"Srimad Bhagavatam Tenth Canto Part One"
by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE:
This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of this book, and is NOT FOR
RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended for personal non-commercial use only,
under the "fair use" guidelines established by international copyright laws. You
may use this electronic file to evaluate the printed version of this book, for your
own private use, or for short excerpts used in academic works, research, student
papers, presentations, and the like. You can distribute this evaluation copy to
others over the Internet, so long as you keep this copyright information intact and
do not add or subtract anything to this file and its contents. You may not reproduce
more than ten percent (10%) of this book in any medium without the express
written permission from the copyright holders.
Reference any excerpts in the following way: “Excerpted from “Srimad
Bhagavatam Tenth Canto Part One” by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada,
courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, www.krishna.com.”
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1972-2004 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust
International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, California 90034, USA. All
rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or to evaluate
dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website of the publishers,
www.krishna.com.

About the Author
His Divine Grace AC Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, the world’s most
distinguished teacher of Vedic religion and thought, is the author of
Bhagavad-gita As It Is, Srimad-Bhagavatam, The Sri Isopanisad and many
other English versions of Vedic literature. He is the Founder-Arcarya of the
International Society for Krishna Consciousness, which has hundreds of
centers throughout the world.
For more information about His Divine Grace visit:
http://www.krishna.com/newsite/main.php?id=7
1
Summary of the Tenth Canto
A short description of each chapter of this Tenth Canto is as follows. The
First Chapter, which has sixty-nine verses, describes Mahäräja Parékñit's
eagerness to learn about the incarnation of Lord Kåñëa, and it also tells how
Kaàsa killed the six sons of Devaké because of his fear of being killed by her
eighth child. The Second Chapter contains forty-two verses, describing the
entrance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, into the womb of
Devaké to fulfill His mission of killing Kaàsa. When Lord Kåñëa was within
Devaké's womb, all the demigods, headed by Brahmä, offered prayers to the
Lord. The Third Chapter contains fifty-three verses. This chapter describes
the appearance of Lord Kåñëa as He is. The Lord's father and mother,
understanding the Lord's appearance, offered prayers. Fearing Kaàsa, the
Lord's father brought the child from Mathurä to Gokula Våndävana. The
Fourth Chapter contains forty-six verses, which tell of a prophecy by the
goddess Caëòikä. After consulting demoniac friends, Kaàsa began killing all
the children born at that time, since he thought this would be to his benefit.
The Fifth Chapter contains thirty-two verses, describing how Nanda
Mahäräja performed the birth ceremony of Kåñëa and then went to Mathurä,
where he met Vasudeva. The Sixth Chapter contains forty-four verses. In this
chapter, Nanda Mahäräja, following the advice of his friend Vasudeva, returns
to Gokula and on the way sees the dead body of the Pütanä demoness and is
astonished at her having been killed by Kåñëa. The Seventh Chapter, which
contains thirty-seven verses, describes Mahäräja Parékñit's enthusiasm to hear
about the boyhood pastimes of Lord Kåñëa, who killed Çakaöäsura and
Tåëävartäsura and showed within His mouth the entire cosmic manifestation.
In the Eighth Chapter there are fifty-two verses, which describe Gargamuni's
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
2
performing the name-giving ceremony of Kåñëa and Balaräma and how Kåñëa
and Balaräma performed playful childish activities, crawling on the ground,
trying to walk with Their small legs, and stealing butter and breaking the pots.
This chapter also describes the vision of the universal form.
The Ninth Chapter, which has twenty-three verses, describes how Kåñëa
disturbed His mother while she was churning butter. Because she left Kåñëa to
see to the stove, where the milk was boiling, and did not allow Him to suck her
breast, Kåñëa was very angry and broke a pot of yogurt. To chastise her
naughty child, mother Yaçodä wanted to bind Him with rope, but every time
she tried she failed because of a shortage of rope when the time came to knot
it. In the Tenth Chapter there are forty-three verses. This chapter describes
how Kåñëa, as Dämodara, caused the twin Yamalärjuna trees to fall and how
the two demigods within the trees were delivered by the mercy of Kåñëa. In the
Eleventh Chapter there are fifty-nine verses. This chapter describes how
Nanda Mahäräja released Kåñëa from the ropes, how Kåñëa showed His mercy
to a fruit seller while exchanging grains for fruit, and how Nanda Mahäräja
and others decided to leave Gokula for Våndävana, where Kåñëa killed
Vatsäsura and Bakäsura.
Chapter Twelve contains forty-four verses, describing Kåñëa's pastimes with
the cowherd boys in the forest and the killing of the demon named Aghäsura.
Chapter Thirteen contains sixty-four verses, describing how Brahmä stole
Kåñëa's calves and His friends, the cowherd boys. Kåñëa expanded His pastimes
for one year, representing Himself as the calves and boys in forms exactly like
their own. In this way He bewildered Brahmä, who at last surrendered when
his illusion was over. The Fourteenth Chapter contains sixty-one verses. In
this chapter, Brahmä offers prayers to Kåñëa after fully understanding Him to
be the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Fifteenth Chapter contains
fifty-two verses. This chapter describes how Kåñëa entered Tälavana Forest
with Balaräma, how Balaräma killed Dhenukäsura, and how Kåñëa protected
the cowherd boys and cows from the poisonous effects of Käliya.
The Sixteenth Chapter contains sixty-seven verses. This chapter describes
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
3
the chastisement of Käliya by Kåñëa, and it also describes the prayers offered
by Käliya's wives. In the Seventeenth Chapter there are twenty-five verses.
This chapter describes why Käliya entered the River Yamunä after leaving his
home, Nägälaya, one of the dvépas, which according to some corresponds to the
Fiji Islands. This chapter also describes how Garuòa was cursed by Saubhari
Åñi, how the cowherd boys, Kåñëa's friends, were enlivened when Kåñëa
emerged from the Yamunä, and how Kåñëa stopped the forest fire and saved
the sleeping inhabitants of Vraja.
The Eighteenth Chapter contains thirty-two verses, giving a description of
Kåñëa and Balaräma, Their picnics within the forest, the climate of Våndävana
in the summer and the spring, and Lord Balaräma's killing of Pralambäsura.
Chapter Nineteen contains sixteen verses, describing Kåñëa's entering the
forest known as Muïjäraëya, saving the cowherd boys and cows from the
forest fire, and bringing them to Bhäëòéravana. Chapter Twenty contains
forty-nine verses. This chapter describes the enjoyment of Balaräma and Kåñëa
in the forest with the cowherd boys during the rainy season, and it gives
various instructions through analogies concerning the rainy season and
autumn.
Chapter Twenty-one contains twenty verses, describing how Kåñëa entered
the forest of Våndävana in the autumn, playing His flute, and how He
attracted the gopés, who were singing His glories. The Twenty-second Chapter
contains thirty-eight verses, describing how the gopés prayed to the goddess
Kätyäyané to obtain Kåñëa as their husband and how Kåñëa later stole the
garments of the gopés while the gopés were bathing in the Yamunä. The
Twenty-third Chapter contains fifty-two verses, describing how the cowherd
boys, being very hungry, followed Kåñëa's directions by begging some food for
Him and themselves from brähmaëas engaged in performing yajïas. The
brähmaëas refused to give food to Kåñëa and Balaräma, although the boys
begged for it, but the wives of the brähmaëas agreed, and therefore Kåñëa
bestowed His mercy upon them.
The Twenty-fourth Chapter contains thirty-eight verses, describing how
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
4
Kåñëa defied King Indra, despite Indra's position of prestige, by stopping the
indra-yajïa and instead worshiping Govardhana. The Twenty-fifth Chapter
contains thirty-three verses. As described in this chapter, because the
indra-yajïa was stopped, King Indra was very angry, and to kill the inhabitants
of Våndävana, Vraja, he flooded the entire area with rain. Kåñëa, however,
accepted King Indra's challenge by lifting Govardhana Hill as an umbrella to
protect Våndävana and all the cows. The Twenty-sixth Chapter contains
twenty-five verses, describing how Nanda Mahäräja, seeing the extraordinary
activities of Kåñëa, was struck with wonder and how he thus narrated for all
the cowherd men the whole story of Kåñëa's opulence, as foretold by
Gargamuni. Chapter Twenty-seven, which contains twenty-eight verses,
describes how King Indra, upon seeing Kåñëa's unlimited power, worshiped
Lord Kåñëa, who was fully washed with milk supplied by the surabhi and who
thus became known as Govinda. The Twenty-eighth Chapter contains
seventeen verses. In this chapter Kåñëa saves His father, Nanda Mahäräja,
from the custody of Varuëa and shows the cowherd men how Vaikuëöhaloka is
situated.
The Twenty-ninth Chapter contains forty-eight verses, describing how
Kåñëa talked to the gopés before performing the räsa-lélä and how, after the
beginning of the räsa-lélä, Kåñëa disappeared from the scene. Chapter Thirty
contains forty-four verses, describing how the gopés, being separated from
Kåñëa, went mad and began to wander in the forest in search of Him. The
gopés met Çrématé Rädhäräëé, the daughter of King Våñabhänu, and they all
wandered on the bank of the Yamunä searching for Krishna. Chapter
Thirty-one contains nineteen verses, describing how the bereaved gopés waited
in great anxiety to meet Kåñëa. Chapter Thirty-two contains twenty-two
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
gopés, who are fully satisfied
in ecstatic love for Him. Chapter Thirty-three contains thirty-nine verses. In
this chapter Kåñëa appears in multiforms in the midst of the gopés, with whom
He dances in the räsa dance. Then they all bathe in the River Yamunä. Also
in this chapter, Çukadeva mitigates the doubts of Parékñit concerning the
5
performance of the räsa-lélä.
Chapter Thirty-four contains thirty-two verses. This chapter describes how
Nanda Mahäräja, Kåñëa's father, was swallowed by a big python, who had been
a demigod named Vidyädhara but was cursed by Aìgirä Åñi. Kåñëa rescued His
father and saved this demigod simultaneously. Chapter Thirty-five contains
twenty-six verses. This chapter describes how Kåñëa went to the pasturing
grounds with the cows and how the gopés sang in separation from Him.
Chapter Thirty-six contains forty verses. This chapter describes Kåñëa's
killing of Ariñöäsura. It also describes Närada's disclosure to Kaàsa that both
Räma and Kåñëa were sons of Vasudeva. Because of this disclosure, Kaàsa
arranged to kill both Räma and Kåñëa. He sent his assistant Keçé to
Våndävana, and later he sent Akrüra to bring Räma and Kåñëa to Mathurä.
Chapter Thirty-seven contains thirty-three verses. In this chapter Kåñëa kills
the Keçé demon, Närada worships Kåñëa by narrating His future activities, and
Kåñëa kills the demon named Vyomäsura. Chapter Thirty-eight contains
forty-three verses. This chapter describes how Akrüra went to Våndävana and
how he was received by Räma-Kåñëa and Nanda Mahäräja. Chapter
Thirty-nine contains fifty-seven verses. This chapter describes how Räma and
Kåñëa, having been invited by Kaàsa started for Mathurä. While They were
ready on the chariot, the gopés began to cry, and Kåñëa sent His messenger to
pacify them. Thus He was able to travel toward Mathurä. On the way, Akrüra
was shown the entire Viñëuloka within the water of the Yamunä.
Chapter Forty contains thirty verses, in which the prayers of Akrüra are
described. Chapter Forty-one, which contains fifty-two verses, describes the
entrance of Räma and Kåñëa into the city of Mathurä, where the ladies were
very jubilant to see these two brothers. Kåñëa killed a washerman, glorified
Sudämä and gave Sudämä His benediction. Chapter Forty-two, which contains
thirty-eight verses, describes how Kåñëa delivered Kubjä and how He broke
Kaàsa's gigantic bow and killed its caretakers. Thus Kaàsa and Kåñëa met.
Chapter Forty-three contains forty verses. Outside the sporting arena of
Kaàsa, Kåñëa killed an elephant named Kuvalayäpéòa. Then He entered the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
6
arena and spoke with Cäëüra. Chapter Forty-four, which contains fifty-one
verses, describes how Kåñëa and Balaräma killed the wrestlers named Cäëüra
and Muñöika and thereafter killed Kaàsa and his eight brothers. Kåñëa,
however, pacified Kaàsa's wives and His own father and mother, Vasudeva
and Devaké.
Chapter Forty-five contains fifty verses. This chapter describes how Kåñëa
pacified His father and mother and celebrated the enthronement of His
grandfather Ugrasena. After promising the inhabitants of Våndävana that He
would return very soon, Kåñëa underwent ritualistic ceremonies as a kñatriya.
He took the vow of brahmacarya and lived in the guru-kula, where He studied
regularly. By killing the demon named Païcajana, He received a conchshell
named Päïcajanya. Krishna rescued the son of His guru from the custody of
Yamaräja and returned him. After thus offering guru-dakñiëä to repay His
teacher, Lord Kåñëa returned to Mathurä-puré. Chapter Forty-six contains
forty-nine verses. As described in this chapter, Kåñëa sent Uddhava to
Våndävana to pacify His father and mother, Nanda Mahäräja and Yaçodä.
Chapter Forty-seven contains sixty-nine verses, describing how Uddhava,
following Kåñëa's order, went to pacify the gopés and then returned to
Mathurä. Thus Uddhava appreciated the ecstatic love felt for Kåñëa by the
inhabitants of Våndävana.
Chapter Forty-eight contains thirty-six verses. This chapter describes how
Kåñëa fulfilled the desire of Kubjä by going to her house and enjoying her.
Kåñëa then went to the home of Akrüra. Satisfied by Akrüra's prayers, Kåñëa
praised him very much and sent him to Hastinäpura to gather information
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Chapter Forty-nine contains thirty-one verses. As
described in this chapter, Akrüra, following Kåñëa's orders, went to
Hastinäpura, where he met Vidura and Kunté and heard from them about
Dhåtaräñöra's mistreatment of the Päëòavas. Informed of the Päëòavas' faith in
Kåñëa, Akrüra advised Dhåtaräñöra, and after understanding Dhåtaräñöra's
mind, he returned to Mathurä, where he described everything about the
situation in Hastinäpura.
7
Chapter Fifty contains fifty-seven verses. In this chapter, Jaräsandha,
having heard that his son-in-law Kaàsa was killed, attacked Mathurä to kill
Räma and Kåñëa but was defeated seventeen times. When Jaräsandha was
about to attack for the eighteenth time, Kälayavana, having been advised by
Närada, also attacked Mathurä. Thus the Yädava dynasty entered a fort in the
midst of the water and lived there by mystic power. After giving full
protection to the Yädava dynasty and conferring with Lord Baladeva, Lord
Kåñëa emerged from Dvärakä. Chapter Fifty-one, which contains sixty-three
verses, describes how Mucukunda killed Kälayavana simply by glancing upon
him.
Chapter Fifty-two contains forty-four verses. In this chapter, Mucukunda
offers prayers to Kåñëa, and then Kåñëa kills all the soldiers of Kälayavana and
returns to Dvärakä with their booty. When Jaräsandha attacked Mathurä
again, Räma and Kåñëa, as if afraid of him, fled to the top of a mountain, to
which Jaräsandha then set fire. Unseen by Jaräsandha, Kåñëa and Balaräma
jumped from the mountain and entered Dvärakä, which was surrounded by the
sea. Jaräsandha, thinking that Kåñëa and Balaräma had been killed, returned
with his soldiers to his own country, and Kåñëa continued to live in Dvärakä.
Rukmiëé, the daughter of Vidarbha, was very much attracted to Kåñëa, and she
sent Kåñëa a letter through a brähmaëa. Chapter Fifty-three contains
fifty-seven verses. Following Rukmiëé's request, Kåñëa went to the city of
Vidarbha and kidnapped her in the presence of such enemies as Jaräsandha.
Chapter Fifty-four contains sixty verses. As described in this chapter, Kåñëa
defeated all the opposing princes and disfigured Rukmiëé's brother Rukmé.
Then Kåñëa returned with Rukmiëé to Dvärakä, where they were united in a
regular marriage. Rukmé, however, remained in a place known as Bhojakaöa,
being angry at his brother-in-law, Kåñëa. Chapter Fifty-five, containing forty
verses, describes the birth of Pradyumna, how Pradyumna was kidnapped by
Çambaräsura, and how Pradyumna later killed Çambaräsura and returned to
Dvärakä with his wife, Ratidevé.
Chapter Fifty-six contains forty-five verses. As described in this chapter,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
8
King Saträjit, by the mercy of the sun-god, received a jewel called Syamantaka.
Later, when this jewel was stolen, Saträjit unnecessarily became doubtful of
Kåñëa, but Kåñëa, to vindicate His position, retrieved the jewel, along with the
daughter of Jämbavän. Kåñëa later married Saträjit's daughter and received a
full dowry. As described in Chapter Fifty-seven, which contains forty-two
verses, both Balaräma and Kåñëa went to Hastinäpura, having heard about the
fire in the shellac house of the Päëòavas. After Saträjit was killed by
Çatadhanvä at the instigation of Akrüra and Kåtavarmä, Balaräma and Kåñëa
returned to Dvärakä. Çatadhanvä left the Syamantaka jewel with Akrüra and
fled to the forest. Thus although Kåñëa killed Çatadhanvä, He was unable to
retrieve the jewel. Finally the jewel was discovered and awarded to Akrüra.
Chapter Fifty-eight contains fifty-eight verses. After the Päëòavas finished
living incognito in the forest, Kåñëa went to Indraprastha to see them. He then
married five wives, headed by Kälindé. After Kåñëa and Arjuna set fire to the
Khäëòava Forest, Arjuna received the Gäëòéva bow. The demon Maya
Dänava constructed an assembly house for the Päëòavas, and Duryodhana was
very much aggrieved.
Chapter Fifty-nine contains forty-five verses. In this chapter, Kåñëa, at the
request of Indra, kills the demon Narakäsura, the son of the earth personified,
along with the demon's associates, headed by Mura. The earth personified
offers prayers to Kåñëa and returns to Him all the paraphernalia that
Narakäsura has stolen. Kåñëa then bestows fearlessness upon the son of
Narakäsura and marries the sixteen thousand princesses whom the demon
kidnapped. Also in this chapter, Kåñëa takes away the pärijäta plant from the
heavenly planets, and the foolishness of Indra and others is described.
Chapter Sixty contains fifty-nine verses. In this chapter, Kåñëa makes
Rukmiëé angry with His joking words. Kåñëa pacifies Rukmiëé, and there is a
lover's quarrel between them. Chapter Sixty-one contains forty verses. This
chapter contains a description of the sons and grandsons of Kåñëa. At the time
of Aniruddha's marriage, Balaräma kills Rukmé and breaks the teeth of the
King of Kaliìga.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
9
Chapter Sixty-two contains thirty-three verses. This chapter begins the
discourse concerning the abduction of Üñä, the daughter of Bäëäsura, and the
amorous pastimes between Üñä and Aniruddha. It also describes a fight
between Aniruddha and Bäëäsura and how Bäëäsura seized Aniruddha with a
snake-noose. Chapter Sixty-three, which contains fifty-three verses, describes
how the strength of Lord Çiva was defeated in a battle between Bäëäsura and
the Yädavas. The Raudra-jvara, having been defeated by the Vaiñëava-jvara,
offered prayers to Krishna. Kåñëa severed all but four of Bäëa's one thousand
arms and thus showed him mercy. Kåñëa then returned to Dvärakä with Üñä
and Aniruddha.
Chapter Sixty-four contains forty-four verses. In this chapter, Kåñëa
liberates King Någa, the son of Ikñväku, from a curse and instructs all kings by
explaining the fault in misappropriating the property of a brähmaëa. In
connection with the deliverance of King Någa, there are instructions for the
Yädavas, who were puffed up with pride due to wealth, opulence, enjoyment
and so on.
Chapter Sixty-five contains thirty-four verses. As described in this chapter,
Lord Baladeva, desiring to see His friends and relatives, went to Gokula. In the
months of Caitra and Vaiçäkha, in the groves by the Yamunä, Lord Balaräma
performed the räsa-rasotsava and yamunä-karñaëa léläs in the association of
His gopés.
As described in Chapter Sixty-six, which contains forty-three verses,
Krishna went to Käçé and then killed Pauëòraka, as well as his friend the King
of Käçé, Sudakñiëa and others. Chapter Sixty-seven, which contains
twenty-eight verses, describes how Lord Baladeva, while enjoying with many
young girls on Raivataka Mountain, vanquished the extremely mischievous
ape Dvivida, who was the brother of Mainda and a friend of Narakäsura's.
Chapter Sixty-eight has fifty-four verses. As described in this chapter,
when Sämba, the son of Jämbavaté, kidnapped Lakñmaëä, the daughter of
Duryodhana, he was captured in a fight with the Kauravas. In order to free
him and establish peace, Lord Baladeva
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
10
The Kauravas, however, were uncooperative, and upon seeing their arrogance,
Lord Baladeva began pulling their city of Hastinäpura with His plow. The
Kauravas, headed by Duryodhana, offered prayers to Lord Baladeva, who then
returned to Dvärakä with Sämba and Lakñmaëä.
Chapter Sixty-nine contains forty-five verses. As described in this chapter,
Kåñëa exhibited His householder life with His sixteen thousand wives. Even
the great sage Närada was astonished at how Kåñëa, having expanded Himself
into sixteen thousand forms, was conducting His householder life. Thus
Närada offered prayers to Lord Kåñëa, and Kåñëa was very much pleased with
him.
Chapter Seventy, which contains forty-seven verses, describes how Kåñëa
exhibited His daily ritualistic ceremonies and how He released the kings
arrested by Jaräsandha. While Lord Kåñëa was receiving a messenger sent by
these kings, Närada came to see Kåñëa and told Him news of the Päëòavas.
Närada informed Kåñëa that the Päëòavas desired to perform a räjasüya
sacrifice, and Kåñëa agreed to attend it, but He first asked for Uddhava's
decision about whether to give preference to killing King Jaräsandha or
performing the räjasüya-yajïa. Chapter Seventy-one contains forty-five
verses, describing the happiness of the Päëòavas when Kåñëa went to
Indraprastha. By the inconceivable desire of Kåñëa, Jaräsandha would be
killed, and the räjasüya-yajïa would be performed by Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira.
Chapter Seventy-two contains forty-six verses. By agreeing to perform the
räjasüya-yajïa, Krishna gave Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira great pleasure. This
chapter also describes the killing of Jaräsandha, the enthroning of his son, and
the release of the kings whom Jaräsandha had arrested. Chapter Seventy-three
contains thirty-five verses. After Lord Kåñëa released the kings and restored
their royal power, He was worshiped by Sahadeva, the son of Jaräsandha, and
then He returned to Indraprastha with Bhéma and Arjuna. Chapter
Seventy-four contains fifty-four verses. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira offered prayers
to Kåñëa and offered Him the first worship in the räjasüya-yajïa. To honor the
Lord in this way is the foremost duty of every man, but this was intolerable to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
11
Çiçupäla, the King of Cedi. Çiçupäla began to blaspheme Kåñëa, who thus
severed the King's head from his body and awarded him the salvation called
särüpya-mukti. After the conclusion of the räjasüya sacrifice, Kåñëa returned
to Dvärakä with His queens. Chapter Seventy-five contains forty verses. As
described in this chapter, Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, after the räjasüya-yajïa,
performed the final ritualistic bathing ceremonies. Duryodhana was
bewildered in the palace constructed by Maya Dänava, and thus he felt
insulted.
Chapter Seventy-six contains thirty-three verses, describing how Çälva, one
of the kings Kåñëa defeated when He kidnapped Rukmiëé, decided to rid the
entire world of the Yädavas. To defeat the Yädavas, Çälva worshiped Lord
Çiva, who rewarded him with an aerial car named Saubha. When Çälva fought
with the Våñëis, Pradyumna smashed the car designed by Maya Dänava, but he
was attacked by Çälva's brother, whose name was Dyumän. Beaten unconscious
by Dyumän's club, Pradyumna was carried some distance away from the
warfield by his charioteer, but later he lamented having been removed from
the battlefield. Chapter Seventy-seven contains thirty-seven verses. In this
chapter, Pradyumna recovers from his injuries and begins fighting with Çälva.
When Kåñëa returned to Dvärakä from Indraprastha, He immediately went to
the battlefield where Çälva and Pradyumna were fighting. There He killed
Çälva, although Çälva was powerfully equipped with illusory weapons.
Chapter Seventy-eight contains forty verses. As described in this chapter, a
friend of Çälva's named Dantavakra and Dantavakra's brother Vidüratha were
killed by Çré Kåñëa. Instead of taking part in the fighting between the
Kauravas and the Päëòavas, Baladeva, who had been staying at Dvärakä-puré,
went touring holy places. Because of the misbehavior of Romaharñaëa,
Baladeva killed him at Naimiñäraëya and appointed his son Ugraçravä, Süta
Gosvämé, the speaker of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, to continue the discourses on the
Puräëas. Chapter Seventy-nine contains thirty-four verses. This chapter
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
describes how the brähmaëas of Naimiñäraëya advised Baladeva to atone for
the death of Romaharñaëa. After killing a demon named Balvala, Baladeva
12
traveled and bathed in holy places until He at last came to the Battlefield of
Kurukñetra, where Bhéma and Duryodhana were fighting. Then He returned to
Dvärakä and went again to Naimiñäraëya, where He instructed the åñis. Then
He left with His wife Revaté.
Chapter Eighty, which contains forty-five verses, describes how Sudämä
Vipra, a friend of Kåñëa's, approached Kåñëa for money and was worshiped by
Kåñëa, who reminisced with him about their boyhood at the guru-kula.
Chapter Eighty-one contains forty-one verses. This chapter describes the
friendly talks between Kåñëa and His friend Sudämä. Kåñëa very gladly
accepted a gift of flat rice from Sudämä Vipra. When Sudämä Vipra returned
home, he saw that everything there was wonderfully opulent, and he praised
the friendship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. With the gifts of the
Lord, he enjoyed material opulence, and later he was promoted back home,
back to Godhead.
Chapter Eighty-two contains forty-eight verses. This chapter describes how
the Yädavas went to Kurukñetra because of a solar eclipse and how other kings
spoke to them of Kåñëa. At this meeting, Kåñëa satisfied Nanda Mahäräja and
the residents of Våndävana, who had also come there. Chapter Eighty-three
contains forty-three verses, describing how the women assembled at
Kurukñetra engaged in topics of Çré Kåñëa and how Draupadé asked all Kåñëa's
queens about how they had married Him. Chapter Eighty-four contains
seventy-one verses. As described in this chapter, when great sages went to see
Kåñëa at Kurukñetra, Kåñëa took this opportunity to praise them. Because
Vasudeva desired to perform a great sacrifice on this occasion, the sages
advised him regarding worship of Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
After the yajïa was performed, all who were present dispersed to their
respective abodes. Chapter Eighty-five contains fifty-nine verses. At the
request of His father and mother, Kåñëa, by His mercy, returned their dead
sons, all of whom were liberated. Chapter Eighty-six contains fifty-nine verses.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
also describes how Kåñëa went to Mithilä to favor His devotee Bahuläçva and
13
stay at the house of Çrutadeva and advise them about spiritual advancement.
Chapter Eighty-seven contains fifty verses, describing the prayers offered to
Näräyaëa by the Vedas. Chapter Eighty-eight contains forty verses. This
chapter describes how Vaiñëavas become transcendental by worshiping Lord
Viñëu and then return home, back to Godhead. By worship of demigods, one
may get material power, but this chapter describes how an ordinary living
being in the material world can be favored by Lord Çré Kåñëa, and it establishes
Lord Viñëu's supremacy above Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva. Chapter
Eighty-nine contains sixty-five verses, disclosing who is the best among the
material deities. Although Viñëu is among the three deities-Brahmä, Viñëu
and Maheçvara-He is transcendental and supreme. In this chapter we also find
a description of how Kåñëa and Arjuna went to Mahäkäla-pura to deliver the
son of a Dvärakä brähmaëa and how Arjuna was astonished. Chapter Ninety
contains fifty verses. This chapter summarizes Kåñëa's léläs and presents the
logic of madhureëa samäpayet, establishing that everything ends well in
transcendental bliss.
1. The Advent of Lord Kåñëa: Introduction
The summary of the First Chapter is as follows. This chapter describes how
Kaàsa, frightened by hearing an omen about his being killed by the eighth son
of Devaké, killed Devaké's sons one after another.
When Çukadeva Gosvämé finished describing the dynasty of Yadu, as well
as the dynasties of the moon-god and sun-god, Mahäräja Parékñit requested him
to describe Lord Kåñëa, who appeared with Baladeva in the Yadu dynasty, and
how Kåñëa performed His activities within this world. Kåñëa is transcendental,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
14
the King said, and therefore to understand His activities is the occupation of
liberated persons. Hearing of kåñëa-lélä is the boat by which to achieve the
ultimate goal of life. Except for an animal killer or one who is following a
policy of suicide, every intelligent person must strive to understand Kåñëa and
His activities.
Kåñëa was the only worshipable Deity for the Päëòavas. When Mahäräja
Parékñit was in the womb of his mother, Uttarä, Kåñëa saved him from the
attack of the brahma-çastra. Now Mahäräja Parékñit asked Çukadeva Gosvämé
how His Lordship Baladeva, the son of Rohiëé, could have appeared in the
womb of Devaké. Why did Kåñëa transfer Himself from Mathurä to
Våndävana, King Parékñit asked, and how did He live there with His family
members? What did Kåñëa do in Mathurä and Våndävana, and why did He kill
His maternal uncle Kaàsa? For how many years did Kåñëa reside in Dvärakä,
and how many queens did He have? Mahäräja Parékñit asked Çukadeva
Gosvämé all these questions. He also requested Çukadeva Gosvämé to describe
other activities of Kåñëa about which he could not inquire.
When Çukadeva Gosvämé began to speak about Kåñëa consciousness,
Mahäräja Parékñit forgot the fatigue brought about by his fasting. Enthusiastic
to describe Kåñëa, Çukadeva Gosvämé said, "Like the waters of the Ganges,
descriptions of the activities of Kåñëa can purify the entire universe. The
speaker, the inquirer and the audience all become purified."
Once when the entire world was overburdened by the increasing military
power of demons in the form of kings, mother earth assumed the shape of a
cow and approached Lord Brahmä for relief, Sympathetic to mother earth's
lamentation, Brahmä, accompanied by Lord Çiva and other demigods, took the
cow-shaped mother earth to the shore of the milk ocean, where he offered
prayers to please Lord Viñëu, who lay there on an island in transcendental
ecstasy. Brahmä thereafter understood the advice of Mahä-Viñëu, who
informed him that He would appear on the surface of the earth to mitigate the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
appear there as associates of Lord Kåñëa in the family of Yadu to increase the
15
sons and grandsons in that dynasty. By the will of Lord Kåñëa, Anantadeva
would appear first, as Balaräma, and Kåñëa's potency, yogamäyä, would also
appear. Brahmä informed mother earth about all this, and then he returned to
his own abode.
After marrying Devaké, Vasudeva was returning home with her on a chariot
driven by Kaàsa, her brother, when an ominous voice addressed Kaàsa,
warning him that Devaké's eighth son would kill him. Upon hearing this omen,
Kaàsa was immediately ready to kill Devaké, but Vasudeva diplomatically
began to instruct him. Vasudeva stressed that it would not be good for Kaàsa
to kill his younger sister, especially at the time of her marriage. Anyone who
possesses a material body must die, Vasudeva advised him. Every living entity
lives in a body for some time and then transmigrates to another body, but one
is unfortunately misled into accepting the body as the soul. If a person under
this mistaken conception wants to kill another body, he is condemned as
hellish.
Because Kaàsa was not satisfied by Vasudeva's instructions, Vasudeva
devised a plan. He offered to bring Kaàsa all of Devaké's children so that
Kaàsa could kill them. Why then should Kaàsa kill Devaké now? Kaàsa was
satisfied by this proposal. In due course of time, when Devaké gave birth to a
child, Vasudeva brought the newborn baby to Kaàsa, who, upon seeing
Vasudeva's magnanimity, was struck with wonder. When Vasudeva gave
Kaàsa the child, Kaàsa, showing some intelligence, said that since he was to
be killed by the eighth child, why should he kill the first? Although Vasudeva
did not trust him, Kaàsa requested Vasudeva to take the child back. Later,
however, after Närada approached Kaàsa and disclosed to him that the
demigods were appearing in the Yadu and Våñëi dynasties and conspiring to
kill him, Kaàsa decided to kill all the children born in these families, and he
also decided that any child born from the womb of Devaké must be killed. Thus
he arrested and imprisoned both Devaké and Vasudeva and killed six of their
sons, one after another. Närada had also informed Kaàsa that in his previous
birth Kaàsa was Kälanemi, a demon killed by Viñëu. Consequently, Kaàsa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
16
became a great enemy to all the descendants of the yadu-vaàça, the Yadu
dynasty. He even arrested and imprisoned his own father, Ugrasena, for Kaàsa
wanted to enjoy the kingdom alone.
Kåñëa has threefold pastimes-the Vraja-lélä, Mäthura-lélä and Dvärakä-lélä.
As already mentioned, in the Tenth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam there are
ninety chapters, which describe all these léläs. The first four chapters describe
Brahmä's prayers for the relief of the earth's burden, and they also describe the
appearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Chapters Five through
Thirty-nine recount Kåñëa's pastimes in Våndävana. The Fortieth Chapter
describes how Kåñëa enjoyed in the water of the Yamunä and how Akrüra
offered prayers. Chapters Forty-one through Fifty-one, eleven chapters, tell of
Kåñëa's pastimes in Mäthura, and Chapters Fifty-two through Ninety,
thirty-nine chapters, relate Kåñëa's pastimes in Dvärakä.
Chapters Twenty-nine through Thirty-three describe Kåñëa's dancing with
the gopés, known as the räsa-lélä. Therefore these five chapters are known as
räsa-païcädhyäya. The Forty-seventh Chapter of the Tenth Canto is a
description known as the bhramara-gétä.
TEXT 1
é[qraJaaevac
k-iQaTaae v&XaivSTaarae >avTaa SaaeMaSaUYaRYaae" )
raja& cae>aYav&XYaaNaa& cirTa& ParMaad(>auTaMa( )) 1 ))
çré-räjoväca
kathito vaàça-vistäro
bhavatä soma-süryayoù
räjïäà cobhaya-vaàçyänäà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
caritaà paramädbhutam
17
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—King Parékñit said; kathitaù—has already been described;
vaàça-vistäraù—a broad description of the dynasties; bhavatä—by Your
Lordship; soma-süryayoù—of the moon-god and the sun-god; räjïäm—of the
kings; ca—and; ubhaya—both; vaàçyänäm—of the members of the dynasties;
caritam—the character; parama—exalted; adbhutam—and wonderful.
TRANSLATION
King Parékñit said: My dear lord, you have elaborately described the
dynasties of both the moon-god and the sun-god, with the exalted and
wonderful character of their kings.
PURPORT
At the end of the Ninth Canto, Twenty-fourth Chapter, Çukadeva
Gosvämé summarized the activities of Kåñëa. He spoke of how Kåñëa had
personally appeared to reduce the burden on the earth, how He had
manifested His pastimes as a householder, and how, soon after His birth, He
had transferred Himself to His Vrajabhümi-lélä. Parékñit Mahäräja, being
naturally a devotee of Kåñëa, wanted to hear more about Lord Kåñëa.
Therefore, to encourage Çukadeva Gosvämé to continue speaking about Kåñëa
and give further details, he thanked Çukadeva Gosvämé for having described
the activities of Kåñëa in brief. Çukadeva Gosvämé had said:
jäto gataù pitå-gåhäd vrajam edhitärtho
hatvä ripün suta-çatäni kåtorudäraù
utpädya teñu puruñaù kratubhiù saméje
ätmänam ätma-nigamaà prathayaï janeñu
"The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, known as lélä-puruñottama,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
18
appeared as the son of Vasudeva but immediately left His father's home and
went to Våndävana to expand His loving relationships with His confidential
devotees. In Våndävana the Lord killed many demons, and afterward He
returned to Dvärakä, where according to Vedic principles He married many
wives who were the best of women, begot through them hundreds of sons, and
performed sacrifices for His own worship to establish the principles of
householder life." (SB 9.24.66)
The Yadu dynasty belonged to the family descending from Soma, the
moon-god. Although the planetary systems are so arranged that the sun comes
first, before the moon, Parékñit Mahäräja gave more respect to the dynasty of
the moon-god, the soma-vaàça, because in the Yädava dynasty, descending
from the moon, Kåñëa had appeared. There are two different kñatriya families
of the royal order, one descending from the king of the moon planet and the
other descending from the king of the sun. When the Supreme Personality of
Godhead appears, He generally appears in a kñatriya family because He comes
to establish religious principles and the life of righteousness. According to the
Vedic system, the kñatriya family is the protector of the human race. When the
Supreme Personality of Godhead appeared as Lord Rämacandra, He appeared
in the sürya-vaàça, the family descending from the sun-god, and when He
appeared as Lord Kåñëa, He did so in the Yadu dynasty, or yadu-vaàça, whose
descent was from the moon-god. In the Ninth Canto, Twenty-fourth Chapter,
of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, there is a long list of the kings of the yadu-vaàça. All
the kings in both the soma-vaàça and sürya-vaàça were great and powerful,
and Mahäräja Parékñit praised them very highly (räjïäà cobhaya-vaàçyänäà
caritaà paramädbhutam). Nonetheless, he wanted to hear more about the
soma-vaàça because that was the dynasty in which Kåñëa had appeared.
The supreme abode of the Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, is described in
Brahma-saàhitä as the abode of cintämaëi: cintämaëi-prakara-sadmasu
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
[Bs. 5.29]. The
Våndävana-dhäma on this earth is a replica of that same abode. As stated in
Bhagavad-gétä (8.20), in the spiritual sky there is another, eternal nature,
19
transcendental to manifested and unmanifested matter. The manifested world
can be seen in the form of many stars and planets such as the sun and moon,
but beyond this is the unmanifested, which is imperceptible to those who are
embodied. And beyond this unmanifested matter is the spiritual kingdom,
which is described in Bhagavad-gétä as supreme and eternal. That kingdom is
never annihilated. Although material nature is subject to repeated creation
and annihilation, that spiritual nature remains as it is eternally. In the Tenth
Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, that spiritual nature, the spiritual world, is
described as Våndävana, Goloka Våndävana or Vraja-dhäma. The elaborate
description of the above-mentioned çloka from the Ninth Canto—jäto gataù
pitå-gåhäd (SB 9.24.66)—will be found here, in the Tenth Canto.
TEXT 2
Yadaeê DaMaRXaql/SYa iNaTara& MauiNaSataMa )
Ta}aa&XaeNaavTaq<aRSYa ivZ<aaevsYaaRi<a Xa&Sa Na" )) 2 ))
yadoç ca dharma-çélasya
nitaräà muni-sattama
taträàçenävatérëasya
viñëor véryäëi çaàsa naù
SYNONYMS
yadoù—of Yadu or the Yadu dynasty; ca—also; dharma-çélasya—who were
strictly attached to religious principles; nitaräm—highly qualified;
muni-sattama—O best of all munis, king of the munis
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
tatra—in that dynasty; aàçena—with His plenary expansion Baladeva;
avatérëasya—who appeared as an incarnation; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu;
véryäëi—the glorious activities; çaàsa—kindly describe; naù—unto us.
20
TRANSLATION
O best of munis, you have also described the descendants of Yadu, who were
very pious and strictly adherent to religious principles. Now, if you will, kindly
describe the wonderful, glorious activities of Lord Viñëu, or Kåñëa, who
appeared in that Yadu dynasty with Baladeva, His plenary expansion.
PURPORT
The Brahma-saàhitä (5.1) explains that Kåñëa is the origin of the
viñëu-tattva.
éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù
sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù
anädir ädir govindaù
sarva-käraëa-käraëam
"Kåñëa, who is known as Govinda, is the supreme controller. He has an eternal,
blissful, spiritual body. He is the origin of all. He has no other origin, for He is
the prime cause of all causes."
yasyaika-niçvasita-kälam athävalambya
jévanti loma-vilajä jagad-aëòa-näthäù
viñëur mahän sa iha yasya kalä-viçeño
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"The Brahmäs, the heads of the innumerable universes, live only for the
duration of one breath of Mahä-Viñëu. I worship Govinda, the original Lord,
of whom Mahä-Viñëu is but a portion of a plenary portion." (Bs. 5.48)
Govinda, Kåñëa, is the original Personality of Godhead. Kåñëas tu bhagavän
svayam [SB 1.3.28]. Even Lord Mahä-Viñëu, who by His breathing creates many
millions upon millions of universes, is Lord Kåñëa's kalä-viçeña, or plenary
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
21
portion of a plenary portion. Mahä-Viñëu is a plenary expansion of
Saìkarñaëa, who is a plenary expansion of Näräyaëa. Näräyaëa is a plenary
expansion of the catur-vyüha, and the catur-vyüha are plenary expansions of
Baladeva, the first manifestation of Kåñëa. Therefore when Kåñëa appeared
with Baladeva, all the viñëu-tattvas appeared with Him.
Mahäräja Parékñit requested Çukadeva Gosvämé to describe Kåñëa and His
glorious activities. Another meaning may be derived from this verse as follows,
Although Çukadeva Gosvämé was the greatest muni, he could describe Kåñëa
only partially (aàçena), for no one can describe Kåñëa fully. It is said that
Anantadeva has thousands of heads, but although He tries to describe Kåñëa
with thousands of tongues, His descriptions are still incomplete.
TEXT 3
AvTaqYaR Yadaev|Xae >aGavaNa( >aUTa>aavNa" )
k*-TavaNa( YaaiNa ivìaTMaa TaaiNa Naae vd ivSTaraTa( )) 3 ))
avatérya yador vaàçe
bhagavän bhüta-bhävanaù
kåtavän yäni viçvätmä
täni no vada vistarät
SYNONYMS
avatérya—after descending; yadoù vaàçe—in the dynasty of Yadu;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhüta-bhävanaù—who is the
cause of the cosmic manifestation; kåtavän—executed; yäni—whatever
(activities); viçva-ätmä—the Supersoul of the entire universe; täni
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—all of
those (activities); naù—unto us; vada—kindly say; vistarät—elaborately.
22
TRANSLATION
The Supersoul, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, the cause of
the cosmic manifestation, appeared in the dynasty of Yadu. Please tell me
elaborately about His glorious activities and character, from the beginning to
the end of His life.
PURPORT
In this verse the words kåtavän yäni indicate that all the different activities
Kåñëa performed while present on earth are beneficial to human society. If
religionists, philosophers and people in general simply hear the activities of
Kåñëa, they will be liberated. We have described several times that there are
two kinds of kåñëa-kathä, represented by Bhagavad-gétä, spoken personally by
Kåñëa about Himself, and Çrémad-Bhägavatam, spoken by Çukadeva Gosvämé
about the glories of Kåñëa. Anyone who becomes even slightly interested in
kåñëa-kathä is liberated. Kértanäd eva kåñëasya mukta-saìgaù paraà vrajet (SB
12.3.51). Simply by chanting or repeating kåñëa-kathä, one is liberated from the
contamination of Kali-yuga. Caitanya Mahäprabhu therefore advised, yäre
dekha, täre kaha 'kåñëa'-upadeça (Cc. Madhya 7.128). This is the mission of
Kåñëa consciousness: to hear about Kåñëa and thus be liberated from material
bondage.
TEXT 4
iNav*taTazOEåPaGaqYaMaaNaad(
>avaEzDaaC^\ae}aMaNaae_i>araMaaTa( )
k- otaMaëaek-Gau<aaNauvadaTa(
PauMaaNa( ivrJYaeTa ivNaa PaéuganaTa( )) 4 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
23
nivåtta-tarñair upagéyamänäd
bhavauñadhäc chrotra-mano-'bhirämät
ka uttamaçloka-guëänuvädät
pumän virajyeta vinä paçughnät
SYNONYMS
nivåtta—released from; tarñaiù—lust or material activities;
upagéyamänät—which is described or sung; bhava-auñadhät—which is the right
medicine for the material disease; çrotra—the process of aural reception;
manaù—the subject matter of thought for the mind; abhirämät—from the
pleasing vibrations from such glorification; kaù—who; uttamaçloka—of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; guëa-anuvädät—from describing such
activities; pumän—a person; virajyeta—can keep himself aloof; vinä—except;
paçu-ghnät—either a butcher or one who is killing his own personal existence.
TRANSLATION
Glorification of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is performed in the
paramparä system; that is, it is conveyed from spiritual master to disciple. Such
glorification is relished by those no longer interested in the false, temporary
glorification of this cosmic manifestation. Descriptions of the Lord are the right
medicine for the conditioned soul undergoing repeated birth and death.
Therefore, who will cease hearing such glorification of the Lord except a
butcher or one who is killing his own self?
PURPORT
In India it is the practice among the general populace to hear about Kåñëa,
either from Bhagavad-gétä or from Çrémad-Bhägavatam, in order to gain relief
from the disease of repeated birth and death. Although India is now fallen,
when there is a message that someone will speak about Bhagavad-gétä or
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
24
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, thousands of people still gather to hear. This verse
indicates, however, that such recitation of Bhagavad-gétä and
Çrémad-Bhägavatam must be done by persons completely freed from material
desires (nivåtta-tarñaiù). Everyone within this material world, beginning from
Brahmä down to the insignificant ant, is full of material desires for sense
enjoyment, and everyone is busy in sense gratification, but when thus engaged
one cannot fully understand the value of kåñëa-kathä, either in the form of
Bhagavad-gétä or in Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
If we hear the glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead from liberated
persons, this hearing will certainly free us from the bondage of material
activities, but hearing Çrémad-Bhägavatam spoken by a professional reciter
cannot actually help us achieve liberation. Kåñëa-kathä is very simple. In
Bhagavad-gétä it is said that Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As
He Himself explains, mattaù parataraà nänyat kiïcid asti dhanaïjaya: "O
Arjuna, there is no truth superior to Me." (Bg. 7.7) Simply by understanding
this fact—that Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead—one can
become a liberated person. But, especially in this age, because people are
interested in hearing Bhagavad-gétä from unscrupulous persons who depart
from the simple presentation of Bhagavad-gétä and distort it for their personal
satisfaction, they fail to derive the real benefit. There are big scholars,
politicians, philosophers and scientists who speak on Bhagavad-gétä in their
own polluted way, and people in general hear from them, being uninterested in
hearing the glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead from a devotee. A
devotee is one who has no other motive for reciting Bhagavad-gétä and
Çrémad-Bhägavatam than to serve the Lord. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu has
therefore advised us to hear the glories of the Lord from a realized person
(bhägavata paro diya bhägavata sthane). Unless one is personally a realized soul
in the science of Kåñëa consciousness, a neophyte should not approach him to
hear about the Lord, for this is strictly forbidden by Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé,
who quotes from the Padma Puräëa:
avaiñëava-mukhodgérëaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
25
pütaà hari-kathämåtam
çravaëaà naiva kartavyaà
sarpocchiñöaà yathä payaù
One should avoid hearing from a person not situated in Vaiñëava behavior. A
Vaiñëava is nivåtta-tåñëa; that is, he has no material purpose, for his only
purpose is to preach Kåñëa consciousness. So-called scholars, philosophers and
politicians exploit the importance of Bhagavad-gétä by distorting its meaning
for their own purposes. Therefore this verse warns that kåñëa-kathä should be
recited by a person who is nivåtta-tåñëa. Çukadeva Gosvämé epitomizes the
proper reciter for Çrémad-Bhägavatam, and Parékñit Mahäräja, who
purposefully left his kingdom and family prior to meeting death, epitomizes the
person fit to hear it. A qualified reciter of Çrémad-Bhägavatam gives the right
medicine (bhavauñadhi) for the conditioned souls. The Kåñëa consciousness
movement is therefore trying to train qualified preachers to recite
Çrémad-Bhägavatam and Bhagavad-gétä throughout the entire world, so that
people in general in all parts of the world may take advantage of this
movement and thus be relieved of the threefold miseries of material existence.
The instructions of Bhagavad-gétä and the descriptions of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam are so pleasing that almost anyone suffering from the
threefold miseries of material existence will desire to hear the glories of the
Lord from these books and thus benefit on the path of liberation. Two classes
of men, however, will never be interested in hearing the message of
Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam—those who are determined to commit
suicide and those determined to kill cows and other animals for the
satisfaction of their own tongues. Although such persons may make a show of
hearing Çrémad-Bhägavatam at a Bhägavata-saptäha, this is but another
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
creation of the karmés, who cannot derive any benefit from such a
performance. The word paçu-ghnät is important in this connection. paçu-ghna
means "butcher." Persons fond of performing ritualistic ceremonies for
elevation to the higher planetary systems must offer sacrifices (yajïas) by
killing animals. Lord Buddhadeva therefore rejected the authority of the Vedas
26
because his mission was to stop animal sacrifices, which are recommended in
Vedic ritualistic ceremonies.
nindasi yajïa-vidher ahaha çruti-jätaà
sa-daya-hådaya darçita-paçu-ghätaà
keçava dhåta-buddha-çaréra jaya jagadéça hare
(Géta-govinda)
Even though animal sacrifices are sanctioned in Vedic ceremonies, men who
kill animals for such ceremonies are considered butchers. Butchers cannot be
interested in Kåñëa consciousness, for they are already materially allured.
Their only interest lies in developing comforts for the temporary body.
bhogaiçvarya-prasaktänäà
tayäpahåta-cetasäm
vyavasäyätmikä buddhiù
samädhau na vidhéyate
"In the minds of those who are too attached to sense enjoyment and material
opulence, and who are bewildered by such things, the resolute determination
of devotional service to the Supreme Lord does not take place." (Bg. 2.44) Çréla
Narottama däsa Öhäkura says:
manuñya-janama päiyä, rädhä-kåñëa nä bhajiyä,
jäniyä çuniyä viña khäinu
Anyone who is not Kåñëa conscious and who therefore does not engage in the
service of the Lord is also paçu-ghna, for he is willingly drinking poison. Such a
person cannot be interested in kåñëa-kathä because he still has a desire for
material sense gratification; he is not nivåtta-tåñëa. As it is said, traivargikäs te
puruñä vimukhä hari-medhasaù. Those interested in trivarga—that is, in
dharma, artha and käma—are religious for the sake of achieving a material
position with which to gain better facilities for sense gratification. Such
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
27
birth and death. They cannot be interested in Kåñëa consciousness.
For kåñëa-kathä, topics about Kåñëa consciousness, there must be a speaker
and a hearer, both of whom can be interested in Kåñëa consciousness if they
are no longer interested in material topics. One can actually see how this
attitude automatically develops in persons who are Kåñëa conscious. Although
the devotees of the Kåñëa consciousness movement are quite young men, they
no longer read materialistic newspapers, magazines and so on, for they are no
longer interested in such topics (nivåtta-tarñaiù). They completely give up the
bodily understanding of life. For topics concerning Uttamaçloka, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the spiritual master speaks, and the disciple hears with
attention. Unless both of them are free from material desires, they cannot be
interested in topics of Kåñëa consciousness. The spiritual master and disciple
do not need to understand anything more than Kåñëa because simply by
understanding Kåñëa and talking about Kåñëa, one becomes a perfectly learned
person (yasmin vijïäte sarvam evaà vijïätaà bhavati, Muëòaka Upaniñad 1.3).
The Lord sits within everyone's heart, and by the grace of the Lord the devotee
receives instructions directly from the Lord Himself, who says in Bhagavad-gétä
(15.15):
sarvasya cähaà hådi sanniviñöo
mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca
vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva vedyo
vedänta-kåd veda-vid eva cäham
"I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowledge
and forgetfulness. By all the Vedas, I am to be known; indeed, I am the
compiler of Vedänta, and I am the knower of the Vedas." Kåñëa consciousness
is so exalted that one who is perfectly situated in Kåñëa consciousness, under
the direction of the spiritual master, is fully satisfied by reading kåñëa-kathä as
found in Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Bhagavad-gétä and similar Vedic literatures.
Since merely talking about Kåñëa is so pleasing, we can simply imagine how
pleasing it is to render service to Kåñëa.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
28
When discourses on kåñëa-kathä take place between a liberated spiritual
master and his disciple, others also sometimes take advantage of hearing these
topics and also benefit. These topics are the medicine to stop the repetition of
birth and death. The cycle of repeated birth and death, by which one takes on
different bodies again and again, is called bhava or bhava-roga. If anyone,
willingly or unwillingly, hears kåñëa-kathä, his bhava-roga, the disease of birth
and death, will certainly stop. Therefore kåñëa-kathä is called bhavauñadha, the
remedy to stop the repetition of birth and death. Karmés, or persons attached
to material sense enjoyment, generally cannot give up their material desires,
but kåñëa-kathä is such a potent medicine that if one is induced to hear
kåñëa-kértana, he will certainly be freed from this disease. A practical example
is Dhruva Mahäräja, who at the end of his tapasya was fully satisfied. When
the Lord wanted to give Dhruva a benediction, Dhruva refused it. Svämin
kåtärtho'smi varaà na yäce [Cc. Madhya 22.42]. "My dear Lord," he said, "I am
fully satisfied. I do not ask for any benediction for material sense gratification."
We actually see that even young boys and girls in the Kåñëa consciousness
movement have given up their long practice of bad habits like illicit sex,
meat-eating, intoxication and gambling. Because Kåñëa consciousness is so
potent that it gives them full satisfaction, they are no longer interested in
material sense gratification.
TEXTS 5-7
iPaTaaMaha Mae SaMare_MarÅYaE‚
deRvv]TaaÛaiTarQaEiSTaiMai(r)lE/" )
durTYaYa& k-aErvSaENYaSaaGar&
k*-TvaTarNa( vTSaPad& SMa YaTâva" )) 5 ))
d]aE<YañivPlu=íiMad& Mad(r)&
SaNTaaNabqJa& ku-åPaa<@vaNaaMa( )
JauGaaePa ku-i+a& GaTa Aatac§-ae
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
29
MaaTauê Mae Ya" Xar<a& GaTaaYaa" )) 6 ))
vqYaaRi<a TaSYaai%l/deh>aaJaa‚
MaNTabRih" PaUåzk-al/æPaE" )
Pa[YaC^Taae Ma*TYauMauTaaMa*Ta& c
MaaYaaMaNauZYaSYa vdSv ivÜNa( )) 7 ))
pitämahä me samare 'maraïjayair
devavratädyätirathais timiìgilaiù
duratyayaà kaurava-sainya-sägaraà
kåtvätaran vatsa-padaà sma yat-plaväù
drauëy-astra-vipluñöam idaà mad-aìgaà
santäna-béjaà kuru-päëòavänäm
jugopa kukñià gata ätta-cakro
mätuç ca me yaù çaraëaà gatäyäù
véryäëi tasyäkhila-deha-bhäjäm
antar bahiù püruña-käla-rüpaiù
prayacchato måtyum utämåtaà ca
mäyä-manuñyasya vadasva vidvan
SYNONYMS
pitämahäù—my grandfathers, the five Päëòavas (Yudhiñöhira, Bhéma, Arjuna,
Nakula and Sahadeva); me—my; samare—on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra;
amaram jayaiù—with fighters who could gain victory over the demigods on the
battlefield; devavrata-ädya—Bhéñmadeva and others; atirathaiù—great
commanders in chief; timiìgilaiù—resembling great timiìgila fish, which can
easily eat large sharks; duratyayam—very difficult to cross;
kaurava-sainya-sägaram—the ocean of the assembled soldiers of the Kauravas;
kåtvä—considering such an ocean; ataran—crossed it; vatsa-padam—exactly
as one steps over a small hoofprint of a calf; sma—in the past; yat-plaväù—the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
30
shelter of the boat of Kåñëa's lotus feet; drauëi—of Açvatthämä; astra—by the
brahmästra; vipluñöam—being attacked and burned; idam—this;
mat-aìgam—my body; santäna-béjam—the only seed left, the last descendant
of the family; kuru-päëòavänäm—of the Kurus and the Päëòavas (because no
one but me lived after the Battle of Kurukñetra); jugopa—gave protection;
kukñim—within the womb; gataù—being placed; ätta-cakraù—taking in hand
the disc; mätuù—of my mother; ca—also; me—my; yaù—the Lord who;
çaraëam—the shelter; gatäyäù—who had taken; véryäëi—the glorification of
the transcendental characteristics; tasya—of Him (the Supreme Personality of
Godhead); akhila-deha-bhäjäm—of all the materially embodied living entities;
antaù bahiù—inside and outside; püruña—of the Supreme Person;
käla-rüpaiù—in the forms of eternal time; prayacchataù—who is the giver;
måtyum—of death; uta—it is so said; amåtam ca—and eternal life;
mäyä-manuñyasya—of the Lord, who appeared as an ordinary human being by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
His own potency; vadasva—kindly describe; vidvan—O learned speaker
(Çukadeva Gosvämé).
TRANSLATION
Taking the boat of Kåñëa's lotus feet, my grandfather Arjuna and others
crossed the ocean of the Battlefield of Kurukñetra, in which such commanders
as Bhéñmadeva resembled great fish that could very easily have swallowed them.
By the mercy of Lord Kåñëa, my grandfathers crossed this ocean, which was
very difficult to cross, as easily as one steps over the hoofprint of a calf. Because
my mother surrendered unto Lord Kåñëa's lotus feet, the Lord, Sudarçana-cakra
in hand, entered her womb and saved my body, the body of the last remaining
descendant of the Kurus and the Päëòavas, which was almost destroyed by the
fiery weapon of Açvatthämä. Lord Çré Kåñëa, appearing within and outside of
all materially embodied living beings by His own potency in the forms of eternal
time—that is, as Paramätmä and as viräö-rüpa—gave liberation to everyone,
either as cruel death or as life. Kindly enlighten me by describing His
31
transcendental characteristics.
PURPORT
As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.14.58):
samäçritä ye pada-pallava-plavaà
mahat-padaà puëya-yaço muräreù
bhavämbudhir vatsa-padaà paraà padaà
padaà padaà yad vipadäà na teñäm
"For one who has accepted the boat of the lotus feet of the Lord, who is the
shelter of the cosmic manifestation and is famous as Muräri, or the enemy of
the Mura demon, the ocean of the material world is like the water contained in
a calf's hoofprint. His goal is paraà padam, or Vaikuëöha, the place where
there are no material miseries, not the place where there is danger at every
step."
One who seeks shelter at the lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa is immediately
protected by the Lord. As the Lord promises in Bhagavad-gétä (18.66), ahaà
tväà sarva-päpebhyo mokñayiñyämi mä çucaù: "I shall deliver you from all sinful
reactions. Do not fear." By taking shelter of Lord Kåñëa, one comes under the
safest protection. Thus when the Päëòavas took shelter at the lotus feet of
Kåñëa, all of them were on the safe side of the Battlefield of Kurukñetra.
Parékñit Mahäräja, therefore, felt obliged to think of Kåñëa in the last days of
his life. This is the ideal result of Kåñëa consciousness: ante näräyaëa-småtiù
[SB 2.1.6]. If at the time of death one can remember Kåñëa, one's life is
successful. Parékñit Mahäräja, therefore, because of his many obligations to
Kåñëa, intelligently decided to think of Kåñëa constantly during the last days
of his life. Kåñëa had saved the Päëòavas, Mahäräja Parékñit's grandfathers, on
the Battlefield of Kurukñetra, and Kåñëa had saved Mahäräja Parékñit himself
when he was attacked by the brahmästra of Açvatthämä. Kåñëa acted as the
friend and worshipable Deity of the Päëòava family. Moreover, apart from
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
32
Lord Kåñëa's personal contact with the Päëòavas, Kåñëa is the Supersoul of all
living entities, and He gives everyone liberation, even if one is not a pure
devotee. Kaàsa, for example, was not at all a devotee, yet Kåñëa, after killing
him, gave him salvation. Kåñëa consciousness is beneficial to everyone,
whether one is a pure devotee or a nondevotee. This is the glory of Kåñëa
consciousness. Considering this, who will not take shelter at the lotus feet of
Kåñëa? Kåñëa is described in this verse as mäyä-manuñya because He descends
exactly like a human being. He is not obliged to come here, like karmés, or
ordinary living beings; rather, He appears by His own internal energy
(sambhavämy ätma-mäyayä [Bg. 4.6]) just to show favor to the fallen
conditioned souls. Kåñëa is always situated in His original position as
sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], and anyone who renders service to Him is also
situated in his original, spiritual identity (svarüpeëa vyavasthitiù [SB 2.10.6]).
This is the highest perfection of human life.
TEXT 8
raeih<YaaSTaNaYa" Pa[ae¢-ae raMa" SaªzR<aSTvYaa )
devKYaa Ga>aRSaMbNDa" ku-Taae dehaNTar& ivNaa )) 8 ))
rohiëyäs tanayaù prokto
rämaù saìkarñaëas tvayä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
kuto dehäntaraà vinä
SYNONYMS
rohiëyäù—of Rohiëédevé, the mother of Baladeva; tanayaù—the son;
proktaù—is well known; rämaù—Balaräma; saìkarñaëaù—Balaräma is none
other than Saìkarñaëa, the first Deity in the quadruple group (Saìkarñaëa,
Aniruddha, Pradyumna and Väsudeva); tvayä—by you (it is so said);
33
devakyäù—of Devaké, the mother of Kåñëa; garbha-sambandhaù—connected
with the womb; kutaù—how; deha-antaram—transferring bodies;
vinä—without.
TRANSLATION
My dear Çukadeva Gosvämé, you have already explained that Saìkarñaëa,
who belongs to the second quadruple, appeared as the son of Rohiëé named
Balaräma. If Balaräma was not transferred from one body to another, how is it
possible that He was first in the womb of Devaké and then in the womb of
Rohiëé? Kindly explain this to me.
PURPORT
Here is a question particularly directed at understanding Balaräma, who is
Saìkarñaëa Himself. Balaräma is well known as the son of Rohiëé, yet it is also
known that He was the son of Devaké. Parékñit Mahäräja wanted to understand
the mystery of Balaräma's being the son of both Devaké and Rohiëé.
TEXT 9
k-SMaaNMauku-Ndae >aGavaNa( iPaTauGaeRhad( v]Ja& GaTa" )
Kv vaSa& jaiTai>a" SaaDa| k*-TavaNa( SaaTvTaa&PaiTa" )) 9 ))
kasmän mukundo bhagavän
pitur gehäd vrajaà gataù
kva väsaà jïätibhiù särdhaà
kåtavän sätvatäà patiù
SYNONYMS
kasmät—why; mukundaù—Kåñëa, who can award liberation to everyone;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
34
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pituù—of His father
(Vasudeva); gehät—from the house; vrajam—to Vrajadhäma, Vrajabhümi;
gataù—went; kva—where; väsam—placed Himself to live; jïätibhiù—His
relatives; särdham—with; kåtavän—did so; sätvatäm patiù—the master of all
Vaiñëava devotees.
TRANSLATION
Why did Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, leave the house of His
father, Vasudeva, and transfer Himself to the house of Nanda in Våndävana?
Where did the Lord, the master of the Yadu dynasty, live with His relatives in
Våndävana?
PURPORT
These are inquiries about the itinerary of Kåñëa. Just after His birth in the
house of Vasudeva in Mathurä, Kåñëa transferred Himself to Gokula, on the
other side of the Yamunä, and after some days He moved with His father,
mother and other relatives to Nanda-gräma, Våndävana. Mahäräja Parékñit was
very much eager to hear about Kåñëa's activities in Våndävana. This entire
canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam is full of activities performed in Våndävana and
Dvärakä. The first forty chapters describe Kåñëa's Våndävana affairs, and the
next fifty describe Kåñëa's activities in Dvärakä. Mahäräja Parékñit, to fulfill
his desire to hear about Kåñëa, requested Çukadeva Gosvämé to describe these
activities in full detail.
TEXT 10
v]Jae vSaNa( ik-Mak-raeNMaDauPauYaa| c ke-Xav" )
>a]aTar& cavDaqTa( k&-Sa& MaaTaurÖaTadhR<aMa( )) 10 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
35
vraje vasan kim akaron
madhupuryäà ca keçavaù
bhrätaraà cävadhét kaàsaà
mätur addhätad-arhaëam
SYNONYMS
vraje—at Våndävana; vasan—while residing; kim akarot—what did He do;
madhupuryäm—in Mathurä; ca—and; keçavaù—Kåñëa, the killer of Keçé;
bhrätaram—the brother; ca—and; avadhét—killed; kaàsam—Kaàsa;
mätuù—of His mother; addhä—directly; a-tat-arhaëam—which was not at all
sanctioned by the çästras.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa lived both in Våndävana and in Mathurä. What did He do there?
Why did He kill Kaàsa, His mother's brother? Such killing is not at all
sanctioned in the çästras.
PURPORT
One's maternal uncle, the brother of one's mother, is on the level of one's
father. When a maternal uncle has no son, his nephew legally inherits his
property. Therefore, why did Kåñëa directly kill Kaàsa, the brother of His
mother? Mahäräja Parékñit was very much inquisitive about the facts in this
regard.
TEXT 11
deh& MaaNauzMaaié[TYa k-iTa vzaRi<a v*iZ<ai>a" )
YaduPauYaa| SahavaTSaqTa( PaTNYa" k-TYa>avNa( Pa[>aae" )) 11 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
36
dehaà mänuñam äçritya
kati varñäëi våñëibhiù
yadu-puryäà sahävätsét
patnyaù katy abhavan prabhoù
SYNONYMS
deham—body; mänuñam—exactly like a man; äçritya—accepting; kati
varñäëi—how many years; våñëibhiù—in the company of the Våñëis, those who
were born in the Våñëi family; yadu-puryäm—in Dvärakä, in the residential
quarters of the Yadus; saha—with; avätsét—the Lord lived; patnyaù—wives;
kati—how many; abhavan—were there; prabhoù—of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, has no material body, yet He
appears as a human being. For how many years did He live with the
descendants of Våñëi? How many wives did He marry, and for how many years
did He live in Dvärakä?
PURPORT
In many places the Supreme Personality of Godhead is described as
sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], possessing a spiritual, blissful body. His bodily
feature is naräkåti, that is, exactly like that of a human being. Here the same
idea is repeated in the wo
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
mänuñam äçritya, which indicate that He accepts
a body exactly like that of a man. Everywhere it is confirmed that Kåñëa is
never niräkära, or formless. He has His form, exactly like that of a human
being. There is no doubt about this.
TEXT 12
37
WTadNYaÀ Sav| Mae MauNae k*-Z<aivceiíTaMa( )
v¢u-MahRiSa SavRj é[ÕDaaNaaYa ivSTa*TaMa( )) 12 ))
etad anyac ca sarvaà me
mune kåñëa-viceñöitam
vaktum arhasi sarvajïa
çraddadhänäya viståtam
SYNONYMS
etat—all these details; anyat ca—and others also; sarvam—everything;
me—unto me; mune—O great sage; kåñëa-viceñöitam—the activities of Lord
Kåñëa; vaktum—to describe; arhasi—you are able; sarva-jïa—because you
know everything; çraddadhänäya—because I am not envious but have all faith
in Him; viståtam—in full detail.
TRANSLATION
O great sage, who know everything about Kåñëa, please describe in detail all
the activities of which I have inquired and also those of which I have not, for I
have full faith and am very eager to hear of them.
TEXT 13
NaEzaiTadu"Saha +auNMaa& TYa¢-aedMaiPa baDaTae )
iPabNTa& TvNMau%aM>aaeJaCYauTa& hirk-QaaMa*TaMa( )) 13 ))
naiñätiduùsahä kñun mäà
tyaktodam api bädhate
pibantaà tvan-mukhämbhojacyutaà
hari-kathämåtam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
38
SYNONYMS
na—not; eñä—all this; ati-duùsahä—extremely difficult to bear; kñut—hunger;
mäm—unto me; tyakta-udam—even after giving up drinking water; api—also;
bädhate—does not hinder; pibantam—while drinking;
tvat-mukha-ambhoja-cyutam—emanating from your lotus mouth;
hari-kathä-amåtam—the nectar of topics concerning Kåñëa.
TRANSLATION
Because of my vow on the verge of death, I have given up even drinking
water, yet because I am drinking the nectar of topics about Kåñëa, which is
flowing from the lotus mouth of your Lordship, my hunger and thirst, which
are extremely difficult to bear, cannot hinder me.
PURPORT
To prepare to meet death in seven days, Mahäräja Parékñit gave up all food
and drink. As a human being, he was certainly both hungry and thirsty, and
therefore Çukadeva Gosvämé might have wanted to stop narrating the
transcendental topics of Kåñëa; but despite his fast, Mahäräja Parékñit was not
at all fatigued. "The hunger and thirst from my fast do not disturb me," he said.
"Once when I felt very thirsty, I went to the äçrama of Çaméka Muni to drink
water, but the muni did not supply it. I therefore wrapped a dead snake over
his shoulder, and that is why I was cursed by the brähmaëa boy. Now, however,
I am quite fit. I am not at all disturbed by my hunger and thirst." This indicates
that although on the material platform there are disturbances from hunger and
thirst, on the spiritual platform there is no such thing as fatigue.
The entire world is suffering because of spiritual thirst. Every living being is
Brahman, or spirit soul, and needs spiritual food to satisfy his hunger and
thirst. Unfortunately, however, the world is completely unaware of the nectar
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
39
of kåñëa-kathä. The Kåñëa consciousness movement is therefore a boon to
philosophers, religionists and people in general. There is certainly a charming
attraction in Kåñëa and kåñëa-kathä. Therefore the Absolute Truth is called
Kåñëa, the most attractive.
The word amåta is also an important reference to the moon, and the word
ambuja means "lotus." The pleasing moonshine and pleasing fragrance of the
lotus combined to bring pleasure to everyone hearing kåñëa-kathä from the
mouth of Çukadeva Gosvämé. As it is said:
matir na kåñëe parataù svato vä
mitho 'bhipadyeta gåha-vratänäm
adänta-gobhir viçatäà tamisraà
punaù punaç carvita-carvaëänäm
"Because of their uncontrolled senses, persons too addicted to materialistic life
make progress toward hellish conditions and repeatedly chew that which has
already been chewed. Their inclinations toward Kåñëa are never aroused,
either by the instructions of others, by their own efforts, or by a combination
of both." (SB 7.5.30) At the present moment, all of human society is engaged in
the business of chewing the chewed (punaù punaç carvita-carvaëänäm). People
are prepared to undergo måtyu-saàsära-vartmani [Bg. 9.3], taking birth in one
form, dying, accepting another form and dying again. To stop this repetition of
birth and death, kåñëa-kathä, or Kåñëa consciousness, is absolutely necessary.
But unless one hears kåñëa-kathä from a realized soul like Çukadeva Gosvämé,
one cannot relish the nectar of kåñëa-kathä, which puts an end to all material
fatigue, and enjoy the blissful life of transcendental existence. In relation to
the Kåñëa consciousness movement, we actually see that those who have tasted
the nectar of kåñëa-kathä lose all material desires, whereas those who cannot
understand Kåñëa or kåñëa-kathä regard the Kåñëa conscious life as
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
the nondevotees are surprised that the devotees have forgotten material
hankerings.
40
TEXT 14
SaUTa ovac
Wv& iNaXaMYa >a*GauNaNdNa SaaDauvad&
vEYaaSaik-" Sa >aGavaNaQa ivZ<auraTaMa( )
Pa[TYaCYaR k*-Z<acirTa& k-il/k-LMazgan&
VYaahTauRMaar>aTa >aaGavTaPa[DaaNa" )) 14 ))
süta uväca
evaà niçamya bhågu-nandana sädhu-vädaà
vaiyäsakiù sa bhagavän atha viñëu-rätam
pratyarcya kåñëa-caritaà kali-kalmaña-ghnaà
vyähartum ärabhata bhägavata-pradhänaù
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; evam—thus; niçamya—hearing;
bhågu-nandana—O son of the Bhågu dynasty, Çaunaka; sädhu-vädam—pious
questions; vaiyäsakiù—Çukadeva Gosvämé, the son of Vyäsadeva; saù—he;
bhagavän—the most powerful; atha—thus; viñëu-rätam—unto Parékñit
Mahäräja, who was always protected by Viñëu; pratyarcya—offering him
respectful obeisances; kåñëa-caritam—topics of Lord Kåñëa;
kali-kalmaña-ghnam—which diminish the troubles of this age of Kali;
vyähartum—to describe; ärabhata—began; bhägavata-pradhänaù—Çukadeva
Gosvämé, the chief among the pure devotees.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Süta Gosvämé said: O son of Bhågu [Çaunaka Åñi], after Çukadeva Gosvämé,
the most respectable devotee, the son of Vyäsadeva, heard the pious questions
41
of Mahäräja Parékñit, he thanked the King with great respect. Then he began to
discourse on topics concerning Kåñëa, which are the remedy for all sufferings in
this age of Kali.
PURPORT
In this verse the words kåñëa-caritaà kali-kalmaña-ghnam indicate that the
activities of Lord Kåñëa are certainly the greatest panacea for all miseries,
especially in this age of Kali. It is said that in Kali-yuga people have only short
lives, and they have no culture of spiritual consciousness. If anyone is at all
interested in spiritual culture, he is misled by many bogus svämés and yogés who
do not refer to kåñëa-kathä. Therefore most people are unfortunate and
disturbed by many calamities. Çréla Vyäsadeva prepared Çrémad-Bhägavatam at
the request of Närada Muni in order to give relief to the suffering people of
this age (kali-kalmaña-ghnam). The Kåñëa consciousness movement is seriously
engaged in enlightening people through the pleasing topics of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam. All over the world, the message of Çrémad-Bhägavatam
and Bhagavad-gétä is being accepted in all spheres of life, especially in
advanced, educated circles.
Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé is described in this verse as bhägavata-pradhänaù,
whereas Mahäräja Parékñit is described as viñëu-rätam. Both words bear the
same meaning; that is, Mahäräja Parékñit was a great devotee of Kåñëa, and
Çukadeva Gosvämé was also a great saintly person and a great devotee of
Kåñëa. Combined together to present kåñëa-kathä, they give great relief to
suffering humanity.
anarthopaçamaà säkñäd
bhakti-yogam adhokñaje
lokasyäjänato vidväàç
cakre sätvata-saàhitäm
"The material miseries of the living entity, which are superfluous to him, can
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
42
be directly mitigated by the linking process of devotional service. But the mass
of people do not know this, and therefore the learned Vyäsadeva compiled this
Vedic literature, Çrémad-Bhägavatam, which is in relation to the Supreme
Truth." (SB 1.7.6) People in general are unaware that the message of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam can give all of human society relief from the pangs of
Kali-yuga (kali-kalmaña-ghnam).
TEXT 15
é[qéuk- ovac
SaMYaGVYaviSaTaa buiÖSTav raJaizRSataMa )
vaSaudevk-QaaYaa& Tae YaÂaTaa NaEiïk-I riTa" )) 15 ))
çré-çuka uväca
samyag vyavasitä buddhis
tava räjarñi-sattama
väsudeva-kathäyäà te
yaj jätä naiñöhiké ratiù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; samyak—completely;
vyavasitä—fixed; buddhiù—intelligence; tava—of Your Majesty;
räja-åñi-sattama—O best of räjarñis, saintly kings; väsudeva-kathäyäm—in
hearing about the topics of Väsudeva, Kåñëa; te—your; yat—because;
jätä—developed; naiñöhiké—without cessation; ratiù—attraction or ecstatic
devotional service.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
TRANSLATION
Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O Your Majesty, best of all saintly kings,
43
because you are greatly attracted to topics of Väsudeva, it is certain that your
intelligence is firmly fixed in spiritual understanding, which is the only true
goal for humanity. Because that attraction is unceasing, it is certainly sublime.
PURPORT
Kåñëa-kathä is compulsory for the räjarñi, or executive head of government.
This is also mentioned in Bhagavad-gétä (imaà räjarñayo viduù [Bg. 4.2]).
Unfortunately, however, in this age the governmental power is gradually being
captured by third-class and fourth-class men who have no spiritual
understanding, and society is therefore very quickly becoming degraded.
Kåñëa-kathä must be understood by the executive heads of government, for
otherwise how will people be happy and gain relief from the pangs of
materialistic life? One who has fixed his mind in Kåñëa consciousness should
be understood to have very sharp intelligence in regard to the value of life.
Mahäräja Parékñit was räjarñi-sattama, the best of all saintly kings, and
Çukadeva Gosvämé was muni-sattama, the best of munis. Both of them were
elevated because of their common interest in kåñëa-kathä. The exalted position
of the speaker and the audience will be explained very nicely in the next verse.
Kåñëa-kathä is so enlivening that Mahäräja Parékñit forgot everything material,
even his personal comfort in relation to food and drink. This is an example of
how the Kåñëa consciousness movement should spread all over the world to
bring both the speaker and the audience to the transcendental platform and
back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 16
vaSaudevk-QaaPa[én" Pauåza&ñqNa( PauNaaiTa ih )
v¢-ar& Pa[C^k&- é[aeTa›&STaTPaadSail/l&/ YaQaa )) 16 ))
väsudeva-kathä-praçnaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
44
puruñäàs trén punäti hi
vaktäraà pracchakaà çrotèàs
tat-päda-salilaà yathä
SYNONYMS
väsudeva-kathä-praçnaù—questions about the pastimes and characteristics of
Väsudeva, Kåñëa; puruñän—persons; trén—three; punäti—purify; hi—indeed;
vaktäram—the speaker, such as Çukadeva Gosvämé; pracchakam—and an
inquisitive hearer like Mahäräja Parékñit; çrotèn—and, between them, the
listeners hearing about the topics; tat-päda-salilam yathä—exactly as the entire
world is purified by the Ganges water emanating from the toe of Lord Viñëu.
TRANSLATION
The Ganges, emanating from the toe of Lord Viñëu, purifies the three
worlds, the upper, middle and lower planetary systems. Similarly, when one
asks questions about the pastimes and characteristics of Lord Väsudeva, Kåñëa,
three varieties of men are purified: the speaker or preacher, he who inquires,
and the people in general who listen.
PURPORT
It is said, tasmäd guruà prapadyeta jijïäsuù çreya uttamam (SB 11.3.21).
Those interested in understanding transcendental subject matters as the goal
of life must approach the bona fide spiritual master. Tasmäd guruà prapadyeta.
One must surrender to such a guru, who can give right information about
Kåñëa. Herein, Mahäräja Parékñit has surrendered to the right personality,
Çukadeva Gosvämé, for enlightenment in väsudeva-kathä. Väsudeva is the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
original Personality of Godhead, who has unlimited spiritual activities.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is a record of such activities, and Bhagavad-gétä is the
record of Väsudeva speaking personally. Therefore, since the Kåñëa
45
consciousness movement is full of väsudeva-kathä, anyone who hears, anyone
who joins the movement and anyone who preaches will be purified.
TEXT 17
>aUiMad*RáNa*PaVYaaJadETYaaNaqk-XaTaaYauTaE" )
Aa§-aNTaa >aUir>aare<a b]øa<a& Xar<a& YaYaaE )) 17 ))
bhümir dåpta-nåpa-vyäjadaityänéka-
çatäyutaiù
äkräntä bhüri-bhäreëa
brahmäëaà çaraëaà yayau
SYNONYMS
bhümiù—mother earth; dåpta—puffed up; nåpa-vyäja—posing as kings, or the
supreme power personified in the state; daitya—of demons; anéka—of military
phalanxes of soldiers; çata-ayutaiù—unlimitedly, by many hundreds of
thousands; äkräntä—being overburdened; bhüri-bhäreëa—by a burden of
unnecessary fighting power; brahmäëam—unto Lord Brahmä; çaraëam—to
take shelter; yayau—went.
TRANSLATION
Once when mother earth was overburdened by hundreds of thousands of
military phalanxes of various conceited demons dressed like kings, she
approached Lord Brahmä for relief.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
PURPORT
When the world is overburdened by unnecessary military arrangements and
when various demoniac kings are the executive heads of state, this burden
46
causes the appearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As the Lord
says in Bhagavad-gétä (4.7):
yadä yadä hi dharmasya
glänir bhavati bhärata
abhyutthänam adharmasya
tadätmänaà såjämy aham
"Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendant
of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that time I appear Myself."
When the residents of this earth become atheistic and godless, they descend to
the status of animals like dogs and hogs, and thus their only business is to bark
among themselves. This is dharmasya gläni, deviation from the goal of life.
Human life is meant for attaining the highest perfection of Kåñëa
consciousness, but when people are godless and the presidents or kings are
unnecessarily puffed up with military power, their business is to fight and
increase the military strength of their different states. Nowadays, therefore, it
appears that every state is busy manufacturing atomic weapons to prepare for a
third world war. Such preparations are certainly unnecessary; they reflect the
false pride of the heads of state. The real business of a chief executive is to see
to the happiness of the mass of people by training them in Kåñëa consciousness
in different divisions of life. Cätur-varëyaà mayä såñöaà
guëa-karma-vibhägaçaù (Bg. 4.13). A leader should train the people as
brähmaëas, kñatriyas, vaiçyas and çüdras and engage them in various
occupational duties, thus helping them progress toward Kåñëa consciousness.
Instead, however, rogues and thieves in the guise of protectors arrange for a
voting system, and in the name of democracy they come to power by hook or
crook and exploit the citizens. Even long, long ago, asuras, persons devoid of
God consciousness, became the heads of state, and now this is happening
again. The various states of the world are preoccupied with arranging for
military strength. Sometimes they spend sixty-five percent of the government's
revenue for this purpose. But why should people's hard-earned money be spent
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
47
in this way? Because of the present world situation, Kåñëa has descended in the
form of the Kåñëa consciousness movement. This is quite natural, for without
the Kåñëa consciousness movement the world cannot be peaceful and happy.
TEXT 18
GaaE>aURTvaé[uMau%q i%àa §-NdNTaq k-å<a& iv>aae" )
oPaiSQaTaaiNTake- TaSMaE VYaSaNa& SaMavaecTa )) 18 ))
gaur bhütväçru-mukhé khinnä
krandanté karuëaà vibhoù
upasthitäntike tasmai
vyasanaà samavocata
SYNONYMS
gauù—the shape of a cow; bhütvä—assuming; açru-mukhé—with tears in the
eyes; khinnä—very much distressed; krandanté—weeping; karuëam—piteously;
vibhoù—of Lord Brahmä; upasthitä—appeared; antike—in front; tasmai—unto
him (Lord Brahmä); vyasanam—her distress; samavocata—submitted.
TRANSLATION
Mother earth assumed the form of a cow. Very much distressed, with tears
in her eyes, she appeared before Lord Brahmä and told him about her
misfortune.
TEXT 19
b]øa TaduPaDaaYaaRQa Sah devESTaYaa Sah )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
48
JaGaaMa Sai}aNaYaNaSTaqr& +aqrPaYaaeiNaDae" )) 19 ))
brahmä tad-upadhäryätha
saha devais tayä saha
jagäma sa-tri-nayanas
téraà kñéra-payo-nidheù
SYNONYMS
brahmä—Lord Brahmä; tat-upadhärya—understanding everything rightly;
atha—thereafter; saha—with; devaiù—the demigods; tayä saha—with mother
earth; jagäma—approached; sa-tri-nayanaù—with Lord Çiva, who has three
eyes; téram—the shore; kñéra-payaù-nidheù—of the ocean of milk.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, having heard of the distress of mother earth, Lord Brahmä, with
mother earth, Lord Çiva and all the other demigods, approached the shore of the
ocean of milk.
PURPORT
After Lord Brahmä understood the precarious condition of the earth, he
first visited the demigods headed by Lord Indra, who are in charge of the
various affairs of this universe, and Lord Çiva, who is responsible for
annihilation. Both maintenance and annihilation go on perpetually, under the
order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (4.8),
pariträëäya sädhünäà vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm. Those who are obedient to the
laws of God are protected by different servants and demigods, whereas those
who are undesirable are vanquished by Lord Çiva. Lord Brahmä first met all
the demigods, including Lord Çiva. Then, along with mother earth, they went
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
to the shore of the ocean of milk, where Lord Viñëu lies on a white island,
49
Çvetadvépa.
TEXT 20
Ta}a GaTva JaGaàaQa& devdev& v*zak-iPaMa( )
Pauåz& PauåzSaU¢e-Na oPaTaSQae SaMaaihTa" )) 20 ))
tatra gatvä jagannäthaà
deva-devaà våñäkapim
puruñaà puruña-süktena
upatasthe samähitaù
SYNONYMS
tatra—there (on the shore of the ocean of milk); gatvä—after going;
jagannätham—unto the master of the entire universe, the Supreme Being;
deva-devam—the Supreme God of all gods; våñäkapim—the Supreme Person,
Viñëu, who provides for everyone and diminishes everyone's suffering;
puruñam—the Supreme Person; puruña-süktena—with the Vedic mantra
known as puruña-sükta; upatasthe—worshiped; samähitaù—with full attention.
TRANSLATION
After reaching the shore of the ocean of milk, the demigods worshiped the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viñëu, the master of the whole
universe, the supreme God of all gods, who provides for everyone and
diminishes everyone's suffering. With great attention, they worshiped Lord
Viñëu, who lies on the ocean of milk, by reciting the Vedic mantras known as
the Puruña-sükta.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
50
The demigods, such as Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva, King Indra, Candra and
Sürya, are all subordinate to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Aside from
the demigods, even in human society there are many influential personalities
supervising various businesses or establishments. Lord Viñëu, however, is the
God of gods (parameçvara). He is parama-puruña, the Supreme Being,
Paramätmä. As confirmed in the Brahma-saàhitä (5.1), éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù
sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù: "Kåñëa, known as Govinda, is the supreme controller.
He has an eternal, blissful, spiritual body." No one is equal to or greater than
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore He is described here by
many words: jagannätha, deva-deva, våñäkapi and puruña. The supremacy of
Lord Viñëu is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (10.12) in this statement by
Arjuna:
paraà brahma paraà dhäma
pavitraà paramaà bhavän
puruñaà çäçvataà divyam
ädi-devam ajaà vibhum
"You are the Supreme Brahman, the ultimate, the supreme abode and purifier,
the Absolute Truth and the eternal divine person. You are the primal God,
transcendental and original, and You are the unborn and all-pervading
beauty." Kåñëa is ädi-puruña, the original Personality of Godhead (govindam
ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi). Viñëu is a plenary expansion of Lord Kåñëa,
and all the viñëu-tattvas are parameçvara, deva-deva.
TEXT 21
iGar& SaMaaDaaE GaGaNae SaMaqirTaa&
iNaXaMYa veDaaiñdXaaNauvac h )
Gaa& PaaEåzq& Mae é*<auTaaMara" PauNa‚
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
51
ivRDaqYaTaaMaaéu TaQaEv Maa icrMa( )) 21 ))
giraà samädhau gagane saméritäà
niçamya vedhäs tridaçän uväca ha
gäà pauruñéà me çåëutämaräù punar
vidhéyatäm äçu tathaiva mä ciram
SYNONYMS
giram—a vibration of words; samädhau—in trance; gagane—in the sky;
saméritäm—vibrated; niçamya—hearing; vedhäù—Lord Brahmä;
tridaçän—unto the demigods; uväca—said; ha—oh; gäm—the order;
pauruñém—received from the Supreme Person; me—from me; çåëuta—just
hear; amaräù—O demigods; punaù—again; vidhéyatäm—execute;
äçu—immediately; tathä eva—just so; mä—do not; ciram—delay.
TRANSLATION
While in trance, Lord Brahmä heard the words of Lord Viñëu vibrating in
the sky. Thus he told the demigods: O demigods, hear from me the order of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu, the Supreme Person, and execute it attentively without
delay.
PURPORT
It appears that the words of the Supreme Personality of Godhead can be
heard in trance by competent persons. Modern science gives us telephones, by
which one can hear sound vibrations from a distant place. Similarly, although
other persons cannot hear the words of Lord Viñëu, Lord Brahmä is able to
hear the Lord's words within himself. This is confirmed in the beginning of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.1.1): tene brahma hådä ya ädi-kavaye. Ädi-kavi is Lord
Brahmä. In the beginning of the creation, Lord Brahmä received the
52
instructions of Vedic knowledge from Lord Viñëu through the medium of the
heart (hådä). The same principle is confirmed herewith. While Brahmä was in
trance, he was able to hear the words of Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu, and he carried
the Lord's message to the demigods. Similarly, in the beginning, Brahmä first
received the Vedic knowledge from the Supreme Personality of Godhead
through the core of the heart. In both instances the same process was used in
transmitting the message to Lord Brahmä. In other words, although Lord
Viñëu was invisible even to Lord Brahmä, Lord Brahmä could hear Lord
Viñëu's words through the heart. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is
invisible even to Lord Brahmä, yet He descends on this earth and becomes
visible to people in general. This is certainly an act of His causeless mercy, but
fools and nondevotees think that Kåñëa is an ordinary historical person.
Because they think that the Lord is an ordinary person like them, they are
described as müòha (avajänanti mäà müòhäù [Bg. 9.11]). The causeless mercy of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead is neglected by such demoniac persons,
who cannot understand the instructions of Bhagavad-gétä and who therefore
misinterpret them.
TEXT 22
PaurEv Pau&SaavDa*Taae DaraJvrae
>aviÙr&XaEYaRduzUPaJaNYaTaaMa( )
Sa YaavduVYaaR >arMaqìreìr"
Svk-al/Xa¢-ya +aPaYa&êred( >auiv )) 22 ))
puraiva puàsävadhåto dharä-jvaro
bhavadbhir aàçair yaduñüpajanyatäm
sa yävad urvyä bharam éçvareçvaraù
sva-käla-çaktyä kñapayaàç cared bhuvi
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
53
SYNONYMS
purä—even before this; eva—indeed; puàsä—by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; avadhåtaù—was certainly known; dharä-jvaraù—the distress on the
earth; bhavadbhiù—by your good selves; aàçaiù—expanding as plenary
portions; yaduñu—in the family of King Yadu; upajanyatäm—take your birth
and appear there; saù—He (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); yävat—as
long as; urvyäù—of the earth; bharam—the burden; éçvara-éçvaraù—the Lord
of lords; sva-käla-çaktyä—by His own potency the time factor;
kñapayan—diminishing; caret—should move; bhuvi—on the surface of the
earth.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä informed the demigods: Before we submitted our petition to
the Lord, He was already aware of the distress on earth. Consequently, for as
long as the Lord moves on earth to diminish its burden by His own potency in
the form of time, all of you demigods should appear through plenary portions as
sons and grandsons in the family of the Yadus.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
As stated in the Brahma-saàhitä (5.39):
rämädi-mürtiñu kalä-niyamena tiñöhan
nänävatäram akarod bhuvaneñu kintu
kåñëaù svayaà samabhavat paramaù pumän yo
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda, who is always
situated in various incarnations such as Räma, Nåsiàha and many
sub-incarnations as well, but who is the original Personality of Godhead,
54
known as Kåñëa, and who incarnates personally also."
In this verse from Çrémad-Bhägavatam we find the words puraiva
puàsävadhåto dharä jvaraù. The word puàsä refers to Kåñëa, who was already
aware of how the whole world was suffering because of the increase of demons.
Without reference to the supreme power of the Personality of Godhead,
demons assert themselves to be independent kings and presidents, and thus
they create a disturbance by increasing their military power. When such
disturbances are very prominent, Kåñëa appears. At present also, various
demoniac states all over the world are increasing their military power in many
ways, and the whole situation has become distressful. Therefore Kåñëa has
appeared by His name, in the Hare Kåñëa movement, which will certainly
diminish the burden of the world. Philosophers, religionists, and people in
general must take to this movement very seriously, for man-made plans and
devices will not help bring peace on earth. The transcendental sound Hare
Kåñëa is not different from the person Kåñëa.
näma cintämaëiù kåñëaç
caitanya-rasa-vigrahaù
pürëaù çuddho nitya-mukto
'bhinnatvän näma-näminoù
[Cc. Madhya 17.133]
(Padma Puräëa)
There is no difference between the sound Hare Kåñëa and Kåñëa the person.
TEXT 23
vSaudevGa*he Saa+aad( >aGavaNa( Pauåz" Par" )
JaiNaZYaTae TaiTPa[YaaQa| SaM>avNTau SauriñYa" )) 23 ))
vasudeva-gåhe säkñäd
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
55
bhagavän puruñaù paraù
janiñyate tat-priyärthaà
sambhavantu sura-striyaù
SYNONYMS
vasudeva-gåhe—in the house of Vasudeva (who would be the father of Kåñëa
when the Lord appeared); säkñät—personally; bhagavän—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who has full potency; puruñaù—the original person;
paraù—who is transcendental; janiñyate—will appear; tat-priya-artham—and
for His satisfaction; sambhavantu—should take birth; sura-striyaù—all the
wives of the demigods.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, who has full potency, will
personally appear as the son of Vasudeva. Therefore all the wives of the
demigods should also appear in order to satisfy Him.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (4.9) the Lord says, tyaktvä dehaà punar janma naiti mäm
eti: after giving up the material body, the devotee of the Lord returns home,
back to Godhead. This means that the devotee is first transferred to the
particular universe where the Lord is at that time staying to exhibit His
pastimes. There are innumerable universes, and the Lord is appearing in one of
these universes at every moment. Therefore His pastimes are called nitya-lélä,
eternal pastimes. The Lord's appearance as a child in the house of Devaké takes
place continuously in one universe after another. Therefore, the devotee is
first transferred to that particular universe where the pastimes of the Lord are
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
current. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, even if a devotee does not complete the
course of devotional service, he enjoys the happiness of the heavenly planets,
56
where the most pious people dwell, and then takes birth in the house of a çuci
or çrémän, a pious brähmaëa or a wealthy vaiçya (çucénäà çrématäà gehe
yoga-bhrañöo 'bhijäyate [Bg. 6.41]). Thus a pure devotee, even if unable to
execute devotional service completely, is transferred to the upper planetary
system, where pious people reside. From there, if his devotional service is
complete, such a devotee is transferred to the place where the Lord's pastimes
are going on. Herein it is said, sambhavantu sura-striyaù. Sura-stré, the women
of the heavenly planets, were thus ordered to appear in the Yadu dynasty in
Våndävana to enrich the pastimes of Lord Kåñëa. These sura-stré, when further
trained to live with Kåñëa, would be transferred to the original Goloka
Våndävana. During Lord Kåñëa's pastimes within this world, the sura-stré were
to appear in different ways in different families to give pleasure to the Lord,
just so that they would be fully trained before going to the eternal Goloka
Våndävana. With the association of Lord Kåñëa, either at Dvärakä-puré,
Mathurä-puré or Våndävana, they would certainly return home, back to
Godhead. Among the sura-stré, the women of the heavenly planets, there are
many devotees, such as the mother of the Upendra incarnation of Kåñëa. It
was such devoted women who were called for in this connection.
TEXT 24
vaSaudevk-l/aNaNTa" SahóvdNa" Svra$( )
AGa]Taae >aivTaa devae hre" iPa[Yaick-IzRYaa )) 24 ))
väsudeva-kalänantaù
sahasra-vadanaù svaräö
agrato bhavitä devo
hareù priya-cikérñayä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
SYNONYMS
57
väsudeva-kalä anantaù—the plenary expansion of Lord Kåñëa known as
Anantadeva or Saìkarñaëa Ananta, the all-pervasive incarnation of the
Supreme Lord; sahasra-vadanaù—having thousands of hoods; svaräö—fully
independent; agrataù—previously; bhavitä—will appear; devaù—the Lord;
hareù—of Lord Kåñëa; priya-cikérñayä—with the desire to act for the pleasure.
TRANSLATION
The foremost manifestation of Kåñëa is Saìkarñaëa, who is known as
Ananta. He is the origin of all incarnations within this material world. Previous
to the appearance of Lord Kåñëa, this original Saìkarñaëa will appear as
Baladeva, just to please the Supreme Lord Kåñëa in His transcendental
pastimes.
PURPORT
Çré Baladeva is the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself. He is equal in
supremacy to the Supreme Godhead, yet wherever Kåñëa appears, Çré Baladeva
appears as His brother, sometimes elder and sometimes younger. When Kåñëa
appears, all His plenary expansions and other incarnations appear with Him.
This is elaborately explained in Caitanya-caritämåta. This time, Baladeva
would appear before Kåñëa as Kåñëa's elder brother.
TEXT 25
ivZ<aaeMaaRYaa >aGavTaq YaYaa SaMMaaeihTa& JaGaTa( )
Aaidía Pa[>au<aa&XaeNa k-aYaaRQaeR SaM>aivZYaiTa )) 25 ))
viñëor mäyä bhagavaté
yayä sammohitaà jagat
ädiñöä prabhuëäàçena
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
58
käryärthe sambhaviñyati
SYNONYMS
viñëoù mäyä—the potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu;
bhagavaté—as good as Bhagavän and therefore known as Bhagavaté; yayä—by
whom; sammohitam—captivated; jagat—all the worlds, both material and
spiritual; ädiñöä—being ordered; prabhuëä—by the master; aàçena—with her
different potential factors; kärya-arthe—for executing business;
sambhaviñyati—would also appear.
TRANSLATION
The potency of the Lord, known as viñëu-mäyä, who is as good as the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, will also appear with Lord Kåñëa. This
potency, acting in different capacities, captivates all the worlds, both material
and spiritual. At the request of her master, she will appear with her different
potencies in order to execute the work of the Lord.
PURPORT
Paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate (Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad 6.8 [Cc. Madhya
13.65, purport]). In the Vedas it is said that the potencies of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead are called by different names, such as yogamäyä and
mahämäyä. Ultimately, however, the Lord's potency is one, exactly as electric
potency is one although it can act both to cool and to heat. The Lord's potency
acts in both the spiritual and material worlds. In the spiritual world the Lord's
potency works as yogamäyä, and in the material world the same potency works
as mahämäyä, exactly as electricity works in both a heater and a cooler. In the
material world, this potency, working as mahämäyä, acts upon the conditioned
souls to deprive them more and more of devotional service. It is said, yayä
sammohito jéva ätmänaà tri-guëätmakam [SB 1.7.5]. In the material world the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
59
conditioned soul thinks of himself as a product of tri-guëa, the three modes of
material nature. This is the bodily conception of life. Because of associating
with the three guëas of the material potency, everyone identifies himself with
his body. Someone is thinking he is a brähmaëa, someone a kñatriya, and
someone a vaiçya or çüdra. Actually, however, one is neither a brähmaëa, a
kñatriya, a vaiçya nor a çüdra; one is part and parcel of the Supreme Lord
(mamaiväàçaù), but because of being covered by the material energy,
mahämäyä, one identifies himself in these different ways. When the
conditioned soul becomes liberated, however, he thinks himself an eternal
servant of Kåñëa. Jévera 'svarüpa' haya-kåñëera 'nitya-däsa.' [Cc. Madhya
20.108]. When he comes to that position, the same potency, acting as
yogamäyä, increasingly helps him become purified and devote his energy to the
service of the Lord.
In either case, whether the soul is conditioned or liberated, the Lord is
supreme. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (9.10), mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù süyate
sa-caräcaram: it is by the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead that
the material energy, mahämäyä, works upon the conditioned soul.
prakåteù kriyamäëäni
guëaiù karmäëi sarvaçaù
ahaìkära-vimüòhätmä
kartäham iti manyate
"The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of material
nature, thinks himself to be the doer of activities which are in actuality carried
out by nature." (Bg. 3.27) Within conditioned life, no one has freedom, but
because one is bewildered, being subject to the rule of mahämäyä, one foolishly
thinks himself independent (ahaìkära-vimüòhätmä kartäham iti manyate [
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
.
3.27]). But when the conditioned soul becomes liberated by executing
devotional service, he is given a greater and greater chance to relish a
relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead in different
transcendental statuses, such as däsya-rasa, sakhya-rasa, vätsalya-rasa and
60
mädhurya-rasa.
Thus the Lord's potency, viñëu-mäyä, has two features—ävaraëikä and
unmukha. When the Lord appeared, His potency came with Him and acted in
different ways. She acted as yogamäyä with Yaçodä, Devaké and other intimate
relations of the Lord, and she acted in a different way with Kaàsa, Çälva and
other asuras. By the order of Lord Kåñëa, His potency yogamäyä came with
Him and exhibited different activities according to the time and
circumstances. Käryärthe sambhaviñyati. Yogamäyä acted differently to execute
different purposes desired by the Lord. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (9.13),
mahätmänas tu mäà pärtha daivéà prakåtim äçritäù. The mahätmäs, who fully
surrender to the lotus feet of the Lord, are directed by yogamäyä, whereas the
durätmäs, those who are devoid of devotional service, are directed by
mahämäyä.
TEXT 26
é[qéuk- ovac
wTYaaidXYaaMarGa<aaNa( Pa[JaaPaiTaPaiTaivR>au" )
AaìaSYa c Mahq& Gaqi>aR" SvDaaMa ParMa& YaYaaE )) 26 ))
çré-çuka uväca
ity ädiçyämara-gaëän
prajäpati-patir vibhuù
äçväsya ca mahéà gérbhiù
sva-dhäma paramaà yayau
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
ädiçya—after
informing; amara-gaëän—all the demigods; prajäpati-patiù—Lord Brahmä, the
master of the Prajäpatis; vibhuù—all-powerful; äçväsya—after pacifying;
61
ca—also; mahém—mother earth; gérbhiù—by sweet words; sva-dhäma—his
own planet, known as Brahmaloka; paramam—the best (within the universe);
yayau—returned.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: After thus advising the demigods and
pacifying mother earth, the very powerful Lord Brahmä, who is the master of
all other Prajäpatis and is therefore known as Prajäpati-pati, returned to his
own abode, Brahmaloka.
TEXT 27
éUrSaeNaae YaduPaiTaMaRQauraMaavSaNa( PaurqMa( )
MaaQauraH^UrSaeNaa&ê ivzYaaNa( bu>auJae Paura )) 27 ))
çüraseno yadupatir
mathuräm ävasan purém
mäthuräï chürasenäàç ca
viñayän bubhuje purä
SYNONYMS
çürasenaù—King Çürasena; yadu-patiù—the chief of the Yadu dynasty;
mathuräm—at the place known as Mathurä; ävasan—went to live; purém—in
that city; mäthurän—at the place known as the Mäthura district; çürasenän
ca—and the place known as Çürasena; viñayän—such kingdoms;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
bubhuje—enjoyed; purä—formerly.
TRANSLATION
62
Formerly, Çürasena, the chief of the Yadu dynasty, had gone to live in the
city of Mathurä. There he enjoyed the places known as Mäthura and Çürasena.
TEXT 28
raJaDaaNaq TaTa" Saa>aUTa( SavRYaadv>aU>auJaaMa( )
MaQaura >aGavaNa( Ya}a iNaTYa& SaiàihTaae hir" )) 28 ))
räjadhäné tataù säbhüt
sarva-yädava-bhübhujäm
mathurä bhagavän yatra
nityaà sannihito hariù
SYNONYMS
räjadhäné—the capital; tataù—from that time; sä—the country and the city
known as Mathurä; abhüt—became; sarva-yädava-bhübhujäm—of all the kings
who appeared in the Yadu dynasty; mathurä—the place known as Mathurä;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yatra—wherein;
nityam—eternally; sannihitaù—intimately connected, living eternally;
hariù—the Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Since that time, the city of Mathurä had been the capital of all the kings of
the Yadu dynasty. The city and district of Mathurä are very intimately
connected with Kåñëa, for Lord Kåñëa lives there eternally.
PURPORT
It is understood that Mathurä City is the transcendental abode of Lord
Kåñëa; it is not an ordinary material city, for it is eternally connected with the
63
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Våndävana is within the jurisdiction of
Mathurä, and it still continues to exist. Because Mathurä and Våndävana are
intimately connected with Kåñëa eternally, it is said that Lord Kåñëa never
leaves Våndävana (våndävanaà parityajya padam ekaà na gacchati). At
present, the place known as Våndävana, in the district of Mathurä, continues
its position as a transcendental place, and certainly anyone who goes there
becomes transcendentally purified. Navadvépa-dhäma is also intimately
connected with Vrajabhümi. Çréla Narottama däsa Öhäkura therefore says:
çré gauòa-maëòala-bhümi, yebä jäne cintämaëi,
tä'ra haya vrajabhüme väsa
"Vrajabhümi" refers to Mathurä-Våndävana, and Gauòa-maëòala-bhümi
includes Navadvépa. These two places are nondifferent. Therefore, anyone
living in Navadvépa-dhäma, knowing Kåñëa and Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu to
be the same personality, lives in Vrajabhümi, Mathurä-Våndävana. The Lord
has made it convenient for the conditioned soul to live in Mathurä,
Våndävana and Navadvépa and thus be directly connected with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Simply by living in these places, one can immediately
come in contact with the Lord. There are many devotees who vow never to
leave Våndävana and Mathurä. This is undoubtedly a good vow, but if one
leaves Våndävana, Mathurä or Navadvépa-dhäma for the service of the Lord,
he is not disconnected from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. At any rate,
we must understand the transcendental importance of Mathurä-Våndävana
and Navadvépa-dhäma. Anyone who executes devotional service in these
places certainly goes back home, back to Godhead, after giving up his body.
Thus the words mathurä bhagavän yatra nityaà sannihito hariù are particularly
important. A devotee should fully utilize this instruction to the best of his
ability. Whenever the Supreme Lord personally appears, He appears in
Mathurä because of His intimate connection with this place. Therefore
although Mathurä and Våndävana are situated on this planet earth, they are
transcendental abodes of the Lord.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
64
TEXT 29
TaSYaa& Tau k-ihRicC^aEirvRSaudev" k*-TaaeÜh" )
devKYaa SaUYaRYaa SaaDa| Pa[Yaa<ae rQaMaaåhTa( )) 29 ))
tasyäà tu karhicic chaurir
vasudevaù kåtodvahaù
devakyä süryayä särdhaà
prayäëe ratham äruhat
SYNONYMS
tasyäm—in that place known as Mathurä; tu—indeed; karhicit—some time
ago; çauriù—the demigod, descendant of Çüra; vasudevaù—who appeared as
Vasudeva; kåta-udvahaù—after being married; devakyä—Devaké; süryayä—his
newly married wife; särdham—along with; prayäëe—for returning home;
ratham—the chariot; äruhat—mounted.
TRANSLATION
Some time ago, Vasudeva, who belonged to the demigod family [or to the
Çüra dynasty], married Devaké. After the marriage, he mounted his chariot to
return home with his newly married wife.
TEXT 30
oGa]SaeNaSauTa" k&-Sa" SvSau" iPa[Yaick-IzRYaa )
rXMaqNa( hYaaNaa& JaGa]ah raEKMaE rQaXaTaEv*RTa" )) 30 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
ugrasena-sutaù kaàsaù
65
svasuù priya-cikérñayä
raçmén hayänäà jagräha
raukmai ratha-çatair våtaù
SYNONYMS
ugrasena-sutaù—the son of Ugrasena; kaàsaù—by the name Kaàsa;
svasuù—of his own sister Devaké; priya-cikérñayä—to please her on the
occasion of her marriage; raçmén—the reins; hayänäm—of the horses;
jagräha—took; raukmaiù—made of gold; ratha-çataiù—by hundreds of
chariots; våtaù—surrounded.
TRANSLATION
Kaàsa, the son of King Ugrasena, in order to please his sister Devaké on the
occasion of her marriage, took charge of the reins of the horses and became the
chariot driver. He was surrounded by hundreds of golden chariots.
TEXTS 31-32
cTau"XaTa& Paairbh| GaJaaNaa& heMaMaail/NaaMa( )
AìaNaaMaYauTa& SaaDa| rQaaNaa& c i}az$(XaTaMa( )) 31 ))
daSaqNaa& Sauku-Maarq<aa& Üe XaTae SaMal/x(k*-Tae )
duih}ae devk-" Pa[adad( YaaNae duihTa*vTSal/" )) 32 ))
catuù-çataà päribarhaà
gajänäà hema-mälinäm
açvänäm ayutaà särdhaà
rathänäà ca tri-ñaö-çatam
däsénäà sukumäréëäà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
66
dve çate samalaìkåte
duhitre devakaù prädäd
yäne duhitå-vatsalaù
SYNONYMS
catuù-çatam—four hundred; päribarham—dowry; gajänäm—of elephants;
hema-mälinäm—decorated with garlands of gold; açvänäm—of horses;
ayutam—ten thousand; särdham—along with; rathänäm—of chariots;
ca—and; tri-ñaö-çatam—three times six hundred (eighteen hundred);
däsénäm—of maidservants; su-kumäréëäm—very young and beautiful
unmarried girls; dve—two; çate—hundred; samalaìkåte—fully decorated with
ornaments; duhitre—unto his daughter; devakaù—King Devaka; prädät—gave
as a gift; yäne—while going away; duhitå-vatsalaù—who was very fond of his
daughter Devaké.
TRANSLATION
Devaké's father, King Devaka, was very much affectionate to his daughter.
Therefore, while she and her husband were leaving home, he gave her a dowry
of four hundred elephants nicely decorated with golden garlands. He also gave
ten thousand horses, eighteen hundred chariots, and two hundred very
beautiful young maidservants, fully decorated with ornaments.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
The system of giving a dowry to one's daughter has existed in Vedic
civilization for a very long time. Even today, following the same system, a
father who has money will give his daughter an opulent dowry. A daughter
would never inherit the property of her father, and therefore an affectionate
father, during the marriage of his daughter, would give her as much as possible.
A dowry, therefore, is never illegal according to the Vedic system. Here, of
67
course, the gift offered as a dowry by Devaka to Devaké was not ordinary.
Because Devaka was a king, he gave a dowry quite suitable to his royal position.
Even an ordinary man, especially a high-class brähmaëa, kñatriya or vaiçya, is
supposed to give his daughter a liberal dowry. Immediately after the marriage,
the daughter goes to her husband's house, and it is also a custom for the
brother of the bride to accompany his sister and brother-in-law to exhibit
affection for her. This system was followed by Kaàsa. These are all old customs
in the society of varëäçrama-dharma, which is now wrongly designated as
Hindu. These long-standing customs are nicely described here.
TEXT 33
Xa«TaUYaRMa*d(r)aê NaeduduRNdu>aYa" SaMaMa( )
Pa[Yaa<aPa[§-Mae TaaTa vrvßae" SauMa(r)l/Ma( )) 33 ))
çaìkha-türya-mådaìgäç ca
nedur dundubhayaù samam
prayäëa-prakrame täta
vara-vadhvoù sumaìgalam
SYNONYMS
çaìkha—conchshells; türya—bugles; mådaìgäù—drums; ca—also;
neduù—vibrated; dundubhayaù—kettledrums; samam—in concert;
prayäëa-prakrame—at the time of departure; täta—O beloved son;
vara-vadhvoù—of the bridegroom and the bride; su-maìgalam—for the
purpose of their auspicious departure.
TRANSLATION
O beloved son, Mahäräja Parékñit, when the bride and bridegroom were
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
68
ready to start, conchshells, bugles, drums and kettledrums all vibrated in
concert for their auspicious departure.
TEXT 34
PaiQa Pa[Ga]ih<a& k&-SaMaa>aaZYaahaXarqrvak( -)
ASYaaSTvaMaíMaae Ga>aaeR hNTaa Yaa& vhSae_buDa )) 34 ))
pathi pragrahiëaà kaàsam
äbhäñyähäçaréra-väk
asyäs tväm añöamo garbho
hantä yäà vahase 'budha
SYNONYMS
pathi—on the way; pragrahiëam—who was managing the reins of the horses;
kaàsam—unto Kaàsa; äbhäñya—addressing; äha—said; a-çaréra-väk—a voice
coming from someone whose body was invisible; asyäù—of this girl (Devaké);
tväm—you; añöamaù—the eighth; garbhaù—pregnancy; hantä—killer;
yäm—her whom; vahase—you are carrying; abudha—you foolish rascal.
TRANSLATION
While Kaàsa, controlling the reins of the horses, was driving the chariot
along the way, an unembodied voice addressed him, "You foolish rascal, the
eighth child of the woman you are carrying will kill you!"
PURPORT
The omen spoke of añöamo garbhaù, referring to the eighth pregnancy, but
did not clearly say whether the child was to be a son or a daughter. Even if
Kaàsa were to see that the eighth child of Devaké was a daughter, he should
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
69
have no doubt that the eighth child was to kill him. According to the
Viçva-koça dictionary, the word garbha means "embryo" and also arbhaka, or
"child." Kaàsa was affectionate toward his sister, and therefore he had become
the chariot driver to carry her and his brother-in-law to their home. The
demigods, however, did not want Kaàsa to be affectionate toward Devaké, and
therefore, from an unseen position, they encouraged Kaàsa to offend her.
Moreover, the six sons of Maréci had been cursed to take birth from the womb
of Devaké, and upon being killed by Kaàsa they would be delivered. When
Devaké understood that Kaàsa would be killed by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who would appear from her womb, she felt great joy. The word
vahase is also significant because it indicates that the ominous vibration
condemned Kaàsa for acting just like a beast of burden by carrying his
enemy's mother.
TEXT 35
wTYau¢-" Sa %l/" PaaPaae >aaeJaaNaa& ku-l/Paa&SaNa" )
>aiGaNaq& hNTauMaarBDa& %ÉPaai<a" k-ce_Ga]hqTa( )) 35 ))
ity uktaù sa khalaù päpo
bhojänäà kula-päàsanaù
bhaginéà hantum ärabdhaà
khaòga-päëiù kace 'grahét
SYNONYMS
iti uktaù—thus being addressed; saù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
khalaù—envious;
päpaù—sinful; bhojänäm—of the Bhoja dynasty; kula-päàsanaù—one who
can degrade the reputation of his family; bhaginém—unto his sister; hantum
ärabdham—being inclined to kill; khaòga-päëiù—taking a sword in his hand;
kace—hair; agrahét—took up.
70
TRANSLATION
Kaàsa was a condemned personality in the Bhoja dynasty because he was
envious and sinful. Therefore, upon hearing this omen from the sky, he caught
hold of his sister's hair with his left hand and took up his sword with his right
hand to sever her head from her body.
PURPORT
Kaàsa was driving the chariot and controlling the reins with his left hand,
but as soon as he heard the omen that his sister's eighth child would kill him,
he gave up the reins, caught hold of his sister's hair, and with his right hand
took up a sword to kill her. Before, he had been so affectionate that he was
acting as his sister's chariot driver, but as soon as he heard that his self-interest
or his life was at risk, he forgot all affection for her and immediately became a
great enemy. This is the nature of demons. No one should trust a demon,
despite any amount of affection. Aside from this, a king, a politician or a
woman cannot be trusted, since they can do anything abominable for their
personal interest. Cäëakya Paëòita therefore says, viçväso naiva kartavyaù
stréñu räja-kuleñu ca.
TEXT 36
Ta& JauGauiPSaTak-MaaR<a& Na*Xa&Sa& iNarPa}aPaMa( )
vSaudevae Maha>aaGa ovac PairSaaNTvYaNa( )) 36 ))
taà jugupsita-karmäëaà
nåçaàsaà nirapatrapam
vasudevo mahä-bhäga
uväca parisäntvayan
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
71
SYNONYMS
tam—unto him (Kaàsa); jugupsita-karmäëam—who was ready to commit such
an offensive act; nåçaàsam—very cruel; nirapatrapam—shameless;
vasudevaù—Vasudeva; mahä-bhägaù—the greatly fortunate father of
Väsudeva; uväca—said; parisäntvayan—pacifying.
TRANSLATION
Wanting to pacify Kaàsa, who was so cruel and envious that he was
shamelessly ready to kill his sister, the great soul Vasudeva, who was to be the
father of Kåñëa, spoke to him in the following words.
PURPORT
Vasudeva, who was to be the father of Kåñëa, is described here as
mahä-bhäga, a very upright and sober personality, because although Kaàsa was
ready to kill Vasudeva's wife, Vasudeva remained sober and unagitated. In a
peaceful attitude, Vasudeva began to address Kaàsa by putting forward
reasonable arguments. Vasudeva was a great personality because he knew how
to pacify a cruel person and how to forgive even the bitterest enemy. One who
is fortunate is never caught, even by tigers or snakes.
TEXT 37
é[qvSaudev ovac
ëagaNaqYaGau<a" éUrE>aRvaNa( >aaeJaYaXaSk-r" )
Sa k-Qa& >aiGaNaq& hNYaaTa( iñYaMauÜahPavRi<a )) 37 ))
çré-vasudeva uväca
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
72
çläghanéya-guëaù çürair
bhavän bhoja-yaçaskaraù
sa kathaà bhaginéà hanyät
striyam udväha-parvaëi
SYNONYMS
çré-vasudevaù uväca—the great personality Vasudeva said;
çläghanéya-guëaù—a person who possesses praiseworthy qualities; çüraiù—by
great heroes; bhavän—your good self; bhoja-yaçaù-karaù—a brilliant star in
the Bhoja dynasty; saù—one such as your good self; katham—how;
bhaginém—your sister; hanyät—can kill; striyam—especially a woman;
udväha-parvaëi—at the time of the marriage ceremony.
TRANSLATION
Vasudeva said: My dear brother-in-law Kaàsa, you are the pride of your
family, the Bhoja dynasty, and great heroes praise your qualities. How could
such a qualified person as you kill a woman, your own sister, especially on the
occasion of her marriage?
PURPORT
According to Vedic principles, a brähmaëa, an old man, a woman, a child or
a cow cannot be killed under any circumstances. Vasudeva stressed that
Devaké was not only a woman but a member of Kaàsa s family. Because she
was now married to Vasudeva, she was para-stré, another man's wife, and if
such a woman were killed, not only would Kaàsa be implicated in sinful
activities, but his reputation as king of the Bhoja dynasty would be damaged.
Thus Vasudeva tried in many ways to convince Kaàsa in order to stop him
from killing Devaké.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
73
TEXT 38
Ma*TYauJaRNMavTaa& vqr deheNa Sah JaaYaTae )
AÛ vaBdXaTaaNTae va Ma*TYauvOE Pa[ai<aNaa& Da]uv" )) 38 ))
måtyur janmavatäà véra
dehena saha jäyate
adya väbda-çatänte vä
måtyur vai präëinäà dhruvaù
SYNONYMS
måtyuù—death; janma-vatäm—of the living entities who have taken birth;
véra—O great hero; dehena saha—along with the body; jäyate—is born (one
who has taken birth is sure to die); adya—today; vä—either; abda-çata—of
hundreds of years; ante—at the end; vä—or; måtyuù—death; vai—indeed;
präëinäm—for every living entity; dhruvaù—is assured.
TRANSLATION
O great hero, one who takes birth is sure to die, for death is born with the
body. One may die today or after hundreds of years, but death is sure for every
living entity.
PURPORT
Vasudeva wanted to impress upon Kaàsa that although Kaàsa feared dying
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
sure. Why then should Kaàsa do something that would be detrimental to his
reputation and that of his family? As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (2.27):
jätasya hi dhruvo måtyur
74
dhruvaà janma måtasya ca
tasmäd aparihärye 'rthe
na tvaà çocitum arhasi
"For one who has taken his birth, death is certain; and for one who is dead,
birth is certain. Therefore, in the unavoidable discharge of your duty, you
should not lament." One should not fear death. Rather, one should prepare
oneself for the next birth. One should utilize one's time in this human form to
end the process of birth and death. It is not that to save oneself from death one
should entangle oneself in sinful activities. This is not good.
TEXT 39
dehe PaÄTvMaaPaàe dehq k-MaaRNauGaae_vXa" )
dehaNTarMaNauPa[aPYa Pa[a¢-Na& TYaJaTae vPau" )) 39 ))
dehe païcatvam äpanne
dehé karmänugo 'vaçaù
dehäntaram anupräpya
präktanaà tyajate vapuù
SYNONYMS
dehe—when the body; païcatvam äpanne—turns into five elements; dehé—the
proprietor of the body, the living being; karma-anugaù—following the
reactions of his own fruitive activities; avaçaù—spontaneously, automatically;
deha-antaram—another body (made of material elements);
anupräpya—receiving as a result; präktanam—the former;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—gives up;
vapuù—body.
TRANSLATION
75
When the present body turns to dust and is again reduced to five
elements—earth, water, fire, air and ether—the proprietor of the body, the
living being, automatically receives another body of material elements according
to his fruitive activities. When the next body is obtained, he gives up the
present body.
PURPORT
This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä, which presents the beginning of
spiritual understanding.
dehino 'smin yathä dehe
kaumäraà yauvanaà jarä
tathä dehäntara-präptir
dhéras tatra na muhyati
"As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to youth
to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death. The
self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change." (Bg. 2.13) A person or an
animal is not the material body; rather, the material body is the covering of the
living being. Bhagavad-gétä compares the body to a dress and elaborately
explains how one changes dresses one after another. The same Vedic
knowledge is confirmed here. The living being, the soul, is constantly changing
bodies one after another. Even in the present life, the body changes from
childhood to boyhood, from boyhood to youth, and from youth to old age;
similarly, when the body is too old to continue, the living being gives up this
body and, by the laws of nature, automatically gets another body according to
his fruitive activities, desires and ambitions. The laws of nature control this
sequence, and therefore as long as the living entity is under the control of the
external, material energy, the process of bodily change takes place
automatically, according to one's fruitive activities. Vasudeva therefore wanted
to impress upon Kaàsa that if he committed this sinful act of killing a woman,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
76
in his next life he would certainly get a material body still more conditioned to
the sufferings of material existence. Thus Vasudeva advised Kaàsa not to
commit sinful activities.
One who commits sinful activities because of ignorance, tamo-guëa, obtains
a lower body. Käraëaà guëa-saìgo 'sya sad-asad-yoni janmasu (Bg. 13.22).
There are hundreds and thousands of different species of life. Why are there
higher and lower bodies? One receives these bodies according to the
contaminations of material nature. If in this life one is contaminated by the
mode of ignorance and sinful activities (duñkåté), in the next life, by the laws of
nature, one will certainly get a body full of suffering. The laws of nature are
not subservient to the whimsical desires of the conditioned soul. Our
endeavor, therefore, should be to associate always with sattva-guëa and not
indulge in rajo-guëa or tamo-guëa (rajas-tamo-bhäväù [SB 1.2.19]). Lusty
desires and greed keep the living entity perpetually in ignorance and prevent
him from being elevated to the platform of sattva-guëa or çuddha-sattva-guëa.
One is advised to be situated in çuddha-sattva-guëa, devotional service, for
thus one is immune to the reactions of the three modes of material nature.
TEXT 40
v]Ja&iSTaïNa( PadEke-Na YaQaEvEke-Na GaC^iTa )
YaQaa Ta*<aJal/aEkE-v& dehq k-MaRGaiTa& GaTa" )) 40 ))
vrajaàs tiñöhan padaikena
yathaivaikena gacchati
yathä tåëa-jalaukaivaà
dehé karma-gatià gataù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
SYNONYMS
vrajan—a person, while traveling on the road; tiñöhan—while standing; padä
77
ekena—on one foot; yathä—as; eva—indeed; ekena—by another foot;
gacchati—goes; yathä—as; tåëa-jalaukä—a worm on a vegetable; evam—in this
way; dehé—the living entity; karma-gatim—the reactions of fruitive activities;
gataù—undergoes.
TRANSLATION
Just as a person traveling on the road rests one foot on the ground and then
lifts the other, or as a worm on a vegetable transfers itself to one leaf and then
gives up the previous one, the conditioned soul takes shelter of another body
and then gives up the one he had before.
PURPORT
This is the process of the soul's transmigration from one body to another.
At the time of death, according to his mental condition, the living being is
carried by the subtle body, consisting of mind, intelligence and ego, to another
gross body. When higher authorities have decided what kind of gross body the
living entity will have, he is forced to enter such a body, and thus he
automatically gives up his previous body. Dull-minded persons who do not
have the intelligence to understand this process of transmigration take for
granted that when the gross body is finished, one's life is finished forever. Such
persons have no brains with which to understand the process of
transmigration. At the present moment there is great opposition to the Hare
Kåñëa movement, which is being called a "brainwashing" movement. But
actually the so-called scientists, philosophers and other leaders in the Western
countries have no brains at all. The Hare Kåñëa movement is trying to elevate
such foolish persons by enlightening their intelligence so that they will take
advantage of the human body. Unfortunately, because of gross ignorance, they
regard the Hare Kåñëa movement as a brainwashing movement. They do not
know that without God consciousness one is forced to continue transmigrating
from one body to another. Because of their devilish brains, they will next be
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
78
forced to accept an abominable life and practically never be able to liberate
themselves from the conditional life of material existence. How this
transmigration of the soul takes place is very clearly explained in this verse.
TEXT 41
SvPane YaQaa PaXYaiTa dehMaqd*Xa&
MaNaaerQaeNaai>aiNaivíceTaNa" )
d*íé[uTaa>Yaa& MaNaSaaNauicNTaYaNa(
Pa[PaÛTae TaTa( ik-MaiPa ùPaSMa*iTa" )) 41 ))
svapne yathä paçyati deham édåçaà
manorathenäbhiniviñöa-cetanaù
dåñöa-çrutäbhyäà manasänucintayan
prapadyate tat kim api hy apasmåtiù
SYNONYMS
svapne—in a dream; yathä—as; paçyati—one sees; deham—the kind of body;
édåçam—similarly; manorathena—by mental speculation; abhiniviñöa—is fully
absorbed; cetanaù—he whose consciousness; dåñöa—by whatever has been
experienced by seeing with the eyes; çrutäbhyäm—and by hearing a
description of something else; manasä—by the mind; anucintayan—thinking,
feeling and willing; prapadyate—surrenders; tat—to that situation; kim
api—what to speak of; hi—indeed; apasmåtiù—experiencing forgetfulness of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
the present body.
TRANSLATION
Having experienced a situation by seeing or hearing about it, one
contemplates and speculates about that situation, and thus one surrenders to it,
79
not considering his present body. Similarly, by mental adjustments one dreams
at night of living under different circumstances, in different bodies, and forgets
his actual position. Under this same process, one gives up his present body and
accepts another [tathä dehäntara-präptiù [Bg. 2.13]].
PURPORT
Transmigration of the soul is very clearly explained in this verse. One
sometimes forgets his present body and thinks of his childhood body, a body of
the past, and of how one was playing, jumping, talking and so on. When the
material body is no long workable, it becomes dust: "For dust thou art, and unto
dust shalt thou return." But when the body again mixes with the five material
elements—earth, water, fire, air and ether—the mind continues to work. The
mind is the subtle substance in which the body is created, as we actually
experience in our dreams and also when we are awake in contemplation. One
must understand that the process of mental speculation develops a new type of
body that does not actually exist. If one can understand the nature of the mind
(manorathena) and its thinking, feeling and willing, one can very easily
understand how from the mind different types of bodies develop.
The Kåñëa consciousness movement, therefore, offers a process of
transcendental activities wherein the mind is fully absorbed in affairs
pertaining to Kåñëa. The presence of the soul is perceived by consciousness,
and one must purify his consciousness from material to spiritual, or, in other
words, to Kåñëa consciousness. That which is spiritual is eternal, and that
which is material is temporary. Without Kåñëa consciousness, one's
consciousness is always absorbed in temporary things. For everyone, therefore,
Kåñëa recommends in Bhagavad-gétä (9.34), man-manä bhava mad-bhakto
mad-yäjé mäà namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. One should always be absorbed in
thought of Kåñëa, one should become His devotee, one should always engage in
His service and worship Him as the supreme great, and one should always offer
Him obeisances. In the material world one is always a servant of a greater
person, and in the spiritual world our constitutional position is to serve the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
80
Supreme, the greatest, paraà brahma. This is the instruction of Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu. Jévera 'svarüpa' haya-kåñëera 'nitya-däsa' (Cc. Madhya 20.108).
To act in Kåñëa consciousness is the perfection of life and the highest
perfection of yoga. As Lord Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (6.47):
yoginäm api sarveñäà
mad-gatenäntarätmanä
çraddhävän bhajate yo mäà
sa me yuktatamo mataù
"Of all yogés, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping Me in
transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in yoga and is
the highest of all."
The condition of the mind, which flickers between saìkalpa and vikalpa,
accepting something and rejecting it, is very important in transferring the soul
to another material body at the time of death.
yaà yaà väpi smaran bhävaà
tyajaty ante kalevaram
taà tam evaiti kaunteya
sadä tad-bhäva-bhävitaù
"Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body, that state he
will attain without fail." (Bg. 8.6) Therefore one must train the mind in the
system of bhakti-yoga, as did Mahäräja Ambaréña, who kept himself always in
Kåñëa consciousness. Sa vai manaù kåñëa-padäravindayoù [SB 9.4.18]. One must
fix the mind at the lotus feet of Kåñëa twenty-four hours a day. If the mind is
fixed upon Kåñëa's lotus feet, the activities of the other senses will be engaged
in Kåñëa's service. Håñékeëa håñékeça-sevanaà bhaktir ucyate: [Cc. Madhya
19.170] to serve Håñékeça, the master of the senses, with purified senses is called
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
bhakti. Those who constantly engage in devotional service are situated in a
transcendental state, above the material modes of nature. As Kåñëa says in
81
Bhagavad-gétä (14.26):
mäà ca yo 'vyabhicäreëa
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa guëän samatétyaitän
brahma-bhüyäya kalpate
"One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in any
circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes
to the level of Brahman." One must learn the secret of success from the Vedic
literatures, especially when the cream of Vedic knowledge is presented by
Bhagavad-gétä as it is.
Because the mind is ultimately controlled by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Kåñëa, the word apasmåtiù is significant. Forgetfulness of one's own
identity is called apasmåtiù. This apasmåtiù can be controlled by the Supreme
Lord, for the Lord says, mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca: [Bg. 15.15] "From
Me come remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness." Instead of allowing one
to forget one's real position, Kåñëa can revive one's original identity at the
time of one's death, even though the mind may be flickering. Although the
mind may work imperfectly at the time of death, Kåñëa gives a devotee shelter
at His lotus feet. Therefore when a devotee gives up his body, the mind does
not take him to another material body (tyaktvä dehaà punar janma naiti mäm
eti [Bg. 4.9]); rather, Kåñëa takes the devotee to that place where He is engaged
in His pastimes (mäm eti), as we have already discussed in previous verses.
One's consciousness, therefore, must always be absorbed in Kåñëa, and then
one's life will be successful. Otherwise the mind will carry the soul to another
material body. The soul will be placed in the semen of a father and discharged
into the womb of a mother. The semen and ovum create a particular type of
body according to the form of the father and mother, and when the body is
mature, the soul emerges in that body and begins a new life. This is the process
of transmigration of the soul from one body to another (tathä
dehäntara-präptiù [Bg. 2.13
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
]). Unfortunately, those who are less intelligent
82
think that when the body disappears, everything is finished. The entire world
is being misled by such fools and rascals. But as stated in Bhagavad-gétä (2.20),
na hanyate hanyamäne çarére. The soul does not die when the body is destroyed.
Rather, the soul takes on another body.
TEXT 42
YaTaae YaTaae DaaviTa dEvcaeidTa&
MaNaae ivk-araTMak-MaaPa PaÄSau )
Gau<aezu MaaYaaricTaezu deùSaaE
Pa[PaÛMaaNa" Sah TaeNa JaaYaTae )) 42 ))
yato yato dhävati daiva-coditaà
mano vikärätmakam äpa païcasu
guëeñu mäyä-raciteñu dehy asau
prapadyamänaù saha tena jäyate
SYNONYMS
yataù yataù—from one place to another or from one position to another;
dhävati—speculates; daiva-coditam—impelled by accident or deliberation;
manaù—the mind; vikära-ätmakam—changing from one type of thinking,
feeling and willing to another; äpa—at the end, he obtains (a mentality);
païcasu—at the time of death (when the material body turns totally into
matter); guëeñu—(the mind, not being liberated, becomes attached) to the
material qualities; mäyä-raciteñu—where the material energy creates a similar
body; dehé—the spirit soul who accepts such a body; asau—he;
prapadyamänaù—being surrendered (to such a condition); saha—with;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
tena—a similar body; jäyate—takes birth.
83
TRANSLATION
At the time of death, according to the thinking, feeling and willing of the
mind, which is involved in fruitive activities, one receives a particular body. In
other words, the body develops according to the activities of the mind. Changes
of body are due to the flickering of the mind, for otherwise the soul could
remain in its original, spiritual body.
PURPORT
One can very easily understand that the mind is constantly flickering,
changing in the quality of its thinking, feeling and willing. This is explained by
Arjuna in Bhagavad-gétä (6.34):
caïcalaà hi manaù kåñëa
pramäthi balavad dåòham
tasyähaà nigrahaà manye
väyor iva suduñkaram
The mind is caïcala, flickering, and it changes very strongly. Therefore
Arjuna admitted that controlling the mind is not at all possible; this would be
as difficult as controlling the wind. For example, if one were in a boat moving
according to the wind on a river or the sea, and the wind were uncontrollable,
the tilting boat would be very much disturbed and extremely difficult to
control. It might even capsize. Therefore, in the bhava-samudra, the ocean of
mental speculation and transmigration to different types of bodies, one must
first control the mind.
By regulative practice one can control the mind, and this is the purpose of
the yoga system (abhyäsa-yoga-yuktena [Bg. 8.8]). But there is a chance of
failure with the yoga system, especially in this age of Kali, because the yoga
system uses artificial means. If the mind is engaged in bhakti-yoga, however, by
the grace of Kåñëa one can very easily control it. Therefore Çré Caitanya
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
84
Mahäprabhu has recommended, harer näma harer näma harer nämaiva kevalam
[Cc. Ädi 17.21]. One should chant the holy name of the Lord constantly, for the
holy name of the Lord is nondifferent from Hari, the Supreme Person.
By chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra constantly, one can fix the mind on
the lotus feet of Kåñëa (sa vai manaù kåñëa-padäravindayoù [SB 9.4.18]) and in
this way achieve the perfection of yoga. Otherwise, the flickering mind will
hover on the platform of mental speculation for sense enjoyment, and one will
have to transmigrate from one type of body to another because the mind is
trained only in relation to the material elements, or, in other words, to sense
gratification, which is false. Mäyä-sukhäya bharam udvahato vimüòhän (SB
7.9.43). Rascals (vimüòhän), being controlled by mental speculation, make huge
arrangements by which to enjoy life temporarily, but they must give up the
body at the time of death, when everything is taken away by Kåñëa's external
energy (måtyuù sarva-haraç cäham [Bg. 10.34]). At that time, whatever one has
created in this life is lost, and one must automatically accept a new body by the
force of material nature. In this life one may have constructed a very tall
skyscraper, but in the next life, because of one's mentality, one may have to
accept a body like that of a cat, a dog, a tree or perhaps a demigod. Thus the
body is offered by the laws of material nature. Käraëaà guëa-saìgo 'sya
sad-asad-yoni janmasu (Bg. 13.22). The spirit soul takes birth in higher and
lower species of life only because of his association with the three qualities of
material nature.
ürdhvaà gacchanti sattva-sthä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
madhye tiñöhanti räjasäù
jaghanya-guëa-våtti-sthä
adho gacchanti tämasäù
"Those situated in the mode of goodness gradually go upward to the higher
planets; those in the mode of passion live on the earthly planets; and those in
the mode of ignorance go down to the hellish worlds." (Bg. 14.18)
In conclusion, the Kåñëa consciousness movement offers the topmost
85
welfare activity for human society. The saner section of human society must
therefore take this movement very seriously for the benefit of all humanity. To
save oneself from the repetition of birth and death, one must purify his
consciousness. Sarvopädhi-vinirmuktaà tat-paratvena nirmalam [Cc. Madhya
19.170]. One must be freed from all designations-"I am American," "I am
Indian," "I am this," "I am that"-and come to the platform of understanding that
Kåñëa is the original master and we are His eternal servants. When the senses
are purified and engaged in Kåñëa's service, one achieves the highest
perfection. Håñékeëa håñékeça-sevanaà bhaktir ucyate [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. The
Kåñëa consciousness movement is a movement of bhakti-yoga.
Vairägya-vidyä-nija-bhakti-yoga [Cc. Madhya 6.254]. By following the principles
of this movement, one becomes disassociated from material mental
concoctions and is established on the original platform of the eternal
relationship between the living entity and the Supreme Personality of
Godhead as servant and master. This, in summary, is the purpose of the Kåñëa
consciousness movement.
TEXT 43
JYaaeiTaYaRQaEvaedk-PaaiQaRveZvd"
SaMaqrveGaaNauGaTa& iv>aaVYaTae )
Wv& SvMaaYaaricTaeZvSaaE PauMaaNa(
Gau<aezu raGaaNauGaTaae ivMauùiTa )) 43 ))
jyotir yathaivodaka-pärthiveñv adaù
saméra-vegänugataà vibhävyate
evaà sva-mäyä-raciteñv asau pumän
guëeñu rägänugato vimuhyati
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
86
jyotiù—the luminaries in the sky, such as the sun, the moon and the stars;
yathä—as; eva—indeed; udaka—in water; pärthiveñu—or in other liquids, like
oil; adaù—directly; saméra-vega-anugatam—being forced by the movements of
the wind; vibhävyate—appear in different shapes; evam—in this way;
sva-mäyä-raciteñu—in the situation created by one's mental concoctions;
asau—the living entity; pumän—person; guëeñu—in the material world,
manifested by the modes of nature; räga-anugataù—according to his
attachment; vimuhyati—becomes bewildered by identification.
TRANSLATION
When the luminaries in the sky, such as the moon, the sun and the stars, are
reflected in liquids like oil or water, they appear to be of different
shapes—sometimes round, sometimes long, and so on—because of the
movements of the wind. Similarly, when the living entity, the soul, is absorbed
in materialistic thoughts, he accepts various manifestations as his own identity
because of ignorance. In other words, one is bewildered by mental concoctions
because of agitation from the material modes of nature.
PURPORT
This verse gives a very good example by which to understand the different
positions of the eternal spiritual soul in the material world and how the soul
takes on different bodies (dehäntara-präptiù [Bg. 2.13]). The moon is stationary
and is one, but when it is reflected in water or oil, it appears to take different
shapes because of the movements of the wind. Similarly, the soul is the eternal
servant of Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but when put into the
material modes of nature, it takes different bodies, sometimes as a demigod,
sometimes a man, a dog, a tree and so on. By the influence of mäyä, the illusory
potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the living entity thinks that
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
he is this person, that person, American, Indian, cat, dog, tree or whatever.
This is called mäyä. When one is freed from this bewilderment and
87
understands that the soul does not belong to any shape of this material world,
one is situated on the spiritual platform (brahma-bhüta [SB 4.30.20]).
This realization is sometimes explained as niräkära, or formlessness. This
formlessness, however, does not mean that the soul has no form. The soul has
form, but the external, agitating form he has acquired because of material
contamination is false. Similarly, God is also described as niräkära, which
means that God has no material form but is sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1].
The living entity is part and parcel of the supreme sac-cid-änanda-vigraha, but
his material forms are temporary, or illusory. Both the living entity and the
Supreme Lord have original, spiritual forms (sac-cid-änanda-vigraha), but the
Lord, the Supreme, does not change His form. The Lord appears as He is,
whereas the living entity appears because material nature forces him to accept
different forms. When the living entity receives these different forms, he
identifies with them, and not with his original, spiritual form. As soon as the
living entity returns to his original, spiritual form and understanding, he
immediately surrenders to the supreme form, the Personality of Godhead. This
is explained in Bhagavad-gétä (7.19). Bahünäà janmanäm ante jïänavän mäà
prapadyate. When the living entity, after many, many births in different forms,
returns to his original form of Kåñëa consciousness, he immediately surrenders
unto the lotus feet of the supreme form, Kåñëa. This is liberation. As the Lord
says in Bhagavad-gétä (18.54):
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
na çocati na käìkñati
samaù sarveñu bhüteñu
mad-bhaktià labhate paräm
"One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme
Brahman and becomes fully joyful. He never laments nor desires to have
anything; he is equally disposed to every living entity. In that state he attains
pure devotional service unto Me." Surrender unto the supreme form is the
result of bhakti. This bhakti, or understanding of one's own position, is the
88
complete liberation. As long as one is under an impersonal understanding of
the Absolute Truth, he is not in pure knowledge, but must still struggle for
pure knowledge. Kleço 'dhikataras teñäm avyaktäsakta-cetasäm (Bg. 12.5).
Although one may be spiritually advanced, if one is attached to the impersonal
feature of the Absolute Truth one must still work very hard, as indicated by
the words kleço 'dhikataraù, which mean "greater suffering." A devotee,
however, easily attains his original position as a spiritual form and understands
the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His original form.
Kåñëa Himself explains the forms of the living entities in the Second
Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä, where He clearly says to Arjuna that He, Arjuna
and all other living entities, who were previously in their original forms, are
separate individual identities. They were individuals in the past, they are now
situated in individuality, and in the future they will all continue to maintain
their individual forms. The only difference is that the conditioned living
entity appears in various material forms, whereas Kåñëa appears in His
original, spiritual form. Unfortunately, those who are not advanced in spiritual
knowledge think that Kåñëa is like one of them and that His form is like their
material forms. Avajänanti mäà müòhä mänuñéà tanum äçritam (Bg. 9.11).
Kåñëa is never puffed up by material knowledge and is therefore called acyuta,
whereas the living entities fall down and are agitated by material nature. This
is the difference between the Supreme Lord and the living entities.
In this connection it is to be noted that Vasudeva, who was situated in a
transcendental position, advised Kaàsa not to commit further sinful activities.
Kaàsa, a representative of the demons, was always ready to kill Kåñëa, or God,
whereas Vasudeva represents a transcendentally situated person to whom
Kåñëa is born (Väsudeva is the son of Vasudeva). Vasudeva wanted his
brother-in-law Kaàsa to refrain from the sinful act of killing his sister, since
the result of being agitated by material nature would be that Kaàsa would
have to accept a body in which to suffer again and again. Elsewhere in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (5.5.4), Åñabhadeva also says:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
89
na sädhu manye yata ätmano 'yam
asann api kleçada äsa dehaù
As long as the living entity is entangled in the fruitive activities of so-called
happiness and distress, he will receive a particular type of body in which to
endure the three kinds of suffering due to material nature (tri-täpa-yantraëä).
An intelligent person, therefore, must free himself from the influence of the
three modes of material nature and revive his original, spiritual body by
engaging in the service of the Supreme Person, Kåñëa. As long as one is
materially attached, one must accept the process of birth, death, old age and
disease. One is therefore advised that an intelligent person, instead of being
entangled in so-called good and bad fruitive activities, should engage his life in
advancing in Kåñëa consciousness so that instead of accepting another
material body (tyaktvä dehaà punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9]), he will return home,
back to Godhead.
TEXT 44
TaSMaaà k-SYaicd( d]aehMaacreTa( Sa TaQaaivDa" )
AaTMaNa" +aeMaMaiNvC^Na( d]aeGDauvOE ParTaae >aYaMa( )) 44 ))
tasmän na kasyacid droham
äcaret sa tathä-vidhaù
ätmanaù kñemam anvicchan
drogdhur vai parato bhayam
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; na—not; kasyacit—of anyone; droham—envy; äcaret—one
should act;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—a person (Kaàsa); tathä-vidhaù—who has been advised in
such a way (by Vasudeva); ätmanaù—his own; kñemam—welfare;
90
anvicchan—if he desires; drogdhuù—of one who is envious of others;
vai—indeed; parataù—from others; bhayam—there is a cause of fear.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, since envious, impious activities cause a body in which one
suffers in the next life, why should one act impiously? Considering one's
welfare, one should not envy anyone, for an envious person must always fear
harm from his enemies, either in this life or in the next.
PURPORT
Instead of being inimical toward other living entities, one should act piously
by engaging in the service of the Supreme Lord, thus avoiding a fearful
situation both in this life and in the next. In this regard, the following moral
instruction by the great politician Cäëakya Paëòita is very meaningful:
tyaja durjana-saàsargaà
bhaja sädhu-samägamam
kuru puëyam aho rätraà
smara nityam anityatäm
One should give up the company of devils, demons and nondevotees and
should always associate with devotees and saintly persons. One should always
act piously, thinking that this life is temporary, and not be attached to
temporary happiness and distress. The Kåñëa consciousness movement is
teaching all of human society this principle of becoming Kåñëa conscious and
thus solving the problems of life forever (tyaktvä dehaà punar janma naiti mäm
eti so 'rjuna [Bg. 4.9]).
TEXT 45
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
91
Wza TavaNauJaa bal/a k*-Pa<aa Paui}ak-aePaMaa )
hNTau& NaahRiSa k-LYaa<aqiMaMaa& Tv& dqNavTSal/" )) 45 ))
eñä tavänujä bälä
kåpaëä putrikopamä
hantuà närhasi kalyäëém
imäà tvaà déna-vatsalaù
SYNONYMS
eñä—this; tava—your; anujä—younger sister; bälä—innocent woman;
kåpaëä—completely dependent on you; putrikä-upamä—exactly like your own
daughter; hantum—to kill her; na—not; arhasi—you deserve; kalyäëém—who
is under your affection; imäm—her; tvam—you; déna-vatsalaù—very
compassionate to the poor and innocent.
TRANSLATION
As your younger sister, this poor girl Devaké is like your own daughter and
deserves to be affectionately maintained. You are merciful, and therefore you
should not kill her. Indeed, she deserves your affection.
TEXT 46
é[qéuk- ovac
Wv& Sa SaaMai>a>aeRdEbaeRDYaMaaNaae_iPa daå<a" )
Na NYavTaRTa k-aErVYa PauåzadaNaNauv]Ta" )) 46 ))
çré-çuka uväca
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
evaà sa sämabhir bhedair
bodhyamäno 'pi däruëaù
92
na nyavartata kauravya
puruñädän anuvrataù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—in this way; saù—he
(Kaàsa); sämabhiù—by attempts to pacify him (Kaàsa); bhedaiù—by moral
instructions that one should not be cruel to anyone else; bodhyamänaù
api—even being pacified; däruëaù—he who was the most fiercely cruel; na
nyavartata—could not be stopped (from the grievous act); kauravya—O
Mahäräja Parékñit; puruña-adän—the Räkñasas, man-eaters;
anuvrataù—following in their footsteps.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: O best of the Kuru dynasty, Kaàsa was
fiercely cruel and was actually a follower of the Räkñasas. Therefore he could be
neither pacified nor terrified by the good instructions given by Vasudeva. He
did not care about the results of sinful activities, either in this life or in the
next.
TEXT 47
iNabRNDa& TaSYa Ta& jaTva ivicNTYaaNak-duNdui>a" )
Pa[aá& k-al&/ Pa[iTaVYaae!uiMad& Ta}aaNvPaÛTa )) 47 ))
nirbandhaà tasya taà jïätvä
vicintyänakadundubhiù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
idaà tatränvapadyata
93
SYNONYMS
nirbandham—determination to do something; tasya—of him (Kaàsa);
tam—that (determination); jïätvä—understanding; vicintya—thinking
deeply; änakadundubhiù—Vasudeva; präptam—had arrived; kälam—imminent
danger of death; prativyoòhum—to stop him from such activities; idam—this;
tatra—thereupon; anvapadyata—thought of other ways.
TRANSLATION
When Vasudeva saw that Kaàsa was determined to kill his sister Devaké, he
thought to himself very deeply. Considering the imminent danger of death, he
thought of another plan to stop Kaàsa.
PURPORT
Although Vasudeva saw the imminent danger that his wife Devaké would
be killed, he was convinced of his welfare because at his birth the demigods
had played drums and kettledrums. He therefore attempted another way to
save Devaké.
TEXT 48
Ma*TYaubuRiÖMaTaaPaaeùae Yaavd(buiÖbl/aedYaMa( )
YaÛSaaE Na iNavTaeRTa NaaParaDaae_iSTa deihNa" )) 48 ))
måtyur buddhimatäpohyo
yävad buddhi-balodayam
yady asau na nivarteta
näparädho 'sti dehinaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
94
SYNONYMS
måtyuù—death; buddhi-matä—by an intelligent person; apohyaù—should be
avoided; yävat—as long as; buddhi-bala-udayam—intelligence and bodily
strength are present; yadi—if; asau—that (death); na nivarteta—cannot be
checked; na—not; aparädhaù—offense; asti—there is; dehinaù—of the person
in danger of death.
TRANSLATION
As long as he has intelligence and bodily strength, an intelligent person must
try to avoid death. This is the duty of every embodied person. But if death
cannot be avoided in spite of one's endeavors, a person facing death commits no
offense.
PURPORT
It is natural for a person facing untimely death to try his best to save
himself. This is one's duty. Although death is sure, everyone should try to
avoid it and not meet death without opposition because every living soul is by
nature eternal. Because death is a punishment imposed in the condemned life
of material existence, the Vedic culture is based on avoiding death (tyaktvä
dehaà punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9]). Everyone should try to avoid death and
rebirth by cultivating spiritual life and should not submit to death without
struggling to survive. One who is not trying to stop death is not an intelligent
human being. Because Devaké was face to face with imminent death, it was
Vasudeva's duty to save her, as he was trying his best to do. He therefore
considered another way to approach Kaàsa so that Devaké would be saved.
TEXTS 49-50
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
95
Pa[daYa Ma*TYave Pau}aaNa( MaaecYae k*-Pa<aaiMaMaaMa( )
SauTaa Mae Yaid JaaYaerNa( Ma*TYauvaR Na iMa]YaeTa ceTa( )) 49 ))
ivPaYaRYaae va ik&- Na SYaad( GaiTaDaaRTauduRrTYaYaa )
oPaiSQaTaae iNavTaeRTa iNav*ta" PauNaraPaTaeTa( )) 50 ))
pradäya måtyave puträn
mocaye kåpaëäm imäm
sutä me yadi jäyeran
måtyur vä na mriyeta cet
viparyayo vä kià na syäd
gatir dhätur duratyayä
upasthito nivarteta
nivåttaù punar äpatet
SYNONYMS
pradäya—promising to deliver; måtyave—unto Kaàsa, who is death
personified for Devaké; puträn—my sons; mocaye—I am releasing her from
imminent danger; kåpaëäm—innocent; imäm—Devaké; sutäù—sons; me—my;
yadi—whether; jäyeran—should take birth; måtyuù—Kaàsa; vä—or; na—not;
mriyeta
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
cet—if; viparyayaù—just the opposite; vä—or;
kim—whether; na—not; syät—it may happen; gatiù—the movement;
dhätuù—of providence; duratyayä—very difficult to understand;
upasthitaù—that which is presently obtained; nivarteta—may stop;
nivåttaù—Devaké's death being stopped; punaù äpatet—in the future it may
happen again (but what can I do).
TRANSLATION
Vasudeva considered: By delivering all my sons to Kaàsa, who is death
personified, I shall save the life of Devaké. Perhaps Kaàsa will die before my
96
sons take birth, or, since he is already destined to die at the hands of my son,
one of my sons may kill him. For the time being, let me promise to hand over
my sons so that Kaàsa will give up this immediate threat, and if in due course
of time Kaàsa dies, I shall have nothing to fear.
PURPORT
Vasudeva wanted to save the life of Devaké by promising to deliver his sons
to Kaàsa. "In the future," he thought, "Kaàsa may die, or I may not beget any
sons. Even if a son is born and I deliver him to Kaàsa, Kaàsa may die at his
hands, for by providence anything could happen. It is very difficult to
understand how things are managed by providence." Thus Vasudeva decided
that he would promise to deliver his sons to the hands of Kaàsa in order to
save Devaké from the imminent danger of death.
TEXT 51
AGaneYaRQaa daåivYaaeGaYaaeGaYaae‚
rd*íTaae_NYaà iNaiMataMaiSTa )
Wv& ih JaNTaaeriPa duivR>aaVYa"
XarqrSa&YaaeGaivYaaeGaheTau" )) 51 ))
agner yathä däru-viyoga-yogayor
adåñöato 'nyan na nimittam asti
evaà hi jantor api durvibhävyaù
çaréra-saàyoga-viyoga-hetuù
SYNONYMS
agneù—of a fire in the forest; yathä—as; däru—of wood; viyoga-yogayoù—of
both the escaping and the capturing; adåñöataù—than unseen providence;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
97
anyat—some other reason or accident; na—not; nimittam—a cause;
asti—there is; evam—in this way; hi—certainly; jantoù—of the living being;
api—indeed; durvibhävyaù—cannot be found out; çaréra—of the body;
saàyoga—of the accepting; viyoga—or of the giving up; hetuù—the cause.
TRANSLATION
When a fire, for some unseen reason, leaps over one piece of wood and sets
fire to the next, the reason is destiny. Similarly, when a living being accepts one
kind of body and leaves aside another, there is no other reason than unseen
destiny.
PURPORT
When there is a fire in a village, the fire sometimes jumps over one house
and burns another. Similarly, when there is a forest fire, the fire sometimes
jumps over one tree and catches another. Why this happens, no one can say.
One may set forth some imaginary reason why the nearest tree or house did
not catch fire whereas a tree or house in a distant place did, but actually the
reason is destiny. This reason also applies to the transmigration of the soul, by
which a prime minister in one life may become a dog in the next. The work of
unseen destiny cannot be ascertained by practical experimental knowledge,
and therefore one must be satisfied by reasoning that everything is done by
supreme providence.
TEXT 52
Wv& ivMa*XYa Ta& PaaPa& YaavdaTMaiNadXaRNaMa( )
PaUJaYaaMaaSa vE XaaEirbRhuMaaNaPaur"SarMa( )) 52 ))
evaà vimåçya taà päpaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
98
yävad-ätmani-darçanam
püjayäm äsa vai çaurir
bahu-mäna-puraùsaram
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; vimåçya—after contemplating; tam—unto Kaàsa;
päpam—the most sinful; yävat—as far as possible; ätmani-darçanam—with all
the intelligence possible within himself; püjayäm äsa—praised; vai—indeed;
çauriù—Vasudeva; bahu-mäna—offering all respect; puraùsaram—before him.
TRANSLATION
After thus considering the matter as far as his knowledge would allow,
Vasudeva submitted his proposal to the sinful Kaàsa with great respect.
TEXT 53
Pa[SaàvdNaaM>aaeJaae Na*Xa&Sa& iNarPa}aPaMa( )
MaNaSaa dUYaMaaNaeNa ivhSaiàdMab]vqTa( )) 53 ))
prasanna-vadanämbhojo
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
nåçaàsaà nirapatrapam
manasä düyamänena
vihasann idam abravét
SYNONYMS
prasanna-vadana-ambhojaù—Vasudeva, who externally presented himself as if
very happy; nåçaàsam—unto the most cruel; nirapatrapam—shameless Kaàsa;
manasä—with the mind; düyamänena—which was full of anxiety and sorrow;
99
vihasan—smiling externally; idam abravét—and spoke as follows.
TRANSLATION
Vasudeva's mind was full of anxiety because his wife was facing danger, but
in order to please the cruel, shameless and sinful Kaàsa, he externally smiled
and spoke to him as follows.
PURPORT
Sometimes one must act duplicitously in a dangerous position, as Vasudeva
did to save his wife. The material world is complicated, and to execute one's
duties, one cannot avoid adopting such diplomacy. Vasudeva did everything
possible to save his wife for the sake of begetting Kåñëa. This indicates that
one may act duplicitously for the purpose of saving Kåñëa and His interests.
According to the arrangement already foretold, Kåñëa was to appear through
Vasudeva and Devaké to kill Kaàsa. Vasudeva, therefore, had to do everything
to save the situation. Although all the events were prearranged by Kåñëa, a
devotee must try his best to serve the purpose of Kåñëa. Kåñëa Himself is
all-powerful, but it is not that a devotee should therefore sit idly and leave
everything to Him. This instruction is also found in Bhagavad-gétä. Although
Kåñëa was doing everything for Arjuna, Arjuna never sat down idly as a
nonviolent gentleman. Rather, he tried his best to fight the battle and be
victorious.
TEXT 54
é[qvSaudev ovac
Na ùSYaaSTae >aYa& SaaEMYa Yad( vE SaahaXarqr vak( -)
Pau}aaNa( SaMaPaRiYaZYae_SYaa YaTaSTae >aYaMauiTQaTaMa( )) 54 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
100
çré-vasudeva uväca
na hy asyäs te bhayaà saumya
yad vai sähäçaréra-väk
puträn samarpayiñye 'syä
yatas te bhayam utthitam
SYNONYMS
çré-vasudevaù uväca—Çré Vasudeva said; na—not; hi—indeed; asyäù—from
Devaké; te—of you; bhayam—fear; saumya—O most sober; yat—which;
vai—indeed; sä—that omen; äha—dictated; a-çaréra-väk—a vibration without
a body; puträn—all my sons; samarpayiñye—I shall deliver to you; asyäù—of
her (Devaké); yataù—from whom; te—your; bhayam—fear; utthitam—has
arisen.
TRANSLATION
Vasudeva said: O best of the sober, you have nothing to fear from your sister
Devaké because of what you have heard from the unseen omen. The cause of
death will be her sons. Therefore I promise that when she gives birth to the
sons from whom your fear has arisen, I shall deliver them all unto your hands.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Kaàsa feared Devaké's existence because after her eighth pregnancy she
would give birth to a son who would kill him. Vasudeva, therefore, to assure his
brother-in-law the utmost safety, promised to bring him all the sons. He would
not wait for the eighth son, but from the very beginning would deliver to the
hands of Kaàsa all the sons to which Devaké would give birth. This was the
most liberal proposition offered by Vasudeva to Kaàsa.
TEXT 55
101
é[qéuk- ovac
SvSauvRDaaiàvv*Tae k&-SaSTaÜaKYaSaarivTa( )
vSaudevae_iPa Ta& Pa[qTa" Pa[XaSYa Pa[aivXad( Ga*hMa( )) 55 ))
çré-çuka uväca
svasur vadhän nivavåte
kaàsas tad-väkya-sära-vit
vasudevo 'pi taà prétaù
praçasya präviçad gåham
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; svasuù—of his sister (Devaké);
vadhät—from the act of killing; nivavåte—stopped for the time being;
kaàsaù—Kaàsa; tat-väkya—the words of Vasudeva; sära-vit—knowing to be
perfectly correct; vasudevaù—Vasudeva; api—also; tam—to him (Kaàsa);
prétaù—being satisfied; praçasya—pacifying more; präviçat gåham—entered his
own house.
TRANSLATION
Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: Kaàsa agreed to the logical arguments of
Vasudeva, and, having full faith in Vasudeva's words, he refrained from killing
his sister. Vasudeva, being pleased with Kaàsa, pacified him further and
entered his own house.
PURPORT
Although Kaàsa was a sinful demon, he believed that Vasudeva would
never deviate from his word. The character of a pure devotee like Vasudeva is
such that even so great a demon as Kaàsa firmly believed in his words and was
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
102
satisfied. Yasyästi bhaktir bhagavaty akiïcanä sarvair guëais tatra samäsate
suräù (SB 5.18.12). All good attributes are present in a devotee, so much so that
even Kaàsa believed in Vasudeva's words without a doubt.
TEXT 56
AQa k-al/ oPaav*tae devk-I SavRdevTaa )
Pau}aaNa( Pa[Sauzuve caíaE k-NYaa& cEvaNauvTSarMa( )) 56 ))
atha käla upävåtte
devaké sarva-devatä
puträn prasuñuve cäñöau
kanyäà caivänuvatsaram
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; käle—in due course of time; upävåtte—when it was ripe;
devaké—Devaké, the wife of Vasudeva, Kåñëa's father; sarva-devatä—Devaké,
to whom all the demigods and God Himself appeared; puträn—sons;
prasuñuve—gave birth to; ca—and; añöau—eight; kanyäà ca—and one
daughter named Subhadrä; eva—indeed; anuvatsaram—year after year.
TRANSLATION
Each year thereafter, in due course of time, Devaké, the mother of God and
all the demigods, gave birth to a child. Thus she bore eight sons, one after
another, and a daughter named Subhadrä.
PURPORT
The spiritual master is sometimes glorified as sarva-devamayo guruù (SB
11.17.27). By the grace of the guru, the spiritual master, one can understand the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
103
different kinds of devas. The word deva refers to God, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, who is the original source of all the demigods, who are also called
devas. In Bhagavad-gétä (10.2) the Lord says, aham ädir hi devänäm: "I am the
source of all the devas." The Supreme Lord, Viñëu, the Original person,
expands in different forms. Tad aikñata bahu syäm (Chändogya Upaniñad
6.2.3). He alone has expanded into many. Advaitam acyutam anädim
ananta-rüpam (Bs. 5.33). There are different grades of forms, known as sväàça
and vibhinnäàça. The sväàça expansions, or viñëu-tattva, are the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, whereas the vibhinnäàça are jéva-tattva, who are part
and parcel of the Lord (mamaiväàço jéva-loke jéva-bhütaù sanätanaù [Bg. 15.7]).
If we accept Kåñëa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead and worship Him,
all the parts and expansions of the Lord are automatically worshiped.
Sarvärhaëam acyutejyä (SB 4.31.14). Kåñëa is known as Acyuta (senayor
ubhayor madhye rathaà sthäpaya me 'cyuta [Bg. 1.21]). By worshiping Acyuta,
Kåñëa, one automatically worships all the demigods. There is no need of
separately worshiping either the viñëu-tattva or
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
jéva-tattva. If one concentrates
upon Kåñëa, one worships everyone. Therefore, because mother Devaké gave
birth to Kåñëa, she is described here as sarva-devatä.
TEXT 57
k-IiTaRMaNTa& Pa[QaMaJa& k&-SaaYaaNak-duNdui>a" )
APaRYaaMaaSa k*-C^e\<a Saae_Na*TaadiTaivûl/" )) 57 ))
kértimantaà prathamajaà
kaàsäyänakadundubhiù
arpayäm äsa kåcchreëa
so 'nåtäd ativihvalaù
SYNONYMS
104
kértimantam—by the name Kértimän; prathama-jam—the first-born baby;
kaàsäya—unto Kaàsa; änakadundubhiù—Vasudeva; arpayäm äsa—delivered;
kåcchreëa—with great pain; saù—he (Vasudeva); anåtät—from the breaking
of the promise, or from fear of being a liar; ati-vihvalaù—was very much
disturbed, being afraid.
TRANSLATION
Vasudeva was very much disturbed by fear of becoming a liar by breaking his
promise. Thus with great pain he delivered his first-born son, named Kértimän,
into the hands of Kaàsa.
PURPORT
In the Vedic system, as soon as a child is born, especially a male child, the
father calls for learned brähmaëas, and according to the description of the
child's horoscope, the child is immediately given a name. This ceremony is
called näma-karaëa. There are ten different saàskäras, or reformatory
methods, adopted in the system of varëäçrama-dharma, and the name-giving
ceremony is one of them. Although Vasudeva's first son was to be delivered
into the hands of Kaàsa, the näma-karaëa ceremony was performed, and thus
the child was named Kértimän. Such names are given immediately after birth.
TEXT 58
ik&- du"Sah& Nau SaaDaUNaa& ivduza& ik-MaPaei+aTaMa( )
ik-Mak-aYa| k-dYaaR<aa& duSTYaJa& ik&- Da*TaaTMaNaaMa( )) 58 ))
kià duùsahaà nu sädhünäà
viduñäà kim apekñitam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
kim akäryaà kadaryäëäà
105
dustyajaà kià dhåtätmanäm
SYNONYMS
kim—what is; duùsaham—painful; nu—indeed; sädhünäm—for saintly
persons; viduñäm—of learned persons; kim apekñitam—what is dependence;
kim akäryam—what is forbidden work; kadaryäëäm—of persons in the lowest
grade; dustyajam—very difficult to give up; kim—what is; dhåta-ätmanäm—of
persons who are self-realized.
TRANSLATION
What is painful for saintly persons who strictly adhere to the truth? How
could there not be independence for pure devotees who know the Supreme Lord
as the substance? What deeds are forbidden for persons of the lowest character?
And what cannot be given up for the sake of Lord Kåñëa by those who have
fully surrendered at His lotus feet?
PURPORT
Since the eighth son of Devaké was to kill Kaàsa, one might ask what the
need was for Vasudeva to deliver the first-born child. The answer is that
Vasudeva had promised Kaàsa that he would deliver all the children born of
Devaké. Kaàsa, being an asura, did not believe that the eighth child would kill
him; he took it for granted that he might be killed by any of the children of
Devaké. Vasudeva, therefore, to save Devaké, promised to give Kaàsa every
child, whether male or female. From another point of view, Vasudeva and
Devaké were very pleased when they understood that the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Kåñëa, would come as their eighth son. Vasudeva, a pure devotee
of the Lord, was eager to see Kåñëa appear as his child from the eighth
pregnancy of Devaké. Therefore he wanted to deliver all the children quickly
so that the eighth turn would come and Kåñëa would appear. He begot one
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
106
child every year so that Kåñëa's turn to appear would come as soon as possible.
TEXT 59
d*îa SaMaTv& TaC^aEre" SaTYae cEv VYaviSQaiTaMa( )
k&-SaSTauíMaNaa raJaNa( Pa[hSaiàdMab]vqTa( )) 59 ))
dåñövä samatvaà tac chaureù
satye caiva vyavasthitim
kaàsas tuñöa-manä räjan
prahasann idam abravét
SYNONYMS
dåñövä—by seeing; samatvam—being equipoised, undisturbed in distress or
happiness; tat—that; çaureù—of Vasudeva; satye—in truthfulness;
ca—indeed; eva—certainly; vyavasthitim—the firm situation;
kaàsaù—Kaàsa; tuñöa-manäù—being very satisfied (with Vasudeva's behavior
in delivering the first child to keep his promise); räjan—O Mahäräja Parékñit;
prahasan—with a smiling face; idam—this; abravét—said.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Parékñit, when Kaàsa saw that Vasudeva, being situated in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
truthfulness, was completely equipoised in giving him the child, he was very
happy. Therefore, with a smiling face, he spoke as follows.
PURPORT
The word samatvam is very significant in this verse. Samatvam refers to one
who is always equipoised, unaffected by either happiness or distress. Vasudeva
was so steadily equipoised that he did not seem in the least agitated when
107
delivering his first-born child into the hands of Kaàsa to be killed. In
Bhagavad-gétä (2.56) it is said, duùkheñv anudvigna-manäù sukheñu
vigata-spåhaù. In the material world, one should not be very eager to be happy,
nor should one be very much disturbed by material distress. Lord Kåñëa
advised Arjuna:
mäträ-sparçäs tu kaunteya
çétoñëa-sukha-duùkha-däù
ägamäpäyino 'nityäs
täàs titikñasva bhärata
"O son of Kunté, the nonpermanent appearance of happiness and distress, and
their disappearance in due course, are like the appearance and disappearance
of winter and summer seasons. They arise from sense perception, O scion of
Bharata, and one must learn to tolerate them without being disturbed." (Bg.
2.14) The self-realized soul is never disturbed by so-called distress or happiness,
and this is especially true of an exalted devotee like Vasudeva, who showed
this by his practical example. Vasudeva was not at all disturbed when
delivering his first child to Kaàsa to be killed.
TEXT 60
Pa[iTaYaaTau ku-Maarae_Ya& Na ùSMaadiSTa Mae >aYaMa( )
AíMaad( YauvYaaeGaR>aaRNMa*TYauMaeR ivihTa" ik-l/ )) 60 ))
pratiyätu kumäro 'yaà
na hy asmäd asti me bhayam
añöamäd yuvayor garbhän
måtyur me vihitaù kila
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
108
pratiyätu—my dear Vasudeva, take back your child and go home;
kumäraù—newborn child; ayam—this; na—not; hi—indeed; asmät—from
him; asti—there is; me—my; bhayam—fear; añöamät—from the eighth;
yuvayoù—of both you and your wife; garbhät—from the pregnancy;
måtyuù—death; me—my; vihitaù—has been ordained; kila—indeed.
TRANSLATION
O Vasudeva, you may take back your child and go home. I have no fear of
your first child. It is the eighth child of you and Devaké I am concerned with
because that is the child by whom I am destined to be killed.
TEXT 61
TaQaeiTa SauTaMaadaYa YaYaavaNak-duNdui>a" )
Naa>YaNaNdTa TaÜaKYaMaSaTaae_iviJaTaaTMaNa" )) 61 ))
tatheti sutam ädäya
yayäv änakadundubhiù
näbhyanandata tad-väkyam
asato 'vijitätmanaù
SYNONYMS
tathä—very well; iti—thus; sutam ädäya—taking back his child; yayau—left
that place; änakadundubhiù—Vasudeva; na abhyanandata—did not very much
value; tat-väkyam—the words (of Kaàsa); asataù—who was without character;
avijita-ätmanaù—and without self-control.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
109
Vasudeva agreed and took his child back home, but because Kaàsa had no
character and no self-control, Vasudeva knew that he could not rely on Kaàsa's
word.
TEXTS 62-63
NaNdaÛa Yae v]Jae GaaePaa YaaêaMaqza& c YaaeizTa" )
v*Z<aYaae vSaudevaÛa devKYaaÛa YaduiñYa" )) 62 ))
SaveR vE devTaaPa[aYaa o>aYaaeriPa >aarTa )
jaTaYaae bNDauSauôdae Yae c k&-SaMaNauv]Taa" )) 63 ))
nandädyä ye vraje gopä
yäç cäméñäà ca yoñitaù
våñëayo vasudevädyä
devaky-ädyä yadu-striyaù
sarve vai devatä-präyä
ubhayor api bhärata
jïätayo bandhu-suhådo
ye ca kaàsam anuvratäù
SYNONYMS
nanda-ädyäù—beginning from Nanda Mahäräja; ye—all of which persons;
vraje—in Våndävana; gopäù—the cowherd men; yäù—which; ca—and;
améñäm—of all those (inhabitants of Våndävana); ca—as well as; yoñitaù—the
women; våñëayaù—members of the Våñëi family; vasudeva-ädyäù—headed by
Vasudeva; devaké-ädyäù—headed by Devaké;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—all the women of
the Yadu dynasty; sarve—all of them; vai—indeed; devatä-präyäù—were
inhabitants of heaven; ubhayoù—of both Nanda Mahäräja and Vasudeva;
api—indeed; bhärata—O Mahäräja Parékñit; jïätayaù—the relatives;
110
bandhu—friends; suhådaù—well-wishers; ye—all of whom; ca—and; kaàsam
anuvratäù—even though apparently followers of Kaàsa.
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants of Våndävana, headed by Nanda Mahäräja and including his
associate cowherd men and their wives, were none but denizens of the heavenly
planets, O Mahäräja Parékñit, best of the descendants of Bharata, and so too
were the descendants of the Våñëi dynasty, headed by Vasudeva, and Devaké
and the other women of the dynasty of Yadu. The friends, relatives and
well-wishers of both Nanda Mahäräja and Vasudeva and even those who
externally appeared to be followers of Kaàsa were all demigods.
PURPORT
As previously discussed, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu,
informed Lord Brahmä that Lord Kåñëa would personally descend to mitigate
the suffering on the earth. The Lord ordered all the denizens of the heavenly
planets to take birth in different families of the Yadu and Våñëi dynasties and
in Våndävana. Now this verse informs us that all the family and friends of the
Yadu dynasty, the Våñëi dynasty, Nanda Mahäräja and the gopas descended
from the heavenly planets to see the pastimes of the Lord. As confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä (4.8), the Lord's pastimes consist of pariträëäya sädhünäà
vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm—saving the devotees and killing the demons. To
demonstrate these activities, the Lord called for devotees from different parts
of the universe.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
There are many devotees who are elevated to the higher planetary systems.
präpya puëya-kåtäà lokän
uñitvä çäçvatéù samäù
çucénäà çrématäà gehe
111
yoga-bhrañöo 'bhijäyate
"The unsuccessful yogé, after many, many years of enjoyment on the planets of
the pious living entities, is born into a family of righteous people, or into a
family of rich aristocracy." (Bg. 6.41) Some devotees, having failed to complete
the process of devotional service, are promoted to the heavenly planets, to
which the pious are elevated, and after enjoying there they may be directly
promoted to the place where the Lord's pastimes are going on. When Lord
Kåñëa was to appear, the denizens of the heavenly planets were invited to see
the pastimes of the Lord, and thus it is stated here that the members of the
Yadu and Våñëi dynasties and the inhabitants of Våndävana were demigods or
almost as good as demigods. Even those who externally helped the activities of
Kaàsa belonged to the higher planetary systems. The imprisonment and
release of Vasudeva and the killing of various demons were all manifestations
of the pastimes of the Lord, and because the devotees would be pleased to see
these activities personally, they were all invited to take birth as friends and
relatives of these families. As confirmed in the prayers of Kunté (SB 1.8.19),
nato näöya-dharo yathä. The Lord was to play the part of a demon-killer, and a
friend, son and brother to His devotees, and thus these devotees were all
summoned.
TEXT 64
WTaTa( k&-SaaYa >aGavaH^Xa&Saa>YaeTYa Naard" )
>aUMae>aaRraYaMaa<aaNaa& dETYaaNaa& c vDaaeÛMaMa( )) 64 ))
etat kaàsäya bhagaväï
chaçaàsäbhyetya näradaù
bhümer bhäräyamäëänäà
daityänäà ca vadhodyamam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
112
SYNONYMS
etat—all these words about the Yadu family and Våñëi family; kaàsäya—unto
King Kaàsa; bhagavän—the most powerful representative of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; çaçaàsa—informed (Kaàsa, who was in doubt);
abhyetya—after approaching him; näradaù—the great sage Närada;
bhümeù—on the surface of the earth; bhäräyamäëänäm—of those who were a
burden; daityänäm ca—and of the demons; vadha-udyamam—the endeavor to
kill.
TRANSLATION
Once the great saint Närada approached Kaàsa and informed him of how the
demoniac persons who were a great burden on the earth were going to be killed.
Thus Kaàsa was placed into great fear and doubt.
PURPORT
It has already been discussed that mother earth implored Lord Brahmä to
give her relief from the distress created by the burdensome demons and that
Lord Brahmä informed her that Lord Kåñëa Himself was going to appear.
Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (4.8):
pariträëäya sädhünäà
vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm
dharma-saàsthäpanärthäya
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
sambhavämi yuge yuge
Whenever there is a burden created by the demons and whenever the
innocent devotees are distressed by demoniac rulers, the Lord appears in due
course of time to kill the demons with the assistance of His real
representatives, who are technically called demigods. In the Upaniñads it is
113
stated that the demigods are different parts of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. As it is the duty of the parts of the body to serve the whole, it is the
duty of Kåñëa's devotees to serve Kåñëa as He wants. Kåñëa's business is to kill
the demons, and therefore this should be a devotee's business also. Because the
people of Kali-yuga are fallen, however, Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, out of
kindness for them, did not bring any weapon to kill them. Rather, by spreading
Kåñëa consciousness, love of Kåñëa, He wanted to kill their nefarious,
demoniac activities. This is the purpose of the Kåñëa consciousness movement.
Unless the demoniac activities on the surface of the world are diminished or
vanquished, no one can be happy. The program for the conditioned soul is
fully described in Bhagavad-gétä, and one simply has to follow these
instructions to become happy. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu has therefore
prescribed:
harer näma harer näma
harer nämaiva kevalam
kalau nästy eva nästy eva
nästy eva gatir anyathä
[Cc. Ädi 17.21]
Let people chant the Hare Kåñëa mantra constantly. Then their demoniac
tendencies will be killed, and they will become first-class devotees, happy in
this life and in the next.
TEXTS 65-66
‰zeivRiNaGaRMae k&-Saae YadUNa( MaTva SauraiNaiTa )
devKYaa Ga>aRSaM>aUTa& ivZ<au& c SvvDa& Pa[iTa )) 65 ))
devk-I& vSaudev& c iNaGa*ù iNaGa@EGa*Rhe )
JaaTa& JaaTaMahNa( Pau}a& TaYaaerJaNaXaªYaa )) 66 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
114
åñer vinirgame kaàso
yadün matvä surän iti
devakyä garbha-sambhütaà
viñëuà ca sva-vadhaà prati
devakéà vasudevaà ca
nigåhya nigaòair gåhe
jätaà jätam ahan putraà
tayor ajana-çaìkayä
SYNONYMS
åñeù—of the great sage Närada; vinirgame—on the departure (after giving
information); kaàsaù—Kaàsa; yadün—all the members of the Yadu dynasty;
matvä—thinking of; surän—as demigods; iti—thus; devakyäù—of Devaké;
garbha-sambhütam—the children born from the womb; viñëum—(accepting)
as Viñëu; ca—and; sva-vadham prati—fearing his own death from Viñëu;
devakém—Devaké; vasudevam ca—and her husband, Vasudeva;
nigåhya—arresting; nigaòaiù—by iron shackles; gåhe—confined at home; jätam
jätam—each one who was born, one after another; ahan—killed;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
putram—the
sons; tayoù—of Vasudeva and Devaké; ajana-çaìkayä—with the doubt that
they would be Viñëu.
TRANSLATION
After the departure of the great saint Närada, Kaàsa thought that all the
members of the Yadu dynasty were demigods and that any of the children born
from the womb of Devaké might be Viñëu. Fearing his death, Kaàsa arrested
Vasudeva and Devaké and chained them with iron shackles. Suspecting each of
the children to be Viñëu, Kaàsa killed them one after another because of the
prophecy that Viñëu would kill him.
115
PURPORT
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, in his notes on this verse, has mentioned how Närada
Muni gave Kaàsa this information. This incident is described in the
Hari-vaàça. Närada Muni went to see Kaàsa by providence, and Kaàsa
received him very well. Närada, therefore, informed him that any one of the
sons of Devaké might be Viñëu. Because Viñëu was to kill him, Kaàsa should
not spare any of Devaké's children, Närada Muni advised. Närada's intention
was that Kaàsa, by killing the children, would increase his sinful activities so
that Kåñëa would soon appear to kill him. Upon receiving the instructions of
Närada Muni, Kaàsa killed all the children of Devaké one after another.
The word ajana-çaìkayä indicates that Lord Viñëu never takes birth
(ajana) and that He therefore appeared as Kåñëa, taking birth just like a
human being (mänuñéà tanum äçritam). Kaàsa attempted to kill all the babies
born of Devaké and Vasudeva, although he knew that if Viñëu were born, He
would not be killed. Actually it came to pass that when Viñëu appeared as
Kåñëa, Kaàsa could not kill Him; rather, as foretold, it was He who killed
Kaàsa. One should know in truth how Kåñëa, who takes His birth
transcendentally, acts to kill the demons but is never killed. When one
perfectly understands Kåñëa in this way, through the medium of çästra, one
becomes immortal. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (4.9):
janma karma ca me divyam
evaà yo vetti tattvataù
tyaktvä dehaà punar janma
naiti mäm eti so 'rjuna
"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities
does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but
attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
116
TEXT 67
MaaTar& iPaTar& >a]aTa›Na( Sava|ê SauôdSTaQaa )
ganiNTa ùSauTa*Paae lu/BDaa raJaaNa" Pa[aYaXaae >auiv )) 67 ))
mätaraà pitaraà bhrätèn
sarväàç ca suhådas tathä
ghnanti hy asutåpo lubdhä
räjänaù präyaço bhuvi
SYNONYMS
mätaram—unto the mother; pitaram—unto the father; bhrätèn—unto
brothers; sarvän ca—and anyone else; suhådaù—friends; tathä—as well as;
ghnanti—they kill (as it is practically seen); hi—indeed; asu-tåpaù—those who
envy the lives of others for their personal sense gratification; lubdhäù—greedy;
räjänaù—such kings; präyaçaù—almost always; bhuvi—on the earth.
TRANSLATION
Kings greedy for sense gratification on this earth almost always kill their
enemies indiscriminately. To satisfy their own whims, they may kill anyone,
even their mothers, fathers, brothers or friends.
PURPORT
We have seen in the history of India that Aurangzeb killed his brother and
nephews and imprisoned his father to fulfill political ambitions. There have
been many similar instances, and Kaàsa was the same type of king. Kaàsa did
not hesitate to kill his nephews and imprison his sister and his father. For
demons to do such things is not astonishing. Nonetheless, although Kaàsa was
a demon, he was aware that Lord Viñëu cannot be killed, and thus he attained
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
117
salvation. Even partial understanding of the activities of Lord Viñëu makes
one eligible for salvation. Kaàsa knew a little about Kåñëa—that He could not
be killed—and therefore he attained salvation although he thought of Viñëu,
Kåñëa, as an enemy. What then is to be said of one who knows Kåñëa perfectly
from the descriptions of çästras like Bhagavad-gétä? It is therefore the duty of
everyone to read Bhagavad-gétä and understand Kåñëa perfectly. This will
make one's life successful.
TEXT 68
AaTMaaNaiMah SaÅaTa& JaaNaNa( Pa[aGa( ivZ<auNaa hTaMa( )
MahaSaur& k-al/NaeiMa& Yadui>a" Sa VYaåDYaTa )) 68 ))
ätmänam iha saïjätaà
jänan präg viñëunä hatam
mahäsuraà kälanemià
yadubhiù sa vyarudhyata
SYNONYMS
ätmänam—personally; iha—in this world; saïjätam—born again;
jänan—understanding well; präk—previously, before this birth; viñëunä—by
Lord Viñëu; hatam—was killed; mahä-asuram—a great demon; kälanemim—by
the name Kälanemi; yadubhiù—with the members of the Yadu dynasty;
saù—he (Kaàsa); vyarudhyata—acted inimically.
TRANSLATION
In his previous birth, Kaàsa had been a great demon named Kälanemi and
been killed by Viñëu. Upon learning this information from Närada, Kaàsa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
became envious of everyone connected with the Yadu dynasty.
118
PURPORT
Persons who are demons, enemies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
are called asuras. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, the asuras, because of their
enmity toward the Supreme Personality of Godhead, take birth after birth in
asura families and therefore glide down to the darkest hellish regions.
TEXT 69
oGa]SaeNa& c iPaTar& Yadu>aaeJaaNDak-aiDaPaMa( )
SvYa& iNaGa*ù bu>auJae éUrSaeNaaNa( Mahabl/" )) 69 ))
ugrasenaà ca pitaraà
yadu-bhojändhakädhipam
svayaà nigåhya bubhuje
çürasenän mahä-balaù
SYNONYMS
ugrasenam—unto Ugrasena; ca—and; pitaram—who was his own father;
yadu—of the Yadu dynasty; bhoja—of the Bhoja dynasty; andhaka—of the
Andhaka dynasty; adhipam—the king; svayam—personally;
nigåhya—subduing; bubhuje—enjoyed; çürasenän—all the states known as
Çürasena; mahä-balaù—the extremely powerful Kaàsa.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Kaàsa, the most powerful son of Ugrasena, even imprisoned his own father,
the King of the Yadu, Bhoja and Andhaka dynasties, and personally ruled the
states known as Çürasena.
119
PURPORT
The state known as Mathurä was also included within the states known as
Çürasena.
ADDITIONAL NOTES FOR THIS CHAPTER
Regarding transmigration of the soul, Çréla Madhväcärya gives the
following notes. When one is awake, whatever one sees or hears is impressed
upon the mind, which later works in dreams to show one different experiences,
although in dreams one appears to accept a different body. For example, when
one is awake one does business and talks with customers, and similarly in
dreams one meets various customers, talks about business and gives quotations.
Madhväcärya says, therefore, that dreams take place according to what one
sees, hears and remembers. When one reawakens, of course, one forgets the
body of the dream. This forgetfulness is called apasmåti. Thus we are changing
bodies because we are sometimes dreaming, sometimes awake and sometimes
forgetful. Forgetfulness of our previously created body is called death, and our
work in the present body is called life. After death, one cannot remember the
activities of one's previous body, whether imaginary or factual.
The agitated mind is compared to agitated water reflecting the sun and the
moon. Actually the sun and moon reflected on the water do not exist there;
nonetheless, they are reflected according to the movements of the water.
Similarly, when our minds are agitated, we wander in different material
atmospheres and receive different types of bodies. This is described in
Bhagavad-gétä as guëa-saìga. Käraëaà guëa-saìgo 'sya [Bg. 13.22].
Madhväcärya says, guëa-nubaddhaù san. And Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu says,
brahmäëòa bhramite kona bhägyavän jéva (Cc. Madhya 19.151). The living
entity rotates up and down throughout the universe, sometimes in the upper
planetary system, sometimes in the middle and lower planetary systems,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
120
sometimes as a man, sometimes a god, a dog, a tree and so on. This is all due to
the agitation of the mind. The mind must therefore be steadily fixed. As it is
said, sa vai manaù kåñëa-padäravindayoù [SB 9.4.18]. One should fix one's mind
at the lotus feet of Kåñëa, and then one will become free from agitation. This is
the instruction of the Garuòa Puräëa, and in the Näradéya Puräëa the same
process is described. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, yänti deva-vratä devän [Bg.
9.25]. The agitated mind goes to different planetary systems because it is
attached to different kinds of demigods, but one does not go to the abode of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead by worshiping the demigods, for this is
not supported by any Vedic literature. Man is the architect of his own fortune.
In this human life one has the facility with which to understand one's real
situation, and one can decide whether to wander around the universe forever
or return home, back to Godhead. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä
(apräpya mäà nivartante måtyu-saàsära-vartmani [Bg. 9.3]).
There is no such thing as chance. When a tree is burning in a forest fire
and although the nearest tree is spared a distant tree catches fire, this may
appear to be chance. Similarly, one may seem to get different types of bodies by
chance, but actually one receives these bodies because of the mind. The mind
flickers between accepting and rejecting, and according to the acceptance and
rejection of the mind, we receive different types of bodies, although we
superficially seem to obtain these bodies by chance. Even if we accept the
theory of chance, the immediate cause for the change of body is the agitation
of the mind.
Notes on aàça. This chapter describes that Kåñëa appeared aàçena, with
His parts and parcels or His partial manifestation. In this connection, Çrédhara
Svämé says that Kåñëa is one hundred percent Bhagavän (kåñëas tu bhagavän
svayam [SB 1.3.28]). Because of our imperfections, however, we cannot
appreciate Kåñëa in fullness, and therefore whatever Kåñëa exhibited when
present on earth was but a partial manifestation of His opulence. Again, Kåñëa
appeared with His plenary expansion Baladeva. Kåñëa, however, is full; there is
no question of His appearing partially. In the Vaiñëava-toñaëé, Çréla Sanätana
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
121
Gosvämé says that to accept that Kåñëa was partially manifested would
contradict the statement kåñëas tu bhagavän svayam [SB 1.3.28]. Çréla Jéva
Gosvämé says that the word aàçena means that Kåñëa appeared with all His
plenary expansions. The words aàçena viñëoù do not mean that Kåñëa is a
partial representative of Viñëu. Rather, Kåñëa appeared in fullness, and He
manifests Himself partially in the Vaikuëöhalokas. In other words, Lord Viñëu
is a partial representation of Kåñëa; Kåñëa is not a partial representation of
Viñëu. In the Caitanya-caritämåta, Ädi-lélä, Chapter Four, this subject matter
is explained very clearly. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura also notes that
no one can describe Kåñëa in fullness. Whatever descriptions we find in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam are partial explanations of Kåñëa. In conclusion, therefore,
the word aàçena indicates that Lord Viñëu is a partial representation of Kåñëa,
not that Kåñëa is a partial representation of Viñëu.
Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé's Vaiñëava-toñaëé has explained the word
dharma-çélasya. The exact meaning of dharma-çéla is "an unadulterated
devotee." Real dharma consists of full surrender to Kåñëa (sarva-dharmän
parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja [Bg. 18.66]). One who has fully surrendered
to Kåñëa is actually religious. One such religious person was Mahäräja Parékñit.
Anyone who accepts the principle of surrender to the lotus feet of the Lord,
giving up all other systems of religion, is actually dharma-çéla, perfectly
religious.
The word nivåtta-tarñaiù refers to one who no longer has any material
desires (sarvopädhi-vinirmuktam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]). One may have many
material desires because of contamination in this material world, but when one
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
is completely free from all material desires, he is called nivåtta-tåñëa, which
indicates that he no longer has any thirst for material enjoyment. Svämin
kåtärtho 'smi varaà na yäce [Cc. Madhya 22.42] (Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya).
Materialistic persons want some material profit from executing devotional
service, but this is not the purpose of service. The perfection of devotional
service lies in complete surrender unto the lotus feet of Kåñëa, with no
material desires. One who surrenders in this way is already liberated.
122
Jévan-muktaù sa ucyate. One who is always busy serving Kåñëa, in whatever
condition he may live, is understood to be liberated even in this life. Such a
person, who is a pure devotee, does not need to change his body; indeed, he
does not possess a material body, for his body has already been spiritualized. An
iron rod kept constantly within a fire will ultimately become fire, and
whatever it touches will burn. Similarly, the pure devotee is in the fire of
spiritual existence, and therefore his body is cin-maya; that is, it is spiritual,
not material, because the pure devotee has no desire but the transcendental
desire to serve the Lord. In text four the word upagéyamänät is used:
nivåtta-tarñair upagéyamänät. Who will chant the glories of the Lord unless he
is a devotee? Therefore the word nivåtta-tarñaiù indicates the devotee, and no
one else. These are the remarks of äcäryas like Véraräghava Äcärya and
Vijayadhvaja. To desire anything other than devotional service will diminish
one's freedom from material desires, but when one is free from all such desires
one is called nivåtta-tarñaiù [Cc. Madhya 19.170].
Vinä paçu-ghnät. The word paçu means "animal." An animal killer,
paçu-ghna, cannot enter into Kåñëa consciousness. In our Kåñëa consciousness
movement, therefore, animal killing is completely prohibited.
Uttamaçloka-guëänuvädät. The word uttamaçloka means "one who is famous
as the best of those who are good." The Lord is good in all circumstances. That
is His natural reputation. His goodness is unlimited, and He uses it
unlimitedly. A devotee is also sometimes described as uttamaçloka, meaning
that he is eager to glorify the Supreme Personality of Godhead or the Lord's
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Or, rather, glorifying the devotee is more important than glorifying the Lord
directly. Narottama däsa Öhäkura explains this fact: chäòiyä vaiñëava-sevä,
nistära päyeche kebä. One cannot be liberated from material contamination
without sincerely serving a devotee of Kåñëa.
Bhavauñadhät means "from the universal remedy." Chanting the holy name
and glorifying the Supreme Lord are the universal remedy for all the miseries
of materialistic life. Persons who desire to be freed from this material world are
123
called mumukñu. Such persons can understand the miseries of materialistic life,
and by glorifying the activities of the Lord they can be released from all these
miseries. The transcendental sound vibrations concerning the Lord's name,
fame, form, qualities and paraphernalia are all nondifferent from the Lord.
Therefore the very sound vibration of the Lord's glorification and name are
pleasing to the ears, and by understanding the absolute nature of the Lord's
name, form and qualities the devotee becomes joyful. Even those who are not
devotees, however, enjoy the pleasing narrations of the Lord's transcendental
activities. Even ordinary persons not very much advanced in Kåñëa
consciousness take pleasure in describing the narrations depicted in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam. When a materialistic person is purified in this way, he
engages in hearing and chanting the glories of the Lord. Because glorification
of the Lord's pastimes is very pleasing to the ear and heart of the devotee, it is
simultaneously his subject and object.
In this world there are three kinds of men: those who are liberated, those
trying to be liberated, and those entangled in sense enjoyment. Of these three,
those who are already liberated chant and hear the holy name of the Lord,
knowing perfectly that to glorify the Lord is the only way to keep oneself in a
transcendental position. Those who are trying to be liberated, the second class,
may regard the chanting and hearing of the Lord's holy name as a process of
liberation, and they too will feel the transcendental pleasure of this chanting.
As for karmés and persons engaged in sense gratification, they also may take
pleasure in hearing the pastimes of the Lord, like His fighting on the
Battlefield of Kurukñetra and His dancing in Våndävana with the gopés.
The word uttamaçloka-guëänuväda refers to the transcendental qualities of
the Supreme Lord, such as His affection for mother Yaçodä and His friends the
cowherd boys and His loving attitude toward the gopés. The Lord's devotees
like Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira are also described by the qualification
uttamaçloka-guëänuväda. The word anuväda refers to describing the qualities
of the Supreme Lord or His devotees. When these qualities are described,
other devotees are interested in hearing them. The more one is interested in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
124
hearing about these transcendental qualities, the more one transcendentally
enjoys. Everyone, therefore, including the mumukñus, the vimuktas and the
karmés, should chant and hear the glories of the Lord, and in this way everyone
will benefit.
Although the sound vibration of the transcendental qualities of the Lord is
equally beneficial to all, for those who are muktas, liberated, it is especially
pleasing. As described in Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Eighth Canto, Third Chapter,
verse twenty, because pure devotees, who no longer have any material desires,
surrender fully to the lotus feet of the Lord, they always merge in the ocean of
bliss by chanting and hearing the Lord's holy name. According to this verse,
devotees like Närada and other residents of Çvetadvépa are seen always
engaged in chanting the holy name of the Lord because by such chanting they
are always externally and internally blissful. The mumukñus, persons desiring
to be liberated, do not depend on the pleasures of the senses; instead, they
concentrate fully on becoming liberated by chanting the holy name of the
Lord. Karmés like to create something pleasing to their ears and hearts, and
although they sometimes like to chant or hear the glories of the Lord, they do
not do it openly. Devotees, however, always spontaneously hear, chant about
and remember the activities of the Lord, and by this process they are fully
satisfied, even though these may seem like topics of sense gratification. Simply
by hearing the transcendental narrations of the Lord's activities, Parékñit
Mahäräja was liberated. He was therefore çrotramano-'bhiräma; that is, he
glorified the process of hearing. This process should be accepted by all living
entities.
To distinguish persons who are bereft of these transcendental pleasures,
Parékñit Mahäräja has used the words virajyeta pumän. The word pumän refers
to any person, whether man, woman or in-between. Because of the bodily
conception of life, we are subject to lamentation, but one who has no such
bodily conceptions can take pleasure in transcendental hearing and chanting.
Therefore a person fully absorbed in the bodily concept of life is surely killing
himself by not making spiritual progress. Such a person is called paçu-ghna.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
125
Especially excluded from spiritual life are the animal hunters, who are not
interested in hearing and chanting the holy name of the Lord. Such hunters
are always unhappy, both in this life and in the next. It is therefore said that a
hunter should neither die nor live because for such persons both living and
dying are troublesome. Animal hunters are completely different from ordinary
karmés, and thus they have been excluded from the process of hearing and
chanting. Vinä paçu-ghnät. They cannot enter into the transcendental
pleasure of chanting and hearing the holy name of the Lord.
The word mahä-ratha refers to a great hero who can fight alone against
eleven thousand other heroes, and the word atiratha, as found in text five,
refers to one who can fight against an unlimited number. This is mentioned in
the Mahäbhärata as follows:
ekädaça-sahasräëi
yodhayed yas tu dhanvinäm
astra-çastra-pravéëaç ca
mahä-ratha iti småtaù
amitän yodhayed yas tu
samprokto 'tirathas tu saù
This is the description given in the Båhad-vaiñëava-toñaëé by Çréla Sanätana
Gosvämé.
Mäyä-manuñyasya (10.1.17). Because of being covered by yogamäyä (nähaà
prakäçaù sarvasya yogamäyä-samävåtaù [Bg. 7.25]), Kåñëa is sometimes called
mäyä-manuñya, indicating that although He is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, He appears like an ordinary person. A misunderstanding arises
because yogamäyä covers the vision of the general public. The Lord's position
is actually different from that of an ordinary person, for although He appears
to act like an ordinary man, He is always transcendental. The word mäyä also
indicates "mercy," and sometimes it also means "knowledge." The Lord is always
full of all transcendental knowledge, and therefore although He acts like a
human being, He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, full of knowledge. In
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
126
His original identity, the Lord is the controller of mäyä (mayädhyakñeëa
prakåtiù süyate sa-caräcaram [Bg. 9.10]). Therefore the Lord may be called
mäyä-manuñya, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead playing like an
ordinary human being, although He is the controller of both the material and
spiritual energies. The Lord is the Supreme Person, Puruñottama, but because
we are deluded by yogamäyä, He appears to be an ordinary person. Ultimately,
however, yogamäyä induces even a nondevotee to understand the Lord as the
Supreme Person, Puruñottama. In Bhagavad-gétä we find two statements given
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For the devotees, the Lord says:
teñäà satata-yuktänäà
bhajatäà préti-pürvakam
dadämi buddhi-yogaà taà
yena mäm upayänti te
"To those who are constantly devoted and worship Me with love, I give the
understanding by which they can come to Me." (Bg. 10.10) Thus for the willing
devotee the Lord gives intelligence by which to understand Him and return
home, back to Godhead. For others, for nondevotees, the Lord says, måtyuù
sarva-haraç cäham: [Bg. 10.34] "I am all-plundering, inevitable death." A
devotee like Prahläda enjoys the activities of Lord Nåsiàhadeva, whereas
nondevotees like Prahläda's father, Hiraëyakaçipu, meet death before Lord
Nåsiàhadeva. The Lord therefore acts in two ways, by sending some onto the
path of repeated birth and death and sending others back home, back to
Godhead.
The word käla, meaning "black," indicates the color of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. Lord Kåñëa and Lord Rämacandra, who both
look blackish, give liberation and transcendental bliss to Their devotees.
Among persons possessing material bodies, sometimes someone is able to
subject death to his own will. For such a person, death is almost impossible
because no one wants to die. But although Bhéñmadeva possessed this power,
Bhéñma, by the supreme will of the Lord, died very easily in the Lord's
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
127
presence. There have also been many demons who had no hope of salvation,
yet Kaàsa attained salvation by the supreme will of the Lord. Not to speak of
Kaàsa, even Pütanä attained salvation and reached the level of the Lord's
mother. Parékñit Mahäräja, therefore, was very eager to hear about the Lord,
who has inconceivable qualities by which to give liberation to anyone. Parékñit
Mahäräja, at the point of his death, was certainly interested in his liberation.
When such a great and exalted personality as the Lord behaves like an
ordinary human being although possessing inconceivable qualities, His
behavior is called mäyä. Therefore the Lord is described as mäyä-manuñya.
This is the opinion of Çréla Jéva Gosvämé. Mu refers to mukti, or salvation, and
ku refers to that which is bad or very obnoxious. Thus muku refers to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who saves one from the bad condition of
material existence. The Lord is called mukunda because He not only saves the
devotee from material existence but offers him transcendental bliss in love and
service.
As for Keçava, ka means Brahmä, and éça means Lord Çiva. The Personality
of Godhead captivates both Lord Brahmä and Lord Mahädeva, or Çiva, by His
transcendental qualities. Therefore He is called Keçava. This opinion is given
by Sanätana Gosvämé in his Vaiñëava-toñaëé commentary.
It is said that all the demigods, accompanied by Tri-nayana, Lord Çiva, went
to the shore of the ocean of milk and offered their prayers through the mantra
known as puruña-sükta. From this statement it is understood that the demigods
cannot directly approach Lord Viñëu, who lies on the ocean of milk, or enter
His abode. This is also clearly stated in the Mahäbhärata, Mokña-dharma, and
the next chapter of Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Godhead, has His abode in Goloka (goloka-nämni nija-dhämni tale ca tasya [Bs.
5.43]). From Lord Kåñëa come the catur-vyüha, the quadruple expansions
Saìkarñaëa, Aniruddha, Pradyumna and Väsudeva. There are innumerable
brahmäëòas, all of which emanate from the pores of Käraëodakaçäyé Viñëu,
and in every brahmäëòa there is a Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, who is a partial
expansion of Aniruddha. This Aniruddha is a partial expansion of Pradyumna,
128
who is partially represented as Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu, the Supersoul of all living
entities. These Viñëu expansions are different from Kåñëa, who resides in
Goloka Våndävana. When it is said that the demigods offered prayers to the
Lord by chanting the puruña-sükta, this indicates that they pleased the Lord by
enunciating prayers of bhakti.
The word våñäkapi refers to one who satisfies His devotee in every way and
frees His devotee from all material anxieties. Våña refers to religious
performances like sacrifices. Even without the execution of sacrifices, the Lord
can still enjoy the supermost comforts of the heavenly planets. The statement
that Puruñottama, Jagannätha, would appear in the house of Vasudeva
distinguishes the Supreme Personality of Godhead from ordinary persons. The
statement that He personally appeared indicates that He did not send His
plenary expansion. The word priyärtham indicates that the Lord appeared to
please Rukmiëé and Rädhäräëé. Priyä means "the most beloved."
In the commentary of Çré Véraräghava Äcärya, the following extra verse is
accepted after text twenty-three:
åñayo 'pi tad-ädeçät
kalpyantäà paçu-rüpiëaù
payo-däna-mukhenäpi
viñëuà tarpayituà suräù
"O demigods, even great sages, following the order of Viñëu, appeared in the
forms of cows and calves to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead by
delivering milk."
Rämänujäcärya sometimes accepts Baladeva as a çaktyäveça-avatära, but
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has explained that Baladeva is an expansion of Kåñëa and
that a part of Baladeva is Saìkarñaëa. Although Baladeva is identical with
Saìkarñaëa, He is the origin of Saìkarñaëa. Therefore the word svaräö has
been used to indicate that Baladeva always exists in His own independence.
The word svaräö also indicates that Baladeva is beyond the material
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
129
conception of existence. Mäyä cannot attract Him, but because He is fully
independent, He can appear by His spiritual potency wherever He likes. Mäyä
is fully under the control of Viñëu. Because the material potency and
yogamäyä mingle in the Lord's appearance, they are described as ekänaàçä.
Sometimes ekänaàçä is interpreted to mean "without differentiation."
Saìkarñaëa and Çeña-näga are identical. As stated by Yamunädevé, "O Räma,
O great-armed master of the world, who have extended Yourself throughout
the entire universe by one plenary expansion, it is not possible to understand
You fully." Therefore ekäàçä refers to Çeña-näga. In other words, Baladeva,
merely by His partial expansion, sustains the entire universe.
The word käryärthe refers to one who attracted the pregnancy of Devaké
and bewildered mother Yaçodä. These pastimes are very confidential. The
Supreme Personality of Godhead ordered yogamäyä to bewilder His associates
in His pastimes and bewilder demons like Kaàsa. As stated previously,
yogamäyäà samädiçat. To give service to the Lord, yogamäyä appeared along
with mahämäyä. Mahämäyä refers to yayä sammohitaà jagat, "one who
bewilders the entire material world." From this statement it is to be understood
that yogamäyä, in her partial expansion, becomes mahämäyä and bewilders the
conditioned souls. In other words, the entire creation has two
divisions-transcendental, or spiritual, and material. Yogamäyä manages the
spiritual world, and by her partial expansion as mahämäyä she manages the
material world. As stated in the Närada-païcarätra, mahämäyä is a partial
expansion of yogamäyä. The Närada-païcarätra clearly states that the
Supreme Personality has one potency, which is sometimes described as Durgä.
The Brahma-saàhitä says, chäyeva yasya bhuvanäni bibharti durgä [Bs. 5.44].
Durgä is not different from yogamäyä. When one understands Durgä properly,
he is immediately liberated, for Durgä is originally the spiritual potency,
hlädiné-çakti, by whose mercy one can understand the Supreme Personality of
Godhead very easily. Rädhä kåñëa-praëaya-vikåtir hlädiné-çaktir asmäd [Cc. Ädi
1.5]. The mahämäyä-çakti, however, is a covering of yogamäyä, and she is
therefore called the covering potency. By this covering potency, the entire
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
130
material world is bewildered (yayä sammohitaà jagat). In conclusion,
bewildering the conditioned souls and liberating the devotees are both
functions belonging to yogamäyä. Transferring the pregnancy of Devaké and
keeping mother Yaçodä in deep sleep were both done by yogamäyä; mahämäyä
cannot act upon such devotees, for they are always liberated. But although it is
not possible for mahämäyä to control liberated souls or the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, she did bewilder Kaàsa. The action of yogamäyä in
presenting herself before Kaàsa was the action of mahämäyä, not yogamäyä.
Yogamäyä cannot even see or touch such polluted persons as Kaàsa. In Caëòé,
in the Märkaëòeya Puräëa, Eleventh Chapter, Mahämäyä says, "During the
twenty-eighth yuga in the period of Vaivasvata Manu, I shall take birth as the
daughter of Yaçodä and be known as Vindhyäcala-väsiné."
The distinction between the two mäyäs-yogamäyä and mahä-mäyä-is
described as follows. Kåñëa's räsa-lélä with the gopés and the gopés'
bewilderment in respect to their husbands, fathers-in-law and other such
relatives were arrangements of yogamäyä in which mahämäyä had no
influence. The Bhägavatam gives sufficient evidence of this when it clearly
says, yogamäyäm upäçritaù. On the other hand, there were asuras headed by
Çälva and kñatriyas like Duryodhana who were bereft of devotional service in
spite of seeing Kåñëa's carrier Garuòa and the universal form, and who could
not understand Kåñëa to be the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This was
also bewilderment, but this bewilderment was due to mahämäyä.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
to be concluded that the mäyä which drags a person from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is called jaòamäyä, and the mäyä which acts on the
transcendental platform is called yogamäyä. When Nanda Mahäräja was taken
away by Varuëa, he saw Kåñëa's opulence, but nonetheless he thought of Kåñëa
as his son. Such feelings of parental love in the spiritual world are acts of
yogamäyä, not of jaòamäyä, or mahämäyä. This is the opinion of Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura.
Çürasenäàç ca. The son of Kärtavéryärjuna was Çürasena, and the countries
he ruled were also called Çürasena. This is noted by Sanätana Gosvämé in his
131
Vaiñëava-toñaëé commentary.
In regard to Mathurä, we find this quotation:
mathyate tu jagat sarvaà
brahma-jïänena yena vä
tat-sära-bhütaà yad yasyäà
mathurä sä nigadyate
When a self-realized soul acts in his transcendental position, his situation is
called Mathurä. In other words, when one acts in the process of bhakti-yoga, he
may live anywhere, but actually he lives in Mathurä, Våndävana. Devotion to
Kåñëa, the son of Nanda Mahäräja, is the essence of all knowledge, and
wherever such knowledge is manifested is called Mathurä. Also, when one
establishes bhakti-yoga, excluding all other methods, one's situation is called
Mathurä. Yatra nityaà sannihito hariù: the place where Hari, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, lives eternally is called Mathurä. The word nitya
indicates eternality. The Supreme Lord is eternal, and His abode is also
eternal. Goloka eva nivasaty akhilätma-bhütaù [Bs. 5.37]. Although the Lord is
always stationed in His abode, Goloka Våndävana, He is present everywhere in
fullness. This means that when the Supreme Lord descends on the surface of
the world, His original abode is not vacant, for He can remain in His original
abode and simultaneously descend upon Mathurä, Våndävana, Ayodhyä and
other places. He does not need to descend, since He is already present there;
He simply manifests Himself.
Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé has addressed Mahäräja Parékñit as täta, or "beloved
son." This is due to parental love in the heart of Çukadeva Gosvämé. Because
Kåñëa was soon coming as the son of Vasudeva and Devaké, out of parental
affection Çukadeva Gosvämé addressed Mahäräja Parékñit as täta, "my dear
son."
In the Viçva-koça dictionary, the word garbha is explained: garbho bhrüëe
arbhake kukñäv ity ädi. When Kaàsa was about to kill Devaké, Vasudeva
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
132
wanted to dissuade him by the diplomacy of säma and bheda. Säma means
"pacifying." Vasudeva wanted to pacify Kaàsa by indicating relations, gain,
welfare, identity and glorification. Reference to these five concerns
constitutes säma, and Vasudeva's presentation of fear in two situations-in this
life and the next-is called bheda. Thus Vasudeva used both säma and bheda to
pacify Kaàsa. Praising Kaàsa's qualifications was glorification, and praising
him as a descendant of the bhoja-vaàça appealed to sambandha, relationship.
Speaking of "your sister" was an appeal to identity. Speaking about killing a
woman raises questions about fame and welfare, and arousing fear of the sinful
act of killing one's sister during her marriage ceremony is an aspect of bheda.
The Bhoja dynasty refers to those who were simply interested in sense
gratification and were therefore not very aristocratic. Another meaning of
bhoja is "fighting." These were indications of defamation for Kaàsa. When
Vasudeva addressed Kaàsa as déna-vatsala, this was excessive praise. Kaàsa
would accept calves as a form of revenue from his poor constituents, and
therefore he was called déna-vatsala. Vasudeva knew very well that he could
not by force rescue Devaké from the imminent danger. Devaké was actually the
daughter of Kaàsa's uncle, and therefore she is described as suhåt, meaning
"relative." It is stated that Kaàsa refrained from killing his close relation
Devaké because if he had killed her, a great fight would have ensued among the
other members of the family. Kaàsa refrained from provoking this great
danger of a family fight, for it would have caused many persons to lose their
lives.
Formerly an asura named Kälanemi had six sons, named Haàsa,
Suvikrama, Krätha, Damana, Ripurmardana and Krodhahantä. They were
known as the ñaò-garbhas, or six garbhas,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
and expert in military affairs. These ñaò-garbhas gave up the association of
Hiraëyakaçipu, their grandfather, and underwent great austerities to satisfy
Lord Brahmä, who, upon being satisfied, agreed to give them whatever
benediction they might desire. When asked by Lord Brahmä to state what they
wanted, the ñäò-garbhas replied, "Dear Lord Brahmä, if you want to give us a
133
benediction, give us the blessing that we will not be killed by any demigod,
mahä-roga, Yakña, Gandharva-pati, Siddha, Cäraëa or human being, nor by
great sages who are perfect in their penances and austerities." Brahmä
understood their purpose and fulfilled their desire. But when Hiraëyakaçipu
came to know of these events, he was very angry at his grandsons. "You have
given up my association and have gone to worship Lord Brahmä," he said, "and
therefore I no longer have any affection for you. You have tried to save
yourselves from the hands of the demigods, but I curse you in this way: Your
father will take birth as Kaàsa and kill all of you because you will take birth as
sons of Devaké." Because of this curse, the grandsons of Hiraëyakaçipu had to
take birth from the womb of Devaké and be killed by Kaàsa, although he was
previously their father. This description is mentioned in the Hari-vaàça,
Viñëu-parva, Second Chapter. According to the comments of the
Vaiñëava-toñaëé, the son of Devaké known as Kértimän was the third
incarnation. In his first incarnation he was known as Smara and was the son of
Maréci, and later he became the son of Kälanemi. This is mentioned in the
histories.
An additional verse in this chapter of Çrémad-Bhägavatam is accepted by
the Madhväcärya-sampradäya, represented by Vijayadhvaja Tértha. The verse
is as follows:
atha kaàsam upägamya
närado brahma-nandanaù
ekäntam upasaìgamya
väkyam etad uväca ha
atha—in this way; kaàsam—unto Kaàsa; upägamya—after going;
näradaù—the great sage Närada; brahma-nandanaù—who is the son of
Brahmä; ekäntam upasaìgamya—after going to a very solitary place;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
the following instruction; etat—this; uväca-said; ha—in the past.
Translation: "Thereafter, Närada, the mental son of Lord Brahmä,
134
approached Kaàsa and, in a very solitary place, informed him of the following
news."
The great saint Närada descended from the heavenly planets to the forest
of Mathurä and sent his messenger to Kaàsa. When the messenger approached
Kaàsa and informed him of Närada's arrival, Kaàsa, the leader of the asuras,
was very happy and immediately came out of his palace to receive Närada, who
was as bright as the sun, as powerful as fire, and free from all tinges of sinful
activities. Kaàsa accepted Närada as his guest, offered him respectful
obeisances and gave him a golden seat, brilliant like the sun. Närada was a
friend of the King of heaven, and thus he told Kaàsa, the son of Ugrasena,
"My dear hero, you have satisfied me with a proper reception, and therefore I
shall tell you something secret and confidential. While I was coming here from
Nandakänana through the Caitraratha forest, I saw a great meeting of the
demigods, who followed me to Sumeru Parvata. We traveled through many
holy places, and finally we saw the holy Ganges. While Lord Brahmä was
consulting the other demigods at the top of Sumeru Hill, I was also present
with my stringed instrument, the véëä. I shall tell you confidentially that the
meeting was held just to plan to kill the asuras, headed by you. You have a
younger sister named Devaké, and it is a fact that her eighth son will kill you."
(reference: Hari-vaàça, Viñëu-parva 1.2-16)
No one can blame Näradajé for encouraging Kaàsa to kill the sons of
Devaké. The saint Närada is always a well-wisher for human society, and he
wanted the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, to descend to this world
as soon as possible so that the society of demigods would be pleased and would
see Kaàsa and his friends killed by Kåñëa. Kaàsa would also attain salvation
from his nefarious activities, and this too would very much please the demigods
and their followers. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura remarks in this
connection that Närada Muni sometimes did things that were beneficial to the
demigods and the demons simultaneously. Çré Véraräghava Äcärya, in his
commentary, has included the following half-verse in this regard: asuräù sarva
evaita lokopadrava-käriëaù.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
are always disturbing elements for human
135
society.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Tenth Canto, First Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Advent of Lord Kåñëa: Introduction."
2. Prayers by the Demigods for Lord Kåñëa in the Womb
As described in this chapter, when the Supreme Personality of Godhead
entered the womb of Devaké to kill Kaàsa, all the demigods understood that
the Lord was living within Devaké's womb, and therefore in veneration they
offered Him the Garbha-stuti prayers.
Kaàsa, under the protection of his father-in-law, Jaräsandha, and with the
help of his demoniac friends like Pralamba, Baka, Cäëüra, Tåëävarta,
Aghäsura, Muñöika, Bäëa and Bhaumäsura, began oppressing the members of
the Yadu dynasty. Therefore, the members of the Yadu dynasty left their
homes and sought shelter in such states as Kuru, Païcäla, Kekaya, Çälva and
Vidarbha. Only some of them stayed with Kaàsa, as nominal friends.
After Kaàsa killed the ñaò-garbhas, the six sons of Devaké, one after
another, Anantadeva entered Devaké's womb and was transferred to the womb
of Rohiëé by the manipulation of Yogamäyä, who was following the order of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord Himself, who was soon to
appear as the eighth son of Devaké, ordered Yogamäyä to take birth from the
womb of Yaçodädevé. Because Kåñëa and His potency, Yogamäyä, appeared
simultaneously as brother and sister, the world is full of Vaiñëavas and çäktas,
and there is certainly some rivalry between them. Vaiñëavas worship the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
136
Supreme Lord, whereas çäktas, according to their desires, worship Yogamäyä in
forms like Durgä, Bhadrakälé and Caëòikä. Following the orders of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Yogamäyä transferred Baladeva, Saìkarñaëa,
the seventh child of Devaké, from the womb of Devaké to the womb of Rohiëé.
Because Saìkarñaëa appears in order to increase love of Kåñëa, He is known as
Baladeva. One may take auspicious strength from Him to become a devotee of
the Lord, and therefore He is also known as Balabhadra.
After Yogamäyä transferred the seventh child of Devaké to the womb of
Rohiëé, the Supreme Personality of Godhead appeared within the heart of
Vasudeva and transferred Himself into the heart of Devaké. Because the Lord
was present in her heart, Devaké, as her pregnancy continued, appeared
effulgent. Upon seeing this effulgence, Kaàsa was full of anxiety, but he could
not harm Devaké because of their family relationship. Thus he began indirectly
thinking of Kåñëa and became fully Kåñëa conscious.
Meanwhile, because of the Lord's presence within the womb of Devaké, all
the demigods came to offer the Lord their prayers. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead, they said, is eternally the Absolute Truth. The spiritual soul is more
important than the gross body, and the Supersoul, Paramätmä, is still more
important than the soul. The Supreme Godhead is absolutely independent,
and His incarnations are transcendental. The prayers of the demigods glorify
and exalt devotees and explain the fate of persons who superficially consider
themselves liberated from the conditions of material nature. A devotee is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
always safe. When a devotee fully surrenders at the lotus feet of the Lord, he is
completely liberated from the fear of material existence. By explaining why
the Supreme Personality of Godhead descends, the prayers of the demigods
clearly confirm the Lord's statement in Bhagavad-gétä (4.7):
yadä yadä hi dharmasya
glänir bhavati bhärata
abhyutthänam adharmasya
tadätmänaà såjämy aham
137
"Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendant
of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion-at that time I descend Myself."
TEXTS 1-2
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
‘alambabak(caANAUr"
ta{NAAvataRmah"AzAnaE:
mauií"k(Air"í"iã"ivad"
paUtanaAke(zAIDaenaukE(:
@nyaEêAs$aur"BaUpaAlaEr,"
baANABaAEmaAid"iBayauRta:
yaäU"naAM k(d"naM ca‚e(
balaI maAgADas$aM™aya:
çré-çuka uväca
pralamba-baka-cäëüratåëävarta-
mahäçanaiù
muñöikäriñöa-dvividapütanä-
keçé-dhenukaiù
anyaiç cäsura-bhüpälair
bäëa-bhaumädibhir yutaù
yadünäà kadanaà cakre
balé mägadha-saàçrayaù
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
138
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; pralamba—by the asura named
Pralamba; baka—by the asura named Baka; cäëüra—by the asura named
Cäëüra; tåëävarta—by the asura named Tåëävarta; mahäçanaiù—by
Aghäsura; muñöika—by the asura named Muñöika; ariñöa—by the asura Ariñöa;
dvivida—by the asura named Dvivida; pütanä—by Pütanä; keçé—by Keçé;
dhenukaiù—by Dhenuka; anyaiù ca—and by many others;
asura-bhüpälaiù—by demoniac kings on the surface of the globe; bäëa—by
King Bäëa; bhauma—by Bhaumäsura; ädibhiù—and by others as well;
yutaù—being assisted; yadünäm
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—of the kings of the Yadu dynasty;
kadanam—persecution; cakre—regularly performed; balé—very powerful;
mägadha-saàçrayaù—under the protection of Jaräsandha, the King of
Magadha.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Under the protection of Magadharäja, Jaräsandha,
the powerful Kaàsa began persecuting the kings of the Yadu dynasty. In this he
had the cooperation of demons like Pralamba, Baka, Cäëüra, Tåëävarta,
Aghäsura, Muñöika, Ariñöa, Dvivida, Pütanä, Keçé, Dhenuka, Bäëäsura,
Narakäsura and many other demoniac kings on the surface of the earth.
PURPORT
This verse supports the following statement given by the Lord in
Bhagavad-gétä (4.7-8):
yadä yadä hi dharmasya
glänir bhavati bhärata
abhyutthänam adharmasya
tadätmänaà såjämy aham
pariträëäya sädhünäà
139
vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm
dharma-saàsthäpanärthäya
sambhavämi yuge yuge
"Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendant
of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that time I descend
Myself. To deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as well as to
reestablish the principles of religion, I advent Myself millennium after
millennium."
The Lord's purpose in maintaining this material world is to give everyone a
chance to go back home, back to Godhead, but kings and political leaders
unfortunately try to hinder the purpose of the Lord, and therefore the Lord
appears, either personally or with His plenary portions, to set things right. It is
therefore said:
garbhaà saïcärya rohiëyäà
devakyä yogamäyayä
tasyäù kukñià gataù kåñëo
dvitéyo vibudhaiù stutaù
"Kåñëa appeared in the womb of Devaké after transferring Baladeva to the
womb of Rohiëé by the power of Yogamäyä." Yadubhiù sa vyarudhyata. The
kings of the Yadu dynasty were all devotees, but there were many powerful
demons, such as Çälva, who began to persecute them. At that time, Jaräsandha,
who was Kaàsa's father-in-law, was extremely powerful, and therefore Kaàsa
took advantage of his protection and the help of the demons in persecuting the
kings of the Yadu dynasty. The demons naturally appeared more powerful than
the demigods, but ultimately, because of help received from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the demons were defeated and the demigods
triumphant.
TEXT 3
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
140
tae paIix"taA inaivaivazAu:
ku(ç&paÂaAlake(k(yaAna,
zAAlvaAna, ivad"BaARiªaSaDaAna,
ivade"h"Ana, k(AezAlaAnaipa
te péòitä niviviçuù
kuru-païcäla-kekayän
çälvän vidarbhän niñadhän
videhän koçalän api
SYNONYMS
te—they (the kings of the Yadu dynasty); péòitäù—being persecuted;
niviviçuù—took shelter or entered (the kingdoms); kuru-païcäla—the
countries occupied by the Kurus and Païcälas; kekayän—the countries of the
Kekayas; çälvän—the countries occupied by the Çälvas; vidarbhän—the
countries occupied by the Vidarbhas; niñadhän—the countries occupied by the
Niñadhas; videhän—the country of Videha; koçalän api—as well as the
countries occupied by the Koçalas.
TRANSLATION
Persecuted by the demoniac kings, the Yädavas left their own kingdom and
entered various others, like those of the Kurus, Païcälas, Kekayas, Çälvas,
Vidarbhas, Niñadhas, Videhas and Koçalas.
TEXTS 4-5
Wke( tamanauç&nDaAnaA
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
141
ÁaAtaya: payauRpaAs$atae
h"taeSau Saq%.s$au baAlaeSau
de"vafyaA @AEƒas$aeinanaA
s$aæamaAe vaESNAvaM DaAma
yamanantaM ‘acaºatae
gABaAeR baBaUva de"vafyaA
h"SaRzAAek(ivavaDaRna:
eke tam anurundhänä
jïätayaù paryupäsate
hateñu ñaösu bäleñu
devakyä augraseninä
saptamo vaiñëavaà dhäma
yam anantaà pracakñate
garbho babhüva devakyä
harña-çoka-vivardhanaù
SYNONYMS
eke—some of them; tam—unto Kaàsa; anurundhänäù—exactly following his
policy; jïätayaù—relatives; paryupäsate—began to agree with him;
hateñu—having been killed; ñaösu—six; bäleñu—children; devakyäù—born of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Devaké; augraseninä—by the son of Ugrasena (Kaàsa); saptamaù—the
seventh; vaiñëavam—of Lord Viñëu; dhäma—a plenary expansion; yam—unto
whom; anantam—by the name Ananta; pracakñate—is celebrated;
garbhaù—embryo; babhüva—there was; devakyäù—of Devaké;
harña-çoka-vivardhanaù—simultaneously arousing pleasure and lamentation.
142
TRANSLATION
Some of their relatives, however, began to follow Kaàsa's principles and act
in his service. After Kaàsa, the son of Ugrasena, killed the six sons of Devaké,
a plenary portion of Kåñëa entered her womb as her seventh child, arousing her
pleasure and her lamentation. That plenary portion is celebrated by great sages
as Ananta, who belongs to Kåñëa's second quadruple expansion.
PURPORT
Some of the chief devotees, such as Akrüra, stayed with Kaàsa to satisfy
him. This they did for various purposes. They all expected the Supreme
Personality of Godhead to appear as the eighth child as soon as Devaké's other
children were killed by Kaàsa, and they were eagerly awaiting His appearance.
By remaining in Kaàsa's association, they would be able to see the Supreme
Personality of Godhead take birth and display His childhood pastimes, and
Akrüra would later go to Våndävana to bring Kåñëa and Balaräma to Mathurä.
The word paryupäsate is significant because it indicates that some devotees
wanted to stay near Kaàsa in order to see all these pastimes of the Lord. The
six children killed by Kaàsa had formerly been sons of Maréci, but because of
having been cursed by a brähmaëa, they were obliged to take birth as
grandsons of Hiraëyakaçipu. Kaàsa had taken birth as Kälanemi, and now he
was obliged to kill his own sons. This was a mystery. As soon as the sons of
Devaké were killed, they would return to their original place. The devotees
wanted to see this also. Generally speaking, no one kills his own nephews, but
Kaàsa was so cruel that he did so without hesitation. Ananta, Saìkarñaëa,
belongs to the second catur-vyüha, or quadruple expansion. This is the opinion
of experienced commentators.
TEXT 6
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
143
BagAvaAnaipa ivaìAtmaA
ivaid"tvaA kM(s$ajaM Bayama,
yaäU"naAM inajanaATaAnaAM
yaAegAmaAyaAM s$amaAid"zAta,
bhagavän api viçvätmä
viditvä kaàsajaà bhayam
yadünäà nija-näthänäà
yogamäyäà samädiçat
SYNONYMS
bhagavän—Çré Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; api—also;
viçvätmä—who is the Supersoul of everyone; viditvä—understanding the
position of the Yadus and His other devotees; kaàsa-jam—because of Kaàsa;
bhayam—fear; yadünäm—of the Yadus; nija-näthänäm—who had accepted
Him, the Supreme Lord, as their supreme shelter; yogamäyäm—unto
Yogamäyä, the spiritual potency of Kåñëa; samädiçat—ordered as follows.
TRANSLATION
To protect the Yadus, His personal devotees, from Kaàsa's attack, the
Personality of Godhead, Viçvätmä, the Supreme Soul of everyone, ordered
Yogamäyä as follows.
PURPORT
The words bhagavän api viçvätmä viditvä kaàsajaà bhayam are commented
upon by Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé. Bhagavän svayam is Kåñëa (kåñëas tu
bhagavän svayam [SB 1.3.28]). He is Viçvätmä, the original Supersoul of
everyone, because his plenary portion expands as the Supersoul. This is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
144
confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (13.3): kñetra-jïaà cäpi mäà viddhi sarva-kñetreñu
bhärata. Lord Kåñëa is the kñetra jïa, or Supersoul, of all living entities. He is
the original source of all expansions of the Personality of Godhead. There are
hundreds and thousands of plenary expansions of Viñëu, such as Saìkarñaëa,
Pradyumna, Aniruddha and Väsudeva, but here in this material world, the
Viçvätmä, the Supersoul for all living entities, is Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu. As
stated in Bhagavad-gétä (18.61), éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà håd-deçe'rjuna tiñöhati:
"The Supreme Lord is situated in the heart of all living entities, O Arjuna."
Kåñëa is actually Viçvätmä by His plenary expansion as viñëu-tattva, yet
because of His affection for His devotees, He acts as Supersoul to give them
directions (sarvasya cähaà hådi sanniviñöo mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca
[Bg. 15.15]).
The affairs of the Supersoul pertain to Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu, but Kåñëa took
compassion on Devaké, His devotee, because He understood her fear of
Kaàsa's persecution. A pure devotee is always fearful of material existence. No
one knows what will happen next, for one may have to change his body at any
moment (tathä dehäntara-präptiù [Bg. 2.13]). Knowing this fact, a pure devotee
acts in such a way that he will not have his life spoiled by being obliged to
accept another body and undergo the tribulations of material existence. This is
bhayam, or fear. Bhayaà dvitéyäbhiniveçataù syät (SB 11.2.37). This fear is due
to material existence. Properly speaking, everyone should always be alert and
fearful of material existence, but although everyone is prone to be affected by
the ignorance of material existence, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Kåñëa, is always alert to the protection of His devotees. Kåñëa is so kind and
affectionate toward His devotees that He helps them by giving them the
intelligence by which to exist in this material world without forgetting Him
even for a moment. The Lord says:
teñäm evänukampärtham
aham ajïäna-jaà tamaù
näçayämy ätma-bhävastho
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
145
jïäna-dépena bhäsvatä
"Out of compassion for them, I, dwelling in their hearts, destroy with the
shining lamp of knowledge the darkness born of ignorance." (Bg. 10.11)
The word yoga means "link." Any system of yoga is an attempt to reconnect
our broken relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. There are
different types of yoga, of which bhakti-yoga is the best. In other yoga systems,
one must undergo various processes before attaining perfection, but
bhakti-yoga is direct. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (6.47):
yoginäm api sarveñäà
mad-gatenäntarätmanä
çraddhävän bhajate yo mäà
sa me yuktatamo mataù
"Of all yogés, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping Me in
transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in yoga and is
the highest of all." For the bhakti-yogé, a human body is guaranteed in his next
existence, as stated by Lord Kåñëa (çucénäà çrématäà gehe yoga-bhrañöo
'bhijäyate [Bg. 6.41]). Yogamäyä is the spiritual potency of the Lord. Out of
affection for His devotees, the Lord always stays in spiritual touch with them,
although otherwise His mäyä potency is so strong that she bewilders even
exalted demigods like Brahmä. Therefore the Lord's potency is called
yogamäyä. Since the Lord is Viçvätmä, He immediately ordered Yogamäyä to
give protection to Devaké.
TEXT 7
gAcC$ de"iva ˜ajaM Ba‰e"
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
r"Aeih"NAI vas$aude"vasya
146
BaAyaARstae nand"gAAeku(lae
@nyaAê kM(s$as$aMiva¢aA
ivavare"Sau vas$ainta ih"
gaccha devi vrajaà bhadre
gopa-gobhir alaìkåtam
rohiëé vasudevasya
bhäryäste nanda-gokule
anyäç ca kaàsa-saàvignä
vivareñu vasanti hi
SYNONYMS
gaccha—now go; devi—O you who are worshipable for the whole world;
vrajam—to the land of Vraja; bhadre—O you who are auspicious for all living
entities; gopa-gobhiù—with cowherds and cows; alaìkåtam—decorated;
rohiëé—by the name Rohiëé; vasudevasya—of Vasudeva, Kåñëa's father;
bhäryä—one of the wives; äste—is living; nanda-gokule—in the estate of
Nanda Mahäräja known as Gokula, where hundreds and thousands of cows are
maintained; anyäù ca—and other wives; kaàsa-saàvignäù—being afraid of
Kaàsa; vivareñu—in secluded places; vasanti—are living; hi—indeed.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
The Lord ordered Yogamäyä: O My potency, who are worshipable for the
entire world and whose nature is to bestow good fortune upon all living entities,
go to Vraja, where there live many cowherd men and their wives. In that very
beautiful land, where many cows reside, Rohiëé, the wife of Vasudeva, is living
at the home of Nanda Mahäräja. Other wives of Vasudeva are also living there
incognito because of fear of Kaàsa. Please go there.
147
PURPORT
Nanda-gokula, the residence of King Nanda, was itself very beautiful, and
when Yogamäyä was ordered to go there and encourage the devotees with
fearlessness, it became even more beautiful and safe. Because Yogamäyä had
the ability to create such an atmosphere, the Lord ordered her to go to
Nanda-gokula.
TEXT 8
de"vafyaA jaQ&re" gABa<
zAeSaAKyaM DaAma maAmak(ma,
tats$aiªak{(Sya r"Aeih"NyaA
od"re" s$aiªavaezAya
devakyä jaöhare garbhaà
çeñäkhyaà dhäma mämakam
tat sannikåñya rohiëyä
udare sanniveçaya
SYNONYMS
devakyäù—of Devaké; jaöhare—within the womb; garbham—the embryo;
çeña-äkhyam—known as Çeña, the plenary expansion of Kåñëa; dhäma—the
plenary expansion; mämakam—of Me; tat—Him; sannikåñya—attracting;
rohiëyäù—of Rohiëé; udare—within the womb; sanniveçaya—transfer without
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
difficulty.
TRANSLATION
148
Within the womb of Devaké is My partial plenary expansion known as
Saìkarñaëa or Çeña. Without difficulty, transfer Him into the womb of Rohiëé.
PURPORT
The first plenary expansion of Kåñëa is Baladeva, also known as Çeña. The
Çeña incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead supports the entire
universe, and the eternal mother of this incarnation is mother Rohiëé.
"Because I am going into the womb of Devaké," the Lord told Yogamäyä, "the
Çeña incarnation has already gone there and made suitable arrangements so
that I may live there. Now He should enter the womb of Rohiëé, His eternal
mother."
In this connection, one may ask how the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who is always situated transcendentally, could enter the womb of Devaké,
which had previously been entered by the six asuras, the ñaò-garbhas. Does this
mean that the Ñaò-garbhäsuras were equal to the transcendental body of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead? The following answer is given by Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura.
The entire creation, as well as its individual parts, is an expansion of the
energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore, even though the
Lord enters the material world, He does not do so. This is explained by the
Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gétä (9.4-5):
mayä tatam idaà sarvaà
jagad avyakta-mürtinä
mat-sthäni sarva-bhütäni
na cähaà teñv avasthitaù
na ca mat-sthäni bhütäni
paçya me yogam aiçvaram
bhüta-bhån na ca bhüta-stho
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
149
mamätmä bhüta-bhävanaù
"By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All beings
are in Me, but I am not in them. And yet everything that is created does not
rest in Me. Behold My mystic opulence! Although I am the maintainer of all
living entities, and although I am everywhere, My Self is the very source of
creation." Sarvaà khalv idaà brahma. Everything is an expansion of Brahman,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, yet everything is not the Supreme
Godhead, and He is not everywhere. Everything rests upon Him and yet does
not rest upon Him. This can be explained only through the acintya-bhedäbheda
philosophy. Such truths cannot be understood, however, unless one is a pure
devotee, for the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (18.55), bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti
yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù: "One can understand the Supreme Personality as He
is only by devotional service." Even though the Lord cannot be understood by
ordinary persons, this principle should be understood from the statement of
the çästras.
A pure devotee is always transcendentally situated because of executing
nine different processes of bhakti-yoga (çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù smaranaà
päda-sevanam/ arcanaà vandanaà däsyaà sakhyam ätma-nivedanam [SB
7.5.23]). Thus situated in devotional service, a devotee, although in the
material world, is not in the material world. Yet a devotee always fears,
"Because I am associated with the material world, so many contaminations
affect me." Therefore he is always alert in fear, which gradually diminishes his
material association.
Symbolically, mother Devaké's constant fear of Kaàsa was purifying her. A
pure devotee should always fear material association, and in this way all the
asuras of material association will be killed, as the ñaò-garbhäsuras were killed
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
by Kaàsa. It is said that from the mind, Maréci appears. In other words, Maréci
is an incarnation of the mind. Maréci has six sons: Käma, Krodha, Lobha,
Moha, Mada and Mätsarya (lust, anger, greed, illusion, madness and envy).
The Supreme Personality of Godhead appears in pure devotional service. This
150
is confirmed in the Vedas: bhaktir evainaà darçayati. Only bhakti can bring
one in contact with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead appeared from the womb of Devaké, and therefore
Devaké symbolically represents bhakti, and Kaàsa symbolically represents
material fear. When a pure devotee always fears material association, his real
position of bhakti is manifested, and he naturally becomes uninterested in
material enjoyment. When the six sons of Maréci are killed by such fear and
one is freed from material contamination, within the womb of bhakti the
Supreme Personality of Godhead appears. Thus the seventh pregnancy of
Devaké signifies the appearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. After
the six sons Käma, Krodha, Lobha, Moha, Mada and Mätsarya are killed, the
Çeña incarnation creates a suitable situation for the appearance of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. In other words, when one awakens his
natural Kåñëa consciousness, Lord Kåñëa appears. This is the explanation
given by Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura.
TEXT 9
@TaAh"maMzABaAgAena
de"vafyaA: pau‡ataAM zAuBae
‘aApsyaAima tvaM yazAAed"AyaAM
nand"patnyaAM BaivaSyais$a
athäham aàça-bhägena
devakyäù putratäà çubhe
präpsyämi tvaà yaçodäyäà
nanda-patnyäà bhaviñyasi
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
151
atha—therefore; aham—I; aàça-bhägena—by My plenary expansion;
devakyäù—of Devaké; putratäm—the son; çubhe—O all-auspicious Yogamäyä;
präpsyämi—I shall become; tvam—you; yaçodäyäm—in the womb of mother
Yaçodä; nanda-patnyäm—in the wife of Mahäräja Nanda; bhaviñyasi—shall
also appear.
TRANSLATION
O all-auspicious Yogamäyä, I shall then appear with My full six opulences as
the son of Devaké, and you will appear as the daughter of mother Yaçodä, the
queen of Mahäräja Nanda.
PURPORT
The word aàça-bhägena is important in this verse. In Bhagavad-gétä (10.42)
the Lord says:
athavä bahunaitena
kià jïätena tavärjuna
viñöabhyäham idaà kåtsnam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
"But what need is there, Arjuna, for all this detailed knowledge? With a single
fragment of Myself I pervade and support this entire universe." Everything is
situated as a part of the Supreme Lord's potency. In regard to Lord Kåñëa's
appearance in the womb of Devaké, Brahmä played a part also because on the
bank of the milk ocean he requested the Supreme Personality of Godhead to
appear. A part was also played by Baladeva, the first expansion of Godhead.
Similarly, Yogamäyä, who appeared as the daughter of mother Yaçodä, also
played a part. Thus jéva-tattva, viñëu-tattva and çakti-tattva are all integrated
with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and when Kåñëa appears, He
appears with all His integrated parts. As explained in previous verses,
152
Yogamäyä was requested to attract Saìkarñaëa, Baladeva, from the womb of
Devaké to the womb of Rohiëé, and this was a very heavy task for her.
Yogamäyä naturally could not see how it was possible for her to attract
Saìkarñaëa. Therefore Kåñëa addressed her as çubhe, auspicious, and said, "Be
blessed. Take power from Me, and you will be able to do it." By the grace of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, anyone can do anything, for the Lord is
present in everything, all things being His parts and parcels (aàça-bhägena)
and increasing or decreasing by His supreme will. Balaräma was only fifteen
days older than Kåñëa. By the blessings of Kåñëa, Yogamäyä became the
daughter of mother Yaçodä, but by the supreme will she was not able to enjoy
the parental love of her father and mother. Kåñëa, however, although not
actually born from the womb of mother Yaçodä, enjoyed the parental love of
mother Yaçodä and Nanda. By the blessings of Kåñëa, Yogamäyä was able to
achieve the reputation of being the daughter of mother Yaçodä, who also
became famous by the blessings of Kåñëa. Yaçodä means "one who gives fame."
TEXT 10
@icaRSyainta manauSyaAstvaAM
s$avaRk(Amavare"ìr"Ima,
DaUpaAepah"Ar"bailaiBa:
s$avaRk(Amavar"‘ad"Ama,
arciñyanti manuñyäs tväà
sarva-käma-vareçvarém
dhüpopahära-balibhiù
sarva-käma-vara-pradäm
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
153
arciñyanti—will worship; manuñyäù—human society; tväm—unto you;
sarva-käma-vara-éçvarém—because you are the best of the demigods who can
fulfill all material desires; dhüpa—by incense; upahära—by presentations;
balibhiù—by different types of worship through sacrifice; sarva-käma—of all
material desires; vara—the blessings; pradäm—one who can bestow.
TRANSLATION
By sacrifices of animals, ordinary human beings will worship you gorgeously,
with various paraphernalia, because you are supreme in fulfilling the material
desires of everyone.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (7.20), kämais tais tair håta jïänäù prapadyante
'nya-devatäù: "Those whose minds are distorted by material desires surrender
unto demigods." Therefore the word manuñya, meaning "human being," here
refers to one who does not know the actual goal of life. Such a person wants to
enjoy the material world by taking birth in a highly elevated family with the
benefits of education, beauty and immense wealth, which in this material
world are desirable. One who has forgotten the real aim of life may worship
goddess Durgä, mäyä-çakti, under various names, for different purposes, and in
different places. As there are many holy places for the worship of Kåñëa, there
are also many holy places in India for the worship of Durgädevé, or Mäyädevé,
who took birth as the daughter of Yaçodä. After cheating Kaàsa, Mäyädevé
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
dispersed herself to various places, especially in Vindhyäcala, to accept regular
worship from ordinary men. A human being should actually be interested in
understanding ätma-tattva, the truth of ätmä, the spirit soul, and Paramätmä,
the supreme soul. Those who are interested in ätma-tattva worship the
Supreme Personality of Godhead (yasmin vijïäte sarvam evaà vijïätaà
bhavati) (Muëòaka Upaniñad 1.3). However, as explained in the next verse of
this chapter, those who cannot understand ätma-tattva (apaçyatäm
154
ätma-tattvam) worship Yogamäyä in her different features. Therefore
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (2.1.2) says:
çrotavyädéni räjendra
nåëäà santi sahasraçaù
apaçyatäm ätma-tattvaà
gåheñu gåha-medhinäm
"Those persons who are materially engrossed, being blind to the knowledge of
ultimate truth, have many subject matters for hearing in human society, O
Emperor." Those who are interested in remaining in this material world and
are not interested in spiritual salvation have many duties, but for one who is
interested in spiritual salvation, the only duty is to surrender fully unto Kåñëa
(sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja [Bg. 18.66]). Such a person
is not interested in material enjoyment.
TEXTS 11-12
naAmaDaeyaAina ku(vaRinta
sTaAnaAina ca nar"A Bauiva
äu"gAeRita Ba‰"k(AlaIita
ivajayaA vaESNAvaIita ca
ku(maud"A caiNx"k(A k{(SNAA
maADavaI k(nyake(ita ca
maAyaA naAr"AyaNAIzAAnaI
zAAr"de"tyaimbake(ita ca
nämadheyäni kurvanti
sthänäni ca narä bhuvi
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
155
durgeti bhadrakäléti
vijayä vaiñëavéti ca
kumudä caëòikä kåñëä
mädhavé kanyaketi ca
mäyä näräyaëéçäné
çäradety ambiketi ca
SYNONYMS
nämadheyäni—different names; kurvanti—will give; sthänäni—in different
places; ca—also; naräù—persons interested in material enjoyment; bhuvi—on
the surface of the globe; durgä iti—the name Durgä; bhadrakälé iti—the name
Bhadrakälé; vijayä—the name Vijayä; vaiñëavé iti—the name Vaiñëavé;
ca—also; kumudä—the name Kumudä; caëòikä—the name Caëòikä;
kåñëä—the name Kåñëä; mädhavé—the name Mädhavé; kanyakä iti—the name
Kanyakä or Kanyä-kumäré; ca—also; mäyä—the name Mäyä; näräyaëé—the
name Näräyaëé; éçäné—the name Éçäné; çäradä—the name Çäradä; iti—thus;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
ambikä—the name Ambikä; iti—also; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa blessed Mäyädevé by saying: In different places on the surface of
the earth, people will give you different names, such as Durgä, Bhadrakälé,
Vijayä, Vaiñëavé, Kumudä, Caëòikä, Kåñëä, Mädhavé, Kanyakä, Mäyä,
Näräyaëé, Éçäné, Çäradä and Ambikä.
PURPORT
Because Kåñëa and His energy appeared simultaneously, people have
generally formed two groups—the çäktas and the Vaiñëavas—and sometimes
there is rivalry between them. Essentially, those who are interested in material
enjoyment are çäktas, and those interested in spiritual salvation and attaining
156
the spiritual kingdom are Vaiñëavas. Because people are generally interested in
material enjoyment, they are interested in worshiping Mäyädevé, the energy of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Vaiñëavas, however, are çuddha-çäktas,
or pure bhaktas, because the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra indicates worship of the
Supreme Lord's energy, Harä. A Vaiñëava prays to the energy of the Lord for
the opportunity to serve the Lord along with His spiritual energy. Thus
Vaiñëavas all worship such Deities as Rädhä-Kåñëa, Sétä-Räma,
Lakñmé-Näräyaëa and Rukmiëé-Dvärakädhéça, whereas durgä-çäktas worship
the material energy under different names.
The names by which Mäyädevé is known in different places have been
listed by Vallabhäcärya as follows. In Väräëasé she is known as Durgä, in
Avanté she is known as Bhadrakälé, in Orissa she is known as Vijayä, and in
Kulahäpura she is known as Vaiñëavé or Mahälakñmé. (The representatives of
Mahälakñmé and Ambikä are present in Bombay.) In the country known as
Kämarüpa she is known as Caëòikä, in Northern India as Çäradä, and in Cape
Comorin as Kanyakä. Thus she is distributed according to various names in
various places.
Çréla Vijayadhvaja Térthapäda, in his Pada-ratnävalé-öékä, has explained the
meanings of the different representations. Mäyä is known as Durgä because
she is approached with great difficulty, as Bhadrä because she is auspicious, and
as Kälé because she is deep blue. Because she is the most powerful energy, she is
known as Vijayä; because she is one of the different energies of Viñëu, she is
known as Vaiñëavé; and because she enjoys in this material world and gives
facilities for material enjoyment, she is known as Kumudä. Because she is very
severe to her enemies, the asuras, she is known as Caëòikä, and because she
gives all sorts of material facilities, she is called Kåñëä. In this way the material
energy is differently named and situated in different places on the surface of
the globe.
TEXT 13
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
157
gABaRs$aÆÿSaRNAAÔaM vaE
‘aAò": s$aÆÿSaRNAM Bauiva
r"Amaeita laAek(r"maNAAä,"
balaBa‰M" balaAecC)$yaAta,
garbha-saìkarñaëät taà vai
prähuù saìkarñaëaà bhuvi
rämeti loka-ramaëäd
balabhadraà balocchrayät
SYNONYMS
garbha-saìkarñaëät—because He will be taken from the womb of Devaké to
that of Rohiëé; tam—Him (Rohiëé-nandana, the son of Rohiëé); vai—indeed;
prähuù—people will call; saìkarñaëam—by the name Saìkarñaëa; bhuvi—in
the world; räma iti—He will also be called Räma; loka-ramaëät—because of
His special mercy in enabling people in general to become devotees;
balabhadram—He will also be called Balabhadra; bala-ucchrayät—because of
extensive bodily strength.
TRANSLATION
The son of Rohiëé will also be celebrated as Saìkarñaëa because of being sent
from the womb of Devaké to the womb of Rohiëé. He will be called Räma
because of His ability to please all the inhabitants of Gokula, and He will be
known as Balabhadra because of His extensive physical strength.
PURPORT
These are some of the reasons why Balaräma is known as Saìkarñaëa,
Balaräma or sometimes Räma. In the mahä-mantra—Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
158
Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare
Hare—people sometimes object when Räma is accepted as Balaräma. But
although devotees of Lord Räma may object, they should know that there is no
difference between Balaräma and Lord Räma. Here Çrémad-Bhägavatam clearly
states that Balaräma is also known as Räma (rämeti). Therefore, it is not
artificial for us to speak of Lord Balaräma as Lord Räma. Jayadeva Gosvämé
also speaks of three Rämas: Paraçuräma, Raghupati Räma and Balaräma. All of
them are Rämas.
TEXT 14
s$aind"íE"vaM BagAvataA
taTaetyaAeimaita taã"ca:
‘aitagA{÷ pair"‚(mya
gAAM gAtaA taÔaTaAk(r"Aeta,
sandiñöaivaà bhagavatä
tathety om iti tad-vacaù
pratigåhya parikramya
gäà gatä tat tathäkarot
SYNONYMS
sandiñöä—having been ordered; evam—thus; bhagavatä—by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; tathä iti—so be it; oà—affirmation by the mantra
oà; iti—thus; tat-vacaù—His words;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
pratigåhya—accepting the order;
parikramya—after circumambulating Him; gäm—to the surface of the globe;
gatä—she immediately went; tat—the order, as given by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; tathä—just so; akarot—executed.
159
TRANSLATION
Thus instructed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Yogamäyä
immediately agreed. With the Vedic mantra oà, she confirmed that she would
do what He asked. Thus having accepted the order of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, she circumambulated Him and started for the place on earth
known as Nanda-gokula. There she did everything just as she had been told.
PURPORT
After receiving the orders of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Yogamäyä twice confirmed her acceptance by saying, "Yes, sir, I shall do as You
order," and then saying oà. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura comments
that oà signifies Vedic confirmation. Thus Yogamäyä very faithfully received
the Lord's order as a Vedic injunction. It is a fact that whatever is spoken by
the Supreme Personality of Godhead is a Vedic injunction that no one should
neglect. In Vedic injunctions there are no mistakes, illusions, cheating or
imperfection. Unless one understands the authority of the Vedic version,
there is no purpose in quoting çästra. No one should violate the Vedic
injunctions. Rather, one should strictly execute the orders given in the Vedas.
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (16.24):
tasmäc chästraà pramäëaà te
käryäkärya-vyavasthitau
jïätvä çästra-vidhänoktaà
karma kartum ihärhasi
"One should understand what is duty and what is not duty by the regulations
of the scriptures. Knowing such rules and regulations, one should act so that
one may gradually be elevated."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
160
TEXT 15
gABaeR ‘aNAItae de"vafyaA
r"Aeih"NAI%M yaAegAina‰"yaA
@h"Ae iva›aMis$ataAe gABaR
wita paAEr"A ivacau‚u(zAu:
garbhe praëéte devakyä
rohiëéà yoga-nidrayä
aho visraàsito garbha
iti paurä vicukruçuù
SYNONYMS
garbhe—when the embryo; praëéte—was carried from the womb; devakyäù—of
Devaké; rohiëém—to the womb of Rohiëé; yoga-nidrayä—by the spiritual
energy called Yogamäyä; aho—alas; visraàsitaù—is lost; garbhaù—the embryo;
iti—thus; pauräù—all the inhabitants of the house; vicukruçuù—lamented.
TRANSLATION
When the child of Devaké was attracted and transferred into the womb of
Rohiëé by Yogamäyä, Devaké seemed to have a miscarriage. Thus all the
inhabitants of the palace loudly lamented, "Alas, Devaké has lost her child!"
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
"All the inhabitants of the palace" includes Kaàsa. When everyone
lamented, Kaàsa joined in compassion, thinking that perhaps because of drugs
or some other external means, Devaké had undergone this abortion. The real
story of what happened after Yogamäyä attracted the child of Devaké into the
161
womb of Rohiëé in the seventh month of Rohiëé's pregnancy is described as
follows in the Hari-vaàça. At midnight, while Rohiëé was deeply sleeping, she
experienced, as if in a dream, that she had undergone a miscarriage. After
some time, when she awoke, she saw that this had indeed happened, and she
was in great anxiety. But Yogamäyä then informed her, "O auspicious lady,
your child is now being replaced. I am attracting a child from the womb of
Devaké, and therefore your child will be known as Saìkarñaëa."
The word yoga-nidrä is significant. When one is spiritually reconnected
through self-realization, one regards his material life as having been like a
dream. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (2.69):
yä niçä sarva-bhütänäà
tasyäà jägarti saàyamé
yasyäà jägrati bhütäni
sä niçä paçyato muneù
"What is night for all beings is the time of awakening for the self-controlled;
and the time of awakening for all beings is night for the introspective sage."
The stage of self-realization is called yoga-nidrä. All material activities appear
to be a dream when one is spiritually awakened. Thus yoga-nidrä may be
explained to be Yogamäyä.
TEXT 16
BagAvaAnaipa ivaìAtmaA
Bal(AnaAmaBayaÆÿr":
@AivavaezAAMzABaAgAena
mana @Anak(äu"näu"Bae:
bhagavän api viçvätmä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
162
bhaktänäm abhayaìkaraù
äviveçäàça-bhägena
mana änakadundubheù
SYNONYMS
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; api—also; viçvätmä—the
Supersoul of all living entities; bhaktänäm—of His devotees;
abhayam-karaù—always killing the causes of fear; äviveça—entered;
aàça-bhägena—with all of His potential opulences (Ñaò-aiçvarya-pürëa);
manaù—in the mind; änakadundubheù—of Vasudeva.
TRANSLATION
Thus the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the Supersoul of all living
entities and who vanquishes all the fear of His devotees, entered the mind of
Vasudeva in full opulence.
PURPORT
The word viçvätmä refers to one who is situated in everyone's heart (éçvaraù
sarva-bhütänäà håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati [Bg. 18.61]). Another meaning of
viçvätmä is "the only lovable object for everyone." Because of forgetfulness of
this object, people are suffering in this material world, but if one fortunately
revives his old consciousness of loving Kåñëa and connects with Viçvätmä, one
becomes perfect. The Lord is described in the Third Canto (3.2.15) as follows:
parävareço mahad-aàça-yukto hy ajo 'pi jäto bhagavän. Although unborn, the
Lord, the master of everything, appears like a born child by entering the mind
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
of a devotee. The Lord is already there within the mind, and consequently it is
not astonishing for Him to appear as if born from a devotee's body. The word
äviveça signifies that the Lord appeared within the mind of Vasudeva. There
was no need for a discharge of semen. That is the opinion of Çrépäda Çrédhara
163
Svämé and Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura. In the Vaiñëava-toñaëé, Çréla
Sanätana Gosvämé says that consciousness was awakened within the mind of
Vasudeva. Çréla Véraräghava Äcärya also says that Vasudeva was one of the
demigods and that within his mind the Supreme Personality of Godhead
appeared as an awakening of consciousness.
TEXT 17
s$a iba”atpaAEç&SaM DaAma
”aAjamaAnaAe yaTaA r"iva:
äu"r"As$ad"Ae'itaäu"DaRSaAeR
BaUtaAnaAM s$ambaBaUva h"
sa bibhrat pauruñaà dhäma
bhräjamäno yathä raviù
duräsado 'tidurdharño
bhütänäà sambabhüva ha
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Vasudeva); bibhrat—carried; pauruñam—pertaining to the Supreme
Person; dhäma—the spiritual effulgence; bhräjamänaù—illuminating;
yathä—as; raviù—the sunshine; duräsadaù—very difficult even to look at,
difficult to understand by sensory perception; ati-durdharñaù—approachable
with great difficulty; bhütänäm—of all living entities; sambabhüva—so he
became; ha—positively.
TRANSLATION
While carrying the form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead within the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
164
core of his heart, Vasudeva bore the Lord's transcendentally illuminating
effulgence, and thus he became as bright as the sun. He was therefore very
difficult to see or approach through sensory perception. Indeed, he was
unapproachable and unperceivable even for such formidable men as Kaàsa, and
not only for Kaàsa but for all living entities.
PURPORT
The word dhäma is significant. Dhäma refers to the place where the
Supreme Personality of Godhead resides. In the beginning of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.1.1) it is said, dhämnä svena sadä nirasta-kuhakaà
satyaà paraà dhémahi. In the abode of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
there is no influence of material energy (dhämnä svena sadä nirasta-kuhakam).
Any place where the Supreme Personality of Godhead is present by His name,
form, qualities or paraphernalia immediately becomes a dhäma. For example,
we speak of Våndävana-dhäma, Dvärakä-dhäma and Mathurä-dhäma because
in these places the name, fame, qualities and paraphernalia of the Supreme
Godhead are always present. Similarly, if one is empowered by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead to do something, the core of his heart becomes a
dhäma, and thus he becomes so extraordinarily powerful that not only his
enemies but also people in general are astonished to observe his activities.
Because he is unapproachable, his enemies are simply struck with wonder, as
explained here by the words duräsado 'tidurdharsaù.
The words pauruñaà dhäma have been explained by various äcäryas. Çré
Véraräghava Äcärya says that these words refer to the effulgence of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Vijayadhvaja says that they signify
viñëu-tejas, and Çukadeva says bhagavat-svarüpa. The Vaiñëava-toñaëé says that
these words indicate the influence of the Supreme Lord's effulgence, and
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura says that they signify the appearance of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
165
TEXT 18
tataAe jagAnmaËÿlamacyautaAMzAM
s$amaAih"taM zAUr"s$autaena de"vaI
d"DaAr" s$avaARtmak(maAtmaBaUtaM
k(Aï"A yaTaAnand"k(rM" manasta:
tato jagan-maìgalam acyutäàçaà
samähitaà çüra-sutena devé
dadhära sarvätmakam ätma-bhütaà
käñöhä yathänanda-karaà manastaù
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; jagat-maìgalam—auspiciousness for all living entities in all
the universes of the creation; acyuta-aàçam—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is never bereft of the six opulences, all of which are present in
all His plenary expansions; samähitam—fully transferred; çüra-sutena—by
Vasudeva, the son of Çürasena; devé—Devaké-devé; dadhära—carried;
sarva-ätmakam—the Supreme Soul of everyone; ätma-bhütam—the cause of
all causes; käñöhä—the east; yathä—just as; änanda-karam—the blissful
(moon); manastaù—being placed within the mind.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, accompanied by plenary expansions, the fully opulent Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is all-auspicious for the entire universe, was
transferred from the mind of Vasudeva to the mind of Devaké. Devaké, having
thus been initiated by Vasudeva, became beautiful by carrying Lord Kåñëa, the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
original consciousness for everyone, the cause of all causes, within the core of
her heart, just as the east becomes beautiful by carrying the rising moon.
166
PURPORT
As indicated here by the word manastaù, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead was transferred from the core of Vasudeva's mind or heart to the core
of the heart of Devaké. We should note carefully that the Lord was transferred
to Devaké not by the ordinary way for a human being, but by dékñä, initiation.
Thus the importance of initiation is mentioned here. Unless one is initiated by
the right person, who always carries within his heart the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, one cannot acquire the power to carry the Supreme Godhead
within the core of one's own heart.
The word acyutäàçam is used because the Supreme Personality of Godhead
is Ñaò-aiçvarya-pürëa, full in the opulences of wealth, strength, fame,
knowledge, beauty and renunciation. The Supreme Godhead is never
separated from His personal opulences. As stated in the Brahma-saàhitä
(5.39), rämädi-mürtiñu kalä-niyamena tiñöhan: the Lord is always situated with
all His plenary expansions, such as Räma, Nåsiàha and Varäha. Therefore the
word acyutäàçam is specifically used here, signifying that the Lord is always
present with His plenary expansions and opulences. There is no need to think
of the Lord artificially as yogés do. Dhyänävasthita-tad-gatena manasä paçyanti
yaà yoginaù (SB 12.13.1). Yogés meditate upon the Supreme person within the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
wever, the Lord is present, and His presence need only
be awakened through initiation by a bona fide spiritual master. The Lord did
not need to live within the womb of Devaké, for His presence within the core
of her heart was sufficient to carry Him. One is here forbidden to think that
Kåñëa was begotten by Vasudeva within the womb of Devaké and that she
carried the child within her womb.
When Vasudeva was sustaining the form of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead within his heart, he appeared just like the glowing sun, whose
shining rays are always unbearable and scorching to the common man. The
form of the Lord situated in the pure, unalloyed heart of Vasudeva is not
different from the original form of Kåñëa. The appearance of the form of
167
Kåñëa anywhere, and specifically within the heart, is called dhäma. Dhäma
refers not only to Kåñëa's form, but to His name, His form, His quality and His
paraphernalia. Everything becomes manifest simultaneously.
Thus the eternal form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead with full
potencies was transferred from the mind of Vasudeva to the mind of Devaké,
exactly as the setting sun's rays are transferred to the full moon rising in the
east.
Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, entered the body of Devaké
from the body of Vasudeva. He was beyond the conditions of the ordinary
living entity. When Kåñëa is there, it is to be understood that all His plenary
expansions, such as Näräyaëa, and incarnations like Lord Nåsiàha and
Varäha, are with Him, and they are not subject to the conditions of material
existence. In this way, Devaké became the residence of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is one without a second and the cause of all
creation. Devaké became the residence of the Absolute Truth, but because she
was within the house of Kaàsa, she looked just like a suppressed fire, or like
misused education. When fire is covered by the walls of a pot or is kept in a
jug, the illuminating rays of the fire cannot be very much appreciated.
Similarly, misused knowledge, which does not benefit the people in general, is
not very much appreciated. So Devaké was kept within the prison walls of
Kaàsa's palace, and no one could see her transcendental beauty, which
resulted from her conceiving the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Commenting upon this verse, Çré Véraräghava Äcärya writes,
vasudeva-devaké jaöharayor hådayayor bhagavataù sambandhaù. The Supreme
Lord's entrance into the womb of Devaké from the heart of Vasudeva was a
heart-to-heart relationship.
TEXT 19
s$aA de"vak(L s$avaRjagAiªavaAs$acopyright
©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
168
inavaAs$aBaUtaA inatar"AM na re"jae
BaAejaen‰"gAehe"'i¢aizAKaeva ç&Ü"A
s$ar"svataI ÁaAnaKalae yaTaA s$ata,
sä devaké sarva-jagan-niväsaniväsa-
bhütä nitaräà na reje
bhojendra-gehe 'gni-çikheva ruddhä
sarasvaté jïäna-khale yathä saté
SYNONYMS
sä devaké—that Devakédevé; sarva-jagat-niväsa—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the sustainer of all the universes (mat-sthäni sarva-bhütäni);
niväsa-bhütä—the womb of Devaké has now become the residence;
nitaräm—extensively; na—not; reje—became illuminated;
bhojendra-gehe—within the limits of the house of Kaàsa; agni-çikhä iva—like
the flames of a fire; ruddhä—covered; sarasvaté—knowledge; jïäna-khale—in
a person known as jïäna-khala, one who possesses knowledge but cannot
distribute it; yathä—or just as; saté—so being.
TRANSLATION
Devaké then kept within herself the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
cause of all causes, the foundation of the entire cosmos, but because she was
under arrest in the house of Kaàsa, she was like the flames of a fire covered by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
ke a person who has knowledge but cannot distribute it
to the world for the benefit of human society.
PURPORT
In this verse the word jïäna-khala is most significant. Knowledge is meant
169
for distribution. Although there is already much scientific knowledge,
whenever scientists or philosophers awaken to a particular type of knowledge,
they try to distribute it throughout the world, for otherwise the knowledge
gradually dries up and no one benefits from it. India has the knowledge of
Bhagavad-gétä, but unfortunately, for some reason or other, this sublime
knowledge of the science of God was not distributed throughout the world,
although it is meant for all of human society. Therefore Kåñëa Himself
appeared as Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu and ordered all Indians to take up the
cause of distributing the knowledge of Bhagavad-gétä throughout the entire
world.
yäre dekha, täre kaha 'kåñëa'-upadeça
ämära äjïäya guru haïä tära' ei deça
"Instruct everyone to follow the orders of Lord Çré Kåñëa as they are given in
Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam. In this way become a spiritual master
and try to liberate everyone in this land." (Cc. Madhya 7.128) Although India
has the sublime knowledge of Bhagavad-gétä, Indians have not done their
proper duty of distributing it. Now, therefore, the Kåñëa consciousness
movement has been set up to distribute this knowledge as it is, without
distortion. Although previously there were attempts to distribute the
knowledge of Bhagavad-gétä, these attempts involved distortion and
compromise with mundane knowledge. But now the Kåñëa consciousness
movement, without mundane compromises, is distributing Bhagavad-gétä as it
is, and people are deriving the benefits of awakening to Kåñëa consciousness
and becoming devotees of Lord Kåñëa. Therefore the proper distribution of
knowledge has begun by which not only will the whole world benefit, but
India's glory will be magnified in human society. Kaàsa tried to arrest Kåñëa
consciousness within his house (bhojendra-gehe), with the result that Kaàsa,
with all his opulences, was later vanquished. Similarly, the real knowledge of
Bhagavad-gétä was being choked by unscrupulous Indian leaders, with the
result that India's culture, and knowledge of the Supreme were being lost.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
170
Now, however, because Kåñëa consciousness is spreading, the proper use of
Bhagavad-gétä is being attempted.
TEXT 20
taAM vaIºya kM(s$a: ‘aBayaAijataAntar"AM
ivar"AecayantaI%M BavanaM zAuicaismataAma,
@AhE"Sa mae ‘aANAh"r"Ae h"ir"gAuRh"AM
‹auvaM i™ataAe yaªa paure"yamaIä{"zAI
täà vékñya kaàsaù prabhayäjitäntaräà
virocayantéà bhavanaà çuci-smitäm
ähaiña me präëa-haro harir guhäà
dhruvaà çrito yan na pureyam édåçé
SYNONYMS
täm—her (Devaké); vékñya—after seeing; kaàsaù—her brother Kaàsa;
prabhayä—with the enhancement of her beauty and influence;
ajita-antaräm—because of keeping Ajita, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Viñëu, within herself; virocayantém—illuminating; bhavanam—the
whole atmosphere of the house; çuci-smitäm—smiling and brilliant; äha—said
to himself; eñaù—this (Supreme Person); me—my; präëa-haraù—who will kill
me; hariù—Lord Viñëu; guhäm—within the womb of Devaké;
dhruvam—certainly; çritaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—has taken shelter; yat—because; na—was not;
purä—formerly; iyam—Devaké; édåçé—like this.
TRANSLATION
Because the Supreme Personality of Godhead was within her womb, Devaké
171
illuminated the entire atmosphere in the place where she was confined. Seeing
her jubilant, pure and smiling, Kaàsa thought, "The Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Viñëu, who is now within her, will kill me. Devaké has never before
looked so brilliant and jubilant."
PURPORT
The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (4.7):
yadä yadä hi dharmasya
glänir bhavati bhärata
abhyutthänam adharmasya
tadätmänaà såjämy aham
"Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendant
of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that time I descend
Myself." In this age, at the present moment, there are inordinate discrepancies
in the discharge of human duties. Human life is meant for God realization, but
unfortunately the materialistic civilization is stressing only the senses of the
body, not understanding the living force within the body. As clearly stated in
Bhagavad-gétä (dehino 'smin yathä dehe [Bg. 2.13]), within the body is the body's
proprietor, the living force, which is more important. But human society has
become so fallen that instead of understanding the living force within the
body, people have become busy with external things. This is a discrepancy in
human duties. Therefore Kåñëa has taken birth or taken shelter within the
womb of the Kåñëa consciousness movement. Men of Kaàsa's class, therefore,
are very much afraid and are busy trying to stop this movement, especially in
the Western countries. One politician has remarked that the Kåñëa
consciousness movement is spreading like an epidemic and that if not checked
immediately, within ten years it may capture governmental power. There is, of
course, such potency in the Kåñëa consciousness movement. As stated by
authorities (Cc. Ädi 17.22), kali-käle näma-rüpe kåñëa-avatära: in this age,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
172
Kåñëa has appeared in the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra. The Kåñëa consciousness
movement is spreading like wildfire all over the world, and it will go on doing
so. Men who are like Kaàsa are very much afraid of the movement's progress
and acceptance by the younger generation, but as Kåñëa could not be killed by
Kaàsa, this movement cannot be checked by men of Kaàsa's class. The
movement will go on increasing more and more, provided the leaders of the
movement remain firmly Kåñëa conscious by following the regulative
principles and the primary activities of chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra
regularly.
TEXT 21
ik(maâ taismana, k(r"NAIyamaAzAu mae
yad"TaRtan‡aAe na ivah"inta iva‚(mama,
iñyaA: svas$augAuRç&matyaA vaDaAe'yaM
yazA: i™ayaM h"ntyanauk(AlamaAyau:
kim adya tasmin karaëéyam äçu me
yad artha-tantro na vihanti vikramam
striyäù svasur gurumatyä vadho 'yaà
yaçaù çriyaà hanty anukälam äyuù
SYNONYMS
kim—what; adya—now, immediately; tasmin—in this situation; karaëéyam—is
to be done; äçu—without delay; me—my duty; yat—because;
artha-tantraù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is always
determined to protect the sädhus and kill the asädhus; na—does not;
vihanti—give up;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—His prowess; striyäù—of a woman; svasuù—of
my sister; guru-matyäù—especially when she is pregnant; vadhaù ayam—the
173
killing; yaçaù—fame; çriyam—opulence; hanti—will vanquish;
anukälam—forever; äyuù—and the duration of life.
TRANSLATION
Kaàsa thought: What is my duty now? The Supreme Lord, who knows His
purpose [pariträëäya sädhünäà vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm Bg. 4.8], will not give up
His prowess. Devaké is a woman, she is my sister, and moreover she is now
pregnant. If I kill her, my reputation, opulence and duration of life will
certainly be vanquished.
PURPORT
According to Vedic principles, a woman, a brähmaëa, an old man, a child
and a cow should never be killed. It appears that Kaàsa, although a great
enemy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, was aware of the Vedic culture
and conscious of the fact that the soul transmigrates from one body to another
and that one suffers in the next life according to the karmas of this life.
Therefore he was afraid of killing Devaké, since she was a woman, she was his
sister, and she was pregnant. A kñatriya becomes famous by performing heroic
acts. But what would be heroic about killing a woman who, while confined in
his custody, was under his shelter? Therefore, he did not want to act drastically
by killing Devaké. Kaàsa's enemy was within Devaké's womb, but killing an
enemy in such a nescient state would not be an exhibition of prowess.
According to kñatriya rules, an enemy should be fought face to face and with
proper weapons. Then if the enemy is killed, the victor becomes famous.
Kaàsa very conscientiously deliberated upon these facts and therefore
refrained from killing Devaké, although he was completely confident that his
enemy had already appeared within her womb.
TEXT 22
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
174
s$a WSa jaIvana, Kalau s$ampare"taAe
vataeRta yaAe'tyantana{zAMis$ataena
de"he" ma{tae taM manaujaA: zApainta
gAntaA tamaAe'nDaM tanaumaAinanaAe ‹auvama,
sa eña jévan khalu sampareto
varteta yo 'tyanta-nåçaàsitena
dehe måte taà manujäù çapanti
gantä tamo 'ndhaà tanu-mänino dhruvam
SYNONYMS
saù—he; eñaù—that jealous person; jévan—while living; khalu—even;
samparetaù—is dead; varteta—continues to live; yaù—anyone who;
atyanta—very much; nåçaàsitena—by executing cruel activities; dehe—when
the body; måte—is finished; tam—him; manujäù—all human beings;
çapanti—condemn; gantä—he will go; tamaù andham—to hellish life;
tanu-mäninaù—of a person in the bodily concept of life; dhruvam—without a
doubt.
TRANSLATION
A person who is very cruel is regarded as dead even while living, for while
he is living or after his death, everyone condemns him. And after the death of a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
known as Andhatama.
PURPORT
Kaàsa considered that if he killed his sister, while living he would be
condemned by everyone, and after death he would go to the darkest region of
175
hellish life because of his cruelty. It is said that a cruel person like a butcher is
advised not to live and not to die. While living, a cruel person creates a hellish
condition for his next birth, and therefore he should not live; but he is also
advised not to die, because after death he must go to the darkest region of hell.
Thus in either circumstance he is condemned. Kaàsa, therefore, having good
sense about the science of the soul's transmigration, deliberately refrained
from killing Devaké.
In this verse the words gantä tamo 'ndhaà tanu-mänino dhruvam are very
important and require extensive understanding. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, in his
Vaiñëava-toñaëé-öékä, says: tatra tanu-mäninaù päpina iti dehätma-buddhyaiva
päpäbhiniveço bhavati. One who lives in the bodily concept, thinking, "I am this
body," involves himself, by the very nature of this conception, in a life of sinful
activities. Anyone living in such a conception is to be considered a candidate
for hell.
adänta-gobhir viçatäà tamisraà
punaù punaç carvita-carvaëänäm
[SB 7.5.30]
One who is in a bodily concept of life has no control over sense
gratification. Such a person can do anything sinful to eat, drink, be merry and
enjoy a life of sense gratification, not knowing of the soul's transmigration
from one body to another. Such a person does whatever he likes, whatever he
imagines, and therefore, being subject to the laws of nature, he suffers
miserably again and again in different material bodies.
yävat kriyäs tävad idaà mano vai
karmätmakaà yena çaréra-bandhaù
(SB 5.5.5)
In the bodily concept of life, a person is karmänubandha, or conditioned by
karma, and as long as the mind is absorbed in karma, one must accept a
material body. Çaréra-bandha, bondage to the material body, is a source of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
176
misery (kleça-da).
na sädhu manye yata ätmano 'yam
asann api kleçada äsa dehaù
[SB 5.5.4]
Although the body is temporary, it always gives one trouble in many ways, but
human civilization is now unfortunately based on tanu-mäné, the bodily
concept of life, by which one thinks, "I belong to this nation," "I belong to this
group," "I belong to that group," and so on. Each of us has his own ideas, and we
are becoming increasingly involved, individually, socially, communally and
nationally, in the complexities of karmänubandha, sinful activities. For the
maintenance of the body, men are killing so many other bodies and becoming
implicated in karmänubandha. Therefore Çréla Jéva Gosvämé says that
tanu-mäné, those in the bodily concept of life, are päpé, sinful persons. For such
sinful persons, the ultimate destination is the darkest region of hellish life
(gantä tamo 'ndham). In particular, a person who wants to maintain his body
by killing animals is most sinful and cannot understand the value of spiritual
life. In Bhagavad-gétä (16.19-20) the Lord says:
tän ahaà dviñataù krürän
saàsäreñu narädhamän
kñipämy ajasram açubhän
äsuréñv eva yoniñu
äsuréà yonim äpannä
müòhä janmani janmani
mäm apräpyaiva kaunteya
tato yänty adhamäà gatim
"Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among men, are
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
of life. Attaining repeated birth among the species of demoniac life, such
177
persons can never approach Me. Gradually they sink down to the most
abominable type of existence." A human being is meant to understand the
value of human life, which is a boon obtained after many, many births.
Therefore one must free oneself from tanu-mäné, the bodily concept of life,
and realize the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 23
wita GaAer"tamaAà"AvaAta,
s$aiªava{Ôa: svayaM ‘aBau:
@Astae ‘ataIºaMstaÀanma
h"re"vaE=r"AnaubanDak{(ta,
iti ghoratamäd bhävät
sannivåttaù svayaà prabhuù
äste pratékñaàs taj-janma
harer vairänubandha-kåt
SYNONYMS
iti—thus (thinking in the above-mentioned way); ghora-tamät bhävät—from
the most ghastly contemplation of how to kill his sister;
sannivåttaù—refrained; svayam—personally deliberating; prabhuù—one who
was in full knowledge (Kaàsa); äste—remained; pratékñan—awaiting the
moment; tat-janma—until the birth of Him; hareù—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Hari; vaira-anubandha-kåt—determined to continue
such enmity.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
178
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Deliberating in this way, Kaàsa, although
determined to continue in enmity toward the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
refrained from the vicious killing of his sister. He decided to wait until the Lord
was born and then do what was needed.
TEXT 24
@As$aIna: s$aMivazAMistaï"na,
BauÃaAna: payaRq%nmah"Ima,
icantayaAnaAe ô$SaIke(zAma,
@pazyaÔanmayaM jagAta,
äsénaù saàviçaàs tiñöhan
bhuïjänaù paryaöan mahém
cintayäno håñékeçam
apaçyat tanmayaà jagat
SYNONYMS
äsénaù—while sitting comfortably in his sitting room or on the throne;
saàviçan—or lying on his bed; tiñöhan—or staying anywhere;
bhuïjänaù—while eating; paryaöan—while walking or moving; mahém—on the
ground, going hither and thither; cintayänaù—always inimically thinking of;
håñékeçam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the controller of everything;
apaçyat—observed; tat-mayam—consisting of Him (Kåñëa), and nothing more;
jagat—the entire world.
TRANSLATION
While sitting on his throne or in his sitting room, while lying on his bed, or,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
179
indeed, while situated anywhere, and while eating, sleeping or walking, Kaàsa
saw only his enemy, the Supreme Lord, Håñékeça. In other words, by thinking
of his all-pervading enemy, Kaàsa became unfavorably Kåñëa conscious.
PURPORT
Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé has described the finest pattern of devotional service as
änukülyena kåñëänuçélanam [Cc. Madhya 19.167], or cultivating Kåñëa
consciousness favorably. Kaàsa, of course, was also Kåñëa conscious, but
because he regarded Kåñëa as his enemy, even though he was fully absorbed in
Kåñëa consciousness, his Kåñëa consciousness was not favorable for his
existence. Kåñëa consciousness, favorably cultivated, makes one completely
happy, so much so that a Kåñëa conscious person does not consider
kaivalya-sukham, or merging into the existence of Kåñëa, to be a great gain.
Kaivalyaà narakäyate. For a Kåñëa conscious person, even merging into the
existence of Kåñëa, or Brahman, as impersonalists aspire to do, is
uncomfortable. Kaivalyaà narakäyate tridaça-pür äkäça-puñpäyate. Karmés
hanker to be promoted to the heavenly planets, but a Kåñëa conscious person
considers such promotion a will-o'-the-wisp, good for nothing.
Durdäntendriya-käla-sarpa-paöalé protkhäta-daàñöräyate. Yogés try to control
their senses and thus become happy, but a Kåñëa conscious person neglects the
methods of yoga. He is unconcerned with the greatest of enemies, the senses,
which are compared to snakes. For a Kåñëa conscious person who is cultivating
Kåñëa consciousness favorably, the happiness conceived by the karmés, jïänés
and yogés is treated as less than a fig. Kaàsa, however, because of cultivating
Kåñëa consciousness in a different way—that is, inimically—was
uncomfortable in all the affairs of his life; whether sitting, sleeping, walking or
eating, he was always in danger. This is the difference between a devotee and a
nondevotee. A nondevotee or atheist also cultivates God consciousness—by
trying to avoid God in everything. For example, so-called scientists who want
to create life by a combination of chemicals regard the external, material
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
180
parcel of the Supreme Lord. As clearly stated in Bhagavad-gétä (mamaiväàço
jéva-loke jéva-bhütaù [Bg. 15.7]), the living entities do not arise from a
combination of material elements, such as earth, water, air and fire, but are
separated portions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If one can
understand the position of the living entity as a separated portion of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, by studying the nature of the living entity
one can understand the nature of the Supreme Godhead, since the living
entity is a fragmental sample of the Godhead. But because atheists are not
interested in God consciousness, they try to be happy by cultivating Kåñëa
consciousness in various unfavorable ways.
Although Kaàsa was always absorbed in thoughts of Hari, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, he was not happy. A devotee, however, whether
sitting on a throne or beneath a tree, is always happy. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé
resigned from office as a government minister to sit beneath a tree, yet he was
happy. Tyaktvä türëam açeña-maëòalapati-çreëéà sadä tucchavat
(Ñaò-gosvämy-añöaka 4). He did not care for his comfortable position as
minister; he was happy even beneath a tree in Våndävana, favorably serving
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is the difference between a devotee
and a nondevotee. For a nondevotee, the world is full of problems, whereas for
a devotee the entire world is full of happiness.
viçvaà pürëa-sukhäyate vidhi-mahendrädiç ca kéöäyate
yat-käruëya-kaöäkña-vaibhavavatäà taà gauram eva stumaù
(Caitanya-candrämåta 95)
This comfortable position of a devotee can be established by the mercy of
Lord Caitanya Mahäprabhu. Yasmin sthito na duùkhena guruëäpi vicälyate (Bg.
6.22). Even when a devotee is superficially put into great difficulty, he is never
disturbed.
TEXT 25
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
181
“aöA Bavaê ta‡aEtya
mauinaiBanaARr"d"Aid"iBa:
de"vaE: s$aAnaucarE": s$aAkM(
gAIiBaRva{RSaNAmaEx"yana,
brahmä bhavaç ca tatraitya
munibhir näradädibhiù
devaiù sänucaraiù säkaà
gérbhir våñaëam aiòayan
SYNONYMS
brahmä—the supreme four-headed demigod; bhavaù ca—and Lord Çiva;
tatra—there; etya—arriving; munibhiù—accompanied by great sages;
närada-ädibhiù—by Närada and others; devaiù—and by demigods like Indra,
Candra and Varuëa; sa-anucaraiù—with their followers; säkam—all together;
gérbhiù—by their transcendental prayers; våñaëam—the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, who can bestow blessings upon everyone; aiòayan—pleased.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva, accompanied by great sages like Närada, Devala
and Vyäsa and by other demigods like Indra, Candra and Varuëa, invisibly
approached the room of Devaké, where they all joined in offering their
respectful obeisances and prayers to please the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who can bestow blessings upon everyone.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
PURPORT
Dvau bhüta-sargau loke 'smin daiva äsura eva ca [Bg. 16.6] (Padma Puräëa).
There are two classes of men—the daivas and the asuras—and there is a great
182
difference between them. Kaàsa, being an asura, was always planning how to
kill the Supreme Personality of Godhead or His mother, Devaké. Thus he was
also Kåñëa conscious. But devotees are Kåñëa conscious favorably
(viñëu-bhaktaù småto daivaù). Brahmä is so powerful that he is in charge of
creating an entire universe, yet he personally came to receive the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Bhava, Lord Çiva, is always jubilant in chanting the
holy name of the Lord. And what to speak of Närada? Närada-muni, bäjäya
véëä, rädhikä-ramaëa-näme. Närada Muni is always chanting the glories of the
Lord, and his engagement is to travel all over the universe and find a devotee
or make someone a devotee. Even a hunter was made a devotee by the grace of
Närada. Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé, in his Toñaëé, says that the word
närada-ädibhiù means that Närada and the demigods were accompanied by
other saintly persons, like Sanaka and Sanätana, all of whom came to
congratulate or welcome the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Even though
Kaàsa was planning to kill Devaké, he too awaited the arrival of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead (pratékñaàs taj janma).
TEXT 26
s$atya˜ataM s$atyaparM" i‡as$atyaM
s$atyasya yaAeinaM inaih"taM ca s$atyae
s$atyasya s$atyama{tas$atyanae‡aM
s$atyaAtmakM( tvaAM zAr"NAM ‘apaªaA:
satya-vrataà satya-paraà tri-satyaà
satyasya yonià nihitaà ca satye
satyasya satyam åta-satya-netraà
satyätmakaà tväà çaraëaà prapannäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
183
SYNONYMS
satya-vratam—the Personality of Godhead, who never deviates from His
vow*(1); satya-param—who is the Absolute Truth (as stated in the beginning
of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, satyaà paraà dhémahi); tri-satyam—He is always
present as the Absolute Truth, before the creation of this cosmic
manifestation, during its maintenance, and even after its annihilation;
satyasya—of all relative truths, which are emanations from the Absolute
Truth, Kåñëa; yonim—t;he cause; nihitam—entered*(2); ca—and; satye—in
the factors that create this material world (namely, the five elements-earth,
water, fire, air and ether); satyasya—of all that is accepted as the truth;
satyam—the Lord is the original truth; åta-satya-netram—He is the origin of
whatever truth is pleasing (sunetram); satya-ätmakam—everything pertaining
to the Lord is truth (sac-cid-änanda: His body is truth, His knowledge is truth,
and His pleasure is truth); tväm—unto you, O Lord; çaraëam—offering our
full surrender; prapannäù—we are completely under Your protection.
TRANSLATION
The demigods prayed: O Lord, You never deviate from Your vow, which is
always perfect because whatever You decide is perfectly correct and cannot be
stopped by anyone. Being present in the three phases of cosmic
manifestation-creation, maintenance and annihilation—You are the Supreme
Truth. Indeed, unless one is completely truthful, one cannot achieve Your
favor, which therefore cannot be achieved by hypocrites. You are the active
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
principle, the real truth, in all the ingredients of creation, and therefore you are
known as antaryämé, the inner force. You are equal to everyone, and Your
instructions apply for everyone, for all time. You are the beginning of all truth.
Therefore, offering our obeisances, we surrender unto You. Kindly give us
protection.
184
PURPORT
The demigods or devotees know perfectly well that the Supreme Personality
of Godhead is the true substance, whether within this material world or in the
spiritual world. Çrémad-Bhägavatam begins, therefore, with the words oà namo
bhagavate väsudeväya. .. satyaà paraà dhémahi [SB 1.1.1]. Väsudeva, Kåñëa, is
the paraà satyam, the Supreme Truth. The Supreme Truth can be approached
or understood by the supreme method, as declared by the Supreme Truth:
bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù (Bg. 18.55). Bhakti,
devotional service, is the only way to understand the Absolute Truth. For
protection, therefore, the demigods surrender to the Supreme Truth, not to
the relative truth. There are persons who worship various demigods, but the
Supreme Truth, Kåñëa, declares in Bhagavad-gétä (7.23), antavat tu phalaà
teñäà tad bhavaty alpa-medhasäm: "Men of small intelligence worship the
demigods, and their fruits are limited and temporary." Worship of demigods
may be useful for a limited time, but the result is antavat, perishable. This
material world is impermanent, the demigods are impermanent, and the
benedictions derived from the demigods are also impermanent, whereas the
living entity is eternal (nityo nityänäà cetanaç cetanänäm (Kaöha Upaniñad
2.2.13)). Every living entity, therefore, must search for eternal happiness, not
temporary happiness. The words satyaà paraà dhémahi [SB 1.1.1] indicate that
one should search for the Absolute Truth, not the relative truth.
While offering prayers to the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Nåsiàhadeva, Prahläda Mahäräja said:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
bälasya neha çaraëaà pitarau nåsiàha
närtasya cägadam udanvati majjato nauù
Generally it is understood that the protectors for a child are his parents, but
this is not actually the fact. The real protector is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
185
taptasya tat-pratividhir ya ihäïjaseñöas
tävad vibho tanu-bhåtäà tvad-upekñitänäm
(SB 7.9.19)
If neglected by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, a child, despite the
presence of his parents, will suffer, and a diseased person, despite all medical
help, will die. In this material world, where there is a struggle for existence,
men have invented many means for protection, but these are useless if the
Supreme Personality of Godhead rejects them. Therefore the demigods
purposefully say, satyätmakaà tväà çaraëaà prapannäù: "Real protection can
be obtained from You, O Lord, and therefore we surrender unto You,"
The Lord demands that one surrender unto Him (sarva-dharmän parityajya
mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja [Bg. 18.66]), and He further says:
sakåd eva prapanno yas
taväsméti ca yäcate
abhayaà sarvadä tasmai
dadämy etad vrataà mama
"If one surrenders unto Me sincerely, saying, 'My Lord, from this day I am fully
surrendered unto You,' I always give him protection. That is My vow."
(Rämäyaëa, Yuddha-käëòa 18.33) The demigods offered their prayers to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead because He had now appeared in the womb
of His devotee Devaké to protect all the devotees harassed by Kaàsa and his
lieutenants. Thus the Lord acts as satyavrata. The protection given by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead cannot be compared to the protection given
by the demigods. It is said that Rävaëa was a great devotee of Lord Çiva, but
when Lord Rämacandra went to kill him, Lord Çiva could not give him
protection.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva, accompanied by great sages like Närada and
followed by many other demigods, had now invisibly appeared in the house of
Kaàsa. They began to pray for the Supreme Personality of Godhead in select
186
prayers which are very pleasing to the devotees and which award fulfillment of
devotional desires. The first words they spoke acclaimed that the Lord is true
to His vow. As stated in the Bhagavad-gétä, Kåñëa descends upon this material
world just to protect the pious and destroy the impious. That is His vow. The
demigods could understand that the Lord had taken His residence within the
womb of Devaké to fulfill this vow. They were very glad that the Lord was
appearing to fulfill His mission, and they addressed Him as satyaà param, or
the Supreme Absolute Truth.
Everyone is searching after the truth. That is the philosophical way of life.
The demigods give information that the Supreme Absolute Truth is Kåñëa.
One who becomes fully Kåñëa conscious can attain the Absolute Truth. Kåñëa
is the Absolute Truth. Relative truth is not truth in all the three phases of
eternal time. Time is divided into past, present and future. Kåñëa is Truth
always, past, present and future. In the material world, everything is being
controlled by supreme time, in the course of past, present and future. But
before the creation, Kåñëa was existing, and when there is creation, everything
is resting in Kåñëa, and when this creation is finished, Kåñëa will remain.
Therefore, He is Absolute Truth in all circumstances, If there is any truth
within this material world, it emanates from the Supreme Truth, Kåñëa. If
there is any opulence within this material world, the cause of the opulence is
Kåñëa. If there is any reputation within this material world, the cause of the
reputation is Kåñëa. If there is any strength within this material world, the
cause of such strength is Kåñëa. If there is any wisdom and education within
this material world, the cause of such wisdom and education is Kåñëa.
Therefore Kåñëa is the source of all relative truths.
Devotees, therefore, following in the footsteps of Lord Brahmä, pray,
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi **, worshiping the ädi-puruña, the
supreme truth, Govinda. Everything, everywhere, is performed in terms of
three principles, jïäna-bala-kriyä—knowledge, strength and activity. In every
field, if there is not full knowledge, full strength and full activity, an endeavor
is never successful. Therefore, if one wants success in everything, one must be
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
187
backed by these three principles. In the Vedas (Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad 6.8)
there is this statement about the Supreme Personality of Godhead:
na tasya käryaà karaëaà ca vidyate
na tat samaç cäbhyadhikaç ca dåçyate
paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate
sväbhäviké jïäna-bala-kriyä ca
[Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]
The Supreme Personality of Godhead does not need to do anything personally,
for He has such potencies that anything He wants done will be done perfectly
well through the control of material nature (sväbhäviké jïäna-bala-kriyä ca).
Similarly, those who are engaged in the service of the Lord are not meant to
struggle for existence. The devotees who are fully engaged in spreading the
Kåñëa consciousness movement, more than ten thousand men and women all
over the world, have no steady or permanent occupation, yet we actually see
that they are maintained very opulently. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä
(9.22):
ananyäç cintayanto mäà
ye janäù paryupäsate
teñäà nityäbhiyuktänäà
yoga-kñemaà vahämy aham
"For those who worship Me with devotion, meditating on My transcendental
form, I carry to them what they lack and preserve what they have." The
devotees have no anxiety over what will happen next, where they will stay or
what they will eat, for everything is maintained and supplied by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who has promised, kaunteya pratijänéhi na me bhaktaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
"O son of Kunté, declare it boldly that My devotee never perishes."
(Bg. 9.31) From all angles of vision, therefore, in all circumstances, if one fully
surrenders unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, there is no question of
one's struggling for existence. In this connection, the commentary by Çrépäda
188
Madhväcärya, who quotes from the Tantra-bhägavata, is very meaningful:
sac-chadba uttamaà brüyäd
änandantéti vai vadet
yetijïänaà samuddiñöaà
pürëänanda-dåçis tataù
attåtväc ca tadä dänät
satyättya cocyate vibhuù
Explaining the words satyasya yonim, Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura
says that Kåñëa is the avatäré, the origin of all incarnations. All incarnations
are the Absolute Truth, yet the Supreme Personality of Godhead Kåñëa is the
origin of all incarnations. Dépärcir eva hi daçäntaram abhyupetya dépäyate (Bs.
5.46). There may be many lamps, all equal in power, yet there is a first lamp, a
second lamp, a third lamp and so on. Similarly, there are many incarnations,
who are compared to lamps, but the first lamp, the original Personality of
Godhead, is Kåñëa. Govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi **.
The demigods must offer worship in obedience to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, but one might argue that since the Supreme Godhead was within
the womb of Devaké, He was also coming in a material body. Why then should
He be worshiped? Why should one make a distinction between an ordinary
living entity and the Supreme Personality of Godhead? These questions are
answered in the following verses.
TEXT 27
Wk(AyanaAe's$aAE iã"P(laiñmaUlazA,
cataUr"s$a: paÂaivaDa: Sax"AtmaA
s$aæatvagAí"ivaq%paAe navaAºaAe
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
189
d"zAcC$d"I iã"KagAAe ÷Aid"va{ºa:
ekäyano 'sau dvi-phalas tri-mülaç
catü-rasaù païca-vidhaù ñaò-ätmä
sapta-tvag añöa-viöapo naväkño
daça-cchadé dvi-khago hy ädi-våkñaù
SYNONYMS
eka-ayanaù—the body of an ordinary living being is fully dependent on the
material elements; asau—that; dvi-phalaù—in this body we are subject to
material happiness and distress, which result from karma; tri-mülaù—having
three roots, the three modes of nature (goodness, passion and ignorance), upon
which the body is created; catuù-rasaù(3)-four rasas, or tastes;
païca-vidhaù—consisting of five senses for acquiring knowledge (the eyes,
ears, nose, tongue and touch); ñaö-ätmä—six circumstances (lamentation,
illusion, old age, death, hunger and thirst); sapta-tvak—having seven coverings
(skin, blood, muscle, fat, bone, marrow and semen); añöa-viöapaù—eight
branches (the five gross elements-earth, water, fire, air and ether-and also the
mind, intelligence and ego); nava-akñaù—nine holes; daça-chadé—ten kinds of
life air, resembling the leaves of a tree; dvi-khagaù—two birds (the individual
soul and the Supersoul); hi—indeed; ädi-våkñaù -this is the original tree or
construction of the material body, whether individu
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
TRANSLATION
The body [the total body and the individual body are of the same
composition] may figuratively be called "the original tree." From this tree,
which fully depends on the ground of material nature, come two kinds of
fruit—the enjoyment of happiness and the suffering of distress. The cause of
the tree, forming its three roots, is association with the three modes of material
nature—goodness, passion and ignorance. The fruits of bodily happiness have
190
four tastes—religiosity, economic development, sense gratification and
liberation—which are experienced through five senses for acquiring knowledge
in the midst of six circumstances: lamentation, illusion, old age, death, hunger
and thirst. The seven layers of bark covering the tree are skin, blood, muscle,
fat, bone, marrow and semen, and the eight branches of the tree are the five
gross and three subtle elements—earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind,
intelligence and false ego. The tree of the body has nine hollows—the eyes, the
ears, the nostrils, the mouth, the rectum and the genitals—and ten leaves, the
ten airs passing through the body. In this tree of the body there are two birds:
one is the individual soul, and the other is the Supersoul.
PURPORT
This material world is composed of five principal elements—earth, water,
fire, air and ether—all of which are emanations from Kåñëa. Although
materialistic scientists may accept these five primary elements as the cause of
the material manifestation, these elements in their gross and subtle states are
produced by Kåñëa, whose marginal potency also produces the living entities
working within this material world. The Seventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä
clearly states that the entire cosmic manifestation is a combination of two of
Kåñëa's energies—the superior energy and the inferior energy. The living
entities are the superior energy, and the inanimate material elements are His
inferior energy. In the dormant stage, everything rests in Kåñëa.
Material scientists cannot give such a thorough analysis of the material
structure of the body. The analysis of the material scientists concerns itself
only with inanimate matter, but this is inadequate because the living entity is
completely separate from the material bodily structure. In Bhagavad-gétä (7.5)
the Lord says:
apareyam itas tv anyäà
prakåtià viddhi me paräm
jéva-bhütäà mahä-bäho
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
191
yayedaà dhäryate jagat
"Besides this inferior nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is a superior
energy of Mine, which consists of all the living entities who are struggling with
material nature and are sustaining the universe." Although the material
elements emanate from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, they are
separated elements and are sustained by the living elements.
As indicated by the word dvi-khagaù, the living elements within the body
resemble two birds in a tree. Kha means "sky," and ga means "one who flies."
Thus the word dvi-khagaù refers to birds. In the tree of the body there are two
birds, or two living elements, and they are always different. In Bhagavad-gétä
(13.3), the Lord says, kñetra-jïaà cäpi mäà viddhi sarva-kñetreñu bhärata: "O
scion of Bharata, you should understand that I am also the knower in all
bodies." The kñetra jïa, the owner of the body, is also called the khaga, the
living entity. Within the body there are two such kñetra jïas—the individual
soul and the Supersoul. The individual soul is the owner of his individual body,
but the Supersoul is present within the bodies of all living entities. Such a
thorough analysis and understanding of the bodily structure cannot be
obtained anywhere but in the Vedic literature.
When two birds enter a tree, one may foolishly think that the birds become
one or merge with the tree, but actually they do not. Rather, each bird keeps
its individual identity. Similarly, the individual soul and the Supersoul do not
become one, nor do they merge with matter. The living entity lives close to
matter, but this does not mean that he merges or mixes with it (asaìgo hy ayaà
puruñaù), although material scientists mistakenly see the organic and
inorganic, or animate and inanimate, to be mixed.
Vedic knowledge has been kept imprisoned or concealed, but every human
being needs to understand it in truth. The modern civilization of ignorance is
simply engaged in analyzing the body, and thus people come to the erroneous
conclusion that the living force within the body is generated under certain
material conditions. People have no information of the soul, but this verse
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
192
gives the perfect explanation that there are two living forces (dvi-khaga): the
individual soul and the Supersoul. The Supersoul is present in every body
(éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati [Bg. 18.61]), whereas the
individual soul is situated only in his own body (dehé) and is transmigrating
from one body to another.
TEXT 28
tvamaek( WvaAsya s$ata: ‘as$aUitas$a,
tvaM s$aiªaDaAnaM tvamanauƒah"ê
tvanmaAyayaA s$aMva{tacaetas$astvaAM
pazyainta naAnaA na ivapaiêtaAe yae
tvam eka eväsya sataù prasütis
tvaà sannidhänaà tvam anugrahaç ca
tvan-mäyayä saàvåta-cetasas tväà
paçyanti nänä na vipaçcito ye
SYNONYMS
tvam—You (O Lord); ekaù—being one without a second, You are everything;
eva—indeed; asya sataù—of this cosmic manifestation now visible;
prasütiù—the original source; tvam—Your Lordship; sannidhänam—the
conservation of all such energy when everything is annihilated; tvam—Your
Lordship; anugrahaù ca—and the maintainer; tvat-mäyayä—by Your illusory,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
external energy; saàvåta-cetasaù—those whose intelligence is covered by such
illusory energy; tväm—unto You; paçyanti—observe; nänä—many varieties;
na—not; vipaçcitaù—learned scholars or devotees; ye—who are.
193
TRANSLATION
The efficient cause of this material world, manifested with its many varieties
as the original tree, is You, O Lord. You are also the maintainer of this material
world, and after annihilation You are the one in whom everything is conserved.
Those who are covered by Your external energy cannot see You behind this
manifestation, but theirs is not the vision of learned devotees.
PURPORT
Various demigods, beginning from Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva and even Viñëu,
are supposed to be the creator, maintainer and annihilator of this material
world, but actually they are not. The fact is that everything is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, manifested in varieties of energy. Ekam evädvitéyaà
brahma. There is no second existence. Those who are truly vipaçcit, learned,
are those who have reached the platform of understanding and observing the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in any condition of life.
premäïjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaù sadaiva hådayeñu vilokayanti (Bs.
5.38). Learned devotees accept even conditions of distress as representing the
presence of the Supreme Lord. When a devotee is in distress, he sees that the
Lord has appeared as distress just to relieve or purify the devotee from the
contamination of the material world. While one is within this material world,
one is in various conditions, and therefore a devotee sees a condition of
distress as but another feature of the Lord. Tat te'nukampäà susamékñamäëaù
(SB 10.14.8). A devotee, therefore, regards distress as a great favor of the Lord
because he understands that he is being cleansed of contamination. Teñäm
ahaà samuddhartä måtyu-saàsära-sägarät (Bg. 12.7). The appearance of
distress is a negative process intended to give the devotee relief from this
material world, which is called måtyu-saàsära, or the constant repetition of
birth and death. To save a surrendered soul from repeated birth and death, the
Lord purifies him of contamination by offering him a little distress. This
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
194
cannot be understood by a nondevotee, but a devotee can see this because he is
vipaçcit, or learned. A nondevotee, therefore, is perturbed in distress, but a
devotee welcomes distress as another feature of the Lord. Sarvaà khalv idaà
brahma. A devotee can actually see that there is only the Supreme Personality
of Godhead and no second entity. Ekam evädvitéyam. There is only the Lord,
who presents Himself in different energies.
Persons who are not in real knowledge think that Brahmä is the creator,
Viñëu the maintainer and Çiva the annihilator and that the different demigods
are intended to fulfill diverse purposes. Thus they create diverse purposes and
worship various demigods to have these purposes fulfilled (kämais tais tair håta
jïänäù prapadyante 'nya-devatäù [Bg. 7.20]). A devotee, however, knows that
these various demigods are but different parts of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and that these parts need not be worshiped. As the Lord says in
Bhagavad-gétä (9.23):
ye 'py anya-devatä bhaktä
yajante çraddhayänvitäù
te 'pi mäm eva kaunteya
yajanty avidhi-pürvakam
"Whatever a man may sacrifice to other gods, O son of Kunté, is really meant
for Me alone, but it is offered without true understanding." There is no need to
worship the demigods, for this is avidhi, not in order. Simply by surrendering
oneself at the lotus feet of Kåñëa, one can completely discharge one's duties;
there is no need to worship various deities or demigods. These various
divinities are observed by the müòhas, fools, who are bewildered by the three
modes of material nature (tribhir guëamayair bhävair ebhiù sarvam idaà jagat).
Such fools cannot understand that the real source of everything is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead (mohitaà näbhijänäti mäm ebhyaù param
avyayam [Bg. 7.13]). Not being disturbed by the Lord's various features, one
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
should concentrate upon and worship the Supreme Lord (mäm ekaà çaraëaà
vraja). This should be the guiding principle of one's life.
195
TEXT 29
ibaBaiSaR è&paANyavabaAeDa @AtmaA
ºaemaAya laAek(sya car"Acar"sya
s$aÔvaAepapaªaAina s$auKaAvah"Aina
s$ataAmaBa‰"AiNA mauò": KalaAnaAma,
bibharñi rüpäëy avabodha ätmä
kñemäya lokasya caräcarasya
sattvopapannäni sukhävahäni
satäm abhadräëi muhuù khalänäm
SYNONYMS
bibharñi—You accept; rüpäëi—varieties of forms, such as Matsya, Kürma,
Varäha, Räma and Nåsiàha; avabodhaù ätmä—in spite of having different
incarnations, You remain the Supreme, full of knowledge; kñemäya—for the
benefit of everyone, and especially the devotees; lokasya—of all living entities;
cara-acarasya—moving and nonmoving; sattva-upapannäni—all such
incarnations are transcendental (çuddha-sattva); sukha-avahäni—full of
transcendental bliss; satäm—of the devotees; abhadräëi—all inauspiciousness
or annihilation; muhuù—again and again; khalänäm—of the nondevotees.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, You are always in full knowledge, and to bring all good fortune to all
living entities, You appear in different incarnations, all of them transcendental
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
to the material creation. When You appear in these incarnations, You are
pleasing to the pious and religious devotees, but for nondevotees You are the
196
annihilator.
PURPORT
This verse explains why the Supreme Personality of Godhead appears as an
incarnation again and again. The incarnations of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead all function differently, but their main purpose is pariträëäya
sädhünäà vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm [Bg. 4.8]—to protect the devotees and
annihilate the miscreants. Yet even though the duñkåtés, or miscreants, are
annihilated, this is ultimately good for them.
TEXT 30
tvayyambaujaAºaAiKalas$aÔvaDaAi°a
s$amaAiDanaAvaeizAtacaetas$aEke(
tvatpaAd"paAetaena mah"tk{(taena
ku(vaRinta gAAevats$apadM" BavaAibDama,
tvayy ambujäkñäkhila-sattva-dhämni
samädhinäveçita-cetasaike
tvat-päda-potena mahat-kåtena
kurvanti govatsa-padaà bhaväbdhim
SYNONYMS
tvayi—in You; ambuja-akña—O lotus-eyed Lord; akhila-sattva-dhämni—who
are the original cause of all existence, from whom everything emanates and in
whom all potencies reside; samädhinä—by constant meditation and complete
absorption (in thoughts of You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead);
äveçita—fully absorbed, fully engaged; cetasä—but by such a mentality;
eke—the one process of always thinking of Your lotus feet;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
197
tvat-päda-potena—by boarding such a boat as Your lotus feet;
mahat-kåtena—by that action which is considered the most powerful original
existence or which is executed by mahäjanas; kurvanti—they make;
govatsa-padam—like the hoofprint of a calf; bhava-abdhim—the great ocean of
nescience.
TRANSLATION
O lotus-eyed Lord, by concentrating one's meditation on Your lotus feet,
which are the reservoir of all existence, and by accepting those lotus feet as the
boat by which to cross the ocean of nescience, one follows in the footsteps of
mahäjanas [great saints, sages and devotees]. By this simple process, one can
cross the ocean of nescience as easily as one steps over the hoofprint of a calf.
PURPORT
The true mission in life is to cross the ocean of nescience, of repeated birth
and death. Those in the darkness of ignorance, however, do not know this
mission. Instead, being carried away by the waves of material nature (prakåteù
kriyamäëäni guëaiù karmäëi sarvaçaù [Bg. 3.27]), they are undergoing the
tribulations of måtyu-saàsära-vartmani [Bg. 9.3], repeated birth and death. But
persons who have achieved knowledge by the association of devotees follow
the mahäjanas (mahat-kåtena). Such a person always concentrates his mind
upon the lotus feet of the Lord and executes one or more of the nine varieties
of devotional service (çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù smaraëaà päda-sevanam [SB
7.5.23]). Simply by this process, one can cross the insurmountable ocean of
nescience.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Devotional service is powerful in any form. Çré-viñëoù çravaëe parékñid
abhavad vaiyäsakiù kértane (Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.2.265). According to this
verse, Mahäräja Parékñit became liberated by fully concentrating his mind on
hearing the Lord's holy name, attributes and pastimes. Similarly, Çukadeva
Gosvämé simply glorified the Lord, and by speaking on the subject matters of
198
Kåñëa that constitute the entire Çrémad-Bhägavatam, he too was liberated. One
may also be liberated simply by sakhya, friendly behavior with the Lord. Such
is the power of devotional service, as we learn from the examples set by the
Lord's many pure devotees.
svayambhür näradaù çambhuù
kumäraù kapilo manuù
prahlädo janako bhéñmo
balir vaiyäsakir vayam
[SB 6.3.20]
We have to follow in the footsteps of such devotees, for by this one easy
process one can cross the great ocean of nescience just as one might cross a
small hole created by the hoof of a calf.
Here the Lord is described as ambujäkña, or lotus-eyed. By seeing the eyes of
the Lord, which are compared to lotus flowers, one becomes so satisfied that
one does not want to turn his eyes to anything else. Simply by seeing the
transcendental form of the Lord, a devotee is at once fully absorbed in the
Lord in his heart. This absorption is called samädhi. Dhyänävasthita-tad-gatena
manasä paçyanti yaà yoginaù (SB 12.13.1). A yogé is fully absorbed in thoughts
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for he has no other business than to
think of the Lord always within the heart. It is also said:
samäçritä ye pada-pallava-plavaà
mahat-padaà puëya-yaço muräreù
bhavämbudhir vatsa-padaà paraà padaà
padaà padaà yad vipadäà na teñäm
"For one who has accepted the boat of the lotus feet of the Lord, who is the
shelter of the cosmic manifestation and is famous as Muräri, the enemy of the
demon Mura, the ocean of the material world is like the water contained in a
calf's hoofprint. His go
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
paraà padam, or Vaikuëöha, the place where there
are no material miseries, not the place where there is danger at every step." (SB
199
10.14.58) This process is recommended here by authorities like Lord Brahmä
and Lord Çiva (svayambhür näradaù çambhuù [SB 6.3.20]), and therefore we
must take to this process in order to transcend nescience. This is very easy, but
we must follow in the footsteps of great personalities, and then success will be
possible.
In regard to the word mahat-kåtena, it is also significant that the process
shown by great devotees is not only for them but also for others. If things are
made easy, this affords facility for the person who has made them easy and also
for others who follow the same principles. The process recommended in this
verse for crossing the ocean of nescience is easy not only for the devotee but
also for common persons who follow the devotee (mahäjano yena gataù sa
panthäù [Cc. Madhya 17.186]).
TEXT 31
svayaM s$amauÔaIyaR s$auäu"starM" âumana,
BavaANARvaM BaImamad"”as$aAEô$d"A:
Bavatpad"AmBaAeç&h"naAvama‡a tae
inaDaAya yaAtaA: s$ad"nauƒah"Ae BavaAna,
svayaà samuttérya sudustaraà dyuman
bhavärëavaà bhémam adabhra-sauhådäù
bhavat-padämbhoruha-nävam atra te
nidhäya yätäù sad-anugraho bhavän
SYNONYMS
svayam—personally; samuttérya—perfectly crossing; su-dustaram—which is
very difficult to cross; dyuman—O Lord, who appear exactly like the sun,
illuminating the darkness of this world of ignorance; bhava-arëavam—the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
200
ocean of nescience; bhémam—which is extremely fierce;
adabhra-sauhådäù—devotees who are incessantly friendly to the fallen souls;
bhavat-pada-ambhoruha—Your lotus feet; nävam—the boat for crossing;
atra—in this world; te—they (the Vaiñëavas); nidhäya—leaving behind;
yätäù—on to the ultimate destination, Vaikuëöha; sat-anugrahaù—who are
always kind and merciful to the devotees; bhavän—You.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, who resemble the shining sun, You are always ready to fulfill the
desire of Your devotee, and therefore You are known as a desire tree
[väïchä-kalpataru]. When äcäryas completely take shelter under Your lotus feet
in order to cross the fierce ocean of nescience, they leave behind on earth the
method by which they cross, and because You are very merciful to Your other
devotees, You accept this method to help them.
PURPORT
This statement reveals how the merciful äcäryas and the merciful Supreme
Personality of Godhead together help the serious devotee who wants to return
home, back to Godhead. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, in His teachings to Rüpa
Gosvämé, said:
brahmäëòa bhramite kona bhägyavän jéva
guru-kåñëa-prasäde päya bhakti-latä-béja
(Cc. Madhya 19.151)
One can achieve the seed of bhakti-latä, devotional service, by the mercy of
guru and Kåñëa. The duty of the guru is to find the means, according to the
time, the circumstances and the candidate, by which one can be induced to
render devotional service, which Kåñëa accepts from a candidate who wants to
be successful in going back home, back to Godhead. After wandering
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
201
throughout the universe, a fortunate person within this material world seeks
shelter of such a guru, or äcärya, who trains the devotee in the suitable ways to
render service according to the circumstances so that the Supreme Personality
of Godhead will accept the service. This makes it easier for the candidate to
reach the ultimate destination. The äcärya's duty, therefore, is to find the
means by which devotees may render service according to references from
çästra. Rüpa Gosvämé, for example, in order to help subsequent devotees,
published such devotional books as Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu. Thus it is the duty
of the äcärya to publish books that will help future candidates take up the
method of service and become eligible to return home, back to Godhead, by
the mercy of the Lord. In our Kåñëa consciousness movement, this same path is
being prescribed and followed. Thus the devotees have been advised to refrain
from four sinful activities—illicit sex, intoxication, meat-eating and
gambling—and to chant sixteen rounds a day. These are bona fide
instructions. Because in the Western countries constant chanting is not
possible, one should not artificially imitate Haridäsa Öhäkura, but should
follow this method. Kåñëa will accept a devotee who strictly follows the
regulative principles and the method prescribed in the various books and
literatures published by the authorities. The äcärya gives the suitable method
for crossing the ocean of nescience by accepting the boat of the Lord's lotus
feet, and if this method is strictly followed, the followers will ultimately reach
the destination, by the grace of the Lord. This method is called
äcärya-sampradäya. It is therefore said, sampradäya-vihénä ye manträs te
niñphalä matäù (Padma Puräëa). The äcärya-sampradäya is strictly bona fide.
Therefore one must accept the äcärya-sampradäya; otherwise one's endeavor
will be futile. Çréla Narottama däsa Öhäkura therefore sings:
täìdera caraëa sevi bhakta sane väsa
janame janame haya, ei abhiläña
One must worship the lotus feet of the äcärya and live within the society of
devotees. Then one's endeavor to cross over nescience will surely be successful.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
202
TEXT 32
yae'nyae'r"ivand"Aºa ivamaul(maAinanas$a,
tvayyastaBaAvaAd"ivazAuÜ"bauÜ"ya:
@Aç&÷ k{(cC)e$NA parM" padM" tata:
patantyaDaAe'naAä{"tayauSmad"x.~„aya:
ye 'nye 'ravindäkña vimukta-mäninas
tvayy asta-bhäväd aviçuddha-buddhayaù
äruhya kåcchreëa paraà padaà tataù
patanty adho 'nädåta-yuñmad-aìghrayaù
SYNONYMS
ye anye—anyone, or all others; aravinda-akña—O lotus-eyed one;
vimukta-mäninaù—falsely considering themselves free from the bondage of
material contamination; tvayi—unto You; asta-bhävät—speculating in various
ways but not knowing or desiring more information of Your lotus feet;
aviçuddha-buddhayaù—whose intelligence is still not purified and who do not
know the goal of life; äruhya—even though achieving; kåcchreëa—by
undergoing severe austerities, penances and hard labor; param padam—the
highest position (according to their imagination and speculation); tataù—from
that position; patanti—they fall; adhaù—down into material existence again;
anädåta—neglecting devotion to; yuñmat—Your; aìghrayaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
[Someone may say that aside from devotees, who always seek shelter at the
Lord's lotus feet, there are those who are not devotees but who have accepted
different processes for attaining salvation. What happens to them? In answer to
203
this question, Lord Brahmä and the other demigods said:] O lotus-eyed Lord,
although nondevotees who accept severe austerities and penances to achieve the
highest position may think themselves liberated, their intelligence is impure.
They fall down from their position of imagined superiority because they have
no regard for Your lotus feet.
PURPORT
Aside from devotees, there are many others, nondevotees, known as karmés,
jïänés or yogés, philanthropists, altruists, politicians, impersonalists and
voidists. There are many varieties of nondevotees who have their respective
ways of liberation, but simply because they do not know the shelter of the
Lord's lotus feet, although they falsely think that they have been liberated and
elevated to the highest position, they fall down. As clearly stated by the Lord
Himself in Bhagavad-gétä (9.3):
açraddadhänäù puruñä
dharmasyäsya parantapa
apräpya mäà nivartante
måtyu-saàsära-vartmani
"Those who are not faithful on the path of devotional service cannot attain
Me, O conqueror of foes, but return to birth and death in this material world."
It doesn't matter whether one is a karmé, jïäné, yogé, philanthropist, politician
or whatever; if one has no love for the lotus feet of the Lord, one falls down.
That is the verdict given by Lord Brahmä in this verse.
There are persons who advocate accepting any process and who say that
whatever process one accepts will lead to the same goal, but that is refuted in
this verse, where such persons are referred to as vimukta-mäninaù, signifying
that although they think they have attained the highest perfection, in fact
they have not. In the present day, big, big politicians all over the world think
that by scheming they can occupy the highest political post, that of president
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
204
or prime minister, but we actually see that even in this life such big prime
ministers, presidents and other politicians, because of being nondevotees, fall
down (patanty adhaù). To become president or prime minister is not easy; one
must work very hard (äruhya kåcchreëa) to achieve the post. And even though
one may reach his goal, at any moment one may be kicked down by material
nature. In human society there have been many instances in which great,
exalted politicians have fallen from government and become lost in historical
oblivion. The cause of this is aviçuddha-buddhayaù: [SB 10.2.32] their
intelligence is impure. The çästra says, na te viduù svärtha-gatià hi viñëum (SB
7.5.31). One achieves the perfection of life by becoming a devotee of Viñëu,
but people do not know this. Therefore, as stated in Bhagavad-gétä (12.5), kleço
'dhikataras teñäm avyaktäsakta-cetasäm. Persons who do not ultimately accept
the Supreme Personality of Godhead and take to devotional service, but who
instead are attached to impersonalism and voidism, must undergo great labor
to achieve their goals.
çreyaù-såtià bhaktim udasya te vibho
kliçyanti ye kevala-bodha-labdhaye
(SB 10.14.4)
To achieve understanding, such persons work very hard and undergo severe
austerities, but their hard labor and austerities themselves are their only
achievement, for they do not actually achieve the real goal of life.
Dhruva Mahäräja at first wanted to achieve the greatest material kingdom
and greater material possessions than his father, but when he was actually
favored by the Lord, who appeared before him to give him the benediction he
desired, Dhruva Mahäräja refused it, saying, svämin kåtärtho'smi varaà na
yäce: [Cc. Madhya 22.42] "Now I am fully satisfied. I do not want any material
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
benediction." (Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya 7.28) This is the perfection of life. Yaà
labdhvä cäparaà läbhaà manyate nädhikaà tataù (Bg. 6.22). If one achieves
the shelter of the Lord's lotus feet, one is fully satisfied and does not need to
ask for any material benediction.
205
At night, no one can see a lotus, for lotuses blossom only during the
daytime. Therefore the word aravindäkña is significant. One who is not
captivated by the lotus eyes or transcendental form of the Supreme Lord is in
darkness, exactly like one who cannot see a lotus. One who has not come to
the point of seeing the lotus eyes and transcendental form of Çyämasundara is
a failure. premäïjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaù sadaiva hådayeñu
vilokayanti [Bs. 5.38]. Those who are attached to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in love always see the Lord's lotus eyes and lotus feet, whereas others
cannot see the Lord's beauty and are therefore classified as
anädåta-yuñmad-aìghrayaù, or neglectful of the Lord's personal form. Those
who neglect the Lord's form are surely failures on every path in life, but if one
develops even a little love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one is
liberated without difficulty (svalpam apy asya dharmasya träyate mahato
bhayät). Therefore the Supreme Personality of Godhead recommends in
Bhagavad-gétä (9.34), man-manä bhava mad-bhakto mad-yäjé mäà namaskuru:
[Bg. 18.65] "Simply think of Me, become My devotee, worship Me and offer
some slight homage to Me." Simply by this process, one is guaranteed to return
home, back to Godhead, and thus attain the highest perfection. The Lord
further affirms in Bhagavad-gétä (18.54-55):
brahma-bhütaù prasannätmä
na çocati na käìkñati
samaù sarveñu bhüteñu
mad-bhaktià labhate paräm
bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti
yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù
tato mäà tattvato jïätvä
viçate tad-anantaram
"One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme
Brahman and becomes fully joyful. He never laments nor desires to have
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
206
anything; he is equally disposed to every living entity. In that state he attains
pure devotional service unto Me. One can understand the Supreme
Personality as He is only by devotional service. And when one is in full
consciousness of the Supreme Lord by such devotion, he can enter into the
kingdom of God."
TEXT 33
taTaA na tae maADava taAvak(A: ¸(icaä,"
”azyainta maAgAARÔvaiya baÜ"s$aAEô$d"A:
tvayaAiBagAuæaA ivacar"inta inaBaRyaA
ivanaAyak(AnaIk(pamaUDaRs$au ‘aBaAe
tathä na te mädhava tävakäù kvacid
bhraçyanti märgät tvayi baddha-sauhådäù
tvayäbhiguptä vicaranti nirbhayä
vinäyakänékapa-mürdhasu prabho
SYNONYMS
tathä—like them (the nondevotees); na—not; te—they (the devotees);
mädhava—O Lord, husband of the goddess of fortune; tävakäù—the followers
of the devotional path, the devotees; kvacit—in any circumstances;
bhraçyanti—fall down; märgät—from the path of devotional service;
tvayi—unto You; baddha-sauhådäù—because of being fully attached to Your
lotus feet; tvayä—by You; abhiguptäù—always protected from all dangers;
vicaranti—they move; nirbhayäù—without fear; vinäyaka-anékapa—the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
enemies who maintain paraphernalia to oppose the bhakti cult; mürdhasu—on
their heads; prabho—O Lord.
207
TRANSLATION
O Mädhava, Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord of the goddess of
fortune, if devotees completely in love with You sometimes fall from the path of
devotion, they do not fall like nondevotees, for You still protect them. Thus
they fearlessly traverse the heads of their opponents and continue to progress in
devotional service.
PURPORT
Devotees generally do not fall down, but if circumstantially they do, the
Lord, because of their strong attachment to Him, gives them protection in all
circumstances. Thus even if devotees fall down, they are still strong enough to
traverse the heads of their enemies. We have actually seen that our Kåñëa
consciousness movement has many opponents, such as the "deprogrammers,"
who instituted a strong legal case against the devotees. We thought that this
case would take a long time to settle, but because the devotees were protected
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, we unexpectedly won the case in one
day. Thus a case that was expected to continue for years was settled in a day
because of the protection of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who has
promised in Bhagavad-gétä (9.31), kaunteya pratijänéhi na me bhaktaù
praëaçyati: "O son of Kunté, declare it boldly that My devotee never perishes."
In history there are many instances of devotees like Citraketu, Indradyumna
and Mahäräja Bharata who circumstantially fell down but were still protected.
Mahäräja Bharata, for example, because of his attachment to a deer, thought of
the deer at the time of death, and therefore in his next life he became a deer
(yaà yaà väpi smaran bhävaà tyajaty ante kalevaram [Bg. 8.6]). Because of
protection by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, however, the deer
remembered his relationship with the Lord and next took birth in a good
brahminical family and performed devotional service (çucénäà çrématäà gehe
yoga-bhrañöo 'bhijäyate [Bg. 6.41]). Similarly, Citraketu fell down and became a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
208
demon, Våträsura, but he too was protected. Thus even if one falls down from
the path of bhakti-yoga, one is ultimately saved. If a devotee is strongly situated
in devotional service, the Supreme Personality of Godhead has promised to
protect him (kaunteya pratijänéhi na me bhaktaù praëaçyati [Bg. 9.31]). But even
if a devotee circumstantially falls down, he is protected by Mädhava.
The word Mädhava is significant. Mä, mother Lakñmé, the mother of all
opulences, is always with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and if a
devotee is in touch with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, all the
opulences of the Lord are ready to help him.
yatra yogeçvaraù kåñëo
yatra pärtho dhanur-dharaù
tatra çrér vijayo bhütir
dhruvä nétir matir mama
(Bg. 18.78)
Wherever there is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, and His
devotee Arjuna, Pärtha, there is victory, opulence, extraordinary power and
morality. The opulences of a devotee are not a result of karma-käëòa-vicära. A
devotee is always protected by all of the Supreme Lord's opulences, of which
no one can deprive him (teñäà nityäbhiyuktänäà yoga-kñemaà vahämy aham
[Bg. 9.22]). Thus a devotee cannot be defeated by any opponents. A devotee,
therefore, should not deviate knowingly from the path of devotion. The
adherent devotee is assured all protection from the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
TEXT 34
s$aÔvaM ivazAuÜM" ™ayatae BavaAna, isTataAE
zAr"Iir"NAAM ™aeyaopaAyanaM vapau:
vaed"i‚(yaAyaAegAtapa:s$amaAiDaiBas$a,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
209
tavaAhR"NAM yaena jana: s$amaIh"tae
sattvaà viçuddhaà çrayate bhavän sthitau
çarériëäà çreya-upäyanaà vapuù
veda-kriyä-yoga-tapaù-samädhibhis
tavärhaëaà yena janaù saméhate
SYNONYMS
sattvam—existence; viçuddham—transcendental, beyond the three modes of
material nature; çrayate—accepts; bhavän—Your Lordship; sthitau—during
the maintenance of this material world; çarériëäm—of all living entities;
çreyaù—of supreme auspiciousness; upäyanam—for the benefit; vapuù—a
transcendental form or body; veda-kriyä—by ritualistic ceremonies according
to the directions of the Vedas; yoga—by practice of devotion; tapaù—by
austerities; samädhibhiù—by becoming absorbed in transcendental existence;
tava—Your; arhaëam—worship; yena—by such activities; janaù—human
society; saméhate—offers (its obligation unto You).
TRANSLATION
O Lord, during the time of maintenance You manifest several incarnations,
all with transcendental bodies, beyond the material modes of nature. When You
appear in this way, You bestow all good fortune upon the living entities by
teaching them to perform Vedic activities such as ritualistic ceremonies, mystic
yoga, austerities, penances, and ultimately samädhi, ecstatic absorption in
thoughts of You. Thus You are worshiped by the Vedic principles.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (18.3
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
yajïa-däna-tapaù-karma na tyäjyam: the
Vedic ritualistic ceremonies, charity, austerity and all such prescribed duties
210
are never to be given up. Yajïo dänaà tapaç caiva pävanäni manéñiëäm (18.5):
even one who is very much advanced in spiritual realization must still execute
the Vedic principles. Even in the lowest stage, the karmés are advised to work
for the sake of the Lord.
yajïärthät karmaëo 'nyatra
loko 'yaà karma-bandhanaù
"Work done as a sacrifice for Viñëu has to be performed, otherwise work binds
one to this material world." (Bg. 3.9) The words yajïärthät karmaëaù indicate
that while performing all kinds of duties, one should remember that these
duties should be performed to satisfy the Supreme Lord (sva-karmaëä tam
abhyarcya [Bg. 18.46]). According to Vedic principles, there must be divisions
of human society (cätur-varëyaà mayä såñöam [Bg. 4.13]). There should be
brähmaëas, kñatriyas, vaiçyas and çüdras, and everyone should learn to worship
the Supreme Personality of Godhead (tam abhyarcya). This is real human
society, and without this system we are left with animal society.
The modern activities of human society are described in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam as the activities of go-khara, cows and asses (sa eva
go-kharaù [SB 10.84.13]). Everyone is acting in a bodily concept of life
involving society, friendship and love for the improvement of economic and
political conditions, and thus all activities are enacted in ignorance. The
Supreme Personality therefore comes to teach us how to act according to the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Vedic principles. In this age of Kali, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
appeared as Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu and preached that in this age the Vedic
activities cannot be systematically performed because people are so fallen. He
gave this recommendation from the çästras:
harer näma harer näma
harer nämaiva kevalam
kalau nästy eva nästy eva
nästy eva gatir anyathä
211
[Cc. Ädi 17.21]
"In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance is chanting
the holy name of the Lord. There is no other way. There is no other way.
There is no other way." The Kåñëa consciousness movement is therefore
teaching people all over the world how to chant the Hare Kåñëa mantra, and
this has proved very much effective in all places at all times. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead appears in order to teach us Vedic principles intended
for understanding Him (vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva vedyaù [Bg. 15.15]). We
should always know that when Kåñëa and Lord Caitanya appeared, They
appeared in çuddha-sattva bodies. One should not mistake the body of Kåñëa or
Caitanya Mahäprabhu to be a material body like ours, for Kåñëa and Caitanya
Mahäprabhu appeared as needed for the benefit of the entire human society.
Out of causeless mercy, the Lord appears in different ages in His original
çuddha-sattva transcendental body to elevate human society to the spiritual
platform upon which they can truly benefit. Unfortunately, modern
politicians and other leaders stress the bodily comforts of life
(yasyätma-buddhiù kuëape tri-dhätuke [SB 10.84.13]) and concentrate on the
activities of this ism and that ism, which they describe in different kinds of
flowery language. Essentially such activities are the activities of animals (sa eva
go-kharaù [SB 10.84.13]). We should learn how to act from Bhagavad-gétä,
which explains everything for human understanding. Thus we can become
happy even in this age of Kali.
TEXT 35
s$aÔvaM na caeÜ"Atair"dM" inajaM Bavaeä,"
ivaÁaAnamaÁaAnaiBad"ApamaAjaRnama,
gAuNA‘ak(AzAEr"naumaIyatae BavaAna,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
212
‘ak(AzAtae yasya ca yaena vaA gAuNA:
sattvaà na ced dhätar idaà nijaà bhaved
vijïänam ajïäna-bhidäpamärjanam
guëa-prakäçair anuméyate bhavän
prakäçate yasya ca yena vä guëaù
SYNONYMS
sattvam—çuddha-sattva, transcendental; na—not; cet—if; dhätaù—O reservoir
of all energies, cause of all causes; idam—this; nijam—personal, spiritual;
bhavet—could have been; vijïänam—transcendental knowledge;
ajïäna-bhidä—which drives away the ignorance of the material modes;
apamärjanam—completely vanquished; guëa-prakäçaiù—by the awakening of
such transcendental knowledge; anuméyate—becomes manifested;
bhavän—Your Lordship; prakäçate—exhibit; yasya—whose; ca—and;
yena—by which; vä—either; guëaù—quality or intelligence.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, cause of all causes, if Your transcendental body were not beyond the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
modes of material nature, one could not understand the difference between
matter and transcendence. Only by Your presence can one understand the
transcendental nature of Your Lordship, who are the controller of material
nature. Your transcendental nature is very difficult to understand unless one is
influenced by the presence of Your transcendental form.
PURPORT
It is said, traiguëya-viñayä vedä nistraiguëyo bhavärjuna. Unless one is
situated in transcendence, one cannot understand the transcendental nature
of the Lord. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.14.29):
213
athäpi te deva padämbuja-dvayaprasäda-
leçänugåhéta eva hi
jänäti tattvaà bhagavan-mahimno
na cänya eko 'pi ciraà vicinvan
Only by the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead can one
understand Him. Those who are in the modes of material nature, although
speculating for thousands of years, cannot understand Him. The Lord has
innumerable forms (rämädi-mürtiñu kalä-niyamena tiñöhan [Bs. 5.39]), and
unless these forms, such as Lord Rämacandra, Nåsiàhadeva, Kåñëa and
Balaräma, were transcendental, how could they be worshiped by devotees since
time immemorial? Bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù (Bg.
18.55). Devotees who awaken their transcendental nature in the presence of
the Lord and who follow the rules and regulations of devotional service can
understand Lord Kåñëa, Lord Rämacandra and other incarnations, who are
not of this material world but who come from the spiritual world for the
benefit of people in general. If one does not take to this process, one imagines
or manufactures some form of God according to material qualities and can
never awaken a real understanding of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The words bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù signify that unless
one worships the Lord according to the regulative devotional principles, one
cannot awaken the transcendental nature. Deity worship, even in the absence
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, awakens the transcendental nature of
the devotee, who thus becomes increasingly attached to the Lord's lotus feet.
The appearance of Kåñëa is the answer to all imaginative iconography of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Everyone imagines the form of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead according to his mode of material nature. In
the Brahma-saàhitä it is said that the Lord is the oldest person. Therefore a
section of religionists imagine that God must be very old, and therefore they
depict a form of the Lord like a very old man. But in the same Brahma-saàhitä,
that is contradicted; although He is the oldest of all living entities, He has His
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
214
eternal form as a fresh youth. The exact words used in this connection in the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam are vijïänam ajïäna-bhidäpamärjanam. Vijïäna means
transcendental knowledge of the Supreme Personality; vijïäna is also
experienced knowledge. Transcendental knowledge has to be accepted by the
descending process of disciplic succession as Brahmä presents the knowledge of
Kåñëa in the Brahma-saàhitä. Brahma-saàhitä is vijïäna as realized by
Brahmä's transcendental experience, and in that way he presented the form
and the pastimes of Kåñëa in the transcendental abode. Ajïäna-bhidä means
"that which can match all kinds of speculation." In ignorance, people are
imagining the form of the Lord; sometimes He has no form and sometimes He
has form, according to their different imaginations. But the presentation of
Kåñëa in the Brahma-saàhitä is vijïäna—scientific, experienced knowledge
given by Lord Brahmä and accepted by Lord Caitanya. There is no doubt
about it. Çré Kåñëa's form, Çré Kåñëa's flute, Kåñëa's color—everything is
reality. Here it is said that this vijïänam is always defeating all kinds of
speculative knowledge. "Therefore," the demigods prayed, "without Your
appearing as Kåñëa, as You are, neither ajïäna-bhidä (the nescience of
speculative knowledge) nor vijïänam would be realized.
Ajïäna-bhidäpamärjanam—by Your appearance the speculative knowledge of
ignorance will be vanquished, and the real, experienced knowledge of
authorities like Lord Brahmä will be established. Men influenced by the three
modes of material nature imagine their own God according to the modes of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
material nature. In this way God is presented in various ways, but Your
appearance will establish what the real form of God is."
The highest blunder committed by the impersonalist is to think that when
the incarnation of God comes, He accepts a form of matter in the mode of
goodness. Actually the form of Kåñëa or Näräyaëa is transcendental to any
material idea. Even the greatest impersonalist, Çaìkaräcärya, has admitted,
näräyaëaù paro 'vyaktät: the material creation is caused by the avyakta, the
impersonal manifestation of matter or the nonphenomenal total reservoir of
matter, and Kåñëa is transcendental to that material conception. This is
215
expressed in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam as çuddha-sattva, or transcendental. The
Lord does not belong to the material mode of goodness, for He is above the
position of material goodness. He belongs to the transcendental, eternal status
of bliss and knowledge.
"Dear Lord," the demigods prayed, "when You appear in Your different
incarnations, You take different names and forms according to different
situations. Lord Kåñëa is Your name because You are all-attractive; You are
called Çyämasundara because of Your transcendental beauty. Çyäma means
blackish, yet they say that You are more beautiful than thousands of cupids.
Kandarpa-koöi-kamanéya. Although You appear in a color which is compared
to that of a blackish cloud, You are the transcendental Absolute, and therefore
Your beauty is many, many times more attractive than the delicate body of
Cupid. Sometimes You are called Giridhäré because You lifted the hill known
as Govardhana. You are sometimes called Nanda-nandana or Väsudeva or
Devaké-nandana because You appear as the son of Mahäräja Nanda or Devaké
or Vasudeva. Impersonalists think that Your many names or forms are
according to a particular type of work and quality because they accept You
from the position of a material observer.
"Our dear Lord, the way of understanding is not to study Your absolute
nature, form and activities by mental speculation. One must engage himself in
devotional service; then one can understand Your absolute nature and Your
transcendental form, name and quality. Actually, only a person who has a little
taste for the service of Your lotus feet can understand Your transcendental
nature or form and quality. Others may go on speculating for millions of years,
but it is not possible for them to understand even a single part of Your actual
position." In other words, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, cannot
be understood by the nondevotees because there is a curtain of yogamäyä
which covers Kåñëa's actual features. As confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä (7.25),
nähaà prakäçaù sarvasya. The Lord says, "I am not exposed to anyone and
everyone." When Kåñëa came, He was actually present on the battlefield of
Kurukñetra, and everyone saw Him. But not everyone could understand that
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
216
He was the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Still, everyone who died in His
presence attained complete liberation from material bondage and was
transferred to the spiritual world.
Because foolish müòhas do not awaken their spiritual nature, they do not
understand Kåñëa or Räma (avajänanti mäà müòhä mänuñéà tanum äçritam
[Bg. 9.11]). Even big academic scholars, not considering the endeavors of the
äcäryas who have recommended devotional service in many elaborate
commentaries and notes, think that Kåñëa is fictitious. This is due to a lack of
transcendental knowledge and a failure to awaken Kåñëa consciousness. One
should have the common sense to ask why, if Kåñëa or Räma were fictitious,
stalwart scholars like Çrédhara Svämé, Rüpa Gosvämé, Sanätana Gosvämé,
Véraräghava, Vijayadhvaja, Vallabhäcärya and many other recognized äcäryas
would have spent so much time to write about Kåñëa in notes and
commentaries on Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 36
na naAmaè&pae gAuNAjanmak(maRiBar,"
inaè&ipatavyae tava tasya s$aAiºaNA:
manaAevacaAeByaAmanaumaeyavatmaRnaAe
de"va i‚(yaAyaAM ‘aitayantyaTaAipa ih"
na näma-rüpe guëa-janma-karmabhir
nirüpitavye tava tasya säkñiëaù
mano-vacobhyäm anumeya-vartmano
deva kriyäyäà pratiyanty athäpi hi
SYNONYMS
na—not; näma-rüpe—the name and form; guëa—with attributes;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
217
janma—appearance; karmabhiù—activities or pastimes; nirüpitavye—are not
able to be ascertained; tava—Your; tasya—of Him; säkñiëaù—who is the direct
observer; manaù—of the mind; vacobhyäm—words; anumeya—hypothesis;
vartmanaù—the path; deva—O Lord; kriyäyäm—in devotional activities;
pratiyanti—they realize; atha api—still; hi—indeed (You can be realized by the
devotees).
TRANSLATION
O Lord, Your transcendental name and form are not ascertained by those
who merely speculate on the path of imagination. Your name, form and
attributes can be ascertained only through devotional service.
PURPORT
As stated in the Padma Puräëa:
ataù çré-kåñëa-nämädi
na bhaved grähyam indriyaiù
sevonmukhe hi jihvädau
svayam eva sphuraty adaù
[Cc. Madhya 17.136]
"One cannot understand the transcendental nature of the name, form, quality
and pastimes of Çré Kåñëa through one's materially contaminated senses. Only
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
when one becomes spiritually saturated by transcendental service to the Lord
are the transcendental name, form, quality and pastimes of the Lord revealed
to him." Since Kåñëa and His transcendental name, form and activities are all
of a transcendental nature, ordinary persons or those who are only slightly
advanced cannot understand them. Even big scholars who are nondevotees
think that Kåñëa is fictitious. Yet although so-called scholars and
commentators do not believe that Kåñëa was factually a historical person
218
whose presence on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra is recorded in the history of
Mahäbhärata, they feel compelled to write commentaries on Bhagavad-gétä and
other historical records. Sevonmukhe hi jihvädau svayam eva sphuraty adaù:
[Brs. 1.2.234(4)] Kåñëa's transcendental name, form, attributes and activities
can be revealed only when one engages in His service in full consciousness.
This confirms Kåñëa's own words in Bhagavad-gétä (18.55):
bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti
yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù
tato mäà tattvato jïätvä
viçate tad-anantaram
"One can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead as He is only by
devotional service. And when one is in full consciousness of the Supreme Lord
by such devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God." Only by
sevonmukha, by engaging oneself in the Lord's service, can one realize the
name, form and qualities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
"O Lord," the demigods say, "the impersonalists, who are nondevotees,
cannot understand that Your name is identical with Your form." Since the
Lord is absolute, there is no difference between His name and His actual form.
In the material world there is a difference between form and name. The mango
fruit is different from the name of the mango. One cannot taste the mango
fruit simply by chanting, "Mango, mango, mango." But the devotee who knows
that there is no difference between the name and the form of the Lord chants
Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma,
Räma Räma, Hare Hare, and realizes that he is always in Kåñëa's company.
For persons who are not very advanced in absolute knowledge of the
Supreme, Lord Kåñëa exhibits His transcendental pastimes. They can simply
think of the pastimes of the Lord and get the full benefit. Since there is no
difference between the transcendental name and form of the Lord, there is no
difference between the transcendental pastimes and the form of the Lord. For
those who are less intelligent (like women, laborers or the mercantile class),
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
219
the great sage Vyäsadeva wrote Mahäbhärata. In the Mahäbhärata, Kåñëa is
present in His different activities. Mahäbhärata is history, and simply by
studying, hearing, and memorizing the transcendental activities of Kåñëa, the
less intelligent can also gradually rise to the standard of pure devotees.
The pure devotees, who are always absorbed in the thought of the
transcendental lotus feet of Kåñëa and who are always engaged in devotional
service in full Kåñëa consciousness, are never to be considered to be in the
material world. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé has explained that those who are always
engaged in Kåñëa consciousness by body, mind and activities are to be
considered liberated even within this body. This is also confirmed in the
Bhagavad-gétä: those who are engaged in the devotional service of the Lord
have already transcended the material position.
Kåñëa appears in order to give a chance to both the devotees and the
nondevotees for realization of the ultimate goal of life. The devotees get the
direct chance to see Him and worship Him. Those who are not on that
platform get the chance to become acquainted with His activities and thus
become elevated to the same position.
The Brahma-saàhitä (5.38) says:
premäïjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santaù sadaiva hådayeñu vilokayanti
yaà çyämasundaram acintya-guëa-svarüpaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
Although Kåñëa's transcendental form is presented as black, devotees who are
in love with the Supreme Personality of Godhead appreciate the Lord as
Çyämasundara, having a very beautiful blackish form. The Lord's form is so
beautiful that the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
(5.30) also states:
veëuà kvaëantam aravinda-daläyatäkñaà
barhävataàsam asitämbuda-sundaräìgam
kandarpa-koöi-kamanéya-viçeña-çobhaà
220
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who plays on His transcendental flute.
His eyes are like lotus flowers, He is decorated with peacock plumes, and His
bodily color resembles the color of a fresh black cloud, although His bodily
features are more beautiful than millions of Cupids." This beauty of the
Supreme Lord can be seen by devotees who are in love with Him, devotees
whose eyes are anointed with love of Godhead
(premäïjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena [Bs. 5.38]).
The Lord is also known as Giridhäré or Girivara-dhäré. Because Kåñëa, for
the sake of His devotees, lifted Govardhana Hill, the devotees appreciate the
Lord's inconceivable strength; but nondevotees, in spite of directly perceiving
the Lord's inconceivable strength and power, regard the Lord's activities as
fictitious. This is the difference between a devotee and a nondevotee.
Nondevotees cannot give any nomenclature for the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, yet the Lord is known as Çyämasundara and Giridhäré. Similarly, the
Lord is known as Devaké-nandana and Yaçodä-nandana because He accepted
the role of son for mother Devaké and mother Yaçodä, and He is known as
Gopäla because He enjoyed the sport of maintaining the cows and calves.
Therefore, although He has no mundane name, He is addressed by devotees as
Devaké-nandana, Yaçodä-nandana, Gopäla and Çyämasundara. These are all
transcendental names that only devotees can appreciate and nondevotees
cannot.
The history of Kåñëa the person has been openly seen by everyone, yet only
those who are in love with the Supreme Personality of Godhead can
appreciate this history, whereas nondevotees, who have not developed their
loving qualities, think that the activities, form and attributes of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead are fictitious. Therefore this verse explains, na
näma-rüpe guëa janma-karmabhir nirüpitavye tava tasya säkñiëaù. In this
connection, Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has given the example that
persons suffering from jaundice cannot taste the sweetness of sugar candy,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
221
although everyone knows that sugar candy is sweet. Similarly, because of the
material disease, nondevotees cannot understand the transcendental name,
form, attributes and activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
although they actually see the Lord's activities, either through authority or
through history. The Puräëas are old, authentic histories, but nondevotees
cannot understand them, especially Çrémad-Bhägavatam, which is the essence
of Vedic knowledge. Nondevotees cannot understand even the preliminary
study of transcendental knowledge, Bhagavad-gétä. They simply speculate and
present commentaries with absurd distortions. In conclusion, unless one
elevates himself to the transcendental platform by practicing bhakti-yoga, one
cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead or His name, form,
attributes or activities. But if by chance, by the association of devotees, one
can actually understand the Lord and His features, one immediately becomes a
liberated person. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (4.9):
janma karma ca me divyam
evaà yo vetti tattvataù
tyaktvä dehaà punar janma
naiti mäm eti so 'rjuna
"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities
does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but
attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna."
Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé has therefore said that by affection and love for the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, devotees can express their mind to Him with
their words. Others, however, cannot do this, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä
(bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù [Bg. 18.55]).
TEXT 37
Za{Nvana, gA{NAna, s$aMsmar"yaMê icantayana,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
222
naAmaAina è&paAiNA ca maËÿlaAina tae
i‚(yaAs$au yastva»ar"NAAr"ivand"yaAer,"
@Aivaí"caetaA na BavaAya k(lpatae
çåëvan gåëan saàsmarayaàç ca cintayan
nämäni rüpäëi ca maìgaläni te
kriyäsu yas tvac-caraëäravindayor
äviñöa-cetä na bhaväya kalpate
SYNONYMS
çåëvan—constantly hearing about the Lord (çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù);
gåëan—chanting or reciting (the holy name of the Lord and His activities);
saàsmarayan—remembering (constantly thinking of the Lord's lotus feet and
His form); ca—and; cintayan—contemplating (the transcendental activities of
the Lord); nämäni—His transcendental names; rüpäëi—His transcendental
forms; ca—also; maìgaläni—which are all transcendental and therefore
auspicious; te—of Your Lordship; kriyäsu—in being engaged in the devotional
service; yaù—he who; tvat-caraëa-aravindayoù—at Your lotus feet;
äviñöa-cetäù—the devotee who is completely absorbed (in such activities);
na—not; bhaväya—for the material platform; kalpate—is fit.
TRANSLATION
Even while engaged in various activities, devotees whose minds are
completely absorbed at Your lotus feet, and who constantly hear, chant,
contemplate and cause others to remember Your transcendental names and
forms, are always on the transcendental platform, and thus they can understand
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
223
PURPORT
How bhakti-yoga can be practiced is explained in this verse. Çréla Rüpa
Gosvämé has said that anyone who has dedicated his life to the service of the
Lord (éhä yasya harer däsye) by his activities, his mind and his words (karmaëä
manasä girä) may stay in any condition of life (nikhiläsv apy avasthäsu) and yet
is no longer actually conditioned but is liberated (jévan-muktaù sa ucyate).
Even though such a devotee is in a material body, he has nothing to do with
this body, for he is transcendentally situated. Näräyaëa-paräù sarve na
kutaçcana bibhyati: because a devotee is engaged in transcendental activities,
he is not afraid of being materially embodied. (SB 6.17.28) Illustrating this
liberated position, Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu prayed, mama janmani
janmanéçvare bhavatäd bhaktir ahaituké tvayi: [Cc. Antya 20.29, Çikñäñöaka 4]
"All I want is Your causeless devotional service in My life, birth after birth."
Even if a devotee, by the supreme will of the Lord, takes birth in this material
world, he continues his devotional service. When King Bharata made a
mistake and in his next life became a deer, his devotional service did not stop,
although some slight chastisement was given to him because of his negligence.
Närada Muni says that even if one falls from the platform of devotional
service, he is not lost, whereas nondevotees are lost entirely because they are
not engaged in service. Bhagavad-gétä (9.14) therefore recommends that one
always engage at least in chanting the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra:
satataà kértayanto mäà
yatantaç ca dåòha-vratäù
namasyantaç ca mäà bhaktyä
nitya-yuktä upäsate
"Always chanting My glories, endeavoring with great determination, bowing
down before Me, the great souls perpetually worship Me with devotion."
One should not give up the process of devotional service, which is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
224
performed in nine different ways (çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù smaraëaà
päda-sevanam, etc. [SB 7.5.23]). The most important process is hearing
(çravaëam) from the guru, sädhu and çästra-the spiritual master, the saintly
äcäryas and the Vedic literature. Sädhu-çästra-guru-väkya, cittete kariyä aikya.
We should not hear the commentaries and explanations of nondevotees, for
this is strictly forbidden by Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé, who quotes from the
Padma Puräëa:
avaiñëava-mukhodgérëaà
pütaà hari-kathämåtam
çravaëaà naiva kartavyaà
sarpocchiñöaà yathä payaù
We should strictly follow this injunction and never try to hear from
Mäyävädés, impersonalists, voidists, politicians or so-called scholars. Strictly
avoiding such inauspicious association, we should simply hear from pure
devotees. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé therefore recommends, çré-guru-padäçrayaù: one
must seek shelter at the lotus feet of a pure devotee who can be one's guru.
Caitanya Mahäprabhu advises that a guru is one who strictly follows the
instructions of Bhagavad-gétä: yare dekha, tare kaha, 'kåñëa'-upadeça (Cc.
Madhya 7.128). A juggler, a magician or one who speaks nonsense as an
academic career is not a guru. Rather, a guru is one who presents
Bhagavad-gétä, Kåñëa's instructions, as it is. Çravaëa is very important; one
must hear from the Vaiñëava sädhu, guru and çästra.
The word kriyäsu, meaning "by manual labor" or "by work," is important in
this verse. One should engage in practical service to the Lord. In our Kåñëa
consciousness movement, all our activities are concentrated upon distributing
Kåñëa literature. This is very important. One may approach any person and
induce him to read Kåñëa literature so that in the future he also may become a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Kriyäsu yas
tvac-caraëäravindayoù. Such activities will always remind the devotees of the
Lord's lotus feet. By fully concentrating on distributing books for Kåñëa, one is
225
fully absorbed in Kåñëa. This is samädhi.
TEXT 38
id"í"YaA h"re"'syaA Bavata: pad"Ae BauvaAe
BaAr"Ae'panaItastava janmanaeizAtau:
id"í"YaAiÆÿtaAM tvatpad"kE(: s$auzAAeBanaEr,"
‰"ºyaAma gAAM âAM ca tavaAnauk(impataAma,
diñöyä hare 'syä bhavataù pado bhuvo
bhäro 'panétas tava janmaneçituù
diñöyäìkitäà tvat-padakaiù suçobhanair
drakñyäma gäà dyäà ca tavänukampitäm
SYNONYMS
diñöyä—by fortune; hare—O Lord; asyäù—of this (world); bhavataù—of Your
Lordship; padaù—of the place; bhuvaù—on this earth; bhäraù—the burden
created by the demons; apanétaù—now removed; tava—of Your Lordship;
janmanä—by appearance as an incarnation; éçituù—You, the controller of
everything; diñöyä—and by fortune; aìkitäm—marked; tvat-padakaiù—by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Your lotus feet; su-çobhanaiù—which are transcendentally decorated with the
marks of conchshell, disc, lotus and club; drakñyäma—we shall surely observe;
gäm—upon this earth; dyäm ca—in heaven also; tava anukampitäm—due to
Your causeless mercy upon us.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, we are fortunate because the heavy burden of the demons upon this
earth is immediately removed by Your appearance. Indeed, we are certainly
226
fortunate, for we shall be able to see upon this earth and in the heavenly planets
the marks of lotus, conchshell, club and disc that adorn Your lotus feet.
PURPORT
The soles of the Lord's lotus feet are marked with
çaìkha-cakra-gadä-padma—conchshell, disc, club and lotus—and also by a flag
and a thunderbolt. When Kåñëa walks on this earth or in the heavenly planets,
these marks are visible wherever He goes. Våndävana-dhäma is a
transcendental place because of Kåñëa's walking on this land frequently. The
inhabitants of Våndävana were fortunate to see these marks here and there.
When Akrüra went to Våndävana to take Kåñëa and Balaräma away to the
festival arranged by Kaàsa, upon seeing the marks of the Lord's lotus feet on
the ground of Våndävana, he fell down and began to groan. These marks are
visible to devotees who receive the causeless mercy of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead (tavänukampitäm). The demigods were jubilant not only because
the appearance of the Supreme Lord would do away with the burdensome
demons, but also because they would be able to see upon the ground the
transcendental marks from the soles of the Lord's lotus feet. The gopés always
thought of the Lord's lotus feet when He was walking in the pasturing grounds,
and, as described in the previous verse, simply by thinking of the Lord's lotus
feet, the gopés were fully absorbed in transcendence (äviñöa-cetä na bhaväya
kalpate). Like the gopés, one who is always absorbed in thought of the Lord is
beyond the material platform and will not remain in this material world. It is
our duty, therefore, always to hear, chant and think about the Lord's lotus feet,
as actually done by Vaiñëavas who have decided to live in Våndävana always
and think of the Lord's lotus feet twenty-four hours a day.
TEXT 39
na tae'BavasyaezA Bavasya k(Ar"NAM
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
227
ivanaA ivanaAedM" bata takR(yaAmahe"
BavaAe inar"AeDa: isTaitar"pyaivaâyaA
k{(taA yatastvayyaBayaA™ayaAtmaina
na te 'bhavasyeça bhavasya käraëaà
vinä vinodaà bata tarkayämahe
bhavo nirodhaù sthitir apy avidyayä
kåtä yatas tvayy abhayäçrayätmani
SYNONYMS
na—not; te—of Your Lordship; abhavasya—of whom there is no birth, death
or maintenance as for an ordinary being; éça—O Supreme Lord; bhavasya—of
Your appearance, Your birth; käraëam—the cause; vinä—without;
vinodam—the pastimes (despite what is said, You are not forced to come to
this world by any cause); bata—however; tarkayämahe—we cannot argue (but
must simply understand that these are Your pastimes); bhavaù—birth;
nirodhaù—death; sthitiù—maintenance; api—also; avidyayä—by the external,
illusory energy; kåtäù—done; yataù—because; tvayi—unto You;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
abhaya-äçraya—O fearless shelter of all; ätmani—of the ordinary living entity.
TRANSLATION
O Supreme Lord, You are not an ordinary living entity appearing in this
material world as a result of fruitive activities. Therefore Your appearance or
birth in this world has no other cause than Your pleasure potency. Similarly,
the living entities, who are part of You, have no cause for miseries like birth,
death and old age, except when these living entities are conducted by Your
external energy.
228
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (15.7), mamaiväàço jéva-loke jéva-bhütaù
sanätanaù: the living entities are parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord, and
thus they are qualitatively one with the Lord. We can understand that when
the Supreme Lord appears or disappears as an incarnation, there is no other
cause than His pleasure potency. We cannot force the Supreme Personality of
Godhead to appear. As He says in Bhagavad-gétä (4.7):
yadä yadä hi dharmasya
glänir bhavati bhärata
abhyutthänam adharmasya
tadätmänaà såjämy aham
"Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendant
of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that time I descend
Myself." When there is a need to diminish a burden created by the demons, the
Supreme Godhead can do it in many ways because He has multifarious
energies. There is no need for Him to come as an incarnation, since He is not
forced to do anything like ordinary living entities. The living entities come to
this material world in the spirit of enjoyment, but because they want to enjoy
without Kåñëa (kåñëa-bahirmukha haiyä bhoja-väïchä kare), they suffer birth,
death, old age and disease under the control of the illusory energy. When the
Supreme Personality of Godhead appears, however, no such causes are
involved; His descent is an act of His pleasure potency. We should always
remember this distinction between the Lord and the ordinary living entity and
not uselessly argue that the Lord cannot come. There are philosophers who do
not believe in the Lord's incarnation and who ask, "Why should the Supreme
Lord come?" But the answer is, "Why should He not come? Why should He be
controlled by the desire of the living entity?" The Lord is free to do whatever
He likes. Therefore this verse says, vinä vinodaà bata tarkayämahe. It is only
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
229
for His pleasure that He comes although He does not need to come.
When the living entities come to this world for material enjoyment, they
are entangled in karma and karma-phala by the Lord's illusory energy. But if
one seeks shelter at the Lord's lotus feet, one is again situated in his original,
liberated state. As stated here, kåtä yatas tvayy abhayäçrayätmani: one who
seeks shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord is always fearless. Because we are
dependent on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, we should give up the idea
that without Kåñëa we can enjoy freedom in this material world. This idea is
the reason we have become entangled. Now it is our duty to seek shelter again
at the Lord's lotus feet. This shelter is described as abhaya, or fearless. Since
Kåñëa is not subject to birth, death, old age or disease, and since we are part
and parcel of Kåñëa, we also are not subject to birth, death, old age and disease,
but we have become subject to these illusory problems because of our
forgetfulness of Kåñëa and our position as His eternal servants (jévera 'svarüpa'
haya-kåñëera 'nitya-däsa' [Cc. Madhya 20.108]). Therefore, if we practice
devotional service by always thinking of the Lord, always glorifying Him and
always chanting about Him, as described in text 37 (çåëvan gåëan
saàsmarayaàç ca cintayan), we will be reinstated in our original,
constitutional position and thus be saved. The demigods, therefore,
encouraged Devaké not to fear Kaàsa, but to think of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, who was already within her womb.
TEXT 40
matsyaAìk(cC$pana{is$aMh"var"Ah"hM"s$ar"
Ajanyaiva‘aivabauDaeSau k{(taAvataAr":
tvaM paAis$a naiñBauvanaM ca yaTaADaunaezA
BaArM" BauvaAe h"r" yaäU"Ôama vand"naM tae
matsyäçva-kacchapa-nåsiàha-varäha-haàsacopyright
©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
230
räjanya-vipra-vibudheñu kåtävatäraù
tvaà päsi nas tri-bhuvanaà ca yathädhuneça
bhäraà bhuvo hara yadüttama vandanaà te
SYNONYMS
matsya—the fish incarnation; açva—the horse incarnation; kacchapa—the
tortoise incarnation; nåsiàha—the Narasiàha incarnation; varäha—the
Varäha incarnation; haàsa—the swan incarnation; räjanya—incarnations as
Lord Rämacandra and other kñatriyas; vipra—incarnations as brähmaëas like
Vämanadeva; vibudheñu—among the demigods; kåta-avatäraù—appeared as
incarnations; tvam—Your Lordship; päsi—please save; naù—us; tri-bhuvanam
ca—and the three worlds; yathä—as well as; adhunä—now; éça—O Supreme
Lord; bhäram—burden; bhuvaù—of the earth; hara—please diminish;
yadu-uttama—O Lord Kåñëa, best of the Yadus; vandanam te—we offer our
prayers unto You.
TRANSLATION
O supreme controller, Your Lordship previously accepted incarnations as a
fish, a horse, a tortoise, Narasiàhadeva, a boar, a swan, Lord Rämacandra,
Paraçuräma and, among the demigods, Vämanadeva, to protect the entire world
by Your mercy. Now please protect us again by Your mercy by diminishing the
disturbances in this world. O Kåñëa, best of the Yadus, we respectfully offer our
obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
mission to execute, and this was true in His appearance as the son of Devaké in
the family of the Yadus. Thus all the demigods offered their prayers to the
Lord, bowing down before Him, and requested the Lord to do the needful. We
231
cannot order the Supreme Personality of Godhead to do anything for us. We
can simply offer Him our obeisances, as advised in Bhagavad-gétä (man-manä
bhava mad-bhakto mad-yäjé mäà namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]), and pray to Him for
annihilation of dangers.
TEXT 41
id"í"YaAmba tae ku(iºagAta: par": paumaAna,
@MzAena s$aAºaAà"gAvaAna, BavaAya na:
maABaUà"yaM BaAejapataemauRmaUSaAeRr,"
gAAeæaA yaäU"naAM BaivataA tavaAtmaja:
diñöyämba te kukñi-gataù paraù pumän
aàçena säkñäd bhagavän bhaväya naù
mäbhüd bhayaà bhoja-pater mumürñor
goptä yadünäà bhavitä tavätmajaù
SYNONYMS
diñöyä—by fortune; amba—O mother; te—your; kukñi-gataù—in the womb;
paraù—the Supreme; pumän—Personality of Godhead; aàçena—with all His
energies, His parts and parcels; säkñät—directly; bhagavän—the Supreme
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Personality of Godhead; bhaväya—for the auspiciousness; naù—of all of us; mä
abhüt—never be; bhayam—fearful; bhoja-pateù—from Kaàsa, King of the
Bhoja dynasty; mumürñoù—who has decided to be killed by the Lord;
goptä—the protector; yadünäm—of the Yadu dynasty; bhavitä—will become;
tava ätmajaù—your son.
TRANSLATION
232
O mother Devaké, by your good fortune and ours, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead Himself, with all His plenary portions, such as Baladeva, is now
within your womb. Therefore you need not fear Kaàsa, who has decided to be
killed by the Lord. Your eternal son, Kåñëa, will be the protector of the entire
Yadu dynasty.
PURPORT
The words paraù pumän aàçena signify that Kåñëa is the original Supreme
Personality of Godhead. This is the verdict of the çästra (kåñëas tu bhagavän
svayam [SB 1.3.28]). Thus the demigods assured Devaké, "Your son is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and He is appearing with Baladeva, His
plenary portion. He will give you all protection and kill Kaàsa, who has
decided to continue his enmity toward the Lord and thus be killed by Him."
TEXT 42
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
wtyaiBaí^"ya pauç&SaM
yaåU"pamainadM" yaTaA
“aöezAAnaAE paur"AeDaAya
de"vaA: ‘aitayayauidR"vama,
çré-çuka uväca
ity abhiñöüya puruñaà
yad-rüpam anidaà yathä
brahmeçänau purodhäya
deväù pratiyayur divam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
233
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—in this way;
abhiñöüya—offering prayers; puruñam—unto the Supreme Personality;
yat-rüpam—whose form; anidam—transcendental; yathä—as; brahma—Lord
Brahmä; éçänau—and Lord Çiva; purodhäya—keeping them in front;
deväù—all the demigods; pratiyayuù—returned; divam—to their heavenly
homes.
TRANSLATION
After thus offering prayers to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord
Viñëu, the Transcendence, all the demigods, with Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva
before them, returned to their homes in the heavenly planets.
PURPORT
It is said:
adyäpiha caitanya ei saba lélä kare
yäì'ra bhägye thäke, se dekhaye nirantare
(Caitanya-bhägavata, Madhya 23.513)
The incarnations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead appear
continuously, like the waves of a river or an ocean. There is no limit to the
Lord's incarnations, but they can be perceived only by devotees who are
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
fortunate. The devatäs, the demigods, fortunately understood the incarnation
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and thus they offered their prayers.
Then Lord Çiva and Lord Brahmä led the demigods in returning to their
homes.
The word kukñi-gataù, meaning "within the womb of Devaké," has been
discussed by Çré Jéva Gosvämé in his Krama-sandarbha commentary. Since it
234
was said at first that Kåñëa was present within the heart of Vasudeva and was
transferred to the heart of Devaké, Çré Jéva Gosvämé writes, how is it that
Kåñëa was now in the womb? He replies that there is no contradiction. From
the heart the Lord can go to the womb, or from the womb He can go to the
heart. Indeed, He can go or stay anywhere. As confirmed in the
Brahma-saàhitä (5.35), aëòäntara-stha-paramäëu-cayäntara-sthaà govindam
ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi. The Lord can stay wherever He likes. Devaké,
therefore, in accordance with the desire of her former life, now had the
opportunity to seek the benediction of having the Supreme Personality of
Godhead as her son, Devaké-nandana.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Tenth Canto, Second Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Prayers by the Demigods for Lord Kåñëa in the
Womb."
3. The Birth of Lord Kåñëa
As described in this chapter, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa,
Hari in His original form, appeared as Viñëu so that His father and mother
could understand that their son was the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Because they were afraid of Kaàsa, when the Lord appeared as an ordinary
child they took Him to Gokula, the home of Nanda Mahäräja.
Mother Devaké, being fully transcendental, sac-cid-änanda, does not belong
to this material world. Thus the Supreme Personality of Godhead appeared
with four hands, as if born from her womb. Upon seeing the Lord in that
Viñëu form, Vasudeva was struck with wonder, and in transcendental
happiness he and Devaké mentally gave ten thousand cows in charity to the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
235
brähmaëas. Vasudeva then offered prayers to the Lord, addressing Him as the
Supreme Person, Parabrahman, the Supersoul, who is beyond duality and who
is internally and externally all-pervading. The Lord, the cause of all causes, is
beyond material existence, although He is the creator of this material world.
When He enters this world as Paramätmä, He is all-pervading
(aëòäntara-stha-paramäëu-cayäntara-stham [Bs. 5.35]), yet He is
transcendentally situated. For the creation, maintenance and annihilation of
this material world, the Lord appears as the guëa-avatäras-Brahmä, Viñëu and
Maheçvara. Thus Vasudeva offered prayers full of meaning to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Devaké followed her husband by offering prayers
describing the transcendental nature of the Lord. Fearing Kaàsa and desiring
that the Lord not be understood by atheistic and materialistic nondevotees,
she prayed that the Lord withdraw His transcendental four-armed form and
appear like an ordinary child with two hands.
The Lord reminded Vasudeva and Devaké of two other incarnations in
which He had appeared as their son. He had appeared as Påçnigarbha and
Vämanadeva, and now this was the third time He was appearing as the son of
Devaké to fulfill their desire. The Lord then decided to leave the residence of
Vasudeva and Devaké, in the prison house of Kaàsa, and at this very time,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Yogamäyä took birth as the daughter of Yaçodä. By the arrangement of
Yogamäyä, Vasudeva was able to leave the prison house and save the child
from the hands of Kaàsa. When Vasudeva brought Kåñëa to the house of
Nanda Mahäräja, he saw that by Yogamäyä's arrangement, Yaçodä, as well as
everyone else, was deeply asleep. Thus he exchanged the babies, taking
Yogamäyä from Yaçodä's lap and placing Kåñëa there instead. Then Vasudeva
returned to his own place, having taken Yogamäyä as his daughter. He placed
Yogamäyä on Devaké's bed and prepared to be a prisoner as before. In Gokula,
Yaçodä could not understand whether she had given birth to a male or a
female child.
TEXTS 1-5
236
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
@Ta s$avaRgAuNAAepaeta:
k(Ala: par"mazAAeBana:
ya÷eRvaAjanajanmaºa<
zAAntaºaRƒah"taAr"k(ma,
id"zA: ‘as$aeäu"gARgAnaM
inamaRlaAex"]gANAAed"yama,
mah"I maËÿlaBaUiyaï"-
paur"ƒaAma˜ajaAk(r"A
naâ: ‘as$aªas$ailalaA
oe"d"A jalaç&h"i™aya:
iã"jaAilaku(las$aªaAd"-
stavak(A vanar"Ajaya:
vavaAE vaAyau: s$auKas$pazAR:
pauNyagAnDavah": zAuica:
@¢ayaê iã"jaAtaInaAM
zAAntaAsta‡a s$aimanData
manaAMsyaAs$ana, ‘as$aªaAina
s$aADaUnaAmas$aur"åu"h"Ama,
jaAyamaAnae'janae taismana,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
237
naeäu"äuR"näu"Baya: s$amama,
çré-çuka uväca
atha sarva-guëopetaù
kälaù parama-çobhanaù
yarhy eväjana-janmarkñaà
çäntarkña-graha-tärakam
diçaù prasedur gaganaà
nirmaloòu-gaëodayam
mahé maìgala-bhüyiñöhapura-
gräma-vrajäkarä
nadyaù prasanna-salilä
hradä jalaruha-çriyaù
dvijäli-kula-sannädastavakä
vana-räjayaù
vavau väyuù sukha-sparçaù
puëya-gandhavahaù çuciù
agnayaç ca dvijäténäà
çäntäs tatra samindhata
manäàsy äsan prasannäni
sädhünäm asura-druhäm
jäyamäne 'jane tasmin
nedur dundubhayaù samam
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; atha—on the occasion of the
Lord's appearance; sarva—all around; guëa-upetaù—endowed with material
attributes or facilities; kälaù—a favorable time;
parama-çobhanaù—all-auspicious and very favorable from all points of view;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
238
yarhi—when; eva—certainly; ajana janma-åkñam—the constellation of stars
known as Rohiëé; çänta-åkña—none of the constellations were fierce (all of
them were peaceful); graha-tärakam—and the planets and stars like Açviné;
diçaù—all directions; praseduù—appeared very auspicious and peaceful;
gaganam—all of outer space or the sky; nirmala-uòu-gaëa-udayam—in which
all the auspicious stars were visible (in the upper strata of the universe);
mahé—the earth; maìgala-bhüyiñöha-pura-gräma-vraja-äkaräù—whose many
cities, towns, pasturing grounds and mines became auspicious and very neat
and clean; nadyaù—the rivers; prasanna-saliläù—the waters became clear;
hradäù—the lakes or large reservoirs of water; jalaruha-çriyaù—appeared very
beautiful because of blooming lotuses all around;
dvija-ali-kula-sannäda-stavakäù—the birds, especially the cuckoos, and swarms
of bees began to chant in sweet voices, as if praying to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; vana-räjayaù—the green trees and plants were also very pleasing
to see; vavau—blew; väyuù—the breeze; sukha-sparçaù—very pleasing to the
touch; puëya-gandha-vahaù—which was full of fragrance; çuciù—without
pollution by dust; agnayaù ca
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—and the fires (at the places of sacrifice);
dvijäténäm—of the brähmaëas; çäntäù—undisturbed, steady, calm and quiet;
tatra—there; samindhata—blazed; manäàsi—the minds of the brähmaëas
(who because of Kaàsa had always been afraid); äsan—became;
prasannäni—fully satisfied and free from disturbances; sädhünäm—of the
brähmaëas, who were all Vaiñëava devotees; asura-druhäm—who had been
oppressed by Kaàsa and other demons disturbing the discharge of religious
rituals; jäyamäne—because of the appearance or birth; ajane—of Lord Viñëu,
who is always unborn; tasmin—in that situation; neduù—resounded;
dundubhayaù—kettledrums; samam—simultaneously (from the upper planets).
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, at the auspicious time for the appearance of the Lord, the entire
universe was surcharged with all the qualities of goodness, beauty and peace.
239
The constellation Rohiëé appeared, as did stars like Açviné. The sun, the moon
and the other stars and planets were very peaceful. All directions appeared
extremely pleasing, and the beautiful stars twinkled in the cloudless sky.
Decorated with towns, villages, mines and pasturing grounds, the earth seemed
all-auspicious. The rivers flowed with clear water, and the lakes and vast
reservoirs, full of lilies and lotuses, were extraordinarily beautiful. In the trees
and green plants, full of flowers and leaves, pleasing to the eyes, birds like
cuckoos and swarms of bees began chanting with sweet voices for the sake of
the demigods. A pure breeze began to blow, pleasing the sense of touch and
bearing the aroma of flowers, and when the brähmaëas engaging in ritualistic
ceremonies ignited their fires according to Vedic principles, the fires burned
steadily, undisturbed by the breeze. Thus when the birthless Lord Viñëu, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, was about to appear, the saints and
brähmaëas, who had always been disturbed by demons like Kaàsa and his men,
felt peace within the core of their hearts, and kettledrums simultaneously
vibrated from the upper planetary system.
PURPORT
As stated in the Bhagavad-gétä, the Lord says that His appearance, birth,
and activities are all transcendental and that one who factually understands
them is immediately eligible to be transferred to the spiritual world. The Lord's
appearance or birth is not like that of an ordinary man, who is forced to accept
a material body according to his past deeds. The Lord's appearance is explained
in the previous chapter: He appears out of His own sweet pleasure.
When the time was mature for the appearance of the Lord, the
constellations became very auspicious. The astrological influence of the
constellation known as Rohiëé was also predominant because this constellation
is considered very auspicious. Rohiëé is under the direct supervision of
Brahmä, who is born of Viñëu, and it appears at the birth of Lord Viñëu, who
in fact is birthless. According to the astrological conclusion, besides the proper
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
ts due to
240
the different situations of the different planetary systems. At the time of
Kåñëa's birth, the planetary systems were automatically adjusted so that
everything became auspicious.
At that time, in all directions, east, west, south, north, everywhere, there
was an atmosphere of peace and prosperity. Auspicious stars were visible in the
sky, and on the surface in all towns and villages or pasturing grounds and
within the mind of everyone there were signs of good fortune. The rivers were
flowing full of water, and the lakes were beautifully decorated with lotus
flowers. The forests were full with beautiful birds and peacocks. All the birds
within the forests began to sing with sweet voices, and the peacocks began to
dance with their consorts. The wind blew very pleasantly, carrying the aroma
of different flowers, and the sensation of bodily touch was very pleasing. At
home, the brähmaëas, who were accustomed to offer sacrifices in the fire,
found their homes very pleasant for offerings. Because of disturbances created
by the demoniac kings, the sacrificial fire had been almost stopped in the
houses of brähmaëas, but now they could find the opportunity to start the fire
peacefully. Being forbidden to offer sacrifices, the brähmaëas were very
distressed in mind, intelligence and activities. But just on the point of Kåñëa's
appearance, automatically their minds became full of joy because they could
hear loud vibrations in the sky of transcendental sounds proclaiming the
appearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
On the occasion of Lord Kåñëa's birth, seasonal changes took place
throughout the entire universe. Kåñëa was born during the month of
September, yet it appeared like springtime. The atmosphere, however, was very
cool, although not chilly, and the rivers and reservoirs appeared just as they
would in çarat, the fall. Lotuses and lilies blossom during the day, but although
Kåñëa appeared at twelve o'clock midnight, the lilies and lotuses were in
bloom, and thus the wind blowing at that time was full of fragrance. Because of
Kaàsa's disturbances, the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies had almost stopped. The
brähmaëas and saintly persons could not execute the Vedic rituals with
peaceful minds. But now the brähmaëas were very pleased to perform their
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
241
daily ritualistic ceremonies undisturbed. The business of the asuras is to
disturb the suras, the devotees and brähmaëas, but at the time of Kåñëa's
appearance these devotees and brähmaëas were undisturbed.
TEXT 6
jagAu: ik(ªar"gAnDavaARs$a,
tauí]"vau: is$aÜ"caAr"NAA:
ivaâADayaRê nana{taur,"
@ps$ar"AeiBa: s$amaM maud"A
jaguù kinnara-gandharväs
tuñöuvuù siddha-cäraëäù
vidyädharyaç ca nanåtur
apsarobhiù samaà mudä
SYNONYMS
jaguù—recited auspicious songs; kinnara-gandharväù—the Kinnaras and
Gandharvas, inhabitants of various planets in the heavenly planetary system;
tuñöuvuù—offered their respective prayers; siddha-cäraëäù—the Siddhas and
Cäraëas, other inhabitants of the heavenly planets; vidyädharyaù ca—and the
Vidyädharés, another group of inhabitants of the heavenly planets;
nanåtuù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
apsarobhiù—the Apsaräs, beautiful
dancers in the heavenly kingdom; samam—along with; mudä—in great
jubilation.
TRANSLATION
The Kinnaras and Gandharvas began to sing auspicious songs, the Siddhas
242
and Cäraëas offered auspicious prayers, and the Vidyädharés, along with the
Apsaräs, began to dance in jubilation.
TEXTS 7-8
maumaucaumauRnayaAe de"vaA:
s$aumanaAMis$a maud"AinvataA:
mandM" mandM" jalaDar"A
jagAjauRr"naus$aAgAr"ma
inazAITae tamaoàU"tae
jaAyamaAnae janaAdR"nae
de"vafyaAM de"vaè&ipaNyaAM
ivaSNAu: s$avaRgAuh"AzAya:
@Aivar"As$aIâTaA ‘aAcyaAM
id"zAInäu"ir"va pauSk(la:
mumucur munayo deväù
sumanäàsi mudänvitäù
mandaà mandaà jaladharä
jagarjur anusägaram
niçéthe tama-udbhüte
jäyamäne janärdane
devakyäà deva-rüpiëyäà
viñëuù sarva-guhä-çayaù
äviräséd yathä präcyäà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
243
diçéndur iva puñkalaù
SYNONYMS
mumucuù—showered; munayaù—all the great sages and saintly persons;
deväù—and the demigods; sumanäàsi—very beautiful and fragrant flowers;
mudä anvitäù—being joyous in their attitude; mandam mandam—very mildly;
jala-dharäù—the clouds; jagarjuù—vibrated; anusägaram—following the
vibrations of the sea waves; niçéthe—late at night; tamaù-udbhüte—when it
was densely dark; jäyamäne—on the appearance of; janärdane—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Viñëu; devakyäm—in the womb of Devaké;
deva-rüpiëyäm—who was in the same category as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead (änanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhävitäbhiù); viñëuù—Lord Viñëu, the
Supreme Lord; sarva-guhä-çayaù—who is situated in the core of everyone's
heart; äviräsét—appeared; yathä—as; präcyäm diçi—in the east; induù iva—like
the full moon; puñkalaù—complete in every respect.
TRANSLATION
The demigods and great saintly persons showered flowers in a joyous mood,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
and clouds gathered in the sky and very mildly thundered, making sounds like
those of the ocean's waves. Then the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu,
who is situated in the core of everyone's heart, appeared from the heart of
Devaké in the dense darkness of night, like the full moon rising on the eastern
horizon, because Devaké was of the same category as Çré Kåñëa.
PURPORT
As stated in the Brahma-saàhitä (5.37):
änanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhävitäbhis
täbhir ya eva nija-rüpatayä kaläbhiù
goloka eva nivasaty akhilätma-bhüto
244
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
This verse indicates that Kåñëa and His entourage are of the same spiritual
potency (änanda-cinmaya-rasa). Kåñëa's father, His mother, His friends the
cowherd boys, and the cows are all expansions of Kåñëa, as will be explained in
the brahma-vimohana-lélä. When Brahmä took away Kåñëa's associates to test
the supremacy of Lord Kåñëa, the Lord expanded Himself again in the forms of
the many cowherd boys and calves, all of whom, as Brahmä saw, were
viñëu-mürtis. Devaké is also an expansion of Kåñëa, and therefore this verse
says, devakyäà deva-rüpiëyäà viñëuù sarva-guhä-çayaù.
At the time for the Lord's appearance, the great sages and the demigods,
being pleased, began to shower flowers. At the seashore, there was the sound of
mild waves, and above the sea there were clouds in the sky which began to
thunder very pleasingly.
When things were adjusted like this, Lord Viñëu, who is residing within the
heart of every living entity, appeared in the darkness of night as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead before Devaké, who appeared as one of the
demigoddesses. The appearance of Lord Viñëu at that time could be compared
to the rising of the full moon in the sky on the eastern horizon. The objection
may be raised that since Lord Kåñëa appeared on the eighth day of the waning
moon, there could be no rising of the full moon. In answer to this it may be
said that Lord Kåñëa appeared in the dynasty which is in the hierarchy of the
moon; therefore, although the moon was incomplete on that night, because of
the Lord's appearance in the dynasty wherein the moon is himself the original
person, the moon was in an overjoyous condition, so by the grace of Kåñëa he
could appear as a full moon. To welcome the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
the waning moon became a full moon in jubilation.
Instead of deva-rüpiëyäm, some texts of Çrémad-Bhägavatam clearly say
viñëu-rüpiëyäm. In either case, the meaning is that Devaké has the same
spiritual form as the Lord. The Lord is sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], and
Devaké is also sac-cid-änanda-vigraha. Therefore no one can find any fault in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
245
the way the Supreme Personality of Godhead, sac-cid-änanda-vigraha,
appeared from the womb of Devaké.
Those who are not in full knowledge that the appearance and
disappearance of the Lord are transcendental (janma karma ca me divyam [Bg.
4.9]) are sometimes surprised that the Supreme Personality of Godhead can
take birth like an ordinary child. Actually, however, the Lord's birth is never
ordinary. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is already situated within the
core of everyone's heart as antaryämé, the Supersoul. Thus because He was
present in full potency in Devaké's heart, He was also able to appear outside
her body.
One of the twelve great personalities is Bhéñmadeva (svayambhür näradaù
çambhuù kumäraù kapilo manuù prahläda, janako bhéñmaù [SB 6.3.20]). In
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.9.42), Bhéñma, a great authority to be followed by
devotees, says that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is situated in the core
of everyone's heart, just as the sun may be on everyone's head. Yet although
the sun may be on the heads of millions and millions of people, this does not
mean that the sun is variously situated. Similarly, because the Supreme
Personality of Godhead has inconceivable potencies, He can be within
everyone's heart and yet not be situated variously. Ekatvam anupaçyataù
(Éçopaniñad 7). The Lord is one, but He can appear in everyone's heart by His
inconceivable potency. Thus although the Lord was within the heart of
Devaké, He appeared as her child. According to the Viñëu Puräëa, therefore, as
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Vaiñëava-toñaëé, the Lord appeared like the sun (anugrahäsaya).
The Brahma-saàhitä (5.35) confirms that the Lord is situated even within the
atom (aëòäntara-stha-paramäëu-cayäntara-stham). He is situated in Mathurä,
in Vaikuëöha and in the core of the heart. Therefore one should clearly
understand that He did not live like an ordinary child in the heart or the
womb of Devaké. Nor did He appear like an ordinary human child, although
He seemed to do so in order to bewilder asuras like Kaàsa. I he asuras wrongly
think that Kåñëa took birth like an ordinary child and passed away from this
world like an ordinary man. Such asuric conceptions are rejected by persons in
246
knowledge of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Ajo 'pi sann avyayätmä
bhütänäm éçvaro 'pi san (Bg. 4.6). As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, the Lord is aja,
unborn, and He is the supreme controller of everything. Nonetheless, He
appeared as the child of Devaké. This verse describes the inconceivable
potency of the Lord, who appeared like the full moon. Understanding the
special significance of the appearance of the Supreme Godhead, one should
never regard Him as having taken birth like an ordinary child.
TEXTS 9-10
tamaàu"taM baAlak(mambaujaeºaNAM
catauBauRjaM zAÊÿgAd"Aâud"AyauDama,
™aIvats$alaºmaM gAlazAAeiBak(AEstauBaM
paItaAmbarM" s$aAn‰"payaAed"s$aAEBagAma,
mah"AhR"#vaEäU"yaRik(r"Iq%ku(Nx"laitvaSaA
pair"Sval(s$ah"›aku(ntalama,
oÚ"Amak(AHcyaËÿd"k(ÆÿNAAid"iBar,"
ivar"AecamaAnaM vas$aude"va Weºata
tam adbhutaà bälakam ambujekñaëaà
catur-bhujaà çaìkha-gadädy-udäyudham
çrévatsa-lakñmaà gala-çobhi-kaustubhaà
pétämbaraà sändra-payoda-saubhagam
mahärha-vaidürya-kiréöa-kuëòalatviñä
pariñvakta-sahasra-kuntalam
uddäma-käïcy-aìgada-kaìkaëädibhir
virocamänaà vasudeva aikñata
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
247
SYNONYMS
tam—that; adbhutam—wonderful; bälakam—child; ambuja-ékñaëam—with
eyes resembling lotuses; catuù-bhujam—with four hands;
çaìkha-gadä-ädi—bearing a conchshell, club, disc and lotus (in those four
hands); udäyudham—different weapons; çrévatsa-lakñmam—decorated with a
particular type of hair called Çrévatsa, which is visible only on the chest of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; gala-çobhi-kaustubham—on His neck was
the Kaustubha gem, which is particularly available in Vaikuëöhaloka;
péta-ambaram—His garments were yellow; sändra-payoda-saubhagam—very
beautiful, being present with the hue of blackish clouds;
mahä-arha-vaidürya-kiréöa-kuëòala—of His helmet and earrings, which were
studded with very valuable Vaidürya gems; tviñä—by the beauty;
pariñvakta-sahasra-kuntalam—brilliantly illuminated by scattered, fully grown
hair; uddäma-käïcé-aìgada-kaìkaëa-ädibhiù—with a brilliant belt on His
waist, armbands on His arms, bracelets on His wrists, etc.; virocamänam—very
beautifully decorated; vasudevaù—Vasudeva, the father of Kåñëa;
aikñata—saw.
TRANSLATION
Vasudeva then saw the newborn child, who had very wonderful lotuslike
eyes and who bore in His four hands the four weapons çaìkha, cakra, gadä and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
padma. On His chest was the mark of Çrévatsa and on His neck the brilliant
Kaustubha gem. Dressed in yellow, His body blackish like a dense cloud, His
scattered hair fully grown, and His helmet and earrings sparkling uncommonly
with the valuable gem Vaidürya, the child, decorated with a brilliant belt,
armlets, bangles and other ornaments, appeared very wonderful.
PURPORT
248
To support the word adbhutam, meaning "wonderful," the decorations and
opulences of the newborn child are fully described. As confirmed in the
Brahma-saàhitä (5.30), barhävataàsam asitämbuda-sundaräìgam: the hue of
the Lord's beautiful form resembles the blackish color of dense clouds (asita
means "blackish," and ambuda means "cloud"). It is clear from the word
catur-bhujam that Kåñëa first appeared with four hands, as Lord Viñëu. No
ordinary child in human society has ever been born with four hands. And
when is a child born with fully grown hair? The descent of the Lord, therefore,
is completely distinct from the birth of an ordinary child. The Vaidürya gem,
which sometimes appears bluish, sometimes yellow and sometimes red, is
available in Vaikuëöhaloka. The Lord's helmet and earrings were decorated
with this particular gem.
TEXT 11
s$a ivasmayaAetPu(éaivalaAecanaAe h"ir$M
s$autaM ivalaAefyaAnak(äu"näu"iBastad"A
k{(SNAAvataAr"Aets$avas$am”amaAe's$pa{zAna,
maud"A iã"jaeByaAe'yautamaAplautaAe gAvaAma,
sa vismayotphulla-vilocano harià
sutaà vilokyänakadundubhis tadä
kåñëävatärotsava-sambhramo 'spåçan
mudä dvijebhyo 'yutam äpluto gaväm
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Vasudeva, also known as Änakadundubhi);
vismaya-utphulla-vilocanaù—his eyes being struck with wonder at the beautiful
appearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; harim—Lord Hari, the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
249
Supreme Personality of Godhead; sutam—as his son; vilokya—observing;
änakadundubhiù—Vasudeva; tadä—at that time; kåñëa-avatära-utsava—for a
festival to be observed because of Kåñëa's appearance; sambhramaù—wishing
to welcome the Lord with great respect; aspåçat—took advantage by
distributing; mudä—with great jubilation; dvijebhyaù—to the brähmaëas;
ayutam—ten thousand; äplutaù—overwhelmed, surcharged; gaväm—cows.
TRANSLATION
When Vasudeva saw his extraordinary son, his eyes were struck with
wonder. In transcendental jubilation, he mentally collected ten thousand cows
and distributed them among the brähmaëas as a transcendental festival.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has analyzed the wonder of Vasudeva
upon seeing his extraordinary child. Vasudeva was shivering with wonder to
see a newborn child decorated so nicely with valuable garments and gems. He
could immediately understand that the Supreme Personality of Godhead had
appeared, not as an ordinary child but in His original, fully decorated,
four-handed form. The first wonder was that the Lord was not afraid to appear
within the prison house of Kaàsa, where Vasudeva and Devaké were interned.
Second, although the Lord, the Supreme Transcendence, is all-pervading, He
had appeared from the womb of Devaké. The third point of wonder, therefore,
was that a child could take birth from the womb so nicely decorated. Fourth,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead was Vasudeva's worshipable Deity yet
had taken birth as his son. For all these reasons, Vasudeva was
transcendentally jubilant, and he wanted to perform a festival, as kñatriyas do
to celebrate the birth of a child, but because of his imprisonment he was
unable to do it externally, and therefore he performed the festival within his
mind. This was just as good. If one cannot externally serve the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, one can serve the Lord within one's mind, since the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
250
activities of the mind are as good as those of the other senses. This is called the
nondual or absolute situation (advaya jïäna). People generally perform
ritualistic ceremonies for the birth of a child. Why then should Vasudeva not
have performed such a ceremony when the Supreme Lord appeared as his son?
TEXT 12
@TaEnamastaAEd"vaDaAyaR paUç&SaM
parM" nataAËÿ: k{(taDaI: k{(taAÃaila:
svar"AeicaSaA BaAr"ta s$aUitak(AgA{hM"
ivar"AecayantaM gAtaBaI: ‘aBaAvaivata,
athainam astaud avadhärya püruñaà
paraà natäìgaù kåta-dhéù kåtäïjaliù
sva-rociñä bhärata sütikä-gåhaà
virocayantaà gata-bhéù prabhäva-vit
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; enam—to the child; astaut—offered prayers;
avadhärya—understanding surely that the child was the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; püruñam—the Supreme Person; param—transcendental;
nata-aìgaù—falling down; kåta-dhéù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
on;
kåta-aïjaliù—with folded hands; sva-rociñä—by the brilliance of His personal
beauty; bhärata—O Mahäräja Parékñit, descendant of Mahäräja Bharata;
sütikä-gåham—the place where the Lord was born;
virocayantam—illuminating all around; gata-bhéù—all his fear disappeared;
prabhäva-vit—he could now understand the influence (of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead).
251
TRANSLATION
O Mahäräja Parékñit, descendant of King Bharata, Vasudeva could
understand that this child was the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa.
Having concluded this without a doubt, he became fearless. Bowing down with
folded hands and concentrating his attention, he began to offer prayers to the
child, who illuminated His birthplace by His natural influence.
PURPORT
Struck with such great wonder, Vasudeva now concentrated his attention
on the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Understanding the influence of the
Supreme Lord, he was surely fearless, since he understood that the Lord had
appeared to give him protection (gata-bhéù prabhäva-vit). Understanding that
the Supreme Personality of Godhead was present, he appropriately offered
prayers as follows.
TEXT 13
™aIvas$aude"va ovaAca
ivaid"taAe'is$a BavaAna, s$aAºaAta,
pauç&Sa: ‘ak{(tae: par":
ke(valaAnauBavaAnand"-
svaè&pa: s$avaRbauiÜ"ä{"k,(
çré-vasudeva uväca
vidito 'si bhavän säkñät
puruñaù prakåteù paraù
kevalänubhavänandacopyright
©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
252
svarüpaù sarva-buddhi-dåk
SYNONYMS
çré-vasudevaù uväca—Çré Vasudeva prayed; viditaù asi—now I am fully
conscious of You; bhavän—Your Lordship; säkñät—directly; puruñaù—the
Supreme Person; prakåteù—to material nature; paraù—transcendental, beyond
everything material; kevala-anubhava-änanda-svarüpaù—Your form is
sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], and whoever perceives You becomes
transcendentally blissful; sarva-buddhi-dåk—the supreme observer, the
Supersoul, the intelligence of everyone.
TRANSLATION
Vasudeva said: My Lord, You are the Supreme Person, beyond material
existence, and You are the Supersoul. Your form can be perceived by
transcendental knowledge, by which You can be understood as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. I now understand Your position perfectly.
PURPORT
Within Vasudeva's heart, affection for his son and knowledge of the
Supreme Lord's transcendental nature both awakened In the beginning
Vasudeva thought, "Such a beautiful child has been born, but now Kaàsa will
come and kill Him." But when he understood that this was not an ordinary
child but the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he became fearless. Regarding
his son as the Supreme Lord, wonderful in everything, he began offering
prayers appropriate for the Supreme Lord. Completely free from fear of
Kaàsa's atrocities, he accepted the child simultaneously as an object of
affection and as an object of worship by prayers.
TEXT 14
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
253
s$a Wva sva‘ak{(tyaedM"
s$a{"î"Aƒae i‡agAuNAAtmak(ma,
tad"nau tvaM ÷‘aivaí":
‘aivaí" wva BaAvyas$ae
sa eva svaprakåtyedaà
såñövägre tri-guëätmakam
tad anu tvaà hy apraviñöaù
praviñöa iva bhävyase
SYNONYMS
saù—He (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); eva—indeed;
sva-prakåtyä—by Your personal energy (mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù süyate
sa-caräcaram); idam—this material world; såñövä—after creating; agre—in the
beginning; tri-guëa-ätmakam—made of three modes of energy
(sattva-rajas-tamo-guëa); tat anu—thereafter; tvam—Your Lordship;
hi—indeed; apraviñöaù—although You did not enter; praviñöaù iva—You
appear to have entered; bhävyase—are so understood.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, You are the same person who in the beginning created this
material world by His personal external energy. After the creation of this world
of three guëas [sattva, rajas and tamas], You appear to have entered it, although
in fact You have not.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
In Bhagavad-gétä (7.4) the Supreme Personality of Godhead clearly
254
explains:
bhümir äpo 'nalo väyuù
khaà mano buddhir eva ca
ahaìkära itéyaà me
bhinnä prakåtir añöadhä
This material world of three modes of nature-sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa and
tamo-guëa—is a composition of earth, water, fire, air, mind, intelligence and
false ego, all of which are energies coming from Kåñëa, yet Kåñëa, being always
transcendental, is aloof from this material world. Those who are not in pure
knowledge think that Kåñëa is a product of matter and that His body is
material like ours (avajänanti mäà müòhäù [Bg. 9.11]). In fact, however, Kåñëa
is always aloof from this material world.
In the Vedic literature, we find the creation described in relationship to
Mahä-Viñëu. As stated in the Brahma-saàhitä (5.35):
eko 'py asau racayituà jagad-aëòa-koöià
yac-chaktir asti jagad-aëòa-cayä yad-antaù
aëòäntara-stha-paramäëu-cayäntara-sthaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship the primeval Lord, Govinda, the original Personality of Godhead.
By His partial plenary expansion as Mahä-Viñëu, He enters into material
nature. Then He enters every universe as Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, and He
enters all the elements, including every atom of matter, as Kñérodakaçäyé
Viñëu. Such manifestations of cosmic creation are innumerable, both in the
universes and in the individual atoms." Govinda is partially exhibited as
antaryämé, the Supersoul, who enters this material world (aëòäntara-stha) and
who is also within the atom. The
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
(5.48) further says:
yasyaika-niçvasita-kälam athävalambya
jévanti loma-vilajä jagad-aëòa-näthäù
255
viñëur mahän sa iha yasya kalä-viçeño
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
This verse describes Mahä-Viñëu as a plenary expansion of Kåñëa. Mahä-Viñëu
lies on the Causal Ocean, and when He exhales, millions of brahmäëòas, or
universes, come from the pores of His body. Then, when Mahä-Viñëu inhales,
all these brahmäëòas disappear. Thus the millions of brahmäëòas controlled by
the Brahmäs and other demigods come and go in this material world through
the breathing of Mahä-Viñëu.
Foolish persons think that when Kåñëa appears as the son of Vasudeva, He
is limited like an ordinary child. But Vasudeva was aware that although the
Lord had appeared as his son, the Lord had not entered Devaké's womb and
then come out. Rather, the Lord was always there. The Supreme Lord is
all-pervading, present within and without. praviñöa iva bhävyase: He only
seemed to have entered the womb of Devaké and to have now appeared as
Vasudeva's child. The expression of this knowledge by Vasudeva indicates that
Vasudeva knew how these events took place. Vasudeva was certainly a devotee
of the Lord in full knowledge, and we must learn from devotees like him.
Bhagavad-gétä (4.34) therefore recommends:
tad viddhi praëipätena
paripraçnena sevayä
upadekñyanti te jïänaà
jïäninas tattva-darçinaù
"Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire from him
submissively and render service unto him. The self-realized soul can impart
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Supreme Personality of Godhead, yet he was in full knowledge of how the
Supreme Lord appears and disappears. He was therefore tattva-darçé, a seer of
the truth, because he personally saw how the Supreme Absolute Truth
appeared as his son. Vasudeva was not in ignorance, thinking that because the
256
Supreme Godhead had appeared as his son, the Lord had become limited. The
Lord is unlimitedly existing and all-pervading, inside and outside. Thus there
is no question of His appearance or disappearance.
TEXTS 15-17
yaTaemae'ivak{(taA BaAvaAs$a,
taTaA tae ivak{(taE: s$ah"
naAnaAvaIyaAR: pa{TagBaUtaA
ivar"AjaM janayainta ih"
s$aiªapatya s$amautpaAâ
ä{"zyantae'naugAtaA wva
‘aAgAeva ivaâmaAnatvaAna,
na taeSaAimah" s$amBava:
WvaM BavaAna, bauÜ"YanaumaeyalaºaNAEr,"
ƒaA÷EgAuRNAE: s$aªaipa taÖ"NAAƒah":
@naAva{tatvaAß"ih"r"ntarM" na tae
s$avaRsya s$avaARtmana @Atmavastauna:
yatheme 'vikåtä bhäväs
tathä te vikåtaiù saha
nänä-véryäù påthag-bhütä
viräjaà janayanti hi
sannipatya samutpädya
dåçyante 'nugatä iva
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
257
präg eva vidyamänatvän
na teñäm iha sambhavaù
evaà bhavän buddhy-anumeya-lakñaëair
grähyair guëaiù sann api tad-guëägrahaù
anävåtatväd bahir antaraà na te
sarvasya sarvätmana ätma-vastunaù
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; ime—these material creations, made of material energy;
avikåtäù—actually not disintegrated; bhäväù—with such a conception;
tathä—similarly; te—they; vikåtaiù saha—association with these different
elements coming from the total material energy; nänä-véryäù—every element
is full of different energies; påthak—separated; bhütäù—becoming;
viräjam—the whole cosmic manifestation; janayanti—create; hi—indeed;
sannipatya—because of association with the spiritual energy;
samutpädya—after being created; dåçyante—they appear; anugatäù—entered
within it; iva—as if; präk—from the very beginning, before the creation of this
cosmic manifestation;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—indeed; vidyamänatvät—due to the existence of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; na—not; teñäm—of these material
elements; iha—in this matter of creation; sambhavaù—entering would have
been possible; evam—in this way; bhavän—O my Lord;
buddhi-anumeya-lakñaëaiù—by real intelligence and by such symptoms;
grähyaiù—with the objects of the senses; guëaiù—with the modes of material
nature; san api—although in touch; tat-guëa-agrahaù—are not touched by the
material qualities; anävåtatvät—because of being situated everywhere; bahiù
antaram—within the external and internal; na te—there is no such thing for
You; sarvasya—of everything; sarva-ätmanaù—You are the root of everything;
ätma-vastunaù—everything belongs to You, but You are outside and inside of
everything.
258
TRANSLATION
The mahat-tattva, the total material energy, is undivided, but because of the
material modes of nature, it appears to separate into earth, water, fire, air and
ether. Because of the living energy [jéva-bhüta], these separated energies
combine to make the cosmic manifestation visible, but in fact, before the
creation of the cosmos, the total energy is already present. Therefore, the total
material energy never actually enters the creation. Similarly, although You are
perceived by our senses because of Your presence, You cannot be perceived by
the senses, nor experienced by the mind or words [aväì-mänasa-gocara]. With
our senses we can perceive some things, but not everything; for example, we
can use our eyes to see, but not to taste. Consequently, You are beyond
perception by the senses. Although in touch with the modes of material nature,
You are unaffected by them. You are the prime factor in everything, the
all-pervading, undivided Supersoul. For You, therefore, there is no external or
internal. You never entered the womb of Devaké; rather, You existed there
already.
PURPORT
This same understanding is explained by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gétä
(9.4):
mayä tatam idaà sarvaà
jagad-avyakta-mürtinä
mat-sthäni sarva-bhütäni
na cähaà teñv avasthitaù
"By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All beings
are in Me, but I am not in them."
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is not perceivable through the gross
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
259
cannot be understood by material senses. Only to one who is engaged in pure
devotional service under proper guidance is He revealed. As stated in
Brahma-saàhitä (5.38):
premäïjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santaù sadaiva hådayeñu vilokayanti
One can see the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda, always, within
oneself and outside oneself, if one has developed the transcendental loving
attitude toward Him. Thus for people in general, He is not visible. In the
above-mentioned verse from Bhagavad-gétä, therefore, it is said that although
He is all-pervading, everywhere present, He is not conceivable by the material
senses. But actually, although we cannot see Him, everything is resting in Him.
As discussed in the Seventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä, the entire material
cosmic manifestation is only a combination of His two different energies, the
superior, spiritual energy and the inferior, material energy. Just as the sunshine
is spread all over the universe, the energy of the Lord is spread all over the
creation, and everything is resting in that energy.
Yet one should not conclude that because He is spread all over He has lost
His personal existence. To refute such arguments, the Lord says, "I am
everywhere, and everything is in Me, but still I am aloof." For example, a king
heads a government which is but the manifestation of the king's energy; the
different governmental departments are nothing but the energies of the king,
and each department is resting on the king's power. But still one cannot expect
the king to be present in every department personally. That is a crude
example. Similarly, all the manifestations that we see, and everything that
exists, both in this material world and in the spiritual world, are resting on the
energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The creation takes place by
the diffusion of His different energies, and, as stated in the Bhagavad-gétä,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
He
is everywhere present by His personal representation, the diffusion of His
different energies.
One may argue that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who creates the
260
whole cosmic manifestation simply by His glance, cannot come within the
womb of Devaké, the wife of Vasudeva. To eradicate this argument, Vasudeva
said, "My dear Lord, it is not very wonderful that You appeared within the
womb of Devaké, for the creation was also made in that way. You were lying in
the Causal Ocean as Mahä-Viñëu, and by Your breathing, innumerable
universes came into existence. Then You entered into each of the universes as
Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu. Then again You expanded Yourself as Kñérodakaçäyé
Viñëu and entered into the heart of all living entities and entered even within
the atoms. Therefore Your entrance into the womb of Devaké is
understandable in the same way. You appear to have entered, but You are
simultaneously all-pervading. We can understand Your entrance and
nonentrance from material examples. The total material energy remains intact
even after being divided into sixteen elements. The material body is nothing
but a combination of the five gross elements—namely earth, water, fire, air
and ether. Whenever there is a material body, it appears that such elements
are newly created, but actually the elements are always existing outside of the
body. Similarly, although You appear as a child in the womb of Devaké, You
are also existing outside. You are always in Your abode, but still You can
simultaneously expand Yourself into millions of forms.
"One has to understand Your appearance with great intelligence because
the material energy is also emanating from You. You are the original source of
the material energy, just as the sun is the source of the sunshine. The sunshine
cannot cover the sun globe, nor can the material energy—being an emanation
from You—cover You. You appear to be in the three modes of material energy,
but actually the three modes of material energy cannot cover You. This is
understood by the highly intellectual philosophers. In other words, although
You appear to be within the material energy, You are never covered by it."
We hear from the Vedic version that the Supreme Brahman exhibits His
effulgence and therefore everything is illuminated. We can understand from
Brahma-saàhitä that the brahmajyoti, or the Brahman effulgence, emanates
from the body of the Supreme Lord. And from the Brahman effulgence, all
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
261
creation takes place. It is further stated in the Bhagavad-gétä that the Lord is
the support of the Brahman effulgence. Originally He is the root cause of
everything. But persons who are less intelligent think that when the Supreme
Personality of Godhead comes within this material world, He accepts material
qualities. Such conclusions are not mature, but are, made by the less
intelligent.
TEXT 18
ya @AtmanaAe ä{"zyagAuNAeSau s$aiªaita
vyavasyatae svavyaitare"k(taAe'bauDa:
ivanaAnauvaAdM" na ca tanmanaIiSataM
s$amyagyatastyal(maupaAd"d"tpaumaAna,
ya ätmano dåçya-guëeñu sann iti
vyavasyate sva-vyatirekato 'budhaù
vinänuvädaà na ca tan manéñitaà
samyag yatas tyaktam upädadat pumän
SYNONYMS
yaù—anyone who; ätmanaù—of his own real identity, the soul;
dåçya-guëeñu—among the visible objects, beginning with the body; san—being
situated in that position; iti—thus; vyavasyate—continues to act;
sva-vyatirekataù—as if the body were independent of the soul; abudhaù—a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
rascal; vinä anuvädam—without proper analytical study; na—not; ca—also;
tat—the body and other visible objects; manéñitam—such considerations
having been discussed; samyak—fully; yataù—because he is a fool;
tyaktam—are rejected; upädadat—accepts this body as reality; pumän—a
person.
262
TRANSLATION
One who considers his visible body, which is a product of the three modes of
nature, to be independent of the soul is unaware of the basis of existence, and
therefore he is a rascal. Those who are learned have rejected his conclusion
because one can understand through full discussion that with no basis in soul,
the visible body and senses would be insubstantial. Nonetheless, although his
conclusion has been rejected, a foolish person considers it a reality.
PURPORT
Without the basic principle of soul, the body cannot be produced. So-called
scientists have tried in many ways to produce a living body in their chemical
laboratories, but no one has been able to do it because unless the spirit soul is
present, a body cannot be prepared from material elements. Since scientists are
now enamored of theories about the chemical composition of the body, we
have challenged many scientists to make even a small egg. The chemicals in
eggs can be found very easily. There is a white substance and a yellow
substance, covered by a shell, and modern scientists should very easily be able
to duplicate all this. But even if they were to prepare such an egg and put it in
an incubator, this man-made chemical egg would not produce a chicken. The
soul must be added because there is no question of a chemical combination for
life. Those who think that life can exist without the soul have therefore been
described here as abudhaù, foolish rascals.
Again, there are those who reject the body, regarding it as insubstantial.
They are of the same category of fools. One can neither reject the body nor
accept it as substantial. The substance is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and both the body and the soul are energies of the Supreme Godhead, as
described by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gétä (7.4-5):
bhümir äpo 'nalo väyuù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
263
khaà mano buddhir eva ca
ahaìkära itéyaà me
bhinnä prakåtir añöadhä
apareyam itas tv anyäà
prakåtià viddhi me paräm
jéva-bhütäà mahä-bäho
yayedaà dhäryate jagat
"Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego—all together
these eight comprise My separated material energies. But besides this inferior
nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is a superior energy of Mine, which
consists of all living entities who are struggling with material nature and are
sustaining the universe."
The body, therefore, has a relationship with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, just as the soul does. Since both of them are energies of the Lord,
neither of them is false, because they come from the reality. One who does not
know this secret of life is described as abudhaù. According to the Vedic
injunctions, aitadätmyam idaà sarvam, sarvaà khalv idaà brahma: everything
is the Supreme Brahman. Therefore, both the body and the soul are Brahman,
since matter and spirit emanate from Brahman.
Not knowing the conclusions of the Vedas, some people accept the material
nature as substance, and others accept the spirit soul as substance, but actually
Brahman is the substance. Brahman is the cause of all causes. The ingredients
and the immediate cause of this manifested material world are Brahman, and
we cannot make the ingredients of this world independent of Brahman.
Furthermore, since the ingredients and the immediate cause of this material
manifestation are Brahman, both of them are truth, satya; there is no validity
to the expression brahma satyaà jagan mithyä. The world is not false.
Jïänés reject this world, and foolish persons accept this world as reality, and
in this way they are both misguided. Although the body is not as important as
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
264
the soul, we cannot say that it is false. Yet the body is temporary, and only
foolish, materialistic persons, who do not have full knowledge of the soul,
regard the temporary body as reality and engage in decorating this body. Both
of these pitfalls—rejection of the body as false and acceptance of the body as
all in all—can be avoided when one is fully situated in Kåñëa consciousness. If
we regard this world as false, we fall into the category of asuras, who say that
this world is unreal, with no foundation and no God in control (asatyam
apratiñöhaà te jagad ähur anéçvaram). As described in the Sixteenth Chapter of
Bhagavad-gétä, this is the conclusion of demons.
TEXT 19
tvaÔaAe'sya janmaisTaitas$aMyamaAna, ivaBaAe
vad"ntyanaIh"Ad"gAuNAAd"ivai‚(yaAta,
tvayaIìre" “aöiNA naAe ivaç&Dyatae
tvad"A™ayatvaAäu"pacayaRtae gAuNAE:
tvatto 'sya janma-sthiti-saàyamän vibho
vadanty anéhäd aguëäd avikriyät
tvayéçvare brahmaëi no virudhyate
tvad-äçrayatväd upacaryate guëaiù
SYNONYMS
tvattaù—are from Your Lordship; asya—of the entire cosmic manifestation;
janma—the creation; sthiti—maintenance; saàyamän—and annihilation;
vibho—O my Lord; vadanti—the learned Vedic scholars conclude;
anéhät—who are free from endeavor; aguëät—who are unaffected by the
modes of material nature; avikriyät—who are unchanging in Your spiritual
situation; tvayi—in You; éçvare—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
265
brahmaëi—who are Parabrahman, the Supreme Brahman; no—not;
virudhyate—there is a contradiction; tvat-äçrayatvät—because of being
controlled by You; upacaryate—things are going on automatically; guëaiù—by
the operation of the material modes.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, learned Vedic scholars conclude that the creation, maintenance
and annihilation of the entire cosmic manifestation are performed by You, who
are free from endeavor, unaffected by the modes of material nature, and
changeless in Your spiritual situation. There are no contradictions in You, who
are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Parabrahman. Because the three
modes of material nature-sattva, rajas and tamas—are under Your control,
everything takes place automatically.
PURPORT
As stated in the Vedas:
na tasya käryaà karaëaà ca vidyate
na tat-samaç cäbhyadhikaç ca dåçyate
paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate
sväbhäviké jïäna-bala-kriyä ca
[Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]
"The Supreme Lord has nothing to do, and no one is found to be equal to or
greater than Him, for everything is done naturally and systematically by His
multifarious energies." (Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad 6.8) Creation, maintenance and
annihilation are all conducted personally by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and this is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù
süyate sa-caräcaram [Bg. 9.10]). Yet ultimately the Lord does not need to do
anything, and therefore He is nirvikära, changeless. Because everything is done
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
266
under His direction, He is called såñöi-kartä, the master of creation. Similarly,
He is the master of annihilation. When a master sits in one place while his
servants work in different duties, whatever the servants are doing is ultimately
an activity of the master, although he is doing nothing (na tasya käryaà
karaëaà ca vidyate). The Lord's potencies are so numerous that everything is
nicely done. Therefore, He is naturally still and is not directly the doer of
anything in this material world.
TEXT 20
s$a tvaM i‡alaAek(isTatayae svamaAyayaA
ibaBaiSaR zAuflaM Kalau vaNARmaAtmana:
s$agAARya r"lM( r"jas$aAepaba{Mih"taM
k{(SNAM ca vaNA< tamas$aA janaAtyayae
sa tvaà tri-loka-sthitaye sva-mäyayä
bibharñi çuklaà khalu varëam ätmanaù
sargäya raktaà rajasopabåàhitaà
kåñëaà ca varëaà tamasä janätyaye
SYNONYMS
saù tvam—Your Lordship, who are the same person, the Transcendence;
tri-loka-sthitaye—to maintain the three worlds, the upper, middle and lower
planetary systems; sva-mäyayä—by Your personal energy (ätma-mäyayä);
bibharñi—assume; çuklam—the white form of Viñëu in goodness; khalu—as
well as; varëam—color; ätmanaù—of the same category as You (viñëu-tattva);
sargäya—for the creation of the entire world; raktam—the reddish color of
rajo-guëa; rajasä—with the quality of passion; upabåàhitam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—being charged;
kåñëam ca—and the quality of darkness; varëam—the color; tamasä—which is
267
surrounded by ignorance; jana-atyaye—for the ultimate destruction of the
entire creation.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, Your form is transcendental to the three material modes, yet for
the maintenance of the three worlds, You assume the white color of Viñëu in
goodness; for creation, which is surrounded by the quality of passion, You
appear reddish; and at the end, when there is a need for annihilation, which is
surrounded by ignorance, You appear blackish.
PURPORT
Vasudeva prayed to the Lord, "You are called çuklam. Çuklam, or 'whiteness,'
is the symbolic representation of the Absolute Truth because it is unaffected
by the material qualities. Lord Brahmä is called rakta, or red, because Brahmä
represents the qualities of passion for creation. Darkness is entrusted to Lord
Çiva because he annihilates the cosmos. The creation, annihilation and
maintenance of this cosmic manifestation are conducted by Your potencies,
yet You are always unaffected by those qualities." As confirmed in the Vedas,
harir hi nirguëaù säkñät: the Supreme Personality of Godhead is always free
from all material qualities. It is also said that the qualities of passion and
ignorance are nonexistent in the person of the Supreme Lord.
In this verse, the three colors mentioned-çukla, rakta and kåñëa—are not to
be understood literally, in terms of what we experience with our senses, but
rather as representatives of sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa. After all,
sometimes we see that a duck is white, although it is in tamo-guëa, the mode of
ignorance. Illustrating the logic called bakändha-nyäya, the duck is such a fool
that it runs after the testicles of a bull, thinking them to be a hanging fish that
can be taken when it drops. Thus the duck is always in darkness. Vyäsadeva,
however, the compiler of the Vedic literature, is blackish, but this does not
mean that he is in tamo-guëa;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
268
sattva-guëa, beyond the material modes of nature. Sometimes these colors
(çukla-raktas tathä pétaù) are used to designate the brähmaëas, kñatriyas, vaiçyas
and çüdras. Lord Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu is celebrated as possessing a blackish
color, Lord Çiva is whitish, and Lord Brahmä is reddish, but according to Çréla
Sanätana Gosvämé in the Vaiñëava-toñaëé-öékä, this exhibition of colors is not
what is referred to here.
The real understanding of çukla, rakta and kåñëa is as follows. The Lord is
always transcendental, but for the sake of creation He assumes the color rakta
as Lord Brahmä. Again, sometimes the Lord becomes angry. As He says in
Bhagavad-gétä (16.19):
tän ahaà dviñataù krürän
saàsäreñu narädhamän
kñipämy ajasram açubhän
äsuréñv eva yoniñu
"Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among men, are
cast by Me into the ocean of material existence, into various demoniac species
of life." To destroy the demons, the Lord becomes angry, and therefore He
assumes the form of Lord Çiva. In summary, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is always beyond the material qualities, and we should not be misled
into thinking otherwise simply because of sense perception. One must
understand the position of the Lord through the authorities, or mahäjanas. As
stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.3.28), ete cäàça-kaläù puàsaù kåñëas tu
bhagavän svayam.
TEXT 21
tvamasya laAek(sya ivaBaAe ir"r"iºaSaur,"
gA{he"'vataINAAeR'is$a mamaAiKalaeìr"
r"Ajanyas$aMÁaAs$aur"k(Aeiq%yaUTapaEr,"
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
269
inavyaUR÷maAnaA inah"inaSyas$ae camaU:
tvam asya lokasya vibho rirakñiñur
gåhe 'vatérëo 'si mamäkhileçvara
räjanya-saàjïäsura-koöi-yüthapair
nirvyühyamänä nihaniñyase camüù
SYNONYMS
tvam—Your Lordship; asya—of this world; lokasya—especially of this
martya-loka, the planet earth; vibho—O Supreme; rirakñiñuù—desiring
protection (from the disturbance of the asuras); gåhe—in this house; avatérëaù
asi—have now appeared; mama—my; akhila-éçvara—although You are the
proprietor of the entire creation; räjanya-saàjïa-asura-koöi-yütha-paiù—with
millions of demons and their followers in the roles of politicians and kings;
nirvyühyamänäù—which are moving here and there all over the world;
nihaniñyase—will kill; camüù—the armies, paraphernalia, soldiers and
retinues.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, proprietor of all creation, You have now appeared in my house,
desiring to protect this world. I am sure that You will kill all the armies that are
moving all over the world under the leadership of politicians who are dressed as
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
kñatriya rulers but who are factually demons. They must be killed by You for
the protection of the innocent public.
PURPORT
Kåñëa appears in this world for two purposes, pariträëäya sädhünäà
vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm: [Bg. 4.8] to protect the innocent, religious devotees of
the Lord and to annihilate all the uneducated, uncultured asuras, who
270
unnecessarily bark like dogs and fight among themselves for political power. It
is said, kali-käle näma-rüpe kåñëa avatära. The Hare Kåñëa movement is also an
incarnation of Kåñëa in the form of the holy name (näma-rüpe). Every one of
us who is actually afraid of the asuric rulers and politicians must welcome this
incarnation of Kåñëa: Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare
Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare. Then we will surely be protected
from the harassment of asuric rulers. At the present moment these rulers are
so powerful that by hook or by crook they capture the highest posts in
government and harass countless numbers of people on the plea of national
security or some emergency. Then again, one asura defeats another asura, but
the public continues to suffer. Therefore the entire world is in a precarious
condition, and the only hope is this Hare Kåñëa movement. Lord Nåsiàhadeva
appeared when Prahläda was excessively harassed by his asuric father. Because
of such asuric fathers—that is, the ruling politicians—it is very difficult to
press forward the Hare Kåñëa movement, but because Kåñëa has now appeared
in His holy name through this movement, we can hope that these asuric
fathers will be annihilated and the kingdom of God established all over the
world. The entire world is now full of many asuras in the guise of politicians,
gurus, sädhus, yogés and incarnations, and they are misleading the general
public away from Kåñëa consciousness, which can offer true benefit to human
society.
TEXT 22
@yaM tvas$aByastava janma naAE gA{he"
™autvaAƒajaAMstae nyavaDaIts$aure"ìr"
s$a tae'vataArM" pauç&SaE: s$amaipaRtaM
™autvaADaunaEvaAiBas$ar"tyaud"AyauDa:
ayaà tv asabhyas tava janma nau gåhe
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
271
çrutvägrajäàs te nyavadhét sureçvara
sa te 'vatäraà puruñaiù samarpitaà
çrutvädhunaiväbhisaraty udäyudhaù
SYNONYMS
ayam—this (rascal); tu—but; asabhyaù—who is not civilized at all (asura
means "uncivilized," and sura means "civilized"); tava—of Your Lordship;
janma—the birth; nau—our; gåhe—into the home; çrutvä—after hearing;
agrajän te—all the brothers born before You; nyavadhét—killed;
sura-éçvara—O Lord of the suras, the civilized persons; saù—he (that
uncivilized Kaàsa); te—Your; avatäram—appearance; puruñaiù—by his
lieutenants; samarpitam—being informed of; çrutvä—after hearing;
adhunä—now; eva—indeed; abhisarati—will come immediately;
udäyudhaù—with raised weapons.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, Lord of the demigods, after hearing the prophecy that You
would take birth in our home and kill him, this uncivilized Kaàsa killed so
many of Your elder brothers. As soon as he hears from his lieutenants that You
have appeared, he will immediately come with weapons to kill You.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
PURPORT
Kaàsa has here been described as asabhya, meaning "uncivilized" or "most
heinous," because he killed the many children of his sister. When he heard the
prophecy that he would be killed by her eighth son, this uncivilized man,
Kaàsa, was immediately ready to kill his innocent sister on the occasion of her
marriage. An uncivilized man can do anything for the satisfaction of his
senses. He can kill children, he can kill cows, he can kill brähmaëas, he can kill
old men; he has no mercy for anyone. According to the Vedic civilization,
272
cows, women, children, old men and brähmaëas should be excused if they are
at fault. But asuras, uncivilized men, do not care about that. At the present
moment, the killing of cows and the killing of children is going on
unrestrictedly, and therefore this civilization is not at all human, and those
who are conducting this condemned civilization are uncivilized asuras.
Such uncivilized men are not in favor of the Kåñëa consciousness
movement. As public officers, they declare without hesitation that the
chanting of the Hare Kåñëa movement is a nuisance, although Bhagavad-gétä
clearly says, satataà kértayanto mäà yatantaç ca dåòha-vratäù [Bg. 9.14].
According to this verse, it is the duty of the mahätmäs to chant the Hare
Kåñëa mantra and try to spread it all over the world to the best of their ability.
Unfortunately, society is in such an uncivilized state that there are so-called
mahätmäs who are prepared to kill cows and children and stop the Hare Kåñëa
movement. Such uncivilized activities were actually demonstrated in
opposition to the Hare Kåñëa movement's Bombay center, Hare Kåñëa Land.
As Kaàsa was not expected to kill the beautiful child of Devaké and Vasudeva,
the uncivilized society, although unhappy about the advancement of the Kåñëa
consciousness movement, cannot be expected to stop it. Yet we must face
many difficulties in many different ways. Although Kåñëa cannot be killed,
Vasudeva, as the father of Kåñëa, was trembling because in affection he
thought that Kaàsa would immediately come and kill his son. Similarly,
although the Kåñëa consciousness movement and Kåñëa are not different and
no asuras can check it, we are afraid that at any moment the asuras can stop
this movement in any part of the world.
TEXT 23
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
@TaEnamaAtmajaM vaIºya
mah"Apauç&SalaºaNAma,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
273
de"vak(L tamaupaADaAvata,
kM(s$aAà"ItaA s$auivaismataA
çré-çuka uväca
athainam ätmajaà vékñya
mahä-puruña-lakñaëam
devaké tam upädhävat
kaàsäd bhétä suvismitä
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; atha—after this offering of
prayers by Vasudeva; enam—this Kåñëa; ätmajam—their son;
vékñya—observing; mahä-puruña-lakñaëam—with all the symptoms of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu; devaké—Kåñëa's mother; tam—unto
Him (Kåñëa); upädhävat—offered prayers; kaàsät—of Kaàsa; bhétä—being
afraid; su-vismitä—and also being astonished by seeing such a wonderful child.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: Thereafter, having seen that her child had all
the symptoms of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Devaké, who was very
much afraid of Kaàsa and unusually astonished, began to offer prayers to the
Lord.
PURPORT
The word suvismitä, meaning "astonished," is significant in this verse.
Devaké and her husband, Vasudeva, were assured that their child was the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and could not be killed by Kaàsa, but
because of affection, as they thought of Kaàsa's previous atrocities, they were
simultaneously afraid that Kåñëa would be killed. This is why the word
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
274
suvismitä has been used. Similarly, we are also astounded upon thinking of
whether this movement will be killed by the asuras or will continue to advance
without fear.
TEXT 24
™aIde"vafyauvaAca
è&paM yaÔat‘aAò"r"vyal(maAâM
“aö jyaAeitainaRgAuRNAM inaivaRk(Ar"ma,
s$aÔaAmaA‡aM inaivaRzAeSaM inar"IhM"
s$a tvaM s$aAºaAiã"SNAur"DyaAtmad"Ipa:
çré-devaky uväca
rüpaà yat tat prähur avyaktam ädyaà
brahma jyotir nirguëaà nirvikäram
sattä-mätraà nirviçeñaà niréhaà
sa tvaà säkñäd viñëur adhyätma-dépaù
SYNONYMS
çré-devaké uväca—Çré Devaké said; rüpam—form or substance; yat tat—because
You are the same substance; prähuù—You are sometimes called;
avyaktam—not perceivable by the material senses (ataù çré-kåñëa-nämädi na
bhaved grähyam indriyaiù); ädyam—You are the original cause; brahma—You
are known as Brahman; jyotiù—light; nirguëam—without material qualities;
nirvikäram—without change, the same form of Viñëu perpetually;
sattä-mätram—the original substance, the cause of everything;
nirviçeñam—You are present everywhere as the Supersoul (within the heart of
a human being and within the heart of an animal, the same substance is
present); niréham—without material desires; saù—that Supreme Person;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
275
tvam—Your Lordship; säkñät—directly; viñëuù—Lord Viñëu;
adhyätma-dépaù—the light for all transcendental knowledge (knowing You,
one knows everything: yasmin vijïäte sarvam evaà vijïätaà bhavati).
TRANSLATION
Çré Devaké said: My dear Lord, there are different Vedas, some of which
describe You as unperceivable through words and the mind. Yet You are the
origin of the entire cosmic manifestation. You are Brahman, the greatest of
everything, full of effulgence like the sun. You have no material cause, You are
free from change and deviation, and You have no material desires. Thus the
Vedas say that You are the substance. Therefore, my Lord, You are directly the
origin of all Vedic statements, and by understanding You, one gradually
understands everything. You are different from the light of Brahman and
Paramätmä, yet You are not different from them. Everything emanates from
You. Indeed, You are the cause of all causes, Lord Viñëu, the light of all
transcendental knowledge.
PURPORT
Viñëu is the origin of everything, and there is no difference between Lord
Viñëu and Lord Kåñëa because both of Them are viñëu-tattva. From the Åg
Veda we understand, oà tad viñëoù paramaà padam: the original substance is
the all-pervading Lord Viñëu, who is also Paramätmä and the effulgent
Brahman. The living entities are also part and parcel of Viñëu, who has various
energies (paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate sväbhäviké jïäna-bala-kriyä ca [Cc.
Madhya 13.65, purport]). Viñëu, or Kåñëa, is therefore everything. Lord Kåñëa
says in the Bhagavad-gétä (10.8), ahaà sarvasya prabhavo mattaù sarvaà
pravartate: "I am the source of all spiritual and material worlds. Everything
emanates from Me." Kåñëa, therefore, is the original cause of everything
(sarva-käraëa-käraëam [Bs. 5.1]). When Viñëu expands in His all-pervading
aspect, we should understand Him to be the niräkära-nirviçeña-brahmajyoti.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
276
Although everything emanates from Kåñëa, He is ultimately a person.
Aham ädir hi devänäm: [Bg 10.2] He is the origin of Brahmä, Viñëu and
Maheçvara, and from them many other demigods are manifested. Kåñëa
therefore says in Bhagavad-gétä (14.27), brahmaëo hi pratiñöhäham; "Brahman
rests upon Me." The Lord also says:
ye 'py anya-devatä-bhaktä
yajante çraddhayänvitäù
te 'pi mäm eva kaunteya
yajanty avidhi-pürvakam
"Whatever a man may sacrifice to other gods, O son of Kunté, is really meant
for Me alone, but it is offered without true understanding." (Bg. 9.23) There
are many persons who worship different demigods, considering all of them to
be separate gods, which in fact they are not. The fact is that every demigod,
and every living entity, is part and parcel of Kåñëa (mamaiväàço jéva-loke
jéva-bhütaù [Bg. 15.7]). The demigods are also in the category of living entities;
they are not separate gods. But men whose knowledge is immature and
contaminated by the modes of material nature worship various demigods,
according to their intelligence. Therefore they are rebuked in Bhagavad-gétä
(kämais tais tair håta-jïänäù prapadyante 'nya-devatäù [Bg.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
]). Because they
are unintelligent and not very advanced and have not properly considered the
truth, they take to the worship of various demigods or speculate according to
various philosophies, such as the Mäyäväda philosophy.
Kåñëa, Viñëu, is the actual origin of everything. As stated in the Vedas,
yasya bhäñä sarvam idaà vibhäti. The Absolute Truth is described later in the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.28.15) as satyaà jïänam anantam yad brahma-jyotiù
sanätanam. The brahmajyoti is sanätana, eternal, yet it is dependent on Kåñëa
(brahmaëo hi pratiñöhäham). The Brahma-saàhitä states that the Lord is
all-pervading. Aëòäntara-stha-paramäëu-cayäntara-stham: [Bs. 5.35] He is
within this universe, and He is within the atom as Paramätmä. Yasya prabhä
prabhavato jagad-aëòa-koöi-koöiñv açeña-vasudhädi-vibhu-ti-bhinnam: [Bs. 5.40]
277
Brahman is also not independent of Him. Therefore whatever a philosopher
may describe is ultimately Kåñëa, or Lord Viñëu (sarvaà khalv idaà brahma,
paraà brahma paraà dhäma pavitraà paramaà bhavän [Bg. 10.12]). According
to different phases of understanding, Lord Viñëu is differently described, but
in fact He is the origin of everything.
Because Devaké was an unalloyed devotee, she could understand that the
same Lord Viñëu had appeared as her son. Therefore, after the prayers of
Vasudeva, Devaké offered her prayers. She was very frightened because of her
brother's atrocities. Devaké said, "My dear Lord, Your eternal forms, like
Näräyaëa, Lord Räma, Çeña, Varäha, Nåsiàha, Vämana, Baladeva, and
millions of similar incarnations emanating from Viñëu, are described in the
Vedic literature as original. You are original because all Your forms as
incarnations are outside of this material creation. Your form was existing
before this cosmic manifestation was created. Your forms are eternal and
all-pervading. They are self-effulgent, changeless and uncontaminated by the
material qualities. Such eternal forms are ever-cognizant and full of bliss; they
are situated in transcendental goodness and are always engaged in different
pastimes. You are not limited to a particular form only; all such
transcendental, eternal forms are self-sufficient. I can understand that You are
the Supreme Lord Viñëu." We may conclude, therefore, that Lord Viñëu is
everything, although He is also different from everything. This is the
acintya-bhedäbheda-tattva(5) philosophy.
TEXT 25
naíe" laAeke( iã"par"ADaARvas$aAnae
mah"ABaUtaeSvaAid"BaUtaM gAtaeSau
vyale('vyalM( k(AlavaegAena yaAtae
BavaAnaek(: izASyatae'zAeSas$aMÁa:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
278
nañöe loke dvi-parärdhävasäne
mahä-bhüteñv ädi-bhütaà gateñu
vyakte 'vyaktaà käla-vegena yäte
bhavän ekaù çiñyate 'çeña-saàjïaù
SYNONYMS
nañöe—after the annihilation; loke—of the cosmic manifestation;
dvi-parärdha-avasäne—after millions and millions of years (the life of
Brahmä); mahä-bhüteñu—when the five primary elements (earth, water, fire,
air and ether); ädi-bhütam gateñu—enter within the subtle elements of sense
perception; vyakte—when everything manifested; avyaktam—into the
unmanifested; käla-vegena—by the force of time; yäte—enters; bhavän—Your
Lordship; ekaù—only one; çiñyate—remains; açeña-saàjïaù—the same one
with different names.
TRANSLATION
After millions of years, at the time of cosmic annihilation, when everything,
manifested and unmanifested, is annihilated by the force of time, the five gross
elements enter into the subtle conception, and the manifested categories enter
into the unmanifested substance. At that time, You alone remain, and You are
known as Ananta Çeña-näga.
PURPORT
At the time of annihilation, the five gross elements—earth, water, fire, air
and ether—enter into the mind, intelligence and false ego (ahaìkära), and the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
entire cosmic manifestation enters into the spiritual energy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who alone remains as the origin of everything. The
Lord is therefore known as Çeña-näga, as Ädi-puruña and by many other names.
Devaké therefore prayed, "After many millions of years, when Lord Brahmä
279
comes to the end of his life, the annihilation of the cosmic manifestation takes
place. At that time the five elements—namely earth, water, fire, air and
ether—enter into the mahat-tattva. The mahat-tattva again enters, by the force
of time, into the nonmanifested total material energy, the total material
energy enters into the energetic pradhäna, and the pradhäna enters into You.
Therefore after the annihilation of the whole cosmic manifestation, You alone
remain with Your transcendental name, form, quality and paraphernalia.
"My Lord, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You because You are the
director of the unmanifested total energy, and the ultimate reservoir of the
material nature. My Lord, the whole cosmic manifestation is under the
influence of time, beginning from the moment up to the duration of the year.
All act under Your direction. You are the original director of everything and
the reservoir of all potent energies."
TEXT 26
yaAe'yaM k(Alastasya tae'vyal(banDaAe
caeí"AmaAò"êeí"tae yaena ivaìma,
inamaeSaAid"vaRts$ar"AntaAe mah"IyaAMs$a,
taM tvaezAAnaM ºaemaDaAma ‘apaâe
yo 'yaà kälas tasya te 'vyakta-bandho
ceñöäm ähuç ceñöate yena viçvam
nimeñädir vatsaränto mahéyäàs
taà tveçänaà kñema-dhäma prapadye
SYNONYMS
yaù—that which; ayam—this; kälaù—time (minutes, hours, seconds);
tasya—of Him; te—of You; avyakta-bandho—O my Lord, You are the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
280
inaugurator of the unmanifested (the original mahat-tattva or prakåti);
ceñöäm—attempt or pastimes; ähuù—it is said; ceñöate—works; yena—by
which; viçvam—the entire creation; nimeña-ädiù—beginning with minute
parts of time; vatsara-antaù—up to the limit of a year; mahéyän—powerful;
tam—unto Your Lordship; tvä éçänam—unto You, the supreme controller;
kñema-dhäma—the reservoir of all auspiciousness; prapadye—I offer full
surrender.
TRANSLATION
O inaugurator of the material energy, this wonderful creation works under
the control of powerful time, which is divided into seconds, minutes, hours and
years. This element of time, which extends for many millions of years, is but
another form of Lord Viñëu. For Your pastimes, You act as the controller of
time, but You are the reservoir of all good fortune. Let me offer my full
surrender unto Your Lordship.
PURPORT
As stated in the Brahma-saàhitä (5.52):
yac-cakñur eña savitä sakala-grahäëäà
räjä samasta-sura-mürtir açeña-tejäù
yasyäjïayä bhramati saàbhåta-käla-cakro
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"The sun is the king of all planetary systems and has unlimited potency in heat
and light. I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, the Supreme Personality of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
of the Lord, rotates within the fixed orbit of eternal time." Although we see
the cosmic manifestation as gigantic and wonderful, it is within the limitations
of käla, the time factor. This time factor is also controlled by the Supreme
281
Personality of Godhead, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (mayädhyakñeëa
prakåtiù süyate sa-caräcaram [Bg. 9.10]). Prakåti, the cosmic manifestation, is
under the control of time. Indeed, everything is under the control of time, and
time is controlled by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the
Supreme Lord has no fear of the onslaughts of time. Time is estimated
according to the movements of the sun (savitä). Every minute, every second,
every day, every night, every month and every year of time can be calculated
according to the sun's movements. But the sun is not independent, for it is
under time's control. Bhramati saàbhåta-käla-cakraù: the sun moves within
the käla-cakra, the orbit of time. The sun is under the control of time, and
time is controlled by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the Lord
has no fear of time.
The Lord is addressed here as avyakta-bandhu, or the inaugurator of the
movements of the entire cosmic manifestation. Sometimes the cosmic
manifestation is compared to a potter's wheel. When a potter's wheel is
spinning, who has set it in motion? It is the potter, of course, although
sometimes we can see only the motion of the wheel and cannot see the potter
himself. Therefore the Lord, who is behind the motion of the cosmos, is called
avyakta-bandhu. Everything is within the limits of time, but time moves under
the direction of the Lord, who is therefore not within time's limit.
TEXT 27
matyaAeR ma{tyauvyaAlaBaIta: palaAyana,
laAek(Ana, s$avaARiªaBaRyaM naADyagAcC$ta,
tvatpaAd"AbjaM ‘aApya yaä{"cC$yaAâ
s$ausTa: zAetae ma{tyaur"smaAd"paEita
martyo måtyu-vyäla-bhétaù paläyan
lokän sarvän nirbhayaà nädhyagacchat
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
282
tvat pädäbjaà präpya yadåcchayädya
susthaù çete måtyur asmäd apaiti
SYNONYMS
martyaù—the living entities who are sure to die; måtyu-vyäla-bhétaù—afraid of
the serpent of death; paläyan—running (as soon as a serpent is seen, everyone
runs away, fearing immediate death); lokän—to the different planets;
sarvän—all; nirbhayam—fearlessness; na adhyagacchat—do not obtain;
tvat-päda-abjam—of Your lotus feet; präpya—obtaining the shelter;
yadåcchayä—by chance, by the mercy of Your Lordship and Your
representative, the spiritual master (guru-kåpä, kåñëa-kåpä); adya—presently;
su-sthaù—being undisturbed and mentally composed; çete—are sleeping;
måtyuù—death; asmät—from those persons; apaiti—flees.
TRANSLATION
No one in this material world has become free from the four principles birth,
death, old age and disease, even by fleeing to various planets. But now that You
have appeared, My Lord, death is fleeing in fear of You, and the living entities,
having obtained shelter at Your lotus feet by Your mercy, are sleeping in full
mental peace.
PURPORT
There are different categories of living entities, but everyone is afraid of
death. The highest aim of the karmés is to be promoted to the higher, heavenly
planets, where the duration of life is very long. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä
(8.17), sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad brahmaëo viduù: one day of Brahmä
equals 1,000 yugas, and each yuga consists of 4,300,000 years. Similarly,
Brahmä has a night of 1,000 times 4,300,000 years. In this way, we may
calculate Brahmä's month and year, but even Brahmä, who lives for millions
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
283
and millions of years (dvi-parärdha-käla), also must die. According to Vedic
çästra, the inhabitants of the higher planetary systems live for 10,000 years,
and just as Brahmä's day is calculated to equal 4,300,000,000 of our years, one
day in the higher planetary systems equals six of our months. Karmés,
therefore, try for promotion to the higher planetary systems, but this cannot
free them from death. In this material world, everyone from Brahmä to the
insignificant ant must die. Therefore this world is called martya-loka. As Kåñëa
says in Bhagavad-gétä (8.16), äbrahma-bhuvanäl lokäù punar ävartino'rjuna: as
long as one is within this material world, either on Brahmaloka or on any
other loka within this universe, one must undergo the käla-cakra of one life
after another (bhütvä bhütvä praléyate) [Bg. 8.19]. But if one returns to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead (yad gatvä na nivartante [Bg. 15.6]), one need
not reenter the limits of time. Therefore, devotees who have taken shelter of
the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord can sleep very peacefully with this
assurance from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä (4.9), tyaktvä dehaà punar janma naiti: after giving up the
present body, a devotee who has understood Kåñëa as
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
this material world.
The constitutional position for the living entity is eternity (na hanyate
hanyamäne çarére, nityaù çäçvato 'yam [Bg. 2.20]). Every living entity is eternal.
But because of having fallen into this material world, one wanders within the
universe, continually changing from one body to another. Caitanya
Mahäprabhu says:
brahmäëòa bhramite kona bhägyavän jéva
guru-kåñëa-prasäde päya bhakti-latä-béja
(Cc. Madhya 19.151)
Everyone is wandering up and down within this universe, but one who is
sufficiently fortunate comes in contact with Kåñëa consciousness, by the mercy
of the spiritual master, and takes to the path of devotional service. Then one is
assured of eternal life, with no fear of death. When Kåñëa appears, everyone is
284
freed from fear of death, yet Devaké felt, "We are still afraid of Kaàsa,
although You have appeared as our son." She was more or less bewildered as to
why this should be so, and she appealed to the Lord to free her and Vasudeva
from this fear.
In this connection, it may be noted that the moon is one of the heavenly
planets. From the Vedic literature we understand that one who goes to the
moon receives a life with a duration of ten thousand years in which to enjoy
the fruits of pious activities. If our so-called scientists are going to the moon,
why should they come back here? We must conclude without a doubt that they
have never gone to the moon. To go to the moon, one must have the
qualification of pious activities. Then one may go there and live. If one has
gone to the moon, why should he return to this planet, where life is of a very
short duration?
TEXT 28
s$a tvaM GaAer"Aäu"ƒas$aenaAtmajaAªas$a,
‡aAih" ‡astaAna, Ba{tyaiva‡aAs$ah"Ais$a
è&paM caedM" paAEç&SaM DyaAnaiDaSNyaM
maA ‘atyaºaM maAMs$aä{"zAAM k{(SaIï"A:
sa tvaà ghoräd ugrasenätmajän nas
trähi trastän bhåtya-viträsa-häsi
rüpaà cedaà pauruñaà dhyäna-dhiñëyaà
mä pratyakñaà mäàsa-dåçäà kåñéñöhäù
SYNONYMS
saù—Your Lordship; tvam—You; ghorät—terribly fierce;
ugrasena-ätmajät—from the son of Ugrasena; naù—us; trähi—kindly protect;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
285
trastän—who are very much afraid (of him); bhåtya-viträsa-hä asi—You are
naturally the destroyer of the fear of Your servants; rüpam—in Your Viñëu
form; ca—also; idam—this; pauruñam—as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; dhyäna-dhiñëyam—who is appreciated by meditation; mä—not;
pratyakñam—directly visible; mäàsa-dåçäm—to those who see with their
material eyes; kåñéñöhäù—please be.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, because You dispel all the fear of Your devotees, I request You to
save us and give us protection from the terrible fear of Kaàsa. Your form as
Viñëu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is appreciated by yogés in
meditation. Please make this form invisible to those who see with material eyes.
PURPORT
The word dhyäna-dhiñëyam is significant in this verse because the form of
Lord Viñëu is meditated upon by yogés (dhyänävasthita-tad-gatena manasä
paçyanti yaà yoginaù [SB
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
12.13.1]). Devaké requested the Lord, who had
appeared as Viñëu, to conceal that form, for she wanted to see the Lord as an
ordinary child, like a child appreciated by persons who have material eyes.
Devaké wanted to see whether the Supreme Personality of Godhead had
factually appeared or she was dreaming the Viñëu form. If Kaàsa were to
come, she thought, upon seeing the Viñëu form he would immediately kill the
child, but if he saw a human child, he might reconsider. Devaké was afraid of
Ugrasena-ätmaja; that is, she was afraid not of Ugrasena and his men, but of
the son of Ugrasena. Thus she requested the Lord to dissipate that fear, since
He is always ready to give protection (abhayam) to His devotees. "My Lord,"
she prayed, "I request You to save me from the cruel hands of the son of
Ugrasena, Kaàsa. I am praying to Your Lordship to please rescue me from this
fearful condition because You are always ready to give protection to Your
servitors." The Lord has confirmed this statement in the Bhagavad-gétä by
286
assuring Arjuna, "You may declare to the world, My devotee shall never be
vanquished."
While thus praying to the Lord for rescue, mother Devaké expressed her
motherly affection: "I understand that this transcendental form is generally
perceived in meditation by the great sages, but I am still afraid because as soon
as Kaàsa understands that You have appeared, he might harm You. So I
request that for the time being You become invisible to our material eyes." In
other words, she requested the Lord to assume the form of an ordinary child.
"My only cause of fear from my brother Kaàsa is due to Your appearance. My
Lord Madhusüdana, Kaàsa may know that You are already born. Therefore I
request You to conceal this four-armed form of Your Lordship, which holds the
four symbols of Viñëu-namely the conchshell, the disc, the club and the lotus
flower. My dear Lord, at the end of the annihilation of the cosmic
manifestation, You put the whole universe within Your abdomen; still, by Your
unalloyed mercy, You have appeared in my womb. I am surprised that You
imitate the activities of ordinary human beings just to please Your devotee."
Devaké was so afraid of Kaàsa that she could not believe that Kaàsa would
be unable to kill Lord Viñëu, who was personally present. Out of motherly
affection, therefore, she requested the Supreme Personality of Godhead to
disappear. Although because of the Lord's disappearance Kaàsa would harass
her more and more, thinking that the child born of her was hidden
somewhere, she did not want the transcendental child to be harassed and
killed. Therefore she requested Lord Viñëu to disappear. Later, when harassed,
she would think of Him within her mind.
TEXT 29
janma tae mayyas$aAE paApaAe
maA ivaâAnmaDaus$aUd"na
s$amauiã"jae BavaÜe"taAe:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
287
kM(s$aAd"h"maDaIr"DaI:
janma te mayy asau päpo
mä vidyän madhusüdana
samudvije bhavad-dhetoù
kaàsäd aham adhéra-dhéù
SYNONYMS
janma—the birth; te—of Your Lordship; mayi—in my (womb); asau—that
Kaàsa; päpaù—extremely sinful; mä vidyät—may be unable to understand;
madhusüdana—O Madhusüdana; samudvije—I am full of anxiety;
bhavat-hetoù—because of Your appearance; kaàsät—because of Kaàsa, with
whom I have had such bad experience; aham—I; adhéra-dhéù—have become
more and more anxious.
TRANSLATION
O Madhusüdana, because of Your appearance, I am becoming more and more
anxious in fear of Kaàsa. Therefore, please arrange for that sinful Kaàsa to be
unable to understand that You have taken birth from my womb.
PURPORT
Devaké addressed the Supreme Personality of Godhead as Madhusüdana.
She was aware that the Lord had killed many demons like Madhu who were
hundreds and thousands of times more powerful than Kaàsa, yet because of
affection for the transcendental child, she believed that Kaàsa could kill Him.
Instead of thinking of the unlimited power of the Lord, she thought of the
Lord with affection, and therefore she requested the transcendental child to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
disappear.
288
TEXT 30
opas$aMh"r" ivaìAtmaªa,
@d"Ae è&pamalaAEik(k(ma,
zAÊÿca‚(gAd"Apaái
™ayaA jauíM" catauBauRjama,
upasaàhara viçvätmann
ado rüpam alaukikam
çaìkha-cakra-gadä-padmaçriyä
juñöaà catur-bhujam
SYNONYMS
upasaàhara—withdraw; viçvätman—O all-pervading Supreme Personality of
Godhead; adaù—that; rüpam—form; alaukikam—which is unnatural in this
world; çaìkha-cakra-gadä-padma—of the conchshell, disc, club and lotus;
çriyä—with these opulences; juñöam—decorated; catuù-bhujam—four hands.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, You are the all-pervading Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
Your transcendental four-armed form, holding conchshell, disc, club and lotus,
is unnatural for this world. Please withdraw this form [and become just like a
natural human child so that I may try to hide You somewhere].
PURPORT
Devaké was thinking of hiding the Supreme Personality of Godhead and
not handing Him over to Kaàsa as she had all her previous children. Although
Vasudeva had promised to hand over every child to Kaàsa, this time he
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
289
wanted to break his promise and hide the child somewhere. But because of the
Lord's appearance in this surprising four-armed form, He would be impossible
to hide.
TEXT 31
ivaìM yade"tatsvatanaAE inazAAntae
yaTaAvak(AzAM pauç&Sa: par"Ae BavaAna,
ibaBaitaR s$aAe'yaM mama gABaRgAAe'BaUä,"
@h"Ae na{laAek(sya ivax"mbanaM ih" tata,
viçvaà yad etat sva-tanau niçänte
yathävakäçaà puruñaù paro bhavän
bibharti so 'yaà mama garbhago 'bhüd
aho nå-lokasya viòambanaà hi tat
SYNONYMS
viçvam—the entire cosmic manifestation; yat etat—containing all moving and
nonmoving creations; sva-tanau—within Your body; niçä-ante—at the time of
devastation; yathä-avakäçam—shelter in Your body without difficulty;
puruñaù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; paraù—transcendental;
bhavän—Your Lordship; bibharti—keep; saù—that (Supreme Personality of
Godhead); ayam—this form; mama—my; garbha-gaù—came within my womb;
abhüt—it so happened; aho—alas; nå-lokasya
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—within this material world of
living entities; viòambanam—it is impossible to think of; hi—indeed; tat—that
(kind of conception).
TRANSLATION
290
At the time of devastation, the entire cosmos, containing all created moving
and nonmoving entities, enters Your transcendental body and is held there
without difficulty. But now this transcendental form has taken birth from my
womb. People will not be able to believe this, and I shall become an object of
ridicule.
PURPORT
As explained in Caitanya-caritämåta, loving service to the Personality of
Godhead is of two different kinds: aiçvarya-pürëa, full of opulence, and
aiçvarya-çéthila, without opulence. Real love of Godhead begins with
aiçvarya-çéthila, simply on the basis of pure love.
premäïjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santaù sadaiva hådayeñu vilokayanti
yaà çyämasundaram acintya-guëa-svarüpaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
(Bs. 5.38)
Pure devotees, whose eyes are anointed with the ointment of prema, love, want
to see the Supreme Personality of Godhead as Çyämasundara, Muralédhara,
with a flute swaying in His two hands. This is the form available to the
inhabitants of Våndävana, who are all in love with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead as Çyämasundara, not as Lord Viñëu, Näräyaëa, who is worshiped in
Vaikuëöha, where the devotees admire His opulence. Although Devaké is not
on the Våndävana platform, she is near the Våndävana platform. On the
Våndävana platform the mother of Kåñëa is mother Yaçodä, and on the
Mathurä and Dvärakä platform the mother of Kåñëa is Devaké. In Mathurä
and Dvärakä the love for the Lord is mixed with appreciation of His opulence,
but in Våndävana the opulence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is not
exhibited.
There are five stages of loving service to the Supreme Personality of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
291
Godhead—çänta, däsya, sakhya, vätsalya and mädhurya. Devaké is on the
platform of vätsalya. She wanted to deal with her eternal son, Kåñëa, in that
stage of love, and therefore she wanted the Supreme Personality of Godhead to
withdraw His opulent form of Viñëu. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura
illuminates this fact very clearly in his explanation of this verse.
Bhakti, bhagavän and bhakta do not belong to the material world. This is
confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (14.26):
mäà ca yo 'vyabhicäreëa
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa guëän samatétyaitän
brahma-bhüyäya kalpate
"One who engages in the spiritual activities of unalloyed devotional service
immediately transcends the modes of material nature and is elevated to the
spiritual platform." From the very beginning of one's transactions in bhakti,
one is situated on the transcendental platform. Vasudeva and Devaké,
therefore, being situated in a completely pure devotional state, are beyond this
material world and are not subject to material fear. In the transcendental
world, however, because of pure devotion, there is a similar conception of fear,
which is due to intense love.
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti yävän yaç cäsmi
tattvataù [Bg. 18.55]) and as confirmed in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (bhaktyäham
ekayä grähyaù), without bhakti
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
one cannot understand the spiritual situation of
the Lord. Bhakti may be considered in three stages, called guëé-bhüta,
pradhäné-bhüta and kevala, and according to these stages there are three
divisions, which are called jïäna, jïänamayé and rati, or premä—that is, simple
knowledge, love mixed with knowledge, and pure love. By simple knowledge,
one can perceive transcendental bliss without variety. This perception is called
mäna-bhüti. When one comes to the stage of jïänamayé, one realizes the
transcendental opulences of the Personality of Godhead. But when one
reaches pure love, one realizes the transcendental form of the Lord as Lord
292
Kåñëa or Lord Räma. This is what is wanted. Especially in the mädhurya-rasa,
one becomes attached to the Personality of Godhead
(çré-vigraha-niñöha-rüpädi). Then loving transactions between the Lord and the
devotee begin.
The special significance of Kåñëa's bearing a flute in His hands in
Vrajabhümi, Våndävana, is described as mädhuré. .. viräjate. The form of the
Lord with a flute in His hands is most attractive, and the one who is most
sublimely attracted is Çrématé Rädhäräëé, Rädhikä. She enjoys supremely
blissful association with Kåñëa. Sometimes people cannot understand why
Rädhikä's name is not mentioned in Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Actually, however,
Rädhikä can be understood from the word ärädhana, which indicates that She
enjoys the highest loving affairs with Kåñëa.
Not wanting to be ridiculed for having given birth to Viñëu, Devaké wanted
Kåñëa, with two hands, and therefore she requested the Lord to change His
form.
TEXT 32
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
tvamaeva paUvaRs$agAeR'BaU:
pa{i´a: svaAyamBauvae s$aita
tad"AyaM s$autapaA naAma
‘ajaApaitar"k(lmaSa:
çré-bhagavän uväca
tvam eva pürva-sarge 'bhüù
påçniù sväyambhuve sati
tadäyaà sutapä näma
prajäpatir akalmañaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
293
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said to Devaké;
tvam—you; eva—indeed; pürva-sarge—in a previous millennium;
abhüù—became; påçniù—by the name Påçni; sväyambhuve—the millennium of
Sväyambhuva Manu; sati—O supremely chaste; tadä—at that time;
ayam—Vasudeva; sutapä—Sutapä; näma—by the name; prajäpatiù—a
Prajäpati; akalmañaù—a spotlessly pious person.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead replied: My dear mother, best of the
chaste, in your previous birth, in the Sväyambhuva millennium, you were
known as Påçni, and Vasudeva, who was the most pious Prajäpati, was named
Sutapä.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead made it clear that Devaké had not
become His mother only now; rather, she had been His mother previously also.
Kåñëa is eternal, and His selection of a father and mother from among His
devotees takes place eternally. Previously also, Devaké had been the Lord's
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
mother and Vasudeva the Lord's father, and they were named Påçni and
Sutapä. When the Supreme Personality of Godhead appears, He accepts His
eternal father and mother, and they accept Kåñëa as their son. This pastime
takes place eternally and is therefore called nitya-lélä. Thus there was no cause
for surprise or ridicule. As confirmed by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gétä
(4.9):
janma karma ca me divyam
evaà yo vetti tattvataù
tyaktvä dehaà punar janma
294
naiti mäm eti so 'rjuna
"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities
does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but
attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna." One should try to understand the
appearance and disappearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead from
Vedic authorities, not from imagination. One who follows his imaginations
about the Supreme Personality of Godhead is condemned.
avajänanti mäà müòhä
mänuñéà tanum äçritam
paraà bhävam ajänanto
mama bhüta-maheçvaram
(Bg. 9.11)
The Lord appears as the son of His devotee by His paraà bhävam. The word
bhäva refers to the stage of pure love, which has nothing to do with material
transactions.
TEXT 33
yauvaAM vaE “aöNAAid"í"AE
‘ajaAs$agAeR yad"A tata:
s$aiªayamyaein‰"yaƒaAmaM
taepaATae par"maM tapa:
yuväà vai brahmaëädiñöau
prajä-sarge yadä tataù
sanniyamyendriya-grämaà
tepäthe paramaà tapaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
295
SYNONYMS
yuväm—both of you (Påçni and Sutapä); vai—indeed; brahmaëä
ädiñöau—ordered by Lord Brahmä (who is known as Pitämaha, the father of
the Prajäpatis); prajä-sarge—in the creation of progeny; yadä—when;
tataù—thereafter; sanniyamya—keeping under full control;
indriya-grämam—the senses; tepäthe—underwent; paramam—very great;
tapaù—austerity.
TRANSLATION
When both of you were ordered by Lord Brahmä to create progeny, you first
underwent severe austerities by controlling your senses.
PURPORT
Here is an instruction about how to use one's senses to create progeny.
According to Vedic principles, before creating progeny one must fully control
the senses. This control takes place through the garbhädhäna-saàskära. In
India there is great agitation for birth control in various mechanical ways, but
birth cannot be mechanically controlled. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (13.9),
janma-måtyu jarä-vyädhi-duùkha-doñänudarçanam: birth, death, old age and
disease are certainly the primary distresses of the material world. People are
trying to control birth, but they are not able to control death; and if one
cannot control death, one cannot control birth either. In other words,
artificially controlling birth is not any more feasible than artificially
controlling death.
According to Vedic civilization, procreation should not be contrary to
religious principles, and then the birthrate will be controlled. As stated in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Bhagavad-gétä (7.11), dharmäviruddho bhüteñu kämo'smi: sex not contrary to
religious principles is a representation of the Supreme Lord. People should be
296
educated in how to give birth to good children through saàskäras, beginning
with the garbhädhäna-saàskära; birth should not be controlled by artificial
means, for this will lead to a civilization of animals. If one follows religious
principles, he automatically practices birth control because if one is spiritually
educated he knows that the after-effects of sex are various types of misery
(bahu-duùkha-bhäja). One who is spiritually advanced does not indulge in
uncontrolled sex. Therefore, instead of being forced to refrain from sex or
refrain from giving birth to many children, people should be spiritually
educated, and then birth control will automatically follow.
If one is determined to make spiritual advancement, he will not beget a
child unless able to make that child a devotee. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam
(5.5.18), pitä na sa syät: one should not become a father unless one is able to
protect his child from måtyu, the path of birth and death. But where is there
education about this? A responsible father never begets children like cats and
dogs. Instead of being encouraged to adopt artificial means of birth control,
people should be educated in Kåñëa consciousness because only then will they
understand their responsibility to their children. If one can beget children
who will be devotees and be taught to turn aside from the path of birth and
death (måtyu-saàsära-vartmani [Bg. 9.3]), there is no need of birth control.
Rather, one should be encouraged to beget children. Artificial means of birth
control have no value. Whether one begets children or does not, a population
of men who are like cats and dogs will never make human society happy. It is
therefore necessary for people to be educated spiritually so that instead of
begetting children like cats and dogs, they will undergo austerities to produce
devotees. This will make their lives successful.
TEXTS 34-35
vaSaRvaAtaAtapaih"ma-
GamaRk(AlagAuNAAnanau
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
297
s$ah"maAnaAE ìAs$ar"AeDaivainaDaURtamanaAemalaAE
zAINARpaNAARinalaAh"Ar"Ava,
opazAAntaena caetas$aA
maÔa: k(AmaAnaBaIps$antaAE
mad"Ar"ADanamaIh"tau:
varña-vätätapa-himagharma-
käla-guëän anu
sahamänau çväsa-rodhavinirdhüta-
mano-malau
çérëa-parëänilähäräv
upaçäntena cetasä
mattaù kämän abhépsantau
mad-ärädhanam éhatuù
SYNONYMS
varña—the rain; väta—strong wind; ätapa—strong sunshine; hima—severe
cold; gharma—heat; käla-guëän anu—according to seasonal changes;
sahamänau—by enduring; çväsa-rodha—by practicing yoga, controlling the
breath; vinirdhüta—the dirty things accumulated in the mind were completely
washed away; manaù-malau—the mind became clean, free from material
contamination; çérëa—rejected, dry; parëa—leaves from the trees; anila—and
air; ähärau—eating; upaçäntena—peaceful;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—with a fully controlled
mind; mattaù—from Me; kämän abhépsantau—desiring to beg some
benediction; mat—My; ärädhanam—worship; éhatuù—you both executed.
298
TRANSLATION
My dear father and mother, you endured rain, wind, strong sun, scorching
heat and severe cold, suffering all sorts of inconvenience according to different
seasons. By practicing präëäyäma to control the air within the body through
yoga, and by eating only air and dry leaves fallen from the trees, you cleansed
from your minds all dirty things. In this way, desiring a benediction from Me,
you worshiped Me with peaceful minds.
PURPORT
Vasudeva and Devaké did not obtain the Supreme Personality of Godhead
as their son very easily, nor does the Supreme Godhead accept merely anyone
as His father and mother. Here we can see how Vasudeva and Devaké obtained
Kåñëa as their eternal son. In our own lives, we are meant to follow the
principles indicated herewith for getting good children. Of course, it is not
possible for everyone to get Kåñëa as his son, but at least one can get very good
sons and daughters for the benefit of human society. In Bhagavad-gétä it is said
that if human beings do not follow the spiritual way of life, there will be an
increase of varëa-saìkara population, population begotten like cats and dogs,
and the entire world will become like hell. Not practicing Kåñëa consciousness
but simply encouraging artificial means to check the population will be futile;
the population will increase, and it will consist of varëa-saìkara, unwanted
progeny. It is better to teach people how to beget children not like hogs and
dogs, but in controlled life.
Human life is meant not for becoming a hog or dog, but for tapo divyam [SB
5.5.1], transcendental austerity. Everyone should be taught to undergo
austerity, tapasya. Although it may not be possible to undergo tapasya like that
of Påçni and Sutapä, the çästra has given an opportunity for a method of
tapasya very easy to perform—the saìkértana movement. One cannot expect
to undergo tapasya to get Kåñëa as one's child, yet simply by chanting the Hare
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
299
Kåñëa mahä-mantra (kértanäd eva kåñëasya [SB 12.3.51]), one can become so
pure that one becomes free from all the contamination of this material world
(mukta-saìgaù) and goes back home, back to Godhead (paraà vrajet). The
Kåñëa consciousness movement, therefore, is teaching people not to adopt
artificial means of happiness, but to take the real path of happiness as
prescribed in the çästra—the chanting of the Hare Kåñëa mantra—and
become perfect in every aspect of material existence.
TEXT 36
WvaM vaAM tapyataAestaI˜aM
tapa: par"maäu"Sk(r"ma,
id"vyavaSaRs$ah"›aAiNA
ã"Ad"zAeyaumaRd"AtmanaAe:
evaà väà tapyatos tévraà
tapaù parama-duñkaram
divya-varña-sahasräëi
dvädaçeyur mad-ätmanoù
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; väm—for both of you; tapyatoù—executing austerities;
tévram—very severe; tapaù—austerity; parama-duñkaram—extremely difficult
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
to execute; divya-varña—celestial years, or years counted according to the
higher planetary system; sahasräëi—thousand; dvädaça—twelve; éyuù—passed;
mat-ätmanoù—simply engaged in consciousness of Me.
TRANSLATION
300
Thus you spent twelve thousand celestial years performing difficult activities
of tapasya in consciousness of Me [Kåñëa consciousness].
TEXTS 37-38
tad"A vaAM pair"tauí"Ae'h"ma,
@maunaA vapauSaAnaGae
tapas$aA ™aÜ"yaA inatyaM
BaftyaA ca ô$id" BaAivata:
‘aAäu"r"As$aM var"d"r"Ax".
yauvayaAe: k(Amaid"ts$ayaA
i˜ayataAM var" wtyaule(
maAä{"zAAe vaAM va{ta: s$auta:
tadä väà parituñöo 'ham
amunä vapuñänaghe
tapasä çraddhayä nityaà
bhaktyä ca hådi bhävitaù
präduräsaà varada-räò
yuvayoù käma-ditsayä
vriyatäà vara ity ukte
mädåço väà våtaù sutaù
SYNONYMS
tadä—then (after the expiry of twelve thousand celestial years); väm—with
both of you; parituñöaù aham—I was very much satisfied; amunä—by this;
vapuñä—in this form as Kåñëa; anaghe—O My dear sinless mother; tapasä—by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
301
austerity; çraddhayä—by faith; nityam—constantly (engaged); bhaktyä—by
devotional service; ca—as well as; hådi—within the core of the heart;
bhävitaù—fixed (in determination); präduräsam—appeared before you (in the
same way); vara-da-räö—the best of all who can bestow benedictions;
yuvayoù—of both of you; käma-ditsayä—wishing to fulfill the desire;
vriyatäm—asked you to open your minds; varaù—for a benediction; iti
ukte—when you were requested in this way; mädåçaù—exactly like Me;
väm—of both of you; våtaù—was asked; sutaù—as Your son (you wanted a son
exactly like Me).
TRANSLATION
O sinless mother Devaké, after the expiry of twelve thousand celestial years,
in which you constantly contemplated Me within the core of your heart with
great faith, devotion and austerity, I was very much satisfied with you. Since I
am the best of all bestowers of benediction, I appeared in this same form as
Kåñëa to ask you to take from Me the benediction you desired. You then
expressed your desire to have a son exactly like Me.
PURPORT
Twelve thousand years on the celestial planets is not a very long time for
those who live in the upper planetary system, although it may be very long for
those who live on this planet. Sutapä was the son of Brahmä, and as we have
already understood from Bhagavad-gétä (8.17), one day of Brahmä equals many
millions of years according to our calculation (sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar
yad brahmaëo viduù). We should be careful to understand that to get Kåñëa as
one's son, one must undergo such great austerities. If we want to get the
Supreme Personality of Godhead to become one of us in this material world,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
this requires great penance, but if we want to go back to Kåñëa (tyaktvä dehaà
punar janma naiti mäm eti so 'rjuna [Bg. 4.9]), we need only understand Him
and love Him. Through love only, we can very easily go back home, back to
302
Godhead. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu therefore declared, premä pum-artho
mahän: love of Godhead is the highest achievement for anyone.
As we have explained, in worship of the Lord there are three stages—jïäna,
jïänamayé and rati, or love. Sutapä and his wife, Påçni, inaugurated their
devotional activities on the basis of full knowledge. Gradually they developed
love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and when this love was mature,
the Lord appeared as Viñëu, although Devaké then requested Him to assume
the form of Kåñëa. To love the Supreme Personality of Godhead more, we
want a form of the Lord like Kåñëa or Räma. We can engage in loving
transactions with Kåñëa especially.
In this age, we are all fallen, but the Supreme Personality of Godhead has
appeared as Caitanya Mahäprabhu to bestow upon us love of Godhead directly.
This was appreciated by the associates of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. Rüpa
Gosvämé said:
namo mahä-vadänyäya
kåñëa-prema-pradäya te
kåñëäya kåñëa-caitanyanämne
gaura-tviñe namaù
[Cc. Madhya 19.53]
In this verse, Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu is described as mahä-vadänya, the most
munificent of charitable persons, because He gives Kåñëa so easily that one can
attain Kåñëa simply by chanting the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra. We should
therefore take advantage of the benediction given by Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu, and when by chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra we are cleansed of
all dirty things (ceto-darpaëa-märjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]), we shall be able to
understand very easily that Kåñëa is the only object of love (kértanäd eva
kåñëasya mukta-saìgaù paraà vrajet [SB 12.3.51]).
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Therefore, one need not undergo severe penances for many thousands of
years; one need only learn how to love Kåñëa and be always engaged in His
303
service (sevonmukhe hi jihvädau svayam eva sphuraty adaù [Brs. 1.2.234(6)]).
Then one can very easily go back home, back to Godhead. Instead of bringing
the Lord here for some material purpose, to have a son or whatever else, if we
go back home, back to Godhead, our real relationship with the Lord is
revealed, and we eternally engage in our eternal relationship. By chanting the
Hare Kåñëa mantra, we gradually develop our eternal relationship with the
Supreme Person and thus attain the perfection called svarüpa-siddhi(7). We
should take advantage of this benediction and go back home, back to Godhead.
Çréla Narottama däsa Öhäkura has therefore sung, patita-pävana-hetu tava
avatära: Caitanya Mahäprabhu appeared as an incarnation to deliver all fallen
souls like us and directly bestow upon us love of Godhead. We must take
advantage of this great benediction of the great Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 39
@jauí"ƒaAmyaivaSayaAva,
@napatyaAE ca d"mpataI
na va˜aATae'pavagA< mae
maAeih"taAE de"vamaAyayaA
ajuñöa-grämya-viñayäv
anapatyau ca dam-paté
na vavräthe 'pavargaà me
mohitau deva-mäyayä
SYNONYMS
ajuñöa-grämya-viñayau—for sex life and to beget a child like Me;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
anapatyau—because of possessing no son; ca—also; dam-paté—both husband
and wife; na—never; vavräthe—asked for (any other benediction);
304
apavargam—liberation from this world; me—from Me; mohitau—being so
much attracted; deva-mäyayä—by transcendental love for Me (desiring Me as
your beloved son).
TRANSLATION
Being husband and wife but always sonless, you were attracted by sexual
desires, for by the influence of devamäyä, transcendental love, you wanted to
have Me as your son. Therefore you never desired to be liberated from this
material world.
PURPORT
Vasudeva and Devaké had been dam-paté, husband and wife, since the time
of Sutapä and Påçni, and they wanted to remain husband and wife in order to
have the Supreme Personality of Godhead as their son. This attachment came
about by the influence of devamäyä. Loving Kåñëa as one's son is a Vedic
principle. Vasudeva and Devaké never desired anything but to have the Lord
as their son, yet for this purpose they apparently wanted to live like ordinary
gåhasthas for sexual indulgence. Although this was a transaction of spiritual
potency, their desire appears like attachment for sex in conjugal life. If one
wants to return home, back to Godhead, one must give up such desires. This is
possible only when one develops intense love for the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu has said:
niñkiïcanasya bhagavad-bhajanonmukhasya
päraà paraà jigamiñor bhava-sägarasya
(Cc. Madhya 11.8)
If one wants to go back home, back to Godhead, one must be niñkiïcana, free
from all material desires. Therefore, instead of desiring to have the Lord come
here and become one's son, one should desire to become free from all material
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
305
desires (anyäbhiläñitä-çünyam [Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.1.11(8)]) and go back
home, back to Godhead. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu teaches us in His
Çikñäñöaka:
na dhanaà na janaà na sundaréà
kavitäà vä jagad-éça kämaye
mama janmani janmanéçvare
bhavatäd bhaktir ahaituké tvayi
[Cc. Antya 20.29, Çikñäñöaka 4]
"O almighty Lord, I have no desire to accumulate wealth, nor do I desire
beautiful women, nor do I want any number of followers. I only want Your
causeless devotional service, birth after birth." One should not ask the Lord to
fulfill any materially tainted desires.
TEXT 40
gAtae maiya yauvaAM labDvaA
varM" mats$aä{"zAM s$autama,
ƒaAmyaAna, BaAegAAnaBauÃaATaAM
yauvaAM ‘aAæamanaAer"TaAE
gate mayi yuväà labdhvä
varaà mat-sadåçaà sutam
grämyän bhogän abhuïjäthäà
yuväà präpta-manorathau
SYNONYMS
gate mayi—after My departure; yuväm—both of you (husband and wife);
labdhvä—after receiving; varam—the benediction of (having a son);
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
306
mat-sadåçam—exactly like Me; sutam—a son; grämyän bhogän—engagement
in sex; abhuïjäthäm—enjoyed; yuväm—both of you; präpta—having been
achieved; manorathau—the desired result of your aspirations.
TRANSLATION
After you received that benediction and I disappeared, you engaged
yourselves in sex to have a son like Me, and I fulfilled your desire.
PURPORT
According to the Sanskrit dictionary Amara-koça, sex life is also called
grämya-dharma, material desire, but in spiritual life this grämya-dharma, the
material desire for sex, is not very much appreciated. If one has a tinge of
attachment for the material enjoyments of eating, sleeping, mating and
defending, one is not niñkiïcana. But one really should be niñkiïcana.
Therefore, one should be free from the desire to beget a child like Kåñëa by
sexual enjoyment. This is indirectly hinted at in this verse.
TEXT 41
@ä{"î"AnyatamaM laAeke(
zAIlaAEd"AyaRgAuNAE: s$amama,
@hM" s$autaAe vaAmaBavaM
pa{i´agABaR wita ™auta:
adåñövänyatamaà loke
çélaudärya-guëaiù samam
ahaà suto väm abhavaà
påçnigarbha iti çrutaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
307
SYNONYMS
adåñövä—not finding; anyatamam—anyone else; loke—in this world;
çéla-audärya-guëaiù—with the transcendental qualities of good character and
magnanimity; samam—equal to you; aham—I; sutaù—the son; väm—of both
of you; abhavam—became; påçni-garbhaù—celebrated as born of Påçni;
iti—thus; çrutaù—I am known.
TRANSLATION
Since I found no one else as highly elevated as you in simplicity and other
qualities of good character, I appeared in this world as Påçnigarbha, or one who
is celebrated as having taken birth from Påçni.
PURPORT
In the Tretä-yuga the Lord appeared as Påçnigarbha. Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura says, påçnigarbha iti so 'yaà tretä-yugävatäro lakñyate.
TEXT 42
tayaAevaA< paunare"vaAh"ma,
@id"tyaAmaAs$a k(zyapaAta,
opaen‰" wita ivaKyaAtaAe
vaAmanatvaA»a vaAmana:
tayor väà punar eväham
adityäm äsa kaçyapät
upendra iti vikhyäto
vämanatväc ca vämanaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
308
SYNONYMS
tayoù—of you two, husband and wife; väm—in both of you; punaù eva—even
again; aham—I Myself; adityäm—in the womb of Aditi; äsa—appeared;
kaçyapät—by the semen of Kaçyapa Muni; upendraù—by the name Upendra;
iti—thus; vikhyätaù—celebrated; vämanatvät ca—and because of being a
dwarf; vämanaù—I was known as Vämana.
TRANSLATION
In the next millennium, I again appeared from the two of you, who appeared
as My mother, Aditi, and My father, Kaçyapa. I was known as Upendra, and
because of being a dwarf, I was also known as Vämana.
TEXT 43
ta{taIyae'ismana, Bavae'hM" vaE
taenaEva vapauSaATa vaAma,
jaAtaAe BaUyastayaAere"va
s$atyaM mae vyaAô$taM s$aita
tåtéye 'smin bhave 'haà vai
tenaiva vapuñätha väm
jäto bhüyas tayor eva
satyaà me vyähåtaà sati
SYNONYMS
tåtéye—for the third time; asmin bhave—in this appearance (as Kåñëa);
aham—I Myself; vai—indeed; tena—with the same personality; eva
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—in this
309
way; vapuñä—by the form; atha—as; väm—of both of you; jätaù—born;
bhüyaù—again; tayoù—of both of you; eva—indeed; satyam—take as truth;
me—My; vyähåtam—words; sati—O supremely chaste.
TRANSLATION
O supremely chaste mother, I, the same personality, have now appeared of
you both as your son for the third time. Take My words as the truth.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead chooses a mother and father from
whom to take birth again and again. The Lord took birth originally from
Sutapä and Påçni, then from Kaçyapa and Aditi, and again from the same
father and mother, Vasudeva and Devaké. "In other appearances also," the Lord
said, "I took the form of an ordinary child just to become your son so that we
could reciprocate eternal love." Jéva Gosvämé has explained this verse in his
Kåñëa-sandarbha, Ninety-sixth Chapter, where he notes that in text 37 the
Lord says, amunä vapuña, meaning "by this same form." In other words, the
Lord told Devaké, "This time I have appeared in My original form as Çré Kåñëa."
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé says that the other forms were partial expansions of the
Lord's original form, but because of the intense love developed by Påçni and
Sutapä, the Lord appeared from Devaké and Vasudeva in His full opulence as
Çré Kåñëa. In this verse the Lord confirms, "I am the same Supreme Personality
of Godhead, but I appear in full opulence as Çré Kåñëa." This is the purport of
the words tenaiva vapuñä. When the Lord mentioned the birth of Påçnigarbha,
He did not say tenaiva vapuñä, but He assured Devaké that in the third birth
the Supreme Personality of Godhead Kåñëa had appeared, not His partial
expansion. Påçnigarbha and Vämana were partial expansions of Kåñëa, but in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
this third birth Kåñëa Himself appeared. This is the explanation given in Çré
Kåñëa-sandarbha by Çréla Jéva Gosvämé.
310
TEXT 44
Wtaã"AM d"izARtaM è&paM
‘aAgjanmasmar"NAAya mae
naAnyaTaA maà"vaM ÁaAnaM
matyaRilaËeÿna jaAyatae
etad väà darçitaà rüpaà
präg-janma-smaraëäya me
nänyathä mad-bhavaà jïänaà
martya-liìgena jäyate
SYNONYMS
etat—this form of Viñëu; väm—unto both of you; darçitam—has been shown;
rüpam—My form as the Supreme Personality of Godhead with four hands;
präk-janma—of My previous appearances; smaraëäya—just to remind you;
me—My; na—not; anyathä—otherwise; mat-bhavam—Viñëu's appearance;
jïänam—this transcendental knowledge; martya-liìgena—by taking birth like
a human child; jäyate—does arise.
TRANSLATION
I have shown you this form of Viñëu just to remind you of My previous
births. Otherwise, if I appeared like an ordinary human child, you would not
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
believe that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, has indeed appeared.
PURPORT
Devaké did not need to be reminded that the Supreme Personality of
311
Godhead, Lord Viñëu, had appeared as her son; she already accepted this.
Nonetheless, she was anxious, thinking that if her neighbors heard that Viñëu
had appeared as her son, none of them would believe it. Therefore she wanted
Lord Viñëu to transform Himself into a human child. On the other hand, the
Supreme Lord was also anxious, thinking that if He appeared as an ordinary
child, she would not believe that Lord Viñëu had appeared. Such are the
dealings between devotees and the Lord. The Lord deals with His devotees
exactly like a human being, but this does not mean that the Lord is one of the
human beings, for this is the conclusion of nondevotees (avajänanti mäà
müòhä mänuñéà tanum äçritam [Bg. 9.11]). Devotees know the Supreme
Personality of Godhead under any circumstances. This is the difference
between a devotee and a nondevotee. The Lord says, man-manä bhava
mad-bhakto mad-yäjé mäà namaskuru: [Bg. 18.65] "Engage your mind always in
thinking of Me, become My devotee, offer obeisances and worship Me." A
nondevotee cannot believe that simply by thinking of one person, one can
achieve liberation from this material world and go back home, back to
Godhead. But this is a fact. The Lord comes as a human being, and if one
becomes attached to the Lord on the platform of loving service, one's
promotion to the transcendental world is assured.
TEXT 45
yauvaAM maAM pau‡aBaAvaena
“aöBaAvaena caAs$ak{(ta,
icantayantaAE k{(taµaeh"AE
yaAsyaeTae maÕ"itaM par"Ama,
yuväà mäà putra-bhävena
brahma-bhävena cäsakåt
cintayantau kåta-snehau
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
312
yäsyethe mad-gatià paräm
SYNONYMS
yuväm—both of you (husband and wife); mäm—unto Me; putra-bhävena—as
your son; brahma-bhävena—knowing that I am the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; ca—and; asakåt—constantly; cintayantau—thinking like that;
kåta-snehau—dealing with love and affection; yäsyethe—shall both obtain;
mat-gatim—My supreme abode; paräm—which is transcendental, beyond this
material world.
TRANSLATION
Both of you, husband and wife, constantly think of Me as your son, but
always know that I am the Supreme Personality of Godhead. By thus thinking
of Me constantly with love and affection, you will achieve the highest
perfection: returning home, back to Godhead.
PURPORT
This instruction by the Supreme Personality of Godhead to His father and
mother, who are eternally connected with Him, is especially intended for
persons eager to return home, back to Godhead. One should never think of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead as an ordinary human being, as nondevotees
do. Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, personally appeared and left
His instructions for the benefit of all human society, but fools and rascals
unfortunately think of Him as an ordinary human being and twist the
instructions of Bhagavad-gétä for the satisfaction of their senses. Practically
everyone commenting on Bhagavad-gétä interprets it for sense gratification. It
has become especially fashionable for modern scholars and politicians to
interpret Bhagavad
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
as if it were something fictitious, and by their wrong
interpretations they are spoiling their own careers and the careers of others.
313
The Kåñëa consciousness movement, however, is fighting against this principle
of regarding Kåñëa as a fictitious person and of accepting that there was no
Battle of Kurukñetra, that everything is symbolic, and that nothing in
Bhagavad-gétä is true. In any case, if one truly wants to be successful, one can
do so by reading the text of Bhagavad-gétä as it is. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu
especially stressed the instructions of Bhagavad-gétä: yäre dekha, täre kaha
'kåñëa'-upadeça [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. If one wants to achieve the highest success
in life, one must accept Bhagavad-gétä as spoken by the Supreme Lord. By
accepting Bhagavad-gétä in this way, all of human society can become perfect
and happy.
It is to be noted that because Vasudeva and Devaké would be separated from
Kåñëa when He was carried to Gokula, the residence of Nanda Mahäräja, the
Lord personally instructed them that they should always think of Him as their
son and as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That would keep them in
touch with Him. After eleven years, the Lord would return to Mathurä to be
their son, and therefore there was no question of separation.
TEXT 46
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
wtyauftvaAs$aIÜ"ir"staUSNAI%M
BagAvaAnaAtmamaAyayaA
ipa‡aAe: s$ampazyataAe: s$aâAe
baBaUva ‘aAk{(ta: izAzAu:
çré-çuka uväca
ity uktväséd dharis tüñëéà
bhagavän ätma-mäyayä
pitroù sampaçyatoù sadyo
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
314
babhüva präkåtaù çiçuù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti uktvä—after instructing in
this way; äsét—remained; hariù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
tüñëém—silent; bhagavän—Lord Viñëu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
ätma-mäyayä—by acting in His own spiritual energy; pitroù
sampaçyatoù—while His father and mother were factually seeing Him;
sadyaù—immediately; babhüva—He became; präkåtaù—like an ordinary
human being; çiçuù—a child.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: After thus instructing His father and mother, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, remained silent. In their presence, by
His internal energy, He then transformed Himself into a small human child. [In
other words, He transformed Himself into His original form: kåñëas tu
bhagavän svayam [SB 1.3.28].
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (4.6), sambhavämy ätma-mäyayä: whatever is
done by the Supreme Personality of Godhead is done by His spiritual energy;
nothing is forced upon Him by the material energy. This is the difference
between the Lord and an ordinary living being. The Vedas say:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate
sväbhäviké jïäna-bala-kriyä ca
(Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad 6.8)
[Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]
It is natural for the Lord to be untinged by material qualities, and because
315
everything is perfectly present in His spiritual energy, as soon as He desires
something, it is immediately done. The Lord is not a präkåta-çiçu, a child of
this world, but by His personal energy He appeared like one. Ordinary people
may have difficulty accepting the supreme controller, God, as a human being
because they forget that He can do everything by spiritual energy
(ätma-mäyayä). Nonbelievers say, "How can the supreme controller descend as
an ordinary being?" This sort of thinking is materialistic. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé
says that unless we accept the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
as inconceivable, beyond the conception of our words and mind, we cannot
understand the Supreme Lord. Those who doubt that the Supreme Personality
of Godhead can come as a human being and turn Himself into a human child
are fools who think that Kåñëa's body is material, that He is born and that He
therefore also dies.
In Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Third Canto, Fourth Chapter, verses 28 and 29,
there is a description of Kåñëa's leaving His body. Mahäräja Parékñit inquired
from Çukadeva Gosvämé, "When all the members of the Yadu dynasty met
their end, Kåñëa also put an end to Himself, and the only member of the family
who remained alive was Uddhava. How was this possible?" Çukadeva Gosvämé
answered that Kåñëa, by His own energy, destroyed the entire family and then
thought of making His own body disappear. In this connection, Çukadeva
Gosvämé described how the Lord gave up His body. But this was not the
destruction of Kåñëa's body; rather, it was the disappearance of the Supreme
Lord by His personal energy.
Actually, the Lord does not give up His body, which is eternal, but as He
can change His body from the form of Viñëu to that of an ordinary human
child, He can change His body to any form He likes. This does not mean that
He gives up His body. By spiritual energy, the Lord can appear in a body made
of wood or stone. He can change His body into anything because everything is
His energy (paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]). As
clearly said in Bhagavad-gétä (7.4), bhinnä prakåtir añöadhä: the material
elements are separated energies of the Supreme Lord. If He transforms Himself
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
316
into the arcä-mürti, the worshipable Deity, which we see as stone or wood, He
is still Kåñëa. Therefore the çästra warns, arcye viñëau çilä-dhér guruñu
nara-matiù. One who thinks that the worshipable Deity in the temple is made
of wood or stone, one who sees a Vaiñëava guru as an ordinary human being, or
one who materially conceives of a Vaiñëava as belonging to a particular caste is
näraké, a resident of hell. The Supreme Personality of Godhead can appear
before us in many forms, as he likes, but we must know the true facts: janma
karma ca me divyam evaà yo vetti tattvataù (Bg. 4.9). By following the
instructions of sädhu, guru and çästra—the saintly persons, the spiritual master
and the authoritative scriptures—one can understand Kåñëa, and then one
makes his life successful by returning home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 47
tataê zAAEir"BaRgAvat‘acaAeid"ta:
s$autaM s$amaAd"Aya s$a s$aUitak(AgA{h"Ata,
yad"A baih"gARntauimayaeSa ta÷RjaA
yaA yaAegAmaAyaAjaina nand"jaAyayaA
tataç ca çaurir bhagavat-pracoditaù
sutaà samädäya sa sütikä-gåhät
yadä bahir gantum iyeña tarhy ajä
yä yogamäyäjani nanda-jäyayä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; ca—indeed; çauriù—Vasudeva; bhagavat-pracoditaù—being
instructed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sutam—his son;
samädäya—carrying very carefully; saù—he; sütikä-gåhät—from the maternity
room; yadä—when; bahiù gantum—to go outside; iyeña—desired;
317
tarhi—exactly at that time; ajä—the transcendental energy, who also never
takes birth; yä—who; yogamäyä—is known as Yogamäyä; ajani—took birth;
nanda-jäyayä—from the wife of Nanda Mahäräja.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, exactly when Vasudeva, being inspired by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, was about to take the newborn child from the delivery
room, Yogamäyä, the Lord's spiritual energy, took birth as the daughter of the
wife of Mahäräja Nanda.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura discusses that Kåñëa appeared
simultaneously as the son of Devaké and as the son of Yaçodä, along with the
spiritual energy Yogamäyä. As the son of Devaké, He first appeared as Viñëu,
and because Vasudeva was not in the position of pure affection for Kåñëa,
Vasudeva worshiped his son as Lord Viñëu. Yaçodä, however, pleased her son
Kåñëa without understanding His Godhood. This is the difference between
Kåñëa as the son of Yaçodä and as the son of Devaké. This is explained by
Viçvanätha Cakravarté on the authority of Hari-vaàça.
TEXTS 48-49
tayaA ô$ta‘atyayas$avaRva{iÔaSau
ã"A:sTaeSau paAEre"Svaipa zAAiyataeSvaTa
ã"Ar"ê s$avaAR: ipaih"taA äu"r"tyayaA
ba{h"tk(paAq%Ayas$ak(LlaZa{"ÊÿlaE:
taA: k{(SNAvaAhe" vas$aude"va @AgAtae
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
318
svayaM vyavayaRnta yaTaA tamaAe r"vae:
vavaSaR pajaRnya opaAMzAugAijaRta:
zAeSaAe'nvagAAã"Air" inavaAr"yana, P(NAE:
tayä håta-pratyaya-sarva-våttiñu
dväù-stheñu paureñv api çäyiteñv atha
dväraç ca sarväù pihitä duratyayä
båhat-kapäöäyasa-kéla-çåìkhalaiù
täù kåñëa-vähe vasudeva ägate
svayaà vyavaryanta yathä tamo raveù
vavarña parjanya upäàçu-garjitaù
çeño 'nvagäd väri nivärayan phaëaiù
SYNONYMS
tayä—by the influence of Yogamäyä; håta-pratyaya—deprived of all sensation;
sarva-våttiñu—having all their senses; dväù-stheñu—all the doormen; paureñu
api—as well as other members of the house; çäyiteñu—sleeping very deeply;
atha—when Vasudeva tried to take his transcendental son out of the
confinement; dväraù ca—as well as the doors; sarväù—all;
pihitäù—constructed; duratyayä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—very hard and firm; båhat-kapäöa—and on
great doors; äyasa-kéla-çåìkhalaiù—strongly constructed with iron pins and
closed with iron chains; täù—all of them; kåñëa-vähe—bearing Kåñëa;
vasudeve—when Vasudeva; ägate—appeared; svayam—automatically;
vyavaryanta—opened wide; yathä—as; tamaù—darkness; raveù—on the
appearance of the sun; vavarña—showered rain; parjanyaù—the clouds in the
sky; upäàçu-garjitaù—very mildly resounding and raining very slightly;
çeñaù—Ananta-näga; anvagät—followed; väri—showers of rain;
nivärayan—stopping; phaëaiù—by spreading His hoods.
319
TRANSLATION
By the influence of Yogamäyä, all the doorkeepers fell fast asleep, their
senses unable to work, and the other inhabitants of the house also fell deeply
asleep. When the sun rises, the darkness automatically disappears; similarly,
when Vasudeva appeared, the closed doors, which were strongly pinned with
iron and locked with iron chains, opened automatically. Since the clouds in the
sky were mildly thundering and showering, Ananta-näga, an expansion of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, followed Vasudeva, beginning from the door,
with hoods expanded to protect Vasudeva and the transcendental child.
PURPORT
Çeña-näga is an expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead whose
business is to serve the Lord with all necessary paraphernalia. When Vasudeva
was carrying the child, Çeña-näga came to serve the Lord and protect Him from
the mild showers of rain.
TEXT 50
maGaAeina vaSaRtyas$ak{(âmaAnaujaA
gAmBaIr"taAeyaAEGajavaAeimaR%Pe(inalaA
BayaAnak(AvataRzAtaAku(laA nad"I
maAgA< d"d"AE is$anDauir"va i™aya: patae:
maghoni varñaty asakåd yamänujä
gambhéra-toyaugha-javormi-phenilä
bhayänakävarta-çatäkulä nadé
märgaà dadau sindhur iva çriyaù pateù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
320
SYNONYMS
maghoni varñati—because of Lord Indra's showering rain; asakåt—constantly;
yama-anujä—the River Yamunä, who is considered the younger sister of
Yamaräja; gambhéra-toya-ogha—of the very deep water; java—by the force;
ürmi—by the waves; phenilä—full of foam; bhayänaka—fierce;
ävarta-çata—by the whirling waves; äkulä—agitated; nadé—the river;
märgam—way; dadau—gave; sindhuù iva—like the ocean; çriyaù pateù—unto
Lord Rämacandra, the husband of the goddess Sétä.
TRANSLATION
Because of constant rain sent by the demigod Indra, the River Yamunä was
filled with deep water, foaming about with fiercely whirling waves. But as the
great Indian Ocean had formerly given way to Lord Rämacandra by allowing
Him to construct a bridge, the River Yamunä gave way to Vasudeva and
allowed him to cross.
TEXT 51
nand"˜ajaM zAAEir"ç&paetya ta‡a taAna,
gAAepaAna, ‘as$auæaAnaupalaBya ina‰"yaA
s$autaM yazAAed"AzAyanae inaDaAya tata,-
s$autaAmaupaAd"Aya paunagA{Rh"AnagAAta,
nanda-vrajaà çaurir upetya tatra tän
gopän prasuptän upalabhya nidrayä
sutaà yaçodä-çayane nidhäya tatsutäm
upädäya punar gåhän agät
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
321
SYNONYMS
nanda-vrajam—the village or the house of Nanda Mahäräja;
çauriù—Vasudeva; upetya—reaching; tatra—there; tän—all the members;
gopän—the cowherd men; prasuptän—were fast asleep;
upalabhya—understanding that; nidrayä—in deep sleep; sutam—the son
(Vasudeva's son); yaçodä-çayane—on the bed where mother Yaçodä was
sleeping; nidhäya—placing; tat-sutäm—her daughter; upädäya—picking up;
punaù—again; gåhän—to his own house; agät—returned.
TRANSLATION
When Vasudeva reached the house of Nanda Mahäräja, he saw that all the
cowherd men were fast asleep. Thus he placed his own son on the bed of
Yaçodä, picked up her daughter, an expansion of Yogamäyä, and then returned
to his residence, the prison house of Kaàsa.
PURPORT
Vasudeva knew very well that as soon as the daughter was in the prison
house of Kaàsa, Kaàsa would immediately kill her; but to protect his own
child, he had to kill the child of his friend. Nanda Mahäräja was his friend, but
out of deep affection and attachment for his own son, he knowingly did this.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura says that one cannot be blamed for
protecting one's own child at the sacrifice of another's. Furthermore, Vasudeva
cannot be accused of callousness, since his actions were impelled by the force
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
of Yogamäyä.
TEXT 52
de"vafyaA: zAyanae nyasya
322
vas$aude"vaAe'Ta d"Air"k(Ama,
‘aitamaucya pad"AelaAeRh"ma,
@Astae paUvaRvad"Ava{ta:
devakyäù çayane nyasya
vasudevo 'tha därikäm
pratimucya pador loham
äste pürvavad ävåtaù
SYNONYMS
devakyäù—of Devaké; çayane—on the bed; nyasya—placing;
vasudevaù—Vasudeva; atha—thus; därikäm—the female child;
pratimucya—binding himself again; padoù loham—iron shackles on the two
legs; äste—remained; pürva-vat—like before; ävåtaù—bound.
TRANSLATION
Vasudeva placed the female child on the bed of Devaké, bound his legs with
the iron shackles, and thus remained there as before.
TEXT 53
yazAAed"A nand"pa¥aI ca
jaAtaM par"mabauDyata
na taiéaËMÿ pair"™aAntaA
ina‰"yaApagAtasma{ita:
yaçodä nanda-patné ca
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
323
jätaà param abudhyata
na tal-liìgaà pariçräntä
nidrayäpagata-småtiù
SYNONYMS
yaçodä—Yaçodä, Kåñëa's mother in Gokula; nanda-patné—the wife of Nanda
Mahäräja; ca—also; jätam—a child was born; param—the Supreme Person;
abudhyata—could understand; na—not; tat-liìgam—whether the child was
male or female; pariçräntä—because of too much labor; nidrayä—when
overwhelmed with sleep; apagata-småtiù—having lost consciousness.
TRANSLATION
Exhausted by the labor of childbirth, Yaçodä was overwhelmed with sleep
and unable to understand what kind of child had been born to her.
PURPORT
Nanda Mahäräja and Vasudeva were intimate friends, and so were their
wives, Yaçodä and Devaké. Although their names were different, they were
practically nondifferent personalities. The only difference is that Devaké was
able to understand that the Supreme Personality of Godhead had been born to
her and had now changed into Kåñëa, whereas Yaçodä was not able to
understand what kind of child had been born to her. Yaçodä was such an
advanced devotee that she never regarded Kåñëa as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, but simply loved Him as her own child. Devaké, however, knew from
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
the very beginning that although Kåñëa was her son, He was the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. In Våndävana, no one regarded Kåñëa as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. When something very wonderful happened because of
Kåñëa's activities, the inhabitants of Våndävana—the cowherd men, the
cowherd boys, Nanda Mahäräja, Yaçodä and the others—were surprised, but
324
they never considered their son Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Sometimes they suggested that some great demigod had appeared there as
Kåñëa. In such an exalted status of devotional service, a devotee forgets the
position of Kåñëa and intensely loves the Supreme Personality of Godhead
without understanding His position. This is called kevala-bhakti and is distinct
from the stages of jïäna and jïänamayé bhakti.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Tenth Canto, Third Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Birth of Lord Kåñëa."
4. The Atrocities of King Kaàsa
This chapter describes how Kaàsa, following the advice of his demoniac
friends, considered the persecution of small children to be very diplomatic.
After Vasudeva bound himself with iron shackles as before, all the doors of
the prison house closed by the influence of Yogamäyä, who then began crying
as a newborn child, This crying awakened the doorkeepers, who immediately
informed Kaàsa that a child had been born to Devaké. Upon hearing this
news, Kaàsa appeared with great force in the maternity room, and in spite of
Devaké's pleas that the child be saved, the demon forcibly snatched the child
from Devaké's hands and dashed the child against a rock. Unfortunately for
Kaàsa, however, the newborn child slipped away from his hands, rose above
his head and appeared as the eight-armed form of Durgä. Durgä then told
Kaàsa, "The enemy you contemplate has taken birth somewhere else.
Therefore your plan to persecute all the children will prove futile."
According to the prophecy, the eighth child of Devaké would kill Kaàsa,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
325
and therefore when Kaàsa saw that the eighth child was a female and heard
that his so-called enemy had taken birth elsewhere, he was struck with wonder.
He decided to release Devaké and Vasudeva, and he admitted before them the
wrongness of his atrocities. Falling at the feet of Devaké and Vasudeva, he
begged their pardon and tried to convince them that because the events that
had taken place were destined to happen, they should not be unhappy for his
having killed so many of their children. Devaké and Vasudeva, being naturally
very pious, immediately excused Kaàsa for his atrocities, and Kaàsa, after
seeing that his sister and brother-in-law were happy, returned to his home.
After the night passed, however, Kaàsa called for his ministers and
informed them of all that had happened. The ministers, who were all demons,
advised Kaàsa that because his enemy had already taken birth somewhere else,
all the children born within the past ten days in the villages within Kaàsa's
kingdom should be killed. Although the demigods always feared Kaàsa, they
should not be treated leniently; since they were enemies, Kaàsa should try his
best to uproot their existence. The demoniac ministers further advised that
Kaàsa and the demons continue their enmity toward Viñëu because Viñëu is
the original person among all the demigods. The brähmaëas, the cows, the
Vedas, austerity, truthfulness, control of the senses and mind, faithfulness and
mercy are among the different parts of the body of Viñëu, who is the origin of
all the demigods, including Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva. Therefore, the
ministers advised, the demigods, the saintly persons, the cows and the
brähmaëas should be systematically persecuted. Strongly advised in this way by
his friends, the demoniac ministers, Kaàsa approved of their instructions and
considered it beneficial to be envious of the brähmaëas. Following Kaàsa's
orders, therefore, the demons began committing their atrocities all over
Vrajabhümi.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
326
baih"r"nta:paur"ã"Ar":
s$avaAR: paUvaRvad"Ava{taA:
tataAe baAlaDvainaM ™autvaA
gA{h"paAlaA: s$amauitTataA:
çré-çuka uväca
bahir-antaù-pura-dväraù
sarväù pürvavad ävåtäù
tato bäla-dhvanià çrutvä
gåha-päläù samutthitäù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; bahiù-antaù-pura-dväraù—the
doors inside and outside the house; sarväù—all; pürva-vat—like before;
ävåtäù—closed; tataù—thereafter; bäla-dhvanim—the crying of the newborn
child; çrutvä—hearing; gåha-päläù—all the inhabitants of the house, especially
the doormen; samutthitäù—awakened.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: My dear King Parékñit, the doors inside and
outside the house closed as before. Thereafter, the inhabitants of the house,
especially the watchmen, heard the crying of the newborn child and thus
awakened from their beds.
PURPORT
The activities of Yogamäyä are distinctly visible in this chapter, in which
Devaké and Vasudeva excuse Kaàsa for his many devious, atrocious activities
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
and Kaàsa becomes repentant and falls at their feet. Before the awakening of
327
the watchmen and the others in the prison house, many other things
happened. Kåñëa was born and transferred to the home of Yaçodä in Gokula,
the strong doors opened and again closed, and Vasudeva resumed his former
condition of being shackled. The watchmen, however, could not understand
all this. They awakened only when they heard the crying of the newborn child,
Yogamäyä.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has remarked that the watchmen
were just like dogs. At night the dogs in the street act like watchmen. If one
dog barks, many other dogs immediately follow it by barking. Although the
street dogs are not appointed by anyone to act as watchmen, they think they
are responsible for protecting the neighborhood, and as soon as someone
unknown enters it, they all begin to bark. Both Yogamäyä and Mahämäyä act
in all material activities (prakåteù kriyamäëäni guëaiù karmäëi sarvaçaù [Bg.
3.27]), but although the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead acts
under the Supreme Lord's direction (mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù süyate
sa-caräcaram [Bg. 9.10]), doglike watchmen such as politicians and diplomats
think that they are protecting their neighborhoods from the dangers of the
outside world. These are the actions of mäyä. But one who surrenders to Kåñëa
is relieved of the protection afforded by the dogs and doglike guardians of this
material world.
TEXT 2
tae tau taUNARmaupa˜ajya
de"vafyaA gABaRjanma tata,
@AcaKyauBaAeRjar"AjaAya
yaäu"iã"¢a: ‘ataIºatae
te tu türëam upavrajya
devakyä garbha-janma tat
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
328
äcakhyur bhoja-räjäya
yad udvignaù pratékñate
SYNONYMS
te—all the watchmen; tu—indeed; türëam—very quickly; upavrajya—going
before (the King); devakyäù—of Devaké; garbha-janma—the deliverance from
the womb; tat—that (child); äcakhyuù—submitted; bhoja-räjäya—unto the
King of the Bhojas, Kaàsa; yat—of whom; udvignaù—with great anxiety;
pratékñate—was waiting (for the child's birth).
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, all the watchmen very quickly approached King Kaàsa, the ruler
of the Bhoja dynasty, and submitted the news of the birth of Devaké's child.
Kaàsa, who had awaited this news very anxiously, immediately took action.
PURPORT
Kaàsa was very anxiously waiting because of the prophecy that the eighth
child of Devaké would kill him. This time, naturally, he was awake and waiting,
and when the watchmen approached him, he immediately took action to kill
the child.
TEXT 3
s$a talpaAÔaUNARmautTaAya
k(AlaAe'yaimaita ivaù"la:
s$aUtaIgA{h"magAAÔaUNA<
‘asKalanmaul(maUDaRja:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
329
sa talpät türëam utthäya
kälo 'yam iti vihvalaù
süté-gåham agät türëaà
praskhalan mukta-mürdhajaù
SYNONYMS
saù—he (King Kaàsa); talpät—from the bed; türëam—very quickly;
utthäya—getting up; kälaù ayam—here is my death, the supreme time; iti—in
this way; vihvalaù—overwhelmed; süté-gåham—to the maternity home;
agät—went; türëam—without delay; praskhalan—scattering; mukta—had
become opened; mürdha-jaù—the hair on the head.
TRANSLATION
Kaàsa immediately got up from bed, thinking, "Here is Käla, the supreme
time factor, which has taken birth to kill me!" Thus overwhelmed, Kaàsa, his
hair scattered on his head, at once approached the place where the child had
been born.
PURPORT
The word kälaù is significant. Although the child was born to kill Kaàsa,
Kaàsa thought that this was the proper time to kill the child so that he himself
would be saved. Käla is actually another name of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead when He appears only for the purpose of killing. When Arjuna
inquired from Kåñëa in His universal form, "Who are You?" the Lord presented
Himself as käla, death personified to kill. By nature's law, when there is an
unwanted increase in population, käla appears, and by some arrangement of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, people are killed wholesale in different
ways, by war, pestilence, famine and so on. At that time, even atheistic
political leaders go to a church, mosque or temple for protection by God or
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
330
gods and submissively say, "God willing." Before that, they pay no attention to
God, not caring to know God or His will, but when käla appears, they say,
"God willing." Death is but another feature of the supreme käla, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. At the time of death, the atheist must submit to this
supreme käla, and then the Supreme Personality of Godhead takes away all his
possessions (måtyuù sarva-haraç cäham [Bg. 10.34]) and forces him to accept
another body (tathä dehäntara-präptiù [Bg. 2.13]). This the atheists do not
know, and if they do know, they neglect it so that they may go on with their
normal life. The Kåñëa consciousness movement is trying to teach them that
although for a few years one may act as a great protector or great watchman,
with the appearance of käla, death, one must take another body by the laws of
nature. Not knowing this, they unnecessarily waste their time in their
occupation as watchdogs and do not try to get the mercy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. As it is clearly said, apräpya mäà nivartante
måtyu-saàsära-vartmani: [Bg. 9.3] without Kåñëa consciousness, one is
condemned to continue wandering in birth and death, not knowing what will
happen in one's next birth.
TEXT 4
tamaAh" ”aAtarM" de"vaI
k{(paNAA k(ç&NAM s$ataI
µauSaeyaM tava k(lyaANA
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
iñyaM maA h"ntaumahR"is$a
tam äha bhrätaraà devé
kåpaëä karuëaà saté
snuñeyaà tava kalyäëa
striyaà mä hantum arhasi
331
SYNONYMS
tam—unto Kaàsa; äha—said; bhrätaram—her brother; devé—mother Devaké;
kåpaëä—helplessly; karuëam—piteously; saté—the chaste lady; snuñä iyam
tava—this child will be your daughter-in-law, the wife of your future son;
kalyäëa—O all-auspicious one; striyam—a woman; mä—not; hantum—to kill;
arhasi—you deserve.
TRANSLATION
Devaké helplessly, piteously appealed to Kaàsa: My dear brother, all good
fortune unto you. Don't kill this girl. She will be your daughter-in-law. Indeed,
it is unworthy of you to kill a woman.
PURPORT
Kaàsa had previously excused Devaké because he thought that a woman
should not be killed, especially when pregnant. But now, by the influence of
mäyä, he was prepared to kill a woman—not only a woman, but a small,
helpless newborn child. Devaké wanted to save her brother from this terrible,
sinful act. Therefore she told him, "Don't be so atrocious as to kill a female
child. Let there be all good fortune for you." Demons can do anything for their
personal benefit, not considering what is pious or vicious. But Devaké, on the
contrary, although safe because she had already given birth to her own son,
Kåñëa, was anxious to save the daughter of someone else. This was natural for
her.
TEXT 5
bah"vaAe ihM"is$ataA ”aAta:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
332
izAzAva: paAvak(AepamaA:
tvayaA dE"vainas$a{íe"na
paui‡akE(k(A ‘ad"IyataAma,
bahavo hiàsitä bhrätaù
çiçavaù pävakopamäù
tvayä daiva-nisåñöena
putrikaikä pradéyatäm
SYNONYMS
bahavaù—many; hiàsitäù—killed out of envy; bhrätaù—my dear brother;
çiçavaù—small children; pävaka-upamäù—all of them equal to fire in
brightness and beauty; tvayä—by you; daiva-nisåñöena—as spoken by destiny;
putrikä—daughter; ekä—one; pradéyatäm—give me as your gift.
TRANSLATION
My dear brother, by the influence of destiny you have already killed many
babies, each of them as bright and beautiful as fire. But kindly spare this
daughter. Give her to me as your gift.
PURPORT
Here we see that Devaké first focused Kaàsa's attention on his atrocious
activities, his killing of her many sons. Then she wanted to compromise with
him by saying that whatever he had done was not his fault, but was ordained
by destiny. Then she appealed to him to give her the daughter as a gift. Devaké
was the daughter of a kñatriya and knew how to play the political game. In
politics there are different methods of achieving success: first repression
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
(dama), then compromise (säma), and then asking for a gift (däna). Devaké
333
first adopted the policy of repression by directly attacking Kaàsa for having
cruelly, atrociously killed her babies. Then she compromised by saying that this
was not his fault, and then she begged for a gift. As we learn from the history
of the Mahäbhärata, or "Greater India," the wives and daughters of the ruling
class, the kñatriyas, knew the political game, but we never find that a woman
was given the post of chief executive. This is in accordance with the
injunctions of Manu-saàhitä, but unfortunately Manu-saàhitä is now being
insulted, and the Äryans, the members of Vedic society, cannot do anything.
Such is the nature of Kali-yuga.
Nothing happens unless ordained by destiny.
tasyaiva hetoù prayateta kovido
na labhyate yad bhramatäm upary adhaù
tal labhyate duùkhavad anyataù sukhaà
kälena sarvatra gabhéra-raàhasä
(SB 1.5.18)
Devaké knew very well that because the killing of her many children had been
ordained by destiny, Kaàsa was not to be blamed. There was no need to give
good instructions to Kaàsa. Upadeço hi murkhäëäà prakopäya na çäntaye
(Cäëakya Paëòita). If a foolish person is given good instructions, he becomes
more and more angry. Moreover, a cruel person is more dangerous than a
snake. A snake and a cruel person are both cruel, but a cruel person is more
dangerous because although a snake can be charmed by mantras or subdued by
herbs, a cruel person cannot be subdued by any means. Such was the nature of
Kaàsa.
TEXT 6
nanvahM" tae ÷var"jaA
d"InaA h"tas$autaA ‘aBaAe
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
334
d"AtaumahR"is$a mand"AyaA
@ËeÿmaAM car"maAM ‘ajaAma,
nanv ahaà te hy avarajä
dénä hata-sutä prabho
dätum arhasi mandäyä
aìgemäà caramäà prajäm
SYNONYMS
nanu—however; aham—I am; te—your; hi—indeed; avarajä—younger sister;
dénä—very poor; hata-sutä—deprived of all children; prabho—O my lord;
dätum arhasi—you deserve to give (some gift); mandäyäù—to me, who am so
poor; aìga—my dear brother; imäm—this; caramäm—last; prajäm—child.
TRANSLATION
My lord, my brother, I am very poor, being bereft of all my children, but still
I am your younger sister, and therefore it would be worthy of you to give me
this last child as a gift.
TEXT 7
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
opagAu÷AtmajaAmaevaM
ç&d"tyaA d"Inad"Inavata,
yaAicatastaAM ivainaBaRtsyaR
h"staAd"AicaicC$de" Kala:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
335
çré-çuka uväca
upaguhyätmajäm evaà
rudatyä déna-dénavat
yäcitas täà vinirbhartsya
hastäd äcicchide khalaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; upaguhya—embracing;
ätmajäm—her daughter; evam—in this way; rudatyä—by Devaké, who was
crying; déna-déna-vat—very piteously, like a poor woman; yäcitaù—being
begged; täm—her (Devaké); vinirbhartsya—chastising; hastät—from her
hands; äcicchide—separated the child by force; khalaù—Kaàsa, the most cruel.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: Piteously embracing her daughter and crying,
Devaké begged Kaàsa for the child, but he was so cruel that he chastised her
and forcibly snatched the child from her hands.
PURPORT
Although Devaké was crying like a very poor woman, actually she was not
poor, and therefore the word used here is dénavat. She had already given birth
to Kåñëa. Therefore, who could have been richer than she? Even the demigods
had come to offer prayers to Devaké, but she played the part of a poor,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
piteously afflicted woman because she wanted to save the daughter of Yaçodä.
TEXT 8
taAM gA{h"ItvaA car"NAyaAer,"
336
jaAtamaA‡aAM svas$au: s$autaAma,
@paAeTayaicC$laApa{ïe"
svaATaAeRnmaUilatas$aAEô$d":
täà gåhétvä caraëayor
jäta-mäträà svasuù sutäm
apothayac chilä-påñöhe
svärthonmülita-sauhådaù
SYNONYMS
täm—the child; gåhétvä—taking by force; caraëayoù—by the two legs;
jäta-mäträm—the newborn child; svasuù—of his sister; sutäm—the daughter;
apothayat—smashed; çilä-påñöhe—on the surface of a stone;
sva-artha-unmülita—uprooted because of intense selfishness; sauhådaù—all
friendship or family relationships.
TRANSLATION
Having uprooted all relationships with his sister because of intense
selfishness, Kaàsa, who was sitting on his knees, grasped the newborn child by
the legs and tried to dash her against the surface of a stone.
TEXT 9
s$aA taÜ"staAts$amautpatya
s$aâAe de"vyambarM" gAtaA
@ä{"zyataAnaujaA ivaSNAAe:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
337
s$aAyauDaAí"mah"ABaujaA
sä tad-dhastät samutpatya
sadyo devy ambaraà gatä
adåçyatänujä viñëoù
säyudhäñöa-mahäbhujä
SYNONYMS
sä—that female child; tat-hastät—from the hand of Kaàsa;
sam-utpatya—slipped upward; sadyaù—immediately; devé—the form of a
demigoddess; ambaram—into the sky; gatä—went; adåçyata—was seen;
anujä—the younger sister; viñëoù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
sa-äyudhä—with weapons; añöa—eight; mahä-bhujä—with mighty arms.
TRANSLATION
The child, Yogamäyä-devé, the younger sister of Lord Viñëu, slipped upward
from Kaàsa's hands and appeared in the sky as Devé, the goddess Durgä, with
eight arms, completely equipped with weapons.
PURPORT
Kaàsa tried to dash the child downward against a piece of stone, but since
she was Yogamäyä, the younger sister of Lord Viñëu, she slipped upward and
assumed the form of the goddess Durgä. The word anujä, meaning "the younger
sister," is significant. When
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
have simultaneously taken birth from Yaçodä also. Otherwise how could
Yogamäyä have been anujä, the Lord's younger sister?
TEXTS 10-11
338
id"vya›agAmbar"Alaepar"¥
aABar"NABaUiSataA
Danau:zAUlaeSaucamaARis$azAÊÿca‚(
gAd"ADar"A
is$aÜ"caAr"NAgAnDavaE=r,"
@ps$ar":ik(ªar"Aer"gAE:
opaAô$taAeç&bailaiBa:
staUyamaAnaed"ma“avaIta,
divya-srag-ambaräleparatnäbharaëa-
bhüñitä
dhanuù-çüleñu-carmäsiçaìkha-
cakra-gadä-dharä
siddha-cäraëa-gandharvair
apsaraù-kinnaroragaiù
upähåtoru-balibhiù
stüyamänedam abravét
SYNONYMS
divya-srak-ambara-älepa—she then assumed the form of a demigoddess,
completely decorated with sandalwood pulp, flower garlands and a nice dress;
ratna-äbharaëa-bhüñitä—decorated with ornaments of valuable jewels;
dhanuù-çüla-iñu-carma-asi—with bow, trident, arrows, shield and sword;
çaìkha-cakra-gadä-dharä—and holding the weapons of Viñëu (conchshell, disc
and club); siddha-cäraëa-gandharvaiù—by the Siddhas, Cäraëas and
Gandharvas; apsaraù-kinnara-uragaiù—and by the Apsaräs, Kinnaras and
Uragas; upähåta-uru-balibhiù—who brought all kinds of presentations to her;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
339
stüyamänä—being praised; idam—these words; abravét—she said.
TRANSLATION
The goddess Durgä was decorated with flower garlands, smeared with
sandalwood pulp and dressed with excellent garments and ornaments made of
valuable jewels. Holding in her hands a bow, a trident, arrows, a shield, a
sword, a conchshell, a disc and a club, and being praised by celestial beings like
Apsaräs, Kinnaras, Uragas, Siddhas, Cäraëas and Gandharvas, who worshiped
her with all kinds of presentations, she spoke as follows.
TEXT 12
ikM( mayaA h"tayaA mand"
jaAta: Kalau tavaAntak{(ta,
ya‡a ¸( vaA paUvaRzA‡aur,"
maA ihM"s$aI: k{(paNAAna, va{TaA
kià mayä hatayä manda
jätaù khalu tavänta-kåt
yatra kva vä pürva-çatrur
mä hiàséù kåpaëän våthä
SYNONYMS
kim—what is the use; mayä—me; hatayä—in killing; manda—O you fool;
jätaù—has already been born; khalu—indeed; tava anta-kåt—who will kill you;
yatra kva vä—somewhere else; pürva-çatruù—your former enemy; mä—do not;
hiàséù—kill; kåpaëän—other poor children;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
våthä—unnecessarily.
340
TRANSLATION
O Kaàsa, you fool, what will be the use of killing me? The Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who has been your enemy from the very beginning and
who will certainly kill you, has already taken His birth somewhere else.
Therefore, do not unnecessarily kill other children.
TEXT 13
wita ‘aBaASya taM de"vaI
maAyaA BagAvataI Bauiva
baò"naAmainake(taeSau
baò"naAmaA baBaUva h"
iti prabhäñya taà devé
mäyä bhagavaté bhuvi
bahu-näma-niketeñu
bahu-nämä babhüva ha
SYNONYMS
iti—in this way; prabhäñya—addressing; tam—Kaàsa; devé—the goddess
Durgä; mäyä—Yogamäyä; bhagavaté—possessing immense power, like that of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhuvi—on the surface of the earth;
bahu-näma—of different names; niketeñu—in different places;
bahu-nämä—different names; babhüva—became; ha—indeed.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
TRANSLATION
After speaking to Kaàsa in this way, the goddess Durgä, Yogamäyä,
341
appeared in different places, such as Väräëasé, and became celebrated by
different names, such as Annapürëä, Durgä, Kälé and Bhadrä.
PURPORT
The goddess Durgä is celebrated in Calcutta as Kälé, in Bombay as
Mumbädevé, in Väräëasé as Annapürëä, in Cuttack as Bhadrakälé and in
Ahmedabad as Bhadrä. Thus in different places she is known by different
names. Her devotees are known as çäktas, or worshipers of the energy of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, whereas worshipers of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead Himself are called Vaiñëavas. Vaiñëavas are destined
to return home, back to Godhead, in the spiritual world, whereas the çäktas are
destined to live within this material world to enjoy different types of material
happiness. In the material world, the living entity must accept different types
of bodies. Bhrämayan sarva-bhütäni yanträrüòhäni mäyayä (Bg. 18.61).
According to the living entity's desire, Yogamäyä, or Mäyä, the goddess Durgä,
gives him a particular type of body, which is mentioned as yantra, a machine.
But the living entities who are promoted to the spiritual world do not return to
the prison house of a material body (tyaktvä dehaà punar janma naiti mäm eti
so'rjuna [Bg. 4.9]). The words janma na eti indicate that these living entities
remain in their original, spiritual bodies to enjoy the company of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead in the transcendental abodes Vaikuëöha and
Våndävana.
TEXT 14
taeX#.ta,
tayaAiBaih"tamaAk(NyaR
kM(s$a: par"maivaismata:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
de"vak(LM vas$aude"vaM ca
342
ivamaucya ‘ai™ataAe'“avaIta,
tayäbhihitam äkarëya
kaàsaù parama-vismitaù
devakéà vasudevaà ca
vimucya praçrito 'bravét
SYNONYMS
tayä—by the goddess Durgä; abhihitam—the words spoken; äkarëya—by
hearing; kaàsaù—Kaàsa; parama-vismitaù—was struck with wonder;
devakém—unto Devaké; vasudevam ca—and Vasudeva; vimucya—releasing
immediately; praçritaù—with great humility; abravét—spoke as follows.
TRANSLATION
After hearing the words of the goddess Durgä, Kaàsa was struck with
wonder. Thus he approached his sister Devaké and brother-in-law Vasudeva,
released them immediately from their shackles, and very humbly spoke as
follows.
PURPORT
Kaàsa was astonished because the goddess Durgä had become the daughter
of Devaké. Since Devaké was a human being, how could the goddess Durgä
become her daughter? This was one cause of his astonishment. Also, how is it
that the eighth child of Devaké was a female? This also astonished him. Asuras
are generally devotees of mother Durgä, Çakti, or of demigods, especially Lord
Çiva. The appearance of Durgä in her original eight-armed feature, holding
various weapons, immediately changed Kaàsa's mind about Devaké's being an
ordinary human. Devaké must have had some transcendental qualities;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
343
otherwise why would the goddess Durgä have taken birth from her womb?
Under the circumstances, Kaàsa, struck with wonder, wanted to compensate
for his atrocities against his sister Devaké.
TEXT 15
@h"Ae BaigAnyah"Ae BaAma
mayaA vaAM bata paApmanaA
pauç&SaAd" wvaApatyaM
bah"vaAe ihM"is$ataA: s$autaA:
aho bhaginy aho bhäma
mayä väà bata päpmanä
puruñäda iväpatyaà
bahavo hiàsitäù sutäù
SYNONYMS
aho—alas; bhagini—my dear sister; aho—alas; bhäma—my dear
brother-in-law; mayä—by me; väm—of you; bata—indeed; päpmanä—because
of sinful activities; puruña-adaù—a Räkñasa, man-eater; iva—like;
apatyam—child; bahavaù—many; hiàsitäù—have been killed; sutäù—sons.
TRANSLATION
Alas, my sister! Alas, my brother-in-law! I am indeed so sinful that exactly
like a man-eater [Räkñasa] who eats his own child, I have killed so many sons
born of you.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
PURPORT
344
Räkñasas are understood to be accustomed to eating their own sons, as
snakes and many other animals sometimes do. At the present moment in
Kali-yuga, Räkñasa fathers and mothers are killing their own children in the
womb, and some are even eating the fetus with great relish. Thus the so-called
civilization is gradually advancing by producing Räkñasas.
TEXT 16
s$a tvahM" tyal(k(Aç&Nyas$a,
tyal(ÁaAitas$auô$tKala:
k(AnlaAek(Ana, vaE gAimaSyaAima
“aöhe"va ma{ta: ìs$ana,
sa tv ahaà tyakta-käruëyas
tyakta-jïäti-suhåt khalaù
kän lokän vai gamiñyämi
brahma-heva måtaù çvasan
SYNONYMS
saù—that person (Kaàsa); tu—indeed; aham—I; tyakta-käruëyaù—devoid of
all mercy; tyakta-jïäti-suhåt—my relatives and friends have been rejected by
me; khalaù—cruel; kän lokän—which planets; vai—indeed; gamiñyämi—shall
go; brahma-hä iva—like the killer of a brähmaëa; måtaù çvasan—either after
death or while breathing.
TRANSLATION
Being merciless and cruel, I have forsaken all my relatives and friends.
Therefore, like a person who has killed a brähmaëa, I do not know to which
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
345
planet I shall go, either after death or while breathing.
TEXT 17
dE"vamapyana{taM vail(
na matyaAR Wva ke(valama,
yaiã"™amBaAd"hM" paApa:
svas$auinaRh"tavaAiHC$zAUna,
daivam apy anåtaà vakti
na martyä eva kevalam
yad-viçrambhäd ahaà päpaù
svasur nihataväï chiçün
SYNONYMS
daivam—providence; api—also; anåtam—lies; vakti—say; na—not;
martyäù—human beings; eva—certainly; kevalam—only;
yat-viçrambhät—because of believing that prophecy; aham—I; päpaù—the
most sinful; svasuù—of my sister; nihatavän—killed; çiçün—so many children.
TRANSLATION
Alas, not only human beings but sometimes even providence lies. And I am
so sinful that I believed the omen of providence and killed so many of my
sister's children.
TEXT 18
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
maA zAAecataM mah"ABaAgAAva,
346
@AtmajaAna, svak{(taM Bauja:
jaAntavaAe na s$adE"k(‡a
dE"vaADaInaAstad"As$atae
mä çocataà mahä-bhägäv
ätmajän sva-kåtaà bhujaù
jäntavo na sadaikatra
daivädhénäs tadäsate
SYNONYMS
mä çocatam—kindly do not be aggrieved (for what happened in the past);
mahä-bhägau—O you who are learned and fortunate in spiritual knowledge;
ätmajän—for your sons; sva-kåtam—only because of their own acts;
bhujaù—who are suffering; jäntavaù—all living entities; na—not;
sadä—always; ekatra—in one place; daiva-adhénäù—who are under the
control of providence; tadä—hence; äsate—live.
TRANSLATION
O great souls, your children have suffered their own misfortune. Therefore,
please do not lament for them. All living entities are under the control of the
Supreme, and they cannot always live together.
PURPORT
Kaàsa addressed his sister and brother-in-law as mahä-bhägau because
although he killed their ordinary children, the goddess Durgä took birth from
them. Because Devaké bore Durgädevé in her womb, Kaàsa praised both
Devaké and her husband. Asuras are very devoted to the goddess Durgä, Kälé
and so forth. Kaàsa, therefore, truly astonished, appreciated the exalted
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
347
position of his sister and brother-in-law. Durgä is certainly not under the laws
of nature, because she herself is the controller of the laws of nature. Ordinary
living beings, however, are controlled by these laws (prakåteù kriyamäëäni
guëaiù karmäëi sarvaçaù [Bg. 3.27]). Consequently, none of us are allowed to
live together for any long period. By speaking in this way, Kaàsa tried to
pacify his sister and brother-in-law.
TEXT 19
Bauiva BaAEmaAina BaUtaAina
yaTaA yaAntyapayaAinta ca
naAyamaAtmaA taTaEtaeSau
ivapayaeRita yaTaEva BaU:
bhuvi bhaumäni bhütäni
yathä yänty apayänti ca
näyam ätmä tathaiteñu
viparyeti yathaiva bhüù
SYNONYMS
bhuvi—on the surface of the world; bhaumäni—all material products from
earth, such as pots; bhütäni—which are produced; yathä—as; yänti—appear
(in form); apayänti—disappear (broken or mixed with the earth); ca—and;
na—not; ayam ätmä—the soul or spiritual identity; tathä—similarly;
eteñu—among all these (products of material elements); viparyeti
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
or broken; yathä—as; eva—certainly; bhüù—the earth.
TRANSLATION
348
In this world, we can see that pots, dolls and other products of the earth
appear, break and then disappear, mixing with the earth. Similarly, the bodies of
all conditioned living entities are annihilated, but the living entities, like the
earth itself, are unchanging and never annihilated [na hanyate hanyamäne
çarére [Bg. 2.20]].
PURPORT
Although Kaàsa is described as a demon, he had good knowledge of the
affairs of ätma-tattva, the truth of the self. Five thousand years ago, there were
kings like Kaàsa, who is described as an asura, but he was better than modern
politicians and diplomats, who have no knowledge about ätma-tattva. As stated
in the Vedas, asaìgo hy ayaà puruñaù: the spirit soul has no connection with
the changes of the material body. The body undergoes six changes—birth,
growth, sustenance, by-products, dwindling and then annihilation—but the
soul undergoes no such changes. Even after the annihilation of a particular
bodily form, the original source of the bodily elements does not change. The
living entity enjoys the material body, which appears and disappears, but the
five elements earth, water, fire, air and ether remain the same. The example
given here is that pots and dolls are produced from the earth, and when
broken or destroyed they mingle with their original ingredients. In any case,
the source of supply remains the same.
As already discussed, the body is made according to the desires of the soul.
The soul desires, and thus the body is formed. Kåñëa therefore says in
Bhagavad-gétä (18.61):
éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà
håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati
bhrämayan sarva-bhütäni
yanträrüòhäni mäyayä
"The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna, and is directing
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
349
the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a machine, made of
the material energy." Neither the Supersoul, Paramätmä, nor the individual
soul changes its original, spiritual identity. The ätmä does not undergo birth,
death or changes like the body. Therefore a Vedic aphorism says, asaìgo hy
ayaà puruñaù: although the soul is conditioned within this material world, he
has no connections with the changes of the material body.
TEXT 20
yaTaAnaevaMivad"Ae Baed"Ae
yata @AtmaivapayaRya:
de"h"yaAegAivayaAegAAE ca
s$aMs$a{itanaR inavataRtae
yathänevaà-vido bhedo
yata ätma-viparyayaù
deha-yoga-viyogau ca
saàsåtir na nivartate
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; an-evam-vidaù—of a person who has no knowledge (about
ätma-tattva and the steadiness of the ätmä in his own identity, despite the
changes of the body); bhedaù—the idea of difference between body and self;
yataù—because of which; ätma-viparyayaù—the foolish understanding that
one is the body; deha-yoga-viyogau ca—and this causes connections and
separations among different bodies; saàsåtiù—the continuation of
conditioned life; na—not; nivartate—does stop.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
350
TRANSLATION
One who does not understand the constitutional position of the body and the
soul [ätmä] becomes too attached to the bodily concept of life. Consequently,
because of attachment to the body and its by-products, he feels affected by
union with and separation from his family, society and nation. As long as this
continues, one continues his material life. [Otherwise, one is liberated.]
PURPORT
As confirmed in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.6):
sa vai puàsäà paro dharmo
yato bhaktir adhokñaje
ahaituky apratihatä
yayätmä suprasédati
The word dharma means "engagement." One who is engaged in the service of
the Lord (yato bhaktir adhokñaje), without impediment and without cessation,
is understood to be situated in his original, spiritual status. When one is
promoted to this status, one is always happy in transcendental bliss. Otherwise,
as long as one is in the bodily concept of life, one must suffer material
conditions. Janma-måtyu jarä-vyädhi-duùkha-doñänudarçanam [Bg. 13.9]. The
body is subject to its own principles of birth, death, old age and disease, but
one who is situated in spiritual life (yato bhaktir adhokñaje) has no birth, no
death, no old age and no disease. One may argue that we may see a person who
is spiritually engaged twenty-four hours a day but is still suffering from disease.
In fact, however, he is neither suffering nor diseased; otherwise he could not
be engaged twenty-four hours a day in spiritual activities. The example may be
given in this connection that sometimes dirty foam or garbage is seen floating
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
on the water of the Ganges. This is called néra-dharma, a function of the water.
But one who goes to the Ganges does not mind the foam and dirty things
351
floating in the water. With his hand, he pushes away such nasty things, bathes
in the Ganges and gains the beneficial results. Therefore, one who is situated
in the spiritual status of life is unaffected by foam and garbage—or any
superficial dirty things. This is confirmed by Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé:
éhä yasya harer däsye
karmaëä manasä girä
nikhiläsv apy avasthäsu
jévan-muktaù sa ucyate
"A person acting in the service of Kåñëa with his body, mind and words is a
liberated person, even within the material world." (Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu
1.2.187) Therefore, one is forbidden to regard the guru as an ordinary human
being (guruñu nara-matir. .. näraké saù). The spiritual master, or äcärya, is
always situated in the spiritual status of life. Birth, death, old age and disease
do not affect him. According to the Hari-bhakti-viläsa, therefore, after the
disappearance of an äcärya, his body is never burnt to ashes, for it is a spiritual
body. The spiritual body is always unaffected by material conditions.
TEXT 21
tasmaAà"‰e" svatanayaAna,
mayaA vyaApaAid"taAnaipa
maAnauzAAeca yata: s$avaR:
svak{(taM ivand"tae'vazA:
tasmäd bhadre sva-tanayän
mayä vyäpäditän api
mänuçoca yataù sarvaù
sva-kåtaà vindate 'vaçaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
352
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; bhadre—my dear sister (all auspiciousness unto you);
sva-tanayän—for your own sons; mayä—by me; vyäpäditän—unfortunately
killed; api—although; mä anuçoca—do not be aggrieved; yataù—because;
sarvaù—everyone; sva-kåtam—the fruitive results of one's own deeds;
vindate—suffers or enjoys; avaçaù—under the control of providence.
TRANSLATION
My dear sister Devaké, all good fortune unto you. Everyone suffers and
enjoys the results of his own work under the control of providence. Therefore,
although your sons have unfortunately been killed by me, please do not lament
for them.
PURPORT
As stated in the Brahma-saàhitä (5.54):
yas tv indra-gopam athavendram aho sva-karmabandhänurüpa-
phala-bhäjanam ätanoti
karmäëi nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhäjäà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
Everyone, beginning from the small insect known as indra-gopa up to Indra,
the King of the heavenly planets, is obliged to undergo the results of his
fruitive activities. We may superficially see that one is suffering or enjoying
because of some external causes, but the real cause is one's own fruitive
activities. Even when someone kills someone else, it is to be understood that
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
the person who was killed met the fruitive results of his own work and that the
man who killed him acted as the agent of material nature. Thus Kaàsa begged
Devaké's pardon by analyzing the matter deeply. He was not the cause of the
353
death of Devaké's sons. Rather, this was their own destiny. Under the
circumstances, Devaké should excuse Kaàsa and forget his past deeds without
lamentation. Kaàsa admitted his own fault, but whatever he had done was
under the control of providence. Kaàsa might have been the immediate cause
for the death of Devaké's sons, but the remote cause was their past deeds. This
was an actual fact.
TEXT 22
yaAvaÜ"taAe'isma h"ntaAsmaItyaAtmaAnaM
manyatae'svaä{"k,(
taAvaÔad"iBamaAnyaÁaAe
baADyabaADak(taAimayaAta,
yävad dhato 'smi hantäsméty
ätmänaà manyate 'sva-dåk
tävat tad-abhimäny ajïo
bädhya-bädhakatäm iyät
SYNONYMS
yävat—as long as; hataù asmi—I am now being killed (by others); hantä
asmi—I am the killer (of others); iti—thus; ätmänam—own self; manyate—he
considers; a-sva-dåk—one who has not seen himself (because of the darkness
of the bodily conception of life);
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
at—for that long; tat-abhimäné—regarding
himself as the killed or the killer; ajïaù—a foolish person;
bädhya-bädhakatäm—the worldly transaction of being obliged to execute some
responsibility; iyät—continues.
354
TRANSLATION
In the bodily conception of life, one remains in darkness, without
self-realization, thinking, "I am being killed" or "I have killed my enemies." As
long as a foolish person thus considers the self to be the killer of the killed, he
continues to be responsible for material obligations, and consequently he suffers
the reactions of happiness and distress.
PURPORT
By the grace of the Lord, Kaàsa felt sincere regret for having unnecessarily
persecuted such Vaiñëavas as Devaké and Vasudeva, and thus he came to the
transcendental stage of knowledge. "Because I am situated on the platform of
knowledge," Kaàsa said, "understanding that I am not at all the killer of your
sons, I have no responsibility for their death. As long as I thought that I would
be killed by your son, I was in ignorance, but now I am free from this
ignorance, which was due to a bodily conception of life." As stated in
Bhagavad-gétä (18.17):
yasya nähaìkåto bhävo
buddhir yasya na lipyate
hatväpi sa imäû lokän
na hanti na nibadhyate
"One who is not motivated by false ego, whose intelligence is not entangled,
though he kills men in this world, is not the slayer. Nor is he bound by his
actions." According to this axiomatic truth, Kaàsa pleaded that he was not
responsible for having killed the sons of Devaké and Vasudeva. "Please try to
excuse me for such false, external activities," he said, "and be pacified with this
same knowledge."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
355
TEXT 23
ºamaDvaM mama d"AEr"AtmyaM
s$aADavaAe d"Inavats$alaA:
wtyauftvaA™aumauKa: paAd"AE
zyaAla: sva›aAer"TaAƒah"Ita,
kñamadhvaà mama daurätmyaà
sädhavo déna-vatsaläù
ity uktväçru-mukhaù pädau
çyälaù svasror athägrahét
SYNONYMS
kñamadhvam—kindly excuse; mama—my; daurätmyam—atrocious activities;
sädhavaù—both of you are great saintly persons; déna-vatsaläù—and are very
kind to poor, cripple-minded persons; iti uktvä—saying this; açru-mukhaù—his
face full of tears; pädau—the feet; çyälaù—his brother-in-law Kaàsa;
svasraù—of his sister and brother-in-law; atha—thus; agrahét—captured.
TRANSLATION
Kaàsa begged, "My dear sister and brother-in-law, please be merciful to
such a poor-hearted person as me, since both of you are saintly persons. Please
excuse my atrocities." Having said this, Kaàsa fell at the feet of Vasudeva and
Devaké, his eyes full of tears of regret.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
PURPORT
Although Kaàsa had spoken very nicely on the subject of real knowledge,
his past deeds were abominable and atrocious, and therefore he further begged
356
forgiveness from his sister and brother-in-law by falling at their feet and
admitting that he was a most sinful person.
TEXT 24
maAecayaAmaAs$a inagAx"Aä,"
iva™abDa: k(nyak(AigAr"A
de"vak(LM vas$aude"vaM ca
d"zARyaªaAtmas$aAEô$d"ma,
mocayäm äsa nigaòäd
viçrabdhaù kanyakä-girä
devakéà vasudevaà ca
darçayann ätma-sauhådam
SYNONYMS
mocayäm äsa—Kaàsa released them; nigaòät—from their iron shackles;
viçrabdhaù—with full confidence; kanyakä-girä—in the words of the goddess
Durgä; devakém—toward his sister Devaké; vasudevam ca—and his
brother-in-law Vasudeva; darçayan—fully exhibiting; ätma-sauhådam—his
family relationship.
TRANSLATION
Fully believing in the words of the goddess Durgä, Kaàsa exhibited his
familial affection for Devaké and Vasudeva by immediately releasing them from
their iron shackles.
TEXT 25
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
357
”aAtau: s$amanautaæasya
ºaAntar"AeSaA ca de"vak(L
vyas$a{jaã"s$aude"vaê
‘ah"sya tamauvaAca h"
bhrätuù samanutaptasya
kñänta-roñä ca devaké
vyasåjad vasudevaç ca
prahasya tam uväca ha
SYNONYMS
bhrätuù—toward her brother Kaàsa; samanutaptasya—because of his being
regretful; kñänta-roñä—was relieved of anger; ca—also; devaké—Kåñëa's
mother, Devaké; vyasåjat—gave up; vasudevaù ca—Vasudeva also;
prahasya—smiling; tam—unto Kaàsa; uväca—said; ha—in the past.
TRANSLATION
When Devaké saw her brother actually repentant while explaining ordained
events, she was relieved of all anger. Similarly, Vasudeva was also free from
anger. Smiling, he spoke to Kaàsa as follows.
PURPORT
Devaké and Vasudeva, both highly elevated personalities, accepted the
truth presented by Kaàsa that everything is ordained by providence.
According to the prophecy, Kaàsa would be killed by the eighth child of
Devaké. Therefore, Vasudeva and Devaké saw that behind all these incidents
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
was a great plan devised by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Because the
358
Lord had already taken birth, just like a human child, and was in the safe
custody of Yaçodä, everything was happening according to plan, and there was
no need to continue their ill feeling toward Kaàsa. Thus they accepted
Kaàsa's words.
TEXT 26
Wvamaetanmah"ABaAgA
yaTaA vad"is$a de"ih"naAma,
@ÁaAna‘aBavaAhM"DaI:
svapare"ita iBad"A yata:
evam etan mahä-bhäga
yathä vadasi dehinäm
ajïäna-prabhavähaà-dhéù
sva-pareti bhidä yataù
SYNONYMS
evam—yes, this is right; etat—what you have said; mahä-bhäga—O great
personality; yathä—as; vadasi—you are speaking; dehinäm—about living
entities (accepting material bodies); ajïäna-prabhavä—by the influence of
ignorance; aham-dhéù—this is my interest (false ego); sva-parä iti—this is
another's interest; bhidä—differentiation; yataù—because of such a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
conception of life.
TRANSLATION
O great personality Kaàsa, only by the influence of ignorance does one
accept the material body and bodily ego. What you have said about this
359
philosophy is correct. Persons in the bodily concept of life, lacking
self-realization, differentiate in terms of "This is mine" and "This belongs to
another."
PURPORT
Everything is done automatically by the laws of nature, which work under
the direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. There is no question of
doing anything independently, for one who has put himself in this material
atmosphere is fully under the control of nature's laws. Our main business,
therefore, should be to get out of this conditioned life and again become
situated in spiritual existence. Only due to ignorance does a person think, "I
am a demigod," "I am a human being," "I am a dog," "I am a cat," or, when the
ignorance is still further advanced, "I am God." Unless one is fully self-realized,
one's life of ignorance will continue.
TEXT 27
zAAek(h"SaRBayaãe"SalaAeBamaAeh"
mad"AinvataA:
imaTaAe £antaM na pazyainta
BaAvaEBaARvaM pa{Tagä{"zA:
çoka-harña-bhaya-dveñalobha-
moha-madänvitäù
mitho ghnantaà na paçyanti
bhävair bhävaà påthag-dåçaù
SYNONYMS
çoka—lamentation; harña—jubilation; bhaya—fear; dveña—envy;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
360
lobha—greed; moha—illusion; mada—madness; anvitäù—endowed with;
mithaù—one another; ghnantam—engaged in killing; na paçyanti—do not see;
bhävaiù—because of such differentiation; bhävam—the situation in relation to
the Supreme Lord; påthak-dåçaù—persons who see everything as separate from
the control of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
Persons with the vision of differentiation are imbued with the material
qualities lamentation, jubilation, fear, envy, greed, illusion and madness. They
are influenced by the immediate cause, which they are busy counteracting,
because they have no knowledge of the remote, supreme cause, the Personality
of Godhead.
PURPORT
Kåñëa is the cause of all causes (sarva-käraëa-käraëam [Bs. 5.1]), but one
who has no connection with Kåñëa is disturbed by immediate causes and
cannot restrain his vision of separation or differences. When an expert
physician treats a patient, he tries to find the original cause of the disease and
is not diverted by the symptoms of that original cause. Similarly, a devotee is
never disturbed by reverses in life. Tat te 'nukampäà susamékñamäëaù (SB
10.14.8). A devotee understands that when he is in distress, this is due to his
own past misdeeds, which are now accruing reactions, although by the grace of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead these are only very slight. Karmäëi
nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhäjäm (Bs. 5.54). When a devotee under the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
protection of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is to suffer because of faults
in his past deeds, he passes through only a little misery by the grace of the
Lord. Although the disease of a devotee is due to mistakes committed
sometime in the past, he agrees to suffer and tolerate such miseries, and he
depends fully on the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus he is never
affected by material conditions of lamentation, jubilation, fear and so on. A
361
devotee never sees anything to be unconnected with the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Çréla Madhväcärya, quoting from the Bhaviñya Puräëa, says:
bhagavad-darçanäd yasya
virodhäd darçanaà påthak
påthag-dåñöiù sa vijïeyo
na tu sad-bheda-darçanaù
TEXT 28
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
kM(s$a WvaM ‘as$aªaAByaAM
ivazAuÜM" ‘aitaBaAiSata:
de"vak(Lvas$aude"vaAByaAma,
@nauÁaAtaAe'ivazAä," gA{h"ma,
çré-çuka uväca
kaàsa evaà prasannäbhyäà
viçuddhaà pratibhäñitaù
devaké-vasudeväbhyäm
anujïäto 'viçad gåham
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; kaàsaù—King Kaàsa;
evam—thus; prasannäbhyäm—who were very much appeased; viçuddham—in
purity; pratibhäñitaù—being answered; devaké-vasudeväbhyäm—by Devaké and
Vasudeva; anujïätaù—taking permission; aviçat—entered; gåham—his own
palace.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
362
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: Thus having been addressed in purity by
Devaké and Vasudeva, who were very much appeased, Kaàsa felt pleased, and
with their permission he entered his home.
TEXT 29
tasyaAM r"A‡yaAM vyataItaAyaAM
kM(s$a @Aó"ya main‡aNA:
taeBya @Acaí" tats$ava<
yaäu"lM( yaAegAina‰"yaA
tasyäà rätryäà vyatétäyäà
kaàsa ähüya mantriëaù
tebhya äcañöa tat sarvaà
yad uktaà yoga-nidrayä
SYNONYMS
tasyäm—that; rätryäm—night; vyatétäyäm—having passed; kaàsaù—King
Kaàsa; ähüya—calling for; mantriëaù—all the ministers; tebhyaù—them;
äcañöa—informed; tat—that; sarvam—all; yat uktam—which was spoken (that
Kaàsa's murderer was already somewhere else); yoga-nidrayä—by Yogamäyä,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
the goddess Durgä.
TRANSLATION
After that night passed, Kaàsa summoned his ministers and informed them
of all that had been spoken by Yogamäyä [who had revealed that He who was to
363
slay Kaàsa had already been born somewhere else].
PURPORT
The Vedic scripture Caëòé describes mäyä, the energy of the Supreme Lord,
as nidrä: durgä devé sarva-bhüteñu nidrä-rüpeëa samästhitaù. The energy of
Yogamäyä and Mahämäyä keeps the living entities sleeping in this material
world in the great darkness of ignorance. Yogamäyä, the goddess Durgä, kept
Kaàsa in darkness about Kåñëa's birth and misled him to believe that his
enemy Kåñëa had been born elsewhere. Kåñëa was born the son of Devaké, but
according to the Lord's original plan, as prophesied to Brahmä, He went to
Våndävana to give pleasure to mother Yaçodä and Nanda Mahäräja and other
intimate friends and devotees for eleven years. Then He would return to kill
Kaàsa. Because Kaàsa did not know this, he believed Yogamäyä's statement
that Kåñëa was born elsewhere, not of Devaké.
TEXT 30
@Ak(NyaR BatauRgARid"taM
tamaUcaudeR"vazA‡ava:
de"vaAna, ‘aita k{(taAmaSaAR
dE"taeyaA naAitak(Aeivad"A:
äkarëya bhartur gaditaà
tam ücur deva-çatravaù
devän prati kåtämarñä
daiteyä näti-kovidäù
SYNONYMS
äkarëya—after hearing; bhartuù—of their master; gaditam—the words or
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
364
statement; tam ücuù—replied to him; deva-çatravaù—all the asuras, who were
enemies of the demigods; devän—the demigods; prati—toward;
kåta-amarñäù—who were envious; daiteyäù—the asuras; na—not;
ati-kovidäù—who were very expert in executing transactions.
TRANSLATION
After hearing their master's statement, the envious asuras, who were
enemies of the demigods and were not very expert in their dealings, advised
Kaàsa as follows.
PURPORT
There are two different types of men-the asuras and the suras.
dvau bhüta-sargau loke 'smin
daiva äsura eva ca
viñëu-bhaktaù småto daiva
äsuras tad-viparyayaù
[Bg. 16.6]
(Padma Puräëa)
Those who are devotees of Lord Viñëu, Kåñëa, are suras, or devas, whereas
those who are opposed to the devotees are called asuras. Devotees are expert in
all transactions (yasyästi bhaktir bhagavaty akiïcanä sarvair guëais tatra
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
[SB 5.18.12]). Therefore they are called kovida, which means
"expert." Asuras, however, although superficially showing expertise in
passionate activities, are actually all fools. They are neither sober nor expert.
Whatever they do is imperfect. Moghäçä mogha-karmäëaù. According to this
description of the asuras given in Bhagavad-gétä (9.12), whatever they do will
ultimately be baffled. It was such persons who advised Kaàsa because they
were his chief friends and ministers.
365
TEXT 31
WvaM caeÔaihR" BaAejaen‰"
paur"ƒaAma˜ajaAid"Sau
@inadR"zAAiªadR"zAAMê
h"inaSyaAmaAe'â vaE izAzAUna,
evaà cet tarhi bhojendra
pura-gräma-vrajädiñu
anirdaçän nirdaçäàç ca
haniñyämo 'dya vai çiçün
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; cet—if it is so; tarhi—then; bhoja-indra—O King of Bhoja;
pura-gräma-vraja-ädiñu—in all the towns, villages and pasturing grounds;
anirdaçän—those who are less than ten days old; nirdaçän ca—and those who
are just over ten days old; haniñyämaù—we shall kill; adya—beginning from
today; vai—indeed; çiçün—all such children.
TRANSLATION
If this is so, O King of the Bhoja dynasty, beginning today we shall kill all
the children born in all the villages, towns and pasturing grounds within the
past ten days or slightly more.
TEXT 32
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
ik(mauâmaE: k(ir"Syainta
366
de"vaA: s$amar"BaIr"va:
inatyamauiã"¢amanas$aAe
jyaAGaAeSaEDaRnauSastava
kim udyamaiù kariñyanti
deväù samara-bhéravaù
nityam udvigna-manaso
jyä-ghoñair dhanuñas tava
SYNONYMS
kim—what; udyamaiù—by their endeavors; kariñyanti—will do; deväù—all the
demigods; samara-bhéravaù—who are afraid of fighting; nityam—always;
udvigna-manasaù—with agitated minds; jyä-ghoñaiù—by the sound of the
string; dhanuñaù—of the bow; tava—your.
TRANSLATION
The demigods always fear the sound of your bowstring. They are constantly
in anxiety, afraid of fighting. Therefore, what can they do by their endeavors to
harm you?
TEXT 33
@syatastae zAr"˜aAtaEr,"
h"nyamaAnaA: s$amantata:
ijajaIivaSava ots$a{jya
palaAyanapar"A yayau:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
367
asyatas te çara-vrätair
hanyamänäù samantataù
jijéviñava utsåjya
paläyana-parä yayuù
SYNONYMS
asyataù—pierced by your discharged arrows; te—your; çara-vrätaiù—by the
multitude of arrows; hanyamänäù—being killed; samantataù—here and there;
jijéviñavaù—aspiring to live; utsåjya—giving up the battlefield;
paläyana-paräù—intent on escaping; yayuù—they fled (the fighting).
TRANSLATION
While being pierced by your arrows, which you discharged on all sides, some
of them, who were injured by the multitude of arrows but who desired to live,
fled the battlefield, intent on escaping.
TEXT 34
ke(icat‘aAÃalayaAe d"InaA
nyastazAñA id"vaAEk(s$a:
maul(k(cC$izAKaA: ke(icaä,"
BaItaA: sma wita vaAid"na:
kecit präïjalayo dénä
nyasta-çasträ divaukasaù
mukta-kaccha-çikhäù kecid
bhétäù sma iti vädinaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
368
SYNONYMS
kecit—some of them; präïjalayaù—folded their hands just to please you;
dénäù—very poor; nyasta-çasträù—being bereft of all weapons;
divaukasaù—the demigods; mukta-kaccha-çikhäù—their garments and hair
loosened and scattered; kecit—some of them; bhétäù—we are very much afraid;
sma—so became; iti vädinaù—they spoke thus.
TRANSLATION
Defeated and bereft of all weapons, some of the demigods gave up fighting
and praised you with folded hands, and some of them, appearing before you
with loosened garments and hair, said, "O lord, we are very much afraid of
you."
TEXT 35
na tvaM ivasma{tazAñAñAna,
ivar"TaAna, Bayas$aMva{taAna,
hM"syanyaAs$al(ivamauKaAna,
Ba¢acaApaAnayauDyata:
na tvaà vismåta-çasträsträn
virathän bhaya-saàvåtän
haàsy anyäsakta-vimukhän
bhagna-cäpän ayudhyataù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
SYNONYMS
na—not; tvam—Your Majesty; vismåta-çastra-asträn—those who have
369
forgotten how to use weapons; virathän—without chariots;
bhaya-saàvåtän—bewildered by fear; haàsi—does kill;
anya-äsakta-vimukhän—persons attached not to fighting but to some other
subject matter; bhagna-cäpän—their bows broken; ayudhyataù—and thus not
fighting.
TRANSLATION
When the demigods are bereft of their chariots, when they forget how to use
weapons, when they are fearful or attached to something other than fighting, or
when their bows are broken and they have thus lost the ability to fight, Your
Majesty does not kill them.
PURPORT
There are principles that govern even fighting. If an enemy has no chariot,
is unmindful of the fighting art because of fear, or is unwilling to fight, he is
not to be killed. Kaàsa's ministers reminded Kaàsa that despite his power, he
was cognizant of the principles of fighting, and therefore he had excused the
demigods because of their incapability. "But the present emergency," the
ministers said, "is not intended for such mercy or military etiquette. Now you
should prepare to fight under any circumstances." Thus they advised Kaàsa to
give up the traditional etiquette in fighting and chastise the enemy at any cost.
TEXT 36
ikM( ºaemazAUrE"ivaRbauDaEr,"
@s$aMyaugAivak(tTanaE:
r"h"AejauSaA ikM( h"ir"NAA
zAmBaunaA vaA vanaAEk(s$aA
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
370
ik(iman‰e"NAAlpavaIyaeRNA
“aöNAA vaA tapasyataA
kià kñema-çürair vibudhair
asaàyuga-vikatthanaiù
raho-juñä kià hariëä
çambhunä vä vanaukasä
kim indreëälpa-véryeëa
brahmaëä vä tapasyatä
SYNONYMS
kim—what is there to fear; kñema—in a place where there is a scarcity of the
ability to fight; çüraiù—by the demigods; vibudhaiù—by such powerful persons;
asaàyuga-vikatthanaiù—by boasting and talking uselessly, away from the
fighting; rahaù-juñä—who is living in a solitary place within the core of the
heart; kim hariëä—what is the fear from Lord Viñëu; çambhunä—(and what is
the fear) from Lord Çiva; vä—either; vana-okasä—who is living in the forest;
kim indreëa—what is the fear from Indra; alpa-véryeëa—he is not at all
powerful (having no power to fight with you); brahmaëä—and what is the fear
from Brahmä; vä—either; tapasyatä—who is always engaged in meditation.
TRANSLATION
The demigods boast uselessly while away from the battlefield. Only where
there is no fighting can they show their prowess. Therefore, from such
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
demigods we have nothing to fear. As for Lord Viñëu, He is in seclusion in the
core of the hearts of the yogés. As for Lord Çiva, he has gone to the forest. And
as for Lord Brahmä, he is always engaged in austerities and meditation. The
other demigods, headed by Indra, are devoid of prowess. Therefore you have
nothing to fear.
371
PURPORT
Kaàsa's ministers told Kaàsa that all the exalted demigods had fled in fear
of him. One had gone to the forest, one to the core of the heart, and one to
engage in tapasya. "Thus you can be free from all fear of the demigods," they
said. "Just prepare to fight."
TEXT 37
taTaAipa de"vaA: s$aApatnyaAna,
naAepaeºyaA wita manmahe"
tatastanmaUlaKananae
inayaux.~ºvaAsmaAnanau˜ataAna,
tathäpi deväù säpatnyän
nopekñyä iti manmahe
tatas tan-müla-khanane
niyuìkñväsmän anuvratän
SYNONYMS
tathä api—still; deväù—the demigods; säpatnyät—due to enmity; na
upekñyäù—should not be neglected; iti manmahe—this is our opinion;
tataù—therefore; tat-müla-khanane—to uproot them completely;
niyuìkñva—engage; asmän—us; anuvratän—who are ready to follow you.
TRANSLATION
Nonetheless, because of their enmity, our opinion is that the demigods
should not be neglected. Therefore, to uproot them completely, engage us in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
372
fighting with them, for we are ready to follow you.
PURPORT
According to moral instructions, one should not neglect to extinguish fire
completely, treat diseases completely, and clear debts completely. Otherwise
they will increase and later be difficult to stop. Therefore the ministers advised
Kaàsa to uproot his enemies completely.
TEXT 38
yaTaAmayaAe'Ëeÿ s$amaupaeiºataAe na{iBar,"
na zAfyatae è&X#pad"iêik(its$atauma,
yaTaein‰"yaƒaAma opaeiºatastaTaA
ir"paumaRh"Ana, baÜ"balaAe na caAlyatae
yathämayo 'ìge samupekñito nåbhir
na çakyate rüòha-padaç cikitsitum
yathendriya-gräma upekñitas tathä
ripur mahän baddha-balo na cälyate
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; ämayaù—a disease; aìge—in the body; samupekñitaù—being
neglected; nåbhiù—by men; na—not; çakyate—is able; rüòha-padaù—when it
is acute; cikitsitum—to be treated; yathä—and as; indriya-grämaù—the senses;
upekñitaù—not controlled in the beginning; tathä—similarly; ripuù mahän—a
great enemy; baddha-balaù—if he becomes strong; na—not; cälyate—can be
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
373
TRANSLATION
As a disease, if initially neglected, becomes acute and impossible to cure, or
as the senses, if not controlled at first, are impossible to control later, an enemy,
if neglected in the beginning, later becomes insurmountable.
TEXT 39
maUlaM ih" ivaSNAudeR"vaAnaAM
ya‡a DamaR: s$anaAtana:
tasya ca “aögAAeiva‘aAs$a,
tapaAe yaÁaA: s$ad"iºaNAA:
mülaà hi viñëur devänäà
yatra dharmaù sanätanaù
tasya ca brahma-go-vipräs
tapo yajïäù sa-dakñiëäù
SYNONYMS
mülam—the foundation; hi—indeed; viñëuù—is Lord Viñëu; devänäm—of the
demigods; yatra—wherein; dharmaù—religious principles;
sanätanaù—traditional or eternal; tasya—of this (foundation); ca—also;
brahma—brahminical civilization; go—cow protection; vipräù—brähmaëas;
tapaù—austerity; yajïäù—performing sacrifices; sa-dakñiëäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—with proper
remuneration.
TRANSLATION
The foundation of all the demigods is Lord Viñëu, who lives and is
374
worshiped wherever there are religious principles, traditional culture, the
Vedas, cows, brähmaëas, austerities, and sacrifices with proper remuneration.
PURPORT
Here is a description of sanätana-dharma, eternal religious principles,
which must include brahminical culture, brähmaëas, sacrifices and religion.
These principles establish the kingdom of Viñëu. Without the kingdom of
Viñëu, the kingdom of God, no one can be happy. Na te viduù svärtha-gatià hi
viñëum: [SB 7.5.31] in this demoniac civilization, people unfortunately do not
understand that the self-interest of human society lies in Viñëu. Duräçayä ye
bahir-artha-mäninaù: thus they are involved in a hopeless hope. People want to
be happy without God consciousness, or Kåñëa consciousness, because they are
led by blind leaders who lead human society to chaos. The asuric adherents of
Kaàsa wanted to disrupt the traditional condition of human happiness and
thus defeat the devatäs, the devotees and demigods. Unless the devotees and
demigods predominate, the asuras will increase, and human society will be in a
chaotic condition.
TEXT 40
tasmaAts$avaARtmanaA r"Ajana,
“aAöNAAna, “aövaAid"na:
tapaisvanaAe yaÁazAIlaAna,
gAAê h"nmaAe h"ivaäuR"GaA:
tasmät sarvätmanä räjan
brähmaëän brahma-vädinaù
tapasvino yajïa-çélän
gäç ca hanmo havir-dughäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
375
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; sarva-ätmanä—in every respect; räjan—O King;
brähmaëän—the brähmaëas; brahma-vädinaù—who maintain the brahminical
culture, centered around Viñëu; tapasvinaù—persons who are engaged in
austerities; yajïa-çélän—persons engaged in offering sacrifices; gäù ca—cows
and persons engaged in protecting cows; hanmaù—we shall kill;
haviù-dughäù—because they supply milk, from which clarified butter is
obtained for the offering of sacrifice.
TRANSLATION
O King, we, who are your adherents in all respects, shall therefore kill the
Vedic brähmaëas, the persons engaged in offering sacrifices and austerities, and
the cows that supply milk, from which clarified butter is obtained for the
ingredients of sacrifice.
TEXT 41
iva‘aA gAAvaê vaed"Aê
tapa: s$atyaM d"ma: zAma:
™aÜ"A d"yaA itaitaºaA ca
‚(tavaê h"re"stanaU:
viprä gävaç ca vedäç ca
tapaù satyaà damaù çamaù
çraddhä dayä titikñä ca
kratavaç ca hares tanüù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
376
SYNONYMS
vipräù—the brähmaëas; gävaù ca—and the cows; vedäù ca—and the Vedic
knowledge; tapaù—austerity; satyam—truthfulness; damaù—control of the
senses; çamaù—control of the mind; çraddhä—faith; dayä—mercy;
titikñä—tolerance; ca—also; kratavaù ca—as well as sacrifices; hareù
tanüù—are the different parts of the body of Lord Viñëu.
TRANSLATION
The brähmaëas, the cows, Vedic knowledge, austerity, truthfulness, control
of the mind and senses, faith, mercy, tolerance and sacrifice are the different
parts of the body of Lord Viñëu, and they are the paraphernalia for a godly
civilization.
PURPORT
When we offer our obeisances to the Personality of Godhead, we say:
namo brahmaëya-deväya
go-brähmaëa-hitäya ca
jagad-dhitäya kåñëäya
govindäya namo namaù
When Kåñëa comes to establish real perfection in the social order, He
personally gives protection to the cows and the brähmaëas
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
go-brähmaëa-hitäya ca). This is His first interest because without protection
of the brähmaëas and the cows, there can be no human civilization and no
question of happy, peaceful life. Asuras, therefore, are always interested in
killing the brähmaëas and cows. Especially in this age, Kali-yuga, cows are
being killed all over the world, and as soon as there is a movement to establish
brahminical civilization, people in general rebel. Thus they regard the Kåñëa
377
consciousness movement as a form of "brainwashing." How can such envious
persons be happy in their godless civilization? The Supreme Personality of
Godhead punishes them by keeping them in darkness, birth after birth, and
pushing them lower and lower into wretched conditions of hellish life. The
Kåñëa consciousness movement has started a brahminical civilization, but
especially when it is introduced in the Western countries, the asuras try to
impede it in many ways. Nonetheless, we must push forward this movement
tolerantly for the benefit of human society.
TEXT 42
s$a ih" s$avaRs$aur"ADyaºaAe
÷s$aur"iã"Ì"h"AzAya:
tanmaUlaA de"vataA: s$avaAR:
s$aeìr"A: s$acataumauRKaA:
@yaM vaE taã"DaAepaAyaAe
yaä{"SaINAAM ivaihM"s$anama,
sa hi sarva-surädhyakño
hy asura-dviò guhä-çayaù
tan-mülä devatäù sarväù
seçvaräù sa-catur-mukhäù
ayaà vai tad-vadhopäyo
yad åñéëäà vihiàsanam
SYNONYMS
saù—He (Lord Viñëu); hi—indeed; sarva-sura-adhyakñaù—the leader of all
the demigods; hi—indeed; asura-dviö—the enemy of the asuras;
guhä-çayaù—He is the Supersoul within the core of everyone's heart;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
378
tat-müläù—taking shelter at His lotus feet; devatäù—the demigods exist;
sarväù—all of them; sa-éçvaräù—including Lord Çiva; sa-catuù-mukhäù—as
well as Lord Brahmä, who has four faces; ayam—this is; vai—indeed;
tat-vadha-upäyaù—the only means of killing Him (Viñëu); yat—which;
åñéëäm—of great sages, saintly persons, or Vaiñëavas;
vihiàsanam—suppression with all kinds of persecution.
TRANSLATION
Lord Viñëu, the Supersoul within the core of everyone's heart, is the
ultimate enemy of the asuras and is therefore known as asura-dviö. He is the
leader of all the demigods because all the demigods, including Lord Çiva and
Lord Brahmä, exist under His protection. The great saintly persons, sages and
Vaiñëavas also depend upon Him. To persecute the Vaiñëavas, therefore, is the
only way to kill Viñëu.
PURPORT
The demigods and the Vaiñëavas especially are part and parcel of the
Supreme Lord, Viñëu, because they are always obedient to His orders (oà tad
viñëoù paramaà padaà sadä paçyanti sürayaù). The demoniac followers of
Kaàsa thought that if the Vaiñëavas, saintly persons and sages were
persecuted, the original body of Viñëu would naturally be destroyed. Thus they
decided to suppress Vaiñëavism. The asuras perpetually struggle to persecute
the Vaiñëavas because they do not want Vaiñëavism to spread. Vaiñëavas
preach only devotional service, not encouraging karmés, jïänés and yogés,
because if one must liberate oneself from material, conditional life, one must
ultimately become a Vaiñëava. Our Kåñëa consciousness movement is directed
with this understanding, and therefore the asuras always try to suppress it.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
TEXT 43
379
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
WvaM äu"maRin‡aiBa: kM(s$a:
s$ah" s$amman‡ya äu"maRita:
“aöihM"s$aAM ih"taM maenae
k(AlapaAzAAva{taAe's$aur":
çré-çuka uväca
evaà durmantribhiù kaàsaù
saha sammantrya durmatiù
brahma-hiàsäà hitaà mene
käla-päçävåto 'suraù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—in this way;
durmantribhiù—his bad ministers; kaàsaù—King Kaàsa; saha—along with;
sammantrya—after considering very elaborately; durmatiù—without good
intelligence; brahma-hiàsäm—persecution of the brähmaëas; hitam—as the
best way; mene—accepted; käla-päça-ävåtaù—being bound by the rules and
regulations of Yamaräja; asuraù—because he was a demon.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: Thus, having considered the instructions of
his bad ministers, Kaàsa, who was bound by the laws of Yamaräja and devoid of
good intelligence because he was a demon, decided to persecute the saintly
persons, the brähmaëas, as the only way to achieve his own good fortune.
PURPORT
Çréla Locana däsa Öhäkura has sung, äpana karama, bhuïjäye çamana,
380
kahaye locana däsa. Instead of taking good instructions from the sages and the
çästras, godless nondevotees act whimsically, according to their own plans.
Actually, however, no one has his own plans because everyone is bound by the
laws of nature and must act according to his tendency in material, conditional
life. Therefore one must change one's own decision and follow the decision of
Kåñëa and Kåñëa's devotees. Then one is rescued from punishment by
Yamaräja. Kaàsa was not uneducated. It appears from his talks with Vasudeva
and Devaké that he knew all about the laws of nature. But because of his
association with bad ministers, he could not make a clear decision about his
welfare. Therefore the Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 22.54) says:
'sädhu-saìga,' 'sädhu-saìga'—sarva-çästre kaya
lava-mätra sädhu-saçge sarva-siddhi haya
If one desires his real welfare, he must associate with devotees and saintly
persons and in this way rectify the material condition of his life.
TEXT 44
s$aind"zya s$aADaulaAek(sya
k(d"nae k(d"nai‘ayaAna,
k(Amaè&paDar"Aind"ºau
d"AnavaAna, gA{h"maAivazAta,
sandiçya sädhu-lokasya
kadane kadana-priyän
käma-rüpa-dharän dikñu
dänavän gåham äviçat
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
381
sandiçya—after giving permission; sädhu-lokasya—of the saintly persons;
kadane—in persecution; kadana-priyän—to the demons, who were very expert
at persecuting others; käma-rüpa-dharän—who could assume any form,
according to their own desire; dikñu—in all directions; dänavän—to the
demons; gåham äviçat—Kaàsa entered his own palace.
TRANSLATION
These demons, the followers of Kaàsa, were expert at persecuting others,
especially the Vaiñëavas, and could assume any form they desired. After giving
these demons permission to go everywhere and persecute the saintly persons,
Kaàsa entered his palace.
TEXT 45
tae vaE r"ja:‘ak{(tayas$a,
tamas$aA maUX#caetas$a:
s$ataAM ivaãe"SamaAcaeç&r,"
@Ar"Ad"AgAtama{tyava:
te vai rajaù-prakåtayas
tamasä müòha-cetasaù
satäà vidveñam äcerur
äräd ägata-måtyavaù
SYNONYMS
te—all the asuric ministers;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
vai—indeed; rajaù-prakåtayaù—surcharged with
the mode of passion; tamasä—overwhelmed by the mode of ignorance;
müòha-cetasaù—foolish persons; satäm—of saintly persons;
382
vidveñam—persecution; äceruù—executed; ärät ägata-måtya-vaù—impending
death having already overtaken them.
TRANSLATION
Surcharged with passion and ignorance and not knowing what was good or
bad for them, the asuras, for whom impending death was waiting, began the
persecution of the saintly persons.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (2.13):
dehino 'smin yathä dehe
kaumäraà yauvanaà jarä
tathä dehäntara-präptir
dhéras tatra na muhyati
"As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to youth
to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death. The
self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change." Irresponsible persons,
surcharged with passion and ignorance, foolishly do things that are not to be
done (nünaà pramattaù kurute vikarma [SB 5.5.4]). But one should know the
results of irresponsible actions, as explained in the next verse.
TEXT 46
@Ayau: i™ayaM yazAAe Dama<
laAek(AnaAizASa Wva ca
h"inta ™aeyaAMis$a s$avaARiNA
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
383
pauMs$aAe mah"d"ita‚(ma:
äyuù çriyaà yaço dharmaà
lokän äçiña eva ca
hanti çreyäàsi sarväëi
puàso mahad-atikramaù
SYNONYMS
äyuù—the duration of life; çriyam—beauty; yaçaù—fame; dharmam—religion;
lokän—elevation to higher planets; äçiñaù—blessings; eva—indeed; ca—also;
hanti—destroys; çreyäàsi—benedictions; sarväëi—all; puàsaù—of a person;
mahat-atikramaù—trespassing against great personalities.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, when a man persecutes great souls, all his benedictions of
longevity, beauty, fame, religion, blessings and promotion to higher planets will
be destroyed.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Tenth Canto, Fourth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Atrocities of King Kaàsa."
5. The Meeting of Nanda Mahäräja and Vasudeva
As described in this chapter, Nanda Mahäräja very gorgeously performed
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
the birth ceremony for his newborn child. Then he went to Kaàsa to pay taxes
384
due and met his intimate friend Vasudeva.
There was great jubilation all over Våndävana due to Kåñëa's birth.
Everyone was overwhelmed with joy. Therefore the King of Vraja, Mahäräja
Nanda, wanted to perform the birth ceremony for his child, and this he did.
During this great festival, Nanda Mahäräja gave in charity to all present
whatever they desired. After the festival, Nanda Mahäräja put the cowherd
men in charge of protecting Gokula, and then he went to Mathurä to pay
official taxes to Kaàsa. In Mathurä, Nanda Mahäräja met Vasudeva. Nanda
Mahäräja and Vasudeva were brothers, and Vasudeva praised Nanda
Mahäräja's good fortune because he knew that Kåñëa had accepted Nanda
Mahäräja as His father. When Vasudeva inquired from Nanda Mahäräja about
the welfare of the child, Nanda Mahäräja informed him all about Våndävana,
and Vasudeva was very much satisfied by this, although he expressed his grief
because Devaké's many children had been killed by Kaàsa. Nanda Mahäräja
consoled Vasudeva by saying that everything happens according to destiny and
that one who knows this is not aggrieved. Expecting many disturbances in
Gokula, Vasudeva then advised Nanda Mahäräja not to wait in Mathurä, but
to return to Våndävana as soon as possible. Thus Nanda Mahäräja took leave
of Vasudeva and returned to Våndävana with the other cowherd men on their
bullock carts.
TEXTS 1-2
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
nand"stvaAtmaja otpaªae
jaAtaAø"Ad"Ae mah"AmanaA:
@Aó"ya iva‘aAna, vaed"ÁaAna,
µaAta: zAuicar"lax.~k{(ta:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
385
vaAcaiyatvaA svastyayanaM
jaAtak(maARtmajasya vaE
k(Ar"yaAmaAs$a ivaiDavata,
ipata{de"vaAcaRnaM taTaA
çré-çuka uväca
nandas tv ätmaja utpanne
jätählädo mahä-manäù
ähüya viprän veda-jïän
snätaù çucir alaìkåtaù
väcayitvä svastyayanaà
jäta-karmätmajasya vai
kärayäm äsa vidhivat
pitå-devärcanaà tathä
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; nandaù—Mahäräja Nanda;
tu—indeed; ätmaje—his son; utpanne—having been born; jäta—overwhelmed;
ählädaù—in great jubilation; mahä-manäù—who was great minded;
ähüya—invited; viprän—the brähmaëas; veda-jïän—who were fully
conversant in Vedic knowledge; snätaù—taking a full bath; çuciù—purifying
himself; alaìkåtaù—being dressed very nicely with ornaments and fresh
garments; väcayitvä—after causing to be recited; svasti-ayanam—Vedic
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
mantras (by the brähmaëas); jäta-karma—the festival for the birth of the
child; ätmajasya—of his own son; vai—indeed; kärayäm äsa—caused to be
performed; vidhi-vat—according to the Vedic regulations;
pitå-deva-arcanam—the worship of the forefathers and the demigods;
tathä—as well as.
386
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Nanda Mahäräja was naturally very magnanimous,
and when Lord Çré Kåñëa appeared as his son, he was overwhelmed by
jubilation. Therefore, after bathing and purifying himself and dressing himself
properly, he invited brähmaëas who knew how to recite Vedic mantras. After
having these qualified brähmaëas recite auspicious Vedic hymns, he arranged to
have the Vedic birth ceremony celebrated for his newborn child according to
the rules and regulations, and he also arranged for worship of the demigods and
forefathers.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has discussed the significance of the
words nandas tu. The word tu, he says, is not used to fulfill the sentence,
because without tu the sentence is complete. Therefore the word tu is used for
a different purpose. Although Kåñëa appeared as the son of Devaké, Devaké
and Vasudeva did not enjoy the jäta-karma, the festival of the birth ceremony.
Instead, this ceremony was enjoyed by Nanda Mahäräja, as stated here (nandas
tv ätmaja utpanne jätählädo mahä-manäù). When Nanda Mahäräja met
Vasudeva, Vasudeva could not disclose, "Your son Kåñëa is actually my son.
You are His father in a different way, spiritually." Because of fear of Kaàsa,
Vasudeva could not observe the festival for Kåñëa's birth, Nanda Mahäräja,
however, took full advantage of this opportunity.
The jäta-karma ceremony can take place when the umbilical cord,
connecting the child and the placenta, is cut. However, since Kåñëa was
brought by Vasudeva to the house of Nanda Mahäräja, where was the chance
for this to happen? In this regard, Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura desires to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
prove with evidence from many çästras that Kåñëa actually took birth as the
son of Yaçodä before the birth of Yogamäyä, who is therefore described as the
Lord's younger sister. Even though there may be doubts about the cutting of
387
the umbilical cord, and even though it is possible that this was not done, when
the Supreme Personality of Godhead appears, such events are regarded as
factual. Kåñëa appeared as Varähadeva from the nostril of Brahmä, and
therefore Brahmä is described as the father of Varähadeva. Also significant are
the words kärayäm äsa vidhivat. Being overwhelmed with jubilation over the
birth of his son, Nanda Mahäräja did not see whether the cord was cut or not.
Thus he performed the ceremony very gorgeously. According to the opinion of
some authorities, Kåñëa was actually born as the son of Yaçodä. In any case,
without regard for material understandings, we can accept that Nanda
Mahäräja's celebration for the ceremony of Kåñëa's birth was proper. This
ceremony is therefore well known everywhere as Nandotsava.
TEXT 3
DaenaUnaAM inayautae ‘aAd"Aä,"
iva‘aeBya: s$amalax.~k{(tae
italaA‰"Ina, s$aæa r"¥aAEGazAAtak(
AEmBaAmbar"Ava{taAna,
dhenünäà niyute prädäd
viprebhyaù samalaìkåte
tilädrén sapta ratnaughaçätakaumbhämbarävåtän
SYNONYMS
dhenünäm—of milk-giving cows; niyute—two million; prädät—gave in charity;
viprebhyaù—unto the brähmaëas; samalaìkåte—completely decorated;
tila-adrén—hills of grain; sapta—seven;
ratna-ogha-çäta-kaumbha-ambara-ävåtän—covered with jewels and cloth
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
388
embroidered with gold.
TRANSLATION
Nanda Mahäräja gave two million cows, completely decorated with cloth and
jewels, in charity to the brähmaëas. He also gave them seven hills of grain,
covered with jewels and with cloth decorated with golden embroidery.
TEXT 4
k(Alaena µaAnazAAEcaAByaAM
s$aMs$k(ArE"stapas$aejyayaA
zAuDyainta d"AnaE: s$antauí"YaA
‰"vyaANyaAtmaAtmaivaâyaA
kälena snäna-çaucäbhyäà
saàskärais tapasejyayä
çudhyanti dänaiù santuñöyä
dravyäëy ätmätma-vidyayä
SYNONYMS
kälena—by due course of time (the land and other material things become
purified); snäna-çaucäbhyäm—by bathing (the body becomes purified) and by
cleansing (unclean things become purified); saàskäraiù—by purificatory
processes (birth becomes purified); tapasä—by austerity (the senses become
purified); ijyayä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—by worship (the brähmaëas become purified);
çudhyanti—become purified; dänaiù—by charity (wealth becomes purified);
santuñöyä—by satisfaction (the mind becomes purified); dravyäëi—all material
possessions, such as cows, land and gold; ätmä—the soul (becomes purified);
389
ätma-vidyayä—by self-realization.
TRANSLATION
O King, by the passing of time, land and other material possessions are
purified; by bathing, the body is purified; and by being cleansed, unclean things
are purified. By purificatory ceremonies, birth is purified; by austerity, the
senses are purified; and by worship and charity offered to the brähmaëas,
material possessions are purified. By satisfaction, the mind is purified; and by
self-realization, or Kåñëa consciousness, the soul is purified.
PURPORT
These are çästric injunctions concerning how one can purify everything
according to Vedic civilization. Unless purified, anything we use will infect us
with contamination. In India five thousand years ago, even in the villages such
as that of Nanda Mahäräja, people knew know to purify things, and thus they
enjoyed even material life without contamination.
TEXT 5
s$aAEmaËÿlyaigAr"Ae iva‘aA:
s$aUtamaAgADavaind"na:
gAAyak(Aê jagAunaeRäu"r,"
BaeyaAeR äu"näu"BayaAe mauò":
saumaìgalya-giro vipräù
süta-mägadha-vandinaù
gäyakäç ca jagur nedur
bheryo dundubhayo muhuù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
390
SYNONYMS
saumaìgalya-giraù—whose chanting of mantras and hymns purified the
environment by their vibration; vipräù—the brähmaëas; süta—experts in
reciting all the histories; mägadha—experts in reciting the histories of special
royal families; vandinaù—general professional reciters; gäyakäù—singers;
ca—as well as; jaguù—chanted; neduù—vibrated; bheryaù—a kind of musical
instrument; dundubhayaù—a kind of musical instrument; muhuù—constantly.
TRANSLATION
The brähmaëas recited auspicious Vedic hymns, which purified the
environment by their vibration. The experts in reciting old histories like the
Puräëas, the experts in reciting the histories of royal families, and general
reciters all chanted, while singers sang and many kinds of musical instruments,
like bherés and dundubhis, played in accompaniment.
TEXT 6
˜aja: s$amma{í"s$aMis$al(-
ã"Ar"Aijar"gA{h"Antar":
ica‡aDvajapataAk(A›ak,(-
caElapaéavataAer"NAE:
vrajaù sammåñöa-saàsiktadväräjira-
gåhäntaraù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
citra-dhvaja-patäkä-srakcaila-
pallava-toraëaiù
391
SYNONYMS
vrajaù—the land occupied by Nanda Mahäräja; sammåñöa—very nicely
cleaned; saàsikta—very nicely washed; dvära—all the doors or entrances;
ajira—courtyards; gåha-antaraù—everything within the house;
citra—variegated; dhvaja—of festoons; patäkä—of flags; srak—of flower
garlands; caila—of pieces of cloth; pallava—of the leaves of mango trees;
toraëaiù—(decorated) by gates in different places.
TRANSLATION
Vrajapura, the residence of Nanda Mahäräja, was fully decorated with
varieties of festoons and flags, and in different places, gates were made with
varieties of flower garlands, pieces of cloth, and mango leaves. The courtyards,
the gates near the roads, and everything within the rooms of the houses were
perfectly swept and washed with water.
TEXT 7
gAAvaAe va{SaA vats$atar"A
h"ir"‰"AtaElaè&iSataA:
ivaica‡aDaAtaubahR"›agA,-
vañk(AÂanamaAilana:
gävo våñä vatsatarä
haridrä-taila-rüñitäù
vicitra-dhätu-barhasragvastra-
käïcana-mälinaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
392
SYNONYMS
gävaù—the cows; våñäù—the bulls; vatsataräù—the calves; haridrä—with a
mixture of turmeric; taila—and oil; rüñitäù—their entire bodies smeared;
vicitra—decorated varieties of; dhätu—colored minerals;
barha-srak—peacock-feather garlands; vastra—cloths; käïcana—golden
ornaments; mälinaù—being decorated with garlands.
TRANSLATION
The cows, the bulls and the calves were thoroughly smeared with a mixture
of turmeric and oil, mixed with varieties of minerals. Their heads were
bedecked with peacock feathers, and they were garlanded and covered with
cloth and golden ornaments.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead has instructed in Bhagavad-gétä
(18.44), kåñi-go-rakñya-väëijyaà vaiçya-karma-svabhävajam: "Farming, cow
protection and trade are the qualities of work for the vaiçyas." Nanda Mahäräja
belonged to the vaiçya community, the agriculturalist community. How to
protect the cows and how rich this community was are explained in these
verses. We can hardly imagine that cows, bulls and calves could be cared for so
nicely and decorated so well with cloths and valuable golden ornaments. How
happy they were. As described elsewhere in the Bhägavatam, during Mahäräja
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Yudhiñöhira's time the cows were so happy that they used to muddy the
pasturing ground with milk. This is Indian civilization. Yet in the same place,
India, Bhärata-varña, how much people are suffering by giving up the Vedic
way of life and not understanding the teachings of Bhagavad-gétä.
TEXT 8
393
mah"AhR"vañABar"NAk(
Âauk(AeSNAISaBaUiSataA:
gAAepaA: s$amaAyayaU r"Ajana,
naAnaAepaAyanapaANAya:
mahärha-vasträbharaëakaïcukoñëéña-
bhüñitäù
gopäù samäyayü räjan
nänopäyana-päëayaù
SYNONYMS
mahä-arha—extremely valuable; vastra-äbharaëa—with garments and
ornaments; kaïcuka—by a particular type of garment used in Våndävana;
uñëéña—with turbans; bhüñitäù—being nicely dressed; gopäù—all the cowherd
men; samäyayuù—came there; räjan—O King (Mahäräja Parékñit);
nänä—various; upäyana—presentations; päëayaù—holding in their hands.
TRANSLATION
O King Parékñit, the cowherd men dressed very opulently with valuable
ornaments and garments such as coats and turbans. Decorated in this way and
carrying various presentations in their hands, they approached the house of
Nanda Mahäräja.
PURPORT
When we consider the past condition of the agriculturalist in the village,
we can see how opulent he was, simply because of agricultural produce and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
protection of cows. At the present, however, agriculture having been neglected
394
and cow protection given up, the agriculturalist is suffering pitiably and is
dressed in a niggardly torn cloth. This is the distinction between the India of
history and the India of the present day. By the atrocious activities of
ugra-karma, how we are killing the opportunity of human civilization!
TEXT 9
gAAepyaêAk(NyaR mauid"taA
yazAAed"AyaA: s$autaAeà"vama,
@AtmaAnaM BaUSayaAM ca‚u(r,"
vañAk(lpaAÃanaAid"iBa:
gopyaç cäkarëya muditä
yaçodäyäù sutodbhavam
ätmänaà bhüñayäà cakrur
vasträkalpäïjanädibhiù
SYNONYMS
gopyaù—the feminine community, the wives of the cowherd men; ca—also;
äkarëya—after hearing; muditäù—became very glad; yaçodäyäù—of mother
Yaçodä; suta-udbhavam—the birth of a male child; ätmänam—personally;
bhüñayäm cakruù—dressed very nicely to attend the festival;
vastra-äkalpa-aïjana-ädibhiù—with proper dress, ornaments, black ointment,
and so on.
TRANSLATION
The gopé wives of the cowherd men were very pleased to hear that mother
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Yaçodä had given birth to a son, and they began to decorate themselves very
395
nicely with proper dresses, ornaments, black ointment for the eyes, and so on.
TEXT 10
navaku(Çÿmaik(Ãalk(-
mauKapaÆÿjaBaUtaya:
bailaiBastvair"taM jagmau:
pa{Tau™aAeNyaêlatku(caA:
nava-kuìkuma-kiïjalkamukha-
paìkaja-bhütayaù
balibhis tvaritaà jagmuù
påthu-çroëyaç calat-kucäù
SYNONYMS
nava-kuìkuma-kiïjalka—with saffron and newly grown kuìkuma flower;
mukha-paìkaja-bhütayaù—exhibiting an extraordinary beauty in their
lotuslike faces; balibhiù—with presentations in their hands; tvaritam—very
quickly; jagmuù—went (to the house of mother Yaçodä);
påthu-çroëyaù—bearing full hips, fulfilling womanly beauty;
calat-kucäù—their developed breasts were moving.
TRANSLATION
Their lotuslike faces extraordinarily beautiful, being decorated with saffron
and newly grown kuìkuma, the wives of the cowherd men hurried to the house
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
of mother Yaçodä with presentations in their hands. Because of natural beauty,
the wives had full hips and full breasts, which moved as they hurried along.
396
PURPORT
The cowherd men and women in the villages lived a very natural life, and
the women developed a natural feminine beauty, with full hips and breasts.
Because women in modern civilization do not live naturally, their hips and
breasts do not develop this natural fullness. Because of artificial living, women
have lost their natural beauty, although they claim to be independent and
advanced in material civilization. This description of the village women gives a
clear example of the contrast between natural life and the artificial life of a
condemned society, such as that of the Western countries, where topless,
bottomless beauty may be easily purchased in clubs and shops and for public
advertisements. The word balibhiù indicates that the women were carrying
gold coins, jeweled necklaces, nice cloths, newly grown grass, sandalwood pulp,
flower garlands and similar offerings on plates made of gold. Such offerings are
called bali. The words tvaritaà jagmuù indicate how happy the village women
were to understand that mother Yaçodä had given birth to a wonderful child
known as Kåñëa.
TEXT 11
gAAepya: s$auma{í"maiNAku(Nx"lainaSk(k(NQ$YazA,
ica‡aAmbar"A: paiTa izAKaAcyautamaAlyavaSaAR:
nand"AlayaM s$avalayaA ˜ajataIivaR&#re"jaur,"
vyaAlaAelaku(Nx"lapayaAeDar"h"Ar"zAAeBaA:
gopyaù sumåñöa-maëi-kuëòala-niñka-kaëöhyaç
citrämbaräù pathi çikhä-cyuta-mälya-varñäù
nandälayaà sa-valayä vrajatér virejur
vyälola-kuëòala-payodhara-hära-çobhäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
397
SYNONYMS
gopyaù—the gopés; su-måñöa—very dazzling; maëi—made of jewels;
kuëòala—wearing earrings; niñka-kaëöhyaù—and having little keys and
lockets hanging from their necks; citra-ambaräù—dressed with varieties of
colored embroidery; pathi—on their way to Yaçodämayé's house;
çikhä-cyuta—fell from their hair; mälya-varñäù—a shower of flower garlands;
nanda-älayam—to the house of Mahäräja Nanda; sa-valayäù—with bangles on
their hands; vrajatéù—while going (in that costume); virejuù—they looked
very, very beautiful; vyälola—moving; kuëòala—with earrings;
payodhara—with breasts; hära—with flower garlands; çobhäù—who appeared
so beautiful.
TRANSLATION
In the ears of the gopés were brilliantly polished jeweled earrings, and from
their necks hung metal lockets. Their hands were decorated with bangles, their
dresses were of varied colors, and from their hair, flowers fell onto the street
like showers. Thus while going to the house of Mahäräja Nanda, the gopés, their
earrings, breasts and garlands moving, were brilliantly beautiful.
PURPORT
The description of the gopés, who were going to the house of Mahäräja
Nanda to welcome Kåñëa, is especially significant. The gopés were not ordinary
women, but expansions of Kåñëa's pleasure potency, as described in the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Brahma-saàhitä (5.37,29):
änanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhävitäbhis
täbhir ya eva nija-rüpatayä kaläbhiù
goloka eva nivasaty akhilätma-bhüto
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
398
(5.37)
cintämaëi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-våkñalakñävåteñu
surabhér abhipälayantam
lakñmé-sahasra-çata-sambhrama-sevyamänaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
(5.29)
Kåñëa is always worshiped by the gopés wherever He goes. Therefore Kåñëa is so
vividly described in Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu has also
described Kåñëa in this way: ramyä käcid upäsanä vrajavadhü-vargeëa yä
kalpitä. All these gopés were going to offer Kåñëa their presentations because
the gopés are eternal associates of the Lord. Now the gopés were more jubilant
because of the news of Kåñëa's appearance in Våndävana.
TEXT 12
taA @AizASa: ‘ayauÃaAnaAzA,
icarM" paAh"Iita baAlake(
h"ir"‰"AcaUNAR#taElaAià":
is$aÂantyaAe'janamauÀagAu:
tä äçiñaù prayuïjänäç
ciraà pähéti bälake
haridrä-cürëa-tailädbhiù
siïcantyo 'janam ujjaguù
SYNONYMS
täù—all the women, the wives and daughters of the cowherd men;
äçiñaù—blessings; prayuïjänäù—offering; ciram—for a long time;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
pähi—may
399
You become the King of Vraja and maintain all its inhabitants; iti—thus;
bälake—unto the newborn child; haridrä-cürëa—powder of turmeric;
taila-adbhiù—mixed with oil; siïcantyaù—sprinkling; ajanam—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is unborn; ujjaguù—offered prayers.
TRANSLATION
Offering blessings to the newborn child, Kåñëa, the wives and daughters of
the cowherd men said, "May You become the King of Vraja and long maintain
all its inhabitants." They sprinkled a mixture of turmeric powder, oil and water
upon the birthless Supreme Lord and offered their prayers.
TEXT 13
@vaAânta ivaica‡aAiNA
vaAid"‡aAiNA mah"Aets$avae
k{(SNAe ivaìeìre"'nantae
nand"sya ˜ajamaAgAtae
avädyanta viciträëi
väditräëi mahotsave
kåñëe viçveçvare 'nante
nandasya vrajam ägate
SYNONYMS
avädyanta—vibrated in celebration of Vasudeva's son; viciträëi—various;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—musical instruments; mahä-utsave—in the great festival;
kåñëe—when Lord Kåñëa; viçva-éçvare—the master of the entire cosmic
manifestation; anante—unlimitedly; nandasya—of Mahäräja Nanda;
400
vrajam—at the pasturing place; ägate—had so arrived.
TRANSLATION
Now that the all-pervading, unlimited Lord Kåñëa, the master of the cosmic
manifestation, had arrived within the estate of Mahäräja Nanda, various types
of musical instruments resounded to celebrate the great festival.
PURPORT
The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (4.7):
yadä yadä hi dharmasya
glänir bhavati bhärata
abhyutthänam adharmasya
tadätmänaà såjämy aham
"Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendant
of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that time I descend
Myself." Whenever Kåñëa comes, once in a day of Brahmä, He comes to the
house of Nanda Mahäräja in Våndävana. Kåñëa is the master of all creation
(sarva-loka-maheçvaram [Bg. 5.29]). Therefore, not only in the neighborhood
of Nanda Mahäräja's estate, but all over the universe—and in all the other
universes—musical sounds celebrated the auspicious arrival of the Lord.
TEXT 14
gAAepaA: par"s$parM" ô$í"A
d"iDaºaIr"Ga{taAmbauiBa:
@Ais$aÂantaAe ivailampantaAe
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
401
navanaItaEê icaiºapau:
gopäù parasparaà håñöä
dadhi-kñéra-ghåtämbubhiù
äsiïcanto vilimpanto
navanétaiç ca cikñipuù
SYNONYMS
gopäù—the cowherd men; parasparam—on one another; håñöäù—being so
pleased; dadhi—with curd; kñéra—with condensed milk; ghåta-ambubhiù—with
water mixed with butter; äsiïcantaù—sprinkling; vilimpantaù—smearing;
navanétaiù ca—and with butter; cikñipuù—they threw on one another.
TRANSLATION
In gladness, the cowherd men enjoyed the great festival by splashing one
another's bodies with a mixture of curd, condensed milk, butter and water.
They threw butter on one another and smeared it on one another's bodies.
PURPORT
From this statement we can understand that five thousand years ago not
only was there enough milk, butter and curd to eat, drink and cook with, but
when there was a festival it would be thrown about without restriction. There
was no limit to how extensively milk, butter, curd and other such products
were used in human society. Everyone had an ample stock of milk, and by
using it in many varied milk preparations, people would keep good health in
natural ways and thus enjoy life in Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXTS 15-16
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
402
nand"Ae mah"AmanaAstaeByaAe
vaAs$aAe'laÆÿAr"gAAeDanama,
s$aUtamaAgADavaind"ByaAe
yae'nyae ivaâAepajaIivana:
taEstaE: k(AmaEr"d"InaAtmaA
yaTaAeicatamapaUjayata,
ivaSNAAer"Ar"ADanaATaARya
svapau‡asyaAed"yaAya ca
nando mahä-manäs tebhyo
väso 'laìkära-go-dhanam
süta-mägadha-vandibhyo
ye 'nye vidyopajévinaù
tais taiù kämair adénätmä
yathocitam apüjayat
viñëor ärädhanärthäya
sva-putrasyodayäya ca
SYNONYMS
nandaù—Mahäräja Nanda; mahä-manäù—who among the cowherd men was
the greatest of all upright persons; tebhyaù—unto the cowherd men;
väsaù—clothing; alaìkära—ornaments; go-dhanam—and cows;
süta-mägadha-vandibhyaù—unto the sütas (the professional reciters of the old
histories), the mägadhas (the professional reciters of the histories of royal
dynasties) and the vandés (general singers of prayers); ye anye—as well as
others; vidyä-upajévinaù—who were continuing their livelihood on the basis of
educational qualifications; taiù taiù—with whatever; kämaiù—improvements
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
403
of desire; adéna-ätmä—Mahäräja Nanda, who was so magnanimous;
yathä-ucitam—as was suitable; apüjayat—worshiped them or satisfied them;
viñëoù ärädhana-arthäya—for the purpose of satisfying Lord Viñëu;
sva-putrasya—of his own child; udayäya—for the improvement in all respects;
ca—and.
TRANSLATION
The great-minded Mahäräja Nanda gave clothing, ornaments and cows in
charity to the cowherd men in order to please Lord Viñëu, and thus he
improved the condition of his own son in all respects. He distributed charity to
the sütas, the mägadhas, the vandés, and men of all other professions, according
to their educational qualifications, and satisfied everyone's desires.
PURPORT
Although it has become fashionable to speak of daridra-näräyaëa, the words
viñëor ärädhanärthäya do not mean that all the people satisfied by Nanda
Mahäräja in this great ceremony were Viñëus. They were not daridra, nor were
they Näräyaëa. Rather, they were devotees of Näräyaëa, and by their
educational qualifications they would satisfy Näräyaëa. Therefore, satisfying
them was an indirect way of satisfying Lord Viñëu. Mad-bhakta-püjäbhyadhikä
(SB 11.19.21). The Lord says, "Worshiping My devotees is better than
worshiping Me directly." The varëäçrama system is entirely meant for
viñëu-ärädhana, worship of Lord Viñëu. Varëäçramäcäravatä puruñeëa paraù
pumän/ viñëur ärädhyate [Cc. Madhya 8.58
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
] (Viñëu Puräëa 3.8.9). The ultimate
goal of life is to please Lord Viñëu, the Supreme Lord. The uncivilized man or
materialistic person, however, does not know this aim of life. Na te viduù
svärtha-gatià hi viñëum (SB 7.5.31). One's real self-interest lies in satisfying
Lord Viñëu. Not satisfying Lord Viñëu but instead attempting to become happy
through material adjustments (bahir-artha-mäninaù) is the wrong way for
happiness. Because Viñëu is the root of everything, if Viñëu is pleased,
404
everyone is pleased; in particular, one's children and family members become
happy in all respects. Nanda Mahäräja wanted to see his newborn child happy.
That was his purpose. Therefore he wanted to satisfy Lord Viñëu, and to satisfy
Lord Viñëu it was necessary to satisfy His devotees, such as the learned
brähmaëas, mägadhas and sütas. Thus, in a roundabout way, ultimately it was
Lord Viñëu who was to be satisfied.
TEXT 17
r"Aeih"NAI ca mah"ABaAgAA
nand"gAAepaAiBanaind"taA
vyacar"iÚ"vyavaAs$a›ak,(-
k(NQ&ABar"NABaUiSataA
rohiëé ca mahä-bhägä
nanda-gopäbhinanditä
vyacarad divya-väsa-srakkaëöhäbharaëa-
bhüñitä
SYNONYMS
rohiëé—Rohiëé, the mother of Baladeva; ca—also; mahä-bhägä—the most
fortunate mother of Baladeva (greatly fortunate because of having the
opportunity to raise Kåñëa and Balaräma together);
nanda-gopä-abhinanditä—being honored by Mahäräja Nanda and mother
Yaçodä;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—was busy wandering here and there; divya—beautiful;
väsa—with a dress; srak—with a garland; kaëöha-äbharaëa—and with an
ornament covering the neck; bhüñitä—decorated.
405
TRANSLATION
The most fortunate Rohiëé, the mother of Baladeva, was honored by Nanda
Mahäräja and Yaçodä, and thus she also dressed gorgeously and decorated
herself with a necklace, a garland and other ornaments. She was busy
wandering here and there to receive the women who were guests at the festival.
PURPORT
Rohiëé, another wife of Vasudeva's, was also kept under the care of Nanda
Mahäräja with her son Baladeva. Because her husband was imprisoned by
Kaàsa, she was not very happy, but on the occasion of Kåñëa-janmäñöamé,
Nandotsava, when Nanda Mahäräja gave dresses and ornaments to others, he
also gave gorgeous garments and ornaments to Rohiëé so that she could take
part in the festival. Thus she also was busy receiving the women who were
guests. Because of her good fortune in being able to raise Kåñëa and Balaräma
together, she is described as mahä-bhägä, greatly fortunate.
TEXT 18
tata @Ar"Bya nand"sya
˜aja: s$avaRs$ama{iÜ"maAna,
h"re"inaRvaAs$aAtmagAuNAE
r"maA‚(Lx"maBaUªa{pa
tata ärabhya nandasya
vrajaù sarva-samåddhimän
harer niväsätma-guëai
ramäkréòam abhün nåpa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
406
SYNONYMS
tataù ärabhya—beginning from that time; nandasya—of Mahäräja Nanda;
vrajaù—Vrajabhümi, the land for protecting and breeding cows;
sarva-samåddhimän—became opulent with all kinds of riches; hareù niväsa—of
the residence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ätma-guëaiù—by the
transcendental qualities; ramä-äkréòam—the place of pastimes for the goddess
of fortune; abhüt—became; nåpa—O King (Mahäräja Parékñit).
TRANSLATION
O Mahäräja Parékñit, the home of Nanda Mahäräja is eternally the abode of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His transcendental qualities and is
therefore always naturally endowed with the opulence of all wealth. Yet
beginning from Lord Kåñëa's appearance there, it became the place for the
pastimes of the goddess of fortune.
PURPORT
As stated in the Brahma-saàhitä (5.29),
lakñmé-sahasra-çata-sambhrama-sevyamänaà govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà
bhajämi. The abode of Kåñëa is always served by hundreds and thousands of
goddesses of fortune. Wherever Kåñëa goes, the goddess of fortune naturally
resides with Him. The chief of the goddesses of fortune is Çrématé Rädhäräëé.
Therefore, Kåñëa's appearance in the land of Vraja indicated that the chief
goddess of fortune, Rädhäräëé, would also appear there very soon. Nanda
Mahäräja's abode was already opulent, and since Kåñëa had appeared, it would
be opulent in all respects.
TEXT 19
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
407
gAAepaAna, gAAeku(lar"ºaAyaAM
inaè&pya maTaur"AM gAta:
nand": kM(s$asya vaAiSaRfyaM
k(rM" d"AtauM ku(è&ã"h"
gopän gokula-rakñäyäà
nirüpya mathuräà gataù
nandaù kaàsasya värñikyaà
karaà dätuà kurüdvaha
SYNONYMS
gopän—the cowherd men; gokula-rakñäyäm—in giving protection to the state
of Gokula; nirüpya—after appointing; mathuräm—to Mathurä; gataù—went;
nandaù—Nanda Mahäräja; kaàsasya—of Kaàsa; värñikyam—yearly taxes;
karam—the share of profit; dätum—to pay; kuru-udvaha—O Mahäräja
Parékñit, best protector of the Kuru dynasty.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: Thereafter, my dear King Parékñit, O best
protector of the Kuru dynasty, Nanda Mahäräja appointed the local cowherd
men to protect Gokula and then went to Mathurä to pay the yearly taxes to
King Kaàsa.
PURPORT
Because the killing of babies was going on and had already become known,
Nanda Mahäräja was very much afraid for his newborn child. Thus he
appointed the local cowherd men to protect his home and child. He wanted to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
go immediately to Mathurä to pay the taxes due and also to offer some
408
presentation for the sake of his newborn son. For the protection of the child,
he had worshiped various demigods and forefathers and given charity to
everyone's satisfaction. Similarly, Nanda Mahäräja wanted not only to pay
Kaàsa the yearly taxes but also to offer some presentation so that Kaàsa too
would be satisfied. His only concern was how to protect his transcendental
child, Kåñëa.
TEXT 20
vas$aude"va opa™autya
”aAtarM" nand"maAgAtama,
ÁaAtvaA d"Ôak(rM" r"AÁae
yayaAE tad"vamaAecanama,
vasudeva upaçrutya
bhrätaraà nandam ägatam
jïätvä datta-karaà räjïe
yayau tad-avamocanam
SYNONYMS
vasudevaù—Vasudeva; upaçrutya—when he heard; bhrätaram—that his dear
friend and brother; nandam—Nanda Mahäräja; ägatam—had come to
Mathurä; jïätvä—when he learned; datta-karam—and had already paid the
taxes; räjïe—unto the King; yayau—he went; tat-avamocanam—to the
residential quarters of Nanda Mahäräja.
TRANSLATION
When Vasudeva heard that Nanda Mahäräja, his very dear friend and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
409
brother, had come to Mathurä and already paid the taxes to Kaàsa, he went to
Nanda Mahäräja's residence.
PURPORT
Vasudeva and Nanda Mahäräja were so intimately connected that they
lived like brothers. Furthermore, it is learned from the notes of Çrépäda
Madhväcärya that Vasudeva and Nanda Mahäräja were stepbrothers.
Vasudeva's father, Çürasena, married a vaiçya girl, and from her Nanda
Mahäräja was born. Later, Nanda Mahäräja himself married a vaiçya girl,
Yaçodä. Therefore his family is celebrated as a vaiçya family, and Kåñëa,
identifying Himself as their son, took charge of vaiçya activities
(kåñi-go-rakñya-väëijyam [Bg. 18.44]). Balaräma represents plowing the land for
agriculture and therefore always carries in His hand a plow, whereas Kåñëa
tends cows and therefore carries a flute in His hand. Thus the two brothers
represent kåñi-rakñya and go-rakñya.
TEXT 21
taM ä{"î"A s$ah"s$aAetTaAya
de"h": ‘aANAimavaAgAtama,
‘aIta: i‘ayatamaM d"AeByaA<
s$asvajae ‘aemaivaù"la:
taà dåñövä sahasotthäya
dehaù präëam ivägatam
prétaù priyatamaà dorbhyäà
sasvaje prema-vihvalaù
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
410
tam—him (Vasudeva); dåñövä—seeing; sahasä—suddenly; utthäya—getting up;
dehaù—the same body; präëam—life; iva—as if; ägatam—had returned;
prétaù—so pleased; priya-tamam—his dear friend and brother; dorbhyäm—by
his two arms; sasvaje—embraced; prema-vihvalaù—overwhelmed with love and
affection.
TRANSLATION
When Nanda Mahäräja heard that Vasudeva had come, he was overwhelmed
with love and affection, being as pleased as if his body had regained its life.
Seeing Vasudeva suddenly present, he got up and embraced him with both arms.
PURPORT
Nanda Mahäräja was older than Vasudeva. Therefore Nanda Mahäräja
embraced him, and Vasudeva offered him namaskära.
TEXT 22
paUijata: s$auKamaAs$aIna:
pa{"î"AnaAmayamaAä{"ta:
‘as$al(DaI: svaAtmajayaAer,"
wd"maAh" ivazAAmpatae
püjitaù sukham äsénaù
påñövänämayam ädåtaù
prasakta-dhéù svätmajayor
idam äha viçämpate
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
411
püjitaù—Vasudeva having been so dearly welcomed; sukham äsénaù—having
been given a place to sit comfortably; påñövä—asking;
anämayam—all-auspicious inquiries; ädåtaù—being honored and respectfully
received; prasakta-dhéù—because of his being very much attached;
sva-ätmajayoù—to his own two sons, Kåñëa and Balaräma; idam—the
following; äha—inquired; viçäm-pate—O Mahäräja Parékñit.
TRANSLATION
O Mahäräja Parékñit, having thus been received and welcomed by Nanda
Mahäräja with honor, Vasudeva sat down very peacefully and inquired about
his own two sons because of intense love for them.
TEXT 23
id"í"YaA ”aAta: ‘avayas$a
wd"AnaIma‘ajasya tae
‘ajaAzAAyaA inava{Ôasya
‘ajaA yats$amapaâta
diñöyä bhrätaù pravayasa
idäném aprajasya te
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
prajäçäyä nivåttasya
prajä yat samapadyata
SYNONYMS
diñöyä—it is by great fortune; bhrätaù—O my dear brother; pravayasaù—of
you whose age is now quite advanced; idäném—at the present moment;
aprajasya—of one who did not have a son before; te—of you; prajä-äçäyäù
412
nivåttasya—of one who was almost hopeless of getting a son at this age;
prajä—a son; yat—whatever; samapadyata—has been gotten by chance.
TRANSLATION
My dear brother Nanda Mahäräja, at an advanced age you had no son at all
and were hopeless of having one. Therefore, that you now have a son is a sign
of great fortune.
PURPORT
At an advanced age one generally cannot beget a male child. If by chance
one does beget a child at this age, the child is generally female. Thus Vasudeva
indirectly asked Nanda Mahäräja whether he had actually begotten a male
child or a female child. Vasudeva knew that Yaçodä had given birth to a female
child, whom he had stolen and replaced with a male child. This was a great
mystery, and Vasudeva wanted to determine whether this mystery was already
known to Nanda Mahäräja. On inquiring, however, he was confident that the
mystery of Kåñëa's birth and His being placed in the care of Yaçodä was still
hidden. There was no danger, since Kaàsa at least could not learn what had
already happened.
TEXT 24
id"í"YaA s$aMs$aAr"ca‚e('ismana,
vataRmaAna: paunaBaRva:
opalabDaAe BavaAnaâ
äu"laRBaM i‘ayad"zARnama,
diñöyä saàsära-cakre 'smin
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
413
vartamänaù punar-bhavaù
upalabdho bhavän adya
durlabhaà priya-darçanam
SYNONYMS
diñöyä—it is also by great fortune; saàsära-cakre asmin—in this world of birth
and death; vartamänaù—although I was existing; punaù-bhavaù—my meeting
with you is just like another birth; upalabdhaù—being obtained by me;
bhavän—you; adya—today; durlabham—although it was never to happen;
priya-darçanam—to see you again, my very dear friend and brother.
TRANSLATION
It is also by good fortune that I am seeing you. Having obtained this
opportunity, I feel as if I have taken birth again. Even though one is present in
this world, to meet with intimate friends and dear relatives in this material
world is extremely difficult.
PURPORT
Vasudeva had been imprisoned by Kaàsa, and therefore, although present
in Mathurä, he was unable to see Nanda Mahäräja for many years. Therefore
when they met again, Vasudeva considered this meeting to be another birth.
TEXT 25
naEk(‡a i‘ayas$aMvaAs$a:
s$auô$d"AM ica‡ak(maRNAAma,
@AeGaena vyaU÷maAnaAnaAM
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
414
plavaAnaAM ›aAetas$aAe yaTaA
naikatra priya-saàväsaù
suhådäà citra-karmaëäm
oghena vyühyamänänäà
plavänäà srotaso yathä
SYNONYMS
na—not; ekatra—in one place; priya-saàväsaù—living together with dear
friends and relatives; suhådäm—of friends; citra-karmaëäm—of all of us who
have had varieties of reactions to our past karma; oghena—by the force;
vyühyamänänäm—carried away; plavänäm—of sticks and other objects
floating in the water; srotasaù—of the waves; yathä—as.
TRANSLATION
Many planks and sticks, unable to stay together, are carried away by the
force of a river's waves. Similarly, although we are intimately related with
friends and family members, we are unable to stay together because of our
varied past deeds and the waves of time.
PURPORT
Vasudeva was lamenting because he and Nanda Mahäräja could not live
together. Yet how could they live together? Vasudeva warns that all of us, even
if intimately related, are carried away by the waves of time according to the
results of past karma.
TEXT 26
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
415
k(i»atpazAvyaM inaç&jaM
BaUyaRmbauta{NAvaIç&Dama,
ba{h"ã"naM tad"DaunaA
ya‡aAss$ae tvaM s$auô$ä,"va{ta:
kaccit paçavyaà nirujaà
bhüry-ambu-tåëa-vérudham
båhad vanaà tad adhunä
yaträsse tvaà suhåd-våtaù
SYNONYMS
kaccit—whether; paçavyam—protection of the cows; nirujam—without
difficulties or disease; bhüri—sufficient; ambu—water; tåëa—grass;
vérudham—plants; båhat vanam—the great forest; tat—all these arrangements
are there; adhunä—now; yatra—where; ässe—are living; tvam—you;
suhåt-våtaù—surrounded by friends.
TRANSLATION
My dear friend Nanda Mahäräja, in the place where you are living with your
friends, is the forest favorable for the animals, the cows? I hope there is no
disease or inconvenience. The place must be full of water, grass and other
plants.
PURPORT
For human happiness, one must care for the animals, especially the cows.
Vasudeva therefore inquired whether there was a good arrangement for the
animals where Nanda Mahäräja lived. For the proper pursuit of human
happiness, there must be arrangements for the protection of cows. This means
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
416
that there must be forests and adequate pasturing grounds full of grass and
water. If the animals are happy, there will be an ample supply of milk, from
which human beings will benefit by deriving many milk products with which
to live happily. As enjoined in Bhagavad-gétä (18.44), kåñi-go-rakñya-väëijyaà
vaiçya-karma-svabhävajam. Without giving proper facilities to the animals,
how can human society be happy? That people are raising cattle to send to the
slaughterhouse is a great sin. By this demoniac enterprise, people are ruining
their chance for a truly human life. Because they are not giving any
importance to the instructions of Kåñëa, the advancement of their so-called
civilization resembles the crazy efforts of men in a lunatic asylum.
TEXT 27
”aAtamaRma s$auta: k(i»ana,
maA‡aA s$ah" Bavaä,"˜ajae
taAtaM BavantaM manvaAnaAe
Bavaà"YaAmaupalaAilata:
bhrätar mama sutaù kaccin
mäträ saha bhavad-vraje
tätaà bhavantaà manväno
bhavadbhyäm upalälitaù
SYNONYMS
bhrätaù—my dear brother; mama—my; sutaù—son (Baladeva, born of
Rohiëé); kaccit—whether; mäträ saha—with His mother, Rohiëé;
bhavat-vraje—in your house; tätam—as father; bhavantam—unto you;
manvänaù—thinking; bhavadbhyäm—by you and your wife, Yaçodä;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
upalälitaù—properly being raised.
417
TRANSLATION
My son Baladeva, being raised by you and your wife, Yaçodädevé, considers
you His father and mother. Is he living very peacefully in your home with His
real mother, Rohiëé?
TEXT 28
pauMs$aiñvagAAeR ivaih"ta:
s$auô$d"Ae ÷nauBaAivata:
na taeSau iflazyamaAnaeSau
i‡avagAAeR'TaARya k(lpatae
puàsas tri-vargo vihitaù
suhådo hy anubhävitaù
na teñu kliçyamäneñu
tri-vargo 'rthäya kalpate
SYNONYMS
puàsaù—of a person; tri-vargaù—the three aims of life (religion, economic
development and sense gratification); vihitaù—enjoined according to Vedic
ritualistic ceremonies; suhådaù—toward relatives and friends; hi—indeed;
anubhävitaù—when they are properly in line; na—not; teñu—in them;
kliçyamäneñu—if they are actually in any difficulty; tri-vargaù—these three
aims of life; arthäya—for any purpose; kalpate—does become so.
TRANSLATION
When one's friends and relatives are properly situated, one's religion,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
418
economic development and sense gratification, as described in the Vedic
literatures, are beneficial. Otherwise, if one's friends and relatives are in
distress, these three cannot offer any happiness.
PURPORT
Vasudeva regretfully informed Nanda Mahäräja that although he had his
wife and children, he could not properly discharge his duty of maintaining
them and was therefore unhappy.
TEXT 29
™aInand" ovaAca
@h"Ae tae de"vak(Lpau‡aA:
kM(s$aena bah"vaAe h"taA:
Wk(AvaizAí"Avar"jaA
k(nyaA s$aAipa id"vaM gAtaA
çré-nanda uväca
aho te devaké-puträù
kaàsena bahavo hatäù
ekävaçiñöävarajä
kanyä säpi divaà gatä
SYNONYMS
çré-nandaù uväca—Nanda Mahäräja said; aho—alas; te—your;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
devaké-puträù—all the sons of your wife Devaké; kaàsena—by King Kaàsa;
bahavaù—many; hatäù—have been killed; ekä—one; avaçiñöä—remaining
child; avarajä—the youngest of all; kanyä—a daughter also; sä api—she also;
419
divam gatä—gone to the heavenly planets.
TRANSLATION
Nanda Mahäräja said: Alas, King Kaàsa killed so many of your children,
born of Devaké. And your one daughter, the youngest child of all, entered the
heavenly planets.
PURPORT
When Vasudeva understood from Nanda Mahäräja that the mystery of
Kåñëa's birth and His having been exchanged with Yaçodä's daughter was yet
undisclosed, he was happy that things were going on nicely. By saying that
Vasudeva's daughter, his youngest child, had gone to the heavenly planets,
Nanda Mahäräja indicated that he did not know that this daughter was born
of Yaçodä and that Vasudeva had exchanged her with Kåñëa. Thus the doubts
of Vasudeva were dispelled.
TEXT 30
naUnaM ÷ä{"í"inaï"Ae'yama,
@ä{"í"par"maAe jana:
@ä{"í"maAtmanastaÔvaM
yaAe vaed" na s$a mau÷ita
nünaà hy adåñöa-niñöho 'yam
adåñöa-paramo janaù
adåñöam ätmanas tattvaà
yo veda na sa muhyati
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
420
SYNONYMS
nünam—certainly; hi—indeed; adåñöa—unseen; niñöhaù ayam—something
ends there; adåñöa—the unseen destiny; paramaù—ultimate; janaù—every
living entity within this material world; adåñöam—that destiny; ätmanaù—of
oneself; tattvam—ultimate truth; yaù—anyone who; veda—knows; na—not;
saù—he; muhyati—becomes bewildered.
TRANSLATION
Every man is certainly controlled by destiny, which determines the results of
one's fruitive activities. In other words, one has a son or daughter because of
unseen destiny, and when the son or daughter is no longer present, this also is
due to unseen destiny. Destiny is the ultimate controller of everyone. One who
knows this is never bewildered.
PURPORT
Nanda Mahäräja consoled his younger brother Vasudeva by saying that
destiny is ultimately responsible for everything. Vasudeva should not be
unhappy that his many children had been killed by Kaàsa or that the last
child, the daughter, had gone to the heavenly planets.
TEXT 31
™aIvas$aude"va ovaAca
k(r"Ae vaE vaAiSaRk(Ae d"ÔaAe
r"AÁae ä{"í"A vayaM ca va:
naeh" sTaeyaM baò"itaTaM
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
421
s$antyautpaAtaAê gAAeku(lae
çré-vasudeva uväca
karo vai värñiko datto
räjïe dåñöä vayaà ca vaù
neha stheyaà bahu-tithaà
santy utpätäç ca gokule
SYNONYMS
çré-vasudevaù uväca—Çré Vasudeva replied; karaù—the taxes; vai—indeed;
värñikaù—yearly; dattaù—have already been paid by you; räjïe—to the King;
dåñöäù—have been seen; vayam ca—both of us; vaù—of you; na—not; iha—in
this place; stheyam—should be staying; bahu-titham—for many days;
santi—may be; utpätäù ca—many disturbances; gokule—in your home,
Gokula.
TRANSLATION
Vasudeva said to Nanda Mahäräja: Now, my dear brother, since you have
paid the annual taxes to Kaàsa and have also seen me, do not stay in this place
for many days. It is better to return to Gokula, since I know that there may be
some disturbances there.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
TEXT 32
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
wita nand"Ad"yaAe gAAepaA:
‘aAel(Astae zAAEir"NAA yayau:
@naAeiBar"nax"]âulE(s$a,
422
tamanauÁaApya gAAeku(lama,
çré-çuka uväca
iti nandädayo gopäù
proktäs te çauriëä yayuù
anobhir anaòud-yuktais
tam anujïäpya gokulam
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus;
nanda-ädayaù—Nanda Mahäräja and his companions; gopäù—the cowherd
men; proktäù—being advised; te—they; çauriëä—by Vasudeva; yayuù—started
from that place; anobhiù—by the bullock carts; anaòut-yuktaiù—yoked with
oxen; tam anujïäpya—taking permission from Vasudeva; gokulam—for
Gokula.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: After Vasudeva advised Nanda Mahäräja in this
way, Nanda Mahäräja and his associates, the cowherd men, took permission
from Vasudeva, yoked their bulls to the bullock carts, and started riding for
Gokula.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Tenth Canto, Fifth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Meeting of Nanda Mahäräja and Vasudeva."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
423
6. The Killing of the Demon Pütanä
A summary of the Sixth Chapter is as follows: when Nanda Mahäräja,
following the instructions of Vasudeva, was returning home, he saw a great
demoniac woman lying on the road, and then he heard about her death.
While Nanda Mahäräja, the King of Vraja, was thinking about Vasudeva's
words concerning disturbances in Gokula, he was a little afraid and sought
shelter at the lotus feet of Çré Hari. Meanwhile, Kaàsa sent to the village of
Gokula a Räkñasé named Pütanä, who was wandering here and there killing
small babies. Of course, wherever there is no Kåñëa consciousness, there is the
danger of such Räkñasés, but since the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Himself was in Gokula, Pütanä could accept nothing there but her own death.
One day, Pütanä arrived from outer space in Gokula, the home of Nanda
Mahäräja, and by displaying her mystic power, she assumed the disguise of a
very beautiful woman. Taking courage, she immediately entered Kåñëa's
bedroom without anyone's permission; by the grace of Kåñëa, no one forbade
her to enter the house or the room, because that was Kåñëa's desire. The baby
Kåñëa, who resembled a fire covered by ashes, looked upon Pütanä and thought
that He would have to kill this demon, the beautiful woman. Enchanted by the
influence of yogamäyä and the Personality of Godhead, Pütanä took Kåñëa
upon her lap, and neither Rohiëé nor Yaçodä objected. The demon Pütanä
offered her breast for Kåñëa to suck, but her breast was smeared with poison.
The child Kåñëa, therefore, squeezed Pütanä's breast so severely that in
unbearable pain she had to assume her original body and fell to the ground.
Then Kåñëa began playing on her breast just like a small child. When Kåñëa
was playing, the gopés were pacified and took the child away to their own laps.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
424
After this incident, the gopés took precautions because of the attack of the
Räkñasé. Mother Yaçodä gave the child her breast to suck and then laid Him in
bed.
Meanwhile, Nanda and his associates the cowherd men returned from
Mathurä, and when they saw the great dead body of Pütanä, they were struck
with wonder. Everyone was astonished that Vasudeva had foretold this mishap,
and they praised Vasudeva for his power of foresight. The inhabitants of Vraja
cut the gigantic body of Pütanä into pieces, but because Kåñëa had sucked her
breast, she had been freed from all sins, and therefore when the cowherd men
burned the pieces of her body in a fire, the smoke filled the air with a very
pleasing fragrance. Ultimately, although Pütanä had desired to kill Kåñëa, she
attained the Lord's abode. From this incident we gain the instruction that if
one is attached to Kåñëa somehow or other, even as an enemy, one ultimately
attains success. What then is to be said of devotees who are naturally attached
to Kåñëa in love? When the inhabitants of Vraja heard about the killing of
Pütanä and the welfare of the child, they were very much satisfied. Nanda
Mahäräja took the baby Kåñëa on his lap and was filled with satisfaction.
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
nand": paiTa vaca: zAAEre"r,"
na ma{Saeita ivaicantayana,
h"ir$M jagAAma zAr"NAma,
otpaAtaAgAmazAiÆÿta:
çré-çuka uväca
nandaù pathi vacaù çaurer
na måñeti vicintayan
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
425
harià jagäma çaraëam
utpätägama-çaìkitaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; nandaù—Nanda Mahäräja;
pathi—on his way back home; vacaù—the words; çaureù—of Vasudeva;
na—not; måñä—without purpose or cause; iti—thus; vicintayan—while
thinking about inauspiciousness for his little son, Kåñëa; harim—unto the
Supreme Lord, the controller; jagäma—took; çaraëam—shelter; utpäta—of
disturbances; ägama—with the expectation; çaìkitaù—thus being afraid.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: My dear King, while Nanda Mahäräja was on
the way home, he considered that what Vasudeva had said could not be false or
useless. There must have been some danger of disturbances in Gokula. As
Nanda Mahäräja thought about the danger for his beautiful son, Kåñëa, he was
afraid, and he took shelter at the lotus feet of the supreme controller.
PURPORT
Whenever there is danger, the pure devotee thinks of the protection and
shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is also advised in
Bhagavad-gétä (9.33): anityam asukhaà lokam imaà präpya bhajasva mäm. In
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
this material world there is danger at every step (padaà padaà yad vipadäm
[SB 10.14.58]). Therefore a devotee has no other course than to take shelter of
the Lord at every step.
TEXT 2
kM(s$aena ‘aih"taA GaAer"A
426
paUtanaA baAlaGaAitanaI
izAzAUMêcaAr" ina£antaI
paur"ƒaAma˜ajaAid"Sau
kaàsena prahitä ghorä
pütanä bäla-ghätiné
çiçüàç cacära nighnanté
pura-gräma-vrajädiñu
SYNONYMS
kaàsena—by King Kaàsa; prahitä—engaged previously; ghorä—very fierce;
pütanä—by the name Pütanä; bäla-ghätiné—a Räkñasé who killed; çiçün—small
babies; cacära—wandered; nighnanté—killing; pura-gräma-vraja-ädiñu—in
towns, cities and villages here and there.
TRANSLATION
While Nanda Mahäräja was returning to Gokula, the same fierce Pütanä
whom Kaàsa had previously engaged to kill babies was wandering about in the
towns, cities and villages, doing her nefarious duty.
TEXT 3
na ya‡a ™avaNAAd"Iina
r"ºaAe£aAina svak(maRs$au
ku(vaRinta s$aAtvataAM BatauRr,"
yaAtauDaAnyaê ta‡a ih"
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
427
na yatra çravaëädéni
rakño-ghnäni sva-karmasu
kurvanti sätvatäà bhartur
yätudhänyaç ca tatra hi
SYNONYMS
na—not; yatra—wherever; çravaëa-ädéni—the activities of bhakti-yoga,
beginning with hearing and chanting; rakñaù-ghnäni—the sound vibration to
kill all danger and bad elements; sva-karmasu—if one is engaged in his own
occupational duty; kurvanti—such things are done; sätvatäm bhartuù—of the
protector of the devotees; yätudhänyaù—disturbing elements, bad elements;
ca—also; tatra hi—there must be.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, wherever people in any position perform their occupational
duties of devotional service by chanting and hearing [çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù
SB 7.5.23], there cannot be any danger from bad elements. Therefore there was
no need for anxiety about Gokula while the Supreme Personality of Godhead
was personally present.
PURPORT
Çukadeva Gosvämé spoke this verse to mitigate the anxiety of Mahäräja
Parékñit. Mahäräja Parékñit was a devotee of Kåñëa, and therefore when he
understood that Pütanä was causing disturbances in Gokula, he was somewhat
perturbed. Çukadeva Gosvämé therefore assured him that there was no danger
in Gokula. Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura has sung: nämäçraya kari' yatane tumi,
thäkaha äpana käje. Everyone is thus advised to seek shelter in the chanting of
the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra and remain engaged in his own occupational
duty. There is no loss in this, and the gain is tremendous. Even from a material
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
428
point of view, everyone should take to chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra to be
saved from all kinds of danger. This world is full of danger (padaà padaà yad
vipadäm [SB 10.14.58]). Therefore we should be encouraged to chant the Hare
Kåñëa mahä-mantra so that in our family, society, neighborhood and nation,
everything will be smooth and free from danger.
TEXT 4
s$aA KaecayaeRk(d"Aetpatya
paUtanaA nand"gAAeku(lama,
yaAeiSatvaA maAyayaAtmaAnaM
‘aAivazAtk(AmacaAir"NAI
sä khe-cary ekadotpatya
pütanä nanda-gokulam
yoñitvä mäyayätmänaà
präviçat käma-cäriëé
SYNONYMS
sä—that (Pütanä); khe-caré—who traveled in outer space; ekadä—once upon a
time; utpatya—was flying;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
pütanä—the demon Pütanä; nanda-gokulam—at
the place of Nanda Mahäräja, Gokula; yoñitvä—converting into a very
beautiful woman; mäyayä—by mystic power; ätmänam—herself;
präviçat—entered; käma-cäriëé—one who could move according to her own
desire.
TRANSLATION
Once upon a time, Pütanä Räkñasé, who could move according to her desire
429
and was wandering in outer space, converted herself by mystic power into a
very beautiful woman and thus entered Gokula, the abode of Nanda Mahäräja.
PURPORT
Räkñasés learn mystic powers by which they can travel in outer space
without machines. In some parts of India there are still such mystical witches,
who can sit on a stick and use it to fly from one place to another in a very
short time. This art was known to Pütanä. Assuming the feature of a very
beautiful woman, she entered Nanda Mahäräja's abode, Gokula.
TEXTS 5-6
taAM ke(zAbanDavyaitaSal(maiéak(AM
ba{h"iªatambastanak{(cC)$maDyamaAma,
s$auvaAs$as$aM k(ilpatak(NARBaUSaNAitvaSaAeéas$
atku(ntalamaiNx"taAnanaAma
valgAuismataApaAËÿivas$agARvaIiºataEr,"
manaAe h"r"ntaI%M vainataAM ˜ajaAEk(s$aAma,
@maMs$ataAmBaAejak(re"NA è&ipaNAI%M
gAAepya: i™ayaM ‰"í]"imavaAgAtaAM paitama,
täà keça-bandha-vyatiñakta-mallikäà
båhan-nitamba-stana-kåcchra-madhyamäm
suväsasaà kalpita-karëa-bhüñaëatviñollasat-
kuntala-maëòitänanäm
valgu-smitäpäìga-visarga-vékñitair
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
430
mano harantéà vanitäà vrajaukasäm
amaàsatämbhoja-kareëa rüpiëéà
gopyaù çriyaà drañöum ivägatäà patim
SYNONYMS
täm—her; keça-bandha-vyatiñakta-mallikäm—whose arrangement of hair was
decorated with a garland of mallikä flowers; båhat—very, very big;
nitamba-stana—by her hips and firm breasts; kåcchra-madhyamäm—whose
slim waist was overburdened; su-väsasam—nicely painted or very attractively
dressed; kalpita-karëa-bhüñaëa—of the earrings arranged on her ears;
tviñä—by the brilliance; ullasat—very attractive;
kuntala-maëòita-änanäm—whose beautiful face was surrounded by black hair;
valgu-smita-apäìga-visarga-vékñitaiù—by her casting her smiling glance on
everyone very attractively; manaù harantém—everyone's attention was
attracted (by her); vanitäm—an especially attractive woman;
vraja-okasäm—of the inhabitants of Gokula; amaàsata—thought;
ambhoja—holding a lotus flower; kareëa—with her hand; rüpiëém—very
beautiful; gopyaù—the gopé inhabitants of Gokula; çriyam—the goddess of
fortune; drañöum—to see; iva—as if; ägatäm—had come; patim—her husband.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
TRANSLATION
Her hips were full, her breasts were large and firm, seeming to overburden
her slim waist, and she was dressed very nicely. Her hair, adorned with a
garland of mallikä flowers, was scattered about her beautiful face. Her earrings
were brilliant, and as she smiled very attractively, glancing upon everyone, her
beauty drew the attention of all the inhabitants of Vraja, especially the men.
When the gopés saw her, they thought that the beautiful goddess of fortune,
holding a lotus flower in her hand, had come to see her husband, Kåñëa.
TEXT 7
431
baAlaƒah"sta‡a ivaicanvataI izAzAUna,
yaä{"cC$yaA nand"gA{he"'s$ad"ntak(ma,
baAlaM ‘aitacC$ªainajaAeç&taejas$aM
d"d"zAR talpae'i¢aimavaAih"taM Bais$a
bäla-grahas tatra vicinvaté çiçün
yadåcchayä nanda-gåhe 'sad-antakam
bälaà praticchanna-nijoru-tejasaà
dadarça talpe 'gnim ivähitaà bhasi
SYNONYMS
bäla-grahaù—the witch, whose business was to kill small babies;
tatra—standing there; vicinvaté—thinking of, searching for; çiçün—children;
yadåcchayä—independently; nanda-gåhe—in the house of Nanda Mahäräja;
asat-antakam—who could kill all demons; bälam—the child;
praticchanna—covered; nija-uru-tejasam—whose unlimited power;
dadarça—she saw; talpe—(lying) on the bed; agnim—fire; iva—just like;
ähitam—covered; bhasi—within ashes.
TRANSLATION
While searching for small children, Pütanä, whose business was to kill them,
entered the house of Nanda Mahäräja unobstructed, having been sent by the
superior potency of the Lord. Without asking anyone's permission, she entered
Nanda Mahäräja's room, where she saw the child sleeping in bed, His unlimited
power covered like a powerful fire covered by ashes. She could understand that
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
this child was not ordinary, but was meant to kill all demons.
432
PURPORT
Demons are always busy creating disturbances and killing. But the child
lying on the bed in the house of Nanda Mahäräja was meant to kill many
demons.
TEXT 8
ivabauDya taAM baAlak(maAir"k(AƒahM"
car"Acar"AtmaA s$a inamaIilataeºaNA:
@nantamaAr"Aepayad"ÆÿmantakM(
yaTaAer"gAM s$auæamabauiÜ"r"ÀauDaI:
vibudhya täà bälaka-märikä-grahaà
caräcarätmä sa nimélitekñaëaù
anantam äropayad aìkam antakaà
yathoragaà suptam abuddhi-rajju-dhéù
SYNONYMS
vibudhya—understanding; täm—her (Pütanä); bälaka-märikä-graham—a
witch very expert in killing small babies; cara-acara-ätmä—Kåñëa, the
all-pervading Supersoul; saù—He; nimélita-ékñaëaù—closed His eyes;
anantam—the Unlimited; äropayat—she placed; aìkam—on her lap;
antakam—for her own annihilation; yathä—as; uragam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
suptam—while sleeping; abuddhi—a person who has no intelligence;
rajju-dhéù—one who thinks a snake to be a rope.
TRANSLATION
433
Lord Çré Kåñëa, the all-pervading Supersoul, lying on the bed, understood
that Pütanä, a witch who was expert in killing small children, had come to kill
Him. Therefore, as if afraid of her, Kåñëa closed His eyes. Thus Pütanä took
upon her lap Him who was to be her own annihilation, just as an unintelligent
person places a sleeping snake on his lap, thinking the snake to be a rope.
PURPORT
In this verse there are two perplexities. When Kåñëa saw that Pütanä had
come to kill Him, He thought that since this woman was present with motherly
affection, although artificial, He had to offer her a benediction. Therefore He
looked at her with a little perplexity and then closed His eyes again. Pütanä
Räkñasé also was perplexed. She was not intelligent enough to understand that
she was taking a sleeping snake on her lap; she thought the snake to be an
ordinary rope. The two words antakam and anantam are contradictory.
Because of not being intelligent, Pütanä thought that she could kill her
antakam, the source of her annihilation; but because He is ananta, unlimited,
no one can kill Him.
TEXT 9
taAM taIºNAicaÔaAmaitavaAmacaeií"taAM
vaIºyaAntar"A k(AeSapair"cC$d"Ais$avata,
var"iñyaM tat‘aBayaA ca DaiSaRtae
inar"IºyamaANAe jananaI ÷itaï"taAma,
täà tékñëa-cittäm ativäma-ceñöitäà
vékñyäntarä koña-paricchadäsivat
vara-striyaà tat-prabhayä ca dharñite
nirékñyamäëe janané hy atiñöhatäm
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
434
SYNONYMS
täm—that (Pütanä Räkñasé); tékñëa-cittäm—having a very fierce heart for
killing the child; ati-väma-ceñöitäm—although she was trying to treat the child
better than a mother; vékñya antarä—seeing her within the room;
koña-paricchada-asi-vat—like a sharp sword within a soft sheath;
vara-striyam—the very beautiful woman; tat-prabhayä—by her influence;
ca—also; dharñite—being overwhelmed; nirékñyamäëe—were seeing;
janané—the two mothers; hi—indeed; atiñöhatäm—they remained silent,
without prohibiting.
TRANSLATION
Pütanä Räkñasé's heart was fierce and cruel, but she looked like a very
affectionate mother. Thus she resembled a sharp sword in a soft sheath.
Although seeing her within the room, Yaçodä and Rohiëé, overwhelmed by her
beauty, did not stop her, but remained silent because she treated the child like a
mother.
PURPORT
Although Pütanä was an outsider and although she personified fierce death
because the determination within her heart was to kill the child, when she
directly came and placed the child on her lap to offer the child her breast to
suck, the mothers were so captivated by her beauty that they did not prohibit
her. Sometimes a beautiful woman is dangerous because everyone, being
captivated by external beauty (mäyä-mohita), is unable to understand what is
in her mind. Those who are captivated by the beauty of the external energy
are called mäyä-mohita. Mohitaà näbhijänäti mäm ebhyaù param avyayam (Bg.
7.13). Na te viduù svärtha-gatià hi viñëuà duräçayä ye bahir-artha-mäninaù (SB
7.5.31). Here, of course, the two mothers Rohiëé and Yaçodä were not
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
435
mäyä-mohita, deluded by the external energy, but to develop the pastimes of
the Lord, they were captivated by yogamäyä. Such mäyä-moha is the action of
yogamäyä.
TEXT 10
taismana, stanaM äu"jaRr"vaIyaRmaulbaNAM
GaAer"AÆÿmaAd"Aya izAzAAedR"d"AvaTa
gAAXM# k(r"AByaAM BagAvaAna, ‘apaIx"Ya tata,-
‘aANAE: s$amaM r"AeSas$amainvataAe'ipabata,
tasmin stanaà durjara-véryam ulbaëaà
ghoräìkam ädäya çiçor dadäv atha
gäòhaà karäbhyäà bhagavän prapéòya tatpräëaiù
samaà roña-samanvito 'pibat
SYNONYMS
tasmin—in that very spot; stanam—the breast; durjara-véryam—a very
powerful weapon mixed with poison; ulbaëam—which was fierce; ghorä—the
most ferocious Pütanä; aìkam—on her lap; ädäya—placing; çiçoù—in the
mouth of the child; dadau—pushed; atha—thereupon; gäòham—very hard;
karäbhyäm—with both hands; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; prapéòya—giving her great pain; tat-präëaiù—her life;
samam—along with; roña-samanvitaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—being very angry at her;
apibat—sucked the breast.
TRANSLATION
On that very spot, the fiercely dangerous Räkñasé took Kåñëa on her lap and
436
pushed her breast into His mouth. The nipple of her breast was smeared with a
dangerous, immediately effective poison, but the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Kåñëa, becoming very angry at her, took hold of her breast, squeezed
it very hard with both hands, and sucked out both the poison and her life.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa was not angry at Pütanä for His own sake. Rather, He was angry
because the Räkñasé had killed so many small children in Vrajabhümi.
Therefore He decided that she should be punished by having to forfeit her life.
TEXT 11
s$aA mauÂa mauÂaAlaimaita ‘aBaAiSaNAI
inaSpaIx"YamaAnaAiKalajaIvamamaRiNA
ivava{tya nae‡ae car"NAAE BaujaAE mauò":
‘aisvaªagAA‡aA iºapataI ç&r"Aed" h"
sä muïca muïcälam iti prabhäñiëé
niñpéòyamänäkhila-jéva-marmaëi
vivåtya netre caraëau bhujau muhuù
prasvinna-gäträ kñipaté ruroda ha
SYNONYMS
sä—she (Pütanä Räkñasé); muïca—give up; muïca—give up; alam—suck my
breast no longer; iti—thus; prabhäñiëé—crying; niñpéòyamänä—being pressed
severely; akhila-jéva-marmaëi—in every center of her vitality;
vivåtya—opening wide; netre—her two eyes; caraëau—t
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
bhujau—two
hands; muhuù—again and again; prasvinna-gäträ—with her body perspiring;
437
kñipaté—throwing; ruroda—cried severely; ha—indeed.
TRANSLATION
Unbearably pressed in every vital point, the demon Pütanä began to cry,
"Please leave me, leave me! Suck my breast no longer!" Perspiring, her eyes
wide open and her arms and legs flailing, she cried very loudly again and again.
PURPORT
The Räkñasé was severely punished by Kåñëa. She threw her arms and legs
about, and Kåñëa also began to kick her with His legs to punish her properly
for her mischievous activities.
TEXT 12
tasyaA: svanaenaAitagABaIr"rM"h"s$aA
s$aAi‰"maRh"I âAEê cacaAla s$aƒah"A
r"s$aA id"zAê ‘aitanaeid"re" janaA:
paetau: iºataAE va†ainapaAtazAÆÿyaA
tasyäù svanenätigabhéra-raàhasä
sädrir mahé dyauç ca cacäla sa-grahä
rasä diçaç ca pratinedire janäù
petuù kñitau vajra-nipäta-çaìkayä
SYNONYMS
tasyäù—of the great Räkñasé Pütanä; svanena—by the vibration of the sound;
ati—very; gabhéra—deep; raàhasä—forceful; sa-adriù—with the mountains;
mahé—the surface of the world; dyauù ca
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—and outer space; cacäla—trembled;
438
sa-grahä—with the stars; rasä—below the planet earth; diçaù ca—and all
directions; pratinedire—vibrated; janäù—people in general; petuù—fell down;
kñitau—on the surface of the world; vajra-nipäta-çaìkayä—by suspecting that
thunderbolts were falling.
TRANSLATION
As Pütanä screamed loudly and forcefully, the earth with its mountains, and
outer space with its planets, trembled. The lower planets and all directions
vibrated, and people fell down, fearing that thunderbolts were falling upon
them.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura remarks that in this verse the word
rasä refers to the planetary systems below the earth, such as Rasätala, Atala,
Vitala, Sutala and Talätala.
TEXT 13
inazAAcar"ItTaM vyaiTatastanaA vyas$aur,"
vyaAd"Aya ke(zAAMêr"NAAE BaujaAvaipa
‘as$aAyaR gAAeïe" inajaè&pamaAisTataA
va†aAh"taAe va{‡a wvaApataªa{pan
içä-carétthaà vyathita-stanä vyasur
vyädäya keçäàç caraëau bhujäv api
prasärya goñöhe nija-rüpam ästhitä
vajrähato våtra iväpatan nåpa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
439
SYNONYMS
niçä-caré—the Räkñasé; ittham—in this way; vyathita-stanä—being severely
aggrieved because of pressure on her breast; vyasuù—lost her life;
vyädäya—opening her mouth wide; keçän—bunch of hairs; caraëau—her two
legs; bhujau—her two hands; api—also; prasärya—expanding; goñöhe—in the
pasturing ground; nija-rüpam ästhitä—remained in her original demoniac
form; vajra-ähataù—killed by the thunderbolt of Indra; våtraù—Våträsura;
iva—as if; apatat—fell down; nåpa—O King.
TRANSLATION
In this way the demon Pütanä, very much aggrieved because her breast was
being attacked by Kåñëa, lost her life. O King Parékñit, opening her mouth wide
and spreading her arms, legs and hair, she fell down in the pasturing ground in
her original form as a Räkñasé, as Våträsura had fallen when killed by the
thunderbolt of Indra.
PURPORT
Pütanä was a great Räkñasé who knew the art of covering her original form
by mystic power, but when she was killed her mystic power could not hide her,
and she appeared in her original form.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
TEXT 14
patamaAnaAe'ipa taÚe"h"s$a,
i‡agAvyaUtyantar"åu"maAna,
caUNARyaAmaAs$a r"Ajaen‰"
440
mah"d"As$aIÔad"àu"tama,p
atamäno 'pi tad-dehas
tri-gavyüty-antara-drumän
cürëayäm äsa räjendra
mahad äsét tad adbhutam
SYNONYMS
patamänaù api—even while falling down; tat-dehaù—her gigantic body;
tri-gavyüti-antara—within a limit of twelve miles; drumän—all kinds of trees;
cürëayäm äsa—smashed; räjendra—O King Parékñit; mahat äsét—was quite
gigantic; tat—that body; adbhutam—and very, very wonderful.
TRANSLATION
O King Parékñit, when the gigantic body of Pütanä fell to the ground, it
smashed all the trees within a limit of twelve miles. Appearing in a gigantic
body, she was certainly extraordinary.
PURPORT
Because of the grievous hurt imposed upon her by Kåñëa's sucking her
breast, Pütanä, while dying, not only left the room but abandoned the village
and fell down in the pasturing ground in her gigantic body.
TEXTS 15-17
wRSaAmaA‡aAeƒadM"í)"AsyaM
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
gANx"zAElastanaM r"AE‰M"
441
‘ak(LNAARç&NAmaUDaRjama,
@nDakU(pagABaIr"AºaM
pauilanaAr"Aeh"BaISaNAma,
baÜ"s$aetauBaujaAevaRx.~i„a
zAUnyataAeyaoe"d"Aed"r"ma,
s$anta‡as$au: sma taã"Iºya
gAAepaA gAAepya: k(laevar"ma,
paUva< tau taiªa:svainataiBa
ªaô$tk(NARmastak(A:
éñä-mätrogra-daàñöräsyaà
giri-kandara-näsikam
gaëòa-çaila-stanaà raudraà
prakérëäruëa-mürdhajam
andha-küpa-gabhéräkñaà
pulinäroha-bhéñaëam
baddha-setu-bhujorv-aìghri
çünya-toya-hradodaram
santatrasuù sma tad vékñya
gopä gopyaù kalevaram
pürvaà tu tan-niùsvanitabhinna-
håt-karëa-mastakäù
SYNONYMS
éñä-mätra—like the front of a plow; ugra—fierce; daàñöra—the teeth;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
442
äsyam—having a mouth in which; giri-kandara—like mountain caves;
näsikam—the nostrils of whom; gaëòa-çaila—like big slabs of stone;
stanam—the breasts of whom; raudram—very fierce; prakérëa—scattered;
aruëa-mürdha-jam—whose hair was the color of copper; andha-küpa—like
blind wells; gabhéra—deep; akñam—eye sockets;
pulina-äroha-bhéñaëam—whose thighs were fearful like the banks of a river;
baddha-setu-bhuja-uru-aìghri—whose arms, thighs and feet were strongly built
bridges; çünya-toya-hrada-udaram—whose abdomen was like a lake without
water; santatrasuù sma—became frightened; tat—that; vékñya—seeing;
gopäù—the cowherd men; gopyaù—and the cowherd women; kalevaram—such
a gigantic body; pürvam tu—before that; tat-niùsvanita—because of her loud
vibration; bhinna—were shocked; håt—whose hearts; karëa—ears;
mastakäù—and heads.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
The Räkñasé's mouth was full of teeth, each resembling the front of a plow,
her nostrils were deep like mountain caves, and her breasts resembled big slabs
of stone fallen from a hill. Her scattered hair was the color of copper. The
sockets of her eyes appeared like deep blind wells, her fearful thighs resembled
the banks of a river, her arms, legs and feet seemed like big bridges, and her
abdomen appeared like a dried-up lake. The hearts, ears and heads of the
cowherd men and women were already shocked by the Räkñasé's screaming, and
when they saw the fierce wonder of her body, they were even more frightened.
TEXT 18
baAlaM ca tasyaA or"is$a
‚(Lx"ntamaku(taAeBayama,
gAAepyastaUNA< s$amaByaetya
443
jagA{"ò"jaARtas$am”amaA:
bälaà ca tasyä urasi
kréòantam akutobhayam
gopyas türëaà samabhyetya
jagåhur jäta-sambhramäù
SYNONYMS
bälam ca—the child also; tasyäù—of that (Räkñasé Pütanä); urasi—on the
upper portion of the breast; kréòantam—engaged in playing;
akutobhayam—without fear; gopyaù—all the cowherd women;
türëam—immediately; samabhyetya—coming near; jagåhuù—picked up;
jäta-sambhramäù—with the same affection and respect they always
maintained.
TRANSLATION
Without fear, the child Kåñëa was playing on the upper portion of Pütanä
Räkñasé's breast, and when the gopés saw the child's wonderful activities, they
immediately came forward with great jubilation and picked Him up.
PURPORT
Here is the Supreme Personality of Godhead—Kåñëa. Although the Räkñasé
Pütanä could increase or decrease her bodily size by her mystic abilities and
thus gain proportionate power, the Supreme Personality of Godhead is equally
powerful in any transcendental form. Kåñëa is the real Personality of Godhead
because whether as a child or as a grown-up young man, He is the same person.
He does not need to become powerful by meditation or any other external
endeavor. Therefore when the greatly powerful Pütanä expanded her body,
Kåñëa remained the same small child and fearlessly played on the upper
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
444
portion of her breast. Ñaòaiçvarya-pürëa. Bhagavän, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, is always full in all potencies, regardless of whether He is present
in this form or that. His potencies are always full. Paräsya çaktir vividhaiva
çrüyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]. He can display all potencies under any
circumstances.
TEXT 19
yazAAed"Ar"Aeih"NAIByaAM taA:
s$amaM baAlasya s$avaRta:
r"ºaAM ivad"iDare" s$amyagA,
gAAepaucC$”amaNAAid"iBa:
yaçodä-rohiëébhyäà täù
samaà bälasya sarvataù
rakñäà vidadhire samyag
go-puccha-bhramaëädibhiù
SYNONYMS
yaçodä-rohiëébhyäm—with mother Yaçodä and mother Rohiëé, who principally
took charge of the child; täù—the other gopés; samam—equally as important as
Yaçodä and Rohiëé; bälasya—of the child; sarvataù—from all dangers;
rakñäm—protection;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
vidadhire—executed; samyak—completely;
go-puccha-bhramaëa-ädibhiù—by waving around the switch of a cow.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, mother Yaçodä and Rohiëé, along with the other elderly gopés,
waved about the switch of a cow to give full protection to the child Çré Kåñëa.
445
PURPORT
When Kåñëa was saved from such a great danger, mother Yaçodä and
Rohiëé were principally concerned, and the other elderly gopés, who were
almost equally concerned, followed the activities of mother Yaçodä and
Rohiëé. Here we find that in household affairs, ladies could take charge of
protecting a child simply by taking help from the cow. As described here, they
knew how to wave about the switch of a cow so as to protect the child from all
types of danger. There are so many facilities afforded by cow protection, but
people have forgotten these arts. The importance of protecting cows is
therefore stressed by Kåñëa in Bhagavad-gétä (kåñi-go-rakñya-väëijyaà
vaiçya-karma svabhävajam [Bg. 18.44]). Even now in the Indian villages
surrounding Våndävana, the villagers live happily simply by giving protection
to the cow. They keep cow dung very carefully and dry it to use as fuel. They
keep a sufficient stock of grains, and because of giving protection to the cows,
they have sufficient milk and milk products to solve all economic problems.
Simply by giving protection to the cow, the villagers live so peacefully. Even
the urine and stool of cows have medicinal value.
TEXT 20
gAAemaU‡aeNA µaApaiyatvaA
paunagAAeRr"jas$aABaRk(ma,
r"ºaAM ca‚u(ê zAk{(taA
ã"Ad"zAAËeÿSau naAmaiBa:
go-mütreëa snäpayitvä
punar go-rajasärbhakam
rakñäà cakruç ca çakåtä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
446
dvädaçäìgeñu nämabhiù
SYNONYMS
go-mütreëa—with the urine of the cows; snäpayitvä—after thoroughly
washing; punaù—again; go-rajasä—with the dust floating because of the
movements of the cows; arbhakam—unto the child; rakñäm—protection;
cakruù—executed; ca—also; çakåtä—with the cow dung; dvädaça-aìgeñu—in
twelve places (dvädaça-tilaka); nämabhéù—by imprinting the holy names of
the Lord.
TRANSLATION
The child was thoroughly washed with cow urine and then smeared with the
dust raised by the movements of the cows. Then different names of the Lord
were applied with cow dung on twelve different parts of His body, beginning
with the forehead, as done in applying tilaka. In this way, the child was given
protection.
TEXT 21
gAAepya: s$aMs$pa{í"s$ailalaA
@ËeÿSau k(r"yaAe: pa{Tak,(
nyasyaAtmanyaTa baAlasya
baIjanyaAs$amaku(vaRta
gopyaù saàspåñöa-salilä
aìgeñu karayoù påthak
nyasyätmany atha bälasya
béja-nyäsam akurvata
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
447
SYNONYMS
gopyaù—the gopés; saàspåñöa-saliläù—touching a cup of water and drinking;
aìgeñu—on their bodies; karayoù—on their two hands; påthak—separately;
nyasya—after placing the letters of the mantra; ätmani—on their own;
atha—then; bälasya—of the child; béja-nyäsam—the process of mantra-nyäsa;
akurvata—executed.
TRANSLATION
The gopés first executed the process of äcamana, drinking a sip of water from
the right hand. They purified their bodies and hands with the nyäsa-mantra and
then applied the same mantra upon the body of the child.
PURPORT
Nyäsa-mantra includes äcamana, or first drinking a sip of water kept in the
right hand. There are different viñëu-mantras to purify the body. The gopés,
and in fact any householders, knew the process for being purified by chanting
Vedic hymns. The gopés executed this process first to purify themselves and
then to purify the child Kåñëa. One executes the process of aìga-nyäsa and
kara-nyäsa simply by drinking a little sip of water and chanting the mantra.
The mantra is preceded with the first letter of the name, followed by anusvära
and the word namaù: oà namo 'jas taväìghré avyät, maà mano maëimäàs tava
jänuné avyät, and so on. By losing Indian culture, Indian householders have
forgotten how to execute the aìga-nyäsa and are simply busy in sense
gratification, without any advanced knowledge of human civilization.
TEXTS 22-23
@vyaAd"jaAe'x.~i„a maiNAmaAMstava jaAnvaTaAeè&
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
448
yaÁaAe'cyauta: k(iq%taqM% jaQ&rM" h"yaAsya:
ô$tke(zAvastvaäu"r" wRzA wnastau k(NQM&
ivaSNAuBauRjaM mauKamauç&‚(ma wRìr": k(ma,
cafr,"yaƒata: s$ah"gAd"Ae h"ir"r"stau paêAta,
tvatpaAìRyaAeDaRnaur"s$aI maDauh"Ajanaê
k(AeNAeSau zAÊÿ oç&gAAya opayauR"paen‰"s$a,
taAºyaR: iºataAE h"laDar": pauç&Sa: s$amantaAta,
avyäd ajo 'ìghri maëimäàs tava jänv athorü
yajïo 'cyutaù kaöi-taöaà jaöharaà hayäsyaù
håt keçavas tvad-ura éça inas tu kaëöhaà
viñëur bhujaà mukham urukrama éçvaraù kam
cakry agrataù saha-gado harir astu paçcät
tvat-pärçvayor dhanur-asé madhu-häjanaç ca
koëeñu çaìkha urugäya upary upendras
tärkñyaù kñitau haladharaù puruñaù samantät
SYNONYMS
avyät—may protect; ajaù—Lord Aja; aìghri—legs; maëimän—Lord Maëimän;
tava—Your; jänu—knees; atha—thereafter; urü—thighs; yajïaù—Lord Yajïa;
acyutaù—Lord Acyuta; kaöi-taöam—the upper part of the waist;
jaöharam—abdomen; hayäsyaù—Lord Hayagréva; håt—the heart;
keçavaù—Lord Keçava; tvat—Your; uraù—chest; éçaù—the supreme
controller, Lord Éça; inaù—Sürya, the sun-god; tu—but; kaëöham—neck;
viñëuù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
bhujam—arms; mukham—the mouth; urukramaù—Lord
Urukrama; éçvaraù—Lord Éçvara; kam—head; cakré—the carrier of the disc;
agrataù—in front; saha-gadaù—the carrier of the club; hariù—Lord Hari;
449
astu—may He remain; paçcät—on the back; tvat-pärçvayoù—on both sides;
dhanuù-asé—the carrier of the bow and the sword; madhu-hä—the killer of the
demon Madhu; ajanaù—Lord Viñëu; ca—and; koëeñu—in the corners;
çaìkhaù—the carrier of the conchshell; urugäyaù—who is well worshiped;
upari—above; upendraù—Lord Upendra; tärkñyaù—Garuòa; kñitau—on the
surface; haladharaù—Lord Haladhara; puruñaù—the Supreme Person;
samantät—on all sides.
TRANSLATION
[Çukadeva Gosvämé informed Mahäräja Parékñit that the gopés, following the
proper system, protected Kåñëa, their child, with this mantra.] May Aja protect
Your legs, may Maëimän protect Your knees, Yajïa Your thighs, Acyuta the
upper part of Your waist, and Hayagréva Your abdomen. May Keçava protect
Your heart, Éça Your chest, the sun-god Your neck, Viñëu Your arms,
Urukrama Your face, and Éçvara Your head. May Cakré protect You from the
front; may Çré Hari, Gadädharé, the carrier of the club, protect You from the
back; and may the carrier of the bow, who is known as the enemy of Madhu,
and Lord Ajana, the carrier of the sword, protect Your two sides. May Lord
Urugäya, the carrier of the conchshell, protect You from all corners; may
Upendra protect You from above; may Garuòa protect You on the ground; and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
may Lord Haladhara, the Supreme Person, protect You on all sides.
PURPORT
Even in the houses of the cultivators, who were not very advanced in the
modern ways of civilization, the ladies used to know how to chant mantras to
give protection to children with the help of cow dung and cow urine. This was
a simple and practical way to give the greatest protection from the greatest
dangers. People should know how to do this, for this is a part of Vedic
civilization.
450
TEXT 24
win‰"yaAiNA ô$SaIke(zA:
‘aANAAªaAr"AyaNAAe'vatau
ìetaã"IpapaitaiêÔaM
manaAe yaAegAeìr"Ae'vatau
indriyäëi håñékeçaù
präëän näräyaëo 'vatu
çvetadvépa-patiç cittaà
mano yogeçvaro 'vatu
SYNONYMS
indriyäëi—all the senses; håñékeçaù—Lord Håñékeça, the proprietor of all the
senses; präëän—all kinds of life air; näräyaëaù—Lord Näräyaëa; avatu—may
He give protection; çvetadvépa-patiù—the master of Çvetadvépa, Viñëu;
cittam—the core of the heart; manaù—the mind; yogeçvaraù—Lord Yogeçvara;
avatu—may He give protection.
TRANSLATION
May Håñékeça protect Your senses, and Näräyaëa Your life air. May the
master of Çvetadvépa protect the core of Your heart, and may Lord Yogeçvara
protect Your mind.
TEXTS 25-26
pa{i´agABaRstau tae bauiÜ"ma,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
451
@AtmaAnaM BagAvaAna, par":
‚(Lx"ntaM paAtau gAAeivand":
zAyaAnaM paAtau maADava:
˜ajantamavyaAãE"ku(NQ&
@As$aInaM tvaAM i™aya: paita:
BauÃaAnaM yaÁaBaufpaAtau
s$avaRƒah"BayaÆÿr":
påçnigarbhas tu te buddhim
ätmänaà bhagavän paraù
kréòantaà pätu govindaù
çayänaà pätu mädhavaù
vrajantam avyäd vaikuëöha
äsénaà tväà çriyaù patiù
bhuïjänaà yajïabhuk pätu
sarva-graha-bhayaìkaraù
SYNONYMS
påçnigarbhaù—Lord Påçnigarbha; tu—indeed; te—Your;
buddhim—intelligence; ätmänam—Your soul; bhagavän—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; paraù—transcendental; kréòantam—while playing;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
pätu—may He protect; govindaù—Lord Govinda; çayänam—while sleeping;
pätu—may He protect; mädhavaù—Lord Mädhava; vrajantam—while walking;
avyät—may He protect; vaikuëöhaù—Lord Vaikuëöha; äsénam—while sitting
down; tväm—unto You; çriyaù patiù—Näräyaëa, the husband of the goddess of
fortune (may protect); bhuïjänam—while enjoying life;
yajïabhuk—Yajïabhuk; pätu—may He protect;
452
sarva-graha-bhayam-karaù—who is fearful to all evil planets.
TRANSLATION
May Lord Påçnigarbha protect Your intelligence, and the Supreme
Personality of Godhead Your soul. While You are playing, may Govinda protect
You, and while You are sleeping may Mädhava protect You. May Lord
Vaikuëöha protect You while You are walking, and may Lord Näräyaëa, the
husband of the goddess of fortune, protect You while You are sitting. Similarly,
may Lord Yajïabhuk, the fearful enemy of all evil planets, always protect You
while You enjoy life.
TEXTS 27-29
x"Aik(nyaAe yaAtauDaAnyaê
ku(SmaANx"A yae'BaRk(ƒah"A:
BaUta‘aetaipazAAcaAê
yaºar"ºaAeivanaAyak(A:
k(Aeq%r"A re"vataI jyaeï"A
paUtanaA maAta{k(Ad"ya:
onmaAd"A yae ÷pasmaAr"A
de"h"‘aANAein‰"yaåu"h":
sva«aä{"í"A mah"AetpaAtaA
va{Ü"A baAlaƒah"Aê yae
s$avaeR nazyantau tae ivaSNAAer,"
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
453
naAmaƒah"NABaIr"va:
òäkinyo yätudhänyaç ca
kuñmäëòä ye 'rbhaka-grahäù
bhüta-preta-piçäcäç ca
yakña-rakño-vinäyakäù
koöarä revaté jyeñöhä
pütanä mätåkädayaù
unmädä ye hy apasmärä
deha-präëendriya-druhaù
svapna-dåñöä mahotpätä
våddhä bäla-grahäç ca ye
sarve naçyantu te viñëor
näma-grahaëa-bhéravaù
SYNONYMS
òäkinyaù yätudhänyaù ca kuñmäëòäù—witches and devils, enemies of children;
ye—those who are; arbhaka-grahäù—like evil stars for children; bhüta—evil
spirits; preta—evil hobgoblins; piçäcäù—similar bad spirits; ca—also;
yakña—the living entities known as Yakñas; rakñaù—those known as Räkñasas;
vinäyakäù—those by the name Vinäyaka; koöarä—by the name Koöarä;
revaté—by the name Revaté; jyeñöhä—by the name Jyeñöhä; pütanä—by the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
name Pütanä; mätåkä-ädayaù—and evil women like Mätåkä; unmädäù—those
who cause madness; ye—which others; hi—indeed; apasmäräù—causing loss of
memory; deha-präëa-indriya—to the body, life air and senses; druhaù—give
trouble; svapna-dåñöäù—the evil spirits that cause bad dreams;
mahä-utpätäù—those causing great disturbances; våddhäù—the most
experienced; bäla-grahäù ca—and those attacking children; ye—who;
sarve—all of them; naçyantu—let be vanquished; te—those; viñëoù—of Lord
454
Viñëu; näma-grahaëa—by the chanting of the name; bhéravaù—become afraid.
TRANSLATION
The evil witches known as Òäkinés, Yätudhänés and Kuñmäëòas are the
greatest enemies of children, and the evil spirits like Bhütas, Pretas, Piçäcas,
Yakñas, Räkñasas and Vinäyakas, as well as witches like Koöarä, Revaté,
Jyeñöhä, Pütanä and Mätåkä, are always ready to give trouble to the body, the
life air and the senses, causing loss of memory, madness and bad dreams. Like
the most experienced evil stars, they all create great disturbances, especially for
children, but one can vanquish them simply by uttering Lord Viñëu's name, for
when Lord Viñëu's name resounds, all of them become afraid and go away.
PURPORT
As stated in the Brahma-saàhitä (5.33):
advaitam acyutam anädim ananta-rüpam
ädyaà puräëa-puruñaà nava-yauvanaà ca
vedeñu durlabham adurlabham ätma-bhaktau
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda, who is the original
person—nondual, infallible, and without beginning. Although He expands
into unlimited forms, He is still the original, and although He is the oldest
person, He always appears as a fresh youth. Such eternal, blissful and
all-knowing forms of the Lord cannot be understood by the academic wisdom
of the Vedas, but they are always manifest to pure, unalloyed devotees."
While decorating the body with tilaka, we give protection to the body by
chanting twelve names of Viñëu. Although Govinda, or Lord Viñëu, is one, He
has different names and forms with which to act differently. But if one cannot
remember all the names at one time, one may simply chant, "Lord Viñëu, Lord
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
455
Viñëu, Lord Viñëu," and always think of Lord Viñëu. Viñëor ärädhanaà param:
this is the highest form of worship. If one remembers Viñëu always, even
though one is disturbed by many bad elements, one can be protected without a
doubt. The Äyurveda-çästra recommends, auñadhi cintayet viñëum: even while
taking medicine, one should remember Viñëu, because the medicine is not all
and all and Lord Viñëu is the real protector. The material world is full of
danger (padaà padaà yad vipadäm [SB 10.14.58]). Therefore one must become
a Vaiñëava and think of Viñëu constantly. This is made easier by the chanting
of the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra. Therefore Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu has
recommended, kértanéyaù sadä hariù [Cc. Ädi 17.31] paraà vijayate
çré-kåñëa-saìkértanam, and kértanäd eva kåñëasya mukta-saìgaù paraà vrajet.
TEXT 30
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
wita ‘aNAyabaÜ"AiBar,"
gAAepaIiBa: k{(tar"ºaNAma,
paAyaiyatvaA stanaM maAtaA
s$aªyavaezAyad"Atmajama,
çré-çuka uväca
iti praëaya-baddhäbhir
gopébhiù kåta-rakñaëam
päyayitvä stanaà mätä
sannyaveçayad ätmajam
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—in this way;
praëaya-baddhäbhiù—who were bound with maternal affection; gopébhiù—by
456
the elderly gopés, headed by mother Yaçodä; kåta-rakñaëam—all measures were
taken to protect the child; päyayitvä—and after that, feeding the child;
stanam—the nipple; mätä—mother Yaçodä; sannyaveçayat—made to lie down
on the bed; ätmajam—her son.
TRANSLATION
Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: All the gopés, headed by mother Yaçodä,
were bound by maternal affection. After they thus chanted mantras to protect
the child, mother Yaçodä gave the child the nipple of her breast to suck and
then got Him to lie down on His bed.
PURPORT
When a baby drinks milk from the breast of his mother, this is a good sign
of health. So the elderly gopés were not satisfied with chanting mantras to give
protection to Kåñëa; they also tested whether their child's health was in order.
When the child sucked the breast, this confirmed that He was healthy, and
when the gopés were fully satisfied, they had the child lie down on His bed.
TEXT 31
taAvaªand"Ad"yaAe gAAepaA
maTaur"AyaA ˜ajaM gAtaA:
ivalaAefya paUtanaAde"hM"
baBaUvaur"itaivaismataA:
tävan nandädayo gopä
mathuräyä vrajaà gatäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
vilokya pütanä-dehaà
457
babhüvur ativismitäù
SYNONYMS
tävat—in the meantime; nanda-ädayaù—headed by Nanda Mahäräja;
gopäù—all the cowherd men; mathuräyäù—from Mathurä; vrajam—to
Våndävana; gatäù—came back; vilokya—when they saw; pütanä-deham—the
gigantic body of Pütanä lying dead; babhüvuù—became; ati—very much;
vismitäù—struck with wonder.
TRANSLATION
Meanwhile, all the cowherd men, headed by Nanda Mahäräja, returned from
Mathurä, and when they saw on the way the gigantic body of Pütanä lying
dead, they were struck with great wonder.
PURPORT
Nanda Mahäräja's wonder may be understood in various ways. First of all,
the cowherd men had never before seen such a gigantic body in Våndävana,
and therefore they were struck with wonder. Then they began to consider
where such a body had come from, whether it had dropped from the sky, or
whether, by some mistake or by the power of some mystic yoginé, they had
come to some place other than Våndävana. They could not actually guess what
had happened, and therefore they were struck with wonder.
TEXT 32
naUnaM bataiSaR: s$aÃaAtaAe
yaAegAezAAe vaA s$amaAs$a s$a:
s$a Wva ä{"í"Ae ÷utpaAtaAe
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
458
yad"Ah"Anak(äu"näu"iBa:
nünaà batarñiù saïjäto
yogeço vä samäsa saù
sa eva dåñöo hy utpäto
yad ähänakadundubhiù
SYNONYMS
nünam—certainly; bata—O my friends; åñiù—a great saintly person;
saïjätaù—has become; yoga-éçaù—a master of mystic power; vä—or;
samäsa—has become; saù—he (Vasudeva); saù—that; eva—indeed;
dåñöaù—has been seen (by us); hi—because; utpätaù—kind of disturbance;
yat—that which; äha—predicted; änakadundubhiù—Änakadundubhi
(another name of Vasudeva).
TRANSLATION
Nanda Mahäräja and the other gopas exclaimed: My dear friends, you must
know that Änakadundubhi, Vasudeva, has become a great saint or a master of
mystic power. Otherwise how could he have foreseen this calamity and
predicted it to us?
PURPORT
This verse illustrates the difference between kñatriyas and innocent vaiçyas.
By studying the political situation, Vasudeva could see what would happen,
whereas Nanda Mahäräja, the king of the agriculturalists, could only guess that
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Vasudeva was a great saintly person and had developed mystic powers.
Vasudeva actually had all mystic powers under his control; otherwise he could
not have become the father of Kåñëa. But in fact he foresaw the calamities in
Vraja by studying Kaàsa's political activities and thus warned Nanda
459
Mahäräja to take precautions, although Nanda Mahäräja thought that
Vasudeva had predicted this incident through wonderful mystic powers. By
mystic powers gained through the practice of haöha-yoga, one can study and
understand the future.
TEXT 33
k(laevarM" par"zAuiBazA,
iC$ÔvaA taÔae ˜ajaAEk(s$a:
äU"re" iºaptvaAvayavazAAe
nyad"h"na, k(Aï"vaeií"tama,
kalevaraà paraçubhiç
chittvä tat te vrajaukasaù
düre kñiptvävayavaço
nyadahan käñöha-veñöitam
SYNONYMS
kalevaram—the gigantic body of Pütanä; paraçubhiù—with the aid of axes;
chittvä—after cutting to pieces; tat—that (body); te—all of those;
vraja-okasaù—inhabitants of Vraja; düre—far, far away; kñiptvä—after
throwing; avayavaçaù—different parts of the body, piece by piece;
nyadahan—burned to ashes; käñöha-veñöitam—covered by wood.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
help of axes. Then they threw the pieces far away, covered them with wood and
burned them to ashes.
460
PURPORT
It is the practice that after a snake has been killed, its body is cut into
various pieces for fear that it may come to life again simply by interacting with
air. Merely killing a serpent is not sufficient; after it is killed, it must be cut to
pieces and burned, and then the danger will be over. Pütanä resembled a great
serpent, and therefore the cowherd men took the same precautions by burning
her body to ashes.
TEXT 34
d"÷maAnasya de"h"sya
DaUmaêAgAuç&s$aAEr"Ba:
oitTata: k{(SNAinaBauRl(-
s$apaâAh"tapaApmana:
dahyamänasya dehasya
dhümaç cäguru-saurabhaù
utthitaù kåñëa-nirbhuktasapady
ähata-päpmanaù
SYNONYMS
dahyamänasya—while being burnt to ashes; dehasya—of the body of Pütanä;
dhümaù—the smoke; ca—and; aguru-saurabhaù—turned into saintly scented
smoke of the aguru herb; utthitaù—emanating from her body;
kåñëa-nirbhukta—because of Kåñëa's having sucked her breast;
sapadi—immediately; ähata-päpmanaù—her material body became
spiritualized or relieved of all material conditions.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
461
TRANSLATION
Because of Kåñëa's having sucked the breast of the Räkñasé Pütanä, when
Kåñëa killed her she was immediately freed of all material contamination. Her
sinful reactions automatically vanished, and therefore when her gigantic body
was being burnt, the smoke emanating from her body was fragrant like aguru
incense.
PURPORT
Such are the effects of Kåñëa consciousness. If one somehow or other
becomes Kåñëa conscious by applying his senses in the service of the Lord, one
is immediately freed from material contamination. Çåëvatäà sva-kathäù kåñëaù
puëya-çravaëa-kértanaù (SB 1.2.17). Hearing about the activities of Kåñëa is the
beginning of purified life. Puëya-çravaëa-kértanaù: simply by hearing and
chanting, one becomes purified. Therefore, in discharging devotional service,
çravaëa-kértana (hearing and chanting) is most important. Then, with purified
senses, one begins to render service to the Lord (håñékeëa håñékeça-sevanam [Cc.
Madhya 19.170]). Bhaktir ucyate: this is called bhakti. When Pütanä was
somehow or other, directly or indirectly, induced to render some service to the
Lord by feeding Him with her breast, she was immediately purified, so much so
that when her nasty material body was burnt to ashes, it gave off the fragrance
of aguru, the most agreeably scented herb.
TEXTS 35-36
paUtanaA laAek(baAla£aI
r"Aºas$aI ç&iDar"AzAnaA
ijaGaAMs$ayaAipa h"r"yae
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
462
stanaM d"ÔvaApa s$aÕ"itama,
ikM( pauna: ™aÜ"yaA BaftyaA
k{(SNAAya par"maAtmanae
yacC$na, i‘ayatamaM ikM( nau
r"l(AstanmaAtar"Ae yaTaA
pütanä loka-bäla-ghné
räkñasé rudhiräçanä
jighäàsayäpi haraye
stanaà dattväpa sad-gatim
kià punaù çraddhayä bhaktyä
kåñëäya paramätmane
yacchan priyatamaà kià nu
raktäs tan-mätaro yathä
SYNONYMS
pütanä—Pütanä, the professional Räkñasé; loka-bäla-ghné—who used to kill
human children; räkñasé—the she-demon; rudhira-açanä—simply hankering
for blood; jighäàsayä—with the desire to kill Kåñëa (being envious of Kåñëa
and having been instructed by Kaàsa); api—still; haraye—unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; stanam—her breast; dattvä—after offering;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
äpa—obtained; sat-gatim—the most elevated position of spiritual existence;
kim—what to speak of; punaù—again; çraddhayä—with faith; bhaktyä—by
devotion; kåñëäya—unto Lord Kåñëa; paramätmane—who is the Supreme
Person; yacchan—offering; priya-tamam—the dearmost; kim—something;
nu—indeed; raktäù—those who have an affinity; tat-mätaraù—Kåñëa's
affectionate mothers (offering the beloved child their breasts); yathä—exactly
463
like.
TRANSLATION
Pütanä was always hankering for the blood of human children, and with that
desire she came to kill Kåñëa; but because she offered her breast to the Lord,
she attained the greatest achievement. What then is to be said of those who had
natural devotion and affection for Kåñëa as mothers and who offered Him their
breasts to suck or offered something very dear, as a mother offers something to
a child?
PURPORT
Pütanä had no affection for Kåñëa; rather, she was envious and wanted to
kill Him. Nonetheless, because with or without knowledge she offered her
breast, she attained the highest achievement in life. But the offerings of
devotees attracted to Kåñëa in parental love are always sincere. A mother likes
to offer something to her child with affection and love; there is no question of
envy. So here we can make a comparative study. If Pütanä could attain such an
exalted position in spiritual life by neglectfully, enviously making an offering
to Kåñëa, what is to be said of mother Yaçodä and the other gopés, who served
Kåñëa with such great affection and love, offering everything for Kåñëa's
satisfaction? The gopés automatically achieved the highest perfection.
Therefore Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu recommended the affection of the gopés,
either in maternal affection or in conjugal love, as the highest perfection in
life (ramyä käcid upäsanä vrajavadhü-vargeëa yä kalpitä).
TEXTS 37-38
paà"YaAM Bal(ô$id"sTaAByaAM
vanâAByaAM laAek(vaind"taE:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
464
@ËMÿ yasyaA: s$amaA‚(mya
BagAvaAnaipa tatstanama,
yaAtauDaAnyaipa s$aA svagARma,
@vaApa jananaIgAitama,
k{(SNABaul(stanaºaIr"A:
ik(mau gAAvaAe'naumaAtar":
padbhyäà bhakta-hådi-sthäbhyäà
vandyäbhyäà loka-vanditaiù
aìgaà yasyäù samäkramya
bhagavän api tat-stanam
yätudhäny api sä svargam
aväpa janané-gatim
kåñëa-bhukta-stana-kñéräù
kim u gävo 'numätaraù
SYNONYMS
padbhyäm—by the two lotus feet; bhakta-hådi-sthäbhyäm—which are always
thought of by pure devotees, in whose heart the Lord is therefore situated
constantly; vandyäbhyäm—which are always to be praised; loka-vanditaiù—by
Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva, who are praised by all the inhabitants of the three
worlds; aìgam—the body; yasyäù—of whom (Pütanä);
samäkramya—embracing; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
api—also; tat-stanam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—that breast; yätudhäné api—although she was a witch
(whose only business was to kill small children and who had tried to kill Kåñëa
also); sä—she; svargam—the transcendental abode; aväpa—achieved;
janané-gatim—the position of a mother; kåñëa-bhukta-stana-kñéräù—therefore,
465
because their breasts were sucked by Kåñëa, who drank the milk flowing from
their bodies; kim u—what to speak of; gävaù—the cows; anumätaraù—exactly
like mothers (who allowed their nipples to be sucked by Kåñëa).
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, is always situated within the
core of the heart of the pure devotee, and He is always offered prayers by such
worshipable personalities as Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva. Because Kåñëa
embraced Pütanä's body with great pleasure and sucked her breast, although she
was a great witch, she attained the position of a mother in the transcendental
world and thus achieved the highest perfection. What then is to be said of the
cows whose nipples Kåñëa sucked with great pleasure and who offered their
milk very jubilantly with affection exactly like that of a mother?
PURPORT
These verses explain how devotional service rendered to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, whether directly or indirectly, knowingly or
unknowingly, becomes successful. Pütanä was neither a devotee nor a
nondevotee; she was actually a demoniac witch instructed by Kaàsa to kill
Kåñëa. Nonetheless, in the beginning she assumed the form of a very beautiful
woman and approached Kåñëa exactly like an affectionate mother, so that
mother Yaçodä and Rohiëé did not doubt her sincerity. The Lord took all this
into consideration, and thus she was automatically promoted to a position like
that of mother Yaçodä. As explained by Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, there
are various roles one may play in such a position. Pütanä was immediately
promoted to Vaikuëöhaloka, which is also sometimes described as Svarga. The
Svarga mentioned in this verse is not the material heavenly planet, but the
transcendental world. In Vaikuëöhaloka, Pütanä attained the position of a
nurse (dhätry-ucitäm), as described by Uddhava. Pütanä was elevated to the
position of a nurse and maidservant in Goloka Våndävana to assist mother
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
466
Yaçodä.
TEXTS 39-40
payaAMis$a yaAs$aAmaipabata,
pau‡aµaeh"µautaAnyalama,
BagAvaAnde"vak(Lpau‡a:
kE(valyaAâiKala‘ad":
taAs$aAmaivar"taM k{(SNAe
ku(vaRtaInaAM s$autaeºaNAma,
na pauna: k(lpatae r"Ajana,
s$aMs$aAr"Ae'ÁaAnas$amBava:
payäàsi yäsäm apibat
putra-sneha-snutäny alam
bhagavän devaké-putraù
kaivalyädy-akhila-pradaù
täsäm avirataà kåñëe
kurvaténäà sutekñaëam
na punaù kalpate räjan
saàsäro 'jïäna-sambhavaù
SYNONYMS
payäàsi—milk (coming from the body); yäsäm—of all of whom; apibat—Lord
Kåñëa drank; putra-sneha-snutäni—that milk coming from the bodies of the
gopés, not artificially but because of maternal affection; alam—sufficiently;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; devaké-putraù—who
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
467
appeared as the son of Devaké; kaivalya-ädi—like liberation or merging into
the Brahman effulgence; akhila-pradaù—the bestower of all similar blessings;
täsäm—of all of them (of all the gopés); aviratam—constantly; kåñëe—unto
Lord Kåñëa; kurvaténäm—making; suta-ékñaëam—as a mother looks upon her
child; na—never; punaù—again; kalpate—can be imagined; räjan—O King
Parékñit; saàsäraù—the material bondage of birth and death;
ajïäna-sambhavaù—which is to be accepted by foolish persons ignorantly
trying to become happy.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, is the bestower of many
benedictions, including liberation [kaivalya], or oneness with the Brahman
effulgence. For that Personality of Godhead, the gopés always felt maternal love,
and Kåñëa sucked their breasts with full satisfaction. Therefore, because of
their relationship as mother and son, although the gopés were engaged in various
family activities, one should never think that they returned to this material
world after leaving their bodies.
PURPORT
The advantage of Kåñëa consciousness is described herein. Kåñëa
consciousness gradually develops on the transcendental platform. One may
think of Kåñëa as the supreme personality, one may think of Kåñëa as the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
supreme master, one may think of Kåñëa as the supreme friend, one may think
of Kåñëa as the supreme son, or one may think of Kåñëa as the supreme
conjugal lover. If one is connected with Kåñëa in any of these transcendental
relationships, the course of one's material life is understood to have already
ended. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (4.9), tyaktvä dehaà punar janma naiti
mäm eti: for such devotees, going back home, back to Godhead, is guaranteed.
Na punaù kalpate räjan saàsäro jïäna-sambhavaù. This verse also guarantees
that devotees who constantly think of Kåñëa in a particular relationship will
468
never return to this material world. In this material world of saàsära, there are
the same relationships. One thinks, "Here is my son," "Here is my wife," "Here
is my lover," or "Here is my friend." But these relationships are temporary
illusions. Ajïäna-sambhavaù: such a consciousness awakens in ignorance. But
when the same relationships awaken in Kåñëa consciousness, one's spiritual life
is revived, and one is guaranteed to return home, back to Godhead. Even
though the gopés who were friends of Rohiëé and mother Yaçodä and who
allowed their breasts to be sucked by Kåñëa were not directly Kåñëa's mothers,
they all had the same chance as Rohiëé and Yaçodä to go back to Godhead and
act as Kåñëa's mothers-in-law, servants and so on. The word saàsära refers to
attachment for one's body, home, husband or wife, and children, but although
the gopés and all the other inhabitants of Våndävana had the same affection
and attachment for husband and home, their central affection was for Kåñëa
in some transcendental relationship, and therefore they were guaranteed to be
promoted to Goloka Våndävana in the next life, to live with Kåñëa eternally in
spiritual happiness. The easiest way to attain spiritual elevation, to be liberated
from this material world, and to go back home, back to Godhead, is
recommended by Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura: kåñëera saàsära kara chäòi' anäcära.
One should give up all sinful activities and remain in the family of Kåñëa.
Then one's liberation is guaranteed.
TEXT 41
k(q%DaUmasya s$aAEr"Byama,
@va„aAya ˜ajaAEk(s$a:
ik(imadM" ku(ta Wvaeita
vad"ntaAe ˜ajamaAyayau:
kaöa-dhümasya saurabhyam
avaghräya vrajaukasaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
469
kim idaà kuta eveti
vadanto vrajam äyayuù
SYNONYMS
kaöa-dhümasya—of the smoke emanating from the fire burning the different
parts of Pütanä's body; saurabhyam—the fragrance; avaghräya—when they
smelled through their nostrils; vraja-okasaù—the inhabitants of Vrajabhümi in
distant places; kim idam—what is this fragrance; kutaù—where does it come
from; eva—indeed; iti—in this way; vadantaù—speaking; vrajam—the place of
Nanda Mahäräja, Vrajabhümi; äyayuù—reached.
TRANSLATION
Upon smelling the fragrance of the smoke emanating from Pütanä's burning
body, many inhabitants of Vrajabhümi in distant places were astonished.
"Where is this fragrance coming from?" they asked. Thus they went to the spot
where Pütanä's body was being burnt.
PURPORT
The aroma of the smoke emanating from a burning fire is not always very
favorable. Therefore upon smelling such a wonderful fragrance, the
inhabitants of Vraja were astonished.
TEXT 42
tae ta‡a vaiNARtaM gAAepaE:
paUtanaAgAmanaAid"k(ma,
™autvaA taiªaDanaM svaista
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
470
izAzAAeêAs$ana, s$auivaismataA:
te tatra varëitaà gopaiù
pütanägamanädikam
çrutvä tan-nidhanaà svasti
çiçoç cäsan suvismitäù
SYNONYMS
te—all those persons who arrived; tatra—there (in the vicinity of Nanda
Mahäräja's estate); varëitam—described; gopaiù—by the cowherd men;
pütanä-ägamana-ädikam—everything about how Pütanä the witch had come
there and played havoc; çrutvä—after hearing; tat-nidhanam—and about how
Pütanä had died; svasti—all auspiciousness; çiçoù—for the baby; ca—and;
äsan—offered; su-vismitäù—being struck with great wonder because of what
had happened.
TRANSLATION
When the inhabitants of Vraja who had come from distant places heard the
whole story of how Pütanä had come and then been killed by Kåñëa, they were
certainly astonished, and they offered their blessings to the child for His
wonderful deed of killing Pütanä. Nanda Mahäräja, of course, was very much
obliged to Vasudeva, who had foreseen the incident, and simply thanked him,
thinking how wonderful Vasudeva was.
TEXT 43
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
‘aetyaAgAtamaud"Ar"DaI:
471
maUDnyauRpaA„aAya par"maAM
maudM" laeBae ku(è&ã"h"
nandaù sva-putram ädäya
pretyägatam udära-dhéù
mürdhny upäghräya paramäà
mudaà lebhe kurüdvaha
SYNONYMS
nandaù—Mahäräja Nanda; sva-putram ädäya—taking his son Kåñëa on his
lap; pretya-ägatam—as if Kåñëa had returned from death (no one could even
imagine that from such danger a child could be saved); udära-dhéù—because
he was always liberal and simple; mürdhni—on the head of Kåñëa;
upäghräya—formally smelling; paramäm—highest; mudam—peace;
lebhe—achieved; kuru-udvaha—O Mahäräja Parékñit.
TRANSLATION
O Mahäräja Parékñit, best of the Kurus, Nanda Mahäräja was very liberal
and simple. He immediately took his son Kåñëa on his lap as if Kåñëa had
returned from death, and by formally smelling his son's head, Nanda Mahäräja
undoubtedly enjoyed transcendental bliss.
PURPORT
Nanda Mahäräja could not understand how the inhabitants of his house
had allowed Pütanä to enter the house, nor could he imagine the gravity of the
situation. He did not understand that Kåñëa had wanted to kill Pütanä and
that His pastimes were performed by yogamäyä. Nanda Mahäräja simply
thought that someone had entered his house and created havoc. This was
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
472
Nanda Mahäräja's simplicity.
TEXT 44
ya WtatpaUtanaAmaAeºaM
k{(SNAsyaABaRk(maàu"tama,
Za{NAuyaAcC)$Ü"yaA matyaAeR
gAAeivande" laBatae r"itama,
ya etat pütanä-mokñaà
kåñëasyärbhakam adbhutam
çåëuyäc chraddhayä martyo
govinde labhate ratim
SYNONYMS
yaù—anyone who; etat—this; pütanä-mokñam—salvation of Pütanä;
kåñëasya—of Kåñëa; ärbhakam—the childhood pastimes;
adbhutam—wonderful; çåëuyät—should hear; çraddhayä—with faith and
devotion; martyaù—any person within this material world; govinde—for the
Supreme Person, Govinda, Ädi-puruña; labhate—gains; ratim—attachment.
TRANSLATION
Any person who hears with faith and devotion about how Kåñëa, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, killed Pütanä, and who thus invests his
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
hearing in such childhood pastimes of Kåñëa, certainly attains attachment for
Govinda, the supreme, original person.
PURPORT
473
The incident in which the great witch attempted to kill the child but was
killed herself is certainly wonderful. Therefore this verse uses the word
adbhutam, meaning "specifically wonderful." Kåñëa has left us many wonderful
narrations about Him. Simply by reading these narrations, as they are
described in Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one gains salvation
from this material world and gradually develops attachment to and devotion
for Govinda, Ädi-puruña.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Tenth Canto, Sixth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Killing of the Demon Pütanä."
7. The Killing of the Demon Tåëävarta
In this chapter, Çré Kåñëa's pastimes of breaking the cart (çakaöa-bhaïjana),
killing the asura known as Tåëävarta, and demonstrating the entire universe
within His mouth are especially described.
When Çukadeva Gosvämé saw that Mahäräja Parékñit was eagerly waiting to
hear about Lord Kåñëa's pastimes as a child, he was very much pleased, and he
continued to speak. When Çré Kåñëa was only three months old and was just
trying to turn backside up, before He even attempted to crawl, mother Yaçodä
wanted to observe a ritualistic ceremony with her friends for the good fortune
of the child. Such a ritualistic ceremony is generally performed with ladies who
also have small children. When mother Yaçodä saw that Kåñëa was falling
asleep, because of other engagements she put the child underneath a
household cart, called çakaöa, and while the child was sleeping, she engaged
herself in other business pertaining to the auspicious ritualistic ceremony.
Underneath the cart was a cradle, and mother Yaçodä placed the child in that
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
474
cradle. The child was sleeping, but suddenly He awakened and, as usual for a
child, began to kick His small legs. This kicking shook the cart, which
collapsed with a great sound, breaking completely and spilling all its contents.
Children who were playing nearby immediately informed mother Yaçodä that
the cart had broken, and therefore she hastily arrived there in great anxiety
with the other gopés. Mother Yaçodä immediately took the child on her lap and
allowed Him to suck her breast. Then various types of Vedic ritualistic
ceremonies were performed with the help of the brähmaëas. Not knowing the
real identity of the child, the brähmaëas showered the child with blessings.
Another day, when mother Yaçodä was sitting with her child on her lap,
she suddenly observed that he had assumed the weight of the entire universe.
She was so astonished that she had to put the child down, and in the meantime
Tåëävarta, one of the servants of Kaàsa, appeared there as a whirlwind and
took the child away. The whole tract of land known as Gokula became
surcharged with dust, no one could see where the child had been taken, and all
the gopés were overwhelmed because He had been taken away in the dust
storm. But up in the sky, the asura, being overburdened by the child, could not
carry the child far away, although he also could not drop the child because the
child had caught him so tightly that it was difficult for him to separate the
child from his body. Thus Tåëävarta himself fell down from a very great
height, the child grasping him tightly by the shoulder, and immediately died.
The demon having fallen, the gopés picked the child up and delivered Him to
the lap of mother Yaçodä. Thus mother Yaçodä was struck with wonder, but
because of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
influence, no one could understand who Kåñëa was and
what had actually happened. Rather, everyone began to praise fortune for the
child's having been saved from such a calamity. Nanda Mahäräja, of course,
was thinking of the wonderful foretelling of Vasudeva and began to praise him
as a great yogé. Later, when the child was on the lap of mother Yaçodä, the
child yawned, and mother Yaçodä could see within His mouth the entire
universal manifestation.
475
TEXTS 1-2
™aIr"AjaAevaAca
yaena yaenaAvataAre"NA
BagAvaAna, h"ir"r"Iìr":
k(r"Aeita k(NARr"myaAiNA
manaAeÁaAina ca na: ‘aBaAe
yacC+$NvataAe'paEtyar"itaivaRta{SNAA
s$aÔvaM ca zAuÜ"Yatyaicare"NA pauMs$a:
Bail(hR"r"AE tatpauç&Sae ca s$aKyaM
tade"va h"ArM" vad" manyas$ae caeta,
çré-räjoväca
yena yenävatäreëa
bhagavän harir éçvaraù
karoti karëa-ramyäëi
mano-jïäni ca naù prabho
yac-chåëvato 'paity aratir vitåñëä
sattvaà ca çuddhyaty acireëa puàsaù
bhaktir harau tat-puruñe ca sakhyaà
tad eva häraà vada manyase cet
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—the King inquired (from Çukadeva Gosvämé); yena yena
avatäreëa—the pastimes exhibited by different varieties of incarnations;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hariù—the Lord;
éçvaraù—the controller; karoti—presents; karëa-ramyäëi—were all very
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
476
pleasing to the ear; manaù-jïäni—very attractive to the mind; ca—also;
naù—of us; prabho—my lord, Çukadeva Gosvämé; yat-çåëvataù—of anyone
who simply hears these narrations; apaiti—vanishes; aratiù—unattractiveness;
vitåñëä—dirty things within the mind that make us uninterested in Kåñëa
consciousness; sattvam ca—the existential position in the core of the heart;
çuddhyati—becomes purified; acireëa—very soon; puàsaù—of any person;
bhaktiù harau—devotional attachment and service to the Lord;
tat-puruñe—with Vaiñëavas; ca—also; sakhyam—attraction to association; tat
eva—that only; häram—the activities of the Lord, which should be heard and
kept on the neck as a garland; vada—kindly speak; manyase—you think it fit;
cet—if.
TRANSLATION
King Parékñit said: My lord, Çukadeva Gosvämé, all the various activities
exhibited by the incarnations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are
certainly pleasing to the ear and to the mind. Simply by one's hearing of these
activities, the dirty things in one's mind immediately vanish. Generally we are
reluctant to hear about the activities of the Lord, but Kåñëa's childhood
activities are so attractive that they are automatically pleasing to the mind and
ear. Thus one's attachment for hearing about material things, which is the root
cause of material existence, vanishes, and one gradually develops devotional
service to the Supreme Lord, attachment for Him, and friendship with devotees
who give us the contribution of Kåñëa consciousness. If you think it fit, kindly
speak about those activities of the Lord.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
PURPORT
As stated in the Prema-vivarta:
kåñëa-bahirmukha haiyä bhoga-väïchä kare
nikaöa-stha mäyä täre jäpaöiyä dhare
477
Our material existence is mäyä, or illusion, in which we desire different
varieties of material enjoyment and therefore change to different varieties of
bodies (bhrämayan sarva-bhütäni yanträrüòhäni mäyayä [Bg. 18.61]). Asann api
kleçada äsa dehaù: [SB 5.5.4] as long as we have these temporary bodies, they
give us many varieties of tribulation—ädhyätmika, ädhibhautika and
ädhidaivika. This is the root cause of all suffering, but this root cause of
suffering can be removed by revival of our Kåñëa consciousness. All the Vedic
literatures presented by Vyäsadeva and other great sages are therefore
intended to revive our Kåñëa consciousness, which begins to revive with
çravaëa-kértanam. Çåëvatäà sva-kathäù kåñëaù (SB 1.2.17). Çrémad-Bhägavatam
and other Vedic literatures exist simply to give us a chance to hear about
Kåñëa. Kåñëa has different avatäras, or incarnations, all of which are
wonderful and which arouse one's inquisitiveness, but generally such avatäras
as Matsya, Kürma and Varäha are not as attractive as Kåñëa. First of all,
however, we have no attraction for hearing about Kåñëa, and this is the root
cause of our suffering.
But Parékñit Mahäräja specifically mentions that the wonderful activities of
baby Kåñëa, which amazed mother Yaçodä and the other inhabitants of Vraja,
are especially attractive. From the very beginning of His childhood, Kåñëa
killed Pütanä, Tåëävarta and Çakaöäsura and showed the entire universe
within His mouth. Thus the pastimes of Kåñëa, one after another, kept mother
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Yaçodä and all the inhabitants of Vraja in great astonishment. The process to
revive one's Kåñëa consciousness is ädau çraddhä tataù sädhu-saìgaù
(Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.4.15). The pastimes of Kåñëa can be properly
received from devotees. If one has developed a little bit of Kåñëa consciousness
by hearing from Vaiñëavas about the activities of Kåñëa, one becomes attached
to Vaiñëavas who are interested only in Kåñëa consciousness. Therefore
Parékñit Mahäräja recommends that one hear about Kåñëa's childhood
activities, which are more attractive than the activities of other incarnations,
such as Matsya, Kürma and Varäha. Wanting to hear more and more from
Çukadeva Gosvämé, Mahäräja Parékñit requested him to continue describing
478
Kåñëa's childhood activities, which are especially easy to hear and which create
more and more inquisitiveness.
TEXT 3
@TaAnyad"ipa k{(SNAsya
taAek(Acair"tamaàu"tama,
maAnauSaM laAek(maAs$aAâ
taÀaAitamanauç&nData:
athänyad api kåñëasya
tokäcaritam adbhutam
mänuñaà lokam äsädya
taj-jätim anurundhataù
SYNONYMS
atha—also; anyat api—other pastimes also; kåñëasya—of child Kåñëa;
toka-äcaritam adbhutam—they are also wonderful childhood pastimes;
mänuñam—as if playing as a human child; lokam äsädya—appearing on this
planet earth in human society; tat-jätim—exactly like a human child;
anurundhataù—who was imitating.
TRANSLATION
Please describe other pastimes of Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality, who
appeared on this planet earth, imitating a human child and performing
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
wonderful activities like killing Pütanä.
PURPORT
479
Mahäräja Parékñit requested Çukadeva Gosvämé to narrate other childhood
pastimes exhibited by Kåñëa while playing as a human child. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead incarnates at different times in different planets and
universes, and according to the nature of those places, He exhibits His
unlimited potency. That a child sitting on the lap of his mother was able to kill
the gigantic Pütanä is extremely wonderful for the inhabitants of this planet,
but on other planets the inhabitants are more advanced, and therefore the
pastimes the Lord performs there are still more wonderful. Kåñëa's appearance
on this planet like a human being makes us more fortunate than the demigods
in the higher planets, and therefore Mahäräja Parékñit was very much
interested in hearing about Him.
TEXT 4
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
k(d"Aicad"AEtTaAinak(k(AEtauk(Aplavae
janmaºaRyaAegAe s$amavaetayaAeiSataAma,
vaAid"‡agAItaiã"jaman‡avaAcakE(zA,
cak(Ar" s$aUnaAer"iBaSaecanaM s$ataI
çré-çuka uväca
kadäcid autthänika-kautukäplave
janmarkña-yoge samaveta-yoñitäm
väditra-géta-dvija-mantra-väcakaiç
cakära sünor abhiñecanaà saté
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued to speak (at the request of
Mahäräja Parékñit); kadäcit—at that time (when Kåñëa was three months old);
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
480
autthänika-kautuka-äplave—when Kåñëa was three or four months old and His
body was developing, He attempted to turn around, and this pleasing occasion
was observed with a festival and bathing ceremony; janma-åkña-yoge—at that
time, there was also a conjunction of the moon with the auspicious
constellation Rohiëé; samaveta-yoñitäm—(the ceremony was observed) among
the assembled women, a ceremony of mothers; väditra-géta—different varieties
of music and singing; dvija-mantra-väcakaiù—with chanting of Vedic hymns
by qualified brähmaëas; cakära—executed; sünoù—of her son;
abhiñecanam—the bathing ceremony; saté—mother Yaçodä.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: When mother Yaçodä's baby was slanting His body
to attempt to rise and turn around, this attempt was observed by a Vedic
ceremony. In such a ceremony, called utthäna, which is performed when a child
is due to leave the house for the first time, the child is properly bathed. Just
after Kåñëa turned three months old, mother Yaçodä celebrated this ceremony
with other women of the neighborhood. On that day, there was a conjunction of
the moon with the constellation Rohiëé. As the brähmaëas joined by chanting
Vedic hymns and professional musicians also took part, this great ceremony was
observed by mother Yaçodä
PURPORT
There is no question of overpopulation or of children's being a burden for
their parents in a Vedic society. Such a society is so well organized and people
are so advanced in spiritual consciousness that childbirth is never regarded as
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
a burden or a botheration. The more a child grows, the more his parents
become jubilant, and the child's attempts to turn over are also a source of
jubilation. Even before the child is born, when the mother is pregnant, many
recommended ritualistic ceremonies are performed. For example, when the
child has been within the womb for three months and for seven months, there
481
is a ceremony the mother observes by eating with neighboring children. This
ceremony is called sväda-bhakñaëa. Similarly, before the birth of the child
there is the garbhädhäna ceremony. In Vedic civilization, childbirth or
pregnancy is never regarded as a burden; rather, it is a cause for jubilation. In
contrast, people in modern civilization do not like pregnancy or childbirth,
and when there is a child, they sometimes kill it. We can just consider how
human society has fallen since the inauguration of Kali-yuga. Although people
still claim to be civilized, at the present moment there is actually no human
civilization, but only an assembly of two-legged animals.
TEXT 5
nand"sya pa¥aI k{(tamaÀanaAid"kM(
iva‘aE: k{(tasvastyayanaM s$aupaUijataE:
@ªaAâvaAs$a:›agABaIí"DaenauiBa:
s$aÃaAtaina‰"AºamazAIzAyacC$naE:
nandasya patné kåta-majjanädikaà
vipraiù kåta-svastyayanaà supüjitaiù
annädya-väsaù-srag-abhéñöa-dhenubhiù
saïjäta-nidräkñam açéçayac chanaiù
SYNONYMS
nandasya—of Mahäräja Nanda; patné—the wife (mother Yaçodä);
kåta-majjana-ädikam—after she and the other members of the house had
bathed and the child had been bathed also; vipraiù—by the brähmaëas;
kåta-svastyayanam—engaging them in chanting auspicious Vedic hymns;
su-püjitaiù—who were all received and worshiped with proper respect;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
anna-ädya—by offering them sufficient grains and other eatables;
482
väsaù—garments; srak-abhéñöa-dhenubhiù—by offering flower garlands and
very desirable cows; saïjäta-nidrä—had become sleepy; akñam—whose eyes;
açéçayat—laid the child down; çanaiù—for the time being.
TRANSLATION
After completing the bathing ceremony for the child, mother Yaçodä
received the brähmaëas by worshiping them with proper respect and giving
them ample food grains and other eatables, clothing, desirable cows, and
garlands. The brähmaëas properly chanted Vedic hymns to observe the
auspicious ceremony, and when they finished and mother Yaçodä saw that the
child felt sleepy, she lay down on the bed with the child until He was peacefully
asleep.
PURPORT
An affectionate mother takes great care of her child and is always anxious
to see that the child is not disturbed even for a moment. As long as the child
wants to remain with the mother, the mother stays with the child, and the
child feels very comfortable. Mother Yaçodä saw that her child felt sleepy, and
to give Him all facilities for sleep, she lay down with the child, and when He
was peaceful, she got up to attend to her other household affairs.
TEXT 6
@AEtTaAinak(AEts$aufyamanaA manaisvanaI
s$amaAgAtaAna, paUjayataI ˜ajaAEk(s$a:
naEvaAZa{NAAeãE" ç&id"taM s$autasya s$aA
ç&d"na, stanaATaI= car"NAAvaud"iºapata,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
483
autthänikautsukya-manä manasviné
samägatän püjayaté vrajaukasaù
naiväçåëod vai ruditaà sutasya sä
rudan stanärthé caraëäv udakñipat
SYNONYMS
autthänika-autsukya-manäù—mother Yaçodä was very busy celebrating the
utthäna ceremony of her child; manasviné—very liberal in distributing food,
clothing, ornaments and cows, according to necessity; samägatän—to the
assembled guests; püjayaté—just to satisfy them; vraja-okasaù—to the
inhabitants of Vraja; na—not; eva—certainly; açåëot—did hear; vai—indeed;
ruditam—the crying; sutasya—of her child; sä—mother Yaçodä;
rudan—crying; stana-arthé—Kåñëa, who was hankering to drink His mother's
milk by sucking her breast; caraëau udakñipat—out of anger, threw His two
legs hither and thither.
TRANSLATION
The liberal mother Yaçodä, absorbed in celebrating the utthäna ceremony,
was busy receiving guests, worshiping them with all respect and offering them
clothing, cows, garlands and grains. Thus she could not hear the child crying for
His mother. At that time, the child Kåñëa, demanding to drink the milk of His
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
mother's breast, angrily threw His legs upward.
PURPORT
Kåñëa had been placed underneath a household handcart, but this handcart
was actually another form of the Çakaöäsura, a demon who had come there to
kill the child. Now, on the plea of demanding to suck His mother's breast,
Kåñëa took this opportunity to kill the demon. Thus He kicked Çakaöäsura just
to expose him. Although Kåñëa's mother was engaged in receiving guests, Lord
484
Kåñëa wanted to draw her attention by killing the Çakaöäsura, and therefore
he kicked that cart-shaped demon. Such are the pastimes of Kåñëa. Kåñëa
wanted to draw the attention of His mother, but while doing so He created a
great havoc not understandable by ordinary persons. These narrations are
wonderfully enjoyable, and those who are fortunate are struck with wonder
upon hearing of these extraordinary activities of the Lord. Although the less
intelligent regard them as mythological because a dull brain cannot
understand them, they are real facts. These narrations are actually so
enjoyable and enlightening that Mahäräja Parékñit and Çukadeva Gosvämé
took pleasure in them, and other liberated persons, following in their footsteps,
become fully jubilant by hearing about the wonderful activities of the Lord.
TEXT 7
@Da:zAyaAnasya izAzAAer"naAe'lpak(-
‘avaAlama{ã"x.~i„ah"taM vyavataRta
ivaDvastanaAnaAr"s$aku(pyaBaAjanaM
vyatyastaca‚(AºaivaiBaªakU(bar"ma,
adhaù-çayänasya çiçor ano 'lpakapraväla-
mådv-aìghri-hataà vyavartata
vidhvasta-nänä-rasa-kupya-bhäjanaà
vyatyasta-cakräkña-vibhinna-kübaram
SYNONYMS
adhaù-çayänasya—who was put underneath the handcart; çiçoù—of the child;
anaù—the cart; alpaka—not very much grown; praväla—just like a new leaf;
mådu-aìghri-hatam—struck by His beautiful, delicate legs; vyavartata—turned
over and fell down; vidhvasta—scattered; nänä-rasa-kupya-bhäjanam—utensils
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
485
made of various metals; vyatyasta—dislocated; cakra-akña—the two wheels
and the axle; vibhinna—broken; kübaram—the pole of the handcart.
TRANSLATION
Lord Çré Kåñëa was lying down underneath the handcart in one corner of the
courtyard, and although His little legs were as soft as leaves, when He struck
the cart with His legs, it turned over violently and collapsed. The wheels
separated from the axle, the hubs and spokes fell apart, and the pole of the
handcart broke. On the cart there were many little utensils made of various
metals, and all of them scattered hither and thither.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has commented on this verse as
follows. When Lord Kåñëa was of a very tender age, His hands and legs
resembled soft new leaves, yet simply by touching the handcart with His legs,
He made the cart fall to pieces. It was quite possible for Him to act in this way
and yet not exert Himself very much. The Lord in His Vämana avatära had to
extend His foot to the greatest height to penetrate the covering of the
universe, and when the Lord killed the gigantic demon Hiraëyakaçipu, He had
to assume the special bodily feature of Nåsiàhadeva. But in His Kåñëa avatära,
the Lord did not need to exert such energy. Therefore, kåñëas tu bhagavän
svayam: [SB 1.3.28] Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself. In
other incarnations, the Lord had to exert some energy according to the time
and circumstances, but in this form He exhibited unlimited potency. Thus the
handcart collapsed, its joints broken, and all the metal pots and utensils
scattered.
The Vaiñëava-toñaëé remarks that although the handcart was higher than
the child, the child could easily touch the wheel of the cart, and this was
sufficient to send the demon down to the earth. The Lord simultaneously
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
486
pushed the demon to the earth and superficially broke the handcart.
TEXT 8
ä{"î"A yazAAed"A‘amauKaA ˜ajaiñya
@AEtTaAinake( k(maRiNA yaA: s$amaAgAtaA:
nand"Ad"yaêAàu"tad"zARnaAku(laA:
k(TaM svayaM vaE zAk(qM% ivapayaRgAAta,
dåñövä yaçodä-pramukhä vraja-striya
autthänike karmaëi yäù samägatäù
nandädayaç cädbhuta-darçanäkuläù
kathaà svayaà vai çakaöaà viparyagät
SYNONYMS
dåñövä—after seeing; yaçodä-pramukhäù—headed by mother Yaçodä;
vraja-striyaù—all the ladies of Vraja; autthänike karmaëi—in the celebration
of the utthäna ceremony; yäù—those who; samägatäù—assembled there;
nanda-ädayaù ca—and the men, headed by Nanda Mahäräja;
adbhuta-darçana—by seeing the wonderful calamity (that the heavily loaded
cart had broken upon the small baby, who still lay there unhurt); äkuläù—and
thus they were very much perturbed as to how it had happened; katham—how;
svayam—by itself; vai—indeed; çakaöam—the handcart; viparyagät—became
so heavily damaged, dismantled.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
TRANSLATION
When mother Yaçodä and the other ladies who had assembled for the
utthäna festival, and all the men, headed by Nanda Mahäräja, saw the
487
wonderful situation, they began to wonder how the handcart had collapsed by
itself. They began to wander here and there, trying to find the cause, but were
unable to do so.
TEXT 9
Ocaur"vyavais$atamataIna,
gAAepaAna, gAAepaIê baAlak(A:
ç&d"taAnaena paAde"na
iºaæamaetaªa s$aMzAya:
ücur avyavasita-matén
gopän gopéç ca bälakäù
rudatänena pädena
kñiptam etan na saàçayaù
SYNONYMS
ücuù—said; avyavasita-matén—who had lost all intelligence in the present
situation; gopän—to the cowherd men; gopéù ca—and to the ladies;
bälakäù—the children; rudatä anena—as soon as the child cried;
pädena—with one leg; kñiptam etat—this cart was dashed apart and
immediately fell dismantled; na saàçayaù—there is no doubt about it.
TRANSLATION
The assembled cowherd men and ladies began to contemplate how this thing
had happened. "Is it the work of some demon or evil planet?" they asked. At
that time, the small children present asserted that the cart had been kicked
apart by the baby Kåñëa. As soon as the crying baby bad kicked the cart's
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
488
wheel, the cart had collapsed. There was no doubt about it.
PURPORT
We have heard of people's being haunted by ghosts. Having no gross
material body, a ghost seeks shelter of a gross body to stay in and haunt. The
Çakaöäsura was a ghost who had taken shelter of the handcart and was looking
for the opportunity to do mischief to Kåñëa. When Kåñëa kicked the cart with
His small and very delicate legs, the ghost was immediately pushed down to the
earth and his shelter dismantled, as already described. This was possible for
Kåñëa because He has full potency, as confirmed in the Brahma-saàhitä (5.32):
aìgäni yasya sakalendriya-våttimanti
paçyanti pänti kalayanti ciraà jaganti
änanda-cinmaya-sad-ujjvala-vigrahasya
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
Kåñëa's body is sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], or
änanda-cinmaya-rasa-vigraha. That is, any of the parts of His änanda-cinmaya
body can act for any other part. Such are the inconceivable potencies of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Supreme Lord does not need to acquire
these potencies; He already has them. Thus Kåñëa kicked His little legs, and
His whole purpose was fulfilled. Also, when the handcart broke, an ordinary
child could have been injured in many ways, but because Kåñëa is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, He enjoyed the dismantling of the cart, and nothing
injured Him. Everything done by Him is änanda-cinmaya-rasa, full
transcendental bliss. Thus Kåñëa factually enjoyed.
The nearby children saw that actually Kåñëa had kicked the wheel of the
cart and this was how the accident happened. By the arrangement of
yogamäyä, all the gopés and gopas thought that the accident had taken place
because of some bad planet or some ghost, but in fact everything was done by
Kåñëa and enjoyed by Him. Those who enjoy the activities of Kåñëa are also on
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
489
the platform of änanda-cinmaya-rasa; they are liberated from the material
platform. When one develops the practice of hearing kåñëa-kathä, he is
certainly transcendental to material existence, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä
(sa guëän samatétyaitän brahma-bhüyäya kalpate [Bg. 14.26]). Unless one is on
the spiritual platform, one cannot enjoy the transcendental activities of Kåñëa;
or in other words, whoever engages in hearing the transcendental activities of
Kåñëa is not on the material platform, but on the transcendental, spiritual
platform.
TEXT 10
na tae ™aÚ"iDare" gAAepaA
baAlaBaAiSataimatyauta
@‘amaeyaM balaM tasya
baAlak(sya na tae ivaäu":
na te çraddadhire gopä
bäla-bhäñitam ity uta
aprameyaà balaà tasya
bälakasya na te viduù
SYNONYMS
na—not; te—the cowherd men and ladies; çraddadhire—put their faith (in
such statements); gopäù—the cowherd men and women;
bäla-bhäñitam—childish talk from the assembled children; iti uta—thus
spoken; aprameyam—unlimited, inconceivable;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—the power; tasya
bälakasya—of the small baby Kåñëa; na—not; te—the gopés and gopas;
viduù—were aware of.
490
TRANSLATION
The assembled gopés and gopas, unaware that Kåñëa is always unlimited,
could not believe that baby Kåñëa had such inconceivable power. They could
not believe the statements of the children, and therefore they neglected these
statements as being childish talk.
TEXT 11
ç&d"ntaM s$autamaAd"Aya
yazAAed"A ƒah"zAiÆÿtaA
k{(tasvastyayanaM iva‘aE:
s$aUlE(: stanamapaAyayata,
rudantaà sutam ädäya
yaçodä graha-çaìkitä
kåta-svastyayanaà vipraiù
süktaiù stanam apäyayat
SYNONYMS
rudantam—crying; sutam—son; ädäya—picking up; yaçodä—mother Yaçodä;
graha-çaìkitä—fearing some bad planet; kåta-svastyayanam—immediately
performed a ritualistic ceremony for good fortune; vipraiù—by calling all the
brähmaëas; süktaiù—by Vedic hymns; stanam—her breast; apäyayat—made
the child suck.
TRANSLATION
Thinking that some bad planet had attacked Kåñëa, mother Yaçodä picked up
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
491
the crying child and allowed Him to suck her breast. Then she called for
experienced brähmaëas to chant Vedic hymns and perform an auspicious
ritualistic ceremony.
PURPORT
Whenever there is some danger or some inauspicious occurrence, it is the
custom of Vedic civilization to have qualified brähmaëas immediately chant
Vedic hymns to counteract it. Mother Yaçodä did this properly and allowed
the baby to suck her breast.
TEXT 12
paUvaRvatsTaAipataM gAAepaEr,"
bailaiBa: s$apair"cC$d"ma,
iva‘aA ò"tvaAcaRyaAM ca‚u(r,"
d"Dyaºataku(zAAmbauiBa:
pürvavat sthäpitaà gopair
balibhiù sa-paricchadam
viprä hutvärcayäà cakrur
dadhy-akñata-kuçämbubhiù
SYNONYMS
pürva-vat—as the handcart had been situated before; sthäpitam—again
assembled with the pots situated properly; gopaiù—by the cowherd men;
balibhiù—all of whom were very strong and stout and who could therefore
assemble the parts without difficulty; sa-paricchadam—with all the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
paraphernalia kept on it; vipräù—the brähmaëas; hutvä—after performing a
fire ceremony; arcayäm cakruù—performed ritualistic ceremonies;
492
dadhi—with curd; akñata—grains of rice; kuça—and kuça grass;
ambubhiù—with water.
TRANSLATION
After the strong, stout cowherd men assembled the pots and paraphernalia
on the handcart and set it up as before, the brähmaëas performed a ritualistic
ceremony with a fire sacrifice to appease the bad planet, and then, with rice
grains, kuça, water and curd, they worshiped the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
The handcart was loaded with heavy utensils and other paraphernalia. To
set the cart back in its original position required much strength, but this was
easily done by the cowherd men. Then, according to the system of the gopa
jäti, various Vedic ceremonies were performed to appease the calamitous
situation.
TEXTS 13-15
yae's$aUyaAna{tad"mBaeSaARihM"
s$aAmaAnaivavaijaRtaA:
na taeSaAM s$atyazAIlaAnaAma,
@AizASaAe ivaP(laA: k{(taA:
wita baAlak(maAd"Aya
s$aAmagyaRjauç&paAk{(taE:
jalaE: paiva‡aAESaiDaiBar,"
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
493
@iBaiSacya iã"jaAeÔamaE:
vaAcaiyatvaA svastyayanaM
nand"gAAepa: s$amaAih"ta:
ò"tvaA caAi¢aM iã"jaAitaBya:
‘aAd"Ad"ªaM mah"AgAuNAma,
ye 'süyänåta-dambherñähiàsä-
mäna-vivarjitäù
na teñäà satya-çélänäm
äçiño viphaläù kåtäù
iti bälakam ädäya
sämarg-yajur-upäkåtaiù
jalaiù pavitrauñadhibhir
abhiñicya dvijottamaiù
väcayitvä svastyayanaà
nanda-gopaù samähitaù
hutvä cägnià dvijätibhyaù
prädäd annaà mahä-guëam
SYNONYMS
ye—those brähmaëas who; asüya—envy; anåta—untruthfulness;
dambha—false pride; érñä—grudges; hiàsä—being disturbed by the opulence
of others; mäna—false prestige; vivarjitäù—completely devoid of; na—not;
teñäm—of such brähmaëas; satya-çélänäm—who are endowed with perfect
brahminical qualifications (satya, çama, dama, etc.); äçiñaù—the blessings;
viphaläù—useless; kåtäù—have become; iti—considering all these things;
bälakam—the child; ädäya—taking care of; säma—according to the Säma
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
494
Veda; åk—according to the Åg Veda; yajuù—and according to the Yajur Veda;
upäkåtaiù—purified by such means; jalaiù—with water;
pavitra-auñadhibhiù—mixed with pure herbs; abhiñicya—after bathing (the
child); dvija-uttamaiù—with ceremonies performed by first-class brähmaëas
with the above qualifications; väcayitvä—requested to be chanted;
svasti-ayanam—auspicious hymns; nanda-gopaù—Mahäräja Nanda, the head
of the cowherd men; samähitaù—liberal and good; hutvä—after offering
oblations; ca—also; agnim—unto the sacred fire; dvijätibhyaù—unto those
first-class brähmaëas; prädät—gave in charity; annam—food grains;
mahä-guëam—excellent.
TRANSLATION
When brähmaëas are free from envy, untruthfulness, unnecessary pride,
grudges, disturbance by the opulence of others, and false prestige, their
blessings never go in vain. Considering this, Nanda Mahäräja soberly took
Kåñëa on his lap and invited such truthful brähmaëas to perform a ritualistic
ceremony according to the holy hymns of the Säma Veda, Åg Veda and Yajur
Veda. Then, while the hymns were being chanted, he bathed the child with
water mixed with pure herbs, and after performing a fire ceremony, he
sumptuously fed all the brähmaëas with first-class grains and other food.
PURPORT
Nanda Mahäräja was very confident about the qualifications of the
brähmaëas and their blessings. He was fully confident that simply if the good
brähmaëas showered their blessings, the child Kåñëa would be happy. The
blessings of qualified brähmaëas can bring happiness not only to Kåñëa, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, but to everyone. Because Kåñëa is
self-sufficient, He does not require anyone's blessings, yet Nanda Mahäräja
thought that Kåñëa required the blessings of the brähmaëas. What then is to be
said of others? In human society, therefore, there must be an ideal class of men,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
495
brähmaëas, who can bestow blessings upon others, namely, upon the kñatriyas,
vaiçyas and çüdras, so that everyone will be happy. Kåñëa therefore says in
Bhagavad-gétä (4.13) that human society must have four social orders
(cätur-varëyaà mayä såñöaà guëa-karma-vibhägaçaù); it is not that everyone
should become a çüdra or a vaiçya and human society will prosper. As
enunciated in Bhagavad-gétä, there must be a class of brähmaëas with qualities
like satya (truthfulness), çama (peacefulness), dama (self-control) and titikñä
(tolerance).
Here also, in the Bhägavatam, Nanda Mahäräja invites qualified brähmaëas.
There may be caste brähmaëas, and we have all respect for them, but their
birth in brähmaëa families does not mean that they are qualified to bestow
blessings upon the other members of human society. This is the verdict of the
çästras. In Kali-yuga, caste brähmaëas are accepted as brähmaëas. Vipratve
sütram eva hi (SB 12.2.3): in Kali-yuga, simply by putting on a thread worth two
paise, one becomes a brähmaëa. Such brähmaëas were not called for by Nanda
Mahäräja. As stated by Närada Muni (SB 7.11.35), yasya yal lakñaëaà proktam.
The symptoms of a brähmaëa are stated in çästra, and one must be qualified
with these symptoms.
The blessings of brähmaëas who are not envious, disturbed or puffed up
with pride and false prestige and who are fully qualified with truthfulness will
be useful. Therefore a class of men must be trained as brähmaëas from the very
beginning. Brahmacäré guru-kule vasan dänto guror hitam (SB 7.12.1). The word
däntaù is very important. Däntaù refers to one who is not envious, disturbing
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
or puffed up with false prestige. With the Kåñëa consciousness movement, we
are trying to introduce such brähmaëas in society. Brähmaëas must ultimately
be Vaiñëavas, and if one is a Vaiñëava, he has already acquired the
qualifications of a brähmaëa. Brahma-bhütaù prasannätmä (Bg. 18.54). The
word brahma-bhüta [SB 4.30.20] refers to becoming a brähmaëa, or
understanding what is Brahman (brahma jänätéti brähmaëaù). One who is
brahma-bhüta is always happy (prasannätmä). Na çocati na käìkñati: he is
never disturbed about material necessities. Samaù sarveñu bhüteñu: he is ready
496
to bestow blessings upon everyone equally. Mad-bhaktià labhate paräm: [Bg.
18.54] then he becomes a Vaiñëava. In this age, Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté
Öhäkura introduced the sacred thread ceremony for his Vaiñëava disciples,
with the idea that people should understand that when one becomes a
Vaiñëava he has already acquired the qualifications of a brähmaëa. Therefore
in the International Society for Krishna Consciousness, those who are twice
initiated so as to become brähmaëas must bear in mind their great
responsibility to be truthful, control the mind and senses, be tolerant, and so
on. Then their life will be successful. It was such brähmaëas that Nanda
Mahäräja invited to chant the Vedic hymns, not ordinary brähmaëas. Verse
thirteen distinctly mentions hiàsä-mäna. The word mäna refers to false
prestige or false pride. Those who were falsely proud, thinking that they were
brähmaëas because they were born in brähmaëa families, were never invited
by Nanda Mahäräja on such occasions.
Verse fourteen mentions pavitrauñadhi. In any ritualistic ceremony, many
herbs and leaves were required. These were known as pavitra-patra. Sometimes
there were nimba leaves, sometimes bael leaves, mango leaves, açvattha leaves
or ämalaké leaves. Similarly, there were païca-gavya, païca-çasya and
païca-ratna. Although Nanda Mahäräja belonged to the vaiçya community,
everything was known to him.
The most important word in these verses is mahä-guëam, indicating that
the brähmaëas were offered very palatable food of exalted quality. Such
palatable dishes were generally prepared with two things, namely food grains
and milk products. Bhagavad-gétä (18.44) therefore enjoins that human society
must give protection to the cows and encourage agriculture
(kåñi-go-rakñya-väëijyaà vaiçya-karma svabhävajam). Simply by expert cooking,
hundreds and thousands of palatable dishes can be prepared from agricultural
produce and milk products. This is indicated here by the words annaà
mahä-guëam.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
and milk, hundreds and thousands of varieties of food are prepared, and then
they are offered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
497
(Catur-vidha-çré-bhagavat-prasäda**(9). patraà puñpaà phalaà toyaà yo me
bhaktyä prayacchati [Bg. 9.26].) Then the prasäda is distributed. Even today in
Jagannätha-kñetra and other big temples, very palatable dishes are offered to
the Deity, and prasäda is distributed profusely. Cooked by first-class brähmaëas
with expert knowledge and then distributed to the public, this prasäda is also a
blessing from the brähmaëas or Vaiñëavas. There are four kinds of prasäda
(catur-vidha). Salty, sweet, sour and pungent tastes are made with different
types of spices, and the food is prepared in four divisions, called carvya, cüñya,
lehya and peya-prasäda that is chewed, prasäda that is licked, prasäda tasted
with the tongue, and prasäda that is drunk. Thus there are many varieties of
prasäda, prepared very nicely with grains and ghee, offered to the Deity and
distributed to the brähmaëas and Vaiñëavas and then to the general public.
This is the way of human society. Killing the cows and spoiling the land will
not solve the problem of food. This is not civilization. Uncivilized men living
in the jungle and being unqualified to produce food by agriculture and cow
protection may eat animals, but a perfect human society advanced in
knowledge must learn how to produce first-class food simply by agriculture and
protection of cows.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
TEXT 16
gAAva: s$avaRgAuNAAepaetaA
vaAs$a:›aƒaufmamaAilanaI:
@AtmajaAByaud"yaATaARya
‘aAd"AÔae caAnvayauÃata
gävaù sarva-guëopetä
väsaù-srag-rukma-mälinéù
ätmajäbhyudayärthäya
prädät te cänvayuïjata
498
SYNONYMS
gävaù—cows; sarva-guëa-upetäù—being fully qualified by giving sufficient
milk, etc.; väsaù—well dressed; srak—with flower garlands;
rukma-mälinéù—and with garlands of gold; ätmaja-abhyudaya-arthäya—for
the purpose of his son's affluence; prädät—gave in charity; te—those
brähmaëas; ca—also; anvayuïjata—accepted them.
TRANSLATION
Nanda Mahäräja, for the sake of the affluence of his own son Kåñëa, gave
the brähmaëas cows fully decorated with garments, flower garlands and gold
necklaces. These cows, fully qualified to give ample milk, were given to the
brähmaëas in charity, and the brähmaëas accepted them and bestowed blessings
upon the whole family, and especially upon Kåñëa.
PURPORT
Nanda Mahäräja first fed the brähmaëas sumptuously and then gave them
in charity first-class cows fully decorated with golden necklaces, garments and
flower garlands.
TEXT 17
iva‘aA man‡aivad"Ae yaul(As$a,
taEyaAR: ‘aAel(AstaTaAizASa:
taA inaSP(laA BaivaSyainta
na k(d"Aicad"ipa s$Pu(q%ma,
viprä mantra-vido yuktäs
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
499
tair yäù proktäs tathäçiñaù
tä niñphalä bhaviñyanti
na kadäcid api sphuöam
SYNONYMS
vipräù—the brähmaëas; mantra-vidaù—completely expert in chanting the
Vedic hymns; yuktäù—perfect mystic yogés; taiù—by them; yäù—whatsoever;
proktäù—was spoken; tathä—becomes just so; äçiñaù—all blessings; täù—such
words; niñphaläù—useless, without fruit; bhaviñyanti na—never will become;
kadäcit—at any time; api—indeed; sphuöam—always factual, as it is.
TRANSLATION
The brähmaëas, who were completely expert in chanting the Vedic hymns,
were all yogés fully equipped with mystic powers. Whatever blessings they spoke
were certainly never fruitless.
PURPORT
Brähmaëas fully equipped with the brahminical qualifications are always
yogés fully powerful in mystic yoga. Their words never fail. In every transaction
with other members of society, brähmaëas are certainly dependable. In this
age, however, one must take into account that the brähmaëas are uncertain in
their qualifications. Because there are no yajïic brähmaëas, all
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
yajïas are
forbidden. The only yajïa recommended in this age is saìkértana-yajïa.
Yajïaiù saìkértana-präyair yajanti hi sumedhasaù (SB 11.5.32). Yajïa is meant
to satisfy Viñëu (yajïärthät karmaëo 'nyatra loko 'yaà karma-bandhanaù [Bg.
3.9])). Because in this age there are no qualified brähmaëas, people should
perform yajïa by chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra (yajïaiù saìkértana-präyair
yajanti hi sumedhasaù). Life is meant for yajïa, and yajïa is performed by the
chanting of Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma,
500
Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare.
TEXT 18
Wk(d"Ar"Aeh"maAè&XM#
laAlayantaI s$autaM s$ataI
gAir"maANAM izAzAAevaAeRXM#]
na s$aehe" igAir"kU(q%vata,
ekadäroham ärüòhaà
lälayanté sutaà saté
garimäëaà çiçor voòhuà
na sehe giri-küöavat
SYNONYMS
ekadä—one time (estimated to have been when Kåñëa was one year old);
äroham—on His mother's lap; ärüòham—who was sitting; lälayanté—was
patting; sutam—her son; saté—mother Yaçodä; garimäëam—because of an
increase in heaviness; çiçoù—of the child; voòhum—to bear Him; na—not;
sehe—was able; giri-küöa-vat—appearing like the weight of a mountain peak.
TRANSLATION
One day, a year after Kåñëa's appearance, mother Yaçodä was patting her son
on her lap. But suddenly she felt the child to be heavier than a mountain peak,
and she could no longer bear His weight.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
PURPORT
Lälayanté. Sometimes a mother lifts her child, and when the child falls in
501
her hands, the child laughs, and the mother also enjoys pleasure. Yaçodä used
to do this, but this time Kåñëa became very heavy, and she could not bear His
weight. Under the circumstances, it is to be understood that Kåñëa was aware
of the coming of Tåëävartäsura, who would take Him far away from His
mother. Kåñëa knew that when Tåëävarta came and took Him away from His
mother's lap, mother Yaçodä would be greatly bereaved. He did not want His
mother to suffer any difficulty from the demon. Therefore, because He is the
source of everything (janmädy asya yataù [SB 1.1.1]), He assumed the heaviness
of the entire universe. The child was on the lap of Yaçodä, who was therefore
in possession of everything in the world, but when the child assumed such
heaviness, she had to put Him down in order to give Tåëävartäsura an
opportunity to take Him away and play with Him for some time before the
child returned to the lap of His mother.
TEXT 19
BaUmaAE inaDaAya taM gAAepaI
ivaismataA BaAr"paIix"taA
mah"Apauç&SamaAd"DyaAE
jagAtaAmaAs$a k(maRs$au
bhümau nidhäya taà gopé
vismitä bhära-péòitä
mahä-puruñam ädadhyau
jagatäm äsa karmasu
SYNONYMS
bhümau—on the ground; nidhäya—placing; tam—the child; gopé—mother
Yaçodä; vismitä—being astonished; bhära-péòitä—being aggrieved by the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
502
weight of the child; mahä-puruñam—Lord Viñëu, Näräyaëa; ädadhyau—took
shelter of; jagatäm—as if the weight of the whole world; äsa—engaged herself;
karmasu—in other household affairs.
TRANSLATION
Feeling the child to be as heavy as the entire universe and therefore being
anxious, thinking that perhaps the child was being attacked by some other ghost
or demon, the astonished mother Yaçodä put the child down on the ground and
began to think of Näräyaëa. Foreseeing disturbances, she called for the
brähmaëas to counteract this heaviness, and then she engaged in her other
household affairs. She had no alternative than to remember the lotus feet of
Näräyaëa, for she could not understand that Kåñëa was the original source of
everything.
PURPORT
Mother Yaçodä did not understand that Kåñëa is the heaviest of all heavy
things and that Kåñëa rests within everything (mat-sthäni sarva-bhütäni). As
confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (9.4), mayä tatam idaà sarvaà jagad
avyakta-mürtinä: Kåñëa is everywhere in His impersonal form, and everything
rests upon Him. Nonetheless, na cähaà teñv avasthitaù: Kåñëa is not
everywhere. Mother Yaçodä was unable to understand this philosophy because
she was dealing with Kåñëa as His real mother by the arrangement of
yogamäyä. Not understanding the importance of Kåñëa, she could only seek
shelter of Näräyaëa for Kåñëa's safety and call the brähmaëas to counteract the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
situation.
TEXT 20
dE"tyaAe naA°aA ta{NAAvataR:
503
kM(s$aBa{tya: ‘aNAAeid"ta:
ca‚(vaAtasvaè&paeNA
jah"Ar"As$aInamaBaRk(ma,
daityo nämnä tåëävartaù
kaàsa-bhåtyaù praëoditaù
cakraväta-svarüpeëa
jahäräsénam arbhakam
SYNONYMS
daityaù—another demon; nämnä—by the name; tåëävartaù—Tåëävartäsura;
kaàsa-bhåtyaù—a servant of Kaàsa; praëoditaù—having been induced by
him; cakraväta-svarüpeëa—in the form of a whirlwind; jahära—swept away;
äsénam—the sitting; arbhakam—child.
TRANSLATION
While the child was sitting on the ground, a demon named Tåëävarta, who
was a servant of Kaàsa's, came there as a whirlwind, at Kaàsa's instigation,
and very easily carried the child away into the air.
PURPORT
Kåñëa's heaviness was unbearable for the child's mother, but when
Tåëävartäsura came, he immediately carried the child away. This was another
demonstration of Kåñëa's inconceivable energy. When the Tåëävarta demon
came, Kåñëa became lighter than the grass so that the demon could carry Him
away. This was änanda-cinmaya-rasa, Kåñëa's blissful, transcendental pleasure.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
TEXT 21
504
gAAeku(laM s$avaRmaAva{Nvana,
mauSNAMêºaUMiSa re"NAuiBa:
wRr"yana, s$aumah"AGaAer"-
zAbde"na ‘aid"zAAe id"zA:
gokulaà sarvam ävåëvan
muñëaàç cakñüàñi reëubhiù
érayan sumahä-ghoraçabdena
pradiço diçaù
SYNONYMS
gokulam—the whole tract of land known as Gokula; sarvam—everywhere;
ävåëvan—covering; muñëan—taking away; cakñüàñi—the power of vision;
reëubhiù—by particles of dust; érayan—was vibrating; su-mahä-ghora—very
fierce and heavy; çabdena—with a sound; pradiçaù diçaù—entered everywhere,
in all directions.
TRANSLATION
Covering the whole land of Gokula with particles of dust, that demon, acting
as a strong whirlwind, covered everyone's vision and began vibrating
everywhere with a greatly fearful sound.
PURPORT
Tåëävartäsura assumed the form of a whirlwind and covered with a dust
storm the whole tract of land known as Gokula, so that no one could see even
the nearest thing.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
505
TEXT 22
mauó"taRmaBavaÕ"AeïM"
r"jas$aA tamas$aAva{tama,
s$autaM yazAAed"A naApazyata,
taismaªyastavataI yata:
muhürtam abhavad goñöhaà
rajasä tamasävåtam
sutaà yaçodä näpaçyat
tasmin nyastavaté yataù
SYNONYMS
muhürtam—for a moment; abhavat—there was; goñöham—throughout the
whole pasturing ground; rajasä—by big particles of dust; tamasä
ävåtam—covered with darkness; sutam—her son; yaçodä—mother Yaçodä; na
apaçyat—could not find; tasmin—in that very spot; nyastavaté—she had
placed Him; yataù—where.
TRANSLATION
For a moment, the whole pasturing ground was overcast with dense darkness
from the dust storm, and mother Yaçodä was unable to find her son where she
had placed Him.
TEXT 23
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
naApazyatk(ênaAtmaAnaM
parM" caAipa ivamaAeih"ta:
506
ta{NAAvataRinas$a{í"AiBa:
zAkR(r"AiBaç&paåu"ta:
näpaçyat kaçcanätmänaà
paraà cäpi vimohitaù
tåëävarta-nisåñöäbhiù
çarkaräbhir upadrutaù
SYNONYMS
na—not; apaçyat—saw; kaçcana—anyone; ätmänam—himself; param ca
api—or another; vimohitaù—being illusioned; tåëävarta-nisåñöäbhiù—thrown
by Tåëävartäsura; çarkaräbhiù—by the sands; upadrutaù—and thus being
disturbed.
TRANSLATION
Because of the bits of sand thrown about by Tåëävarta, people could not see
themselves or anyone else, and thus they were illusioned and disturbed.
TEXT 24
wita Kar"pavanaca‚(paAMzAuvaSaeR
s$autapad"vaImabalaAivalaºya maAtaA
@itak(ç&NAmanausmar"ntyazAAecaä,"
Bauiva paitataA ma{tavats$ak(A yaTaA gAAE:
iti khara-pavana-cakra-päàçu-varñe
suta-padavém abalävilakñya mätä
atikaruëam anusmaranty açocad
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
507
bhuvi patitä måta-vatsakä yathä gauù
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; khara—very strong; pavana-cakra—by a whirlwind;
päàçu-varñe—when there were showers of dust and small dust particles;
suta-padavém—the place of her son; abalä—the innocent woman;
avilakñya—not seeing; mätä—because of being His mother; ati-karuëam—very
pitifully; anusmaranté—she was thinking of her son; açocat—lamented
extraordinarily; bhuvi—on the ground; patitä—fell down; måta-vatsakä—who
has lost her calf; yathä—like; gauù—a cow.
TRANSLATION
Because of the dust storm stirred up by the strong whirlwind, mother Yaçodä
could find no trace of her son, nor could she understand why. Thus she fell
down on the ground like a cow who has lost her calf and began to lament very
pitifully.
TEXT 25
ç&id"tamanauinazAmya ta‡a gAAepyaAe
Ba{zAmanautaæaiDayaAe'™aupaUNARmauKya:
ç&ç&äu"r"naupalaBya nand"s$aUnauM
pavana opaAr"tapaAMzAuvaSaR"vaegAe
ruditam anuniçamya tatra gopyo
bhåçam anutapta-dhiyo 'çru-pürëa-mukhyaù
rurudur anupalabhya nanda-sünuà
pavana upärata-päàçu-varña-vege
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
508
SYNONYMS
ruditam—mother Yaçodä, crying pitifully; anuniçamya—after hearing;
tatra—there; gopyaù—the other ladies, the gopés; bhåçam—highly;
anutapta—lamenting sympathetically after mother Yaçodä; dhiyaù—with such
feelings; açru-pürëa-mukhyaù—and the other gopés, their faces full of tears;
ruruduù—they were crying; anupalabhya—without finding;
nanda-sünum—the son of Nanda Mahäräja, Kåñëa; pavane—when the
whirlwind; upärata—had ceased; päàçu-varña-vege—its force of showering
dust.
TRANSLATION
When the force of the dust storm and the winds subsided, Yaçodä's friends,
the other gopés, approached mother Yaçodä, hearing her pitiful crying. Not
seeing Kåñëa present, they too felt very much aggrieved and joined mother
Yaçodä in crying, their eyes full of tears.
PURPORT
This attachment of the gopés to Kåñëa is wonderful and transcendental. The
center of all the activities of the gopés was Kåñëa. When Kåñëa was there they
were happy, and when Kåñëa was not there, they were unhappy. Thus when
mother Yaçodä was lamenting Kåñëa's absence, the other ladies also began to
cry.
TEXT 26
ta{NAAvataR: zAAntar"yaAe
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
vaAtyaAè&paDar"Ae h"r"na,
509
k{(SNAM naBaAegAtaAe gAntauM
naAzA¡(AeàU"ir"BaAr"Ba{ta,
tåëävartaù çänta-rayo
vätyä-rüpa-dharo haran
kåñëaà nabho-gato gantuà
näçaknod bhüri-bhära-bhåt
SYNONYMS
tåëävartaù—the demon Tåëävarta; çänta-rayaù—the force of the blast
reduced; vätyä-rüpa-dharaù—who had assumed the form of a forceful
whirlwind; haran—and had thus taken away; kåñëam—Kåñëa, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; nabhaù-gataù—went up to the top of the sky;
gantum—to go further; na açaknot—was not able; bhüri-bhära-bhåt—because
Kåñëa then became more powerful and heavy than the demon.
TRANSLATION
Having assumed the form of a forceful whirlwind, the demon Tåëävarta took
Kåñëa very high in the sky, but when Kåñëa became heavier than the demon,
the demon had to stop his force and could go no further.
PURPORT
Here is a competition in yogic power between Kåñëa and Tåëävartäsura. By
practicing mystic yoga, asuras generally attain some perfection in the eight
siddhis, or perfections, namely aëimä, laghimä, mahimä, präpti, präkämya, éçitva,
vaçitva and kämävasäyitä. But although a demon may acquire such powers to a
very limited extent, he cannot compete with the mystic power of Kåñëa, for
Kåñëa is Yogeçvara, the source of all mystic power (yatra yogeçvaro hariù [
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Bg.
18.78]). No one can compete with Kåñëa. Sometimes, of course, having
510
acquired a fragmental portion of Kåñëa's mystic power, asuras demonstrate
their power to the foolish public and assert themselves to be God, not knowing
that God is the supreme Yogeçvara. Here also we see that Tåëävarta assumed
the mahimä-siddhi and took Kåñëa away as if Kåñëa were an ordinary child. But
Kåñëa also became a mystic mahimä-siddha. When mother Yaçodä was carrying
Him, He became so heavy that His mother, who was usually accustomed to
carrying Him, could not bear Him and had to place Him down on the ground.
Thus Tåëävarta had been able to take Kåñëa away in the presence of mother
Yaçodä. But when Kåñëa, high in the sky, assumed the mahimä-siddhi, the
demon, unable to go further, was obliged to stop his force and come down
according to Kåñëa's desire. One should not, therefore, compete with Kåñëa's
mystic power.
Devotees automatically have all mystic power, but they do not like to
compete with Kåñëa. Instead, they fully surrender to Kåñëa, and their yogic
power is demonstrated by Kåñëa's mercy. Devotees can show mystic yoga so
powerful that a demon could not even dream of it, but they never try to
demonstrate it for their personal sense gratification. Whatever they do is for
the service of the Lord, and therefore they are always in a position superior to
that of the demons. There are many karmés, yogés and jïänés who artificially try
to compete with Kåñëa, and thus ordinary, foolish people who do not care to
hear Çrémad-Bhägavatam from authorities consider some rascal yogé to be
Bhagavän, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. At the present moment there
are many so-called bäbäs who present themselves as incarnations of God by
showing some insignificant mystic wonder, and foolish people regard them as
God because of lacking knowledge of Kåñëa.
TEXT 27
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
tamazmaAnaM manyamaAna
@AtmanaAe gAuç&maÔayaA
511
gAlae gA{h"Ita ot›aí]M"
naAzA¡(Aed"àu"taABaRk(ma,
tam açmänaà manyamäna
ätmano guru-mattayä
gale gåhéta utsrañöuà
näçaknod adbhutärbhakam
SYNONYMS
tam—Kåñëa; açmänam—very heavy stone like a lump of iron;
manyamänaù—thinking like that; ätmanaù guru-mattayä—because of being
heavier than he could personally perceive; gale—his neck; gåhéte—being
embraced or encircled by His arms; utsrañöum—to give up; na açaknot—was
not able; adbhuta-arbhakam—this wonderful child who was different from an
ordinary child.
TRANSLATION
Because of Kåñëa's weight, Tåëävarta considered Him to be like a great
mountain or a hunk of iron. But because Kåñëa had caught the demon's neck,
the demon was unable to throw Him off. He therefore thought of the child as
wonderful, since he could neither bear the child nor cast aside the burden.
PURPORT
Tåëävarta intended to take Kåñëa up in the sky and kill Him, but Kåñëa
enjoyed the pastime of riding on Tåëävarta's body and traveling for a while in
the sky. Thus Tåëävarta's attempt to kill Kåñëa failed, while Kåñëa,
änanda-cinmaya-rasa-vigraha, enjoyed this pastime. Now, since Tåëävarta was
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
falling because of Kåñëa's heaviness, he wanted to save himself by throwing
Kåñëa off from his neck, but was unable to do so because Kåñëa held him very
512
tightly. Consequently, this would be the last time for Tåëävarta's yogic power.
Now he was going to die by the arrangement of Kåñëa.
TEXT 28
gAlaƒah"NAinaêeí"Ae
dE"tyaAe inagARtalaAecana:
@vyal(r"AvaAe nyapatata,
s$ah"baAlaAe vyas$au˜aRjae
gala-grahaëa-niçceñöo
daityo nirgata-locanaù
avyakta-rävo nyapatat
saha-bälo vyasur vraje
SYNONYMS
gala-grahaëa-niçceñöaù—because of Kåñëa's grasping the neck of the demon
Tåëävarta, the demon choked and could not do anything; daityaù—the
demon; nirgata-locanaù—his eyes popped out because of pressure;
avyakta-rävaù—because of choking, he could not even make a sound;
nyapatat—fell down; saha-bälaù—with the child; vyasuù vraje—lifeless on the
ground of Vraja.
TRANSLATION
With Kåñëa grasping him by the throat, Tåëävarta choked, unable to make
even a sound or even to move his hands and legs. His eyes popping out, the
demon lost his life and fell, along with the little boy, down to the ground of
Vraja.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
513
TEXT 29
tamantair"ºaAtpaitataM izAlaAyaAM
ivazAINARs$avaARvayavaM k(r"Alama,
paurM" yaTaA ç&‰"zAre"NA ivaÜM"
iñyaAe ç&d"tyaAe d"ä{"zAu: s$amaetaA:
tam antarikñät patitaà çiläyäà
viçérëa-sarvävayavaà karälam
puraà yathä rudra-çareëa viddhaà
striyo rudatyo dadåçuù sametäù
SYNONYMS
tam—unto the demon Tåëävarta; antarikñät—from outer space;
patitam—fallen; çiläyäm—on a slab of stone; viçérëa—scattered, separated;
sarva-avayavam—all the parts of his body; karälam—very fierce hands and
legs; puram—the place of Tripuräsura; yathä—as; rudra-çareëa—by the arrow
of Lord Çiva; viddham—pierced; striyaù—all the women, the gopés;
rudatyaù—although crying because Kåñëa was separated from them;
dadåçuù—they saw in front of them; sametäù—all together.
TRANSLATION
While the gopés who had gathered were crying for Kåñëa, the demon fell
from the sky onto a big slab of stone, his limbs dislocated, as if he had been
pierced by the arrow of Lord Çiva like Tripuräsura.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
514
In transcendental life, as soon as devotees of the Lord merge in
lamentation, they immediately experience the Lord's transcendental activities
and merge in transcendental bliss. Actually such devotees are always in
transcendental bliss, and such apparent calamities provide a further impetus
for that bliss.
TEXT 30
‘aAd"Aya maA‡ae ‘aitaô$tya ivaismataA:
k{(SNAM ca tasyaAer"is$a lambamaAnama,
taM svaistamantaM pauç&SaAd"naItaM
ivah"Ayas$aA ma{tyaumauKaAt‘amaul(ma,
gAAepyaê gAAepaA: ik(la nand"mauKyaA
labDvaA pauna: ‘aApaur"taIva maAed"ma,
prädäya mätre pratihåtya vismitäù
kåñëaà ca tasyorasi lambamänam
taà svastimantaà puruñäda-nétaà
vihäyasä måtyu-mukhät pramuktam
gopyaç ca gopäù kila nanda-mukhyä
labdhvä punaù präpur atéva modam
SYNONYMS
prädäya—after picking up; mätre—unto His mother (Yaçodä);
pratihåtya—delivered; vismitäù—all surprised; kåñëam ca—and Kåñëa;
tasya—of the demon; urasi—on the chest; lambamänam—situated;
tam—Kåñëa; svastimantam—endowed with all auspiciousness;
puruñäda-nétam—who was taken by the man-eating demon; vihäyasä—into the
sky; måtyu-mukhät—from the mouth of death; pramuktam—now liberated;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
515
gopyaù—the gopés; ca—and; gopäù—the cowherd men; kila—indeed;
nanda-mukhyäù—headed by Nanda Mahäräja; labdhvä—after getting;
punaù—again (their son); präpuù—enjoyed; atéva—very much; modam—bliss.
TRANSLATION
The gopés immediately picked Kåñëa up from the chest of the demon and
delivered Him, free from all inauspiciousness, to mother Yaçodä. Because the
child, although taken into the sky by the demon, was unhurt and now free from
all danger and misfortune, the gopés and cowherd men, headed by Nanda
Mahäräja, were extremely happy.
PURPORT
The demon fell flat from the sky, and Kåñëa was playing on his chest very
happily, uninjured and free from misfortune. Not at all disturbed because of
being taken high in the sky by the demon, Kåñëa was playing and enjoying.
This is änanda-cinmaya-rasa-vigraha. In any condition, Kåñëa is
sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]. He has no unhappiness. Others might have
thought that He was in difficulty, but because the demon's chest was
sufficiently broad to play on, the baby was happy in all respects. It was most
astonishing that although the demon went so high in the sky, the child did not
fall down. Therefore, the child had been saved virtually from the mouth of
death. Now that He was saved, all the inhabitants of Våndävana were happy.
TEXT 31
@h"Ae bataAtyaàu"tamaeSa r"ºas$aA
baAlaAe inava{iÔaM gAimataAe'ByagAAtpauna:
ihM"›a: svapaApaena ivaihM"is$ata: Kala:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
516
s$aADau: s$amatvaena BayaAiã"maucyatae
aho batäty-adbhutam eña rakñasä
bälo nivåttià gamito 'bhyagät punaù
hiàsraù sva-päpena vihiàsitaù khalaù
sädhuù samatvena bhayäd vimucyate
SYNONYMS
aho—alas; bata—indeed; ati—very much; adbhutam—this incident is
wonderfully astonishing; eñaù—this (child); rakñasä—by the man-eating
demon; bälaù—the innocent child Kåñëa; nivåttim—taken away just to be
killed and eaten; gamitaù—went away; abhyagät punaù—but He has come back
again unhurt; hiàsraù—one who is envious; sva-päpena—because of his own
sinful activities; vihiàsitaù—now (that demon) has been killed;
khalaù—because he was envious and polluted; sädhuù—any person who is
innocent and free from sinful life; samatvena—being equal to everyone;
bhayät—from all kinds of fear; vimucyate—becomes relieved.
TRANSLATION
It is most astonishing that although this innocent child was taken away by
the Räkñasa to be eaten, He has returned without having been killed or even
injured. Because this demon was envious, cruel and sinful, he has been killed
for his own sinful activities. This is the law of nature. An innocent devotee is
always protected by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and a sinful person is
always vanquished for his sinful life.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Kåñëa conscious life means innocent devotional life, and a sädhu is one who
is fully devoted to Kåñëa. As confirmed by Kåñëa in Bhagavad-gétä (9.30),
517
bhajate mäà ananya-bhäk sädhur eva sa mantavyaù: anyone fully attached to
Kåñëa is a sädhu. Nanda Mahäräja and the gopés and other cowherd men could
not understand that Kåñëa was the Supreme Personality of Godhead playing as
a human child and that His life was not in danger under any circumstances.
Rather, because of their intense parental love for Kåñëa, they thought that
Kåñëa was an innocent child and had been saved by the Supreme Lord.
In the material world, because of intense lust and desire for enjoyment, one
becomes implicated in sinful life more and more (käma eña krodha eña
rajo-guëa-samudbhavaù). Therefore the quality of fear is one of the aspects of
material life (ähära-nidrä-bhaya-maithunaà ca). But if one becomes Kåñëa
conscious, the process of devotional service, çravaëaà kértanam [SB 7.5.23],
diminishes one's polluted life of material existence, and one is purified and
protected by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Çåëvatäà sva-kathäù kåñëaù
puëya-çravaëa-kértanaù [SB 1.2.17]. In devotional life, one has faith in this
process. Such faith is one of the six kinds of surrender. Rakñiñyatéti viçväsaù
(Hari-bhakti-viläsa 11.676). One of the processes of surrender is that one
should simply depend on Kåñëa, convinced that He will give one all protection.
That Kåñëa will protect His devotee is a fact, and Nanda Mahäräja and the
other inhabitants of Våndävana accepted this very simply, although they did
not know that the Supreme Lord Himself was present before them. There have
been many instances in which a devotee like Prahläda Mahäräja or Dhruva
Mahäräja has been put in difficulty even by his father but has been saved
under all circumstances. Therefore our only business is to become Kåñëa
conscious and depend fully on Kåñëa for all protection.
TEXT 32
ikM( nastapaêINARmaDaAeºajaAcaRnaM
paUtaeRí"d"Ôamauta BaUtas$aAEô$d"ma,
yats$ampare"ta: paunare"va baAlak(Ae
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
518
id"í"YaA svabanDaUna, ‘aNAyaªaupaisTata:
kià nas tapaç cérëam adhokñajärcanaà
pürteñöa-dattam uta bhüta-sauhådam
yat samparetaù punar eva bälako
diñöyä sva-bandhün praëayann upasthitaù
SYNONYMS
kim—what kind of; naù—by us; tapaù—austerity; cérëam—has been done for
a very long time; adhokñaja—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
arcanam—worshiping; pürta—constructing public roads, etc.; iñöa—activities
for public benefit; dattam—giving charity; uta—or else;
bhüta-sauhådam—because of love for the general public; yat—by the result of
which; samparetaù—even though the child was practically lost in death; punaù
eva—even again because of pious activities; bälakaù—the child; diñöyä—by
fortune; sva-bandhün—all His relatives; praëayan—to please; upasthitaù—is
present here.
TRANSLATION
Nanda Mahäräja and the others said:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
austerities for a very long time, worshiped the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
performed pious activities for public life, constructing public roads and wells,
and also given charity, as a result of which this boy, although faced with death,
has returned to give happiness to His relatives.
PURPORT
Nanda Mahäräja confirmed that by pious activities one can become a sädhu
so that one will be happy at home and one's children will be protected. In
çästra there are many injunctions for karmés and jïänés, especially for karmés,
519
by which they can become pious and happy even in material life. According to
Vedic civilization, one should perform activities for the benefit of the public,
such as constructing public roads, planting trees on both sides of the road so
that people can walk in the shade, and constructing public wells so that
everyone can take water without difficulty. One should perform austerity to
control one's desires, and one must simultaneously worship the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Thus one becomes pious, and as a result one is happy
even in material conditions of life.
TEXT 33
ä{"î"Aàu"taAina baò"zAAe
nand"gAAepaAe ba{h"ã"nae
vas$aude"vavacaAe BaUyaAe
maAnayaAmaAs$a ivaismata:
dåñövädbhutäni bahuço
nanda-gopo båhadvane
vasudeva-vaco bhüyo
mänayäm äsa vismitaù
SYNONYMS
dåñövä—after seeing; adbhutäni—the very wonderful and astonishing
incidents; bahuçaù—many times; nanda-gopaù—Nanda Mahäräja, the head of
the cowherd men; båhadvane—in Båhadvana; vasudeva-vacaù—the words
spoken by Vasudeva when Nanda Mahäräja was in Mathurä; bhüyaù—again
and again; mänayäm äsa—accepted how true they were; vismitaù—in great
astonishment.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
520
TRANSLATION
Having seen all these incidents in Båhadvana, Nanda Mahäräja became more
and more astonished, and he remembered the words spoken to him by Vasudeva
in Mathurä.
TEXT 34
Wk(d"ABaRk(maAd"Aya
svaAÆÿmaAr"Aepya BaAimanaI
‘aµautaM paAyayaAmaAs$a
stanaM µaeh"pair"plautaA
ekadärbhakam ädäya
sväìkam äropya bhäminé
prasnutaà päyayäm äsa
stanaà sneha-pariplutä
SYNONYMS
ekadä—once upon a time; arbhakam—the child; ädäya—taking;
sva-aìkam—on her own lap; äropya—and placing Him; bhäminé—mother
Yaçodä; prasnutam—breast milk oozing out; päyayäm äsa—fed the child;
stanam—her breast; sneha-pariplutä—with great affection and love.
TRANSLATION
One day mother Yaçodä, having taken Kåñëa up and placed Him on her lap,
was feeding Him milk from her breast with maternal affection. The milk was
flowing from her breast, and the child was drinking it.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
521
TEXTS 35-36
paIta‘aAyasya jananaI
s$autasya ç&icar"ismatama,
mauKaM laAlayataI r"AjaHa,
ja{mBataAe d"ä{"zAe wd"ma
KaM r"Aed"s$aI jyaAeitar"naIk(maAzAA:
s$aUyaeRnäu"vai¶"ìs$anaAmbauDaI%Mê
ã"IpaAªagAAMstaä,"äu"ih"ta|vaRnaAina
BaUtaAina yaAina isTar"jaËÿmaAina
péta-präyasya janané
sutasya rucira-smitam
mukhaà lälayaté räjaï
jåmbhato dadåçe idam
khaà rodasé jyotir-anékam äçäù
süryendu-vahni-çvasanämbudhéàç ca
dvépän nagäàs tad-duhitèr vanäni
bhütäni yäni sthira-jaìgamäni
SYNONYMS
péta-präyasya—of child Kåñëa, who was being offered breast milk and was
almost satisfied; janané—mother Yaçodä; sutasya—of her son;
rucira-smitam—seeing the child fully satisfied and smiling; mukham—the face;
lälayaté—patting and softly rubbing with her hand; räjan—O King;
jåmbhataù—while the child was yawning; dadåçe—she saw; idam—the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
522
following; kham—the sky; rodasé—both the higher planetary system and the
earth; jyotiù-anékam—the luminaries; äçäù—the directions; sürya—the sun;
indu—the moon; vahni—fire; çvasana—the air; ambudhén—the seas; ca—and;
dvépän—the islands; nagän—the mountains; tat-duhitèù—the daughters of the
mountains (the rivers); vanäni—forests; bhütäni—all kinds of living entities;
yäni—which are; sthira-jaìgamäni—nonmoving and moving.
TRANSLATION
O King Parékñit, when the child Kåñëa was almost finished drinking His
mother's milk and mother Yaçodä was touching Him and looking at His
beautiful, brilliantly smiling face, the baby yawned, and mother Yaçodä saw in
His mouth the whole sky, the higher planetary system and the earth, the
luminaries in all directions, the sun, the moon, fire, air, the seas, islands,
mountains, rivers, forests, and all kinds of living entities, moving and
nonmoving.
PURPORT
By the arrangement of yogamäyä, Kåñëa's pastimes with mother Yaçodä
were all regarded as ordinary. So here was an opportunity for Kåñëa to show
His mother that the whole universe is situated within Him. In His small form,
Kåñëa was kind enough to show His mother the viräö-rüpa,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
so that she could enjoy seeing what kind of child she had on her lap. The rivers
have been mentioned here as the daughters of the mountains (nagäàs
tad-duhitèù). It is the flowing of the rivers that makes big forests possible.
There are living entities everywhere, some of them moving and some of them
not moving. No place is vacant. This is a special feature of God's creation.
TEXT 37
523
s$aA vaIºya ivaìM s$ah"s$aA
r"Ajana, s$aÃaAtavaepaTau:
s$ammaIlya ma{gAzAAvaAºaI
nae‡ae @As$aIts$auivaismataA
sä vékñya viçvaà sahasä
räjan saïjäta-vepathuù
sammélya mågaçäväkñé
netre äsét suvismitä
SYNONYMS
sä—mother Yaçodä; vékñya—by seeing; viçvam—the whole universe;
sahasä—suddenly within the mouth of her son; räjan—O King (Mahäräja
Parékñit); saïjäta-vepathuù—whose heart was beating; sammélya—opening;
mågaçäva-akñé—like the eyes of a deer cub; netre—her two eyes; äsét—became;
su-vismitä—astonished.
TRANSLATION
When mother Yaçodä saw the whole universe within the mouth of her child,
her heart began to throb, and in astonishment she wanted to close her restless
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
PURPORT
Because of her pure maternal love, mother Yaçodä thought that this
wonderful child playing so many tricks must have had some disease. She did
not appreciate the wonders shown by her child; rather, she wanted to close her
eyes. She was expecting another danger, and therefore her eyes became restless
like those of a deer cub. This was all the arrangement of yogamäyä. The
524
relationship between mother Yaçodä and Kåñëa is one of pure maternal love.
In that love, mother Yaçodä did not very much appreciate the display of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead's opulences.
At the beginning of this chapter, two extra verses sometimes appear:
evaà bahüni karmäëi
gopänäà çaà sa-yoñitäm
nandasya gehe vavådhe
kurvan viñëu-janärdanaù
"In this way, to chastise and kill the demons, the child Kåñëa demonstrated
many activities in the house of Nanda Mahäräja, and the inhabitants of Vraja
enjoyed these incidents."
evaà sa vavådhe viñëur
nanda-gehe janärdanaù
kurvann aniçam änandaà
gopälänäà sa-yoñitäm
"To increase the transcendental pleasure of the gopas and the gopés, Kåñëa, the
killer of all demons, was thus raised by His father and mother, Nanda and
Yaçodä."
Çrépäda Vijayadhvaja Tértha also adds another verse after the third verse in
this chapter:
vistareëeha käruëyät
sarva-päpa-praëäçanam
vaktum arhasi dharma-jïa
dayälus tvam iti prabho
"Parékñit Mahäräja then requested Çukadeva Gosvämé to continue speaking
such narrations about the pastimes of Kåñëa, so that the King could enjoy from
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
525
them transcendental bliss."
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Tenth Canto, Seventh Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Killing of the Demon Tåëävarta."
8. Lord Kåñëa Shows the Universal Form Within His Mouth
The summary of the Eighth Chapter is as follows. This chapter describes
the ceremony of giving a name to Kåñëa. It also describes His crawling, His
playing with the cows, and His eating earth and again showing the universal
form to His mother.
One day, Vasudeva sent for Gargamuni, the family priest of the
yadu-vaàça, and thus Gargamuni went to the house of Nanda Mahäräja, who
received him very well and requested him to give names to Kåñëa and
Balaräma. Gargamuni, of course, reminded Nanda Mahäräja that Kaàsa was
looking for the son of Devaké and said that if he performed the ceremony very
gorgeously, the ceremony would come to the notice of Kaàsa, who would then
suspect that Kåñëa was the son of Devaké. Nanda Mahäräja therefore requested
Gargamuni to perform this ceremony without anyone's knowledge, and
Gargamuni did so. Because Balaräma, the son of Rohiëé, increases the
transcendental bliss of others, His name is Räma, and because of His
extraordinary strength, He is called Baladeva. He attracts the Yadus to follow
His instructions, and therefore His name is Saìkarñaëa. Kåñëa, the son of
Yaçodä, previously appeared in many other colors, such as white, red and
yellow, and He had now assumed the color black. Because He was sometimes
the son of Vasudeva, His name is Väsudeva. According to His various activities
and qualities, He has many other names. After thus informing Nanda
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
526
Mahäräja and completing the name-giving ceremony, Gargamuni advised
Nanda Mahäräja to protect his son very carefully and then departed.
Çukadeva Gosvämé next described how the two children crawled, walked on
Their small legs, played with the cows and calves, stole butter and other milk
products and broke the butter pots. In this way, he described many naughty
activities of Kåñëa and Balaräma. The most wonderful of these occurred when
Kåñëa's playmates complained to mother Yaçodä that Kåñëa was eating earth.
Mother Yaçodä wanted to open Kåñëa's mouth to see the evidence so that she
could chastise Him. Sometimes she assumed the position of a chastising
mother, and at the next moment she was overwhelmed with maternal love.
After describing all this to Mahäräja Parékñit, Çukadeva Gosvämé, at Mahäräja
Parékñit's request, praised the fortune of mother Yaçodä and Nanda. Nanda
and Yaçodä were formerly Droëa and Dharä, and by the order of Brahmä they
came to this earth and had the Supreme Personality of Godhead as their son.
TEXT 1
çré-çuka uväca
gargaù purohito räjan
yadünäà sumahä-tapäù
vrajaà jagäma nandasya
vasudeva-pracoditaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; gargaù—Gargamuni;
purohitaù—the priest; räjan—O King Parékñit; yadünäm—of the Yadu
dynasty; su-mahä-tapäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
vrajam—to
the village known as Vrajabhümi; jagäma—went; nandasya—of Mahäräja
Nanda; vasudeva-pracoditaù—being inspired by Vasudeva.
527
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O Mahäräja Parékñit, the priest of the Yadu
dynasty, namely Gargamuni, who was highly elevated in austerity and penance,
was then inspired by Vasudeva to go see Nanda Mahäräja at his home.
TEXT 2
taM ä{"î"A par"ma‘aIta:
‘atyautTaAya k{(taAÃaila:
@AnacaARDaAeºajaiDayaA
‘aiNApaAtapaur":s$ar"ma,
taà dåñövä parama-prétaù
pratyutthäya kåtäïjaliù
änarcädhokñaja-dhiyä
praëipäta-puraùsaram
SYNONYMS
tam—him (Gargamuni); dåñövä—after seeing; parama-prétaù—Nanda
Mahäräja was very much pleased; pratyutthäya—standing up to receive him;
kåta-aïjaliù—with folded hands; änarca—worshiped;
adhokñaja-dhiyä—although Gargamuni was visible to the senses, Nanda
Mahäräja maintained a very high respect for him;
praëipäta-puraùsaram—Nanda Mahäräja fell down before him and offered
obeisances.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
528
When Nanda Mahäräja saw Gargamuni present at his home, Nanda was so
pleased that he stood up to receive him with folded hands. Although seeing
Gargamuni with his eyes, Nanda Mahäräja could appreciate that Gargamuni
was adhokñaja; that is, he was not an ordinary person seen by material senses.
TEXT 3
s$aUpaivaíM" k{(taAitaTyaM
igAr"A s$aUna{tayaA mauinama,
nand"iyatvaA“avaIä," “aöna,
paUNARsya k(r"vaAma ik(ma,
süpaviñöaà kåtätithyaà
girä sünåtayä munim
nandayitväbravéd brahman
pürëasya karaväma kim
SYNONYMS
su-upaviñöam—when Gargamuni was seated very comfortably;
kåta-ätithyam—and he had been properly received as a guest; girä—by words;
sünåtayä—very sweet; munim—Gargamuni; nandayitvä—pleasing him in this
way; abravét—said; brahman—O brähmaëa; pürëasya—of one who is full in
everything; karaväma kim—what can I do for you (kindly order me).
TRANSLATION
When Gargamuni had been properly received as a guest and was very
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
comfortably seated, Nanda Mahäräja submitted with gentle and submissive
words: Dear sir, because you are a devotee, you are full in everything. Yet my
529
duty is to serve you. Kindly order me. What can I do for you?
TEXT 4
mah"iã"calanaM na|NAAM
gA{ih"NAAM d"Inacaetas$aAma,
ina:™aeyas$aAya BagAvana,
k(lpatae naAnyaTaA ¸(icata,
mahad-vicalanaà nèëäà
gåhiëäà déna-cetasäm
niùçreyasäya bhagavan
kalpate nänyathä kvacit
SYNONYMS
mahat-vicalanam—the movement of great personalities; nèëäm—in the houses
of ordinary persons; gåhiëäm—especially householders; déna-cetasäm—who are
very simple-minded, being engaged in family maintenance and nothing more;
niùçreyasäya—a great personality has no reason to go to the gåhastha but to
benefit him; bhagavan—O most powerful devotee; kalpate—is to be taken that
way; na anyathä—not for any other purpose; kvacit—at any time.
TRANSLATION
O my lord, O great devotee, persons like you move from one place to another
not for their own interests but for the sake of poor-hearted gåhasthas
[householders]. Otherwise they have no interest in going from one place to
another.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
530
PURPORT
As factually stated by Nanda Mahäräja, Gargamuni, being a devotee, had
no needs. Similarly, when Kåñëa comes He has no needs, for He is pürëa,
ätmäräma. Nonetheless, He descends to this material world to protect the
devotees and vanquish miscreants (pariträëäya sädhünäà vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm
[Bg. 4.8]). This is the mission of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
devotees also have the same mission. One who executes this mission of
para-upakära, performing welfare activities for people in general, is recognized
by Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as being very, very dear to
Him (na ca tasmän manuñyeñu kaçcin me priya-kåttamaù [Bg. 18.69]). Similarly,
Caitanya Mahäprabhu has advised this para-upakära, and He has especially
advised the inhabitants of India:
bhärata-bhümite haila manuñya-janma yära
janma särthaka kari' kara para-upakära
"One who has taken his birth as a human being in the land of India
[Bhärata-varña] should make his life successful and work for the benefit of all
other people." (Cc. Ädi 9.41) On the whole, the duty of a pure Vaiñëava
devotee is to act for the welfare of others.
Nanda Mahäräja could understand that Gargamuni had come for this
purpose and that his own duty now was to act according to Gargamuni's
advice. Thus he said, "Please tell me what is my duty." This should be the
attitude of everyone, especially the householder. The varëäçrama society is
organized into eight divisions: brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya, çüdra, brahmacarya,
gåhastha, vänaprastha and sannyäsa. Nanda Mahäräja represented himself as
gåhiëäm, a householder. A brahmacäré factually has no needs, but gåhé,
householders, are engaged in sense gratification. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
(2.44), bhogaiçvarya-prasaktänäà tayäpahåta-cetasäm. Everyone has come to
this material world for sense gratification, and the position of those who are
531
too attached to sense gratification and who therefore accept the
gåhastha-äçrama is very precarious. Since everyone in this material world is
searching for sense gratification, gåhasthas are required to be trained as mahat,
great mahätmäs. Therefore Nanda Mahäräja specifically used the word
mahad-vicalanam. Gargamuni had no interest to serve by going to Nanda
Mahäräja, but Nanda Mahäräja, as a gåhastha, was always perfectly ready to
receive instructions from a mahätmä to gain the real benefit in life. Thus he
was ready to execute Gargamuni's order.
TEXT 5
jyaAeitaSaAmayanaM s$aAºaAä,"
yaÔajÁaAnamataIin‰"yama,
‘aNAItaM BavataA yaena
paumaAna, vaed" par"Avar"ma,
jyotiñäm ayanaà säkñäd
yat taj jïänam aténdriyam
praëétaà bhavatä yena
pumän veda parävaram
SYNONYMS
jyotiñäm—knowledge of astrology (along with other aspects of culture in
human society, and specifically in civilized society, there must be knowledge of
astrology); ayanam—the movements of the stars and planets in relationship to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
human society; säkñät—directly; yat tat jïänam—such knowledge;
ati-indriyam—which an ordinary person cannot understand because it is
beyond his vision; praëétam bhavatä—you have prepared a perfect book of
knowledge; yena—by which; pumän—any person; veda—can understand;
532
para-avaram—the cause and effect of destiny.
TRANSLATION
O great saintly person, you have compiled the astrological knowledge by
which one can understand past and present unseen things. By the strength of
this knowledge, any human being can understand what he has done in his past
life and how it affects his present life. This is known to you.
PURPORT
The word "destiny" is now defined. Unintelligent persons who do not
understand the meaning of life are just like animals. Animals do not know the
past, present and future of life, nor are they able to understand it. But a human
being can understand this, if he is sober. Therefore, as stated in Bhagavad-gétä
(2.13), dhéras tatra na muhyati: a sober person is not bewildered. The simple
truth is that although life is eternal, in this material world one changes from
one body to another. Foolish people, especially in this age, do not understand
this simple truth. Kåñëa says:
dehino 'smin yathä dehe
kaumäraà yauvanaà jarä
tathä dehäntara-präptir
dhéras tatra na muhyati
"As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to youth
to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death. The
self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change." (Bg. 2.13) Kåñëa, the
greatest authority, says that the body will change. And as soon as the body
changes, one's whole program of work changes also. Today I am a human being
or a great personality, but with a little deviation from nature's law, I shall have
to accept a different type of body. Today I am a human being, but tomorrow I
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
533
may become a dog, and then whatever activities I have performed in this life
will be a failure. This simple truth is now rarely understood, but one who is a
dhéra can understand this. Those in this material world for material enjoyment
should know that because their present position will cease to exist, they must
be careful in how they act. This is also stated by Åñabhadeva. Na sädhu manye
yata ätmano 'yam asann api kleçada äsa dehaù (SB 5.5.4). Although this body is
temporary, as long as we have to live in this body we must suffer. Whether one
has a short life or a long life, one must suffer the threefold miseries of material
life. Therefore any gentleman, dhéra, must be interested in jyotiña, astrology.
Nanda Mahäräja was trying to take advantage of the opportunity afforded
by Gargamuni's presence, for Gargamuni was a great authority in this
knowledge of astrology, by which one can see the unseen events of past,
present and future. It is the duty of a father to understand the astrological
position of his children and do what is needed for their happiness. Now, taking
advantage of the opportunity afforded by the presence of Gargamuni, Nanda
Mahäräja suggested that Gargamuni prepare a horoscope for Nanda's two sons,
Kåñëa and Balaräma.
TEXT 6
tvaM ih" “aöivad"AM ™aeï":
s$aMs$k(Ar"Ana, k(tauRmahR"is$a
baAlayaAer"nayaAena|RNAAM
janmanaA “aAöNAAe gAuç&:
tvaà hi brahma-vidäà çreñöhaù
saàskärän kartum arhasi
bälayor anayor nèëäà
janmanä brähmaëo guruù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
534
SYNONYMS
tvam—Your Holiness; hi—indeed; brahma-vidäm—of all brähmaëas, or
persons who understand what is Brahman (brahma jänätéti brähmaëaù);
çreñöhaù—you are the best; saàskärän—ceremonies performed for reformation
(because by these reformatory activities one takes one's second birth:
saàskäräd bhaved dvijaù); kartum arhasi—because you have kindly come here,
kindly execute; bälayoù—of these two sons (Kåñëa and Balaräma); anayoù—of
both of Them; nèëäm—not only of Them, but of all human society;
janmanä—as soon as he takes birth; brähmaëaù—immediately the brähmaëa
becomes; guruù—the guide.*(10)
TRANSLATION
My lord, you are the best of the brähmaëas, especially because you are fully
aware of the jyotiù-çästra, the astrological science. Therefore you are naturally
the spiritual master of every human being. This being so, since you have kindly
come to my house, kindly execute the reformatory activities for my two sons.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, says in Bhagavad-gétä (4.13),
cätur-varëyaà mayä såñöaà guëa-karma-vibhägaçaù: the four varëas-brähmaëa,
kñatriya, vaiçya and çüdra—must be present in society. The brähmaëas are
required for the guidance of the whole society. If there is no such institution as
varëäçrama-dharma and if human society has no such guide as the brähmaëa,
human society will be hellish. In Kali-yuga, especially at the present moment,
there is no such thing as a real brähmaëa, and therefore society is in a chaotic
condition. Formerly there were qualified brähmaëas, but at present, although
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
brähmaëas, they actually
have no ability to guide society. The Kåñëa consciousness movement is
535
therefore very much eager to reintroduce the varëäçrama system into human
society so that those who are bewildered or less intelligent will be able to take
guidance from qualified brähmaëas.
Brähmaëa means Vaiñëava. After one becomes a brähmaëa, the next stage
of development in human society is to become a Vaiñëava. People in general
must be guided to the destination or goal of life, and therefore they must
understand Viñëu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The whole system of
Vedic knowledge is based on this principle, but people have lost the clue (na te
viduù svärtha-gatià hi viñëum [SB 7.5.31]), and they are simply pursuing sense
gratification, with the risk of gliding down to a lower grade of life
(måtyu-saàsära-vartmani [Bg. 9.3]). It doesn't matter whether one is born a
brähmaëa or not. No one is born a brähmaëa; everyone is born a çüdra. But by
the guidance of a brähmaëa and by saàskära, one can become dvija,
twice-born, and then gradually become a brähmaëa. Brähmaëism is not a
system meant to create a monopoly for a particular class of men. Everyone
should be educated so as to become a brähmaëa. At least there must be an
opportunity to allow everyone to attain the destination of life. Regardless of
whether one is born in a brähmaëa family, a kñatriya family or a çüdra family,
one may be guided by a proper brähmaëa and be promoted to the highest
platform of being a Vaiñëava. Thus the Kåñëa consciousness movement affords
an opportunity to develop the right destiny for human society. Nanda
Mahäräja took advantage of the opportunity of Gargamuni's presence by
requesting him to perform the necessary reformatory activities for his sons to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
TEXT 7
™aIgAgAR ovaAca
yaäU"naAmah"maAcaAyaR:
KyaAtaê Bauiva s$avaRd"A
536
s$autaM mayaA s$aMs$k{(taM tae
manyatae de"vak(Ls$autama,
çré-garga uväca
yadünäm aham äcäryaù
khyätaç ca bhuvi sarvadä
sutaà mayä saàskåtaà te
manyate devaké-sutam
SYNONYMS
çré-gargaù uväca—Gargamuni said; yadünäm—of the Yadu dynasty; aham—I
am; äcäryaù—the priestly guide, or purohita; khyätaù ca—this is already
known; bhuvi—everywhere; sarvadä—always; sutam—the son; mayä—by me;
saàskåtam—having undergone the purificatory process; te—of you;
manyate—would be considered; devaké-sutam—the son of Devaké.
TRANSLATION
Gargamuni said: My dear Nanda Mahäräja, I am the priestly guide of the
Yadu dynasty. This is known everywhere. Therefore, if I perform the
purificatory process for your sons, Kaàsa will consider Them the sons of
Devaké.
PURPORT
Gargamuni indirectly disclosed that Kåñëa was the son of Devaké, not of
Yaçodä. Since Kaàsa was already searching for Kåñëa, if the purificatory
process were undertaken by Gargamuni, Kaàsa might be informed, and that
would create a catastrophe. It may be argued that although Gargamuni was the
priest of the Yadu dynasty, Nanda Mahäräja also belonged to that dynasty.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Nanda Mahäräja, however, was not acting as a kñatriya. Therefore Gargamuni
537
said, "If I act as your priest, this will confirm that Kåñëa is the son of Devaké."
TEXTS 8-9
kM(s$a: paApamaita: s$aKyaM
tava caAnak(äu"näu"Bae:
de"vafyaA @í"maAe gABaAeR
na ñI BaivataumahR"ita
wita s$aiÂantayaHC_$tvaA
de"vafyaA d"Air"k(Avaca:
@ipa h"ntaA gAtaAzAÆÿs$a,
taihR" taªaAe'nayaAe Bavaeta,
kaàsaù päpa-matiù sakhyaà
tava cänakadundubheù
devakyä añöamo garbho
na stré bhavitum arhati
iti saïcintayaï chrutvä
devakyä därikä-vacaù
api hantä gatäçaìkas
tarhi tan no 'nayo bhavet
SYNONYMS
kaàsaù—King Kaàsa; päpa-matiù—very, very sinful, having a polluted mind;
sakhyam—friendship; tava—your; ca—also; änaka-dundubheù—of Vasudeva;
devakyäù—of Devaké; añöamaù garbhaù—the eighth pregnancy; na—not;
stré—a woman; bhavitum arhati—is possible to be; iti
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—in this way;
538
saïcintayan—considering; çrutvä—and hearing (this news); devakyäù—of
Devaké; därikä-vacaù—the message from the daughter; api—although there
was; hantä gata-äçaìkaù—there is a possibility that Kaàsa would take steps to
kill this child; tarhi—therefore; tat—that incident; naù—for us; anayaù
bhavet—may not be very good.
TRANSLATION
Kaàsa is both a great diplomat and a very sinful man. Therefore, having
heard from Yogamäyä, the daughter of Devaké, that the child who will kill him
has already been born somewhere else, having heard that the eighth pregnancy
of Devaké could not bring forth a female child, and having understood your
friendship with Vasudeva, Kaàsa, upon hearing that the purificatory process
has been performed by me, the priest of the Yadu dynasty, may certainly
consider all these points and suspect that Kåñëa is the son of Devaké and
Vasudeva. Then he might take steps to kill Kåñëa. That would be a catastrophe.
PURPORT
Kaàsa knew very well that Yogamäyä was, after all, the maidservant of
Kåñëa and Viñëu and that although Yogamäyä had appeared as the daughter of
Devaké, she might have been forbidden to disclose this fact. Actually this was
what had happened. Gargamuni argued very soberly that his taking part in
performing the reformatory process for Kåñëa would give rise to many doubts,
so that Kaàsa might take very severe steps to kill the child. Kaàsa had already
sent many demons to attempt to kill this child, but none of them had survived.
If Gargamuni were to perform the purificatory process, Kaàsa's suspicions
would be fully confirmed, and he would take very severe steps. Gargamuni
gave this warning to Nanda Mahäräja.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
TEXT 10
539
™aInand" ovaAca
@laiºataAe'ismana, r"h"is$a
maAmakE(r"ipa gAAe˜ajae
ku(ç& iã"jaAitas$aMs$k(ArM"
svaistavaAcanapaUvaRk(ma,
çré-nanda uväca
alakñito 'smin rahasi
mämakair api go-vraje
kuru dvijäti-saàskäraà
svasti-väcana-pürvakam
SYNONYMS
çré-nandaù uväca—Nanda Mahäräja said (to Gargamuni); alakñitaù—without
Kaàsa's knowledge; asmin—in this cow shed; rahasi—in a very solitary place;
mämakaiù—even by my relatives; api—a still more secluded place;
go-vraje—in the cow shed; kuru—just execute; dvijäti-saàskäram—the
purificatory process of second birth (saàskäräd bhaved dvijaù);
svasti-väcana-pürvakam—by chanting the Vedic hymns to perform the
purificatory process.
TRANSLATION
Nanda Mahäräja said: My dear great sage, if you think that your performing
this process of purification will make Kaàsa suspicious, then secretly chant the
Vedic hymns and perform the purifying process of second birth here in the cow
shed of my house, without the knowledge of anyone else, even my relatives, for
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
this process of purification is essential.
540
PURPORT
Nanda Mahäräja did not like the idea of avoiding the purificatory process.
Despite the many obstacles, he wanted to take advantage of Gargamuni's
presence and do what was needed. The purificatory process is essential
specifically for brähmaëas, kñatriyas and vaiçyas. Therefore, since Nanda
Mahäräja presented himself as a vaiçya, this process of purification was
essential. Formerly, such institutional activities were compulsory.
Cätur-varëyaà mayä såñöaà guëa-karma-vibhägaçaù (Bg. 4.13). Without these
activities of purification, the society would be considered a society of animals.
To take advantage of Gargamuni's presence, Nanda Mahäräja wanted to
perform the näma-karaëa ceremonies, even secretly, without any gorgeous
arrangements. Therefore, the opportunity for purification should be regarded
as the essential duty of human society. In Kali-yuga, however, people have
forgotten the essence. Mandäù sumanda-matayo manda-bhägyä hy upadrutäù
(SB 1.1.10). In this age, people are all bad and unfortunate, and they do not
accept Vedic instructions to make their life successful. Nanda Mahäräja,
however, did not want to neglect anything. To keep intact a happy society
advanced in spiritual knowledge, he took full advantage of Gargamuni's
presence to do what was necessary. How degraded society has become within
five thousand years. Mandäù sumanda-matayo manda-bhägyäù. The human life
is obtained after many, many millions of births, and it is intended for
purification. Previously, a father was eager to give all kinds of help to elevate
his children, but at present, because of being misguided, people are prepared
even to kill to avoid the responsibility of raising children.
TEXT 11
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
WvaM s$am‘aAiTaRtaAe iva‘a:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
541
svaicak(LiSaRtamaeva tata,
cak(Ar" naAmak(r"NAM
gAUX#Ae r"h"is$a baAlayaAe:
çré-çuka uväca
evaà samprärthito vipraù
sva-cikérñitam eva tat
cakära näma-karaëaà
güòho rahasi bälayoù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—in this way;
samprärthitaù—being eagerly requested; vipraù—the brähmaëa Gargamuni;
sva-cikérñitam eva—which he already desired to do and for which he had gone
there; tat—that; cakära—performed; näma-karaëam—the name-giving
ceremony; güòhaù—confidentially; rahasi—in a secluded place; bälayoù—of
the two boys (Kåñëa and Balaräma).
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: Having thus been especially requested by
Nanda Mahäräja to do that which he already desired to do, Gargamuni
performed the name-giving ceremony for Kåñëa and Balaräma in a solitary
place.
TEXT 12
™aIgAgAR ovaAca
@yaM ih" r"Aeih"NAIpau‡aAe
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
542
r"mayana, s$auô$d"Ae gAuNAE:
@AKyaAsyatae r"Ama wita
balaAiDafyaAß"laM ivaäu":
yaäU"naAmapa{TagBaAvaAta,
s$aÆÿSaRNAmauzAntyaipa
çré-garga uväca
ayaà hi rohiëé-putro
ramayan suhådo guëaiù
äkhyäsyate räma iti
balädhikyäd balaà viduù
yadünäm apåthag-bhävät
saìkarñaëam uçanty api
SYNONYMS
çré-gargaù uväca—Gargamuni said; ayam—this; hi—indeed;
rohiëé-putraù—the son of Rohiëé; ramayan—pleasing; suhådaù—all His friends
and relatives; guëaiù—by transcendental qualities; äkhyäsyate—will be called;
rämaù—by the name Räma, the supreme enjoyer; iti—in this way;
bala-ädhikyät—because of extraordinary strength; balam viduù—will be
known as Balaräma; yadünäm—of the Yadu dynasty; apåthak-bhävät—because
of not being separated from you; saìkarñaëam—by the name Saìkarñaëa, or
uniting two families; uçanti—attracts; api—also.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
TRANSLATION
Gargamuni said: This child, the son of Rohiëé, will give all happiness to His
relatives and friends by His transcendental qualities. Therefore He will be
known as Räma. And because He will manifest extraordinary bodily strength,
543
He will also be known as Bala. Moreover, because He unites two
families—Vasudeva's family and the family of Nanda Mahäräja—He will be
known as Saìkarñaëa.
PURPORT
Baladeva was actually the son of Devaké, but He was transferred from
Devaké's womb to that of Rohiëé. This fact was not disclosed. According to a
statement in the Hari-vaàça:
pratyuväca tato rämaù
sarväàs tän abhitaù sthitän
yädaveñv api sarveñu
bhavanto mama vallabhäù
Gargamuni did disclose to Nanda Mahäräja that Balaräma would be known as
Saìkarñaëa because of uniting two families—the yadu-vaàça and the vaàça of
Nanda Mahäräja—one of which was known as kñatriya and the other as vaiçya.
Both families had the same original forefather, the only difference being that
Nanda Mahäräja was born of a vaiçya wife whereas Vasudeva was born of a
kñatriya wife. Later, Nanda Mahäräja married a vaiçya wife, and Vasudeva
married a kñatriya wife. So although the families of Nanda Mahäräja and
Vasudeva both came from the same father, they were divided as kñatriya and
vaiçya. Now Baladeva united them, and therefore He was known as
Saìkarñaëa.
TEXT 13
@As$ana, vaNAARñyaAe ÷sya
gA{õ"taAe'nauyaugAM tanaU:
zAuflaAe r"l(staTaA paIta
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
544
wd"AnaI%M k{(SNAtaAM gAta:
äsan varëäs trayo hy asya
gåhëato 'nuyugaà tanüù
çuklo raktas tathä péta
idänéà kåñëatäà gataù
SYNONYMS
äsan—were assumed; varëäù trayaù—three colors; hi—indeed; asya—of your
son Kåñëa; gåhëataù—accepting; anuyugam tanüù—transcendental bodies
according to the different yugas; çuklaù—sometimes white; raktaù—sometimes
red; tathä—as well as; pétaù—sometimes yellow; idäném kåñëatäm gataù—at the
present moment He has assumed a blackish color.
TRANSLATION
Your son Kåñëa appears as an incarnation in every millennium. In the past,
He assumed three different colors—white, red and yellow—and now He has
appeared in a blackish color. [In another Dväpara-yuga, He appeared (as Lord
Rämacandra) in the color of çuka, a parrot.] All such incarnations have now
assembled in Kåñëa.]
PURPORT
Partially explaining the position of Lord Kåñëa and partially covering the
facts, Gargamuni indicated, "Your son is a great personality, and He can
change the color of His body in different ages." The word gåhëataù indicates
that Kåñëa is free to make His choice. In other words, He is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and may therefore do whatever He desires. In Vedic
literature the different colors assumed by the Personality of Godhead in
different millenniums are stated, and therefore when Gargamuni said, "Your
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
545
son has assumed these colors," he indirectly said, "He is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead." Because of Kaàsa's atrocities, Gargamuni tried to
avoid disclosing this fact, but he indirectly informed Nanda Mahäräja that
Kåñëa, his son, was the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
It may be noted that Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, in his book Krama-sandarbha, has
enunciated the purport of this verse. In every millennium, Kåñëa appears in a
different form, either as white, red or yellow, but this time He personally
appeared in His original, blackish form and, as predicted by Gargamuni,
exhibited the power of Näräyaëa. Because in this form the Supreme
Personality of Godhead exhibits Himself fully, His name is Çré Kåñëa, the
all-attractive.
Factually, Kåñëa is the source of all avatäras, and therefore all the different
features of the different avatäras are present in Kåñëa. When Kåñëa
incarnates, all the features of other incarnations are already present within
Him. Other incarnations are partial representations of Kåñëa, who is the
full-fledged incarnation of the Supreme Being. It is to be understood that the
Supreme Being, whether appearing as çukla, rakta or péta (white, red or
yellow), is the same person. When He appears in different incarnations, He
appears in different colors, just like the sunshine, which contains seven colors.
Sometimes the colors of sunshine are represented separately; otherwise the
sunshine is observed mainly as bright light. The different avatäras, such as the
manvantara-avatäras, lélä-avatäras and daça-avatäras, are all included in the
kåñëa-avatära. When Kåñëa appears, all the avatäras appear with Him. As
described in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.3.26):
avatärä hy asaìkhyeyä
hareù sattva-nidher dvijäù
yathävidäsinaù kulyäù
sarasaù syuù sahasraçaù
The avatäras incessantly appear, like incessantly flowing water. No one can
count how many waves there are in flowing water, and similarly there is no
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
546
limitation of the avatäras. And Kåñëa is the full representation of all avatäras
because He is the source of all avatäras. Kåñëa is aàçé, whereas others are aàça,
part of Kåñëa. All living entities, including us, are aàças (mamaiväàço
jéva-loke jéva-bhütaù sanätanaù [Bg. 15.7]). These aàças are of different
magnitude. Human beings (who are minute aàças) and the demigods,
viñëu-tattva and all other living beings are all part of the Supreme. Nityo
nityänäà cetanaç cetanänäm (Kaöha Upaniñad 2.2.13). Kåñëa is the full
representation of all living entities, and when Kåñëa is present, all avatäras are
included in Him.
The Eleventh Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam describes the incarnations for
each yuga in chronological order. The Bhägavatam says, kåte çuklaç
catur-bähuù, tretäyäà rakta-varëo'sau, dväpare bhagavän çyämaù and
kåñëa-varëaà tviñäkåñëam [SB 11.5.32]. We actually see that in Kali-yuga,
Bhagavän has appeared in péta-varëa, or a yellow color, as Gaurasundara,
although the Bhägavatam speaks of kåñëa-varëam. To adjust all these
statements, one should understand that although in some yugas some of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
colors are prominent, in every yuga, whenever Kåñëa appears, all the colors are
present. Kåñëa-varëaà tviñäkåñëam: although Caitanya Mahäprabhu appears
without kåñëa, or a blackish color, He is understood to be Kåñëa Himself.
Idänéà kåñëatäà gataù. The same original Kåñëa who appears in different
varëas has now appeared. The word äsan indicates that He is always present.
Whenever the Supreme Personality of Godhead appears in His full feature, He
is understood to be kåñëa-varëam, although He appears in different colors.
Prahläda Mahäräja states that Caitanya Mahäprabhu is channa; that is,
although He is Kåñëa, He is covered by a yellow color. Thus the Gauòéya
Vaiñëavas accept the conclusion that although Caitanya Mahäprabhu
appeared in péta color, He is Kåñëa.
kåñëa-varëaà tviñäkåñëaà
säìgopäìgästra-pärñadam
yajïaiù saìkértana-präyair
yajanti hi sumedhasaù
547
[SB 11.5.32]
TEXT 14
‘aAgAyaM vas$aude"vasya
¸(icaÀaAtastavaAtmaja:
vaAs$aude"va wita ™aImaAna,
@iBaÁaA: s$am‘acaºatae
präg ayaà vasudevasya
kvacij jätas tavätmajaù
väsudeva iti çrémän
abhijïäù sampracakñate
SYNONYMS
präk—before; ayam—this child; vasudevasya—of Vasudeva;
kvacit—sometimes; jätaù—was born; tava—your; ätmajaù—Kåñëa, who has
taken birth as your child; väsudevaù—therefore He may be given the name
Väsudeva; iti—thus; çrémän—very beautiful; abhijïäù—those who are learned;
sampracakñate—also say that Kåñëa is Väsudeva.
TRANSLATION
For many reasons, this beautiful son of yours sometimes appeared previously
as the son of Vasudeva. Therefore, those who are learned sometimes call this
child Väsudeva.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
PURPORT
Gargamuni indirectly disclosed, "This child was originally born as the son of
548
Vasudeva, although He is acting as your child. Generally He is your child, but
sometimes He is the son of Vasudeva."
TEXT 15
baó"ina s$ainta naAmaAina
è&paAiNA ca s$autasya tae
gAuNAk(maARnauè&paAiNA
taAnyahM" vaed" naAe janaA:
bahüni santi nämäni
rüpäëi ca sutasya te
guëa-karmänurüpäëi
täny ahaà veda no janäù
SYNONYMS
bahüni—various; santi—there are; nämäni—names; rüpäëi—forms; ca—also;
sutasya—of the son; te—your; guëa-karma-anu-rüpäëi—according to His
attributes and activities; täni—them; aham—I; veda—know; no janäù—not
ordinary persons.
TRANSLATION
For this son of yours there are many forms and names according to His
transcendental qualities and activities. These are known to me, but people in
general do not understand them.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Bahüni: the Lord has many names. Advaitam acyutam anädim ananta-rüpam
549
ädyaà puräëa-puruñaà nava-yauvanaà ca. As stated in the Brahma-saàhitä
(5.33), the Lord is one, but He has many forms and many names. It was not
that because Gargamuni gave the child the name Kåñëa, that was His only
name. He has other names, such as Bhaktavatsala, Giridhäré, Govinda and
Gopäla. If we analyze the nirukti, or semantic derivation, of the word "Kåñëa,"
we find that na signifies that He stops the repetition of birth and death, and
kåñ means sattärtha, or "existence." (Kåñëa is the whole of existence.) Also, kåñ
means "attraction," and na means änanda, or "bliss." Kåñëa is known as
Mukunda because He wants to give everyone spiritual, eternal, blissful life.
Unfortunately, because of the living entity's little independence, the living
entity wants to "deprogram" the program of Kåñëa. This is the material disease.
Nonetheless, because Kåñëa wants to give transcendental bliss to the living
entities, He appears in various forms. Therefore He is called Kåñëa. Because
Gargamuni was an astrologer, he knew what others did not know. Yet Kåñëa
has so many names that even Gargamuni did not know them all. It is to be
concluded that Kåñëa, according to His transcendental activities, has many
names and many forms.
TEXT 16
WSa va: ™aeya @ADaAsyaä,"
gAAepagAAeku(lanand"na:
@naena s$avaRäu"gAARiNA
yaUyamaÃastair"SyaTa
eña vaù çreya ädhäsyad
gopa-gokula-nandanaù
anena sarva-durgäëi
yüyam aïjas tariñyatha
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
550
SYNONYMS
eñaù—this child; vaù—for all of you people; çreyaù—the most auspicious;
ädhäsyat—will act all-auspiciously; gopa-gokula-nandanaù—just like a cowherd
boy, born in a family of cowherd men as the son of the estate of Gokula;
anena—by Him; sarva-durgäëi—all kinds of miserable conditions; yüyam—all
of you; aïjaù—easily; tariñyatha—will overcome.
TRANSLATION
To increase the transcendental bliss of the cowherd men of Gokula, this
child will always act auspiciously for you. And by His grace only, you will
surpass all difficulties.
PURPORT
For the cowherd men and the cows, Kåñëa is the supreme friend. Therefore
He is worshiped by the prayer namo brahmaëya-deväya go-brähmaëa-hitäya ca.
His pastimes in Gokula, His dhäma, are always favorable to the brähmaëas and
the cows. His first business is to give all comfort to the cows and the
brähmaëas. In fact, comfort for the brähmaëas is secondary, and comfort for
the cows is His first concern. Because of His presence, all people would
overcome all difficulties and always be situated in transcendental bliss.
TEXT 17
puränena vraja-pate
sädhavo dasyu-péòitäù
aräjake rakñyamäëä
jigyur dasyün samedhitäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
551
SYNONYMS
purä—formerly; anena—by Kåñëa; vraja-pate—O King of Vraja;
sädhavaù—those who were honest; dasyu-péòitäù—being disturbed by rogues
and thieves; aräjake—when there was an irregular government;
rakñyamäëäù—were protected; jigyuù—conquered; dasyün—the rogues and
thieves; samedhitäù—flourished.
TRANSLATION
O Nanda Mahäräja, as recorded in history, when there was an irregular,
incapable government, Indra having been dethroned, and people were being
harassed and disturbed by thieves, this child appeared in order to protect the
people and enable them to flourish, and He curbed the rogues and thieves.
PURPORT
Indra is the king of the universe. Demons, thieves and rogues always disturb
Indra (indräri-vyäkulaà lokam), but when indräris, the enemies of Indra,
become prominent, Kåñëa appears. Kåñëas tu bhagavän svayaà/
indräri-vyäkulaà lokaà måòayanti yuge yuge (SB 1.3.28).
TEXT 18
ya Wtaismanmah"ABaAgAA:
‘aIitaM ku(vaRinta maAnavaA:
naAr"yaAe'iBaBavantyaetaAna,
ivaSNAupaºaAinavaAs$aur"A:
ya etasmin mahä-bhägäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
552
prétià kurvanti mänaväù
närayo 'bhibhavanty etän
viñëu-pakñän iväsuräù
SYNONYMS
ye—those persons who; etasmin—unto this child; mahä-bhägäù—very
fortunate; prétim—affection; kurvanti—execute; mänaväù—such persons;
na—not; arayaù—the enemies; abhibhavanti—do overcome; etän—those who
are attached to Kåñëa; viñëu-pakñän—the demigods, who always have Lord
Viñëu on their side; iva—like; asuräù—the demons.
TRANSLATION
Demons [asuras] cannot harm the demigods, who always have Lord Viñëu on
their side. Similarly, any person or group attached to Kåñëa is extremely
fortunate. Because such persons are very much affectionate toward Kåñëa, they
cannot be defeated by demons like the associates of Kaàsa [or by the internal
enemies, the senses].
TEXT 19
tasmaAªand"AtmajaAe'yaM tae
naAr"AyaNAs$amaAe gAuNAE:
i™ayaA k(LtyaARnauBaAvaena
gAAepaAyasva s$amaAih"ta:
tasmän nandätmajo 'yaà te
näräyaëa-samo guëaiù
çriyä kértyänubhävena
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
553
gopäyasva samähitaù
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; nanda—O Nanda Mahäräja; ätmajaù—your son;
ayam—this; te—of you; näräyaëa-samaù—is as good as Näräyaëa (Näräyaëa
Himself showing transcendental qualities); guëaiù—by qualities; çriyä—by
opulence; kértyä—especially by His name and fame; anubhävena—and by His
influence; gopäyasva—just raise this child; samähitaù—with great attention
and precaution.
TRANSLATION
In conclusion, therefore, O Nanda Mahäräja, this child of yours is as good as
Näräyaëa. In His transcendental qualities, opulence, name, fame and influence,
He is exactly like Näräyaëa. You should all raise this child very carefully and
cautiously.
PURPORT
In this verse, the word näräyaëa-samaù is significant. Näräyaëa has no
equal. He is asamaurdhva: no one is equal to Him, and no one is greater than
He is. As stated in çästra:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
yas tu näräyaëaà devaà
brahma-rudrädi-daivataiù
samatvenaiva vékñeta
sa päñaëòé bhaved dhruvam
[Cc. Madhya 18.116]
One who equates Näräyaëa even with great exalted demigods like Lord Çiva or
Lord Brahmä is a päñaëòé, an agnostic. No one can equal Näräyaëa.
Nonetheless, Gargamuni used the word sama, meaning "equal," because he
554
wanted to treat Kåñëa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead who had
become Nanda Mahäräja's son. Gargamuni wanted to impress upon the mind
of Nanda Mahäräja, "Your worshipable Deity, Näräyaëa, is so pleased with you
that He has sent you a son almost equal to Him in qualifications. Therefore
you may designate your son with a similar name, such as Mukunda or
Madhusüdana. But you must always remember that whenever you want to do
something very good, there will be many hindrances. Therefore you should
raise and protect this child with great care. If you can protect this child very
cautiously, as Näräyaëa always protects you, the child will be as good as
Näräyaëa." Gargamuni also indicated that although the child was exaltedly
qualified like Näräyaëa, He would enjoy more than Näräyaëa as räsa-vihäré,
the central enjoyer of the räsa dance. As stated in the Brahma-saàhitä,
lakñmé-sahasra-çata-sambhrama-sevyamänam: [Bs. 5.29] He would be served by
many gopés, who would all be as good as the goddess of fortune.
TEXT 20
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
wtyaAtmaAnaM s$amaAid"zya
gAgAeR ca svagA{hM" gAtae
nand": ‘amauid"taAe maenae
@AtmaAnaM paUNARmaAizASaAma,
çré-çuka uväca
ity ätmänaà samädiçya
garge ca sva-gåhaà gate
nandaù pramudito mene
ätmänaà pürëam äçiñäm
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
555
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; ätmänam—about the
Absolute Truth, the Supreme Soul; samädiçya—after fully instructing;
garge—when Gargamuni; ca—also; sva-gåham—to his own abode; gate—had
departed; nandaù—Mahäräja Nanda; pramuditaù—became extremely pleased;
mene—considered; ätmänam—his own self; pürëam äçiñäm—full of all good
fortune.
TRANSLATION
Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: After Gargamuni, having instructed
Nanda Mahäräja about Kåñëa, departed for his own home, Nanda Mahäräja was
very pleased and considered himself full of all good fortune.
PURPORT
Kåñëa is the Supersoul, and Nanda Mahäräja is the individual soul. By the
instructions of Gargamuni, both of them were blessed. Nanda Mahäräja was
thinking of Kåñëa's safety from the hands of demons like Pütanä and
Çakaöäsura, and because he possessed such a son, he thought of himself as most
fortunate.
TEXT 21
k(Alaena ˜ajataAlpaena
gAAeku(lae r"Amake(zAvaAE
jaAnauByaAM s$ah" paAiNAByaAM
ir"ËÿmaANAAE ivajaoe"tau:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
556
kälena vrajatälpena
gokule räma-keçavau
jänubhyäà saha päëibhyäà
riìgamäëau vijahratuù
SYNONYMS
kälena—of time; vrajatä—passing; alpena—a very small duration; gokule—in
Gokula, Vraja-dhäma; räma-keçavau—both Balaräma and Kåñëa;
jänubhyäm—by the strength of Their knees; saha päëibhyäm—resting on
Their hands; riìgamäëau—crawling; vijahratuù—enjoyed childhood play.
TRANSLATION
After a short time passed, both brothers, Räma and Kåñëa, began to crawl on
the ground of Vraja with the strength of Their hands and knees and thus enjoy
Their childhood play.
PURPORT
One brähmaëa devotee says:
çrutim apare småtim itare bhäratam anye bhajantu bhava-bhétäù
aham iha nandaà vande yasyälinde paraà brahma
"Let others, fearing material existence, worship the Vedas, the Vedic
supplementary puräëas and the Mahäbhärata, but I shall worship Nanda
Mahäräja, in whose courtyard the Supreme Brahman is crawling." For a highly
exalted devotee, kaivalya, merging into the existence of the Supreme, appears
no better than hell (narakäyate). But here one can simply think of the
crawling of Kåñëa and Balaräma in the courtyard of Nanda Mahäräja and
always merge in transcendental happiness. As long as one is absorbed in
thoughts of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
especially Kåñëa's childhood pastimes, as Parékñit
557
Mahäräja desired to be, one is always merged in actual kaivalya. Therefore
Vyäsadeva compiled Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Lokasyäjänato vidväàç cakre
sätvata-saàhitäm (SB 1.7.6). Vyäsadeva compiled Çrémad-Bhägavatam, under
the instruction of Närada, so that anyone can take advantage of this literature,
think of Kåñëa's pastimes and always be liberated.
çrutim apare småtim itare bhäratam anye bhajantu bhava-bhétäù
aham iha nandaà vande yasyälinde paraà brahma
TEXT 22
taAvax.~i„ayaugmamanauk{(Sya s$ar"Is$a{pantaAE
GaAeSa‘aGaAeSaç&icarM" ˜ajak(dR"maeSau
taªaAd"ô$í"manas$aAvanaus$a{tya laAekM(
maugDa‘aBaItavaäu"paeyataur"inta maA‡aAe:
täv aìghri-yugmam anukåñya sarésåpantau
ghoña-praghoña-ruciraà vraja-kardameñu
tan-näda-håñöa-manasäv anusåtya lokaà
mugdha-prabhétavad upeyatur anti mätroù
SYNONYMS
tau—Kåñëa and Balaräma; aìghri-yugmam anukåñya—dragging Their legs;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
sarésåpantau—crawling like snakes; ghoña-praghoña-ruciram—producing a
sound with Their ankle bells that was very, very sweet to hear;
vraja-kardameñu—in the mud created by cow dung and cow urine on the earth
of Vrajabhümi; tat-näda—by the sound of those ankle bells;
håñöa-manasau—being very much pleased; anusåtya—following; lokam—other
persons; mugdha—thus being enchanted; prabhéta-vat—then again being
558
afraid of them; upeyatuù—immediately returned; anti mätroù—toward Their
mothers.
TRANSLATION
When Kåñëa and Balaräma, with the strength of Their legs, crawled in the
muddy places created in Vraja by cow dung and cow urine, Their crawling
resembled the crawling of serpents, and the sound of Their ankle bells was very
charming. Very much pleased by the sound of other people's ankle bells, They
used to follow these people as if going to Their mothers, but when They saw
that these were other people, They became afraid and returned to Their real
mothers, Yaçodä and Rohiëé.
PURPORT
When Kåñëa and Balaräma were crawling about Vrajabhümi, They were
enchanted by the sound of ankle bells. Thus They sometimes followed other
people, who would enjoy the crawling of Kåñëa and Balaräma and exclaim,
"Oh, see how Kåñëa and Balaräma are crawling!" Upon hearing this, Kåñëa and
Balaräma could understand that these were not Their mothers They were
following, and They would return to Their actual mothers. Thus the crawling
of Kåñëa and Balaräma was enjoyed by the people of the neighborhood, as well
as by mother Yaçodä and Rohiëé and the two children Themselves.
TEXT 23
tanmaAtar"AE inajas$autaAE Ga{NAyaA µauvantyaAE
paÆÿAËÿr"AgAç&icar"AvaupagA{÷ d"AeByaARma,
d"ÔvaA stanaM ‘aipabataAe: sma mauKaM inar"Iºya
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
559
maugDaismataAlpad"zAnaM yayatau: ‘amaAed"ma,
tan-mätarau nija-sutau ghåëayä snuvantyau
paìkäìga-räga-ruciräv upagåhya dorbhyäm
dattvä stanaà prapibatoù sma mukhaà nirékñya
mugdha-smitälpa-daçanaà yayatuù pramodam
SYNONYMS
tat-mätarau—Their mothers (Rohiëé and Yaçodä); nija-sutau—their own
respective sons; ghåëayä—with great affection; snuvantyau—allowed to suck
the flowing milk from their breasts very happily;
paìka-aìga-räga-rucirau—whose beautiful transcendental bodies were
covered with muddy cow dung and urine; upagåhya—taking care of;
dorbhyäm—by their arms; dattvä—delivering Them; stanam—the breast;
prapibatoù—when the babies were sucking; sma—indeed; mukham—the
mouth; nirékñya—and seeing; mugdha-smita-alpa-daçanam—smiling with little
teeth coming out of Their mouths (they were more and more attracted);
yayatuù—and enjoyed; pramodam—transcendental bliss.
TRANSLATION
Dressed with muddy earth mixed with cow dung and cow urine, the babies
looked very beautiful, and when They went to Their mothers, both Yaçodä and
Rohiëé picked Them up with great affection, embraced Them and allowed
Them to suck the milk flowing from their breasts. While sucking the breast, the
babies smiled, and Their small teeth were visible. Their mothers, upon seeing
those beautiful teeth, enjoyed great transcendental bliss.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
As the mothers cared for their respective babies, by the arrangement of
560
yogamäyä the babies thought, "Here is My mother," and the mothers thought,
"Here is my son." Because of affection, milk naturally flowed from the mothers'
breasts, and the babies drank it. When the mothers saw small teeth coming in,
they would count them and be happy, and when the babies saw Their mothers
allowing Them to drink their breast milk, the babies also felt transcendental
pleasure. As this transcendental affection continued between Rohiëé and
Balaräma and Yaçodä and Kåñëa, they all enjoyed transcendental bliss.
TEXT 24
ya÷RËÿnaAd"zARnaIyaku(maAr"laIlaAva,
@nta˜aRjae tad"balaA: ‘agA{h"ItapaucCE$:
vats$aEir"tastata oBaAvanauk{(SyamaANAAE
‘aeºantya oijJatagA{h"A jaô$SauhR"s$antya:
yarhy aìganä-darçanéya-kumära-léläv
antar-vraje tad abaläù pragåhéta-pucchaiù
vatsair itas tata ubhäv anukåñyamäëau
prekñantya ujjhita-gåhä jahåñur hasantyaù
SYNONYMS
yarhi—when; aìganä-darçanéya—visible only to the ladies within the house;
kumära-lélau—the pastimes Çré Kåñëa and Balaräma exhibited as children;
antaù-vraje—within the inside of Vraja, in the house of Nanda Mahäräja;
tat—at that time; abaläù—all the ladies;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
pragåhéta-pucchaiù—the ends of their
tails having been caught by Kåñëa and Balaräma; vatsaiù—by the calves; itaù
tataù—here and there; ubhau—both Kåñëa and Balaräma;
anukåñyamäëau—being dragged; prekñantyaù—seeing such things;
ujjhita—given up; gåhäù—their household affairs; jahåñuù—enjoyed very
561
much; hasantyaù—while laughing.
TRANSLATION
Within the house of Nanda Mahäräja, the cowherd ladies would enjoy seeing
the pastimes of the babies Räma and Kåñëa. The babies would catch the ends of
the calves' tails, and the calves would drag Them here and there. When the
ladies saw these pastimes, they certainly stopped their household activities and
laughed and enjoyed the incidents.
PURPORT
While crawling in curiosity, Kåñëa and Balaräma would sometimes catch
the ends of the tails of calves. The calves, feeling that someone had caught
them, would begin to flee here and there, and the babies would hold on very
tightly, being afraid of how the calves were moving. The calves, seeing that the
babies were holding them tightly, would also become afraid. Then the ladies
would come to rescue the babies and gladly laugh. This was their enjoyment.
TEXT 25
Za{"ËÿYai¢adM"í)"Yais$ajalaiã"jak(Nq%ke(Bya:
‚(Lx"Apar"AvaitacalaAE svas$autaAE inaSaeä,"Dauma,
gA{÷AiNA k(tauRmaipa ya‡a na taÀananyaAE
zAek(Ata @Apataur"laM manas$aAe'navasTaAma,
çåìgy-agni-daàñöry-asi-jala-dvija-kaëöakebhyaù
kréòä-paräv aticalau sva-sutau niñeddhum
gåhyäëi kartum api yatra na taj-jananyau
çekäta äpatur alaà manaso 'navasthäm
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
562
SYNONYMS
çåìgé—with the cows; agni—fire; daàñöré—monkeys and dogs; asi—swords;
jala—water; dvija—birds; kaëöakebhyaù—and thorns; kréòä-parau
ati-calau—the babies, being too restless, engaged in play; sva-sutau—their own
two sons; niñeddhum—just to stop Them; gåhyäëi—household duties; kartum
api—by executing; yatra—when; na—not; tat-jananyau—Their mothers
(Rohiëé and Yaçodä); çekäte—able; äpatuù—obtained; alam—indeed;
manasaù—of the mind; anavasthäm—equilibrium.
TRANSLATION
When mother Yaçodä and Rohiëé were unable to protect the babies from
calamities threatened by horned cows, by fire, by animals with claws and teeth
such as monkeys, dogs and cats, and by thorns, swords and other weapons on
the ground, they were always in anxiety, and their household engagements were
disturbed. At that time, they were fully equipoised in the transcendental ecstasy
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
known as the distress of material affection, for this was aroused within their
minds.
PURPORT
All these pastimes of Kåñëa, and the great enjoyment exhibited by the
mothers, are transcendental; nothing about them is material. They are
described in the Brahma-saàhitä as änanda-cinmaya-rasa. In the spiritual
world there is anxiety, there is crying, and there are other feelings similar to
those of the material world, but because the reality of these feelings is in the
transcendental world, of which this world is only an imitation, mother Yaçodä
and Rohiëé enjoyed them transcendentally.
TEXT 26
563
k(AlaenaAlpaena r"AjaSaeR
r"Ama: k{(SNAê gAAeku(lae
@Ga{í"jaAnauiBa: paià"r,"
ivaca‚(mataur"Ãas$aA
kälenälpena räjarñe
rämaù kåñëaç ca gokule
aghåñöa-jänubhiù padbhir
vicakramatur aïjasä
SYNONYMS
kälena alpena—within a very short time; räjarñe—O King (Mahäräja Parékñit);
rämaù kåñëaù ca—both Räma and Kåñëa; gokule—in the village of Gokula;
aghåñöa-jänubhiù—without the help of crawling on Their knees; padbhiù—by
Their legs alone; vicakramatuù—began to walk; aïjasä—very easily.
TRANSLATION
O King Parékñit, within a very short time both Räma and Kåñëa began to
walk very easily in Gokula on Their legs, by Their own strength, without the
need to crawl.
PURPORT
Instead of crawling with Their knees, the babies could now stand up by
holding on to something and walk little by little, without difficulty, by the
strength of Their legs.
TEXT 27
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
564
tatastau BagAvaAna, k{(SNAAe
vayasyaE˜aRjabaAlakE(:
s$ah"r"AmaAe ˜ajañINAAM
ica‚(Lxe" janayanmaud"ma,
tatas tu bhagavän kåñëo
vayasyair vraja-bälakaiù
saha-rämo vraja-stréëäà
cikréòe janayan mudam
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; tu—but; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
kåñëaù—Lord Kåñëa; vayasyaiù—with Their playmates; vraja-bälakaiù—with
other small children in Vraja; saha-rämaù—along with Balaräma;
vraja-stréëäm—of all the ladies of Vraja; cikréòe—played very happily;
janayan—awakening; mudam—transcendental bliss.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, Lord Kåñëa, along with Balaräma, began to play with the other
children of the cowherd men, thus awakening the transcendental bliss of the
cowherd women.
PURPORT
The word saha-rämaù, meaning "along with Balaräma," is significant in this
verse. In such transcendental pastimes, Kåñëa is the chief hero, and Balaräma
provides additional help.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
565
TEXT 28
kåñëasya gopyo ruciraà
vékñya kaumära-cäpalam
çåëvantyäù kila tan-mätur
iti hocuù samägatäù
SYNONYMS
kåñëasya—of Kåñëa; gopyaù—all the gopés; ruciram—very attractive;
vékñya—observing; kaumära-cäpalam—the restlessness of the childish
pastimes; çåëvantyäù—just to hear them again and again; kila—indeed;
tat-mätuù—in the presence of His mother; iti—thus; ha—indeed; ücuù—said;
samägatäù—assembled there.
TRANSLATION
Observing the very attractive childish restlessness of Kåñëa, all the gopés in
the neighborhood, to hear about Kåñëa's activities again and again, would
approach mother Yaçodä and speak to her as follows.
PURPORT
Kåñëa's activities are always very attractive to devotees. Therefore the
neighbors, who were friends of mother Yaçodä, informed mother Yaçodä of
whatever they saw Kåñëa doing in the neighborhood. Mother Yaçodä, just to
hear about the activities of her son, stopped her household duties and enjoyed
the information given by the neighborhood friends.
TEXT 29
vats$aAnmauÂana, ¸(icad"s$amayae ‚(AezAs$aÃaAtah"As$a:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
566
staeyaM svaAã"ÔyaTa d"iDapaya: k(ilpataE: staeyayaAegAE:
mak(ARna, BaAeºyana, ivaBajaita s$a caeªaAiÔa BaANxM" iBaªaiÔa
‰"vyaAlaABae s$agA{h"ku(ipataAe yaAtyaupa‚(Aezya taAek(Ana,
vatsän muïcan kvacid asamaye kroça-saïjäta-häsaù
steyaà svädv atty atha dadhi-payaù kalpitaiù steya-yogaiù
markän bhokñyan vibhajati sa cen nätti bhäëòaà bhinnatti
dravyäläbhe sagåha-kupito yäty upakroçya tokän
SYNONYMS
vatsän—the calves; muïcan—releasing; kvacit—sometimes; asamaye—at odd
times; kroça-saïjäta-häsaù—after this, when the head of the house is angry,
Kåñëa begins to smile; steyam—obtained by stealing; svädu—very tasteful;
atti—eats; atha—thus; dadhi-payaù—pot of curd and milk; kalpitaiù—devised;
steya-yogaiù—by some sort of stealing process; markän—to the monkeys;
bhokñyan—giving to eat; vibhajati—divides their portion; saù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
cet—if; na—not; atti—eats; bhäëòam—the pot; bhinnatti—He breaks;
dravya-aläbhe—when eatables are unavailable or He cannot find such pots;
sa-gåha-kupitaù—He becomes angry at the residents of the house; yäti—He
goes away; upakroçya—irritating and pinching; tokän—the small children.
TRANSLATION
"Our dear friend Yaçodä, your son sometimes comes to our houses before the
milking of the cows and releases the calves, and when the master of the house
becomes angry, your son merely smiles. Sometimes He devises some process by
which He steals palatable curd, butter and milk, which He then eats and drinks.
When the monkeys assemble, He divides it with them, and when the monkeys
have their bellies so full that they won't take more, He breaks the pots.
Sometimes, if He gets no opportunity to steal butter or milk from a house, He
567
will be angry at the householders, and for His revenge He will agitate the small
children by pinching them. Then, when the children begin crying, Kåñëa will go
away.
PURPORT
The narration of Kåñëa's naughty childhood activities would be presented
to mother Yaçodä in the form of complaints. Sometimes Kåñëa would enter the
house of a neighbor, and if He found no one there, He would release the calves
before the time for the cows to be milked. The calves are actually supposed to
be released when their mothers are milked, but Kåñëa would release them
before that time, and naturally the calves would drink all the milk from their
mothers. When the cowherd men saw this, they would chase Kåñëa and try to
catch Him, saying, "Here is Kåñëa doing mischief," but He would flee and enter
another house, where He would again devise some means to steal butter and
curd. Then the cowherd men would again try to capture Him, saying, "Here is
the butter thief. Better capture Him!" And they would be angry. But Kåñëa
would simply smile, and they would forget everything. Sometimes, in their
presence, He would begin eating the curd and butter. There was no need for
Kåñëa to eat butter, since His belly was always full, but He would try to eat it,
or else He would break the pots and distribute the contents to the monkeys. In
this way, Kåñëa was always engaged in mischief-making. If in any house He
could not find any butter or curd to steal, He would go into a room and agitate
the small children sleeping there by pinching them, and when they cried He
would go away.
TEXT 30
h"staAƒaA÷e r"cayaita ivaiDaM paIQ&k(AelaUKalaAâEzA,
iC$‰M" ÷ntainaRih"tavayauna: izAfyaBaANxe"Sau taiã"ta,
DvaAntaAgAAre" Da{tamaiNAgANAM svaAËÿmaTaR‘ad"IpaM
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
568
k(Alae gAAepyaAe yaihR" gA{h"k{(tyaeSau s$auvyaƒaicaÔaA:
hastägrähye racayati vidhià péöhakolükhalädyaiç
chidraà hy antar-nihita-vayunaù çikya-bhäëòeñu tad-vit
dhväntägäre dhåta-maëi-gaëaà sväìgam artha-pradépaà
käle gopyo yarhi gåha-kåtyeñu suvyagra-cittäù
SYNONYMS
hasta-agrähye—when the destination is out of the reach of His hands;
racayati—He arranges to make; vidhim—a means; péöhaka—by wooden planks
piled together; ulükhala-ädyaiù—and by overturning the stone mortar for
grinding spices; chidram—a hole; hi—indeed; antaù-nihita—about the
contents of the pot; vayunaù—with such knowledge; çikya—hanging by a
swing; bhäëòeñu—in the pots; tat-vit—expert in that knowledge, or in full
knowledge; dhvänta-ägäre—in a very dark room; dhåta-maëi-gaëam—because
of being decorated with valuable jewels; sva-aìgam—His own body;
artha-pradépam—is the light required for seeing in darkness; käle—after that,
in due course of time; gopyaù—the elderly gopés; yarhi—as soon as;
gåha-kåtyeñu—in discharging household affairs; su-vyagra-cittäù—are busily
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
engaged.
TRANSLATION
"When the milk and curd are kept high on a swing hanging from the ceiling
and Kåñëa and Balaräma cannot reach it, They arrange to reach it by piling up
various planks and turning upside down the mortar for grinding spices. Being
quite aware of the contents of a pot, They pick holes in it. While the elderly
gopés go about their household affairs, Kåñëa and Balaräma sometimes go into a
dark room, brightening the place with the valuable jewels and ornaments on
Their bodies and taking advantage of this light by stealing.
569
PURPORT
Formerly, in every household, yogurt and butter were kept for use in
emergencies. But Kåñëa and Balaräma would pile up planks so that They could
reach the pots and would then pick holes in the pots with Their hands so that
the contents would leak out and They could drink it. This was another means
for stealing butter and milk. When the butter and milk were kept in a dark
room, Kåñëa and Balaräma would go there and make the place bright with the
valuable jewels on Their bodies. On the whole, Kåñëa and Balaräma engaged in
stealing butter and milk from the neighborhood houses in many ways.
TEXT 31
WvaM DaAí"YaARnyauzAita ku(ç&tae maeh"naAd"Iina vaAstaAE
staeyaAepaAyaEivaRr"icatak{(ita: s$au‘ataIk(Ae yaTaAstae
wtTaM ñIiBa: s$aBayanayana™aImauKaAlaAeik(naIiBar,"
vyaAKyaAtaATaAR ‘ah"is$atamauKaI na ÷upaAlabDaumaEcC$ta,
evaà dhärñöyäny uçati kurute mehanädéni västau
steyopäyair viracita-kåtiù supratéko yathäste
itthaà strébhiù sa-bhaya-nayana-çré-mukhälokinébhir
vyäkhyätärthä prahasita-mukhé na hy upälabdhum aicchat
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; dhärñöyäni—naughty activities; uçati—in a neat and clean
place; kurute—sometimes does; mehana-ädéni—passing stool and urine;
västau—in our houses; steya-upäyaiù—and by inventing different devices to
steal butter and milk; viracita-kåtiù—is very expert; su-pratékaù—is now sitting
down here like a very good, well-behaved child; yathä äste—while staying here;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
570
ittham—all these topics of conversation; strébhiù—by the gopés;
sa-bhaya-nayana—just now sitting there with fearful eyes; çré-mukha—such a
beautiful face; älokinébhiù—by the gopés, who were enjoying the pleasure of
seeing; vyäkhyäta-arthä—and while complaining against Him before mother
Yaçodä; prahasita-mukhé—they were smiling and enjoying; na—not;
hi—indeed; upälabdhum—to chastise and threaten (rather, she enjoyed how
Kåñëa was sitting there as a very good boy); aicchat—she desired.
TRANSLATION
"When Kåñëa is caught in His naughty activities, the master of the house
will say to Him, 'Oh, You are a thief,' and artificially express anger at Kåñëa.
Kåñëa will then reply, 'I am not a thief. You are a thief.' Sometimes, being
angry, Kåñëa passes urine and stool in a neat, clean place in our houses. But
now, our dear friend Yaçodä, this expert thief is sitting before you like a very
good boy." Sometimes all the gopés would look at Kåñëa sitting there, His eyes
fearful so that His mother would not chastise Him, and when they saw Kåñëa's
beautiful face, instead of chastising Him they would simply look upon His face
and enjoy transcendental bliss. Mother Yaçodä would mildly smile at all this
fun, and she would not want to chastise her blessed transcendental child.
PURPORT
Kåñëa's business in the neighborhood was not only to steal but sometimes to
pass stool and urine in a neat, clean house. When caught by the master of the
house, Kåñëa would chastise him, saying, "You are a thief." Aside from being a
thief in His childhood affairs, Kåñëa acted as an expert thief when He was
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
young by attracting young girls and enjoying them in the räsa dance. This is
Kåñëa's business. He is also violent, as the killer of many demons. Although
mundane people like nonviolence and other such brilliant qualities, God, the
Absolute Truth, being always the same, is good in any activities, even so-called
immoral activities like stealing, killing and violence. Kåñëa is always pure, and
571
He is always the Supreme Absolute Truth. Kåñëa may do anything supposedly
abominable in material life, yet still He is attractive. Therefore His name is
Kåñëa, meaning "all-attractive." This is the platform on which transcendental
loving affairs and service are exchanged. Because of the features of Kåñëa's
face, the mothers were so attracted that they could not chastise Him. Instead
of chastising Him, they smiled and enjoyed hearing of Kåñëa's activities. Thus
the gopés remained satisfied, and Kåñëa enjoyed their happiness. Therefore
another name of Kåñëa is Gopé-jana-vallabha because He invented such
activities to please the gopés.
TEXT 32
Wk(d"A ‚(Lx"maAnaAstae
r"AmaAâA gAAepad"Ar"k(A:
k{(SNAAe ma{dM" BaiºatavaAna,
wita maA‡ae nyavaed"yana,
ekadä kréòamänäs te
rämädyä gopa-därakäù
kåñëo mådaà bhakñitavän
iti mätre nyavedayan
SYNONYMS
ekadä—once upon a time; kréòamänäù—now Kåñëa, being still more grown up,
was playing with other children of the same age; te—they;
räma-ädyäù—Balaräma and others; gopa-därakäù—other boys born in the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
same neighborhood of the cowherd men; kåñëaù mådam bhakñitavän—O
Mother, Kåñëa has eaten earth (a complaint was lodged); iti—thus;
mätre—unto mother Yaçodä; nyavedayan—they submitted.
572
TRANSLATION
One day while Kåñëa was playing with His small playmates, including
Balaräma and other sons of the gopas, all His friends came together and lodged a
complaint to mother Yaçodä. "Mother," they submitted, "Kåñëa has eaten
earth."
PURPORT
Here is another of Kåñëa's transcendental activities invented to please the
gopés. First a complaint was lodged with mother Yaçodä about Kåñëa's stealing,
but mother Yaçodä did not chastise Him. Now, in an attempt to awaken
mother Yaçodä's anger so that she would chastise Kåñëa, another complaint
was invented-that Kåñëa had eaten earth.
TEXT 33
s$aA gA{h"ItvaA k(re" k{(SNAma,
opaAlaBya ih"taEiSaNAI
yazAAed"A Bayas$am”aAnta-
‘aeºaNAAºamaBaASata
sä gåhétvä kare kåñëam
upälabhya hitaiñiëé
yaçodä bhaya-sambhräntaprekñaëäkñam
abhäñata
SYNONYMS
sä—mother Yaçodä; gåhétvä—taking; kare—within the hands (being anxious
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
573
about what Kåñëa might have eaten); kåñëam—Kåñëa; upälabhya—wanted to
chastise Him; hita-eñiëé—because she was anxious for the welfare of Kåñëa, she
became very much agitated, thinking, "How is it that Kåñëa has eaten earth?";
yaçodä—mother Yaçodä; bhaya-sambhränta-prekñaëa-akñam—began to look
very carefully within Kåñëa's mouth in fear, to see if Kåñëa had eaten
something dangerous; abhäñata—began to address Kåñëa.
TRANSLATION
Upon hearing this from Kåñëa's playmates, mother Yaçodä, who was always
full of anxiety over Kåñëa's welfare, picked Kåñëa up with her hands to look
into His mouth and chastise Him. Her eyes fearful, she spoke to her son as
follows.
TEXT 34
k(smaAnma{d"mad"AntaAtmana,
BavaAna, BaiºatavaAna, r"h":
vad"inta taAvak(A ÷etae
ku(maAr"Astae'ƒajaAe'pyayama,
kasmän mådam adäntätman
bhavän bhakñitavän rahaù
vadanti tävakä hy ete
kumäräs te 'grajo 'py ayam
SYNONYMS
kasmät—why; mådam—dirt; adänta-ätman—You restless boy; bhavän
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—You;
bhakñitavän—have eaten; rahaù—in a solitary place; vadanti—are lodging this
574
complaint; tävakäù—Your friends and playmates; hi—indeed; ete—all of them;
kumäräù—boys; te—Your; agrajaù—older brother; api—also (confirms);
ayam—this.
TRANSLATION
Dear Kåñëa, why are You so restless that You have eaten dirt in a solitary
place? This complaint has been lodged against You by all Your playmates,
including Your elder brother, Balaräma. How is this?
PURPORT
Mother Yaçodä was agitated by Kåñëa's restless misbehavior. Her house was
full of sweetmeats. Why then should the restless boy eat dirt in a solitary place?
Kåñëa replied, "My dear mother, they have plotted together and lodged a
complaint against Me so that you will punish Me. My elder brother, Balaräma,
has joined them. Actually, I have not done this. Take My words as true. Do not
be angry and chastise Me."
TEXT 35
naAhM" BaiºatavaAnamba
s$avaeR imaTyaAiBazAMis$ana:
yaid" s$atyaigAr"staihR"
s$amaºaM pazya mae mauKama,
nähaà bhakñitavän amba
sarve mithyäbhiçaàsinaù
yadi satya-giras tarhi
samakñaà paçya me mukham
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
575
SYNONYMS
na—not; aham—I; bhakñitavän—have eaten dirt; amba—My dear mother;
sarve—all of them; mithya-abhiçaàsinaù—all liars, simply complaining against
Me so that you may chastise Me; yadi—if it is actually a fact; satya-giraù—that
they have spoken the truth; tarhi—then; samakñam—directly; paçya—see;
me—My; mukham—mouth.
TRANSLATION
Lord Çré Kåñëa replied: My dear mother, I have never eaten dirt. All My
friends complaining against Me are liars. If you think they are being truthful,
you can directly look into My mouth and examine it.
PURPORT
Kåñëa presented Himself as an innocent child to increase the
transcendental ecstasy of maternal affection. As described in the çästra,
täòana-bhayän mithyoktir vätsalya-rasa-poñikä. This means that sometimes a
small child speaks lies. For example, he may have stolen something or eaten
something and yet deny that he has done so. We ordinarily see this in the
material world, but in relation to Kåñëa it is different; such activities are
meant to endow the devotee with transcendental ecstasy. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead was playing as a liar and accusing all the other
devotees of being liars. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.12.11),
kåta-puëya-puïjäù: a devotee may attain such an ecstatic position after many,
many births of devotional service. Persons who have amassed the results of a
vast amount of pious activities can attain the stage of associating with Kåñëa
and playing with Him like ordinary playmates. One should not consider these
transactions of transcendental service to be untruthful accusations. One
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
should never accuse such devotees of being ordinary boys speaking lies, for
576
they attained this stage of associating with Kåñëa by great austerities (tapasä
brahmacaryeëa çamena ca damena ca [SB 6.1.13]).
TEXT 36
yaâevaM taihR" vyaAde"h"Ityaul(:
s$a BagAvaAna, h"ir":
vyaAd"ÔaAvyaAh"taEìyaR:
‚(Lx"AmanaujabaAlak(:
yady evaà tarhi vyädehéty
uktaù sa bhagavän hariù
vyädattävyähataiçvaryaù
kréòä-manuja-bälakaù
SYNONYMS
yadi—if; evam—it is so; tarhi—then; vyädehi—open Your mouth wide (I want
to see); iti uktaù—in this way ordered by mother Yaçodä; saù—He;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hariù—the Supreme Lord;
vyädatta—opened His mouth; avyähata-aiçvaryaù—without minimizing any
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
potencies of absolute opulence (aiçvaryasya samagrasya); kréòä—pastimes;
manuja-bälakaù—exactly like the child of a human being.
TRANSLATION
Mother Yaçodä challenged Kåñëa, "If You have not eaten earth, then open
Your mouth wide." When challenged by His mother in this way, Kåñëa, the son
of Nanda Mahäräja and Yaçodä, to exhibit pastimes like a human child, opened
His mouth. Although the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, who is full
577
of all opulences, did not disturb His mother's parental affection, His opulence
was automatically displayed, for Kåñëa's opulence is never lost at any stage, but
is manifest at the proper time.
PURPORT
Without disturbing the ecstasy of His mother's affection, Kåñëa opened His
mouth and displayed His own natural opulences. When a person is given
varieties of food, there may be a hundred and one varieties, but if one likes
ordinary çäka, spinach, he prefers to eat that. Similarly, although Kåñëa was
full of opulences, now, by the order of mother Yaçodä, He opened wide His
mouth like a human child and did not neglect the transcendental humor of
maternal affection.
TEXTS 37-39
s$aA ta‡a d"ä{"zAe ivaìM
jagAtsTaAµau ca KaM id"zA:
s$aAi‰"ã"IpaAibDaBaUgAAelaM
s$avaAyva¢aInäu"taAr"k(ma
jyaAeitaê‚M( jalaM taejaAe
naBasvaAna, ivayade"va ca
vaEk(Air"k(ANAIin‰"yaAiNA
manaAe maA‡aA gAuNAAñya:
Wtaiã"ica‡aM s$ah"jaIvak(AlasvaBaAvak(
maARzAyailaËÿBaed"ma,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
578
s$aUnaAestanaAE vaIºya ivad"Air"taAsyae
˜ajaM s$ah"AtmaAnamavaApa zAÆÿAma,
sä tatra dadåçe viçvaà
jagat sthäsnu ca khaà diçaù
sädri-dvépäbdhi-bhügolaà
sa-väyv-agnéndu-tärakam
jyotiç-cakraà jalaà tejo
nabhasvän viyad eva ca
vaikärikäëéndriyäëi
mano mäträ guëäs trayaù
etad vicitraà saha-jéva-kälasvabhäva-
karmäçaya-liìga-bhedam
sünos tanau vékñya vidäritäsye
vrajaà sahätmänam aväpa çaìkäm
SYNONYMS
sä—mother Yaçodä; tatra—within the wide-open mouth of Kåñëa;
dadåçe—saw; viçvam—the whole universe; jagat—moving entities;
sthäsnu—maintenance of nonmoving entities; ca—and; kham—the sky;
diçaù—the directions; sa-adri—with the mountains; dvépa—islands;
abdhi—and oceans; bhü-golam—the surface of the earth; sa-väyu—with the
blowing wind; agni—fire; indu—the moon; tärakam—stars;
jyotiù-cakram—the planetary systems; jalam—water; tejaù—light;
nabhasvän—outer space;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—the sky; eva—also; ca—and;
vaikärikäëi—creation by transformation of ahaìkära; indriyäëi—the senses;
manaù—mind; mäträù—sense perception; guëäù trayaù—the three material
qualities (sattva, rajas and tamas); etat—all these; vicitram—varieties;
saha—along with; jéva-käla—the duration of life of all living entities;
579
svabhäva—natural instinct; karma-äçaya—resultant action and desire for
material enjoyment; liìga-bhedam—varieties of bodies according to desire;
sünoù tanau—in the body of her son; vékñya—seeing; vidärita-äsye—within the
wide-open mouth; vrajam—Våndävana-dhäma, Nanda Mahäräja's place;
saha-ätmänam—along with herself; aväpa—was struck; çaìkäm—with all
doubts and wonder.
TRANSLATION
When Kåñëa opened His mouth wide by the order of mother Yaçodä, she
saw within His mouth all moving and nonmoving entities, outer space, and all
directions, along with mountains, islands, oceans, the surface of the earth, the
blowing wind, fire, the moon and the stars. She saw the planetary systems,
water, light, air, sky, and creation by transformation of ahaìkära. She also saw
the senses, the mind, sense perception, and the three qualities goodness, passion
and ignorance. She saw the time allotted for the living entities, she saw natural
instinct and the reactions of karma, and she saw desires and different varieties
of bodies, moving and nonmoving. Seeing all these aspects of the cosmic
manifestation, along with herself and Våndävana-dhäma, she became doubtful
and fearful of her son's nature.
PURPORT
All the cosmic manifestations that exist on the gross and subtle elements, as
well as the means of their agitation, the three guëas, the living entity, creation,
maintenance, annihilation and everything going on in the external energy of
the Lord—all this comes from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda.
Everything is within the control of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This
is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (9.10). Mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù süyate
sa-caräcaram: everything in the material nature (p
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
) works under His
control. Because all these manifestations come from Govinda, they could all be
visible within the mouth of Govinda. Quite astonishingly, mother Yaçodä was
580
afraid because of intense maternal affection. She could not believe that within
the mouth of her son such things could appear. Yet she saw them, and
therefore she was struck with fear and wonder.
TEXT 40
ikM( sva«a Wtaäu"ta de"vamaAyaA
ikM( vaA mad"IyaAe bata bauiÜ"maAeh":
@TaAe @mauSyaEva mamaABaRk(sya
ya: k(ênaAEtpaiÔak( @AtmayaAegA:
kià svapna etad uta devamäyä
kià vä madéyo bata buddhi-mohaù
atho amuñyaiva mamärbhakasya
yaù kaçcanautpattika ätma-yogaù
SYNONYMS
kim—whether; svapnaù—a dream; etat—all this; uta—or otherwise;
deva-mäyä—an illusory manifestation by the external energy; kim vä—or else;
madéyaù—my personal; bata—indeed; buddhi-mohaù—illusion of intelligence;
atho—otherwise; amuñya
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
eva—indeed; mama arbhakasya—of my
child; yaù—which; kaçcana—some; autpattikaù—natural;
ätma-yogaù—personal mystic power.
TRANSLATION
[Mother Yaçodä began to argue within herself:] Is this a dream, or is it an
illusory creation by the external energy? Has this been manifested by my own
intelligence, or is it some mystic power of my child?
581
PURPORT
When mother Yaçodä saw this wonderful manifestation within the mouth
of her child, she began to argue within herself about whether it was a dream.
Then she considered, "I am not dreaming, because my eyes are open. I am
actually seeing what is happening. I am not sleeping, nor am I dreaming. Then
maybe this is an illusion created by devamäyä. But that is also not possible.
What business would the demigods have showing such things to me? I am an
insignificant woman with no connection with the demigods. Why should they
take the trouble to put me into devamäyä? That also is not possible." Then
mother Yaçodä considered whether the vision might be due to bewilderment: "I
am fit in health; I am not diseased. Why should there be any bewilderment? It
is not possible that my brain is deranged, since I am ordinarily quite fit to
think. Then this vision must be due to some mystic power of my son, as
predicted by Gargamuni." Thus she finally concluded that the vision was due
to her son's activities, and nothing else.
TEXT 41
@TaAe yaTaAvaªa ivatakR(gAAecarM"
caetaAemana:k(maRvacaAeiBar"Ãas$aA
yad"A™ayaM yaena yata: ‘ataIyatae
s$auäu"ivaRBaAvyaM ‘aNAtaAisma tatpad"ma,
atho yathävan na vitarka-gocaraà
ceto-manaù-karma-vacobhir aïjasä
yad-äçrayaà yena yataù pratéyate
sudurvibhävyaà praëatäsmi tat-padam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
582
SYNONYMS
atho—therefore she decided to surrender unto the Supreme Lord;
yathä-vat—as perfectly as one can perceive; na—not;
vitarka-gocaram—beyond all arguments, reason and sense perception;
cetaù—by consciousness; manaù—by mind; karma—by activities;
vacobhiù—or by words; aïjasä—taking all of them together, we cannot
understand them; yat-äçrayam—under whose control; yena—by whom;
yataù—from whom; pratéyate—can be conceived only that from Him
everything emanates; su-durvibhävyam—beyond our sense perception or
consciousness; praëatä asmi—let me surrender; tat-padam—at His lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
Therefore let me surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead and
offer my obeisances unto Him, who is beyond the conception of human
speculation, the mind, activities, words and arguments, who is the original cause
of this cosmic manifestation, by whom the entire cosmos is maintained, and by
whom we can conceive of its existence. Let me simply offer my obeisances, for
He is beyond my contemplation, speculation and meditation. He is beyond all of
my material activities.
PURPORT
One simply has to realize the greatness of the Supreme Personality of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Godhead. One should not try to understand Him by any material means, subtle
or gross. Mother Yaçodä, being a simple woman, could not find out the real
cause of the vision; therefore, out of maternal affection, she simply offered
obeisances unto the Supreme Lord to protect her child. She could do nothing
but offer obeisances to the Lord. It is said, acintyäù khalu ye bhävä na täàs
tarkeëa yojayet (Mahäbhärata, Bhéñma parva 5.22). One should not try to
583
understand the supreme cause by argument or reasoning. When we are beset
by some problem for which we can find no reason, there is no alternative than
to surrender to the Supreme Lord and offer Him our respectful obeisances.
Then our position will be secure. This was the means adopted in this instance
also by mother Yaçodä. Whatever happens, the original cause is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead (sarva-käraëa-käraëam [Bs. 5.1]). When the immediate
cause cannot be ascertained, let us simply offer our obeisances at the lotus feet
of the Lord. Mother Yaçodä concluded that the wonderful things she saw
within the mouth of her child were due to Him, although she could not clearly
ascertain the cause. Therefore when a devotee cannot ascertain the cause of
suffering, he concludes:
tat te 'nukampäà susamékñamäëo
bhuïjäna evätma-kåtaà vipäkam
håd-väg-vapurbhir vidadhan namas te
jéveta yo mukti-pade sa däya-bhäk
(SB 10.14.8)
The devotee accepts that it is due to his own past misdeeds that the Supreme
Personality of Godhead has caused him some small amount of suffering. Thus
he offers obeisances to the Lord again and again. Such a devotee is called
mukti-pade sa däya-bhäk; that is, he is guaranteed his liberation from this
material world. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (2.14):
mäträ-sparçäs tu kaunteya
çétoñëa-sukha-duùkha-däù
ägamäpäyino nityäs
täàs titikñasva bhärata
We should know that material suffering due to the material body will come
and go. Therefore we must tolerate the suffering and proceed with discharging
our duty as ordained by our spiritual master.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
584
TEXT 42
@hM" mamaAs$aAE paitare"Sa mae s$autaAe
˜ajaeìr"syaAiKalaivaÔapaA s$ataI
gAAepyaê gAAepaA: s$ah"gAAeDanaAê mae
yanmaAyayaetTaM ku(maita: s$a mae gAita:
ahaà mamäsau patir eña me suto
vrajeçvarasyäkhila-vittapä saté
gopyaç ca gopäù saha-godhanäç ca me
yan-mäyayetthaà kumatiù sa me gatiù
SYNONYMS
aham—my existence ("I am something"); mama—my; asau—Nanda Mahäräja;
patiù—husband; eñaù—this (Kåñëa); me sutaù—is my son; vraja-éçvarasya—of
my husband, Nanda Mahäräja; akhila-vitta-pä—I am the possessor of unlimited
opulence and wealth; saté—because I am his wife; gopyaù ca—and all the
damsels of the cowherd men; gopäù—all the cowherd men (are my
subordinates); saha-godhanäù ca—with the cows and calves; me—my;
yat-mäyayä—all such things addressed by me are, after all, given by the mercy
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
of the Supreme; ittham—thus; kumatiù—I am wrongly thinking they are my
possessions; saù me gatiù—He is therefore my only shelter (I am simply
instrumental).
TRANSLATION
It is by the influence of the Supreme Lord's mäyä that I am wrongly
thinking that Nanda Mahäräja is my husband, that Kåñëa is my son, and that
because I am the queen of Nanda Mahäräja, all the wealth of cows and calves
585
are my possessions and all the cowherd men and their wives are my subjects.
Actually, I also am eternally subordinate to the Supreme Lord. He is my
ultimate shelter.
PURPORT
Following in the footsteps of mother Yaçodä, everyone should follow this
mentality of renunciation. Whatever wealth, opulence or whatever else we
may possess belongs not to us but to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who
is the ultimate shelter of everyone and the ultimate owner of everything. As
stated by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gétä (5.29):
bhoktäraà yajïa-tapasäà
sarva-loka-maheçvaram
suhådaà sarva-bhütänäà
jïätvä mäà çäntim åcchati
"The sages, knowing Me as the ultimate purpose of all sacrifices and austerities,
the Supreme Lord of all planets and demigods and the benefactor and
well-wisher of all living entities, attains peace from the pangs of material
miseries."
We should not be proud of our possessions. As expressed by mother Yaçodä
herein, "I am not the owner of possessions, the opulent wife of Nanda
Mahäräja. The estate, the possessions, the cows and calves and the subjects like
the gopés and cowherd men are all given to me." One should give up thinking
of "my possessions, my son and my husband" (janasya moho'yam ahaà mameti
[SB 5.5.8]). Nothing belongs to anyone but the Supreme Lord. Only because of
illusion do we wrongly think, "I am existing" or "Everything belongs to me."
Thus mother Yaçodä completely surrendered unto the Supreme Lord. For the
moment, she was rather disappointed, thinking, "My endeavors to protect my
son by charity and other auspicious activities are useless. The Supreme Lord
has given me many things, but unless He takes charge of everything, there is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
586
no assurance of protection. I must therefore ultimately seek shelter of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead." As stated by Prahläda Mahäräja (SB 7.9.19),
bälasya neha çaraëaà pitarau nåsiàha: a father and mother cannot ultimately
take care of their children. Ato gåha-kñetra-sutäpta-vittair janasya moho 'yam
ahaà mameti (SB 5.5.8). One's land, home, wealth and all of one's possessions
belong to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although we wrongly think, "I
am this" and "These things are mine."
TEXT 43
wtTaM ivaid"tataÔvaAyaAM
gAAeipak(AyaAM s$a wRìr":
vaESNAvaI%M vyatanaAenmaAyaAM
pau‡aµaeh"mayaI%M ivaBau:
itthaà vidita-tattväyäà
gopikäyäà sa éçvaraù
vaiñëavéà vyatanon mäyäà
putra-snehamayéà vibhuù
SYNONYMS
ittham—in this way; vidita-tattväyäm—when she understood the truth of
everything philosophically; gopikäyäm—unto mother Yaçodä; saù—the
Supreme Lord; éçvaraù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
vaiñëavém—viñëumäyä, or
yogamäyä; vyatanot—expanded; mäyäm—yogamäyä;
putra-sneha-mayém—very much attached because of maternal affection for her
son; vibhuù—the Supreme Lord.
587
TRANSLATION
Mother Yaçodä, by the grace of the Lord, could understand the real truth.
But then again, the supreme master, by the influence of the internal potency,
yogamäyä, inspired her to become absorbed in intense maternal affection for her
son.
PURPORT
Although mother Yaçodä understood the whole philosophy of life, at the
next moment she was overwhelmed by affection for her son by the influence of
yogamäyä. Unless she took care of her son Kåñëa, she thought, how could He
be protected? She could not think otherwise, and thus she forgot all her
philosophical speculations. This forgetfulness is described by Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura as being inspired by the influence of yogamäyä
(mohana-sädharmyän mäyäm). Materialistic persons are captivated by
mahämäyä, whereas devotees, by the arrangement of the spiritual energy, are
captivated by yogamäyä.
TEXT 44
s$aâAe naí"sma{itagAAeRpaI
s$aAr"AepyaAr"Aeh"maAtmajama,
‘ava{Ü"µaeh"k(ilalaô$
d"yaAs$aIâTaA paur"A
sadyo nañöa-småtir gopé
säropyäroham ätmajam
pravåddha-sneha-kalilahådayäséd
yathä purä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
588
SYNONYMS
sadyaù—after all these philosophical speculations, mother Yaçodä fully
surrendered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nañöa-småtiù—having
gotten rid of the memory of seeing the universal form within Kåñëa's mouth;
gopé—mother Yaçodä; sä—she; äropya—seating; äroham—on the lap;
ätmajam—her son; pravåddha—increased; sneha—by affection;
kalila—affected; hådayä—the core of her heart; äsét—became situated; yathä
purä—as she was formerly.
TRANSLATION
Immediately forgetting yogamäyä's illusion that Kåñëa had shown the
universal form within His mouth, mother Yaçodä took her son on her lap as
before, feeling increased affection in her heart for her transcendental child.
PURPORT
Mother Yaçodä regarded the vision of the universal form within Kåñëa's
mouth as an arrangement of yogamäyä, like a dream. As one forgets everything
after a dream, mother Yaçodä immediately forgot the entire incident. As her
natural feeling of affection increased, she decided to herself, "Now let this
incident be forgotten. I do not mind. Here is my son. Let me kiss Him."
TEXT 45
‡ayyaA caAepainaSaià"ê
s$aAÊÿYayaAegAEê s$aAtvataE:
opagAIyamaAnamaAh"AtmyaM
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
589
h"ir$M s$aAmanyataAtmajama,
trayyä copaniñadbhiç ca
säìkhya-yogaiç ca sätvataiù
upagéyamäna-mähätmyaà
harià sämanyatätmajam
SYNONYMS
trayyä—by studying the three Vedas (Säma, Yajur and Atharva); ca—also;
upaniñadbhiù ca—and by studying the Vedic knowledge of the Upaniñads;
säìkhya-yogaiù—by reading the literature of säìkhya-yoga; ca—and;
sätvataiù—by the great sages and devotees, or by reading Vaiñëava-tantra,
Païcarätras; upagéyamäna-mähätmyam—whose glories are worshiped (by all
these Vedic literatures); harim—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
sä—she; amanyata—considered (ordinary); ätmajam—as her own son.
TRANSLATION
The glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are studied through the
three Vedas, the Upaniñads, the literature of Säìkhya-yoga, and other Vaiñëava
literature, yet mother Yaçodä considered that Supreme Person her ordinary
child.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (15.15) by the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Kåñëa, the purpose of studying the Vedas is to understand Him (vedaiç ca
sarvair aham eva vedyaù). Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu explained to Sanätana
Gosvämé that there are three purposes in the Vedas. One is to understand our
relationship with Kåñëa (sambandha), another is to act according to that
relationship (abhidheya), and the third is to reach the ultimate goal
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
590
(prayojana). The word prayojana means "necessities," and the ultimate
necessity is explained by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. premä pum-artho mahän:
the greatest necessity for a human being is the achievement of love for the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Here we see that mother Yaçodä is on the
highest stage of necessity, for she is completely absorbed in love for Kåñëa.
In the beginning, the Vedic purpose is pursued in three ways (trayé)—by
karma-käëòa, jïäna-käëòa and upäsanä-käëòa. When one reaches the
complete, perfect stage of upäsanä-käëòa, one comes to worship Näräyaëa, or
Lord Viñëu. When Pärvaté asked Lord Mahädeva, Lord Çiva, what is the best
method of upäsanä, or worship, Lord Çiva answered, ärädhanänäà sarveñäà
viñëor ärädhanaà param. Viñëüpäsanä, or viñëv-ärädhana, worship of Lord
Viñëu, is the highest stage of perfection, as realized by Devaké. But here
mother Yaçodä performs no upäsanä, for she has developed transcendental
ecstatic love for Kåñëa. Therefore her position is better than that of Devaké. In
order to show this, Çréla Vyäsadeva enunciates this verse, trayyä copaniñadbhiù
etc.
When a human being enters into the study of the Vedas to obtain vidyä,
knowledge, he begins to take part in human civilization. Then he advances
further to study the Upaniñads and gain brahma jïäna, impersonal realization
of the Absolute Truth, and then he advances still further, to säìkhya-yoga, in
order to understand the supreme controller, who is indicated in Bhagavad-gétä
(
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
[Bg.
10.12]). When one understands that puruña, the supreme controller, to be
Paramätmä, one is engaged in the method of yoga (dhyänävasthita-tad-gatena
manasä paçyanti yaà yoginaù [SB 12.13.1]). But mother Yaçodä has surpassed all
these stages. She has come to the platform of loving Kåñëa as her beloved
child, and therefore she is accepted to be on the highest stage of spiritual
realization. The Absolute Truth is realized in three features (brahmeti
paramätmeti bhagavän iti çabdyate [SB 1.2.11]), but she is in such ecstasy that
she does not care to understand what is Brahman, what is Paramätmä or what
is Bhagavän. Bhagavän has personally descended to become her beloved child.
591
Therefore there is no comparison to mother Yaçodä's good fortune, as declared
by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu (ramyä käcid upäsanä vrajavadhü-vargeëa yä
kalpitä). The Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, may be
realized in different stages. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (4.11):
ye yathä mäà prapadyante
täàs tathaiva bhajämy aham
mama vartmänuvartante
manuñyäù pärtha sarvaçaù
"As men surrender unto Me, I reward them accordingly. Everyone follows My
path in all respects, O son of Påthä." One may be a karmé, a jïäné, a yogé and
then a bhakta or prema-bhakta. But the ultimate stage of realization is
prema-bhakti, as actually demonstrated by mother Yaçodä.
TEXT 46
™aIr"AjaAevaAca
nand": ik(mak(r"Aeä," “aöna,
™aeya WvaM mah"Aed"yama,
yazAAed"A ca mah"ABaAgAA
papaAE yasyaA: stanaM h"ir":
çré-räjoväca
nandaù kim akarod brahman
çreya evaà mahodayam
yaçodä ca mahä-bhägä
papau yasyäù stanaà hariù
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
592
çré-räjä uväca—Mahäräja Parékñit further inquired (from Çukadeva Gosvämé);
nandaù—Mahäräja Nanda; kim—what; akarot—performed; brahman—O
learned brähmaëa; çreyaù—auspicious activities, like performing penances and
austerities; evam—as exhibited by him; mahä-udayam—from which they
achieved the greatest perfection; yaçodä—mother Yaçodä; ca—also;
mahä-bhägä—most fortunate; papau—drank; yasyäù—of whom; stanam—the
breast milk; hariù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Having heard of the great fortune of mother Yaçodä, Parékñit Mahäräja
inquired from Çukadeva Gosvämé: O learned brähmaëa, mother Yaçodä's breast
milk was sucked by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. What past auspicious
activities did she and Nanda Mahäräja perform to achieve such perfection in
ecstatic love?
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (7.16), catur-vidhä bhajante mäà janäù sukåtino
'rjuna. Without sukåti, or pious activities, no one can come to the shelter of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord is approached by four kinds of
pious men (ärto jijïäsur a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
), but here we see that Nanda
Mahäräja and Yaçodä surpassed all of them. Therefore Parékñit Mahäräja
naturally inquired, "What kind of pious activities did they perform in their
past lives by which they achieved such a stage of perfection?" Of course, Nanda
Mahäräja and Yaçodä are accepted as the father and mother of Kåñëa, yet
mother Yaçodä was more fortunate than Nanda Mahäräja, Kåñëa's father,
because Nanda Mahäräja was sometimes separated from Kåñëa whereas
Yaçodä, Kåñëa's mother, was not separated from Kåñëa at any moment. From
Kåñëa's babyhood to His childhood and from His childhood to His youth,
mother Yaçodä was always in association with Kåñëa. Even when Kåñëa was
grown up, He would go to Våndävana and sit on the lap of mother Yaçodä.
593
Therefore there is no comparison to the fortune of mother Yaçodä, and
Parékñit Mahäräja naturally inquired, yaçodä ca mahä-bhägä.
TEXT 47
ipatar"AE naAnvaivande"taAM
k{(SNAAed"Ar"ABaR$ke(ih"tama,
gAAyantyaâAipa k(vayaAe
yaéaAek(zAmalaApah"ma,
pitarau nänvavindetäà
kåñëodärärbhakehitam
gäyanty adyäpi kavayo
yal loka-çamaläpaham
SYNONYMS
pitarau—the actual father and mother of Kåñëa; na—not;
anvavindetäm—enjoyed; kåñëa—of Kåñëa; udära—magnanimous;
arbhaka-éhitam—the childhood pastimes He performed; gäyanti—are
glorifying; adya api—even today; kavayaù—great, great sages and saintly
persons;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—which is; loka-çamala-apaham—by hearing of which the
contamination of the whole material world is vanquished.
TRANSLATION
Although Kåñëa was so pleased with Vasudeva and Devaké that He
descended as their son, they could not enjoy Kåñëa's magnanimous childhood
pastimes, which are so great that simply chanting about them vanquishes the
contamination of the material world. Nanda Mahäräja and Yaçodä, however,
594
enjoyed these pastimes fully, and therefore their position is always better than
that of Vasudeva and Devaké.
PURPORT
Kåñëa actually took birth from the womb of Devaké, but just after His birth
He was transferred to the home of mother Yaçodä. Devaké could not even have
Kåñëa suck her breast. Therefore Parékñit Mahäräja was astonished. How had
mother Yaçodä and Nanda Mahäräja become so fortunate that they enjoyed
the complete childhood pastimes of Kåñëa, which are still glorified by saintly
persons? What had they done in the past by which they were elevated to such
an exalted position?
TEXT 48
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
‰"AeNAAe vas$aUnaAM ‘avar"Ae
Dar"yaA BaAyaRyaA s$ah"
k(ir"SyamaANA @Ade"zAAna,
“aöNAstamauvaAca h"
çré-çuka uväca
droëo vasünäà pravaro
dharayä bhäryayä saha
kariñyamäëa ädeçän
brahmaëas tam uväca ha
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; droëaù—by the name Droëa;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
595
vasünäm—of the eight Vasus (a type of demigod); pravaraù—who was the best;
dharayä—with Dharä; bhäryayä—His wife; saha—with; kariñyamäëaù—just to
execute; ädeçän—the orders; brahmaëaù—of Lord Brahmä; tam—unto him;
uväca—said; ha—in the past.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: To follow the orders of Lord Brahmä, Droëa, the
best of the Vasus, along with his wife, Dharä, spoke to Lord Brahmä in this
way.
PURPORT
As stated in the Brahma-saàhitä (5.37):
änanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhävitäbhis
täbhir ya eva nija-rüpatayä kaläbhiù
goloka eva nivasaty akhilätma-bhüto
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
When Kåñëa descends anywhere, He is accompanied by His own associates.
These associates are not ordinary living beings. Kåñëa's pastimes are eternal,
and when He descends, He comes with His associates. Therefore Nanda and
mother Yaçodä are the eternal father and mother of Kåñëa. This means that
whenever Kåñëa descends, Nanda and Yaçodä, as well as Vasudeva and Devaké,
also descend as the Lord's father and mother. Their personalities are
expansions of Kåñëa's personal body; they are not ordinary living beings.
Mahäräja Parékñit knew this, but he was curious to know from Çukadeva
Gosvämé whether it is possible for an ordinary human being to come to this
stage by sädhana-siddhi. There are two kinds of perfection—nitya-siddhi and
sädhana-siddhi. A nitya-siddha is one who is eternally Kåñëa's associate, an
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
expansion of Kåñëa's personal body, whereas a sädhana-siddha is an ordinary
596
human being who, by executing pious activities and following regulative
principles of devotional service, also comes to that stage. Thus the purpose of
Mahäräja Parékñit's inquiry was to determine whether an ordinary human
being can attain the position of mother Yaçodä and Nanda Mahäräja.
Çukadeva Gosvämé answered this question as follows.
TEXT 49
jaAtayaAenaAE= mah"Ade"vae
Bauiva ivaìeìre" h"r"AE
Bail(: syaAtpar"maA laAeke(
yayaAÃaAe äu"gARitaM tare"ta,
jätayor nau mahädeve
bhuvi viçveçvare harau
bhaktiù syät paramä loke
yayäïjo durgatià taret
SYNONYMS
jätayoù—after we two have taken birth; nau—both husband and wife, Droëa
and Dharä; mahädeve—in the Supreme Person, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; bhuvi—on the earth; viçva-éçvare—in the master of all the planetary
systems; harau—in the Supreme Lord; bhaktiù—devotional service; syät—will
be spread; paramä—the ultimate goal of life; loke—in the world; yayä—by
which; aïjaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
durgatim—miserable life; taret—one can avoid and
be delivered.
TRANSLATION
597
Droëa and Dharä said: Please permit us to be born on the planet earth so
that after our appearance, the Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead, the
supreme controller and master of all planets, will also appear and spread
devotional service, the ultimate goal of life, so that those born in this material
world may very easily be delivered from the miserable condition of materialistic
life by accepting this devotional service.
PURPORT
This statement by Droëa clearly indicates that Droëa and Dharä are the
eternal father and mother of Kåñëa. Whenever there is a necessity of Kåñëa's
appearance, Droëa and Dharä appear first, and then Kåñëa appears. Kåñëa says
in Bhagavad-gétä that His birth is not ordinary (janma karma ca me divyam [Bg.
4.9]).
ajo 'pi sann avyayätmä
bhütänäm éçvaro 'pi san
prakåtià sväm adhiñöhäya
sambhavämy ätma-mäyayä
"Although I am unborn and My transcendental body never deteriorates, and
although I am the Lord of all sentient beings, I still appear in every millennium
in My original transcendental form." (Bg. 4.6) Before Kåñëa's appearance,
Droëa and Dharä appear in order to become His father and mother. It is they
who appear as Nanda Mahäräja and his wife, Yaçodä. In other words, it is not
possible for a sädhana-siddha living being to become the father or mother of
Kåñëa, for Kåñëa's father and mother are already designated. But by following
the principles exhibited by Nanda Mahäräja and Yaçodä and their associates,
the inhabitants of Våndävana, ordinary living beings may attain such affection
as exhibited by Nanda and Yaçodä.
When Droëa and Dharä were requested to beget children, they chose to
come to this world to have the Supreme Personality of Godhead as their son,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
598
Kåñëa. Kåñëa's appearance means pariträëäya sädhünäà vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm
[Bg. 4.8]—the devotees are protected, and the miscreants are vanquished.
Whenever Kåñëa comes, He distributes the highest goal of life, devotional
service. He appears as Caitanya Mahäprabhu for the same purpose because
unless one comes to devotional service, one cannot be delivered from the
miseries of the material world (duùkhälayam açäçvatam [Bg. 8.15]), where the
living beings struggle for existence. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (15.7):
mamaiväàço jéva-loke
jéva-bhütaù sanätanaù
manaù ñañöhänéndriyäëi
prakåti-sthäni karñati
"The living entities in this conditioned world are My eternal, fragmental parts.
Because of conditioned life, they are struggling very hard with the six senses,
which include the mind." The living entities are struggling to become happy,
but unless they take to the bhakti cult, their happiness is not possible. Kåñëa
clearly says:
açraddadhänäù puruñä
dharmasyäsya parantapa
apräpya mäà nivartante
måtyu-saàsära-vartmani
"Those who are not faithful on the path of devotional service cannot attain
Me, O conqueror of foes, but return to birth and death in this material world."
(Bg. 9.3)
Foolish persons do not know how risky life is here if one does not follow the
instructions of Kåñëa. The Kåñëa consciousness movement, therefore, has been
started so that by practicing Kåñëa consciousness one can avoid the risky life of
this material existence. There is no question of accepting or not accepting
Kåñëa consciousness. It is not optional; it is compulsory. If we do not take to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
599
Kåñëa consciousness, our life is very risky. Everything is explained in
Bhagavad-gétä. Therefore, to learn how to become free from the miserable
condition of material existence, Bhagavad-gétä As It Is is the preliminary study.
Then, if one understands Bhagavad-gétä, one can proceed to
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, and if one advances further, one may study
Caitanya-caritämåta. We are therefore presenting these invaluable books to
the whole world so that people may study them and be happy, being delivered
from miserable conditional life.
TEXT 50
@istvatyaul(: s$a BagAvaAna,
˜ajae ‰"AeNAAe mah"AyazAA:
jaÁae nand" wita KyaAtaAe
yazAAed"A s$aA Dar"ABavata,
astv ity uktaù sa bhagavän
vraje droëo mahä-yaçäù
jajïe nanda iti khyäto
yaçodä sä dharäbhavat
SYNONYMS
astu—when Brahmä agreed, "Yes, it is all right"; iti uktaù—thus being ordered
by him; saù—he (Droëa); bhagavän—eternally the father of Kåñëa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
(Bhagavän's father is also Bhagavän); vraje—in Vrajabhümi, Våndävana;
droëaù—Droëa, the most powerful Vasu; mahä-yaçäù—the very famous
transcendentalist; jajïe—appeared; nandaù—as Nanda Mahäräja; iti—thus;
khyätaù—is celebrated; yaçodä—as mother Yaçodä; sä—she; dharä—the same
Dharä; abhavat—appeared.
600
TRANSLATION
When Brahmä said, "Yes, let it be so," the most fortune Droëa, who was
equal to Bhagavän, appeared in Vrajapura, Våndävana, as the most famous
Nanda Mahäräja, and his wife, Dharä, appeared as mother Yaçodä.
PURPORT
Because whenever Kåñëa appears on this earth He superficially needs a
father and mother, Droëa and Dharä, His eternal father and mother, appeared
on earth before Kåñëa as Nanda Mahäräja and Yaçodä. In contrast to Sutapä
and Påçnigarbha, they did not undergo severe penances and austerities to
become the father and mother of Kåñëa. This is the difference between
nitya-siddha and sädhana-siddha.
TEXT 51
tataAe Bail(BaRgAvaita
pau‡aIBaUtae janaAdR"nae
d"mpatyaAeinaRtar"AmaAs$aIä,"
gAAepagAAepaISau BaAr"ta
tato bhaktir bhagavati
putré-bhüte janärdane
dampatyor nitaräm äséd
gopa-gopéñu bhärata
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; bhaktiù bhagavati—the cult of bhakti, devotional service
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
601
unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; putré-bhüte—in the Lord, who had
appeared as the son of mother Yaçodä; janärdane—in Lord Kåñëa;
dam-patyoù—of both husband and wife; nitaräm—continuously; äsét—there
was; gopa-gopéñu—all the inhabitants of Våndävana, the gopas and the gopés,
associating with Nanda Mahäräja and Yaçodä and following in their footsteps;
bhärata—O Mahäräja Parékñit.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, O Mahäräja Parékñit, best of the Bhäratas, when the Supreme
Personality of Godhead became the son of Nanda Mahäräja and Yaçodä, they
maintained continuous, unswerving devotional love in parental affection. And
in their association, all the other inhabitants of Våndävana, the gopas and gopés,
developed the culture of kåñëa-bhakti.
PURPORT
Although when the Supreme Personality of Godhead stole the butter, curd
and milk of the neighboring gopas and gopés this teasing superficially seemed
troublesome, in fact it was an exchange of affection in the ecstasy of
devotional service. The more the gopas and gopés exchanged feelings with the
Lord, the more their devotional service increased. Sometimes we may
superficially see that a devotee is in difficulty because of being engaged in
devotional service, but the fact is different. When a devotee suffers for Kåñëa,
that suffering is transcendental enjoyment. Unless one becomes a devotee, this
cannot be understood. When Kåñëa exhibited His childhood pastimes, not
only did Nanda Mahäräja and Yaçodä increase their devotional affection, but
those in their association also increased in devotional service. In other words,
persons who follow the activities of Våndävana will also develop devotional
service in the highest perfection.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
602
TEXT 52
k{(SNAAe “aöNA @Ade"zAM
s$atyaM k(tau< ˜ajae ivaBau:
s$ah"r"AmaAe vas$aMê‚e(
taeSaAM ‘aIitaM svalaIlayaA
kåñëo brahmaëa ädeçaà
satyaà kartuà vraje vibhuù
saha-rämo vasaàç cakre
teñäà prétià sva-lélayä
SYNONYMS
kåñëaù—the Supreme Personality, Kåñëa; brahmaëaù—of Lord Brahmä;
ädeçam—the order; satyam—truthful; kartum—to make; vraje—in
Vrajabhümi, Våndävana; vibhuù—the supreme powerful; saha-rämaù—along
with Balaräma; vasan—residing; cakre—increased; teñäm—of all the
inhabitants of Våndävana; prétim—the pleasure; sva-lélayä—by His
transcendental pastimes.
TRANSLATION
Thus the Supreme Personality, Kåñëa, along with Balaräma, lived in
Vrajabhümi, Våndävana, just to substantiate the benediction of Brahmä. By
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
exhibiting different pastimes in His childhood, He increased the transcendental
pleasure of Nanda and the other inhabitants of Våndävana.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Tenth Canto, Eighth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled, "Lord Kåñëa Shows the Universal Form Within
His Mouth."
603
9. Mother Yaçodä Binds Lord Kåñëa
While mother Yaçodä was allowing Kåñëa to drink her breast milk, she was
forced to stop because she saw the milk pan boiling over on the oven. The
maidservants being engaged in other business, she stopped allowing Kåñëa to
drink from her breast and immediately attended to the overflowing milk pan.
Kåñëa became very angry because of His mother's behavior and devised a
means of breaking the pots of yogurt. Because He created this disturbance,
mother Yaçodä decided to bind Him. These incidents are described in this
chapter.
One day, the maidservants being engaged in other work, mother Yaçodä
was churning the yogurt into butter herself, and in the meantime Kåñëa came
and requested her to allow Him to suck her breast milk. Of course, mother
Yaçodä immediately allowed Him to do so, but then she saw that the hot milk
on the oven was boiling over, and therefore she immediately stopped allowing
Kåñëa to drink the milk of her breast and went to stop the milk on the oven
from overflowing. Kåñëa, however, having been interrupted in His business of
sucking the breast, was very angry. He took a piece of stone, broke the
churning pot and entered a room, where He began to eat the freshly churned
butter. When mother Yaçodä, after attending to the overflowing milk,
returned and saw the pot broken, she could understand that this was the work
of Kåñëa, and therefore she went to search for Him. When she entered the
room, she saw Kåñëa standing on the ulükhala, a large mortar for grinding
spices. Having turned the mortar upside down, He was stealing butter hanging
from a swing and was distributing the butter to the monkeys. As soon as Kåñëa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
saw that His mother had come, He immediately began to run away, and mother
604
Yaçodä began to follow Him. After going some distance, mother Yaçodä was
able to catch Kåñëa, who because of His offense was crying. Mother Yaçodä, of
course, threatened to punish Kåñëa if He acted that way again, and she decided
to bind Him with rope. Unfortunately, when the time came to knot the rope,
the rope with which she wanted to bind Him was short by a distance equal to
the width of two fingers. When she made the rope longer by adding another
rope, she again saw that it was short by two fingers. Again and again she tried,
and again and again she found the rope too short by two fingers. Thus she
became very tired, and Kåñëa, seeing His affectionate mother so tired, allowed
Himself to be bound. Now, being compassionate, He did not show her His
unlimited potency. After mother Yaçodä bound Kåñëa and became engaged in
other household affairs, Kåñëa observed two yamala-arjuna trees, which were
actually Nalaküvara and Maëigréva, two sons of Kuvera who had been
condemned by Närada Muni to become trees. Kåñëa, by His mercy, now began
to proceed toward the trees to fulfill the desire of Närada Muni.
TEXTS 1-2
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
Wk(d"A gA{h"d"As$aISau
yazAAed"A nand"gAeih"naI
k(maARntar"inayaul(As$au
inamaRmanTa svayaM d"iDa
yaAina yaAnaIh" gAItaAina
taß"Alacair"taAina ca
d"iDainamaRnTanae k(Alae
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
605
smar"ntaI taAnyagAAyata
çré-çuka uväca
ekadä gåha-däséñu
yaçodä nanda-gehiné
karmäntara-niyuktäsu
nirmamantha svayaà dadhi
yäni yänéha gétäni
tad-bäla-caritäni ca
dadhi-nirmanthane käle
smaranté täny agäyata
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; ekadä—one day;
gåha-däséñu—when all the maidservants of the household were otherwise
engaged; yaçodä—mother Yaçodä; nanda-gehiné—the queen of Nanda
Mahäräja; karma-antara—in other household affairs; niyuktäsu—being
engaged; nirmamantha—churned; svayam—personally; dadhi—the yogurt;
yäni—all such; yäni—such; iha—in this connection; gétäni
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
tat-bäla-caritäni—in which the activities of her own child were enacted;
ca—and; dadhi-nirmanthane—while churning the yogurt; käle—at that time;
smaranté—remembering; täni—all of them (in the form of songs);
agäyata—chanted.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: One day when mother Yaçodä saw that all
the maidservants were engaged in other household affairs, she personally began
to churn the yogurt. While churning, she remembered the childish activities of
Kåñëa, and in her own way she composed songs and enjoyed singing to herself
606
about all those activities.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, quoting from the Vaiñëava-toñaëé of
Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé, says that the incident of Kåñëa's breaking the pot of
yogurt and being bound by mother Yaçodä took place on the Dépävalé Day, or
Dépa-mälikä. Even today in India, this festival is generally celebrated very
gorgeously in the month of Kärtika by fireworks and lights, especially in
Bombay. It is to be understood that among all the cows of Nanda Mahäräja,
several of mother Yaçodä's cows ate only grasses so flavorful that the grasses
would automatically flavor the milk. Mother Yaçodä wanted to collect the milk
from these cows, make it into yogurt and churn it into butter personally, since
she thought that this child Kåñëa was going to the houses of neighborhood
gopas and gopés to steal butter because He did not like the milk and yogurt
ordinarily prepared.
While churning the butter, mother Yaçodä was singing about the childhood
activities of Kåñëa. It was formerly a custom that if one wanted to remember
something constantly, he would transform it into poetry or have this done by a
professional poet. It appears that mother Yaçodä did not want to forget Kåñëa's
activities at any time. Therefore she poeticized all of Kåñëa's childhood
activities, such as the killing of Pütanä, Aghäsura, Çakaöäsura and Tåëävarta,
and while churning the butter, she sang about these activities in poetical form.
This should be the practice of persons eager to remain Kåñëa conscious
twenty-four hours a day. This incident shows how Kåñëa conscious mother
Yaçodä was. To stay in Kåñëa consciousness, we should follow such persons.
TEXT 3
ºaAEmaM vaAs$a: pa{Tauk(iq%taqe% iba”ataI s$aU‡anaÜM"
pau‡aµaeh"µautaku(cayaugAM jaAtak(mpaM ca s$au”aU:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
607
r"jjvaAk(SaR™amaBaujacalatk(ÆÿNAAE ku(Nx"lae ca
isvaªaM vaf‡aM k(bar"ivagAlanmaAlataI inamaRmanTa
kñaumaà väsaù påthu-kaöi-taöe bibhraté sütra-naddhaà
putra-sneha-snuta-kuca-yugaà jäta-kampaà ca subhrüù
rajjv-äkarña-çrama-bhuja-calat-kaìkaëau kuëòale ca
svinnaà vaktraà kabara-vigalan-mälaté nirmamantha
SYNONYMS
kñaumam—saffron and yellow mixed; väsaù—mother Yaçodä was wearing such
a sari; påthu-kaöi-taöe—surrounding her large hips; bibhraté—shaking;
sütra-naddham—bound with a belt; putra-sneha-snuta—because of intense
love for her child, became wet with milk; kuca-yugam—the nipples of her
breasts; jäta-kampam ca—as they were very nicely moving and quivering;
su-bhrüù—who had very beautiful eyebrows; rajju-äkarña—by pulling on the
rope of the churning rod; çrama—because of the labor; bhuja—on whose
hands; calat-kaìkaëau—the two bangles were moving; kuëòale—the two
earrings;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—also; svinnam—her hair was black like a cloud, so perspiration
was dropping like rain; vaktram—throughout her face;
kabara-vigalat-mälaté—and mälaté flowers were dropping from her hair;
nirmamantha—thus mother Yaçodä was churning the butter.
TRANSLATION
Dressed in a saffron-yellow sari, with a belt tied about her full hips, mother
Yaçodä pulled on the churning rope, laboring considerably, her bangles and
earrings moving and vibrating and her whole body shaking. Because of her
intense love for her child, her breasts were wet with milk. Her face, with its
very beautiful eyebrows, was wet with perspiration, and mälaté flowers were
falling from her hair.
608
PURPORT
Anyone who desires to be Kåñëa conscious in motherly affection or
parental affection should contemplate the bodily features of mother Yaçodä. It
is not that one should desire to become like Yaçodä, for this is Mäyäväda.
Either in parental affection or conjugal love, friendship or servitorship—in
any way—we must follow in the footsteps of the inhabitants of Våndävana,
not try to become like them. Therefore this description is provided here.
Advanced devotees must cherish this description, always thinking of mother
Yaçodä's features—how she was dressed, how she was working and perspiring,
how beautifully the flowers were arranged in her hair, and so on. One should
take advantage of the full description provided here by thinking of mother
Yaçodä in maternal affection for Kåñëa.
TEXT 4
taAM stanyak(Ama @As$aAâ
ma§antaI%M jananaI%M h"ir":
gA{h"ItvaA d"iDamanTaAnaM
nyaSaeDat‘aIitamaAvah"na,
täà stanya-käma äsädya
mathnantéà jananéà hariù
gåhétvä dadhi-manthänaà
nyañedhat prétim ävahan
SYNONYMS
täm—unto mother Yaçodä; stanya-kämaù—Kåñëa, who was desiring to drink
her breast milk; äsädya—appearing before her; mathnantém—while she was
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
609
churning butter; jananém—to the mother; hariù—Kåñëa; gåhétvä—catching;
dadhi-manthänam—the churning rod; nyañedhat—forbade; prétim
ävahan—creating a situation of love and affection.
TRANSLATION
While mother Yaçodä was churning butter, Lord Kåñëa, desiring to drink the
milk of her breast, appeared before her, and in order to increase her
transcendental pleasure, He caught hold of the churning rod and began to
prevent her from churning.
PURPORT
Kåñëa was sleeping within the room, and as soon as He got up, He became
hungry and went to His mother. Wanting to stop her from churning and drink
the milk of her breasts, He stopped her from moving the churning rod.
TEXT 5
tamaÆÿmaAè&X#mapaAyayatstanaM
µaeh"µautaM s$aismatamaIºataI mauKama,
@ta{æamauts$a{jya javaena s$aA yayaAva,
oits$acyamaAnae payais$a tvaiDai™atae
tam aìkam ärüòham apäyayat stanaà
sneha-snutaà sa-smitam ékñaté mukham
atåptam utsåjya javena sä yayäv
utsicyamäne payasi tv adhiçrite
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
610
tam—unto Kåñëa; aìkam ärüòham—very affectionately allowing Him to sit
down on her lap; apäyayat—allowed to drink; stanam—her breast;
sneha-snutam—which was flowing with milk because of intense affection;
sa-smitam ékñaté mukham—mother Yaçodä was smiling and observing the
smiling face of Kåñëa; atåptam—Kåñëa, who was still not fully satisfied by
drinking the milk; utsåjya—putting Him aside; javena—very hastily;
sä—mother Yaçodä; yayau—left that place; utsicyamäne payasi—because of
seeing that the milk was overflowing; tu—but; adhiçrite—in the milk pan on
the oven.
TRANSLATION
Mother Yaçodä then embraced Kåñëa, allowed Him to sit down on her lap,
and began to look upon the face of the Lord with great love and affection.
Because of her intense affection, milk was flowing from her breast. But when
she saw that the milk pan on the oven was boiling over, she immediately left
her son to take care of the overflowing milk, although the child was not yet
fully satisfied with drinking the milk of His mother's breast.
PURPORT
Everything in the household affairs of mother Yaçodä was meant for Kåñëa.
Although Kåñëa was drinking the breast milk of mother Yaçodä, when she saw
that the milk pan in the kitchen was overflowing, she had to take care of it
immediately, and thus she left her son, who then became very angry, not
having been fully satisfied with drinking the milk of her breast. Sometimes one
must take care of more than one item of important business for the same
purpose. Therefore mother Yaçodä was not unjust when she left her son to
take care of the overflowing milk. On the platform of love and affection, it is
the duty of the devotee to do one thing first and other things later. The proper
intuition by which to do this is given by Kåñëa.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
611
teñäà satata-yuktänäà
bhajatäà préti-pürvakam
dadämi buddhi-yogaà taà
yena mäm upayänti te
(Bg. 10.10)
In Kåñëa consciousness, everything is dynamic. Kåñëa guides the devotee in
what to do first and what to do next on the platform of absolute truth.
TEXT 6
s$aÃaAtak(Aepa: s$Pu(ir"taAç&NAADarM"
s$and"zya d"ià"dR"iDamanTaBaAjanama,
iBaÔvaA ma{SaA™auä{R"Sad"zmanaA r"h"Ae
jaGaAs$a hE"yaËÿvamantarM" gAta:
saïjäta-kopaù sphuritäruëädharaà
sandaçya dadbhir dadhi-mantha-bhäjanam
bhittvä måñäçrur dåñad-açmanä raho
jaghäsa haiyaìgavam antaraà gataù
SYNONYMS
saïjäta-kopaù—in this way, Kåñëa being very angry;
sphurita-aruëa-adharam—swollen reddish lips; sandaçya—capturing;
dadbhiù—by His teeth; dadhi-mantha-bhäjanam—the pot in which yogurt was
being churned; bhittvä—breaking; måñä-açruù—with false tears in the eyes;
dåñat-açmanä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
rahaù—in a solitary place;
jaghäsa—began to eat; haiyaìgavam—the freshly churned butter;
antaram—within the room; gataù—having gone.
612
TRANSLATION
Being very angry and biting His reddish lips with His teeth, Kåñëa, with
false tears in His eyes, broke the container of yogurt with a piece of stone.
Then He entered a room and began to eat the freshly churned butter in a
solitary place.
PURPORT
It is natural that when a child becomes angry he can begin crying with false
tears in his eyes. So Kåñëa did this, and biting His reddish lips with His teeth,
He broke the pot with a stone, entered a room and began to eat the freshly
churned butter.
TEXT 7
oÔaAyaR gAAepaI s$auZa{taM paya: pauna:
‘aivazya s$aMä{"zya ca d"Dyama‡ak(ma,
Ba¢aM ivalaAefya svas$autasya k(maR taja,
jah"As$a taM caAipa na ta‡a pazyataI
uttärya gopé suçåtaà payaù punaù
praviçya saàdåçya ca dadhy-amatrakam
bhagnaà vilokya sva-sutasya karma taj
jahäsa taà cäpi na tatra paçyaté
SYNONYMS
uttärya—putting down from the oven; gopé—mother Yaçodä; su-çåtam—very
hot; payaù—the milk; punaù—again; praviçya—entered the churning spot;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
613
saàdåçya—by observing; ca—also; dadhi-amatrakam—the container of yogurt;
bhagnam—broken; vilokya—seeing this; sva-sutasya—of her own child;
karma—work; tat—that; jahäsa—smiled; tam ca—Kåñëa also; api—at the
same time; na—not; tatra—there; paçyaté—finding.
TRANSLATION
Mother Yaçodä, after taking down the hot milk from the oven, returned to
the churning spot, and when she saw that the container of yogurt was broken
and that Kåñëa was not present, she concluded that the breaking of the pot was
the work of Kåñëa.
PURPORT
Seeing the pot broken and Kåñëa not present, Yaçodä definitely concluded
that the breaking of the pot was the work of Kåñëa. There was no doubt about
it.
TEXT 8
olaUKalaAx.~„aeç&pair" vyavaisTataM
mak(ARya k(AmaM d"d"taM izAica isTatama,
hE"yaËÿvaM caAEyaRivazAiÆÿtaeºaNAM
inar"Iºya paêAts$autamaAgAmacC$naE:
ulükhaläìghrer upari vyavasthitaà
markäya kämaà dadataà çici sthitam
haiyaìgavaà caurya-viçaìkitekñaëaà
nirékñya paçcät sutam ägamac chanaiù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
614
SYNONYMS
ulükhala-aìghreù—of the mortar in which spices were ground and which was
being kept upside down; upari—on top; vyavasthitam—Kåñëa was sitting;
markäya—unto a monkey; kämam—according to His satisfaction;
dadatam—delivering shares; çici sthitam—situated in the butter pot hanging
on the swing; haiyaìgavam—butter and other milk preparations;
caurya-viçaìkita—because of stealing, were anxiously looking hither and
thither; ékñaëam—whose eyes; nirékñya—by seeing these activities;
paçcät—from behind; sutam—her son; ägamat—she reached; çanaiù—very
slowly, cautiously.
TRANSLATION
Kåñëa, at that time, was sitting on an upside-down wooden mortar for
grinding spices and was distributing milk preparations such as yogurt and butter
to the monkeys as He liked. Because of having stolen, He was looking all
around with great anxiety, suspecting that He might be chastised by His
mother. Mother Yaçodä, upon seeing Him, very cautiously approached Him
from behind.
PURPORT
Mother Yaçodä was able to trace Kåñëa by following His butter-smeared
footprints. She saw that Kåñëa was stealing butter, and thus she smiled.
Meanwhile, the crows also entered the room and came out in fear. Thus
mother Yaçodä found Kåñëa stealing butter and very anxiously looking here
and there.
TEXT 9
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
615
taAmaAÔayaiíM" ‘as$amaIºya s$atvar"s$a,
tataAe'vaç&÷Apas$as$aAr" BaItavata,
gAAepyanvaDaAvaªa yamaApa yaAeigAnaAM
ºamaM ‘avaeí]M" tapas$aeir"taM mana:
täm ätta-yañöià prasamékñya satvaras
tato 'varuhyäpasasära bhétavat
gopy anvadhävan na yam äpa yoginäà
kñamaà praveñöuà tapaseritaà manaù
SYNONYMS
täm—unto mother Yaçodä; ätta-yañöim—carrying in her hand a stick;
prasamékñya—Kåñëa, seeing her in that attitude; satvaraù—very quickly;
tataù—from there; avaruhya—getting down; apasasära—began to flee;
bhéta-vat—as if very much afraid; gopé—mother Yaçodä; anvadhävat—began to
follow Him; na—not; yam—unto whom; äpa—failed to reach; yoginäm—of
great yogés, mystics; kñamam—who could reach Him; praveñöum—trying to
enter into the Brahman effulgence or Paramätmä; tapasä—with great
austerities and penances; éritam—trying for that purpose; manaù—by
meditation.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
TRANSLATION
When Lord Çré Kåñëa saw His mother, stick in hand, He very quickly got
down from the top of the mortar and began to flee as if very much afraid.
Although yogés try to capture Him as Paramätmä by meditation, desiring to
enter into the effulgence of the Lord with great austerities and penances, they
fail to reach Him. But mother Yaçodä, thinking that same Personality of
Godhead, Kåñëa, to be her son, began following Kåñëa to catch Him.
616
PURPORT
Yogés, mystics, want to catch Kåñëa as Paramätmä, and with great austerities
and penances they try to approach Him, yet they cannot. Here we see,
however, that Kåñëa is going to be caught by Yaçodä and is running away in
fear. This illustrates the difference between the bhakta and the yogé. Yogés
cannot reach Kåñëa, but for pure devotees like mother Yaçodä, Kåñëa is already
caught. Kåñëa was even afraid of mother Yaçodä's stick. This was mentioned by
Queen Kunté in her prayers: bhaya-bhävanayä sthitasya (SB 1.8.31). Kåñëa is
afraid of mother Yaçodä, and yogés are afraid of Kåñëa. Yogés try to reach Kåñëa
by jïäna-yoga and other yogas, but fail. Yet although mother Yaçodä was a
woman, Kåñëa was afraid of her, as clearly described in this verse.
TEXT 10
@nvaÂamaAnaA jananaI ba{h"»alaca,-
C)$AeNAIBar"A‚(AntagAita: s$aumaDyamaA
javaena iva›aMis$atake(zAbanDanacyauta‘
as$aUnaAnaugAita: par"Ama{zAta,
anvaïcamänä janané båhac-calacchroëé-
bharäkränta-gatiù sumadhyamä
javena visraàsita-keça-bandhanacyuta-
prasünänugatiù parämåçat
SYNONYMS
anvaïcamänä—following Kåñëa very swiftly; janané—mother Yaçodä;
båhat-calat-çroëé-bhara-äkränta-gatiù—being overburdened by the weight of
her large breasts, she became tired and had to reduce her speed;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
617
su-madhyamä—because of her thin waist; javena—because of going very fast;
visraàsita-keça-bandhana—from her arrangement of hair, which had become
loosened; cyuta-prasüna-anugatiù—she was followed by the flowers falling
after her; parämåçat—finally captured Kåñëa without fail.
TRANSLATION
While following Kåñëa, mother Yaçodä, her thin waist overburdened by her
heavy breasts, naturally had to reduce her speed. Because of following Kåñëa
very swiftly, her hair became loose, and the flowers in her hair were falling
after her. Yet she did not fail to capture her son Kåñëa.
PURPORT
Yogés cannot capture Kåñëa by severe penances and austerities, but mother
Yaçodä, despite all obstacles, was finally able to catch Kåñëa without difficulty.
This is the difference between a yogé and a bhakta. Yogés cannot enter even the
effulgence of Kåñëa. Yasya prabhä prabhavato jagad-aëòa-koöi-koöiñu (Bs. 5.40).
In that effulgence there are millions of universes, but yogés and jïänés cannot
enter that effulgence even after many, many years of austerities, whereas
bhaktas can capture Kåñëa simply by love and affection. This is the example
shown here by mother Yaçodä. Kåñëa therefore confirms that if one wants to
capture Him, one must undertake devotional service.
bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti
yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù
tato mäà tattvato jïätvä
viçate tad-anantaram
(Bg. 18.55)
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Bhaktas enter even the planet of Kåñëa very easily, but the less intelligent yogés
and jïänés, by their meditation, remain running after Kåñëa. Even if they enter
618
Kåñëa's effulgence, they fall down.
TEXT 11
k{(taAgAs$aM taM ‘aç&d"ntamaiºaNAI
k(SantamaÃanmaiSaNAI svapaAiNAnaA
oã"IºamaANAM Bayaivaù"laeºaNAM
h"stae gA{h"ItvaA iBaSayantyavaAgAur"ta,
kåtägasaà taà prarudantam akñiëé
kañantam aïjan-mañiëé sva-päëinä
udvékñamäëaà bhaya-vihvalekñaëaà
haste gåhétvä bhiñayanty avägurat
SYNONYMS
kåta-ägasam—who was an offender; tam—unto Kåñëa; prarudantam—with a
crying attitude; akñiëé—His two eyes; kañantam—rubbing; aïjat-mañiëé—from
whose eyes the blackish ointment was distributed all over His face with tears;
sva-päëinä—with His own hand; udvékñamäëam—who was seen in that
attitude by mother Yaçodä; bhaya-vihvala-ékñaëam—whose eyes appeared
distressed because of such fear of His mother; haste—by the hand;
gåhétvä—catching;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
bhiñayanté—mother Yaçodä was threatening Him;
avägurat—and thus she very mildly chastised Him.
TRANSLATION
When caught by mother Yaçodä, Kåñëa became more and more afraid and
admitted to being an offender. As she looked upon Him, she saw that He was
crying, His tears mixing with the black ointment around His eyes, and as He
619
rubbed His eyes with His hands, He smeared the ointment all over His face.
Mother Yaçodä, catching her beautiful son by the hand, mildly began to chastise
Him.
PURPORT
From these dealings between mother Yaçodä and Kåñëa, we can understand
the exalted position of a pure devotee in loving service to the Lord. Yogés,
jïänés, karmés and Vedäntists cannot even approach Kåñëa; they must remain
very, very far away from Him and try to enter His bodily effulgence, although
this also they are unable to do. Great demigods like Lord Brahmä and Lord
Çiva always worship the Lord by meditation and by service. Even the most
powerful Yamaräja fears Kåñëa. Therefore, as we find in the history of
Ajämila, Yamaräja instructed his followers not even to approach the devotees,
what to speak of capturing them. In other words, Yamaräja also fears Kåñëa
and Kåñëa's devotees. Yet this Kåñëa became so dependent on mother Yaçodä
that when she simply showed Kåñëa the stick in her hand, Kåñëa admitted to
being an offender and began to cry like an ordinary child. Mother Yaçodä, of
course, did not want to chastise her beloved child very much, and therefore
she immediately threw her stick away and simply rebuked Kåñëa, saying, "Now
I shall bind You so that You cannot commit any further offensive activities.
Nor for the time being can You play with Your playmates." This shows the
position of a pure devotee, in contrast with others, like jïänés, yogés and the
followers of Vedic ritualistic ceremonies, in regarding the transcendental
nature of the Absolute Truth.
TEXT 12
tyaftvaA yaiíM" s$autaM BaItaM
ivaÁaAyaABaRk(vats$alaA
wyaeSa ik(la taM baä,"DauM
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
620
d"A°aAtaã"IyaRk(Aeivad"A
tyaktvä yañöià sutaà bhétaà
vijïäyärbhaka-vatsalä
iyeña kila taà baddhuà
dämnätad-vérya-kovidä
SYNONYMS
tyaktvä—throwing away; yañöim—the stick in her hand; sutam—her son;
bhétam—considering her son's great fear; vijïäya—understanding;
arbhaka-vatsalä—the most affectionate mother of Kåñëa; iyeña—desired;
kila—indeed; tam—Kåñëa; baddhum—to bind; dämnä—with a rope;
a-tat-vérya-kovidä—without knowledge of the supremely powerful Personality
of Godhead (because of intense love for Kåñëa).
TRANSLATION
Mother Yaçodä was always overwhelmed by intense love for Kåñëa, not
knowing who Kåñëa was or how powerful He was. Because of maternal
affection for Kåñëa, she never even cared to know who He was. Therefore,
when she saw that her son had become excessively afraid, she threw the stick
away and desired to bind Him so that He would not commit any further
naughty activities.
PURPORT
Mother Yaçodä wanted to bind Kåñëa not in order to chastise Him but
because she thought that the child was so restless that He might leave the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
affection, to stop Kåñëa from leaving the house, she wanted to bind Him with
rope. Mother Yaçodä wanted to impress upon Kåñëa that since He was afraid
621
merely to see her stick, He should not perform such disturbing activities as
breaking the container of yogurt and butter and distributing its contents to
the monkeys. Mother Yaçodä did not care to understand who Kåñëa was and
how His power spreads everywhere. This is an example of pure love for Kåñëa.
TEXTS 13-14
na caAntanaR baih"yaRsya
na paUva< naAipa caApar"ma,
paUvaARparM" baih"êAntar,"
jagAtaAe yaAe jagA»a ya:
taM matvaAtmajamavyalM(
matyaRilaËÿmaDaAeºajama,
gAAeipak(AelaUKalae d"A°aA
babanDa ‘aAk{(taM yaTaA
na cäntar na bahir yasya
na pürvaà näpi cäparam
pürväparaà bahiç cäntar
jagato yo jagac ca yaù
taà matvätmajam avyaktaà
martya-liìgam adhokñajam
gopikolükhale dämnä
babandha präkåtaà yathä
SYNONYMS
na—not; ca—also; antaù—interior; na—nor; bahiù—exterior; yasya—whose;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
622
na—neither; pürvam—beginning; na—nor; api—indeed; ca—also;
aparam—end; pürva-aparam—the beginning and the end; bahiù ca antaù—the
external and the internal; jagataù—of the whole cosmic manifestation;
yaù—one who is; jagat ca yaù—and who is everything in creation in total;
tam—Him; matvä—considering; ätmajam—her own son; avyaktam—the
unmanifested; martya-liìgam—appearing as a human being;
adhokñajam—beyond sense perception; gopikä—mother Yaçodä; ulükhale—to
the grinding mortar; dämnä—by a rope; babandha—bound; präkåtam
yathä—as done to a common human child.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead has no beginning and no end, no
exterior and no interior, no front and no rear. In other words, He is
all-pervading. Because He is not under the influence of the element of time, for
Him there is no difference between past, present and future; He exists in His
own transcendental form at all times. Being absolute, beyond relativity, He is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
free from distinctions between cause and effect, although He is the cause and
effect of everything. That unmanifested person, who is beyond the perception
of the senses, had now appeared as a human child, and mother Yaçodä,
considering Him her own ordinary child, bound Him to the wooden mortar
with a rope.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (10.12), Kåñëa is described as the Supreme Brahman
(paraà brahma paraà dhäma). The word brahma means "the greatest." Kåñëa is
greater than the greatest, being unlimited and all-pervading. How can it be
possible for the all-pervading to be measured or bound? Then again, Kåñëa is
the time factor. Therefore, He is all-pervading not only in space but also in
time. We have measurements of time, but although we are limited by past,
present and future, for Kåñëa these do not exist. Every individual person can
623
be measured, but Kåñëa has already shown that although He also is an
individual, the entire cosmic manifestation is within His mouth. All these
points considered, Kåñëa cannot be measured. How then did Yaçodä want to
measure Him and bind Him? We must conclude that this took place simply on
the platform of pure transcendental love. This was the only cause.
advaitam acyutam anädim ananta-rüpam
ädyaà puräëa-puruñaà nava-yauvanaà ca
vedeñu durlabham adurlabham ätma-bhaktau
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
(Bs. 5.33)
Everything is one because Kåñëa is the supreme cause of everything. Kåñëa
cannot be measured or calculated by Vedic knowledge (vedeñu durlabham). He
is available only to devotees (adurlabham ätma-bhaktau). Devotees can handle
Him because they act on the basis of loving service (bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti
yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù) [Bg. 18.55]. Thus mother Yaçodä wanted to bind
Him.
TEXT 15
taÚ"Ama baDyamaAnasya
svaABaRk(sya k{(taAgAs$a:
ã"YaÌÿlaAenamaBaUÔaena
s$and"Dae'nya»a gAAeipak(A
tad däma badhyamänasya
svärbhakasya kåtägasaù
dvy-aìgulonam abhüt tena
sandadhe 'nyac ca gopikä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
624
SYNONYMS
tat däma—that binding rope; badhyamänasya—who was being bound by
mother Yaçodä; sva-arbhakasya—of her own son; kåta-ägasaù—who was an
offender; dvi-aìgula—by a measurement of two fingers; ünam—short;
abhüt—became; tena—with that rope; sandadhe—joined; anyat ca—another
rope; gopikä—mother Yaçodä.
TRANSLATION
When mother Yaçodä was trying to bind the offending child, she saw that
the binding rope was short by a distance the width of two fingers. Thus she
brought another rope to join to it.
PURPORT
Here is the first chapter in Kåñëa's exhibition of unlimited potency to
mother Yaçodä when she tried to bind Him: the rope was too short. The Lord
had already shown His unlimited potency by killing Pütanä, Çakaöäsura and
Tåëävarta. Now Kåñëa exhibited another vibhüti, or display of potency, to
mother Yaçodä. "Unless I agree," Kåñëa desired to show, "you cannot bind Me."
Thus although mother Yaçodä, in her attempt to bind Kåñëa, added one rope
after another, ultimately she was a failure. When Kåñëa agreed, however, she
was successful. In other words, one must be in transcendental love with Kåñëa,
but that does not mean that one can control Kåñëa. When Kåñëa is satisfied
with one's devotional service, He does everything Himself. Sevonmukhe hi
jihvädau svayam eva sphuraty adaù. He reveals more and more to the devotee as
the devotee advances in service. Jihvädau: this service begins with the tongue,
with chanting and with taking the prasäda of Kåñëa.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
625
na bhaved grähyam indriyaiù
sevonmukhe hi jihvädau
svayam eva sphuraty adaù
[Cc. Madhya 17.136]
TEXT 16
yad"As$aIÔad"ipa nyaUnaM
taenaAnyad"ipa s$and"Dae
tad"ipa ã"YaÌÿlaM nyaUnaM
yaâd"Ad"Ôa banDanama,
yadäsét tad api nyünaà
tenänyad api sandadhe
tad api dvy-aìgulaà nyünaà
yad yad ädatta bandhanam
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; äsét—became; tat api—even the new rope that had been joined;
nyünam—still short; tena—then, with the second rope; anyat api—another
rope also; sandadhe—she joined; tat api—that also; dvi-aìgulam—by a
measurement of two fingers; nyünam—remained short; yat yat ädatta—in this
way, one after another, whatever ropes she joined; bandhanam—for binding
Kåñëa.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
TRANSLATION
This new rope also was short by a measurement of two fingers, and when
another rope was joined to it, it was still two fingers too short. As many ropes
626
as she joined, all of them failed; their shortness could not be overcome.
TEXT 17
WvaM svagAeh"d"AmaAina
yazAAed"A s$and"Datyaipa
gAAepaInaAM s$ausmayantaInaAM
smayantaI ivaismataABavata,
evaà sva-geha-dämäni
yaçodä sandadhaty api
gopénäà susmayanténäà
smayanté vismitäbhavat
SYNONYMS
evam—in this manner; sva-geha-dämäni—all the ropes available in the
household; yaçodä—mother Yaçodä; sandadhati api—although she was joining
one after another; gopénäm—when all the other elderly gopé friends of mother
Yaçodä; su-smayanténäm—were all taking pleasure in this funny affair;
smayanté—mother Yaçodä was also smiling; vismitä abhavat—all of them were
struck with wonder.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
TRANSLATION
Thus mother Yaçodä joined whatever ropes were available in the household,
but still she failed in her attempt to bind Kåñëa. Mother Yaçodä's friends, the
elderly gopés in the neighborhood, were smiling and enjoying the fun. Similarly,
mother Yaçodä, although laboring in that way, was also smiling. All of them
were struck with wonder.
627
PURPORT
Actually this incident was wonderful because Kåñëa was only a child with
small hands. To bind Him should have required only a rope not more than two
feet long. All the ropes in the house combined together might have been
hundreds of feet long, but still He was impossible to bind, for all the ropes
together were still too short. Naturally mother Yaçodä and her gopé friends
thought, "How is this possible?" Seeing this funny affair, all of them were
smiling. The first rope was short by a measurement the width of two fingers,
and after the second rope was added, it was still two fingers too short. If the
shortness of all the ropes were added together, it must have amounted to the
width of hundreds of fingers. Certainly this was astonishing. This was another
exhibition of Kåñëa's inconceivable potency to His mother and His mother's
friends.
TEXT 18
svamaAtau: isvaªagAA‡aAyaA
iva›astak(bar"›aja:
ä{"î"A pair"™amaM k{(SNA:
k{(payaAs$aItsvabanDanae
sva-mätuù svinna-gäträyä
visrasta-kabara-srajaù
dåñövä pariçramaà kåñëaù
kåpayäsét sva-bandhane
SYNONYMS
sva-mätuù—of His own mother (Kåñëa's mother, Yaçodädevé);
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
628
svinna-gäträyäù—when Kåñëa saw His mother perspiring all over because of
unnecessary labor; visrasta—were falling down; kabara—from her hair;
srajaù—of whom the flowers; dåñövä—by seeing the condition of His mother;
pariçramam—He could understand that she was now overworked and feeling
fatigued; kåñëaù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kåpayä—by His
causeless mercy upon His devotee and mother; äsét—agreed; sva-bandhane—in
binding Him.
TRANSLATION
Because of mother Yaçodä's hard labor, her whole body became covered with
perspiration, and the flowers and comb were falling from her hair. When child
Kåñëa saw His mother thus fatigued, He became merciful to her and agreed to
be bound.
PURPORT
When mother Yaçodä and the other ladies finally saw that Kåñëa, although
decorated with many bangles and other jeweled ornaments, could not be
bound with all the ropes available in the house, they decided that Kåñëa was so
fortunate that He could not be bound by any material condition. Thus they
gave up the idea of binding Him. But in competition between Kåñëa and His
devotee, Kåñëa sometimes agrees to be defeated. Thus Kåñëa's internal energy,
yogamäyä, was brought to work, and Kåñëa agreed to be bound by mother
Yaçodä.
TEXT 19
WvaM s$and"izARtaA ÷Ëÿ
h"ir"NAA Ba{tyavazyataA
svavazAenaAipa k{(SNAena
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
629
yasyaedM" s$aeìrM" vazAe
evaà sandarçitä hy aìga
hariëä bhåtya-vaçyatä
sva-vaçenäpi kåñëena
yasyedaà seçvaraà vaçe
SYNONYMS
evam—in this manner; sandarçitä—was exhibited; hi—indeed; aìga—O
Mahäräja Parékñit; hariëä—by the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
bhåtya-vaçyatä—His transcendental quality of becoming subordinate to His
servitor or devotee; sva-vaçena—who is within the control only of His own
self; api—indeed; kåñëena—by Kåñëa; yasya—of whom; idam—the whole
universe; sa-éçvaram—with the powerful demigods like Lord Çiva and Lord
Brahmä; vaçe—under the control.
TRANSLATION
O Mahäräja Parékñit, this entire universe, with its great, exalted demigods
like Lord Çiva, Lord Brahmä and Lord Indra, is under the control of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Yet the Supreme Lord has one transcendental
attribute: He comes under the control of His devotees. This was now exhibited
by Kåñëa in this pastime.
PURPORT
This pastime of Kåñëa's is very difficult to understand, but devotees can
understand it. It is therefore said, darçayaàs tad-vidäà loka ätmano
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
(SB 10.11.9): the Lord displays the transcendental attribute of
coming under the control of His devotees. As stated in the Brahma-saàhitä
(5.35):
630
eko 'py asau racayituà jagad-aëòa-koöià
yac-chaktir asti jagad-aëòa-cayä yad-antaù
aëòäntara-stha-paramäëu-cayäntara-sthaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
By His one plenary portion as Paramätmä, the Lord controls innumerable
universes, with all their demigods; yet He agrees to be controlled by a devotee.
In the Upaniñads it is said that the Supreme Personality of Godhead can run
with more speed than the mind, but here we see that although Kåñëa wanted
to avoid being arrested by His mother, He was finally defeated, and mother
Yaçodä captured Him. Lakñmé-sahasra-çata-sambhrama-sevyamänam: [Bs. 5.29]
Kåñëa is served by hundreds and thousands of goddesses of fortune.
Nonetheless, He steals butter like one who is poverty-stricken. Yamaräja, the
controller of all living entities, fears the order of Kåñëa, yet Kåñëa is afraid of
His mother's stick. These contradictions cannot be understood by one who is
not a devotee, but a devotee can understand how powerful is unalloyed
devotional service to Kåñëa; it is so powerful that Kåñëa can be controlled by
an unalloyed devotee. This bhåtya-vaçyatä does not mean that He is under the
control of the servant; rather, He is under the control of the servant's pure
love. In Bhagavad-gétä (1.21) it is said that Kåñëa became the chariot driver of
Arjuna. Arjuna ordered Him, senayor ubhayor madhye rathaà sthäpaya me
'cyuta: "My dear Kåñëa, You have agreed to be my charioteer and to execute
my orders. Place my chariot between the two armies of soldiers." Kåñëa
immediately executed this order, and therefore one may argue that Kåñëa also
is not independent. But this is one's ajïäna, ignorance. Kåñëa is always fully
independent; when He becomes subordinate to His devotees, this is a display of
änanda-cinmaya-rasa, the humor of transcendental qualities that increases His
transcendental pleasure. Everyone worships Kåñëa as the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, and therefore He sometimes desires to be controlled by someone
else. Such a controller can be no one else but a pure devotee.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
631
TEXT 20
naemaM ivair"ÂaAe na BavaAe
na ™aIr"pyaËÿs$aM™ayaA
‘as$aAdM" laeiBare" gAAepaI
yaÔat‘aApa ivamauil(d"Ata,
nemaà viriïco na bhavo
na çrér apy aìga-saàçrayä
prasädaà lebhire gopé
yat tat präpa vimuktidät
SYNONYMS
na—not; imam—this exalted position; viriïcaù—Lord Brahmä; na—nor;
bhavaù—Lord Çiva; na—nor; çréù—the goddess of fortune; api—indeed;
aìga-saàçrayä—although she is always the better half of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; prasädam—mercy; lebhire—obtained; gopé—mother
Yaçodä; yat tat—as that which; präpa—obtained; vimukti-dät—from Kåñëa,
who gives deliverance from this material world.
TRANSLATION
Neither Lord Brahmä, nor Lord Çiva, nor even the goddess of fortune, who
is always the better half of the Supreme Lord, can obtain from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the deliverer from this material world, such mercy as
received by mother Yaçodä.
PURPORT
This is a comparative study between mother Yaçodä and other devotees of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
632
the Lord. As stated in Caitanya caritämåta (Ädi 5.142), ekale éçvara kåñëa, ära
saba bhåtya: the only supreme master is Kåñëa, and all others are His servants.
Kåñëa has the transcendental quality of bhåtya-vaçyatä, becoming subordinate
to His bhåtya, or servant. Now, although everyone is bhåtya and although Kåñëa
has the quality of becoming subordinate to His bhåtya, the position of mother
Yaçodä is the greatest. Lord Brahmä is bhåtya, a servant of Kåñëa, and he is
ädi-kavi, the original creator of this universe (tene brahma hådä ya ädi-kavaye
[SB 1.1.1]). Nonetheless, even he could not obtain such mercy as mother
Yaçodä. As for Lord Çiva, he is the topmost Vaiñëava (vaiñëavänäà yathä
çambhuù). What to speak of Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva, the goddess of
fortune, Lakñmé, is the Lord's constant companion in service, since she always
associates with His body. But even she could not get such mercy. Therefore
Mahäräja Parékñit was surprised, thinking, "What did mother Yaçodä and
Nanda Mahäräja do in their previous lives by which they got such a great
opportunity, the opportunity to be the affectionate father and mother of
Kåñëa?"
In this verse there are three negative pronouncements-na, na, na. When
anything is uttered three times—"do it, do it, do it"—one should understand
that this is meant to indicate great stress on a fact. In this verse, we find na
lebhire, na lebhire, na lebhire. Yet mother Yaçodä is in the supermost exalted
position, and thus Kåñëa has become completely subordinate to her.
The word vimuktidät is also significant. There are different types of
liberation, such as säyujya, sälokya, särüpya, särñöi and sämépya [Cc. Madhya
6.266]
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
, but vimukti means "special mukti." When after liberation one is situated
on the platform of prema-bhakti, one is said to have achieved vimukti, "special
mukti." Therefore the word na is mentioned. That exalted platform of premä is
described by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu as premä pum-artho mahän, and mother
Yaçodä naturally acts in such an exalted position in loving affairs. She is
therefore a nitya-siddha devotee, an expansion of Kåñëa's hlädiné potency, His
potency to enjoy transcendental bliss through expansions who are special
devotees (änanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhävitäbhiù [Bs. 5.37]). Such devotees are
633
not sädhana-siddha.
TEXT 21
naAyaM s$auKaApaAe BagAvaAna,
de"ih"naAM gAAeipak(As$auta:
ÁaAinanaAM caAtmaBaUtaAnaAM
yaTaA Bail(mataAimah"
näyaà sukhäpo bhagavän
dehinäà gopikä-sutaù
jïäninäà cätma-bhütänäà
yathä bhaktimatäm iha
SYNONYMS
na—not; ayam—this; sukha-äpaù—very easily obtainable, or an object of
happiness; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; dehinäm—of
persons in the bodily concept of life, especially the karmés;
gopikä-sutaù—Kåñëa, the son of mother Yaçodä (Kåñëa as the son of Vasudeva
is called Väsudeva, and as the son of mother Yaçodä He is known as Kåñëa);
jïäninäm ca—and of the jïänés, who try to be free from material
contamination; ätma-bhütänäm—of self-sufficient yogés; yathä—as;
bhakti-matäm—of the devotees; iha—in this world.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, the son of mother Yaçodä, is
accessible to devotees engaged in spontaneous loving service, but He is not as
easily accessible to mental speculators, to those striving for self-realization by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
634
severe austerities and penances, or to those who consider the body the same as
the self.
PURPORT
Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead as the son of mother Yaçodä, is
very easily available to devotees, but not to tapasvés, yogés, jïänés and others
who have a bodily concept of life. Although they may sometimes be called
çänta-bhaktas, real bhakti begins with däsya-rasa. Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä
(4.11):
ye yathä mäà prapadyante
täàs tathaiva bhajämy aham
mama vartmänuvartante
manuñyäù pärtha sarvaçaù
"As living entities surrender unto Me, I reward them accordingly. Everyone
follows My path in all respects, O son of Påthä." Everyone is seeking Kåñëa, for
He is the Supersoul of all individual souls. Everyone loves his body and wants
to protect it because he is within the body as the soul, and everyone loves the
soul because the soul is part and parcel of the Supersoul. Therefore, everyone
is actually seeking to achieve happiness by reviving his relationship with the
Supersoul. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (15.15), vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva
vedyaù: "By all the Vedas, it is I who am to be known." Therefore, the karmés,
jïänés, yogés and saintly persons are all seeking Kåñëa. But by following in the
footsteps of devotees who are in a direct relationship with Kåñëa, especially the
inhabitants of Våndävana, one can reach the supreme position of associating
with Kåñëa. As it is said, våndävanaà parityajya padam ekaà na gacchati: Kåñëa
does not leave Våndävana even for a moment. The våndävana-väsés—mother
Yaçodä, Kåñëa's friends and Kåñëa's conjugal lovers, the younger gopés with
whom He dances—have very intimate relationships with Kåñëa, and if one
follows in the footsteps of these devotees, Kåñëa is available. Although the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
635
nitya-siddha expansions of Kåñëa always remain with Kåñëa, if those engaged
in sädhana-siddhi follow in the footsteps of Kåñëa's nitya-siddha associates, such
sädhana-siddhas also can easily attain Kåñëa without difficulty. But there are
those who are attached to bodily concepts of life. Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva,
for example, have very prestigious positions, and thus they have the sense of
being very exalted éçvaras. In other words, because Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva
are guëa-avatäras and have exalted positions, they have some small sense of
being like Kåñëa. But the pure devotees who inhabit Våndävana do not possess
any bodily conception. They are fully dedicated to the service of the Lord in
sublime affection, premä. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu has therefore
recommended, premä pum-artho mahän: the highest perfection of life is premä,
pure love in relationship with Kåñëa. And mother Yaçodä appears to be the
topmost of devotees who have attained this perfection.
TEXT 22
k{(SNAstau gA{h"k{(tyaeSau
vyaƒaAyaAM maAtair" ‘aBau:
@‰"AºaId"jauRnaAE paUva<
gAu÷k(AE Danad"AtmajaAE
kåñëas tu gåha-kåtyeñu
vyagräyäà mätari prabhuù
adräkñéd arjunau pürvaà
guhyakau dhanadätmajau
SYNONYMS
kåñëaù tu—in the meantime; gåha-kåtyeñu—in engagement in household
affairs; vyagräyäm—very busy; mätari—when His mother; prabhuù—the Lord;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
636
adräkñét—observed; arjunau—the twin arjuna trees; pürvam—before Him;
guhyakau—which in a former millennium had been demigods;
dhanada-ätmajau—the sons of Kuvera, the treasurer of the demigods.
TRANSLATION
While mother Yaçodä was very busy with household affairs, the Supreme
Lord, Kåñëa, observed twin trees known as yamala-arjuna, which in a former
millennium had been the demigod sons of Kuvera.
TEXT 23
paur"A naAr"d"zAApaena
va{ºataAM ‘aAipataAE mad"Ata,
nalakU(var"maiNAƒaIvaAva,
wita KyaAtaAE i™ayaAinvataAE
purä närada-çäpena
våkñatäà präpitau madät
nalaküvara-maëigréväv
iti khyätau çriyänvitau
SYNONYMS
purä—formerly; närada-çäpena—being cursed by Närada Muni;
våkñatäm—the forms of trees; präpitau—obtained; madät—because of
madness; nalaküvara—one of them was Nalaküvara; maëigrévau—the other
was Maëigréva; iti—thus; khyätau
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—well known; çriyä anvitau—very opulent.
TRANSLATION
637
In their former birth, these two sons, known as Nalaküvara and Maëigréva,
were extremely opulent and fortunate. But because of pride and false prestige,
they did not care about anyone, and thus Närada Muni cursed them to become
trees.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Tenth Canto, Ninth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Mother Yaçodä Binds Lord Kåñëa."
10. Deliverance of the Yamala-arjuna Trees
This chapter describes how Kåñëa broke the twin arjuna trees, from which
Nalaküvara and Maëigréva, the sons of Kuvera, then came out.
Nalaküvara and Maëigréva were great devotees of Lord Çiva, but because of
material opulence they became so extravagant and senseless that one day they
were enjoying with naked girls in a lake and shamelessly walking here and
there. Suddenly Närada Muni passed by, but they were so maddened by their
wealth and false prestige that even though they saw Närada Muni present,
they remained naked and were not even ashamed. In other words, because of
opulence and false prestige, they lost their sense of common decency. Of
course, it is the nature of the material qualities that when one becomes very
much opulent in terms of wealth and a prestigious position, one loses one's
sense of etiquette and does not care about anyone, even a sage like Närada
Muni. For such bewildered persons (ahaìkära-vimüòhätmä), who especially
deride devotees, the proper punishment is to be again stricken with poverty.
The Vedic rules and regulations prescribe how to control the false sense of
prestige by the practice of yama, niyama and so on (tapasä brahmacaryeëa
çamena ca damena ca [SB 6.1.13]). A poor man can be convinced very easily
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
638
that the prestige of an opulent position in this material world is temporary, but
a rich man cannot. Therefore Närada Muni set an example by cursing these
two persons, Nalaküvara and Maëigréva, to become dull and unconscious like
trees. This was a fit punishment. But because Kåñëa is always merciful, even
though they were punished they were fortunate enough to see the Supreme
Personality of Godhead face to face. Therefore the punishment given by
Vaiñëavas is not at all punishment; rather, it is another kind of mercy. By the
curse of the devarñi, Nalaküvara and Maëigréva became twin arjuna trees and
remained in the courtyard of mother Yaçodä and Nanda Mahäräja, waiting for
the opportunity to see Kåñëa directly. Lord Kåñëa, by the desire of His devotee,
uprooted these yamala-arjuna trees, and when Nalaküvara and Maëigréva were
thus delivered by Kåñëa after one hundred years of the devas, their old
consciousness revived, and they offered Kåñëa prayers suitable to be offered by
demigods. Having thus gotten the opportunity to see Kåñëa face to face, they
understood how merciful Närada Muni was, and therefore they expressed their
indebtedness to him and thanked him. Then, after circumambulating the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, they departed for their respective
abodes.
TEXT 1
™aIr"AjaAevaAca
k(TyataAM BagAvaªaetata,
tayaAe: zAApasya k(Ar"NAma,
yaÔaiã"gAihR"taM k(maR
yaena vaA de"vaSaeRstama:
çré-räjoväca
kathyatäà bhagavann etat
tayoù çäpasya käraëam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
639
yat tad vigarhitaà karma
yena vä devarñes tamaù
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—the King further inquired; kathyatäm—please describe;
bhagavan—O supremely powerful one; etat—this; tayoù—of both of them;
çäpasya—of cursing; käraëam—the cause; yat—which; tat—that;
vigarhitam—abominable; karma—act; yena—by which; vä—either; devarñeù
tamaù—the great sage Närada became so angry.
TRANSLATION
King Parékñit inquired from Çukadeva Gosvämé: O great and powerful saint,
what was the cause of Nalaküvara's and Maëigréva's having been cursed by
Närada Muni? What did they do that was so abominable that even Närada, the
great sage, became angry at them? Kindly describe this to me.
TEXTS 2-3
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
ç&‰"syaAnaucar"AE BaUtvaA
s$auä{"æaAE Danad"AtmajaAE
kE(laAs$aAepavanae r"myae
mand"Aik(nyaAM mad"Aetk(q%AE
vaAç&NAI%M maid"r"AM paItvaA
mad"AGaUiNARtalaAecanaAE
ñIjanaEr"naugAAyaià"zA,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
640
caer"tau: pauiSpatae vanae
çré-çuka uväca
rudrasyänucarau bhütvä
sudåptau dhanadätmajau
kailäsopavane ramye
mandäkinyäà madotkaöau
väruëéà madiräà pétvä
madäghürëita-locanau
stré-janair anugäyadbhiç
ceratuù puñpite vane
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé replied; rudrasya—of Lord Çiva;
anucarau—two great devotees or associates; bhütvä—being elevated to that
post; su-dåptau—being proud of that position and their beautiful bodily
features; dhanada-ätmajau—the two sons of Kuvera, treasurer of the demigods;
kailäsa-upavane—in a small garden attached to Kailäsa Parvata, the residence
of Lord Çiva; ramye—in a very beautiful place; mandäkinyäm—on the River
Mandäkiné; mada-utkaöau—terribly proud and mad; väruëém—a kind of liquor
named Väruëé; madiräm—intoxication; pétvä—drinking;
mada-äghürëita-locanau—their eyes rolling with intoxication;
stré-janaiù—with women; anugäyadbhiù—vibrating songs sung by them;
ceratuù—wandered; puñpite vane—in a nice flower garden.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O King Parékñit, because the two sons of Kuvera
had been elevated to the association of Lord Çiva, of which they were very
much proud, they were allowed to wander in a garden attached to Kailäsa Hill,
641
on the bank of the Mandäkiné River. Taking advantage of this, they used to
drink a kind of liquor called Väruëé. Accompanied by women singing after
them, they would wander in that garden of flowers, their eyes always rolling in
intoxication.
PURPORT
This verse mentions some of the material advantages afforded to persons
associated with or devoted to Lord Çiva. Apart from Lord Çiva, if one is a
devotee of any other demigod, one receives some material advantages. Foolish
people, therefore, become devotees of demigods. This has been pointed out and
criticized by Lord Kåñëa in Bhagavad-gétä (7.20): kämais tais tair håta jïänäù
prapadyante 'nya-devatäù. Those who are not devotees of Kåñëa have a taste for
women, wine and so forth, and therefore they have been described as håta
jïäna, bereft of sense. The Kåñëa consciousness movement can very easily
point out such foolish persons, for they have been indicated in Bhagavad-gétä
(7.15), where Lord Kåñëa says:
na mäà duñkåtino müòhäù
prapadyante narädhamäù
mäyayäpahåta-jïänä
äsuraà bhävaà äçritäù
"Those miscreants who are grossly foolish, lowest among mankind, whose
knowledge is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the atheistic nature of
demons, do not surrender unto Me." Anyone who is not a devotee of Kåñëa
and does not surrender to Kåñëa must be considered narädhama, the lowest of
men, and duñkåté, one who always commits sinful activities. Thus there is no
difficulty in finding out who is a third-class or fourth-class man, for one's
position can be understood simply by this crucial test: is he or is he not a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
devotee of Kåñëa?
Why are devotees of the demigods greater in number than the Vaiñëavas?
642
The answer is given herein. Vaiñëavas are not interested in such fourth-class
pleasures as wine and women, nor does Kåñëa allow them such facilities.
TEXT 4
@nta: ‘aivazya gAËÿAyaAma,
@mBaAejavanar"Aijaina
ica‚(Lx"tauyauRvaitaiBar,"
gAjaAivava k(re"NAuiBa:
antaù praviçya gaìgäyäm
ambhoja-vana-räjini
cikréòatur yuvatibhir
gajäv iva kareëubhiù
SYNONYMS
antaù—within; praviçya—entering; gaìgäyäm—the Ganges, known as
Mandäkiné; ambhoja—of lotus flowers; vana-räjini—where there was a
congested forest; cikréòatuù—the two of them used to enjoy; yuvatibhiù—in
the company of young girls; gajau—two elephants; iva—just like;
kareëubhiù—with female elephants.
TRANSLATION
Within the waters of the Mandäkiné Ganges, which were crowded with
gardens of lotus flowers, the two sons of Kuvera would enjoy young girls, just
like two male elephants enjoying in the water with female elephants.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
643
People generally go to the Ganges to be purified of the effects of sinful life,
but here is an example of how foolish persons enter the Ganges to become
involved in sinful life. It is not that everyone becomes purified by entering the
Ganges. Everything, spiritual and material, depends on one's mental condition.
TEXT 5
yaä{"cC$yaA ca de"vaiSaRr,"
BagAvaAMsta‡a k(AEr"va
@pazyaªaAr"d"Ae de"vaAE
ºaIbaANAAE s$amabauDyata
yadåcchayä ca devarñir
bhagaväàs tatra kaurava
apaçyan närado devau
kñébäëau samabudhyata
SYNONYMS
yadåcchayä—by chance, while wandering all over the universe; ca—and;
deva-åñiù—the supreme saintly person among the demigods; bhagavän—the
most powerful; tatra—there (where the two sons of Kuvera were enjoying life);
kaurava—O Mahäräja Parékñit; apaçyat—when he saw; näradaù—the great
saint; devau—the two boys of the demigods; kñébäëau—with eyes maddened by
intoxication; samabudhyata—he could understand (their position).
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
TRANSLATION
O Mahäräja Parékñit, by some auspicious opportunity for the two boys, the
great saint Devarñi Närada once appeared there by chance. Seeing them
644
intoxicated, with rolling eyes, he could understand their situation.
PURPORT
It is said:
'sädhu-saìga,' 'sädhu-saìga'—sarva-çästre kaya
lava-mätra sädhu-saìge sarva-siddhi haya
(Cc. Madhya 22.54)
Wherever Närada Muni goes, any moment at which he appears is understood
to be extremely auspicious. It is also said:
brahmäëòa bhramite kona bhägyavän jéva
guru-kåñëa-prasäde päya bhakti-latä-béja
"According to their karma, all living entities are wandering throughout the
entire universe. Some of them are being elevated to the upper planetary
systems, and some are going down into the lower planetary systems. Out of
many millions of wandering living entities, one who is very fortunate gets an
opportunity to associate with a bona fide spiritual master by the grace of
Kåñëa. By the mercy of both Kåñëa and the spiritual master, such a person
receives the seed of the creeper of devotional service." (Cc. Madhya 19.151)
Närada appeared in the garden to give the two sons of Kuvera the seed of
devotional service, even though they were intoxicated. Saintly persons know
how to bestow mercy upon the fallen souls.
TEXT 6
taM ä{"î"A ˜aIix"taA de"vyaAe
ivavañA: zAApazAiÆÿtaA:
vaAs$aAMis$a payaRDau: zAI„aM
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
645
ivavañAE naEva gAu÷k(AE
taà dåñövä vréòitä devyo
vivasträù çäpa-çaìkitäù
väsäàsi paryadhuù çéghraà
vivastrau naiva guhyakau
SYNONYMS
tam—Närada Muni; dåñövä—seeing; vréòitäù—being ashamed; devyaù—the
young girls of the demigods; vivasträù—although they were naked;
çäpa-çaìkitäù—being afraid of being cursed; väsäàsi—garments;
paryadhuù—covered the body; çéghram—very swiftly; vivastrau—who were
also naked; na—not; eva—indeed; guhyakau—the two sons of Kuvera.
TRANSLATION
Upon seeing Närada, the naked young girls of the demigods were very much
ashamed. Afraid of being cursed, they covered their bodies with their garments.
But the two sons of Kuvera did not do so; instead, not caring about Närada,
they remained naked.
TEXT 7
taAE ä{"î"A maid"r"AmaÔaAE
™aImad"AnDaAE s$aur"AtmajaAE
tayaAer"nauƒah"ATaARya
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
zAApaM d"AsyaiªadM" jagAAE
tau dåñövä madirä-mattau
646
çré-madändhau surätmajau
tayor anugrahärthäya
çäpaà däsyann idaà jagau
SYNONYMS
tau—the two boys of the demigods; dåñövä—seeing; madirä-mattau—very
intoxicated because of drinking liquor; çré-mada-andhau—being blind with
false prestige and opulence; sura-ätmajau—the two sons of the demigods;
tayoù—unto them; anugraha-arthäya—for the purpose of giving special mercy;
çäpam—a curse; däsyan—desiring to offer them; idam—this; jagau—uttered.
TRANSLATION
Seeing the two sons of the demigods naked and intoxicated by opulence and
false prestige, Devarñi Närada, in order to show them special mercy, desired to
give them a special curse. Thus he spoke as follows.
PURPORT
Although in the beginning Närada Muni appeared very angry and cursed
them, at the end the two demigods Nalaküvara and Maëigréva were able to see
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, face to face. Thus the curse was
ultimately auspicious and brilliant. One has to judge what kind of curse
Närada placed upon them. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura gives herein a
good example. When a father finds his child deeply asleep but the child has to
take some medicine to cure some disease, the father pinches the child so that
the child will get up and take the medicine. In a similar way, Närada Muni
cursed Nalaküvara and Maëigréva in order to cure their disease of material
blindness.
TEXT 8
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
647
™aInaAr"d" ovaAca
na ÷nyaAe jauSataAe jaAeSyaAna,
bauiÜ"”aMzAAe r"jaAegAuNA:
™aImad"Ad"AiBajaAtyaAid"r,"
ya‡a ñI âUtamaAs$ava:
çré-närada uväca
na hy anyo juñato joñyän
buddhi-bhraàço rajo-guëaù
çré-madäd äbhijätyädir
yatra stré dyütam äsavaù
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù uväca—Närada Muni said; na—there is not; hi—indeed;
anyaù—another material enjoyment; juñataù—of one who is enjoying;
joñyän—things very attractive in the material world (different varieties of
eating, sleeping, mating and defense); buddhi-bhraàçaù—such enjoyments
attract the intelligence; rajaù-guëaù—being controlled by the mode of passion;
çré-madät—than riches; äbhijätya-ädiù—among the four material principles
(attractive personal bodily features, birth in an aristocratic family, being very
learned, and being very rich);
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
yatra—wherein; stré—women;
dyütam—gambling; äsavaù—wine (wine, women and gambling are very
prominent).
TRANSLATION
Närada Muni said: Among all the attractions of material enjoyment, the
attraction of riches bewilders one's intelligence more than having beautiful
bodily features, taking birth in an aristocratic family, and being learned. When
648
one is uneducated but falsely puffed up by wealth, the result is that one engages
his wealth in enjoying wine, women and gambling.
PURPORT
Among the three modes of material nature-goodness, passion and
ignorance—people are certainly conducted by the lower qualities, namely
passion and ignorance, and especially by passion. Conducted by the mode of
passion, one becomes more and more involved in material existence. Therefore
human life is meant for subduing the modes of passion and ignorance and
advancing in the mode of goodness.
tadä rajas-tamo-bhäväù
käma-lobhädayaç ca ye
ceta etair anäviddhaà
sthitaà sattve prasédati
(SB 1.2.19)
This is culture: one must subdue the modes of passion and ignorance. In the
mode of passion, when one is falsely proud of wealth, one engages his wealth
only for three things, namely wine, women and gambling. We can actually see,
especially in this age, that those who have unnecessary riches simply try to
enjoy these three things. In Western civilization, these three things are very
prominent because of an unnecessary increase of wealth. Närada Muni
considered all this in the case of Maëigréva and Nalaküvara because he found
in them so much pride in the wealth of their father, Kuvera.
TEXT 9
h"nyantae pazAvaAe ya‡a
inadR"yaEr"ijataAtmaiBa:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
649
manyamaAnaEir"maM de"h"ma,
@jar"Ama{tyau naìr"ma,
hanyante paçavo yatra
nirdayair ajitätmabhiù
manyamänair imaà deham
ajarämåtyu naçvaram
SYNONYMS
hanyante—are killed in many ways (especially by slaughterhouses);
paçavaù—four-legged animals (horses, sheep, cows, hogs, etc.);
yatra—wherein; nirdayaiù—by those merciless persons who are conducted by
the mode of passion; ajita-ätmabhiù—rascals who are unable to control the
senses; manyamänaiù—are thinking; imam—this; deham—body; ajara—will
never become old or diseased; amåtyu—death will never come;
naçvaram—although the body is destined to be annihilated.
TRANSLATION
Unable to control their senses, rascals who are falsely proud of their riches
or their birth in aristocratic families are so cruel that to maintain their
perishable bodies, which they think will never grow old or die, they kill poor
animals without mercy. Sometimes they kill animals merely to enjoy an
excursion.
PURPORT
When the modes of passion and ignorance increase in human society,
giving rise to unnecessary economic development, the result is that people
become involved with wine, women and gambling. Then, being mad, they
maintain big slaughterhouses or occasionally go on pleasure excursions to kill
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
650
animals. Forgetting that however one may try to maintain the body, the body
is subject to birth, death, old age and disease, such foolish rascals engage in
sinful activities, one after another. Being duñkåtés, they completely forget the
existence of the supreme controller, who is sitting within the core of
everyone's heart (éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati [Bg. 18.61]).
That supreme controller is observing every bit of one's activity, and He
rewards or punishes everyone by giving one a suitable body made by material
nature (bhrämayan sarva-bhütäni yanträrüòhäni mäyayä [Bg. 18.61]). In this
way, sinful persons automatically receive punishment in different types of
bodies. The root cause of this punishment is that when one unnecessarily
accumulates wealth, one becomes more and more degraded, not knowing that
his wealth will be finished with his next birth.
na sädhu manye yata ätmano 'yam
asann api kleçada äsa dehaù
(SB 5.5.4)
Animal killing is prohibited. Every living being, of course, has to eat
something (jévo jévasya jévanam). But one should be taught what kind of food
one should take. Therefore the Éçopaniñad instructs, tena tyaktena bhuïjéthäù:
one should eat whatever is allotted for human beings [Éço mantra 1]. Kåñëa says
in Bhagavad-gétä (9.26):
patraà puñpaà phalaà toyaà
yo me bhaktyä prayacchati
tad ahaà bhakty-upahåtam
açnämi prayatätmanaù
"If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit or water, I will
accept it." A devotee, therefore, does not eat anything that would require
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
slaughterhouses for poor animals. Rather, devotees take prasäda of Kåñëa (tena
tyaktena bhuïjéthäù). Kåñëa recommends that one give Him patraà puñpaà
phalaà toyam—a leaf, a flower, fruit or water [Bg. 9.26]. Animal food is never
651
recommended for human beings; instead, a human being is recommended to
take prasäda, remnants of food left by Kåñëa. Yajïa-çiñöäçinaù santo mucyante
sarva-kilbiñaiù (Bg. 3.13). If one practices eating prasäda, even if there is some
little sinful activity involved, one becomes free from the results of sinful acts.
TEXT 10
de"vas$aMiÁatamapyantae
k{(imaivaÑ"smas$aMiÁatama,
BaUta‹aul(tk{(tae svaATa<
ikM( vaed" inar"yaAe yata:
deva-saàjïitam apy ante
kåmi-viò-bhasma-saàjïitam
bhüta-dhruk tat-kåte svärthaà
kià veda nirayo yataù
SYNONYMS
deva-saàjïitam—the body now known as a very exalted person, like president,
minister or even demigod; api—even if the body is so exalted; ante—after
death; kåmi—turns into worms; viö—or into stool; bhasma-saàjïitam—or into
ashes; bhüta-dhruk—a person who does not accept the çästric injunctions and
is unnecessarily envious of other living entities; tat-kåte—by acting in that
way; sva-artham—self-interest; kim—who is there; veda—who knows; nirayaù
yataù—because from such sinful activities one must suffer hellish conditions.
TRANSLATION
While living one may be proud of one's body, thinking oneself a very big
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
652
man, minister, president or even demigod, but whatever one may be, after death
this body will turn either into worms, into stool or into ashes. If one kills poor
animals to satisfy the temporary whims of this body, one does not know that he
will suffer in his next birth, for such a sinful miscreant must go to hell and
suffer the results of his actions.
PURPORT
In this verse the three words kåmi-vid-bhasma are significant. After death,
the body may become kåmi, which means "worms," for if the body is disposed of
without cremation, it may be eaten by worms; or else it may be eaten by
animals like hogs and vultures and be turned into stool. Those who are more
civilized burn the dead body, and thus it becomes ashes (bhasma-saàjïitam).
Yet although the body will be turned into worms, stool or ashes, foolish
persons, just to maintain it, commit many sinful activities. This is certainly
regrettable. The human form of body is actually meant for jévasya tattva jijïäsä,
enlightenment in knowledge of spiritual values. Therefore, one must seek
shelter of a bona fide spiritual master. Tasmäd guruà prapadyeta: one must
approach a guru. Who is a guru? Çäbde pare ca niñëätam (SB 11.3.21): a guru is
one who has full transcendental knowledge. Unless one approaches a spiritual
master, one remains in ignorance. Äcäryavän puruño veda (Chändogya
Upaniñad 6.14.2): one has full knowledge about life when one is äcäryavän,
controlled by the äcärya. But when one is conducted by rajo-guëa and
tamo-guëa, one does not care about anything; instead, one acts like an
ordinary foolish animal, risking his life (måtyu-saàsära-vartmani [
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
. 9.3]) and
therefore continuing to go through suffering after suffering. Na te viduù
svärtha-gatià hi viñëum (SB 7.5.31). Such a foolish person does not know how
to elevate himself in this body. Instead, he indulges in sinful activities and goes
deeper and deeper into hellish life.
TEXT 11
653
de"h": ik(maªad"Atau: svaM
inaSaelu(maARtaure"va ca
maAtau: ipatauvaAR bailana:
‚e(taur"¢ae: zAunaAe'ipa vaA
dehaù kim anna-dätuù svaà
niñektur mätur eva ca
mätuù pitur vä balinaù
kretur agneù çuno 'pi vä
SYNONYMS
dehaù—this body; kim anna-dätuù—does it belong to the employer who gives
me the money to maintain it; svam—or does it belong to me personally;
niñektuù—(or does it belong) to the person who discharged the semen; mätuù
eva—(or does it belong) to the mother who maintained this body within her
womb; ca—and; mätuù pituù vä—or (does it belong) to the father of the
mother (because sometimes the father of the mother takes a grandson as an
adopted son); balinaù—(or does it belong) to the person who takes this body
away by force; kretuù—or to the person who purchases the body as a slave;
agneù—or to the fire (because ultimately the body is burned); çunaù—or to the
dogs and vultures that ultimately eat it; api—even; vä—or.
TRANSLATION
While alive, does this body belong to its employer, to the self, to the father,
the mother, or the mother's father? Does it belong to the person who takes it
away by force, to the slave master who purchases it, or to the sons who burn it
in the fire? Or, if the body is not burned, does it belong to the dogs that eat it?
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
654
ascertain this but instead to maintain the body by sinful activities is not good.
TEXT 12
WvaM s$aADaAr"NAM de"h"ma,
@vyal(‘aBavaApyayama,
k(Ae ivaã"AnaAtmas$aAtk{(tvaA
h"inta jantaUna{tae's$ata:
evaà sädhäraëaà deham
avyakta-prabhaväpyayam
ko vidvän ätmasät kåtvä
hanti jantün åte 'sataù
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; sädhäraëam—common property; deham—the body;
avyakta—from unmanifested nature; prabhava—manifested in that way;
apyayam—and again merged with the unmanifested ("for dust thou art, and
unto dust shalt thou return"); kaù—who is that person; vidvän—one who is
actually in knowledge; ätmasät kåtvä—claiming as his own; hanti—kills;
jantün—poor animals; åte—except; asataù—rascals who have no knowledge,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
no clear understanding.
TRANSLATION
This body, after all, is produced by the unmanifested nature and again
annihilated and merged in the natural elements. Therefore, it is the common
property of everyone. Under the circumstances, who but a rascal claims this
property as his own and while maintaining it commits such sinful activities as
655
killing animals just to satisfy his whims? Unless one is a rascal, one cannot
commit such sinful activities.
PURPORT
Atheists do not believe in the existence of the soul. Nonetheless, unless one
is very cruel, why should one kill animals unnecessarily? The body is a
manifestation of a combination of matter. In the beginning it was nothing, but
by a combination of matter it has come into existence. Then again, when the
combination is dismantled, the body will no longer exist. In the beginning it
was nothing, and in the end it will be nothing. Why then should one commit
sinful activities when it is manifested? It is not possible for anyone to do this
unless he is rascal number one.
TEXT 13
@s$ata: ™aImad"AnDasya
d"Air"‰"YaM par"maÃanama,
@AtmaAEpamyaena BaUtaAina
d"ir"‰": par"maIºatae
asataù çré-madändhasya
däridryaà param aïjanam
ätmaupamyena bhütäni
daridraù param ékñate
SYNONYMS
asataù—of such a foolish rascal; çré-mada-andhasya—who is blinded by
temporarily possessing riches and opulence; däridryam—poverty; param
aïjanam—the best ointment for the eyes, by which to see things as they are;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
656
ätma-aupamyena—with comparison to himself; bhütäni—living beings;
daridraù—a poverty-stricken man; param—perfectly; ékñate—can see things as
they are.
TRANSLATION
Atheistic fools and rascals who are very much proud of wealth fail to see
things as they are. Therefore, returning them to poverty is the proper ointment
for their eyes so they may see things as they are. At least a poverty-stricken
man can realize how painful poverty is, and therefore he will not want others to
be in a painful condition like his own.
PURPORT
Even today, if a man who was formerly poverty-stricken gets money, he is
inclined to utilize his money to perform many philanthropic activities, like
opening schools for uneducated men and hospitals for the diseased. In this
connection there is an instructive story called punar müñiko bhava, "Again
Become a Mouse." A mouse was very much harassed by a cat, and therefore the
mouse approached a saintly person to request to become a cat. When the
mouse became a cat, he was harassed by a dog, and then when he became a
dog, he was harassed by a tiger. But when he became a tiger, he stared at the
saintly person, and when the saintly person asked him, "What do you want?"
the tiger said, "I want to eat you." Then the saintly person cursed him, saying,
"May you again become a mouse." A similar thing is going on all over the
universe. One is going up and down, sometimes becoming a mouse, sometimes
a tiger, and so on. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu said:
brahmäëòa bhramite kona bhägyavän jéva
guru-kåñëa-prasäde päya bhakti-latä-béja
(Cc. Madhya 19.151)
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
657
The living entities are promoted and degraded by the laws of nature, but if one
is very, very fortunate, by association with saintly persons he gets the seed of
devotional service, and his life becomes successful. Närada Muni wanted to
bring Nalaküvara and Maëigréva to the platform of devotional service through
poverty, and thus he cursed them. Such is the mercy of a Vaiñëava. Unless one
is brought to the Vaiñëava platform, one cannot be a good man. Haräv
abhaktasya kuto mahad-guëäù (SB 5.18.12). An avaiñëava never becomes a good
man, however severely he is punished.
TEXT 14
yaTaA k(Nq%k(ivaÜ"AËÿAe
jantaAenaeRcC$ita taAM vyaTaAma,
jaIvas$aAmyaM gAtaAe ilaËEÿr,"
na taTaAivaÜ"k(Nq%k(:
yathä kaëöaka-viddhäìgo
jantor necchati täà vyathäm
jéva-sämyaà gato liìgair
na tathäviddha-kaëöakaù
SYNONYMS
yathä—just as; kaëöaka-viddha-aìgaù—a person whose body has been
pinpricked; jantoù—of such an animal; na—not; icchati—desires; täm—a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
particular; vyathäm—pain; jéva-sämyam gataù—when he understands that the
position is the same for everyone; liìgaiù—by possessing a particular type of
body; na—not; tathä—so; aviddha-kaëöakaù—a person who has not been
pinpricked.
658
TRANSLATION
By seeing their faces, one whose body has been pricked by pins can
understand the pain of others who are pinpricked. Realizing that this pain is the
same for everyone, he does not want others to suffer in this way. But one who
has never been pricked by pins cannot understand this pain.
PURPORT
There is a saying, "The happiness of wealth is enjoyable by a person who has
tasted the distress of poverty." There is also another common saying, vandhyä
ki bujhibe prasava-vedanä: "A woman who has not given birth to a child cannot
understand the pain of childbirth." Unless one comes to the platform of actual
experience, one cannot realize what is pain and what is happiness in this
material world. The laws of nature act accordingly. If one has killed an animal,
one must himself be killed by that same animal. This is called mäàsa. Mäm
means "me," and sa means "he." As I am eating an animal, that animal will have
the opportunity to eat me. In every state, therefore, it is ordinarily the custom
that if a person commits murder he is hanged.
TEXT 15
d"ir"‰"Ae inar"hM"stamBaAe
maul(: s$avaRmadE"ir"h"
k{(cC)M$ yaä{"cC$yaA«aAeita
taiÜ" tasya parM" tapa:
daridro nirahaà-stambho
muktaù sarva-madair iha
kåcchraà yadåcchayäpnoti
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
659
tad dhi tasya paraà tapaù
SYNONYMS
daridraù—a poverty-stricken person; nir-aham-stambhaù—is automatically
freed from all false prestige; muktaù—liberated; sarva—all; madaiù—from
false ego; iha—in this world; kåcchram—with great difficulty; yadåcchayä
äpnoti—what he gains by chance from providence; tat—that; hi—indeed;
tasya—his; param—perfect; tapaù—austerity.
TRANSLATION
A poverty-stricken man must automatically undergo austerities and penances
because he does not have the wealth to possess anything. Thus his false prestige
is vanquished. Always in need of food, shelter and clothing, he must be satisfied
with what is obtained by the mercy of providence. Undergoing such compulsory
austerities is good for him because this purifies him and completely frees him
from false ego.
PURPORT
A saintly person voluntarily accepts a state of poverty just to become free
from material false prestige. Many great kings left their princely standard of
living and went to the forest to practice austerity according to Vedic culture,
just to become purified. But if one who cannot voluntarily accept such
austerity is put into a situation of poverty, he automatically must practice
austerity. Austerity is good for everyone because it frees one from material
conditions. Therefore, if one is very much proud of his material position,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
putting him into poverty is the best way to rectify his foolishness.
Däridrya-doño guëa-räçi-näçi: when a person is poverty-stricken, naturally his
false pride in aristocracy, wealth, education and beauty is smashed. Thus
corrected, he is in the right position for liberation.
660
TEXT 16
inatyaM ºautºaAmade"h"sya
d"ir"‰"syaAªak(AiÉÿNA:
win‰"yaANyanauzAuSyainta
ihM"s$aAipa ivainavataRtae
nityaà kñut-kñäma-dehasya
daridrasyänna-käìkñiëaù
indriyäëy anuçuñyanti
hiàsäpi vinivartate
SYNONYMS
nityam—always; kñut—with hunger; kñäma—weak, without necessary
strength; dehasya—of the body of a poor man; daridrasya—poverty-stricken;
anna-käìkñiëaù—always desiring to get sufficient food; indriyäëi—the senses,
which are compared to snakes; anuçuñyanti—gradually become weaker and
weaker, with less potency; hiàsä api—the tendency to be envious of others;
vinivartate—reduces.
TRANSLATION
Always hungry, longing for sufficient food, a poverty-stricken man gradually
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
becomes weaker and weaker. Having no extra potency, his senses are
automatically pacified. A poverty-stricken man, therefore, is unable to perform
harmful, envious activities. In other words, such a man automatically gains the
results of the austerities and penances adopted voluntarily by saintly persons.
661
PURPORT
According to the opinion of experienced medical practitioners, diabetes is a
result of voracious eating, and tuberculosis is a disease of undereating. We
should desire neither to be diabetic nor to be tubercular. Yävad
artha-prayojanam. We should eat frugally and keep the body fit for advancing
in Kåñëa consciousness. As recommended elsewhere in Çrémad-Bhägavatam
(1.2.10):
kämasya nendriya-prétir
läbho jéveta yävatä
jévasya tattva-jijïäsä
närtho yaç ceha karmabhiù
The real business of human life is to keep oneself fit for advancement in
spiritual realization. Human life is not meant for making the senses
unnecessarily strong so that one suffers from disease and one increases in an
envious, fighting spirit. In this age of Kali, however, human civilization is so
misled that people are unnecessarily increasing in economic development, and
as a result they are opening more and more slaughterhouses, liquor shops and
brothels. In this way, the whole civilization is being spoiled.
TEXT 17
d"ir"‰"syaEva yaujyantae
s$aADava: s$amad"izARna:
s$aià": iºaNAAeita taM taSa<
tata @Ar"Aiã"zAuÜ"Yaita
daridrasyaiva yujyante
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
662
sädhavaù sama-darçinaù
sadbhiù kñiëoti taà tarñaà
tata äräd viçuddhyati
SYNONYMS
daridrasya—of a person who is poverty-stricken; eva—indeed; yujyante—may
easily associate; sädhavaù—saintly persons; sama-darçinaù—although sädhus
are equal to everyone, to the poor and the rich, the poor man can take
advantage of their association; sadbhiù—by the association of such saintly
persons; kñiëoti—reduces; tam—the original cause of material suffering;
tarñam—the desire for material enjoyment; tataù—thereafter; ärät—very
soon; viçuddhyati—his material contamination is cleansed off.
TRANSLATION
Saintly persons may freely associate with those who are poverty-stricken,
but not with those who are rich. A poverty-stricken man, by association with
saintly persons, very soon becomes uninterested in material desires, and the
dirty things within the core of his heart are cleansed away.
PURPORT
It is said, mahad-vicalanaà nèëäà gåhiëäà déna-cetasäm (SB 10.8.4). The
only business of a saintly person or sannyäsé, a person in the renounced order,
is to preach Kåñëa consciousness.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
saintly persons, want to preach to
both the poor and the rich, but the poor take more advantage of the sädhus'
preaching than the rich do. A poor man receives sädhus very quickly, offers
them obeisances, and tries to take advantage of their presence, whereas a rich
man keeps a big greyhound dog at his door so that no one can enter his house.
He posts a sign saying "Beware of Dog" and avoids the association of saintly
persons, whereas a poor man keeps his door open for them and thus benefits by
663
their association more than a rich man does. Because Närada Muni, in his
previous life, was the poverty-stricken son of a maidservant, he got the
association of saintly persons and later became the exalted Närada Muni. This
was his actual experience. Therefore, he is now comparing the position of a
poor man with that of a rich man.
satäà prasaìgän mama vérya-saàvido
bhavanti håt-karëa-rasäyanäù kathäù
taj-joñaëäd äçv apavarga-vartmani
çraddhä ratir bhaktir anukramiñyati
(SB 3.25.25)
If one gets the advantage of association with saintly persons, by their
instructions one becomes more and more purified of material desires.
kåñëa-bahirmukha haiyä bhoga-väïchä kare
nikaöa-stha mäyä täre jäpaöiyä dhare
(Prema-vivarta)
Material life means that one forgets Kåñëa and that one increases in one's
desires for sense gratification. But if one receives the advantage of instructions
from saintly persons and forgets the importance of material desires, one is
automatically purified. Ceto-darpaëa-märjanaà
bhava-mahä-dävägni-nirväpaëam [Cc. Antya 20.12] (Çikñäñöaka 1). Unless the
core of a materialistic person's heart is purified, he cannot get rid of the pangs
of bhava-mahä-dävägni, the blazing fire of material existence.
TEXT 18
s$aADaUnaAM s$amaicaÔaAnaAM
mauku(nd"car"NAEiSaNAAma,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
664
opaeºyaE: ikM( DanastamBaEr,"
@s$aià"r"s$ad"A™ayaE:
sädhünäà sama-cittänäà
mukunda-caraëaiñiëäm
upekñyaiù kià dhana-stambhair
asadbhir asad-äçrayaiù
SYNONYMS
sädhünäm—of saintly persons; sama-cittänäm—of those who are equal to
everyone; mukunda-caraëa-eñiëäm—whose only business is to serve Mukunda,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and who always aspire for that service;
upekñyaiù—neglecting the association; kim—what; dhana-stambhaiù—rich
and proud; asadbhiù—with the association of undesirable persons;
asat-äçrayaiù—taking shelter of those who are asat, or nondevotees.
TRANSLATION
Saintly persons [sädhus] think of Kåñëa twenty-four hours a day. They have
no other interest. Why should people neglect the association of such exalted
spiritual personalities and try to associate with materialists, taking shelter of
nondevotees, most of whom are proud and rich?
PURPORT
A sädhu is one who is engaged in devotional service to the Lord without
deviation (bhajate mäm ananya-bhäk).
titikñavaù käruëikäù
suhådaù sarva-dehinäm
ajäta-çatravaù çäntäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
665
sädhavaù sädhu-bhüñaëäù
"The symptoms of a sädhu are that he is tolerant, merciful and friendly to all
living entities. He has no enemies, he is peaceful, he abides by the scriptures,
and all his characteristics are sublime." (SB 3.25.21) A sädhu is suhådaù
sarva-dehinäm, the friend of everyone. Why then should the rich, instead of
associating with sädhus, waste their valuable time in association with other
rich men who are averse to spiritual life? Both the poor man and the rich man
can take advantage of the Kåñëa consciousness movement, and here it is
advised that everyone do so. There is no profit in avoiding the association of
the members of the Kåñëa consciousness movement. Narottama däsa Öhäkura
has said:
sat-saìga chäòi' kainu asate viläsa
te-käraëe lägila ye karma-bandha-phäìsa
If we give up the association of sädhus, saintly persons engaged in Kåñëa
consciousness, and associate with persons seeking sense gratification and
accumulating wealth for this purpose, our life is spoiled. The word asat refers
to an avaiñëava, one who is not a devotee of Kåñëa, and sat refers to a
Vaiñëava, Kåñëa's devotee. One should always seek the association of
Vaiñëavas and not spoil one's life by mixing with avaiñëavas. In Bhagavad-gétä
(7.15), the distinction between Vaiñëava and avaiñëava is enunciated:
na mäà duñkåtino müòhäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
prapadyante narädhamäù
mäyayäpahåta-jïänä
äsuraà bhävam äçritäù
Anyone who is not surrendered to Kåñëa is a most sinful person (duñkåté), a
rascal (müòha), and the lowest of men (narädhama). Therefore one should not
avoid the association of Vaiñëavas, which is now available all over the world in
the form of the Kåñëa consciousness movement.
666
TEXT 19
tad"hM" maÔayaAemaARDvyaA
vaAç&NyaA ™aImad"AnDayaAe:
tamaAemadM" h"ir"SyaAima
ñENAyaAer"ijataAtmanaAe:
tad ahaà mattayor mädhvyä
väruëyä çré-madändhayoù
tamo-madaà hariñyämi
straiëayor ajitätmanoù
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; aham—I; mattayoù—of these two drunken persons;
mädhvyä—by drinking liquor; väruëyä—named Väruëé;
çré-mada-andhayoù—who are blinded by celestial opulence;
tamaù-madam—this false prestige due to the mode of ignorance; hariñyämi—I
shall take away; straiëayoù—because they have become so attached to women;
ajita-ätmanoù—being unable to control the senses.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, since these two persons, drunk with the liquor named Väruëé, or
Mädhvé, and unable to control their senses, have been blinded by the pride of
celestial opulence and have become attached to women, I shall relieve them of
their false prestige.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
PURPORT
667
When a sädhu chastises or punishes someone, he does not do so for revenge.
Mahäräja Parékñit had inquired why Närada Muni was subject to such a spirit
of revenge (tamaù). But this was not tamaù, for Närada Muni, in full
knowledge of what was for the good of the two brothers, wisely thought of how
to cure them. Vaiñëavas are good physicians. They know how to protect a
person from material disease. Thus they are never in tamo-guëa. Sa guëän
samatétyaitän brahma-bhüyäya kalpate (Bg. 14.26). Vaiñëavas are always
situated on the transcendental platform, the Brahman platform. They cannot
be subject to mistakes or the influence of the modes of material nature.
Whatever they do, after full consideration, is meant just to lead everyone back
home, back to Godhead.
TEXTS 20-22
yaid"maAE laAek(paAlasya
pau‡aAE BaUtvaA tama:plautaAE
na ivavaAs$as$amaAtmaAnaM
ivajaAnaIta: s$auäu"maRd"AE
@taAe'hR"ta: sTaAvar"taAM
syaAtaAM naEvaM yaTaA pauna:
sma{ita: syaAnmat‘as$aAde"na
ta‡aAipa mad"nauƒah"Ata,
vaAs$aude"vasya s$aAiªaDyaM
labDvaA id"vyazAr"cC$tae
va{Ôae svalaAeRk(taAM BaUyaAe
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
668
labDaBal(L BaivaSyata:
yad imau loka-pälasya
putrau bhütvä tamaù-plutau
na viväsasam ätmänaà
vijänétaù sudurmadau
ato 'rhataù sthävaratäà
syätäà naivaà yathä punaù
småtiù syän mat-prasädena
taträpi mad-anugrahät
väsudevasya sännidhyaà
labdhvä divya-çarac-chate
våtte svarlokatäà bhüyo
labdha-bhakté bhaviñyataù
SYNONYMS
yat—because; imau—these two young demigods; loka-pälasya—of the great
demigod Kuvera; putrau—born as sons; bhütvä—being so (they should not
have become like that); tamaù-plutau—so absorbed in the mode of darkness;
na—not; viväsasam—without any dress, completely naked; ätmänam—their
personal bodies; vijänétaù—could understand that they were naked;
su-durmadau—because they were very much fallen due to false pride;
ataù—therefore; arhataù—they deserve; sthävaratäm—immobility like that of
a tree; syätäm
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—they may become; na—not; evam—in this way; yathä—as;
punaù—again; småtiù—remembrance; syät—may continue;
mat-prasädena—by my mercy; tatra api—over and above that;
mat-anugrahät—by my special favor; väsudevasya—of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; sännidhyam—the personal association, face to face;
labdhvä—obtaining; divya-çarat-çate våtte—after the expiry of one hundred
years by the measurement of the demigods; svarlokatäm—the desire to live in
669
the celestial world; bhüyaù—again; labdha-bhakté—having revived their
natural condition of devotional service; bhaviñyataù—will become.
TRANSLATION
These two young men, Nalaküvara and Maëigréva, are by fortune the sons of
the great demigod Kuvera, but because of false prestige and madness after
drinking liquor, they are so fallen that they are naked but cannot understand
that they are. Therefore, because they are living like trees (for trees are naked
but are not conscious), these two young men should receive the bodies of trees.
This will be proper punishment. Nonetheless, after they become trees and until
they are released, by my mercy they will have remembrance of their past sinful
activities. Moreover, by my special favor, after the expiry of one hundred years
by the measurement of the demigods, they will be able to see the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Väsudeva, face to face, and thus revive their real
position as devotees.
PURPORT
A tree has no consciousness: when cut, it feels no pain. But Närada Muni
wanted the consciousness of Nalaküvara and Maëigréva to continue, so that
even after being released from the life of trees, they would not forget the
circumstances under which they had been punished. Therefore, to bestow
upon them special favor, Närada Muni arranged things in such a way that after
being released, they would be able to see Kåñëa in Våndävana and thus revive
their dormant bhakti.
Each day of the demigods in the upper planetary system equals six months
of our measurement. Although the demigods in the upper planetary system are
attached to material enjoyment, they are all devotees, and therefore they are
called demigods. There are two kinds of persons, namely the devas and the
asuras. Asuras forget their relationship with Kåñëa (äsuraà bhävam äçritäù),
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
670
whereas the devas do not forget.
dvau bhüta-sargau loke 'smin
daiva äsura eva ca
viñëu-bhaktaù småto daiva
äsuras tad-viparyayaù
[Bg. 16.6]
(Padma Puräëa)
The distinction between a pure devotee and a karma-miçra devotee is this: a
pure devotee does not desire anything for material enjoyment, whereas a
mixed devotee becomes a devotee to become a first-class enjoyer of this
material world. One who is in direct touch with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in devotional service remains pure, uncontaminated by material
desires (anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam
[Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.1.11(11)]).
By karma-miçra-bhakti one is elevated to the celestial kingdom, by
jïäna-miçra-bhakti one is able to merge in the Brahman effulgence, and by
yoga-miçra-bhakti one is able to realize the omnipotency of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. But pure bhakti does not depend on karma, jïäna or
yoga, for it simply consists of loving affairs. The liberation of the bhakta,
therefore, which is called not just mukti but vimukti, surpasses the five other
kinds of liberation-säyujya, särüpya, sälokya, särñöi and sämépya. A pure devotee
always engages in pure service (änukülyena kåñëänuçélanaà bhaktir uttamä [Cc.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Madhya 19.167]). Taking birth in the upper planetary system as a demigod is a
chance to become a further purified devotee and go back home, back to
Godhead. Närada Muni indirectly gave Maëigréva and Nalaküvara the greatest
opportunity by his so-called curse.
TEXT 23
671
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
WvamauftvaA s$a de"vaiSaRr,"
gAtaAe naAr"AyaNAA™amama,
nalakU(var"maiNAƒaIvaAva,
@As$atauyaRmalaAjauRnaAE
çré-çuka uväca
evam uktvä sa devarñir
gato näräyaëäçramam
nalaküvara-maëigréväv
äsatur yamalärjunau
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued to speak; evam uktvä—thus
uttering; saù—he; devarñiù—the greatest saintly person, Närada; gataù—left
that place; näräyaëa-äçramam—for his own äçrama, known as
Näräyaëa-äçrama; nalaküvara—Nalaküvara; maëigrévau—and Maëigréva;
äsatuù—remained there to become; yamala-arjunau—twin arjuna trees.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: Having thus spoken, the great saint Devarñi
Närada returned to his äçrama, known as Näräyaëa-äçrama, and Nalaküvara
and Maëigréva became twin arjuna trees.
PURPORT
Arjuna trees are still found in many forests, and their skin is used by
cardiologists to prepare medicine for heart trouble. This means that even
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
672
though they are trees, they are disturbed when skinned for medical science.
TEXT 24
[%SaeBaARgAvatamauKyasya
s$atyaM k(tau< vacaAe h"ir":
jagAAma zAnakE(sta‡a
ya‡aAstaAM yamalaAjauRnaAE
åñer bhägavata-mukhyasya
satyaà kartuà vaco hariù
jagäma çanakais tatra
yaträstäà yamalärjunau
SYNONYMS
åñeù—of the great sage and saintly person Närada; bhägavata-mukhyasya—of
the topmost of all devotees; satyam—truthful; kartum—to prove; vacaù—his
words; hariù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa; jagäma—went
there; çanakaiù—very slowly; tatra—there; yatra—to the spot where;
ästäm—there were; yamala-arjunau—the twin arjuna trees.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, to fulfill the truthfulness
of the words of the greatest devotee, Närada, slowly went to that spot where the
twin arjuna trees were standing.
TEXT 25
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
673
de"vaiSaRmaeR i‘ayatamaAe
yaid"maAE Danad"AtmajaAE
taÔaTaA s$aADaiyaSyaAima
yaÕ"ItaM tanmah"AtmanaA
devarñir me priyatamo
yad imau dhanadätmajau
tat tathä sädhayiñyämi
yad gétaà tan mahätmanä
SYNONYMS
devarñiù—the great saint Devarñi Närada; me—My; priya-tamaù—most
beloved devotee; yat—although; imau—these two persons (Nalaküvara and
Maëigréva); dhanada-ätmajau—born of a rich father and being nondevotees;
tat—the words of Devarñi; tathä—just so; sädhayiñyämi—I shall execute
(because he wanted Me to come face to face with the yamala-arjuna, I shall do
so); yat gétam—as already stated; tat—that; mahätmanä—by Närada Muni.
TRANSLATION
"Although these two young men are the sons of the very rich Kuvera and I
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
have nothing to do with them, Devarñi Närada is My very dear and affectionate
devotee, and therefore because he wanted Me to come face to face with them, I
must do so for their deliverance."
PURPORT
Nalaküvara and Maëigréva actually had nothing to do with devotional
service or seeing the Supreme Personality of Godhead face to face, for this is
not an ordinary opportunity. It is not that because one is very rich or learned
674
or was born in an aristocratic family one will be able to see the Supreme
Personality of Godhead face to face. This is impossible. But in this case,
because Närada Muni desired that Nalaküvara and Maëigréva see Väsudeva
face to face, the Supreme Personality of Godhead wanted to fulfill the words of
His very dear devotee Närada Muni. If one seeks the favor of a devotee instead
of directly asking favors from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one is very
easily successful. Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura has therefore recommended:
vaiñëava öhäkura tomära kukkura bhuliyä jänaha more, kåñëa se tomära kåñëa
dite pära. One should desire to become like a dog in strictly following a
devotee. Kåñëa is in the hand of a devotee. Adurlabham ätma-bhaktau. Thus
without the favor of a devotee, one cannot directly approach Kåñëa, what to
speak of engaging in His service. Narottama däsa Öhäkura therefore sings,
chäòiyä vaiñëava-sevä nistära päyeche kebä: unless one becomes a servant of a
pure devotee, one cannot be delivered from the material condition of life. In
our Gauòéya Vaiñëava society, following in the footsteps of Rüpa Gosvämé, our
first business is to seek shelter of a bona fide spiritual master (ädau
gurv-äçrayaù).
TEXT 26
wtyantare"NAAjauRnayaAe:
k{(SNAstau yamayaAeyaRyaAE
@AtmainavaeRzAmaA‡aeNA
itayaRggAtamaulaUKalama,
ity antareëärjunayoù
kåñëas tu yamayor yayau
ätma-nirveça-mätreëa
tiryag-gatam ulükhalam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
675
SYNONYMS
iti—thus deciding; antareëa—between; arjunayoù—the two arjuna trees;
kåñëaù tu—Lord Kåñëa; yamayoù yayau—entered between the two trees;
ätma-nirveça-mätreëa—as soon as He entered (between the two trees);
tiryak—crossways; gatam—so became; ulükhalam—the big mortar for grinding
spices.
TRANSLATION
Having thus spoken, Kåñëa soon entered between the two arjuna trees, and
thus the big mortar to which He was bound turned crosswise and stuck between
them.
TEXT 27
baAlaena inaSk(SaRyataAnvagAulaUKalaM taä,"
d"AmaAed"re"NA tar"s$aAetk(ilataAx.~i„abanDaAE
inaSpaetatau: par"maiva‚(imataAitavaepas$
k(nDa‘avaAlaivaq%paAE k{(tacaNx"zAbd"AE
bälena niñkarñayatänvag ulükhalaà tad
dämodareëa tarasotkalitäìghri-bandhau
niñpetatuù parama-vikramitätivepaskandha-
praväla-viöapau kåta-caëòa-çabdau
SYNONYMS
bälena—by the boy Kåñëa; niñkarñayatä—who was dragging; anvak—following
the dragging of Kåñëa; ulükhalam—the wooden mortar;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
tat—that;
676
däma-udareëa—by Kåñëa, who was tied by the belly; tarasä—with great force;
utkalita—uprooted; aìghri-bandhau—the roots of the two trees;
niñpetatuù—fell down; parama-vikramita—by the supreme power;
ati-vepa—trembling severely; skandha—trunk; praväla—bunches of leaves;
viöapau—those two trees, along with their branches; kåta—having made;
caëòa-çabdau—a fierce sound.
TRANSLATION
By dragging behind Him with great force the wooden mortar tied to His
belly, the boy Kåñëa uprooted the two trees. By the great strength of the
Supreme Person, the two trees, with their trunks, leaves and branches,
trembled severely and fell to the ground with a great crash.
PURPORT
This is the pastime of Kåñëa known as dämodara-lélä. Therefore another of
Kåñëa's names is Dämodara. As stated in the Hari-vaàça:
sa ca tenaiva nämnä tu
kåñëo vai däma-bandhanät
goñöhe dämodara iti
gopébhiù parigéyate
TEXT 28
ta‡a i™ayaA par"mayaA k(ku(Ba: s$Pu(r"ntaAE
is$aÜ"Avaupaetya ku(jayaAeir"va jaAtavaed"A:
k{(SNAM ‘aNAmya izAr"s$aAiKalalaAek(naATaM
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
677
baÜ"AÃalaI ivar"jas$aAivad"maUcatau: sma
tatra çriyä paramayä kakubhaù sphurantau
siddhäv upetya kujayor iva jäta-vedäù
kåñëaà praëamya çirasäkhila-loka-näthaà
baddhäïjalé virajasäv idam ücatuù sma
SYNONYMS
tatra—there, on the very spot where the two arjunas fell; çriyä—with
beautification; paramayä—superexcellent; kakubhaù—all directions;
sphurantau—illuminating by effulgence; siddhau—two perfect persons;
upetya—then coming out; kujayoù—from between the two trees; iva—like;
jäta-vedäù—fire personified; kåñëam—unto Lord Kåñëa; praëamya—offering
obeisances; çirasä—with the head; akhila-loka-nätham—to the Supreme
Person, the controller of everything; baddha-aïjalé—with folded hands;
virajasau—fully cleansed of the mode of ignorance; idam—the following
words; ücatuù sma—uttered.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, in that very place where the two arjuna trees had fallen, two
great, perfect personalities, who appeared like fire personified, came out of the
two trees. The effulgence of their beauty illuminating all directions, with bowed
heads they offered obeisances to Kåñëa, and with hands folded they spoke the
following words.
TEXT 29
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
k{(SNA k{(SNA mah"AyaAeigAMs$a,
tvamaAâ: pauç&Sa: par":
678
vyal(Avyal(imadM" ivaìM
è&paM tae “aAöNAA ivaäu":
kåñëa kåñëa mahä-yogiàs
tvam ädyaù puruñaù paraù
vyaktävyaktam idaà viçvaà
rüpaà te brähmaëä viduù
SYNONYMS
kåñëa kåñëa—O Lord Kåñëa, O Lord Kåñëa; mahä-yogin—O master of
mysticism; tvam—You, the exalted personality; ädyaù—the root cause of
everything; puruñaù—the Supreme Person; paraù—beyond this material
creation; vyakta-avyaktam—this material cosmic manifestation, consisting of
cause and effect, or gross and subtle forms; idam—this; viçvam—whole world;
rüpam—form; te—Your; brähmaëäù—learned brähmaëas; viduù—know.
TRANSLATION
O Lord Kåñëa, Lord Kåñëa, Your opulent mysticism is inconceivable. You
are the supreme, original person, the cause of all causes, immediate and remote,
and You are beyond this material creation. Learned brähmaëas know [on the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
basis of the Vedic statement sarvaà khalv idaà brahma] that You are
everything and that this cosmic manifestation, in its gross and subtle aspects, is
Your form.
PURPORT
The two demigods Nalaküvara and Maëigréva, because of their continuing
memory, could understand the supremacy of Kåñëa by the grace of Närada.
Now they admitted, "That we should be delivered by the blessings of Närada
Muni was all Your plan. Therefore You are the supreme mystic.
679
Everything—past, present and future—is known to You. Your plan was made
so nicely that although we stayed here as twin arjuna trees, You have appeared
as a small boy to deliver us. This was all Your inconceivable arrangement.
Because You are the Supreme Person, You can do everything."
TEXTS 30-31
tvamaek(: s$avaRBaUtaAnaAM
de"h"AsvaAtmaein‰"yaeìr":
tvamaeva k(AlaAe BagAvaAna,
ivaSNAur"vyaya wRìr":
tvaM mah"Ana, ‘ak{(ita: s$aUºmaA
r"ja:s$aÔvatamaAemayaI
tvamaeva pauç&SaAe'Dyaºa:
s$avaRºae‡aivak(Ar"ivata,
tvam ekaù sarva-bhütänäà
dehäsv-ätmendriyeçvaraù
tvam eva kälo bhagavän
viñëur avyaya éçvaraù
tvaà mahän prakåtiù sükñmä
rajaù-sattva-tamomayé
tvam eva puruño 'dhyakñaù
sarva-kñetra-vikära-vit
SYNONYMS
tvam—Your Lordship; ekaù—one; sarva-bhütänäm—of all living entities;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
680
deha—of the body; asu—of the life force; ätma—of the soul; indriya—of the
senses; éçvaraù—the Supersoul, the controller; tvam—Your Lordship;
eva—indeed; kälaù—the time factor; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; viñëuù—all-pervading; avyayaù—imperishable; éçvaraù—controller;
tvam—Your Lordship; mahän—the greatest; prakåtiù—the cosmic
manifestation; sükñmä—subtle; rajaù-sattva-tamaù-mayé—consisting of three
modes of nature (passion, goodness and ignorance); tvam eva—Your Lordship
is indeed; puruñaù—the Supreme Person; adhyakñaù—the proprietor;
sarva-kñetra—in all living entities; vikära-vit—knowing the restless mind.
TRANSLATION
You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the controller of everything.
The body, life, ego and senses of every living entity are Your own self. You are
the Supreme Person, Viñëu, the imperishable controller. You are the time
factor, the immediate cause, and You are material nature, consisting of the
three modes passion, goodness and ignorance. You are the original cause of this
material manifestation. You are the Supersoul, and therefore You know
everything within the core of the heart of every living entity.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Çrépäda Madhväcärya has quoted from the Vämana Puräëa as follows:
rüpyatvät tu jagad rüpaà
viñëoù säkñät sukhätmakam
nitya-pürëaà samuddiñöaà
svarüpaà paramätmanaù
TEXT 32
681
gA{÷maANAEstvamaƒaA÷Ae
ivak(ArE": ‘aAk{(taEgAuRNAE:
k(Ae invah"AhR"ita ivaÁaAtauM
‘aAifs$aÜM" gAuNAs$aMva{ta:
gåhyamäëais tvam agrähyo
vikäraiù präkåtair guëaiù
ko nv ihärhati vijïätuà
präk siddhaà guëa-saàvåtaù
SYNONYMS
gåhyamäëaiù—accepting the body made of material nature as existing at the
present moment because of being visible; tvam—You; agrähyaù—not confined
in a body made of material nature; vikäraiù—agitated by the mind; präkåtaiù
guëaiù—by the material modes of nature (sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa and
tamo-guëa); kaù—who is there; nu—after that; iha—in this material world;
arhati—who deserves; vijïätum—to know; präk siddham—that which existed
before the creation; guëa-saàvåtaù—because of being covered by the material
qualities.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, You exist before the creation. Therefore, who, trapped by a body of
material qualities in this material world, can understand You?
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
PURPORT
As it is said:
ataù çré-kåñëa-nämädi
682
na bhaved grähyam indriyaiù
sevonmukhe hi jihvädau
svayam eva sphuraty adaù
[Cc. Madhya 17.136]
Kåñëa's name, attributes and form are Absolute Truth, existing before the
creation. Therefore, how can those who are created-that is, those entrapped in
bodies created of material elements—understand Kåñëa perfectly? This is not
possible. But, sevonmukhe hi jihvädau svayam eva sphuraty adaù: Kåñëa reveals
Himself to those engaged in devotional service. This is also confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä (18.15) by the Lord Himself: bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti. Even the
descriptions of Kåñëa in Çrémad-Bhägavatam are sometimes misunderstood by
less intelligent men with a poor fund of knowledge. Therefore, the best course
by which to know Him is to engage oneself in pure devotional activities. The
more one advances in devotional activities, the more one can understand Him
as He is. If from the material platform one could understand Kåñëa, then, since
Kåñëa is everything (sarvaà khalv idaà brahma), one could understand Kåñëa
by seeing anything within this material world. But that is not possible.
mayä tatam idaà sarvaà
jagad avyakta-mürtinä
mat-sthäni sarva-bhütäni
na cähaà teñv avasthitaù
(Bg. 9.4)
Everything is resting on Kåñëa, and everything is Kåñëa, but this is not to be
realized by persons on the material platform.
TEXT 33
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
tasmaE tauByaM BagAvatae
683
vaAs$aude"vaAya vaeDas$ae
@AtmaâAetagAuNAEzC$ªamaih"°
ae “aöNAe nama:
tasmai tubhyaà bhagavate
väsudeväya vedhase
ätma-dyota-guëaiç channamahimne
brahmaëe namaù
SYNONYMS
tasmai—(because You are not to be understood from the material platform, we
simply offer obeisances) unto Him; tubhyam—unto You; bhagavate—unto the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; väsudeväya—unto Väsudeva, the origin of
Saìkarñaëa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha; vedhase—unto the origin of creation;
ätma-dyota-guëaiù channa-mahimne—unto You whose glories are covered by
Your personal energy; brahmaëe—unto the Supreme Brahman; namaù—our
respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, whose glories are covered by Your own energy, You are the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. You are Saìkarñaëa, the origin of creation,
and You are Väsudeva, the origin of the caturvyüha. Because You are
everything and are therefore the Supreme Brahman, we simply offer our
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
Instead of trying to understand Kåñëa in detail, it is better to offer our
respectful obeisances unto Him, for He is the origin of everything and He is
684
everything. Because we are covered by the material modes of nature, He is very
difficult for us to understand unless He reveals Himself to us. Therefore it is
better for us to acknowledge that He is everything and offer obeisances unto
His lotus feet.
TEXTS 34-35
yasyaAvataAr"A ÁaAyantae
zAr"Ire"SvazAr"Iir"NA:
taEstaEr"taulyaAitazAyaEr,"
vaIyaE=&deR"ih"Svas$aËÿtaE:
s$a BavaAna, s$avaRlaAek(sya
BavaAya ivaBavaAya ca
@vataINAAe<'zABaAgAena
s$aAm‘ataM paitar"AizASaAma,
yasyävatärä jïäyante
çaréreñv açarériëaù
tais tair atulyätiçayair
véryair dehiñv asaìgataiù
sa bhavän sarva-lokasya
bhaväya vibhaväya ca
avatérëo 'àça-bhägena
sämprataà patir äçiñäm
SYNONYMS
yasya—of whom; avatäräù—the different incarnations, like Matsya, Kürma
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
685
and Varäha; jïäyante—are speculated; çaréreñu—in different bodies,
differently visible; açarériëaù—they are not ordinary material bodies, but are
all transcendental; taiù taiù—by such bodily activities; atulya—incomparable;
ati-çayaiù—unlimited; véryaiù—by strength and power; dehiñu—by those who
actually have material bodies; asaìgataiù—which activities, enacted in
different incarnations, are impossible to be performed; saù—the same
Supreme; bhavän—Your Lordship; sarva-lokasya—of everyone; bhaväya—for
the elevation; vibhaväya—for the liberation; ca—and; avatérëaù—have now
appeared; aàça-bhägena—in full potency, with different parts and parcels;
sämpratam—at the present moment; patiù äçiñäm—You are the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the master of all auspiciousness.
TRANSLATION
Appearing in bodies like those of an ordinary fish, tortoise and hog, You
exhibit activities impossible for such creatures to perform—extraordinary,
incomparable, transcendental activities of unlimited power and strength. These
bodies of Yours, therefore, are not made of material elements, but are
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
incarnations of Your Supreme Personality. You are the same Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who have now appeared, with full potency, for the
benefit of all living entities within this material world.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (4.7-8):
yadä yadä hi dharmasya
glänir bhavati bhärata
abhyutthänam adharmasya
tadätmänaà såjämy aham
pariträëäya sädhünäà
686
vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm
dharma-saàsthäpanärthäya
sambhavämi yuge yuge
Kåñëa appears as an incarnation when real spiritual life declines and when
rogues and thieves increase to disturb the situation of the world. Unfortunate,
less intelligent persons, bereft of devotional service, cannot understand the
Lord's activities, and therefore such persons describe these activities as
kalpanä-mythology or imagination-because they are rascals and the lowest of
men (na mäà duñkåtino müòhäù prapadyante narädhamäù [Bg. 7.15]). Such men
cannot understand that the events described by Vyäsadeva in the puräëas and
other çästras are not fictitious or imaginary, but factual.
Kåñëa, in His full, unlimited potency, here shows that He is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, for although the two trees were so large and sturdy
that even many elephants could not move them, Kåñëa, as a child, exhibited
such extraordinary strength that they fell down with a great sound. From the
very beginning, by killing Pütanä, Çakaöäsura and Tåëävartäsura, by causing
the trees to fall, and by showing the entire universe within His mouth, Kåñëa
proved that He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The lowest of men
(müòhas), because of sinful activities, cannot understand this, but devotees can
accept it without a doubt. Thus the position of a devotee is different from that
of a nondevotee.
TEXT 36
nama: par"mak(lyaANA
nama: par"mamaËÿla
vaAs$aude"vaAya zAAntaAya
yaäU"naAM patayae nama:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
687
namaù parama-kalyäëa
namaù parama-maìgala
väsudeväya çäntäya
yadünäà pataye namaù
SYNONYMS
namaù—we therefore offer our respectful obeisances; parama-kalyäëa—You
are the supreme auspiciousness; namaù—our respectful obeisances unto You;
parama-maìgala—whatever You do is good; väsudeväya—unto the original
Personality of Godhead, Väsudeva; çäntäya—unto the most peaceful;
yadünäm—of the Yadu dynasty; pataye—unto the controller; namaù—our
respectful obeisances unto You.
TRANSLATION
O supremely auspicious, we offer our respectful obeisances unto You, who
are the supreme good. O most famous descendant and controller of the Yadu
dynasty, O son of Vasudeva, O most peaceful, let us offer our obeisances unto
Your lotus feet.
PURPORT
The word parama-kalyäëa is significant because Kåñëa, in any of His
incarnations, appears in order to protect the sädhus (pariträëäya sädhünäm
[Bg. 4.8]). The sädhus, saintly persons or devotees, are always harassed by
nondevotees, and Kåñëa appears in His incarnations to give them relief. This is
His first concern. If we study the history of Kåñëa's life, we shall find that for
most of His life He predominantly engaged in killing demons one after
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
TEXT 37
688
@naujaAnaIih" naAE BaUmaMs$a,
tavaAnaucar"ik(Æÿr"AE
d"zARnaM naAE BagAvata
[%Saer"As$aId"nauƒah"Ata,
anujänéhi nau bhümaàs
tavänucara-kiìkarau
darçanaà nau bhagavata
åñer äséd anugrahät
SYNONYMS
anujänéhi—may we have permission; nau—we; bhüman—O greatest universal
form; tava anucara-kiìkarau—because of being servants of Your most
confidential devotee Närada Muni; darçanam—to see personally; nau—of us;
bhagavataù—of You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; åñeù—of the great
saint Närada; äsét—there was (in the form of a curse); anugrahät—from the
mercy.
TRANSLATION
O supreme form, we are always servants of Your servants, especially of
Närada Muni. Now give us permission to leave for our home. It is by the grace
and mercy of Närada Muni that we have been able to see You face to face.
PURPORT
Unless delivered or blessed by a devotee, one cannot realize that Kåñëa is
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Manuñyäëäà sahasreñu kaçcid yatati
siddhaye. According to this verse of Bhagavad-gétä (7.3), there are so many
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
689
siddhas or yogés who cannot understand Kåñëa; instead, they misunderstand
Him. But if one takes shelter of a devotee descending from the paramparä
system of Närada (svayambhür näradaù çambhuù [SB 6.3.20]), one can then
understand who is an incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In
this age, many pseudo incarnations are advertised simply for having exhibited
some magical performances, but except for persons who are servants of Närada
and other servants of Kåñëa, no one can understand who is God and who is
not. This is confirmed by Narottama däsa Öhäkura. Chäòiyä vaiñëava-sevä
nistära päyeche kebä: no one is delivered from the material conception of life
unless favored by a Vaiñëava. Others can never understand, neither by
speculation nor by any other bodily or mental gymnastics.
TEXT 38
vaANAI gAuNAAnauk(Tanae ™avaNAAE k(TaAyaAM
h"staAE ca k(maRs$au manastava paAd"yaAenaR:
sma{tyaAM izAr"stava inavaAs$ajagAt‘aNAAmae
ä{"ií": s$ataAM d"zAR"nae'stau BavaÔanaUnaAma,
väëé guëänukathane çravaëau kathäyäà
hastau ca karmasu manas tava pädayor naù
småtyäà çiras tava niväsa-jagat-praëäme
dåñöiù satäà darçane 'stu bhavat-tanünäm
SYNONYMS
väëé—words, the power of speech; guëa-anukathane—always engaged in
talking about Your pastimes; çravaëau—the ear, or aural reception;
kathäyäm—in talks about You and Your pastimes; hastau—hands and legs and
other senses; ca—also; karmasu—engaging them in executing Your mission;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
690
manaù—the mind; tava—Your; pädayoù—of Your lotus feet; naù—our;
småtyäm—in remembrance always engaged in meditation; çiraù—the head;
tava—Your; niväsa-jagat-praëäme—because You are all-pervading, You are
everything, and our heads should bow down, not looking for enjoyment;
dåñöiù—the power of sight; satäm—of the Vaiñëavas; darçane—in seeing;
astu—let all of them be engaged in this way; bhavat-tanünäm—who are
nondifferent from You.
TRANSLATION
Henceforward, may all our words describe Your pastimes, may our ears
engage in aural reception of Your glories, may our hands, legs and other senses
engage in actions pleasing to You, and may our minds always think of Your
lotus feet. May our heads offer our obeisances to everything within this world,
because all things are also Your different forms, and may our eyes see the forms
of Vaiñëavas, who are nondifferent from You.
PURPORT
Here the process of understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
given. This process is bhakti.
çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù
smaraëaà päda-sevanam
arcanaà vandanaà däsyaà
sakhyam ätma-nivedanam
(SB 7.5.23)
Everything should be engaged in the service of the Lord. Håñékeëa
håñékeça-sevanaà bhaktir ucyate [Cc. Madhya 19.170] (Närada-païcarätra).
Everything—the mind, the body and all the sense organs—should be engaged
in Kåñëa's service. This is to be learned from expert devotees like Närada,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
691
Svayambhü and Çambhu. This is the process. We cannot manufacture our own
way of understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for it is not that
everything one manufactures or concocts will lead to understanding God.
Such a proposition—yata mata, tata patha—is foolish. Kåñëa says, bhaktyäham
ekayä grähyaù: "Only by executing the activities of bhakti can one understand
Me." (SB 11.14.21) This is called änukülyena kåñëänuçélanam [Cc. Madhya
19.167], remaining engaged favorably in the service of the Lord.
TEXT 39
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
wtTaM s$aÆÿLitaRtastaAByaAM
BagAvaAna, gAAeku(laeìr":
d"A°aA caAelaUKalae baÜ":
‘ah"s$aªaAh" gAu÷k(AE
çré-çuka uväca
itthaà saìkértitas täbhyäà
bhagavän gokuleçvaraù
dämnä colükhale baddhaù
prahasann äha guhyakau
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued to speak;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
ittham—in this
way, as aforesaid; saìkértitaù—being glorified and praised; täbhyäm—by the
two young demigods; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
gokula-éçvaraù—the master of Gokula (because He is sarva-loka-maheçvara);
dämnä—by the rope; ca—also; ulükhale—on the wooden mortar;
baddhaù—bound; prahasan—smiling; äha—said; guhyakau—unto the two
692
young demigods.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: The two young demigods thus offered prayers
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Although Çré Kåñëa, the Supreme
Godhead, is the master of all and was certainly Gokuleçvara, the master of
Gokula, He was bound to the wooden mortar by the ropes of the gopés, and
therefore, smiling widely, He spoke to the sons of Kuvera the following words.
PURPORT
Kåñëa was smiling because He was thinking to Himself, "These two young
demigods fell from the higher planetary system to this planet, and I have
delivered them from the bondage of standing for a long time as trees, but as for
Me, I am bound by the ropes of the gopés and am subject to their
chastisements." In other words, Kåñëa submits to being chastised and bound by
the gopés because of pure love and affection worthy of being praised by a
devotee in so many ways.
TEXT 40
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
ÁaAtaM mama paurE"vaEtaä,"
[%iSaNAA k(ç&NAAtmanaA
yacC)$Imad"AnDayaAevaARigBar,"
iva”aMzAAe'nauƒah": k{(ta:
çré-bhagavän uväca
jïätaà mama puraivaitad
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
693
åñiëä karuëätmanä
yac chré-madändhayor vägbhir
vibhraàço 'nugrahaù kåtaù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
jïätam—everything is known; mama—to Me; purä—in the past; eva—indeed;
etat—this incident; åñiëä—by the great sage Närada; karuëä-ätmanä—because
he was very, very kind to you; yat—which; çré-mada-andhayoù—who had
become mad after material opulence and had thus become blind; vägbhiù—by
words or by cursing; vibhraàçaù—falling down from the heavenly planet to
become arjuna trees here; anugrahaù kåtaù—this was a great favor done by him
to you.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: The great saint Närada Muni is
very merciful. By his curse, he showed the greatest favor to both of you, who
were mad after material opulence and who had thus become blind. Although
you fell from the higher planet Svargaloka and became trees, you were most
favored by him. I knew of all these incidents from the very beginning.
PURPORT
It is now confirmed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead that the curse
of a devotee is also to be regarded as mercy. As Kåñëa, God, is all-good, a
Vaiñëava is also all-good. Whatever he does is good for everyone. This is
explained in the following verse.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
TEXT 41
694
s$aADaUnaAM s$amaicaÔaAnaAM
s$autar"AM matk{(taAtmanaAma,
d"zARnaAªaAe Bavaeß"nDa:
pauMs$aAe'ºNAAe: s$aivatauyaRTaA
sädhünäà sama-cittänäà
sutaräà mat-kåtätmanäm
darçanän no bhaved bandhaù
puàso 'kñëoù savitur yathä
SYNONYMS
sädhünäm—of devotees; sama-cittänäm—who are equally disposed toward
everyone; sutaräm—excessively, completely; mat-kåta-ätmanäm—of persons
who are fully surrendered, determined to render service unto Me;
darçanät—simply by the audience; no bhavet bandhaù—freedom from all
material bondage; puàsaù—of a person; akñëoù—of the eyes; savituù yathä—as
by being face to face with the sun.
TRANSLATION
When one is face to face with the sun, there is no longer darkness for one's
eyes. Similarly, when one is face to face with a sädhu, a devotee, who is fully
determined and surrendered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one will
no longer be subject to material bondage.
PURPORT
As stated by Caitanya Mahäprabhu (Cc. Madhya 22.54):
'sädhu-saìga,' 'sädhu-saìga'—sarva-çästre kaya
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
695
lava-mätra sädhu-saìge sarva-siddhi haya
If by chance one meets a sädhu, a devotee, one's life is immediately successful,
and one is freed from material bondage. It may be argued that whereas
someone may receive a sädhu with great respect, someone else may not receive
a sädhu with such respect. A sädhu, however, is always equipoised toward
everyone. Because of being a pure devotee, a sädhu is always ready to deliver
Kåñëa consciousness without discrimination. As soon as one sees a sädhu, one
naturally becomes free. Nonetheless, persons who are too much offensive, who
commit vaiñëava-aparädhas, or offenses to a sädhu, will have to take some time
before being rectified. This is also indicated herein.
TEXT 42
taÕ"cC$taM matpar"maAE
nalakU(var" s$aAd"nama,
s$aÃaAtaAe maiya BaAvaAe vaAma,
wRips$ata: par"maAe'Bava:
tad gacchataà mat-paramau
nalaküvara sädanam
saïjäto mayi bhävo väm
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
épsitaù paramo 'bhavaù
SYNONYMS
tat gacchatam—now both of you may return; mat-paramau—accepting Me as
the supreme destination of life; nalaküvara—O Nalaküvara and Maëigréva;
sädanam—to your home; saïjätaù—being saturated with; mayi—unto Me;
bhävaù—devotional service; väm—by you; épsitaù—which was desired;
paramaù—supreme, highest, always engaged with all senses; abhavaù—from
696
which there is no falldown into material existence.
TRANSLATION
O Nalaküvara and Maëigréva, now you may both return home. Since you
desire to be always absorbed in My devotional service, your desire to develop
love and affection for Me will be fulfilled, and now you will never fall from that
platform.
PURPORT
The highest perfection of life is to come to the platform of devotional
service and always engage in devotional activities. Understanding this,
Nalaküvara and Maëigréva desired to attain that platform, and the Supreme
Personality of Godhead blessed them with the fulfillment of their
transcendental desire.
TEXT 43
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
wtyaul(AE taAE pair"‚(mya
‘aNAmya ca pauna: pauna:
baÜ"AelaUKalamaAman‡ya
jagmatauidR"zAmauÔar"Ama,
çré-çuka uväca
ity uktau tau parikramya
praëamya ca punaù punaù
baddholükhalam ämantrya
jagmatur diçam uttaräm
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
697
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti uktau—having been ordered
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead in this way; tau—Nalaküvara and
Maëigréva; parikramya—circumambulating; praëamya—offering obeisances;
ca—also; punaù punaù—again and again; baddha-ulükhalam ämantrya—taking
the permission of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who was bound to the
wooden mortar; jagmatuù—departed; diçam uttaräm—to their respective
destinations.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: The Supreme Personality of Godhead having
spoken to the two demigods in this way, they circumambulated the Lord, who
was bound to the wooden mortar, and offered obeisances to Him. After taking
the permission of Lord Kåñëa, they returned to their respective homes.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Tenth Canto, Tenth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Deliverance of the Yamala-arjuna Trees."
11. The Childhood Pastimes of Kåñëa
This chapter describes how the inhabitants of Gokula left Gokula and went
to Våndävana and how Kåñëa killed Vatsäsura and Bakäsura.
When the yamala-arjuna trees fell, they made a tremendous sound, like that
of falling thunderbolts. Being surprised, Kåñëa's father, Nanda, and the other
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
698
elderly inhabitants of Gokula went to the spot, where they saw the fallen trees
and Kåñëa standing between them, bound to the ulükhala, the wooden mortar.
They could find no cause for the trees' having fallen and Kåñëa's being there.
They thought this might be the work of some other asura who had met Kåñëa
on this spot, and they inquired from the playmates of Kåñëa about how the
whole incident had taken place. The children properly described how
everything had happened, but the elderly persons could not believe the story.
Some of them, however, thought that it might be true, since they had already
seen many wonderful incidents in connection with Kåñëa. Anyway, Nanda
Mahäräja immediately released Kåñëa from the ropes.
In this way, Kåñëa, at every day and every moment, displayed wonderful
incidents to increase the parental affection of Nanda Mahäräja and Yaçodä,
who thus felt both surprise and joy. The breaking of the yamala-arjunas was
one of these wonderful pastimes.
One day a fruit vendor approached Nanda Mahäräja's house, and Kåñëa
gathered some food grains with His little palms and went to the vendor to
exchange the grains for fruit. On the way, almost all the grains fell from His
palms, only one or two grains remaining, but the fruit vendor, out of full
affection, accepted these grains in exchange for as much fruit as Kåñëa could
take. As soon as she did this, her basket became filled with gold and jewels.
Thereafter, all the elderly gopas decided to leave Gokula because they saw
that in Gokula there was always some disturbance. They decided to go to
Våndävana, Vraja-dhäma, and the next day they all departed. In Våndävana,
both Kåñëa and Balaräma, after finishing Their childhood pastimes, began to
take charge of the calves and send them to the pasturing grounds (go-caraëa).
During this time, a demon named Vatsäsura entered among the calves and was
killed, and another asura, in the shape of a big duck, was also killed. The
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
playmates of Kåñëa narrated all these stories to their mothers. The mothers
could not believe their children, Kåñëa's playmates, but because of full
affection they enjoyed these narrations of Kåñëa's activities.
699
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
gAAepaA nand"Ad"ya: ™autvaA
åu"mayaAe: patataAe r"vama,
ta‡aAjagmau: ku(ç&™aeï"
inaGaARtaBayazAiÆÿtaA:
çré-çuka uväca
gopä nandädayaù çrutvä
drumayoù patato ravam
taträjagmuù kuru-çreñöha
nirghäta-bhaya-çaìkitäù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; gopäù—all the cowherd men;
nanda-ädayaù—headed by Nanda Mahäräja; çrutvä—hearing; drumayoù—of
the two trees; patatoù—falling down; ravam—the high sound, as terrible as a
thunderbolt; tatra—there, on the spot; äjagmuù—went; kuru-çreñöha—O
Mahäräja Parékñit; nirghäta-bhaya-çaìkitäù—who were afraid of falling
thunderbolts.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: O Mahäräja Parékñit, when the yamala-arjuna
trees fell, all the cowherd men in the neighborhood, hearing the fierce sound
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
and fearing thunderbolts, went to the spot.
700
TEXT 2
BaUmyaAM inapaitataAE ta‡a
d"ä{"zAuyaRmalaAjauRnaAE
ba”amaustad"ivaÁaAya
laºyaM patanak(Ar"NAma,
bhümyäà nipatitau tatra
dadåçur yamalärjunau
babhramus tad avijïäya
lakñyaà patana-käraëam
SYNONYMS
bhümyäm—on the ground; nipatitau—which had fallen; tatra—there;
dadåçuù—all of them saw; yamala-arjunau—the twin arjuna trees;
babhramuù—they became bewildered; tat—that; avijïäya—but they could not
trace out; lakñyam—although they could directly perceive that the trees had
fallen; patana-käraëam—the cause of their falling (how could it have
happened all of a sudden?).
TRANSLATION
There they saw the fallen yamala-arjuna trees on the ground, but they were
bewildered because even though they could directly perceive that the trees had
fallen, they could not trace out the cause for their having done so.
PURPORT
Considering all the circumstances, had this been done by Kåñëa? He was
standing on the spot, and His playmates described that this had been done by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
701
Him. Had Kåñëa actually done this, or were these merely stories? This was a
cause of bewilderment.
TEXT 3
olaUKalaM ivak(SaRntaM
d"A°aA baÜM" ca baAlak(ma,
k(syaedM" ku(ta @AêyaRma,
otpaAta wita k(Atar"A:
ulükhalaà vikarñantaà
dämnä baddhaà ca bälakam
kasyedaà kuta äçcaryam
utpäta iti kätaräù
SYNONYMS
ulükhalam—the wooden mortar; vikarñantam—dragging; dämnä—with the
rope; baddham ca—and bound by the belly; bälakam—Kåñëa; kasya—of whom;
idam—this; kutaù—wherefrom; äçcaryam—these wonderful happenings;
utpätaù—disturbance; iti—thus; kätaräù—they were very much agitated.
TRANSLATION
Kåñëa was bound by the rope to the ulükhala, the mortar, which He was
dragging. But how could He have pulled down the trees? Who had actually done
it? Where was the source for this incident? Considering all these astounding
things, the cowherd men were doubtful and bewildered.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
702
The cowherd men were very much agitated because the child Kåñëa, after
all, had been standing between the two trees, and if by chance the trees had
fallen upon Him, He would have been smashed. But He was standing as He
was, and still the things had happened, so who had done all this? How could
these events have happened in such a wonderful way? These considerations
were some of the reasons they were agitated and bewildered. They thought,
however, that by chance Kåñëa had been saved by God so that nothing had
happened to Him.
TEXT 4
baAlaA Ocaur"naenaeita
itayaRggAtamaulaUKalama,
ivak(SaRtaA maDyagAena
pauç&SaAvapyacaºmaih"
bälä ücur aneneti
tiryag-gatam ulükhalam
vikarñatä madhya-gena
puruñäv apy acakñmahi
SYNONYMS
bäläù—all the other boys; ücuù—said; anena—by Him (Kåñëa); iti—thus;
tiryak—crosswise; gatam—which had become; ulükhalam—the wooden
mortar; vikarñatä—by Kåñëa, who was dragging; madhya-gena—going between
the two trees; puruñau—two beautiful persons; api
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
so; acakñmahi—we have
seen with our own eyes.
703
TRANSLATION
Then all the cowherd boys said: It is Kåñëa who has done this. When He
was in between the two trees, the mortar fell crosswise. Kåñëa dragged the
mortar, and the two trees fell down. After that, two beautiful men came out of
the trees. We have seen this with our own eyes.
PURPORT
Kåñëa's playmates wanted to inform Kåñëa's father of the exact situation by
explaining that not only did the trees break, but out of the broken trees came
two beautiful men. "All these things happened," they said. "We have seen them
with our own eyes."
TEXT 5
na tae taäu"lM( jagA{"ò"r,"
na Gaqe%taeita tasya tata,
baAlasyaAetpaAq%naM tavaAeR:
ke(icats$aind"gDacaetas$a:
na te tad-uktaà jagåhur
na ghaöeteti tasya tat
bälasyotpäöanaà tarvoù
kecit sandigdha-cetasaù
SYNONYMS
na—not; te—all the gopas; tat-uktam—being spoken by the boys;
jagåhuù—would accept; na ghaöeta—it cannot be;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—thus; tasya—of Kåñëa;
704
tat—the activity; bälasya—of a small boy like Kåñëa; utpäöanam—the
uprooting; tarvoù—of the two trees; kecit—some of them;
sandigdha-cetasaù—became doubtful about what could be done (because
Gargamuni had predicted that this child would be equal to Näräyaëa).
TRANSLATION
Because of intense paternal affection, the cowherd men, headed by Nanda,
could not believe that Kåñëa could have uprooted the trees in such a wonderful
way. Therefore they could not put their faith in the words of the boys. Some of
the men, however, were in doubt. "Since Kåñëa was predicted to equal
Näräyaëa," they thought, "it might be that He could have done it."
PURPORT
One view was that it was impossible for a small boy like this to have done
such a thing as pulling down the trees. But there were doubts because Kåñëa
had been predicted to equal Näräyaëa. Therefore the cowherd men were in a
dilemma.
TEXT 6
olaUKalaM ivak(SaRntaM
d"A°aA baÜM" svamaAtmajama,
ivalaAefya nand": ‘ah"s$aä,"-
vad"naAe ivamaumaAeca h"
ulükhalaà vikarñantaà
dämnä baddhaà svam ätmajam
vilokya nandaù prahasadcopyright
©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
705
vadano vimumoca ha
SYNONYMS
ulükhalam—the wooden mortar; vikarñantam—dragging; dämnä—by the rope;
baddham—bound; svam ätmajam—his own son Kåñëa; vilokya—by seeing;
nandaù—Mahäräja Nanda; prahasat-vadanaù—whose face began to smile
when he saw the wonderful child; vimumoca ha—released Him from the
bonds.
TRANSLATION
When Nanda Mahäräja saw his own son bound with ropes to the wooden
mortar and dragging it, he smiled and released Kåñëa from His bonds.
PURPORT
Nanda Mahäräja was surprised that Yaçodä, Kåñëa's mother, could have
bound her beloved child in such a way. Kåñëa was exchanging love with her.
How then could she have been so cruel as to bind Him to the wooden mortar?
Nanda Mahäräja understood this exchange of love, and therefore he smiled
and released Kåñëa. In other words, as Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, binds a living entity in fruitive activities, He binds mother Yaçodä
and Nanda Mahäräja in parental affection. This is His pastime.
TEXT 7
gAAepaIiBa: staAeiBataAe'na{tyaä,"
BagAvaAna, baAlavat¸(icata,
oÕ"Ayaita ¸(icanmaugDas$a,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
706
taã"zAAe d"Aç&yan‡avata,
gopébhiù stobhito 'nåtyad
bhagavän bälavat kvacit
udgäyati kvacin mugdhas
tad-vaço däru-yantravat
SYNONYMS
gopébhiù—by the gopés (by flattery and offers of prizes); stobhitaù—encouraged,
induced; anåtyat—the small Kåñëa danced; bhagavän—although He was the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; bäla-vat—exactly like a human child;
kvacit—sometimes; udgäyati—He would sing very loudly; kvacit—sometimes;
mugdhaù—being amazed; tat-vaçaù—under their control;
däru-yantra-vat—like a wooden doll.
TRANSLATION
The gopés would say, "If You dance, my dear Kåñëa, then I shall give You
half a sweetmeat." By saying these words or by clapping their hands, all the
gopés encouraged Kåñëa in different ways. At such times, although He was the
supremely powerful Personality of Godhead, He would smile and dance
according to their desire, as if He were a wooden doll in their hands. Sometimes
He would sing very loudly, at their bidding. In this way, Kåñëa came completely
under the control of the gopés.
TEXT 8
ibaBaitaR ¸(icad"AÁaæa:
paIQ&k(AenmaAnapaAäu"k(ma,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
707
baAò"ºaepaM ca ku(ç&tae
svaAnaAM ca ‘aIitamaAvah"na,
bibharti kvacid äjïaptaù
péöhakonmäna-pädukam
bähu-kñepaà ca kurute
svänäà ca prétim ävahan
SYNONYMS
bibharti—Kåñëa would simply stand and touch articles as if unable to raise
them; kvacit—sometimes; äjïaptaù—being ordered; péöhaka-unmäna—the
wooden seat and wooden measuring pot; pädukam—bringing the wooden
shoes; bähu-kñepam ca—striking the arms on the body; kurute—does; svänäm
ca—of His own relatives, the gopés and other intimate friends; prétim—the
pleasure; ävahan—inviting.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes mother Yaçodä and her gopé friends would tell Kåñëa, "Bring this
article" or "Bring that article." Sometimes they would order Him to bring a
wooden plank, wooden shoes or a wooden measuring pot, and Kåñëa, when thus
ordered by the mothers, would try to bring them. Sometimes, however, as if
unable to raise these things, He would touch them and stand there. Just to
invite the pleasure of His relatives, He would strike His body with His arms to
show that He had sufficient strength.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
TEXT 9
d"zARyaMstaiã"d"AM laAek(
708
@AtmanaAe Ba{tyavazyataAma,
˜ajasyaAevaAh" vaE h"Sa<
BagAvaAna, baAlacaeií"taE:
darçayaàs tad-vidäà loka
ätmano bhåtya-vaçyatäm
vrajasyoväha vai harñaà
bhagavän bäla-ceñöitaiù
SYNONYMS
darçayan—exhibiting; tat-vidäm—unto persons who can understand Kåñëa's
activities; loke—throughout the whole world; ätmanaù—of Himself;
bhåtya-vaçyatäm—how He is agreeable to carrying out the orders of His
servants, His devotees; vrajasya—of Vrajabhümi; uväha—executed;
vai—indeed; harñam—pleasure; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; bäla-ceñöitaiù—by His activities like those of a child trying to do so
many things.
TRANSLATION
To pure devotees throughout the world who could understand His activities,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, exhibited how much He can be
subdued by His devotees, His servants. In this way He increased the pleasure of
the Vrajaväsés by His childhood activities.
PURPORT
That Kåñëa performed childhood activities to increase the pleasure of His
devotees was another transcendental humor. He exhibited these activities not
only to the inhabitants of Vrajabhümi, but also to others, who were captivated
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
709
by His external potency and opulence. Both the internal devotees, who were
simply absorbed in love of Kåñëa, and the external devotees, who were
captivated by His unlimited potency, were informed of Kåñëa's desire to be
submissive to His servants.
TEXT 10
‚(LNAIih" BaAe: P(laAnaIita
™autvaA s$atvar"macyauta:
P(laATaI= DaAnyamaAd"Aya
yayaAE s$avaRP(la‘ad":
kréëéhi bhoù phalänéti
çrutvä satvaram acyutaù
phalärthé dhänyam ädäya
yayau sarva-phala-pradaù
SYNONYMS
kréëéhi—please come and purchase; bhoù—O neighborhood residents;
phaläni—ripe fruits; iti—thus; çrutvä—hearing; satvaram—very soon;
acyutaù—Kåñëa; phala-arthé—as if He wanted some fruits; dhänyam
ädäya—capturing some grains of paddy; yayau—went to the fruit vendor;
sarva-phala-pradaù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who can give all
kinds of fruit to everyone, had now become in need of fruits.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Once a woman selling fruit was calling, "O inhabitants of Vrajabhümi, if you
want to purchase some fruits, come here!" Upon hearing this, Kåñëa
710
immediately took some grains and went to barter as if He needed some fruits.
PURPORT
Aborigines generally go to the villagers to sell fruits. How much the
aborigines were attached to Kåñëa is here described. Kåñëa, to show His favor
to the aborigines, would immediately go purchase fruits, bartering with paddy
in His hand as He had seen others do.
TEXT 11
P(laiva‚(iyaNAI tasya
cyautaDaAnyak(r"ã"yama,
P(laEr"paUr"ya‰"¥aE:
P(laBaANx"mapaUir" ca
phala-vikrayiëé tasya
cyuta-dhänya-kara-dvayam
phalair apürayad ratnaiù
phala-bhäëòam apüri ca
SYNONYMS
phala-vikrayiëé—the aborigine fruit vendor, who was an elderly woman;
tasya—of Kåñëa; cyuta-dhänya—the paddy He brought to barter having mostly
fallen; kara-dvayam—palms of the hands; phalaiù apürayat—the fruit vendor
filled His small palms with fruits; ratnaiù—in exchange for jewels and gold;
phala-bhäëòam—the basket of fruit; apüri ca—filled.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
711
While Kåñëa was going to the fruit vendor very hastily, most of the grains
He was holding fell. Nonetheless, the fruit vendor filled Kåñëa's hands with
fruits, and her fruit basket was immediately filled with jewels and gold.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (9.26) Kåñëa says:
patraà puñpaà phalaà toyaà
yo me bhaktyä prayacchati
tad ahaà bhakty-upahåtam
açnämi prayatätmanaù
Kåñëa is so kind that if anyone offers Him a leaf, a fruit, a flower or some
water, He will immediately accept it. The only condition is that these things
should be offered with bhakti (yo me bhaktyä prayacchati). Otherwise, if one is
puffed up with false prestige, thinking, "I have so much opulence, and I am
giving something to Kåñëa," one's offering will not be accepted by Kåñëa. The
fruit vendor, although a woman belonging to the poor aborigine class, dealt
with Kåñëa with great affection, saying, "Kåñëa, You have come to me to take
some fruit in exchange for grains. All the grains have fallen, but still You may
take whatever You like." Thus she filled Kåñëa's palms with whatever fruits He
could carry. In exchange, Kåñëa filled her whole basket with jewels and gold.
From this incident one should learn that for anything offered to Kåñëa with
love and affection, Kåñëa can reciprocate many millions of times over, both
materially and spiritually. The basic principle involved is an exchange of love.
Therefore Kåñëa teaches in Bhagavad-gétä (9.27):
yat karoñi yad açnäsi
yaj juhoñi dadäsi yat
yat tapasyasi kaunteya
tat kuruñva mad-arpaëam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
712
"O son of Kunté, all that you do, all that you eat, all that you offer and give
away, as well as all austerities that you may perform, should be done as an
offering unto Me." With love and affection, one should try to give something
to Kåñëa from one's source of income. Then one's life will be successful. Kåñëa
is full in all opulences; He does not need anything from anyone. But if one is
prepared to give something to Kåñëa, that is for one's own benefit. The
example given in this connection is that when one's real face is decorated, the
reflection of one's face is automatically decorated. Similarly, if we try to serve
Kåñëa with all our opulences, we, as parts and parcels or reflections of Kåñëa,
will become happy in exchange. Kåñëa is always happy, for He is ätmäräma,
fully satisfied with His own opulence.
TEXT 12
s$air"ÔaIr"gAtaM k{(SNAM
Ba¢aAjauRnamaTaAù"yata,
r"AmaM ca r"Aeih"NAI de"vaI
‚(Lx"ntaM baAlakE(Ba{RzAma,
sarit-téra-gataà kåñëaà
bhagnärjunam athähvayat
rämaà ca rohiëé devé
kréòantaà bälakair bhåçam
SYNONYMS
sarit-téra—to the riverside; gatam—who had gone; kåñëam—unto Kåñëa;
bhagna-arjunam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
yamala-arjuna trees;
atha—then; ähvayat—called; rämam ca—as well as Balaräma; rohiëé—the
mother of Balaräma; devé—the goddess of fortune; kréòantam—who were
713
engaged in playing; bälakaiù—with many other boys; bhåçam—with deep
attention.
TRANSLATION
Once, after the uprooting of the yamala-arjuna trees, Rohiëédevé went to call
Räma and Kåñëa, who had both gone to the riverside and were playing with the
other boys with deep attention.
PURPORT
Mother Yaçodä was more attached to Kåñëa and Balaräma than Rohiëédevé
was, although Rohiëédevé was the mother of Balaräma. Mother Yaçodä sent
Rohiëédevé to call Räma and Kåñëa from Their play, since it was the right time
for lunch. Therefore Rohiëédevé went to call Them, breaking Their
engagement in play.
TEXT 13
naAepaeyaAtaAM yad"Aó"taAE
‚(Lx"As$aËeÿna pau‡ak(AE
yazAAed"AM ‘aeSayaAmaAs$a
r"Aeih"NAI pau‡avats$alaAma,
nopeyätäà yadähütau
kréòä-saìgena putrakau
yaçodäà preñayäm äsa
rohiëé putra-vatsaläm
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
714
na upeyätäm—would not return home; yadä—when; ähütau—They were
called back from playing; kréòä-saìgena—because of so much attachment to
playing with other boys; putrakau—the two sons (Kåñëa and Balaräma);
yaçodäm preñayäm äsa—sent mother Yaçodä to call Them; rohiëé—mother
Rohiëé; putra-vatsaläm—because mother Yaçodä was a more affectionate
mother to Kåñëa and Balaräma.
TRANSLATION
Because of being too attached to playing with the other boys, Kåñëa and
Balaräma did not return upon being called by Rohiëé. Therefore Rohiëé sent
mother Yaçodä to call Them back, because mother Yaçodä was more affectionate
to Kåñëa and Balaräma.
PURPORT
Yaçodäà preñayäm äsa. These very words show that since Kåñëa and
Balaräma did not care to return in response to the order of Rohiëé, Rohiëé
thought that if Yaçodä called They would have to return, for Yaçodä was more
affectionate to Kåñëa and Balaräma.
TEXT 14
‚(Lx"ntaM s$aA s$autaM baAlaEr,"
@itavaelaM s$ah"Aƒajama,
yazAAed"AjaAeh"vaItk{(SNAM
pau‡aµaeh"µautastanaI
kréòantaà sä sutaà bälair
ativelaà sahägrajam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
715
yaçodäjohavét kåñëaà
putra-sneha-snuta-stané
SYNONYMS
kréòantam—engaged in playing; sä—mother Yaçodä; sutam—her son;
bälaiù—with the other boys; ati-velam—although it was too late;
saha-agrajam—who was playing with His elder brother, Balaräma;
yaçodä—mother Yaçodä; ajohavét—called ("Kåñëa and Balaräma, come here!");
kåñëam—unto Kåñëa; putra-sneha-snuta-stané—while she was calling Them,
milk flowed from her breast because of her ecstatic love and affection.
TRANSLATION
Kåñëa and Balaräma, being attached to Their play, were playing with the
other boys although it was very late. Therefore mother Yaçodä called Them
back for lunch. Because of her ecstatic love and affection for Kåñëa and
Balaräma, milk flowed from her breasts.
PURPORT
The word ajohavét means "calling them again and again." "Kåñëa and
Balaräma," she called, "please come back. You are late for Your lunch. You
have played sufficiently. Come back."
TEXT 15
k{(SNA k{(SNAAr"ivand"Aºa
taAta Wih" stanaM ipaba
@laM ivah"ArE": ºautºaAnta:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
716
‚(Lx"A™aAntaAe'is$a pau‡ak(
kåñëa kåñëäravindäkña
täta ehi stanaà piba
alaà vihäraiù kñut-kñäntaù
kréòä-çränto 'si putraka
SYNONYMS
kåñëa kåñëa aravinda-akña—O Kåñëa, my son, lotus-eyed Kåñëa; täta—O
darling; ehi—come here; stanam—the milk of my breast; piba—drink; alam
vihäraiù—after this there is no necessity of playing; kñut-kñäntaù—tired
because of hunger; kréòä-çräntaù—fatigued from playing; asi—You must be;
putraka—O my son.
TRANSLATION
Mother Yaçodä said: My dear son Kåñëa, lotus-eyed Kåñëa, come here and
drink the milk of my breast. My dear darling, You must be very tired because of
hunger and the fatigue of playing so long. There is no need to play any more.
TEXT 16
he" r"AmaAgAcC$ taAtaAzAu
s$aAnauja: ku(lanand"na
‘aAtare"va k{(taAh"Ar"s$a,
taà"vaAna, BaAelu(mahR"ita
he rämägaccha tätäçu
sänujaù kula-nandana
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
717
prätar eva kåtähäras
tad bhavän bhoktum arhati
SYNONYMS
he räma—my dear son Balaräma; ägaccha—please come here; täta—my dear
darling; äçu—immediately; sa-anujaù—with Your younger brother;
kula-nandana—the great hope of our family; prätaù eva—certainly in the
morning; kåta-ähäraù—have taken Your breakfast; tat—therefore;
bhavän—You; bhoktum—to eat something more; arhati—deserve.
TRANSLATION
My dear Baladeva, best of our family, please come immediately with Your
younger brother, Kåñëa. You both ate in the morning, and now You ought to
eat something more.
TEXT 17
‘ataIºatae tvaAM d"AzAAhR"
BaAeºyamaANAAe ˜ajaAiDapa:
W÷AvayaAe: i‘ayaM Daeih"
svagA{h"Ana, yaAta baAlak(A:
pratékñate tväà däçärha
bhokñyamäëo vrajädhipaù
ehy ävayoù priyaà dhehi
sva-gåhän yäta bälakäù
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
718
pratékñate—is waiting; tväm—for both of You (Kåñëa and Balaräma);
däçärha—O Balaräma; bhokñyamäëaù—desiring to eat; vraja-adhipaù—the
King of Vraja, Nanda Mahäräja; ehi—come here; ävayoù—our;
priyam—pleasure; dhehi—just consider; sva-gåhän—to their respective homes;
yäta—let them go; bälakäù—the other boys.
TRANSLATION
Nanda Mahäräja, the King of Vraja, is now waiting to eat. O my dear son
Balaräma, he is waiting for You. Therefore, come back to please us. All the boys
playing with You and Kåñëa should now go to their homes.
PURPORT
It appears that Nanda Mahäräja regularly took his food with his two sons,
Kåñëa and Balaräma. Yaçodä told the other boys, "Now you should go to your
homes." Father and son generally sit together, so mother Yaçodä requested
Kåñëa and Balaräma to return, and she advised the other boys to go home so
that their parents would not have to wait for them.
TEXT 18
DaUilaDaUs$air"taAËÿstvaM
pau‡a maÀanamaAvah"
janmaºa< tae'â Bavaita
iva‘aeByaAe de"ih" gAA: zAuica:
dhüli-dhüsaritäìgas tvaà
putra majjanam ävaha
janmarkñaà te 'dya bhavati
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
719
viprebhyo dehi gäù çuciù
SYNONYMS
dhüli-dhüsarita-aìgaù tvam—You have become covered with dust and sand all
over Your body; putra—my dear son; majjanam ävaha—now come here, take
Your bath and cleanse Yourself; janma-åkñam—the auspicious star of Your
birth; te—of You; adya—today; bhavati—it is; viprebhyaù—unto the pure
brähmaëas; dehi—give in charity; gäù—cows; çuciù—being purified.
TRANSLATION
Mother Yaçodä further told Kåñëa: My dear son, because of playing all day,
Your body has become covered with dust and sand. Therefore, come back, take
Your bath and cleanse Yourself. Today the moon is conjoined with the
auspicious star of Your birth. Therefore, be pure and give cows in charity to the
brähmaëas.
PURPORT
It is a custom of Vedic culture that whenever there is any auspicious
ceremony, one should give valuable cows in charity to the brähmaëas.
Therefore mother Yaçodä requested Kåñëa, "Instead of being enthusiastic in
playing, now please come and be enthusiastic in charity."
Yajïa-däna-tapaù-karma na tyäjyaà käryam eva tat. As advised in
Bhagavad-gétä (18.5), sacrifice, charity and austerity should never be given up.
Yajïo dänaà tapaç caiva pävanäni manéñiëäm:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
advanced in spiritual life, one should not give up these three duties. To
observe one's birthday ceremony, one should do something in terms of one of
these three items (yajïa, däna or tapaù), or all of them together.
TEXT 19
720
pazya pazya vayasyaAMstae
maAta{ma{í"Ana, svalax.~k{(taAna,
tvaM ca µaAta: k{(taAh"Ar"Ae
ivah"r"sva svalax.~k{(ta:
paçya paçya vayasyäàs te
mätå-måñöän svalaìkåtän
tvaà ca snätaù kåtähäro
viharasva svalaìkåtaù
SYNONYMS
paçya paçya—just see, just see; vayasyän—boys of Your age; te—Your;
mätå-måñöän—cleansed by their mothers; su-alaìkåtän—decorated with nice
ornaments; tvam ca—You also; snätaù—after taking a bath; kåta-ähäraù—and
eating Your lunch; viharasva—enjoy with them; su-alaìkåtaù—fully decorated
like them.
TRANSLATION
Just see how all Your playmates of Your own age have been cleansed and
decorated with beautiful ornaments by their mothers. You should come here,
and after You have taken Your bath, eaten Your lunch and been decorated with
ornaments, You may play with Your friends again.
PURPORT
Generally young boys are competitive. If one friend has done something,
another friend also wants to do something. Therefore mother Yaçodä pointed
out how Kåñëa's playmates were decorated, so that Kåñëa might be induced to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
721
decorate Himself like them.
TEXT 20
wtTaM yazAAed"A tamazAeSazAeKarM"
matvaA s$autaM µaeh"inabaÜ"DaIna{Rpa
h"stae gA{h"ItvaA s$ah"r"AmamacyautaM
naItvaA svavaAqM% k{(tavatyaTaAed"yama,
itthaà yaçodä tam açeña-çekharaà
matvä sutaà sneha-nibaddha-dhér nåpa
haste gåhétvä saha-rämam acyutaà
nétvä sva-väöaà kåtavaty athodayam
SYNONYMS
ittham—in this way; yaçodä—mother Yaçodä; tam açeña-çekharam—unto
Kåñëa, who was on the peak of everything auspicious, with no question of
dirtiness or uncleanliness; matvä—considering; sutam—as her son;
sneha-nibaddha-dhéù—because of an intense spirit of love; nåpa—O King
(Mahäräja Parékñit); haste—in the hand; gåhétvä—taking; saha-rämam—with
Balaräma; acyutam—Kåñëa, the infallible; nétvä—bringing; sva-väöam—at
home; kåtavaté—performed; atha—now; udayam—brilliancy by bathing Him,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
dressing Him and decorating Him with ornaments.
TRANSLATION
My dear Mahäräja Parékñit, because of intense love and affection, mother
Yaçodä, Kåñëa's mother, considered Kåñëa, who was at the peak of all
opulences, to be her own son. Thus she took Kåñëa by the hand, along with
722
Balaräma, and brought Them home, where she performed her duties by fully
bathing Them, dressing Them and feeding Them.
PURPORT
Kåñëa is always neat, clean and opulent and does not need to be washed,
bathed or dressed, yet mother Yaçodä, because of affection, considered Him
her ordinary child and did her duties to keep her son brilliant.
TEXT 21
çré-çuka uväca
gopa-våddhä mahotpätän
anubhüya båhadvane
nandädayaù samägamya
vraja-käryam amantrayan
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; gopa-våddhäù—the elderly
persons among the cowherd men; mahä-utpätän—very great disturbances;
anubhüya—after experiencing; båhadvane—in the place known as Båhadvana;
nanda-ädayaù—the cowherd men, headed by Nanda Mahäräja;
samägamya—assembled, came together; vraja-käryam—the business of
Vrajabhümi; amantrayan—deliberated on how to stop the continuous
disturbances in Mahävana.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: Then one time, having seen the great
disturbances in Båhadvana, all the elderly persons among the cowherd men,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
723
the continuous disturbing situations in Vraja.
TEXT 22
ta‡aAepaAnand"naAmaAh"
gAAepaAe ÁaAnavayaAe'iDak(:
de"zAk(AlaATaRtaÔvaÁa:
i‘ayak{(‰"Amak{(SNAyaAe:
tatropänanda-nämäha
gopo jïäna-vayo-'dhikaù
deça-kälärtha-tattva-jïaù
priya-kåd räma-kåñëayoù
SYNONYMS
tatra—in the assembly; upananda-nämä—by the name Upananda (the elder
brother of Nanda Mahäräja); äha—said; gopaù—the cowherd man;
jïäna-vayaù-adhikaù—who by knowledge and by age was the eldest of all;
deça-käla-artha-tattva-jïaù—very experienced according to time, place and
circumstances; priya-kåt—just for the benefit; räma-kåñëayoù—of Balaräma
and Kåñëa, the Supreme Personalities of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
At this meeting of all the inhabitants of Gokula, a cowherd man named
Upananda, who was the most mature in age and knowledge and was very
experienced according to time, circumstances and country, made this suggestion
for the benefit of Räma and Kåñëa.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
724
TEXT 23
otTaAtavyaimataAe'smaAiBar,"
gAAeku(lasya ih"taEiSaiBa:
@AyaAntya‡a mah"AetpaAtaA
baAlaAnaAM naAzAhe"tava:
utthätavyam ito 'smäbhir
gokulasya hitaiñibhiù
äyänty atra mahotpätä
bälänäà näça-hetavaù
SYNONYMS
utthätavyam—now this place should be left; itaù—from here, from Gokula;
asmäbhiù—by all of us; gokulasya—of this place, Gokula; hita-eñibhiù—by
persons who desire good for this place; äyänti—are happening; atra—here;
mahä-utpätäù—many great disturbances; bälänäm—for the boys like Räma
and Kåñëa; näça-hetavaù—having the definite purpose of killing Them.
TRANSLATION
He said: My dear friends the cowherd men, in order to do good to this place,
Gokula, we should leave it, because so many disturbances are always occurring
here, just for the purpose of killing Räma and Kåñëa.
TEXT 24
maul(: k(TaiÂa‰"AºasyaA
baAlaGnyaA baAlak(Ae ÷s$aAE
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
725
h"re"r"nauƒah"AªaUnama,
@naêAepair" naApatata,
muktaù kathaïcid räkñasyä
bäla-ghnyä bälako hy asau
harer anugrahän nünam
anaç copari näpatat
SYNONYMS
muktaù—was delivered; kathaïcit—somehow or other; räkñasyäù—from the
hands of the Räkñasé Pütanä; bäla-ghnyäù—who was determined to kill small
children; bälakaù—especially the child Kåñëa; hi—because; asau—He; hareù
anugrahät—by the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
nünam—indeed; anaù ca—and the handcart; upari—on top of the child;
na—not; apatat—did fall down.
TRANSLATION
The child Kåñëa, simply by the mercy of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, was somehow or other rescued from the hands of the Räkñasé Pütanä,
who was determined to kill Him. Then, again by the mercy of the Supreme
Godhead, the handcart missed falling upon the child.
TEXT 25
ca‚(vaAtaena naItaAe'yaM
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
dE"tyaena ivapadM" ivayata,
izAlaAyaAM paitatasta‡a
726
pair"‡aAta: s$aure"ìrE":
cakra-vätena néto 'yaà
daityena vipadaà viyat
çiläyäà patitas tatra
pariträtaù sureçvaraiù
SYNONYMS
cakra-vätena—by the demon in the shape of a whirlwind (Tåëävarta); nétaù
ayam—Kåñëa was taken away; daityena—by the demon; vipadam—dangerous;
viyat—to the sky; çiläyäm—on a slab of stone; patitaù—fallen; tatra—there;
pariträtaù—was saved; sura-éçvaraiù—by the mercy of Lord Viñëu or His
associates.
TRANSLATION
Then again, the demon Tåëävarta, in the form of a whirlwind, took the child
away into the dangerous sky to kill Him, but the demon fell down onto a slab of
stone. In that case also, by the mercy of Lord Viñëu or His associates, the child
was saved.
TEXT 26
yaªa i•ayaeta åu"mayaAer,"
@ntarM" ‘aApya baAlak(:
@s$aAvanyatamaAe vaAipa
tad"pyacyautar"ºaNAma,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
yan na mriyeta drumayor
727
antaraà präpya bälakaù
asäv anyatamo väpi
tad apy acyuta-rakñaëam
SYNONYMS
yat—then again; na mriyeta—did not die; drumayoù antaram—between the
two trees; präpya—although He was between; bälakaù asau—that child, Kåñëa;
anyatamaù—another child; vä api—or; tat api acyuta-rakñaëam—in that case
also, He was saved by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Even the other day, neither Kåñëa nor any of His playmates died from the
falling of the two trees, although the children were near the trees or even
between them. This also is to be considered the mercy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 27
yaAvad"AEtpaAitak(Ae'ir"í"Ae
˜ajaM naAiBaBavaeid"ta:
taAvaß"AlaAnaupaAd"Aya
yaAsyaAmaAe'nya‡a s$aAnaugAA:
yävad autpätiko 'riñöo
vrajaà näbhibhaved itaù
tävad bälän upädäya
yäsyämo 'nyatra sänugäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
728
SYNONYMS
yävat—so long; autpätikaù—disturbing; ariñöaù—the demon; vrajam—this
Gokula Vrajabhümi; na—not; abhibhavet itaù—go away from this place;
tävat—so long; bälän upädäya—for the benefit of the boys; yäsyämaù—we
shall go; anyatra—somewhere else; sa-anugäù—with our followers.
TRANSLATION
All these incidents are being caused by some unknown demon. Before he
comes here to create another disturbance, it is our duty to go somewhere else
with the boys until there are no more disturbances.
PURPORT
Upananda suggested, "By the mercy of Lord Viñëu, Kåñëa has always been
saved from so many dangerous incidents. Now let us leave this place and go
someplace where we may worship Lord Viñëu undisturbed, before there is
another cause of death from some demon who may attack us." A devotee
desires only that he may execute devotional service undisturbed. Actually we
see, however, that even during the presence of Kåñëa, when Nanda Mahäräja
and the other cowherd men had the Supreme Personality of Godhead in their
presence, there were disturbances. Of course, in every case, Kåñëa came out
victorious. The instruction we may derive from this is that we should not be
disturbed by so-called disturbances. There have been so many disturbances to
our Kåñëa consciousness movement, but we cannot give up our forward march.
On the contrary, people are receiving this movement very enthusiastically all
over the world, and they are purchasing literature about Kåñëa consciousness
with redoubled energy. Thus there are both encouragements and disturbances.
This was so even in Kåñëa's time.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
729
TEXT 28
vanaM va{nd"AvanaM naAma
pazAvyaM navak(Ananama,
gAAepagAAepaIgAvaAM s$aevyaM
pauNyaAi‰"ta{NAvaIç&Dama,
vanaà våndävanaà näma
paçavyaà nava-känanam
gopa-gopé-gaväà sevyaà
puëyädri-tåëa-vérudham
SYNONYMS
vanam—another forest; våndävanam näma—named Våndävana; paçavyam—a
very suitable place for maintenance of the cows and other animals;
nava-känanam—there are many new gardenlike places; gopa-gopé-gaväm—for
all the cowherd men, the members of their families, and the cows; sevyam—a
very happy, very suitable place; puëya-adri—there are nice mountains;
tåëa—plants; vérudham—and creepers.
TRANSLATION
Between Nandeçvara and Mahävana is a place named Våndävana. This place
is very suitable because it is lush with grass, plants and creepers for the cows
and other animals. It has nice gardens and tall mountains and is full of facilities
for the happiness of all the gopas and gopés and our animals.
PURPORT
Våndävana is situated between Nandeçvara and Mahävana. Formerly the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
730
cowherd men had shifted to Mahävana, but still there were disturbances.
Therefore the cowherd men selected Våndävana, which was between the two
villages, and decided to go there.
TEXT 29
taÔa‡aAâEva yaAsyaAma:
zAk(q%Ana, yauÈÿ maA icar"ma,
gAAeDanaAnyaƒataAe yaAntau
BavataAM yaid" r"Aecatae
tat taträdyaiva yäsyämaù
çakaöän yuìkta mä ciram
godhanäny agrato yäntu
bhavatäà yadi rocate
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; tatra—there; adya eva—just today; yäsyämaù—let us go;
çakaöän—all the carts; yuìkta—make ready; mä ciram—without delay;
go-dhanäni—all the cows; agrataù—in front; yäntu—let them go;
bhavatäm—of all of you; yadi—if; rocate—it is pleasing to accept it.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, let us immediately go today. There is no need to wait any further.
If you agree to my proposal, let us prepare all the bullock carts and put the cows
in front of us, and let us go there.
TEXT 30
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
731
tacC_$tvaEk(iDayaAe gAAepaA:
s$aADau s$aAiDvaita vaAid"na:
˜ajaAna, svaAna, svaAna, s$amaAyaujya
yayaU è&X#pair"cC$d"A:
tac chrutvaika-dhiyo gopäù
sädhu sädhv iti vädinaù
vrajän svän svän samäyujya
yayü rüòha-paricchadäù
SYNONYMS
tat çrutvä—hearing this advice of Upänanda's; eka-dhiyaù—voting
unanimously; gopäù—all the cowherd men; sädhu sädhu—very nice, very nice;
iti—thus; vädinaù—speaking, declaring; vrajän—cows; svän svän—own
respective; samäyujya—assembling; yayuù—started; rüòha-paricchadäù—all
the dresses and paraphernalia having been kept on the carts.
TRANSLATION
Upon hearing this advice from Upananda, the cowherd men unanimously
agreed. "Very nice," they said. "Very nice." Thus they sorted out their
household affairs, placed their clothing and other paraphernalia on the carts,
and immediately started for Våndävana.
TEXTS 31-32
va{Ü"Ana, baAlaAna, iñyaAe r"Ajana,
s$avaAeRpak(r"NAAina ca
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
732
@na:svaAr"Aepya gAAepaAlaA
yaÔaA @AÔazAr"As$anaA:
gAAeDanaAina paur"s$k{(tya
Za{"ËÿANyaApaUyaR s$avaRta:
taUyaRGaAeSaeNA mah"taA
yayau: s$ah"paur"Aeih"taA:
våddhän bälän striyo räjan
sarvopakaraëäni ca
anaùsv äropya gopälä
yattä ätta-çaräsanäù
godhanäni puraskåtya
çåìgäëy äpürya sarvataù
türya-ghoñeëa mahatä
yayuù saha-purohitäù
SYNONYMS
våddhän—first all the old men; bälän—children; striyaù—women; räjan—O
King Parékñit; sarva-upakaraëäni ca—then all sorts of necessities and whatever
belongings they had; anaùsu—on the bullock carts; äropya—keeping;
gopäläù—all the cowherd men; yattäù—with great care;
ätta-çara-asanäù—fully equipped with arrows and bows; go-dhanäni—all the
cows; puraskåtya—keeping in front; çåìgäëi—bugles or horns;
äpürya—vibrating; sarvataù—all around;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
türya-ghoñeëa—with the resounding
of the bugles; mahatä—loud; yayuù—started; saha-purohitäù—with the priests.
TRANSLATION
733
Keeping all the old men, women, children and household paraphernalia on
the bullock carts and keeping all the cows in front, the cowherd men picked up
their bows and arrows with great care and sounded bugles made of horn. O King
Parékñit, in this way, with bugles vibrating all around, the cowherd men,
accompanied by their priests, began their journey.
PURPORT
In this connection it is to be noted that although the inhabitants of Gokula
were mostly cowherd men and cultivators, they knew how to defend
themselves from danger and how to give protection to the women, the old
men, the cows and the children, as well as to the brahminical purohitas.
TEXT 33
gAAepyaAe è&X#r"TaA naU¥aku(
caku(Çÿmak(Antaya:
k{(SNAlaIlaA jagAu: ‘aItyaA
inaSk(k(NQ$Ya: s$auvaAs$as$a:
gopyo rüòha-rathä nütnakuca-
kuìkuma-käntayaù
kåñëa-lélä jaguù prétyä
niñka-kaëöhyaù suväsasaù
SYNONYMS
gopyaù—all the cowherd women; rüòha-rathäù—while riding on the bullock
carts; nütna-kuca-kuìkuma-käntayaù—their bodies, especially their breasts,
were decorated with fresh kuìkuma; kåñëa-léläù—the pastimes of Kåñëa;
jaguù—they chanted;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
prétyä—with great pleasure; niñka-kaëöhyaù—decorated
734
with lockets on their necks; su-väsasaù—very well dressed.
TRANSLATION
The cowherd women, riding on the bullock carts, were dressed very nicely
with excellent garments, and their bodies, especially their breasts, were
decorated with fresh kuìkuma powder. As they rode, they began to chant with
great pleasure the pastimes of Kåñëa.
TEXT 34
taTaA yazAAed"Ar"Aeih"NyaAva,
WkM( zAk(q%maAisTatae
re"jatau: k{(SNAr"AmaAByaAM
tatk(TaA™avaNAAets$auke(
tathä yaçodä-rohiëyäv
ekaà çakaöam ästhite
rejatuù kåñëa-rämäbhyäà
tat-kathä-çravaëotsuke
SYNONYMS
tathä—as well as; yaçodä-rohiëyau—both mother Yaçodä and mother Rohiëé;
ekam çakaöam—on one bullock cart; ästhite—seated; rejatuù—very beautiful;
kåñëa-rämäbhyäm—Kåñëa and Balaräma, along with Their mothers;
tat-kathä—of the pastimes of Kåñëa and Balaräma; çravaëa-utsuke—being
situated in hearing with great transcendental pleasure.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
735
Thus hearing about the pastimes of Kåñëa and Balaräma with great pleasure,
mother Yaçodä and Rohiëédevé, so as not to be separated from Kåñëa and
Balaräma for even a moment, got up with Them on one bullock cart. In this
situation, they all looked very beautiful.
PURPORT
It appears that mother Yaçodä and Rohiëé could not be separated from
Kåñëa and Balaräma even for a moment. They used to pass their time either by
taking care of Kåñëa and Balaräma or by chanting about Their pastimes. Thus
mother Yaçodä and Rohiëé looked very beautiful.
TEXT 35
va{nd"AvanaM s$am‘aivazya
s$avaRk(Alas$auKaAvah"ma,
ta‡a ca‚u(˜aRjaAvaAs$aM
zAk(qE%r"DaRcan‰"vata,
våndävanaà sampraviçya
sarva-käla-sukhävaham
tatra cakrur vrajäväsaà
çakaöair ardha-candravat
SYNONYMS
våndävanam—the sacred place by the name Våndävana; sampraviçya—after
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
sarva-käla-sukha-ävaham—where in all seasons it is pleasing to live;
tatra—there; cakruù—they made; vraja-äväsam—inhabitation of Vraja;
çakaöaiù—by the bullock carts; ardha-candravat—making a semicircle like a
736
half moon.
TRANSLATION
In this way they entered Våndävana, where it is always pleasing to live in all
seasons. They made a temporary place to inhabit by placing their bullock carts
around them in the shape of a half moon.
PURPORT
As stated in the Viñëu Puräëa:
çakaöé-väöa-paryantaç
candrärdha-kära-saàsthite
And as stated in the Hari-vaàça:
kaëöakébhiù pravåddhäbhis
tathä kaëöakébhir drumaiù
nikhätocchrita-çäkhäbhir
abhiguptaà samantataù
There was no need to make fences all around. One side was already defended
by thorn trees, and thus the thorn trees, the bullock carts and the animals
encircled the inhabitants in their temporary residence.
TEXT 36
va{nd"AvanaM gAAevaDaRnaM
yamaunaApauilanaAina ca
vaIºyaAs$aIäu"ÔamaA ‘aItaI
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
737
r"AmamaADavayaAena{Rpa
våndävanaà govardhanaà
yamunä-pulinäni ca
vékñyäséd uttamä prété
räma-mädhavayor nåpa
SYNONYMS
våndävanam—the place known as Våndävana; govardhanam—along with
Govardhana Hill; yamunä-pulinäni ca—and the banks of the River Yamunä;
vékñya—seeing this situation; äsét—remained or was enjoyed; uttamä
prété—first-class pleasure; räma-mädhavayoù—of Kåñëa and Balaräma;
nåpa—O King Parékñit.
TRANSLATION
O King Parékñit, when Räma and Kåñëa saw Våndävana, Govardhana and
the banks of the River Yamunä, They both enjoyed great pleasure.
TEXT 37
WvaM ˜ajaAEk(s$aAM ‘aIitaM
yacC$ntaAE baAlacaeií"taE:
k(lavaAfyaE: svak(Alaena
vats$apaAlaAE baBaUvatau:
evaà vrajaukasäà prétià
yacchantau bäla-ceñöitaiù
kala-väkyaiù sva-kälena
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
738
vatsa-pälau babhüvatuù
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; vraja-okasäm—to all the inhabitants of Vraja;
prétim—pleasure; yacchantau—giving; bäla-ceñöitaiù—by the activities and
pastimes of childhood; kala-väkyaiù—and by very sweet broken language;
sva-kälena—in due course of time; vatsa-pälau—to take care of the calves;
babhüvatuù—were grown up.
TRANSLATION
In this way, Kåñëa and Balaräma, acting like small boys and talking in
half-broken language, gave transcendental pleasure to all the inhabitants of
Vraja. In due course of time, They became old enough to take care of the
calves.
PURPORT
As soon as Kåñëa and Balaräma were a little grown up, They were meant for
taking care of the calves. Although born of a very well-to-do family, They still
had to take care of the calves. This was the system of education. Those who
were not born in brähmaëa families were not meant for academic education.
The brähmaëas were trained in a literary, academic education, the kñatriyas
were trained to take care of the state, and the vaiçyas learned how to cultivate
the land and take care of the cows and calves. There was no need to waste time
going to school to be falsely educated and later increase the numbers of the
unemployed. Kåñëa and Balaräma taught us by Their personal behavior. Kåñëa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
took care of the cows and played His flute, and Balaräma took care of
agricultural activities with a plow in His hand.
TEXT 38
739
@ivaäU"re" ˜ajaBauva:
s$ah" gAAepaAlad"Ar"kE(:
caAr"yaAmaAs$atauvaRts$aAna,
naAnaA‚(Lx"Apair"cC$d"AE
avidüre vraja-bhuvaù
saha gopäla-därakaiù
cärayäm äsatur vatsän
nänä-kréòä-paricchadau
SYNONYMS
avidüre—not very far from the residential quarters of the Vrajaväsés;
vraja-bhuvaù—from the land known as Vraja; saha gopäla-därakaiù—with
other boys of the same profession (cowherd boys); cärayäm äsatuù—tended;
vatsän—the small calves; nänä—various; kréòä—sporting;
paricchadau—dressed very nicely in different ways and equipped with
implements.
TRANSLATION
Not far away from Their residential quarters, both Kåñëa and Balaräma,
equipped with all kinds of playthings, played with other cowherd boys and
began to tend the small calves.
TEXTS 39-40
¸(icaã"Ad"yataAe vaeNAuM
ºaepaNAE: iºapata: ¸(icata,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
740
¸(icatpaAdE": ik(iÆÿNAIiBa:
¸(icatk{(i‡amagAAeva{SaE:
va{SaAyamaANAAE nadR"ntaAE
yauyauDaAtae par"s$par"ma,
@nauk{(tya ç&taEjaRntaUMzA,
caer"tau: ‘aAk{(taAE yaTaA
kvacid vädayato veëuà
kñepaëaiù kñipataù kvacit
kvacit pädaiù kiìkiëébhiù
kvacit kåtrima-go-våñaiù
våñäyamäëau nardantau
yuyudhäte parasparam
anukåtya rutair jantüàç
ceratuù präkåtau yathä
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; vädayataù—blowing; veëum—on the flute;
kñepaëaiù—with a device of rope for throwing; kñipataù—throwing stones to
get fruit; kvacit—sometimes; kvacit pädaiù—sometimes with the legs;
kiìkiëébhiù—with the sound of ankle bells; kvacit—sometimes;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
kåtrima-go-våñaiù—by becoming artificial cows and bulls;
våñäyamäëau—imitating the animals; nardantau—roaring loudly;
yuyudhäte—They both used to fight; parasparam—with one another;
anukåtya—imitating; rutaiù—by resounding; jantün—all the animals;
ceratuù—They used to wander; präkåtau—two ordinary human children;
yathä—like.
741
TRANSLATION
Sometimes Kåñëa and Balaräma would play on Their flutes, sometimes They
would throw ropes and stones devised for getting fruits from the trees,
sometimes They would throw only stones, and sometimes, Their ankle bells
tinkling, They would play football with fruits like bael and ämalaké. Sometimes
They would cover Themselves with blankets and imitate cows and bulls and
fight with one another, roaring loudly, and sometimes They would imitate the
voices of the animals. In this way They enjoyed sporting, exactly like two
ordinary human children.
PURPORT
Våndävana is full of peacocks. Küjat-kokila-haàsa-särasa-gaëäkérëe
mayüräkule. The Våndävana forest is always full of cuckoos, ducks, swans,
peacocks, cranes and also monkeys, bulls and cows. So Kåñëa and Balaräma
used to imitate the sounds of these animals and enjoy sporting.
TEXT 41
k(d"AicaâmaunaAtaIre"
vats$aAMêAr"yataAe: svakE(:
vayasyaE: k{(SNAbalayaAer,"
ijaGaAMs$audE="tya @AgAmata,
kadäcid yamunä-tére
vatsäàç cärayatoù svakaiù
vayasyaiù kåñëa-balayor
jighäàsur daitya ägamat
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
742
SYNONYMS
kadäcit—sometimes; yamunä-tére—on the bank of the Yamunä; vatsän—the
calves; cärayatoù—when They were tending; svakaiù—Their own;
vayasyaiù—with other playmates; kåñëa-balayoù—both Kåñëa and Balaräma;
jighäàsuù—desiring to kill Them; daityaù—another demon; ägamat—reached
there.
TRANSLATION
One day while Räma and Kåñëa, along with Their playmates, were tending
the calves on the bank of the River Yamunä, another demon arrived there,
desiring to kill Them.
TEXT 42
taM vats$aè&ipaNAM vaIºya
vats$ayaUTagAtaM h"ir":
d"zARyana, balade"vaAya
zAnaEmauRgDa wvaAs$ad"ta,
taà vatsa-rüpiëaà vékñya
vatsa-yütha-gataà hariù
darçayan baladeväya
çanair mugdha iväsadat
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
tam—unto the demon; vatsa-rüpiëam—assuming the form of a calf;
vékñya—seeing; vatsa-yütha-gatam—when the demon entered the group of all
743
the other calves; hariù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa;
darçayan—indicating; baladeväya—unto Baladeva; çanaiù—very slowly;
mugdhaù iva—as if He did not understand anything; äsadat—came near the
demon.
TRANSLATION
When the Supreme Personality of Godhead saw that the demon had assumed
the form of a calf and entered among the groups of other calves, He pointed out
to Baladeva, "Here is another demon." Then He very slowly approached the
demon, as if He did not understand the demon's intentions.
PURPORT
The import of the words mugdha iva is that although Kåñëa knows
everything, here He pretended that He did not understand why the demon
had entered among the calves, and He informed Baladeva by a sign.
TEXT 43
gA{h"ItvaApar"paAd"AByaAM
s$ah"laAx.~gAUlamacyauta:
”aAmaiyatvaA k(ipatTaAƒae
‘aAih"NAAeÕ"tajaIivatama,
s$a k(ipatTaEmaRh"Ak(Aya:
paAtyamaAnaE: papaAta h"
gåhétväpara-pädäbhyäà
saha-läìgülam acyutaù
bhrämayitvä kapitthägre
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
744
prähiëod gata-jévitam
sa kapitthair mahä-käyaù
pätyamänaiù papäta ha
SYNONYMS
gåhétvä—capturing; apara-pädäbhyäm—with the hind legs; saha—along with;
läìgülam—the tail; acyutaù—Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
bhrämayitvä—twirling around very severely; kapittha-agre—on the top of a
kapittha tree; prähiëot—threw him; gata-jévitam—lifeless body; saù—that
demon; kapitthaiù—with the kapittha trees; mahä-käyaù—assumed a great
body; pätyamänaiù—and while the tree fell down; papäta ha—he fell dead on
the ground.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, Çré Kåñëa caught the demon by the hind legs and tail, twirled the
demon's whole body very strongly until the demon was dead, and threw him
into the top of a kapittha tree, which then fell down, along with the body of the
demon, who had assumed a great form.
PURPORT
Kåñëa killed the demon in such a way as to get the kapittha fruits to fall so
that He and Balaräma and the other boys could take advantage of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
opportunity to eat them. The kapittha is sometimes called kñatbelphala. The
pulp of this fruit is very palatable. It is sweet and sour, and everyone likes it.
TEXT 44
taM vaIºya ivaismataA baAlaA:
745
zAzAMs$au: s$aADau s$aAiDvaita
de"vaAê pair"s$antauí"A
baBaUvau: pauSpavaiSaRNA:
taà vékñya vismitä bäläù
çaçaàsuù sädhu sädhv iti
deväç ca parisantuñöä
babhüvuù puñpa-varñiëaù
SYNONYMS
tam—this incident; vékñya—observing; vismitäù—very much astonished;
bäläù—all the other boys; çaçaàsuù—praised highly; sädhu sädhu
iti—exclaiming, "Very good, very good"; deväù ca—and all the demigods from
the heavenly planets; parisantuñöäù—being very much satisfied;
babhüvuù—became; puñpa-varñiëaù—showered flowers on Kåñëa.
TRANSLATION
Upon seeing the dead body of the demon, all the cowherd boys exclaimed,
"Well done, Kåñëa! Very good, very good! Thank You." In the upper planetary
system, all the demigods were pleased, and therefore they showered flowers on
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 45
taAE vats$apaAlak(AE BaUtvaA
s$avaRlaAekE(k(paAlak(AE
s$a‘aAtar"AzAAE gAAevats$aAMzA,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
746
caAr"yantaAE ivacaer"tau:
tau vatsa-pälakau bhütvä
sarva-lokaika-pälakau
saprätar-äçau go-vatsäàç
cärayantau viceratuù
SYNONYMS
tau—Kåñëa and Balaräma; vatsa-pälakau—as if taking care of the calves;
bhütvä—so becoming; sarva-loka-eka-pälakau—although They are the
maintainers of all living beings throughout the whole universe;
sa-prätaù-äçau—finishing breakfast in the morning; go-vatsän—all the calves;
cärayantau—tending; viceratuù—wandered here and there.
TRANSLATION
After the killing of the demon, Kåñëa and Balaräma finished Their breakfast
in the morning, and while continuing to take care of the calves, They wandered
here and there. Kåñëa and Balaräma, the Supreme Personalities of Godhead,
who maintain the entire creation, now took charge of the calves as if cowherd
boys.
PURPORT
Pariträëäya sädhünäà vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm [Bg. 4.8]. Kåñëa's daily business
here in this material world was to kill the duñkåtés. This did not hamper His
daily affairs, for it was routine work. While He tended the calves on the bank
of the River Yamunä, two or three incidents took place every day, and
although these were serious, killing the demons one after another appeared to
be His daily routine work.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
747
TEXT 46
svaM svaM vats$aku(laM s$avaeR
paAyaiyaSyanta Wk(d"A
gAtvaA jalaAzAyaAByaAzAM
paAyaiyatvaA papaujaRlama,
svaà svaà vatsa-kulaà sarve
päyayiñyanta ekadä
gatvä jaläçayäbhyäçaà
päyayitvä papur jalam
SYNONYMS
svam svam—own respective; vatsa-kulam—the group of calves; sarve—all the
boys and Kåñëa and Balaräma; päyayiñyantaù—desiring to have them drink
water; ekadä—one day; gatvä—going; jala-äçaya-abhyäçam—near the water
tank; päyayitvä—after allowing the animals to drink water; papuù jalam—they
also drank water.
TRANSLATION
One day all the boys, including Kåñëa and Balaräma, each boy taking his
own group of calves, brought the calves to a reservoir of water, desiring to allow
them to drink. After the animals drank water, the boys drank water there also.
TEXT 47
tae ta‡a d"ä{"zAubaARlaA
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
748
ta‡as$auvaR†ainaiBaRªaM
igAre": Za{"Ëÿimava cyautama,
te tatra dadåçur bälä
mahä-sattvam avasthitam
tatrasur vajra-nirbhinnaà
gireù çåìgam iva cyutam
SYNONYMS
te—they; tatra—there; dadåçuù—observed; bäläù—all the boys;
mahä-sattvam—a gigantic body; avasthitam—situated; tatrasuù—became
afraid; vajra-nirbhinnam—broken by a thunderbolt; gireù çåìgam—the peak of
a mountain; iva—like; cyutam—fallen there.
TRANSLATION
Right by the reservoir, the boys saw a gigantic body resembling a mountain
peak broken and struck down by a thunderbolt. They were afraid even to see
such a huge living being.
TEXT 48
s$a vaE bak(Ae naAma mah"Ana,
@s$aur"Ae bak(è&paDa{k,(
@AgAtya s$ah"s$aA k{(SNAM
taIºNAtauNx"Ae'ƒas$aß"laI
sa vai bako näma mahän
asuro baka-rüpa-dhåk
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
749
ägatya sahasä kåñëaà
tékñëa-tuëòo 'grasad balé
SYNONYMS
saù—that creature; vai—indeed; bakaù näma—by the name Bakäsura; mahän
asuraù—a great, gigantic demon; baka-rüpa-dhåk—assumed the bodily shape
of a big duck; ägatya—coming there; sahasä—all of a sudden; kåñëam—Kåñëa;
tékñëa-tuëòaù—sharp beak; agrasat—swallowed; balé—very powerful.
TRANSLATION
That great-bodied demon was named Bakäsura. He had assumed the body of
a duck with a very sharp beak. Having come there, he immediately swallowed
Kåñëa.
TEXT 49
k{(SNAM mah"Abak(ƒastaM
ä{"î"A r"AmaAd"yaAe'BaRk(A:
baBaUvauir"in‰"yaANAIva
ivanaA ‘aANAM ivacaetas$a:
kåñëaà mahä-baka-grastaà
dåñövä rämädayo 'rbhakäù
babhüvur indriyäëéva
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
SYNONYMS
kåñëam—unto Kåñëa; mahä-baka-grastam—swallowed by the great duck;
750
dåñövä—seeing this incident; räma-ädayaù arbhakäù—all the other boys,
headed by Balaräma; babhüvuù—became overwhelmed; indriyäëi—senses;
iva—like; vinä—without; präëam—life; vicetasaù—very much bewildered,
almost unconscious.
TRANSLATION
When Balaräma and the other boys saw that Kåñëa had been devoured by
the gigantic duck, they became almost unconscious, like senses without life.
PURPORT
Although Balaräma can do everything, because of intense affection for His
brother He was momentarily bewildered. A similar thing is stated to have
happened in connection with rukmiëé-haraëa, the kidnapping of Rukmiëé.
When Kåñëa, after kidnapping Rukmiëé, was attacked by all the kings,
Rukmiëé was momentarily bewildered, until the Lord took the proper steps.
TEXT 50
taM taAlaumaUlaM ‘ad"h"ntamai¢avaä,"
gAAepaAlas$aUnauM ipatarM" jagAÖ"r"Ae:
cacC$dR" s$aâAe'itaç&SaAºataM bak(s$a,
tauNxe"na h"ntauM paunar"Byapaâta
taà tälu-mülaà pradahantam agnivad
gopäla-sünuà pitaraà jagad-guroù
caccharda sadyo 'tiruñäkñataà bakas
tuëòena hantuà punar abhyapadyata
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
751
SYNONYMS
tam—Kåñëa; tälu-mülam—the root of the throat; pradahantam—burning;
agni-vat—like fire; gopäla-sünum—Kåñëa, the son of a cowherd man;
pitaram—the father; jagat-guroù—of Lord Brahmä; caccharda—got out of his
mouth; sadyaù—immediately; ati-ruñä—with great anger; akñatam—without
being hurt; bakaù—Bakäsura; tuëòena—with his sharp beak; hantum—to kill;
punaù—again; abhyapadyata—endeavored.
TRANSLATION
Kåñëa, who was the father of Lord Brahmä but who was acting as the son of
a cowherd man, became like fire, burning the root of the demon's throat, and
the demon Bakäsura immediately disgorged Him. When the demon saw that
Kåñëa, although having been swallowed, was unharmed, he immediately
attacked Kåñëa again with his sharp beak.
PURPORT
Although Kåñëa is always as soft as a lotus, within the throat of Bakäsura
He created a burning sensation of being hotter than fire. Although Kåñëa's
whole body is sweeter than sugar candy, Bakäsura tasted bitterness and
therefore immediately vomited Kåñëa up. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (4.11), ye
yathä mäà prapadyante täàs tathaiva bhajämy aham. When Kåñëa is accepted
as an enemy, He becomes the most intolerable object for the nondevotee, who
cannot tolerate Kåñëa within or without. Here this is shown by the example of
Bakäsura.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
TEXT 51
tamaApatantaM s$a inagA{÷ tauNx"yaAer,"
752
d"AeByaA< bakM( kM(s$as$aKaM s$ataAM paita:
pazyats$au baAlaeSau d"d"Ar" laIlayaA
maud"Avah"Ae vaIr"NAvaiÚ"vaAEk(s$aAma,
tam äpatantaà sa nigåhya tuëòayor
dorbhyäà bakaà kaàsa-sakhaà satäà patiù
paçyatsu bäleñu dadära lélayä
mudävaho véraëavad divaukasäm
SYNONYMS
tam—unto Bakäsura; äpatantam—again endeavoring to attack Him;
saù—Lord Kåñëa; nigåhya—capturing; tuëòayoù—by the beak;
dorbhyäm—with His arms; bakam—Bakäsura; kaàsa-sakham—who was the
friend and associate of Kaàsa; satäm patiù—Lord Kåñëa, the master of the
Vaiñëavas; paçyatsu—while observing; bäleñu—all the cowherd boys;
dadära—bifurcated; lélayä—very easily; mudä-ävahaù—this action was very
much pleasing; véraëa-vat—like the grass called véraëa (as it is bifurcated);
divaukasäm—to all the denizens of heaven.
TRANSLATION
When Kåñëa, the leader of the Vaiñëavas, saw that the demon Bakäsura, the
friend of Kaàsa, was endeavoring to attack Him, with His arms He captured
the demon by the two halves of the beak, and in the presence of all the cowherd
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
cated him, as a child splits a blade of véraëa grass.
By thus killing the demon, Kåñëa very much pleased the denizens of heaven.
TEXT 52
753
tad"A bak(Air$M s$aur"laAek(vaAis$ana:
s$amaAik(r"ªand"namaiéak(Aid"iBa:
s$amaIix"re" caAnak(zAÊÿs$aMstavaEs$a,
taã"Iºya gAAepaAlas$autaA ivais$aismare"
tadä bakärià sura-loka-väsinaù
samäkiran nandana-mallikädibhiù
saméòire cänaka-çaìkha-saàstavais
tad vékñya gopäla-sutä visismire
SYNONYMS
tadä—at that time; baka-arim—unto the enemy of Bakäsura;
sura-loka-väsinaù—the celestial denizens of the higher planets;
samäkiran—showered flowers; nandana-mallikä-ädibhiù—with such flowers as
mallikä, which are grown in Nandana-känana; saméòire—also congratulated
Him; ca—and; änaka-çaìkha-saàstavaiù—by celestial kettledrums and
conchshells, accompanied with prayers; tat vékñya—by seeing this;
gopäla-sutäù—the cowherd boys; visismire—were struck with wonder.
TRANSLATION
At that time, the celestial denizens of the higher planetary system showered
mallikä-puñpa, flowers grown in Nandana-känana, upon Kåñëa, the enemy of
Bakäsura. They also congratulated Him by sounding celestial kettledrums and
conchshells and by offering prayers. Seeing this, the cowherd boys were struck
with wonder.
TEXT 53
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
754
maulM( bak(AsyaAäu"palaBya baAlak(A
r"AmaAd"ya: ‘aANAimavaein‰"yaAe gANA:
sTaAnaAgAtaM taM pair"r"Bya inava{RtaA:
‘aNAIya vats$aAna, ˜ajamaetya taÀagAu:
muktaà bakäsyäd upalabhya bälakä
rämädayaù präëam ivendriyo gaëaù
sthänägataà taà parirabhya nirvåtäù
praëéya vatsän vrajam etya taj jaguù
SYNONYMS
muktam—thus released; baka-äsyät—from the mouth of Bakäsura;
upalabhya—getting back; bälakäù—all the boys, the playmates;
räma-ädayaù—headed by Balaräma; präëam—life; iva—like; indriyaù—senses;
gaëaù—all of them; sthäna-ägatam—going to their own place; tam—unto
Kåñëa; parirabhya—embracing; nirvåtäù—being freed from the danger;
praëéya—after collecting; vatsän—all the calves; vrajam etya—returning to
Vrajabhümi; tat jaguù—loudly declared the incident.
TRANSLATION
Just as the senses are pacified when consciousness and life return, so when
Kåñëa was freed from this danger, all the boys, including Balaräma, thought
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
that their life had been restored. They embraced Kåñëa in good consciousness,
and then they collected their own calves and returned to Vrajabhümi, where
they declared the incident loudly.
PURPORT
It was the practice of the inhabitants of Vrajabhümi to compose poetry
755
about the incidents that occurred in the forest when Kåñëa performed His
different activities of killing the asuras. They would compose all the stories in
poetry or have this done by professional poets, and then they would sing about
these incidents. Thus it is written here that the boys sang very loudly.
TEXT 54
™autvaA taiã"ismataA gAAepaA
gAAepyaêAitai‘ayaAä{"taA:
‘aetyaAgAtaimavaAets$aufyaAä,"
Weºanta ta{iSataeºaNAA:
çrutvä tad vismitä gopä
gopyaç cätipriyädåtäù
pretyägatam ivotsukyäd
aikñanta tåñitekñaëäù
SYNONYMS
çrutvä—after hearing; tat—these incidents; vismitäù—being struck with
wonder; gopäù—the cowherd men; gopyaù ca—and their respective wives;
ati-priya-ädåtäù—received the news with great transcendental pleasure; pretya
ägatam iva—thought that it was as if the boys had returned from death;
utsukyät—with great eagerness; aikñanta—began to look upon the boys;
tåñita-ékñaëäù—with full satisfaction, they did not want to turn their eyes from
Kåñëa and the boys.
TRANSLATION
When the cowherd men and women heard about the killing of Bakäsura in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
756
the forest, they were very much astonished. Upon seeing Kåñëa and hearing the
story, they received Kåñëa very eagerly, thinking that Kåñëa and the other boys
had returned from the mouth of death. Thus they looked upon Kåñëa and the
boys with silent eyes, not wanting to turn their eyes aside now that the boys
were safe.
PURPORT
Because of intense love for Kåñëa, the cowherd men and women simply
remained silent, thinking of how Kåñëa and the boys had been saved. The
cowherd men and women looked upon Kåñëa and the boys and did not desire
to turn their eyes aside.
TEXT 55
@h"Ae bataAsya baAlasya
bah"vaAe ma{tyavaAe'Bavana,
@pyaAs$aIiã"i‘ayaM taeSaAM
k{(taM paUva< yataAe Bayama,
aho batäsya bälasya
bahavo måtyavo 'bhavan
apy äséd vipriyaà teñäà
kåtaà pürvaà yato bhayam
SYNONYMS
aho bata—it is very astonishing; asya—of this; bälasya—Kåñëa;
bahavaù—many, many; måtyavaù—causes of death; abhavan—appeared;
api—still; äsét
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—there was; vipriyam—the cause of death; teñäm—of them;
kåtam—done; pürvam—formerly; yataù—from which; bhayam—there was fear
757
of death.
TRANSLATION
The cowherd men, headed by Nanda Mahäräja, began to contemplate: It is
very astonishing that although this boy Kåñëa has many times faced many
varied causes of death, by the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead it
was these causes of fear that were killed, instead of Him.
PURPORT
The cowherd men innocently thought, "Because our Kåñëa is innocent, the
causes of death that appeared before Him were themselves killed instead of
Kåñëa. This is the greatest grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead."
TEXT 56
@TaApyaiBaBavantyaenaM
naEva tae GaAer"d"zARnaA:
ijaGaAMs$ayaEnamaAs$aAâ
nazyantya¢aAE pataËÿvata,
athäpy abhibhavanty enaà
naiva te ghora-darçanäù
jighäàsayainam äsädya
naçyanty agnau pataìgavat
SYNONYMS
atha api—although they come to attack; abhibhavanti—they are able to kill;
enam—this boy; na—not; eva—certainly; te—all of them;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
758
ghora-darçanäù—very fierce looking; jighäàsayä—because of envy;
enam—unto Kåñëa; äsädya—approaching; naçyanti—are vanquished (death
occurs to the aggressor); agnau—in fire; pataìga-vat—like flies.
TRANSLATION
Although the causes of death, the daityas, were very fierce, they could not
kill this boy Kåñëa. Rather, because they came to kill innocent boys, as soon as
they approached they themselves were killed, exactly like flies attacking a fire.
PURPORT
Nanda Mahäräja innocently thought, "Perhaps this boy Kåñëa formerly
killed all these demons, and therefore in this life they are envious and are
attacking Him. But Kåñëa is a fire, and they are flies, and in a fight between
fire and flies, the fire is always victorious." Fighting is always taking place
between the demons and the power of the Supreme Personality. Pariträëäya
sädhünäà vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm (Bg. 4.8). Anyone who is against the control of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead must be killed, life after life. Ordinary
living beings are subject to karma, but the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
always victorious over the demons.
TEXT 57
@h"Ae “aöivad"AM vaAcaAe
naAs$atyaA: s$ainta k(ihR"icata,
gAgAAeR yad"Ah" BagAvaAna,
@nvaBaAiva taTaEva tata,
aho brahma-vidäà väco
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
759
näsatyäù santi karhicit
gargo yad äha bhagavän
anvabhävi tathaiva tat
SYNONYMS
aho—how wonderful it is; brahma-vidäm—of persons who have full knowledge
of Brahman, transcendence; väcaù—the words; na—never; asatyäù—untruth;
santi—become; karhicit—at any time; gargaù—Gargamuni; yat—whatever;
äha—predicted; bhagavän—Gargamuni, the most powerful; anvabhävi—is
exactly happening; tathä eva—as; tat—that.
TRANSLATION
The words of persons in full knowledge of Brahman never become untrue. It
is very wonderful that whatever Gargamuni predicted we are now actually
experiencing in all detail.
PURPORT
The purpose of human life is indicated in the Brahma-sütra: athäto brahma
jijïäsä. To make one's life perfect—in the past, present and future—one must
learn about Brahman. Because of intense affection, Nanda Mahäräja could not
understand Kåñëa as He is. Gargamuni was able to know everything, past,
present and future, by studying the Vedas, but Nanda Mahäräja could not
understand Kåñëa directly. Because of his intense love for Kåñëa, he forgot
who Kåñëa was and could not understand Kåñëa's potency. Although
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Näräyaëa Himself, Gargamuni did not disclose this. Thus Nanda Mahäräja
appreciated the words of Gargamuni, but because of his deep affection he
could not understand who Kåñëa was, although Gargamuni had said that
Kåñëa's qualities would be exactly like those of Näräyaëa.
760
TEXT 58
wita nand"Ad"yaAe gAAepaA:
k{(SNAr"Amak(TaAM maud"A
ku(vaRntaAe r"mamaANAAê
naAivand"na, Bavavaed"naAma,
iti nandädayo gopäù
kåñëa-räma-kathäà mudä
kurvanto ramamäëäç ca
nävindan bhava-vedanäm
SYNONYMS
iti—in this way; nanda-ädayaù—all the cowherd men, headed by Nanda
Mahäräja; gopäù—cowherd men; kåñëa-räma-kathäm—narration of incidents
in connection with Bhagavän Kåñëa and Räma; mudä—in great
transcendental pleasure; kurvantaù—doing that; ramamäëäù ca—enjoyed life
and increased their affection for Kåñëa; na—not; avindan—perceived;
bhava-vedanäm—the tribulations of material existence.
TRANSLATION
In this way all the cowherd men, headed by Nanda Mahäräja, enjoyed topics
about the pastimes of Kåñëa and Balaräma with great transcendental pleasure,
and they could not even perceive material tribulations.
PURPORT
Here is an instruction about the result of studying or discussing the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
that appear in Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Sadyo hådy avarudhyate 'tra
761
kåtibhiù çuçrüñubhis tat-kñaëät (SB 1.1.2). Nanda Mahäräja and Yaçodä in
Våndävana appeared like ordinary persons of this material world, but they
never felt the tribulations of this world, although they sometimes met many
dangerous situations created by the demons. This is a practical example. If we
follow in the footsteps of Nanda Mahäräja and the gopas, we can all be happy
simply by discussing the activities of Kåñëa.
anarthopaçamaà säkñäd
bhakti-yogam adhokñaje
lokasyäjänato vidväàç
cakre sätvata-saàhitäm
(SB 1.7.6)
Vyäsadeva has given this literature so that everyone may understand one's
transcendental position simply by discussing bhägavata-kathä. Even at the
present moment, everyone everywhere can be happy and free from material
tribulations by following Çrémad-Bhägavatam. There is no need of austerities
and penances, which in this age are very difficult to perform. Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu has therefore declared, sarvätma-snapanaà paraà vijayate
çré-kåñëa-saìkértanam. By our Kåñëa consciousness movement, we are trying to
distribute Çrémad-Bhägavatam so that anyone in any part of the world can be
absorbed in the Kåñëa consciousness movement by chanting and hearing about
the activities of Kåñëa and be free from all material tribulations.
TEXT 59
WvaM ivah"ArE": k(AEmaArE":
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
k(AEmaArM" jah"tau˜aRjae
inalaAyanaE: s$aetaubanDaEr,"
762
makR(q%AetplavanaAid"iBa:
evaà vihäraiù kaumäraiù
kaumäraà jahatur vraje
niläyanaiù setu-bandhair
markaöotplavanädibhiù
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; vihäraiù—by different pastimes; kaumäraiù—childish;
kaumäram—the age of childhood; jahatuù—(Kåñëa and Balaräma) passed;
vraje—in Vrajabhümi; niläyanaiù—by playing hide-and-seek;
setu-bandhaiù—by constructing an artificial bridge on the ocean;
markaöa—like the monkeys; utplavana-ädibhiù—by jumping here and there,
etc.
TRANSLATION
In this way Kåñëa and Balaräma passed Their childhood age in Vrajabhümi
by engaging in activities of childish play, such as playing hide-and-seek,
constructing a make-believe bridge on the ocean, and jumping here and there
like monkeys.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Tenth Canto, Eleventh Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Childhood Pastimes of Kåñëa."
12. The Killing of the Demon Aghäsura
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
763
This chapter describes in detail Kåñëa's pastime of killing Aghäsura.
One day Kåñëa wanted to enjoy a picnic lunch within the forest, and
therefore He went out early into the forest with the other cowherd boys,
accompanied by their respective groups of calves. While they were enjoying
their picnic, Aghäsura, the younger brother of Pütanä and Bakäsura, appeared
there, desiring to kill Kåñëa and His companions. The demon, who had been
sent by Kaàsa, assumed the form of a python, expanding himself to a length of
eight miles and the height of a mountain, his mouth seeming to extend from
the surface of the earth to the heavenly planets. Having assumed this feature,
Aghäsura lay on the road. Kåñëa's friends, the cowherd boys, thought that the
demon's form was one of the beautiful spots of Våndävana. Thus they wanted
to enter within the mouth of this gigantic python. The gigantic figure of the
python became a subject for their sporting pleasure, and they began to laugh,
confident that even if this figure were dangerous, Kåñëa was there to protect
them. In this way, they proceeded toward the mouth of the gigantic figure.
Kåñëa knew everything about Aghäsura, and therefore He wanted to forbid
His friends to enter the demon's mouth, but in the meantime all the cowherd
boys, along with their groups of calves, entered the mouth of that gigantic
figure. Kåñëa was waiting outside, and Aghäsura was waiting for Kåñëa,
thinking that as soon as Kåñëa entered he would close his mouth so that
everyone would die. While waiting for Kåñëa, he refrained from swallowing
the boys. In the meantime, Kåñëa was thinking of how to save the boys and kill
Aghäsura. Thus He entered the mouth of the gigantic asura, and when He was
within the demon's mouth along with His friends, He expanded His body to
such an extent that the asura suffocated and died. After this, Kåñëa, by casting
His nectarean glance upon His friends, brought them back to life, and with
pleasure they all came out unhurt. Thus Kåñëa encouraged all the demigods,
and they expressed their pleasure and happiness. For a crooked, sinful person
there is no scope for säyujya-mukti, or becoming one with the effulgence of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Kåñëa, but because the Supreme Personality of Godhead entered the body of
764
Aghäsura, by His touch this demon got the opportunity to merge into the
existence of the Brahman effulgence and thus attain säyujya-mukti.
When this pastime was performed, Kåñëa was only five years old. One year
later, when He was six years old and He stepped into the paugaëòa age, this
pastime was disclosed to the inhabitants of Vraja. Parékñit Mahäräja inquired,
"Why is it that this pastime was disclosed only after one year and yet the
inhabitants of Vraja thought that it had been performed that very day?" With
this question, the Twelfth Chapter ends.
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
¸(icaã"naAzAAya manaAe d"Daä," ˜ajaAta,
‘aAta: s$amautTaAya vayasyavats$apaAna,
‘abaAeDayaHC+$Ëÿr"vaeNA caAç&NAA
ivainagARtaAe vats$apaur":s$ar"Ae h"ir":
çré-çuka uväca
kvacid vanäçäya mano dadhad vrajät
prätaù samutthäya vayasya-vatsapän
prabodhayaï chåìga-raveëa cäruëä
vinirgato vatsa-puraùsaro hariù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; kvacit—one day;
vana-äçäya—just to enjoy a picnic in the forest; manaù—mind; dadhat—gave
attention; vrajät—and went out of Vrajabhümi; prätaù—early in the morning;
samutthäya—waking up; vayasya-vatsa-pän—the cowherd boys and the calves;
prabodhayan—to get everyone to rise, waking up and informing them;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
765
çåìga-raveëa—by sounding the bugle made of horn; cäruëä—very beautiful;
vinirgataù—came out of Vrajabhümi; vatsa-puraùsaraù—keeping the
respective groups of calves in front; hariù—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: O King, one day Kåñëa decided to take His
breakfast as a picnic in the forest. Having risen early in the morning, He blew
His bugle made of horn and woke all the cowherd boys and calves with its
beautiful sound. Then Kåñëa and the boys, keeping their respective groups of
calves before them, proceeded from Vrajabhümi to the forest.
TEXT 2
taenaEva s$aAkM( pa{Tauk(A: s$ah"›azA:
iµagDaA: s$auizAgvae‡aivaSaANAvaeNAva:
svaAna, svaAna, s$ah"›aAepair"s$aÊÿYayaAinvataAna,
vats$aAna, paur"s$k{(tya ivainayaRyaumauRd"A
tenaiva säkaà påthukäù sahasraçaù
snigdhäù suçig-vetra-viñäëa-veëavaù
svän svän sahasropari-saìkhyayänvitän
vatsän puraskåtya viniryayur mudä
SYNONYMS
tena—Him; eva—indeed; säkam—accompanied by; påthukäù—the boys;
sahasraçaù—by the thousands; snigdhäù—very attractive; su—beautiful;
çik—lunch bags; vetra
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—sticks for controlling the calves; viñäëa—horn bugles;
766
veëavaù—flutes; svän svän—their own respective; sahasra-upari-saìkhyayä
anvitän—numbering over a thousand; vatsän—the calves;
puraù-kåtya—keeping in front; viniryayuù—they came out; mudä—with great
pleasure.
TRANSLATION
At that time, hundreds and thousands of cowherd boys came out of their
respective homes in Vrajabhümi and joined Kåñëa, keeping before them their
hundreds and thousands of groups of calves. The boys were very beautiful, and
they were equipped with lunch bags, bugles, flutes, and sticks for controlling
the calves.
TEXT 3
k{(SNAvats$aEr"s$aÊÿYaAtaEr,"
yaUTaIk{(tya svavats$ak(Ana,
caAr"yantaAe'BaRlaIlaAiBar,"
ivajaoeú"sta‡a ta‡a h"
kåñëa-vatsair asaìkhyätair
yüthé-kåtya sva-vatsakän
cärayanto 'rbha-léläbhir
vijahrus tatra tatra ha
SYNONYMS
kåñëa—of Lord Kåñëa; vatsaiù—along with the calves;
asaìkhyätaiù—unlimited; yüthé-kåtya—assembled them;
sva-vatsakän—personal calves; cärayantaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
arbha-léläbhiù—by
767
boyhood pastimes; vijahruù—enjoyed; tatra tatra—here and there;
ha—indeed.
TRANSLATION
Along with the cowherd boys and their own groups of calves, Kåñëa came
out with an unlimited number of calves assembled. Then all the boys began to
sport in the forest in a greatly playful spirit.
PURPORT
In this verse the words kåñëa-vatsair asaìkhyätaiù are significant. The word
asaìkhyäta means "unlimited." Kåñëa's calves were unlimited. We may speak of
hundreds, thousands, tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands, millions,
billions, trillions, tens of trillions, and so on, but when we go further to speak
of numbers impossible for us to count, we are speaking of unlimited numbers.
Such unlimited numbers are indicated here by the word asaìkhyätaiù. Kåñëa is
unlimited, His potency is unlimited, His cows and calves are unlimited, and
His space is unlimited. Therefore He is described in Bhagavad-gétä as
Parabrahman. The word brahman means "unlimited," and Kåñëa is the
Supreme Unlimited, Parabrahman. Therefore, we should not consider the
statements of this verse to be mythological. They are factual, but
inconceivable. Kåñëa can accommodate an unlimited number of calves and an
unlimited measurement of space. This is neither mythological nor false, but if
we study Kåñëa's potency with our limited knowledge, that potency will never
be possible to understand. Ataù çré-kåñëa-nämädi na bhaved grähyam indriyaiù
[Cc. Madhya 17.136]. Our senses cannot perceive how He could keep an
unlimited number of calves and cows and have unlimited space in which to do
so. But this is answered in the Båhad-bhägavatämåta:
evaà prabhoù priyänäà ca
dhämnaç ca samayasya ca
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
768
avicintya-prabhävatväd
atra kiïcin na durghaöam
Çré Sanätana Gosvämé, in the Båhad-bhägavatämåta, states that since
everything about Kåñëa is unlimited, nothing is impossible for Him. It is in this
sense that we have to understand this verse.
TEXT 4
P(la‘abaAlastavak(-
s$aumana:ipacC$DaAtauiBa:
k(AcagAuÃaAmaiNAsvaNARBaUiSataA
@pyaBaUSayana,
phala-prabäla-stavakasumanaù-
piccha-dhätubhiù
käca-guïjä-maëi-svarëabhüñitä
apy abhüñayan
SYNONYMS
phala—fruits from the forest; prabäla—green leaves; stavaka—bunches;
sumanaù—beautiful flowers; piccha—peacock feathers; dhätubhiù—very soft
and colorful minerals; käca—a kind of gem; guïjä—small conchshells;
maëi—pearls; svarëa—gold; bhüñitäù—although decorated; api abhüñayan—in
spite of being decorated by their mothers, the boys decorated themselves still
more with the above-mentioned articles.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
TRANSLATION
Although all these boys were already decorated by their mothers with
769
ornaments of käca, guïjä, pearls and gold, when they went into the forest they
further decorated themselves with fruits, green leaves, bunches of flowers,
peacock feathers and soft minerals.
TEXT 5
mauSNAntaAe'nyaAenyaizAfyaAd"Ina,
ÁaAtaAnaAr"A»a icaiºapau:
ta‡atyaAê paunaäUR"r"Aä,"
Das$antaê paunadR"äu":
muñëanto 'nyonya-çikyädén
jïätän äräc ca cikñipuù
tatratyäç ca punar düräd
dhasantaç ca punar daduù
SYNONYMS
muñëantaù—stealing; anyonya—from one another; çikya-ädén—lunch bags
and other belongings; jïätän—having been understood by the proprietor of
the bag; ärät ca—to a distant place; cikñipuù—threw away; tatratyäù ca—those
who were in that place also; punaù dürät—then again threw farther away;
hasantaù ca punaù daduù—when they saw the proprietor, they threw it farther
away and enjoyed laughing, and when the owner sometimes cried, his bag was
given to him again.
TRANSLATION
All the cowherd boys used to steal one another's lunch bags. When a boy
came to understand that his bag had been taken away, the other boys would
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
770
throw it farther away, to a more distant place, and those standing there would
throw it still farther. When the proprietor of the bag became disappointed, the
other boys would laugh, the proprietor would cry, and then the bag would be
returned.
PURPORT
This kind of playing and stealing among boys still exists even in the
material world because this kind of sporting pleasure is present in the spiritual
world, from which this idea of enjoyment emanates. Janmädy asya yataù [SB
1.1.1] (Vedänta-sütra 1.1.2). This same enjoyment is displayed by Kåñëa and His
associates in the spiritual world, but there the enjoyment is eternal, whereas
here, on the material platform, it is temporary; there the enjoyment is
brahman, whereas here the enjoyment is jaòa. The Kåñëa consciousness
movement is meant to train one how to transfer oneself from the jaòa to the
Brahman, because human life is meant for this purpose. Athäto brahma jijïäsä
(Vedänta-sütra 1.1.1). Kåñëa comes down to teach us how we can enjoy with
Him on the spiritual platform, in the spiritual world. Not only does He come,
but He personally displays His pastimes in Våndävana and attracts people to
spiritual enjoyment.
TEXT 6
yaid" äU"rM" gAta: k{(SNAAe
vanazAAeBaeºaNAAya tama,
@hM" paUvaRmahM" paUvaRma,
wita s$aMs$pa{zya re"imare"
yadi düraà gataù kåñëo
vana-çobhekñaëäya tam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
771
ahaà pürvam ahaà pürvam
iti saàspåçya remire
SYNONYMS
yadi—if; düram—to a distant place; gataù—went; kåñëaù—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; vana-çobha—the beauty of the forest; ékñaëäya—for
visiting and enjoying; tam—unto Kåñëa; aham—I; pürvam—first; aham—I;
pürvam—first; iti—in this way; saàspåçya—by touching Him; remire—they
enjoyed life.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes Kåñëa would go to a somewhat distant place to see the beauty of
the forest. Then all the other boys would run to accompany Him, each one
saying, "I shall be the first to run and touch Kåñëa! I shall touch Kåñëa first!"
In this way they enjoyed life by repeatedly touching Kåñëa.
TEXTS 7-11
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
ke(icaãe"NAUna, vaAd"yantaAe
DmaAnta: Za{"ËÿAiNA ke(cana
ke(icaà{"ËEÿ: ‘agAAyanta:
kU(janta: k(Aeik(laE: pare"
ivacC$AyaAiBa: ‘aDaAvantaAe
gAcC$nta: s$aADauhM"s$akE(:
bakE(ç&paivazAntaê
772
na{tyantaê k(laAipaiBa:
ivak(SaRnta: k(LzAbaAlaAna,
@Ar"Aeh"ntaê taEåuR"maAna,
ivaku(vaRntaê taE: s$aAkM(
plavantaê palaAizASau
s$aAkM( BaekE(ivaRlaÎÿnta:
s$air"ta: ›avas$amplautaA:
ivah"s$anta: ‘aitacC$AyaA:
zApantaê ‘aitasvanaAna
wtTaM s$ataAM “aös$auKaAnauBaUtyaA
d"AsyaM gAtaAnaAM par"dE"vataena
maAyaAi™ataAnaAM nar"d"Ar"ke(NA
s$aAkM( ivajaoeú": k{(tapauNyapauÃaA:
kecid veëün vädayanto
dhmäntaù çåìgäëi kecana
kecid bhåìgaiù pragäyantaù
küjantaù kokilaiù pare
vicchäyäbhiù pradhävanto
gacchantaù sädhu-haàsakaiù
bakair upaviçantaç ca
nåtyantaç ca kaläpibhiù
vikarñantaù kéça-bälän
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
773
ärohantaç ca tair drumän
vikurvantaç ca taiù säkaà
plavantaç ca paläçiñu
säkaà bhekair vilaìghantaù
saritaù srava-samplutäù
vihasantaù praticchäyäù
çapantaç ca pratisvanän
itthaà satäà brahma-sukhänubhütyä
däsyaà gatänäà para-daivatena
mäyäçritänäà nara-därakeëa
säkaà vijahruù kåta-puëya-puïjäù
SYNONYMS
kecit—some of them; veëün—flutes; vädayantaù—blowing;
dhmäntaù—bugling; çåìgäëi—the horn bugles; kecana—someone else;
kecit—someone; bhåìgaiù—with the bumblebees; pragäyantaù—singing along
with; küjantaù—imitating the sound of; kokilaiù—with the cuckoos;
pare—others; vicchäyäbhiù—with running shadows; pradhävantaù—someone
running on the ground after the birds; gacchantaù—going along;
sädhu—beautiful; haàsakaiù—with the swans; bakaiù—with the ducks sitting
in one place; upaviçantaù ca—sitting silently like them; nåtyantaù ca—and
dancing with; kaläpibhiù—with the peacocks;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
vikarñantaù—attracting;
kéça-bälän—the young monkeys; ärohantaù ca—gliding over; taiù—with the
monkeys; drumän—the trees; vikurvantaù ca—exactly imitating them;
taiù—with the monkeys; säkam—along with; plavantaù ca—gliding over;
paläçiñu—on the trees; säkam—along with; bhekaiù—with the frogs;
vilaìghantaù—jumping like them; saritaù—the water;
srava-samplutäù—became wet in the water of the river; vihasantaù—laughing;
praticchäyäù—at the shadows; çapantaù ca—condemned; pratisvanän—the
sound of their echoes; ittham—in this way; satäm—of the transcendentalists;
774
brahma-sukha-anubhütyä—with Kåñëa, the source of brahma-sukha (Kåñëa is
Parabrahman, and from Him originates His personal effulgence);
däsyam—servitorship; gatänäm—of the devotees who have accepted;
para-daivatena—with the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
mäyä-äçritänäm—for those in the clutches of material energy;
nara-därakeëa—with Him who is like an ordinary child; säkam—along with;
vijahruù—enjoyed; kåta-puëya-puïjäù—all these boys, who had accumulated
the results of life after life of pious activities.
TRANSLATION
All the boys would be differently engaged. Some boys blew their flutes, and
others blew bugles made of horn. Some imitated the buzzing of the bumblebees,
and others imitated the voice of the cuckoo. Some boys imitated flying birds by
running after the birds' shadows on the ground, some imitated the beautiful
movements and attractive postures of the swans, some sat down with the ducks,
sitting silently, and others imitated the dancing of the peacocks. Some boys
attracted young monkeys in the trees, some jumped into the trees, imitating the
monkeys, some made faces as the monkeys were accustomed to do, and others
jumped from one branch to another. Some boys went to the waterfalls and
crossed over the river, jumping with the frogs, and when they saw their own
reflections on the water they would laugh. They would also condemn the
sounds of their own echoes. In this way, all the cowherd boys used to play with
Kåñëa, who is the source of the Brahman effulgence for jïänés desiring to merge
into that effulgence, who is the Supreme Personality of Godhead for devotees
who have accepted eternal servitorship, and who for ordinary persons is but
another ordinary child. The cowherd boys, having accumulated the results of
pious activities for many lives, were able to associate in this way with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. How can one explain their great fortune?
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
775
As recommended by Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé, tasmät kenäpy upäyena manaù
kåñëe niveçayet (Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.2.4) [SB 7.1.32]. Somehow or other,
whether one thinks of Kåñëa as an ordinary human child, as the source of the
Brahman effulgence, as the origin of Paramätmä, or as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, one should concentrate one's full attention upon the
lotus feet of Kåñëa. That is also the instruction of Bhagavad-gétä (18.66):
sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the
easiest way of directly approaching Kåñëa. Éçvaraù sadyo hådy avarudhyate 'tra
kåtibhiù çuçrüñubhis tat-kñaëät (SB 1.1.2). Diverting even a little of one's
attention toward Kåñëa and activities in Kåñëa consciousness immediately
enables one to achieve the highest perfection of life. This is the purpose of the
Kåñëa consciousness movement. Lokasyäjänato vidväàç cakre sätvata-saàhitäm
(SB 1.7.6). The secret of success is unknown to people in general, and therefore
Çréla Vyäsadeva, being compassionate toward the poor souls in this material
world, especially in this age of Kali, has given us the Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
Çrémad-bhägavataà puräëam amalaà yad vaiñëavänäà priyam (SB 12.13.18).
For Vaiñëavas who are somewhat advanced, or who are fully aware of the
glories and potencies of the Lord, Çrémad-Bhägavatam is a beloved Vedic
literature. After all, we have to change this body (tathä dehäntara-präptiù [Bg.
2.13]). If we do not care about Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam, we do
not know what the next body will be. But if one adheres to these two
books—Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam—one is sure to obtain the
association of Kåñëa in the next life (tyaktvä dehaà punar janma naiti mäm eti
so 'rjuna [Bg. 4.9
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
]). Therefore, distribution of Çrémad-Bhägavatam all over the
world is a great welfare activity for theologians, philosophers,
transcendentalists and yogés (yoginäm api sarveñäm [Bg. 6.47]), as well as for
people in general. Janma-läbhaù paraù puàsäm ante näräyaëa-småtiù (SB
2.1.6): if we can somehow or other remember Kåñëa, Näräyaëa, at the end of
life, our life will be successful.
TEXT 12
776
yatpaAd"paAMs$aubaRò"janmak{(cC)$taAe
Da{taAtmaiBayaAeRigAiBar"pyalaBya:
s$a Wva yaä,"ä{"igvaSaya: svayaM isTata:
ikM( vaNyaRtae id"í"mataAe ˜ajaAEk(s$aAma,
yat-päda-päàsur bahu-janma-kåcchrato
dhåtätmabhir yogibhir apy alabhyaù
sa eva yad-dåg-viñayaù svayaà sthitaù
kià varëyate diñöam ato vrajaukasäm
SYNONYMS
yat—whose; päda-päàsuù—dust of the lotus feet; bahu-janma—in many
births; kåcchrataù—from undergoing severe austerities and penances as a way
of practicing yoga, meditation, etc.; dhåta-ätmabhiù—by persons able to control
the mind; yogibhiù—by such yogés (jïana-yogés, räja-yogés, dhyäna-yogés, etc.);
api—indeed; alabhyaù—cannot be achieved; saù—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; eva—indeed; yat-dåk-viñayaù—has become the object of direct
vision, face to face; svayam—personally; sthitaù—present in front of them;
kim—what; varëyate—can be described; diñöam—about the fortune;
ataù—therefore;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
vraja-okasäm—of the inhabitants of Vrajabhümi,
Våndävana.
TRANSLATION
Yogés may undergo severe austerities and penances for many births by
practicing yama, niyama, äsana and präëäyäma, none of which are easily
performed. Yet in due course of time, when these yogés attain the perfection of
controlling the mind, they will still be unable to taste even a particle of dust
from the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. What then can we
777
describe about the great fortune of the inhabitants of Vrajabhümi, Våndävana,
with whom the Supreme Personality of Godhead personally lived and who saw
the Lord face to face?
PURPORT
We can simply imagine the great fortune of the inhabitants of Våndävana.
It is impossible to describe how, after many, many births of pious activities,
they have become so fortunate.
TEXT 13
@TaAGanaAmaAByapatanmah"As$aur"s$a,
taeSaAM s$auKa‚(Lx"navaIºaNAAºama:
inatyaM yad"ntainaRjajaIivataeps$auiBa:
paItaAma{taEr"pyamarE": ‘ataIºyatae
athägha-nämäbhyapatan mahäsuras
teñäà sukha-kréòana-vékñaëäkñamaù
nityaà yad-antar nija-jévitepsubhiù
pétämåtair apy amaraiù pratékñyate
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; agha-näma—a very powerful demon by the name Agha;
abhyapatat—appeared on the spot; mahä-asuraù—a great, extremely powerful
demon; teñäm—of the cowherd boys; sukha-kréòana—the enjoyment of their
transcendental pastimes; vékñaëa-akñamaù—being unable to see, he could not
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
tolerate the transcendental happiness of the cowherd boys;
nityam—perpetually; yat-antaù—the end of the life of Aghäsura;
nija-jévita-épsubhiù—just to live undisturbed by Aghäsura; péta-amåtaiù
778
api—although they drank nectar every day; amaraiù—by such demigods;
pratékñyate—was also being awaited (the demigods were also awaiting the
death of the great demon Aghäsura).
TRANSLATION
My dear King Parékñit, thereafter there appeared a great demon named
Aghäsura, whose death was being awaited even by the demigods. The demigods
drank nectar every day, but still they feared this great demon and awaited his
death. This demon could not tolerate the transcendental pleasure being enjoyed
in the forest by the cowherd boys.
PURPORT
One may ask how Kåñëa's pastimes could be interrupted by a demon. Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura answers this question by saying that although
the transcendental pleasure being enjoyed by the cowherd boys could not be
stopped, unless they stopped the transcendental pleasure of their various
activities they could not eat their lunch. Therefore at lunchtime Aghäsura
appeared by the arrangement of yogamäyä, so that for the time being they
could stop their activities and take lunch. Changing varieties are the mother
of enjoyment. The cowherd boys would continuously play, then stop, and then
again enjoy in a different way. Therefore every day a demon would come and
interrupt their sporting pastimes. The demon would be killed, and then the
boys would engage again in their transcendental pastimes.
TEXT 14
ä{"î"ABaRk(Ana, k{(SNAmauKaAnaGaAs$aur":
kM(s$aAnauizAí": s$a bak(Lbak(Anauja:
@yaM tau mae s$aAed"r"naAzAk{(ÔayaAer,"
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
779
ã"yaAemaR"maEnaM s$abalaM h"inaSyae
dåñövärbhakän kåñëa-mukhän aghäsuraù
kaàsänuçiñöaù sa baké-bakänujaù
ayaà tu me sodara-näça-kåt tayor
dvayor mamainaà sa-balaà haniñye
SYNONYMS
dåñövä—after seeing; arbhakän—all the cowherd boys; kåñëa-mukhän—headed
by Kåñëa; aghäsuraù—the demon by the name Aghäsura;
kaàsa-anuçiñöaù—sent by Kaàsa; saù—he (Aghäsura); baké-baka-anujaù—the
younger brother of Pütanä and Bakäsura; ayam—this Kåñëa; tu—indeed;
me—my; sodara-näça-kåt—the killer of my brother and sister; tayoù—for my
brother and sister; dvayoù—for those two; mama—my; enam—Kåñëa;
sa-balam—along with His assistants, the cowherd boys; haniñye—I shall kill.
TRANSLATION
Aghäsura, who had been sent by Kaàsa, was the younger brother of Pütanä
and Bakäsura. Therefore when he came and saw Kåñëa at the head of all the
cowherd boys, he thought, "This Kåñëa has killed my sister and brother, Pütanä
and Bakäsura. Therefore, in order to please them both, I shall kill this Kåñëa,
along with His assistants, the other cowherd boys."
TEXT 15
Wtae yad"A mats$auô$d"AeistalaApa:
k{(taAstad"A naí"s$amaA ˜ajaAEk(s$a:
‘aANAe gAtae vaSmaRs$au k(A nau icantaA
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
780
‘ajaAs$ava: ‘aANABa{taAe ih" yae tae
ete yadä mat-suhådos tiläpaù
kåtäs tadä nañöa-samä vrajaukasaù
präëe gate varñmasu kä nu cintä
prajäsavaù präëa-bhåto hi ye te
SYNONYMS
ete—this Kåñëa and His associates, the cowherd boys; yadä—when;
mat-suhådoù—of my brother and sister; tila-äpaù kåtäù—become the last
ritualistic ceremonial offering of sesame and water; tadä—at that time;
nañöa-samäù—without life; vraja-okasaù—all the inhabitants of Vrajabhümi,
Våndävana; präëe—when the vital force; gate—has been thrown out of the
body; varñmasu—as far as the body is concerned; kä—what; nu—indeed;
cintä—consideration; prajä-asavaù—those whose love for their children is the
same as their love for their own life; präëa-bhåtaù—those living beings;
hi—indeed; ye te—all the inhabitants of Vrajabhümi.
TRANSLATION
Aghäsura thought: If somehow or other I can make Kåñëa and His associates
serve as the last offering of sesame and water for the departed souls of my
brother and sister, then the inhabitants of Vrajabhümi, for whom these boys are
the life and soul, will automatically die. If there is no life, there is no need for
the body; consequently, when their sons are dead, naturally all the inhabitants
of Vraja will die.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
wita vyavasyaAjagArM" ba{h"ã"pau:
781
s$a yaAejanaAyaAmamah"Ai‰"paIvar"ma,
Da{tvaAàu"taM vyaAÔagAuh"AnanaM tad"A
paiTa vyazAeta ƒas$anaAzAyaA Kala:
iti vyavasyäjagaraà båhad vapuù
sa yojanäyäma-mahädri-pévaram
dhåtvädbhutaà vyätta-guhänanaà tadä
pathi vyaçeta grasanäçayä khalaù
SYNONYMS
iti—in this way; vyavasya—deciding; äjagaram—python; båhat vapuù—a very,
very large body; saù—Aghäsura; yojana-äyäma—occupying eight miles of land;
mahä-adri-pévaram—as thick as a great mountain; dhåtvä—assuming this form;
adbhutam—wonderful; vyätta—spread; guhä-änanam—having a mouth
resembling a big cave in a mountain; tadä—at that time; pathi—on the road;
vyaçeta—occupied; grasana-äçayä—expecting to swallow all the cowherd boys;
khalaù—the most crooked.
TRANSLATION
After thus deciding, that crooked Aghäsura assumed the form of a huge
python, as thick as a big mountain and as long as eight miles. Having assumed
this wonderful python's body, he spread his mouth like a big cave in the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
mountains and lay down on the road, expecting to swallow Kåñëa and His
associates the cowherd boys.
TEXT 17
Dar"ADar"Aeï"Ae jalad"AeÔar"Aeï"Ae
782
d"yaARnanaAntaAe igAir"Za{"ËÿdM"í)":
DvaAntaAntar"AsyaAe ivatataADvaijaù":
paç&SaAinalaìAs$ad"vaeºaNAAeSNA:
dharädharoñöho jaladottaroñöho
dary-änanänto giri-çåìga-daàñöraù
dhväntäntar-äsyo vitatädhva-jihvaù
paruñänila-çväsa-davekñaëoñëaù
SYNONYMS
dharä—on the surface of the globe; adhara-oñöhaù—whose lower lip;
jalada-uttara-oñöhaù—whose upper lip was touching the clouds;
daré-änana-antaù—whose mouth was expanded very widely like a mountain
cave; giri-çåìga—like a mountain peak; daàñöraù—whose teeth;
dhvänta-antaù-äsyaù—within whose mouth the atmosphere was as dark as
possible; vitata-adhva-jihvaù—whose tongue was like a broad way;
paruña-anila-çväsa—whose breath was like a warm wind;
dava-ékñaëa-uñëaù—and whose glance was like flames of fire.
TRANSLATION
His lower lip rested on the surface of the earth, and his upper lip was
touching the clouds in the sky. The borders of his mouth resembled the sides of
a big cave in a mountain, and the middle of his mouth was as dark as possible.
His tongue resembled a broad traffic-way, his breath was like a warm wind, and
his eyes blazed like fire.
TEXT 18
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
783
ä{"î"A taM taAä{"zAM s$avaeR
matvaA va{nd"Avanai™ayama,
vyaAÔaAjagAr"tauNxe"na
÷ut‘aeºantae sma laIlayaA
dåñövä taà tädåçaà sarve
matvä våndävana-çriyam
vyättäjagara-tuëòena
hy utprekñante sma lélayä
SYNONYMS
dåñövä—seeing; tam—that Aghäsura; tädåçam—in that posture; sarve—Kåñëa
and all the cowherd boys; matvä—thought it; våndävana-çriyam—a beautiful
statue of Våndävana; vyätta—spread; ajagara-tuëòena—with the form of a
python's mouth; hi—indeed; utprekñante—as if observing; sma—in the past;
lélayä—as a matter of pastimes.
TRANSLATION
Upon seeing this demon's wonderful form, which resembled a great python,
the boys thought that it must be a beautiful scenic spot of Våndävana.
Thereafter, they imagined it to be similar to the mouth of a great python. In
other words, the boys, unafraid, thought that it was a statue made in the shape
of a great python for the enjoyment of their pastimes.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Some of the boys, upon seeing this wonderful phenomenon, thought that it
was in fact a python, and they were fleeing from the spot. But others said,
"Why are you fleeing? It is not possible that a python like this is staying here.
784
This is a spot of beauty for sporting." This is what they imagined.
TEXT 19
@h"Ae ima‡aAiNA gAd"ta
s$aÔvakU(qM% paur": isTatama,
@smats$aÍÿs$anavyaAÔavyaAlatauNx"
Ayatae na vaA
aho miträëi gadata
sattva-küöaà puraù sthitam
asmat-saìgrasana-vyättavyäla-
tuëòäyate na vä
SYNONYMS
aho—oh; miträëi—friends; gadata—just let us know; sattva-küöam—dead
python; puraù sthitam—as it is just before us all; asmat—all of us;
saìgrasana—to devour us altogether; vyätta-vyäla-tuëòä-yate—the python has
spread its mouth; na vä—whether it is a fact or not.
TRANSLATION
The boys said: Dear friends, is this creature dead, or is it actually a living
python with its mouth spread wide just to swallow us all? Kindly clear up this
doubt.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
PURPORT
The friends began to discuss among themselves the reality of the wonderful
creature laying before them. Was it dead, or was it actually a living python
785
trying to swallow them up?
TEXT 20
s$atyamakR(k(r"Ar"l(ma,
oÔar"Ah"nauvaÙ"nama,
@Dar"Ah"nauva‰"AeDas$a,
tat‘aitacC$AyayaAç&NAma,
satyam arka-karäraktam
uttarä-hanuvad ghanam
adharä-hanuvad rodhas
tat-praticchäyayäruëam
SYNONYMS
satyam—now the boys decided that it was in fact a living python;
arka-kara-äraktam—appearing like the sunshine; uttarä-hanuvat ghanam—on
the cloud resembling the upper lips; adharä-hanuvat—resembling the lower
lips; rodhaù—big bank; tat-praticchäyayä—by the reflection of sunshine;
aruëam—reddish.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter they decided: Dear friends, this is certainly an animal sitting here
to swallow us all. Its upper lip resembles a cloud reddened by the sunshine, and
its lower lip resembles the reddish shadows of a cloud.
TEXT 21
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
786
‘aitas$paDaeRtae s$a{fk(ByaAM
s$avyaAs$avyae nagAAed"re"
tauËÿZa{"ËÿAlayaAe'pyaetaAs$a,
taÚM"í)"AiBaê pazyata
pratispardhete såkkabhyäà
savyäsavye nagodare
tuìga-çåìgälayo 'py etäs
tad-daàñöräbhiç ca paçyata
SYNONYMS
pratispardhete—just resembling; såkkabhyäm—with the corners of the mouth;
savya-asavye—left and right; naga-udare—caves of a mountain;
tuìga-çåìga-älayaù—the high mountain peaks; api—although it is so; etäù
tat-daàñöräbhiù—they resemble the teeth of the animal; ca—and;
paçyata—just see.
TRANSLATION
On the left and right, the two depressions resembling mountain caves are the
corners of its mouth, and the high mountain peaks are its teeth.
TEXT 22
@Asta{taAyaAmamaAgAAeR'yaM
r"s$anaAM ‘aitagAjaRita
WSaAM @ntagARtaM DvaAntama,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
787
Wtad"pyantar"Ananama,
äståtäyäma-märgo 'yaà
rasanäà pratigarjati
eñäà antar-gataà dhväntam
etad apy antar-änanam
SYNONYMS
äståta-äyäma—the length and breadth; märgaù ayam—a broad way;
rasanäm—the tongue; pratigarjati—resembles; eñäm antaù-gatam—on the
inside of the mountains; dhväntam—darkness; etat—this; api—indeed;
antaù-änanam—the inside of the mouth.
TRANSLATION
In length and breadth the animal's tongue resembles a broad traffic-way, and
the inside of its mouth is very, very dark, like a cave in a mountain.
TEXT 23
d"AvaAeSNAKar"vaAtaAe'yaM
ìAs$avaà"Aita pazyata
taÚ"gDas$aÔvaäu"gARnDaAe
'pyantar"AimaSagAnDavata,
dävoñëa-khara-väto 'yaà
çväsavad bhäti paçyata
tad-dagdha-sattva-durgandho
'py antar-ämiña-gandhavat
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
788
SYNONYMS
däva-uñëa-khara-vätaù ayam—hot breath coming out exactly like fire;
çväsa-vat bhäti paçyata—just see how it resembles his breath;
tat-dagdha-sattva—of burning corpses; durgandhaù—the bad smell;
api—indeed; antaù-ämiña-gandha-vat—is like the fleshy smell coming out from
within.
TRANSLATION
The hot fiery wind is the breath coming out of his mouth, which is giving off
the bad smell of burning flesh because of all the dead bodies he has eaten.
TEXT 24
@smaAna, ik(ma‡a ƒais$ataA inaivaí"Ana,
@yaM taTaA caeß"k(vaiã"naÉÿYaita
ºaNAAd"naenaeita bak(AyauRzAnmauKaM
vaIºyaAeÜ"s$anta: k(r"taAx"naEyaRyau:
asmän kim atra grasitä niviñöän
ayaà tathä ced bakavad vinaìkñyati
kñaëäd aneneti bakäry-uçan-mukhaà
vékñyoddhasantaù kara-täòanair yayuù
SYNONYMS
asmän—all of us; kim—whether; atra—here; grasitä—will swallow;
niviñöän—who have attempted to enter; ayam—this animal; tathä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—so; cet—if;
baka-vat—like Bakäsura; vinaìkñyati—he will be vanquished;
789
kñaëät—immediately; anena—by this Kåñëa; iti—in this way;
baka-ari-uçat-mukham—the beautiful face of Kåñëa, the enemy of Bakäsura;
vékñya—observing, looking at; uddhasantaù—loudly laughing;
kara-täòanaiù—with clapping of hands; yayuù—entered the mouth.
TRANSLATION
Then the boys said, "Has this living creature come to swallow us? If he does
so, he will immediately be killed like Bakäsura, without delay." Thus they
looked at the beautiful face of Kåñëa, the enemy of Bakäsura, and, laughing
loudly and clapping their hands, they entered the mouth of the python.
PURPORT
After talking about the terrible animal this way and that way, they decided
to enter the demon's mouth. They had full faith in Kåñëa because they had
experienced how Kåñëa had saved them from the mouth of Bakäsura. Now,
here was another asura, Aghäsura. Therefore, they wanted to enjoy the sport
of entering the demon's mouth and being saved by Kåñëa, the enemy of
Bakäsura.
TEXT 25
wtTaM imaTaAe'taTyamatajÁaBaAiSataM
™autvaA ivaicantyaetyama{SaA ma{SaAyatae
r"ºaAe ivaid"tvaAiKalaBaUtaô$itsTata:
svaAnaAM inar"Aeä,"DauM BagAvaAnmanaAe d"Dae
itthaà mitho 'tathyam ataj-jïa-bhäñitaà
çrutvä vicintyety amåñä måñäyate
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
790
rakño viditväkhila-bhüta-håt-sthitaù
svänäà niroddhuà bhagavän mano dadhe
SYNONYMS
ittham—in this way; mithaù—or another; atathyam—a subject matter that is
not a fact; a-tat-jïa—without knowledge; bhäñitam—while they were talking;
çrutvä—Kåñëa hearing them; vicintya—thinking; iti—thus; amåñä—actually,
truly; måñäyate—who is trying to appear as a false thing (actually the animal
was Aghäsura, but because of poor knowledge they were thinking him to be a
dead python); rakñaù—(Kåñëa, however, could understand that) he was a
demon; viditvä—knowing it; akhila-bhüta-håt-sthitaù—because He is
antaryämé, situated everywhere, in the core of everyone's heart; svänäm—of
His own associates; niroddhum—just to forbid them; bhagavän—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; manaù dadhe—made up His mind.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, who is situated as
antaryämé, the Supersoul, in the core of everyone's heart, heard the boys
talking among themselves about the artificial python. Unknown to them, it was
actually Aghäsura, a demon who had appeared as a python. Kåñëa, knowing
this, wanted to forbid His associates to enter the demon's mouth.
TEXT 26
taAvat‘aivaí"Astvas$aur"Aed"r"AntarM"
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
parM" na gAINAAR: izAzAva: s$avats$aA:
‘ataIºamaANAena bak(Air"vaezAnaM
791
h"tasvak(Antasmar"NAena r"ºas$aA
tävat praviñöäs tv asurodaräntaraà
paraà na gérëäù çiçavaù sa-vatsäù
pratékñamäëena bakäri-veçanaà
hata-sva-känta-smaraëena rakñasä
SYNONYMS
tävat—in the meantime; praviñöäù—all entered; tu—indeed;
asura-udara-antaram—within the belly of the great demon; param—but; na
gérëäù—they were not swallowed; çiçavaù—all the boys; sa-vatsäù—along with
their calves; pratékñamäëena—who was just waiting for; baka-ari—of the
enemy of Bakäsura; veçanam—the entering; hata-sva-känta-smaraëena—the
asura was thinking of his own dead relatives, who would not be satisfied unless
Kåñëa were dead; rakñasä—by the demon.
TRANSLATION
In the meantime, while Kåñëa was considering how to stop them, all the
cowherd boys entered the mouth of the demon. The demon, however, did not
swallow them, for he was thinking of his own relatives who had been killed by
Kåñëa and was just waiting for Kåñëa to enter his mouth.
TEXT 27
taAna, vaIºya k{(SNA: s$ak(laABaya‘ad"Ae
÷nanyanaATaAna, svak(r"Ad"vacyautaAna,
d"InaAMê ma{tyaAejaRQ&r"Ai¢aGaAs$aAna,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
792
Ga{NAAidR"taAe id"í"k{(taena ivaismata:
tän vékñya kåñëaù sakaläbhaya-prado
hy ananya-näthän sva-karäd avacyutän
dénäàç ca måtyor jaöharägni-ghäsän
ghåëärdito diñöa-kåtena vismitaù
SYNONYMS
tän—all those boys; vékñya—seeing; kåñëaù—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Kåñëa; sakala-abhaya-pradaù—who is the source of fearlessness for
everyone; hi—indeed; ananya-näthän—especially for the cowherd boys, who
did not know anyone except Kåñëa; sva-karät—from the control of His hand;
avacyutän—now gone out; dénän ca—helpless; måtyoù
jaöhara-agni-ghäsän—who had all entered like straws into the fire of the
abdomen of Aghäsura, who was very bold and hungry, like death personified
(because the asura had assumed a big body, he must have had a very strong
appetite); ghåëä-arditaù—therefore, being compassionate due to causeless
mercy; diñöa-kåtena—by things arranged by His internal potency;
vismitaù—He also, for the time being, was astonished.
TRANSLATION
Kåñëa saw that all the cowherd boys, who did not know anyone but Him as
their Lord, had now gone out of His hand and were helpless, having entered
like straws into the fire of the abdomen of Aghäsura, who was death
personified. It was intolerable for Kåñëa to be separated from His friends the
cowherd boys. Therefore, as if seeing that this had been arranged by His
internal potency, Kåñëa was momentarily struck with wonder and unsure of
what to do.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
793
TEXT 28
k{(tyaM ik(ma‡aAsya Kalasya jaIvanaM
na vaA @maISaAM ca s$ataAM ivaihM"s$anama,
ã"yaM k(TaM syaAid"ita s$aMivaicantya
ÁaAtvaAivazAÔauNx"mazAeSaä{"gGair":
kåtyaà kim aträsya khalasya jévanaà
na vä améñäà ca satäà vihiàsanam
dvayaà kathaà syäd iti saàvicintya
jïätväviçat tuëòam açeña-dåg ghariù
SYNONYMS
kåtyam kim—what to do; atra—in this situation; asya khalasya—of this
envious demon; jévanam—the existence of life; na—there should not be;
vä—either; améñäm ca—and of those who are innocent; satäm—of the
devotees; vihiàsanam—the death; dvayam—both actions (killing the demon
and saving the boys); katham—how; syät—can be possible; iti
saàvicintya—very perfectly thinking about the subject matter; jïätvä—and
deciding what to do; aviçat—entered; tuëòam—within the mouth of the
demon; açeña-dåk hariù—Kåñëa, who has unlimited potency, could understand
past, future and present.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Now, what was to be done? How could both the killing of this demon and
the saving of the devotees be performed simultaneously? Kåñëa, being
unlimitedly potent, decided to wait for an intelligent means by which He could
simultaneously save the boys and kill the demon. Then He entered the mouth
of Aghäsura.
794
PURPORT
Kåñëa is known as ananta-vérya-sarvajïa because everything is known to
Him. Because He knows everything perfectly well, it was not difficult for Him
to find a means by which He could save the boys and at the same time kill the
demon. Thus He also decided to enter the demon's mouth.
TEXT 29
tad"A GanacC$d"A de"vaA
BayaAÜ"Ahe"ita cau‚u(zAu:
jaô$SauyaeR ca kM(s$aAâA:
k(AENApaAstvaGabaAnDavaA:
tadä ghana-cchadä devä
bhayäd dhä-heti cukruçuù
jahåñur ye ca kaàsädyäù
kauëapäs tv agha-bändhaväù
SYNONYMS
tadä—at that time; ghana-chadäù—behind the clouds; deväù—all the
demigods; bhayät—on account of feeling danger because Kåñëa had entered
the mouth of the demon; hä-hä—alas, alas; iti—in this way; cukruçuù—they
exclaimed; jahåñuù—became jubilant; ye—those; ca—also;
kaàsa-ädyäù—Kaàsa and others; kauëapäù—the demons; tu—indeed;
agha-bändhaväù—the friends of Aghäsura.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
795
When Kåñëa entered the mouth of Aghäsura, the demigods hidden behind
the clouds exclaimed, "Alas! Alas!" But the friends of Aghäsura, like Kaàsa
and other demons, were jubilant.
TEXT 30
tacC_$tvaA BagAvaAna, k{(SNAs$a,
tvavyaya: s$aABaRvats$ak(ma,
caUNAI=#icak(LSaAeRr"AtmaAnaM
tar"s$aA vava{Dae gAlae
tac chrutvä bhagavän kåñëas
tv avyayaù särbha-vatsakam
cürëé-cikérñor ätmänaà
tarasä vavådhe gale
SYNONYMS
tat—that exclamation of hä-hä; çrutvä—hearing; bhagavän—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; kåñëaù—Lord Kåñëa; tu—indeed; avyayaù—never
vanquishable; sa-arbha-vatsakam—along with the cowherd boys and the
calves; cürëé-cikérñoù—of that demon, who desired to smash within the
abdomen; ätmänam—personally, Himself; tarasä—very soon;
vavådhe—enlarged; gale—within the throat.
TRANSLATION
When the invincible Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, heard the
demigods crying "Alas! Alas!" from behind the clouds, He immediately enlarged
Himself within the demon's throat, just to save Himself and the cowherd boys,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
796
His own associates, from the demon who wished to smash them.
PURPORT
Such are the acts of Kåñëa. pariträëäya sädhünäà vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm (Bg.
4.8). By enlarging Himself within the throat of the demon, Kåñëa suffocated
and killed him and at the same time saved Himself and His associates from
imminent death and also saved the demigods from lamentation.
TEXT 31
tataAe'itak(Ayasya inaç&Ü"maAigARNAAe
÷uÕ"INARä{"íe"”aRmataistvatastata:
paUNAAeR'ntar"Ëeÿ pavanaAe inaç&Ü"Ae
maUDaRna, ivainaiBaRâ ivainagARtaAe baih":
tato 'tikäyasya niruddha-märgiëo
hy udgérëa-dåñöer bhramatas tv itas tataù
pürëo 'ntar-aìge pavano niruddho
mürdhan vinirbhidya vinirgato bahiù
SYNONYMS
tataù—after Kåñëa took action to kill the demon's body from within the
mouth; ati-käyasya—of that great demon, who had expanded his body to a
very large size; niruddha-märgiëaù—because of suffocating, all outlets being
stopped up; hi udgérëa-dåñöeù—whose eyes had popped out; bhramataù tu itaù
tataù—the eyeballs, or the life air, moving here and there; pürëaù—completely
filled; antaù-aìge—within the body; pavanaù—the life air; niruddhaù—being
stopped; mürdhan—the hole in the top of the head; vinirbhidya—breaking;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
797
vinirgataù—went out; bahiù—externally.
TRANSLATION
Then, because Kåñëa had increased the size of His body, the demon extended
his own body to a very large size. Nonetheless, his breathing stopped, he
suffocated, and his eyes rolled here and there and popped out. The demon's life
air, however, could not pass through any outlet, and therefore it finally burst
out through a hole in the top of the demon's head.
TEXT 32
taenaEva s$avaeRSau baih"gARtaeSau
‘aANAeSau vats$aAna, s$auô$d": pare"taAna,
ä{"í"YaA svayaAetTaApya tad"invata: paunar,"
vaf‡aAnmauku(nd"Ae BagAvaAna, ivainayaRyaAE
tenaiva sarveñu bahir gateñu
präëeñu vatsän suhådaù paretän
dåñöyä svayotthäpya tad-anvitaù punar
vakträn mukundo bhagavän viniryayau
SYNONYMS
tena eva—through that brahma-randhra, or the hole in the top of the head;
sarveñu—all the air within the body; bahiù gateñu—having gone out;
präëeñu—the life airs, along with the vital force; vatsän—the calves;
suhådaù—the cowherd boy friends; paretän—who were all dead within; dåñöyä
svayä—by Kåñëa's glancing over; utthäpya—brought them back to life;
tat-anvitaù—thus accompanied by them; punaù—again; vakträt—from the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
798
mouth; mukundaù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhagavän—Kåñëa;
viniryayau—came out.
TRANSLATION
When all the demon's life air had passed away through that hole in the top of
his head, Kåñëa glanced over the dead calves and cowherd boys and brought
them back to life. Then Mukunda, who can give one liberation, came out from
the demon's mouth with His friends and the calves.
TEXT 33
paInaAih"BaAegAAeitTatamaàu"taM mah"ja,
jyaAeita: svaDaA°aA jvalayaiÚ"zAAe d"zA
‘ataIºya Kae'vaisTatamaIzAinagARmaM
ivavaezA taismainmaSataAM id"vaAEk(s$aAma,
pénähi-bhogotthitam adbhutaà mahaj
jyotiù sva-dhämnä jvalayad diço daça
pratékñya khe 'vasthitam éça-nirgamaà
viveça tasmin miñatäà divaukasäm
SYNONYMS
péna—very great; ahi-bhoga-utthitam—issuing from the serpent's body, which
was meant for material enjoyment; adbhutam—very wonderful; mahat—great;
jyotiù—effulgence; sva-dhämnä—by his own illumination; jvalayat—making
glaring; diçaù daça—all the ten directions; pratékñya
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
khe—in the sky;
avasthitam—individually staying; éça-nirgamam—until the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, came out; viveça—entered; tasmin—in the
799
body of Kåñëa; miñatäm—while observing; divaukasäm—all the demigods.
TRANSLATION
From the body of the gigantic python, a glaring effulgence came out,
illuminating all directions, and stayed individually in the sky until Kåñëa came
out from the corpse's mouth. Then, as all the demigods looked on, this
effulgence entered into Kåñëa's body.
PURPORT
Apparently the serpent named Aghäsura, because of having received
association with Kåñëa, attained mukti by entering Kåñëa's body. Entering the
body of Kåñëa is called säyujya-mukti, but later verses prove that Aghäsura, like
Dantavakra and others, received särüpya-mukti. This has been broadly
described by Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura with references from the
Vaiñëava-toñaëé of Çréla Jéva Gosvämé. Aghäsura attained särüpya-mukti, being
promoted to the Vaikuëöha planets to live with the same four-armed bodily
features as Viñëu. The explanation of how this is so may be summarized as
follows.
The effulgence came out from the python's body and became purified,
attaining spiritual çuddha-sattva, freedom from material contamination,
because Kåñëa had stayed within the serpent's body, even after the serpent's
death. One may doubt that such a demon, full of mischievous activities, could
attain the liberation of särüpya or säyujya, and one may be astonished about
this. But Kåñëa is so kind that in order to drive away such doubts, He had the
effulgence, the individual life of the python, wait for some time in its
individuality, in the presence of all the demigods.
Kåñëa is the full effulgence, and every living being is part and parcel of that
effulgence. As proved here, the effulgence in every living being is individual.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
For some time, the effulgence remained outside the demon's body, individually,
800
and did not mix with the whole effulgence, the brahmajyoti. The Brahman
effulgence is not visible to material eyes, but to prove that every living being is
individual, Kåñëa had this individual effulgence stay outside the demon's body
for some time, for everyone to see. Then Kåñëa proved that anyone killed by
Him attains liberation, whether säyujya, särüpya, sämépya or whatever.
But the liberation of those who are on the transcendental platform of love
and affection is vimukti, special liberation. Thus the serpent first entered the
body of Kåñëa personally and mixed with the Brahman effulgence. This
merging is called säyujya-mukti. But from later verses we find that Aghäsura
attained särüpya-mukti. Text 38 explains that Aghäsura attained a body
exactly like that of Viñëu, and the verse after that also clearly states that he
attained a completely spiritual body like that of Näräyaëa. Therefore in two or
three places the Bhägavatam has confirmed that Aghäsura attained
särüpya-mukti. One may then argue, How is it that he mixed with the
Brahman effulgence? The answer is that as Jaya and Vijaya, after three births,
again attained särüpya-mukti and association with the Lord, Aghäsura received
a similar liberation.
TEXT 34
tataAe'itaô$í"A: svak{(taAe'k{(taAhR"NAM
pauSpaE: s$augAA @ps$ar"s$aê nataR$naE:
gAItaE: s$aur"A vaAâDar"Aê vaAâkE(:
stavaEê iva‘aA jayaina:svanaEgARNAA:
tato 'tihåñöäù sva-kåto 'kåtärhaëaà
puñpaiù sugä apsarasaç ca nartanaiù
gétaiù surä vädya-dharäç ca vädyakaiù
stavaiç ca viprä jaya-niùsvanair gaëäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
801
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; ati-håñöäù—everyone becoming very much pleased;
sva-kåtaù—own respective duty; akåta—executed; arhaëam—in the shape of
worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead; puñpaiù—by showering
flowers grown in Nandana-känana from the heavens; su-gäù—the celestial
singers; apsarasaù ca—and the celestial dancing girls; nartanaiù—by dancing;
gétaiù—by singing celestial songs; suräù—all the demigods; vädya-dharäù
ca—those who played on musical drums; vädyakaiù—by playing respectively;
stavaiù ca—and by offering prayers; vipräù—the brähmaëas;
jaya-niùsvanaiù—simply by glorifying the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
gaëäù—everyone.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, everyone being pleased, the demigods began to shower flowers
from Nandana-känana, the celestial dancing girls began to dance, and the
Gandharvas, who are famous for singing, offered songs of prayer. The
drummers began to beat their kettledrums, and the brähmaëas offered Vedic
hymns. In this way, both in the heavens and on earth, everyone began to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
perform his own duties, glorifying the Lord.
PURPORT
Everyone has some particular duty. The çästra has concluded (nirüpitaù)
that everyone should glorify the Supreme Personality of Godhead by his own
qualifications. If you are a singer, always glorify the Supreme Lord by singing
very nicely. If you are a musician, glorify the Supreme Lord by playing musical
instruments. Svanuñöhitasya dharmasya saàsiddhir hari-toñaëam (SB 1.2.13).
The perfection of life is to satisfy the Personality of Godhead. Therefore,
beginning from this earth up to the celestial kingdom, everyone engaged in
802
glorifying the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The decision of all great
saintly persons is that whatever qualifications one has acquired should be
utilized to glorify the Supreme Lord.
idaà hi puàsas tapasaù çrutasya vä
sviñöasya süktasya ca buddhi-dattayoù
avicyuto 'rthaù kavibhir nirüpito
yad uttamaçloka-guëänuvarëanam
"Learned sages have definitely concluded that the infallible purpose of the
advancement of knowledge, austerity, Vedic study, sacrifice, the chanting of
hymns, and charity is found in the transcendental descriptions of the qualities
of the Lord, who is defined in choice poetry." (SB 1.5.22) This is the perfection
of life. One should be trained how to glorify the Supreme Personality of
Godhead by one's respective qualities. Education, austerity, penance or, in the
modern world, business, industry, education and so on-all should be engaged in
glorifying the Lord. Then everyone in the world will be happy.
Kåñëa comes, therefore, to exhibit His transcendental activities so that
people may have the chance to glorify Him in every respect. To understand
how to glorify the Lord is actual research work. It is not that everything should
be understood without God. That is condemned.
bhagavad-bhakti-hénasya
jätiù çästraà japas tapaù
apräëasyaiva dehasya
maëòanaà loka-raïjanam
(Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya 3.11)
Without bhagavad-bhakti, without glorification of the Supreme Lord, whatever
we have is simply a decoration of the dead body.
TEXT 35
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
803
tad"àu"tastaAe‡as$auvaAâgAIitak(AjayaAid"
naEk(Aets$avamaËÿlasvanaAna,
™autvaA svaDaA°aAe'ntyaja @AgAtaAe'icar"Aä,"
ä{"î"A mah"IzAsya jagAAma ivasmayama,
tad-adbhuta-stotra-suvädya-gétikäjayädi-
naikotsava-maìgala-svanän
çrutvä sva-dhämno 'nty aja ägato 'ciräd
dåñövä mahéçasya jagäma vismayam
SYNONYMS
tat—that celebration performed by the demigods in the upper planetary
system; adbhuta—wonderful; stotra—prayers; su-vädya—glorious musical
sounds of drums and other instruments; gétikä—celestial songs;
jaya-ädi—sounds of jaya, etc.; na-eka-utsava—celebrations simply for
glorifying the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
maìgala-svanän—transcendental sounds auspicious for everyone;
çrutvä—hearing such sounds; sva-dhämnaù—from his abode; anti—nearby;
ajaù—Lord Brahmä; ägataù—coming there; acirät—very soon; dåñövä—seeing;
mahi—the glorification;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—of Lord Kåñëa; jagäma vismayam—became
astonished.
TRANSLATION
When Lord Brahmä heard the wonderful ceremony going on near his planet,
accompanied by music and songs and sounds of "Jaya! Jaya!" he immediately
came down to see the function. Upon seeing so much glorification of Lord
Kåñëa, he was completely astonished.
804
PURPORT
Here the word anti means "near," indicating that even in the higher
planetary systems near Brahmaloka, like Maharloka, Janaloka and Tapoloka,
the festival of glorification of Lord Kåñëa was going on.
TEXT 36
r"AjaªaAjagArM" camaR
zAuSkM( va{nd"Avanae'àu"tama,
˜ajaAEk(s$aAM baò"itaTaM
baBaUvaA‚(Lx"gAù"r"ma,
räjann äjagaraà carma
çuñkaà våndävane 'dbhutam
vrajaukasäà bahu-tithaà
babhüväkréòa-gahvaram
SYNONYMS
räjan—O Mahäräja Parékñit; äjagaram carma—the dry body of Aghäsura,
which remained only a big skin; çuñkam—when it completely dried up;
våndävane adbhutam—like a wonderful museum piece in Våndävana;
vraja-okasäm—for the inhabitants of Vrajabhümi, Våndävana;
bahu-titham—for many days, or for a long time; babhüva—became;
äkréòa—sporting place; gahvaram—a cave.
TRANSLATION
O King Parékñit, when the python-shaped body of Aghäsura dried up into
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
805
merely a big skin, it became a wonderful place for the inhabitants of Våndävana
to visit, and it remained so for a long, long time.
TEXT 37
Wtatk(AEmaAr"jaM k(maR
h"re"r"AtmaAih"maAeºaNAma,
ma{tyaAe: paAEgANx"ke( baAlaA
ä{"î"AecauivaRismataA ˜ajae
etat kaumärajaà karma
harer ätmähi-mokñaëam
måtyoù paugaëòake bälä
dåñövocur vismitä vraje
SYNONYMS
etat—this incident of delivering both Aghäsura and Kåñëa's associates from
death; kaumära-jam karma—performed during their kaumära age (the age of
five years); hareù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ätma—the
devotees are the Lord's heart and soul; ahi-mokñaëam—their deliverance and
the deliverance of the python; måtyoù—from the path of repeated birth and
death; paugaëòake—at the age of paugaëòa, beginning with the sixth year (one
year later); bäläù—all the boys; dåñövä ücuù—disclosed the fact after on
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
e year;
vismitäù—as if it had happened on that very day; vraje—in Våndävana.
TRANSLATION
This incident of Kåñëa's saving Himself and His associates from death and of
giving deliverance to Aghäsura, who had assumed the form of a python, took
806
place when Kåñëa was five years old. It was disclosed in Vrajabhümi after one
year, as if it had taken place on that very day.
PURPORT
The word mokñaëam means "liberation." For the associates of Kåñëa and for
Kåñëa Himself, there is no question about liberation; they are already
liberated, being in the spiritual world. In the material world there are birth,
death, old age and disease, but in the spiritual world there are no such things
because everything is eternal. As for the python, however, by the association
of Kåñëa and His devotees, Aghäsura also achieved the same facility of eternal
life. Therefore, as indicated here by the word ätmähi-mokñaëam, if the python
Aghäsura could receive eternal association with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, what is to be said of those who are already associates of the Lord?
Säkaà vijahruù kåta-puëya-puïjäù (SB 10.12.11). Here is proof that God is good
for everyone. Even when He kills someone, the one who is killed attains
liberation. What then is to be said of those who are already in the association
of the Lord?
TEXT 38
naEtaiã"ica‡aM manaujaABaRmaAiyana:
par"Avar"ANAAM par"masya vaeDas$a:
@GaAe'ipa yats$pazARnaDaAEtapaAtak(:
‘aApaAtmas$aAmyaM tvas$ataAM s$auäu"laRBama,
naitad vicitraà manujärbha-mäyinaù
parävaräëäà paramasya vedhasaù
agho 'pi yat-sparçana-dhauta-pätakaù
präpätma-sämyaà tv asatäà sudurlabham
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
807
SYNONYMS
na—not; etat—this; vicitram—is wonderful; manuja-arbha-mäyinaù—of
Kåñëa, who appeared as the son of Nanda Mahäräja and Yaçodä, being
compassionate upon them; para-avaräëäm—of all causes and effects;
paramasya vedhasaù—of the supreme creator; aghaù api—Aghäsura also;
yat-sparçana—simply by the slight association of whom;
dhauta-pätakaù—became freed from all contamination of material existence;
präpa—became elevated; ätma-sämyam—to a body exactly resembling that of
Näräyaëa; tu—but; asatäm sudurlabham—which is not at all possible to be
obtained by contaminated souls (but everything can be possible by the mercy
of the Supreme Lord).
TRANSLATION
Kåñëa is the cause of all causes. The causes and effects of the material world,
both higher and lower, are all created by the Supreme Lord, the original
controller. When Kåñëa appeared as the son of Nanda Mahäräja and Yaçodä, He
did so by His causeless mercy. Consequently, for Him to exhibit His unlimited
opulence was not at all wonderful. Indeed, He showed such great mercy that
even Aghäsura, the most sinful miscreant, was elevated to being one of His
associates and achieving särüpya-mukti, which is actually impossible for
materially contaminated persons to attain.
PURPORT
The word mäyä is also used in connection with love. Out of mäyä, love, a
father has affection for his child. Therefore the word mäyinaù indicates that
Kåñëa, out of love, appeared as the son of Nanda Mahäräja and assumed the
form of a human child (manujärbha). Kåñëa is the cause of all causes. He is the
creator of cause and effect, and He is the supreme controller. Nothing is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
808
impossible for Him. Therefore, that He enabled even a living being like
Aghäsura to attain the salvation of särüpya-mukti was not at all wonderful for
Kåñëa. Kåñëa took pleasure in entering the mouth of Aghäsura in a sporting
spirit along with His associates. Therefore, when Aghäsura, by that sporting
association, as maintained in the spiritual world, was purified of all
contamination, he attained särüpya-mukti and vimukti by the grace of Kåñëa.
For Kåñëa this was not at all wonderful.
TEXT 39
s$ak{(âd"Ëÿ‘aitamaAntar"Aih"taA
manaAemayaI BaAgAvataI%M d"d"AE gAitama,
s$a Wva inatyaAtmas$auKaAnauBaUtyaiBavyaud"
stamaAyaAe'ntagARtaAe ih" ikM( pauna:
sakåd yad-aìga-pratimäntar-ähitä
manomayé bhägavatéà dadau gatim
sa eva nityätma-sukhänubhüty-abhivyudasta-
mäyo 'ntar-gato hi kià punaù
SYNONYMS
sakåt—once only; yat—whose; aìga-pratimä—the form of the Supreme Lord
(there are many forms, but Kåñëa is the original form); antaù-ähitä—placing
within the core of the heart, somehow or other; manaù-mayé—thinking of
Him even by force; bhägavatém—which is competent to offer devotional
service to the Lord; dadau—Kåñëa gave; gatim—the best destination; saù—He
(the Supreme Personality of Godhead); eva—indeed; nitya—always; ätma—of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
all living entities; sukha-anubhüti—anyone thinking of Him immediately
enjoys transcendental pleasure; abhivyudasta-mäyaù—because all illusion is
809
completely removed by Him; antaù-gataù—He is always present within the
core of the heart; hi—indeed; kim punaù—what to speak.
TRANSLATION
If even only once or even by force one brings the form of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead into one's mind, one can attain the supreme salvation
by the mercy of Kåñëa, as did Aghäsura. What then is to be said of those whose
hearts the Supreme Personality of Godhead enters when He appears as an
incarnation, or those who always think of the lotus feet of the Lord, who is the
source of transcendental bliss for all living entities and by whom all illusion is
completely removed?
PURPORT
The process for receiving the favor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
is described here. Yat-päda-paìkaja-paläça-viläsa-bhaktyä (SB 4.22.39). Simply
by thinking of Kåñëa, one can attain Him very easily. Kåñëa is also described as
having His lotus feet always within the hearts of His devotees (bhagavän
bhakta-hådi sthitaù). In the case of Aghäsura, one may argue that he was not a
devotee. The answer to this is that he thought of Kåñëa for a moment with
devotion. Bhaktyäham ekayä grähyaù. Without devotion, one cannot think of
Kåñëa; and, conversely, whenever one thinks of Kåñëa, one undoubtedly has
devotion. Although Aghäsura's purpose was to kill Kåñëa, for a moment
Aghäsura thought of Kåñëa with devotion, and Kåñëa and His associates
wanted to sport within Aghäsura's mouth. Similarly, Pütanä wanted to kill
Kåñëa by poisoning Him, but Kåñëa took her as His mother because He had
accepted the milk of her breast. Svalpam apy asya dharmasya träyate mahato
bhayät (Bg. 2.40). Especially when Kåñëa appears as an avatära, anyone who
thinks of Kåñëa in His different incarnations (rämädi-mürtiñu kalä-niyamena
tiñöhan [Bs. 5.39]), and especially in His original form as Kåñëa, attains
salvation. There are many instances of this, and among them is Aghäsura, who
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
810
attained the salvation of särüpya-mukti. Therefore the process is satataà
kértayanto mäà yatantaç ca dåòha-vratäù (Bg. 9.14). Those who are devotees
always engage in glorifying Kåñëa. Advaitam acyutam anädim ananta-rüpam:
[Bs. 5.33] when we speak of Kåñëa, we refer to all His avatäras, such as Kåñëa,
Govinda, Näräyaëa, Viñëu, Lord Caitanya, Kåñëa-Balaräma and
Çyämasundara. One who always thinks of Kåñëa must attain vimukti, special
salvation as the Lord's personal associate, not necessarily in Våndävana, but at
least in Vaikuëöha. This is called särüpya-mukti.
TEXT 40
™aIs$aUta ovaAca
wtTaM iã"jaA yaAd"vade"vad"Ôa:
™autvaA svar"Atauêir"taM ivaica‡ama,
pa‘acC$ BaUyaAe'ipa tade"va pauNyaM
vaEyaAs$aikM( yaiªagA{h"ItacaetaA:
çré-süta uväca
itthaà dvijä yädavadeva-dattaù
çrutvä sva-rätuç caritaà vicitram
papraccha bhüyo 'pi tad eva puëyaà
vaiyäsakià yan nigåhéta-cetäù
SYNONYMS
çré-sütaù uväca—Çré Süta Gosvämé spoke to the assembled saints at
Naimiñäraëya; ittham—in this way; dvijäù—O learned brähmaëas;
yädava-deva-dattaù—Mahäräja Parékñit (or Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira), who was
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
protected by Yädavadeva, Kåñëa; çrutvä—hearing; sva-rätuù—of Kåñëa, who
was his savior within the womb of his mother, Uttarä; caritam—the activities;
811
vicitram—all wonderful; papraccha—inquired; bhüyaù api—even again; tat
eva—such activities; puëyam—which are always full of pious activities
(çåëvatäà sva-kathäù kåñëaù puëya-çravaëa-kértanaù: [SB 1.2.17] to hear about
Kåñëa is always pious); vaiyäsakim—unto Çukadeva Gosvämé; yat—because;
nigåhéta-cetäù—Parékñit Mahäräja had already become steady in hearing about
Kåñëa.
TRANSLATION
Çré Süta Gosvämé said: O learned saints, the childhood pastimes of Çré Kåñëa
are very wonderful. Mahäräja Parékñit, after hearing about those pastimes of
Kåñëa, who had saved him in the womb of his mother, became steady in his
mind and again inquired from Çukadeva Gosvämé to hear about those pious
activities.
TEXT 41
™aIr"AjaAevaAca
“aöna, k(AlaAntar"k{(taM
tatk(AlaInaM k(TaM Bavaeta,
yatk(AEmaAre" h"ir"k{(taM
jagAu: paAEgANx"ke('BaRk(A:
çré-räjoväca
brahman käläntara-kåtaà
tat-kälénaà kathaà bhavet
yat kaumäre hari-kåtaà
jaguù paugaëòake 'rbhakäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
812
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—Mahäräja Parékñit inquired; brahman—O learned brähmaëa
(Çukadeva Gosvämé); käla-antara-kåtam—things done in the past, at a
different time (in the kaumära age); tat-kälénam—described as happening now
(in the paugaëòa age); katham bhavet—how could it be so; yat—which
pastime; kaumäre—in the kaumära age; hari-kåtam—was done by Kåñëa;
jaguù—they described; paugaëòake—in the paugaëòa age (after one year);
arbhakäù—all the boys.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Parékñit inquired: O great sage, how could things done in the past
have been described as being done at the present? Lord Çré Kåñëa performed this
pastime of killing Aghäsura during His kaumära age. How then, during His
paugaëòa age, could the boys have described this incident as having happened
recently?
TEXT 42
taä," “aUih" mae mah"AyaAeigAna,
parM" k(AEtaUh"laM gAur"Ae
naUnamaetaÜ"re"re"va
maAyaA Bavaita naAnyaTaA
tad brühi me mahä-yogin
paraà kautühalaà guro
nünam etad dharer eva
mäyä bhavati nänyathä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
813
SYNONYMS
tat brühi—therefore please explain that; me—unto me; mahä-yogin—O great
yogé; param—very much; kautühalam—curiosity; guro—O my lord, my
spiritual master; nünam—otherwise; etat—this incident; hareù—of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; eva—indeed; mäyä—the illusion;
bhavati—becomes; na anyathä—nothing more.
TRANSLATION
O greatest yogé, my spiritual master, kindly describe why this happened. I
am very much curious to know about it. I think that it was nothing but another
illusion due to Kåñëa.
PURPORT
Kåñëa has many potencies: paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate (Çvetäçvatara
Upaniñad 6.8 [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]). The description of Aghäsura was
disclosed after one year. Some act of Kåñëa's potency must have been involved.
Therefore Mahäräja Parékñit was very curious to know about this, and he
requested Çukadeva Gosvämé to explain it.
TEXT 43
vayaM DanyatamaA laAeke(
gAur"Ae'ipa ºa‡abanDava:
vayaM ipabaAmaAe mauò"stvaÔa:
pauNyaM k{(SNAk(TaAma{tama,
vayaà dhanyatamä loke
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
814
guro 'pi kñatra-bandhavaù
vayaà pibämo muhus tvattaù
puëyaà kåñëa-kathämåtam
SYNONYMS
vayam—we are; dhanya-tamäù—most glorified; loke—in this world; guro—O
my lord, my spiritual master; api—although; kñatra-bandhavaù—the lowest of
the kñatriyas (because we did not act like kñatriyas); vayam—we are;
pibämaù—drinking; muhuù—always; tvattaù—from you; puëyam—pious;
kåñëa-kathä-amåtam—the nectar of kåñëa-kathä.
TRANSLATION
O my lord, my spiritual master, although we are the lowest of kñatriyas, we
are glorified and benefited because we have the opportunity of always hearing
from you the nectar of the pious activities of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
PURPORT
The pious activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are very
confidential. It is not ordinarily possible to hear such activities unless one is
very, very fortunate. Parékñit Mahäräja placed himself as kñatra-bandhavaù,
which means "the lowest of the kñatriyas." The qualities of the kñatriya are
described in Bhagavad-gétä, and although the general quality of the kñatriya is
éçvara-bhäva, the tendency to rule, a kñatriya is not supposed to rule over a
brähmaëa. Thus Mahäräja Parékñit regretted that he had wanted to rule over
the brähmaëas and had therefore been cursed. He considered himself the
lowest of the kñatriyas. Dänam éçvara-bhävaç ca kñätraà karma svabhävajam
(Bg. 18.43). There was no doubt that Mahäräja Parékñit had the good qualities
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
of a kñatriya, but as a devotee he presented himself, with submissiveness and
815
humility, as the lowest of the kñatriyas, remembering his act of wrapping a dead
serpent around the neck of a brähmaëa. A student and disciple has the right to
ask the guru about any confidential service, and it is the duty of the guru to
explain these confidential matters to his disciple.
TEXT 44
™aIs$aUta ovaAca
wtTaM sma pa{í": s$a tau baAd"r"AyaiNAs$a,
tatsmaAir"taAnantaô$taAiKalaein‰"ya:
k{(cC)$AtpaunalaRbDabaih"ä{R"izA: zAnaE:
‘atyaAh" taM BaAgAvataAeÔamaAeÔama
çré-süta uväca
itthaà sma påñöaù sa tu bädaräyaëis
tat-smäritänanta-håtäkhilendriyaù
kåcchrät punar labdha-bahir-dåçiù çanaiù
pratyäha taà bhägavatottamottama
SYNONYMS
çré-sütaù uväca—Çré Süta Gosvämé said; ittham—in this way; sma—in the past;
påñöaù—being inquired from; saù—he; tu—indeed;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
bädaräyaëiù—Çukadeva
Gosvämé; tat—by him (Çukadeva Gosvämé); smärita-ananta—as soon as Lord
Kåñëa was remembered; håta—lost in ecstasy; akhila-indriyaù—all actions of
the external senses; kåcchrät—with great difficulty; punaù—again;
labdha-bahiù-dåçiù—having revived his external sensory perception;
çanaiù—slowly; pratyäha—replied; tam—unto Mahäräja Parékñit;
bhägavata-uttama-uttama—O great saintly person, greatest of all devotees
(Çaunaka).
816
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: O Çaunaka, greatest of saints and devotees, when
Mahäräja Parékñit inquired from Çukadeva Gosvämé in this way, Çukadeva
Gosvämé, immediately remembering subject matters about Kåñëa within the
core of his heart, externally lost contact with the actions of his senses.
Thereafter, with great difficulty, he revived his external sensory perception and
began to speak to Mahäräja Parékñit about kåñëa-kathä.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Tenth Canto, Twelfth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled, "The Killing of the Demon Aghäsura."
13. The Stealing of the Boys and Calves by Brahmä
This chapter describes Lord Brahmä's attempt to take away the calves and
cowherd boys, and it also describes the bewilderment of Lord Brahmä and
finally the clearance of his illusion.
Although the incident concerning Aghäsura had been performed one year
before, when the cowherd boys were five years old, when they were six years
old they said, "It happened today." What happened was this. After killing
Aghäsura, Kåñëa, along with His associates the cowherd boys, went for a picnic
within the forest. The calves, being allured by green grasses, gradually went far
away, and therefore Kåñëa's associates became a little agitated and wanted to
bring back the calves. Kåñëa, however, encouraged the boys by saying, "You
take your tiffin without being agitated. I shall go find the calves." And thus the
Lord departed. Then, just to examine the potency of Kåñëa, Lord Brahmä took
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
817
away all the calves and cowherd boys and kept them in a secluded place.
When Kåñëa was unable to find the calves and boys, He could understand
that this was a trick performed by Brahmä. Then the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the cause of all causes, in order to please Lord Brahmä, as well as His
own associates and their mothers, expanded Himself to become the calves and
boys, exactly as they were before. In this way, He discovered another pastime.
A special feature of this pastime was that the mothers of the cowherd boys
thus became more attached to their respective sons, and the cows became more
attached to their calves. After nearly a year, Baladeva observed that all the
cowherd boys and calves were expansions of Kåñëa. Thus He inquired from
Kåñëa and was informed of what had happened.
When one full year had passed, Brahmä returned and saw that Kåñëa was
still engaged as usual with His friends and the calves and cows. Then Kåñëa
exhibited all the calves and cowherd boys as four-armed forms of Näräyaëa.
Brahmä could then understand Kåñëa's potency, and he was astonished by the
pastimes of Kåñëa, his worshipable Lord. Kåñëa, however, bestowed His
causeless mercy upon Brahmä and released him from illusion. Thus Brahmä
began to offer prayers to glorify the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
s$aADau pa{íM" mah"ABaAgA
tvayaA BaAgAvataAeÔama
yaªaUtanayas$aIzAsya
Za{Nvaªaipa k(TaAM mauò":
çré-çuka uväca
sädhu påñöaà mahä-bhäga
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
818
tvayä bhägavatottama
yan nütanayaséçasya
çåëvann api kathäà muhuù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; sädhu påñöam—I have been very
much honored by your inquiry; mahä-bhäga—you are a greatly fortunate
personality; tvayä—by you; bhägavata-uttama—O best of devotees;
yat—because; nütanayasi—you are making newer and newer; éçasya—of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; çåëvan api—although you are continuously
hearing; kathäm—the pastimes; muhuù—again and again.
TRANSLATION
Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O best of devotees, most fortunate Parékñit,
you have inquired very nicely, for although constantly hearing the pastimes of
the Lord, you are perceiving His activities to be newer and newer.
PURPORT
Unless one is very advanced in Kåñëa consciousness, one cannot stick to
hearing the pastimes of the Lord constantly. Nityaà nava-naväya-mänam:
even though advanced devotees hear continually about the Lord for years,
they still feel that these topics are coming to them as newer and fresher.
Therefore such devotees cannot give up hearing of the pastimes of Lord Kåñëa.
premäïjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaù sadaiva hådayeñu vilokayanti. The
word santaù is used to refer to persons who have developed love for Kåñëa.
Yaà çyämasundaram acintya-guëa-svarüpaà govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà
bhajämi (Bs. 5.38). Parékñit Mahäräja, therefore, is addressed as bhägavatottama,
the best of devotees, because unless one is very much elevated in devotional
service, one cannot feel ecstasy from hearing more and more and appreciate
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
819
the topics as ever fresher and newer.
TEXT 2
s$ataAmayaM s$aAr"Ba{taAM inas$agAAeR
yad"TaRvaANAI™auitacaetas$aAmaipa
‘aitaºaNAM navyavad"cyautasya yata,
iñyaA ivaq%AnaAimava s$aADau vaAtaAR
satäm ayaà sära-bhåtäà nisargo
yad-artha-väëé-çruti-cetasäm api
prati-kñaëaà navya-vad acyutasya yat
striyä viöänäm iva sädhu värtä
SYNONYMS
satäm—of the devotees; ayam—this; sära-bhåtäm—those who are
paramahaàsas, who have accepted the essence of life; nisargaù—feature or
symptom; yat—which; artha-väëé—the aim of life, the aim of profit; çruti—the
aim of understanding; cetasäm api—who have decided to accept the bliss of
transcendental subjects as the aim and object of life; prati-kñaëam—every
moment; navya-vat—as if newer and newer; acyutasya—of Lord Kåñëa;
yat—because; striyäù—(topics) of woman or sex; viöänäm—of debauchees, who
are attached to women; iva—exactly like; sädhu värtä—actual conversation.
TRANSLATION
Paramahaàsas, devotees who have accepted the essence of life, are attached
to Kåñëa in the core of their hearts, and He is the aim of their lives. It is their
nature to talk only of Kåñëa at every moment, as if such topics were newer and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
820
newer. They are attached to such topics, just as materialists are attached to
topics of women and sex.
PURPORT
The word sära-bhåtäm means paramahaàsas. The haàsa, or swan, accepts
milk from a mixture of milk and water and rejects the water. Similarly, the
nature of persons who have taken to spiritual life and Kåñëa consciousness,
understanding Kåñëa to be the life and soul of everyone, is that they cannot
give up kåñëa-kathä, or topics about Kåñëa, at any moment. Such
paramahaàsas always see Kåñëa within the core of the heart (santaù sadaiva
hådayeñu vilokayanti). Käma (desires), krodha (anger) and bhaya (fear) are
always present in the material world, but in the spiritual, or transcendental,
world one can use them for Kåñëa. Kämaà kåñëa-karmärpaëe. The desire of
the paramahaàsas, therefore, is to act always for Kåñëa. Krodhaà bhakta-dveñi
jane. They use anger against the nondevotees and transform bhaya, or fear,
into fear of being deviated from Kåñëa consciousness. In this way, the life of a
paramahaàsa devotee is used entirely for Kåñëa, just as the life of a person
attached to the material world is used simply for women and money. What is
day for the materialistic person is night for the spiritualist. What is very sweet
for the materialist—namely women and money—is regarded as poison by the
spiritualist.
sandarçanaà viñayinäm atha yoñitäà ca
ha hanta hanta viña-bhakñaëato 'py asädhu
[Cc. Madhya 11.8]
This is the instruction of Caitanya Mahäprabhu. For the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Kåñëa
is everything, but for the materialist, women and money are everything.
TEXT 3
821
Za{NAuSvaAvaih"taAe r"Ajaªa,
@ipa gAu÷M vad"Aima tae
“aUyau: iµagDasya izASyasya
gAur"vaAe gAu÷mapyauta
çåëuñvävahito räjann
api guhyaà vadämi te
brüyuù snigdhasya çiñyasya
guravo guhyam apy uta
SYNONYMS
çåëusva—please hear; avahitaù—with great attention; räjan—O King
(Mahäräja Parékñit); api—although; guhyam—very confidential (because
ordinary men cannot understand the activities of Kåñëa); vadämi—I shall
explain; te—unto you; brüyuù—explain; snigdhasya—submissive; çiñyasya—of
a disciple; guravaù—spiritual masters; guhyam—very confidential; api
uta—even so.
TRANSLATION
O King, kindly hear me with great attention. Although the activities of the
Supreme Lord are very confidential, no ordinary man being able to understand
them, I shall speak about them to you, for spiritual masters explain to a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
submissive disciple even subject matters that are very confidential and difficult
to understand.
TEXT 4
taTaAGavad"naAnma{tyaAe
822
r"iºatvaA vats$apaAlak(Ana,
s$air"tpauilanamaAnaIya
BagAvaAinad"ma“avaIta,
tathägha-vadanän måtyo
rakñitvä vatsa-pälakän
sarit-pulinam änéya
bhagavän idam abravét
SYNONYMS
tathä—thereafter; agha-vadanät—from the mouth of Aghäsura;
måtyoù—death personified; rakñitvä—after saving; vatsa-pälakän—all the
cowherd boys and calves; sarit-pulinam—to the bank of the river;
änéya—bringing them; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Kåñëa; idam—these words; abravét—spoke.
TRANSLATION
Then, after saving the boys and calves from the mouth of Aghäsura, who
was death personified, Lord Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
brought them all to the bank of the river and spoke the following words.
TEXT 5
@h"Ae'itar"myaM pauilanaM vayasyaA:
svake(ilas$ampanma{äu"laAcC$baAlauk(ma,
s$Pu(q%ts$ar"AegAnDaô$taAilapai‡ak(-
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
823
Dvaina‘aitaDvaAnalas$aä,"åu"maAku(lama,
aho 'tiramyaà pulinaà vayasyäù
sva-keli-sampan måduläccha-bälukam
sphuöat-saro-gandha-håtäli-patrikadhvani-
pratidhväna-lasad-drumäkulam
SYNONYMS
aho—oh; ati-ramyam—very, very beautiful; pulinam—the bank of the river;
vayasyäù—My dear friends; sva-keli-sampat—full with all paraphernalia for
pastimes of play; mådula-accha-bälukam—the very soft and clean sandy bank;
sphuöat—in full bloom; saraù-gandha—by the aroma of the lotus flower;
håta—attracted; ali—of the bumblebees; patrika—and of the birds;
dhvani-pratidhväna—the sounds of their chirping and moving and the echoes
of these sounds; lasat—moving all over; druma-äkulam—full of nice trees.
TRANSLATION
My dear friends, just see how this riverbank is extremely beautiful because
of its pleasing atmosphere. And just see how the blooming lotuses are attracting
bees and birds by their aroma. The humming and chirping of the bees and birds
is echoing throughout the beautiful trees in the forest. Also, here the sands are
clean and soft. Therefore, this must be considered the best place for our
sporting and pastimes.
PURPORT
The description of Våndävana forest as given herewith was spoken by
Kåñëa five thousand years ago, and the same condition prevailed during the
time of the Vaiñëava äcäryas three or four hundred years ago.
Küjat-kokila-haàsa-särasa-gaëäkérëe mayüräkule. Våndävana forest is always
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
824
filled with the chirping and cooing of birds like cuckoos (kokila), ducks
(haàsa) and cranes (särasa), and it is also full of peacocks (mayüräkule). The
same sounds and atmosphere still prevail in the area where our
Kåñëa-Balaräma temple is situated. Everyone who visits this temple is pleased
to hear the chirping of the birds as described here (küjat-kokila-haàsa-särasa).
TEXT 6
@‡a BaAel(vyamasmaAiBar,"
id"vaAè&XM# ºauDaAidR"taA:
vats$aA: s$amaIpae'pa: paItvaA
car"ntau zAnakE(sta{NAma,
atra bhoktavyam asmäbhir
divärüòhaà kñudhärditäù
vatsäù samépe 'paù pétvä
carantu çanakais tåëam
SYNONYMS
atra—here, on this spot; bhoktavyam—our lunch should be eaten;
asmäbhiù—by us; diva-ärüòham—it is very late now; kñudhä arditäù—we are
fatigued with hunger; vatsäù—the calves; samépe—nearby; apaù—water;
pétvä—after drinking; carantu—let them eat; çanakaiù—slowly; tåëam—the
grasses.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
TRANSLATION
I think we should take our lunch here, since we are already hungry because
the time is very late. Here the calves may drink water and go slowly here and
825
there and eat the grass.
TEXT 7
taTaeita paAyaiyatvaABaAR
vats$aAnaAç&Dya zAAã"lae
mauftvaA izAfyaAina bauBaujau:
s$amaM BagAvataA maud"A
tatheti päyayitvärbhä
vatsän ärudhya çädvale
muktvä çikyäni bubhujuù
samaà bhagavatä mudä
SYNONYMS
tathä iti—as Kåñëa proposed, the other cowherd boys agreed; päyayitvä
arbhäù—they allowed to drink water; vatsän—the calves; ärudhya—tying
them to the trees, allowed them to eat; çädvale—in a place of green, tender
grasses; muktvä—opening; çikyäni—their bags of eatables and other
paraphernalia; bubhujuù—went and enjoyed; samam—equally;
bhagavatä—with the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mudä—in
transcendental pleasure.
TRANSLATION
Accepting Lord Kåñëa's proposal, the cowherd boys allowed the calves to
drink water from the river and then tied them to trees where there was green,
tender grass. Then the boys opened their baskets of food and began eating with
Kåñëa in great transcendental pleasure.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
826
TEXT 8
k{(SNAsya ivaSvafpauç&r"AijamaNx"laEr,"
@ByaAnanaA: Pu(éaä{"zAAe ˜ajaABaRk(A:
s$ah"Aepaivaí"A ivaipanae ivare"jauzA,
C$d"A yaTaAmBaAeç&h"k(iNARk(AyaA:
kåñëasya viñvak puru-räji-maëòalair
abhyänanäù phulla-dåço vrajärbhakäù
sahopaviñöä vipine virejuç
chadä yathämbhoruha-karëikäyäù
SYNONYMS
kåñëasya viñvak—surrounding Kåñëa; puru-räji-maëòalaiù—by different
encirclements of associates; abhyänanäù—everyone looking forward to the
center, where Kåñëa was sitting; phulla-dåçaù—their faces looking very bright
because of transcendental pleasure; vraja-arbhakäù—all the cowherd boys of
Vrajabhümi; saha-upaviñöäù—sitting with Kåñëa; vipine—in the forest;
virejuù—so nicely and beautifully made; chadäù—petals and leaves;
yathä—just as; ambhoruha—of a lotus flower; karëikäyäù—of the whorl.
TRANSLATION
Like the whorl of a lotus flower surrounded by its petals and leaves, Kåñëa
sat in the center, encircled by lines of His friends, who all looked very
beautiful. Every one of them was trying to look forward toward Kåñëa, thinking
that Kåñëa might look toward him. In this way they all enjoyed their lunch in
the forest.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
827
PURPORT
To a pure devotee, Kåñëa is always visible, as stated in the Brahmä saàhitä
(santaù sadaiva hådayeñu vilokayanti) and as indicated by Kåñëa Himself in
Bhagavad-gétä (sarvataù päëi-pädaà tat sarvato 'kñi-çiro-mukham). If by
accumulating pious activities (kåta-puëya-puïjäù [SB 10.12.11]) one is raised to
the platform of pure devotional service, Kåñëa is always visible in the core of
one's heart. One who has attained such perfection is all-beautiful in
transcendental bliss. The present Kåñëa consciousness movement is an attempt
to keep Kåñëa in the center, for if this is done all activities will automatically
become beautiful and blissful.
TEXT 9
ke(icatpauSpaEdR"laE: ke(icata,
paéavaEr"ÇÿrE": P(laE:
izAigBastvaigBaä{R"Saià"ê
bauBaujau: k{(taBaAjanaA:
kecit puñpair dalaiù kecit
pallavair aìkuraiù phalaiù
çigbhis tvagbhir dåñadbhiç ca
bubhujuù kåta-bhäjanäù
SYNONYMS
kecit—someone; puñpaiù—by flowers; dalaiù—by nice leaves of flowers;
kecit
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
pallavaiù—on the surface of bunches of leaves; aìkuraiù—on
the sprouts of flowers; phalaiù—and some on fruits; çigbhiù—some actually in
the basket or packet; tvagbhiù—by the bark of trees; dåñadbhiù—on rocks;
828
ca—and; bubhujuù—enjoyed; kåta-bhäjanäù—as if they had made their plates
for eating.
TRANSLATION
Among the cowherd boys, some placed their lunch on flowers, some on
leaves, fruits, or bunches of leaves, some actually in their baskets, some on the
bark of trees and some on rocks. This is what the children imagined to be their
plates as they ate their lunch.
TEXT 10
s$avaeR imaTaAe d"zARyanta:
svasvaBaAejyaç&icaM pa{Tak,(
h"s$antaAe h"As$ayantaêAByavajaoeú":
s$ahe"ìr"A:
sarve mitho darçayantaù
sva-sva-bhojya-rucià påthak
hasanto häsayantaç cäbhyavajahruù
saheçvaräù
SYNONYMS
sarve—all the cowherd boys; mithaù—to one another; darçayantaù—showing;
sva-sva-bhojya-rucim påthak—different varieties of foodstuffs brought from
home, with their separate and different tastes; hasantaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—after tasting, they
were all laughing; häsayantaù ca—and making others laugh;
abhyavajahruù—enjoyed lunch; saha-éçvaräù—along with Kåñëa.
829
TRANSLATION
All the cowherd boys enjoyed their lunch with Kåñëa, showing one another
the different tastes of the different varieties of preparations they had brought
from home. Tasting one another's preparations, they began to laugh and make
one another laugh.
PURPORT
Sometimes one friend would say, "Kåñëa, see how my food is relishable," and
Kåñëa would take some and laugh. Similarly, Balaräma, Sudämä and other
friends would taste one another's food and laugh. In this way, the friends very
jubilantly began to eat their respective preparations brought from home.
TEXT 11
iba”aãe"NAuM jaQ&r"paq%yaAe: Za{"Ëÿvae‡ae ca k(ºae
vaAmae paANAAE mas$a{NAk(valaM tatP(laAnyaÌÿlaISau
itaï"nmaDyae svapair"s$auô$d"Ae h"As$ayaªamaRiBa: svaE:
svagAeR laAeke( imaSaita bauBaujae yaÁaBaugbaAlake(ila:
bibhrad veëuà jaöhara-paöayoù çåìga-vetre ca kakñe
väme päëau masåëa-kavalaà tat-phaläny aìguléñu
tiñöhan madhye sva-parisuhådo häsayan narmabhiù svaiù
svarge loke miñati bubhuje yajïa-bhug bäla-keliù
SYNONYMS
bibhrat veëum—keeping the flute; jaöhara-paöayoù—between the tight
clothing and the abdomen; çåìga-vetre—both the horn bugle and the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
830
cow-driving stick; ca—also; kakñe—on the waist; väme—on the left-hand side;
päëau—taking in hand; masåëa-kavalam—very nice food prepared with rice
and first-class curd; tat-phaläni—suitable pieces of fruit like bael;
aìguléñu—between the fingers; tiñöhan—staying in this way; madhye—in the
middle; sva-pari-suhådaù—His own personal associates; häsayan—making
them laugh; narmabhiù—with joking words; svaiù—His own; svarge loke
miñati—while the inhabitants of the heavenly planets, Svargaloka, were
watching this wonderful scene; bubhuje—Kåñëa enjoyed; yajïa-bhuk
bäla-keliù—although He accepts offerings in yajïa, for the sake of childhood
pastimes He was enjoying foodstuffs very jubilantly with His cowherd
boyfriends.
TRANSLATION
Kåñëa is yajïa-bhuk—that is, He eats only offerings of yajïa—but to
exhibit His childhood pastimes, He now sat with His flute tucked between His
waist and His tight cloth on His right side and with His horn bugle and
cow-driving stick on His left. Holding in His hand a very nice preparation of
yogurt and rice, with pieces of suitable fruit between His fingers, He sat like
the whorl of a lotus flower, looking forward toward all His friends, personally
joking with them and creating jubilant laughter among them as He ate. At that
time, the denizens of heaven were watching, struck with wonder at how the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Personality of Godhead, who eats only in yajïa, was now eating with His
friends in the forest.
PURPORT
When Kåñëa was eating with His cowherd boyfriends, a certain bumblebee
came there to take part in the eating. Thus Kåñëa joked, "Why have you come
to disturb My brähmaëa friend Madhumaìgala? You want to kill a brähmaëa.
This is not good." All the boys would laugh and enjoy, speaking such joking
words while eating. Thus the inhabitants of the higher planets were astonished
831
at how the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who eats only when yajïa is
offered, was now eating like an ordinary child with His friends in the forest.
TEXT 12
BaAr"taEvaM vats$apaeSau
BauÃaAnaeSvacyautaAtmas$au
vats$aAstvantavaR"nae äU"rM"
ivaivazAusta{NAlaAeiBataA:
bhärataivaà vatsa-peñu
bhuïjäneñv acyutätmasu
vatsäs tv antar-vane düraà
viviçus tåëa-lobhitäù
SYNONYMS
bhärata—O Mahäräja Parékñit; evam—in this way (while they were enjoying
their lunch); vatsa-peñu—along with all the boys tending the calves;
bhuïjäneñu—engaged in taking their food; acyuta-ätmasu—all of them being
very near and dear to Acyuta, Kåñëa; vatsäù—the calves; tu—however;
antaù-vane—within the deep forest; düram—far away; viviçuù—entered;
tåëa-lobhitäù—being allured by green grass.
TRANSLATION
O Mahäräja Parékñit, while the cowherd boys, who knew nothing within the
core of their hearts but Kåñëa, were thus engaged in eating their lunch in the
forest, the calves went far away, deep into the forest, being allured by green
grass.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
832
TEXT 13
taAnä{"î"A Bayas$an‡astaAna,
Ocae k{(SNAAe'sya BaIBayama,
ima‡aANyaAzAAnmaA ivar"mataeh"
AnaeSyae vats$ak(Anah"ma,
tän dåñövä bhaya-santrastän
üce kåñëo 'sya bhé-bhayam
miträëy äçän mä viramatehäneñye
vatsakän aham
SYNONYMS
tän—that those calves were going away; dåñövä—seeing; bhaya-santrastän—to
the cowherd boys, who were disturbed by fear that within the dense forest the
calves would be attacked by some ferocious animals; üce—Kåñëa said; kåñëaù
asya bhé-bhayam—Kåñëa, who is Himself the fearful element of all kinds of
fear (when Kåñëa is present, there is no fear); miträëi—My dear friends;
äçät—from your enjoyment of eating; mä viramata—do not stop; iha—in this
place, in this spot; äneñye—I shall bring back; vatsakän—the calves; aham—I.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
When Kåñëa saw that His friends the cowherd boys were frightened, He, the
fierce controller even of fear itself, said, just to mitigate their fear, "My dear
friends, do not stop eating. I shall bring your calves back to this spot by
personally going after them Myself."
833
PURPORT
In the presence of Kåñëa's friendship, a devotee cannot have any fear.
Kåñëa is the supreme controller, the controller of even death, which is
supposed to be the ultimate fear in this material world. Bhayaà
dvitéyäbhiniveçataù syät (SB 11.2.37). This fear arises because of lack of Kåñëa
consciousness; otherwise there cannot be any fear. For one who has taken
shelter of the lotus feet of Kåñëa, this material world of fear becomes hardly
dangerous at all.
bhavämbudhir vatsa-padaà paraà padaà
padaà padaà yad vipadäà na teñäm
Bhavämbudhiù, the material ocean of fear, becomes very easy to cross by the
mercy of the supreme controller. This material world, in which there is fear
and danger at every step (padaà padaà yad vipadäm), is not meant for those
who have taken shelter at Kåñëa's lotus feet. Such persons are delivered from
this fearful world.
samäçritä ye pada-pallava-plavaà
mahat-padaà puëya-yaço muräreù
bhavämbudhir vatsa-padaà paraà padaà
padaà padaà yad vipadäà na teñäm
(SB 10.14.58)
Everyone, therefore, should take shelter of the Supreme Person, who is the
source of fearlessness, and thus be secure.
TEXT 14
wtyauftvaAi‰"d"r"Iku(Ãacopyright
©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
834
gAù"re"SvaAtmavats$ak(Ana,
ivaicanvana, BagAvaAna, k{(SNA:
s$apaAiNAk(valaAe yayaAE
ity uktvädri-daré-kuïjagahvareñv
ätma-vatsakän
vicinvan bhagavän kåñëaù
sapäëi-kavalo yayau
SYNONYMS
iti uktvä—saying this ("Let Me bring your calves personally");
adri-daré-kuïja-gahvareñu—everywhere in the mountains, the mountain caves,
the bushes and narrow places; ätma-vatsakän—the calves belonging to His
own personal friends; vicinvan—searching out; bhagavän—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; kåñëaù—Lord Kåñëa; sa-päëi-kavalaù—carrying His
yogurt and rice in His hand; yayau—started out.
TRANSLATION
"Let Me go and search for the calves," Kåñëa said. "Don't disturb your
enjoyment." Then, carrying His yogurt and rice in His hand, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, immediately went out to search for the calves of
His friends. To please His friends, He began searching in all the mountains,
mountain caves, bushes and narrow passages.
PURPORT
The Vedas (Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad 6.8) assert that the Supreme Personality
of Godhead has nothing to do personally (na tasya käryaà karaëaà ca vidyate)
because He is doing everything through His energies and potencies (paräsya
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
835
çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]). Nonetheless, here we see
that He took personal care to find the calves of His friends. This was Kåñëa's
causeless mercy. Mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù süyate sa-caräcaram: [Bg. 9.10] all the
affairs of the entire world and the entire cosmic manifestation are working
under His direction, through His different energies. Still, when there is a need
to take care of His friends, He does this personally. Kåñëa assured His friends,
"Don't be afraid. I am going personally to search for your calves." This was
Kåñëa's causeless mercy.
TEXT 15
@mBaAejanmajainastad"ntar"gAtaAe maAyaABaRk(syaeizAtaur,"
‰"í]M" maÃau maih"tvamanyad"ipa taã"ts$aAinataAe vats$apaAna,
naItvaAnya‡a ku(è&ã"h"Antar"d"DaAtKae'vaisTataAe ya: paur"A
ä{"î"AGaAs$aur"maAeºaNAM ‘aBavata: ‘aAæa: parM" ivasmayama,
ambhojanma-janis tad-antara-gato mäyärbhakasyeçitur
drañöuà maïju mahitvam anyad api tad-vatsän ito vatsapän
nétvänyatra kurüdvahäntaradadhät khe 'vasthito yaù purä
dåñöväghäsura-mokñaëaà prabhavataù präptaù paraà vismayam
SYNONYMS
ambhojanma-janiù—Lord Brahmä, who was born from a lotus flower;
tat-antara-gataù—now became entangled with the affairs of Kåñëa, who was
enjoying luncheon pastimes with His cowherd boys; mäyä-arbhakasya—of the
boys made by Kåñëa's mäyä; éçituù—of the supreme controller; drañöum—just
to see; maïju—very pleasing; mahitvam anyat api—other glories of the Lord
also; tat-vatsän—their calves; itaù—than that place where they were;
vatsa-pän—and the cowherd boys taking care of the calves; nétvä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
836
them; anyatra—to a different place; kurüdvaha—O Mahäräja Parékñit;
antara-dadhät—kept hidden and invisible for some time; khe avasthitaù
yaù—this person Brahmä, who was situated in the higher planetary system in
the sky; purä—formerly; dåñövä—was observing; aghäsura-mokñaëam—the
wonderful killing and deliverance of Aghäsura from material tribulation;
prabhavataù—of the all-potent Supreme Person; präptaù param
vismayam—had become extremely astonished.
TRANSLATION
O Mahäräja Parékñit, Brahmä, who resides in the higher planetary system in
the sky, had observed the activities of the most powerful Kåñëa in killing and
delivering Aghäsura, and he was astonished. Now that same Brahmä wanted to
show some of his own power and see the power of Kåñëa, who was engaged in
His childhood pastimes, playing as if with ordinary cowherd boys. Therefore, in
Kåñëa's absence, Brahmä took all the boys and calves to another place. Thus he
became entangled, for in the very near future he would see how powerful Kåñëa
was.
PURPORT
When Aghäsura was being killed by Kåñëa, who was accompanied by His
associates, Brahmä was astonished, but when he saw that Kåñëa was very much
enjoying His pastimes of lunch, he was even more astonished and wanted to
test whether Kåñëa was actually there. Thus he became entangled in Kåñëa's
mäyä. After all, Brahmä was born materially. As mentioned here, ambhojanma
janiù: he was born of ambhoja, a lotus flower. It does not matter that he was
born of a lotus and not of any man, animal or material father. A lotus is also
material, and anyone born through the material energy must be subject to the
four material deficiencies: bhrama (the tendency to commit mistakes),
pramäda (the tendency to be illusioned), vipralipsä (the tendency to cheat)
and karaëäpäöava (imperfect senses). Thus Brahmä also became entangled.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
837
Brahmä, with his mäyä, wanted to test whether Kåñëa was actually present.
These cowherd boys were but expansions of Kåñëa's personal self
(änanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhävitäbhiù [Bs. 5.37]). Later Kåñëa would show
Brahmä how He expands Himself into everything as His personal pleasure,
änanda-cinmaya-rasa. Hlädiné çaktir asmät: Kåñëa has a transcendental
potency called hlädiné çakti. He does not enjoy anything that is a product of
the material energy. Brahmä, therefore, would see Lord Kåñëa expand His
energy.
Brahmä wanted to take away Kåñëa's associates, but instead he took away
some other boys and calves. Rävaëa wanted to take away Sétä, but that was
impossible, and instead he took away a mäyä Sétä. Similarly, Brahmä took away
mäyärbhakäù: boys manifested by Kåñëa's mäyä. Brahmä could show some
extraordinary opulence to the mäyärbhakäù; but he could not show any
extraordinary potency to Kåñëa's associates. That he would see in the very near
future. Mäyärbhakasya éçituù. This bewilderment, this mäyä, was caused by the
supreme controller, prabhavataù—the all-potent Supreme person, Kåñëa—and
we shall see the result. Anyone materially born is subject to bewilderment.
This pastime is therefore called brahma-vimohana-lélä, the pastime of
bewildering Brahmä. Mohitaà näbhijänäti mäm ebhyaù param avyayam (Bg.
7.13). Materially born persons cannot fully understand Kåñëa. Even the
demigods cannot understand Him (muhyanti yat sürayaù). Tene brahmä hådä
ya ädi-kavaye (SB 1.1.1). Everyone, from Brahmä down to the small insect
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
, must
take lessons from Kåñëa.
TEXT 16
tataAe vats$aAnaä{"îE"tya
pauilanae'ipa ca vats$apaAna,
oBaAvaipa vanae k{(SNAAe
838
ivaicak(Aya s$amantata:
tato vatsän adåñövaitya
puline 'pi ca vatsapän
ubhäv api vane kåñëo
vicikäya samantataù
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; vatsän—the calves; adåñövä—not seeing there within the
forest; etya—after; puline api—to the bank of the Yamunä; ca—also;
vatsapän—could not see the cowherd boys; ubhau api—both of them (the
calves and the cowherd boys); vane—within the forest; kåñëaù—Lord Kåñëa;
vicikäya—searched all over; samantataù—here and there.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, when Kåñëa was unable to find the calves, He returned to the
bank of the river, but there He was also unable to see the cowherd boys. Thus
He began to search for both the calves and the boys, as if He could not
understand what had happened.
PURPORT
Kåñëa could immediately understand that Brahmä had taken away both the
calves and the boys, but as an innocent child He searched here and there so
that Brahmä could not understand Kåñëa's mäyä. This was all a dramatic
performance. A player knows everything, but still he plays on the stage in such
a way that others do not understand him.
TEXT 17
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
839
¸(Apyaä{"î"AntaivaRipanae
vats$aAna, paAlaAMê ivaìivata,
s$ava< ivaiDak{(taM k{(SNA:
s$ah"s$aAvajagAAma h"
kväpy adåñöväntar-vipine
vatsän päläàç ca viçva-vit
sarvaà vidhi-kåtaà kåñëaù
sahasävajagäma ha
SYNONYMS
kva api—anywhere; adåñövä—not seeing at all; antaù-vipine—within the forest;
vatsän—the calves; pälän ca—and their caretakers, the cowherd boys;
viçva-vit—Kåñëa, who is aware of everything going on throughout the whole
cosmic manifestation; sarvam—everything; vidhi-kåtam—was executed by
Brahmä; kåñëaù—Lord Kåñëa; sahasä—immediately; avajagäma ha—could
understand.
TRANSLATION
When Kåñëa was unable to find the calves and their caretakers, the cowherd
boys, anywhere in the forest, He could suddenly understand that this was the
work of Lord Brahmä.
PURPORT
Although Kåñëa is viçva-vit, the knower of everything happening in the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
entire cosmic manifestation, as an innocent child He showed ignorance of
Brahmä's actions, although He could immediately understand that these were
the doings of Brahmä. This pastime is called brahma-vimohana, the
840
bewilderment of Brahmä. Brahmä was already bewildered by Kåñëa's activities
as an innocent child, and now he would be further bewildered.
TEXT 18
tata: k{(SNAAe maudM" k(tau<
tanmaAta|NAAM ca k(sya ca
oBayaAiyatamaAtmaAnaM
ca‚e( ivaìk{(d"Iìr":
tataù kåñëo mudaà kartuà
tan-mätèëäà ca kasya ca
ubhayäyitam ätmänaà
cakre viçva-kåd éçvaraù
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; kåñëaù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
mudam—pleasure; kartum—to create; tat-mätèëäm ca—of the mothers of the
cowherd boys and calves; kasya ca—and (the pleasure) of Brahmä;
ubhayäyitam—expansion, both as the calves and as the cowherd boys;
ätmänam—Himself; cakre—did; viçva-kåt éçvaraù—it was not difficult for Him,
for He is the creator of the whole cosmic manifestation.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, just to create pleasure both for Brahmä and for the mothers of
the calves and cowherd boys, Kåñëa, the creator of the entire cosmic
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
manifestation, expanded Himself as calves and boys.
841
PURPORT
Although Brahmä was already entangled in bewilderment, he wanted to
show his power to the cowherd boys; but after he took away the boys and their
calves and returned to his abode, Kåñëa created further astonishment for
Brahmä, and for the mothers of the boys, by establishing the lunch pastimes in
the forest again and replacing all the calves and boys, just as they had appeared
before. According to the Vedas, ekaà bahu syäm: the Personality of Godhead
can become many, many millions upon millions of calves and cowherd boys, as
He did to bewilder Brahmä more and more.
TEXT 19
yaAvaã"ts$apavats$ak(Alpak(vapauyaARvatk(r"Ax.~„yaAid"kM(
yaAvaâií"ivaSaANAvaeNAud"laizAgyaAvaiã"BaUSaAmbar"ma,
yaAvacC$IlagAuNAAiBaDaAk{(itavayaAe yaAvaiã"h"Ar"Aid"kM(
s$ava< ivaSNAumayaM igAr"Ae'Ëÿvad"ja: s$avaRsvaè&paAe baBaAE
yävad vatsapa-vatsakälpaka-vapur yävat karäìghry-ädikaà
yävad yañöi-viñäëa-veëu-dala-çig yävad vibhüñämbaram
yävac chéla-guëäbhidhäkåti-vayo yävad vihärädikaà
sarvaà viñëumayaà giro 'ìga-vad ajaù sarva-svarüpo babhau
SYNONYMS
yävat vatsapa—exactly like the cowherd boys; vatsaka-alpaka-vapuù—and
exactly like the tender bodies of the calves; yävat kara-aìghri-ädikam—exactly
to the measurement of their particular varieties of legs and hands; yävat
yañöi-viñäëa-veëu-dala-çik—not only like their bodies but exactly like their
bugles, flutes, sticks, lunch bags and so on; yävat vibhüñä-ambaram—exactly
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
842
like their ornaments and dress in all their varied particulars; yävat
çéla-guëa-abhidhä-äkåti-vayaù—their exact character, habits, features,
attributes and explicit bodily features; yävat vihära-ädikam—exactly according
to their tastes or amusements; sarvam—everything in detail;
viñëu-mayam—expansions of Väsudeva, Viñëu; giraù aìga-vat—voices exactly
like theirs; ajaù—Kåñëa; sarva-svarüpaù babhau—created everything in detail
as Himself, without any change.
TRANSLATION
By His Väsudeva feature, Kåñëa simultaneously expanded Himself into the
exact number of missing cowherd boys and calves, with their exact bodily
features, their particular types of hands, legs and other limbs, their sticks,
bugles and flutes, their lunch bags, their particular types of dress and ornaments
placed in various ways, their names, ages and forms, and their special activities
and characteristics. By expanding Himself in this way, beautiful Kåñëa proved
the statement samagra-jagad viñëumayam: "Lord Viñëu is all-pervading."
PURPORT
As stated in the Brahma-saàhitä (5.33):
advaitam acyutam anädim ananta-rüpam
ädyaà puräëa-puruñaà nava-yauvanaà ca
Kåñëa, paraà brahma, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is ädyam, the
beginning of everything; He is ädi-puruñam, the ever-youthful original person.
He can expand Himself in more forms than one can imagine, yet He does not
fall down from His original form as Kåñëa; therefore He is called Acyuta. This
is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Sarvaà viñëumayaà jagat. Sarvaà
khalv idaà brahma. Kåñëa thus proved that He is everything, that He can
become everything, but that still He is personally different from everything
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
843
(mat-sthäni sarva-bhütäni na cähaà teñv avasthitaù [Bg. 9.4]). This is Kåñëa,
who is understood by acintya-bhedäbheda-tattva(12) philosophy. pürëasya
pürëam ädäya pürëam evävaçiñyate: [Éço Invocation] Kåñëa is always complete,
and although He can create millions of universes, all of them full in all
opulences, He remains as opulent as ever, without any change (advaitam). This
is explained by different Vaiñëava äcäryas through philosophies such as
viçuddhädvaita, viçiñöädvaita and dvaitädvaita. Therefore one must learn about
Kåñëa from the äcäryas. Äcäryavän puruño veda: one who follows the path of
the äcäryas knows things as they are. Such a person can know Kåñëa as He is,
at least to some extent, and as soon as one understands Kåñëa (janma karma ca
me divyam evaà yo vetti tattvataù [Bg. 4.9]), one is liberated from material
bondage (tyaktvä dehaà punar janma naiti mäm eti so 'rjuna).
TEXT 20
svayamaAtmaAtmagAAevats$aAna,
‘aitavaAyaARtmavats$apaE:
‚(Lx"ªaAtmaivah"ArE"ê
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
s$avaARtmaA ‘aAivazAä," ˜ajama,
svayam ätmätma-govatsän
prativäryätma-vatsapaiù
kréòann ätma-vihäraiç ca
sarvätmä präviçad vrajam
SYNONYMS
svayam ätmä—Kåñëa, who is personally the Supreme Soul, the Supersoul;
ätma-go-vatsän—now expanded into calves that were also He Himself;
prativärya ätma-vatsapaiù—again He Himself was represented as the cowherd
844
boys controlling and commanding the calves; kréòan—thus Himself
constituting everything in these transcendental pastimes; ätma-vihäraiù
ca—enjoying Himself by Himself in different ways; sarva-ätmä—the
Supersoul, Kåñëa; präviçat—entered; vrajam—Vrajabhümi, the land of
Mahäräja Nanda and Yaçodä.
TRANSLATION
Now expanding Himself so as to appear as all the calves and cowherd boys,
all of them as they were, and at the same time appear as their leader, Kåñëa
entered Vrajabhümi, the land of His father, Nanda Mahäräja, just as He usually
did while enjoying their company.
PURPORT
Kåñëa usually stayed in the forest and pasturing ground, taking care of the
calves and cows with His associates the cowherd boys. Now that the original
group had been taken away by Brahmä, Kåñëa Himself assumed the forms of
every member of the group, without anyone's knowledge, even the knowledge
of Baladeva, and continued the usual program. He was ordering His friends to
do this and that, and He was controlling the calves and going into the forest to
search for them when they went astray, allured by new grass, but these calves
and boys were He Himself. This was Kåñëa's inconceivable potency. As
explained by Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, rädhä kåñëa-praëaya-vikåtir hlädiné çaktir
asmät. Rädhä and Kåñëa are the same. Kåñëa, by expanding His pleasure
potency, becomes Rädhäräëé. The same pleasure potency
(änanda-cinmaya-rasa) was expanded by Kåñëa when He Himself became all
the calves and boys and enjoyed transcendental bliss in Vrajabhümi. This was
done by the yogamäyä potency and was inconceivable to persons under the
potency of mahämäyä.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
845
TEXT 21
taÔaã"ts$aAna, pa{Tax.~ naItvaA
taÔaÕ"Aeïe" inavaezya s$a:
taÔad"AtmaABava‰"AjaMs$a,
taÔats$aá ‘aivaí"vaAna,
tat-tad-vatsän påthaì nétvä
tat-tad-goñöhe niveçya saù
tat-tad-ätmäbhavad räjaàs
tat-tat-sadma praviñöavän
SYNONYMS
tat-tat-vatsän—the calves, which belonged to different cows;
påthak—separately; nétvä—bringing; tat-tat-goñöhe—to their respective cow
sheds; niveçya—entering; saù—Kåñëa; tat-tat-ätmä—as originally different
individual souls; abhavat—He expanded Himself in that way; räjan—O King
Parékñit; tat-tat-sadma—their respective houses; praviñöavän—entered (Kåñëa
thus entered everywhere).
TRANSLATION
O Mahäräja Parékñit, Kåñëa, who had divided Himself as different calves and
also as different cowherd boys, entered different cow sheds as the calves and
then different homes as different boys.
PURPORT
Kåñëa had many, many friends, of whom Çrédämä, Sudämä and Subala were
prominent. Thus Kåñëa Himself became Çrédämä, Sudämä and Subala and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
846
entered their respective houses with their respective calves.
TEXT 22
tanmaAtar"Ae vaeNAur"vatvar"AeitTataA
otTaApya d"AeiBaR: pair"r"Bya inaBaRr"ma,
µaeh"µautastanyapaya:s$auDaAs$avaM
matvaA parM" “aö s$autaAnapaAyayana,
tan-mätaro veëu-rava-tvarotthitä
utthäpya dorbhiù parirabhya nirbharam
sneha-snuta-stanya-payaù-sudhäsavaà
matvä paraà brahma sutän apäyayan
SYNONYMS
tat-mätaraù—the mothers of the respective cowherd boys; veëu-rava—because
of the sounds played on flutes and bugles by the cowherd boys;
tvara—immediately; utthitäù—awakened from their respective household
duties; utthäpya—immediately lifted their respective sons; dorbhiù—with their
two arms; parirabhya—embracing; nirbharam—without feeling any weight;
sneha-snuta—which was flowing because of intense love; stanya-payaù—their
breast milk; sudhä-äsavam—tasting just like a nectarean beverage;
matvä—accepting the milk like that;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
param—the Supreme; brahma—Kåñëa;
sutän apäyayan—began to feed their respective sons.
TRANSLATION
The mothers of the boys, upon hearing the sounds of the flutes and bugles
being played by their sons, immediately rose from their household tasks, lifted
847
their boys onto their laps, embraced them with both arms and began to feed
them with their breast milk, which flowed forth because of extreme love
specifically for Kåñëa. Actually Kåñëa is everything, but at that time, expressing
extreme love and affection, they took special pleasure in feeding Kåñëa, the
Parabrahman, and Kåñëa drank the milk from His respective mothers as if it
were a nectarean beverage.
PURPORT
Although all the elderly gopés knew that Kåñëa was the son of mother
Yaçodä, they still desired, "If Kåñëa had become my son, I would also have
taken care of Him like mother Yaçodä. "This was their inner ambition. Now, in
order to please them, Kåñëa personally took the role of their sons and fulfilled
their desire. They enhanced their special love for Kåñëa by embracing Him
and feeding Him, and Kåñëa tasted their breast milk to be just like a nectarean
beverage. While thus bewildering Brahmä, He enjoyed the special
transcendental pleasure created by yogamäyä between all the other mothers
and Himself.
TEXT 23
tataAe na{paAenmadR"namaÀalaepanaAlaÆÿAr"
r"ºaAitalak(AzAnaAid"iBa:
s$aMlaAilata: svaAcair"taE: ‘ah"SaRyana,
s$aAyaM gAtaAe yaAmayamaena maADava:
tato nåponmardana-majja-lepanälaìkära-
rakñä-tilakäçanädibhiù
saàlälitaù sväcaritaiù praharñayan
säyaà gato yäma-yamena mädhavaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
848
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; nåpa—O King (Mahäräja Parékñit); unmardana—by
massaging them with oil; majja—by bathing; lepana—by smearing the body
with oil and sandalwood pulp; alaìkära—by decorating with ornaments;
rakñä—by chanting protective mantras; tilaka—by decorating the body with
tilaka marks in twelve places; açana-ädibhiù—and by feeding them
sumptuously; saàlälitaù—in this way cared for by the mothers;
sva-äcaritaiù—by their characteristic behavior; praharña-yan—making the
mothers very much pleased; säyam—evening; gataù—arrived;
yäma-yamena—as the time of each activity passed; mädhavaù—Lord Kåñëa.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, O Mahäräja Parékñit, as required according to the scheduled
round of His pastimes, Kåñëa returned in the evening, entered the house of
each of the cowherd boys, and engaged exactly like the former boys, thus
enlivening their mothers with transcendental pleasure. The mothers took care
of the boys by massaging them with oil, bathing them, smearing their bodies
with sandalwood pulp, decorating them with ornaments, chanting protective
mantras, decorating their bodies with tilaka and giving them food. In this way,
the mothers served Kåñëa personally.
TEXT 24
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
gAAvastataAe gAAeï"maupaetya s$atvarM"
ò"ÆÿAr"GaAeSaE: pair"ó"tas$aËÿtaAna,
svak(Ana, svak(Ana, vats$atar"AnapaAyayana,
849
mauò"ilaRh"ntya: ›avad"AEDas$aM paya:
gävas tato goñöham upetya satvaraà
huìkära-ghoñaiù parihüta-saìgatän
svakän svakän vatsatarän apäyayan
muhur lihantyaù sravad audhasaà payaù
SYNONYMS
gävaù—the calves; tataù—thereafter; goñöham—to the cow sheds;
upetya—reaching; satvaram—very soon; huìkära-ghoñaiù—by making jubilant
mooing sounds; parihüta-saìgatän—to call the cows; svakän svakän—following
their respective mothers; vatsatarän—the respective calves;
apäyayan—feeding them; muhuù—again and again; lihantyaù—licking the
calves; sravat audhasam payaù—abundant milk flowing from their milk bags.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, all the cows entered their different sheds and began mooing
loudly, calling for their respective calves. When the calves arrived, the mothers
began licking the calves' bodies again and again and profusely feeding them with
the milk flowing from their milk bags.
PURPORT
All the dealings between the calves and their respective mothers taking
care of them were enacted by Kåñëa Himself.
TEXT 25
gAAegAAepaInaAM maAta{taAismaªa,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
850
@As$aItµaeh"iDaRk(AM ivanaA
paur"Aevad"Asvaipa h"re"s$a,
taAek(taA maAyayaA ivanaA
go-gopénäà mätåtäsminn
äsét snehardhikäà vinä
purovad äsv api hares
tokatä mäyayä vinä
SYNONYMS
go-gopénäm—for both the cows and the gopés, the elderly cowherd women;
mätåtä—motherly affection; asmin—unto Kåñëa; äsét—there ordinarily was;
sneha—of affection; ådhikäm—any increase; vinä—without; puraù-vat—like
before; äsu—there was among the cows and gopés; api—although; hareù—of
Kåñëa; tokatä—Kåñëa is my son; mäyayä vinä—without mäyä.
TRANSLATION
Previously, from the very beginning, the gopés had motherly affection for
Kåñëa. Indeed, their affection for Kåñëa exceeded even their affection for their
own sons. In displaying their affection, they had thus distinguished between
Kåñëa and their sons, but now that distinction disappeared.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Many elderly women have motherly affection for the sons of others. They
observe distinctions, however, between those other sons and their own. But
now the elderly gopés could not distinguish between their own sons and Kåñëa,
for since their own sons had been taken by Brahmä, Kåñëa had expanded as
851
their sons. Therefore, their extra affection for their sons, who were now Kåñëa
Himself, was due to bewilderment resembling that of Brahmä. Previously, the
mothers of Çrédämä, Sudämä, Subala and Kåñëa's other friends did not have
the same affection for one another's sons, but now the gopés treated all the boys
as their own. Çukadeva Gosvämé, therefore, wanted to explain this increment
of affection in terms of Kåñëa's bewilderment of Brahmä, the gopés, the cows
and everyone else.
TEXT 26
˜ajaAEk(s$aAM svataAeke(Sau
µaeh"vaéyaAbd"manvah"ma,
zAnaEinaR:s$aIma vava{Dae
yaTaA k{(SNAe tvapaUvaRvata,
vrajaukasäà sva-tokeñu
sneha-vally äbdam anvaham
çanair niùséma vavådhe
yathä kåñëe tv apürvavat
SYNONYMS
vraja-okasäm—of all the inhabitants of Vraja, Våndävana; sva-tokeñu—for
their own sons; sneha-vallé—the creeper of affection; ä-abdam—for one year;
anu-aham—every day; çanaiù—gradually; niùséma—without limit;
vavådhe—increased; yathä kåñëe—exactly accepting Kåñëa as their son;
tu—indeed; apürva-vat—as it had not been previously.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
852
Although the inhabitants of Vrajabhümi, the cowherd men and cowherd
women, previously had more affection for Kåñëa than for their own children,
now, for one year, their affection for their own sons continuously increased, for
Kåñëa had now become their sons. There was no limit to the increment of their
affection for their sons, who were now Kåñëa. Every day they found new
inspiration for loving their children as much as they loved Kåñëa.
TEXT 27
wtTamaAtmaAtmanaAtmaAnaM
vats$apaAlaimaSaeNA s$a:
paAlayana, vats$apaAe vaSa<
ica‚(Lxe" vanagAAeï"yaAe:
ittham ätmätmanätmänaà
vatsa-päla-miñeëa saù
pälayan vatsapo varñaà
cikréòe vana-goñöhayoù
SYNONYMS
ittham—in this way; ätmä—the Supreme Soul, Kåñëa; ätmanä—by Himself;
ätmänam—Himself again; vatsa-päla-miñeëa—with the forms of cowherd boys
and calves; saù—Kåñëa Himself; pälayan—maintaining; vatsa-paù—tending
the calves; varñam—continuously for one year; cikréòe—enjoyed the pastimes;
vana-goñöhayoù—both in Våndävana and in the forest.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
TRANSLATION
In this way, Lord Çré Kåñëa, having Himself become the cowherd boys and
853
groups of calves, maintained Himself by Himself. Thus He continued His
pastimes, both in Våndävana and in the forest, for one year.
PURPORT
Everything was Kåñëa. The calves, the cowherd boys and their maintainer
Himself were all Kåñëa. In other words, Kåñëa expanded Himself in varieties of
calves and cowherd boys and continued His pastimes uninterrupted for one
year. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, Kåñëa's expansion is situated in everyone's
heart as the Supersoul. Similarly, instead of expanding Himself as the
Supersoul, He expanded Himself as a portion of calves and cowherd boys for
one continuous year.
TEXT 28
Wk(d"A caAr"yana, vats$aAna,
s$ar"AmaAe vanamaAivazAta,
paÂaSaAs$au i‡ayaAmaAs$au
h"AyanaApaUr"NAISvaja:
ekadä cärayan vatsän
sa-rämo vanam äviçat
païca-ñäsu tri-yämäsu
häyanäpüraëéñv ajaù
SYNONYMS
ekadä—one day; cärayan vatsän—while taking care of all the calves;
sa-rämaù—along with Balaräma; vanam—within the forest; äviçat—entered;
païca-ñäsu
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
tri-yämäsu—nights; häyana—a whole year;
apüraëéñu—not being fulfilled (five or six days before the completion of one
854
year); ajaù—Lord Çré Kåñëa.
TRANSLATION
One day, five or six nights before the completion of the year, Kåñëa, tending
the calves, entered the forest along with Balaräma.
PURPORT
Up to this time, even Balaräma was captivated by the bewilderment that
covered Brahmä. Even Balaräma did not know that all the calves and cowherd
boys were expansions of Kåñëa or that He Himself was also an expansion of
Kåñëa. This was disclosed to Balaräma just five or six days before the
completion of the year.
TEXT 29
tataAe ivaäU"r"A»ar"taAe
gAAvaAe vats$aAnaupa˜ajama,
gAAevaDaRnaAi‰"izAr"is$a
car"ntyaAe d"ä{"zAusta{NAma,
tato vidüräc carato
gävo vatsän upavrajam
govardhanädri-çirasi
carantyo dadåçus tåëam
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; vidürät—from a not-distant place; carataù—while
pasturing; gävaù—all the cows; vatsän—and their respective calves;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
855
upavrajam—also pasturing near Våndävana; govardhana-adri-çirasi—on the
top of Govardhana Hill; carantyaù—while pasturing to find; dadåçuù—saw;
tåëam—tender grass nearby.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, while pasturing atop Govardhana Hill, the cows looked down to
find some green grass and saw their calves pasturing near Våndävana, not very
far away.
TEXT 30
ä{"î"ATa tatµaeh"vazAAe'sma{taAtmaA
s$a gAAe˜ajaAe'tyaAtmapaäu"gARmaAgAR:
iã"paAtk(ku(Ø"Iva od"AsyapaucC$Ae
'gAAä," Daux.~k{(taEr"A›aupayaA javaena
dåñövätha tat-sneha-vaço 'småtätmä
sa go-vrajo 'tyätmapa-durga-märgaù
dvi-pät kakud-gréva udäsya-puccho
'gäd dhuìkåtair äsru-payä javena
SYNONYMS
dåñövä—when the cows saw their calves below; atha—thereafter;
tat-sneha-vaçaù—because of increased love for the calves; asmåta-ätmä—as if
they had forgotten themselves; saù—that; go-vrajaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—herd of cows;
ati-ätma-pa-durga-märgaù—escaping their caretakers because of increased
affection for the calves, although the way was very rough and hard;
dvi-pät—pairs of legs together; kakut-grévaù—their humps moving with their
856
necks; udäsya-pucchaù—raising their heads and tails; agät—came;
huìkåtaiù—lowing very loudly; äsru-payäù—with milk flowing from the
nipples; javena—very forcibly.
TRANSLATION
When the cows saw their own calves from the top of Govardhana Hill, they
forgot themselves and their caretakers because of increased affection, and
although the path was very rough, they ran toward their calves with great
anxiety, each running as if with one pair of legs. Their milk bags full and
flowing with milk, their heads and tails raised, and their humps moving with
their necks, they ran forcefully until they reached their calves to feed them.
PURPORT
Generally the calves and cows are pastured separately. The elderly men
take care of the cows, and the small children see to the calves. This time,
however, the cows immediately forgot their position as soon as they saw the
calves below Govardhana Hill, and they ran with great force, their tails erect
and their front and hind legs joined, until they reached their calves.
TEXT 31
s$amaetya gAAvaAe'DaAe vats$aAna,
vats$avatyaAe'pyapaAyayana,
igAlantya wva caAËÿAina
ilah"ntya: svaAEDas$aM paya:
sametya gävo 'dho vatsän
vatsavatyo 'py apäyayan
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
857
gilantya iva cäìgäni
lihantyaù svaudhasaà payaù
SYNONYMS
sametya—assembling; gävaù—all the cows; adhaù—down at the foot of
Govardhana Hill; vatsän—all their calves; vatsa-vatyaù—as if new calves had
been born from them; api—even though new calves were present;
apäyayan—fed them; gilantyaù—swallowing them; iva—as if; ca—also;
aìgäni—their bodies; lihantyaù—licking as they do when newborn calves are
present; sva-odhasam payaù—their own milk flowing from the milk bags.
TRANSLATION
The cows had given birth to new calves, but while coming down from
Govardhana Hill, the cows, because of increased affection for the older calves,
allowed the older calves to drink milk from their milk bags and then began
licking the calves' bodies in anxiety, as if wanting to swallow them.
TEXT 32
gAAepaAsta‰"AeDanaAyaAs$amaAEGyalaÀaAeç&
manyaunaA
äu"gAARDvak{(cC)$taAe'Byaetya
gAAevats$aEdR"ä{"zAu: s$autaAna,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
maughya-lajjoru-manyunä
durgädhva-kåcchrato 'bhyetya
go-vatsair dadåçuù sutän
858
SYNONYMS
gopäù—the cowherd men; tat-rodhana-äyäsa—of their attempt to stop the
cows from going to their calves; maughya—on account of the frustration;
lajjä—being ashamed; uru-manyunä—and at the same time becoming very
angry; durga-adhva-kåcchrataù—although they passed the very rough way with
great difficulty; abhyetya—after reaching there; go-vatsaiù—along with the
calves; dadåçuù—saw; sutän—their respective sons.
TRANSLATION
The cowherd men, having been unable to check the cows from going to their
calves, felt simultaneously ashamed and angry. They crossed the rough road
with great difficulty, but when they came down and saw their own sons, they
were overwhelmed by great affection.
PURPORT
Everyone was increasing in affection for Kåñëa. When the cowherd men
coming down from the hill saw their own sons, who were no one else than
Kåñëa, their affection increased.
TEXT 33
tad"IºaNAAet‘aemar"s$aAplautaAzAyaA
jaAtaAnaur"AgAA gAtamanyavaAe'BaRk(Ana,
oäu"÷ d"AeiBaR: pair"r"Bya maUDaRina
„aANAEr"vaApau: par"maAM maudM" tae
tad-ékñaëotprema-rasäplutäçayä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
859
jätänurägä gata-manyavo 'rbhakän
uduhya dorbhiù parirabhya mürdhani
ghräëair aväpuù paramäà mudaà te
SYNONYMS
tat-ékñaëa-utprema-rasa-äpluta-äçayäù—all the thoughts of the cowherd men
merged in the mellow of paternal love, which was aroused by seeing their sons;
jäta-anurägäù—experiencing a great longing or attraction;
gata-manyavaù—their anger disappeared; arbhakän—their young sons;
uduhya—lifting; dorbhiù—with their arms; parirabhya—embracing;
mürdhani—on the head; ghräëaiù—by smelling; aväpuù—obtained;
paramäm—the highest; mudam—pleasure; te—those cowherd men.
TRANSLATION
At that time, all the thoughts of the cowherd men merged in the mellow of
paternal love, which was aroused by the sight of their sons. Experiencing a great
attraction, their anger completely disappearing, they lifted their sons, embraced
them in their arms and enjoyed the highest pleasure by smelling their sons'
heads.
PURPORT
After Brahmä stole the original cowherd boys and calves, Kåñëa expanded
Himself to become the boys and calves again. Therefore, because the boys were
actually Kåñëa's expansions, the cowherd men were especially attracted to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
who were on top of the hill, were angry, but
because of Kåñëa the boys were extremely attractive, and therefore the
cowherd men immediately came down from the hill with special affection.
TEXT 34
860
tata: ‘avayas$aAe gAAepaAs$a,
taAek(AëeSas$auinava{RtaA:
k{(cC)$AcC$naEr"pagAtaAs$a,
tad"nausma{tyaud"™ava:
tataù pravayaso gopäs
tokäçleña-sunirvåtäù
kåcchräc chanair apagatäs
tad-anusmåty-udaçravaù
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; pravayasaù—elderly; gopäù—cowherd men;
toka-äçleña-sunirvåtäù—became overjoyed by embracing their sons;
kåcchrät—with difficulty; çanaiù—gradually; apagatäù—ceased from that
embracing and returned to the forest; tat-anusmåti-uda-çravaù—as they
remembered their sons, tears began to roll down from their eyes.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter the elderly cowherd men, having obtained great feeling from
embracing their sons, gradually and with great difficulty and reluctance ceased
embracing them and returned to the forest. But as the men remembered their
sons, tears began to roll down from their eyes.
PURPORT
In the beginning the cowherd men were angry that the cows were being
attracted by the calves, but when the men came down from the hill, they
themselves were attracted by their sons, and therefore the men embraced
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
861
them. To embrace one's son and smell his head are symptoms of affection.
TEXT 35
˜ajasya r"Ama: ‘aemaDaeRr,"
vaIºyaAEtk(NQ$YamanauºaNAma,
maul(stanaeSvapatyaeSvapya,
@he"tauivad"icantayata,
vrajasya rämaù premardher
vékñyautkaëöhyam anukñaëam
mukta-staneñv apatyeñv apy
ahetu-vid acintayat
SYNONYMS
vrajasya—of the herd of cows; rämaù—Balaräma; prema-ådheù—because of an
increase of affection; vékñya—after observing; aut-kaëöhyam—attachment;
anu-kñaëam—constantly; mukta-staneñu—who had grown up and were no
longer drawing milk from their mothers; apatyeñu—in regard to those calves;
api—even; ahetu-vit—not understanding the reason; acintayat—began to
consider as follows.
TRANSLATION
Because of an increase of affection, the cows had constant attachment even
to those calves that were grown up and had stopped sucking milk from their
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
mothers. When Baladeva saw this attachment, He was unable to understand the
reason for it, and thus He began to consider as follows.
862
PURPORT
The cows had younger calves who had started sucking milk from their
mothers, and some of the cows had newly given birth, but now, because of
love, the cows enthusiastically showed their affection for the older calves,
which had left off milking. These calves were grown up, but still the mothers
wanted to feed them. Therefore Balaräma was a little surprised, and He wanted
to inquire from Kåñëa about the reason for their behavior. The mothers were
actually more anxious to feed the older calves, although the new calves were
present, because the older calves were expansions of Kåñëa. These surprising
events were taking place by the manipulation of yogamäyä. There are two
mäyäs working under the direction of Kåñëa-mahämäyä, the energy of the
material world, and yogamäyä, the energy of the spiritual world. These
uncommon events were taking place because of the influence of yogamäyä.
From the very day on which Brahmä stole the calves and boys, yogamäyä acted
in such a way that the residents of Våndävana, including even Lord Balaräma,
could not understand how yogamäyä was working and causing such uncommon
things to happen. But as yogamäyä gradually acted, Balaräma in particular was
able to understand what was happening, and therefore He inquired from
Kåñëa.
TEXT 36
ik(maetad"àu"taimava
vaAs$aude"vae'iKalaAtmaina
˜ajasya s$aAtmanastaAeke(Sva,
@paUva< ‘aema vaDaRtae
kim etad adbhutam iva
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
863
väsudeve 'khilätmani
vrajasya sätmanas tokeñv
apürvaà prema vardhate
SYNONYMS
kim—what; etat—this; adbhutam—wonderful; iva—just as; väsudeve—in
Väsudeva, Lord Çré Kåñëa; akhila-ätmani—the Supersoul of all living entities;
vrajasya—of all the inhabitants of Vraja; sa-ätmanaù—along with Me;
tokeñu—in these boys; apürvam—unprecedented; prema—affection;
vardhate—is increasing.
TRANSLATION
What is this wonderful phenomenon? The affection of all the inhabitants of
Vraja, including Me, toward these boys and calves is increasing as never before,
just like our affection for Lord Kåñëa, the Supersoul of all living entities.
PURPORT
This increase of affection was not mäyä; rather, because Kåñëa had
expanded Himself as everything and because the whole life of everyone in
Våndävana was meant for Kåñëa, the cows, because of affection for Kåñëa, had
more affection for the older calves than for the new calves, and the men
increased in their affection for their sons. Balaräma was astonished to see all
the residents of Våndävana so affectionate toward their own children, exactly
as they had been for Kåñëa. Similarly, the cows had grown affectionate toward
their calves—as much as toward Kåñëa. Balaräma was surprised to see the acts
of yogamäyä. Therefore He inquired from Kåñëa, "What is happening here?
What is this mystery?"
TEXT 37
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
864
ke(yaM vaA ku(ta @AyaAtaA
dE"vaI vaA naAyauRtaAs$aur"I
‘aAyaAe maAyaAstau mae BatauRr,"
naAnyaA mae'ipa ivamaAeih"naI
keyaà vä kuta äyätä
daivé vä näry utäsuré
präyo mäyästu me bhartur
nänyä me 'pi vimohiné
SYNONYMS
kä—who; iyam—this; vä—or; kutaù—from where; äyätä—has come;
daivé—whether demigod; vä—or; näré—woman; uta—or; äsuré—demoness;
präyaù—in most cases; mäyä—illusory energy; astu—she must be; me—My;
bhartuù—of the master, Lord Kåñëa; na—not; anyä—any other; me—My;
api—certainly; vimohiné—bewilderer.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Who is this mystic power, and where has she come from? Is she a demigod or
a demoness? She must be the illusory energy of My master, Lord Kåñëa, for who
else can bewilder Me?
PURPORT
Balaräma was surprised. This extraordinary show of affection, He thought,
was something mystical, performed either by the demigods or some wonderful
man. Otherwise, how could this wonderful change take place? "This mäyä
might be some räkñasé-mäyä," He thought, "but how can räkñasé-mäyä have any
865
influence upon Me? This is not possible. Therefore it must be the mäyä of
Kåñëa." He thus concluded that the mystical change must have been caused by
Kåñëa, whom Balaräma considered His worshipable Personality of Godhead.
He thought, "It was arranged by Kåñëa, and even I could not check its mystic
power." Thus Balaräma understood that all these boys and calves were only
expansions of Kåñëa.
TEXT 38
wita s$aiÂantya d"AzAAh"AeR
vats$aAna, s$avayas$aAnaipa
s$avaARnaAcaí" vaEku(NQM&
caºauSaA vayaunaena s$a:
iti saïcintya däçärho
vatsän sa-vayasän api
sarvän äcañöa vaikuëöhaà
cakñuñä vayunena saù
SYNONYMS
iti saïcintya—thinking in this way; däçärhaù—Baladeva; vatsän—the calves;
sa-vayasän—along with His companions; api—also; sarvän—all; äcañöa—saw;
vaikuëöham—as Çré Kåñëa only; cakñuñä vayunena—with the eye of
transcendental knowledge; saù—He (Baladeva).
TRANSLATION
Thinking in this way, Lord Balaräma was able to see, with the eye of
transcendental knowledge, that all these calves and Kåñëa's friends were
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
866
expansions of the form of Çré Kåñëa.
PURPORT
Every individual is different. There are even differences between twin
brothers. Yet when Kåñëa expanded Himself as the boys and calves, each boy
and each calf appeared in its own original feature, with the same individual
way of acting, the same tendencies, the same color, the same dress, and so on,
for Kåñëa manifested Himself with all these differences. This was Kåñëa's
opulence.
TEXT 39
naEtae s$aure"zAA [%SayaAe na caEtae
tvamaeva BaAs$aIzA iBad"A™ayae'ipa
s$ava< pa{TaftvaM inagAmaAtk(TaM vade"tya,
ole(na va{ÔaM ‘aBauNAA balaAe'vaEta,
naite sureçä åñayo na caite
tvam eva bhäséça bhid-äçraye 'pi
sarvaà påthak tvaà nigamät kathaà vadety
uktena våttaà prabhuëä balo 'vait
SYNONYMS
na—not; ete—these boys; sura-éçäù—the best of the demigods; åñayaù—great
sages; na—not; ca—and; ete—these calves; tvam—You (Kåñëa); eva—alone;
bhäsi—are manifesting; éça—O supreme controller; bhit-äçraye
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—in the
existence of varieties of difference; api—even; sarvam—everything;
påthak—existing; tvam—You (Kåñëa); nigamät—briefly; katham—how;
vada—please explain; iti—thus; uktena—having been requested (by Baladeva);
867
våttam—the situation; prabhuëä—(having been explained) by Lord Kåñëa;
balaù—Baladeva; avait—understood.
TRANSLATION
Lord Baladeva said, "O supreme controller! These boys are not great
demigods, as I previously thought. Nor are these calves great sages like Närada.
Now I can see that You alone are manifesting Yourself in all varieties of
difference. Although one, You are existing in the different forms of the calves
and boys. Please briefly explain this to Me." Having thus been requested by
Lord Baladeva, Kåñëa explained the whole situation, and Baladeva understood
it.
PURPORT
Inquiring from Kåñëa about the actual situation, Lord Balaräma said, "My
dear Kåñëa, in the beginning I thought that all these cows, calves and cowherd
boys were either great sages and saintly persons or demigods, but at the present
it appears that they are actually Your expansions. They are all You; You
Yourself are playing as the calves and cows and boys. What is the mystery of
this situation? Where have those other calves and cows and boys gone? And
why are You expanding Yourself as the cows, calves and boys? Will You kindly
tell Me what is the cause?" At the request of Balaräma, Kåñëa briefly explained
the whole situation: how the calves and boys were stolen by Brahmä and how
He was concealing the incident by expanding Himself so that people would
not know that the original cows, calves and boys were missing. Balaräma
understood, therefore, that this was not mäyä but Kåñëa's opulence. Kåñëa has
all opulences, and this was but another opulence of Kåñëa.
"At first," Lord Balaräma said, "I thought that these boys and calves were a
display of the power of great sages like Närada, but now I see that all these boys
and calves are You." After inquiring from Kåñëa, Lord Balaräma understood
that Kåñëa Himself had become many. That the Lord can do this is stated in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
868
the Brahma-saàhitä (5.33). Advaitam acyutam anädim ananta-rüpam: although
He is one, He can expand Himself in so many forms. According to the Vedic
version, ekaà bahu syäm: He can expand Himself into many thousands and
millions but still remain one. In that sense, everything is spiritual because
everything is an expansion of Kåñëa; that is, everything is an expansion either
of Kåñëa Himself or of His potency. Because the potency is nondifferent from
the potent, the potency and the potent are one (çakti-çaktimatayor abhedaù).
The Mäyävädés, however, say, cid-acit-samanvayaù: spirit and matter are one.
This is a wrong conception. Spirit (cit) is different from matter (acit), as
explained by Kåñëa Himself in Bhagavad-gétä (7.4-5):
bhümir äpo 'nalo väyuù
khaà mano buddhir eva ca
ahaìkära itéyaà me
bhinnä prakåtir añöadhä
apareyam itas tv anyäà
prakåtià viddhi me paräm
jéva-bhütäà mahä-bäho
yayedaà dhäryate jagat
"Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego—all together
these eight comprise My separated material energies. But besides this inferior
nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is a superior energy of Mine, which
consists of all living entities who are struggling with material nature and are
sustaining the universe." Spirit and matter cannot be made one, for actually
they are superior and inferior energies, yet the Mäyävädés, or Advaita-vädés,
try to make them one. This is wrong. Although spirit and matter ultimately
come from the same one source, they cannot be made one. For example, there
are many things that come from our bodies, but although they come from the
same source, they cannot be made one. We should be careful to note that
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
ugh the supreme source is one, the emanations from this source should be
869
separately regarded as inferior and superior. The difference between the
Mäyäväda and Vaiñëava philosophies is that the Vaiñëava philosophy
recognizes this fact. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu's philosophy, therefore, is called
acintya-bhedäbheda—simultaneous oneness and difference. For example, fire
and heat cannot be separated, for where there is fire there is heat and where
there is heat there is fire. Nonetheless, although we cannot touch fire, heat we
can tolerate. Therefore, although they are one, they are different.
TEXT 40
taAvade"tyaAtmaBaUr"AtmamaAnaena
‡auq"Yanaeh"s$aA
paur"Aevad"AbdM" ‚(Lx"ntaM
d"ä{"zAe s$ak(laM h"ir"ma,
tävad etyätmabhür ätmamänena
truöy-anehasä
purovad äbdaà kréòantaà
dadåçe sa-kalaà harim
SYNONYMS
tävat—for so long; etya—after returning; ätma-bhüù—Lord Brahmä;
ätma-mänena—by his (Brahmä's) own measurement; truöi-anehasä—by a
moment's time; puraù-vat—just as previously; ä-abdam—for one year (by
human measurement of time); kréòantam—playing;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
—he saw;
sa-kalam—along with His expansions; harim—Lord Hari (Çré Kåñëa).
TRANSLATION
870
When Lord Brahmä returned after a moment of time had passed (according
to his own measurement), he saw that although by human measurement a
complete year had passed, Lord Kåñëa, after all that time, was engaged just as
before in playing with the boys and calves, who were His expansions.
PURPORT
Lord Brahmä had gone away for only a moment of his time, but when he
returned, a year of human time had passed. On different planets, the
calculation of time is different. To give an example, a man-made satellite may
orbit the earth in an hour and twenty-five minutes and thus complete one full
day, although a day ordinarily takes twenty-four hours for those living on
earth. Therefore, what was but a moment for Brahmä was one year on earth.
Kåñëa continued to expand Himself in so many forms for one year, but by the
arrangement of yogamäyä no one could understand this but Balaräma.
After one moment of Brahmä's calculation, Brahmä came back to see the
fun caused by his stealing the boys and calves. But he was also afraid that he
was playing with fire. Kåñëa was his master, and he had played mischief for fun
by taking away Kåñëa's calves and boys. He was really anxious, so he did not
stay away very long; he came back after a moment (of his calculation). When
Brahmä returned, he saw that all the boys, calves and cows were playing with
Kåñëa in the same way as when he had come upon them; by Kåñëa's display of
yogamäyä, the same pastimes were going on without any change.
On the day when Lord Brahmä had first come, Baladeva could not go with
Kåñëa and the cowherd boys, for it was His birthday, and His mother had kept
Him back for the proper ceremonial bath, called çäntika-snäna. Therefore Lord
Baladeva was not taken by Brahmä at that time. Now, one year later, Brahmä
returned, and because he returned on exactly the same day, Baladeva was
again kept at home for His birthday. Therefore, although this verse mentions
that Brahmä saw Kåñëa and all the cowherd boys, Baladeva is not mentioned.
It was five or six days earlier that Baladeva had inquired from Kåñëa about the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
871
extraordinary affection of the cows and cowherd men, but now, when Brahmä
returned, Brahmä saw all the calves and cowherd boys playing with Kåñëa as
expansions of Kåñëa, but he did not see Baladeva. As in the previous year, Lord
Baladeva did not go to the woods on the day Lord Brahmä appeared there.
TEXT 41
yaAvantaAe gAAeku(lae baAlaA:
s$avats$aA: s$avaR Wva ih"
maAyaAzAyae zAyaAnaA mae
naAâAipa paunaç&itTataA:
yävanto gokule bäläù
sa-vatsäù sarva eva hi
mäyäçaye çayänä me
nädyäpi punar utthitäù
SYNONYMS
yävantaù—whatsoever, as many as; gokule—in Gokula; bäläù—boys;
sa-vatsäù—along with their calves; sarve—all; eva—indeed; hi—because;
mäyä-äçaye—on the bed of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
çayänäù—are sleeping; me—my; na—not;
adya—today; api—even; punaù—again; utthitäù—have risen.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä thought: Whatever boys and calves there were in Gokula, I
have kept them sleeping on the bed of my mystic potency, and to this very day
they have not yet risen again.
872
PURPORT
For one year Lord Brahmä kept the calves and boys lying down in a cave by
his mystic power. Therefore when Brahmä saw Lord Kåñëa still playing with all
the cows and calves, he began trying to reason about what was happening.
"What is this?" he thought. "Maybe I took those calves and cowherd boys away
but now they have been taken from that cave. Is this what has happened? Has
Kåñëa brought them back here?" Then, however, Lord Brahmä saw that the
calves and boys he had taken were still in the same mystic mäyä into which he
had put them. Thus he concluded that the calves and cowherd boys now
playing with Kåñëa were different from the ones in the cave. He could
understand that although the original calves and boys were still in the cave
where he had put them, Kåñëa had expanded Himself and so the present
demonstration of calves and boys consisted of expansions of Kåñëa. They had
the same features, the same mentality and the same intentions, but they were
all Kåñëa.
TEXT 42
wta Wtae'‡a ku(‡atyaA
manmaAyaAmaAeih"taetare"
taAvanta Wva ta‡aAbdM"
‚(Lx"ntaAe ivaSNAunaA s$amama,
ita ete 'tra kutratyä
man-mäyä-mohitetare
tävanta eva taträbdaà
kréòanto viñëunä samam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
873
SYNONYMS
itaù—for this reason; ete—these boys with their calves; atra—here;
kutratyäù—where have they come from; mat-mäyä-mohita-itare—different
from those who were mystified by my illusory potency; tävantaù—the same
number of boys; eva—indeed; tatra—there; ä-abdam—for one year;
kréòantaù—are playing; viñëunä samam—along with Kåñëa.
TRANSLATION
A similar number of boys and calves have been playing with Kåñëa for one
whole year, yet they are different from the ones illusioned by my mystic
potency. Who are they? Where did they come from?
PURPORT
Although appearing like calves, cows and cowherd boys, these were all
Viñëu. Actually they were viñëu-tattva, not jéva-tattva. Brahmä was surprised.
"The original cowherd boys and cows," he thought, "are still where I put them
last year. So who is it that is now keeping company with Kåñëa exactly as
before? Where have they come from?" Brahmä was surprised that his mystic
power had been neglected. Without touching the original cows and cowherd
boys kept by Brahmä, Kåñëa had created another assembly of calves and boys,
who were all expansions of viñëu-tattva. Thus Brahmä's mystic power was
superseded.
TEXT 43
WvamaetaeSau Baede"Sau
icarM" DyaAtvaA s$a @AtmaBaU:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
874
s$atyaA: ke( k(tare" naeita
ÁaAtauM naeíe" k(TaÂana
evam eteñu bhedeñu
ciraà dhyätvä sa ätma-bhüù
satyäù ke katare neti
jïätuà neñöe kathaïcana
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; eteñu bhedeñu—between these boys, who were existing
separately; ciram—for a long time; dhyätvä—after thinking; saù—he;
ätma-bhüù—Lord Brahmä; satyäù—real; ke—who; katare—who; na—are not;
iti—thus; jïätum—to understand; na—not; iñöe—was able; kathaïcana—in
any way at all.
TRANSLATION
Thus Lord Brahmä, thinking and thinking for a long time, tried to
distinguish between those two sets of boys, who were each separately existing.
He tried to understand who was real and who was not real, but he couldn't
understand at all.
PURPORT
Brahmä was puzzled. "The original boys and calves are still sleeping as I have
kept them," he thought, "but another set is here playing with Kåñëa. How has
this happened?" Brahmä could not grasp what was happening. Which boys
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
were real, and which were not real? Brahmä was unable to come to any definite
conclusion. He pondered the matter for a long while. "How can there be two
sets of calves and boys at the same time? Have the boys and calves here been
created by Kåñëa, or has Kåñëa created the ones lying asleep? Or are both
875
merely creations of Kåñëa?" Brahmä thought about the subject in many
different ways. "After I go to the cave and see that the boys and calves are still
there, does Kåñëa go take them away and put them here so that I come here
and see them, and does Kåñëa then take them from here and put them there?"
Brahmä could not figure out how there could be two sets of calves and cowherd
boys exactly alike. Although thinking and thinking, he could not understand
at all.
TEXT 44
WvaM s$ammaAeh"yana, ivaSNAuM
ivamaAehM" ivaìmaAeh"nama,
svayaEva maAyayaAjaAe'ipa
svayamaeva ivamaAeih"ta:
evaà sammohayan viñëuà
vimohaà viçva-mohanam
svayaiva mäyayäjo 'pi
svayam eva vimohitaù
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; sammohayan—wanting to mystify; viñëum—the
all-pervading Lord Kåñëa; vimoham—who can never be mystified;
viçva-mohanam—but who mystifies the entire universe; svayä—by his
(Brahmä's) own; eva—indeed; mäyayä—by mystic power; ajaù—Lord Brahmä;
api—even; svayam—himself; eva—certainly; vimohitaù—was put into
bewilderment, became mystified.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
876
TRANSLATION
Thus because Lord Brahmä wanted to mystify the all-pervading Lord Kåñëa,
who can never be mystified, but who, on the contrary, mystifies the entire
universe, he himself was put into bewilderment by his own mystic power.
PURPORT
Brahmä wanted to bewilder Kåñëa, who bewilders the entire universe. The
whole universe is under Kåñëa's mystic power (mama mäyä duratyayä [Bg.
7.14]), but Brahmä wanted to mystify Him. The result was that Brahmä himself
was mystified, just as one who wants to kill another may himself be killed. In
other words, Brahmä was defeated by his own attempt. In a similar position are
the scientists and philosophers who want to overcome the mystic power of
Kåñëa. They challenge Kåñëa, saying, "What is God? We can do this, and we
can do that." But the more they challenge Kåñëa in this way, the more they are
implicated in suffering. The lesson here is that we should not try to overcome
Kåñëa. Rather, instead of endeavoring to surpass Him, we should surrender to
Him (sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja [Bg. 18.66]).
Instead of defeating Kåñëa, Brahmä himself was defeated, for he could not
understand what Kåñëa was doing. Since Brahmä, the chief person within this
universe, was so bewildered, what is to be said of so-called scientists and
philosophers? Sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja. We should
give up all our tiny efforts to defy the arrangement of Kåñëa. Instead, whatever
arrangements He proposes, we should accept. This is always better, for this will
make us happy. The more we try to defeat the arrangement of Kåñëa, the more
we become implicated in Kåñëa's mäyä (
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
duratyayä). But one who has reached the point of surrendering to the
instructions of Kåñëa (mäm eva ye prapadyante) is liberated, free from
kåñëa-mäyä (mäyäm etäà taranti te [Bg. 7.14]). The power of Kåñëa is just like a
government that cannot be overcome. First of all there are laws, and then
877
there is police power, and beyond that is military power. Therefore, what is the
use of trying to overcome the power of the government? Similarly, what is the
use of trying to challenge Kåñëa?
From the next verse it is clear that Kåñëa cannot be defeated by any kind of
mystic power. If one gets even a little power of scientific knowledge, one tries
to defy God, but actually no one is able to bewilder Kåñëa. When Brahmä, the
chief person within the universe, tried to bewilder Kåñëa, he himself was
bewildered and astonished. This is the position of the conditioned soul.
Brahmä wanted to mystify Kåñëa, but he himself was mystified.
The word viñëum is significant in this verse. Viñëu pervades the entire
material world, whereas Brahmä merely occupies one subordinate post.
yasyaika-niçvasita-kälam athävalambya
jévanti loma-vila-jä jagadaëòa-näthäù
(Bs. 5.48)
The word näthäù, which refers to Lord Brahmä, is plural because there are
innumerable universes and innumerable Brahmäs. Brahmä is but a tiny force.
This was exhibited in Dvärakä when Kåñëa called for Brahmä. One day when
Brahmä came to see Kåñëa at Dvärakä, the doorman, at Lord Kåñëa's request,
asked, "Which Brahmä are you?" Later, when Brahmä inquired from Kåñëa
whether this meant that there was more than one Brahmä, Kåñëa smiled and
at once called for many Brahmäs from many universes. The four-headed
Brahmä of this universe then saw innumerable other Brahmäs coming to see
Kåñëa and offer their respects. Some of them had ten heads, some had twenty,
some had a hundred and some had a million heads. Upon seeing this wonderful
exhibition, the four-headed Brahmä became nervous and began to think of
himself as no more than a mosquito in the midst of many elephants. Therefore,
what can Brahmä do to bewilder Kåñëa?
TEXT 45
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
878
tamyaAM tamaAevaªaEh"ArM"
KaâAetaAicaRir"vaAh"ina
mah"taItar"maAyaEzyaM
inah"ntyaAtmaina yauÃata:
tamyäà tamovan naihäraà
khadyotärcir ivähani
mahatétara-mäyaiçyaà
nihanty ätmani yuïjataù
SYNONYMS
tamyäm—on a dark night; tamaù-vat—just as darkness; naihäram—produced
by snow; khadyota-arciù—the light of a glowworm; iva—just as; ahani—in the
daytime, in the sunlight; mahati—in a great personality; itara-mäyä—inferior
mystic potency; aiçyam—the ability; nihanti—destroys; ätmani—in his own
self; yuïjataù—of the person who attempts to use.
TRANSLATION
As the darkness of snow on a dark night and the light of a glowworm in the
light of day have no value, the mystic power of an inferior person who tries to
use it against a person of great power is unable to accomplish anything; instead,
the power of that inferior person is diminished.
PURPORT
When one wants to supersede a superior power, one's own inferior power
becomes ludicrous. Just as a glowworm in the daytime and snow at night have
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
no value, Brahmä's mystic power became worthless in the presence of Kåñëa,
879
for greater mystic power condemns inferior mystic power. On a dark night, the
darkness produced by snow has no meaning. The glowworm appears very
important at night, but in the daytime its glow has no value; whatever little
value it has is lost. Similarly, Brahmä became insignificant in the presence of
Kåñëa's mystic power. Kåñëa's mäyä was not diminished in value, but Brahmä's
mäyä was condemned. Therefore, one should not try to exhibit one's
insignificant opulence before a greater power.
TEXT 46
taAvats$avaeR vats$apaAlaA:
pazyataAe'jasya tatºaNAAta,
vyaä{"zyanta GanazyaAmaA:
paItak(AEzAeyavaAs$as$a:
tävat sarve vatsa-päläù
paçyato 'jasya tat-kñaëät
vyadåçyanta ghana-çyämäù
péta-kauçeya-väsasaù
SYNONYMS
tävat—so long; sarve—all; vatsa-päläù—both the calves and the boys tending
them; paçyataù—while he was watching; ajasya—of Lord Brahmä;
tat-kñaëät—immediately;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
vyadåçyanta—were seen; ghana-çyämäù—as having a
complexion resembling bluish rainclouds; péta-kauçeya-väsasaù—and dressed
in yellow silk garments.
TRANSLATION
880
Then, while Lord Brahmä looked on, all the calves and the boys tending
them immediately appeared to have complexions the color of bluish rainclouds
and to be dressed in yellow silken garments.
PURPORT
While Brahmä was contemplating, all the calves and cowherd boys
immediately transformed into viñëu-mürtis, having bluish complexions and
wearing yellow garments. Brahmä was contemplating his own power and the
immense, unlimited power of Kåñëa, but before he could come to a conclusion,
he saw this immediate transformation.
TEXTS 47-48
catauBauRjaA: zAÊÿca‚(-
gAd"Ar"AjaIvapaANAya:
ik(r"Iiq%na: ku(Nx"ilanaAe
h"Air"NAAe vanamaAilana:
™aIvats$aAËÿd"d"Aer"¥ak(
mbauk(ÆÿNApaANAya:
naUpaurE": k(q%kE(BaARtaA:
k(iq%s$aU‡aAÌÿlaIyakE(:
catur-bhujäù çaìkha-cakragadä-
räjéva-päëayaù
kiréöinaù kuëòalino
häriëo vana-mälinaù
çrévatsäìgada-do-ratnacopyright
©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
881
kambu-kaìkaëa-päëayaù
nüpuraiù kaöakair bhätäù
kaöi-süträìguléyakaiù
SYNONYMS
catuù-bhujäù—having four arms; çaìkha-cakra-gadä-räjéva-päëa-yaù—holding
conchshell, disc, club and lotus flower in Their hands; kiréöinaù—bearing
helmets on Their heads; kuëòalinaù—wearing earrings; häriëaù—wearing
pearl necklaces; vana-mälinaù—wearing garlands of forest flowers;
çrévatsa-aìgada-do-ratna-kambu-kaìkaëa-päëayaù—bearing the emblem of
the goddess of fortune on Their chests, armlets on Their arms, the Kaustubha
gem on Their necks, which were marked with three lines like a conchshell, and
bracelets on Their hands; nüpuraiù—with ornaments on the feet;
kaöakaiù—with bangles on Their ankles; bhätäù—appeared beautiful;
kaöi-sütra-aìgulé-yakaiù—with sacred belts around the waist and with rings on
the fingers.
TRANSLATION
All those personalities had four arms, holding conchshell, disc, mace and
lotus flower in Their hands. They wore helmets on Their heads, earrings on
Their ears and garlands of forest flowers around Their necks. On the upper
portion of the right side of Their chests was the emblem of the goddess of
fortune. Furthermore, They wore armlets on Their arms, the Kaustubha gem
around Their necks, which were marked with three lines like a conchshell, and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
bracelets on Their wrists. With bangles on Their ankles, ornaments on Their
feet, and sacred belts around Their waists, They all appeared very beautiful.
PURPORT
All the Viñëu forms had four arms, with conchshell and other articles, but
882
these characteristics are also possessed by those who have attained
särüpya-mukti in Vaikuëöha and who consequently have forms exactly like the
form of the Lord. However, these Viñëu forms appearing before Lord Brahmä
also possessed the mark of Çrévatsa and the Kaustubha gem, which are special
characteristics possessed only by the Supreme Lord Himself. This proves that
all these boys and calves were in fact directly expansions of Viñëu, the
Personality of Godhead, not merely His associates of Vaikuëöha. Viñëu
Himself is included within Kåñëa. All the opulences of Viñëu are already
present in Kåñëa, and consequently for Kåñëa to demonstrate so many Viñëu
forms was actually not very astonishing.
The Çrévatsa mark is described by the Vaiñëava-toñaëé as being a curl of fine
yellow hair on the upper portion of the right side of Lord Viñëu's chest. This
mark is not for ordinary devotees. It is a special mark of Viñëu or Kåñëa.
TEXT 49
@Ax.~i„amastak(maApaUNAARs$a,
taulas$aInavad"AmaiBa:
k(AemalaE: s$avaRgAA‡aeSau
BaUir"pauNyavad"ipaR#taE:
äìghri-mastakam äpürëäs
tulasé-nava-dämabhiù
komalaiù sarva-gätreñu
bhüri-puëyavad-arpitaiù
SYNONYMS
ä-aìghri-mastakam—from the feet up to the top of the head; äpürëäù—fully
decorated; tulasé-nava-dämabhiù—with garlands of fresh tulasé leaves;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
883
komalaiù—tender, soft; sarva-gätreñu—on all the limbs of the body;
bhüri-puëyavat-arpitaiù—which were offered by devotees engaged in the
greatest pious activity, worshiping the Supreme Lord by hearing, chanting and
so on.
TRANSLATION
Every part of Their bodies, from Their feet to the top of Their heads, was
fully decorated with fresh, tender garlands of tulasé leaves offered by devotees
engaged in worshiping the Lord by the greatest pious activities, namely hearing
and chanting.
PURPORT
The word bhüri-puëyavad-arpitaiù is significant in this verse. These forms
of Viñëu were worshiped by those who had performed pious activities
(sukåtibhiù) for many births and who were constantly engaged in devotional
service (çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù [SB 7.5.23]). Bhakti, devotional service, is
the engagement of those who have performed highly developed pious
activities. The accumulation of pious activities has already been mentioned
elsewhere in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.12.11), where Çukadeva Gosvämé says,
itthaà satäà brahma-sukhänubhütyä
däsyaà gatänäà para-daivatena
mäyäçritänäà nara-därakeëa
säkaà vijahruù kåta-puëya-puïjäù
"Those who are engaged in self-realization, appreciating the Brahman
effulgence of the Lord, and those engaged in devotional service, accepting the
Supreme Personality of Godhead as master, as well as those who are under the
clutches of mäyä,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
thinking the Lord an ordinary person, cannot understand
that certain exalted personalities—after accumulating volumes of pious
884
activities—are now playing with the Lord in friendship as cowherd boys."
In our Kåñëa-Balaräma Temple in Våndävana, there is a tamäla tree that
covers an entire corner of the courtyard. Before there was a temple the tree
was lying neglected, but now it has developed very luxuriantly, covering the
whole corner of the courtyard. This is a sign of bhüri-puëya.
TEXT 50
cain‰"k(AivazAd"smaerE":
s$aAç&NAApaAËÿvaIiºataE:
svak(ATaARnaAimava r"ja:-
s$aÔvaAByaAM ›aí+"paAlak(A:
candrikä-viçada-smeraiù
säruëäpäìga-vékñitaiù
svakärthänäm iva rajaùsattväbhyäà
srañöå-pälakäù
SYNONYMS
candrikä-viçada-smeraiù—by pure smiling like the full, increasing moonlight;
sa-aruëa-apäìga-vékñitaiù—by the clear glances of Their reddish eyes;
svaka-arthänäm—of the desires of His own devotees; iva—just as;
rajaù-sattväbhyäm—by the modes of passion and goodness;
srañöå-pälakäù—were creators and protectors.
TRANSLATION
Those Viñëu forms, by Their pure smiling, which resembled the increasing
light of the moon, and by the sidelong glances of Their reddish eyes, created and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
885
protected the desires of Their own devotees, as if by the modes of passion and
goodness.
PURPORT
Those Viñëu forms blessed the devotees with Their clear glances and smiles,
which resembled the increasingly full light of the moon
(çreyaù-kairava-candrikä-vitaraëam). As maintainers, They glanced upon
Their devotees, embracing them and protecting them by smiling. Their smiles
resembled the mode of goodness, protecting all the desires of the devotees, and
the glancing of Their eyes resembled the mode of passion. Actually, in this
verse the word rajaù means not "passion" but "affection." In the material world,
rajo-guëa is passion, but in the spiritual world it is affection. In the material
world, affection is contaminated by rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa, but in the
çuddha-sattva the affection that maintains the devotees is transcendental.
The word svakärthänäm refers to great desires. As mentioned in this verse,
the glance of Lord Viñëu creates the desires of the devotees. A pure devotee,
however, has no desires. Therefore Sanätana Gosvämé comments that because
the desires of devotees whose attention is fixed on Kåñëa have already been
fulfilled, the Lord's sidelong glances create variegated desires in relation to
Kåñëa and devotional service. In the material world, desire is a product of
rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa, but desire in the spiritual world gives rise to a variety
of everlasting transcendental service. Thus the word svakärthänäm refers to
eagerness to serve Kåñëa.
In Våndävana there is a place where there was no temple, but a devotee
desired, "Let there be a temple and sevä, devotional service." Therefore, what
was once an empty corner has now become a place of pilgrimage. Such are the
desires of a devotee.
TEXT 51
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
886
@AtmaAid"stambapayaRntaEr,"
maUitaRmaià"êr"AcarE":
na{tyagAItaAânaek(AhE=":
pa{Tafpa{TagAupaAis$ataA:
ätmädi-stamba-paryantair
mürtimadbhiç caräcaraiù
nåtya-gétädy-anekärhaiù
påthak påthag upäsitäù
SYNONYMS
ätma-ädi-stamba-paryantaiù—from Lord Brahmä to the insignificant living
entity; mürti-madbhiù—assuming some form; cara-acaraiù—both the moving
and the nonmoving; nåtya-géta-ädi-aneka-arhaiù—by many varied means of
worship, such as dancing and singing; påthak påthak—differently;
upäsitäù—who were being worshiped.
TRANSLATION
All beings, both moving and nonmoving, from the four-headed Lord Brahmä
down to the most insignificant living entity, had taken forms and were
differently worshiping those viñëu-mürtis, according to their respective
capacities, with various means of worship, such as dancing and singing.
PURPORT
Innumerable living entities are engaged in different types of worship of the
Supreme, according to their abilities and karma, but everyone is engaged
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
(jévera 'svarüpa' haya-kåñëera 'nitya-däsa' [Cc. Madhya 20.108]); there is no one
who is not serving. Therefore the mahä-bhägavata, the topmost devotee, sees
887
everyone as being engaged in the service of Kåñëa; only himself does he see as
not engaged. We have to elevate ourselves from a lower position to a higher
position, and the topmost position is that of direct service in Våndävana. But
everyone is engaged in service. Denial of the service of the Lord is mäyä.
ekale éçvara kåñëa, ära saba bhåtya
yäre yaiche näcäya, se taiche kare nåtya
"Only Kåñëa is the supreme master, and all others are His servants. As Kåñëa
desires, everyone dances according to His tune.' (Cc. Ädi 5.142)
There are two kinds of living entities-the moving and the nonmoving.
Trees, for example, stand in one place, whereas ants move. Brahmä saw that all
of them, down to the smallest creatures, had assumed different forms and were
accordingly engaged in the service of Lord Viñëu.
One receives a form according to the way one worships the Lord. In the
material world, the body one receives is guided by the demigods. This is
sometimes referred to as the influence of the stars. As indicated in
Bhagavad-gétä (3.27) by the words prakåteù kriyamäëäni, according to the laws
of nature one is controlled by the demigods.
All living entities are serving Kåñëa in different ways, but when they are
Kåñëa conscious, their service is fully manifest. As a flower in the bud
gradually fructifies and yields its desired aroma and beauty, so when a living
entity comes to the platform of Kåñëa consciousness, the beauty of his real
form comes into full blossom. That is the ultimate beauty and the ultimate
fulfillment of desire.
TEXT 52
@iNAmaAâEmaRih"maiBar,"
@jaAâAiBaivaRBaUitaiBa:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
888
catauiva<zAitaiBastaÔvaE:
par"ItaA mah"d"Aid"iBa:
aëimädyair mahimabhir
ajädyäbhir vibhütibhiù
catur-viàçatibhis tattvaiù
parétä mahad-ädibhiù
SYNONYMS
aëimä-ädyaiù—headed by aëimä; mahimabhiù—by opulences;
ajä-ädyäbhiù—headed by Ajä; vibhütibhiù—by potencies;
catuù-viàçatibhiù—twenty-four in number; tattvaiù—by elements for the
creation of the material world; parétäù—(all the viñëu-mürtis) were
surrounded; mahat-ädibhiù—headed by the mahat-tattva.
TRANSLATION
All the viñëu-mürtis were surrounded by the opulences, headed by
aëimä-siddhi; by the mystic potencies, headed by Ajä; and by the twenty-four
elements for the creation of the material world, headed by the mahat-tattva.
PURPORT
In this verse the word mahimabhiù means aiçvarya, or opulence. The
Supreme Personality of Godhead can do whatever He likes. That is His
aiçvarya. No one can command Him, but He can command everyone.
Sad-aiçvarya-pürëam. The Lord is full in six opulences. The yoga-siddhis, the
perfections of yoga, such as the ability to become smaller than the smallest
(aëimä-siddhi) or bigger than the biggest (mahimä-siddhi), are present in Lord
Viñëu. Sad-aiçvaryaiù pürëo ya iha bhagavän (Cc. Ädi 1.3). The word ajä means
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
889
mäyä, or mystic power. Everything mysterious is in full existence in Viñëu.
The twenty-four elements mentioned are the five working senses
(païca-karmendriya), the five senses for obtaining knowledge
(païca-jïänendriya), the five gross material elements (païca-mahäbhüta), the
five sense objects (païca-tanmätra), the mind (manas), the false ego
(ahaìkära), the mahat-tattva, and material nature (prakåti). All twenty-four of
these elements are employed for the manifestation of this material world. The
mahat-tattva is divided into different subtle categories, but originally it is
called the mahat-tattva.
TEXT 53
k(AlasvaBaAvas$aMs$k(Ar"-
k(Amak(maRgAuNAAid"iBa:
svamaih"Dvastamaih"iBar,"
maUitaRmaià"ç&paAis$ataA:
käla-svabhäva-saàskärakäma-
karma-guëädibhiù
sva-mahi-dhvasta-mahibhir
mürtimadbhir upäsitäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
käla—by the time factor; svabhäva—own nature; saàskära—reformation;
käma—desire; karma—fruitive action; guëa—the three modes of material
nature; ädibhiù—and by others; sva-mahi-dhvasta-mahibhiù—whose own
independence was subordinate to the potency of the Lord;
mürti-madbhiù—possessing form; upäsitäù—were being worshiped.
890
TRANSLATION
Then Lord Brahmä saw that käla (the time factor), svabhäva (one's own
nature by association), saàskära (reformation), käma (desire), karma (fruitive
activity) and the guëas (the three modes of material nature), their own
independence being completely subordinate to the potency of the Lord, had all
taken forms and were also worshiping those viñëu-mürtis.
PURPORT
No one but Viñëu has any independence. If we develop consciousness of
this fact, then we are in actual Kåñëa consciousness. We should always
remember that Kåñëa is the only supreme master and that everyone else is His
servant (ekale éçvara kåñëa, ära saba bhåtya). Be one even Näräyaëa or Lord
Çiva, everyone is subordinate to Kåñëa (çiva-viriïci-nutam). Even Baladeva is
subordinate to Kåñëa. This is a fact.
ekale éçvara kåñëa, ära saba bhåtya
yäre yaiche näcäya, se taiche kare nåtya
[Cc. Ädi 5.142]
One should understand that no one is independent, for everything is part and
parcel of Kåñëa and is acting and moving by the supreme desire of Kåñëa. This
understanding, this consciousness, is Kåñëa consciousness.
yas tu näräyaëaà devaà
brahma-rudrädi-daivataiù
samatvenaiva vékñeta
sa päñaëòé bhaved dhruvam
[Cc. Madhya 18.116]
"A person who considers demigods like Brahmä and Çiva to be on an equal
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
891
level with Näräyaëa must certainly be considered an offender." No one can
compare to Näräyaëa, or Kåñëa. Kåñëa is Näräyaëa, and Näräyaëa is also
Kåñëa, for Kåñëa is the original Näräyaëa. Brahmä himself addressed Kåñëa,
näräyaëas tvaà na hi sarva-dehinäm: "You are also Näräyaëa. Indeed, You are
the original Näräyaëa." (SB 10.14.14)
Käla, or the time factor, has many assistants, such as svabhäva, saàskära,
käma, karma and guëa. Svabhäva, or one's own nature, is formed according to
the association of the material qualities. Käraëaà guëa-saìgo 'sya
sad-asad-yoni janmasu (Bg. 13.22). Sat and asat-svabhäva—one's higher or
lower nature—is formed by association with the different qualities, namely
sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa. We should gradually come to the
sattva-guëa, so that we may avoid the two lower guëas. This can be done if we
regularly discuss Çrémad-Bhägavatam and hear about Kåñëa's activities.
Nañöa-präyeñv abhadreñu nityaà bhägavata-sevayä (SB 1.2.18). All the activities
of Kåñëa described in Çrémad-Bhägavatam, beginning even with the pastimes
concerning Pütanä, are transcendental. Therefore, by hearing and discussing
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa are subdued, so that only
sattva-guëa remains. Then rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa cannot do us any harm.
Varëäçrama-dharma, therefore, is essential, for it can bring people to
sattva-guëa. Tadä rajas-tamo-bhäväù käma-lobhädayaç ca ye (SB 1.2.19).
Tamo-guëa and rajo-guëa increase lust and greed, which implicate a living
entity in such a way that he must exist in this material world in many, many
forms. That is very dangerous. One should therefore be brought to sattva-guëa
by the establishment of varëäçrama-dharma
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
and should develop the
brahminical qualifications of being very neat and clean, rising early in the
morning and seeing maìgala-ärätrika, and so on. In this way, one should stay
in sattva-guëa, and then one cannot be influenced by tamo-guëa and
rajo-guëa.
tadä rajas-tamo-bhäväù
käma-lobhädayaç ca ye
892
ceta etair anäviddhaà
sthitaà sattve prasédati
(SB 1.2.19)
The opportunity for this purification is the special feature of human life; in
other lives, this is not possible. Such purification can be achieved very easily
by rädhä-kåñëa-bhajana, devotional service rendered to Rädhä and Kåñëa, and
therefore Narottama däsa Öhäkura sings, hari hari viphale janama goìäinu,
indicating that unless one worships Rädhä-Kåñëa, one's human form of life is
wasted. Väsudeve bhagavati bhakti-yogaù prayojitaù/ janayaty äçu vairägyam (SB
1.2.7). By engagement in the service of Väsudeva, one very quickly renounces
material life. The members of the Kåñëa consciousness movement, for example,
being engaged in väsudeva-bhakti, very quickly come to the stage of being nice
Vaiñëavas, so much so that people are surprised that mlecchas and yavanas are
able to come to this stage. This is possible by väsudeva-bhakti. But if we do not
come to the stage of sattva-guëa in this human life, then, as Narottama däsa
Öhäkura sings, hari hari viphale janama goìäinu—there is no profit in gaining
this human form of life.
Çré Véraräghava Äcärya comments that each of the items mentioned in the
first half of this verse is a cause for material entanglement. Käla, or the time
factor, agitates the modes of material nature, and svabhäva is the result of
association with these modes. Therefore Narottama däsa Öhäkura says,
bhakta-sane väsa. If one associates with bhaktas, then one's svabhäva, or nature,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
will change. Our Kåñëa consciousness movement is meant to give people good
association so that this change may take place, and we actually see that by this
method people all over the world are gradually becoming devotees.
As for saàskära, or reformation, this is possible by good association, for by
good association one develops good habits, and habit becomes second nature.
Therefore, bhakta-sane väsa: let people have the chance to live with bhaktas.
Then their habits will change. In the human form of life one has this chance,
but as Narottama däsa Öhäkura sings, hari hari viphale janama goìäinu: if one
893
fails to take advantage of this opportunity, one's human life is wasted. We are
therefore trying to save human society from degradation and actually elevate
people to the higher nature.
As for käma and karma—desires and activities—if one engages in
devotional service, one develops a different nature than if one engages in
activities of sense gratification, and of course the result is also different.
According to the association of different natures, one receives a particular
type of body. Käraëaà guëa-saìgo 'sya sad-asad-yoni janmasu (Bg. 13.22).
Therefore we should always seek good association, the association of devotees.
Then our life will be successful. A man is known by his company. If one has
the chance to live in the good association of devotees, one is able to cultivate
knowledge, and naturally one's character or nature will change for one's
eternal benefit.
TEXT 54
s$atyaÁaAnaAnantaAnand"-
maA‡aEk(r"s$amaUtaRya:
@s$pa{í"BaUir"maAh"AtmyaA
@ipa ÷upainaSaä,"ä{"zAAma,
satya-jïänänantänandamätraika-
rasa-mürtayaù
aspåñöa-bhüri-mähätmyä
api hy upaniñad-dåçäm
SYNONYMS
satya—eternal; jïäna—having full knowledge; ananta—unlimited;
änanda—fully blissful; mätra—only; eka-rasa—always existing;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
894
mürtayaù—forms; aspåñöa-bhüri-mähätmyäù—whose great glory is not touched;
api—even; hi—because; upaniñat-dåçäm—by those jïänés who are engaged in
studying the Upaniñads.
TRANSLATION
The viñëu-mürtis all had eternal, unlimited forms, full of knowledge and
bliss and existing beyond the influence of time. Their great glory was not even
to be touched by the jïänés engaged in studying the Upaniñads.
PURPORT
Mere çästra jïäna, or knowledge in the Vedas, does not help anyone
understand the Personality of Godhead. Only one who is favored or shown
mercy by the Lord can understand Him. This is also explained in the
Upaniñads (Muëòaka Upaniñad 3.2.3):
näyam ätmä pravacanena labhyo
na medhasä na bahunä çrutena
yam evaiña våëute tena labhyas
tasyaiña ätmä vivåëute tanuà sväm
"The Supreme Lord is not obtained by expert explanations, by vast
intelligence, or even by much hearing. He is obtained only by one whom He
Himself chooses. To such a person, He manifests His own form."
One description given of Brahman is satyaà brahma, änanda-rüpam:
"Brahman is the Absolute Truth and complete änanda, or bliss." The forms of
Viñëu, the Supreme Brahman, were one, but They were manifested differently.
The followers of the Upaniñads, however, cannot understand the varieties
manifested by Brahman. This proves that Brahman and Paramätmä can
actually he understood only through devotion, as confirmed by the Lord
Himself in Çrémad-Bhägavatam: bhaktyäham ekayä grähyaù (SB 11.14.21). To
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
895
establish that Brahman indeed has transcendental form, Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura gives various quotations from the çästras. In the
Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad (3.8), the Supreme is described as äditya-varëaà
tamasaù parastät, "He whose self-manifest form is luminous like the sun and
transcendental to the darkness of ignorance." Änanda-mätram ajaraà
puräëam ekaà santaà bahudhä dåçyamänam: "The Supreme is blissful, with no
tinge of unhappiness. Although He is the oldest, He never ages, and although
one, He is experienced in different forms." Sarve nityäù çäçvatäç ca dehäs tasya
parätmanaù: "All the forms of that Supreme Person are eternal." (Mahä-varäha
Puräëa) The Supreme Person has a form, with hands and legs and other
personal features, but His hands and legs are not material. Bhaktas know that
the form of Kåñëa, or Brahman, is not at all material. Rather, Brahman has a
transcendental form, and when one is absorbed in it, being fully developed in
bhakti, one can understand Him (premäïjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena [Bs.
5.38]). The Mäyävädés, however, cannot understand this transcendental form,
for they think that it is material.
Transcendental forms of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His
person are so great that the impersonal followers of the Upaniñads cannot
reach the platform of knowledge to understand them. Particularly, the
transcendental forms of the Lord are beyond the reach of the impersonalists,
who can only understand, through the studies of the Upaniñads, that the
Absolute Truth is not matter and that the Absolute Truth is not materially
restricted by limited potency.
Yet although Kåñëa cannot be seen through the Upaniñads, in some places it
is said that Kåñëa can in fact be known in this way. Aupaniñadaà puruñam:
"He is known by the Upaniñads." This means that when one is purified by
Vedic knowledge, one is then allowed to enter into devotional understanding
(mad-bhaktià labhate paräm [Bg. 18.54]).
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
tac chraddadhänä munayo
jïäna-vairagya-yuktayä
896
paçyanty ätmani cätmänaà
bhaktyä çruta-gåhétayä
"The seriously inquisitive student or sage, well equipped with knowledge and
detachment, realizes that Absolute Truth by rendering devotional service in
terms of what he has heard from the Vedänta-çruti." (SB 1.2.12) The word
çruta-gåhétayä refers to Vedänta knowledge, not sentimentality. Çruta-gåhéta is
sound knowledge.
Lord Viñëu, Brahmä thus realized, is the reservoir of all truth, knowledge
and bliss. He is the combination of these three transcendental features, and He
is the object of worship for the followers of the Upaniñads. Brahmä realized
that all the different forms of cows, boys and calves transformed into Viñëu
forms were not transformed by mysticism of the type that a yogé or demigod
can display by specific powers invested in him. The cows, calves and boys
transformed into viñëu-mürtis, or Viñëu forms, were not displays of viñëu-mäyä,
or Viñëu energy, but were Viñëu Himself. The respective qualifications of
Viñëu and viñëu-mäyä are just like those of fire and heat. In heat there is the
qualification of fire, namely warmth; and yet heat is not fire. The
manifestation of the Viñëu forms of the boys, cows and calves was not like the
heat, but rather like the fire—they were all actually Viñëu. Factually, the
qualification of Viñëu is full truth, full knowledge and full bliss. Another
example may be given with material objects, which may be reflected in many,
many forms. For example, the sun is reflected in many waterpots, but the
reflections of the sun in many pots are not actually the sun. There is no actual
heat and light from the sun in the pot, although it appears as the sun. But each
and every one of the forms Kåñëa assumed was fully Viñëu.
We should discuss Çrémad-Bhägavatam daily as much as possible, and then
everything will be clarified, for Bhägavatam is the essence of all Vedic
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
nigama-kalpa-taror galitaà phalam [SB 1.1.3]). It was written by
Vyäsadeva (mahä-muni-kåte) when he was self-realized. Thus the more we read
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the more its knowledge becomes clear. Each and every
897
verse is transcendental.
TEXT 55
WvaM s$ak{(Ú"d"zAARja:
par"“aöAtmanaAe'iKalaAna,
yasya BaAs$aA s$avaRimadM"
ivaBaAita s$acar"Acar"ma,
evaà sakåd dadarçäjaù
para-brahmätmano 'khilän
yasya bhäsä sarvam idaà
vibhäti sa-caräcaram
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; sakåt—at one time; dadarça—saw; ajaù—Lord Brahmä;
para-brahma—of the Supreme Absolute Truth; ätmanaù—expansions;
akhilän—all the calves and boys, etc.; yasya—of whom; bhäsä—by the
manifestation; sarvam—all; idam—this; vibhäti—is manifested;
sa-cara-acaram—whatever is moving and nonmoving.
TRANSLATION
Thus Lord Brahmä saw the Supreme Brahman, by whose energy this entire
universe, with its moving and nonmoving living beings, is manifested. He also
saw at the same time all the calves and boys as the Lord's expansions.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
By this incident, Lord Brahmä was able to see how Kåñëa maintains the
898
entire universe in different ways. It is because Kåñëa manifests everything that
everything is visible.
TEXT 56
tataAe'itaku(tauk(Aeä,"va{tyaistaimataEk(
Ad"zAein‰"ya:
taÜ"A°aABaUd"jastaUSNAI%M
paUdeR"vyantaIva paui‡ak(A
tato 'tikutukodvåtyastimitaikädaçendriyaù
tad-dhämnäbhüd ajas tüñëéà
pür-devy-antéva putrikä
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; atikutuka-udvåtya-stimita-ekädaça-indriyaù—whose eleven senses
had all been jolted by great astonishment and then stunned by transcendental
bliss; tad-dhämnä—by the effulgence of those viñëu-mürtis; abhüt—became;
ajaù—Lord Brahmä; tüñëém—silent; püù-devé-anti—in the presence of a
village deity (grämya-devatä); iva—just as; putrikä—a clay doll made by a
child.
TRANSLATION
Then, by the power of the effulgence of those viñëu-mürtis, Lord Brahmä,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
his eleven senses jolted by astonishment and stunned by transcendental bliss,
became silent, just like a child's clay doll in the presence of the village deity.
899
PURPORT
Brahmä was stunned because of transcendental bliss (muhyanti yat
sürayaù). In his astonishment, all his senses were stunned, and he was unable
to say or do anything. Brahmä had considered himself absolute, thinking
himself the only powerful deity, but now his pride was subdued, and he again
became merely one of the demigods—an important demigod, of course, but a
demigod nonetheless. Brahmä, therefore, cannot be compared to God—Kåñëa,
or Näräyaëa. It is forbidden to compare Näräyaëa even to demigods like
Brahmä and Çiva, what to speak of others.
yas tu näräyaëaà devaà
brahma-rudrädi-daivataiù
samatvenaiva vékñeta
sa päñaëòé bhaved dhruvam
[Cc. Madhya 18.116]
"One who considers demigods like Brahmä and Çiva to be on an equal level
with Näräyaëa must certainly be considered an offender." We should not
equate the demigods with Näräyaëa, for even Çaìkaräcärya has forbidden this
(näräyaëaù paro'vyaktät). Also, as mentioned in the Vedas, eko näräyaëa äsén
na brahmä neçänaù: "In the beginning of creation there was only the Supreme
Personality, Näräyaëa, and there was no existence of Brahmä or Çiva."
Therefore, one who at the end of his life remembers Näräyaëa attains the
perfection of life (ante näräyaëa-småtiù [SB 2.1.6]).
TEXT 57
wtaIre"zAe'tafyaeR inajamaih"maina sva‘aimaitake(
par"‡aAjaAtaAe'taiªar"s$anamauKa“aök(imataAE
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
900
@naIzAe'ipa ‰"í]M" ik(imad"imaita vaA mau÷ita s$aita
cacC$Ad"AjaAe ÁaAtvaA s$apaid" par"maAe'jaAjavainak(Ama,
itéreçe 'tarkye nija-mahimani sva-pramitike
paraträjäto 'tan-nirasana-mukha-brahmaka-mitau
anéçe 'pi drañöuà kim idam iti vä muhyati sati
cacchädäjo jïätvä sapadi paramo 'jä-javanikäm
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; irä-éçe—Lord Brahmä, the lord of Sarasvaté (Irä); atarkye—beyond;
nija-mahimani—whose own glory; sva-pramitike—self-manifest and blissful;
paratra—beyond; ajätaù—the material energy (prakåti); atat—irrelevant;
nirasana-mukha—by the rejection of that which is irrelevant; brahmaka—by
the crest jewels of the Vedas; mitau—in whom there is knowledge; anéçe—not
being able; api—even; drañöum—to see; kim—what; idam—is this; iti—thus;
vä—or; muhyati sati—being mystified; cacchäda—removed; ajaù—Lord Çré
Kåñëa; jïätvä—after understanding; sapadi—at once; paramaù—the greatest
of all; ajä-javanikäm—the curtain of mäyä.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Brahman is beyond mental speculation, He is self-manifest,
existing in His own bliss, and He is beyond the material energy. He is known
by the crest jewels of the Vedas by refutation of irrelevant knowledge. Thus in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
relation to that Supreme Brahman, the Personality of Godhead, whose glory
had been shown by the manifestation of all the four-armed forms of Viñëu,
Lord Brahmä, the lord of Sarasvaté, was mystified. "What is this?" he thought,
and then he was not even able to see. Lord Kåñëa, understanding Brahmä's
position, then at once removed the curtain of His yogamäyä.
901
PURPORT
Brahmä was completely mystified. He could not understand what he was
seeing, and then he was not even able to see. Lord Kåñëa, understanding
Brahmä's position, then removed that yogamäyä covering. In this verse,
Brahmä is referred to as ireça. Irä means Sarasvaté, the goddess of learning, and
Ireça is her husband, Lord Brahmä. Brahmä, therefore, is most intelligent. But
even Brahmä, the lord of Sarasvaté, was bewildered about Kåñëa. Although he
tried, he could not understand Lord Kåñëa. In the beginning the boys, the
calves and Kåñëa Himself had been covered by yogamäyä, which later displayed
the second set of calves and boys, who were Kåñëa's expansions, and which
then displayed so many four-armed forms. Now, seeing Brahmä's
bewilderment, Lord Kåñëa caused the disappearance of that yogamäyä. One
may think that the mäyä taken away by Lord Kåñëa was mahämäyä, but Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura comments that it was yogamäyä, the potency
by which Kåñëa is sometimes manifest and sometimes not manifest. The
potency which covers the actual reality and displays something unreal is
mahämäyä, but the potency by which the Absolute Truth is sometimes
manifest and sometimes not is yogamäyä. Therefore, in this verse the word ajä
refers to yogamäyä.
Kåñëa's energy—His mäyä-çakti, or svarüpa-çakti—is one, but it is
manifested in varieties. paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate (Çvetäçvatara
Upaniñad 6.8 [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]). The difference between Vaiñëavas
and Mäyävädés is that Mäyävädés say that this mäyä is one, whereas Vaiñëavas
recognize its varieties. There is unity in variety. For example, in one tree, there
are varieties of leaves, fruits and flowers. Varieties of energy are required for
performing the varieties of activity within the creation. To give another
example, in a machine all the parts may be iron, but the machine includes
varied activities. Although the whole machine is iron, one part works in one
way, and other parts work in other ways. One who does not know how the
machine is working may say that it is all iron; nonetheless, in spite of its being
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
902
iron, the machine has different elements, all working differently to accomplish
the purpose for which the machine was made. One wheel runs this way,
another wheel runs that way, functioning naturally in such a way that the
work of the machine goes on. Consequently we give different names to the
different parts of the machine, saying, "This is a wheel," "This is a screw," "This
is a spindle," "This is the lubrication," and so on. Similarly, as explained in the
Vedas,
paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate
sväbhäviké jïäna-bala-kriyä ca
[Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]
Kåñëa's power is variegated, and thus the same çakti, or potency, works in
variegated ways. Vividhä means "varieties." There is unity in variety. Thus
yogamäyä and mahämäyä are among the varied individual parts of the same
one potency, and all of these individual potencies work in their own varied
ways. The saàvit, sandhiné and ählädiné potencies—Kåñëa's potency for
existence, His potency for knowledge and His potency for pleasure—are
distinct from yogamäyä. Each is an individual potency. The ählädiné potency is
Rädhäräëé. As Svarüpa Dämodara Gosvämé has explained, rädhä
kåñëa-praëaya-vikåtir hlädiné çaktir asmät (Cc. Ädi 1.5). The ählädiné-çakti is
manifested as Rädhäräëé, but Kåñëa and Rädhäräëé are the same, although one
is potent and the other is potency.
Brahmä was mystified about Kåñëa's opulence (nija-mahimani) because this
opulence was atarkya, or inconceivable. With one's limited senses, one cannot
argue about that which is inconceivable. Therefore the inconceivable is called
acintya, that which is beyond cintya, our thoughts and arguments. Acintya
refers to that which we cannot contemplate but have to accept. Çréla Jéva
Gosvämé has said that unless we accept acintya in the Supreme, we cannot
accommodate the conception of God. This must be understood. Therefore we
say that the words of çästra should be taken as they are, without change, since
they are beyond our arguments. Acintyäù khalu ye bhävä na täàs tarkeëa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
903
yojayet: "That which is acintya cannot be ascertained by argument." People
generally argue, but our process is not to argue but to accept the Vedic
knowledge as it is. When Kåñëa says, "This is superior, and this is inferior," we
accept what He says. It is not that we argue, "Why is this superior and that
inferior?" If one argues, for him the knowledge is lost.
This path of acceptance is called avaroha-panthä The word avaroha is
related to the word avatära, which means"that which descends." The
materialist wants to understand everything by the äroha-panthä—by argument
and reason—but transcendental matters cannot be understood in this way.
Rather, one must follow the avaroha-panthä, the process of descending
knowledge. Therefore one must accept the paramparä system. And the best
paramparä is that which extends from Kåñëa (evaà paramparä-präptam [Bg.
4.2]). What Kåñëa says, we should accept (imaà räjarñayo viduù). This is called
the avaroha-panthä.
Brahmä, however, adopted the äroha-panthä. He wanted to understand
Kåñëa's mystic power by his own limited, conceivable power, and therefore he
himself was mystified. Everyone wants to take pleasure in his own knowledge,
thinking, "I know something." But in the presence of Kåñëa this conception
cannot stand, for one cannot bring Kåñëa within the limitations of prakåti.
One must submit. There is no alternative. Na täàs tarkeëa yojayet. This
submission marks the difference between Kåñëa-ites and Mäyävädés.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
The phrase atan-nirasana refers to the discarding of that which is
irrelevant. (Atat means "that which is not a fact.") Brahman is sometimes
described as asthülam anaëv ahrasvam adérgham, "that which is not large and
not small, not short and not long." (Båhad-äraëyaka Upaniñad 5.8.8) Neti neti:
"It is not this, it is not that." But what is it? In describing a pencil, one may say,
"It is not this; it is not that," but this does not tell us what it is. This is called
definition by negation. In Bhagavad-gétä, Kåñëa also explains the soul by giving
negative definitions. Na jäyate mriyate vä: "It is not born, nor does it die. You
can hardly understand more than this." But what is it? It is eternal. Ajo nityaù
çäçvato 'yaà puräëo na hanyate hanyamäne çarére: "It is unborn, eternal,
904
ever-existing, undying and primeval. It is not slain when the body is slain." (Bg.
2.20) In the beginning the soul is difficult to understand, and therefore Kåñëa
has given negative definitions:
nainaà chindanti çasträëi
nainaà dahati pävakaù
na cainaà kledayanty äpo
na çoñayati märutaù
"The soul can never be cut into pieces by any weapon, nor can it be burned by
fire, nor moistened by water, nor withered by the wind." (Bg. 2.23) Kåñëa says,
"It is not burned by fire." Therefore, one has to imagine what it is that is not
burned by fire. This is a negative definition.
TEXT 58
tataAe'vaARf‘aitalabDaAºa:
k(: pare"tavaäu"itTata:
k{(cC)$Aäu"nmaIlya vaE ä{"í"Ir,"
@Acaíe"dM" s$ah"AtmanaA
tato 'rväk pratilabdhäkñaù
kaù paretavad utthitaù
kåcchräd unmélya vai dåñöér
äcañöedaà sahätmanä
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; arväk—externally; pratilabdha-akñaù—having revived his
consciousness; kaù—Lord Brahmä; pareta-vat—just like a dead man;
utthitaù—stood up; kåcchrät—with great difficulty; unmélya—opening up;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
905
vai—indeed; dåñöéù—his eyes; äcañöa—he saw; idam—this universe;
saha-ätmanä—along with himself.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä's external consciousness then revived, and he stood up, just
like a dead man coming back to life. Opening his eyes with great difficulty, he
saw the universe, along with himself.
PURPORT
We actually do not die. At death, we are merely kept inert for some time,
just as during sleep. At night we sleep, and all our activities stop, but as soon as
we arise, our memory immediately returns, and we think, "Oh, where am I?
What do I have to do?" This is called suptotthita-nyäya. Suppose we die. "Die"
means that we become inert for some time and then again begin our activities.
This takes place life after life, according to our karma, or activities, and
svabhäva, or nature by association. Now, in the human life, if we prepare
ourselves by beginning the activity of our spiritual life, we return to our real
life and attain perfection. Otherwise, according to karma, svabhäva, prakåti
and so on, our varieties of life and activity continue, and so also do our birth
and death. As explained by Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura, mäyära vaçe, yäccha bhese',
khäccha häbuòubu bhäi: "My dear brothers, why are you being washed away by
the waves of mäyä?" One should come to the spiritual platform, and then one's
activities will be permanent. Kåta-puëya-puïjäù: [SB 10.12.11] this stage is
attained after one accumulates the results of pious activities for many, many
lives. Janma-koöi-sukåtair na labhyate (Cc.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Madhya 8.70). The Kåñëa
consciousness movement wants to stop koöi-janma, repeated birth and death.
In one birth, one should rectify everything and come to permanent life. This is
Kåñëa consciousness.
906
TEXT 59
s$apaâevaAiBata: pazyana,
id"zAAe'pazyatpaur":isTatama,
va{nd"AvanaM janaAjaIvyaåu"
maAk(LNA< s$amaAi‘ayama,
sapady eväbhitaù paçyan
diço 'paçyat puraù-sthitam
våndävanaà janäjévyadrumäkérëaà
samä-priyam
SYNONYMS
sapadi—immediately; eva—indeed; abhitaù—on all sides; paçyan—looking;
diçaù—in the directions; apaçyat—Lord Brahmä saw; puraù-sthitam—situated
in front of him; våndävanam—Våndävana; jana-äjévya-druma-äkérëam—dense
with trees, which were the means of living for the inhabitants;
samä-priyam—and which was equally pleasing in all seasons.
TRANSLATION
Then, looking in all directions, Lord Brahmä immediately saw Våndävana
before him, filled with trees, which were the means of livelihood for the
inhabitants and which were equally pleasing in all seasons.
PURPORT
Janäjévya-drumäkérëam: trees and vegetables are essential, and they give
happiness all year round, in all seasons. That is the arrangement in
Våndävana. It is not that in one season the trees are pleasing and in another
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
907
season not pleasing; rather, they are equally pleasing throughout the seasonal
changes. Trees and vegetables provide the real means of livelihood
recommended for everyone. Sarva-käma-dughä mahé (SB 1.10.4). Trees and
vegetables, not industry, provide the real means of life.
TEXT 60
ya‡a naEs$agARäu"vaE=r"A:
s$ah"As$aªa{ma{gAAd"ya:
ima‡aANAIvaAijataAvaAs$aåu"
taç&q%.taSaRk(Aid"k(ma,
yatra naisarga-durvairäù
sahäsan nå-mågädayaù
miträëéväjitäväsadruta-
ruö-tarñakädikam
SYNONYMS
yatra—where; naisarga—by nature; durvairäù—living in enmity; saha
äsan—live together; nå—human beings; måga-ädayaù—and animals;
miträëi—friends; iva—like; ajita—of Lord Çré Kåñëa; äväsa—residence;
druta—gone away; ruö—anger; tarñaka-ädikam—thirst and so on.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
TRANSLATION
Våndävana is the transcendental abode of the Lord, where there is no
hunger, anger or thirst. Though naturally inimical, both human beings and
fierce animals live there together in transcendental friendship.
908
PURPORT
The word vana means "forest." We are afraid of the forest and do not wish
to go there, but in Våndävana the forest animals are as good as demigods, for
they have no envy. Even in this material world, in the forest the animals live
together, and when they go to drink water they do not attack anyone. Envy
develops because of sense gratification, but in Våndävana there is no sense
gratification, for the only aim is Kåñëa's satisfaction. Even in this material
world, the animals in Våndävana are not envious of the sädhus who live there.
The sädhus keep cows and supply milk to the tigers, saying, "Come here and
take a little milk." Thus envy and malice are unknown in Våndävana. That is
the difference between Våndävana and the ordinary world. We are horrified
to hear the name of vana, the forest, but in Våndävana there is no such horror.
Everyone there is happy by pleasing Kåñëa. Kåñëotkértana-gäna-nartana-parau.
Whether a gosvämé or a tiger or other ferocious animal, everyone's business is
the same—to please Kåñëa. Even the tigers are also devotees. This is the
specific qualification of Våndävana. In Våndävana everyone is happy. The calf
is happy, the cat is happy, the dog is happy, the man is happy—everyone.
Everyone wants to serve Kåñëa in a different capacity, and thus there is no
envy. One may sometimes think that the monkeys in Våndävana are envious,
because they cause mischief and steal food, but in Våndävana we find that the
monkeys are allowed to take butter, which Kåñëa Himself distributes. Kåñëa
personally demonstrates that everyone has the right to live. This is Våndävana
life. Why should I live and you die? No. That is material life. The inhabitants
of Våndävana think, "Whatever is given by Kåñëa, let us divide it as prasäda
and eat." This mentality cannot appear all of a sudden, but it will gradually
develop with Kåñëa consciousness; by sädhana, one can come to this platform.
In the material world one may collect funds all over the world in order to
distribute food freely, yet those to whom the food is given may not even feel
appreciative. The value of Kåñëa consciousness, however, will gradually be
very much appreciated. For instance, in an article about the temple of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
909
Hare Kåñëa movement in Durban, South Africa, the Durban Post reported,
"All the devotees here are very active in the service of Lord Kåñëa, and the
results are obvious to see: happiness, good health, peace of mind, and the
development of all good qualities." This is the nature of Våndävana. Haräv
abhaktasya kuto mahad-guëäù: without Kåñëa consciousness, happiness is
impossible; one may struggle, but one cannot have happiness. We are therefore
trying to give human society the opportunity for a life of happiness, good
health, peace of mind and all good qualities through God consciousness.
TEXT 61
ta‡aAeã"h"tpazAupavaMzAizAzAutvanaAq"YaM
“aöAã"yaM par"manantamagAADabaAeDama,
vats$aAna, s$aKaIinava paur"A pair"taAe ivaicanvaä,"
WkM( s$apaAiNAk(valaM par"maeï"Yacaí"
tatrodvahat paçupa-vaàça-çiçutva-näöyaà
brahmädvayaà param anantam agädha-bodham
vatsän sakhén iva purä parito vicinvad
ekaà sa-päëi-kavalaà parameñöhy acañöa
SYNONYMS
tatra—there (in Våndävana); udvahat—assuming;
paçupa-vaàça-çiçutva-näöyam—the play of being a child in a family of cowherd
men (another of Kåñëa's names is Gopäla, "He who maintains the cows");
brahma—the Absolute Truth; advayam—without a second; param—the
Supreme; anantam—unlimited; agädha-bodham—possessing unlimited
knowledge; vatsän—the calves; sakhén—and His friends, the boys; iva
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
purä—just as before; paritaù—everywhere; vicinvat—searching; ekam—alone,
910
all by Himself; sa-päëi-kavalam—with a morsel of food in His hand;
parameñöhé—Lord Brahmä; acañöa—saw.
TRANSLATION
Then Lord Brahmä saw the Absolute Truth—who is one without a second,
who possesses full knowledge and who is unlimited—assuming the role of a
child in a family of cowherd men and standing all alone, just as before, with a
morsel of food in His hand, searching everywhere for the calves and His
cowherd friends.
PURPORT
The word agädha-bodham, meaning "full of unlimited knowledge," is
significant in this verse. The Lord's knowledge is unlimited, and therefore one
cannot touch where it ends, just as one cannot measure the ocean. What is the
extent of our intelligence in comparison to the vast expanse of water in the
ocean? On my passage to America, how insignificant the ship was, like a
matchbox in the midst of the ocean. Kåñëa's intelligence resembles the ocean,
for one cannot imagine how vast it is. The best course, therefore, is to
surrender to Kåñëa. Don't try to measure Kåñëa.
The word advayam, meaning "one without a second," is also significant.
Because Brahmä was overcast by Kåñëa's mäyä, he was thinking himself the
Supreme. In the material world, everyone thinks, "I am the best man in this
world. I know everything." One thinks, "Why should I read Bhagavad-gétä? I
know everything. I have my own interpretation." Brahmä, however, was able to
understand that the Supreme Personality is Kåñëa. Éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù [Bs.
5.1]. Another of Kåñëa's names, therefore, is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
parameçvara.
Now Brahmä saw Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, appearing as
a cowherd boy in Våndävana, not demonstrating His opulence but standing
just like an innocent boy with some food in His hand, loitering with His
911
cowherd boyfriends, calves and cows. Brahmä did not see Kåñëa as catur-bhuja,
the opulent Näräyaëa; rather, he simply saw an innocent boy. Nonetheless, he
could understand that although Kåñëa was not demonstrating His power, He
was the same Supreme person. people generally do not appreciate someone
unless he shows something wonderful, but here, although Kåñëa did not
manifest anything wonderful, Brahmä could understand that the same
wonderful person was present like an ordinary child, although He was the
master of the whole creation. Thus Brahmä prayed, govindam ädi-puruñaà tam
ahaà bhajämi **: "You are the original person, the cause of everything. I bow
down to You." This was his realization. Tam ahaà bhajämi. This is what is
wanted. Vedeñu durlabham: one cannot reach Kåñëa merely by Vedic
knowledge. Adurlabham ätma-bhaktau: but when one becomes a devotee, then
one can realize Him. Brahmä, therefore, became a devotee. In the beginning he
was proud of being Brahmä, the lord of the universe, but now he understood,
"Here is the Lord of the universe. I am simply an insignificant agent.
Govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi **."
Kåñëa was playing like a dramatic actor. Because Brahmä had some false
prestige, thinking that he had some power, Kåñëa showed him his real position.
A similar incident occurred when Brahmä went to see Kåñëa in Dvärakä.
When Kåñëa's doorman informed Lord Kåñëa that Lord Brahmä had arrived,
Kåñëa responded, "Which Brahmä? Ask him which Brahmä." The doorman
relayed this question, and Brahmä was astonished. "Is there another Brahmä
besides me?" he thought. When the doorman informed Lord Kåñëa, "It is
four-headed Brahmä," Lord Kåñëa said, "Oh, four-headed. Call others. Show
him." This is Kåñëa's position. For Kåñëa the four-headed Brahmä is
insignificant, to say nothing of "four-headed scientists." Materialistic scientists
think that although this planet earth is full of opulence, all others are vacant.
Because they simply speculate, this is their scientific conclusion. But from the
Bhägavatam we understand that the entire universe is full of living entities
everywhere. Thus it is the folly of the scientists that although they do not
know anything, they mislead people by presenting themselves as scientists,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
912
philosophers and men of knowledge.
TEXT 62
ä{"î"A tvare"NA inajaDaAer"NAtaAe'vataIyaR
pa{TvyaAM vapau: k(nak(d"Nx"imavaAiBapaAtya
s$pa{"î"A cataumauRku(q%k(Aeiq%iBar"x.~i„ayaugmaM
natvaA maud"™aus$aujalaEr"k{(taAiBaSaek(ma,
dåñövä tvareëa nija-dhoraëato 'vatérya
påthvyäà vapuù kanaka-daëòam iväbhipätya
spåñövä catur-mukuöa-koöibhir aìghri-yugmaà
natvä mud-açru-sujalair akåtäbhiñekam
SYNONYMS
dåñövä—after seeing; tvareëa—with great speed, hastily;
nija-dhoraëataù—from his swan carrier; avatérya—descended; påthvyäm—on
the ground; vapuù—his body; kanaka-daëòam iva—like a golden rod;
abhipätya—fell down; spåñövä—touching; catuù-mukuöa-koöi-bhiù—with the
tips of his four crowns; aìghri-yugmam—the two lotus feet; natvä—making
obeisances; mut-açru-su-jalaiù—with the water of his tears of joy;
akåta—performed; abhiñekam—the ceremony of bathing His lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
After seeing this, Lord Brahmä hastily got down from his swan carrier, fell
down like a golden rod and touched the lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa with the tips of
the four crowns on his heads. Offering his obeisances, he bathed the feet of
Kåñëa with the water of his tears of joy.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
913
PURPORT
Lord Brahmä bowed down like a stick, and because Lord Brahmä's
complexion is golden, he appeared to be like a golden stick lying down before
Lord Kåñëa. When one falls down before a superior just like a stick, one's
offering of obeisances is called daëòavat. Daëòa means "stick," and vat means
"like." It is not that one should simply say, "daëòavat." Rather, one must fall
down. Thus Brahmä fell down, touching his foreheads to the lotus feet of
Kåñëa, and his crying in ecstasy is to be regarded as an abhiñeka bathing
ceremony of Kåñëa's lotus feet.
He who appeared before Brahmä as a human child was in fact the Absolute
Truth, Parabrahman (brahmeti paramätmeti bhagavän iti çabdyate [SB 1.2.11]).
The Supreme Lord is naräkåti; that is, He resembles a human being. It is not
that He is four-armed (catur-bähu). Näräyaëa is catur-bähu, but the Supreme
Person resembles a human being. This is also confirmed in the Bible, where it
is said that man was made in the image of God.
Lord Brahmä saw that Kåñëa, in His form as a cowherd boy, was
Parabrahman, the root cause of everything, but was now appearing as a human
child, loitering in Våndävana with a morsel of food in His hand. Astonished,
Lord Brahmä hastily got down from his swan carrier and let his body fall to the
earth. Usually, the demigods never touch the ground, but Lord Brahmä,
voluntarily giving up his prestige as a demigod, bowed down on the ground
before Kåñëa. Although Brahmä has one head in each direction, he voluntarily
brought all his heads to the ground and touched Kåñëa's feet with the tips of
his four helmets. Although his intelligence works in every direction, he
surrendered everything before the boy Kåñëa.
It is mentioned that Brahmä washed the feet of Kåñëa with his tears, and
here the word sujalaiù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
bhakti
is present, everything is purified (sarvopädhi-vinirmuktam [Cc. Madhya
19.170]). Therefore Brahmä's crying was a form of bhakty-anubhäva, a
914
transformation of transcendental ecstatic love.
TEXT 63
otTaAyaAetTaAya k{(SNAsya
icar"sya paAd"yaAe: patana,
@Astae maih"tvaM ‘aAgä{"íM"
sma{tvaA sma{tvaA pauna: pauna:
utthäyotthäya kåñëasya
cirasya pädayoù patan
äste mahitvaà präg-dåñöaà
småtvä småtvä punaù punaù
SYNONYMS
utthäya utthäya—rising repeatedly; kåñëasya—of Lord Kåñëa; cirasya—for a
long time; pädayoù—at the lotus feet; patan—falling down; äste—remained;
mahitvam—the greatness; präk-dåñöam—which he had previously seen; småtvä
småtvä—remembering and remembering; punaù punaù—again and again.
TRANSLATION
Rising and falling again and again at the lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa for a long
time, Lord Brahmä remembered over and over the Lord's greatness he had just
seen.
PURPORT
As stated in one prayer,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
915
çrutim apare småtim itare bhäratam anye bhajantu bhava-bhétäù
aham iha nandaà vande yasyälinde paraà brahma
"Let others study the Vedas, småti and Mahäbhärata, fearing material existence,
but I shall worship Nanda Mahäräja, in whose courtyard is crawling the
Supreme Brahman. Nanda Mahäräja is so great that the Parabrahman is
crawling in his yard, and therefore I shall worship him." (Padyävalé 126)
Brahmä was falling down in ecstasy. Because of the presence of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who exactly resembled a human child,
Brahmä was naturally astonished. Therefore with a faltering voice he offered
prayers, understanding that here was the Supreme Person.
TEXT 64
zAnaEr"TaAetTaAya ivama{jya laAecanae
mauku(nd"mauã"Iºya ivana•ak(nDar":
k{(taAÃaila: ‘a™ayavaAna, s$amaAih"ta:
s$avaepaTaugARÕ"d"yaElataelayaA
çanair athotthäya vimåjya locane
mukundam udvékñya vinamra-kandharaù
kåtäïjaliù praçrayavän samähitaù
sa-vepathur gadgadayailatelayä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
SYNONYMS
çanaiù—gradually; atha—then; utthäya—rising; vimåjya—wiping; locane—his
two eyes; mukundam—at Mukunda, Lord Çré Kåñëa; udvékñya—looking up;
vinamra-kandharaù—his neck bent; kåta-aïjaliù—with folded hands;
praçraya-vän—very humble; samähitaù—his mind concentrated;
916
sa-vepathuù—his body trembling; gadgadayä—faltering; ailata—Brahmä began
to offer praise; élayä—with words.
TRANSLATION
Then, rising very gradually and wiping his two eyes, Lord Brahmä looked up
at Mukunda. Lord Brahmä, his head bent low, his mind concentrated and his
body trembling, very humbly began, with faltering words, to offer praises to
Lord Kåñëa.
PURPORT
Brahmä, being very joyful, began to shed tears, and he washed the lotus feet
of Kåñëa with his tears. Repeatedly he fell and rose as he recalled the
wonderful activities of the Lord. After repeating obeisances for a long time,
Brahmä stood up and smeared his hands over his eyes. Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura comments that the word locane indicates that with his
two hands he wiped the two eyes on each of his four faces. Seeing the Lord
before him, Brahmä began to offer prayers with great humility, respect and
attention.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Tenth Canto, Thirteenth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Stealing of the Boys and Calves by
Brahmä."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com

Srimad Bhagavatam
Tenth Canto Part One
e-book
This e-book and others are available for download at:
www.e-vedas.com
Hard bound books may be purchased at:
www.thekrishnastore.com
Email comments or questions to:
comments@evedas.com
This e-book was completed on April 23,2006
e-books copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved
www.krishna.com
Distributed by e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers