Çrémad-Bhägavatam Canto 11: "General History"
1. The Curse Upon the Yadu Dynasty
This chapter gives a hint of the destruction of the Yadu dynasty, which
took place owing to the appearance of an iron club. Hearing this narration is a
great impetus for becoming detached from the material world.
Lord Çré Kåñëa expertly arranged the great Kurukñetra battle between the
Kurus and the Päëòavas and thus removed to a great extent the earth's burden.
But the Supreme Lord, whose influence is inconceivable, was not yet satisfied,
because of the continued presence of the undefeatable Yadu family. The Lord
desired to bring about the destruction of the Yadu dynasty so that He could
completely wind up His pastimes on the earth and go back to His own abode.
Using the pretense of a curse by an assembly of brähmaëas, He withdrew His
entire dynasty from the surface of the earth.
By Çré Kåñëa's desire, many great sages, headed by Närada and Viçvämitra,
assembled at the holy place named Piëòäraka, near the city of Dvärakä. The
young boys of the Yadu family, absorbed in a playful mood, also arrived there.
These boys dressed Sämba in the guise of a pregnant woman about to give
birth and inquired from the sages about the fruitfulness of Sämba's so-called
pregnancy. The sages cursed the mocking boys by saying, "She will give birth to
a club that will destroy your family." The Yadus, frightened by this curse,
immediately lifted the garment from Sämba's abdomen and found a club.
Hurrying to the assembly of Ugrasena, the King of the Yadus, they offered a
report of everything that had taken place. Fearing the brähmaëas' curse,
Yaduräja Ugrasena ordered the club ground to powder and thrown into the
ocean. Within the ocean, a fish swallowed the last remaining lump of iron, and
the waves carried all the bits of ground powder to the shore, where they were
implanted and eventually grew into a grove of canes. Fishermen caught the
fish, and a hunter named Jarä used the iron lump found in its belly to fashion
an arrow. Although the Supersoul, Lord Çré Kåñëa, understood what was
happening, He did not wish to do anything to counteract it. Rather, in the
form of time He sanctioned these events.
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
k{(tvaA dE"tyavaDaM k{(SNA:
s$ar"AmaAe yaäu"iBava{Rta:
BauvaAe'vataAr"yaà"ArM"
jaivaïM" janayana, k(ilama,
çré-çuka uväca
kåtvä daitya-vadhaà kåñëaù
sa-rämo yadubhir våtaù
bhuvo 'vatärayad bhäraà
javiñöhaà janayan kalim
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çuka said; kåtvä—having performed; daitya—of the
demons; vadham—the killing; kåñëaù—Lord Kåñëa; sa-rämaù—accompanied
by Balaräma; yadubhiù—by the Yadus; våtaù—surrounded; bhuvaù—of the
earth; avatärayat—caused to be lessened; bhäram—the burden;
javiñöham—most sudden, leading to violence; janayan—raising; kalim—a state
of quarrel.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Lord Çré Kåñëa, accompanied by Balaräma and
surrounded by the Yadu dynasty, executed the killing of many demons. Then,
further to remove the burden of the earth, the Lord arranged for the great
Battle of Kurukñetra, which suddenly erupted in violence between the Kurus
and the Päëòavas.
PURPORT
The Eleventh Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam begins with a reference to the
pastimes executed by Lord Çré Kåñëa in the Tenth Canto. The beginning of
the Tenth Canto describes that when the earth was overburdened by
demoniac rulers, the personified earth, Bhümi, approached Lord Brahmä with
tears in her eyes, begging for relief, and Brahmä immediately went with the
demigods to approach the Supreme Lord in His form of Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu.
As the demigods waited respectfully on the shore of the milk ocean, the
Supreme Lord announced through Brahmä that He would soon incarnate on
earth and that the demigods should also descend to assist in His pastimes. Thus
from the very beginning of Lord Kåñëa's appearance it was understood that He
would descend to the earth to remove the demons.
As Çréla Prabhupäda states in his commentary to Bhagavad-gétä (16.6), those
who agree to obey the injunctions of revealed scriptures are known as
demigods, whereas those who defy the orders of Vedic scriptures are known as
asuras, or demons. The Vedic literatures are presented within the universe for
the guidance of the conditioned souls, who are trapped under the three modes
of material nature and who are therefore rotating in a continuous cycle of
birth and death. By strictly adhering to the Vedic injunctions, we can easily
satisfy our material needs and at the same time make tangible progress on the
path back home, back to Godhead. Thus we can achieve an eternal life of bliss
and knowledge in the Lord's own abode simply by obeying the Lord's
instructions as they are presented in Vedic literatures such as Bhagavad-gétä
and Çrémad-Bhägavatam. The demons, however, minimize or even mock the
absolute authority of the Supreme Lord and His teachings. Because these
asuras envy the sovereign status of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they
minimize the importance of the Vedic scriptures, which emanate directly from
the breathing of the Lord. The demons establish a society governed by their
own concocted whims and inevitably create chaos and misery, especially for
pious living entities who sincerely desire to follow the will of God.
Lord Çré Kåñëa states in Bhagavad-gétä that when there is a predominance
of such chaotic, irreligious societies on the earth, He personally descends to
rectify the imbalance. Thus from the very beginning of His transcendental
infancy, Kåñëa systematically killed the powerful asuras, or demons, who were
an intolerable burden for the earth. Lord Çré Kåñëa was assisted by His brother,
Balaräma, who is also the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Although God is
one, He can expand Himself to enjoy in many forms at once. That is His
omnipotence. And the first such expansion is Balaräma, or Baladeva. Balaräma
killed many noteworthy demons, including Dhenukäsura, Dvivida and the
envious Rukmé. Kåñëa was also accompanied by the members of the Yadu
dynasty, many of whom were demigods who had descended to assist the Lord.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, however, has revealed that
although many demigods had taken birth in the Yadu dynasty to assist the
Lord, some members of the Yadu dynasty were actually inimical toward Kåñëa.
Because of their mundane vision of the Lord, they considered themselves to be
on the same level as Kåñëa. Having taken birth in the family of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead Himself, they had inconceivable strength, and thus
they misunderstood Kåñëa's supreme position. Having forgotten that Kåñëa is
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they would constitute a great burden,
and consequently it was necessary for Kåñëa to remove them from the earth.
There is a popular saying that familiarity breeds contempt. To destroy the
contemptuous members of His own dynasty, the Lord caused a quarrel among
them. For this purpose, He arranged for Närada and other sages to display
anger against the Kärñëas, the members of His family. Although many Yadus
who were devoted to Kåñëa were apparently killed in this fratricidal war, Lord
Kåñëa actually returned them to their original positions as universal directors,
or demigods. It is the Lord's promise in Bhagavad-gétä that He will always
protect those who are favorable to His service.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, in his commentary on this verse, has
given a summary of the entire Eleventh Canto as follows. Chapter One
describes the beginning of the mauñala-lélä, or the prelude to the destruction of
the Yadu dynasty. Chapters Two through Five describe the conversations
between the nine Yogendras and King Nimi. Chapter Six describes the prayers
of Brahmä, Çiva and other residents of heaven. Chapters Seven through
Twenty-nine present the conversation between Kåñëa and Uddhava that is
known as the Uddhava-gétä. Chapter Thirty describes the withdrawal of the
Yadu dynasty from the earth. The final chapter describes the disappearance of
Lord Kåñëa.
TEXT 2
yae k(AeipataA: s$aubaò" paANx"]s$autaA: s$apa¥aEr,"
äu"âURtahe"lanak(caƒah"NAAid"iBastaAna,
k{(tvaA inaimaÔaimatare"tar"ta: s$amaetaAna,
h"tvaA na{paAiªar"h"r"itºaitaBaAr"maIzA:
ye kopitäù su-bahu päëòu-sutäù sapatnair
durdyüta-helana-kaca-grahaëädibhis tän
kåtvä nimittam itaretarataù sametän
hatvä nåpän niraharat kñiti-bhäram éçaù
SYNONYMS
ye—they who; kopitäù—were angered; su-bahu—excessively, time and time
again; päëòu-sutäù—the sons of Päëòu; sapatnaiù—by their enemies;
duù-dyüta—by duplicitous gambling; helana—insults; kaca-grahaëa—grabbing
the hair (of Draupadé); ädibhiù—and other impetuses; tän—them (the
Päëòavas); kåtvä—making; nimittam—the immediate cause;
itara-itarataù—confronting one another on opposite sides; sametän—all
assembled; hatvä—killing; nåpän—the kings; niraharat—took away once and
for all; kñiti—of the earth; bhäram—the burden; éçaù—the Supreme Lord.
TRANSLATION
Because the sons of Päëòu were enraged by the numerous offenses of their
enemies, such as duplicitous gambling, verbal insults, the seizing of Draupadé's
hair, and many other cruel transgressions, the Supreme Lord engaged those
Päëòavas as the immediate cause to execute His will. On the pretext of the
Battle of Kurukñetra, Lord Kåñëa arranged for all the kings who were
burdening the earth to assemble with their armies on opposite sides of the
battlefield, and when the Lord killed them through the agency of war, the earth
was relieved of its burden.
PURPORT
The Päëòavas were repeatedly harassed by their enemies, such as
Duryodhana and Duùçäsana. As innocent young princes, the Päëòavas had no
enemy, but Duryodhana was constantly plotting against his helpless cousins.
The Päëòavas were sent to a house of lac, which was later burned to the
ground. They were administered poison, and their chaste wife Draupadé was
publicly insulted when her hair was pulled and an attempt was made to strip
her naked. Throughout these dangers, Lord Çré Kåñëa constantly protected the
Päëòavas, who were fully surrendered to Him and who knew no shelter other
than Him.
In this verse the word itaretarataù is significant. Previous to the Battle of
Kurukñetra, Kåñëa had personally killed many demons, including Pütanä, Keçé,
Aghäsura and Kaàsa. Now, Kåñëa wanted to complete His mission of
removing the earth's burden by killing the remaining impious persons. But as
stated here, kåtvä nimittam: the Lord did not personally kill, but empowered
His devotees Arjuna and the other Päëòavas to remove the impious kings.
Thus acting personally and through His immediate expansion Balaräma, as
well as by empowering His pure devotees such as the Päëòavas, Kåñëa fully
displayed the pastimes of the yugävatära by reestablishing religious principles
and ridding the world of demons. Although the general purpose of the
Kurukñetra battle was to kill the demons, by Kåñëa's arrangement some great
devotees such as Bhéñma also appeared to be inimical toward the Lord. But as
described in the First Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.9.39) by the words hatä
gatäù svarüpam, many great devotees played with the Lord as enemies and
upon being killed by Kåñëa returned immediately to His abode in the spiritual
sky in their original spiritual bodies. Because God is absolute, by His killing He
simultaneously removes the demons from the earth and encourages His pure
devotees.
TEXT 3
BaUBaAr"r"Ajapa{tanaA yaäu"iBainaRr"sya
gAuæaE: svabaAò"iBar"icantayad"‘amaeya:
manyae'vanaenaRnau gAtaAe'pyagAtaM ih" BaArM"
yaâAd"vaM ku(lamah"Ae @ivaSa÷maAstae
bhü-bhära-räja-påtanä yadubhir nirasya
guptaiù sva-bähubhir acintayad aprameyaù
manye 'vaner nanu gato 'py agataà hi bhäraà
yad yädavaà kulam aho aviñahyam äste
SYNONYMS
bhü-bhära—existing as the burden of the earth; räja—of the kings;
påtanäù—the armies; yadubhiù—by the Yadus; nirasya—eliminating;
guptaiù—protected; sva-bahubhiù—by His own arms; acintayat—He
considered; aprameyaù—the unfathomable Lord; manye—I think; avaneù—of
the earth; nanu—one may say; gataù—it is gone; api—but; agatam—it is not
gone; hi—indeed; bhäram—the burden; yat—because; yädavam—of Yadus;
kulam—the dynasty; aho—ah; aviñahyam—intolerable; äste—remains.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead used the Yadu dynasty, which was
protected by His own arms, to eliminate the kings who with their armies had
been the burden of this earth. Then the unfathomable Lord thought to Himself,
"Although some may say that the earth's burden is now gone, in My opinion it
is not yet gone, because there still remains the Yädava dynasty itself, whose
strength is unbearable for the earth."
PURPORT
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has remarked in this regard that
although ordinary people might think that the Lord had now removed the
burden of the earth by killing the demons, reestablishing dharma, and so on,
Lord Çré Kåñëa Himself could detect that there was further danger from the
irreligious activities of His own family members who were acting improperly. It
is stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam that a just king will refuse to punish his own
enemy if his enemy is innocent but will punish his own son if his son actually
deserves punishment. Thus although in the eyes of the world the members of
the Lord's own dynasty are always worshipable, Lord Kåñëa detected that by
their intimate association with Him some members of the Yadu dynasty had
become indifferent to His will. Since such whimsical members of the Yadu
dynasty could act freely, being relatives of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, they would surely cause great misfortune for the world, and foolish
persons would take such whimsical behavior to be the will of Kåñëa. Thus the
Lord, whose desires are inconceivable, began to consider the need to
annihilate the indifferent, contemptuous members of the Yadu family.
From the viewpoint of ordinary persons, all the demons had been killed by
the Supreme Lord's pastimes in Dvärakä and Mathurä, as well as by the Battle
of Kurukñetra, and the earth was now free of its burden. Nevertheless, to free
the earth from the remaining burden of His own puffed-up family members,
Lord Çré Kåñëa transferred them away from the earth by causing a fratricidal
quarrel among them. In this way He prepared for His own disappearance from
the earth.
Çrédhara Svämé has pointed out that the word bähubhiù, "by His arms," is
used in the plural (rather than the dual) to indicate that the Lord caused the
destruction of the Yadu dynasty in His four-armed form. The original form of
Kåñëa as Govinda is two-armed, but it was by the plenary portion of the
four-armed Näräyaëa that the Lord killed all the demons on the earth and
ultimately removed the burdensome members of His own family. It may be
asked, If certain members of the Yadu family had become indifferent to the
will of the Lord, why didn't they oppose the Lord in His plan to remove them
from the earth? Therefore the word aprameyaù is used, which indicates that it
is impossible for anyone, even the Lord's own family members, to understand
His will completely.
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has given another reason for the destruction of the Yadu
dynasty. He emphasizes that the activities of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead should never be taken to be ordinary material activities. Nor are the
Lord's associates ordinary persons. Although Lord Kåñëa apparently incarnates
within this world for some time and then goes away, it should be understood
that the Supreme Lord is eternally situated with His entourage in His various
abodes in the spiritual sky, such as Çré Gokula, Mathurä and Dvärakä. The
members of the Yadu dynasty are eternal associates of the Lord, and therefore
they cannot bear to be separated from the Lord. Since Kåñëa was preparing to
give up His earthly pastimes, if He were to leave the Yadu dynasty on the earth
they would surely become so disturbed by His absence that in their highly
agitated state of mind they would trample and destroy the earth. Therefore,
Kåñëa arranged the disappearance of the Yadu dynasty prior to His own
disappearance.
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé concludes that ultimately the members of the Yadu
dynasty are never to be considered irreligious. Vaiñëava äcäryas have
mentioned that the story of the disappearance of the Yadu dynasty is especially
meant to help the conditioned souls achieve liberation from the bondage of
materialistic life. Within the three worlds there were none as powerful and
opulent as the Yadu dynasty. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the
possessor of unlimited opulences—beauty, strength, knowledge, fame and so
on—and the members of the Yadu dynasty, being the personal associates of
the Lord, were also endowed with inconceivable opulences. Therefore, when
we see how a fratricidal war suddenly deprived the members of the Yadu
dynasty of all of their earthly possessions and even their lives, we can
understand that there is no permanent position within this material world. In
other words, although the members of the Yadu dynasty are eternal associates
of the Lord and were immediately transferred to another planet where the
Lord was appearing, their sudden disappearance through fratricidal war is
meant to impress upon the conditioned souls the temporary nature of this
world. Therefore, the apparent indifference or enmity of certain members of
the Yadu dynasty toward Kåñëa should not be taken to be actual irreligion on
their part. The entire situation was arranged by Lord Kåñëa to teach a lesson to
the conditioned souls. In this connection Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has cited several
verses from the Bhägavatam to prove that the members of the Yadu dynasty
achieved their exalted birth in the Lord's own family by innumerable pious
activities and by complete absorption in thought of Lord Kåñëa. In fact it is
said that in sleeping, sitting, walking and speaking, they were unable to
remember their own selves, because they were simply thinking of Kåñëa.
In the First Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.15.33), Çréla Prabhupäda has
commented as follows on the disappearance of the Yadu dynasty: "The setting
of the sun does not mean the end of the sun. It means that the sun is out of our
sight. Similarly, the end of the mission of the Lord on a particular planet or
universe only means that He is out of our sight. The end of the Yadu dynasty
also does not mean that it is annihilated. It disappears along with the Lord, out
of our sight."
TEXT 4
naEvaAnyata: pair"BavaAe'sya Bavaetk(TaiÂana,
mats$aM™ayasya ivaBavaAeªah"nasya inatyama,
@nta: k(ilaM yaäu"ku(lasya ivaDaAya vaeNAustambasya
vai¶"imava zAAintamaupaEima DaAma
naivänyataù paribhavo 'sya bhavet kathaïcin
mat-saàçrayasya vibhavonnahanasya nityam
antaù kalià yadu-kulasya vidhäya veëustambasya
vahnim iva çäntim upaimi dhäma
SYNONYMS
na—not; eva—certainly; anyataù—from another cause; paribhavaù—defeat;
asya—of this (dynasty); bhavet—there can be; kathaïcit—by any means;
mat-saàçrayasya—which has fully taken shelter of Me; vibhava—with its
power; unnahanasya—unrestricted; nityam—always; antaù—within; kalim—a
quarrel; yadu-kulasya-the Yadu dynasty; vidhäya—inspiring;
veëu-stambasya—of a clump of bamboo plants; vahnim—a fire; iva—as;
çäntim—peace; upaimi—I shall achieve; dhäma—My eternal personal abode.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa thought, "No outside force could ever bring about the defeat of
this family, the Yadu dynasty, whose members have always been fully
surrendered to Me and are unrestricted in their opulence. But if I inspire a
quarrel within the dynasty, that quarrel will act just like a fire created from the
friction of bamboo in a grove, and then I shall achieve My real purpose and
return to My eternal abode."
PURPORT
Even though Lord Kåñëa wanted to arrange for the disappearance of the
members of the Yadu dynasty, He could not personally kill them, as He had
killed many demons, because the Yadu dynasty was His own family. One might
ask why Lord Kåñëa did not arrange for them to be killed by others. Therefore
it is stated in this verse, naivänyataù paribhavo 'sya bhavet kathaïcit: because
the Yadu dynasty was the Lord's own family, no one within the universe was
capable of killing them, not even the demigods. In fact, Viçvanätha Cakravarté
Öhäkura points out that no one within the universe was capable of even
insulting the members of the Yadu dynasty, what to speak of defeating or
killing them. The reason is given here by the words mat-saàçrayasya. The
members of the Yadu dynasty had fully taken shelter of Kåñëa, and therefore
they were always under the personal protection of the Lord. It is stated, märe
kåñëa räkhe ke, räkhe kåñëa märe ke: If Kåñëa protects someone, no one can kill
him, and if Kåñëa wants to kill someone, no one can save him. Kåñëa had
originally requested all of His associates, along with the demigods, to appear on
the earth to assist Him in His pastimes. Now that His pastimes were coming to
an end on this particular planet and would be transferred to another planet in
another universe, Kåñëa wanted to remove all of His associates from the earth
so that in His absence they would not constitute a burden. Since the powerful
Yadu dynasty, being the Lord's personal family and army, could not possibly be
defeated by anyone, Kåñëa arranged an internal quarrel, just as the wind in a
bamboo forest sometimes rubs the bamboos together and creates a fire that
consumes the entire forest.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté has pointed out that ordinary people,
hearing of the adventures of the Yadu family, might think that the heroes of
the Yadu dynasty are as worshipable as Kåñëa or that they are independent
controllers. In other words, people polluted by Mäyäväda philosophy might see
the Yadu dynasty as being on the same level as Kåñëa. Therefore, to establish
that even the most powerful living entity can never equal or surpass the
Supreme Lord, Kåñëa arranged for the destruction of the Yadu dynasty.
TEXT 5
WvaM vyavais$ataAe r"Ajana,
s$atyas$aÆÿlpa wRìr":
zAApavyaAjaena iva‘aANAAM
s$aÃaoee" svaku(laM ivaBau:
evaà vyavasito räjan
satya-saìkalpa éçvaraù
çäpa-vyäjena vipräëäà
saïjahre sva-kulaà vibhuù
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; vyavasitaù—deciding for certain; räjan—O King;
satya-saìkalpaù—whose desire always proves true; éçvaraù—the Supreme Lord;
çäpa-vyäjena—by the pretext of a curse; vipräëäm—of brähmaëas;
saïjahre—withdrew; sva-kulam—His own family; vibhuù—the Almighty.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Parékñit, when the supreme almighty Lord, whose desire
always comes to pass, had thus made up His mind, He withdrew His own family
on the pretext of a curse spoken by an assembly of brähmaëas.
PURPORT
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has made a very important
comment on this verse. He states that since the intentions of the Supreme
Lord, Kåñëacandra, are always perfect, it was certainly in consideration of the
greatest benefit for the entire world that He destroyed His own family on the
pretext of a curse by brähmaëas. In this connection, Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté
Öhäkura has shown a parallel in the pastimes of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu,
who is Kåñëa Himself appearing as His own devotee.
Lord Caitanya appeared along with His first plenary expansion, known as
Lord Nityänanda Prabhu, and with Lord Advaita Prabhu. All three
personalities—Caitanya Mahäprabhu, Nityänanda Prabhu and Advaita
Prabhu—are accepted by Vaiñëava äcäryas to be in the category of
viñëu-tattva, the full status of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. These
three Personalities of Godhead perceived that in the future Their so-called
seminal descendants would get undue recognition and thus, being puffed up,
would commit grave offenses against those who were actually Vaiñëava gurus
or representatives of the Lord.
Every living being is part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, as stated in the
Bhagavad-gétä (mamaiväàçaù). Every living entity is originally a son of God,
yet to execute His pastimes the Lord selects certain highly qualified living
entities whom He allows to take birth as His personal relatives. But those
living entities who appear as descendants of the Lord's personal family may
undoubtedly become proud of such a position and thus abuse the great
adulation they receive from ordinary people. In this way such persons may
artificially get undue attention and divert people from the actual principle of
spiritual advancement, which is to surrender to the pure devotee who
represents the Lord. The last eight verses (85)of the Twelfth Chapter of
Bhagavad-gétä give a description of the pure devotees the Lord permits to act as
äcäryas, or spiritual leaders of mankind. In other words, simply to take birth in
the personal family of Kåñëa is not the qualification for being a spiritual
master, since according to Bhagavad-gétä, pitäham asya jagataù: every living
entity is eternally a member of the Lord's family. Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä,
samo 'haà sarva-bhüteñu na me dveñyo 'sti na priyaù: [Bg. 9.29] "I am equal to
everyone. No one is My enemy, and no one is My special friend." If the
Supreme Personality of Godhead appears to have a special family, such as the
Yadu dynasty, such a so-called family is a special arrangement of the Lord's
pastimes in order to attract the conditioned souls. When Kåñëa descends, He
acts as if He were an ordinary person in order to attract the living entities to
His pastimes. Therefore Kåñëa acted as though the Yadu dynasty was His
personal family, although in fact every living entity is a member of His family.
Ordinary people, however, not understanding the higher principles of
spiritual knowledge, easily forget the actual qualifications of a bona fide
spiritual master and instead give undue importance to people born in the
Lord's so-called family. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, therefore, avoided this
impediment on the path of spiritual enlightenment by leaving behind no
children. Although Caitanya Mahäprabhu married twice, He was childless.
Nityänanda Prabhu, who is also the Supreme Personality of Godhead, did not
accept any of the natural sons born of His own son, Çré Vérabhadra. Similarly,
Lord Advaita Äcärya divested of His association all of His sons except
Acyutänanda and two others. Acyutänanda, the chief faithful son of Advaita
Äcärya, had no seminal progeny, and the remaining three of the six sons of
Lord Advaita fell from the path of devotion to the Lord and are known as
rejected sons. In other words, the appearance of Caitanya Mahäprabhu
allowed little facility for continuing a so-called seminal family to create
confusion. The respect shown to the conception of seminal lineage in
deference to the ideas of the smärtas is unfit to be accepted by one who
actually understands the supreme truth from Vedic authority.
Other äcäryas, or spiritual masters, have also demonstrated this point in
their own families. His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda,
our own beloved spiritual master, who is the mighty author of this
Çrémad-Bhägavatam series, was born in a family of pure devotees, and he
himself exhibited all the symptoms of pure devotional service from his very
childhood. Çréla Prabhupäda eventually came to the Western countries and
exhibited unprecedented spiritual potency in establishing the Kåñëa
consciousness movement all over the world. In a few short years, he translated
more than fifty large volumes of Vedic philosophy. By his practical activities
he is certainly understood to be a most empowered representative of the Lord.
Nonetheless, his own family members, although devotees of Kåñëa, did not at
all come up to the proper standard of devotional service and are therefore not
given attention by the members of ISKCON. The natural tendency for the
members of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness would be to
offer all reverence and worship to the members of Çréla Prabhupäda's
immediate family. But since by Kåñëa's arrangement these family members are
not at all on the platform of pure devotional service, the members of ISKCON
give them hardly any attention but instead worship those who actually exhibit
the qualities of highly advanced Vaiñëavas, regardless of their so-called birth.
In other words, birth cannot constitute the qualification for a respectable
person, even when one is born in the Lord's own family or in the äcärya's
family, what to speak of an ordinary wealthy or learned family.
In India there is a class of men known as nityänanda-vaàça, who claim to be
direct descendants of Lord Nityänanda and therefore worthy of the highest
respect for their position in devotional service. In this regard, Çréla
Prabhupäda has written in The Nectar of Devotion, "In the Middle Ages, after
the disappearance of Lord Caitanya's great associate Lord Nityänanda, a class
of priestly persons claimed to be the descendants of Nityänanda, calling
themselves the gosvämé caste. They further claimed that the practice and
spreading of devotional service belonged only to their particular class, which
was known as nityänanda-vaàça. In this way they exercised their artificial
power for some time, until Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, the
powerful äcärya of the Gauòéya Vaiñëava sampradäya, completely smashed
their idea. There was a great hard struggle for some time, but it has turned out
successful, and it is now correctly and practically established that devotional
service is not restricted to a particular class of men. Besides that, anyone who
is engaged in devotional service is already a high-class brähmaëa. So Çréla
Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura's struggle for this movement has come out
successful. It is on the basis of his position that anyone, from any part of the
universe, can become a Gauòéya Vaiñëava."
In other words, the essence of spiritual knowledge is that every living being,
regardless of his present status in life, is originally a servant of the Supreme
Lord, and it is the mission of the Lord to reclaim all of these fallen living
entities. Despite his past situation, any living being who is willing to surrender
again at the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord or His bona fide representative can
purify himself by strictly adhering to the rules and regulations of bhakti-yoga
and thus act as a high-class brähmaëa. Nonetheless, the seminal descendants of
the Lord think themselves to have acquired their ancestor's character and
position. Thus the Supreme Lord, who is the well-wisher of the entire universe
and especially of His devotees, bewilders the discriminatory power of His own
descendants in such a contradictory way that these seminal descendants
become recognized as deviant and the actual qualification to be a
representative of the Lord, namely unalloyed surrender to the will of Kåñëa,
remains prominent.
TEXTS 6-7
svamaUtyaAR laAek(laAvaNyainamauRftyaA
laAecanaM na{NAAma,
gAIiBaRstaA: smar"taAM icaÔaM
padE"staAnaIºataAM i‚(yaA:
@AicC$â k(Lita< s$auëAek(AM
ivatatya ÷Ãas$aA nau k(AE
tamaAe'nayaA tair"SyantaItya,
@gAAtsvaM pad"maIìr":
sva-mürtyä loka-lävaëyanirmuktyä
locanaà nåëäm
gérbhis täù smaratäà cittaà
padais tän ékñatäà kriyäù
äcchidya kértià su-çlokäà
vitatya hy aïjasä nu kau
tamo 'nayä tariñyantéty
agät svaà padam éçvaraù
SYNONYMS
sva-mürtyä—by His own form; loka—of all the material worlds; lävaëya—the
beauty; nirmuktyä—which takes away; locanam—(He attracted) the eyes;
nåëäm—of men; gérbhiù—by His words; täù smaratäm—of those who
remembered them; cittam—the mind; padaiù—by His feet; tän ékñatäm—of
those who saw them; kriyäù—the physical activities (walking, etc.);
äcchidya—having attracted; kértim—His glories; su-çlokäm—praised by the
best verses; vitatya—having spread; hi—certainly; aïjasä—easily; nu—indeed;
kau—upon the earth; tamaù—ignorance; anayä—by those (glories);
tariñyanti—people will cross over; iti—thus thinking; agät—He obtained; svam
padam—His own desired position; éçvaraù—the Lord.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, is the reservoir of all beauty.
All beautiful things emanate from Him, and His personal form is so attractive
that it steals the eyes away from all other objects, which then seem devoid of
beauty in comparison to Him. When Lord Kåñëa was on the earth, He attracted
the eyes of all people. When Kåñëa spoke, His words attracted the minds of all
who remembered them. By seeing the footsteps of Lord Kåñëa, people became
attracted to Him, and thus they wanted to offer their bodily activities to the
Lord as His followers. In this way Kåñëa very easily spread His glories, which
are sung throughout the world by the most sublime and essential Vedic verses.
Lord Kåñëa considered that simply by hearing and chanting those glories,
conditioned souls born in the future would cross beyond the darkness of
ignorance. Being satisfied with this arrangement, He left for His desired
destination.
PURPORT
According to Çrédhara Svämé, these two verses indicate that Lord Kåñëa,
having achieved all the purposes for which He had descended, went back to
His spiritual kingdom. It is natural that people in the material world hanker to
see a beautiful object. In materialistic life, however, our consciousness is
polluted by the influence of the three modes of nature, and therefore we
hanker for material objects of beauty and pleasure. The materialistic process of
sense gratification is imperfect, because the laws of material nature will not
allow us to be happy or satisfied in materialistic life. The living entity is
constitutionally an eternal servant of God and is meant to appreciate the
infinite beauty and pleasure of the Supreme Lord. Lord Kåñëa is the Absolute
Truth and the reservoir of all beauty and pleasure. By serving Kåñëa we can
also share in His ocean of beauty and pleasure, and thus our desire to see
beautiful things and enjoy life will be fully satisfied. The example is given that
the hand cannot enjoy food independently but can assimilate it indirectly by
giving it to the stomach. Similarly, by serving Lord Kåñëa the living entity,
who is part and parcel of the Lord, will derive unlimited happiness.
The inconceivable Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëa, by displaying His own true
form, freed the living entities from falsely seeking forms of beauty other than
His form, which is itself the source of all beautiful things. Simply by seeing His
lotus feet, fortunate living beings could distinguish between the ungodly
endeavors of the karmés, who seek gross enjoyment for their own sense
gratification, and the practice of dovetailing one's activities with the service of
the Lord. Although philosophers perpetually speculate about the nature of
God, Lord Kåñëa directly liberated the jéva souls from all speculative
misunderstandings about Him by displaying His actual transcendental form
and activities. Superficially, Kåñëa's personal form, words and activities
resemble those of ordinary conditioned souls. Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté
Öhäkura explains that this apparent resemblance between the Lord's activities
and those of the living entities is a merciful concession by the Lord so that the
conditioned souls will be attracted to Him and become eligible to return to His
kingdom for an eternal life of bliss and knowledge. By showing His own
spiritual form and kingdom to the living entities in a way tangible for them,
Lord Kåñëa drove away their false enjoying attitude and removed their
long-standing indifference to His personality. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, if
one can understand the position of Çré Kåñëa as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, one will never again fall into the network of material illusion. Such
a falldown can be avoided if one constantly hears about the unique
transcendental form and beauty of the Lord from authorized Vedic literatures.
As explained in Bhagavad-gétä (2.42-43):
yäm imäà puñpitäà väcaà
pravadanty avipaçcitaù
veda-väda-ratäù pärtha
nänyad astéti vädinaù
kämätmänaù svarga-parä
janma-karma-phala-pradäm
kriyä-viçeña-bahuläà
bhogaiçvarya-gatià prati
"Men of small knowledge are very much attached to the flowery words of the
Vedas, which recommend various fruitive activities for elevation to heavenly
planets, resultant good birth, power, and so forth. Being desirous of sense
gratification and opulent life, they say that there is nothing more than this."
On the other hand, certain parts of Vedic literature are specifically meant
to award material sense gratification to the conditioned soul and at the same
time gradually condition him to obey the Vedic injunctions. The portions of
the Vedas that recommend fruitive activities for regulated sense gratification
are themselves dangerous, because the living being who engages in such
activities becomes easily entangled in the material enjoyment offered and
neglects the ultimate purpose of the Vedas. The ultimate purpose of Vedic
literature is to bring the living entity back to his original consciousness, in
which he acts as an eternal servant of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. By
rendering service to the Lord, the living entity can enjoy unlimited spiritual
bliss in the association of the Lord in His own kingdom. Thus, one who
seriously desires to advance in Kåñëa consciousness should specifically hear the
Vedic literature that deals with pure devotional service to the Lord. One
should hear from those who are highly advanced in Kåñëa consciousness and
avoid interpretations that stimulate materialistic desires for enjoyment.
When the tiny living entity is finally able to see the difference between the
temporary affairs of this world and the transcendental activities of Lord
Trivikrama, Kåñëa, he devotes himself to the Lord and removes from his heart
the dark covering of matter, no longer desiring sense gratification, which is
enjoyed under the two headings sin and piety. In other words, although people
within this world are considered sinful or pious, on the material platform both
sin and piety are performed for one's personal gratification. If one can
understand that his real happiness lies in giving pleasure to Kåñëa, Lord Kåñëa
takes such a fortunate living being back to His own abode, which is called
Goloka Våndävana. According to Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, the
Lord first gives a sincere soul the opportunity to hear about His pastimes.
When the devotee has advanced in his spontaneous attraction to such
narrations, the Lord gives him the opportunity to take part in His spiritual
pastimes as they appear within this world. By taking part in the pastimes of the
Lord within a particular universe, the living being becomes completely
detached from the material world, and ultimately the Lord brings him to His
personal abode in the spiritual sky.
Foolish people cannot understand this substantial benefit offered by the
Lord, but Lord Kåñëa acts for the benefit of such foolish people by saving them
from their absorption in the temporary world of false enjoyment. The Lord
does this by personally displaying His own superlative transcendental beauty,
transcendental words and transcendental activities. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has
pointed out that the words tamo 'nayä tariñyanti indicate that although Lord
Kåñëa appeared five thousand years ago, one who hears and chants about the
activities, form and words of the Lord will get exactly the same benefit as those
who personally experienced these things as contemporaries of Lord Kåñëa. In
other words, he will also cross over the darkness of material existence and
achieve the Lord's abode. Thus Çréla Jéva Gosvämé concludes that if such an
exalted destination is available to all living beings, it must certainly have been
awarded to the Yädavas, who were personal associates of the Lord.
It is stated in this verse that by His beauty Kåñëa stole away the vision of
people who saw Him. Kåñëa's speaking was so attractive that those who heard
Him became speechless. Since generally those who cannot speak are also deaf,
the Lord's words also stole away the ears of those who heard Him, since they
were no longer interested in hearing sounds other than the Lord's speaking. By
displaying the beauty of His footsteps, Kåñëa stole away from those who saw
them the power to perform materialistic activities. Thus by His appearance in
this world Kåñëa took away the senses of mankind. In other words, He made
people blind, dumb, deaf, mad and otherwise invalid. Therefore Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura asks, "Since He took away everything people possessed,
who would properly call Him merciful? Rather, He is just a thief." In this way,
he indirectly offers the highest praise to the beauty of the Lord. Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura also points out that although Kåñëa gave liberation to the
demons by destroying them, to those who were attracted to Him, Kåñëa gave
pure love of God and drowned them in the ocean of His own beauty. Thus
Kåñëa is not like a person who gives charity without discrimination. And
Kåñëa is so merciful that not only did He give the highest benediction to the
inhabitants of the earth, but He empowered great saintly persons such as
Vyäsadeva to describe His pastimes with beautiful poetic verses. Thus people
born on the earth in the future could easily cross over the ocean of birth and
death by those glories, which are compared to a strong boat. In fact, those of us
who are now enjoying the glories of Kåñëa through the transparent medium of
the Bhaktivedanta purports to Çrémad-Bhägavatam, by the mercy of His Divine
Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda, are the fortunate recipients of
the mercy of Kåñëa, who was merciful even to persons yet to be born.
Quoting from the Amara-koça dictionary, Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté has
also stated, padaà vyavasita-träëa-sthäna-lakñmy-aìghri-vastuñu: the possible
definitions for padam are "that which has been decided," "place of deliverance,"
"fortune," "foot" or "object." Thus he translates the word padam as also meaning
vyavasita, "that which has been decided." In other words, the statement agät
svam padam éçvaraù indicates not only that Kåñëa went to His abode, but that
Kåñëa realized His determined desire. If we say that Kåñëa returned to His
eternal abode, we imply that Kåñëa had been absent from His abode and was
now returning. Therefore, Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura points out that it is
incorrect to say in a normal sense that Kåñëa "went back to His abode."
According to the Brahma-saàhitä, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Kåñëa, is always present in His eternal abode in the spiritual sky. Yet by His
causeless mercy He also manifests Himself from time to time within the
material world. In other words, God is all-pervading. Even when present
before us He is simultaneously in His abode. The ordinary soul, or jéva, is not
all-pervading like the Supersoul, and therefore by his presence in the material
world he is absent from the spiritual world. In fact, we are suffering due to that
absence from the spiritual world, or Vaikuëöha. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead, however, is all-pervading, and therefore Viçvanätha Cakravarté
Öhäkura translates the words agät svaà padam to mean that Kåñëa achieved
exactly what He desired. The Lord is all-pervading and self-sufficient in
fulfilling His perfect desires. His appearance and disappearance in this world
should never be compared to ordinary material activities.
Viçvanätha Cakravarté has quoted a statement by Uddhava at the
beginning of the Third Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam (3.2.7) wherein Uddhava
compares the disappearance of Lord Kåñëa to the setting of the sun. In his
purport to this verse, Çréla Prabhupäda has written, "The comparison of Kåñëa
to the sun is very appropriate. As soon as the sun sets, darkness automatically
appears. But the darkness experienced by the common man does not affect the
sun itself either at the time of sunrise or at sunset. Lord Kåñëa's appearance
and disappearance are exactly like that of the sun. He appears and disappears
in innumerable universes, and as long as He is present in a particular universe
there is all transcendental light in that universe, but the universe from which
He passes away is put into darkness. His pastimes, however, are everlasting.
The Lord is always present in some universe, just as the sun is present in either
the eastern or western hemisphere. The sun is always present either in India or
America, but when the sun is present in India the American land is in
darkness, and when the sun is present in America the Indian hemisphere is in
darkness."
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has quoted a verse from the end of the Eleventh Canto
that further clarifies that the abode of the Lord is as eternal as the Lord
Himself: "The ocean immediately swallowed Dvärakä, O Mahäräja, taking
away the Lord's personal abode, which the Lord had abandoned. The Supreme
Lord, Madhusüdana, is always present in Dvärakä, which merely by being
remembered takes away everything unfavorable. It is the most auspicious of
auspicious places." (SB 11.31.23-24) Just as the sun appears to be swallowed by
the night, Kåñëa or His abode or His dynasty seems to disappear, but actually
the Lord and all of His paraphernalia, including His abode and dynasty, are
eternal, in the same way as the sun is always in the sky. Çréla Prabhupäda says
in this connection, "As the sun appears in the morning and gradually rises to
the meridian and then again sets in one hemisphere while simultaneously
rising in the other, so Lord Kåñëa's disappearance in one universe and the
beginning of His different pastimes in another take place simultaneously. As
soon as one pastime is finished here, it is manifested in another universe. And
thus His nitya-lélä, or eternal pastimes, are going on without ending."
TEXT 8
™aIr"AjaAevaAca
“aöNyaAnaAM vad"AnyaAnaAM
inatyaM va{Ü"Aepas$aeivanaAma,
iva‘azAApa: k(TamaBaUä,"
va{SNAInaAM k{(SNAcaetas$aAma,
çré-räjoväca
brahmaëyänäà vadänyänäà
nityaà våddhopasevinäm
vipra-çäpaù katham abhüd
våñëénäà kåñëa-cetasäm
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—the King said; brahmaëyänäm—of them who were respectful to
the brähmaëas; vadänyänäm—charitable; nityam—always;
våddha-upasevinäm—engaged in serving elders; vipra-çäpaù—the brähmaëas'
curse; katham—how; abhüt—did it come about; våñëénäm—of the Våñëis;
kåñëa-cetasäm—whose minds were totally absorbed in thought of Lord Kåñëa.
TRANSLATION
King Parékñit inquired: How could the brähmaëas curse the Våñëis, who
were always respectful to the brähmaëas, charitable, and inclined to serve senior
and exalted personalities and whose minds were always fully absorbed in
thought of Lord Kåñëa?
PURPORT
Brähmaëas generally become angry at persons who disrespect the
brahminical class, who are uncharitable and who decline to serve senior,
respectable personalities. The Våñëis, however, were not like that, and thus
they are described here by King Parékñit as brahmaëyänäm, or sincere followers
of brahminical culture. Further, even if the brähmaëas became angry, why
would they curse members of Kåñëa's own family? Since the brähmaëas were
well learned, they must have known that it is offensive to oppose personal
associates of the Supreme Lord. The Yadu dynasty is specifically described here
as våñnénäm and kåñëa-cetasäm. In other words, they were Lord Kåñëa's own
men, and they were always absorbed in thinking of Kåñëa. Therefore, even if
somehow or other the brähmaëas had cursed them, how could that curse have
had any effect?
These are the questions of Parékñit Mahäräja.
Although the Våñëis are described in this verse as kåñëa-cetasäm, always
absorbed in thinking of Kåñëa, it is clearly indicated that Kåñëa desired that
the brähmaëas become angry and curse the Yadu dynasty. The Supreme Lord
desired to remove His personal dynasty from the earth, and therefore
uncustomary offensive behavior was exhibited by the young boys of Kåñëa's
own family.
It is to be understood from this incident that when a man displays envy and
ridicule of devotees of Viñëu, his brahmaëyatä, or high spiritual qualifications,
along with his reverence for Çré Kåñëa, are all destroyed. Contempt and
ridicule directed toward respectable persons and true brähmaëas vanquish all
good qualities. If there is a break in etiquette toward His devotees, the
Supreme Lord will become ill-disposed even to His own relatives and friends
and thus arrange to destroy those who oppose His devotees. If foolish persons
in the guise of members of Kåñëa's personal family express enmity toward
Vaiñëavas, such offenders cannot properly be called offspring of Lord Kåñëa's
dynasty. That is the supreme equality of the Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 9
yaiªaimaÔa: s$a vaE zAApaAe
yaAä{"zAAe iã"jas$aÔama
k(Tamaek(AtmanaAM Baed"
Wtats$ava< vad"sva mae
yan-nimittaù sa vai çäpo
yädåço dvija-sattama
katham ekätmanäà bheda
etat sarvaà vadasva me
SYNONYMS
yat-nimittaù—arising by what cause; saù—that; vai—indeed; çäpaù—curse;
yädåçaù—what kind; dvija-sat-tama—O purest of twice-born brähmaëas;
katham—how; eka-ätmanäm—of those who shared the same soul (Çré Kåñëa);
bhedaù—the disagreement; etat—this; sarvam—all; vadasva—please tell;
me—to me.
TRANSLATION
King Parékñit continued inquiring: What was the motive for this curse?
What did it consist of, O purest of the twice-born? And how could such a
disagreement have arisen among the Yadus, who all shared the same goal of life?
Please tell me all these things.
PURPORT
Ekätmanäm means that the Yadus all shared the same opinion, namely that
Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, was the goal of their life.
Therefore, Parékñit Mahäräja could not see any obvious reason for such a
destructive quarrel among the members of the Yadu dynasty, and he was
anxious to know the actual cause.
TEXT 10
™aIbaAd"r"AyaiNAç&vaAca
iba”aã"pau: s$ak(las$aund"r"s$aiªavaezAM
k(maARcar"na, Bauiva s$aumaËÿlamaAæak(Ama:
@AsTaAya DaAma r"mamaANA od"Ar"k(L[%ita:
s$aMh"tauR"maEcC$ta ku(laM isTatak{(tyazAeSa:
çré-bädaräyaëir uväca
bibhrad vapuù sakala-sundara-sanniveçaà
karmäcaran bhuvi su-maìgalam äpta-kämaù
ästhäya dhäma ramamäëa udära-kéåtiù
saàhartum aicchata kulaà sthita-kåtya-çeñaù
SYNONYMS
çré-bädaräyaëiù—Çukadeva Gosvämé, the son of Bädaräyaëa; uväca—said;
bibhrat—bearing; vapuù—a divine body; sakala—of all; sundara—beautiful
things; sanniveçam—the amalgamation; karma—activities;
äcaran—performing; bhuvi—on the earth; su-maìgalam—very auspicious;
äpta-kämaù—being satisfied in all His desires; ästhäya—residing; dhäma—in
His abode (Dvärakä); ramamäëaù—enjoying life; udära-kértiù—He whose
glories are very magnanimous in themselves; saàhartum—to destroy;
aicchata—He wanted; kulam—His dynasty; sthita—there remaining; kåtya—of
His business; çeñaù—some remnant.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: The Lord, who bore His body as the amalgamation
of everything beautiful, dutifully executed the most auspicious activities while
on the earth, although He was, in fact, without any endeavor already satisfied
in all desires. Residing in His abode and enjoying life, the Lord, whose
glorification is in itself magnanimous, now wanted to annihilate His dynasty, as
there still remained some small part of His duty to be carried out.
PURPORT
This verse answers Parékñit Mahäräja's question as to how the powerful
members of the Yadu dynasty could be cursed by the brähmaëas and thus
destroy themselves in a fratricidal war. By the words saàhartum aicchata kulam
it is clearly stated that Lord Kåñëa Himself desired to withdraw His dynasty
and therefore engaged the brähmaëas as His agent. Viçvanätha Cakravarté
Öhäkura remarks here that Kåñëa had clearly demonstrated the insurpassable
beauty and strength of His personal form, pastimes and pleasures to all the
residents of the earth. Thus His incarnation to kill the demons, save the
devotees and reestablish religious principles had been completely successful.
When Lord Kåñëa noticed that His mission was now complete, everything
having been done perfectly, He desired to return to His transcendental abode,
along with the Våñëis. Thus the Lord personally arranged for the Yadu dynasty
to be cursed by the brähmaëas.
According to Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, äpta-kämaù means that
Kåñëa is always self-satisfied, and yet in order to execute His transcendental
pastimes He arranged to destroy His own dynasty for three specific purposes,
namely, to reestablish in the heavenly planets those demigods who had taken
birth among the Yadus to assist Him, to reestablish His plenary Viñëu
expansions in Their abodes, such as Vaikuëöha, Çvetadvépa and
Badarikäçrama, and to remove Himself from the vision of the material world,
along with His eternal associates.
In this connection, Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté has made several important
remarks about the destruction of the Yadu dynasty. He states that many
so-called religious persons have fallen down by committing the second offense
against chanting the holy name, namely viñëau sarveçvareçe
tad-itara-sama-dhéù, considering another living entity to be equal to Lord
Viñëu, who is the Lord of lords. One who is captured by the impersonal
tendency of Mäyäväda philosophy falsely thinks that the external, material
energy of the Lord is equal to His internal, spiritual potency. In this way, one
equates ordinary living entities with the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
taking Kåñëa to be another aspect of mäyä. This is a most unfortunate
misconception, for it spoils one's opportunity to understand God as He actually
is.
Persons inclined toward this illusory conception of life would undoubtedly
consider the members of the Yadu dynasty equal in all respects to Kåñëa and
worship the future descendants of Kåñëa's family as being equal to Kåñëa
Himself. Thus the continued presence of the Yadu dynasty on the earth would
certainly constitute a great impediment on the path of spiritual understanding
and a great burden on the earth. To counteract the danger to the world from
the offense of equating Viñëu with the family of Viñëu, the Lord decided to
crush the Yadu family.
The Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëa, is always affectionate to His devotees, but
whenever the familial descendants of Lord Kåñëa become inimical or
indifferent to Him, not loving His pure devotees or making friendship with
His servants, such so-called family members of the Lord become impediments
to His will. There is a tangible danger that ignorant living beings will worship
such inimical persons, revering them as close associates of Kåñëa. For example,
to consider Kaàsa the maternal uncle of Kåñëa and therefore a faithful
servant of Kåñëa would be a completely erroneous conclusion. By such a
misconception, evil men who oppose the Lord may be accepted as His intimate
associates, and persons inimical to Kåñëa may be thought of as His surrendered
dependents appearing in His own family. The purpose of the destruction of the
Yadu dynasty was to eradicate the false logic of the Mäyävädés who desire to
see everything as one in all respects and who therefore improperly reason that
the enemies of Kåñëa's devotees can be His intimate family members.
TEXTS 11-12
k(maARina pauNyainavah"Aina s$aumaËÿlaAina
gAAyaÀagAtk(ilamalaApah"r"AiNA k{(tvaA
k(AlaAtmanaA inavas$ataA yaäu"de"vagAehe"
ipaNx"Ar"kM( s$amagAmanmaunayaAe inas$a{í"A:
ivaìAima‡aAe'is$ata: k(NvaAe
äu"vaARs$aA Ba{gAur"iËÿr"A:
k(zyapaAe vaAmade"vaAe'i‡ar,"
vais$aï"Ae naAr"d"Ad"ya:
karmäni puëya-nivahäni su-maìgaläni
gäyaj-jagat-kali-maläpaharäëi kåtvä
kälätmanä nivasatä yadu-deva-gehe
piëòärakaà samagaman munayo nisåñöäù
viçvämitro 'sitaù kaëvo
durväsä bhågur aìgiräù
kaçyapo vämadevo 'trir
vasiñöho näradädayaù
SYNONYMS
karmäëi—fruitive rituals; puëya—piety; nivahäni—which bestow;
su-maìgaläni—most auspicious; gäyat—chanting (about which); jagat—for
the whole world; kali—of the current, degraded age; mala—the impurities;
apaharäëi—which take away; kåtvä—having performed; käla-ätmanä—by
Him who is the very personification of time; nivasatä—residing;
yadu-deva—of the lord of the Yadus (King Vasudeva); gehe—in the home;
piëòärakam—to the pilgrimage site known as Piëòäraka; samagaman—they
went; munayaù—the sages; nisåñöäù—being let out; viçvämitraù asitaù
kaëvaù—the sages Viçvämitra, Asita and Kaëva; durväsäù bhåguù
aìgiräù—Durväsä, Bhågu and Aìgirä; kaçyapaù vämadevaù atriù—Kaçyapa,
Vämadeva and Atri; vasiñöhaù närada-ädayaù—Vasiñöha, Närada and others.
TRANSLATION
The sages Viçvämitra, Asita, Kaëva, Durväsä, Bhågu, Aìgirä, Kaçyapa,
Vämadeva, Atri and Vasiñöha, along with Närada and others, once performed
fruitive rituals that award abundant pious results, bring great happiness and
take away the sins of Kali-yuga for the whole world by merely being recounted.
The sages duly executed these rituals in the home of the chief of the Yadus,
Vasudeva, the father of Lord Kåñëa. After Lord Kåñëa, who was staying in
Vasudeva's house as time personified, respectfully sent the sages off at the
conclusion of the ceremonies, they went to the holy place called Piëòäraka.
PURPORT
In this verse, Çukadeva Gosvämé begins to narrate the story of the
brahminical curse that arose against the Yadu dynasty by the Lord's desire.
According to Çrédhara Svämé, certain religious rituals, such as the
açvamedha-yajïa, generate pious reactions. On the other hand, activities such
as caring for one's children give immediate pleasure in the present only,
whereas rituals performed as atonement take away sinful reactions. But the
religious activities mentioned in verse 11, which are indicated by the words
karmäëi puëya-nivahäni su-maìgaläni gäyaj-jagat-kali-maläpaharäëi, were
pious in all respects. They produced abundant pious results and great joy and
were so potent that merely glorifying these rituals relieves one from all the
sinful reactions of Kali-yuga.
The sages called to Vasudeva's house to perform such auspicious religious
activities were satisfied with proper gifts and then sent by Kåñëa to Piëòäraka,
a nearby holy place situated about two miles from the Arabian Sea on the
coast of Gujarat. Its current name is still Piëòäraka.
Significantly, Lord Kåñëa is mentioned here as kälätmanä, the form of time,
or the Supersoul. In the Eleventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä the Supreme
Personality of Godhead reveals Himself to Arjuna as time personified,
appearing on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra to destroy all the kings and armies
who constitute a burden to the earth. Similarly, kälätmanä nivasatä
yadu-deva-gehe: Kåñëa was staying in the home of His father Vasudeva as time
personified, thus indicating that the time was approaching for the destruction
of His own dynasty according to His desire.
TEXTS 13-15
‚(Lx"ntastaAnaupa˜ajya
ku(maAr"A yaäu"nand"naA:
opas$ax.~gA{÷ pa‘acC]$r,"
@ivanaItaA ivanaItavata,
tae vaeSaiyatvaA ñIvaeSaE:
s$aAmbaM jaAmbavataIs$autama,
WSaA pa{cC$ita vaAe iva‘aA
@ntavaRtnyais$ataeºaNAA
‘aí]M" ivalaÀataI s$aAºaAta,
‘a“aUtaAmaAeGad"zARnaA:
‘as$aAeSyantaI pau‡ak(AmaA
ikM( isvats$aÃanaiyaSyaita
kréòantas tän upavrajya
kumärä yadu-nandanäù
upasaìgåhya papracchur
avinétä vinéta-vat
te veñayitvä stré-veñaiù
sämbaà jämbavaté-sutam
eñä påcchati vo viprä
antarvatny asitekñaëä
prañöuà vilajjaté säkñät
prabrütämogha-darçanäù
prasoñyanté putra-kämä
kià svit saïjanayiñyati
SYNONYMS
kréòantaù—playing; tän—them (the sages); upavrajya—approaching;
kumäräù—the young boys; yadu-nandanäù—the sons of the Yadu dynasty;
upasaìgåhya—taking hold of the sages' feet; papracchuù—they asked;
avinétäù—not humble; vinéta-vat—acting as if humble; te—they;
veñayitvä—dressing; stré-veñaiù—in a woman's clothes and ornaments; sämbam
jämbavaté-sutam—Sämba, the son of Jämbavaté; eñä—this woman; påcchati—is
asking; vaù—you; vipräù—O learned brähmaëas; antarvatné—pregnant;
asita-ékñanä—black-eyed; prañöum—to ask; vilajjaté—embarrassed;
säkñät—directly herself; prabrüta—please speak; amogha-darçanäù—O you
whose vision is never bewildered; prasoñyanté—she who is just about to give
birth; putra-kämä—and desirous of getting a son; kim svit—what indeed (a son
or daughter?); saïjanayiñyati—will she give birth to.
TRANSLATION
To that holy place, the young boys of the Yadu dynasty had brought Sämba,
son of Jämbavaté, dressed in woman's garb. Playfully approaching the great sages
gathered there, the boys grabbed hold of the sages' feet and impudently asked
them with feigned humility, "O learned brähmaëas, this black-eyed pregnant
woman has something to ask you. She is too embarrassed to inquire for herself.
She is just about to give birth and is very desirous of having a son. Since all of
you are great sages with infallible vision, please tell us whether her child will be
a boy or a girl."
PURPORT
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté has made the following comment: "The
impudent behavior of the young Yadus toward the sages headed by Närada,
who were all brähmaëas and devotees of the Lord, was a display of deviation
from the path of Lord Kåñëa. Similarly, although the präkåta-sahajiyäs think of
themselves as intimate associates of Kåñëa, the supremely merciful Lord's
determination is perfectly correct in working to finish such false devotees.
Such impostors actually never accept real service to Kåñëa. The yadu-kumäras'
deception is termed 'seemingly humble,' meaning that in fact they were
anything but humble. Therefore, the ridiculing of Vaiñëavas by the Lord's
family resulted in a great offense against the devotees of the Lord."
A similar incident occurred during the pastimes of Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu when His own mother offended Çré Advaita Äcärya. Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu personally rectified this offense against a great Vaiñëava, and
thus the Lord showed His magnanimity. Lord Kåñëa's pastime of destroying the
Yadu dynasty is also a demonstration of His mercy to His devotees.
Believing the brähmaëas, Vaiñëavas and åñis to be foolishly lacking
knowledge in material affairs of sense gratification, the yadu-kumäras dressed
Sämba, the son of Jämbavaté, as a woman and tried to mock the saintly
assembly. Lord Kåñëa wanted to teach that such an offense committed against
great devotees by His associate Sämba would be the cause of the Yadu dynasty's
destruction, all as part of His lélä.
In modern times such misbehavior has also manifested itself within the
Gauòéya Vaiñëava community. Unauthorized persons have initiated the
process of deceitfully bestowing a woman's dress on their followers. This
process is to be counted as a variety of aparädha, or offense against Kåñëa.
Such an attempt to cheapen and ridicule devotional service to Kåñëa is
certainly caused by envy toward the real Vaiñëavas, who are faithfully engaged
in devotional service according to the rules and regulations of the Vedic
literature. Thus Rüpa Gosvämé has said:
çruti-småti-puräëädipaïcarätra-
vidhià vinä
aikäntiké harer bhaktir
utpätäyaiva kalpate
[Brs. 1.2.101(86)]
"If one wants to demonstrate his great devotion to the Supreme Lord but his
process of devotional service violates the standard rules of revealed scriptures
such as çruti, småti, Puräëas and Närada-païcarätra, then his alleged love of
Godhead will simply disturb society by misleading people from the auspicious
path of spiritual advancement." (Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.2.101) The taking of
a woman's clothing by a man in kåñëa-lélä was intended to point out this fact.
Such an act amounts to cheating and ridicule of the devotees of Kåñëa. Sämba
is a personal associate of the Lord, but acting as a harbinger of the future
misfortune to be created in Kali-yuga by bogus followers of Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu, Sämba displayed this didactic pastime to help the living entities
be blessed on the correct path of devotional service.
The boys said to the sages, "O åñis, O brähmaëas, O Närada and other great
personalities, can you tell us whether it will be a son or a daughter that will be
born from this pregnant woman's womb?" By addressing pure Vaiñëavas in this
way, they anticipated the fraudulent sampradäyas of the modern age in their
practice of sakhé-bheka, or dressing men as female associates of the gopés. This
unauthorized activity constitutes contempt and mockery of the pure devotees
of the Lord.
Many false yogés, imagining they are distributing first-class devotion on the
liberated platform, attempt to award the status of "pure devotee" to candidates
totally ignorant of the transcendental tastes of madhura-rati, or the Lord's
conjugal love in the spiritual world. Even though they know that the general
populace is unfit to imitate the liberated associates of the Lord, they artificially
decorate ordinary persons with the ornaments of spiritual perfection, such as
tears, a melted heart, and the standing on end of the bodily hairs. Thus these
bogus yogés introduce a process that misleads the world. Because Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu understood that the great misfortune caused by such false yogés,
or kuyogés, was impossible to forestall in the Kali-yuga, He infected them with
insane desires for material objects of lust so that ordinary persons can easily
identify such false yogés as deviated from the path of pure devotional service.
The mockery of the brähmaëas and Vaiñëavas by the young boys of the
Yadu dynasty who dressed Sämba in woman's garb, and the resultant
destruction of the Yadu dynasty, conclusively demonstrate the uselessness of
the sahajiyä-sampradäyas.
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has confirmed that the lack of humility shown by the
sons of the Yadu dynasty was an arrangement by the Lord Himself. In other
words, the members of the Yadu dynasty are ultimately associates of Lord
Kåñëa, and to facilitate the instructive pastimes of the Lord they acted in
apparently unethical ways.
TEXT 16
WvaM ‘alabDaA maunayas$a,
taAnaUcau: ku(ipataA na{pa
janaiyaSyaita vaAe mand"A
mauSalaM ku(lanaAzAnama,
evaà pralabdhä munayas
tän ücuù kupitä nåpa
janayiñyati vo mandä
muñalaà kula-näçanam
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; pralabdhäù—tricked; munyayaù—the sages; tän—to those boys;
ücuù—they spoke; kupitäù—angered; nåpa—O King Parékñit; janayiñyati—she
will give birth; vaù—for you; mandäù—O fools; muñalam—to a club;
kula-näçanam—which will destroy the dynasty.
TRANSLATION
Thus ridiculed by deceit, the sages became angry, O King, and told the boys,
"Fools! She will bear you an iron club that will destroy your entire dynasty."
PURPORT
The four defects of the conditioned soul, namely the tendency to commit
mistakes (bhrama), illusion (pramäda), imperfect senses (karaëäpäöava) and
the tendency to cheat (vipralipsä), are not found in pure devotees of the Lord.
Lord Kåñëa, however, arranged for the young members of His own family, the
Yadu dynasty, to exhibit the dangerous lower propensities of mankind. Thus
the Yädava boys imitated the activities of the followers of a pseudodevotional
cult.
Just before His disappearance, Kåñëa desired that the sages become angry at
the young members of the Yadu dynasty, in order to teach that Vaiñëavas
cannot be thought of as foolish, ignorant or mundane and to reduce the false
pride of His own family members. Sometimes misguided persons assume the
roles of pseudodevotees and blaspheme the actual process of pure devotional
service and the pure devotees who are surrendered to preaching the mission of
the Lord. Such foolish pseudodevotees think that their hatred or envy of the
actual preaching mission of the Lord constitutes bhakti, but in fact it
constitutes the cause of all trouble both for them and for the unfortunate
people who follow them. The preachers of pure devotional service expose the
pernicious attempts of pseudodevotees, and similarly the sages headed by
Närada, who were all exalted devotees of the Lord, addressed the young boys of
the Yadu dynasty as bewildered fools and told them, "Within this false womb
or false dress of a sädhu, a club will take birth that will be the source of your
dynasty's destruction."
Especially in India, but now also in the Western countries, there is a class of
polluted sense enjoyers who also call themselves Gauòéya Vaiñëavas and
pretend to exhibit the highest state of prema-bhakti. They declare that they are
on the highest stage of devotion and therefore concerned only with the most
intimate affairs of mädhurya-lélä, as exhibited in Våndävana. Sometimes they
even dress as gopés, making a false show of entering into the pastimes of Kåñëa
without actually following the standard regulations. In the name of
prema-bhakti, they sometimes commit grievous offenses against the pure
devotees of Kåñëa. By this incident concerning the iron club from the so-called
womb of Sämba, Lord Kåñëa Himself taught the dangerous results of such
pseudodevotion.
TEXT 17
tacC_$tvaA tae'itas$an‡astaA
ivamaucya s$ah"s$aAed"r"ma,
s$aAmbasya d"ä{"zAustaismana,
mauSalaM Kalvayasmayama,
tac chrutvä te 'ti-santrastä
vimucya sahasodaram
sämbasya dadåçus tasmin
muñalaà khalv ayasmayam
SYNONYMS
tat—that; çrutvä—having heard; te—they; ati-santrastäù—extremely afraid;
vimucya—uncovering; sahasä—hastily; udaram—the belly; sämbasya—of
Sämba; dadåçuù—they saw; tasmin—within it; muñalam—a club;
khalu—indeed; ayaù-mayam—made of iron.
TRANSLATION
Upon hearing the curse of the sages, the terrified boys quickly uncovered the
belly of Sämba, and indeed they observed that therein was an iron club.
PURPORT
Upon hearing the words of the Vaiñëavas, headed by Närada, the Yadu boys
lifted the garment covering Sämba's abdomen and saw the fruit of the offense
they had committed against Vaiñëavas by their deceit: an actual club was there
to destroy their dynasty. This example shows that in a polluted society the club
of duplicity can never bring the peace found in the society of devotees. Rather,
such duplicity smashes all the nondevotional activities and whimsical
doctrines of the pseudodevotees. The Yadu boys were wary about jeopardizing
their advanced position and indeed had been thinking that as long as they
kept their trickery concealed, others would never be able to detect such
sophisticated cheating. Nonetheless, they were unable to protect their family
from the reaction of their grievous offense against the devotees of the Lord.
TEXT 18
ikM( k{(taM mand"BaAgyaEnaR:
ikM( vaid"Syainta naAe janaA:
wita ivaù"ilataA gAeh"Ana,
@Ad"Aya mauSalaM yayau:
kià kåtaà manda-bhägyair naù
kià vadiñyanti no janäù
iti vihvalitä gehän
ädäya muñalaà yayuù
SYNONYMS
kim—what; kåtam—has been done; manda-bhägyaiù—who are very
unfortunate; naù—by us; kim—what; vadiñyanti—will they say; naù—to us;
janäù—the family; iti—thus speaking; vihvalitäù—overwhelmed; gehän—to
their homes; ädäya—taking; muñalam—the club; yayuù—they went.
TRANSLATION
The young men of the Yadu dynasty said, "Oh, what have we done? We are
so unfortunate! What will our family members say to us?" Speaking thus and
being very disturbed, they returned to their homes, taking the club with them.
TEXT 19
ta»aAepanaIya s$ad"is$a
pair"mlaAnamauKai™aya:
r"AÁa @Avaed"yaAM ca‚u(:
s$avaRyaAd"vas$aiªaDaAE
tac copanéya sadasi
parimläna-mukha-çriyaù
räjïa ävedayäà cakruù
sarva-yädava-sannidhau
SYNONYMS
tat—that club; ca—and; upanéya—bringing; sadasi—into the assembly;
parimläna—completely faded; mukha—of their faces; çréyaù—the beauty;
räjïe—the King; ävedayäm cakruù—they informed; sarva-yädava—of all the
Yadus; sannidhau—in the presence.
TRANSLATION
The Yadu boys, the luster of their faces completely faded, brought the club
into the royal assembly, and in the presence of all the Yädavas they told King
Ugrasena what had happened.
PURPORT
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura points out that the word räjïe refers to
King Ugrasena and not to Çré Kåñëa. Because of their shame and fear, the boys
did not approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa.
TEXT 20
™autvaAmaAeGaM iva‘azAApaM
ä{"î"A ca mauSalaM na{pa
ivaismataA Bayas$an‡astaA
baBaUvauã"ARr"k(AEk(s$a:
çrutvämoghaà vipra-çäpaà
dåñövä ca muñalaà nåpa
vismitä bhaya-santrastä
babhüvur dvärakaukasaù
SYNONYMS
çrutvä—hearing about; amogham—infallible; vipra-çäpam—the curse of the
brähmaëas; dåñövä—seeing; ca—and; muñalam—the club; nåpa—O King;
vismitäù—amazed; bhaya—with fear; santrastäù—distraught; babhüvuù—they
became; dvärakä-okasaù—the inhabitants of Dvärakä.
TRANSLATION
O King Parékñit, when the inhabitants of Dvärakä heard of the infallible
curse of the brähmaëas and saw the club, they were astonished and distraught
with fear.
TEXT 21
ta»aUNARiyatvaA mauSalaM
yaäu"r"Aja: s$a @Aò"k(:
s$amau"‰"s$ailalae ‘aAsyala,
laAehM" caAsyaAvazAeiSatama,
tac cürëayitvä muñalaà
yadu-räjaù sa ähukaù
samudra-salile präsyal
lohaà cäsyävaçeñitam
SYNONYMS
tat—that; cürëayitvä—having ground to bits; muñalam—club;
yadu-räjaù—the King of the Yadus; saù—he; ähukaù—Ähuka (Ugrasena);
samudra—of the ocean; salile—in the water; präsyat—he threw; loham—the
iron; ca—and; asya—of the club; avaçeñitam—the remnant.
TRANSLATION
After having the club ground to bits, King Ähuka [Ugrasena] of the Yadus
personally threw the pieces, along with the remaining lump of iron, into the
water of the ocean.
PURPORT
King Ugrasena thought, "Sämba and the others should not feel any shame
or fear," and thus without even consulting Çré Kåñëa he ordered the club
ground to bits and thrown into the water, along with a small iron lump that
remained, which he considered insignificant.
TEXT 22
k(iênmatsyaAe'ƒas$aIéaAehM"
caUNAARina tar"laEstata:
o÷maAnaAina vaelaAyaAM
la¢aAnyaAs$ana, ik(laEr"k(A:
kaçcin matsyo 'grasél lohaà
cürëäni taralais tataù
uhyamänäni veläyäà
lagnäny äsan kilairakäù
SYNONYMS
kaçcit—a certain; matsyaù—fish; agrasét—swallowed; loham—the iron;
cürëäni—the bits of powder; taralaiù—by the waves; tataù—from that place;
uhyamänäni—being carried; veläyäm—on the shore; lagnäni—becoming stuck;
äsan—they became; kilu—indeed; erakäù—a particular species of grass with
long, sharp-edged blades.
TRANSLATION
A certain fish swallowed the iron lump, and the bits of iron, carried back to
the shore by the waves, implanted themselves there and grew into tall, sharp
canes.
TEXT 23
matsyaAe gA{h"ItaAe matsya£aEr,"
jaAlaenaAnyaE: s$ah"ANAR"vae
tasyaAed"r"gAtaM laAehM"
s$a zAlyae laubDak(Ae'k(r"Aeta,
matsyo gåhéto matsya-ghnair
jälenänyaiù sahärëave
tasyodara-gataà lohaà
sa çalye lubdhako 'karot
SYNONYMS
matsyaù—the fish; gåhétaù—being seized; matsya-ghnaiù—by fishermen;
jälena—with a net; anyaiù saha—along with other fish; arëave—within the
ocean; tasya—of the fish; udara-gatam—contained in the stomach;
loham—lump of iron; saù—he (Jarä); çalye—on his arrow; lubdhakaù—a
hunter; akarot—placed.
TRANSLATION
The fish was caught in the ocean along with other fish in a fisherman's net.
The iron lump in the fish's stomach was taken by the hunter Jarä, who fixed it
as an arrowhead at the end of his shaft.
TEXT 24
BagAvaAna, ÁaAtas$avaARTaR
wRìr"Ae'ipa tad"nyaTaA
k(tau< naEcC$iã"‘azAApaM
k(Alaè&pyanvamaAed"ta
bhagavän jïäta-sarvärtha
éçvaro 'pi tad-anyathä
kartuà naicchad vipra-çäpaà
käla-rüpy anvamodata
SYNONYMS
bhagavän—the Supreme Lord; jïäta—knowing; sarva-arthaù—the meaning of
everything; éçvaraù—quite capable; api—although; tat-anyathä—otherwise;
kartum—to make; na aicchat—He did not desire; vipra-çäpam—the
brähmaëas' curse; käla-rüpé—exhibiting His form of time; anvamodata—He
gladly sanctioned.
TRANSLATION
Knowing fully the significance of all these events, the Supreme Lord, though
capable of reversing the brähmaëas' curse, did not wish to do so. Rather, in His
form of time, He gladly sanctioned the events.
PURPORT
Ordinary persons may be surprised or bewildered that the Lord gladly
sanctioned the cursing and destruction of His own dynasty. The word
anvamodata used here indicates taking pleasure in something, or giving
sanction or approval. It is also mentioned, käla-rüpé: Kåñëa gladly gave His
sanction to the brähmaëas' curse in the form of time. Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta
Sarasvaté Prabhupäda has commented that the Supreme Lord, Kåñëacandra,
decided to maintain the curse intact in order to protect the actual principles of
religion and destroy the unbecoming offense of the deceitful members of the
Kärñëa dynasty. It is clearly explained in Bhagavad-gétä that the whole purpose
of the Lord's descent into the material world is to reestablish the authentic
principles of religion by which the conditioned souls who are suffering
intensely under the laws of material nature can regain their original
existential status as eternally liberated servants of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Kåñëa. The living entity comes to this material world with a desire
to lord it over material nature, although the living entity is in fact not a lord
but an eternal servant. Due to this perverted tendency to exploit the entire
world for his sense gratification, the living entity is also prone to try to pervert
the principles of spiritual life so that the eternal religious principles become
appropriate to his own material sense gratification. Religion, however, is
meant for pleasing the Supreme Lord by obeying His laws. And therefore Lord
Kåñëa Himself personally comes from time to time to revive and enliven the
correct method of devotional service to His lotus feet. In the Eleventh Canto
of Çrémad-Bhägavatam it is clearly stated that Lord Kåñëa had completed the
vast majority of His pastimes on the earth and was now making the final
arrangements for His departure. Therefore, He wished to leave behind a vivid
lesson for the living entities of this age that any so-called religious person,
even if he is so exalted as to take birth in the Lord's personal family, cannot
violate the respect and reverence which is due to the pure devotees of the
Lord, such as Närada Muni. The principle of serving the pure devotee of Kåñëa
is so essential for spiritual advancement that the Lord exhibited the
inconceivable pastime of causing the destruction of His entire dynasty just to
impress this point upon the conditioned souls of Kali-yuga.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam hints at the great misfortunes that would come after
the disappearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such misfortunes
also occurred after the disappearance of Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, who
is accepted by Gauòéya Vaiñëavas as Kåñëa Himself. Through various
instructions, the Bhägavatam provides for eliminating the cheating
pseudoreligion that comes forth in human society after the departure of the
Lord.
Lord Caitanya, exhibiting His magnanimous pastimes, drove away from
South India all the false doctrines of the apasampradäyas, or so-called disciplic
traditions of pseudodevotees, who had gained great influence by resorting to
the atheistic theories of the Buddhists and Jains. Thus He turned all of India
toward the devotional service of Lord Kåñëa, so that due to the extensive
preaching of Lord Caitanya Mahäprabhu and His followers there remained no
topic of discussion in the world other than devotional service to the Supreme
Lord. Tridaëòipäda Prabodhänanda Sarasvaté has elaborated on this in his
verse stré-puträdi-kathäà jahur viñayiëaù.
Çré Narahari Sarakära Öhäkura, in his book Kåñëa-bhajanämåta, has
corrected the improper statements of the gauräìga-nägaré-vädés,
sakhébheka-vädés, and others of the eleven pseudodisciplic chains that claim to
follow Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. These unauthorized persons present
cheating in the guise of religion and advertise their duplicity as kathä, or pure
worship of the Lord. Just as Kåñëa brought about a furious quarrel to destroy
His own family, Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu arranged for the world to be flooded
by varieties of Mäyäväda and karma-väda philosophies just after His
disappearance. He did this to destroy persons who belonged to the eleven
apasampradäyas, or unauthorized disciplic traditions, as well as the many other
apasampradäyas that would appear in the future and presume to call
themselves devotees of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu or pretend to be descendants
in His family line. At the same time, Caitanya Mahäprabhu arranged for His
own men to be kept away from the pseudodevotion of these cheaters. The
devotees of Lord Gaurasundara, Caitanya Mahäprabhu, can discern the
mysteries of His pastimes that manifest in the pastimes of Lord Kåñëa. The
activities of the transcendental body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
cannot be understood in any ordinary mundane way. That is the essential
meaning of this chapter.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Eleventh Canto, First Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Curse Upon the Yadu Dynasty."
2. Mahäräja Nimi Meets the Nine Yogendras
In this chapter Närada gives instructions in bhägavata-dharma to the
faithful and inquisitive Vasudeva by recounting a conversation between
Mahäräja Nimi and the nine Yogendras.
Greatly eager to see Lord Kåñëa, Devarñi Närada resided almost exclusively
in Dvärakä. Vasudeva, bewildered by the Lord's illusory potency, had
previously offered worship to the Supreme Lord Ananta for the purpose of
getting a son, but had failed to worship Him for liberation.
Once Närada arrived at the home of Vasudeva, who worshiped him
according to proper etiquette, greeted him respectfully and requested to hear
about pure devotional service, which frees one from all kinds of fear. Närada
praised Vasudeva's fixed intelligence and then related the ancient history of
the conversation between the nine Yogendras, who were sons of Lord
Åñabhadeva, and Nimi, the King of Videha.
Sväyambhuva Manu's son was Priyavrata. His son was Ägnédhra, whose son
was Näbhi. Lord Åñabhadeva, the plenary portion of Väsudeva, incarnated as
the son of Näbhi. The oldest of Åñabhadeva's one hundred sons was Bharata,
an exalted devotee of Näräyaëa by whose name this earth, previously called
Ajanäbha-varña, became famous as Bhärata-varña. Nine other sons of
Åñabhadeva were widely known as the nava-yogendras: Kavi, Havir, Antarékña,
Prabuddha, Pippaläyana, Ävirhotra, Drumila, Camasa and Karabhäjana. They
were well versed in knowledge of the self, fixed in their goal and always
striving for perfection. Nine other sons of Åñabhadeva took on the duty of
kñatriyas and became masters of the nine dvépas comprising Bhärata-varña. His
other eighty-one sons became brähmaëas expert in småti doctrines who
propagated the path of fruitive sacrifice.
The nine Yogendras, free to move without impediment, traveled
everywhere as they wished. They were direct associates of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Madhusüdana, and wandered freely to give protection
to the various planets in the universe. The human body can be lost at any
moment, but it is still a very rare attainment. Still rarer is to get the
association of the confidential devotees of the Lord of Vaikuëöha while in this
very human body. The association of such saintly persons, even for a fraction
of a second, bestows all benefits on a living being. Therefore King Nimi
offered the nine Yogendras suitable seats, worshiped them, humbled himself
with obeisances and joyfully inquired from them about bhägavata-dharma.
Bhägavata-dharma, or pure devotional service to the Lord, is the only means of
ultimate good fortune for the soul. The Supreme Lord, being pleased by such
service, offers His own self to the devotee.
In answer to the King's question, one of the nine Yogendras, Kavi, spoke as
follows: "Those means of advancement which are described by the Personality
of Godhead Himself and which enable even foolish persons easily to achieve
perfect self-realization are called bhägavata-dharma. This bhägavata-dharma,
manifested as service to the lotus feet of the infallible Supreme Lord,
eradicates all fear for the living being. By abiding in bhägavata-dharma one will
never stumble or fall, even while running with both eyes closed. Whatever one
does with his body, mind, words, intelligence, consciousness, senses and
natural proclivities should all be offered to Lord Näräyaëa. Living entities
averse to the Lord's lotus feet come under the control of the Lord's illusory
energy, mäyä. They forget the Lord's identity and are trapped by the illusion of
identifying with the temporary body. Under the sway of material attraction,
they become greatly fearful. Thus the best thing for them is to surrender their
very life energy to a qualified guru and execute worship of the Supreme Lord,
the absolute controller of mäyä, with pure devotion. Just as by eating one
gradually appeases his hunger and with every bite feels more and more satisfied
and nourished, a surrendered devotee achieves detachment from all objects
other than Kåñëa, gains direct personal experience of the Lord and relishes
pure love for the Lord, all simultaneously."
Next Havir spoke, describing the different characteristics of first-class,
second-class and third-class devotees: "One who offers prescribed worship with
faith to the Deity of Lord Viñëu but has no devotion for Vaiñëavas and things
related to Viñëu is a materialistic devotee. One who shows love for the Lord,
friendship for the Lord's devotees, mercy for the ignorant and indifference for
the enemies of Viñëu and the Vaiñëavas is an intermediate devotee. And one
who sees the presence of the Supreme Lord in everything and sees everything
within the Lord is the topmost devotee." The first-class devotees are described
in eight verses, which conclude by stating that the first-class devotee keeps the
Supreme Lord perpetually fastened to his own heart with ropes of affection.
Lord Hari never leaves the heart of such a devotee.
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
gAAeivand"BaujagAuæaAyaAM
ã"Ar"vatyaAM ku(è&ã"h"
@vaAts$aIªaAr"d"Ae'BaIºNAM
k{(SNAAepaAs$analaAlas$a:
çré-çuka uväca
govinda-bhuja-guptäyäà
dväravatyäà kurüdvaha
avätsén närado 'bhékñëaà
kåñëopäsana-lälasaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çuka said; govinda—of Lord Govinda; bhuja—by the
arms; guptäyäm—protected; dväravatyäm—in the capital Dväravaté;
kuru-udvaha—O best of the Kurus; avätsét—dwelled; näradaù—Närada Muni;
abhékñëam—constantly; kåñëa-upäsana—to engage in the worship of Kåñëa;
lälasaù—who had great eagerness.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Eager to engage in the worship of Lord Kåñëa, O
best of the Kurus, Närada Muni stayed for some time in Dvärakä, which was
always protected by the arms of Govinda.
PURPORT
In the Second Chapter of this canto, bhägavata-dharma, or pure devotional
service to Kåñëa, is explained by Närada Muni to Vasudeva, who had inquired
with devotion. Närada Muni cites a conversation between King Nimi and the
Jäyanteyas. According to Jéva Gosvämé, the word abhékñëam indicates that
although Närada Muni was frequently sent by Lord Kåñëa here and there for
various pastimes, such as inquiring about the affairs of the world, Närada
continuously returned to reside in Dvärakä. The word kåñëopäsana-lälasaù
indicates that Närada was very eager to be near Kåñëa and worship Him.
Because of the curse of Dakña, Närada is never allowed to live continuously in
one place. Çrédhara Svämé, however, has pointed out, na tasyäà çäpädeù
prabhävaù: in Dvärakä there is no influence of curses or other such evils,
because Dvärakä is the abode of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and is
always protected by His arms, as shown by the word govinda-bhuja-guptäyäm.
The conditioned souls are struggling within the kingdom of mäyä against the
cruel laws of material nature, such as birth, death, old age and disease, but if
such conditioned souls have the good fortune to enter the city of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, whether Dvärakä, Mathurä or Våndävana, and live
there under the direct protection of the omnipotent arms of the Supreme
Lord, Kåñëa, they will experience the unlimited transcendental bliss of real
life, which is eternal and which is meant to be lived in the personal company
of God.
TEXT 2
k(Ae nau r"Ajaiªain‰"yavaAna,
mauku(nd"car"NAAmbaujama,
na Bajaets$avaRtaAema{tyaur,"
opaAsyamamar"AeÔamaE:
ko nu räjann indriyavän
mukunda-caraëämbujam
na bhajet sarvato-måtyur
upäsyam amarottamaiù
SYNONYMS
kaù—who; nu—indeed; räjan—O King; indriya-vän—possessed of senses;
mukunda-caraëa-ambujam—the lotus feet of Lord Mukunda; na bhajet—would
not worship; sarvataù-måtyuù—being faced by death on all sides;
upäçyam—worshipable; amara-uttamaiù—by the best of liberated
personalities.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, in the material world the conditioned souls are confronted by
death at every step of life. Therefore, who among the conditioned souls would
not render service to the lotus feet of Lord Mukunda, who is worshipable even
for the greatest of liberated souls?
PURPORT
The word indriyavän is significant in this verse. Indriyavän means
"possessing senses." Although we are conditioned within the material world, by
the mercy of the Supreme Lord we are awarded a human body, which possesses
distinct senses, such as the eyes, ears, tongue, nose and skin. Generally the
conditioned souls use these senses in a false attempt to exploit the material
nature for sense gratification. But our material senses and their objects are
temporary, and it is not possible to become peaceful or happy in the attempt to
gratify our temporary senses with the temporary sense objects offered by mäyä,
the illusory energy of the Lord. In fact, our strenuous endeavor to satisfy the
material senses inevitably brings exactly the opposite result, namely material
suffering. A man is attracted to a woman. Being sexually aroused he marries
her, and soon there is a family that requires ever-increasing support. In this
way his innocent and simple life is ended, and he spends the major portion of
his life working hard like an ass to support the demands of his family. In the
Third Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Lord Kapila describes very clearly that in
spite of the exhausting work a man performs throughout his life, his family is
ultimately dissatisfied, and when the exhausted father reaches old age, the
irritated family members look upon him just as farmers look upon an old and
useless ox. Sometimes the sons dream of receiving their father's money as an
inheritance and secretly wish for him to die. Nowadays people strongly resent
the trouble of caring for elderly parents and therefore send them to an
institution, where they die lonely and neglected after a life of hard work for
their so-called loved ones. One doctor in England is seriously proposing
euthanasia for elderly persons who are no longer productive.
Nowadays some people, desiring material sense gratification but hoping to
avoid the inconvenience of family life, try to enjoy "free" sexual relations with
women, without the trouble of marriage. Through birth control and abortion
they eliminate the disturbance of caring for children. In this way they hope to
enjoy material sense gratification without any material impediment. By the
laws of nature, however, such persons become bound in a network of sinful
reactions by avoiding their real duty to the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and by thoughtlessly causing violence and suffering to others for increasing
their own sense gratification. Caught in a network of impious activities, they
drift further and further away from their original pure consciousness and
gradually lose all power to understand the laws of nature. Therefore it is stated
here, sarvato-måtyuù. Måtyu means "death." Death suddenly appears, startling
such confident sense gratifiers, and destroys their entire program of so-called
material happiness. Often such persons are afflicted with ghastly diseases and
undergo inconceivable suffering, which ends in death. If a sincere well-wisher
points these facts out to them, trying to inform them of the reality, they
become angry and accuse him of being a pessimist or a religious fanatic. In this
way they blindly ignore the laws of nature until these laws inevitably smash
them down and drag them out of their fool's paradise. Because of an excessive
accumulation of sinful results, they are forced into situations of great distress
by the laws of karma. Sinking down into the lower species of life, they lose all
awareness of that which lies beyond their gross material senses.
Sometimes a living being is able to understand the miserable result of
materialistic sense gratification. Being frustrated by the pain and suffering of
materialistic life and being ignorant of any superior life, he adopts a
neo-Buddhist philosophy and seeks shelter in so-called nothingness. But there
is no actual void within the kingdom of God. The desire to merge into
nothingness is a reaction against material pain; it is not a tangible concept of
the Supreme. For example, if I feel unbearable pain in my leg and the pain
cannot be cured, I may finally agree to have my leg amputated. But it is far
better to remove the pain and keep my leg. Similarly, because of false ego we
think, "I am everything. I am the most important person. No one is as
intelligent as me." Thinking in this way, we suffer constantly and experience
intense anxiety. But as soon as we purify the ego by admitting that we are
insignificant eternal servants of Kåñëa, our ego will give us great pleasure.
Çré Kåñëa, the Lord of the blissfully variegated spiritual sky, called
Vaikuëöha, is always absorbed in transcendental enjoyment. In fact, Çré Kåñëa
is the reservoir of all pleasure. People absorbed in materialistic enjoyment are
bound by the laws of omnipresent death, but if we endeavor instead to serve
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, we can immediately be connected to His
hlädiné çakti, or blissful potency. If we serve Kåñëa under the guidance of His
authorized representative, the spiritual master, we can immediately get relief
from material distress. Then we shall not yearn after nothing, but instead we
shall be able to relish unlimited spiritual bliss in the service of the Supreme
Lord.
Sarvato-måtyuù also indicates that birth and death occur on every planet in
the universe. Therefore our so-called space travel and cosmic consciousness are
useless, since there is no eternal life anywhere within the material cosmos. In
conclusion, to understand the futility of engaging in the service of anything
other than Kåñëa and to engage instead in serving that which is eternal and
full of bliss is the highest possible development of intelligence. Although our
present intelligence is narrow, being conditioned by the laws of nature, we can
create unlimited good fortune for ourselves by taking shelter of the lotus feet
of Mukunda, learning to discriminate between that which is temporary and
useless and that which is eternal and real.
TEXT 3
tamaek(d"A tau de"vaiSa<
vas$aude"vaAe gA{h"AgAtama,
@icaRtaM s$auKamaAs$aInama,
@iBavaAâed"ma“avaIta,
tam ekadä tu devarñià
vasudevo gåhägatam
arcitaà sukham äsénam
abhivädyedam abravét
SYNONYMS
tam—him; ekadä—once; tu—and; deva-åñim—the sage among the demigods,
Närada; vasudevaù—Vasudeva, the father of Lord Kåñëa; gåha-ägatam—who
had come to his house; arcitam—worshiped with paraphernalia; sukham
äsénam—comfortably seated; abhivädya—respectfully greeting him;
idam—this; abravét—said.
TRANSLATION
One day the sage among the demigods, Närada, came to the house of
Vasudeva. After worshiping Närada with suitable paraphernalia, seating him
comfortably and respectfully bowing down to him, Vasudeva spoke as follows.
TEXT 4
™aIvas$aude"va ovaAca
BagAvana, BavataAe yaA‡aA
svastayae s$avaR$de"ih"naAma,
k{(paNAAnaAM yaTaA ipa‡aAer,"
oÔamaëAek(vatmaRnaAma,
çré-vasudeva uväca
bhagavan bhavato yäträ
svastaye sarva-dehinäm
kåpaëänäà yathä pitror
uttama-çloka-vartmanäm
SYNONYMS
çré-vasudevaù uväca—Çré Vasudeva said; bhagavan—O lord; bhavataù—of your
good self; yäträ—the coming; svastaye—for the benefit; sarva-dehinäm—of all
embodied beings; kåpaëänäm—of the most wretched; yathä—as; pitroù—that
of a father; uttama-çloka—the Supreme Lord, who is praised by excellent
verses; vartmanäm—of those who are fixed on the path toward.
TRANSLATION
Çré Vasudeva said: My lord, your visit, like that of a father to his children, is
for the benefit of all living beings. You especially help the most wretched among
them, as well as those who are advanced on the path toward the Supreme Lord,
Uttamaçloka.
PURPORT
Vasudeva herein describes the glories of Närada Muni. The words
kåpaëänäà yathä pitror uttama-çloka-vartmanäm are significant. Kåpaëänäm
refers to the most wretched persons, whereas uttama-çloka-vartmanäm refers to
the most fortunate, those who are advanced in Kåñëa consciousness. Çrédhara
Svämé has stated, tathä bhagavad-rüpasya bhavato yäträ sarva-dehinäm svastaya
iti. The word bhagavad-rüpasya indicates that Närada Muni is an expansion of
the Supreme Lord and that his activities therefore bring immense benefit for
all living beings. In the First Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Närada Muni is
described as a manifestation of the mercy of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. There it is stated that Närada is especially empowered to give
instructions in the art of devotional service to Kåñëa. Närada is especially able
to advise the conditioned souls as to how they can dovetail their present
activities with the devotional service of Kåñëa without unnecessarily
disrupting their present life.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté has defined the word kåpaëa by quoting
from the Båhad-äraëyaka Upaniñad (3.9.10). Etad akñaraà gärgi aviditväsmäl
lokät praiti sa kåpaëaù: "O daughter of Gargäcärya, he who leaves this world
without learning about the infallible Supreme is a kåpaëa, or miser." In other
words, we are awarded the human form of life so that we may understand our
eternal, blissful relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As
indicated in verse 2 of this chapter by the word indriyavän, the human body is
specifically awarded so that we may serve the Supreme Lord, Kåñëa. This
human form of body is the greatest fortune because the highly evolved
intelligence of human life enables us to understand Kåñëa, the Absolute Truth.
If we are unable to understand our eternal relationship with God, we shall
derive no permanent benefit whatsoever in this present life, nor can we
ultimately benefit others. One who receives a great treasure but can neither
use it himself nor dedicate it to the happiness of others is called a miser.
Therefore, a person who leaves this world without having understood his
actual position as servant of God is called a kåpaëa, or miser.
This verse states that Närada Muni is so empowered in the devotional
service of Kåñëa that he can lift even miserly rascals out of their illusion, just
as a kind father goes to his child and wakes him from a distressing nightmare.
Our present materialistic life is just like a troublesome dream, from which
great souls such as Närada can wake us. Närada Muni is so powerful that even
those already advanced in devotional service to Kåñëa can greatly enhance
their spiritual position by hearing his instructions, as they will be given here in
the Eleventh Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Therefore Çré Närada is the guru
and father of all living beings, who are originally devotees of the Lord but who
are now artificially attempting to enjoy the material world in the material
bodies of human beings, animals, and so on.
TEXT 5
BaUtaAnaAM de"vacair"taM
äu":KaAya ca s$auKaAya ca
s$auKaAyaEva ih" s$aADaUnaAM
tvaAä{"zAAmacyautaAtmanaAma,
bhütänäà deva-caritaà
duùkhäya ca sukhäya ca
sukhäyaiva hi sädhünäà
tvädåçäm acyutätmanäm
SYNONYMS
bhütänäm—of the living beings; deva-caritam—the activities of demigods;
duùkhäya—result in the misery; ca—also; sukhäya—in happiness; ca—as well;
sukhäya—in happiness; eva—only; hi—indeed; sädhünäm—that of saints;
tvädåçäm—like you; acyuta—the infallible Supreme Lord; ätmanäm—who
have accepted as their very soul.
TRANSLATION
The activities of demigods lead to both misery and happiness for living
beings, but the activities of great saints like you, who have accepted the
infallible Lord as their very soul, result only in the happiness of all beings.
PURPORT
This verse clearly states that the pure devotees of the Lord such as Närada
Muni are saintly persons, to be considered superior even to the demigods, the
living beings empowered by the Supreme Lord to administer the entire
universe. In Bhagavad-gétä (3.12) it is stated:
iñöän bhogän hi vo devä
däsyante yajïa-bhävitäù
tair dattän apradäyaibhyo
yo bhuìkte stena eva saù
"The demigods in charge of the various necessities of life, being satisfied by the
performance of yajïa [sacrifice], supply all necessities to man. But one who
enjoys these gifts without offering them in return to the demigods is certainly
a thief." In this connection Çréla Prabhupäda has made the following comment
regarding the demigods: "The demigods are empowered administrators of
material affairs. The supply of air, light, water and other blessings for
maintaining the body and the soul of all living entities are entrusted to the
demigods, who are innumerable assistants in the different parts of the body of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Their pleasure and displeasure depend
on the performance of yajïas by the human being." In other words, by the
Lord's arrangement, material prosperity depends upon the satisfaction of the
demigods. If the demigods are dissatisfied due to nonperformance or improper
performance of sacrifice, they are empowered to impose various types of
suffering upon human beings. Usually this suffering takes the form of either
excessive or insufficient supply of material necessities. For example, sunshine
is necessary for life, but if there is excessive heat or insufficient heat from the
sun, we suffer. Excessive or insufficient rain is also a cause of suffering. Thus
the demigods bestow either happiness or suffering upon human beings, in
accordance with the performance of sacrifice.
As stated here, however, great saintly persons such as Närada Muni are
always merciful to all living beings.
titikñavaù käruëikäù
suhådaù sarva-dehinäm
ajäta-çatravaù çäntäù
sädhavaù sädhu-bhüñaëäù
"The symptoms of a sädhu are that he is tolerant, merciful and friendly to all
living entities, he has no enemies, he is peaceful, he abides by the scriptures,
and all his characteristics are sublime." (SB 3.25.21) Çréla Prabhupäda, in his
commentary on this verse, has portrayed the sädhu as follows: "A sädhu as
described above is a devotee of the Lord. His concern, therefore, is to
enlighten people in devotional service to the Lord. That is his mercy. He
knows that without devotional service to the Lord, human life is spoiled. A
devotee travels all over the country door to door preaching, 'Be Kåñëa
conscious. Be a devotee of Lord Kåñëa. Don't spoil your life in simply fulfilling
your animal propensities. Human life is meant for self-realization, or Kåñëa
consciousness.' These are the preachings of a sädhu. He is not satisfied with his
own liberation. He always thinks about others. He is the most compassionate
personality toward all the fallen souls. One of his qualifications, therefore, is
käruëika, great mercy to the fallen souls. While engaged in preaching work he
has to meet with so many opposing elements, and therefore the sädhu, or
devotee of the Lord, has to be very tolerant. Someone may ill-treat him,
because the conditioned souls are not prepared to receive the transcendental
knowledge of devotional service. They do not like it; that is their disease. The
sädhu has the thankless task of impressing upon them the importance of
devotional service. Sometimes devotees are personally attacked with violence.
Lord Jesus Christ was crucified. Haridäsa Öhäkura was caned in twenty-two
marketplaces, and Lord Caitanya's principal assistant, Nityänanda, was
violently attacked by Jagäi and Mädhäi. But still they were tolerant because
their mission was to deliver the fallen souls. One of the qualifications of a
sädhu is that he is very tolerant and is merciful to all fallen souls. He is
merciful because he is a well-wisher of all living entities. He is not only a
well-wisher of human society, but a well-wisher of animal society as well. It is
said here, sarva-dehinäm, which indicates all living entities who have accepted
material bodies. Not only does a human being have a material body, but other
living entities, such as cats and dogs, also have material bodies. The devotee of
the Lord is merciful to everyone—the cats, dogs, trees, etc. He treats all living
entities in such a way that they can ultimately get salvation from this material
entanglement. Çivänanda Sena, one of the disciples of Lord Caitanya, gave
liberation to a dog by treating the dog transcendentally. There are many
instances where a dog got salvation by association with a sädhu, because a
sädhu engages in the highest philanthropic activities for the benediction of all
living entities. Although the sädhu is not inimical toward anyone, the world is
so ungrateful that even a sädhu has many enemies.
"What is the difference between an enemy and a friend? It is a difference in
behavior. A sädhu behaves with all conditioned souls for their ultimate relief
from material entanglement. Therefore, no one can be more friendly than the
sädhu in relieving a conditioned soul. A sädhu is calm, and he quietly and
peacefully follows the principles of scripture and at the same time is a devotee
of the Lord. One who actually follows the principles of scripture must be a
devotee of God because all the çästras instruct us to obey the orders of the
Personality of Godhead. Sädhu, therefore, means a follower of the scriptural
injunctions and a devotee of the Lord. All these characteristics are prominent
in a devotee. A devotee develops all the good qualities of the demigods,
whereas a nondevotee, even though academically qualified, has no actual good
qualifications or good characteristics according to the standards of
transcendental realization."
Vasudeva, therefore, has used the word sädhu to describe Närada Muni,
indicating that the position of the devotee of the Lord is superior even to that
of the demigods.
TEXT 6
Bajainta yae yaTaA de"vaAna,
de"vaA @ipa taTaEva taAna,
C$Ayaeva k(maRs$aicavaA:
s$aADavaAe d"Inavats$alaA:
bhajanti ye yathä devän
devä api tathaiva tän
chäyeva karma-saciväù
sädhavo déna-vatsaläù
SYNONYMS
bhajanti—worship; ye—they who; yathä—in which way; devän—the demigods;
deväù—the demigods; api—also; tathä eva—just in that way; tän—them;
chäyä—in a shadow; iva—as if; karma—of material work and its reactions;
saciväù—the attendants; sädhavaù—saintly persons; déna-vatsaläù—merciful
to the fallen.
TRANSLATION
Those who worship the demigods receive reciprocation from the demigods in
a way just corresponding to the offering. The demigods are attendants of karma,
like a person's shadow, but sädhus are actually merciful to the fallen.
PURPORT
The words chäyeva karma-saciväù are significant here. Chäyä means
"shadow." The shadow of the body precisely follows the movements of the
body. The shadow has no power to move in a way different from the
movement of the body. Similarly, as stated here, bhajanti ye yathä devän devä
api tathäiva tän: the results the demigods award to living beings correspond
exactly to the living beings' actions. The demigods are empowered by the Lord
to follow precisely the particular karma of a living entity in awarding him
happiness and distress. Just as a shadow cannot move independently, the
demigods cannot punish or reward a living being independently. Although the
demigods are millions of times more powerful than the human beings on earth,
they are ultimately tiny servants of God whom the Lord allows to play as the
controllers of the universe. In the Fourth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Påthu
Mahäräja, an empowered incarnation of the Lord, states that even the
demigods are subject to punishment by the Lord if they deviate from His laws.
On the other hand, devotees of the Lord such as Närada Muni, by their potent
preaching, can interfere in the karma of a living being by persuading him to
give up his fruitive activity and mental speculation and surrender to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. In material existence, one works hard under
the bondage of ignorance. But if one becomes enlightened by association with
a pure devotee of the Lord, one can understand one's actual position as an
eternal servant of God. By rendering such service, one dissolves his
attachment to the material world and the reactions of his previous activities,
and as a surrendered soul he is endowed with unlimited spiritual freedom in
the service of the Lord. In this regard, the Brahma-saàhitä (5.54) states:
yas tv indragopam athavendram aho sva-karmabandhänurüpa-
phala-bhäjanam ätanoti
karmäëi nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhäjäà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I adore the primeval Lord, Govinda, who burns to the root all the fruitive
activities of those imbued with devotion. For those who walk the path of
work—no less for Indra, king of the demigods, than for the tiny insect
indragopa—He impartially ordains the due enjoyments of the fruits of
activities in accordance with the chain of works previously performed." Even
the demigods are bound to the laws of karma, whereas a pure devotee of the
Lord, having completely given up the desire for material enjoyment,
successfully burns to ashes all traces of karma.
In this regard, Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has commented
that unless one is engaged as a surrendered soul in the devotional service of
the Lord, he cannot actually be considered niñkäma, or free from all personal
desire. Sometimes a materialistic person will engage in charity or altruistic
activities and in this way consider himself a selfless worker. Similarly, those
who engage in mental speculation with the ultimate goal of merging into the
impersonal Brahman aspect of the Lord also advertise themselves as being
selfless or desireless. According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté, however,
such karmés and jïänés, while busy in their so-called "selflessness," are in fact
servants of lusty desires. In other words, they have not perfectly understood
their position as eternal servants of God. The altruistic karmé falsely considers
himself the best friend of humanity, although he is unable to give actual
benefit to others because he is ignorant of the eternal life of bliss and
knowledge beyond the temporary hallucination of material existence.
Similarly, although the jïäné proudly declares himself God and invites others
to become God also, he neglects to explain how the so-called gods have come
to be bound by the laws of material nature. Actually, the attempt to become
God is based not on love of God but on the desire to take the same status as
God. In other words, the desire to be equal in all respects to the Supreme is
simply another materialistic desire. Therefore the karmés and jïänés, because of
their dissatisfaction in artificially trying to fulfill their own desires, can show
no actual mercy to the fallen souls. In this regard, Çré Madhväcärya has quoted
the Uddäma-saàhitä:
sukham icchanti bhütänäà
präyo duùkhäsahä nåëäm
tathäpi tebhyaù pravarä
devä eva hareù priyäù
"Åñis want happiness for all beings and are almost always incapable of
tolerating the unhappiness of men. Nevertheless, the demigods are superior
because they are very dear to Lord Hari." But although Çréla Madhväcärya has
placed the demigods in a higher position than the merciful åñis, Çréla Jéva
Gosvämé has stated, sädhavas tu na karmänugatäù: the sädhus are actually
better than the demigods because the sädhus are merciful regardless of the
pious or impious acts of the conditioned souls. This apparent disagreement
between Madhväcärya and Jéva Gosvämé is resolved by Bhaktisiddhänta
Sarasvaté Öhäkura, who points out that in the statement by Çréla
Madhväcärya, the word åñi, or "sage," indicates the so-called sädhus or saintly
persons among the karmés and jïänés. Ordinary fruitive workers and
speculative philosophers certainly consider themselves to be at the summit of
pious morality and altruism. However, since they are ignorant of the supreme
position of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they cannot be considered
equal to the demigods, who are all devotees of the Lord and aware that all
living beings are eternal servants of the Lord. Even such demigods, however,
cannot be compared to the pure devotees such as Närada. Such pure devotees
are empowered to award the highest perfection of life to both pious and
impious living beings, who have only to follow the orders of such pure
devotees.
TEXT 7
“aöMstaTaAipa pa{cC$AmaAe
DamaARna, BaAgAvataAMstava
yaAna, ™autvaA ™aÜ"yaA matyaAeR
maucyatae s$avaRtaAe BayaAta,
brahmaàs tathäpi påcchämo
dharmän bhägavatäàs tava
yän çrutvä çraddhayä martyo
mucyate sarvato bhayät
SYNONYMS
brahman—O brähmaëa; tathä api—nevertheless (although I am completely
satisfied just by seeing you); påcchämaù—I am inquiring about;
dharmän—religious duties; bhägavatän—which are specifically meant for
pleasing the Supreme Lord; tava—from you; yän—which; çrutvä—hearing;
çraddhayä—with faith; martyaù—one destined to die; mucyate—he is freed;
sarvataù—from all; bhayät—fear.
TRANSLATION
O brähmaëa, although I am satisfied simply by seeing you, I still wish to
inquire about those duties which give pleasure to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Any mortal who faithfully hears about them is freed from all kinds of
fear.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, Närada Muni might have been reluctant
to instruct Vasudeva because of natural respect for Vasudeva's exalted position
as the father of Kåñëa. Närada might have thought that since Vasudeva was
already perfect in Kåñëa consciousness there was no need to instruct him in
the process of devotional service. Therefore, anticipating Närada's possible
reluctance, Vasudeva specifically requested Närada to preach to him about
devotional service to Kåñëa. This is the symptom of a pure devotee. A pure
devotee of Kåñëa never considers himself exalted. To the contrary, he meekly
feels that his devotional service is most imperfect but that somehow or other
Lord Kåñëa, out of His causeless mercy, is accepting such imperfect service.
Caitanya Mahäprabhu has stated in this regard,
tåëäd api sunécena
taror api sahiñëunä
amäninä mänadena
kértanéyaù sadä hariù
[Cc. Ädi 17.31]
"One can chant the holy name of the Lord in a humble state of mind, feeling
himself lower than the straw in the street. One should be more tolerant than a
tree, devoid of all sense of false prestige, and ready to offer all respect to
others." (Çikñäñöaka 3) The conditioned souls in this material world become
falsely proud of their so-called family lineage. This pride is false because one
who has taken birth in the material world is in a fallen situation, even in the
best of cases. Vasudeva, however, was certainly not fallen, since he had taken
birth in the family of Kåñëa. Since he was Kåñëa's father, his position was most
exalted, yet because he was a pure devotee he did not become proud of his
special relationship with Kåñëa. Instead, considering himself deficient in
spiritual understanding, he took advantage of the appearance of Närada Muni,
a great preacher of Kåñëa consciousness, by immediately inquiring from him
about devotional service. This incomparable humility of a pure devotee of
Kåñëa is far superior to the false humility of the impersonalist, who actually
maintains a desire to be equal to God though adopting the external behavior of
a meek and saintly person.
Bhayam, or fear, is caused by seeing something other than Kåñëa
(dvitéyäbhiniveçataù). Everything is actually an emanation from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, as stated in Vedänta-sutra (janmädy asya yataù [SB
1.1.1]) and as confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (ahaà sarvasya prabhavaù [Bg. 10.8],
väsudevaù sarvam iti, etc. [Bg. 7.19]). Kåñëa is the well-wishing friend of every
living entity (suhådam sarva-bhütänäm [Bg. 5.29]). If a living being gives up his
misguided attempt to defy the Supreme Personality of Godhead and surrenders
to the Lord, certainly he becomes confident in his eternal relationship with
Kåñëa. A surrendered soul can actually experience that Kåñëa is his
well-wishing friend, and since that friend is the supreme absolute controller of
all existence, there is certainly no cause for fear. The son of a rich man
certainly feels confident while touring the estate of his father. Similarly, an
empowered representative of the government feels confident in the discharge
of his duty. In the same way, a devotee of Kåñëa, acting as a representative of
the Supreme Lord, feels confident because he can understand at every moment
that the entire material and spiritual creation is strictly under the control of
his benevolent master. The nondevotee, however, denies the supreme position
of Kåñëa and therefore imagines that something is different from Kåñëa. For
example, if a servant of the government thinks that there is some dangerous
obstacle that cannot be controlled by the government's power, he becomes
fearful. If a child feels that there is some power that cannot be subdued by his
father, then he becomes fearful. Similarly, because we artificially think that
there is something within existence that is not under the strict control of the
benevolent Lord, we become fearful. Such a concept of a second thing
(something other than Kåñëa) is called dvitéyäbhiniveça, and it immediately
creates a foreign atmosphere of bhayam, or fear. Kåñëa is called abhayaìkara,
which means that He destroys all fear in the heart of His devotee.
Sometimes so-called scholars, distraught after many years of impersonal
speculation and enjoyment of materialistic life, become fearful and anxious.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté compares such disturbed philosophers to the
bound vulture in the Chändogya Upaniñad. Desiring liberation from fear, such
speculators unfortunately concoct an imaginary liberation (vimukta-mäninaù)
and try to take shelter of impersonal spiritual existence or voidness. But the
Bhägavatam (10.2.32) states, äruhya kåcchreëa paraà padaà tataù/ patanty adho
'nädåta-yuñmad-aìghrayaù: because such speculators have not rectified their
original mistake of rejecting their eternal relationship with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, they fall from their concocted liberation and thus
remain in a fearful condition. Vasudeva, however, is openly eager to hear more
and more about devotional service to Kåñëa, and therefore he states, yän çrutvä
çraddhayä martyo mucyate sarvato bhayät: simply by hearing about pure
devotional service to Kåñëa, a conditioned soul can easily free himself from all
types of fear, and this transcendental freedom is certainly eternal.
TEXT 8
@hM" ik(la paur"AnantaM
‘ajaATaAeR Bauiva mauil(d"ma,
@paUjayaM na maAeºaAya
maAeih"taAe de"vamaAyayaA
ahaà kila puränantaà
prajärtho bhuvi mukti-dam
apüjayaà na mokñäya
mohito deva-mäyayä
SYNONYMS
aham—I; kila—indeed; pura—long ago; anantam—the Supreme Lord, who is
unlimited; prajä-arthaù—wanting a child; bhuvi—on the earth;
mukti-dam—the Lord, who awards liberation; apüjayam—I worshiped; na
mokñäya—not for liberation; mohitaù—bewildered; deva-mäyayä—by the
illusory energy of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
In a previous birth on this earth, I worshiped the Supreme Lord, Ananta,
who alone can award liberation, but because I desired to have a child, I did not
worship Him for liberation. Thus I was bewildered by the Lord's illusory
energy.
PURPORT
According to Çrédhara Svämé the word kila (meaning "indeed, it is true," "it
is said" or "as is well known") indicates that Vasudeva was remembering the
words the Lord had spoken to him when the Lord had appeared as four-armed
Viñëu in the prison of Kaàsa. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé states that from the anxiety
of Vasudeva, which is expressed in this verse by the words apüjayaà na
mokñäya mohito deva-mäyayä, it is to be discerned that Vasudeva had heard of
the curse of the brähmaëas at Piëòäraka against the Yadu dynasty and that he
could understand from this curse that the Lord's disappearance from the earth
was imminent. Vasudeva understood that the Lord's manifest pastimes within
this universe were coming to an end, and he now lamented that he had not
directly taken advantage of the opportunity to worship Kåñëa to go back home,
back to Godhead.
Significantly, Vasudeva has used the word mukti-dam to describe the Lord.
Mukti-dam is a synonym of Mukunda, or that personality who can give
liberation from the cycle of birth and death. It is stated in Vedic literature that
even the demigods are bound to the cycle of birth and death, although their
life span is inconceivably long by earthly calculations. It is the almighty God
alone who can free the conditioned soul from the reactions to his previous
sinful activities and award him an eternal life of bliss and knowledge.
Vasudeva lamented that he had desired Kåñëa to come to him as a son
instead of desiring to go back to Kåñëa, back to Godhead, to serve the Lord in
the spiritual sky. Commenting on this incident in the Tenth Canto of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Çréla Prabhupäda has emphasized that we should desire to
go back home, back to Godhead, rather than try to bring the Lord to this world
as our son. Nor can we artificially imitate the severe penances Vasudeva and
Devaké performed for thousands of heavenly years in their previous births as
Sutapä and Påçni. In this connection Çréla Prabhupäda states, "If we want to
get the Supreme Personality of Godhead to become one of us in this material
world, this requires great penance, but if we want to go back to Kåñëa (tyaktvä
dehaà punar janma naiti mäm eti so 'rjuna [Bg. 4.9]), we need only understand
Him and love Him. Through love only we can very easily go back home, back
to Godhead." Çréla Prabhupäda goes on to explain that Caitanya Mahäprabhu
freely bestows the benediction of love of Kåñëa, which allows one to return to
Kåñëa's abode, through the chanting of the Hare Kåñëa mantra. This chanting
process is far more effective in this age than artificial attempts to perform
severe penances and austerities. Çréla Prabhupäda concludes, "Therefore, one
need not undergo severe penances for many thousands of years. One need only
learn how to love Kåñëa and be always engaged in His service (sevonmukhe hi
jihvädau svayam eva sphuraty adaù [Brs. 1.2.234(87)]). Then one can very easily
go back home, back to Godhead. Instead of bringing the Lord here for some
material purpose, to have a son or whatever else, if we go back home, back to
Godhead, our real relationship with the Lord is revealed, and we eternally
engage in our eternal relationship. By chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra, we
gradually develop our eternal relationship with the Supreme Person and thus
attain the perfection called svarüpa-siddhi(88). We should take advantage of
this benediction and go back home, back to Godhead." (SB 10.3.38 purport)
Although Vasudeva and Devaké desired that Kåñëa become their son, it
should be understood that they are devotees eternally situated in love of
Kåñëa. As stated by the Lord Himself (SB 10.3.39), mohitau devamäyayä:
Vasudeva and Devaké, His pure devotees, were covered by His internal
potency. In the Fourth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam (4.1.20) the great sage
Atri Muni prayed to the Lord, prajäm ätma-samäà mahyaà prayacchatu:
"Kindly be pleased to offer me a son exactly like You." Atri Muni said he
wanted a son exactly like the Lord, and therefore he was not a pure devotee,
because he had a desire to be fulfilled and that desire was material. If he had
desired the Supreme Personality of Godhead as his child, he would have been
completely free of material desires because he would have wanted the Supreme
Absolute Truth, but because he wanted a similar child, his desire was material.
Thus Atri Muni cannot be counted among the pure devotees. Vasudeva and
Devaké, however, did want the Lord Himself, and therefore they were pure
devotees of the Lord. In this verse, therefore, Vasudeva's statement apüjayaà
na mokñäya mohito deva-mäyayä should be taken to mean that Kåñëa's internal
potency bewildered Vasudeva so that he would desire Kåñëa as his son. This
paved the way for the Lord's appearance as the son of His loving devotees.
TEXT 9
yaTaA ivaica‡avyas$anaAä,"
Bavaià"ivaRìtaAeBayaAta,
maucyaema ÷Ãas$aEvaAÜ"A
taTaA na: zAAiDa s$au˜ata
yathä vicitra-vyasanäd
bhavadbhir viçvato-bhayät
mucyema hy aïjasaiväddhä
tathä naù çädhi su-vrata
SYNONYMS
yathä—so that; vicitra-vyasanät—which is full of various dangers;
bhavadbhiù—because of you; viçvataù-bhayät—(from this material world)
which is fearful everywhere; mucyema—I may be liberated; hi—indeed;
aïjasä—easily; eva—even; addhä—directly; tathä—thus; naù—us;
çädhi—please instruct; su-vrata—O you who are always true to your vow.
TRANSLATION
My dear lord, you are always true to your vow. Please instruct me clearly, so
that by your mercy I may easily free myself from material existence, which is
full of many dangers and keeps us constantly bound in fear.
PURPORT
The word mucyema is significant here. In the previous verse Vasudeva
stated that because he had been bewildered by the illusory energy of the Lord
he could not achieve from the Supreme Personality of Godhead the boon of
liberation. Therefore he is now approaching the pure devotee of the Lord,
confident that by the mercy of the Lord's devotee he will certainly achieve
liberation from material bondage.
In this connection the words aïjasä, "easily," and addhä, "directly," are very
important. Although foolish persons proudly want to jump up directly to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead without accepting His pure devotee as
spiritual master, those who are experienced in spiritual science know that by
submission and service at the lotus feet of a pure devotee one directly contacts
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.17.27)
Lord Kåñëa has stated, äcäryaà mäà vijänéyän nävamanyeta karhicit. Thus one
should understand that the pure devotee of Kåñëa stands on the same spiritual
level as the Lord Himself. This does not mean that a pure devotee is also God,
but because of his intimate loving connection with the Lord, he is accepted by
the Lord as being the Lord's very soul. In other words, Kåñëa is always in the
heart of His pure devotee, and the pure devotee is always in the heart of Kåñëa.
Although Çré Kåñëa is eternally the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one
without a second, the Lord is more pleased to see His pure devotee worshiped.
Therefore the Lord says, äcäryaà mäà vijänéyät. One must offer the same
respect to the Vaiñëava spiritual master as one would offer to the Lord.
Therefore as soon as one pleases the Vaiñëava spiritual master, one
immediately pleases Kåñëa and makes spiritual advancement. The word aïjasä
means that this bona fide process is the easiest method of achieving spiritual
perfection. And because the pure devotee is a transparent medium, the word
addhä, "directly," is used, indicating that service rendered to the pure devotee
goes directly to the lotus feet of Kåñëa, whereas service one whimsically offers
to Kåñëa directly, bypassing the bona fide spiritual master, is not actually
accepted and is therefore useless.
Those who actually desire the highest perfection, that of going back home,
back to the eternal, blissful kingdom of Kåñëa, should study very carefully the
example shown by Çré Vasudeva in these two verses. He indicates that
although one cannot achieve liberation by directly worshiping the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, one can very easily achieve the perfection of life
simply by a moment's association with a pure devotee of Lord Kåñëa such as
Närada Muni, the exalted Vaiñëava saint among the demigods.
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, the word viçvato-bhayät indicates that
Vasudeva very much feared the curse of the brähmaëas. As one can become
perfect by worshiping the Vaiñëavas, by displeasing the Vaiñëavas one can
bring about all misfortune. Thus Vasudeva feared the curse delivered by the
brähmaëas at Piëòäraka-tértha.
TEXT 10
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
r"AjaªaevaM k{(ta‘a´aAe
vas$aude"vaena DaImataA
‘aItastamaAh" de"vaiSaRr,"
h"re": s$aMsmaAir"taAe gAuNAE:
çré-çuka uväca
räjann evaà kåta-praçno
vasudevena dhématä
prétas tam äha devarñir
hareù saàsmärito guëaiù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; räjan—O King; evam—thus;
kåta-praçnaù—questioned; vasudevena—by Vasudeva; dhématä—the
intelligent; prétaù—pleased; tam—to him; äha—spoke; deva-åñiù—the sage
among the demigods; hareù—of Lord Hari; saàsmäritaù—made to remember;
guëaiù—by the qualities.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O King, Devarñi Närada was pleased by the
questions of the highly intelligent Vasudeva. Because they suggested the
transcendental qualities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they reminded
Närada of Lord Kåñëa. Thus Närada replied to Vasudeva as follows.
TEXT 11
™aInaAr"d" ovaAca
s$amyagAetaã"Yavais$ataM
BavataA s$aAtvataSaRBa
yatpa{cC$s$ae BaAgAvataAna,
DamaA<stvaM ivaìBaAvanaAna,
çré-närada uväca
samyag etad vyavasitaà
bhavatä sätvatarñabha
yat påcchase bhägavatän
dharmäàs tvaà viçva-bhävanän
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù uväca—Närada Muni said; samyak—correctly; etat—this;
vyavasitam—determined; bhavatä—by you; sätvata-åñabha—O best of the
Sätvata clan; yat—because; påcchase—you are asking about; bhägavatän
dharmän—duties toward the Supreme Lord; tvam—you;
viçva-bhävanän—which can purify the entire universe.
TRANSLATION
Çré Närada said: O best of the Sätvatas, you have quite correctly asked about
the eternal duty of the living entity toward the Supreme Lord. Such devotional
service to the Lord is so potent that its performance can purify the entire
universe.
PURPORT
A similar statement was made by Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé in the first verse of
the Second Canto when he congratulated Parékñit Mahäräja for asking about
Kåñëa.
varéyän eña te praçnaù
kåto loka-hitaà nåpa
ätmavit-sammataù puàsäà
çrotavyädiñu yaù paraù
[SB 2.1.1]
"My dear King, your question is glorious because it is very beneficial to all
kinds of people. The answer to this question is the prime subject matter for
hearing, and it is approved by all transcendentalists."
Similarly, Çréla Süta Gosvämé congratulated the inquiring sages of
Naimiñäraëya in the following words:
munayaù sädhu påñöo 'haà
bhavadbhir loka-maìgalam
yat kåtaù kåñëa-sampraçno
yenätmä suprasédati
"O sages, I have been justly questioned by you. Your questions are worthy
because they relate to Lord Kåñëa and so are of relevance to the world's
welfare. Only questions of this sort are capable of completely satisfying the
self." (SB 1.2.5)
Närada will now answer Vasudeva's inquiry about the process of devotional
service. Later, at the end of their conversation, he will reply to Vasudeva's
comments about Vasudeva's own faulty intentions.
TEXT 12
™autaAe'naupaiQ&taAe DyaAta
@Aä{"taAe vaAnaumaAeid"ta:
s$aâ: paunaAita s$aÜ"maAeR
de"vaivaìåu"h"Ae'ipa ih"
çruto 'nupaöhito dhyäta
ädåto vänumoditaù
sadyaù punäti sad-dharmo
deva-viçva-druho 'pi hi
SYNONYMS
çrutaù—heard; anupaöhitaù—subsequently chanted; dhyätaù—meditated on;
ädåtaù—faithfully accepted; vä—or; anumoditaù—praised when performed by
others; sadyaù—immediately; punäti—purifies; sat-dharmaù—pure devotional
service; deva—to the demigods; viçva—and to the universe; druhaù—those
who are hateful; api hi—even.
TRANSLATION
Pure devotional service rendered to the Supreme Lord is spiritually so potent
that simply by hearing about such transcendental service, by chanting its glories
in response, by meditating on it, by respectfully and faithfully accepting it, or
by praising the devotional service of others, even persons who hate the
demigods and all other living beings can be immediately purified.
PURPORT
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has commented that the word
sad-dharma refers to bhägavata-dharma. This is also confirmed by Çrédhara
Svämé. Bhägavata-dharma is spiritually so powerful that even those who by
worldly standards are implicated in various ways in sinful behavior can easily
be purified by adopting any of the processes mentioned in this verse. In the
practice of ordinary piety, one worships God with the expectation of receiving
something in return for one's service. Similarly, the impersonalist aspires for
his own liberation, wishfully thinking that he will become equal to God. In
bhägavata-dharma, however, there is no such impurity. Bhägavata-dharma is
devotional service to the Lord in which the only objective is the satisfaction of
the Lord. If one rejects this process and instead wants to hear about, teach or
meditate upon another process, the chance for immediate purification is lost.
Neither ordinary materialistic yoga processes meant for achieving mystic
powers nor impersonal processes based on speculation have the power to purify
immediately those who have fallen into sinful behavior. Sad-dharma, or
bhägavata-dharma, pure devotional service to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, is unique in that even the most fallen souls can immediately rise to
the highest perfectional stage by surrendering at the lotus feet of Kåñëa or His
pure devotee. This was vividly demonstrated in the preaching work of
Caitanya Mahäprabhu, especially in the case of the sinful brothers Jagäi and
Mädhäi.
TEXT 13
tvayaA par"mak(lyaANA:
pauNya™avaNAk(LtaRna:
smaAir"taAe BagAvaAnaâ
de"vaAe naAr"AyaNAAe mama
tvayä parama-kalyäëaù
puëya-çravaëa-kértanaù
smärito bhagavän adya
devo näräyaëo mama
SYNONYMS
tvayä—by you; parama—supremely; kalyäëaù—blissful; puëya—very pious;
çravaëa—hearing; kértanaù—and chanting (about whom); smäritaù—brought
to memory; bhagavän—the Supreme Lord; adya—today; devaù
näräyaëaù—Lord Näräyaëa; mama—my.
TRANSLATION
Today you have made me remember my Lord, the supremely blissful
Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa. The Supreme Lord is so auspicious that
whoever hears and chants about Him becomes completely pious.
PURPORT
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has stated, näräyaëas tädåça-dharme madéya-guru-rüpo
näräyaëarñiù. The word näräyaëa in this verse refers to the incarnation of
Godhead Näräyaëa Åñi, who acted as Närada's spiritual master in this dharma.
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has also pointed out, smärita iti kåñëopäsanäveçena tasyäpi
vismaraëät. The word smärita, "he is brought back to memory," indicates that
because of Närada's absorption in the worship of Kåñëa he had forgotten Lord
Nara-Näräyaëa. In other words, if intense engagement in devotional service
makes one sometimes forget the Personality of Godhead, by Kåñëa's
arrangement such a sincere servitor will again be reminded of the Personality
of Godhead.
TEXT 14
@‡aApyaud"Ah"r"ntaImama,
witah"As$aM paur"Atanama,
@ASaRBaANAAM ca s$aMvaAdM"
ivade"h"sya mah"Atmana:
aträpy udäharantémam
itihäsaà purätanam
ärñabhäëäà ca saàvädaà
videhasya mahätmanaù
SYNONYMS
atra api—in this very matter (of describing bhägavata-dharma); udäharanti—is
given as an example; imam—this; itihäsam—historical account;
purätanam—ancient; ärñabhäëäm—of the sons of Åñabha; ca—and;
saàvädam—the conversation; videhasya—with Janaka, King of Videha;
mahä-ätmanaù—who was a great broad-minded soul.
TRANSLATION
To explain the devotional service of the Lord, sages have related the ancient
history of the conversation between the great soul King Videha and the sons of
Åñabha.
PURPORT
The words itihäsam purätanam, meaning "ancient historical account," are
significant here. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is nigama-kalpa-taror galitam phalam [SB
1.1.3], the ripe fruit of the desire tree of Vedic knowledge. In the pages of the
Bhägavatam we find true historical narrations relating to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and the liberation of the conditioned souls. These
historical accounts are not fiction or mythology, but describe the wonderful
activities of the Lord and His devotees that took place in yugas previous to the
advent of this puny age. Although mundane scholars have foolishly tried to
depict the Bhägavatam as a mythological work or a recent creation, the actual
fact is that Çrémad-Bhägavatam is a perfect transcendental literature describing
not only the entire situation of this universe but also that which lies far
beyond this universe, in both the material and spiritual skies. If one seriously
studies the Çrémad-Bhägavatam he becomes the most learned intellectual man.
Caitanya Mahäprabhu desires that all pious persons become highly learned by
hearing Çrémad-Bhägavatam and then preach the glories of the Lord in a
scientific way all over the world. It is essential that we hear these historical
narrations, such as the conversation between the nava-yogendras and King
Videha, with complete faith and submission. Then, as stated in verse 12 of this
chapter, even if our former life is filled with abominable activities, simply by
hearing Çrémad-Bhägavatam we shall be promoted to the same transcendental
status as the Lord and His pure devotees. This is the extraordinary power of
bhägavata history, as contrasted with useless, mundane historical accounts,
which ultimately serve no purpose. Although mundane historians justify their
work on the plea that we have to learn from history, we can practically see
that the world situation is now rapidly deteriorating into unbearable conflict
and chaos while so-called historians stand helplessly by. But the bhägavata
historians who have faithfully heard Çrémad-Bhägavatam can give perfect and
potent instructions for the restoration of a peaceful and blissful world.
Therefore those who are inclined to enrich their intellectual life through the
study of history should educate themselves in the historical narrations of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam. This will bring them the perfection of intellectual and
spiritual life.
TEXT 15
i‘aya˜ataAe naAma s$autaAe
manaAe: svaAyamBauvasya ya:
tasyaA¢aI‹astataAe naAiBar,"
[%SaBastats$auta: sma{ta:
priyavrato näma suto
manoù sväyambhuvasya yaù
tasyägnédhras tato näbhir
åñabhas tat-sutaù småtaù
SYNONYMS
priyavrataù—Mahäräja Priyavrata; näma—by name; sutaù—the son; manoù
sväyambhuvasya—of Sväyambhuva Manu; yaù—who; tasya—his;
ägnédhraù—(son was) Ägnédhra; tataù—from him (Ägnédhra); näbhiù—King
Näbhi; åñabhaù—Lord Åñabhadeva; tat-sutaù—his son; småtaù—is so
remembered.
TRANSLATION
Sväyambhuva Manu had a son named Mahäräja Priyavrata, and among
Priyavrata's sons was Ägnédhra. From Ägnédhra was born Näbhi, whose son
was known as Åñabhadeva.
PURPORT
The genealogical background of the sons of Åñabhadeva is given in this
verse.
TEXT 16
tamaAò"vaARs$aude"vaAMzAM
maAeºaDamaRivavaºayaA
@vataINA< s$autazAtaM
tasyaAs$aIä," “aöpaAr"gAma,
tam ähur väsudeväàçaà
mokña-dharma-vivakñayä
avatérëaà suta-çataà
tasyäséd brahma-päragam
SYNONYMS
tam—Him; ähuù—they call; väsudeva-aàçam—a plenary expansion of the
Supreme Lord, Vasudeva; mokña-dharma—the process of attaining liberation;
vivakñayä—with the desire to teach; avatérëam—appeared in this world;
suta—sons; çatam—one hundred; tasya—His; äsét—there were; brahma—the
Vedas; pära-gam—who perfectly assimilated.
TRANSLATION
Çré Åñabhadeva is accepted as an expansion of the Supreme Lord, Väsudeva.
He incarnated in this world to propagate those religious principles that lead
living entities to ultimate liberation. He had one hundred sons, all perfect in
Vedic knowledge.
TEXT 17
taeSaAM vaE Bar"taAe jyaeï"Ae
naAr"AyaNApar"AyaNA:
ivaKyaAtaM vaSaRmaetaâna,-
naA°aA BaAr"tamaàu"tama,
teñäà vai bharato jyeñöho
näräyaëa-paräyaëaù
vikhyätaà varñam etad yannämnä
bhäratam adbhutam
SYNONYMS
teñäm—of them; vai—indeed; bharataù—Bharata; jyeñöhaù—the oldest;
näräyaëa-paräyaëaù—completely devoted to Lord Näräyaëa; vikhyätam—is
famous; varñam—the planet; etat—this; yat-nämnä—by whose name;
bhäratam—Bhärata-varña; adbhutam—wonderful.
TRANSLATION
Of the one hundred sons of Lord Åñabhadeva, the eldest, Bharata, was
completely devoted to Lord Näräyaëa. It is because of Bharata's fame that this
planet is now celebrated as the great Bhärata-varña.
TEXT 18
s$a Baul(BaAegAAM tyaftvaemaAM
inagARtastapas$aA h"ir"ma,
opaAs$aInastatpad"vaI%M
laeBae vaE jana{naiBaiñiBa:
sa bhukta-bhogäà tyaktvemäà
nirgatas tapasä harim
upäsénas tat-padavéà
lebhe vai janånabhis tribhiù
SYNONYMS
saù—he; bhukta—used up; bhogäm—all the pleasures; tyaktvä—rejecting;
imäm—of this (earth); nirgataù—having left home; tapasä—by austerities;
harim—the Supreme Lord, Hari; upäsénaù—having worshiped;
tat-padavém—His destination; lebhe—he achieved; vai—indeed;
janmabhiù—in births; tribhiù—three.
TRANSLATION
King Bharata rejected this material world, considering all types of material
pleasure temporary and useless. Leaving his beautiful young wife and family, he
worshiped Lord Hari by severe austerities and attained the abode of the Lord
after three lifetimes.
PURPORT
The complete narration of the three lives of Bharata—as a king, as a deer
and as an exalted paramahaàsa devotee of the Lord—is given in the Fifth
Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 19
taeSaAM nava navaã"IpapatayaAe'sya
s$amantata:
k(maRtan‡a‘aNAetaAr"
Wk(AzAIitaiãR"jaAtaya:
teñäà nava nava-dvépapatayo
'sya samantataù
karma-tantra-praëetära
ekäçétir dvijätayaù
SYNONYMS
teñäm—of them (the one hundred sons of Åñabhadeva); nava—nine;
nava-dvépa—of the nine islands (comprising Bhärata-varña); patayaù—the
masters; asya—of this varña; samantataù—covering it entirely;
karma-tantra—of the path of fruitive Vedic sacrifices; praëetäraù—initiators;
ekäçétiù—eighty-one; dvi-jätayaù—twice-born brähmaëas.
TRANSLATION
Nine of the remaining sons of Åñabhadeva became the rulers of the nine
islands of Bhärata-varña, and they exercised complete sovereignty over this
planet. Eighty-one sons became twice-born brähmaëas and helped initiate the
Vedic path of fruitive sacrifices [karma-käëòa].
PURPORT
The nine dvépas, or islands, ruled by nine sons of Åñabhadeva are the nine
varñas of Jambüdvépa, namely Bhärata, Kinnara, Hari, Kuru, Hiraëmaya,
Ramyaka, Ilävåta, Bhadräçva and Ketumäla.
TEXTS 20-21
navaABavanmah"ABaAgAA
maunayaAe ÷TaRzAMis$ana:
™amaNAA vaAtar"s$anaA
@AtmaivaâAivazAAr"d"A:
k(ivahR"ivar"ntar"Iºa:
‘abauÜ": ipappalaAyana:
@Aivah"AeR‡aAe'Ta åu"imalazA,
camas$a: k(r"BaAjana:
naväbhavan mahä-bhägä
munayo hy artha-çaàsinaù
çramaëä väta-rasanä
ätma-vidyä-viçäradäù
kavir havir antarékñaù
prabuddhaù pippaläyanaù
ävirhotro 'tha drumilaç
camasaù karabhäjanaù
SYNONYMS
nava—nine; abhavan—there were; mahä-bhägäù—greatly fortunate souls;
munayaù—sages; hi—indeed; artha-çaàsinaù—engaged in explaining the
Absolute Truth; çramaëäù—thus exerting great endeavor;
väta-rasanäù—dressed by the wind (naked); ätma-vidyä—in spiritual science;
viçäradäù—learned; kaviù haviù antarékñaù—Kavi, Havir and Antarékña;
prabuddhaù pippaläyanaù—Prabuddha and Pippaläyana;
ävirhotraù—Ävirhotra; atha—also; drumilaù—Drumila; camasaù
karabhäjanaù—Camasa and Karabhäjana.
TRANSLATION
The nine remaining sons of Åñabha were greatly fortunate sages who worked
vigorously to spread knowledge of the Absolute Truth. They wandered about
naked and were very well versed in spiritual science. Their names were Kavi,
Havir, Antarékña, Prabuddha, Pippaläyana, Ävirhotra, Drumila, Camasa and
Karabhäjana.
PURPORT
Nimi, the King of Videha, asked the following nine questions of the nine
Yogendras, the saintly sons of Åñabha. (1) What is the highest good? (Chapter
Two, verse 30); (2) What are the religious principles (dharma), natural
proclivities (svabhäva), behavior (äcära), speech (väkya) and outward
symptoms (lakñaëa) of a bhägavata, a Vaiñëava devotee of the Lord? (2.44); (3)
What is the external energy of Viñëu, the Supreme Lord? (3.1); (4) How can
one become dissociated from this mäyä? (3.17); (5)What is the true identity of
Brahman? (3.34); (6) What are the three types of karma, namely karma based
on the enjoyment of the fruits of work, karma offered to the Supreme Lord,
and naiñkarmya? (3.41); (7) What are the various pastimes of the various
incarnations of God? (4.1); (8) What is the aim or destination of one who is
against the Supreme Lord and devoid of bhakti (in other words, a nondevotee)?
(5.1); and (9)What are the respective colors, forms and names of the four
yugävatäras, the four incarnations of the Supreme Lord who appear in the four
ages, and what is the process of worshiping each of Them? (5.19).
The transcendental answers to these inquiries were given by the great
devotees Kavi, Havir, Antarékña, Prabuddha, Pippaläyana, Ävirhotra, Drumila,
Camasa and Karabhäjana. These nine paramahaàsas answered the nine
questions, each in turn, in the following verses: (1) 2.33-43; (2) 2.45-55; (3)
3.3-16; (4) 3.18-33; (5) 3.35-40; (6) 3.43-55; (7) 4.2-23; (8) 5.2-18; and (9)
5.20-42.
TEXT 22
ta Wtae BagAvaåU"paM
ivaìM s$ad"s$ad"Atmak(ma,
@AtmanaAe'vyaitare"ke(NA
pazyantaAe vyacar"nmah"Ima,
ta ete bhagavad-rüpaà
viçvaà sad-asad-ätmakam
ätmano 'vyatirekeëa
paçyanto vyacaran mahém
SYNONYMS
te ete—these (nine Yogendras); bhagavat—of the Supreme Lord; rüpam—a
form; viçvam—the entire universe; sat-asat-ätmakam—consisting of both gross
and subtle objects; ätmanaù—from the self; avyatirekeëa—as nondifferent;
paçyantaù—seeing; vyacaran—they wandered; mahém—the earth.
TRANSLATION
These sages wandered the earth seeing the entire universe, with all its gross
and subtle objects, as a manifestation of the Supreme Lord and as nondifferent
from the self.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, it is clearly demonstrated in this and
the following verse that the nine saintly sons of Åñabhadeva known as the
nava-yogendras were situated in the highest stage of spiritual perfection, called
päramahaàsya-caritam, or "having fully developed the character of
paramahaàsas." In other words, they were pure devotees of the Lord.
According to Çrédhara Svämé and Jéva Gosvämé, the words ätmano 'vyatirekeëa
indicate that the nine sages saw the universe as being nondifferent from
themselves as well as nondifferent from the Supreme Soul, Lord Kåñëa.
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has additionally commented, ätmanaù
paramätmanaù sakäçäd avyatirekeëa, viçvasya tac-chakti-mayatväd iti bhävaù:
"Ätmanaù indicates the Supersoul. This universe is not different from the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Paramätmä, since the entire universe is
composed of His energy."
Although it is stated here that the cosmic manifestation is nondifferent
from both the living entity and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one
should not think that either the living entity or the Supreme Lord is material.
A Vedic aphorism states, asaìgo hy ayaà puruñaù: "The living entity and the
Supreme Personality of Godhead have nothing to do with the material world."
Furthermore, Bhagavad-gétä says that the entire universe, consisting of eight
gross and subtle elements, constitutes the bhinnä prakåti, or aparä prakåti—the
separated, inferior energy—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Lord
Kåñëa clearly states in Bhagavad-gétä that He has eternally established His own
abode in the kingdom of God, where life is eternal, full of bliss and knowledge,
and that the living entity, being part and parcel of God, is also eternal
(mamaiväàço jéva-loke jéva-bhütaù sanätanaù [Bg. 15.7]). Furthermore, once
having gone to that eternal abode of the Lord the living entity never returns
to this temporary manifestation (yaà präpya na nivartante tad dhäma paramaà
mama).
One may therefore ask why the living entity and the Supreme Lord are
stated to be nondifferent from the material universe. The question is very
nicely answered by Çréla Närada Muni in the First Canto of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.5.20). Idaà hi viçvaà bhagavän ivetaro yato
jagat-sthäna-nirodha-sambhaväù: "The Supreme Lord Personality of Godhead
is Himself this cosmos, and still He is aloof from it. From Him only has this
cosmic manifestation emanated, in Him it rests, and unto Him it enters after
annihilation." Commenting on Närada's statement, Çréla Prabhupäda has very
nicely explained this delicate philosophical point: "For a pure devotee, the
conception of Mukunda, Lord Çré Kåñëa, is both personal and impersonal. The
impersonal cosmic situation is also Mukunda because it is the emanation of the
energy of Mukunda. For example, a tree is a complete unit, whereas the leaves
and branches of the tree are emanated parts and parcels of the tree. The leaves
and branches of the tree are also the tree, but the tree itself is neither the
leaves nor the branches. The Vedic version that the whole cosmic creation is
nothing but Brahman means that since everything is emanating from the
Supreme Brahman, nothing is apart from Him. Similarly, the part-and-parcel
hands and legs are called the body, but the body as the whole unit is neither
the hands nor the legs. The Lord is the transcendental form of eternity,
cognition and beauty. And thus the creation of the energy of the Lord appears
to be partially eternal, full of knowledge and beautiful also....
"According to the Vedic version, the Lord is naturally fully powerful, and
thus His supreme energies are always perfect and identical with Him. Both the
spiritual and the material skies and their paraphernalia are emanations of the
internal and external energies of the Lord. External energy is comparatively
inferior, whereas the internal potency is superior. The superior energy is living
force, and therefore she is completely identical [with the Lord], but the
external energy, being inert, is partially identical. But both the energies are
neither equal to nor greater than the Lord, who is the generator of all energies;
such energies are always under His control, exactly as electrical energy,
however powerful it may be, is always under the control of the engineer.
"The human being and all other living beings are products of His internal
energies. Thus the living being is also identical with the Lord. But he is never
equal or superior to the Personality of Godhead."
Çréla Prabhupäda has clearly explained here that both the cosmic
manifestation and the living entities are emanations from the Supreme Lord,
as confirmed both in Vedanta-sutra and in the opening statement of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Janmädy asya yataù: [SB 1.1.1] "The Absolute Truth is that
from which everything emanates." Similarly, the Éçopaniñad states:
oà pürëam adaù pürëam idaà
pürëät pürëam udacyate
pürëasya pürëam ädäya
pürëam evävaçiñyate
[Éço Invocation]
The Supreme Lord, the Absolute Truth, is pürëa, or complete in Himself. And
since this cosmic world is a manifestation of His potency, it also appears to be
pürëa. In other words, because this material world is an emanation from the
Supreme Lord, it is nondifferent from Him, exactly as the sun's rays are
nondifferent from the sun globe, which is the source of their emanation.
Similarly the living beings, who are expansions of the superior, or conscious,
energy of the Supreme Lord, are also nondifferent from Kåñëa, although this
nondifference is qualitative and not quantitative. The gold found in golden
ornaments such as rings and bracelets is qualitatively identical with the gold in
a mine, but the gold in the mine is quantitatively far superior to the tiny
quantity of gold in a bracelet or ring. Similarly, although we are qualitatively
one with God, being spiritual emanations of His unlimited potency, we are
quantitatively infinitesimal and eternally subordinate to His supreme power.
Therefore the Lord is called vibhu, or infinitely potent, and we are aëu, or
infinitesimal and dependent. This is further confirmed in the Vedic literature
by the statement nityo nityänäà cetanaç cetanänäm/ eko bahünäà yo vidadhäti
kämän (Kaöha Upaniñad 2.2.13). There are innumerable eternal living entities
who are eternally and totally dependent upon the supreme singular living
entity, the Supreme Lord. That dependence is not an illusion created by
material existence, as stated by the impersonalist philosophers, but is an
eternal relationship in which the Lord is eternally superior and we are
eternally inferior. The Lord is eternally independent, and we are eternally
dependent. The Lord is eternally absolute in Himself, and we are eternally
relative to His supreme personality.
Although the Lord is infinitely greater than any other living being, or than
all of them combined, every living being is qualitatively nondifferent from the
Lord, because all living beings are parts and parcels emanating from Him
(mamaiväàço jéva-loke jéva-bhütaù sanätanaù [Bg. 15.7]). Therefore, in one
sense, the living entity is also not different from the material cosmic
manifestation, which is an inferior sister energy of the Lord. Both the living
entity and the material nature are prakåti, or feminine, dependent expansions
of the supreme puruña. The difference is that the living entity is the superior
energy of the Lord, because the living entity is conscious and eternal like the
Lord, whereas material energy is the inferior energy of the Lord, lacking
consciousness and eternal form.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has emphasized in this regard that
the absolute substance is one and is called Paramätmä, or the Supersoul. When
one has achieved but a partial vision of the Paramätmä, one's understanding of
life is called ätma-darçana, or self-realization. And when even this partial
understanding is lacking, one's existential condition is called anätma-darçana,
or ignorance of the self. In the state of partial realization of the Supersoul,
without recognition of the Paramätmä's distinction from the individual soul,
the living entity tends to become puffed up by his spiritual achievement, be
carried away by mental concoction, and consider himself equal in all respects
with God. On the other hand, the living entity situated in anätma-darçana, or
material ignorance, feels that he is completely different from the Supreme
Lord; and since everyone in this material world is interested in himself, the
living entity forgets about God, thinking that God is completely different from
him and that there is therefore no substantial relationship between him and
God. In this way the impersonal transcendentalists emphasize only the oneness
between God and the living entity, whereas the ordinary materialists
overemphasize the difference between God and the living entity. But Caitanya
Mahäprabhu has clearly revealed that the Ultimate Truth is simultaneous
oneness and difference (acintya-bhedäbheda-tattva(89)). Actually we are
eternally different from God. Because the living entity and God are eternally
separate individual entities, there exists the possibility of an eternal
relationship. And because every living entity is qualitatively one with the
Supreme Lord, that relationship constitutes the essence of the ultimate reality
for every living being. As stated in the Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 20.108),
jévera 'svarüpa' haya-kåñëera 'nitya-däsa.' The ultimate essential identity of
every living entity is his relationship with the Supreme Lord as a servitor of
the Lord.
If one can understand that he is an eternal servant of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, one can correctly understand that both the living
entity and the material universe are identical with Kåñëa, being emanations
from Him, and that they are therefore nondifferent from each other. Çréla
Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté has stated, "The material world is a manifestation of
simultaneous difference and nondifference, and it is a form of the Supreme
Lord. Thus the temporary, perishable and ever-changing material world is
different from Vaikuëöha, the eternal world."
It should be noted that in this verse the word sad-asad-ätmakam, or "made
up of gross and subtle objects," does not refer to material and spiritual objects.
This universe is stated to be composed of sat and asat, gross and subtle material
objects. According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté, "The very subtle state
within the manifest world is known as 'the unmanifest,' and the realm beyond
the manifest world is called 'transcendental.' Within the coverings
surrounding the manifest, in the region of the time factor, is the phase of
material existence experienced by the controlling deities; in this phase exist
the two functions cause (asat) and effect (sat). In the universe, which is a third
tattva, or reality (apart from and containing both sat and asat), and which is a
form of the Supreme Lord, it is impossible to produce any contradiction to the
nondual Absolute Truth." In other words, although ignorant, materialistic
scientists may zealously carry out research to find a material principle that can
negate or render unnecessary the existence of God, Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta
Sarasvaté clearly states that since the universe is an emanation from the Lord
and therefore spiritually identical with Him, there cannot possibly exist
anywhere within the universe a material law, principle or phenomenon that in
any way contradicts the supremacy of the Personality of Godhead. In fact, the
entire universe, along with the spiritual sky, exists as eternal testimony to the
unlimited glory of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. With this
understanding, the nine Yogendras were traveling about the earth in
transcendental bliss.
TEXT 23
@vyaAh"taeí"gAtaya: s$aur"is$aÜ"s$aADyagAnDavaRya
ºanar"ik(ªar"naAgAlaAek(Ana,
maul(Aêr"inta mauinacaAr"NABaUtanaATaivaâADar"
iã"jagAvaAM BauvanaAina k(Amama,
avyähateñöa-gatayaù sura-siddha-sädhyagandharva-
yakña-nara-kinnara-näga-lokän
muktäç caranti muni-cäraëa-bhütanäthavidyädhara-
dvija-gaväà bhuvanäni kämam
SYNONYMS
avyähata—unimpeded; iñöa-gatayaù—in moving as they please; sura—of the
demigods; siddha—perfected mystics; sädhya—Sädhyas; gandharva—heavenly
musicians; yakña—associates of Kuvera; nara—human beings; kinnara—minor
demigods who can change their form at will; näga—and serpents; lokän—the
worlds; muktäù—free; caranti—they travel; muni—of the sages;
cäraëa—angels; bhüta-nätha—ghostly followers of Lord Çiva;
vidyädhara—Vidyädharas; dvija—brähmaëas; gaväm—and of the cows;
bhuvanäni—the worlds; kämam—however they want.
TRANSLATION
The nine Yogendras are liberated souls who travel freely to the planets of the
demigods, the perfected mystics, the Sädhyas, the heavenly musicians, the
Yakñas, the human beings, and the minor demigods such as the Kinnaras and
the serpents. No mundane force can check their free movement, and exactly as
they wish they can travel as well to the worlds of the sages, the angels, the
ghostly followers of Lord Çiva, the Vidyädharas, the brähmaëas and the cows.
TEXT 24
ta Wk(d"A inamae: s$a‡ama,
opajagmauyaRä{"cC$yaA
ivataAyamaAnama{iSaiBar,"
@janaABae mah"Atmana:
ta ekadä nimeù satram
upajagmur yadåcchayä
vitäyamänam åñibhir
ajanäbhe mahätmanaù
SYNONYMS
te—they; ekadä—once; nimeù—of King Nimi; satram—the soma sacrifice;
upajagmuù—they approached; yadåcchayä—as they wished;
vitäyamänam—being carried out; åñibhiù—by sages; ajanäbhe—in Ajanäbha
(the old name for Bhärata-varña); mahä-ätmanaù—of the great soul.
TRANSLATION
Once in Ajanäbha [the former name of the earth], they came upon the
sacrificial performance of the great soul Mahäräja Nimi, which was being
carried out under the direction of elevated sages.
TEXT 25
taAnä{"î"A s$aUyaRs$aÆÿAzAAna,
mah"ABaAgAvataAªa{pa
yajamaAnaAe'¢ayaAe iva‘aA:
s$avaR WvaAepataisTare"
tän dåñövä sürya-saìkäçän
mahä-bhägavatän nåpa
yajamäno 'gnayo vipräù
sarva evopatasthire
SYNONYMS
tän—them; dåñövä—seeing; sürya—the sun; saìkäçän—who rivaled in
brilliance; mahä-bhägavatän—the pure devotees of the Lord; nåpa—O King
(Vasudeva); yajamänaù—the performer of the sacrifice (Nimi Mahäräja);
agnayaù—the fires; vipräù—the brähmaëas; sarve—everyone; eva—even;
upatasthire—stood in respect.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, seeing those pure devotees of the Lord, who rival the sun in
brilliance, everyone present—the performer of the sacrifice, the brähmaëas and
even the sacrificial fires—stood in respect.
TEXT 26
ivade"h"staAnaiBa‘aetya
naAr"AyaNApar"AyaNAAna,
‘aIta: s$ampaUjayaAM ca‚e(
@As$anasTaAna, yaTaAhR"ta:
videhas tän abhipretya
näräyaëa-paräyaëän
prétaù sampüjayäà cakre
äsana-sthän yathärhataù
SYNONYMS
videhaù—Nimi Mahäräja; tän—them; abhipretya—recognizing;
näräyaëa-paräyaëän—as devotees whose only goal was Näräyaëa;
prétaù—satisfied; sampüjayäm cakre—he fully worshiped them;
äsana-sthän—who had been seated; yathä-arhataù—as they deserved.
TRANSLATION
King Videha [Nimi] understood that the nine sages were exalted devotees of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore, overjoyed at their auspicious
arrival, he offered them suitable sitting places and worshiped them in a proper
way, just as one would worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
The word yathärhataù is significant here. According to Viçvanätha
Cakravarté the word yathärhataù means yathocitam, or "according to the proper
etiquette." It is clearly mentioned here that the nava-yogendras are
näräyaëa-paräyaëa, exalted devotees of the Supreme Lord, Näräyaëa, or
Kåñëa. Therefore, the word yathärhataù indicates that the King worshiped the
nine sages according to the standard Vaiñëava etiquette. The etiquette for
worshiping exalted Vaiñëavas is expressed by Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura
with the words säkñäd-dharitvena samasta-çästraiù: an exalted Vaiñëava, being
totally surrendered to the will of the Supreme Lord, is taken to be a
transparent medium for the Lord's will. In the Caitanya-caritämåta it is stated
that even by a moment's association with the pure devotees of the Lord one
can achieve all perfection in life. Therefore, as indicated by the word prétaù,
King Nimi was overjoyed by the auspicious arrival of the sages, and therefore
he worshiped them just as one would worship the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
Although impersonalist philosophers claim that every living entity is equal
to God, they callously step over the heads of their so-called spiritual masters
and freely speculate on the nature of the Absolute, giving their own whimsical
opinions in defiance of the impersonal whims of their so-called gurus. In other
words, although Mäyävädé impersonalists claim that everyone is God, they
ultimately show an offensive mentality toward the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in rejecting the reality of His eternal form and pastimes. Thus, they
unwittingly belittle the eternal position of all living beings by denying their
eternal personality and activities in the kingdom of God. The impersonalists,
through their mental concoctions, try to minimize the position of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and the living entities who are part of Him, reducing
them theoretically to a formless, nameless light, which by their concoction
they claim to be the Absolute God. The Vaiñëavas, however, welcome the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and easily understand that the unlimited
Supreme Personality has nothing to do with the conditioned, limited,
mundane personalities we find in the material world. The impersonalists
arrogantly assume that there could not be any transcendental or unlimited
personality beyond our present experience. But the Vaiñëavas intelligently
understand that there are many wonderful things far beyond our limited
experience. Therefore they accept the words of Kåñëa, who states in
Bhagavad-gétä (15.19):
yo mäm evam asammüòho
jänäti puruñottamam
sa sarva-vid bhajati mäà
sarva-bhävena bhärata
"Whoever knows Me as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, without
doubting, is the knower of everything, and he therefore engages himself in full
devotional service, O son of Bharata." In this connection Çréla Prabhupäda
states, "There are many philosophical speculations about the constitutional
position of the living entities and the Supreme Absolute Truth. Now in this
verse the Supreme Personality of Godhead clearly explains that anyone who
knows Lord Kåñëa as the Supreme Person is actually the knower of everything.
The imperfect knower goes on simply speculating about the Absolute Truth,
but the perfect knower, without wasting his valuable time, engages directly in
Kåñëa consciousness, the devotional service of the Supreme Lord.... It is not
that one should simply speculate academically. One should submissively hear
from Bhagavad-gétä that these living entities are always subordinate to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Anyone who is able to understand this,
according to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, knows the
purpose of the Vedas; no one else knows the purpose of the Vedas." Therefore,
exalted devotees such as the nine Yogendras always accept the supremacy of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as expressed here by the word
näräyaëa-paräyaëän.
King Nimi was a Vaiñëava, and therefore he worshiped the great sages with
the same respect with which he would worship the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, as shown by the word yathärhataù. Although impersonalists falsely
claim that every living entity is equal to God, they cannot properly respect any
living being, because of their original offense at the lotus feet of the Supreme
Personality. Their so-called worship, even of their own gurus, is ultimately
self-serving and opportunistic. When an impersonalist imagines that he has
become God, he has no further need for his so-called guru. The Vaiñëava,
however, because he accepts the supremacy of the eternal Personality of
Godhead, is ready and willing to offer eternal respect to all living beings,
especially to those most fortunate living beings who have achieved shelter at
the lotus feet of the Lord. A Vaiñëava's worship of the Lord's representative is
not self-serving or opportunistic, but is an expression of eternal love for the
Lord and His representatives, as indicated here by the word prétaù. Therefore
it is clear from this verse that not only the nine exalted sons of Åñabhadeva
but also King Nimi himself were all great devotees of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, in defiance of the artificial and limited concept of impersonalism.
TEXT 27
taAna, r"AecamaAnaAna, svaç&caA
“aöpau‡aAepamaAªava
pa‘acC$ par"ma‘aIta:
‘a™ayaAvanataAe na{pa:
tän rocamänän sva-rucä
brahma-putropamän nava
papraccha parama-prétaù
praçrayävanato nåpaù
SYNONYMS
tän—them; rocamänän—glowing; sva-rucä—by their own effulgence;
brahma-putra-upamän—just like the sons of Brahmä; nava—nine;
papraccha—he asked; parama-prétaù—transcendentally overjoyed;
praçraya—with humility; avanataù—bowed down; nåpaù—the King.
TRANSLATION
Overwhelmed by transcendental joy, the King humbly bowed his head and
then proceeded to question the nine sages. These nine great souls glowed with
their own effulgence and thus appeared equal to the four Kumäras, the sons of
Lord Brahmä.
PURPORT
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé has pointed out that the word sva-rucä indicates that
the nava-yogendras glowed from their own spiritual effulgence and not due to
their ornaments or any other cause. The Supreme Soul, Lord Kåñëa, is the
original source of all light. His brilliantly glowing body is the source of the
all-pervading brahmajyoti, the immeasurable spiritual light that is the resting
place of innumerable universes (yasya prabhä prabhavato jagad-aëòa-koöi [Bs.
5.40]). The individual soul, being part and parcel of the Lord, is also
self-effulgent. In fact, everything in the kingdom of God is self-effulgent, as
described in Bhagavad-gétä (15.6):
na tad bhäsayate süryo
na çaçaìko na pävakaù
yad gatvä na nivartante
tad dhäma paramaà mama
It has already been described in many ways that the nava-yogendras were pure
devotees of the Lord. Being completely Kåñëa conscious souls, they naturally
radiated the intense effulgence of the soul, as indicated here by the word
sva-rucä. Çréla Çrédhara Svämé has also pointed out that the word
brahma-putropamän, meaning "equal to the sons of Brahmä," indicates that the
nava-yogendras were on the same spiritual platform as the four exalted Kumära
brothers. It has been described in the Fourth Canto that Mahäräja Påthu
received the four Kumäras with great love and reverence, and here King Nimi
is similarly receiving the nine sons of Lord Åñabhadeva. Receiving exalted
Vaiñëavas with love and reverence is standard spiritual etiquette for those who
desire progress and happiness in life.
TEXT 28
™aIivade"h" ovaAca
manyae BagAvata: s$aAºaAta,
paASaRd"Ana, vaAe maDauiã"s$a:
ivaSNAAeBaURtaAina laAek(AnaAM
paAvanaAya car"inta ih"
çré-videha uväca
manye bhagavataù säkñät
pärñadän vo madhu-dvisaù
viñëor bhütäni lokänäà
pävanäya caranti hi
SYNONYMS
çré-videhaù uväca—King Videha said; manye—I consider; bhagavataù—of the
Supreme Lord; säkñät—directly; pärñadän—personal associates; vaù—you;
madhu-dviñaù—of the enemy of Madhu; visëoù—of Lord Viñëu; bhütäni—the
servants; lokänäm—of all the worlds; pävanäya—for the purification;
caranti—they move about; hi—indeed.
TRANSLATION
King Videha said: I think that you must be direct associates of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is famous as the enemy of the demon Madhu.
Indeed, the pure devotees of Lord Viñëu wander throughout the universe not
for their personal, selfish interest, but to purify all the conditioned souls.
PURPORT
King Nimi here welcomes the great sages by glorifying their transcendental
activities. It is well known that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
transcendental to the three modes of material nature, as stated in
Bhagavad-gétä (7.13): mäm ebhyaù param avyayam. Similarly, His pure devotees
are also on the transcendental platform. One may ask how such
transcendental living beings as the associates of Lord Viñëu could be seen
within the material world. Therefore it is stated here, pävanäya caranti hi: the
associates of Lord Viñëu travel throughout the universe to reclaim the fallen,
conditioned souls on behalf of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. A
representative of the governor may be seen moving within the prison house,
but that does not mean that the governor's representative has become a
conditioned prisoner. It is understood that he is within the prison to negotiate
the possible release of those prisoners who have rectified their criminal
propensity. Similarly, the devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
called parivräjakäcäryas wander throughout the universe inviting everyone to
surrender to Lord Kåñëa and go back home, back to Godhead, for an eternal
life of bliss and knowledge.
In the Sixth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam the mercy of the associates of
Lord Viñëu has been described in connection with the salvation of Ajämila.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has pointed out that the associates of
Lord Viñëu are as merciful as the Lord Himself. Even though the ignorant
members of human society are not interested in approaching the servants of
Lord Viñëu, the devotees of the Lord, without any false prestige, act to liberate
the conditioned souls from their perpetual misfortune.
TEXT 29
äu"laRBaAe maAnauSaAe de"h"Ae
de"ih"naAM ºaNABaÌÿr":
ta‡aAipa äu"laRBaM manyae
vaEku(NQ&i‘ayad"zARnama,
durlabho mänuño deho
dehinäà kñaëa-bhaìguraù
taträpi durlabhaà manye
vaikuëöha-priya-darçanam
SYNONYMS
durlabhaù—difficult to achieve; mänuñaù—human; dehaù-body; dehinäm—for
embodied beings; kñaëa-bhaìguraù—prone to be destroyed at any moment;
tatra—in that human body; api—even; durlabham—more difficult to achieve;
manye—I consider; vaikuëöhapriya—of those who are dear to the Supreme
Lord, Vaikuëöha; darçanam—the vision.
TRANSLATION
For the conditioned souls, the human body is most difficult to achieve, and it
can be lost at any moment. But I think that even those who have achieved
human life rarely gain the association of pure devotees, who are dear to the
Lord of Vaikuëöha.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, the word dehinäm means bahavo dehä
bhavanté yeñäà te, "the conditioned souls, who accept innumerable material
bodies." According to some wishful thinkers a living entity in the human form
of life will never be degraded to a lower form such as that of an animal or
plant. But despite this wishful thinking, it is a fact that according to our
activities at the present, we will be elevated or degraded by the laws of God. At
the present time in human society there is no clear or precise understanding of
the nature of life. Foolish scientists have invented highly sophisticated
terminologies and theories to bluff innocent people into believing that life
comes from chemical reactions. His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupäda has exposed this bluff in his book Life Comes From Life, which
points out that although scientists claim that life comes from chemicals, they
cannot produce so much as an insect, even from unlimited quantities of
chemicals. Actually, life and consciousness are symptoms of the spirit soul.
In Life Comes From Life (page 43), Çréla Prabhupäda has stated, "Living
beings move from one bodily form to another. The forms already exist. The
living entity simply transfers himself, just as a man transfers himself from one
apartment to another. One apartment is first class, another is second class, and
another is third class. Suppose a person comes from a lower-class apartment to
a first-class apartment. The person is the same. But now, according to his
capacity for payment, or karma, he is able to occupy a higher-class apartment.
Real evolution does not mean physical development, but development of
consciousness." Within every species of life there is consciousness, and that
consciousness is the symptom of the living entity, who is the superior energy of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Without understanding this essential
point of the transmigration of the conscious living entity throughout
8,400,000 species of life, one cannot possibly understand the words durlabho
mänuño dehaù, "the human body is very rarely achieved."
People are now being cheated of this essential understanding. They are
completely unaware of the danger of slipping back into the eight million
species that lie below the human species. It is natural that a human being
think in terms of progress. We want to feel that our life is progressing and that
we are advancing and improving the quality of our life. Therefore, it is urgent
that people be informed of the great danger of misusing the valuable human
life and that they know of the great opportunity the human life affords, the
opportunity to take to Kåñëa consciousness. Just as on earth different
residential areas are divided into high class, middle class and low class, within
the universe there are upper-class, middle-class and lower-class planets. By
practice of the yoga system, or by meticulous execution of religious rituals, one
can transfer himself to the higher planets within this universe. On the other
hand, by neglecting religious principles one will degrade himself to a lower
planet. But the Supreme Lord, Kåñëa, declares in Bhagavad-gétä (8.16),
äbrahma-bhuvanäl lokäù punar ävartino 'rjuna. Thus the final conclusion is
that every planet within the material universe is an unsuitable and
inappropriate residence, because on each planet there are the primal defects
old age and death. The Lord assures us, however, that in His transcendental
abode, which lies far beyond the material cosmos, life is everlasting, blissful
and absolutely cognizant. The material world is temporary, troublesome and
rife with ignorance, but the spiritual world, called Vaikuëöha, is eternal,
blissful and full of perfect knowledge.
The highly evolved human brain is a gift given by God so that we may use
our intelligence to distinguish between that which is eternal and that which is
temporary. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (2.16),
näsato vidyate bhävo
näbhävo vidyate sataù
ubhayor api dåñöo 'ntas
tv anayos tattva-darçibhiù
"Those who are seers of the truth have concluded that matter has no
permanent existence whereas the spirit soul never ceases to exist. Learned
seers have concluded this by studying the nature of both."
Those who have accepted the Supreme Lord and His abode as the ultimate
goal of life are called vaikuëöha-priya. Here King Nimi states that to have the
personal association of such learned transcendentalists is certainly the
perfection of human life. In this connection Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté
Öhäkura suggests that we consider the following verse:
nå-deham ädyaà su-labhaà su-durlabhaà
plavaà su-kalpaà guru-karëadhäram
mayänukülena nabhasvateritaà
pumän bhaväbdhià na taret sa ätma-hä
"[The Supreme Lord said:] The best of bodies, a human body, is a great
attainment, rarely achieved, and may be compared to a boat. The guru is an
expert captain for this boat, and I have sent favorable winds (the Vedas). Thus
I have given all facilities for crossing over the ocean of material existence. Any
human being who has achieved these excellent facilities of human life but does
not cross over the material ocean is to be considered the killer of his own self."
(SB 11.20.17)
According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté, the eternal servants of the
Supreme Lord, being controlled by powerful feelings of mercy, descend into
the material world as Vaiñëavas to deliver the conditioned souls who are
bound by the results of their own mundane work. Such Vaiñëavas also
distribute their mercy to those who are laboriously searching after the
impersonal Absolute. Çré Närada Muni has stated that without ecstatic love of
Godhead such laborious, impersonal contemplation of the Absolute is
certainly troublesome (naiñkarmyam apy acyuta-bhäva-varjitam), and what to
speak of the innumerable problems of ordinary gross materialistic life. We
have practical experience that in the Western countries most people are
working hard to get money, laboring under heavenly dreams of sense
gratification. Others, having become frustrated with ordinary materialistic life,
are trying to negate their personal existence and merge into the existence of
God through so-called yoga and meditation. Both classes of unhappy people are
receiving the mercy of the Kåñëa consciousness movement, putting aside their
dreams of sense gratification as well as their troublesome impersonal
speculation. They are learning to chant the holy names of God, dance in
ecstasy, and feast on the holy food offered to the Lord. They become enlivened
by the transcendental knowledge spoken by the Lord Himself in the
Bhagavad-gétä. As the Lord states in Bhagavad-gétä (9.2), susukhaà kartum
avyayam. The actual process of spiritual freedom is joyful to perform and has
nothing to do with fruitive activities aimed at sense gratification or with dry
impersonal speculation. More and more people are taking to the process of
Kåñëa consciousness, becoming joyful, and eagerly distributing Kåñëa's mercy
to others. Thus the whole world will be enlivened and inspired by the Kåñëa
consciousness movement, which is the practical demonstration of the mercy of
the Vaiñëavas.
TEXT 30
sat-saìgaù çe@ta @AtyaintakM( ºaemaM
pa{cC$AmaAe BavataAe'naGaA:
s$aMs$aAre"'ismana, ºaNAADaAeR'ipa
s$ats$aËÿ: zAevaiDana{RNAAma,vadhir nåëäm
ata ätyantikaà kñemaà
påcchämo bhavato 'naghäù
saàsäre 'smin kñaëärdho 'pi
sat-saìgaù çevadhir nåëäm
SYNONYMS
ataù—therefore; ätyantikam—supreme; kñemam—good; påcchämaù—I am
asking; bhavataù—from you; anaghäù—O sinless ones; saàsäre—in the cycle
of birth and death; asmin—this; kñaëa-ardhaù—lasting only half of one
moment; api—even; sat-saìgaù—the association of devotees of the Lord;
çevadhiù—a great treasure; nåëäm—for human beings.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O completely sinless ones, I ask you to kindly tell me what the
supreme good is. After all, even half a moment's association with pure devotees
within this world of birth and death is a priceless treasure for any man.
PURPORT
The word çevadhiù, or "a great treasure," is significant in this verse. Just as
an ordinary man is overjoyed to discover an unexpected treasure, one who is
actually intelligent is overjoyed to gain the association of a pure devotee of the
Lord, by which one's life can easily be perfected. According to Çréla Jéva
Gosvämé the words ätyantikaà kñemam, or "the supreme good," indicate that
situation in which one cannot be touched by even the slightest fear. Now we
are entangled in the cycle of birth, old age, disease and death (saàsäre).
Because our entire situation can be devastated in a single moment, we are
constantly in fear. But the pure devotees of the Lord can teach us the practical
way to free ourselves from material existence and thus to abolish all types of
fear.
According to Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, normal etiquette would
dictate that a host immediately ask a guest who has arrived about his
well-being. But such an inquiry is unsuitable to place before self-satisfied
devotees of the Lord, who are themselves the bestowers of all well-being.
According to Çréla Viçvanätha, the King knew that it would be useless to ask
the sages about their business affairs, since the only business of the pure
devotees of the Lord is the achievement of the supreme goal of life. According
to Bhagavad-gétä, the goal of life is to free oneself from the cycle of birth and
death and reinstate oneself as an eternal servant of God on the platform of
spiritual bliss. Pure devotees of the Lord do not waste their time with ordinary
mundane affairs. Sometimes foolish relatives of a Vaiñëava preacher lament
that such a transcendental preacher has not used his life for material business
and that so much money has therefore been lost by the practice of spiritual
life. Such ignorant persons cannot imagine the unlimited prosperity available
on the spiritual platform to those who have surrendered heart and soul to the
mission of the Lord. King Nimi was himself a learned Vaiñëava, and therefore
he did not foolishly ask the sages about ordinary worldly affairs. He
immediately inquired about ätyantikaà kñemam, the highest, most perfect goal
of life.
According to Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, the word anaghäù, "O sinless
ones," has two meanings. Anaghäù indicates that the nine Yogendras were
themselves completely free of sins. It also indicates that merely by the great
fortune of seeing them and hearing from them submissively, an ordinary, sinful
man could also be freed of his sins and achieve everything he desired.
One might object that since the great sages had just arrived, the King
should not have been so impatient as to inquire from them about the
perfection of life. Perhaps the King should have waited until the sages
themselves invited his inquiry. Such a hypothetical objection is answered by
the words kñaëärdho pi. Even a single moment's association with pure devotees,
or even half a moment's association, is sufficient to give one the perfection of
life. An ordinary person who is offered a great treasure will immediately desire
to claim such a treasure. Similarly, King Nimi was thinking, "Why should I
consider myself fortunate enough to have such great sages stay here for a long
time? Because I am an ordinary person, undoubtedly you will soon be leaving.
Therefore, let me immediately take advantage of your holy association."
According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté, in this world there are
different varieties of mercy. But ordinary mercy cannot bring about the
cessation of all unhappiness. In other words, there are many humanitarians,
altruists and social reformers who certainly work for the betterment of
humanity. Such persons are universally considered merciful. But in spite of
their mercy, humanity continues to suffer in the grip of birth, old age, disease
and death. I may distribute free food to the needy, but even after eating my
merciful gift, the recipient will again become hungry, or he will suffer in some
other way. In other words, by mere humanitarianism or altruism, people do not
actually become free from unhappiness. Their unhappiness is merely
postponed or altered. King Nimi was joyful upon seeing the nava-yogendras
because he knew that they were eternally perfect associates of the Supreme
Lord. Therefore he thought, "You are not prone to sinful activities like
unfortunate mundane people such as me. Thus the words you speak carry no
deception or exploitation."
The materially conditioned souls spend their days and nights discussing
various topics of sense gratification. They never find time to hear about
transcendental knowledge. But if even only briefly or accidentally they hear
hari-kathä, topics of Kåñëa, in the association of pure devotees of the Lord,
their propensity to suffer in material existence will slacken. When one sees
liberated persons, hears about Kåñëa from them, remembers their saintly
behavior and so on, one's tendency to bind himself in the illusion of sense
gratification is diminished, and he becomes eager to serve the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 31
DamaARna, BaAgAvataAna, “aUta
yaid" na: ™autayae ºamama,
yaE: ‘as$aªa: ‘apaªaAya
d"AsyatyaAtmaAnamapyaja:
dharmän bhägavatän brüta
yadi naù çrutaye kñamam
yaiù prasannaù prapannäya
däsyaty ätmänam apy ajaù
SYNONYMS
dharmän bhägavatän—the science of devotional service; brüta—please speak;
yadi—if; naù—of us; çrutaye—to hear properly; kñamam—there is the
capacity; yaiù—by which (devotional service); prasannaù—being satisfied;
prapannäya—to one who has taken shelter; däsyati—He will give;
ätmänam—Himself; api—even; ajaù—the unborn Supreme Lord.
TRANSLATION
Please speak about how one engages in the devotional service of the Supreme
Lord, if you consider me capable of properly hearing these topics. When a living
entity offers loving service to the Supreme Lord, the Lord is immediately
satisfied, and in return He will give even His own self to the surrendered soul.
PURPORT
Within the material world there are two classes of mundane philosophers
who present their opinions about the Supreme Lord. Some so-called
theologians claim that we are infinitely different from God, and therefore they
tend to look upon the Lord as something far beyond our power to understand.
Such extreme dualistic philosophers outwardly or officially claim to be pious
and religious believers in God, but they consider God so much different from
that which is within our experience that according to them there is little profit
in even trying to discuss the personality or attributes of the Supreme Lord.
Such outwardly faithful persons generally take to fruitive activities and gross
materialistic sense gratification, being infatuated with the mundane
relationships of the material world, which appear under the headings society,
friendship and love.
The advaita-vädés, or nondualistic philosophers, claim that there is no
difference between God and the living entity and that the highest goal of life
is to give up our personal existence, which is due to illusion, and merge into
the impersonal Brahman effulgence, which is devoid of name, form,
paraphernalia and personality. Thus neither class of speculative philosopher is
able to understand the transcendental Personality of Godhead.
Caitanya Mahäprabhu, in His sublime teaching of
acintya-bhedäbhedha-tattva, or simultaneous oneness and difference, has clearly
demonstrated that we are qualitatively one with God but quantitatively
different. God is personal consciousness, and He has His personal form.
Similarly we are also personal consciousness, and ultimately, when liberated,
we also have eternal forms. The difference is that the eternal form and
personality of the Supreme Lord contain unlimited potency and opulence
whereas our potency and opulence are infinitesimal. We are conscious of our
personal body, whereas Lord Kåñëa, the Absolute Truth, is conscious of
everyone's body, as stated in Bhagavad-gétä (kñetra-jïaà cäpi mäà viddhi
sarva-kñetreñu bhärata [Bg. 13.3]). But although God is infinitely greater than
the living entity, both God and the living entities are eternal personalities
with form, activities and feelings.
The Supreme Lord, Kåñëa, expands Himself into innumerable living
entities to enjoy rasas, or ecstatic relationships, with them. The living entities
are part and parcel of Lord Kåñëa, and they are meant to serve Him with love.
Although the Supreme Lord is eternally the predominator and the living
entity is eternally the predominated, when the living entity surrenders unto
the Lord with a sincere loving attitude, desiring to serve the Lord eternally
without the slightest expectation of personal reward for such service, the Lord
immediately is pleased, as expressed here by the word prasannaù. Kåñëa, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, is so unlimitedly merciful and magnanimous
that in His gratitude to such a surrendered and loving servitor, He is
immediately inclined to offer anything, even Himself, to His surrendered
devotee.
There are numerous practical, historical examples of this loving propensity
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Because of the love of Mother Yaçodä,
child Kåñëa, in His form as Dämodara, surrendered Himself to His loving
mother and allowed Himself to be bound with ropes as a childhood
punishment. Similarly, feeling indebted to the Päëòavas for their intense love
for Him, Kåñëa in His form as Pärtha-särathi happily agreed to drive the
chariot of Arjuna on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra. Similarly, Kåñëa in
Våndävana is always thinking of ways to satisfy the gopés, who are universally
recognized as the most exalted loving devotees of the Lord.
Such intense loving feelings exchanged between the Lord and His pure
devotees would not be possible were the living entities not qualitatively one
with the Supreme Personality of Godhead and indeed inseparable parts and
parcels of the Lord. On the other hand, because both the Supreme Personality
of Godhead and the living entities are eternally individuals, each with his own
eternal individual consciousness, such loving exchanges are a perpetual reality
in the kingdom of God. In other words, absolute oneness with God and
absolute difference from God are theoretical imaginations of different schools
of speculative philosophy. The perfection of spiritual love, as described in this
verse, is based on simultaneous oneness and difference, and this absolute
reality was elaborately presented by Lord Kåñëa Himself in His brahminical
incarnation as Caitanya Mahäprabhu. The followers of Caitanya Mahäprabhu
have expounded this perfect doctrine in innumerable books, culminating in
the teachings of His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda,
who has most perfectly presented this knowledge in a way that is
understandable not only in India but to all the people of the world. Our
present insignificant attempt is simply to complete his translation and
commentary on Çrémad-Bhägavatam, and we are constantly praying for his
guidance so that this work can simply be completed exactly as he would have
desired. If one can understand these teachings of Caitanya Mahäprabhu as
they are being presented in Western languages, surely the Lord will be satisfied
with such a sincere seeker of spiritual truth.
TEXT 32
™aInaAr"d" ovaAca
WvaM tae inaimanaA pa{í"A
vas$aude"va mah"ÔamaA:
‘aitapaUjyaA“auvana, ‘aItyaA
s$as$ad"syaitvaRjaM na{pama,
çré-närada uväca
evaà te niminä påñöä
vasudeva mahattamäù
pratipüjyäbruvan prétyä
sa-sadasyartvijaà nåpam
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù uväca—Çré Närada said; evam—thus; te—they; niminä—by King
Nimi; påñöäù—questioned; vasudeva—O Vasudeva; mahat-tamäù—those best
of saints; pratipüjya—offering him words of respect in return; abruvan—they
spoke; prétyä—affectionately; sa-sadasya—who was accompanied by the
members of the sacrificial assembly; åtvijam—and by the priests; nåpam—to
the King.
TRANSLATION
Çré Närada said: O Vasudeva, when Mahäräja Nimi had thus inquired from
the nine Yogendras about devotional service to the Lord, those best of saintly
persons sincerely thanked the King for his questions and spoke to him with
affection in the presence of the members of the sacrificial assembly and the
brähmaëa priests.
PURPORT
According to Çrédhara Svämé, not only the King but also the members of
the assembly and the priests conducting the sacrifice were all devoted to
hearing and chanting the glories of devotional service to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The sages, beginning with Kavi, will now each speak
in turn, answering the questions of the King.
TEXT 33
™aIk(ivaç&vaAca
manyae'ku(taiêà"yamacyautasya
paAd"AmbaujaAepaAs$anama‡a inatyama,
oiã"¢abauÜe"r"s$ad"AtmaBaAvaAä,"
ivaìAtmanaA ya‡a inavataRtae BaI:
çré-kavir uväca
manye 'kutaçcid-bhayam acyutasya
pädämbujopäsanam atra nityam
udvigna-buddher asad-ätma-bhäväd
viçvätmanä yatra nivartate bhéù
SYNONYMS
çré-kaviù uväca—Çré Kavi said; manye—I consider;
akutaçcit-bhayam—fearlessness; acyutasya—of the infallible Lord;
päda-ambuja—of the lotus feet; upäsanam—the worship; atra—in this world;
nityam—constantly; udvigna-buddheù—of one whose intelligence is disturbed;
asat—that which is only temporary; ätma-bhävät—by thinking to be the self;
viçva-ätmanä—thoroughly; yatra—in which (service to the Lord);
nivartate—ceases; bhéù—fear.
TRANSLATION
Çré Kavi said: I consider that one whose intelligence is constantly disturbed
by his falsely identifying himself with the temporary material world can achieve
real freedom from fear only by worshiping the lotus feet of the infallible
Supreme Lord. In such devotional service, all fear ceases entirely.
PURPORT
In the opinion of Çréla Çrédhara Svämé the word asad-ätma-bhävät in this
verse indicates that the living entity is constantly disturbed by fear because he
identifies his eternal self with the temporary material body and its
paraphernalia. Similarly, Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has stated,
bhakti-pratiküla-deha-gehädiñv äsaktim. Because of one's attachment to one's
temporary body and so-called home, family, friends and so on, one's
intelligence is always disturbed by fear, and one is unable to appreciate or
practice pure devotional service to the Supreme Lord. So-called religious
activities executed in the bodily conception of life are always accompanied by
fear and anxiety about the ultimate result. But pure devotional service to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead frees one from fear and anxiety because it is
executed on the platform of Vaikuëöha, or the spiritual plane, where there is
no fear or anxiety. According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, the process of bhakti-yoga
is so powerful that even in the stage of sädhana-bhakti, in which one is
practicing devotional service through rules and regulations, the neophyte can
have a direct experience of fearlessness by the mercy of the Lord. As one's
devotional service becomes mature, the Lord reveals Himself to the devotee,
and all fear is totally vanquished forever.
Every living entity has a natural propensity to serve God, but because of
false identification with the temporary body one loses touch with this pure,
constitutional propensity and instead inauspiciously becomes attached to
temporary sense gratification in the form of body, home, family and so on. The
result of such false attachment is continuing distress, which can be eradicated
only by devotional service to the Supreme Lord.
In this connection, Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté has quoted the
following verse:
tävad bhayaà draviëa-deha-suhån-nimittaà
çokaù spåhä paribhavo vipulaç ca lobhaù
tävan mamety asad-avagraha ärti-mülaà
yävan na te 'ìghrim abhayaà pravåëéta lokaù
"O my Lord, the people of the world are embarrassed by all material
anxieties—they are always afraid. They always try to protect wealth, body and
friends, they are filled with lamentation and unlawful desires and
paraphernalia, and they avariciously base their undertakings on the perishable
conceptions of 'I' and 'mine.' As long as they do not take shelter of Your safe
lotus feet, they are full of such anxieties." (SB 3.9.6)
TEXT 34
yae vaE BagAvataA ‘aAel(A
opaAyaA ÷AtmalabDayae
@Ãa: pauMs$aAmaivaäu"SaAM
ivaiÜ" BaAgAvataAna, ih" taAna,
ye vai bhagavatä proktä
upäyä hy ätma-labdhaye
aïjaù puàsäm aviduñäà
viddhi bhägavatän hi tän
SYNONYMS
ye—which; vai—indeed; bhagavatä—by the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
proktaù—spoken; upäyäù—means; hi—indeed; ätma-labdhaye—for realizing
the Supreme Soul; aïjaù—easily; puàsäm—by persons; aviduñäm—less
intelligent; viddhi—know; bhägavatän—to be bhägavata-dharma; hi-certainly;
tän—these.
TRANSLATION
Even ignorant living entities can very easily come to know the Supreme Lord
if they adopt those means prescribed by the Supreme Lord Himself. The process
recommended by the Lord is to be known as bhägavata-dharma, or devotional
service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
There are many Vedic scriptures, such as Manu-saàhitä, that present
standard injunctions for the peaceful management of human society. Such
Vedic knowledge is based on the varëäçrama system, which scientifically
divides human society into four occupational divisions as well as four spiritual
divisions. According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, however, knowledge that can
bring one directly in contact with the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
called ati-rahasyam, or the most confidential knowledge (ati-rahasyatvät
sva-mukhenaiva bhagavatäviduñäm api puàsäm aïjaù sukhenaivätma-labdhaye).
Bhägavata-dharma is so confidential that it is spoken by the Lord Himself.
The essence of bhägavata-dharma is given in Bhagavad-gétä, wherein Kåñëa
personally instructs Arjuna. Yet in the Eleventh Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam
the Lord will give instructions to Uddhava that surpass even the teachings
given to Arjuna in Bhagavad-gétä. As Çréla Prabhupäda has stated,
"Undoubtedly Bhagavad-gétä was spoken by the Lord on the Battlefield of
Kurukñetra just to encourage Arjuna to fight, and yet to complete the
transcendental knowledge of Bhagavad-gétä the Lord instructed Uddhava. The
Lord wanted Uddhava to fulfill His mission and disseminate knowledge which
He had not spoken even in Bhagavad-gétä." (SB 3.4.32 purport) Similarly, it is
understood that the knowledge that will be presented here by the nine
Yogendras is not their personal concoction but is authorized knowledge
originally spoken by the Lord Himself.
According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté, the living entities, in the
course of their wanderings throughout the cycle of birth and death, lose all
trace of the Personality of Godhead. But when they hear the eternally
auspicious topics spoken by the Supreme Lord for their benefit and understand
their eternal identities as spirit souls, the realized experience of being an
eternal servant of Kåñëa becomes the basis of bhägavata-dharma. In the soul's
experience as a pure Vaiñëava, or servant of God, there is no consideration of
being different from God or the same as God, nor is one interested in the
kingdom of material sense gratification. The pure devotee simply perceives his
particular devotional service to the Supreme Lord and sees himself as an
individual part and parcel of the ultimate shelter. A pure devotee experiences
that his very being is tied, by ropes of loving devotion, to the ultimate shelter
Himself in one of His direct personal expansions. And in such a perfect state
of consciousness, the devotee can perceive the all-pervading variegated forms
of the Absolute Truth.
TEXT 35
yaAnaAsTaAya nar"Ae r"Ajana,
na ‘amaAâeta k(ihR"icata,
DaAvaiªamaIlya vaA nae‡ae
na sKalaeªa pataeid"h"
yän ästhäya naro räjan
na pramädyeta karhicit
dhävan nimélya vä netre
na skhalen na pated iha
SYNONYMS
yän—which (means); ästhäya—accepting; naraù—a man; räjan—O King; na
pramädyeta—is not bewildered; karhicit—ever; dhävan—running;
nimélya—closing; vä—or; netre—his eyes; na skhalet—will not trip; na
patet—will not fall; iha—on this path.
TRANSLATION
O King, one who accepts this process of devotional service to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead will never blunder on his path in this world. Even while
running with eyes closed, he will never trip or fall.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, the word aïjaù ("easily"), which is used
in the previous verse, is explained in this verse. He states, aïjaù-padenoktaà
su-karatvaà vivåëoti: "By the word aïjaù the ease of performing bhakti-yoga is
established, and this will be elaborated in the present verse." In Bhagavad-gétä
(9.2) the Lord Himself states, pratyakñävagamaà dharmyaà susukhaà kartum
avyayam: "The process of devotional service to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is eternal, and it is very joyfully and naturally performed." Çréla
Prabhupäda comments, "The process of devotional service is a very happy one.
Why? Devotional service consists of çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù [SB 7.5.23], so
one can simply hear the chanting of the glories of the Lord or can attend
philosophical lectures on transcendental knowledge given by authorized
äcäryas. Simply by sitting, one can learn; then one can eat the remnants of the
food offered to God, nice palatable dishes. In every state devotional service is
joyful. One can execute devotional service even in the most poverty-stricken
condition. The Lord says, patraà puñpaà phalam: He is ready to accept from
the devotee any kind of offering, never mind what. Even a leaf, a flower, a bit
of fruit or a little water, which are all available in every part of the world, can
be offered by any person, regardless of social position, and will be accepted if
offered with love. There are many instances of this in history. Simply by
tasting the tulasé leaves offered to the lotus feet of the Lord, great sages like
Sanat-kumära became great devotees. Therefore the devotional process is very
nice, and it can be executed in a happy mood. God accepts only the love with
which things are offered to Him."
The essential point to be understood here is that when a living entity
surrenders to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he tells the Lord, "My dear
Lord, although I am most sinful and unqualified and for so long have been
trying to forget You, now I am taking shelter at Your lotus feet. From this day
on I am Yours. Whatever I possess—my body, mind, words, family, riches—I
am now offering at Your lotus feet. Please do with me as You like." The
Supreme Lord, Kåñëa, has repeatedly given assurance in Bhagavad-gétä that He
will protect and redeem such a surrendered living entity, bringing him back
home, back to Godhead, for an eternal life in the Lord's own kingdom. Thus
the qualification of surrendering to the Lord is so great and spiritually potent
that even if a surrendered soul is deficient in other aspects of pious life, his
elevated status is protected by the Lord Himself. In other processes, however,
such as yoga, because one depends upon his own determination and
intelligence and does not actually seek shelter of the Lord, one is subject to fall
at any moment, being protected only by one's own flimsy, limited potency.
Therefore, as stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.2.32), äruhya kåcchreëa paraà
padaà tataù/ patanty adho 'nädåta-yuñmad-aìghrayaù: if one gives up the
shelter of the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord and instead tries to advance in
the yoga process by one's own determination, or if one tries to make progress in
knowledge by one's own speculative power, surely one will eventually fall again
to a mediocre material platform, having no protection other than one's own
fallible strength. Therefore the Vaiñëava äcäryas, in their commentaries on
this verse, have illustrated in various ways the vast superiority of bhakti-yoga,
or pure devotional service. In this connection, Çrédhara Svämé states, nimélya
netre dhävann api iha eñu bhägavata-dharmeñu na skhalet. nimélanaà
nämäjïänaà, yathähuù-'çruti-småté ubhe netre vipräëäà parikértite/ ekena
vikalaù käëo dväbhyäm andhaù prakértitaù' iti. "Even if running with both eyes
closed, a devotee on this path of bhägavata-dharma will not stumble. 'Closing
one's eyes' refers to being in ignorance [of standard Vedic literatures]. As it is
said, 'The çruti and småti scriptures are the two eyes of the brähmaëas. Lacking
one of them, a brähmaëa is half blind, and deprived of both he is considered
completely blind.' "
In Bhagavad-gétä (10.10-11) the Lord has clearly stated that even if a devotee
is lacking in Vedic knowledge or ignorant of Vaiñëava literature, the Lord
personally enlightens him from within his heart if the devotee is actually
engaged in loving service to the Lord. In this connection, Çréla Prabhupäda
states, "When Lord Caitanya was in Benares promulgating the chanting of
Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma,
Räma Räma, Hare Hare, thousands of people were following Him.
Prakäçänanda, a very influential and learned scholar in Benares at that time,
derided Lord Caitanya for being a sentimentalist. Sometimes philosophers
criticize the devotees because they think that most of the devotees are in the
darkness of ignorance and are philosophically naive sentimentalists. Actually
that is not the fact. There are very, very learned scholars who have put
forward the philosophy of devotion, but even if a devotee does not take
advantage of their literatures or of his spiritual master, if he is sincere in his
devotional service he is helped by Kåñëa Himself within his heart. So the
sincere devotee engaged in Kåñëa consciousness cannot be without knowledge.
The only qualification is that one carry out devotional service in full Kåñëa
consciousness."
Yet this facility given by the Lord cannot justify unauthorized concoctions
put forward about the process of devotional service in the name of
spontaneous devotion. In this connection Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté
Öhäkura has stated, bhagavat-präpty-arthaà påthäì-märga-karaëaà tv
ati-düñaëävaham eva: "If one manufactures his own process of devotional
service for the sake of attaining the Supreme Lord, such a concoction will
cause total ruination." Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura goes on to quote:
çruti-småti-puräëädipaïcarätra-
vidhià vinä
aikäntiké harer bhaktir
utpätäyaiva kalpate
[Brs. 1.2.101(90)]
"If one's so-called unalloyed devotion to Lord Hari does not take into account
the regulations of the çruti, småti, Puräëas and Païcarätra, it is nothing more
than a disturbance to society." In other words, even if one is not learned in the
Vedic literatures, if he is engaged in the loving service of the Lord he is to be
accepted as a pure devotee; nonetheless, such loving devotion cannot in any
way contradict the injunctions of revealed scriptures.
Such groups as the präkåta-sahajiyäs ignore the standard regulations of
Vaiñëava dharma and engage in illicit, degraded activities, dressing as Rädhä
and Kåñëa in the name of spontaneous devotion. They claim that because such
spontaneous devotion is revealed by the Lord Himself, they need not refer to
standard scriptures. Similarly, all over the world there are pseudoreligionists
who manufacture their own processes and claim they are receiving knowledge
from the Lord Himself within their hearts. Therefore it is very important to
understand, as stated here, that spontaneous revelation by the Lord within the
heart is meant not to alter the eternal process of devotional service to the
Lord, but to give a supplementary facility to a sincere devotee who is ignorant
of revealed scriptures. In other words, the revealed scriptures describe the
eternal process of service to the Lord. Since the Lord is eternal and the living
entity is eternal, the process of their loving relationship is also eternal. The
Lord never changes His essential nature, nor does the living entity. Therefore
there is no need to change the essential process of loving service to the Lord.
Special revelation by the Lord is meant to give scriptural knowledge by
another means, and not to contradict scriptural knowledge.
On the other hand, Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has stated that if
a devotee is executing all the basic principles of bhakti-yoga and advancing in
devotional service, such a Vaiñëava should not be criticized for neglecting the
secondary procedures. For example, His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta
Swami Prabhupäda established hundreds of spiritual communities in the
Western countries for practicing Kåñëa consciousness. The devotees in these
communities give up all illicit sex, gambling, intoxication and meat-eating and
constantly engage in service to Kåñëa. Such followers of Çréla Prabhupäda are
able to make wonderful spiritual advancement and convert many thousands of
people to the process of devotional service. In fact, all the faithful members of
ISKCON who follow the standard regulations remain free from material
contamination and make visible progress in going back home, back to
Godhead. Such members of ISKCON cannot possibly execute all the details of
the varëäçrama-dharma system. In fact, many Western devotees can barely
pronounce Sanskrit words and are not very expert in performing elaborate
sacrifices based on chanting of mantras and offering of oblations. But because
they are executing all the essential principles of bhakti-yoga by giving up
material sense gratification and constantly engaging in loving service to Kåñëa,
their position is guaranteed both in this life and in the next.
We have seen many sophisticated Sanskrit scholars and learned experts in
the details of Vedic sacrifice who can hardly even follow the basic principles of
human life, namely no illicit sex, no meat-eating, no gambling and no
intoxication. Such brilliant scholars and ritualistic performers are generally
seen to be attached to a materialistic conception of life and are fond of mental
speculation. Although in Bhagavad-gétä the Lord Himself has given perfect
knowledge for all time, such so-called scholars consider themselves more
intelligent than the Lord and thus speculate on the meaning of Vedic
literature. Such speculation certainly constitutes a fall from perfect spiritual
life, and what then is to be said of materialistic fruitive activities, which are
illusory in every sense of the term. The transcendental devotees are able to
remain aloof from the pollution of fruitive activity and mental speculation,
and that is the essential purport of this verse.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has warned that the words yän
ästhäya indicate that the exalted status of a Vaiñëava can never be accorded to
one who is not following the basic regulations of bhakti-yoga. Nor can it apply
to one who is sometimes serving Kåñëa and sometimes serving the illusory
energy, mäyä, by mental speculation or fruitive activities. Çréla
Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has concluded, "In all dharmas other than
bhägavata-dharma one must consider the conditioned soul's qualification. But a
soul surrendered to the Lord is never confounded by error, even if unqualified
in all other respects. His feet never stumble, and he never falls. Even though
wandering in the world at whim, he always resides in an auspicious place by
the influence of his unswerving worship. The unique potency of
bhagavata-dharma does not appear in any of the other dharmas of the world.
There is no comparison between a surrendered individual who has taken
shelter of bhägavata-dharma and the practitioner of any other dharma."
TEXT 36
k(Ayaena vaAcaA manas$aein‰"yaEvaAR
bauÜ"YaAtmanaA vaAnaus$a{tasvaBaAvaAta,
k(r"Aeita yaâts$ak(laM par"smaE
naAr"AyaNAAyaeita s$amapaRyaeÔata,
käyena väcä manasendriyair vä
buddhyätmanä vänusåta-svabhävät
karoti yad yat sakalaà parasmai
näräyaëäyeti samarpayet tat
SYNONYMS
käyena—with the body; väcä—speech; manasä—mind; indriyaiù—senses;
vä—or; buddhyä—with the intelligence; ätmanä—the purified consciousness;
vä—or; anusåta—followed; svabhävät—according to one's conditioned nature;
karoti—one does; yat yat—whatever; sakalam—all; parasmai—to the
Supreme; näräyaëäya iti—thinking, "This is for Näräyaëa"; samarpayet—he
should offer; tat—that.
TRANSLATION
In accordance with the particular nature one has acquired in conditioned
life, whatever one does with body, words, mind, senses, intelligence or purified
consciousness one should offer to the Supreme, thinking, "This is for the
pleasure of Lord Näräyaëa."
PURPORT
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has commented in this regard that
a person who engages all the sensory activities of his body, mind, words,
intelligence, ego and consciousness in the service of the Supreme Lord cannot
be considered to be on the same level as a karmé working for his personal sense
gratification. Although apparently still a conditioned soul, one who offers the
fruits of all his activities to the Lord can no longer be touched by the countless
miseries that arise from the reactions to materialistic activities.
Because of enmity against the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His
omnipotent authority, the conditioned living entity performs activities against
the order of the Lord. Yet self-realized souls continue to perform all types of
work within this world to carry out the mission of the Supreme Lord.
According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, those karmés who are
sufficiently pious follow the example of the self-realized souls by trying to offer
the fruits of their own duties at the lotus feet of the Lord. Although this is
counted as karma-miçrä bhakti, or devotional service mixed with the desire to
execute fruitive activities, such mixed devotional service is gradually
transformed into pure devotional service. As the pious fruitive workers
disengage themselves, step by step, from the bogus philosophy of "enjoyment of
one's hard-earned rewards," pure devotional service rewards them with
complete good fortune.
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé has commented, ätmanä cittenähaìkäreëa vä anusåto
yaù svabhävas tasmät: although one may still be in the bodily concept of life,
he should offer the fruit of his work to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Those with a primitive, materialistic concept of the Supreme Lord consider
the Lord present only in a temple or church. They make some offering to the
Lord in the place of worship, but in their normal activities they claim
proprietorship, not thinking that God is present everywhere and within
everyone. We have practical experience of many so-called religious men who
become very offended if their children try to become servants of the Supreme
Lord. They feel, "God should be pleased with whatever humble offering I give
Him, but my family and ordinary business affairs belong to me and are under
my control." The perception of anything as separate from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead or His proprietorship is called mäyä, or illusion. Çréla
Çrédhara Svämé has quoted, na kevalaà vidhitaù kåtam eveti niyamaù;
svabhävänusäri laukikam api: "The regulation that one should serve the
Supreme Lord does not refer only to prescribed religious paths, ceremonies and
regulations; rather, all the activities one performs in this world according to
one's personal nature should be dedicated to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead."
The words karoti yad yat sakalaà parasmai näräyaëäyeti samarpayet tat in
this verse are very significant. A similar verse is found in Bhagavad-gétä (9.27):
yat karoñi yad açnäsi
yaj juhoñi dadäsi yat
yat tapasyasi kaunteya
tat kuruñva mad-arpaëam
"O son of Kunté, all that you do, all that you eat, all that you offer and give
away, and all the austerities that you perform should be done as an offering
unto Me." The objection may be raised, Since our ordinary activities are
performed with a material body and material mind, not by the spirit soul, how
can such activities be offered to the Supreme Lord, who is completely
transcendental to the material world? How can such activities be considered
spiritual? In answer to this it is stated in the Viñëu Puräëa (3.8.8):
varëäçramäcära-vatä
puruñeëa paraù pumän
viñëur ärädhyate panthä
nänyat tat-toña-käraëam
[Cc. Madhya 8.58]
One who wants to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, must
accept the system of varëäçrama-dharma and worship the Lord through the
execution of his prescribed duties. In Bhagavad-gétä (4.13) the Supreme Lord
has personally taken credit for establishing the system of varëäçrama-dharma:
cätur-varëyaà mayä såñöaà guëa-karma-vibhägaçaù. Therefore if one offers his
work within the varëäçrama-dharma system to the Supreme Lord, such work is
counted as devotional service. According to one's svabhäva, or nature, one may
work as an intellectual or priest, as an administrator or military man, as an
agriculturist or mercantile man, or as a laborer or craftsman. And while
working, everyone should meditate on the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
thinking, yat sakalaà parasmai näräyaëäya: "I am working for the Supreme
Lord. Whatever result comes from my work, I shall accept the bare minimum
for my personal maintenance, and the rest I shall offer for the glorification of
Lord Näräyaëa."
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has pointed out, käminäà tu sarvathaiva na
duñkarmärpaëam: one cannot offer duñkarma, or sinful, wicked activities, to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The four pillars of sinful life are illicit
sex, meat-eating, gambling and intoxication. Such activities are never
acceptable as offerings to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The example
may be given that although in a free society each person is allowed to choose
his own occupation, even a democratic government will not allow a citizen to
choose the occupation of thief or murderer. In the same way, according to the
laws of God one is invited to work according to his own nature in the
varëäçrama system, but one is forbidden to adopt a criminal life of sinful
activities violating the laws of God.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has given a nice description of how
one should offer one's ordinary activities to the Supreme Lord. He says that an
ordinary sense gratifier begins his activities in the morning by passing stool
and urine, cleaning his mouth, brushing his teeth, bathing, meeting his friends
and family members and discussing with them the day's business. In this way
one has so many activities during the day, and a sense gratifier executes all
these activities for his personal material enjoyment. A karmé, on the other
hand, working under the jurisdiction of the karma-käëòa section of the Vedas,
will perform the same activities for the pleasure of the demigods and his
forefathers. Thus, according to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, a
devotee of the Supreme Lord, Näräyaëa, should similarly perform all of his
daily activities for the pleasure of the Supreme Lord. In this way everything we
do throughout the day will become bhakty-aìga, or a supplementary aspect of
our devotional service to Kåñëa.
It should be understood that as long as one identifies oneself in terms of the
varëäçrama-dharma system rather than as part and parcel of Kåñëa one is still
on the platform of ahaìkära, or false ego, because the varëäçrama system is
designed according to the modes of nature acquired by the living entity
through his material body. But the äcäryas have emphasized in their
commentaries on this verse that such a false ego, by which one identifies
oneself as a brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya, çüdra, sannyäsé, gåhastha and so on,
should also be offered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, when one becomes very much attracted to
hearing and chanting about the Supreme Lord and not merely offering Him
the fruits of one's work, one has attained the stage called svarüpa-siddhä bhakti,
or the stage in which actual devotion becomes visible. The example may be
given that although any good citizen will pay his taxes to the government, he
may not necessarily love the government or its leaders. Similarly a pious living
entity can understand that he is working under the laws of God, and therefore
in accordance with Vedic injunctions or the injunctions of other scriptures he
offers a portion of his assets to the Supreme Lord in religious ceremonies. But
when such a pious person actually becomes attached to chanting and hearing
about the personal qualities of the Lord and when love thus becomes visible,
he is considered to be reaching the mature stage of life. In this regard, Çréla
Jéva Gosvämé has quoted several verses that very nicely show the development
of love for Godhead. Anena durväsanä-duùkha-darçanena sa karuëä-mayaù
karuëäà karotu: "May the merciful Lord show mercy on me by demonstrating
the misery created by sinful desires." Yä prétir avivekänäà visayeñv anapäyiné/
tväm anusmarataù sä me hådayän näpasarpatu: "Unintelligent persons have
unflinching affection for the objects of sense gratification. Similarly, may I
always remember You, so that that same attachment, applied to You, never
leaves my heart." (Viñëu Puräëa 1.20.19) Yuvaténäà yathä yüni yünäà ca
yuvatau yathä/ mano 'bhiramate tadvan mano me ramatäà tvayi: "As the minds
of young girls take pleasure in thinking of a young boy and those of young boys
take pleasure in thinking of a young girl, may my mind take pleasure in You."
Mama sukarmaëi duñkarmaëi ca yad räga-sämänyam, tad sarvato-bhävena
bhagavad-viñayam eva bhavatu: "Whatever attraction I have for pious or sinful
activities, let that attraction be wholeheartedly invested in You."
TEXT 37
BayaM iã"taIyaAiBainavaezAta: syaAä,"
wRzAAd"paetasya ivapayaRyaAe'sma{ita:
tanmaAyayaAtaAe bauDa @ABajaeÔaM
BaftyaEk(yaezAM gAuç&de"vataAtmaA
bhayaà dvitéyäbhiniveçataù syäd
éçäd apetasya viparyayo 'småtiù
tan-mäyayäto budha äbhajet taà
bhaktyaikayeçaà guru-devatätmä
SYNONYMS
bhayam—fear; dvitéya—in something seeming to be other than the Lord;
abhiniveçataù—because of absorption; syät—it will arise; éçät—from the
Supreme Lord; apetasya—for one who has turned away;
viparyayaù—misidentification; asmåtiù—forgetfulness; tat—of the Lord;
mäyayä—by the illusory energy; ataù—therefore; budhaù—an intelligent
person; äbhajet—should worship fully; tam—Him; bhaktyä—with devotion;
ekayä—unalloyed; éçam—the Lord; guru-devatä-ätmä—one who sees his own
spiritual master as his lord and very soul.
TRANSLATION
Fear arises when a living entity misidentifies himself as the material body
because of absorption in the external, illusory energy of the Lord. When the
living entity thus turns away from the Supreme Lord, he also forgets his own
constitutional position as a servant of the Lord. This bewildering, fearful
condition is effected by the potency for illusion, called mäyä. Therefore, an
intelligent person should engage unflinchingly in the unalloyed devotional
service of the Lord, under the guidance of a bona fide spiritual master, whom he
should accept as his worshipable deity and as his very life and soul.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé the objection may be raised that since
fear is caused by ignorance, it can be dispelled by knowledge and there is no
need to worship the Supreme Lord. The living entity falsely identifies with his
material body, family, society and so on, and he simply has to give up this false
identification. Then what will mäyä be able to do?
In reply to this argument, Çréla Çrédhara Svämé has quoted the following
verse from Bhagavad-gétä (7.14):
daivé hy eñä guëa-mayé
mama mäyä duratyayä
mäm eva ye prapadyante
mäyäm etäà taranti te
"This divine energy of Mine consisting of the three modes of material nature is
difficult to overcome. But those who have surrendered unto Me can easily
cross beyond it." The living entity, called jéva-tattva, is one of the potencies of
the Supreme Lord, but the constitutional position of the living entity is
taöa-stha, or marginal. Being minute, every living entity is eternally dependent
upon the supreme living entity, Kåñëa. This is confirmed in the Vedic
literature as follows: nityo nityänäà cetanaç cetanänäà/ eko bahünäà yo
vidadhäti kämän. "Among all the eternally conscious beings there is one
supreme eternal living being who is supplying the needs of all the innumerable
others." (Kaöha Upaniñad 2.1.12) Kåñëadäsa Kaviräja has stated, ekale éçvara
kåñëa, ära saba bhåtya: "Kåñëa is the only independent controller; all other
living entities depend upon Him." (Cc. Ädi 5.142) Just as the finger is part and
parcel of the body and therefore must always be engaged in bodily service, we
as parts and parcels of Kåñëa (mamaiväàço jéva-loke jéva-bhütaù sanätanaù [Bg.
15.7]) have the eternal duty (sanätana-dharma) of engaging in the unalloyed
service of the Lord.
The potency of the Lord that enlightens us in the Lord's service is called
cit-çakti. Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura comments that when the
living entity develops a spirit of independence he is forced to come to the
material world, where he enters into various types of petty and undesirable
behavior that create a fearful situation for him. The bahiraìgä-çakti, the
illusory potency of the Supreme Lord, covers all trace of the cit-çakti and
imposes one material body after another upon the living entity for his gross
sinful enjoyment. As further punishment, the living entity who has given up
his loving relationship with Kåñëa loses all power to perceive the eternal,
blissful form of the Supreme Lord, who is his actual shelter. Instead the living
entity becomes attached to many temporary, phantasmagorical forms, such as
his personal body, the bodies of his family members and friends, his nation, his
city, with its buildings and cars, and innumerable types of ephemeral material
scenery. In such a state of gross ignorance the idea of returning to one's
original identity no longer even crosses the mind.
By the laws of God the three modes of material nature are constantly in
conflict, as stated in the Bhagavad-gétä. This conflict is described in many
places in the Bhägavatam as guëa-vyatikaram. When the living entity is
bewildered by the interactions of the modes of material nature, he comes to
the conclusion of relativity and assumes that God and worship of God are
simply by-products of the relative, contradictory interactions of nature's
modes. In the name of anthropological, sociological or psychological
perspective, the living entity falls deeper and deeper into the darkness of
materialistic ignorance, dedicating himself to mundane piety, economic
development, sense gratification, or speculation in which he regards the
Absolute as lacking variety and personality, which he assumes to be products
of the interactions of nature's modes.
The illusory potency of the Supreme Lord is duratyayä; it is impossible to
escape without the direct mercy of Kåñëa (mäm eva ye prapadyante mäyäm
etäà taranti te [Bg. 7.14]). The example may be given that when the sun is
covered by clouds, no man-made apparatus can remove them from the sky, but
the sun itself, which created the clouds, can immediately burn away the cloudy
covering and reveal itself. Similarly, when we become covered by the illusory
potency of the Lord we identify with our temporary material body, and thus we
are always in fear and anxiety. But when we surrender to the Lord Himself, He
can immediately free us from this illusion. The material world is padaà padaà
yad vipadäm; [SB 10.14.58] it is dangerous at every step. When a living entity
understands that he is not the material body but an eternal servant of God, his
fear is vanquished. As stated by Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, atra
bhaktaiù saàsära-bandhän na bhetavyaà sa hi bhaktau pravartamänasya svata
eväpayäti: "In this bhägavata-dharma devotees have no need to fear the
bondage of material existence. That fear goes away of its own accord for one
who engages in devotional service."
It is important to make clear that bhayam, or fear, cannot ultimately be
vanquished simply by impersonal self-realization as expressed by the words
ahaà brahmäsmi(91), "I am spirit soul." In Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.5.12) Närada
Muni says to Vyäsadeva, naiñkarmyam apy acyuta-bhäva-varjitaà na çobhate:
mere naiñkarmyam, or cessation of material activities and repudiation of the
bodily concept of life, cannot ultimately save one. The living entity must find
a superior shelter on the spiritual platform; otherwise he will come back to the
fearful situation of material existence. That is stated in çästra: äruhya
kåcchreëa paraà padaà tataù patanty adho 'nädåta-yuñmad-aìghrayaù (SB
10.2.32). Although one may with great labor and effort struggle up to the
Brahman platform (kleço 'dhikataras teñäm avyaktäsakta-cetasäm [Bg. 12.5]), if
he does not find a suitable shelter he will come back to the material platform.
His so-called liberation is vimukta-mäna, liberation by imagination.
The living entity is by nature pleasure-seeking, änanda-maya. Now we are
suffering because we are falsely seeking pleasure on the material platform and
as a result we are becoming entangled in the painful complexities of material
existence. But if we try to give up the pleasure-seeking propensity altogether,
we shall eventually become frustrated and return to the platform of material
pleasure-seeking. Although there is eternal existence on the Brahman
platform of impersonal realization, there is no änanda. Variety is the mother of
enjoyment. In the Vaikuëöha planets there is actual, spiritual änanda. Kåñëa is
there in His ecstatic, spiritual form, surrounded by His blissful associates, all of
them eternally full of bliss and knowledge. They have nothing to do with
material existence. In the spiritual planets even the scenery and birds and
animals are fully conscious of Kåñëa and are absorbed in transcendental bliss.
Yad gatvä na nivartante tad dhäma paramaà mama (Bg. 15.6). One who goes to
the blissful, spiritual planet of Kåñëa will be fully satisfied and never come
back to the material platform. Therefore Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has
said, kià cätra bhaktaiù saàsära-bandhän na bhetavyam. Only the bhakta
actually becomes free from fear.
In this connection Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has emphasized
the necessity of accepting a bona fide spiritual master who is
vrajendranandana-preñöha, the dearmost servitor of the son of Nanda
Mahäräja, Kåñëa. The bona fide spiritual master is completely free from envy
of other living entities, and therefore he freely distributes knowledge of
devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When the living
entities who are inimical to the service of the Lord somehow hear this
knowledge submissively, they become free from the illusory potency of the
Lord, which has covered them and thrown them into various miserable species
of life. According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, by the mercy of
the spiritual master the faithful disciple gradually realizes the transcendental
position of Lord Näräyaëa, who is served with great awe and reverence by
hundreds and thousands of goddesses of fortune. As the disciple's
transcendental knowledge gradually increases, even the paramaiçvarya, or
supreme opulence, of the Lord of Vaikuëöha becomes pale in the light of the
beauty of Govinda, Kåñëa. Govinda has inconceivable potency to enchant and
give pleasure, and by the mercy of the spiritual master the disciple gradually
develops his own blissful relationship (rasa) with Govinda. Having understood
the blissful pastimes of Lakñmé-Näräyaëa, Çré Sétä-Räma,
Rukmiëé-Dvärakädhéça and finally Lord Kåñëa Himself, the purified living
entity is given the unique privilege of participating directly in the devotional
service of Kåñëa, who becomes his only object and shelter.
TEXT 38
@ivaâmaAnaAe'pyavaBaAita ih" ã"yaAe
DyaAtauiDaRyaA sva«amanaAer"TaAE yaTaA
tatk(maRs$aÆÿlpaivak(lpakM( manaAe
bauDaAe inaç&nDyaAd"BayaM tata: syaAta,
avidyamäno 'py avabhäti hi dvayo
dhyätur dhiyä svapna-manorathau yathä
tat karma-saìkalpa-vikalpakaà mano
budho nirundhyäd abhayaà tataù syät
SYNONYMS
avidyamänaù—not present in reality; api—although; avabhäti—is manifest;
hi—indeed; dvayaù—duality; dhyätuù-of the person experiencing; dhiyä—by
the intelligence; svapna—a dream; manaù-rathau—or the conceiving of a
desire; yathä—as; tat—therefore; karma—of material activities;
saìkalpa-vikalpakam—having the functions of forming positive and negative
desires; manaù—the mind; budhaù—an intelligent person; nirundhyät—should
bring under control; abhayam—fearlessness; tataù—in this way; syät—there
may be.
TRANSLATION
Although the duality of the material world does not ultimately exist, the
conditioned soul experiences it as real under the influence of his own
conditioned intelligence. This imaginary experience of a world separate from
Kåñëa can be compared to the acts of dreaming and desiring. When the
conditioned soul dreams at night of something desirable or horrible, or when he
daydreams of what he would like to have or avoid, he creates a reality that has
no existence beyond his own imagination. The tendency of the mind is to accept
and reject various activities based on sense gratification. Therefore an
intelligent person should control the mind, restricting it from the illusion of
seeing things separate from Kåñëa, and when the mind is thus controlled he will
experience actual fearlessness.
PURPORT
Although the conditioned mind is bewildered by the objects of sense
gratification offered by mäyä, illusion, if one takes to the unalloyed devotional
service of the Lord such material sense gratification gradually dissipates, for it
is merely a mental concoction of the conditioned soul. Çréla Çrédhara Svämé
has emphasized by the words avyabhicäriëé bhakti that one cannot dissipate the
illusion of material sense gratification unless one takes to the unalloyed
devotional service of the Lord. As Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé has stated:
anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà
jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam
änukülyena kåñëänuçélanaà
bhaktir uttamä
[Cc. Madhya 19.167]
[Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.1.11(92)]
Unalloyed devotional service cannot be mixed with material sense
gratification or mental speculation. The servant must act only for the
satisfaction of the master. Similarly, Lord Kåñëa states in Bhagavad-gétä, mäm
ekaà çaraëaà vraja. One must see only Kåñëa everywhere and must act
exclusively for the satisfaction of Lord Kåñëa, the eternal master of every
living entity.
Çréla Madhväcärya has quoted several verses from the Hari-vaàça
illustrating that the living entity bewildered by identifying with his material
body, home, family, friends and so on and thus entangled in the cycle of birth
and death accepts phantasmagoria as reality. According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé,
çravaëa-kértanädi-lakñaëa-mätratvaà yato na vyähanyeta: if one seriously
desires to vanquish the duality of material illusion, one must adopt the process
of chanting and hearing the glories of the Supreme Lord. Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu also cited the following Vedic reference:
harer näma harer näma
harer nämaiva kevalam
kalau nästy eva nästy eva
nästy eva gatir anyathä
[Cc. Ädi 17.21]
(Båhan-näradéya Puräëa)
According to Vedic literatures the living entities of this Kali-yuga are very
feeble in their power to understand spiritual knowledge (mandäù
sumanda-matayo manda-bhägyä hy upadrutäù [SB 1.1.10]). Their minds are
always disturbed. and they are lazy and misguided by so many bogus leaders.
They are further described in the Bhägavatam as niùsattvän (impatient and
impious). durmedhän (possessed of weak intelligence) and hrasitäyuñaù (very
short lived). Therefore one who seriously wants to overcome the ignorance of
material life must surrender to the process of chanting and hearing the holy
name of the Lord—Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare
Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare—as well as reciting and rendering
submissive aural reception to the transcendental literatures presented by the
Lord, such as Bhagavad-gétä, Çrémad-Bhägavatam and Caitanya-caritämåta. It
should be understood that the living entity is completely spiritual and never
actually becomes mixed with material energy (asaìgo hy ayaà puruñaù).
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, tasmin çuddhe 'pi kalpyate: although the
living entity is çuddha, pure spirit soul, he imagines that he is a material
creation and thus entangles himself in the network of illusion called
dehäpatya-kalaträdi [SB 2.1.4].
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has used the word mänasa-pratyakña
to describe the experience of material life. Mänasa-pratyakña means "that
which is experienced only within the mind." The actual pratyakña is described
in Bhagavad-gétä (9.2):
räja-vidyä räja-guhyaà
pavitram idam uttamam
pratyakñävagamaà dharmyaà
susukhaà kartum avyayam
When one submissively hears the instructions given by the Lord Himself in
Bhagavad-gétä, which constitute the king of all knowledge (räja-vidyä) and the
most confidential of all information (räja-guhyam), by associating with such
spotless spiritual knowledge (pavitram idam uttamam) one can directly
experience one's eternal nature (pratyakñävagamam). By experiencing one's
eternal nature, one becomes thoroughly religious (dharmyam), blissful
(susukham) and eternally engaged in the devotional service of the Lord
(kartum avyayam).
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has quoted the following çruti-mantra
in this connection: vijita-håñéka-väyubhir adänta-manas turagam. "By the very
senses and life air one has conquered, the uncurbed mind will again drag one
away." According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura the meaning of this
verse is samavahäya guroç caraëam: if one rejects the lotus feet of one's
spiritual master, all of one's previous spiritual advancement becomes null and
void. This has already been indicated in the previous verse by the words
guru-devatätmä. Unless one accepts a bona fide spiritual master in the
authorized paramparä as one's worshipable deity and life and soul, there is no
question of overcoming the duality of material life.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has made the following comments
on this verse. "Control of the mind is a result of living a life of devotional
service to the Lord. By the influence of fixed devotional service, the accepting
and rejecting mind can stop its thirst for sensory enjoyment apart from Kåñëa.
In transcendental Kåñëa consciousness there is no contradiction, pettiness or
lack of ecstasy. In other words, it is not like a material object, which always
proves temporary and constantly miserable. Having forgotten Kåñëa, the
conditioned living entity is suffering the misdirection and perversion of his
own so-called intelligence. The living entities are fragmental parts of the
supreme shelter, Kåñëa, but have fallen from Kåñëa's kingdom of spiritual
pastimes. Because of forgetting the Supreme Lord, they become prone to sinful
life and turn their attention to dangerous material objects, which fill them
with constant fear. If one desires to subdue the mind, which is constantly
engaged in the duality of mental concoction, one must take to the devotional
service of Lord Kåñëa."
TEXT 39
Za{Nvana, s$auBa‰"AiNA r"TaAËÿpaANAer,"
janmaAina k(maARiNA ca yaAina laAeke(
gAItaAina naAmaAina tad"TaRk(Aina
gAAyana, ivalaÀaAe ivacare"d"s$aËÿ:
çåëvan su-bhadräëi rathäìga-päëer
janmäni karmäëi ca yäni loke
gétäni nämäni tad-arthakäni
gäyan vilajjo vicared asaìgaù
SYNONYMS
çåëvan—hearing; su-bhadräëi—all-auspicious; ratha-aìga-päëeù—of the
Supreme Lord, who holds a chariot wheel in His hand (in His pastime of
fighting with grandfather Bhéñma); janmäni—the appearances;
karmäëi—activities; ca—and; yäni—which; loke—in this world; gétäni—are
chanted; nämäni—names; tat-arthakäni—signifying these appearances and
activities; gäyan—singing; vilajjaù—free from embarrassment; vicaret—one
should wander; asaìgaù—without material association.
TRANSLATION
An intelligent person who has controlled his mind and conquered fear should
give up all attachment to material objects such as wife, family and nation and
should wander freely without embarrassment, hearing and chanting the holy
names of the Lord, the bearer of the chariot wheel. The holy names of Kåñëa
are all-auspicious because they describe His transcendental birth and activities,
which He performs within this world for the salvation of the conditioned souls.
Thus the holy names of the Lord are sung throughout the world.
PURPORT
Since the holy names, forms and pastimes of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead are unlimited, no one can hear or chant about all of them. Therefore
the word loke indicates that one should chant the holy names of the Lord that
are well known on this particular planet. Within this world, Lord Räma and
Lord Kåñëa are very famous. Their books, Rämäyaëa and Bhagavad-gétä, are
studied and relished all over the world. Similarly, Caitanya Mahäprabhu is
gradually becoming famous all over the world, as He Himself predicted.
Påthivéte äche yata nagarädi gräma/ sarvatra pracära haibe mora näma: "In every
town and village on this earth the glories of My name will be chanted."
Therefore in conformity with the authorized statement of this verse of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the Kåñëa consciousness movement emphasizes the
mahä-mantra—Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma,
Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare—along with the Païca-tattva
mahä-mantra—çré-kåñëa-caitanya prabhu-nityänanda çré-advaita gadädhara
çréväsädi-gaura-bhakta-vånda.
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, this blissful process of chanting the holy
names of the Lord without any material conception is called sugamaà märgam,
a very enjoyable path. Similarly, Lord Kåñëa has described the process of
bhakti-yoga as susukhaà kartum, very joyfully performed, and Çréla Locana
däsa Öhäkura has sung, saba avatära sära çiromaëi kevala änanda-käëòa.
Caitanya Mahäprabhu's process for worshiping Kåñëa is kevala änanda-käëòa,
simply joyful. In this connection Çréla Prabhupäda has stated that people in
any part of the world can assemble, chant the Hare Kåñëa mantra, read from
authorized books such as Bhagavad-gétä As It Is, and accept kåñëa-prasädam
sumptuously, just as Caitanya Mahäprabhu did in Navadvépa.
To be successful in this program, however, Locana däsa Öhäkura has
warned, viñaya chäòiyä: one must give up material sense gratification. If one
indulges in material sense gratification, surely he will be in the bodily concept
of life. One who is in the bodily concept of life will undoubtedly have a
materialistic understanding of the pastimes of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Thus, by considering the Lord's pastimes mundane, one will come
within the category of Mäyäväda, or impersonalism, in which one considers
the transcendental body of the Lord to be a creation of material nature.
Therefore the word asaìgaù in this verse is very significant. One must chant
the holy name of the Lord without mental speculation. One must accept Lord
Kåñëa as He presents Himself in Bhagavad-gétä, wherein He states that He
alone is Puruñottama, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and that His
transcendental form is eternal (ajo 'pi sann avyayätmä).
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has emphasized, yäni çästra-dvärä sat-paramparä-dvärä
ca loke gétäni janmäni karmäëi ca, täni çåëvan gäyaàç ca: if one wants to be
successful in chanting and hearing the holy name of the Lord, one must adopt
the process as it is coming down in the sat-paramparä, the transcendental
disciplic succession. And the sat-paramparä can be identified by reference to
bona fide Vedic scriptures. Contrary to the opinion of uninformed critics, the
followers of Kåñëa consciousness are not mindless or fanatical. They
intelligently follow the system of checks and balances called guru, sädhu and
çästra. That is, one must accept a bona fide spiritual master, who must in turn
be confirmed by the opinion of great saintly persons and revealed scriptures. If
one accepts a bona fide spiritual master, follows the example of great saintly
persons and becomes conversant with authorized literature such as
Bhagavad-gétä As It Is and Çrémad-Bhägavatam, one's program of chanting the
holy names of the Lord and hearing about the Lord's pastimes will be
completely successful. As Kåñëa states in Bhagavad-gétä (4.9):
janma karma ca me divyam
evaà yo vetti tattvataù
tyaktvä dehaà punar janma
naiti mäm eti so 'rjuna
"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities
does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in the material world, but
attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna."
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has stated that throughout the world
the Supreme Lord is known by many names, some of them expressed in
vernacular language, but any name used to indicate the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, who is one without a second, beyond the influence of material
nature, can be accepted as a holy name of God, according to this verse. That is
indicated by the word loke.
One should not misinterpret the word vicaret, "one should wander," to mean
that while chanting the holy names of Kåñëa one may go anywhere or engage
in any activity without discrimination. Therefore it is stated, vicared asaìgaù:
one may wander freely, but at the same time one must strictly avoid the
association of those who are not interested in Kåñëa consciousness or who are
engaged in sinful life. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu has stated, asat-saìga-tyäga-ei
vaiñëava äcära (Cc. Madhya 22.87): a Vaiñëava is known by his complete
avoidance of all mundane association. If in the course of traveling and
chanting the glories of the Lord a Vaiñëava preacher finds a submissive
nondevotee who is willing to hear about Kåñëa, the preacher will always give
his merciful association to such a person. But a Vaiñëava should strictly avoid
those who are not interested in hearing about Kåñëa.
According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, those who do not
engage in hearing the astonishing pastimes and holy names of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and who do not relish the Lord's pastimes are simply
executing mundane, illusory activities or indulging in false, materialistic
renunciation. Frustrated living entities sometimes take to dry impersonalism
and avoid the descriptions of the Supreme Lord's eternal name, form, qualities,
entourage and pastimes. But if one gains the association of a pure devotee, one
gives up the path of dry speculative argument and becomes situated on the
actual Vedic path of devotional service to the Lord.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura says that the word dvaita, or
"duality," expresses the false understanding that some object has a substantial
existence independent of Kåñëa. The Mäyäväda conception of advaita, which
lacks any spiritual distinctions, is simply another manifestation of the mind's
function of acceptance and rejection. The eternal appearance and pastimes of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead never contradict the concept of
advaya-jïäna, or transcendental knowledge beyond duality.
TEXT 40
WvaM˜ata: svai‘ayanaAmak(LtyaAR
jaAtaAnaur"AgAAe åu"taicaÔa o»aE:
h"s$atyaTaAe r"Aeid"ita r"AEita gAAyatya,
onmaAd"vaªa{tyaita laAek(baA÷:
evaà-vrataù sva-priya-näma-kértyä
jätänurägo druta-citta uccaiù
hasaty atho roditi rauti gäyaty
unmäda-van nåtyati loka-bähyaù
SYNONYMS
evam-vrataù—when one thus engages in the vow to chant and dance;
sva—own; priya—very dear; näma—holy name; kértya—by chanting; jäta—in
this way develops; anurägaù—attachment; druta-cittaù—with a melted heart;
uccaiù—loudly; hasati—laughs; atho—also; roditi—cries; rauti—becomes
agitated; gäyati—chants; unmäda-vat—like a madman; nåtyati—dancing;
loka-bähyaù—without caring for outsiders.
TRANSLATION
By chanting the holy name of the Supreme Lord, one comes to the stage of
love of Godhead. Then the devotee is fixed in his vow as an eternal servant of
the Lord, and he gradually becomes very much attached to a particular name
and form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As his heart melts with
ecstatic love, he laughs very loudly or cries or shouts. Sometimes he sings and
dances like a madman, for he is indifferent to public opinion.
PURPORT
In this verse, pure love of God is being described. Çréla Çrédhara Svämé has
described this spiritual situation as sampräpta-prema-lakñana-bhakti-yogasya
saàsära-dharmätétäà gatim, or the perfectional stage of life in which one's
devotional service to the Supreme Lord is enriched by ecstatic love. At that
time, one's spiritual duties are entirely beyond the scope of worldly affairs.
In Çré Caitanya-caritämåta (Ädi 7.78), there is the following statement by
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu:
dhairya dharite näri, hailäma unmatta
häsi, kändi, näci, gäi, yaiche mada-matta
"While chanting the holy name of the Lord in pure ecstasy, I lose myself, and
thus I laugh, cry, dance and sing just like a madman." Caitanya Mahäprabhu
immediately approached His spiritual master to ask him why He had
apparently become mad by chanting the holy name of Kåñëa. His guru replied:
kåñëa-näma-mahä-mantrera ei ta ' svabhäva
yei jape, tära kåñëe upajaye bhäva
"It is the nature of the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra that anyone who chants it
immediately develops his loving ecstasy for Kåñëa." (Cc. Ädi 7.83) In this
connection Çréla Prabhupäda has commented, "These symptoms are very
prominently manifest in the body of a pure devotee. Sometimes when our
students of the Kåñëa consciousness movement chant and dance, even in India
people are astonished to see how these foreigners have learned to chant and
dance in this ecstatic fashion. As explained by Caitanya Mahäprabhu,
however, actually this is not due to practice, for without extra endeavor these
symptoms become manifest in anyone who sincerely chants the Hare Kåñëa
mahä-mantra."
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has warned us in this regard about
the ungodly sahajiyäs who imitate the pastimes of the Supreme Lord in an
unauthorized way, neglecting the standard injunctions of Vedic scriptures,
foolishly trying to take the position of Kåñëa as Puruñottama, and thus making
a cheap farce of the exalted pastimes of the Lord. Their so-called ecstatic
symptoms like crying, shivering and falling on the ground are not to be
confused with the advanced features of devotional service described by
Çrédhara Svämé as sampräpta-prema-lakñaëa-bhakti-yoga. Çréla Prabhupäda
comments in this regard, "One who has attained this bhäva stage is no longer
under the clutches of the illusory energy." Similarly, Kåñëadäsa Kaviräja states:
païcama puruñärtha-premänandämåta-sindhu
mokñädi änanda yära nahe eka bindu
"For a devotee who has actually developed bhäva [love of Godhead], the
pleasure derived from dharma, artha, käma and mokña appears like a drop in
the presence of the sea." (Cc. Ädi 7.85) As already stated in the previous verse
of this chapter, gäyan vilajjo vicared asaìgaù: one exhibits the ecstatic
symptoms of love of Godhead when he is asaìga, free from all attachment to
material sense gratification.
The word loka-bähyaù in this verse indicates that a pure devotee on the
platform of prema, love of Godhead, is not at all concerned with ridicule,
praise, respect or criticism from ordinary people in the bodily concept of life.
Kåñëa is the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and when
He reveals Himself to a surrendered servant, all doubt and speculation about
the nature of the Absolute are vanquished forever.
In this connection Çrépäda Madhväcärya has quoted a verse from the
Varäha Puräëa:
kecid unmäda-vad bhaktä
bähya-liìga-pradarçakäù
kecid äntara-bhaktäù syuù
kecic caivobhayätmakäù
mukha-prasädäd däròhyäc ca
bhaktir jïeyä na cänyataù
"Some devotees of the Lord exhibit external symptoms, acting like madmen,
others are introspective devotees, and still others partake of both natures. It is
by one's steadfastness and by the merciful vibrations emanating from one's
mouth that one's devotion can be judged, not otherwise."
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has given a very nice example to
illustrate ecstatic laughing and other symptoms of love of Godhead: 'Oh, that
thief Kåñëa, the son of Yaçodä, has entered the house to steal the fresh butter.
Grab Him! Keep Him away!' Hearing these menacing words spoken by the
elderly gopé Jaraté, Kåñëa immediately prepares to leave the house. The devotee
to whom this transcendental pastime is revealed laughs in ecstasy. But
suddenly he can no longer see Kåñëa. He then cries in great lamentation, 'Oh!
I achieved the greatest fortune in the world, and now it has suddenly slipped
from my hands!' Thus the devotee cries loudly, 'So my Lord! Where are You?
Give me Your answer!' The Lord answers, 'My dear devotee, I heard your loud
complaint, and so I have again come before you.' Upon seeing Lord Kåñëa
again, the devotee begins to sing, 'Today my life has become perfect.' Thus
overwhelmed with transcendental bliss, he begins to dance like a madman."
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura also notes that the word druta-cittaù
or "with a melted heart," indicates that one's heart, melted by the fire of
anxiety to see the Lord, becomes like Jambünadé, a river of roseapple juice. The
äcärya further points out, näma-kértanasya sarvotkarñam: the present and
previous verse clearly distinguish the exalted position of çravaëaà kértanaà
viñëoù [SB 7.5.23], chanting and hearing the name and glories of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Caitanya Mahäprabhu also emphasized this by
quoting:
harer näma harer näma
harer nämaiva kevalam
kalau nästy eva nästy eva
nästy eva gatir anyathä
[Cc. Ädi 17.21]
"In this age of Kali there is no alternative, there is no alternative, there is no
alternative for spiritual progress but the holy name, the holy name, the holy
name of the Lord." In his purports to Caitanya-caritämåta (Ädi 7.76), Çréla
Prabhupäda has given an elaborate explanation of this verse.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura recommends that we study the
following verse in this connection:
parivadatu jano yathä tathä vä
nanu mukharo na vayaà vicärayämaù
hari-rasa-madirä-madäti-mattä
bhuvi viluöhämo naöämo nirviçämaù
"Let the garrulous populace say whatever they like; we shall pay them no
regard. Thoroughly maddened by the ecstasy of the intoxicating beverage of
love for Kåñëa, we shall enjoy life running about, rolling on the ground and
dancing in ecstasy." (Padyävalé 73)
TEXT 41
KaM vaAyaumai¢aM s$ailalaM mah"I%M ca
jyaAetaI%MiSa s$aÔvaAina id"zAAe åu"maAd"Ina,
s$air"ts$amau"‰"AMê h"re": zAr"IrM"
yaitkM( ca BaUtaM ‘aNAmaed"nanya:
khaà väyum agnià salilaà mahéà ca
jyotéàñi sattväni diço drumädén
sarit-samudräàç ca hareù çaréraà
yat kià ca bhütaà praëamed ananyaù
SYNONYMS
kham—ether; väyum—air; agnim—fire; salilam—water; mahém—earth;
ca—and; jyotéàñi—the sun, moon and other celestial luminaries; sattväni—all
living beings; diçaù—the directions; druma-ädén—trees and other immovable
creatures; sarit—the rivers; samudrän—and oceans; ca—also; hareù—of the
Supreme Lord, Hari; çaréram—the body; yat kim ca—whatever; bhütam—in
created existence; praëamet—one should bow to; ananyaù—thinking nothing
to be separate from the Lord.
TRANSLATION
A devotee should not see anything as being separate from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. Ether, fire, air, water, earth, the sun and other
luminaries, all living beings, the directions, trees and other plants, the rivers
and oceans—whatever a devotee experiences he should consider to be an
expansion of Kåñëa. Thus seeing everything that exists within creation as the
body of the Supreme Lord, Hari, the devotee should offer his sincere respects to
the entire expansion of the Lord's body.
PURPORT
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has given this example from the Puräëas: yat paçyati, tat
tv anurägätiçayena "jagad dhana-mayaà lubdhäù kämukäù käminé-mayam"
iti-vat hareù çaréram. "Because of a greedy person's obsession with money,
wherever he goes he sees an opportunity for acquiring wealth. Similarly a very
lusty man notices women everywhere." In the same way, a pure devotee should
see the transcendental form of the Lord within everything, since everything is
an expansion of the Lord. It is our practical experience that a greedy man will
see money everywhere. If he goes to the forest he will immediately consider
whether it would be profitable to purchase the forest land and sell the trees to
a paper mill. Similarly, if a lusty man goes to the same forest he will look
everywhere for beautiful women tourists who might happen to be there. And if
a devotee goes to the same forest he will see Kåñëa there, knowing correctly
that the entire forest, as well as the sky canopy above, is the inferior energy of
the Lord. Kåñëa is supremely sacred, being the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and since everything that exists expands directly or indirectly from
the body of the Lord, everything is sacred when seen through the eyes of a
self-realized person. Therefore as stated in this verse, praëamet: one should
offer one's sincere respects to everything. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has mentioned
that we should see the personal form of Kåñëa everywhere.
This verse does not approve of the impersonal, atheistic philosophy that
everything is God. In this regard, Çréla Madhväcärya has quoted from the
Hari-vaàça:
sarvaà harer vaçatvena
çaréraà tasya bhaëyate
ananyädhipatitväc ca
tad ananyam udéryate
na cäpy abhedo jagatäà
viñëoù pürëa-guëasya tu
"Because everything is under the control of the Supreme Lord, Hari,
everything is considered to be His body. He is the original source and master of
everything, and therefore nothing should be seen as different from Him.
Nonetheless, one should not foolishly conclude that there is absolutely no
difference between the material universe and Lord Viñëu, who is full of His
own unique spiritual qualities."
The example is often given of the sun and the sun's rays. The sunshine is
nothing but an expansion of the sun globe, and therefore there is no
qualitative difference between the sun and its rays. But although the sunshine
is situated everywhere and although everything is a transformation of the sun's
energy, the sun globe itself, the source of the sunshine, is not everywhere, but
is situated in a particular place in the vast sky and has its own specific form.
If we penetrate further into the sun globe we shall find the sun-god,
Vivasvän. Although pseudointellectuals of the modern age who are incapable
of even counting the hairs on their own heads will consider the sun-god a
mythological figure, it is actually the foolish mythology of modern men to
think that such a sophisticated apparatus as the sun, which provides heat and
light for the entire universe, can function without intelligent administration.
Transformations of solar energy make life possible on earth, and thus the earth
can be understood to consist of an endless variety of secondary manifestations
of all-pervading solar energy.
So within the sun planet is the personality Vivasvän, the chief
administrator of the solar functions; the sun globe itself is localized; and the
sun's rays expand everywhere. Similarly Çré Kåñëa, Çyämasundara, is the
original Personality of Godhead (bhagavän svayam); He expands Himself as the
localized Supersoul (Paramätmä) in everyone's heart; and finally He expands
His potency by His personal bodily glow, the all-pervading spiritual effulgence
called the brahmajyoti. The entire material manifestation floats within the rays
of this brahmajyoti. Just as all life on earth is a transformation of the
all-pervading rays of the sun, the entire cosmic manifestation is a
transformation of the spiritual rays of the brahmajyoti. As stated in the
Brahma-saàhitä (5.40):
yasya prabhä prabhavato jagad-aëòa-koöikoöiñv
açeña-vasudhädi vibhüti-bhinnam
tad brahma niñkalam anantam açeña-bhütaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who is endowed with great power. The
glowing effulgence of His transcendental form is the impersonal Brahman,
which is absolute, complete and unlimited and which displays the varieties of
countless planets, with their different opulences, in millions and millions of
universes." Therefore, the brahmajyoti is the spiritual light that emanates
directly from the body of the Lord. This universe is a transformation of that
spiritual energy, and therefore everything that exists is in one sense connected
directly with the personal body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
It is emphasized here that we should offer respect to everything that exists,
recognizing it to be the energy of the Lord. The example may be given that if a
man is important his property is also important. The president of a country is
the most important person in the country, and therefore everyone must
respect his property. Similarly, everything that exists is an expansion of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and should be respected accordingly. If we
fail to see everything that exists as the energy of the Lord, we risk the danger
of drifting into the Mäyäväda philosophy, which according to Caitanya
Mahäprabhu is the most deadly poison for one trying to advance in actual
spiritual life. Mäyävädi-bhäñya çunile haya sarva-näça (Cc. Madhya 6.169). If we
try to understand Kåñëa alone, without the expansion of His potency, we shall
not understand such statements in Bhagavad-gétä as väsudevaù sarvam and
ahaà sarvasya prabhavaù [Bg. 10.8].
As already explained in this chapter, bhayaà dvitiyäbhiniveçataù syät: fear
or illusion arises from thinking that there is something not dependent upon
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Now, in this verse, the specific process
for overcoming this fearful illusion is given. One must train one's mind to see
everything that exists as an expansion of the potency of the Supreme Lord. By
offering respects to everything and meditating upon everything as part of the
body of the Lord, one will become free from fear. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä
(5.29), suhådaà sarva-bhütänäm: Kåñëa is the well-wishing friend of every
living being. As soon as one understands that everything that exists is under
the powerful control of one's most beloved friend, one comes to the stage in
which the whole universe becomes a blissful abode (viçvaà pürëa-sukhäyate),
because he sees Kåñëa everywhere.
If Kåñëa's personality were not the source of everything and if everything
were not connected to Kåñëa, one might be proper in concluding that Kåñëa's
personality is a material manifestation of some impersonal truth. As stated in
Vedänta-sütra, janmädy asya yataù: [SB 1.1.1] the Absolute Truth is that from
which everything emanates. Similarly, Kåñëa says, ahaà sarvasya prabhavaù:
[Bg. 10.8] "I am the source of everything." If we see anything totally
disconnected from the personal body of Kåñëa, we may doubt whether Kåñëa's
personality is actually the absolute source described in Vedänta-sütra. As soon
as one feels this way, he becomes fearful and should be understood to be under
the control of the Lord's illusory energy.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has warned us that if we do not
see everything as a manifestation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, we
shall become victims of phalgu-vairägya, or immature renunciation. Whatever
we see as disconnected from Kåñëa will have in our mind no relationship to
Kåñëa's service. But if we see everything as connected to Kåñëa, we shall use
everything for Kåñëa's satisfaction. This is called yukta-vairägya. According to
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, "One who has experienced his own
true identity understands that all things exist as paraphernalia for giving
ecstatic pleasure to the Supreme Lord. Thus one becomes free from the
separatist vision in which one sees the world as existing for one's own
enjoyment. In the transcendental state, whatever a devotee sees reminds him
of Kåñëa, and thus his transcendental knowledge and bliss increase." Because
the impersonalist philosophers fail to see everything as belonging to the
personal form of Kåñëa, they reject this world as having no true existence
(jagan mithyä). But since the material world is an emanation from the supreme
reality, Kåñëa, it does in fact exist. Its nonexistence is simply a creation of the
imagination, and one cannot possibly act on such an imaginary platform.
Therefore, having proposed an illusory theory and being unable actually to live
on such a platform, the impersonalist comes back to the material platform for
altruistic or gross sense gratificatory activities. Since the impersonalist does
not accept the personal proprietorship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
he does not know how or for whom to engage the things of this world, and
since it is impossible to reject this world totally while living within it, he runs
the risk of again becoming entangled in material fruitive activities. Therefore
as stated in Bhagavad-gétä (12.5), kleço 'dhikataras teñäm: the impersonal path
of imaginary philosophy is very painful to follow.
The conclusion is that this verse is spoken to help the devotee of the
Supreme Lord advance in Kåñëa consciousness. It can be understood from the
previous verses of this chapter that the ultimate goal is pure devotional service
to Lord Kåñëa. If one falsely interprets this verse to sanction the imaginary
Mäyäväda philosophy that everything is God, one will simply become
bewildered and fall from the path of spiritual advancement.
TEXT 42
Bail(: pare"zAAnauBavaAe ivar"il(r,"
@nya‡a caESa i‡ak( Wk(k(Ala:
‘apaâmaAnasya yaTaA´ata: syaus$a,
tauií": pauií": ºaud"paAyaAe'nauGaAs$ama,
bhaktiù pareçänubhavo viraktir
anyatra caiña trika eka-kälaù
prapadyamänasya yathäçnataù syus
tuñöiù puñöiù kñud-apäyo 'nu-ghäsam
SYNONYMS
bhaktiù—devotion; para-éça—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
anubhavaù—direct perception; viraktiù—detachment; anyatra—from
everything else; ca—and; eñaù—this; trikaù—group of three;
eka-kälaù—simultaneously; prapadyamänasya—for one in the process of
taking shelter of the Supreme Lord; yathä—in the same way as; açnataù—for
one engaged in eating; syuù—they occur; tuñöiù—satisfaction;
puñöiù—nourishment; kñut-apäyaù—eradication of hunger;
anu-ghäsam—increasingly with each morsel.
TRANSLATION
Devotion, direct experience of the Supreme Lord, and detachment from
other things—these three occur simultaneously for one who has taken shelter
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, in the same way that pleasure,
nourishment and relief from hunger come simultaneously and increasingly, with
each bite, for a person engaged in eating.
PURPORT
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has explained this analogy as follows: Bhakti, or
devotion, may be compared to tuñöi (satisfaction) because they both take the
form of pleasure. Pareçänubhava (experience of the Supreme Lord) and puñöi
(nourishment) are analogous because both sustain one's life. Finally, virakti
(detachment) and kñud-apäya (cessation of hunger) may be compared because
both free one from further hankering so that one may experience çänti, or
peace.
A person who is eating not only becomes uninterested in other activities
but increasingly becomes uninterested in the food itself, according to his
satisfaction. On the other hand, according to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, although one
who is experiencing the blissful Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, becomes
uninterested in anything other than Kåñëa, his attachment to Kåñëa increases
at every moment. Therefore it is to be understood that the transcendental
beauty and qualities of the Supreme Lord are not material, since one never
becomes satiated by relishing the bliss of the Supreme Lord.
The word viraktiù is very significant in this verse. Virakti means
"detachment," whereas tyäga means "renunciation." According to Çréla
Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, the word renunciation can be used in a
situation in which one considers giving up an enjoyable object. But by
considering everything to be potential paraphernalia in the service of Lord
Kåñëa, as described in the previous verse, one need not give thought to
renunciation, for one uses everything in the proper way in the service of the
Lord. Yukta-vairägyam ucyate.
The very pleasant analogy of a good meal is given in this verse. A hungry
man busily consuming a sumptuous plate of food is not interested in anything
else happening around him. In fact, he considers any other topic or activity a
disturbance to his concentration on the delicious meal. Similarly, as one
advances in Kåñëa consciousness one considers anything unrelated to the
devotional service of Kåñëa an obnoxious disturbance. Such concentrated love
of Godhead has been described in the Second Canto of the Bhägavatam by the
words tévreëa bhakti-yogena yajeta puruñaà param (SB 2.3.10). One should not
make an artificial show of renouncing the material world; rather, one should
systematically train the mind to see everything as an expansion of the
opulence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Just as a hungry materialistic
man, upon seeing sumptuous food, immediately desires to put it in his mouth,
an advanced devotee of Kåñëa, upon seeing a material object, immediately
becomes eager to use it for the pleasure of Kåñëa. Without the spontaneous
hunger to engage everything in the service of Kåñëa and to dive deeper and
deeper into the ocean of love of Kåñëa, so-called realization of God or loose
talk about so-called religious life is irrelevant to the actual experience of
entering the kingdom of God.
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, the path of bhakti-yoga
is so joyful and practical that even in the stage of sädhana-bhakti, in which one
follows rules and regulations without an advanced understanding, one can
perceive the ultimate result. As stated by Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé
(Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.2.187),
éhä yasya harer däsye
karmaëä manasä girä
nikhiläsv apy avasthäsu
jévan-muktaù sa ucyate
As soon as one surrenders to the Supreme Lord, Kåñëa (prapadyamänasya),
giving up all other activities (viraktir anyatra ca), one is immediately to be
considered a liberated soul (jévan-muktaù). The Supreme Lord, Kåñëa, is so
merciful that when a living entity understands that the personality Kåñëa is
the source of everything and surrenders to the Lord, Kåñëa personally takes
charge of him and reveals to him within his heart that he is under the Lord's
full protection. Thus devotion, direct experience of the Personality of
Godhead, and detachment from other objects become manifest even in the
beginning stage of bhakti-yoga, since bhakti-yoga begins at the point of
liberation. Other processes have as their final goal salvation or liberation, but
according to Bhagavad-gétä (18.66),
sarva-dharmän parityajya
mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja
ahaà tväà sarva-päpebhyo
mokñayiñyämi mä çucaù
If one surrenders to Kåñëa one is immediately liberated and thus begins his
career as a transcendental devotee with complete confidence in the Lord's
protection.
TEXT 43
wtyacyautaAx.~i„aM BajataAe'nauva{ÔyaA
Bail(ivaRr"il(BaRgAvat‘abaAeDa:
Bavainta vaE BaAgAvatasya r"AjaMs$a,
tata: par"AM zAAintamaupaEita s$aAºaAta,
ity acyutäìghrià bhajato 'nuvåttyä
bhaktir viraktir bhagavat-prabodhaù
bhavanti vai bhägavatasya räjaàs
tataù paräà çäntim upaiti säkñät
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; acyuta—of the infallible Supreme Lord; aìghrim—the feet;
bhajataù—for one who is worshiping; anuvåttyä—by constant practice;
bhaktiù—devotion; viraktiù—detachment; bhagavat-prabodhaù—knowledge of
the Personality of Godhead; bhavanti—they manifest; vai—indeed;
bhägavatasya—for the devotee; räjan—O King Nimi; tataù—then; paräm
çäntim—supreme peace; upaiti—he attains; säkñät—directly.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, the devotee who worships the lotus feet of the infallible
Personality of Godhead with constant endeavor thus achieves unflinching
devotion, detachment and experienced knowledge of the Personality of
Godhead. In this way the successful devotee of the Lord achieves supreme
spiritual peace.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (2.71):
vihäya kämän yaù sarvän
pumäàç carati niùspåhaù
nirmamo nirahaìkäraù
sa çäntim adhigacchati
"A person who has given up all desires for sense gratification, who lives free
from desires, who has given up all sense of proprietorship and who is devoid of
false ego—he alone can attain real peace." Çréla Prabhupäda comments, "To
become desireless means not to desire anything for sense gratification. In other
words, desire for becoming Kåñëa conscious is actually desirelessness." There is
a similar statement in the Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 19.149):
kåñëa-bhakta-niñkäma, ataeva 'çänta'
bhukti-mukti-siddhi-kämé sakali 'açänta'
"Because a devotee of Lord Kåñëa is desireless, he is peaceful. Fruitive workers
desire material enjoyment, jïänés desire liberation, and yogés desire material
opulence; therefore they are all lusty and cannot be peaceful."
Generally there are three classes of living entities afflicted with selfish
desire. These are the bhukti-kämé, mukti-kämi and siddhi-kämi. Bhukti-kämé
refers to those ordinary persons who desire money and everything money can
buy. Such a primitive mentality is based on the desire to enjoy money, sex and
social prestige. When a living being becomes frustrated with this hallucination,
he takes to the path of speculative philosophy and analytically tries to track
down the source of illusion. Such a person is called mukti-kämé because he
desires to negate material illusion and merge into an impersonal spiritual state,
free from anxiety. The mukti-kämé is also motivated by personal desire,
although the desire is somewhat more elevated. Similarly the siddhi-kämé, or
the mystic yogé who desires the spectacular powers of mystic yoga, such as
reaching one's hand across the world or making oneself smaller than the
smallest or lighter than the lightest, is also infected by material or selfish
desire. Therefore it is said, sakali 'açänta.' If one has any personal desire,
whether it be material, philosophical or mystic, he will be açänta, or ultimately
frustrated, because he will see himself as the central object of satisfaction. This
egocentric concept is in itself illusory and therefore ultimately frustrating.
On the other hand, kåñëa-bhakta niñkäma, ataeva 'çänta': [Cc. Madhya
19.149] a devotee of Lord Kåñëa is niñkäma; he has no personal desire. His only
desire is to please Kåñëa. Lord Çiva himself has praised this outstanding quality
of the pure devotees of the Lord by stating,
näräyaëa-paräù sarve
na kutaçcana bibhyati
svargäpavarga-narakeñv
api tulyärtha-darçinaù
"A person who is devoted to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa, is
not afraid of anything. Elevation to the heavenly kingdom, condemnation to
hell and liberation from material bondage all appear the same to a devotee."
(SB 6.17.28) Although the impersonalist philosopher proposes that everything
is one, the devotee of the Lord is actually tulyärtha-darçé, or empowered with
the vision of oneness. The devotee sees everything as the potency of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and therefore desires to engage everything in
the service of the Lord, for the Lord's satisfaction. Since the devotee does not
see anything as dvitéya, or outside the scope of the Lord's potency, he is happy
in any situation. Having no personal desire, the devotee of Kåñëa is actually
çänta, or peaceful, because he has achieved the perfection of life, love of Kåñëa.
He is actually situated in his eternal constitutional position under the direct
shelter and protection of the omnipotent Parameçvara, Kåñëa.
According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, this verse ends the
answer given by the first of the nine Yogendras, Kavi, to Mahäräja Nimi's first
question, "What is the highest good?"
TEXT 44
™aIr"AjaAevaAca
@Ta BaAgAvataM “aUta
yaÜ"maAeR yaAä{"zAAe na{NAAma,
yaTaAcar"ita yaä," “aUtae
yaEilaR$ËEÿBaRgAvait‘aya:
çré-räjoväca
atha bhägavataà brüta
yad-dharmo yädåço nåëäm
yathäcarati yad brüte
yair liìgair bhagavat-priyaù
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—the King spoke; atha—next; bhägavatam—about the devotee
of the Personality of Godhead; brüta—please tell me; yat-dharmaù—having
what duties; yädåçaù—having what nature; nåëäm—among men; yathä—how;
äcarati—he behaves; yat—what; brüte—he speaks; yaiù—by which;
liìgaiù—visible symptoms; bhagavat-priyaù—(he is known as) one dear to the
Supreme Lord.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Nimi said: Now please tell me in greater detail about the devotees
of the Supreme Lord. What are the natural symptoms by which I can
distinguish between the most advanced devotees, those on the middle level and
those who are neophytes? What are the typical religious activities of a Vaiñëava,
and how does he speak? Specifically, please describe those symptoms and
characteristics by which Vaiñëavas become dear to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
PURPORT
The great sage Kavi has informed King Nimi about the general external
symptoms of a devotee of the Lord, namely his appearance, personal qualities
and activities. But now King Nimi asks how to make further distinctions
among the servants of the Supreme Personality of Godhead so that the
first-class, second-class and lower-class Vaiñëavas can be clearly identified.
According to Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé, kåñëeti yasya giri taà manasädriyeta:
"One should mentally honor any devotee who chants the holy name of Lord
Kåñëa." (Upadeçämåta 5) Any living entity who is faithfully chanting the holy
name of Kåñëa is to be considered a Vaiñëava and at least within the mind is to
be offered respect. But for practical advancement in Kåñëa consciousness one
should associate at least with a second-class devotee. And if one can receive
the mercy of a first-class devotee of the Lord, one's perfection is very easily
guaranteed. Thus Nimi Mahäräja is humbly inquiring, "What are the
character, behavior and speech of devotees?" The King wants to know the
particular symptoms of body, mind and speech by which the different
categories uttama-adhikäré, madhyama-adhikäré and kaniñöha-adhikäré are
clearly identified. In response to the King's inquiry, another of the
nava-yogendras, namely Havir, will give a further elaboration of the science of
Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 45
™aIh"ivaç&vaAca
s$avaRBaUtaeSau ya: pazyaeä,"
BagAvaà"AvamaAtmana:
BaUtaAina BagAvatyaAtmanya,
WSa BaAgAvataAeÔama:
çré-havir uväca
sarva-bhüteñu yaù paçyed
bhagavad-bhävam ätmanaù
bhütäni bhagavaty ätmany
eña bhägavatottamaù
SYNONYMS
çré-haviù uväca—Çré Havir said; sarva-bhüteñu—in all objects (in matter, spirit,
and combinations of matter and spirit); yaù—anyone who; paçyet—sees;
bhagavat-bhävam—the ability to be engaged in the service of the Lord;
ätmanaù—of the supreme spirit soul, or the transcendence beyond the
material concept of life; bhütäni—all beings; bhagavati—in the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; ätmani—the basic principle of all existence;
eñaù—this; bhägavata-uttamaù—a person advanced in devotional service.
TRANSLATION
Çré Havir said: The most advanced devotee sees within everything the soul
of all souls, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa. Consequently he
sees systematically everything in relation to the Supreme Lord and understands
that everything that exists is eternally situated within the Lord.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (6.30) the Lord says,
yo mäà paçyati sarvatra
sarvaà ca mayi paçyati
tasyähaà na praëaçyämi
sa ca me na praëaçyati
"For one who sees Me everywhere and sees everything in Me, I am never lost,
nor is he ever lost to Me." Çréla Prabhupäda comments, "A person in Kåñëa
consciousness certainly sees Lord Kåñëa everywhere, and he sees everything in
Kåñëa. Such a person may appear to see all separate manifestations of the
material nature, but in each and every instance he is conscious of Kåñëa,
knowing that everything is the manifestation of Kåñëa's energy. Nothing can
exist without Kåñëa, and Kåñëa is the Lord of everything-this is the basic
principle of Kåñëa consciousness."
The qualification for seeing Kåñëa everywhere is stated in the
Brahma-saàhitä (5.38):
premäïjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santaù sadaiva hådayeñu vilokayanti
yaà syämasundaram acintya-guëa-svarüpaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship the primeval Lord, Govinda, who is always seen by the devotee
whose eyes are anointed with the pulp of love. He is seen in His eternal form
of Çyämasundara, situated within the heart of the devotee." A devotee of the
highest level of spiritual qualification is glorified for the expansiveness of his
spiritual vision. For example, when the stalwart demon Hiraëyakaçipu
questioned his self-realized son Prahläda Mahäräja as to the whereabouts of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Prahläda, being a mahä-bhägavata, or
pure devotee, answered straightforwardly that the Supreme Lord is
everywhere. The demoniac father then asked if God was in the pillar of the
palace. When Prahläda answered yes, Hiraëyakaçipu, being a bona fide demon,
struck the pillar with his sword, trying to kill God, or at least disprove His
existence. Then Lord Nåsiàhadeva, the most ferocious form of the Supreme
Lord, immediately appeared and finished forever the illicit program of
Hiraëyakaçipu. Thus Prahläda Mahäräja can be accepted as an uttama-adhikäré
devotee.
A pure devotee is completely free from the tendency to enjoy things
separately from the Lord's service. He does not see anything in the universe as
unfavorable, because he sees everything as the expanded potency of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such a devotee's purpose in existing is to
give pleasure somehow or other to the Supreme Lord. Thus everything that a
pure devotee experiences, moment by moment, increases his ecstatic loving
desire to satisfy the transcendental senses of the Lord.
The three modes of material nature torment the conditioned soul, who
absorbs his mind in the separated, material energy of the Lord. The function of
this separated energy, bhinnä prakåti, is to take the living entity away from the
reality, which is that everything is within Kåñëa and Kåñëa is within
everything. Being covered by gross ignorance, the bewildered conditioned soul
believes that only the objects of his own limited vision actually exist.
Sometimes such foolish persons speculate that if a tree falls in a forest with no
one to hear it, there will actually be no sound. The conditioned souls do not
consider that since the Supreme Personality of Godhead is all-pervading, there
is no question of no one's hearing; the Lord always hears. As stated in the
Thirteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä (13.14), sarvataù çrutimal loke: the
Supreme Lord hears everything. He is upadrañöa, the witness of everything (Bg.
13.23).
In this verse the word bhägavatottamaù, "the most advanced devotee,"
indicates that there are those who are not gross materialists but who are not
the highest devotees. According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura,
those who cannot properly distinguish between devotees and nondevotees and
who therefore never worship the pure devotees of the Lord are to be known as
kaniñöha-adhikäris, devotees on the lowest stage of devotional service. Such
kaniñöha-adhikäris engage in worship of the Supreme Lord, especially in the
temple, but are indifferent to the Lord's devotees. Thus they misunderstand
this statement by Lord Çiva in the Padma Puräëa:
ärädhanänäà sarveñäà
viñëor ärädhanaà param
tasmäd parataraà devi
tadéyänäà samarcanam
"O Devé, the most exalted system of worship is the worship of Lord Viñëu.
Greater than that is the worship of tadéya, or anything belonging to Viñëu."
Çréla Prabhupäda comments on this verse, "Çré Viñëu is sac-cid-änanda-vigraha
[Bs. 5.1]. Similarly the most confidential servant of Kåñëa, the spiritual master,
and all devotees of Viñëu are tadéya. The sac-cid-änanda-vigraha, guru,
Vaiñëavas and things used by them must be considered tadéya, and without a
doubt worshipable by all living beings." (Cc. Madhya 12.38 purport)
Typically the kaniñöha-adhikäré is eager to engage his materialistic
qualifications in the service of the Lord, mistaking such material expertise to
be the sign of advanced devotion. But by continuing to serve the Supreme
Lord and the devotees engaged in propagating the Lord's mission, the
kaniñöha-adhikäré also advances in his realization and comes to the stage of
dedicating his activities to helping more advanced Vaiñëavas. Even such
kaniñöha-adhikärés can help ordinary living entities by their association, since
at least the kaniñöha-adhikärés have faith that Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Because of this faith, the kaniñöha-adhikäré gradually becomes
inimical to those who are opposed to the Lord. As he gradually becomes more
and more inimical to those who hate the supremacy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and becomes more attracted to friendship with other
faithful servants of the Lord, the kaniñöha-adhikäré approaches the second-class
stage, called madhyama. In the madhyama stage the Vaiñëava sees the Lord as
the cause of all causes and the chief goal of everyone's loving propensity. He
sees the Vaiñëavas as his only friends within this morbid world and is eager to
bring innocent people within the shelter of Vaiñëava society. Also, a
madhyama-adhikäré strictly avoids associating with the self-proclaimed enemies
of God. When such an intermediate qualification becomes mature, the
concept of supreme qualification begins to present itself; that is, one comes to
the stage of uttama-adhikäré.
A kaniñöha-adhikäré guru, one who is simply attached to performing
religious ceremonies and worshiping the Deity, without appreciation for other
Vaiñëavas, especially those who are preaching the message of the Lord, will
especially appeal to persons interested in the dry cultivation of knowledge. As
a living entity develops mundane piety, he proudly devotes himself to
regulated work and nobly tries to detach himself from the fruits of his work.
Through such regulated detached work, knowledge or wisdom gradually arises.
As knowledge or wisdom becomes prominent, the pious materialist becomes
attracted to altruistic and charitable work and gives up gross sinful activities. If
he is fortunate, he then becomes favorable to the transcendental devotional
service of the Lord. Desiring a mere intellectual understanding of devotional
service, such a pious materialist may seek shelter at the feet of a
kaniñöha-adhikäré. If able to advance to the madhyama qualification, he then
becomes attracted to a Vaiñëava actively engaged in preaching Kåñëa
consciousness. And when fully mature on the platform of intermediate
devotion, he becomes attracted to the mahä-bhägavata level and is awarded a
glimpse of the exalted position of the mahä-bhägavata spiritual master by the
grace of Kåñëa within his heart. If one gradually goes on in the devotional
service of the Lord, one becomes established as a paramahaàsa
mahä-bhägavata. At this stage all of his actions. movements and engagements
in preaching are dedicated solely to the satisfaction of Kåñëa. The illusory
potency, mäyä, has no power to throw or cover such a purified living entity. In
Upadeçämåta (5) Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé has described this stage of life as
bhajana-vijïam ananyam anya-nindädi-çünya-hådam.
A mahä-bhägavata, being empowered by the Supreme Lord, Yogeçvara, is
endowed with the supernatural power to inspire and give success to the
madhyama-adhikäré who follows in his footsteps and to elevate a
kaniñöha-adhikäré gradually to the intermediate platform. Such devotional
power springs automatically from the ocean of mercy found within the heart of
a pure devotee. Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura points out that a
mahä-bhägavata has no desire to inflict punishment on the enemies of the
Lord. Rather, he engages the madhyama-adhikärés and kaniñöha-adhikärés in
preaching work to purify the polluted mentality of the inimical souls, who are
falsely imagining the material world to be separate from Kåñëa.
There are unfortunate living entities who are unable to understand the
glory of a kaniñöha-adhikäré within the realm of devotional service, have no
praise for the more advanced state of intermediate devotion and cannot even
begin to understand the most exalted stage, that of the uttama-adhikäré. Such
unfortunate souls, attracted to impersonal Mäyäväda speculation, follow
faithfully in the footsteps of Kaàsa, Agha, Baka and Pütanä and are thus
killed by Çré Hari. In this way the community of sense gratifiers remains
uninterested in service at the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord, and according to
the individual perverted vision of so-called self-interest, each materialist
chooses his own misfortune in the form of repeated birth and death in various
types of material bodies. There are 8,400,000 species of material forms, and the
materialistic living entities select the particular flavors of birth, old age,
disease and death they wish to inflict upon themselves under the
hallucinations of so-called material progress.
The analogy is given that a lusty man, being agitated by sexual desire, sees
the whole world as filled with sensuous women. In a similar way, a pure
devotee of Kåñëa sees Kåñëa consciousness everywhere, although it may be
temporarily covered. Thus one sees the world just as one sees himself (ätmavan
manyate jagat). On this basis one may argue that the vision of the
mahä-bhagavata is also illusioned, since the Bhägavatam has already stated
throughout that those conditioned by the three modes of material nature are
not at all Kåñëa conscious but in fact are inimical to Kåñëa. But although the
conditioned living entity may appear inimical to the Lord, the eternal,
unalterable fact is that every living being is part and parcel of Kåñëa. Although
one's ecstatic love for Kåñëa may now be covered by the influence of mäyä, by
the causeless mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead the conditioned
soul will gradually be promoted to the stage of Kåñëa consciousness.
In fact, everyone is suffering the pangs of separation from Kåñëa. Because
the conditioned soul imagines that he has no eternal relationship with Kåñëa,
he is unable to ascertain that all his miseries are due to this separation. This is
mäyä, or "that which is not." Actually, to think that misery arises from
anything other than separation from Kåñëa is to be in illusion. So when a pure
devotee sees living entities suffering within this world, he correctly feels that
just as he is suffering because of separation from Kåñëa, all other living beings
are also suffering from separation from Kåñëa. The difference is that a pure
devotee correctly ascertains the cause of his heartbreak whereas the
conditioned soul, bewildered by mäyä, is unable to understand his eternal
relationship with Kåñëa and the unlimited pain arising from neglect of that
relationship.
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has quoted the following verses, which illustrate the
ecstatic feelings of the topmost devotees of the Lord. In the Tenth Canto of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.35.9) the goddesses of Vraja speak as follows:
vana-latäs tarava ätmani viñëuà
vyaïjayantya iva puñpa-phaläòhyäù
praëata-bhära-viöapä madhu-dhäräù
prema-håñöa-tanavo vavåñuù sma
"The creepers and trees of the forest, their branches weighed down by rich
coverings of flowers and fruits, seemed to manifest Lord Viñëu within their
hearts. Exhibiting eruptions of ecstatic love upon their bodies, they poured
down rains of honey." Elsewhere in the Tenth Canto (SB 10.21.15) it is said:
nadyas tadä tad upadhärya mukunda-gétam
ävarta-lakñita-mano-bhava-bhagna-vegäù
äliìgana-sthagitam ürmi-bhujair murärer
gåhëanti päda-yugalaà kamalopahäräù
"Hearing the song of Lord Mukunda's flute, the rivers then stopped their
currents, although the minds of the rivers could still be ascertained from the
presence of whirlpools. With the arms of their waves the rivers seized the two
lotus feet of Muräri, taking help from the lotus plants, and thus He became
trapped in their embrace." And in the last chapter of the Tenth Canto
(10.90.15), the queens of Dvärakä pray:
kurari vilapasi tvaà véta-nidrä na çeñe
svapiti jagati rätryäm éçvaro gupta-bodhaù
vayam iva sakhi kaccid gäòha-nirviddha-cetä
nalina-nayana-häsodära-lélekñitena
"Dear kuraré, now it is very late at night. Everyone is sleeping. The whole
world is now calm and peaceful. At this time, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is sleeping, although His knowledge is undisturbed by any
circumstance. Then why are you not sleeping? Why are you lamenting like this
throughout the whole night? Dear friend, is it that you are also attracted by
the lotus eyes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and by His sweet smiling
and attractive words, exactly as we are? Do those dealings of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead pinch your heart as they do ours?" Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura has also given mother Yaçodä as an example of an
uttama-adhikäré, for mother Yaçodä actually saw all living beings within the
mouth of Kåñëa during the Lord's Våndävana lélä.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura also points out in his commentary,
atra paçyed iti tathä darçana-yogyataiva vivakñitä, na tu tathä darçanasya
särva-kälikatä. "In this verse the word paçyet, or 'one must see,' does not mean
that at every moment one is visualizing the form of Kåñëa; rather, it means
that one has reached the exalted platform of devotional service on which he is
fit to see or is capable of seeing Kåñëa's form." If only those who constantly see
the form of Kåñëa are to be considered uttama-adhikärés, then Närada, Vyäsa
and Çukadeva cannot be considered topmost devotees, since they do not
always see the Lord everywhere. Of course, Närada, Vyäsa and Çukadeva are
considered to be on the highest standard of pure devotional service, and
therefore the real qualification is tad-didåkñädhikya, or having an
overwhelming desire to see the Lord. Therefore the statement of Bhagavad-gétä
that a devotee should see Kåñëa everywhere (yo mäà paçyati sarvatra) can be
understood in terms of the example of a lusty man's thinking that the world is
full of beautiful women. Similarly, one should become transcendentally so
desirous of seeing the Lord that one can perceive within the entire universe
nothing but Kåñëa and His potency. Väsudevaù sarvam iti [Bg. 7.19]. In Çréla
Prabhupäda's correspondence in 1969 with Professor J. F. Staal of the
University of California, Çréla Prabhupäda claimed that all of his disciples who
were strictly following the intense program of Kåñëa consciousness were in fact
sudurlabha-mahätmäs who were seeing väsudevaù sarvam. In other words, if
one is constantly engaged in Kåñëa consciousness with an intense desire to
please the Lord and one day gain His association, it is to be understood that in
one's life there is nothing but Kåñëa. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has
warned us, however, that a mere theoretical or academic understanding that
Kåñëa is everything does not qualify one as a first-class devotee. One must
actually have developed love for Kåñëa. Therefore it can be practically
understood that anyone who enthusiastically adopts the Kåñëa consciousness
program and eagerly participates in the preaching activities of the
International Society for Krishna Consciousness is acting on the platform of a
madhyama-adhikäré devotee. When such a devotee becomes overwhelmed by
his desire to serve Kåñëa and associate with the Lord, so much so that he is not
attracted to anything else within the universe, he should be understood to be
an uttama-adhikäré Vaiñëava, as mentioned in this verse.
TEXT 46
wRsvare" tad"DaInaeSau
baAilazAeSau iã"Sats$au ca
‘aemamaE‡aIk{(paAepaeºaA
ya: k(r"Aeita s$a maDyama:
ésvare tad-adhéneñu
bäliçeñu dviñatsu ca
prema-maitré-kåpopekñä
yaù karoti sa madhyamaù
SYNONYMS
éçvare—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tat-adhéneñu—to persons
who have taken fully to Kåñëa consciousness; bäliçeñu—unto the neophytes or
the ignorant; dviñatsu—to persons envious of Kåñëa and Kåñëa's devotees;
ca—and; prema—love; maitré—friendship; kåpä—mercy;
upekñäù—negligence; yaù—anyone who; karoti—does; saù—he;
madhyamaù—a second-class devotee.
TRANSLATION
An intermediate or second-class devotee, called madhyama-adhikäré, offers
his love to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is a sincere friend to all the
devotees of the Lord, shows mercy to ignorant people who are innocent and
disregards those who are envious of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
According to Bhagavad-gétä, every living entity within the material world is
eternally a minute fragmental portion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Mamaiväàço jéva-loke jéva-bhütaù sanätanaù (Bg. 15.7). But because of the
influence of mäyä the puffed-up conditioned souls become inimical to the
service of the Lord and the Lord's devotees, choose leaders among the
materialistic sense gratifiers, and thus engage busily in a useless society of the
cheaters and the cheated, a society of the blind leading the blind into a ditch.
Although the community of Vaiñëavas is sincerely eager to serve the
conditioned souls by bringing them back to their constitutional position, by
mäyä's influence the materialistic living entity becomes hardhearted and
rejects the mercy of the Lord's devotees.
According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, although a
second-class devotee is eager to preach to the innocent conditioned souls, he
should avoid the atheistic class of men so that he will not become disturbed or
polluted by their association. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has
confirmed that a Vaiñëava should be indifferent to those who are envious of
the Supreme Lord. It is practically seen that when such persons are informed
of the glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they attempt to ridicule
the Supreme Lord, thus further deteriorating their polluted existence. In this
connection Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has quoted from the Tenth
Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.20.36):
girayo mumucus toyaà
kvacin na mumucuù çivam
yathä jïänämåtaà käle
jïänino dadate na vä
"Sometimes in autumn the water falls down from the tops of the hills to supply
clean water, and sometimes the water stops. Similarly, sometimes great saintly
persons distribute clear knowledge, and sometimes they are silent."
In this regard, Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has mentioned that although the
first-class devotee of the Lord may at times exhibit apparent hatred toward the
demons because of entering the mood of the Lord's pastimes, the intermediate
devotees should avoid such feelings. Furthermore, the intermediate devotee
should not in any way associate with the powerful atheistic class of men,
because there is danger that his mind will become bewildered by such
association. According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, if a Vaiñëava
preacher encounters one who is envious of him, the preacher should remain
far away from such an envious person. But the Vaiñëava preacher may
meditate upon ways to save the envious class of men. Such meditation is called
sad-äcära, or saintly behavior. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has mentioned Prahläda
Mahäräja as an example of a saintly person. In Çrémad-Bhägavatam (7.9.43)
there is the following statement by Prahläda:
naivodvije para duratyaya-vaitaraëyäs
tvad-vérya-gäyana-mahämåta-magna-cittaù
çoce tato vimukha-cetasa indriyärthamäyä-
sukhäya bharam udvahato vimüòhän
"O best of the great personalities, I am not at all afraid of material existence,
for wherever I stay I am fully absorbed in thought of Your glories and
activities. My concern is only for the fools and rascals who are making
elaborate plans for material happiness and maintaining their families, societies
and countries. I am simply concerned with love for them." Although a
Vaiñëava preacher constantly meditates on the welfare of all living entities, he
will not associate with those who are unreceptive to the message of the
Supreme Lord, Kåñëa. In this regard Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura
states that even Bharata Mahäräja, Vyäsadeva and Çukadeva Gosvämé do not
exhibit their mercy indiscriminately.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has given an elaborate
explanation to prove that the discrimination employed by a
madhyama-adhikäré preacher does not at all show a lack of mercy. He states
that upekñä, or neglect, as mentioned in this verse, is the proper medicine for
those who are inimical to the Supreme Lord and His devotees. Indifference
from the preacher checks feelings of hostility on both sides. Although there is
a Vedic injunction that one should cut out the tongue of a person who offends
the Supreme Lord and His devotees, in this age it is best simply to avoid
potential offenders and thus prevent them from committing further sinful
activities against the Vaiñëavas. It is the duty of a Vaiñëava preacher to point
out the futility of any process besides surrendering to the Supreme Lord. An
envious person, however, will resent such strong preaching by a Vaiñëava and
disrespect him, considering the devotee to be unnecessarily criticizing others.
Such a person, who cannot appreciate the mercy of Vaiñëavas, should be
neglected. Otherwise, according to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura,
his cheating mentality will increase day by day.
Those who are not attracted to the saìkértana movement of Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu and who disrespect the faithful servants of Lord Caitanya,
considering their strong statements about the saìkértana movement to be
obstacles to their own worship of the Lord, will never be able to fix their minds
on Kåñëa, but will gradually fall down from the path of devotion by confusing
the external activities of the material world with the actual worship of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. Such bewilderment has been
expressed by the words bhayaà dvitéyäbhiniveçataù syät.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has strongly rejected those foolish
persons who, under a plea of mercy and equal vision, perceive that a faithless
person is also a devotee of the Supreme Lord and who thus try to thrust the
hari-näma, or holy name of God, upon such offensive people. Çréla
Bhaktisiddhänta has stated, "When childish people think themselves
mahä-bhägavatas and act in defiance of the Vaiñëava spiritual master, such
behavior simply holds them back from receiving the mercy of the Vaiñëava
guru. Bewildered by false ego, these self-proclaimed devotees gradually become
fit to be ignored by pure devotees on the intermediate platform and are
cheated of the mercy that comes from the devotees' satisfaction. Thus they
become asädhu by constantly committing offenses against the devotees who
preach the holy name of Kåñëa. Pure devotees, therefore, in all circumstances
display indifference to those who falsely imagine themselves to be
viçuddha-bhaktas, or pure devotees of the Lord. This indifference is an
excellent manifestation of their mercy." In other words, those who criticize the
Vaiñëava preachers on the second-class platform for discriminating between
those who are fit to receive the Lord's mercy and those who are simply envious
are misunderstanding the mission of the Lord. Kåñëa Himself states in
Bhagavad-gétä (4.8):
pariträëäya sädhünäà
vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm
dharma-saàsthäpanärthäya
sambhavämi yuge yuge
"To deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as well as to reestablish
the principles of religion, I advent Myself millennium after millennium." Even
such a great Vaiñëava as Çukadeva Gosvämé, one of the twelve mahäjanas in
this universe, expressed his contempt for the evil Kaàsa.
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has pointed out that even though the mahä-bhägavata
devotee may act on the second-class platform for preaching, his rejection of
the envious living entities does not obstruct his vision of the Lord as
all-pervading. Rather, when a first-class devotee or even a second-class devotee
rejects the atheistic class of men, he is expressing the mission of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. A first-class or second-class Vaiñëava never actually
becomes envious of another living entity, but out of intense love for the
Supreme Lord he becomes angry when the Lord is offended. Also,
understanding the Lord's mission, he discriminates according to the position of
a particular living entity. To consider such a Vaiñëava preacher an ordinary,
envious person, or to consider him sectarian because of his proclamation of
pure devotional service as the most exalted of all methods of spiritual
advancement, reflects a materialistic vision called vaiñëave jäti-buddhiù or
guruñu nara-matiù. Such an offense drags the offender down to a hellish
condition of life by the laws of nature.
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, although a mahä-bhägavata sees every
living entity as a pure spirit soul, such a mahä-bhägavata still experiences
special ecstasies and other symptoms upon meeting another Vaiñëava. This is
not contradictory to his vision as a topmost devotee; rather, it is a symptom of
his love for Kåñëa. A pure devotee sees every living entity as part and parcel of
Kåñëa and therefore expresses his love for Kåñëa through love for all the
expansions and creations of Kåñëa. Still, such a mahä-bhägavata feels special
ecstatic love upon seeing another living entity directly pleasing the senses of
the Supreme Lord. Such feelings are manifest in the statement of Lord Çiva to
the Pracetäs:
kñaëärdhenäpi tulaye
na svargaà näpunar-bhavam
bhagavat-saìgi-saìgasya
martyänäà kim utäçiñaù
"If one by chance associates with a devotee, even for a fraction of a moment,
he no longer is subject to attraction by the results of karma or jïäna. What
interest then can he have in the benedictions of the demigods, who are subject
to the laws of birth and death?" (SB 4.24.57) Similarly, Lord Çiva also stated:
atha bhägavatä yüyaà
priyäù stha bhagavän yathä
na mad bhägavatänäà ca
preyän anyo 'sti karhicit
"You are all devotees of the Lord, and as such I appreciate that you are as
respectable as the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself. I know that in
this way the devotees also respect me and that I am dear to them. Thus no one
can be as dear to the devotees as I am." (SB 4.24.30) Similarly, in the First
Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.7.11) Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé is mentioned as
nityaà viñëu-jana-priyaù, especially dear to the pure devotees of the Lord.
The wonderful loving dealings between Vaiñëavas on the topmost platform
are demonstrated in the pastimes of Caitanya-caritämåta. In other words,
although a Vaiñëava sees every living entity as part and parcel of Kåñëa, he
must discriminate in his external behavior so as not to interfere with the
original purpose of the Lord's creation, which is to reform the living entities so
that they can gradually come back home, back to Godhead. A pure devotee
does not foolishly pretend equal vision and approach envious persons; rather,
he respects the mission of the Lord, as stated in Bhagavad-gétä (4.11) by the
words ye yathä mäà prapadyante täàs tathaiva bhajämy aham.
On the other hand, if it is the Lord's desire, a pure devotee can offer his
respects to all living beings. For example, Çréla Jéva Gosvämé mentions that
Uddhava and other pure devotees of the Lord were always prepared to offer
respectful obeisances even to such persons as Duryodhana.
Madhyama-adhikärés, however, should not imitate such uttama-adhikäré
behavior. In this connection, the distinction between madhyama-adhikäré and
uttama-adhikäré is stated by Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura as follows:
atra sarva-bhüteñu bhagavad-darçana-yogyatä yasya kadäcid api na dåñöä. A
madhyama-adhikäré cannot at any time perceive the presence of the Supreme
Lord within all living beings, whereas an uttama-adhikäré, however he acts on
the second-class platform to carry out the Lord's mission, is aware that every
living entity is ultimately a forgetful Kåñëa conscious living entity. Therefore,
although a devotee may externally engage four different types of behavior, as
mentioned in this verse—namely, worship of the Lord, friendship with the
devotees, preaching to the innocent and rejection of the demons—he is not
necessarily on the second-class platform, since an uttama-adhikäré also may
exhibit these symptoms to carry out the Lord's mission. In this regard, Çréla
Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura mentions that it is the duty of the
madhyama-adhikäré to extend himself as the right hand of the uttama-adhikäré,
vowing to work for the benefit of others and offering to help in distributing
love of Kåñëa.
Finally, Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has given a nice
explanation of the difference between arcana and bhajana. Arcana refers to
the platform of sädhana-bhakti, in which one serves the Lord to carry out the
rules and regulations of the process. One who has achieved the shelter of the
Lord's holy name and is totally engaged in the attempt to serve the Lord should
be considered to be on the platform of bhajana, even though his external
activities may sometimes be less strict than those of the neophyte engaged in
arcana. This apparent lack of strictness, however, refers to laxity not in the
basic principles of sane behavior and renunciation of sense gratification, but
rather in the details of Vaiñëava ceremonies.
TEXT 47
@caARyaAmaeva h"r"yae
paUjaAM ya: ™aÜ"yaeh"tae
na taà"le(Sau caAnyaeSau
s$a Bal(: ‘aAk{(ta: sma{ta:
arcäyäm eva haraye
püjäà yaù çraddhayehate
na tad-bhakteñu cänyeñu
sa bhaktaù präkåtaù småtaù
SYNONYMS
arcäyäm—Deity; eva—certainly; haraye—to Lord Hari; püjäm—worship;
yaù—who; çraddhayä—faithfully; éhate—engages; na—not; tat—of Kåñëa;
bhakteñu—toward the devotees; ca—and; anyeñu—toward people in general;
saù—he; bhaktaù präkåtaù—materialistic devotee; småtaù—is called.
TRANSLATION
A devotee who faithfully engages in the worship of the Deity in the temple
but does not behave properly toward other devotees or people in general is
called a präkåta-bhakta, a materialistic devotee, and is considered to be in the
lowest position.
PURPORT
Çréla Madhväcärya comments that one in the lowest stage of devotional
service faithfully worships the Deity in the temple but is not aware that the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is actually all-pervading. This same mentality
can be seen in the Western countries, where people commit all types of sinful
activities in their homes and in the street but then piously go to a church and
pray to God for mercy. Actually, God is in our home, God is in the street, God
is in our office, God is in the forest, God is everywhere, and therefore God
should be worshiped everywhere by the process of devotional service at His
lotus feet. As stated in verse 41 of this chapter,
khaà väyum agnià salilaà mahéà ca
jyotéàñi sattväni diço drumädén
sarit-samudräàç ca hareù çaréraà
yat kià ca bhütaà praëamed ananyaù
"A devotee should not see anything as being separate from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. Ether, fire, air, water, earth, the sun and other
luminaries, all living beings, the directions, trees and other plants, the rivers
and oceans—whatever a devotee experiences he should consider to be an
expansion of Kåñëa. Thus seeing everything that exists within creation as the
body of the Supreme Lord, Hari, the devotee should offer his sincere respects
to the entire expansion of the Lord's body." This is the vision of the
mahä-bhagavata devotee of the Lord.
Çréla Madhväcärya states that a madhyama-adhikäré, a devotee in the
intermediate stage, sees the Supreme Personality of Godhead as the cause of all
causes and therefore offers his love to the Lord. Such a devotee is a sincere
friend of other devotees, is merciful to the ignorant and avoids the atheists.
Nonetheless, tad-vaçatvaà na jänäti sarvasya jagato 'pi tu: his realization of the
all-pervading feature of the Supreme Lord is imperfect. Although he does have
a general sense that everyone is ultimately meant to be a devotee of the
Supreme Lord and he tries to use everything in the service of Kåñëa, aware
that everything belongs to the Lord, he may be bewildered by association with
atheistic men.
Çréla Madhväcärya states, arcäyäm eva saàsthitam/ viñëum jïätvä
tad-anyatra naiva jänäti yaù pumän. A kaniñöha-adhikäré has no idea that the
Supreme Lord has the power to exist outside a church or temple. Furthermore,
being puffed up by his own ceremonial worship (ätmano bhakti-darpataù), a
kaniñöha-adhikäré cannot imagine that anyone is more pious or religious than
he, and he is not even aware that other devotees are more advanced. Thus he
cannot understand the madhyama or uttama standard of devotional service,
and sometimes, because of his false pride, he criticizes the more advanced
devotees of the Lord, neglects them or simply has no understanding of their
exalted position as preachers or completely self-realized souls.
Another symptom of the kaniñöha-adhikäré is that he is infatuated by the
material qualifications of so-called great materialistic persons. Having a bodily
concept of life himself, he is attracted by material opulence and thus minimizes
the position of the Supreme Lord, Viñëu. Such a kaniñöha-adhikäré, therefore,
is disturbed if a second-class devotee criticizes the nondevotees of the Lord. In
the name of compassion or kindness, a kaniñöha-adhikäré approves of the
nondevotional activities of such materialistic men. Because the
kaniñöha-adhikäré is ignorant of the higher realms of devotional service and the
unlimited transcendental bliss of Kåñëa consciousness, he sees devotional
service merely as the religious aspect of life but thinks that life has many
enjoyable and worthwhile nondevotional aspects. Therefore he becomes angry
when second-class devotees, who are experiencing that Kåñëa is everything,
criticize the nondevotees. Madhväcärya says that such a person, because of his
rudimentary faith in Kåñëa, is considered a devotee, but he is bhaktädhama, a
devotee on the lowest standard. If such materialistic devotees follow the rules
and regulations of Deity worship, they will gradually be elevated to a higher
standard and eventually become pure devotees of the Lord, unless they commit
offenses against other devotees, in which case their advancement will be
checked.
Çréla Madhväcärya states, tad-bhaktänäm upekñakäù kuryur viñëäv api
dveñam. Those who neglect or show indifference to the devotees of the Lord
are to be considered offenders at the lotus feet of Viñëu. Similarly, those who
disrespect the demigods will become bereft of devotional service and be forced
to rotate again and again within saàsära, the cycle of birth and death. Püjyä
deväs tataù sadä: the demigods are always to be offered respect, since they are
devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If someone is envious of the
demigods, he is to be considered envious of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Similarly, one who offers sincere respect to the demigods is
considered to be respecting the will of the Supreme Lord. A Vaiñëava does not
foolishly think that there are many gods. He knows that there is one Supreme
Personality of Godhead. But as stated many times in Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the
Lord has a mission within this material world, which is to reform the
conditioned living entities through the cruel laws of nature. In the Lord's
mission within this world, the demigods are to be considered limbs of the
Lord's body. It is stated in Bhagavad-gétä (7.20):
kämais tais tair håta-jïänäù
prapadyante 'nya-devatäù
taà taà niyamam ästhäya
prakåtyä niyatäù svayä
"Those whose minds are distorted by material desires surrender unto demigods
and follow the particular rules and regulations of worship according to their
own natures." But there are many examples of devotees who worshiped the
demigods to get benedictions for serving Lord Kåñëa. The gopés worshiped the
demigods to achieve Kåñëa, and similarly Rukmiëédevé, on the day of her
marriage, engaged in such demigod worship, her only goal being Kåñëa. Even
today the preachers of the Kåñëa consciousness movement cultivate important
people with all kindness and diplomacy so that such wealthy or influential
people will engage their resources in the devotional service of Kåñëa to glorify
Kåñëa all over the world. Similarly, offering all respects to the demigods so that
they will give facility for the devotional service of Kåñëa is not against the
bhakti-märga, although nowadays such demigod worship has also deteriorated.
Therefore, Caitanya Mahäprabhu has recommended hari-näma saìkértana,
chanting the holy names of Kåñëa, as the only realistic process for this age.
Nonetheless, a devotee of the Lord should not misinterpret Bhagavad-gétä's
injunctions against demigod worship as a license to offend the demigods, who
are bona fide Vaiñëavas.
Çréla Madhväcärya notes,
viñëor upekñakaà sarve
vidviñanty adhikaà suräù
pataty avaçyaà tamasi
hariëä taiç ca pätitaù
"All the demigods are extremely inimical to one who does not respect Lord
Viñëu. Such a person is pushed into the darkest regions by the Lord, as well as
by the demigods." From this statement by Çréla Madhväcärya, the devotional
sentiments of the demigods can be understood. It is stated that in the supreme
liberation achieved by an uttama-adhikäré, the most exalted devotee of the
Lord, the devotee enjoys transcendental bliss in the direct association of the
Supreme Lord and the demigods.
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, since a kaniñöha-adhikäré who cannot
properly respect other devotees will certainly fail to offer respects to ordinary
living entities who are not even devotees, a kaniñöha-adhikäré is useless for
practical preaching work unless he comes to a higher platform of
understanding. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé says, iyaà ca çraddhä na
çästrärthävadhäraëa-jätä. Because the kaniñöha-adhikäré's faith is not actually
based on the statements of Vedic literature, he cannot understand the exalted
position of the Supreme Personality of Godhead within everyone's heart.
Therefore he cannot actually manifest love of Godhead, nor can he
understand the exalted position of the devotees of the Lord. Kåñëa is so
glorious that Kåñëa's intimate associates must also be glorious. But this is
unknown to a kaniñöha-adhikäré. Similarly, the essential qualification of a
Vaiñëava, which is to offer all respects to others (amäninä manädena kértanéyaù
sadä hariù [Cc. Ädi 17.31] is also conspicuous by its absence in a
kaniñöha-adhikäré. If such a person, however, has faith in the Vedic literatures
and tries to understand the statements of Bhagavad-gétä and
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, he will gradually be elevated to the second—and
first-class stages of devotional service.
According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, a kaniñöha-adhikäré
should very seriously engage in regulated worship of the Deity. The Deity is a
particular incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Lord Kåñëa can
present Himself before the worshiper in five different manifestations, namely
His original form as Kåñëa (para), His quadruple expansions (vyüha), His
pastime incarnations (vaibhava), the Supersoul (antaryämé) and the Deity
(arcä). Within the Deity form (arcä) is the Supersoul, who in turn is included
within the Lord's pastime forms (vaibhava). The Supreme Lord's
vaibhava-prakäça is an emanation from the catur-vyüha. This quadruple
expansion of the Lord is situated within the supreme truth, Väsudeva, who
Himself is situated within the svayaà-prakäça-tattva. This svayaà-prakäça
consists of expansions of the ultimate svayaà-rüpa-tattva, the original form of
Kåñëa within Goloka Våndävana in the spiritual sky. This hierarchy of the
expansions of the Supreme Lord in the spiritual world is realized even within
the material world in terms of one's eagerness to render service to the Lord. A
beginner in the lowest stage of devotional service should try to dedicate all his
activities to the satisfaction of the Lord and cultivate the worship of Kåñëa in
the temple.
According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, all the plenary
expansions of the Supreme Lord mentioned above descend into this world and
enter within the Deity, who exhibits the function of the Supersoul by
accompanying the daily life of the Vaiñëava. Although the vaibhava, or
pastime expansions, of the Lord incarnate at specific times (rämädi-mürtiñu
kalä-niyamena tiñöhan [Bs. 5.39]), the Supersoul and Deity forms are constantly
available for the spiritual advancement of the devotees in this world. As one
comes to the madhyama-adhikäré platform, one is able to understand the
expansions of the Supreme Lord, whereas the kaniñöha-adhikäré's entire
knowledge of the Lord is limited to the Deity. Nonetheless, Kåñëa is so kind
that to encourage even the lowest class of Vaiñëavas He condenses all of His
various forms into the Deity so that by worshiping the Deity the
kaniñöha-adhikäré devotee is worshiping all the forms of the Lord. As the
devotee makes advancement, he can understand these forms as they appear in
their own way, both within this world and in the spiritual sky.
As long as one remains on the third-class platform, one has no
transcendental appreciation of the blissful reality of the Supreme Lord's
paraphernalia and entourage. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu was very pleased with
King Pratäparudra when the King, upon receiving an outer cloth from the
Lord, immediately installed it as a Deity and began to worship it as being as
good as the Lord Himself. Lord Çiva himself has stated, tasmäd parataraà devi
tadéyänäà samarcanam. Worship of the paraphernalia, entourage or devotees
of the Lord is even better than worship of the Lord, because the Lord is more
pleased by worship of His devotees and entourage than by worship of Himself
personally.
According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, the inability of the
kaniñöha-adhikäré to appreciate the Lord's devotees, entourage and
paraphernalia indicates that such a materialistic Vaiñëava is still affected by
the speculative understanding of the karma-vadés and Mäyävädés, those who
are dedicated to sense gratification and impersonal speculation about the
Absolute. Çréla Prabhupäda often said that only the impersonalist desires to see
Kåñëa alone; we desire to see Kåñëa with His cows, His friends, His parents, His
gopés, His flute, jewelry, forest scenery and so on. Kåñëa is gorgeous in the
setting of Våndävana. It is in the land of Våndävana that Lord Kåñëa,
surrounded by so many beautiful associates, manifests His exalted
indescribable beauty. Similarly, the unique mercy of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead is exhibited in the activities of His pure devotees who selflessly
travel around the universe distributing the dust particles from Kåñëa's lotus
feet on the heads of the conditioned souls. One who is uninterested in the
Lord's paraphernalia, entourage and devotees has a stunted conception of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. This must be due to contamination from the
impersonal and sensuous understandings of life.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura states that after hundreds of
lifetimes of faithfully worshiping the Deity of Lord Väsudeva with external
paraphernalia, one realizes the true nature of His transcendental name and
mantras, and the bondage of one's materialistic mentality slackens. In this way,
as a kaniñöha-adhikäré gradually comes to perceive the mental activities of a
devotee and tries seriously to advance to a higher stage, his materialistic
conceptions will go away of their own accord. He then exhibits loving service
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and makes friendship with the
devotees who are the dearmost sons of the Lord, and by appreciating the
universal quality of devotional service to Kåñëa he becomes very much eager to
engage other innocent people in the service of the Lord. Further, as he begins
to make significant advancement he becomes inimical to anything or anyone
that hinders the progress of his devotional life, and thus he avoids atheistic
people who cannot benefit by good instruction.
The International Society for Krishna Consciousness, founded by His
Divine Grace Oà Viñëupäda Paramahaàsa Parivräjakäcärya 108 Çré Çrémad
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda, is so nice that anyone who helps this
society immediately engages in preaching work for the Lord. Thus there is
great facility for the members of this society to come quickly to the
second-class stage of devotional service. If in the name of Kåñëa consciousness
one gives up preaching and instead becomes interested simply in collecting
funds for maintenance, he is showing a type of envy of other living entities.
This is a symptom of the third-class platform. According to Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura, verses 45 through 47 constitute the answer to King Nimi's
two questions "What is the nature of devotional service to the Lord?" and
"What are the specific duties of the Vaiñëavas?"
TEXT 48
gA{h"ItvaApaIin‰"yaEr"TaARna,
yaAe na ãe"ií" na ô$Syaita
ivaSNAAemaARyaAimadM" pazyana,
s$a vaE BaAgAvataAeÔama:
gåhétväpéndriyair arthän
yo na dveñöi na håñyati
viñëor mäyäm idaà paçyan
sa vai bhägavatottamaù
SYNONYMS
gåhétvä—accepting; api—even though; indriyaiù—with his senses;
arthän—objects of the senses; yaù—who; na dveñöi—does not hate; na
håñyati—does not rejoice; viñëoù—of the Supreme Lord, Viñëu; mäyäm—the
illusory potency; idam—this material universe; paçyan—seeing as; saù—he;
vai—indeed; bhägavata-uttamaù—a first-class devotee.
TRANSLATION
Even while engaging his senses in contact with their objects, one who sees
this whole world as the energy of Lord Viñëu is neither repelled nor elated. He
is indeed the greatest among devotees.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, the position of the uttama-adhikäré, or
first-class devotee of the Lord, is so worshipable that additional symptoms are
now given in eight verses. It should be understood that unless one comes in
contact with the lotus feet of a pure devotee of the Lord, the path of freedom
from material illusion is very difficult to understand. In the fifth verse of Çré
Upadeçämåta Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé has stated, çuçrüñayä bhajana-vijïam
ananyam anya-nindädi-çünya-hådam épsita-saìga-labdhyä: "One should
associate with and faithfully serve that pure devotee who is advanced in
undeviated devotional service and whose heart is completely devoid of the
propensity to criticize others." Çréla Prabhupäda comments, "In this verse Çréla
Rüpa Gosvämé advises the devotee to be intelligent enough to distinguish
between the kaniñöha-adhikäré, madhyama-adhikäré and uttama-adhikäré. A
neophyte Vaiñëava or a Vaiñëava situated on the intermediate platform can
also accept disciples, but such disciples must be on the same platform, and it
should be understood that they cannot advance very well toward the ultimate
goal of life under his insufficient guidance. Therefore a disciple should be
careful to accept an uttama-adhikäré as a spiritual master." Therefore
additional symptoms will now be given so that the conditioned soul who
desires to go back home, back to Godhead, can properly identify the bona fide
spiritual master.
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé and Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, associating with
a pure devotee of the Lord is so important that now that the various categories
of devotional service have been defined, eight additional verses are given
concerning the qualifications of a pure devotee, so that students of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam will make no mistake in this connection. Similarly, in the
Second Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä Arjuna asked Kåñëa about the symptoms of a
completely Kåñëa conscious person, and Kåñëa elaborately explained the
symptoms of one who is prajïä pratiñöhitä, or established in Kåñëa
consciousness.
The particular qualification mentioned in this verse is viñëor mäyäm idaà
paçyan: one should see the entire material universe as a product of the illusory
energy of the Lord. There is no question of lamenting or rejoicing for that
which is the property of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Within this
world one generally laments upon losing something desirable and rejoices upon
acquiring the object of his wish. But since a pure devotee has no personal
desire whatsoever (kåñëa-bhakta niñkäma-ataeva 'çänta' [Cc. Madhya 19.149]),
there is no question of gain or loss. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (18.54):
brahma-bhütaù prasannätmä
na çocati na käìkñati
samaù sarveñu bhüteñu
mad-bhaktià labhate paräm
"One who is transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme Brahman
and becomes fully joyful. He never laments nor desires to have anything; he is
equally disposed to every living entity. In that state he attains pure devotional
service unto Me." Similarly, Lord Çiva says to his wife, Pärvaté, while glorifying
the character of King Citraketu,
näräyaëa-paräù sarve
na kutaçcana bibhyati
svargäpavarga-narakeñv
api tulyärtha-darçinaù
"Devotees solely engaged in the devotional service of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Näräyaëa, never fear any condition of life. For them the heavenly
planets, liberation and the hellish planets are all the same, for such devotees
are interested only in the service of the Lord." (SB 6.17.28)
This state of complete satisfaction in the devotional service of Kåñëa is not
a mental concoction achieved by artificial meditation, but is a result of having
experienced the superior nature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who
is a reservoir of transcendental bliss. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (2.59),
rasa-varjaà raso 'py asya paraà dåñövä nivartate. When impersonalists and
voidists artificially try to push material things out of their minds, they undergo
great hardships and ordeals in their artificial meditation.
kleço 'dhikataras teñäm
avyaktäsakta-cetasäm
avyaktä hi gatir duùkhaà
dehavadbhir aväpyate
(Bg. 12.5)
According to Lord Kåñëa, it is only with great inconvenience and suffering
that one can achieve impersonal liberation, because every living being is
eternally a person, being part and parcel of the Supreme Person, Kåñëa. The
concept of giving up one's personal identity is a reaction to the terrible
frustration of material egotism. It is not a positive program. If one is suffering
unbearable pain in his hand, he may agree to have the hand amputated, but
the real solution is to remove the infection so that the healthy hand may
become a source of pleasure. Similarly ego, or the sense that "I am," is a source
of unlimited happiness when we understand what we are, namely servants of
Kåñëa. Impersonal meditation is dry and troublesome. A pure devotee realizes
that he is an eternal person, part and parcel of the Supreme Person, Lord
Kåñëa, and that he has the privilege as the son of God to participate in the
ecstatic eternal pastimes of the Supreme Lord, loving Kåñëa and playing with
Him forever. For such a devotee the pale material nature, which is but a
perverted reflection of the spiritual world, becomes totally unattractive.
Therefore, one who is completely attached to Kåñëa and uninterested in the
manifestations of mäyä can be considered bhägavatottamaù, a pure devotee of
the Lord, as described in a previous verse (bhaktiù pareçänubhavo viraktir
anyatra ca [SB 11.2.42]).
Çréla Madhväcärya has stated, viñëor mäyäà viñëv-icchädhénäm: "The words
viñëor mäyäm in this verse indicate that the illusory energy always remains
dependent upon the will of Lord Viñëu." Similarly the Brahma-saàhitä (5.44)
says, såñöi-sthiti-pralaya-sädhana-çaktir ekä chäyeva yasya bhuvanäni bibharti
durgä. Mäyä is like a shadow of the Supreme Personality of Godhead who
serves Him in the creation, maintenance and annihilation of this world. Just as
a shadow has no independent power of movement but follows the substance
that casts the shadow, the illusory energy of the Lord has no independent
power, but bewilders the living entities according to the Lord's desire. One of
Kåñëa's opulences is that He is supremely detached; when a living entity wants
to forget Him, Kåñëa immediately employs His illusory energy to facilitate the
foolishness of the conditioned soul.
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé the words gåhétväpéndriyair arthän indicate
that the pure devotee of the Lord does not cease acting within this world;
rather, he uses his senses in the service of the Lord of the senses, Håñékeça.
Håñékeëa håñékeça-sevanaà bhaktir ucyate [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. Çréla Rüpa
Gosvämé has stated that if one gives up those material things which are
favorable for serving Kåñëa, considering them material and therefore an
impediment to his spiritual advancement, his renunciation is merely
phalgu-vairägya, or immature and imperfect renunciation. On the other hand,
one who accepts all material things for the service of Kåñëa without any
personal desire for sense gratification is actually renounced (yuktaà vairägyam
ucyate).
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has warned in his commentary on
this verse that by envying any of the three classes of
devotees—uttama-adhikäré, madhyama-adhikäré or kaniñöha-adhikäré—one falls
down to the platform of impersonalism and loses all power to benefit others or
even himself. Therefore those who are trying to advance in Kåñëa
consciousness should not endanger their transcendental experience by
unnecessarily criticizing other Vaiñëavas. According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta
Sarasvaté Öhäkura, if one engages in phalgu-vairägya, or renouncing material
things that are favorable to the service of Lord Kåñëa, one runs the risk of
being polluted by impersonal philosophy. On the other hand, by sticking to the
principle of yukta-vairägya, engaging everything for Kåñëa without personal
desire, one can remain aloof from the danger of material sense gratification
and gradually come to the mahä-bhägavata platform, as mentioned in this
verse.
TEXT 49
de"he"in‰"ya‘aANAmanaAeiDayaAM yaAe
janmaApyayaºauà"yataSaRk{(cC)E$:
s$aMs$aAr"DamaE=r"ivamau÷maAna:
sma{tyaA h"re"BaARgAvata‘aDaAna:
dehendriya-präëa-mano-dhiyäà yo
janmäpyaya-kñud-bhaya-tarña-kåcchraiù
saàsära-dharmair avimuhyamänaù
småtyä harer bhägavata-pradhänaù
SYNONYMS
deha—of the body; indriya—senses; präëa—life air; manaù—mind;
dhiyäm—and intelligence; yaù—who; janma—by birth; apyaya—diminution;
kñut—hunger; bhaya—fear; tarña—thirst; kåcchraiù—and the pain of exertion;
saàsära—of material life; dharmaiù—by the inseparable features;
avimuhyamänaù—not bewildered; småtyä—because of remembrance;
hareù—of Lord Hari; bhägavata-pradhänaù—the foremost of devotees.
TRANSLATION
Within the material world, one's material body is always subject to birth and
decay. Similarly, the life air [präëa] is harassed by hunger and thirst, the mind
is always anxious, the intelligence hankers for that which cannot be obtained,
and all of the senses are ultimately exhausted by constant struggle in the
material nature. A person who is not bewildered by the inevitable miseries of
material existence, and who remains aloof from them simply by remembering
the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is to be considered
bhägavata-pradhäna, the foremost devotee of the Lord.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Madhväcärya there are three classes of intelligent living
beings within this world, namely the demigods, ordinary human beings, and
demons. A living being endowed with all auspicious qualities—in other words,
a highly advanced devotee of the Lord—either on the earth or in the higher
planetary systems is called a deva, or demigod. Ordinary human beings
generally have good and bad qualities, and according to this mixture they
enjoy and suffer on the earth. But those who are distinguished by their absence
of good qualities and who are always inimical to pious life and the devotional
service of the Lord are called asuras, or demons.
Of these three classes, the ordinary human beings and demons are terribly
afflicted by birth, death and hunger, whereas the godly persons, the demigods,
are aloof from such bodily distress. The demigods remain aloof from such
distress because they are enjoying the results of their pious activities; by the
laws of karma, they are unaware of the gross suffering of the material world. As
the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (9.20),
trai-vidyä mäà soma-päù püta-päpä
yajïair iñövä svar-gatià prärthyante
te puëyam äsädya surendra-lokam
açnanti divyän divi deva-bhogän
"Those who study the Vedas and drink the soma juice, seeking the heavenly
planets, worship Me indirectly. They take birth on the planet of Indra, where
they enjoy godly delights." But the next verse of Bhagavad-gétä says that when
one uses up the results of these pious activities, one has to forfeit his status as a
demigod, along with the pleasure of the heavenly kingdom, and return to earth
as a nara, or ordinary human being (kñéëe puëye martya-lokaà viçanti [Bg.
9.21]). In fact the laws of nature are so subtle that one may not even return to
earth as a human, but may take birth as an insect or tree, depending on the
particular configuration of his karma.
The pure devotee of the Lord, however, does not experience material
misery, because he has given up the bodily concept of life and identifies
himself correctly as an eternal servitor of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Kåñëa. As stated by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gétä (9.2),
susukhaà kartum avyayam. Even in the stage of regulative practice, the process
of bhakti-yoga is very joyful. Similarly, Locana däsa Öhäkura, a near
contemporary of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, said, saba avatära sära çiromaëi
kevala änanda-käëòa. Although there are various käëòas, or divisions, of Vedic
discipline, such as karma-käëòa (fruitive ceremonies) and jïäna-käëòa
(regulated speculation), Caitanya Mahäprabhu's hari-näma saìkértana
movement is kevala änanda-käëòa, the pathway of pure bliss. Simply by
chanting the holy names of Kåñëa, eating the remnants of sumptuous food
offered to the Supreme Lord and hearing the enchanting pastimes of the
Personality of Godhead, one merges into an ocean of bliss called Kåñëa
consciousness.
Fortunately this blissful ocean is the eternal situation of every living entity,
provided he gives up all of his bogus concepts of life. One should not identify
himself as a gross material body, nor as a fickle mind, nor as speculative
intelligence, nor should one foolishly identify himself with the so-called void
of Buddhist imagination. Nor should one even identify himself with the ocean
of impersonal spiritual life called the brahmajyoti, which illuminates the great
outdoors of the spiritual sky beyond the covered universe. One should rather
identify himself correctly as an eternal individual servant of the supreme
individual Personality of Godhead. By this simple admission of one's
constitutional position and by sincere engagement in the service of the lotus
feet of the Lord, one is quickly promoted to direct participation in the eternal
pastimes of Kåñëa, just as Arjuna got the opportunity to play with Kåñëa as a
soldier on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra.
Çréla Madhväcärya has given an elaborate description of the process by
which material miseries arise. When a conditioned soul of demoniac mentality
identifies himself with the gross material body, he undergoes miseries of
constant drowsiness and unquenchable sexual desires that burn all mental
peace and serenity to ashes. When a demoniac person identifies himself with
präëa, the life air, he suffers from hunger, and by identifying himself with the
mind he suffers panic, fear, and hankering that ends in disappointment. When
he identifies himself with intelligence, he suffers profound existential
bitterness and frustration deep within his heart. When he identifies himself
with the false ego, he feels inferiority, thinking, "I am so low." And when he
identifies himself with the process of consciousness, he is haunted by memories
of the past. When a demon tries to impose himself as the ruler of all living
beings, all of these miseries expand simultaneously.
According to Çrépäda Madhväcärya, sinful life is the demoniac standard for
happiness. We can observe that in demoniac societies the dark, late hours of
night are considered most appropriate for recreational activity. When a demon
hears that someone is rising at four o'clock in the morning to take advantage of
the godly early-morning hours, he is astonished and bewildered. Therefore it is
said in Bhagavad-gétä (2.69),
yä niçä sarva-bhütänäà
tasyäà jägarti saàyamé
yasyäà jägrati bhütäni
sä niçä paçyato muneù
"What is night for all beings is the time of awakening for the self-controlled;
and the time of awakening for all beings is night for the introspective sage."
Çréla Prabhupäda has commented, "There are two classes of intelligent men.
The one is intelligent in material activities for sense gratification, and the
other is introspective and awake to the cultivation of self-realization." Thus
the more one can increase illicit sex, intoxication, meat-eating and gambling,
the more one advances his prestige in a demoniac society, whereas in a godly
society based on Kåñëa consciousness these things are abolished completely.
Similarly, as one becomes blissfully attached to the holy name and pastimes of
Kåñëa, one becomes more and more alienated from the demoniac society.
The demons are self-proclaimed enemies of the Supreme Lord, and they
mock His kingdom. Thus they are described by Çréla Madhväcärya as
adho-gateù, or those who have purchased their tickets to the darkest regions of
hell. On the other hand, if one is undisturbed by the miseries of material life,
he is on the same spiritual level as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As
stated in Bhagavad-gétä (2.15),
yaà hi na vyathayanty ete
puruñaà puruñarñabha
sama-duùkha-sukhaà dhéraà
so 'måtatväya kalpate
"O best among men [Arjuna], the person who is not disturbed by happiness and
distress and is steady in both is certainly eligible for liberation." One can come
to this transcendental stage only by the mercy of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. In the words of Çré Madhväcärya, sampürëänugrahäd viñëoù.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has described the process by
which one becomes an uttama-adhikäré If one is fortunate, he gradually
becomes disgusted with the limited vision and activities of the
kaniñöha-adhikäré and learns to appreciate the expanded vision of the
madhyama-adhikäré, who is able to recognize that every living entity should
become a devotee of Kåñëa and that one achieves the perfection of life by
following in the footsteps of an uttama-adhikäré devotee of the Lord. As one's
devotional service gradually intensifies and one repeatedly bathes in dust from
the lotus feet of a pure devotee, the harassment of birth, death, hunger, thirst,
fear and so on gradually cease disturbing the mind. As stated in
Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu (1.2.114),
alabdhe vä vinañöe vä
bhakñyäcchädana-sädhane
aviklava-matir bhütvä
harim eva dhiyä smaret
"Even if a devotee is frustrated in his attempt to eat properly or clothe himself
properly, he should not allow this material failure to disturb his mind; rather,
he should use his intelligence to remember his master, Lord Kåñëa, and thus
remain undisturbed." As one becomes mature in this process of remembering
Kåñëa in all circumstances, he is awarded the title mahä-bhägavata.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta gives the example that just as a child's ball may be
fastened to the end of a rope so that it cannot bounce away, a devotee who
surrenders to Kåñëa becomes tied to the rope of Vedic injunctions and is never
lost in worldly affairs. In this connection Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté
Öhäkura has quoted from the Åg Veda (1.156.3) as follows: oà äsya jänanto
näma cid vivaktan mahas te viñëo su-matià bhajämahe oà tat sat. "O Viñëu,
Your name is completely transcendental. Thus it is self-manifest. Indeed, even
without properly understanding the glories of chanting Your holy name, if we
vibrate Your name with at least a small understanding of its glories—that is, if
we simply repeat the syllables of Your holy name—gradually we shall
understand it." The supreme entity indicated by the praëava oà is sat, or
self-revealing. Therefore, even if one is disturbed by fear or envy, the
transcendental form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead will become
manifest to one who continues to chant the Lord's holy name. Further
evidence is given in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (6.2.14):
säìketyam pärihäsyaà vä
stobhaà helanam eva vä
vaikuëöha-näma-grahaëam
açeñägha-haraà viduù
"One who chants the holy name of the Lord is immediately freed from the
reactions of unlimited sins, even if he chants indirectly (to indicate something
else), jokingly, for musical entertainment, or even neglectfully. This is
accepted by all the learned scholars of the scriptures."
TEXT 50
na k(Amak(maRbaIjaAnaAM
yasya caetais$a s$amBava:
vaAs$aude"vaEk(inalaya:
s$a vaE BaAgAvataAeÔama:
na käma-karma-béjänäà
yasya cetasi sambhavaù
väsudevaika-nilayaù
sa vai bhägavatottamaù
SYNONYMS
na—never; käma—of lust; karma—fruitive work; béjänäm—or of material
hankerings, which are the seeds of fruitive activity; yasya—of whom;
cetasi—in the mind; sambhavaù—chance to arise; väsudeva-eka-nilayaù—one
for whom the Supreme Lord, Väsudeva, is the only shelter; saù—he;
vai—indeed; bhägavata-uttamaù—is a first-class devotee.
TRANSLATION
One who has taken exclusive shelter of the Supreme Lord, Väsudeva,
becomes free from fruitive activities, which are based on material lust. In fact,
one who has taken shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord is freed from even the
desire to enjoy material sense gratification. Plans for enjoying sex life, social
prestige and money cannot develop within his mind. Thus he is considered
bhägavatottama, a pure devotee of the Lord on the highest platform.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, this verse describes the behavior of a
devotee of the Lord. The activities of a pure devotee are devoid of material
envy, false elation, delusion and lust. According to the Vaiñëava
commentators, the word béjänäm in this verse refers to väsanäù, or deeply
rooted desires, which gradually fructify in the form of activities, for which the
living entity becomes subject to reactions. Thus the compound word
käma-karma-béjänäm indicates the deep-rooted desire to lord it over the
material world through the enjoyment of sexual pleasure and the expansions of
sexual pleasure mentioned in the Bhägavatam (5.5.8) as
gåha-kñetra-sutäpta-vittaiù, that is, a beautiful residential building and ample
land for producing sumptuous food to fill the belly, as well as children, friends,
social contacts and a large bank balance. All of these material items are
essential for completely forgetting that one is an eternal servant of the
Supreme Lord. Therefore as stated in the Bhägavatam, janasya moho 'yam
ahaà mameti: [SB 5.5.8] intoxicated by these objects of material illusion, the
conditioned soul becomes madly convinced that he is the center of the
universe and that everything in existence has been created only for his
personal sense gratification. Whoever obstructs such illusory enjoyment
becomes immediately his enemy and subject to be killed.
Because of this bodily concept of life and the shackles of illusion, the whole
world is being violently shaken by conflict arising from envy and lust. The
only possible solution is to accept the leadership of the Lord's pure devotees,
who are described here. A popular expression used to justify democratic
government is "Power corrupts and absolute power corrupts absolutely." Such
homilies may be valid on the material platform, but it is specifically mentioned
here that a pure devotee of the Lord who has completely taken shelter of the
Lord's lotus feet cannot even consider taking part in material envy and sense
gratification. His mind remains perpetually clear and sober, and he is always
aware of the ultimate good of every living entity. The Kåñëa consciousness
movement is strenuously endeavoring to inform the earth's suffering living
entities of the serious need for a brain in human society. A brain racked by
fever cannot give proper direction, and if the so-called thinkers of society are
burning with selfish desires, they are no better than feverish, delirious brains.
Delirious governments are gradually destroying all traces of happiness in
human society. Therefore it is the duty of Vaiñëava preachers to act on the
platform of bhägavatottama so that they can give clear guidance to humanity,
without being corrupted or even slightly attracted by the material opulence
that may be offered to a saintly person. All intelligent human beings who are
unable to take directly to the process of bhakti-yoga should at least be
sufficiently educated to recognize the first-class devotee of the Lord and accept
his guidance. In this way human society can be very nicely organized so that
not only all human beings but even the animals, birds and trees can make
advancement in life and gradually go back home, back to Godhead, for an
eternal life of bliss and knowledge.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has emphasized that those
seriously interested in achieving the perfection of Kåñëa consciousness must
live in a community of Vaiñëavas. Çréla Prabhupäda has also mentioned several
times in his literature that it is not possible to achieve the stage of perfect
Kåñëa consciousness unless one accepts the shelter of the pure devotees by
living in the Kåñëa conscious communities being established all over the world
by the International Society for Krishna Consciousness. Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta
Sarasvaté Öhäkura has emphasized that this does not mean that spiritual life is
restricted only to those celibate students who can live within a temple
compound. Devotees in the gåhastha order, that of spiritual family life, can also
take shelter of the Vaiñëava community by regularly attending temple
functions. Those who are living in family life should daily see the Deity of the
Supreme Lord, chant His holy names in His personal presence, accept the
remnants of food offered to the Deity and hear learned discourses on
Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Any householder who regularly takes
advantage of these spiritual facilities and follows the regulative principles of
spiritual life, namely no meat-eating, no illicit sex, no gambling and no
intoxication, is to be considered a bona fide member of the Vaiñëava
community. According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, those who
remain inimical to the devotional service of the Lord are to be considered
lifeless puppets in the hands of the illusory energy of the Lord.
TEXT 51
na yasya janmak(maRByaAM
na vaNAAR™amajaAitaiBa:
s$aÀatae'ismaªahM"BaAvaAe
de"he" vaE s$a h"re": i‘aya:
na yasya janma-karmabhyäà
na varëäçrama-jätibhiù
sajjate 'sminn ahaà-bhävo
dehe vai sa hareù priyaù
SYNONYMS
na—there is not; yasya—of whom; janma—by good birth; karmabhyäm—or
meritorious acts; na—not; varëa-äçrama—by adherence to rules of
occupational or religious duty; jätibhiù—or by belonging to a certain class of
society; sajjate—attaches itself; asmin—in this (body); aham-bhävaù—egotistic
sentiment; dehe—in the body; vai—indeed; saù—he; hareù—to Lord Hari;
priyaù—is dear.
TRANSLATION
Birth in an aristocratic family and the execution of austere and pious
activities certainly cause one to take pride in himself. Similarly, if one enjoys a
prestigious position within society because his parents are highly respected
members of the varëäçrama social system, one becomes even more infatuated
with himself. But if despite these excellent material qualifications one does not
feel even a tinge of pride within himself, he is to be considered the dearmost
servitor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, the word janma ("good birth") refers to
such classes as the mürdhävasiktas (children of brähmaëa fathers and kñatriya
mothers) and ambañöhas (children of brähmaëa fathers and vaiçya mothers),
both of which are considered anuloma since the father comes from a higher
caste. Marriages in which the mother comes from a higher class than the
father are called pratiloma. In any case, one who becomes proud of his so-called
prestigious birth is certainly in the bodily concept of life. Birth in any material
body is a serious problem, which one should solve by surrendering to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. One can thereby release himself from the
golden shackles of a so-called aristocratic material body.
According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, kaniñöha-adhikärés
think that karma-miçra bhakti, or devotional service mixed with material
endeavor, is the ultimate in spiritual life. They become attached to verses such
as this:
varëäçramäcära-vatä
puruñeëa paraù pumän
viñëur ärädhyate panthä
nänyat tat-toña-käraëam
[Cc. Madhya 8.58]
"The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viñëu, is worshiped by the proper
execution of prescribed duties in the system of varëa and äçrama. There is no
other way to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One must be
situated in the institution of the four varëas and äçramas." (Viñëu Puräëa
3.8.9) Thus they think that material work in which a portion of the fruits are
offered to God forms the highest platform of human life. According to Çréla
Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, there are several småti literatures that
have encouraged such mixed devotional service. Such books are taken by
materialistic devotees as facility for offending the holy name of the Lord
because of egotistic attachment to the material body. Thus one thinks that a
prestigious position in the varëäçrama system according to birth and so-called
pious activities is a prerequisite for becoming successful in life.
But those who have actually taken shelter of the holy name of Kåñëa never
boast about their birth in the material world, nor do they pride themselves on
their so-called expertise in material work. As long as one's mentality is
encumbered by the material designations of the varëäçrama system, one has
very little chance of becoming free from material bondage and establishing
himself as dear to the Lord. In this regard, Caitanya Mahäprabhu emphatically
declared that He could not identify Himself with any varëäçrama designation,
such as that of a great intellectual or priest, a courageous warrior in the Lord's
army, a brilliant businessman making money for the Lord, or the hardest
worker for the Lord. Nor could Caitanya Mahäprabhu identify Himself as a
stalwart brahmacäré, a noble householder or an exalted sannyäsé. These
designations reflect the material pride that can infiltrate the execution of
devotional service. Although a devotee may carry out the standard duties of
varëäçrama, his only designation is gopé-bhartuù pada-kamalayor
däsa-däsänudäsaù [Cc. Madhya 13.80], the eternal servant of the servant of the
servant of the Lord, the master of the gopés, Kåñëa.
According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, when a devotee
understands that the process of bhakti-yoga is complete in itself and he
becomes absorbed in hearing and chanting the glories of the Lord, the
supremely merciful Personality of Godhead affectionately lifts such a first-class
devotee onto His own lap. The Supreme Lord can be pleased only by unalloyed
devotion, and not by any arrangement of the gross body, composed of five
material elements, or the subtle body, composed of innumerable speculations
and bogus pride. In other words, Lord Kåñëa can never be pleased by one's
so-called aristocratic body, which is due to be devoured by worms or vultures. If
one becomes proud of his material birth and so-called pious activities, by such
false pride one gradually develops the impersonal mentality of merely
renouncing the fruit of work or else the karmé mentality of enjoying the fruits
of work. Neither the karmés nor the jïäné speculators are aware that the fruit
of work actually belongs to Kåñëa. The conclusion is that one should carefully
give up all false pride and always remember that he is a humble servant of
Kåñëa. As stated by Caitanya Mahäprabhu, amäninä mänadena kértanéyaù sadä
hariù [Cc. Ädi 17.31].
TEXT 52
na yasya sva: par" wita
ivaÔaeSvaAtmaina vaA iBad"A
s$avaRBaUtas$ama: zAAnta:
s$a vaE BaAgAvataAeÔama:
na yasya svaù para iti
vitteñv ätmani vä bhidä
sarva-bhüta-samaù çäntaù
sa vai bhägavatottamaù
SYNONYMS
na—there is not; yasya—of whom; svaù paraù iti—"mine" and "someone else's";
vitteñu—about his property; ätmani—about his body; vä—or; bhidä—by
thinking in terms of duality; sarva-bhüta—to all living beings; samaù—equal;
çäntaù—peaceful; saù—he; vai—indeed; bhägavata-uttamaù—the best of
devotees.
TRANSLATION
When a devotee gives up the selfish conception by which one thinks "This is
my property, and that is his," and when he is no longer concerned with the
pleasures of his own material body or indifferent to the discomforts of others,
he becomes fully peaceful and satisfied. He considers himself simply one among
all the living beings who are equally part and parcel of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Such a satisfied Vaiñëava is considered to be at the highest
standard of devotional service.
PURPORT
The vision described by the phrase sarva-bhüta-samaù, "seeing all living
entities equally," does not include one's vision of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. In this connection Çréla Madhväcärya has quoted from the
Haré-vaàça as follows:
na kväpi jévaà viñëutve
saàsåtau mokña eva ca
"Under no circumstance should one consider the living entity equal to Lord
Viñëu, either in conditional life or in liberation." The impersonal speculative
philosophers are fond of imagining that although in our present illusion we
appear to be individual entities, at liberation we shall all merge into God and
be God. Such wishful thinkers cannot reasonably explain how the omnipotent
God could arrive at the embarrassing position of having to enter a yoga studio,
pay weekly fees, press His nose and chant mantras to regain His divinity. As
stated in the Vedas, nityo nityänäà cetanaç cetanänäm eko bahünäà yo
vidadhäti kämän (Kaöha Upaniñad 2.2.13). The individuality or plurality of
living entities is not a product of material existence. The word nityänäm,
denoting the plurality of eternal entities, clearly indicates that the living
entities are eternally individual parts and parcels of the Lord, who is the
singular unique entity described here as ekaù. In Bhagavad-gétä (1.21) Arjuna
said to Kåñëa, rathaà sthäpaya me 'cyuta: "My dear Acyuta, please place my
chariot between the armies." This body is also ratha, a vehicle, and therefore
the best policy is to request the infallible Lord to take charge of our
conditioned body and guide us on the path back to the kingdom of God. The
word acyuta means "the infallible" or "one who never falls." Learned or sane
human beings will not entertain the silly notion that the omnipotent,
omniscient God has slipped and fallen because of mäyä. No amount of wishful
thinking can erase our eternal servitorship at the lotus feet of the Lord.
This fact is stated by the Lord Himself in the Varäha Puräëa:
naivaà tvayänumantavyaà
jévätmäham iti kvacit
sarvair guëair su-sampannaà
daivaà mäà jïätum arhasi
"You should never think Me one of the ordinary living entities in the jéva
category. In fact I am the reservoir of all opulences and godly qualities, and
therefore you should understand that I am the Supreme Lord."
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé and Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura,
this verse of Çrémad-Bhägavatam does not forbid using a particular object in
the Lord's service, since a devotee is free to use anything favorable for serving
Lord Kåñëa. This acceptance of favorable objects in the service of Kåñëa is
called yukta-vairägya. As stated by Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé, nirbandhaù
kåñëa-sambandhe: one should be attached for Kåñëa's sake, never for one's own
sake. If one interprets this verse to indicate that one should not exercise
control over any material object, even if it is favorable for serving Kåñëa, one
falls into the bad understanding called phalgu-vairägya, or immature
renunciation. Great kings such as Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira and Mahäräja Parékñit
engaged the entire earth, and other Vaiñëavas have engaged the entire
universe in the service of Kåñëa. But they completely gave up the sense of their
personal proprietorship. That is the point made in this verse. Just as one
becomes very much concerned about any pain in one's own body, one should
be concerned with bringing the conditioned souls to the platform of
devotional service so that all of their suffering will be banished forever. That is
the actual purport of not distinguishing between one body and another.
TEXT 53
i‡aBauvanaivaBavahe"tavae'pyaku(NQ&-
sma{itar"ijataAtmas$aur"Aid"iBaivaRma{gyaAta,
na calaita BagAvatpad"Ar"ivand"Ala,
lavainaimaSaADaRmaipa ya: s$a vaESNAvaAƒya:
tri-bhuvana-vibhava-hetave 'py akuëöhasmåtir
ajitätma-surädibhir vimågyät
na calati bhagavat-padäravindäl
lava-nimiñärdham api yaù sa vaiñëavägryaù
SYNONYMS
tri-bhuvana—of the three worlds comprising the material universe;
vibhava-hetave—for the sake of the opulences; api—even;
akuëöha-småtiù—whose remembrance is undisturbed; ajita-ätma—of whom the
unconquerable Lord is the very soul; sura-ädibhiù—by the demigods and
others; vimågyät—which are sought; na calati—he does not go away;
bhagavat—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pada-aravindät—from the
lotus feet; lava—of eight forty-fifths of one second; nimiña—or of three times
that; ardham—one half; api—even; yaù—who; saù—he; vaiñëava-agryaù—the
foremost of devotees of Lord Viñëu.
TRANSLATION
The lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are sought even by
the greatest of demigods, such as Brahmä and Çiva, who have all accepted the
Supreme Personality of Godhead as their life and soul. A pure devotee of the
Lord can never forget those lotus feet in any circumstance. He will not give up
his shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord for a single moment—indeed, not for
half a moment—even in exchange for the benediction of ruling and enjoying
the opulence of the entire universe. Such a devotee of the Lord is to be
considered the best of the Vaiñëavas.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé one may ask, "If one were able to gain
the opulence of the entire universe in exchange for leaving the Lord's lotus
feet for just half a moment, what would be the harm in leaving the Lord's lotus
feet for such an insignificant amount of time?" The answer is given by the
word akuëöha-småti. It is simply impossible for a pure devotee to forget the
lotus feet of the Personality of Godhead, since everything that exists is in fact
an expansion of the Supreme Lord. Since nothing is separate from the
Supreme Lord, a pure devotee of the Lord cannot think of anything but the
Lord. Nor can a pure devotee contemplate ruling or enjoying universal
opulence; even if given all the opulence of the universe, he would immediately
offer it at the lotus feet of the Lord and return to his position of a humble
servant of the Lord.
The words ajitätma-surädibhir vimågyät are very significant in this verse.
The lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa are so opulent that even the lords of all material
opulence, namely Brahmä and Çiva, as well as the other demigods, are always
searching for a glimpse of the Lord's lotus feet. The word vimågyät indicates
that the demigods are not actually able to see the lotus feet of the Lord, but are
endeavoring to see them. An example of this is given in the Tenth Canto
when Lord Brahmä offers prayers to Viñëu, begging the Lord to rectify the
disturbances on the earth.
A similar verse is found elsewhere in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.14.14):
na pärameñöhyaà na mahendra-dhiñëyaà
na särvabhaumaà na rasädhipatyam
na yoga-siddhér apunar-bhavaà vä
mayy arpitätmecchati mad vinänyat
"The devotee who has offered his soul to Me does not want anything if it is
separate from Me—not the position of the supreme demigod of the universe,
Brahmä, nor that of Lord Indra, nor kingship over the entire earth or over the
lower planetary systems, nor the mystic perfections of yoga, nor even freedom
from the cycle of rebirth."
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, the word ajitätmä can
also be taken to mean ajitendriyäù, or "those whose senses are uncontrolled."
Although the demigods are all to be respected as devotees of Lord Viñëu, the
absence of gross material discomfort in the higher planetary systems makes
them tend to become affected by the bodily concept of life, and sometimes
they experience some spiritual difficulty due to the gorgeous material facilities
available to them. Such disturbances, however, cannot exist within the mind
of a pure devotee of the Lord, as indicated in this verse by the word
akuëöha-småti. According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, we can
understand from this verse that since none of the material facilities available
in any of the universal planetary systems can distract a pure devotee of the
Lord, such a devotee can never possibly fall or become inimical to the Lord's
service.
TEXT 54
BagAvata oç&iva‚(maAx.~i„azAAKaAnaKamaiNAcain‰"
k(yaA inar"stataApae
ô$id" k(Tamaupas$aId"taAM pauna: s$a
‘aBavaita can‰" wvaAeid"tae'kR(taApa:
bhagavata uru-vikramäìghri-çäkhänakha-
maëi-candrikayä nirasta-täpe
hådi katham upasédatäà punaù sa
prabhavati candra ivodite 'rka-täpaù
SYNONYMS
bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; uru-vikrama—which
have performed great heroic deeds; aìghri—of the lotus feet; çäkhä—of the
toes; nakha—of the nails; maëi—which are like jewels; candrikayä—by the
moonshine; nirasta-täpe—when the pain has been removed; hådi—in the
hearts; katham—how indeed; upasédatäm—of those who are worshiping;
punaù—again; saù—that pain; prabhavati—can have its effect; candre—when
the moon; iva—just as; udite—risen; arka—of the sun; täpaù—the burning
heat.
TRANSLATION
How can the fire of material suffering continue to burn the hearts of those
who worship the Supreme Lord? The Lord's lotus feet have performed
innumerable heroic deeds, and the beautiful nails on His toes resemble valuable
jewels. The effulgence emanating from those nails resembles cooling moonshine,
for it instantly relieves the suffering within the heart of the pure devotee, just
as the appearance of the moon's cooling light relieves the burning heat of the
sun.
PURPORT
When the moon rises, the expansion of its rays drives away the distress of
the sun's fierce heat. Similarly, the cooling rays emanating from the lotus nails
of the Personality of Godhead's lotus feet vanquish all distress for the Lord's
pure devotee. According to the Vaiñëava commentators it is to be understood
from this verse that material lust, exemplified by uncontrolled sexual desire, is
exactly like a blazing fire. The flames of this fire burn to ashes the peace and
happiness of the conditioned soul, who perpetually wanders in 8,400,000
species of life, vainly struggling to extinguish this intolerable fire. The pure
devotees of the Lord place the Lord's cooling, jewellike lotus feet within their
hearts, and thus all of the pain and suffering of material existence are
extinguished.
The word uru-vikramäìghri indicates that the Lord's lotus feet are quite
heroic. Çré Kåñëa is famous for His incarnation as Vämana, the dwarf
brähmaëa, who extended His beautiful toes up to the outer limits of the
universe and perforated the universal shell, thus bringing the waters of the
holy Ganges into the universe. Similarly, when Kåñëa was entering the city of
Mathurä to challenge the demoniac King Kaàsa and His entrance was
impeded by a ferocious elephant named Kuvalayäpéòa, Lord Kåñëa kicked the
elephant to death and peacefully entered the city gates. Lord Kåñëa's lotus feet
are so exalted that the Vedic literatures state that the entire material
manifestation rests beneath His lotus feet: samäçrétä ye pada-pallava-plavaà
mahat padaà puëya-yaço muräreù (SB 10.14.58).
TEXT 55
ivas$a{jaita ô$d"yaM na yasya s$aAºaAä,"
Dair"r"vazAAiBaih"taAe'pyaGaAEGanaAzA:
‘aNAyar"s$anayaA Da{taAx.~i„apaá:
s$a Bavaita BaAgAvata‘aDaAna ol(:
visåjati hådayaà na yasya säkñäd
dharir avaçäbhihito 'py aghaugha-näçaù
praëaya-rasanayä dhåtäìghri-padmaù
sa bhavati bhägavata-pradhäna uktaù
SYNONYMS
visåjati—He leaves; hådayam—the heart; na—never; yasya—of whom;
säkñät—Himself; hariù—Lord Hari; avaça—accidentally; abhihitaù—called;
api—even though; agha—of sins; ogha—heaps; näçaù—who destroys;
praëaya—of love; rasanayä—by ropes; dhåta—held; aìghri-padmaù—His lotus
feet; saù—he; bhavati—is; bhägavata-pradhänaù—the foremost devotee;
uktaù—called.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is so kind to the conditioned souls that
if they call upon Him by speaking His holy name, even unintentionally or
unwillingly, the Lord is inclined to destroy innumerable sinful reactions in their
hearts. Therefore, when a devotee who has taken shelter of the Lord's lotus feet
chants the holy name of Kåñëa with genuine love, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead can never give up the heart of such a devotee. One who has thus
captured the Supreme Lord within his heart is to be known as
bhägavata-pradhäna, the most exalted devotee of the Lord.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, the essence of a pure devotee's
qualifications is given in this verse. A pure devotee is one who has attracted
the Lord by his love so that the Lord cannot give up the devotee's heart.
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, the word säkñät in this verse indicates that a
pure devotee has realized knowledge of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
having given his heart to the Supreme Lord, Kåñëa, who is all-attractive in six
opulences, including beauty. A pure devotee can never be attracted by the
fleshy bags of women's breasts or by the hallucinations of so-called society,
friendship and love within the material world. Therefore his clean heart
becomes a suitable abode for the Supreme Lord. A gentleman will live only in
a clean place. He will not live in a polluted, contaminated place. Educated
people in the Western countries are now greatly protesting the pollution of
water and air by urban industrial enterprises. People are demanding the right
to live in a clean place. Similarly, Lord Kåñëa is the supreme gentleman, and
therefore He will not live in a polluted heart, nor will He appear within the
polluted mind of a conditioned soul. When a devotee surrenders to Lord Kåñëa
and becomes a lover of the Lord by direct realization of Kåñëa's all-attractive
nature, the Lord makes His residence in the clean heart and mind of such a
pure devotee.
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, ya etädåça-praëayaväàs tenänena tu
sarvadä paramävaçenaiva kértyamänaù sutaräm evam eväghaugha-näçaù syät. If a
devotee is absorbed in the loving transcendental service of Kåñëa, directly or
indirectly he is always glorifying the Lord by transcendental loving service.
Therefore, even if he chants the holy name of Kåñëa with improper attention
due to being absorbed in the Lord's service, the mercy of the Lord purifies his
heart of all sinful reactions. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (2.1.11):
etan nirvidyamänänäm
icchatäm akuto-bhayam
yoginäà nåpa nirëétaà
harer nämänukértanam
"O King, constant chanting of the holy name of the Lord after the ways of the
great authorities is the doubtless and fearless way of success for all, including
those who are free from all material desires, those who are desirous of all
material enjoyment, and also those who are self-satisfied by dint of
transcendental knowledge." Therefore if one who has not come to the platform
of loving devotional service chants the holy name of Kåñëa, he will also be
gradually freed from all sinful reactions. In the Sixth Canto of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, in the purports to the history of Ajämila, Çréla
Prabhupäda has elaborately explained the holy name's potency to purify even
an ordinary person.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has nicely explained the process of
bringing the Supreme Lord under control. Mother Yaçodä bound the child
Kåñëa to a grinding mortar with a rope. Kåñëa, being attracted by the
inconceivable love of His devotees, allowed Himself to be bound. Therefore,
although Lord Kåñëa binds all the conditioned souls by the chains of His
illusory potency, mäyä, if those same conditioned souls become pure devotees
of the Lord they can in turn bind Kåñëa by the chains of love of God.
According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, all the world's
inauspicious conditions due to sinful activities can be immediately eradicated
by the chanting of the Lord's holy name. The Supreme Personality of Godhead
never leaves the hearts of those who give up all sinful behavior and chant His
holy name. Even if such chanting is not yet perfect, devotee who always
remains in the Lord's service will gradually come to the stage of prema-niñöhä,
or steady love of Godhead. Then they are to be considered mahä-bhägavatas, or
pure devotees of the Lord.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Eleventh Canto, Second Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Mahäräja Nimi Meets the Nine Yogendras."
3. Liberation from the Illusory Energy
In answer to four questions spoken by Mahäräja Nimi, this chapter
describes the nature and activities of the illusory potency (mäyä), the method
of becoming free from mäyä's insurmountable grip, the transcendental
situation of the Supreme Lord Näräyaëa, and the process of karma-yoga, by
which one becomes free from all material activities.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, the original cause of all causes,
created the five material elements, from which the material bodies of the
conditioned souls are created so that the conditioned souls may cultivate
either sense gratification or ultimate liberation. Appearing as the Supersoul,
the Supreme Lord enters the material bodies of the created beings and
activates the eleven senses of the conditioned souls. The conditioned soul
misidentifies the created material body with his actual self and thus engages in
various fruitive activities. Impelled by the reactions of his own activities, he
repeatedly takes birth in various species of life and thus suffers greatly until
the time of the cosmic annihilation. When the annihilation is imminent, the
soul of the universal form withdraws the entire material creation within
Himself, and then He Himself enters into the original cause of all causes. In
this way the Lord empowers His illusory potency, consisting of the three modes
of material nature, for the creation, maintenance and annihilation of the
material universe.
Accepting the roles of male and female in this material world, the
conditioned souls unite in sexual relationships. Although these souls
constantly make material endeavors to eliminate their unhappiness and
unlimitedly increase their pleasure, they inevitably achieve exactly the
opposite result.
Permanent happiness cannot be found in this world-either on the earthly
planets or on the heavenly planets, which one can attain in the next life after
performing ritualistic ceremonies and sacrifices. Both on earth and in heaven
the living entity is harassed by the envy and rivalry of others.
Therefore any person who seriously desires. to find permanent relief from
the sufferings of material existence should take shelter of the lotus feet of a
bona fide spiritual master. The qualification of the bona fide guru is that he
has realized the conclusions of the Vedic scriptures by deliberation and is able
to convince others of these conclusions. Such great personalities, who have
taken shelter of the Supreme Godhead, leaving aside all material
considerations, should he understood to be bona fide spiritual masters.
Accepting the bona fide spiritual master as one's life and soul, the
submissive disciple should learn from him the process of pure devotional
service, which satisfies the Supreme Lord. By thus following the path of
devotional service, the disciple gradually develops all good qualities.
One should hear, glorify and meditate upon the wonderful transcendental
activities, appearance, qualities and holy names of the Lord. Whatever one
finds pleasing or enjoyable he should immediately offer to the Supreme Lord;
even his wife, children, home and very life air should all be offered at the lotus
feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One should serve others and also
accept instructions from others. Especially, one should serve and learn from
those who are pure devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
By chanting the glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the
association of devotees, one becomes satisfied and happy and develops a loving
friendship with the devotees. In this way one becomes able to give up material
sense gratification, which is the cause of all suffering. When a devotee attains
the stage of pure love of Godhead, the hairs of his body stand on end, and he
manifests various ecstatic symptoms; he personally meets the Supreme Lord
and becomes full of transcendental bliss. By learning the science of devotional
service and practically engaging in the devotional service of the Lord, the
devotee comes to the stage of love of Godhead. When completely devoted to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa, the devotee easily crosses
over the illusory energy, mäyä, which is extremely difficult to cross.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the cause of the creation,
maintenance and destruction of the universe, yet He has no prior cause.
Situated within the temporary and constantly changing material world, the
Supreme Lord remains eternal and unchanging. He cannot be understood by
the unaided mind or senses, and He is transcendental to the manifestation of
the material world, which takes place as the subtle cause and material effect
visible in the appearance of gross material objects. Although He is originally
one, by expanding His illusory potency (mäyä) He appears in many different
forms. He is always free from birth, growth, decay and death, and He is the
Supersoul, the all-pervading witness who perceives the mentalities of all living
entities. He is the Supreme Brahman and is known as Näräyaëa.
When one seriously engages in devotional service to the lotus feet of Lord
Näräyaëa, the impure desires lodged within one's heart as a result of one's
previous work within the three modes of material nature are destroyed. When
the heart is thus purified, one can directly perceive both the Supreme Lord
and one's self as transcendental entities.
Through authorized study of the transcendental Vedic literature, one can
properly understand the meaning of prescribed duties, nonperformance of
such duties, and forbidden activities. This difficult subject matter can never be
understood by mundane speculation. Vedic injunctions indirectly lead one to
the path of ultimate liberation by first prescribing fruitive religious activities,
just as a father promises his child candy so that the child will take his
medicine. If an ignorant person who has not conquered the material senses
does not perform the Vedic injunctions, he will certainly engage in sinful and
irreligious activities. Thus his reward will be repeated birth and death. On the
other hand, if one executes the regulated activities prescribed in the Vedas,
without attachment, and offers the result of such work to the Supreme Lord,
one attains perfect freedom from the bondage of material work. The material
fruitive results offered in the revealed scriptures are not the actual goal of
Vedic knowledge, but are meant for stimulating the interest of the performer.
If a conditioned soul worships the Supreme Lord Hari by following the
regulations found in Vedic literatures such as the tantras, he will quickly
become free from the bondage of false ego.
When a devotee obtains the mercy of his spiritual master, who reveals to
him the injunctions of Vedic scriptures, he worships the Supreme Personality
of Godhead in the particular personal form he finds most attractive. In this
way the devotee quickly becomes liberated from all material bondage.
TEXT 1
™aIr"AjaAevaAca
par"sya ivaSNAAer"IzAsya
maAiyanaAmaipa maAeih"naIma,
maAyaAM vaeid"tauimacC$AmaAe
BagAvantaAe “auvantau na:
çré-räjoväca
parasya viñëor éçasya
mäyinäm api mohiném
mäyäà veditum icchämo
bhagavanto bruvantu naù
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—the King said; parasya—of the Supreme; viñëoù—Viñëu;
éçasya—the Lord; mäyinäm—for the possessors of great mystic power;
api—even; mohiném—which is bewildering; mäyäm—the illusory potency;
veditum—to understand; icchämaù—we desire; bhagavantaù—my lords;
bruvantu—please tell this; naù—to us.
TRANSLATION
King Nimi said: Now we wish to learn about the illusory potency of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Viñëu, which bewilders even great
mystics. My lords, please speak to us about this subject.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, in this chapter various saintly sons of
Åñabhadeva will speak about the illusory energy (mäyä), the means for crossing
beyond it, the characteristics of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
prescribed duties for human beings. The forty-eighth verse of the previous
chapter stated, viñëor mäyäm idaà paçyan: "A devotee of Kåñëa should see the
entire universe to be the illusory potency of the Lord." Therefore King Nimi is
now pursuing this subject matter by requesting more detailed information from
the saintly Yogendras.
According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, the demigods,
headed by Lord Brahmä, and the human beings of the earth are all driven by
their particular desires for material sense gratification. Thus they direct their
senses toward research for material knowledge. The subtle celestial senses of
the demigods and the gross senses of human beings are all busy in ascertaining
the measurements of material sense objects. To understand fully the actual
nature of mäyä, the illusory potency, which causes the conditioned souls to
become averse to Kåñëa consciousness and surrender to bewildering material
manifestations, King Nimi is inquiring from another of the nine Yogendras,
Çré Antarékña.
TEXT 2
naAnauta{pyae jauSana, yauSmaä,"-
vacaAe h"ir"k(TaAma{tama,
s$aMs$aAr"taApainastaæaAe
matyaRstaÔaApaBaeSajama,
nänutåpye juñan yuñmad229
vaco hari-kathämåtam
saàsära-täpa-nistapto
martyas tat-täpa-bheñajam
SYNONYMS
na anutåpye—I am not yet satiated; juñan—engaging; yuñmat—your; vacaù—in
the words; hari-kathä—of the topics of the Supreme Lord, Hari; amåtam—the
nectar; saàsära—of material existence; täpa—by the misery;
nistaptaù—tormented; martyaù—a mortal human; tat-täpa—of that pain;
bheñajam—the medical treatment.
TRANSLATION
Although I am drinking the nectar of your statements about the glories of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, my thirst is not yet satiated. Such
nectarean descriptions of the Lord and His devotees are the actual medicine for
conditioned souls like me, who are tormented by the threefold miseries of
material existence.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, one may argue that since the symptoms
of a pure devotee of the Lord have already been elaborately described, one can
perfect his life by advancing to the platform mentioned in the previous verse,
and there is no need for further questions. But hari-kathämåtam, topics about
the Lord and His devotees, are so pleasing and beautiful that one cannot give
up hearing them, even after spiritual liberation. Caitanya Mahäprabhu, in this
connection, has quoted the following verse:
ätmärämäç ca munayo
nirgranthä apy urukrame
kurvanty ahaitukéà bhaktim
ittham-bhüta-guëo hariù
"Those who are self-satisfied and unattracted by external, material desires are
also attracted to the loving service of Çré Kåñëa, whose qualities are
transcendental and whose activities are wonderful. Hari, the Personality of
Godhead, is called Kåñëa because He has such transcendentally attractive
features." (SB 1.7.10) Material medicine is not desirable once a disease has been
cured, but on the absolute platform the means and the end are not different.
So chanting and hearing the glories of Lord Kåñëa are both the means and the
end of transcendental bliss.
King Nimi said to the sages, "You are all great saintly persons absorbed in
love of Godhead. Therefore although you will speak about mäyä, or illusion,
the conclusion will undoubtedly be Kåñëa consciousness. Please don't think
that you have already explained everything to me. The intoxicating nectar of
your instructions has left me more eager than ever to hear about the Supreme
Personality of Godhead."
King Nimi was also a great devotee of the Lord, otherwise there would have
been no question of his personally conversing with such exalted living entities
as the nine Yogendras. But as a humble Vaiñëava he considered himself an
ordinary conditioned soul covered by material designations. Thus he showed
his eagerness to understand the actual nature of mäyä in order to be safe from
her future attempts to place him in the burning fire of material existence.
TEXT 3
™aI@ntar"Iºa ovaAca
WiBaBaURtaAina BaUtaAtmaA
mah"ABaUtaEmaRh"ABauja
s$as$ajaAeR»aAvacaAnyaAâ:
svamaA‡aAtma‘ais$aÜ"yae
çré-antarékña uväca
ebhir bhütäni bhütätmä
mahä-bhütair mahä-bhuja
sasarjoccävacäny ädyaù
sva-mäträtma-prasiddhaye
SYNONYMS
çré-antarékñaù uväca—Çré Antarékña said; ebhiù—by these (material elements);
bhütäni—creatures; bhüta-ätmä—the Soul of all creation; mahä-bhütaiù—by
the elements of the mahat-tattva; mahä-bhuja-O mighty-armed King;
sasarja—He created; ucca-avacäni—both high and low; ädyaù—the original
person; sva—of His own parts and parcels; mäträ—the sense gratification;
ätma—and the self-realization; prasiddhaye—for facilitating.
TRANSLATION
Çré Antarékña said: O mighty-armed King, by activating the material
elements, the primeval Soul of all creation has sent forth all living beings in
higher and lower species so that these conditioned souls can cultivate either
sense gratification or ultimate liberation, according to their desire.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, the illusory energy
(mäyä) is explained in this verse through a description of her potencies,
namely the modes of material nature. In Bhagavad-gétä Lord Kåñëa has
described mäyä as guëamayé, "consisting of the material modes of nature." The
material modes of nature are alluded to in this verse by the word uccävacäni,
"high and low species of life." Various species of life become manifest, as do
varieties of beauty, ugliness, strength, weakness and other characteristics
within a particular species, according to the proportionate development of the
modes of nature. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (13.22), käraëaà guëa-saìgo
'sya sad-asad-yoni-janmasu: "This is due to the living being's association with
material nature in good and evil species." Similarly we find this statement:
ürdhvaà gacchanti sattva-sthä
madhye tiñöhanti räjasäù
jaghanya-guëa-våtti-sthä
adho gacchanti tämasäù
"Those situated in the mode of goodness gradually go upward to the higher
planets, those in the mode of passion live on the earthly planets, and those in
the mode of ignorance go down to the hellish worlds." (Bg. 14.18)
The three general divisions of material life are called deva, tiryak and
nara—that is, demigods subhuman creatures and human beings. In the various
species of life there are various facilities for material sense gratification.
Different species are distinguished by differently formed senses, such as the
genitals, nostrils, tongue, ears and eyes. Pigeons, for example, are given the
facility for almost unlimited sex. Bears have an ample opportunity for sleeping.
Tigers and lions exhibit the propensities for fighting and meat-eating, horses
are distinguished by their legs for swift running, vultures and eagles have keen
eyesight, and so on. The human being is distinguished by his large brain, which
is meant for understanding God.
The phrase sva-mäträtma-prasiddhaye is very significant in this verse. The
word sva indicates possession. All living beings belong to the Supreme Lord
(mamaiväàço jéva-loke jéva-bhütaù sanätanaù [Bg. 15.7]). Therefore according
to this verse they have two options-mäträ-prasiddhaye and ätma-prasiddhaye.
Mäträ refers to the material senses, and prasiddhaye refers to effective
accomplishment. Therefore mäträ-prasiddhaye means "efficiently engaging in
sense gratification."
On the other hand, ätma-prasiddhaye refers to Kåñëa consciousness. There
are two categories of ätmä—the jévätmä, or ordinary living entity, who is
dependent, and the Paramätmä, the supreme living entity, who is
independent. Some living entities desire to understand both categories of
ätma, and in this verse the word ätma-prasiddhaye indicates that the material
world is created to give those living entities the opportunity to achieve such an
understanding and thus return to the kingdom of God, where life is eternal
and full of bliss and knowledge.
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé confirms this by quoting a verse from the veda-stuti of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.87.2):
buddhéndriya-manaù-präëän
janänäm asåjat prabhuù
mäträrthaà ca bhavärthaà ca
ätmane 'kalpanäya ca
"The Lord created the intelligence, senses, mind and vital air of the living
beings for sense gratification, for performing sacrifices to attain higher births,
and ultimately for offering sacrifices to the Supreme Soul."
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, the actual purpose of the Lord's creation is
only one: to facilitate the advancement of devotional service to the Lord
Himself. Although it is stated that the Lord facilitates sense gratification, it
should be understood that the Supreme Personality of Godhead does not
ultimately condone the foolishness of the conditioned souls. The Lord
facilitates sense gratification (mäträ-prasiddhaye) so that the living entities
will gradually understand the futility of trying to enjoy without Him. Every
living entity is part and parcel of Kåñëa. In the Vedic literature the Lord gives
a regulative program so that the living beings can gradually exhaust their
tendencies to be foolish and learn the value of surrender unto Him. The Lord
is undoubtedly the reservoir of all beauty, bliss and satisfaction, and it is the
duty of every living entity to engage in the loving service of the Lord.
Although there are apparently two purposes for creation, it should be
understood that ultimately the purpose is one. The arrangement for sense
gratification is ultimately meant to bring the living entities to the single
purpose of going back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 4
WvaM s$a{í"Aina BaUtaAina
‘aivaí": paÂaDaAtauiBa:
Wk(DaA d"zADaAtmaAnaM
ivaBajana, jauSatae gAuNAAna,
evaà såñöäni bhütäni
praviñöaù païca-dhätubhiù
ekadhä daçadhätmänaà
vibhajan juñate guëän
SYNONYMS
evam—in the manner just described; såñöäni—created; bhütäni—the living
beings; praviñöaù—having entered; païca-dhätubhiù—(created) by the five
gross elements (earth, water, fire, air and ether); ekadhä—onefold (as the
overseer of the mind); daçadhä—tenfold (as the overseer of the five senses of
perception and five organs of action); ätmänam—Himself; vibhajan—dividing;
juñate—He engages (He causes the individual soul to engage); guëän—with
the material modes.
TRANSLATION
The Supersoul enters the material bodies of the created beings, activates the
mind and senses, and thus causes the conditioned souls to approach the three
modes of material nature for sense gratification.
PURPORT
The following is a summary of Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura's
commentary on this verse.
The one Supersoul enters the gross material elements (earth, water, fire, air
and ether) and uses the activated material mind to subtly divide the sensory
activities of the conditioned souls among the five knowledge-acquiring senses
(the eyes, ears, nose, tongue and skin) and, by a further gross division, the five
working senses (the hands, legs, speech, genitals and anus). Because liberated
souls have a strong tendency to serve the Lord, they are not attracted by the
dualities of material good and evil. They derive their pleasure through
devotion and love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who eternally
enjoys His own transcendental pastimes beyond the material manifestation.
When the conditioned souls forget their loving relationship with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, they develop illicit desires. Therefore,
unable to serve the form, taste, fragrance and other aspects of Lord Viñëu,
these souls become bound to the bitter fruits of fruitive activities. But if their
love of Godhead is somehow or other awakened, the conditioned souls can
dovetail all their sensory activities in the service of the Lord's transcendental
pastimes.
Actually, all materialistic activities are most undesirable. But the
conditioned soul, under the influence of illusion, sees apparent distinctions
between good and bad, pleasing and displeasing, and so on. The Lord, the
Supersoul, having entered the collective and individual consciousness of the
living entities, knows the heart of everyone. Therefore when a sincere soul
aspires for spiritual perfection, the Lord frees him from material bondage and
arouses his propensity to serve the Lord of Vaikuëöha. Love of Godhead
flourishes in the variegated flavors of transcendental enjoyment. In ignorance,
however, the conditioned soul considers himself the proper object of service
and thus misunderstands the entire existential situation.
TEXT 5
gAuNAEgAuRNAAna, s$a BauÃaAna
@Atma‘aâAeitataE: ‘aBau:
manyamaAna wdM" s$a{í"ma,
@AtmaAnaimah" s$aÀatae
guëair guëän sa bhuïjäna
ätma-pradyotitaiù prabhuù
manyamäna idaà såñöam
ätmänam iha sajjate
SYNONYMS
guëaiù—with the modes (the senses); guëän—the modes (the objects of the
senses); saù—he (the individual living being); bhuïjänaù—enjoying;
ätma—by the Supreme Soul; pradyotitaiù—enlivened; prabhuù—the master;
manyamänaù—thinking; idam—this; såñöam—created (body); ätmänam—as
his own self; iha—in this; sajjate—he becomes entangled.
TRANSLATION
The individual living being, the master of the material body, uses his
material senses, which have been activated by the Supersoul, to try to enjoy
sense objects composed of the three modes of nature. Thus he misidentifies the
created material body with the unborn eternal self and becomes entangled in the
illusory energy of the Lord.
PURPORT
In this verse the living entity is called prabhuù, or "master," because he is a
minute part and parcel of the supreme master, Kåñëa. Similarly, in
Bhagavad-gétä (15.8) the Lord has described the living entity as éçvaraù, "the
controller."
çaréraà yad aväpnoti
yac cäpy utkrämatéçvaraù
gåhétvaitäni saàyäti
väyur gandhän iväçayät
"The living entity in the material world carries his various conceptions of life
from one body to another as the air carries aromas." Çréla Prabhupäda has
commented in his purport, "Here the living entity is described as éçvaraù, the
controller of his own body. If he likes, he can change his body to a higher
grade, and if he likes he can move to a lower class. Minute independence is
there. The change his body undergoes depends upon him." This statement
confirms the words sva-mäträ and ätma-prasiddhaye in text 3 of this chapter. If
the Supreme Lord were to interfere with the minute independence of the
living entity, there would be no question of the living entity's engaging in the
loving service of the Lord, since love implies a spontaneous free choice by the
lover. Here the word prabhuù indicates that just as a child, having received a
toy car from his father, pedals on the sidewalk, imitating the father, who drives
an actual car, the living entity pedals around the material universe in the
innumerable material bodies selected for him by the Supreme Lord from an
assortment of 8,400,000 species. Thus the living entity, infatuated with the
false ego of the material body, creates a fearful situation in which he undergoes
repeated birth and death, as described in the statement bhayaà
dvitéyäbhiniveçataù syät (SB 11.2.37).
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has given another explanation for this verse. If the word
prabhuù is taken to mean the Supreme Lord, the word guëaiù can be
understood to mean "good qualities," since guëa can refer to the material
modes of nature or to admirable qualities (as in the verse yasyästi bhaktir
bhagavaty akiïcanä sarvair guëais tatra samäsate suräù [SB 5.18.12]). This verse
would then mean that the Lord, by His transcendental qualities (guëaiù), such
as mercy, is able to relish the transcendental qualities (guëän) of His pure
devotees. Ätma-pratyoditaiù would then indicate that by surrendering unto the
Lord, who is the reservoir of all good qualities, the pure devotees become
similarly endowed with godly qualities. The words manyamäna idaà såñöam
ätmänam would indicate that the Lord accepts the body of His pure devotee to
be on the same spiritual level as He Himself, as indicated in the verse äcäryaà
mäà vijänéyän nävamanyeta karhicit [SB 11.17.27]. The Lord is attracted by the
loving devotional service of His pure devotees and thus becomes entangled in
the network of their loving relationship with Him. For example, after the
Battle of Kurukñetra, when Kåñëa was leaving for His own city, Dvärakä, the
loving appeal of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira forced the Lord to remain for several
more weeks in Hastinäpura. Similarly, when the elderly gopés of Våndävana
clapped their hands, Kåñëa would dance like a puppet, keeping time to their
rhythm. In relation to this subject matter, Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has quoted a
verse from Çrémad-Bhägavatam (9.4.68):
sädhavo hådayaà mahyaà
sädhünäà hådayaà tv aham
mad-anyat te na jänanti
nähaà tebhyo manäg api
"The pure devotee is always within the core of My heart, and I am always in
the heart of the pure devotee. My devotees do not know anything but Me, and
I do not know anyone but them."
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura the word prabhuù may
also be understood as follows. The word pra indicates prakarñeëa, or
"excessively," and bhü indicates bhavati, or "taking birth." Thus prabhuù
indicates prakarñeëa deva-tiryag-ädiñu bhavatéti saù, or repeatedly taking birth
among the demigods, animals, human beings and other forms of life.
Confirming the statement by Çréla Jéva Gosvämé concerning the Lord's
attachment to the spiritualized body of a pure devotee, Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta
Sarasvaté Öhäkura has quoted the following verses from Caitanya-caritämåta
(Antya 4.192-93):
dékñä-käle bhakta kare ätma-samarpaëa
sei-käle kåñëa täre kare ätma-sama
"At the time of initiation, when a devotee fully surrenders unto the service of
the Lord, Kåñëa accepts him to be as good as Himself."
sei deha kare tära cid-änanda-maya
apräkåta-dehe täìra caraëa bhajaya
"When the devotee's body is thus transformed into spiritual existence, the
devotee, in that transcendental body, renders service to the lotus feet of the
Lord."
TEXT 6
k(maARiNA k(maRiBa: ku(vaRna,
s$ainaimaÔaAina de"h"Ba{ta,
taÔatk(maRP(laM gA{õ"na,
”amataIh" s$auKaetar"ma,
karmäëi karmabhiù kurvan
sa-nimittäni deha-bhåt
tat tat karma-phalaà gåhëan
bhramatéha sukhetaram
SYNONYMS
karmäëi—various kinds of fruitive work; karmabhiù—by the karmendriyas, the
organs of action; kurvan—performing; sa-nimittäni—which are imbued with
motivating desires; deha-bhåt—the proprietor of the material body; tat
tat—various; karma-phalam—results of work; gåhëan—accepting;
bhramati—he wanders; iha—throughout this world; sukha—happiness;
itaram—and otherwise.
TRANSLATION
Impelled by deep-rooted material desires, the embodied living entity engages
his active sense organs in fruitive activities. He then experiences the results of
his material actions by wandering throughout this world in so-called happiness
and distress.
PURPORT
The argument may be given that if a living entity were subject to the results
of his previous activities there would be no scope for free will; once having
committed a sinful action, the living entity would be bound in an endless
chain of suffering, being perpetually subject to previous reactions. According
to this speculation there cannot be a just and omniscient God, since the living
entity is forced to commit sinful activities by the reactions of his previous
activities, which were reactions to still previous activities. Since even an
ordinary gentleman will not unfairly punish an innocent person, how could
there be a God witnessing the helpless suffering of the conditioned souls
within this world?
This foolish argument can easily be refuted by a practical example. If I
purchase a ticket for an airline flight, board the plane and commence the
flight, once the plane has taken off my decision to board the plane forces me to
continue flying until the plane lands. But although I am forced to accept the
reaction of this decision, on board the plane I have many new decisions I can
make. I may accept the food and drink from the stewardesses or reject it, I may
read a magazine or newspaper, I may sleep, walk up and down the aisle,
converse with other passengers and so on. In other words, although the general
context—flying to a particular city—is forcibly imposed upon me as a reaction
to my previous decision to board the plane, even within that situation I am
constantly making new decisions and creating new reactions. For example, if I
cause a disturbance on the airplane I may be arrested when the plane lands.
On the other hand, if I make friends with a businessman sitting next to me on
the plane, such a contact may lead to a favorable business transaction in the
future.
Similarly, although the living entity is forced to accept a particular body by
the laws of karma, within the human form of life there is always scope for free
will and decision-making. Therefore the Supreme Personality of Godhead
cannot be considered unjust for holding the living entity in human life
responsible for his present activities despite the living entity's undergoing the
reactions of his previous work.
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura the influence of mäyä is
so strong that even in a hellish condition the proud conditioned soul thinks
that he is enjoying life.
TEXT 7
wtTaM k(maRgAtaIgARcC$na,
baù"Ba‰"vah"A: paumaAna,
@ABaUtas$amplavaAts$agAR-
‘alayaAva´autae'vazA:
itthaà karma-gatér gacchan
bahv-abhadra-vahäù pumän
äbhüta-samplavät sargapralayäv
açnute 'vaçaù
SYNONYMS
ittham—in this way; karma-gatéù—the destinations determined by his past
activities; gacchan—obtaining; bahu-abhadra—much that is inauspicious;
vahäù—which involve; pumän—the living being; äbhüta-samplavät—until the
dissolution of the created universe; sarga-pralayau-birth and death; açnute—he
experiences; avaçaù—helplessly.
TRANSLATION
Thus the conditioned living entity is forced to experience repeated birth and
death. Impelled by the reactions of his own activities, he helplessly wanders
from one inauspicious situation to another, suffering from the moment of
creation until the time of cosmic annihilation.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Madhväcärya, after hearing that the living entity is
repeatedly subjected to birth and death within the material world, if one still
considers such a helpless entity equal to God in all respects one will surely fall
into the darkest regions of the universe, from which it is difficult to rise.
TEXT 8
DaAtaUpaplava @As$aªae
vyalM( ‰"vyagAuNAAtmak(ma,
@naAid"inaDana: k(AlaAe
÷vyal(AyaApak(SaRita
dhätüpaplava äsanne
vyaktaà dravya-guëätmakam
anädi-nidhanaù kälo
hy avyaktäyäpakarñati
SYNONYMS
dhätu—of the material elements; upaplave—the dissolution; äsanne—when it
has become imminent; vyaktam—the manifest cosmos; dravya—gross objects;
guëa—and the subtle modes; ätmakam—consisting of; anädi—without
beginning; nidhanaù—or end; kälaù—time; hi—indeed; avyaktäya—into the
unmanifest; apakarñati—draws.
TRANSLATION
When the annihilation of the material elements is imminent, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead in His form of eternal time withdraws the manifest
cosmos, consisting of gross and subtle features, and the entire universe vanishes
into nonmanifestation.
PURPORT
In the Third Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam Lord Kapiladeva teaches that
the material nature originally exists in an inert state of equilibrium called
pradhäna. When Lord Viñëu casts His potent glance in the form of käla, or
time, material interactions take place, culminating in the variegated creation
of the material cosmos. In this verse it is stated that at the end of universal
time the same käla that originally incited the female nature into manifestation
again withdraws the cosmos into its original state of inert nonmanifestation.
According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, the time potency itself,
käla, is then withdrawn, and it merges into the Supreme Soul, who manifests
Himself as the original cause of material nature (anädir ädir govindaù
sarva-käraëa-käraëam [Bs. 5.1]).
Such technical arrangements for creation and annihilation, birth and
death, do not exist in the eternal spiritual kingdom of God. In the spiritual sky
the variegated spiritual enjoyment of the Lord and His devotees is not
hampered by the inferior cycles of birth, maintenance and destruction found
in the material world.
TEXT 9
zAtavaSaAR ÷naAva{ií"r,"
BaivaSyatyaulbaNAA Bauiva
tatk(AlaAepaicataAeSNAAk(AeR
laAek(AMñIna, ‘ataipaSyaita
çata-varñä hy anävåñöir
bhaviñyaty ulbaëä bhuvi
tat-kälopacitoñëärko
lokäàs trén pratapiñyati
SYNONYMS
çata-varñä—lasting one hundred years; hi—indeed; anävåñöiù—drought;
bhaviñyati—there will be; ulbaëä—terrible; bhuvi—on the earth; tat-käla—in
that duration of time; upacita—accumulated; uñëa—whose heat; arkaù—the
sun; lokän—the worlds; trén—three; pratapiñyati—will greatly burn.
TRANSLATION
As cosmic annihilation approaches, a terrible drought takes place on earth
for one hundred years. For one hundred years the heat of the sun gradually
increases, and its blazing heat begins to torment the three worlds.
TEXT 10
paAtaAlatalamaAr"Bya
s$aÆÿSaRNAmauKaAnala:
d"h"ªaUDvaRizAKaAe ivaSvagA,
vaDaRtae vaAyaunaeir"ta:
pätäla-talam ärabhya
saìkarñaëa-mukhänalaù
dahann ürdhva-çikho viñvag
vardhate väyuneritaù
SYNONYMS
pätäla-talam—the planet Pätäla; ärabhya—beginning from;
saìkarñaëa-mukha—from the mouth of the Supreme Lord in His form as
Saìkarñaëa; analaù—the fire; dahan—burning; ürdhva-çikhaù—its flame
going upward; viñvak—all the directions; vardhate—grows; väyunä—by winds;
éritaù—impelled.
TRANSLATION
Beginning from Pätälaloka, a fire grows, emanating from the mouth of Lord
Saìkarñaëa. Its flames shooting upward, driven by great winds, it scorches
everything in all directions.
TEXT 11
s$aMvataRk(Ae maeGagANAAe
vaSaRita sma zAtaM s$amaA:
DaAr"AiBahR"istah"staAiBar,"
laIyatae s$ailalae ivar"Aq%.
saàvartako megha-gaëo
varñati sma çataà samäù
dhäräbhir hasti-hastäbhir
léyate salile viräö
SYNONYMS
saàvartakaù—of annihilation; megha-gaëaù—hoards of clouds; varñati—will
rain; sma—indeed; çatam samäù—for one hundred years; dhäräbhiù—with
torrents; hasti-hastäbhiù—(raindrops measuring the length of) elephant
trunks; léyate—will merge; salile—in the water; viräö—the entire universe.
TRANSLATION
Hoards of clouds called Saàvartaka pour torrents of rain for one hundred
years. Flooding down in raindrops as long as the trunk of an elephant, the
deadly rainfall submerges the entire universe in water.
TEXT 12
tataAe ivar"Ajamauts$a{jya,
vaEr"Aja: pauç&SaAe na{pa
@vyalM( ivazAtae s$aUºmaM
inair"nDana wvaAnala:
tato viräjam utsåjy
vairäjaù puruño nåpa
avyaktaà viçate sükñmaà
nirindhana ivänalaù
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; viräjam—the universe; utsåjya—giving up (as his body); vairäjaù
puruñaù—the personality of the universal form (Hiraëyagarbha Brahmä);
nåpa—O King Nimi; avyaktam—unmanifest nature (the pradhäna); viçate—he
enters; sükñmam—subtle; nirindhanaù—devoid of fuel; iva—like; analaù—a
fire.
TRANSLATION
Then Vairäja Brahmä, the soul of the universal form, gives up his universal
body, O King, and enters into the subtle unmanifest nature, like a fire that has
run out of fuel.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura the word vairäjaù in
this verse indicates the totality of the individual conditioned souls who
originally take birth from Brahmä and are amalgamated back into him at the
time of annihilation. By the manifestation of the viräö-puruña, the universal
form of the Lord, there is a temporary display of forms, qualities and activities
within the material creation. But the entire cosmic scene reverts to inert
formlessness when the creation is withdrawn by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Therefore the Lord's universal form cannot be accepted as an
eternal form of the Lord. It is merely the temporary imaginary resemblance of
His personal form within the kingdom of mäyä. In the First Canto of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, as well as in the Second Canto, the universal form of the
Lord is clearly explained to be an imaginary form offered to the neophyte for
meditation on God. Those who are excessively materialistic are totally unable
to understand that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is actually
sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], or the eternal form of bliss and knowledge,
transcendental to the exhibition of material energy. Therefore to encourage
such gross materialists to become faithful theists, the Vedic literature instructs
them to meditate upon the physical universe as the gigantic body of the
Supreme Lord. This pantheistic conception does not reflect the ultimate
reality of the Supreme Lord but is a technique to bring the mind gradually
toward God.
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé has quoted the following verse as evidence that Lord
Brahmä is supposed to go back to Godhead at the time of annihilation:
brahmaëä saha te sarve
sampräpte pratisaïcare
parasyänte kåtätmänaù
praviçanti paraà padam
"At the time of final annihilation all self-realized souls enter with Brahmä into
the supreme abode." Since Brahmä is sometimes considered the best devotee of
the Supreme Lord, he surely should obtain liberation rather than merely
entering into the unmanifest state of material nature called avyakta. In this
connection Çréla Çrédhara Svämé points out that there is a class of nondevotees
who attain the planet of Brahmä by performing açvamedha-yajïas and other
sacrifices, and in certain cases Brahmä himself may not be a devotee of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. So the words avyaktaà viçate sükñmam can
be understood to indicate that such a nondevotee Brahmä cannot enter the
spiritual sky, despite having achieved the ultimate universal status of material
expertise. But when Brahmä is a devotee of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead the word avyaktam can be taken to indicate the spiritual sky; since
the spiritual sky is not manifest to the conditioned souls, it may also be
considered avyakta. If even Lord Brahmä cannot enter the kingdom of God
without surrendering to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, then what to
speak of other so-called pious or expert nondevotees.
In this regard Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has pointed out that
there are three categories within the status of Brahmä, namely those of karmé,
jïäné and devotee. A Brahmä who is the most exalted karmé of the universe
will have to come back to the material world; a living entity who has achieved
the post of Brahmä by being the greatest speculative philosopher within the
universe may attain impersonal liberation; and a living entity who has been
awarded the post of Brahma due to being a great devotee of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead enters into the personal abode of the Lord. In the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (3.32.15) yet another case is described: a Brahmä who is a
devotee of the Lord but who has the tendency to think himself independent of
or equal to the Lord may achieve Mahä-Viñëu's abode at the time of
annihilation, but when creation begins again he has to return and again take
the post of Brahma. The word used in this case is bheda-dåñöyä, which refers to
the tendency to think oneself independently powerful. The various
destinations possible for such an exalted living entity as a Lord Brahmä
definitely prove that any material position is worthless for guaranteeing an
eternal life of bliss and knowledge. In Bhagavad-gétä Lord Kåñëa promises that
if one gives up all other so-called obligations and surrenders to the devotional
service of the Lord, the Lord will personally protect him and bring him back to
the supreme abode in the spiritual sky. It is futile and foolish to try to achieve
perfection by one's own strenuous endeavor and not surrender to the lotus feet
of Kåñëa. Such a blind attempt is described in the Eighteenth Chapter of
Bhagavad-gétä as bahuläyäsam, indicating that it is work in the material mode
of passion. Brahmä is the lord of passion, and his creation and management of
the entire universe are certainly bahuläyäsam, or strenuous endeavor, in the
most exalted sense. But all such passionate work, even that of Lord Brahmä, is
ultimately useless without surrender to the lotus feet of Kåñëa.
TEXT 13
vaAyaunaA ô$tagAnDaA BaU:
s$ailalatvaAya k(lpatae
s$ailalaM taä,"Da{tar"s$aM
jyaAeitaî"AyaAepak(lpatae
väyunä håta-gandhä bhüù
salilatväya kalpate
salilaà tad-dhåta-rasaà
jyotiñöväyopakalpate
SYNONYMS
väyunä—by the wind; håta—deprived; gandhä—of its quality of aroma;
bhüù—the element earth; salilatväya kalpate—becomes water; salilam—water;
tat—by that (the same element, wind); håta-rasam—deprived of its quality of
taste; jyotiñöväya upakalpate—becomes fire.
TRANSLATION
Deprived of its quality of aroma by the wind, the element earth is
transformed into water; and water, deprived of its taste by that same wind, is
merged into fire.
PURPORT
Çrémad-Bhägavatam gives several descriptions of the material creation, by
which air is expanded from ether, fire from air, water from fire, and earth from
water. Now, in the reverse order, the creation is wound up. Thus earth merges
back into the water from which it came, and water similarly merges into fire.
TEXT 14
ô$taè&paM tau tamas$aA
vaAyaAE jyaAeita: ‘alaIyatae
ô$tas$pazAAeR'vak(AzAena
vaAyaunaRBais$a laIyatae
k(AlaAtmanaA ô$tagAuNAM
naBa @Atmaina laIyatae
håta-rüpaà tu tamasä
väyau jyotiù praléyate
håta-sparço 'vakäçena
väyur nabhasi léyate
kälätmanä håta-guëaà
nabha ätmani léyate
SYNONYMS
håta-rüpam—deprived of its quality of form; tu—certainly; tamasä—by
darkness; väyau—into air; jyotiù—fire; praléyate—merges;
håta-sparçaù—deprived of touch; avakäçena—by the element space;
väyuù—air; nabhasi—into space; léyate—merges; käla-ätmana—by the
Supreme Soul in the form of time; håta-guëam—deprived of its tangible
quality; nabhaù—space; ätmani—into false ego in the mode of ignorance;
léyate—merges.
TRANSLATION
Fire, deprived of its form by darkness, dissolves into the element air. When
the air loses its quality of touch by the influence of space, the air merges into
that space. When space is deprived of its tangible quality by the Supreme Soul
in the form of time, space merges into false ego in the mode of ignorance.
TEXT 15
win‰"yaAiNA manaAe bauiÜ":
s$ah" vaEk(Air"kE(na{Rpa
‘aivazAinta ÷h"ÆÿArM"
svagAuNAEr"h"maAtmaina
indriyäëi mano buddhiù
saha vaikärikair nåpa
praviçanti hy ahaìkäraà
sva-guëair aham ätmani
SYNONYMS
indriyäëi—the senses; manaù—the mind; buddhiù—intelligence; saha
vaikärikaiù—along with the demigods, who are products of false ego in the
mode of goodness; nåpa—O King; praviçanti—they enter; hi—indeed;
ahaìkäram—the element ego; sta-guëaiù—along with its qualities (goodness,
passion and ignorance); aham—ego; ätmani—into the mahat-tattva.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, the material senses and intelligence merge into false ego in
the mode of passion, from which they arose; and the mind, along with the
demigods, merges into false ego in the mode of goodness. Then the total false
ego, along with all of its qualities, merges into the mahat-tattva.
TEXT 16
WSaA maAyaA BagAvata:
s$agARisTatyantak(Air"NAI
i‡avaNAAR vaiNARtaAsmaAiBa:
ikM( BaUya: ™aAetauimacC$is$a
eñä mäyä bhagavataù
sarga-sthity-anta-käriëé
tri-varëä varëitäsmäbhiù
kià bhüyaù çrotum icchasi
SYNONYMS
eñä—this; mäyä—material energy; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Lord;
sarga—of creation; sthiti—maintenance; anta—and dissolution (of this
universe); käriëé—the agent; tri-varëä—consisting of three modes (goodness,
passion and ignorance); varëitä—has been described; asmäbhiù—by us;
kim—what; bhüyaù—further; çrotum—to hear; icchasi—do you wish.
TRANSLATION
I have now described mäyä, the illusory energy of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. This illusory potency, consisting of the three modes of material
nature, is empowered by the Lord for the creation, maintenance and
annihilation of the material universe. Now, what more do you wish to hear?
PURPORT
King Nimi had expressed to the nava-yogendras his fear of the illusory
potency of the Lord and had requested a detailed explanation of mäyä so that
he could avoid becoming a victim at her hands. Now, Çré Antarékña, having
described the illusory potency, is suggesting that the King inquire about the
means to become totally free of mäyä's influence. Not waiting for the King to
ask such a question, Çré Antarékña himself is suggesting, "Now that you have
heard about mäyä's influence, you should inquire about the process of
becoming free of such influence." According to Çrédhara Svämé, that is the
significance of Çré Antarékña's question kià bhüyaù çrotum icchasi, "What more
do you wish to hear?"
The following is a summary of Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura's
explanation of the process of annihilation described in the previous verses.
Väsudeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the presiding Deity of
consciousness, which becomes manifest within the mahat-tattva. By further
transformations of the mahat-tattva the threefold false ego appears as follows.
(1) From vaikärika, false ego in the mode of goodness, appears the eleventh
sense, the mind, whose presiding Deity is Aniruddha. (2) From taijasa, false
ego in the mode of passion, comes intelligence, whose presiding Deity is
Pradyumna, and the five working senses and five knowledge-acquiring senses
with their various presiding deities. (3) From false ego in the mode of
ignorance arises the subtle form of sound, and from that sound, or çabda, all
the material elements gradually become manifest, beginning with ether and
the sense of hearing. The presiding Deity of these three divisions of false ego is
Saìkarñaëa. This description is taken from Chapter 26 of the Third Canto of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, verses 21, 27, 28, 30, 31, 32 and 35.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead's external potency, mäyä, causes the
birth, maintenance and destruction of the material world. She is tricolored
red, white and black. In her red feature the material nature is created, in white
it endures, and in black it is annihilated. The mahat-tattva arises from this
mäyä, and from the mahat-tattva come the three varieties of false ego
mentioned above. At the time of annihilation the five great elements, namely
earth, water, fire, air and ether, merge into false ego in the mode of ignorance,
from which they were originally generated; the ten senses and intelligence
merge into false ego in passion; and the mind, along with the demigods, merges
into false ego in the mode of goodness, which then merges into mahat-tattva,
which further takes shelter of the prakåti or unmanifest pradhäna.
As described above, each of the gross elements is wound up when its
distinguishing quality is removed; the element then merges into the previous
element. This can be understood as follows. In space or ether there is the
quality of sound. In air there are the qualities of sound and touch. In fire there
are sound, touch and form. In water there are sound, touch, form and taste.
And in earth there are sound, touch, form, taste and aroma. Therefore from
ether down to earth each element is distinguished by the addition of its own
unique quality, called guëa-viçeñam. When that quality is removed, an element
becomes nondifferent from its previous element and thus merges into it. For
example, when great winds take aroma away from earth, earth contains only
sound, touch, form and taste and thus becomes nondifferent from water, into
which it merges. Similarly when water loses its rasa, or taste, it contains only
sound, touch and form, thus becoming nondifferent from fire, which also
contains those three qualities. So the wind takes away aroma to merge earth
into water and takes away taste to merge water into fire. Then when the
universal darkness removes form from fire, fire merges into air. Space then
removes the sense of touch from air, and air merges into space. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead as the time element removes sound from space, and
space then merges into the false ego in the mode of ignorance, from which it
arose. Finally, false ego is merged into the mahat-tattva, which is merged into
the unmanifest pradhäna, and thus the universe is annihilated.
TEXT 17
™aIr"AjaAevaAca
yaTaEtaAmaEìr"I%M maAyaAM
äu"star"Amak{(taAtmaiBa:
tar"ntyaÃa: sTaUlaiDayaAe
mah"SaR wd"maucyataAma,
çré-räjoväca
yathaitäm aiçvaréà mäyäà
dustaräm akåtätmabhiù
taranty aïjaù sthüla-dhiyo
maharña idam ucyatäm
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—King Nimi said; yathä—how; etäm—this; aiçvarém—of the
Supreme Lord; mäyäm—material energy; dustaräm—unsurpassable;
akåta-ätmabhiù—by those who are not self-controlled; taranti—they may cross
over; aïjaù—easily; sthüla-dhiyaù—persons whose intelligence is dulled by
materialistic attachments; maha-åñe—O great sage; idam—this;
ucyatäm—please tell.
TRANSLATION
King Nimi said: O great sage, please explain how even a foolish materialist
can easily cross over the illusory energy of the Supreme Lord, which is always
insurmountable for those who are not self-controlled.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, sthüla-dhiyaù indicates those who
ignorantly identify themselves with the gross material body and who are
therefore unable to analyze the subtle laws of nature by which the soul
transmigrates in illusion. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé comments that sthüla-dhiyaù also
indicates so-called pious persons who execute pompous religious ceremonies
for material sense gratification rather than trying to prepare themselves to go
back home, back to Godhead, by engaging in the loving devotional service of
the Lord.
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, King Nimi was already
an advanced devotee of the Lord and therefore knew that one can cross over
the illusory energy, mäyä, by surrendering to the lotus feet of the Lord and
pleasing Him by pure devotional service. Therefore the King was asking the
question for the benefit of those who falsely consider themselves very much
learned but in fact are addicted to materialistic fruitive activities, which
increasingly entangle them in illusion. In this regard Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura has quoted from the Amara-koça dictionary to show that
akåtätmabhiù indicates apürëatvam, or one whose life is empty.
Every living being has an eternal relationship with the supreme living
being, Kåñëa. One may love Kåñëa by thinking of Him as one's eternal master,
one's most intimate friend, one's beloved child or the object of one's conjugal
attraction. Of course, such ecstasies should never be confused with ordinary,
material emotions, which are perverted reflections of spiritual rasas, or
relationships. In the material world we try to relish these same relationships of
servitude, friendship, parental love and conjugal love, but the object of such
feelings is a temporary material body, which is quickly devastated by the laws
of nature. These loving feelings should be directed toward the spiritual body of
the Supreme Personality, Kåñëa, who is the reservoir of all beauty and
transcendental bliss. One who has not learned the art of directing his love to
Kåñëa is apürëa, or one whose life is ultimately empty.
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, one whose life is empty
can also be called manda-dhéù, or one whose intelligence is crippled by a lack of
broad experience. King Nimi, a pure Vaiñëava, was so kind that he asked,
"How can such cripple-minded people cross over mäyä in the easiest way
possible, since by nature they are very lazy in spiritual matters?"
TEXT 18
™aI‘abauÜ" ovaAca
k(maARNyaAr"BamaANAAnaAM
äu":Kah"tyaE s$auKaAya ca
pazyaetpaAk(ivapayaARs$aM
imaTaunaIcaAir"NAAM na{NAAma,
çré-prabuddha uväca
karmäëy ärabhamäëänäà
duùkha-hatyai sukhäya ca
paçyet päka-viparyäsaà
mithuné-cäriëäà nåëäm
SYNONYMS
çré-prabuddhaù uväca—Çré Prabuddha said; karmäëi—fruitive activities;
ärabhamäëänäm—making endeavors in; duùkha-hatyai—for the elimination
of distress; sukhäya ca—and for gaining happiness; paçyet—one should see;
päka—of the result; viparyäsam—contrary outcome; mithuné-cäriëäm—who
are coupled as men and women; nåëäm—of such persons.
TRANSLATION
Çré Prabuddha said: Accepting the roles of male and female in human
society, the conditioned souls unite in sexual relationships. Thus they
constantly make material endeavors to eliminate their unhappiness and
unlimitedly increase their pleasure. But one should see that they inevitably
achieve exactly the opposite result. In other words, their happiness inevitably
vanishes, and as they grow older their material discomfort increases.
PURPORT
Without the mercy of a pure devotee it is exceedingly difficult to free
oneself from the bodily concept of life, which is the illusory basis of sexual
attraction.
TEXT 19
inatyaAitaR$de"na ivaÔaena
äu"laRBaenaAtmama{tyaunaA
gA{h"ApatyaAæapazAuiBa:
k(A ‘aIita: s$aAiDataEêlaE:
nityärtidena vittena
durlabhenätma-måtyunä
gåhäpatyäpta-paçubhiù
kä prétiù sädhitaiç calaiù
SYNONYMS
nitya—constantly; ärti-dena—giving pain; vittena—with wealth;
durlabhena—hard to acquire; ätma-måtyunä—death for the self; gåha—with
one's home; apatya—children; äpta—relatives; paçubhiù—and domestic
animals; kä—what; prétiù—happiness; sädhitaiù—which are gained (by that
wealth); calaiù—unsteady.
TRANSLATION
Wealth is a perpetual source of distress, it is most difficult to acquire, and it
is virtual death for the soul. What satisfaction does one actually gain from his
wealth? Similarly, how can one gain ultimate or permanent happiness from
one's so-called home, children, relatives and domestic animals, which are all
maintained by one's hard-earned money?
TEXT 20
WvaM laAekM( par"imvaâAna,
naìrM" k(maRinaimaRtama,
s$ataulyaAitazAyaDvaMs$aM
yaTaA maNx"lavaitaRnaAma,
evaà lokaà param vidyän
naçvaraà karma-nirmitam
sa-tulyätiçaya-dhvaàsaà
yathä maëòala-vartinäm
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; lokam—the world; param—next (after this life);
vidyät—one should understand as; naçvaram—impermanent;
karma-nirmitam—created from fruitive work; sa-tulya—characterized by (the
rivalry of) equals; atiçaya—and superiors; dhvaàsam—and by ruination;
yathä—as; maëòala-vartinäm—(the rivalries) of minor rulers.
TRANSLATION
One cannot find permanent happiness even on the heavenly planets, which
one can attain in the next life by ritualistic ceremonies and sacrifices. Even in
material heaven the living entity is disturbed by rivalry with his equals and
envy of those superior to him. And since one's residence in heaven is finished
with the exhaustion of pious fruitive activities, the denizens of heaven are
afflicted by fear, anticipating the destruction of their heavenly life. Thus they
resemble kings who, though enviously admired by ordinary citizens, are
constantly harassed by enemy kings and who therefore never attain actual
happiness.
PURPORT
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé has quoted the following text from the Chändogya
Upaniñad (8.1.6): tad yatheha karma-cito lokaù kñéyate, evam evämutra
puëya-cito lokaù kñéyate. "One's present status of material pleasure, the result of
one's previous work, will eventually be vanquished by time. Similarly, although
by executing pious activities one will be elevated to a higher status in the next
life, that future situation will also be vanquished." The basis of material
enjoyment is the particular body one has acquired. The material body is
karma-citaù, the accumulated result of one's previous material activities. If one
is awarded a body decorated with beauty, education, popularity, strength and
so on, his standard of material enjoyment is certainly high class. On the other
hand, if one is ugly, mentally retarded, crippled or repulsive to others, there is
very little hope for his material happiness. In both cases, however, the
situation is flickering and temporary. One who has acquired an attractive body
should not rejoice, since death will quickly bring an end to such an
intoxicating situation. Similarly, one who has taken birth in an obnoxious
situation should not lament, since his suffering is also temporary. The beautiful
man and the ugly man, the rich and the poor, the educated and the foolish
should all endeavor to become Kåñëa conscious so that they can be elevated to
their eternal constitutional situation, which is to reside in the planets beyond
this material universe. Originally every living entity is unimaginably beautiful,
intelligent, wealthy, and so strong that his spiritual body lives forever. But we
foolishly give up this eternal, blissful situation because we are unwilling to
meet the condition for eternal life. The condition is that one should be a lover
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. Although love of Kåñëa is the
most exquisite ecstasy, surpassing by millions of times the most intense
pleasure of the material universe, we foolishly break off our loving affair with
the Supreme Lord and artificially try to become independent enjoyers in the
material atmosphere of self-delusion and false pride.
Even if one reaches the exalted heavenly planets of this universe he will be
afflicted by various types of suffering. Every conditioned soul in the material
world wants to become the greatest person. Therefore one is constantly
harassed by his equals who have a similar desire. This situation is commonly
termed the "rat race" of material existence. Even on the heavenly planets there
is a similar rat race for heavenly distinction. Since some persons inevitably
excel our own achievements, our hearts burn with envy upon seeing others
enjoying the very rewards we have strived for. And because our whole
situation is temporary, we must undergo fear, anxiety and death even on the
heavenly planets. The example given here is very nice. Minor kings may be
enviously admired by ordinary citizens for their wealth, power and fame, but
such kings themselves constantly burn with jealousy, resentment and fear due
to rivalry and threats from other kings. Similarly, modern politicians are
constantly harassed by envy and fear.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has pointed out that the
conditioned souls, being eager to acquire material happiness and avoid distress,
take shelter of sexual relationships and thus surrender to the hard labor of
fruitive activities. Those who are enlightened, however, can perceive the
ultimate futility of such gross materialistic endeavors. One's so-called wife,
home, children, relatives, bank account and so on are all temporary
phantasmagoria, and even while manifest they can never give real satisfaction
to one's senses. To acquire wealth in this world one is practically forced to
become the killer of his own soul. There is no possibility of acquiring pleasure
from materialistic activities, since they are performed with temporary senses in
the hot pursuit of temporary sense objects. When the conditioned soul
achieves his goal he becomes proud and brags to others as if his achievements
were permanent. And when defeated he is submerged in lamentation. Such a
tendency to consider oneself the doer is a sign of weak intelligence, since in
fact the living entity is merely desiring within the material body. The body
itself is moved by the forces of material nature, under the control of God. The
relationships of master and servant, father and son, husband and wife entail
exchanges of well-wishing and service that give a sense of material
gratification, but such ephemeral devotion can never bring about the eternal
absolute benefit of the soul. By such temporary gratification, mäyä induces the
conditioned soul to wander throughout the material world, pursuing the
relative rewards of material nature. According to the subtle laws of karma, the
living entity achieves happiness and distress. One cannot obtain happiness by
force, no matter how strenuously or how long one tries. Therefore those whose
intelligence is uncontaminated should surrender at the lotus feet of Kåñëa and
give up the ludicrous pursuit of permanent material happiness, a pursuit which
can be compared to a dog's chasing its tail.
TEXT 21
tasmaAÖ"çM& ‘apaâeta
ijaÁaAs$au: ™aeya oÔamama,
zAAbde" pare" ca inaSNAAtaM
“aöNyaupazAmaA™ayama,
tasmäd guruà prapadyeta
jijïäsuù çreya uttamam
çäbde pare ca niñëätaà
brahmaëy upaçamäçrayam
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; gurum—a spiritual master; prapadyeta—one should take
shelter of; jijïäsuù—being inquisitive; çreyaù uttamam—about the highest
good; çäbde—in the Vedas; pare—in the Supreme; ca—and;
niñëätam—perfectly knowledgeable; brahmaëi—(in these two aspects) of the
Absolute Truth; upaçama-äçrayam—fixed in detachment from material affairs.
TRANSLATION
Therefore any person who seriously desires real happiness must seek a bona
fide spiritual master and take shelter of him by initiation. The qualification of
the bona fide guru is that he has realized the conclusions of the scriptures by
deliberation and is able to convince others of these conclusions. Such great
personalities, who have taken shelter of the Supreme Godhead, leaving aside all
material considerations, should be understood to be bona fide spiritual masters.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, the word çäbde refers to the Vedic
literature, and pare refers to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The bona
fide spiritual master must be niñëätam, deeply experienced in authorized Vedic
literatures and in practical understanding of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Without scriptural knowledge and practical realization of the
Personality of Godhead, a so-called guru will be unable to dissipate the doubts
of his disciples and therefore unable to execute the function of bringing the
sincere student back home, back to Godhead. The symptom of realized
understanding of the Vedas and Kåñëa is upaçamäçrayam. In other words, the
bona fide spiritual master is one who has retired from the glittering illusions of
materialistic society, friendship and love.
Within the material world one is certainly attracted to becoming a great
intellectual, a powerful politician, the loving father of many beautiful and
affectionate little children, a most honored welfare worker or a highly admired
and successful businessman. But none of these material positions have a
permanent basis, nor do they afford permanent happiness, because they are all
based on the primary misunderstanding by which one identifies himself with
the material body.
Anyone can readily experience that he is not the body but consciousness.
Even if one loses a limb of his body, he does not cease to exist as a conscious
entity. Ultimately, the entire body is lost at the time of death, and the living
entity acquires a new body. The preliminary understanding of one's identity as
consciousness is called self-realization. But beyond this elementary knowledge
is the elaborate subject matter of how the soul came to exist within the cycle of
8,400,000 material species of life. And if the living entity is not the material
body but consciousness, he must ultimately have an original status on a higher
platform.
Punishment implies reward also; a powerful man who can punish is also able
to reward. Therefore, the existence of punishment for the living being, who is
forced to take a miserable material body subject to birth, old age, disease and
death, also logically implies the existence of a reward for him. Although we
mistakenly consider material sense gratification the ultimate reward of life,
material happiness is actually another type of punishment, since it entices one
to continue rotating in the cycle of birth and death. In the Western countries
violent prisoners are placed in solitary confinement whereas well-behaved
prisoners are sometimes allowed to work in the warden's garden or library as a
reward. But any position in prison is ultimately a punishment. Similarly, the
existence of higher and lower categories of material sense gratification does
not explain the living entity's ultimate reward, which must constitute the
natural antithesis of the punishment of material existence. That actual reward
is an eternal life of bliss and knowledge in the kingdom of God, where there is
no punishment. The kingdom of God is Vaikuëöha, or unconditional pleasure.
There is no punishment in the spiritual world; it is a place of ever-increasing
pleasure.
A bona fide spiritual master is one who is expert in all of these subject
matters, not by his personal imagination or speculation but by mature
understanding of the authorized Vedic literatures, which are the literary
manifestation of the causeless mercy of God. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä
(9.3).
açraddadhänäù puruñä
dharmasyäsya parantapa
apräpya mäà nivartante
måtyu-saàsära-vartmani
"Those who are not faithful on the path of devotional service cannot attain
Me, O conqueror of foes, but return to birth and death in this material world."
Therefore the spiritual master must awaken the disciple to the eternal
existence of devotional service. The example may be given that in the early
morning a mother may enter her child's room to wake him up so that he can
attend school. The child does not want to get up, but the loving mother forces
him to get up and sends him off to school to be educated. Similarly, the bona
fide spiritual master awakens the sleeping soul and sends him to the gurukula,
or the äçrama of the spiritual master, where he can be trained in perfect
knowledge.
If the disciple has doubts about the value of Kåñëa consciousness, the bona
fide spiritual master must dissipate those doubts by superior knowledge. One
who himself doubts the authority of Kåñëa or Vedic knowledge cannot become
a bona fide spiritual master. On the other hand, kibä vipra, kibä nyäsé, çüdra
kena naya/ yei kåñëa-tattva-vettä, sei 'guru' haya: [Cc. Madhya 8.128] any human
being from any social or economic status can become a bona fide spiritual
master if he knows the science of Kåñëa. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu said,
yäre dekha, täre kaha 'kåñëa'-upadeça
ämära äjïäya guru haïä tära ei deça
"Instruct everyone to follow the orders of Lord Çré Kåñëa as they are given in
Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam. In this way become a spiritual master
and try to liberate everyone in this land." (Cc. Madhya 7.128) Only by the
order and authority of the Supreme Lord one can become a spiritual master,
not by one's own so-called erudition.
The duty of the bona fide guru is to connect the disciple to Kåñëa. A
scholar or meditator has no potency to connect another living being with
Kåñëa if that scholar or meditator himself is not connected with Kåñëa.
Although many sports fans attend gymnastic competitions and applaud at the
exhibition of difficult calisthenic feats, the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
not such a gymnastic spectator, and He does not applaud the calisthenics
exhibited by foolish persons in the name of yoga. Nor is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead impressed by mediocre attempts at philosophical
speculation, since the Lord has already given His own opinion in
Bhagavad-gétä (çåëu me paramaà vacaù). The word of Kåñëa is paramaà vacaù,
the last word in knowledge. And Kåñëa says, yaj jïätvä neha bhüyo 'nyaj
jïätavyam avaçiñyate: "When you know this knowledge there shall remain
nothing further to be known." Kåñëa has also referred to His knowledge as
räja-vidyä, the king of all knowledge.
If one does not become a lover of Kåñëa, his connection with Kåñëa takes
place indirectly, through the illusory potency of the Lord. The idea that one
can attract the Supreme Lord through mere gymnastics or foolish speculation
on the Absolute Truth is certainly a product of mäyä. One who is connected to
Kåñëa through His external, illusory potency can serve only as a material
master to connect his so-called disciples to the same illusory energy. On the
other hand, in Bhagavad-gétä (9.13) it is said,
mahätmänas tu mäà pärtha
daivéà prakåtim äçritäù
bhajanty ananya-manaso
jïätvä bhütädim avyayam
Those who are actually great souls have surrendered to the internal potency of
the Lord and can similarly connect others to the internal pleasure-giving
potency. A mahätmä is described in Bhagavad-gétä as follows: väsudevaù sarvam
iti sa mahätmä sudurlabhaù [Bg. 7.19]. "He knows Me to be the cause of all
causes and all that is. Such a great soul is very rare." It is to such a spiritual
master, who has reached the mature understanding that Väsudeva is
everything, that one must surrender. According to Çré Närada Muni, yo vidvän
sa gurur hariù: such a great soul is to be considered the external manifestation
of Kåñëa Himself. Kåñëa states this also:
äcäryaà mäà vijänéyän
nävamanyeta karhicit
na martya-buddhyäsüyeta
sarva-devamayo guruù
"One should know the äcärya to be My self and never disrespect him in any
way. One should not envy him, thinking him an ordinary man, for he is the
representative of all the demigods." (SB 11.17.27)
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, if a spiritual master
cannot destroy his disciple's doubts by superior knowledge, the disciple will
gradually become despondent in spiritual life. Because a bogus guru cannot
actually give Kåñëa to the disciple according to the principle of rasa-varjaà
raso 'py asya, the disciple will again become attracted to material happiness,
not having achieved the bliss of Kåñëa's association. Such a weak disciple of a
weak spiritual master will gradually become hopeless and discouraged in his
attempt at self-realization and will again become fascinated by the temptations
of illusion, such as women, money and so-called intellectuality based on
speculation and imagination.
Further symptoms of the bona fide spiritual master are given in the
Upadeçämåta (1) as follows:
väco vegaà manasaù krodha-vegaà
jihvä-vegam udaropastha-vegam
etän vegän yo viñaheta dhéraù
sarväm apémäà påthivéà sa çiñyät
"A sober person who can tolerate the urge to speak, the mind's demands, the
actions of anger and the urges of the tongue, belly and genitals is qualified to
make disciples all over the world." Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has
stated, upaçamäçrayaà krodha-lobhädy-avaçé-bhütam: a bona fide spiritual
master cannot be under the control of ordinary anger, greed and lust.
According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, one who has
understood the futility of material existence can approach a bona fide spiritual
master. In the two previous verses the futility of earthly and heavenly sense
gratification has been described. Now, the natural conclusion is that one who
has understood this should approach a bona fide spiritual master. The bona
fide spiritual master broadcasts the sound vibration from the spiritual planets
called Vaikuëöha. The inhabitants of the spiritual planets, headed by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself, are certainly not deaf and dumb;
they are in constant communication through unlimited transcendental bliss
and knowledge. And the bona fide spiritual master can transmit this sound
vibration of bliss and knowledge to his disciple. Just as a radio broadcasts
mundane news, the bona fide guru broadcasts the news from Vaikuëöha. This
is confirmed by Narottama däsa Öhäkura: golokera prema-dhana,
hari-näma-saìkértana. The spiritual master also transmits to the disciple the
holy name of Kåñëa, which is nondifferent from Kåñëa Himself. The bona fide
guru informs his disciple that every living entity is qualitatively one with the
Supreme Lord but quantitatively different and thus engages the disciple in the
loving service of the Lord. Because the living entity is qualitatively one with
the Lord and is part of Him, there is an eternal loving relationship between
them. And because the living entity is quantitatively different, that
relationship is eternally one of service. According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta
Sarasvaté Öhäkura, even though one may have the good fortune to accept a
bona fide, highly qualified guru, if one maintains a taste for fruitive activities
or mental speculation one's advancement will be checked. But if a serious
student surrenders to a bona fide spiritual master there is absolutely no
impediment to the transmission of perfect knowledge and bliss in the
devotional service of the Lord.
TEXT 22
ta‡a BaAgAvataAnDamaARna,
izAºaeÖ"vaARtmadE"vata:
@maAyayaAnauva{ÔyaA yaEs$a,
tauSyaed"AtmaAtmad"Ae h"ir":
tatra bhägavatän dharmän
çikñed gurv-ätma-daivataù
amäyayänuvåttyä yais
tuñyed ätmätma-do hariù
SYNONYMS
tatra—there (in the association of the spiritual master); bhägavatän
dharmän—the science of devotional service; çikñet—should learn;
guru-ätma-daivataù—he for whom the spiritual master is his very life and
worshipable deity; amäyayä—without deceit; anuvåttyä—by faithful service;
yaiù—by which (devotional science); tuñyet—can be satisfied; ätmä—the
Supreme Soul; ätma-daù—who bestows His own self; hariù—Lord Hari.
TRANSLATION
Accepting the bona fide spiritual master as one's life and soul and
worshipable deity, the disciple should learn from him the process of pure
devotional service. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, the soul of all
souls, is inclined to give Himself to His pure devotees. Therefore, the disciple
should learn from the spiritual master to serve the Lord without duplicity and
in such a faithful and favorable way that the Supreme Lord, being satisfied, will
offer Himself to the faithful disciple.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé the Lord's tendency to give Himself to
His pure devotee is demonstrated in the case of Bali Mahäräja, who sacrificed
his universal kingdom for the pleasure of Lord Vämanadeva. Lord Vämana was
so pleased by the selfless surrender of Bali Mahäräja that the Lord became the
doorman in the palace of Bali who was reinstalled as a great leader in the
universe.
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé comments that the spiritual master is to be considered
the ätmä, or the very life, of the disciple, since real life begins when one is
initiated by a bona fide spiritual master. Although one may experience many
seemingly wonderful or important events in a dream, one's real life begins
when he wakes up. Similarly, since the spiritual master gives birth to the
disciple by awakening him to spiritual life, a bona fide disciple understands
that his spiritual master is the very basis of his life.
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
the reservoir of all pleasure, and thus the Lord's giving Himself to a pure
devotee indicates that such a devotee becomes immersed in the highest
possible ecstasy. In this connection there is the following çruti-mantra:
änandäd dhémäni bhütäni jäyante. "Indeed, it is from the all-blissful Supreme
that all these creatures have come into being." Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté
Öhäkura has further pointed out that when the Lord bestows His own self
upon a pure devotee such a fortunate devotee can actually see the Lord, touch
Him and directly engage in His service.
According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, one should never
consider one's spiritual master to be mundane or on an equal level with one's
self. One should see the spiritual master as being always under the shelter of
the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord. One should never try to engage the
spiritual master in one's personal service with the mentality of lording it over
the spiritual master and attaining through him some material gain. One who is
actually advancing will become more and more eager to serve the spiritual
master, and thus such a disciple experiences the pleasure of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé has delineated four preliminary requisites for
advancement for the sincere disciple:
guru-pädäçrayas tasmät
kåñëa-dékñädi-çikñaëam
viçrambheëa guroù sevä
sädhu-vartmänuvartanam
"[1] Accepting the shelter of the lotus feet of a bona fide spiritual master, [2]
becoming initiated by the spiritual master and learning how to discharge
devotional service from him, [3] obeying the orders of the spiritual master with
faith and devotion, and [4] following in the footsteps of great äcäryas [teachers]
under the direction of the spiritual master." (Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.2.74)
One who has executed these preliminary duties is qualified to relish
Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
When one actually hears the sound vibration of Çrémad-Bhägavatam as it is,
he becomes free from the desire for sense gratification and mental speculation
and is happy and satisfied in the service of Lord Kåñëa.
yasyäà vai çrüyamäëäyäà
kåñëe parama-püruñe
bhaktir utpadyate puàsaù
çoka-moha-bhayäpahä
"Simply by giving aural reception to Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the feeling for loving
devotional service to Lord Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, sprouts
up at once to extinguish the fire of lamentation, illusion and fearfulness." (SB
1.7.7) One should hear Çrémad-Bhägavatam from a bona fide spiritual master
who can expertly engage the propensity for loving Kåñëa that arises from
hearing the transcendental sound of the Bhägavatam. Such a transcendental,
authorized engagement is called bhägavata-dharma. Within the International
Society for Krishna Consciousness there are many thousands of authorized
engagements pertaining to the Society's missionary activities. And by hearing
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam and performing such engagements the Society's
members feel relief from çoka (lamentation), moha (illusion) and bhaya (fear).
According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, those who have
achieved a mature understanding of the transcendental sound vibration of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam may adopt the order of tridaëòi-sannyäsa, as described in
the Haàsa-gétä, the Thirteenth Chapter of this canto. A so-called Vaiñëava
who whimsically neglects the strict control of the body, mind and speech
cannot actually achieve shelter at the lotus feet of a bona fide spiritual master.
Even if such a whimsical sense enjoyer makes a show of assuming the dress and
daëòa of Vaiñëava sannyäsa, he will not attain the desired result, love of
Kåñëa. A bona fide Vaiñëava should work earnestly to free himself from any
tinge of sense gratification and mental speculation, and with a loving heart he
should carry out the orders of his bona fide spiritual master. By always
remembering the exalted position of the bona fide spiritual master, the disciple
will achieve shelter at the lotus feet of Kåñëa.
TEXT 23
s$avaRtaAe manas$aAe's$aËÿma,
@Ad"AE s$aËMÿ ca s$aADauSau
d"yaAM maE‡aI%M ‘a™ayaM ca
BaUtaeSvaÜ"A yaTaAeicatama,
sarvato manaso 'saìgam
ädau saìgaà ca sädhuñu
dayäà maitréà praçrayaà ca
bhüteñv addhä yathocitam
SYNONYMS
sarvataù—everywhere; manasaù—of the mind; asaìgam—detachment;
ädau-in the beginning; saìgam—association; ca—and; sädhuñu—with saintly
persons; dayäm—mercy; maitrém—friendship; praçrayam—reverence;
ca—and; bhüteñu—for all living beings; addhä—thus; yathä ucitam—as is
suitable.
TRANSLATION
A sincere disciple should learn to dissociate the mind from everything
material and positively cultivate association with his spiritual master and other
saintly devotees. He should be merciful to those in an inferior position to him,
cultivate friendship with those on an equal level and meekly serve those in a
higher spiritual position. Thus he should learn to deal properly with all living
beings.
PURPORT
Çréla Madhväcärya has quoted from the Garuòa Puräëa to demonstrate that
within this universe those who take birth as demigods, great åñis or pious
human beings are all considered santaù, or saintly persons. According to
Bhagavad-gétä, traiguëya-viñayä vedäù: the varëäçrama culture described in
Vedic literature deals mostly with the living entities who are struggling within
the three modes of nature. The Vedic literatures teach such conditioned souls
that material happiness can be achieved only through pious works. In this
sense, the demigods are to be considered the most pious living entities within
the three modes of material nature. The åñis, or the great saintly mystics of the
universe, who are able to travel at will to various planets and who cultivate
mystic powers, are to be considered somewhat below the demigods. And those
human beings on earth who perfectly execute the Vedic rituals are to be
considered in the third or lowest category of santaù, or saintly persons. But a
devotee of the Lord is beyond the three modes of material nature. Lord Kåñëa
says in Bhagavad-gétä (14.26),
mäà ca yo 'vyabhicäreëa
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa guëän samatétyaitän
brahma-bhüyäya kalpate
"One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in any
circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes
to the level of Brahman." Thus Lord Kåñëa clearly says that a Vaiñëava who
does not fall down from the regulations of bhakti-yoga is beyond the three
modes of nature. And Lord Kåñëa advised Arjuna, a kåñëa-bhakta, to transcend
the three material qualities of the illusory creation of mäyä (nistraiguëyo
bhavärjuna). But in the Eighteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä (18.40) the Lord
says,
na tad asti påthivyäà vä
divi deveñu vä punaù
sattvaà prakåti-jair muktaà
yad ebhiù syät tribhir guëaiù
"There is no being existing, either here or among the demigods in the higher
planetary systems, who is free from the three modes of material nature." Thus
the demigods are not exempt from the pollution of the three modes of material
nature, whereas a pure devotee actually becomes guëätéta, or transcendental to
the influence of mäyä.
Therefore, one should cultivate the association of the uttama-adhikäré, or
pure devotee of the Lord, as stated previously (SB 11.3.21):
tasmäd guruà prapadyeta
jijïäsuù çreya uttamam
çäbde pare ca niñëätaà
brahmaëy upaçamäçrayam
"Therefore any person who seriously desires real happiness must seek a bona
fide spiritual master and take shelter of him by initiation. The qualification of
the bona fide guru is that he has realized the conclusions of the scriptures by
deliberation and is able to convince others of these conclusions. Such great
personalities, who have taken shelter of the Supreme Godhead, leaving aside
all material considerations, should be understood to be bona fide spiritual
masters."
On the other hand, one should avoid the association of a materialistic
person even if such a person is outwardly chanting the holy names of Kåñëa.
Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé has advised in this respect,
kåñëeti yasya giri taà manasädriyeta
dékñästi cet praëatibhiç ca bhajantam éçam
çuçrüñayä bhajana-vijïam ananyam anyanindädi-
çünya-hådam épsita-saìga-labdhyä
One may mentally offer respect to any living entity who is chanting the holy
name of Kåñëa, but one should avoid intimate association with materialistic
persons, especially those attached to sex enjoyment. Tamo-dväraà yoñitäà
saìgi-saìgam. If one associates with a sensuous person who is attached to the
company of women, by such association one will surely go to hell.
But if a materialistic person approaches a pure devotee with a sincere desire
to hear from him about spiritual improvement, that first-class devotee may
mercifully give his association, provided the purpose of such a meeting is
advancement in the devotional service of Kåñëa. By such association even a
materialistic person can gradually become a pure devotee of Kåñëa. If an
advanced devotee is not able to engage a materialistic person in the devotional
service of Kåñëa, such association is strictly forbidden.
In the Garuòa Puräëa it is stated,
viçeñataù svottameñu
vinä saìgaà na mucyate
sva-néceñu tu deveñu
vinä saìgaà na püryate
"One cannot be liberated without association with a pure devotee of the Lord.
And unless one shows mercy to those in an inferior position, one's life will be
superficial." It is our practical experience in the Kåñëa consciousness
movement that those who are expanding their mercy by preaching the message
of Kåñëa are making rapid spiritual progress, and their life is filled with
transcendental bliss. Those who neglect the quality of mercy, being
uninterested in the missionary activities of the Kåñëa consciousness
movement, are not filled with transcendental pleasure as described here by the
word püryate. Not being filled with spiritual pleasure, surely such persons
attempt to fill their lives with material pleasure through sense gratification
and mental speculation, associating with women or reading innumerable
mundane novels, newspapers, newsmagazines, and so on. According to Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu the preaching activities of the Kåñëa consciousness
movement are änandämbudhi-vardhanam, the ever-increasing ocean of bliss.
Missionary activities are based on the principle of dayäm, or mercy to those
who are fallen. Those who are actually preaching become enlivened by
associating with other preachers. This principle is called maitrém, or friendship
among equals. The power to carry out such preaching activities, as well as the
proper guidance for distributing Kåñëa's message, comes through the principle
of praçrayam, or humble service at the lotus feet of spiritual authorities such as
the spiritual master. If one preaches Kåñëa consciousness sincerely under the
guidance of a bona fide spiritual master and in the company of fellow
preachers, one is perfectly fulfilling the statement of this verse of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, and thus he will come to the point of sarvato manaso
'saìgam, or complete detachment from the illusory energy of the Lord.
Caitanya Mahäprabhu has stated, lava-mätra sädhu-saìge sarva-siddhi haya
[Cc. Madhya 22.54]. By becoming attached to the devotees of the Lord, one will
achieve all perfection in life, going back home, back to Godhead.
If one neglects the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead by
engaging in sinful life, he is certainly not merciful. One who ignores his
eternal status as part and parcel of the Supreme Lord and who instead covers
himself more and more with material illusions in the form of temporary
designations—"I am American," "I am Russian," "I am Indian," "I am black," "I
am white" and so on—is certainly a killer of his own soul and cannot be
considered merciful. Similarly, those who support animal slaughter by eating
meat, fish and eggs cannot be considered merciful. Sometimes the argument is
given that if one does not harm others he is perfectly religious. But because we
are now in a state of ignorance, we have no idea whatsoever of the future
reactions to our present activities. Ignorantly boasting that one is not harming
others, without an awareness of the subtle laws of nature, does not make one a
religious person. One becomes religious by surrendering to the laws of God as
they are stated by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gétä. As long as a living entity
is infatuated with his own mental speculations, which carry him away like the
waves of the ocean, he cannot understand the process of devotional service to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Mental speculations based on our
experience of the variegated creations of the Lord's illusory energy are
incapable of bringing us to perfect knowledge. One must give up materialistic
association and make company with pure devotees of the Lord, those who are
engaged twenty-four hours a day in perfectly pleasing the Supreme Lord.
One should cultivate association with those who are more advanced than
oneself in devotional service. One's advancement can be measured by one's
detachment from sense gratification and his ability to distribute Kåñëa
consciousness to others. In this connection Çréla Narottama däsa Öhäkura has
said, chäòiyä vaiñëava-sevä, nistära päyeche kebä: "Who can attain salvation if
he gives up the service of the Vaiñëavas?" By serving the lotus feet of pure
devotees, one is immediately enlightened with spiritual knowledge. All of the
so-called pleasures of the material world, culminating in many varieties of
sexual fantasy and impersonal visions of oneself as God, become useless to one
who has achieved the mercy of the lotus feet of a pure devotee of Kåñëa. The
entire material creation is compared to an insignificant bubble in the ocean.
The material universe rests on the spiritual potency of the Lord called
brahmajyoti, just as an insignificant bubble rests on the potency of the
unlimited ocean. By serving the lotus feet of a pure devotee one can enter the
ocean of eternal happiness and experience his constitutional position as a
servant of Kåñëa. The mercy of the Vaiñëavas is unlimited, and one who has
tasted that mercy becomes mad after the lotus feet of Kåñëa, not caring for the
hallucinations of so-called material pleasure or mental speculation. The mercy
of the Vaiñëavas is substantial and as powerful as Kåñëa Himself, whereas
impersonal speculations and hopeless dreams of society, friendship and love
merely constitute various means by which mäyä cheats the conditioned souls
and keeps them in perpetual frustration.
TEXT 24
zAAEcaM tapaistaitaºaAM ca
maAEnaM svaADyaAyamaAjaRvama,
“aöcayaRmaihM"s$aAM ca
s$amatvaM ã"nã"s$aMÁayaAe:
çaucaà tapas titikñäà ca
maunaà svädhyäyam ärjavam
brahmacaryam ahiàsäà ca
samatvaà dvandva-saàjïayoù
SYNONYMS
çaucam—cleanliness; tapaù—austerity; titikñäm—tolerance; ca—and;
maunam—silence; svädhyäyam—study of the Vedas; ärjavam—simplicity;
brahmacaryam—celibacy; ahiàsäm—nonviolence; ca—and;
samatvam—equanimity; dvandva-saàjïayoù—in situations perceived in terms
of duality.
TRANSLATION
To serve the spiritual master the disciple should learn cleanliness, austerity,
tolerance, silence, study of Vedic knowledge, simplicity, celibacy, nonviolence,
and equanimity in the face of material dualities such as heat and cold, happiness
and distress.
PURPORT
Çaucam, or "cleanliness," refers to both internal and external purity. One
should remain externally clean by bathing with soap and water at least once
and, if possible, three times daily. One is considered internally pure when he is
free from the pollution of false pride and egotism. Tapaù, or "austerity," means
that despite the irrational impulses of the mind one should remain fixed in
executing his proper duty in life. Specifically, one must control burning anger
and the urge for wanton sex life. If a human being does not control the
impulses of lust, anger and greed, he loses his power to understand his actual
situation. Human life is a golden opportunity to solve the overwhelming
problems of birth, death, old age and disease. According to the Viñëu Puräëa
(3.8.9),
varëäçramäcära-vatä
puruñeëa paraù pumän
viñëur ärädhyate panthä
nänyat tat-toña-käraëam
[Cc. Madhya 8.58]
Every human being can achieve spiritual perfection by dedicating the fruits of
his prescribed work to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu. Similarly,
in Bhagavad-gétä (18.45) Lord Kåñëa clearly states, sve sve karmaëy abhirataù
saàsiddhià labhate naraù. One does not have to adopt a monastic life or live in
the forest as a yogé; one can achieve perfection by dedicating his occupational
duties to the Supreme Lord. Similarly, Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura has said,
nämäçraya kari' yatane tumi, thakaha äpana käje. If one sincerely takes shelter
of the holy names of Kåñëa by chanting Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa,
Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare, he will achieve
spiritual perfection within the compass of his normal daily activities.
Unfortunately, if a human being neglects the regulative principles of civilized
life that prohibit illicit sex, meat-eating, intoxication and gambling, he will
surely be overwhelmed by the waves of lust and anger, which completely cover
one's consciousness of the reality of spiritual life and draw one to engage in the
phantasmagoria of the temporary material body. As Lord Kåñëa has stated in
Bhagavad-gétä (3.39),
ävåtaà jïänam etena
jïänino nitya-vairiëä
käma-rüpeëa kaunteya
duñpüreëänalena ca
"Thus a man's pure consciousness is covered by his eternal enemy in the form
of lust, which is never satisfied and which burns like fire." Therefore, the word
tapaù, or "austerity," in this verse indicates that one must remain in his
prescribed duty and not become impatient or unregulated due to the waves of
lust, anger and greed.
The word titikñäm, or "tolerance," indicates that a transcendentalist must be
forgiving. The material world is full of embarrassing and irritating situations,
and unless one is inclined to be very much forgiving he will become infected
by a vindictive mentality, which spoils one's spiritual consciousness. Maunam,
or "silence," means that one should not speak on worthless or frivolous topics,
but should discuss the actual issues of human life such as going back home,
back to Godhead. Remaining completely silent is a symptom of ignorance; a
stone is silent due to a lack of consciousness. Since every material thing has its
spiritual counterpart, the Vedic çästras contain negative and positive
injunctions. Corresponding to the negative injunction against speech is the
positive injunction that one should always speak about Kåñëa. Satataà
kértayanto mäm [Bg. 9.14]. One should always speak about the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, glorifying His holy name, fame, pastimes, entourage,
and so on. In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam also it is stated, çrotavyaù kértitavyaç ca
dhyeyaù püjyaç ca nityadä. One should always hear about, glorify, meditate
upon and worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. In the
twenty-first verse of this chapter it was stated, çäbde pare ca niñëätam. The
bona fide spiritual master is expert in çäbde pare, or the transcendental sound
vibration describing the spiritual world. One cannot artificially remain
empty-headed or speechless, as advocated by foolish proponents of concocted
systems of meditation and yoga. But one should be so absorbed in the loving
service of Kåñëa, and so lovingly attracted to praising Kåñëa, that one has not a
single moment free to speak nonsense. That is the purport of the word
maunam.
Svädhyäyam means that one should study Vedic literature according to his
individual ability and also teach others. In Bhagavad-gétä it is mentioned that a
brähmaëa should have the qualities of jïäna and vijïäna, scriptural knowledge
and practical realized application of knowledge. Specifically one should study
those books which increase one's desire to serve the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. His Divine Grace Oà Viñëupäda Paramahaàsa Parivräjakäcärya
Añöottara-çata Çré Çrémad Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda has written in a
few short years a veritable library of transcendental knowledge. It is being
practically seen throughout the world that when the principle of svädhyäyam,
or Vedic study, is applied to these books, such as Çrémad-Bhägavatam,
Bhagavad-gétä As It Is, Caitanya-caritämåta and The Nectar of Devotion, the
sincere reader becomes infused with the ecstatic determination to serve the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The entire International Society for Krishna
Consciousness is expanding all over the world on the basis of this
transcendental literature. Svädhyäyam does not indicate speculative or
imaginary interpretations of religious scriptures, nor should one try to read
many books to increase his false prestige as a so-called scholar. One should
read those books which inspire practical spiritual advancement in knowledge
and renunciation, as exemplified by the books of Çréla Prabhupäda.
The word ärjavam indicates simplicity or straightforwardness. According to
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé svacchatäm, or "clarity, transparency," is a synonym for
straightforwardness. Unless one is pure in consciousness he will adopt many
crooked means. Straightforwardness does not indicate that one should insult
others in the name of honesty, but that one should speak the humble truth.
The word brahmacaryam, or "celibacy," indicates either renouncing completely
the association of women or following strictly the Vedic principles of
householder life, which regulate sex life for the purpose of procreating saintly
children. Ahiàsäm indicates that one should not commit violence against any
living entity. Unless one is aware of the subtle laws of karma, by which a living
being enjoys and suffers, one cannot actually practice ahiàsä, or nonviolence.
Ultimately the material world is full of violence, and the laws of nature, which
impose old age, disease and death upon every living creature, are themselves
filled with violence. Therefore, if somehow or other one can convince others
to surrender to Kåñëa and thus release themselves from the violent laws of
material nature, that is the perfection of ahiàsä.
Samatvaà dvandva-saàjïayoù indicates that one should keep a cool head
even when disturbing material dualities become manifest. Kåñëa says in
Bhagavad-gétä (2.14):
mäträ-sparçäs tu kaunteya
çétoñëa-sukha duùkha-däù
ägamäpäyino 'nityäs
täàs titikñasva bhärata
"O son of Kunté, the nonpermanent appearance of happiness and distress, and
their disappearance in due course, are like the appearance and disappearance
of winter and summer seasons. They arise from sense perception, O scion of
Bharata, and one must learn to tolerate them without being disturbed."
TEXT 25
s$avaR‡aAtmaeìr"AnvaIºaAM
kE(valyamainake(tataAma,
ivaival(caIr"vas$anaM
s$antaAeSaM yaena ke(naicata,
sarvaträtmeçvaränvékñäà
kaivalyam aniketatäm
vivikta-céra-vasanaà
santoñaà yena kenacit
SYNONYMS
sarvatra—everywhere; ätma—for one's true self; éçvara—and for the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; anvékñäm—meditation by keeping continuously in
view; kaivalyam—solitude; aniketatäm—having no fixed residence;
vivikta-céra—scraps of cloth found in unfrequented places; vasanam—wearing;
santoñam—satisfaction; yena kenacit—with anything.
TRANSLATION
One should practice meditation by constantly seeing oneself to be an eternal
cognizant spirit soul and seeing the Lord to be the absolute controller of
everything. To increase one's meditation, one should live in a secluded place
and give up false attachment to one's home and household paraphernalia. Giving
up the decorations of the temporary material body, one should dress himself
with scraps of cloth found in rejected places, or with the bark of trees. In this
way one should learn to be satisfied in any material situation.
PURPORT
Kaivalyam, or living in a secluded place, indicates a place free from material
disturbances. Therefore, one should live in the association of Vaiñëavas, where
the common goal is advancement in Kåñëa consciousness. Especially in the
Kali-yuga, if one tries to remain physically isolated from all others the result
will be degradation or insanity. Aniketatäm means that one should not be
intoxicated by the ephemeral satisfaction of one's "home sweet home," which
will vanish at any moment by the unforeseen circumstances produced by one's
previous activities. In this age it is not actually possible to dress in tree bark in
modern cities, nor to wear mere scraps of cloth. Previously, human culture
accommodated those practicing tapasya, or penances in the interest of spiritual
advancement. In this age, however, the most urgent necessity is for preaching
the message of Bhagavad-gétä throughout human society. Therefore, it is
recommended that Vaiñëavas dress with clean and neat cloth, covering the
body decently so that the conditioned souls will not be frightened or repulsed
by the severe penances of the Vaiñëavas. In the Kali-yuga the conditioned
souls are extremely attached to material sense gratification, and extreme
austerities are not appreciated, but are instead considered abominable denials
of the flesh. Of course, austerity is required for spiritual advancement, but the
practical example set by Çréla Prabhupäda in successfully spreading the Kåñëa
consciousness movement was that all material things should be used to attract
people to Kåñëa consciousness. Therefore, Vaiñëavas may at times adopt
ordinary dress to serve the higher principle of distributing Kåñëa
consciousness. In any case, one should learn to be satisfied in any material
situation so as to prepare for the moment of death. According to
Bhagavad-gétä, at the time of death the particular consciousness we have
created in this life will carry us to our future situation. Therefore, human life
can be seen as a type of practice for successfully fixing one's mind on the
Absolute Truth during the severe trials of death.
TEXT 26
™aÜ"AM BaAgAvatae zAAñe
'inand"Amanya‡a caAipa ih"
manaAevaAfk(maRd"NxM" ca
s$atyaM zAmad"maAvaipa
çraddhäà bhägavate çästre
'nindäm anyatra cäpi hi
mano-väk-karma-daëòaà ca
satyaà çama-damäv api
SYNONYMS
çraddhäm—faith; bhägavate—related to the Supreme Lord; çästre—in
scripture; anindäm—not blaspheming; anyatra—others; ca—also; api
hi—indeed; manaù—of the mind; väk—speech; karma—and one's activities;
daëòam—strict control; ca—and; satyam—truthfulness; çama—self-control of
the mind; damau—and of the external senses; api—also.
TRANSLATION
One should have firm faith that he will achieve all success in life by
following those scriptures that describe the glories of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Bhagavän. At the same time, one should avoid blaspheming other
scriptures. One should rigidly control his mind, speech and bodily activities,
always speak the truth, and bring the mind and senses under full control.
PURPORT
The definition of çraddhä, or faith, is given as follows in
Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 22.62):
'çraddhä'-çabde-viçväsa kahe sudåòha niçcaya
kåñëe bhakti kaile sarva-karma kåta haya
"By rendering transcendental loving service to Kåñëa, one automatically
performs all subsidiary activities. This confident, firm faith, favorable to the
discharge of devotional service, is called "çraddhä." Thus a devotee should be
confident that by carrying out the injunctions of bhägavata-çästra, or Vedic
literature that directly, rather than indirectly, describes devotional service to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one will easily achieve all knowledge and
the perfection of life.
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura,
mano-väk-käya-daëòam, or strict control of the mind, speech and bodily
activities, means mänasa-väcika-käyika-vikarma-rähityam; that is, one should
rigidly abandon all sinful activities with his mind, speech and body. As Çréla
Prabhupäda has repeatedly pointed out, sense control does not mean stopping
sensory activities, thus becoming like a dead body, but rather engaging one's
mental, vocal and bodily activities in the service of Kåñëa. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé
has stated,
éhä yasya harer däsye
karmaëä manasä girä
nikhiläsv apy avasthäsu
jévan-muktaù sa ucyate
"A person acting in Kåñëa consciousness, in the service of Kåñëa, with his
body, mind, intelligence and words is a liberated person, even within the
material world, although he may be engaged in many so-called material
activities." (Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.2.187) Thus one can achieve
vikarma-rähityam, or freedom from unauthorized, sinful activities, by engaging
one's senses, mind, intelligence and speech twenty-four hours daily in the
service of Kåñëa. In Bhagavad-gétä Lord Kåñëa says that only those pious living
entities who are vikarma-rahita, completely free from sinful life, can achieve
freedom from the illusory duality of material nature (samatvaà
dvandva-saàjïayoù). The Lord says,
yeñäà tv anta-gataà päpaà
janänäà punya-karmaëäm
te dvandva-moha-nirmuktä
bhajante mäà dåòha-vratäù
"Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life, whose sinful
actions are completely eradicated and who are freed from the duality of
delusion engage themselves in My service with determination." (Bg. 7.28) In
his purport to this verse, His Divine Grace Çréla Prabhupäda has stated, "Those
eligible for elevation to the transcendental position are mentioned in this
verse. For those who are sinful, atheistic, foolish and deceitful, it is very
difficult to transcend the duality of desire and hate. Only those who have
passed their lives in practicing the regulative principles of religion, who have
acted piously and have conquered sinful reactions can accept devotional
service and gradually rise to the pure knowledge of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Then, gradually, they can meditate in trance on the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. That is the process of being situated on the spiritual
platform. This elevation is possible in Kåñëa consciousness in the association of
pure devotees who can deliver one from delusion."
Çréla Madhväcärya has quoted the following statement from the Brahmäëòa
Puräëa: "One should have complete faith in transcendental literature such as
Çrémad-Bhägavatam and other literature that directly glorifies the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. One should also have faith in Vaiñëava tantras, the
original Vedas, and Mahäbhärata, which includes Bhagavad-gétä and which is
considered the fifth Veda. The Vedic knowledge originally emanated from the
breathing of Viñëu, and Vedic literature has been compiled in literary form by
Çréla Vyäsadeva, the incarnation of Viñëu. Therefore, Lord Viñëu should be
understood to be the personal speaker of all this Vedic literature.
"There are other Vedic literatures, called kalä-vidyä, which give
instructions in material arts and sciences. Since all such Vedic arts and
sciences are ultimately intended to be used to render devotional service to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Keçava, saintly persons in the renounced
order of life should never blaspheme such apparently mundane literatures;
because such literatures are indirectly connected with the Supreme Lord, one
may go to hell for blaspheming these secondary literatures.
"Çraddhä indicates a faithful mentality, which can be analyzed in two
sections. The first type of faith is a firm conviction that all the statements of
the multifarious Vedic literatures are true. In other words, the understanding
that Vedic knowledge in general is infallible is called çraddhä, or faith. A
second type of faith is the belief that one must personally carry out a particular
injunction of Vedic literature in order to achieve his goal in life. A devotee of
the Supreme Lord should thus apply the first type of faith to the various
kalä-vidyäs, or Vedic material arts and sciences, but he should not accept such
scriptures as pointing out his personal goal in life. Nor should he carry out any
Vedic injunction that is contradictory to the injunctions of Vaiñëava
scriptures such as the Païcarätra.
"Thus one should faithfully accept all Vedic literature as directly or
indirectly describing the Supreme Personality of Godhead and should not
blaspheme any portion of it. Even for Lord Brahmä, as well as for other
creatures, down to the insignificant unmoving species such as trees and stones,
blasphemy of any Vedic literature causes one to merge into the darkness of
ignorance. Thus the suras—the demigods, great sages and devotees of the
Lord—should understand that the Païcarätric literatures, as well as the four
Vedas, the original Rämäyaëa, the Çrémad-Bhägavatam and other Puräëas, and
the Mahäbhärata, are Vedic literatures that establish the supremacy of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and the unique transcendental position of
the Lord's devotees according to their status of spiritual advancement. Any
other vision of Vedic literatures is to be considered an illusion. In all
authorized religious scriptures the ultimate goal is to understand that the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is the controller of everything and everyone,
and that the Lord's devotees are not different from Him, although such
devotees are to be understood in terms of their level of spiritual advancement."
Lord Kåñëa has stated in Bhagavad-gétä, vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva vedyo/
vedänta-kåd veda-vid eva cäham: "By all the Vedas, I am to be known; indeed, I
am the compiler of Vedänta, and I am the knower of the Vedas." Similarly, the
Lord states:
yasmät kñaram atéto 'ham
akñaräd api cottamaù
ato 'smi loke vede ca
prathitaù puruñottamaù
"Because I am transcendental, beyond both the fallible and the infallible, and
because I am the greatest, I am celebrated both in the world and in the Vedas
as the Supreme Person." (Bg. 15.18)
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura mentions that one cannot develop
the godly qualities mentioned in the preceding verses unless one accepts the
shelter of the lotus feet of a bona fide Vaiñëava spiritual master. Tasmäd
guruà prapadyeta jijïäsuù çreya uttamam [SB 11.3.21]. In this connection, he
has quoted the following statement:
arcayitvä tu govindaà
tadéyän närcayet tu yaù
na sa bhägavato jïeyaù
kevalaà dämbhikaù småtaù
"One who performs worship of Lord Govinda but fails to worship His devotees
should be understood to be not a devotee of the Lord but simply a victim of
false pride." For one who has accepted shelter at the lotus feet of a pure
devotee of Kåñëa, it is very easy to execute worship of the Lord Himself.
For such a surrendered soul there is no need of artificial penances and
austerities. In this regard Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has quoted
the following (from Närada Païcarätra):
ärädhito yadi haris tapasä tataù kià
narädhito yadi haris tapasä tataù kim
antar bahir yadi haris tapasä tataù kià
näntar bahir yadi haris tapasä tataù kim
"If one is worshiping Lord Hari, what is the use of performing extraneous
penances? And if one is not worshiping Lord Hari, no such penances will save
one. If one can understand that Lord Hari is all-pervading, within and
without, what is the need of performing penances? And if one is not able to
understand that Hari is all-pervading, all his penances are useless." A Vaiñëava
is always absorbed in executing his devotional service to Kåñëa. If a devotee
becomes falsely proud of executing severe penances and austerities and
meditates on accepting and rejecting material objects instead of thinking of
his service to Kåñëa, his so-called austerities become an impediment to
devotional service.
A devotee should not be disturbed by the word jugglery of those who are
against the devotional service of the Lord. Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté
Öhäkura has emphatically pointed out that devotional service to the lotus feet
of the Supreme Lord is the only means of achieving the final perfection of life.
Therefore a Vaiñëava should practice maunam, or silence, by ignoring those
literatures which are full of false arguments, such as those of the Mäyäväda
school, and those karma-käëòa scriptures which promote sense gratification in
the name of religious life. If one becomes overwhelmed by mundane
unhappiness due to not achieving immediate success in self-realization, or if
one becomes deluded by sense gratification and tries to take shelter of
materialistic men and doctrines, one's devotional progress will immediately be
checked. Similarly, if a devotee expresses love for things separate from Kåñëa
or tries to find fault in the process of devotional service or the philosophy of
Bhagavad-gétä in order to justify absorbing himself in the sense gratification of
seeing things separate from Kåñëa, his progress in spiritual enlightenment will
be seriously disturbed. Such an illusory concept is called dvitéyäbhiniveça, or
absorption in illusion. On the other hand, if one is attracted to the vibration
of Vedic sound by the consensus of self-realized authorities called the
vaiñëava-paramparä and thus engages enthusiastically in kåñëa-näma-kértana,
or chanting the holy names of the Lord, then one's practice of mauna, or
silence, is perfect.
One should avoid prajalpa, or whimsical conversations unrelated to
devotional service. Merely restraining the senses artificially without chanting
and hearing the glories of the Supreme Lord cannot be considered the spiritual
perfection. The example is given that although many domestic animals in the
barnyard are sometimes forced to practice celibacy when isolated from one
another, such animals cannot be considered brahmacärés, or spiritual students.
Similarly, one is not considered spiritually advanced simply because of dry
speculative arguments or temporary austerities. One must submissively hear
the message of the Vedic sound vibration, especially as it is summarized in
Bhagavad-gétä by the Lord Himself. Vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva vedyaù [Bg.
15.15].
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has warned us that if one becomes
attracted to nontheistic ethical philosophies, such as those of the Buddhists
and Jains, which glorify such mundane principles as ahiàsä, or nonviolence,
one's mundane faith in godless ethics is spiritually suicidal. To restrict the
senses by artificial austerities and to undertake huge social arrangements to
facilitate mass sense gratification are both godless attempts to regulate human
society in an artificial way that hides the eternal relationship of every living
being with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the natural leader of society.
When so-called moral philosophers spoil the opportunity of human life, the
opportunity to revive our eternal relationship with Kåñëa, in the name of
ethics such foolish persons commit the greatest violence against human
society. Therefore, Kåñëadäsa Kaviräja Gosvämé has said,
çré-kåñëa-caitanya-dayä karaha vicära
vicära karile citte päbe camatkära
"If you are indeed interested in logic and argument, kindly apply them to the
mercy of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. If you do so, you will find such mercy
strikingly wonderful." (Cc. Ädi 8.15)
According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura a mahä-bhägavata,
or pure devotee of the Lord, is one who sees that both the material and
spiritual worlds are nondifferent from Lord Kåñëa, being expansions of His
potency, but also sees that Vrajendranandana, Kåñëa, keeps Himself eternally
distinct by His unique quality of all-attractiveness. Thus a pure devotee of the
Lord is aniketana, without a fixed residence, meaning that he accepts neither
the gross nor subtle body as his eternal residence. Since one's so-called home
and family are expansions of his body, such material creations are also not to
be considered one's actual residence. Caitanya Mahäprabhu said,
ayi nanda-tanuja kiìkaraà
patitaà mäm viñame bhavämbudhau
kåpayä tava päda-paìkajasthita-
dhülé-sadåçaà vicintaya
[Cc. Antya 20.32, Çikñäñöaka 5]
"O Kåñëa, son of Mahäräja Nanda, I am Your eternal servitor, yet somehow or
other I have fallen into the ocean of birth and death. Please pick me up from
this ocean of death and place me as one of the atoms at Your lotus feet."
(Çikñäñöaka 5) Thus a devotee should understand that his eternal residence is
fixed in the dust of the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. A
Vaiñëava should reject the gross sense gratification of living in the forest in
the mode of goodness, in the city in the mode of passion, or in the gambling
house in ignorance. A pure devotee may travel all over the world distributing
Kåñëa consciousness, but he should never consider any material place to be his
actual residence. One who has become mature in this understanding may take
the tridaëòa-sannyäsa order of life under the direct shelter of the Lord.
The impersonalist cannot understand how the devotee of the Lord,
although fixed in the duality of seeing himself as eternally different from the
Lord, sees all existence as nondifferent from the Lord. Those who attempt to
acquire knowledge by impersonal speculation based on their tiny experience of
the material cosmic manifestation cannot understand the transcendental
reality of acintya-bhedäbheda-tattva(93), the Absolute Truth's simultaneous
oneness with and difference from His creation. The process of assimilating this
transcendental knowledge is given in these verses, starting with tasmäd guruà
prapadyeta [SB 11.3.21]. One is recommended to accept a bona fide spiritual
master and serve him according to the direction of these verses. The essence of
such instructions is that one should abandon the association of Mäyävädé
impersonalists, ritualistic fruitive workers and those who are whimsically
indifferent to the ultimate purpose of life, and instead one should devote
himself to associating with the devotees of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. A falsely proud neophyte may imagine himself a great devotee of the
Lord without taking to the company of the Lord's followers, but without such
association it is not possible to become advanced in Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXTS 27-28
™avaNAM k(LtaRnaM DyaAnaM
h"re"r"àu"tak(maRNA:
janmak(maRgAuNAAnaAM ca
tad"TaeR'iKalacaeií"tama,
wíM" d"ÔaM tapaAe jaæaM
va{ÔaM ya»aAtmana: i‘ayama,
d"Ar"Ana, s$autaAna, gA{h"Ana, ‘aANAAna,
yatpar"smaE inavaed"nama,
çravaëaà kértanaà dhyänaà
harer adbhuta-karmaëaù
janma-karma-guëänäà ca
tad-arthe 'khila-ceñöitam
iñöaà dattaà tapo japtaà
våttaà yac cätmanaù priyam
därän sutän gåhän präëän
yat parasmai nivedanam
SYNONYMS
çravaëam—hearing; kértanam—chanting; dhyänam—and meditation;
hareù—of the Supreme Lord, Hari; adbhuta-karmaëaù—whose activities are
wonderful; janma—of His incarnations; karma—pastimes;
guëänäm—transcendental qualities; ca—and; tat-arthe—for His sake;
akhila—all; ceñöitam—endeavors; iñöam—whatever worship one performs;
dattam—whatever charity; tapaù—penance; japtam—whatever mantras one
chants; våttam—pious activities performed; yat—what; ca—also; ätmanaù—to
oneself; priyam—dear; därän—wife; sutän—sons; gåhän—home; präëän—vital
air; yat—which; parasmai—unto the Supreme; nivedanam—offering.
TRANSLATION
One should hear, glorify and meditate upon the wonderful transcendental
activities of the Lord. One should specifically become absorbed in the
appearance, activities, qualities and holy names of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Thus inspired, one should perform all of one's daily activities as an
offering to the Lord. One should perform sacrifice, charity and penance
exclusively for the Lord's satisfaction. Similarly, one should chant only those
mantras which glorify the Supreme Personality of Godhead. And all one's
religious activities should be performed as an offering to the Lord. Whatever
one finds pleasing or enjoyable he should immediately offer to the Supreme
Lord, and even his wife, children, home and very life air he should offer at the
lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (9.27) Lord Kåñëa has ordered,
yat karoñi yad açnäsi
yaj juhoñi dadäsi yat
yat tapasyasi kaunteya
tat kuruñva mad-arpaëam
"O son of Kunté, all that you do, all that you eat, all that you offer and give
away, and all austerities that you perform should be done as an offering unto
Me." Çréla Prabhupäda has commented on this verse as follows: "Thus, it is the
duty of everyone to mold his life in such a way that he will not forget Kåñëa in
any circumstance. Everyone has to work for maintenance of his body and soul
together, and Kåñëa recommends herein that one should work for Him.
Everyone has to eat something to live; therefore he should accept the
remnants of foodstuffs offered to Kåñëa. Any civilized man has to perform
some religious ritualistic ceremonies; therefore Kåñëa recommends, 'Do it for
Me,' and this is called arcanam. Everyone has a tendency to give something in
charity; Kåñëa says, 'Give it to Me,' and this means that all surplus money
accumulated should be utilized in furthering the Kåñëa consciousness
movement. Nowadays people are very much inclined to the meditational
process, which is not practical in this age, but if anyone practices meditating
on Kåñëa twenty-four hours by chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra round his
beads, he is surely the greatest yogé, as substantiated by the Sixth Chapter of
Bhagavad-gétä."
Many persons who become attracted to the devotional service of Kåñëa are
bewildered by the material possessions, reputation or skills they have
accumulated by their previous material activities. According to Çréla Jéva
Gosvämé these two verses indicate that all such material opulences
accumulated by one's previous karma should be used as an offering to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. One's fame, education, wealth and so on
should all be used to carry out the mission of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Sometimes envious materialists ask why one should waste one's
wealth and education in the Lord's service when such things could be better
used to gratify the temporary material body. Actually, however, whatever we
possess, including this body, is ultimately the property of the Supreme Lord,
who is the creator, maintainer and annihilator of all existence. Therefore, one
should be blessed by dovetailing one's so-called opulences in the devotional
service of the Lord. Otherwise, as stated in Bhagavad-gétä, måtyuù sarva-haraç
cäham: [Bg. 10.34] the Supreme Lord will appear before us at the time of death
as måtyu, death personified, and violently take away all of our possessions.
Therefore, such possessions should be peacefully offered to the lotus feet of the
Lord while we are still living and able to enjoy the pious result of such an
offering.
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, tapaù, austerity, means
that one should observe vows such as Ekädaçé-vrata, in which one fasts from
grains and beans twice a month. The word japtam refers to chanting the holy
names of the Lord, such as Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/
Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté
Öhäkura has further pointed out that one can offer one's wife, children and
home to the Lord by converting one's family into devotees of the Supreme
Lord. Rather than becoming artificially puffed up in the pursuit of so-called
status symbols, one's family should be trained to understand that they are
eternal servants of the Supreme Lord. And when the entire family becomes
dedicated to the Lord's service, a very beautiful situation is created.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has pointed out that if a human
being is not initiated into the process of bhägavata-dharma he must depend
upon the uncertain knowledge derived from his gross material senses.
Indifferent to the sublime descriptions of the Lord's eternal appearances,
pastimes and innumerable transcendental qualities, the faithless materialist
wanders about on the platform of mundane enjoyment. But if one can
understand the reality of the Supreme Personality of Godhead as He is
described in authorized Vedic literature, then one should accept the order of
tridaëòa-sannyäsa, or at least one should practice restraint of the body, mind
and words and thus become self-controlled and fixed in the Absolute Truth.
Then all of one's desires, all the charity he gives, and his penances and
chanting of mantras-in other words, his entire personality, his home, his
children, his wife and his very life air—become heartfelt offerings to the
Supreme Lord. When a living entity constantly hears the authorized
descriptions of the Supreme Lord and dovetails all of his activities in the
Lord's service, avoiding other activities, he is considered to be fixed on the
platform of bhägavata-dharma.
TEXT 29
WvaM k{(SNAAtmanaATaeSau
manauSyaeSau ca s$aAEô$d"ma,
pair"cayaA< caAeBaya‡a
mah"ts$au na{Sau s$aADauSau
evaà kåñëätma-nätheñu
manuñyeñu ca sauhådam
paricaryäà cobhayatra
mahatsu nåñu sädhuñu
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; kåñëa-ätma-nätheñu—for those who take Lord Kåñëa as the Lord
of their soul; manuñyeñu—humans; ca—and; sauhådam—friendship;
paricaryäm—service; ca—and; ubhayatra—rendered to both (moving and
nonmoving creatures, or the Lord and His devotees); mahatsu—(especially) to
the pure devotees of the Lord; nåñu—to human beings; sädhuñu—those who
are fixed in saintly behavior.
TRANSLATION
One who desires his ultimate self-interest should cultivate friendship with
those persons who have accepted Kåñëa as the Lord of their life. One should
further develop an attitude of service toward all living beings. One should
especially try to help those in the human form of life and, among them,
especially those who accept the principles of religious behavior. Among religious
persons, one should especially render service to the pure devotees of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, the highest duty for
devotees of the Supreme Lord is to establish friendship with those who have
completely surrendered to Kåñëa and who have thus achieved çaraëägati,
shelter at the Lord's lotus feet. One should render service to both the Lord and
His devotees, since the Lord is more pleased by sincere service rendered to His
pure devotees. One should not only officially offer respect to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, His devotees and His worshipful paraphernalia, but
should actually render service to the representatives of the Lord, who are
known as mahä-bhägavatas.
TEXT 30
par"s$par"Anauk(TanaM
paAvanaM BagAvaâzA:
imaTaAe r"itaimaRTastauií"r,"
inava{iÔaimaRTa @Atmana:
parasparänukathanaà
pävanaà bhagavad-yaçaù
mitho ratir mithas tuñöir
nivåttir mitha ätmanaù
SYNONYMS
paraspara—mutual; anukathanam—discussion; pävanam—purifying;
bhagavat—of the Supreme Lord; yaçaù—glories; mithaù—mutual;
ratiù—loving attraction; mithaù—mutual; tuñöiù—satisfaction;
nivåttiù—cessation of material miseries; mithaù—mutual; ätmanaù—of the
soul.
TRANSLATION
One should learn how to associate with the devotees of the Lord by
gathering with them to chant the glories of the Lord. This process is most
purifying. As devotees thus develop their loving friendship, they feel mutual
happiness and satisfaction. And by thus encouraging one another they are able
to give up material sense gratification, which is the cause of all suffering.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, those who are advanced in Kåñëa
consciousness should not envy one another or quarrel among themselves.
Giving up all such mundane feelings, they should gather together and chant
the glories of the Supreme Lord for mutual purification. Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura has pointed out that glorification of the Supreme Lord is
especially potent when performed in the association of pure devotees. When
devotees engage in saìkértana, chanting the glories of the Lord together, they
experience the highest transcendental bliss and satisfaction. Thus they
encourage one another to give up material sense gratification, which is based
on illicit sexual connections with women. One devotee will say to another,
"Oh, you have given up sense gratification. Starting today, I shall also give it
up."
One should learn to increase one's love for the devotees, to satisfy them and
to give up sense objects unfavorable to serving Kåñëa. And one should learn to
view the entire universe as paraphernalia for the Lord's service. By engaging
the objects of the senses in Kåñëa's service, one automatically becomes
detached from them. And as one passes one's days in the association of the
Lord's devotees, one's transcendental ecstasy increases more and more, through
discussions about the topics of Çrémad-Bhägavatam and Bhagavad-gétä.
Therefore, one who wants to be free from the harassment of mäyä in the form
of sense gratification must constantly associate with pure devotees of the Lord
who have no engagement other than chanting and hearing the glories of the
Lord and carrying out His mission on earth.
Çréla Madhväcärya has pointed out that just as one should cultivate
friendship with devotees, one must cultivate a spirit of friendship toward the
demigods, who manage the universe on the Lord's behalf. Thus one should live
peacefully within this world.
TEXT 31
smar"nta: smaAr"yantaê
imaTaAe'GaAEGah"rM" h"ir"ma,
BaftyaA s$aÃaAtayaA BaftyaA
iba”atyautpaulak(AM tanauma,
smarantaù smärayantaç ca
mitho 'ghaugha-haraà harim
bhaktyä saïjätayä bhaktyä
bibhraty utpulakäà tanum
SYNONYMS
smarantaù—remembering; smärayantaù ca—and reminding; mithaù—one
another; agha-ogha-haram—who takes away everything inauspicious from the
devotee; harim—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhaktyä—by devotion;
saïjätayä—awakened; bhaktyä—by devotion; bibhrati—possess;
utpulakäm—agitated by ecstasy; tanum—body.
TRANSLATION
The devotees of the Lord constantly discuss the glories of the Personality of
Godhead among themselves. Thus they constantly remember the Lord and
remind one another of His qualities and pastimes. In this way, by their devotion
to the principles of bhakti-yoga, the devotees please the Personality of Godhead,
who takes away from them everything inauspicious. Being purified of all
impediments, the devotees awaken to pure love of Godhead, and thus, even
within this world, their spiritualized bodies exhibit symptoms of transcendental
ecstasy, such as standing of the bodily hairs on end.
PURPORT
The word aghaugha-haram is very significant in this verse. Agha refers to
that which is inauspicious or sinful. The living entity is actually
sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], or eternal and full of bliss and knowledge, but
by neglecting his eternal relationship with Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead,
he commits sinful activities and undergoes the inauspicious result in the form
of material suffering. The chain of sinful reactions is called ogha, or a
relentless wave of suffering. Kåñëa is aghaugha-haraà harim; He takes away
the sinful reactions of His devotees, who are thus entitled to experience the
inconceivable bliss of the kingdom of God even while remaining in this world.
The words bhaktyä saïjätayä bhaktyä indicate that there are two divisions
of bhakti-yoga: sädhana-bhakti and rägänuga-bhakti. Çréla Prabhupäda has
elaborately explained in his book The Nectar of Devotion the progress of the
devotee from sädhana-bhakti, or the execution of regulative principles, to
rägänuga-bhakti, or service executed in love of Godhead. According to Çréla
Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, a liberated soul is always enthusiastic due
to the appearance of transcendental ecstasy within his body. Thus he always
aspires to remain overwhelmed in chanting the glories of the Personality of
Godhead, Hari.
TEXT 32
¸(icaåu"d"ntyacyautaicantayaA ¸(icaä,"
Das$ainta nand"inta vad"ntyalaAEik(k(A:
na{tyainta gAAyantyanauzAIlayantyajaM
Bavainta taUSNAI%M par"maetya inava{RtaA:
kvacid rudanty acyuta-cintayä kvacid
dhasanti nandanti vadanty alaukikäù
nåtyanti gäyanty anuçélayanty ajaà
bhavanti tüñëéà param etya nirvåtäù
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; rudanti—they cry; acyuta—of the infallible Supreme Lord;
cintayä—by the thought; kvacit—sometimes; hasanti—they laugh;
nandanti—take great pleasure; vadanti—speak; alaukikäù—acting amazingly;
nåtyanti—they dance; gäyanti—sing; anuçélayanti—and imitate; ajam—the
unborn; bhavanti—they become; tüñëém—silent; param—the Supreme;
etya—obtaining; nirvåtäù—freed from distress.
TRANSLATION
Having achieved love of Godhead, the devotees sometimes cry out loud,
absorbed in thought of the infallible Lord. Sometimes they laugh, feel great
pleasure, speak out loud to the Lord, dance or sing. Such devotees, having
transcended material, conditioned life, sometimes imitate the unborn Supreme
by acting out His pastimes. And sometimes, achieving His personal audience,
they remain peaceful and silent.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has explained the symptoms of love of
Godhead. Rudanti: The devotees cry, thinking, "Another day has passed, and
still I could not obtain Kåñëa. Then what will I do, where will I go, from whom
shall I inquire, and who can possibly help me reach Kåñëa?" Hasanti: It is late
at night, the sky is dark, and Kåñëa is determined to steal from the house of
one of the elderly gopés. He is hiding underneath a tree in the corner of the
courtyard belonging to one of the cowherd men. Although Kåñëa thinks that
He is completely concealed, He suddenly hears a voice from one of the elderly
members of the family. "Who are You there? Who are You? I say." Thus Kåñëa
has been caught, and He begins to flee the courtyard. When this humorous
scene is revealed to the devotee, the devotee begins to laugh heartily.
Nandanti: When Kåñëa actually reveals His transcendental form to the
devotee, the devotee experiences the highest transcendental bliss. Vadanti:
The devotee says to the Lord, "O Kåñëa, after so many days I have finally
achieved You."
When all of the devotee's senses are absorbed in Çré Kåñëa, the devotee has
successfully transcended the material condition of life. This is indicated by the
word alaukikäù. Alaukikäù, or the transcendental platform, is explained by the
Lord in Bhagavad-gétä (14.26):
mäm ca yo 'vyabhicäreëa
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa guëän samatétyaitän
brahma-bhüyäya kalpate
"One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in any
circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes
to the level of Brahman."
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, ajaà harim, anuçélayanti tal-léläm
abhinayanti: "Anuçélayanti indicates that out of extreme ecstasy the devotees
sometimes imitate or act out the pastimes of the Supreme Lord." This ecstatic
symptom was manifested by the gopés in Våndävana during Kåñëa's absence.
In the twenty-first verse of this chapter it was stated that one who has
understood that there is no happiness either on earth or in material heaven
must surrender at the lotus feet of a bona fide spiritual master. Tasmäd guruà
prapadyeta jijïäsuù çreya uttamam [SB 11.3.21]. The following verses gave many
detailed instructions regarding the activities of a bona fide disciple. Now this
verse is describing the mature fruit of devotional service, namely, pure love of
Godhead. Everyone has the opportunity to come to this platform of
transcendental bliss by taking the dust of the lotus feet of Kåñëa's
representative on his head. One should give up the mentality of envy and false
prestige and humbly take shelter of the mercy of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. The spiritual master is to be considered the incarnation of the Lord's
mercy. There is absolutely no doubt that a sincere soul who serves a bona fide
spiritual master will achieve the highest perfection of life (çreya uttamam). He
will enjoy eternal bliss and knowledge in the personal abode of the Lord.
TEXT 33
wita BaAgAvataAnDamaARna,
izAºana, BaftyaA taäu"tTayaA
naAr"AyaNApar"Ae maAyaAma,
@Ãastar"ita äu"star"Ama,
iti bhägavatän dharmän
çikñan bhaktyä tad-utthayä
näräyaëa-paro mäyäm
aïjas tarati dustaräm
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; bhägavatän dharmän—the science of devotional service;
çikñan—studying; bhaktyä—by devotion; tat-utthayä—generated by it;
näräyaëa-paraù—completely devoted to the Supreme Lord, Näräyaëa;
mäyäm—the illusory energy; aïjaù—easily; tarati—crosses beyond;
dustaräm—impossible to cross.
TRANSLATION
Thus learning the science of devotional service and practically engaging in
the devotional service of the Lord, the devotee comes to the stage of love of
Godhead. And by complete devotion to the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Näräyaëa, the devotee easily crosses over the illusory energy, mäyä, which is
extremely difficult to cross.
PURPORT
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has pointed out that mukti, or liberation, which is
described in this verse by the words mäyäm aïjas tarati dustaräm, is actually a
by-product or secondary result of pure love of Godhead. In the second verse of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam it is pointed out, dharmaù projjhita-kaitavo 'tra paramo
nirmatsaräëäà satäà/ vedyaà västavam atra vastu çivadaà
täpa-trayonmülanam [SB 1.1.2]. Çrémad-Bhägavatam teaches the science of
devotional service, in which the ultimate goal is pure love of Godhead.
According to the Vaiñëava äcäryas, mukti, or liberation, is a by-product of love
of Godhead. Çivadaà täpa-trayonmülanam. One should not approach the
Supreme Personality of Godhead for liberation, since one is automatically
liberated by obeying the order of the Lord. Kåñëa's order is given at the end of
Bhagavad-gétä: sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja [Bg. 18.66].
Every living being should give up his mundane conceptions of life and take full
shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. If one carries out this
order the Lord automatically provides liberation (mukti). Actual happiness
comes from loving God without any tinge of mental speculation or fruitive
desire.
anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà
jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam
änukülyena kåñëänuçélanaà
bhaktir uttamä
[Cc. Madhya 19.167]
"One should render transcendental loving service to Lord Kåñëa favorably and
without desire for material profit or gain through fruitive activities or
philosophical speculation. That is called pure devotional service."
(Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.1.11) So crossing over the insurmountable ocean of
illusion, as described here, is not actually the principal result of
bhägavata-dharma, or devotional service to the Lord, but is a by-product of
pure love of Godhead.
TEXT 34
™aIr"AjaAevaAca
naAr"AyaNAAiBaDaAnasya
“aöNA: par"maAtmana:
inaï"AmahR"Ta naAe valuM(
yaUyaM ih" “aöivaÔamaA:
çré-räjoväca
näräyaëäbhidhänasya
brahmaëaù paramätmanaù
niñöhäm arhatha no vaktuà
yüyaà hi brahma-vittamäù
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—the King said; näräyaëa-abhidhänasya—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, named Näräyaëa; brahmaëaù—of the Absolute
Truth; parama-ätmanaù—of the Supersoul; niñöhäm—the transcendental
situation; arhatha—you may kindly; naù—to us; vaktum—speak; yüyam—all of
you; hi—indeed; brahma-vit-tamäù—the most expert knowers of the Supreme.
TRANSLATION
King Nimi inquired: Please explain to me the transcendental situation of the
Supreme Lord, Näräyaëa, who is Himself the Absolute Truth and the
Supersoul of everyone. You can explain this to me, because you are all most
expert in transcendental knowledge.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, in the previous verse the sages informed
the King, näräyaëa-paro mäyäm aïjas tarati dustaräm: simply by unalloyed
devotion to Lord Näräyaëa, one can very easily cross over the ocean of
material illusion. Therefore, in this verse the King is requesting specific
information about the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa. It is
significant in this verse that the King refers to the Supreme Lord as Näräyaëa,
Brahman and Paramätmä. Although King Nimi is already understood to be a
devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by his question he wants to
clarify that the Personality of Godhead is the highest transcendental truth. In
the Bhägavatam (1.2.11):
vadanti tat tattva-vidas
tattvaà yaj jïänam advayam
brahmeti paramätmeti
bhagavän iti çabdyate
"Learned transcendentalists who know the Absolute Truth call this nondual
substance Brahman, Paramätmä or Bhagavän." Therefore it is to be understood
that the word näräyaëa in this verse refers to the Bhagavän feature of the
Supreme Lord in the spiritual world.
Generally the speculative philosophers become attracted to the impersonal
Brahman feature of the Absolute Truth, whereas the mystic yogés meditate
upon the Paramätmä, the Supersoul within everyone's heart. On the other
hand, those who have achieved mature transcendental knowledge surrender
directly to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Bhagavän, who is eternally
situated in His own abode, called Vaikuëöha-dhäma. In Bhagavad-gétä Lord
Kåñëa clearly says, brahmaëo hi pratiñöhäham: "I am the source of the
impersonal Brahman." Similarly, it is described in Çrémad-Bhägavatam that the
Supersoul, Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu, is a secondary plenary expansion of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. King Nimi wants the sages to make
clear that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the original feature of the
Absolute Truth, and therefore he places his question before the next of the
nine Yogendras, Pippaläyana.
According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura the word niñöhä can
also be translated as "firm faith." In this sense, Nimi Mahäräja is inquiring
about the process of developing perfect faith in the Supreme Lord
(bhagavan-niñöhä).
TEXT 35
™aIipappalaAyana ovaAca
isTatyauà"va‘alayahe"taur"he"taur"sya
yatsva«ajaAgAr"s$auSauiæaSau s$aß"ih"ê
de"he"in‰"yaAs$auô$d"yaAina car"inta yaena
s$aÃaIivataAina tad"vaeih" parM" nare"n‰"
çré-pippaläyana uväca
sthity-udbhava-pralaya-hetur ahetur asya
yat svapna-jägara-suñuptiñu sad bahiç ca
dehendriyäsu-hådayäni caranti yena
saïjévitäni tad avehi paraà narendra
SYNONYMS
çré-pippaläyanaù uväca—Çré Pippaläyana said; sthiti—of the creation;
udbhava—maintenance; pralaya—and destruction; hetuù—the cause;
ahetuù—itself without cause; asya—of this material universe; yat—which;
svapna—in dream; jägara—wakefulness; suñuptiñu—in deep sleep or
unconsciousness; sat—which exists; bahiù ca—and external to them as well;
deha—of the material bodies of the living entities; indriya—the senses;
äsu—life airs; hådayäni—and minds; caranti—act; yena—by which;
saïjévitäni—given life; tat—that; avehi—please know; param—to be the
Supreme; nara-indra—O King.
TRANSLATION
Çré Pippaläyana said: The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the cause of
the creation, maintenance and destruction of this universe, yet He has no prior
cause. He pervades the various states of wakefulness, dreaming and unconscious
deep sleep and also exists beyond them. By entering the body of every living
being as the Supersoul, He enlivens the body, senses, life airs and mental
activities, and thus all the subtle and gross organs of the body begin their
functions. My dear King, know that Personality of Godhead to be the Supreme.
PURPORT
In the previous verse King Nimi inquired about various aspects of the
Absolute Truth, namely Näräyaëa, Brahman and Paramätmä. Now the sage
Çré Pippaläyana explains these three features of the Absolute Truth in the
same order in which the King mentioned them. Sthity-udbhava-pralaya-hetuù
refers to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who expands Himself as the
triple puruña incarnations-Mahä-Viñëu, Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu and
Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu. As described in the Bhägavatam (1.3.1):
jagåhe pauruñaà rüpaà
bhagavän mahad-ädibhiù
sambhütaà ñoòaça-kalam
ädau loka-sisåkñayä
"In the beginning of the creation, the Lord first expanded Himself in the
universal form of the puruña incarnation and manifested all the ingredients for
the material creation. And thus at first there was the creation of the sixteen
principles of material action. This was for the purpose of creating the material
universe." Thus the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa, is mentioned
here as hetuù, or the supreme cause of the creation, maintenance and
annihilation of the cosmic situation. Still, there is no cause of the Lord
Himself; He is ahetuù. As expressed in the Brahma-saàhitä, anädir ädir
govindaù sarva-käraëa-käraëam [Bs. 5.1]. The Supreme Lord is the cause of all
causes, and being the eternal Absolute Truth, He has no cause of Himself. The
word ahetuù has also been explained by Çréla Jéva Gosvämé to indicate that the
Supreme Lord has His original form as Kåñëa in His own transcendental abode,
called Kåñëaloka. Since Kåñëa is always engaged in His blissful pastimes in the
company of His eternally liberated associates, He is aloof from the affairs of
this world, which is created by His external potency, known as mäyä.
Therefore it is stated, jagåhe pauruñaà rüpam. The Lord expands Himself as
Näräyaëa and Viñëu to facilitate the gross illusion and gradual rectification of
the conditioned souls. The Lord's aloofness from the material creation is also
described in the Vedas: na tasya käryaà karaëaà ca vidyate. The Absolute
Truth has nothing to do, since everything is done self-sufficiently by His
multipotencies. Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has pointed out that
even though the Supreme Lord Kåñëa is ahetuù, or causeless and aloof from the
cause of material creation, the Lord is also described in this verse as hetuù, or
the ultimate cause of the creation, maintenance and annihilation of the
material manifestation, because He expands Himself as Paramätmä, or the
Supersoul, who acts as the prime mover of the cosmic manifestation.
The word ahetuù may also be understood in another way. In Bhagavad-gétä
(7.5) the Lord says,
apareyam itas tv anyäà
prakåtià viddhi me paräm
jéva-bhütäà mahä-bäho
yayedaà dhäryate jagat
The conditioned living entities (jéva-bhüta) desire to engage in sense
gratification with their material senses (manaù-ñañöhänéndriyäëi prakåti-sthäni
karñati [Bg. 15.7]). Thus the creation of the material world becomes necessary.
In fact, the material cosmic manifestation continues to exist because of the
desires of the conditioned souls to exploit it (yayedaà dhäryate jagat [Bg. 7.5]).
The government must create a prison to accommodate those citizens who are
inclined to criminal activity. There is no need for any citizen to live in the
obnoxious conditions of the prison, but because a certain portion of the
population is inclined toward antisocial behavior, the prison becomes
necessary. In a higher sense, the prisoners themselves can be considered the
hetuù, or the cause, for the construction of the prison. Similarly, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead expands His internal potency according to His own
desire to increase the änanda, or transcendental bliss, of Himself and His pure
devotees, but He manifests the material universe in response to the illicit
desires of the conditioned souls to live a life of sense gratification in willful
forgetfulness of Him. Therefore the conditioned living entities themselves can
be considered the hetuù, or cause, of the material manifestation. The external
potency of the Lord, mäyä, who is charged with the duty of material
manifestation, is called chäyä, or the shadow of the Lord's internal potency.
Såñöi-sthiti-pralaya-sädhana-çaktir eka/ chäyeva yasya bhuvanäni bibharti durgä
[Bs. 5.44]. The Lord does not personally desire to manifest the shadow potency,
called Durgä or mäyä. The blissful spiritual planets, eternally manifest, contain
the best possible facilities for the living entities who are parts and parcels of
the Lord. But the conditioned souls, rejecting the inconceivable, eternal living
arrangements the Lord has kindly provided, prefer to seek their misfortune in
the shadow kingdom called the material world. Thus, both Durgä and the
conditioned living entities may be considered the hetuù, or cause, of the
material manifestation. Since Lord Kåñëa is ultimately sarva-käraëa-käraëam
[Bs. 5.1], the cause of all causes, He is to be known as the ultimate supreme
cause. But how the Lord functions as the supreme cause of the material
manifestation (sthity-udbhava-pralaya-hetuù) is described in the Thirteenth
Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä. Upadrañöänumantä ca: the Lord acts as overseer and
permitter. The actual desire of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is stated
very clearly in Bhagavad-gétä: sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà
vraja [Bg. 18.66]. The Lord desires every living entity to give up the shadow
potency mäyä and return to the actual substance (västavaà vastu), which is
the eternal kingdom of God.
Although various aspects of the Absolute Truth are being described, the
Absolute Truth is ultimately one, as stated in this verse (tad avehi paraà
narendra). King Nimi inquired about Brahman, and now this verse says, yat
svapna-jägara-susuptiñu sad bahiç ca. The Lord's all-pervading feature within
wakefulness, dreaming and deep sleep, and His existence beyond these three
mental states, are understood to be manifestations of Brahman, the spiritual
potency of the Lord. Finally, the statement dehendriyäsu-hådayäëi caranti yena
saïjévitäni can be understood to refer to the Paramätmä feature of the Lord.
When the Lord expands Himself as Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu, the third of the three
Viñëu features, and enters the heart of every living entity, the gross and subtle
organs of the body become enlivened for continuing the chain of fruitive
activity called karma.
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, the multifarious
manifestations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead do not compromise His
supremacy as one without a second. The Absolute Truth is
paramavyoma-nätha, or the Lord of the spiritual sky, who appears as two-armed
Çyämasundara, as four-armed, as eight-armed or as having one thousand arms.
In each aspect His body is eternal and full of bliss and knowledge
(sac-cid-änanda-mürti). He appears on earth as Väsudeva and within the
Causal Ocean as Mahä-Viñëu. He lies on the Milk Ocean as Kñérodakaçäyé
Viñëu and rescues His helpless young devotee as Nåsiàhadeva. Appearing as
Lord Rämacandra, He acts. as a perfect king. And appearing as Kåñëa He steals
the heart of everyone, and especially of young beautiful women. All these
features of the Lord are indicated by the word Näräyaëa, or the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, just as the word president indicates not only the
official duties of the president but his personal family life and long intimate
friendships as well. According to Çrémad-Bhägavatam, kåñëas tu bhagavän
svayam [SB 1.3.28]. When one transcends an official understanding of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and comes to the superior status of love of
God, one can understand the Lord to be Kåñëa, the cause of all causes. The
innumerable Viñëu expansions of the Lord are also understood to be plenary
portions of Çré Kåñëa. Kåñëas tu bhagavän svayam. As the Lord Himself states
in Bhagavad-gétä, ahaà sarvasya prabhavaù [Bg. 10.8]. These points have been
explicitly clarified in the Tenth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam as well as in the
opening verse, oà namo bhagavate väsudeväya, janmädy asya yato 'nvayäd
itarataç cärtheñu [SB 1.1.1].
TEXT 36
naEtanmanaAe ivazAita vaAgAuta caºaur"AtmaA
‘aANAein‰"yaAiNA ca yaTaAnalamaicaRSa: svaA:
zAbd"Ae'ipa baAeDak(inaSaeDatayaAtmamaUlama,
@TaAeRl(maAh" yaä{"tae na inaSaeDais$aiÜ":
naitan mano viçati väg uta cakñur ätmä
präëendriyäëi ca yathänalam arciñaù sväù
çabdo 'pi bodhaka-niñedhatayätma-mülam
arthoktam äha yad-åte na niñedha-siddhiù
SYNONYMS
na—cannot; etat—this (Supreme Truth); manaù—the mind; viçati—enter;
väk—the function of speech; uta—nor; cakñuù—sight; ätmä—intelligence;
präëa—the subtle airs supporting life; indriyäëi—the senses; ca—or;
yathä—just as; analam—a fire; arciñaù—its sparks; sväù—own; çabdaù—the
authoritative sound of the Vedas; api—even; bodhaka—being able to indicate
by verbal reference; niñedhatayä—because of denying such; ätma—of the
Supreme Soul; mülam—basic evidence; artha-uktam—expressed indirectly;
äha—does express; yat-åte—without which (Supreme); na—there is not;
niñedha—of the negative statements of scripture; siddhiù—ultimate purpose.
TRANSLATION
Neither the mind nor the faculties of speech, sight, intelligence, the life air
or any of the senses are capable of penetrating that Supreme Truth, any more
than small sparks can affect the original fire from which they are generated.
Not even the authoritative language of the Vedas can perfectly describe the
Supreme Truth, since the Vedas themselves disclaim the possibility that the
Truth can be expressed by words. But through indirect reference the Vedic
sound does serve as evidence of the Supreme Truth, since without the existence
of that Supreme Truth the various restrictions found in the Vedas would have
no ultimate purpose.
PURPORT
The small sparks generated by a blazing fire have no power to illuminate the
original fire, nor can they burn it. The quantity of heat and light in the
original fire is always superior to the quantity found in the insignificant
sparks. Similarly, the minute living entity is generated from the internal
potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as stated in Vedänta-sütra
(janmädy asya yataù [SB 1.1.1]) and Bhagavad-gétä (ahaà sarvasya prabhavaù
[Bg. 10.8], mamaiväàço jéva-loke jéva-bhütaù sanätanaù [Bg. 15.7]). The minute
living entities, being aàçaù, or sparks of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
can never equal the Supreme Godhead in the quantity of their potency. The
quantity of knowledge and bliss in the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
always superior. Therefore, when a foolish conditioned soul tries to illuminate
the subject matter of the highest truth with his tiny brain, he merely
illuminates his own foolishness. The Personality of Godhead has personally
spoken Bhagavad-gétä, which is the blazing fire of perfect knowledge that burns
to ashes the insignificant speculations and theories of so-called philosophers
and scientists regarding the ultimate truth.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is called Håñékeça, or the Lord of
everyone's senses. Because the Personality of Godhead has supreme seeing
power, hearing power, touching power, smelling power and tasting power, the
living entities in a limited sense can also see, hear, touch, smell and taste, by
the mercy of Håñékeça. This idea is expressed in the Båhad-äraëyaka Upaniñad
(4.4.18): präëasya präëam uta cakñuñaç cakñur uta çrotrasya çrotram
annasyännaà manaso ye mano viduù. "The Supreme Truth is understood to be
the life air sustaining everyone's life air, the vision of everyone's eyes, the
hearing power of the ear, and the sustenance of food itself." The obvious
conclusion is that the Supreme Truth can be known by His own causeless
mercy, and not by our foolish attempts to bring the all-pervading truth within
the insignificant boundaries of our intelligence. It is stated in the Taittiréya
Upaniñad (2.4.1), yato väco nivartante apräpya manasä saha: "The descriptive
power of speech fails in the realm of the Supreme Truth, and the speculative
power of the mind cannot achieve Him."
But because such statements of Vedic çrutis are in themselves descriptions
of the Absolute Truth, one may consider such Vedic statements contradictory.
Therefore, in this connection it is stated, çabdo 'pi
bodhaka-niñedhatayätma-mülam arthoktam äha: although the Vedic çruti
(çabda) forbids us to speculate upon the Absolute Truth, such restrictive
injunctions indirectly constitute positive assertions of the existence of the
supreme living entity. In fact, the Vedic restrictions are meant to save one
from the false path of mental speculation and ultimately bring one to the point
of devotional surrender. As Lord Kåñëa Himself states in Bhagavad-gétä, vedaiç
ca sarvair aham eva vedyaù: [Bg. 15.15] by all Vedic literatures the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is to be known. The assertion that a particular process,
such as mental speculation, is useless (yato väco nivartante apräpya manasä
saha) constitutes an indirect assertion of the existence of a correct path of
achieving the Supreme. As Çréla Çrédhara Svämé has stated, sarvasya
niñedhasya sävadhitvät: "Every negative injunction is understood to have a
specific limit. Negative injunctions cannot be taken as applicable in all cases."
For example, a negative injunction is that no living entity can be equal to or
greater than the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But Çrémad-Bhägavatam
clearly states that because of the intense love of the residents of Våndävana for
Kåñëa, they sometimes assume a superior position. Thus mother Yaçodä binds
Kåñëa with ropes, and the influential cowherd boys sometimes ride on the
shoulders of Kåñëa or defeat Him in wrestling. Negative injunctions, therefore,
may sometimes be adjusted according to the transcendental situation.
Although the Absolute Truth is transcendental to the material creation
and therefore beyond the scope of material senses, when those same material
senses are saturated with love of Godhead they become spiritualized and
empowered to perceive the Absolute Truth. As stated in Brahma-saàhitä
(5.38),
premäïjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santaù sadaiva hådayeñu vilokayanti
yaà çyämasundaram acintya-guëa-svarüpaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship the primeval Lord, Govinda. who is always seen by the devotee
whose eyes are anointed with the pulp of love. He is seen in His eternal form
of Çyämasundara within the heart of the devotee." In Bhagavad-gétä (11.8) Lord
Kåñëa says to Arjuna,
na tu mäà çakyase drañöum
anenava sva-cakñuñä
divyaà dadämi te cakñuù
paçya me yogam aiçvaram
"But you cannot see Me with your present eyes. Therefore I give you divine
eyes by which you can behold My mystic opulence." Similarly,
Çrémad-Bhägavatam describes many incidents in which the Supreme Absolute
Truth revealed Himself to His devotee, as in the histories of Prahläda
Mahäräja, Dhruva Mahäräja, Påthu Mahäräja, Kardama Muni, the Päëòavas
and the gopés. Therefore, the Vedic assertions that the Absolute Truth is
beyond the power of the eyes refer to those who have not received
transcendental eyes by the mercy of the Personality of Godhead. But the
Lord's own transcendental senses, which are the source of our limited senses,
are confirmed in the çruti, as in the following statement from the Kena
Upaniñad (1.4): yad väcänabhyuditaà yena väg abhyudyate/ tad eva brahma tvaà
viddhi nedaà yad idam upäsate. "Brahman, the Absolute, should be understood
to be that which cannot be ascertained by the material power of speech;
speech itself is evinced by that Supreme Truth." By the statement yena väg
abhyudyate, "our power of speech is expressed by the Absolute Truth," it is
clearly expressed that the Absolute Truth has His own transcendental senses.
Therefore He is called Håñékeça.
Çréla Närada Muni has stated, håñékena håñékeça-sevanaà bhaktir ucyate [Cc.
Madhya 19.170]. Our senses cannot approach the Absolute Truth by their own
power, but when engaged in loving devotional service to satisfy the Lord of the
senses, our limited senses must become connected with the Lord's unlimited
senses, and thus by the Lord's mercy He can be understood.
Çréla Madhväcärya has quoted the following statement from the
Brahma-tarka:
änando nedåçänanda
ity ukte lokataù param
pratibhäti na cäbhäti
yathävad darçanaà vinä
"The transcendental bliss of the Absolute Truth cannot be compared to the
ordinary happiness of the material world." Similarly, in the Vedänta-sütra the
Absolute Truth is described as änandamaya, or full of bliss.
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, in this verse Çré
Pippaläyana is more or less describing the impersonal feature of the Absolute
Truth. The nine Yogendras were themselves devotees of the personal feature
of the Lord, so King Nimi asked his question about the different features of the
Absolute Truth to clarify that the Personality of Godhead is the source of all
the variegated aspects of the advaya-jïäna, or transcendental reality. This is
also expressed by the following statement in çruti: taà tv aupaniñadaà puruñaà
påcchämi. "I am inquiring about that Supreme Person revealed in the
Upaniñads."
If the Absolute Truth were actually inaccessible by words, there would be
no meaning to the Vedic literature, which consists of collections of
transcendental words. Since the Vedic descriptions of the truth are to be
taken as infallible, it is impossible to maintain that the power of speech is in all
cases unable to describe the truth. After all, the Vedic mantras themselves are
meant to be spoken and heard. Therefore, the injunction that neither the
mind nor speech can approach the Absolute Truth (naitan mano viçati väg uta)
cannot be taken as applicable in all cases; rather, it is a warning to those who
foolishly try to encompass the Absolute Truth by their own puny speculative
powers. Since the Vedic injunctions, either positive or negative, are to be
taken as realistic descriptions of the Absolute Truth, the process of hearing
and repeating Vedic knowledge (çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù [SB 7.5.23]) can be
understood as a separate process in which one's hearing and speaking power
becomes spiritualized by submissive reception of transcendental knowledge.
This process depends upon one's faith in the bona fide spiritual master, who is
a devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore it is stated,
yasya deve parä bhaktir
yathä deve tathä gurau
tasyaite kathitä hy arthäù
prakäçante mahätmanaù
[ÇU 6.23(94)]
"Only unto those great souls who have implicit faith in both the Lord and the
spiritual master are all the imports of Vedic knowledge automatically
revealed." (Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad 6.23) As the Lord Himself states in the
Hari-vaàça,
tat-paraà paramaà brahma
sarvaà vibhajate jagat
mamaiva tad ghanaà tejo
jïätum arhasi bhärata
"That Supreme Truth, Parabrahman, expands itself into all the variegatedness
of this universe. You should know it to be My own concentrated effulgence, O
Bhärata." The words jïätum arhasi, "you must know it," spoken by the Lord
Himself, indicate that the Absolute Truth is to be known, but one must
surrender to the truth, rather than waste time in foolish speculation.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has pointed out that according to
authorized statements of Vedic literature the Lord's transcendental form is
understood to be brahmamaya, or completely spiritual, with no trace of
material contamination. Therefore, in such statements as
nélotpala-dala-çyämam, "the Lord's form is beautifully manifest with the hue of
dark blue lotus petals," it is understood that a transcendental dark blue color is
being described. Still, the Lord is inconceivably merciful to His devotees, even
those on the neophyte platform who are trying to come to the state of love of
Godhead. Therefore the Lord gradually purifies the senses of a conditioned
soul who is trying to understand Him, and eventually the Lord appears before
such a rectified servitor. According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura,
präkåta-nélotpala-varëatvena bhaktair dhyätam atädåçam api. In the beginning,
being conditioned by previous materialistic activities, a devotee meditating on
the Lord's transcendental form may base his meditation on his experience of
material forms and colors within this world. The Lord's transcendental form
has nothing to do with material forms and colors, but since the object of this
meditation is Kåñëa, such meditation will eventually be transformed into
transcendental experience of the actual form, color, activities, pastimes and
entourage of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In other words,
transcendental knowledge depends not on material logic but on the pleasure of
the Personality of Godhead. If the Lord is pleased by His devotee's sincere
attempt to understand Him, the Lord can immediately circumvent all the
so-called technicalities of material logic and Vedic injunctions and reveal
Himself to His pure devotee. Unless one accepts this omnipotency of the
Personality of Godhead, there is no hope of approaching the Absolute Truth.
Therefore it is stated in the Kaöha Upaniñad (1.3.12), dåçyate tv agryayä
buddhyä: the Absolute Truth is seen by transcendental intelligence.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has pointed out that knowledge
acquired through the interaction of the material senses with the modes of
nature is merely hypothetical and not factual. Empirical knowledge deals with
our ephemeral experience of the sense objects generated by material nature.
For example, there are many wars currently going on because of a false concept
of nationalism. Similarly, there is conflict throughout the world, and great
world leaders fight like cats and dogs for the economic development of their
countries. Thus, material language is used to designate temporary objects
perceived by the eyes, nose, tongue, touch and taste. This type of language and
experience is useless for approaching the Absolute Truth. But the
transcendental sound from the spiritual sky has a completely different effect.
We should not foolishly try to use materially concocted language to include
the Supreme Personality of Godhead as an object of the material world. The
Supreme Lord is completely transcendental and is known as ätma-prakäça, or
self-manifested. Therefore, as stated in the Padma Puräëa,
ataù çré-kåñëa-nämädi
na bhaved grähyam indriyaiù
sevonmukhe hi jihvädau
svayam eva sphuraty adaù
[Cc. Madhya 17.136]
"Material senses cannot appreciate Kåñëa's holy name, form, qualities and
pastimes. But when a conditioned soul is awakened to Kåñëa consciousness and
renders service by using his tongue to chant the Lord's holy name and taste the
remnants of the Lord's food, the tongue is purified, and one gradually comes to
understand who Kåñëa really is." If one surrenders to the Supreme Lord, taking
shelter at His lotus feet, one's spiritualized senses gradually become empowered
to perceive the Lord. Mere empiricism and material logic have a limited
jurisdiction within the external energy of the Supreme Lord and cannot apply
to those things which are eternal. In this regard, Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta
Sarasvaté Öhäkura has quoted the following verse from Çrémad-Bhägavatam
(7.5.32):
naiñäà matis tävad urukramäìghrià
spåçaty anarthäpagamo yad-arthaù
mahéyasäm päda-rajo-'bhiñekaà
niñkiïcanänäà na våëéta yävat
"Unless they smear upon their bodies the dust of the lotus feet of a Vaiñëava
completely freed from material contamination, persons very much inclined
toward materialistic life cannot be attached to the lotus feet of the Lord, who
is glorified for His uncommon activities. Only by becoming Kåñëa conscious
and taking shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord in this way can one be freed
from material contamination."
Although Çré Pippaläyana is expressing that the Absolute Truth cannot be
approached by material senses, the sage himself is describing the Absolute
Truth with transcendental senses, and King Nimi is able to understand this
transcendental sound because he has surrendered at the lotus feet of pure
devotees, the nava-yogendras. Therefore, one should not foolishly try to
understand this verse out of context, in an impersonal way, but should follow
the example of King Nimi, who was trying to understand how the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is ultimately the source of everything.
TEXT 37
s$aÔvaM r"jastama wita i‡ava{de"k(maAd"AE
s$aU‡aM mah"Anah"imaita ‘avad"inta jaIvama,
ÁaAnai‚(yaATaRP(laè&patayaAeç&zAil(
“aöEva BaAita s$ad"s$a»a tayaAe: parM" yata,
sattvaà rajas tama iti tri-våd ekam ädau
sütraà mahän aham iti pravadanti jévam
jïäna-kriyärtha-phala-rüpatayoru-çakti
brahmaiva bhäti sad asac ca tayoù paraà yat
SYNONYMS
sattvam—goodness; rajaù—passion; tamaù—and ignorance; iti—thus known;
tri-våt—threefold; ekam—one; ädau—in the beginning, before creation;
sütram—the power to act; mahän—the power of consciousness; aham—and
the false ego; iti—thus; pravadanti—is called; jévam—(false ego, which covers)
the living entity; jïäna—the demigods as the embodiment of knowledge;
kriyä—the senses; artha—sense objects; phala—and fruitive results such as
happiness and distress; rüpatayä—assuming the forms; uru-çakti—possessing
great varieties of energy; brahma eva—the Supreme alone; bhäti—is manifest;
sat asat ca—as both gross objects and their subtle causes; tayoù—both;
param—beyond; yat—which is.
TRANSLATION
Originally one, the Absolute, Brahman, comes to be known as threefold,
manifesting itself as the three modes of material nature—goodness, passion and
ignorance. Brahman further expands its potency, and thus the power to act and
the power of consciousness become manifest, along with the false ego, which
covers the identity of the conditioned living being. Thus, by the expansion of
the multipotencies of the Absolute, the demigods, as the embodiment of
knowledge, become manifest, along with the material senses, their objects, and
the results of material activity, namely happiness and distress. In this way the
manifestation of the material world takes place as the subtle cause and as the
material effect visible in the appearance of gross material objects. Brahman,
which is the source of all subtle and gross manifestations, is simultaneously
transcendental to them, being absolute.
PURPORT
In the previous verse the sage Pippaläyana described the Absolute, Brahman,
as being beyond the range of material sense perception and mental
speculation. At the same time, it was stated, ätma-mülam arthoktam äha yad-åte
na niñedha-siddhiù: the negative injunctions of the Vedas indirectly indicate
the existence of the Absolute Truth. This Absolute Truth can be approached
by correct means. Now, in the present verse, it is clearly described that the
Absolute Truth possesses innumerable potencies (uru-çakti brahmaiva bhäti).
Thus by the expansion of the Absolute Truth the gross and subtle features of
the material world become manifest. As stated by Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, käryaà
käraëäd bhinnaà na bhavati: "The result is not different from its cause."
Therefore, since the Absolute is eternal existence, this material world, being
the potency of the Absolute, must also be accepted as real, although the
various manifestations of the material world are temporary and thus illusory.
The material world should be understood to consist of the bewildering
interactions of real elements. The material world is not false in the imaginary
sense of the Buddhists and Mäyävädés, who state that in fact the material
world does not exist outside the mind of the observer. The material world, as
the potency of the Absolute, has real existence. But the living entity becomes
bewildered by the temporary manifestations, foolishly taking them to be
permanent. Thus the material world functions as an illusory potency, causing
the living entity to forget the spiritual world, wherein life is eternal, full of
bliss and knowledge. Because the material world thus bewilders the
conditioned soul, it is called illusory. When a magician performs his tricks
onstage, that which the audience apparently sees is an illusion. But the
magician actually exists, and the hat and rabbit exist, although the appearance
of a rabbit coming out of a hat is an illusion. Similarly, when the living entity
identifies himself as part and parcel of the material world, thinking, "I am
American," "I am Indian," "I am Russian," "I am black," "I am white," he is
bewildered by the magic of the Lord's illusory potency. The conditioned soul
must come to understand, "I am a pure spirit soul, part and parcel of Kåñëa.
Now let me stop my useless activities and serve Kåñëa, since I am part of Him."
Then he is free from the illusion of mäyä. If one artificially tries to escape the
clutches of the illusory energy by declaring that there is no illusory potency
and that this world is false, he merely falls into another illusion created by
mäyä to keep him in ignorance. Kåñëa states in Bhagavad-gétä (7.14),
daivé hy eñä guëamayé
mama mäyä duratyayä
mäm eva ye prapadyante
mäyäm etäà taranti te
Unless one surrenders at the lotus feet of Mäyeça, the Lord of the illusory
potency, there is no possibility of escaping from illusion. Childishly declaring
that there is no illusory potency is useless, since mäyä is duratyayä, or
insurpassable for the tiny living entity. But Lord Kåñëa, the omnipotent
Personality of Godhead, can immediately call off the illusory potency.
In this verse the expansion of the material world from Brahman, the
Absolute, is described. Since Brahman is one of the subordinate features of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead (brahmeti paramätmeti bhagavän iti çabdyate
[SB 1.2.11]), one who understands this material world to be Brahman is freed
from the tendency to exploit the material energy through sense gratification
and mental speculation aimed at one's own satisfaction.
The question may be raised, Since Brahman is stated to be ekam, or one,
how does it become manifest in the innumerable varieties of the material
world? Therefore this verse uses the word uru-çakti. The Absolute contains
multipotencies, as stated in the Vedas (Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad): parasya çaktir
vividhaiva çrüyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]. The Absolute Truth is not çakti,
or energy, but çaktimän, the possessor of innumerable potencies. According to
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, one should submissively hear these authorized
descriptions of the Absolute Truth. As stated in the previous verse,
yathänalam arciñaù sväù: the insignificant sparks of a fire have no power to
illuminate the blazing fire, which is itself the source of illumination. Similarly,
the tiny living entity, who is like a spark of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, cannot illuminate the Personality of Godhead by his insignificant
intellectual power. One may argue that the sun expands its potency in the
form of its rays and it is through the illumination of those rays that we are able
to see the sun. In the same way, we should be able to perceive the Absolute
Truth by the expansion of its potency. In answer to this it may be stated that if
the sun creates a cloud covering the sky, then despite the presence of sun rays
the sun cannot be seen. Therefore, ultimately the power to see the sun
depends not only on the sun's rays but on the presence of a clear sky, which is
also an arrangement by the sun. Similarly, as stated in this verse, one can
understand the existence of the Absolute Truth by the expansion of its
potencies.
Although in the previous verse the power of the material senses and mind
was rejected, the authorized descriptions given here inform us that one can
directly perceive everything that exists to be the potency of the Personality of
Godhead. In this regard, Närada Muni advised King Präcénabarhi as follows:
atas tad apavädärthaà
bhaja sarvätmanä harim
paçyaàs tad-ätmakaà viçvaà
sthity-utpatty-apyayä yataù
"You should always know that this cosmic manifestation is created, maintained
and annihilated by the will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Consequently, everything within this cosmic manifestation is under the
control of the Lord. To be enlightened by this perfect knowledge, one should
always engage himself in the devotional service of the Lord." (SB 4.29.79) As
stated here, bhaja sarvätmanä harim: one must worship the Supreme
Personality of Godhead so that one's consciousness will become clean and
pure, just like the clear blue sky in which the potent sun is fully manifest.
When one sees the sun, he immediately sees the sun's rays in full potency.
Similarly, if one engages in the devotional service of Kåñëa, one's mind
becomes cleansed of material dirt, and thus he can see not only the Lord but
the Lord's expansions as the spiritual world, as the pure devotees, as the
Paramätmä, as the impersonal Brahman effulgence and as the subsequent
creation of the material world, the shadow of the kingdom of God (chäyeva), in
which so many material varieties become manifest.
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, the word phalam can also be understood to
mean puruñärtha-svarüpam, or the actual form of the goal of life, or, in other
words, the transcendental form of the Lord Himself. The living entity in his
original pure state is not different from the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Similarly, the infinite multicolored opulence of the kingdom of God, called
Vaikuëöha, is nondifferent in quality from the Lord. Thus when the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is personally present with His unparalleled opulence
and His pure spiritual servitors, the living entities, a very happy situation is
created. The mundane concept of family is a perverted reflection of the happy
situation created when the Lord is united in full spiritual opulence with His
pure devotees. Every living entity has the option to join the Lord in His
opulent eternal kingdom. Thus one should understand from this verse that
everything within the gross and subtle cosmic manifestations is the potency of
the Lord and is therefore meant to be used in the Lord's service. Éçäväsyam
idaà sarvam [Éço mantra 1].
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has given an elaborate explanation proving that the
entire cosmic situation is the natural potency of the Absolute Truth.
Sometimes superstitious people, without knowledge of the Personality of
Godhead, say that material activities are controlled by an independent devil
and that God is struggling with such a devil. Such gross ignorance of the
omnipotent status of the Personality of Godhead can be removed by
understanding the purport of this verse. Just as a spark is a tiny emanation
from a blazing fire, everything that exists is but an insignificant spark of the
potency of the Personality of Godhead. The Lord therefore says in
Bhagavad-gétä (10.42),
athavä bahunaitena
kià jïätena tavärjuna
viñöabhyäham idaà kåtsnam
ekäàçena sthito jagat
"But what need is there, Arjuna, for all this detailed knowledge? With a single
fragment of Myself I pervade and support this entire universe." The
omnipotent Personality of Godhead is actually the well-wishing friend of every
living entity (suhådaà sarva-bhütänäm [Bg. 5.29]). Therefore, if one becomes
sane and understands that one's well-wishing friend Kåñëa is the ultimate
source and controller of everything that exists, one attains immediate peace
(jïätvä mäà çäntim åcchati). Fear and illusion arise when one foolishly thinks
that even one atom of the creation is not the controlled potency of the
Personality of Godhead. Bhayaà dvitéyäbhiniveçataù syät. Denying the
existence of the material world also creates a very dangerous situation of
illusion. Both types of atheism—namely, seeing the material world as
belonging to oneself (and therefore being meant for one's sense gratification)
and declaring the nonexistence of the material world—are futile attempts to
avoid one's eternal subordination to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who
is the actual owner and enjoyer of everything. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has quoted
the following question stated by Çré Maitreya to Çré Paräçara in the Viñëu
Puräëa (1.3.1):
nirguëasyäprameyasya
çuddhasyäpy amalätmanaù
kathaà sargädi-kartåtvaà
brahmaëo 'bhyupagamyate
"How are we to understand that Brahman, the Supreme Soul, is the executor of
the creation, maintenance and destruction of the material world, even though
it is devoid of qualities, immeasurable, unembodied and free from any fault?" In
reply, Çré Paräçara stated:
çaktayaù sarva-bhävänäm
acintya-jïäna-gocaräù
yato 'to brahmaëas täs tu
sargädyä bhäva-çaktayaù
bhavanti tapatäà çreñöha
pävakasya yathoñëatä
"Mere logic cannot explain how even material objects expand their potency.
These things can be understood by mature observation. The Absolute Truth
expands His potency in the creation, maintenance and annihilation of the
material world just as fire expands its potency of heat." (Viñëu Puräëa 1.3.2)
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé explains that one can understand the power of a valuable
gem not by logical statements but by observing the effect of the gem. Similarly,
one can understand the potency of a mantra by observing its power to achieve
a particular effect. Such potency doesn't depend on so-called logic. There is no
logical necessity for a seed's growing into a tree and giving fruits that nourish
the human body. One may argue that the genetic code for the entire tree is
contained within the seed. But there is no logical necessity for the existence of
the seed, nor for the seed's expanding itself into a gigantic tree. Ex post facto,
or after the manifestation of the wonderful material nature, the foolish
material scientist traces out the expansion of a seed's potency in an apparently
logical sequence of events. But there is nothing within the realm of so-called
pure logic that dictates that a seed should expand into a tree. Rather, such
expansion should be understood to be the potency of the tree. Similarly, the
potency of a jewel is its mystic power, and various mantras also contain innate
potencies. Ultimately the mahä-mantra—Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa
Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare—has the
potency to transfer one to the spiritual world of bliss and knowledge. In the
same way, the Absolute Truth has the natural quality of expanding itself into
innumerable varieties of material and spiritual worlds. We may logically
describe this expansion after the fact, but we cannot deny the expansion of the
Absolute Truth. The conditioned soul who purifies his consciousness through
the process of devotional service can scientifically observe the expansion of
the Absolute Truth as described here, just as one who is not blind can observe
the expansion of a seed into a huge tee. One can understand the potency of a
seed not by speculation but rather by practical observation. Similarly, one must
purify his vision so that he can practically observe the expansion of the
Absolute Truth. Such observation can take place either by the ears or by the
eyes. Vedic knowledge is çabda-brahma, or transcendental potency in the form
of sound vibration. Therefore, one can observe the functions of the Absolute
Truth through submissive hearing of transcendental sound. Çästra-cakñus.
When one's consciousness becomes fully purified one can perceive the
Absolute Truth with all of one's spiritualized senses.
The Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead, is devoid of material
qualities such as mundane goodness, passion and ignorance because He is an
ocean of transcendental qualities and therefore has no need for the inferior
qualities of the material world. As stated in the Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad (4.10),
mäyäà tu prakåtià vidyän mäyinaà tu maheçvaram: "Understand that mäyä is
the material energy whereas the Supreme Lord is the Supreme Lord of
mäyä."Similarly, it is stated in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, mäyäà ca
tad-apäçrayäm: mäyä is always under the control of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
Just as it is understood from the above discussion that the material world is
an emanation from the impersonal Brahman potency of the Lord, Brahman
itself is an expansion of the potency of Kåñëa, as stated in Bhagavad-gétä
(brahmaëo hi pratiñöhäham).
yasya prabhä prabhavato jagad-aëòa-koöikotiñv
açeña-vasudhädi vibhüti-bhinnam
tad brahma niñkalam anantam açeña-bhütaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
(Bs. 5.40)
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has pointed out that in the
impersonal Brahman there is neither transcendental activity nor the supreme
pum-artha, or benefit of human life, namely prema, love of Godhead.
Therefore, if one is prematurely dazzled by the expansion of the Lord's bodily
effulgence, known as Brahman, and therefore does not actually come to know
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, there is no possibility of actually
understanding one's eternal identity as an eternal blissful expansion of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The subject matter is summarized in the
Caitanya-caritämåta (Ädi 1.13):
yad advaitaà brahmopaniñadi tad apy asya tanu-bhä
ya ätmäntaryämé puruña iti so 'syäàça-vibhavaù
ñaò-aiçvaryaiù pürëo ya iha bhagavän sa svayam ayaà
na caitanyät kåñëäj jagati para-tattvaà param iha
TEXT 38
naAtmaA jajaAna na mair"Syaita naEDatae's$aAE
na ºaIyatae s$avanaivaã"YaiBacaAir"NAAM ih"
s$avaR‡a zAìd"napaAyyaupalaibDamaA‡aM
‘aANAAe yaTaein‰"yabalaena ivak(ilpataM s$ata,
nätmä jajäna na mariñyati naidhate 'sau
na kñéyate savana-vid vyabhicäriëäà hi
sarvatra çaçvad anapäyy upalabdhi-mätraà
präëo yathendriya-balena vikalpitaà sat
SYNONYMS
na—never; ätmä—the soul; jajäna—was born; na—never; mariñyati—will die;
na—does not; edhate—grow; asau—this; na—does not; kñéyate—become
diminished; savana-vit—the knower of these phases of time;
vyabhicäriëäm—as they occur in other, changing beings; hi—indeed;
sarvatra—everywhere; çaçvat—constantly; anapäyi—never disappearing;
upalabdhi-mätram—pure consciousness; präëaù yathä—just like the life air
within the body; indriya-balena—by the force of the senses;
vikalpitam—imagined as divided; sat—becoming.
TRANSLATION
Brahman, the eternal soul, was never born and will never die, nor does it
grow or decay. That spiritual soul is actually the knower of the youth, middle
age and death of the material body. Thus the soul can be understood to be pure
consciousness, existing everywhere at all times and never being destroyed. Just
as the life air within the body, although one, becomes manifest as many in
contact with the various material senses, the one soul appears to assume various
material designations in contact with the material body.
PURPORT
The Vedic aphorism sarvaà khalv idaà brahma, "Everything is Brahman,"
has been explained in this chapter of the Bhägavatam. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead is the original source of everything. By expanding His
internal potency, He manifests the spiritual world, and by expanding His
external potency He manifests the material cosmos. The conditioned living
entity is originally part and parcel of the superior, internal potency of the
Lord, but being in contact with illusion, he falls under the clutches of the
external potency. In any case, since everything is an expansion of the potency
of the Supreme Brahman, everything is part and parcel of the Lord's spiritual
potency. Bhayaà dvitéyäbhiniveçataù syäd éçäd apetasya viparyayo 'småtiù. When
a living entity thinks that the material world is not part and parcel of the
Lord's potency but is a separate existence, liable to be controlled and enjoyed
by the tiny jéva soul, he is under viparyayaù, or a wrong conception. Asmåtiù.
Thus the living entity forgets that the Supreme Lord is the proprietor of
everything, everything being an expansion of the Lord.
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé has pointed out that although the Lord's external
potency is subject to transformations such as birth, growth, decay and death,
one should not foolishly conclude that the Lord's internal potency, the living
entity, is also subject to these changes. Both the living entity and material
nature are ultimately Brahman, being expansions of the Supreme Brahman.
But the Vedas clearly say, paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate: [Cc. Madhya 13.65,
purport] the Lord's potencies are vividhä, or multifarious. Thus, according to
this verse, nätmä jajäna na mariñyati naidhate 'sau na kñéyate: the soul is never
born, nor does he die, and he certainly cannot grow or decay like a material
body. Although the visible material body passes through boyhood, adolescence
and old age, or although one may take birth as a demigod, human being, plant
or animal, the spirit soul never changes his eternal constitutional position.
Rather, he falsely identifies with the external transformations of the material
body and thus imposes upon himself a psychological condition called illusion.
This miserable illusory experience of seeing oneself transformed and
ultimately annihilated by the laws of nature can be nullified by transcendental
knowledge of one's eternal status as the superior energy of the Lord.
The word sarvatra in this verse should not be foolishly misinterpreted to
mean that the individual jéva soul is all-pervading. The soul is not born, nor
does he die. Yet in our present conditioned state we falsely identify with the
birth and death of the body. Therefore, because an all-pervading soul would
never fall into illusion, sarvatra cannot indicate that the individual soul is
all-pervading. Illusion implies an incomplete understanding of reality, which
would not be possible for an all-pervading entity. Therefore, the word sarvatra
is understood to mean that the pure spiritual soul exists in all material
conditions. In deep sleep, for example, consciousness may not overtly be
manifest, and yet the spirit soul is understood to be present within the body.
Similarly, it is understood from Bhagavad-gétä that the spirit soul (nityaù
sarva-gataù) may exist even within fire, water or outer space, since the
existence of the soul never depends upon material conditions but is an eternal
fact. The consciousness of the soul is more or less manifest according to the
possibilities offered by a particular material situation, just as electric light is
manifest in a particular intensity and color according to the bulb available.
The electrical energy is one, but it is manifested variously according to
material conditions.
The argument may be raised that although the spirit soul is pure
consciousness (upalabdhi-mätram), it is our practical experience that
consciousness is constantly transformed. If I am thinking of a blue object such
as the sky, then my previous thought of a yellow object such as a flower is
destroyed. Similarly, if I become aware that I am hungry, then my
consciousness of the blue sky is destroyed. In this way, consciousness is
constantly being transformed. Çréla Çrédhara Svämé has replied that
consciousness itself is eternal, but in contact with the material senses it may be
manifest in various ways. The example of the life air is very appropriate. Präëa,
or the life air, is one, but in contact with the different senses it is manifest as
the power to see, the power to hear, and so on. Similarly, consciousness, being
spiritual, is ultimately one, but when in contact with the various senses it may
be perceived in terms of particular sensory functions. But the state of
consciousness is an eternal fact that cannot be changed, although it may be
temporarily covered by mäyä.
When one becomes Kåñëa conscious, he is understood to be dhéra (dhéras
tatra na muhyati [Bg. 2.13]). At that time one is no longer subject to
bewilderment by falsely identifying his consciousness with the transformations
of material nature.
From the statement tat tvam asi, found in the Chändogya Upaniñad, it is to
be understood that spiritual knowledge is not impersonal but entails gradually
perceiving the pure spiritual soul within the material body. Just as in
Bhagavad-gétä Kåñëa repeatedly says aham, or "I," this Vedic aphorism uses the
word tvam, or "you," to indicate that just as the Absolute Truth is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the individual spark of Brahman (tat) is also an
eternal personality (tvam). Therefore, according to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé it is to
be understood that the individual spark of Brahman is eternally conscious.
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has further pointed out that instead of
wasting time trying to understand the truth in its impersonal aspect, which is
merely the negation of temporary material variety, one should try to
understand oneself to be an eternally conscious entity in the jéva category. In
other words, one should understand oneself to be eternally a conscious servitor
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
In this regard Çréla Madhväcärya has quoted the following statement from
the Mokña-dharma section of the Mahäbhärata:
ahaà hi jéva-saàjïo vai
mayi jévaù sanätanaù
maivaà tvayänumantavyaà
dåñöo jévo mayeti ha
ahaà çreyo vidhäsyämi
yathädhikäram éçvaraù
"The living entity, known as jéva, is not different from Me, for he is My
expansion. Thus the living entity is eternal, as I am, and always exists within
Me. But you should not artificially think, 'Now I have seen the soul.' Rather, I,
as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, will bestow this benediction upon you
when you are actually qualified."
TEXT 39
@Nxe"Sau paeizASau taç&SvaivainaiêtaeSau
‘aANAAe ih" jaIvamaupaDaAvaita ta‡a ta‡a
s$aªae yaid"in‰"yagANAe'h"ima ca ‘as$auæae
kU(q%sTa @AzAyama{tae tad"nausma{itanaR:
aëòeñu peçiñu taruñv aviniçciteñu
präëo hi jévam upadhävati tatra tatra
sanne yad indriya-gaëe 'hami ca prasupte
küöa-stha äçayam åte tad-anusmåtir naù
SYNONYMS
aëòeñu—in (species of life born from) eggs; peçiñu—in embryos; taruñu—in
plants; aviniçciteñu—in species of indeterminate origin (born from
perspiration); präëaù—the vital air; hi—indeed; jévam—the soul;
upadhävati—follows; tatra tatra—from one species to another; sanne—they
are merged; yat—when; indriya-gaëe—all the senses; ahami—the false ego;
ca—also; prasupte—in deep sleep; küöa-sthaù—unchanging; äçayam—the
subtle covering of contaminated consciousness, the liìga-çaréra; åte-without;
tat—of that; anusmåtiù—(there is) subsequent remembrance; naù—our.
TRANSLATION
The spirit soul is born in many different species of life within the material
world. Some species are born from eggs, others from embryos, others from the
seeds of plants and trees, and others from perspiration. But in all species of life
the präëa, or vital air, remains unchanging and follows the spirit soul from one
body to another. Similarly, the spirit soul is eternally the same despite its
material condition of life. We have practical experience of this. When we are
absorbed in deep sleep without dreaming, the material senses become inactive,
and even the mind and false ego are merged into a dormant condition. But
although the senses, mind and false ego are inactive, one remembers upon
waking that he, the soul, was peacefully sleeping.
PURPORT
When a living entity is awake the material senses and mind are constantly
active. Similarly, when one is sleeping the false ego recollects one's waking
experiences, and thus one experiences dreams or fragments of dreams while
sleeping. But in the state of prasupti, or deep sleep, both the mind and the
senses become inactive, and the false ego does not recall previous experiences
or desires. The subtle mind and false ego are called liìga-çaréra, or the subtle
material body. This linga-çaréra is experienced in the form of temporary
material designations such as "I am a rich man," "I am a strong man," "I am
black," "I am white," "I am American," "I am Chinese." The sum total of one's
illusory conceptions of oneself is called ahaìkära, or false ego. And due to this
illusory conception of life the living entity transmigrates from one species of
life to another, as clearly explained in Bhagavad-gétä. The spirit soul, however,
does not change its constitutional position of eternity, knowledge and bliss,
although the soul may temporarily forget this position. To cite an analogous
situation, if one dreams at night that he is walking in the forest, such a dream
does not change one's actual position of lying in bed within his apartment.
Thus it is stated in this verse, küöa-stha äçayam åte: despite the transformations
of the subtle body, the spirit soul does not change. Çréla Çrédhara Svämé has
given the following example to illustrate this point. Etävantaà kälaà sukham
aham asväpsam, na kiïcid avediñam. One often thinks, "I was sleeping very
peacefully, although I was not dreaming or aware of anything." It can be
logically understood that one cannot remember something of which he has had
no experience. Therefore, since one remembers peacefully sleeping although
there was no mental or sensual experience, such a memory should be
understood to be a vague experience of the spirit soul.
Çréla Madhväcärya has explained that the demigods, who are a superior race
of humanlike entities on the higher planetary systems of this universe, do not
actually undergo the gross ignorance of deep sleep as do ordinary human
beings. Because the demigods have superior intelligence, they are not merged
into ignorance at the time of sleeping. In Bhagavad-gétä Lord Kåñëa says,
mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca [Bg. 15.15]. Sleep is apohanam, or
forgetfulness. Sometimes by dreaming there is småti, or memory of one's actual
condition, although in a dream one may experience one's family or friends in
an altered, illusory state. But all such conditions of remembering and
forgetting are due to the presence of the Supersoul within the heart. By the
mercy of the Supersoul one can have a preliminary glimpse of the soul by
remembering how one was peacefully resting even without mental or sensual
experience.
According to the authorized commentaries on this verse, aviniçciteñu means
sveda-jeñu, or born from perspiration. Çréla Madhväcärya has pointed out,
bhü-svedena hi präyo jäyante: the earth's dew is to be considered the
perspiration of the earth, and various species of life are generated from dew.
In the Muëòaka Upaniñad (3.1.9) the situation of the soul in relation to
präëa is explained:
eño 'ëur ätmä cetasä veditavyo
yasmin präëaù païcadhä saàviveça
präëaiç cittaà sarvam otam prajänäà
yasmin viçuddhe vibhavaty eña ätmä
"The soul is atomic in size and can be perceived by perfect intelligence. This
atomic soul is floating in the five kinds of air [präëa, apäna, vyäna, samäna and
udäna]. The soul is situated within the heart, and it spreads its influence all
over the body of the embodied living entities. When the soul is purified from
the contamination of the five kinds of material air, its spiritual influence is
exhibited." Thus in the innumerable species of life the spiritual soul remains
situated within präëa, or the material life air.
TEXT 40
ya÷RbjanaABacar"NAESaNAyaAeç&BaftyaA
caetaAemalaAina ivaDamaeÖ"NAk(maRjaAina
taismana, ivazAuÜ" opalaByata @AtmataÔvaM
zAAºaAâTaAmalaä{"zAAe: s$aivata{‘ak(AzA:
yarhy abja-näbha-caraëaiñaëayoru-bhaktyä
ceto-maläni vidhamed guëa-karma-jäni
tasmin viçuddha upalabhyata ätma-tattvaà
çäkñäd yathämala-dåçoù savitå-prakäçaù
SYNONYMS
yarhi—when; abja-näbha—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose
navel is shaped like a lotus; caraëa—the feet; eñaëayä—desiring (only);
uru-bhaktyä—by powerful devotional service; cetaù—of the heart;
maläni—the dirt; vidhamet—cleanses away; guëa-karma-jäni—generated from
the modes of nature and material activities in those modes; tasmin—in that;
viçuddhe—completely purified (heart); upalabhyate—is perceived;
ätma-tattvam—the true nature of the self; säkñät—directly; yathä—just as;
amala-dåçoù—of pure eyes; savitå—of the sun; prakäçaù—the manifestation.
TRANSLATION
When one seriously engages in the devotional service of the Personality of
Godhead, fixing the Lord's lotus feet within one's heart as the only goal of life,
one can destroy the innumerable impure desires lodged within the heart as a
result of one's previous fruitive work within the three modes of material nature.
When the heart is thus purified one can directly perceive both the Supreme
Lord and one's self as transcendental entities. Thus one becomes perfect in
spiritual understanding through direct experience, just as one can directly
experience the sunshine through normal, healthy vision.
PURPORT
In the previous verse it was explained that one can have a preliminary
glimpse of the eternal, unchanging soul by remembering one's experience of
peacefully sleeping even while the mind and senses were totally inactive. One
may ask, If in deep sleep there is a preliminary experience of the soul, why
upon waking does one return to illusory material existence? It may be
answered that because of material desires lodged within the heart the
conditioned soul is addicted to the nescience of material sense gratification. A
prisoner may glimpse through the bars the free light outside the prison window
but still remain captive behind the bars. Similarly, although a conditioned soul
may have a glimpse of the spirit soul, he remains captured within the bondage
of material desires. Therefore, although one may have a preliminary
understanding of the eternal soul that exists within the temporary body, or
even of the Supersoul that accompanies the individual soul within the heart, a
specific process is still required to eliminate the cause of material existence,
namely material desire.
As explained in Bhagavad-gétä (8.6),
yaà yaà väpi smaran bhävaà
tyajaty ante kalevaram
taà tam evaiti kaunteya
sadä tad-bhäva-bhävitaù
"Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body, that state he
will attain without fail." According to one's desire at the time of death a
suitable material body is awarded by material nature. Karmaëä daiva-netreëa
jantur dehopapattaye [SB 3.31.1]. According to one's fruitive desires and actions
and under the jurisdiction of the representatives of the Lord called demigods,
the living entity is awarded a particular material body, which is inevitably
subject to harassment by birth, death, old age and disease. If one can eliminate
the cause of a particular phenomenon, logically he also eliminates the effect.
Therefore, this verse states that one should desire only to achieve shelter at
the lotus feet of the Personality of Godhead. One should give up illusory
desires for material society, friendship and love, since such desires cause
further material bondage. One should fix his mind on the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Kåñëa, so that without fail one can remember Kåñëa at the time of
death. As the Lord states,
anta-käle ca mäm eva
smaran muktvä kalevaram
yaù prayäti sa mad-bhävaà
yäti nästy atra saàçayaù
"Whoever, at the time of death, quits his body remembering Me alone, at once
attains My nature. Of this there is no doubt." (Bg. 8.5) The Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, is the actual shelter for every living being. And
the Lord can be directly perceived as soon as one's heart has become
transparently clean through bhakti-yoga.
Bhagavad-gétä describes the state of achieving the Supreme Personality of
Godhead by the words tato mäà tattvato jïätvä viçate tad-anantaram, and
sometimes impersonalists falsely interpret these words to be a description of
brahma-säyujyam, or impersonal merging into the existence of the Lord. It is
clearly mentioned in this verse that one must fix his mind and devotion on the
lotus feet of abja-näbha, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If the
individual living entity were equal to the Personality of Godhead, the living
entity could simply think of himself in order to be purified. But even then a
contradiction would arise: the Personality of Godhead has no need to be
purified, since He is described in Bhagavad-gétä as pavitraà paramam, or the
supreme pure. Therefore, one should not artificially try to twist an impersonal
meaning out of the statements of the Vedic literature.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has stated that the perfect stage of
devotional service indicated in this verse can be observed in the activities of
such great devotees as Dhruva Mahäräja. Dhruva Mahäräja approached the
Personality of Godhead desiring a political adjustment on the material
platform, but when purified by chanting the holy name of God (oà namo
bhagavate väsudeväya) he felt no further need for material sense gratification.
As stated in the First Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, janayaty äçu vairägyam. As
soon as one advances in devotional service, one is freed from the
embarrassment of superficial material desires.
The words upalabhyata ätma-tattvam are significant in this verse.
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura says that ätma-tattvam, or knowledge of the
soul, indicates knowledge of the Supreme Personality of Godhead along with
His various expansions such as the impersonal brahmajyoti and the marginal
living entity himself. As indicated here by the word säkñät, perceiving the
Personality of Godhead means seeing the personal form of the Lord, His hands
and legs, His various transcendental vehicles and servants, and so on, just as by
devotion to the sun-god one can gradually perceive the personal body of the
sun-god, along with his chariot and personal attendants.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has pointed out that in verses 35
through 39 the various stages of standard logic are demonstrated. Verse 35
establishes the viñaya, or general thesis. Verse 36 manifests saàçaya, or an
expression of doubt. Verse 37 gives the pürva-pakña, or opposing argument.
And verse 38 definitely establishes the siddhänta, or conclusion. Verse 39
presents saìgati, the summary. The saìgati, or final word, is that one should
become a pure devotee of the Personality of Godhead and worship the Lord's
lotus feet. Thus by cleansing the mirror of the heart one can see the Lord, just
as a normal human being with healthy 20/20 vision can very easily see the
brilliant rays of the sun or as an advanced devotee of the sun-god himself can
see the personal body of the sun-god.
TEXT 41
™aIr"AjaAevaAca
k(maRyaAegAM vad"ta na:
pauç&SaAe yaena s$aMs$k{(ta:
ivaDaUyaeh"AzAu k(maARiNA
naESk(mya< ivand"tae par"ma,
çré-räjoväca
karma-yogaà vadata naù
puruño yena saàskåtaù
vidhüyehäçu karmäëi
naiñkarmyaà vindate param
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—the King said; karma-yogam—the practice of dovetailing one's
work with the Supreme; vadata—please tell; naù—us; puruñaù—a person;
yena—by which; saàskåtaù—being refined; vidhüya—getting rid of; iha—in
this life; äçu-quickly; karmäëi—materialistic activities;
naiñkarmyam—freedom from fruitive reactions; vindate—enjoys;
param—transcendental.
TRANSLATION
King Nimi said: O great sages, please speak to us about the process of
karma-yoga. Purified by this process of dedicating one's practical work to the
Supreme, a person can very quickly free himself from all material activities,
even in this life, and thus enjoy pure life on the transcendental platform.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (3.5),
na hi kaçcit kñaëam api
jätu tiñöhaty akarma-kåt
käryate hy avaçaù karma
sarvaù prakåti-jair guëaiù
"All men are forced to act helplessly according to the impulses born of the
modes of material nature; therefore no one can refrain from doing something,
not even for a moment." Since the living entity cannot remain inactive, he
must learn to dedicate his activities to the Lord. Çréla Prabhupäda comments
on this verse from Bhagavad-gétä as follows: "It is not a question of embodied
life, but it is the nature of the soul to be always active. Without the presence of
the spirit soul, the material body cannot move. The body is only a dead vehicle
to be worked by the spirit soul, which is always active and cannot stop even for
a moment. As such, the spirit soul has to be engaged in the good work of Kåñëa
consciousness, otherwise it will be engaged in occupations dictated by illusory
energy. In contact with material energy, the spirit soul acquires material
modes, and to purify the soul from such affinities it is necessary to engage in
the prescribed duties enjoined in the çästras. But if the soul is engaged in his
natural function of Kåñëa consciousness, whatever he is able to do is good for
him."
Ordinary people often question the busy activities of the devotees of the
Kåñëa consciousness movement, mistaking such activities to be ordinary
material work. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has stated in this connection,
kämya-karmäëy eva tyäjitäni, na tu nitya-naimittikäni, phalasyaiva vininditatvät.
One should give up selfish activities performed for one's personal sense
gratification, since the result of such thoughtless work is further material
bondage. But one should offer one's regular or occasional occupational duties
to the Supreme Lord, and thus such activities become transcendental
devotional service. By the words tasmäd guruà prapadyeta jijïäsuù çreya
uttamam [SB 11.3.21], this chapter has clearly explained that dovetailing one's
work with the service of the Lord is an art one should learn at the lotus feet of
the bona fide spiritual master. Otherwise, if one whimsically declares his
materialistic work to be transcendental devotional service, there will be no
actual result. Therefore, according to Çré Jéva Gosvämé, one should not mistake
the word naiñkarmyam to indicate inactivity; rather, it indicates
transcendental activity under the guidance of the Lord and His representative.
TEXT 42
WvaM ‘a´ama{SaIna, paUvaRma,
@pa{cCM$ ipataur"intake(
naA“auvana, “aöNA: pau‡aAs$a,
ta‡a k(Ar"NAmaucyataAma,
evaà praçnam åñén pürvam
apåcchaà pitur antike
näbruvan brahmaëaù puträs
tatra käraëam ucyatäm
SYNONYMS
evam—similar; praçnam—a question; åñén—to the sages; pürvam—previously;
apåccham—I asked; pituù—of my father (Ikñväku Mahäräja); antike—in front;
na abruvan—they did not speak; brahmaëaù—of Lord Brahmä; puträù—the
sons; tatra—of that; käraëam—the reason; ucyatäm—please say.
TRANSLATION
Once in the past, in the presence of my father, Mahäräja Ikñväku, I placed a
similar question before four great sages who were sons of Lord Brahmä. But
they did not answer my question. Please explain the reason for this.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé the words brahmaëaù puträù, "the sons
of Brahmä," refer to the four Kumäras headed by Sanaka Åñi. Çréla
Madhväcärya has quoted a verse from the Tantra-bhägavata stating that the
reason the four sons of Lord Brahmä, although mahäjanas and experts in the
science of devotional service, declined to answer King Nimi was that they
wanted to demonstrate clearly that even those who are expert in the
cultivation of speculative knowledge cannot understand the actual science of
pure devotional service. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has further commented that the
sages avoided answering the question from the King because at that time King
Nimi was a young boy and therefore not mature enough to understand the
answer fully.
TEXT 43
™aI@Aivah"AeR‡a ovaAca
k(maARk(maR ivak(maeRita
vaed"vaAd"Ae na laAEik(k(:
vaed"sya caeìr"AtmatvaAta,
ta‡a mau÷inta s$aUr"ya:
çré-ävirhotra uväca
karmäkarma vikarmeti
veda-vädo na laukikaù
vedasya ceçvarätmatvät
tatra muhyanti sürayaù
SYNONYMS
çré-ävirhotraù uväca—the sage Ävirhotra said; karma—the execution of duties
prescribed by scripture; akarma—failure to perform such duties;
vikarma—engagement in forbidden activities; iti—thus; veda-vädaù—subject
matter understood through the Vedas; na—not; laukikaù—mundane;
vedasya—of the vedas; ca—and; éçvara-ätmatvät-because of coming from the
Personality of Godhead Himself; tatra—in this matter; muhyanti—become
confused; sürayaù—(even) great scholarly authorities.
TRANSLATION
Çré Ävirhotra replied: Prescribed duties, nonperformance of such duties, and
forbidden activities are topics one can properly understand through authorized
study of the Vedic literature. This difficult subject matter can never be
understood by mundane speculation. The authorized Vedic literature is the
sound incarnation of the Personality of Godhead Himself, and thus Vedic
knowledge is perfect. Even the greatest learned scholars are bewildered in their
attempts to understand the science of action if they neglect the authority of
Vedic knowledge.
PURPORT
Prescribed duties authorized by revealed scripture are called karma, whereas
the failure to execute one's highest duty is called akarma. The performance of
forbidden activities is called vikarma. Thus karma, akarma and vikarma are
established by the authorized explanations of Vedic literature. They cannot be
ascertained merely through mundane exercises in logic. In the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (6.16.51) the Lord says, çabda-brahma paraà brahma
mamobhe çäçvaté tanü: "I am the form of the transcendental vibrations of the
Vedas, such as oàkära and Hare Kåñëa Hare Räma, and I am the Supreme
Absolute Truth. These two forms of Mine—namely, the transcendental Vedic
sound and the eternally blissful spiritual form of the Deity—are My eternal
forms; they are not material. " Similarly, it is stated in the Bhägavatam (6.1.40),
vedo näräyaëaù säkñät svayambhür iti çuçruma: "The Vedas are directly the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa, and are self-born. This we have
heard from Yamaräja." In the Puruña-sükta (Åg Veda, maëòala 10, sükta 90,
mantra 9) it is stated, tasmäd yajïät sarva-huta åcaù sämäni jajïjire/ chandäàsi
jajïjire tasmät: "From Him, Yajïa, came all sacrificial offerings, hymns of
invocation and songs of praise. All the mantras of the Vedas come from the
Lord." All the incarnations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are
completely transcendental and free from the four defects of conditional life,
namely mistakes, illusion, cheating and imperfect senses. So Vedic knowledge,
being a plenary manifestation of the Supreme Lord, is similarly infallible and
transcendental.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has pointed out that in the
material world, which is controlled by the illusory energy of the Lord, a
particular sound vibration is discarded after describing its object. But on the
spiritual platform called Vaikuëöha nothing is ever lost, and thus
çabda-brahma, or the Personality of Godhead in His form as transcendental
sound, is eternal.
In ordinary human discourse one can ascertain the meaning of human
words by understanding the intention of the speaker. But since Vedic
knowledge is apauruñeya, or transcendental, one can appreciate its purport
only by hearing from the standard authorities in the chain of disciplic
succession. This process is prescribed by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gétä
(evaà paramparä-präptam [Bg. 4.2]). Thus, even highly learned scholars who
proudly neglect this simple descending process are certainly bewildered and
embarrassed in their hopeless attempt to ascertain the ultimate meaning of
Vedic knowledge. The four sons of Lord Brahmä declined to answer the
question of King Nimi since at that time the King was a mere child and
therefore not capable of seriously surrendering to the process of hearing
through disciplic succession. Çréla Madhväcärya has pointed out in this regard,
éçvarätmatväd éçvara-viñayatvät. Because the Vedas describe the unlimited
Personality of Godhead, Vedic knowledge cannot be approached by mundane
methods of comprehension.
TEXT 44
par"AeºavaAd"Ae vaed"Ae'yaM
baAlaAnaAmanauzAAs$anama,
k(maRmaAeºaAya k(maARiNA
ivaDaÔae ÷gAdM" yaTaA
parokña-vädo vedo 'yaà
bälänäm anuçäsanam
karma-mokñäya karmäëi
vidhatte hy agadaà yathä
SYNONYMS
parokña-vädaù—describing a situation as something else in order to disguise its
real nature; vedaù—Vedas; ayam—these; bälänäm—of childlike persons;
anuçäsanam—guidance; karma-mokñäya—for liberation from material
activities; karmäëi—material activities; vidhatte—prescribe; hi—indeed;
agadam—a medicine; yathä—just as.
TRANSLATION
Childish and foolish people are attached to materialistic, fruitive activities,
although the actual goal of life is to become free from such activities. Therefore,
the Vedic injunctions indirectly lead one to the path of ultimate liberation by
first prescribing fruitive religious activities, just as a father promises his child
candy so that the child will take his medicine.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, traiguëya-viñayä vedä nistraiguëyo bhavärjuna.
The Vedas apparently offer fruitive results within the three modes of material
nature. Those who perform ritualistic ceremonies or austerities in the mode of
goodness are offered the chance for promotion to the higher planetary systems
called Svargaloka. Açnanti divyän divi deva-bhogän. Similarly, those who
perform karma-käëòa, or fruitive religious activities in the mode of passion,
are allowed to become great rulers or wealthy men on earth and enjoy great
prestige and earthly power. But as stated in the Manu-saàhitä, pravåttir eñä
bhütänäà nivåttis tu mahä-phalä: "Although fruitive religious activities are
very much popular among the conditioned souls, the actual perfection of life is
achieved when one gives up all fruitive endeavor."
If a father tells his child, "You must take this medicine by my order," the
child may become fearful and rebellious and reject the medicine. Therefore,
the father entices his child by saying, "I am going to give you a delicious piece
of candy. But if you want this candy, first just take this little bit of medicine,
and then you can have the candy." Such indirect persuasion is called
parokña-vädaù, or an indirect description that conceals the actual purpose. The
father presents his proposal to the child as if the ultimate goal were to receive
the candy and only a minor condition must be fulfilled to receive it. Actually,
however, the father's goal is to administer the medicine to the child and cure
him of his disease. Thus, describing the primary purpose indirectly and
concealing it with a secondary proposal is called parokña-vädaù, or indirect
persuasion.
Since the great majority of conditioned souls are addicted to sense
gratification (pravåttir eñä bhütänäm), the Vedic karma-käëòa rituals offer
them a chance to become free from temporary materialistic sense gratification
by making them greedy for fruitive Vedic results such as promotion to heaven
or a powerful ruling position on earth. In all Vedic rituals Viñëu is worshiped,
and thus one is gradually promoted to the understanding that one's actual
self-interest is to surrender to Viñëu. Na te viduù svärtha-gatià hi viñëum [SB
7.5.31]. Such an indirect method is prescribed for bälänäm, those who are
childish or foolish. An intelligent person can immediately understand by
direct analysis the actual purpose of Vedic literature as described by the Lord
Himself (vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva vedyaù [Bg. 15.15]). All Vedic knowledge
ultimately aims at achieving shelter at the lotus feet of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Without such shelter one must rotate within the
8,400,000 species offered by the illusory energy of the Lord. Ordinary material
vision, either through gross sense perception or the subtle perception of
rational induction, always yields imperfect knowledge distorted by the desire
for illusory material enjoyment. Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura
comments that the cultivation of impersonal self-realization is also a
disturbance to the conditioned souls, since the impersonal speculative process
is an artificial attempt to become completely formless. Such an attempt is not
at all in accord with the proper judgment of the Vedas, which is described in
Bhagavad-gétä (vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva vedyaù [Bg. 15.15]).
In Lord Caitanya's movement there is no need to childishly pursue fruitive
material results and gradually be dragged to actual knowledge. According to
Caitanya Mahäprabhu:
harer näma harer näma
harer nämaiva kevalam
kalau nästy eva nästy eva
nästy eva gatir anyathä
[Cc. Ädi 17.21]
In Kali-yuga life is very short (präyeëälpäyuñaù), and people are generally
undisciplined (mandäù), misguided (sumanda-matayaù), and overwhelmed by
the unfavorable results of their previous activities (manda-bhägyäù). Thus
their minds are never peaceful (upadrutäù), and their very brief life span
vitiates the possibility of their gradually progressing through the path of Vedic
ritualistic activities. Therefore, the only hope is to chant the holy names of the
Lord, harer näma [Cc. Ädi 17.21], In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam (12.3.51) it is
stated:
kaler doña-nidhe räjann
asti hy eko mahän guëaù
kértanäd eva kåñëasya
mukta-saìgaù paraà vrajet
Kali-yuga is an ocean of hypocrisy and pollution. In Kali-yuga all natural
elements are polluted, such as water, earth, sky, mind, intelligence and ego.
The only auspicious aspect of this fallen age is the process of chanting the holy
names of the Lord (asti hy eko mahän guëaù). Simply by the delightful process
of kåñëa-kértana one is freed from his connection to this fallen age
(mukta-saìga) and goes back home, back to Godhead (paraà vrajet).
Sometimes the preachers of the Kåñëa consciousness movement also use the
parokña, or indirect method of persuasion, offering a nice transcendental sweet
to the conditioned soul to entice him to come to the lotus feet of the Lord.
Caitanya Mahäprabhu's movement is kevala änanda-käëòa, simply blissful. But
by the mercy of Caitanya Mahäprabhu even one who is indirectly attracted to
the Kåñëa consciousness movement achieves very quickly the perfection of life
and goes back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 45
naAcare"âstau vaed"AelM(
svayamaÁaAe'ijataein‰"ya:
ivak(maRNAA ÷DamaeRNA
ma{tyaAema{RtyaumaupaEita s$a:
näcared yas tu vedoktaà
svayam ajïo 'jitendriyaù
vikarmaëä hy adharmeëa
måtyor måtyum upaiti saù
SYNONYMS
na äcaret—does not perform; yaù—who; tu—but; veda-uktam—what is
prescribed in the Vedas; svayam—himself; ajïaù—ignorant;
ajita-indriyaù—not having learned to control his senses; vikarmaëä—by not
executing scriptural duty; hi—indeed; adharmeëa—by his irreligion; måtyoù
måtyum—death after death; upaiti—achieves; saù—he.
TRANSLATION
If an ignorant person who has not conquered the material senses does not
adhere to the Vedic injunctions, certainly he will engage in sinful and
irreligious activities. Thus his reward will be repeated birth and death.
PURPORT
In the previous verse it was stated that although fruitive activities are
prescribed in the Vedas, the actual goal of human life is to free oneself from all
materialistic activities. Therefore, one may conclude that there is no need to
perform the Vedic rituals, which offer regulated sense gratification. But an
ignorant person, or, in other words, one who has not understood that he is not
the material body but an eternal spiritual soul, part and parcel of Kåñëa, will
invariably be unable to control the urges of the material senses. Therefore, if
such a materially inclined person neglects the Vedic injunctions that
administer regulated sense gratification, he will surely fall down into
unregulated sense gratification in päpa, or sinful life. For example, those who
are affected by sexual desire are ordered to accept the viväha-yajïa, or religious
marriage ceremony. We often see that because of false pride a so-called
brahmacäré, or celibate student of Vedic knowledge, rejects the marriage
ceremony as mäyä, or material illusion. But if such a celibate student is unable
to control his senses he will undoubtedly degrade himself by eventually
engaging in illicit sex, which has no connection to Vedic culture. Similarly, a
neophyte in Kåñëa consciousness is encouraged to eat kåñëa-prasädam to his
full satisfaction. Sometimes an immature practitioner of bhakti-yoga tries to
make a show of severe eating habits and eventually falls down into eating
unregulated and abominable foodstuffs.
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, the words måtyor
måtyum upaiti mean that a sinful person is awarded a free ticket to hell by the
lord of death himself, Yamaräja. This is also described in the Vedas as follows:
måtvä punar måtyum äpadyate ardyamänaù sva-karmabhiù. "Persons who cause
themselves severe pain by their materialistic activities gain no relief at the
moment of death, for they are placed again in a situation in which death will
occur." Therefore, Vedic ritualistic activities such as the wedding ceremony or
the relishing of sumptuous yajïa-çiñöa, or food remnants of sacrifice, should not
be given up by those whose senses are not yet controlled.
The previous verse gave the example of a father's administering candy to
his son to induce the child to take medicine. If the child rejects the father's
offer, thinking that the candy is unnecessary, the child also misses the
opportunity to take the medicine that will cure him. Similarly, if a
materialistic person rejects the Vedic injunctions that administer prescribed
sense gratification, he will not be purified but instead will be further degraded.
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has described a materialistic person as one whose mind and
intelligence are not faithfully fixed in the message of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. In Bhagavad-gétä Çré Bhagavän, Lord Kåñëa, gives wonderful
explanations to the conditioned souls, represented by Arjuna, concerning the
actual goal of life. One who cannot fix his mind on these instructions is to be
considered a materialistic person who is inclined toward sinful activities and
who must therefore submit himself to the standard Vedic injunctions. Such
Vedic injunctions, even though fruitive. are considered puëya, or pious,
according to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, and thus one who strictly performs them will
not go to hell. Lord Kåñëa Himself states in the Bhägavatam (11.20.9),
tävat karmäëi kurvéta
na nirvidyeta yävatä
mat-kathä-çravaëädau vä
çraddhä yävan na jäyate
"One should continue to perform the Vedic ritualistic activities until one
actually becomes detached from material sense gratification and develops faith
for hearing and chanting about Me."
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains that the Vedas prescribe that
one rise early in the morning, bathe, and chant the Gäyatré mantra. If one
artificially gives up such a disciplined, regulated life, one will gradually become
a victim of activities for gross sense gratification, such as eating in restaurants
and indulging in illicit connections with women. Thus losing control of his
senses, he becomes just like an animal, engaging from the early morning until
the night in dangerous activities. Çréla Madhväcärya has commented in this
regard, ajïaù sann äcarann api. Although in ignorance, one continues to act,
not considering the future result of one's activities. Such indifference to the
future result of one's activities is described in Bhagavad-gétä to be a symptom of
the mode of ignorance. Just as an intelligent man will not drive his car on a
highway if he knows the highway will lead him to danger, an intelligent man
will not perform non-Vedic activities if he knows that the ultimate result will
be the disaster described here by the words måtyor måtyum upaiti. Çréla
Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has stated that ignorant persons sometimes
think that after death one automatically attains everlasting peace. But by the
powerful reactions of one's sinful activities one comes to a most unpeaceful
condition, for one must suffer hellish miseries in exchange for the meager
temporary fruits of material work. Such hellish reactions occur not once but
perpetually, as long as one is indifferent to the Vedic injunctions.
TEXT 46
vaed"Ael(maeva ku(vaARNAAe
ina:s$aËÿAe'ipaRtamaIìre"
naESk(mya< laBatae is$aiÜM"
r"AecanaATaAR P(la™auita:
vedoktam eva kurväëo
niùsaìgo 'rpitam éçvare
naiñkarmyaà labhate siddhià
rocanärthä phala-çrutiù
SYNONYMS
veda-uktam—the regulated activities described by the Vedas; eva—certainly;
kurväëaù—performing; nihsaìgaù—without attachment; arpitam—offered;
éçvare—to the Supreme Lord; naiñkarmyam—of liberation from material work
and its reactions; labhate—one achieves; siddhim—the perfection;
rocana-arthä—for the purpose of giving encouragement; phala-çrutiù—the
promises of material results given in the Vedic scriptures.
TRANSLATION
By executing without attachment the regulated activities prescribed in the
Vedas, offering the results of such work to the Supreme Lord, one attains the
perfection of freedom from the bondage of material work. The material fruitive
results offered in the revealed scriptures are not the actual goal of Vedic
knowledge, but are meant for stimulating the interest of the performer.
PURPORT
Human life is an opportunity offered by the laws of nature to the
conditioned soul so that he may understand his eternal relationship with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Unfortunately, even in the human form of
life most living entities remain addicted to improving the standard of animal
activities, namely eating, sleeping, defending and mating. Almost no one is
interested in the actual success of life, Kåñëa consciousness.
çrotavyädéni räjendra
nåëäà santi sahasraçaù
apaçyatäm ätma-tattvaà
gåheñu gåha-medhinäm
"Those persons who are materially engrossed, being blind to the knowledge of
ultimate truth, have many subject matters for hearing in human society, O
Emperor." (SB 2.1.2)
It is stated, parama-käruëiko vedaù—"Vedic knowledge is supremely
merciful"—because it engages the animalistic human beings in a gradual
process of purification that culminates in full consciousness of Lord Kåñëa, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is confirmed by the Lord Himself in
Bhagavad-gétä (vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva vedyaù [Bg. 15.15]). The majority of
human beings are not able to suddenly give up material sense gratification,
even though they understand from Vedic literature that such sense
gratification causes a pernicious future effect. We have practical experience in
the Western countries that when the government informed the citizens that
smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer, most people were unable to give up
their smoking habit. Therefore, the Vedic literature prescribes a gradual
process of purification in which the conditioned soul learns to offer the results
of his material activities to the Supreme Lord, thus spiritualizing those
activities. Material sense gratification is based on two organs, namely the
tongue for tasting and the genitals for sex life. By offering palatable food to the
Deity of Kåñëa and then enjoying the remnants as kåñëa-prasädam and by
accepting the rules and regulations for Vedic householder life and begetting of
Kåñëa conscious children, one can gradually bring the full range of material
activities to the platform of pure devotional service. By offering the fruits of
one's ordinary activities to the Supreme Lord, one gradually understands that
the Lord Himself, and not material sense gratification, is the actual goal of life.
Lord Kåñëa warns in Bhagavad-gétä that if people are prematurely encouraged
to give up householder life or the sumptuous remnants of the Lord's prasädam,
such artificial renunciation will have the opposite effect.
There is a class of duplicitous men who misunderstand the transcendental
purpose of the Vedas and falsely claim that material fruitive results such as
promotion to heaven, which is offered in the agniñöoma sacrifice, constitute
the ultimate goal of the Vedas. Such foolish men have been described by Lord
Kåñëa:
yäm imäà puñpitäà väcaà
pravadanty avipaçcitaù
veda-väda-ratäù pärtha
nänyad astéti vädinaù
kämätmänaù svarga-parä
janma-karma-phala-pradäm
kriyä-viçeña-bahuläà
bhogaiçvarya-gatià prati
"Men of small knowledge are very much attached to the flowery words of the
Vedas, which recommend various fruitive activities for elevation to heavenly
planets, resultant good birth, power, and so forth. Being desirous of sense
gratification and opulent life, they say that there is nothing more than this."
(Bg. 2.42-43) To refute such a foolish understanding of the Vedic purpose, this
verse uses the word niùsaìgaù, which means "without attachment to material
results." The actual purpose of the Vedas is arpitam éçvare, to offer everything
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The result is siddhim, or the
perfection of life, Kåñëa consciousness.
The words rocanärthä phala-çrutiù clearly indicate that the fruitive results
promised in the Vedic literature are meant to stimulate a materialistic person
to have faith in the Vedic injunctions. The example is given that a child may
be offered candy-covered medicine. The child becomes enthusiastic to take the
medicine because of the candy coating, whereas a mature person will be
enthusiastic to take the medicine itself, knowing that such medicine is meant
for his real self-interest. The mature platform of Vedic understanding is
mentioned in the Båhad-äraëyaka Upaniñad (4.4.22): tam etaà vedänuvacanena
brähmaëä vividiñanti brahmacaryeëa tapasä çraddhayä yajïenänäçakena ca. "By
the teaching of the Vedas and by celibacy, penances, faith and controlled
eating, great brähmaëas come to know the Supreme." The Supreme is Kåñëa, as
stated in Bhagavad-gétä. Although the prescribed rituals of the Vedas may
sometimes resemble material fruitive work, the activity is spiritualized because
the result is offered to the Supreme. Candy-covered medicine and ordinary
candy may appear or taste the same. But the candy-covered medicine has a
therapeutic effect not found in ordinary candy. Similarly, the words
naiñkarmyaà labhate siddhim in this verse indicate that a faithful follower of
the Vedic injunctions will gradually be promoted to the highest perfection of
life, pure love of Godhead, as stated by Caitanya Mahäprabhu (premä
pum-artho mahän).
TEXT 47
ya @AzAu ô$d"yaƒainTaM
inaijaRh"I[%Sau: par"Atmana:
ivaiDanaAepacare"Úe"vaM
tan‡aAele(na ca ke(zAvama,
ya äçu hådaya-granthià
nirjihéåñuù parätmanaù
vidhinopacared devaà
tantroktena ca keçavam
SYNONYMS
yaù—one who; äçu-quickly; hådaya-granthim—the knot of the heart (false
identification with the material body); nirjihérñuù—desirous of cutting;
parätmanaù—of the transcendental soul; vidhinä—with the regulations;
upacaret—he should worship; devam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
tantra-uktena—which are described by the tantras (the supplementary Vedic
literatures that give detailed instructions for spiritual practice); ca—as well (in
addition to those regulations which are directly vedoktam); keçavam—Lord
Keçava.
TRANSLATION
One who desires to quickly cut the knot of false ego, which binds the spirit
soul, should worship the Supreme Lord, Keçava, by the regulations found in
Vedic literatures such as the tantras.
PURPORT
The Vedic literatures contain mysterious descriptions of the Absolute
Truth that stimulate philosophical speculation. The Vedas also offer heavenly
rewards for the performance of ritualistic ceremonies. But as stated in verse 44
of this chapter such jïäna-käëòa and karma-käëòa sections of the Vedas are
bälänäm anuçäsanam; that is, because less intelligent or childish persons are
addicted to mental speculation and fruitive activity, these sections of the
Vedas are meant to attract such persons to take shelter of the Vedic
injunctions for gradual promotion to the perfect stage of Kåñëa consciousness.
Now that the path for those who are materialistic has been described in
several verses, this verse describes the process for those who are vijïaù, or
learned transcendentalists. Such learned transcendentalists are advised to
follow the regulated worship described in such Vaiñëava tantras as Çré
Närada-païcarätra for pleasing the Supreme Lord directly. The words
upacared devaà tantroktena ca keçavam indicate that one should directly
worship Keçava, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who appears in many
different incarnations to please His devotees. Çréla Jayadeva Gosvämé has
described the pastimes of the Lord in his song describing ten prominent
incarnations of the Personality of Godhead, Keçava: Lord Fish, Lord Tortoise,
Lord Boar, Lord Nåsiàhadeva, Lord Vämana, Lord Paraçuräma, Lord
Rämacandra, Lord Balaräma, Lord Buddha and Lord Kalki. The words
upacared devam indicate devotional service to the Personality of Godhead.
And therefore the word tantroktena, or "injunctions of the tantras," should be
understood to indicate vaiñëava-tantras such as Çré Närada-païcarätra, which
give explicit and detailed instructions for worshiping Keçava. The Vedas are
referred to by the term nigama. And the elaborate explanation of these
nigamas is called ägama, or tantra. When the transcendental living entity
becomes perturbed by the obnoxious harassment of material bodily dualities,
he becomes eager to hear from the Vedas about his transcendental situation.
The word äçu in this verse indicates that those who are eager to put a quick
end to material existence and situate themselves in the eternal blissful life of
perfect knowledge should directly worship Lord Kåñëa, bypassing the
preliminary Vedic rituals described in the previous verses.
TEXT 48
labDvaAnauƒah" @AcaAyaARta,
taena s$and"izARtaAgAma:
mah"Apauç&SamaByacaeRna,
maUtyaARiBamatayaAtmana:
labdhvänugraha äcäryät
tena sandarçitägamaù
mahä-puruñam abhyarcen
mürtyäbhimatayätmanaù
SYNONYMS
labdhvä—having obtained; anugrahaù—mercy; äcäryät—from the spiritual
master; tena—by him; sandarçita—being shown; ägamaù—(the process of
worship given by) the vaiñëava-tantras; mahä-puruñam-the Supreme Person;
abhyarcet—the disciple should worship; mürtyä—in the particular personal
form; abhimatayä—which is preferred; ätmanaù—by himself.
TRANSLATION
Having obtained the mercy of his spiritual master, who reveals to the
disciple the injunctions of Vedic scriptures, the devotee should worship the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in the particular personal form of the Lord the
devotee finds most attractive.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, the word labdhvänugrahaù indicates
formal initiation by a bona fide spiritual master. It is stated in the Padma
Puräëa,
ñaö-karma-nipuëo vipro
mantra-tantra-viçäradaù
avaiñëavo gurur na syäd
vaiñëavaù çvapaco guruù
A bona fide spiritual master must be a soul surrendered at the lotus feet of the
Supreme Lord. In the Brahma-vaivarta Puräëa it is stated,
bodhaù kaluñitas tena
daurätmyaà prakaöé-kåtam
gurur yena parityaktas
tena tyaktaù purä hariù
"One pollutes his own intelligence and exhibits severe weakness of character
when he rejects his own spiritual master. Indeed, such a person has already
rejected the Supreme Lord, Hari." The bona fide disciple should always
remember that his entire understanding of Vedic knowledge is coming through
the mercy of his bona fide spiritual master. If one superficially or whimsically
accepts and rejects a bona fide Vaiñëava spiritual master, sometimes becoming
attracted to another spiritual master, one commits a vaiñëava-aparädha, a great
offense against the devotees of the Lord. Sometimes a foolish neophyte
mistakenly thinks that the relationship with the spiritual master is meant for
the sense gratification of the disciple, and therefore in the name of spiritual
aspirations such a fool gives up a bona fide Vaiñëava guru. One should
understand oneself to be the eternal servant of the guru. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé,
however, has quoted this verse from the Närada-païcarätra:
avaiñëavopadiñöena
mantreëa nirayaà vrajet
punaç ca vidhinä samyag
grähayed vaiñëaväd guroù
"One who is initiated into a mantra by a non-Vaiñëava must go to hell.
Therefore he should again be initiated properly, according to the prescribed
method, by a Vaiñëava guru."It is the duty of the bona fide spiritual master to
examine carefully the qualification of the disciple, and the disciple should
similarly approach a bona fide spiritual master. Otherwise, the foolish disciple
and the indiscriminate guru may both be punished by the laws of nature.
One should not artificially try to assimilate all of the apparently conflicting
branches of Vedic knowledge. Vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva vedyaù [Bg. 15.15].
Conditioned souls have various conflicting natures, which are engaged by
apparently conflicting Vedic injunctions called pravåtti and nivåtti-märga. But
the easiest path is simply to learn the process of regularly worshiping
advaya-jïäna, Lord Viñëu. All the demigods mentioned in the Vedas are
paraphernalia for the service of the Supreme Lord, Viñëu. Whatever exists in
the visible material world is also meant to be engaged in the Lord's service;
otherwise, it has no value. If one artificially renounces material things useful
in the service of the Supreme Lord, he loses his spiritual qualification of seeing
everything as meant for Kåñëa's pleasure and will be forced to think of material
objects as meant for his own sense enjoyment. In other words, material things
should be accepted or rejected according to the pleasure of the Supreme Lord.
Otherwise, one will fall down from the standard of pure devotional service. As
stated in this verse, labdhvänugraha äcäryät: such discrimination can be
learned when one receives the mercy of a bona fide spiritual master, who
reveals to the sincere disciple the practical application of Vedic knowledge.
TEXT 49
zAuica: s$ammauKamaAs$aIna:
‘aANAs$aMyamanaAid"iBa:
ipaNxM" ivazAAeDya s$aªyaAs$ak{(
tar"ºaAe'caRyaeÜ"ir"ma,
çuciù sammukham äsénaù
präëa-saàyamanädibhiù
piëòaà viçodhya sannyäsakåta-
rakño 'rcayed dharim
SYNONYMS
çuciù—clean; sammukham—facing (the Deity); äsénaù—thus seated;
präëa-saàyamana-ädibhiù—by präëäyäma (breathing exercises) and other
means; piëòam—the gross body; viçodhya—purifying; sannyäsa—by placing
transcendental marks of tilaka on various places of the body; kåta-rakñaù—in
this way invoking the Lord's protection; arcayet—one should worship;
harim—Lord Hari.
TRANSLATION
After cleansing oneself, purifying the body by präëäyäma, bhüta-çuddhi and
other processes, and marking the body with sacred tilaka for protection, one
should sit in front of the Deity and worship the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
PURPORT
Präëäyäma is the authorized Vedic process for controlling the air within
the body. Similarly, bhüta-çuddhi is a process for purifying the body. The word
çuciù means that one should be internally and externally clean. Çuciù means
that one should perform activities only for the pleasure of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. If somehow or other one can remember the Supreme
Lord constantly by chanting and hearing His holy name, one will come to the
pure stage of life, as described in this Vedic mantra:
oà apavitraù pavitro vä
sarvävasthäà gato 'pi vä
yaù smaret puëòarékäkñaà
sa bahyäbhyantara-çuciù
(Garuòa Puräëa)
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has pointed out that although one
may mark the body with sacred tilaka, perform mudräs and chant mantras, if
one is thinking within his mind of material sense gratification his worship of
Lord Çré Hari is bogus. Therefore the word çuciù here indicates that one should
worship the Lord in a favorable frame of mind, considering the Lord to be
sacred and one's self to be an insignificant servant of the Lord. Those who are
not favorably inclined toward the Supreme Personality of Godhead do not like
to worship the Deity in the temple, and they discourage people from going to
the temple of the Lord by saying that since the Lord is omnipresent there is no
need to do so. Such envious persons prefer the gymnastic exercises of
haöha-yoga or the räja-yoga system. But statements by the Lord Himself, such
as väsudevaù sarvam iti and mäà ekaà çaraëaà vraja [Bg. 7.19], indicate that in
mature transcendental realization one understands that the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is the source of everything and therefore the only
worshipable object. Thus the devotees who worship the Deity of the Lord
according to the païcarätra system are not attracted by any yoga process
except bhakti-yoga.
TEXTS 50-51
@caARd"AE ô$d"yae caAipa
yaTaAlabDaAepacaAr"kE(:
‰"vyaiºatyaAtmailaNgAAina
inaSpaAâ ‘aAeºya caAs$anama,
paAâAd"Inaupak(lpyaATa
s$aiªaDaApya s$amaAih"ta:
ô$d"Aid"iBa: k{(tanyaAs$aAe
maUlaman‡aeNA caAcaRyaeta,
arcädau hådaye cäpi
yathä-labdhopacärakaiù
dravya-kñity-ätma-liëgäni
niñpädya prokñya cäsanam
pädyädén upakalpyätha
sannidhäpya samähitaù
håd-ädibhiù kåta-nyäso
müla-mantreëa cärcayet
SYNONYMS
arcä-ädau—in the form of the Deity and His paraphernalia; hådaye—in the
heart; ca api—also; yathä-labdha—whatever is available; upacärakaiù—with
ingredients of worship; dravya—the physical items to be offered; kñiti—the
ground; ätma—one's own mind; liìgäni—and the Deity; niñpädya—preparing;
prokñya—sprinkling with water for purification; ca—and; äsanam—one's seat;
pädya-ädén—the water for bathing the Deity's feet and other offerings;
upakalpya—getting ready; atha—then; sannidhäpya—placing the Deity in His
proper place; samähitaù—concentrating one's attention; håt-ädibhiù—on the
Deity's heart and other places of the body; kåta-nyäsaù—having drawn sacred
marks; müla-mantreëa—with the appropriate basic mantra for worshiping the
particular Deity; ca—and; arcayet—one should offer worship.
TRANSLATION
The devotee should gather whatever ingredients for worshiping the Deity
are available, make ready the offerings, the ground, his mind and the Deity,
sprinkle his sitting place with water for purification and prepare the bathing
water and other paraphernalia. The devotee should then place the Deity in His
proper place, both physically and within his own mind, concentrate his
attention, and mark the Deity's heart and other parts of the body with tilaka.
Then he should offer worship with the appropriate mantra.
PURPORT
ataù çré-kåñëa-nämädi
na bhaved grähyam indriyaiù
sevonmukhe hi jihvädau
svayam eva sphuraty adaù
[Cc. Madhya 17.136]
(Padma Puräëa)
The Absolute Truth can never be understood by ordinary material sense
perception. The conditioned souls engrossed in the vain pursuit of material
sense gratification are completely indifferent to the transcendental loving
service of the Lord. Their materially conditioned minds are always impure and
disturbed by the endless flow of material dualities, such as prosperity and
poverty, winter and summer, fame and infamy, youth and old age. Such
disturbed conditioned souls cannot recognize the personal presence of the
Absolute Truth in the form of the Deity.
The Lord's incarnation as arcä-avatära, the Deity form, is a special
manifestation of the Lord's mercy toward the materialistic or neophyte
devotees who are still under the influence of material designations. They are
unable to perceive the Lord in His eternal abode, and therefore the Lord
descends as the Deity form, manifesting the prakäça incarnations and even the
svayaà-prakäça, or the original form of the Lord. The prakäça incarnations
exhibit various pastimes within this world, whereas svayaà-prakäça, the Lord's
original form, is the source of all avatäras.
To one who sincerely worships the Deity, the Deity manifests Himself as
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Those who are most unfortunate cannot
even recognize the Supreme Lord in His merciful Deity expansion. They
consider the Deity an ordinary material object. But by surrendering at the
lotus feet of a bona fide spiritual master, who is a pure devotee of the Lord, one
can learn to worship the Deity, as mentioned in this verse, and thus revive
one's lost relationship with the Lord. One who considers such transcendental
Deity worship to be equivalent to idol worship is grossly covered by the three
modes of material nature. A person wearing rose-colored glasses sees the entire
world to be rose colored. Similarly, those unfortunate living entities who are
thickly covered by the material modes of nature see everything, including the
Supreme Lord, as material due to their polluted vision.
TEXTS 52-53
s$aAËÿAepaAËÿAM s$apaASaRd"AM
taAM taAM maUita< svaman‡ata:
paAâAGyaARcamanaIyaAâE:
µaAnavaAs$aAeivaBaUSaNAE:
gAnDamaAlyaAºata›aigBar,"
DaUpad"IpaAepah"Ar"kE(:
s$aAËÿms$ampaUjya ivaiDavata,
stavaE: stautvaA namaeÜ"ir"ma,
säìgopäìgäà sa-pärñadäà
täà täà mürtià sva-mantrataù
pädyärghyäcamanéyädyaiù
snäna-väso-vibhüñaëaiù
gandha-mälyäkñata-sragbhir
dhüpa-dépopahärakaiù
säìgam sampüjya vidhivat
stavaiù stutvä named dharim
SYNONYMS
sa-aìga—including the limbs of His transcendental body; upäìgäm—and His
special bodily features such as His Sudarçana disc and other weapons;
sa-pärñadäm—along with His personal associates; täm täm—each particular;
mürtim—Deity; sva-mantrataù—by the Deity's own mantra; pädya—with
water for bathing the feet; arghya—scented water for greeting;
äcamanéya—water for washing the mouth; ädyaiù—and so on; snäna—water
for bathing; väsaù—fine clothing; vibhüñaëaiù—ornaments; gandha—with
fragrances; mälya—necklaces; akñata—unbroken barleycorns; sragbhiù—and
flower garlands; dhüpa—with incense; dépa—and lamps; upahärakaiù—such
offerings; sa-aìgam—in all aspects; sampüjya—completing the worship;
vidhivat—in accordance with the prescribed regulations; stavaiù
stutvä—honoring the Deity by offering prayers; namet—one should bow down;
harim—to the Lord.
TRANSLATION
One should worship the Deity along with each of the limbs of His
transcendental body, His weapons such as the Sudarçana cakra, His other
bodily features and His personal associates. One should worship each of these
transcendental aspects of the Lord by its own mantra and with offerings of
water to wash the feet, scented water, water to wash the mouth, water for
bathing, fine clothing and ornaments, fragrant oils, valuable necklaces,
unbroken barleycorns, flower garlands, incense and lamps. Having thus
completed the worship in all its aspects in accordance with the prescribed
regulations, one should then honor the Deity of Lord Hari with prayers and
offer obeisances to Him by bowing down.
PURPORT
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé has mentioned that akñata, or unbroken barleycorns
(mentioned in verse 53), are to be used in decorating the Deity with tilaka, and
not in the actual püjä. Näkñatair arcayed viñëuà na ketakyä maheçvaram: "Lord
Viñëu should not be worshiped with unbroken barleycorns, and Lord Çiva
should not be worshiped with ketaké flowers."
TEXT 54
@AtmaAnamtanmayamDyaAyana,
maUita< s$ampaUjayaeÜ"re":
zAeSaAmaADaAya izAr"s$aA
svaDaAmnyauã"Asya s$atk{(tama,
ätmänam tan-mayam dhyäyan
mürtià sampüjayed dhareù
çeñäm ädhäya çirasä
sva-dhämny udväsya sat-kåtam
SYNONYMS
ätmänam—oneself; tat—in the Lord; mayam—absorbed; dhyäyan—so
meditating; mürtim—the personal form; sampüjayet—should fully worship;
hareù—of Lord Hari; çeñäm—the remnants of worship; ädhäya—taking;
çirasä—upon one's head; sva-dhämni—in His place; udväsya—putting;
sat-kåtam—respectfully.
TRANSLATION
The worshiper should become fully absorbed in meditating upon himself as
an eternal servant of the Lord and should thus perfectly worship the Deity,
remembering that the Deity is also situated within his heart. Then he should
take the remnants of the Deity's paraphernalia, such as flower garlands, upon
his head and respectfully put the Deity back in His own place, thus concluding
the worship.
PURPORT
The word tan-mayam in this verse is significant. One who is purified by
worshiping the Deity form of the Lord can understand that he, the worshiper,
is an eternal servant of the Lord and is qualitatively one with the Lord, being
like a tiny spark of the original fire, the Personality of Godhead. Çréla
Madhväcärya has stated in this regard,
viñëor bhåtyo 'ham ity eva
sadä syäd bhagavan-mayaù
naivähaà viñëur asméti
viñëuù sarveçvaro hy ajaù
"One should think, 'I am an eternal servant of Viñëu, and therefore, because I
am His eternal part and parcel, I am eternally one with Him. But I am not
Viñëu Himself, because Viñëu is the supreme controller of everything.' "
The basic principle of Deity worship is that one must understand oneself to
be an eternal servant of the Supreme Lord. One who is addicted to sexual
gratification, foolishly identifying himself with the external material body,
cannot change his conception of himself from that of an enjoyer to that of the
enjoyed. Such a person interprets the word tan-mayam to mean that the
worshiper is himself also the worshipable object. Çré Jéva Gosvämé Prabhupäda
has written in his Durga-saìgamané, his commentary on Çré Rüpa Gosvämé
Prabhu's Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu, that ahaìgrahopäsanä, or the process of
worshiping oneself as the Supreme, is a gross misidentification of one's own
self with the Supreme, who is actually one's eternal shelter. The six Gosvämés
have repeatedly clarified this point. But unintelligent persons within the
präkåta-sahajiyä community become influenced by the bogus ideas of the
Mäyävädé philosophers and thus display the deluded misconception that the
worshiper becomes the supreme shelter. Such a hallucination is an aparädha,
an offense against the Lord. Therefore the word tan-maya in this verse should
not be offensively understood to mean that the worshiper becomes equal to his
eternal worshipable object.
TEXT 55
WvamagnyakR(taAeyaAd"Ava,
@itaTaAE ô$d"yae ca ya:
yajataIìr"maAtmaAnama,
@icar"Anmaucyatae ih" s$a:
evam agny-arka-toyädäv
atithau hådaye ca yaù
yajatéçvaram ätmänam
acirän mucyate hi saù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; agni—in fire; arka—the sun; toya—water; ädau—and so on;
atithau—in the guest at ones's home; hådaye—in one's heart; ca—also;
yaù—who; yajati—worships; éçvaram—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
ätmänam—the Supreme Soul; acirät—without delay; mucyate—becomes
liberated; hi—indeed; saù—he.
TRANSLATION
Thus the worshiper of the Supreme Lord should recognize that the
Personality of Godhead is all-pervading and should worship Him through His
presence in fire, the sun, water and other elements, in the heart of the guest
one receives in one's home, and also in one's own heart. In this way the
worshiper will very soon achieve liberation.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Eleventh Canto, Third Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Liberation from the Illusory Energy."
4. Drumila Explains the Incarnations of Godhead to King
Nimi
The various forms of the past, present and future incarnations of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Hari, and the various transcendental
characteristics of each of these avatäras constitute the subject matter of this
chapter.
Even if it were ever possible to count all the particles of dust on the face of
the earth, any attempt to count all the innumerable transcendental qualities of
the unlimited Lord Hari, the foundation of all potencies, would be simply
madness. The Personality of Godhead Näräyaëa created the universe out of
the five elements manufactured by His own mäyä, entered into that universe
in the form of the Supersoul and became known as the Puruña-avatära. He
effects the work of creation in the mode of passion through the personal form
of Brahmä, of protection in the mode of goodness through the form of the Lord
of sacrifice, Viñëu, and of annihilation in the mode of ignorance through the
form of Rudra. Incarnating in the form of Nara-Näräyaëa, the greatest of
sages, from the womb of Mürti, the daughter of Dakña and wife of Dharma, He
preached by His own practical demonstration the science of naiñkarmyam.
When Cupid (Kandarpa) and his hosts were sent to Badarikäçrama by King
Indra, who had become fearful and envious at seeing the austerities of Lord
Nara-Näräyaëa, that best of sages welcomed Cupid as an honored guest. The
pacified Cupid then offered prayers to the Supreme Personality
Nara-Näräyaëa Åñi. By the order of the sage, Cupid returned from there with
Urvaçé and upon presenting himself before Indra related to him everything
that had taken place.
The Personality of Godhead Lord Viñëu has appeared in various partial
incarnations for the benefit of the entire world and has given instructions in
spiritual knowledge in the forms of Haàsa, Dattätreya, Sanaka and the other
Kumära brothers, and Åñabhadeva. In the form of Hayagréva He killed the
demon Madhu and saved all the Vedas. In the avatära of Matsya, the fish, He
protected both the earth and Satyavrata Manu. In the incarnation of Varäha,
the boar, He delivered the earth and destroyed Hiraëyäkña; in that of Kürma,
the tortoise, He carried Mandara Mountain upon His back; and in the form of
Çré Hari He gave liberation to the king of the elephants. The Lord delivered
the Välakhilyas, who had been trapped in the water in a cow's hoofprint, He
delivered Indra from the reaction for murdering a brähmaëa, and He delivered
the wives of the demigods from imprisonment in the palaces of the demoniac
asuras. In the avatära of Nåsiàha, He killed Hiraëyakaçipu. In the reign of
each Manu He kills the demons, fulfills the needs of the demigods and protects
all the planetary systems. In the form of Vämana, the dwarf brähmaëa boy, He
cheated Bali Mahäräja; in the form of Paraçuräma He rid the earth of kñatriyas
twenty-one times; and in the form of Çré Räma He brought the ocean under
His submission and killed Rävaëa. Descending into the Yadu dynasty, He
removed the burden of the earth. In the form of Buddha, by His argumentative
preaching in defiance of the Vedas He bewildered the demons who were
unqualified to perform sacrifices, and at the end of Kali-yuga He will destroy
the çüdra kings in His form of Kalki. In this way the innumerable appearances
and activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Lord Hari are described.
TEXT 1
™aIr"AjaAevaAca
yaAina yaAnaIh" k(maARiNA
yaEyaE=: svacC$nd"janmaiBa:
ca‚e( k(r"Aeita k(taAR vaA
h"ir"staAina “auvantau na:
çré-räjoväca
yäni yänéha karmäëi
yair yaiù svacchanda-janmabhiù
cakre karoti kartä vä
haris täni bruvantu naù
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—the King said; yäni yäni—each; iha—in this world;
karmäëi—of the activities; yaiù yaiù—by each; svacchanda—assumed
independently; janmabhiù—of the appearances; cakre—He performed;
karoti—is performing; kartä—will perform; vä—or; hariù—the Supreme Lord,
Hari; täni—these; bruvantu—please tell; naù—us.
TRANSLATION
King Nimi said: The Supreme Personality of Godhead descends into the
material world by His internal potency and according to His own desire.
Therefore, please tell us about the various pastimes Lord Hari has performed in
the past, is performing now and will perform in this world in the future in His
various incarnations.
PURPORT
In this Fourth Chapter the son of Jayanté, Drumila, will address King Nimi.
The forty-eighth verse of the Third Chapter stated, mürtyäbhimatayätmanaù:
"One should worship the particular form of the Lord most attractive to
oneself." Similarly it was stated in the previous chapter, stavaiù stutvä named
dharim: "One should bow down to Lord Hari after glorifying Him with
prayers." Thus it is assumed that the worshiper has knowledge of the Supreme
Lord's transcendental qualities and pastimes in order to execute the process of
worship previously described. King Nimi, therefore, is eagerly inquiring about
the various incarnations of the Supreme Lord so that he can ascertain which
particular form of the Supreme Lord is most suitable for his personal worship.
It is understood that King Nimi is a Vaiñëava, or devotee, who is trying to
advance in the transcendental loving service of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
It is important to note in this regard that the word abhimata-mürti, meaning
"one's most desirable form," does not indicate that one may concoct a form of
the Lord by one's own whim. Advaitam acyutam anädim ananta-rüpam [Bs.
5.33]. All the forms of the Supreme Lord are anädim, or eternal. Thus there is
no question of concocting a form, because such a concoction would be ädi, or
the origin of the concocted form. Abhimata-mürti means that among the
eternal forms of the Lord one should select that form which most inspires one's
love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such love cannot be imitated,
but it is automatically aroused when one follows the prescribed rules and
regulations given by the bona fide spiritual master and submissively hears these
descriptions of Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 2
™aIåu"imala ovaAca
yaAe vaA @nantasya gAunaAnanantaAna,
@nau‚(imaSyana, s$a tau baAlabauiÜ":
r"jaAMis$a BaUmaegARNAyaetk(TaiÂata,
k(Alaena naEvaAiKalazAil(DaA°a:
çré-drumila uväca
yo vä anantasya gunän anantän
anukramiñyan sa tu bäla-buddhiù
rajäàsi bhümer gaëayet kathaïcit
kälena naiväkhila-çakti-dhämnaù
SYNONYMS
çré-drumilaù uväca—Çré Drumila said; yaù—who; vai—indeed; anantasya—of
the unlimited Lord; guruëä—the transcendental qualities; anantän—which
are unlimited; anukramiñyan—trying to enumerate; saù—he; tu—certainly;
bäla-buddhiù—is a person of childish intelligence; rajäàsi—the particles of
dust; bhümeù—on the earth; gaëayet—one may count; kathaïcit—somehow;
kälena—in time; na eva—but not; akhila-çakti-dhämnaù—(the qualities) of
the reservoir of all potencies.
TRANSLATION
Çré Drumila said: Anyone trying to enumerate or describe fully the
unlimited qualities of the unlimited Supreme Lord has the intelligence of a
foolish child. Even if a great genius could somehow or other, after a
time-consuming endeavor, count all the particles of dust on the surface of the
earth, such a genius could never count the attractive qualities of the Personality
of Godhead, who is the reservoir of all potencies.
PURPORT
In reply to King Nimi's request that the nava-yogendras describe all the
qualities and pastimes of the Lord, Çré Drumila here explains that only the
most foolish person would even attempt such a comprehensive description of
the unlimited qualities and pastimes of the Personality of Godhead. Such
foolish, childish persons, however, are far more advanced than ignorant
materialistic scientists who actually try to describe all knowledge without even
referring to the Personality of Godhead. In other words, although it is
impossible to describe the Lord fully, foolish atheistic scientists attempt to
describe all knowledge without even having reached the most preliminary
knowledge of the Personality of Godhead. Such atheistic persons should be
understood to be shortsighted and of very weak intelligence, despite their
showy material achievements, which ultimately end in great suffering and
destruction. It is said that Lord Anantadeva Himself, with His innumerable
tongues, cannot even begin to vibrate completely the glories of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The example given in this verse is very nice. No
human being can hope to count the number of particles on the surface of the
earth; therefore no one should foolishly try to understand the Supreme Lord
by his own tiny endeavor. One should submissively hear knowledge of God as
it is spoken by God Himself in Bhagavad-gétä, and thus one should gradually be
elevated to the stage of hearing Çrémad-Bhägavatam. According to Caitanya
Mahäprabhu, by tasting a drop of seawater one can get a general idea of the
flavor of the entire ocean. Similarly, by submissively hearing about the
Personality of Godhead one can acquire a qualitative understanding of the
Absolute Truth, although quantitatively one's knowledge can never be
complete.
TEXT 3
BaUtaEyaRd"A paÂaiBar"Atmas$a{íE":
paurM" ivar"AjaM ivar"cayya taismana,
svaAMzAena ivaí": pauç&SaAiBaDaAnama,
@vaApa naAr"AyaNA @Aid"de"va:
bhütair yadä païcabhir ätma-såñöaiù
puraà viräjaà viracayya tasmin
sväàçena viñöaù puruñäbhidhänam
aväpa näräyaëa ädi-devaù
SYNONYMS
bhütaiù—by the material elements; yadä—when; païcabhiù—five (earth,
water, fire, air and ether); ätma-såñöaiù—created by Himself; puram—the
body; viräjam—of the universe in its subtle form; viracayya—having
constructed; tasmin—within that; sva-aàçena—in the manifestation of His
own plenary expansion; viñöaù—entering; puruña-abhidhänam—the name
Puruña; aväpa—assumed; näräyaëaù—Lord Näräyaëa; ädi-devaù—the original
Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
When the primeval Lord Näräyaëa created His universal body out of the
five elements produced from Himself and then entered within that universal
body by His own plenary portion, He thus became known as the Puruña.
PURPORT
The words bhütaiù païcabhiù in this verse refer to the five gross material
elements—earth, water, fire, air and sky—which form the basic building
blocks of the material world. When the conditioned living entity enters within
these five elements, consciousness becomes manifest, along with the functions
of the mind and intelligence. Unfortunately, the consciousness manifest under
the modes of material nature is governed by ahaìkära, or false ego, in which
the living entity wrongly considers himself the enjoyer of the material
elements. Although the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Puruñottama, enjoys
His pure transcendental existence in the spiritual sky, the material elements
are also meant for His enjoyment, through the process of yajïa, or sacrifice.
This material world is called Devé-dhäma, or the abode of the illusory energy of
the Lord, Mäyä-devé. The Brahma-saàhitä explains that the Supreme Person is
not at all attracted to His inferior energy, mäyä, but when the material
creation is used in the devotional service of the Lord, the Lord becomes
attracted by the devotion and sacrifice of the living entities, and thus,
indirectly, He is also the enjoyer of the material world.
We should not think that the pastimes of Lord Näräyaëa as the Supersoul
and creator of this universe are on a lower spiritual level than Näräyaëa's
eternal pastimes in the spiritual world. Were Lord Näräyaëa in any way to
diminish His transcendental bliss and knowledge in His activities of material
creation, He would have to be considered a conditioned soul, affected by
contact with the illusory potency. But since Lord Näräyaëa is eternally aloof
from the influence of mäyä, His activities as the Supersoul of this universe are
exactly on the same transcendental level as His activities in the spiritual
world. All the activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are part and
parcel of His unlimited spiritual pastimes.
TEXT 4
yatk(Aya WSa Bauvana‡ayas$aiªavaezAAe
yasyaein‰"yaEstanauBa{taAmauBayaein‰"yaAiNA
ÁaAnaM svata: ìs$anataAe balamaAeja wRh"A
s$aÔvaAid"iBa: isTaitalayaAeà"va @Aid"k(taAR
yat-käya eña bhuvana-traya-sanniveço
yasyendriyais tanu-bhåtäm ubhayendriyäëi
jïänaà svataù çvasanato balam oja éhä
sattvädibhiù sthiti-layodbhava ädi-kartä
SYNONYMS
yat-käye—within whose body; eñaù—this; bhuvana-traya—of the three
planetary systems making up the universe; sanniveçaù—the elaborate
arrangement; yasya—of whom; indriyaiù—by the senses; tanu-bhåtäm—of the
embodied living beings; ubhaya-indriyäëi—both kinds of senses
(knowledge-acquiring and active); jïänam—knowledge; svataù—directly from
Him; çvasanataù—from His breathing; balam—strength of the body;
ojaù—strength of the senses; éhä—activities; sattva-ädibhiù—by nature's
modes of goodness, passion and ignorance; sthiti—in maintenance;
laya—destruction; udbhave—and creation; ädi-kartä—the original doer.
TRANSLATION
Within His body are elaborately arranged the three planetary systems of this
universe. His transcendental senses generate the knowledge-acquiring and
active senses of all embodied beings. His consciousness generates conditioned
knowledge, and His powerful breathing produces the bodily strength, sensory
power and conditioned activities of the embodied souls. He is the prime mover,
through the agency of the material modes of goodness, passion and ignorance.
And thus the universe is created, maintained and annihilated.
PURPORT
When a conditioned soul becomes completely exhausted by his strenuous
activities, or when he is overcome by disease, death or fear, he loses all power
to manifest practical knowledge or activities. Thus we should understand that
independent of the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead we can
neither work nor cultivate knowledge. By the mercy of the Personality of
Godhead the conditioned soul acquires a material body, which is a perverted
reflection of the unlimited spiritual body of the Lord. Thus the living entity
engages in ignorant materialistic activities for society, friendship and love. But
the entire program suddenly vanishes with the unforeseen dissolution of the
material body. Similarly, our material knowledge is always subject to become
null and void within an instant, since the material nature is itself constantly
changing. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the prime mover behind the
birth, maintenance and destruction of the universe. And the living entity
should try to understand that Personality of Godhead who has given him so
much facility for illusion. The Personality of Godhead actually wants the
conditioned soul to surrender to Him and regain an eternal life of bliss and
knowledge at the Lord's side. The conditioned soul should reason, "If the Lord
is giving me so much facility to merge into ignorance, surely He will give even
more facility to come out of this ignorance if I humbly follow His direction
without foolish speculations."
This verse describes Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, the second phase of the puruña
incarnations of the Lord. This Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, who is glorified in the
Puruña-sükta prayers, expands Himself as the Supersoul to enter the heart of
every living being. Through chanting the holy names of the Lord—Hare
Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma
Räma, Hare Hare—even in this degraded age one can find the Supreme Lord
within one's heart. The Lord is a person as much as we are, but He is
unlimited. Still, a personal loving relationship exists between the tiny living
entity and the unlimited Supreme Lord. In consideration of this personal
relationship, bhakti-yoga is the only suitable process by which to come to the
ultimate understanding of our constitutional position as eternal servants of the
Supreme Lord.
TEXT 5
@Ad"AvaBaUcC$taDa{taI r"jas$aAsya s$agAeR
ivaSNAu: isTataAE ‚(taupaitaiãR"jaDamaRs$aetau:
ç&‰"Ae'pyayaAya tamas$aA pauç&Sa: s$a @Aâ
wtyauà"vaisTaitalayaA: s$atataM ‘ajaAs$au
ädäv abhüc chata-dhåté rajasäsya sarge
viñëuù sthitau kratu-patir dvija-dharma-setuù
rudro 'pyayäya tamasä puruñaù sa ädya
ity udbhava-sthiti-layäù satataà prajäsu
SYNONYMS
ädau—in the beginning; abhüt—He became; çata-dhåtiù—Lord Brahmä;
rajasä—by the material mode of passion; asya—of this universe; sarge—in the
creation; viñëuù—Lord Viñëu; sthitau—in maintenance; kratu-patiù—the Lord
of sacrifice; dvija—of the twice-born brähmaëas; dharma—of the religious
duties; setuù—the protector; rudraù—Lord Çiva; apyayäya—for annihilation;
tamasä—by the mode of ignorance; puruñaù—the Supreme Person; saù—He;
ädyaù—original; iti—thus; udbhava-sthiti-layäù—creation, maintenance and
destruction; satatam—always; prajäsu—among created beings.
TRANSLATION
In the beginning, the original Supreme Personality manifested the form of
Brahmä through the material mode of passion in order to create this universe.
The Lord manifested His form as Viñëu, the Lord of sacrifice and protector of
the twice-born brähmaëas and their religious duties, to maintain the universe.
And when the universe is to be annihilated the same Supreme Lord employs the
material mode of ignorance and manifests the form of Rudra The created living
beings are thus always subject to the forces of creation, maintenance and
destruction.
PURPORT
In the previous verse the Supreme Personality of Godhead was described as
ädi-kartä, the original person responsible for the creation, maintenance and
annihilation of the material world. According to Çrédhara Svämé, ädi-kartä, or
"the original doer," implies subsequent creators, maintainers and annihilators.
Otherwise there would be no meaning to the word ädi, or "original." Therefore
this verse describes that the Absolute Truth expands Himself into the
guëävatäras, or incarnations who carry out the creation, maintenance and
annihilation of the universe through the modes of passion, goodness and
ignorance respectively.
It is significant here that although this verse mentions creation through the
material mode of passion and annihilation through the material mode of
ignorance, it does not mention maintenance by Viñëu through the material
mode of goodness. That is because Viñëu is viçuddha-sattva, or existing on the
platform of unlimited transcendental goodness. Although Lord Çiva and Lord
Brahmä are somewhat affected by their prescribed duties as superintendents of
the modes of nature, Lord Viñëu is viçuddha-sattva, completely beyond
contamination even by the material mode of goodness. As described in the
Vedas, na tasya käryaà karaëaà ca vidyate: the Lord has no occupational duty.
Whereas Lord Çiva and Lord Brahmä are understood to be servants of the
Lord, Viñëu is completely transcendental.
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, Viñëu, described in this verse as
kratu-patiù, the Lord of sacrifice, is understood to have appeared in a previous
age as the incarnation Suyajïa, the son of Prajäpati Ruci. Whereas Brahmä
and Çiva faithfully engage in service to the Supreme Lord, Viñëu is the
Supreme Lord Himself, and therefore His activities of maintaining the
brähmaëas and religious principles, as mentioned in this verse
(dvija-dharma-setuù), are not occupational duties but lélä. So in addition to
being a guëävatära, Viñëu is also a lélävatära, according to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé.
The Mahäbhärata (Çänti-parva) describes the birth of Lord Brahmä from the
lotus flower emanating from Viñëu and the subsequent birth of Lord Çiva from
the angry eyes of Lord Brahmä. Viñëu, however, is the self-manifested
Personality of Godhead who enters the material universe by His own internal
potency, as stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (3.8.15):
tal loka-padmaà sa u eva viñëuù
prävéviçat sarva-guëävabhäsam
In conclusion, Lord Viñëu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the
supreme controller whose personal form is full of eternal existence, knowledge
and bliss, who is beginningless but is the beginning of everything, who is
known as Govinda, and who is the original cause of all causes, as stated in
Brahma-saàhitä. Still, that same eternal Lord manifests Himself as Brahmä
and Çiva in the sense that the primeval controllers Brahmä and Çiva manifest
the potency and supreme will of the Lord, although they themselves are not
supreme.
TEXT 6
DamaRsya d"ºaäu"ih"tayaRjainaí" maUtyaA<
naAr"AyaNAAe nar" [%iSa‘avar": ‘azAAnta:
naESk(myaRlaºaNAmauvaAca cacaAr" k(maR
yaAe'âAipa caAsta [%iSavayaRinaSaeivataAx.~i„a:
dharmasya dakña-duhitary ajaniñöa mürtyäà
näräyaëo nara åñi-pravaraù praçäntaù
naiñkarmya-lakñaëam uväca cacära karma
yo 'dyäpi cästa åñi-varya-niñevitäìghriù
SYNONYMS
dharmasya—(the wife) of Dharma; dakña-duhitari—by the daughter of Dakña;
ajaniñöa—was born; mürtyäm—by Mürti; näräyaëaù naraù—Nara-Näräyaëa;
åñi-pravaraù—the best of sages; praçäntaù—perfectly peaceful;
naiñkarmya-lakñaëam—characterized by the cessation of all material work;
uväca—He spoke; cacära—and performed; karma—the duties; yaù—who;
adya api—even today; ca—also; äste—is living; åñi-varya—by the greatest
sages; niñevita—being served; aìghriù—His feet.
TRANSLATION
Nara-Näräyaëa Åñi, who is perfectly peaceful and is the best of sages, was
born as the son of Dharma and his wife Mürti, the daughter of Dakña.
Nara-Näräyaëa Åñi taught the devotional service of the Lord, by which material
work ceases, and He Himself perfectly practiced this knowledge. He is living
even today, His lotus feet served by the greatest of saintly persons.
PURPORT
It is understood that Nara-Näräyaëa Åñi spoke transcendental knowledge to
great saintly persons such as Närada Muni. On the basis of these teachings,
Närada was able to describe naiñkarmyam, or the devotional service of the
Lord, which eradicates material work, as mentioned in Çrémad-Bhägavatam
(1.3.8): tantraà sätvatam äcañöa naiñkarmyaà karmaëäà yataù. The
ätma-svarüpa, or eternal form of the living entity, is devotional service to the
Personality of Godhead. But our perception of our eternal form is covered by a
material concept of life, just as our normal understanding of our life is covered
by a dream. Naiñkarmyam, or the cessation of material work, is possible only by
the devotional service of the Lord, as stated by Närada Muni himself:
naiñkarmyam apy acyuta-bhäva-varjitaà na çobhate jïänam alaà niraïjanam
(SB 1.5.12). The process of transforming ordinary karma into naiñkarmya, or
transcendental work, is summarized by Çréla Prabhupäda in his commentary on
this verse spoken by Närada Muni. "Fruitive work, in which almost all people
in general are engaged, is always painful either in the beginning or at the end.
It can be fruitful only when made subservient to the devotional service of the
Lord. In the Bhagavad-gétä also it is confirmed that the result of such fruitive
work may be offered for the service of the Lord, otherwise it leads to material
bondage. The bona fide enjoyer of the fruitive work is the Personality of
Godhead, and thus when it is engaged for the sense gratification of the living
beings, it becomes an acute source of trouble." According to the Matsya Puräëa
(3.10), Dharma, the father of Nara-Näräyaëa Åñi, was born from the right
breast of Brahmä and later married thirteen of the daughters of Prajäpati
Dakña. The Lord Himself appeared from the womb of Mürti-devé.
TEXT 7
wn‰"Ae ivazAÆÿYa mama DaAma ijaGa{ºataIita
k(AmaM nyayauÈÿ s$agANAM s$a bad"yauRpaAKyam
gAtvaAps$ar"AegANAvas$antas$aumand"vaAtaE:
ñI‘aeºaNAeSauiBar"ivaDyad"tanmaih"Áa:
indro viçaìkya mama dhäma jighåkñatéti
kämaà nyayuìkta sa-gaëaà sa badary-upäkhyam
gatväpsaro-gaëa-vasanta-sumanda-vätaiù
stré-prekñaëeñubhir avidhyad atan-mahi-jïaù
SYNONYMS
indraù—Lord Indra; viçaìkya—fearing; mama—my; dhäma—kingdom;
jighåkñati—He wants to devour; iti—thinking thus; kämam—Cupid;
nyayuìkta—he engaged; sa-gaëam—with his associates; saù—he (Cupid);
badaré-upäkhyam—to the äçrama named Badarikä; gatvä—going;
apsaraù-gaëa—with the heavenly society girls; vasanta—the spring season;
su-manda-vätaiù—and the gentle breezes; stré-prekñaëa—(consisting of) the
glances of women; iñubhiù—with his arrows; avidhyat—attempted to pierce;
atat-mahi-jïaù—not knowing His greatness.
TRANSLATION
King Indra became fearful, thinking that Nara-Näräyaëa Åñi would become
very powerful by His severe penances and seize Indra's heavenly kingdom.
Thus Indra, not knowing the transcendental glories of the incarnation of the
Lord, sent Cupid and his associates to the Lord's residence in Badarikäçrama.
As the charming breezes of spring created a most sensuous atmosphere, Cupid
himself attacked the Lord with arrows in the form of the irresistible glances of
beautiful women.
PURPORT
This verse and the following nine verses illustrate the Personality of
Godhead's opulence of supreme renunciation. The word atan-mahi-jïaù, "not
understanding the glories of the Lord," indicates that King Indra was placing
the Personality of Godhead on the same level as he himself, considering the
Lord an ordinary enjoyer who would be attracted by mundane sex life. Indra's
plot to cause the falldown of Nara-Näräyaëa Åñi could not affect the Lord, but
it reveals the shortsightedness of Indra himself. Because Indra is attached to
his heavenly kingdom, he took it for granted that the Supreme Lord was
performing austerities to acquire such flickering phantasmagoria as the
kingdom of heaven (tridaça-pür äkäça-puñpäyate).
TEXT 8
ivaÁaAya zA‚(k{(tama‚(mamaAid"de"va:
‘aAh" ‘ah"sya gAtaivasmaya WjamaAnaAna,
maA BaEivaRBaAe mad"na maAç&ta de"vavaDvaAe
gA{õ"Ita naAe bailamazAUnyaimamaM ku(ç&Dvama,
vijïäya çakra-kåtam akramam ädi-devaù
präha prahasya gata-vismaya ejamänän
mä bhair vibho madana märuta deva-vadhvo
gåhëéta no balim açünyam imaà kurudhvam
SYNONYMS
vijïäya—understanding perfectly; çakra—by Indra; kåtam—committed;
akramam—the offense; ädi-devaù—the original Personality of Godhead;
präha—He spoke; prahasya—laughing; gata-vismayaù—free from pride;
ejamänän—to those who were trembling; mä bhaiù—please have no fear;
vibho—O mighty one; madana—Cupid; märuta—O god of the wind;
deva-vadhvaù—O wives of the demigods; gåhëéta—please accept; naù—from
Us; balim—these gifts; açünyam—not empty; imam—this (äçrama);
kurudhvam—please make.
TRANSLATION
The primeval Lord, understanding the offense committed by Indra, did not
become proud. Instead He spoke laughingly as follows to Cupid and his
followers, who were trembling before Him: "Do not fear, O mighty Madana, O
wind-god and wives of the demigods. Rather, please accept these gifts I am
offering you and kindly sanctify My äçrama by your presence."
PURPORT
The word gata-vismayaù, or "free from false pride," is very significant. If one
becomes proud by performing severe penances, such penances are considered
material. One should not think, "I am a great, austere personality." Çré
Nara-Näräyaëa could immediately understand the foolishness of Indra, and
thus He was amused by the whole situation. Cupid and the heavenly women,
understanding their great offense, were trembling before Nara-Näräyaëa in
fear of receiving a powerful curse. But the Lord, exhibiting most sublime
saintly behavior, reassured them by saying, mä bhaiù—"Don't worry about
it"—and actually offered them nice prasädam and articles of worship. "If you
do not give Me the opportunity to act as host to the demigods and other
respectable personalities," He said, "what will be the use of My äçrama? My
äçrama will be void without the opportunity to receive respectable
personalities such as you."
Similarly, the International Society for Krishna Consciousness is
establishing beautiful centers in all the major cities of the world. In some of
these centers, such as those in Los Angeles, Bombay, London, Paris and
Melbourne, the Society has established very gorgeous preaching äçramas. But
the Vaiñëavas who live in these beautiful buildings feel that the buildings are
void if guests do not come to hear about Kåñëa and chant His holy name. Thus,
one may establish a beautiful äçrama not for one's personal sense gratification
but to execute Kåñëa consciousness peacefully and encourage others to take to
Kåñëa consciousness also.
TEXT 9
wtTaM “auvatyaBayade" nar"de"va de"vaA:
s$a˜aIx"na•aizAr"s$a: s$aGa{NAM tamaUcau:
naEtaiã"BaAe tvaiya pare"'ivak{(tae ivaica‡aM
svaAr"AmaDaIr"inak(r"AnatapaAd"paáe
itthaà bruvaty abhaya-de nara-deva deväù
sa-vréòa-namra-çirasaù sa-ghåëaà tam ücuù
naitad vibho tvayi pare 'vikåte vicitraà
sväräma-dhéra-nikaränata-päda-padme
SYNONYMS
ittham—in this way; bruvati—when He had spoken; abhaya-de—the giver of
fearlessness; nara-deva—O King (Nimi); deväù—the demigods (Cupid and his
associates); sa-vréòa—out of shame; namra—bowed; çirasaù—with their heads;
sa-ghåëam—begging for compassion; tam—to Him; ücuù—they said; na—is
not; etat—this; vibho—O almighty Lord; tvayi—for You; pare—the Supreme;
avikåte—unchanging; vicitram—anything surprising; sva-äräma—of those who
are self-satisfied; dhéra—and those who are sober-minded; nikara—by great
numbers; änata—bowed down to; päda-padme—whose lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Nimi, when Nara-Näräyaëa Åñi thus spoke, eradicating the
fear of the demigods, they bowed their heads with shame and addressed the
Lord as follows, to invoke His compassion: Our dear Lord, You are always
transcendental, beyond the reach of illusion, and therefore You are forever
changeless. Your causeless compassion toward us, despite our great offense, is
not at all unusual in You, since innumerable great sages who are self-satisfied
and free from anger and false pride bow down humbly at Your lotus feet.
PURPORT
The demigods said, "Our dear Lord, although ordinary living entities such
as the demigods and ordinary men are always disturbed by material pride and
anger, You are always transcendental. Therefore it is not surprising that we
fallible demigods could not appreciate Your glories."
TEXT 10
tvaAM s$aevataAM s$aur"k{(taA bah"vaAe'ntar"AyaA:
svaAEk(Ae ivalaÎÿYa par"maM ˜ajataAM padM" tae
naAnyasya baihR"iSa balaInd"d"ta: svaBaAgAAna,
DaÔae padM" tvamaivataA yaid" iva£amaUi©aR
tväà sevatäà sura-kåtä bahavo 'ntaräyäù
svauko vilaìghya paramaà vrajatäà padaà te
nänyasya barhiñi balén dadataù sva-bhägän
dhatte padaà tvam avitä yadi vighna-mürdhni
SYNONYMS
tväm—You; sevatäm—for those who are serving; sura-kåtäù—made by the
demigods; bahavaù—many; antaräyäù—disturbances; sva-okaù—their own
abode (the planets of the demigods); vilaìghya—crossing beyond;
paramam—the supreme; vrajatäm—who are going; padam—to the abode;
te—Your; na—there are not such; anyasya—for another; barhiñi—in ritual
sacrifices; balén—offerings; dadataù—for one who is giving; sva-bhägän—the
own shares (of the demigods); dhatte—(the devotee) places; padam—his foot;
tvam—You; avitä—the protector; yadi—because; vighna—of the disturbance;
mürdhni—upon the head.
TRANSLATION
The demigods place many obstacles on the path of those who worship You to
transcend the temporary abodes of the demigods and reach Your supreme abode.
Those who offer the demigods their assigned shares in sacrificial performances
encounter no such obstacles. But because You are the direct protector of Your
devotee, he is able to step over the head of whatever obstacle the demigods place
before him.
PURPORT
The demigods, headed by Kämadeva, or Cupid, recognizing their offense at
the lotus feet of the Personality of Godhead, Nara-Näräyaëa Åñi, here point
out the insignificant position of the demigods in relation to the Supreme Lord.
Just as a farmer must pay a specific percentage of his agricultural profit to the
king or political head as tax money, all human beings must offer a percentage
of their material wealth to the demigods in sacrifice. In Bhagavad-gétä,
however, the Lord explains that the demigods are also His servants and it is He
Himself who awards all benedictions, through the agency of the demigods.
Mayaiva vihitän hi tän. Although a Vaiñëava, or devotee of the Lord, has no
need to worship the demigods, the demigods, being proud of their exalted
material position, sometimes resent the exclusive devotion of the Vaiñëava to
the Lord and thus try to cause the devotee to fall down, as described in this
verse (sura-kåtä bahavo 'ntaräyäù). But the demigods here point out that Kåñëa
is directly the protector of His devotees. Therefore, so-called impediments
become stimuli for further spiritual advancement for a sincere devotee.
The demigods here state, "We thought, our dear Lord, that we could disturb
Your consciousness by our foolish tricks. But by Your mercy even Your
devotees pay little regard to us, so why should You take our foolish behavior
seriously?" The word yadi here is used to indicate the certainty that Kåñëa is
always the protector of His surrendered devotees. Although there may be
many obstacles on the path of the sincere devotee who is preaching the glories
of the Lord, such obstacles increase the determination of the devotee.
Therefore, according to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, the continuous obstacles presented
by the demigods form a kind of ladder or stairway upon which the devotee
steadily progresses back to the kingdom of God. A similar verse appears in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.2.33):
tathä na te mädhava tävakäù kvacid
bhraçyanti märgät tvayi baddha-sauhådäù
tvayäbhiguptä vicaranti nirbhayä
vinäyakänékapa-mürdhasu prabho
"O Mädhava, Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord of the goddess of fortune,
if devotees completely in love with You sometimes fall from the path of
devotion, they do not fall like nondevotees, for You still protect them. Thus
they fearlessly traverse the heads of their opponents and continue to progress
in devotional service."
TEXT 11
ºauÔa{q%.i‡ak(AlagAuNAmaAç&tajaEù"zAESNAAna,
@smaAnapaAr"jalaDaInaitataIyaR ke(icata,
‚(AeDasya yaAinta ivaP(lasya vazAM pade" gAAer,"
maÀainta äu"êr"tapaê va{TaAets$a{jainta
kñut-tåö-tri-käla-guëa-märuta-jaihva-çaiñëän
asmän apära-jaladhén atitérya kecit
krodhasya yänti viphalasya vaçaà pade gor
majjanti duçcara-tapaç ca våthotsåjanti
SYNONYMS
kñut—hunger; tåö—thirst; tri-käla-guëa—the manifestations of the three
phases of time (such as heat and cold, rain and so on); märuta—wind;
jaihva—enjoyment of the tongue; çaiñëän—and of the genitals;
asmän—ourselves (in all these forms); apära—limitless; jala-dhén—oceans;
atitérya—having crossed over; kecit—some persons; krodhasya—of anger;
yänti—they come; viphalasya—which is fruitless; vaçam—under the sway;
pade—in the foot(print); goù—of a cow; majjanti—they drown;
duçcara—difficult to execute; tapaù—their austerities; ca—and;
våthä—without any good purpose; utsåjanti—they throw away.
TRANSLATION
Some men practice severe penances to cross beyond our influence, which is
like an immeasurable ocean with endless waves of hunger, thirst, heat, cold and
the other conditions brought about by the passing of time, such as the sensuous
wind and the urges of the tongue and sex organs. Nevertheless, although
crossing this ocean of sense gratification through severe penances, such persons
foolishly drown in a cow's hoofprint when conquered by useless anger. Thus
they exhaust the benefit of their difficult austerities in vain.
PURPORT
Those who do not accept the devotional service of the Supreme Lord can be
considered in two categories. Those engaged in sense gratification are easily
conquered by the demigods through various weapons such as hunger, thirst,
sexual desire, lamentation for the past and vain hoping for the future. Such
materialistic fools, infatuated with the material world, are easily controlled by
the demigods, who are the ultimate supplying agents of sense gratification. But
according to Çrédhara Svämé, persons who attempt to subdue the desires of the
material senses and thus avoid the control of the demigods without
surrendering to the Supreme Lord are even more foolish than the sense
gratifiers. Although crossing the ocean of sense gratification, those who
perform severe penances without service to the Lord eventually drown in tiny
puddles of anger. One who simply performs material penances does not
actually purify his heart. By one's material determination one may restrict the
activities of the senses although one's heart is still filled with material desires.
The practical result of this is krodha, or anger. We have seen artificial
performers of penance who have become very bitter and angry through denial
of the senses. Being indifferent to the Supreme Lord, such persons do not
achieve ultimate liberation, nor can they enjoy material sense gratification;
rather, they become angry, and through cursing others or enjoying false pride
they uselessly exhaust the results of their painful austerities. It is understood
that when a yogé curses he diminishes the mystic power he has accumulated.
Thus, anger gives neither liberation nor material sense gratification but merely
burns up all the results of material penances and austerities. Being useless, such
anger is compared to a useless puddle found in a cow's hoofprint. Thus after
crossing over the ocean of sense gratification the great yogés who are
indifferent to the Supreme Lord drown in puddles of anger. Although the
demigods admit that the devotees of the Lord actually conquer the miseries of
material life, it is understood here that a similar result is not to be obtained by
so-called yogés who are not interested in devotional service to the Supreme
Lord.
TEXT 12
wita ‘agA{NAtaAM taeSaAM
iñyaAe'tyaàu"tad"zARnaA:
d"zARyaAmaAs$a zAu™aUSaAM
svaicaRtaA: ku(vaRtaIivaRBau:
iti pragåëatäà teñäà
striyo 'ty-adbhuta-darçanäù
darçayäm äsa çuçrüñäà
sv-arcitäù kurvatér vibhuù
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; pragåëatäm—who were offering praise; teñäm—in their presence;
striyaù—women; ati-adbhuta—very wonderful; darçanäù—in appearance;
darçayäm äsa—He showed; çuçrüñäm—reverential service; su-arcitäù—nicely
decorated; kurvatéù—performing; vibhuù—the almighty Lord.
TRANSLATION
While the demigods were thus praising the Supreme Lord, the all-powerful
Lord suddenly manifested before their eyes many women, who were
astonishingly gorgeous, decorated with fine clothes and ornaments, and all
faithfully engaging in the Lord's service.
PURPORT
Lord Nara-Näräyaëa showed His causeless mercy toward the demigods by
relieving them of their false prestige. Although the demigods were proud of
their personal beauty and female companions, the Lord showed that He was
already being adequately served by innumerable gorgeous females, each of
whom was far more beautiful than any female companion imagined by the
demigods. The Lord manifested such uniquely attractive women through His
own mystic potency.
TEXT 13
tae de"vaAnaucar"A ä{"î"A
iñya: ™aIir"va è&ipaNAI:
gAnDaena maumauò"staAs$aAM
è&paAEd"AyaRh"tai™aya:
te devänucarä dåñövä
striyaù çrér iva rüpiëéù
gandhena mumuhus täsäà
rüpaudärya-hata-çriyaù
SYNONYMS
te—they; deva-anucaräù—the followers of the demigods; dåñövä—seeing;
striyaù—these women; çréù—the goddess of fortune; iva—as if; rüpiëéù—in
person; gandhena—by the fragrance; mumuhuù—they became bewildered;
täsäm—of the women; rüpa—of the beauty; audärya—by the magnificence;
hata—ruined; çriyaù—their opulence.
TRANSLATION
When the followers of the demigods gazed upon the fascinating mystic
beauty of the women created by Nara-Näräyaëa Åñi and smelled the fragrance
of their bodies, the minds of these followers became bewildered. Indeed, upon
seeing the beauty and magnificence of such women, the representatives of the
demigods were completely diminished in their own opulence.
TEXT 14
taAnaAh" de"vade"vaezA:
‘aNAtaAna, ‘ah"s$aiªava
@As$aAmaek(tamaAM va{x.~DvaM
s$avaNAA< svagARBaUSaNAAma,
tän äha deva-deveçaù
praëatän prahasann iva
äsäm ekatamäà våìdhvaà
sa-varëäà svarga-bhüñaëäm
SYNONYMS
tän—to them; äha—said; deva-deva-éçaù—the Supreme Lord of all lords;
praëatän—who had bowed down to Him; prahasan iva—almost smiling;
äsäm—of these women; ekatamäm—one; våìdhvam—please choose;
sa-varëäm—suitable; svarga—of heaven; bhüñaëäm—the ornament.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord of lords then smiled slightly and told the representatives
of heaven, who were bowing down before Him, "Please choose one of these
women, whomever you find suitable for you. She will become the ornament of
the heavenly planets."
PURPORT
Nara-Näräyaëa Åñi was almost laughing upon seeing the defeat of the
demigods. However, being extremely grave, He did not actually laugh.
Although the demigods might have thought, "We are simply low-class fools in
comparison to these women," the Lord encouraged them to choose one of the
women, whomever they considered equal in character to themselves. The
beauty thus selected would become the ornament of heaven.
TEXT 15
@AeimatyaAde"zAmaAd"Aya
natvaA taM s$aur"vaind"na:
ovaRzAImaps$ar":™aeï"AM
paur"s$k{(tya id"vaM yayau:
om ity ädeçam ädäya
natvä taà sura-vandinaù
urvaçém apsaraù-çreñöhäà
puraskåtya divaà yayuù
SYNONYMS
om iti—chanting oà to signify agreement; ädeçam—His order; ädäya—taking;
natvä—offering obeisances; tam—to Him; sura—of the demigods;
vandinaù—those servants; urvaçém—Urvaçi; apsaraù-çreñöhäm—the best of the
Apsaräs; puraù-kåtya—placing in front (out of respect); divam—to heaven;
yayuù—they returned.
TRANSLATION
Vibrating the sacred syllable oà, the servants of the demigods selected
Urvaçé, the best of the Apsaräs. Placing her in front of them out of respect,
they returned to the heavenly planets.
TEXT 16
wn‰"AyaAnamya s$ad"is$a
Za{NvataAM i‡aid"vaAEk(s$aAma,
OcaunaARr"AyaNAbalaM
zA‚(sta‡aAs$a ivaismata:
indräyänamya sadasi
çåëvatäà tri-divaukasäm
ücur näräyaëa-balaà
çakras taträsa vismitaù
SYNONYMS
indräya—to Lord Indra; änamya—bowing down; sadasi—in his assembly;
çåëvatäm—while they were listening; tri-diva—the three heavens;
okasäm—whose residents; ücuù—they told; näräyaëa-balam—about the
strength of Lord Näräyaëa; çakraù—Indra; tatra—at that; äsa—became;
vismitaù—surprised.
TRANSLATION
The servants of the demigods reached the assembly of Indra, and thus, while
all the residents of the three heavens listened, they explained to Indra the
supreme power of Näräyaëa. When Indra heard of Nara-Näräyaëa Åñi and
became aware of his offense, he was both frightened and astonished.
TEXT 17
hM"s$asvaè&pyavad"d"cyauta @AtmayaAegAM
d"Ôa: ku(maAr" [%SaBaAe BagAvaAna, ipataA na:
ivaSNAu: izAvaAya jagAtaAM k(layaAvaitaNARs$a,
taenaAô$taA maDauiBad"A ™autayaAe h"yaAsyae
haàsa-svarüpy avadad acyuta ätma-yogaà
dattaù kumära åñabho bhagavän pitä naù
viñëuù çiväya jagatäà kalayävatirëas
tenähåtä madhu-bhidä çrutayo hayäsye
SYNONYMS
haàsa-svarüpé—assuming His eternal form of the swan incarnation;
avadat—He spoke; acyutaù—the infallible Supreme Personality of Godhead;
ätma-yogam—self-realization; dattaù—Dattätreya; kumäraù—the Kumära
brothers, headed by Sanaka; åñabhaù—Åñabhadeva; bhagavän—the Lord;
pitä—father; naù—our; viñëuù—Lord Viñëu; çiväya—for the welfare;
jagatäm—of all the world; kalayä—by His secondary personal expansions;
avatérëaù—descending to this world; tena—by Him; ähåtäù—were brought
back (from the depths of Pätälaloka); madhu-bhidä—by the killer of the demon
Madhu; çrutayaù—the original texts of the Vedas; haya-äsye—in the
horse-headed incarnation.
TRANSLATION
The infallible Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, has descended into
this world by His various partial incarnations such as Lord Haàsa [the swan],
Dattätreya, the four Kumäras and our own father, the mighty Åñabhadeva. By
such incarnations, the Lord teaches the science of self-realization for the benefit
of the whole universe. In His appearance as Hayagréva He killed the demon
Madhu and thus brought the Vedas back from the hellish planet Pätälaloka.
PURPORT
It is stated in the Skanda Puräëa that the Lord of the universe, Hari
Himself, once appeared in the form of a young brahmacäré named Kumära and
spoke transcendental knowledge to Sanat-kumära.
TEXT 18
gAuæaAe'pyayae manauir"laAESaDayaê maAtsyae
‚(AExe" h"taAe id"itaja oÜ"r"taAmBas$a: ºmaAma,
k(AEmaeR Da{taAe'i‰"r"ma{taAenmaTanae svapa{ïe"
ƒaAh"At‘apaªaimaBar"AjamamauÂad"AtaRma,
gupto 'pyaye manur ilauñadhayaç ca mätsye
krauòe hato diti-ja uddharatämbhasaù kñmäm
kaurme dhåto 'drir amåtonmathane sva-påñöhe
grähät prapannam ibha-räjam amuïcad ärtam
SYNONYMS
guptaù—was protected; apyaye—during the annihilation; manuù—Vaivasvata
Manu; ilä—the earth planet; oñadhayaù—the herbs; ca—and; mätsye—in His
incarnation as a fish; krauòe—in His incarnation as a boar; hataù—was killed;
diti-jaù—the demoniac son of Diti, Hiraëyäkña; uddharatä—by Him who was
delivering; ambhasaù—from the waters; kñmäm—the earth; kaurme—as a
tortoise; dhåtaù—was held; adriù—the mountain (Mandara);
amåta-unmathane—when the nectar was being churned (by the demons and
demigods together); sva-påñöhe—upon His own back; grähät—from the
crocodile; prapannam—surrendered; ibha-räjam—the king of the elephants;
amuïcat—He freed; ärtam—distressed.
TRANSLATION
In His appearance as a fish, the Lord protected Satyavrata Manu, the earth
and her valuable herbs. He protected them from the waters of annihilation. As a
boar, the Lord killed Hiraëyäkña, the son of Diti, while delivering the earth
from the universal waters. And as a tortoise, He lifted Mandara Mountain on
His back so that nectar could be churned from the ocean. The Lord saved the
surrendered king of the elephants, Gajendra, who was suffering terrible distress
from the grips of a crocodile.
TEXT 19
s$aMstaunvataAe inapaitataAna, ™amaNAAna{SaI%Mê
zA‚M( ca va{‡avaDatastamais$a ‘aivaí"ma,
de"vaiñyaAe's$aur"gA{he" ipaih"taA @naATaA
ja£ae's$aure"n‰"maBayaAya s$ataAM na{is$aMhe"
saàstunvato nipatitän çramaëän åñéàç ca
çakraà ca våtra-vadhatas tamasi praviñöam
deva-striyo 'sura-gåhe pihitä anäthä
jaghne 'surendram abhayäya satäà nåsiàhe
SYNONYMS
saàstunvataù—who were offering prayers; nipatitän—fallen (into the water in
a cow's hoofprint); çramaëän—the ascetics; åñén—sages (the Välakhilyas);
ca—and; çakram—Indra; ca—and; våtra-vadhataù—from killing Våträsura;
tamasi—in darkness; praviñöam—absorbed; deva-striyaù—the wives of the
demigods; asura-gåhe—in the palace of the demons; pihitäù—imprisoned;
anäthäù—helpless; jaghne—He killed; asura-indram—the king of the demons,
Hiraëyakaçipu; abhayäya—for the sake of giving fearlessness; satäm—to the
saintly devotees; nåsiàhe—in the incarnation of Nåsiàha.
TRANSLATION
The Lord also delivered the tiny ascetic sages called the Välakhilyas when
they fell into the water in a cow's hoofprint and Indra was laughing at them.
The Lord then saved Indra when Indra was covered by darkness due to the
sinful reaction for killing Våträsura. When the wives of the demigods were
trapped in the palace of the demons without any shelter, the Lord saved them.
In His incarnation as Nåsiàha, the Lord killed Hiraëyakaçipu, the king of
demons, to free the saintly devotees from fear.
TEXT 20
de"vaAs$aure" yauiDa ca dE"tyapataIna, s$aur"ATaeR
h"tvaAntare"Sau BauvanaAnyad"DaAtk(laAiBa:
BaUtvaATa vaAmana wmaAmah"r"ß"lae: ºmaAM
yaA¿aAcC$laena s$amad"Ad"id"tae: s$autaeBya:
deväsure yudhi ca daitya-patén surärthe
hatväntareñu bhuvanäny adadhät kaläbhiù
bhütvätha vämana imäm aharad baleù kñmäà
yäcïä-cchalena samadäd aditeù sutebhyaù
SYNONYMS
deva-asure—of the demigods and demons; yudhi—in the battle; ca—and;
daitya-patén—the leaders of the demons; sura-arthe—for the sake of the
demigods; hatvä—by killing; antareñu—during the reign of each Manu;
bhuvanäni—all the worlds; adadhät—protected; kaläbhiù—by His various
appearances; bhütvä—becoming; atha—moreover; vämanaù—the incarnation
as a dwarf brähmaëa boy; imäm—this; aharat—took away; baleù—from Bali
Mahäräja; kñmäm—earth; yäcïä-chalena—on the excuse of begging for
charity; samadät—gave; aditeù—of Aditi; sutebhyaù—to the sons (the
demigods).
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord regularly takes advantage of the wars between the
demons and demigods to kill the leaders of the demons. The Lord thus
encourages the demigods by protecting the universe through His various
incarnations during the reigns of each Manu. The Lord also appeared as
Vämana and took the earth away from Bali Mahäräja on the plea of begging
three steps of land. The Lord then returned the entire world to the sons of
Aditi.
TEXT 21
ina:ºai‡ayaAmak{(ta gAAM ca i‡a:s$aæak{(tvaAe
r"Amastau hE"h"yaku(laApyayaBaAgARvaAi¢a:
s$aAe'ibDaM babanDa d"zAvaf‡amah"na, s$alaÆMÿ
s$aItaApaitajaRyaita laAek(mala£ak(L[%ita:
niùkñatriyäm akåta gäà ca triù-sapta-kåtvo
rämas tu haihaya-kuläpyaya-bhärgavägniù
so 'bdhià babandha daça-vaktram ahan sa-laìkaà
sétä-patir jayati loka-mala-ghna-kéåtiù
SYNONYMS
niùkñatriyäm—devoid of members of the warrior class; akåta—He made;
gäm—the earth; ca—and; triù-sapta-kåtvaù—three times seven (twenty-one)
times; rämaù—Lord Paraçuräma; tu—indeed; haihaya-kula—of the dynasty of
Haihaya; apyaya—the destruction; bhärgava—descending from Bhågu Muni;
agniù—the fire; saù—He; abdhim—the ocean; babandha—brought under
subjection; daça-vaktram—the ten-headed Rävaëa; ahan—killed;
sa-laìkam—along with all the soldiers of his kingdom, Laìkä; sétä-patiù—Lord
Rämacandra, the husband of Sétä; jayati—is always victorious; loka—of the
entire world; mala—the contamination; ghna—which destroys; kértiù—the
recounting of whose glories.
TRANSLATION
Lord Paraçuräma appeared in the family of Bhågu as a fire that burned to
ashes the dynasty of Haihaya. Thus Lord Paraçuräma rid the earth of all
kñatriyas twenty-one times. The same Lord appeared as Rämacandra, the
husband of Sétädevé, and thus He killed the ten-headed Rävaëa, along with all
the soldiers of Laìkä. May that Çré Räma, whose glories destroy the
contamination of the world, be always victorious.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, Lord Rämacandra was more or less a
contemporary incarnation for the nine Yogendras. Thus they have offered
particular respect to Lord Rämacandra, as indicated by the word jayati.
TEXT 22
BaUmaeBaRr"Avatar"NAAya yaäu"SvajanmaA
jaAta: k(ir"Syaita s$aurE"r"ipa äu"Sk(r"AiNA
vaAdE"ivaRmaAeh"yaita yaÁak{(taAe'tad"h"ARna,
zAU#‰"Ana, k(laAE iºaitaBaujaAe nyah"inaSyad"ntae
bhümer bharävataraëäya yaduñv ajanmä
jätaù kariñyati surair api duñkaräëi
vädair vimohayati yajïa-kåto 'tad-arhän
çüdrän kalau kñiti-bhujo nyahaniñyad ante
SYNONYMS
bhümeù—of the earth; bhara—the burden; avataraëäya—to diminish;
yaduñu—in the Yadu dynasty; ajanmä—the unborn Lord; jätaù—taking birth;
kariñyati—He will perform; suraiù—by the demigods; api—even;
duñkaräëi—difficult deeds; vädaiù—by speculative arguments; vimohayati—He
will bewilder; yajïa-kåtaù—the performers of Vedic sacrifices;
atat-arhän—who are unfit to be so engaged; çüdrän—the low-class men;
kalau—in the degraded age of Kali; kñiti-bhujaù—rulers; nyahaniñyat—He will
kill; ante—at the end.
TRANSLATION
To diminish the burden of the earth, the unborn Lord will take birth in the
Yadu dynasty and perform feats impossible even for the demigods. Propounding
speculative philosophy, the Lord, as Buddha, will bewilder the unworthy
performers of Vedic sacrifices. And as Kalki the Lord will kill all the low-class
men posing as rulers at the end of the age of Kali.
PURPORT
It is understood that in this verse the description of the Lord's appearance
in the Yadu dynasty refers to the appearance of both Kåñëa and Balaräma, who
together removed the demoniac rulers who were burdening the earth. Çréla
Jéva Gosvämé has pointed out that the description of the incarnations to deal
with çüdrän, or low-class men, refers to both Buddha and Kalki. Those who
misuse Vedic sacrifice to engage in gross sense gratification, such as the sinful
killing of animals, are certainly in the category of çüdra, as are the so-called
political leaders of Kali-yuga who perform many atrocities in the name of state
management.
TEXT 23
WvaMivaDaAina janmaAina
k(maARiNA ca jagAtpatae:
BaUr"IiNA BaUir"yazAs$aAe
vaiNARtaAina mah"ABauja
evaà-vidhäni janmäni
karmäëi ca jagat-pateù
bhüréëi bhüri-yaçaso
varëitäni mahä-bhuja
SYNONYMS
evam-vidhäni—just like these; janmäni—appearances; karmäëi—activities;
ca—and; jagat-pateù—of the Lord of the universe; bhüréëi—innumerable;
bhüri-yaçasaù—very glorious; varëitäni—described; mahä-bhuja—O
mighty-armed King Nimi.
TRANSLATION
O mighty-armed King, there are innumerable appearances and activities of
the Supreme Lord of the universe similar to those I have already mentioned. In
fact, the glories of the Supreme Lord are unlimited.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Eleventh Canto, Fourth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Drumila Explains the Incarnations of Godhead
to King Nimi."
5. Närada Concludes His Teachings to Vasudeva
In this chapter the destination of persons who are inimical to the worship
of Lord Hari, who are unable to control their own senses and who are not
peaceful is examined, along with the different names, forms and modes of
worship of the Personality of Godhead in each yuga.
From the face, arms, thighs and feet of the primeval person Lord Viñëu are
born (correspondingly and in order of the modes of goodness, passion and
ignorance) the four varëas-brähmaëa and so on-and also the four different
äçramas. If the members of the four varëas and four äçramas do not worship
Lord Çré Hari, who is Himself directly the origin of their own creation, they
will simply fall down. Among these classes, women and çüdras, who generally
have no contact with the hearing and chanting of hari-kathä, are on account
of their very ignorance special candidates for the mercy of great souls. The
members of the other three varëas, becoming fit for achieving the lotus feet of
Hari by second birth through Vedic initiation (çrauta-janma), nevertheless
become confused by concocted interpretations of the Vedas. Presuming
themselves to be great scholars, although not understanding the essential
meaning of karma, they become flatterers of other deities in their greed for
fruitive results and ridicule the devotees of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. They are fixed in family life, attached to mundane gossip and
indifferent to the devotional service of Viñëu and the Vaiñëavas. They are
maddened by material opulences and pleasures, devoid of real discrimination
and intelligence and always function on the mental platform. But such
attachment to family life and so on is most natural for the mass of people, even
though it is against the best advice of çästra. To become disentangled from
such life in all respects is the principal teaching of the Vedas. Real wealth is
that conducive to the faithful execution of the duty of the soul, not that which
exists simply for selfish sense gratification. As a consequence of the desire to
indulge the senses, men and women couple together to produce children.
Engaging in animal slaughter apart from that necessary for performance of
sacrifice, these human animals themselves suffer violence in the next life. If
because of excessive greed for one's own pleasure one commits violence against
living beings. He is also attacking Lord Çré Hari, who is present in the bodies of
all living entities as the Supersoul. Opposed to Lord Väsudeva, ignorant
self-cheaters completely carry out their own ruination and enter into hell.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Hari, accepts in each of the
different yugas various colors, names and forms and is worshiped by various
prescribed processes. In Satya-yuga the Supreme Lord is white in complexion,
has four arms, dresses as a brahmacäré, is known by such names as Haàsa and is
served by the practice of meditational yoga. In Tretä-yuga He is red in color
and four-armed, is the personification of sacrifice, is characterized by the
symbols of the sacrificial spoon, ladle, etc., is called by such names as Yajïa
and is worshiped by Vedic sacrifices. In Dväpara-yuga He is of dark blue
complexion, wears a yellow garment, is marked by Çrévatsa and other signs, has
such names as Väsudeva and is worshiped in His Deity form by the regulations
of the Vedas and tantras. In Kali-yuga He is golden in color, is accompanied by
associates who are His primary and secondary limbs and His weapons, is
absorbed in kåñëa-kértana and is worshiped by the performance of
saìkértana-yajïa. Since in Kali-yuga all the goals of human life can be
achieved simply by the glorification of the holy name of Lord Çré Hari, those
who can appreciate the real essence of things praise Kali-yuga. In Kali-yuga
many people in South India (Draviòa-deça), in places where the Tämraparëé,
Kåtamälä, Käveré and Mahänadé rivers flow, will be dedicated to the
devotional service of the Supreme Lord.
Persons who give up all false ego and take full shelter of Lord Hari are no
longer debtors to the demigods or anyone else. The Personality of Godhead,
Çré Hari, appears in the hearts of devotees who know no other shelter than
Him and causelessly drives away all evil desires from the devotees' hearts.
Videharäja Nimi, having heard elaborate descriptions of bhägavata-dharma
from the mouths of the nava-yogendras, offered worship to them with a
satisfied mind. They then disappeared.
Devarñi Närada thereupon instructed Vasudeva about the ultimate shelter
of devotional service. He told Vasudeva that although Lord Kåñëa had become
his son, having appeared in this world to free the earth of its burden, he still
should not think of Lord Kåñëa as his child, but rather as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Even by meditating upon Kåñëa in a spirit of enmity,
such kings as Çiçupäla attained an equal status to Him. So to attempt to say
anything more about the perfect achievement of great souls such as Vasudeva,
who enjoy intimate loving relations with Kåñëa, would be a useless endeavor.
TEXT 1
™aIr"AjaAevaAca
BagAvantaM h"ir$M ‘aAyaAe
na BajantyaAtmaivaÔamaA:
taeSaAmazAAntak(AmaAnaAM
k( inaï"AivaijataAtmanaAma,
çré-räjoväca
bhagavantaà harià präyo
na bhajanty ätma-vittamäù
teñäm açänta-kämänäà
ka niñöhävijitätmanäm
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—King Nimi inquired; bhagavantam—the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; harim—Hari; präyaù—for the most part; na—never;
bhajanti—who worship; ätma-vittamäù—all of you are most perfect in
knowledge of the science of the self; teñäm—of them; açänta—unquenched;
kämänäm—material desires; kä—what; niñöhä—destination; avijita—who are
not able to control; ätmanäm—themselves.
TRANSLATION
King Nimi further inquired: My dear Yogendras, all of you are most perfect
in knowledge of the science of the self. Therefore, kindly explain to me the
destination of those who for the most part never worship the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Hari, who are unable to quench their material desires
and who are not in control of their own selves.
PURPORT
In the Fifth Chapter of the Eleventh Canto, Camasa Åñi describes the
inauspicious path of those who are unfavorable to the devotional service of
Lord Viñëu, and the sage Karabhäjana explains the yuga-dharmävatäras, the
incarnations of the Lord who present the authorized process of religion for
each different age.
In the previous chapter it was explained that although the demigods place
obstacles in the path of the Lord's devotees, by the mercy of the Supreme Lord
the devotees are able to place their feet on the head of such obstacles and thus
pass beyond them to the supreme destination. However, for the nondevotees
there is no such facility. As soon as the conditioned soul becomes indifferent
to the devotional service of the Supreme Lord, he is immediately attracted by
the temporary varieties of matter and becomes a slave of inauspicious desires.
Thus the conditioned soul, devoid of devotion for the Lord, completely forgets
the transcendental bliss of the spiritual world, which is enjoyed in five
transcendental rasas. Although the devotees are not overcome by the sense
gratification offered by the demigods, the demigods themselves become
absorbed in material form, taste and smell. And similarly, those who are
nondevotees also become bound by material form, taste and other sense
perceptions, such as the sensuous experience of sex life. Thus they remain
hovering in a dreamlike state, imagining different types of material sense
gratification, and forget their eternal relationship with the Personality of
Godhead. Videharäja Nimi now inquires from Camasa Muni about the goal
attained by such bewildered persons.
TEXT 2
™aIcamas$a ovaAca
mauKabaAó"ç&paAde"Bya:
pauç&SasyaA™amaE: s$ah"
catvaAr"Ae jaiÁare" vaNAAR
gAuNAEivaR‘aAd"ya: pa{Tak,(
çré-camasa uväca
mukha-bähüru-pädebhyaù
puruñasyäçramaiù saha
catväro jajïire varëä
guëair viprädayaù påthak
SYNONYMS
çré-camasaù uväca—Çré Camasa said; mukha—face; bähu—arms; üru-thighs;
pädebhyaù—from the feet; puruñasya—of the Supreme Lord; äçramaiù—the
four spiritual orders; saha—with; catväraù—four; jajïire—were born;
varëäù—the social orders; guëaiù—by the modes of nature;
vipra-ädayaù—headed by the brähmaëas; påthak—various.
TRANSLATION
Çré Camasa said: Each of the four social orders, headed by the brähmaëas,
was born through different combinations of the modes of nature, from the face,
arms, thighs and feet of the Supreme Lord in His universal form. Thus the four
spiritual orders were also generated.
PURPORT
Those who are not spontaneously attracted to the devotional service of the
Lord can be gradually purified by observing the varëäçrama system of four
social orders and four spiritual orders. According to Çrédhara Svämé, the
brähmaëas are born of the mode of goodness, the kñatriyas of a combination of
goodness and passion, the vaiçyas of a combination of passion and ignorance
and the çüdras of the mode of ignorance. Just as the four social orders are born
from the face, arms, thighs and feet of the Lord's universal form, similarly the
brahmacärés are generated from the heart of the Lord, the householder order
from His loins, the vänaprasthas from His chest and the sannyäsa order from
His head.
A similar verse is found in the Åk-saàhitä (8.4.19), as well as the
Çukla-yajur Veda (34.11) and the Atharva Veda (19.66):
brähmaëo 'sya mukham äséd
bähü räjanyaù kåtaù
ürü tad asya yad vaiçyaù
padbhyäà çüdro 'jäyata
"The brähmaëa appeared as His face, the king as His arms, the vaiçya as His
thighs, and the çüdra was born from His feet."
It is understood that pure devotional service to the Lord has already been
described by two of the Yogendras, Drumila and Ävirhotra. Camasa Muni now
describes the system of varëäçrama-dharma, because this system is meant to
gradually purify those who are inimical to the Supreme Lord, bringing them
back to their constitutional position of love of Godhead. Similarly, the
viräö-rüpa, or universal form of the Lord, is an imaginary form meant to help
the gross materialists gradually understand the position of the Personality of
Godhead. Since the foolish materialist cannot understand anything beyond
matter, he is encouraged to see the entire universe as a personal form of the
Supreme Lord's body. The impersonal conception of formlessness is a mere
negation of temporary material variety without any concept of the Lord's
spiritual potency. The impersonal view is another kind of material speculative
conception. The Supreme Lord is full of spiritual potencies under the principal
headings hlädiné, or unlimited bliss, sandhiné, or eternal existence, and saàvit,
or omniscience. It is understood from this verse that the varëäçrama-dharma
system generated from the universal form of the Lord is a program offered by
the Lord to engage the conditioned souls in a complete social and religious
system that gradually brings them back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 3
ya WSaAM pauç&SaM s$aAºaAä,"
@Atma‘aBavamaIìr"ma,
na BajantyavajaAnainta
sTaAnaAä," ”aí"A: patantyaDa:
ya eñäà puruñaà säkñäd
ätma-prabhavam éçvaram
na bhajanty avajänanti
sthänäd bhrañöäù patanty adhaù
SYNONYMS
yaù—one who; eñäm—of them; puruñaà—the Supreme Lord; säkñät—directly;
ätma-prabhavam—the source of their own creation; éçvaram—the supreme
controller; na—do not; bhajanti—worship; avajänanti—disrespect;
sthänät—from their position; bhrañöäù—fallen; patanti—they fall;
adhaù—down.
TRANSLATION
If any of the members of the four varëas and four äçramas fail to worship or
intentionally disrespect the Personality of Godhead, who is the source of their
own creation, they will fall down from their position into a hellish state of life.
PURPORT
The words na bhajanti in this verse refer to those who out of ignorance do
not worship the Supreme Lord, whereas the word avajänanti refers to those
who have actually been informed of the supreme position of the Lord but still
show Him disrespect. It has already been described that the four spiritual and
occupational orders of life are generated from the body of the Lord. In fact, the
Supreme Lord is the source of everything, as described in Bhagavad-gétä (10.8):
ahaà sarvasya prabhavaù. Those who foolishly do not inquire into the position
of the Personality of Godhead, as well as those who disrespect the Lord in spite
of having heard of His transcendental position, will certainly fall down from
the varëäçrama-dharma system, as described by the words sthänäd bhrañöäù.
The words patanty adhaù indicate that one who falls from the varëäçrama
system will have no means of avoiding sinful activities; nor will such a person
receive any credit for performing sacrifice, and thus he will gradually sink
down into lower and lower species of life in hellish conditions. Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has pointed out that the original cause of
offending the Lord and falling down from one's position is one's not learning
how to properly worship a bona fide spiritual master. One who is trained to
offer respectful obeisances and worship to the bona fide spiritual master
automatically offers proper worship to the Supreme Lord. Without the mercy
of a bona fide spiritual master, even a so-called religious man will gradually
become atheistic, offend the Lord by foolish speculation and fall into a hellish
condition of life. Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has pointed out that
the puruña mentioned in this verse is Lord Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, who is
glorified in the Puruña-sükta prayers. If one is proud of his high social position
and enviously thinks that the Lord is also a creation of nature and that there is
no absolute entity who is the origin of all beings, then such a puffed-up fool
will certainly fall down from the varëäçrama system and become just like an
unregulated animal.
TEXT 4
äU"re" h"ir"k(TaA: ke(icaä,"
äU"re" caAcyautak(LtaRnaA:
iñya: zAU#‰"Ad"yaêEva
tae'nauk(mpyaA BavaAä{"zAAma,
düre hari-kathäù kecid
düre cäcyuta-kértanäù
striyaù çüdrädayaç caiva
te 'nukampyä bhavädåçäm
SYNONYMS
düre—far away; han-kathäù—from discussion of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Hari; kecit—many persons; düre—far away; ca—and;
acyuta—infallible; kértanäù—glories; striyaù—women; çüdra-ädayaù—çüdras
and other fallen classes; ca—and; eva—indeed; te—they;
anukampyäù—deserve the mercy; bhavädåçäm—of personalities like yourself.
TRANSLATION
There are many persons who have little opportunity to take part in
discussions about the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, and thus it is
difficult for them to chant His infallible glories. Persons such as women, çüdras
and other fallen classes always deserve the mercy of great personalities like
yourself.
PURPORT
In the previous verse it was explained that some persons are ignorant of the
glories of the Personality of Godhead (na bhajanti), whereas others, although
aware of the Lord, ridicule Him or state that the Lord is also material
(avajänanti). In this verse the first class, namely the ignorant, are described as
fit candidates for the mercy of a pure devotee. The word düre indicates those
who have little opportunity to hear and chant the glories of the Lord.
According to Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura they can be explained as ye
sädhu-saìga-bhägya-hénäù, those who are bereft of the association of saintly
persons and pure devotees. Generally, those who are advanced in the spiritual
science of Kåñëa consciousness avoid contact with women and low-class men.
In general, women are lusty, and çüdras and other low-class men are habitually
addicted to materialistic habits such as smoking, drinking and woman hunting.
Therefore, Caitanya Mahäprabhu warned the sädhus, or saintly persons, to
avoid intimate connection with women and low-class men. The practical result
of such a restriction is that women and lower-class men are often bereft of the
opportunity to hear the glories of the Lord chanted by saintly persons; thus Çré
Camasa Muni instructs the King that he should especially give his mercy to
such fallen persons.
Our spiritual master, His Divine Grace Çréla Prabhupäda, was severely
criticized in India for giving all classes of men and women the opportunity to
take part in the Kåñëa consciousness movement. Indeed, the caste brähmaëas
of India and other persons concerned only with ritualistic formalities were
shocked that Çréla Prabhupäda allowed women and persons born in low-class
families to take part freely in the Vaiñëava culture and even become initiated
as bona fide brähmaëas. However, Çréla Prabhupäda could understand that in
this age practically everyone is fallen. He saw that if spiritual life were to be
limited to the so-called higher classes, there would be no possibility of
spreading a genuine spiritual movement all around the world. The mercy of
Caitanya Mahäprabhu is so great and the holy name of Kåñëa so potent that
any man, woman, child or even animal can become purified by chanting
Kåñëa's name and taking prasädam, the sanctified remnants of Kåñëa's food. In
Caitanya Mahäprabhu's movement, no sincere person is restricted from
achieving the highest perfection of self-realization. Whereas the impersonalists
and yogés tend to be selfishly concerned with their individual realization and
achievement of mystic power, it has always been the custom of the Vaiñëavas
to be merciful to all classes of living entities.
It is understood that the conversation between the nava-yogendras and
King Nimi took place approximately at the time of Lord Rämacandra, many
hundreds of thousands of years ago. But in the Bhagavad-gétä, which was
spoken only five thousand years ago, Lord Kåñëa Himself also states that any
person, despite his material situation of life, can become the most dear devotee
of the Lord by full surrender to the lotus feet of Kåñëa. Therefore, the fallen
people of Kali-yuga should take advantage of the special mercy of the
Vaiñëavas and join the Kåñëa consciousness movement to perfect their lives
and go back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 5
iva‘aAe r"AjanyavaEzyaAE vaA
h"re": ‘aAæaA: pad"Aintak(ma,
™aAEtaena janmanaATaAipa
mau÷ntyaA°aAyavaAid"na:
vipro räjanya-vaiçyau vä
hareù präptäù padäntikam
çrautena janmanäthäpi
muhyanty ämnäya-vädinaù
SYNONYMS
vipraù—the brähmaëas; räjanya-vaiçyau—of the royal order and the vaiçyas;
vä—or; hareù—of the Supreme Lord, Hari; präptäù—after being allowed to
approach; pada-antikam—near the lotus feet; çrautena janmanä—by having
received the second birth of Vedic initiation; atha—then; api—even;
muhyanti—bewildered; ämnäya-vädinaù—adopting various materialistic
philosophies.
TRANSLATION
On the other hand, brähmaëas, members of the royal order and vaiçyas, even
after being allowed to approach the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord, Hari, by
receiving the second birth of Vedic initiation, can become bewildered and adopt
various materialistic philosophies.
PURPORT
It is said that a little knowledge can be very dangerous. Those who are
falsely proud of material social status and who thus neglect to perfect their
worship of the Personality of Godhead are condemned in this verse. Muhyanty
ämnäya-vädinaù: becoming attracted by the sense gratification of high status
within the varëäçrama social system, such persons become more attracted to
illusory material philosophy than to the Absolute Truth, which is not material.
Within the Vedic system, brähmaëas, kñatriyas and vaiçyas, as mentioned in
this verse, are all offered initiation into the Gäyatré mantra and are considered
twice-born, or highly civilized men. By studying Vedic literature, chanting
Vedic mantras, executing ritualistic ceremonies and worshiping the spiritual
master and the Personality of Godhead such persons gradually come near to
the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord. If one in such an exalted position becomes
proud of his status or fascinated by the heavenly material enjoyment that is
undoubtedly available to the followers of the varëäçrama system, then one so
bewildered returns to the illusory material platform of birth and death. Even
the highly posted demigods become victims of mäyä's enticement, as described
in the first verse of Çrémad-Bhägavatam: muhyanti yat sürayaù.
In order to justify their illusory desire to enjoy dead matter, such foolish
persons condemn themselves by minimizing the necessity of worshiping the
Personality of Godhead (avajänanti) and falsely try to give equal importance to
the karma-käëòa section of the Vedas, which awards heavenly sense
gratification in exchange for the performance of prescribed ritualistic
ceremonies. Such bogus rationalizers are described in Bhagavad-gétä (2.42):
yäm imäà puñpitäà väcaà
pravadanty avipaçcitaù
veda-väda-ratäù pärtha
nänyad astéti vädinaù
"Men of small knowledge are very much attached to the flowery words of the
Vedas, which recommend various fruitive activities for elevation to the
heavenly planets, resultant good birth, power and so on. Being desirous of
sense gratification and opulent life, they say that there is nothing more than
this."
Çréla Prabhupäda's purport to this verse of Bhagavad-gétä gives a clear
picture of the offensive class of men described therein. "People in general are
not very intelligent, and due to their ignorance they are most attached to the
fruitive activities recommended in the karma-käëòa portions of the Vedas.
They do not want anything more than sense gratificatory proposals for
enjoying life in heaven, where wine and women are available and material
opulence is very common. In the Vedas many sacrifices are recommended for
elevation to the heavenly planets, especially the jyotiñöoma sacrifices. In fact, it
is stated that anyone desiring elevation to heavenly planets must perform
these sacrifices, and men with a poor fund of knowledge think that this is the
whole purpose of Vedic wisdom. It is very difficult for such inexperienced
persons to be situated in the determined action of Kåñëa consciousness. As
fools are attached to the flowers of poisonous trees without knowing the results
of such attractions, similarly, unenlightened men are attracted by such
heavenly opulence and the sense enjoyment thereof.
"In the karma-käëòa sections of the Vedas it is said that those who perform
the four monthly penances become eligible to drink the soma-rasa beverage to
become immortal and happy forever. Even on this earth some are very eager to
have soma-rasa to become strong and fit to enjoy sense gratification. Such
persons have no faith in liberation from material bondage, and they are very
much attached to the pompous ceremonies of Vedic sacrifices. They are
generally sensual, and they do not want anything other than the heavenly
pleasures of life. It is understood that there are gardens called
Nandana-känana, in which there is good opportunity for association with
angelic, beautiful women and having a profuse supply of soma-rasa wine. Such
bodily happiness is certainly sensual; therefore there are those who are purely
attached to material, temporary happiness, as lords of the material world."
The significant point in this verse is that such bewildered materialists who
have become attracted to the materialistic portions of the Vedas (muhyanty
ämnäya-vädinaù) desire to ignore the supreme proprietorship of the
Personality of Godhead, who is the supreme enjoyer (bhoktäraà yajïa-tapasäm
[Bg. 5.29]). And at the same time they wish to preserve their exalted status as
followers of the Vedic principles. Such duplicitous persons take shelter of
materialistic philosophers, such as Jaimini, who deny the existence of God as a
tangible principle (éçvaräsiddheù) and therefore recommend material fruitive
activities as the highest knowable truth. Such so-called Vedic philosophers
amount to little more than polished atheists and are therefore understood to
be anéçvara-vädinaù, or those who preach against the supremacy of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Although foolish materialistic followers of
the varëäçrama system desire to maintain their exalted status as Äryans, or
twice-born men, and at the same time neglect the Personality of Godhead, it is
clearly stated in the Bhägavatam (11.5.3), sthänäd bhrañöäù patanty adhaù: such
persons inevitably fall from their position into a degraded condition of life. As
confirmed in this verse by the word muhyanti, they fall into the darkness of
ignorance. Sometimes such pompous persons even present themselves as gurus.
However, Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has pointed out that they are
actually laghu, or flimsy, rather than guru, or heavy with Vedic knowledge. It is
one's ultimate duty to oneself (svärtha-gati) and to the Personality of Godhead
to give up all materialistic activities characterized by karma and jïäna and
surrender fully at the lotus feet of the Lord. Only the most unfortunate person
will consider that there is a higher pleasure than ecstatic surrender at the lotus
feet of Gokulänanda, the Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 6
k(maRNyak(Aeivad"A: stabDaA
maUKaAR: paiNx"tamaAinana:
vad"inta caAq%]k(AnmaUX#A
yayaA maADvyaA igAr"Aets$auk(A:
karmaëy akovidäù stabdhä
mürkhäù paëòita-mäninaù
vadanti cäöukän müòhä
yayä mädhvyä girotsukäù
SYNONYMS
karmaëi—about the facts of fruitive work; akovidäù—ignorant;
stabdhäù—puffed up by false pride; mürkhäù—fools;
paëòita-mäninaù—thinking themselves great scholars; vadanti—they speak;
cäöukän—flattering entreaties; müòhäù—bewildered; yayä—by which;
mädhvyä—sweet; girä—words; utsukäù—very eager.
TRANSLATION
Ignorant of the art of work, such arrogantly proud fools, enchanted and
enlivened by the sweet words of the Vedas, pose as learned authorities and offer
flattering entreaties to the demigods.
PURPORT
The words karmaëy akovidäù refer to those who are ignorant of the art of
performing work in such a way that there will be no future bondage. This art is
described in Bhagavad-gétä: yajïärthät karmaëo 'nyatra loko 'yaà
karma-bandhanaù [Bg. 3.9]). Work must be performed for the satisfaction of
Viñëu, otherwise work is the cause of future bondage in the cycle of repeated
birth and death. The word stabdhäù, "puffed up by false pride," indicates that
although ignorant persons do not know the art of working properly, they do
not inquire from learned devotees, nor do they accept the advice of the Lord's
own men. Being infatuated by the fruitive results offered in the Vedas, such
mürkhas, or fools, think, "We are learned Vedic scholars; we have understood
everything perfectly." Thus they are attracted to such Vedic statements as
apäma somam amåtä abhüma ("We have drunk the soma juice and now we are
immortal"), akñayyaà ha vai cäturmäsya-yäjinaù sukåtaà bhavati ("For one who
executes the cäturmäsya sacrifice there is inexhaustible pious reaction"), and
yatra noñëaà na çétaà syän na glänir näpy arätayaù ("Let us go to that material
planet where there is no heat, no cold, no diminution and no enemies"). Such
foolish persons are unaware that even Lord Brahmä, the creator of the
universe, will die at the end of universal time, what to speak of materialistic
followers of the Vedas who jump like frogs to the different celestial planets,
seeking the highest standard of sense gratification. Such bewildered Vedic
scholars dream of frolicking with the Apsaräs, the gorgeous society girls of the
heavenly planets who are expert in singing, dancing and in general stimulating
uncontrollable lusty desires. Thus, those who are carried away by the heavenly
phantasmagoria offered in the karma-käëòa section of the Vedas gradually
develop an atheistic mentality. Actually, the entire universe is meant to be
offered to Lord Viñëu as sacrifice. The conditioned soul can thereby gradually
elevate himself to the eternal kingdom beyond the hallucination of material
sense gratification. However, being puffed up by false pride, the materialistic
followers of the Vedas remain perpetually ignorant of the supremacy and
beauty of Lord Viñëu.
TEXT 7
r"jas$aA GaAer"s$aÆÿlpaA:
k(Amauk(A @ih"manyava:
d"AimBak(A maAinana: paApaA
ivah"s$antyacyautai‘ayaAna,
rajasä ghora-saìkalpäù
kämukä ahi-manyavaù
dämbhikä mäninaù päpä
vihasanty acyuta-priyän
SYNONYMS
rajasä—by the prominence of the mode of passion; ghora-saìkalpäù—having
horrible desires; kämukäù—lusty; ahi-manyavaù—their anger like that of a
snake; dämbhikäù—deceitful; mäninaù—overly proud; päpäù—sinful;
vihasanti—they make fun; acyuta-priyän—of those who are dear to the
infallible Supreme Lord.
TRANSLATION
Due to the influence of the mode of passion, the materialistic followers of
the Vedas become subject to violent desires and are excessively lusty. Their
anger is like that of a snake. Deceitful, overly proud, and sinful in their
behavior, they mock the devotees who are dear to Lord Acyuta.
PURPORT
Ghora-saìkalpäù refers to ghastly desires, such as thinking, "He is my
enemy, let him die." Due to the mode of passion, waves of lust overcome the
conditioned soul, who then becomes furious like a snake. Such a person, filled
with pride and arrogance, cannot appreciate the humble efforts of the Lord's
devotees to distribute Kåñëa consciousness. He thinks, "These beggars worship
Lord Viñëu to fill their bellies, but they will never be happy." Such a
materialistic rascal cannot appreciate the transcendental status of the devotees
of the Lord, who are personally protected and encouraged by the Personality of
Godhead.
TEXT 8
vad"inta tae'nyaAenyamaupaAis$ataiñyaAe
gA{he"Sau maETaunyapare"Sau caAizASa:
yajantyas$a{í"AªaivaDaAnad"iºaNAM
va{ÔyaE parM" £ainta pazAUnataiã"d":
vadanti te 'nyonyam upäsita-striyo
gåheñu maithunya-pareñu cäçiñaù
yajanty asåñöänna-vidhäna-dakñiëaà
våttyai paraà ghnanti paçün atad-vidaù
SYNONYMS
vadanti—speak; te—they; anyonyam—among each other;
upäsita-striyaù—who are engaged in worshiping women; gåheñu—in their
homes; maithunya-pareñu—which are dedicated to sex only; ca—and;
äçiñaù—blessings; yajanti—they worship; asåñöa—without discharging;
anna-vidhäna—distribution of food; dakñiëam—gifts in payment to the priests;
våttyai—for their own livelihood; param—only; ghnanti—they murder;
paçün—animals; atat-vidaù—in ignorance of the consequences of such
behavior.
TRANSLATION
The materialistic followers of Vedic rituals, giving up the worship of the
Lord, instead practically worship their wives, and thus their homes become
dedicated to sex life. Such materialistic householders encourage one another in
such whimsical behavior. Understanding ritualistic sacrifice as a necessary item
for bodily maintenance, they perform unauthorized ceremonies in which there
is no distribution of foodstuffs or charity to the brähmaëas and other
respectable persons. Instead, they cruelly slaughter animals such as goats
without any understanding of the dark consequences of their activities.
PURPORT
False pride is certainly not complete without sex indulgence. Thus, lusty
materialistic householders are not attracted to worshiping saintly persons, but
rather worship their wives as a source of constant sex pleasure. The mentality
of such condemned persons is described by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gétä
(16.13):
idam adya mayä labdham
imaà präpsye manoratham
idam astédam api me
bhaviñyati punar dhanam
"So much wealth do I have today, and I will gain more according to my
schemes. So much is mine now, and it will increase in the future, more and
more."
Generally, materialistic householders consider themselves to be very
religious. In fact, by earning money to support a band of relatives they consider
themselves to be more pious than the "irresponsible" sädhus, who do not
struggle to maintain family members. Worshiping the material body, they are
contemptuous of the humble brähmaëas, who are generally not very advanced
in economic development. They consider such so-called beggars to be
unworthy objects of charity and instead perform sacrifices only for the
enhancement of the false prestige of their own family members. Madhväcärya
has stated in this regard, upekñya vai harià te tu bhütvä yäjyäù patanty adhaù. In
spite of proudly considering themselves to be great performers of religious
ceremonies, those who neglect the Lord and His devotees certainly fall down.
Such foolish persons sometimes bless each other by saying, "May you be blessed
with the wealth of gorgeous flower garlands, sandalwood pulp and beautiful
women."
Men who are controlled by the nature of women become exactly like
women. Materialistic women are uninterested in the devotional service of the
Supreme Lord and strive for their own selfish happiness. Therefore they
eagerly take service from their husbands and become most discouraged if the
husband prefers to serve the Personality of Godhead. Being lost in such a fool's
paradise, both husband and wife mutually encourage each other in temporary
happiness. They do not like to speak or hear about the pastimes of the Lord,
but prefer to discuss their own families. Still, the devotees of the Lord, being
mature in the mode of goodness, are always ready to act mercifully toward such
conditioned souls, who are just like vain animals. When the devotees of the
Lord preach that human beings should not slaughter animals, materialistic
householders are very often astonished and inquire if it is actually possible to
subsist on a vegetarian diet. Thus being completely ignorant of the material
mode of goodness, what to speak of spiritual knowledge, such condemned
materialists have no hope beyond the mercy of the devotees of the Lord.
TEXT 9
i™ayaA ivaBaUtyaAiBajanaena ivaâyaA
tyaAgAena è&paeNA balaena k(maRNAA
jaAtasmayaenaAnDaiDaya: s$ahe"ìr"Ana,
s$ataAe'vamanyainta h"ir"i‘ayaAna, KalaA:
çriyä vibhütyäbhijanena vidyayä
tyägena rüpeëa balena karmaëä
jäta-smayenändha-dhiyaù saheçvarän
sato 'vamanyanti hari-priyän khaläù
SYNONYMS
çriyä—by their opulence (wealth, etc.); vibhütyä—special abilities;
abhijanena—aristocratic heritage; vidyayä—education;
tyägena—renunciation; rüpeëa—beauty; balena—strength;
karmaëä—performance of Vedic rituals; jäta—which is born; smayena—by
such pride; andha-blinded; dhiyaù—whose intelligence; saha-éçvarän—along
with the Supreme Lord Himself; sataù—the saintly devotees;
avamanyanti—they disrespect; hari-priyän—who are very dear to Lord Hari;
khaläù—cruel persons.
TRANSLATION
The intelligence of cruel-minded persons is blinded by false pride based on
great wealth, opulence, prestigious family connections, education, renunciation,
personal beauty, physical strength and successful performance of Vedic rituals.
Being intoxicated with this false pride, such cruel persons blaspheme the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and His devotees.
PURPORT
The attractive qualities exhibited by the conditioned soul originally belong
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the reservoir of all attractive
qualities. The moonshine is actually the reflected effulgence of the sun.
Similarly, the living entity reflects for a brief time a particular quantity of the
Lord's opulences. Not knowing this, atheistic persons become intoxicated by
such reflected opulences, and thus blinded, they condemn themselves more
and more by criticizing the Lord and His devotees. They are unable to
understand how they have become abominable, and it is difficult to prevent
them from going to hell.
TEXT 10
s$avaeRSau zAìÔanauBa{tsvavaisTataM
yaTaA KamaAtmaAnamaBaIí"maIìr"ma,
vaed"AepagAItaM ca na Za{Nvatae'bauDaA
manaAer"TaAnaAM ‘avad"inta vaAtaRyaA
sarveñu çaçvat tanu-bhåtsv avasthitaà
yathä kham ätmänam abhéñöam éçvaram
vedopagétaà ca na çåëvate 'budhä
mano-rathänäà pravadanti värtayä
SYNONYMS
sarveñu—in all; çaçvat—eternally; tanu-bhåtsu—embodied living beings;
avasthitam—situated; yathä—just as; kham—the sky; ätmänam—the Supreme
Soul; abhéñöam—most worshipable; éçvaram—ultimate controller;
veda-upagétam—glorified by the Vedas; ca—also; na çåëvate—they do not
hear; abudhäù—unintelligent persons; manaù-rathänäm—of whimsical
pleasures; pravadanti—they go on discussing; värtayä—the topics.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead is eternally situated within the heart of every
embodied being; still the Lord remains situated apart, just as the sky, which is
all-pervading, does not mix with any material object. Thus the Lord is the
supreme worshipable object and the absolute controller of everything. He is
elaborately glorified in the Vedic literature, but those who are bereft of
intelligence do not like to hear about Him. They prefer to waste their time
discussing their own mental concoctions, which inevitably deal with gross
material sense gratification such as sex life and meat-eating.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä Lord Kåñëa says, vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva vedyaù [Bg.
15.15]. The goal of all Vedic knowledge is to know the Lord, who is the
Absolute Truth. Although this purpose of the Vedas is clearly revealed both in
the Vedic literature itself and by the self-realized äcäryas, foolish people
cannot grasp this simple truth. They prefer to cultivate knowledge of illicit sex
by discussing their sexual partners and experiences. They also eagerly describe
and recommend to their friends the best restaurants for eating meat, and they
are fond of glorifying drugs and liquor by elaborately describing the drunken
and hallucinogenic effects of their sinful experiences. The materialistic sense
gratifiers eagerly call one another on the telephone, congregate in clubs and
committees, and enthusiastically go on hunting, drinking and gambling
excursions, thus filling their lives with the mode of ignorance. They have
neither the time nor the inclination to discuss the Absolute Truth, Kåñëa.
Unfortunately, they neglect the Supreme Lord, who therefore severely
punishes such foolish persons in order to bring them back to their senses.
Everything belongs to the Lord, and everything is meant for the Lord's
enjoyment. When the living entity dovetails his activities for the pleasure of
the Lord, he experiences unlimited happiness. Yena sattvaà çuddhyed yasmäd
brahma-saukhyaà tv anantam [SB 5.5.1]. There is actually no happiness in
material affairs, and the Lord mercifully punishes the intoxicated conditioned
soul to bring him back to his real life.
Unfortunately, materialistic persons do not heed the advice of the Supreme
Lord in Bhagavad-gétä or that of the Lord's representatives, who speak in allied
literatures such as Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Instead, such sense gratifiers consider
themselves to be most eloquent and learned. Every materialistic person
actually feels that he is the most intelligent person, and thus he has no time to
hear the actual truth. Nevertheless, the Personality of Godhead, as described
in this verse, waits patiently within the heart of the conditioned soul,
encouraging him to recognize the Lord, who is sitting beside him. Such
recognition of the Personality of Godhead is the beginning of all
auspiciousness and happiness for the conditioned soul.
TEXT 11
laAeke( vyavaAyaAimaSamaâs$aevaA
inatyaA ih" jantaAenaR ih" ta‡a caAed"naA
vyavaisTaitastaeSau ivavaAh"yaÁa
s$aur"AƒahE"r"As$au inava{iÔair"í"A
loke vyaväyämiña-madya-sevä
nityä hi jantor na hi tatra codanä
vyavasthitis teñu viväha-yajïa
surä-grahair äsu nivåttir iñöä
SYNONYMS
loke—in the material world; vyaväya—sex indulgence; ämiña—of meat;
madya—and liquor; seväù—the taking; nityäù—always found; hi—indeed;
jantoù—in the conditioned living being; na—not; hi—indeed; tatra—in
regard to them; codanä—any command of scripture; vyavasthitiù—the
prescribed arrangement; teñu—in these; viväha—by sacred marriage;
yajïa—the offering of sacrifice; surä-grahaiù—and the acceptance of ritual
cups of wine; äsu-of these; nivåttiù—cessation; iñöä—is the desired end.
TRANSLATION
In this material world the conditioned soul is always inclined to sex,
meat-eating and intoxication. Therefore religious scriptures never actually
encourage such activities. Although the scriptural injunctions provide for sex
through sacred marriage, for meat-eating through sacrificial offerings and for
intoxication through the acceptance of ritual cups of wine, such ceremonies are
meant for the ultimate purpose of renunciation.
PURPORT
Those who are not situated in pure Kåñëa consciousness are always inclined
toward material sense gratification in the form of illicit sex, meat-eating and
intoxication. They simply desire a party life of eat, drink and be merry. Such
materialistic persons are unwilling to give up such temporary gratification
because they are firmly bound up in the bodily concept of life. For such
persons there are numerous Vedic injunctions for rituals that bestow material
sense pleasure in a regulated manner. The conditioned soul thereby becomes
accustomed to indirectly worshiping the Supreme Lord by accepting the
austerity of regulated sense gratification in obedience to the Vedic way of life.
Through purification the living entity gradually develops a higher taste and
becomes directly attracted to the spiritual nature of the Lord.
Sometimes the fallen practitioners of the karma-käëòa section of the Vedas
assert that the material fruitive results of Vedic ceremonies should never be
given up, because they are prescribed by religious scriptures. For example,
there is a Vedic injunction that in the proper season a husband must approach
his wife at night at least five days after her menstrual period, if the wife has
properly bathed and cleansed herself. Thus, a responsible householder should
engage in religious sex life.
The injunction that one must approach his wife for sex life is explained by
the Vaiñëava äcäryas as follows. Within the material world almost every man is
very lusty and desires passionate sex life with every attractive woman he
meets, or with any woman at all. Actually, for an ordinary materialistic man it
is an accomplishment if he can restrict himself to relationships with his
lawfully wedded wife. But because familiarity breeds contempt, the natural
tendency is for the husband to gradually become envious or resentful of the
wife and desire illicit connections with other women. Such a mentality is most
sinful and abominable, and the Vedic scripture therefore orders that one must
approach his actual wife, with a desire to beget children, and thus curtail the
tendency toward illicit sexual connection with other women. Were there no
such Vedic injunction ordering one to approach his wife, many men would
naturally be inclined to neglect their wives and pollute other women by illicit
connection.
However, such an injunction for conditioned souls does not apply to great
souls who are fixed on the spiritual platform and are transcendental to
material sex desire. As stated in this verse, nivåttir iñöä: the actual purpose of
the Vedic scriptures is to bring one back home, back to Godhead, back to the
spiritual world. It is clearly stated by Lord Kåñëa in Bhagavad-gétä, yaà yaà
väpi smaran bhävaà tyajaty ante kalevaram: [Bg. 8.6] whatever we think of at
the time of death will determine our next body.
anta-kale ca mäm eva
smaran muktvä kalevaram
yaù prayäti sa mad-bhävaà
yäti nästy atra saàçayaù
(Bg. 8.5)
If one remembers Kåñëa, he is immediately transferred to the eternal planet of
Kåñëa. Therefore, since all the Vedic scriptures are meant for knowing Kåñëa
(vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva vedyaù [Bg. 15.15]), the ultimate goal of the Vedas
cannot be any type of absorption in the material senses, either licit or illicit.
The Vedic regulations governing married sex life are actually meant to prevent
sinful illicit sex. However, one should not foolishly conclude that a lusty
attraction to his wife's naked body is the perfection of self-realization and
Vedic elevation. The actual perfection of spiritual life is to become free from
all material desires, nivåtti, and to fix the mind on Kåñëa.
Similarly there are other injunctions, governing the regulated consumption
of liquor and meat. Those who are mad after meat-eating are instructed to
perform Vedic ceremonies by which they are permitted to consume five types
of five-clawed animals, namely the rhinoceros, turtle, rabbit, porcupine and
lizard. Similarly, the consumption of specific liquors is allowed during highly
restricted sacrifices performed on specific days of the year at great expense. In
this way, other types of drunkenness and cruel animal slaughter are prohibited.
One is gradually purified by performing such sacrifices, and he develops a
distaste for such foolish activities as meat-eating and the drinking of liquor.
The Vedic rules and regulations that gradually restrict sense gratification are
called vidhi. The word niyama refers to injunctions governing activities that
human beings ordinarily would not be inclined to perform. For example, it is
said, ahar ahaù sandhyäm upäséta: "One should chant Gäyatré mantra at the
three junctions of the day, every day." It is also stated, mägha-snänaà
prakurvéta: "One must take bath daily, even during the coldest months of
winter." Such injunctions prescribe activities that ordinarily would be
neglected.
Although it has been mentioned above that there are injunctions against
neglecting one's lawful wife, there is no injunction against totally neglecting
meat-eating. In other words, killing of animals is considered most abominable,
and although some concession is made for the more violent class of men, one
should actually completely give up this cruel activity because even a slight
discrepancy in animal sacrifices will cause havoc in one s life.
It should be understood that those who have become spiritually advanced
by chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra under the guidelines of Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu are expected to completely give up material sense gratification. If
a devotee of Kåñëa duplicitously tries to take advantage of the scriptural
allowances for meat-eating, intoxication or sex enjoyment, then he commits
the tenth offense against chanting. Especially if one has accepted the
renounced order of life called tridaëòi-sannyäsa, it is most abominable and
reprehensible to become attracted to the Vedic injunctions prescribing
regulated sex life for householders. According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé there is no
such allowance for one in the renounced order of life. The Vaiñëava sannyäsés
should not foolishly become bewildered by statements in the Vedic literature
such as the following verse from Manu-saàhitä:
na mäàsa-bhakñaëe doño
na madye na ca maithune
pravåttir eñä bhütänäà
nivåttis tu mahä-phalä
"It may be considered that meat-eating, intoxication and sex indulgence are
natural propensities of the conditioned souls, and therefore such persons
should not be condemned for these activities. But unless one gives up such
sinful activities, there is no possibility of achieving the actual perfection of
life."
In the Kriyä-vidhäna it is explained that sex is permitted only during the
vämadeva sacrifice, or the garbhädhäna-saàskära for begetting of religious
children. It is also stated that sometimes certain types of meat are used in
worshiping Lord Hari through sacrifices to the forefathers and demigods.
Similarly, there is a form of intoxication available through drinking the soma
beverage. But if a so-called brähmaëa becomes attracted to such offerings, he
immediately becomes polluted. Actually, the brähmaëas who performed such
offerings would not personally accept any type of liquor or meat. These things
would be consumed by the kñatriyas, who were not considered at fault in
accepting such remnants of sacrifice.
However, in the movement of Caitanya Mahäprabhu it can be observed
that those who desire to become advanced devotees of Kåñëa immediately give
up all such fruitive sacrifices. There is no scope in pure devotional service for
any type of fruitive sacrifices. Caitanya Mahäprabhu demanded that all of His
sincere followers engage twenty-four hours a day in çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù
[SB 7.5.23], hearing and chanting the glories of the Personality of Godhead.
Those who claim to be followers of Caitanya Mahäprabhu and who are
seriously planning on going back home, back to Godhead, in the near future
should not become mindlessly attracted by Vedic fruitive rituals that are
meant to attract those who are hopelessly bound up in the material, bodily
concept of life. The followers of Caitanya Mahäprabhu always remain aloof
from such tainted rituals.
TEXT 12
DanaM ca DamaE=k(P(laM yataAe vaE
ÁaAnaM s$aivaÁaAnamanau‘azAAinta
gA{he"Sau yauÃainta k(laevar"sya
ma{tyauM na pazyainta äu"r"ntavaIyaRma,
dhanaà ca dharmaika-phalaà yato vai
jïänaà sa-vijïänam anupraçänti
gåheñu yuïjanti kalevarasya
måtyuà na paçyanti duranta-véryam
SYNONYMS
dhanam—wealth; ca—also; dharma-eka-phalam—whose only proper fruit is
religiosity; yataù—from which (religious life); vai—indeed;
jïänam—knowledge; sa-vijïänam—along with direct realization;
anupraçänti—and subsequent liberation from suffering; gåheñu—in their
homes; yuïjanti—they utilize; kalevarasya—of their material body;
måtyum—the death; na paçyanti—they cannot see; duranta—insurmountable;
véryam—the power of which.
TRANSLATION
The only proper fruit of acquired wealth is religiosity, on the basis of which
one can acquire a philosophical understanding of life that eventually matures
into direct perception of the Absolute Truth and thus liberation from all
suffering. Materialistic persons, however, utilize their wealth simply for the
advancement of their family situation. They fail to see that insurmountable
death will soon destroy the frail material body.
PURPORT
Those things that come under the control of the proprietor are called
dhanam, or wealth. When a foolish person becomes addicted to spending all of
his hard-earned money to increase the prestige of his material body and family,
he is no longer able to see how death is steadily approaching his own body as
well as the temporary bodies of his family and friends. Måtyuù sarva-haraç
cäham: [Bg. 10.34] the Supreme Lord appears as all-powerful death, which
destroys all material situations. Actually, even in family life one should use
one's wealth for spiritual advancement of oneself and one's family. In the
Kåñëa consciousness movement there are many religious householders who live
a simple, peaceful life and use their wealth for arranging Kåñëa conscious
activities at home and for helping the renounced brahmacärés and sannyäsés
who are actively preaching Kåñëa consciousness in public places. Such
householders, even those who are not able to dedicate one hundred percent of
their energy to Kåñëa consciousness, gradually acquire a very solid
understanding of the spiritual principles of life and eventually become
transcendentalists firmly fixed at the lotus feet of Kåñëa. Thus they free
themselves from all of the anxieties of conditional life, namely birth, old age,
disease and death.
Life without Kåñëa consciousness is actually poverty, but the
poverty-stricken materialist, whose intelligence is limited, cannot perceive
that real wealth is the expansion of consciousness up to the highest level of
Kåñëa consciousness, love of Godhead. Such persons raise their children to be
just like animals, having as their only goal false prestige and material sense
gratification. Such materialistic householders fear that excessive interest in
spiritual life may damage the ambition of their children to acquire false
material prestige. Actually, death will smash all of the endeavors and plans of
such spiritually impoverished materialists. If family life and wealth are used for
Kåñëa consciousness, one will learn to discriminate between the eternal and
the noneternal, between spirit and matter, between bliss and anxiety, and thus
the living entity will become liberated and go beyond mere theoretical
knowledge to acquire the highest perfectional benediction of eternal Kåñëa
conscious life. Limited sensory knowledge, pratyakña-jïäna, is useless without
theoretical spiritual knowledge, parokña-jïäna, which gradually matures, with
careful cultivation, into direct realized knowledge of the soul, aparokña-jïäna.
The word anupraçänti in this verse indicates that by spiritual knowledge
(vijïänam) one achieves the most sublime state of eternal peace and bliss, far
beyond the dreams of the materialistic conditioned soul.
TEXT 13
yaä," „aANABaºaAe ivaih"ta: s$aur"AyaAs$a,
taTaA pazAAer"AlaBanaM na ihM"s$aA
WvaM vyavaAya: ‘ajayaA na r"tyaA
wmaM ivazAuÜM" na ivaäu": svaDamaRma,
yad ghräëa-bhakño vihitaù suräyäs
tathä paçor älabhanaà na hiàsä
evaà vyaväyaù prajayä na ratyä
imaà viçuddhaà na viduù sva-dharmam
SYNONYMS
yat—because; ghräëa—by smell; bhakñaù—the taking; vihitaù—is enjoined;
suräyäù—of wine; tathä—similarly; paçoù—of a sacrificial animal;
älabhanam—prescribed killing; na—not; hiàsä—wanton violence; evam—in
the same way; vyaväyaù—sex; prajayä—for the purpose of begetting children;
na—not; ratyai—for the sake of sense enjoyment; imam—this (as pointed out
in the previous verse); viçuddham—most pure; na viduù—they do not
understand; sva-dharmam—their own proper duty.
TRANSLATION
According to the Vedic injunctions, when wine is offered in sacrificial
ceremonies it is later to be consumed by smelling, and not by drinking.
Similarly, the sacrificial offering of animals is permitted, but there is no
provision for wide-scale animal slaughter. Religious sex life is also permitted,
but only in marriage for begetting children, and not for sensuous exploitation of
the body. Unfortunately, however, the less intelligent materialists cannot
understand that their duties in life should be performed purely on the spiritual
platform.
PURPORT
Madhväcärya has given the following statement in regard to animal
sacrifice:
yajïeñv älabhanaà proktaà
devatoddeçataù paçoù
himsä näma tad-anyatra
tasmät täà näcared budhaù
yato yajïe måtä ürdhvaà
yänti deve ca paitåke
ato läbhäd älabhanaà
svargasya na tu märaëam
According to this statement, the Vedas sometimes prescribe animal sacrifice in
ritual performances for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord or a particular
demigod. If, however, one whimsically slaughters animals without rigidly
following the Vedic prescriptions, such killing is actual violence and should
not be accepted by any intelligent person. If the animal sacrifice is perfectly
performed, the sacrificed animal immediately goes to the heavenly planets of
the demigods and the forefathers. Therefore such a sacrifice is not for killing
animals but for demonstrating the potency of Vedic mantras, by the power of
which the sacrificed creature is immediately promoted to a higher situation.
Caitanya Mahäprabhu, however, has forbidden such animal sacrifice in this
age because there are no qualified brähmaëas to chant the mantras, and the
so-called sacrificial arena becomes an ordinary butcher shop. And in an earlier
era, when unscrupulous persons tried to establish that animal killing and
meat-eating are acceptable by misinterpreting the Vedic sacrifices, Lord
Buddha personally appeared and rejected their heinous proposition. This is
described by Jayadeva Gosvämé:
nindasi yajïa-vidher ahaha çruti-jätaà
sadaya-hådaya darçita-paçu-ghätam
keçava dhåta-buddha-çaréra
jaya jagad-éça hare
Unfortunately, the conditioned souls are afflicted by four imperfections, one
of which is the cheating propensity, and thus they tend to exploit the
concessions that the Lord mercifully gives to them in religious scriptures for
their gradual purification. Rather than follow the Vedic injunctions for
simultaneously satisfying their senses and gradually elevating themselves, the
conditioned souls reject the actual purpose of such apparently materialistic
ceremonies and simply become more and more degraded in the ignorance of
the bodily concept of life. Thus they fall down altogether from the varëäçrama
system and, taking birth in violent non-Vedic societies, foolishly presume the
small fragments of universal religious principles prevalent there to be the
exclusive religion of the soul. As a result, they fall into fanaticism, embracing
merely sectarian, dogmatic views of religion. Such unfortunate persons are
completely out of touch with their own eternal function in life and consider
things to be vastly different than they are in reality.
TEXT 14
yae tvanaevaMivad"Ae's$anta:
stabDaA: s$ad"iBamaAinana:
pazAUnåu"÷inta iva™abDaA:
‘aetya KaAd"inta tae ca taAna,
ye tv anevaà-vido 'santaù
stabdhäù sad-abhimäninaù
paçün druhyanti viçrabdhäù
pretya khädanti te ca tän
SYNONYMS
ye—those who; tu—but; anevam-vidaù—not knowing these facts;
asantaù—very impious; stabdhäù—presumptuous;
sat-abhimäninaù—considering themselves saintly; paçün—animals;
druhyanti—they harm; viçrabdhäù—being innocently trusted; pretya—after
leaving this present body; khädanti—they eat; te—those animals; ca—and;
tän—them.
TRANSLATION
Those sinful persons who are ignorant of actual religious principles, yet
consider themselves to be completely pious, without compunction commit
violence against innocent animals who are fully trusting in them. In their next
lives, such sinful persons will be eaten by the same creatures they have killed in
this world.
PURPORT
In this verse we can clearly see the great discrepancies in those persons who
do not surrender to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His law. As
stated in the Bhägavatam, haräv abhaktasya kuto mahad-guëäù: those who do
not accept the supremacy of the Supreme Lord gradually become infected with
the most sinful propensities that bring, in their turn, terrible suffering upon
the nondevotees. In the Western countries such as America, many people
proudly proclaim themselves to be most pious religionists and sometimes even
prophets or representatives of God. Boasting of their religiosity, such foolish
people experience no fear or doubt in cruelly slaughtering innumerable
animals in slaughterhouses or on hunting trips for their whimsical sense
gratification. In the state of Mississippi there are sometimes pig-killing
festivals, in which entire families enjoy watching a pig cruelly butchered
before their eyes. Similarly, a former president of the United States from
Texas did not consider any social occasion complete without the slaughtering
of a cow. Such persons mistakenly consider themselves to be perfectly
observing the laws of God and due to such arrogant foolishness lose all touch
with reality. When a man is raising an animal for slaughter, he feeds the
animal nicely and encourages it to grow fat. Thus the animal gradually accepts
its would-be killer as its protector and master. When the master finally
approaches the helpless animal with a sharp knife or gun, the animal thinks,
"Oh, my master is joking with me." Only at the last minute does the animal
understand that the so-called master is death personified. It is clearly stated in
Vedic literature that cruel masters who kill innocent animals will undoubtedly
be killed in the next life by a similar process.
mäà sa bhakñayitämutra
yasya mäàsam ihädmy aham
etan mäàsasya mäàsatvaà
pravadanti manéñiëaù
"That creature whose flesh I am eating here and now will consume me in the
next life.' Thus meat is called mäàsa, as described by learned authorities." In
Çrémad-Bhägavatam this grizzly fate of animal killers is described by Närada
Muni to King Präcénabarhi, who was excessively killing animals in so-called
sacrifices.
bho bhoù prajäpate räjan
paçün paçya tvayädhvare
saàjïäpitän jéva-saìghän
nirghåëena sahasraçaù
ete tväà sampratékñante
smaranto vaiçasaà tava
samparetam ayaù-küöaiç
chindanty utthita-manyavaù
"O ruler of the citizens, my dear King, please see in the sky those animals
which you have sacrificed, without compassion and without mercy, in the
sacrificial arena. All these animals are awaiting your death so that they can
avenge the injuries you have inflicted upon them. After you die, they will
angrily pierce your body with iron horns." (SB 4.25.7-8) Such punishment of
animal killers may take place under the jurisdiction of Yamaräja on the planet
of the lord of death. In other words, one who kills an animal or who eats meat
undoubtedly acquires a debt to the living entity who has contributed his body
for the satisfaction of the meat-eater. The meat-eater must pay his debt by
contributing his own body to be consumed in the next life. Such payment of
one's debt by offering one's own body to be eaten is confirmed in the Vedic
literature.
TEXT 15
iã"Santa: par"k(AyaeSau
svaAtmaAnaM h"ir"maIìr"ma,
ma{take( s$aAnaubanDae'ismana,
baÜ"µaeh"A: patantyaDa:
dviñantaù para-käyeñu
svätmänaà harim éçvaram
måtake sänubandhe 'smin
baddha-snehäù patanty adhaù
SYNONYMS
dviñantaù—envying; para-käyeñu—(the souls) within the bodies of others;
sva-ätmänam—their own true self; harim éçvaram—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Hari; måtake—in the corpse; sa-anubandhe—together with its
relations; asmin—this; baddha-snehäù—their affection being fixed;
patanti—they fall; adhaù—downward.
TRANSLATION
The conditioned souls become completely bound in affection to their own
corpselike material bodies and their relatives and paraphernalia. uIn such a
proud and foolish condition, the conditioned souls envy other living entities as
well as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, who resides in the heart of
all beings. Thus enviously offending others, the conditioned souls gradually fall
down into hell.
PURPORT
Materialistic persons express their envy of animals by cruelly killing them.
Similarly, the conditioned souls become envious even of other human beings
and of the Lord Himself, who dwells within everyone's body. They express
their envy of God by preaching atheistic science or pseudophilosophy in which
they ridicule the fact that everyone is an eternal servant of God. Envious
persons express their bitter feelings toward other human beings by creating
wars, terrorism, cruel governments and cheating business enterprises. The
sinful bodies of such envious persons are just like corpses. Still, envious persons
are enamored by the corpse of their material body and become further
fascinated by their children and other bodily extensions. Such feelings are
based in false pride. Çréla Madhväcärya has quoted the following verse from
Hari-vaàça:
äptatväd ätma-çabdoktaà
svasminn api pareñu ca
jéväd anyaà na paçyanti
çrutvaivaà vidviñanti ca
etäàs tvam äsurän viddhi
lakñaëaiù puruñädhamän
"The Supreme is called ätmä because He is found both in oneself and within
others. Some persons become agitated by hearing descriptions of the Supreme
Lord, and they openly state that there is no superior living being beyond
themselves. Such persons are to be known as demons. By their practical
symptoms they are to be understood as the lowest class of men."
TEXT 16
yae kE(valyamas$am‘aAæaA
yae caAtaItaAê maUX#taAma,
‡aEvaigARk(A ÷ºaiNAk(A
@AtmaAnaM GaAtayainta tae
ye kaivalyam asampräptä
ye cätétäç ca müòhatäm
trai-vargikä hy akñaëikä
ätmänaà ghätayanti te
SYNONYMS
ye—those who; kaivalyam—knowledge of the Absolute Truth;
asampräptäù—have not achieved; ye—who; ca—also; atétäù—have
transcended; ca—also; müòhatäm—gross foolishness; trai-vargikäù—dedicated
to the three goals of pious life, namely dharma (religiosity), artha (economic
development) and käma (sense gratification); hi—indeed; akñaëikäù—not
having even a moment to reflect; ätmänam—their own selves;
ghätayanti—murder; te—they.
TRANSLATION
Those who have not achieved knowledge of the Absolute Truth, yet who are
still beyond the darkness of complete ignorance, generally follow the threefold
path of pious material life, namely religiosity, economic development and sense
gratification. Not having time to reflect on any higher purpose, they become the
killers of their own soul.
PURPORT
Those who are completely in the darkness of ignorance and thus bereft
even of material pious life commit innumerable sinful activities and suffer
greatly. Due to such intense suffering such persons sometimes seek the shelter
of the devotees of the Lord and, being blessed by such transcendental
association, are sometimes elevated to the highest perfectional stage of Kåñëa
consciousness.
Those who are not completely sinful experience some mitigation of the
miseries of material life and thus develop a false sense of well-being within the
material world. Because those who are materially pious generally obtain
worldly prosperity, bodily beauty and a pleasant family situation, they become
falsely proud of their position and are not inclined to associate with or accept
instructions from the devotees of the Lord. Unfortunately, all material
activities, whether pious or impious, are inevitably contaminated by sinful
activity. Those who are proud of their piety and do not like to hear about
Kåñëa sooner or later fall down from their artificial position. Every living
entity is an eternal servant of Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Therefore, until we surrender to Kåñëa, our position is actually always impious.
The word akñaëikäù ("not having even a moment to reflect") is significant in
this verse Materialistic persons cannot spare a single moment for their eternal
self-interest. This is a symptom of misfortune. Such persons are considered to
be killing their own souls because by their obstinacy they are preparing a dark
future for themselves from which they will not escape for a very long time.
A sick man receiving medical treatment may be encouraged by the
preliminary results of the doctor's care. But if the patient becomes falsely
proud of the preliminary progress in his treatment and prematurely gives up
the doctor's orders, thinking himself already cured, there will undoubtedly be a
relapse. The words ye kaivalyam asampräptäù in this verse clearly indicate that
material piety is a long way from perfect knowledge of the Absolute Truth. If
one gives up his spiritual progress before achieving the lotus feet of Kåñëa, he
will undoubtedly fall back down into the most unpleasant material situation,
even if he has achieved impersonal realization of the Brahman effulgence. As
stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam, äruhya kåcchreëa paraà padaà tataù patanty
adhaù [SB 10.2.32].
TEXT 17
Wta @Atmah"naAe'zAAntaA
@ÁaAnae ÁaAnamaAinana:
s$aId"ntyak{(tak{(tyaA vaE
k(AlaDvastamanaAer"TaA:
eta ätma-hano 'çäntä
ajïäne jïäna-mäninaù
sédanty akåta-kåtyä vai
käla-dhvasta-manorathäù
SYNONYMS
ete—these; ätma-hanaù—killers of the self; açäntäù—devoid of peace;
ajïäne—in ignorance; jïäna-mäninaù—presuming to have knowledge;
sédanti—they suffer; akåta—failing to perform; kåtyäù—their duty;
vai—indeed; käla—by time; dhvasta—destroyed; manaù-rathäù—their
fanciful desires.
TRANSLATION
The killers of the soul are never peaceful, because they consider that human
intelligence is ultimately meant for expanding material life. Thus neglecting
their real, spiritual duties, they are always in distress. They are filled with great
hopes and dreams, but unfortunately these are always destroyed by the
inevitable march of time.
PURPORT
There is a similar verse in Çré Éçopaniñad (3):
asuryä näma te lokä
andhena tamasävåtäù
täàs te pretyäbhigacchanti
ye ke cätma-hano janäù
"The killer of the soul, whoever he may be, must enter into the planets known
as the worlds of the faithless, full of darkness and ignorance."
TEXT 18
ih"tvaAtmamaAyaAr"icataA
gA{h"Apatyas$auô$itñya:
tamaAe ivazAntyainacC$ntaAe
vaAs$aude"vapar"Ax.~mauKaA:
hitvätma-mäyä-racitä
gåhäpatya-suhåt-striyaù
tamo viçanty anicchanto
väsudeva-paräì-mukhäù
SYNONYMS
hitvä—giving up; ätma-mäyä—by the illusory energy of the Supreme Soul;
racitäù—manufactured; gåha—homes; apatya—children; suhåt—friends;
striyaù—wives; tamaù—into darkness; viçanti—they enter;
anicchantaù—without desiring; vasudeva-paräk-mukhäù—those who have
turned away from Lord Väsudeva.
TRANSLATION
Those who have turned away from the Supreme Lord, Väsudeva, being
under the spell of the Lord's illusory energy, are eventually forced to give up
their so-called homes, children, friends, wives and lovers, which were all
created by the illusory potency of the Supreme Lord, and enter against their
will into the darkest regions of the universe.
PURPORT
The living entity turns his back on the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and tries instead to enjoy temporary sense gratification. The result is simply
anxiety as the conditioned soul struggles to maintain his temporary wife,
children, friends, home, nation, etc. Finally all of these things are taken away,
and the bewildered soul, in great frustration, sometimes tries to take shelter of
an impersonal concept of God and liberation. Thus the conditioned soul is
always in ignorance, either pursuing illusory sense gratification or trying to
avoid sense gratification by merging into the impersonal aspect of the Lord,
called Brahman. But the actual position of the living entity is to serve the
Supreme Person, who is his master. And unless one gives up one's inimical
feelings toward the Supreme Personality of Godhead, there is no question of
peace or happiness.
kåñëa-bhakta-niñkäma, ataeva 'çänta'
bhukti-mukti-siddhi-kämé-sakali 'açänta'
(Cc. Madhya 19.149)
TEXT 19
™aI r"AjaAevaAca
k(ismana, k(Alae s$a BagAvaAna,
ikM( vaNAR: k(Lä{"zAAe na{iBa:
naA°aA vaA ke(na ivaiDanaA
paUjyatae taid"h"AecyataAma,
çré räjoväca
kasmin käle sa bhagavän
kià varëaù kédåço nåbhiù
nämnä vä kena vidhinä
püjyate tad ihocyatäm
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—the King said; kasmin—in what; käle—time; saù—He;
bhagavän—the Supreme Lord; kim varëaù—having what color;
kédåçaù—having what form; nåbhiù—by men; nämnä—by (what) names;
vä—and; kena—by what; vidhinä—processes; püjyate—is worshiped; tat—that;
iha—in our presence; ucyatäm—please speak.
TRANSLATION
King Nimi inquired: In what colors and forms does the Supreme Personality
of Godhead appear in each of the different ages, and with what names and by
what types of regulative principles is the Lord worshiped in human society?
PURPORT
It has been clearly established in the previous verses that human life is
spoiled if one does not surrender unto the Supreme Lord and engage in His
loving devotional service. Therefore the King is now requesting the sages to
give specific details about the worship of the Lord because this devotional
process has clearly been described as the only practical means of delivering the
conditioned soul.
TEXT 20
™aIk(r"BaAjana ovaAca
k{(taM ‡aetaA ã"AparM" ca
k(ilair"tyaeSau ke(zAva:
naAnaAvaNAARiBaDaAk(Ar"Ae
naAnaEva ivaiDanaejyatae
çré-karabhäjana uväca
kåtaà tretä dväparaà ca
kalir ity eñu keçavaù
nänä-varëäbhidhäkäro
nänaiva vidhinejyate
SYNONYMS
çré-karabhäjanaù uväca—Çré Karabhäjana said; kåtam—Satya; tretä—Tretä;
dväparam—Dväpara; ca—and; kaliù—Kali; iti—thus named; eñu—in these
ages; keçavaù—the Supreme Lord, Keçava; nänä—various; varëa—having
complexions; abhidhä—names; äkäraù—and forms; nänä—various;
eva—similarly; vidhinä—by processes; ijyate—is worshiped.
TRANSLATION
Çré Karabhäjana replied: In each of the four yugas, or ages—Kåta, Tretä,
Dväpara and Kali—Lord Keçava appears with various complexions, names and
forms and is thus worshiped by various processes.
TEXT 21
k{(tae zAuflaêtaubaARò"r,"
jaiq%laAe valk(laAmbar":
k{(SNAAijanaAepavaItaAºaAna,
iba”aÚ"Nx"k(maNx"laU
kåte çuklaç catur-bähur
jaöilo valkalämbaraù
kåñëäjinopavétäkñän
bibhrad daëòa-kamaëòalü
SYNONYMS
kåte—in Satya-yuga; çuklaù—white; catuù-bähuù—having four arms;
jaöilaù—with matted locks; valkala-ambaraù—wearing a garment of tree bark;
kåñëa-ajina—a black deerskin; upavéta—a brähmaëa's sacred thread;
akñän—prayer beads made of akña seeds; bibhrat—carrying; danda—a rod;
kamaëòalü—and waterpot.
TRANSLATION
In Satya-yuga the Lord is white and four-armed, has matted locks and wears
a garment of tree bark. He carries a black deerskin, a sacred thread, prayer
beads and the rod and waterpot of a brahmacäré.
TEXT 22
manauSyaAstau tad"A zAAntaA
inavaE=r"A: s$auô$d": s$amaA:
yajainta tapas$aA de"vaM
zAmaena ca d"maena ca
manuñyäs tu tadä çäntä
nirvairäù suhådaù samäù
yajanti tapasä devaà
çamena ca damena ca
SYNONYMS
manuñyäù—human beings; tu—and; tadä—then; çäntäù—peaceful;
nirvairäù—free from envy; suhådaù—friendly to all; samäù—equipoised;
yajanti—they worship; tapasä—by the austerity of meditation; devam—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; çamena—by controlling the mind; ca—also;
damena—by controlling the external senses; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
People in Satya-yuga are peaceful, nonenvious, friendly to every creature
and steady in all situations. They worship the Supreme Personality by austere
meditation and by internal and external sense control.
PURPORT
In Satya-yuga the Supreme Lord incarnates as a four-armed brahmacäré
described in the previous verse and personally introduces the process of
meditation.
TEXT 23
hM"s$a: s$aupaNAAeR vaEku(NQ&Ae
DamaAeR yaAegAeìr"Ae'mala:
wRìr": pauç&SaAe'vyal(:
par"maAtmaeita gAIyatae
haàsaù suparëo vaikuëöho
dharmo yogeçvaro 'malaù
éçvaraù puruño 'vyaktaù
paramätmeti géyate
SYNONYMS
haàsaù—the transcendental swan; su-parëaù—whose wings are very
beautiful; vaikuëöhaù—the Lord of the spiritual kingdom; dharmaù—the
maintainer of religion; yoga-éçvaraù—the master of all mystic perfection;
amalaù—immaculate; éçvaraù—the supreme controller; puruñaù—the supreme
enjoying male; avyaktaù—the unmanifest; parama-ätmä—the Supersoul in the
heart of every living being; iti—thus; géyate—His names are variously chanted.
TRANSLATION
In Satya-yuga the Lord is glorified by the names Haàsa, Suparëa,
Vaikuëöha, Dharma, Yogeçvara, Amala, Éçvara, Puruña, Avyakta and
Paramätmä.
PURPORT
The sage Karabhäjana Muni is replying to Videharäja Nimi's questions
about the varieties of the Lord's incarnations. In Satya-yuga the Lord's color is
white, and He wears tree bark and a black deerskin as an ideal meditative
brahmacäré. Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has explained the Lord's
various names in Satya-yuga as follows. Those who are self-realized know this
supreme reality of the Personality of Godhead as Paramätmä, Those souls who
are situated in the religious system of varëäçrama glorify Him as the haàsa
who is transcendental to all the varëas and äçramas. Persons absorbed in gross
matter consider Him to be Suparëa, "the beautifully winged" basis of the
conceptions of cause and effect who flies within the subtle sky of the soul, as
described in Chändogya Upaniñad. Persons accustomed to wandering within
this universe of subtle and gross matter created by the Lord's illusory potency
chant His name Vaikuëöha. Persons deprived of the power of transcendental
meditation (dhäraëä), who are thus subject to falling from the path of religion,
glorify Him as Dharma, or religion personified. Those who are forced to submit
to the illusory modes of material nature and whose minds are uncontrolled and
disturbed glorify Him as the most perfectly self-controlled Yogeçvara. Persons
tainted by a mixture of the modes of passion and ignorance call Him Amala, or
the uncontaminated. Persons devoid of potency call Him Éçvara, and those
who consider themselves to be under His shelter chant His glories by the name
Uttama Puruña. Those who know that this material manifestation is only
temporary call Him Avyakta. In this way, in Satya-yuga Lord Väsudeva
appears in various four-armed transcendental forms, and the jéva souls worship
Him, each by their own particular process of devotional service. Therefore the
Supreme Lord has many different names.
TEXT 24
‡aetaAyaAM r"l(vaNAAeR's$aAE
cataubaARò"iñmaeKala:
ih"r"Nyake(zAñyyaAtmaA
›auf›auvaAâupalaºaNA:
tretäyäà rakta-varëo 'sau
catur-bähus tri-mekhalaù
hiraëya-keças trayy-ätmä
sruk-sruvädy-upalakñaëaù
SYNONYMS
tretäyäm—in Tretä-yuga; rakta-varëaù—red-complexioned; asau—He;
catuù-bähuù—four-armed; tri-mekhalaù—wearing three belts (representing
three phases of Vedic initiation); hiraëya-keçaù—having golden hair;
trayi-ätmä—personifying the knowledge of the three Vedas;
srak-sruva-ädi—the sacrificial wooden ladle, spoon and so on;
upalakñaëaù—having as His symbols.
TRANSLATION
In Tretä-yuga the Lord appears with a red complexion. He has four arms,
golden hair, and wears a triple belt representing initiation into each of the three
Vedas. Embodying the knowledge of worship by sacrificial performance, which
is contained in the Åg, Säma and Yajur Vedas, His symbols are the ladle, spoon
and other implements of sacrifice.
PURPORT
The sruk is a particular implement for pouring ghee in sacrifices. It is about
an arm's length long and is made of a particular type of wood called vikaìkata.
The sruk has a rodlike handle and a spout with a shallow groove at its tip that
resembles a swan's beak. Its front part is a carved-out spoon the size of a fist.
The sruva is another implement used in sacrificial oblations. It is made of
khadira wood, is smaller than the sruk and is used to pour ghee into the sruk. It
is also sometimes used instead of the sruk to pour ghee directly into the
sacrificial fire. These are the Lord's symbols in Tretä-yuga, when the Lord
incarnates to introduce the yuga-dharma of yajïa, or sacrifice.
TEXT 25
taM tad"A manaujaA de"vaM
s$avaR$de"vamayaM h"ir"ma,
yajainta ivaâyaA ‡ayyaA
DaimaRï"A “aövaAid"na:
taà tadä manujä devaà
sarva-deva-mayaà harim
yajanti vidyayä trayyä
dharmiñöhä brahma-vädinaù
SYNONYMS
tam—Him; tadä—then; manujäù—human beings; devam—the Personality of
Godhead; sarva-deva-mayam—who contains within Himself all the demigods;
harim—Çré Hari; yajanti—they worship; vidyayä—with the rituals; trayyä—of
the three main Vedas; dharmiñöhäù—fixed in religiosity;
brahma-vädinaù—seekers of the Absolute Truth.
TRANSLATION
In Tretä-yuga, those members of human society who are fixed in religiosity
and are sincerely interested in achieving the Absolute Truth worship Lord
Hari, who contains within Himself all the demigods. The Lord is worshiped by
the rituals of sacrifice taught in the three Vedas.
PURPORT
The residents of the earth in Satya-yuga are described as having all good
qualities. In Tretä-yuga human society is described as dharmiñöhäù, or
thoroughly religious, and brahma-vädinaù, or faithfully seeking the Absolute
Truth through the Vedic injunctions. However, it should be noted that all of
the exalted qualities of the people of Satya-yuga are not mentioned in this
verse. In other words, in Satya-yuga people are automatically perfect, whereas
in Tretä-yuga people are inclined to become perfect through performing Vedic
sacrifice. In Tretä-yuga human society is not automatically Kåñëa conscious, as
it was in Satya-yuga, but people are still highly inclined to become Kåñëa
conscious, and thus they strictly follow the Vedic injunctions.
TEXT 26
ivaSNAuyaRÁa: pa{i´agABaR:
s$avaR$de"va oç&‚(ma:
va{SaAk(ipajaRyantaê
oç&gAAya wtaIyaRtae
viñëur yajïaù påçnigarbhaù
sarvadeva urukramaù
våñäkapir jayantaç ca
urugäya itéryate
SYNONYMS
viñëuù—the all-pervading Supreme Lord; yajïaù—the supreme personality of
sacrifice; påçni-garbhaù—the son of Påçni and Prajäpati Sutapä;
sarva-devaù—the Lord of all lords; uru-kramaù—the performer of wonderful
deeds; våñäkapiù—the Lord, who dispels all suffering and rewards all desires
simply by being remembered; jayantaù—the all-victorious; ca—and;
uru-gäyaù—the most glorified; iti—by these names; éryate-He is called.
TRANSLATION
In Tretä-yuga the Lord is glorified by the names Viñëu, Yajïa, Påçnigarbha,
Sarvadeva, Urukrama, Våñäkapi, Jayanta and Urugäya.
PURPORT
Påçnigarbha refers to Kåñëa's incarnation as the son of Påçni-devé and
Prajäpati Sutapä. Våñäkapi indicates that if the living entities simply remember
the Lord, He is inclined to shower all benedictions upon them, thus satisfying
their desires and removing their miseries. Since the Lord is always victorious,
He is called Jayanta.
TEXT 27
ã"Apare" BagAvaAHzyaAma:
paItavaAs$aA inajaAyauDa:
™aIvats$aAid"iBar"ÆEÿê
laºaNAEç&palaiºata:
dväpare bhagaväï çyämaù
péta-väsä nijäyudhaù
çrévatsädibhir aìkaiç ca
lakñaëair upalakñitaù
SYNONYMS
dväpare—in Dväpara-yuga; bhagavän—the Supreme Lord; çyämaù—dark blue;
péta-väsäù—wearing a yellow garment; nija-äyudhaù—having His own
particular weapons (the disc, club, conchshell and lotus flower);
çrévatsa-ädibhiù—by Çrévatsa and others; aìkaiù—bodily marks; ca—and;
lakñaëaiù—by ornaments; upalakñitaù—characterized.
TRANSLATION
In Dväpara-yuga the Supreme Personality of Godhead appears with a dark
blue complexion, wearing yellow garments. The Lord's transcendental body is
marked in this incarnation with Çrévatsa and other distinctive ornaments, and
He manifests His personal weapons.
PURPORT
The Lord's transcendental body in Dväpara-yuga can be compared to the
color of a dark blue flower. The Lord exhibits His personal transcendental
weapons such as Sudarçana cakra, and all of the limbs of His body, especially
His hands and feet, are decorated with auspicious symbols such as a lotus
flower and a flag. And on His chest, the Lord manifests the Kaustubha jewel as
well as the auspicious Çrévatsa, a whorl of hair curling from left to right on the
right side of the Lord's chest. Actually, such auspicious marks as Kaustubha
and Çrévatsa, as well as the weapons of the Lord, are present in all of the
viñëu-tattva incarnations. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé explains that these universal
characteristics of the Lord mentioned by the sage Karabhäjana are indications
of the Kåñëa avatära. Because Kåñëa is the source of all incarnations, all of the
symptoms of all other incarnations are to be found in His transcendental body.
TEXT 28
taM tad"A pauç&SaM matyaAR
mah"Ar"AjaAepalaºaNAma,
yajainta vaed"tan‡aAByaAM
parM" ijaÁaAs$avaAe na{pa
taà tadä puruñaà martyä
mahä-räjopalakñaëam
yajanti veda-tanträbhyäà
paraà jijïäsavo nåpa
SYNONYMS
tam—Him; tadä—in that age; puruñam—the supreme enjoyer;
martyäù—mortal men; mahä-räja—a great king; upalakñaëam—playing the
role of; yajanti—they worship; veda-tanträbhyäm—according to both the
original Vedas and ritual tantras; param-of the Supreme; jijïäsavaù—those
who want to gain knowledge; nåpa—O King.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, in Dväpara-yuga men who desire to know the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is the supreme enjoyer, worship Him in the mood
of honoring a great king, following the prescriptions of both the Vedas and
tantras.
PURPORT
When Lord Kåñëa was leaving the city of Hastinäpura, Arjuna personally
held an umbrella over the Lord, and Uddhava and Sätyaki fanned the Lord
with decorated fans (SB 1.10.17, 18). In this way, Emperor Yudhiñöhira and his
followers worshiped Kåñëa as the greatest of noble kings and as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Similarly, at the Räjasüya sacrifice all of the great
souls of the universe elected Kåñëa as the King of all kings, the greatest
personality, deserving of first worship. Such reverential worship of the Lord is
characteristic of Dväpara-yuga, as described in this verse
(mahä-räjopalakñaëam). With each successive yuga, namely Satya, Tretä,
Dväpara and Kali, the condition of human society deteriorates more and more.
As mentioned in this verse, the only favorable qualification of the residents of
Dväpara-yuga is that they are jijïäsavaù, strongly desirous of knowing the
Absolute Truth. Otherwise there is no good qualification mentioned. The
inhabitants of Satya-yuga were described as çäntäù, nirvairäù, suhådaù and
samäù, or peaceful, free from envy, the well-wishers of every living entity, and
fixed on the spiritual platform beyond the modes of material nature. Similarly
the inhabitants of Tretä-yuga were described as dharmiñöhäù and
brahma-vädinaù, or thoroughly religious, and expert followers of the Vedic
injunctions. In the present verse, the inhabitants of Dväpara-yuga are said to
be simply jijïäsavaù, desiring to know the Absolute Truth. Otherwise they are
described as martyäù, or subject to the weakness of mortal beings. If the human
society of even Dväpara-yuga was clearly inferior to that of Satya and
Tretä-yugas, we can hardly imagine the truly disastrous condition of human
society in Kali-yuga. Therefore, as will be mentioned in the following verses,
human beings who have taken their birth in the present age of Kali should
attach themselves rigidly to the movement of Caitanya Mahäprabhu to free
themselves from foolishness.
TEXTS 29-30
namastae vaAs$aude"vaAya
nama: s$aÆÿSaRNAAya ca
‘aâu°aAyaAinaç&Ü"Aya
tauByaM BagAvatae nama:
naAr"AyaNAAya [%Sayae
pauç&SaAya mah"Atmanae
ivaìeìr"Aya ivaìAya
s$avaRBaUtaAtmanae nama:
namas te väsudeväya
namaù saìkarñaëäya ca
pradyumnäyäniruddhäya
tubhyaà bhagavate namaù
näräyaëäya åñaye
puruñäya mahätmane
viçveçvaräya viçväya
sarva-bhütätmane namaù
SYNONYMS
namaù—obeisances; te—unto You; väsudeväya—Väsudeva;
namaù—obeisances; saìkarñaëäya—to Saìkarñaëa; ca—and;
pradyumnäya—to Pradyumna; aniruddhäya—to Aniruddha; tubhyam—to You;
bhagavate—the Personality of Godhead; namaù—obeisances; näräyaëäya
åñaye—to Lord Näräyaëa Åñi; puruñäya—the supreme enjoying male and the
creator of the material universe; mahä-ätmane—the supreme being;
viçva-éçvaräya—the Lord of the universe; viçväya—and Himself the very form
of the universe; sarva-bhüta-ätmane—the Supersoul of all living beings;
namaù—obeisances.
TRANSLATION
"Obeisances to You, O Supreme Lord Väsudeva, and to Your forms of
Saìkarñaëa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha. O Supreme Personality of Godhead, all
obeisances unto You. O Lord Näräyaëa Åñi, O creator of the universe, best of
personalities, master of this cosmos and original form of the universe, O
Supersoul of all created entities, all homage unto You."
PURPORT
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé explains that although Lord Kåñëa appeared at the end
of Dväpara-yuga, great sages chanted this verse from the beginning of that age
in expectation of His appearance.
Ordinary living entities, although eternally subordinate to the Lord,
become absorbed in attempting to dominate the material creation yet
ultimately remain under the control of the Supreme Lord. The constitutional
position of the living entity is engagement in the Lord's service. It is further
the constitutional position of the material nature to be engaged by the living
entity in satisfying the transcendental desires of the Lord. Thus these prayers,
as mentioned in this verse, are offered to the Supreme Lord in accordance
with the Païcarätra and the Vedic mantras so that one may become fixed in
remembering his eternal subordination to the Absolute Truth.
The supreme living entity, Kåñëa, eternally manifests Himself as the
catur-vyüha, or quadruple plenary expansion. The purport of this prayer is that
one should give up his false ego and pray to this catur-vyüha by offering Them
obeisances. Although the Absolute Truth is one without a second, the
Absolute Truth displays His unlimited opulences and potencies by expanding
Himself in innumerable plenary forms, of which the catur-vyüha is a principal
expansion. The original being is Väsudeva, the Personality of Godhead. When
the Godhead manifests His primeval energies and opulences, He is called
Saìkarñaëa. Pradyumna is the basis of the Viñëu expansion who is the soul of
the entire universe, and Aniruddha is the basis of the personal manifestation
of Viñëu as the Supersoul of every individual entity within the universe.
Among the four plenary expansions mentioned here, the original expansion is
Väsudeva, and the other three are considered to be particular manifestations
of Him.
When the living entity forgets that both he himself as well as the material
nature are meant for the Lord's service, the quality of ignorance becomes
prominent, and the conditioned entity desires to become himself the master.
Thus the conditioned soul imagines that he is a very important person within
society or that he is a great philosopher. The Vedic mantras and Païcarätra
give mankind instructions about devotional service to the Personality of
Godhead, which free one from the contamination of considering oneself a
prestigious member of society or a great philosopher. One in knowledge should
recognize himself as a tiny servant of the Supreme Absolute Truth.
In Dväpara-yuga, Deity worship of the Lord is prominent. Such Deity
worship is ultimately aimed at the process of çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù [SB
7.5.23]. Without hearing and chanting the glories of the Lord one cannot
perform Deity worship. In Deity worship it is required that the worshiper
glorify the names, forms, qualities, paraphernalia, entourage and pastimes of
the Supreme Lord. When such glorification is complete, the worshiper
becomes eligible to realize transcendental knowledge through hearing about
the Lord.
TEXT 31
wita ã"Apar" ovaI=zA
stauvainta jagAd"Iìr"ma,
naAnaAtan‡aivaDaAnaena
k(laAvaipa taTaA Za{NAu
iti dväpara urv-éça
stuvanti jagad-éçvaram
nänä-tantra-vidhänena
kaläv api tathä çåëu
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; dväpare—in the Dväpara age; uru-éça—O King; stuvanti—they
praise; jagat-éçvaram—the Lord of the universe; nänä—various; tantra—of
scriptures; vidhänena—by the regulations; kalau—in the age of Kali; api—also;
tathä—in which manner; çåëu—please hear.
TRANSLATION
O King, in this way people in Dväpara-yuga glorified the Lord of the
universe. In Kali-yuga also people worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead
by following various regulations of the revealed scriptures. Now kindly hear of
this from me.
PURPORT
The words kaläv api, "in Kali-yuga also," are very important in this verse. It
is well known that Kali-yuga is an irreligious age. Thus it is surprising that in
such a completely irreligious age the Supreme Lord is worshiped. Therefore it
is stated kaläv api, "even in Kali-yuga." In Kali-yuga the incarnation of the
Personality of Godhead does not directly assert Himself to be the Personality
of Godhead, but rather He is detected by expert devotees in accordance with
the revealed Vedic scriptures. Similarly, Prahläda Mahäräja states in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (7.9.38):
itthaà nå-tiryag-åñi-deva-jhañävatärair
lokän vibhävayasi haàsi jagat pratépän
dharmaà mahä-puruña päsi yugänuvåttaç
channaù kalau yad abhavas tri-yugo 'tha sa tvam
"In this way, my Lord, You appear in various incarnations as a human being, an
animal, a great saintly demigod, a fish or a tortoise, thus maintaining the entire
creation in different planetary systems and killing the demoniac principles.
According to the age, O my Lord, You protect the principles of religion. In the
age of Kali, however, You do not assert Yourself as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and therefore You are known as Triyuga, or the Lord who appears in
three yugas." Thus it is understood that it is difficult for common people in
Kali-yuga to recognize the incarnation of the Lord since in this age the Lord's
appearance is slightly concealed.
According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura the word
nänä-tantra-vidhänena indicates the importance in Kali-yuga of the Vaiñëava
scriptures known as the Païcarätras or Sätvata-païcarätras. It is stated in the
Bhägavatam, stré-çüdra-dvija-bandhünäà trayé na çruti-gocarä: [SB 1.4.25] in
Kali-yuga it is impossible for ordinary people to perform highly technical Vedic
sacrifices or the unbearable penances of the mystic yoga system. Such standard
Vedic processes are practically inaccessible for the spiritually retarded
population of Kali-yuga. Therefore the simple process of glorifying the
Personality of Godhead by chanting His holy names is essential in this age.
Such devotional processes as chanting the holy names of the Lord and
worshiping His Deity form are elaborately described in the Vaiñëava çästras
known as Païcarätras. Such tantric scriptures are referred to in this verse, and
it is stated that in Kali-yuga these devotional processes, taught by great äcäryas
such as Närada Muni, are the only practical means for worshiping the Lord.
This will be more clearly explained in the following verse.
TEXT 32
k{(SNAvaNA< itvaSaAk{(SNAM
s$aAËÿAepaAËÿAñpaASaRd"ma,
yaÁaE: s$aÆÿLtaRna‘aAyaEr,"
yajainta ih" s$aumaeDas$a:
kåñëa-varëaà tviñäkåñëaà
säìgopäìgästra-pärñadam
yajïaiù saìkértana-präyair
yajanti hi su-medhasaù
SYNONYMS
kåñëa-varëam—repeating the syllables kåñ-ëa; tviñä-with a luster;
akåñëam—not black (golden); sa-aìga—along with associates;
upa-aìga—servitors; astra—weapons; pärñadam—confidential companions;
yajïaiù—by sacrifice; saìkértana-präyaiù—consisting chiefly of congregational
chanting; yajanti—they worship; hi—certainly; su-medhasaù—intelligent
persons.
TRANSLATION
In the age of Kali, intelligent persons perform congregational chanting to
worship the incarnation of Godhead who constantly sings the names of Kåñëa.
Although His complexion is not blackish, He is Kåñëa Himself. He is
accompanied by His associates, servants, weapons and confidential companions.
PURPORT
This same verse is quoted by Kåñëadäsa Kaviräja in the
Caitanya-caritämåta, Ädi-lélä, Chapter Three, verse 52. His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda has given the following commentary on this
verse. "This text is from Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.5.32). Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has
explained this verse in his commentary on the Bhägavatam known as the
Krama-sandarbha, wherein he says that Lord Kåñëa also appears with a golden
complexion. That golden Lord Kåñëa is Lord Caitanya, who is worshiped by
intelligent men in this age. That is confirmed in Çrémad-Bhägavatam by Garga
Muni, who said that although the child Kåñëa was blackish, He also appears in
three other colors—red, white and yellow. He exhibited His white and red
complexions in the Satya and Tretä ages respectively. He did not exhibit the
remaining color, yellow—gold, until He appeared as Lord Caitanya, who is
known as Gaurahari.
"Çréla Jéva Gosvämé explains that kåñëa-varëam means Çré Kåñëa Caitanya.
Kåñëa-varëam and Kåñëa Caitanya are equivalent. The name Kåñëa appears
with both Lord Kåñëa and Lord Caitanya Kåñëa. Lord Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but He always engages in
describing Kåñëa and thus enjoying transcendental bliss by chanting and
remembering His name and form. Lord Kåñëa Himself appears as Lord
Caitanya to preach the highest gospel. Varëayati means 'utters' or 'describes.'
Lord Caitanya always chants the holy name of Kåñëa and describes it also, and
because He is Kåñëa Himself, whoever meets Him will automatically chant the
holy name of Kåñëa and later describe it to others. He injects one with
transcendental Kåñëa consciousness, which merges the chanter in
transcendental bliss. In all respects, therefore, He appears before everyone as
Kåñëa, either by personality or by sound. Simply by seeing Lord Caitanya one
at once remembers Lord Kåñëa. One may therefore accept Him as viñëu-tattva.
In other words, Lord Caitanya is Lord Kåñëa Himself.
"Säìgopäìgästra-pärñadam further indicates that Lord Caitanya is Lord
Kåñëa. His body is always decorated with ornaments of sandalwood and with
sandalwood paste. By His superexcellent beauty He subdues all the people of
the age. In other descents the Lord sometimes used weapons to defeat the
demoniac, but in this age the Lord subdues them with His all-attractive figure
as Caitanya Mahäprabhu. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé explains that His beauty is His
astra, or weapon, to subdue the demons. Because He is all-attractive, it is to be
understood that all the demigods lived with Him as His companions. His acts
were uncommon and His associates wonderful. When He propagated the
saìkértana movement, He attracted many great scholars and äcäryas, especially
in Bengal and Orissa. Lord Caitanya is always accompanied by His best
associates like Lord Nityänanda, Advaita, Gadädhara and Çréväsa.
"Çréla Jéva Gosvämé cites a verse from the Vedic literature that says that
there is no necessity of performing sacrificial demonstrations or ceremonial
functions. He comments that instead of engaging in such external, pompous
exhibitions, all people, regardless of caste, color or creed, can assemble
together and chant Hare Kåñëa to worship Lord Caitanya. Kåñëa-varëaà
tviñäkåñëam [SB 11.5.32] indicates that prominence should be given to the
name Kåñëa. Lord Caitanya taught Kåñëa consciousness and chanted the name
of Kåñëa. Therefore, to worship Lord Caitanya, everyone should together
chant the mahä-mantra—Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/
Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare. To propagate worship in
churches, temples or mosques is not possible because people have lost interest
in that. But anywhere and everywhere, people can chant Hare Kåñëa. Thus
worshiping Lord Caitanya, they can perform the highest activity and fulfill the
highest religious purpose of satisfying the Supreme Lord.
"Çréla Särvabhauma Bhaööäcärya, a famous disciple of Lord Caitanya, said:
'The principle of transcendental devotional service having been lost, Çré Kåñëa
Caitanya has appeared to deliver again the process of devotion. He is so kind
that He is distributing love of Kåñëa. Everyone should be attracted more and
more to His lotus feet, as humming bees are attracted to a lotus flower.' "
The incarnation of Caitanya Mahäprabhu is also described in the Çré
Viñëu-sahasra-näma, which appears in Chapter 189 of the Däna-dharma-parva
of Mahäbhärata. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has quoted this reference as follows:
suvarëa-varëo hemäìgo varäìgaç candanäìgadé. "In His early pastimes He
appears as a householder with a golden complexion. His limbs are beautiful,
and His body, smeared with the pulp of sandalwood, seems like molten gold."
He has also quoted, sannyäsa-kåc chamaù çänto niñöhä-çänti-paräyaëaù: "In His
later pastimes He accepts the sannyäsa order, and He is equipoised and
peaceful. He is the highest abode of peace and devotion, for He silences the
impersonalist nondevotees."
TEXT 33
DyaeyaM s$ad"A pair"Bava£amaBaIí"d"AehM"
taITaARs$padM" izAvaivair"iÂanautaM zAr"Nyama,
Ba{tyaAitaRhM" ‘aNAtapaAla BavaAibDapaAetaM
vande" mah"Apauç&Sa tae car"NAAr"ivand"ma,
dhyeyaà sadä paribhava-ghnam abhéñöa-dohaà
térthäspadaà çiva-viriïci-nutaà çaraëyam
bhåtyärti-haà praëata-päla bhaväbdhi-potaà
vande mahä-puruña te caraëäravindam
SYNONYMS
dhyeyam—fit to be meditated upon; sadä—always; paribhava—the insults of
material existence; ghnam—which destroy; abhéñöa—the true desire of the
soul; doham—which amply reward; tértha—of all the holy places and great
saintly personalities; äspadam—the abode; çiva-viriïci—by the greatest of
demigods, Lord Çiva and Brahmä; nutam—which are bowed down to;
çaraëyam—most worthy of taking shelter of; bhåtya—of Your servants;
ärti-ham—which relieve the distress; praëata-päla—O protector of all who
simply offer respects to You; bhava-abdhi—of the ocean of birth and death;
potam—which are a suitable boat (for crossing); vande—I offer my homage;
mahä-puruña—O Lord Mahäprabhu; te—to Your; caraëa-aravindam—lotus
feet.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, You are the Mahä-puruña, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and I worship Your lotus feet, which are the only eternal object of
meditation. Those feet destroy the embarrassing conditions of material life and
freely award the greatest desire of the soul, the attainment of pure love of
Godhead. My dear Lord, Your lotus feet are the shelter of all holy places and of
all saintly authorities in the line of devotional service and are honored by
powerful demigods like Lord Çiva and Lord Brahmä. My Lord, You are so kind
that You willingly protect all those who simply bow down to You with respect,
and thus You mercifully relieve all the distress of Your servants. In conclusion,
my Lord, Your lotus feet are actually the suitable boat for crossing over the
ocean of birth and death, and therefore even Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva seek
shelter at Your lotus feet."
PURPORT
The incarnation of the Personality of Godhead in Kali-yuga is described
and worshiped in this verse. The sage Karabhäjana, after describing the
incarnation of Godhead in each of the three previous yugas-Satya, Tretä and
Dväpara—presented suitable prayers which are utilized for glorifying the Lord
in each particular age. After describing the Lord's manifestation in Kali-yuga
with the verse kåñëa-varëaà tviñäkåñëam [SB 11.5.32], this and the next verse
are now presented to glorify the Lord's appearance in Kali-yuga as Caitanya
Mahäprabhu, kåñëa-varëam. Caitanya Mahäprabhu appears in Kali-yuga and
teaches everyone to chant the holy name of Kåñëa. The members of the
ISKCON movement are so much absorbed in kåñëa-varëam, or chanting the
holy names of Kåñëa, that sometimes ordinary persons refer to them as "the
Kåñëas." Thus whoever comes into contact with Caitanya Mahäprabhu's
movement immediately begins to worship Kåñëa by chanting His holy name.
The words dhyeyaà sadä, or "always to be meditated upon," indicate that
there are no hard-and-fast rules in this age for chanting the holy names of
Kåñëa. In Kali-yuga the authorized process of meditation is to chant the holy
names of the Lord, especially the mantra Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa
Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare. This
process is to be executed constantly and always (sadä). Similarly, Caitanya
Mahäprabhu stated, nämnäm akäri bahudhä nija-sarva-çaktis taträrpitä
niyamitaù smaraëe na kälaù: in Kali-yuga, the Supreme Lord has kindly
invested all of His potencies in His holy name, and there are no hard-and-fast
rules for chanting such names. The mention of such rules refers to
käla-deça-niyama, or regulations of time and place. Normally there are strict
regulations governing the time, season, place, conditions, etc., under which
one may execute a particular Vedic ceremony or chant a particular mantra.
However, one should chant the holy name of Kåñëa everywhere and at all
times, twenty-four hours a day. Thus there is no restriction in terms of time
and place. This is the meaning of Caitanya Mahäprabhu's statement.
The word paribhava-ghnam is significant in this verse. In Kali-yuga human
society is infected with enviousness. There is great envy, even among members
of the same family, who constantly quarrel in this age. Similarly, neighbors are
envious of each other and of each other's possessions and status. And entire
nations, burning with envy, go to war unnecessarily at the risk of genocide
caused by terrible modern weapons. But all of these harassments caused by
family members, strangers, so-called friends who are unfaithful, opposing
nations, financial competition, social disgrace, cancer, etc., can be relieved by
taking shelter of the lotus feet of Caitanya Mahäprabhu. It is not possible to
save the material body, but one who takes shelter of Caitanya Mahäprabhu
loosens the hard knot of the heart that psychologically binds him to the
hallucination of identifying with the external body or the subtle material
mind. Once this false identification is broken, one can be blissful in any
adverse material condition. Those who foolishly try to make the temporary
body eternal are wasting their time and neglecting the actual process for
making life permanent, which is to take shelter of the lotus feet of Caitanya
Mahäprabhu, who is Kåñëa Himself.
In this verse the word térthäspadam means that the lotus feet of Caitanya
Mahäprabhu are the shelter of all holy places. As the Kåñëa consciousness
movement spreads all over the world, we often find, especially in poor
third-world countries, that it is very difficult for people to travel to India to
visit the most exalted holy places such as Våndävana and Mäyäpur. Especially
in South America it is very difficult for a large number of devotees to visit
such places in India and purify themselves. But Caitanya Mahäprabhu is so
merciful that simply by worshiping Him, Vaiñëavas throughout the world
receive the benefit of having visited the supreme holy place, namely the lotus
feet of Caitanya Mahäprabhu. Thus there is no loss for the followers of the
Kåñëa consciousness movement, despite their external situation.
In this regard, Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has stated, kalau
dravya-deça-kriyädi-janitaà durväram apävitryam api näçaìkanéyam iti bhävaù.
In this age the world is so polluted by sinful life that it is very difficult to
become free from all of the symptoms of Kali-yuga. Still, one who is faithfully
serving in the missionary work of Caitanya Mahäprabhu need not fear
occasional, unavoidable symptoms of Kali-yuga. The followers of Caitanya
Mahäprabhu strictly follow the four regulative principles of no illicit sex, no
intoxication, no meat-eating and no gambling. They try to always chant Hare
Kåñëa and engage in the service of the Lord. However, it may happen that by
accident an occasional symptom of Kali-yuga such as envy, anger, lust, greed,
etc., may momentarily appear in the life of a devotee. But if such a devotee is
actually surrendered at the lotus feet of Caitanya Mahäprabhu, by His mercy
such an unwanted symptom, or anartha, will quickly disappear. Therefore, a
sincere follower of the Lord should never be discouraged in the execution of
his prescribed duty but should be confident that he will be protected by
Caitanya Mahäprabhu.
It is also mentioned in this verse, çiva-viriïci-nutam. Lord Çiva and Lord
Brahmä are undoubtedly the two most powerful personalities within this
universe. Still, they meticulously worship the lotus feet of Caitanya
Mahäprabhu. Why? Çaraëyam. Even Lord Çiva and Lord Brahmä are not safe
without the shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord.
The words bhåtyärti-haà praëata-päla indicate that if one simply bows
down without duplicity at the lotus feet of the Lord (praëata), then the Lord
will give such a sincere candidate all protection. This verse does not mention
that one need be an exalted devotee of the Lord. Rather, it is stated that if one
simply bows down at the Lord's lotus feet he will get all protection, and this
also applies to anyone who is trying to serve the mission of Caitanya
Mahäprabhu. Even the neophyte will get all protection by the mercy of the
Lord.
In regard to the words bhaväbdhi-potam, or "a suitable boat for crossing the
ocean of material existence," there is the following statement by Lord Brahmä
and other demigods in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam: tvat-päda-potena mahat-kåtena
kurvanti go-vatsa-padaà bhaväbdhim. "By accepting Your lotus feet as the boat
by which to cross the ocean of nescience, one follows in the footsteps of the
mahäjanas and can cross that ocean as easily as one steps over the hoofprint of
a calf." According to Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé, a follower of Caitanya Mahäprabhu
is jévan-mukta, or a liberated soul. Thus the devotee is not worried about his
future destination, for he is confident that the Lord will quickly take him
across the ocean of material existence. Such confidence is referred to in the
Upadeçämåta by the word niçcayät, meaning firm conviction about the potency
of the process of devotional service. According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté
Öhäkura, the statement çiva-viriïci-nutam is also understood to indicate that
Caitanya Mahäprabhu is worshiped by Lord Çiva's incarnation Advaita Äcärya
and by Lord Brahmä's incarnation Haridäsa Öhäkura.
Caitanya Mahäprabhu is addressed in this verse as mahä-puruña, meaning
puruñottama, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Similarly, there is
reference to mahäprabhu in the Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad (3.12), mahän prabhur
vai puruñaù sattvasyaiña pravartakaù: "The supreme prabhu is the Personality of
Godhead, who is the initiator of the entire cosmos." Similarly, Lord Çré
Gaurakåñëa is addressed by the word mahäpuruña in this verse, and the whole
intention of this verse is to offer obeisances at His lotus feet. Such lotus feet
are the actual eternal object of meditation because they cut off the bondage of
material life and fulfill the desires of the devotees. Although the conditioned
souls laboring arduously under illusion pursue many temporary goals in life,
there is no possibility of their achieving actual bliss or knowledge. Such eternal
bliss and knowledge is actually wealth. One should not neglect the lotus feet of
Caitanya Mahäprabhu, taking Him to be an ordinary person, and instead
accept the temporary, useless shelter offered by the illusory energy of the Lord.
Those yogés who falsely select some other object of meditation besides the
lotus feet of the Lord are simply creating obstructions to their own eternal life.
When the meditator, the meditation and the object of meditation are all on
the eternal platform of the Lord, then actual shelter has been achieved.
Generally the conditioned souls are engaged in bhoga-tyäga. Sometimes they
run madly after material prestige and sense gratification, and sometimes they
desperately try to renounce these things. However, beyond this vicious cycle of
alternating sense gratification and renunciation are the lotus feet of the Lord,
which constitute the ultimate abode of peace and happiness for the living
entity.
The following are additional notes on this verse given by Çréla
Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura.
dhyeyam—the object indicated by the word dhémahi in the Gäyatré mantra.
térthäspadam—the original shelter of holy places headed by Çré Gauòakñetra
and Vraja-maëòala; or the original shelter, namely the lotus feet of the Lord,
of the great devotees of the Brahma-sampradäya following in the succession of
faithful hearing. The succession of faithful hearing begins with Çrémad
Änandatértha (Madhväcärya) and is continued by the rüpänuga
mahä-bhägavatas, the highly elevated followers of Rüpa Gosvämé and Caitanya
Mahäprabhu.
çiva-viriïci-nutam—He who is worshiped by the incarnation of Lord Çiva,
Çrémad Advaitäcärya Prabhu, and by the incarnation of Lord Viriïci, Çrémän
Äcärya Haridäsa Prabhu.
bhåtyärti-ham—He who destroyed by His causeless mercy the misery of His
own servant, the brähmaëa Väsudeva, who was afflicted with leprosy in
caitanya-lélä.
bhaväbdhi-potam—the means of crossing over the ocean of saàsära; or the
shelter of those who are freeing themselves from material existence, which
afflicts the living entity in the form of hankering for liberation or material
enjoyment. Such persons who took advantage of this transcendental boat of
the Lord's lotus feet are Särvabhauma Bhaööäcärya, who was saved from
mukti-käma, or desire for liberation, and Pratäparudra Mahäräja, who was
saved from bhukti-käma, or the desire for material opulence.
TEXT 34
tyaftvaA s$auäu"styajas$aure"ips$atar"AjyalaºmaI%M
DaimaRï" @AyaRvacas$aA yad"gAAd"r"Nyama,
maAyaAma{gAM d"iyatayaeips$atamanvaDaAvaä,"
vande" mah"Apauç&Sa tae car"NAAr"ivand"ma,
tyaktvä su-dustyaja-surepsita-räjya-lakñméà
dharmiñöha ärya-vacasä yad agäd araëyam
mäyä-mågaà dayitayepsitam anvadhävad
vande mahä-puruña te caraëäravindam
SYNONYMS
tyaktvä—abandoning; su-dustyaja—most difficult to give up;
sura-épsita—anxiously desired by the demigods; räjya-lakñmém—the goddess of
fortune and her opulence; dharmiñöhaù—most perfectly fixed in religiousness;
ärya-vacasä-according to the words of a brähmaëa (who had cursed Him to be
deprived of all the happiness of family life); yat—He who; agät—went;
araëyam—to the forest (taking to the renounced order of life);
mäyä-mågam—the conditioned soul, who is always searching out illusory
enjoyment; dayitayä—out of sheer mercy; épsitam—His desired object;
anvadhävat—running after; vande—I offer my homage; mahä-puruña—O Lord
Mahäprabhu; te—to Your; caraëa-aravindam—lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
O Mahä-puruña, I worship Your lotus feet. You gave up the association of
the goddess of fortune and all her opulence, which is most difficult to renounce
and is hankered after by even the great demigods. Being the most faithful
follower of the path of religion, You thus left for the forest in obedience to a
brähmaëa's curse. Out of sheer mercifulness You chased after the fallen
conditioned souls, who are always in pursuit of the false enjoyment of illusion,
and at the same time engaged in searching out Your own desired object, Lord
Çyämasundara.
PURPORT
According to the Vaiñëava äcäryas, this important verse of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is understood to describe Caitanya Mahäprabhu, Lord
Kåñëa and also Lord Çré Rämacandra. This verse appears within the discussion
by the sage Karabhäjana of the yugävatäras, or the different incarnations of
the Personality of Godhead who deliver the conditioned souls of each age. The
prayers ending with the words vande mahäpuruña te caraëäravindam are
understood to glorify the incarnation of Lord Kåñëa in Kali-yuga known as
Caitanya Mahäprabhu. Caitanya Mahäprabhu lived for twenty-four years in
Navadvépa as a householder and enjoyed immense popularity among both
scholars and ordinary persons. His saìkértana movement was completely
supported by the local government, even though it was Muslim. And Caitanya
Mahäprabhu had the pleasure of marrying the goddess of fortune. No ordinary
woman of the material world, no matter how gorgeous she may be, can in any
way compare with the beautiful goddess of fortune. Everyone in the universe,
including Lord Brahmä, is searching after the goddess of fortune. Therefore it
is stated here, surepsita.
However, Caitanya Mahäprabhu is Lord Kåñëa appearing as a brähmaëa,
and therefore He is certainly dharmiñöhaù, or the most religious. Actually the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is always dharmiñöhaù, whether He appears as
a cowherd boy, a great king or a brähmaëa, because the Lord Himself is the
original source and personification of all religious principles. However, in the
pastimes of Caitanya Mahäprabhu there are very few political or economic
activities. Caitanya Mahäprabhu appeared as a great philosopher—brähmaëa,
and thus He is certainly dharmiñöhaù. In Caitanya-caritämåta, in the
Seventeenth Chapter of the Ädi-lélä, it is described that a certain brähmaëa,
who was well known for being harsh and cursing others, could not enter the
kértana hall where Caitanya Mahäprabhu was performing kértana because the
door was locked. Being very agitated and breaking his brähmaëa's thread, he
cursed Caitanya Mahäprabhu the next day on the bank of the Ganges, saying,
"I shall now curse You, for Your behavior has greatly aggrieved me. You shall
be bereft of all material happiness." However, Caitanya Mahäprabhu felt great
jubilation within Himself, since His mission was
vairägya-vidyä-nija-bhakti-yoga [Cc. Madhya 6.254]—to give up the illusion of
material sense gratification and staunchly engage twenty-four hours a day in
the devotional service of the Lord. Therefore, Caitanya Mahäprabhu took this
curse as a blessing, and soon after, the Lord took sannyäsa. Thus it is stated in
this verse that by the words of the Äryan, the brähmaëa (ärya-vacasä),
Caitanya Mahäprabhu took sannyäsa (yad agäd araëyam) and went traveling
through the different forests of India on the way to Våndävana, and later
South India. Caitanya Mahäprabhu wanted especially to preserve the prestige
of the brähmaëa class, and therefore He decided to keep the brähmaëa's curse
intact.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has explained the word mäyä-mågam
as follows. Mäyä means one's so-called wife, children and bank account, which
keep one firmly bound up in the material bodily concept of life. The word
mågam indicates mågyati, or "to search out." Thus, mäyä-mågam indicates the
conditioned living entity, who is always frantically searching for the latest
up-to-the-minute sense gratification in the material bodily concept of society,
friendship and love. Anvadhävat indicates that Caitanya Mahäprabhu was
always visibly going here and there, searching after the fallen conditioned
souls. Caitanya Mahäprabhu would sometimes embrace the conditioned souls
on the pretext of religious friendship or ecstasy. But actually, the Lord was
touching the bodies of the conditioned souls to pull them out of the ocean of
material existence and hurl them into the ocean of ecstatic love of Godhead.
Thus Caitanya Mahäprabhu was the most merciful and munificent
incarnation of the Lord, whose mercy surpassed the bounds of mundane
discrimination in the matter of caste, color and creed.
The word dayitayä can be explained as follows. The Sanskrit word dayä
means "mercy." Thus, by grammatical derivation, the word used in this verse,
dayitayä, indicates that because of being the most merciful, Caitanya
Mahäprabhu was busily engaged in rescuing the fallen conditioned souls, who
are completely distracted and bewildered by the external illusory energy of the
Lord. The quality of being the most merciful is part and parcel of the character
of the mahä-puruña, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, this verse also describes the incarnation of
Lord Kåñëa Himself in His original blackish form. Thus the words
surepsita-räjya-lakñmém indicate çré-mathurä-sampattim, or the opulence of
Mathurä. Mathurä is described in Vedic literature as the reservoir of all
opulence because of the touch of the Lord's lotus feet in that precinct. But
Kåñëa, although taking birth in the opulent city of Mathurä, transferred
Himself to the forest village of Våndävana. In this case the word ärya-vacasä
indicates the order of Lord Kåñëa's original parents, Vasudeva and Devaké. In
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.3.22, 29) both Vasudeva and Devaké express their fear
at the threat of Kaàsa, who had already killed all of Kåñëa's elder brothers.
The word ärya-vacasä thus indicates that with great love they requested Kåñëa
to kindly make some arrangement to avoid Kaàsa. And Kåñëa, to obey their
order, transferred Himself to the forest village of Våndävana (yad agäd
araëyam).
In this context, the words mäyä-mågam indicate the special, exalted
relationship between Çrématé Rädhäräëé and Çré Kåñëa. Mäyä also indicates
the internal potency of Kåñëa, yoga-mäyä. The original form of Kåñëa's
internal potency is Çrématé Rädhäräëé. Due to the inconceivable love of
Çrématé Rädhäräëé, Lord Kåñëa becomes easily controlled by Her. Thus,
mågam, or "animal" in this case indicates kréòä-mågam, or "a toy animal." Just as
a beautiful young girl may play with so many dolls or stuffed animals, similarly
Lord Kåñëa becomes just like a doll in the hands of the most beautiful young
girl, Çrématé-Rädhäräëé. According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, Çrématé Rädhäräëé
performed innumerable types of worship in order to bind Kåñëa more and
more to Her because Çrématé Rädhäräëé cannot live without Kåñëa. Thus, due
to Çrématé Rädhäräëé's ärädhana, or worship, Kåñëa can never leave
Våndävana. He runs here and there in Våndävana, protecting the cows,
playing with His friends and engaging in countless intrigues of love with
Çrématé Rädhäräëé and the gopés. Thus the word anvadhävat indicates Kåñëa's
boyish activities, His running throughout the transcendental land of
Våndävana, tightly under the control of the love of Çrématé Rädhäräëé.
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé has explained how this verse also describes the
incarnation of Lord Çré Rämacandra. Although the Lord is completely
independent and detached from everything, He becomes attached to His pure
devotees due to their love for Him. In the great capital of Ayodhyä all of the
citizens loved Rämacandra more than can be described. In this context
ärya-vacasä means that by the order of His father, who was just like His guru,
Rämacandra gave up everything and went to the forest. There He exhibited
His great affection for mother Sétä and chased after mäyä-mågam, or the
illusory deer that had been created by the trick of Rävaëa. That this golden
deer was especially desired by Çrématé Sétädevé is indicated by the word
dayitayepsitam.
All of the limbs of the Lord's transcendental body are nondifferent and
interchangeable, as stated in Brahma-saàhitä (5.32):
aìgäni yasya sakalendriya-våttimanti
paçyanti pänti kalayanti ciraà jaganti
änanda-cinmaya-sad-ujjvala-vigrahasya
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
All of the limbs (aìgäni) of the Supreme Lord are sakalendriya-våttimanti, or
possessing all of the functions of all of the other limbs. Thus the two lotus feet
of the Personality of Godhead are a plenary representation of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and worshiping the Lord's lotus feet immediately
places the worshiper in the ocean of transcendental bliss. There is no factual
difference in spiritual quality between the incarnations of Caitanya
Mahäprabhu, Lord Kåñëa and Lord Çré Rämacandra. As stated in Vedic
literatures, advaitam acyutam anädim ananta-rüpam [Bs. 5.33]. Therefore there
is no contradiction in the opinions of the äcäryas that this verse wonderfully
glorifies three different manifestations of the one Absolute Truth. Caitanya
Mahäprabhu is undoubtedly the Supreme Personality of Godhead. His
transcendental attributes fulfill in every sense of the term the descriptions of
the Absolute Truth as given in Vedic literature. In Caitanya-caritämåta, in the
Third Chapter of the Ädi-lélä, Kåñëadäsa Kaviräja Gosvämé and Çréla
Prabhupäda have given elaborate explanations of the transcendental status of
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, which the reader can refer to for further
information.
Everyone should follow the example of the sage Karabhäjana and worship
the lotus feet of the Mahäprabhu, the mahä-puruña, Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu.
One should not rot on the platform of mental speculation and whimsical
interpretation but should actually revive his lost relationship with the
Absolute Truth by surrendering to Caitanya Mahäprabhu. Those who are
worshiping Caitanya Mahäprabhu are deriving wonderful spiritual results and
are tasting the fruit of love of Kåñëa. Therefore, vande mahä-puruña te
caraëäravindam: let us humbly bow down at the lotus feet of the original
Personality of Godhead, Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, who is the mahä-puruña
glorified within Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
Corroborating the explanation of this verse, the followers of Caitanya
Mahäprabhu also worship Him in His six-armed form of ñaò-bhuja. Two arms
carry the waterpot and daëòa of the sannyäsé Caitanya Mahäprabhu, two arms
carry the flute of Lord Kåñëa, and two arms carry the bow and arrow of Çré
Rämacandra. This ñaò-bhuja form is the actual purport of this verse of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 35
WvaM yaugAAnauè&paAByaAM
BagAvaAna, yaugAvaitaRiBa:
manaujaEir"jyatae r"Ajana,
™aeyas$aAmaIìr"Ae h"ir":
evaà yugänurüpäbhyäà
bhagavän yuga-vartibhiù
manujair ijyate räjan
çreyasäm éçvaro hariù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; yuga-anurüpäbhyäm—(by particular names and forms) suitable
for each age; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
yuga-vartibhiù—by those living in each of the different ages;
manujaiù—human beings; ijyate—is worshiped; räjan—O King; çreyasäm—of
all spiritual benefit; éçvaraù—the controller; hariù—Lord Hari.
TRANSLATION
Thus, O King, the Supreme Lord Hari is the giver of all desirable benefits of
life. Intelligent human beings worship the particular forms and names that the
Lord manifests in different ages.
PURPORT
The word yugänurüpäbhyäm is significant here. Anurüpa means "suitable" or
"appropriate." The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, anxiously desires
that all conditioned living entities come back home, back to Godhead, for an
eternal life of bliss and knowledge. Thus, the Lord reveals Himself in each of
the four ages—Satya, Tretä, Dväpara and Kali—in a form appropriate for
worship by the human beings of that age. In his Laghu-bhägavatämåta
(Pürva-khaëòa 1.25), Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé states:
kathyate varëa-nämäbhyäà
çuklaù satya-yuge hariù
raktaù çyämaù kramät kåñëas
tretäyäà dväpare kalau
"The Supreme Lord Hari is described in terms of His color and names as çukla
[white, or the most pure] in Satya-yuga, and as red, dark blue and black
respectively in Tretä, Dväpara and Kali." Thus, although in each age various
names suitable for glorifying the Lord are given, such as Haàsa and Suparëa in
Satya-yuga, Viñëu and Yajïa in Tretä-yuga, and Väsudeva and Saìkarñaëa in
Dväpara-yuga, similar names are not given for Kali-yuga, although such names
exist, in order to avoid disclosing cheaply the truth of the incarnation of Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu.
In Kali-yuga human society is infested with hypocrisy and superficiality.
There is a strong tendency toward imitation and fraud in this age. Therefore
the incarnation of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu is revealed in Vedic literature in
a confidential, discrete way, so that it will be known to the authorized persons
who can then propagate the mission of the Lord on the earth. We actually see
in this modern age that many foolish and ordinary persons claim to be God or
incarnations, avatäras, etc. There are many cheap philosophies and academies
that promise, for a moderate fee, to make one God in a short time. In America
one famous religious group promises its followers that they will all become the
Supreme Lord in heaven. Such bogus preaching goes on in the name of
Christianity. Thus, were Caitanya Mahäprabhu's name widely spoken of in
Vedic literature, there would soon be a veritable plague of imitation Caitanya
Mahäprabhus infesting the world.
Therefore, to prevent this pandemonium, discretion is exercised in the
Vedic literatures in Kali-yuga, and in a sober, concealed way the actual
followers of Vedic culture are informed through the Vedic mantras of the
descent of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. This discrete system, selected by the
Lord Himself for His appearance in Kali-yuga, is proving to be greatly
successful on the earth planet. And throughout the world millions of people
are chanting the holy names of Kåñëa without the unbearable harassment of
hundreds and thousands of imitation Caitanya Mahäprabhus. Those who
seriously desire to approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead can easily
understand the Lord's mission, whereas cynical materialistic rascals, puffed up
by false prestige and madly considering their insignificant intelligence to be
greater than the intelligence of Lord Kåñëa, cannot understand the beautiful
arrangements made by the Lord for His graceful descent into the material
world. Thus, although Kåñëa is çreyasäm éçvaraù, or the Lord of all
benedictions, such foolish persons turn away from the Lord's mission and in
this way deprive themselves of their own true benefit in life.
TEXT 36
k(ilaM s$aBaAjayantyaAyaAR
gAuNA ÁaA: s$aAr"BaAigAna:
ya‡a s$aÆÿLtaR"naenaEva
s$avaRsvaATaAeR'iBalaByatae
kalià sabhäjayanty äryä
guëa jïäù sära-bhäginaù
yatra saìkértanenaiva
sarva-svärtho 'bhilabhyate
SYNONYMS
kalim—the age of Kali; sabhäjayanti—they praise; äryäù—progressive souls;
guëa-jïaù—who know the true value (of the age); sära-bhäginaù—who are
able to pick out the essence; yatra—in which; saìkértanena—by the
congregational chanting of the holy names of the Supreme Lord; eva—merely;
sarva—all; sva-arthaù—desired goals; abhilabhyate—are attained.
TRANSLATION
Those who are actually advanced in knowledge are able to appreciate the
essential value of this age of Kali. Such enlightened persons worship Kali-yuga
because in this fallen age all perfection of life can easily be achieved by the
performance of saìkértana.
PURPORT
It is stated here that among the four ages—Satya, Tretä, Dväpara and
Kali—Kali-yuga is actually the best because in this age the Lord mercifully
distributes the highest perfection of consciousness, namely Kåñëa
consciousness, very freely. The word ärya has been defined by Çréla
Prabhupäda as "one who is advancing spiritually." The nature of an advanced
person is to search for the essence of life. For example, the essence of the
material body is not the body itself but the spirit soul that is within the body;
therefore an intelligent person gives more attention to the eternal spirit soul
than to the temporary body. Similarly, although Kali-yuga is considered to be
an ocean of contamination, there is also an ocean of good fortune in Kali-yuga,
namely the saìkértana movement. In other words, all of the degraded qualities
of this age are completely counteracted by the process of chanting the holy
names of the Lord. Thus it is stated in the Vedic language,
dhyäyan kåte yajan yajïais
tretäyäà dväpare 'rcayan
yad äpnoti tad äpnoti
kalau saìkértya keçavam
"Whatever is achieved in Satya-yuga by meditation, in Tretä by offering ritual
sacrifices and in Dväpara by temple worship is achieved in Kali-yuga by
chanting the names of Lord Keçava congregationally."
The Vedic process gradually lifts the conditioned entity out of the darkness
of ahaìkära, or false identification with the gross material body, and brings
him to the platform of self-realization, or ahaà brahmäsmi(95), "I am spirit
soul. I am eternal." One has to make further progress to discover that although
one is eternal, there is a superior eternal entity, who is the Lord Himself
within one's own heart and within every atom in the material universe.
Beyond this second phase of self-realization there is the third and final stage of
perfection, which is realization of Bhagavän, or the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, in His own abode.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is not primarily the superintendent
of this world but rather the enjoyer of His own world, which is beyond the
most fantastic dreams of the conditioned living entity. In other words,
although the king or president of a country is ultimately the controller of the
prison department, the king or president derives actual pleasure within his
own palace and not in administering justice to the foolish prisoners. Similarly,
the Lord appoints the demigods to administer the material creation on His
behalf while He Himself personally enjoys the ocean of transcendental bliss in
His own transcendental kingdom. Thus, realization of the Lord within His own
kingdom is far superior to the primitive understanding that the Lord is the
"creator" of the prison of the material world. This realization of Bhagavän
begins with understanding that there are innumerable Vaikuëöha planets in
the spiritual sky and that on each of them a particular expansion of Näräyaëa
dwells with His innumerable devotees who are attached to that particular
form. The central and chief planet in the spiritual sky is called Kåñëaloka, and
there the Personality of Godhead exhibits His supreme and original form of
Govinda. As confirmed by Lord Brahmä, govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà
bhajämi **. Lord Brahmä also states:
éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù
sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù
anädir ädir govindaù
sarva-käraëa-käraëam
(Bs. 5.1)
Thus, love of Kåñëa and entrance into Kåñëa's planet in the spiritual sky is the
most supremely perfect and exalted status of life available anywhere, at any
time, throughout the totality of existence. That perfection is available in
Kali-yuga simply by chanting the holy names of God: Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa,
Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare.
Therefore every sane man, woman or child should deeply understand the
unprecedented opportunity offered by Caitanya Mahäprabhu and seriously
take up this chanting process. Only the most unfortunate and irrational person
will neglect this transcendental opportunity.
TEXT 37
na ÷ta: par"maAe laABaAe
de"ih"naAM ”aAmyataAimah"
yataAe ivande"ta par"maAM
zAAintaM nazyaita s$aMs$a{ita:
na hy ataù paramo läbho
dehinäà bhrämyatäm iha
yato vindeta paramäà
çäntià naçyati saàsåtiù
SYNONYMS
na—there is no; hi—indeed; ataù—than this (process of saìkértana);
paramaù—greater; läbhaù—thing to be gained; dehinäm—for embodied souls;
bhrämyatäm—who are being forced to wander; iha—throughout this material
universe; yataù—from which; vindeta—one obtains; paramäm—the supreme;
çäntim—peace; naçyati—and is destroyed; saàsåtiù—the cycle of repeated
birth and death.
TRANSLATION
Indeed, there is no higher possible gain for embodied souls forced to wander
throughout the material world than the Supreme Lord's saìkértana movement,
by which one can attain the supreme peace and free oneself from the cycle of
repeated birth and death.
PURPORT
In the Skanda Puräëa, as well as in other Puräëas, there is the following
statement: mahä-bhägavatä nityaà kalau kurvanti kértanam. "During Kali-yuga
the great devotees of the Lord always engage in kértana, chanting the Lord's
holy names." It is the nature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead to be
merciful, and He is especially merciful to those who, in a helpless condition,
take complete shelter of His lotus feet. One can immediately take shelter of
the lotus feet of the Lord by chanting His holy names. According to Çrédhara
Svämé, even in previous ages such as Satya-yuga it was not possible for the
living entities to achieve the perfection that is available in Kali-yuga. Çréla Jéva
Gosvämé has explained this as follows. In former ages such as Satya-yuga
human beings were perfectly qualified and easily performed even the most
difficult spiritual processes, meditating for many thousands of years practically
without eating or sleeping. Thus, although in any age one who completely
takes shelter of the Lord's holy name gets all perfection, the highly qualified
inhabitants of Satya-yuga do not consider that merely moving the tongue and
lips, chanting the Lord's holy name, is a complete process and that the Lord's
holy name is the only shelter within the universe. They are more attracted to
the difficult and elaborate yoga system of meditation, complete with
sophisticated sitting postures, painstaking control of the breath and deep,
extended meditations in trance on the Personality of Godhead within the
heart. In Satya-yuga sinful life is practically unheard of, and therefore people
are not afflicted with the terrible reactions seen in Kali-yuga, such as world
war, famine, plague, drought, insanity, etc. Although in Satya-yuga people
always worship the Personality of Godhead as the ultimate goal of life and
meticulously follow His laws, called dharma, they do not feel themselves to be
in a helpless condition, and thus they do not always experience intense love
for the Lord.
However, in Kali-yuga living conditions are so unbearable, modern
governments are so obnoxious, our bodies are so ridden by physical and mental
disease, and even self-preservation is so troublesome, that the conditioned
souls intensely cry out the holy name of Kåñëa, begging for relief from the
onslaught of this age. The members of the Kåñëa consciousness movement
have vivid and unforgettable experiences of the terrible contradictions
inherent in human society in this age, and thus they are firmly convinced that
there is nothing to be achieved except the mercy of the Supreme Lord. In
ISKCON centers throughout the world we observe wonderfully ecstatic
kértana performances in which men, women and children from all walks of life
chant with startling enthusiasm the holy names of Kåñëa and dance in ecstasy,
becoming completely indifferent to so-called public opinion. In America a
prominent professor from Oberlin College visited a Hare Kåñëa center in
California and was astonished by the enthusiasm with which the devotees
chant the holy name of Kåñëa in their congregational performances.
Thus, due to their helpless and pathetic condition, the living entities in
Kali-yuga have great impetus to surrender fully to the holy name of Kåñëa,
putting all of their hope and faith in the Lord's holy name. Kali-yuga is
therefore the best age because in this age, more than in Satya-yuga or other
ages, the conditioned souls become disgusted with the kingdom of illusion and
surrender fully to the Lord's holy name. This status of full surrender is called
paramäà çäntim, or supreme peace.
Çréla Madhväcärya has quoted a passage from the book called Sväbhävya to
the effect that a bona fide spiritual master in disciplic succession is able to
understand the mentality and capability of his disciples and engage them in
worshiping the particular form of the Lord suitable for them. In this way the
spiritual master destroys all obstacles in the path of his disciples. The general
rule is that one must worship the particular form of the Lord that appears in
the current yuga. One may also offer his love and worship to other forms of the
Lord that appear in other ages, and specifically one is recommended to chant
the holy names of Lord Nåsiàhadeva to get all protection. Practically all of
these injunctions are being carried out within the ISKCON movement.
Within the Kåñëa consciousness society, men, women and children are all
being engaged in worshiping the Lord according to their particular natures. In
addition, according to Caitanya Mahäprabhu's order, we are worshiping
Balaräma and Kåñëa, who appeared in Dväpara-yuga, because They are the
original Supreme Personality of Godhead. Similarly, by chanting the
Daçävatära-stotra, jaya jagad-éça hare, and by reading Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the
members of ISKCON worship all of the plenary expansions of the Personality
of Godhead. And after every ärati performance devotional prayers are duly
chanted to Lord Nåsiàhadeva for protection of this movement, which is so
essential to human society.
TEXTS 38-40
k{(taAid"Sau ‘ajaA r"Ajana,
k(laAivacC$inta s$amBavama,
k(laAE Kalau BaivaSyainta
naAr"AyaNApar"AyaNAA:
¸(icat¸(icanmah"Ar"Aja
‰"ivaxe"Sau ca BaUir"zA:
taA•apaNAI= nad"I ya‡a
k{(tamaAlaA payaisvanaI
k(Avaer"I ca mah"ApauNyaA
‘ataIcaI ca mah"Anad"I
yae ipabainta jalaM taAs$aAM
manaujaA manaujaeìr"
‘aAyaAe Bal(A BagAvaita
vaAs$aude"vae'malaAzAyaA:
kåtädiñu prajä räjan
kaläv icchanti sambhavam
kalau khalu bhaviñyanti
näräyaëa-paräyaëäù
kvacit kvacin mahä-räja
draviòeñu ca bhüriçaù
tämraparëé nadé yatra
kåtamälä payasviné
käveré ca mahä-puëyä
pratécé ca mahä-nadé
ye pibanti jalaà täsäà
manujä manujeçvara
präyo bhaktä bhagavati
väsudeve 'maläçayäù
SYNONYMS
kåta-ädiñu—of Satya and the other earlier ages; prajäù—the inhabitants;
räjan—O King; kalau—in Kali-yuga; icchanti—they want; sambhavam—birth;
kalau—in Kali; khalu—certainly; bhaviñyanti—there will be;
näräyaëa-paräyaëäù—devotees who dedicate their lives to the service of Lord
Näräyaëa; kvacit kvacit—here and there; mahä-räja—O great monarch;
draviòeñu—in the provinces of South India; ca—but; bhüriçaù—especially
plentifully; tämraparëé—named Tämraparëé; nadé—the river; yatra—where;
kåtamälä—Kåtamälä; payasviné—Payasviné; käveré—Käveré; ca—and;
mahä-puëyä—extremely pious; pratécé—named Pratécé; ca—and;
mahä-nadé—the Mahänadé; ye—those who; pibanti—drink; jalam—the water;
täsäm—of these; manujäù—humans; manuja-éçvara—O lord of men (Nimi);
präyaù—for the most part; bhaktäù—devotees; bhagavati—of the Personality
of Godhead; väsudeve—Lord Väsudeva; amala-äçayäù—having spotless hearts.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, the inhabitants of Satya-yuga and other ages eagerly desire to
take birth in this age of Kali, since in this age there will be many devotees of
the Supreme Lord, Näräyaëa. These devotees will appear in various places but
will be especially numerous in South India. O master of men, in the age of Kali
those persons who drink the waters of the holy rivers of Draviòa-deça, such as
the Tämraparëé, Krtamälä, Payasviné, the extremely pious Käveré and the
Pratécé Mahänadé, will almost all be purehearted devotees of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Väsudeva.
PURPORT
The Vedas contain information of past, present and future living conditions
throughout the universe. This is not very wonderful. For example, although at
present time in India we are experiencing spring weather, we know that in the
future the torrid summer will come, followed by the rainy season, autumn and
eventually winter and a new spring. Similarly, we know that these seasons
have occurred repeatedly in the past. Thus, just as ordinary human beings can
understand the past, present and future seasons of the earth, the liberated
followers of Vedic culture can easily understand the past, present and future
conditions of the seasonal ages of the earth and other planets. The inhabitants
of Satya-yuga are certainly aware of the conditions of Kali-yuga. They know
that in Kali-yuga the difficult material situation forces the living entity to take
complete shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and that the
inhabitants of Kali-yuga therefore develop a high degree of love of Godhead.
Therefore although the inhabitants of Satya-yuga are far more sinless, truthful
and self-controlled than the people of other ages, they desire to take birth in
Kali-yuga in order to taste pure love of Kåñëa.
Without associating with the devotees of the Lord no one can become an
advanced devotee of the Lord. Therefore, since in Kali-yuga other Vedic
processes collapse due to the unfavorable condition, and since the only
authorized Vedic process is the devotional chanting of the Lord's holy name,
which is available to everyone, there will undoubtedly be innumerable
Vaiñëavas, or devotees of the Lord, in this age. Birth in this age is very
favorable for one who is eager to associate with the devotees. In fact, the Kåñëa
consciousness movement is establishing authorized Vaiñëava temples
throughout the world so that in innumerable areas one may avail himself of
association with pure Vaiñëavas.
Association with the devotees of the Lord is far more valuable than any
amount of association with persons who are merely self-controlled, sinless or
expert in Vedic scholarship. Therefore it is stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam
(6.14.5):
muktänäm api siddhänäà
näräyaëa-paräyaëaù
su-durlabhaù praçäntätmä
koöiñv api mahä-mune
"O great sage, among many millions who are liberated and perfect in
knowledge of liberation, one may be a devotee of Lord Näräyaëa, or Kåñëa.
Such devotees, who are fully peaceful, are extremely rare." Similarly, it is
stated in Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 22.54):
'sädhu-saìga ', 'sädhu-saìga '-sarva-çästre kaya
lava-mätra sädhu-saìge sarva-siddhi haya
"The verdict of all revealed scriptures is that by even a moment's association
with a pure devotee, one can attain all success."
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé the words kvacit kvacit in this verse
indicate that in Kali-yuga Lord Çré Kåñëa Caitanya will appear in Gauòa-deça,
in the district of Nadia. And from this pivotal point, He will gradually expand
the flood of love of Godhead to cover the entire earth. Many exalted devotees
such as Çré Advaitäcärya also take birth in Gauòa-deça.
The process of chanting the holy name of Kåñëa, kåñëa-kértana, is not
limited to Kali-yuga. In the Viñëu-dharma, in relation to the story of the fallen
son of a kñatriya, it is stated,
na deça-niyamas tatra
na käla-niyamas tathä
nocchiñöädau niñedhaç ca
çré-harer nämni lubdhakaù
"There is no restriction of place or time, nor any injunction forbidding the
accepting of remnants of foods, etc., when one has become greedy to chant the
name of Çré Hari." Similarly, it is stated in the Skanda Puräëa, the
Viñëu-dharma and the Vaiçäkha-mähätmya section of the Padma Puräëa,
cakräyudhasya nämäni sadä sarvatra kértayet: "The names of the Supreme Lord
who has the disc as His weapon should be glorified always and everywhere."
Similarly, the Skanda Puräëa states,
na deça-kälävasthätmaçuddhy-
ädikam apekñate
kintu svatantram evaitaà
näma kämita-käma-dam
"The name of the Lord need not be chanted with regard to place, time,
circumstantial conditions, preliminary self-purification or any other factors.
Rather, it is completely independent of all other processes and rewards all the
desires of those who eagerly chant it." Similarly, it is stated in the
Viñëu-dharma,
kalau kåta-yugaà tasya
kalis tasya kåte yuge
yasya cetasi govindo
hådaye yasya näcyutaù
"For one who has Lord Govinda in his heart, Satya-yuga becomes manifest in
the midst of Kali, and conversely even Satya-yuga becomes Kali-yuga for one
who does not have the infallible Lord in his heart." The holy name of Kåñëa is
potent everywhere, at all times and in all circumstances; therefore one should
always chant the holy names of the Lord, either in Kali-yuga, Satya-yuga, in
heaven, in hell or in Vaikuëöha. Kåñëa's holy name is eternally nondifferent
from Him, and Kåñëa is eternally the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus,
it is not that the holy name is powerful in this age only because other processes
are not effective.
It is also stated in the Çré Viñëu Puräëa that chanting the holy names of the
Lord is far more potent than simply trying to remember the Lord through
meditation. In Çrémad-Bhägavatam (2.1.11), Çukadeva Gosvämé has stated,
etan nirvidyamänänäm
icchatäm akuto-bhayam
yoginäà nåpa nirëétaà
harer nämänukértanam
"O King, constant chanting of the holy name of the Lord after the ways of the
great authorities is the doubtless and fearless way of success for all, including
those who are free from all material desires, those who are desirous of all
material enjoyment, and also those who are self-satisfied by dint of
transcendental knowledge." In his commentary on this verse in the
Bhägavatam, Çréla Prabhupäda has written: "According to Çré Çukadeva
Gosvämé, this way of attaining success [chanting the holy name] is an
established fact, concluded not only by him, but also by all other previous
äcäryas. Therefore there is no need of further evidence." The reader may
consult Çréla Prabhupäda's purport to this verse for a detailed explanation of
the chanting of the holy name of the Lord and the offenses to be avoided in
such chanting.
In the Vaiñëava-cintämaëi there is the following statement:
agha-cchit smaraëaà viñëor
bahv-äyäsena sädhyate
oñöha-spandana-mätreëa
kértanaà tu tato varam
"Although capable of destroying all sins, the remembrance of Lord Viñëu is
achieved only with extraordinary effort. On the other hand, one may perform
kåñëa-kértana simply by moving one's lips, and thus this process is superior."
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has also quoted the following verse:
yena janma-çataiù pürvaà
väsudevaù samärcitaù
tan-mukhe hari-nämäni
sadä tiñöhanti bhärata
"O descendant of Bharata, the holy names of Lord Viñëu are always vibrating
in the mouth of one who has previously worshiped Väsudeva perfectly for
hundreds of lifetimes." The same idea is conveyed in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam
by Çrématé Devahüti in her statement to her son, Kapila:
aho bata çva-paco 'to garéyän
yaj-jihvägre vartate näma tubhyam
tepus tapas te juhuvuù sasnur äryä
brahmänücur näma gåëanti ye te
"Oh, how glorious are they whose tongues are chanting Your holy name! Even
if born in the families of dog-eaters, such persons are worshipable. Persons who
chant the holy name of Your Lordship must have executed all kinds of
austerities and fire sacrifices and achieved all the good manners of the Aryans.
To be chanting the holy name of Your Lordship, they must have bathed at
holy places of pilgrimage, studied the Vedas and fulfilled everything required."
(SB 3.33.7)
Therefore, Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has concluded that it is possible to perform
kértana equally in all ages. In Kali-yuga, however, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, by His causeless mercy, personally induces the living entities to take
the holy name. Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura has thus quoted the Lord as follows:
enechi auñadhi mäyä näçibära lägi'
hari-näma mahä-mantra lao tumi mägi'
"O conditioned souls who are foolishly sleeping on the lap of the witch Mäyä, I
have brought an excellent medicine to cure the disease of your illusion. This
medicine is called hari-näma. It is My holy name, and by taking this medicine
you will get all perfection in life. Therefore, I sincerely request you to please
take this medicine that I have personally brought for you."
In verse 32 of this chapter it was stated, yajïaiù saìkértana-präyair yajanti hi
su-medhasaù. According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé the words saìkértana-präyaiù,
which mean "mainly by the process of saìkértana," indicate that although other
processes such as Deity worship may be performed to some extent in Kali-yuga,
such processes, in order to be successful, must be favorably connected with the
chanting of the holy names of the Lord. One who is performing worship of the
Kåñëa Deity should know that the most essential part of such Deity worship is
constant chanting of the holy names of the Lord. On the other hand, one who
has perfectly chanted the holy name of the Lord need not depend on other
processes, as expressed in the following famous mantra:
harer näma harer näma
harer nämaiva kevalam
kalau nästy eva nästy eva
nästy eva gatir anyathä
[Cc. Ädi 17.21]
"In this age of Kali there is no alternative, there is no alternative, there is no
alternative for spiritual progress other than the holy name, the holy name, the
holy name of the Lord." (Båhan-näradéya Puräëa 38.126) As proved by all of
these evidences, the statement in the Bhägavatam (kalià sabhäjayanty äryäù)
that spiritually advanced persons worship the age of Kali due to the facilities
offered in this age by the Lord is not at all contradictory.
At the end of verse 40 in this chapter it is stated, präyo bhaktä bhagavati
väsudeve 'maläçayäù: in general those who are able to regularly drink the
waters of the holy rivers of South India will be pure-hearted devotees of Lord
Väsudeva. The word präyaù, or "in general" indicates that those who are
offensive to the Lord's devotees, although claiming themselves to be devotees,
are not included within the list of amaläçayäù, or purehearted souls. Çréla
Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has pointed out that one should not be
bewildered by seeing the apparently poverty-stricken condition of the
inhabitants of South India. Even nowadays the inhabitants of the places
mentioned in this verse generally spend their days with meager eating and
clothing and live as great renounced devotees of the Supreme Lord. In other
words, clothes do not make the man. To live as a polished animal, dressing
oneself luxuriously and gratifying the tongue with rich foodstuffs, is not the
actual symptom of an advanced transcendentalist. Although the residents of
South India are generally Çré Vaiñëavas, or devotees in the
Lakñmé-sampradäya, they are recognized as devotees of the Lord by the
followers of Caitanya Mahäprabhu. According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta
Sarasvaté Öhäkura, their austere living conditions should be taken as a good
qualification, not a disqualification.
TEXT 41
de"vaiSaRBaUtaAæana{NAAM ipata|NAAM
na ik(Æÿr"Ae naAyama{NAI ca r"Ajana,
s$avaARtmanaA ya: zAr"NAM zAr"NyaM
gAtaAe mauku(ndM" pair"ô$tya k(taRma,
devarñi-bhütäpta-nåëäà pitèëäà
na kiìkaro näyam åëé ca räjan
sarvätmanä yaù çaraëaà çaraëyaà
gato mukundaà parihåtya kartam
SYNONYMS
deva-of the demigods; åñi-of the sages; bhüta-of ordinary living entities; äpta-of
friends and relatives; nåëäm-of ordinary men; pitèëäm-of the forefathers;
na-not; kiìkaraù-the servant; na—nor; ayam—this one; åëé—debtor; ca—also;
räjan—O King; sarva-ätmanä—with his whole being; yaù—a person who;
çaraëam—shelter; çaraëyam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who
affords shelter to all; gataù—approached; mukundam—Mukunda;
parihåtya—giving up; kartam—duties.
TRANSLATION
O King, one who has given up all material duties and has taken full shelter
of the lotus feet of Mukunda, who offers shelter to all, is not indebted to the
demigods, great sages, ordinary living beings, relatives, friends, mankind or even
one's forefathers who have passed away. Since all such classes of living entities
are part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, one who has surrendered to the Lord's
service has no need to serve such persons separately.
PURPORT
One who has not fully surrendered to the devotional service of the Lord
undoubtedly has many material duties to perform. Every ordinary conditioned
soul is the recipient of innumerable benefits given by the demigods, who
provide sun and moonshine, rain, wind, food and, ultimately, one's own
material body. In Bhagavad-gétä it is stated, stena eva saù: [Bg. 3.12] one who
does not reciprocate with the demigods by offering them sacrifice is stena, or a
thief. Similarly, other living entities such as cows are providing us with
innumerable delicious and nutritious foodstuffs. When we wake up in the
morning our mind is refreshed by the sweet singing of birds, and on a hot day
we enjoy the cool shade and breeze of the forest trees. We are accepting
service from innumerable living entities, and we are obligated to repay them.
Äpta means one's own family members, to whom one is certainly obligated
according to normal morality, and nåëäm means human society. Until one
becomes a devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one is certainly a
product of his society. We receive mundane education, culture, tradition and
protection from the society in which we live, and thus we owe a great debt to
society. Of course, our debt to society is not simply to the present order but to
all of our forefathers and ancestors who carefully preserved moral and social
customs so that we, their descendants, could live peacefully. Therefore the
word pitèëäm, or "forefathers," indicates our debt to previous generations.
In fact, the members of the Kåñëa consciousness society are sometimes
criticized by materialistic persons for giving too much attention to Kåñëa
rather than working to fulfill all of the above-mentioned obligations. In reply
to this, the Bhägavatam (4.31.14) states, yathä taror müla-niñecanena tåpyanti
tat-skandha-bhujopaçäkhäù. If one waters the root of a tee, automatically all of
the branches, twigs, leaves, etc., are also nourished. There is no need for, nor
any effectiveness in, separately pouring water on the branches, twigs and
leaves of a tree. The water has to be placed on the root. Similarly,
präëopahäräc ca yathendriyäëäm: food must be placed in the stomach, from
where it is automatically distributed to all of the limbs of the body. It is foolish
to try to nourish the whole body by rubbing food separately on all the bodily
limbs. Similarly, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, is the source of
all existence. Everything is emanating from Kåñëa, everything is maintained by
Kåñëa, and at the end, everything will merge to rest in Kåñëa. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, is the supreme benefactor, friend, protector
and well-wisher of every living entity, and if He is satisfied, then automatically
the whole world will become satisfied, just as all of the bodily limbs are
strengthened and satisfied when food is duly remitted to the stomach.
The example can be given that a man who is working as the personal
secretary to a great king has no further obligation to petty minor kings.
Undoubtedly an ordinary person has many obligations within this material
world. But according to Bhagavad-gétä, mayaiva vihitän hi tän: it is actually the
Supreme Lord who is giving all benedictions. For example, one receives one's
body by the mercy of one's parents. However, sometimes we find that a
particular man or woman may become impotent at a given moment.
Sometimes a deformed child is born, and sometimes a child is born dead. Often
the sexual act fails to produce pregnancy at all. So although all parents desire a
beautiful, highly qualified child, this is often not the case. Thus it can be
understood that ultimately it is by the mercy of the Supreme Lord that a man
and woman are able to produce a child by the sexual act. It is by the Lord's
mercy that the man's seminal injection is potent and the woman's ovum is
fertile. Similarly, it is only by the mercy of the Lord that the child is born in a
healthy condition and reaches physical maturity to pursue his own life. If at
any stage in the evolution of a human being the Lord's mercy is withdrawn,
sudden death or crippling disease occurs.
The demigods are also not independent. The words parihåtya kartam,
"giving up other duties," indicate that one should give up any concept that the
demigods are separate from Kåñëa. It is clearly stated in Vedic literature that
the demigods are different limbs of the universal body of the Supreme Lord.
Further, it is stated in Bhagavad-gétä that the Supreme Lord is situated in
everyone's heart and that He only is giving intelligence and memory. Thus, our
forefathers who carefully preserved cultural traditions were acting with
intelligence provided by the Supreme Lord. They certainly were not acting
with their own independent intelligence. No one can be intelligent without a
brain, and it is only by Kåñëa's mercy that we receive a human brain.
Therefore, if we carefully analyze all of our multifarious obligations toward
different classes of living entities, we shall find that in each and every case it is
ultimately by the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead that we have
received a particular benediction in life. So although an ordinary person must
methodically fulfill all of his various obligations by executing different types of
sacrifices and charitable activities for the satisfaction of those who have
benefited him, one who is directly serving the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Kåñëa, at once fulfills all such obligations because all benedictions
ultimately have come from the Lord through the agency of family, forefathers,
demigods, etc.
The example may be given that sometimes a state government may
distribute benefits originally provided by the federal government. So one who
becomes the personal secretary or minister to the chief executive of the federal
government has no further obligation to the less important representatives of
the state government. Therefore, it is stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.20.9):
tävat karmäëi kurvéta
na nirvidyeta yävatä
mat-kathä-çravaëädau vä
çraddhä yävan na jäyate
"As long as one is not satiated by fruitive activity and has not awakened his
taste for devotional service by hearing and chanting about the Supreme Lord,
one has to act according to the regulative principles of the Vedic injunctions."
The conclusion is that one who has fully surrendered to the devotional service
of the Supreme Lord is a first-class human being.
People in general are only eager to receive benedictions from demigods,
family members and society because such benedictions are conducive to
material sense gratification. Less intelligent persons consider such material
progress to be the only goal of life and thus cannot appreciate the exalted
position of pure devotional service to the Lord. Bhakti-yoga, or pure devotional
service, is meant to directly please the senses of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Envious materialistic persons propose various arguments to deny
that the Supreme Lord even has transcendental senses. The devotees,
however, do not waste!time doubting the inconceivable beauty, strength,
wealth and geniality of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but directly
please the Lord's senses through loving service and thus receive the supreme
benediction of going back home, back to Godhead. The devotees return to the
Lord's abode, where life is eternal, full of bliss and knowledge. No demigod,
family member or forefather can give one an eternal life of bliss and
knowledge. However, if one foolishly neglects the lotus feet of the Supreme
Lord and instead accepts the temporary material body to be everything, then
one must certainly perform elaborate sacrifices, austerities and charity and
fulfill all of the obligations mentioned above. Otherwise, one becomes
completely sinful and condemned, even from the material point of view.
TEXT 42
svapaAd"maUlamBajata: i‘ayasya
tyal(AnyaBaAvasya h"ir": pare"zA:
ivak(maR ya»aAetpaitataM k(TaiÂaä,"
DaunaAeita s$ava< ô$id" s$aiªaivaí":
sva-päda-mülam bhajataù priyasya
tyaktänya-bhävasya hariù pareçaù
vikarma yac cotpatitaà kathaïcid
dhunoti sarvaà hådi sanniviñöaù
SYNONYMS
sva-päda-mülam—the lotus feet of Kåñëa, the shelter of the devotees;
bhajataù—who is engaged in worshiping; priyasya—who is very dear to Kåñëa;
tyakta—given up; anya—for others; bhävasya—of one whose disposition or
inclination; hariù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; para-éçaù—the
Supreme Lord; vikarma—sinful activities; yat—whatever; ca—and;
utpatitam—occurred; kathaïcit—somehow; dhunoti—removes; sarvam—all;
hådi—in the heart; sanniviñöaù—entered.
TRANSLATION
One who has thus given up all other engagements and has taken full shelter
at the lotus feet of Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is very dear to
the Lord. Indeed, if such a surrendered soul accidentally commits some sinful
activity, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is seated within everyone's
heart, immediately takes away the reaction to such sin.
PURPORT
In the previous verse it was clearly described that a fully surrendered
devotee of the Supreme Lord has no need to perform ordinary, worldly duties.
Now in this verse it is revealed that devotional service is so pure and potent
that a surrendered devotee of the Lord has no need to perform any other
purificatory process. As described in the Sixth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, a
surrendered devotee has no need to perform präyaçcitta, or atonement for an
accidental falldown into sinful activity. Since devotional service is itself the
most purifying process, a sincere devotee who has accidentally stumbled on the
path should immediately resume his pure devotional service at the lotus feet of
the Lord. And thus the Lord will protect him, as stated in Bhagavad-gétä (9.30):
api cet su-duräcäro
bhajate mäm ananya-bhäk
sädhur eva sa mantavyaù
samyag vyavasito hi saù
The word tyaktänya-bhävasya in this verse is very significant. As stated in the
previous verse, a pure devotee realizes clearly that all living entities, including
Brahmä and Çiva, are part and parcel of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and thus have no separate or independent existence. Realizing that everything
and everyone is part and parcel of the Lord, a devotee automatically is not
inclined to commit sinful activities by violating the order of God. However,
due to the powerful influence of material nature, even a sincere devotee may
be temporarily overwhelmed by illusion and deviate from the rigid path of pure
devotional service. In such a case, Lord Kåñëa Himself, acting within the heart,
removes such sinful activities. Even Yamaräja, the lord of death, has no power
to punish a surrendered devotee who has accidentally committed sinful
activities. As stated here, Kåñëa is pareça, or the Supreme Lord, and all
secondary lords such as the demigods cannot threaten the Lord's personal
devotees. In his youth Ajämila had been a pious brähmaëa engaged in the
service of the Lord. Then, by bad association with a prostitute, he became
practically the most degraded man in the world. At the end of his life,
Yamaräja sent his Yamadütas to drag away the soul of the sinful Ajämila, but
the Personality of Godhead immediately sent His personal associates to save
Ajämila and demonstrate to Yamaräja that no secondary personality can
disturb the personal devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As
stated in Bhagavad-gétä, kaunteya pratijänéhi na me bhaktaù praëaçyati [Bg.
9.31].
The argument may be raised that the småti-çästra states, çruti-småti
mamaiväjïe: the Vedic scriptures are the direct orders of the Personality of
Godhead. Therefore, one may ask, how can the Lord tolerate that His orders
be occasionally neglected, even by His devotees? To answer this possible
objection, the word priyasya is used in this verse. The devotees of the Lord are
very dear to the Lord. Although the beloved child may accidentally commit an
abominable activity, the loving father forgives the child, taking into
consideration the actual good intentions of the child. Thus, although the
devotee of the Lord does not try to exploit the Lord's mercy by requesting the
Lord to free him from any future suffering, the Lord, by His own initiative,
frees the devotee from the reactions to accidental falldowns.
This causeless mercy of the Lord upon His devotee is His paramaiçvaryam,
or supreme opulence. Gradually the faithful devotee becomes free, even from
accidental falldown, because simply by remembering the lotus feet of the Lord,
what to speak of by actively rendering service to Him, his heart is purified.
Although the surrendered devotees of the Personality of Godhead may
sometimes appear to be affected by mundane attitudes, they are inevitably
protected by the merciful Lord and are never actually defeated in life.
TEXT 43
™aInaAr"d" ovaAca
DamaARna, BaAgAvataAinatTaM
™autvaATa imaiTalaeìr":
jaAyantaeyaAnmaunaIna, ‘aIta:
s$aAepaADyaAyaAe ÷paUjayata,
çré-närada uväca
dharmän bhägavatän itthaà
çrutvätha mithileçvaraù
jäyanteyän munén prétaù
sopädhyäyo hy apüjayat
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù uväca—Närada Muni said; dharmän bhägavatän—the science of
devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ittham—in this
manner; çrutvä—having heard; atha—then; mithilä-éçvaraù—the master of the
kingdom of Mithilä, King Nimi; jäyanteyän—to the sons of Jayanté;
munén—sages; prétaù—being satisfied; sa-upädhyäyaù—along with the priests;
hi—indeed; apüjayat—he offered worship.
TRANSLATION
Närada Muni said: Having thus heard the science of devotional service,
Nimi, the King of Mithilä, felt extremely satisfied and, along with the sacrificial
priests, offered respectful worship to the sagacious sons of Jayanté.
PURPORT
The word jäyanteyän indicates the nine Yogendras, who were born from the
womb of Jayanté, the wife of Åñabhadeva.
TEXT 44
tataAe'ntadR"iDare" is$aÜ"A:
s$avaRlaAek(sya pazyata:
r"AjaA DamaARnaupaAitaï"ªa,
@vaApa par"maAM gAitama,
tato 'ntardadhire siddhäù
sarva-lokasya paçyataù
räjä dharmän upätiñöhann
aväpa paramäà gatim
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; antardadhire—they disappeared; siddhäù—the perfect sages
headed by Kavi; sarva-lokasya—all those present; paçyataù—as they were
watching; räjä—the King; dharmän—these principles of spiritual life;
upätiñöhan—faithfully following; aväpa—he achieved; paramäm—the
supreme; gatim—destination.
TRANSLATION
The perfect sages then disappeared before the eyes of everyone present. King
Nimi faithfully practiced the principles of spiritual life he had learned from
them, and thus he achieved the supreme goal of life.
TEXT 45
tvamapyaetaAnmah"ABaAgA
DamaARna, BaAgAvataAna, ™autaAna,
@AisTata: ™aÜ"yaA yaul(Ae
ina:s$aËÿAe yaAsyas$ae par"ma,
tvam apy etän mahä-bhäga
dharmän bhägavatän çrutän
ästhitaù çraddhayä yukto
niùsaìgo yäsyase param
SYNONYMS
tvam—you (Vasudeva); api—also; etän—these; mahä-bhäga—O most
fortunate one; dharmän—principles; bhägavatän—of devotional service;
çrutän—which you have heard; ästhitaù—situated in; çraddhayä—with faith;
yuktaù—endowed; niùsaìgaù—free from material association; yäsyase—you
will go; param—to the Supreme.
TRANSLATION
O greatly fortunate Vasudeva, simply apply with faith these principles of
devotional service which you have heard, and thus, being free from material
association, you will attain the Supreme.
PURPORT
Närada Muni related to Kåñëa's father, Vasudeva, the story of the
enlightenment of King Nimi. Now Närada reveals that Vasudeva himself will
also achieve the supreme perfection of life by practicing the same principles
spoken long ago by the nine Yogendras. Actually, Vasudeva was already a
personal associate of the Supreme Lord, but due to his natural humility as a
great devotee, he was determined to perfect his love of Kåñëa. Thus we can
observe the exalted status of the parents of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
Ordinary persons feel that the Supreme Lord is always to be worshiped as
the supreme father who supplies everything for the living entities. Such an
attitude is not the perfection of love of Godhead, because when a son is young
he is incapable of giving much service to his mother and father. When the
child is very young, it is rather the parents who are constantly serving the
child. So when the devotee takes the role of mother or father of Kåñëa, there is
unlimited opportunity for rendering loving service to the Lord, whom the
devotee ecstatically accepts as his son. It was Vasudeva's good fortune that
Närada Muni personally revealed to him the wonderful teachings given by the
nava-yogendras long, long ago to the saintly King Nimi.
TEXT 46
yauvayaAe: Kalau d"mpatyaAer,"
yazAs$aA paUir"taM jagAta,
pau‡ataAmagAmaâã"AM
BagAvaAnaIìr"Ae h"ir":
yuvayoù khalu dampatyor
yaçasä püritaà jagat
putratäm agamad yad väà
bhagavän éçvaro hariù
SYNONYMS
yuvayoù—of the two of you; khalu—indeed; dam-patyoù—of the husband and
wife; yaçasä—by the glories; püritam—has become full; jagat—the earth;
putratäm—the state of being the son; agamat—assumed; yat—because;
väm—your; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; éçvaraù—the Supreme
Lord; hariù—Hari.
TRANSLATION
Indeed, the whole world has become filled with the glories of you and your
good wife because the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Hari, has taken
the position of your son.
PURPORT
In this verse Närada Muni hints at the glories of Vasudeva and Devaké, the
parents of Kåñëa and Balaräma, by the words yaçasä püritaà jagat, "the whole
world is now filled with your glories." In other words, although Vasudeva
inquired from Närada about spiritual advancement, Närada here states, "You
are already completely glorious due to your extraordinary devotion to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead."
TEXT 47
d"zARnaAilaËÿnaAlaApaE:
zAyanaAs$anaBaAejanaE:
@AtmaA vaAM paAivata: k{(SNAe
pau‡aµaehM" ‘aku(vaRtaAe:
darçanäliìganäläpaiù
çayanäsana-bhojanaiù
ätmä väà pävitaù kåñëe
putra-snehaà prakurvatoù
SYNONYMS
darçana—by seeing; äliìgana—embracing; äläpaiù—and conversing;
çayana—in taking rest; äsana—sitting; bhojanaiù—and eating; ätmä—the
hearts; väm—of you two; pävitaù—have become purified; kåñëe—for Lord
Kåñëa; putra-sneham—the affection toward a son; prakurvatoù—who were
manifesting.
TRANSLATION
My dear Vasudeva, you and your good wife Devaké have manifested great
transcendental love for Kåñëa, accepting Him as your son. Indeed, you are
always seeing the Lord, embracing Him, speaking with Him, resting with Him,
sitting together with Him and taking your meals with Him. By such
affectionate and intimate association with the Lord, undoubtedly both of you
have completely purified your hearts. In other words, you are already perfect.
PURPORT
The words ätmä väm pävitaù in this verse are very significant. Ordinary
conditioned souls are required to purify their existence by practicing the
regulative principles of bhakti-yoga and learning how to offer all of their
activities in the devotional service of the Lord. Such a regulative, gradual
process, however, cannot be applied to those exalted souls who are personally
attending the Lord as His parents, boyfriends, girl friends, advisors, sons, etc.
Due to Vasudeva and Devaké's intense love for Kåñëa as their son, they had
already achieved the highest perfectional stage of life. Although in the
previous verse Çré Närada Muni informed Vasudeva that he and his wife had
become glorious by Kåñëa's taking birth as their son, Vasudeva might have
argued that other personal associates of the Lord, such as Jaya and Vijaya, had
fallen down due to offending the brähmaëa class. Therefore, in the present
verse Närada has used the word pävitaù: "You are completely purified, and
therefore you are completely free from the slightest trace of discrepancy in
your devotional service, due to your intense love for Kåñëa."
It is understood from the commentary of Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté
Öhäkura that Çré Vasudeva, Kåñëa's pastime father, is actually an eternally
liberated nitya-siddha associate of the Personality of Godhead. Vasudeva has a
spiritual body, just as Kåñëa does, and he is always merged in the overwhelming
ecstatic desire to serve Kåñëa, his beautiful son. However, Närada could
understand that due to extreme humility, Vasudeva considered himself an
ordinary human being and was feeling very anxious to receive transcendental
instructions on the devotional service of the Lord. Accepting the ecstatic
humility of Vasudeva, and to relieve his anxiety, Çré Närada Muni instructed
him in the science of bhakti-yoga as one might instruct an ordinary human
being. However, at the some time Närada has revealed that actually Çré
Vasudeva and Devaké are already completely glorious by their unprecedented
fortune of having Kåñëa and Balaräma as their sons. Therefore, Närada is
telling Vasudeva, "My dear Vasudeva, do not in any way be discouraged or
doubtful about your position. Undoubtedly you are immediately going back
home, back to Godhead. And actually you and your good wife are the most
fortunate persons."
In conclusion, everyone should become fortunate by fully developing his
dormant love for Kåñëa. Many terrible demons who opposed Kåñëa eventually
achieved a happy state of life by their association with Kåñëa. Therefore there
is no doubt about the supreme bliss achieved by the loving devotees of the
Lord who day and night can only think of pleasing Kåñëa.
TEXT 48
vaEre"NA yaM na{pataya: izAzAupaAlapaAENx")-
zAAlvaAd"yaAe gAitaivalaAs$aivalaAek(naAâE:
DyaAyanta @Ak{(taiDaya: zAyanaAs$anaAd"AE
tats$aAmyamaApaur"naur"l(iDayaAM pauna: ik(ma,
vaireëa yaà nåpatayaù çiçupäla-pauëòraçälvädayo
gati-viläsa-vilokanädyaiù
dhyäyanta äkåta-dhiyaù çayanäsanädau
tat-sämyam äpur anurakta-dhiyäà punaù kim
SYNONYMS
vaireëa—with envy; yam—whom (Lord Kåñëa); nå-patayaù—kings;
çiçupäla-pauëòra-çälva-ädayaù—like Çiçupäla, Pauëòraka, Çälva, etc.;
gati—upon His movements; viläsa—sporting; vilokana—glances; ädyaiù—and
so forth; dhyäyantaù—meditating; äkåta—thus fixed; dhiyaù—their minds;
çayana—in the activities of lying down; äsana-ädau—sitting, and so on;
tat-sämyam—a position on the same level with Him (that is, a position in the
eternal, spiritual world); äpuù—they achieved; anurakta-dhiyäm—for those
whose minds are naturally attached in a favorable way; punaù kim—what to
speak of in comparison.
TRANSLATION
Inimical kings like Çiçupäla, Pauëòraka and Çälva were always thinking
about Lord Kåñëa. Even while they were lying down, sitting or engaging in
other activities, they enviously meditated upon the bodily movements of the
Lord, His sporting pastimes, His loving glances upon His devotees, and other
attractive features displayed by the Lord. Being thus always absorbed in Kåñëa,
they achieved spiritual liberation in the Lord's own abode. What then can be
said of the benedictions offered to those who constantly fix their minds on Lord
Kåñëa in a favorable, loving mood?
PURPORT
On the eve of the disappearance of Lord Kåñëa from this world, Vasudeva
became filled with lamentation thinking that he had not properly utilized the
opportunity of the Lord's personal presence to become perfectly Kåñëa
conscious. However, Närada Muni assured Çré Vasudeva that the glories of
Vasudeva and his good wife Devaké were chanted throughout the universe
because even the demigods worshiped the exalted status of the Lord's own
parents. Vasudeva was not only concerned about his own spiritual position, but
he also lamented for the Yadu dynasty, which had left the world in an
apparently inauspicious way, being cursed by great brähmaëas such as Närada
and dying in a fratricidal war. Although the members of the Yadu dynasty
were personal associates of the Lord, their disappearance from the earth was
apparently inauspicious, and therefore Vasudeva was concerned about their
eventual destination. So Närada here assures Vasudeva that even the demons
who opposed Kåñëa, such as Çiçupäla, Pauëòraka and Çälva, achieved
promotion to the Lord's own abode because of their constant absorption in
thinking of Kåñëa. Therefore what to speak of the exalted members of the
Yadu dynasty who actually loved Kåñëa more than anything (anurakta-dhiyäm
punaù kim)? Similarly, it is stated in the Garuòa Puräëa,
ajïäninaù sura-varaà samadhikñipanto
yaà päpino 'pi çiçupäla-suyodhanädyäù
muktià gatäù smaraëa-mätra-vidhüta-päpäù
kaù saàçayaù parama-bhaktimatäà janänäm
"Even foolish sinners like Çiçupäla and Duryodhana who showered abuse upon
the Lord were cleansed of all sins simply by remembering Lord Kåñëa.
Somehow or other their minds were absorbed in the Lord, and thus they
attained liberation. What doubt then is there about the destination of those
who are overwhelmed with devotional feelings for the Lord?"
Vasudeva was also feeling anxiety because on the one hand he was aware
that Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but at the same time he
treated the Lord as his beloved son. In the relationship between the father and
son, sometimes the father must chastise the son and restrict him in various
ways. In this way Vasudeva was feeling that undoubtedly he had offended the
Lord in his attempt to train Lord Kåñëa as his son. However, Lord Kåñëa is
actually pleased when a pure devotee becomes absorbed in parental love for
Him and thus devotedly tries to care for Him just as loving parents care for a
small child. Kåñëa reciprocates the intense devotional feelings of such devotees
by actually appearing before them as a young boy and acting just like their son.
As mentioned in this verse, the demons actually chastised Kåñëa with
feelings of enmity. Nevertheless, such demons attained liberation due to their
absorption in Kåñëa. Therefore, what to speak of the destination of Vasudeva,
who chastised Kåñëa due to his overwhelming parental love for Him? The
conclusion is that the devotees of the Lord should never consider Vasudeva
and Devaké to be ordinary, conditioned souls. Their relationship with Lord
Kåñëa is completely on the transcendental platform of vätsalya-rasa, or
parental love for the Personality of Godhead. It has nothing to do with the
parental love of the material world, which is based on a mood of sense
gratification, since the parents see their children as objects of material
enjoyment.
TEXT 49
maApatyabauiÜ"mak{(TaA:
k{(SNAe s$avaARtmanaIìre"
maAyaAmanauSyaBaAvaena
gAUXE#ìyaeR pare"'vyayae
mäpatya-buddhim akåthäù
kåñëe sarvätmanéçvare
mäyä-manuñya-bhävena
güòhaiçvarye pare 'vyaye
SYNONYMS
mä—do not; apatya-buddhim—the idea of being your son; akåthäù—impose;
kåñëe—on Kåñëa; sarva-ätmani—the Supreme Soul of all; éçvare-the
Personality of Godhead; mäyä—by His power of illusion;
manuñya-bhävena—appearing as if an ordinary person; güòha-aiçvarye—hiding
His opulence; pare—the Supreme; avyaye—infallible.
TRANSLATION
Do not think of Kåñëa as an ordinary child, because He is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, inexhaustible and the Soul of all beings. The Lord has
concealed His inconceivable opulences and is thus outwardly appearing to be an
ordinary human being.
PURPORT
Lord Çré Kåñëa is the original source of all plenary incarnations of the
Absolute Truth. Kåñëas tu bhagavän svayam [SB 1.3.28]. His unlimited
transcendental opulences are inexhaustible, and thus He very easily brings the
entire creation under His personal control. Lord Kåñëa is the eternal
well-wisher of every living entity, so there was no need for Vasudeva to be
anxious about his future destination, nor that of the other personal associates
of Kåñëa, such as the members of the Yadu dynasty. In verse 46 of this chapter,
Närada Muni told Vasudeva, putratäm agamad yad väà bhagavän éçvaro hariù:
"You and your good wife are now glorified throughout the universe because
Lord Kåñëa has personally become your son." In this way Närada is
encouraging Vasudeva to continue to love Kåñëa as his most beloved son, for
such ecstatic devotional feelings are never to be given up. But at the same
time, Närada is removing Vasudeva's doubts about the future by assuring him,
"Due to your love for Kåñëa you may think that He is an ordinary human
being. You are appearing like a human being, and Lord Kåñëa is simply
reciprocating with you. In order to encourage you to love Him as your son, He
is placing Himself under your control. And thus, His inconceivable power and
opulences are being concealed from you. Don't assume, however, that there is
actually a dangerous situation because of the events of this material world.
Although Kåñëa appears to be under your control, He is eternally the supreme
controller. Therefore, do not consider Him to be a human being. He is always
the Supreme Personality of Godhead."
The word mäyä in this verse indicates that Kåñëa's manuñya, or humanlike,
activities are actually misleading to the ordinary man because Kåñëa is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Mäyä also means "transcendental potencies."
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, sambhavämy ätma-mäyayä: [Bg. 4.6] the Lord
descends in His own transcendental form filled with transcendental potencies.
And thus the words mäyä-manuñya-bhävena here also indicate Kåñëa's original
transcendental form, which resembles the humanlike forms experienced in
this world. Mäyä also indicates "mercy," or "compassion," according to the
Sanskrit dictionary, and thus the Lord's incarnation is understood to be His
causeless mercy upon the conditioned souls. The Lord's descent is also His
causeless mercy upon the liberated souls, who take immense pleasure in joining
the Lord in His pastimes and in chanting and hearing about such exalted
spiritual activities (çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù [SB 7.5.23]).
In order to reciprocate the love of Vasudeva for Him, Kåñëa mostly
concealed His unlimited opulences. In this way the devotee is fully encouraged
in his particular loving relationship with the Lord. However, when Vasudeva
was filled with anxiety due to the dangerous situation created by the
brähmaëa's curse, Närada immediately reminded him that such anxiety was
unnecessary, since all these events were under the direct control of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus, the Vaiñëava paramahaàsas who take
the position of the Lord's parents remain under the shelter of the Lord at all
times and never deviate from the loving devotional service of the Lord. They
remain fixed in transcendence in all circumstances, unlike ordinary parents of
the material world, who are constantly becoming bewildered by illusion due to
the bodily concept of life.
TEXT 50
BaUBaAr"As$aur"r"Ajanyah"
ntavae gAuæayae s$ataAma,
@vataINARsya inava{RtyaE
yazAAe laAeke( ivatanyatae
bhü-bhäräsura-räjanyahantave
guptaye satäm
avatérëasya nirvåtyai
yaço loke vitanyate
SYNONYMS
bhü-bhära—who were the burden of the earth; asura—demons;
räjanya—members of the kingly order; hantave—in order to kill; guptaye—for
the protection; satäm—of the saintly devotees; avitérëasya—of Him who has
descended; nirvåtyai—also for awarding liberation; yaçaù—the fame;
loke—throughout the world; vitanyate—has become spread.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead descended to kill the demoniac kings
who were the burden of the earth and to protect the saintly devotees. However,
both the demons and the devotees are awarded liberation by the Lord's mercy.
Thus, His transcendental fame has spread throughout the universe.
PURPORT
A doubt may arise as to how the Supreme Personality of Godhead descends
to this material world. And since He is the omnipotent creator of millions of
universes, why do the devotees glorify as wonderful the Lord's activities such as
His killing a witch named Pütanä by sucking out her life through her breast?
Although such activities are certainly beyond the scope of ordinary human
beings, why should they be considered wonderful when executed by the
omnipotent Personality of Godhead? The answer is given in this verse by the
word nirvåtyai The Lord killed the demons not because He was envious of
them, but in order to give them spiritual liberation. Thus the causeless mercy
of the Personality of Godhead in liberating both the devotees and the demons
by His inconceivable pastimes clearly distinguishes the Lord from any other
living entity, either man or demigod. It is stated, mukti-pradätä sarveñäà viñëur
eva na saàçayaù: only Viñëu can give liberation beyond birth and death. Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has pointed out that generally the demons are
awarded impersonal liberation in the Brahman effulgence, whereas the
devotees are given the superior benediction of love of Godhead in the spiritual
planets. Thus, the Lord exhibits His causeless mercy toward all classes of living
entities, and His fame is spread throughout the universe. Because Kåñëa is
transcendental, His fame is not different from His personal incarnation, so as
the Lord's fame expands, the entire universe is gradually liberated. These are
some of the unique characteristics of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 51
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
WtacC_$tvaA mah"ABaAgAAe
vas$aude"vaAe'itaivaismata:
de"vak(L ca mah"ABaAgAA
jah"taumaAeRh"maAtmana:
çré-çuka uväca
etac chrutvä mahä-bhägo
vasudevo 'ti-vismitaù
devaké ca mahä-bhägä
jahatur moham ätmanaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; etat—this; çrutvä—having
heard; mahä-bhägaù—the greatly fortunate; vasudevaù—King Vasudeva;
ati-vismitaù—extremely amazed; devaké—mother Devaké; ca—and;
mahä-bhägä—the greatly fortunate; jahatuù—they both gave up; moham-the
confusion; ätmanaù—their own.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: Having heard this narration, the greatly
fortunate Vasudeva was completely struck with wonder. Thus he and his most
blessed wife Devaké gave up all illusion and anxiety that had entered their
hearts.
TEXT 52
witah"As$aimamaM pauNyaM
DaAr"yaeâ: s$amaAih"ta:
s$a ivaDaUyaeh" zAmalaM
“aöBaUyaAya k(lpatae
itihäsam imaà puëyaà
dhärayed yaù samähitaù
sa vidhüyeha çamalaà
brahma-bhüyäya kalpate
SYNONYMS
itihäsam—historical account; imam—this; puëyam—pious; dhärayet-meditates
upon; yaù—who; samähitaù—with fixed attention; saù—he;
vidhüya—cleaning off; iha—in this very life; çamalam—contamination;
brahma-bhüyäya—the supreme spiritual perfection; kalpate—achieves.
TRANSLATION
Anyone who meditates on this pious historical narration with fixed attention
will purify himself of all contamination in this very life and thus achieve the
highest spiritual perfection.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Eleventh Canto, Fifth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Närada Concludes His Teachings to Vasudeva."
6. The Yadu Dynasty Retires to Prabhäsa
This chapter describes how Brahmä and other demigods, after offering
prayers to Lord Çré Kåñëa, requested the Lord to return to His own abode and
how Uddhava, anticipating separation from the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, was very distressed and prayed to Çré Kåñëa that he might
accompany Him on His return to that abode.
Desiring to see Çré Kåñëa in His humanlike form, which enchants all the
worlds, the Gandharvas, Apsaräs, Nägas, Åñis, Pitäs, Vidyädharas, Kinnaras
and other demigods, all headed by Brahmä, Çiva and Indra, arrived at the city
of Dvärakä. Covering the body of Kåñëa with flower garlands from the
Nandana gardens of heaven, they praised Him with statements about His
transcendental power and qualities.
All living entities, beginning with Brahmä, are subordinate to Lord Çré
Kåñëa. Kåñëa creates the universe by empowering His expansion Mahä-Viñëu.
Although Kåñëa creates, maintains and destroys this world through His
material energy, He remains transcendental to the material energy and
perfectly self-satisfied. Even in the midst of His sixteen thousand queens, Lord
Kåñëa is undisturbed.
Performers of fruitive sacrifices and yogés desiring mystic power
contemplate the lotus feet of Lord Çré Kåñëa to attain their materialistic
objectives. But the most elevated devotees, who desire liberation from the
bondage of material work, lovingly contemplate the Lord's lotuslike feet
because those feet are the fire that destroys all desires for sense gratification.
One cannot actually purify the mind by ordinary worship, penance and other
such processes. One can purify the mind contaminated by sense gratification
only through mature faith in the mode of goodness, which arises by hearing
the glories of Kåñëa. Therefore, intelligent persons situated in the varëäçrama
system serve the two kinds of holy places: the nectarean rivers of the topics of
Kåñëa and the nectarean rivers flowing from the Lord's lotus feet.
By incarnating within the Yadu dynasty, Kåñëa performed the highest
welfare work for the entire universe by displaying His transcendental pastimes.
Simply by hearing and chanting about these pastimes, pious persons in
Kali-yuga can definitely cross over the ocean of material illusion. When the
Lord had fulfilled the purpose of His descent and the Yadu dynasty was facing
imminent destruction from the brähmaëas' curse, the Lord desired to wind up
His pastimes. When Brahmä prayed to the lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa for the
deliverance of himself and all the other demigods, Çré Kåñëa revealed in His
reply that after the destruction of the Yadu dynasty He would return to His
own abode.
Observing terrible disturbances indicating the imminent destruction of the
world, Lord Kåñëa called together the wise members of the Yadu dynasty and
reminded them of the brähmaëas' curse. The Lord convinced them to go to
Prabhäsa-tértha, where they could save themselves by the performance of ritual
bathing, charity, and so on. The Yadus, in obedience to Kåñëa's desire,
prepared to journey to Prabhäsa.
Upon seeing and hearing the Lord's conversation with the Yadu dynasty,
Uddhava approached Lord Çré Kåñëa in a secluded place, offered Him full
obeisances and, with folded hands, expressed his inability to tolerate
separation from the Lord. He begged Kåñëa to carry him to His own abode.
If one tastes the nectar of Kåñëa's pastimes with his ears, one loses all
hankering for other things. Persons who engage constantly in Kåñëa's
service-while eating, sporting, sleeping, sitting, etc.-cannot tolerate separation
from Kåñëa. They honor all kinds of remnants from Çré Kåñëa and thus
conquer the Lord's illusory energy. Peaceful members of the renounced order
attain Brahmaloka after exhaustive and painful exertion, whereas the devotees
of the Lord simply discuss Lord Kåñëa among themselves, chant and remember
His various pastimes and instructions, and thus automatically cross beyond the
insurmountable material energy.
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
@Ta “aöAtmajaE: de"vaE:
‘ajaezAEr"Ava{taAe'ByagAAta,
Bavaê BaUtaBavyaezAAe
yayaAE BaUtagANAEva{Rta:
çré-çuka uväca
atha brahmätma-jaiù devaiù
prajeçair ävåto 'bhyagät
bhavaç ca bhüta-bhavyeço
yayau bhüta-gaëair våtaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; atha—then; brahmä—Lord
Brahmä; ätma-jaiù—by his sons (headed by Sanaka); devaiù—by the demigods;
prajä-éçaiù—and hy the progenitors of universal population (headed by
Maréci); ävåtaù—surrounded; abhyagät—went (to Dvärakä); bhavaù—Lord
Çiva; ca—also; bhüta—to all living beings; bhavya-éçaù—the bestower of
auspiciousness; yayau—went; bhüta gaëaiù—by the hordes of ghostly
creatures; våtaù—surrounded.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Lord Brahmä then set off for Dvärakä,
accompanied by his own sons as well as by the demigods and the great
Prajäpatis. Lord Çiva, the bestower of auspiciousness to all living beings, also
went, surrounded by many ghostly creatures.
TEXTS 2-4
wn‰"Ae maç&ià"BaRgAvaAna,
@Aid"tyaA vas$avaAe'iìnaAE
[%BavaAe'iËÿr"s$aAe ç&‰"A
ivaìe s$aADyaAê de"vataA:
gAnDavaARps$ar"s$aAe naAgAA:
is$aÜ"caAr"NAgAu÷k(A:
[%Saya: ipatar"êEva
s$aivaâADar"ik(ªar"A:
ã"Ar"k(Amaupas$aÃagmau:
s$avaeR k{(SNAid"ä{"ºava:
vapauSaA yaena BagAvaAna,
nar"laAek(manaAer"ma:
yazAAe ivataenae laAeke(Sau
s$avaRlaAek(malaApah"ma,
indro marudbhir bhagavän
ädityä vasavo 'çvinau
åbhavo 'ìgiraso rudrä
viçve sädhyäç ca devatäù
gandharväpsaraso nägäù
siddha-cäraëa-guhyakäù
åñayaù pitaraç caiva
sa-vidyädhara-kinnaräù
dvärakäm upasaïjagmuù
sarve kåñëa-didåkñavaù
vapuñä yena bhagavän
nara-loka-manoramaù
yaço vitene lokeñu
sarva-loka-maläpaham
SYNONYMS
indraù—Lord Indra; marudbhiù—along with the wind-gods; bhagavän—the
powerful controller; ädityäù—the twelve principal demigods, all sons of Aditi;
vasavaù—the eight Vasu demigods; açvinau—the two Açviné-kumäras;
åbhavaù—the Åbhus; aìgirasaù—the descendants of Aìgirä Muni;
rudräù—the expansions of Lord Çiva; viçve sädhyäù—known as Viçvedevas
and Sädhyas; ca—also; devatäù—other demigods; gandharva-apsarasaù—the
heavenly musicians and dancing girls; nägäù—the celestial snakes;
siddha-cäraëa—the Siddhas and Cäraëas; guhyakäù—and the hobgoblins;
åñayaù—the great sages; pitaraù—the departed forefathers; ca—also;
eva—indeed; sa—along with; vidyädhara-kinnaräù—the Vidyädharas and
Kinnaras; dvärakäm—to Dvärakä; upasaïjagmuù—they arrived together;
sarve—all of them; kåñëa-didåkñavaù—eager to see Lord Kåñëa; vapuñä—by the
transcendental body; yena—which; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; nara-loka—to all human society; manaù-ramaù—enchanting;
yaçaù—His fame; vitene—He expanded; lokeñu—throughout all the universe;
sarva-loka—of all planets; mala—the impurities; apaham—which eradicates.
TRANSLATION
The powerful Lord Indra, along with the Maruts, Ädityas, Vasus, Açvinés,
Åbhus, Aìgiräs, Rudras, Viçvedevas, Sädhyas, Gandharvas, Apsaräs, Nägas,
Siddhas, Cäraëas, Guhyakas, the great sages and forefathers and the
Vidyädharas and Kinnaras, arrived at the city of Dvärakä, hoping to see Lord
Kåñëa. By His transcendental form, Kåñëa, the Supreme Lord, enchanted all
human beings and spread His own fame throughout the worlds. The Lord's
glories destroy all contamination within the universe.
PURPORT
The Personality of Godhead descends within the material world to assist
the demigods in the cosmic management; thus the demigods can normally see
such forms of the Lord as Upendra. However, here it is indicated that although
accustomed to seeing various Viñëu expansions of the Lord, the demigods were
specifically eager to see the most beautiful form of the Lord as Kåñëa.
Deha-dehi-vibhägaç ca neçvare vidyate kvacit: there is no distinction between
the Supreme Lord and His personal body. The jéva soul is different from his
body, but the beautiful, transcendental form of the Lord is identical with the
Lord in all respects.
TEXT 5
tasyaAM iva”aAjamaAnaAyaAM
s$ama{Ü"AyaAM mah"iÜR"iBa:
vyacaºataAivata{æaAºaA:
k{(SNAmaàu"tad"zARnama,
tasyäà vibhräjamänäyäà
samåddhäyäà maharddhibhiù
vyacakñatävitåptäkñäù
kåñëam adbhuta-darçanam
SYNONYMS
tasyäm—in that (Dvärakä); vibhräjamänäyäm—resplendent;
samåddhäyäm—very rich; mahä-åddhibhiù—with great opulences;
vyacakñata—they saw; avitåpta—unsatisfied; akñäù—whose eyes;
kåñëam—Lord Kåñëa; adbhuta-darçanam—wonderful to behold.
TRANSLATION
In that resplendent city of Dvärakä, rich with all superior opulences, the
demigods beheld with unsatiated eyes the wonderful form of Çré Kåñëa.
TEXT 6
svagAAeRâAnaAepagAEmaARlyaEzA,
C$Ad"yantaAe yauäU"Ôamama,
gAIiBaRiê‡apad"ATaARiBas$a,
tauí]"vaujaRgAd"Iìr"ma,
svargodyänopagair mälyaiç
chädayanto yudüttamam
gérbhiç citra-padärthäbhis
tuñöuvur jagad-éçvaram
SYNONYMS
svarga-udyäna—from the gardens of the heavenly planets of the demigods;
upagaiù—obtained; mälyaiù—with flower garlands; chädayantaù—covering;
yadu-uttamam—the best of the Yadus; gérbhiù—with verbal expressions;
citra—charming; pada-arthäbhiù—the words and ideas comprising which;
tuñöuvuù—they praised; jagat-éçvaram—the Lord of the universe.
TRANSLATION
The demigods covered the Supreme Lord of the universe with flower
garlands brought from the gardens of heaven. Then they praised Him, the best
of the Yadu dynasty, with statements containing charming words and ideas.
TEXT 7
™aIde"vaA Ocau:
nataA: sma tae naATa pad"Ar"ivandM"
bauÜ"Iin‰"ya‘aANAmanaAevacaAeiBa:
yai»antyatae'ntaôR$id" BaAvayaulE(r,"
maumauºauiBa: k(maRmayaAeç&paAzAAta,
çré-devä ücuù
natäù sma te nätha padäravindaà
buddhéndriya-präëa-mano-vacobhiù
yac cintyate 'ntar hådi bhäva-yuktair
mumukñubhiù karma-mayoru-päçät
SYNONYMS
çré-deväù ücuù—the demigods said; natäù sma—we are bowed down; te—Your;
nätha—O Lord; pada-aravindam—to the lotus feet; buddhi—with our
intelligence; indriya—senses; präëa—vital air; manaù—mind; vacobhiù—and
words; yat—which; cintyate—are meditated upon; antaù hådi—within the
heart; bhäva-yuktaiù—who are fixed in yoga practice; mumukñubhiù—by those
striving for liberation; karma-maya—of the reactions of fruitive work;
uru-päçät—from the great bondage.
TRANSLATION
The demigods began to speak: Our dear Lord, advanced mystic yogis,
striving for liberation from the severe bondage of material work, meditate with
great devotion upon Your lotus feet within their hearts. Dedicating our
intelligence, senses, vital air, mind and power of speech to Your Lordship, we
demigods bow down at Your lotus feet.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, the word sma in this verse indicates
vismaya, "astonishment." The demigods were astonished that although great
mystic yogés are only able to contemplate the lotus feet of the Lord within their
hearts, the demigods arriving in the city of Dvärakä were able to see before
them the entire body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the
powerful demigods fell down like sticks before the Lord. Such full obeisances
(called daëòavat, "like a stick") are described as follows:
dorbhyäà padäbhyäà jänubhyäm
urasä çirasä dåçä
manasä vacasä ceti
praëämo 'ñöäìga éritaù
"The obeisances offered with eight limbs are made with the two arms, the two
legs, the two knees, the chest, the head, the eyes, the mind and the power of
speech.''
The currents of material nature are very powerful, and one should therefore
cling tightly to the lotus feet of the Lord. Otherwise, the violent waves of sense
gratification and mental speculation will undoubtedly sweep one away from
one's eternal, constitutional position as the loving servitor of the Supreme
Lord, and one will then fall down into the stringent bondage described here as
uru-päçät, "a very powerful illusory network."
TEXT 8
tvaM maAyayaA i‡agAuNAyaAtmaina äu"ivaRBaAvyaM
vyalM( s$a{jasyavais$a laumpais$a taÖ"NAsTa:
naEtaEBaRvaAnaijata k(maRiBar"jyatae vaE
yatsvae s$auKae'vyavaih"tae'iBar"taAe'navaâ:
tvaà mäyayä tri-guëayätmani durvibhävyaà
vyaktaà såjasy avasi lumpasi tad-guëa-sthaù
naitair bhavän ajita karmabhir ajyate vai
yat sve sukhe 'vyavahite 'bhirato 'navadyaù
SYNONYMS
tvam—You; mäyayä—by the material energy; tri-guëayä—made up of the
three modes of nature; ätmani—within Yourself;
durvibhävyam—inconceivable; vyaktam—the manifest cosmos; såjasi—You
create; avasi—protect; lumpasi—and destroy; tat—of that material nature;
guëa—within the modes (goodness, passion and ignorance); sthaù—situated;
na—not; etaiù—by these; bhavän—You; ajita—O unconquerable Lord;
karmabhiù—activities; ajyate—are entangled; vai—at all; yat—because;
sve—in Your own; sukhe—happiness; avyavahite—unimpeded; abhirataù—You
are always absorbed; anavadyaù—the unimpeachable Lord.
TRANSLATION
O unconquerable Lord, You engage Your illusory energy, composed of three
modes, to unleash, maintain and devastate the inconceivable manifest cosmos,
all within Your own self. As the supreme superintendent of mäyä, You appear
to be situated in the interaction of the modes of nature; however, You are never
affected by material activities. In fact, You are directly engaged in Your own
eternal, spiritual bliss, and thus You cannot be accused of any material
infection.
PURPORT
The word durvibhävyam is significant here. The ultimate cause of the
creation, maintenance and annihilation of the material world is certainly
inconceivable even for the greatest mundane scientists, who waste their lives
in useless and fruitless speculation. Yet Mahä-Viñëu, who is the secondary
expansion of an expansion of the Supreme Lord, Kåñëa, sees the entire cosmos
to be like an insignificant atom. So what hope is there for foolish so-called
scientists who try to understand Kåñëa by their ridiculous experimental power?
Thus the word anavadya is used. No one can find fault or discrepancy in the
body, character, activities or instructions of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. The Lord is never materially ignorant; therefore He never exhibits
cruelty, laziness, foolishness, blindness or material intoxication. Similarly,
because the Lord is never polluted by material passion, He never exhibits
material pride, lamentation, yearning or violence. And since the Lord is free
from material goodness, He never attempts to peacefully enjoy the material
world with a sublime materialistic mentality.
Lord Kåñëa, as stated here (sve sukhe 'vyavahite 'bhirataù), is eternally busy,
day and night, in His transcendental abode, relishing the inconceivable loving
devotion of His innumerable associates. The Lord is being embraced and is
embracing. He is joking and is hearing the joking of His loved ones. The Lord
is walking through forests full of fruits and flowers, playing in the nectarean
river Yamunä and taking part in His most confidential transcendental loving
affairs with the cowherd girls of Våndävana. These pastimes in Kåñëaloka and
on other Vaikuëöha planets are eternal, faultless and an ocean of spiritual
happiness. The Lord never descends to the dry platform of relative material
happiness. The infinite Personality of Godhead bas nothing to gain from
anyone; thus fruitive activity cannot possibly exist within the Lord.
TEXT 9
zAuiÜ"na{RNAAM na tau taTaex"Ya äu"r"AzAyaAnaAM
ivaâA™autaADyayanad"Anatapa:i‚(yaAiBa:
s$aÔvaAtmanaAma{SaBa tae yazAis$a ‘ava{Ü"-
s$acC)$Ü"yaA ™avaNAs$amBa{tayaA yaTaA syaAta,
çuddhir nåëäà na tu tatheòya duräçayänäà
vidyä-çrutädhyayana-däna-tapaù-kriyäbhiù
sattvätmanäm åñabha te yaçasi pravåddhasac-
chraddhayä çravaëa-sambhåtayä yathä syät
SYNONYMS
çuddhiù—purification; nåëäm—of persons; na—is not; tu—but; tathä—in
such a way; éòya—O worshipable one; duräçayänäm—of those whose
consciousness is contaminated; vidyä—by ordinary worship; çruta—hearing
and obeying the injunctions of the Vedas; adhyayana-study of various çästras;
däna-charity; tapaù—austere penances; kriyäbhiù—and ritual activities;
sattva-ätmanäm—of those who are situated in pure goodness; åñabha—O
greatest of all; te—Your; yaçasi—in the glories; pravåddha—fully matured;
sat—transcendental; çraddhayä—by faith; çravaëa-sambhåtayä—which is
reinforced by the process of hearing; yathä—as; syät—there is.
TRANSLATION
O greatest of all, those whose consciousness is polluted by illusion cannot
purify themselves merely by ordinary worship, study of the Vedas, charity,
austerity and ritual activities. Our Lord, those pure souls who have developed a
powerful transcendental faith in Your glories achieve a purified state of
existence that can never be attained by those lacking such faith.
PURPORT
Even if a pure devotee is lacking the above qualifications, such as Vedic
study and austerity, if he has unflinching faith in Lord Kåñëa the Lord will
save him because of his devotion. On the other hand, if one becomes falsely
proud of one's material qualifications, including ordinary piety, but does not
devote himself to hearing and chanting the glories of Kåñëa, the result will
ultimately be nil. The transcendental spirit soul cannot be purified by any
amount of material piety, charity or scholarship. Only the transcendental
Supreme Lord can purify the transcendental living entity by bestowing His
mercy within the heart. The demigods were astonished at their good fortune.
Even by hearing about Kåñëa, one achieves all perfection, but they had
entered the Lord's own city and were seeing Him standing before them,
TEXT 10
syaAªastavaAx.~i„ar"zAuBaAzAyaDaUmake(tau:
ºaemaAya yaAe mauinaiBar"A‰R"ô$d"Ae÷maAna:
ya: s$aAtvataE: s$amaivaBaUtaya @Atmavaià"r,"
vyaUhe"'icaRta: s$avanazA: svar"ita‚(maAya
syän nas taväìghrir açubhäçaya-dhümaketuù
kñemäya yo munibhir ärdra-hådohyamänaù
yaù sätvataiù sama-vibhütaya ätmavadbhir
vyühe 'rcitaù savanaçaù svar-atikramäya
SYNONYMS
syät—may they be; naù—for Us; tava—Your; aìghriù—the lotus feet;
açubha-äçaya—of our inauspicious mentality; dhüma-ketuù—the annihilating
fire; kñemäya—for achieving real benefit; yaù—which; munibhiù—by sages;
ärdra-hådä—with melted hearts; uhyamänaù—are being carried; yaù—which;
sätvataiù—by the devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
sama-vibhütaye—for gaining opulence like His; ätma-vadbhiù—by those who
are self-controlled; vyühe—in the four-handed personal expansions of
Väsudeva, Saìkarñaëa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha; arcitaù—worshiped;
savanaçaù—at the three junctions of each day; svaù-atikramäya—for crossing
beyond the heavenly planets of this world.
TRANSLATION
Great sages, desiring the highest benefit in life, always cherish Your lotus
feet within their hearts, which are melted by love for You. Similarly, Your
self-controlled devotees, desiring to cross beyond the material kingdom of
heaven to achieve opulence equal to Yours, worship Your lotus feet in the
morning, at noon and in the evening. Thus, they meditate upon Your Lordship
in Your quadruple expansion. Your lotus feet are just like a blazing fire that
burns to ashes all the inauspicious desires for material sense gratification.
PURPORT
The conditioned living entity can purify his existence simply by having
firm faith in the transcendental glories of the Personality of Godhead. What
then can be said of the extraordinary good fortune of the demigods, who were
directly seeing Lord Kåñëa's lotus feet? Although we are presently afflicted by
innumerable material desires, these desires are temporary. The eternal living
entity is meant to experience a loving relationship with the supreme living
entity, the Personality of Godhead; and by rendering pure devotional service
to the Lord, the heart of the living entity is completely satisfied.
The word dhümaketu in this verse indicates a flaming comet or fire, which
represents Lord Çiva. Lord Çiva is the master of the mode of ignorance, and
Lord Kåñëa's lotus feet are compared to the comet, a symbol of the potency of
Çiva, which can destroy all ignorance within the heart. The word
sama-vibhütaye ("for achieving equal opulence") indicates that the pure
devotees go back home, back to Godhead, and enjoy the infinite bliss of the
spiritual world. Lord Kåñëa is endowed with unlimited opulent paraphernalia
for enjoyment, and a liberated soul who goes to Kåñëa's abode is awarded all
opulence for serving the Lord. According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté
Öhäkura, the word vyühe in this verse indicates the three puruña incarnations,
namely Mahä-Viñëu, Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu and Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu, as well
as Väsudeva. If we can scientifically understand how Kåñëa expands Himself to
create the material world, we shall immediately experience that everything is
the property of Kåñëa and thus become free from the desire to exploit it for our
own selfish purposes. Kåñëa is the Supreme Lord, the master of everyone and
the reservoir of all opulences, and one should remember His lotus feet in the
morning, at noon and in the evening. One who always remembers Kåñëa and
never forgets Him will experience real, blissful life beyond the pale shadow of
material illusion.
TEXT 11
yais$cantyatae ‘ayatapaAiNAiBar"Dvar"A¢aAE
‡ayyaA inaç&l(ivaiDanaezA h"ivagA{Rh"ItvaA
@DyaAtmayaAegA ota yaAeigAiBar"AtmamaAyaAM
ijaÁaAs$auiBa: par"maBaAgAvataE: par"Ií":
yas cintyate prayata-päëibhir adhvarägnau
trayyä nirukta-vidhineça havir gåhétvä
adhyätma-yoga uta yogibhir ätma-mäyäà
jijïäsubhiù parama-bhägavataiù paréñöaù
SYNONYMS
yaù—which; cintyate—are meditated upon; prayata-päëibhiù—by those with
folded hands; adhvara-agnau—in the fire of sacrifice; trayyä—of the three
Vedas (Åg, Yajur and Säma); nirukta—comprising the essential understanding
presented in the Nirukta; vidhinä-by the process; éça-O Lord; haviù—the ghee
meant for offering; gåhétvä—taking; adhyätma-yoge—in that yoga system
meant for realization of one's true self; uta—also; yogibhiù—by the
practitioners of this yoga; ätma-mäyäm—about Your bewildering material
energy; jijïäsubhiù—who are inquisitive; parama-bhägavataiù—by the most
elevated devotees; paréñöaù—perfectly worshiped.
TRANSLATION
Those about to offer oblations into the fire of sacrifice in accordance with
the Åg, Yajur and Säma Vedas meditate on Your lotus feet. Similarly, the
practitioners of transcendental yoga meditate upon Your lotus feet, hoping for
knowledge about Your divine mystic potency, and the most elevated pure
devotees perfectly worship Your lotus feet, desiring to cross beyond Your
illusory potency.
PURPORT
The words ätma-mäyäà jijïäsubhiù are significant in this verse. The mystic
yogés (adhyätma-yoga uta yogibhiù) are eager to acquire knowledge of the Lord's
mystic potencies, whereas the pure devotees (parama-bhägavataiù) are eager to
cross beyond the kingdom of illusion so that they can serve Lord Kåñëa's lotus
feet in pure loving ecstasy. In any case, everyone is interested in the potency
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The atheistic material scientists are
also fascinated by the external material potency of the Lord, and the gross
sense gratifiers are attracted by the physical body, which is also ätma-mäyä, or
an expansion of the Lord's potency. Although all of the Lord's potencies are
qualitatively one with the Lord, and therefore with each other, the blissful
spiritual potency is nevertheless supreme because it establishes relationships
between the Lord and the pure living entities on the platform of eternal
happiness. Every living entity is originally a loving servitor of the Lord, and
the spiritual energy of the Lord engages the living entity in his pure
constitutional position beyond illusion.
Our dreaming and waking experiences are both activities of the mind;
however, the activities we perform while awake are more valuable because they
establish us in our permanent situation. Similarly, at every moment every
living entity is experiencing one of the innumerable potencies of the Supreme
Lord. However, the experience of the spiritual potency is more significant
because it establishes the living entity in his eternal, constitutional position as
a faithful servitor of the Personality of Godhead.
The demigods are glorifying the Lord's lotus feet because they are
personally very eager to be purified by contact with those feet (taväìghrir
asmäkam açubhäçaya-dhümaketuù syät). When a sincere devotee eagerly
desires to attain the shelter of the Lord's lotus feet, the Lord brings him to His
personal abode, just as the demigods were brought to Dvärakä by Lord Kåñëa's
arrangement.
TEXT 12
payauRí"yaA tava ivaBaAe vanamaAlayaeyaM
s$aMs$paAiDaRnaI BagAvataI ‘aitapa¥aIvacC)$I:
ya: s$au‘aNAItamamauyaAhR"NAmaAd"d"ªaAe
BaUyaAts$ad"Ax.~i„ar"zAuBaAzAyaDaUmake(tau:
paryuñöayä tava vibho vana-mälayeyaà
saàspärdhiné bhagavaté pratipatné-vac chréù
yaù su-praëétam amuyärhaëam ädadan no
bhüyät sadäìghrir açubhäçaya-dhümaketuù
SYNONYMS
paryuñöayä—worn out; tava—Your; vibho—almighty Lord; vanamälayä—by
the flower garland; iyam—she; saàspärdhiné—feeling competitive;
bhagavaté—the female counterpart of the Personality of Godhead;
prati-patné-vat—just like an envious co wife; çréù—Lakñmédevé, the goddess of
fortune; yaù—which Supreme Lord (Yourself); su-praëétam-(so that it may be)
properly executed; amuyä—by this; arhaëam—the offering;
ädadan—accepting; naù—our; bhüyät—may they be; sadä—always;
aìghriù—the lotus feet; açubha-äçaya—of our impure desires;
dhüma-ketuù—the fire of destruction.
TRANSLATION
O almighty Lord, You are so kind to Your servants that You have accepted
the withered flower garland that we have placed on Your chest. Since the
goddess of fortune makes her abode on Your transcendental chest, she will
undoubtedly become agitated, like a jealous co-wife, upon seeing our offering
also dwelling there. Yet You are so merciful that You neglect Your eternal
consort Lakñmé and accept our offering as most excellent worship. O merciful
Lord, may Your lotus feet always act as a blazing fire to consume the
inauspicious desires within our hearts.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (9.26) it is stated:
patraà puñpaà phalaà toyaà
yo me bhaktyä prayacchati
tad ahaà bhakty-upahåtam
açnämi prayatätmanaù
Lord Kåñëa gratefully and happily accepts even the most meager offering from
His loving devotee. Lord Kåñëa is conquered by the love of His pure devotees,
just as a father is easily conquered by the most insignificant gift offered by his
loving child. Unless a transcendentalist completely gives up the impersonal
conception of life, he cannot make such a loving offering to the Lord. The
process of meditation upon the Supersoul within the heart, called dhyäna-yoga,
is not as pleasing to Kåñëa as bhakti-yoga, or devotional service, because in
dhyäna, or meditation, the yogé is trying to satisfy himself (and not the Lord)
by attaining mystic powers. Similarly, in order to acquire material benefits
from the Lord, ordinary people worship God in temples, churches and
mosques. But one who desires actual spiritual perfection must be enlivened to
always chant and hear the glories of the Lord. Such devotional enthusiasm is
motivated by love of Godhead and is devoid of any selfish expectation.
The Lord is so kind that He neglects His own eternal consort, Lakñmé, and
gives preference to His humble devotee, just as a man will neglect the loving
embrace of his wife when his affectionate child approaches him with a gift.
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has pointed out that any garland worn by the Lord cannot
be faded because all of the Lord's personal paraphernalia is completely
transcendental and spiritually opulent. Similarly, there is no possibility that
mundane jealousy could appear in the character of the goddess of fortune, who
is as transcendental as Lord Kåñëa Himself. Therefore the statements of the
demigods are to be understood as humorous words inspired by intense love of
Godhead. The demigods enjoy the protection of Lakñmé and, ultimately, of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, and due to their confidence in their
loving relationship with the Lord and His consort they feel free to speak in a
joking way.
TEXT 13
ke(tauiñiva‚(mayautaiñpatatpataAk(Ae
yastae BayaABayak(r"Ae's$aur"de"vacamvaAe:
svagAARya s$aADauSau KalaeiSvatar"Aya BaUmana,
pad": paunaAtau BagAvana, BajataAmaGaM na:
ketus tri-vikrama-yutas tri-patat-patäko
yas te bhayäbhaya-karo 'sura-deva-camvoù
svargäya sädhuñu khaleñv itaräya bhüman
padaù punätu bhagavan bhajatäm aghaà naù
SYNONYMS
ketuù—a flagpole; tri-vikrama—three mighty steps in conquering Bali
Mahäräja; yataù—adorned by; tri-patat—falling into each of the three
planetary systems; patäkaù—the flag upon which; yaù—which; te—Your (lotus
feet); bhaya-abhaya—fear and fearlessness; karaù—creating; asura-deva—of
the demons and the demigods; camvoù—for the respective armies;
svargäya—for the attainment of heaven; sädhuñu—among the saintly
demigods and devotees; khaleñu—among the envious; itaräya—for just the
opposite; bhüman—O most powerful Lord; pädaù—the lotus feet;
punätu—may they purify; bhagavan—O Supreme Personality of Godhead;
bhajatäm—who are engaged in worshiping You; agham—the sins; naù—of us.
TRANSLATION
O omnipotent Lord, in Your incarnation as Trivikrama, You raised Your leg
like a flagpole to break the shell of the universe, allowing the holy Ganges to
flow down, like a banner of victory, in three branches throughout the three
planetary systems. By three mighty steps of Your lotus feet, Your Lordship
captured Bali Mahäräja, along with his universal kingdom. Your lotus feet
inspire fear in the demons by driving them down to hell and fearlessness among
Your devotees by elevating them to the perfection of heavenly life. We are
sincerely trying to worship You, our Lord; therefore may Your lotus feet kindly
free us from all of our sinful reactions.
PURPORT
In order to reclaim for the demigods the universal kingdom seized by Bali
Mahäräja, Lord Kåñëa, as described in the Eighth Canto of this great work,
appeared as the beautiful dwarf-brähmaëa Vämana, who extended His foot
upward to the outer limits of the universe. When the Lord's leg breached a
hole in the universal shell, the holy Ganges water came flowing into the
universe. This scene appeared like an upraised flagpole with a wonderfully
flowing victory banner.
As stated in the çruti-mantras, caraëaà pavitraà vitataà puräëaà yena
pütas tarati duñkåtäni: "The lotus feet of the Personality of Godhead are most
pure, all-pervading and the oldest of all. One who is purified by them crosses
over all previous sinful activities." Throughout the universe the process of
worshiping the lotus feet of the Lord is most famous.
TEXT 14
nasyaAetagAAva wva yasya vazAe Bavainta
“aöAd"yastanauBa{taAe imaTaur"âRmaAnaA:
k(Alasya tae ‘ak{(itapaUç&SayaAe: par"sya
zAM nastanaAetau car"NA: pauç&SaAeÔamasya
nasy ota-gäva iva yasya vaçe bhavanti
brahmädayas tanu-bhåto mithur ardyamänäù
kälasya te prakåti-püruñayoù parasya
çaà nas tanotu caraëaù puruñottamasya
SYNONYMS
nasi—through the nose; ota—strung; gävaù—oxen; iva—as if; yasya—of
whose; vaçe—under the control; bhavanti—they exist;
brahma-ädayaù—Brahmä and all others; tanu-bhåtaù—the embodied living
beings; mithuù—among each other; ardyamänäù—struggling; kälasya—of the
force of time; te—of Yourself; prakåti-püruñayoù—both the material nature
and the living entity; parasya—who is beyond them; çam—transcendental
fortune; naù—for us; tanotu—may they spread; caraëaù—the lotus feet;
puruña-uttamasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the transcendental entity who
is superior to both material nature and the enjoyer of nature. May Your lotus
feet bestow transcendental pleasure upon us. All of the great demigods,
beginning with Brahmä, are embodied living entities. Struggling painfully with
one another under the strict control of Your time factor, they are just like bulls
dragged by ropes tied through their pierced noses.
PURPORT
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé states: nanu yuddhe deväsurädayaù parasparaà jayanti
jéyante ca kim ahaà tatrety ata ähuù, naséti. mithur mitho 'rdyamänä
yuddhädibhiù péòyamänä brahmädayo 'pi yasya tava vaçe bhavanti na tu jaye
paräjaye vä svatanträù. "In the perpetual battles between the demigods, or
devotees of the Lord, and the demons, or nondevotees, each side sometimes
conquers and is sometimes apparently defeated. One may argue that all this
has nothing to do with the Personality of Godhead since it is based on nothing
more than the interaction of opposing living entities. But every living entity is,
however, strictly under the control of the Personality of Godhead, and victory
and defeat are always in the hands of the Lord." This does not contradict the
fact of the living entity's free will, since the Lord awards victory and defeat
according to the merit of the living entities. In a legal battle neither the
prosecution nor the defense can act independently of the legal system presided
over by the authorized judge. Victory and defeat in the court are awarded by
the judge, but the judge is acting according to the laws, which do not favor or
discriminate against either side.
Similarly, the Personality of Godhead is awarding us the results of our
previous activities. In order to discredit God, materialists frequently give the
argument that oftentimes innocent people suffer whereas impious rogues enjoy
life unimpeded. The fact is, however, that the Personality of Godhead is not a
fool, as are the materialistic persons who place such arguments. The Lord can
see our many previous lives; therefore He may allow one to enjoy or suffer in
this life not only as a result of one's present activities, but also as a result of
one's previous activities. For example, by working very hard a man may
accumulate a fortune. If such a newly rich man then gives up his work and
takes to a degenerate life, his fortune does not immediately disappear. On the
other hand, one who is destined to become rich may now be working very
hard, with discipline and austerity, and yet be without spending money. So a
superficial observer might well be confused upon seeing the moral,
hard-working man without funds and the degenerate, lazy man in possession of
riches. Similarly, a materialistic fool without knowledge of past, present and
future is unable to understand the perfect justice of the Personality of
Godhead.
The example given in this verse to explain Kåñëa's controlling power is
appropriate. Although a bull is extremely powerful, he is easily controlled by a
slight tug on a rope strung through his pierced nose. Similarly, even the most
powerful politicians, scholars, demigods, etc., may immediately be put into an
unbearable situation by the omnipotent Personality of Godhead. Therefore the
demigods have not come to Dvärakä to proudly display their universal political
and intellectual powers but to humbly surrender at the lotus feet of the
Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 15
@syaAis$a he"tauç&d"yaisTaitas$aMyamaAnaAma,
@vyal(jaIvamah"taAmaipa k(AlamaAò":
s$aAe'yaM i‡aNAAiBar"iKalaApacayae ‘ava{Ôa:
k(AlaAe gABaIr"r"ya oÔamapaUç&Sastvama,
asyäsi hetur udaya-sthiti-saàyamänäm
avyakta-jéva-mahatäm api kälam ähuù
so 'yaà tri-ëäbhir akhiläpacaye pravåttaù
kälo gabhéra-raya uttama-püruñas tvam
SYNONYMS
asya—of this (universe); asi—You are; hetuù—the cause; udaya—of the
creation; sthiti—maintenance; saàyamänäm—and annihilation; avyakta—of
the unmanifest material nature; jéva—the individual living beings;
mahatäm—and of the mahat-tattva, with the manifest elements evolved from
it; api—also; kälam—the controlling time factor; ähuù—You are said to be; saù
ayam—this same personality; tri-ëäbhiù—appearing as a wheel with
circumference divided into three parts (the year divided into four-month
seasons); akhila—of everything; apacaye—in effecting the diminution;
pravåttaù—engaged; kälaù—the time factor; gabhéra—imperceptible;
rayaù—the movement of which; uttama-püruñaù—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; tvam—You are.
TRANSLATION
You are the cause of the creation, maintenance and destruction of this
universe. As time, You regulate the subtle and manifest states of material
nature and control every living being. As the threefold wheel of time You
diminish all things by Your imperceptible actions, and thus You are the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
The word gabhéra-rayaù, or "imperceptible speed and power," is significant.
We observe that by the laws of nature all material things, including our own
bodies, gradually disintegrate. Although we can perceive the long-term results
of this aging process, we cannot experience the process itself. For example, no
one can feel how his hair or fingernails are growing. We perceive the
cumulative result of their growth, but from moment to moment we cannot
experience it. Similarly, a house gradually decays until it is demolished. From
moment to moment we cannot perceive exactly how this is happening, but in
the course of longer intervals of time we can actually see the deterioration of
the house. In other words, we can experience the results or manifestations of
aging and deterioration, but as it is taking place the process itself is
imperceptible. This is the wonderful potency of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in His form of time.
The word tri-ëäbhiù indicates that according to astrological calculation of
the sun's movements, the year can be divided into three sections: those
represented by Aries, Taurus, Gemini and Cancer; Leo, Virgo, Libra and
Scorpio; and Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius and Pisces.
The word uttama-püruña, or puruñottama, is explained in Bhagavad-gétä
(15.18):
yasmät kñaram atéto 'ham
akñaräd api cottamaù
ato 'smi loke vede ca
prathitaù puruñottamaù
"Because I am transcendental, beyond both the fallible and the infallible, and
because I am the greatest, I am celebrated both in the world and in the Vedas
as that Supreme Person."
TEXT 16
tvaÔa: paumaAna, s$amaiDagAmya yayaAsya vaIya<
DaÔae mah"Antaimava gABaRmamaAeGavaIyaR:
s$aAe'yaM tayaAnaugAta @Atmana @ANx"k(AezAM
hE"maM s$as$ajaR baih"r"Avar"NAEç&paetama,
tvattaù pumän samadhigamya yayäsya véryaà
dhatte mahäntam iva garbham amogha-véryaù
so 'yaà tayänugata ätmana äëòa-koçaà
haimaà sasarja bahir ävaraëair upetam
SYNONYMS
tvattaù—from You; pumän—the puruña-avatära, Mahä-Viñëu;
samadhigamya—obtaining; yayä—along with which (material nature);
asya—of this creation; véryam—the potential seed; dhatte—He impregnates;
mahäntam—the mahat-tattva, the raw amalgamation of matter; iva
garbham—like an ordinary fetus; amogha-véryaù—He whose semen is never
wasted; saù ayam—that same (mahat-tattva); tayä—with the material nature;
anugataù—joined; ätmanaù—from itself; äëòa-koçam—the primeval egg of
the universe; haimam—golden; sasarja—produced; bahiù—on its outside;
ävaraëaiù—with several coverings; upetam—endowed.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, the original puruña-avatära, Mahä-Viñëu, acquires His
creative potency from You. Thus with infallible energy He impregnates material
nature, producing the mahat-tattva. Then the mahat-tattva, the amalgamated
material energy, endowed with the potency of the Lord, produces from itself the
primeval golden egg of the universe, which is covered by various layers of
material elements.
PURPORT
In the previous verses the supremacy of the Personality of Godhead has
been established in relation to the living entity and material nature. In this
verse it is clearly stated that Lord Kåñëa is the source of the greatest Viñëu
incarnation, Mahä-Viñëu, and that Mahä-Viñëu acquires His creative potency
from Lord Kåñëa. It would therefore be foolish to surmise that Lord Kåñëa is an
expansion of Viñëu. In this regard the opinion of the demigods, headed by
Brahmä, can be taken as final.
TEXT 17
taÔasTaUSaê jagAtaê BavaAnaDaIzAAe
yanmaAyayaAetTagAuNAivai‚(yayaAepanaItaAna,
@TaARÃauSaªaipa ô$SaIk(patae na ilaæaAe
yae'nyae svata: pair"ô$taAd"ipa ibaByaita sma
tat tasthüñaç ca jagataç ca bhavän adhéço
yan mäyayottha-guëa-vikriyayopanétän
arthäï juñann api håñéka-pate na lipto
ye 'nye svataù parihåtäd api bibhyati sma
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; tasthüñaù—of everything stationary; ca—and;
jagataù—mobile; ca—as well; bhavän—You (are); adhéçaù—the ultimate
controller; yat—because; mäyayä—by material nature; uttha—raised;
guëa—of (nature's) modes; vikriyayä—by the transformation (i.e. by the
activity of the sense organs of the living beings); upanétän—gathered together;
arthän—the sense objects; juñan—engaging with; api—even though;
håñéka-pate—O master of everyone's senses; na liptaù—You are never touched;
ye—those who; anye—others; svataù—on their own strength; parihåtät—on
account of (objects of sense gratification); api—even; bibhyati—they fear;
sma—indeed.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, You are the supreme creator of this universe and the ultimate
controller of all moving and nonmoving living entities. You are Håñékeça, the
supreme controller of all sensory activity, and thus You never become
contaminated or entangled in the course of Your supervision of the infinite
sensory activities within the material creation. On the other hand, other living
entities, even yogés and philosophers, are disturbed and frightened simply by
remembering the material objects that they have supposedly renounced in their
pursuit of enlightenment.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord Kåñëa is within the heart of every conditioned soul and
guides the living entity in the pursuit and experience of sense gratification.
The disappointing results of such activities gradually convince the conditioned
soul to reject material life and surrender again to the Lord within his heart.
Lord Kåñëa is never affected by the futile attempts of the living entities to
enjoy His illusory energy. For the Personality of Godhead there is no
possibility of fear or disturbance, because nothing is ultimately separate from
Him.
TEXT 18
smaAyaAvalaAek(lavad"izARtaBaAvah"Air"-
”aUmaNx"la‘aih"tas$aAEr"taman‡azAAENxE":
patnyastau SaAex"zAs$ah"›amanaËÿbaANAEr,"
yasyaein‰"yaM ivamaiTatauM k(r"NAEnaR ivaBvya:
smäyävaloka-lava-darçita-bhäva-häribhrü-
maëòala-prahita-saurata-mantra-çauëòaiù
patnyas tu ñoòaça-sahasram anaìga-bäëair
yasyendriyaà vimathituà karaëair na vibhvyaù
SYNONYMS
smäya—smiling; avaloka—of a glance; lava—by fractions; darçita—having
shown; bhäva—their feelings; häri—enchanting; bhrü-maëòala—by which
arch of the eyebrows; prahita—launched; saurata—of conjugal love;
mantra—messages; çauëòaiù—by the impudent advances; patnyaù—wives;
tu—but; ñoòaça-sahasram—sixteen thousand; anaìga—of Cupid; bäëaiù—by
the arrows; yasya—whose; indriyam—senses; vimathitum—to agitate;
karaëaiù—with all their devices; na vibhvyaù—they were not able.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, You are living with sixteen thousand exquisitely beautiful,
aristocratic wives. By their irresistible coy and smiling glances and by their
lovely arching eyebrows, they send You messages of eager conjugal love. But
they are completely unable to disturb the mind and senses of Your Lordship.
PURPORT
In the previous verse it was clearly stated that no material object can attract
the senses of the Lord. Now in this verse it is demonstrated that the Lord has
no desire to enjoy even spiritual sense gratification. Kåñëa is complete in
Himself. He is the reservoir of all pleasure, and He does not lust after anything
material or spiritual. The argument may by given that Kåñëa, in order to please
His wife Satyabhämä, stole a pärijäta flower from heaven and thus appeared to
be a henpecked husband under the control of His loving wife. But although
Kåñëa is sometimes conquered by the love of His devotees, He is never
influenced by the desire to enjoy like an ordinary, lusty materialistic person.
The nondevotees cannot understand the overwhelming loving feelings
exchanged between the Lord and His pure devotees. Kåñëa may be conquered
by our intense love for Him, and thus pure devotees can control the Lord. For
example, the elderly gopés in Våndävana would clap their hands in different
rhythms to make Kåñëa dance, and in Dvärakä Satyabhämä ordered Kåñëa to
bring her a flower as proof of His love for her. As stated in Çréniväsa Äcärya's
song to the six Gosvämés, gopé-bhäva-rasämåtäbdhi-laharé-kallola-magnau
muhuù: the love between the Lord and His pure devotee is an ocean of
spiritual bliss. But at the same time, Kåñëa remains completely self-satisfied.
Kåñëa indifferently gave up the company of the incomparable young damsels
of Vraja-bhümi, the gopés, and went to Mathurä at the request of His uncle,
Akrüra. Thus neither the gopés of Våndävana nor the queens of Dvärakä could
arouse an enjoying spirit in Kåñëa. When all is said and done, pleasure in this
world means sex. But this mundane sexual attraction is simply a perverted
reflection of the transcendental loving affairs between Kåñëa and His eternal
associates in the spiritual world. The gopés of Våndävana are unsophisticated
village girls, whereas the queens in Dvärakä are aristocratic young ladies. But
both the gopés and the queens are overwhelmed with love for Kåñëa. As the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa displays the highest perfection of
beauty, strength, wealth, fame, knowledge and renunciation and is thus
completely satisfied by His own supreme position. He reciprocates spiritual
loving affairs with the gopés and queens simply for their sake. Only fools think
that Lord Kåñëa could be attracted by the perverted illusory pleasures to which
we poor conditioned souls are so blindly attached. Therefore everyone should
recognize the supreme transcendental position of the Personality of Godhead
and surrender to Him. That is the clear implication of this statement by the
demigods.
TEXT 19
ivaBvyastavaAma{tak(TaAed"vah"AiñlaAefyaA:
paAd"Avanaejas$air"ta: zAmalaAina h"ntauma,
@Anau™avaM ™auitaiBar"x.~i„ajamaËÿs$aËEÿs$a,
taITaRã"yaM zAuicaSad"sta opas$pa{zAinta
vibhvyas tavämåta-kathoda-vahäs tri-lokyäù
pädävane-ja-saritaù çamaläni hantum
änuçravaà çrutibhir aìghri-jam aìga-saìgais
tértha-dvayaà çuci-ñadas ta upaspåçanti
SYNONYMS
vibhvyaù—are able; tava—Your; amåta—nectarean; kathä—of the topics;
uda-vahäù—the water-bearing rivers; tri-lokyäù—of the three worlds;
päda-avane—from the bathing of Your lotus feet; ja—born; saritaù—rivers;
çamaläni—all contamination; hantum—to destroy; änuçravam—consisting of
the process of hearing from bona fide authority; çrutibhiù—with the ears;
aìghri-jam—consisting of (the holy rivers) generated from Your lotus feet;
aìga-saìgaiù—by direct physical contact; tértha-dvayam—these two kinds of
holy places; çuci-ñadaù—those who are striving for purification; te—Your;
upaspåçanti—they approach to associate with.
TRANSLATION
The nectar-bearing rivers of discussions about You, and also the holy rivers
generated from the bathing of Your lotus feet, are able to destroy all
contamination within the three worlds. Those who are striving for purification
associate with the holy narrations of Your glories by hearing them with their
ears, and they associate with the holy rivers flowing from Your lotus feet by
physically bathing in them.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura states, änuçravaà guror uccäraëam
anuçrüyante: "One should hear about Kåñëa by hearing from the spiritual
master." The bona fide spiritual master describes the pastimes, potencies and
incarnations of the Personality of Godhead to his disciple. If the spiritual
master is bona fide and if the disciple is sincere and obedient, then the
communication between guru and disciple is just like nectar, both for the guru
and the disciple. Ordinary persons cannot even imagine the special pleasure
experienced by the devotees of the Lord. Such nectarean speaking and hearing
destroys all contamination within the heart of a conditioned soul, the primary
contamination being the desire to live without serving Kåñëa.
The other nectar described here is caraëämåta, the nectarean waters that
bathe the Lord's feet. Lord Vämanadeva bathed His own lotus foot by kicking a
hole in the universal covering so that the sacred Ganges water washed His toes
and fell into the universe. The Yamunä River also washed Kåñëa's lotus feet
when the Lord appeared on this planet five thousand years ago. Kåñëa sported
daily with His boyfriends and girl friends in the Yamunä River, and
consequently that river is also caraëämåta. One should therefore try to take
bath in the Ganges or Yamunä.
Every morning in ISKCON temples, the lotus feet of the Deity of Kåñëa are
bathed, and the water thus sanctified is also called caraëämåta, the nectar of
Kåñëa's lotus feet. Çréla Prabhupäda taught his disciples and followers to come
before the Deities each morning and drink three drops of the caraëämåta from
the Deities' bathing.
In all these ways one can purify his heart and relish spiritual bliss. When
one is fixed on the platform of spiritual bliss, then one does not take another
birth in the material world. In this verse the word çuci-ñadaù is significant: one
must engage in the purified activities of Kåñëa consciousness. One must learn
to serve the Lord from the bona fide spiritual master, whose instructions one
should accept without speculation. Those who are attached to the
phantasmagoria of this world sometimes concoct their own whimsical concepts
of God. But only from the bona fide spiritual master can we get perfect and
pure knowledge about the Supreme Personality of Godhead and devotional
service to Him. Such knowledge may be found in all the books of His Divine
Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda.
TEXT 20
™aIbaAd"r"AyaiNAç&vaAca
wtyaiBaí^"ya ivabauDaE:
s$aezA: zAtaDa{itahR"ir"ma,
@ByaBaASata gAAeivandM"
‘aNAmyaAmbar"maAi™ata:
çré-bädaräyaëir uväca
ity abhiñöüya vibudhaiù
seçaù çata-dhåtir harim
abhyabhäñata govindaà
praëamyämbaram äçritaù
SYNONYMS
çré-bädaräyaëiù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus;
abhiñöüya—praising; vibudhaiù—along with all the demigods; sa-éçaù—and also
Lord Çiva; çata-dhåtiù—Lord Brahmä; harim—the Supreme Lord;
abhyabhäñata—spoke; govindam—to Govinda; praëamya—offering obeisances;
ambaram—in the sky; äçritaù—situated.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: After Brahmä, along with Lord Çiva and
the other demigods, thus offered prayers to the Supreme Lord, Govinda, Lord
Brahmä situated himself in the sky and addressed the Lord as follows.
TEXT 21
™aI“aöAevaAca
BaUmaeBaARr"AvataAr"Aya
paur"A ivaÁaAipata: ‘aBaAe
tvamasmaAiBar"zAeSaAtmana,
taÔaTaEvaAepapaAid"tama,
çré-brahmoväca
bhümer bhärävatäräya
purä vijïäpitaù prabho
tvam asmäbhir açeñätman
tat tathaivopapäditam
SYNONYMS
çré-brahmä uväca—Çré Brahmä said; bhümeù—of the earth; bhära—the
burden; avatäräya—for the sake of diminishing; purä—previously;
vijïäpitaù—were requested; prabho—O Lord; tvam—You; asmäbhiù—by us;
açeña-ätman—O unlimited Soul of all; tat—that (request); tathä eva—just as
expressed by us; upapäditam—was fulfilled.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä said: My dear Lord, previously we requested You to remove
the burden of the earth. O unlimited Personality of Godhead, that request has
certainly been fulfilled.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa might have said to the demigods, "Actually, you requested
Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu to come down, so why are you saying that you requested
Me? After all, I am Govinda." Therefore Brahmä has addressed the Lord here
as açeñätmä, or the unlimited Personality of Godhead from whom all plenary
expansions of Viñëu emanate. This is the opinion of Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura.
TEXT 22
DamaRê sTaAipata: s$ats$au
s$atyas$anDaeSau vaE tvayaA
k(LitaRê id"ºau ivaiºaæaA
s$avaRlaAek(malaApah"A
dharmaç ca sthäpitaù satsu
satya-sandheñu vai tvayä
kértiç ca dikñu vikñiptä
sarva-loka-maläpahä
SYNONYMS
dharmaù—the principles of religion; ca—and; sthäpitaù—established;
satsu—among the pious; satya-sandheñu—among those who seek after truth;
vai—indeed; tvayä—by You; kértiù—Your glories; ca—and; dikñu—in all the
directions; vikñiptä—disseminated; sarva-loka—of all planets; mala—the
contamination; apahä—which remove.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, You have reestablished the principles of religion among pious men
who are always firmly bound to the truth. You have also distributed Your
glories all over the world, and thus the whole world can be purified by hearing
about You.
TEXT 23
@vataIyaR yad"Aeva<zAe
iba”aåU"pamanauÔamama,
k(maARNyauÚ"Amava{ÔaAina
ih"taAya jagAtaAe'k{(TaA:
avatérya yador vaàçe
bibhrad rüpam anuttamam
karmäëy uddäma-våttäni
hitäya jagato 'kåthäù
SYNONYMS
avatérya—descending; yadoù—of King Yadu; vaàçe—into the dynasty;
bibhrat—bearing; rüpam—a transcendental form; anuttamam—unexcelled;
karmäëi—activities; uddäma-våttäni—comprised of magnanimous deeds;
hitäya—for the benefit; jagataù—of the universe; akåthäù—You performed.
TRANSLATION
Descending into the dynasty of King Yadu, You have manifested Your
unique transcendental form, and for the benefit of the entire universe You have
executed magnanimous transcendental activities.
TEXT 24
yaAina tae cair"taAnaIzA
manauSyaA: s$aADava: k(laAE
Za{Nvanta: k(LtaRyantaê
tair"SyantyaÃas$aA tama:
yäni te caritänéça
manuñyäù sädhavaù kalau
çåëvantaù kértayantaç ca
tariñyanty aïjasä tamaù
SYNONYMS
yäni—which; te—Your; caritäni—pastimes; éça-O Supreme Lord;
manuñyäù—humans; sädhavaù—saintly persons; kalau—in the degraded age of
Kali; çåëvantaù—hearing; kértayantaù—chanting; ca—and; tariñyanti—they
will cross over; aïjasä—easily; tamaù—darkness.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, those pious and saintly persons who in the age of Kali hear
about Your transcendental activities and also glorify them will easily cross over
the darkness of the age.
PURPORT
Unfortunately, in Kali-yuga many persons are not attracted to the
authorized Vedic literatures. Minimizing the transcendental process of hearing
and chanting the glories of the Personality of Godhead, they prefer to listen to
useless and whimsical vibrations on the radio and television, in newspapers
and magazines, and so on. Rather than hear about Kåñëa from the bona fide
spiritual master, they endlessly give their own opinions about everything, until
they are dragged away by the force of time. After studying the temporary,
limited forms of the material world, they impatiently conclude that the
Absolute Truth is formless. Such persons are actually worshiping Kåñëa's
illusory energy, mäyä, who has been authorized to kick their stubborn heads. If
instead people hear directly about Kåñëa from the bona fide sources, they will
very easily solve all the problems of their lives. In Kali-yuga people are
constantly suffering from many psychological, social, economic, historical,
political and existential problems. But all these nightmarish problems can be
removed as soon as one awakens to the transcendental reality of the
Personality of Godhead, who is eternal, full of bliss and knowledge and beyond
the bewildering manifestations of the material energy. The Lord appears
within this universe so that people can observe, hear about and glorify His
actual activities. In this difficult age of Kali we should all seriously take
advantage of this opportunity.
TEXT 25
yaäu"vaMzAe'vataINARsya
Bavata: pauç&SaAeÔama
zAr"cC$taM vyataIyaAya
paÂaivaMzAAiDakM( ‘aBaAe
yadu-vaàçe 'vatérëasya
bhavataù puruñottama
çarac-chataà vyatéyäya
païca-viàçädhikaà prabho
SYNONYMS
yadu-vaàçe—in the family of the Yadus; avatérëasya—who has descended;
bhavataù—of Yourself; puruña-uttama—O Supreme Person; çarat-çatam—one
hundred autumns; vyatéyäya—having passed; païca-viàça—by twenty-five;
adhikam—more; prabho—O Lord.
TRANSLATION
O Supreme Personality of Godhead, O my Lord, You have descended into
the Yadu dynasty, and thus You have spent one hundred twenty-five autumns
with Your devotees.
TEXTS 26-27
naADaunaA tae'iKalaADaAr"
de"vak(AyaARvazAeiSatama,
ku(laM ca iva‘azAApaena
naí"‘aAyamaBaUid"d"ma,
tata: svaDaAma par"maM
ivazAsva yaid" manyas$ae
s$alaAek(AéaAek(paAlaAªa:
paAih" vaEku(NQ&ik(Æÿr"Ana,
nädhunä te 'khilädhära
deva-käryävaçeñitam
kulaà ca vipra-çäpena
nañöa-präyam abhüd idam
tataù sva-dhäma paramaà
viçasva yadi manyase
sa-lokäl loka-pälän naù
pähi vaikuëöha-kiìkarän
SYNONYMS
na adhunä—no longer; te—for You; akhila-ädhära—O basis of everything;
deva-kärya—duty on behalf of the demigods; avaçeñitam—remaining part;
kulam—Your dynasty; ca—and; vipra-çäpena—by the curse of the brähmaëas;
nañöa-präyam—virtually annihilated; abhüt—has become; idam—this;
tataù—therefore; sva-dhäma—Your own abode; paramam—supreme;
viçasva—please enter; yadi—if; manyase—You are so disposed; sa-lokän—with
the inhabitants of all the planets; loka-pälän—the protectors of the planets;
naù—us; pähi—please continue to protect; vaikuëöha—of Lord Viñëu,
Vaikuëöha; kiìkarän—the servants.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, there is nothing remaining at this time for Your Lordship to
do on behalf of the demigods. You have already withdrawn Your dynasty by the
curse of the brähmaëas. O Lord, You are the basis of everything, and if You so
desire, kindly return now to Your own abode in the spiritual world. At the same
time, we humbly beg that You always protect us. We are Your humble servants,
and on Your behalf we are managing the universal situation. We, along with our
planets and followers, require Your constant protection.
TEXT 28
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
@vaDaAir"tamaetanmae
yad"AtTa ivabauDaeìr"
k{(taM va: k(AyaRmaiKalaM
BaUmaeBaARr"Ae'vataAir"ta:
çré-bhagavän uväca
avadhäritam etan me
yad ättha vibudheçvara
kåtaà vaù käryam akhilaà
bhümer bhäro 'vatäritaù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
avadhäritam—is understood; etat—this; me—by Me; yat—that which;
ättha—you have said; vibudha-éçvara—O controller of the demigods, Brahmä;
kåtam—is completed; vaù—your; käryam—work; akhilam—all; bhümeù—of
the earth; bhäraù—the burden; avatäritaù—is removed.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord said: O lord of the demigods, Brahmä, I understand your
prayers and request. Having removed the burden of the earth, I have executed
everything that was required on your behalf.
TEXT 29
taid"dM" yaAd"vaku(laM
vaIyaRzAAEyaRi™ayaAeÜ"tama,
laAekM( ijaGa{ºaåu"ÜM" mae
vaelayaeva mah"ANARva:
tad idaà yädava-kulaà
vérya-çaurya-çriyoddhatam
lokaà jighåkñad ruddhaà me
velayeva mahärëavaù
SYNONYMS
tat idam—this very; yädava-kulam—Yädava dynasty; vérya—by their power;
çaurya—courage; çriyä—and opulence; uddhatam—magnified; lokam—the
whole world; jighåkñat—threatening to devour; ruddham—has been checked;
me—by Me; velayä—by the shore; iva—just as; mahä-arëavaù—a great ocean.
TRANSLATION
That very Yädava dynasty in which I appeared became greatly magnified in
opulence, especially in their physical strength and courage, to the extent that
they threatened to devour the whole world. Therefore I have stopped them, just
as the shore holds back the great ocean.
PURPORT
The heroes of the Yadu dynasty were so powerful that even the demigods
could not check them. The enthusiasm of the Yadus was unlimitedly increased
by their victories in dangerous battles, and they could not be killed. Due to
their martial spirit they naturally desired to establish their power over the
whole world; therefore the Lord checked them and withdrew them from the
earth.
TEXT 30
yaâs$aMô$tya ä{"æaAnaAM
yaäU"naAM ivapaulaM ku(lama,
gAntaAsmyanaena laAek(Ae'yama,
oãe"laena ivanaÉÿYaita
yady asaàhåtya dåptänäà
yadünäà vipulaà kulam
gantäsmy anena loko 'yam
udvelena vinaìkñyati
SYNONYMS
yadi—if; asaàhåtya—without withdrawing; dåptänäm—of the overly proud;
yadünäm—Yadus; vipulam—the vast; kulam—dynasty; gantä asmi—I go;
anena—for that reason; lokaù—the world; ayam—this; udvelena—by the
overflow (of the Yadus); vinaìkñyati—will be destroyed.
TRANSLATION
If I were to leave this world without withdrawing the overly proud members
of the Yadu dynasty, the whole world would be destroyed by the deluge of their
unlimited expansion.
PURPORT
Just as a tidal wave overwhelms the boundary of the shore and wreaks
havoc on innocent people, similarly, there was imminent danger that the
powerful Yadu dynasty might expand beyond all boundaries of social and
political control. The members of the Yadu dynasty had become proud because
of their apparent familial relationship with the Personality of Godhead.
Although they were very religious and devoted to brahminical culture, they
had become, as indicated by the word dåptänäm, affected by pride due to their
relationship with Kåñëa. Furthermore, due to their intense love for Kåñëa, they
would certainly feel such intense separation after the Lord's departure to the
spiritual world that they would become maddened and thus become an
unbearable burden on the earth. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has
pointed out, however, that the earth herself, due to attachment for Kåñëa,
would never consider Kåñëa's own family members to be anything but a
welcome burden. Still, Kåñëa wanted to remove this burden. The example is
given that for the pleasure of her husband a beautiful young wife may decorate
herself with many golden ornaments. These ornaments constitute a painful
burden for the delicate wife, but although she is willing to bear this burden,
the loving husband removes the ornaments for the pleasure of his wife. So the
Lord, desiring to apply the wisdom of "An ounce of prevention is worth a
pound of cure," took precautions to remove from the earth the burden of the
Yadu dynasty.
TEXT 31
wd"AnaI%M naAzA @Ar"bDa:
ku(lasya iã"jazAApaja:
yaAsyaAima BavanaM “aöªa,
Wtad"ntae tavaAnaGa
idänéà näça ärabdhaù
kulasya dvija-çäpa-jaù
yäsyämi bhavanaà brahmann
etad-ante tavänagha
SYNONYMS
idäném—just now; näçaù—the annihilation; ärabdhaù—has begun;
kulasya—of the dynasty; dvija-çäpa-jaù—due to the curse of the brähmaëas;
yäsyämi—I will go; bhavanam—to the place of residence; brahman—O
Brahmä; etat-ante—after this; tava—your; anagha—O sinless one.
TRANSLATION
Now due to the brähmaëas' curse, the annihilation of My family has already
begun. O sinless Brahmä, when this annihilation is finished and I am enroute to
Vaikuëöha, I will pay a small visit to your abode.
PURPORT
The members of the Yadu dynasty are eternal servants of the Lord;
therefore Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has explained the word näçaù, or "destruction," as
nigüòhäyäà dvärakäyäà praveçanam ity arthaù: the members of the Yadu
dynasty entered into the hidden or confidential Dvärakä in the spiritual world,
which is not manifested here on the earth. In other words, Dvärakä, the Lord's
abode, is manifest on the earth, and when the earthly Dvärakä is apparently
removed, the eternal Dvärakä in the spiritual world remains as it is. Since the
members of the Yadu dynasty are eternal associates of the Lord, there is no
question of their destruction. Only our conditioned vision of their
manifestation was destroyed. This is the meaning of the word näçaù.
TEXT 32
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
wtyaul(Ae laAek(naATaena
svayamBaU: ‘aiNApatya tama,
s$ah" de"vagANAEdeR"va:
svaDaAma s$amapaâta
çré-çuka uväca
ity ukto loka-näthena
svayam-bhüù praëipatya tam
saha deva-gaëair devaù
sva-dhäma samapadyata
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; uktaù—being addressed;
loka-näthena—by the Lord of the universe, Çré Kåñëa; svayam-bhüù—self-born
Brahmä; praëipatya—falling down to offer obeisances; tam—unto Him;
saha—along with; deva-gaëaiù—all the different demigods; devaù—the great
Lord Brahmä; sva-dhäma—to his personal abode; samapadyata—returned.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Thus addressed by the Lord of the universe, the
self-born Brahmä fell down in obeisances at the lotus feet of the Lord.
Surrounded by all the demigods, the great Brahmä then returned to his personal
abode.
TEXT 33
@Ta tasyaAM mah"AetpaAtaAna,
ã"Ar"vatyaAM s$amauitTataAna,
ivalaAefya BagAvaAnaAh"
yaäu"va{Ü"Ana, s$amaAgAtaAna,
atha tasyäà mahotpätän
dväravatyäà samutthitän
vilokya bhagavän äha
yadu-våddhän samägatän
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; tasyäm—in that city; mahä-utpätän—serious disturbances;
dväravatyäm—in Dvärakä; samutthitän—developed; vilokya—observing;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; äha—said;
yadu-våddhän—to the elder Yadus; samägatän—assembled.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, the Personality of Godhead observed that tremendous
disturbances were taking place in the holy city of Dvärakä. Thus the Lord
spoke to the assembled senior members of the Yadu dynasty as follows.
PURPORT
Muni-väsa-nivase kià ghaöetäriñöa-darçanam: there is no possibility of actual
disturbances or inauspicious events in holy places inhabited by saintly persons.
Thus the so-called disturbances in Dvärakä were directly enacted by the
Personality of Godhead for His own auspicious purpose.
TEXT 34
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
Wtae vaE s$aumah"AetpaAtaA
vyauiÔaï"ntaIh" s$avaRta:
zAApaê na: ku(lasyaAs$aIä,"
“aAöNAeByaAe äu"r"tyaya:
çré-bhagavän uväca
ete vai su-mahotpätä
vyuttiñöhantéha sarvataù
çäpaç ca naù kulasyäséd
brähmaëebhyo duratyayaù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Personality of Godhead said; ete—these; vai—indeed;
su-mahä-utpätäù—very great disturbances; vyuttiñöhanti—are rising up;
iha—here; sarvataù—on all sides; çäpaù—the curse; ca—and; naù—our;
kulasya—of the family; äsét—there has been; brähmaëebhyaù—by the
brähmaëas; duratyayaù—impossible to counteract.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Our dynasty has been cursed by
the brähmaëas. Such a curse is impossible to counteract, and thus great
disturbances are appearing everywhere around us.
TEXT 35
na vastavyaimah"AsmaAiBar,"
ijajaIivaSauiBar"AyaRk(A:
‘aBaAs$aM s$aumah"tpauNyaM
yaAsyaAmaAe'âEva maA icar"ma,
na vastavyam ihäsmäbhir
jijéviñubhir äryakäù
prabhäsaà su-mahat-puëyaà
yäsyämo 'dyaiva mä ciram
SYNONYMS
na vastavyam—should not reside; iha—here; asmäbhiù—we;
jijéviñubhiù—desiring to live; äryakäù—O venerable ones; prabhäsam—to the
holy place called Prabhäsa; su-mahat—very much; puëyam—pious;
yäsyämaù—let us go; adya—today; eva—even; mä ciram—without delay.
TRANSLATION
My dear respected elders, we must not remain any longer in this place if we
wish to keep our lives intact. Let us go this very day to the most pious place
Prabhäsa. We have no time to delay.
PURPORT
Many demigods, coming to the earth to assist Lord Kåñëa in His pastimes,
took birth within the Yadu dynasty and appeared as Lord Kåñëa's associates.
When the Lord had completed His earthly pastimes He wanted to send these
demigods back to their previous service in universal administration. Each
demigod was to return to his respective planet. The transcendental city of
Dvärakä is so auspicious that whoever dies there immediately goes back home,
back to Godhead, but because the demigod members of the Yadu dynasty, in
many cases, were not yet prepared to go back to Godhead, they had to die
outside the city of Dvärakä. Thus Lord Kåñëa, pretending to be an ordinary
living being, said, "We are all in danger. Let us all immediately go to Prabhäsa."
In this way, by His yoga-mäyä Kåñëa bewildered such demigod members of the
Yadu dynasty and led them away to the holy place Prabhäsa.
Since Dvärakä is parama-maìgala, the most auspicious place, not even an
imitation of inauspiciousness can take place there. Actually, Lord Kåñëa's
pastime of removing the Yadu dynasty is ultimately auspicious, but since it
outwardly appeared inauspicious, it could not take place in Dvärakä; therefore
Lord Kåñëa led the Yadus away from Dvärakä. After having sent the demigods
back to their planets, Lord Kåñëa planned to return to the spiritual world,
Vaikuëöha, in His original form and remain in the eternal city of Dvärakä.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has made the following important
comments on this verse. Prabhäsa is a famous holy place located near the
Veraval railway station, within the region of Junagarah. In Chapter Thirty of
the Eleventh Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam it is written that after hearing the
words of Çré Kåñëa, the Yädavas went to the mainland from the island city of
Dvärakä by means of boats and then traveled to Prabhäsa in chariots. At
Prabhäsa-kñetra they drank a beverage called maireya and became engaged in a
mutual quarrel. A great battle ensued, and killing each other with hard stalks
of cane, the members of the Yadu dynasty acted out the pastime of their own
annihilation.
Lord Çré Kåñëa, manifesting His four-armed form, sat down under a pippala
tree, placing His left foot, the heel of which was colored red like the red
koka-nada lotus, upon His right thigh. A hunter named Jarä, watching from
the shore of the ocean at Prabhäsa, mistook the Lord's red-colored foot to be
the face of a deer and shot his arrow at it.
At the base of that same pippala tree under which Lord Kåñëa had sat there
is now a temple. One mile away from the tree, on the seashore, is the
Véra-prabhaïjana Maöha, and it is said that from this point the hunter Jarä
fired his arrow.
In the conclusion to his work Mahäbhärata-tätparya-nirëaya, Çré
Madhväcärya-päda has written the following purport to the mauñala-lélä. The
Supreme Personality of Godhead, in order to bewilder the demons and ensure
that the word of His own devotees and of the brähmaëas be maintained,
created a body of material energy into which the arrow was shot. But the
Lord's actual four-armed form was never touched by the arrow of Jarä, who is
actually the Lord's devotee Bhågu Åñi. In a previous age Bhågu Muni had
placed his foot on the chest of Lord Viñëu. In order to counteract the offense
of improperly placing his foot on the Lord's chest, Bhågu had to take birth as a
degraded hunter. But even though a great devotee willingly accepts such a low
birth, the Personality of Godhead cannot tolerate seeing His devotee in such a
fallen condition. Thus the Personality of Godhead arranged that at the end of
Dväpara-yuga, when the Lord was winding up His manifest pastimes, His
devotee Bhågu, in the form of the hunter Jarä, would cast the arrow into a
material body created by the Lord's illusory energy. Thus the hunter would
become remorseful, gain release from his degraded birth and go back to
Vaikuëöha-loka.
Therefore, to please His devotee Bhågu and to confuse the demons, the
Supreme Lord manifested His mauñala-lélä at Prabhäsa, but it should be
understood that this is an illusory pastime. The Personality of Godhead, Lord
Kåñëa, from His very appearance on the earth, did not manifest any of the
material qualities of ordinary human beings. The Lord did not appear from the
womb of His mother. Rather, by His inconceivable power He descended into
the maternity room. At the time of His giving up this mortal world, He
similarly manifested an illusory situation for the sake of bewildering the
demons. To bewilder the nondevotees, the Lord created an illusory body out of
His material energy while simultaneously remaining personally in His own
sac-cid-änanda body, and thus He manifested the downfall of an illusory,
material form. This pretense effectively bewilders foolish demons, but Lord Çré
Kåñëa's actual transcendental, eternal body of bliss never experiences death.
Also at Prabhäsa-kñetra there is the holy place known as Bhågu-tértha,
which was manifested by Lord Paraçuräma. The place at which the two rivers
Sarasvaté and Hiraëyä flow together into the ocean is named Bhågu-tértha, and
there the hunter cast his arrow. There is an elaborate description of
Prabhäsa-tértha in the Prabhäsa-khaëòa of the Skanda Puräëa. There are also
many phala-çrutis given within the Mahäbhärata in connection with
Prabhäsa-tértha. Phala-çrutis are scriptural statements that promise various
auspicious results for one who performs a particular pious activity. In the
following verses the Lord Himself will explain the particular benefits to be
derived from visiting Prabhäsakñetra and performing religious activities there.
TEXT 36
ya‡a µaAtvaA d"ºazAApaAä,"
gA{h"ItaAe yaºmaNAAeäu"r"Aq%.
ivamaul(: ik(ilbaSaAts$aâAe
Baejae BaUya: k(laAed"yama,
yatra snätvä dakña-çäpäd
gåhéto yakñmaëodu-räö
vimuktaù kilbiñät sadyo
bheje bhüyaù kalodayam
SYNONYMS
yatra—where; snätvä—taking bath; dakña-çäpät—because of the curse of
Prajäpati Dakña; gåhétaù—seized; yakñmaëä—by consumptive lung disease;
uòu-räö—the king of stars, the moon; vimuktaù—freed; kilbiñät—from his
sinful reaction; sadyaù—immediately; bheje—he assumed; bhüyaù—once
again; kalä—of his phases; udayam—the increasing.
TRANSLATION
Once, the moon was afflicted with consumption because of the curse of
Dakña, but just by taking bath at Prabhäsa-kñetra, the moon was immediately
freed from his sinful reaction and again resumed the waxing of his phases.
TEXTS 37-38
vayaM ca taismaªaAplautya
tapaRiyatvaA ipata|na, s$aur"Ana,
BaAejaiyatvaAeiSajaAe iva‘aAna,
naAnaAgAuNAvataAnDas$aA
taeSau d"AnaAina paA‡aeSau
™aÜ"yaAeptvaA mah"Ainta vaE
va{ijanaAina tair"SyaAmaAe
d"AnaEnaAE=#iBair"vaANARvama,
vayaà ca tasminn äplutya
tarpayitvä pitèn surän
bhojayitvoñijo viprän
nänä-guëavatändhasä
teñu dänäni pätreñu
çraddhayoptvä mahänti vai
våjinäni tariñyämo
dänair naubhir ivärëavam
SYNONYMS
vayam—we; ca—also; tasmin—at that place; äplutya—bathing;
tarpayitvä—satisfying by offerings; pitèn—the departed forefathers;
surän—and the demigods; bhojayitvä—feeding; uñijaù—worshipable;
viprän—the brähmaëas; nänä—various; guëa-vatä—having tastes;
andhasä—with foodstuffs; teñu—in them (the brähmaëas); dänäni—gifts;
pätreñu—as fitting candidates for charity; çraddhayä—faithfully;
uptvä—sowing (i.e. offering to them); mahänti—great; vai—indeed;
våjinäni—the dangers; tariñyämaù—we will cross over; dänaiù—by our charity;
naubhiù—with boats; iva—as if; arëavam—the ocean.
TRANSLATION
By bathing at Prabhäsa-kñetra, by offering sacrifice there to placate the
forefathers and demigods, by feeding the worshipable brähmaëas with various
delicious foodstuffs and by bestowing opulent gifts upon them as the most
suitable candidates for charity, we will certainly cross over these terrible
dangers through such acts of charity, just as one can cross over a great ocean in
a suitable boat.
TEXT 39
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
WvaM BagAvataAid"í"A
yaAd"vaA: ku(ç&nand"na
gAntauM k{(taiDayastaITa<
syand"naAna, s$amayaUyaujana,
çré-çuka uväca
evaà bhagavatädiñöä
yädaväù kuru-nandana
gantuà kåta-dhiyas térthaà
syandanän samayüyujan
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva said; evam—thus; bhagavatä—by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; ädiñöäù—instructed; yädaväù—the Yädavas;
kuru-nandana—O favorite of the Kurus; gantum—to go; kåta-dhiyaù—having
made up their minds; tértham—to the holy place; syandanän—to their
chariots; samayüyujan—they yoked their horses.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O favorite son of the Kurus, thus advised by the
Personality of Godhead, the Yädavas made up their minds to go to that holy
place, Prabhäsa-kñetra, and thus yoked their horses to their chariots.
TEXTS 40-41
taiªar"IºyaAeÜ"vaAe r"Ajana,
™autvaA BagAvataAeid"tama,
ä{"î"Air"í"Aina GaAer"AiNA
inatyaM k{(SNAmanau˜ata:
ivaival( opas$aËÿmya
jagAtaAmaIìre"ìr"ma,
‘aNAmya izAir"s$aA paAd"AE
‘aAÃailastamaBaASata
tan nirékñyoddhavo räjan
çrutvä bhagavatoditam
dåñöväriñöäni ghoräëi
nityaà kåñëam anuvrataù
vivikta upasaìgamya
jagatäm éçvareçvaram
praëamya çirisä pädau
präïjalis tam abhäñata
SYNONYMS
tat—that; nirékñya—seeing; uddhavaù—Uddhava; räjan—O King;
çrutvä—hearing; bhagavatä—by the Lord; uditam—what had been said;
dåñövä—observing; ariñöäni—evil omens; ghoräëi—fearful; nityam—always;
kåñëam—of Lord Kåñëa; anuvrataù—a faithful follower; vivikte—in privacy;
upasaìgamya—approaching; jagatäm—of all the moving creatures within the
universe; éçvara-of the controllers; éçvaram-the one supreme controller;
praëamya—bowing down; çirasä—with his head; pädau—at His feet;
präïjaliù—with hands folded in submission; tam—to Him; abhäñata—spoke.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, Uddhava was a constantly faithful follower of Lord Kåñëa.
Upon seeing the imminent departure of the Yädavas, hearing from them of the
Lord's instructions and taking note of the fearful omens, he approached the
Personality of Godhead in a private place. He bowed down with his head at the
lotus feet of the supreme controller of the universe and with folded hands
addressed Him as follows.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé there cannot be any actual disturbance in
the Lord's own abode. The great disasters apparently occurring in Dvärakä
were an external show created by the Lord to facilitate His pastimes. We can
understand the pastimes of Kåñëa only by hearing from the recognized äcäryas.
Lord Kåñëa is not a mundane historical figure, and His activities cannot be
confined within the tiny limits of material logic. Lord Kåñëa's pastimes are an
exhibition of His acintya-çakti, or inconceivable potency, which functions
according to higher, spiritual laws, unknown to the blind conditioned souls
and their petty material logic.
TEXT 42
™aIoÜ"va ovaAca
de"vade"vaezA yaAegAezA
pauNya™avaNAk(LtaRna
s$aMô$tyaEtatku(laM naUnaM
laAekM( s$antyaºyatae BavaAna,
iva‘azAApaM s$amaTaAeR'ipa
‘atyah"ªa yad"Iìr":
çré-uddhava uväca
deva-deveça yogeça
puëya-çravaëa-kértana
saàhåtyaitat kulaà nünaà
lokaà santyakñyate bhavän
vipra-çäpaà samartho 'pi
pratyahan na yad éçvaraù
SYNONYMS
çré-uddhavaù uväca—Çré Uddhava said; deva-deva—of the greatest among the
demigods; éça—O ultimate God; yoga-éça—O master of all mystic power;
puëya—which are pious; çravaëa-kértana—O You, hearing and chanting the
glories of whom; saàhåtya—withdrawing; etat—this; kulam—dynasty;
nünam—is it not so; lokam—this world; santyakñyate—are about to give up
once and for all; bhavän—You; vipra-çäpam—the curse of the brähmaëas;
samarthaù—capable; api—although; pratyahan na—You did not counteract;
yat—because; éçvaraù-the Supreme Lord.
TRANSLATION
Çré Uddhava said: O my Lord, O supreme God among all the demigods, real
piety is invoked simply by hearing and chanting Your transcendental glories.
My Lord, it appears that You will now withdraw Your dynasty, and thus You
Yourself will finally give up Your pastimes within this universe. You are the
supreme controller and the master of all mystic power. But although You are
fully capable of counteracting the brähmaëas' curse against Your dynasty, You
are not doing so, and Your disappearance is imminent.
PURPORT
As previously mentioned, Kåñëa's own dynasty can never be destroyed;
therefore the word saàhåtya means that Kåñëa was taking the Yädavas with
Him as He left this material world. However, in the eyes of ordinary,
unenlightened persons the withdrawal of the Yadu dynasty appears to be its
destruction. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has very nicely explained
the statement of Uddhava as follows.
Kåñëa is addressed as deva-deva, or the supreme God among the gods,
because He expertly solved all of the problems of the demigods by His
incarnation within the universe. The Lord rid the world of demons and firmly
established both His devotees and religious principles. Lord Kåñëa is addressed
here as yogeça because He not only performed work on behalf of the demigods,
but also revealed His beautiful, transcendental form, full of transcendental
qualities and ecstasies, for the pleasure of His pure devotees. Kåñëa is called
puëya-çravaëa-kértana because when by His internal mystic potency He
exhibited His humanlike activities, the Lord stimulated the writing of
innumerable Vedic scriptures about His pastimes. Thus persons who would be
born in the future, like ourselves would be able to hear and chant about the
Lord's activities and also go back home, back to Godhead.
Having insured the transcendental bliss and liberation of all of His
devotees, even those who would be born in the future, Kåñëa decided the time
had come for Him to leave this material universe. Uddhava could understand
the Lord's desire and said to Kåñëa, "You have instructed the Yädavas to
counteract the brähmaëas' curse by taking bath at Prabhäsakñetra, but how
could mere bathing in a holy place be of greater value than seeing You, the
Personality of Godhead, face to face? Since the Yädavas are always seeing Your
transcendental form, and since You are the Supreme Lord, what is the use of
their taking bath in a so-called holy place? Therefore You obviously have some
other purpose. If You actually wanted to counteract the curse, You could
simply say, 'Let this curse not act,' and the curse would immediately be
neutralized. Therefore You must be preparing to leave this universe, and that
is why You have not counteracted the curse."
TEXT 43
naAhM" tavaAx.~i„ak(malaM
ºaNAADaRmaipa ke(zAva
tyaluM( s$amauts$ahe" naATa
svaDaAma naya maAmaipa
nähaà taväìghri-kamalaà
kñaëärdham api keçava
tyaktuà samutsahe nätha
sva-dhäma naya mäm api
SYNONYMS
na—am not; aham—I; tava—Your; aìghri-kamalam—lotus feet; kñaëa—of a
moment; ardham—for half; api—even; keçava—O killer of the demon Keçi;
tyaktum—giving up; samutsahe—am I able to tolerate; nätha—O master;
sva-dhäma—to Your own abode; naya—please take; mäm—me; api—also.
TRANSLATION
O Lord Keçava, my dear master, I cannot tolerate giving up Your lotus feet
even for a fraction of a moment. I urge You to take me along with You to Your
own abode.
PURPORT
Uddhava understood that Kåñëa was going to withdraw the Yadu dynasty,
and thus he begged the Lord to take him along to the Lord's abode. He had no
desire to merge into Kåñëa's impersonal effulgence; instead he wanted to go to
the Lord's spiritual abode and continue associating with Kåñëa as His dearmost
friend. Kåñëa is the Personality of Godhead and can do whatever He likes, but
the devotee begs the Lord for the chance to serve Him. Although the Lord
manifests within the material world His various abodes, such as Våndävana,
Dvärakä and Mathurä, and although these are certainly nondifferent from
their counterparts in the spiritual world, the most advanced devotees,
overwhelmed with desire to personally serve the Lord, are very eager to go to
the Lord's original spiritual planet. As stated by Lord Kapila in the Third
Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the pure devotees have no desire for liberation.
Because of their eagerness to render service, they urge the Lord to appear
before them. The six Gosvämés, due to their intense eagerness to serve Rädhä
and Kåñëa, urgently searched after Them, calling out Their names in the
forests of Våndävana. Similarly, Uddhava is urging the Lord to take him to His
own abode so that Uddhava's personal service to the Lord's lotus feet will not
be interrupted even for a moment.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has pointed out that immature
conditioned souls think that Lord Kåñëa is an ordinary jéva soul engaged in
material activities and was thus unable to protect His own dynasty from the
curse of the brähmaëas. Uddhava's statement corrects such unfortunate
persons. It is Lord Kåñëa Himself who awarded pious living entities birth in
brahminical families, and then Lord Kåñëa further awarded them the potency
to curse His dynasty. And finally, Lord Kåñëa personally kept the curse intact,
although He was capable of neutralizing it. Therefore in the beginning, middle
and end, directly and indirectly, in the past, present and future, Lord Kåñëa is
the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and He is
completely transcendental to even the slightest touch of material illusion or
impotence.
TEXT 44
tava iva‚(Lix"taM k{(SNA
na{naAM par"mamaËÿlama,
k(NARpaIyaUSamaAs$aAâ
tyajantyanyas$pa{h"AM janaA:
tava vikréòitaà kåñëa
nånäà parama-maìgalam
karëa-péyüñam äsädya
tyajanty anya-spåhäà janäù
SYNONYMS
tava—Your; vikréòitam—pastimes; kåñëa—O Kåñëa; nåëäm—for men;
parama-maìgalam—supremely auspicious; karëa—for the ears;
péyüñam—nectar; äsädya—having tasted; tyajanti—they reject; anya—for
other things; spåhäm—their desires; janäù—persons.
TRANSLATION
O my dear Kåñëa, Your pastimes are supremely auspicious for mankind and
are an intoxicating beverage for the ears. Tasting such pastimes, people forget
their desires for other things.
PURPORT
Anya-spåhäm, or "desire for things other than Kåñëa," indicates the material
desire to enjoy wife, children, money, and so on. Ultimately, the materialist
may desire religious salvation for his personal comfort and satisfaction, but all
such desires are mundane, because on the spiritual platform the pure soul
thinks only of the Lord's pleasure and the Lord's service. Therefore, a pure
devotee can never give up Kåñëa, even for a moment, although for Kåñëa's
pleasure he can give up the entire universe.
TEXT 45
zAyyaAs$anaAq%nasTaAna-
µaAna‚(Lx"AzAnaAid"Sau
k(TaM tvaAM i‘ayamaAtmaAnaM
vayaM Bal(Astyajaema ih"
çayyäsanäöana-sthänasnäna-
kréòäçanädiñu
kathaà tväà priyam ätmänaà
vayaà bhaktäs tyajema hi
SYNONYMS
sayyä—in lying down; äsana—sitting; aöana—walking; sthäna—standing;
snäna—bathing; kréòä—taking recreation; äsana—eating; ädiñu—and other
activities; katham—how; tväm—You; priyam—dear; ätmänam—Self;
vayam—we; bhaktäù—Your devotees; tyajema—can reject; hi—indeed.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, You are the Supreme Soul, and thus You are most dear to us.
We are Your devotees, and how can we possibly reject You or live without You
even for a moment? Whether we are lying down, sitting, walking, standing,
bathing, enjoying recreation, eating or doing anything else, we are constantly
engaged in Your service.
PURPORT
One should be constantly engaged in the service of Lord Kåñëa. By hearing
about Kåñëa and by serving Him, we can give up the illusion of trying to enjoy
something separately from the Supreme Lord. If we neglect such hearing and
serving, our minds will become bewildered by the illusory energy of the Lord,
and seeing the world as separate from Kåñëa, we will take it as a place meant
for our own sense gratification. This gross ignorance brings nothing but
trouble to the living entity.
TEXT 46
tvayaAepaBaul(›aggAnDavaAs$
aAe'laÆÿAr"caicaRtaA:
oicC$í"BaAeijanaAe d"As$aAs$a,
tava maAyaAM jayaema ih"
tvayopabhukta-srag-gandhaväso-'
laìkära-carcitäù
ucchiñöa-bhojino däsäs
tava mäyäà jayema hi
SYNONYMS
tvayä—by You; upabhukta—already enjoyed; srak—with the garlands;
gandha—fragrances; väsaù—garments; alaìkära—and ornaments;
carcitäù—adorned; ucchiñöa—the remnants of Your food; bhojinaù—eating;
däsäù—Your servants; tava—Your; mäyäm—illusory energy; jayema—we will
conquer; hi—indeed.
TRANSLATION
Simply by decorating ourselves with the garlands, fragrant oils, clothes and
ornaments that You have already enjoyed, and by eating the remnants of Your
meals, we, Your servants, will indeed conquer Your illusory energy.
PURPORT
It is clear from this verse that Uddhava is not approaching the Lord for
liberation from the illusory energy. As a personal, confidential associate of
Lord Kåñëa, Uddhava was undoubtedly a completely liberated soul. He is
praying to the Lord because he cannot bear the thought of living without
Kåñëa even for a moment. This feeling is called love of God. Uddhava is
addressing the Lord as follows: "Even if Your illusory energy tries to attack us,
my Lord, we will very easily conquer her by our powerful weapons, which are
the remnants of Your foodstuffs, clothes, ornaments, and so on. In other
words, we will easily conquer over mäyä by kåñëa-prasädam, and not by useless
speculation and mental concoction."
TEXT 47
vaAtavas$anaA ya [%Saya:
™amaNAA O‹aRmainTana:
“aöAKyaM DaAma tae yaAinta
zAAntaA: s$aªyaAs$aInaAe'malaA:
väta-vasanä ya åñayaù
çramaëä ürdhra-manthinaù
brahmäkhyaà dhäma te yänti
çäntäù sannyäséno 'maläù
SYNONYMS
väta-vasanäù—dressed by the air (naked); ye—those who are; åñayaù—sages;
çramaëäù—strict observers of spiritual practices; ürdhva-manthinaù—who
have conserved their semen to the point that it has risen up to their heads;
brahma-äkhyam—known as Brahman; dhäma—the (impersonal) spiritual
abode; te—they; yänti—to go; çäntäù—peaceful; sannyäsinaù—members of the
renounced order of life; amaläù—sinless.
TRANSLATION
Naked sages who seriously endeavor in spiritual practice, who have raised
their semen upward, who are peaceful and sinless members of the renounced
order, attain the spiritual abode called Brahman.
PURPORT
In Chapter Twelve of Bhagavad-gétä it is stated, kleço 'dhikataras teñäm
avyaktäsakta-cetasäm: those who are attached to the impersonal feature of the
Personality of Godhead must endure grueling penances in order to achieve
impersonal liberation in the realm of Brahman. Also it is stated in the
Bhägavatam, äruhya kåcchreëa paraà padaà tataù/ patanty adho
'nädåta-yuñmad-aìghrayaù [SB 10.2.32]. Kåcchreëa: with great struggle and
trouble the yogés climb their way up into the impersonal effulgence called
brahmajyoti, but again they slip out of the jyoti and fall back into the material
world because they do not take shelter of the Personality of Godhead.
Envious fools object to the "paternalism" of the Personality of Godhead, but
these fools cannot take credit for the creation of their own body, brain or
energy, nor can they claim credit for the air, rain, vegetables, fruits, sun, moon,
and so on. In other words, they are totally dependent on the mercy of God at
every second, and yet they arrogantly state that they do not want to accept the
shelter of the Lord, because they are self-sufficient. In fact, some bewildered
living entities even think that they themselves are God, although they cannot
explain why "God" has to struggle and toil to achieve meager success in the
yoga system. Therefore Uddhava is pointing out that, unlike the impersonalists
and meditators, the pure devotees very easily cross over the illusory energy
because they are totally attached to the lotus feet of Kåñëa. Lord Kåñëa is
always transcendental, and if one is firmly attached to the Lord's lotus feet,
then he is also transcendental. The causeless mercy of Kåñëa is more valuable
than millions and billions of years of one's own struggling and straining. One
should try to get the Lord's mercy, and then everything will become very easy
on the path of spiritual realization. In this age one can achieve the mercy of
Lord Kåñëa by constantly chanting His holy name, as recommended in the
çästra:
harer näma harer näma
harer nämaiva kevalam
kalau nästy eva nästy eva
nästy eva gatir anyathä
[Cc. Ädi 17.21]
(Båhan-näradéya Puräëa)
If one constantly chants Lord Kåñëa's holy names, avoiding offenses against
the names, then surely one will achieve the same result as Uddhava. Uddhava
was not interested in so-called Brahman realization, but rather he wanted to go
on drinking the maddening nectar of the beautiful smiling of the Lord's
moonlike face.
TEXTS 48-49
vayaM itvah" mah"AyaAeigAna,
”amanta: k(maRvatmaRs$au
tvaã"AtaRyaA tair"SyaAmas$a,
taAvakE(äuR"starM" tama:
smar"nta: k(LtaRyantastae
k{(taAina gAid"taAina ca
gAtyauitsmataeºaNAºvaeila
yaªa{laAek(ivax"mbanama,
vayaà tv iha mahä-yogin
bhramantaù karma-vartmasu
tvad-värtayä tariñyämas
tävakair dustaraà tamaù
smarantaù kértayantas te
kåtäni gaditäni ca
gaty-utsmitekñaëa-kñveli
yan nå-loka-viòambanam
SYNONYMS
vayam—we; tu—on the other hand; iha—in this world; mahä-yogin—O
greatest of yogés; bhramantaù—wandering; karma-vartmasu—on the paths of
material work; tvat—of You; värtayä—by discussion of the topics;
tariñyämaù—will cross over; tävakaiù—along with Your devotees;
dustaram—insurmountable; tamaù—darkness; smarantaù—remembering;
kértayantaù—glorifying; te—Your; kåtäni—deeds; gaditäni—words; ca—also;
gati—movements; utsmita—widely smiling; ékñaëa—glances; kñveli—and
loving pastimes; yat—which are; nå-loka—of human society; viòambanam—a
clever imitation.
TRANSLATION
O greatest of mystics, although we are conditioned souls wandering on the
path of fruitive work, we will certainly cross beyond the darkness of this
material world simply by hearing about Your Lordship in the association of
Your devotees. Thus we are always remembering and glorifying the wonderful
things You do and the wonderful things You say. We ecstatically recall Your
amorous pastimes with Your confidential conjugal devotees and how You boldly
smile and move about while engaged in such youthful pastimes. My dear Lord,
Your loving pastimes are bewilderingly similar to the activities of ordinary
people within this material world.
PURPORT
In this verse Uddhava, by stating bhramantaù karma-vartmasu, humbly
presents himself as one of the conditioned souls entangled in fruitive
activities. Still, Uddhava is confident that he will certainly cross over the
illusory energy because he is addicted to chanting and remembering the
glorious activities and words of Lord Kåñëa. Similarly, Rüpa Gosvämé has
stated:
éhä yasya harer däsye
karmaëä manasä girä
nikhiläsv apy avasthäsu
jévan-muktaù sa ucyate
Although one may outwardly appear to be involved in this material world, if
one is always engaged, twenty-four hours a day, in the service of Lord Kåñëa,
then one is considered to be a liberated soul. Uddhava states here that hearing
and chanting the holy name and pastimes of Kåñëa is infinitely more effective
than becoming a naked yogé in the forest and running the constant risk of
becoming, due to lusty desires and sex indulgence, a naked monkey in the
forest. Uddhava is begging the Lord for the mercy of His Sudarçana cakra,
whose effulgence is represented by the process of remembering and chanting
the pastimes of the Lord. One who absorbs himself in the incomparable bliss of
thinking of the Lord's abode easily becomes free from all lamentation, illusion
and fear. That is the recommendation of Çré Uddhava.
TEXT 50
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
WvaM ivaÁaAipataAe r"Ajana,
BagAvaAnde"vak(Ls$auta:
Wk(AintanaM i‘ayaM Ba{tyama,
oÜ"vaM s$amaBaASata
çré-çuka uväca
evaà vijïäpito räjan
bhagavän devaké-sutaù
ekäntinaà priyaà bhåtyam
uddhavaà samabhäñata
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—in this way;
vijïäpitaù—requested; räjan—O King; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; devaké-sutaù—the son of Devaké; ekäntinam—in private;
priyam—dear; bhåtyam—to the servant; uddhavam—Uddhava;
samabhäñata—He spoke at length.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O King Parékñit, thus addressed, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, the son of Devaké, began to reply confidentially
to His dear, unalloyed servant Uddhava.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté, the conditioned living
entities, by their movements, laughter, activities and words, simply bind
themselves more and more in material existence. But if they engage in hearing
and chanting about the pastimes of the Personality of Godhead, the
conditioned souls will achieve liberation from the bondage of repeated birth
and death. This process of supreme liberation will now be elaborately described
by Lord Çré Kåñëa to His dearmost devotee Çré Uddhava.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Eleventh Canto, Sixth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Yadu Dynasty Retires to Prabhäsa."
7. Lord Kåñëa Instructs Uddhava
As described in this chapter, the Supreme Lord, Kåñëa, replied to
Uddhava's prayerful entreaty that he be allowed to return with Him to His
abode. Kåñëa advised Uddhava to take to the renounced order of sannyäsa,
and when Uddhava showed interest in more elaborate instructions, the Lord
further described the avadhüta's account of his twenty-eight spiritual masters.
After hearing Uddhava's prayerful request to be taken back with Him to
the spiritual world, Lord Kåñëa informed him that He was indeed desirous of
returning to His own personal abode because the purpose of His descent had
been successfully fulfilled and the misfortunes of Kali-yuga would soon beset
the earth. He thus advised Uddhava to take up sannyäsa by fixing his mind
upon Him and establishing himself in theoretical and realized transcendental
knowledge. The Lord further instructed Uddhava that while remaining
untouched by contamination and compassionately disposed to all beings, he
should begin wandering throughout this temporary world, which is simply the
combined manifestation of the Lord's illusory energy and the imagination of
the living entities.
Uddhava then stated that renouncing material things in a spirit of
detachment is the source of the highest auspiciousness, but such renunciation
is certainly extremely difficult to accomplish for living entities other than the
devotees of the Supreme Lord, because they are very attached to sense
gratification. Uddhava expressed the need for some instruction by which
foolish persons who misidentify the body as the self can be convinced to carry
out their duties in accordance with the order of the Supreme Lord. Even great
demigods like Brahmä are not completely surrendered to the Lord, but
Uddhava declared that he himself had taken shelter of the only true instructor
of the Absolute Truth-Lord Näräyaëa, the all-perfect, all-knowing master of
Vaikuëöha and the only real friend of all living entities. Hearing this, the
Supreme Lord replied that actually the jéva soul is his own guru. Within this
human body, the living beings can search out the Supreme Lord by positive
and negative means and ultimately achieve Him. For this reason the human
form of life is most dear to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In this regard,
Lord Kåñëa began to describe an ancient conversation between a brähmaëa
avadhüta and the great king Yadu.
The son of Yayäti, Mahäräja Yadu, once encountered an avadhüta who was
traveling about, here and there, in great transcendental ecstasy and was acting
unpredictably, just like someone who has become haunted by a ghost. The
King inquired from the holy man about the cause of his wandering and his
ecstatic condition, and the avadhüta replied that he had received various
instructions from twenty-four different gurus-the earth, the wind, the sky, the
water, fire, and so on. Because of the knowledge he had gained from them, he
was able to travel about the earth in a liberated state.
From the earth he had learned how to be sober, and from the two
manifestations of earth, namely the mountain and the tree, he had learned,
respectively, how to serve others and how to dedicate one's whole life to the
benefit of others. From the wind, manifesting in the form of the vital air
within the body, he had learned how to be satisfied with merely keeping
oneself alive, and from the external wind he had learned how to remain
uncontaminated by the body and the objects of the senses. From the sky he
had learned how the soul, which pervades all material substances, is both
indivisible and imperceptible, and from the water he had learned how to be
naturally clear and purifying. From the fire he had learned how to devour all
things without becoming dirtied and how to destroy all the inauspicious desires
of those who make offerings to him. He had also learned from fire how the
spirit soul enters into every body and gives illumination and how the birth and
death of those who are embodied cannot be discerned. From the moon he had
learned how the material body undergoes growth and dwindling. From the sun
he had learned how to avoid entanglement even while coming into contact
with sense objects, and he had also learned about the two different modes of
perception based on seeing the real form of the soul and seeing false
designative coverings. From the pigeon he had learned how too much affection
and excessive attachment are not good for one. This human body is the open
door to liberation, but if one becomes attached to family life like the pigeon,
one is compared to a person who has climbed up to a high place just to fall
down again.
TEXT 1
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
yad"AtTa maAM mah"ABaAgA
tai»ak(LiSaRtamaeva mae
“aöA BavaAe laAek(paAlaA:
svavaARs$aM mae'iBak(AiÉÿNA:
çré-bhagavän uväca
yad ättha mäà mahä-bhäga
tac-cikérñitam eva me
brahmä bhavo loka-päläù
svar-väsaà me 'bhikäìkñiëaù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; yat—that
which; ättha—you spoke; mäm—to Me; mahä-bhäga—O greatly fortunate
Uddhava; tat—that; cikérñitam—the program that I am desiring to execute;
eva—certainly; me—Mine; brahmä—Lord Brahmä; bhavaù—Lord Çiva;
loka-päläù—the leaders of all universal planets; svaù-väsam—abode in
Vaikuëöha; me—My; abhikäìkñiëaù—they are desiring.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O greatly fortunate Uddhava,
you have accurately revealed My desire to withdraw the Yadu dynasty from the
earth and return to My own abode in Vaikuëöha. Thus Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva
and all other planetary rulers are now praying for Me to resume My residence
in Vaikuëöha.
PURPORT
Each and every demigod has his particular abode in the heavenly planets
within the material universe. Although Lord Viñëu is sometimes counted
among the demigods, His abode is in Vaikuëöha, the spiritual sky. The
demigods are universal controllers within the kingdom of mäyä, but Viñëu is
the Lord of the illusory potency and many other spiritual potencies. His
exalted residence does not lie within the kingdom of His insignificant
maidservant mäyä.
Lord Viñëu, the Personality of Godhead, is the Supreme Lord of all lords;
the demigods are His separated parts and parcels. Being themselves minute jéva
souls, the demigods are under the influence of the potency of mäyä; but Lord
Viñëu is always the supreme controller of mäyä. The Personality of Godhead is
the reservoir and root of all existence, and the material world is just a dim
reflection of the brilliant scenery of His eternal, spiritual abode, where
everything is infinitely beautiful and pleasurable. Viñëu is the supreme reality,
and no living entity can ever be equal to or greater than Him. The Lord exists
within His own unique category called viñëu-tattva, or the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. All other prominent or extraordinary living entities owe their
positions and potencies to the Lord. Ultimately Viñëu Himself is a plenary
expansion of Lord Kåñëa, the original source of all the viñëu-tattva and
jéva-tattva expansions. Thus Lord Kåñëa is the basis of everything.
TEXT 2
mayaA inaSpaAid"taM ÷‡a
de"vak(AyaRmazAeSata:
yad"TaRmavataINAAeR'h"ma,
@MzAena “aöNAAiTaRta:
mayä niñpäditaà hy atra
deva-käryam açeñataù
yad-artham avatérëo 'ham
aàçena brahmaëärthitaù
SYNONYMS
mayä—by Me; niñpäditam—accomplished; hi—certainly; atra—within this
world; deva-käryam—work for the benefit of the demigods;
açeñataù—completely, with nothing remaining; yat—for whose; artham—sake;
avatérëaù—incarnated; aham—I; aàçena—with My plenary portion, Baladeva;
brahmaëä—by Lord Brahmä; arthitaù—being prayed for.
TRANSLATION
Answering the prayer of Lord Brahmä, I descended within this world along
with My plenary portion, Lord Baladeva, and performed various activities on
behalf of the demigods. I have now completed My mission here.
TEXT 3
ku(laM vaE zAApainadR"gDaM
naÉÿYatyanyaAenyaivaƒah"Ata,
s$amau"‰": s$aæamae ÷enaAM
paur"I%M ca plaAvaiyaSyaita
kulaà vai çäpa-nirdagdhaà
naìkñyaty anyonya-vigrahät
samudraù saptame hy enäà
puréà ca plävayiñyati
SYNONYMS
kulam—this Yadu dynasty; vai—definitely; çäpa—by the curse;
nirdagdham—finished; naìkñyati—will be destroyed; anyonya—mutual;
vigrahät—by a quarrel; samudraù—the ocean; saptame—on the seventh day;
hi—certainly; enäm—this; purém—city; ca—also; plävayiñyati—will inundate.
TRANSLATION
Now due to the brähmaëas' curse the Yadu dynasty will certainly perish by
fighting among themselves; and on the seventh day from today the ocean will
rise up and inundate this city of Dvärakä.
PURPORT
In this and the following verses, Lord Kåñëa indicates to Uddhava that he
should immediately fix himself in self-realization by giving up all identification
with the material world. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has pointed out that the Yadu
dynasty was not actually destroyed by Lord Kåñëa but merely removed from
the vision of the world through the curse of the brähmaëas; similarly, the
Lord's eternal abode Dvärakä can never be drowned by the ocean.
Nevertheless, all external approaches to this transcendental city were covered
by the ocean, and thus the Lord's abode remains inaccessible to foolish persons
in Kali-yuga, as will be described later in this canto.
By the Lord's mystic potency, called yoga-mäyä, He reveals His own form,
abode, paraphernalia, pastimes, entourage, and so on, and at the suitable time
He removes all of these from our mundane sight. Although bewildered
conditioned souls may doubt the spiritual potency of the Lord, the pure
devotees can directly perceive and relish His transcendental appearance and
disappearance, which are described in Bhagavad-gétä as janma karma ca me
divyam [Bg. 4.9]. If one faithfully accepts this perfect knowledge of the Lord's
transcendental nature, then surely one will go back home, back to Godhead,
and become an eternal companion of Lord Kåñëa.
TEXT 4
ya÷eRvaAyaM mayaA tyal(Ae
laAek(Ae'yaM naí"maËÿla:
BaivaSyatyaicar"Ats$aADaAe
k(ilanaAipa inar"Ak{(ta:
yarhy eväyaà mayä tyakto
loko 'yaà nañöa-maìgalaù
bhaviñyaty acirät sädho
kalinäpi niräkåtaù
SYNONYMS
yarhi—when; eva—certainly; ayam—this; mayä—by Me;
tyaktaù—abandoned; lokaù—the world; ayam—this; nañöa-maìgalaù—bereft
of all auspiciousness or piety; bhaviñyati—it will be; acirät—very soon;
sädho—O saintly one; kalinä—due to Kali; api—himself;
niräkåtaù—overwhelmed.
TRANSLATION
O saintly Uddhava, in the near future I will abandon this earth. Then, being
overwhelmed by the age of Kali, the earth will be bereft of all piety.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa's plan was to bring Uddhava back to His own eternal abode
after a brief delay. Because of Uddhava's extraordinary spiritual qualities, the
Lord wanted to engage him in propagating His message among other saintly
persons who were not yet advanced to the stage of pure devotional service.
However, the Lord assured Uddhava that he would not be bereft of the Lord's
association for even a moment. Also, because Uddhava had become a perfect
master of his senses, he would never be afflicted by the three modes of material
nature. In this way, before bringing Uddhava back home, back to Godhead,
the Lord empowered him to carry out a specific confidential mission.
Wherever the supreme position of the Personality of Godhead is not
recognized, useless mental speculation becomes very prominent, and the safe
and sure path of hearing perfect Vedic knowledge becomes covered by the
chaos of mental concoction. At the present time, especially in the Western
countries, literally millions of books are being published on hundreds and
thousands of subjects; yet despite this proliferation of mental concoction
people remain totally in ignorance about the most fundamental issues of
human life, namely, Who am I? Where have I come from? Where am I going?
What is my soul? What is God?
The Personality of Godhead, Lord Çré Kåñëa, is the reservoir of
innumerable enchanting pastimes, and thus He is the source of innumerable
varieties of pleasure. In fact, He is the ocean of eternal pleasure. When the
eternal soul is bereft of the constitutional pleasure that comes from loving
service to the Lord, he is overwhelmed and bewildered by material nature. He
helplessly chases after material sense gratification, thinking that one material
object is good and another bad, and constantly changes his assessment of what
is good and what is bad. Thus he derives no peace or pleasure, is in constant
anxiety and is repeatedly thrashed by the cruel laws of nature in the form of
birth, death, old age and disease.
In this way the conditioned soul becomes a fit candidate to take birth in
Kali-yuga, which is the epitome of misfortune. In Kali-yuga the living entities,
who are already suffering so many tribulations, mercilessly turn against one
another. Human society in Kali-yuga becomes savagely violent, and men open
slaughterhouses to butcher hundreds of millions of innocent creatures.
Large-scale wars are declared, and millions of human beings, even women and
children, are quickly annihilated.
Unless the living entity recognizes the authority of the Personality of
Godhead, he remains a helpless victim in the clutches of mäyä, or material
illusion. He concocts different solutions to release himself from mäyä, but
these solutions are themselves creations of mäyä and thus cannot possibly
release the conditioned soul. In fact, they only intensify his distress. In the
next verse, Lord Kåñëa specifically warns Uddhava to avoid Kali-yuga and go
back home, back to Godhead. Those of us who have already taken birth in
Kali-yuga should also heed this advice and immediately take all necessary steps
to go back to the Lord's eternal abode for a blissful life of perfect knowledge.
The material world is never a happy place, especially during the fearful days of
Kali-yuga.
TEXT 5
na vastavyaM tvayaEvaeh"
mayaA tyale( mah"Italae
janaAe'Ba‰"ç&icaBaR‰"
BaivaSyaita k(laAE yaugAe
na vastavyaà tvayaiveha
mayä tyakte mahé-tale
jano 'bhadra-rucir bhadra
bhaviñyati kalau yuge
SYNONYMS
na—not; vastavyam—should remain; tvayä—you; eva—certainly; iha—in this
world; mayä—by Me; tyakte—when it is abandoned; mahétale—the earth;
janaù—the people; abhadra—sinful, inauspicious things; ruciù—addicted to;
bhadra—O you who are sinless and auspicious; bhaviñyati—will be; kalau—in
Kali; yuge—in this yuga.
TRANSLATION
My dear Uddhava, you should not remain here on the earth once I have
abandoned this world. My dear devotee, you are sinless, but in Kali-yuga the
people will be addicted to all types of sinful activities; therefore do not stay
here.
PURPORT
In this age of Kali, human beings are totally unaware that the Supreme
Personality of Godhead comes personally to the earth to manifest His
transcendental pastimes as they are enacted in the spiritual world. Heedless of
the authority of the Personality of Godhead, the fallen souls of Kali-yuga
become engulfed in bitter quarrel and cruelly harass one another. Because
people in Kali-yuga are addicted to polluted, sinful activities, they are always
angry, lusty and frustrated. In Kali-yuga the devotees of the Personality of
Godhead, who are engaged in the ever-increasing loving service of the Lord,
should never be attracted to living on the earth, the population of which is
covered in the darkness of ignorance and devoid of any loving relationship
with the Lord. Thus Lord Kåñëa advised Uddhava not to remain on the earth
in Kali-yuga. In fact, in Bhagavad-gétä the Lord advises all living entities that
they should never remain anywhere within the material universe—during any
age. Therefore every living being should take advantage of the pressures of
Kali-yuga to understand the overall useless nature of the material world and
surrender himself at the lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa. Following in the footsteps of
Çré Uddhava, one should surrender to Kåñëa and go back home, back to
Godhead.
TEXT 6
tvaM tau s$ava< pair"tyajya
µaehM" svajanabanDauSau
mayyaAvaezya mana: s$aMyak,(
s$amaä{"igvacar"sva gAAma,
tvaà tu sarvaà parityajya
snehaà sva-jana-bandhuñu
mayy äveçya manaù saàyak
sama-dåg vicarasva gäm
SYNONYMS
tvam—you; tu—in fact; sarvam—all; parityajya—giving up;
sneham—affection; sva-jana-bandhuñu—for your relatives and friends;
mayi—in Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; äveçya—fixing;
manaù—your mind; saàyak—completely; sama-dåk—seeing everything with
equal vision; vicarasva—wander; gäm—throughout the earth.
TRANSLATION
Now you should completely give up all attachment to your personal friends
and relatives and fix your mind on Me. Thus being always conscious of Me, you
should observe all things with equal vision and wander throughout the earth.
PURPORT
Çrémad Véraräghava Äcärya has explained the concept of equal vision as
follows: sama-dåk sarvasya brahmätmakatvänusandhäna-rüpa-sama-dåñöimän.
"One who is on the path of self-realization should always endeavor to see the
ultimate spiritual nature of all existence." The word mayi in this verse means
paramätmani. One should fix one's mind on the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is the source of everything. Thus as one passes one's life on the
earth, using up one's allotted time, one should practice seeing all things and all
people as part and parcel of the Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead.
Since all living entities are part and parcel of Kåñëa, ultimately they all have
the same spiritual status. The material nature, also being an emanation of
Kåñëa, has a similar spiritual status, but although matter and spirit are both
emanations from the Personality of Godhead, they do not exist exactly on the
same level. In Bhagavad-gétä it is said that the spirit soul is the superior energy
of the Lord, whereas the material nature is His inferior energy. However, since
Lord Kåñëa is equally present in all things, the word sama-dåk in this verse
indicates that one must ultimately see Kåñëa within everything and everything
within Kåñëa. Thus equal vision is compatible with mature knowledge of the
varieties present within this world.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura comments as follows on this verse.
"At the end of His manifest pastimes on the earth, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Kåñëa, thought as follows within His mind: 'During My pastimes on
the earth, I have satisfied the desires of all those devotees who anxiously
desired to see Me. I have duly married many thousands of queens, headed by
Rukmiëé, whom I personally kidnapped, and I have killed innumerable demons
in various places and by various means. I have attended meetings, reunions
and ceremonies with many friends, relatives and well-wishers in cities such as
Våndävana, Mathurä, Dvärakä, Hastinäpura and Mithilä, and thus I have kept
constantly busy coming and going in the performance of pastimes.
" 'I further arranged to give My personal association to great devotees who
are situated below the earthly planet. In order to please My mother Devaké and
return her six deceased sons who were killed by Kaàsa, I descended to the
planet Sutala and blessed My great devotee Bali Mahäräja. In order to return
the dead son of My spiritual master, Sändépani Muni, I personally went to the
court of Ravinandana, or Yamaräja, and thus he was able to see Me face to
face. I even blessed the residents of heaven, such as mother Aditi and Kaçyapa
Muni, with My personal association when I traveled there to steal the pärijäta
flower for My wife Satyabhämä. And in order to please the inhabitants of
Mahä-Viñëu's abode, such as Nanda, Sunanda and Sudarçana, I traveled to
Mahä-vaikuëöhaloka to recover the deceased children of a frustrated
brähmaëa. Thus, innumerable devotees who ardently desired to see Me have
received the object of their prayers.
" 'Unfortunately Nara-Näräyaëa Åñi and the great paramahaàsa sages who
live with Him in Badarikäçrama, although most enthusiastic to see Me, never
had their desire fulfilled. I have been on the earth for 125 years, and the
scheduled time is now up. Being busily engaged in My pastimes, I did not have
time to give My blessings to these great sages. Nevertheless, Uddhava is
practically the same as Me. He is a great devotee and shares My own
transcendental opulences. Thus, he is the right person for Me to send to
Badarikäçrama. I shall give Uddhava complete transcendental knowledge by
which one becomes detached from the material world, and he in turn can
deliver this knowledge, the science of transcending the kingdom of illusion, to
the worthy sages at Badarikäçrama. In this way he can teach them the method
of rendering loving devotional service to My lotus feet. Such loving devotional
service rendered to Me is the most valuable treasure, and by hearing such
knowledge the desires of the great sages such as Nara-Näräyaëa will be
completely fulfilled.
" 'Those great souls who have surrendered unto Me are always equipped
with transcendental knowledge and detachment from the material world.
Sometimes, being busy in their devotional service, they may appear to forget
Me. However, a pure devotee who has achieved the platform of love for Me
will always be protected by such sincere devotion. Even if such a devotee
should suddenly give up his life while neglecting to fix his mind intensely on
Me, such a devotee's loving feelings are so powerful that they afford him all
protection. Even if there is a temporary moment of forgetfulness, such
devotion will bring the devotee to My lotus feet, which are beyond the vision
of ordinary, materialistic persons. Uddhava is My pure devotee. Knowledge of
Me and detachment from this world have again been aroused in him because
he can never give up My association.' "
The sincere servants of Caitanya Mahäprabhu are vigorously endeavoring
to spread this Kåñëa consciousness movement for the pleasure of their spiritual
master and Lord Kåñëa. At the present time thousands of devotees in the
Kåñëa consciousness movement, in all parts of the world, are working long
hours under difficult conditions to distribute transcendental literature and
thus enlighten the general populace. In this effort the devotees have no
personal motivation but are simply desirous of pleasing their spiritual master
by distributing his books. The people who receive this literature usually have
no previous experience of Kåñëa consciousness, yet they are so impressed by
the purity of the devotees they meet that they eagerly purchase the books and
magazines. In order to execute the tremendous task of spreading Kåñëa
consciousness, the devotees are tirelessly laboring day and night because they
are on the platform of loving devotion. Although superficially such busy
devotees may occasionally not think directly of the lotus feet of Kåñëa, such
loving devotion will undoubtedly take them back to Kåñëa's lotus feet, and
being pleased by their service, the Lord Himself will again arouse their
unflinching meditation upon His personal form. This is the beauty of
bhakti-yoga, which depends wholly and solely on the mercy of the all-merciful
Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa. This is the only totally safe means of
uprooting the deep desires for material enjoyment, attaining pure love for
Kåñëa and going beyond the material universe to the kingdom of God. As
stated in Bhagavad-gétä (2.40):
nehäbhikrama-näço 'sti
pratyaväyo na vidyate
sv-alpam apy asya dharmasya
träyate mahato bhayät
Lord Kåñëa also advised Uddhava in this verse to give up the illusory
attachment to so-called friends and family within this material world. One
may not be able to physically give up association with family and friends, but
one should understand that everyone and everything is part and parcel of God
and is meant for the pleasure of God. As soon as one thinks, "This is my
personal family," immediately one will see the material world as no more than
a place for enjoying family life. As soon as one is attached to one's so-called
family, false prestige and material possessiveness arise. Actually, everyone is
part and parcel of God and therefore, on the spiritual platform, related to all
other entities. This is called kåñëa-sambandha, or the constitutional
relationship with Kåñëa. It is not possible to advance to the highest stage of
spiritual awareness and at the same time maintain a petty material concept of
society, friendship and love. One should experience all relationships on the
higher, spiritual platform of kåñëa-sambandha, which means seeing everything
in relation to Lord Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead.
One who is situated in his constitutional relationship with Kåñëa can see all
things in relation to Kåñëa. He thus gives up the mundane urges of the body,
mind and speech and travels throughout the earth as a devotee of the Lord.
Such a highly elevated personality is called gosvämé, or the master of the
senses. This stage is described in Bhagavad-gétä (18.54) by the words
brahma-bhütaù prasannätmä: on the spiritual platform one attains complete
satisfaction.
TEXT 7
yaid"dM" manas$aA vaAcaA
caºauByaA< ™avaNAAid"iBa:
naìrM" gA{÷maANAM ca
ivaiÜ" maAyaAmanaAemayama,
yad idaà manasä väcä
cakñurbhyäà çravaëädibhiù
naçvaraà gåhyamäëaà ca
viddhi mäyä-mano-mayam
SYNONYMS
yat—that which; idam—this world; manasä—by the mind; väcä—by speech;
cakñurbhyäm—by the eyes; çravaëa-ädibhiù—by the ears and other senses;
naçvaram—temporary; gåhyamäëam—that which is being accepted or
perceived; ca—and; viddhi—you should know; mäyä-manaù-mayam—it is only
imagined to be real by the influence of mäyä.
TRANSLATION
My dear Uddhava, the material universe that you perceive through your
mind, speech, eyes, ears and other senses is an illusory creation that one
imagines to be real due to the influence of mäyä. In fact, you should know that
all of the objects of the material senses are temporary.
PURPORT
The question may be raised that since we find good and bad qualities
throughout the material world, how can Lord Kåñëa advise Uddhava to see
everything equally? In this verse Kåñëa explains that material good and evil are
a creation of the illusory energy, just as the objects of a dream are a mental
creation.
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, väsudevaù sarvam iti: [Bg. 7.19] Lord Kåñëa is
actually everything because He is present within everything and everything is
present within Him. Kåñëa is sarva-loka-maheçvaram [Bg. 5.29], the Lord and
proprietor of all worlds. To see anything separate from Kåñëa is illusion, and
attraction to any kind of material illusion, either good or bad, is ultimately
useless since it obliges the living entity to continue wandering in the cycle of
birth and death.
Seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting and touching constitute the activities of
the five knowledge-gathering senses. Similarly, the voice, the hands, the legs,
the anus and the genital constitute the five working senses. These ten senses
are organized around the mind, which is the center of material activity. When
the living entity desires to exploit matter, he is covered by the three modes of
nature. Thus he concocts different philosophical, political and social
explanations of reality but never understands the Absolute Truth, Lord Kåñëa,
who is beyond the contaminated perception of the material senses. One who is
entangled in the network of material designations, such as race, nationality,
sectarian religion, political affiliation, etc., is absorbed in the experience of
combining his body and other bodies with material sense objects, thinking
these sense objects to be sources of happiness and satisfaction. Unfortunately,
the entire material world, along with the senses that experience it, is a
temporary creation that will be annihilated by the time potency of the
Supreme Lord. Despite our foolish hopes and dreams, there is no actual
happiness on the material platform. The real truth is not material, nor is it
temporary. The real truth is called ätmä, or the eternal soul, and among all
eternal souls one is supreme. He is called the Personality of Godhead, and in
His original form He is known as Kåñëa. The knowledge-gathering process
culminates in perception of the inconceivable, transcendental form of Kåñëa.
One who is not perceiving Kåñëa in everything and everything in Kåñëa is
undoubtedly on the platform of mental concoction. In this verse Lord Kåñëa
warns Uddhava to remain clear of this illusory platform of existence.
TEXT 8
pauMs$aAe'yaul(sya naAnaATaAeR
”ama: s$a gAuNAd"AeSaBaAk,(
k(maARk(maRivak(maeRita
gAuNAd"AeSaiDayaAe iBad"A
puàso 'yuktasya nänärtho
bhramaù sa guëa-doña-bhäk
karmäkarma-vikarmeti
guëa-doña-dhiyo bhidä
SYNONYMS
puàsaù—of a person; ayuktasya—whose mind is diverted from the truth;
nänä—many; arthaù—values or meanings; bhramaù—confusion; saù—that;
guëa—something good; doña—something bad; bhäk—embodying;
karma—compulsory duties; akarma—nonperformance of prescribed duties;
vikarma—forbidden activities; iti—thus; guëa—good things; doña—bad
things; dhiyaù—of one who perceives; bhidä—this difference.
TRANSLATION
One whose consciousness is bewildered by illusion perceives many
differences in value and meaning among material objects. Thus one engages
constantly on the platform of material good and evil and is bound by such
conceptions. Absorbed in material duality, such a person contemplates the
performance of compulsory duties, nonperformance of such duties and
performance of forbidden activities.
PURPORT
The illusory mental platform of existence is described in this verse. The
word ayuktasya indicates the conditioned soul who does not fix his mind on
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is clearly described in Bhagavad-gétä
and other Vedic literature that Lord Kåñëa, the Absolute Truth, is within
everything, and everything is within the Lord. The example may be given that
when a woman loves a man, she is most eager to see him, and she daily sees
him dressed in different clothes. Actually the woman is interested not in the
clothes but in the man. Similarly, within every material object is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; therefore one who has developed love of God is
constantly seeing the Lord everywhere, and not just the superficial material
objects that cover the Lord.
The word ayuktasya in this verse indicates one who has not come to the
stage of reality. Such a person, being deprived of loving devotional service to
Lord Kåñëa, attempts to enjoy the innumerable forms and flavors of material
experience. This temporary, illusory engagement is not the constitutional
function of the bewildered living entity, who remains without any awareness
of the ultimate reality, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Within the world
of matter there are undoubtedly varieties. Among dogs there are pedigree
poodles and common mutts, and among horses there are thoroughbreds and
old gray mares. Similarly, some human beings are beautiful and educated and
others are dull and homely. Some are rich and some are poor. In nature we
find fertile land and sterile land, lush forests and useless deserts, invaluable
gems and colorless stones, flowing transparent rivers and stagnant dirty ponds.
In human society we find happiness and distress, love and hate, victory and
defeat, war and peace, life and death, and so on. However, we do not have any
permanent relationship with any of these conditions, because we are eternal
spirit souls, part and parcel of Lord Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Vedic culture is arranged in such a way that everyone can become
perfect in self-realization simply by performing his occupational duty for the
satisfaction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Sve sve karmaëy abhirataù
saàsiddhià labhate naraù. Some conditioned souls, however, believe that
complete perfection in life may be achieved by performing ordinary,
nonspiritual duties on behalf of family, nation, humanity, and so on. Others
are interested in neither service to God nor noble mundane activities, and
there are others who actively pursue sinful life. Such sinful persons generally
rise from bed late in the afternoon and stay awake all night, taking intoxicants
and engaging in illicit sex. Such a dark, hellish existence is caused by
attraction to tamo-guëa, the mode of ignorance. Actions in the mode of
ignorance are called vikarma, as mentioned in this verse. Unfortunately,
neither the materially responsible person nor the materially irresponsible
person nor the sinful person can achieve the real perfection of life, Kåñëa
consciousness. Although different societies and different individuals maintain
different concepts of good and evil, all material things are ultimately useless in
terms of our eternal self-interest, which is Kåñëa consciousness. This idea is
expressed by the saintly King Citraketu in the Sixth Canto of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (6.17.20):
guëa-praväha etasmin
kaù çäpaù ko nv anugrahaù
kaù svargo narakaù ko vä
kià sukhaà duùkham eva vä
"This material world resembles the waves of a constantly flowing river.
Therefore, what is a curse and what is a favor? What are the heavenly planets
and what are the hellish planets? What is actually happiness and what is
actually distress? Because the waves flow constantly, none of them has an
eternal effect." The argument may be given that since in the Vedas there are
prescribed and forbidden activities, the Vedas also accept the concept of good
and evil within the material world. The fact is, however, that it is not the
Vedas themselves but the conditioned souls who are bound up in material
duality. The function of Vedic literature is to engage each individual at the
particular level on which he is presently situated and gradually elevate him to
the perfection of life. The material mode of goodness is not itself spiritual, but
it does not impede spiritual life. Since the material mode of goodness purifies
one's consciousness and creates a hankering for higher knowledge, it is a
favorable platform from which to pursue spiritual life, just as the airport is a
favorable place from which to travel. If a man desires to travel from New York
to London, the New York airport is certainly the most favorable place from
which to travel. But if the man misses his plane, he is no closer to London than
anyone in New York who did not go to the airport. In other words, the
advantage of the airport is meaningful only if one catches his plane. Similarly,
the material mode of goodness is the most favorable situation from which to
move up to the spiritual platform. The Vedas prescribe and forbid various
activities to lift the conditioned soul to the material mode of goodness, and
from that point he should rise to the spiritual platform by transcendental
knowledge. Therefore if one does not come to the platform of Kåñëa
consciousness, his elevation to the material mode of goodness is useless, just as
a trip to the airport is useless for one who misses his plane. In the Vedas there
are injunctions and prohibitions that appear to accept good and evil among
material things, but the ultimate purpose of the Vedic regulations is to create a
favorable situation for spiritual life. If one can immediately take to spiritual
life then there is no need to waste time with rituals within the modes of
nature. Therefore Kåñëa advises Arjuna in Bhagavad-gétä (2.45),
trai-guëya-visayä vedä
nistrai-guëyo bhavärjuna
nirdvandvo nitya-sattva-stho
niryoga-kñema ätmavän
"The Vedas mainly deal with the subject of the three modes of material nature.
Rise above these modes, O Arjuna. Be transcendental to all of them. Be free
from all dualities and from all anxieties for gain and safety, and be established
in the Self." In this connection, Çréla Madhväcärya has quoted the following
verses from Mahäbhärata:
svargädyäç ca guëäù sarve
doñäù sarve tathaiva ca
ätmanaù kartåtä-bhräntyä
jäyante nätra saàçayaù
"Within the material world, the conditioned souls consider residence on the
heavenly planets and celestial pleasures, such as the pious enjoyment of
beautiful women, to be good and desirable things. Similarly, painful or
miserable conditions are considered to be evil or bad. However, all such
perception of good and bad in the material world is undoubtedly based upon
the fundamental mistake of considering oneself, and not the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, to be the ultimate doer or performer of all actions."
paramätmänam evaikaà
kartäraà vetti yaù pumän
sa mucyate 'smät saàsärät
paramätmänam eti ca
"On the other hand, a person who knows that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is the actual controller of material nature, and that it is ultimately
He who is moving everything, can free himself from the bondage of material
existence. Such a person goes to the abode of the Lord."
TEXT 9
tasmaAâule(in‰"yaƒaAmaAe
yaul(icaÔa wd"mjagAta,
@AtmanaIºasva ivatatama,
@AtmaAnaM mayyaDaIìre"
tasmäd yuktendriya-grämo
yukta-citta idam jagat
ätmanékñasva vitatam
ätmänaà mayy adhéçvare
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; yukta—having brought under control; indriya-grämaù—all
the senses; yukta—also subduing; cittaù—your mind; idam—this; jagat—world;
ätmani—within the individual soul; ékñasva—you should see; vitatam—spread
out (as the substance of his material enjoyment); ätmänam—and that
individual soul; mayi—in Me; adhéçvare—the supreme controller.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, bringing all your senses under control and thus subduing the
mind, you should see the entire world as situated within the self, who is
expanded everywhere, and you should also see this individual self within Me,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
The word vitatam, or "widely expanded," implies that the individual jéva soul
is present throughout the material universe. Similarly, in Bhagavad-gétä (2.24)
Lord Kåñëa states, nityaù sarva-gataù: the individual soul is eternal and is
expanded everywhere throughout the material and spiritual worlds. This does
not mean, however, that each individual soul is all-pervading, but that the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. has expanded His marginal potency
everywhere. Thus, one should not blindly conclude that a minute living entity
is all-pervading; rather, one should understand that God is great and expands
His personal energy everywhere. In this verse, ätmanékñasva vitatam means
that this material world is created to facilitate the sense gratification of the
conditioned souls, who are trying to enjoy without Kåñëa, their actual master.
The living entities are busily trying to exploit the external energy of the Lord,
but their jurisdiction over the material world is illusory. Both the material
nature and the conditioned living being are energies of the Lord and thus exist
within the Personality of Godhead and are under His supreme control.
The individual living entity exists for the pleasure of the Personality of
Godhead and is the Lord's eternal servant. As soon as the senses become
absorbed in material gratification they lose their power to experience the
Absolute Truth. The actual goal of sense activity is satisfaction of Viñëu, the
Lord, and all of the senses can experience infinite spiritual pleasure by
perceiving and serving the Lord in His personal feature. Those who adopt the
impersonal conception of God, however, try to stop all sense activity. But
because the senses cannot remain permanently inactive they naturally return
to activities in the realm of material illusion. If one engages the senses in the
service of the Personality of Godhead, then one enjoys unlimited pleasure
upon seeing the transcendental beauty of the Lord's form. But unless one
qualifies himself by pure loving devotion to Kåñëa, the Lord does not award
him this exalted experience. Therefore, every conditioned soul should end his
unnecessary separation from the Personality of Godhead by rejoining the
Lord's blissful company. Lord Kåñëa personally comes down to reopen the
blind eyes of the conditioned souls, and thus the Lord is personally teaching
Uddhava so that sincere souls in the future might take advantage of His
instructions. Indeed, hundreds and millions of people even now derive
spiritual enlightenment from Lord Kåñëa's instructions to Arjuna in
Bhagavad-gétä.
TEXT 10
ÁaAnaivaÁaAnas$aMyaul(
@AtmaBaUta: zAr"Iir"NAAma,
@tmaAnauBavatauí"AtmaA
naAntar"AyaEivaRh"nyas$ae
jïäna-vijïäna-saàyukta
ätma-bhütaù çarériëäm
atmänubhava-tuñöätmä
näntaräyair vihanyase
SYNONYMS
jïäna—with conclusive knowledge of the Vedas; vijïäna—and practical
realization of the purpose of knowledge; saàyuktaù—fully endowed;
ätma-bhütaù—an object of affection; çarériëäm—for all embodied beings
(beginning with the great demigods); ätma-anubhava—by direct perception of
the soul; tuñöa-ätmä—having a satisfied mind; na—never; antaräyaiù—by
disturbances; vihanyase—you will be checked in your progress.
TRANSLATION
Being fully endowed with conclusive knowledge of the Vedas and having
realized the ultimate purpose of such knowledge in practice, you will be able to
perceive the pure self, and thus your mind will be satisfied. At that time you
will become dear to all living beings, headed by the demigods, and you will
never be hampered by any disturbance in life.
PURPORT
As explained in Bhagavad-gétä, one whose mind is free from material desire
becomes disinterested in demigod worship, since the purpose of such worship is
material amelioration. The demigods, however, are never displeased with one
who becomes a pure devotee of Lord Kåñëa and offers all of his worship to the
Lord. The demigods themselves are humble servants of Lord Kåñëa, as was
amply demonstrated in Lord Kåñëa's pastimes on the earth. One who can
experience the eternal soul within everyone's body certainly becomes dear to
all living beings. Since he sees everyone as qualitatively equal to himself, he
does not envy anyone nor try to lord it over any other living being. Being free
from envy and a well-wisher of all, such a self-realized soul is naturally dear to
everyone. As stated in the song to the six Gosvämés, dhérädhéra-jana-priyau
priya-karau nirmatsarau püjitau.
TEXT 11
d"AeSabauÜ"YaAeBayaAtaItaAe
inaSaeDaAªa inavataRtae
gAuNAbauÜ"YaA ca ivaih"taM
na k(r"Aeita yaTaABaRk(:
doña-buddhyobhayätéto
niñedhän na nivartate
guëa-buddhyä ca vihitaà
na karoti yathärbhakaù
SYNONYMS
doña-buddhyä—because of thinking that such action is wrong;
ubhaya-atétaù—one who has transcended both (the conceptions of mundane
right and wrong); niñedhät—from what is forbidden; na nivartate—he does not
desist; guëa-buddhyä—because of thinking it is good; ca—also; vihitam—what
is enjoined; na karoti—he does not do; yathä—just like; arbhakaù—a young
child.
TRANSLATION
One who has transcended material good and evil automatically acts in
accordance with religious injunctions and avoids forbidden activities. The
self-realized person does this spontaneously, like an innocent child, and not
because he is thinking in terms of material good and evil.
PURPORT
One who has developed transcendental knowledge never acts whimsically.
Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé describes two stages of devotional service: sädhana-bhakti
and rägänugä-bhakti. Rägänugä-bhakti is the stage of spontaneous love of
Godhead, whereas sädhana-bhakti means the conscientious practice of the
regulative principles of devotional service. In most cases, one who is now
enjoying transcendental consciousness has rigidly practiced the rules and
regulations of devotional service. Thus, due to previous practice, one
spontaneously avoids sinful life and acts in accordance with the standards of
ordinary piety. This does not mean that a self-realized soul is consciously
avoiding sin and pursuing piety. Rather, due to his self-realized nature, he
spontaneously engages in the most exalted spiritual activities, just as an
innocent child may spontaneously exhibit good qualities such as kindness,
tolerance, and so on. The spiritual platform is called çuddha-sattva, or purified
goodness, to distinguish it from the material mode of goodness, which is always
to some extent polluted by the lower modes of passion and ignorance. Thus if a
man in material goodness appears to be most pious in the eyes of the world, we
can only imagine the spotless character of a self-realized soul in purified
spiritual goodness. Therefore it is stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (5.18.12):
yasyästi bhaktir bhagavaty akiïcanä
sarvair guëais tatra samäsate suräù
haräv abhaktasya kuto mahad-guëä
mano-rathenäsati dhävato bahiù
If one is a pure devotee of Lord Kåñëa, he will automatically exhibit all the
exalted qualities of the demigods. Such manifestation of purity is spontaneous,
as explained in this verse.
TEXT 12
s$avaRBaUtas$auô$cC$AntaAe
ÁaAnaivaÁaAnainaêya:
pazyanmad"AtmakM( ivaìM
na ivapaâeta vaE pauna:
sarva-bhüta-suhåc chänto
jïäna-vijïäna-niçcayaù
paçyan mad-ätmakaà viçvaà
na vipadyeta vai punaù
SYNONYMS
sarva-bhüta—to all creatures; su-håt—a well-wisher; çäntaù—peaceful;
jïäna-vijïäna—in knowledge and transcendental realization; niçcayaù—firmly
fixed; paçyan—seeing; mat-ätmakam—pervaded by Me; viçvam—the universe;
na vipadyeta—will never fall into the cycle of repeated birth and death;
vai—indeed; punaù—again.
TRANSLATION
One who is the kind well-wisher of all living beings, who is peaceful and
firmly fixed in knowledge and realization, sees Me within all things. Such a
person never again falls down into the cycle of birth and death.
TEXT 13
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
wtyaAid"í"Ae BagAvataA
mah"ABaAgAvataAe na{pa
oÜ"va: ‘aiNApatyaAh"
taÔvaM ijaÁaAs$aur"cyautama,
çré-çuka uväca
ity ädiñöo bhagavatä
mahä-bhägavato nåpa
uddhavaù praëipatyäha
tattvaà jijïäsur acyutam
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; ädiñöaù—instructed;
bhagavatä—by the Supreme Lord; mahä-bhägavataù—the exalted devotee of
the Lord; nåpa—O King; uddhavaù—Uddhava; praëipatya—after bowing
down to offer respects; äha—spoke; tattvam—the scientific truth;
jijïäsuù—being eager to learn; acyutam—unto the infallible Personality of
Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämi said: O King, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Lord Kåñëa, thus instructed His pure devotee Uddhava, who was eager to
receive knowledge from the Lord. Uddhava then offered obeisances to the Lord
and spoke as follows.
PURPORT
Uddhava is described here as tattvaà jijïäsuù, or desiring to know the truth.
It is clear from previous verses that Çré Uddhava is a pure devotee of Lord
Kåñëa and that he considers devotional service to Lord Kåñëa to be the
perfection of life. Thus the words tattvaà jijïäsuù indicate that since Lord
Kåñëa is about to leave the earth, Uddhava is most anxious to deepen his
understanding of the Lord so that he may further advance in loving service at
the Lord's lotus feet. Unlike an ordinary philosopher or scholar, a pure devotee
is not eager to acquire knowledge for personal gratification.
TEXT 14
™aIoÜ"va ovaAca
yaAegAezA yaAegAivanyaAs$a
yaAegAAtmana, yaAegAs$amBava
ina:™aeyas$aAya mae ‘aAel(s$a,
tyaAgA: s$aªyaAs$alaºaNA:
çré-uddhava uväca
yogeça yoga-vinyäsa
yogätman yoga-sambhava
niùçreyasäya me proktas
tyägaù sannyäsa-lakñaëaù
SYNONYMS
çré-uddhavaù uväca—Çré Uddhava said; yoga-éça—O giver of all results of yoga;
yoga-vinyäsa—O You who by Your own power bestow yoga even upon those
who are unqualified; yoga-ätman—O Supreme Soul realized through yoga;
yoga-sambhava—O origin of all mystic power; niùçreyasäya—for the ultimate
benefit; me—of me; proktaù—You have spoken about; tyägaù—renunciation;
sannyäsa—by the acceptance of the order of sannyäsa;
lakñaëaù—characterized.
TRANSLATION
Çré Uddhava said: My dear Lord, You alone award the results of yoga
practice, and You are so kind that by Your own influence You distribute the
perfection of yoga to Your devotee. Thus You are the Supreme Soul who is
realized through yoga, and it is You who are the origin of all mystic power. For
my supreme benefit You have explained the procedure for giving up the
material world through the process of sannyäsa, or renunciation.
PURPORT
The word yogeça here indicates that the Supreme Personality of Godhead
awards the results of all yoga practices. Since all of the material and spiritual
worlds emanate from the transcendental body of Kåñëa, there is nothing to be
achieved by any yoga process except Kåñëa and His potencies. And since the
Lord remains eternally the master of His potencies, no one can achieve
anything through yoga, or any other spiritual or material process, except by the
sanction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The word yoga means
"linking up," and unless we link ourselves with the Absolute Truth, we remain
covered by the darkness of ignorance. Thus, Kåñëa is the goal of yoga.
In the material world we falsely try to link ourselves with the objects of the
senses. Man wants to link with woman and woman with man, or one tries to
link up with nationalism, socialism, capitalism or innumerable other creations
of the illusory energy of the Lord. Since we are linking ourselves to temporary
objects the relationships are temporary, the results are temporary, and at the
time of death we become bewildered when all of our connections are suddenly
cut off by mäyä. If we link ourselves to Kåñëa, however, our relationship with
Him will continue even after death. As explained in Bhagavad-gétä, the
relationship with Kåñëa that we develop in this life will continue to increase in
our next life until we achieve the supreme goal of entering Kåñëa's planet.
Those who sincerely serve the mission of Caitanya Mahäprabhu, following the
transcendental life-style prescribed by the Lord, will enter the Lord's abode at
the end of this lifetime.
One can never achieve a permanent situation by mental speculation, and
what to speak of by ordinary material sense gratification. By the methods of
haöha-yoga, karma-yoga, räja-yoga, jïäna-yoga, etc., one does not actually
awaken his propensity for rendering eternal loving service to the Personality
of Godhead. Thus, one is bereft of the transcendental tastes of spiritual
enjoyment. Sometimes the conditioned soul, disgusted by his failure to gratify
his senses, bitterly decides to renounce the material world and merge into an
impersonal, painless transcendence. But our actual happy situation is to render
loving service at the lotus feet of the Personality of Godhead. All of the
different yoga processes gradually lead one to love of Godhead, and it is Lord
Kåñëa's aim to reestablish the conditioned souls in this happy position.
Caitanya Mahäprabhu is making this perfection easily available through the
chanting of the holy name of Kåñëa, the supreme yoga process for this age.
TEXT 15
tyaAgAAe'yaM äu"Sk(r"Ae BaUmana,
k(AmaAnaAM ivaSayaAtmaiBa:
s$autar"AM tvaiya s$avaARtmaªa,
@BalE(ir"ita mae maita:
tyägo 'yaà duñkaro bhüman
kämänäà viñayätmabhiù
sutaräà tvayi sarvätmann
abhaktair iti me matiù
SYNONYMS
tyägaù—renunciation; ayam—this; duñkaraù—difficult to perform;
bhüman—O my Lord; kämänäm—of material enjoyment; viñaya—sense
gratification; ätmabhiù—by those dedicated to; sutaräm—especially;
tvayi—unto You; sarva-ätman—O Supreme Soul; abhaktaiù—by those without
devotion; iti—thus; me—My; matiù—opinion.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, O Supreme Soul, for those whose minds are attached to sense
gratification, and especially for those bereft of devotion unto You, such
renunciation of material enjoyment is most difficult to perform. That is my
opinion.
PURPORT
Those who are truly devoted to the Supreme Lord do not accept anything
for their personal gratification but rather accept those things suitable to be
offered in the Lord's loving service. The word viñayätmabhiù indicates those
who desire material objects for their personal gratification instead of for the
devotional service of the Lord. The minds of such materialistic persons are
suitably disturbed, and it is virtually impossible for such persons to renounce
material enjoyment. This is the opinion of Çré Uddhava.
TEXT 16
s$aAe'hM" mamaAh"imaita maUX#maitaivaRgAAX#s$a,
tvanmaAyayaA ivar"icataAtmaina s$aAnaubanDae
taÔvaÃas$aA inagAid"taM BavataA yaTaAhM"
s$aMs$aADayaAima BagAvaªanauzAAiDa Ba{tyama,
so 'haà mamäham iti müòha-matir vigäòhas
tvan-mäyayä viracitätmani sänubandhe
tat tv aïjasä nigaditaà bhavatä yathähaà
saàsädhayämi bhagavann anuçädhi bhåtyam
SYNONYMS
saù—he; aham—I; mama aham—the false concept of "I" and "mine"; iti—thus;
müòha—most foolish; matiù—consciousness; vigäòhaù-merged;
tvat-mäyayä—by Your illusory potency; viracita—manufactured; ätmani—in
the body; sa-anubandhe—along with bodily relations; tat—therefore;
tu—indeed; aïjasä—easily; nigaditam—that instructed; bhavatä—by You;
yathä—the process by which; aham—I; saàsädhayämi-may execute;
bhagavan—My dear Lord; anuçädhi—teach; bhåtyam—Your servant.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, I myself am most foolish because my consciousness is merged in
the material body and bodily relations, which are all manufactured by Your
illusory energy. Thus I am thinking, "I am this body, and all of these relatives
are mine." Therefore, my Lord, please instruct Your poor servant. Please tell
me how I can very easily carry out Your instructions.
PURPORT
It is very difficult to give up false identification with the material body, and
thus we remain attached to our so-called bodily relations such as wife,
children, friends, and so on. Bodily attachment causes intense pain within the
heart, and we are stunned by lamentation and hankering. Çré Uddhava, a pure
devotee of the Lord, here speaks like an ordinary person showing how to pray
to the Personality of Godhead. We practically see that many sinful persons
enter the International Society for Krishna Consciousness and after
preliminary purification become most repentant for their previous illicit
activities. They are shocked when they realize how they gave up the personal
association of God to pursue the useless forms created by mäyä; therefore they
wholeheartedly pray to the spiritual master and Lord Kåñëa to be engaged
eternally in transcendental devotional service. Such a repentant, eager
mentality is most auspicious for spiritual advancement. The Lord certainly
answers the prayers of a repentant devotee desperate to escape the clutches of
illusion.
TEXT 17
s$atyasya tae svaä{"zA @Atmana @AtmanaAe'nyaM
val(Ar"maIzA ivabauDaeSvaipa naAnaucaºae
s$avaeR ivamaAeih"taiDayastava maAyayaemae
“aöAd"yastanauBa{taAe baih"r"TaRBaAvaA:
satyasya te sva-dåça ätmana ätmano 'nyaà
vaktäram éça vibudheñv api nänucakñe
sarve vimohita-dhiyas tava mäyayeme
brahmädayas tanu-bhåto bahir-artha-bhäväù
SYNONYMS
satyasya—of the Absolute Truth; te—besides You; sva-dåçaù—who reveal
Yourself; ätmanaù—for me personally; ätmanaù—than the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; anyam—other; vaktäram—qualified speaker; éça-O
my Lord; vibudheñu—among the demigods; api—even; na—not; anucakñe—I
can see; sarve—all of them; vimohita—bewildered; dhiyaù—their
consciousness; tava—Your; mäyayä—by the illusory potency; ime—these;
brahma-ädayaù—headed by Lord Brahmä; tanu-bhåtaù—conditioned souls
with material bodies; bahiù—in external things; artha—supreme value;
bhäväù—conceiving of.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, You are the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and You reveal Yourself to Your devotees. Besides Your Lordship, I
do not see anyone who can actually explain perfect knowledge to me. Such a
perfect teacher is not to be found even among the demigods in heaven. Indeed,
all of the demigods, headed by Lord Brahmä, are bewildered by Your illusory
potency. They are conditioned souls who accept their own material bodies and
bodily expansions to be the highest truth.
PURPORT
All conditioned souls, from Lord Brahmä down to the insignificant ant, are
declared by Çré Uddhava to be covered by material bodies produced by the
illusory potency of the Lord. The demigods in heaven, being absorbed in
universal management, constantly utilize their fabulous material potencies.
They therefore gradually fix their minds upon their mystically empowered
bodies and also upon their bodily expansions such as their celestial wives,
children, co-workers and friends. In the course of life in the heavenly planets,
the demigods become conditioned to think in terms of material good and bad,
and thus they accept the immediate welfare of their bodies to be the highest
goal of life.
The demigods do, however, try to strictly follow the laws of God. And to
help them do this, the Supreme Lord descends to remind the heavenly beings
of His own supreme personality, which possesses powers infinitely exceeding
theirs. Lord Viñëu has an eternal body, full of bliss, knowledge and unlimited
variegated potencies, whereas the demigods possess only deluxe material forms,
subject to birth, death, old age and disease.
Because the demigods are attached to ruling the created universe, their
devotion to God is tinged with material desires. They are therefore attracted
to those portions of Vedic knowledge that award the various material
opulences necessary for perpetuating their celestial life. Çré Uddhava,
however, being a pure devotee of the Lord, is determined to go back home,
back to Godhead, for eternal life and is thus not at all interested in the
sophisticated Vedic knowledge of the demigods. The material world is a
gigantic prison, whose inmates are subjected to birth, death, old age and
illusion, and a pure devotee has no desire to remain there even as a first-class
prisoner, like the demigods. Çré Uddhava desires to return to the kingdom of
God and for this reason directly approaches the Personality of Godhead. The
Lord is sva-dåçaù, or one who reveals Himself to His devotee. Thus, only the
Lord Himself or His pure devotee, who faithfully repeats the Lord's message,
can take one beyond the material sky into the free atmosphere of the spiritual
planets, where the liberated souls enjoy an eternal life of bliss and
omniscience.
TEXT 18
tasmaAà"vantamanavaâmanantapaArM"
s$avaRÁamaIìr"maku(NQ&ivaku(NQ&iDaSNyama,
inaivaRNNADaIr"h"mau he" va{ijanaAiBataæaAe
naAr"AyaNAM nar"s$aKaM zAr"NAM ‘apaâe
tasmäd bhavantam anavadyam ananta-päraà
sarva-jïam éçvaram akuëöha-vikuëöha-dhiñëyam
nirviëëa-dhér aham u he våjinäbhitapto
näräyaëaà nara-sakhaà çaraëaà prapadye
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; bhavantam—unto You; anavadyam—the perfect;
ananta-päram—unlimited; sarva jïam—omniscient; éçvaram—Personality of
Godhead; akuëöha—undisturbed by any force; vikuëöha—the spiritual
kingdom Vaikuëöha; dhiñëyam—whose personal abode; nirviëëa—feeling
renounced; dhéù—my mind; aham—I; u he—O (Lord); våjina—by material
distress; abhitaptaù—tormented; näräyaëam—unto Lord Näräyaëa;
nara-sakham—the friend of the infinitesimal living entity; çaraëam
prapadye—I approach to take shelter.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O Lord, feeling weary of material life and tormented by its
distresses, I now surrender unto You because You are the perfect master. You
are the unlimited, all-knowing Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose spiritual
abode in Vaikuëöha is free from all disturbances. In fact, You are known as
Näräyaëa, the true friend of all living beings.
PURPORT
No one can claim to be a self-made man, because everyone works with the
body and mind awarded by material nature. By the laws of nature there is
always anxiety in material existence, and terrible tragedies periodically harass
the conditioned souls. Here Uddhava points out that only Çré Kåñëa, the
Personality of Godhead, is a proper master, friend and shelter for the
conditioned souls. We may be attracted by the good qualities of a particular
man or demigod, but we may later discover discrepancies in that person's
behavior. Therefore Kåñëa is described as anavadyam. There are no
discrepancies in the personal conduct or character of the Personality of
Godhead; He is eternally faultless.
We may faithfully serve a master, father or demigod, but when it is time for
us to receive our reward for faithful service, the master may die. Therefore
Lord Kåñëa is here described as ananta-päram, which indicates that He is not
limited by time or space. The word anta indicates the termination of time, and
pära indicates a spatial termination; therefore ananta-päram means that Lord
Kåñëa is not limited by time or space and thus will always dutifully reward His
faithful servants.
If we serve someone other than the Personality of Godhead, our so-called
master may forget our service or become ungrateful. Therefore Lord Kåñëa is
described here as sarva-jïam, omniscient. He can never forget the service of
His devotee, and therefore He is never ungrateful. In fact, it is said that Lord
Kåñëa does not remember the faults of His devotees but only the sincere
service they have rendered.
A further disadvantage in serving anyone besides Kåñëa is that when we are
in danger our master may not be able to protect us. If we take shelter of our
nation, that nation may be destroyed in war. If we take shelter of our family,
they may also die. And as described in the Vedic literature, even the demigods
are sometimes defeated by the demons. But since Lord Kåñëa is described here
as éçvara, or the supreme controller, there is no danger of His being overcome
or even impeded by any other power. Thus Lord Kåñëa's promise of protection
to His devotee is eternally valid.
If we do not serve the Personality of Godhead, we will not know the
ultimate result of our service. But here Lord Kåñëa is described as
akuëöha-vikuëöha-dhiñëyam. Lord Kåñëa has an eternal abode called
Vaikuëöha, and that abode is never disturbed by anything. The faithful
servants of Lord Kåñëa will certainly go back to Godhead, back home, for an
eternal life of bliss and knowledge in the personal abode of the Lord. However,
since even the demigods, and what to speak of insignificant human beings, are
subject sooner or later to annihilation, what ultimate benefit can be derived
from serving them?
Uddhava describes his personal situation as nirviëëa-dhéù and
våjinäbhitaptaù. In other words, Çré Uddhava states that he is exhausted and
discouraged by the contradictions and anguish of material life. He has been
forced, therefore, to become humble and surrender to the lotus feet of Kåñëa,
the personal friend of every living entity. In the material world a great man
does not have time for insignificant men. But although the Lord is the greatest
person, He sits in the heart of every living entity; thus He is the most merciful.
Lord Kåñëa is the ultimate shelter of even Nära, or the Lord's puruña expansion
who creates the material world. The living entity is called nara, and the source
of his material situation is Nära, or Mahä-Viñëu. The word näräyaëa indicates
that even Mahä-Viñëu finds His shelter in Kåñëa, who is certainly supreme.
Although our consciousness is presently contaminated by sinful propensities, if
we follow the example of Çré Uddhava and take shelter of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, everything can be rectified. Taking shelter of
Kåñëa means taking shelter of devotional service to Kåñëa and obeying Him.
Lord Kåñëa demands this in Bhagavad-gétä, and if we comply with the order of
the Lord our life can become fully auspicious and successful. Sooner than we
expect, we may, by Kåñëa's mercy, enter the kingdom of God for an eternal life
of bliss and knowledge.
TEXT 19
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
‘aAyaeNA manaujaA laAeke(
laAek(taÔvaivacaºaNAA:
s$amauÜ"r"inta ÷AtmaAnama,
@AtmanaEvaAzAuBaAzAyaAta,
çré-bhagavän uväca
präyeëa manujä loke
loka-tattva-vicakñaëäù
samuddharanti hy ätmänam
ätmanaiväçubhäçayät
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—Lord Kåñëa said; präyeëa—in general;
manujäù—humans; loke—in this world; loka-tattva—the factual situation of
the material world; vicakñaëäù—who know expertly; samuddharanti—they
deliver; hi—indeed; ätmänam—themselves; ätmanä—by their own
intelligence; eva—indeed; açubha-äçayät—from the inauspicious attitude of
desiring sense gratification.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord replied: Generally those human beings who can expertly
analyze the actual situation of the material world are able to raise themselves
beyond the inauspicious life of gross material gratification.
PURPORT
Çré Uddhava expressed to the Lord in the previous verses his fallen
condition and his entanglement in the material concept of life. Now Lord
Kåñëa reassures Uddhava that even persons far less qualified than Uddhava
are able to extricate themselves from the inauspicious life of material sense
gratification. According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, even if one has not received
the instruction of a bona fide spiritual master, one can understand by direct
and indirect analysis that the material world is not a place of enjoyment.
Direct analysis means one's personal experience and indirect analysis means
hearing and reading of the experience of others.
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, Lord Kåñëa considered
Uddhava to be more intelligent than even the demigods in heaven. Uddhava,
however, was feeling discouraged, thinking himself unqualified to render
devotional service to the Lord. But Uddhava was actually perfectly situated
because he had achieved Lord Kåñëa as his personal spiritual master. Similarly,
the members of the Kåñëa consciousness movement are guided by the
instructions of the Society's founder-äcärya, Oà Viñëupäda Paramahaàsa
Parivräjakäcärya Añöottara-çata Çré Çrémad A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupäda. Therefore, a sincere member of the Kåñëa consciousness
movement should never feel discouraged but should rather count his blessings
and do the needful to go back home, back to Godhead. Within the material
world, certain activities are auspicious and produce happiness, whereas other
activities, being sinful, are inauspicious and cause unlimited suffering. Even
one who has not yet received the complete mercy of the bona fide Kåñëa
conscious spiritual master should conclude by sharp intelligence that there is
no happiness in ordinary, material life and that real self-interest lies beyond
the material platform.
Çréla Madhväcärya points out that even if one is expert not only in material
knowledge but also in spiritual knowledge, one will enter into the darkness of
ignorance if one neglects the association of the devotees of the Lord.
Therefore, one should not misinterpret this verse in a way that minimizes the
significance of the pure devotee spiritual master. One who is vicakñaëäù, or
expert, will eventually come to understand the difference between matter and
spirit. Such a person will certainly recognize and appreciate a genuine spiritual
master. One who is advanced in knowledge undoubtedly becomes humble, and
thus an expert advanced human will never neglect the lotus feet of the pure
devotees of the Lord.
TEXT 20
@AtmanaAe gAuç&r"AtmaEva
pauç&Sasya ivazAeSata:
yat‘atyaºaAnaumaAnaAByaAM
™aeyaAe's$aAvanauivand"tae
ätmano gurur ätmaiva
puruñasya viçeñataù
yat pratyakñänumänäbhyäà
çreyo 'säv anuvindate
SYNONYMS
ätmanaù—of himself; guruù—the instructing spiritual master; ätmä—himself;
eva—indeed; puruñasya—of a person; viçeñataù—in a particular sense;
yat—because; pratyakña—by his direct perception; anumänäbhyäm—and
application of logic; çreyaù—real benefit; asau—he; anuvindate—can
eventually gain.
TRANSLATION
An intelligent person, expert in perceiving the world around him and in
applying sound logic, can achieve real benefit through his own intelligence.
Thus sometimes one acts as one's own instructing spiritual master.
PURPORT
As illustrated in this chapter by the conversation between King Yadu and
the avadhüta, a sensitive, reasonable person can acquire real knowledge and
happiness simply by carefully observing the world around him. By observing
the happiness and distress of other living entities, one can understand what is
beneficial and what is destructive.
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé states in this connection, gurv-anusaraëe pravartaka ity
arthaù: the knowledge acquired by one's own perception and intelligence leads
one to appreciate the value of the representative of Lord Kåñëa. The word
çreyas in this verse indicates that one can advance in life through one's own
intelligence. By good association one should gradually come to understand
one's eternal position as servant of Kåñëa, and then one becomes very eager to
live in the company of other enlightened persons. Birds of a feather flock
together. The symptom of an enlightened servant of Kåñëa is that he is eager
for the company of other such great souls. Thus by one's sensitive and rational
observation of this material world, one should come to appreciate the value of
spiritual life in the association of the devotees.
TEXT 21
pauç&Satvae ca maAM DaIr"A:
s$aAÊÿYayaAegAivazAAr"d"A:
@Aivastar"AM ‘apazyainta
s$avaRzAftyaupaba{Mih"tama,
puruñatve ca mäà dhéräù
säìkhya-yoga-viçäradäù
ävistaräà prapaçyanti
sarva-çakty-upabåàhitam
SYNONYMS
puruñatve—in the human form of life; ca—and; mäm—Me; dhéräù—those free
from envy through spiritual knowledge; säìkhya-yoga—in the spiritual science
composed of analytical knowledge and devotion to the Supreme;
viçäradäù—who are expert; ävistaräm—directly manifest; prapaçyanti—they
clearly see; sarva—all; çakti—with My energies; upabåàhitam—fully endowed.
TRANSLATION
In the human form of life, those who are self-controlled and expert in the
spiritual science of Säìkhya can directly see Me along with all of My potencies.
PURPORT
We find the following statement in the Vedas: puruñatve cävistaräm ätmä
sahita-prajïänena sampanna-tamo vijïätaà vadati vijïätaà paçyati veda
çvastanaà veda lokälokau martyenämåtam épsaty evaà sampanno 'thetareñäà
paçünäm äsanä-pipäse eväbhijïänam. "In the human form of life, the soul is
fully endowed with intelligence to understand spiritual knowledge. Thus, in
human life the soul may speak realized knowledge, see the truth, know the
future and also understand the reality both of this world and of the next.
Taking advantage of the experience of mortal life, the soul in human form may
endeavor for immortality, and the human body is fully equipped to achieve this
end. In such an elevated state the soul is certainly well acquainted with the
ordinary activities of animals, such as eating and drinking."
The human form of life (puruñatve) is very significant because it affords us
the opportunity to perfect our existence. The Säìkhya system mentioned here
is best illustrated by the instructions of Lord Kapila to His mother, Devahüti.
Lord Kapila is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and His mother
approached Him, saying,
nirviëëä nitaräà bhümann
asad-indriya-tarñaëät
yena sambhävyamänena
prapannändhaà tamaù prabho
"I am very sick of the disturbance caused by my material senses, for because of
this sense disturbance, my Lord, I have fallen into the abyss of ignorance." (SB
3.25.7) Lord Kapila delivered to His mother a highly analytical summary of all
material and spiritual reality. It is significant that Lord Kapila did not
discriminate against His mother because she was a woman, nor did He consider
her incapable of understanding the most elaborate spiritual knowledge. Thus,
in a Kåñëa conscious society of liberated souls, any man, woman or child may
become a great devotee of Lord Kåñëa without discrimination. It is also
significant that in the highly intellectual Säìkhya system enunciated by Lord
Kapila, the solid conclusion is surrender to the lotus feet of the pure devotees
and love of Godhead. In Lord Kapila's instructions in the Third Canto of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, He emphasizes the need to take shelter of the pure
devotees of the Lord. In the present verse Lord Kåñëa says,
säìkhya-yoga-viçäradäù: those who are expert in taking shelter of the pure
devotees and who can thus understand the actual situation of this world are
able to see Kåñëa in His personal form, along with His internal and external
potencies.
A spiritual master becomes bona fide by his full surrender to his spiritual
master; but as explained in this chapter, one may also act as his own guru. This
means that an intelligent and perceptive person can understand the nature of
this world and his own limitations. Such a person then becomes very much
inclined to associate with the pure devotees of the Lord and to receive the
mercy of those who are advanced in Kåñëa consciousness. According to Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, säìkhya-yoga, as described here, refers to the
rigorous intellectual progress of the jïäna-yoga system, along with the devotion
of bhakti-yoga, which emphasizes the mercy of the lotus feet of the pure
devotees.
Actually, jïäna-yoga is a factor in the bhakti-yoga system, since Kåñëa is
jïäna-gamya, or the goal of all knowledge. The Lord also says in Bhagavad-gétä
(10.10) that He personally enlightens a sincere devotee with all knowledge. In
this chapter, Lord Kåñëa is training Uddhava to see the Lord's personal form in
the course of his daily experiences in the material world. The Lord has already
indicated to Uddhava that he will travel throughout the world in samädhi, or
trance, and now Lord Kåñëa is preparing Uddhava to travel as a true sannyäsé
seeing the Personality of Godhead everywhere.
TEXT 22
Wk(iã"i‡acataus$paAd"Ae
baò"paAd"staTaApad":
baù"Ya: s$ainta paur": s$a{í"As$a,
taAs$aAM mae paAEç&SaI i‘ayaA
eka-dvi-tri-catus-pädo
bahu-pädas tathäpadaù
bahvyaù santi puraù såñöäs
täsäà me pauruñé priyä
SYNONYMS
eka—one; dvi—two; tri—three; catuù—four; pädaù—having legs;
bahu-pädaù—having many legs; tathä—also; apadaù—having no legs;
bahvyaù—many; santi—there are; puraù—different kinds of bodies;
såñöäù—created; täsäm—of them; me—to Me; pauruñé—the human form;
priyä—is most dear.
TRANSLATION
In this world there are many kinds of created bodies—some with one leg,
others with two, three, four or more legs, and still others with no legs—but of
all these, the human form is actually dear to Me.
PURPORT
The ultimate purpose of material creation is to facilitate the return of the
conditioned souls back home, back to Godhead. Since this redemption of the
conditioned souls is especially possible in the human form of life, naturally this
form is particularly dear to the compassionate Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 23
@‡a maAM ma{gAyantyaÜ"A
yaul(A he"tauiBar"Iìr"ma,
gA{÷maANAEgAuRNAEilaR$ËEÿr,"
@ƒaA÷manaumaAnata:
atra mäà mågayanty addhä
yuktä hetubhir éçvaram
gåhyamäëair guëair liìgair
agrähyam anumänataù
SYNONYMS
atra—here (in the human form); mäm—for Me; mågayanti—they search;
addhä—directly; yuktäù—situated; hetubhiù—by apparent symptoms;
éçvaram-the Supreme Lord; gåhyamäëaiù guëaiù—with the perceiving
intelligence, mind and senses; liìgaiù—and by indirectly ascertained
symptoms; agrähyam—beyond the grasp of direct perception; anumänataù—by
the process of logical deduction.
TRANSLATION
Although I, the Supreme Lord, can never be captured by ordinary sense
perception, those situated in human life may use their intelligence and other
faculties of perception to directly search for Me through both apparent and
indirectly ascertained symptoms.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, the word yuktäù in this
verse indicates those engaged in the regulative practice of bhakti-yoga. The
devotees of the Lord do not abandon their intelligence and become mindless
fanatics, as some fools think. As indicated by the words anumänataù and
guëair liìgaiù, a devotee engaged in bhakti-yoga intensely searches out the
Personality of Godhead through all of the rational faculties of the human
brain. The word mågayanti, or "searching," does not, however, indicate an
unregulated or unauthorized process. If we are searching for the telephone
number of a particular person, we look in the authorized telephone directory.
Similarly, if we are searching for a particular product, we go to a specialized
store where we are likely to find what we are looking for. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé
points out that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is not a product of the
imagination, and thus we cannot whimsically imagine what the Lord might be.
Therefore, to gain information about Lord Kåñëa, one must conduct a
regulated search in the authorized Vedic scriptures. The word agrähyam in this
verse indicates that no one can achieve or understand Lord Kåñëa by ordinary
speculation or through the activities of the material senses. In this regard Çréla
Rüpa Gosvämé states the following verse in the Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu
(1.2.234):
ataù çré-kåñëa-nämädi
na bhaved grähyam indriyaiù
sevonmukhe hi jihvädau
svayam eva sphuraty adaù
[Cc. Madhya 17.136]
"No one can understand the transcendental nature of the name, form, quality
and pastimes of Çré Kåñëa through his materially contaminated senses. Only
when one becomes spiritually saturated by transcendental service to the Lord
are the transcendental name, form, quality and pastimes of the Lord revealed
to him."
The words gåhyamäëair guëaiù indicate the rational and intellectual
faculties of the human brain. All of these can be used to directly and indirectly
perceive the Personality of Godhead. Indirectly one may experience the Lord
through His creation. Since we are experiencing this world through our
intelligence (and senses), we may conclude that our own intelligence must
have a creator and that creator is therefore supremely intelligent. Thus,
through simple logic any sane person can understand that there is a Supreme
Personality of Godhead who is controlling everything.
One may also directly perceive the Lord through chanting and hearing His
holy names and glories. Çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù [SB 7.5.23] means that one
should always chant and hear of the glories of the Lord. One who perfectly
hears and chants will undoubtedly see the Lord face to face. Lord Kåñëa is
all-pervading, and one should search for Him everywhere. By the
transcendental senses, purified by bhakti-yoga, one may directly perceive the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. As indicated by the word addhä in this
verse, this perception is direct and not imaginary. This point has been
elaborately explained by Çréla Prabhupäda in his purport to this verse from
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (2.2.35):
bhagavän sarva-bhüteñu
lakñitaù svätmanä hariù
dåçyair buddhy-ädibhir drañöä
lakñaëair anumäpakaiù
"The Personality of Godhead, Lord Çré Kåñëa, is in every living being along
with the individual soul, and this fact is perceived and hypothesized in our acts
of seeing and taking help from the intelligence."
TEXT 24
@‡aApyaud"Ah"r"ntaImama,
witah"As$aM paur"Atanama,
@vaDaUtasya s$aMvaAdM"
yad"Aer"imatataejas$a:
aträpy udäharantémam
itihäsaà purätanam
avadhütasya saàvädaà
yador amita-tejasaù
SYNONYMS
atra api—in this very matter; udäharanti—they cite as example; imam—this;
itihäsam—a historical narration; purätanam—ancient; avadhütasya—of a holy
man acting outside the scope of ordinary regulative principles; saàvädam—the
conversation; yadoù—and of King Yadu; amita-tejasaù—whose power was
unlimited.
TRANSLATION
In this regard, sages cite a historical narration concerning the conversation
between the greatly powerful King Yadu and an avadhüta.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa will narrate this story to show Uddhava how rational
intelligence can be utilized in bhakti-yoga to acquire Vedic knowledge and how
ultimately an intelligent person will come to the lotus feet of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 25
@vaDaUtaM iã"yaM k(iÂaca,
car"ntamaku(taAeBayama,
k(ivaM inar"Iºya taç&NAM
yaäu": pa‘acC$ DamaRivata,
avadhütaà dviyaà kaïcic
carantam akuto-bhayam
kavià nirékñya taruëaà
yaduù papraccha dharma-vit
SYNONYMS
avadhütam—the mendicant; dvijam—a brähmaëa; kaïcit—a certain;
carantam—wandering; akutaù-bhayam—without fear for any reason;
kavim—learned; nirékñya—observing; taruëam—young; yaduù—King Yadu;
papraccha—inquired; dharma-vit—expert in religious principles.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Yadu once observed a certain brähmaëa avadhüta, who appeared to
be quite young and learned, wandering about fearlessly. Being himself most
learned in spiritual science, the King took the opportunity and inquired from
him as follows.
TEXT 26
™aIyaäu"ç&vaAca
ku(taAe bauiÜ"ir"yaM “aöªa,
@k(tauR: s$auivazAAr"d"A
yaAmaAs$aAâ BavaAéaAekM(
ivaã"AMêr"ita baAlavata,
çré-yadur uväca
kuto buddhir iyaà brahmann
akartuù su-viçäradä
yäm äsädya bhaväl lokaà
vidväàç carati bäla-vat
SYNONYMS
çré-yaduù uväca—King Yadu said; kutaù—from where; buddhiù—intelligence;
iyam—this; brahman—O brähmaëa; akartuù—of one not engaged in any
work; su-viçäradä—very broad; yäm—which; äsädya—having acquired;
bhavän—you; lokam—the world; vidvän—in full knowledge; carati—travel;
bäla-vat—like a child.
TRANSLATION
Çré Yadu said: O brähmaëa, I see that you are not engaged in any practical
religious activity, and yet you have acquired a most expert understanding of all
things and all people within this world. Kindly tell me, sir, how did you acquire
this extraordinary intelligence, and why are you traveling freely throughout the
world behaving as if you were a child?
TEXT 27
‘aAyaAe DamaARTaRk(AmaeSau
ivaivats$aAyaAM ca maAnavaA:
he"taunaEva s$amaIh"nta
@AyauSaAe yazAs$a: i™aya:
präyo dharmärtha-kämeñu
vivitsäyäà ca mänaväù
hetunaiva saméhanta
äyuño yaçasaù çriyaù
SYNONYMS
präyaù—generally; dharma—in religiosity; artha—economic development;
kämeñu—and sense gratification; vivitsäyäm—in pursuit of spiritual
knowledge; ca—also; mänaväù—human beings; hetunä—for the purpose;
eva—indeed; saméhante—they endeavor; äyuñaù—of long life; yaçasaù—fame;
çriyaù—and material opulence.
TRANSLATION
Generally human beings work hard to cultivate religiosity, economic
development, sense gratification and also knowledge of the soul, and their usual
motive is to increase the duration of their lives, acquire fame and enjoy material
opulence.
PURPORT
An intelligent person should understand that if there is an eternal soul
different from the body, then real happiness must lie in our eternal situation,
beyond the bondage of material nature. However, ordinary persons, even when
discussing spiritual subject matters, generally desire to become famous or to
increase their wealth and duration of life by such spiritual practices. Most
common people think, for example, that the yoga system is meant for
improving one's health, that one may pray to God for money, and that one's
spiritual knowledge is meant for increasing one's prestige in society. Mahäräja
Yadu wants to clarify that the young brähmaëa avadhüta is not like ordinary
persons and that he is actually on a spiritual platform, as will be explained in
the following verses.
TEXT 28
tvaM tau k(lpa: k(ivadR"ºa:
s$auBagAAe'ma{taBaASaNA:
na k(taAR naeh"s$ae ik(iÂaja,
jax"AenmaÔaipazAAcavata,
tvaà tu kalpaù kavir dakñaù
su-bhago 'måta-bhäñaëaù
na kartä nehase kiïcij
jaòonmatta-piçäca-vat
SYNONYMS
tvam—you; tu—however; kalpaù—capable; kaviù—learned; dakñaù—expert;
su-bhagaù—handsome; amåta-bhäñaëaù—having nectarean speech; na—are
not; kartä—a doer; na éhase—you do not desire; kiïcit—anything;
jaòa—stupefied; unmatta—maddened; piçäca-vat—like a ghostly creature.
TRANSLATION
You, however, although capable, learned, expert, handsome and most
eloquent, are not engaged in doing anything, nor do you desire anything; rather,
you appear stupefied and maddened as if you were a ghostly creature.
PURPORT
Ignorant persons often think that renounced spiritual life is meant for
those who are impotent or homely or incompetent in practical worldly affairs.
Sometimes foolish people say that religious life is a crutch for those who are
not expert enough to achieve a high status in society. Therefore King Yadu has
described the qualities of the mendicant brähmaëa in order to show that the
brähmaëa has taken to renounced spiritual life in spite of great potential for
worldly success. The avadhüta brähmaëa is described as being expert, learned,
good-looking, eloquent and in every sense qualified to be a great material
success. Still, the avadhüta has renounced material life and taken to Kåñëa
consciousness. Going back home, back to Godhead, for an eternal life of bliss
and knowledge is the real work of a human being.
The followers of Lord Caitanya Mahäprabhu simultaneously cultivate their
own Kåñëa consciousness and strenuously endeavor in missionary work to help
others become Kåñëa conscious. Often foolish persons deride the devotees by
saying, "Why don't you get a job?" They think that one who is sincerely
endeavoring for spiritual enlightenment and who is also enlightening others is
not doing anything practical. Foolish materialists will pay millions of dollars to
extend their lives by a few weeks or months in a hospital, but they do not
appreciate someone endeavoring for eternal life. There is no actual logic in
material life. The act of trying to enjoy without Kåñëa is in itself the
culmination of irrationality, and thus we cannot expect to find anything
ultimately rational or logical in a materialistic life devoid of Kåñëa
consciousness. Many devotees of Kåñëa come from wealthy, learned and
influential families, and they take to Kåñëa consciousness in order to perfect
their lives, and certainly not due to lack of opportunity for material
advancement. Although sometimes persons in material distress approach the
Supreme Lord for help in material life, a real devotee of Lord Kåñëa
voluntarily gives up all types of material enjoyment, knowing that nothing but
love of Kåñëa and service to His lotus feet are the actual perfection of life.
TEXT 29
janaeSau d"÷maAnaeSau
k(AmalaAeBad"vaAi¢anaA
na tapyas$ae'i¢anaA maul(Ae
gAËÿAmBa:sTa wva iã"pa:
janeñu dahyamäneñu
käma-lobha-davägninä
na tapyase 'gninä mukto
gaìgämbhaù-stha iva dvipaù
SYNONYMS
janeñu—all people; dahyamäneñu—even while they are burning; käma—of
lust; lobha—and greed; dava-agninä—in the forest fire; na tapyase—you are
not burned; agninä—from the fire; muktaù—free; gaìgä-ambhaù—in the
water of the Gaìgä; sthaù—standing; iva—as if; dvipaù—an elephant.
TRANSLATION
Although all people within the material world are burning in the great forest
fire of lust and greed, you remain free and are not burned by that fire. You are
just like an elephant who takes shelter from a forest fire by standing within the
water of the Ganges River,
PURPORT
The natural result of transcendental bliss is described in this verse. The
young brähmaëa was physically very attractive, and his senses were full of
potency for material enjoyment, yet he was not at all affected by material lust.
This position is called mukti, or liberation.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura explains that within the Ganges
flow great currents of water, capable of extinguishing a blazing fire. If an
elephant maddened by sex desire stands within the Ganges, its powerful,
cooling currents extinguish his lust, and the elephant becomes pacified.
Similarly, ordinary human beings trapped in the cycle of birth and death are
constantly harassed by the enemies of lust and greed, which never allow the
mind to be completely peaceful. But if, following the example of the elephant,
one situates oneself within the cooling waves of transcendental bliss, then all
material desire will soon be extinguished, and one will become çänta, or
peaceful. As described in Sr Caitanya-caritämåta, kåñëa-bhakta niñkäma ataeva
çänta [Cc. Madhya 19.149]. Thus, everyone should take to the movement of
Caitanya Mahäprabhu and cleanse himself in the cooling waters of Kåñëa
consciousness, our real, eternal consciousness.
TEXT 30
tvaM ih" na: pa{cC$taAM “aöªa,
@AtmanyaAnand"k(Ar"NAma,
“aUih" s$pazARivah"Inasya
Bavata: ke(valaAtmana:
tvaà hi naù påcchatäà brahmann
ätmany änanda-käraëam
brühi sparça-vihénasya
bhavataù kevalätmanaù
SYNONYMS
tvam—you; hi—certainly; naù—to us; påcchatäm—who are inquiring;
brahman—O brähmaëa; ätmani—within yourself; änanda—of the ecstasy;
käraëam—the cause; brühi—please say; sparça-vihénasya—who are devoid of
any contact with material enjoyment; bhavataù—of you;
kevala-ätmanaù—who are living completely alone.
TRANSLATION
O brähmaëa, we see that you are devoid of any contact with material
enjoyment and that you are traveling alone, without any companions or family
members. Therefore, because we are sincerely inquiring from you, please tell us
the cause of the great ecstasy that you are feeling within yourself.
PURPORT
The word kevalätmanaù is significant here. Unless one has practical
realization of the Supreme Soul and the individual soul, who reside together
within the heart of every living being, it is very difficult to artificially adopt
the sannyäsa order of life and travel without the association of wife, children
or other family members. The nature of every living being is to make friends
with others and to offer his love to a suitable person. One who has realized the
Supreme Person is satisfied to always carry the Personality of Godhead within
his heart as his constant companion. Unless one has realized that Kåñëa is
one's only true friend and that Kåñëa is within one's heart, one will remain
attached to the temporary relationships of the material world.
TEXT 31
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
yaäu"naEvaM mah"ABaAgAAe
“aöNyaena s$aumaeDas$aA
pa{í": s$aBaAijata: ‘aAh"
‘a™ayaAvanataM iã"ja:
çré-bhagavän uväca
yadunaivaà mahä-bhägo
brahmaëyena su-medhasä
påñöaù sabhäjitaù präha
praçrayävanataà dvijaù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; yadunä—by
King Yadu; evam—in this way; mahä-bhägaù—greatly fortunate;
brahmaëyena—who was very respectful to brähmaëas; su-medhasä—and
intelligent; påñöaù—asked; sabhäjitaù—honored; präha—he spoke;
praçraya—out of humility; avanatam—bowing his head; dvijaù—the
brähmaëa.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa continued: The intelligent King Yadu, always respectful to the
brähmaëas, waited with bowed head as the brähmaëa, pleased with the King's
attitude, began to reply.
TEXT 32
™aI“aAöNA ovaAca
s$ainta mae gAur"vaAe r"Ajana,
bah"vaAe bauÜ"Yaupai™ataA:
yataAe bauiÜ"maupaAd"Aya
maul(Ae'q%AmaIh" taAna, Za{NAu
çré-brähmaëa uväca
santi me guravo räjan
bahavo buddhy-upaçritäù
yato buddhim upädäya
mukto 'öäméha tän çåëu
SYNONYMS
çré-brähmaëaù uväca—the brähmaëa said; santi—there are; me—my;
guravaù—spiritual masters; räjan—O King; bahavaù—many; buddhi—by my
intelligence; upaçritäù—taken shelter of; yataù—from whom;
buddhim—intelligence; upädäya—gaining; muktaù—liberated; aöämi—I
wander; iha—in this world; tän—them; çåëu—please hear.
TRANSLATION
The brähmaëa said: My dear King, with my intelligence I have taken shelter
of many spiritual masters. Having gained transcendental understanding from
them, I now wander about the earth in a liberated condition. Please listen as I
describe them to you.
PURPORT
The word buddhy-upäçritäù in this verse indicates that the brähmaëa's
spiritual masters did not directly speak to him. Instead, he learned from them
by his intelligence. All living entities who are inimical to Lord Kåñëa glorify
useless material things and spend their lives trying to lord it over the material
objects they falsely worship. Thus the conditioned souls try to increase their
duration of life, as well as their fame and beauty, by means of mundane
religiosity, economic development and gross sense gratification. King Yadu
noticed that the saintly avadhüta did not behave like that. Therefore the King
was inquisitive to find out the actual situation of the brähmaëa. In reply to the
King the saintly brähmaëa states, "I do not consider the twenty-four elements
of the physical world as objects of my sense gratification, and therefore I don't
consider accepting or rejecting them. Rather, I accept the material elements as
my instructing spiritual masters. Thus, even though wandering throughout the
material world, I am never bereft of service to the guru. Taking shelter of
steady intelligence, I travel about the earth constantly engaged on the
transcendental platform. By intelligence I transcend useless desires, and my
ultimate goal is the loving devotional service of the Lord. Now I shall explain
to you about my twenty-four spiritual masters."
TEXTS 33-35
pa{iTavaI vaAyaur"Ak(AzAma,
@ApaAe'i¢aên‰"maA r"iva:
k(paAetaAe'jagAr": is$anDau:
pataËÿAe maDauk{(Õ"ja:
maDauh"A h"ir"NAAe maIna:
ipaËÿlaA ku(r"r"Ae'BaRk(:
ku(maAr"I zAr"k{(ts$apaR
ONARnaAiBa: s$aupaezAk{(ta,
Wtae mae gAur"vaAe r"Ajana,
catauiva<zAitar"Ai™ataA:
izAºaA va{iÔaiBare"taeSaAma,
@nvaizAºaimah"Atmana:
påthivé väyur äkäçam
äpo 'gniç candramä raviù
kapoto 'jagaraù sindhuù
pataìgo madhukåd gajaù
madhu-hä hariëo ménaù
piìgalä kuraro 'rbhakaù
kumäré çara-kåt sarpa
ürëanäbhiù supeçakåt
ete me guravo räjan
catur-viàçatir äçritäù
çikñä våttibhir eteñäm
anvaçikñam ihätmanaù
SYNONYMS
påthivé—the earth; väyuù—the air; äkäçam—the sky; äpaù—the water;
agniù—the fire; candramäù—the moon; raviù—the sun; kapotaù—the pigeon;
ajagaraù—the python; sindhuù—the sea; pataìgaù—the moth;
madhu-kåt—the honeybee; gajaù—the elephant; madhu-hä—the honey thief;
hariëaù—the deer; ménaù—the fish; piìgalä—the prostitute named Piìgalä;
kuraraù—the kurara bird; arbhakaù—the child; kumäré—the young girl;
çara-kåt-the arrow maker; sarpaù—the serpent; ürëa-näbhiù—the spider;
supeça-kåt—the wasp; ete—these; me—me; guravaù—spiritual masters;
räjan—O King; catuù-viàçatiù—twenty-four; äçritäù—taken shelter of;
çikñä—instruction; våttibhiù—from the activities; eteñäm—of them;
anvaçikñam—I have properly learned; iha—in this life; ätmanaù—about the
self.
TRANSLATION
O King, I have taken shelter of twenty-four gurus, who are the following:
the earth, air, sky, water, fire, moon, sun, pigeon and python; the sea, moth,
honeybee, elephant and honey thief; the deer, the fish, the prostitute Piìgalä,
the kurara bird and the child; and the young girl, arrow maker, serpent, spider
and wasp. My dear King, by studying their activities I have learned the science
of the self.
PURPORT
The wasp is known as supeça-kåt because it causes the insect that it kills to
take a beautiful form in the next life.
TEXT 36
yataAe yad"nauizAºaAima
yaTaA vaA naAò"SaAtmaja
taÔaTaA pauç&SavyaA„a
inabaAeDa k(TayaAima tae
yato yad anuçikñämi
yathä vä nähuñätmaja
tat tathä puruña-vyäghra
nibodha kathayämi te
SYNONYMS
yataù—from whom; yat—what; anuçikñämi—I have learned; yathä—how;
vä—and; nähuña-ätma-ja—O son of King Nähuña (Yayäti); tat—that;
tathä—thus; puruña-vyäghra—O tiger among men; nibodha—listen;
kathayämi—I will recount; te—to you.
TRANSLATION
Please listen, O son of Mahäräja Yayäti, O tiger among men, as I explain to
you what I have learned from each of these gurus.
TEXT 37
BaUtaEr"A‚(myamaANAAe'ipa
DaIr"Ae dE"vavazAAnaugAE:
taiã"ã"Aªa calaenmaAgAARä,"
@nvaizAºaM iºatae˜aRtama,
bhütair äkramyamäëo 'pi
dhéro daiva-vaçänugaiù
tad vidvän na calen märgäd
anvaçikñaà kñiter vratam
SYNONYMS
bhütaiù—by various creatures; äkramyamäëaù—being harassed;
api—although; dhéraù—sober; daiva—of fate; vaça—the control;
anugaiù—who are simply following; tat—this fact; vidvän—he who is in
knowledge of; na calet—should not deviate; märgät—from the path;
anvaçikñam—I have learned; kñiteù—from the earth; vratam—this fixed
practice.
TRANSLATION
A sober person, even when harassed by other living beings, should
understand that his aggressors are acting helplessly under the control of God,
and thus he should never be distracted from progress on his own path. This rule
I have learned from the earth.
PURPORT
The earth is the symbol of tolerance. By deep oil-drilling, atomic explosions,
pollution, and so on, the earth is constantly harassed by demoniac living
entities. Sometimes lush forests are cut down by greedy men with commercial
interests, and thus a wasteland is created. Sometimes the earth's surface is
soaked by the blood of soldiers fighting in savage warfare. Yet, despite all these
disturbances, the earth continues to provide all the necessities of the living
beings. In this way one may learn the art of tolerance by studying the earth.
TEXT 38
zAìtpar"ATaRs$avaeRh":
par"ATaE=k(Antas$amBava:
s$aADau: izAºaeta BaUBa{ÔaAe
nagAizASya: par"AtmataAma,
çaçvat parärtha-sarvehaù
parärthaikänta-sambhavaù
sädhuù çikñeta bhü-bhåtto
naga-çiñyaù parätmatäm
SYNONYMS
çaçvat—always; para—of others; artha—for the sake; sarva-éhaù—all of one's
efforts; para-artha—the benefit of others; ekänta—sole; sambhavaù—reason
for living; sädhuù—a saintly person; çikñeta—should learn; bhü-bhåttaù—from
the mountain; naga-çiñyaù—the disciple of the tree;
para-ätmatäm—dedication to others.
TRANSLATION
A saintly person should learn from the mountain to devote all his efforts to
the service of others and to make the welfare of others the sole reason for his
existence. Similarly, as the disciple of the tree, he should learn to dedicate
himself to others.
PURPORT
Great mountains bear unlimited quantities of earth, which in turn give
sustenance to innumerable forms of life such as trees, grass, birds, animals, and
so on. Mountains also pour forth unlimited quantities of crystalline water in
the form of waterfalls and rivers, and this water gives life to all. By studying
the example of mountains, one should learn the art of providing for the
happiness of all living entities. Similarly, one may take excellent lessons from
the pious trees, who offer innumerable benefits, such as fruits, flowers, cooling
shade and medicinal extracts. Even when a tree is suddenly cut down and
dragged away, the tree does not protest but continues to give service to others
in the form of firewood. Thus, one should become the disciple of such
magnanimous trees and learn from them the qualities of saintly conduct.
According to Çréla Madhväcärya, the word parärthaikänta-sambhavaù
indicates that one should dedicate all of one's wealth and other assets to the
welfare of others. By one's acquired opulence, one should especially try to
please the spiritual master and the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus, the
demigods, as well as all truly respectable superior personalities, will
automatically be pleased. By developing saintly conduct, as described in this
verse, one will become tolerant, and this will free one from the useless
agitation of the material senses, which drive one to wander throughout the
world searching in vain for material happiness. Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu
has also emphasized the tree's quality of tolerance: taror iva sahiñëunä,
kértanéyaù sadä hariù [Cc. Ädi 17.31]. One who is as tolerant as a tree can chant
the holy name of Kåñëa constantly, finding ever-new satisfaction.
TEXT 39
‘aANAva{ÔyaEva s$antauSyaena,
mauinanaE=$vaein‰"yai‘ayaE:
ÁaAnaM yaTaA na nazyaeta
naAvak(LyaeRta vaAx.~mana:
präëa-våttyaiva santuñyen
munir naivendriya-priyaiù
jïänaà yathä na naçyeta
nävakéryeta väì-manaù
SYNONYMS
präëa-våttyä—with the mere functioning of his vital air; eva—even;
santuñyet—should be satisfied; muniù—a sage; na—not; eva—indeed;
indriya-priyaiù—with things that gratify the senses; jïänam—consciousness;
yathä—so that; na naçyeta—may not be destroyed; na avakéryeta—may not
become disturbed; väk—his speech; manaù—and mind.
TRANSLATION
A learned sage should take his satisfaction in the simple maintenance of his
existence and should not seek satisfaction through gratifying the material
senses. In other words, one should care for the material body in such a way that
one's higher knowledge is not destroyed and so that one's speech and mind are
not deviated from self-realization.
PURPORT
A wise man does not absorb his consciousness in the forms, flavors, aromas
and sensations of material sense gratification, but rather accepts activities such
as eating and sleeping simply to keep body and soul together. One must
properly maintain one's body by regulated activities of eating, sleeping,
cleansing, etc., otherwise the mind will become weak, and one's spiritual
knowledge will fade away. If one eats too austerely, or if in the name of
selflessness one accepts impure food, surely one loses control of the mind. On
the other hand, if one eats food that is excessively fatty or rich there will be an
unwanted increase in sleep and semen, and thus the mind and speech will be
overwhelmed by the modes of passion and ignorance. Lord Kåñëa has
summarized the whole matter in Bhagavad-gétä by His statement
yuktähära-vihärasya yukta-ceñöasya karmasu. One should moderately and
intelligently regulate all of one's bodily activities so that they are favorable for
self-realization. This technique is taught by the bona fide spiritual master. If
one is too austere or if one engages too much in sense gratification,
self-realization is impossible.
It is the duty of a devotee of the Lord to avoid seeing any object as separate
from Kåñëa, because that is illusion. A gentleman will never try to enjoy the
property of another gentleman. Similarly, if one sees everything in relation to
Kåñëa, there is no scope for material sense gratification. But if one sees
material objects as separate from Kåñëa, then one's material enjoying
propensity is immediately aroused. A human being must be intelligent enough
to distinguish between preyas, or temporary gratification, and çreyas,
permanent benefit. One may accept sense activity in a regulated, limited
fashion so that one will be strong for serving Kåñëa, but if one excessively
indulges the material senses, one will lose one's gravity and seriousness in
spiritual life and act like an ordinary materialist. The ultimate goal, as stated
here, is jïänam, or steady consciousness of the Absolute Truth, Lord Kåñëa.
TEXT 40
ivaSayaeSvaAivazAna, yaAegAI
naAnaADamaeRSau s$avaRta:
gAuNAd"AeSavyapaetaAtmaA
na ivaSaÀaeta vaAyauvata,
viñayeñv äviçan yogé
nänä-dharmeñu sarvataù
guëa-doña-vyapetätmä
na viñajjeta väyu-vat
SYNONYMS
viñayeñu—into contact with material objects; äviçan—entering; yogé—one who
has attained self-control; nänä-dharmeñu—which have different varieties of
qualities; sarvataù—everywhere; guëa—good qualities; doña—and faults;
vyapeta-ätmä—a person who has transcended; na viñajjeta—should not become
entangled; väyu-vat—like the wind.
TRANSLATION
Even a transcendentalist is surrounded by innumerable material objects,
which possess good and bad qualities. However, one who has transcended
material good and evil should not become entangled even when in contact with
the material objects; rather, he should act like the wind.
PURPORT
The wind is the external manifestation of air, whereas präëa is the internal
manifestation. When the wind passes over waterfalls it carries sprinkles of
clear water and thus becomes most refreshing. Sometimes the wind blows
through a beautiful forest, carrying the fragrances of fruits and flowers; at
other times the wind may fuel a fire that burns the same forest to ashes. The
wind, however, being fixed in its own nature, remains neutral in both its
auspicious and inauspicious activities. Similarly, within this material world we
will inevitably face both pleasing and disgusting situations. If, however, we
remain fixed in Kåñëa consciousness, we will not be disturbed by the
inauspicious, nor will we become attached to the materially auspicious. In the
course of his spiritual duties, a devotee sometimes finds himself chanting Hare
Kåñëa in a beautiful country atmosphere, and sometimes he finds himself doing
the same thing in a hellish city. In both cases the devotee fixes his mind upon
Lord Kåñëa and experiences transcendental bliss. Although the wind passes
through the most dark and forbidding places, the wind is not frightened or
disturbed. Similarly, a devotee of Lord Kåñëa should never be fearful or
anxious, even when in the most difficult situation. One who is attached to
materially pleasing forms, tastes, smells, sounds and touches will also be
repelled by the opposite in each category. Thus finding himself surrounded by
innumerable good and bad things, the materialist is constantly disturbed.
When the wind blows in many directions at once, the atmosphere becomes
agitated. Similarly, if the mind is constantly attracted and repelled by material
objects there will be such mental disturbance that it will be impossible to think
of the Absolute Truth. Therefore, one should learn from the blowing wind the
art of moving throughout the material world without attachment.
TEXT 41
paAiTaR"vaeiSvah" de"he"Sau
‘aivaí"staÖ"NAA™aya:
gAuNAEnaR yaujyatae yaAegAI
gAnDaEvaARyauir"vaAtmaä{"k,(
pärthiveñv iha deheñu
praviñöas tad-guëäçrayaù
guëair na yujyate yogé
gandhair väyur ivätma-dåk
SYNONYMS
pärthiveñu—composed of earth (and other elements); iha—in this world;
deheñu—within bodies; praviñöaù—having entered; tat—of them; guëa—the
characteristic qualities; äçrayaù—having assumed; guëaiù—with those
qualities; na yujyate—does not entangle himself; yogé—a yogé; gandhaiù—with
different odors; väyuù—the air; iva—just as; ätma-dåk—he who can see
himself properly (as separate from this matter).
TRANSLATION
Although a self-realized soul may live in various material bodies while in this
world, experiencing their various qualities and functions, he is never entangled,
just as the wind which carries various aromas does not actually mix with them.
PURPORT
Although we experience the wind as fragrant or foul, depending on the
aromas it carries, the wind does not in fact change its actual nature. Similarly,
although we regard a particular person as strong or weak, intelligent or
retarded, beautiful or homely, good or bad, the pure spirit soul, who is the
actual person, does not really possess any of the qualities of the body but is
merely covered by them, just as the wind is covered by different aromas. Thus,
a Kåñëa conscious person is always aware that he is different from the
temporary body. He experiences the various transformations of the body, such
as childhood, adolescence, adulthood and old age; but although he experiences
the pains, pleasures, qualities and functions of that body, a Kåñëa conscious
person never thinks that he is the body. He always understands that he is an
eternal spirit soul, part and parcel of Lord Kåñëa. As stated in this verse, na
yujyate yogé: he is not entangled. The conclusion is that one should never
consider a Kåñëa conscious person in terms of bodily designation, but should
see him as an eternal servitor of the Lord.
TEXT 42
@ntaihR"taê isTar"jaËÿmaeSau
“aöAtmaBaAvaena s$amanvayaena
vyaAptyaAvyavacCe$d"mas$aËÿmaAtmanaAe
mauinanaRBastvaM ivatatasya BaAvayaeta,
antarhitaç ca sthira-jaìgameñu
brahmätma-bhävena samanvayena
vyäptyävyavacchedam asaìgam ätmano
munir nabhastvaà vitatasya bhävayet
SYNONYMS
antarhitaù—present within; ca—also; sthira—all nonmoving living bodies;
jaìgameñu—and all moving forms of life; brahma-ätma-bhävena—by
realization that he himself is pure spirit; samanvayena—as a result of the
different contacts (with different bodies); vyäptyä—because of being
all-pervading; avyavacchedam—the feature of being undivided;
asaìgam—being unattached; ätmanaù—possessed by the Supersoul; muniù—a
sage; nabhastvam—the similarity with the sky; vitatasya—of the expansive;
bhävayet—should meditate upon.
TRANSLATION
A thoughtful sage, even while living within a material body, should
understand himself to be pure spirit soul. Similarly, one should see that the
spirit soul enters within all forms of life, both moving and nonmoving, and that
the individual souls are thus all-pervading. The sage should further observe that
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as the Supersoul, is simultaneously
present within all things. Both the individual soul and the Supersoul can be
understood by comparing them to the nature of the sky: although the sky
extends everywhere and everything rests within the sky, the sky does not mix
with anything, nor can it be divided by anything.
PURPORT
Although air exists within the sky, the sky, or space, is different from air.
Even in the absence of air, space or sky is present. All material objects are
situated within space, or within the vast material sky, but the sky remains
undivided and, although accommodating all objects, never actually mixes with
anything. In the same way one can understand the situation of both the
individual soul and the Supersoul. The individual soul is all-pervading, because
there are innumerable jévätmäs, which enter within all things; yet, as
confirmed in Vedic literature, each individual ätmä remains infinitesimal. The
Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad (5.9) states,
bälägra-çata-bhagasya
çatadhä kalpitasya ca
bhago jévaù sa vijïeyaù
sa cänantyäya kalpate
"When the upper point of a hair is divided into one hundred parts and again
each of such parts is further divided into one hundred parts, each such part is
the measurement of the dimension of the spirit soul." The same is stated in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam:
keçägra-çata-bhägasya
çatäàçaù sädåçätmakaù
jévaù sükñma-svarüpo 'yaà
saìkhyätéto hi cit-kaëaù
[Cc. Madhya 19.140]
"There are innumerable particles of spiritual atoms, which are measured as one
ten-thousandth of the upper portion of the hair."
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, however. is all-pervading because He
Himself is personally present everywhere. The Lord is known as advaita, or
indivisible. Thus the same unique Personality of Godhead exists everywhere,
just like the sky, and yet is not attached to anything, although everything is
resting within Him. The Lord Himself has confirmed this analysis of His
all-pervasiveness in Bhagavad-gétä (9.6):
yathäkäça-sthito nityaà
väyuù sarvatra-go mahän
tathä sarväëi bhütäni
mat-sthänéty upadhäraya
"As the almighty wind, blowing everywhere, always rests in ethereal space,
know that in the same manner all beings rest in Me."
Therefore, although both the jéva soul and the Supersoul are said to be
all-pervading, it should be remembered that there are innumerable individual
jéva souls, whereas there is only one Supreme Personality of Godhead. The
Lord is always supreme, and one who is actually a thoughtful sage never doubts
the supreme position of the Lord.
TEXT 43
taejaAe'baªamayaEBaAR$vaEr,"
maeGaAâEvaARyaunaeir"taE:
na s$pa{zyatae naBastaã"ta,
k(Alas$a{íE"gAuRNAE: paumaAna,
tejo-'b-anna-mayair bhävair
meghädyair väyuneritaiù
na spåçyate nabhas tadvat
käla-såñöair guëaiù pumän
SYNONYMS
tejaù—fire; ap—water; anna—and earth; mayaiù—consisting of; bhävaiù—by
objects; megha-ädyaiù—clouds and so on; väyunä—by the wind; éritaiù—which
are blown; na spåçyate—is not touched; nabhaù—the ethereal sky; tat-vat—in
the same way; käla-såñöaiù—which have been sent forth by time; guëaiù—by
the modes of nature; pumän—a person.
TRANSLATION
Although the mighty wind blows clouds and storms across the sky, the sky is
never implicated or affected by these activities. Similarly, the spirit soul is not
actually changed or affected by contact with the material nature. Although the
living entity enters within a body made of earth, water and fire, and although
he is impelled by the three modes of nature created by eternal time, his eternal
spiritual nature is never actually affected.
PURPORT
Although the sky appears to be affected by the mighty movements of wind,
rain, hurricanes, lightning and thunder, etc., the sky, being very subtle, is
actually not affected, but is rather the background for such visible activities.
Similarly, although the material body and mind undergo innumerable changes,
such as birth and death, happiness and distress, love and hate, the eternal
living entity is merely the background for such activities. The spirit soul, being
most subtle, is not actually affected; only due to misidentification with the
superficial activities of the body and mind does the soul undergo terrible
distress within the material world.
In this regard, Çréla Madhväcärya has pointed out that the individual living
entity must struggle to revive his divine spiritual qualities. The living entity is
part and parcel of the supreme entity, called Kåñëa, and as such the individual
soul is also a reservoir of godly qualities. The Personality of Godhead, however,
automatically manifests these qualities without any hindrance, whereas the
conditioned soul must struggle to revive such qualities. Thus, although both
the Personality of Godhead and the personality of the living entity are eternal
and transcendental, the Personality of Godhead is always supreme. By realizing
all this with clear intelligence, the conditioned soul can rise to the spiritual
platform.
TEXT 44
svacC$: ‘ak{(itata: iµagDaAe
maADauyaRstaITaRBaUna{RNAAma,
mauina: paunaAtyapaAM ima‡ama,
wRºaAepas$pazARk(LtaR$naE:
svacchaù prakåtitaù snigdho
mädhuryas tértha-bhür nåëäm
muniù punäty apäà mitram
ékñopasparça-kértanaiù
SYNONYMS
svacchaù—pure; prakåtitaù—by nature; snigdhaù—soft or softhearted;
mädhuryaù—sweet or gentle speech; tértha-bhüù—a place of pilgrimage;
nåëäm—for human beings; muniù—a sage; punäti—sanctifies; apäm—of the
water; mitram—the exact counterpart; ékñä—by being seen; upasparça—by
being respectfully touched; kértanaiù—and by being glorified verbally.
TRANSLATION
O King, a saintly person is just like water because he is free from all
contamination, gentle by nature, and by speaking creates a beautiful vibration
like that of flowing water. Just by seeing, touching or hearing such a saintly
person, the living entity is purified, just as one is cleansed by contact with pure
water. Thus a saintly person, just like a holy place, purifies all those who
contact him because he always chants the glories of the Lord.
PURPORT
The words apäà mitram, "just like water," can also be read as aghän mitram,
which means that a saintly person purifies all living entities by accepting them
as mitram, or his personal friends, and saves them from their sinful reactions
(aghät). The conditioned living entity falsely identifies with his gross material
body and subtle mind and thus falls from the platform of spiritual knowledge.
A conditioned living being is always lusty for material sense gratification, and
if he does not acquire it, he becomes angry. Sometimes he is so obsessed with
fear of losing his material gratification that he enters a stage approaching
madness.
A saintly person, however, is like pure water, free from all contamination
and capable of purifying all things. Just as pure water is transparent, a saintly
person transparently manifests the Personality of Godhead within his heart.
Such love of Godhead is the reservoir of all happiness. Water makes a most
pleasing vibration as it flows and cascades, and similarly the sound vibration of
the Lord's pure devotee, who is saturated with the glories of the Lord, is most
charming and beautiful. Thus, by studying the nature of water one can
understand the symptoms of a pure devotee of the Lord.
TEXT 45
taejasvaI tapas$aA d"IæaAe
äu"DaRSaAeRd"r"BaAjana:
s$avaRBaºyaAe'ipa yaul(AtmaA
naAd"Ôae malamai¢avata,
tejasvé tapasä dépto
durdharñodara-bhäjanaù
sarva-bhakñyo 'pi yuktätmä
nädatte malam agni-vat
SYNONYMS
tejasvé—brilliantly luminous; tapasä—by his austerity; déptaù—glowing;
durdharña—unshakable; udara-bhäjanaù—eating only that needed by his
stomach; sarva—everything; bhakñyaù—eating; api—even though;
yukta-ätmä—one who is fixed in spiritual life; na ädatte—does not assume;
malam—contamination; agni-vat—like the fire.
TRANSLATION
Saintly persons become powerful by execution of austerities. Their
consciousness is unshakable because they do not try to enjoy anything within
the material world. Such naturally liberated sages accept foodstuffs that are
offered to them by destiny, and if by chance they happen to eat contaminated
food, they are not affected, just like fire, which burns up contaminated
substances that are offered to it.
PURPORT
The word udara-bhäjana indicates that a saintly person eats only to keep
body and soul together and not for sense gratification. One should eat
palatable foodstuffs to maintain one's mind in a cheerful mood; however, one
should not eat luxuriously, because this will cause sex desire and laziness. A
saintly person is always a perfect gentleman and is never greedy or lusty.
Although mäyä tries to defeat him by offering different material allurements,
ultimately these attractive material features are themselves defeated by the
spiritual power of a saintly person. Thus one should never disrespect a
spiritually advanced personality but should worship him reverentially. To
carelessly approach a Kåñëa conscious personality is just like carelessly
approaching fire, which immediately burns if not handled properly. The Lord
does not excuse mistreatment of a pure devotee.
TEXT 46
¸(icacC$ªa: ¸(icats$paí"
opaAsya: ™aeya wcC$taAma,
BauÈeÿ s$avaR‡a d"Ata{NAAM
d"h"na, ‘aAgAuÔar"AzAuBama,
kvacic channaù kvacit spañöa
upäsyaù çreya icchatäm
bhuìkte sarvatra dätåëäà
dahan präg-uttaräçubham
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; channaù—concealed; kvacit—sometimes;
spañöaù—manifest; upäsyaù—worshipable; çreyaù—the highest good;
icchatäm—by those desiring; bhuìkte—he devours; sarvatra—on all sides;
dätèëäm—of those making offerings to him; dahan—burning; präk—previous;
uttara—and future; açubham—sinful reactions.
TRANSLATION
A saintly person, just like fire, sometimes appears in a concealed form and at
other times reveals himself. For the welfare of the conditioned souls who desire
real happiness, a saintly person may accept the worshipable position of spiritual
master, and thus like fire he burns to ashes all the past and future sinful
reactions of his worshipers by mercifully accepting their offerings.
PURPORT
A saintly person prefers to conceal his exalted spiritual position, but to
instruct the suffering people of the world he sometimes reveals his own
greatness. This is compared to a fire that sometimes burns unnoticed beneath
ashes and sometimes blazes openly. Just as fire devours the ghee and other
offerings given by the performers of sacrifice, similarly a saintly person accepts
the praise offered by his conditioned followers, knowing that in fact all praise
is meant for the Supreme Lord, Kåñëa. Although an ordinary person
immediately becomes puffed up and foolish when he is praised, such
inauspicious tendencies within a saintly person are burned to ashes by his
attachment to the Absolute Truth. In this way, he is just like fire.
TEXT 47
svamaAyayaA s$a{í"imadM"
s$ad"s$aéaºaNAM ivaBau:
‘aivaí" wRyatae taÔata,-
svaè&paAe'i¢air"vaEDais$a
sva-mäyayä såñöam idaà
sad-asal-lakñaëaà vibhuù
praviñöa éyate tat-tatsvarüpo
'gnir ivaidhasi
SYNONYMS
sva-mäyayä—by His own material energy; såñöam—created; idam—this (body
of the individual jéva); sat-asat—as demigod, animal, and so on;
lakñaëam—characterized; vibhuù—the Almighty; praviñöaù—having entered;
éyate—appears; tat-tat—of each different form; svarüpaù—assuming the
identity; agniù—fire; iva—as; edhasi—in firewood.
TRANSLATION
Just as fire manifests differently in pieces of wood of different sizes and
qualities, the omnipotent Supreme Soul, having entered the bodies of higher
and lower life forms created by His own potency, appears to assume the identity
of each.
PURPORT
Although the Supreme Lord is within everything, everything is not the
Lord. By the mode of goodness the Lord creates the exalted material bodies of
demigods and brähmaëas, and by expanding the mode of ignorance He
similarly creates the bodies of animals, çüdras and other lower forms of life.
The Lord enters all of these superior and inferior creations, but He remains
vibhu, the all-powerful Personality of Godhead. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté
Öhäkura explains that although fire is present within smoldering wood, it
blazes forth when we stir the wood around. Similarly, although the Personality
of Godhead is indirectly present everywhere, when we chant and hear His
glories with love and devotion the Lord is stirred into manifestation and
directly appears before His devotees.
The foolish conditioned souls ignore the spectacular presence of the Lord
within everything and instead absorb their mediocre consciousness in their
own temporary material coverings, thinking, "I am a strong man," "I am a
beautiful woman," "I am the richest man in this city," "I am a Ph.D.," and so on.
One should cut off such useless entanglement and accept the fact that one is
pure spirit soul, the eternal, blissful servant of Lord Kåñëa.
TEXT 48
ivas$agAARâA: zmazAAnaAntaA
BaAvaA de"h"sya naAtmana:
k(laAnaAimava can‰"sya
k(AlaenaAvyal(vatmaRnaA
visargädyäù çmaçänäntä
bhävä dehasya nätmanaù
kalänäm iva candrasya
kälenävyakta-vartmanä
SYNONYMS
visarga—birth; ädyäù—beginning with; çmaçäna—the time of death, when the
body is burned to ashes; antäù—ending with; bhäväù—the states; dehasya—of
the body; na—not; ätmanaù—of the soul; kalänäm—of the different phases;
iva—as; candrasya—of the moon; kälena—by time; avyakta—imperceptible;
vartmanä—whose movement.
TRANSLATION
The various phases of one's material life, beginning with birth and
culminating in death, are all properties of the body and do not affect the soul,
just as the apparent waxing and waning of the moon does not affect the moon
itself. Such changes are enforced by the imperceptible movements of time.
PURPORT
The body undergoes six changes: birth, growth, maintenance, production of
by-products, dwindling and death. Similarly, the moon appears to grow,
diminish and finally disappear. Since moonlight is a lunar reflection of
sunlight, it is understood that the moon itself does not grow or diminish;
rather, we perceive the reflection of the moon in various phases. Similarly, the
eternal soul is not born, nor does it die, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (2.20):
na jäyate mriyate vä kadäcit. We perceive the reflection of the soul in the form
of the gross material body and the subtle mind, which undergo various material
changes.
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, the sun is a fiery planet and the moon is
a watery planet. This is also confirmed by Çréla Jéva Gosvämé and further
illustrates the ignorance of modern science about the actual nature of the
moon planet.
TEXT 49
k(Alaena ÷AeGavaegAena
BaUtaAnaAM ‘aBavaApyayaAE
inatyaAvaipa na ä{"zyaetae
@AtmanaAe'¢aeyaRTaAicaRSaAma,
kälena hy ogha-vegena
bhütänäà prabhaväpyayau
nityäv api na dåçyete
ätmano 'gner yathärciñäm
SYNONYMS
kälena—by time; hi—indeed; ogha—like a flood; vegena—whose speed;
bhütänäm—of created bodies; prabhava—the birth; apyayau—and demise;
nityau—constant; api—although; na dåçyete—are not seen; ätmanaù—related
to the spirit soul; agneù—of fire; yathä—just as; arciñäm—of the flames.
TRANSLATION
The flames of a fire appear and disappear at every moment, and yet this
creation and destruction is not noticed by the ordinary observer. Similarly, the
mighty waves of time flow constantly, like the powerful currents of a river, and
imperceptibly cause the birth, growth and death of innumerable material bodies.
And yet the soul, who is thus constantly forced to change his position, cannot
perceive the actions of time.
PURPORT
The brähmaëa avadhüta instructing King Yadu again gives the example of
fire after having already proceeded to the example of the moon. This analytic
method is called siàhävalokana, or "the lion's glance," by which one
simultaneously proceeds forward and casts backward glances to see if anything
has been overlooked. Thus the sage proceeds with his analysis but returns to
the example of fire to illustrate the need for renunciation. The material body
is certainly an ephemeral and phantasmagorical manifestation of the Lord's
external potency. The flames of a fire constantly take birth and disappear, yet
we perceive the fire as a continuous reality. Similarly, the soul is a continuous
reality, although his material bodies appear and disappear constantly, by the
influence of time. It is said that the most astonishing thing is that no one
thinks that they will die. Because the soul is eternal, the living entity is prone
to accept any fleeting situation as permanent, forgetting that his eternal
nature can be truly experienced only in the eternal atmosphere of the spiritual
sky. If one is convinced of this fact, he develops the quality of vairägya, or
detachment from material illusion.
TEXT 50
gAuNAEgAuRNAAnaupaAd"Ôae
yaTaAk(AlaM ivamauÂaita
na taeSau yaujyatae yaAegAI
gAAeiBagAAR wva gAAepaita:
guëair guëän upädatte
yathä-kälaà vimuïcati
na teñu yujyate yogé
gobhir gä iva go-patiù
SYNONYMS
guëaiù—by his senses; guëän—material sense objects; upädatte—accepts;
yathä-kälam—at the proper time; vimuïcati—gives them up; na—he does not;
teñu—in them; yujyate—become entangled; yogé—a self-realized sage;
gobhiù—by his rays; gäù—bodies of water; iva—as; go-patiù—the sun.
TRANSLATION
Just as the sun evaporates large quantities of water by its potent rays and
later returns the water to the earth in the form of rain, similarly, a saintly
person accepts all types of material objects with his material senses, and at the
appropriate time, when the proper person has approached him to request them,
he returns such material objects. Thus, both in accepting and giving up the
objects of the senses, he is not entangled.
PURPORT
A Kåñëa conscious person never feels proprietorship over the opulences
entrusted to him by Lord Kåñëa for spreading the Kåñëa consciousness
movement. The devotees of Lord Kåñëa should not merely accumulate material
wealth, but should distribute the opulences of Lord Kåñëa in such a way that
the Kåñëa consciousness movement spreads unlimitedly. This is a lesson to be
learned from the sun.
TEXT 51
bauDyatae svae na Baede"na
vyail(sTa wva taÕ"ta:
laºyatae sTaUlamaitaiBar,"
@AtmaA caAvaisTataAe'kR(vata,
budhyate sve na bhedena
vyakti-stha iva tad-gataù
lakñyate sthüla-matibhir
ätmä cävasthito 'rka-vat
SYNONYMS
budhyate—is thought of; sve—in his original form; na—not; bhedena—in
terms of diversity; vyakti—on separate reflecting objects; sthaù—situated;
iva—apparently; tat-gataù—actually having entered within them;
lakñyate—seems; sthüla-matibhiù—to those whose intelligence is dull;
ätmä—the self; ca—also; avasthitaù—situated; arkavat—like the sun.
TRANSLATION
Even when reflected in various objects, the sun is never divided, nor does it
merge into its reflection. Only those with dull brains would consider the sun in
this way. Similarly, although the soul is reflected through different material
bodies, the soul remains undivided and nonmaterial.
PURPORT
The sun is reflected in many objects, such as windows, mirrors, shiny metal,
oil, water, and so on, yet the sun remains one and indivisible. Similarly, the
eternal spirit soul within the body is reflected through the screen of the
material body. Thus the soul appears to be old or young, fat or skinny, happy or
sad. The soul may appear to be American, Russian, African, Hindu or
Christian; however, the eternal soul in its natural position is free of any
material designation.
The word sthüla-matibhiù in this verse indicates those whose intelligence is
gross and dull. We have practical experience of a dog urinating on a valuable
painting at an outdoor art show. Due to its dull intelligence, the dog could not
appreciate the actual value of the painting. Similarly, unless one takes to
Kåñëa consciousness, one is grossly misusing the invaluable opportunity of
human life. Human life is meant for self-realization, and we should not waste
time bickering over material designations such as capitalist, communist,
American, Russian, and so on. Instead, all people should take to the loving
devotional service of God and realize their eternal, pure identity. One should
understand the sun by observing its direct manifestation and not its distorted
reflection on material objects. Similarly, one should consider every living
being in terms of his pure spiritual identity beyond the distorted manifestation
of material designations.
The word ätmä in this verse also refers to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Just as we tend to observe ordinary jéva souls through the reflection
of the material body, we tend to observe the Personality of Godhead through
the distorting screen of our material mind. Thus, we imagine God to be
impersonal or material or unknowable. When the sky is overcast, sunlight is
the highest possible perception of the sun, which is covered by clouds.
Similarly, when one's mind is fogged over with mental speculation one may
take the light emanating from the transcendental body of God to be the
highest spiritual truth. However, when the mind is spotlessly clear like a
cloudless blue sky, one can see the actual form of the Personality of Godhead,
Lord Kåñëa. The Absolute Truth cannot be perfectly understood by the
covered mind of the conditioned soul; rather, one must see the Lord through
the clear blue sky of pure Kåñëa consciousness, which is free from fruitive
desires and mental speculation. Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura sings,
jévera kalyäëa-sädhana-käma
jagate äsi ' e madhura näma
avidyä-timira-täpana-rüpe
håd-gagane viräje
"The holy name of Lord Kåñëa descends into the darkness of the material
world just to benedict the conditioned souls. The holy name of Lord Kåñëa is
just like the sun that rises in the clear sky of the heart of the devotees." Such
brilliant knowledge cannot be understood by those who are trying, in the name
of either piety or atheism, to exploit the material creation of the Lord. One
must become a pure devotee of Lord Kåñëa, and then his knowledge will
illuminate everything in all directions: yasmin vijïäte sarvam evam vijïätaà
bhavati (Muëòaka Upaniñad 1.3).
TEXT 52
naAitaµaeh": ‘as$aËÿAe vaA
k(taRvya: ¸(Aipa ke(naicata,
ku(vaRna, ivande"ta s$antaApaM
k(paAeta wva d"InaDaI:
näti-snehaù prasaìgo vä
kartavyaù kväpi kenacit
kurvan vindeta santäpaà
kapota iva déna-dhéù
SYNONYMS
na—not; ati-snehaù—excess affection; prasaìgaù—close association; vä—or;
kartavyaù—one should manifest; kva api—ever; kenacit—with anyone or
anything; kurvan—so doing; vindeta—one will experience; santäpam—great
distress; kapotaù—the pigeon; iva—just as; déna-dhéù—cripple-minded.
TRANSLATION
One should never indulge in excessive affection or concern for anyone or
anything; otherwise one will have to experience great suffering, just like the
foolish pigeon.
PURPORT
The Sanskrit prefix ati, or "excessive," indicates affection or attachment in
which there is no Kåñëa consciousness. Lord Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä
(5.29), suhådaà sarva-bhütänäm: the Lord is the eternal well-wisher of every
living being. The Lord is so affectionate that He sits in the heart of every
conditioned soul and accompanies him throughout his endless wandering in
the kingdom of mäyä, patiently waiting for the conditioned soul to come back
home, back to Godhead. Thus the Lord makes all arrangements for the eternal
happiness of every living entity. The best way for anyone to show compassion
and affection for all living beings is to become a preacher on behalf of Lord
Kåñëa and assist the Lord in reclaiming the fallen souls. If our affection or
attachment for others is based on bodily sense gratification, in the name of
society, friendship and love, that excessive, unwanted affection (ati-sneha) will
cause burning pain at the time of the breaking or destruction of the
relationship. Now the story of the foolish pigeon will be narrated. A similar
story is described in the Seventh Canto, Second Chapter of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, told by Yamaräja to the mourning widows of King
Suyajïa.
TEXT 53
k(paAeta: k(ênaAr"Nyae
k{(tanaIx"Ae vanas$pataAE
k(paAetyaA BaAyaRyaA s$aADaRma,
ovaAs$a k(itaicats$amaA:
kapotaù kaçcanäraëye
kåta-néòo vanaspatau
kapotyä bhäryayä särdham
uväsa katicit samäù
SYNONYMS
kapotaù—pigeon; kaçcana—a certain; araëye—in the forest;
kåta-néòaù—having built his nest; vanaspatau—in a tree; kapotyä—with a
female pigeon; bhäryayä—his wife; sa-ardham—as his companion; uväsa—he
dwelled; katicit—for some; samäù—years.
TRANSLATION
There once was a pigeon who lived in the forest along with his wife. He had
built a nest within a tree and lived there for several years in her company.
TEXT 54
k(paAetaAE µaeh"gAuiNAtaô$
d"yaAE gA{h"DaimaRNAAE
ä{"iíM" ä{"í"YaAËÿmaËeÿna
bauiÜM" bauÜ"YaA babanDatau:
kapotau sneha-guëitahådayau
gåha-dharmiëau
dåñöià dåñöyäìgam aìgena
buddhià buddhyä babandhatuù
SYNONYMS
kapotau—the two pigeons; sneha—by affection; guëita—tied together as if by
ropes; hådayau—their hearts; gåha-dharmiëau—attached householders;
dåñöim—glance; dåñöyä—by glance; aìgam—physical body; aìgena—by the
other's body; buddhim—mind; buddhyä—by the other's mind;
babandhatuù—they bound each other.
TRANSLATION
The two pigeons were very much devoted to their household duties. Their
hearts being tied together by sentimental affection, they were each attracted by
the other's glances, bodily features and states of mind. Thus, they completely
bound each other in affection.
PURPORT
The male and female pigeon were so attracted to each other that they could
not tolerate even a moment's separation from one another. This is called
bhagavad-vismåti, or forgetfulness of the Supreme Lord and attachment to dead
matter. The living entity has an eternal love for the Lord, but when perverted,
that love is manifested as false material affection. A pale reflection of actual
pleasure thus becomes the foundation of a false life based on forgetfulness of
the Absolute Truth.
TEXT 55
zAyyaAs$anaAq%nasTaAna
vaAtaAR‚(Lx"AzAnaAid"k(ma,
imaTaunaIBaUya iva™abDaAE
caer"tauvaRnar"AijaSau
çayyäsanäöana-sthäna
värtä-kréòäçanädikam
mithuné-bhüya viçrabdhau
ceratur vana-räjiñu
SYNONYMS
çayyä—resting; äsana—sitting; aöana—walking; sthäna—standing;
värtä—conversing; kréòä—playing; açana—eating; ädikam—and so on;
mithuné-bhüya—together as a couple; viçrabdhau—trusting; ceratuù—they
performed; vana—of the forest; räjiñu—among the groves of trees.
TRANSLATION
Naively trusting in the future, they carried out their acts of resting, sitting,
walking, standing, conversing, playing, eating and so forth as a loving couple
among the trees of the forest.
TEXT 56
yaM yaM vaAHC$ita s$aA r"Ajana,
tapaRyantyanauk(impataA
taM taM s$amanayatk(AmaM
k{(cC)e$NAApyaijataein‰"ya:
yaà yaà väïchati sä räjan
tarpayanty anukampitä
taà taà samanayat kämaà
kåcchreëäpy ajitendriyaù
SYNONYMS
yam yam—whatever; väïchati—would want; sä—she; räjan—O King;
tarpayanté—pleasing; anukampitä—being shown mercy; tam tam—that;
samanayat—brought; kämam—her desire; kåcchreëa—with difficulty;
api—even; ajita-indriyaù—having never learned to control his senses.
TRANSLATION
Whenever she desired anything, O King, the she-pigeon would flatteringly
cajole her husband, and he in turn would gratify her by faithfully doing
whatever she wanted, even with great personal difficulty. Thus, he could not
control his senses in her association.
PURPORT
The word tarpayanté indicates that the lady pigeon was quite expert in
seducing her husband through smiling glances and loving talks. Thus appealing
to his noble sentiments, she efficiently engaged him as her faithful servant.
The poor pigeon was ajitendriya, or one who cannot control his senses and
whose heart is easily melted by the beauty of a woman. The brähmaëa avadhüta
is giving valuable instructions by narrating this story of the two pigeons and
the terrible distress they suffered by inevitable separation. If one's intelligence
is not dedicated to serving Håñékeça, the Supreme Lord of sense activity,
undoubtedly one will plunge into the nescience of bodily gratification. Then
one becomes no better than a foolish pigeon.
TEXT 57
k(paAetaI ‘aTamaM gABa<
gA{õ"ntaI k(Ala @AgAtae
@Nx"Aina s$auSauvae naIxe"
stapatyau: s$aiªaDaAE s$ataI
kapoté prathamaà garbhaà
gåhëanté käla ägate
aëòäni suñuve néòe
sta-patyuù sannidhau saté
SYNONYMS
kapoté—the female pigeon; prathamam—her first; garbham—pregnancy;
gåhëanté—carrying; käle—when the time (for delivery); ägate-had come;
aëòäni—eggs; suñuve—she delivered; néòe—in the nest; sva-patyuù—of her
husband; sannidhau—in the presence; saté—the chaste.
TRANSLATION
Then the female pigeon experienced her first pregnancy. When the time
arrived, the chaste lady delivered a number of eggs within the nest in the
presence of her husband.
TEXT 58
taeSau k(Alae vyajaAyanta
r"icataAvayavaA h"re":
zAil(iBaäuR"ivaRBaAvyaAiBa:
k(AemalaAËÿtanaUç&h"A:
teñu käle vyajäyanta
racitävayavä hareù
çaktibhir durvibhävyäbhiù
komaläìga-tanüruhäù
SYNONYMS
teñu—from those eggs; käle—in time; vyajäyanta—were born;
racita—produced; avayaväù—(children) whose limbs; hareù—of the Supreme
Lord, Hari; çaktibhiù—by the potencies; durvibhävyäbhiù—which are
inconceivable; komala—tender; aìga—whose limbs; tanüruhäù—and feathers.
TRANSLATION
When the time was ripe, baby pigeons, with tender limbs and feathers
created by the inconceivable potencies of the Lord, were born from those eggs.
TEXT 59
‘ajaA: paupauSatau: ‘aItaAE
d"mpataI pau‡avats$alaAE
Za{NvantaAE kU(ijataM taAs$aAM
inava{RtaAE k(laBaAiSataE:
prajäù pupuñatuù prétau
dampaté putra-vatsalau
çåëvantau küjitaà täsäà
nirvåtau kala-bhäñitaiù
SYNONYMS
prajäù—their progeny; pupuñatuù—they nourished; prétau—very pleased;
dam-paté—the couple; putra—to their children; vatsalau—compassionate;
çåëvantau—listening; küjitam—to the chirping; täsäm—of their children;
nirvåtau—extremely happy; kala-bhäñitaiù—by the awkward sounds.
TRANSLATION
The two pigeons became most affectionate to their children and took great
pleasure in listening to their awkward chirping, which sounded very sweet to
the parents. Thus with love they began to raise the little birds who were born of
them.
TEXT 60
taAs$aAM pata‡aE: s$aus$pazAE=:
kU(ijataEmauRgDacaeií"taE:
‘atyauÕ"maEr"d"InaAnaAM
ipatar"AE maud"maApatau:
täsäà patatraiù su-sparçaiù
küjitair mugdha-ceñöitaiù
pratyudgamair adénänäà
pitarau mudam äpatuù
SYNONYMS
täsäm—of the little birds; patatraiù—by the wings; su-sparçaiù—gentle to the
touch; küjitaiù—their chirping; mugdha—attractive; ceñöitaiù—by the
activities; pratyudgamaiù—by their efforts to fly by eagerly jumping up;
adénänäm—of the happy (children); pitarau—the parents; mudam
äpatuù—became joyful.
TRANSLATION
The parent birds became very joyful by observing the soft wings of their
children, their chirping, their lovely innocent movements around the nest and
their attempts to jump up and fly. Seeing their children happy, the parents were
also happy.
TEXT 61
µaeh"AnaubaÜ"ô$d"yaAva,
@nyaAenyaM ivaSNAumaAyayaA
ivamaAeih"taAE d"InaiDayaAE
izAzAUna, paupauSatau: ‘ajaA:
snehänubaddha-hådayäv
anyonyaà viñëu-mäyayä
vimohitau déna-dhiyau
çiçün pupuñatuù prajäù
SYNONYMS
sneha—by affection; anubaddha—bound up; hådayau—their hearts;
anyonyam—mutually; viñëu-mäyayä—by the illusory potency of Lord Viñëu;
vimohitau—completely bewildered; déna-dhiyau—weak-minded; çiçün—their
children; pupuñatuù—they nourished; prajäù—their progeny.
TRANSLATION
Their hearts bound to each other by affection, the foolish birds, completely
bewildered by the illusory energy of Lord Viñëu, continued to take care of the
young offspring who had been born to them.
TEXT 62
Wk(d"A jagmataustaAs$aAma,
@ªaATa< taAE ku(q%]imbanaAE
pair"ta: k(Ananae taismaªa,
@iTaRnaAE caer"tauiêr"ma,
ekadä jagmatus täsäm
annärthaà tau kuöumbinau
paritaù känane tasminn
arthinau ceratuç ciram
SYNONYMS
ekadä—once; jagmatuù—they went; täsäm—of the children; anna—food;
artham—for the sake of; tau—the two; kuöumbinau—heads of the family;
paritaù—all around; känane—in the forest; tasmin—that; arthinau—anxiously
searching; ceratuù—they wandered; ciram—far away.
TRANSLATION
One day the two heads of the family went out to find food for the children.
Being very anxious to feed their offspring properly, they wandered all over the
forest for a long time.
TEXT 63
ä{"î"A taAnlaubDak(: k(iêä,"
yaä{"cC$AtaAe vanaecar":
jagA{he" jaAlamaAtatya
car"ta: svaAlayaAintake(
dåñövä tän lubdhakaù kaçcid
yadåcchäto vane-caraù
jagåhe jälam ätatya
carataù svälayäntike
SYNONYMS
dåñövä—seeing; tän—them, the young birds; lubdhakaù—hunter; kaçcit—a
certain; yadåcchätaù—at random; vane—in the forest; caraù—passing;
jagåhe—he seized; jälam—his net; ätatya—having spread out; carataù—who
were moving about; sva-älaya-antike—in the vicinity of their own home.
TRANSLATION
At that time a certain hunter who happened to be wandering through the
forest saw the young pigeons moving about near their nest. Spreading out his
net he captured them all.
TEXT 64
k(paAetaê k(paAetaI ca
‘ajaApaAeSae s$ad"Aets$auk(AE
gAtaAE paAeSaNAmaAd"Aya
svanaIx"maupajagmatau:
kapotaç ca kapoté ca
prajä-poñe sadotsukau
gatau poñaëam ädäya
sva-néòam upajagmatuù
SYNONYMS
kapotaù—the pigeon; ca—and; kapoté—the she-pigeon; ca—and; prajä-of their
children; poñe—in the matter of maintaining; sadä—always; utsukau—eagerly
engaged; gatau—having gone; poñaëam—food; ädäya—bringing; sva—their
own; néòam—to the nest; upajagmatuù—they approached.
TRANSLATION
The pigeon and his wife were always anxious for the maintenance of their
children, and they were wandering in the forest for that purpose. Having
obtained proper food, they now returned to their nest.
TEXT 65
k(paAetaI svaAtmajaAna, vaIºya
baAlak(Ana, jaAlas$amva{taAna,
taAnaByaDaAvat‚(AezAntaI
‚(AezAtaAe Ba{zAäu":iKataA
kapoté svätmajän vékñya
bälakän jäla-samvåtän
tän abhyadhävat kroçanté
kroçato bhåça-duùkhitä
SYNONYMS
kapoté—the female pigeon; sva-ätma-jän—her own offspring; vékñya—seeing;
bälakän—the children; jäla—by the nest; saàvåtän—surrounded;
tän—toward them; abhyadhävat—she ran; kroçanté—calling out;
kroçataù—toward them who were also crying; bhåça—extremely;
duùkhitä—distressed.
TRANSLATION
When the lady pigeon caught sight of her own children trapped within the
hunter's net, she was overwhelmed with anguish, and crying out, she rushed
toward them as they cried out to her in return.
TEXT 66
s$aAs$ak{(tµaeh"gAuiNAtaA
d"InaicaÔaAjamaAyayaA
svayaM caAbaDyata izAcaA
baÜ"Ana, pazyantyapasma{ita:
säsakåt sneha-guëitä
déna-cittäja-mäyayä
svayaà cäbadhyata çicä
baddhän paçyanty apasmåtiù
SYNONYMS
sä—she; asakåt—constantly; sneha—by material affection; guëitä—bound up;
déna-cittä—of crippled intelligence; aja—of the unborn Supreme Lord;
mäyayä—by the illusory potency; svayam—herself; ca—also;
abadhyata—became caught; çicä—by the net; baddhän—the captured
(children); paçyanté—while looking at; apasmåtiù—having forgotten herself.
TRANSLATION
The lady pigeon had always allowed herself to be bound by the ropes of
intense material affection, and thus her mind was overwhelmed by anguish.
Being in the grip of the illusory energy of the Lord, she completely forgot
herself, and rushing forward to her helpless children, she was immediately
bound in the hunter's net.
TEXT 67
k(paAeta: svaAtmajaAna, baÜ"Ana,
@AtmanaAe'pyaiDak(Ana, i‘ayaAna,
BaAyaA< caAtmas$amaAM d"InaAe
ivalalaApaAitaäu":iKata:
kapotaù svätmajän baddhän
ätmano 'py adhikän priyän
bhäryäà cätma-samäà déno
vilaläpäti-duùkhitaù
SYNONYMS
kapotaù—the male pigeon; sva-ätma-jän—his own children; baddhän—bound
up; ätmanaù—than himself; api—even; adhikän—more; priyän—dear;
bhäryäm—his wife; ca—and; ätma-samäm—equal to himself; dénaù—the
unfortunate fellow; vilaläpa—lamented; ati-duùkhitaù—most unhappy.
TRANSLATION
Seeing his own children, who were more dear to him than life itself, fatally
bound in the hunter's net along with his dearmost wife, whom he considered
equal in every way to himself, the poor male pigeon began to lament wretchedly.
TEXT 68
@h"Ae mae pazyataApaAyama,
@lpapauNyasya äu"maRtae:
@ta{æasyaAk{(taATaRsya
gA{h"ñEvaigARk(Ae h"ta:
aho me paçyatäpäyam
alpa-puëyasya durmateù
atåptasyäkåtärthasya
gåhas trai-vargiko hataù
SYNONYMS
aho—alas; me—my; paçyata—just see; apäyam—the destruction;
alpa-puëyasya—of him whose pious credit has been insufficient;
durmateù—unintelligent; atåptasya—unsatisfied; akåta-arthasya—of him who
has not fulfilled the purpose of his life; gåhaù—the family life;
trai-vargikaù—comprising the three aims of civilized existence (religiosity,
economic development and sense gratification); hataù—ruined.
TRANSLATION
The male pigeon said: Alas, just see how I am now destroyed! I am obviously
a great fool, for I did not properly execute pious activities. I could not satisfy
myself, nor could I fulfill the purpose of life. My dear family, which was the
basis of my religiosity, economic development and sense gratification, is now
hopelessly ruined.
PURPORT
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé explains that the word atåptasya indicates that the
pigeon was not satisfied with the sense gratification he had achieved.
Although he was completely attached to his wife, children and nest, he could
not sufficiently enjoy them since there is ultimately no satisfaction in such
things. Akåtärthasya indicates that his hopes and dreams for future expansion
of his sense gratification were now also ruined. People commonly refer to their
"home, sweet home" as their nest, and money put aside for future sense
gratification is called a nest egg. Therefore, all of the love birds of the material
world should clearly note how their so-called wife, children and fortune will all
be dragged away in the hunter's net. In other words, death will finish
everything.
TEXT 69
@nauè&paAnaukU(laA ca
yasya mae paitade"vataA
zAUnyae gA{he" maAM s$antyajya
pau‡aE: svayaARita s$aADauiBa:
anurüpänukülä ca
yasya me pati-devatä
çünye gåhe mäà santyajya
putraiù svar yäti sädhubhiù
SYNONYMS
anurüpä—suitable; anukülä—faithful; ca—and; yasya—of whom; me—of me;
pati-devatä—she who accepted her husband as a worshipable deity;
çünye—empty; gåhe—in the home; mäm—me; santyajya—leaving behind;
putraiù—along with her sons; svaù—to heaven; yäti—is going;
sädhubhiù—saintly.
TRANSLATION
My wife and I were an ideal match. She always faithfully obeyed me and in
fact accepted me as her worshipable deity. But now, seeing her children lost and
her home empty, she has left me behind and gone to heaven with our saintly
children.
TEXT 70
s$aAe'hM" zAUnyae gA{he" d"InaAe
ma{tad"Ar"Ae ma{ta‘aja:
ijajaIivaSae ik(maTa< vaA
ivaDaur"Ae äu":KajaIivata:
so 'haà çünye gåhe déno
måta-däro måta-prajaù
jijéviñe kim arthaà vä
vidhuro duùkha-jévitaù
SYNONYMS
saù aham—myself; çünye—empty; gåhe—in the house; dénaù—wretched;
måta-däraù—my wife dead; måta-prajaù—my children dead; jijéviñe—I should
want to live; kim artham—for what purpose; vä-indeed; vidhuraù—suffering
separation; duùkha—miserable; jévitaù—my life.
TRANSLATION
Now I am a wretched person living in an empty home. My wife is dead; my
children are dead. Why should I possibly want to live? My heart is so pained by
separation from my family that life itself has become simply suffering.
TEXT 71
taAMstaTaEvaAva{taAna, izAigBar,"
ma{tyauƒastaAna, ivacaeí"ta:
svayaM ca k{(paNA: izAºau
pazyaªapyabauDaAe'patata,
täàs tathaivävåtän çigbhir
måtyu-grastän viceñöataù
svayaà ca kåpaëaù çikñu
paçyann apy abudho 'patat
SYNONYMS
tän—them; tathä—also; eva—indeed; ävåtän—surrounded; çigbhiù—by the
net; måtyu—by death; grastän—seized; viceñöataù—stunned; svayam—himself;
ca—also; kåpaëaù—wretched; çikñu—within the net; paçyan—while watching;
api—even; abudhaù—unintelligent; apatat—he fell.
TRANSLATION
As the father pigeon wretchedly stared at his poor children trapped in the
net and on the verge of death, pathetically struggling to free themselves, his
mind went blank, and thus he himself fell into the hunter's net.
TEXT 72
taM labDvaA laubDak(: ‚U(r":
k(paAetaM gA{h"maeiDanama,
k(paAetak(Ana, k(paAetaI%M ca
is$aÜ"ATaR: ‘ayayaAE gA{h"ma,
taà labdhvä lubdhakaù krüraù
kapotaà gåha-medhinam
kapotakän kapotéà ca
siddhärthaù prayayau gåham
SYNONYMS
tam—him; labdhvä—taking; lubdhakaù—the hunter; krüraù—cruel;
kapotam-the pigeon; gåha-medhinam—the materialistic householder;
kapotakän—the pigeon children; kapotém—the pigeon wife; ca—also;
siddha-arthaù—having achieved his purposes; prayayau—he set off;
gåham—for his home.
TRANSLATION
The cruel hunter, having fulfilled his desire by capturing the head pigeon,
his wife and all of their children, set off for his own home.
TEXT 73
WvaM ku(q%]mbyazAAntaAtmaA
ã"nã"Ar"Ama: patai‡avata,
pauSNAna, ku(q%]mbaM k{(paNA:
s$aAnaubanDaAe'vas$aId"ita
evaà kuöumby açäntätmä
dvandvärämaù patatri-vat
puñëan kuöumbaà kåpaëaù
sänubandho 'vasédati
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; kuöumbé—a family man; açänta—unpeaceful; ätmä—his soul;
dvandva—in material dualities (like male and female); ärämaù—taking his
pleasure; patatri-vat—like this bird; puñëan—maintaining; kuöumbam—his
family; kåpaëaù—the miser; sa-anubandhaù—with his relatives;
avasédati—must suffer greatly.
TRANSLATION
In this way, one who is too attached to family life becomes disturbed at
heart. Like the pigeon, he tries to find pleasure in mundane sex attraction.
Busily engaged in maintaining his own family, the miserly person is fated to
suffer greatly, along with all his family members.
TEXT 74
ya: ‘aApya maAnauSaM laAekM(
mauil(ã"Ar"mapaAva{tama,
gA{he"Sau KagAvats$al(s$a,
tamaAè&X#cyautaM ivaäu":
yaù präpya mänuñaà lokaà
mukti-dväram apävåtam
gåheñu khaga-vat saktas
tam ärüòha-cyutaà viduù
SYNONYMS
yaù—one who; präpya—having achieved; mänuñam lokam—the human form
of life; mukti—of liberation; dväram—the door; apävåtam—wide open;
gåheñu—in family affairs; khaga-vat—like the bird of this story;
saktaù—attached; tam—him; ärüòha—having climbed high; cyutam—then
falling; viduù—they consider.
TRANSLATION
The doors of liberation are opened wide to one who has achieved human life.
But if a human being simply devotes himself to family life like the foolish bird
in this story, then he is to be considered as one who has climbed to a high place
only to trip and fall down.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Eleventh Canto, Seventh Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Lord Kåñëa Instructs Uddhava."
8. The Story of Piìgalä
Lord Kåñëa told Uddhava how the avadhüta brähmaëa explained to
Mahäräja Yadu the instructions he had received from nine of his gurus,
beginning with the python.
The instruction the avadhüta brähmaëa received from the python is that an
intelligent person should cultivate a mentality of detachment and should
maintain his body by accepting whatever comes of its own accord or is easily
obtained. In this way, he should remain always engaged in the worship of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Even if no food is available, the person who
wants to engage fully in the Lord's worship should not beg; rather, he should
understand this to be the arrangement of providence, thinking, "Whatever
enjoyment is destined for me will automatically come, and thus I should not
uselessly waste the remaining duration of my life in worrying about such
things." If he does not get any food, he should simply remain lying like the
python and patiently fix his mind in meditation upon the Supreme Lord.
The instruction the avadhüta brähmaëa received from the ocean is that the
mind of the sage who is devoted to the Personality of Godhead appears very
clear and grave, just like the still ocean waters. The ocean does not overflow
during the rainy season, when all the flooded rivers discharge their waters into
it, nor does it dry up during the hot season, when the rivers fail to supply it.
Similarly, the sage does not become elated when he achieves desirable things,
nor does he become distressed in their absence.
The instruction of the moth is that just as he becomes enticed by the fire
and gives up his life, the fool who cannot control his senses becomes
enchanted by the forms of women decorated with gold ornaments and fine
clothing. Chasing after these embodiments of the divine illusory energy of the
Lord, he loses his life untimely and falls down into the most horrible hell.
There are two kinds of bees, the bumblebee and the honeybee. The
instruction learned from the bumblebee is that a sage should collect only small
amounts of food from many different households and thus day after day
practice the occupation of mädhukaré for maintaining his existence. A sage
should also collect the essential truths from all scriptures, be they great or
insignificant. The instruction received from the second insect, the honeybee,
is that a mendicant sannyäsé should not save the food he begs for the sake of
having it later that night or the next day, because if he does so, then just like
the greedy honeybee he will be destroyed along with his hoard.
From the elephant the avadhüta brähmaëa received the following
instruction. Male elephants are tricked by hunters into moving toward captive
female elephants, whereupon they fall into the hunters' ditch and are
captured. Similarly, the man who becomes attached to the form of woman falls
down into the deep well of material life and is destroyed.
The instruction received from the honey thief is that just as he steals the
honey collected with great effort by the honeybee, a person in the renounced
order of life has the privilege of enjoying before anyone else the food and
other valuable things purchased by the hard-earned money of the
householders.
The instruction from the deer is that just as he becomes confused upon
hearing the song of the hunter's flute and loses his life, so also does any person
who becomes attracted to mundane music and song uselessly waste his life.
The instruction learned from the fish is that because he comes under the
sway of attachment to the sense of taste, he is caught on the baited fishhook
and must die. Similarly, an unintelligent person who is victimized by his
insatiable tongue will also end up losing his life.
There was once a prostitute named Piìgalä in the city of Videha, and from
her the avadhüta learned another lesson. One day she dressed herself in very
attractive clothing and ornaments and was waiting from sunset until midnight
for a customer. She waited in great anticipation, but as the time passed her
mind became very uneasy. No man came to see her, and in disgust she finally
became renounced, giving up her hankering for the arrival of a suitor.
Thereafter she engaged herself in thinking only of the Supreme Lord, Hari,
and her mind achieved the supreme platform of peace. The instruction
received from her is that hopes for sense gratification are the root cause of all
suffering. Therefore, only one who has given up such hankering can fix
himself in meditation upon the Personality of Godhead and achieve
transcendental peace.
TEXT 1
™aI“aAöNA ovaAca
s$auKamaEin‰"yakM( r"Ajana,
svagAeR nar"k( Wva ca
de"ih"naAM yaâTaA äu":KaM
tasmaAªaecCe$ta taä,"bauDa:
çré-brähmaëa uväca
sukham aindriyakaà räjan
svarge naraka eva ca
dehinäà yad yathä duùkhaà
tasmän neccheta tad-budhaù
SYNONYMS
çré-brähmaëaù uväca—the saintly brähmaëa said; sukham—happiness;
aindriyakam—generated from the material senses; räjan—O King; svarge—in
material heaven; narake—in hell; eva—certainly; ca—also; dehinäm—of the
embodied living beings; yat—since; yathä-just as; duùkham—unhappiness;
tasmät—therefore; na—not; iccheta-should desire; tat—that; budhaù—one
who knows.
TRANSLATION
The saintly brähmaëa said: O King, the embodied living entity automatically
experiences unhappiness in heaven or hell. Similarly, happiness will also be
experienced, even without one's seeking it. Therefore a person of intelligent
discrimination does not make any endeavor to obtain such material happiness.
PURPORT
One should not uselessly waste his life pursuing material sense gratification,
because a specific quantity of material happiness will automatically come to
one as a result of one's past and present fruitive activities. This lesson is
learned from the ajagara, or python, who lies down and accepts for his
maintenance whatever comes of its own accord. Remarkably, in both material
heaven and hell happiness and unhappiness come automatically, due to our
previous activities, although the proportions of happiness and unhappiness
certainly vary. Either in heaven or in hell one may eat, drink, sleep and have
sex life, but these activities, being based on the material body, are temporary
and inconsequential. An intelligent person should see that even the best
material situation is actually a punishment for previous unlawful activities
executed outside the scope of loving devotional service to God. A conditioned
soul undergoes great trouble to obtain a little happiness. After struggling in
material life, which is full of hardship and hypocrisy, one may receive a little
sense gratification, but this illusory pleasure in no way offsets the burden of
suffering one must bear to obtain it. After all, a pretty hat is no cure for a
homely face. If one really wants to solve life's problems, one should live simply
and reserve the major portion of one's life for loving service to Kåñëa. Even
those who do not serve God receive a certain standard of maintenance from
Him; therefore we can just imagine the security the Lord affords to those who
dedicate their lives to His devotional service.
Unrefined fruitive workers foolishly worry only about the present life,
whereas more pious karmés imprudently make elaborate arrangements for
future material sense gratification, unaware that all such enjoyment is
temporary. The real solution, however, is to understand that by pleasing the
Personality of Godhead, who is the master of all senses and all desires, one can
attain permanent happiness. Such knowledge easily solves the problems of life.
TEXT 2
ƒaAs$aM s$auma{íM" ivar"s$aM
mah"AntaM staAek(maeva vaA
yaä{"cC$yaEvaApaitataM
ƒas$aed"AjagAr"Ae'i‚(ya:
gräsaà su-måñöaà virasaà
mahäntaà stokam eva vä
yadåcchayaiväpatitaà
grased äjagaro 'kriyaù
SYNONYMS
gräsam—food; su-måñöam—clean and delicious; virasam—tasteless;
mahäntam—a large quantity; stokam—a small quantity; eva—certainly;
vä—either; yadåcchayä—without personal endeavor; eva—indeed;
äpatitam—obtained; graset—one should eat; äjagaraù—like the python;
akriyaù—remaining neutral without endeavor.
TRANSLATION
Following the example of the python, one should give up material endeavors
and accept for one's maintenance food that comes of its own accord, whether
such food be delicious or tasteless, ample or meager.
TEXT 3
zAyaItaAh"Aina BaUr"IiNA
inar"Ah"Ar"Ae'naupa‚(ma:
yaid" naAepanayaeØ"As$aAe
mah"Aih"ir"va id"í"Bauk,(
çayétähäni bhüréëi
nirähäro 'nupakramaù
yadi nopanayed gräso
mahähir iva diñöa-bhuk
SYNONYMS
çayéta—he should remain peacefully; ahäni—days; bhüréëi—for many;
nirähäraù—fasting; anupakramaù—without endeavor; yadi—if; na
upanayet—does not come; gräsaù—food; mahä-ahiù—the great python;
iva—like; diñöa—whatever is provided by providence; bhuk—eating.
TRANSLATION
If at any time food does not come, then a saintly person should fast for many
days without making endeavor. He should understand that by God's
arrangement he must fast. Thus, following the example of the python, he
should remain peaceful and patient.
PURPORT
If by God's arrangement one is forced to suffer material hardship, then one
should think, "Due to my past sinful activity I am now being punished. In this
way, God is mercifully making me humble." The word çayéta means one should
remain peaceful and patient without mental agitation. Diñöa-bhuk means one
must accept the Personality of Godhead as the supreme controller and not
foolishly give up one's faith due to material inconvenience. Tat te 'nukampäà
su-samékñamäëo bhuïjäna evätma-kåtaà vipäkam (SB 10.14.8). A devotee of the
Lord always accepts material hardship as the mercy of Lord Kåñëa; thus he
becomes eligible for supreme liberation.
TEXT 4
@Aeja:s$ah"AebalayautaM
iba”aÚe"h"mak(maRk(ma,
zAyaAnaAe vaItaina‰"ê
naehe"taein‰"yavaAnaipa
ojaù-saho-bala-yutaà
bibhrad deham akarmakam
çayäno véta-nidraç ca
nehetendriyavän api
SYNONYMS
ojaù—sensual strength; sahaù—mental strength; bala—physical strength;
yutam—endowed with; bibhrat—maintaining; deham—the body;
akarmakam—without endeavor; çayänaù—remaining peacefully; véta—freed;
nidraù—from nescience; ca—and; na—not; éheta—should endeavor;
indriya-vän—possessing full bodily, mental and sensual strength; api—even
though.
TRANSLATION
A saintly person should remain peaceful and materially inactive, maintaining
his body without much endeavor. Even though possessed of full sensual, mental
and physical strength, a saintly person should not become active for material
gain but rather should always remain alert to his actual self-interest.
PURPORT
The word véta-nidraù in this verse is very significant. Nidrä means "sleep" or
"ignorance," and véta means "freed from." In other words, a transcendentalist
should always be awake to his eternal relationship with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and should carefully cultivate Kåñëa consciousness.
Being confident of his relationship with the Lord, he should not endeavor for
his personal maintenance, knowing that the Lord is protecting him in all
respects. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura states that the example of the
python is given so that one will not uselessly waste his time in bodily
maintenance.
One should not think, however, that the purpose of life is to lie on the
ground like a python or to make a show of starving the body. The example of
the python should not encourage one to become completely inactive. One
should rather become active in spiritual advancement and inactive in material
sense gratification. If one becomes completely inactive, that is certainly nidrä,
or the darkness of ignorance, in which one remains asleep to his identity as an
eternal servant of the Personality of Godhead.
A transcendentalist is eager to execute his service to the Lord, and
therefore he is grateful when the Lord provides material facilities for such
service. Mere renunciation of the material world is phalgu-vairägya, or an
immature stage of spiritual understanding. One must come to the stage of
yukta-vairägya, engaging everything in the service of Lord Kåñëa. It is our
practical experience that a devotee absorbed in spreading Kåñëa consciousness
automatically receives all facilities for his personal maintenance.
TEXT 5
mauina: ‘as$aªagAmBaIr"Ae
äu"ivaRgAA÷Ae äu"r"tyaya:
@nantapaAr"Ae ÷ºaAeBya:
istaimataAed" wvaANARva:
muniù prasanna-gambhéro
durvigähyo duratyayaù
ananta-päro hy akñobhyaù
stimitoda ivärëavaù
SYNONYMS
muniù—a saintly sage; prasanna—pleasing; gambhéraù—very grave;
durvigähyaù—unfathomable; duratyayaù—unsurpassable;
ananta-päraù—unlimited; hi—certainly; akñobhyaù—not to be disturbed;
stimita—calm; udaù—water; iva—like; arëavaù—the ocean.
TRANSLATION
A saintly sage is happy and pleasing in his external behavior, whereas
internally he is most grave and thoughtful. Because his knowledge is
immeasurable and unlimited he is never disturbed, and thus in all respects he is
like the tranquil waters of the unfathomable and unsurpassable ocean.
PURPORT
Even in the midst of great distress, a self-realized sage does not lose control
of himself, nor is his spiritual knowledge lost. Thus he is akñobhya, or
undisturbed. His mind is fixed on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is
the reservoir of unlimited spiritual bliss, and having linked his consciousness
with the supreme consciousness, his knowledge cannot be measured. A pure
devotee, having taken shelter of the Lord's lotus feet, possesses great spiritual
power, and therefore he cannot be surpassed or overwhelmed. In fact, having
developed his spiritual body, he is not affected by the deteriorating actions of
time. Although outwardly he is friendly and pleasing to everyone, internally
his mind is fixed in the Absolute Truth, and no one can understand his actual
purpose or plan. Even the most intelligent human being cannot understand
the mental activities of a self-realized devotee who has given up material life
based on lust and greed and taken shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord. Such a
great soul can be compared to the mighty ocean. Innumerable powerful rivers
plunge into the ocean, but the ocean remains calm and peaceful. Thus, a
saintly person is understood to be, like the ocean, pleasing, unfathomable,
grave, unsurpassable, unlimited and unshakable.
TEXT 6
s$ama{Ü"k(AmaAe h"InaAe vaA
naAr"AyaNApar"Ae mauina:
naAets$apaeRta na zAuSyaeta
s$air"ià"ir"va s$aAgAr":
samåddha-kämo héno vä
näräyaëa-paro muniù
notsarpeta na çuñyeta
saridbhir iva sägaraù
SYNONYMS
samåddha—flourishing; kämaù—material opulence; hénaù—destitute; vä—or;
näräyaëa—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; paraù—accepting as
supreme; muniù—a saintly devotee; na—does not; utsarpeta—swell up;
na—does not; çuñyeta—dry up; saridbhiù—by the rivers; iva—like;
sägaraù—the ocean.
TRANSLATION
During the rainy season the swollen rivers rush into the ocean, and during
the dry summer the rivers, now shallow, severely reduce their supply of water;
yet the ocean does not swell up during the rainy season, nor does it dry up in
the hot summer. In the same way, a saintly devotee who has accepted the
Supreme Personality of Godhead as the goal of his life sometimes will receive by
providence great material opulence, and sometimes he will find himself
materially destitute. However, such a devotee of the Lord does not rejoice in a
flourishing condition, nor is he morose when poverty-stricken.
PURPORT
A sincere devotee of the Lord is always eager to meet the Lord and render
Him transcendental service. He wants to remain fixed as an atom at the lotus
feet of the Lord because Lord Kåñëa, or Näräyaëa, is the reservoir of all
pleasure. He rejoices when experiencing pure Kåñëa consciousness and is
morose when Kåñëa is not present in his mind. In his dealings with the
material world, a devotee cannot be disturbed by ordinary, materialistic people
who sometimes insult him and accuse him of neglecting material sense
gratification, just as the ocean cannot be disturbed by the innumerable rivers
that enter into it. Sometimes lusty women approach a pure devotee, and
sometimes speculative philosophers try to argue against the Personality of
Godhead, but with all such ordinary people, a pure devotee is detached and
undisturbed in his blissful Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 7
ä{"î"A iñyaM de"vamaAyaAM
taà"AvaEr"ijataein‰"ya:
‘alaAeiBata: patatyanDae
tamasya¢aAE pataËÿvata,
dåñövä striyaà deva-mäyäà
tad-bhävair ajitendriyaù
pralobhitaù pataty andhe
tamasy agnau pataìga-vat
SYNONYMS
dåñövä—seeing; striyam—a woman; deva-mäyäm—whose form is created by the
illusory energy of the Lord; tat-bhävaiù—by the alluring seductive activities of
the woman; ajita—one who has not controlled; indriyaù—his senses;
pralobhitaù—enticed; patati—falls down; andhe—into the blindness of
ignorance; tamasi—into the darkness of hell; agnau—in the fire;
pataìga-vat—just like the moth.
TRANSLATION
One who has failed to control his senses immediately feels attraction upon
seeing a woman's form, which is created by the illusory energy of the Supreme
Lord. Indeed, when the woman speaks with enticing words, smiles coquettishly
and moves her body sensuously, his mind is immediately captured, and thus he
falls blindly into the darkness of material existence, just as the moth maddened
by the fire rushes blindly into its flames.
PURPORT
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé explains in this regard that just as a moth is killed by
its attraction to the form of fire, similarly a bee can easily be killed by
exploiting its attraction to the fragrance of flowers. Furthermore, hunters may
trap and kill an elephant by exploiting its sensuous desire to touch a captive
female elephant and may also kill a deer by attracting it with the sounds of
their horns; and a fish is killed by its desire to taste the bait on a hook. Thus,
one who desires to learn detachment from material illusion should accept these
five helpless creatures as guru and learn the needful. Certainly one who is lusty
to enjoy the illusory form of woman will be quickly buried in material illusion.
Of the five types of fatal attraction involving material sense objects, the lesson
of rüpa, or form, is illustrated in this verse.
TEXT 8
yaAeiSaiÜ"r"NyaABar"NAAmbar"Aid"-
‰"vyaeSau maAyaAr"icataeSau maUX#:
‘alaAeiBataAtmaA ÷upaBaAegAbauÜ"YaA
pataËÿvaªazyaita naí"ä{"ií":
yoñid-dhiraëyäbharaëämbarädidravyeñu
mäyä-raciteñu müòhaù
pralobhitätmä hy upabhoga-buddhyä
pataìga-van naçyati nañöa-dåñöiù
SYNONYMS
yoñit—of women; hiraëya—golden; äbharaëa—ornaments; ambara—clothing;
ädi—and so on; dravyeñu—upon seeing such things; mäyä—by the illusory
energy of the Lord; raciteñu—manufactured; müòhaù—a fool with no
discrimination; pralobhita—aroused by lusty desires; ätmä—such a person;
hi—certainly; upabhoga—for sense gratification; buddhyä—with the desire;
pataìga-vat—like the moth; naçyati—is destroyed; nañöa—is ruined;
dåñöiù—whose intelligence.
TRANSLATION
A foolish person with no intelligent discrimination is immediately aroused at
the sight of a lusty woman beautifully decorated with golden ornaments, fine
clothing and other cosmetic features. Being eager for sense gratification, such a
fool loses all intelligence and is destroyed just like the moth who rushes into the
blazing fire.
PURPORT
Actually, women have the power to attract men through all of the material
senses. Men become lusty by seeing the body of a woman, by smelling her
fragrance, by hearing her voice, by tasting her lips and by touching her body.
However, the foolish relationship based on material sex attraction begins by
seeing, and thus rüpa, or form, is very prominent in the process of ruining
one's intelligence. This fact has been exploited in modern times by huge
pornography industries, which prey on unfortunate men and women. The
example of the foolish moth rushing into the fire and destroying itself is most
appropriate in this regard, for one who becomes addicted to the momentary
pleasure of sex indulgence certainly loses his power to understand the spiritual
reality behind dull matter.
A lusty person becomes blind and foolish through sex indulgence, and his
soul is lost in the fire of sense gratification. This whole disaster can be avoided
by taking seriously to the process of chanting the holy names of the Lord: Hare
Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma
Räma, Hare Hare. Caitanya Mahäprabhu and His empowered representatives
such as Çréla Prabhupäda have created a movement to save people from the
dungeon of material life, and we should all seriously take advantage of this
opportunity.
TEXT 9
staAekM( staAekM( ƒas$aeØ"As$aM
de"h"Ae vataeRta yaAvataA
gA{h"AnaihM"s$aªaAitaïe"ä,"
va{iÔaM maADauk(r"I%M mauina:
stokaà stokaà grased gräsaà
deho varteta yävatä
gåhän ahiàsann ätiñöhed
våttià mädhukaréà muniù
SYNONYMS
stokam stokam—always, a little bit; graset—one should eat; gräsam—food;
dehaù—the material body; varteta—that it may live; yävatä—with that much;
gåhän—the householders; ahiàsan—not harassing; ätiñöhet—one should
practice; våttim—the occupation; mädhu-karém—of the honeybee; muniù—a
saintly person.
TRANSLATION
A saintly person should accept only enough food to keep his body and soul
together. He should go from door to door accepting just a little bit of food from
each family. Thus he should practice the occupation of the honeybee.
PURPORT
Sometimes a honeybee is attracted by the extraordinary aroma of a
particular lotus flower and lingers there, neglecting his usual activity of flying
from flower to flower. Unfortunately, at sunset the lotus flower closes, and
thus the infatuated honeybee is trapped. Similarly, a sannyäsé or brahmacäré
may discover that excellent foodstuff is available at a particular house, and
therefore, instead of wandering from place to place, he may become a veritable
resident of such a well-fed household. Thus he will become bewildered by the
illusion of family life and fall down from the platform of renunciation. Also, if
a mendicant takes unfair advantage of the Vedic custom of charity and takes
too often from a single family, the resentment he causes will disturb the social
order. An ideal sage should, like the honeybee, travel from place to place, but
he must be careful not to become a chubby bee by going to many houses and
eating sumptuously at each house. According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta
Sarasvaté Öhäkura, such a chubby bee will undoubtedly become entangled in
the network of mäyä. No one should be overly attached to the gratification of
his tongue, because this will lead to an overstuffed belly and then
uncontrollable lust. In conclusion, one should not endeavor very much for
material sense gratification but should instead endeavor strenuously to spread
the glories of the Supreme Lord, Kåñëa. This is the proper use of human
energy.
TEXT 10
@NAuByaê mah"à"Yaê
zAAñeBya: ku(zAlaAe nar":
s$avaRta: s$aAr"maAd"âAta,
pauSpaeBya wva Saq%.pad":
aëubhyaç ca mahadbhyaç ca
çästrebhyaù kuçalo naraù
sarvataù säram ädadyät
puñpebhya iva ñaöpadaù
SYNONYMS
aëubhyaù—from the smallest; ca—and; mahadbhyaù—from the greatest;
ca—also; çästrebhyaù—from religious scriptures; kuçalaù—intelligent;
naraù—a man; sarvataù—from all; säram—the essence; ädadyät—should take;
puñpebhyaù—from the flowers; iva—like; ñaöpadaù—the honeybee.
TRANSLATION
Just as the honeybee takes nectar from all flowers, big and small, an
intelligent human being should take the essence from all religious scriptures.
PURPORT
In human society the original knowledge is called Veda, and the essential
part of veda, or knowledge, is Kåñëa consciousness. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä
(15.15), vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva vedyaù. From the honeybee, an intelligent
human being should learn to take the essence, or nectar, of all knowledge. A
honeybee does not waste its time trying to carry away an entire bush or garden,
but rather takes the essential nectar. We may thus study the difference
between the honeybee and the ass, who carries heavy loads. Education does
not mean to become an intellectual ass carrying heavy loads of useless
knowledge; rather, one should accept the essential knowledge that leads to an
eternal life of bliss and understanding.
At the present time people generally have a sectarian concept of religion,
and yet there is no scientific understanding of the Absolute Truth. Such
complacent, dogmatic, sectarian religionists can certainly learn something
from the example of the honeybee given in this verse.
TEXT 11
s$aAyantanaM ìstanaM vaA
na s$ax.~gA{õ"Ita iBaiºatama,
paAiNApaA‡aAed"r"Ama‡aAe
maiºake(va na s$aÍÿh"I
säyantanaà çvastanaà vä
na saìgåhëéta bhikñitam
päëi-pätrodarämatro
makñikeva na saìgrahé
SYNONYMS
säyantanam—meant for the night; çvastanam—meant for tomorrow;
vä—either; na—not; saìgåhëéta—should accept; bhikñitam—food in charity;
päëi—with the hand; pätra—as one's plate; udara—with the belly;
amatraù—as the storage container; makñikä—the bee; iva—like; na—not;
saìgrahé—a collector.
TRANSLATION
A saintly person should not think, "This food I will keep to eat tonight and
this other food I can save for tomorrow." In other words, a saintly person
should not store foodstuffs acquired by begging. Rather, he should use his own
hands as his plate and eat whatever fits on them. His only storage container
should be his belly, and whatever conveniently fits into his belly should be his
stock of food. Thus one should not imitate the greedy honeybee who eagerly
collects more and more honey.
PURPORT
There are two types of honeybees: those who collect nectar from the flowers
and those who actually manufacture honey in the beehive. This verse refers to
the second class. The greedy honeybee eventually collects so much honey that
he is trapped in his hive; and in the same way, a materialistic person becomes
trapped under the burden of unnecessary material accumulation. One who is
interested in making spiritual progress should avoid such a situation; however,
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura points out that for the purpose of
spreading Kåñëa consciousness one may accumulate an unlimited amount of
material opulence. This is called yukta-vairägya, or using everything in the
service of Kåñëa. A saintly person who is unable to work in Lord Caitanya's
mission should practice austerities and collect only what he can hold in his
hands and belly. However, one who has given his life to Kåñëa may collect
unlimitedly on Lord Kåñëa's behalf. In fact, without acquiring material
opulence, how is it possible to spread the Kåñëa consciousness movement all
over the world? But if one tries to personally enjoy the funds or facilities
acquired for the missionary activities of the Kåñëa consciousness movement,
he commits the greatest offense. Therefore, even in the name of Lord Kåñëa,
one should collect only what he can immediately engage in practical
devotional service; otherwise one will fall down to the platform of ordinary
greediness.
TEXT 12
s$aAyantanaM ìstanaM vaA
na s$ax.~gA{õ"Ita iBaºauk(:
maiºak(A wva s$ax.~gA{õ"na,
s$ah" taena ivanazyaita
säyantanaà çvastanaà vä
na saìgåhëéta bhikñukaù
makñikä iva saìgåhëan
saha tena vinaçyati
SYNONYMS
säyantanam—meant for the night; çvastanam—meant for tomorrow;
vä—either; na—not; saìgåhëéta—should accept; bhikñukaù—a saintly
mendicant; makñikä—honeybee; iva—like; saìgåhëan—collecting;
saha—with; tena—that collection; vinaçyati—is destroyed.
TRANSLATION
A saintly mendicant should not even collect foodstuffs to eat later in the
same day or the next day. If he disregards this injunction and like the honeybee
collects more and more delicious foodstuffs, that which he has collected will
indeed ruin him.
PURPORT
Bhramara refers to that honeybee who wanders about from flower to flower,
and makñikä is the honeybee who accumulates more and more honey in the
beehive with great attachment. A saintly mendicant should be like the
bhramara bee because if he imitates the makñikä bee his spiritual consciousness
will be ruined. This point is so important that it is repeated in this verse.
TEXT 13
pad"Aipa yauvataI%M iBaºaur,"
na s$pa{zAeÚ"Ar"vaImaipa
s$pa{zAna, k(r"Iva baDyaeta
k(ir"NyaA @Ëÿs$aËÿta:
padäpi yuvatéà bhikñur
na spåçed däravém api
spåçan karéva badhyeta
kariëyä aìga-saìgataù
SYNONYMS
padä—with the foot; api—even; yuvatém—a young girl; bhikñuù—a saintly
mendicant; na—not; spåçet—should touch; däravém—made of wood;
api—even; spåçan—touching; karé—the elephant; iva—like;
badhyeta—becomes captured; kariëyäù—of the she-elephant;
aìga-saìgataù—by contact with the body.
TRANSLATION
A saintly person should never touch a young girl. In fact, he should not even
let his foot touch a wooden doll in the shape of a woman. By bodily contact
with a woman he will surely be captured by illusion, just as the elephant is
captured by the she-elephant due to his desire to touch her body.
PURPORT
Elephants are captured in the jungle in the following way. A large hole is
dug and then covered over with grass, leaves, mud and so on. Then a
she-elephant is exhibited in front of the male elephant, who chases after her
with lusty desire, falls into the hole and is captured. The lesson to be learned
from the elephant is that the desire to relish the touch sensation is certainly
the cause of ruining one's life. An intelligent person, noting the elephant's
great propensity to sport with the she-elephant, will take this excellent
example to heart. Therefore, somehow or other one should avoid being
cheated by allurement to the sensuous form of woman. One should not allow
one's mind to be lost in lusty dreams of sex pleasure. There are various types of
sense gratification to be enjoyed between men and women, including speaking,
contemplating, touching, sexual intercourse, etc., and all of these constitute
the network of illusion by which one is helplessly bound like an animal.
Somehow or other one should remain aloof from sense gratification in the
form of sex pleasure; otherwise, there is no possibility of understanding the
spiritual world.
TEXT 14
naAiDagAcCe$itñyaM ‘aAÁa:
k(ihR"icanma{tyaumaAtmana:
balaAiDakE(: s$a h"nyaeta
gAjaEr"nyaEgARjaAe yaTaA
nädhigacchet striyaà präjïaù
karhicin måtyum ätmanaù
balädhikaiù sa hanyeta
gajair anyair gajo yathä
SYNONYMS
na adhigacchet—he should not approach to enjoy; striyam—a woman;
präjïaù—one who can intelligently discriminate; karhicit—at any time;
måtyum—death personified; ätmanaù—for oneself; bala—in strength;
adhikaiù—by those who are superior; saù—he; hanyeta—will be destroyed;
gajaiù—by elephants; anyaiù—by others; gajaù—an elephant; yathä—just as.
TRANSLATION
A man possessing intelligent discrimination should not under any
circumstances try to exploit the beautiful form of a woman for his sense
gratification. Just as an elephant trying to enjoy a she-elephant is killed by other
bull elephants also enjoying her company, one trying to enjoy a lady's company
can at any moment be killed by her other lovers who are stronger than he.
PURPORT
Just as one is enchanted by the beautiful form of a woman, many other men
will also be enchanted, and there is danger that they will be stronger than
oneself and may even jealously kill one. Crimes of passion are extremely
common. This is another disadvantage of material life.
TEXT 15
na de"yaM naAepaBaAegyaM ca
laubDaEyaRä," äu":Kas$aiÂatama,
BauÈeÿ tad"ipa ta»aAnyaAe
maDauhe"vaATaRivanmaDau
na deyaà nopabhogyaà ca
lubdhair yad duùkha-saïcitam
bhuìkte tad api tac cänyo
madhu-hevärthavin madhu
SYNONYMS
na—not; deyam—to be given in charity to others; na—not; upabhogyam—to
be enjoyed personally; ca—also; lubdhaiù—by those who are greedy; yat—that
which; duùkha—with great struggle and pain; saïcitam—is accumulated;
bhuìkte—he enjoys; tat—that; api—nevertheless; tat—that; ca—also;
anyaù—someone else; madhu-hä—the one who steals the honey from the
beehive; iva—like; artha—wealth; vit—one who knows how to recognize;
madhu—the honey.
TRANSLATION
A greedy person accumulates a large quantity of money with great struggle
and pain, but the person who has struggled so much to acquire this wealth is not
always allowed to enjoy it himself or give it in charity to others. The greedy
man is like the bee who struggles to produce a large quantity of honey, which is
then stolen by a man who will enjoy it personally or sell it to others. No matter
how carefully one hides his hard-earned wealth or tries to protect it, there are
those who are expert in detecting the whereabouts of valuable things, and they
will steal it.
PURPORT
One may argue that a wealthy man may conceal his money so expertly, by
investing it in banks, stocks, properties, and so on, that there is no danger of
theft. Only foolish people actually hide money by burying it in the ground or
placing it under a mattress. But despite the fact that the majority of the world's
wealth has been accumulated in highly developed capitalistic countries, these
countries are being severely challenged by many enemies who threaten at any
moment to overrun the capitalists and steal their wealth. Similarly, we often
find that the children of wealthy people are kidnapped, and then their parents
must pay huge ransoms. Sometimes the parents themselves may also be
kidnapped. Furthermore, there are so-called investment counselors who are
expert in stealing the money of rich people; and in the modern age
governments have also become expert in stealing money by taxation. Thus, the
word artha-vit indicates one who by hook or by crook is expert in stealing the
hard-earned wealth of other people. The bees work frantically to produce
honey, but they will not enjoy their honey. As Lord Kåñëa states, måtyuù
sarva-haraç cäham: "I will come as death personified and steal everything." (Bg.
10.34) Somehow or other one's hard-earned material opulence will be stolen,
and therefore, as mentioned in this verse, one should not work uselessly like
the foolish honeybee.
TEXT 16
s$auäu":KaAepaAijaR#taEivaRÔaEr,"
@AzAAs$aAnaAM gA{h"AizASa:
maDauhe"vaAƒataAe BauÈeÿ
yaitavaE= gA{h"maeiDanaAma,
su-duùkhopärjitair vittair
äçäsänäà gåhäçiñaù
madhu-hevägrato bhuìkte
yatir vai gåha-medhinäm
SYNONYMS
su-duùkha—with great struggle; upärjitaiù—that which is acquired;
vittaiù—material opulence; äçäsänäm—of those fervently desiring;
gåha—related to domestic enjoyment; äçiñaù—blessings; madhu-hä—the
person who steals honey from the bees; iva—like; agrataù—first, before others;
bhuìkte—enjoys; yatiù—a saintly mendicant; vai—certainly;
gåha-medhinäm—of those dedicated to material family life.
TRANSLATION
Just as a hunter takes away the honey laboriously produced by the
honeybees, similarly, saintly mendicants such as brahmacärés and sannyäsés are
entitled to enjoy the property painstakingly accumulated by householders
dedicated to family enjoyment.
PURPORT
The scriptures state, "Saintly mendicants in the sannyäsa order of life and
brahmacärés have first right to enjoy the sumptuous foodstuffs produced by the
householders. If the householders enjoy such foodstuffs without first offering
them in charity to the mendicants, such neglectful householders must undergo
the lunar fast called cändräyaëam." In family life one must overcome the
natural tendency toward selfishness by giving abundant charity. Modern
society foolishly does not observe such Vedic injunctions, and as a result the
world has become overrun by envious gåha-medhés, or persons wholly and solely
dedicated to personal gratification in family life. Therefore, the whole world is
seized in an uncontrollable spasm of violence and suffering. If one wants to
live peacefully one must follow the Vedic injunctions regulating family life.
Although the householders work very hard to accumulate money, the saintly
sannyäsés and brahmacärés have the right to first enjoy the fruits of such labor.
The conclusion is that one should give first priority to spiritual advancement
in Kåñëa consciousness and thus perfect one's life. Then even without personal
endeavor, one will be supplied all of one's necessities by the mercy of the
Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 17
ƒaAmyagAItaM na Za{NAuyaAä,"
yaitavaRnacar": ¸(icata,
izAºaeta h"ir"NAAß"Ü"Ana,
ma{gAyaAegAI=tamaAeih"taAta,
grämya-gétaà na çåëuyäd
yatir vana-caraù kvacit
çikñeta hariëäd baddhän
mågayor géta-mohität
SYNONYMS
grämya—relating to sense gratification; gétam—songs; na—not; çåëuyät—he
should hear; yatiù—a saintly mendicant; vana—in the forest; caraù—moving;
kvacit—ever; çikñeta—one should learn; hariëät—from the deer;
baddhät—bound up; mågayoù—of the hunter; géta—by the song;
mohität—bewildered.
TRANSLATION
A saintly person dwelling in the forest in the renounced order of life should
never listen to songs or music promoting material enjoyment. Rather, a saintly
person should carefully study the example of the deer, who is bewildered by the
sweet music of the hunter's horn and is thus captured and killed.
PURPORT
If one becomes attached to the sense gratification of materialistic music and
songs, one will develop all the features of material entanglement. One should
hear Bhagavad-gétä, or the song sung by the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 18
na{tyavaAid"‡agAItaAina
jauSana, ƒaAmyaAiNA yaAeiSataAma,
@As$aAM ‚(Lx"nak(Ae vazya
[%SyaZa{"ËÿAe ma{gAIs$auta:
nåtya-väditra-gétäni
juñan grämyäëi yoñitäm
äsäà kréòanako vaçya
åñyaçåìgo mågé-sutaù
SYNONYMS
nåtya—dancing; väditra—musical performance; gétäni—songs;
juñan—cultivating; grämyäni—related to sense gratification; yoñitäm—of
women; äsäm—of them; kréòanakaù—a plaything; vaçyaù—fully controlled;
åñya-çåìgaù—the sage Åñyaçåìga; mågé-sutaù—son of Mågé
TRANSLATION
Becoming attracted to the worldly singing, dancing and musical
entertainment of beautiful women, even the great sage Åñyaçåìga, the son of
Mågé, fell totally under their control, just like a pet animal.
PURPORT
Åñyaçåìga, the young son of the sage Mågé, was intentionally brought up by
his father in an atmosphere of complete innocence. Mågé Åñi thought that if
his son were never exposed to the sight of women he would always remain a
perfect brahmacäré. But by chance the inhabitants of the neighboring
kingdom, who were suffering from a long-term drought, received divine advice
that rain would return to their kingdom only after the brähmaëa named
Åñyaçåìga stepped foot in it. Therefore they sent beautiful women to the
hermitage of Mågé to entice Åñyaçåìga and bring him back with them. Since
Åñyaçåìga had never even heard about women, he easily fell for their trap.
The name Åñyaçåìga indicates that the young sage was born with a deerlike
horn growing out of his forehead. If like the deer a åñi becomes attracted to
sweet musical sounds promising sense gratification, then like the deer he is
quickly vanquished. A thoughtful person should humbly take instruction from
the deer, who is doomed by attraction to musical sense gratification.
TEXT 19
ijaù"yaAita‘amaAiTanyaA
janaAe r"s$aivamaAeih"ta:
ma{tyauma{cC$tyas$aä,"bauiÜ"r,"
maInastau baix"zAEyaRTaA
jihvayäti-pramäthinyä
jano rasa-vimohitaù
måtyum åcchaty asad-buddhir
ménas tu baòiçair yathä
SYNONYMS
jihvayä—by the tongue; ati-pramäthinyä—which is extremely disturbing;
janaù—a person; rasa-vimohitaù—bewildered by attraction to taste;
måtyum—death; åcchati—achieves; asat—useless; buddhiù—whose
intelligence; ménaù—the fish; tu—indeed; baòiçaiù—by the hooks; yathä—just
as.
TRANSLATION
Just as a fish, incited by the desire to enjoy his tongue, is fatally trapped on
the fisherman's hook, similarly, a foolish person is bewildered by the extremely
disturbing urges of the tongue and thus is ruined.
PURPORT
The fisherman places meaty bait on a sharp hook and easily attracts the
unintelligent fish, who is greedy to enjoy its tongue. Similarly, people are mad
after gratifying their tongues and lose all discrimination in their eating habits.
For momentary gratification they construct huge slaughterhouses and kill
millions of innocent creatures, and by inflicting such atrocious suffering they
prepare a ghastly future for themselves. But even if one eats only the foods
authorized in the Vedas, there is still danger. One may eat too sumptuously and
then the artificially stuffed belly will create pressure on the sexual organs.
Thus one will fall down into the lower modes of nature and commit sinful
activities that lead to the death of one's spiritual life. From the fish one should
carefully learn the real dangers involved in gratifying the tongue.
TEXT 20
win‰"yaAiNA jayantyaAzAu
inar"Ah"Ar"A manaIiSaNA:
vajaRiyatvaA tau r"s$anaM
taiªar"ªasya vaDaRtae
indriyäëi jayanty äçu
nirähärä manéñiëaù
varjayitvä tu rasanaà
tan nirannasya vardhate
SYNONYMS
indriyäëi—the material senses; jayanti—they conquer; äçu—quickly;
nirähäräù—those who restrain the senses from their objects; manéñiëaù—the
learned; varjayitvä—except for; tu—however; rasanam—the tongue; tat—its
desire; nirannasya—for one who is fasting; vardhate—increases.
TRANSLATION
By fasting, learned men quickly bring all of the senses except the tongue
under control, because by abstaining from eating such men are afflicted with an
increased desire to gratify the sense of taste.
PURPORT
In South America there is a saying that when the belly is full the heart is
content. Thus, one who is eating sumptuously is jolly, and if one is deprived of
proper food one's appetite becomes even more voracious. An intelligent
person, however, does not fall under the control of the tongue, but rather tries
to make progress in Kåñëa consciousness. By accepting the remnants of food
offered to the Lord (prasädam), one gradually purifies the heart and
automatically becomes simple and austere.
In this connection, Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura states that the
business of the tongue is to gratify itself with the varieties of flavor, but by
wandering in the twelve holy forests of Vraja-mandala (Våndävana), one can
be freed from the twelve flavors of material sense gratification. The five
principal divisions of material relationships are neutral admiration, servitude,
friendship, parental affection and conjugal love; the seven subordinate
features of material relationships are material humor, astonishment, chivalry,
compassion, anger, dread and ghastliness. Originally, these twelve rasas, or
flavors of relationships, are exchanged between the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and the living entity in the spiritual world; and by wandering in the
twelve forests of Våndävana one can respiritualize the twelve flavors of
personal existence. Thus one will become a liberated soul, free from all
material desires. If one artificially tries to give up sense gratification, especially
that of the tongue, the attempt will be a failure, and in fact one's desire for
sense gratification will increase as a result of artificial deprivation. Only by
experiencing real, spiritual pleasure in relationship with Kåñëa can one give up
material desires.
TEXT 21
taAvaiÀataein‰"yaAe na syaAä,"
ivaijataAnyaein‰"ya: paumaAna,
na jayae‰"s$anaM yaAvaja,
ijataM s$ava< ijatae r"s$ae
tävaj jitendriyo na syäd
vijitänyendriyaù pumän
na jayed rasanaà yävaj
jitaà sarvaà jite rase
SYNONYMS
tävat—still; jita-indriyaù—one who has conquered the senses; na—not;
syät—can be; vijita-anya-indriyaù—one who has conquered all of the other
senses; pumän—a human being; na jayet—cannot conquer; rasanam—the
tongue; yävat—as long as; jitam—conquered; sarvam—everything; jite—when
conquered; rase—the tongue.
TRANSLATION
Although one may conquer all of the other senses, as long as the tongue is
not conquered it cannot be said that one has controlled his senses. However, if
one is able to control the tongue, then one is understood to be in full control of
all the senses.
PURPORT
By eating, one gives energy and activity to all of the senses, and thus if the
tongue is uncontrolled all of the senses will be dragged down to the material
platform of existence. Therefore, by all means one must control the tongue. If
one fasts, then all of the other senses become weak and lose their potency. The
tongue, however, becomes more greedy to taste delicious preparations, and
when one finally indulges the tongue, all of the senses quickly go out of
control. Therefore, Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura advises that one
accept mahä-prasädam, or the remnants of the Lord's food, in a moderate
proportion. Since the tongue's function is also to vibrate, one should vibrate
the glorious holy name of the Supreme Lord and taste the ecstasy of pure
Kåñëa consciousness. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, rasa-varjaà raso 'py asya
paraà dåñövä nivartate: [Bg. 9.59] only by the higher taste of Kåñëa
consciousness can one give up the deadly lower taste that keeps one
imprisoned in material bondage.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura states that as long as one's
intelligence is materially covered, one cannot understand the pleasure of
Kåñëa consciousness. Trying to enjoy without Kåñëa, the living entity leaves
the abode of the Supreme Lord, called Vrajabhümi, and comes down into the
material world, where he quickly loses control of his senses. One becomes
particularly victimized by the tongue, belly and genitals, which exert
intolerable pressure on the conditioned soul. These desires subside, however,
when one reestablishes one's blissful relationship with the Lord, who is actually
the reservoir of all pleasure. One who is attached to the taste of Kåñëa
consciousness automatically follows all of the rules and regulations of religious
life due to spontaneous attraction to viçuddha-sattva, or the mode of pure
goodness. Without such spontaneous attraction, one is certainly bewildered by
the pushing of the material senses.
Even the beginning stage of devotional service, called sädhana-bhakti
(regulatory practice), is so powerful that it brings one to the platform of
anartha-nivåtti, where one becomes free from unwanted sinful habits and gains
relief from the pressure of the tongue, belly and genitals. Thus one is delivered
from the bondage of material addiction and can no longer be cheated by the
allurements of the material energy. As it is said, all that glitters is not gold. In
this regard Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura recommends that we
consider the following song written by his father, Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura:
çaréra avidyä-jäl, jadendriya tähe käl
jéve phele viñaya-sägare
tä'ra madhye jihvä ati-, lobhamay sudurmati,
tä'ke jetä kaöhina saàsäre
kåñëa baòa dayämay, karibäre jihvä jay,
sva-prasädänna dila bhäi
sei annämåta päo, rädhä-kåñëa-guëa gäo,
preme òäko caitanya-nitäi
"O Lord, this material body is a lump of ignorance, and the senses are a
network of paths to death. Somehow, we have fallen into this ocean of
material sense enjoyment, and of all the senses the tongue is most voracious
and uncontrollable; it is very difficult to conquer the tongue in this world. But
You, dear Kåñëa, are very kind to us and have given us such nice prasädam, just
to control the tongue. Now we take this prasädam to our full satisfaction and
glorify Their Lordships Çré Çré Rädhä-Kåñëa, and in love call for the help of
Lord Caitanya and Lord Nityänanda."
TEXT 22
ipaËÿlaA naAma vaezyaAs$aIä,"
ivade"h"nagAre" paur"A
tasyaA mae izAiºataM ik(iÂana,
inabaAeDa na{panand"na
piìgalä näma veçyäséd
videha-nagare purä
tasyä me çikñitaà kiïcin
nibodha nåpa-nandana
SYNONYMS
piìgalä näma—of the name Piìgalä; veçyä—a prostitute; äsét—there was;
videha-nagare—in the city named Videha; purä—in the past; tasyäù—from
her; me—by me; çikñitaà—what was learned; kiïcit—something;
nibodha—now you learn; nåpa-nandana—O son of kings.
TRANSLATION
O son of kings, previously in the city of Videha there dwelled a prostitute
named Piìgalä. Now please hear what I have learned from that lady.
TEXT 23
s$aA svaEir"Nyaek(d"A k(AntaM
s$aÆeÿta opanaeSyataI
@BaUtk(Alae baih"ã"AR&#re"
iba”ataI è&pamauÔamama,
sä svairiëy ekadä käntaà
saìketa upaneñyaté
abhüt käle bahir dväre
bibhraté rüpam uttamam
SYNONYMS
sä—she; svairiëé—the prostitute; ekadä—once; käntam—a paying lover or a
customer; saìkete—into her house of sex; upaneñyaté—to bring; abhüt—she
stood; käle—at night; bahiù—outside; dväre—in the doorway;
bibhraté—holding up; rüpam—her form; uttamam—most beautiful.
TRANSLATION
Once that prostitute, desiring to bring a lover into her house, stood outside
in the doorway at night showing her beautiful form.
TEXT 24
maAgAR @AgAcC$taAe vaIºya
pauç&SaAna, pauç&SaSaRBa
taAna, zAulk(d"Ana, ivaÔavata:
k(AntaAnmaenae'TaRk(Amauk(L
märga ägacchato vékñya
puruñän puruñarñabha
tän çulka-dän vittavataù
käntän mene 'rtha-kämuké
SYNONYMS
märge—in that street; ägacchataù—those who were coming; vékñya—seeing;
puruñän—men; puruña-åñabha—O best among men; tän—them;
çulka-dän—who could pay the price; vitta-vataù—possessing money;
käntän—lovers or customers; mene—she considered; artha-kämuké—desiring
money.
TRANSLATION
O best among men, this prostitute was very anxious to get money, and as she
stood on the street at night she studied all the men who were passing by,
thinking, "Oh, this one surely has money. I know he can pay the price, and I
am sure he would enjoy my company very much." Thus she thought about all
the men on the street.
TEXTS 25-26
@AgAtaeSvapayaAtaeSau
s$aA s$aÆeÿtaAepajaIivanaI
@pyanyaAe ivaÔavaAna, k(Ae'ipa
maAmaupaESyaita BaUir"d":
WvaM äu"r"AzAyaA Dvastaina‰"
A ã"AyaRvalambataI
inagARcC$ntaI ‘aivazAtaI
inazAITaM s$amapaâta
ägateñv apayäteñu
sä saìketopajéviné
apy anyo vittavän ko 'pi
mäm upaiñyati bhüri-daù
evaà duräçayä dhvastanidrä
dväry avalambaté
nirgacchanté praviçaté
niçéthaà samapadyata
SYNONYMS
ägateñu—when they came; apayäteñu—and they went; sä—she;
saìketa-upajéviné—she whose only income was from prostitution; api—maybe;
anyaù—another one; vitta-vän—who has money; kaù api—someone;
mäm—me; upaiñyati—will approach for love; bhüri-daù—and he will give lots
of money; evam—thus; duräçayä—with vain hope; dhvasta—spoiled;
nidrä—her sleep; dväri—in the doorway; avalambaté—hanging on;
nirgacchanté—going out toward the street; praviçaté—going back into her
house; niçétham—midnight; samapadyata—arrived.
TRANSLATION
As the prostitute Piìgalä stood in the doorway, many men came and went,
walking by her house. Her only means of sustenance was prostitution, and
therefore she anxiously thought, "Maybe this one who is coming now is very
rich...Oh, he is not stopping, but I am sure someone else will come. Surely this
man who is coming now will want to pay me for my love, and he will probably
give lots of money." Thus, with vain hope, she remained leaning against the
doorway, unable to finish her business and go to sleep. Out of anxiety she would
sometimes walk out toward the street, and sometimes she went back into her
house. In this way, the midnight hour gradually arrived.
TEXT 27
tasyaA ivaÔaAzAyaA zAuSyaä,"-
vaf‡aAyaA d"Inacaetas$a:
inavaeRd": par"maAe jaÁae
icantaAhe"tau: s$auKaAvah":
tasyä vittäçayä çuñyadvakträyä
déna-cetasaù
nirvedaù paramo jajïe
cintä-hetuù sukhävahaù
SYNONYMS
tasyäù—of her; vitta—for money; äçayä—by the desire; çuñyat—dried up;
vakträyäù—her face; déna—morose; cetasaù—her mind;
nirvedaù—detachment; paramaù—very great; jajïe—awakened;
cintä—anxiety; hetuù—because of; sukha—happiness; ävahaù—bringing.
TRANSLATION
As the night wore on, the prostitute, who intensely desired money, gradually
became morose, and her face dried up. Thus being filled with anxiety for money
and most disappointed, she began to feel a great detachment from her situation,
and happiness arose in her mind.
PURPORT
It appears from these verses that on this particular night the prostitute
Piìgalä was not at all successful in attracting customers to her house. Being
completely frustrated and disappointed, she gradually became indifferent to
her situation. Thus, great suffering sometimes leads one to the path of
enlightenment; or, according to a Sanskrit proverb, disappointment gives rise
to the greatest satisfaction.
The prostitute had dedicated her life to satisfying the lusty desires of many
men. Engaging her mind, body and words in the service of paying lovers, she
completely forgot the devotional service of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and thus her mind was most unsteady and disturbed. Finally, being
completely frustrated, her face and throat drying up, she began to feel
indifferent to her situation, and happiness arose in her mind.
TEXT 28
tasyaA inaivaRNNAicaÔaAyaA
gAItaM Za{NAu yaTaA mama
inavaeRd" @AzAApaAzAAnaAM
pauç&Sasya yaTaA ÷is$a:
tasyä nirviëëa-cittäyä
gétaà çåëu yathä mama
nirveda äçä-päçänäà
puruñasya yathä hy asiù
SYNONYMS
tasyäù—of her; nirviëëa—disgusted; cittäyäù—whose mind; gétam—song;
çåëu—please hear; yathä—as it is; mama—from me; nirvedaù—detachment;
äçä—of hopes and yearnings; päçänäm—of the binding network;
puruñasya—of a person; yathä—just as; hi—certainly; asiù—the sword.
TRANSLATION
The prostitute felt disgusted with her material situation and thus became
indifferent to it. Indeed, detachment acts like a sword, cutting to pieces the
binding network of material hopes and desires. Now please hear from me the
song sung by the prostitute in that situation.
PURPORT
The network of material desires is created when one falsely thinks that he
can establish himself permanently in the material world. This binding network
should be cut by the sword of detachment; otherwise one will be forced to
wander in the illusory network of mäyä with no understanding of liberated life
on the spiritual platform.
TEXT 29
na ÷ËÿAjaAtainavaeRd"Ae
de"h"banDaM ijah"As$aita
yaTaA ivaÁaAnar"ih"taAe
manaujaAe mamataAM na{pa
na hy aìgäjäta-nirvedo
deha-bandhaà jihäsati
yathä vijïäna-rahito
manujo mamatäà nåpa
SYNONYMS
na—does not; hi—certainly; aìga—O King; ajäta—who has not developed;
nirvedaù—detachment; deha—of the material body; bandham—bondage;
jihäsati—he desires to give up; yathä—just as; vijïäna—realized knowledge;
rahitaù—bereft of; manujaù—a human being; mamatäm—false sense of
proprietorship; nåpa—O King.
TRANSLATION
O King, just as a human being who is bereft of spiritual knowledge never
desires to give up his false sense of proprietorship over many material things,
similarly, a person who has not developed detachment never desires to give up
the bondage of the material body.
TEXT 30
ipaËÿlaAevaAca
@h"Ae mae maAeh"ivataitaM
pazyataAivaijataAtmana:
yaA k(AntaAd"s$ata: k(AmaM
k(Amayae yaena baAilazAA
piìgaloväca
aho me moha-vitatià
paçyatävijitätmanaù
yä käntäd asataù kämaà
kämaye yena bäliçä
SYNONYMS
piìgalä—Piìgalä; uväca—said; aho—oh; me—my; moha—of illusion;
vitatim—expansion; paçyata—just see, everyone; avijita-ätmanaù—of one
whose mind is not controlled; yä—which person (me); käntät-from a lover;
asataù—useless, insignificant; kämam—lusty pleasure; kämaye—I desire;
yena—because; bäliçä—I am a fool.
TRANSLATION
The prostitute Piìgalä said: Just see how greatly illusioned I am ! Because I
cannot control my mind, just like a fool I desire lusty pleasure from an
insignificant man.
PURPORT
In material existence all of the senses are attracted by different objects, and
thus the conditioned soul becomes a first-class fool. The cause of material life
is one's indifference to the Absolute Truth. The conditioned soul considers
himself to be the lord and enjoyer of the material world and considers the
purpose of life to be sense gratification. The more one tries to enjoy the
material world, the more one's illusion increases.
It appears from this verse that the prostitute Piìgalä was not only earning
her livelihood through prostitution, but was actually enjoying her illicit
contact with innumerable men. The words käntäd asataù indicate that she was
freely selling herself without discrimination to the most ordinary and useless
men, considering them to be "lovers." Thus she says, "I was a great fool." The
word bäliçä means "one who has a childish mentality, without practical
experience of right and wrong."
TEXT 31
s$antaM s$amaIpae r"maNAM r"ita‘adM"
ivaÔa‘adM" inatyaimamaM ivah"Aya
@k(AmadM" äu":KaBayaAiDazAAek(-
maAeh"‘adM" taucC$mahM" Bajae'ÁaA
santaà samépe ramaëaà rati-pradaà
vitta-pradaà nityam imaà vihäya
akäma-daà duùkha-bhayädhi-çokamoha-
pradaà tuccham ahaà bhaje 'jïä
SYNONYMS
santam—being; samépe—most near (in my heart); ramaëam—the most dear;
rati—actual love or pleasure; pradam—giving; vitta—prosperity;
pradam—giving; nityam—eternal; imam—Him; vihäya—giving up;
akäma-dam—who can never satisfy one's desires; duùkha—misery;
bhaya—fear; ädhi—mental distress; çoka—lamentation; moha-illusion;
pradam—giving; tuccham—most insignificant; aham—I; bhaje-serve; ajïä—an
ignorant fool.
TRANSLATION
I am such a fool that I have given up the service of that person who, being
eternally situated within my heart, is actually most dear to me. That most dear
one is the Lord of the universe, who is the bestower of real love and happiness
and the source of all prosperity. Although He is in my own heart, I have
completely neglected Him. Instead I have ignorantly served insignificant men
who can never satisfy my real desires and who have simply brought me
unhappiness, fear, anxiety, lamentation and illusion.
PURPORT
Piìgalä laments that she chose to serve most sinful, useless men. She falsely
thought they would bring her happiness and neglected to serve the actual Lord
of the heart, Kåñëa. She could understand how foolishly she had struggled for
money, not knowing that the Supreme Lord is always inclined to award
prosperity to His sincere devotee. The prostitute was proud of her ability to
please men, but she now laments that she did not try to please the Supreme
Lord by loving service. The Supreme Lord is completely aloof from the
transactions of the material world. Lord Kåñëa is the actual enjoyer of
everyone and everything, but one must learn how to please the Lord by pure
spiritual service.
TEXT 32
@h"Ae mayaAtmaA pair"taAipataAe va{TaA
s$aAÆeÿtyava{ÔyaAitaivagA÷RvaAtaRyaA
ñENAAªar"AâATaRta{SaAe'nauzAAecyaAta,
‚(Ltaena ivaÔaM r"itamaAtmanaecC$taI
aho mayätmä paritäpito våthä
säìketya-våttyäti-vigarhya-värtayä
straiëän naräd yärtha-tåño 'nuçocyät
krétena vittaà ratim ätmanecchaté
SYNONYMS
aho—oh; mayä—by me; ätmä—the soul; paritäpitaù—subjected to great pain;
våthä—uselessly; säìketya—of a prostitute; våttyä—by the occupation;
ati-vigarhya—most reprehensible; värtayä—occupation; straiëät—from lusty
woman-hunters; narät—from men; yä—who (me); artha-tåñaù—from the
greedy; anuçocyät—the pitiable; krétena—with that which was sold;
vittam—money; ratim—sex pleasure; ätmanä—with my body;
icchaté—desiring.
TRANSLATION
Oh, how I have uselessly tortured my own soul! I have sold my body to
lusty, greedy men who are themselves objects of pity. Thus practicing the most
abominable profession of a prostitute, I hoped to get money and sex pleasure.
PURPORT
The art of prostitution is based on awakening the enjoying propensity in
men. Apparently this prostitute was so foolish that she maintained a romantic
conception of her profession and was actually trying to enjoy loving affairs
with her customers, not realizing that they were the lowest of men with the
most abominable motives. Like the prostitute Piìgalä, one should understand
that by giving up the devotional service of the Lord one simply becomes a
victim of the illusory energy and suffers greatly.
TEXT 33
yad"isTaiBainaRimaRtavaMzAvaMsyasTaUNAM
tvacaA r"AemanaKaE: ipanaÜ"ma,
ºar"ªavaã"Ar"magAAr"maetaä,"
ivaNmaU‡apaUNA< maäu"paEita k(AnyaA
yad asthibhir nirmita-vaàça-vaàsyasthüëaà
tvacä roma-nakhaiù pinaddham
kñaran-nava-dväram agäram etad
vië-mütra-pürëaà mad upaiti känyä
SYNONYMS
yat—which; asthibhiù—with bones; nirmita—constructed; vaàça—the spine;
vaàçya—the ribs; sthüëam—the bones in the hands and legs; tvacä—by skin;
roma-nakhaiù—by hair and nails; pinaddham—covered; kñarat—oozing;
nava—nine; dväram—doors; agäram—house; etat—this; viö—stool;
mütra—urine; pürëam—full of; mat—besides me; upaiti—devotes oneself to;
kä—what woman; anyä—other.
TRANSLATION
This material body is like a house in which I, the soul, am living. The bones
forming my spine, ribs, arms and legs are like the beams, crossbeams and pillars
of the house, and the whole structure, which is full of stool and urine, is
covered by skin, hair and nails. The nine doors leading into this body are
constantly excreting foul substances. Besides me, what woman could be so
foolish as to devote herself to this material body, thinking that she might find
pleasure and love in this contraption?
PURPORT
The nine doors leading into and out of the body are the two eyes, the two
nostrils, the mouth, the two ears, the genital and the anus. Vaàça, or "spine,"
also means "bamboo," and indeed the skeleton appears to resemble a bamboo
construction. Just as bamboo can be immediately burned to ashes or chopped
into pieces, similarly, the material body, which is constantly deteriorating, may
at any moment be crushed into powder, cut into pieces, drowned, burned,
suffocated, and so on. Eventually the body must disintegrate, and therefore
there is certainly no one as unfortunate as one who has dedicated himself
heart and soul to this flimsy body, which is filled with unpleasant elements.
TEXT 34
ivade"h"AnaAM paure" ÷ismaªa,
@h"maekE(va maUX#DaI:
yaAnyaimacC$ntyas$atyasmaAä,"
@Atmad"Atk(AmamacyautaAta,
videhänäà pure hy asminn
aham ekaiva müòha-dhéù
yänyam icchanty asaty asmäd
ätma-dät kämam acyutät
SYNONYMS
videhänäm—of the residents of Videha; pure—in the city; hi—certainly;
asmin—this; aham—I; ekä—alone; eva—undoubtedly; müòha—fool;
dhéù—whose intelligence; yä—(I am that one) who; anyam—another;
icchanté—desiring; asaté—being most unchaste; asmät—other than Him;
ätma-dät—who awards us our real, spiritual form; kämam—sense gratification;
acyutät—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Acyuta.
TRANSLATION
Certainly in this city of Videha I alone am completely foolish. I neglected
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who awards us everything, even our
original spiritual form, and instead I desired to enjoy sense gratification with
many men.
TEXT 35
s$auô$t‘aeï"tamaAe naATa
@AtmaA caAyaM zAr"Iir"NAAma,
taM iva‚(LyaAtmanaEvaAhM"
r"mae'naena yaTaA r"maA
suhåt preñöhatamo nätha
ätmä cäyaà çarériëäm
taà vikréyätmanaivähaà
rame 'nena yathä ramä
SYNONYMS
su-håt—well-wishing friend; preñöha-tamaù—absolutely the most dear one;
näthaù—Lord; ätmä—soul; ca—also; ayam—He; çarériëäm—of all embodied
beings; tam—Him; vikréya—purchasing; ätmanä—by surrendering myself;
eva—certainly; aham—I; rame—will enjoy; anena—with the Lord; yathä—just
like; ramä—Lakñmédevé.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is absolutely the most dear one for all
living beings because He is everyone's well-wisher and Lord. He is the Supreme
Soul situated in everyone's heart. Therefore I will now pay the price of
complete surrender, and thus purchasing the Lord I will enjoy with Him just
like Lakñmédevé.
PURPORT
The real friend of all conditioned souls is the Supreme Lord, and only He
can award the highest perfection in life. By following the example of
Lakñmédevé, who always remains at the lotus feet of the Lord, one will certainly
obtain eternal happiness. One should make the best use of the material body,
which is a bad bargain, and surrender one's body, mind and words to the Lord.
Paying such a price, one can purchase the Lord, who is everyone's dearmost
well-wisher. Thus one's ancient propensity for sense gratification will
automatically be controlled.
TEXT 36
ik(yait‘ayaM tae vyaBajana,
k(AmaA yae k(Amad"A nar"A:
@AântavantaAe BaAyaARyaA
de"vaA vaA k(Alaivaåu"taA:
kiyat priyaà te vyabhajan
kämä ye käma-dä naräù
ädy-antavanto bhäryäyä
devä vä käla-vidrutäù
SYNONYMS
kiyat—how much; priyam—actual happiness; te—they; vyabhajan—have
provided; kämäù—sense gratification; ye—and those; käma-däù—who give
sense gratification; naräù—men; ädi—a beginning; anta—and an end;
vantaù—having; bhäryäyäù—of a wife; deväù—the demigods; vä—or;
käla—by time; vidrutäù—separated and thus disturbed.
TRANSLATION
Men provide sense gratification for women, but all these men, and even the
demigods in heaven, have a beginning and an end. They are all temporary
creations who will be dragged away by time. Therefore how much actual
pleasure or happiness could any of them ever give to their wives?
PURPORT
In this material world everyone is basically pursuing his personal sense
gratification, and thus everyone is being ruined by the influence of time. On
the material platform no one actually helps anyone else. So-called material
love is simply a cheating process, as the lady Piìgalä is now discovering.
TEXT 37
naUnaM mae BagAvaAna, ‘aItaAe
ivaSNAu: ke(naAipa k(maRNAA
inavaeRd"Ae'yaM äu"r"AzAAyaA
yanmae jaAta: s$auKaAvah":
nünaà me bhagavän préto
viñëuù kenäpi karmaëä
nirvedo 'yaà duräçäyä
yan me jätaù sukhävahaù
SYNONYMS
nünam—undoubtedly; me—with me; bhagavän—the Supreme Lord; prétaù—is
pleased; viñëuù—the Personality of Godhead; kena api—by some;
karmaëä—activity; nirvedaù—detachment from sense gratification;
ayam—this; duräçäyäù—in one who so stubbornly hoped for material
enjoyment; yat—because; me—in me; jätaù—it has arisen; sukha—happiness;
ävahaù—bringing.
TRANSLATION
Although I most stubbornly hoped to enjoy the material world, somehow or
other detachment has arisen in my heart, and it is making me very happy.
Therefore the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, must be pleased with
me. Without even knowing it, I must have performed some activity satisfying to
Him.
TEXT 38
maEvaM syaumaRnd"BaAgyaAyaA:
flaezAA inavaeRd"he"tava:
yaenaAnaubanDaM inaôR$tya
pauç&Sa: zAmama{cC$ita
maivaà syur manda-bhägyäyäù
kleçä nirveda-hetavaù
yenänubandhaà nirhåtya
puruñaù çamam åcchati
SYNONYMS
mä—not; evam—thus; syuù—they could be; manda-bhägyäyäù—of a woman
who is truly unfortunate; kleçäù—miseries; nirveda—of detachment;
hetavaù—the causes; yena—by which detachment; anubandham—the
bondage; nirhåtya—removing; puruñaù—a person; çamam-real peace;
åcchati—obtains.
TRANSLATION
A person who has developed detachment can give up the bondage of material
society, friendship and love, and a person who undergoes great suffering
gradually becomes, out of hopelessness, detached and indifferent to the material
world. Thus, due to my great suffering, such detachment awoke in my heart;
yet how could I have undergone such merciful suffering if I were actually
unfortunate? Therefore, I am in fact fortunate and have received the mercy of
the Lord. He must somehow or other be pleased with me.
TEXT 39
taenaAepak{(tamaAd"Aya
izAr"s$aA ƒaAmyas$aËÿtaA:
tyaftvaA äu"r"AzAA: zAr"NAM
˜ajaAima tamaDaIìr"ma,
tenopakåtam ädäya
çirasä grämya-saìgatäù
tyaktvä duräçäù çaraëaà
vrajämi tam adhéçvaram
SYNONYMS
tena—by Him (the Lord); upakåtam—the great help rendered;
ädäya—accepting; çirasä—upon my head, with devotion; grämya—ordinary
sense gratification; saìgatäù—related to; tyaktvä—giving up; duräçäù—sinful
desires; çaraëam—for shelter; vrajämi—I am now coming; tam—to Him;
adhéçvaram—the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
With devotion I accept the great benefit that the Lord has bestowed upon
me. Having given up my sinful desires for ordinary sense gratification, I now
take shelter of Him, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 40
s$antauí"A ™aÚ"Datyaetaä,"
yaTaAlaABaena jaIvataI
ivah"r"AmyamaunaEvaAh"ma,
@AtmanaA r"maNAena vaE
santuñöä çraddadhaty etad
yathä-läbhena jévaté
viharämy amunaiväham
ätmanä ramaëena vai
SYNONYMS
santuñöä—completely satisfied; çraddadhaté—now having complete faith;
etat—in the Lord's mercy; yathä-läbhena—with whatever comes of its own
accord; jévaté—living; viharämi—I will enjoy life; amunä—with that one;
eva—only; aham—I; ätmanä—with the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
ramaëena—who is the real source of love and happiness; vai—there is no
doubt about it.
TRANSLATION
I am now completely satisfied, and I have full faith in the Lord's mercy.
Therefore I will maintain myself with whatever comes of its own accord. I shall
enjoy life with only the Lord, because He is the real source of love and
happiness.
TEXT 41
s$aMs$aAr"kU(pae paitataM
ivaSayaEmauRiSataeºaNAma,
ƒastaM k(AlaAih"naAtmaAnaM
k(Ae'nyañAtaumaDaIìr":
saàsära-küpe patitaà
viñayair muñitekñaëam
grastaà kälähinätmänaà
ko 'nyas trätum adhéçvaraù
SYNONYMS
saàsära—material existence; küpe—in the dark well; patitam—fallen;
viñayaiù—by sense gratification; muñita—stolen away; ékñaëam—vision;
grastam—seized; käla—of time; ahinä—by the serpent; ätmänam—the living
entity; kaù—who; anyaù—else; trätum—is capable of delivering;
adhéçvaraù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
The intelligence of the living entity is stolen away by activities of sense
gratification, and thus he falls into the dark well of material existence. Within
that well he is then seized by the deadly serpent of time. Who else but the
Supreme Personality of Godhead could save the poor living entity from such a
hopeless condition?
PURPORT
Piìgalä stated in a previous verse that even the demigods are unable to give
actual happiness to a woman. One may question who has authorized this lady
to reject even such exalted personalities as Brahmä, Çiva and the other
demigods. The answer given here is that if one actually wants to solve all the
problems of life and go back home, back to Godhead, then the only solution is
to take shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord. It is well known that the demigods
themselves are subject to birth and death. As stated by Lord Çiva himself,
mukti-pradätä sarveñäà viñëur eva na saàçayaù: "There is no doubt that Viñëu
is the deliverer of liberation for everyone."
TEXT 42
@AtmaEva ÷AtmanaAe gAAeæaA
inaivaRâeta yad"AiKalaAta,
@‘amaÔa wdM" pazyaeä,"
ƒastaM k(AlaAih"naA jagAta,
ätmaiva hy ätmano goptä
nirvidyeta yadäkhilät
apramatta idaà paçyed
grastaà kälähinä jagat
SYNONYMS
ätmä—the soul; eva—alone; hi—certainly; ätmanaù—of himself; goptä—the
protector; nirvidyeta—becomes detached; yadä—when; akhilät—from all
material things; apramattaù—without material fever; idam—this; paçyet—can
see; grastam—seized; käla—of time; ahinä—by the serpent; jagat—the
universe.
TRANSLATION
When the living entity sees that the entire universe has been seized by the
serpent of time, he becomes sober and sane and at that time detaches himself
from all material sense gratification. In that condition the living entity is
qualified to be his own protector.
PURPORT
In this verse, Piìgalä states that by the Lord's mercy a self-realized soul can
see that the entire universe is existing within the jaws of the great serpent of
time. Certainly this is not a promising situation, and one who sees it loses his
desire for sense gratification. Thus, by the Lord's causeless mercy, the
spiritually sane living entity can protect himself from illusion.
Since Piìgalä is now glorifying the Personality of Godhead for His mercy in
awarding salvation, the following question might arise: Is she worshiping the
Lord out of love, or is she merely a salvationist desiring liberation from
material existence? In answer it may be said that in her Kåñëa conscious
situation she is already liberated, even though remaining in this world. Her
program will now be simply to render loving service to the Personality of
Godhead without any personal desire, including that of salvation.
TEXT 43
™aI“aAöNA ovaAca
WvaM vyavais$atamaitar,"
äu"r"AzAAM k(AntataSaRjaAma,
iC$ÔvaAepazAmamaAsTaAya
zAyyaAmaupaivavaezA s$aA
çré-brähmaëa uväca
evaà vyavasita-matir
duräçäà känta-tarña-jäm
chittvopaçamam ästhäya
çayyäm upaviveça sä
SYNONYMS
çré-brähmaëaù uväca—the avadhüta said; evam—thus; vyavasita—determined;
matiù—her mind; duräçäm—the sinful desire; känta—lovers;
tarña—hankering for; jäm—caused by; chittvä—cutting off; upaçamam—in
tranquillity; ästhäya—being situated; çayyäm—on her bed; upaviveça—sat
down; sä—she.
TRANSLATION
The avadhüta said: Thus, her mind completely made up, Piìgalä cut off all
her sinful desires to enjoy sex pleasure with lovers, and she became situated in
perfect peace. Then she sat down on her bed.
TEXT 44
@AzAA ih" par"maM äu":KaM
naEr"AzyaM par"maM s$auKama,
yaTaA s$aiHC$â k(AntaAzAAM
s$auKaM s$auSvaApa ipaËÿlaA
äçä hi paramaà duùkhaà
nairäçyaà paramaà sukham
yathä saïchidya käntäçäà
sukhaà suñväpa piìgalä
SYNONYMS
açä—material desire; hi—certainly; paramam—the greatest;
duùkham—unhappiness; nairäçyam—freedom from material desires;
paramam—the greatest; sukham—happiness; yathä—in that way;
saïchidya—completely cutting off; känta—for lovers; äçäm—the desire;
sukham—happily; suñväpa—she slept; piìgalä-the former prostitute, Piìgalä.
TRANSLATION
Material desire is undoubtedly the cause of the greatest unhappiness, and
freedom from such desire is the cause of the greatest happiness. Therefore,
completely cutting off her desire to enjoy so-called lovers, Piìgalä very happily
went to sleep.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Eleventh Canto, Eighth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Story of Piìgalä."
9. Detachment from All that Is Material
The avadhüta brähmaëa describes his seven remaining gurus, beginning
with the kurara bird. He also describes an additional guru, one's own body.
The instruction received from the kurara bird is that attachment creates
misery, but the person who is unattached and has no material possessions is
qualified to achieve unlimited happiness.
The avadhüta brähmaëa learned from the foolish, lazy child that by
becoming free from anxiety a person becomes capable of worshiping the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and experiencing supreme ecstasy.
The instruction received from the young girl who kept just one conchshell
bracelet on each wrist is that one should remain alone and thus steady one's
mind. Then only will it be possible for one to fix one's mind completely on the
Personality of Godhead. Once several men arrived to ask for the hand of the
young girl, whose relatives had coincidentally left the house. She went inside
and began to prepare food for the unexpected guests by beating rice. At that
time her conchshell bracelets were making a loud noise, rattling against each
other, and in order to stop this sound she broke off the bracelets one by one
until at last only one remained on each arm. Just as two or more bracelets
make noise, if even two people reside in the same place, what to speak of many,
there is every chance of mutual quarrel and useless gossip.
The avadhüta brähmaëa also received instruction from the arrow maker,
who was so absorbed in constructing an arrow that he did not even notice that
the king was passing right by him on the road. In the same way, one must
strictly control one's mind, concentrating it in the worship of Lord Çré Hari.
The avadhüta brähmaëa learned from the serpent that a sage should wander
alone, should not live in any prearranged place, should be always careful and
grave, should not reveal his movements, should take assistance from no one
and should speak little.
The instruction obtained from the spider, who spins his web from his
mouth and then withdraws it, is that the Supreme Personality of Godhead
similarly creates from out of Himself the whole universe and then winds it up
into Himself.
From the weak insect who assumed the same form as the peçaskåt wasp, the
avadhüta brähmaëa learned that the living entity, under the sway of affection,
hatred and fear, attains in his next life the identity of that object upon which
he fixes his intelligence.
Seeing that the fragile material body is subject to birth and death, one who
is sober should become devoid of material attachment to this body and should
properly utilize the rare gift of human life in the pursuit of knowledge,
endeavoring always for the achievement of the highest goal.
TEXT 1
™aI“aAöNA ovaAca
pair"ƒah"Ae ih" äu":KaAya
yaâit‘ayatamaM na{NAAma,
@nantaM s$auKamaA«aAeita
taiã"ã"Ana, yastvaik(Âana:
çré-brähmaëa uväca
parigraho hi duùkhäya
yad yat priyatamaà nåëäm
anantaà sukham äpnoti
tad vidvän yas tv akiïcanaù
SYNONYMS
çré-brähmaëaù uväca—the saintly brähmaëa said; parigrahaù—attachment to
possession; hi—certainly; duùkhäya—leading to misery; yat yat—whatever;
priya-tamam—is most dear; nåëäm—of men; anantam—unlimited;
sukham—happiness; äpnoti—achieves; tat—that; vidvän—knowing;
yaù—whoever; tu—indeed; akiïcanaù—is free from such attachment.
TRANSLATION
The saintly brähmaëa said: Everyone considers certain things within the
material world to be most dear to him, and because of attachment to such things
one eventually becomes miserable. One who understands this gives up material
possessiveness and attachment and thus achieves unlimited happiness.
TEXT 2
s$aAimaSaM ku(r"rM" ja£aur,"
bailanaAe'nyae inar"AimaSaA:
tad"AimaSaM pair"tyajya
s$a s$auKaM s$amaivand"ta
sämiñaà kuraraà jaghnur
balino 'nye nirämiñäù
tadämiñaà parityajya
sa sukhaà samavindata
SYNONYMS
sa-ämiñam—having meat; kuraram—a large hawk; jaghnuù—they attacked;
balinaù—very strong; anye—others; nirämiñäù—without meat; tadä—at that
time; ämiñam—the meat; parityajya—giving up; saù—he; sukham—happiness;
samavindata—achieved.
TRANSLATION
Once a group of large hawks who were unable to find any prey attacked
another, weaker hawk who was holding some meat. At that time, being in
danger of his life, the hawk gave up his meat and experienced actual happiness.
PURPORT
Incited by the modes of nature, birds become violent and kill other birds to
eat them or to steal meat captured by them. Hawks, vultures and eagles are in
this category. However, one should give up the envious propensity to commit
violence against others and should take to Kåñëa consciousness, whereby one
sees every living entity as equal to oneself. On this platform of actual
happiness one does not envy anyone and thus sees no one as his enemy.
TEXT 3
na mae maAnaApamaAnaAE staAe
na icantaA gAeh"paui‡aNAAma,
@Atma‚(Lx" @Atmar"itar,"
ivacar"AmaIh" baAlavata,
na me mänäpamänau sto
na cintä geha-putriëäm
ätma-kréòa ätma-ratir
vicaräméha bäla-vat
SYNONYMS
na—not; me—in me; mäna—honor; apamänau—dishonor; staù—exist;
na—there is not; cintä—anxiety; geha—of those who have a home;
putriëäm—and children; ätma—by the self; kréòaù—sporting; ätma—in the
self alone; ratiù—enjoying; vicarämi—I wander; iha—in this world;
bäla-vat—like a child.
TRANSLATION
In family life, the parents are always in anxiety about their home, children
and reputation. But I have nothing to do with these things. I do not worry at all
about any family, and I do not care about honor and dishonor. I enjoy only the
life of the soul, and I find love on the spiritual platform. Thus I wander the
earth like a child.
TEXT 4
ã"Avaeva icantayaA maul(AE
par"maAnand" @AplautaAE
yaAe ivamaugDaAe jax"Ae baAlaAe
yaAe gAuNAeBya: parM" gAta:
dväv eva cintayä muktau
paramänanda äplutau
yo vimugdho jaòo bälo
yo guëebhyaù paraà gataù
SYNONYMS
dvau—two; eva—certainly; cintayä—from anxiety; muktau—freed;
parama-änande—in great happiness; äplutau—merged; yaù—one who;
vimugdhaù—is ignorant; jaòaù—retarded without developing activities;
bälaù—childish; yaù—one who; guëebhyaù—to the modes of nature;
param—the Lord, who is transcendental; gataù—has achieved.
TRANSLATION
In this world two types of people are free from all anxiety and merged in
great happiness: one who is a retarded and childish fool and one who has
approached the Supreme Lord, who is beyond the three modes of material
nature.
PURPORT
Those who fervently seek material sense gratification are gradually pushed
down into a miserable condition of life because as soon as one even slightly
violates the laws of nature, one must suffer sinful reactions. Thus even
materially alert and ambitious persons are constantly in anxiety, and from time
to time they are plunged into great misery. Those who are nonsensical and
retarded, however, live in a fool's paradise, and those who have surrendered to
Lord Kåñëa are filled with transcendental bliss. Therefore both the fool and
the devotee may be said to be peaceful, in the sense that they are free from the
ordinary anxiety of the materially ambitious person. However, this does not
mean that the devotee and the retarded fool are on the same platform. A fool's
peace is like that of a dead stone, whereas a devotee's satisfaction is based on
perfect knowledge.
TEXT 5
¸(icatku(maAr"I tvaAtmaAnaM
va{NAAnaAna, gA{h"maAgAtaAna,
svayaM taAnahR"yaAmaAs$a
¸(Aipa yaAtaeSau banDauSau
kvacit kumäré tv ätmänaà
våëänän gåham ägatän
svayaà tän arhayäm äsa
kväpi yäteñu bandhuñu
SYNONYMS
kvacit—once; kumäré—a young girl; tu—indeed; ätmänam—herself;
våëänän—desiring as a wife; gåham—to the house; ägatän—arrived;
svayam—herself; tän—those men; arhayäm äsa—received with great
hospitality; kva api—to another place; yäteñu—when they had gone;
bandhuñu—all her relatives.
TRANSLATION
Once a marriageable young girl was alone in her house because her parents
and relatives had gone that day to another place. At that time a few men arrived
at the house, specifically desiring to marry her. She received them with all
hospitality.
TEXT 6
taeSaAmaByavah"Ar"ATa<
zAAlaIna, r"h"is$a paAiTaRva
@va£antyaA: ‘ak(Aeï"sTaAzA,
ca‚u(: zAÊÿA: svanaM mah"ta,
teñäm abhyavahärärthaà
çälén rahasi pärthiva
avaghnantyäù prakoñöha-sthäç
cakruù çaìkhäù svanaà mahat
SYNONYMS
teñäm—of the guests; abhyavahära-artham—so that they could eat; çälén—rice;
rahasi—being alone; pärthiva—O King; avaghnantyäù—of her who was
beating; prakoñöha—on her forearms; sthäù—situated; cakruù—they made;
çaìkhäù—bracelets made of conchshell; svanam—a sound; mahat—great.
TRANSLATION
The girl went to a private place and began to make preparations so that the
unexpected male guests could eat. As she was beating the rice, the conchshell
bracelets on her arms were colliding and making a loud noise.
TEXT 7
s$aA taÀaugAuips$ataM matvaA
mah"taI va{wRix"taA tata:
baBaÃaEkE(k(zA: zAÊÿAna,
ã"AE ã"AE paANyaAer"zAeSayata,
sä taj jugupsitaà matvä
mahaté våéòitä tataù
babhaïjaikaikaçaù çaìkhän
dvau dvau päëyor açeñayat
SYNONYMS
sä—she; tat—that noise; jugupsitam—shameful; matvä—thinking;
mahaté—very intelligent; vréòitä—shy; tataù—from her arms; babhaïja—she
broke; eka-ekaçaù—one by one; çaìkhän—the shell bracelets; dvau dvau—two
each; päëyoù—on her two hands; açeñayat—she kept on.
TRANSLATION
The young girl feared that the men would consider her family to be poor
because their daughter was busily engaged in the menial task of husking rice.
Being very intelligent, the shy girl broke the shell bracelets from her arms,
leaving just two on each wrist.
TEXT 8
oBayaAer"pyaBaUÙ"AeSaAe
÷va£antyaA: svazAÊÿyaAe:
ta‡aApyaekM( inar"iBad"ä,"
Wk(smaAªaABavaä," Dvaina:
ubhayor apy abhüd ghoño
hy avaghnantyäù sva-çaìkhayoù
taträpy ekaà nirabhidad
ekasmän näbhavad dhvaniù
SYNONYMS
ubhayoù—from the two (on each hand); api—still; abhüt—there was;
ghoñaù—noise; hi—indeed; avaghnantyäù—of her who was husking the rice;
sva-çaìkhayoù—from each set of two shell ornaments; tatra—therein;
api—indeed; ekam—one only; nirabhidat—she separated; ekasmät—from that
one ornament; na—not; abhavat—there was; dhvaniù—a sound.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, as the young girl continued to husk the rice, the two bracelets
on each wrist continued to collide and make noise. Therefore she took one
bracelet off each arm, and with only one left on each wrist there was no more
noise.
TEXT 9
@nvaizAºaimamaM tasyaA
opade"zAmair"nd"ma
laAek(Ananaucar"ªaetaAna,
laAek(taÔvaivaivats$ayaA
anvaçikñam imaà tasyä
upadeçam arindama
lokän anucarann etän
loka-tattva-vivitsayä
SYNONYMS
anvaçikñam—I have seen with my own eyes; imam—this; tasyäù—of the young
girl; upadeçam—lesson; arim-dama—O subduer of the enemy; lokän—worlds;
anucaran—wandering; etän—these; loka—of the world; tattva—truth;
vivitsayä—with a desire to know.
TRANSLATION
O subduer of the enemy, I travel throughout the surface of the earth
learning constantly about the nature of this world, and thus I personally
witnessed the lesson of the young girl.
PURPORT
The brähmaëa sage here explains to King Yadu that he is not presenting
theoretical knowledge. Rather, by wandering throughout the world the
observant and thoughtful brähmaëa has personally experienced the lessons
learned from all of the above-mentioned gurus. Thus, instead of posing himself
to be omniscient like God, he humbly explains that he has faithfully learned
these lessons in his travels.
TEXT 10
vaAs$ae baó"naAM k(lah"Ae
Bavaeã"AtaAR ã"yaAer"ipa
Wk( Wva vas$aeÔasmaAta,
ku(maAyaAR wva k(ÆÿNA:
väse bahünäà kalaho
bhaved värtä dvayor api
eka eva vaset tasmät
kumäryä iva kaìkaëaù
SYNONYMS
väse—in a residence; bahünäm—of many people; kalahaù—quarrel;
bhavet—will be; värtä—conversation; dvayoù—of two people; api—even;
ekaù—alone; eva—certainly; vaset—one should live; tasmät—therefore;
kumäryäù—of the young girl; iva—like; kaìkaëaù—the bracelet.
TRANSLATION
When many people live together in one place there will undoubtedly be
quarreling. And even if only two people live together there will be frivolous
conversation and disagreement. Therefore, to avoid conflict, one should live
alone, as we learn from the example of the bracelet of the young girl.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has given a nice example in this
regard. Because the young girl mentioned in this story had no husband, she
had to fulfill her duties as a host by removing her bracelets so that each wrist
held one bracelet only. In the same way, the process of jïäna-yoga, or spiritual
advancement by philosophical speculation, demands that the speculating sages
live alone, without any other association. Since jïänés have dedicated their
lives to speculation. there will undoubtedly be endless argument and
quarreling on technical points if many jïänés live together. Therefore, to keep
a peaceful atmosphere they must live alone. On the other hand, a king's
daughter who has been duly married to an aristocratic prince fulfills her duties
to her husband by dressing herself attractively with innumerable ornaments
and approaching him for love. Similarly, the goddess of devotion, Bhakti-devé,
decorates herself with the innumerable ornaments of the Vaiñëavas, who come
together to relish the sweet sound of the holy name of the Lord. Because pure
Vaiñëavas do not intimately associate with nondevotees, it may be said that
they reside alone, and thus they also fulfill the purpose of this verse. There
cannot be any quarrel among pure Vaiñëavas, because they are on the real
platform of desirelessness, not wanting even salvation or mystic powers, what
to speak of sense gratification. Because they are all devotees of Kåñëa, they
may freely associate with one another for glorifying the Lord. As stated in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (3.25.34):
naikätmatäà me spåhayanti kecin
mat-päda-seväbhiratä mad-éhäù
ye 'nyonyato bhägavatäù prasajya
sabhäjayante mama pauruñäëi
"A pure devotee, who is attached to the activities of devotional service and
who always engages in the service of My lotus feet, never desires to become
one with Me. Such a devotee, who is unflinchingly engaged, always glorifies
My pastimes and activities."
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has commented on this verse as
follows: "The young girl in the story kept only one bracelet on each wrist so
that there would be no noisy conflict among the bracelets. Similarly, one
should give up the association of those who are not devoted to the Supreme
Lord." This is the actual lesson to be learned. A real Vaiñëava is always pure
and faultless in character. However, in those places where nondevotees
congregate there will undoubtedly be envious criticism of the devotional
service of the Lord, and those who falsely attempt to analyze reality without
the Supreme Personality of Godhead will create much disturbing noise in the
name of philosophy. Therefore, one should remain in those places where the
Supreme Lord is properly worshiped according to the Vedic standard. If
everyone is dedicated to glorifying the Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, there
will not be any impediment in mutual association. However, in a place where
people have many different purposes besides the pleasure of the Supreme Lord,
social dealings will certainly be disrupted.
One should therefore avoid the association of those who are inimical to
devotional service; otherwise one will be frustrated in achieving the spiritual
purpose of life. One who always keeps himself in the company of the devotees
of the Lord is actually living alone. If one lives in a community where the only
consideration is the pleasure of the Lord, then one can avoid the contradictory
situations caused by many persons competing to satisfy their own material
desires. This is the lesson intelligently understood by the brähmaëa from the
bracelets of the young girl.
In this connection Çréla Madhväcärya quotes the following:
asaj-janais tu saàväso
na kartavyaù kathaïcana
yävad yävac ca bahubhiù
saj-janaiù sa tu mukti-daù
"One should not under any circumstances live with those who are not devotees
of the Lord. On the other hand, one should stay with many devotees, because
such association awards liberation."
TEXT 11
mana Wk(‡a s$aMyauHjyaAja,
ijataìAs$aAe ijataAs$ana:
vaEr"AgyaAByaAs$ayaAegAena
i‹ayamaANAmatain‰"ta:
mana ekatra saàyuïjyäj
jita-çväso jitäsanaù
vairägyäbhyäsa-yogena
dhriyamäëam atandritaù
SYNONYMS
manaù—the mind; ekatra—in one place; saàyuïjyät—one should fix;
jita—conquered; çväsaù—the breathing process; jita—conquered; äsanaù—the
yoga sitting postures; vairägya—by detachment; abhyäsa-yogena—by the
regulated practice of yoga; dhriyamäëam—the mind being steadied;
atandritaù—very carefully.
TRANSLATION
Having perfected the yoga sitting postures and conquered the breathing
process, one should make the mind steady by detachment and the regulated
practice of yoga. Thus one should carefully fix the mind on the single goal of
yoga practice.
PURPORT
One should develop vairägya, or detachment, by observing that all material
things are doomed. Thus one should take to the regulated practice of yoga,
which in this age means the process of chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra.
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, the avadhüta brähmaëa is
recommending bhakti-miçra añöäìga-yoga, or the eightfold mystic yoga process
performed as an offering to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The desire to enjoy the material world is so strong that the mind wanders
here and there uncontrollably. Therefore it is stated, dhriyamäëam: the mind
must be fixed in the goal of life, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In the
perfect stage of mental concentration called samädhi there is no longer any
distinction between internal and external vision, since one can see the
Absolute Truth everywhere.
In the mystic yoga process one must sit properly, and then it is possible to
control the different airs within the body. When the breathing process is
controlled, the mind, which is dependent upon the actions of the bodily airs, is
easily fixed in higher consciousness. But although the mind may be
momentarily controlled, if one is overcome by desire for sense gratification the
mind will again be lost. Thus, this verse emphasizes vairägya, detachment from
material illusion. This is attained by abhyäsa-yoga, the regulated practice of
Kåñëa consciousness, which is the highest yoga system, as confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä (6.47):
yoginäm api sarveñäà
mad-gatenäntar-ätmanä
çraddhävän bhajate yo mäà
sa me yuktatamo mataù
"And of all yogés, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping Me
in transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in yoga
and is the highest of all."
TEXT 12
yaismanmanaAe labDapadM" yade"taca,
C$naE: zAnaEmauRÂaita k(maR&#re"NAUna,
s$aÔvaena va{Üe"na r"jastamaê
ivaDaUya inavaARNAmaupaEtyainanDanama,
yasmin mano labdha-padaà yad etac
chanaiù çanair muïcati karma-reëün
sattvena våddhena rajas tamaç ca
vidhüya nirväëam upaity anindhanam
SYNONYMS
yasmin—in which (the Supreme Lord); manaù—the mind; labdha—having
obtained; padam—a permanent situation; yat etat—that very mind; çanaiù
çanaiù—gradually, step by step; muïcati—gives up; karma—of fruitive
activities; reëün—the contamination; sattvena—by the mode of goodness;
våddhena—which has grown strong; rajaù—the mode of passion; tamaù—the
mode of ignorance; ca—also; vidhüya—giving up; nirväëam—the
transcendental position in which one is united with the object of his
meditation; upaiti—achieves; anindhanam—without fuel.
TRANSLATION
The mind can be controlled when it is fixed on the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Having achieved a stable situation, the mind becomes free from
polluted desires to execute material activities; thus as the mode of goodness
increases in strength, one can completely give up the modes of passion and
ignorance, and gradually one transcends even the material mode of goodness.
When the mind is freed from the fuel of the modes of nature, the fire of
material existence is extinguished. Then one achieves the transcendental
platform of direct relationship with the object of his meditation, the Supreme
Lord.
PURPORT
The interaction of the three modes of nature creates great obstacles in one's
path of spiritual advancement, and there is danger that one may be thrown
down into the darkness of ignorance. Those who are experienced in practical
psychology know the dangers of the uncontrolled mind and constantly
endeavor to bring the mind under control. If one can free oneself from the
influence of the material modes of passion and ignorance, then life becomes
very auspicious. Controlling the mind, and thereby freeing oneself from the
influence of the material modes of nature, is the only means of making actual
progress in life. The word yasmin in this verse, according to Çréla Çrédhara
Svämé, indicates the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the reservoir of
all pleasure. Giving up the material propensities of the mind does not mean
merging into an impersonal existence, such as that experienced in dreamless
sleep. As stated in this verse, sattvena våddhena: one must become firmly
established in the mode of goodness and then gradually rise onto the spiritual
platform, where one may dwell in the company of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
TEXT 13
tadE"vamaAtmanyavaç&Ü"icaÔaAe
na vaed" ik(iÂaß"ih"r"ntarM" vaA
yaTaeSauk(Ar"Ae na{paitaM ˜ajantama,
wSaAE gAtaAtmaA na d"d"zAR paAìeR
tadaivam ätmany avaruddha-citto
na veda kiïcid bahir antaraà vä
yatheñu-käro nåpatià vrajantam
iñau gatätmä na dadarça pärçve
SYNONYMS
tadä—at that time; evam—thus; ätmani—in the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; avaruddha—fixed; cittaù—the mind; na—does not; veda—know;
kiïcit—anything; bahiù—outside; antaram—inside; vä—either; yathä—just as;
iñu—of arrows; käraù—a maker; nå-patim—the king; vrajantam—going;
iñau—in the arrow; gata-ätmä—being absorbed; na dadarça—did not see;
pärçve—right next to him.
TRANSLATION
Thus, when one's consciousness is completely fixed on the Absolute Truth,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one no longer sees duality, or internal and
external reality. The example is given of the arrow maker who was so absorbed
in making a straight arrow that he did not even see or notice the king himself,
who was passing right next to him.
PURPORT
It is understood that when a king moves on a public street he is heralded by
kettledrums and other musical instruments and is accompanied by soldiers and
other members of his retinue. Thus, despite this royal extravaganza passing
right by his workshop, the arrow maker did not even notice because he was
completely absorbed in his prescribed duty of making an arrow straight and
sharp. One who is completely absorbed in loving devotional service to the
Absolute Truth, Çré Kåñëa, no longer pays attention to material illusion. In
this verse the word bahis, "external" refers to the innumerable objects of
material sense gratification, such as food, drink, sex, and so on, which drag the
senses of the conditioned soul into material duality. The word antaram, or
"internal" refers to memory of previous sense gratification or hopes and dreams
for future materialistic situations. One who is seeing everywhere the Absolute
Truth, Çré Kåñëa, categorically rejects both internal and external illusion. This
is called mukti-pada, or the status of liberation. On this platform there is
neither attraction nor aversion to sense objects; rather, there is loving
absorption in the Absolute Truth, Kåñëa, and an overwhelming desire to
please Him by devotional service. One who gives up the reality of Kåñëa will be
forced to wander uselessly in the kingdom of mental speculation. One who
cannot see that the Absolute Truth, Lord Kåñëa, is the background and basis
of everything that exists will be bewildered by the false concept that there is
something that is not Kåñëa. Everything emanates from the Lord, and He is
the Lord of everything. This simple understanding is the actual existential
situation.
TEXT 14
Wk(caAyaRinake(ta: syaAä,"
@‘amaÔaAe gAuh"AzAya:
@laºyamaANA @AcaArE"r,"
mauinare"k(Ae'lpaBaASaNA:
eka-cäry aniketaù syäd
apramatto guhäçayaù
alakñyamäëa äcärair
munir eko 'lpa-bhäñaëaù
SYNONYMS
eka—alone; cäré—moving; aniketaù—without fixed residence; syät—should
be; apramattaù—being very alert; guhä-äçayaù—remaining secluded;
alakñyamäëaù—without being recognized; äcäraiù—by his activities;
muniù—a sage; ekaù—without companions; alpa—very little;
bhäñaëaù—speaking.
TRANSLATION
A saintly person should remain alone and constantly travel without any
fixed residence. Being alert, he should remain secluded and should act in such a
way that he is not recognized or noticed by others. Moving without companions,
he should not speak more than required.
PURPORT
The previous narration concerning the shell bracelets of the young girl
demonstrates that even saintly persons engaged in ordinary yoga processes
should remain alone to avoid conflict or disturbance. In other words, persons
engaged in ordinary yoga processes should not even associate with each other.
This verse indirectly refers to the serpent, who, fearing attack from human
beings, keeps himself secluded. From this example we learn that a saintly
person should not associate with ordinary materialistic people. He should also
avoid having a fixed residence and should wander unnoticed by others.
Our engagement in material existence is the cause of our unhappiness.
Such engagement destroys the real purpose of our life, Kåñëa consciousness.
Somehow or other one must give up the deep-rooted attachment to material
society, friendship and love. One must practice detachment, and by surrender
to the principles of Kåñëa consciousness one's auspicious life will begin. By
organizing one's life according to the varëäçrama system one can take the first
step in self-realization. In other words, one should accept an honest occupation
and regulate his sex life, either by giving it up entirely as a brahmacäré or
sannyäsé or by living as a married householder. Without regulating one's
occupation and personal life, there will be chaos, and it will be very difficult to
make spiritual advancement. The attachments to material society, friendship
and love are based on a long previous experience in the material world. They
are great obstacles in the path of transcendental understanding, and if one
maintains them, spiritual progress will be most difficult. Caitanya Mahäprabhu
taught by His example and precept what a devotee should and should not do,
and obedience to such principles brings one to the path of supreme perfection.
Thus, one has to rise above ordinary social custom, which directs the living
entity toward useless sense gratification.
TEXT 15
gA{h"Ar"mBaAe ih" äu":KaAya
ivaP(laêA‹auvaAtmana:
s$apaR: par"k{(taM vaezma
‘aivazya s$auKamaeDatae
gåhärambho hi duùkhäya
viphalaç cädhruvätmanaù
sarpaù para-kåtaà veçma
praviçya sukham edhate
SYNONYMS
gåha—of a home; ärambhaù—construction; hi—certainly; duùkhäya—leads to
unhappiness; viphalaù—fruitless; ca—also; adhruva—impermanent;
ätmanaù—of the living being; sarpaù—a serpent; parakåtam—built by others;
veçma—home; praviçya—having entered; sukham—happily; edhate—prospers.
TRANSLATION
When a person living in a temporary material body tries to construct a happy
home, the result is fruitless and miserable. The snake, however, enters a home
that has been built by others and prospers happily.
PURPORT
The snake does not have the proclivity to build his own home, but rather
lives in a suitable place constructed by other creatures. Thus he does not
entangle himself in the labor of home building. Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta
Sarasvaté Öhäkura points out that although materialistic persons take
unlimited pains to invent and mass-produce electricity, automobiles, airplanes,
etc., ultimately these things are meant for the convenience of the Vaiñëavas
who are preaching Kåñëa consciousness. The karmés will always go to such
trouble, and the devotees will always offer such laborious productions to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead by engaging them in His loving service. The
devotees, being concerned with the ultimate perfection of life, do not
personally struggle for material advancement. On the other hand, there is no
need for the devotees to artificially imitate the austere life-style of ancient
times. A devotee's goal is simply to serve Kåñëa as nicely as possible; therefore
the devotees willingly accept beautiful mansions and all types of material
opulences, not with any personal attachment, but only so that these things can
be engaged in the loving service of the Lord. If one engages such things with a
desire to enjoy them, one falls down from the platform of pure devotional
service. Materialistic persons are only interested in exploiting their so-called
yoga practice in order to rejuvenate their sexual potency or to vainly
remember their previous conditioned lives. Thus, applying mysticism to the
endless search for sense gratification, they do not understand the actual goal of
human life.
TEXT 16
Wk(Ae naAr"AyaNAAe de"va:
paUvaRs$a{íM" svamaAyayaA
s$aMô$tya k(Alak(layaA
k(lpaAnta wd"maIìr":
Wk( WvaAiã"taIyaAe'BaUä,"
@AtmaADaAr"Ae'iKalaA™aya:
eko näräyaëo devaù
pürva-såñöaà sva-mäyayä
saàhåtya käla-kalayä
kalpänta idam éçvaraù
eka evädvitéyo 'bhüd
ätmädhäro 'khiläçrayaù
SYNONYMS
ekaù—alone; näräyaëaù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; devaù—God;
pürva—previously; såñöam—created; sta-mäyayä—by His own potency;
saàhåtya—withdrawing within Himself; käla—of time; kalayä—by the
portion; kalpa-ante—at the time of annihilation; idam—this universe;
éçvaraù-the supreme controller; ekaù—alone; eva—indeed; advitéyaù—without
a second; abhüt—became; ätma-ädhäraù—one whose self is the reservoir and
resting place of everything; akhila—of all potencies; äçrayaù—the reservoir.
TRANSLATION
The Lord of the universe, Näräyaëa, is the worshipable God of all living
entities. Without extraneous assistance, the Lord creates this universe by His
own potency, and at the time of annihilation the Lord destroys the universe
through His personal expansion of time and withdraws all of the cosmos,
including all the conditioned living entities, within Himself. Thus, His
unlimited Self is the shelter and reservoir of all potencies. The subtle pradhäna,
the basis of all cosmic manifestation, is conserved within the Lord and is in this
way not different from Him. In the aftermath of annihilation the Lord stands
alone.
PURPORT
As will be explained in verse 21 of this chapter, the Lord's independent
creation and annihilation of the universe can be compared to the spider's
creating and withdrawing his web. The word eka, or "one alone," is mentioned
twice in this verse to emphasize that there is only one Supreme Personality of
Godhead and that all universal affairs, as well as spiritual pastimes, are
conducted by His potency alone. According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté
Öhäkura, this verse refers to Käraëärëavaçäyé Viñëu, or Mahä-Viñëu lying in
the Causal Ocean. The words ätmädhära and akhiläçraya both indicate that
Näräyaëa is the reservoir or shelter of all existence. Ätmädhära indicates that
the Lord's personal body is the shelter of everything. Mahä-Viñëu is a plenary
portion of Lord Kåñëa, the original Supreme Personality of Godhead, from
whose body expand the innumerable potencies that manifest the material and
spiritual worlds. According to the Brahma-saàhitä these innumerable worlds
rest within the brahmajyoti, or spiritual effulgence, also emanating from the
Lord's body. Thus Kåñëa is éçvara, the supreme controller.
TEXTS 17-18
k(AlaenaAtmaAnauBaAvaena
s$aAmyaM naItaAs$au zAil(Sau
s$aÔvaAid"SvaAid"pauç&Sa:
‘aDaAnapauç&Saeìr":
par"Avar"ANAAM par"ma
@Astae kE(valyas$aMiÁata:
ke(valaAnauBavaAnand"-
s$and"Aeh"Ae inaç&paAiDak(:
kälenätmänubhävena
sämyaà nétäsu çaktiñu
sattvädiñv ädi-puruñaù
pradhäna-puruñeçvaraù
parävaräëäà parama
äste kaivalya-saàjïitaù
kevalänubhavänandasandoho
nirupädhikaù
SYNONYMS
kälena—by the time factor; ätma-anubhävena—which is the Lord's own
potency; sämyam—to equilibrium; nétäsu—being brought; çaktiñu—the
material potencies; sattva-ädiñu—the mode of goodness, etc.; ädi-puruñaù—the
eternal Supreme Personality of Godhead; pradhäna-puruña-éçvaraù—the
supreme controller of the neutral state of nature (pradhäna) and of the living
entities; para—of the liberated living entities or the demigods; avaräëäm—of
ordinary conditioned souls; paramaù—the supreme worshipable object;
äste—exists; kaivalya—liberated existence; saàjïitaù—that which is indicated
by the term; kevala—pure without material tinge; anubhava—experience of
revelation; änanda—bliss; sandohaù—the totality; nirupädhikaù—devoid of
materially designated relationships.
TRANSLATION
When the Supreme Personality of Godhead displays His own potency in the
form of time and guides His material potencies, such as the mode of goodness,
into a neutral condition of equilibrium, He remains as the supreme controller of
that neutral state, called pradhäna, as well as of the living entities. He is also
the supreme worshipable object for all beings, including liberated souls,
demigods and ordinary conditioned souls. The Lord is eternally free from any
material designation, and He constitutes the totality of spiritual bliss, which one
experiences by seeing the Lord's spiritual form. The Lord thus exhibits the
fullest meaning of the word "liberation."
PURPORT
One who fixes his mind in the Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead,
gets immediate relief from the waves of material anxiety because the Lord's
transcendental form is completely free of any material contamination or
designation. Less intelligent persons accept the illogical doctrine that the Lord
is transformed into His creation and maintains no separate, individual
existence. They falsely imagine that they can merge their individuality into
the universal oneness and become exactly equal to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. However, in the opinion of Çrémad-Bhägavatam the Personality of
Godhead is not impersonal but is instead full of all transcendental qualities.
The three modes of material nature constitute His inferior energy, and the
omnipotent time factor, upon which the modes rest, is the personal expansion
of the Lord. Thus, the Lord creates, maintains and annihilates the material
manifestation and yet remains completely apart from it. The conditioned souls
who desire to exploit the Lord's inferior creation are impelled by the
Personality of Godhead to do so, and thus they become imitation enjoyers in
the temporary world of matter. But when one gains practical experience that
the gross and subtle material bodies are simply coverings of the eternal soul,
one gives up the foolishness of material attachment and becomes attached to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He realizes that his constitutional
position is neither to enjoy matter nor merge into the Lord's existence. His real
nature is that he is a servant of God. Service rendered to the Lord is eternal,
full of bliss and knowledge, and by the potency of such service one becomes
liberated and his activities become glorious. Such service is eternal and
gradually promotes one to the platform of kevalänubhavänanda-sandoha, or
merging into the ocean of bliss by seeing the transcendental personal form of
the Lord.
TEXT 19
ke(valaAtmaAnauBaAvaena
svamaAyaAM i‡agAuNAAitmak(Ama,
s$aÉÿAeBayana, s$a{jatyaAd"AE
tayaA s$aU‡amair"nd"ma
kevalätmänubhävena
sva-mäyäà tri-guëätmikäm
saìkñobhayan såjaty ädau
tayä sütram arindama
SYNONYMS
kevala—pure; ätma—of His own Self; anubhävena—by the potency;
sva-mäyäm—His own energy; tri—three; guëa—modes; ätmikäm—composed
of; saìkñobhayan—agitating; såjati—He manifests; ädau—at the time of
creation; tayä—with that energy; sütram—the mahat-tattva distinguished by
the power of action; arindama—O subduer of the enemies.
TRANSLATION
O subduer of the enemies, at the time of creation the Personality of Godhead
expands His own transcendental potency in the form of time, and agitating His
material energy, mäyä, composed of the three modes of material nature, He
creates the mahat-tattva.
PURPORT
The word kevala means "pure" and indicates that the Lord's kälaçakti, or
time potency, is a transcendental energy nondifferent from His personal body.
The brähmaëa addresses King Yadu here as arindama, subduer of the enemies.
This indicates that although the topic of mäyä, or illusory creation, is being
discussed, the King need not worry, because as a staunch devotee of the Lord,
he is able to subdue the real enemies of life, namely lust, anger and greed,
which make one a prisoner in mäyä's kingdom. The word sütram indicates the
mahat-tattva, on which many material creations rest, just like jewels rest on a
thread. In the state of pradhäna, or material equilibrium, the modes of nature
do not interact. In the Third Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Lord Kapila
explains in His Säìkhya teachings that the Supreme Personality of Godhead
agitates the neutral state of nature and thus creation takes place. The created
manifest form of nature in which fruitive activities are stimulated is called
mahat-tattva, as indicated in this verse.
If one tries to renounce the illusory creation of the Lord by taking shelter of
impersonal Vedänta philosophy, thus artificially equating the infinite
consciousness of the Lord and the infinitesimal consciousness of the
conditioned soul, one's analysis will fall far short of reality. The word
sva-mäyäm in this verse indicates that the illusory potency that covers the
conditioned souls is always subordinate to the Lord, whose consciousness is
infallible and infinite and who is always a person.
TEXT 20
taAmaAò"iñgAuNAvyailM(
s$a{jantaI%M ivaìtaAemauKama,
yaismana, ‘aAetaimadM" ivaìM
yaena s$aMs$ar"tae paumaAna,
täm ähus tri-guëa-vyaktià
såjantéà viçvato-mukham
yasmin protam idaà viçvaà
yena saàsarate pumän
SYNONYMS
täm—the mahat-tattva; ähuù-they say; tri-guëa—the three modes of material
nature; vyaktim—manifesting as the cause; såjantém—creating;
viçvataù-mukham—many different categories of cosmic manifestation;
yasmin—within the mahat-tattva; protam-strung and bound; idam—this;
viçvam—universe; yena—by which; saàsarate—undergoes material existence;
pumän—the living being.
TRANSLATION
According to great sages, that which is the basis of the three modes of
material nature and which manifests the variegated universe is called the sütra
or mahat-tattva. Indeed, this universe is resting within that mahat-tattva, and
due to its potency the living entity undergoes material existence.
PURPORT
The cosmic manifestation is a reality because it emanates from the supreme
reality, the Personality of Godhead. The material world, however, is temporary
and full of problems. The conditioned soul foolishly tries to become the lord of
this inferior creation and becomes separated from his real friend, the Supreme
Lord. In this state, his only business is material sense gratification, and his real
knowledge is lost.
TEXT 21
yaTaAeNARnaAiBaôR$d"yaAä,"
ONAA< s$antatya vaf‡ata:
tayaA ivaô$tya BaUyastaAM
ƒas$atyaevaM mahe"ìr":
yathorëanäbhir hådayäd
ürëäà santatya vaktrataù
tayä vihåtya bhüyas täà
grasaty evaà maheçvaraù
SYNONYMS
yathä—just as; ürna-näbhiù—the spider; hådayät—from within himself;
ürëäm—thread; santatya—expanding; vaktrataù—from his mouth; tayä—with
that thread; vihåtya—enjoying; bhüyaù—again; täm—that thread; grasati—he
swallows; evam—in the same way; mahä-éçvaraù—the Supreme Lord.
TRANSLATION
Just as from within himself the spider expands thread through his mouth,
plays with it for some time and eventually swallows it, similarly, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead expands His personal potency from within Himself.
Thus, the Lord displays the network of cosmic manifestation, utilizes it
according to His purpose and eventually withdraws it completely within
Himself.
PURPORT
One who is intelligent obtains spiritual knowledge even from an
insignificant creature like the spider. Thus, transcendental knowledge is
visible everywhere for one whose eyes are opened in Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 22
ya‡a ya‡a manaAe de"h"I
DaAr"yaets$ak(laM iDayaA
µaeh"Aä," ãe"SaAà"yaAã"Aipa
yaAita taÔatsvaè&pataAma,
yatra yatra mano dehé
dhärayet sakalaà dhiyä
snehäd dveñäd bhayäd väpi
yäti tat-tat-svarüpatäm
SYNONYMS
yatra yatra—wherever; manaù—the mind; dehé—the conditioned soul;
dhärayet—fixes; sakalam—with complete concentration; dhiyä—with the
intelligence; snehät—because of affection; dveñät—because of envy;
bhayät—because of fear; vä api—either; yäti—he goes; tat-tat—to that,
whatever it is; svarüpatäm—particular state of existence.
TRANSLATION
If out of love, hate or fear an embodied soul fixes his mind with intelligence
and complete concentration upon a particular bodily form, he will certainly
attain the form that he is meditating upon.
PURPORT
From this verse it is not hard to understand that if one constantly meditates
upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one will achieve a spiritual body
just like that of the Lord. The word dhiyä, "with intelligence," indicates
complete intellectual conviction in a particular understanding, and similarly
the word sakalam indicates one-pointed attention of the mind. With such
complete absorption of consciousness, surely one will attain in the next life a
form exactly like that upon which one was meditating. This is another
example learned from the insect kingdom, as explained in the following verse.
TEXT 23
k(Lq%: paezAs$k{(taM DyaAyana,
ku(x"YaAM taena ‘avaeizAta:
yaAita tats$aAtmataAM r"Ajana,
paUvaRè&pamas$antyajana,
kéöaù peçaskåtaà dhyäyan
kuòyäà tena praveçitaù
yäti tat-sätmatäà räjan
pürva-rüpam asantyajan
SYNONYMS
kéöaù—an insect; peçaskåtam—a wasp; dhyäyan—meditating on; kuòyäm—in
his hive; tena—by the wasp; praveçitaù—forced to enter; yäti—he goes; tat—of
the wasp; sa-ätmatäm—the same state of existence; räjan—O King;
pürva-rüpam—the previous body; asantyajan—not giving up.
TRANSLATION
O King, once a wasp forced a weaker insect to enter his hive and kept him
trapped there. In great fear the weak insect constantly meditated upon his
captor, and without giving up his body, he gradually achieved the same state of
existence as the wasp. Thus one achieves a state of existence according to one's
constant concentration.
PURPORT
The following question may be raised: Since the weaker insect in this story
did not physically change his body, how can it be said that he achieved the
same state of existence as the wasp? Actually, by constant meditation upon a
particular object one's consciousness becomes filled with its qualities. Due to
extreme fear the smaller insect was absorbed in the characteristics and
activities of the large wasp and thus entered into the existence of the wasp.
Due to such meditation, he actually took the body of a wasp in his next life.
Similarly, although we are conditioned souls, if we absorb our consciousness
in Lord Kåñëa we can become liberated even before giving up our present
body. If our intelligence becomes steady on the spiritual platform by
understanding that Lord Kåñëa is everything, then we can give up unnecessary
consciousness of the external body and absorb ourselves in the spiritual
pastimes of Vaikuëöha. Thus even before death one can raise oneself to the
spiritual platform and enjoy life as a liberated soul. Or, if one is a stubborn
fool, then even in this life one can become just like an animal, such as a hog or
a dog, constantly thinking of eating and sex life. But human life is actually
meant for understanding the science of consciousness and the future results of
our meditation.
TEXT 24
WvaM gAuç&Bya WtaeBya
WSaA mae izAiºataA maita:
svaAtmaAepaizAiºataAM bauiÜM"
Za{NAu mae vad"ta: ‘aBaAe
evaà gurubhya etebhya
eñä me çikñitä matiù
svätmopaçikñitäà buddhià
çåëu me vadataù prabho
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; gurubhyaù—from the spiritual masters; etebhyaù—from these;
eñä—this; me—by me; çikñitä—learned; matiù—knowledge; sva-ätma—from
one's own body; upaçikñitäm—learned; buddhim—knowledge; çåëu—please
hear; me—from me; vadataù—as I am speaking; prabho—O King.
TRANSLATION
O King, from all these spiritual masters I have acquired great wisdom. Now
please listen as I explain what I learned from my own body.
TEXT 25
de"h"Ae gAuç&maRma ivar"il(ivavaek(he"taur,"
iba”atsma s$aÔvainaDanaM s$atataAtyauRd"kR(ma,
taÔvaAnyanaena ivama{zAAima yaTaA taTaAipa
paAr"fyaimatyavais$ataAe ivacar"Amyas$aËÿ:
deho gurur mama virakti-viveka-hetur
bibhrat sma sattva-nidhanaà satatärty-udarkam
tattväny anena vimåçämi yathä tathäpi
pärakyam ity avasito vicarämy asaìgaù
SYNONYMS
dehaù—the body; guruù—spiritual master; mama—my; virakti—of
detachment; viveka—and intelligence which facilitates; hetuù—the cause;
bibhrat—maintaining; sma—certainly; sattva—existence;
nidhanam—destruction; satata—always; ärti—suffering; udarkam—future
result; tattväni—the truths of this world; anena—with this body; vimåçämi—I
contemplate; yathä—even though; tathä api—nevertheless;
pärakyam—belonging to others; iti—thus; avasitaù—being convinced;
vicarämi—I wander about; asaìgaù-without attachment.
TRANSLATION
The material body is also my spiritual master because it teaches me
detachment. Being subject to creation and destruction, it always comes to a
painful end. Thus, although using my body to acquire knowledge, I always
remember that it will ultimately be consumed by others, and remaining
detached, I move about this world.
PURPORT
The words yathä tathäpi are significant in this verse. Although the body
bestows great benefit by enabling one to learn about this world, one should
always remember its unhappy, inevitable future. If cremated, the body is
burned to ashes by fire; if lost in a lonely place, it is consumed by jackals and
vultures; and if buried in a luxurious coffin, it decomposes and is consumed by
insignificant insects and worms. Thus it is described as pärakyam, "ultimately
to be consumed by others." One should, however, carefully maintain bodily
health to execute Kåñëa consciousness, but without undue affection or
attachment. By studying the body's birth and death, one can acquire
virakti-viveka, the intelligence to detach oneself from useless things. The word
avasita indicates conviction. One should be convinced of all the truths of
Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 26
jaAyaAtmajaATaRpazAuBa{tyagA{h"AæavagAARna,
pauSnaAita yait‘ayaicak(LSaRyaA ivatanvana,
svaAntae s$ak{(cC)$mavaç&Ü"Dana: s$a de"h":
s$a{"î"Asya baIjamavas$aId"ita va{ºaDamaR:
jäyätmajärtha-paçu-bhåtya-gåhäpta-vargän
puñnäti yat-priya-cikérñayä vitanvan
svänte sa-kåcchram avaruddha-dhanaù sa dehaù
såñöväsya béjam avasédati våkña-dharmaù
SYNONYMS
jäyä—wife; ätma-ja—children; artha—money; paçu—domestic animals;
bhåtya—servants; gåha—home; äpta—relatives and friends; vargän—all these
categories; puñëäti—nourishes; yat—the body; priya-cikérñayä—with a desire
to please; vitanvan—expanding; sva-ante—at the time of death;
sa-kåcchram—with great struggle; avaruddha—accumulated; dhanaù—wealth;
saù—this; dehaù—body; såñövä—having created; asya—of the living entity;
béjam—the seed; avasédati—falls down and dies; våkña—the tree;
dharmaù—following the nature of.
TRANSLATION
A man attached to the body accumulates money with great struggle to
expand and protect the position of his wife, children, property, domestic
animals, servants, homes, relatives, friends, and so on. He does all this for the
gratification of his own body. As a tree before dying produces the seed of a
future tree, the dying body manifests the seed of one's next material body in the
form of one's accumulated karma. Thus assuring the continuation of material
existence, the material body sinks down and dies.
PURPORT
One might argue, "Among all the gurus mentioned thus far, the material
body is certainly the best, since it awards the detachment and fine intelligence
that enable one to engage in the devotional service of the Lord. Thus, we
should serve the body, although it is temporary, with great attachment, or risk
the offense of ungratefulness. How can detachment from the body be
recommended when the body is endowed with so many wonderful qualities?"
The answer is given in this verse. The body does not award detachment and
knowledge in the manner of some benevolent teacher; rather, it causes so
much pain and misery that any commonsense person cannot help being
convinced of the uselessness of material life. Just as a tree produces the seeds of
the next tree and then dies, the body's lusty desires induce the conditioned
soul to create a further chain of karma. Finally the body, having paved the way
for unlimited suffering in material existence, drops dead.
According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, deha indicates both
the gross body and the subtle, mental body. Those who do not clearly
understand the difference between body and soul falsely think that body and
soul are identical and that one can find perfect happiness in bodily sense
gratification. But those who foolishly accept the temporary body as
all-important cannot be compared with self-realized souls who intelligently
understand the superiority of the eternal soul.
TEXT 27
ijaùE"k(taAe'maumapak(SaRita k(ihR" taSaAR
izA´aAe'nyatastvagAud"rM" ™avaNAM ku(taiêta,
„aANAAe'nyataêpalaä{"f¸( ca k(maRzAil(r,"
baù"Ya: s$apatnya wva gAeh"paitaM launainta
jihvaikato 'mum apakarñati karhi tarñä
çiçno 'nyatas tvag udaraà çravaëaà kutaçcit
ghräëo 'nyataç capala-dåk kva ca karma-çaktir
bahvyaù sapatnya iva geha-patià lunanti
SYNONYMS
jihvä—the tongue; ekataù—on one side; amum—the body or the conditioned
soul who identifies with the body; apakarñati—drags away; karhi—sometimes;
tarñä—thirst; çiçnaù—the genitals; anyataù—on another side; tvak—the sense
of touch; udaram—the belly; çravaëam—the ears; kutaçcit—from somewhere
else; ghräëaù—the sense of smell; anyataù—from another side;
capala-dåk—the fickle eyes; kva ca—somewhere else; karma-çaktiù—the other
active organs and limbs of the body; bahvyaù—many; sa-patnyaù—co-wives;
iva—like; geha-patim—the head of the household; lunanti—pull in many
directions.
TRANSLATION
A man who has many wives is constantly harassed by them. He is
responsible for their maintenance, and thus all the ladies constantly pull him in
different directions, each struggling for her self-interest. Similarly, the material
senses harass the conditioned soul, pulling him in many different directions at
once. On one side the tongue is pulling him to arrange tasty food; then thirst
drags him to get a suitable drink. Simultaneously the sex organs clamor for
satisfaction, and the sense of touch demands soft, sensuous objects. The belly
harasses him until it is filled, the ears demand to hear pleasing sounds, the sense
of smell hankers for pleasant aromas, and the fickle eyes clamor for pleasing
sights. Thus the senses, organs and limbs, all desiring satisfaction, pull the
living entity in many directions.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura mentions that after understanding
this verse one should merely offer, without attachment, the bare necessities to
the guru of one's body. One should keep one's body fit and working in the
simplest possible way, and that is the sum and substance of service to this
so-called guru. If one desires to faithfully serve the body, one should consider
that the body pulls the consciousness of the conditioned soul in many ways at
once, and thus for the servant of the body there is no possibility of
understanding God or even of becoming peaceful.
TEXT 28
s$a{"î"A paur"AiNA ivaivaDaAnyajayaAtmazAftyaA
va{ºaAna, s$ar"Is$a{papazAUna, KagAd"nd"zAUk(Ana,
taEstaEr"tauí"ô$d"ya: pauç&SaM ivaDaAya
“aöAvalaAek(iDaSaNAM maud"maApa de"va:
såñövä puräëi vividhäny ajayätma-çaktyä
våkñän sarésåpa-paçün khaga-dandaçükän
tais tair atuñöa-hådayaù puruñaà vidhäya
brahmävaloka-dhiñaëaà mudam äpa devaù
SYNONYMS
såñövä—having created; puräëi—material bodies that house the conditioned
souls; vividhäni—many varieties; ajayä—through the agency of mäyä;
ätma-çaktyä—the Lord's own potency; våkñän—trees; sarésåpa—reptiles;
paçün—animals; khaga—birds; danda-çükän—snakes; taiù taiù—by all these
different varieties of bodies; atuñöa—unsatisfied; hådayaù—His heart;
puruñam—the human form of life; vidhäya—creating; brahma—the Absolute
Truth; avaloka—vision of; dhiñaëam—intelligence suitable for;
mudam—happiness; äpä—achieved; devaù—the Lord.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, expanding His own potency,
mäyä-çakti, created innumerable species of life to house the conditioned souls.
Yet by creating the forms of trees, reptiles, animals, birds, snakes and so on, the
Lord was not satisfied within His heart. Then He created human life, which
offers the conditioned soul sufficient intelligence to perceive the Absolute
Truth, and became pleased.
PURPORT
God has specifically created the human form of life to facilitate the
liberation of the conditioned soul. Therefore one who abuses human life
prepares his path to hell. As stated in the Vedas, puruñatve cävistaräm ätmä: "In
the human form of life there is good possibility of understanding the eternal
soul." The Vedas also state:
täbhyo gäm änayat tä abruvan
na vai no 'yam alam iti
täbhyo 'çvam änayat tä abruvan
na vai no 'yam alam iti
täbhyaù puruñam änayat tä
abruvan su-kåtaà bata
The purport of this çruti-mantra is that lower forms of life, such as the cow and
horse, are not actually suitable to fulfill the purpose of creation. But human
life awards the opportunity to understand one's eternal relationship with God.
Thus, one must control the material senses and fulfill the real purpose of
human life. If one takes to Kåñëa consciousness, the Supreme Lord personally
feels happiness and gradually reveals Himself to His devotee.
The Lord's material creation consists of the living entities and dead matter,
which the less intelligent try to enjoy. The Lord, however, is not satisfied by
those species that blindly strive for sense gratification without understanding
spiritual nature. We are suffering due to our forgetfulness of Kåñëa and the
blissful situation of His abode. If we accept the Lord as protector and shelter
and execute His order, we can easily revive our eternal, blissful nature as parts
and parcels of the Personality of Godhead. It is for this purpose that the Lord
has created human life.
TEXT 29
labDvaA s$auäu"laRBaimadM" baò"s$amBavaAntae
maAnauSyamaTaRd"mainatyamapaIh" DaIr":
taUNA< yataeta na pataed"nauma{tyau yaAvana,
ina:™aeyas$aAya ivaSaya: Kalau s$avaRta: syaAta,
labdhvä su-durlabham idaà bahu-sambhavänte
mänuñyam artha-dam anityam apéha dhéraù
türëaà yateta na pated anu-måtyu yävan
niùçreyasäya viñayaù khalu sarvataù syät
SYNONYMS
labdhvä—having obtained; su-durlabham—that which is very difficult to
obtain; idam—this; bahu—many; sambhava—births; ante—after;
mänuñyam—human form of life; artha-dam—which awards great value;
anityam—not eternal; api—although; iha—in this material world;
dhéraù—one who has sober intelligence; türëam—immediately; yateta—should
endeavor; na—not; patet—has fallen; anu-måtyu—always subject to death;
yävat—as long as; niùçreyasäya—for ultimate liberation; viñayaù—sense
gratification; khalu—always; sarvataù—in all conditions; syät—is possible.
TRANSLATION
After many, many births and deaths one achieves the rare human form of
life, which, although temporary, affords one the opportunity to attain the
highest perfection. Thus a sober human being should quickly endeavor for the
ultimate perfection of life as long as his body, which is always subject to death,
has not fallen down and died. After all, sense gratification is available even in
the most abominable species of life, whereas Kåñëa consciousness is possible
only for a human being.
PURPORT
Material life essentially means repeated birth and death. Even the lowest
forms of life, such as reptiles, insects, pigs and dogs, have ample opportunity for
sense gratification. Even ordinary houseflies have a busy sex life and thus
multiply rapidly. Human life, however, enables one to understand the
Absolute Truth and is therefore full of grave responsibility. Since the valuable
human life is not eternal, we should do the needful to achieve the highest
perfection, Kåñëa consciousness. Before death appears, we should seriously
cultivate our real self-interest.
One can experience Kåñëa consciousness in the association of devotees of
the Lord. Without their association, one is in danger of being attracted to an
impersonal conception of life, which causes one to fall away from devotional
service to the Absolute Truth. Or, being discouraged by one's failure to
understand the Absolute Truth, one may return to the false platform of sense
gratification. In conclusion, human life is meant for cultivating Kåñëa
consciousness under the guidance of the experienced, self-realized devotees of
the Lord.
TEXT 30
WvaM s$aÃaAtavaEr"AgyaAe
ivaÁaAnaAlaAek( @Atmaina
ivacar"Aima mah"ImaetaAM
maul(s$aËÿAe'nah"x.~k{(ta:
evaà saïjäta-vairägyo
vijïänäloka ätmani
vicarämi mahém etäà
mukta-saìgo 'nahaìkåtaù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; saïjäta—completely developed; vairägyaù—detachment;
vijïäna—realized knowledge; älokaù—having vision; ätmani—in the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; vicarämi—I wander; mahém—the earth; etäm—this;
mukta—freed; saìgaù—from attachment; anahaìkåtaù—without false ego.
TRANSLATION
Having learned from my spiritual masters, I remain situated in realization of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead and, fully renounced and enlightened by
realized spiritual knowledge, wander the earth without attachment or false ego.
TEXT 31
na ÷ek(smaAÖ"r"AeÁaARnaM
s$auisTarM" syaAts$aupauSk(lama,
“aöEtad"iã"taIyaM vaE
gAIyatae baò"DaiSaRiBa:
na hy ekasmäd guror jïänaà
su-sthiraà syät su-puñkalam
brahmaitad advitéyaà vai
géyate bahudharñibhiù
SYNONYMS
na—not; hi—certainly; ekasmät—from one; guroù—guru;
jïänam—knowledge; su-sthiram—very steady; syät—can be;
su-puñkalam—very complete; brahma—the Absolute Truth; etat—this;
advitéyam—one without a second; vai—certainly; géyate—is glorified;
bahudhä—in many ways; åñibhiù—by the sages.
TRANSLATION
Although the Absolute Truth is one without a second, the sages have
described Him in many different ways. Therefore one may not be able to
acquire very firm or complete knowledge from one spiritual master.
PURPORT
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé comments on this verse as follows. "The statement
that one requires many spiritual masters certainly needs explanation, since
practically all great saintly persons of the past did not take shelter of many
spiritual masters, but rather accepted one. The words géyate bahudharñibhiù,
'the Absolute Truth is glorified in many ways by the sages,' indicate the
personal and impersonal understandings of the Absolute Truth. In other
words, some sages describe only the Lord's impersonal effulgence, which is
without spiritual variety, whereas others describe the Lord's manifest form as
the Personality of Godhead. Thus, merely by hearing from many different
authorities, one cannot actually learn the highest perfection of life. The
proliferation of differing spiritual authorities is useful only to counteract the
living entities' tendency to be grossly materialistic. Different spiritual
philosophers create faith in the existence of the soul and may be accepted at
that level. But as will be clarified in later verses, the spiritual master who
ultimately gives perfect knowledge is one."
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé comments as follows on this verse. "Since it is commonly
understood that one is to accept a single spiritual master, why is it
recommended that one learn from many so-called spiritual masters appearing
in the forms of ordinary material objects? The explanation is that one's
worshipable spiritual master will instruct one in many departments of
knowledge by giving lessons gleaned from ordinary objects. As recommended
by the brähmaëa avadhüta, one can strengthen the teachings received from
one's äcärya and avoid transgressing his orders by observing ordinary things in
nature. One should not mechanically receive the teachings of one's guru. The
disciple should be thoughtful and with his own intelligence realize in practice
what he has heard from his spiritual master by observing the world around
him. In this sense one may accept many gurus, though not those who preach
against the knowledge received from the bona fide spiritual master. In other
words, one should not hear from persons like the atheist Kapila."
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura also comments on this verse, as
follows. "It is stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam, tasmäd guruà prapadyeta jijïäsuù
çreya uttamam: [SB 11.3.21] 'Therefore one should approach a bona fide
spiritual master if one actually desires to achieve the highest perfection in life.'
Similarly, in Chapter Ten, verse 5 of this canto, the Personality of Godhead
Himself states, mad-abhijïaà guruà çäntam upäséta mad-ätmakam: 'One must
serve a bona fide spiritual master who is in full knowledge of My personality
and who is not different from Me.' There are many similar verses in Vedic
literature indicating that one must take shelter of a single bona fide spiritual
master. We also have the examples of innumerable great saintly persons who
did not accept more than one spiritual master. Thus, it is a fact that we should
accept one bona fide spiritual master and receive from him the particular
mantra that one is to chant. I myself certainly follow this principle and
worship my bona fide spiritual master. However, in worshiping one's äcärya,
one may take help from good and bad examples. By observing examples of good
behavior one will be strengthened in devotional service, and in seeing negative
examples one will be forewarned and avoid danger. In this way, one may
accept many ordinary material objects as one's spiritual masters, considering
them as çikñä-gurus, or gurus who give important lessons for spiritual
advancement."
Thus in the Lord's own words, mad-abhijïaà guruà çäntam upäséta
mad-ätmakam: one should approach a single bona fide spiritual master who is
in full knowledge of the Lord's personality and sincerely worship him,
considering him to be mad-ätmakam, or nondifferent from the Lord Himself.
This statement does not contradict what the Lord has presented in the
teachings of the avadhüta brähmaëa. If one receives the teachings of one's
äcärya but keeps them locked up in his brain as theoretical dogma, one will
make little advancement. To develop steady, complete knowledge one must see
the teachings of one's äcärya everywhere; thus a Vaiñëava offers all respects to
anyone or anything that gives him further enlightenment in the path of
worshiping his bona fide äcärya, who is nondifferent from Lord Kåñëa.
Among the many gurus mentioned by the brähmaëa, some give positive
instructions and others give negative instructions. Piìgalä the prostitute and
the young girl who took off her bracelets provide examples of proper conduct,
whereas the hapless pigeons and the foolish honeybee provide examples of
behavior to be avoided. In both cases one's spiritual knowledge is enriched.
Thus, one should not misunderstand the meaning of this verse in a way
contradictory to the Lord's statement mad-abhijïaà guruà çäntam upäséta
mad-ätmakam (SB 11.10.5).
TEXT 32
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
wtyauftvaA s$a yaäuM" iva‘as$a,
tamaAman‡ya gABaIr"DaI:
vaind"ta: svaicaRtaAe r"AÁaA
yayaAE ‘aItaAe yaTaAgAtama,
çré-bhagavän uväca
ity uktvä sa yaduà vipras
tam ämantrya gabhéra-dhéù
vanditaù sv-arcito räjïä
yayau préto yathägatam
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; iti—thus;
uktvä—having spoken; saù—he; yadum—to King Yadu; vipraù—the
brähmaëa; tam—to the King; ämantrya—bidding farewell; gabhéra-extremely
deep; dhéù—intelligence; vanditaù—being offered obeisances;
su-arcitaù—being properly worshiped; räjïä—by the King; yayau—he went;
prétaù—with his mind satisfied; yathä—just as; ägatam—he had come.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Having thus spoken to King
Yadu, the wise brähmaëa accepted obeisances and worship from the King and
felt pleased within himself. Then bidding farewell, he left exactly as he had
come.
PURPORT
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé gives evidence from Çrémad-Bhägavatam that the
brähmaëa avadhüta was actually the incarnation of Godhead Dattätreya. The
Bhägavatam (2.7.4) states,
yat-päda-paìkaja-paräga-pavitra-dehä
yogardhim äpur ubhayéà yadu-haihayädyäù
"Many Yadus, Haihayas, etc., became so purified, by the grace of the lotus feet
of Dattätreya, the Lord, that they obtained both material and spiritual
blessings." This verse mentions that Yadu was purified by contact with the
lotus feet of Dattätreya, and similarly the present verse states, vandito sv-arcito
räjïä: King Yadu worshiped the lotus feet of the brähmaëa. Thus, according to
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, the avadhüta brähmaëa is the Personality of Godhead
Himself, and this is confirmed by Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura.
TEXT 33
@vaDaUtavaca: ™autvaA
paUvaeRSaAM na: s$a paUvaRja:
s$avaRs$aËÿivainamauRl(:
s$amaicaÔaAe baBaUva h"
avadhüta-vacaù çrutvä
pürveñäà naù sa pürva-jaù
sarva-saìga-vinirmuktaù
sama-citto babhüva ha
SYNONYMS
avadhüta—of the avadhüta brähmaëa; vacaù—the words; çrutvä—having
heard; pürveñäm—of the ancestors; naù—our; saù—he; pürvajaù—himself a
forefather; sarva—all; saìga—from attachment; vinirmuktaù—being freed;
sama-cittaù—with his consciousness on the spiritual platform and thus equal
everywhere; babhüva—he became; ha—certainly.
TRANSLATION
O Uddhava, hearing the words of the avadhüta, the saintly King Yadu, who
is the forefather of our own ancestors, became free from all material
attachment, and thus his mind was evenly fixed on the spiritual platform.
PURPORT
Here the Lord praises His own dynasty, called Yadu-vaàça, because there
appeared in that dynasty many great self-realized kings. King Yadu was
enlightened by Dattätreya in the form of an avadhüta brähmaëa who taught
the King to fix his consciousness on the spiritual platform of detachment by
simply observing the creation of God.
Thus end the purports by the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Eleventh Canto, Ninth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Detachment from All that Is Material."
10. The Nature of Fruitive Activity
In this chapter Lord Çré Kåñëa refutes the philosophy of the followers of
Jaimini and describes to Uddhava how the spirit soul bound within the
material body can develop pure transcendental knowledge.
The Vaiñëava, or one who has taken shelter of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Viñëu, should observe the rules and regulations found in the
Païcarätra and other revealed scriptures. According to his own natural
qualities and work, he should follow the code of varëäçrama in a spirit free
from motivation. The so-called knowledge received through one's material
senses, mind and intelligence is as useless as the dreams experienced by a
sleeping person attached to sense gratification. Therefore, one should give up
work performed for sense gratification and accept work as a matter of duty.
When one has come to understand something of the truth of the self, he
should give up material work performed out of duty and simply engage himself
in the service of the bona fide spiritual master, who is the manifest
representative of the Personality of Godhead. The servant of the spiritual
master should have very firm affection for his guru, should be anxious to
receive from him knowledge of the Absolute Truth, and should be devoid of
envy and the tendency to talk nonsense. The soul is distinct from the gross
and subtle material bodies. The spirit soul who has entered into the material
body accepts bodily functions according to the reactions of his own past
activities. Therefore, only the bona fide, transcendental spiritual master is
capable of demonstrating pure knowledge of the self.
The followers of Jaimini and other atheistic philosophers accept regulated
material work as the purpose of life. But Kåñëa refutes this by explaining that
the embodied soul who has come into contact with segmented material time
takes upon himself a perpetual chain of births and deaths and is therefore
forced to suffer the consequent happiness and distress. In this way there is no
possibility that one who is attached to the fruits of his material work can
achieve any substantial goal in life. The pleasures of heaven and other
destinations, which are achieved by sacrificial rituals, can be experienced for
only a short time. After one's enjoyment is finished, one must return to this
mortal sphere to partake of lamentation and suffering. On the path of
materialism there is certainly no uninterrupted or natural happiness.
TEXT 1
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
mayaAeid"taeSvavaih"ta:
svaDamaeRSau mad"A™aya:
vaNAAR™amaku(laAcaAr"ma,
@k(AmaAtmaA s$amaAcare"ta,
çré-bhagavän uväca
mayoditeñv avahitaù
sva-dharmeñu mad-äçrayaù
varëäçrama-kuläcäram
akämätmä samäcaret
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; mayä—by Me;
uditeñu—spoken; avahitaù—with great care; sva-dharmeñu—in the duties of
devotional service to the Lord; mat-äçrayaù—one who accepts Me as shelter;
varëa-äçrama—the Vedic system of social and occupational divisions; kula—of
the society; äcäram—conduct; akäma—devoid of material desires; ätmä—such
a person; samäcaret—should practice.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Taking full shelter in Me, with
the mind carefully fixed in the devotional service of the Lord as spoken by Me,
one should live without personal desire and practice the social and occupational
system called varëäçrama.
PURPORT
In the previous chapters Lord Kåñëa described through the story of an
avadhüta brähmaëa the qualities and character of a saintly person. Now the
Lord describes the practical means for achieving such a saintly position. In the
Païcarätra and other scriptures the Personality of Godhead gives instructions
for executing devotional service. Similarly, in Bhagavad-gétä (4.13) the Lord
says, cätur-varëyaà mayä såñöaà guëa-karma-vibhägaçaù: "I have personally
created the varëäçrama system." There are innumerable rules and regulations
in the varëäçrama system, and the devotee should execute those which do not
contradict the process of devotional service. The term varëa indicates
different classes of human beings, some in the mode of ignorance, some in the
mode of passion and some in the mode of goodness. Devotional service to the
Lord is executed on the liberated platform, and therefore some injunctions for
those persons in passion and ignorance may be contradictory to the regulative
principles for those on the liberated platform. Therefore, under the guidance
of a bona fide spiritual master who is nondifferent from the Lord, one should
execute the basic principles of varëäçrama in a way favorable for advancement
in Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 2
@nvaIºaeta ivazAuÜ"AtmaA
de"ih"naAM ivaSayaAtmanaAma,
gAuNAeSau taÔvaDyaAnaena
s$avaARr"mBaivapayaRyama,
anvékñeta viçuddhätmä
dehinäà viñayätmanäm
guëeñu tattva-dhyänena
sarvärambha-viparyayam
SYNONYMS
anvékñeta—one should see; viçuddha—purified; ätmä—soul; dehinäm—of the
embodied beings; viñaya-ätmanäm—of those who are dedicated to sense
gratification; guëeñu—in the material objects of pleasure; tattva—as truth;
dhyänena—by conceiving; sarva—of all; ärambha—endeavors;
viparyayam—the inevitable failure.
TRANSLATION
A purified soul should see that because the conditioned souls who are
dedicated to sense gratification have falsely accepted the objects of sense
pleasure as truth, all of their endeavors are doomed to failure.
PURPORT
In this verse the Lord describes the process of becoming desireless. All
material sense objects, including those perceived by their form, taste, flavor,
touch or sound, are temporary. We now see our family and nation, but
ultimately they will disappear. Even our own body, by which we perceive them,
will disappear. Thus, the inevitable result of material enjoyment is viparyaya,
or great suffering. The word viçuddhätmä indicates those who have purified
themselves by executing the regulative duties of devotional service. They can
clearly see the hopeless frustration of material life, and thus they become
akämätmä, or great souls free from material desire.
TEXT 3
s$auæasya ivaSayaAlaAek(Ae
DyaAyataAe vaA manaAer"Ta:
naAnaAtmak(tvaAiã"P(las$a,
taTaA Baed"AtmaDaIgAuRNAE:
suptasya viñayäloko
dhyäyato vä manorathaù
nänätmakatväd viphalas
tathä bhedätma-dhér guëaiù
SYNONYMS
suptasya—of one who is sleeping; viñaya—sense gratification; älokaù—seeing;
dhyäyataù—of one who is meditating; vä—or; manaù-rathaù—merely a
creation of the mind; nänä—a large variety; ätmakatvät—due to having the
nature of; viphalaù—bereft of the real perfection; tathä—in that way;
bheda-ätma—in that which is separately constituted; dhéù—intelligence;
guëaiù—by the material senses.
TRANSLATION
One who is sleeping may see many objects of sense gratification in a dream,
but such pleasurable things are merely creations of the mind and are thus
ultimately useless. Similarly, the living entity who is asleep to his spiritual
identity also sees many sense objects, but these innumerable objects of
temporary gratification are creations of the Lord's illusory potency and have no
permanent existence. One who meditates upon them, impelled by the senses,
uselessly engages his intelligence.
PURPORT
Because the fruits of material work are temporary, it ultimately does not
matter whether or not one obtains them; the final result is the same.
Materialistic activities can never award the highest perfection of life, Kåñëa
consciousness. The material intelligence, impelled by the senses, strongly
desires sense gratification. As stated here (bhedätma-dhéù), such intelligence
actually separates one from one's real self-interest. Thus the intelligence,
absorbed in that which is materially favorable and unfavorable, becomes
divided in pursuit of innumerable categories of material advancement. Such
divided intelligence is impotent and cannot understand the Absolute Truth,
the Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa. The devotees of the Lord, however,
have their intelligence fixed on one point—Lord Kåñëa. They meditate upon
the Lord's form, qualities, pastimes and devotees, and thus their intelligence is
never separated from the Absolute Truth. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (2.41):
vyavasäyätmikä buddhir
ekeha kuru-nandana
bahu-çäkhä hy anantaç ca
buddhayo 'vyavasäyinäm
"Those who are on this path are resolute in purpose, and their aim is one. O
beloved child of the Kurus, the intelligence of those who are irresolute is many
branched."
If one is not Kåñëa conscious, he is uselessly dreaming without any
understanding of his eternal situation. The material intelligence will always
devise novel means of achieving happiness, and therefore one bounces from
one fruitless program of sense gratification to another, ignoring the simple fact
that all material things are temporary and will disappear. In this way one's
intelligence becomes infected with material lust and greed, and such infected
intelligence cannot bring one to the true goal of life. One should hear from the
bona fide spiritual master whose intelligence is pure, and then one will come to
Kåñëa consciousness, the highest perfection of life.
TEXT 4
inava{ÔaM k(maR s$aevaeta
‘ava{ÔaM matpar"styajaeta,
ijaÁaAs$aAyaAM s$am‘ava{ÔaAe
naAi‰"yaetk(maRcaAed"naAma,
nivåttaà karma seveta
pravåttaà mat-paras tyajet
jijïäsäyäà sampravåtto
nädriyet karma-codanäm
SYNONYMS
nivåttam—regulative duties; karma—such work; seveta—one should perform;
pravåttam—activities for sense gratification; mat-paraù—one who is dedicated
to Me; tyajet—should give up; jijïäsäyäm—in searching for spiritual truth;
sampravåttaù—being perfectly engaged; na—not; ädriyet—one should accept;
karma—any material activity; codanäm—injunctions governing.
TRANSLATION
One who has fixed Me within his mind as the goal of life should give up
activities based on sense gratification and should instead execute work governed
by the regulative principles for advancement. When, however, one is fully
engaged in searching out the ultimate truth of the soul, one should not accept
the scriptural injunctions governing fruitive activities.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains that the words jijïäsäyäà
sampravåttaù refer to one who is yoga-ärüòha, or advanced in the yoga process.
In Bhagavad-gétä (6.3-4) it is stated:
ärurukñor muner yogaà
karma käraëam ucyate
yogärüòhasya tasyaiva
çamaù käraëam ucyate
yadä hi nendriyärtheñu
na karmasv anuñajjate
sarva-saìkalpa-sannyäsé
yogärüòhas tadocyate
"For one who is a neophyte in the eightfold yoga system, work is said to be the
means; and for one who has already attained to yoga, cessation of all material
activities is said to be the means. A person is said to have attained to yoga
when, having renounced all material desires, he neither acts for sense
gratification nor engages in fruitive activities." The example may be given that
an ordinary man will try to enjoy the company of women for material sense
pleasure. This is called pravåtta-karma, or the path of sense gratification. A
religious person will also enjoy the company of a woman, but under the
regulative principles of the varëäçrama system. However, one who is fully
absorbed in spiritual advancement will ultimately give up all sense
gratification derived from sexual association, either regulated or illicit.
Similarly, in the stage of pravåtta-karma, or ordinary sense gratification, one
will eat whatever pleases his tongue. On the other hand, a materialistic
devotee will sometimes cook sumptuous preparations and offer them to the
Deity, not in order to satisfy the Lord but rather with the intention of
satisfying his own tongue and belly. However, one who is sampravåtta, or fully
engaged in spiritual consciousness, is never interested in simply gratifying his
tongue. He avoids ordinary foods prepared by materialistic persons, and just
for the purpose of keeping his body fit for serving Kåñëa he eats moderate
quantities of food that has first been offered to the Deity for the Deity's
pleasure.
The process of spiritual realization gradually brings a conditioned soul from
the lowest point of materialistic consciousness to total absorption in loving
service to the Personality of Godhead. In the beginning one is taught to
dovetail one's enjoying propensities by first offering to the Lord the fruit of
one's work. In the advanced stage, however, the impulse to execute fruitive
activities (karma-codanäm) is absent, and one simply engages in the loving
service of the Lord without any selfish motive. For example, a renounced
sannyäsé preaching Kåñëa consciousness, or even a renounced householder
preaching Kåñëa consciousness, is not required to execute all of the
injunctions governing sense gratification in family life. Ultimately, every
human being should take to the transcendental duties of Kåñëa consciousness.
Rather than working to fulfill one's own desires and then offering the results
to Kåñëa, one should fully engage in pleasing the Lord directly according to
His own intimate desires.
According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, any attempt to
enjoy the material world, either religiously or irreligiously, ultimately will be
full of contradictions. One should come to the the platform of desirelessness,
pure love of Godhead, and thus solve all of the problems of life.
TEXT 5
yamaAnaBaIºNAM s$aevaeta
inayamaAnmatpar": ¸(icata,
mad"iBaÁaM gAuçM& zAAntama,
opaAs$aIta mad"Atmak(ma,
yamän abhékñëaà seveta
niyamän mat-paraù kvacit
mad-abhijïaà guruà çäntam
upäséta mad-ätmakam
SYNONYMS
yamän—major regulative principles, such as not to kill; abhékñëam—always;
seveta—one should observe; niyamän—minor regulations, such as cleansing
the body; mat-paraù—one who is devoted to Me; kvacit—as far as possible;
mat-abhijïam—one who knows Me as I am in My personal form; gurum—the
spiritual master; çäntam—peaceful; upäséta—one should serve;
mat-ätmakam—who is not different from Me.
TRANSLATION
One who has accepted Me as the supreme goal of life should strictly observe
the scriptural injunctions forbidding sinful activities and, as far as possible,
should execute the injunctions prescribing minor regulative duties such as
cleanliness. Ultimately, however, one should approach a bona fide spiritual
master who is full in knowledge of Me as I am, who is peaceful, and who by
spiritual elevation is not different from Me.
PURPORT
The word yamän refers to major regulative injunctions necessary for
preserving one's purity. In the Kåñëa consciousness movement all bona fide
members must give up eating meat, fish and eggs, and they must also avoid
intoxication, gambling and illicit sex. The word abhijïam indicates that one
cannot at any time perform such forbidden activities, even in difficult
circumstances. The word niyamän refers to less obligatory injunctions, such as
bathing three times daily. In certain difficult situations one may not bathe
three times daily yet may still maintain one's spiritual position. But if one
engages in sinful, forbidden activities, even in difficult circumstances, there
undoubtedly will be a spiritual falldown. Ultimately, as explained in
Upadeçämåta, mere adherence to rules and regulations cannot give one
spiritual perfection. One must approach a bona fide spiritual master who is
mad-abhijïam, or in full knowledge of the personal form of Godhead. The
word mat ("Me") negates the possibility of a bona fide spiritual master having
an impersonal conception of the Absolute Truth. Furthermore, the guru must
be in complete control of his senses; therefore he is called çänta, or peaceful.
Because of being completely surrendered to the mission of the Lord, such a
spiritual master is mad-ätmakam, or nondifferent from the Personality of
Godhead.
TEXT 6
@maAnyamats$ar"Ae d"ºaAe
inamaRmaAe ä{"X#s$aAEô$d":
@s$atvar"Ae'TaRijaÁaAs$aur,"
@nas$aUyaur"maAeGavaAk,(
amäny amatsaro dakño
nirmamo dåòha-sauhådaù
asatvaro 'rtha-jijïäsur
anasüyur amogha-väk
SYNONYMS
amäné—without false ego; amatsaraù—not considering oneself to be the doer;
dakñaù—without laziness; nirmamaù—without any sense of proprietorship
over one's wife, children, home, society, etc.; dåòha-sauhådaù—being fixed in
the mood of loving friendship with the spiritual master, who is one's
worshipable deity; asatvaraù—without becoming bewildered due to material
passion; artha-jijïäsuù—desiring knowledge of the Absolute Truth;
anasüyuù—free from envy; amogha-väk—completely free from useless
conversation.
TRANSLATION
The servant or disciple of the spiritual master should be free from false
prestige, never considering himself to be the doer. He should be active and
never lazy and should give up all sense of proprietorship over the objects of the
senses, including his wife, children, home and society. He should be endowed
with feelings of loving friendship toward the spiritual master and should never
become deviated or bewildered. The servant or disciple should always desire
advancement in spiritual understanding, should not envy anyone and should
always avoid useless conversation.
PURPORT
No one can claim to be the permanent proprietor of his so-called wife,
family, home, society, and so on. Such material relationships appear and
disappear like bubbles on the surface of the ocean. No one can claim to be the
creator of the material elements that produced one's home, society and family.
If it were a fact that parents were the ultimate creators of the bodies of their
children, children would never die before their parents; the parents would
simply create new bodies for the children. Similarly, parents would also not
die, because they would create new bodies for themselves to replace the old
ones. Actually, God creates everyone's bodies as well as the material elements
with which we build our material societies. Therefore, before death drags these
things out of our grasp, we should voluntarily engage them in the loving
service of the spiritual master, who is the bona fide representative of Lord
Kåñëa. Then such material objects, instead of causing lamentation, will be the
cause of happiness.
TEXT 7
jaAyaApatyagA{h"ºae‡asvajana‰"
ivaNAAid"Sau
od"As$aIna: s$amaM pazyana,
s$avaeRSvaTaRimavaAtmana:
jäyäpatya-gåha-kñetrasvajana-
draviëädiñu
udäsénaù samaà paçyan
sarveñv artham ivätmanaù
SYNONYMS
jäyä—to wife; apatya—children; gåha—home; kñetra—land;
svajana—relatives and friends; draviëa—bank account; ädiñu—and so on;
udäsénaù—remaining indifferent; samam—equally; paçyan—seeing;
sarveñu—in all of these; artham—purpose; iva—like; ätmanaù—of oneself.
TRANSLATION
One should see one's real self-interest in life in all circumstances and should
therefore remain detached from wife, children, home, land, relatives, friends,
wealth and so on.
PURPORT
A devotee of the Lord recognizes that his wife, children, home, land, friends
and money are meant to be engaged in the loving service of the Supreme Lord.
Therefore, he does not frantically make arrangements for the sense
gratification of his family and friends. He is not eager to enjoy the false
prestige of being the master of his wife and the lord of his children, nor is he
anxious to gain prestige from his friends and society. Thus he does not envy
anyone and is not lazy in the matter of self-realization. He is free from the false
sense of proprietorship and is always eager to develop his understanding of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is free from false egotism and
automatically turns away from useless materialistic conversation. Thus he is
steady and not whimsical, and he is always firmly situated in loving friendship
at the lotus feet of the spiritual master.
The question may be raised as to how one can develop freedom from false
proprietorship. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has given the following
example. An ordinary man is very eager to accumulate more and more money,
and he maintains his wealth in the form of stocks, bonds, securities, bank
accounts, properties, gold, and so on. As long as these different assets are
contributing to his financial well-being, he sees them equally and considers
that they belong to him. But if some of his assets are taken by the government
for taxes, or if they are lost in an unfortunate business arrangement, then he is
forced to give up his sense of proprietorship. In the same way, everyone should
be intelligent enough to observe that one's sense of ownership over
innumerable material objects is not permanent; therefore one should develop
detachment from these things. If one does not cultivate a loving feeling of
friendship for the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His pure devotee, the
spiritual master, one will undoubtedly be entangled by the network of material
society, friendship and love. One will then remain bound up on the material
platform with no hope of permanent happiness.
TEXT 8
ivalaºaNA: sTaUlas$aUºmaAä,"
de"h"Ad"AtmaeiºataA svaä{"k,(
yaTaAi¢ad"ARç&NAAe d"A÷Aä,"
d"Ah"k(Ae'nya: ‘ak(AzAk(:
vilakñaëaù sthüla-sükñmäd
dehäd ätmekñitä sva-dåk
yathägnir däruëo dähyäd
dähako 'nyaù prakäçakaù
SYNONYMS
vilakñaëaù—having different characteristics; sthüla—from the gross;
sükñmät—and the subtle; dehät—from the body; ätmä—the spirit soul;
ékñitä—the seer; sva-dåk—self-enlightened; yathä—just as; agniù—fire;
däruëaù—from firewood; dähyät—from that which is to be burned;
dähakaù—that which burns; anyaù—other; prakäçakaù—that which
illuminates.
TRANSLATION
Just as fire, which burns and illuminates, is different from firewood, which
is to be burned to give illumination, similarly the seer within the body, the
self-enlightened spirit soul, is different from the material body, which is to be
illuminated by consciousness. Thus the spirit soul and the body possess
different characteristics and are separate entities.
PURPORT
It is analytically demonstrated in this verse that one should never falsely
identify the ego with the material body. Such misidentification is called false
ego, or material illusion. The following question may be raised. Since it is
commonly known that the Supreme Personality of Godhead enlightens the
conditioned soul, why is the term sva-dåk, or "self enlightened," used in this
verse? Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains that although the
Supreme Personality of Godhead certainly furnishes consciousness to the
living entity, the living entity, being endowed with the potency of the Lord
has himself the capacity to revive and expand his pure consciousness. He may
therefore be considered, in a secondary sense, self-enlightened. The example
may be given that gold or silver domes brilliantly reflect the rays of the sun.
Although the light comes from the sun, the inherent properties of gold and
silver can also be considered causes for the brilliant reflection, since other
substances do not possess suitable properties to reflect the sun's light. Similarly,
the spirit soul can be considered sva-dåk, or self-enlightened, because he
possesses characteristics by which he can brilliantly reflect the potency of the
Personality of Godhead, thus illuminating his existential situation, just as a
gold or silver dome shines due to its reflective properties.
A nice example is given in this verse to illustrate the different
characteristics of the body and soul. Fire, which burns and illuminates, is
always different from that which is burned for illumination. It may be said,
however, that fire is present in an unmanifest form within wood. Similarly, in
the conditioned life of ignorance, the spirit soul is present, though unmanifest,
within the body. The enlightened condition of the living entity can be
compared to the act of arousing fire within wood. Just as fire quickly burns
wood to ashes, similarly the spirit soul, when enlightened, burns to ashes the
darkness of ignorance. We are conscious of the body; therefore it may be said
that the body is illuminated by consciousness, which is the energy, or symptom,
of the spirit soul. Identifying the body and soul as one is just as foolish as
considering fire and wood to be the same. In both cases, the intimate
circumstantial connection between fire and wood or between the soul and the
body does not alter the fact that fire is different from wood or that the soul is
always different from the body.
TEXT 9
inar"AeDaAetpaÔyaNAuba{h"na,-
naAnaAtvaM tatk{(taAna, gAuNAAna,
@nta: ‘aivaí" @ADaÔa
WvaM de"h"gAuNAAna, par":
nirodhotpatty-aëu-båhannänätvaà
tat-kåtän guëän
antaù praviñöa ädhatta
evaà deha-guëän paraù
SYNONYMS
nirodha—dormancy; utpatti—manifestation; aëu—tiny; båhat—large;
nänätvam—the variety of characteristics; tat-kåtän—produced by that;
guëän—qualities; antaù—within; praviñöaù—having entered;
ädhatte—accepts; evam—thus; deha—of the material body; guëän—qualities;
paraù—the transcendental entity.
TRANSLATION
Just as fire may appear differently as dormant, manifest, weak, brilliant and
so on, according to the condition of the fuel, similarly, the spirit soul enters a
material body and accepts particular bodily characteristics.
PURPORT
Although fire may appear and disappear within a particular object, the
element fire always exists. Similarly, the eternal soul appears within a suitable
body and then disappears from that body, but the soul always exists. Just as fire
is different from its fuel, the soul is different from the body. A match makes a
tiny fire, whereas the explosion of a huge gasoline tank will send flames
shooting up into the sky. But still, fire is one. Similarly, one spirit soul may
appear in the body of Brahmä and another in the body of an ant, but the spirit
soul is qualitatively the same in every body. Because of ignorance we impose
the bodily characteristics upon the soul, and thus we say that a particular
person is American, Russian, Chinese, African or Mexican or that he is old or
young. Although such designations certainly apply to the body, they do not
apply to the spirit soul, which is described here as paraù, or a transcendental
entity. As long as the bewildered spirit soul remains inimical to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the designations of the gross and subtle bodies will
wrap themselves around him, keeping him in darkness. If one intellectually
identifies oneself with various materialistic philosophies of life, he becomes
covered by the subtle mind. Ultimately everything that exists is part and
parcel of the Absolute Truth, Lord Kåñëa. When the living entity realizes this,
he becomes nirupädhi, or free from material designations. This is his
constitutional position.
TEXT 10
yaAe's$aAE gAuNAEivaRr"icataAe
de"h"Ae'yaM pauç&Sasya ih"
s$aMs$aAr"staiªabanDaAe'yaM
pauMs$aAe ivaâA icC$d"Atmana:
yo 'sau guëair viracito
deho 'yaà puruñasya hi
saàsäras tan-nibandho 'yaà
puàso vidyä cchid ätmanaù
SYNONYMS
yaù—which; asau—that(subtle body); guëaiù-by the material modes;
viracitaù—constructed; dehaù—the body; ayam—this (gross body);
puruñasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hi—certainly;
saàsäraù—material existence; tat-nibandhaù—tied to that; ayam-this;
puàsaù—of the living entity; vidyä—knowledge; chit-that which cuts apart;
ätmanaù—of the soul.
TRANSLATION
The subtle and gross material bodies are created by the material modes of
nature, which expand from the potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Material existence occurs when the living entity falsely accepts the qualities of
the gross and subtle bodies as being his own factual nature. This illusory state,
however, can be destroyed by real knowledge.
PURPORT
Regarding the analogy comparing fire and its fuel to the soul and the body,
one may argue that to some extent fire is dependent upon its fuel and cannot
exist without it. Since we do not experience the existence of fire independent
of fuel, one may therefore still question how it is possible for the living entity
to exist separately from the body, become covered by it and eventually become
free from it. Only through the Supreme Personality of Godhead's knowledge
potency (vidyä) can one clearly understand the nature of the living entity. By
vidyä, or real knowledge, one may cut material existence to pieces and even in
this lifetime experience spiritual reality. According to Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura, our material existence is an artificial imposition. By the
Lord's inconceivable potency of nescience, the qualities of gross and subtle
material forms are psychologically imposed upon the living being, and because
of misidentification with the body, the living entity initiates a series of illusory
activities. As explained in the previous chapter, the present material body is
like a tree that produces the karmic seed of the next body. However, this cycle
of ignorance can be cut to pieces by the transcendental knowledge explained
by the Lord.
Unfortunately, the conditioned souls, being inimical to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, do not accept the perfect knowledge spoken by the
Lord. Instead they remain absorbed in gross and subtle illusion. But if the
living entity accepts the Lord's knowledge, his whole situation can be rectified,
and he can return to his original, eternal, blissful life of perfect knowledge in
the direct association of the Lord.
TEXT 11
tasmaAiÀaÁaAs$ayaAtmaAnama,
@AtmasTaM ke(valaM par"ma,
s$aËÿmya inar"s$aede"taä,"
vastaubauiÜM" yaTaA‚(mama,
tasmäj jijïäsayätmänam
ätma-sthaà kevalaà param
saìgamya nirased etad
vastu-buddhià yathä-kramam
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; jijïäsayä—by the cultivation of knowledge; ätmänam—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; ätma—within oneself; stham—situated;
kevalam—pure; param—transcendental and supreme; saìgamya—approaching
by realized knowledge; niraset—one should give up; etat—this; vastu—within
material objects; buddhim—concept of reality; yathä-kramam—gradually, step
by step.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, by the cultivation of knowledge one should approach the
Supreme Personality of Godhead situated within oneself. By understanding the
Lord's pure, transcendental existence, one should gradually give up the false
vision of the material world as independent reality.
PURPORT
The word yathä-kramam ("step by step") means that after first realizing
oneself to be different from the gross material body one should then
progressively detach oneself from material mental activities. In this verse etad
vastu-buddhim means seeing the material world as existing independently
rather than correctly seeing all things as emanations of the Absolute Truth.
When one correctly identifies oneself as eternal spiritual form, one
achieves the real fruit of knowledge. The Lord is eternally manifest in His
eternal form, and the living entity is similarly manifest in his eternal form as
the loving servitor of the Lord. When we falsely assume that temporary,
illusory material objects are real, knowledge of our eternal spiritual form is
covered by ignorance. If, however, one meditates upon the Lord's supreme
presence within everything, one can return to the normal, blissful state of
spiritual life. Every human being should seriously endeavor to understand the
Absolute Truth, as indicated in this verse by the word jijïäsayä.
TEXT 12
@AcaAyaAeR'r"iNAr"Aâ: syaAä,"
@ntaevaAsyauÔar"Ar"iNA:
tats$anDaAnaM ‘avacanaM
ivaâAs$ainDa: s$auKaAvah":
äcäryo 'raëir ädyaù syäd
ante-väsy uttaräraëiù
tat-sandhänaà pravacanaà
vidyä-sandhiù sukhävahaù
SYNONYMS
äcäryaù—the spiritual master; araëiù—sacred kindling wood used in the
sacrificial fire; ädyaù—held beneath; syät—is to be considered; ante-väsé—the
disciple; uttara—at the top; araëiù—kindling wood; tat-sandhänam—the stick
in the middle, which connects the upper and lower wood;
pravacanam—instructions; vidyä—transcendental knowledge; sandhiù—like
the fire, arising from the friction, that spreads throughout the firewood;
sukha—happiness; ävahaù—bringing.
TRANSLATION
The spiritual master can be compared to the lower kindling stick, the disciple
to the upper kindling stick, and the instruction given by the guru to the third
stick placed in between. The transcendental knowledge communicated from
guru to disciple is compared to the fire arising from the contact of these, which
burns the darkness of ignorance to ashes, bringing great happiness both to guru
and disciple.
PURPORT
When the darkness of ignorance is burned to ashes, the dangerous life of
ignorance is also eradicated, and one can work for his true self-interest in full
knowledge. In this verse the word ädyaù means "original" and it indicates the
spiritual master, who is compared to the sacred kindling stick held below. From
the spiritual master transcendental knowledge, like fire, is spread to the
disciple. Just as friction between two sticks of firewood produces fire, similarly,
bona fide contact between the spiritual master, who is the representative of
Kåñëa, and a sincere disciple produces the fire of knowledge. When the
disciple takes shelter of the lotus feet of the spiritual master, he automatically
acquires perfect knowledge of his original, spiritual form.
TEXT 13
vaEzAAr"d"I s$aAitaivazAuÜ"bauiÜ"r,"
DaunaAeita maAyaAM gAuNAs$am‘as$aUtaAma,
gAunaAMê s$and"÷ yad"Atmamaetata,
svayaM ca zAAMyatyas$aimaâTaAi¢a:
vaiçäradé säti-viçuddha-buddhir
dhunoti mäyäà guëa-samprasütäm
gunäàç ca sandahya yad-ätmam etat
svayaà ca çäàyaty asamid yathägniù
SYNONYMS
vaiçäradé—available from the expert; sä—this; ati-viçuddha—most pure;
buddhiù—intelligence or knowledge; dhunoti—repels; mäyäm—illusion;
guëa—from the modes of material nature; samprasütäm—produced;
guëän—the modes of nature themselves; ca—also; sandahya—completely
burning up; yat—from which modes; ätmam—constituted; etat—this (material
existence); svayam—itself; ca—also; çäàyati—is pacified; asamit—without
fuel; yathä—just as; agniù—fire.
TRANSLATION
By submissively hearing from an expert spiritual master, the expert disciple
develops pure knowledge, which repels the onslaught of material illusion arising
from the three modes of material nature. Finally this pure knowledge itself
ceases, just as fire ceases when the stock of fuel has been consumed.
PURPORT
The Sanskrit word vaiçäradé means "that which is derived from the expert
[viçärada]." Perfect transcendental knowledge comes from the expert spiritual
master, and when such knowledge is heard by the expert disciple, it curbs the
waves of material illusion. Since the Lord's illusory energy acts eternally
within the material world, there is no possibility of destroying illusion. One
may, however, destroy the presence of illusion within one's own heart. To
accomplish this the disciple must become expert in pleasing the expert
spiritual master. As one advances to the perfectional stage of Kåñëa
consciousness, experiencing the presence of the Lord everywhere, one's
attention shifts to the transcendental platform. At that time, pure knowledge
itself, one's constant technical awareness of illusion, diminishes, just as fire
diminishes and is extinguished after consuming its stock of fuel.
Çréla Madhväcärya has quoted from several Vedic scriptures to show that
mäyä, or material illusion, is just like a witch who always haunts the
conditioned souls. Mäyä offers the conditioned souls whatever they like within
the three modes of nature, but such offerings are all just like fire that burns the
heart to ashes. Therefore, one must understand that the material world is a
hellish place, offering a permanent situation to no one. Externally we
experience many things, and internally we contemplate our experience,
formulating plans for future action. Thus internally and externally we are
victims of ignorance. Real knowledge comes from the Vedas, or the Supreme
Personality of Godhead in His form of perfect wisdom. If we become fully
Kåñëa conscious, taking complete shelter of the Lord, there will be no scarcity
of pleasure, because the Lord is the reservoir of all pleasure, and His devotees
freely move within that reservoir.
TEXTS 14-16
@TaESaAmk(maRk(ta|RNAAM
BaAel|(NAAM s$auKaäu":KayaAe:
naAnaAtvamaTa inatyatvaM
laAek(k(AlaAgAmaAtmanaAma,
manyas$ae s$avaRBaAvaAnaAM
s$aMsTaA ÷AEtpaiÔak(L yaTaA
taÔad"Ak{(itaBaede"na
jaAyatae iBaâtae ca DaI:
WvamapyaËÿ s$avaeRSaAM
de"ih"naAM de"h"yaAegAta:
k(AlaAvayavata: s$ainta
BaAvaA janmaAd"yaAe's$ak{(ta,
athaiñäm karma-kartèëäà
bhoktèëäà sukha-duùkhayoù
nänätvam atha nityatvaà
loka-kälägamätmanäm
manyase sarva-bhävänäà
saàsthä hy autpattiké yathä
tat-tad-äkåti-bhedena
jäyate bhidyate ca dhéù
evam apy aìga sarveñäà
dehinäà deha-yogataù
kälävayavataù santi
bhävä janmädayo 'sakåt
SYNONYMS
atha—thus; eñäm—of those; karma—fruitive activities; kartèëäm—of the
performers; bhoktèëäm—of the enjoyers; sukha-duùkhayoù—of happiness and
distress; nänätvam—variegatedness; atha—moreover; nityatvam—perpetual
existence; loka—of the materialistic world; käla—material time;
ägama—Vedic literatures recommending fruitive activities; ätmanäm—and
the self; manyase—if you think; sarva—of all; bhävänäm—material objects;
saàsthä—the actual situation; hi—certainly; autpattiké—original; yathä—as;
tat-tat—of all different objects; äkåti—of their forms; bhedena—by the
difference; jäyate—is born; bhidyate—and changes; ca—also;
dhéù—intelligence or knowledge; evam—thus; api—even though; aìga—O
Uddhava; sarveñäm—of all; dehinäm—embodied beings; deha-yogataù—by
contact with a material body; käla—of time; avayavataù—by the portions or
limbs; santi—there are; bhäväù—states of existence; janma—birth;
ädayaù—and so on; asakåt—constantly.
TRANSLATION
My dear Uddhava, I have thus explained to you perfect knowledge. There
are philosophers, however, who challenge My conclusion. They state that the
natural position of the living entity is to engage in fruitive activities, and they
see him as the enjoyer of the happiness and unhappiness that accrue from his
own work. According to this materialistic philosophy, the world, time, the
revealed scriptures and the self are all variegated and eternal, existing as a
perpetual flow of transformations. Knowledge, moreover, cannot be one or
eternal, because it arises from the different and changing forms of objects; thus
knowledge itself is always subject to change. Even if you accept such a
philosophy, My dear Uddhava, there will still be perpetual birth, death, old age
and disease, since all living entities must accept a material body subject to the
influence of time.
PURPORT
In this verse, according to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, Lord
Kåñëa speaks the following to Uddhava. "My dear Uddhava, I have clearly
established the actual goal of life in the instructions I have just imparted to
you. There are those, however, who challenge My conclusion, especially the
followers of Jaimini Kavi. If you are favorable to their understanding and thus
do not accept My instructions, then kindly hear the following explanation.
"According to the followers of Jaimini, the living entity is originally and
naturally a performer of fruitive activities, and his happiness and distress are
derived from the fruits of his own work. The world in which the living entities
find their enjoyment, the time during which they enjoy, the revealed
scriptures that explain the means for achieving enjoyment, and the subtle
bodies through which the living entities experience enjoyment all exist not
only in manifold variety but also eternally.
"The living entity need not develop detachment from material sense
gratification, either by seeing the temporariness of individual material objects
and situations or by seeing the material world as an illusory creation (mäyä).
According to such materialistic philosophy, material objects such as garlands,
sandalwood or beautiful women are temporary in specific manifestations but
perpetually exist through the natural flow of creation and destruction. In other
words, although a particular woman's form is temporary, there will eternally be
beautiful women within the material world. Thus, by carefully executing
fruitive rituals according to religious scriptures, one can maintain enjoyable
contact with women and wealth life after life. In this way one's sense
gratification will be eternal.
"The Jaimini philosophers further say that there never was a time when the
world did not exist as it does today, which implies that there is no supreme
controller who has created it. They claim that the arrangement of this world is
real and appropriate and thus is not illusory. Moreover, they say that there is
no eternal knowledge of an original perpetual form of the soul. In fact, they
say, knowledge arises not from some absolute truth but from the differences
among material objects. Knowledge therefore is not eternal and is subject to
change. The assumption hidden in this statement is that there is no spirit soul
who possesses eternal, constant knowledge of a single, unchanging reality.
Rather, the nature of consciousness or knowledge is that it undergoes constant
transformation. They state, however, that eternality is not refuted by the
perpetually transforming nature of consciousness. Consciousness perpetually
exists, they say, but not in the same form.
"Thus, the followers of Jaimini conclude that the transformation of
knowledge does not negate its eternality; rather, they state that knowledge
eternally exists within the perpetual nature of its transformation. They
therefore naturally come to the path of regulated sense gratification rather
than the path of renunciation, for in the state of mukti, or liberation, the
living entity would not have any material senses, and thus the transformation
of material understanding would not be possible. Such philosophers consider
that the achievement of an unchanging state of mukti would stunt or paralyze
the natural activity of the living entity and thus would not be in his
self-interest. The path of nivåtti (aiming toward renunciation and
transcendence of the material world) is naturally not interesting to such
materialistic philosophers. Accepting for argument's sake the validity of such
materialistic philosophy, one can easily demonstrate that the path of regulated
sense gratification brings many unwanted and miserable results to the living
entity. Therefore even from a materialistic viewpoint, detachment is desirable.
Material time is divided into different sections such as days, weeks, months
and years, and by material time the living entity is repeatedly forced to
undergo the miseries of birth, death, old age and disease. That such real
miseries occur everywhere throughout the universe is well known." In this way,
states Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, Lord Kåñëa has pointed out the
defect of materialistic philosophy to Uddhava.
We may further elaborate that if one falsely accepts the atheistic
philosophy of Jaimini and his innumerable modern followers. then the living
entity perpetually remains entangled in the anguish of birth, death, old age
and disease. This bogus, atheistic philosophy encourages material gratification
as the only logical goal of life, but the living entity will inevitably commit
mistakes in the execution of regulated sense gratification and eventually go to
hell. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Kåñëa, personally tells
Uddhava that this materialistic philosophy is false and irrelevant to the actual
self-interest of the living entity.
TEXT 17
ta‡aAipa k(maRNAAM k(tauRr,"
@svaAtan‡yaM ca laºyatae
BaAelu(ê äu":Kas$auKayaAe:
k(Ae nvaTaAeR ivavazAM Bajaeta,
taträpi karmaëäà kartur
asvätantryaà ca lakñyate
bhoktuç ca duùkha-sukhayoù
ko nv artho vivaçaà bhajet
SYNONYMS
tatra—in the matter of one's ability to obtain happiness; api—furthermore;
karmaëäm—of fruitive activities; kartuù—of the performer;
asvätantryam—the lack of independence; ca—also; lakñyate—is clearly seen;
bhoktuù—of the one who is trying to enjoy; ca—also;
duùkha-sukhayoù—happiness and unhappiness; kaù—what; nu—indeed;
arthaù—value; vivaçam—for one who is not in control; bhajet—can be
derived.
TRANSLATION
Although the performer of fruitive activities desires perpetual happiness, it is
clearly observed that materialistic workers are often unhappy and only
occasionally satisfied, thus proving that they are not independent or in control
of their destiny. When a person is always under the superior control of another,
how can he expect any valuable results from his own fruitive actions?
PURPORT
Although materialistic persons reject Kåñëa consciousness and instead
pursue temporary sense gratification, even that sense gratification is often
beyond their reach. If a person could really control his destiny, why would he
create problems for himself? No intelligent person would impose death, old age
or disease upon himself or his loved ones. One should recognize that these
unwanted miseries are forced upon one by a higher power. Since we are all
obviously under superior control, the atheistic philosophy advising one to
simply perform fruitive activities and create a happy life is most imperfect.
Due to the influence of time, happiness and misery are created. When a
woman becomes pregnant, her husband, relatives and friends eagerly await the
birth of the child. As time passes and the child is born, everyone feels great
happiness. But as the child grows into old age and eventually dies, that same
passage of time is a cause of suffering. Ignorant persons vainly seek help from
scientists who work feverishly and fruitlessly in their laboratories to stop
death. In modern times, inventions have been created to eliminate the
inconveniences of life, but the maintenance and production of such
conveniences has proven to be unbearably inconvenient for hundreds of
millions of people throughout the world. Only the most foolish person will
propose that there is no superior controller and that one can achieve favorable
results by expert performance of material activities. Ultimately all material
activities are useless because they end in annihilation. If one is driving a car
but has only limited control, the situation is most dangerous and must lead
inevitably to disaster. Similarly, although we are trying to direct the material
body to happiness, we are not in full control of the bodily demands, and
therefore there will inevitably be disaster. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (9.3),
açraddadhänäù puruñä
dharmasyäsya parantapa
apräpya mäà nivartante
måtyu-saàsära-vartmani
"Those who are not faithful on the path of devotional service cannot attain
Me, O conqueror of foes, but return to birth and death in this material world."
If one is not a devotee of Lord Kåñëa, the eventual result of his activities is
simply måtyu-saàsära-repeated birth and death.
TEXT 18
na de"ih"naAM s$auKaM ik(iÂaä,"
ivaâtae ivaäu"SaAmaipa
taTaA ca äu":KaM maUX#AnaAM
va{TaAh"Æÿr"NAM par"ma,
na dehinäà sukhaà kiïcid
vidyate viduñäm api
tathä ca duùkhaà müòhänäà
våthähaìkaraëaà param
SYNONYMS
na—not; dehinäm—of embodied beings; sukham—happiness; kiïcit—some;
vidyate—there is; viduñäm—of those who are intelligent; api—even;
tathä—similarly; ca—also; duùkham—unhappiness; müòhänäm—of the big
fools; våthä—useless; ahaìkaraëam—false ego; param—only, or completely.
TRANSLATION
It is observed within the material world that sometimes even an intelligent
person is not happy. Similarly, sometimes even a great fool is happy. The
concept of becoming happy through expertly performing material activities is
simply a useless exhibition of false egotism.
PURPORT
It may be argued that an intelligent person can expertly perform pious
activities within the material world and thus never experience suffering, since
unhappiness is caused by sinful or impious activities. However, we often
observe great suffering even among pious, intelligent persons, because they
sometimes fail in the execution of their duty and sometimes consciously or
unconsciously perform a forbidden activity. With this argument the Lord
refutes the theory that simply on the strength of material piety one may
remain perpetually happy without Kåñëa consciousness.
On the other hand, we observe that even the most foolish or sinful persons
sometimes experience happiness, because even those completely dedicated to
sin sometimes accidentally perform pious activities by inadvertently traveling
through a holy place or helping a saintly person. The material creation of God
is so complex and bewildering that even those dedicated to piety sometimes
commit sins, and even those dedicated to sinful life sometimes perform pious
actions. Therefore, within the material world we do not find absolute
happiness or unhappiness. Rather, every conditioned soul is hovering in
confusion, without perfect knowledge. Piety and sin are relative material ideas
that bestow relative happiness and unhappiness. Absolute happiness is
experienced on the spiritual platform in full Kåñëa consciousness, or love of
God. Thus material life is always ambiguous and relative, whereas Kåñëa
consciousness is the actual platform of perfect happiness.
TEXT 19
yaid" ‘aAiæaM ivaGaAtaM ca
jaAnainta s$auKaäu":KayaAe:
tae'pyaÜ"A na ivaäu"yaAeRgAM
ma{tyaunaR ‘aBavaeâTaA
yadi präptià vighätaà ca
jänanti sukha-duùkhayoù
te 'py addhä na vidur yogaà
måtyur na prabhaved yathä
SYNONYMS
yadi—if; präptim—achievement; vighätam—removal; ca—also; jänanti—they
know; sukha—of happiness; duùkhayoù—and of distress; te—they; api—still;
addhä—directly; na—not; viduù—do know; yogam—the process;
måtyuù—death; na—not; prabhavet—would exert its power; yathä—by which.
TRANSLATION
Even if people know how to achieve happiness and avoid unhappiness, they
still do not know the process by which death will not be able to exert its power
over them.
PURPORT
If the so-called intelligent materialists know the means of achieving
happiness and destroying unhappiness, then they should deliver people from
inevitable death. The scientists are busily working to solve this problem, but
since they have completely failed, it is understood that they are not actually
intelligent and that they do not know the means of achieving happiness and
eliminating misery. It is most foolish to think that one can be happy with an ax
hanging over one's neck. Lord Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä, måtyuù sarva-haraç
cäham: [Bg. 10.34] "I Myself come before you as death and take everything
away." We should not blindly ignore the disaster of material life, but should
instead accept the Lord's causeless mercy, which He so magnanimously offers
in His incarnation as Caitanya Mahäprabhu,. We should surrender to the lotus
feet of Lord Caitanya, who offers the real means for achieving unqualified
happiness: the chanting of the holy names of the Lord. This is the Lord's
desire, and it is in our own self-interest to take up this process.
TEXT 20
k(Ae'nvaTaR: s$auKayatyaenaM
k(AmaAe vaA ma{tyaur"intake(
@AGaAtaM naIyamaAnasya
vaDyasyaeva na tauií"d":
ko 'nv arthaù sukhayaty enaà
kämo vä måtyur antike
äghätaà néyamänasya
vadhyasyeva na tuñöi-daù
SYNONYMS
kaù—what; nu—certainly; arthaù—material object; sukhayati—gives
happiness; enam—to a person; kämaù—sense gratification derived from
material things; vä—or; måtyuù—death; antike—standing nearby;
äghätam—to the place of execution; néyamänasya—of one who is being led;
vadhyasya—of one who is to be killed; iva—like; na—not at all;
tuñöi-daù—gives satisfaction.
TRANSLATION
Death is not at all pleasing, and since everyone is exactly like a condemned
man being led to the place of execution, what possible happiness can people
derive from material objects or the gratification they provide?
PURPORT
It is customary throughout the world that a condemned man is offered a
sumptuous last meal. For the condemned man, however, such a feast is a
chilling reminder of his imminent death, and therefore he cannot enjoy it.
Similarly, no sane human being can be satisfied in material life, because death
is standing near and may strike at any moment. If one is sitting in one's living
room with a deadly snake at one's side, knowing that at any moment the
poisonous fangs might pierce the flesh, how can one sit peacefully and watch
television or read a book? Similarly, unless one is more or less crazy, one
cannot be enthusiastic or even peaceful in material life. Knowledge of the
inevitability of death should encourage one to become determined in spiritual
life.
TEXT 21
™autaM ca ä{"í"vaä," äu"íM"
s$paDaARs$aUyaAtyayavyayaE:
baù"ntar"Ayak(AmatvaAta,
k{(iSava»aAipa inaSP(lama,
çrutaà ca dåñöa-vad duñöaà
spardhäsüyätyaya-vyayaiù
bahv-antaräya-kämatvät
kåñi-vac cäpi niñphalam
SYNONYMS
çrutam—material happiness which is heard of; ca—also; dåñöa-vat—just like
that which we have already seen; duñöam—is contaminated; spardhä—by
jealousy; asüyä—by envy; atyaya—by death; vyayaiù—and by decay;
bahu—many; antaräya—obstacles; kämatvät—because of accepting happiness
with such characteristics; kåñi-vat—like agriculture; ca—also; api—even;
niñphalam—fruitless.
TRANSLATION
That material happiness of which we hear, such as promotion to heavenly
planets for celestial enjoyment, is just like that material happiness we have
already experienced. Both are polluted by jealousy, envy, decay and death.
Therefore, just as an attempt to raise crops becomes fruitless if there are many
problems like crop disease, insect plague or drought, similarly, the attempt to
attain material happiness, either on earth or on the heavenly planets, is always
fruitless because of innumerable obstacles.
PURPORT
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura comments as follows on this verse.
"Ordinarily, if there is no specific impediment, agricultural endeavors will
yield their fruits. If, however, there is a defect in the seed, or if the soil is too
salty or barren, or if there is drought, plague, excessive rain or heat out of
season, or if there are disturbances caused by animals, birds or insects, then
agricultural activities will not yield the desired harvest. Similarly, those who
are expert in analyzing the material world see that the heavenly situations
offered in the Vedas are not basically different from life on the earth. By the
interaction of conditioned souls there will inevitably be jealousy as one
becomes distinguished as superior and another as inferior. By the power of
time these positions are reversed, and therefore violence and intrigue disturb
life even on the heavenly planets. In fact, the attempt to promote oneself to
the heavenly planets is itself full of problems and disturbances. One should
therefore understand that the kingdom of God, Vaikuëöha, is transcendental
to the limitations and disturbances imposed by the laws of material nature in
this world. If one wrongly concludes that such imperfections are also present
in the kingdom of God, then one will be polluted by material contamination."
TEXT 22
@ntar"AyaEr"ivaih"taAe
yaid" DamaR: svanauiï"ta:
taenaAipa inaijaRtaM sTaAnaM
yaTaA gAcC$ita tacC+$NAu
antaräyair avihito
yadi dharmaù sv-anuñöhitaù
tenäpi nirjitaà sthänaà
yathä gacchati tac chåëu
SYNONYMS
antaräyaiù—by obstacles and discrepancies; avihitaù—not affected; yadi—if;
dharmaù—one's execution of regulated duties according to Vedic injunctions;
sv-anuñöhitaù—excellently performed; tena—by that; api—even;
nirjitam—accomplished; sthänam—status; yathä—the manner in which;
gacchati—it perishes; tat—that; çåëu—please hear.
TRANSLATION
If one performs Vedic sacrifices and fruitive rituals without any mistake or
contamination, one will achieve a heavenly situation in the next life. But even
this result, which is only achieved by perfect performance of fruitive rituals,
will be vanquished by time. Now hear of this.
PURPORT
The word gacchati means "going." In Bhagavad-gétä Lord Kåñëa states,
ägamäpäyino 'nityäù: all material experiences, good or bad, come and go.
Therefore the word gacchati refers to the disappearance of the results of even
the most meticulously performed fruitive sacrifices. Any material situation,
from the worst to the best, is imperfect. Thus one should strive only for pure
Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 23
wîe"h" de"vataA yaÁaE:
svalaAeRkM( yaAita yaAiÁak(:
BauÃaIta de"vavaÔa‡a
BaAegAAind"vyaAiªajaAijaRtaAna,
iñöveha devatä yajïaiù
svar-lokaà yäti yäjïikaù
bhuïjéta deva-vat tatra
bhogän divyän nijärjitän
SYNONYMS
iñövä—having worshiped; iha—in this world; devatäù—the demigods;
yajïaiù—with sacrifices; svaù-lokam—to the heavenly planets; yäti—goes;
yäjïikaù—the performer of sacrifice; bhuïjéta—he may enjoy; deva-vat—like a
god; tatra—therein; bhogän—pleasures; divyän—celestial; nija—by himself;
arjitän—achieved.
TRANSLATION
If on earth one performs sacrifices for the satisfaction of the demigods, he
goes to the heavenly planets, where, just like a demigod, he enjoys all of the
heavenly pleasures he has earned by his performances.
TEXT 24
svapauNyaAepaicatae zAu”ae
ivamaAna opagAIyatae
gAnDavaE=#ivaRh"r"nmaDyae
de"vaInaAM ô$âvaeSaDa{k,(
sva-puëyopacite çubhre
vimäna upagéyate
gandharvair viharan madhye
devénäà hådya-veña-dhåk
SYNONYMS
sva—his own; puëya—by the pious activities; upacite—accumulated;
çubhre—shining; vimäne—in an airplane; upagéyate—is glorified by songs;
gandharvaiù—by the heavenly Gandharvas; viharan—enjoying life;
madhye—in the middle; devénäm—of heavenly goddesses; hådya—charming;
veña—clothes; dhåk—wearing.
TRANSLATION
Having achieved the heavenly planets, the performer of ritualistic sacrifices
travels in a glowing airplane, which he obtains as the result of his piety on
earth. Being glorified by songs sung by the Gandharvas and dressed in
wonderfully charming clothes, he enjoys life surrounded by heavenly goddesses.
TEXT 25
ñIiBa: k(AmagAyaAnaena
ik(iÆÿnaIjaAlamaAilanaA
‚(Lx"ªa vaed"AtmapaAtaM
s$aur"A‚(Lxe"Sau inava{Rta:
strébhiù kämaga-yänena
kiìkiné-jäla-mälinä
kréòan na vedätma-pätaà
suräkréòeñu nirvåtaù
SYNONYMS
strébhiù—with heavenly women; käma-ga—going wherever one desires;
yänena—with such an airplane; kiìkiëé-jäla-mälinä—decorated with circles of
bells; kréòan—having a good time; na—not; veda—does consider; ätma—his
own; pätam—falldown; sura—of the demigods; äkréòeñu—in the pleasure
gardens; nirvåtaù—being comfortable, relaxed and happy.
TRANSLATION
Accompanied by heavenly women, the enjoyer of the fruits of sacrifice goes
on pleasure rides in a wonderful airplane, which is decorated with circles of
tinkling bells and which flies wherever he desires. Being relaxed, comfortable
and happy in the heavenly pleasure gardens, he does not consider that he is
exhausting the fruits of his piety and will soon fall down to the mortal world.
TEXT 26
taAvats$a maAed"tae svagAeR
yaAvatpauNyaM s$amaApyatae
ºaINApaunya: patatyavaARgA,
@inacC$na, k(AlacaAilata:
tävat sa modate svarge
yävat puëyaà samäpyate
kñéëa-punyaù pataty arväg
anicchan käla-cälitaù
SYNONYMS
tävat—that long; saù—he; modate—enjoys life; svarge—in the heavenly
planets; yävat—until; puëyam—his pious results; samäpyate—are used up;
kñéëa—exhausted; puëyaù—his piety; patati—he falls; arväk—down from
heaven; anicchan—not desiring to fall; käla—by time; cälitaù—pushed down.
TRANSLATION
Until his pious results are used up, the performer of sacrifice enjoys life in
the heavenly planets. When the pious results are exhausted, however, he falls
down from the pleasure gardens of heaven, being moved against his desire by
the force of eternal time.
TEXTS 27-29
yaâDamaRr"ta: s$aËÿAä,"
@s$ataAM vaAijataein‰"ya:
k(AmaAtmaA k{(paNAAe laubDa:
ñENAAe BaUtaivaihM"s$ak(:
pazAUnaivaiDanaAlaBya
‘aetaBaUtagANAAna, yajana,
nar"k(AnavazAAe jantaur,"
gAtvaA yaAtyaulbaNAM tama:
k(maARiNA äu":KaAed"k(ARiNA
ku(vaRnde"he"na taE: pauna:
de"h"maABajatae ta‡a
ikM( s$auKaM matyaRDaimaRNA:
yady adharma-rataù saìgäd
asatäà väjitendriyaù
kämätmä kåpaëo lubdhaù
straiëo bhüta-vihiàsakaù
paçün avidhinälabhya
preta-bhüta-gaëän yajan
narakän avaço jantur
gatvä yäty ulbaëaà tamaù
karmäëi duùkhodarkäëi
kurvan dehena taiù punaù
deham äbhajate tatra
kià sukhaà martya-dharmiëaù
SYNONYMS
yadi—if; adharma—in irreligion; rataù—he is engaged; saìgät—due to
association; asatäm—of materialistic people; vä—or; ajita—due to not
conquering; indriyaù—the senses; käma—material lusty desires; ätmä—living
for; kåpaëaù—miserly; lubdhaù—greedy; straiëaù—a woman-hunter;
bhüta—against other living beings; vihiàsakaù—committing violence;
paçün—animals; avidhinä—without the authority of Vedic injunctions;
älabhya—killing; preta-bhüta—ghosts and spirits; gaëän—the groups of;
yajan—worshiping; narakän—to hells; avaçaù—helplessly, being under the
control of fruitive activities; jantuù—a living being; gatvä—having gone;
yäti—approaches; ulbaëam—extreme; tamaù—darkness; karmäëi—activities;
duùkha—great unhappiness; udarkäëi—bringing in the future;
kurvan—performing; dehena—with such a body; taiù—by such activities;
punaù—again; deham-a material body; äbhajate—accepts; tatra—therein;
kim—what; sukham—happiness; martya—always leading to death;
dharmiëaù—of one sworn to activities.
TRANSLATION
If a human being is engaged in sinful, irreligious activities, either because of
bad association or because of his failure to control his senses, then such a person
will certainly develop a personality full of material desires. He thus becomes
miserly toward others, greedy and always anxious to exploit the bodies of
women. When the mind is so polluted one becomes violent and aggressive and
without the authority of Vedic injunctions slaughters innocent animals for
sense gratification. Worshiping ghosts and spirits, the bewildered person falls
fully into the grip of unauthorized activities and thus goes to hell, where he
receives a material body infected by the darkest modes of nature. In such a
degraded body, he unfortunately continues to perform inauspicious activities
that greatly increase his future unhappiness, and therefore he again accepts a
similar material body. What possible happiness can there be for one who engages
in activities inevitably terminating in death?
PURPORT
In the Vedic analysis of civilized life there are two paths. One who takes to
the path of nivåtti-märga immediately renounces material sense gratification
and purifies his existence by performance of austerity and devotional
activities. On the path of pravåtti-märga one furnishes a steady supply of sense
objects to the senses, but one consumes such sense objects under strict
regulations and through ritualistic ceremonies, thus gradually purifying the
heart and satiating the material senses. Unfortunately, as explained in this and
the previous verse, the path of pravåtti-märga is extremely volatile because
rather than becoming detached, the living entity often becomes uncontrolled
and fully addicted to further sense gratification. In the previous verse the path
of regulated, authorized sense gratification was described, and in this verse the
path of unauthorized, demoniac sense gratification is described.
In this verse, the words saìgäd asatäà väjitendriyaù are very significant.
One may fall down into sinful life by bad association, or even in good
association one may fail to control his senses. Ultimately each living entity is
responsible for his existential situation. The word adharma-rataù in this verse
indicates those engaged in excessive sex life, meat-eating, drinking and other
inauspicious activities that transgress the codes of civilized human life. Being
in the mode of ignorance, these persons develop such a cruel mentality that
they do not consider any festive occasion complete without the consumption
of large quantities of meat obtained by slaughtering helpless animals.
Eventually such persons become influenced by ghosts and spirits, who deprive
them of all ability to discriminate between right and wrong. Losing all sense of
decency, they become fit candidates for entrance into the darkest modes of
material existence. Sometimes these lusty, intoxicated carnivores, considering
themselves pious, pray to God in a useless way. Afflicted by innumerable
material desires, they rotate from one material body to another without
experiencing true happiness. Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has
noted that material life is so disturbing that even if one is allowed to live for
an entire day of Brahmä—approximately 8,640,000,000 years—one will
eventually be afflicted by the fear of death. In fact, Brahmä himself is
disturbed by fear of death, what to speak of tiny human beings who live a
paltry seventy or eighty years at most. Thus, as stated here, kià sukhaà
martya-dharmiëaù: what possible happiness can one find within the painful
grip of material illusion?
TEXT 30
laAek(AnaAM laAek(paAlaAnaAM
maà"yaM k(lpajaIivanaAma,
“aöNAAe'ipa BayaM maÔaAe
iã"par"ADaRpar"AyauSa:
lokänäà loka-pälänäà
mad bhayaà kalpa-jévinäm
brahmaëo 'pi bhayaà matto
dvi-parärdha-paräyuñaù
SYNONYMS
lokänäm—in all the planetary systems; loka-pälänäm—and for all the
planetary leaders, such as the demigods; mat—of Me; bhayam—there is fear;
kalpa-jévinäm—for those who live for a kalpa, or a day of Brahmä;
brahmaëaù—of Lord Brahmä; api—even; bhayam—there is fear;
mattaù—from Me; dvi-parärdha—two parärdhas, totalling 311,040,000,000,000
years; para—supreme; äyuñaù—whose duration of life.
TRANSLATION
In all the planetary systems, from the heavenly to the hellish, and for all of
the great demigods who live for one thousand yuga cycles, there is fear of Me in
My form of time. Even Brahmä, who possesses the supreme life span of
311,040,000,000,000 years, is also afraid of Me.
PURPORT
There are many statements throughout Vedic literature proving that even
the great demigods fear the time potency of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Even in the heavenly planets there is no relief from the miseries of
material life. No conditioned soul can live eternally, as clearly demonstrated
by the deaths of Hiraëyakaçipu and other demons. Since even the demigods
fear the time potency of the Personality of Godhead, one may easily conclude
that Kåñëa is the Absolute Truth and that He is eternally the supreme
controller of everything and everyone. Lord Kåñëa is the only real shelter.
TEXT 31
gAuNAA: s$a{jainta k(maARiNA
gAuNAAe'naus$a{jatae gAuNAAna,
jaIvastau gAuNAs$aMyaul(Ae
BauÈeÿ k(maRP(laAnyas$aAE
guëäù såjanti karmäëi
guëo 'nusåjate guëän
jévas tu guëa-saàyukto
bhuìkte karma-phaläny asau
SYNONYMS
guëäù—the material senses; såjanti—create; karmäëi—pious and impious
material activities; guëaù—the three modes of nature; anusåjate—set into
motion; guëän—the material senses; jévaù—the minute living entity;
tu—indeed; guëa—the material senses or the material modes of nature;
saàyuktaù—fully engaged in; bhuìkte—experiences; karma—of activities;
phaläni—the various results; asau—the spirit soul.
TRANSLATION
The material senses create material activities, either pious or sinful, and the
modes of nature set the material senses into motion. The living entity, being
fully engaged by the material senses and modes of nature, experiences the
various results of fruitive work.
PURPORT
It has been explained in the previous verses that the living entity under the
control of fruitive activities is pushed down into a hellish condition of life. In
this verse the exact nature of the living entity's dependence on fruitive
activities is described. One can observe that one's activities are performed by
the material senses and that the living entity himself is merely conscious of
such activities. One may be worshiping the demigods, enjoying sex or
performing agricultural or intellectual activities, but in all cases the material
senses are performing the work.
One may argue that the spirit soul initiates the activities of the senses and
thus is the ultimate doer, but such false egotism is negated in this verse by the
statement guëäù såjanti karmäëi guëo 'nusåjate guëän. The three modes of
nature—goodness, passion and ignorance—stimulate the functions of the
material senses, and the living entity, coming under the control of a particular
mode of nature, merely experiences the good and bad results of his work. This
does not negate the concept of free will, since the living entity chooses to
associate with different modes of nature. By one's eating, speaking, sexual
activities, occupation, etc., one associates with various modes of nature and
acquires a particular mentality. But in all cases the modes of nature themselves
are acting, not the living entity. The word asau in this verse indicates that the
living entity falsely considers himself to be the performer of work carried out
by nature. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (3.27):
prakåteù kriyamäëäni
guëaiù karmäëi sarvaçaù
ahaìkära-vimüòhätmä
kartäham iti manyate
"The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of material
nature, thinks himself to be the doer of activities, which are in actuality
carried out by nature." The conditioned soul can be liberated simply by giving
up this false egoistic conception of life and taking to the devotional service of
the Lord, by which the living entity, or marginal potency of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, escapes the disturbing influence of the external
potency called mäyä. In the devotional service of the Lord the liberated entity
realizes his actual form of eternity, knowledge and bliss.
It is natural to perform activities with a desire to achieve a good result. The
best results, however, can be attained by one who engages in the devotional
service of the Lord with a desire to be reinstated in his constitutional position
as the Lord's loving servant. In this way the tendency to exploit one's own
activities for a particular result can be purified; then the modes of nature and
the material senses will no longer engage the living entity in illusion. The
living entity is by nature blissful, and when his illusion ceases, all suffering
comes to an end. The liberated soul is then fit to reside in Vaikuëöha, the
kingdom of God.
TEXT 32
yaAvatsyaAÖ"NAvaESamyaM
taAvaªaAnaAtvamaAtmana:
naAnaAtvamaAtmanaAe yaAvata,
paAr"tan‡yaM tadE"va ih"
yävat syäd guëa-vaiñamyaà
tävan nänätvam ätmanaù
nänätvam ätmano yävat
päratantryaà tadaiva hi
SYNONYMS
yävat—as long as; syät—there is; guëa—of the modes of material nature;
vaiñamyam—separate existences; tävat—then there will be;
nänätvam—different states of existence; ätmanaù—of the soul;
nänätvam—different states of existence; ätmanaù—of the soul; yävat—as long
as there are; päratantryam—dependence; tadä—then there will be;
eva—certainly; hi—indeed.
TRANSLATION
As long as the living entity thinks that the modes of material nature have
separate existences, he will be obliged to take birth in many different forms and
will experience varieties of material existence. Therefore, the living entity
remains completely dependent on fruitive activities under the modes of nature.
PURPORT
The word guëa-vaiñamyam indicates forgetfulness of Lord Kåñëa, which
causes one to see material varieties as separate states of existence. The living
entity, being attracted to material varieties and having faith in them, is forced
to experience these varieties in different material bodies, such as those of
demigods, pigs, businessmen, insects, and so on. According to the
karma-mémäàsä philosophers, there is no transcendental living entity who is
the background of all existence. They accept material variety as the final
reality. However, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Kåñëa, is the
actual basis of everything. Everything is within Him, and He is within
everything. A pure devotee of the Lord sees Kåñëa everywhere and sees all of
the variegated modes of nature as the potency of Lord Kåñëa. One who does
not see Lord Kåñëa will certainly see material variegatedness as the supreme
reality. Such vision is called mäyä, or gross illusion, and is similar to the vision
of an animal. Päratantryam means one will remain caught in the web of
fruitive activities unless one gives up this superficial, separatist vision.
TEXT 33
yaAvad"syaAsvatan‡atvaM
taAvad"Iìr"taAe Bayama,
ya Wtats$amaupaAs$aIrM"s$a,
tae mau÷inta zAucaAipaRtaA:
yävad asyäsvatantratvaà
tävad éçvarato bhayam
ya etat samupäséraàs
te muhyanti çucärpitäù
SYNONYMS
yävat—as long as; asya—of the living being; asvatantratvam—there is no
freedom from dependence on the modes of nature; tävat—then there will be;
éçvarataù—from the supreme controller; bhayam—fear; ye—those who;
etat—to this material concept of life; samupäséran—devote themselves;
te—they; muhyanti—are bewildered; çucä—in lamentation; arpitäù—always
absorbed.
TRANSLATION
The conditioned soul who remains dependent on fruitive activities under the
material modes of nature will continue to fear Me, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, since I impose the results of one's fruitive activities. Those who
accept the material concept of life, taking the variegatedness of the modes of
nature to be factual, devote themselves to material enjoyment and are therefore
always absorbed in lamentation and grief.
PURPORT
The living entity is bound in the network of illusion, but although he can
understand that he is dependent upon superior powers, he does not want to
serve the Supreme Lord. He thus becomes filled with fear of life itself. Desiring
material sense gratification, the living entity, like the demon Kaàsa, always
fears destruction of his material arrangement. Remaining addicted to the
flavors of material nature, one gradually sinks down into an irrational form of
life.
Mäyä has two potencies—the first covers the living entity, and the second
throws him down into a hellish condition of life. When one is covered by
mäyä, one loses all power of discrimination, and mäyä then throws such a fool
into the darkness of ignorance. When one wrongly considers oneself to be
independent of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Kåñëa, one
becomes a worshiper of temporary material objects, hoping to enjoy material
sense gratification, and as one grows older, one's life becomes filled with fear
and anxiety. A conditioned soul considers himself to be in control of his life,
but since he does not have any actual controlling potency, his situation is
contradictory and not at all pleasing. As all of one's material possessions are
taken away by time, one becomes filled with lamentation. All in all, material
life is truly abominable, and it is only because of dense illusion that we accept
it as satisfactory.
TEXT 34
k(Ala @AtmaAgAmaAe laAek(:
svaBaAvaAe DamaR Wva ca
wita maAM baò"DaA ‘aAò"r,"
gAuNAvyaitak(re" s$aita
käla ätmägamo lokaù
svabhävo dharma eva ca
iti mäà bahudhä prähur
guëa-vyatikare sati
SYNONYMS
kälaù—time; ätmä—the self; ägamaù—Vedic knowledge; lokaù—the universe;
svabhävaù—different natures of different living entities; dharmaù—religious
principles; eva—certainly; ca—also; iti—thus; mäm—Me; bahudhä—in many
ways; prähuù—they call; guëa—of the modes of nature; vyatikare—agitation;
sati—when there is.
TRANSLATION
When there is agitation and interaction of the material modes of nature, the
living entities then describe Me in various ways such as all-powerful time, the
Self, Vedic knowledge, the universe, one's own nature, religious ceremonies
and so on.
PURPORT
One can experience the potency of the Personality of Godhead by
observing how different species of life—demigods, human beings, animals, fish,
birds, insects, plants, etc.—gradually evolve their natures and activities. Each
species of life executes a particular process of sense gratification, and this
function is called the dharma of the species. Lacking knowledge of the
Personality of Godhead, ordinary persons catch a glimpse of the Lord's
potencies in the above-mentioned manifestations. Çréla Madhväcärya has cited
the following information from the Tantra-bhägavata. The Lord is called käla,
or time, because He is the mover and controller of all material qualities.
Because He is complete and perfect, He is called ätmä, or the Self; and He is
the personification of all knowledge. The word svabhäva indicates that the
Lord fully controls His own destiny; and as the maintainer of everyone He is
called dharma. One on the liberated platform can achieve unlimited bliss by
worshiping the Personality of Godhead, whereas those who are ignorant of the
Lord try to find meaning by concocting other objects of worship. If one
stubbornly imagines that anything is independent of the Lord, one will remain
in the grip of the illusory network of the Lord's potency. Seeing the
inevitability of the destruction of material things, one is constantly fearful and
perpetually laments in the darkness of ignorance. In such darkness there is no
question of happiness. Therefore, one should never think that anything is
independent of the Personality of Godhead. As soon as one considers anything
to be independent of the Lord, one is immediately gripped by the Lord's
illusory network, called mäyä. One should always remain humble and obedient
to the Personality of Godhead, even when one is liberated, and thus one will
achieve the supreme spiritual happiness.
TEXT 35
™aIoÜ"va ovaAca
gAuNAeSau vataRmaAnaAe'ipa
de"h"jaeSvanapaAva{ta:
gAuNAEnaR baDyatae de"h"I
baDyatae vaA k(TaM ivaBaAe
çré-uddhava uväca
guëeñu vartamäno 'pi
deha-jeñv anapävåtaù
guëair na badhyate dehé
badhyate vä kathaà vibho
SYNONYMS
çré-uddhavaù uväca—Çré Uddhava said; guëeñu—in the modes of material
nature; vartamänaù—being situated; api—although; deha—from the material
body; jeñu—born; anapävåtaù—being uncovered; guëaiù—by the modes of
nature; na—not; badhyate—is bound; dehé—the living entity within the
material body; badhyate—is bound; vä—or; katham—how does it happen;
vibho—O my Lord.
TRANSLATION
Çré Uddhava said: O my Lord, a living entity situated within the material
body is surrounded by the modes of nature and the happiness and distress that
are born of activities caused by these modes. How is it possible that he is not
bound by this material encirclement? It may also be said that the living entity is
ultimately transcendental and has nothing to do with the material world. Then
how is he ever bound by material nature?
PURPORT
Due to the influence of the modes of nature the material body generates
fruitive activities, which in turn generate material happiness and distress. This
material chain reaction is indicated by the word deha-jeñu. The Personality of
Godhead has shown Uddhava that the actual goal of life is liberation, not
sense gratification. Although the Lord has indicated that the living entity is
liberated by devotional service performed with knowledge and renunciation,
Uddhava apparently does not understand the specific means of perfection.
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, Uddhava's question
implies that we observe even in the activities of liberated souls such external
activities as eating, sleeping, walking, hearing, speaking, etc., which are
functions of the gross and subtle bodies. Thus, if even liberated souls are
situated within the gross and subtle material bodies, then how are they not
bound by the material modes of nature? If it is argued that the living entity is
like the sky, which never mixes with any other object and therefore is not
bound, then one may ask how such a transcendental living entity can ever be
bound by material nature. In other words, how would material existence be
possible? In order to completely clarify the path of Kåñëa consciousness,
Uddhava presents this question to the supreme spiritual authority, Lord Kåñëa.
In the kingdom of mäyä there are innumerable speculations about the
Supreme Lord, who is variously described as nonexistent, or as possessing
material qualities, or as being devoid of all qualities, or as being a neuter object
like a eunuch. But through mundane speculation it is not possible to
understand the nature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore
Uddhava wants to clear the path of spiritual liberation so that people can
actually understand that Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As
long as one is affected by the modes of nature, perfect understanding is not
possible. Lord Kåñëa will now describe to Uddhava further details of spiritual
emancipation on the road back home, back to Kåñëa.
TEXTS 36-37
k(TaM vataeRta ivah"re"ta,
kE(vaAR ÁaAyaeta laºaNAE:
ikM( BauÃaItaAeta ivas$a{jaeca,
C$yaItaAs$aIta yaAita vaA
Wtad"cyauta mae “aUih"
‘a´aM ‘a´aivad"AM var"
inatyabaÜ"Ae inatyamaul(
Wk( Wvaeita mae ”ama:
kathaà varteta viharet
kair vä jïäyeta lakñaëaiù
kià bhuïjétota visåjec
chayétäséta yäti vä
etad acyuta me brühi
praçnaà praçna-vidäà vara
nitya-baddho nitya-mukta
eka eveti me bhramaù
SYNONYMS
katham—in what way; varteta—he is situated; viharet—he enjoys; kaiù—by
which; vä—or; jïäyeta—would be known; lakñaëaiù—by symptoms;
kim—what; bhuïjéta—he would eat; uta—and; visåjet—would evacuate;
çayéta—would lie down; äséta—would sit; yäti—goes; vä—or; etat—this;
acyuta—O Acyuta; me—to me; brühi—explain; praçnam—the question;
praçna-vidäm—of all those who know how to answer questions; vara—O the
best; nitya-baddhaù—eternally conditioned; nitya-muktaù—eternally
liberated; ekaù—singular; eva—certainly; iti—thus; me—my;
bhramaù—confusion.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, Acyuta, the same living entity is sometimes described as
eternally conditioned and at other times as eternally liberated. I am not able to
understand, therefore, the actual situation of the living entity. You, my Lord,
are the best of those who are expert in answering philosophical questions. Please
explain to me the symptoms by which one can tell the difference between a
living entity who is eternally liberated and one who is eternally conditioned. In
what various ways would they remain situated, enjoy life, eat, evacuate, lie
down, sit or move about?
PURPORT
In previous verses Lord Kåñëa has explained to Uddhava that an eternally
liberated soul is beyond the three modes of material nature. Since a liberated
soul is considered to be beyond even the superior mode of goodness, how can
he be recognized? By false identification with the modes of nature, which
produce one's own material body, one is bound by illusion. On the other hand,
by transcending the modes of nature, one is liberated. However, in ordinary
activities—such as eating, evacuating, relaxing, sitting and sleeping—a
liberated soul and a conditioned soul appear to be the same. Therefore
Uddhava is inquiring, "By what symptoms can I recognize that one living
entity is performing such external activities without false ego, and by what
symptoms can I recognize one who is working under the illusory bondage of
material identification? This is difficult, because the ordinary bodily functions
of liberated and conditioned personalities appear similar." Uddhava has
approached the Supreme Personality of Godhead, taking Him as his personal
spiritual master, and wants to be enlightened about how to understand the
differences between material and spiritual life.
Since the living entity is sometimes called eternally conditioned, how could
he ever be considered eternally liberated, or vice versa? This is an apparent
contradiction, which will be cleared up by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Eleventh Canto, Tenth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Nature of Fruitive Activity."
11. The Symptoms of Conditioned and Liberated Living
Entities
In this chapter, Lord Çré Kåñëa describes to Uddhava the difference
between conditioned and liberated living entities, the characteristics of a
saintly person and the different aspects of the practice of devotional service.
In the previous chapter Uddhava had presented questions regarding
conditioned and liberated souls. In His replies, the almighty Lord Çré Kåñëa
states that although the spirit soul is part and parcel of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, on account of his infinitesimal nature, he falls into
contact with the material energy, which causes him to accept the covering
designations of the modes of goodness, passion and ignorance. Thus the soul
has been bound up since time immemorial. But when he achieves the shelter of
pure devotional service, he becomes designated as eternally liberated.
Transcendental knowledge is therefore the cause of the living entity's
liberation, and ignorance is the cause of his bondage. Both knowledge and
ignorance are produced by the mäyä energy of Lord Çré Kåñëa and are His
eternal potencies. The living entities who become attracted to the modes of
nature are bewildered by false ego, which causes them to see themselves as the
enjoyers of misery, confusion, happiness, distress, danger, and so on. In this
way, they meditate upon such states of being, although in the real, or spiritual,
world these things do not exist. Both the jéva (individual soul) and the
Supersoul reside within the same body. The difference between them is that
the almighty Supersoul, being fully cognizant, does not indulge in enjoying the
fruits of material work but remains simply as a witness, whereas the
infinitesimal conditioned jéva, being ignorant, suffers the consequences of his
own work. The liberated jéva, in spite of being within a material body because
of the remaining reactions of his past activities, does not become disturbed by
the happiness and suffering of the body. He sees such bodily experiences in the
same way that a person who has just awakened from a dream sees his dream
experiences. On the other hand, although the conditioned living entity is by
nature not the enjoyer of the happiness and misery of the body, he imagines
himself to be the enjoyer of his bodily experiences, just as a person in a dream
imagines his dream experiences to be real. Just as the sun reflected upon water
is not actually bound up in the water, and just as the air is not confined to
some particular segment of the sky, similarly a detached person takes
advantage of his broad outlook on the world to cut off all his doubts with the
sword of appropriate renunciation, yukta-vairägya. Since his life force, senses,
mind and intelligence have no tendency to fix themselves on sense objects, he
remains liberated even while situated within the material body. Regardless of
whether he is harassed or worshiped, he remains equipoised. He is therefore
considered liberated even in this life. A liberated person has nothing to do
with the piety and sin of this world, but rather sees everything equally. A
self-satisfied sage does not praise or condemn anyone. He does not speak
uselessly to anyone and does not fix his mind on material things. Rather, he is
always merged in meditation upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, so in
the eyes of fools he seems to be a speechless, crazy person.
Even if someone has studied or even taught all the different Vedic
literatures, if he has not developed pure attraction to the service of the
Personality of Godhead, he has accomplished nothing beyond his own labor.
One should study only those scriptures in which the nature of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, His enchanting pastimes and the nectarean topics of
His various incarnations are scientifically discussed; thus one gains the highest
good fortune. However, by studying scriptures other than these one simply
acquires misfortune.
With full determination one should properly understand the identity of the
soul and give up false identification with this material body. He may then offer
his heart at the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëa, the reservoir of all
love, and attain real peace. When the mind is carried away by the three modes
of nature, it can no longer meditate properly on the transcendental Supreme
Truth. After many lifetimes, faithful persons who have performed Vedic
sacrifices for acquiring religiosity, economic development and sense
gratification finally engage in hearing, chanting and constantly thinking of
the Supreme Lord's all-auspicious pastimes, which purify the entire universe.
Such persons then achieve the association of a bona fide spiritual master and
the saintly devotees. After that, by the mercy of the spiritual master they begin
to follow the paths set out by the standard authorities of spiritual life, the
mahäjanas, and become actually perfect in realization of their own true
identity.
Having heard these instructions from Lord Kåñëa, Uddhava further desired
to understand the characteristics of a factually saintly person and the different
aspects of devotional practice. Lord Kåñëa replied that a real sädhu, or
Vaiñëava, is qualified with the following characteristics. He is merciful,
nonenvious, always truthful, self-controlled, faultless, magnanimous, gentle,
clean, nonpossessive, helpful to all, peaceful, dependent on Kåñëa alone, free
from lust, devoid of material endeavor, steady, in control of the six enemies of
the mind, moderate in eating, never bewildered, always respectful to others,
never desirous of respect for himself, sober, compassionate, friendly, poetic,
expert and silent. The principal characteristic of a sädhu is that he takes
shelter of Kåñëa alone. One who engages exclusively in Kåñëa's service and
understands Him as the limitless, indwelling Lord who comprises eternity,
knowledge and bliss, is the topmost devotee. The practice of devotional service
includes sixty-four kinds of activities. Among these are: (1-6) seeing, touching,
worshiping, serving, glorifying and offering obeisances to the Deity of the Lord
and His pure devotees; (7) developing attachment for hearing the chanting of
the Lord's qualities, pastimes, and so on; (8) remaining always in meditation
upon the Lord; (9) offering everything one acquires to the Lord; (10) accepting
oneself to be the Lord's servant; (11) offering the Lord one's heart and soul;
(12) engaging in glorification of the Lord's birth and activities; (13) observing
holidays related to the Lord; (14) performing festivals in the Lord's temple in
the company of other devotees, and with music, singing and dancing; (15)
celebrating all varieties of yearly functions; (16) offering foodstuffs to the
Lord; (17) taking initiation according to the Vedas and tantras; (18) taking
vows related to the Lord; (19) being eager to establish Deities of the Lord; (20)
endeavoring either alone or in association with others in constructing, for the
service of the Lord, vegetable and flower gardens, temples, cities, and so on;
(21) humbly cleansing the temple of the Lord; and (22) rendering service to
the Lord's house by painting it, washing it with water and decorating it with
auspicious designs.
After this, the process of worshiping the Deity of the Supreme Lord is
described in brief.
TEXT 1
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
baÜ"Ae maul( wita vyaAKyaA
gAuNAtaAe mae na vastauta:
gAuNAsya maAyaAmaUlatvaAna,
na mae maAeºaAe na banDanama,
çré-bhagavän uväca
baddho mukta iti vyäkhyä
guëato me na vastutaù
guëasya mäyä-mülatvän
na me mokño na bandhanam
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; baddhaù—in
bondage; muktaù—liberated; iti—thus; vyäkhyä—the explanation of the living
entity; guëataù—due to the modes of material nature; me—which are My
potency; na—not; vastutaù—in reality; guëasya—of the modes of material
nature; mäyä—My illusory energy; mülatvät-because of being the cause;
na—not; me—of Me; mokñaù—liberation; na—nor; bandhanam—bondage.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Uddhava, due to the
influence of the material modes of nature, which are under My control, the
living entity is sometimes designated as conditioned and sometimes as liberated.
In fact, however, the soul is never really bound up or liberated, and since I am
the Supreme Lord of mäyä, which is the cause of the modes of nature, I also am
never to be considered liberated or in bondage.
PURPORT
In this chapter the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, explains the
different characteristics of conditioned and liberated life, the symptoms by
which one can recognize saintly persons, and the various processes of
devotional service to the Lord. In the previous chapter, Uddhava inquired
from the Lord how conditioned and liberated life are possible. The Lord now
replies that Uddhava's question is somewhat superficial, since the pure spirit
soul is never entangled in the material energy of the Lord. The living entity
imagines a false connection with the three modes of nature and accepts the
material body as the self. The living entity therefore suffers the consequences
of his own imagination, just as one suffers the illusory activities of a dream.
This does not indicate that the material world is illusory in the sense that it is
nonexistent. The material world is certainly real, being the potency of the
Personality of Godhead, and the living entity, being the superior potency of
God, is also real. But the living entity's dream of being part and parcel of the
material world is an illusion that drags him into the contradictory state called
material conditioned life. The living entity is never actually baddha, or bound
up, since he merely imagines a false connection with the material world.
Because there is ultimately no permanent connection between the living
entity and matter, there is no actual liberation. The living entity, being
eternally transcendental to the inferior material energy of the Lord, is
eternally liberated. Lord Kåñëa reveals that in one sense the living entity is
factually not bound up and thus cannot be liberated. But in another sense, the
terms bondage and liberation can be conveniently applied to indicate the
particular situation of the individual soul, who is the marginal potency of the
Lord. Although the individual soul is never actually bound to matter, he
suffers the reactions of material nature because of false identification, and thus
the term baddha, or "bound up," may be used to indicate the nature of a living
entity's experience within the inferior energy of the Lord. Since baddha
describes a false situation, freedom from such a false situation may also be
described as mokña, or liberation. Therefore the terms bondage and liberation
are acceptable if one understands that such terms only refer to temporary
situations created by illusion and do not refer to the ultimate nature of the
living entity. In this verse Lord Kåñëa states, guëasya mäyä-mülatvän na me
mokño na bandhanam: the terms liberation and bondage can never be applied to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, since He is the Absolute Truth and the
supreme controller of everything. Lord Kåñëa is eternally the supreme
transcendental entity, and He can never be bound by illusion. It is the duty of
the illusory potency of the Personality of Godhead to attract the living entities
to ignorance by creating the false impression of a blissful existence separate
from Lord Kåñëa. The illusory conception of existence apart from the
Personality of Godhead is called mäyä, or material illusion. Since Lord Kåñëa is
the supreme absolute controller of mäyä, there is no possibility that mäyä could
have any influence over the Personality of Godhead. Thus the term
bandhanam, or "bondage," cannot be applied to the eternal, blissful and
omniscient Personality of Godhead. The term mokña, or "liberation,"
indicating freedom from bandhana, is equally irrelevant to the Lord.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has commented on this verse as
follows. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is endowed with great spiritual
potencies. Because of mundane concoction, the conditioned soul imagines that
the Absolute Truth is devoid of variegated spiritual potencies by which He
may enjoy blissful life. Although the living entity is the spiritual potency of
the Lord, he is presently situated in the inferior, illusory potency, and by
engaging in mental speculation he becomes bound in conditioned life.
Liberation means that the living entity should transfer himself to the spiritual
potency of the Lord, which can be divided into three categories—hlädiné, the
potency of bliss; sandhiné, the potency of eternal existence; and saàvit, the
potency of omniscience. Since the Personality of Godhead is eternally
endowed with a pure existence of bliss and knowledge, He is never
conditioned or liberated. The living entity, however, being entangled in the
Lord's material potency, is sometimes conditioned and sometimes liberated.
The neutral, original state of the three modes of nature is called mäyä.
When the three modes of nature interact, one of them will become powerful,
subordinating the other two modes until another mode becomes prominent. In
this way, the three can be distinguished in their variety of manifestation.
Although the threefold material potency expands from the Personality of
Godhead, the Lord Himself in His personal form is the actual abode of the
three spiritual potencies, namely eternality, bliss and knowledge. If one desires
to become free from the entanglement of conditioned life within the material
sky, called the kingdom of mäyä, one must come to the spiritual sky, wherein
the living entities are filled with bliss, possess eternal spiritual bodies and
engage in the loving devotional service of the Lord. By developing one's
eternal, spiritual form in the loving service of the Lord, one immediately
transcends the duality of conditioned life and impersonal liberation and can
directly experience the spiritual potencies of the Lord. At that time there is no
possibility of false identification with the material world.
Realizing oneself to be eternal spirit soul, the living entity can understand
that he is never truly connected to matter, because he is part of the superior
energy of the Lord. Therefore, both material bondage and liberation are
ultimately meaningless within the reality of the spiritual sky. The living entity
is the marginal potency of the Lord and should exercise his free will to engage
in the pure devotional service of the Lord. By reviving one's eternal, spiritual
body one can understand oneself to be a minute particle of the spiritual
potency of the Lord. In other words, the living entity is a minute particle of
eternity, bliss and omniscience, and thus in full Kåñëa consciousness there is
no possibility of his being carried away by the illusion of the three modes of
nature. In conclusion, it may be stated that the individual living entity is never
actually entangled in matter and is thus not liberated, although his illusory
state may be accurately described as entangled and liberated. On the other
hand, the Supreme Personality of Godhead is eternally situated in His own
spiritual potencies and can never be described as being bound up, and thus
there is no meaning to the concept of the Lord's freeing Himself from such a
nonexistent condition.
TEXT 2
zAAek(maAeh"AE s$auKaM äu":KaM
de"h"ApaiÔaê maAyayaA
sva«aAe yaTaAtmana: KyaAita:
s$aMs$a{itanaR tau vaAstavaI
çoka-mohau sukhaà duùkhaà
dehäpattiç ca mäyayä
svapno yathätmanaù khyätiù
saàsåtir na tu västavé
SYNONYMS
çoka—lamentation; mohau—and illusion; sukham—happiness;
duùkham—distress; deha-äpattiù—accepting a material body; ca—also;
mäyayä—by the influence of mäyä; svapnaù—a dream; yathä—just as;
ätmanaù—of the intelligence; khyätiù—merely an idea; saàsåtiù—material
existence; na—is not; tu—indeed; västavé—real.
TRANSLATION
Just as a dream is merely a creation of one's intelligence but has no actual
substance, similarly, material lamentation, illusion, happiness, distress and the
acceptance of the material body under the influence of mayä are all creations of
My illusory energy. In other words, material existence has no essential reality.
PURPORT
The word deha-äpattiù indicates that the living entity falsely identifies
himself with the external material body and thus transmigrates from one body
to another. Äpatti also indicates great suffering or misfortune. Because of such
false identification under the influence of illusion, the living entity
experiences the miserable symptoms described here. Mäyä means the false
concept that anything can exist without Lord Kåñëa or for any purpose other
than the pleasure of the Supreme Lord. Although the conditioned living
entities are trying to enjoy material sense gratification, the result is always
painful, and such painful experiences turn the conditioned soul back toward
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In other words, the ultimate purpose of
the material creation is to bring the living entity back to the loving devotional
service of the Lord. Therefore, even the sufferings of the material world may
be seen as the transcendental mercy of the Personality of Godhead. The
conditioned soul, imagining that material objects are meant for his personal
enjoyment, bitterly laments the loss of such objects. In this verse, the example
is given of a dream in which the material intelligence creates many illusory
objects. Similarly, our polluted material consciousness creates the false
impression of material sense gratification, but this phantasmagoria, being
devoid of Kåñëa consciousness, has no real existence. By surrendering to
polluted material consciousness, the living entity is afflicted with innumerable
troubles. The only solution is to see Lord Kåñëa within everything and
everything within Lord Kåñëa. Thus, one understands that Lord Kåñëa is the
supreme enjoyer, the proprietor of everything and the well-wishing friend of
all living beings.
In material illusion there is no understanding of one's eternal, spiritual
body, nor is there knowledge of the Absolute Truth. Therefore, material
existence, even in its most sophisticated or pious form, is always foolishness.
One should not misunderstand the example of the dream to mean that the
material world has no real existence. Material nature is the manifestation of
the Lord's external potency, just as the spiritual sky is the manifestation of the
Lord's internal potency. Although material objects are subject to
transformation and thus have no permanent existence, the material energy is
real because it comes from the supreme reality, Lord Kåñëa. It is only our false
acceptance of the material body as the factual self and our foolish dream that
the material world is meant for our pleasure that have no real existence. They
are merely mental concoctions. One should cleanse oneself of material
designations and wake up to the all-pervading reality of the Personality of
Godhead, Lord Kåñëa.
TEXT 3
ivaâAivaâe mama tanaU
ivaÜ"YauÜ"va zAr"Iir"NAAma,
maAeºabanDak(r"I @Aâe
maAyayaA mae ivainaimaRtae
vidyävidye mama tanü
viddhy uddhava çarériëäm
mokña-bandha-karé ädye
mäyayä me vinirmite
SYNONYMS
vidyä—knowledge; avidye—and ignorance; mama—My; tanü—manifested
energies; viddhi—please understand; uddhava—O Uddhava; çarériëäm—of the
embodied living entities; mokña—liberation; bandha—bondage; karé—causing;
ädye—original, eternal; mäyayä—by the potency; me—My;
vinirmite—produced.
TRANSLATION
O Uddhava, both knowledge and ignorance, being products of mäyä, are
expansions of My potency. Both knowledge and ignorance are beginningless and
perpetually award liberation and bondage to embodied living beings.
PURPORT
By the expansion of vidyä, or knowledge, a conditioned soul is liberated
from the clutches of mäyä, and similarly, by the expansion of avidyä, or
ignorance, the conditioned soul is driven further into illusion and bondage.
Both knowledge and ignorance are products of the mighty potency of the
Personality of Godhead. The living being is bound by illusion when he
considers himself the proprietor of the subtle and gross material bodies.
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé the living entity may be designated as
jéva-mäyä, whereas matter is called guëa-mäyä. The living entity places his
living potency (jéva-mäyä) in the grip of the mundane qualitative potency
(guëa-mäyä) and falsely dreams that he is part and parcel of the material
world. Such an artificial mixture is called illusion or ignorance. When all of
the Lord's potencies are correctly perceived in their proper categories, the
living entity is liberated from material bondage and returns to his blissful
eternal residence in the spiritual sky.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is not different from His potencies,
yet He is always above them as the supreme controller. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead may be designated as mukta, or liberated, only to
indicate that He is eternally free from material contamination and never to
indicate that the Lord has been freed from actual entanglement in a material
situation. According to Çréla Madhväcärya, vidyä indicates the goddess of
fortune, the internal potency of the Lord, whereas avidyä indicates Durgä, the
external potency of the Lord. Ultimately, however, the Personality of
Godhead can transform His potencies according to His own desire, as
explained by Çréla Prabhupäda in his commentary on Çrémad-Bhägavatam
(1.3.34), "Because the Lord is the absolute Transcendence, all of His forms,
names, pastimes, attributes, associates and energies are identical with Him. His
transcendental energy acts according to His omnipotency. The same energy
acts as His external, internal and marginal energies, and by His omnipotency
He can perform anything and everything through the agency of any of the
above energies. He can turn the external energy into internal by His will."
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé notes in this regard that although the Lord has
explained in the first verse of this chapter that the living entity is never
actually in bondage, and therefore never actually liberated, one may apply the
terms bondage and liberation if one remembers that the living entity is
eternally a transcendental fragment of the Personality of Godhead. Further,
one should not misinterpret the words mäyayä me vinirmite to indicate that
both material bondage and liberation are temporary states, being creations of
the potency of the Lord. Therefore, the term ädye, or "primeval and eternal" is
used in this verse. The vidyä and avidyä potencies of the Lord are stated to be
creations of mäyä because they carry out the functions of the Lord's potencies.
The vidyä potency engages the living entities in the Lord's pastimes, whereas
the avidyä potency engages the living entities in forgetting the Lord and
merging into darkness. Actually, both knowledge and ignorance are eternal
alternatives of the marginal potency of the Lord, and in this sense it is not
incorrect to state that the living entity is either eternally conditioned or
eternally liberated. The term vinirmite, or "produced," in this case indicates
that the Lord expands His own energy as knowledge and ignorance, which
display the functions of the Lord's internal and external potencies. Such
potential exhibitions may appear and disappear in different times, places and
circumstances, but material bondage and spiritual freedom are eternal options
of the marginal potency of the Lord.
TEXT 4
Wk(syaEva mamaAMzAsya
jaIvasyaEva mah"Amatae
banDaAe'syaAivaâyaAnaAid"r,"
ivaâyaA ca taTaetar":
ekasyaiva mamäàçasya
jévasyaiva mahä-mate
bandho 'syävidyayänädir
vidyayä ca tathetaraù
SYNONYMS
ekasya—of the one; eva—certainly; mama—My; aàçasya—part and parcel;
jévasya—of the living entity; eva—certainly; mahä-mate—O most intelligent
one; bandhaù—bondage; asya—of him; avidyayä—by ignorance;
anädiù—beginningless; vidyayä—by knowledge; ca—and; tathä—similarly;
itaraù—the opposite of bondage, liberation.
TRANSLATION
O most intelligent Uddhava, the living entity, called jéva, is part and parcel
of Me, but due to ignorance he has been suffering in material bondage since
time immemorial. By knowledge, however, he can be liberated.
PURPORT
Just as the sun reveals itself through its own light or covers itself by creating
clouds, the Personality of Godhead reveals and covers Himself by knowledge
and ignorance, which are expansions of His potency. As stated in
Bhagavad-gétä (7.5):
apareyam itas tv anyäà
prakåtià viddhi me paräm
jéva-bhütäà mahä-bäho
yayedaà dhäryate jagat
"Besides this inferior nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is a superior
energy of Mine, consisting of all living entities who are struggling with
material nature and are sustaining the universe." Çréla Prabhupäda states in
connection with this verse: "The Supreme Lord Kåñëa is the only controller,
and all living entities are controlled by Him. These living entities are His
superior energy because the quality of their existence is one and the same with
the Supreme, but they are never equal to the Lord in quantity of power."
Because of quantitative inferiority of potency, the living entity becomes
covered by mäyä and is again liberated by surrendering to the Lord. The word
aàça, or "part and parcel" is also mentioned in Bhagavad-gétä (15.7):
mamaiväàço jéva-loke jéva-bhütaù sanätanaù. The living entity is aàça, or a
minute particle, and therefore subject to liberation and bondage. As stated in
the Viñëu Puräëa:
viñëu-çaktiù parä proktä
kñetra-jïäkhyä tathä parä
avidyä-karma-saàjïänyä
tåtéyä çaktir iñyate
[Cc. Madhya 6.154]
"The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, possesses His superior internal
potency as well as the potency called kñetrajïä çakti. This kñetrajïä çakti is also
spiritual potency, but it is sometimes covered by the third, or material, potency
called ignorance. Thus because of the various stages of covering, the second, or
marginal, potency is manifested in different evolutionary phases."
Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura has written that the living entity has been
executing fruitive activities since time immemorial. Thus his conditioned life
may be called beginningless. Such conditioned life, however, is not endless,
since the living entity may achieve liberation through the loving devotional
service of the Lord. Since the living entity may acquire liberation, Çréla
Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura states that his liberated life begins at a certain point
but is endless, because liberated life is understood to be eternal. In any case,
one who has achieved the shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Kåñëa, may be understood to be eternally liberated, since such a person has
entered into the eternal atmosphere of the spiritual sky. Since there is no
material time in the spiritual sky, one who has achieved his eternal spiritual
body on Lord Kåñëa's planet is not subject to the influence of time. His eternal
blissful life with Kåñëa is not designated in terms of material past, present and
future and is therefore called eternal liberation. Material time is conspicuous
by its absence in the spiritual sky, and every living entity there is eternally
liberated, having attained the supreme situation. Such liberation can be
achieved by vidyä, or perfect knowledge, which is understood in three phases
called Brahman, Paramätmä and Bhagavän, as described in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam. The ultimate phase of vidyä, or knowledge, is to
understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In Bhagavad-gétä such
knowledge is called räja-vidyä, or the king of all knowledge, and it awards the
supreme liberation.
TEXT 5
@Ta baÜ"sya maul(sya
vaElaºaNyaM vad"Aima tae
ivaç&Ü"DaimaRNAAestaAta
isTatayaAere"k(DaimaRiNA
atha baddhasya muktasya
vailakñaëyaà vadämi te
viruddha-dharmiëos täta
sthitayor eka-dharmiëi
SYNONYMS
atha—thus; baddhasya—of the conditioned soul; muktasya—of the liberated
Personality of Godhead; vailakñaëyam—different characteristics; vadämi—I
will now speak; te—unto you; viruddha—opposing; dharmiëoù—whose two
natures; täta—My dear Uddhava; sthitayoù—of the two who are situated;
eka-dharmiëi—in the one body which manifests their different characteristics.
TRANSLATION
Thus, My dear Uddhava, in the same material body we find opposing
characteristics, such as great happiness and misery. That is because both the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is eternally liberated, as well as the
conditioned soul are within the body. I shall now speak to you about their
different characteristics.
PURPORT
In verse 36 of the previous chapter, Uddhava inquired about the different
symptoms of liberated and conditioned life. Çréla Çrédhara Svämé explains that
the characteristics of bondage and liberation may be understood in two
divisions—as the difference between the ordinary conditioned soul and the
eternally liberated Personality of Godhead, or as the difference between
conditioned and liberated living entities in the jéva category. The Lord will
first explain the difference between the ordinary living entity and the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, which may be understood as the difference
between the controlled and the controller.
TEXT 6
s$aupaNAAR"vaetaAE s$aä{"zAAE s$aKaAyaAE
yaä{"cC$yaEtaAE k{(tanaIx"AE ca va{ºae
Wk(stayaAe: KaAd"ita ipappalaAªama,
@nyaAe inar"ªaAe'ipa balaena BaUyaAna,
suparëäv etau sadåçau sakhäyau
yadåcchayaitau kåta-néòau ca våkñe
ekas tayoù khädati pippalännam
anyo niranno 'pi balena bhüyän
SYNONYMS
suparëau—two birds; etau—these; sadåçau—similar; sakhäyau—friends;
yadåcchayä—by chance; etau—these two; kåta—made; néòau—a nest;
ca—and; våkñe—in a tree; ekaù—one; tayoù—of the two; khädati—is eating;
pippala—of the tree; annam—the fruits; anyaù—the other; nirannaù—not
eating; api—although; balena—by strength; bhüyän—He is superior.
TRANSLATION
By chance, two birds have made a nest together in the same tree. The two
birds are friends and are of a similar nature. One of them, however, is eating
the fruits of the tree, whereas the other, who does not eat the fruits, is in a
superior position due to His potency.
PURPORT
The example of two birds in the same tree is given to illustrate the presence
within the heart of the material body of both the individual soul and the
Supersoul, the Personality of Godhead. Just as a bird makes a nest in a tree, the
living entity sits within the heart. The example is appropriate because the bird
is always distinct from the tree. Similarly, both the individual soul and the
Supersoul are distinct entities, separate from the temporary material body. The
word balena indicates that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is satisfied by
His own internal potency, which consists of eternality, omniscience and bliss.
As indicated by the word bhüyän, or "having superior existence," the Supreme
Lord is always in a superior position, whereas the living entity is sometimes in
illusion and sometimes enlightened. The word balena indicates that the Lord is
never in darkness or ignorance, but is always full in His perfect, blissful
consciousness.
Thus, the Lord is niranna, or uninterested in the bitter fruits of material
activities, whereas the ordinary conditioned soul busily consumes such bitter
fruits, thinking them to be sweet. Ultimately, the fruit of all material endeavor
is death, hut the living entity foolishly thinks material things will bring him
pleasure. The word sakhäyau, or "two friends," is also significant. Our real
friend is Lord Kåñëa, who is situated within our heart. Only He knows our
actual needs, and only He can give us real happiness.
Lord Kåñëa is so kind that He patiently sits in the heart, trying to guide the
conditioned soul back home, back to Godhead. Certainly no material friend
would remain with his foolish companion for millions of years, especially if his
companion were to ignore him or even curse him. But Lord Kåñëa is such a
faithful, loving friend that He accompanies even the most demoniac living
entity and is also in the heart of the insect, pig and dog. That is because Lord
Kåñëa is supremely Kåñëa conscious and sees every living entity as part and
parcel of Himself. Every living being should give up the bitter fruits of the tree
of material existence. One should turn one's face to the Lord within the heart
and revive one's eternal loving relationship with one's real friend, Lord Kåñëa.
The word sadåçau, or "of similar nature," indicates that both the living entity
and the Personality of Godhead are conscious entities. As part and parcel of
the Lord we share the Lord's nature, but in infinitesimal quantity. Thus the
Lord and the living entity are sadåçau. A similar statement is found in the
Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad (4.6):
dvä suparëä sayujä sakhäyä
samänaà våkñaà pariñasvajäte
tayor anyaù pippalaà svädy atty
anaçnann anyo 'bhicäkaçéti
"There are two birds in one tree. One of them is eating the fruits of the tree,
while the other is witnessing the actions. The witness is the Lord, and the
fruit-eater is the living entity."
TEXT 7
@AtmaAnamanyaM ca s$a vaed" ivaã"Ana,
@ipappalaAd"Ae na tau ipappalaAd":
yaAe'ivaâyaA yaufs$a tau inatyabaÜ"Ae
ivaâAmayaAe ya: s$a tau inatyamaul(:
ätmänam anyaà ca sa veda vidvän
apippalädo na tu pippalädaù
yo 'vidyayä yuk sa tu nitya-baddho
vidyä-mayo yaù sa tu nitya-muktaù
SYNONYMS
ätmänam—Himself; anyam—the other; ca—also; saù—He; veda—knows;
vidvän—being omniscient; apippala-adaù—not eating the fruits of the tree;
na—not; tu—but; pippala-adaù—the one who is eating the fruits of the tree;
yaù—who; avidyayä—with ignorance; yuk—filled; saù—he; tu—indeed;
nitya—eternally; baddhaù—conditioned; vidyä mayaù—full of perfect
knowledge; yaù—who; saù—he; tu—indeed; nitya—eternally;
muktaù—liberated.
TRANSLATION
The bird who does not eat the fruits of the tree is the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, who by His omniscience perfectly understands His own position
and that of the conditioned living entity, represented by the eating bird. That
living entity, on the other hand, does not understand himself or the Lord. He is
covered by ignorance and is thus called eternally conditioned, whereas the
Personality of Godhead, being full of perfect knowledge, is eternally liberated.
PURPORT
The word vidyä-maya in this verse indicates the internal potency of the
Lord and not the external potency, mahä-mäyä. Within the material world
there is vidyä, or material science, and avidyä, or material ignorance, but in
this verse vidyä means the internal spiritual knowledge by which the
Personality of Godhead is fixed in omniscience. The example of two birds in a
tree, which is given in many Vedic literatures, demonstrates the statement
nityo nityänäm: there are two categories of eternal living entities, namely the
Supreme Lord and the minute jéva soul. The conditioned jéva soul, forgetting
his identity as an eternal servant of the Lord, tries to enjoy the fruits of his
own activities and thus comes under the spell of ignorance. This bondage of
ignorance has existed since time immemorial and can be rectified only by one's
taking to the loving devotional service of the Lord, which is full of spiritual
knowledge. In conditioned life the living entity is forced by the laws of nature
to engage in pious and impious fruitive activities, but the liberated position of
every living entity is to offer the fruits of his work to the Lord, the supreme
enjoyer. It should be understood that even when the living entity is in a
liberated condition, his knowledge is never equal in quantity to that of the
Personality of Godhead. Even Lord Brahmä, the supreme living entity within
this universe, acquires only partial knowledge of the Personality of Godhead
and His potencies. In Bhagavad-gétä (4.5), the Lord explains His superior
knowledge to Arjuna:
bahüni me vyatétäni
janmäni tava cärjuna
täny ahaà veda sarväëi
na tvaà vettha parantapa
"The Blessed Lord said: Many, many births both you and I have passed. I can
remember all of them, but you cannot, O subduer of the enemy!"
The term baddha, or "bound," is also understood to refer to the living
entity's eternal dependence upon the Lord, either in the conditioned or
liberated state. In the kingdom of mäyä the living entity is bound to the cruel
laws of birth and death, whereas in the spiritual sky the living entity is fixed in
a bond of love to the Lord. Liberation means freedom from the miseries of life,
but never freedom from one's loving relationship with Lord Kåñëa, which is
the essence of one's eternal existence. According to Çréla Madhväcärya, the
Lord is the only eternally free living entity, and all other living entities are
eternally dependent and bound to the Lord, either through blissful loving
service or through the bondage of mäyä. The conditioned soul should give up
tasting the bitter fruits of the tree of material existence and turn to his
dearmost friend, Lord Kåñëa, who is sitting within his heart. There is no
pleasure equal to or greater than the pleasure of pure devotional service to
Lord Kåñëa, and by tasting the fruit of love of Kåñëa, the liberated living entity
enters the ocean of happiness.
TEXT 8
de"h"sTaAe'ipa na de"h"sTaAe
ivaã"Ana, sva«aAâTaAeitTata:
@de"h"sTaAe'ipa de"h"sTa:
ku(maita: sva«aä{"gyaTaA
deha-stho 'pi na deha-stho
vidvän svapnäd yathotthitaù
adeha-stho 'pi deha-sthaù
kumatiù svapna-dåg yathä
SYNONYMS
deha—in the material body; sthaù—situated; api—although; na—not;
deha—in the body; sthaù—situated; vidvän—an enlightened person;
svapnät—from a dream; yathä—just as; utthitaù—having risen; adeha—not in
the body; sthaù—situated; api—although; deha—in the body; sthaù—situated;
ku-matiù—a foolish person; svapna—a dream; dåk—seeing; yathä—just as.
TRANSLATION
One who is enlightened in self-realization, although living within the
material body, sees himself as transcendental to the body, just as one who has
arisen from a dream gives up identification with the dream body. A foolish
person, however, although not identical with his material body but
transcendental to it, thinks himself to be situated in the body, just as one who is
dreaming sees himself as situated in an imaginary body.
PURPORT
In Lord Kåñëa's discussion of the different characteristics of liberated and
conditioned souls, the Lord first clarified the distinction between the eternally
liberated Personality of Godhead and the marginal potency, the innumerable
jévas, who are sometimes conditioned and sometimes liberated. In this and the
next nine verses, the Lord describes the different symptoms of liberated and
conditioned jéva souls. In a dream one sees oneself in an imaginary body, but
upon waking one gives up all identification with that body. Similarly, one who
has awakened to Kåñëa consciousness no longer identifies with the gross or
subtle material bodies, nor does he become affected by the happiness and
distress of material life. On the other hand, a foolish person (kumati) does not
awaken from the dream of material existence and is afflicted with innumerable
problems due to false identification with the gross and subtle material bodies.
One should become situated in one's eternal spiritual identity (nitya-svarüpa).
By properly identifying oneself as the eternal servant of Kåñëa, one becomes
relieved of his false material identity, and therefore the miseries of illusory
existence immediately cease, just as the anxiety of a troublesome dream ceases
as soon as one awakens to his normal, pleasant surroundings. It should be
understood, however, that the analogy of awakening from a dream can never
be applied to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is never in illusion.
The Lord is eternally awake and enlightened in His own unique category
called viñëu-tattva. Such knowledge is easily understood by one who is vidvän,
or enlightened in Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 9
win‰"yaEir"in‰"yaATaeRSau
gAuNAEr"ipa gAuNAeSau ca
gA{÷maANAeSvahM" ku(yaARna,
na ivaã"Ana, yastvaivai‚(ya:
indriyair indriyärtheñu
guëair api guëeñu ca
gåhyamäëeñv ahaà kuryän
na vidvän yas tv avikriyaù
SYNONYMS
indriyaiù—by the senses; indriya—of the senses; artheñu—in the objects;
guëaiù—by those generated from the modes of nature; api—even; guëeñu—in
those generated by the same modes; ca—also; gåhyamäëeñu—as they are being
accepted; aham—false ego; kuryät—should create; na—not; vidvän—one who
is enlightened; yaù—who; tu—indeed; avikriyaù—is not affected by material
desire.
TRANSLATION
An enlightened person who is free from the contamination of material desire
does not consider himself to be the performer of bodily activities; rather, he
knows that in all such activities it is only the senses, born of the modes of
nature, that are contacting sense objects born of the same modes of nature.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa makes a similar statement in Bhagavad-gétä (3.28):
tattva-vit tu mahä-bäho
guëa-karma-vibhägayoù
guëä guëeñu vartanta
iti matvä na sajjate
"One who is in knowledge of the Absolute Truth, O mighty-armed, does not
engage himself in the senses and sense gratification, knowing well the
difference between work in devotion and work for fruitive results."
The material body always interacts with the sense objects, for in order to
survive the body must eat, drink, speak, sleep, and so on, but an enlightened
person who knows the science of Kåñëa consciousness never thinks, "I am
accepting these sense objects as my property. They are meant for my pleasure."
Similarly, if the body performs a wonderful activity, a Kåñëa conscious person
does not become proud, nor is he depressed by the failure of the body to
function in a particular way. In other words, Kåñëa consciousness means giving
up identification with the gross and subtle material bodies. One should see
them as the external energy of the Lord, working under the direction of the
Lord's empowered representative mäyä. One absorbed in fruitive activities
works under the jurisdiction of mahä-mäyä, or the external illusory potency,
and experiences the miseries of material existence. On the other hand, a
devotee works under the internal potency, called yoga-mäyä, and remains
satisfied by offering his loving service to the Lord. In either case, the Lord
Himself, by His multifarious potencies, is the ultimate performer of action.
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, one who claims to be
transcendental to the bodily concept of life, but at the same time remains
under the influence of material desire and mental transformation, is
understood to be a cheater and the lowest type of conditioned soul.
TEXT 10
dE"vaADaInae zAr"Ire"'ismana,
gAuNABaAvyaena k(maRNAA
vataRmaAnaAe'bauDasta‡a
k(taARsmaIita inabaDyatae
daivädhéne çarére 'smin
guëa-bhävyena karmaëä
vartamäno 'budhas tatra
kartäsméti nibadhyate
SYNONYMS
daiva—of one's previous fruitive activities; adhéne—which is under the
influence; çarére—in the material body; asmin—in this; guëa—by the modes of
nature; bhävyena—which are produced; karmaëä—by fruitive activities;
vartamänaù—being situated; abudhaù—one who is foolish; tatra—within the
bodily functions; kartä—the doer; asmi—I am; iti—thus; nibadhyate—is bound
up.
TRANSLATION
An unintelligent person situated within the body created by his previous
fruitive activities thinks, "I am the performer of action." Bewildered by false
ego, such a foolish person is therefore bound up by fruitive activities, which are
in fact carried out by the modes of nature.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (3.27):
prakåteù kriyamäëäni
guëaiù karmaëi sarvaçaù
ahaìkära-vimüòhätmä
kartäham iti manyate
The living entity is dependent on the supreme entity, Lord Kåñëa, but because
of false pride he ignores the Supreme Personality of Godhead and considers
himself to be the performer of action and enjoyer of everything. Çréla
Madhväcärya states that just as a king punishes a rebellious subject, the
Supreme Lord punishes the sinful living entity by forcing him to transmigrate
from one body to another in the network of the illusory energy.
TEXT 11
WvaM ivar"l(: zAyana
@As$anaAq%namaÀanae
d"zARnas$pazARna„aANABaAejana
™avaNAAid"Sau
na taTaA baDyatae ivaã"Ana,
ta‡a ta‡aAd"yana, gAuNAAna,
evaà viraktaù çayana
äsanäöana-majjane
darçana-sparçana-ghräëabhojana-
çravaëädiñu
na tathä badhyate vidvän
tatra taträdayan guëän
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; viraktaù—detached from material enjoyment; çayane—in lying or
sleeping; äsana—in sitting; aöana—walking; majjane—or in bathing;
darçana—in seeing; sparçana—touching; ghräëa—smelling; bhojana—eating;
çravaëa—hearing; ädiñu—and so on; na—not; tathä—in that way;
badhyate—is bound; vidvän—an intelligent person; tatra tatra—wherever he
goes; ädayan—causing to experience; guëän—the senses, born of the modes of
nature.
TRANSLATION
An enlightened person fixed in detachment engages his body in lying down,
sitting, walking, bathing, seeing, touching, smelling, eating, hearing and so on,
but is never entangled by such activities. Indeed, remaining as a witness to all
bodily functions, he merely engages his bodily senses with their objects and does
not become entangled like an unintelligent person.
PURPORT
In the previous chapter, Uddhava asked Lord Kåñëa why an enlightened
person, just like a conditioned soul, engages in external bodily functions. Here
is the Lord's answer. While engaged in bodily functions, an unintelligent
person is attached to both the means and end of material life and therefore
experiences intense lamentation and jubilation on the material platform. A
self-realized soul, however, studies the inevitable defeat and suffering of
ordinary persons and does not make the mistake of trying to enjoy the bodily
functions even slightly. He instead remains a detached witness, merely
engaging his senses in the normal functions of bodily maintenance. As
indicated here by the word ädayan, he engages something other than his actual
self in material experience.
TEXTS 12-13
‘ak{(itasTaAe'pyas$aMs$al(Ae
yaTaA KaM s$aivataAinala:
vaEzAAr"âeºayaAs$aËÿizAtayaA
iC$ªas$aMzAya:
‘aitabauÜ" wva sva«aAna,
naAnaAtvaAiã"inavataRtae
prakåti-stho 'py asaàsakto
yathä khaà savitänilaù
vaiçäradyekñayäsaìgaçitayä
chinna-saàçayaù
pratibuddha iva svapnän
nänätväd vinivartate
SYNONYMS
prakåti—in the material world; sthaù—situated; api—even though;
asaàsaktaù—completely detached from sense gratification; yathä—just as;
kham—the sky; savitä—the sun; anilaù—the wind; vaiçäradyä—by most
expert; ékñayä—vision; asaìga—through detachment; çitayä—sharpened;
chinna—cut to pieces; saàçayaù—doubts; pratibuddhaù—awakened; iva—like;
svapnät—from a dream; nänätvät—from the duality of variety of the material
world; vinivartate—one turns away or renounces.
TRANSLATION
Although the sky, or space, is the resting place of everything, the sky does
not mix with anything, nor is it entangled. Similarly, the sun is not at all
attached to the water in which it is reflected within innumerable reservoirs, and
the mighty wind blowing everywhere is not affected by the innumerable aromas
and atmospheres through which it passes. In the same way, a self-realized soul is
completely detached from the material body and the material world around it.
He is like a person who has awakened and arisen from a dream. With expert
vision sharpened by detachment, the self-realized soul cuts all doubts to pieces
through knowledge of the self and completely withdraws his consciousness from
the expansion of material variety.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, a self-realized soul
cuts all doubts to pieces by direct experience of his true spiritual identity. The
Supreme Personality of Godhead is Lord Kåñëa, and there is no possibility of
any existence separate from Lord Kåñëa. Such expert knowledge cuts all doubts
to pieces. As stated here, prakåti-stho 'py asaàsaktaù: like the sky, the sun or
the wind, one who is self-realized is not entangled, though situated within the
material creation of the Lord. Nänätva, or "material variety," refers to one's
material body, the bodies of others and the unlimited paraphernalia for bodily
sense gratification, both physical and mental. By awakening to Kåñëa
consciousness, one completely retires from illusory sense gratification and
becomes absorbed in the progressive realization of the soul situated within the
body. As revealed in the example of the two birds in a tree, both the individual
soul and the Personality of Godhead are completely separate from the gross
and subtle material bodies. If one turns one's face to the Lord, recognizing
one's eternal dependence on Him, there will be no further suffering or anxiety,
even though one is still situated within the material world. The unlimited
experiences of material objects only increase one's anxiety, whereas perception
of the Absolute Truth, Çré Kåñëa, immediately brings one to the platform of
peace. Thus one who is intelligent retires from the world of matter and
becomes a fully self-realized Kåñëa conscious person.
TEXT 14
yasya syauvaI=tas$aÆÿlpaA:
‘aANAein‰"yamanaAeiDayaAma,
va{Ôaya: s$a ivainamauRl(Ae
de"h"sTaAe'ipa ih" taÖ"NAE:
yasya syur véta-saìkalpäù
präëendriya-mano-dhiyäm
våttayaù sa vinirmukto
deha-stho 'pi hi tad-guëaiù
SYNONYMS
yasya—of whom; syuù—they are; véta—freed from; saìkalpäù—material
desire; präëa—of the vital energy; indriya—the senses; manaù—the mind;
dhiyäm—and of intelligence; våttayaù—the functions; saù—such a person;
vinirmuktaù—completely freed; deha—in the body; sthaù—situated; api—even
though; hi—certainly; tat—of the body; guëaiù—from all of the qualities.
TRANSLATION
A person is considered to be completely liberated from the gross and subtle
material bodies when all the functions of his vital energy, senses, mind and
intelligence are performed without material desire. Such a person, although
situated within the body, is not entangled.
PURPORT
The material body and mind are subject to lamentation, illusion, hunger,
lust, greed, insanity, frustration, etc., but one who remains active in this world
without attachment is considered vinirmukta, or completely liberated. The
vital energy, senses, mind and intelligence are purified when engaged in the
devotional service of Lord Kåñëa, as confirmed throughout
Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 15
yasyaAtmaA ihM"syatae ihM"›aEr,"
yaena ik(iÂaâä{"cC$yaA
@cyaRtae vaA ¸(icaÔa‡a
na vyaitai‚(yatae bauDa:
yasyätmä hiàsyate hiàsrair
yena kiïcid yadåcchayä
arcyate vä kvacit tatra
na vyatikriyate budhaù
SYNONYMS
yasya—of whom; ätmä—the body; hiàsyate—is attacked; hiàsraiù—by sinful
people or violent animals; yena—by someone; kiïcit—somewhat;
yadåcchayä—somehow or other; arcyate—is worshiped; vä—or;
kvacit-somewhere; tatra—therein; na—not; vyatikriyate—is transformed or
affected; budhaù—one who is intelligent.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes for no apparent reason one's body is attacked by cruel people or
violent animals. At other times and in other places, one will suddenly be offered
great respect or worship. One who becomes neither angry when attacked nor
satisfied when worshiped is actually intelligent.
PURPORT
If one does not become angry when attacked for no apparent reason, and if
one does not become enlivened when glorified or worshiped, then one has
passed the test of self-realization and is considered fixed in spiritual
intelligence. Uddhava asked Lord Kåñëa, kair vä jïäyeta lakñaëaiù: by what
symptoms can a self-realized person be recognized? Just as Lord Kåñëa
enlightened Arjuna, He now explains the same subject matter to Uddhava. In
this verse the Lord describes symptoms by which it is very easy to recognize a
saintly person, for a normal person becomes furious when criticized or attacked
and overwhelmed with joy when glorified by others. There is a similar
statement by Yäjïavalkya to the effect that one who is actually intelligent does
not become angry though pricked with thorns and does not become satisfied at
heart merely by being worshiped with auspicious paraphernalia such as
sandalwood.
TEXT 16
na stauvaIta na inande"ta
ku(vaRta: s$aADvas$aADau vaA
vad"taAe gAuNAd"AeSaAByaAM
vaijaRta: s$amaä{"x.~ mauina:
na stuvéta na nindeta
kurvataù sädhv asädhu vä
vadato guëa-doñäbhyäà
varjitaù sama-dåì muniù
SYNONYMS
na stuvéta—does not praise; na nindeta—does not criticize; kurvataù—those
who are working; sädhu—very nicely; asädhu—very badly; vä—or;
vadataù—those who are speaking; guëa-doñäbhyäm—from good and bad
qualities; varjitaù—freed; sama-dåk—seeing things equally; muniù—a saintly
sage.
TRANSLATION
A saintly sage sees with equal vision and therefore is not affected by that
which is materially good or bad. Indeed, although he observes others performing
good and bad work and speaking properly and improperly, the sage does not
praise or criticize anyone.
TEXT 17
na ku(yaARªa vade"itk(iÂana,
na DyaAyaets$aADvas$aADau vaA
@AtmaAr"AmaAe'nayaA va{ÔyaA
ivacare"Àax"vanmauina:
na kuryän na vadet kiïcin
na dhyäyet sädhv asädhu vä
ätmärämo 'nayä våttyä
vicarej jaòa-van muniù
SYNONYMS
na kuryät—should not do; na vadet—should not speak; kiïcit—anything; na
dhyäyet—should not contemplate; sädhu asädhu vä—either good or bad things;
ätma-ärämaù—one who is taking pleasure in self-realization; anayä—with
this; våttyä—life-style; vicaret—he should wander; jaòa-vat—just like a stunted
person; muniù—a saintly sage.
TRANSLATION
For the purpose of maintaining his body, a liberated sage should not act,
speak or contemplate in terms of material good or bad. Rather, he should be
detached in all material circumstances, and taking pleasure in self-realization,
he should wander about engaged in this liberated life—style, appearing like a
retarded person to outsiders.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, this verse describes a type of discipline
recommended for the jïäna-yogés, who by intelligence try to understand that
they are not their material bodies. One who is engaged in the devotional
service of the Lord, however, accepts and rejects material things in terms of
their usefulness in the loving service of Lord Kåñëa. One who is trying to
preach Kåñëa consciousness should be seen as very intelligent and not jaòa-vat,
or stunted, as described here. Although a devotee of the Lord does not act,
speak or contemplate for his personal sense gratification, he remains very busy
working, speaking and meditating in the devotional service of the Lord. The
devotee makes elaborate plans to engage all the fallen souls in Lord Kåñëa's
service so they can be purified and go back home, back to Godhead. Merely
rejecting material things is not perfect consciousness. One must see everything
as the property of the Lord and meant for the Lord's pleasure. One busily
engaged in spreading the Kåñëa consciousness movement has no time to make
material distinctions and thus automatically comes to the liberated platform.
TEXT 18
zAbd"“aöiNA inaSNAAtaAe
na inaSNAAyaAtpare" yaid"
™amastasya ™amaP(laAe
÷Daenauimava r"ºata:
çabda-brahmaëi niñëäto
na niñëäyät pare yadi
çramas tasya çrama-phalo
hy adhenum iva rakñataù
SYNONYMS
çabda-brahmaëi—in the Vedic literature; niñëätaù—expert through complete
study; na niñëäyät—does not absorb the mind; pare—in the Supreme; yadi—if;
çramaù—labor; tasya—his; çrama—of great endeavor; phalaù—the fruit;
hi—certainly; adhenum—a cow that gives no milk; iva—like; rakñataù—of one
who is taking care of.
TRANSLATION
If through meticulous study one becomes expert in reading Vedic literature
but makes no endeavor to fix one's mind on the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, then one's endeavor is certainly like that of a man who works very
hard to take care of a cow that gives no milk. In other words, the fruit of one's
laborious study of Vedic knowledge will simply be the labor itself. There will be
no other tangible result.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains that the word pare ("the
Supreme") in this verse indicates the Supreme Personality of Godhead rather
than the impersonal Brahman, because Lord Kåñëa, the speaker of these
instructions, makes references in later verses to His personality as the
Supreme. An impersonal interpretation in this case would be eka-deçänvaya
uttara-çlokärtha-tätparya-virodhaù, or a contradictory interpretation that
creates illogical conflict with other çlokas (verses) spoken in the same context.
It requires great endeavor to take care of a cow. One must either grow food
grains to feed the cow or maintain suitable pastures. If the pasture is not
properly maintained, poisonous weeds will grow, or snakes will multiply, and
there will be danger. Cows are infected by many types of diseases and bugs and
must be regularly cleaned and disinfected. Similarly, fences must be
maintained around the cow pasture, and there is even more work to be done. If
the cow gives no milk, however, then one certainly performs hard labor with
no tangible result. Laborious effort is also required to learn the Sanskrit
language well enough to discern the subtle and esoteric meaning of the Vedic
mantras. If after such great labor one does not understand the spiritual body of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, which is the source of all happiness in
life, and if one does not surrender to the Lord as the supreme shelter of all
things, then one has certainly labored hard with no tangible result other than
his own labor. Even a liberated soul who has given up the bodily concept of life
will fall down if he does not take shelter of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. The word niñëäta, or "expert," indicates that one must ultimately
achieve the goal of life; otherwise one is not expert. As stated by Caitanya
Mahäprabhu, premä pum-artho mahän: the actual goal of human life is love of
Godhead, and no one can be considered expert without achieving this goal.
TEXT 19
gAAM äu"gDad"Aeh"Amas$ataI%M ca BaAyaA<
de"hM" par"ADaInamas$at‘ajaAM ca
ivaÔaM tvataITaI=k{(tamaËÿ vaAcaM
h"InaAM mayaA r"ºaita äu":Kaäu":KaI
gäà dugdha-dohäm asatéà ca bhäryäà
dehaà parädhénam asat-prajäà ca
vittaà tv atérthé-kåtam aìga väcaà
hénäà mayä rakñati duùkha-duùkhé
SYNONYMS
gäm—a cow; dugdha—whose milk; dohäm—already taken; asatém—unchaste;
ca—also; bhäryäm—a wife; deham—a body; para—upon others;
adhénam—always dependent; asat—useless; prajäm—children; ca—also;
vittam—wealth; tu—but; atérthé-kåtam—not given to the proper recipient;
aìga—O Uddhava; väcam—Vedic knowledge; hénäm—devoid; mayä—of
knowledge of Me; rakñati—he takes care of; duùkha-duùkhé—he who suffers
one misery after another.
TRANSLATION
My dear Uddhava, that man is certainly most miserable who takes care of a
cow that gives no milk, an unchaste wife, a body totally dependent on others,
useless children or wealth not utilized for the right purpose. Similarly, one who
studies Vedic knowledge devoid of My glories is also most miserable.
PURPORT
A human being is actually learned or expert when he understands that all
material objects perceived through the various senses are expansions of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and that nothing exists without the support
of the Supreme Lord. In this verse, through various examples, it is concluded
that the power of speech is useless if not engaged in the support of the
Supreme Lord. According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, this verse
implies that all of the functions of the various senses are useless if they are not
engaged in the glorification of God. Indeed, the avadhüta brähmaëa previously
stated to King Yadu that if the tongue is not controlled, one's entire program
of sense control is a failure. One cannot control the tongue unless he vibrates
the glories of the Lord.
The example of the milkless cow is significant. A gentleman never kills a
cow, and therefore when a cow becomes sterile and no longer gives milk, one
must engage in the laborious task of protecting her, since no one will purchase
a useless cow. For some time, the greedy owner of a sterile cow may continue
thinking, "I have already invested so much money in taking care of this cow,
and certainly in the near future she will again become pregnant and give milk."
But when this hope is proven futile, he becomes neglectful and indifferent to
the health and safety of the animal. Because of such sinful neglect, he must
suffer in the next life, after having already suffered because of the sterile cow
in the present life.
Similarly, although a man may discover that his wife is neither chaste nor
affectionate, he may be so eager to get children that he goes on taking care of
such a useless wife, thinking, "I will teach my wife the religious duties of a
chaste woman. By hearing historical examples of great women surely her heart
will change, and she will become a wonderful wife to me." Unfortunately, the
unchaste wife in many cases does not change and also gives a man many
useless children who are just as foolish and irreligious as she. Such children
never give any happiness to the father, yet the father tediously labors to take
care of them.
Also, one who has accumulated wealth by the mercy of God must be
vigilant to give in charity to the right person and for the right cause. If such a
right person or cause appears and one hesitates and selfishly does not give in
charity, one loses his reputation, and in the next life he will be
poverty-stricken. One who fails to give properly in charity spends his life
anxiously protecting his wealth, which ultimately brings him no fame or
happiness.
The previous examples are given to illustrate the uselessness of laboriously
studying Vedic knowledge that does not glorify the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé comments that the spiritual vibration of the
Vedas is meant to bring one to the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord, Kåñëa.
Many processes for achieving the Supreme Truth are recommended in the
Upaniñads and other Vedic literatures, but because of their innumerable and
seemingly contradictory explanations, commentaries and injunctions, one
cannot achieve the Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead, merely by
reading such literature. If, however, one understands Çré Kåñëa to be the
ultimate cause of all causes and reads the Upaniñads and other Vedic literature
as glorification of the Supreme Lord, then one can actually become fixed at
the Lord's lotus feet. For example, His Divine Grace Çréla Prabhupäda
translated and commented upon Çré Éçopaniñad in such a way that it brings the
reader closer to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Undoubtedly, the lotus
feet of Lord Kåñëa are the only reliable boat by which to cross the turbulent
ocean of material existence. Even Lord Brahmä has stated in the Tenth Canto
of Çrémad-Bhägavatam that if one gives up the auspicious path of bhakti and
takes to the fruitless labor of Vedic speculation, one is just like a fool who beats
empty husks in hopes of getting rice. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé recommends that one
completely ignore dry Vedic speculation because it does not bring one to the
point of devotional service to the Absolute Truth, Lord Çré Kåñëa.
TEXT 20
yasyaAM na mae paAvanamaËÿ k(maR
isTatyauà"va‘aANAinar"AeDamasya
laIlaAvataAre"ips$atajanma vaA syaAä,"
vanDyaAM igArM" taAM ibaBa{yaAªa DaIr":
yasyäà na me pävanam aìga karma
sthity-udbhava-präëa-nirodham asya
lélävatärepsita-janma vä syäd
vandhyäà giraà täà bibhåyän na dhéraù
SYNONYMS
yasyäm—in which (literature); na—not; me—My; pävanam—purifying;
aìga—O Uddhava; karma—activities; sthiti—maintenance;
udbhava—creation; präëa-nirodham—and annihilation; asya—of the material
world; lélä-avatära—among the pastime incarnations; épsita—desired;
janma—appearance; vä—or; syät—is; vandhyäm—barren; giram—vibration;
täm—this; bibhåyät—should support; na—not; dhéraù—an intelligent person.
TRANSLATION
My dear Uddhava, an intelligent person should never take to literatures that
do not contain descriptions of My activities, which purify the whole universe.
Indeed, I create, maintain and annihilate the entire material manifestation.
Among all My pastime incarnations, the most beloved are Kåñëa and Balaräma.
Any so-called knowledge that does not recognize these activities of Mine is
simply barren and is not acceptable to those who are actually intelligent.
PURPORT
The words lélävatärepsita-janma are very significant here. The Lord's
incarnation for executing wonderful pastimes is called lélävatära, and such
wonderful forms of Viñëu are glorified by the names Rämacandra,
Nåsiàhadeva, Kürma, Varäha, and so on. Among all such lélävatäras, however,
the most beloved, even to this day, is Lord Kåñëa, the original source of the
viñëu-tattva. The Lord appears in the prison house of Kaàsa and is
immediately transferred to the rural setting of Våndävana, where He exhibits
unique childhood pastimes with His cowherd boyfriends, girl friends, parents
and well-wishers. After some time, the Lord's pastimes are transferred to
Mathurä and Dvärakä, and the extraordinary love of the inhabitants of
Våndävana is exhibited in their anguished separation from Lord Kåñëa. Such
pastimes of the Lord are épsita, or the reservoir of all loving exchanges with the
Absolute Truth. The pure devotees of the Lord are most intelligent and expert
and do not pay any attention to useless, fruitless literatures that neglect the
highest truth, Lord Kåñëa. Although such literatures are very popular among
materialistic persons all over the world, they are completely neglected by the
community of pure Vaiñëavas. In this verse the Lord explains that the
literatures approved for the devotees are those that glorify the Lord's pastimes
as the puruña-avatära and the lélävatäras, culminating in the personal
appearance of Lord Kåñëa Himself, as confirmed in Brahma-saàhitä (5.39):
rämädi-mürtiñu kalä-niyamena tiñöhan
nänävatäram akarod bhuvaneñu kintu
kåñëaù svayaà samabhavat paramaù pumän yo
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who manifested Himself personally as
Kåñëa and the different avatäras in the world in the forms of Räma, Nåsiàha,
Vämana, etc., as His subjective portions."
Even Vedic literatures that neglect the Supreme Personality of Godhead
should be ignored. This fact was also explained by Närada Muni to Çréla
Vyäsadeva, the author of the Vedas, when the great Vedavyäsa felt dissatisfied
with his work.
TEXT 21
WvaM ijaÁaAs$ayaApaAe÷
naAnaAtva”amamaAtmaina
opaAr"maeta ivar"jaM
manaAe mayyapyaR s$avaRgAe
evaà jijïäsayäpohya
nänätva-bhramam ätmani
upärameta virajaà
mano mayy arpya sarva-ge
SYNONYMS
evam—thus (as I have now concluded); jijïäsayä—by analytic study;
apohya—giving up; nänätva—of material variety; bhramam—the mistake of
rotating; ätmani—in the self; upärameta—one should cease from material life;
virajam—pure; manaù—the mind; mayi—in Me; arpya—fixing;
sarva-ge—who am all-pervading.
TRANSLATION
Coming to this conclusion of all knowledge, one should give up the false
conception of material variety that one imposes upon the soul and thus cease
one's material existence. The mind should be fixed on Me, since I am
all-pervading.
PURPORT
Although in previous verses Lord Kåñëa has described the life-style and
approach of the impersonal philosophers who meditate on the distinction
between matter and spirit, the Lord here rejects the path of jïäna, or
speculation, and comes to the final conclusion, bhakti-yoga. The path of jïäna
is interesting only to one who does not know that Lord Kåñëa is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, as stated in Bhagavad-gétä (7.19):
bahünäà janmanäm ante
jïänavän mäm prapadyate
väsudevaù sarvam iti
sa mahätmä su-durlabhaù
The words väsudevaù sarvam iti, or "Väsudeva is everything," are similar to the
words sarva-ge found in this verse. One should know why the Personality of
Godhead is all-pervading. The first verse of Çrémad-Bhägavatam states,
janmädy asya yataù: [SB 1.1.1] the Supreme Lord is the source of everything.
And as stated in the previous verse of this chapter, He creates, maintains and
annihilates everything. Thus the Lord is not all-pervading in the manner of air
or sunlight; rather, the Lord is all-pervading as the absolute controller who
holds in His hands the destiny of every living entity.
Everything is ultimately an expansion of Kåñëa, and therefore there is
really no other object of meditation besides Kåñëa. Meditation upon any other
object is also meditation on Kåñëa but is imperfectly performed, as confirmed
in Bhagavad-gétä by the word avidhi-pürvakam. The Lord also states in the Gétä
that all living entities are on the path back home, back to Godhead. Because of
ignorance, however, some of them go backward or stop along the way, foolishly
thinking that their journey is finished, when in fact they are suspended in one
of the minor potencies of the Supreme Lord. If one wants to intimately
understand the nature of the Absolute Truth, one must take to the path of
love of Godhead. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (18.55):
bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti
yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù
tato mäà tattvato jïätvä
viçate tad-anantaram
"One can understand the Supreme Personality as He is only by devotional
service. And when one is in full consciousness of the Supreme Lord by such
devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God."
The words nänätva-bhramam in this verse indicate false identification with
the gross and subtle material bodies. The word bhramam indicates a mistake; it
can also mean "wandering" or "rotating." The conditioned living entity,
because of his mistake of falling into illusion, is wandering through a
succession of material bodies, sometimes appearing as a demigod and
sometimes as a worm in stool. The word upärameta means that one should stop
such fruitless wandering and fix one's mind on the Absolute Truth, the
Supreme Lord, who is the true object of everyone's love. Such a conclusion is
not sentimental but is the result of keen analytic intelligence (jijïäsayä). Thus
after elaborately explaining to Uddhava many aspects of analytic knowledge,
the Lord now comes to the ultimate conclusion, Kåñëa consciousness, pure love
of Godhead. Without such love there is no question of eternally fixing one's
mind on the Lord.
Quoting from the Viveka, Çréla Madhväcärya states that nänätva-bhramam
indicates the following illusions: considering the living entity to be the
Supreme; considering all living entities to be ultimately one entity without
separate individuality; considering that there are many Gods; thinking that
Kåñëa is not God; and considering that the material universe is the ultimate
reality. All of these illusions are called bhrama, or mistakes, but such ignorance
can be eliminated at once by the chanting of the holy names of Kåñëa: Hare
Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma
Räma, Hare Hare.
TEXT 22
yaânaIzAAe DaAr"iyatauM
manaAe “aöiNA inaêlama,
maiya s$avaARiNA k(maARiNA
inar"paeºa: s$amaAcar"
yady anéço dhärayituà
mano brahmaëi niçcalam
mayi sarväëi karmäëi
nirapekñaù samäcara
SYNONYMS
yadi—if; anéçaù—incapable; dhärayitum—to fix; manaù—the mind;
brahmaëi—on the spiritual platform; niçcalam—free from sense gratification;
mayi—in Me; sarväëi—all; karmäëi—activities; nirapekñaù—without trying to
enjoy the fruits; samäcara—execute.
TRANSLATION
My dear Uddhava, if you are not able to free your mind from all material
disturbance and thus absorb it completely on the spiritual platform, then
perform all your activities as an offering to Me, without trying to enjoy the
fruits.
PURPORT
If one offers one's activities to Lord Kåñëa without trying to enjoy the
results, one's mind becomes purified. When the mind is purified,
transcendental knowledge automatically manifests, since such knowledge is a
by-product of pure consciousness. When the mind is absorbed in perfect
knowledge, it can be raised to the spiritual platform, as described in
Bhagavad-gétä (18.54):
brahma-bhütaù prasannätmä
na çocati na känkñati
samaù sarveñu bhüteñu
mad-bhaktià labhate paräm
"One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme
Brahman. He never laments nor desires to have anything; he is equally
disposed to every living entity. In that state he attains pure devotional service
unto Me." By absorbing the mind in the transcendental form of Lord Kåñëa,
one can surpass the stage of ordinary transcendental knowledge, by which one
simply distinguishes oneself from the gross and subtle material bodies.
Spiritually enriched by loving devotional service to the Lord, the mind is
completely purified of all tinges of illusion. Through intense concentration on
one's relationship with the Personality of Godhead one comes to the highest
standard of knowledge and becomes an intimate associate of the Personality of
Godhead.
By offering one's activities to the Personality of Godhead, one purifies one's
mind to some extent and thus comes to the preliminary stage of spiritual
awareness. Yet even then one may not be able to fix one's mind completely on
the spiritual platform. At that point one should realistically assess one's
position, noting the lingering material contamination within the mind. Then,
as stated in this verse, one should intensify one's practical devotional work in
the service of the Lord. If one artificially considers oneself to be supremely
liberated or if one becomes casual on the path of spiritual advancement, there
is serious danger of a falldown.
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, the Lord previously explained to Uddhava
jïäna-miçrä bhakti, or devotional service mixed with the impure desire to enjoy
transcendental knowledge. In this verse the Lord clearly reveals that
transcendental knowledge is an automatic by-product of loving service to the
Lord, and in the next verse the Lord begins His explanation of pure devotional
service, which is completely sufficient for self-realization. The desire to enjoy
spiritual knowledge is certainly a material desire, since the goal is one's
personal satisfaction and not the pleasure of the Supreme Lord. Therefore
Lord Kåñëa here warns Uddhava that if one is not able to fix one's mind in
trance on the spiritual platform, then one should not go on simply
theoretically discussing what is Brahman and what is not Brahman. Rather,
one should engage in practical devotional service to the Supreme Lord, and
then spiritual knowledge will automatically awaken in one's heart. As stated in
Bhagavad-gétä (10.10):
teñäà satata-yuktänäà
bhajatäà préti-pürvakam
dadämi buddhi-yogaà taà
yena mäm upayänti te
"To those who are constantly devoted and worship Me with love, I give the
understanding by which they can come to Me."
Similarly, in the Tenth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam Lord Brahmä warns
that one should not neglect the auspicious path of bhakti and instead take up
the useless labor of mental speculation. By mere philosophical speculation one
cannot fix one's mind on the spiritual platform. Many great philosophers
throughout history had abominable personal habits, which proves that they
could not fix themselves on the spiritual platform by mere speculation on
philosophical categories. If one is not fortunate enough to have executed
devotional service to the Lord in one's past life, and if one is therefore
addicted to mere speculation on the differences between matter and spirit, one
will not be able to fix one's mind on the spiritual platform. Such a person
should give up useless speculation and engage in the practical work of Kåñëa
consciousness, absorbing himself twenty-four hours a day in the mission of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. In such missionary work for the Lord's sake,
one should never try to enjoy the fruits of one's work. Even though the mind is
not completely pure, if one offers the fruits of one's work to the Lord, the mind
will quickly come to the standard of pure desirelessness, in which one's only
desire is the Lord's satisfaction.
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé states that if one does not have faith in the personal
form and activities of the Personality of Godhead, one will not have the
spiritual strength to remain perpetually on the transcendental platform. In this
verse the Lord is definitely bringing Uddhava, and all living entities, to the
conclusion of all philosophy—pure devotional service to the Supreme Lord,
Kåñëa.
In this regard, Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura points out that one
who is bewildered by false ego may not want to offer his activities to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, even though this is the actual way of rising
above the influence of the modes of material nature. Because of ignorance one
does not know that he is the eternal servant of Kåñëa and instead is attracted
by the duality of material illusion. One cannot become free from such illusion
by theoretical speculation, but if one offers one's work to the Personality of
Godhead, one will clearly understand his eternal, transcendental position as a
servant of the Lord.
TEXTS 23-24
™aÜ"AlaumaRtk(TaA: Za{Nvana,
s$auBa‰"A laAek(paAvanaI:
gAAyaªanausmar"na, k(maR
janma caAiBanayanmauò":
mad"TaeR DamaRk(AmaATaARna,
@Acar"nmad"paA™aya:
laBatae inaêlaAM BailM(
mayyauÜ"va s$anaAtanae
çraddhälur mat-kathäù çåëvan
su-bhadrä loka-pävanéù
gäyann anusmaran karma
janma cäbhinayan muhuù
mad-arthe dharma-kämärthän
äcaran mad-apäçrayaù
labhate niçcaläà bhaktià
mayy uddhava sanätane
SYNONYMS
çraddhäluù—a faithful person; mat-kathäù—narrations about Me;
çåëvan—hearing; su-bhadräù—which are all-auspicious; loka—the entire
world; pävanéù—purifying; gäyan—singing; anusmaran—remembering
constantly; karma—My activities; janma—My birth; ca—also;
abhinayan—reliving through dramatical performances, etc.; muhuù—again
and again; mat-arthe—for My pleasure; dharma—religious activities;
käma—sense activities; arthän—and commercial activities;
äcaran—performing; mat—in Me; apäçrayaù—having one's shelter;
labhate—one obtains; niçcaläm—without deviation; bhaktim—devotional
service; mayi—to Me; uddhava—O Uddhava; sanätane—dedicated to My
eternal form.
TRANSLATION
My dear Uddhava, narrations of My pastimes and qualities are all-auspicious
and purify the entire universe. A faithful person who constantly hears, glorifies
and remembers such transcendental activities, who through dramatic
performances relives My pastimes, beginning with My appearance, and who
takes full shelter of Me, dedicating his religious, sensual and occupational
activities for My satisfaction, certainly obtains unflinching devotional service to
Me, the eternal Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
Those who have faith only in the impersonal effulgent aspect of the
Supreme Lord and those who have faith only in the localized Supersoul, the
perfect object of mystic meditation located in the heart of every living entity,
are considered to be limited and imperfect in their transcendental realization.
The process of mystic meditation and impersonal philosophical speculation are
both devoid of actual love of God and therefore cannot be considered to be the
perfection of human life. Only one who places full faith in the Supreme
Personality of Godhead becomes qualified to go back home, back to Godhead.
Lord Kåñëa's pastimes of stealing butter from the elderly gopés, enjoying life
with His cowherd boyfriends and the young gopés, playing His flute and
engaging in the räsa dance, etc., are all-auspicious spiritual activities, and they
are fully described in the Tenth Canto of this work. There are many
authorized songs and prayers glorifying these pastimes of the Lord, and by
constantly chanting them one will automatically be fixed in smaraëam, or
remembrance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord exhibited His
opulences upon His birth in Kaàsa's prison and at the birth ceremony
subsequently performed by Nanda Mahäräja in Gokula. The Lord further
performed many adventurous activities, such as chastising the serpent Käliya
and many other irresponsible demons. One should regularly take part in the
ceremonies commemorating Kåñëa's pastimes, such as the Janmäñöamé
celebration glorifying the Lord's birth. On such days one should worship the
Deity of Lord Kåñëa and the spiritual master and thus remember the Lord's
pastimes.
The word dharma in this verse indicates that one's religious activities
should always be in connection with Kåñëa. Therefore, one should give charity
in the form of food grains, clothing, etc., to the Vaiñëavas and brähmaëas, and
whenever possible one should arrange for the protection of cows, who are very
dear to the Lord. The word käma indicates that one should satisfy one's desires
with the transcendental paraphernalia of the Lord. One should eat
mahä-prasädam, food offered to the Deity of Lord Kåñëa, and one should also
decorate oneself with the Lord's flower garlands and sandalwood pulp and
should place the remnants of the Deity's clothing on one's body. One who lives
in a luxurious mansion or apartment should convert his residence into a
temple of Lord Kåñëa and invite others to come, chant before the Deity, hear
Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam and taste the remnants of the Lord's
food, or one may live in a beautiful temple building in the community of
Vaiñëavas and engage in the same activities. The word artha in this verse
indicates that one who is inclined toward business should accumulate money
to promote the missionary work of the Lord's devotees and not for one's
personal sense gratification. Thus one's business activities are also considered
to be devotional service to Lord Kåñëa. The word niçcaläm indicates that since
Lord Kåñëa is eternally fixed in perfect knowledge and bliss, there is no
possibility of disturbance for one who worships the Lord. If we worship
anything except the Lord, our worship may be disturbed when our worshipable
deity is placed in an awkward position. But because the Lord is supreme, our
worship of Him is eternally free of disturbance.
One who engages in hearing, glorifying, remembering and dramatically
recreating the pastimes of the Lord will soon be freed from all material desire.
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé mentions in this connection that one who is advanced in
Kåñëa consciousness may specifically be attracted to the pastimes of a devotee
in the spiritual world who serves the Lord in a particular way. An advanced
devotee in this world may desire to serve the Lord in the same way and thus
may take pleasure in dramatically reliving the service of his worshipable
devotee-master in the spiritual world. Also, one may take pleasure in spiritual
festivals, performances of particular pastimes of Lord Kåñëa, or activities of
other devotees of the Lord. In this way, one can continually increase one's
faith in the Personality of Godhead. Those who have no desire to hear, glorify
or remember the transcendental activities of the Lord are certainly materially
polluted and never achieve the highest perfection. Such persons spoil the
opportunity of human life by devoting themselves to fleeting mundane topics
that produce no eternal benefit. The real meaning of religion is to constantly
serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose form is eternal, full of bliss
and knowledge. One who has taken full shelter of the Lord is completely
uninterested in impersonal speculations about the nature of God and uses his
time to advance more and more in the unlimited bliss of pure devotional
service.
TEXT 25
s$ats$aËÿlabDayaA BaftyaA
maiya maAM s$a opaAis$ataA
s$a vaE mae d"izARtaM s$aià"r,"
@Ãas$aA ivand"tae pad"ma,
sat-saìga-labdhayä bhaktyä
mayi mäà sa upäsitä
sa vai me darçitaà sadbhir
aïjasä vindate padam
SYNONYMS
sat—of the devotees of the Lord; saìga—by the association;
labdhayä—obtained; bhaktyä—by devotion; mayi—to Me; mäm—of Me;
saù—he; upäsitä—worshiper; saù—that very person; vai—undoubtedly;
me—My; darçitam—revealed; sadbhiù—by My pure devotees; aïjasä—very
easily; vindate—achieves; padam—My lotus feet or My eternal abode.
TRANSLATION
One who has obtained pure devotional service by association with My
devotees always engages in worshiping Me. Thus he very easily goes to My
abode, which is revealed by My pure devotees.
PURPORT
In the previous verses Lord Kåñëa has emphasized the value of surrendering
to Him in loving service. One may ask how such surrender or devotion is
actually achieved. The Lord gives the answer in this verse. One must live in a
society of devotees, and thus automatically one will be engaged twenty-four
hours a day in the various processes of devotional service, beginning with
çravaëam, kértanam and smaraëam (hearing, glorifying and remembering the
Lord) [SB 7.5.23]. The pure devotees of the Lord can reveal the spiritual world
by their transcendental sound vibration, making it possible for even a
neophyte devotee to experience the Lord's abode. Being thus enlivened, the
neophyte makes further progress and gradually becomes qualified to personally
serve the Personality of Godhead in the spiritual world. By constantly
associating with devotees and learning from them about devotional science,
one quickly achieves a deep attachment for the Lord and the Lord's service,
and such attachment gradually matures into pure love of Godhead.
Foolish persons say that the various mantras composed of names of God, as
well as all other mantras, are merely material creations with no special value,
and therefore any so-called mantra or mystical process will ultimately produce
the same result. To refute such superficial thinking, the Lord here describes
the science of going back home, back to Godhead. One should not accept the
bad association of impersonalists, who state that the holy name, form, qualities
and pastimes of the Lord are mäyä, or illusion. Mäyä is actually an
insignificant potency of the almighty Personality of Godhead, and if one
ignorantly tries to elevate illusion above the Absolute Truth, one will never
experience love of Godhead and will be cast into deep forgetfulness of the
Lord. One should not associate with those who are envious of the fortunate
devotees who are going back to Godhead. Such envious persons deride the
abode of the Lord, which is revealed by the pure devotees to those who have
faith in the Lord's message. Envious persons create disturbances among the
people in general, who should take shelter of the faithful devotees of the Lord.
Unless people hear from pure devotees, it is impossible for them to understand
that there is a Supreme Personality of Godhead eternally existing in His own
abode, which is self-luminous, full of bliss and knowledge. In this verse, the
importance of saìga, association, is clearly explained.
TEXTS 26-27
™aIoÜ"va ovaAca
s$aADaustavaAeÔamaëAek(
mata: k(Lä{"igvaDa: ‘aBaAe
Bail(stvayyaupayaujyaeta
k(Lä{"zAI s$aià"r"Aä{"taA
Wtanmae pauç&SaADyaºa
laAek(ADyaºa jagAt‘aBaAe
‘aNAtaAyaAnaur"l(Aya
‘apaªaAya ca k(TyataAma,
çré-uddhava uväca
sädhus tavottama-çloka
mataù kédåg-vidhaù prabho
bhaktis tvayy upayujyeta
kédåçé sadbhir ädåtä
etan me puruñädhyakña
lokädhyakña jagat-prabho
praëatäyänuraktäya
prapannäya ca kathyatäm
SYNONYMS
çré-uddhavaù uväca—Çré Uddhava said; sädhuù—a saintly person; tava—in
Your; uttama-çloka—my dear Lord; mataù—opinion; kédåk-vidhaù—what kind
would he be; prabho—my dear Personality of Godhead; bhaktiù—devotional
service; tvayi—unto Your Lordship; upayujyeta—deserves to be executed;
kédåçé—what type is it; sadbhiù—by Your pure devotees such as Närada;
ädåtä—honored; etat—this; me—to me; puruña-adhyakña—O ruler of the
universal controllers; loka-adhyakña—O Supreme Lord of Vaikuëöha;
jagat-prabho—O God of the universe; praëatäya—unto Your surrendered
devotee; anuraktäya—who loves You; prapannäya—who has no other shelter
than You; ca—also; kathyatäm—let this be spoken.
TRANSLATION
Çré Uddhava said: My dear Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, what
type of person do You consider to be a true devotee, and what type of
devotional service is approved by great devotees as worthy of being offered to
Your Lordship? My dear ruler of the universal controllers, O Lord of Vaikuëöha
and almighty God of the universe, I am Your devotee, and because I love You I
have no other shelter than You. Therefore please explain this to me.
PURPORT
In the previous verse it was stated that one can achieve the Lord's supreme
abode by associating with devotees. Therefore, Uddhava naturally inquires
about the symptoms of a distinguished devotee whose association can promote
one to the kingdom of God. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé notes that the Personality of
Godhead knows who is actually a sincere devotee because the Lord is always
attached to His loving servitors. Similarly, pure devotees can expertly explain
the proper methods of devotional service to Lord Kåñëa because they are
already absorbed in love of Kåñëa. Uddhava herein requests Lord Kåñëa to
describe the qualities of a devotee and asks the Lord to explain the devotional
service that the devotees themselves approve as worthy to be offered to the
Lord.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura remarks that the word puruñädhyakña
indicates that Lord Kåñëa is the supreme ruler of the universal controllers
headed by Mahä-Viñëu, and thus the Lord possesses infinite sovereignty. The
term lokädhyakña indicates that Lord Kåñëa is the ultimate supervising
authority of all of the Vaikuëöha planets, and therefore the Lord is unlimitedly
glorious and perfect. Uddhava further addresses Lord Kåñëa as jagat-prabhu,
because even in the illusory material world the Lord exhibits His unlimited
mercy by personally incarnating to uplift the conditioned souls. The word
praëatäya ("Your surrendered devotee") indicates that Uddhava is not proud
like ordinary fools who do not enjoy bowing down to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, Uddhava
mentions that he is anuraktäya, or completely bound in love to Lord Kåñëa,
because unlike other great devotees such as Arjuna, who sometimes worshiped
demigods in order to comply with social customs or to show respect for their
positions in the scheme of planetary management, Uddhava never worshiped
any demigods. Therefore, Uddhava is prapannäya, or completely surrendered
to Lord Kåñëa, having no other shelter.
TEXT 28
tvaM “aö par"maM vyaAema
pauç&Sa: ‘ak{(tae: par":
@vataInaAeR'is$a BagAvana,
svaecC$AepaAÔapa{Tagvapau:
tvaà brahma paramaà vyoma
puruñaù prakåteù paraù
avatérno 'si bhagavan
svecchopätta-påthag-vapuù
SYNONYMS
tvam—You; brahma paramam—the Absolute Truth; vyoma—like the sky (You
are detached from everything); puruñaù—the Personality of Godhead;
prakåteù—to material nature; paraù—transcendental; avatérëaù—incarnated;
asi—You are; bhagavan—the Lord; sva—of Your own (devotees);
icchä—according to the desire; upätta—accepted; påthak—different;
vapuù—bodies.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, as the Absolute Truth You are transcendental to material
nature, and like the sky You are never entangled in any way. Still, being
controlled by Your devotees' love, You accept many different forms, incarnating
according to Your devotees' desires.
PURPORT
The pure devotees of the Lord propagate devotional service all over the
world, and therefore, although separate from the personal form of the Lord,
they are considered to be manifestations of God's mercy and potency. As
stated in Caitanya-caritämåta (Antya 7.11): kåñëa-çakti vinä nahe tära
pravartana.
The Lord is like the sky (vyoma) because although expanded everywhere,
He is not entangled in anything. He is prakåteù paraù, or completely
transcendental to material nature. The Lord is fully self-satisfied and is
therefore indifferent to the affairs of the material world. Still, because of His
causeless mercy, the Lord desires to expand pure devotional service, and for
this reason He incarnates within the material world to uplift the fallen
conditioned souls.
The Lord descends in selected spiritual bodies to please His loving devotees.
Sometimes He appears in His original form as Kåñëa. And even Kåñëa Himself
appears in different forms to special devotees so that they may fully develop
their loving sentiments for Him. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé gives several examples of
the Lord's special mercy upon His devotees. Lord Kåñëa personally went to the
home of Jämbavän and there displayed a form with slightly angry glances. In
that form, the Lord enjoyed a fight with His devotee. The Lord displayed His
form as Dattätreya to Atri Muni and similarly bestowed special mercy upon
Lord Brahmä, the demigods, Akrüra and innumerable other devotees. And in
Våndävana the Lord displayed His most beautiful form as Govinda to the
fortunate inhabitants.
Çréla Madhväcärya has quoted from the Prakäça-saàhitä as follows. "The
Lord accepts different spiritual bodies according to the desire of His devotees.
For example, the Lord agreed to become the son of Vasudeva and Devaké.
Thus, although Lord Kåñëa has an eternal, blissful spiritual form, He appears to
enter within the body of His devotee who becomes His mother. Although we
speak of the Lord's 'taking on a body,' the Lord does not change His form, as do
the conditioned souls, who must change their material bodies. The Lord
appears in His own eternally unchangeable forms. Lord Hari always appears in
the forms that are especially desired by His loving devotees, and never in other
forms. However, if one thinks that the Lord, in the manner of an ordinary
person taking birth, becomes the physical son of Vasudeva or other devotees,
then one is victimized by illusion. The Lord merely expands His spiritual
potency, causing His pure devotees to think, 'Kåñëa is now my son.' One should
understand that the Supreme Personality of Godhead never accepts or rejects
a material body, nor does He ever give up His eternal spiritual forms; rather,
the Lord eternally manifests His blissful bodies according to the loving
sentiments of His eternal pure devotees."
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé mentions that the word vyoma also indicates the Lord's
name of Paravyoma, or the Lord of the spiritual sky. One should not
misinterpret this verse to mean that Lord Kåñëa is impersonal, like the
material sky, or that the form of Kåñëa is merely another selected incarnation
equal to any other. Such casual and whimsical speculations cannot be accepted
as actual spiritual knowledge. Çré Kåñëa is the original Personality of Godhead
(kåñëas tu bhagavän svayam [SB 1.3.28]), and the Lord has explained
elaborately in Bhagavad-gétä that He is the original source of everything.
Therefore, the pure devotees of the Lord are eternally engaged, in full
knowledge and bliss, in loving service to the Lord's original form as Kåñëa. The
whole purpose of Çrémad-Bhägavatam is to arouse our love for Lord Kåñëa, and
one should not foolishly misunderstand this great purpose.
TEXTS 29-32
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
k{(paAlaur"k{(ta‰"Aeh"s$a,
itaitaºau: s$avaR$de"ih"naAma,
s$atyas$aAr"Ae'navaâAtmaA
s$ama: s$avaAeRpak(Ar"k(:
k(AmaEr"h"taDaId"ARntaAe
ma{äu": zAuicar"ik(Âana:
@naIh"Ae imataBaufzAAnta:
isTar"Ae macC$r"NAAe mauina:
@‘amaÔaAe gABaIr"AtmaA
Da{itamaAiÃataSaÌ"NA:
@maAnaI maAnad": k(lyaAe
maE‡a: k(Aç&iNAk(: k(iva:
@AÁaAyaEvaM gAuNAAnd"AeSaAna,
mayaAid"í"Anaipa svak(Ana,
DamaARna, s$antyajya ya: s$avaARna,
maAM Bajaeta s$a tau s$aÔama:
çré-bhagavän uväca
kåpälur akåta-drohas
titikñuù sarva-dehinäm
satya-säro 'navadyätmä
samaù sarvopakärakaù
kämair ahata-dhér dänto
måduù çucir akiïcanaù
aného mita-bhuk çäntaù
sthiro mac-charaëo muniù
apramatto gabhérätmä
dhåtimäï jita-ñaò-guëaù
amäné mäna-daù kalyo
maitraù käruëikaù kaviù
äjïäyaivaà guëän doñän
mayädiñöän api svakän
dharmän santyajya yaù sarvän
mäà bhajeta sa tu sattamaù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
kåpäluù—unable to tolerate the suffering of others; akåta-drohaù—never
injuring others; titikñuù—forgiving; sarva-dehinäm—toward all living entities;
satya-säraù—one who lives by truth and whose strength and firmness come
from truthfulness; anavadya-ätmä—a soul free from envy, jealousy, etc.;
samaù—whose consciousness is equal both in happiness and in distress;
sarva-upakärakaù—always endeavoring as far as possible for the welfare of all
others; kämaiù—by material desires; ahata—undisturbed; dhéù—whose
intelligence; däntaù-controlling the external senses; måduù—without a harsh
mentality; çuciù—always well-behaved; akiïcanaù—without possessiveness;
anéhaù—free from worldly activities; mita-bhuk—eating austerely;
çäntaù—controlling the mind; sthiraù—remaining steady in one's prescribed
duty; mat-çaraëaù—accepting Me as the only shelter; muniù—thoughtful;
apramattaù—cautious and sober; gabhéra-ätmä—not superficial, and thus
unchanging; dhåti-män—not weak or miserable even in distressing
circumstances; jita—having conquered; ñaö-guëaù—the six material qualities,
namely hunger, thirst, lamentation, illusion, old age and death;
amäné—without desire for prestige; mäna-daù—offering all respects to others;
kalyaù—expert in reviving the Kåñëa consciousness of others; maitraù—never
cheating anyone, and thus a true friend; käruëikaù—acting always due to
compassion, not personal ambition; kaviù—completely learned;
äjïäya—knowing; evam—thus; guëän—good qualities; doñän—bad qualities;
mayä—by Me; ädiñöän—taught; api—even; svakän—one's own;
dharmän—religious principles; santyajya—giving up; yaù—one who;
sarvän—all; mäm—Me; bhajeta—worships; saù—he; tu—indeed;
sat-tamaù—the best among saintly persons.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O Uddhava, a saintly person is
merciful and never injures others. Even if others are aggressive he is tolerant
and forgiving toward all living entities. His strength and meaning in life come
from the truth itself, he is free from all envy and jealousy, and his mind is equal
in material happiness and distress. Thus, he dedicates his time to work for the
welfare of all others. His intelligence is never bewildered by material desires,
and he has controlled his senses. His behavior is always pleasing, never harsh
and always exemplary, and he is free from possessiveness. He never endeavors
in ordinary, worldly activities, and he strictly controls his eating. He therefore
always remains peaceful and steady. A saintly person is thoughtful and accepts
Me as his only shelter. Such a person is very cautious in the execution of his
duties and is never subject to superficial transformations, because he is steady
and noble, even in a distressing situation. He has conquered over the six
material qualities—namely hunger, thirst, lamentation, illusion, old age and
death. He is free from all desire for prestige and offers honor to others. He is
expert in reviving the Kåñëa consciousness of others and therefore never cheats
anyone. Rather, he is a well-wishing friend to all, being most merciful. Such a
saintly person must be considered the most learned of men. He perfectly
understands that the ordinary religious duties prescribed by Me in various
Vedic scriptures possess favorable qualities that purify the performer, and he
knows that neglect of such duties constitutes a discrepancy in one's life. Having
taken complete shelter at My lotus feet, however, a saintly person ultimately
renounces such ordinary religious duties and worships Me alone. He is thus
considered to be the best among all living entities.
PURPORT
Verses 29-31 describe twenty-eight qualities of a saintly person, and verse 32
explains the highest perfection of life. According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta
Sarasvaté Öhäkura, the seventeenth quality (mat-çaraëa, or taking complete
shelter of Lord Kåñëa) is the most important, and the other twenty-seven
qualities automatically appear in one who has become a pure devotee of the
Lord. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (5.18.12), yasyästi bhaktir bhagavaty
akiïcanä sarvair guëais tatra samäsate suräù. The twenty-eight saintly qualities
may be described as follows.
(1) Kåpälu. A devotee cannot tolerate seeing the world merged in ignorance
and suffering the whiplashes of mäyä. Therefore he busily engages in
distributing Kåñëa consciousness and is called kåpälu, or merciful.
(2) Akåta-droha. Even if someone is offensive toward a devotee, a devotee
does not become offensive in return. Indeed, he never acts against the interest
of any living entity. One may argue that great Vaiñëava kings, such as
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira and Parékñit Mahäräja, executed many criminals.
However, when justice is properly administered by the state, sinful, destructive
persons actually benefit from their punishment because they become freed
from the severe karmic reactions to their illicit activities. A Vaiñëava ruler
gives punishment not out of envy or malice, but in faithful obedience to the
laws of God. The Mäyävädé philosophers who want to kill God by imagining
that He does not exist are certainly kåta-droha, or most injurious to themselves
and others. The impersonalist imagines that he himself is supreme and thus
creates a most dangerous situation for himself and his followers. Similarly, the
karmés, who are dedicated to material sense gratification, are also killers of the
self, because by their absorption in material consciousness they lose all chance
of experiencing the Absolute Truth and the truth of their own self. Therefore,
all living entities who come under the control of materialistic regulations and
duties are unnecessarily harassing themselves and others, and a pure Vaiñëava
feels great compassion and concern for them. A devotee never uses his mind,
body or words to perform any act harmful to the welfare of any living entity.
(3) Titikñu. A devotee forgives and forgets any offense against himself. A
Vaiñëava is personally detached from his material body, which is made of pus,
stool, blood, and so on. Therefore the devotee is able to overlook the
obnoxious behavior he sometimes meets with in the course of preaching work
and always deals with people as a perfect gentleman. A Vaiñëava loudly chants
the holy name of the Lord and tolerates and forgives those fallen conditioned
souls who are unable to reciprocate properly with a pure devotee.
(4) Satya-sära. A devotee always remembers that he is the eternal servant
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is omniscient, the reservoir of all
pleasure and the ultimate enjoyer of all activities. By avoiding activities
outside devotional service, a devotee remains fixed in the truth, does not
uselessly waste time and thus becomes bold, powerful and steady.
(5) Anavadyätmä. A devotee knows that the material world is a temporary
phantasmagoria and therefore does not envy anyone in any material situation.
He never tries to agitate others or criticize them unnecessarily.
(6) Sama. A devotee remains steady and equal in material happiness or
distress, fame or infamy. His actual wealth is his consciousness of Kåñëa, and
he understands that his real self-interest lies outside the scope of material
nature. He does not become excited or depressed by external events, but
remains fixed in consciousness of the omnipotency of Lord Kåñëa.
(7) Sarvopakäraka. Neglecting one's selfish desires and working for the
satisfaction of others is called paropakära, whereas causing trouble to others
for one's personal gratification is called paräpakära. A devotee always works
for the pleasure of Lord Kåñëa, who is the resting place of all living entities,
and thus a devotee's activities are ultimately pleasing to everyone. Devotional
service to Lord Kåñëa is the perfectional stage of welfare work, since Lord
Kåñëa is the supreme controller of everyone's happiness and distress. Foolish
persons under the influence of false egotism, considering themselves to be the
ultimate well-wishers of others, execute superficial materialistic activities
rather than attending to the eternal happiness of others. Because a devotee
remains pure and engages in missionary activities, he is everyone's best friend.
(8) Kämair ahata-dhé. Ordinary persons see all material things as objects for
their personal gratification and thus try to acquire or control them. Ultimately
a man wants to possess a woman and enjoy sex gratification with her. The
Supreme Lord supplies the desired fuel that causes the fire of lust to burn
painfully in one's heart, but the Lord does not give self-realization to such a
misguided person. Lord Kåñëa is transcendental and neutral, but if one is eager
to exploit the Lord's creation, the Lord gives one facility through mäyä, and
one becomes cheated of real happiness by entangling himself in the false role
of a great and lusty enjoyer of the world. On the other hand, one who has
taken full shelter of Kåñëa is enriched with perfect knowledge and bliss and is
not cheated by the seductive appearances of the material world. A pure
devotee does not follow the path of the foolish deer, which is seduced by the
hunter's horn and killed. A devotee is never attracted by the sensuous
entreaties of a beautiful woman, and he avoids hearing from bewildered karmés
about the so-called glories of material acquisition. Similarly, a pure devotee is
not bewildered by aroma or taste. He does not become attached to sumptuous
eating, nor does he spend the whole day making arrangements for bodily
comfort. The only actual enjoyer of God's creation is the Lord Himself, and
the living entities are secondary enjoyers who experience unlimited pleasure
through the Lord's pleasure. This perfect process of experiencing pleasure is
called bhakti-yoga, or pure devotional service, and a devotee never sacrifices
his auspicious position of steady intelligence, even in the face of so-called
material opportunity.
(9) Dänta. A devotee is naturally repelled by sinful activities and controls
his senses by dedicating all his acts to Kåñëa. This requires steady
concentration and a cautious mentality.
(lo) Mådu. A materialistic person will always see people as friends or
enemies and thus will sometimes justify cruel or small-minded behavior in
order to subdue his opponents. Since a devotee has taken shelter of Lord
Kåñëa, he does not consider anyone his enemy and is never disturbed by the
tendency to desire or enjoy the suffering of others. Thus he is mådu, or gentle
and sublime.
(11) Çuci. A devotee never touches that which is impure or improper, and
simply by remembering such a pure devotee, one is freed from the tendency to
sin. Because of his perfect behavior, a devotee is called çuci, or pure.
(12) Akiïcana. A devotee is free from possessiveness and is not eager to
enjoy or renounce anything, since he considers everything to be Lord Kåñëa's
property.
(13) Anéha. A devotee never acts on his own behalf, but rather for the
service of Lord Kåñëa. He is therefore aloof from ordinary, worldly affairs.
(14) Mita-bhuk. A devotee accepts material sense objects only as far as
necessary, to keep himself healthy and fit in Lord Kåñëa's service. He is
therefore not entangled by his sense activities and never injures his
self-realization. When necessary, a devotee can give up anything for Lord
Kåñëa's service, but he does not accept or reject anything for his personal
prestige.
(15) Çänta. Those trying to exploit the Lord's creation are always disturbed.
A devotee, however, is detached from such pointless activities and understands
sense gratification to be diametrically opposed to his self-interest. Being always
engaged according to the Lord's desire, he remains peaceful.
(16) Sthira. Remembering that Lord Kåñëa is the basis of everything, a
devotee does not become fearful or impatient.
(17) Mat-çaraëa. A devotee does not take pleasure in anything except
serving Lord Kåñëa and is constantly attentive in the execution of his duties.
A devotee knows that only Lord Kåñëa can protect him and engage him in
useful work.
(18) Muni. A devotee is thoughtful and through intelligent contemplation
avoids becoming distracted from his spiritual advancement. By intelligence he
is freed from doubts about Lord Kåñëa and confronts all problems in life with
steady Kåñëa consciousness.
(19) Apramatta. One who forgets the Supreme Lord is more or less crazy,
but a devotee remains sane by offering his activities to Lord Kåñëa.
(20) Gabhérätmä. As a devotee merges into the ocean of Kåñëa
consciousness, his own consciousness becomes deeper and deeper; ordinary,
superficial persons hovering on the material platform cannot fathom the
extent of a devotee's awareness.
(21) Dhåtimän. By controlling the urges of the tongue and genitals the
devotee remains steady and patient and does not impulsively change his
position.
(22) Jita-ñaò-guëa. By spiritual knowledge, a devotee is able to conquer the
pushings of hunger, thirst, lamentation, illusion, old age and death.
(23) Amäné. A devotee is not puffed up, and even if he is famous, he does
not take such fame very seriously.
(24) Mäna-da. A devotee offers all respects to others, since everyone is part
and parcel of Lord Kåñëa.
(25) Kalya. A devotee is expert in making people understand the truth of
Kåñëa consciousness.
(26) Maitra. A devotee does not cheat anyone by encouraging them in the
bodily concept of life; rather, by his missionary work a devotee is the true
friend of everyone.
(27) Käruëika. A devotee tries to make people sane and thus is most
merciful. He is para-duùkha-duùkhé, or one who is unhappy to see the
unhappiness of others.
(28) Kavi. A devotee is expert in studying the transcendental qualities of
Lord Kåñëa and is able to show the harmony and compatibility of the Lord's
apparently contradictory qualities. This is possible through expert knowledge
of the absolute nature of the Lord. Lord Caitanya is softer than a rose and
harder than a thunderbolt, but these opposing qualities can easily be
understood in terms of the Lord's transcendental nature and purpose. One
who is always able to understand the truth of Kåñëa consciousness, without
opposition or confusion, is called kavi, or most learned.
The position of those on the spiritual path can be understood in terms of
their development of the qualities mentioned above. Ultimately, the most
important quality is to take shelter of Lord Kåñëa, since the Lord can award all
good qualities to His sincere devotee. In the lowest stage of devotional service
one acts with a desire to enjoy sense gratification but at the same time tries to
offer the fruits to the Lord. This stage is called karma-miçrä bhakti. As one
gradually purifies himself in devotional service, he becomes detached through
knowledge and gains relief from anxiety. In this stage he becomes attached to
transcendental knowledge, and therefore this stage is called jïäna-miçrä
bhakti, or devotional service to Lord Kåñëa with a desire to enjoy the fruits of
transcendental knowledge. But because pure love for Kåñëa is actually the
greatest happiness and the natural position of the living entity, a sincere
devotee gradually overcomes his desire to enjoy sense gratification and
knowledge and comes to the stage of pure devotional service, which is devoid
of personal desire. Na karmäëi tyajed yogé karmabhis tyajyate hi saù: "The yogé
should not give up his work, but rather should cultivate detachment by which
his material activities will automatically vanish." In other words, one should
continue to perform one's prescribed duties, even imperfectly. If one is sincere
about advancing in Kåñëa consciousness, then by the strength of bhakti-yoga
his activities will gradually be transformed into pure loving service.
There are innumerable examples of fruitive workers, mental speculators
and materialistic devotees who became perfect by the strength of devotional
service. By rendering loving service to Kåñëa, one automatically experiences
the greatest pleasure of life and is endowed with perfect knowledge. There is
nothing lacking in the process of pure devotional service, and there is no need
for any extraneous endeavor to acquire sense pleasure or philosophical
satisfaction. One must be completely convinced that simply by serving Kåñëa
one will get all perfection in life. Even if one lacks some or all of the
above-mentioned qualities, one should sincerely engage in Lord Kåñëa's
service, and gradually one's character will become perfect. One who is a
sincere devotee of Lord Kåñëa will develop all godly qualities by the mercy of
the Lord, and one who is already serving the Lord with the above-mentioned
qualities is to be understood as the greatest devotee. As indicated in verse 32, a
pure devotee of the Lord is fully aware of the pious advantages of executing
duties within the varëäçrama system, and he is similarly aware of the harmful
mistake of neglecting such duties. Still, having full faith in the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, a devotee gives up all ordinary social and religious
activities and engages fully in devotional service. He knows that Lord Kåñëa is
the ultimate source of everything and that all perfection comes from Lord
Kåñëa alone. Because of his extraordinary faith, the devotee is called sattama,
or the best among all living beings.
As explained by Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé in Upadeçämåta, a devotee who has
not yet developed the good qualities mentioned above but is nevertheless
sincerely endeavoring for Kåñëa consciousness should receive the mercy of
superior Vaiñëavas. One should not necessarily accept intimate association
with such an aspirant to pure devotional service, but one should be confident
that by chanting the holy names of Kåñëa such a person will eventually attain
all perfection. One can imagine the beauty of a society filled with saintly
persons, as described in these verses. The wonderful Kåñëa conscious qualities
mentioned above are the basis of a peaceful and prosperous society, and if
everyone takes to the loving service of Lord Kåñëa, then certainly the present
atmosphere of fear, violence, lust, greed and insanity can be replaced by a
celestial situation in which all leaders and citizens will be happy. The essential
points here are mat-çaraëa ("one should take full shelter of Lord Kåñëa") and
mäà bhajeta ("one should worship the Lord through the authorized process").
In this way the entire world can become sattama, or most perfect.
TEXTS 33
ÁaAtvaAÁaAtvaATa yae vaE maAM
yaAvaAna, yaêAisma yaAä{"zA:
BajantyananyaBaAvaena
tae mae Bal(tamaA mataA:
jïätväjïätvätha ye vai mäà
yävän yaç cäsmi yädåçaù
bhajanty ananya-bhävena
te me bhaktatamä matäù
SYNONYMS
jïätvä—knowing; ajïätvä—not knowing; atha—thus; ye—those who;
vai—certainly; mäm—Me; yävän—as; yaù—who; ca—also; asmi—I am;
yädåçaù—how I am; bhajanti—worship; ananya-bhävena—with exclusive
devotion; te—they; me—by Me; bhakta-tamäù—the best devotees; matäù—are
considered.
TRANSLATION
My devotees may or may not know exactly what I am, who I am and how I
exist, but if they worship Me with unalloyed love, then I consider them to be
the best of devotees.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, although yävän
indicates that Lord Kåñëa cannot be limited by time or space, He becomes
limited by the love of His pure devotees. For example, Lord Kåñëa never steps
one foot out of Våndävana, because of the intense love of its inhabitants for
Him. In this way, the Lord comes under the control of His devotees' love. The
word yaù indicates that Kåñëa is the Absolute Truth who appears as the son of
Vasudeva, or as Çyämasundara. Yädåça indicates that the Lord is ätmäräma, or
completely self-satisfied, and also äpta-käma, or "one who automatically fulfills
all of His desires." Still, being affected by the love of His devotees, the Lord
sometimes appears to be anätmäräma, or dependent on the love of His
devotees, and anäptakäma, unable to achieve His desire without the
cooperation of His devotees. Actually, the Supreme Lord, Kåñëa, is always
independent, but He reciprocates the intense love of His devotees and thus
appears to be dependent on them, just as He apparently became dependent on
Nanda Mahäräja and Yaçodä during His childhood pastimes in Våndävana.
The word ajïätvä ("inexperienced, lacking knowledge") indicates that
sometimes a devotee may not have a proper philosophical understanding of the
Personality of Godhead or due to love may temporarily forget the Lord's
position. In Bhagavad-gétä (11.41) Arjuna says,
sakheti matvä prasabhaà yad uktaà
he kåñëa he yädava he sakheti
ajänatä mahimänaà tavedaà
mayä pramädät praëayena väpi
"I have in the past addressed You as 'O Kåñëa,' 'O Yädava,' 'O my friend,'
without knowing Your glories. Please forgive whatever I may have done in
madness or in love." Arjuna's words ajänatä mahimänam have the same
meaning as Kåñëa's words ajïätvä mäm in this verse of the Bhägavatam. Both
indicate incomplete understanding of Kåñëa's glories. In Bhagavad-gétä Arjuna
says, praëayena: his forgetfulness of Kåñëa's supreme position was caused by his
love for Him. In this verse, Kåñëa excuses such lapses on the part of His
devotees with the words ajïätvä mäm, which indicate that even though
devotees may not fully appreciate His exalted position, Kåñëa accepts their
loving service. Thus this verse clearly reveals the supreme position of bhakti.
Lord Kåñëa also states in Bhagavad-gétä (11.54):
bhaktyä tv ananyayä çakya
aham evaà-vidho 'rjuna
jïätum drañöuà ca tattvena
praveñöuà ca parantapa
"My dear Arjuna, only by undivided devotional service can I be understood as I
am, standing before you, and can thus be seen directly. Only in this way can
you enter into the mysteries of My understanding."
Although one may develop innumerable saintly qualities, without love of
Kåñëa one will not achieve complete success. One must understand the
Personality of Godhead as He is and love Him. Even if one is not capable of
analytically understanding the position of God, if one simply loves Kåñëa, then
one is certainly perfect. Many of the residents of Våndävana had no idea that
Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, nor did they know of Kåñëa's
potencies or incarnations. They simply loved Kåñëa with their hearts and
souls, and therefore they are considered most perfect.
TEXTS 34-41
maiéaËÿmaà"l(janad"
zARnas$pazARnaAcaRnama,
pair"cayaAR stauita: ‘aù"-
gAuNAk(maARnauk(LtaRnama
matk(TaA™avaNAe ™aÜ"A
mad"nauDyaAnamauÜ"va
s$avaRlaABaAepah"r"NAM
d"AsyaenaAtmainavaed"nama,
maÀanmak(maRk(TanaM
mama pavaARnaumaAed"nama,
gAItataANx"vavaAid"‡agAAeï"
IiBamaRä,"gA{h"Aets$ava:
yaA‡aA bailaivaDaAnaM ca
s$avaRvaAiSaRk(pavaRs$au
vaEid"k(L taAin‡ak(L d"IºaA
mad"Iya˜ataDaAr"NAma,
mamaAcaARsTaApanae ™aÜ"A
svata: s$aMh"tya caAeâma:
oâAnaAepavanaA‚(Lx"-
paur"maind"r"k(maRiNA
s$ammaAjaRnaAepalaepaAByaAM
s$aek(maNx"lavataR$naE:
gA{h"zAu™aUSaNAM ma÷M
d"As$avaâd"maAyayaA
@maAinatvamad"imBatvaM
k{(tasyaApair"k(LtaRnama,
@ipa d"IpaAvalaAekM( mae
naAepayauHjyaAiªavaeid"tama,
yaâid"í"tamaM laAeke(
ya»aAitai‘ayamaAtmana:
taÔaiªavaed"yaenma÷M
tad"AnantyaAya k(lpatae
mal-liìga-mad-bhakta-janadarçana-
sparçanärcanam
paricaryä stutiù prahvaguëa-
karmänukértanam
mat-kathä-çravaëe çraddhä
mad-anudhyänam uddhava
sarva-läbhopaharaëaà
däsyenätma-nivedanam
maj-janma-karma-kathanaà
mama parvänumodanam
géta-täëòava-väditragoñöhébhir
mad-gåhotsavaù
yäträ bali-vidhänaà ca
sarva-värñika-parvasu
vaidiké täntriké dékñä
madéya-vrata-dhäraëam
mamärcä-sthäpane çraddhä
svataù saàhatya codyamaù
udyänopavanäkréòapura-
mandira-karmaëi
sammärjanopalepäbhyäà
seka-maëòala-vartanaiù
gåha-çuçrüñaëaà mahyaà
däsa-vad yad amäyayä
amänitvam adambhitvaà
kåtasyäparikértanam
api dépävalokaà me
nopayuïjyän niveditam
yad yad iñöatamaà loke
yac cäti-priyam ätmanaù
tat tan nivedayen mahyaà
tad änantyäya kalpate
SYNONYMS
mat-liìga—My appearance in this world as the Deity, etc.; mat-bhakta
jana—My devotees; darçana—seeing; sparçana—touching; arcanam—and
worshiping; paricaryä—rendering personal service; stutiù—offering prayers of
glorification; prahva—obeisances; guëa—My qualities; karma—and activities;
anukértanam—constantly glorifying; mat-kathä—topics about Me; çravaëe—in
hearing; çraddhä—faith due to love; mat-anudhyänam—always meditating on
Me; uddhava—O Uddhava; sarva-läbha—all that one acquires;
upaharaëam—offering; däsyena—by accepting oneself as My servant;
ätma-nivedanam—self-surrender; mat-janma-karma-kathanam—glorifying My
birth and activities; mama—My; parva—in festivals such as Janmäñöamé;
anumodanam—taking great pleasure; géta—by songs; täëòava—dancing;
väditra—musical instruments; goñöhébhiù—and discussions among devotees;
mat-gåha—in My temple; utsavaù—festivals; yäträ—celebrations;
bali-vidhänam—making offerings; ca—also; sarva—in all; värñika—annual;
parvasu—in the celebrations; vaidiké—mentioned in the Vedas;
täntriké—mentioned in literatures such as the Païcarätra; dékñä—initiation;
madéya—in relation to Me; vrata—vows; dhäraëam—observing; mama—My;
arcä—of the Deity form; sthäpane—in the installation; çraddhä—being
faithfully attached; svataù—by oneself; saàhatya—with others; ca—also;
udyamaù—endeavor; udyäna—of flower gardens; upavana—orchards;
äkréòa—places of pastimes; pura—devotional cities; mandira—and temples;
karmaëi—in the construction; sammärjana—by thoroughly sweeping and
dusting; upalepäbhyäm—then by smearing water and cow dung; seka—by
sprinkling scented water; maëòala-vartanaiù—by construction of maëòalas;
gåha-of the temple, which is My home; çuçrüñaëam—service; mahyam—for My
sake; däsa-vat—being like a servant; yat—which; amäyayä—without duplicity;
amänitvam—being without false prestige; adambhitvam—being prideless;
kåtasya—one's devotional activities; aparikértanam—not advertising;
api—moreover; dépa—of lamps; avalokam—the light; me—which belong to
Me; na—not; upayuïjyät—one should engage; niveditam—things already
offered to others; yat yat—anything; iñöa-tamam—most desired; loke—in the
material world; yat ca—and anything; ati-priyam—most dear; ätmanaù—of
oneself; tat tat—that very thing; nivedayet—one should offer; mahyam—unto
Me; tat—that offering; änantyäya—for immortality; kalpate-qualifies one.
TRANSLATION
My dear Uddhava, one can give up false pride and prestige by engaging in
the following devotional activities. One may purify oneself by seeing, touching,
worshiping, serving, and offering prayers of glorification and obeisances to My
form as the Deity and to My pure devotees. One should also glorify My
transcendental qualities and activities, hear with love and faith the narrations of
My glories and constantly meditate on Me. One should offer to Me whatever
one acquires, and accepting oneself as My eternal servant, one should give
oneself completely to Me. One should always discuss My birth and activities
and enjoy life by participating in festivals, such as Janmäñöamé, which glorify
My pastimes. In My temple, one should also participate in festivals and
ceremonies by singing, dancing, playing musical instruments and discussing Me
with other Vaiñëavas. One should observe all the regularly celebrated annual
festivals by attending ceremonies, pilgrimages and making offerings. One should
also observe religious vows such as Ekädaçé and take initiation by the
procedures mentioned in the Vedas, Païcarätra and other, similar literatures.
One should faithfully and lovingly support the installation of My Deity, and
individually or in cooperation with others one should work for the construction
of Kåñëa conscious temples and cities as well as flower gardens, fruit gardens
and special areas to celebrate My pastimes. One should consider oneself to be
My humble servant, without duplicity, and thus should help to clean the
temple, which is My home. First one should sweep and dust thoroughly, and
then one should further cleanse with water and cow dung. Having dried the
temple, one should sprinkle scented water and decorate the temple with
mandalas. One should thus act just like My servant. A devotee should never
advertise his devotional activities; therefore his service will not be the cause of
false pride. One should never use lamps that are offered to Me for other
purposes simply because there is need of illumination, and similarly, one should
never offer to Me anything that has been offered to or used by others.
Whatever is most desired by one within this material world, and whatever is
most dear to oneself—one should offer that very thing to Me. Such an offering
qualifies one for eternal life.
PURPORT
In these eight verses Lord Kåñëa ends His discussion of saintly qualities in
general and describes the specific characteristics of the devotees of the Lord.
Lord Kåñëa has clearly described both here and in Bhagavad-gétä that the
ultimate goal of life is to surrender fully to Him and become His pure devotee.
Herein the Lord elaborately describes the process of devotional service. One
should offer everything that one acquires to the Lord, thinking, "Lord Kåñëa
has sent these things so that I may serve Him nicely." One ultimately should
understand that the minute spirit soul is part and parcel of Lord Kåñëa, and
thus one should surrender one's very self to the Lord. Just as an ordinary
servant is meek and submissive to his master, similarly, a devotee should always
be submissive to his spiritual master, who is a representative of Lord Kåñëa. He
should realize how his body and mind are purified simply by his seeing the
spiritual master or by accepting on his head the water offered to the spiritual
master. It is emphasized in these verses that one should attend Vaiñëava
festivals. As far as possible, large festivals should be held all over the world so
that people can gradually learn how to perfect human life. The words
mamärcä-sthäpane çraddhä are significant. Here Lord Kåñëa states that one
should have faith in His Deity worship, since the Lord is personally present as
the Deity. The words udyänopavanäkréòa-pura-mandira-karmaëi indicate that
there should be a serious endeavor to construct beautiful temples and Vaiñëava
cities with ample parks, orchards and flower gardens. An outstanding example
of such endeavors can be presently seen in India at the Mäyäpur Candrodaya
Mandira.
The words dépävalokaà me nopayuïjyän niveditam indicate that one may
never use the Deity's paraphernalia for sense gratification. If there is a
shortage of electricity or lights, one may not use the Deity's lamps, nor should
one ever offer to Lord Kåñëa paraphernalia previously offered to or used by
others. In these verses, the importance of Deity worship and Vaiñëava festivals
is emphasized in many ways. Lord Kåñëa promises that whoever sincerely
performs these activities will certainly go back home, back to Godhead (tad
änantyäya kalpate). One should offer his most dear possession to Lord Kåñëa,
not that which is superfluous or unwanted. If one is most attached to his
family, one should see that his family is engaged in Lord Kåñëa's service. If one
is most attached to money, that should be given for propagating Kåñëa
consciousness. And if one considers one's intelligence to be most valuable, he
should preach Kåñëa consciousness with great logic and reason. If we offer our
most valuable possessions to Lord Kåñëa, we will automatically become dear to
the Lord and go back to Godhead.
TEXT 42
s$aUyaAeR'i¢a“aARöNAA gAAvaAe
vaESNAva: KaM maç&Àalama,
BaUr"AtmaA s$avaRBaUtaAina
Ba‰" paUjaApad"Aina mae
süryo 'gnir brähmaëä gävo
vaiñëavaù khaà maruj jalam
bhür ätmä sarva-bhütäni
bhadra püjä-padäni me
SYNONYMS
süryaù—the sun; agniù—fire; brähmaëäù—the brähmaëas; gävaù—the cows;
vaiñëavaù—the devotee of the Lord; kham—the sky; marut—the wind;
jalam—water; bhüù—the earth; ätmä—the individual soul; sarva-bhütäni—all
living entities; bhadra—O saintly Uddhava; püjä—of worship; padäni—the
places; me—of Me.
TRANSLATION
O saintly Uddhava, please know that you may worship Me in the sun, fire,
brähmaëas, cows, Vaiñëavas, sky, wind, water, earth, individual soul and all
living entities.
PURPORT
Unless one understands that Lord Kåñëa is all-pervading and that
everything is resting within the Lord, one's Kåñëa consciousness is third class
and materialistic. It is clearly stated in all Vedic literatures that the Supreme
Absolute Truth is the source of everything. Everything is within Him, and He
is within everything. To avoid a materialistic conception of Lord Kåñëa, one
should not think that the Lord exists only in a particular time and place.
Rather, one should understand that He exists at all times and in all places and
that one may search for and find Lord Kåñëa within all things. The word
püjä-padäni indicates that Lord Kåñëa is all-pervading, but this does not mean
that all things are Lord Kåñëa. Lord Kåñëa speaks this verse to clarify His
supremacy as the all-pervading Personality of Godhead and to show the path
of complete self-realization.
TEXTS 43-45
s$aUyaeR tau ivaâyaA ‡ayyaA
h"ivaSaA¢aAE yajaeta maAma,
@AitaTyaena tau iva‘aAƒyae
gAAeSvaËÿ yavas$aAid"naA
vaESNAvae banDaus$atk{(tyaA
ô$id" Kae DyaAnainaï"yaA
vaAyaAE mauKyaiDayaA taAeyae
‰"vyaEstaAeyapaur":s$arE":
sTaiNx"lae man‡aô$d"yaEr,"
BaAegAEr"AtmaAnamaAtmaina
ºae‡aÁaM s$avaRBaUtaeSau
s$amatvaena yajaeta maAma,
sürye tu vidyayä trayyä
haviñägnau yajeta mäm
ätithyena tu viprägrye
goñv aìga yavasädinä
vaiñëave bandhu-sat-kåtyä
hådi khe dhyäna-niñöhayä
väyau mukhya-dhiyä toye
dravyais toya-puraùsaraiù
sthaëòile mantra-hådayair
bhogair ätmänam ätmani
kñetra-jïaà sarva-bhüteñu
samatvena yajeta mäm
SYNONYMS
sürye—in the sun; tu—indeed; vidyayä trayyä—by offering selected Vedic
hymns of praise, worship and obeisances; haviñä—with offerings of clarified
butter; agnau—in the fire; yajeta—one should worship; mäm—Me;
ätithyena—by respectfully receiving them as guests even when uninvited;
tu—indeed; vipra—of brähmaëas; agrye—in the best; goñu—in the cows;
aìga—O Uddhava; yavasa-ädinä—by offering grass and other paraphernalia
for their maintenance; vaiñëave—in the Vaiñëava; bandhu—with loving
friendship; sat-kåtyä—by honoring; hådi—within the heart; khe—within the
inner space; dhyäna—in meditation; niñöhayä—by being fixed; väyau—in the
air; mukhya—the most important; dhiyä—considering by intelligence;
toye—in water; dravyaiù—by material elements; toya-puraù-saraiù—by water,
etc.; sthaëòile—in the earth; mantra-hådayaiù—by application of confidential
mantras; bhogaiù—by offering of materially enjoyable objects; ätmänam—the
jéva soul; ätmani—within the body; kñetra-jïam—the Supersoul;
sarva-bhüteñu—within all living beings; samatvena—seeing Him equally
everywhere; yajeta—one should worship; mäm—Me.
TRANSLATION
My dear Uddhava, one should worship Me within the sun by chanting
selected Vedic mantras and by performing worship and offering obeisances. One
may worship Me within fire by offering oblations of ghee, and one may worship
Me among the brähmaëas by respectfully receiving them as guests, even when
uninvited. I can be worshiped within the cows by offerings of grass and other
suitable grains and paraphernalia for the pleasure and health of the cows, and
one may worship Me within the Vaiñëavas by offering loving friendship to them
and honoring them in all respects. Through steady meditation I am worshiped
within the inner space of the heart, and within the air I can be worshiped by
knowledge that präëa, the life air, is the chief among elements. I am worshiped
within water by offerings of water itself, along with other elements such as
flowers and tulasé leaves, and one may worship Me within the earth by proper
application of confidential seed mantras. One may worship Me within the
individual living entity by offering food and other enjoyable substances, and one
may worship Me within all living entities by seeing the Supersoul within all of
them, thus maintaining equal vision.
PURPORT
Significantly, the Lord emphasizes in these three verses that one should
worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead who is expanded within all
living beings. It is not recommended that one accept any material or spiritual
object other than the Lord as supreme. By maintaining steady consciousness of
the Lord in His all-pervading feature, one can remain in a worshipful mood
twenty-four hours a day. Thus, one will naturally try to engage all material and
spiritual elements in the loving service of Lord Kåñëa. If because of ignorance
one forgets the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one may become inclined to
worship powerful material phenomena independent of the Supreme Lord, or
one may foolishly consider oneself to be supreme. One should remain sane and
accept the worshipable presence of the Supreme Lord within everything.
TEXT 46
iDaSNyaeiSvatyaeSau maåU"paM
zAÊÿca‚(gAd"AmbaujaE:
yaulM( catauBauRjaM zAAntaM
DyaAyaªacaeRts$amaAih"ta:
dhiñëyeñv ity eñu mad-rüpaà
çaìkha-cakra-gadämbujaiù
yuktaà catur-bhujaà çäntaà
dhyäyann arcet samähitaù
SYNONYMS
dhiñëyeñu—in the previously mentioned places of worship; iti—thus (by the
previously mentioned processes); eñu—in them; mat-rüpam—My
transcendental form; çaìkha—with the conchshell; cakra—Sudarçana disc;
gadä—club; ambujaiù—and lotus flower; yuktam—equipped;
catuù-bhujam—with four arms; çäntam—peaceful; dhyäyan—meditating;
arcet—one should worship; samähitaù—with complete attention.
TRANSLATION
Thus, in the previously mentioned places of worship and according to the
processes I have described, one should meditate on My peaceful, transcendental
form with four arms holding a conchshell, Sudarçana disc, club and lotus flower.
In this way, one should worship Me with fixed attention.
PURPORT
The Lord has previously explained that He appears in different
transcendental forms to His pure devotees so that they may unlimitedly
increase their love of Godhead. Here is given a general description of the
four-armed Näräyaëa form, which pervades the material world as Supersoul, or
Paramätmä. The pure devotees, however, do not meditate upon the Lord
within the heart but rather render active service to a specific form of the Lord,
such as Räma or Kåñëa, and thus perfect their realization of Bhagavän, or the
Supreme Lord, who engages in transcendental pastimes with His devotees in
the spiritual world. Yet even within the material world one can spiritualize
one's existence by seeing the Supreme Lord within everything and worshiping
Him by constant meditation. As mentioned in the previous verses, one should
also go to the temple and specifically worship the Deity and participate in
spiritual festivals. One should not be puffed up and claim that because one is
meditating on the Lord within nature there is no need to go to the temple.
Temple worship has been repeatedly emphasized by the Lord Himself. The
word samähita in this verse indicates samädhi. If one very carefully worships
the Deity or hears and chants about the pastimes of Lord Kåñëa, one is
certainly in samädhi. By worshiping and glorifying the Lord twenty-four hours
a day one becomes a liberated soul and gradually rises completely beyond the
influence of the material creation. The living entity is called ätmä, or eternal
soul, because of his relationship with the Paramätmä, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. By worshiping the Lord, our eternal nature revives, and as we
increase our enthusiasm and steadiness in devotional service, material
existence fades away.
TEXT 47
wí"ApaUtaeRna maAmaevaM
yaAe yajaeta s$amaAih"ta:
laBatae maiya s$aà"ilM(
matsma{ita: s$aADaus$aevayaA
iñöä-pürtena mäm evaà
yo yajeta samähitaù
labhate mayi sad-bhaktià
mat-småtiù sädhu-sevayä
SYNONYMS
iñöä—by sacrificial performances for one's own benefit; pürtena—and pious
works for the benefit of others, such as digging wells; mäm—Me; evam—thus;
yaù—one who; yajeta—worships; samähitaù—with mind fixed in Me;
labhate—such a person obtains; mayi—in Me; sat-bhaktim—unflinching
devotional service; mat-småtiù—realized knowledge of Me; sädhu—with all
superior qualities; sevayä—by service.
TRANSLATION
One who has executed sacrificial performances and pious works for My
satisfaction, and who thus worships Me with fixed attention, obtains
unflinching devotional service unto Me. By the excellent quality of his service
such a worshiper obtains realized knowledge of Me.
PURPORT
The word iñöä-pürtena, which means "sacrificial performances and pious
works," does not indicate deviation from the pure devotional service of the
Lord. Lord Kåñëa, or Viñëu, is called Yajïa, or the Lord of sacrifice, and in
Bhagavad-gétä (5.29) Lord Kåñëa says, bhoktäraà yajïa-tapasäm: "I am the
actual enjoyer of all sacrifice." The highest sacrifice is to chant the holy names
of the Lord, and by taking shelter of the Lord's names, one will acquire
unflinching devotion and realized knowledge of the Absolute Truth. A
realized devotee is very attentive in his devotional service, taking it as his life
and soul. He keeps himself fit for devotional service by constantly worshiping
and glorifying the lotus feet of the spiritual master and the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Such hari-näma-kértana and guru-püjä are the only
practical methods by which one can achieve pure devotional service. When
hari-kértana is expanded, it is called kåñëa-saìkértana. One should not dry up
by performing unauthorized austerities or sacrifices; rather, one should engage
with all enthusiasm in the great sacrifice of çré-kåñëa-saìkértana, which enables
one to easily achieve the highest perfection of human life.
TEXT 48
‘aAyaeNA Bail(yaAegAena
s$ats$aËeÿna ivanaAeÜ"va
naAepaAyaAe ivaâtae s$amyak,(
‘aAyaNAM ih" s$ataAmah"ma,
präyeëa bhakti-yogena
sat-saìgena vinoddhava
nopäyo vidyate samyak
präyaëaà hi satäm aham
SYNONYMS
präyeëa—for all practical purposes; bhakti-yogena—devotional service unto
Me; sat-saìgena—which is made possible by association with My devotees;
vinä—without; uddhava—O Uddhava; na—not; upäyaù—any means;
vidyate—there is; samyak—that actually works; präyaëam—the true path of
life or actual shelter; hi—because; satäm—of liberated souls; aham—I.
TRANSLATION
My dear Uddhava, I am personally the ultimate shelter and way of life for
saintly liberated persons, and thus if one does not engage in My loving
devotional service, which is made possible by associating with My devotees,
then for all practical purposes, one possesses no effective means for escaping
from material existence.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa has described to Uddhava the characteristics of jïäna-yoga and
bhakti-yoga, both of which are considered to be spiritual processes. Now,
however, Lord Kåñëa clearly indicates that bhakti-yoga is the only real means
to totally free oneself from material existence, and that bhakti-yoga is not
possible without sat-saìga, or association with other Vaiñëavas. On the path of
bhakti-miçra jïäna, or speculation on the Absolute Truth mixed with devotion,
one is still affected by the three modes of material nature. The pure soul,
liberated from all material qualities, has no tendency or desire to engage in
philosophical speculation, severe austerities or impersonal meditation. The
pure soul simply loves Kåñëa and wants to serve Him constantly. Jévera
'svarüpa' haya-kåñëera 'nitya-däsa.' [Cc. Madhya 20.108]. Pure devotional
service to the Lord is called kevala-bhakti, whereas devotional service mixed
with speculative propensities is called guëa-bhüta-bhakti, or devotional service
polluted by the material modes of nature. One who is actually intelligent does
not make a show of philosophical wizardry but rather discerns the superiority
of pure love of Godhead and takes to the path of kevala-bhakti. One who
emphasizes so-called intellectual achievements is actually less intelligent,
because such a person is more attracted to intelligence than to the pure soul,
which is superior. It should be understood, however, that pure devotional
service is not nonphilosophical or anti-intellectual. The Absolute Truth is far
more extensive than partial truth. Therefore, one who is in full knowledge of
Lord Kåñëa has the greatest facility to engage in philosophical analysis, since a
pure devotee is working with the entire range of conceptual categories. Those
who do not know Lord Kåñëa are attracted to the impersonal Brahman or the
localized Paramätmä, but they are not aware of the ultimate category of
understanding called Bhagavän, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Lacking knowledge of Bhagavän, such imperfect philosophers certainly do not
understand the expansion, interaction and withdrawal of the Lord's
innumerable potencies and thus cannot fully analyze them. By faithfully
accepting everything Lord Kåñëa speaks as the absolute truth, one comes to the
mature platform of philosophy and achieves perfect knowledge.
In addition to philosophical or intellectual understanding, pure devotional
service also awards all other benefits in life, both material and spiritual;
therefore one who for any purpose whatsoever accepts a process other than
devotional service has unfortunately misunderstood the nature of pure
devotional service to Lord Kåñëa. It is emphasized here that one must cultivate
devotional service in the association of other devotees. On the other hand, the
jïäna-yoga process is cultivated alone, because it is difficult for even two
mental speculators to be in the same place without their association
degenerating into constant quarrel. Other processes of self-realization are
compared to the nipples on a goat's neck. They look just like breast nipples, but
they will not give any milk whatsoever. In this regard Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura has quoted the following verses, spoken by Çré Uddhava,
Çukadeva Gosvämé and Närada Muni respectively.
täpa-trayeëäbhihitasya ghore
santapyamänasya bhavädhvanéha
paçyämi nänyac charaëaà taväìghridvandvätapaträd
amåtäbhivarñät
"My dear Lord, for one who is being cruelly burned in the blazing fire of
material miseries, having fallen into the network of material existence, I do
not see any other possible shelter besides Your two lotus feet, which are a
shower of nectar extinguishing the fire of suffering." (SB 11.19.9)
saàsära-sindhum ati-dustaram uttitérñor
nänyaù plavo bhagavataù puruñottamasya
lélä-kathä-rasa-niñevaëam antareëa
puàso bhaved vividha-duùkha-davärditasya
"Material existence is like an ocean that is extremely difficult to cross. The
conditioned souls have fallen into this ocean, which is not cool but rather
burns them with the fire of misery. For one who has fallen into this sea and
desires to get out, there is no other rescue boat except the constant relishing
within oneself of the pastime narrations of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead." (SB 12.4.40)
kià vä yogena säìkhyena
nyäsa-svadhyäyayor api
kià vä çreyobhir anyaiç ca
na yaträtma-prado hariù
"What is the use of the yoga system, philosophical speculation, mere
renunciation of the world, or Vedic studies? In fact, what is the use of any
so-called auspicious process without Lord Kåñëa, who is the source of our very
existence?" (SB 4.31.12)
If, as stated in this verse, it is generally (präyeëa) impossible to escape
material bondage without devotional service in the association of devotees,
one can simply imagine the probabilities of liberation in Kali-yuga without the
Kåñëa consciousness movement. The chances are certainly zero. One may
concoct a type of liberation on the mental platform, or one may live in a
so-called spiritual society of mutual flattery, but if one actually wants to go
back home, back to Godhead, and see with spiritual eyes the beautiful kingdom
of God called Kåñëaloka, one must take to Lord Caitanya's movement and
worship Lord Kåñëa in the association of the bhakta-gaëa, the devotees of the
Lord.
TEXT 49
@TaEtatpar"maM gAu÷M
Za{NvataAe yaäu"nand"na
s$augAAepyamaipa vaºyaAima
tvaM mae Ba{tya: s$auô$ts$aKaA
athaitat paramaà guhyaà
çåëvato yadu-nandana
su-gopyam api vakñyämi
tvaà me bhåtyaù suhåt sakhä
SYNONYMS
atha—thus; etat—this; paramam—supreme; guhyam—secret; çåëvataù—to you
who are listening; yadu-nandana—O beloved of the Yadu dynasty;
su-gopyam—most confidential; api—even; vakñyämi—I will speak; tvam—you;
me—of Me; bhåtyaù—are the servant; su-håt—well-wisher; sakhä—and friend.
TRANSLATION
My dear Uddhava, O beloved of the Yadu dynasty, because you are My
servant, well-wisher and friend, I shall now speak to you the most confidential
knowledge. Please hear as I explain these great mysteries to you.
PURPORT
It is stated in the First Chapter of Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.1.8), brüyuù
snigdhasya çiñyasya guravo guhyam apy uta: a bona fide spiritual master
naturally reveals all transcendental secrets to a sincere disciple. Çré Uddhava
had completely surrendered to Lord Kåñëa, and then only could the Lord
explain such mysteries to him, because without complete faith the
transmission of spiritual knowledge is impossible. Other processes of self
realization, such as philosophical speculation, are imperfect and unsteady
because the performer has personal desires, and there is no definite procedure
by which to obtain the full mercy of the Supreme Lord. On the other hand,
association with the pure devotees of the Lord is a self-sufficient process that is
guaranteed to award the desired result. One must only learn how to associate
with the pure devotees and one's life will be perfect. That is the sum and
substance of this chapter.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Eleventh Canto, Eleventh Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Symptoms of Conditioned and
Liberated Living Entities."
12. Beyond Renunciation and Knowledge
In this chapter the glories of holy association and the superexcellence of the
pure love of the residents of Våndävana are described.
The association of saintly devotees destroys the soul's attachment to
material life and is capable of bringing even the Supreme Lord, Kåñëa, under
one's control. Neither yoga, Säìkhya philosophy, ordinary religious duties,
study of scriptures, austerities, renunciation, works of iñöä and pürtam, charity,
vows of fasting, worship of the Deity, secret mantras, visiting of holy places,
nor adherence to any major or minor regulative principles can effect the same
result. In every age there are demons, monsters, birds and animals who are in
the modes of passion and ignorance, and there are also human beings in the
categories of businessmen, women, workers, outcastes, and so on, who cannot
study the Vedic scriptures. Nevertheless, by the purifying effect of the
association of devotees they may all achieve the supreme abode of the
Personality of Godhead, whereas without such saintly association, even those
very seriously endeavoring in yoga, Säìkhya study, charity, vows and practice
of the renounced order of life may remain incapable of attaining the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
The young damsels of Vraja, ignorant of the true identity of Lord
Kåñëacandra, considered Him to be their paramour who would give them
pleasure. Yet by the power of their constant association with Çré Kåñëa, they
attained to the supreme Absolute Truth, which even great demigods like
Brahmä cannot achieve. The young women of Våndävana displayed such deep
attachment to Lord Kåñëa that their minds, which were overflowing with the
ecstasy of being with Him, perceived an entire night spent in His company as
just a fraction of a second. However, when Akrüra took Çré Kåñëa along with
Baladeva to Mathurä, the gopés then thought each night without Him to be
equal in duration to a millennium of the demigods. Being tormented by
separation from Lord Kåñëa, they could not imagine anything that could give
them satisfaction other than His return. This is the incomparable excellence
of the gopés' pure love of God.
The Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëa, after imparting these instructions to
Uddhava, advised that for the sake of attaining the Absolute Truth, Uddhava
should give up all consideration of religion and irreligion as promulgated in
the çrutis and småtis and instead take shelter of the example of the women of
Våndävana.
TEXTS 1-2
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
na r"AeDayaita maAM yaAegAAe
na s$aAÊÿYaM DamaR Wva ca
na svaADyaAyastapastyaAgAAe
naeí"ApaUta< na d"iºaNAA
˜ataAina yaÁazC$nd"AMis$a
taITaARina inayamaA yamaA:
yaTaAvaç&nDae s$ats$aËÿ:
s$avaRs$aËÿApah"Ae ih" maAma,
çré-bhagavän uväca
na rodhayati mäà yogo
na säìkhyaà dharma eva ca
na svädhyäyas tapas tyägo
neñöä-pürtaà na dakñiëä
vratäni yajïaç chandäàsi
térthäni niyamä yamäù
yathävarundhe sat-saìgaù
sarva-saìgäpaho hi mäm
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; na
rodhayati—does not control; mäm—Me; yogaù—the añöäìga-yoga system;
na—neither; säìkhyam—the analytic study of the material elements;
dharmaù—ordinary piety such as nonviolence; eva—indeed; ca—also;
na—neither; svädhyäyaù—chanting the Vedas; tapaù—penances; tyägaù—the
renounced order of life; na—nor; iñöä-pürtam—the performance of sacrifice
and public welfare activities such as digging wells or planting trees;
na—neither; dakñiëä—charity; vratäni—taking vows such as fasting
completely on Ekädaçé; yajïaù—worship of the demigods;
chandäàsi—chanting confidential mantras; térthäni—going to holy places of
pilgrimage; niyamäù—following major instructions for spiritual discipline;
yamäù—and also minor regulations; yathä—as; avarundhe—brings under
control; sat-saìgaù—association with My devotees; sarva—all;
saìga—material association; apahaù—removing; hi—certainly; mäm—Me.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Uddhava, by associating
with My pure devotees one can destroy one's attachment for all objects of
material sense gratification. Such purifying association brings Me under the
control of My devotee. One may perform the añöäìga-yoga system, engage in
philosophical analysis of the elements of material nature, practice nonviolence
and other ordinary principles of piety, chant the Vedas, perform penances, take
to the renounced order of life, execute sacrificial performances and dig wells,
plant trees and perform other public welfare activities, give in charity, carry out
severe vows, worship the demigods, chant confidential mantras, visit holy places
or accept major and minor disciplinary injunctions, but even by performing
such activities one does not bring Me under his control.
PURPORT
The commentary of Çréla Jéva Gosvämé on these two verses can be
summarized as follows. One may serve the devotees of the Lord through
ceremonial worship or by actually associating with them. Association with
pure devotees is sufficient for self-realization because one can learn everything
about spiritual advancement from such devotees. With perfect knowledge one
can achieve all that one desires, for the process of devotional service
immediately brings the blessings of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Pure
devotional service is transcendental to the modes of nature, and therefore it
appears mysterious to the souls conditioned by those modes.
In the previous chapter Lord Kåñëa stated, haviñägnau yajeta mäm: "One
may worship Me in fire by offering oblations of ghee." (SB 11.11.43) Also, in
verse 38 of the previous chapter it was mentioned that one should construct
parks, recreational places, orchards, vegetable gardens, and so on. These serve
to attract people to the temples of Kåñëa, where they may directly engage in
chanting the holy name of the Lord. Such construction projects may be
understood as pürtam, or public welfare activities. Although Lord Kåñëa
mentions in these two verses that association with His pure devotees is far
more powerful than processes such as yoga, philosophical speculation, sacrifices
and public welfare activities, these secondary activities also please Lord Kåñëa,
but to a lesser extent. Specifically, they please the Lord when performed by
devotees rather than by ordinary materialistic persons. Therefore the
comparative term yathä ("according to proportion") is used. In other words,
such practices as sacrifice, austerity and philosophical study may help one
become fit for rendering devotional service, and when such activities are
performed by devotees aspiring for spiritual advancement, they become
somewhat pleasing to the Lord.
One may study the example of vratäni, or vows. The injunction that one
should fast on Ekädaçé is a permanent vow for all Vaiñëavas, and one should
not conclude from these verses that one may neglect the Ekädaçé vow. The
superiority of sat-saìga, or association with pure devotees, in awarding the
fruit of love of Godhead does not mean that one should give up other processes
or that these secondary processes are not permanent factors in bhakti-yoga.
There are many Vedic injunctions instructing one to execute the agnihotra
sacrifice, and the modern-day followers of Caitanya Mahäprabhu also
occasionally execute fire sacrifices. Such sacrifice is recommended by the Lord
Himself in the previous chapter, and therefore it should not be given up by the
devotees of the Lord. By performing Vedic ritualistic and purificatory
processes, one is gradually elevated to the platform of devotional service,
whereupon one is able to directly worship the Absolute Truth. One Vedic
injunction states, "The result awarded for fasting continuously for one month
on six different occasions can easily be achieved simply by accepting a handful
of rice offered to Lord Viñëu. This facility is especially offered in the
Kali-yuga." Nevertheless, regulated fasting on Ekädaçé is not an impediment to
spiritual advancement. Rather, it is a perpetual aspect of devotional service
and can be considered an auxiliary principle supporting the main principle of
worshiping Lord Kåñëa and His devotees. Because such secondary principles
help one become fit for executing the primary processes of devotional service,
they are also greatly beneficial. Therefore, such secondary principles are
widely mentioned throughout Vedic literature. It may be concluded that such
secondary principles are essential for advancement in Kåñëa consciousness,
and therefore one should never give up the principle of vrata, the execution of
prescribed vows.
In the previous chapter Çréla Çrédhara Svämé mentioned that the words
äjïäyaivaà guëän doñän (SB 11.11.32) indicate that a devotee should select
Vedic principles that do not conflict with his service to the Lord. Many of the
elaborate Vedic ceremonies and complicated procedures for fasting, demigod
worship and yoga practice cause great disturbance to the supreme process of
çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù [SB 7.5.23], hearing and chanting about the Lord;
therefore they are rejected by the Vaiñëavas. However, the processes helpful to
devotional service should be accepted. The example can be given of Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira, who was instructed by the dying Bhéñmadeva. In
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.9.27) Bhéñma instructs King Yudhiñöhira in
däna-dharma, or public acts of charity, räja-dharma, or the duties of a king,
mokña-dharma, or duties for salvation, stré-dharma, or duties for women, and
ultimately bhägavata-dharma, or pure devotional service to the Lord. Bhéñma
did not limit his discussion to bhägavata-dharma, because Lord Kåñëa gave
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira the devotional service of acting as a king, and to
execute his service Yudhiñöhira Mahäräja required extensive knowledge of
civic affairs. However, one who is not rendering such prescribed devotional
service in society should not unnecessarily involve himself in the material
world, even by practice of Vedic rituals. Nothing should distract him from the
ultimate goal of satisfying Lord Kåñëa.
The principle of not giving up prescribed vows may be further illustrated by
the example of Mahäräja Ambaréña. In the Ninth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam
we find that although Mahäräja Ambaréña performed elaborate Vedic
sacrifices, his goal was always the satisfaction of the Lord. The citizens in his
kingdom did not desire to go to heaven, because they were always hearing
about the glories of Vaikuëöha. Ambaréña Mahäräja, along with his queen,
observed the vow of Ekädaçé and Dvädaçé for one year. Since Ambaréña
Mahäräja is considered to be a great jewel among Vaiñëavas, and since his
behavior was always exemplary, it is definitely concluded that such vows as
fasting on Ekädaçé are imperative for Vaiñëavas. It is further stated in Vedic
literature, "If due to negligence a Vaiñëava does not fast on Ekädaçé, then his
worship of Lord Viñëu is useless, and he will go to hell." The members of the
International Society for Krishna Consciousness fast from grains and beans on
Ekädaçé, and this vow should always be observed by all of its members.
If one falsely thinks that one may obtain the association of Lord Kåñëa
merely by great austerities, brilliant studies in Sanskrit literature,
magnanimous acts of charity, etc., one's Kåñëa consciousness will be distorted
and weakened. One should remember the example of Lord Caitanya, who
practiced Kåñëa consciousness by constantly hearing and chanting about Lord
Kåñëa. If by fasting, study, austerity or sacrifice one becomes more fit to
participate in the saìkértana movement of Lord Caitanya, then such activities
are also pleasing to Lord Kåñëa. But the Lord clearly explains here that such
activities can never become central in the practice of bhakti-yoga. They must
remain in an auxiliary relationship to the supreme process of sat-saìga, or
association with pure devotees who hear and chant the glories of the Lord.
Çréla Madhväcärya has quoted from Vedic literature that if one offends the
Lord's devotees and does not learn to associate with them, Lord Viñëu
personally places barriers in the path of such a person so that he may not enter
into the Lord's company.
TEXTS 3-6
s$ats$aËeÿna ih" dE"taeyaA
yaAtauDaAnaA ma{gAA: KagAA:
gAnDavaARps$ar"s$aAe naAgAA:
is$aÜ"AêAr"NAgAu÷k(A:
ivaâADar"A manauSyaeSau
vaEzyaA: zAU#‰"A: iñyaAe'ntyajaA:
r"jastama:‘ak{(tayas$a,
taismaMstaismana, yaugAe yaugAe
bah"vaAe matpadM" ‘aAæaAs$a,
tvaAí)"k(AyaADavaAd"ya:
va{SapavaAR bailabaARNAAe
mayaêATa ivaBaISaNA:
s$auƒaIvaAe h"naumaAna{ºaAe
gAjaAe gA{‹aAe vaiNAfpaTa:
vyaADa: ku(bjaA ˜ajae gAAepyaAe
yaÁapatnyastaTaApare"
sat-saìgena hi daiteyä
yätudhänä mågäù khagäù
gandharväpsaraso nägäù
siddhäç cäraëa-guhyakäù
vidyädharä manuñyeñu
vaiçyäù çüdräù striyo 'ntya-jäù
rajas-tamaù-prakåtayas
tasmiàs tasmin yuge yuge
bahavo mat-padaà präptäs
tväñöra-käyädhavädayaù
våñaparvä balir bäëo
mayaç cätha vibhéñaëaù
sugrévo hanumän åkño
gajo gådhro vaëikpathaù
vyädhaù kubjä vraje gopyo
yajïa-patnyas tathäpare
SYNONYMS
sat-saìgena—by association with My devotees; hi—certainly; daiteyäù—the
sons of Diti; yätudhänäù—demons; mågäù—animals; khagäù—birds;
gandharva—Gandharvas; apsarasaù—the society girls of heaven;
nägäù—snakes; siddhäù—residents of Siddhaloka; cäraëa—the Cäraëas;
guhyakäù—the Guhyakas; vidyädharäù—the residents of Vidyädharaloka;
manuñyeñu—among the human beings; vaiçyäù—mercantile men;
çüdräù—laborers; striyaù—women; antya-jäù—uncivilized men;
rajaù-tamaù-prakåtayaù—those bound in the modes of passion and ignorance;
tasmin tasmin—in each and every; yuge yuge—age; bahavaù—many living
entities; mat—My; padam—abode; präptäù—achieved; tväñöra—Våträsura;
käyädhava—Prahläda Mahäräja; ädayaù—and others like them;
våñaparvä—named Våñaparvä; baliù—Bali Mahäräja; bäëaù—Bäëäsura;
mayaù—the demon Maya; ca—also; atha—thus; vibhéñaëaù—Vibhéñaëa, the
brother of Rävaëa; sugrévaù—the monkey king Sugréva; hanumän—the great
devotee Hanumän; åkñaù—Jämbavän; gajaù—the devotee-elephant Gajendra;
gådhraù—Jaöäyu the vulture; vaëikpathaù—the merchant Tulädhära;
vyädhaù—Dharma-vyädha; kubjä—the former prostitute Kubjä, saved by Lord
Kåñëa; vraje—in Våndävana; gopyaù—the gopés; yajïa-patnyaù—the wives of
the brähmaëas performing sacrifice; tathä—similarly; apare—others.
TRANSLATION
In every yuga many living entities entangled in the modes of passion and
ignorance gained the association of My devotees. Thus, such living entities as
the Daityas, Räkñasas, birds, beasts, Gandharvas, Apsaräs, Nägas, Siddhas,
Cäraëas, Guhyakas and Vidyädharas, as well as such lower-class human beings
as the vaiçyas, çüdras, women and others, were able to achieve My supreme
abode. Våträsura, Prahläda Mahäräja and others like them also achieved My
abode by association with My devotees, as did personalities such as Våñaparvä,
Bali Mahäräja, Bäëäsura, Maya, Vibhéñaëa, Sugréva, Hanumän, Jämbavän,
Gajendra, Jaöäyu, Tulädhära, Dharma-vyädha, Kubjä, the gopés in Våndävana
and the wives of the brähmaëas who were performing sacrifice.
PURPORT
The Lord has mentioned devotees such as the gopés in Våndävana and also
demons like Bäëäsura to illustrate how He comes under the control of those
who surrender to Him. It is understood that devotees like the gopés and others
mentioned here obtained pure love of Kåñëa, whereas the demons generally
obtained only salvation. Many demons were purified by association with
devotees and came to accept devotional service to the Lord as the most
important among the various activities in their lives, but the exalted devotees
like Prahläda and Bali Mahäräja know nothing except devotional service,
which they accept as their very life. Still, the reformed demons are also
mentioned so that readers of Çrémad-Bhägavatam will understand the
enormous benefits one may achieve by associating with devotees of the Lord.
The demon Våträsura was the pious King Citraketu in his previous life,
during which he associated with Çré Närada Muni, Çré Aìgirä Muni and Lord
Saìkarñaëa. Prahläda Mahäräja, being the son of Hiraëyakaçipu, is considered
a Daitya, or demon. Yet while still in the womb of his mother, Kayädhü, he
associated with Närada Muni by sound vibration. The demon Våñaparvä was
abandoned by his mother at birth, but he was raised by a muni and became a
devotee of Lord Viñëu. Bali Mahäräja associated with his grandfather Prahläda
and also with Lord Vämanadeva. Bali Mahäräja's son, Bäëäsura, was saved by
association with his father and Lord Çiva. He also associated with Lord Kåñëa
personally when the Lord cut off all but two of his one thousand arms, which
had been awarded as a benediction by Lord Çiva. Understanding the glories of
Lord Kåñëa, Bäëäsura also became a great devotee. The demon Maya Dänava
constructed an assembly house for the Päëòavas and also associated with Lord
Kåñëa Himself, eventually achieving the shelter of the Lord. Vibhéñaëa was a
pious-natured demon, the brother of Rävaëa, and he associated with Hanumän
and Rämacandra.
Sugréva, Hanumän, Jämbavän and Gajendra are examples of animals who
achieved the mercy of the Lord. Jämbavän, or Åkñaräja, was a member of a race
of monkeys. He personally associated with Lord Kåñëa, fighting with Him over
the Syamantaka jewel. The elephant Gajendra in a previous life had
association with devotees, and at the end of his life as Gajendra he was
personally saved by the Lord. Jaöäyu, the bird who at the cost of his own life
assisted Lord Rämacandra, associated with Çré Garuòa and Mahäräja
Daçaratha as well as other devotees in räma-lélä. He also personally met with
Sétä and Lord Räma. According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, the association that the
Gandharvas, Apsaräs, Nägas, Siddhas, Cäraëas, Guhyakas and Vidyädharas
had with the devotees is not very prominent and does not need to be
mentioned. Vaëikpatha is a vaiçya, and his story is mentioned in the
Mahäbhärata in connection with the pride of Jäjali Muni.
The importance of association with devotees is illustrated in the story of
Dharma-vyädha, the nonviolent hunter, as described in the Varäha Puräëa. In
a previous life he somehow became a brahma-räkñasa, or brähmaëa ghost, but
was eventually saved. In a previous Kali-yuga he had the association of a
Vaiñëava king named Väsu. The lady Kubjä associated directly with Lord
Kåñëa, and in her previous birth she had associated with Çré Närada Muni The
gopés of Våndävana rendered service to saintly persons in their previous births.
Having had ample association with devotees, they became gopés in Våndävana
in their next lives and associated with the eternally liberated gopés who had
descended there. They also had association with Tulasé-devé, or Våndä-devé.
The wives of the brähmaëas performing sacrifice had association with women
sent by Lord Kåñëa to sell flower garlands and betel nuts and heard about the
Lord from them.
TEXT 7
tae naADaIta™auitagANAA
naAepaAis$atamah"ÔamaA:
@˜ataAtaæatapas$a:
mats$aËÿAnmaAmaupaAgAtaA:
te nädhéta-çruti-gaëä
nopäsita-mahattamäù
avratätapta-tapasaù
mat-saìgän mäm upägatäù
SYNONYMS
te—they; na—not; adhéta—having studied; çruti-gaëäù—the Vedic literatures;
na—not; upäsita—having worshiped; mahat-tamaù—great saints;
avrata—without vows; atapta—not having undergone; tapasaù—austerities;
mat-saìgät—simply by association with Me and My devotees; mäm—Me;
upägatäù—they achieved.
TRANSLATION
The persons I have mentioned did not undergo serious studies of the Vedic
literature, nor did they worship great saintly persons, nor did they execute
severe vows or austerities. Simply by association with Me and My devotees,
they achieved Me.
PURPORT
Study of the Vedic literature, worship of those who teach the çruti-mantras,
acceptance of vows and austerities, etc., as mentioned previously, are helpful
processes that please the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In this verse,
however, the Lord again explains that all such processes are secondary to the
essential process of associating with the Supreme Personality of Godhead and
His pure devotees. By other processes one may gain the association of the Lord
and His devotees, which will actually give the perfection of life. The word
mat-saìgät can also be read as sat-saìgät, with the same meaning. In the
reading mat-saìgät ("from association with Me"), mat is also understood to
indicate "those who are Mine," or the devotees. Çréla Çrédhara Svämé mentions
that a pure devotee can advance in Kåñëa consciousness by his own
association, since simply by associating with his own activities and
consciousness, he associates with the Lord.
TEXT 8
ke(valaena ih" BaAvaena
gAAepyaAe gAAvaAe nagAA ma{gAA:
yae'nyae maUX#iDayaAe naAgAA:
is$aÜ"A maAmaIyaur"Ãas$aA
kevalena hi bhävena
gopyo gävo nagä mågäù
ye 'nye müòha-dhiyo nägäù
siddhä mäm éyur aïjasä
SYNONYMS
kevalena—by unalloyed; hi—indeed; bhävena—by love; gopyaù—the gopés;
gävaù—the Våndävana cows; nagäù—the unmoving creatures of Våndävana
such as the twin arjuna trees; mågäù—other animals; ye—those; anye—others;
müòha-dhiyaù—with stunted intelligence; nägäù—Våndävana snakes such as
Käliya; siddhäù—achieving the perfection of life; mäm—to Me; éyuù—they
went; aïjasä—quite easily.
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants of Våndävana, including the gopés, cows, unmoving
creatures such as the twin arjuna trees, animals, living entities with stunted
consciousness such as bushes and thickets, and snakes such as Käliya, all
achieved the perfection of life by unalloyed love for Me and thus very easily
achieved Me.
PURPORT
Although innumerable living entities achieved liberation by association
with the Lord and His devotees, many such personalities also executed other
processes such as austerity, charity, philosophical speculation, and so on. As we
have already explained, such procedures are secondary. But the inhabitants of
Våndävana such as the gopés did not know anything except Lord Kåñëa, and
their whole purpose in life was simply to love Lord Kåñëa, as indicated here by
the words kevalena hi bhävena. Even the trees, bushes and hills such as
Govardhana loved Lord Kåñëa. As the Lord explains to His brother, Çré
Baladeva, in the Tenth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.15.5):
aho amé deva-varämarärcitaà
pädämbujaà te sumanaù-phalärhaëam
namanty upädäya çikhäbhir ätmanas
tamo-'pahatyai taru-janma yat-kåtam
"My dear brother Baladeva, just see how these trees are bowing down with
their branches and offering obeisances to Your lotus feet, which are
worshipable even by the demigods. Indeed, My dear brother, You are the
Supreme God, and thus these trees have produced fruits and flowers as an
offering to You. Although a living entity takes birth as a tree due to the mode
of ignorance, certainly by such a birth in Våndävana these trees are destroying
all darkness in their lives by serving Your lotus feet."
Although many living entities achieved the mercy of Lord Kåñëa by
associating with the Lord and His devotees in various ways, those who take
Lord Kåñëa as everything are situated in the highest process of spiritual
realization. Therefore the Lord has not bothered to mention in this verse those
who achieved perfection through mixed processes, but rather glorifies the
unalloyed devotees of Våndävana, headed by the gopés, who knew nothing but
Lord Kåñëa. The residents of Våndävana were so satisfied in their relationships
with Lord Kåñëa that they did not pollute their loving service with mental
speculation or fruitive desires. The gopés served Lord Kåñëa in the conjugal
rasa, or relationship, whereas according to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté
Öhäkura the cows loved Lord Kåñëa in vätsalya-rasa, or the love of parents for
a child, because the cows were always supplying milk to child Kåñëa.
Unmoving objects like Govardhana Hill and other hills and mountains loved
Lord Kåñëa as a friend, and the ordinary animals, trees and bushes of
Våndävana loved Lord Kåñëa in däsya-rasa, or with love of a servant for his
master. Snakes like Käliya also developed this love in servitude, and after
relishing their loving service to Lord Kåñëa, all of them went back home, back
to Godhead. According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, all those
inhabitants of Våndävana should be considered eternally liberated souls, as
expressed by the word siddhäù, which means "having achieved the perfection
of life."
TEXT 9
yaM na yaAegAena s$aAÊÿYaena
d"Ana˜atatapaAe'DvarE":
vyaAKyaAsvaADyaAyas$aªyaAs$aE:
‘aA«auyaAâ¥avaAnaipa
yaà na yogena säìkhyena
däna-vrata-tapo-'dhvaraiù
vyäkhyä-svädhyäya-sannyäsaiù
präpnuyäd yatnavän api
SYNONYMS
yam—whom; na—not; yogena—by the mystic yoga systems; säìkhyena—by
philosophical speculation; däna—by charity; vrata—vows; tapaù—austerities;
adhvaraiù—or Vedic ritualistic sacrifices; vyäkhyä—by explaining Vedic
knowledge to others; svädhyäya—personal study of the Veda; sannyäsaiù—or
by taking the renounced order of life; präpnuyät—can one obtain;
yatna-vän—with great endeavor; api—even.
TRANSLATION
Even though one engages with great endeavor in the mystic yoga system,
philosophical speculation, charity, vows, penances, ritualistic sacrifices,
teaching of Vedic mantras to others, personal study of the Vedas, or the
renounced order of life, still one cannot achieve Me.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa here explains that it is very difficult to achieve His personal
association, even for one who seriously endeavors to reach the Absolute Truth.
The inhabitants of Våndävana, such as the gopés and cows, were always living
with Lord Kåñëa, and thus their association is called sat-saìga. Anyone who is
favorably living with the Supreme Personality of Godhead becomes sat, or
eternal, and thus the association of such a person can immediately award
others pure devotional service to the Lord. There is an austerity called
cändräyaëa, a fast in which one's intake of food is diminished by one mouthful
each day as the moon wanes and increased in the same way as the moon waxes.
Similarly, there are painstaking ritualistic sacrifices and grueling studies of the
Sanskrit Vedic mantras, which one may also teach to others. All these tedious
activities cannot award the highest perfection of life unless one gets the
causeless mercy of the pure devotees of the Lord. As stated in the First Canto
of Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.8):
dharmaù sv-anuñöhitaù puàsäà
viñvaksena-kathäsu yaù
notpädayed yadi ratià
çrama eva hi kevalam
"The occupational activities a man performs according to his own position are
only so much useless labor if they do not provoke attraction for the message of
the Personality of Godhead."
TEXT 10
r"AmaeNA s$aADa< maTaur"AM ‘aNAItae
ìAP(ilk(naA mayyanaur"l(icaÔaA:
ivagAAX#BaAvaena na mae ivayaAegAtaI
˜aADayaAe'nyaM d"ä{"zAu: s$auKaAya
rämeëa särdhaà mathuräà praëéte
çväphalkinä mayy anurakta-cittäù
vigäòha-bhävena na me viyogatévrädhayo
'nyaà dadåçuù sukhäya
SYNONYMS
rämeëa—with Balaräma; särdham—with; mathuräm—to the city of Mathurä;
praëéte—when brought; çväphalkinä—by Akrüra; mayi—Myself;
anurakta—constantly attached; cittäù—those whose consciousness was;
vigäòha—extremely deep; bhävena—by love; na—not; me—than Me;
viyoga—of separation; tévra—intense; ädhayaù—who were experiencing
mental distress, anxiety; anyam—other; dadåçuù—they saw; sukhäya—that
could make them happy.
TRANSLATION
The residents of Våndävana, headed by the gopés, were always completely
attached to Me with deepest love. Therefore, when My uncle Akrüra brought
My brother Balaräma and Me to the city of Mathurä, the residents of
Våndävana suffered extreme mental distress because of separation from Me and
could not find any other source of happiness.
PURPORT
This verse especially describes the sentiments of the cowherd girls of
Våndävana, the gopés, and Lord Kåñëa here reveals the incomparable love they
felt for Him. As explained in the Tenth Canto, Lord Kåñëa's uncle Akrüra,
sent by Kaàsa, came to Våndävana and took Kåñëa and Balaräma back to
Mathurä for a wrestling event. The gopés loved Lord Kåñëa so much that in His
absence their consciousness was completely absorbed in spiritual love. Thus
their Kåñëa consciousness is considered the highest perfectional stage of life.
They were always expecting that Lord Kåñëa would finish His business of
killing demons and return to them, and therefore their anxiety was an
extremely moving, heartrending display of love. Anyone desiring true
happiness must take to the devotional service of the Lord in the spirit of the
gopés, giving up everything for the pleasure of the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 11
taAstaA: ºapaA: ‘aeï"tamaena naItaA
mayaEva va{nd"AvanagAAecare"NA
ºaNAADaRvaÔaA: paunar"Ëÿ taAs$aAM
h"InaA mayaA k(lpas$amaA baBaUvau:
täs täù kñapäù preñöhatamena nétä
mayaiva våndävana-gocareëa
kñaëärdha-vat täù punar aìga täsäà
hénä mayä kalpa-samä babhüvuù
SYNONYMS
täù täù—all those; kñapäù—nights; preñöha-tamena—with the most dearly
beloved; nétäù—spent; mayä—with Me; eva—indeed; våndävana—in
Våndävana; go-careëa—who can be known; kñaëa—a moment;
ardha-vat—like half; täù—those very nights; punaù—again; aìga—dear
Uddhava; täsäm—for the gopés; hénäù—bereft; mayä—of Me; kalpa—a day of
Brahmä (4,320,000,000 years); samäù—equal to; babhüvuù—became.
TRANSLATION
Dear Uddhava, all of those nights that the gopés spent with Me, their most
dearly beloved, in the land of Våndävana seemed to them to pass in less than a
moment. Bereft of My association, however, the gopés felt that those same
nights dragged on forever, as if each night were equal to a day of Brahmä.
PURPORT
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé comments as follows. "The gopés suffered extreme
anxiety in the absence of Lord Kåñëa, and though outwardly appearing
bewildered, they actually achieved the highest perfectional stage of samädhi.
Their consciousness was intensely and intimately attached to Lord Kåñëa, and
by such Kåñëa consciousness their own bodies seemed very far away from them,
even though people normally consider their body to be their closest possession.
In fact, the gopés did not think about their own existence. Although a young
woman normally considers her husband and children to be her dearmost
possessions, the gopés did not even consider the existence of their so-called
families. Nor could they think of this world or life after death. Indeed, they
were not at all aware of these things. Just like great sages who become detached
from the names and forms of the material world, the gopés could not think of
anything, because they were rapt in loving remembrance of Lord Kåñëa. Just as
rivers enter the ocean, similarly, the gopés completely merged into
consciousness of Lord Kåñëa through intense love."
Thus a day of Brahmä seemed like a single moment for the gopés when Lord
Kåñëa was present with them, and a single moment seemed like a day of
Brahmä when Lord Kåñëa was absent. The Kåñëa consciousness of the gopés is
the perfection of spiritual life, and the symptoms of such perfection are
described here.
TEXT 12
taA naAivad"nmayyanauSaËÿbaÜ"-
iDaya: svamaAtmaAnamad"staTaed"ma,
yaTaA s$amaADaAE maunayaAe'ibDataAeyae
naâ: ‘aivaí"A wva naAmaè&pae
tä nävidan mayy anuñaìga-baddhadhiyaù
svam ätmänam adas tathedam
yathä samädhau munayo 'bdhi-toye
nadyaù praviñöä iva näma-rüpe
SYNONYMS
täù—they (the gopés); na—not; avidan—were aware of; mayi—in Me;
anuñaìga—by intimate contact; baddha—bound up; dhiyaù—their
consciousness; svam—their own; ätmänam—body or self; adaù—something
remote; tathä—thus considering; idam—this which is most near; yathä—just
as; samädhau—in yoga-samädhi; munayaù—great sages; abdhi—of the ocean;
toye—in the water; nadyaù—rivers; praviñöäù—having entered; iva—like;
näma—names; rüpe—and forms.
TRANSLATION
My dear Uddhava, just as great sages in yoga trance merge into
self-realization, like rivers merging into the ocean, and are thus not aware of
material names and forms, similarly, the gopés of Våndävana were so completely
attached to Me within their minds that they could not think of their own
bodies, or of this world, or of their future lives. Their entire consciousness was
simply bound up in Me.
PURPORT
The words svam ätmänam adas tathedam indicate that while for ordinary
persons one's personal body is the most near and dear thing, the gopés
considered their own bodies to be distant and remote, just as a yogé in samädhi
trance considers ordinary things around his physical body or his physical body
itself to be most remote. When Kåñëa played on His flute late at night, the
gopés immediately forgot everything about their so-called husbands and
children and went to dance with Lord Kåñëa in the forest. These controversial
points have been clearly explained in the book Kåñëa, by His Divine Grace
A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda. The basic explanation is that Lord
Kåñëa is the source of everything, and the gopés are the Lord's own potency.
Thus there is no discrepancy or immorality in the almighty Personality of
Godhead's loving affairs with His own manifest potency, the gopés, who happen
to be the most beautiful young girls in the creation of God.
There is no illusion on the part of the gopés, for they are so attracted to Lord
Kåñëa that they do not care to think of anything else. Since all existence is
situated within the body of Lord Kåñëa, there is no loss for the gopés when they
concentrate on the Lord. It is the nature of very deep love to exclude all
objects except the beloved. However, in the material world, where we try to
love a limited temporary object such as our nation, family or personal body,
our exclusion of other objects constitutes ignorance. But when our love is
intensely concentrated on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the origin of
everything, such concentration cannot be considered ignorance or
small-mindedness.
The example of the sages in samädhi is given here only to illustrate
exclusive concentration on a single object. Otherwise, there is no comparison
between the ecstatic love of the gopés and the dry meditation of the yogés, who
merely try to understand that they are not their material bodies. Since the
gopés had no material bodies to become detached from and were personally
dancing with and embracing the Absolute Truth, one can never compare the
exalted position of the gopés to that of mere yogés. It is stated that the bliss of
impersonal Brahman realization cannot be compared to even an atomic
fragment of the blissful ocean of love of Kåñëa. Intimate attachment is like a
strong rope that binds the mind and heart. In material life we are bound to
that which is temporary and illusory, and therefore such binding of the heart
causes great pain. However, if we bind our minds and hearts to the eternal
Lord Kåñëa, the reservoir of all pleasure and beauty, then our hearts will
expand unlimitedly in the ocean of transcendental bliss.
One should understand that the gopés were not in any way inclined toward
impersonal meditation, in which one denies the reality of variegated creation.
The gopés did not deny anything; they simply loved Kåñëa and could not think
of anything else. They only rejected whatever impeded their concentration on
Lord Kåñëa, cursing even their own eyelids, which blinked and thus removed
Kåñëa from their sight for a split second. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé has stated that all
sincere devotees of the Lord should have the courage to remove from their
lives anything that impedes their progressive march back home, back to
Godhead.
TEXT 13
matk(AmaA r"maNAM jaAr"ma,
@svaè&paivad"Ae'balaA:
“aö maAM par"maM ‘aApau:
s$aËÿAcC$tas$ah"›azA:
mat-kämä ramaëaà järam
asvarüpa-vido 'baläù
brahma mäà paramaà präpuù
saìgäc chata-sahasraçaù
SYNONYMS
mat—Me; kämäù—those who desired; ramaëam—a charming lover;
järam—the lover of another's wife; asvarüpa-vidaù—not knowing My actual
situation; abaläù—women; brahma—the Absolute; mäm—Me;
paramam—supreme; präpuù—they achieved; saìgät—by association;
çata-sahasraçaù—by hundreds of thousands.
TRANSLATION
All those hundreds of thousands of gopés, understanding Me to be their most
charming lover and ardently desiring Me in that way, were unaware of My
actual position. Yet by intimately associating with Me, the gopés attained Me,
the Supreme Absolute Truth.
PURPORT
The words asvarüpa-vidaù ("not understanding My actual position or form")
indicate that the lovely gopés were so completely absorbed in conjugal love for
Lord Kåñëa that they were not aware of the Lord's unlimited potencies as the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura
explains this and other meanings of the word asvarüpa-vidaù. In Sanskrit the
word vid also means "to acquire." Thus, asvarüpa-vidaù indicates that the gopés,
like other pure devotees of the Lord, were not interested in achieving
särüpya-mukti, the liberation of acquiring a bodily form similar to the Lord's.
Were the gopés to obtain a bodily form like the Lord's, how could the Lord
execute His conjugal pastimes of dancing with the gopés and embracing them?
Since the gopés had realized their eternal spiritual forms as servitors of the
Lord, the word svarüpa also may indicate their own spiritual bodies, and thus
asvarüpa-vidaù means that the gopés never thought, as materialists do, of their
own bodily beauty. Although the gopés are the most beautiful girls in the Lord's
creation, they never thought of their own bodies but rather were always
meditating on the transcendental body of Lord Kåñëa. Although we cannot
imitate the gopé's exalted conjugal feelings, we can follow their superb example
of practical Kåñëa consciousness. They naturally took shelter of Lord Kåñëa
and achieved the highest perfection of life.
TEXTS 14-15
tasmaAÔvamauÜ"vaAets$a{jya
caAed"naAM ‘aitacaAed"naAma,
‘ava{iÔaM ca inava{iÔaM ca
™aAetavyaM ™autamaeva ca
maAmaek(maeva zAr"NAma,
@AtmaAnaM s$avaR$de"ih"naAma,
yaAih" s$avaARtmaBaAvaena
mayaA syaA ÷ku(taAeBaya:
tasmät tvam uddhavotsåjya
codanäà praticodanäm
pravåttià ca nivåttià ca
çrotavyaà çrutam eva ca
mäm ekam eva çaraëam
ätmänaà sarva-dehinäm
yähi sarvätma-bhävena
mayä syä hy akuto-bhayaù
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; tvam—you; uddhava—O Uddhava; utsåjya—giving up;
codanäm—the regulations of the Vedas; praticodanäm—the injunctions of
supplementary Vedic literatures; pravåttim—injunctions; ca—and;
nivåttim—prohibitions; ca—also; çrotavyam—that which is to be heard;
çrutam—that which has been heard; eva—indeed; ca—also; mäm—to Me;
ekam—alone; eva—actually; çaraëam—shelter; ätmänam—the Supersoul
within the heart; sarva-dehinäm—of all conditioned souls; yähi—you must go;
sarva-ätma-bhävena—with exclusive devotion; mayä—by My mercy;
syäù—you should be; hi—certainly; akutaù-bhayaù—free from fear in all
circumstances.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, My dear Uddhava, abandon the Vedic mantras as well as the
procedures of supplementary Vedic literatures and their positive and negative
injunctions. Disregard that which has been heard and that which is to be heard.
Simply take shelter of Me alone, for I am the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
situated within the heart of all conditioned souls. Take shelter of Me
wholeheartedly, and by My grace be free from fear in all circumstances.
PURPORT
Çré Uddhava inquired from Lord Kåñëa about the symptoms of saintly
persons and liberated souls, and the Lord has replied in terms of different
levels of spiritual advancement, distinguishing between those who are able to
understand Lord Kåñëa to be the principal goal of life and those loving
devotees who accept Lord Kåñëa and devotional service to Him as the only
goal of life. Lord Kåñëa also mentioned that He is captured by His loving
devotees and even by those who sincerely associate with His loving devotees.
Among all the devotees, the gopés of Våndävana were described by the Lord as
having achieved such a rare state of pure devotional service that Lord Kåñëa
personally feels constantly indebted to them. According to Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura, Lord Kåñëa previously kept the gopés' love for Him
concealed in His heart because of its confidential nature and the Lord's own
gravity. Finally, however, even Lord Kåñëa could not remain silent about the
intense love of the gopés, and thus in these verses the Lord reveals to Uddhava
how the gopés loved Him in Våndävana and brought Him fully under their
control. The Lord would relax in secret places with the loving gopés, and by
conjugal spontaneous affection the greatest love was exchanged between them.
As explained by the Lord in Bhagavad-gétä, one cannot achieve the
perfection of life merely by renouncing the material world or by executing
ordinary, sectarian religious principles. One must actually understand the
identity of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and by associating with His
pure devotees one must learn to love the Lord in His personal, original form.
This love may be expressed in either the conjugal, paternal, fraternal or
serving rasa, or relationship. The Lord has elaborately explained to Uddhava
the system of philosophical analysis of the material world, and now He clearly
concludes that it is useless for Uddhava to waste time in fruitive activities or
mental speculation. Actually, Lord Kåñëa is hinting that Uddhava should
assimilate the example of the gopés and try to advance further in Kåñëa
consciousness by following in the footsteps of the cowherd damsels of Vraja.
Any conditioned soul who is unsatisfied with the cruel laws of nature, which
impose disease, old age and death, should understand that Lord Kåñëa can
deliver all living beings from the problems of material existence. There is no
need to entangle oneself in unauthorized, sectarian rituals, injunctions or
prohibitions. One should simply surrender to Lord Kåñëa, following the
example of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, who is Lord Kåñëa Himself. By the
authorized regulated process of bhakti-yoga, Kåñëa consciousness, one easily
achieves spiritual perfection.
TEXT 16
™aIoÜ"va ovaAca
s$aMzAya: Za{NvataAe vaAcaM
tava yaAegAeìre"ìr"
na inavataRta @AtmasTaAe
yaena ”aAmyaita mae mana:
çré-uddhava uväca
saàçayaù çåëvato väcaà
tava yogeçvareçvara
na nivartata ätma-stho
yena bhrämyati me manaù
SYNONYMS
çré-uddhavaù uväca—Çré Uddhava said; saàçayaù—doubt; çåëvataù—of the
one who is hearing; väcam—the words; tava—Your; yoga-éçvara—of the lords
of mystic power; éçvara—You who are the Lord; na nivartate—will not go
away; ätma—in the heart; sthaù—situated; yena-by which; bhrämyati—is
bewildered; me—my; manaù—mind.
TRANSLATION
Çré Uddhava said: O Lord of all masters of mystic power, I have heard Your
words, but the doubt in my heart does not go away; thus my mind is
bewildered.
PURPORT
In the first verse of the Tenth Chapter of this canto, the Lord stated that
one should take shelter of Him and execute one's duties within the varëäçrama
system without material desire. Uddhava interpreted this statement as
recommending karma-miçrä bhakti, or devotional service mixed with a
tendency toward fruitive activities. It is a fact that until one understands Lord
Kåñëa to be everything, it is not possible to retire from ordinary, worldly
duties. Rather, one is encouraged to offer the fruits of such work to the Lord.
In verse 4 of the Tenth Chapter, the Lord recommended that one retire from
worldly duties and systematically cultivate knowledge, accepting Him as the
Supreme. Uddhava understood this instruction to indicate jïäna-miçrä bhakti,
or devotional service to the Lord mixed with the secondary desire to
accumulate knowledge. Beginning with verse 35 of the Tenth Chapter,
Uddhava inquired about the process of material conditioning and liberation
from material life. The Lord replied elaborately, stating that without
devotional service the process of philosophical speculation can never be
perfected. In Chapter Eleven, verse 18, the Lord emphasized the importance of
faith in the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and in verse 23 Kåñëa
extensively widened His discussion of devotional service, emphasizing that one
should be faithful and hear and chant the glories of the Lord. The Lord
concluded that both the development and perfection of devotional service
depend on association with the devotees. In verse 26 of the Eleventh Chapter,
Uddhava inquired about the actual ways and means of devotional service and
about the symptoms of devotional perfection. And in verse 48 Lord Kåñëa
stated that unless one takes to the process of devotional service, one's attempt
for liberation will be useless. One must associate with the devotees of the Lord
and follow in their footsteps. Finally, in verse 14 of this chapter the Lord
categorically rejected the paths of fruitive activities and mental speculation
and in verse 15 recommended that one exclusively surrender unto Him with all
one's heart.
Having received such elaborate and technical instructions on the
perfection of life, Uddhava is bewildered, and his mind is afflicted with doubt
about what he should actually do. Lord Kåñëa has described many procedures
and the results of such procedures, all of which ultimately lead to the single
goal of Lord Kåñëa Himself. Uddhava therefore desires that Lord Kåñëa state
in simple terms what should be done. Arjuna makes a similar request of the
Lord at the beginning of the Third Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä. According to
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, Uddhava is stating here, "My dear
friend Kåñëa, first You recommended that I perform worldly activities within
the varëäçrama system, and then You advised that I reject such activities and
take to the path of philosophical research. Now rejecting the path of jïäna,
You recommend that I simply surrender unto You in bhakti-yoga. If I accept
Your decision, in the future You may again go back to Your original point and
recommend worldly activities." By his boldness in disclosing his mind,
Uddhava reveals his intimate friendship with Lord Kåñëa.
TEXT 17
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
s$a WSa jaIvaAe ivavar"‘as$aUita:
‘aANAena GaAeSaeNA gAuh"AM ‘aivaí":
manaAemayaM s$aUºmamaupaetya è&paM
maA‡aA svar"Ae vaNAR wita sTaivaï":
çré-bhagavän uväca
sa eña jévo vivara-prasütiù
präëena ghoñeëa guhäà praviñöaù
mano-mayaà sükñmam upetya rüpaà
mäträ svaro varëa iti sthaviñöhaù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; saù eñaù—He
Himself; jévaù—the Supreme Lord, who gives life to all; vivara—within the
heart; prasütiù-manifest; präëena—along with the life air; ghoñeëa—with the
subtle manifestation of sound; guhäm—the heart; praviñöaù—who has entered;
manaù-mayam—perceived by the mind, or controlling the mind even of great
demigods like Lord Çiva; sükñmam—subtle; upetya—being situated in;
rüpam—the form; mäträ—the different vocalic lengths; svaraù—the different
intonations; varëaù—the different sounds of the alphabet; iti—thus;
sthaviñöhaù—the gross form.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Uddhava, the Supreme
Lord gives life to every living being and is situated within the heart along with
the life air and primal sound vibration. The Lord can be perceived in His subtle
form within the heart by one's mind, since the Lord controls the minds of
everyone, even great demigods like Lord Çiva. The Supreme Lord also assumes a
gross form as the various sounds of the Vedas, composed of short and long
vowels and consonants of different intonations.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura comments as follows on the dialogue
between Lord Kåñëa and Uddhava. Uddhava was bewildered and doubtful
because Lord Kåñëa explained many different processes such as devotional
service, speculative knowledge, renunciation, mystic yoga, austerities, pious
duties, and so on. However, all of these processes are meant to help the living
entities obtain the shelter of Lord Kåñëa, and ultimately no Vedic process
should be understood in any other way. Thus Lord Kåñëa explained the entire
Vedic system, placing everything in proper order. In fact, Lord Kåñëa was
surprised that Uddhava foolishly thought that he was meant to practice every
process, as if each method were meant simply for him. Lord Kåñëa therefore
wants to inform His devotee, "My dear Uddhava, when I told you that analytic
knowledge is to be practiced, pious duties are to be performed, devotional
service is obligatory, yoga procedures must be observed, austerities are to be
executed, etc., I was instructing all living entities, using you as My immediate
audience. That which I have spoken, am speaking now and will speak in the
future should be understood as guidance for all living entities in different
situations. How could you possibly think that you were meant to practice all of
the different Vedic processes? I accept you as you are now, My pure devotee.
You are not supposed to execute all of these processes." Thus according to Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, the Lord, with lighthearted and encouraging
words, reveals to Uddhava the deep purpose behind the variety of Vedic
procedures.
Lord Kåñëa became manifest from the mouth of Lord Brahmä in the form of
the Vedas. The word vivara-prasüti in this verse also indicates that the Lord is
manifest within the ädhärädi-cakras situated within the body of Lord Brahmä.
The word ghoñeëa means "subtle sound," and guhäà praviñöaù also indicates
that Lord Kåñëa enters within the ädhära-cakra. The Lord can further be
perceived within other cakras such as the maëipüraka-cakra, located around
the navel, and the viçuddhi-cakra. The Sanskrit alphabet is composed of short
and long vowels, and consonants pronounced with high and low tones, and
utilizing these vibrations the different branches of Vedic literatures are
manifested as a gross form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. According
to Bhagavad-gétä, such literatures deal mostly with the three modes of material
nature: traiguëya-viñayä vedä nistrai-guëyo bhavärjuna. Çréla Çrédhara Svämé
explains that due to the control of the illusory energy, mäyä, the Personality of
Godhead appears to the conditioned souls as part of the material universe. The
imagined imposition of gross and subtle material qualities on the Personality of
Godhead is called avidyä, or ignorance, and through such ignorance the living
entity considers himself to be the doer of his own activities and becomes
bound up in the network of karma. The Vedas therefore order an entangled
soul to observe positive and negative injunctions to purify his existence. These
procedures are called pravåtti-märga, or the path of regulated fruitive activities.
When one has purified one's existence, one gives up this gross stage of fruitive
activities because it is detrimental to the practice of pure devotional service.
By firm faith one may then worship the Personality of Godhead. One who has
developed perfect Kåñëa consciousness no longer has to perform ritualistic
duties. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, tasya käryaà na vidyate.
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, this verse may be understood in another
way. The word jéva indicates Lord Kåñëa, who gives life to the residents of
Våndävana, and vivara-prasüti indicates that although Lord Kåñëa eternally
performs His pastimes in the spiritual world, beyond the vision of the
conditioned souls, He also enters within the material universe to display these
same pastimes. The words guhäà praviñöaù indicates that after displaying such
pastimes, the Lord withdraws them and enters into His unmanifest pastimes,
or those pastimes not manifest to the conditioned souls. In this case, mäträ
indicates the transcendental senses of the Lord, svara indicates the Lord's
transcendental sound vibration and singing, and the word varëa indicates the
transcendental form of the Lord. The word sthaviñöha, or "gross manifestation,"
means that the Lord becomes manifest in the material world even to those
devotees who are not completely advanced in Kåñëa consciousness and whose
vision is not completely purified. Mano-maya indicates that somehow or other
Lord Kåñëa is to be kept within one's mind; and for the nondevotees Lord
Kåñëa is sükñma, or most subtle, because He cannot be known. Thus different
äcäryas have glorified Lord Kåñëa in different ways through the
transcendental sound vibration of this verse.
TEXT 18
yaTaAnala: Kae'inalabanDauç&SmaA
balaena d"Aç&NyaiDamaTyamaAna:
@NAu: ‘ajaAtaAe h"ivaSaA s$amaeDatae
taTaEva mae vyail(ir"yaM ih" vaANAI
yathänalaù khe 'nila-bandhur uñmä
balena däruëy adhimathyamänaù
aëuù prajäto haviñä samedhate
tathaiva me vyaktir iyaà hi väëé
SYNONYMS
yathä—just as; analaù—fire; khe—in the space within wood; anila—air;
bandhuù—whose help; uñmä—heat; balena—strongly; däruëi—within the
wood; adhimathyamänaù—being kindled by friction; aëuù—very tiny;
prajätaù—is born; haviñä—with ghee (clarified butter); samedhate—it
increases; tathä—similarly; eva—indeed; me—My; vyaktiù-manifestation;
iyam—this; hi—certainly; väëé—the Vedic sounds.
TRANSLATION
When sticks of kindling wood are vigorously rubbed together, heat is
produced by contact with air, and a spark of fire appears. Once the fire is
kindled, ghee is added and the fire blazes. Similarly, I become manifest in the
sound vibration of the Vedas.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa here explains the most confidential meaning of Vedic
knowledge. The Vedas first regulate ordinary material work and channel the
fruits into ritualistic sacrifices, which ostensibly reward the performer with
future benefits. The real purpose of these sacrifices, however, is to accustom a
materialistic worker to offering the fruits of his work to a superior Vedic
authority. An expert fruitive worker gradually exhausts the possibilities of
material enjoyment and naturally gravitates toward the superior stage of
philosophical speculation on his existential situation. By increased knowledge,
one becomes aware of the unlimited glories of the Supreme and gradually takes
to the process of loving devotional service to the transcendental Absolute
Truth. Lord Kåñëa is the goal of Vedic knowledge, as the Lord states in
Bhagavad-gétä: vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva vedyaù [Bg. 15.15]. The Lord gradually
becomes manifest in the progression of Vedic rituals, just as fire is gradually
manifest by the rubbing of firewood. The words haviñä samedhate ("the fire
increases by addition of ghee") indicate that by the progressive advancement
of Vedic sacrifice, the fire of spiritual knowledge gradually blazes, illuminating
everything and destroying the chain of fruitive work.
Lord Kåñëa considered Uddhava to be the most qualified person to hear this
elaborate transcendental knowledge; therefore the Lord mercifully instructs
Uddhava so that he may enlighten the sages at Badarikäçrama, thus fulfilling
the purpose of the sages' lives.
TEXT 19
WvaM gAid": k(maR gAitaivaRs$agAAeR
„aANAAe r"s$aAe ä{"fs$pazAR: ™auitaê
s$aÆÿlpaivaÁaAnamaTaAiBamaAna:
s$aU‡aM r"ja:s$aÔvatamaAeivak(Ar":
evaà gadiù karma gatir visargo
ghräëo raso dåk sparçaù çrutiç ca
saìkalpa-vijïänam athäbhimänaù
sütraà rajaù-sattva-tamo-vikäraù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; gadiù—speech; karma—the function of the hands; gatiù—the
function of the legs; visargaù—the functions of the genital and anus;
ghräëaù—smell; rasaù—taste; dåk—sight; sparçaù—touch; çrutiù—hearing;
ca—also; saìkalpa—the mind's function; vijïänam—the function of
intelligence and consciousness; atha—moreover; abhimänaù—the function of
false ego; sütram—the function of pradhäna, or the subtle cause of material
nature; rajaù—of the mode of passion; sattva—goodness; tamaù—and of
ignorance; vikäraù—the transformation.
TRANSLATION
The functions of the working senses—the organ of speech, the hands, the
legs, the genital and the anus—and the functions of the knowledge-acquiring
senses—the nose, tongue, eyes, skin and ears—along with the functions of the
subtle senses of mind, intelligence, consciousness and false ego, as well as the
function of the subtle pradhäna and the interaction of the three modes of
material nature—all these should be understood as My materially manifest
form.
PURPORT
By the word gadi, or "speech," the Lord concludes His discussion about His
manifestation as Vedic vibrations and describes the functions of the other
working senses, along with the knowledge-acquiring senses, the subtle
functions of consciousness, pradhäna and the interaction of the three modes of
material nature. A Kåñëa conscious person sees the entire material world as a
manifestation of the Lord's potencies. There is therefore no legitimate scope
for material sense gratification, because everything is an expansion from the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and belongs to Him. One who can
understand the expansion of the Lord within subtle and gross material
manifestations gives up his desire to live in this world. In the spiritual world
everything is eternal, full of bliss and knowledge. The exclusive feature of the
material world is that here the living entity dreams that he is lord. A sane
person, giving up this hallucination, finds no attractive features in the
kingdom of mäyä and therefore returns home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 20
@yaM ih" jaIvaiñva{d"bjayaAeinar,"
@vyal( Wk(Ae vayas$aA s$a @Aâ:
ivaiëí"zAil(baRò"Daeva BaAita
baIjaAina yaAeinaM ‘aitapaâ yaã"ta,
ayaà hi jévas tri-våd abja-yonir
avyakta eko vayasä sa ädyaù
viçliñöa-çaktir bahudheva bhäti
béjäni yonià pratipadya yadvat
SYNONYMS
ayam—this; hi—certainly; jévaù—the supreme living entity who gives life to
others; tri-våt—containing the three modes of material nature; abja—of the
universal lotus flower; yoniù—the source; avyaktaù—unmanifest (materially);
ekaù—alone; vayasä—in course of time; saù—He; ädyaù—eternal;
viçliñöa—divided; çaktiù—potencies; bahudhä—in many divisions; iva—like;
bhäti—He appears; béjäni—seeds; yonim—in an agricultural field;
pratipadya—falling; yat-vat—just like.
TRANSLATION
When many seeds are placed in an agricultural field, innumerable
manifestations of trees, bushes, vegetables and so on will arise from a single
source, the soil. Similarly, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who gives life
to all and is eternal, originally exists beyond the scope of the cosmic
manifestation. In the course of time, however, the Lord, who is the resting
place of the three modes of nature and the source of the universal lotus flower,
in which the cosmic manifestation takes place, divides His material potencies
and thus appears to be manifest in innumerable forms, although He is one.
PURPORT
Çréla Véraräghaväcärya comments that one may question as to whom the
cosmic manifestation, consisting of demigods, men, animals, plants, planets,
space, etc., actually belongs. Lord Kåñëa now eradicates any doubt about the
source of the cosmic manifestation. The word tri-våt indicates that the three
modes of nature are not independent but are under superior control. The
suffix våt means the vartanam, or "existence," of the three modes of material
nature within the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Analyzing the term
abja-yoni, ap indicates "water," and ja indicates "birth." Thus abja means the
complex material universe, which sprouts from Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, who
lies in the Garbhodaka Ocean. Yoni, or "source," indicates the Personality of
Godhead, and thus abja-yoni means that the Lord is the source of all cosmic
manifestations; indeed, all creation takes place within the Lord. Since the
three modes of material nature are under the superior control of the Lord,
material objects helplessly undergo creation and annihilation within the
universal shell by the will of the Lord. The term avyakta indicates the Lord's
subtle spiritual form, which exists alone before the material creation. The
Lord's original form, being spiritual, does not undergo birth, transformation or
death. It is eternal. In the course of time, the Lord's material potencies are
divided and manifest as bodies, bodily paraphernalia, sense objects, bodily
expansions, false ego and false proprietorship. Thus the Lord expands His
conscious living potency called jéva-çakti, which is manifest in innumerable
material forms such as those of men, demigods, animals, and so on. From the
example of the seeds sown in an agricultural field, we can understand that
innumerable manifestations may arise from a single source. Similarly, although
the Lord is one, He becomes manifest in innumerable forms through the
expansion of His different potencies.
TEXT 21
yaismaiªadM" ‘aAetamazAeSamaAetaM
paq%Ae yaTaA tantauivataAnas$aMsTa:
ya WSa s$aMs$aAr"taç&: paur"ANA:
k(maARtmak(: pauSpaP(lae ‘as$aUtae
yasminn idaà protam açeñam otaà
paöo yathä tantu-vitäna-saàsthaù
ya eña saàsära-taruù puräëaù
karmätmakaù puñpa-phale prasüte
SYNONYMS
yasmin—in whom; idam—this universe; protam—woven crosswise;
açeñam—the whole; otam—and lengthwise; paöaù—a cloth; yathä—just like;
tantu—of the threads; vitäna—in the expansion; saàsthaù-situated; yaù—that
which; eñaù—this; saàsära—of material existence; taruù—the tree;
puräëaù—existing since time immemorial; karma—toward fruitive activities;
ätmakaù—naturally inclined; puñpa—the first result, blossoming; phale—and
the fruit; prasüte—being produced.
TRANSLATION
Just as woven cloth rests on the expansion of lengthwise and crosswise
threads, similarly the entire universe is expanded on the lengthwise and
crosswise potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and is situated within
Him. The conditioned soul has been accepting material bodies since time
immemorial, and these bodies are like great trees sustaining one's material
existence. Just as a tree first blossoms and then produces fruit, similarly the tree
of material existence, one's material body, produces the various results of
material existence.
PURPORT
Before a tree produces fruit, blossoms appear. Similarly, the word
puñpa-phale, according to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, indicates the
happiness and distress of material existence. One's material life may appear to
be blossoming, but ultimately there will appear the bitter fruits of old age,
death and other catastrophes. Attachment to the material body, which is
always inclined toward sense gratification, is the root cause of material
existence, and it is therefore called saàsära-taru. The tendency to exploit the
external energy of the Supreme Lord has existed since time immemorial, as
expressed by the words puräëaù karmätmakaù. The material universe is an
expansion of the illusory potency of the Supreme Lord and is always
dependent on Him and nondifferent from Him. This simple understanding
can relieve the conditioned souls from endless wandering in the unhappy
kingdom of mäyä.
The word puñpa-phale may also be understood as meaning sense
gratification and liberation. The tree of material existence will be further
explained in the following verses.
TEXTS 22-23
ãe" @sya baIjae zAtamaUlaiñnaAla:
paÂas$k(nDa: paÂar"s$a‘as$aUita:
d"zAEk(zAAKaAe iã"s$aupaNARnaIx"s$a,
i‡avalk(laAe iã"P(laAe'k<( ‘aivaí":
@d"inta caEkM( P(lamasya gA{‹aA
ƒaAmaecar"A Wk(mar"NyavaAs$aA:
hM"s$aA ya WkM( baò"è&paimajyaEr,"
maAyaAmayaM vaed" s$a vaed" vaed"ma,
dve asya béje çata-mülas tri-nälaù
païca-skandhaù païca-rasa-prasütiù
daçaika-çäkho dvi-suparëa-néòas
tri-valkalo dvi-phalo 'rkaà praviñöaù
adanti caikaà phalam asya gådhrä
gräme-carä ekam araëya-väsäù
haàsä ya ekaà bahu-rüpam ijyair
mäyä-mayaà veda sa veda vedam
SYNONYMS
dve—two; asya—of this tree; béje—seeds; çata—hundreds; mülaù—of roots;
tri—three; nälaù—lower trunks; païca—five; skandhaù—upper trunks;
païca—five; rasa—saps; prasütiù—producing; daça—ten; eka—plus one;
çäkhaù—branches; dvi—two; suparëa—of birds; néòaù—a nest; tri—three;
valkalaù—types of bark; dvi—two; phalaù—fruits; arkam—the sun;
praviñöaù—extending into; adanti—they eat or enjoy; ca—also; ekam—one;
phalam—fruit; asya—of this tree; gådhräù—those who are lusty for material
enjoyment; gräme—in householder life; caräù—living; ekam—another;
araëya—in the forest; väsäù—those who live; haàsäù—swanlike men, saintly
persons; yaù—one who; ekam—one only, the Supersoul;
bahu-rüpam—appearing in many forms; ijyaiù—by the help of those who are
worshipable, the spiritual masters; mäyä-mayam—produced by the potency of
the Supreme Lord; veda—knows; saù—such a person; veda—knows;
vedam—the actual meaning of the Vedic literature.
TRANSLATION
This tree of material existence has two seeds, hundreds of roots, three lower
trunks and five upper trunks. It produces five flavors and has eleven branches
and a nest made by two birds. The tree is covered by three types of bark, gives
two fruits and extends up to the sun. Those lusty after material enjoyment and
dedicated to family life enjoy one of the tree's fruits, and swanlike men in the
renounced order of life enjoy the other fruit. One who with the help of the
bona fide spiritual masters can understand this tree to be a manifestation of the
potency of the one Supreme Truth appearing in many forms actually knows the
meaning of the Vedic literature.
PURPORT
The two seeds of this tree are sinful and pious activities, and the hundreds
of roots are the living entities' innumerable material desires, which chain them
to material existence. The three lower trunks represent the three modes of
material nature, and the five upper trunks represent the five gross material
elements. The tree produces five flavors—sound, form, touch, taste and
aroma—and has eleven branches—the five working senses, the five
knowledge-acquiring senses and the mind. Two birds, namely the individual
soul and the Supersoul, have made their nest in this tree, and the three types
of bark are air, bile and mucus, the constituent elements of the body. The two
fruits of this tree are happiness and distress.
Those who are busy trying to enjoy the company of beautiful women,
money and other luxurious aspects of illusion enjoy the fruit of unhappiness.
One should remember that even in the heavenly planets there is anxiety and
death. Those who have renounced material goals and taken to the path of
spiritual enlightenment enjoy the fruit of happiness. One who takes the
assistance of bona fide spiritual masters can understand that this elaborate tree
is simply the manifestation of the external potency of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, who is ultimately one without a second. If one can see the
Supreme Lord as the ultimate cause of everything, then his knowledge is
perfect. Otherwise, if one is entangled in Vedic rituals or Vedic speculation
without knowledge of the Supreme Lord, he has not achieved the perfection of
life.
TEXT 24
WvaM gAuè&paAs$anayaEk(BaftyaA
ivaâAku(Q&Are"NA izAtaena DaIr":
ivava{zcya jaIvaAzAyama‘amaÔa:
s$ampaâ caAtmaAnamaTa tyajaAñma,
evaà gurüpäsanayaika-bhaktyä
vidyä-kuöhäreëa çitena dhéraù
vivåçcya jéväçayam apramattaù
sampadya cätmänam atha tyajästram
SYNONYMS
evam—thus (with the knowledge I have given you); guru—of the spiritual
master; upäsanayä—developed by worship; eka—unalloyed; bhaktyä—by
loving devotional service; vidyä—of knowledge; kuöhäreëa—by the ax;
çitena—sharp; dhéraù—one who is steady by knowledge; vivåçcya—cutting
down; jéva—of the living entity; äçayam—the subtle body (filled with
designations created by the three modes of material nature);
apramattaù—being very careful in spiritual life; sampadya—achieving;
ca—and; ätmänam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; atha—then;
tyaja—you should give up; astram—the means by which you achieved
perfection.
TRANSLATION
With steady intelligence you should develop unalloyed devotional service by
careful worship of the spiritual master, and with the sharpened ax of
transcendental knowledge you should cut off the subtle material covering of the
soul. Upon realizing the Supreme Personality of Godhead, you should then give
up that ax of analytic knowledge.
PURPORT
Because Uddhava had achieved the perfection of personal association with
Lord Kåñëa, there was no need for him to maintain the mentality of a
conditioned soul, and thus, as described here by the words sampadya
cätmänam, Uddhava could personally serve the lotus feet of the Lord in the
spiritual world. Indeed, Uddhava requested this opportunity at the beginning
of this great conversation. As stated here, gurüpäsanayaika-bhaktyä: one can
achieve pure devotional service by worshiping a bona fide spiritual master. It is
not recommended here that one give up pure devotional service or one's
spiritual master. Rather, it is clearly stated by the words vidyä-kuöhäreëa that
one should cultivate knowledge of the material world as described by Lord
Kåñëa in this chapter. One should fully understand that each and every aspect
of the material creation is the expansion of the illusory potency of the Lord.
Such knowledge works as a sharpened ax to cut down the roots of material
existence. In this way, even the stubborn subtle body, created by the three
modes of nature, is cut to pieces, and one becomes apramatta, or sane and
cautious in Kåñëa consciousness.
Lord Kåñëa has clearly explained in this chapter that the cowherd damsels
of Våndävana were not interested in an analytical approach to life. They
simply loved Lord Kåñëa and could not think of anything else. Lord Caitanya
Mahäprabhu taught that all His devotees should follow in the footsteps of the
cowherd damsels of Vraja in order to develop the highest intensity of selfless
love of Godhead. Lord Kåñëa has elaborately analyzed the nature of the
material world so that the conditioned souls, who are trying to enjoy it, can cut
down the tree of material existence with this knowledge. The words sampadya
cätmänam indicate that a person with such knowledge has no further material
existence, because he has already achieved the Personality of Godhead. Such a
person should not loiter in the kingdom of mäyä, perpetually refining his
understanding of the illusory creation. One who has accepted Lord Kåñëa as
everything may enjoy eternal bliss in the Lord's service. Yet even though he
remains in this world, he has no more business with it and gives up the
analytical procedures for negating it. Lord Kåñëa therefore tells Uddhava,
tyajästram: "Give up the ax of analytic knowledge by which you have cut down
your sense of proprietorship and residence in the material world."
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Eleventh Canto, Twelfth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Beyond Renunciation and Knowledge."
13. The Haàsa-avatära Answers the Questions of the Sons of
Brahmä
In this chapter, Lord Çré Kåñëa explains to Uddhava how human beings,
overwhelmed by sense gratification, become bound by the three modes of
nature, and how to renounce these modes. The Lord then describes how He
appeared in His form of Haàsa before Brahmä and the four sages headed by
Sanaka and revealed to them various confidential truths.
The three modes-goodness, passion and ignorance-are related to material
intelligence, not to the soul. One should conquer the lower modes of passion
and ignorance by the mode of goodness, and then one must surpass the mode
of goodness by acting in the transcendental mode of pure goodness. By
associating with things in the mode of goodness, one becomes more fully
situated in that mode. The three modes increase their different influences
through various types of scripture, water, place, time, beneficiaries of activity,
natures of activity, birth, meditation, mantras, purificatory rituals, and so on.
Lacking discrimination, one identifies with the material body, and
consequently the mode of passion, which produces misery, takes over the mind,
which is normally in the mode of goodness. As the mind evolves its function of
decision and doubt, it creates intolerable hankerings for sense gratification.
Unfortunate persons who are bewildered by the urges of the mode of passion
become the slaves of their senses. Even though they know that the eventual
result of their work will be suffering, they cannot avoid engaging in such
fruitive work. A discriminating person, on the other hand, keeps himself
detached from the objects of the senses and, by utilizing appropriate
renunciation, takes shelter of unalloyed devotional service.
Lord Brahmä himself has no material cause. He is the cause of the creation
of all living beings and is the greatest among all the demigods. Yet even
Brahmä is always suffering agitation of the mind on account of the duties he
has to perform; therefore, when he was questioned by his sons headed by
Sanaka, who were born from his mind, about the means for driving away
desires for sense gratification, he was incapable of giving them an answer. In
order to receive some insight into this matter, he took shelter of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, whereupon the Supreme Lord appeared before him in
the form of the swan incarnation, Lord Haàsa. Lord Haàsa proceeded to give
instructions about the categorical identity of the self, the different states of
consciousness (wakeful awareness, sleep and deep sleep) and the means for
conquering over material existence. The sages headed by Sanaka became freed
from all their doubts by hearing the words of the Lord and worshiped Him
with pure devotion in mature love of God.
TEXT 1
çré-bhagavän uväca
sattvaà rajas tama iti
guëä buddher na cätmanaù
sattvenänyatamau hanyät
sattvaà sattvena caiva hi
çré-bhagavän uväca
sattvaà rajas tama iti
guëä buddher na cätmanaù
sattvenänyatamau hanyät
sattvaà sattvena caiva hi
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
sattvam—goodness; rajaù—passion; tamaù—ignorance; iti—thus known;
guëäù—the modes of material nature; buddheù—pertain to material
intelligence; na—not; ca—also; ätmanaù—to the soul; sattvena—by the
material mode of goodness; anyatamau—the other two (passion and
ignorance); hanyät—may be destroyed; sattvam—the material mode of
goodness; sattvena—by purified goodness; ca—also (may be destroyed);
eva—certainly; hi—indeed.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: The three modes of material
nature, namely goodness, passion and ignorance, pertain to material intelligence
and not to the spirit soul. By development of material goodness one can conquer
the modes of passion and ignorance, and by cultivation of transcendental
goodness one may free oneself even from material goodness.
PURPORT
Goodness in the material world never exists in a pure form. Therefore, it is
common knowledge that on the material platform no one is working without
personal motivation. In the material world goodness is always mixed with some
amount of passion and ignorance, whereas spiritual, or purified, goodness
(viçuddha-sattva) represents the liberated platform of perfection. Materially,
one is proud to be an honest, compassionate man, but unless one is fully Kåñëa
conscious one will speak truths that are not ultimately significant, and one will
give mercy that is ultimately useless. Because the onward march of material
time removes all situations and persons from the material stage, our so-called
mercy and truth apply to situations that shortly will not exist. Real truth is
eternal, and real mercy means to situate people in eternal truth. Still, for an
ordinary person, cultivation of material goodness may be a preliminary stage
on the road to Kåñëa consciousness. For example, it is stated in the Tenth
Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam that one who is addicted to meat-eating cannot
understand the pastimes of Lord Kåñëa. By cultivation of the material mode of
goodness, however, one may become a vegetarian and perhaps come to
appreciate the sublime process of Kåñëa consciousness. Since it is clearly stated
in Bhagavad-gétä that the material modes of nature constantly rotate, one must
take advantage of an elevated position in material goodness to step onto the
transcendental platform. Otherwise, as the wheel of time turns one will again
go into the darkness of material ignorance.
TEXT 2
s$aÔvaAÜ"maAeR Bavaeä," va{Ü"Ata,
pauMs$aAe maà"il(laºaNA:
s$aAiÔvak(AepaAs$ayaA s$aÔvaM
tataAe DamaR: ‘avataRtae
sattväd dharmo bhaved våddhät
puàso mad-bhakti-lakñaëaù
sättvikopäsayä sattvaà
tato dharmaù pravartate
SYNONYMS
sattvät—from the mode of goodness; dharmaù—religious principles;
bhavet—arise; våddhät—which are strengthened; puàsaù—of a person;
mat-bhakti—by devotional service to Me; lakñaëaù—characterized;
sättvika—of things in the mode of goodness; upäsayä—by serious cultivation;
sattvam—the mode of goodness; tataù—from that mode; dharmaù—religious
principles; pravartate—arise.
TRANSLATION
When the living entity becomes strongly situated in the mode of goodness,
then religious principles, characterized by devotional service to Me, become
prominent. One can strengthen the mode of goodness by cultivation of those
things that are already situated in goodness, and thus religious principles arise.
PURPORT
Since the three modes of material nature are constantly in conflict, vying
for supremacy, how is it possible that the mode of goodness can subdue the
modes of passion and ignorance? Lord Kåñëa here explains how one can be
strongly fixed in the mode of goodness, which automatically gives rise to
religious principles. In the Fourteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä, Lord Kåñëa
elaborately explains the things that are in goodness, passion and ignorance.
Thus, by choosing food, attitudes, work, recreation, etc., strictly in the mode of
goodness, one will become situated in that mode. The usefulness of
sattva-guëa, or the mode of goodness, is that it produces religious principles
aimed at and characterized by devotional service to Lord Kåñëa. Without such
devotional service to the Lord, the mode of goodness is considered useless and
merely another aspect of material illusion. The word våddhät, or "strengthened,
increased," indicates clearly that one should come to the platform of
viçuddha-sattva, or purified goodness. The word våddhät indicates growth, and
growth should not be stopped until full maturity is reached. The full maturity
of goodness is called véçuddha-sattva, or the transcendental platform on which
there is no trace of any other quality. In pure goodness all knowledge
automatically manifests, and one can easily understand one's eternal loving
relationship with Lord Kåñëa. That is the actual meaning and purpose of
dharma, or religious principles.
Çréla Madhväcärya points out in this regard that an increase in the mode of
goodness strengthens religious principles and the invigorated execution of
religious principles strengthens the mode of goodness. In that way, one can
advance higher and higher in the mode of spiritual happiness.
TEXT 3
DamaAeR r"jastamaAe h"nyaAta,
s$aÔvava{iÜ"r"nauÔama:
@AzAu nazyaita tanmaUlaAe
÷DamaR oBayae h"tae
dharmo rajas tamo hanyät
sattva-våddhir anuttamaù
äçu naçyati tan-mülo
hy adharma ubhaye hate
SYNONYMS
dharmaù—religious principles based on devotional service; rajaù—the mode of
passion; tamaù—the mode of ignorance; hanyät—destroy; sattva—of goodness;
våddhiù—by the increase; anuttamaù—the greatest; äçu—quickly; naçyati—is
destroyed; tat—of passion and ignorance; mülaù—the root; hi—certainly;
adharmaù—irreligion; ubhaye hate—when both are destroyed.
TRANSLATION
Religious principles, strengthened by the mode of goodness, destroy the
influence of passion and ignorance. When passion and ignorance are overcome,
their original cause, irreligion, is quickly vanquished.
TEXT 4
@AgAmaAe'pa: ‘ajaA de"zA:
k(Ala: k(maR ca janma ca
DyaAnaM man‡aAe'Ta s$aMs$k(Ar"Ae
d"zAEtae gAuNAhe"tava:
ägamo 'paù prajä deçaù
kälaù karma ca janma ca
dhyänaà mantro 'tha saàskäro
daçaite guëa-hetavaù
SYNONYMS
ägamaù—religious scriptures; apaù—water; prajäù—association with people in
general or one's children; deçaù—place; kälaù—time; karma—activities;
ca—also; janma—birth; ca—also; dhyänam—meditation; mantraù—chanting
of mantras; atha—and; saàskäraù—rituals for purification; daça—ten;
ete—these; guëa—of the modes of nature; hetavaù-causes.
TRANSLATION
According to the quality of religious scriptures, water, one's association with
one's children or with people in general, the particular place, the time,
activities, birth, meditation, chanting of mantras, and purificatory rituals, the
modes of nature become differently prominent.
PURPORT
The ten items mentioned above possess superior and inferior qualities and
are thus identified as being in goodness, passion or ignorance. One can
increase the mode of goodness by selecting religious scriptures in goodness,
pure water, friendship with other persons in goodness, and so on. One should
scrupulously avoid any of these ten items that may be polluted by an inferior
mode of nature.
TEXT 5
taÔats$aAiÔvak(maevaESaAM
yaâä," va{Ü"A: ‘acaºatae
inand"inta taAmas$aM taÔaä,"
r"Ajas$aM taäu"paeiºatama,
tat tat sättvikam evaiñäà
yad yad våddhäù pracakñate
nindanti tämasaà tat tad
räjasaà tad-upekñitam
SYNONYMS
tat tat—those things; sättvikam—in the mode of goodness; eva—indeed;
eñäm—among the ten items; yat yat—whatever; våddhäù—the sages of the
past, such as Vyäsadeva, who are expert in Vedic knowledge; pracakñate—they
praise; nindanti—they scorn; tämasam—in the mode of ignorance; tat
tat—those things; räjasam—in the mode of passion; tat—hy the sages;
upekñitam—left alone, neither praised nor criticized.
TRANSLATION
Among the ten items I have just mentioned, the great sages who understand
Vedic knowledge have praised and recommended those that are in the mode of
goodness, criticized and rejected those in the mode of ignorance, and shown
indifference to those in the mode of passion.
TEXT 6
s$aAiÔvak(Anyaeva s$aevaeta
paumaAna, s$aÔvaivava{Ü"yae
tataAe DamaRstataAe ÁaAnaM
yaAvatsma{itar"paAeh"nama,
sättvikäny eva seveta
pumän sattva-vivåddhaye
tato dharmas tato jïänaà
yävat småtir apohanam
SYNONYMS
sättvikäni—things in the mode of goodness; eva—indeed; seveta—he should
cultivate; pumän—a person; sattva—the mode of goodness; vivåddhaye—in
order to increase; tataù—from that (increase in goodness); dharmaù—one is
fixed in religious principles; tataù—from that (religion); jïänam—knowledge
is manifest; yävat—until; småtiù—self-realization, remembering one's eternal
identity; apohanam—driving away (the illusory identification with the
material body and mind).
TRANSLATION
Until one revives one's direct knowledge of the spirit soul and drives away
the illusory identification with the material body and mind caused by the three
modes of nature, one must cultivate those things in the mode of goodness. By
increasing the mode of goodness, one automatically can understand and practice
religious principles, and by such practice transcendental knowledge is
awakened.
PURPORT
One who desires to cultivate the mode of goodness must consider the
following points. One should study religious scriptures that teach detachment
from mental speculation and material sense gratification, not scriptures that
provide rituals and mantras to increase material ignorance. Such materialistic
scriptures do not give attention to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and
thus are basically atheistic. One should accept pure water for quenching thirst
and cleaning the body. There is no need for a devotee to use colognes,
perfume, whiskey, beer, etc., which are all polluted manifestations of water.
One should associate with persons who are cultivating detachment from the
material world and not with those who are materially attached or sinful in
their behavior. One should live in a solitary place where devotional service is
practiced and discussed among Vaiñëavas. One should not be spontaneously
attracted to busy highways, shopping centers, sports stadiums, and so on.
Concerning time, one should rise by four o'clock in the morning and utilize
the auspicious brähma-muhürta to advance in Kåñëa consciousness. Similarly,
one should avoid the sinful influence of hours such as midnight when ghosts
and demons are encouraged to become active. Concerning work, one should
execute one's prescribed duties, follow the regulative principles of spiritual life
and utilize all of one's energy for pious purposes. Time should not be wasted in
frivolous or materialistic activities, of which there are now literally millions in
modern society. One can cultivate birth in the mode of goodness by accepting
the second birth of initiation from a bona fide spiritual master and learning to
chant the Hare Kåñëa mantra. One should not accept initiation or so-called
spiritual birth in unauthorized mystical or religious cults in the modes of
passion and ignorance. One should meditate upon the Supreme Personality of
Godhead as the enjoyer of all sacrifices, and similarly, one should meditate on
the lives of great devotees and saintly persons. One should not meditate on
lusty women and envious men. Concerning mantras, one should follow the
example of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu by chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra and
not other songs, verses, poetry or mantras that glorify the kingdom of illusion.
Purificatory rituals should be performed to purify the spirit soul and not to
bring down material blessings on one's material household.
One who increases the mode of goodness will certainly become fixed in
religious principles, and automatically knowledge will arise. As knowledge
increases one is able to understand the eternal spirit soul and the Supreme
Soul, Lord Kåñëa. Thus the soul becomes free from the artificial imposition of
the gross and subtle material bodies caused by the modes of material nature.
Spiritual knowledge burns to ashes the material designations that cover the
living entity, and one's real, eternal life begins.
TEXT 7
vaeNAus$aÎÿSaRjaAe vai¶"r,"
d"gDvaA zAAmyaita taã"nama,
WvaM gAuNAvyatyayajaAe
de"h": zAAmyaita tait‚(ya:
veëu-saìgharña-jo vahnir
dagdhvä çämyati tad-vanam
evaà guëa-vyatyaya-jo
dehaù çämyati tat-kriyaù
SYNONYMS
veëu—of bamboo; saìgharña-jaù—generated by the friction; vahniù—fire;
dagdhvä—having burned; çämyati—is pacified; tat—of bamboo; vanam—the
forest; evam—thus; guëa—of the modes of nature; vyatyaya-jaù-generated by
interaction; dehaù—the material body; çämyati-is pacified; tat—as the fire;
kriyaù-performing the same action.
TRANSLATION
In a bamboo forest the wind sometimes rubs the bamboo stalks together, and
such friction generates a blazing fire that consumes the very source of its birth,
the bamboo forest. Thus, the fire is automatically calmed by its own action.
Similarly, by the competition and interaction of the material modes of nature,
the subtle and gross material bodies are generated. If one uses his mind and
body to cultivate knowledge, then such enlightenment destroys the influence of
the modes of nature that generated one's body. Thus, like the fire, the body and
mind are pacified by their own actions in destroying the source of their birth.
PURPORT
The word guëa-vyatyaya-jaù is significant in this verse. Vyatyaya indicates
change or inversion in the normal order of things. Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta
Sarasvaté Öhäkura has described the concept of vyatyaya by giving the Sanskrit
synonym vaiñamya, which indicates inequality or disproportionate diversity.
Thus, it is understood by the term guëa-vyatyaya-jaù that the body is generated
by the unstable relationships of the three modes of material nature, which
exist everywhere in constantly changing proportions. There is constant strife
among the modes of nature. A good person is sometimes torn by passion, and a
passionate person sometimes wants to give up everything and rest. An
ignorant person may sometimes become disgusted with his depraved life, and a
passionate person may sometimes indulge in bad habits in the mode of
ignorance. Due to the interactive conflict of the modes of nature, one wanders
throughout material nature creating one body after another by one's own
work, karma. As it is said, variety is the mother of enjoyment, and the variety
of material modes gives hope to the conditioned souls that by changing their
material situation their unhappiness and frustration can be turned into
happiness and satisfaction. But even if one acquires relative material
happiness, that will soon be disturbed by the inevitable flux of the material
modes.
TEXT 8
™aIoÜ"va ovaAca
ivad"inta matyaAR: ‘aAyaeNA
ivaSayaAna, pad"maApad"Ama,
taTaAipa BauÃatae k{(SNA
tatk(TaM ìKar"Ajavata,
çré-uddhava uväca
vidanti martyäù präyeëa
viñayän padam äpadäm
tathäpi bhuïjate kåñëa
tat kathaà çva-kharäja-vat
SYNONYMS
çré-uddhavaù uväca—Çré Uddhava said; vidanti—they know; martyäù—human
beings; präyeëa—generally; viñayän—sense gratification; padam—a situation;
äpadäm—of many miserable conditions; tathä api—even so; bhuïjate—they
enjoy; kåñëa—O Kåñëa; tat—such sense gratification; katham—how is it
possible; çva—dogs; khara—asses; aja—and goats; vat—just like.
TRANSLATION
Çré Uddhava said: My dear Kåñëa, generally human beings know that
material life brings great future unhappiness, and still they try to enjoy material
life. My dear Lord, how can one in knowledge act just like a dog, an ass or a
goat?
PURPORT
The standard methods of enjoyment in the material world are sex, money
and false prestige, all of which are obtained with great suffering and eventually
lost. One engaged in material life suffers in the present and has only a very
bleak future to look forward to in the continuing cycle of birth and death.
Thus, how can human beings who have seen these things and know them very
well continue to enjoy life like dogs, asses and goats? Often a dog will approach
a bitch for sex, but the lady dog may not be attracted and will show her teeth,
snarl and threaten the poor dog with serious injury. Still he goes about his
business trying to get a little sex pleasure. Similarly, many times a dog risks
being beaten or shot while stealing some food in a place where he knows he
should not go. The ass is very attracted to the she-ass, but the lady ass often
kicks him in the legs. Similarly, the ass's master gives the ass a handful of grass,
which the poor ass could get anywhere, and then burdens him with great loads.
The goat is generally raised for slaughter, and even when the goat is brought
into the slaughterhouse he shamelessly goes after the lady goat to get sex
pleasure. In this way, even at the risk of being shot, bitten, beaten and
slaughtered, animals persist in their foolish sense gratification. How can an
educated human being commit himself to such a condemned way of life,
wherein the result is practically the same as that of the animals? If by
cultivating the mode of goodness one's life is filled with happiness,
enlightenment and future rewards, why would anyone cultivate the modes of
passion and ignorance? This is Uddhava's question.
TEXTS 9-10
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
@h"imatyanyaTaAbauiÜ":
‘amaÔasya yaTaA ô$id"
ots$apaRita r"jaAe GaAerM"
tataAe vaEk(Air"kM( mana:
r"jaAeyaul(sya manas$a:
s$aÆÿlpa: s$aivak(lpak(:
tata: k(AmaAe gAuNADyaAnaAä,"
äu":s$ah": syaAiÜ" äu"maRtae:
çré-bhagavän uväca
aham ity anyathä-buddhiù
pramattasya yathä hådi
utsarpati rajo ghoraà
tato vaikärikaà manaù
rajo-yuktasya manasaù
saìkalpaù sa-vikalpakaù
tataù kämo guëa-dhyänäd
duùsahaù syäd dhi durmateù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; aham—false
identification with the material body and mind; iti—thus;
anyathä-buddhiù—illusory knowledge; pramattasya—of one who is bereft of
actual intelligence; yathä—accordingly; hådi—within the mind;
utsarpati—arises; rajaù—passion; ghoram—which brings terrible suffering;
tataù—then; vaikärikam—(originally) in the mode of goodness; manaù—the
mind; rajaù—in passion; yuktasya—of that which is engaged; manasaù—of the
mind; saìkalpaù—material determination; sa-vikalpakaù—along with
variation and alternation; tataù—from that; kämaù—full-fledged material
desire; guëa—in the modes of nature; dhyänät—from concentration;
duùsahaù—unbearable; syät—it must so be; hi—certainly; durmateù—of a
foolish person.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Uddhava, a person
bereft of intelligence first falsely identifies himself with the material body and
mind, and when such false knowledge arises within one's consciousness,
material passion, the cause of great suffering, pervades the mind, which by
nature is situated in goodness. Then the mind, contaminated by passion,
becomes absorbed in making and changing many plans for material
advancement. Thus, by constantly thinking of the modes of material nature, a
foolish person is afflicted with unbearable material desires.
PURPORT
Those who are trying to enjoy material sense gratification are not actually
intelligent, although they consider themselves most intelligent. Although such
foolish persons themselves criticize the miseries of material life in innumerable
books, songs, newspapers, television programs, civic committees, etc., they
cannot desist from material life for a single moment. The process by which one
is helplessly bound in illusion is clearly described here.
A materialistic person is always thinking, "Oh, what a beautiful house. I
wish we could buy it" or "What a beautiful woman. I wish I could touch her" or
"What a powerful position. I wish I could occupy it," and so on. The words
saìkalpaù sa-vikalpakaù indicate that a materialist is always making new plans
or modifying his old plans to increase his material enjoyment, although in his
saner moments he admits that material life is full of suffering. The mind is
created from the mode of goodness, as described in Säìkhya philosophy, and
the natural, peaceful situation of the mind is pure love of Kåñëa, in which
there is no mental disturbance, disappointment or confusion. Artificially, the
mind is dragged down to a lower platform in passion or ignorance, and thus
one is never satisfied.
TEXT 11
k(r"Aeita k(AmavazAgA:
k(maARNyaivaijataein‰"ya:
äu":KaAed"k(ARiNA s$ampazyana,
r"jaAevaegAivamaAeih"ta:
karoti käma-vaça-gaù
karmäëy avijitendriyaù
duùkhodarkäëi sampaçyan
rajo-vega-vimohitaù
SYNONYMS
karoti—performs; käma—of material desires; vaça—under the control;
gaù—having gone; karmäëi—fruitive activities; avijita—uncontrolled;
indriyaù-whose senses; duùkha—unhappiness; udarkäëi—bringing as a future
result; sampaçyan—seeing clearly; rajaù—of the mode of passion; vega—by the
force; vimohitaù—bewildered.
TRANSLATION
One who does not control the material senses comes under the control of
material desires and is thus bewildered by the strong waves of the mode of
passion. Such a person executes material activities, although clearly seeing that
the result will be future unhappiness.
TEXT 12
r"jastamaAeByaAM yad"ipa
ivaã"Ana, ivaiºaæaDaI: pauna:
@tain‰"taAe manaAe yauÃana,
d"AeSaä{"ií"naR s$aÀatae
rajas-tamobhyäà yad api
vidvän vikñipta-dhéù punaù
atandrito mano yuïjan
doña-dåñöir na sajjate
SYNONYMS
rajaù-tamobhyäm—by the modes of passion and ignorance; yat api—even
though; vidvän—a learned person; vikñipta—bewildered; dhéù—the
intelligence; punaù—again; atandritaù—carefully; manaù—the mind;
yuïjan—engaging; doña—the contamination of material attachment;
dåñöiù—seeing clearly; na—not; sajjate—becomes attached.
TRANSLATION
Although the intelligence of a learned person may be bewildered by the
modes of passion and ignorance, he should again carefully bring the mind under
control. By clearly seeing the contamination of the modes of nature, he does not
become attached.
TEXT 13
@‘amaÔaAe'nauyauÃaIta
manaAe mayyapaRyaHC$naE:
@inaivaRNNAAe yaTaAk(AlaM
ijataìAs$aAe ijataAs$ana:
apramatto 'nuyuïjéta
mano mayy arpayaï chanaiù
anirviëëo yathä-kälaà
jita-çväso jitäsanaù
SYNONYMS
apramattaù—attentive and grave; anuyuïjéta—one should fix; manaù—the
mind; mayi—in Me; arpayan—placing; çanaiù—gradually, step by step;
anirviëëaù—without being lazy or morose; yathä-kälam—at least three times a
day (dawn, noon and sunset); jita—having conquered; çväsaù—the breathing
process; jita—having conquered; äsanaù—the sitting postures.
TRANSLATION
A person should be attentive and grave and never lazy or morose. Mastering
the yoga procedures of breathing and sitting properly, one should practice fixing
the mind on Me at dawn, noon and sunset, and thus gradually the mind should
be completely absorbed in Me.
TEXT 14
WtaAvaAna, yaAegA @Aid"í"Ae
maicC$SyaE: s$anak(Aid"iBa:
s$avaRtaAe mana @Ak{(Sya
mayyaÜ"Avaezyatae yaTaA
etävän yoga ädiñöo
mac-chiñyaiù sanakädibhiù
sarvato mana äkåñya
mayy addhäveçyate yathä
SYNONYMS
etävän—actually this; yogaù—yoga system; ädiñöaù—instructed;
mat-çiñyaiù—by My devotees; sanaka-ädibhiù—headed by Sanaka-kumära;
sarvataù—from all sides; manaù—the mind; äkåñya—withdrawing; mayi—in
Me; addhä—directly; äveçyate—is absorbed; yathä—accordingly.
TRANSLATION
The actual yoga system as taught by My devotees, headed by
Sanaka-kumära, is simply this: Having withdrawn the mind from all other
objects, one should directly and appropriately absorb it in Me.
PURPORT
The word yathä ("accordingly" or "properly") indicates that like Uddhava
one should hear directly from Lord Kåñëa or His bona fide representative and
directly (addhä) fix the mind in Lord Kåñëa.
TEXT 15
™aIoÜ"va ovaAca
yad"A tvaM s$anak(Aid"ByaAe
yaena è&paeNA ke(zAva
yaAegAmaAid"í"vaAnaetaä,"
è&paimacC$Aima vaeid"tauma,
çré-uddhava uväca
yadä tvaà sanakädibhyo
yena rüpeëa keçava
yogam ädiñöavän etad
rüpam icchämi veditum
SYNONYMS
çré-uddhavaù uväca—Çré Uddhava said; yadä—when; tvam—You;
sanaka-ädibhyaù—to Sanaka, etc.; yena—by which; rüpeëa—form;
keçava—my dear Keçava; yogam—the process of fixing the mind in the
Absolute Truth; ädiñöavän—You have instructed; etat—that; rüpam—form;
icchämi—I desire; veditum—to know.
TRANSLATION
Çré Uddhava said: My dear Keçava, at what time and in what form did You
instruct the science of yoga to Sanaka and his brothers? I now desire to know
about these things.
TEXT 16
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
pau‡aA ih"r"NyagABaRsya
maAnas$aA: s$anak(Ad"ya:
pa‘acC]$: ipatarM" s$aUºmaAM
yaAegAsyaEk(Aintak(LmgAitama,
çré-bhagavän uväca
puträ hiraëyagarbhasya
mänasäù sanakädayaù
papracchuù pitaraà sükñmäà
yogasyaikäntikém gatim
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; puträù—the sons;
hiraëya-garbhasya—of Lord Brahmä; mänasäù—born of the mind;
sanaka-ädayaù—headed by Sanaka Åñi; papracchuù—inquired; pitaram—from
their father (Brahmä); sükñmäm—subtle and therefore difficult to understand;
yogasya—of the science of yoga; ekäntikém—the supreme; gatim—destination.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Once, the mental sons of Lord
Brahmä, namely, the sages headed by Sanaka, inquired from their father about
the difficult subject matter of the supreme goal of yoga.
TEXT 17
s$anak(Ad"ya Ocau:
gAuNAeSvaAivazAtae caetaAe
gAuNAAêetais$a ca ‘aBaAe
k(TamanyaAenyas$antyaAgAAe
maumauºaAer"itaitataISaAeR:
sanakädaya ücuù
guëeñv äviçate ceto
guëäç cetasi ca prabho
katham anyonya-santyägo
mumukñor atititérñoù
SYNONYMS
sanaka-ädayaù ücuù—the sages headed by Sanaka said; guëeñu—in the sense
objects; äviçate—directly enters; cetaù—the mind; guëäù—the sense objects;
cetasi—within the mind; ca—also (enter); prabho—O Lord; katham—what is
the process; anyonya—of the mutual relationship between the sense objects
and the mind; santyägaù—renunciation; mumukñoù—of one desiring
liberation; atititérñoù—of one desiring to cross over sense gratification.
TRANSLATION
The sages headed by Sanaka said: O Lord, people's minds are naturally
attracted to material sense objects, and similarly the sense objects in the form of
desire enter within the mind. Therefore, how can a person who desires
liberation, who desires to cross over activities of sense gratification, destroy this
mutual relationship between the sense objects and the mind? Please explain this
to us.
PURPORT
As described above, as long as one is a conditioned soul the modes of
material nature, manifested in the form of sense objects, constantly disturb the
mind, and by their harassment one is deprived of the actual perfection of life.
TEXT 18
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
WvaM pa{í"Ae mah"Ade"va:
svayamBaUBaURtaBaAvana:
DyaAyamaAna: ‘a´abaIjaM
naAByapaâta k(maRDaI:
çré-bhagavän uväca
evaà påñöo mahä-devaù
svayambhür bhüta-bhävanaù
dhyäyamänaù praçna-béjaà
näbhyapadyata karma-dhéù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; evam—thus;
påñöaù—questioned; mahä-devaù—the great god Brahmä;
svayam-bhüù—without material birth (born directly from the body of
Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu); bhüta—of all conditioned souls; bhävanaù—the
creator (of their conditioned life); dhyäyamänaù—seriously considering;
praçna—of the question; béjam—the essential truth; na abhyapadyata—did not
reach; karma-dhéù—intelligence bewildered by his own activities of creation.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Uddhava, Brahmä
himself, who is born directly from the body of the Lord and who is the creator
of all living entities within the material world, being the best of the demigods,
seriously contemplated the question of his sons headed by Sanaka. The
intelligence of Brahmä, however, was affected by his own activities of creation,
and thus he could not discover the essential answer to this question.
PURPORT
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has quoted three verses from the Second Canto of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam as follows. In the Ninth Chapter, verse 32, Lord Kåñëa
blessed Brahmä with realized knowledge of the Lord's actual form, qualities and
activities. In the Ninth Chapter, verse 37, the Lord ordered Brahmä to rigidly
carry out the Lord's injunctions and affirmed that Brahmä would thus never be
bewildered in his cosmic decision-making. In the Sixth Chapter, verse 34, Lord
Brahmä assured his son Närada, "O Närada, because I have caught hold of the
lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, with great zeal,
whatever I say has never proved to have been false, nor is the progress of my
mind ever deterred, nor are my senses ever degraded by temporary attachment
to matter."
In the present verse in this Thirteenth Chapter of the Eleventh Canto,
Lord Kåñëa states that Brahmä unfortunately did become bewildered by his
creative functions, thus providing a grave lesson to all of the Lord's empowered
representatives. Although one may be elevated to an exalted position in the
Lord's transcendental service, at any moment there is danger of false pride
polluting one's devotional mentality.
TEXT 19
s$a maAmaicantayaÚe"va:
‘a´apaAr"itataISaRyaA
tasyaAhM" hM"s$aè&paeNA
s$ak(AzAmagAmaM tad"A
sa mäm acintayad devaù
praçna-pära-titérñayä
tasyähaà haàsa-rüpeëa
sakäçam agamaà tadä
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Lord Brahmä); mäm—Me; acintayat—remembered; devaù—the
original demigod; praçna—of the question; pära—the end, conclusion (the
answer); titérñayä—with a desire to attain, understand; tasya—unto him;
aham—I; haàsa-rüpeëa—in My form of Haàsa; sakäçam—visible;
agamam—became; tadä—at that time.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä desired to attain the answer to the question that was puzzling
him, and thus he fixed his mind on Me, the Supreme Lord. At that time, in My
form of Haàsa, I became visible to Lord Brahmä.
PURPORT
Haàsa means "swan," and the specific ability of the swan is to separate a
mixture of milk and water, extracting the rich, milky portion. Similarly, Lord
Kåñëa appeared as Haàsa, or the swan, in order to separate the pure
consciousness of Lord Brahmä from the modes of material nature.
TEXT 20
ä{"î"A maAmta opa˜ajya
k{(tva paAd"AiBavand"nama,
“aöANAmaƒata: k{(tvaA
pa‘acC]$: k(Ae BavaAinaita
dåñövä mäm ta upavrajya
kåtva pädäbhivandanam
brahmäëam agrataù kåtvä
papracchuù ko bhavän iti
SYNONYMS
dåñövä—thus seeing; mäm—Me; te—they (the sages); upavrajya—approaching;
kåtvä—offering; päda—at the lotus feet; abhivandanam—obeisances;
brahmäëam—Lord Brahmä; agrataù—in front; kåtvä—keeping;
papracchuù—they asked; kaù bhavän—"who are You, sir?"; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
Thus seeing Me, the sages, placing Brahmä in the lead, came forward and
worshiped My lotus feet. Then they frankly asked Me, "Who are You?"
PURPORT
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura comments, "When Brahmä was
unable to answer the question placed by the sages, he fixed his mind in
thought of the Supreme Lord. The Lord then assumed the form of Haàsa and
appeared before Lord Brahmä and the sages, who proceeded to inquire about
the specific identity of the Lord."
TEXT 21
wtyahM" mauinaiBa: pa{í"s$a,
taÔvaijaÁaAs$auiBastad"A
yad"vaAecamahM" taeByas$a,
taäu"Ü"va inabaAeDa mae
ity ahaà munibhiù påñöas
tattva-jijïäsubhis tadä
yad avocam ahaà tebhyas
tad uddhava nibodha me
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; aham—I; munibhiù—by the sages; påñöaù—questioned; tattva—the
truth about the goal of yoga; jijïäsubhiù—by those desiring to know; tadä—at
that time; yat—that which; avocam—spoke; aham—I; tebhyaù—unto them;
tat—that; uddhava—My dear Uddhava; nibodha—please learn; me—from Me.
TRANSLATION
My dear Uddhava, the sages, being eager to understand the ultimate truth of
the yoga system, thus inquired from Me. Now please hear as I explain that
which I spoke unto the sages.
TEXT 22
vastaunaAe yaânaAnaAtva
@Atmana: ‘a´a wRä{"zA:
k(TaM Gaqe%ta vaAe iva‘aA
valu(vaAR mae k( @A™aya:
vastuno yady anänätva
ätmanaù praçna édåçaù
kathaà ghaöeta vo viprä
vaktur vä me ka äçrayaù
SYNONYMS
vastunaù—of the essential reality; yadi—if; anänätve—in the concept of
nonindividuality; ätmanaù—of the jéva soul; praçnaù—question; édåçaù—such;
katham—how; ghaöeta—is it possible or appropriate; vaù—of you who are
asking; vipräù—O brähmaëas; vaktuù—of the speaker; vä—or; me—of Me;
kaù—what is; äçrayaù—the real situation or resting place.
TRANSLATION
My dear brähmaëas, if, when asking Me who I am, you believe that I am
also a jéva soul and that there is no ultimate difference between us—since all
souls are ultimately one without individuality—then how is your question
possible or appropriate? Ultimately, what is the real situation or resting place
both of yourselves and of Me?
PURPORT
Äçraya means "the resting place" or "shelter." Lord Kåñëa's question "That is
our actual resting place or shelter?" means "What is our ultimate nature or
constitutional position?" This is because no one can come to rest or be satisfied
unless one is in one's natural position. The example is given that one may
travel all over the world, but ultimately one becomes satisfied by returning to
one's own home. Similarly, a crying child is satisfied when embraced by its own
mother. By inquiring about the shelter or resting place of Himself and the
brähmaëas, the Lord is indicating the eternal, constitutional position of every
living entity
If Lord Kåñëa were also in the jéva category, and if all living entities
including Him were thus equal, there would be no deep purpose in one living
entity inquiring and another answering. Only one who is in a superior position
can meaningfully answer important questions. It may be argued that the bona
fide spiritual master answers all the questions of the disciple, and yet the guru
is in the jéva category. The answer is that the bona fide spiritual master speaks
not on his own behalf but as a representative of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is in the Viñëu category. A so-called guru speaking on his own
behalf as a jéva soul is useless and is unable to meaningfully answer serious
questions. Thus, the sages' question ko bhavän ("Who are You?") indicates that
the Supreme Personality of Godhead is eternally an individual person. And
because the sages headed by Lord Brahmä offered obeisances and worshiped
the Lord, it is understood that He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Lord Brahmä, as the first created being in this universe, could not accept any
other living entity except the Lord as worshipable.
Lord Kåñëa's actual purpose is to explain the ultimate perfection of yoga,
which the sages were desiring to know. If one becomes fixed in transcendental
knowledge, the mutual attraction between the material mind and the material
sense objects automatically ceases. The spiritual mind is not attracted to
material objects of gratification, and thus by spiritualizing the mind, material
existence automatically slackens. By questioning the propriety of the sages'
question, the Lord is assuming the position of the spiritual master and
preparing to give valuable instructions. One should never be envious of a bona
fide spiritual master, especially if, as in the case of Lord Haàsa speaking to the
sages headed by Brahmä and Sanaka-kumära, the guru is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead Himself.
TEXT 23
paÂaAtmake(Sau BaUtaeSau
s$amaAnaeSau ca vastauta:
k(Ae BavaAinaita va: ‘a´aAe
vaAcaAr"mBaAe ÷naTaRk(:
païcätmakeñu bhüteñu
samäneñu ca vastutaù
ko bhavän iti vaù praçno
väcärambho hy anarthakaù
SYNONYMS
païca—of five elements; ätmakeñu—made of; bhüteñu—thus existing;
samäneñu—being the same; ca—also; vastutaù—in essence; kaù—who;
bhavän—are You; iti—thus; vaù—your; praçnaù—question; väcä—merely with
words; ärambhaù—such an endeavor; hi—certainly; anarthakaù—without real
meaning or purpose.
TRANSLATION
If by asking Me "Who are You?" you were referring to the material body,
then I must point out that all material bodies are constituted of five elements,
namely earth, water, fire, air and ether. Thus, you should have asked, "Who
are you five?" If you consider that all material bodies are ultimately one, being
constituted essentially of the same elements, then your question is still
meaningless, since there would be no deep purpose in distinguishing one body
from another. Thus, it appears that in asking My identity, you are merely
speaking words, without any real meaning or purpose.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains this verse as follows. "In the
previous verse Lord Kåñëa demonstrated that if the sages accepted the
impersonal philosophy that all living beings are ultimately one in all respects,
their question 'Who are You?' was meaningless, since there would be no
philosophical basis to distinguish one manifestation of spirit soul from another.
In this verse the Lord refutes the false identification with the material body
composed of five elements. If the sages accepted the body as the self, then their
question was meaningless, since they would have to ask, 'Who are you five?' If
the sages replied that although the body is composed basically of five elements
and these elements combine and thus form one unique substance, then the
Lord has already replied by the words samäneñu ca vastutaù. The bodies of
human beings, demigods, animals, etc., are all composed of the same five
elements and are essentially the same. Therefore the question 'Who are You?'
is ultimately meaningless. Thus, if one accepts either the theory that all living
entities are ultimately the same or the theory that all living entities are
ultimately nondifferent from their material bodies, in both cases the question
of the sages is meaningless.
"The sages might argue that even among learned persons it is common
practice to ask questions and give answers on many subjects as a part of normal
life. The sages could point out that Lord Kåñëa also distinguished among them,
by His saying vipräù, 'O brähmaëas,' and vaù, or 'your [question],' as expressed
in this verse. In this way it is seen that the Lord also accepts the ordinary
customs of questions and answers. To answer this argument, Lord Kåñëa states,
väcärambho hy anarthakaù. The Lord states, 'My addressing you as brähmaëas is
merely an exhibition of words if we are ultimately not different. I merely
reciprocated with your approach to Me. Therefore, if we are ultimately one,
neither My statement nor your question has any real meaning. I can conclude
therefore by your question to Me that you are all not actually very intelligent.
Therefore, why are you inquiring after ultimate knowledge? Aren't you all
embarrassed?'"
Çréla Madhväcärya points out in this regard that the question of the sages
was not appropriate, since they had already seen their father, Lord Brahmä,
worshiping the lotus feet of Lord Haàsa. Since their spiritual master and
father was worshiping Lord Haàsa, they should have immediately understood
the Lord's position, and their question is thus meaningless.
TEXT 24
manas$aA vacas$aA ä{"í"YaA
gA{÷tae'nyaEr"paIin‰"yaE:
@h"maeva na maÔaAe'nyaä,"
wita bauDyaDvamaÃas$aA
manasä vacasä dåñöyä
gåhyate 'nyair apéndriyaiù
aham eva na matto 'nyad
iti budhyadhvam aïjasä
SYNONYMS
manasä—by the mind; vacasä—by speech; dåñöyä—by sight; gåhyate—is
perceived and thus accepted; anyaiù—by others; api—even; indriyaiù—senses;
aham—I; eva—indeed; na—not; mattaù—besides Me; anyat—anything else;
iti—thus; budhyadhvam—you should all understand; aïjasä—by
straightforward analysis of the facts.
TRANSLATION
Within this world, whatever is perceived by the mind, speech, eyes or other
senses is Me alone and nothing besides Me. All of you please understand this by
a straightforward analysis of the facts.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa has already explained that if the sages consider all living
entities to be the same, or if they consider the living entity to be the same as
his body, then their question ("Who are You?") is inappropriate. Now the Lord
refutes the conception that He is a Supreme God far beyond and different
from everything within this world. Modern agnostic philosophers preach that
God created the world and then retired or went away. According to them, God
has no tangible connection with this world, nor does He interfere in human
affairs. Ultimately, they claim, God is so great that He cannot be known;
therefore no one should waste time trying to understand God. To refute such
foolish ideas, the Lord here explains that since everything is the expansion of
His potency, He is not different from anything. Nothing can exist separately
from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and thus everything shares in the
Lord's nature, although some manifestations are superior and others inferior.
The Lord is testing the intelligence of the sages by pointing out various
contradictions in their questions. Even if the Lord is supreme, He is not
different from His creation; therefore, what is the meaning of the question
"Who are You?" We can clearly see that the Lord is paving the way for a deep
discussion of spiritual knowledge.
TEXT 25
gAuNAeSvaAivazAtae caetaAe
gAuNAAêetais$a ca ‘ajaA:
jaIvasya de"h" oBayaM
gAuNAAêetaAe mad"Atmana:
guëeñv äviçate ceto
guëäç cetasi ca prajäù
jévasya deha ubhayaà
guëäç ceto mad-ätmanaù
SYNONYMS
guëeñu—in the sense objects; äviçate—enters; cetaù—the mind; guëäù—the
sense objects; cetasi—in the mind; ca—also (enter); prajäù—My dear sons;
jévasya—of the living entity; dehaù—the outward body, existing as
designation; ubhayam—both of these; guëäù—the sense objects; cetaù—the
mind; mat-ätmanaù—having Me as the Supreme Soul.
TRANSLATION
My dear sons, the mind has a natural proclivity to enter into the material
sense objects, and similarly the sense objects enter into the mind; but both this
material mind and the sense objects are merely designations that cover the spirit
soul, who is part and parcel of Me.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa in the form of Haàsa-avatära, on the pretext of finding
contradictions in the simple inquiry of the sons of Brahmä ("Who are You?"), is
actually preparing to teach the sages perfect spiritual knowledge, but only after
first rejecting two false concepts of life, namely that all living entities are the
same in all respects and that the living entity is identical with his outward or
subtle body. Lord Kåñëa now answers the difficult question that puzzled even
Lord Brahmä. According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, the sons of
Lord Brahmä were thinking as follows. "Our dear Lord, if it is indeed true that
we are unintelligent, still Your Lordship has stated that You are actually
everything because everything is the expansion of Your potency. Therefore,
You are also the mind and the sense objects, which are the subject matter of
our question. The material sense objects always enter into the functions of the
mind, and similarly, the mind always enters into the material sense objects.
Thus, it is proper that we inquire from Your Lordship about the process by
which the sense objects will no longer enter the mind and the mind will no
longer enter the sense objects. Please be merciful and give us the answer." The
Lord answers as follows. "My dear sons, it is a fact that the mind enters into the
material sense objects and the sense objects into the mind. Thus, although the
living entity is actually part and parcel of Me, being, as I am also, eternally
conscious, and although the eternal form of the living entity is spiritual, in
conditioned life the living entity artificially imposes upon himself the mind
and sense objects, which act as covering designations of the eternal soul. Since
it is the natural function of the material mind and sense objects to mutually
interact, how can you possibly endeavor to prevent such a mutual attraction?
Since both the material mind and sense objects are useless, they both should be
completely given up, and thus automatically you will be free from all material
duality."
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé points out that the symptom of the material mind is
the tendency to consider oneself to be the ultimate doer and enjoyer.
Naturally, one with such a puffed-up mentality is helplessly attracted by the
sense objects. One who considers himself to be the doer and enjoyer will be
irresistibly attracted to the means for attaining sense gratification and false
prestige, namely, exploitation of material objects. Above the material mind,
however, is intelligence, which can perceive the existence of the eternal spirit
soul. It is not possible to separate the material mind from the sense objects,
because they naturally exist together. Therefore, by intelligence, one must
realize one's eternal form as spirit soul, part and parcel of the Lord, and
completely reject the bogus material mentality. One who revives his original
spiritual mentality becomes automatically detached from material attraction.
Therefore, one should cultivate knowledge of the falsity of sense gratification.
When the mind or senses are attracted to material enjoyment, the superior
intelligence must immediately detect such illusion. In this way, one should
purify one's mentality. By devotional service to the Lord, such detachment and
intelligence automatically awaken, and by full understanding of one's original
spiritual form, one is properly situated in eternal consciousness.
TEXT 26
gAuNAeSau caAivazAi»aÔama,
@BaIºNAM gAuNAs$aevayaA
gAuNAAê icaÔa‘aBavaA
maåU"pa oBayaM tyajaeta,
guëeñu cäviçac cittam
abhékñëaà guëa-sevayä
guëäç ca citta-prabhavä
mad-rüpa ubhayaà tyajet
SYNONYMS
guëeñu—in the sense objects; ca—and; äviçat—entered; cittam—the mind;
abhékñëam—again and again; guëa-sevayä—by sense gratification; guëäù—and
the material sense objects; ca—also; citta—within the mind;
prabhaväù—existing prominently; mat-rüpaù—one who has realized that he is
not different from Me, and who is thus absorbed in My form, pastimes, etc.;
ubhayam—both (the mind and sense objects); tyajet—should give up.
TRANSLATION
A person who has thus achieved Me by understanding that he is not
different from Me realizes that the material mind is lodged within the sense
objects because of constant sense gratification, and that the material objects are
existing prominently within the material mind. Having understood My
transcendental nature, he gives up both the material mind and its objects.
PURPORT
The Lord again states here that it is most difficult to separate the material
mind from its objects because the material mind by definition considers itself
to be the doer and enjoyer of everything. It must be understood that giving up
the material mind does not mean giving up all mental activities, but instead
means purifying the mind and engaging one's enlightened mentality in the
devotional service of the Lord. Since time immemorial the material mind and
senses have been in contact with the sense objects; therefore, how is it possible
for the material mind to give up its objects, which are the basis of its existence?
And not only does the mind reach out to material objects, but also, because of
the mind's desires, the material objects cannot remain out of the mind,
helplessly entering at every moment. Thus, separation between the mind and
sense objects is not actually feasible, nor does it serve any purpose. If one
retains a material mentality, considering oneself to be supreme, one may
renounce sense gratification, considering it to be ultimately the cause of
unhappiness, but one will not be able to remain on such an artificial platform,
nor will such renunciation serve any real purpose. Without surrender to the
lotus feet of the Lord, mere renunciation cannot take one out of this material
world.
Just as the sun's rays are part of the sun, the living entities are part of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. When the living entity is completely
absorbed in his identity as the part and parcel of the Personality of Godhead,
he becomes actually wise and easily gives up the material mind and sense
objects. The word mad-rüpaù in this verse indicates absorption of the mind in
the form, qualities, pastimes and associates of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Immersed in such ecstatic meditation, one should render devotional
service to the Lord, and this will automatically drive away the influence of
sense gratification. By himself, the living entity does not have the potency to
give up his false identification with the material mind and sense objects, but by
worshiping the Lord in the mood of being His eternal part-and-parcel servant,
one is infused with the Lord's potency, which easily drives away the darkness
of ignorance.
TEXT 27
jaAƒatsva«a: s$auSauæaM ca
gAuNAtaAe bauiÜ"va{Ôaya:
taAs$aAM ivalaºaNAAe jaIva:
s$aAiºatvaena ivainaiêta:
jägrat svapnaù suñuptaà ca
guëato buddhi-våttayaù
täsäà vilakñaëo jévaù
säkñitvena viniçcitaù
SYNONYMS
jägrat—being awake; svapnaù—dreaming; su-suptam—deep sleep; ca—also;
guëataù—caused by the modes of nature; buddhi—of intelligence;
våttayaù—the functions; täsäm—from such functions; vilakñaëaù—possessing
different characteristics; jévaù—the living entity; säkñitvena—with the
characteristic of being a witness; viniçcitaù—is ascertained.
TRANSLATION
Waking, sleeping and deep sleep are the three functions of the intelligence
and are caused by the modes of material nature. The living entity within the
body is ascertained to possess characteristics different from these three states
and thus remains us a witness to them.
PURPORT
The spirit soul actually has nothing to do with the material world, having
no permanent or natural relationship with it. Real renunciation means to give
up the illusory identification with matter in its subtle and gross forms.
Suñuptam, or deep sleep, indicates sleeping without any dreams or conscious
activity. These three states are described by Lord Kåñëa as follows:
sattväj jägaraëaà vidyäd
rajasä svapnam ädiçet
prasväpaà tamasä jantos
turéyaà triñu santatam
"One should know that wakefulness is born of the mode of goodness, dreams
from the mode of passion, and deep dreamless sleep from the mode of
ignorance. The fourth element, pure consciousness, is different from these
three and pervades them." (SB 11.25.20) Real freedom means säkñitvena, or to
exist as a witness to the functions of illusion. Such an advantageous position is
achieved by development of Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 28
yaihR" s$aMs$a{itabanDaAe'yama,
@AtmanaAe gAuNAva{iÔad":
maiya tauyaeR isTataAe ja÷Ata,
tyaAgAstaÖ"NAcaetas$aAma,
yarhi saàsåti-bandho 'yam
ätmano guëa-våtti-daù
mayi turye sthito jahyät
tyägas tad guëa-cetasäm
SYNONYMS
yarhi—whereas; saàsåti—of material intelligence or material existence;
bandhaù—bondage; ayam—this is; ätmanaù—of the soul; guëa—in the modes
of nature; våtti-daù—that which gives occupations; mayi—in Me; turye—in
the fourth element (beyond wakefulness, dreaming and deep sleep);
sthitaù—being situated; jahyät—one should give up; tyägaù—renunciation;
tat—at that time; guëa—of the material sense objects; cetasäm—and of the
material mind.
TRANSLATION
The spirit soul is trapped in the bondage of material intelligence, which
awards him constant engagement in the illusory modes of nature. But I am the
fourth stage of consciousness, beyond wakefulness, dreaming and deep sleep.
Becoming situated in Me, the soul should give up the bondage of material
consciousness. At that time, the living entity will automatically renounce the
material sense objects and the material mind.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa now specifically answers the questions that the sages originally
placed before Lord Brahmä. Ultimately, the spirit soul has nothing to do with
the material sense objects and modes of nature. But because of one's false
identification with the material body, the modes of nature are empowered to
engage one in illusory occupations. By destroying this false identification with
matter, the soul gives up the illusory occupations awarded by the modes of
nature. It is clearly stated in this verse that the living entity is not empowered
to independently free himself from illusion, but must situate himself in Kåñëa
consciousness, in full awareness of the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 29
@h"ÆÿAr"k{(taM banDama,
@AtmanaAe'TaRivapayaRyama,
ivaã"AiªaivaRâ s$aMs$aAr"-
icantaAM tauyaeR isTatastyajaeta,
ahaìkära-kåtaà bandham
ätmano 'rtha-viparyayam
vidvän nirvidya saàsäracintäà
turye sthitas tyajet
SYNONYMS
ahaìkära—by false ego; kåtam—produced; bandham—bondage; ätmanaù—of
the soul; artha—of that which is really valuable; viparyayam—being the
opposite; vidvän—one who knows; nirvidya—being detached; saàsära—in
material existence; cintäm—constant thoughts; turye—in the fourth element,
the Lord; sthitaù—being situated; tyajet—should give up.
TRANSLATION
The false ego of the living entity places him in bondage and awards him
exactly the opposite of what he really desires. Therefore, an intelligent person
should give up his constant anxiety to enjoy material life and remain situated in
the Lord, who is beyond the functions of material consciousness.
PURPORT
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé comments as follows. "How does material existence
cause the bondage of the living entity, and how can such bondage be given up?
The Lord explains this here by the word ahaìkära-kåtam. Because of false ego,
one is bound up in the network of illusion. Artha-viparyayam indicates that
although the living entity desires blissful life, eternity and knowledge, he
adopts procedures that actually cover over his eternal, blissful nature and give
him exactly the opposite result. The living entity does not want death and
suffering, but these are actually the results of material existence, which is
therefore useless for all practical purposes. An intelligent person should
contemplate the unhappiness of material life and thus become situated in the
transcendental Lord. The word saàsära-cintäm can be understood as follows.
Saàsära, or material existence, indicates material intelligence, because
material existence only occurs because of the living entity's false intellectual
identification with the material world. Because of this misidentification, one
becomes overwhelmed with saàsära-cintäm, anxiety to enjoy the material
world. One should become situated in the Lord and give up such useless
anxiety."
TEXT 30
yaAvaªaAnaATaRDaI: pauMs$aAe
na inavataeRta yauil(iBa:
jaAgAtyaRipa svapaªaÁa:
sva«ae jaAgAr"NAM yaTaA
yävan nänärtha-dhéù puàso
na nivarteta yuktibhiù
jägarty api svapann ajïaù
svapne jägaraëaà yathä
SYNONYMS
yävat—as long as; nänä—of many; artha—values; dhéù—the conception;
puàsaù—of a person; na—does not; nivarteta—subside; yuktibhiù—by the
appropriate methods (described by Me); jägarti—being awake; api—although;
svapan—sleeping, dreaming; ajïaù—one who does not see things as they are;
svapne—in a dream; jägaraëam—being awake; yathä—just as.
TRANSLATION
According to My instructions, one should fix the mind on Me alone. If,
however, one continues to see many different values and goals in life rather
than seeing everything within Me, then although apparently awake, one is
actually dreaming due to incomplete knowledge, just as one may dream that one
has wakened from a dream.
PURPORT
One who is not Kåñëa conscious cannot understand that everything is
resting within Lord Kåñëa, and thus it is impossible for him to retire from
material sense gratification. One may adopt a particular process of salvation
and consider oneself to be "saved"; nevertheless, his material conditioning will
remain and thus he will maintain his attachment to the material world. While
one is dreaming he sometimes imagines that he has awakened from a dream
and is experiencing normal consciousness. Similarly, one may consider oneself
to be saved, but if he remains absorbed in making material value judgements
between good and bad, without reference to devotional service to the Supreme
Lord, he is understood to be a conditioned soul covered by the illusory
identification with matter.
TEXT 31
@s$aÔvaAd"AtmanaAe'nyaeSaAM
BaAvaAnaAM tatk{(taA iBad"A
gAtayaAe he"tavaêAsya
ma{SaA sva«aä{"zAAe yaTaA
asattväd ätmano 'nyeñäà
bhävänäà tat-kåtä bhidä
gatayo hetavaç cäsya
måñä svapna-dåço yathä
SYNONYMS
asattvät—because of lacking factual existence; ätmanaù—from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; anyeñäm—of others; bhävänäm—states of existence;
tat—by them; kåtä—created; bhidä—difference or separation;
gatayaù—destinations such as going to heaven; hetavaù—fruitive activities,
which are the cause of future rewards; ca—also; asya—of the living entity;
måñä—false; svapna—of a dream; dåçaù—of the seer; yathä—just as.
TRANSLATION
Those states of existence that are conceived of as separate from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead have no actual existence, although they create a sense
of separation from the Absolute Truth. Just as the seer of a dream imagines
many different activities and rewards, similarly, because of the sense of an
existence separate from the Lord's existence, the living entity falsely performs
fruitive activities, thinking them to be the cause of future rewards and
destinations.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura comments as follows: "Although Lord
Kåñëa in His form of Haàsa-avatära has condemned the intelligence that sees
duality and separate values within the material world, the Vedas themselves
institute the system of varëäçrama-dharma, by which the entire human society
is divided into different castes, occupations and spiritual statuses. Therefore,
how can the Lord recommend that one give up one's faith in this Vedic
system? The answer is given in this verse as follows. The words anyeñäà
bhävänäm, or 'of other states of existence,' refer to the innumerable divisions
of false identification with the material body, mind, occupation, and so on.
Such identification is illusion, and the material divisions of the varëäçrama
system are certainly based on this illusion. The Vedic literatures promise
heavenly rewards such as residence in upper planetary systems and prescribe
the means to acquire such rewards. However, both the rewards and the means
for achieving them are ultimately illusion. Since this world is the Lord's
creation, one cannot deny that its existence is also real; yet the living entity
who identifies the creations of this world as belonging to himself is certainly in
illusion. The example may be given that horns are real and rabbits are real, but
if one imagines a rabbit's horns, that is certainly illusion, though a rabbit's
horns may occur in a dream. Similarly, the living entity dreams of a permanent
relationship within the material world. One may dream that one is feasting on
sumptuous sweet rice prepared with milk and sugar, but there is no actual
nutritional value in the dream of royal feasting."
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura remarks in this regard that just as
one soon forgets the experience of a dream after awakening, similarly, a
liberated soul in Kåñëa consciousness does not see anything substantial in even
the most exalted rewards offered by the Vedas, such as promotion to the
heavenly planets. Therefore Lord Kåñëa advised Arjuna in Bhagavad-gétä to
remain fixed in self-realization, without being deviated by fruitive rituals
performed in the name of religion.
TEXT 32
yaAe jaAgAre" baih"r"nauºaNADaimaRNAAe'TaARna,
BauÈeÿ s$amastak(r"NAEôR$id" tats$aä{"ºaAna,
sva«ae s$auSauæa opas$aMh"r"tae s$a Wk(:
sma{tyanvayaAit‡agAuNAva{iÔaä{"igAin‰"yaezA:
yo jägare bahir anukñaëa-dharmiëo 'rthän
bhuìkte samasta-karaëair hådi tat-sadåkñän
svapne suñupta upasaàharate sa ekaù
småty-anvayät tri-guëa-våtti-dåg indriyeçaù
SYNONYMS
yaù—the living entity who; jägare—while awake; bahiù—external;
anukñaëa-momentary; dharmiëaù—qualities; arthän—the body and mind and
their experiences; bhuìkte—enjoys; samasta—with all; karaëaiù—the senses;
hådi—within the mind; tat-sadåkñän—experiences similar to those in
wakefulness; svapne—in dreams; suñupte—in deep dreamless sleep;
upasaàharate—merges into ignorance; saù—he; ekaù—one; småti—of
memory; anvayät—by the succession; tri-guëa—of the three stages
wakefulness, dream and dreamless sleep; våtti—functions; dåk—seeing;
indriya—of the senses; éçaù—becomes the lord.
TRANSLATION
While awake the living entity enjoys with all of his senses the fleeting
characteristics of the material body and mind; while dreaming he enjoys similar
experiences within the mind; and in deep dreamless sleep all such experiences
merge into ignorance. By remembering and contemplating the succession of
wakefulness, dreaming and deep sleep, the living entity can understand that he
is one throughout the three stages of consciousness and is transcendental. Thus,
he becomes the lord of the senses.
PURPORT
In verse 30 of this chapter Lord Kåñëa stated that one must retire from
material duality by the proper means, which the Lord now explains. One may
first consider the three phases of consciousness mentioned above and then
understand one's own transcendental position as spirit soul. One experiences
childhood, boyhood, adolescence, adulthood, middle age and old age, and
throughout these phases one is experiencing things while awake and while
dreaming. Similarly, one may, by careful intelligence, understand one's lack of
consciousness during deep sleep, and thus through intelligence one may have
experience of lack of consciousness.
One may argue that it is actually the senses that experience during
wakefulness and that it is the mind that experiences during dreams. However,
the Lord here states, indriyeçaù: the living entity is actually the lord of the
senses and mind, although temporarily he has become a victim of their
influence. By Kåñëa consciousness one may resume one's rightful position as
master of the mental and sensory faculties. Also, since the living entity can
remember his experiences in these three stages of consciousness, he is
ultimately the experiencing agent or the seer of all phases of consciousness. He
remembers, "I saw so many things in my dream, and then my dream ended and
I didn't see anything. Now I'm waking up." This universal experience can be
understood by everyone, and thus everyone can understand that one's actual
identity is separate from the material body and mind.
TEXT 33
WvaM ivama{zya gAuNAtaAe manas$as$‡yavasTaA
manmaAyayaA maiya k{(taA wita inaiêtaATaAR:
s$aiHC$â h"AdR"manaumaAnas$aäu"il(taIºNA
ÁaAnaAis$anaA Bajata maAiKalas$aMzAyaAiDama,
evaà vimåçya guëato manasas try-avasthä
man-mäyayä mayi kåtä iti niçcitärthäù
saïchidya härdam anumäna-sad-ukti-tékñëa
jïänäsinä bhajata mäkhila-saàçayädhim
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; vimåçya—considering; guëataù—by the modes of nature;
manasaù—of the mind; tri-avasthäù—the three states of consciousness;
mat-mäyayä—by the influence of My illusory potency; mayi—in Me;
kåtäù—imposed; iti—thus; niçcita-arthäù—those who have ascertained the
actual meaning of the soul; saïchidya—cutting off; härdam—situated in the
heart; anumäna—by logic; sat-ukti—and by the instructions of sages and the
Vedic literatures; tékñëa—sharpened; jïäna—of knowledge; asinä—by the
sword; bhajata—all of you worship; mä—Me; akhila—of all; saàçaya—doubts;
ädhim—the cause (false ego).
TRANSLATION
You should consider how, by the influence of My illusory energy, these
three states of the mind, caused by the modes of nature, have been artificially
imagined to exist in Me. Having definitely ascertained the truth of the soul, you
should utilize the sharpened sword of knowledge, acquired by logical reflection
and from the instructions of sages and Vedic literatures, to completely cut off
the false ego, which is the breeding ground of all doubts. All of you should then
worship Me, who am situated within the heart.
PURPORT
One who has obtained transcendental knowledge is no longer dependent
on the three stages of ordinary consciousness, namely waking, dreaming and
dreamless sleep. One thus rids one's material mind of the tendency to become
the enjoyer of the inferior energy of the Lord, and one sees everything as part
and parcel of the Lord's potency, meant only for the enjoyment of the Lord
Himself. In such a state of consciousness, one naturally surrenders fully to the
Lord's devotional service, which Lord Haàsa here advises the sons of Lord
Brahmä to take up.
TEXT 34
wRºaeta iva”amaimadM" manas$aAe ivalaAs$aM
ä{"íM" ivanaí"maitalaAelamalaAtaca‚(ma,
ivaÁaAnamaek(mauç&Daeva ivaBaAita maAyaA
sva«aiñDaA gAuNAivas$agARk{(taAe ivak(lpa:
ékñeta vibhramam idaà manaso viläsaà
dåñöaà vinañöam ati-lolam aläta-cakram
vijïänam ekam urudheva vibhäti mäyä
svapnas tridhä guëa-visarga-kåto vikalpaù
SYNONYMS
ékñeta—one should see; vibhramam—as illusion or mistake; idam—this
(material world); manasaù—of the mind; viläsam—appearance or jumping;
dåñöam—here today; vinañöam—gone tomorrow; ati-lolam—extremely
flickering; aläta-cakram—just like the moving red line created by whirling a
fiery stick; vijïänam—the spirit soul, by nature fully conscious; ekam—is one;
urudhä—in many divisions; iva—as if; vibhäti—appears; mäyä—this is illusion;
svapnaù—merely a dream; tridhä—in three divisions; guëa—of the modes of
nature; visarga—by the transformation; kåtaù—created; vikalpaù—variety of
perception or imagination.
TRANSLATION
One should see that the material world is a distinct illusion appearing in the
mind, because material objects have an extremely flickering existence and are
here today and gone tomorrow. They can be compared to the streaking red line
created by whirling a fiery stick. The spirit soul by nature exists in the single
state of pure consciousness. However, in this world he appears in many
different forms and stages of existence. The modes of nature divide the soul's
consciousness into normal wakefulness, dreaming and dreamless sleep. All such
varieties of perception, however, are actually mäyä and exist only like a dream.
PURPORT
The Lord now describes an additional process for transcending the illusory
interaction of the material mind and material sense objects. Läsa means
"jumping" or "dancing," and thus manaso viläsam here indicates that the
material mind is jumping superficially from one conception of life to another.
Our original consciousness, however, is one (vijïänam ekam). Therefore, one
should carefully study the flickering "here today, gone tomorrow" nature of the
material world and detach oneself from the illusory variety of mäyä.
TEXT 35
ä{"ií"mtata: ‘aitainavatyaR inava{Ôata{SNAs$a,
taUSNAI%M Bavaeiªajas$auKaAnauBavaAe inar"Ih":
s$anä{"zyatae ¸( ca yad"Id"mavastaubauÜ"YaA
tyalM( ”amaAya na Bavaetsma{itar"AinapaAtaAta,
dåñöim tataù pratinivartya nivåtta-tåñëas
tüñëéà bhaven nija-sukhänubhavo niréhaù
sandåçyate kva ca yadédam avastu-buddhyä
tyaktaà bhramäya na bhavet småtir ä-nipätät
SYNONYMS
dåñöim—sight; tataù—from that illusion; pratinivartya—pulling away;
nivåtta—ceased; tåñëaù—material hankering; tüñëém—silent; bhavet—one
should become; nija—one's own (of the soul); sukha—happiness;
anubhavaù—perceiving; niréhaù—without material activities; sandåçyate—is
observed; kva ca—sometimes; yadi—if; idam—this material world; avastu—of
not being reality; buddhyä—by the consciousness; tyaktam—given up;
bhramäya—further illusion; na—not; bhavet—may become;
småtiù—remembrance; ä-nipätät—until giving up the material body.
TRANSLATION
Having understood the temporary illusory nature of material things, and
thus having pulled one's vision away from illusion, one should remain without
material desires. By experiencing the happiness of the soul, one should give up
material speaking and activities. If sometimes one must observe the material
world, one should remember that it is not ultimate reality and therefore one has
given it up. By such constant remembrance up till the time of death, one will
not again fall into illusion.
PURPORT
To maintain the material body one cannot avoid eating and sleeping. In
these and other ways, one will sometimes be forced to deal with the material
world and the physical aspects of one's own body. At such times one should
remember that the material world is not actual reality and that therefore one
has given it up to become Kåñëa conscious. By such constant remembrance, by
enjoying spiritual bliss within oneself and by retiring from any material
activities of the mind, speech or body, one will not fall into material illusion.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura comments as follows. "The living
entity, while living in the external energy of the Lord, should give up any
anxiety for sense gratification and should not act for his personal enjoyment.
Rather, one should search out spiritual bliss through devotional service to the
Supreme Lord. By reviving one's relationship with Lord Kåñëa, one will
understand that if one accepts any material object for one's personal
enjoyment, attachment will inevitably develop, and thus one will be
bewildered by illusion. By gradually developing one's spiritual body, one will no
longer desire to enjoy anything within the material world."
TEXT 36
de"hM" ca naìr"mavaisTatamauitTataM vaA
is$aÜ"Ae na pazyaita yataAe'DyagAmatsvaè&pama,
dE"vaAd"paetamaTa dE"vavazAAäu"paetaM
vaAs$aAe yaTaA pair"k{(taM maid"r"Amad"AnDa:
dehaà ca naçvaram avasthitam utthitaà vä
siddho na paçyati yato 'dhyagamat svarüpam
daiväd apetam atha daiva-vaçäd upetaà
väso yathä parikåtaà madirä-madändhaù
SYNONYMS
deham—the material body; ca—also; naçvaram—to be destroyed;
avasthitam—seated; utthitam—risen; vä—or; siddhaù—one who is perfect; na
paçyati—does not see; yataù—because; adhyagamat—he has achieved;
sva-rüpam—his actual spiritual identity; daivät—by destiny;
apetam—departed; atha—or thus; daiva—of destiny; vaçät—by the control;
upetam—achieved; väsaù—clothes; yathä—just as; parikåtam—placed on the
body; madirä—of liquor; mada—by the intoxication; andhaù—blinded.
TRANSLATION
Just as a drunken man does not notice if he is wearing his coat or shirt,
similarly, one who is perfect in self-realization and who has thus achieved his
eternal identity does not notice whether the temporary body is sitting or
standing. Indeed, if by God's will the body is finished or if by God's will he
obtains a new body, a self-realized soul does not notice, just as a drunken man
does not notice the situation of his outward dress.
PURPORT
A Kåñëa conscious person who has achieved his spiritual identity does not
accept sense gratification in the material world as the goal of his life. He is
constantly engaged in the service of the Lord and knows that the temporary
body and flickering mind are material. By superior intelligence in Kåñëa
consciousness he remains engaged in the Lord's service. The example of a
drunken man in this verse is very nice. It is common knowledge that at
mundane social gatherings men become drunk and lose all awareness of their
external situation. Similarly, a liberated soul has already achieved his spiritual
body and therefore knows that his continued existence does not depend on the
material body. A liberated soul does not, however, inflict punishment on the
body but rather remains neutral, naturally accepting his destiny as the will of
the Supreme.
TEXT 37
de"h"Ae'ipa dE"vavazAgA: Kalau k(maR yaAvata,
svaAr"mBakM( ‘aitas$amaIºata Wva s$aAs$au:
taM s$a‘apaÂamaiDaè&X#s$amaAiDayaAegA:
svaA«aM paunanaR Bajatae ‘aitabauÜ"vastau:
deho 'pi daiva-vaça-gaù khalu karma yävat
svärambhakaà pratisamékñata eva säsuù
taà sa-prapaïcam adhirüòha-samädhi-yogaù
sväpnaà punar na bhajate pratibuddha-vastuù
SYNONYMS
dehaù—the body; api—even; daiva—of the Supreme; vaça-gaù—under the
control; khalu—indeed; karma—the chain of fruitive activities; yävat—as long
as; sva-ärambhakam—that which initiates or perpetuates itself;
pratisamékñate—goes on living and waiting; eva—certainly; sa-asuù—along
with the vital air and senses; tam—that (body); sa-prapaïcam—with its
variety of manifestations; adhirüòha—highly situated; samädhi—the stage of
perfection; yogaù—in the yoga system; sväpnam—just like a dream;
punaù—again; na bhajate—does not worship or cultivate; pratibuddha—one
who is enlightened; vastuù—in the supreme reality.
TRANSLATION
The material body certainly moves under the control of supreme destiny and
therefore must continue to live along with the senses and vital air as long as
one's karma is in effect. A self-realized soul, however, who is awakened to the
absolute reality and who is thus highly situated in the perfect stage of yoga, will
never again surrender to the material body and its manifold manifestations,
knowing it to be just like a body visualized in a dream.
PURPORT
Although Lord Kåñëa recommended in the previous verse that a
self-realized soul not give attention to the body, it is clear from the Lord's
statement here that one should not foolishly starve or injure the body, but
should patiently wait until the chain of one's previous fruitive work has
completely exhausted itself. At that time the body will automatically die
according to destiny. The following doubt may then arise: If a Kåñëa conscious
person pays proper attention to the maintenance of the body, is there danger
of again becoming attached to it? Lord Kåñëa here states that one who is highly
elevated in Kåñëa consciousness, having understood Lord Kåñëa to be the
actual vastu, or reality, never again surrenders to the illusory identification
with the material body, which is just like the body seen in a dream.
TEXT 38
mayaEtaäu"lM( vaAe iva‘aA
gAu÷M yats$aAÊÿYayaAegAyaAe:
jaAnaIta maAgAtaM yaÁaM
yauSmaÜ"maRivavaºayaA
mayaitad uktaà vo viprä
guhyaà yat säìkhya-yogayoù
jänéta mägataà yajïaà
yuñmad-dharma-vivakñayä
SYNONYMS
mayä—by Me; etat—this (knowledge); uktam—has been spoken; vaù—unto
you; vipräù—O brähmaëas; guhyam—confidential; yat—which; säìkhya—of
the philosophical method of distinguishing matter from spirit; yogayoù—and
the añöäìga-yoga system; jänéta—please understand; mä—Me; ägatam—who
has arrived; yajïam—as Viñëu, the Supreme Lord of sacrifice; yuñmat—your;
dharma—religious duties; vivakñayä—with the desire to explain.
TRANSLATION
My dear brähmaëas, I have now explained to you the confidential knowledge
of Säìkhya, by which one philosophically distinguishes matter from spirit, and
of añöäìga-yoga, by which one links up with the Supreme. Please understand
that I am the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, and that I have appeared
before you desiring to explain your actual religious duties.
PURPORT
To increase the faith of Lord Brahmä's sons and establish the prestige of His
teachings, Lord Kåñëa now formally identifies Himself as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Viñëu. As stated in Vedic literature, yajïo vai viñëuù.
After explaining the säìkhya-and añöäìga-yoga systems, the Lord clearly
answers the original question of the sages, "Who are You, sir?" Thus, Lord
Brahmä and his sons were enlightened by Lord Haàsa.
TEXT 39
@hM" yaAegAsya s$aAÊÿYasya
s$atyasyataRsya taejas$a:
par"AyaNAM iã"ja™aeï"A:
i™aya: k(LtaeRdR"masya ca
ahaà yogasya säìkhyasya
satyasyartasya tejasaù
paräyaëaà dvija-çreñöhäù
çriyaù kérter damasya ca
SYNONYMS
aham—I; yogasya—of the yoga system; säìkhyasya—of the system of analytic
philosophy; satyasya—of virtuous action; åtasya—of truthful religious
principles; tejasaù—of power; para-ayanam—the ultimate shelter;
dvija-çreñöhäù—O best of the brähmaëas; çriyaù—of beauty; kérteù—of fame;
damasya—of self-control; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
O best of the brähmaëas, please know that I am the supreme shelter of the
yoga system, analytic philosophy, virtuous action, truthful religious principles,
power, beauty, fame and self-control.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, the synonymous words satyasya and
åtasya refer to, respectively, the proper or virtuous execution of religious
principles and a convincing presentation of religion. Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura points out that the sons of Brahmä were struck with
wonder at the presentation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and were
thinking, "What wonderful knowledge we have just heard." The Lord,
recognizing their astonishment, spoke this verse to confirm their
understanding of Him.
TEXT 40
maAM Bajainta gAuNAA: s$avaeR
inagAuRNAM inar"paeºak(ma,
s$auô$dM" i‘ayamaAtmaAnaM
s$aAmyaAs$aËÿAd"yaAe'gAuNAA:
mäà bhajanti guëäù sarve
nirguëaà nirapekñakam
suhådaà priyam ätmänaà
sämyäsaìgädayo 'guëäù
SYNONYMS
mäm—Me; bhajanti—serve and take shelter of; guëäù—qualities; sarve—all;
nirguëam—free from the modes of nature; nirapekñakam—detached;
su-hådam—the well-wisher; priyam—the most dear; ätmänam—the Supersoul;
sämya—being equally situated everywhere; asaìga—detachment;
ädayaù—and so on; aguëäù—free from the transformation of the material
modes.
TRANSLATION
All superior transcendental qualities, such as being beyond the modes of
nature, detached, the well-wisher, the most dear, the Supersoul, equally
situated everywhere, and free from material entanglement—all such qualities,
free from the transformations of material qualities, find their shelter and
worshipable object in Me.
PURPORT
Because in the previous verse Lord Kåñëa explained His exalted nature, the
sons of Brahmä might have slightly doubted the Lord's position, thinking that
they had detected some pride within the Lord's mind. Therefore, they may
have doubted the instructions they had just received from Lord Haàsa.
Anticipating any such reluctance, the Lord immediately clarifies the situation
in the present verse. The Lord explains that, unlike ordinary living entities
even up to the standard of Brahmä, the Lord's transcendental body is not
different from His eternal Self and has no material qualities such as false
egotism. The Lord's transcendental form is eternal, full of knowledge and bliss,
and is thus nirguëam, beyond the modes of nature. Because the Lord
completely ignores the so-called enjoyment offered by the illusory energy, He
is called nirapekñakam, and being the best well-wisher of His devotees, He is
called suhådam. Priyam indicates that the Lord is the supreme lovable object
and that He establishes wonderful affectionate relationships with His
devotees. Sämya indicates that the Lord is neutral and detached in all material
situations. These and other exalted qualities find their shelter and worshipable
object in the Lord, who does not take material designations into consideration
but awards His mercy to anyone who takes shelter of Him. In
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.16.26-30) mother Bhümi, the predominating deity of the
earth, gives a list of some of the Lord's transcendental qualities, and even more
are found in The Nectar of Devotion. Actually, the Lord's qualities are
unlimited, but a small sample is given here simply to establish the Lord's
transcendental position.
Çréla Madhväcärya has quoted from the Käla-saàhitä as follows. "The
demigods are not actually perfectly endowed with transcendental qualities.
Indeed, their opulences are limited, and therefore they worship the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the Absolute Truth, who is simultaneously free of all
material qualities and completely endowed with all transcendental qualities,
which exist in His personal body."
TEXT 41
wita mae iC$ªas$ande"h"A
maunaya: s$anak(Ad"ya:
s$aBaAjaiyatvaA par"yaA
BaftyaAgA{NAta s$aMstavaE:
iti me chinna-sandehä
munayaù sanakädayaù
sabhäjayitvä parayä
bhaktyägåëata saàstavaiù
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; me—by Me; chinna—destroyed; sandehäù—all their doubts;
munayaù—the sages; sanaka-ädayaù—headed by Sanaka-kumära;
sabhäjayitvä—fully worshiping Me; parayä—characterized by transcendental
love; bhaktyä—with devotion; agåëata—they chanted My glories;
saàstavaiù—with beautiful hymns.
TRANSLATION
[Lord Kåñëa continued:] My dear Uddhava, thus all of the doubts of the
sages headed by Sanaka were destroyed by My words. Fully worshiping Me with
transcendental love and devotion, they chanted My glories with excellent
hymns.
TEXT 42
taEr"hM" paUijata: s$aMyak,(
s$aMstauta: par"maiSaRiBa:
‘atyaeyaAya svakM( DaAma
pazyata: par"maeiï"na:
tair ahaà püjitaù saàyak
saàstutaù paramarñibhiù
pratyeyäya svakaà dhäma
paçyataù parameñöhinaù
SYNONYMS
taiù—by them; aham—I; püjitaù—worshiped; saàyak—perfectly;
saàstutaù—perfectly glorified; parama-åñibhiù—by the greatest of sages;
pratyeyäya—I returned; svakam—to My own; dhäma—abode; paçyataù
parameñöhinaù—as Lord Brahmä looked on.
TRANSLATION
The greatest of sages, headed by Sanaka Åñi, thus perfectly worshiped and
glorified Me, and as Lord Brahmä looked on, I returned to My own abode.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Eleventh Canto, Thirteenth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Haàsa-avatära Answers the Questions
of the Sons of Brahmä."
14. Lord Kåñëa Explains the Yoga System to Çré Uddhava
In this chapter, Kåñëa explains that devotional service to the Supreme Lord
is the most excellent method of spiritual practice. He also speaks about the
process of meditation.
Çré Uddhava wanted to know which process of spiritual advancement is the
best. He also desired to hear about the superexcellence of devotional service
free from ulterior motives. The Supreme Personality of Godhead replied to
him that the original process of religion revealed in the Vedas had become lost
during the time of annihilation. At the beginning of the new creation,
therefore, the Supreme Lord spoke it again to Brahmä. Brahmä repeated it to
Manu, Manu spoke it to the sages headed by Bhågu Muni, and these sages in
turn instructed this eternal religion to the demigods and demons. Because of
the living entities' multitude of diverse desires, this system of religion was
elaborately explained in different ways. Thus different philosophies arose,
including various atheistic doctrines. Because the living entity, bewildered by
illusion, is incapable of ascertaining his eternal benefit, he mistakenly
identifies ordinary vows of penance, austerity, etc., to be the topmost spiritual
practice. But the only true means of achieving happiness is to meditate on
offering everything to the Supreme Lord. In this way one becomes free from all
desires for selfish gratification through enjoyment of mundane sense objects,
and he becomes released from all hankering for either enjoyment or liberation.
The Lord then proceeded to describe the superior process of devotional
service, which destroys countless sinful reactions and produces many
symptoms of spiritual happiness, such as the standing of the hairs on end. Pure
devotion, having the power to purify the heart, enables one to achieve the
association of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and because the devotee is
very dear to the Lord and is always close to Him, he is able in turn to purify the
entire universe. By virtue of his unflinching devotion to the Lord, the devotee
can never be completely diverted by the objects of sense enjoyment, even if he
is not able to gain control over his senses in the beginning. One desiring to
attain the perfection of life is advised to give up all material processes of
elevation as well as the association of women. He should then merge his mind
constantly in thought of Lord Kåñëa. Finally, the Lord instructed Çré Uddhava
about the true object of meditation.
TEXT 1
™aIoÜ"va ovaAca
vad"inta k{(SNA ™aeyaAMis$a
baó"ina “aövaAid"na:
taeSaAM ivak(lpa‘aADaAnyama,
otaAh"Ae Wk(mauKyataA
çré-uddhava uväca
vadanti kåñëa çreyäàsi
bahüni brahma-vädinaù
teñäà vikalpa-prädhänyam
utäho eka-mukhyatä
SYNONYMS
çré-uddhavaù uväca—Çré Uddhava said; vadanti—they speak; kåñëa—my dear
Kåñëa; çreyäàsi—processes for advancement in life; bahüni—many;
brahma-vädinaù—the learned sages who have explained the Vedic literature;
teñäm—of all such processes; vikalpa—of varieties of perception;
prädhänyam—supremacy; uta—or; aho—indeed; eka—of one;
mukhyatä—being most important.
TRANSLATION
Çré Uddhava said: My dear Kåñëa, the learned sages who explain Vedic
literature recommend various processes for perfecting one's life. Considering
these varieties of viewpoint, my Lord, please tell me whether all these processes
are equally important, or whether one of them is supreme.
PURPORT
In order to clearly establish the exalted position of bhakti-yoga, or pure
devotional service to the Supreme Lord, Çré Uddhava requests Lord Kåñëa to
identify the supreme among all processes of self-realization. Not all Vedic
processes lead directly to the ultimate goal, pure love of God; some only
gradually elevate the consciousness of the living entity. For the purpose of
giving a general outline of the process of self-realization, sages may discuss the
various methods of elevation. But when the time comes to ascertain the most
perfect process, the secondary methods must be cleared from the path.
TEXT 2
BavataAed"Aô$ta: svaAimana,
Bail(yaAegAAe'napaeiºata:
inar"sya s$avaRta: s$aËMÿ
yaena tvayyaAivazAenmana:
bhavatodähåtaù svämin
bhakti-yogo 'napekñitaù
nirasya sarvataù saìgaà
yena tvayy äviçen manaù
SYNONYMS
bhavatä—by You; udähåtaù—clearly stated; svämin—O my Lord;
bhakti-yogaù—devotional service; anapekñitaù—without material desires;
nirasya—removing; sarvataù—in all respects; saìgam—material association;
yena—by which (devotional service); tvayi—in Your Lordship; äviçet—may
enter; manaù—the mind.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, You have clearly explained the process of unalloyed
devotional service, by which a devotee removes all material association from his
life, enabling him to fix his mind on You.
PURPORT
It is now clearly established that pure devotional service is the supreme
process for fixing the mind in the Supreme Truth, Lord Kåñëa. The next point
to be clarified is this: Can everyone practice this process, or is it limited to an
elite class of transcendentalists? In discussing the relative advantages of
different spiritual processes, one must immediately ascertain the goal of
spiritual life and then isolate the process that actually awards this goal.
Processes must be defined in terms of primary and secondary functions. A
method that gives one the highest perfection is primary, whereas processes
that merely assist or enhance the primary function are considered secondary.
The mind is most flickering and unsteady; therefore by clear intelligence one
must fix oneself in a progressive mode of life, and thus one can achieve the
Absolute Truth in this lifetime. This is the sober purpose of Lord Kåñëa's
conversation with Çré Uddhava.
TEXT 3
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
k(Alaena naí"A ‘alayae
vaANAIyaM vaed"s$aMiÁataA
mayaAd"AE “aöNAe ‘aAel(A
DamaAeR yasyaAM mad"Atmak(:
çré-bhagavän uväca
kälena nañöä pralaye
väëéyaà veda-saàjïitä
mayädau brahmaëe proktä
dharmo yasyäà mad-ätmakaù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; kälena—by the
influence of time; nañöä—lost; pralaye—at the time of annihilation;
väëé—message; iyam—this; veda-saàjïitä—consisting of the Vedas; mayä—by
Me; ädau—at the time of creation; brahmaëe—unto Lord Brahmä;
proktä—spoken; dharmaù—religious principles; yasyäm—in which;
mat-ätmakaù—identical with Me.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: By the influence of time, the
transcendental sound of Vedic knowledge was lost at the time of annihilation.
Therefore, when the subsequent creation took place, I spoke the Vedic
knowledge to Brahmä because I Myself am the religious principles enunciated in
the Vedas.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa explains to Uddhava that although many processes and
concepts of spiritual realization are described in the Vedas, the Vedas
ultimately recommend devotional service to the Supreme Lord. Lord Kåñëa is
the reservoir of all pleasure, and His devotees directly enter into the Lord's
hlädiné, or pleasure-giving, potency. Somehow or other one must fix one's mind
in Lord Kåñëa, and that is not possible without devotional service. One who
has not developed his attraction to Lord Kåñëa cannot restrain the senses from
inferior engagements. Since other Vedic processes do not actually award Lord
Kåñëa to the practitioner, they cannot offer the highest benefit in life. The
transcendental sound of the Vedas is itself the highest evidence, but one whose
senses and mind are entangled in sense gratification and mental speculation,
and whose heart is therefore covered by material dust, cannot directly receive
the transcendental Vedic message. Thus one cannot appreciate the exalted
position of devotional service to the Lord.
TEXT 4
taena ‘aAel(A svapau‡aAya
manavae paUvaRjaAya s$aA
tataAe Ba{gvaAd"yaAe'gA{õ"na,
s$aæa “aömah"SaRya:
tena proktä sva-puträya
manave pürva-jäya sä
tato bhågv-ädayo 'gåhëan
sapta brahma-maharñayaù
SYNONYMS
tena—by Brahmä; proktä—spoken; sva-puträya—to his son; manave—to
Manu; pürva-jäya—the oldest; sä—that Vedic knowledge; tataù—from Manu;
bhågu-ädayaù—those headed by Bhågu Muni; agåhëan—accepted;
sapta—seven; brahma—in Vedic literature; mahä-åñayaù—most learned sages.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä spoke this Vedic knowledge to his eldest son, Manu, and the
seven great sages headed by Bhågu Muni then accepted the same knowledge
from Manu.
PURPORT
Everyone engages in a certain way of life based on one's own nature and
propensities. Bhakti-yoga is the natural activity of one whose nature is
completely purified by association with the Supreme Lord. Other processes are
meant for those whose nature is still affected by the material modes, and thus
such processes, along with their results, are themselves also materially
contaminated. Devotional service to the Lord, however, is a pure spiritual
process, and by executing it with a pure consciousness one comes directly in
touch with the Personality of Godhead, who describes Himself in
Bhagavad-gétä (9.2) as pavitram idam uttamam, the supreme pure. The system
of paramparä, or disciplic succession, is illustrated in this and the previous
verse. The spiritual masters in Caitanya Mahäprabhu's movement are part of
such a disciplic succession, and through them the same Vedic knowledge
spoken by Brahmä to Manu is still available.
TEXTS 5-7
taeBya: ipata{Byastatpau‡aA
de"vad"AnavagAu÷k(A:
manauSyaA: is$aÜ"gAnDavaAR:
s$aivaâADar"caAr"NAA:
ik(nde"vaA: ik(ªar"A naAgAA
r"ºa:ik(mpauç&SaAd"ya:
baù"YastaeSaAM ‘ak{(tayaAe
r"ja:s$aÔvatamaAeBauva:
yaAiBaBaURtaAina iBaântae
BaUtaAnaAM patayastaTaA
yaTaA‘ak{(ita s$avaeRSaAM
ica‡aA vaAca: ›avainta ih"
tebhyaù pitåbhyas tat-puträ
deva-dänava-guhyakäù
manuñyäù siddha-gandharväù
sa-vidyädhara-cäraëäù
kindeväù kinnarä nägä
rakñaù-kimpuruñädayaù
bahvyas teñäà prakåtayo
rajaù-sattva-tamo-bhuvaù
yäbhir bhütäni bhidyante
bhütänäà patayas tathä
yathä-prakåti sarveñäà
citrä väcaù sravanti hi
SYNONYMS
tebhyaù—from them (Bhågu Muni, etc.); pitåbhyaù—from the forefathers;
tat—their; puträù—sons, descendants; deva—the demigods; dänava—demons;
guhyakäù—the Guhyakas; manuñyäù—human beings;
siddha-gandharväù—Siddhas and Gandharvas; sa-vidyädhara-cäraëäù—along
with Vidyädharas and Cäraëas; kindeväù—a different human species;
kinnaräù—half-humans; nägäù—snakes; rakñaù—demons; kimpuruña—an
advanced race of monkeys; ädayaù—and so on; bahvyaù—many different;
teñäm—of such living entities; prakåtayaù—desires or natures;
rajaù-sattva-tamaù-bhuvaù—being generated from the three modes of material
nature; yäbhiù—by such material desires or tendencies; bhütäni—all such
living entities; bhidyante—appear divided in many material forms;
bhütänäm—and their; patayaù—leaders; tathä—divided in the same way;
yathä-prakåti—according to propensity or desire; sarveñäm—of all of them;
citräù—variegated; väcaù—Vedic rituals and mantras; sravanti—flow down;
hi—certainly.
TRANSLATION
From the forefathers headed by Bhågu Muni and other sons of Brahmä
appeared many children and descendants, who assumed different forms as
demigods, demons, human beings, Guhyakas, Siddhas, Gandharvas,
Vidyädharas, Cäraëas, Kindevas, Kinnaras, Nägas, Kimpuruñas, and so on. All
of the many universal species, along with their respective leaders, appeared with
different natures and desires generated from the three modes of material nature.
Therefore, because of the different characteristics of the living entities within
the universe, there are a great many Vedic rituals, mantras and rewards.
PURPORT
If one is curious why Vedic literatures recommend so many different
methods of worship and advancement, the answer is given here. Bhågu, Maréci,
Atri, Aìgirä, Pulastya, Pulaha and Kratu are the seven great brähmaëa sages
and forefathers of this universe. The Kindevas are a race of human beings who
are, like the demigods, completely free from fatigue, sweat and body odor.
Seeing them, one may thus ask, kià deväù: "Are they demigods?" Actually, they
are human beings living on another planet within the universe. The Kinnaras
are so called because they are kiïcin naräù, or "a little like human beings." The
Kinnaras have either a human head or human body (but not both) combined
with a nonhuman form. The Kimpuruñas are so called because they resemble
human beings and thus prompt the question kià puruñäù: "Are these human
beings?" Actually, they are a race of monkeys who are almost like human
beings.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura explains that this verse describes
the varieties of forgetfulness of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The
different Vedic mantras and rituals are especially meant for the different
species of intelligent beings throughout the universe; but this proliferation of
Vedic formulas indicates only the variety of material illusion and not a variety
of ultimate purpose. The ultimate purpose of the many Vedic injunctions is
one—to know and love the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord
Himself is emphatically explaining this to Çré Uddhava.
TEXT 8
WvaM ‘ak{(itavaEica‡yaAä,"
iBaântae matayaAe na{NAAma,
paAr"mpayaeRNA ke(SaAiÂata,
paASaNx"matayaAe'pare"
evaà prakåti-vaicitryäd
bhidyante matayo nåëäm
päramparyeëa keñäïcit
päñaëòa-matayo 'pare
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; prakåti—of nature or desires; vaicitryät—due to the great variety;
bhidyante—are divided; matayaù—philosophies of life; nåëäm—among human
beings; päramparyeëa—by tradition or disciplic succession; keñäïcit—among
some people; päñaëòa—atheistic; matayaù—philosophies; apare—others.
TRANSLATION
Thus, due to the great variety of desires and natures among human beings,
there are many different theistic philosophies of life, which are handed down
through tradition, custom and disciplic succession. There are other teachers
who directly support atheistic viewpoints.
PURPORT
The word keñäïcit refers to those persons in various parts of the world who
are ignorant of the Vedic conclusion and thus concoct many unauthorized and
ultimately fruitless philosophies of life. Päñaëòa-matayaù refers to those who
directly oppose the Vedic conclusion. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura
has given a most interesting example, as follows. The water of the Ganges is
always pure and very sweet. On the banks of that great river, however, there
are several types of poisonous trees whose roots drink up the Ganges water
from the soil and use it to produce poisonous fruits. Similarly, those who are
atheistic or demoniac utilize their association with Vedic knowledge to
produce the poisonous fruits of atheistic or materialistic philosophy.
TEXT 9
manmaAyaAmaAeih"taiDaya:
pauç&SaA: pauç&SaSaRBa
™aeyaAe vad"ntyanaek(AntaM
yaTaAk(maR yaTaAç&ica
man-mäyä-mohita-dhiyaù
puruñäù puruñarñabha
çreyo vadanty anekäntaà
yathä-karma yathä-ruci
SYNONYMS
mat-mayä—by My illusory potency; mohita—bewildered; dhiyaù—those whose
intelligence; puruñäù—people; puruña-åñabha—O best among men;
çreyaù—what is good for people; vadanti—they speak; aneka-antam—in
innumerable ways; yathä-karma—according to their own activities;
yathä-ruci—according to what pleases them.
TRANSLATION
O best among men, the intelligence of human beings is bewildered by My
illusory potency, and thus, according to their own activities and whims, they
speak in innumerable ways about what is actually good for people.
PURPORT
Unlike the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the individual living entity is
not omniscient, therefore his activities and pleasures do not represent the
whole truth. According to one's individual way of doing things (yathä-karma)
and one's personal preference (yathä-ruci), one speaks to others about what is
good for them. Everyone thinks, "What is good for me is good for everyone."
Actually, the best thing for everyone is to surrender to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Lord Kåñëa, and thus realize one's eternal nature of
bliss and knowledge. Without knowledge of the Absolute Truth, many
so-called learned people are whimsically advising other whimsical people who
also lack perfect knowledge of the actual goal of life.
TEXT 10
DamaRmaeke( yazAêAnyae
k(AmaM s$atyaM d"maM zAmama,
@nyae vad"inta svaATa< vaA
Weìya< tyaAgABaAejanama,
ke(icaâÁaM tapaAe d"AnaM
˜ataAina inayamaAna, yamaAna,
dharmam eke yaçaç cänye
kämaà satyaà damaà çamam
anye vadanti svärthaà vä
aiçvaryaà tyäga-bhojanam
kecid yajïaà tapo dänaà
vratäni niyamän yamän
SYNONYMS
dharmam—pious activities; eke—some people; yaçaù—fame; ca—also;
anye—others; kämam—sense gratification; satyam—truthfulness;
damam—self-control; çamam—peacefulness; anye—others;
vadanti—propound; sva-artham—pursuing one's self-interest; vai—certainly;
aiçvaryam—opulence or political influence; tyäga—renunciation;
bhojanam—consumption; kecit—some people; yajïam—sacrifice;
tapaù—austerity; dänam—charity; vratäni—taking vows; niyamän—regular
religious duties; yamän—strict regulative discipline.
TRANSLATION
Some say that people will be happy by performing pious religious activities.
Others say that happiness is attained through fame, sense gratification,
truthfulness, self-control, peace, self-interest, political influence, opulence,
renunciation, consumption, sacrifice, penance, charity, vows, regulated duties
or strict disciplinary regulation. Each process has its proponents.
PURPORT
Dharmam eke refers to those atheistic philosophers called
karma-mémäàsakas, who state that one should not waste time worrying about
a kingdom of God that no one has ever seen and from which no one has ever
returned; rather, one should expertly utilize the laws of karma, performing
fruitive activities in such a way that one will always be well situated.
Concerning fame, it is said that as long as the fame of a human being is sung in
the pious planets, he may live for thousands of years in material heaven.
Kämam refers to Vedic texts like the Käma-sütra as well as millions of modern
books that advise one about sex pleasure. Some people state that the highest
virtue in life is honesty; others say it is self-control, peace of mind and so on.
Each viewpoint has proponents and "scriptures." Others say that law, order and
morality are the highest good, whereas still others propose political influence
as the real self-interest of human beings. Some state that one should give away
one's material possessions to the needy; others state that one should try to
enjoy this life as far as possible; and others recommend daily rituals,
disciplinary vows, penances, and so on.
TEXT 11
@Aântavanta WvaESaAM
laAek(A: k(maRivainaimaRtaA:
äu":KaAed"k(ARstamaAeinaï"A:
ºau"‰"A mand"A: zAucaAipaRtaA:
ädy-anta-vanta evaiñäà
lokäù karma-vinirmitäù
duùkhodarkäs tamo-niñöhäù
kñudrä mandäù çucärpitäù
SYNONYMS
ädi-anta-vantaù—possessing a beginning and end; eva—undoubtedly;
eñäm—of them (the materialistic); lokäù—achieved destinations; karma—by
one's material work; vinirmitäù—produced; duùkha—misery;
udarkäù—bringing as the future result; tamaù—ignorance; niñöhäù—situated
in; kñudräù—meager; mandäù—wretched; çucä—with lamentation;
arpitäù—filled.
TRANSLATION
All the persons I have just mentioned obtain temporary fruits from their
material work. Indeed, the meager and miserable situations they achieve bring
future unhappiness and are based on ignorance. Even while enjoying the fruits
of their work, such persons are filled with lamentation.
PURPORT
Those who have grasped temporary material things, mistaking them to be
ultimate reality, are not considered very intelligent by anyone except
themselves. Such foolish persons are always in anxiety because by the laws of
nature the very fruits of their work are constantly being transformed in ways
neither desired nor expected. The performer of Vedic rituals can elevate
himself to heavenly planets, whereas one who is atheistic has the privilege of
transferring himself to hell. The entire panorama of material existence is
actually uninteresting and dull (mandäù). One can make no real progress
within the material world; therefore one should take to Kåñëa consciousness
and prepare oneself to go back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 12
mayyaipaRtaAtmana: s$aBya
inar"paeºasya s$avaRta:
mayaAtmanaA s$auKaM yaÔata,
ku(ta: syaAiã"SayaAtmanaAma,
mayy arpitätmanaù sabhya
nirapekñasya sarvataù
mayätmanä sukhaà yat tat
kutaù syäd viñayätmanäm
SYNONYMS
mayi—in Me; arpita—fixed; ätmanaù—of one whose consciousness;
sabhya—O learned Uddhava; nirapekñasya—of one bereft of material desires;
sarvataù—in all respects; mayä—with Me; ätmanä—with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead or with one's own spiritual body; sukham—happiness;
yat tat—such; kutaù—how; syät—could it be; viñaya—in material sense
gratification; ätmanäm—of those who are attached.
TRANSLATION
O learned Uddhava, those who fix their consciousness on Me, giving up all
material desires, share with Me a happiness that cannot possibly be experienced
by those engaged in sense gratification.
PURPORT
The actual purport of Vedic knowledge is explained in this verse. The word
viñayätmanäm includes those who are cultivating material peace of mind,
self-control and speculative philosophy. But even if such persons rise to the
platform of sattva-guëa, the mode of goodness, they do not attain perfection,
because sattva-guëa, being material, is also part and parcel of mäyä, or illusion.
As stated by Çré Närada Muni,
kià vä yogena säìkhyena
nyäsa-svädhyäyayor api
kià vä çreyobhir anyaiç ca
na yaträtma-prado hariù
"The Supreme Personality of Godhead is not inclined to award Himself even
to one who executes the yoga system, speculative philosophy, the renounced
order of life or Vedic studies. Indeed, no so-called materially auspicious process
can induce the Lord to reveal Himself." (SB 4.31.12) According to Çréla
Çrédhara Svämé, one enjoys the happiness spoken of in this verse while
associating, in one's own spiritual body, with the supreme transcendental form
of the Lord. The Lord's transcendental form is filled with infinite, wonderful
qualities, and the happiness of being with the Lord is unlimited.
Unfortunately, materialistic people cannot possibly imagine such happiness,
since they are not at all inclined to love the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 13
@ik(Âanasya d"Antasya
zAAntasya s$amacaetas$a:
mayaA s$antauí"manas$a:
s$avaAR: s$auKamayaA id"zA:
akiïcanasya däntasya
çäntasya sama-cetasaù
mayä santuñöa-manasaù
sarväù sukha-mayä diçaù
SYNONYMS
akiïcanasya—of one who does not desire anything; däntasya—whose senses
are controlled; çäntasya—peaceful; sama-cetasaù—whose consciousness is
equal everywhere; mayä—with Me; santuñöa—completely satisfied;
manasaù—whose mind; sarväù—all; sukha-mayäù—full of happiness;
diçaù—directions.
TRANSLATION
One who does not desire anything within this world, who has achieved peace
by controlling his senses, whose consciousness is equal in all conditions and
whose mind is completely satisfied in Me finds only happiness wherever he
goes.
PURPORT
A devotee who is always meditating upon Lord Kåñëa experiences
transcendental sound, touch, form, flavor and aroma in the pastimes of the
Lord. These sublime perceptions are certainly due to the causeless mercy of
Lord Kåñëa upon one whose mind and senses are completely satisfied in Him.
Such a person finds only happiness wherever he goes. Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura gives the example that when a very wealthy man travels
all over the world, at every place he stays he always enjoys the same luxurious
standard of comfort. Similarly, one who has developed Kåñëa consciousness is
never separated from happiness, because Lord Kåñëa is all-pervading. The word
kiïcana indicates the so-called enjoyable things of this world. One who is
akiïcana has correctly understood that material sense gratification is simply
the glare of illusion, and therefore such a person is däntasya, or self-controlled,
çäntasya, or peaceful, and mayä santuñöa-manasaù, or completely satisfied with
his transcendental experience of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 14
na paAr"maeï"YaM na mahe"n‰"iDaSNyaM
na s$aAvaRBaAEmaM na r"s$aAiDapatyama,
na yaAegAis$aÜ"Ir"paunaBaRvaM vaA
mayyaipaRtaAtmaecC$ita maiã"naAnyata,
na pärameñöhyaà na mahendra-dhiñëyaà
na särvabhaumaà na rasädhipatyam
na yoga-siddhér apunar-bhavaà vä
mayy arpitätmecchati mad vinänyat
SYNONYMS
na—not; pärameñöhyam—the position or abode of Lord Brahmä; na—never;
mahä-indra-dhiñëyam—the position of Lord Indra; na—neither;
särvabhaumam—empire on the earth; na—nor; rasa-ädhipatyam—sovereignty
in the lower planetary systems; na—never; yoga-siddhéù—the eightfold yoga
perfections; apunaù-bhavam—liberation; vä—nor; mayi—in Me;
arpita—fixed; ätmä—consciousness; icchati—he desires; mat—Me;
vinä—without; anyat—anything else.
TRANSLATION
One who has fixed his consciousness on Me desires neither the position or
abode of Lord Brahmä or Lord Indra, nor an empire on the earth, nor
sovereignty in the lower planetary systems, nor the eightfold perfection of yoga,
nor liberation from birth and death. Such a person desires Me alone.
PURPORT
The position of the akiïcana pure devotee is described in this verse. Çré
Priyavrata Mahäräja is an example of a great devotee who was not interested
in universal sovereignty because his love was completely absorbed in the lotus
feet of the Lord. Even the greatest material enjoyment appears most
insignificant and useless to a pure devotee of the Lord.
TEXT 15
na taTaA mae i‘ayatama
@AtmayaAeinanaR zAÆÿr":
na ca s$aÆÿSaRNAAe na ™aIr,"
naEvaAtmaA ca yaTaA BavaAna,
na tathä me priyatama
ätma-yonir na çaìkaraù
na ca saìkarñaëo na çrér
naivätmä ca yathä bhavän
SYNONYMS
na—not; tathä—in the same way; me—to Me; priya-tamaù—most dear;
ätma-yoniù—Lord Brahmä, who is born from My body; na—nor;
saìkaraù—Lord Çiva; na—nor; ca—also; saìkarñaëaù—My direct expansion
Lord Saìkarñaëa; na—nor; çréù—the goddess of fortune; na—nor;
eva—certainly; ätmä—My own self as the Deity; ca—also; yathä—as much as;
bhavän—you.
TRANSLATION
My dear Uddhava, neither Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva, Lord Saìkarñaëa, the
goddess of fortune nor indeed My own self is as dear to Me as you are.
PURPORT
The Lord has described in the previous verses the unalloyed love of His
pure devotees for Him, and now the Lord describes His love for His devotees.
Ätma-yoni means Lord Brahmä, who is born directly from the Lord's body.
Lord Çiva always gives great pleasure to Lord Kåñëa by his constant meditation
upon Him, and Saìkarñaëa, or Balaräma, is the Lord's brother in kåñëa-lélä.
The goddess of fortune is the Lord's wife, and the word ätmä here indicates the
Lord's own self as the Deity. None of these personalities—even the Lord's own
self—are as dear to Him as His pure devotee Uddhava, an akiïcana devotee of
the Lord. Çréla Madhväcärya cites from Vedic literature the example that a
gentleman sometimes neglects his own interest and that of his children to give
charity to a poor beggar. Similarly, the Lord gives preference to a helpless
devotee who depends completely on His mercy. The only way to obtain the
Lord's mercy is through His causeless love, and the Lord is most lovingly
inclined toward those devotees who are most dependent on Him, just as
ordinary mothers and fathers worry more about their helpless children than
about those who are self-sufficient. Thus even if one lacks any material
qualification, one should simply depend upon the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, without any other interest, and surely one will achieve the highest
perfection of life.
TEXT 16
inar"paeºaM mauinaM zAAntaM
inavaE=rM" s$amad"zARnama,
@nau˜ajaAmyahM" inatyaM
paUyaeyaetyax.~i„are"NAuiBa:
nirapekñaà munià çäntaà
nirvairaà sama-darçanam
anuvrajämy ahaà nityaà
püyeyety aìghri-reëubhiù
SYNONYMS
nirapekñam—without personal desire; munim—always thinking of assisting Me
in My pastimes; çäntam—peaceful; nirvairam—not inimical to anyone;
sama-darçanam—equal consciousness everywhere; anuvrajämi—follow;
aham—I; nityam—always; püyeya—I may be purified (I will purify the
universe within Me); iti—thus; aìghri—of the lotus feet; reëubhiù—by the
dust.
TRANSLATION
With the dust of My devotees' lotus feet I desire to purify the material
worlds, which are situated within Me. Thus, I always follow the footsteps of
My pure devotees, who are free from all personal desire, rapt in thought of My
pastimes, peaceful, without any feelings of enmity, and of equal disposition
everywhere.
PURPORT
Just as the devotees always follow the footsteps of Lord Kåñëa, similarly
Lord Kåñëa, being a devotee of His devotees, follows the footsteps of His
devotees. A pure servitor of the Lord is always meditating on the pastimes of
the Lord and considering how to assist the Lord in His mission. All the
material universes are situated in Çré Kåñëa's body, as demonstrated to Arjuna,
mother Yaçodä and others. Lord Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and therefore there is no question of impurity in the Lord. Still, the Lord
desires to purify the universes situated within Him by taking the dust of the
lotus feet of His pure devotees. Without the dust of the lotus feet of the
devotees, it is not possible to engage in pure devotional service, without which
one cannot directly experience transcendental bliss. Lord Kåñëa thought, "I
have established this strict rule that one can enjoy My transcendental bliss
only through devotional service obtained from the dust of the lotus feet of My
devotees. Since I also desire to experience My own bliss, I will observe the
standard procedure and accept the dust of My devotees' feet." Çréla
Madhväcärya points out that Lord Kåñëa follows the footsteps of His devotees
in order to purify them. As the Lord walks along behind His pure devotees, the
wind blows the dust of the Lord's feet in the front of His devotees, who then
become purified by contact with such transcendental dust. One should not
foolishly look for material logic in these transcendental pastimes of the Lord. It
is simply a question of love between the Lord and His devotees.
TEXT 17
inaiSk(ÂanaA mayyanaur"l(caetas$a:
zAAntaA mah"AntaAe'iKalajaIvavats$alaA:
k(AmaEr"naAlabDaiDayaAe jauSainta tae
yaªaEr"paeºyaM na ivaäu": s$auKaM mama
niñkiïcanä mayy anurakta-cetasaù
çäntä mahänto 'khila-jéva-vatsaläù
kämair anälabdha-dhiyo juñanti te
yan nairapekñyaà na viduù sukhaà mama
SYNONYMS
niñkiïcanäù—without any desire for sense gratification; mayi—in Me, the
Supreme Lord; anurakta-cetasaù—mind constantly attached;
çäntäù—peaceful; mahäntaù—great souls without false ego; akhila—to all;
jéva—living entities; vatsaläù—affectionate well-wishers; kämaiù—by
opportunities for sense gratification; anälabdha—untouched and unaffected;
dhiyaù—whose consciousness; juñanti—experience; te—they; yat—which;
nairapekñyam—achieved only by complete detachment; na viduù—they do not
know; sukham—happiness; mama—My.
TRANSLATION
Those who are without any desire for personal gratification, whose minds
are always attached to Me, who are peaceful, without false ego and merciful to
all living entities, and whose consciousness is never affected by opportunities
for sense gratification—such persons enjoy in Me a happiness that cannot be
known or achieved by those lacking such detachment from the material world.
PURPORT
The pure devotees always experience transcendental bliss in their service to
Çré Kåñëa, the reservoir of pleasure; thus they are completely detached from
material pleasure and do not desire even liberation. Since all others have some
personal desire, they cannot experience such happiness. Pure devotees always
desire to give Kåñëa conscious happiness to all others, and therefore they are
called mahäntaù, or great souls. In the course of a devotee's service, many
opportunities for sense gratification arise, but a pure devotee is not tempted or
attracted and does not fall down from his exalted transcendental position.
TEXT 18
baADyamaAnaAe'ipa maà"l(Ae
ivaSayaEr"ijataein‰"ya:
‘aAya: ‘agAlBayaA BaftyaA
ivaSayaEnaARiBaBaUyatae
bädhyamäno 'pi mad-bhakto
viñayair ajitendriyaù
präyaù pragalbhayä bhaktyä
viñayair näbhibhüyate
SYNONYMS
bädhyamänaù—being harassed; api—even though; mat-bhaktaù—My devotee;
viñayaiù—by the sense objects; ajita—without having conquered;
indriyaù—the senses; präyaù—generally; pragalbhayä—effective and strong;
bhaktyä—by devotion; viñayaiù—by sense gratification; na—not;
abhibhüyate—is defeated.
TRANSLATION
My dear Uddhava, if My devotee has not fully conquered his senses, he may
be harassed by material desires, but because of his unflinching devotion for Me,
he will not be defeated by sense gratification.
PURPORT
Abhibhüyate indicates falling down into the material world and being
defeated by mäyä. But even though one's senses are not fully conquered, one
who has unflinching devotion for Lord Kåñëa does not run the risk of being
separated from Him. The words pragalbhayä bhaktyä indicate a person who has
great devotion for Lord Kåñëa, and not one who desires to commit sinful
activities and chant Hare Kåñëa to avoid the reaction. Because of previous bad
habits and immaturity, even a sincere devotee may be harassed by lingering
attraction to the bodily concept of life; but his unflinching devotion for Lord
Kåñëa will act. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura gives the following two
examples. A great warrior may be struck by the weapon of his enemy, but
because of his courage and strength he is not killed or defeated. He accepts the
blow and goes on to victory. Similarly, one may contract a serious disease, but
if he takes the proper medicine he is quickly cured.
If those who follow the impersonal system of speculation and austerity
deviate even slightly from their path, they fall down. A devotee, however,
even though immature, never falls from the path of devotional service. Even if
he displays occasional weakness, he is still considered a devotee if his devotion
to Lord Kåñëa is very strong. As the Lord states in Bhagavad-gétä (9.30):
api cet su-duräcäro
bhajate mäm ananya-bhäk
sädhur eva sa mantavyaù
samyag vyavasito hi saù
"Even if one commits the most abominable actions, if he is engaged in
devotional service he is to be considered saintly because he is properly
situated."
TEXT 19
yaTaAi¢a: s$aus$ama{Ü"AicaR:
k(r"AetyaeDaAMis$a Basmas$aAta,
taTaA maiã"SayaA Bail(r,"
oÜ"vaEnaAMis$a k{(tµazA:
yathägniù su-samåddhärciù
karoty edhäàsi bhasmasät
tathä mad-viñayä bhaktir
uddhavainäàsi kåtsnaçaù
SYNONYMS
yathä—just as; agniù—fire; su-samåddha—blazing; arciù—whose flames;
karoti—turns; edhäàsi—firewood; bhasma-sät—into ashes; tathä—similarly;
mat-viñayä—with Me as the object; bhaktiù—devotion; uddhava—O Uddhava;
enäàsi—sins; kåtsnaçaù—completely.
TRANSLATION
My dear Uddhava, just as a blazing fire turns firewood into ashes, similarly,
devotion unto Me completely burns to ashes sins committed by My devotees.
PURPORT
One should carefully note that the Lord refers to devotion that is like a
blazing fire. To commit sinful activity on the strength of chanting the holy
name is the greatest offense, and the devotion of one who commits this offense
cannot be compared to a blazing fire of love for Kåñëa. As stated in the
previous verse, a sincere loving devotee, because of immaturity or previous bad
habits, may be disturbed by his senses even though he has accepted Lord Kåñëa
as the only goal in his life. But if even by chance the devotee accidentally falls
down without premeditation or indifference, the Lord immediately burns to
ashes his sinful reactions, just as a blazing fire immediately consumes an
insignificant piece of wood. Lord Kåñëa is glorious, and one who takes
exclusive shelter of the Lord receives the unique benefits of devotional service
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 20
na s$aADayaita maAM yaAegAAe
na s$aAÊÿYaM DamaR oÜ"va
na svaADyaAyastapastyaAgAAe
yaTaA Bail(maRmaAeijaRtaA
na sädhayati mäà yogo
na säìkhyaà dharma uddhava
na svädhyäyas tapas tyägo
yathä bhaktir mamorjitä
SYNONYMS
na—not; sädhayati—brings under control; mäm—Me; yogaù—the yoga
system; na—nor; säìkhyam—the system of Säìkhya philosophy;
dharmaù—pious activities within the varëäçrama system; uddhava—My dear
Uddhava; na—not; svädhyäyaù—Vedic study; tapaù—austerity;
tyägaù—renunciation; yathä—as; bhaktiù—devotional service; mama—unto
Me; ürjitä—strongly developed.
TRANSLATION
My dear Uddhava, the unalloyed devotional service rendered to Me by My
devotees brings Me under their control. I cannot be thus controlled by those
engaged in mystic yoga, Säìkhya philosophy, pious work, Vedic study, austerity
or renunciation.
PURPORT
One may make Kåñëa the goal of mystic yoga, Säìkhya philosophy, etc.; yet
such activities do not please the Lord as much as direct loving service, which
one practices by hearing and chanting about the Lord and executing His
mission. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé states, jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam: [Cc. Madhya
19.167] a devotee should simply depend on Kåñëa and should not unnecessarily
complicate his loving service with tendencies toward fruitive work or mental
speculation. The residents of Våndävana simply depend on Lord Kåñëa. When
the great serpent Aghäsura appeared in the precincts of Vraja, the cowherd
boys, completely confident in their friendship with Lord Kåñëa, fearlessly
marched into the serpent's gigantic mouth. Such pure love for Kåñëa brings the
Lord under the control of the devotee.
TEXT 21
BaftyaAh"maek(yaA ƒaA÷:
™aÜ"yaAtmaA i‘aya: s$ataAma,
Bail(: paunaAita maiªaï"A
ìpaAk(Anaipa s$amBavaAta,
bhaktyäham ekayä grähyaù
çraddhayätmä priyaù satäm
bhaktiù punäti man-niñöhä
çva-päkän api sambhavät
SYNONYMS
bhaktyä—by devotional service; aham—I; ekayä—unalloyed; grähyaù—am to
be obtained; çraddhayä—by faith; ätmä—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; priyaù—the object of love; satäm—of the devotees; bhaktiù—pure
devotional service; punäti—purifies; mat-niñöhä—fixing Me as the only goal;
çva-päkän-dog-eaters; api—even; sambhavät—from the contamination of low
birth.
TRANSLATION
Only by practicing unalloyed devotional service with full faith in Me can one
obtain Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. I am naturally dear to My
devotees, who take Me as the only goal of their loving service. By engaging in
such pure devotional service, even the dog-eaters can purify themselves from
the contamination of their low birth.
PURPORT
Sambhavät indicates jäti-doñät, or the pollution of low birth. Jäti-doña does
not refer to mundane social, economic or professional status, but rather to
one's degree of spiritual enlightenment. All around the world, many people are
born into rich and powerful families, but they often acquire abominable habits
that are part of their so-called family tradition. However, even unfortunate
persons who are taught from birth to engage in sinful activities can at once be
purified by the potency of pure devotional service. Such service must have
Lord Kåñëa as the only goal (man-niñöhä), must be rendered with full faith
(çraddhayä), and must be unalloyed, or without any selfish motivation (ekayä).
TEXT 22
DamaR: s$atyad"yaAepaetaAe
ivaâA vaA tapas$aAinvataA
maà"ftyaApaetamaAtmaAnaM
na s$amyaf‘apaunaAita ih"
dharmaù satya-dayopeto
vidyä vä tapasänvitä
mad-bhaktyäpetam ätmänaà
na samyak prapunäti hi
SYNONYMS
dharmaù—religious principles; satya—with truthfulness; dayä—and mercy;
upetaù—endowed; vidyä—knowledge; vä—or; tapasä—with austerity;
anvitä—endowed; mat-bhaktyä—devotional service to Me; apetam—bereft of;
ätmänam—consciousness; na—not; samyak—completely; prapunäti—purifies;
hi—certainly.
TRANSLATION
Neither religious activities endowed with honesty and mercy nor knowledge
obtained with great penance can completely purify one's consciousness if they
are bereft of loving service to Me.
PURPORT
Although pious religious work, truthfulness, mercy, penances and
knowledge partially purify one's existence, they do not take out the root of
material desires. Thus the same desires will reappear at a later time. After an
extensive program of material gratification, one becomes eager to perform
austerities, acquire knowledge, perform selfless work and in general purify
one's existence. After sufficient piety and purification, however, one again
becomes eager for material enjoyment. When clearing an agricultural field one
must uproot the unwanted plants, otherwise with the coming of rain
everything will grow back as it was. Pure devotional service to the Lord
uproots one's material desires, so that there is no danger of relapsing into a
degraded life of material gratification. In the eternal kingdom of God, loving
reciprocation between the Lord and His devotees is manifest. One who has not
come to this stage of enlightenment must remain on the material platform,
which is always full of discrepancies and contradictions. Thus everything is
incomplete and imperfect without loving service to the Lord.
TEXT 23
k(TaM ivanaA r"Aemah"Sa<
‰"vataA caetas$aA ivanaA
ivanaAnand"A™auk(layaA
zAuDyaeà"ftyaA ivanaAzAya:
kathaà vinä roma-harñaà
dravatä cetasä vinä
vinänandäçru-kalayä
çudhyed bhaktyä vinäçayaù
SYNONYMS
katham—how; vinä—without; roma-harñam—standing of the hairs on end;
dravatä—melted; cetasä—heart; vinä—without; vinä—without; änanda—of
bliss; açru-kalayä—the flowing of tears; çudhyet—can be purified;
bhaktyä—loving service; vinä—without; äçayaù—the consciousness.
TRANSLATION
If one's hairs do not stand on end, how can the heart melt? And if the heart
does not melt, how can tears of love flow from the eyes? If one does not cry in
spiritual happiness, how can one render loving service to the Lord? And
without such service, how can the consciousness be purified?
PURPORT
Loving service to the Lord is the only process that can completely purify
one's consciousness; such service produces waves of ecstatic love that
completely cleanse the soul. As mentioned earlier by Lord Kåñëa to Çré
Uddhava, other processes such as self-control, pious activities, mystic yoga,
penances, etc., certainly purify the mind, as stated in many authorized
literatures. Such processes, however, do not completely remove the desire to
perform forbidden activities. But pure devotional service rendered in love of
Godhead is so powerful that it burns to ashes any obstacle encountered on the
path of progress. The Lord has stated in this chapter that loving service to Him
is a blazing fire that burns to ashes all impediments. In contrast, the small fires
of mental speculation or mystic yoga can be extinguished by sinful desires at
any moment. Thus, by hearing Çrémad-Bhägavatam one should ignite the
blazing fire of loving service to the Lord and burn to ashes the network of
material illusion.
TEXT 24
vaAggAÕ"d"A ‰"vatae yasya icaÔaM
ç&d"tyaBaIºNAM h"s$aita ¸(ica»a
ivalaÀa oÕ"Ayaita na{tyatae ca
maà"il(yaul(Ae BauvanaM paunaAita
väg gadgadä dravate yasya cittaà
rudaty abhékñëaà hasati kvacic ca
vilajja udgäyati nåtyate ca
mad-bhakti-yukto bhuvanaà punäti
SYNONYMS
väk—speech; gadgadä—choked up; dravate—melts; yasya—of whom;
cittam—the heart; rudati—cries; abhékñëam—again and again; hasati—laughs;
kvacit—sometimes; ca—also; vilajjaù—ashamed; udgäyati—sings out loudly;
nåtyate—dances; ca—also; mat-bhakti-yuktaù—one fixed in devotional service
to Me; bhuvanam—the universe; punäti—purifies.
TRANSLATION
A devotee whose speech is sometimes choked up, whose heart melts, who
cries continually and sometimes laughs, who feels ashamed and cries out loudly
and then dances—a devotee thus fixed in loving service to Me purifies the
entire universe.
PURPORT
Väg gadgadä refers to a highly emotional state in which the throat is choked
up and one cannot express oneself. Vilajjaù indicates that a devotee sometimes
feels embarrassment due to bodily functions and memories of past sinful
activities. In this condition, a devotee loudly cries out the holy name of Kåñëa
and sometimes dances in ecstasy. As stated here, such a devotee purifies the
three worlds.
By melting of the heart, one becomes very steady in spiritual life. Normally,
one whose heart easily melts is thought to be unsteady; but because Lord Kåñëa
is the stable foundation of all existence, one whose heart melts in love of
Kåñëa becomes most stable and cannot be disturbed by opposing arguments,
bodily suffering, mental problems, supernatural disasters or the interference of
envious persons. Because such a devotee is fixed in loving service to the Lord,
he becomes the very heart of the Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 25
yaTaAi¢anaA he"ma malaM jah"Aita
DmaAtaM pauna: svaM Bajatae ca è&pama,
@AtmaA ca k(maARnauzAyaM ivaDaUya
maà"il(yaAegAena BajatyaTaAe maAma,
yathägninä hema malaà jahäti
dhmätaà punaù svaà bhajate ca rüpam
ätmä ca karmänuçayaà vidhüya
mad-bhakti-yogena bhajaty atho mäm
SYNONYMS
yathä—just as; agninä—by fire; hema—gold; malam—impurities; jahäti—gives
up; dhmätam—smelted; punaù—again; svam—its own; bhajate—enters;
ca—also; rüpam—form; ätmä—the spirit soul or consciousness; ca—also;
karma—of fruitive activities; anuçayam—the resultant contamination;
vidhüya—removing; mat-bhakti-yogena—by loving service to Me;
bhajati—worships; atho—thus; mäm—Me.
TRANSLATION
Just as gold, when smelted in fire, gives up its impurities and returns to its
pure brilliant state, similarly, the spirit soul, absorbed in the fire of bhakti-yoga,
is purified of all contamination caused by previous fruitive activities and returns
to its original position of serving Me in the spiritual world.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, this verse indicates
that the devotee goes back home, back to Godhead, and there worships Lord
Kåñëa in his original spiritual body, which is compared to the original pure
form of smelted gold. Gold alloyed with inferior metals cannot be purified by
water and soap; similarly, the heart's impurities cannot be removed by
superficial processes. Only the fire of love of Godhead can cleanse one's soul
and send one back home, back to Godhead, to engage in eternal loving service
to the Lord.
TEXT 26
yaTaA yaTaAtmaA pair"ma{jyatae's$aAE
matpauNyagAATaA™avaNAAiBaDaAnaE:
taTaA taTaA pazyaita vastau s$aUºmaM
caºauyaRTaEvaAÃanas$am‘ayaul(ma,
yathä yathätmä parimåjyate 'sau
mat-puëya-gäthä-çravaëäbhidhänaiù
tathä tathä paçyati vastu sükñmaà
cakñur yathaiväïjana-samprayuktam
SYNONYMS
yathä yathä—as much as; ätmä—the spirit soul, the conscious entity;
parimåjyate—is cleansed of material contamination; asau—he;
mat-puëya-gäthä—the pious narrations of My glories; çravaëa—by hearing;
abhidhänaiù—and by chanting; tathä tathä—exactly in that proportion;
paçyati—he sees; vastu—the Absolute Truth; sükñmam—subtle, being
nonmaterial; cakñuù—the eye; yathä—just as; eva—certainly; aïjana—with
medicinal ointment; samprayuktam—treated.
TRANSLATION
When a diseased eye is treated with medicinal ointment it gradually recovers
its power to see. Similarly, as a conscious living entity cleanses himself of
material contamination by hearing and chanting the pious narrations of My
glories, he regains his ability to see Me, the Absolute Truth, in My subtle
spiritual form.
PURPORT
The Lord is called sükñmam because He is pure spiritual consciousness,
without any tinge of material energy. If one chants and hears the holy name
and glories of Kåñëa with great sincerity, there is immediately a transcendental
effect. We can immediately see the spiritual world and pastimes of the Lord if
we fully surrender to the process mentioned here. A blind person feels
perpetual gratitude to a doctor who restores his sight. Similarly, we sing
cakñu-däna dila ye, janme janme prabhu sei: the bona fide spiritual master, the
representative of Lord Kåñëa, restores our spiritual sight, and thus he is our
eternal lord and master.
TEXT 27
ivaSayaAnDyaAyataiêÔaM
ivaSayaeSau ivaSaÀatae
maAmanausmar"taiêÔaM
mayyaeva ‘aivalaIyatae
viñayän dhyäyataç cittaà
viñayeñu viñajjate
mäm anusmarataç cittaà
mayy eva praviléyate
SYNONYMS
viñayän—objects of sense gratification; dhyäyataù—of one who is meditating
on; cittam—the consciousness; viñayeñu—in the objects of gratification;
viñajjate—becomes attached; mäm—Me; anusmarataù—of one remembering
constantly; cittam—the consciousness; mayi—in Me; eva—certainly;
praviléyate—is absorbed.
TRANSLATION
The mind of one meditating upon the objects of sense gratification is
certainly entangled in such objects, but if one constantly remembers Me, then
the mind is absorbed in Me.
PURPORT
One should not think that one can attain complete transcendental
knowledge of Kåñëa by mechanically engaging in worship of the Lord. Lord
Kåñëa states here that one must endeavor constantly to keep the Lord within
one's mind. Anusmarataù, or constant remembrance, is possible for one who
always chants and hears the glories of Lord Kåñëa. It is therefore stated,
çravaëam, kértanam [SB 7.5.23], smaraëam: the process of devotional service
begins with hearing (çravaëam) and chanting (kértanam), from which
remembrance (smaraëam) develops. One who constantly thinks of the objects
of material gratification becomes attached to them; similarly, one who
constantly keeps Lord Kåñëa within his mind becomes absorbed in the Lord's
transcendental nature and thus becomes qualified to render personal service to
the Lord in His own abode.
TEXT 28
tasmaAd"s$ad"iBaDyaAnaM
yaTaA sva«amanaAer"Tama,
ih"tvaA maiya s$amaADatsva
manaAe maà"AvaBaAivatama,
tasmäd asad-abhidhyänaà
yathä svapna-manoratham
hitvä mayi samädhatsva
mano mad-bhäva-bhävitam
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; asat—material; abhidhyänam—processes of elevation
which absorb one's attention; yathä—just as; svapna—in a dream;
manaù-ratham—mental concoction; hitvä—giving up; mayi—in Me;
samädhatsva—completely absorb; manaù—the mind; mat-bhäva—by
consciousness of Me; bhävitam—purified.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, one should reject all material processes of elevation, which are
like the mental creations of a dream, and should completely absorb one's mind
in Me. By constantly thinking of Me, one becomes purified.
PURPORT
The word bhävitam means "caused to be." As explained in Bhagavad-gétä,
material existence is an unstable platform subject to the constant disturbances
of creation and annihilation. One who absorbs his consciousness in Kåñëa,
however, attains to Kåñëa's nature and is therefore described as
mad-bhäva-bhävitam, or one situated in real existence because of Kåñëa
consciousness. The Lord here concludes His analysis of different processes of
human perfection.
TEXT 29
ñINAAM ñIs$aiËÿnaAM s$aËMÿ
tyaftvaA äU"r"ta @AtmavaAna,
ºaemae ivaival( @As$aInazA,
icantayaenmaAmatain‰"ta:
stréëäà stré-saìginäà saìgaà
tyaktvä dürata ätmavän
kñeme vivikta äsénaç
cintayen mäm atandritaù
SYNONYMS
stréëäm—of women; stré—to women; saìginäm—of those who are attached or
intimately associated; saìgam—association; tyaktvä—giving up; dürataù—far
away; ätma-vän—being conscious of the self; kñeme—fearless; vivikte—in a
separated or isolated place; äsénaù—sitting; cintayet—one should concentrate;
mäm—on Me; atandritaù—with great care.
TRANSLATION
Being conscious of the eternal self, one should give up association with
women and those intimately associated with women. Sitting fearlessly in a
solitary place, one should concentrate the mind on Me with great attention.
PURPORT
One who has intimate contact with women and becomes attached to them
will gradually lose his determination to go back home, back to Godhead.
Association with lusty men gives exactly the same result. Therefore, one is
advised to be fearless and to sit down in a solitary place, or a place where there
are no lusty men and women committing spiritual suicide. Without fear of
failure or of unhappiness in life, one should remain with sincere devotees of
the Lord. Atandrita means that one should not compromise this principle but
should be rigid and cautious. All this is possible only for one who is ätmavän, or
fixed in practical understanding of the eternal soul.
TEXT 30
na taTaAsya BavaetflaezAAe
banDaêAnya‘as$aËÿta:
yaAeiSats$aËÿAâTaA pauMs$aAe
yaTaA tats$aiËÿs$aËÿta:
na tathäsya bhavet kleço
bandhaç cänya-prasaìgataù
yoñit-saìgäd yathä puàso
yathä tat-saìgi-saìgataù
SYNONYMS
na—not; tathä—like that; asya—of him; bhavet—could be; kleçaù—suffering;
bandhaù—bondage; ca—and; anya-prasaìgataù—from any other attachment;
yoñit—of women; saìgät—from attachment; yathä—just as; puàsaù—of a
man; yathä—similarly; tat—to women; saìgi—of those attached;
saìgataù—from the association.
TRANSLATION
Of all kinds of suffering and bondage arising from various attachments, none
is greater than the suffering and bondage arising from attachment to women and
intimate contact with those attached to women.
PURPORT
One should make a great endeavor to give up intimate contact with women
and those fond of women. A learned gentleman will automatically be on guard
if placed in intimate contact with lusty women. In the company of lusty men,,
however, the same man may engage in all kinds of social dealings and thus be
contaminated by their polluted mentality. Association with lusty men is often
more dangerous than association with women and should be avoided by all
means. There are innumerable verses in the Bhägavatam describing the
intoxication of material lust. Suffice it to say that a lusty man becomes exactly
like a dancing dog and, by the influence of Cupid, loses all gravity, intelligence
and direction in life. The Lord warns here that one who surrenders to the
illusory form of a woman suffers unbearably in this life and the next.
TEXT 31
™aIoÜ"va ovaAca
yaTaA tvaAmar"ivand"Aºa
yaAä{"zAM vaA yad"Atmak(ma,
DyaAyaenmaumauºaure"tanmae
DyaAnaM tvaM valu(mahR"is$a
çré-uddhava uväca
yathä tväm aravindäkña
yädåçaà vä yad-ätmakam
dhyäyen mumukñur etan me
dhyänaà tvaà vaktum arhasi
SYNONYMS
çré-uddhavaù uväca—Çré Uddhava said; yathä—in what way; tväm—You;
aravinda-akña—O my dear lotus-eyed Kåñëa; yädåçam—of what specific
nature; vä—or; yat-ätmakam—in what specific form; dhyäyet—should
meditate; mumukñuù—one who desires liberation; etat—this; me—to me;
dhyänam—meditation; tvam—You; vaktum—to speak or explain;
arhasi—ought.
TRANSLATION
Çré Uddhava said: My dear lotus-eyed Kåñëa, by what process should one
who desires liberation meditate upon You, of what specific nature should his
meditation be, and upon which form should he meditate? Kindly explain to me
this topic of meditation.
PURPORT
It has already been elaborately explained by the Supreme Lord that without
loving devotional service rendered to Him in the association of devotees, no
other process of self-realization will work. Therefore it may be asked why
Uddhava is again referring to the system of meditation, dhyäna. The äcäryas
explain that one cannot fully appreciate the beauty and perfection of
bhakti-yoga unless one sees its superiority to all other processes. Through
comparative analysis, the devotees become fully ecstatic in their appreciation
of bhakti-yoga. It should also be understood that although Uddhava asks about
those who aspire for liberation, he is not actually a mumukñu, or salvationist;
rather, he is asking questions for the benefit of those who are not on the
platform of love of Godhead. Uddhava wants to hear this knowledge for his
personal appreciation and so that those who pursue salvation, or liberation,
can be protected and redirected to the path of pure devotional service to the
Supreme Lord.
TEXTS 32-33
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
s$ama @As$ana @As$aIna:
s$amak(AyaAe yaTaAs$auKama,
h"staAvauts$aËÿ @ADaAya
svanaAs$aAƒak{(taeºaNA:
‘aANAsya zAAeDayaenmaAgA<
paUr"ku(mBak(re"cakE(:
ivapayaRyaeNAAipa zAnaEr,"
@Byas$aeiªaijaRtaein‰"ya:
çré-bhagavän uväca
sama äsana äsénaù
sama-käyo yathä-sukham
hastäv utsaìga ädhäya
sva-näsägra-kåtekñaëaù
präëasya çodhayen märgaà
püra-kumbhaka-recakaiù
viparyayeëäpi çanair
abhyasen nirjitendriyaù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; same—having
a level surface; äsane—on the seat; äsénaù—sitting; sama-käyaù—sitting with
the body straight and erect; yathä-sukham—sitting comfortably; hastau—the
two hands; utsaìge—in the lap; ädhäya—placing; sva-näsa-agra—on the tip of
one's own nose; kåta—focusing; ékñaëaù—the glance; präëasya—of the breath;
çodhayet—should purify; märgam—the pathway; püra-kumbhaka-recakaiù—by
the mechanical breathing exercises, or präëäyäma; viparyayeëa-by reversing
the processes, namely recaka, kumbhaka and püraka; api—also;
çanaiù—following the process step by step; abhyaset—one should practice
präëäyäma; nirjita-having controlled; indriyaù—the senses.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Sitting on a level seat that is not
too high or too low, keeping the body straight and erect yet comfortable, placing
the two hands on one's lap and focusing the eyes on the tip of one's nose, one
should purify the pathways of breathing by practicing the mechanical exercises
of püraka, kumbhaka and recaka, and then one should reverse the procedure
(recaka, kumbhaka, püraka). Having fully controlled the senses, one may thus
practice präëäyäma step by step.
PURPORT
According to this procedure, the hands are to be placed palms upward, one
on top of the other. Thus, one may practice präëäyäma through mechanical
breath control in order to achieve steadiness of the mind. As stated in the
yoga-çästra, antar-lakñyo bahir-dåñöiù sthira-cittaù susaìgataù: "The eyes, which
generally see externally, must be turned inward, and thus the mind is steadied
and fully controlled."
TEXT 34
ô$âivaicC$namaAe"Mk(ArM"
GaNq%AnaAdM" ibas$aAeNARvata,
‘aANAenaAed"IyaR ta‡aATa
pauna: s$aMvaezAyaetsvar"ma,
hådy avicchinam oàkäraà
ghaëöä-nädaà bisorëa-vat
präëenodérya taträtha
punaù saàveçayet svaram
SYNONYMS
hådi—in the heart; avicchinnam—uninterrupted, continuous; oàkäram—the
sacred vibration oà; ghaëöä-like a bell; nädam—sound; bisa-ürëa-vat—like the
fiber running up the lotus stalk; präëena—by the wind of präëa;
udérya-pushing upward; tatra—therein (at a distance of twelve
thumb-breadths); atha—thus; punaù—again; saàveçayet—one should join
together; svaram—the fifteen vibrations produced with anusvära.
TRANSLATION
Beginning from the mülädhära-cakra, one should move the life air
continuously upward like the fibers in the lotus stalk until one reaches the
heart, where the sacred syllable oà is situated like the sound of a bell. One
should thus continue raising the sacred syllable upward the distance of twelve
aìgulas, and there the oàkära should be joined together with the fifteen
vibrations produced with anusvära.
PURPORT
It appears that the yoga system is somewhat technical and difficult to
perform. Anusvära refers to a nasal vibration pronounced after the fifteen
Sanskrit vowels. The complete explanation of this process is extremely
complicated and obviously unsuitable for this age. From this description we
can appreciate the sophisticated achievements of those who in former ages
practiced mystic meditation. Despite such appreciation, however, we should
stick firmly to the simple, foolproof method of meditation prescribed for the
present age, the chanting of Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/
Hare R ama, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare.
TEXT 35
WvaM ‘aNAvas$aMyaulM(
‘aANAmaeva s$amaByas$aeta,
d"zAk{(tvaiñSavaNAM
maAs$aAd"vaARigjataAinala:
evaà praëava-saàyuktaà
präëam eva samabhyaset
daça-kåtvas tri-ñavaëaà
mäsäd arväg jitänilaù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; praëava—with the syllable oà; saàyuktam-joined; präëam—the
präëäyäma system of controlling the bodily airs; eva—indeed;
samabhyaset—one should carefully practice; daça-kåtvaù—ten times;
tri-savanam—at sunrise, noon and sunset; mäsät—one month; arväk—after;
jita—one will conquer; anilaù—the life air.
TRANSLATION
Being fixed in the oàkära, one should carefully practice the präëäyäma
system ten times at each sunrise, noon and sunset. Thus, after one month one
will have conquered the life air.
TEXTS 36-42
ô$tpauNx"r"Ik(manta:sTama,
ODvaRnaAlamaDaAemauKama,
DyaAtvaAeDvaRmauKamauiªa‰"ma,
@í"pa‡aM s$ak(iNARk(ma,
k(iNARk(AyaAM nyas$aets$aUyaR
s$aAemaA¢aInauÔar"AeÔar"ma,
vai¶"maDyae smare"åU"paM
mamaEtaÜ"YaAnamaËÿlama,
s$amaM ‘azAAntaM s$aumauKaM
d"IGaRcaAç&catauBauRjama,
s$aucaAç&s$aund"r"ƒaIvaM
s$auk(paAelaM zAuicaismatama,
s$amaAnak(NARivanyastas$
Pu(r"nmak(r"ku(Nx"lama,
he"maAmbarM" GanazyaAmaM
™aIvats$a™aIinake(tanama,
zAÊÿca‚(gAd"Apaá
vanamaAlaAivaBaUiSatama,
naUpaurE"ivaRlas$atpaAdM"
k(AEstauBa‘aBayaA yautama,
âumaitk(r"Iq%k(q%k(-
k(iq%s$aU‡aAËÿd"Ayautama,
s$avaARËÿs$aund"rM" ô$âM
‘as$aAd"s$aumauKaeºanama,
s$auku(maAr"maiBaDyaAyaeta,
s$avaAR"ËeÿSau manaAe d"Data,
win‰"yaANAIin‰"yaATaeRByaAe
manas$aAk{(Sya tanmana:
bauÜ"YaA s$aAr"iTanaA DaIr":
‘aNAyaenmaiya s$avaRta:
håt-puëòarékam antaù-stham
ürdhva-nälam adho-mukham
dhyätvordhva-mukham unnidram
añöa-patraà sa-karëikam
karëikäyäà nyaset sürya-
somägnénuttarottaram
vahni-madhye smared rüpaà
mamaitad dhyäna-maìgalam
samaà praçäntaà su-mukhaà
dérgha-cäru-catur-bhujam
su-cäru-sundara-grévaà
su-kapolaà çuci-smitam
samäna-karëa-vinyastasphuran-
makara-kuëòalam
hemämbaraà ghana-çyämaà
çrévatsa-çré-niketanam
çaìkha-cakra-gadä-padma-
vanamälä-vibhüñitam
nüpurair vilasat-pädaà
kaustubha-prabhayä yutam
dyumat-kiréöa-kaöaka
kaöi-süträìgadäyutam
sarväìga-sundaraà hådyaà
prasäda-sumukhekñanam
su-kumäram abhidhyäyet
sarväìgeñu mano dadhat
indriyäëéndriyärthebhyo
manasäkåñya tan manaù
buddhyä särathinä dhéraù
praëayen mayi sarvataù
SYNONYMS
håt—in the heart; puëòarékam—lotus flower; antaù-stham—situated within
the body; ürdhva-nälam—having erected the lotus stalk; adhaù-mukham—with
eyes half closed, staring at the tip of the nose; dhyätvä—having fixed the mind
in meditation; ürdhva-mukham—enlivened; unnidram—alert without dozing
off; añöa-patram—with eight petals; sa-karëikam—with the whorl of the lotus;
karëikäyäm—within the whorl; nyaset—one should place by concentration;
sürya—the sun; soma—moon; agnén—and fire; uttara-uttaram—in order, one
after the other; vahni-madhye—within the fire; smaret—one should meditate;
rüpam—upon the form; mama—My; etat—this; dhyäna-maìgalam—the
auspicious object of meditation; samam—balanced, all the parts of the body
proportionate; praçäntam—gentle; su-mukham—cheerful;
dérgha-cäru-catuù-bhujam—having four beautiful long arms;
su-cäru—charming; sundara—beautiful; grévam—neck; su-kapolam—beautiful
forehead; çuci-smitam—having a pure smile; samäna—alike; karëa—in the
two ears; vinyasta—situated; sphurat—glowing; makara—shaped like sharks;
kuëòalam—earrings; hema—golden colored; ambaram—dress;
ghana-çyämam—the color of a dark rain cloud; çré-vatsa—the unique curl of
hair on the Lord's chest; çré-niketanam—the abode of the goddess of fortune;
çaìkha—with the conchshell; cakra—Sudarçana disc; gadä—club;
padma—lotus; vana-mälä—and a garland of forest flowers;
vibhüñitam—decorated; nüpuraiù—with ankle bells and bracelets;
vilasat—shining; pädam—the lotus feet; kaustubha—of the Kaustubha gem;
prabhayä—with the effulgence; yutam—enriched; dyumat—shining;
kiréöa—crown or helmet; kaöaka—gold bracelets; kaöi-sütra—a band for the
waist or upper hip; aìgada—bracelets; äyutam—equipped with;
sarva-aìga—all the parts of the body; sundaram—beautiful;
hådyam—charming; prasäda—with mercy; sumukha—smiling; ékñaëam—His
glance; su-kumäram—most delicate; abhidhyäyet—one should meditate;
sarva-aìgeñu—in all the parts of the body; manaù—the mind;
dadhat—placing; indriyäëi—the material senses; indriya-arthebhyaù—from the
object of the senses; manasä—by the mind; äkåñya—pulling back; tat—that;
manaù—mind; buddhyä—by intelligence; särathinä—which is like the driver
of a chariot; dhéraù—being grave and self-controlled; praëayet—one should
strongly lead; mayi—unto Me; sarvataù—in all limbs of the body.
TRANSLATION
Keeping the eyes half closed and fixed on the tip of one's nose, being
enlivened and alert, one should meditate on the lotus flower situated within the
heart. This lotus has eight petals and is situated on an erect lotus stalk. One
should meditate on the sun, moon and fire, placing them one after the other
within the whorl of that lotus flower. Placing My transcendental form within
the fire, one should meditate upon it as the auspicious goal of all meditation.
That form is perfectly proportioned, gentle and cheerful. It possesses four
beautiful long arms, a charming, beautiful neck, a handsome forehead, a pure
smile and glowing, shark-shaped earrings suspended from two identical ears.
That spiritual form is the color of a dark rain cloud and is garbed in
golden-yellowish silk. The chest of that form is the abode of Çrévatsa and the
goddess of fortune, and that form is also decorated with a conchshell, disc, club,
lotus flower and garland of forest flowers. The two brilliant lotus feet are
decorated with ankle bells and bracelets, and that form exhibits the Kaustubha
gem along with an effulgent crown. The upper hips are beautified by a golden
belt, and the arms are decorated with valuable bracelets. All of the limbs of that
beautiful form capture the heart, and the face is beautified by merciful glancing.
Pulling the senses back from the sense objects, one should be grave and
self-controlled and should use the intelligence to strongly fix the mind upon all
of the limbs of My transcendental body. Thus one should meditate upon that
most delicate transcendental form of Mine.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa here answers Uddhava's question concerning the correct
procedure, nature and object of meditation for those desiring liberation.
TEXT 43
tats$avaRvyaApakM( icaÔama,
@Ak{(SyaEk(‡a DaAr"yaeta,
naAnyaAina icantayaeàU"ya:
s$auismataM BaAvayaenmauKama,
tat sarva-vyäpakaà cittam
äkåñyaikatra dhärayet
nänyäni cintayed bhüyaù
su-smitaà bhävayen mukham
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; sarva—in all the parts of the body; vyäpakam—spread;
cittam—consciousness; äkåñya—pulling back; ekatra—in one place;
dhärayet—one should concentrate; na—not; anyäni—other limbs of the body;
cintayet—one should meditate on; bhüyaù—again; su-smitam—wonderfully
smiling or laughing; bhävayet—one should concentrate on; mukham—the face.
TRANSLATION
One should then pull the consciousness back from all the limbs of that
transcendental body. At that time, one should meditate only on the wonderfully
smiling face of the Lord.
TEXT 44
ta‡a labDapadM" icaÔama,
@Ak{(Sya vyaAei°a DaAr"yaeta,
ta»a tyaftvaA mad"Ar"Aeh"Ae
na ik(iÂad"ipa icantayaeta,
tatra labdha-padaà cittam
äkåñya vyomni dhärayet
tac ca tyaktvä mad-äroho
na kiïcid api cintayet
SYNONYMS
tatra—in such meditation on the Lord's face; labdha-padam—being
established; cittam—consciousness; äkåñya—withdrawing; vyomni—in the sky;
dhärayet—one should meditate; tat—such meditation in the sky as the cause of
material manifestation; ca—also; tyaktvä—giving up; mat—to Me;
ärohaù—having ascended; na—not; kiïcit—anything; api—at all;
cintayet—one should think of.
TRANSLATION
Being established in meditation on the Lord's face, one should then
withdraw the consciousness and fix it in the sky. Then giving up such
meditation, one should become established in Me and give up the process of
meditation altogether.
PURPORT
As one becomes established in pure consciousness, the duality of "I am
meditating and this is the object of my meditation" vanishes, and one comes to
the stage of spontaneous relationship with the Personality of Godhead. Every
living entity is originally part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, and when that
forgotten eternal relationship is revived one experiences remembrance of the
Absolute Truth. In that stage, described here as mad-ärohaù, one no longer
sees oneself as a meditator nor the Lord as a mere object of meditation, but
rather one enters the spiritual sky for an eternal life of bliss and knowledge in
direct loving relationship with the Lord.
Uddhava originally inquired about the procedure of meditation for those
desiring liberation. The word labdha-padam indicates that when one fixes the
mind upon the Lord's face, one achieves full liberation. In the postliberation
phase one then proceeds to render service to the original Personality of
Godhead. By giving up the concept of being a meditator, one casts off the last
small remnant of illusory energy and sees the Lord as He actually is.
TEXT 45
WvaM s$amaAih"tamaitar,"
maAmaevaAtmaAnamaAtmaina
ivacaíe" maiya s$avaARtmana,
jyaAeitajyaAeRitaiSa s$aMyautama,
evaà samähita-matir
mäm evätmänam ätmani
vicañöe mayi sarvätman
jyotir jyotiñi saàyutam
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; samähita—completely fixed; matiù—consciousness; mäm—Me;
eva—indeed; ätmänam—the individual soul; ätmani—within the individual
soul; vicañöe—sees; mayi—in Me; sarva-ätman—in the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; jyotiù—the sunrays; jyotiñi—within the sun; saàyutam—united.
TRANSLATION
One who has completely fixed his mind on Me should see Me within his own
soul and should see the individual soul within Me, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Thus, he sees the individual souls united with the Supreme Soul, just
as one sees the sun's rays completely united with the sun.
PURPORT
In the spiritual world everything is naturally effulgent because that is the
nature of spirit. Thus when one sees the individual soul as part and parcel of
the Supreme Lord, the experience can be compared to seeing the sun's rays
emanating from the sun. The Supreme Lord is within the living entity, and
simultaneously the living entity is within the Lord. But in both cases the
Supreme Lord, and not the living entity, is the maintainer and controller. How
happy everyone could be by taking to Kåñëa consciousness and finding the
Supreme Lord, Kåñëa, within everything and everything within Kåñëa.
Liberated life in Kåñëa consciousness is so pleasurable that the greatest
misfortune is to be without such consciousness. Çré Kåñëa is kindly explaining
in many different ways the supremacy of Kåñëa consciousness, and fortunate
persons will understand the sincere message of the Lord.
TEXT 46
DyaAnaenaetTaM s$autaI˜aeNA
yauÃataAe yaAeigAnaAe mana:
s$aMyaAsyatyaAzAu inavaARNAM
‰"vya ÁaAnai‚(yaA”ama:
dhyänenetthaà su-tévreëa
yuïjato yogino manaù
saàyäsyaty äçu nirväëaà
dravya jïäna-kriyä-bhramaù
SYNONYMS
dhyänena—by meditation; ittham—as thus mentioned; su-tévreëa—extremely
concentrated; yuïjataù—of one practicing; yoginaù—of the yogé; manaù—the
mind; saàyäsyati—will go together; äçu—quickly; nirväëam—to extinction;
dravya-jïäna-kriyä—based on perception of material objects, knowledge and
activities; bhramaù—the illusory identification.
TRANSLATION
When the yogé thus controls his mind by intensely concentrated meditation,
his illusory identification with material objects, knowledge and activities is very
quickly extinguished.
PURPORT
Because of false material identification, we accept our own body and mind,
the bodies and minds of others, and supernatural material control to be
ultimate realities. Supernatural control refers to the bodies and minds of the
demigods, who ultimately are humble servitors of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Even the mighty sun, which displays immense potencies, obediently
treads its universal path by the order of Lord Kåñëa.
It is clearly seen in this chapter that haöha-yoga, karma-yoga, räja-yoga, etc.,
are part and parcel of bhakti-yoga and do not actually exist separately. The goal
of life is Lord Kåñëa, and one must eventually come to the stage of pure
devotion if one desires to perfect one's meditation or yoga practice. In the
mature stage of devotion, as described in this chapter, one becomes free from
the artificial duality of meditator and object of meditation, and one
spontaneously engages in hearing about and glorifying the Supreme Absolute
Truth. Such activities of bhakti-yoga are natural because they spring from
spontaneous love. When one revives one's original nature as the loving
servitor of Lord Kåñëa, other yoga processes cease to be interesting. Uddhava
was a pure devotee even before the Lord began His instruction; therefore it
was not expected that Uddhava would give up the supreme platform of being a
personal associate of the Lord to take up the mechanical exercises of the yoga
system. Bhakti-yoga, or devotional service, is so elevated that even in the
beginning stages of practice one is considered liberated, because all of one's
activities are executed under proper guidance for the pleasure of the Lord. In
the haöha-yoga system one is concerned with bodily control, and in jïäna-yoga
one is concerned with speculative knowledge. In both systems one endeavors
selfishly, desiring to become a great yogé or a philosopher. Such egoistic activity
is described in this verse as kriyä. One must give up the illusory designations of
dravya, jïäna and kriyä and come to the prideless stage of loving service to the
Lord.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Eleventh Canto, Fourteenth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Lord Kåñëa Explains the Yoga System to Çré
Uddhava."
15. Lord Kåñëa's Description of Mystic Yoga Perfections
This chapter describes the eight primary and ten minor mystic perfections.
They are developed by fixing one's mind in yoga, but they are ultimately
obstructions to achieving the spiritual abode of Lord Viñëu.
Being questioned by Uddhava, Lord Çré Kåñëa describes the characteristics
of the eighteen mystic perfections and the particular kind of meditation by
which each is achieved. In conclusion, Kåñëa states that for one who desires to
perform pure devotional service to the Personality of Godhead, the
achievement of these mystic perfections is a waste of time, because they
distract one from proper worship. All these perfections are automatically
offered to a pure devotee, but he does not accept them. Unless used in the yoga
of devotional service, these perfections are valueless. A devotee simply sees
that the Personality of Godhead is always present everywhere, both externally
and internally, and depends completely upon Him.
TEXT 1
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
ijataein‰"yasya yaul(sya
ijataìAs$asya yaAeigAna:
maiya DaAr"yataêeta
opaitaï"inta is$aÜ"ya:
çré-bhagavän uväca
jitendriyasya yuktasya
jita-çväsasya yoginaù
mayi dhärayataç ceta
upatiñöhanti siddhayaù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
jita-indriyasya—of one who has conquered his senses; yuktasya—who has
steadied the mind; jita-çväsasya—and conquered his breathing system;
yoginaù—of such a yogé; mayi—in Me; dhärayataù—fixing; cetaù—his
consciousness; upatiñöhanti—appear; siddhayaù—the mystic perfections of
yoga.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Uddhava, the mystic
perfections of yoga are acquired by a yogé who has conquered his senses,
steadied his mind, conquered the breathing process and fixed his mind on Me.
PURPORT
There are eight primary mystic perfections, such as aëimä-siddhi, and ten
secondary perfections. In this Fifteenth Chapter Lord Kåñëa will explain that
such mystic perfections are actually impediments to the development of Kåñëa
consciousness, and that therefore one should not desire them.
TEXT 2
™aIoÜ"va ovaAca
k(yaA DaAr"NAyaA k(A isvata,
k(TaM vaA is$aiÜ"r"cyauta
k(ita vaA is$aÜ"yaAe “aUih"
yaAeigAnaAM is$aiÜ"d"Ae BavaAna,
çré-uddhava uväca
kayä dhäraëayä kä svit
kathaà vä siddhir acyuta
kati vä siddhayo brühi
yoginäà siddhi-do bhavän
SYNONYMS
çré-uddhavaù uväca—Çré Uddhava said; kayä—by what; dhäraëayä—process of
meditation; kä svit—which indeed; katham—in what manner; vä—or;
siddhiù—mystic perfection; acyuta—My dear Lord; kati—how many; vä—or;
siddhayaù—perfections; brühi—please speak; yoginäm—of all yogés;
siddhi-daù—the giver of mystic perfections; bhavän—You.
TRANSLATION
Çré Uddhava said: My dear Lord Acyuta, by what process can mystic
perfection be achieved, and what is the nature of such perfection? How many
mystic perfections are there? Please explain these things to me. Indeed, You are
the bestower of all mystic perfections.
TEXT 3
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
is$aÜ"yaAe'í"Ad"zA ‘aAel(A
DaAr"NAA yaAegApaAr"gAE:
taAs$aAmaí"AE mat‘aDaAnaA
d"zAEva gAuNAhe"tava:
çré-bhagavän uväca
siddhayo 'ñöädaça proktä
dhäraëä yoga-pära-gaiù
täsäm añöau mat-pradhänä
daçaiva guëa-hetavaù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
siddhayaù—mystic perfections; añöädaça—eighteen; proktäù—are declared;
dhäraëäù—meditations; yoga—of yoga; pära-gaiù—by the masters; täsäm—of
the eighteen; añöau—eight; mat-pradhänäù—have their shelter in Me;
daça—ten; eva—indeed; guëa-hetavaù—are manifested from the material
mode of goodness.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: The masters of the yoga system
have declared that there are eighteen types of mystic perfection and meditation,
of which eight are primary, having their shelter in Me, and ten are secondary,
appearing from the material mode of goodness.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains the word mat pradhänäù as
follows. Lord Kåñëa is naturally the shelter of the eight primary mystic
potencies and meditations because such perfections emanate from the Lord's
personal potency, and thus they are fully developed only within the Lord
Himself and the Lord's personal associates. When materialistic persons
mechanically acquire such potencies, the perfections awarded are of an
inferior degree and are considered to be manifestations of mäyä, illusion. A
pure devotee of the Lord automatically receives from the Lord wonderful
potencies to execute his devotional service. If for sense gratification one
mechanically endeavors to acquire mystic perfections, then these perfections
are certainly considered to be inferior expansions of the Lord's external
potency.
TEXTS 4-5
@iNAmaA maih"maA maUtaeRr,"
laiGamaA ‘aAiæair"in‰"yaE:
‘aAk(AmyaM ™autaä{"íe"Sau
zAil(‘aer"NAmaIizAtaA
gAuNAeSvas$aËÿAe vaizAtaA
yatk(Amastad"vasyaita
WtaA mae is$aÜ"ya: s$aAEmya
@í"AvaAEtpaiÔak(A mataA:
aëimä mahimä mürter
laghimä präptir indriyaiù
präkämyaà çruta-dåñöeñu
çakti-preraëam éçitä
guëeñv asaìgo vaçitä
yat-kämas tad avasyati
etä me siddhayaù saumya
añöäv autpattikä matäù
SYNONYMS
aëimä—the perfection of becoming smaller than the smallest;
mahimä—becoming greater than the greatest; mürteù—of the body;
laghimä—becoming lighter than the lightest; präptiù—acquisition;
indriyaiù—by the senses; präkämyam—obtaining or performing whatever one
desires; çruta—things invisible,, about which one only hears; dåñöeñu—and
things visible; çakti-preraëam—manipulating the subpotencies of mäyä;
éçitä—the perfection of controlling; guëeñu—in the modes of material nature;
asaìgaù—being unobstructed; vaçitä—the power to bring others under
control; yat—whatever; kämaù—desire (there may be); tat—that;
avasyati—one can obtain; etäù—these; me—My (potencies);
siddhayaù—mystic perfections; saumya—O gentle Uddhava; añöau—eight;
autpattikäù—natural and unexcelled; matäù—understood to be.
TRANSLATION
Among the eight primary mystic perfections, the three by which one
transforms one's own body are aëimä, becoming smaller than the smallest;
mahimä, becoming greater than the greatest; and laghimä, becoming lighter than
the lightest. Through the perfection of präpti one acquires whatever one desires,
and through präkämya-siddhi one experiences any enjoyable object, either in
this world or the next. Through içitä-siddhi one can manipulate the
subpotencies of mäyä, and through the controlling potency called vaçitä-siddhi
one is unimpeded by the three modes of nature. One who has acquired
kämävasäyitä-siddhi can obtain anything from anywhere, to the highest possible
limit. My dear gentle Uddhava, these eight mystic perfections are considered to
be naturally existing and unexcelled within this world.
PURPORT
Through aëimä-siddhi one can become so small that one can enter a stone
or pass through any obstacle. Through mahimä-siddhi one becomes so great
that one covers everything, and through laghimä one becomes so light that one
can ride on the sun's rays into the sun planet. Through präpti-siddhi one can
acquire anything from anywhere and can even touch the moon with one's
finger. By this mystic perfection one can also enter into the senses of any other
living entity through the predominating deities of the particular senses; and by
thus utilizing the senses of others, one can acquire anything. Through
präkämya one can experience any enjoyable object, either in this world or the
next, and through éçitä, or the controlling potency, one can manipulate the
subpotencies of mäyä, which are material. In other words, even by acquiring
mystic powers one cannot pass beyond the control of illusion; however, one
may manipulate the subpotencies of illusion. Through vaçitä, or the power to
control, one can bring others under one's dominion or keep oneself beyond the
control of the three modes of nature. Ultimately, one acquires through
kämävasäyitä the maximum powers of control, acquisition and enjoyment. The
word autpattikäù in this verse indicates being original, natural and unexcelled.
These eight mystic potencies originally exist in the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Kåñëa, in the superlative degree. Lord Kåñëa becomes so small that
He enters within the atomic particles, and He becomes so large that as
Mahä-Viñëu He breathes out millions of universes. The Lord can become so
light or subtle that even great mystic yogés cannot perceive Him, and the Lord's
acquisitive power is perfect, because He keeps the total existence eternally
within His body. The Lord certainly can enjoy whatever He likes, control all
energies, dominate all other persons and exhibit complete omnipotency.
Therefore it is to be understood that these eight mystic perfections are
insignificant expansions of the mystic potency of the Lord, who in
Bhagavad-gétä is called Yogeçvara, the Supreme Lord of all mystic potencies.
These eight perfections are not artificial, but are natural and unexcelled
because they originally exist in the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXTS 6-7
@naUimaRmaÔvaM de"he"'ismana,
äU"r"™avaNAd"zARnama,
manaAejava: k(Amaè&paM
par"k(Aya‘avaezAnama,
svacC$nd"ma{tyaudeR"vaAnaAM
s$ah"‚(Lx"Anaud"zARnama,
yaTaAs$aÆÿlpas$aMis$aiÜ"r,"
@AÁaA‘aitah"taA gAita:
anürmimattvaà dehe 'smin
düra-çravaëa-darçanam
mano-javaù käma-rüpaà
para-käya-praveçanam
svacchanda-måtyur devänäà
saha-kréòänudarçanam
yathä-saìkalpa-saàsiddhir
äjïäpratihatä gatiù
SYNONYMS
anürmi-mattvam—being undisturbed by hunger, thirst, etc.; dehe asmin—in
this body; düra—things very far away; çravaëa—hearing; darçanam—and
seeing; manaù-javaù—moving the body at the speed of the mind;
käma-rüpam—assuming any body that one desires; para-käya—the bodies of
others; praveçanam—entering; sva-chanda—according to one's own desire;
måtyuù—dying; devänäm—of the demigods; saha—together with (the celestial
girls); kréòä—the sporting pastimes; anudarçanam—witnessing;
yathä—according to; saìkalpa—one's determination; saàsiddhiù—perfect
accomplishment; äjïä—order; apratihatä—unimpeded; gatiù—whose progress.
TRANSLATION
The ten secondary mystic perfections arising from the modes of nature are
the powers of freeing oneself from hunger and thirst and other bodily
disturbances, hearing and seeing things far away, moving the body at the speed
of the mind, assuming any form one desires, entering the bodies of others, dying
when one desires, witnessing the pastimes between the demigods and the
celestial girls called Apsaräs, completely executing one's determination and
giving orders whose fulfillment is unimpeded.
TEXTS 8-9
i‡ak(AlaÁatvamaã"nãM"
par"icaÔaAâiBaÁataA
@gnyak(ARmbauivaSaAd"InaAM
‘aitaí"mBaAe'par"Ajaya:
WtaAêAeÚe"zAta: ‘aAel(A
yaAegADaAr"NAis$aÜ"ya:
yayaA DaAr"NAyaA yaA syaAä,"
yaTaA vaA syaAiªabaAeDa mae
tri-käla-jïatvam advandvaà
para-cittädy-abhijïatä
agny-arkämbu-viñädénäà
pratiñöambho 'paräjayaù
etäç coddeçataù proktä
yoga-dhäraëa-siddhayaù
yayä dhäraëayä yä syäd
yathä vä syän nibodha me
SYNONYMS
tri-käla-jïatvam—the perfection of knowing past, present and future;
advandvam—being unaffected by dualities such as heat and cold; para—of
others; citta—the mind; ädi—and so on; abhijïatä—knowing; agni—of fire;
arka—the sun; ambu—water; viña—of poison; ädénäm—and so on;
pratiñöambhaù—checking the potency; aparäjayaù—not being conquered by
others; etäù—these; ca—also; uddeçataù—merely by mentioning their names
and characteristics; proktäù—are described; yoga—of the yoga system;
dhäraëa—of meditation; siddhayaù—perfections; yayä—by which;
dhäraëayä—meditation; yä—which (perfection); syät—may occur; yathä—by
which means; vä—or; syät—may occur; nibodha—please learn; me—from Me.
TRANSLATION
The power to know past, present and future; tolerance of heat, cold and
other dualities; knowing the minds of others; checking the influence of fire,
sun, water, poison, and so on; and remaining unconquered by others—these
constitute five perfections of the mystic process of yoga and meditation. I am
simply listing these here according to their names and characteristics. Now
please learn from Me how specific mystic perfections arise from specific
meditations and also of the particular processes involved.
PURPORT
According to the äcäryas these five perfections are considered to be quite
inferior to the others already mentioned, since they involve more or less
ordinary physical and mental manipulations. According to Çréla Madhväcärya,
in the perfection called agny-arkämbu-viñädénäà pratiñöambhaù, or checking
the influence of fire, sun, water, poison, and so on, the term "and so on" refers
to one's remaining invulnerable to all types of weapons as well as attacks by
nails, teeth, beating, curses and other such sources.
TEXT 10
BaUtas$aUºmaAtmaina maiya
tanmaA‡aM DaAr"yaenmana:
@iNAmaAnamavaA«aAeita
tanmaA‡aAepaAs$ak(Ae mama
bhüta-sükñmätmani mayi
tan-mätraà dhärayen manaù
aëimänam aväpnoti
tan-mätropäsako mama
SYNONYMS
bhüta-sükñma—of the subtle elements; ätmani—in the soul; mayi—in Me;
tat-mätram—on the subtle, elemental forms of perception; dhärayet—one
should concentrate; manaù—the mind; aëimänam—the mystic perfection
called aëimä; aväpnoti-obtains; tat-mätra—in the subtle elements;
upäsakaù—the worshiper; mama—My.
TRANSLATION
One who worships Me in My atomic form pervading all subtle elements,
fixing his mind on that alone, obtains the mystic perfection called aëimä.
PURPORT
Aëimä refers to the mystic ability to make oneself smaller than the smallest
and thus able to enter within anything. The Supreme Personality of Godhead
is within the atoms and atomic particles, and one who perfectly fixes his mind
in that subtle atomic form of the Lord acquires the mystic potency called
aëimä, by which one can enter within even the most dense matter such as
stone.
TEXT 11
mah"ÔaÔvaAtmaina maiya
yaTaAs$aMsTaM manaAe d"Data,
maih"maAnamavaA«aAeita
BaUtaAnaAM ca pa{Tafpa{Tak,(
mahat-tattvätmani mayi
yathä-saàsthaà mano dadhat
mahimänam aväpnoti
bhütänäà ca påthak påthak
SYNONYMS
mahat-tattva—of the total material energy; ätmani—in the Soul; mayi—in Me;
yathä—according to; saàstham—the particular situation; manaù—the mind;
dadhat—fixing; mahimänam—the mystic perfection called mahimä;
aväpnoti-one achieves; bhütänäm—of the material elements; ca—also; påthak
påthak—each one individually.
TRANSLATION
One who absorbs his mind in the particular form of the mahat-tattva and
thus meditates upon Me as the Supreme Soul of the total material existence
achieves the mystic perfection called mahimä. By further absorbing the mind in
the situation of each individual element such as the sky, air, fire, and so on, one
progressively acquires the greatness of each material element.
PURPORT
There are innumerable verses in Vedic literatures explaining that the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is qualitatively not different from His
creation and thus a yogé may meditate upon the total material existence as a
manifestation of the external potency of the Lord. Once the yogé has
established his realization that the material creation is not different from the
Lord, he obtains the perfection called mahimä-siddhi. By realizing the Lord's
presence in each individual element the yogé also acquires the greatness of
each element. However, the pure devotees are not very interested in such
perfections because they are surrendered to the Personality of Godhead, who
exhibits such perfections to the infinite degree. Being always protected by the
Lord, the pure devotees save their precious time to chant Hare Kåñëa, Hare
Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare
Hare. Thus they achieve for themselves and others saàsiddhi, or the supreme
perfection, pure love of Godhead, Kåñëa consciousness, by which one expands
one's existence beyond the total material creation to the spiritual planets
called Vaikuëöha.
TEXT 12
par"maANAumayae icaÔaM
BaUtaAnaAM maiya r"Ãayana,
k(Alas$aUºmaATaRtaAM yaAegAI
laiGamaAnamavaA«auyaAta,
paramäëu-maye cittaà
bhütänäà mayi raïjayan
käla-sükñmärthatäà yogé
laghimänam aväpnuyät
SYNONYMS
parama-aëu-maye—in the form of atoms; cittam—his consciousness;
bhütänäm—of the material elements; mayi—in Me; raïjayan—attaching;
käla—of time; sükñma—subtle; arthatäm—being the substance; yogé—the yogé;
laghimänam—the mystic perfection laghimä; aväpnuyät-may obtain.
TRANSLATION
I exist within everything, and I am therefore the essence of the atomic
constituents of material elements. By attaching his mind to Me in this form, the
yogé may achieve the perfection called laghimä, by which he realizes the subtle
atomic substance of time.
PURPORT
Çrémad-Bhägavatam elaborately explains that käla, or time, is the
transcendental form of the Lord that moves the material world. Since the five
gross elements are composed of atoms, the atomic particles are the subtle
substance or manifestation of the movements of time. More subtle than time is
the Personality of Godhead Himself, who expands His potency as the time
factor. By understanding all these things clearly the yogé obtains
laghimä-siddhi, or the power to make himself lighter than the lightest.
TEXT 13
DaAr"yanmayyahM"taÔvae
manaAe vaEk(Air"ke('iKalama,
s$avaeRin‰"yaANAAmaAtmatvaM
‘aAiæaM ‘aA«aAeita manmanaA:
dhärayan mayy ahaà-tattve
mano vaikärike 'khilam
sarvendriyäëäm ätmatvaà
präptià präpnoti man-manäù
SYNONYMS
dhärayan—concentrating; mayi—in Me; aham-tattve—within the element of
false ego; manaù—the mind; vaikärike—in that which is produced from the
mode of goodness; akhilam—completely; sarva—of all living entities;
indriyäëäm—of the senses; ätmatvam—proprietorship; präptim—the mystic
perfection of acquisition; präpnoti—obtains; mat-manäù—the yogé whose mind
is fixed in Me.
TRANSLATION
Fixing his mind completely in Me within the element of false ego generated
from the mode of goodness, the yogé obtains the power of mystic acquisition, by
which he becomes the proprietor of the senses of all living entities. He obtains
such perfection because his mind is absorbed in Me.
PURPORT
It is significant that in order to acquire each mystic perfection one must fix
one's mind on the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta
Sarasvaté Öhäkura states that those who pursue such perfections without fixing
the mind in the Supreme Lord acquire a gross and inferior reflection of each
mystic potency. Those who are not conscious of the Lord cannot actually
synchronize their minds perfectly with the universal functions and therefore
cannot elevate their mystic opulences to the universal platform.
TEXT 14
mah"tyaAtmaina ya: s$aU‡ae
DaAr"yaenmaiya maAnas$ama,
‘aAk(AmyaM paAr"maeï"YaM mae
ivand"tae'vyal(janmana:
mahaty ätmani yaù sütre
dhärayen mayi mänasam
präkämyaà pärameñöhyaà me
vindate 'vyakta-janmanaù
SYNONYMS
mahati—in the mahat-tattva; ätmani-in the Supersoul; yaù—one who;
sütre—characterized by the chain of fruitive activities; dhärayet—should
concentrate; mayi—in Me; mänasam—the mental activities; präkämyam—the
mystic perfection called präkämya; pärameñöhyam-most excellent; me—from
Me; vindate—obtains or enjoys; avyakta-janmanaù—from Him whose
appearance in this world cannot be materially perceived.
TRANSLATION
One who concentrates all mental activities in Me as the Supersoul of that
phase of the mahat-tattva which manifests the chain of fruitive activities
obtains from Me, whose appearance is beyond material perception, the most
excellent mystic perfection called präkämya.
PURPORT
Çréla Véraräghava Äcärya explains that the word sütra, or "thread," is used
to indicate that the mahat-tattva sustains one's fruitive activities just as a
thread sustains a row of jewels. Thus by fixed meditation on the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is the soul of the mahat-tattva, one can achieve
the most excellent perfection called präkämya. Avyakta-janmanaù indicates
that the Supreme Personality of Godhead appears from the avyakta, or the
spiritual sky, or that His birth is avyakta, beyond the perception of material
senses. Unless one accepts the transcendental form of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, there is no possibility of obtaining präkämya or any other genuine
mystic perfection.
TEXT 15
ivaSNAAE ‡yaDaIìre" icaÔaM
DaAr"yaetk(Alaivaƒahe"
s$a wRizAtvamavaA«aAeita
ºae‡aÁaºae‡acaAed"naAma,
viñëau try-adhéçvare cittaà
dhärayet käla-vigrahe
sa éçitvam aväpnoti
kñetrajïa-kñetra-codanäm
SYNONYMS
viñëau—in Lord Viñëu, the Supersoul; tri-adhéçvare—the supreme controller of
mäyä, which consists of three modes of nature; cittam—the consciousness;
dhärayet—one concentrates; käla—of time, the prime mover; vigrahe—in the
form; saù—he, the yogé; éçitvam—the mystic perfection of controlling;
aväpnoti—obtains; kñetra-jïa—the conscious living entity; kñetra—and the
body with its designations; codanäm—impelling.
TRANSLATION
One who places his consciousness on Viñëu, the Supersoul, the prime mover
and Supreme Lord of the external energy consisting of three modes, obtains the
mystic perfection of controlling other conditioned souls, their material bodies
and their bodily designations.
PURPORT
We should remember that mystic perfection never enables a living entity to
challenge the supremacy of the Personality of Godhead. In fact, one cannot
obtain such perfections without the mercy of the Supreme Lord; thus one's
controlling power can never disturb the plan of Lord Kåñëa. One is allowed to
exhibit mystic control only within the confines of the law of God, and even a
great yogé who transgresses the law of God by his so-called mystic opulences
will be severely punished, as revealed in the story of Durväsä Muni cursing
Ambaréña Mahäräja.
TEXT 16
naAr"AyaNAe taur"IyaAKyae
BagAvacC$bd"zAibd"tae
manaAe mayyaAd"DaâAegAI
maÜ"maAR vaizAtaAimayaAta,
näräyaëe turéyäkhye
bhagavac-chabda-çabdite
mano mayy ädadhad yogé
mad-dharmä vaçitäm iyät
SYNONYMS
näräyaëe—in the Supreme Lord, Näräyaëa; turéya-äkhye—known as the
fourth, beyond the three modes of material nature; bhagavat—full of all
opulences; çabda-çabdite—known by the word; manaù—the mind; mayi—in
Me; ädadhat—placing; yogé—the yogé; mat-dharmä—being endowed with My
nature; vaçitäm—the mystic opulence called vaçitä; iyät-may obtain.
TRANSLATION
The yogé who places his mind in My form of Näräyaëa, known as the fourth
factor, full of all opulences, becomes endowed with My nature and thus obtains
the mystic perfection called vaçitä.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (7.13) Lord Kåñëa states,
tribhir guëa-mayair bhävair
ebhiù sarvam idaà jagat
mohitaà näbhijänäti
mäm ebhyaù param avyayam
"Deluded by the three modes [goodness, passion and ignorance], the whole
world does not know Me, who am above the modes and inexhaustible." Thus
the Lord is called turéya, or the fourth factor beyond the three modes of
nature. According to Çréla Véraräghava Äcärya, turéya also indicates that the
Lord is beyond the three ordinary phases of consciousness, namely
wakefulness, dreaming and dreamless sleep. Bhaga-vac-chabda-çabdite indicates
that the Lord is known as Bhagavän, or the possessor of unlimited opulences,
principally beauty, fame, wealth, knowledge, renunciation and intelligence.
In conclusion, one can obtain the mystic opulence vaçitä, or freedom from
the modes of nature, by meditating upon the Lord as turéya, the fourth factor
beyond those modes. Everything depends upon the favor of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 17
inagAuRNAe “aöiNA maiya
DaAr"yana, ivazAdM" mana:
par"maAnand"maA«aAeita
ya‡a k(AmaAe'vas$aIyatae
nirguëe brahmaëi mayi
dhärayan viçadaà manaù
paramänandam äpnoti
yatra kämo 'vaséyate
SYNONYMS
nirguëe—without qualities; brahmaëi—in Brahman; mayi—in Me;
dhärayan—concentrating; viçadam—pure; manaù—the mind;
parama-änandam—the greatest happiness; äpnoti—obtains; yatra—wherein;
kämaù—desire; avaséyate—is completely fulfilled.
TRANSLATION
One who fixes his pure mind on Me in My manifestation as the impersonal
Brahman obtains the greatest happiness, wherein all his desires are completely
fulfilled.
PURPORT
Paramänanda, or "the greatest happiness," here indicates the greatest
material happiness, since it is clearly stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam that a
devotee has no personal desire, or käma. One who has personal desire is
certainly within the material world, and on the material platform the greatest
happiness is kämävasäyitä-siddhi, or the perfection of completely obtaining
anything that one desires.
TEXT 18
ìetaã"IpapataAE icaÔaM
zAuÜe" DamaRmayae maiya
DaAr"yaHC.$vaetataAM yaAita
Sax"^imaRr"ih"taAe nar":
çvetadvépa-patau cittaà
çuddhe dharma-maye mayi
dhärayaï chvetatäà yäti
ñaò-ürmi-rahito naraù
SYNONYMS
çveta-dvépa—of the white island, the abode of Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu; patau—in
the Lord; cittam—consciousness; çuddhe—in the personification of goodness;
dharma-maye—in He who is always situated in piety; mayi—in Me;
dhärayan—concentrating; çvetatäm—pure existence; yäti—obtains;
ñaö-ürmi—the six waves of material disturbance; rahitaù—freed from;
naraù—a person.
TRANSLATION
A human being who concentrates on Me as the upholder of religious
principles, the personification of purity and the Lord of Çvetadvépa obtains the
pure existence in which he is freed from the six waves of material disturbance,
namely hunger, thirst, decay, death, grief and illusion.
PURPORT
The Lord now begins to explain the processes for obtaining the ten
secondary mystic perfections derived from the modes of nature. Within the
material world Lord Viñëu, addressed here as çvetadvépa-pati, the Lord of
Çvetadvépa, governs the material mode of goodness and is thus called çuddha
and dharma-maya, or the personification of purity and piety. By worshiping
Lord Viñëu as the personification of material goodness one obtains the
material benediction of freedom from bodily disturbance.
TEXT 19
mayyaAk(AzAAtmaina ‘aANAe
manas$aA GaAeSamauã"h"na,
ta‡aAepalabDaA BaUtaAnaAM
hM"s$aAe vaAca: Za{NAAetyas$aAE
mayy äkäçätmani präëe
manasä ghoñam udvahan
tatropalabdhä bhütänäà
haàso väcaù çåëoty asau
SYNONYMS
mayi—in Me; äkäça-ätmani—in the personification of the sky; präëe—in the
life air; manasä—with the mind; ghoñam—the transcendental sound;
udvahan—concentrating on; tatra—there in the sky; upalabdhäù—perceived;
bhütänäm—of all living entities; haàsaù—the purified living entity;
väcaù—words or speaking; çåëoti—hears; asau—he.
TRANSLATION
That purified living entity who fixes his mind on the extraordinary sound
vibrations occurring within Me as the personified sky and total life air is then
able to perceive within the sky the speaking of all living entities.
PURPORT
Speech occurs by vibrating air within the sky. One who meditates on the
Supreme Lord as the personified sky and air thereby acquires the ability to
hear that which is vibrated at great distance. The word präëa indicates that
the Lord is the personified life air of the individual living entities and for the
total aggregate of life forms. Ultimately, the pure devotees meditate on the
supreme vibration—Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare
Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare—and are thus able to hear the
speech originating from liberated living entities far beyond the material
universe. Any living entity can hear such discussions by reading
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Bhagavad-gétä and other such literatures. One who has
properly understood the opulences of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
finds all perfection, mystic and otherwise, in Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 20
caºaustvaí"ir" s$aMyaAejya
tvaí"Ar"maipa caºauiSa
maAM ta‡a manas$aA DyaAyana,
ivaìM pazyaita äU"r"ta:
cakñus tvañöari saàyojya
tvañöäram api cakñuñi
mäà tatra manasä dhyäyan
viçvaà paçyati dürataù
SYNONYMS
cakñuù—the eyes; tvañöari—in the sun; saàyojya—merging; tvañöäram—the
sun; api—also; cakñuñi—in one's eyes; mäm—Me; tatra—there, in the mutual
merging of sun and eye; manasä—with the mind; dhyäyan—meditating;
viçvam—everything; paçyati—he sees; dürataù—far away.
TRANSLATION
Merging one's sight into the sun planet and then the sun planet into one's
eyes, one should meditate on Me as existing within the combination of sun and
vision; thus one acquires the power to see any distant thing.
TEXT 21
manaAe maiya s$aus$aMyaAejya
de"hM" tad"nauvaAyaunaA
maÜ"Ar"NAAnauBaAvaena
ta‡aAtmaA ya‡a vaE mana:
mano mayi su-saàyojya
dehaà tad-anuväyunä
mad-dhäraëänubhävena
taträtmä yatra vai manaù
SYNONYMS
manaù—the mind; mayi—in Me; su-saàyojya—completely absorbing;
deham—the material body; tat—the mind; anu-väyunä—by the wind that
follows; mat-dhäraëä—of meditation in Me; anubhävena—by the potency;
tatra—there; ätmä—the material body (goes); yatra—wherever;
vai—certainly; manaù—the mind (goes).
TRANSLATION
The yogé who completely absorbs his mind in Me, and who then makes use
of the wind that follows the mind to absorb the material body in Me, obtains
through the potency of meditation on Me the mystic perfection by which his
body immediately follows his mind wherever it goes.
PURPORT
Tad-anuväyunä indicates the particular subtle air that follows the mind.
When the yogé merges this air together with the body and mind in Kåñëa by
the potency of meditation on the Lord, his gross material body, like the subtle
air, can follow the mind anywhere. This perfection is called mano-javaù.
TEXT 22
yad"A mana opaAd"Aya
yaâåU"paM bauBaUSaita
taÔaà"vaenmanaAeè&paM
maâAegAbalamaA™aya:
yadä mana upädäya
yad yad rüpaà bubhüñati
tat tad bhaven mano-rüpaà
mad-yoga-balam äçrayaù
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; manaù—the mind; upädäya—applying; yat yat—whatever;
rüpam—form; bubhüñati—one desires to assume; tat tat—that very form;
bhavet—may appear; manaù-rüpam—the form desired by the mind;
mat-yoga-balam—My inconceivable mystic potency, by which I manifest
innumerable forms; äçrayaù—being the shelter.
TRANSLATION
When the yogé, applying his mind in a certain way, desires to assume a
particular form, that very form immediately appears. Such perfection is possible
by absorbing the mind in the shelter of My inconceivable mystic potency, by
which I assume innumerable forms.
PURPORT
This perfection is called käma-rüpa, or the ability to assume any form that
one desires, even the form of a demigod. The pure devotees absorb their minds
in a particular type of service to Lord Kåñëa and thus gradually assume a
spiritual body for an eternal life of bliss and knowledge. Thus anyone who
takes to the process of chanting the holy names of Kåñëa and follows the
regulative principles of human life can acquire the ultimate perfection of
käma-rüpa, assuming an eternal, spiritual body in the kingdom of God.
TEXT 23
par"k(AyaM ivazAna, is$aÜ"
@AtmaAnaM ta‡a BaAvayaeta,
ipaNxM" ih"tvaA ivazAet‘aANAAe
vaAyauBaUta: Sax"x.~i„avata,
para-käyaà viçan siddha
ätmänaà tatra bhävayet
piëòaà hitvä viçet präëo
väyu-bhütaù ñaòaìghri-vat
SYNONYMS
para—of another; käyam—the body; viçan—desiring to enter; siddhaù—one
perfected in yoga practice; ätmänam—oneself; tatra—in that body;
bhävayet—imagines; piëòam—one's own gross body; hitvä—giving up;
viçet—one should enter; präëaù—in the subtle body; väyu-bhütaù—becoming
just like the wind; ñaö-aìghri-vat—like the bee, who easily moves from one
flower to another.
TRANSLATION
When a perfect yogé desires to enter another's body, he should meditate upon
himself within the other body, and then, giving up his own gross body, he
should enter the other's body through the pathways of air, as easily as a bee
leaves one flower and flies into another.
PURPORT
As air is inhaled into the body through the nostrils and mouth, similarly,
the life air of the yogé's subtle body travels through the pathways of external
air and easily enters into the body of another person, just as the bee easily flies
from flower to flower. One may admire a heroic man or beautiful woman and
desire to experience life within their extraordinary material body. Such
opportunities are available through the mystic perfection called
para-käya-praveçanam. Pure devotees, being absorbed in meditation upon the
spiritual form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, are not actually
attracted to any material body. Thus the devotees remain transcendental and
satisfied on the platform of eternal life.
TEXT 24
paASNyaARpaIx"Ya gAudM" ‘aANAM
ô$äu"r":k(NQ&maUDaRs$au
@Ar"Aepya “aör"n‹aeNA
“aö naItvaAets$a{jaeÔanauma,
pärñëyäpéòya gudaà präëaà
håd-uraù-kaëöha-mürdhasu
äropya brahma-randhreëa
brahma nétvotsåjet tanum
SYNONYMS
pärñëyä—with the heel of the foot; äpéòya—blocking; gudam—the anus;
präëam—the vital air carrying the living entity; håt—from the heart; uraù—to
the chest; kaëöha—to the neck; mürdhasu—and to the head; äropya—placing;
brahma-randhreëa—by the spiritual seat at the top of the head; brahma—to
the spiritual world or impersonal Brahman (or any other destination one has
selected); nétvä—leading (the soul); utsåjet—one should give up; tanum—the
material body.
TRANSLATION
The yogé who has achieved the mystic perfection called svacchanda-måtyu
blocks the anus with the heel of the foot and then lifts the soul from the heart
to the chest, to the neck and finally to the head. Situated within the
brahma-randhra, the yogé then gives up his material body and guides the spirit
soul to the selected destination.
PURPORT
This mystic opulence of svacchandu-måtyu, or dying at will, was wonderfully
exhibited by Bhéñmadeva at the end of the Battle of Kurukñetra. According to
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, the term brahma, as used in this verse, is an example of
upalakñaëa, or the use of a general term to indicate various concepts. Brahma
here indicates the particular destination selected by the yogé, namely the
spiritual sky, the impersonal brahmajyoti or any other destination that has
attracted the yogé's mind.
TEXT 25
ivah"ir"Syana, s$aur"A‚(Lxe"
matsTaM s$aÔvaM ivaBaAvayaeta,
ivamaAnaenaAepaitaï"inta
s$aÔvava{ÔaI: s$aur"iñya:
vihariñyan suräkréòe
mat-sthaà sattvaà vibhävayet
vimänenopatiñöhanti
sattva-våttéù sura-striyaù
SYNONYMS
vihariñyan—desiring to enjoy; sura—of the demigods; äkréòe—in the pleasure
gardens; mat—in Me; stham—situated; sattvam—the mode of goodness;
vibhävayet—one should meditate on; vimänena—by airplane;
upatiñöhanti—they arrive; sattva—in the mode of goodness; våttéù—appearing;
sura—of the demigods; striyaù—the women.
TRANSLATION
The yogi who desires to enjoy in the pleasure gardens of the demigods should
meditate on the purified mode of goodness, which is situated within Me, and
then the heavenly women, generated from the mode of goodness, will approach
him in airplanes.
TEXT 26
yaTaA s$aÆÿlpayaeä," bauÜ"YaA
yad"A vaA matpar": paumaAna,
maiya s$atyae manaAe yauÃaMs$a,
taTaA tats$amaupaA´autae
yathä saìkalpayed buddhyä
yadä vä mat-paraù pumän
mayi satye mano yuïjaàs
tathä tat samupäçnute
SYNONYMS
yathä—by which means; saìkalpayet—one may determine or resolve;
buddhyä—by the mind; yadä—when; vä—or; mat-paraù—having faith in Me;
pumän—the yogé; mayi—in Me; satye—whose desire always becomes truth;
manaù—the mind; yuïjan—absorbing; tathä—by that means; tat—that very
purpose; samupäçnute—he obtains.
TRANSLATION
A yogi who has faith in Me, absorbing his mind in Me and knowing that My
purpose is always fulfilled, will always achieve his purpose by the very means he
has determined to follow.
PURPORT
In this verse the word yadä ("whenever") indicates that by the mystic power
called yathä-saìkalpa-saàsiddhi one will achieve one's objective even if one
pursues it at an inauspicious time. Lord Kåñëa is called satya-saìkalpa, or He
whose desire, intention, purpose or resolve always comes to pass.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura mentions that one should
determine to revive one's lost relationship with the Supreme Lord Kåñëa
through the infallible means of devotional service, which can be executed at
any time or in any place. There are many books giving proper guidance for
achieving Lord Kåñëa, and the following are mentioned: Çréla Jéva Gosvämé's
Saìkalpa-kalpavåkña, Çréla Kåñëadäsa Kaviräja's Çré Govinda-lélämåta, Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté's Çré Kåñëa-bhävanämåta and Saìkalpa-kalpadruma, and
Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura's Çré Gauräìga-smaraëa-maìgala. In the modern
age, His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda has given us
over sixty large volumes of transcendental literature, which can fix us firmly
on the path back home, back to Godhead. Our saìkalpa, or determination,
should be practical and not useless. We should resolve to make a permanent
solution to the problems of life by going back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 27
yaAe vaE maà"AvamaApaªa
wRizAtauvaRizAtau: paumaAna,
ku(taiêªa ivah"nyaeta
tasya caAÁaA yaTaA mama
yo vai mad-bhävam äpanna
éçitur vaçituù pumän
kutaçcin na vihanyeta
tasya cäjïä yathä mama
SYNONYMS
yaù—one who (a yogé); vai—indeed; mat—from Me; bhävam—nature;
äpannaù—achieved; éçituù—from the supreme ruler; vaçituù—the supreme
controller; pumän—a person (yogé); kutaçcit—in any way; na
vihanyeta—cannot be frustrated; tasya—his; ca—also; äjïä—order, command;
yathä—just as; mama—Mine.
TRANSLATION
A person who perfectly meditates on Me acquires My nature of being the
supreme ruler and controller. His order, like Mine, can never be frustrated by
any means.
PURPORT
By the command of the Supreme Personality of Godhead the entire
creation is moving. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (9.10),
mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù
süyate sa-caräcaram
hetunänena kaunteya
jagad viparivartate
"This material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kunté, and it is
producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule this manifestation is
created and annihilated again and again." Similarly, Caitanya Mahäprabhu has
given His command that people all over the world should take to Kåñëa
consciousness. The sincere devotees of the Lord should go all over the world
repeating the Lord's command. In this way, they can share in His mystic
opulence of giving orders that cannot be counteracted.
TEXT 28
maà"ftyaA zAuÜ"s$aÔvasya
yaAeigAnaAe DaAr"NAAivad":
tasya ‡aEk(Ailak(L bauiÜ"r,"
janmama{tyaUpaba{Mih"taA
mad-bhaktyä çuddha-sattvasya
yogino dhäraëä-vidaù
tasya trai-käliké buddhir
janma-måtyüpabåàhitä
SYNONYMS
mat-bhaktyä—by devotion to Me; çuddha-sattvasya—of one whose existence is
purified; yoginaù—of a yogé; dhäraëä-viduù—who knows the process of
meditation; tasya—of him; trai-käliké—functioning in three phases of time,
namely past, present and future; buddhiù—intelligence; janma-måtyu—birth
and death; upabåàhitä—including.
TRANSLATION
A yogé who has purified his existence by devotion to Me and who thus
expertly knows the process of meditation obtains knowledge of past, present and
future. He can therefore see the birth and death of himself and others.
PURPORT
After having explained the eight primary and ten secondary mystic
perfections of yoga, the Lord now explains the five inferior potencies.
TEXT 29
@gnyaAid"iBanaR h"nyaeta
maunaeyaAeRgAmayaM vapau:
maâAegAzAAntaicaÔasya
yaAd"s$aAmaud"kM( yaTaA
agny-ädibhir na hanyeta
muner yoga-mayaà vapuù
mad-yoga-çänta-cittasya
yädasäm udakaà yathä
SYNONYMS
agni—by fire; ädibhiù—and so on (sun, water, poison, etc.); na—not;
hanyeta—can be injured; muneù—of a wise yogé; yoga-mayam—fully
cultivated in yoga science; vapuù—the body; mat-yoga—by devotional
connection with Me; çänta—pacified; cittasya—whose consciousness;
yädasäm—of the aquatics; udakam—water; yathä—just as.
TRANSLATION
Just as the bodies of aquatics cannot be injured by water, similarly, the body
of a yogi whose consciousness is pacified by devotion to Me and who is fully
developed in yoga science cannot be injured by fire, sun, water, poison, and so
forth.
PURPORT
The creatures dwelling in the ocean are never injured by water; rather, they
enjoy life within the watery medium. Similarly, for one skilled in the
techniques of yoga, fending off attacks by weapons, fire, poison, and so on, is a
recreational activity. Prahläda Mahäräja was attacked by his father in all these
ways, but because of his perfect Kåñëa consciousness he was not injured. The
pure devotees of the Lord depend fully on the mercy of Lord Kåñëa, who
possesses mystic opulences to an infinite degree and is therefore known as
Yogeçvara, the master of all mystic power. Because devotees are always
connected to Lord Kåñëa, they do not feel any need to separately develop
powers already possessed unlimitedly by their Lord, master and protector.
If a human being falls into the middle of the ocean he quickly drowns,
whereas the fish enjoy happiness sporting in the same waves. Similarly, the
conditioned souls have fallen into the ocean of material existence and are
drowning in the reactions to their sinful activities, whereas the devotees
recognize this world to be the potency of the Lord and enjoy pleasurable
pastimes within it by fully engaging in the loving service of Lord Kåñëa.
TEXT 30
maiã"BaUtaIr"iBaDyaAyana,
™aIvats$aAñivaBaUiSataA:
DvajaAtapa‡avyajanaE:
s$a Bavaed"par"Aijata:
mad-vibhütér abhidhyäyan
çrévatsästra-vibhüñitäù
dhvajätapatra-vyajanaiù
sa bhaved aparäjitaù
SYNONYMS
mat—My; vibhütéù—opulent incarnations; abhidhyäyan—meditating upon;
çrévatsa—with the Lord's Çrévatsa opulence; astra—and weapons;
vibhüñitäù—decorated; dhvaja—with flags; ätapatra—with ceremonial
umbrellas; vyajanaiù—and different types of fans; saù—he, the devotee-yogé;
bhavet—becomes; aparäjitaù—unconquerable by others.
TRANSLATION
My devotee becomes unconquerable by meditating on My opulent
incarnations, which are decorated with Çrévatsa and various weapons and are
endowed with imperial paraphernalia such as flags, ornamental umbrellas and
fans.
PURPORT
The imperial paraphernalia of the Lord's opulent incarnations indicates His
omnipotency, and the devotees become unconquerable by meditating on the
Lord's powerful, royally equipped incarnations. As stated by Bilvamaìgala
Öhäkura in Kåñëa-karëämåta, verse 107,
bhaktis tvayi sthiratarä bhagavan yadi syäd
daivena naù phalati divya-kiçora-mürtiù
muktiù svayaà mukulitäïjaliù sevate 'smän
dharmärtha-käma-gatayaù samaya-pratékñäù
"My dear Lord, if we develop unflinching devotional service unto You, then
automatically Your transcendental, youthful form is revealed to us. Thus
liberation herself waits with folded hands to serve us, and the ultimate goals of
religiosity, economic development and sense gratification patiently wait to
render service to us."
TEXT 31
opaAs$ak(sya maAmaevaM
yaAegADaAr"NAyaA maunae:
is$aÜ"ya: paUvaRk(iTataA
opaitaï"ntyazAeSata:
upäsakasya mäm evaà
yoga-dhäraëayä muneù
siddhayaù pürva-kathitä
upatiñöhanty açeñataù
SYNONYMS
upäsakasya—of one who is worshiping; mäm—Me; evam—thus;
yoga-dhäraëayä—by the process of mystic meditation; muneù—of a learned
person; siddhayaù—the mystic perfections; pürva—previously;
kathitäù—described; upatiñöhanti—approach; açeñataù—in all respects.
TRANSLATION
A learned devotee who worships Me through yoga meditation certainly
obtains in all respects the mystic perfections that I have described.
PURPORT
The word yoga-dhäraëayä indicates that each devotee obtains the particular
perfection for which he has qualified himself. The Lord thus concludes His
discussion of yoga-siddhis.
TEXT 32
ijataein‰"yasya d"Antasya
ijataìAs$aAtmanaAe maunae:
maÜ"Ar"NAAM DaAr"yata:
k(A s$aA is$aiÜ": s$auäu"laRBaA
jitendriyasya däntasya
jita-çväsätmano muneù
mad-dhäraëäà dhärayataù
kä sä siddhiù su-durlabhä
SYNONYMS
jita-indriyasya—of one who has conquered his senses; däntasya—who is
disciplined and self-controlled; jita-çväsa—who has conquered his breathing;
ätmanaù—and conquered the mind; muneù—of such a sage; mat—in Me;
dhäraëäm—meditation; dhärayataù—who is conducting; kä—what is;
sä—that; siddhiù—perfection; su-durlabhä—which is very difficult to achieve.
TRANSLATION
For a sage who has conquered his senses, breathing and mind, who is
self-controlled and always absorbed in meditation on Me, what mystic
perfection could possibly be difficult to achieve?
PURPORT
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé comments as follows. "Lord Kåñëa here expresses that
there is no need to practice many different processes, for by completely
carrying out even one of the above-mentioned procedures one controls one's
senses, becomes absorbed in Him and thus achieves all mystic perfections."
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé notes that one must meditate on the transcendental
form of the Lord, which is free from any material designation. This is the
essence of advancing in the yoga system; thus one acquires all mystic
perfections very easily from the personal body of the Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 33
@ntar"AyaAna, vad"ntyaetaA
yauÃataAe yaAegAmauÔamama,
mayaA s$ampaâmaAnasya
k(AlaºapaNAhe"tava:
antaräyän vadanty etä
yuïjato yogam uttamam
mayä sampadyamänasya
käla-kñapaëa-hetavaù
SYNONYMS
antaräyän—impediments; vadanti—they say; etäù—these mystic perfections;
yuïjataù—of one engaging in; yogam—connection with the Absolute;
uttamam—the supreme stage; mayä—with Me; sampadyamänasya—of one
who is becoming completely opulent; käla—of time; kñapaëa—of the
interruption, waste; hetavaù—causes.
TRANSLATION
Learned experts in devotional service state that the mystic perfections of
yoga that I have mentioned are actually impediments and are a waste of time for
one who is practicing the supreme yoga, by which one achieves all perfection in
life directly from Me.
PURPORT
It is common sense that whatever is a useless waste of time should be given
up; therefore one should not pray to God for mystic yoga perfections. For a
pure devotee, who has no material desire, even impersonal liberation is a
useless disturbance in his life, and what to speak of the material perfections of
yoga, which cannot even be compared to impersonal liberation. Such mystic
perfections may be wonderful for an immature and inexperienced person, but
they are not impressive for a learned man who has understood the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Simply by obtaining Lord Kåñëa one dwells within an
infinite ocean of mystic opulences; therefore he should not waste precious time
pursuing separate mystic perfections.
TEXT 34
janmaAESaiDatapaAeman‡aEr,"
yaAvataIir"h" is$aÜ"ya:
yaAegAenaA«aAeita taA: s$avaAR
naAnyaEyaAeRgAgAitaM ˜ajaeta,
janmauñadhi-tapo-mantrair
yävatér iha siddhayaù
yogenäpnoti täù sarvä
nänyair yoga-gatià vrajet
SYNONYMS
janma—by birth; auñadhi—herbs; tapaù—austerities; mantraiù—and by
mantras; yävatéù—as many as there are; iha—in this world;
siddhayaù—perfections; yogena—by devotional service to Me; äpnoti—one
obtains; täù—those; sarväù—all of them; na—not; anyaiù—by other methods;
yoga-gatim—the actual perfection of yoga; vrajet—one can achieve.
TRANSLATION
Whatever mystic perfections can be achieved by good birth, herbs,
austerities and mantras can all be achieved by devotional service to Me; indeed,
one cannot achieve the actual perfection of yoga by any other means.
PURPORT
By taking birth as a demigod one is automatically endowed with many
mystic perfections. Simply by birth on Siddhaloka one automatically acquires
all of the eight principal perfections of yoga. Similarly, by birth as a fish one
becomes invulnerable to water, by birth as a bird one gets the mystic
perfection of flying, and by birth as a ghost one gets the mystic perfection of
disappearing and entering into the bodies of others. Pataïjali Muni states that
the mystic perfections of yoga can be achieved by birth, herbs, austerities and
mantras. The Lord states, however, that such perfections are ultimately a waste
of time and an impediment to achieving the actual perfection of yoga, Kåñëa
consciousness.
Those who give up the process of bhakti-yoga and shop around for other
objects of meditation besides Kåñëa are certainly not very intelligent. Those
who claim to be yogés but pursue the satisfaction of their own senses are
certainly kuyogés, or bhogi-yogés. Such kuyogés cannot understand that just as
they have tiny senses, the Absolute Truth has absolute senses, nor can they
understand that yoga is actually meant to satisfy the absolute senses of the
Lord. Therefore, persons who give up the lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa in order to
pursue so-called happiness in mystic perfection will undoubtedly be frustrated
in their attempt. By meditating exclusively on the Supreme Personality of
Godhead one can achieve yoga-gati, the ultimate goal of yoga, which means
living on Lord Kåñëa's planet and there enjoying spiritual opulences.
TEXT 35
s$avaARs$aAmaipa is$aÜ"InaAM
he"tau: paitar"hM" ‘aBau:
@hM" yaAegAsya s$aAÊÿYasya
DamaRsya “aövaAid"naAma,
sarväsäm api siddhénäà
hetuù patir ahaà prabhuù
ahaà yogasya säìkhyasya
dharmasya brahma-vädinäm
SYNONYMS
sarväsäm—of all of them; api—indeed; siddhénäm—of the mystic perfections;
hetuù—the cause; patiù—the protector; aham—I am; prabhuù—the Lord;
aham—I; yogasya—of unalloyed meditation on Me; säìkhyasya—of analytic
knowledge; dharmasya—of work executed without personal desire;
brahma-vädinäm—of the learned community of Vedic teachers.
TRANSLATION
My dear Uddhava, I am the cause, the protector and the Lord of all mystic
perfections, of the yoga system, of analytic knowledge, of pure activity and of
the community of learned Vedic teachers.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, the word yoga here indicates liberation
from material life, and säìkhya indicates the means of obtaining liberation.
Thus Lord Kåñëa is not merely the Lord of material yoga perfections, but of the
highest liberated perfections as well. One can obtain säìkhya, or knowledge
leading to liberation, by performing pious activities, and Lord Kåñëa is also the
cause, protector and Lord of such activities as well as of the learned teachers
who instruct ordinary people in the means of piety. In many different ways
Lord Kåñëa is the real object of meditation and worship for every living entity.
Lord Kåñëa through the expansion of His potencies is everything, and this
simple understanding, called Kåñëa consciousness, is the supreme perfection of
the yoga system.
TEXT 36
@h"maAtmaAntar"Ae baA÷Ae
'naAva{ta: s$avaR$de"ih"naAma,
yaTaA BaUtaAina BaUtaeSau
baih"r"nta: svayaM taTaA
aham ätmäntaro bähyo
'nävåtaù sarva-dehinäm
yathä bhütäni bhüteñu
bahir antaù svayaà tathä
SYNONYMS
aham—I; ätmä—the Supreme Lord; äntaraù—existing within as the
Supersoul; bähyaù—existing externally in My all-pervading feature;
anävåtaù—uncovered; sarva-dehinäm—of all living entities; yathä—just as;
bhütäni—the material elements; bhüteñu—among living entities;
bahiù—externally; antaù—internally; svayam—Myself; tathä—in the same
way.
TRANSLATION
Just as the same material elements exist within and outside of all material
bodies, similarly, I cannot be covered by anything else. I exist within everything
as the Supersoul and outside of everything in My all-pervading feature.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa is the entire basis of meditation for all yogés and philosophers,
and here the Lord clarifies His absolute position. Since the Lord is within
everything, one might think that the Lord is divided into pieces. However, the
word anävåta, or "completely uncovered," indicates that nothing can interrupt,
disturb or in any way infringe upon the supreme existence of the Absolute
Truth, the Personality of Godhead. There is no actual separation between the
internal and external existence of the material elements, which continuously
exist everywhere. Similarly, the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
all-pervading and is the ultimate perfection of everything.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Eleventh Canto, Fifteenth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Lord Kåñëa's Description of Mystic Yoga
Perfections."
16. The Lord's Opulence
In this chapter the Personality of Godhead, Lord Çré Kåñëa, describes His
manifest opulences in terms of His specific potencies of knowledge, strength,
influence, and so on.
Çré Uddhava offered glorification to Lord Çré Kåñëa, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and ultimate shelter of all holy places, saying, "The
Supreme Lord has no beginning and no end. He is the cause of the birth,
maintenance and destruction of all living entities. He is the soul of all beings,
and by secretly taking up residence within all living bodies He sees everything.
The conditioned souls, on the other hand, are bewildered by His external
energy and thus are unable to see Him." After offering such prayers at the
lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa, Çré Uddhava revealed his desire to know about the
Lord's various opulences in heaven, on earth, in hell and in all directions. Lord
Çré Kåñëa then described all these opulences, after which He commented that
all power, beauty, fame, opulence, humility, charity, charm, good fortune,
valor, tolerance and wisdom-wherever they are manifest-are simply expansions
from Himself. It therefore cannot be truthfully said that a material object
actually possesses these opulences. Such conceptions are the results of mentally
combining two ideas to produce an object that exists only in the imagination,
such as a sky flower. Material opulences are not substantially true, and
therefore one should not become too involved in meditating upon them. The
pure devotees of the Supreme Lord utilize their intelligence to properly
regulate the activities of their speech, mind and vital force and thus perfect
their existence in Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 1
™aIoÜ"va ovaAca
tvaM “aö par"maM s$aAºaAä,"
@naAântamapaAva{tama,
s$avaeRSaAmaipa BaAvaAnaAM
‡aANAisTatyapyayaAeà"va:
çré-uddhava uväca
tvaà brahma paramaà säkñäd
anädy-antam apävåtam
sarveñäm api bhävänäà
träëa-sthity-apyayodbhavaù
SYNONYMS
çré-uddhavaù uväca—Çré Uddhava said; tvam—You are; brahma—the greatest;
paramam—the supreme; säkñät—Himself; anädi—without beginning;
antam—without end; apävåtam—unlimited by anything else; sarveñäm—of all;
api—indeed; bhävänäm—things which exist; träëa—the protector; sthiti—the
life-giver; apyaya—the destruction; udbhavaù—and the creation.
TRANSLATION
Çré Uddhava said: My dear Lord, You are beginningless and endless, the
Absolute Truth Himself, unlimited by anything else. You are the protector and
life-giver, the destruction and creation of all things that exist.
PURPORT
Brahma means the greatest of all and the cause of everything. Uddhava
here addresses the Lord as the paramam, or supreme brahma, because in His
feature as Bhagavän the Lord is the highest feature of the Absolute Truth and
the shelter of unlimited spiritual opulences. Unlike those of ordinary living
entities, the Lord's opulences cannot be restricted by time, and thus the Lord is
anädy-antam, without beginning or end, and apävåtam, unhindered by any
superior or equal potency. The opulence of the material world is also resting
within the Lord, who alone can protect, maintain, create and destroy the
material world. In this chapter, Çré Uddhava inquires from the Lord about His
spiritual and material opulences in order to refine his appreciation of the
Lord's position as the Absolute Truth. Even Lord Viñëu, the ultimate creator
of the material world, is an expansion of Lord Kåñëa, and thus Çré Uddhava
wishes to fully appreciate the unique status of his personal friend.
TEXT 2
o»aAvacaeSau BaUtaeSau
äu"ÁaeRyamak{(taAtmaiBa:
opaAs$atae tvaAM BagAvana,
yaATaAtaTyaena “aAöNAA:
uccävaceñu bhüteñu
durjïeyam akåtätmabhiù
upäsate tväà bhagavan
yäthä-tathyena brähmaëäù
SYNONYMS
ucca—in the superior; avaceñu—and the inferior; bhüteñu—created objects
and entities; durjïeyam—hard to understand; akåta-ätmabhiù—by the impious;
upäsate—they worship; tväm—You; bhagavan—my dear Lord;
yathä-tathyena—in truth; brähmaëäù—those dedicated to the Vedic
conclusion.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, although it is difficult for the impious to understand that You
are situated in all superior and inferior creations, those brähmaëas who are
actual knowers of the Vedic conclusion worship You in truth.
PURPORT
The behavior of saintly persons is also to be taken as evidence, and
therefore it is here stated that although ignorant, impious persons are
bewildered before the Lord's all-pervading feature, those with purified, clear
consciousness worship the Lord as He is. In this chapter çré Uddhava inquires
about the Lord's opulences, and here the words uccävaceñu bhüteñu ("within
superior and inferior creations") clearly refer to the Lord's external opulences,
those manifested in the material world. The saintly brähmaëas, or Vaiñëavas,
worship Lord Kåñëa within all things and yet recognize the variety in the
Lord's creation. For example, in worshiping the Deity, the devotees will select
the nicest flowers, fruits and ornaments for decorating the transcendental
form of the Lord. Similarly, although the Lord is present in the heart of every
conditioned soul, the devotee will give more attention to a conditioned soul
interested in the message of Lord Kåñëa. Although the Lord is everywhere, the
devotees make distinctions, for the sake of the Lord's service, between His
presence in superior (ucca) and inferior (avaceñu) creations.
TEXT 3
yaeSau yaeSau ca BaUtaeSau
BaftyaA tvaAM par"maSaRya:
opaAs$aInaA: ‘apaântae
s$aMis$aiÜM" taã"d"sva mae
yeñu yeñu ca bhüteñu
bhaktyä tväà paramarñayaù
upäsénäù prapadyante
saàsiddhià tad vadasva me
SYNONYMS
yeñu yeñu—in which various; ca—also; bhüteñu—forms; bhaktyä—with
devotion; tväm—You; parama-åñayaù—the great sages; upäsénäù—worshiping;
prapadyante—achieve; saàsiddhim—perfection; tat—that; vadasva—please
speak; me—to me.
TRANSLATION
Please tell me of the perfections that great sages achieve by worshiping You
with devotion. Also, kindly explain which of Your different forms they
worship.
PURPORT
Çré Uddhava here inquires about the spiritual opulences of the Lord, which
consist primarily of His viñëu-tattva expansions such as Väsudeva, Saìkarñaëa,
Pradyumna and Aniruddha. By worshiping different plenary expansions of the
Lord one achieves particular perfections, and Çré Uddhava wants to know
about this.
TEXT 4
gAUX#êr"is$a BaUtaAtmaA
BaUtaAnaAM BaUtaBaAvana
na tvaAM pazyainta BaUtaAina
pazyantaM maAeih"taAina tae
güòhaç carasi bhütätmä
bhütänäà bhüta-bhävana
na tväà paçyanti bhütäni
paçyantaà mohitäni te
SYNONYMS
güòhaù—hidden; carasi—You are engaged; bhüta-ätmä—the Supersoul;
bhütänäm—of the living entities; bhüta-bhävana—O maintainer of all living
beings; na—not; tväm—You; paçyanti—they see; bhütäni—living entities;
paçyantam—who are seeing; mohitäni—bewildered; te—by You.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, maintainer of all, although You are the Supersoul of the living
entities, You remain hidden. Thus being bewildered by You, the living entities
cannot see You, although You are seeing them.
PURPORT
The Lord exists as the Supersoul within everything. He also appears in
various incarnations or sometimes empowers a devotee to act as an
incarnation. All such forms of the Lord are unknown to the nondevotees. The
bewildered conditioned souls think that the supreme enjoyer, Çré Kåñëa, is
actually meant to be enjoyed by them for their sense gratification. Praying to
God for specific material benedictions and assuming God's creation to be their
personal property, the nondevotees cannot understand the actual form of the
Lord. They therefore remain foolish and bewildered. Within the universe
everything is subject to creation, maintenance and destruction, and thus the
Supersoul is the only actual controller in the material world. Unfortunately,
when the Supersoul appears in various incarnations to clarify His position,
ignorant persons think that the Supersoul is merely another creation of the
modes of material nature. As stated in this verse, they cannot see that person
who is actually seeing them, and simply remain bewildered.
TEXT 5
yaA: k(Aê BaUmaAE id"iva vaE r"s$aAyaAM
ivaBaUtayaAe id"ºau mah"AivaBaUtae
taA ma÷maAKyaA÷nauBaAivataAstae
namaAima tae taITaRpad"Ax.~i„apaáma,
yäù käç ca bhümau divi vai rasäyäà
vibhütayo dikñu mahä-vibhüte
tä mahyam äkhyähy anubhävitäs te
namämi te tértha-padäìghri-padmam
SYNONYMS
yäù käù—whatever; ca—also; bhümau—on the earth; divi—in heaven;
vai—indeed; rasäyäm—in hell; vibhütayaù—potencies; dikñu—in all
directions; mahä-vibhüte—O supremely potent; täù—those; mahyam—unto
me; äkhyähi—please explain; anubhävitäù—manifested; te—by You;
namämi—I offer my humble obeisances; te—Your; tértha-pada—the abode of
all holy places; aìghri-padmam—at the lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
O supremely potent Lord, please explain to me Your innumerable potencies,
which You manifest on the earth, in heaven, in hell and indeed in all directions.
I offer my humble obeisances at Your lotus feet, which are the shelter of all
holy places.
PURPORT
Uddhava here inquires about the Lord's material and spiritual potencies, as
manifested within our universe. Just as ordinary animals or insects living in
human cities cannot appreciate the scientific, cultural or military
achievements of man, similarly, foolish materialists cannot appreciate the
mighty opulences of the Personality of Godhead, even those manifested within
our universe. For the appreciation of ordinary human beings Uddhava requests
the Lord to reveal exactly how and in what forms He expands His potencies.
As already explained, the Lord is the essential ingredient of all that exists, and
thus any mighty or opulent manifestation must ultimately rest on the Lord
Himself.
TEXT 6
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
Wvamaetad"hM" pa{í":
‘a´aM ‘a´aivad"AM var"
yauyauts$aunaA ivanazAnae
s$apa¥aEr"jauR"naena vaE
çré-bhagavän uväca
evam etad ahaà påñöaù
praçnaà praçna-vidäà vara
yuyutsunä vinaçane
sapatnair arjunena vai
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; evam—thus;
etat—this; aham—I; påñöaù—was asked; praçnam—the question or topic;
praçna-vidäm—of those who know how to inquire; vara—you who are the best;
yuyutsunä—by him who desired to fight; vinaçane—in the Battle of
Kurukñetra; sapatnaiù—with his rivals or enemies; arjunena—by Arjuna;
vai—indeed.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O best of those who know how
to inquire, on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra, Arjuna, desiring to fight with his
rivals, asked Me the same question that you are now posing.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa was pleased that His two friends, Arjuna and Uddhava, had
posed the same question regarding the opulences of the Personality of
Godhead. Lord Kåñëa considered it wonderful that His two dear friends had
asked exactly the same question.
TEXT 7
ÁaAtvaA ÁaAitavaDaM gA÷Rma,
@Dama< r"Ajyahe"tauk(ma,
tataAe inava{ÔaAe h"ntaAhM"
h"taAe'yaimaita laAEik(k(:
jïätvä jïäti-vadhaà garhyam
adharmaà räjya-hetukam
tato nivåtto hantähaà
hato 'yam iti laukikaù
SYNONYMS
jïätvä—being aware; jïäti—of his relatives; vadham—the killing;
garhyam—abominable; adharmam—irreligion; räjya—to acquire a kingdom;
hetukam—having as the motive; tataù—from such activity; nivåttaù—retired;
haratä—the killer; aham—I am; hataù—killed; ayam—this group of relatives;
iti—thus; laukikaù—mundane.
TRANSLATION
On the Battlefield of Kurukñetra Arjuna thought that killing his relatives
would be an abominable, irreligious activity, motivated only by his desire to
acquire a kingdom. He therefore desisted from the battle, thinking, "I would be
the killer of my relatives. They would be destroyed." Thus Arjuna was afflicted
with mundane consciousness.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa here explains to Uddhava the circumstances in which Çré
Arjuna posed his questions.
TEXT 8
s$a tad"A pauç&SavyaA„aAe
yauftyaA mae ‘aitabaAeiData:
@ByaBaASata maAmaevaM
yaTaA tvaM r"NAmaUDaRina
sa tadä puruña-vyäghro
yuktyä me pratibodhitaù
abhyabhäñata mäm evaà
yathä tvaà raëa-mürdhani
SYNONYMS
saù—he; tadä—at that time; puruña-vyäghraù—the tiger among men;
yuktyä—by logical argument; me—by Me; pratibodhitaù—enlightened in real
knowledge; abhyabhäñata—addressed questions; mäm—to Me; evam—thus;
yathä—just as; tvam—you; raëa—of the battle; mürdhani—in the front.
TRANSLATION
At that time I enlightened Arjuna, the tiger among men, with logical
arguments, and thus in the front of the battle Arjuna addressed Me with
questions in the same way that you are now inquiring.
TEXT 9
@h"maAtmaAeÜ"vaAmaISaAM
BaUtaAnaAM s$auô$d"Iìr":
@hM" s$avaARiNA BaUtaAina
taeSaAM isTatyauà"vaApyaya:
aham ätmoddhaväméñäà
bhütänäà suhåd éçvaraù
ahaà sarväëi bhütäni
teñäà sthity-udbhaväpyayaù
SYNONYMS
aham—I am; ätmä—the Supersoul; uddhava—O Uddhava; améñäm—of these;
bhütänäm—living entities; su-håt—the well-wisher; éçvaraù—the supreme
controller; aham—I am; sarväëi bhütäni—all entities; teñäm—of them;
sthiti—the maintenance; udbhava—creation; apyayaù—and annihilation.
TRANSLATION
My dear Uddhava, I am the Supersoul of all living entities, and therefore I
am naturally their well-wisher and supreme controller. Being the creator,
maintainer and annihilator of all entities, I am not different from them.
PURPORT
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé points out that the Personality of Godhead maintains
an ablative and genitive relationship with His opulences. In other words, the
Lord is not different from all living entities, because they are coming from
Him and they belong to Him. The Lord gave a similar explanation to Arjuna
in the Tenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä (10.20), beginning with the same
words, aham ätmä. Although the Lord describes His external, or material,
opulences, the Lord's position is always transcendental and nonmaterial. Just
as the living soul within the body gives life to the body, similarly, the Lord, by
His supreme potency, gives life to all universal opulences.
TEXT 10
@hM" gAitagARitamataAM
k(Ala: k(layataAmah"ma,
gAunaANAAM caApyahM" s$aAmyaM
gAuiNAnyaAEtpaiÔak(Ae gAuNA:
ahaà gatir gatimatäà
kälaù kalayatäm aham
gunäëäà cäpy ahaà sämyaà
guëiny autpattiko guëaù
SYNONYMS
aham—I am; gatiù—the ultimate goal; gati-matäm—of those who seek
progress; kälaù—time; kalayatäm—of those who exert control; aham—I am;
gunäëäm—of the modes of material nature; ca—also; api—even; aham—I am;
sämyam—material equilibrium; guëini—in the pious; autpattikaù—natural;
guëaù—virtue.
TRANSLATION
I am the ultimate goal of all those seeking progress, and I am time among
those who exert control. I am the equilibrium of the modes of material nature,
and I am natural virtue among the pious.
TEXT 11
gAuiNAnaAmapyahM" s$aU‡aM
mah"taAM ca mah"Anah"ma,
s$aUºmaANAAmapyahM" jaIvaAe
äu"jaRyaAnaAmahM" mana:
guëinäm apy ahaà sütraà
mahatäà ca mahän aham
sükñmäëäm apy ahaà jévo
durjayänäm ahaà manaù
SYNONYMS
guëinäm—among things possessing qualities; api—indeed; aham—I am;
sütram—the primary sütra-tattva; mahatäm-among great things; ca—also;
mahän—the total material manifestation; aham—I am; sükñmäëäm—among
subtle things; api—indeed; aham—I am; jévaù—the spirit soul;
durjayänäm—among things difficult to conquer; aham—I am; manaù—the
mind.
TRANSLATION
Among things possessing qualities I am the primary manifestation of nature,
and among great things I am the total material creation. Among subtle things I
am the spirit soul, and of things that are difficult to conquer I am the mind.
TEXT 12
ih"r"NyagABaAeR vaed"AnaAM
man‡aANAAM ‘aNAvaiñva{ta,
@ºar"ANAAmak(Ar"Ae'isma
pad"Aina cC$näu"s$aAmah"ma,
hiraëyagarbho vedänäà
manträëäà praëavas tri-våt
akñaräëäm a-käro 'smi
padäni cchandusäm aham
SYNONYMS
hiraëya-garbhaù—Lord Brahmä; vedänäm—of the Vedas; manträëäm—of
mantras; praëavaù—the oàkära; tri-våt-consisting of three letters;
akñaräëäm—of letters; a-käraù—the first letter, a; asmi—I am; padäni—the
three-line Gäyatré mantra; chandasäm—among sacred meters; aham—I am.
TRANSLATION
Among the Vedas I am their original teacher, Lord Brahmä, and of all
mantras I am the three-lettered oàkära. Among letters I am the first letter,
"a," and among sacred meters I am the Gäyatré mantra.
TEXT 13
wn‰"Ae'hM" s$avaR$de"vaAnaAM
vas$aUnaAmaisma h"vyavaAq%.
@Aid"tyaAnaAmahM" ivaSNAU
ç&‰"ANAAM naIlalaAeih"ta:
indro 'haà sarva-devänäà
vasünäm asmi havya-väö
ädityänäm ahaà viñëü
rudräëäà néla-lohitaù
SYNONYMS
indraù—Lord Indra; aham—I am; sarva-devänäm—among the demigods;
vasünäm—among the Vasus; asmi—I am; havya-väö—the carrier of oblations,
the fire-god Agni; ädityänäm—among the sons of Aditi; aham—I am;
viñëuù—Viñëu; rudräëäm—among the Rudras; néla-lohitaù—Lord Çiva.
TRANSLATION
Among the demigods I am Indra, and among the Vasus I am Agni, the god of
fire. I am Viñëu among the sons of Aditi, and among the Rudras I am Lord
Çiva.
PURPORT
Lord Viñëu appeared among the sons of Aditi as Vämanadeva.
TEXT 14
“aöSaI=NAAM Ba{gAur"hM"
r"AjaSaI=NAAmahM" manau:
de"vaSaI=NAAM naAr"d"Ae'hM"
h"ivaDaARnyaisma DaenauSau
brahmarñéëäà bhågur ahaà
räjarñéëäm ahaà manuù
devarñéëäà närado 'haà
havirdhäny asmi dhenuñu
SYNONYMS
brahma-åñéëäm—among the saintly brähmaëas; bhåguù—Bhågu Muni;
aham—I am; räja-åñéëäm—among the saintly kings; aham—I am;
manuù—Manu; deva-åñéëäm—among the saintly demigods; näradaù—Närada
Muni; aham—I am; havirdhäné—Kämadhenu; asmi—I am; dhenuñu—among
cows.
TRANSLATION
Among saintly brähmaëas I am Bhågu Muni, and I am Manu among saintly
kings. I am Närada Muni among saintly demigods, and I am Kämadhenu among
cows.
TEXT 15
is$aÜe"ìr"ANAAM k(ipala:
s$aupaNAAeR'hM" patai‡aNAAma,
‘ajaApataInaAM d"ºaAe'hM"
ipata|NAAmah"mayaRmaA
siddheçvaräëäà kapilaù
suparëo 'haà patatriëäm
prajäpaténäà dakño 'haà
pitèëäm aham aryamä
SYNONYMS
siddha-éçvaräëäm—among perfected beings; kapilaù—I am Lord Kapila;
suparëaù—Garuòa; aham—I am; patatriëäm—among birds;
prajäpaténäm—among the progenitors of mankind; dakñaù—Dakña; aham—I
am; pitèëäm—among the forefathers; aham—I am; aryamä—Aryamä.
TRANSLATION
I am Lord Kapila among perfected beings and Garuòa among birds. I am
Dakña among the progenitors of mankind, and I am Aryamä among the
forefathers.
TEXT 16
maAM ivaÜ"YauÜ"va dE"tyaAnaAM
‘aø"Ad"mas$aure"ìr"ma,
s$aAemaM naºa‡aAESaDaInaAM
DanaezAM yaºar"ºas$aAma,
mäà viddhy uddhava daityänäà
prahlädam asureçvaram
somaà nakñatrauñadhénäà
dhaneçaà yakña-rakñasäm
SYNONYMS
mäm—Me; viddhi—you should know; uddhava—My dear Uddhava;
daityänäm—among the sons of Diti, the demons; prahlädam—Prahläda
Mahäräja; asura-éçvaram—the lord of the asuras; somam-the moon;
nakñatra-oñadhénäm—among the stars and herbs; dhana-éçam—the lord of
wealth, Kuvera; yakña-rakñasäm—among the Yakñas and Räkñasas.
TRANSLATION
My dear Uddhava, among the demoniac sons of Diti know Me to be Prahläda
Mahäräja, the saintly lord of the asuras. Among the stars and herbs I am their
lord, Candra (the moon), and among Yakñas and Räkñasas I am the lord of
wealth, Kuvera.
TEXT 17
Wer"AvataM gAjaen‰"ANAAM
yaAd"s$aAM vaç&NAM ‘aBauma,
tapataAM âumataAM s$aUya<
manauSyaANAAM ca BaUpaitama,
airävataà gajendräëäà
yädasäà varuëaà prabhum
tapatäà dyumatäà süryaà
manuñyäëäà ca bhü-patim
SYNONYMS
airävatam—the elephant Airävata; gaja-indräëäm—among lordly elephants;
yädasäm—among aquatics; varuëam—Varuëa; prabhum—the lord of seas;
tapatäm—among things that heat; dyu-matäm—among things that illuminate;
süryam—I am the sun; manuñyäëäm—among human beings; ca—also;
bhü-patim—the king.
TRANSLATION
I am Airävata among lordly elephants, and among aquatics I am Varuna, the
lord of the seas. Among all things that heat and illuminate I am the sun, and
among human beings I am the king.
PURPORT
It is significant to know that Lord Kåñëa is represented within this universe
by the lord or supreme in all categories. No one can be as aristocratic and
perfect as Çré Kåñëa, nor can anyone estimate the glories of Çré Kåñëa. Lord
Kåñëa is without doubt the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 18
o»aE:™avaAstaur"ËÿANAAM
DaAtaUnaAmaisma k(AÂanama,
yama: s$aMyamataAM caAh"ma,
s$apaARNAAmaisma vaAs$auik(:
uccaiùçraväs turaìgäëäà
dhätünäm asmi käïcanam
yamaù saàyamatäà cäham
sarpäëäm asmi väsukiù
SYNONYMS
uccaiùçraväù—the horse Uccaiùçravä; turaìgäëäm—among horses;
dhätünäm—among metals; asmi—I am; käïcanam—gold; yamaù—Yamaräja;
saàyamatäm—among those who punish and suppress; ca—also; aham—I;
sarpäëäm—among serpents; asmi—am; väsukiù—Väsuki.
TRANSLATION
Among horses I am Uccaiùçravä, and I am gold among metals. I am Yamaräja
among those who suppress and punish, and among serpents I am Väsuki.
TEXT 19
naAgAen‰"ANAAmanantaAe'hM"
ma{gAen‰": Za{iËÿdM"ií)"NAAma,
@A™amaANAAmahM" tauyaAeR
vaNAARnaAM ‘aTamaAe'naGa
nägendräëäm ananto 'haà
mågendraù çåìgi-daàñöriëäm
äçramäëäm ahaà turyo
varëänäà prathamo 'nagha
SYNONYMS
näga-indräëäm—among the best of many-hooded snakes;
anantaù—Anantadeva; aham—I am; måga-indraù—the lion;
çåìgi-daàñöriëäm—among animals with sharp horns and teeth;
äçramäëäm—among the four social orders of life; aham—I am; turyaù—the
fourth, sannyäsa; varëänäm—among the four occupational orders;
prathamaù—the first, the brähmaëas; anagha—O sinless one.
TRANSLATION
O sinless Uddhava, among the best of snakes I am Anantadeva, and among
those animals with sharp horns and teeth I am the lion. Among the social orders
I am the fourth, or the renounced order of life, and among the occupational
divisions I am the first, the brähmaëas.
TEXT 20
taITaARnaAM ›aAetas$aAM gAËÿA
s$amau"‰": s$ar"s$aAmah"ma,
@AyauDaAnaAM Danaur"hM"
i‡apaur"£aAe DanauSmataAma,
térthänäà srotasäà gaìgä
samudraù sarasäm aham
äyudhänäà dhanur ahaà
tripura-ghno dhanuñmatäm
SYNONYMS
tirthänäm—among holy places; srotasäm—among flowing things; gaìgä—the
sacred Ganges; samudraù—the ocean; sarasäm—among steady bodies of water;
aham—I am; äyudhänäm—among weapons; dhanuù—the bow; aham—I am;
tri-pura-ghnaù—Lord Çiva; dhanuù-matäm—among those who wield the bow.
TRANSLATION
Among sacred and flowing things I am the holy Ganges, and among steady
bodies of water I am the ocean. Among weapons I am the bow, and of the
wielders of weapons I am Lord Çiva.
PURPORT
Lord Çiva used his bow to completely cover with arrows the three demoniac
cities built by Maya Dänava.
TEXT 21
iDaSNyaAnaAmasmyahM" maeç&r,"
gAh"naAnaAM ih"maAlaya:
vanas$pataInaAmaìtTa
@AeSaDaInaAmahM" yava:
dhiñëyänäm asmy ahaà merur
gahanänäà himälayaù
vanaspaténäm açvattha
oñadhénäm ahaà yavaù
SYNONYMS
dhiñëyänäm—residences; asmi—am; aham—I; meruù—Mount Sumeru;
gahanänäm—of impervious places; himälayaù—the Himalayas;
vanaspaténäm—among trees; açvatthaù—banyan tree; oñadhénäm—among
plants; aham—I; yavaù—barley.
TRANSLATION
Among residences I am Mount Sumeru, and of impervious places I am the
Himalayas. Among trees I am the holy fig tree, and among plants I am those
that bear grains.
PURPORT
Oñadhénäm here indicates those plants that fructify once and then die.
Among them, those that give grains, which sustain human life, represent
Kåñëa. Without grains it is not possible to produce milk products, nor can one
properly perform Vedic fire sacrifices without offerings of grains.
TEXT 22
paur"AeDas$aAM vais$aï"Ae'hM"
“aiöï"AnaAM ba{h"s$paita:
s$k(nd"Ae'hM" s$avaRs$aenaAnyaAma,
@ƒaNyaAM BagAvaAnaja:
purodhasäà vasiñöho 'haà
brahmiñöhänäà båhaspatiù
skando 'haà sarva-senänyäm
agraëyäà bhagavän ajaù
SYNONYMS
purodhasäm—among priests; vasiñöhaù—Vasiñöha Muni; aham—I am;
brahmiñöhänäm—among those fixed in the Vedic conclusion and purpose;
båhaspatiù—Båhaspati, the spiritual master of the demigods;
skandaù—Kärtikeya; aham—I am; sarva-senänyäm—among all military
leaders; agraëyäm—among those advancing in pious life; bhagavän—the great
personality; ajaù—Lord Brahmä.
TRANSLATION
Among priests I am Vasiñöha Muni, and among those highly situated in
Vedic culture I am Båhaspati. I am Kärtikeya among great military leaders, and
among those advancing in superior ways of life I am the great personality Lord
Brahmä.
TEXT 23
yaÁaAnaAM “aöyaÁaAe'hM"
˜ataAnaAmaivaihM"s$anama,
vaAyvagnyak(ARmbauvaAgAAtmaA
zAucaInaAmapyahM" zAuica:
yajïänäà brahma-yajïo 'haà
vratänäm avihiàsanam
väyv-agny-arkämbu-väg-ätmä
çucénäm apy ahaà çuciù
SYNONYMS
yajïänäm—of sacrifices; brahma-yajïaù—study of the Veda; aham—I am;
vratänäm—of vows; avihiàsanam—nonviolence; väyu—wind; agni—fire;
arka—the sun; ambu—water; väk—and speech; ätmä—personified;
çucénäm—of all purifiers; api—indeed; aham—I am; çuciù—pure.
TRANSLATION
Among sacrifices I am study of the Veda, and I am nonviolence among vows.
Among all things that purify I am the wind, fire, the sun, water and speech.
TEXT 24
yaAegAAnaAmaAtmas$aMr"AeDaAe
man‡aAe'isma ivaijagAISataAma,
@AnvaIiºak(L k(AEzAlaAnaAM
ivak(lpa: KyaAitavaAid"naAma,
yogänäm ätma-saàrodho
mantro 'smi vijigéñatäm
änvékñiké kauçalänäà
vikalpaù khyäti-vädinäm
SYNONYMS
yogänäm—among the eight stages of yoga practice (añöäìga);
ätma-saàrodhaù—the ultimate stage, samädhi, in which the soul is completely
separated from illusion; mantraù—prudent political counsel; asmi—I am;
vijigéñatäm—among those desiring victory; änvékñiké—spiritual science, by
which one can distinguish between matter and spirit; kauçalänäm—among all
processes of expert discrimination; vikalpaù—diversity of perception;
khyäti-vädinäm—among the speculative philosophers.
TRANSLATION
Among the eight progressive states of yoga I am the final stage, samädhi, in
which the soul is completely separated from illusion. Among those desiring
victory I am prudent political counsel, and among processes of expert
discrimination I am the science of the soul, by which one distinguishes spirit
from matter. Among all speculative philosophers I am diversity of perception.
PURPORT
Any science is based on the faculty of expert discrimination. By skillful
definition of isolated and interactive components one becomes expert in any
field. Ultimately the most intelligent person can isolate the spirit soul from
matter and describe the properties of matter and spirit as both isolated and
interactive components of reality. The proliferation of innumerable
philosophical speculations is due to differing modes of perception within the
material world. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (15.15), sarvasya cähaà hådi
sanniviñöo mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca: the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is situated in everyone's heart and awards a particular degree of
knowledge or ignorance according to one's desire and merit. Thus the Lord
Himself is the basis of the mundane process of philosophical speculation, for
He creates differing and alternating modes of perception within the
conditioned souls. It is to be understood that one can acquire perfect
knowledge only by hearing directly from Lord Kåñëa and not by hearing from
conditioned philosophers who imperfectly perceive the creation of the Lord
through the screen of their personal desires.
TEXT 25
ñINAAM tau zAtaè&paAhM"
pauMs$aAM svaAyamBauvaAe manau:
naAr"AyaNAAe maunaInaAM ca
ku(maAr"Ae “aöcaAir"NAAma,
stréëäà tu çatarüpähaà
puàsäà sväyambhuvo manuù
näräyaëo munénäà ca
kumäro brahmacäriëäm
SYNONYMS
stréëäm—among ladies; tu—indeed; çatarüpä—Çatarüpä; aham—I am;
puàsäm—among male personalities; sväyambhuvaù manuù—the great
prajäpati Sväyambhuva Manu; näräyaëaù—the sage Näräyaëa;
munénäm—among saintly sages; ca—also; kumäraù—Sanat-kumära;
brahmacäriëäm—among brahmacärés.
TRANSLATION
Among ladies I am Çatarüpä, and among male personalities I am her
husband, Sväyambhuva Manu. I am Näräyaëa among the sages and
Sanat-kumära among brahmacärés.
TEXT 26
DamaARNAAmaisma s$aªyaAs$a:
ºaemaANAAmabaih"maRita:
gAu÷AnaAM s$auna{taM maAEnaM
imaTaunaAnaAmajastvah"ma,
dharmäëäm asmi sannyäsaù
kñemäëäm abahir-matiù
guhyänäà su-nåtaà maunaà
mithunänäm ajas tv aham
SYNONYMS
dharmäëäm—among religious principles; asmi—I am;
sannyäsaù—renunciation; kñemäëäm—among all types of security;
abahiù-matiù—awareness within (of the eternal soul); guhyänäm—of secrets;
sunåtam—pleasant speech; maunam—silence; mithunänäm—of sexual pairs;
ajaù—Brahmä, the original prajäpati; tu-indeed; aham—I am.
TRANSLATION
Among religious principles I am renunciation, and of all types of security I
am consciousness of the eternal soul within. Of secrets I am pleasant speech and
silence, and among sexual pairs I am Brahmä.
PURPORT
One who realizes the eternal soul within no longer fears any material
situation and thus is qualified to accept the renounced order of life, sannyäsa.
Certainly fear is one of the great miseries of material life; therefore the gift of
fearlessness is very valuable and represents Lord Kåñëa. Both in ordinary
pleasant speech and silence, very few confidential things are revealed, and
thus diplomacy and silence are both aids to secrecy. Lord Brahmä is prominent
among sexual pairs because the original beautiful couple, Sväyambhuva Manu
and Çatarüpä, emerged from Lord Brahmä's body, as explained in Chapter
Twelve of the Third Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 27
s$aMvats$ar"Ae'smyainaimaSaAma,
[%taUnaAM maDaumaADavaAE
maAs$aAnaAM maAgARzAISaAeR'hM"
naºa‡aANAAM taTaAiBaijata,
saàvatsaro 'smy animiñäm
åtünäà madhu-mädhavau
mäsänäà märgaçérño 'haà
nakñaträëäà tathäbhijit
SYNONYMS
saàvatsaraù—the year; asmi—I am; animiñäm—among the vigilant cycles of
time; åtünäm—among seasons; madhu-mädhavau—spring; mäsänäm—among
months; märgaçérñaù—Märgaçérña (November-December); aham—I am;
nakñaträëäm—among asterisms; tathä—similarly; abhijit—Abhijit.
TRANSLATION
Among the vigilant cycles of time I am the year, and among seasons I am
spring. Among months I am Märgaçérña, and among lunar houses I am the
auspicious Abhijit.
TEXT 28
@hM" yaugAAnaAM ca k{(taM
DaIr"ANAAM de"valaAe'is$ata:
ãE"paAyanaAe'isma vyaAs$aAnaAM
k(vaInaAM k(Avya @AtmavaAna,
ahaà yugänäà ca kåtaà
dhéräëäà devalo 'sitaù
dvaipäyano 'smi vyäsänäà
kavénäà kävya ätmavän
SYNONYMS
aham—I am; yugänäm—among ages; ca—also; kåtam—Satya-yuga;
dhéräëäm—among steady sages; devalaù—Devala; asitaù—Asita;
dvaipäyanaù—Kåñëa Dvaipäyana; asmi—I am; vyäsänäm—among the editors
of the Vedas; kavénäm—among learned scholars; kävyaù—Çukräcärya;
ätma-vän—learned in spiritual science.
TRANSLATION
Among ages I am the Satya-yuga, the age of truth, and among steady sages I
am Devala and Asita. Among those who have divided the Vedas I am Kåñëa
Dvaipäyana Vedavyäsa, and among learned scholars I am Çukräcärya, the
knower of spiritual science.
TEXT 29
vaAs$aude"vaAe BagAvataAM
tvaM tau BaAgAvataeSvah"ma,
ik(mpauç&SaAnaAM h"naumaAna,
ivaâA‹aANAAM s$aud"zARna:
väsudevo bhagavatäà
tvaà tu bhägavateñv aham
kimpuruñänäà hanumän
vidyädhräëäà sudarçanaù
SYNONYMS
väsudevaù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhagavatäm—of those
entitled to the name Bhagavän; tvam—you; tu—indeed; bhägavateñu—among
My devotees; aham—I am; kimpuruñäëäm—among the Kimpuruñas;
hanumän—Hanumän; vidyädhräëäm—among the Vidyädharas;
sudarçanaù—Sudarçana.
TRANSLATION
Among those entitled to the name Bhagavän I am Väsudeva, and indeed,
you, Uddhava, represent Me among the devotees. I am Hanumän among the
Kimpuruñas, and among the Vidyädharas I am Sudarçana.
PURPORT
The Vedic literatures state that one who possesses perfect knowledge of the
creation and destruction of all entities and who is completely situated in
omniscience is to be known as the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Bhagavän. Although many great personalities are sometimes called Bhagavän,
ultimately Bhagavän is the one supreme entity who possesses unlimited
opulences. Throughout history, many important personalities have been
addressed as "lord," but ultimately there is only one Supreme Lord. In the
Lord's catur-vyüha, or quadruple expansion, the first manifestation is
Väsudeva, who here represents all of the Lord's expansions in the viñëu-tattva
category.
TEXT 30
r"¥aAnaAM paár"AgAAe'isma
paák(AezA: s$aupaezAs$aAma,
ku(zAAe'isma d"BaRjaAtaInaAM
gAvyamaAjyaM h"iva:Svah"ma,
ratnänäà padma-rägo 'smi
padma-koçaù su-peçasäm
kuço 'smi darbha-jäténäà
gavyam äjyaà haviùñv aham
SYNONYMS
ratnänäm—of jewels; padma-rägaù—the ruby; asmi—I am; padma-koçaù—the
lotus cup; su-peçasäm—among beautiful things; kuçaù—the sacred kuça grass;
asmi—I am; darbha-jäténäm—among all types of grass; gavyam—cow products;
äjyam—offering of ghee; haviùñu—among oblations; aham—I am.
TRANSLATION
Among jewels I am the ruby, and among beautiful things I am the lotus cup.
Among all types of grass I am the sacred kuça, and of oblations I am ghee and
other ingredients obtained from the cow.
PURPORT
Païca-gavya refers to five sacrificial ingredients obtained from the cow,
namely milk, ghee, yogurt, dung and urine. The cow is so valuable that even its
dung and urine are antiseptic and fit for sacrificial offering. Kuça grass is also
used for religious occasions. Mahäräja Parékñit constructed a sitting place from
kuça grass during the last week of his life. Among beautiful things the lotus cup
formed by lotus petals represents Lord Kåñëa, and among jewels the ruby,
which is similar to Lord Kåñëa's own Kaustubha gem, symbolizes the potency of
the Lord.
TEXT 31
vyavas$aAiyanaAmahM" laºmaI:
ik(tavaAnaAM C$laƒah":
itaitaºaAisma itaitaºaUNAAM
s$aÔvaM s$aÔvavataAmah"ma,
vyavasäyinäm ahaà lakñméù
kitavänäà chala-grahaù
titikñäsmi titikñüëäà
sattvaà sattvavatäm aham
SYNONYMS
vyavasäyinäm—of the enterprising; aham—I am; lakñméù—fortune;
kitavänäm—of cheaters; chala-grahaù—the gambling; titikñä—the forgiveness;
asmi—I am; titikñüëäm—among the tolerant; sattvam—the goodness;
sattva-vatäm—among those in the mode of goodness; aham—I am.
TRANSLATION
Among the enterprising I am fortune, and among the cheaters I am
gambling. I am the forgiveness of the tolerant and the good qualities of those in
the mode of goodness.
TEXT 32
@Aeja: s$ah"Ae balavataAM
k(maARhM" ivaiÜ" s$aAtvataAma,
s$aAtvataAM navamaUtaI=naAma,
@Aid"maUitaRr"hM" par"A
ojaù saho balavatäà
karmähaà viddhi sätvatäm
sätvatäà nava-mürténäm
ädi-mürtir ahaà parä
SYNONYMS
ojaù—the sensory strength; sahaù—and mental strength; balavatäm—of the
strong; karma—the devotional activities; aham—I am; viddhi—please know;
sätvatäm—among the devotees; sätvatäm—among those devotees;
nava-mürténäm—who worship Me in nine forms; ädi-mürtiù—the original
form, Väsudeva; aham—I am; parä—the Supreme.
TRANSLATION
Of the powerful I am bodily and mental strength, and I am the devotional
activities of My devotees. My devotees worship Me in nine different forms,
among which I am the original and primary Väsudeva.
PURPORT
Generally, the Vaiñëavas worship the Personality of Godhead as Väsudeva,
Saìkarñaëa, Pradyumna, Aniruddha, Näräyaëa, Hayagréva, Varäha, Nåsiàha
and Brahmä. It is understood that when a suitable living entity is not available
to fill the post of Brahmä, the Lord Himself assumes the position; therefore
Lord Brahmä is mentioned in the list. Lord Viñëu sometimes appears as Indra
and sometimes as Brahmä, and it is Viñëu appearing as Brahmä who is
indicated in this connection.
TEXT 33
ivaìAvas$au: paUvaRicaiÔar,"
gAnDavaARps$ar"s$aAmah"ma,
BaUDar"ANAAmahM" sTaEya<
gAnDamaA‡amahM" Bauva:
viçvävasuù pürvacittir
gandharväpsarasäm aham
bhüdharäëäm ahaà sthairyaà
gandha-mätram ahaà bhuvaù
SYNONYMS
viçvävasuù—Viçvävasu; pürvacittiù—Pürvacitti; gandharva-apsarasäm—among
the Gandharvas and Apsaräs; aham—I am; bhüdharäëäm—of the mountains;
aham—I am; sthairyam—the steadiness; gandha-mätram—the perception of
aroma; aham—I am; bhuvaù—of the earth.
TRANSLATION
Among the Gandharvas I am Viçvävasu, and I am Pürvacitti among the
heavenly Apsaras. I am the steadiness of mountains and the fragrant aroma of
the earth.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (7.9) Lord Kåñëa says, puëyo gandhaù påthivyäà ca: "I am
the fragrance of the earth." The original fragrance of the earth is very pleasing
and represents Lord Kåñëa. Although unpleasant aromas may be artificially
produced, they do not represent the Lord.
TEXT 34
@paAM r"s$aê par"mas$a,
taeijaï"AnaAM ivaBaAvas$au:
‘aBaA s$aUyaeRnäu"taAr"ANAAM
zAbd"Ae'hM" naBas$a: par":
apäà rasaç ca paramas
tejiñöhänäà vibhävasuù
prabhä süryendu-täräëäà
çabdo 'haà nabhasaù paraù
SYNONYMS
apäm—of water; rasaù—the taste; ca—also; paramaù—excellent;
tejiñöhänäm—among most brilliant things; vibhävasuù—the sun; prabhä—the
effulgence; sürya—of the sun; indu—the moon; täräëäm—and the stars;
çabdaù—the sound vibration; aham—I am; nabhasaù—of the sky;
paraù—transcendental.
TRANSLATION
I am the sweet taste of water, and among brilliant things I am the sun. I am
the effulgence of the sun, moon and stars, and I am the transcendental sound
that vibrates in the sky.
TEXT 35
“aöNyaAnaAM bailar"hM"
vaIr"ANAAmah"majauRna:
BaUtaAnaAM isTaitaç&tpaiÔar,"
@hM" vaE ‘aitas$ax.~‚(ma:
brahmaëyänäà balir ahaà
véräëäm aham arjunaù
bhütänäà sthitir utpattir
ahaà vai pratisaìkramaù
SYNONYMS
brahmaëyänäm—of those dedicated to brahminical culture; baliù—Bali
Mahäräja, the son of Virocana; aham—I am; véräëäm—of heroes; aham—I am;
arjunaù—Arjuna; bhütänäm—of all living beings; sthitiù—the maintenance;
utpattiù—the creation; aham—I am; vai—indeed; pratisaìkramaù—the
annihilation.
TRANSLATION
Among those dedicated to brahminical culture I am Bali Mahäräja, the son of
Virocana, and I am Arjuna among heroes. Indeed, I am the creation,
maintenance and annihilation of all living entities.
TEXT 36
gAtyauftyauts$agAAeRpaAd"Anama,
@Anand"s$pazARlaºanama,
@AsvaAd"™autyava„aANAma,
@hM" s$avaeRin‰"yaein‰"yama,
gaty-ukty-utsargopädänam
änanda-sparça-lakñanam
äsväda-çruty-avaghräëam
ahaà sarvendriyendriyam
SYNONYMS
gati—movement of the legs (walking, running, etc.); ukti—speech;
utsarga—evacuation; upädänam—accepting with the hands; änanda—the
material pleasure of the sex organs; sparça—touch; lakñaëam—sight;
äsväda—taste; çruti—hearing; avaghräëam—smell; aham—I am;
sarva-indriya—of all the senses; indriyam—the potency to experience their
objects.
TRANSLATION
I am the functions of the five working senses—the legs, speech, anus, hands
and sex organs—as well as those of the five knowledge-acquiring
senses—touch, sight, taste, hearing and smell. I am also the potency by which
each of the senses experiences its particular sense object.
TEXT 37
pa{iTavaI vaAyaur"Ak(AzA
@ApaAe jyaAeitar"hM" mah"Ana,
ivak(Ar": pauç&SaAe'vyalM(
r"ja: s$aÔvaM tama: par"ma,
@h"maetat‘as$aÊÿYaAnaM
ÁaAnaM taÔvaivainaêya:
påthivé väyur äkäça
äpo jyotir ahaà mahän
vikäraù puruño 'vyaktaà
rajaù sattvaà tamaù param
aham etat prasaìkhyänaà
jïänaà tattva-viniçcayaù
SYNONYMS
påthivé—the subtle form of earth, aroma; väyuù—the subtle form of air, touch;
äkäçaù—the subtle form of sky, sound; äpaù—the subtle form of water, taste;
jyotiù—the subtle form of fire, form; aham—false ego; mahän—the
mahat-tattva; vikäraù-the sixteen elements (earth, water, fire, air and sky, the
five working senses, the five knowledge-acquiring senses and the mind);
puruñaù—the living entity; avyaktam—material nature, prakåti; rajaù-the
mode of passion; sattvam—the mode of goodness; tamaù—the mode of
ignorance; param—the Supreme Lord; aham—I am; etat—this;
prasaìkhyänam—all that has been enumerated; jïänam—knowledge of the
above-mentioned elements by individual symptoms; tattva-viniçcayaù—steady
conviction, which is the fruit of knowledge.
TRANSLATION
I am form, taste, aroma, touch and sound; false ego; the mahat-tattva; earth,
water, fire, air and sky; the living entity; material nature; the modes of
goodness, passion and ignorance; and the transcendental Lord. All these items,
along with knowledge of their individual symptoms and the steady conviction
that results from this knowledge, represent Me.
PURPORT
Having given a brief but detailed synopsis of His personal opulences within
this world, the Lord now briefly summarizes the opulences that expand from
His bodily effulgence. It is stated in Brahma-saàhitä that all of the material
universes with their infinite varieties, transformations and opulences rest on
the bodily effulgence of the Lord. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has elaborately explained
this point in his commentary on this verse.
TEXT 38
mayaeìre"NA jaIvaena
gAuNAena gAuiNAnaA ivanaA
s$avaARtmanaAipa s$avaeRNA
na BaAvaAe ivaâtae ¸(icata,
mayeçvareëa jévena
guëena guëinä vinä
sarvätmanäpi sarveëa
na bhävo vidyate kvacit
SYNONYMS
mayä—Me; éçvareëa—the Supreme Lord; jévena—the living entity;
guëena—the modes of nature; guëinä—the mahat-tattva; vinä-without;
sarva-ätmanä—the soul of all that exists; api—indeed; sarveëa—everything;
na—not; bhävaù—existence; vidyate—there is; kvacit—whatsoever.
TRANSLATION
As the Supreme Lord I am the basis of the living entity, of the modes of
nature and of the mahat-tattva. Thus I am everything, and nothing whatsoever
can exist without Me.
PURPORT
Without the manifestation of the mahat-tattva, or total material existence,
and the jéva, or living entity, nothing can exist within the material world.
Everything we experience is a combination of the living entity and matter, in
its various subtle and gross categories. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is
the entire basis of the existence of both the living entity and matter. Nothing
can possibly exist even for a moment without the mercy of the Supreme Lord.
One should not foolishly conclude that the Lord is therefore material. As has
been clearly explained in this canto of the Bhägavatam, both the living entity
and the Supreme Lord are completely transcendental to material nature. The
living entity, however, has the propensity to dream that he is material, whereas
the Lord constantly remembers the transcendental position of both Himself
and the conditioned dreaming entity. As the Lord is transcendental, His abode
is also far beyond the reach of the modes of nature. The actual purpose of life
is to understand by mature conviction the transcendental Lord, His
transcendental abode, our own transcendental position and the process by
which we may go back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 39
s$aÊÿYaAnaM par"maANAUnaAM
k(Alaena i‚(yatae mayaA
na taTaA mae ivaBaUtaInaAM
s$a{jataAe'Nx"Aina k(Aeiq%zA:
saìkhyänaà paramäëünäà
kälena kriyate mayä
na tathä me vibhüténäà
såjato 'ëòäni koöiçaù
SYNONYMS
saìkhyänam—counting; parama-aëünäm—of the atoms; kälena—after some
time; kriyate—is done; mayä—by Me; na—not; tathä—in the same way;
me—of Me; vibhüténäm—of the opulences; såjataù—who am creating;
aëòäni—universes; koöiçaù—by the innumerable millions.
TRANSLATION
Even though over a period of time I might count all the atoms of the
universe, I could not count all of My opulences which I manifest within
innumerable universes.
PURPORT
The Lord here explains that Uddhava should not expect a complete catalog
of the Lord's opulences, since even the Lord Himself finds no limit to such
opulences. According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, kälena indicates that the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is within every atom and can therefore easily calculate
the total number of atoms. However, although the Lord is certainly
omniscient, even He Himself cannot supply a finite number for His opulences,
because they are infinite.
TEXT 40
taeja: ™aI: k(LitaR(rE"ìya<
oe"IstyaAgA: s$aAEBagAM BagA:
vaIya< itaitaºaA ivaÁaAnaM
ya‡a ya‡a s$a mae"M'zAk(:
tejaù çréù kértir aiçvaryaà
hrés tyägaù saubhagaà bhagaù
véryaà titikñä vijïänaà
yatra yatra sa me 'àçakaù
SYNONYMS
tejaù—power; çréù—beautiful, valuable things; kértiù—fame;
aiçvaryam—opulence; hréù—humility; tyägaù—renunciation;
saubhagam—that which pleases the mind and senses; bhagaù—good fortune;
véryam—strength; titikñä—tolerance; vijïänam—spiritual knowledge; yatra
yatra—wherever; saù—this; me—My; aàçakaù—expansion.
TRANSLATION
Whatever power, beauty, fame, opulence, humility, renunciation, mental
pleasure, fortune, strength, tolerance or spiritual knowledge there may be is
simply an expansion of My opulence.
PURPORT
Although the Lord stated in the previous verse that His opulences are
innumerable, the Lord here gives a specific resume and demonstration of His
opulences.
TEXT 41
WtaAstae k(LitaRtaA: s$avaAR:
s$aÉeÿpaeNA ivaBaUtaya:
manaAeivak(Ar"A WvaEtae
yaTaA vaAcaAiBaDaIyatae
etäs te kértitäù sarväù
saìkñepeëa vibhütayaù
mano-vikärä evaite
yathä väcäbhidhéyate
SYNONYMS
etäù—these; te—to you; kértitäù—described; sarväù—all; saìkñepeëa—briefly;
vibhütayaù—spiritual opulences; manaù—of the mind;
vikäräù—transformations; eva—indeed; ete—these; yathä—accordingly;
väcä—by words; abhidhéyate—each is described.
TRANSLATION
I have briefly described to you all My spiritual opulences and also the
extraordinary material features of My creation, which are perceived by the
mind and defined in different ways according to circumstances.
PURPORT
According to Sanskrit grammar, and as confirmed by Çréla Çrédhara Svämé,
the words etäù and ete describe two distinct sets of the Lord's opulences. The
Lord has described His opulent plenary expansions, such as Väsudeva,
Näräyaëa, the Supersoul, etc., and further the Lord has described the
outstanding features of the material creation, which are also included among
the glories of the Personality of Godhead. The plenary manifestations of the
Lord, such as Väsudeva, Näräyaëa, etc., are all eternal, unchanging
transcendental features of the Lord and are indicated by the term etäù. The
extraordinary aspects of material creation, however, are circumstantial and
dependent on individual perception, and they are therefore described here by
the words mano-vikärä evaite yathä väcäbhidhéyate. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé explains
that by consistent logical application of synonyms, etäù refers to the Lord's
eternal spiritual manifestations, beyond the perception of the material senses,
whereas ete refers to those opulences that can be perceived by conditioned
souls. He gives the example that the paraphernalia and intimate associates of a
king are all considered to be part and parcel of the king and are therefore
granted royal status. Similarly, the opulent features of material creation are
reflected expansions of the Lord's personal opulences and thus may be
considered nondifferent from Him. One should not, however, wrongly assume
that such insignificant material opulences occupy the same status as the Lord's
plenary features as the Personality of Godhead, which are qualitatively and
quantitatively equal to the Lord.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura comments as follows on this verse.
"The Lord's external opulences are called mano-vikäräù, or 'related to mental
transformation,' because ordinary people perceive extraordinary features of the
material world according to their personal state of mind. Thus the word
väcäbhidhéyate indicates that conditioned souls describe the Lord's material
creation according to specific material circumstances. Because of the
circumstantial relative definitions of material opulence, such opulence is never
to be considered a direct plenary manifestation of the Lord's personal form.
When one's state of mind is transformed into a favorable or affectionate state,
one defines a manifestation of the Lord's energy as 'my son,' 'my father,' 'my
husband,' 'my uncle,' 'the son of my brother,' 'my friend,' and so on. One forgets
that every living entity is actually part and parcel of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead and that whatever opulences, talents or outstanding features one
may exhibit are actually the potencies of the Lord. Similarly, when the mind is
transformed into a negative or inimical state, one thinks, 'This person will be
the ruin of me,' 'This person must be finished by me,' 'He is my enemy' or 'I am
his enemy,' 'He is a killer, or 'He should be killed.' The negative state of mind is
also expressed when one is attracted to the extraordinary material aspects of
particular persons or objects but forgets that they are manifestations of the
potency of the Personality of Godhead. Even the demigod Indra, who is quite
obviously a manifestation of the Lord's material opulences, is misunderstood by
others. For example, Indra's wife, Çacé, thinks that Indra is 'my husband,'
whereas Aditi thinks that he is 'my son.' Jayanta thinks that he is 'my father,'
Båhaspati thinks that he is 'my disciple,' whereas the demons feel that Indra is
their personal enemy. Thus different personalities define him according to
their mental state. The Lord's material opulences, being relatively perceived,
are therefore called mano-vikära, which means they are dependent on mental
states. This relative perception is material because it does not recognize the
Supreme Personality of Godhead as the actual source of the particular
opulence. If one sees Lord Kåñëa as the source of all opulences and gives up all
desires to enjoy or possess the Lord's opulences, then one can see the spiritual
nature of these opulences. At that time, even though one may continue to
perceive the variety and distinctions of the material world, one will become
perfect in Kåñëa consciousness. One should not conclude, as do the voidist
philosophers, that the Lord's spiritual manifestations in the viñëu-tattva and
liberated jéva categories are also products of relative perception and mental
states. This useless idea is contrary to the entire body of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead's teachings to Çré Uddhava."
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, the word väcä also indicates the various
Vedic literatures that describe the particular processes by which the Lord
manifests His spiritual and material opulences, and in this context yathä
indicates the specific procedures of manifestation and creation.
TEXT 42
vaAcaM yacC$ manaAe yacC$
‘aANAAna, yacCe$i‰"yaAiNA ca
@AtmaAnamaAtmanaA yacC$
na BaUya: k(lpas$ae'Dvanae
väcaà yaccha mano yaccha
präëän yacchedriyäëi ca
ätmänam ätmanä yaccha
na bhüyaù kalpase 'dhvane
SYNONYMS
väcam—speech; yaccha—control; manaù—the mind; yaccha—control;
präëän—your breathing; yaccha—control; indriyäëi—the senses; ca—also;
ätmänam—the intelligence; ätmanä—by purified intelligence;
yaccha—control; na—never; bhüyaù—again; kalpase—you will fall;
adhvane—on the path of material existence.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, control your speaking, subdue the mind, conquer the life air,
regulate the senses and through purified intelligence bring your rational
faculties under control. In this way you will never again fall onto the path of
material existence.
PURPORT
One should see all things as expansions of the Supreme Lord's potency, and
thus with speech, mind and words one should offer respect to all things,
without minimizing any living entity or material object. Since everything
belongs to the Lord, everything ultimately should be engaged in the Lord's
service with great care. A self-realized devotee tolerates personal insult and
does not become envious of any living entity, nor does he see anyone as his
enemy. This is practical enlightenment. Although a pure devotee may criticize
those who obstruct the Lord's mission, such criticism is never personally
motivated nor is it ever based on enviousness. An advanced devotee of the
Lord may chastise his followers or criticize the demoniac, but only to carry out
the mission of the Supreme Lord and never out of personal enmity or
enviousness. For one who completely gives up the material concept of life
there is no possibility of entering again onto the path of birth and death.
TEXT 43
yaAe vaE vaAx.~manas$aI s$aMyagA,
@s$aMyacC$inDayaA yaita:
tasya ˜ataM tapaAe d"AnaM
›avatyaAmaGaq%Ambauvata,
yo vai väì-manasé saàyag
asaàyacchan dhiyä yatiù
tasya vrataà tapo dänaà
sravaty äma-ghaöämbu-vat
SYNONYMS
yaù—one who; vai—certainly; väk-manasé—the speech and mind;
saàyak—completely; asaàyacchan—not controlling; dhiyä—by intelligence;
yatiù—a transcendentalist; tasya—his; vratam—vows; tapaù—austerities;
dänam—charity; sravati—run out; äma—unbaked; ghaöa—in a pot;
ambu-vat—like water.
TRANSLATION
A transcendentalist who does not completely control his words and mind by
superior intelligence will find that his spiritual vows, austerities and charity
flow away just as water flows out of an unbaked clay pot.
PURPORT
When a clay pot is properly baked it holds any liquid substance without
leakage. If a clay pot is not properly baked, however, water or any other liquid
within it will seep out and be lost. Similarly, a transcendentalist who does not
control his speech and mind will find that his spiritual discipline and austerity
gradually seep away and are lost. Däna, or "charity," refers to work performed
for the welfare of others. Those who are trying to give the highest charity by
preaching Kåñëa consciousness should not engage in speaking cleverly for the
satisfaction of beautiful women, nor should they attempt to become artificially
intellectual simply for the sake of mundane academic prestige. One should not
even think of intimate sexual relationships, nor should one daydream of
acquiring a prestigious position. Otherwise, one's determination to strictly
practice Kåñëa consciousness will be lost, as described here. One must control
the mind, senses and speech by higher intelligence so that one's life will be
successful.
TEXT 44
tasmaAã"caAe mana: ‘aANAAna,
inayacCe$nmatpar"AyaNA:
maà"il(yaul(yaA bauÜ"YaA
tata: pair"s$amaApyatae
tasmäd vaco manaù präëän
niyacchen mat-paräyaëaù
mad-bhakti-yuktayä buddhyä
tataù parisamäpyate
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; vacaù—words; manaù—the mind; präëän—the life airs;
niyacchet—one should control; mat-paräyaëaù—who is devoted to Me;
mat—unto Me; bhakti—with devotion; yuktayä—endowed; buddhyä—by such
intelligence; tataù—thus; parisamäpyate—one fulfills the mission of life.
TRANSLATION
Being surrendered to Me, one should control the speech, mind and life air,
and then through loving devotional intelligence one will completely fulfill the
mission of life.
PURPORT
One can develop loving devotional intelligence by perfectly chanting the
Brahma-gäyatré mantra awarded at the moment of brähmaëa initiation. By
clear intelligence, one becomes naturally and spontaneously disinterested in
the rewards offered by mental speculation and fruitive activities and takes full
shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Eleventh Canto, Sixteenth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Lord's Opulence."
17. Lord Kåñëa's Description of the Varëäçrama System
Previously, the Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëa, had assumed the form of Haàsa
and glorified the duties of the brahmacäré and gåhastha orders. In this present
chapter Lord Kåñëa further describes these matters to Uddhava.
After Uddhava inquires from Çré Kåñëa about the duties of the social and
religious orders of the varëäçrama society, the Lord replies that in the first age,
Satya-yuga, there was only one social order, called haàsa. In that age men were
automatically dedicated to pure devotional service from their very birth, and
since everyone was perfect in-all respects, the age was called Kåta-yuga. The
Vedas were then manifest in the form of the sacred syllable oà, and the
Supreme Lord was perceived within the mind in the form of the four-legged
bull of religion. There were no formalized processes of sacrifice, and the sinless
people, who were naturally inclined to austerity, simply engaged in meditation
on the personal form of the Lord. In the following age, Tretä-yuga, there
became manifest from the heart of the Supreme Personality of Godhead the
three Vedas, and from them the three forms of the sacrificial fire. At that time
the system of four varëas and four äçramas, which prescribes material and
spiritual duties for the different members of society, appeared from the bodily
limbs of the Lord. According to how the social divisions took birth from higher
and lower features of the Lord's body, they became endowed with higher and
lower qualities. After this description, Lord Kåñëa explains the natures of
persons in each of the four varëas and of those who are outside the limits of
the varëas. He also describes those qualities that pertain to humanity in
general.
Members of the higher orders are qualified to accept second birth. After
receiving the sacred thread initiation, they should go to live in the guru-kula,
the home of the spiritual master. With a pacified mind, the student
(brahmacäré) should absorb himself in study of the Vedas. He should keep
matted hair and is forbidden to wash his teeth, prepare a nice seat for himself,
talk when bathing or evacuating, cut his hair and nails or at any time pass
semen. He must regularly perform worship at the three junctures of the day
and must render devotional service to his spiritual master in a spirit free from
envy. The brahmacäré must offer to the guru whatever food and other things
he obtains by begging. He accepts for his maintenance whatever remnants of
the Lord he is granted. He should render menial service to the spiritual master
by massaging his feet and worshiping him and should avoid all sense
gratification and strictly maintain the vow of celibacy. With his mind, body
and words, he should worship the Supreme Lord in the form of the Supersoul
in the way prescribed for him. For brahmacärés, seeing or touching women, and
conversations or sports in the company of women, are absolutely disallowed.
Cleanliness and ritual purification by water should be observed by members of
all the spiritual orders of society. Everyone is also advised to always remember
that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the Supreme Soul dwelling within
the hearts of all.
After studying all the different aspects of the Vedas, a brähmaëa who has
material desires may take permission from his spiritual master and enter family
life. Otherwise, if he has no material desire, he may become a vänaprastha or
sannyäsé. The proper order of succession should be followed in changing from
one spiritual order to the next. One who wishes to enter the household order
should accept a wife who is of the same social class, who is not objectionable,
and who is somewhat younger in age than he.
The obligatory duties of the three classes who are twice-born-the
brähmaëas, kñatriyas and vaiçyas-are worship of the Lord, study of the Vedas
and giving charity. The occupational duties of accepting charity, teaching
others and performing sacrifice for others are the privilege of the brähmaëas
alone. If a brähmaëa considers that his consciousness is contaminated by
engaging in these occupations, he may sustain his existence by collecting
grains from the fields. If he is disturbed by poverty, the brähmaëa may out of
necessity accept the business of a kñatriya or vaiçya, but he should never take
the occupation of a çüdra. In a similar situation, a kñatriya may take the
occupation of a vaiçya, and a vaiçya that of a çüdra. But when the emergency
has passed, it is not fitting to continue earning one's living by a lower
occupation. A brähmaëa who is properly fixed in his personal duty rejects all
insignificant material desires, always serves the Vaiñëavas and is under the
protection of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The householder should
study the Vedas every day and maintain his wards with money honestly earned
by his own occupation. As far as possible, he should execute worship of the
Lord by ritual sacrifices. Remaining unattached to material life and fixed in
devotion to the Supreme Lord, the householder may finally take the order of
vänaprastha, so that he can fully involve himself in the Lord's worship. If he
has a grown son, he may directly take the renounced order of sannyäsa. But
persons who are excessively lusty after women, who have no proper
discrimination, and who are extremely attached to wealth and possessions
remain perpetually in anxiety over the welfare of their family members and are
doomed to take their next birth in a lower species of life.
TEXTS 1-2
™aIoÜ"va ovaAca
yastvayaAiBaih"ta: paUva<
DamaRstvaà"il(laºaNA:
vaNAARzAmaAcaAr"vataAM
s$avaeRSaAM iã"pad"Amaipa
yaTaAnauï"IyamaAnaena
tvaiya Bail(na{RNAAM Bavaeta,
svaDamaeRNAAr"ivand"Aºa
tanmamaAKyaAtaumahR"is$a
çré-uddhava uväca
yas tvayäbhihitaù pürvaà
dharmas tvad-bhakti-lakñaëaù
varëäçamäcäravatäà
sarveñäà dvi-padäm api
yathänuñöhéyamänena
tvayi bhaktir nåëäà bhavet
sva-dharmeëäravindäkña
tan mamäkhyätum arhasi
SYNONYMS
çré-uddhavaù uväca—Çré Uddhava said; yaù—which; tvayä—by You;
abhihitaù—described; pürvam—previously; dharmaù—religious principles;
tvat-bhakti-lakñaëaù—characterized by devotional service to Your Lordship;
varëa-äçrama—of the varëäçrama system; äcäravatäm—of the faithful
followers; sarveñäm—of all; dvi-padäm—of ordinary human beings (who do not
follow the varëäçrama system); api—even; yathä—according to;
anuñöhéyamänena—the process being executed; tvayi—in You; bhaktiù—loving
service; nåëäm—of human beings; bhavet—may be; sva-dharmeëa—by one's
own occupational duty; aravinda-akña—O lotus-eyed one; tat—that;
mama—to me; äkhyätum—to explain; arhasi—You ought.
TRANSLATION
Çré Uddhava said: My dear Lord, previously You described the principles of
devotional service that are to be practiced by followers of the varëäçrama system
and even ordinary, unregulated human beings. My dear lotus-eyed Lord, now
please explain to me how all human beings can achieve loving service unto You
by the execution of their prescribed duties.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa has already elaborately explained the process of jïäna-yoga,
bhakti-yoga and añöäìga-yoga. Now Uddhava inquires how those inclined
toward karma-yoga can achieve the perfection of life, Kåñëa consciousness. In
Bhagavad-gétä (4.13) Lord Kåñëa describes that He is personally the creator of
the varëäçrama system. Cätur-varëyaà mayä såñöaà guëa-karma-vibhägaçaù.
Therefore the ultimate goal of the varëäçrama system is to please the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. In other words, one should become a devotee of the
Lord and learn the process of pure devotional service. The easiest method of
achieving pure devotional service is by the association of pure devotees of the
Lord. If one submissively and faithfully associates with pure devotees, one can
immediately achieve the perfection of life. A Kåñëa conscious person is not
required to execute all the formalities of the varëäçrama system, because a
Kåñëa conscious person, absorbed in love of Godhead, automatically gives up
all sense gratification and mental speculation. Those human beings who do not
follow the varëäçrama system are here referred to as dvi-padäm, or two-legged.
In other words, one who does not follow the religious path of life is known to
be human only by the possession of two legs. Even ordinary animals and
insects are eagerly engaged in eating, sleeping, mating and defending; the
human being, however, is distinguished from such lower forms of life by his
capacity to become religious and, ultimately, to love God in pure Kåñëa
consciousness.
TEXTS 3-4
paur"A ik(la mah"AbaAh"Ae
Dama< par"makM( ‘aBaAe
yaÔaena hM"s$aè&paeNA
“aöNAe'ByaAtTa maADava
s$a wd"AnaI%M s$aumah"taA
k(AlaenaAima‡ak(zARna
na ‘aAyaAe BaivataA matyaRlaAeke(
‘aAgAnauzAAis$ata:
purä kila mahä-bäho
dharmaà paramakaà prabho
yat tena haàsa-rüpeëa
brahmaëe 'bhyättha mädhava
sa idänéà su-mahatä
kälenämitra-karçana
na präyo bhavitä martyaloke
präg anuçäsitaù
SYNONYMS
purä—previously; kila—indeed; mahä-bäho—O mighty-armed one;
dharmam—religious principles; paramakam—bringing the greatest happiness;
prabho—my Lord; yat—which; tena—by that; haàsa-rüpeëa—in the form of
Lord Haàsa; brahmaëe—unto Lord Brahmä; abhyättha—You spoke;
mädhava—my dear Mädhava; saù—that (knowledge of religious principles);
idäném—presently; su-mahatä—after very long; kälena—time;
amitra-karçana—O subduer of the enemy; na—not; präyaù—generally;
bhavitä—will exist; martya-loke—in human society; präk—previously;
anuçäsitaù—instructed.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, O mighty-armed one, previously in Your form of Lord Haàsa
You spoke to Lord Brahmä those religious principles that bring supreme
happiness to the practitioner. My dear Mädhava, now much time has passed,
and that which You previously instructed will soon practically cease to exist, O
subduer of the enemy.
TEXTS 5-6
val(A k(taARivataA naAnyaAe
DamaRsyaAcyauta tae Bauiva
s$aBaAyaAmaipa vaEir"HcyaAM
ya‡a maUitaRDar"A: k(laA:
k(‡aARiva‡aA ‘avaf‡aA ca
BavataA maDaus$aUd"na
tyale( mah"Italae de"va
ivanaíM" k(: ‘avaºyaita
vaktä kartävitä nänyo
dharmasyäcyuta te bhuvi
sabhäyäm api vairiïcyäà
yatra mürti-dharäù kaläù
karträviträ pravakträ ca
bhavatä madhusüdana
tyakte mahé-tale deva
vinañöaà kaù pravakñyati
SYNONYMS
vaktä—speaker; kartä—creator; avitä—protector; na—not; anyaù—any other;
dharmasya—of supreme religious principles; acyuta—my dear Acyuta;
te—than You; bhuvi—on the earth; sabhäyäm—in the assembly; api—even;
vairiïcyäm—of Lord Brahmä; yatra—wherein; mürti-dharäù—in the
personified form; kaläù—the Vedas; karträ—by the creator; aviträ—by the
protector; pravakträ—by the speaker; ca—also; bhavatä—by Your Lordship;
madhusüdana—my dear Madhusüdana; tyakte—when it is abandoned;
mahé-tale—the earth; deva—my dear Lord; vinañöam—those lost principles of
religion; kaù—who; pravakñyati—will speak.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord Acyuta, there is no speaker, creator and protector of supreme
religious principles other than Your Lordship, either on the earth or even in the
assembly of Lord Brahmä, where the personified Vedas reside. Thus, my dear
Lord Madhusüdana, when You, who are the very creator, protector and speaker
of spiritual knowledge, abandon the earth, who will again speak this lost
knowledge?
TEXT 7
taÔvaM na: s$avaRDamaRÁa
DamaRstvaà"il(laºaNA:
yaTaA yasya ivaDaIyaeta
taTaA vaNARya mae ‘aBaAe
tat tvaà naù sarva-dharma-jïa
dharmas tvad-bhakti-lakñaëaù
yathä yasya vidhéyeta
tathä varëaya me prabho
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; tvam—You; naù—among us (human beings);
sarva-dharma-jïa—O supreme knower of religious principles; dharmaù—the
spiritual path; tvat-bhakti—by loving service to You; lakñaëaù—characterized;
yathä—in which way; yasya—of whom; vidhéyeta—may be executed; tathä—in
that way; varëaya—please describe; me—unto me; prabho—my Lord.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, my Lord, since You are the knower of all religious principles,
please describe to me the human beings who may execute the path of loving
service to You and how such service is to be rendered.
TEXT 8
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
wtTaM svaBa{tyamauKyaena
pa{í": s$a BagAvaAna, h"ir":
‘aIta: ºaemaAya matyaARnaAM
DamaARnaAh" s$anaAtanaAna,
çré-çuka uväca
itthaà sva-bhåtya-mukhyena
påñöaù sa bhagavän hariù
prétaù kñemäya martyänäà
dharmän äha sanätanän
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; ittham—thus;
sva-bhåtya-mukhyena—by the best of His devotees; påñöaù—questioned;
saù—He; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hariù—Çré Kåñëa;
prétaù—being pleased; kñemäya—for the highest welfare; martyänäm—of all
conditioned souls; dharmän—religious principles; äha—spoke;
sanätanän—eternal.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Çré Uddhava, the best of devotees, thus inquired
from the Lord. Hearing his question, the Personality of Godhead, çré Kåñëa,
was pleased and for the welfare of all conditioned souls spoke those religious
principles that are eternal.
TEXT 9
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
DamyaR WSa tava ‘a´aAe
naE:™aeyas$ak(r"Ae na{NAAma,
vaNAAR™amaAcaAr"vataAM
tamauÜ"va inabaAeDa mae
çré-bhagavän uväca
dharmya eña tava praçno
naiùçreyasa-karo nåëäm
varëäçramäcäravatäà
tam uddhava nibodha me
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
dharmyaù—faithful to religious principles; eñaù—this; tava—your;
praçnaù—question; naiùçreyasa-karaù—the cause of pure devotional service;
nåëäm—for ordinary human beings; varëa-äçrama—the varëäçrama system;
äcära-vatäm—for those who faithfully follow; tam—those highest religious
principles; uddhava—My dear Uddhava; nibodha—please learn; me—from Me.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Uddhava, your question
is faithful to religious principles and thus gives rise to the highest perfection in
life, pure devotional service, for both ordinary human beings and the followers
of the varëäçrama system. Now please learn from Me those supreme religious
principles.
PURPORT
The word naiùçreyasa-kara indicates that which awards the highest
perfection of life, Kåñëa consciousness, which the Lord is explaining to Çré
Uddhava. When considering religious principles, ordinary human beings
remain bogged down in sectarian mundane considerations. The process that
awards the highest perfection of life should be considered the most auspicious
for human beings. The varëäçrama system is the most scientific presentation of
religiosity on the earth, and those who are most perfect in that system come to
the point of Kåñëa consciousness, or dedicating everything for the satisfaction
of the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 10
@Ad"AE k{(tayaugAe vaNAAeR
na{NAAM hM"s$a wita sma{ta:
k{(tak{(tyaA: ‘ajaA jaAtyaA
tasmaAtk{(tayaugAM ivaäu":
ädau kåta-yuge varëo
nåëäà haàsa iti småtaù
kåta-kåtyäù prajä jätyä
tasmät kåta-yugaà viduù
SYNONYMS
ädau—in the beginning (of the millennium); kåta-yuge—in the Satya-yuga, or
age of truth; varëaù—the social class; nåëäm—of human beings;
haàsaù—named haàsa; iti-thus; småtaù—well known; kåta-kåtyäù—perfect in
the execution of duties by complete surrender to the Supreme Lord;
prajäù—the citizens; jätyä—automatically by birth; tasmät—therefore;
kåta-yugam—Kåta-yuga, or the age in which all duties are fulfilled; viduù—was
thus known by the learned.
TRANSLATION
In the beginning, in Satya-yuga, there is only one social class, called haàsa,
to which all human beings belong. In that age all people are unalloyed devotees
of the Lord from birth, and thus learned scholars call this first age Kåta-yuga, or
the age in which all religious duties are perfectly fulfilled.
PURPORT
It is understood from this verse that the supreme religious principle is
unalloyed surrender to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In Satya-yuga
there is no influence of the lower modes of nature, and therefore all human
beings belong to the highest social order, called haàsa, in which one comes
under the direct supervision of the Personality of Godhead. In the modern age
people are crying out for social equality, but unless all human beings are
situated in the mode of goodness, which is the position of purity and unalloyed
devotion, social equality is not possible. As the lower modes of nature become
prominent, secondary religious principles arise, by which people may be
gradually elevated to the pure stage of unalloyed surrender to God. In
Satya-yuga there are no inferior human beings, and thus there is no need of
secondary religious principles. Everyone directly takes to the unalloyed service
of the Lord, fulfilling perfectly all religious obligations. In Sanskrit, one who
perfectly executes all duties is called kåta-kåtya, as mentioned in this verse.
Therefore Satya-yuga is called Kåta-yuga, or the age of perfect religious action.
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, the word ädau ("in the beginning") refers to
the moment of universal creation. In other words, the varëäçrama system is
not a recent concoction but naturally arises at the time of creation and should
therefore be accepted by all intelligent human beings.
TEXT 11
vaed": ‘aNAva WvaAƒae
DamaAeR'hM" va{Saè&paDa{k,(
opaAs$atae tapaAeinaï"A
hM"s$aM maAM maul(ik(ilbaSaA:
vedaù praëava evägre
dharmo 'haà våña-rüpa-dhåk
upäsate tapo-niñöhä
haàsaà mäà mukta-kilbiñäù
SYNONYMS
vedaù—the Veda; praëavaù-the sacred syllable oà; eva-indeed; agre—in
Satya-yuga; dharmaù—the object of mental activities; aham—I;
våña-rüpa-dhåk—bearing the form of the bull of religion; upäsate—they
worship; tapaù-niñöhäù—fixed in austerity; haàsam—Lord Haàsa; mäm—Me;
mukta—freed from; kilbiñäù—all sins.
TRANSLATION
In Satya-yuga the undivided Veda is expressed by the syllable oà, and I am
the only object of mental activities. I become manifest as the four-legged bull of
religion, and thus the inhabitants of Satya-yuga, fixed in austerity and free from
all sins, worship Me as Lord Haàsa.
PURPORT
The bull of religion is described in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.17.24): tapaù
çaucam dayä satyam iti pädäù kåte kåtäù. "In the age of Satya [truthfulness],
your four legs were established by the four principles of austerity, cleanliness,
mercy and truthfulness." Çré Vyäsadeva divided the one Veda into four—the
Åg, Yajur, Säma and Atharva Vedas—at the end of Dväpara-yuga, but in
Satya-yuga the whole of Vedic knowledge is easily understood by everyone
simply by vibrating the syllable oà. In this age there are no ritualistic or pious
activities such as sacrifice, since everyone is sinless, austere and fully engaged
in worshiping the Personality of Godhead, Lord Haàsa, through the process of
meditation.
TEXT 12
‡aetaAmauKae mah"ABaAgA
‘aANAAnmae ô$d"yaAt‡ayaI
ivaâA ‘aAäu"r"BaUÔasyaA
@h"maAs$aM i‡ava{nmaKa:
tretä-mukhe mahä-bhäga
präëän me hådayät trayé
vidyä prädurabhüt tasyä
aham äsaà tri-vån makhaù
SYNONYMS
tretä-mukhe—at the beginning of Tretä-yuga; mahä-bhäga—O greatly
fortunate one; präëät—from the abode of präëa, or the life air; me—My;
hådayät—from the heart; trayé—the threefold; vidyä—Vedic knowledge;
prädurabhüt—appeared; tasyäù—from that knowledge; aham—I;
äsam—appeared; tri-våt—in three divisions; makhaù—sacrifice.
TRANSLATION
O greatly fortunate one, at the beginning of Tretä-yuga Vedic knowledge
appeared from My heart, which is the abode of the air of life, in three
divisions—as Åg, Säma and Yajur. Then from that knowledge I appeared as
threefold sacrifice.
PURPORT
In Tretä-yuga, the bull of religion loses one leg, and only seventy-five
percent of religious principles are manifested, represented by the three
principal Vedas—Åg, Säma and Yajur. The Lord appears in the process of
threefold Vedic sacrifice. The three divisions are understood as follows. The
hotä priest offers oblations into the fire and chants the Åg Veda; the udgätä
priest chants the Säma Veda; and the adhvaryu priest, who arranges the
sacrificial ground, altar, etc., chants the Yajur Veda. In Tretä-yuga such
sacrifice is the authorized process for spiritual perfection. The word präëät in
this verse refers to the universal form of the Personality of Godhead. This
form is further described in the following verses.
TEXT 13
iva‘aºai‡ayaivaq%.zAU#‰"A
mauKabaAó"ç&paAd"jaA:
vaEr"AjaAtpauç&SaAÀaAtaA
ya @AtmaAcaAr"laºaNAA:
vipra-kñatriya-viö-çüdrä
mukha-bähüru-päda-jäù
vairäjät puruñäj jätä
ya ätmäcära-lakñaëäù
SYNONYMS
vipra—brähmaëas; kñatriya—kñatriyas, the martial class; viö—vaiçyas,
mercantile men; çüdräù—çüdras, workers; mukha—from the mouth;
bähu—arms; üru—thighs; päda—and legs; jäù—born; vairäjät—from the
universal form; puruñät—from the Personality of Godhead; jätäù—generated;
ye-who; ätma—personal; äcära—by activities; lakñaëäù—recognized.
TRANSLATION
In Tretä-yuga the four social orders were manifested from the universal
form of the Personality of Godhead. The brähmaëas appeared from the Lord's
face, the kñatriyas from the Lord's arms, the vaiçyas from the Lord's thighs and
the çüdras from the legs of that mighty form. Each social division was
recognized by its particular duties and behavior.
TEXT 14
gA{h"A™amaAe jaGanataAe
“aöcaya< ô$d"Ae mama
vaºa:sTalaAã"naevaAs$a:
s$aªyaAs$a: izAr"is$a isTata:
gåhäçramo jaghanato
brahmacaryaà hådo mama
vakñaù-sthaläd vane-väsaù
sannyäsaù çirasi sthitaù
SYNONYMS
gåha-äçramaù—married life; jaghanataù—from the loins;
brahmacaryam—celibate student life; hådaù—from the heart; mama—My;
vakñaù-sthalät—from the chest; vane—in the forest; väsaù—dwelling;
sannyäsaù—the renounced order of life; çirasi—in the head; sthitaù—situated.
TRANSLATION
The married order of life appeared from the loins of My universal form, and
the celibate students came from My heart. The forest-dwelling retired order of
life appeared from My chest, and the renounced order of life was situated
within the head of My universal form.
PURPORT
There are two classes of brahmacäré life. The naiñöhiki-brahmacäré remains
celibate throughout life, whereas the upakurväëa-brahmacäré marries upon
finishing his student life. One who remains perpetually celibate is situated
within the heart of Lord Kåñëa, but those brahmacärés who eventually marry
are situated within the loins of the universal form of the Lord. The word
vane-väsaù refers to vänaprastha, or the retired order of life, which is situated
on the chest of the Lord.
TEXT 15
vaNAARnaAmaA™amaANAAM ca
janmaBaUmyanaus$aAir"NAI:
@As$ana, ‘ak{(tayaAe na|naAM
naIcaEnaI=caAeÔamaAeÔamaA:
varëänäm äçramäëäà ca
janma-bhümy-anusäriëéù
äsan prakåtayo nènäà
nécair nécottamottamäù
SYNONYMS
varëänäm—of the occupational divisions; äçramäëäm—of the social divisions;
ca—also; janma—of birth; bhümi—the situation; anusäriëéù—according to;
äsan—appeared; prakåtayaù—the natures; nèëäm—of human beings;
nécaiù—by inferior background; néca—inferior nature; uttama—by superior
background; uttamäù—superior natures.
TRANSLATION
The various occupational and social divisions of human society appeared
according to inferior and superior natures manifest in the situation of the
individual's birth.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, the brähmaëas and
sannyäsés, being situated on the head of the universal form of the Lord, are
considered to be the most qualified, whereas the çüdras and gåhasthas, being on
the legs or loins of the Personality of Godhead, are considered to be in the
lowest position. A living entity is born with a certain amount of intelligence,
beauty and social opportunity, and he is therefore situated in a particular
occupational and social position within the varëäçrama system. Ultimately,
such positions are external designations, but since the majority of human
beings are conditioned by the external energy of the Lord, they should act
according to the scientific varëäçrama divisions until they reach the stage of
jévan-mukta, or liberated life.
TEXT 16
zAmaAe d"mastapa: zAAEcaM
s$antaAeSa: ºaAintar"AjaRvama,
maà"il(ê d"yaA s$atyaM
“aö‘ak{(tayaistvamaA:
çamo damas tapaù çaucaà
santoñaù kñäntir ärjavam
mad-bhaktiç ca dayä satyaà
brahma-prakåtayas tv imäù
SYNONYMS
çamaù—peacefulness; damaù—sense control; tapaù—austerity;
çaucam—cleanliness; santoñaù—full satisfaction; kñäntiù—forgiveness;
ärjavam—simplicity and straightforwardness; mat-bhaktiù—devotional service
unto Me; ca—also; dayä—mercy; satyam—truth; brahma—of the brähmaëas;
prakåtayaù—the natural qualities; tu—indeed; imäù—these.
TRANSLATION
Peacefulness, self-control, austerity, cleanliness, satisfaction, tolerance,
simple straightforwardness, devotion to Me, mercy and truthfulness are the
natural qualities of the brähmaëas.
TEXT 17
taejaAe balaM Da{ita: zAAEya<
itaitaºaAEd"AyaRmauâma:
sTaEya< “aönyamaEìya<
ºa‡a‘ak{(tayaistvamaA:
tejo balaà dhåtiù çauryaà
titikñaudäryam udyamaù
sthairyaà brahmanyam aiçvaryaà
kñatra-prakåtayas tv imäù
SYNONYMS
tejaù—dynamic power; balam—bodily strength; dhåtiù—determination;
çauryam—heroism; titikñä—tolerance; audäryam—generosity;
udyamaù—endeavor; sthairyam—steadiness; brahmaëyam—being always eager
to serve the brähmaëas; aiçvaryam—leadership; kñatra—of the kñatriyas;
prakåtayaù—the natural qualities; tu—indeed; imäù—these.
TRANSLATION
Dynamic power, bodily strength, determination, heroism, tolerance,
generosity, great endeavor, steadiness, devotion to the brähmaëas and leadership
are the natural qualities of the kñatriyas.
TEXT 18
@AistafyaM d"Anainaï"A ca
@d"mBaAe “aös$aevanama,
@tauií"r"TaAeRpacayaEr,"
vaEzya‘ak{(tayaistvamaA:
ästikyaà däna-niñöhä ca
adambho brahma-sevanam
atuñöir arthopacayair
vaiçya-prakåtayas tv imäù
SYNONYMS
ästikyam—faith in Vedic civilization; däna-niñöhä—dedicated to charity;
ca—also; adambhaù—being without hypocrisy; brahma-sevanam—service to
the brähmaëas; atuñöiù—remaining dissatisfied; artha—of money;
upacayaiù—by the accumulation; vaiçya—of the vaiçyas; prakåtayaù—the
natural qualities; tu—indeed; imäù—these.
TRANSLATION
Faith in Vedic civilization, dedication to charity, freedom from hypocrisy,
service to the brähmaëas and perpetually desiring to accumulate more money
are the natural qualities of the vaiçyas.
PURPORT
Atuñöir arthopacayaiù indicates that a vaiçya is never satisfied with any
amount of wealth and always wants to accumulate more. On the other hand,
he is däna-niñöha, or dedicated to charitable work; brahmasevé, always engaged
in assisting the brähmaëas; and adambha, free from hypocrisy. This is due to
ästikyam, or complete faith in the Vedic way of life, and confidence that one
will be rewarded or punished in the next life for one's present activities. The
fervent desire of the vaiçyas to accumulate wealth is not the same as ordinary
material greed, because it is purified and tempered by the superior qualities
mentioned in this verse.
TEXT 19
zAu™aUSaNAM iã"jagAvaAM
de"vaAnaAM caApyamaAyayaA
ta‡a labDaena s$antaAeSa:
zAU#‰"‘ak{(tayaistvamaA:
çuçrüñaëaà dvija-gaväà
devänäà cäpy amäyayä
tatra labdhena santoñaù
çüdra-prakåtayas tv imäù
SYNONYMS
çuçrüñaëam—service; dvija—of the brähmaëas; gaväm—of the cows;
devänäm—of worshipable personalities such as the demigods and the spiritual
master; ca—also; api—indeed; amäyayä—without duplicity; tatra—in such
service; labdhena—with that which is obtained; santoñaù—complete
satisfaction; çüdra—of the çüdras; prakåtayaù—the natural qualities;
tu—indeed; imäù—these.
TRANSLATION
Service without duplicity to the brähmaëas, cows, demigods and other
worshipable personalities, and complete satisfaction with whatever income is
obtained in such service, are the natural qualities of çüdras.
PURPORT
When the entire social order is functioning properly according to Vedic
standards, everyone is happy and satisfied. Although the çüdras are to be
satisfied with whatever income they obtain through their service, they never
lack the necessities of life, because the other orders of society, such as kñatriyas
and vaiçyas, are required to be abundantly generous, and the brähmaëas are
well known for being the most merciful of all. Therefore, if all social classes
obey the Vedic injunctions there will be a new and blissful life for the entire
human society under the guidance of Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 20
@zAAEcamana{taM staeyaM
naAistafyaM zAuSk(ivaƒah":
k(Ama: ‚(AeDaê taSaRê
s$a BaAvaAe'ntyaAvas$aAiyanaAma,
açaucam anåtaà steyaà
nästikyaà çuñka-vigrahaù
kämaù krodhaç ca tarñaç ca
sa bhävo 'ntyävasäyinäm
SYNONYMS
açaucam—dirtiness; anåtam—dishonesty; steyam—thievery;
nästikyam—faithlessness; çuñka-vigrahaù—useless quarreling; kämaù—lust;
krodhaù—anger; ca—also; tarñaù—hankering; ca—also; saù—this;
bhävaù—the nature; antya—in the lowest position; avasäyinäm—of those
residing.
TRANSLATION
Dirtiness, dishonesty, thievery, faithlessness, useless quarrel, lust, anger and
hankering constitute the nature of those in the lowest position outside the
varëäçrama system.
PURPORT
Here the Lord describes those who reside outside the scientific social system
called varëäçrama. In Europe and America, we have practically observed that
the standards of cleanliness are abominable even among so-called educated
persons. Going without bathing and the use of indecent language are common.
In the modern age people whimsically speak whatever they like, dispensing
with all authority, and there is therefore very little truthfulness or true
wisdom. Similarly, in both the capitalistic and communistic countries,
everyone is busily engaged in stealing and robbing from everyone else in the
name of business, taxation or outright crime. People are not confident of the
kingdom of God nor of their own eternal nature, and thus their faith is very
weak. Moreover, since modern human beings are not very interested in Kåñëa
consciousness they constantly quarrel, bicker and fight over completely
insignificant issues relating to the material body. Thus at the slightest
provocation there are huge wars and massacres. Lust, anger and hankering
have become practically unlimited in Kali-yuga. The symptoms and
characteristics mentioned here can be abundantly observed throughout the
world, wherever people have fallen away from the varëäçrama system. Because
of sinful habits such as animal killing, illicit sex, intoxication and gambling,
the great majority of human beings have become caëòälas, or untouchables.
TEXT 21
@ihM"s$aA s$atyamastaeyama,
@k(Ama‚(AeDalaAeBataA
BaUtai‘ayaih"taeh"A ca
DamaAeR'yaM s$aAvaRvaiNARk(:
ahiàsä satyam asteyam
akäma-krodha-lobhatä
bhüta-priya-hitehä ca
dharmo 'yaà särva-varëikaù
SYNONYMS
ahiàsä—nonviolence; satyam—truthfulness; asteyam—honesty;
a-käma-krodha-lobhatä—being free from lust, anger and greed; bhüta—of all
living entities; priya—the happiness; hita—and welfare; éhä—desiring;
ca—also; dharmaù—duty; ayam—this; särva-varëikaù—for all members of
society.
TRANSLATION
Nonviolence, truthfulness, honesty, desire for the happiness and welfare of
all others and freedom from lust, anger and greed constitute duties for all
members of society.
PURPORT
The word särva-varëika indicates that the above-mentioned principles
constitute general piety, which should be observed by all members of society,
even those outside the varëäçrama system. We practically find that even in
societies that have fallen away from the varëäçrama system, the
above-mentioned principles are honored and encouraged. Such principles do
not constitute a specific path of liberation but are perennial virtues in human
society.
TEXT 22
iã"taIyaM ‘aApyaAnaupaUvyaARja,
janmaAepanayanaM iã"ja:
vas$ana, gAuç&ku(lae d"AntaAe
“aöADaIyaIta caAó"ta:
dvitéyaà präpyänupürvyäj
janmopanayanaà dvijaù
vasan guru-kule dänto
brahmädhéyéta cähütaù
SYNONYMS
dvitéyam—second; präpya—achieving; änupürvyät—by the gradual process of
purificatory ceremonies; janma—birth; upanayanam—Gäyatré initiation;
dvijaù—a twice-born member of society; vasan—residing; guru-kule—in the
äçrama of the spiritual master; däntaù—self-controlled; brahma—the Vedic
literatures; adhéyéta—should study; ca—and also understand; ähütaù—being
summoned by the spiritual master.
TRANSLATION
The twice-born member of society achieves second birth through the
sequence of purificatory ceremonies culminating in Gäyatré initiation. Being
summoned by the spiritual master, he should reside within the guru's äçrama
and with a self-controlled mind carefully study the Vedic literature.
PURPORT
The term dvija, or "twice-born," here indicates the three superior classes,
namely brähmaëas, kñatriyas and vaiçyas, who all receive the Gäyatré mantra,
which signifies their second birth through spiritual initiation. One's first birth
is biological, or seminal, and does not necessarily indicate that one is
intelligent or enlightened. A young brähmaëa boy, if qualified, may be
initiated with Gäyatré mantra at the age of twelve, and kñatriyas and vaiçyas a
few years later. In order to become enlightened with spiritual knowledge, the
boy resides within the guru-kula, or äçrama of the spiritual master. The
International Society for Krishna Consciousness has established similar
guru-kulas all over the world and is issuing a great call to civilized human
beings to arrange for the proper education of their children. Every young boy
and girl should learn to be self-controlled and should become enlightened
through study of authorized Vedic literatures. In this way, unlike ordinary
animals, insects, fish and birds, etc., an enlightened human being may take
birth twice and thus become perfect in the knowledge that leads to ultimate
liberation. The word änupürvyät in this verse indicates the system of
saàskäras, or purificatory rites, beginning with garbhädhäna-saàskära, or the
purification of the sexual act. Generally, çüdras and those who do not follow
the Vedic system are not attracted to such purificatory ceremonies; therefore
they remain ignorant of spiritual life and envious of the bona fide spiritual
master. Those whose character has been civilized by a systematic cleansing
process give up the tendency to be argumentative and whimsical and instead
become submissive and eager to learn in the presence of a bona fide spiritual
master.
TEXT 23
maeKalaAijanad"Nx"Aºa-
“aös$aU‡ak(maNx"laUna,
jaiq%laAe'DaAEtad"ã"As$aAe
'r"l(paIQ&: ku(zAAnd"Data,
mekhaläjina-daëòäkñabrahma-
sütra-kamaëòalün
jaöilo 'dhauta-dad-väso
'rakta-péöhaù kuçän dadhat
SYNONYMS
mekhalä—belt; ajina—deerskin; daëòa—staff; akña—bead necklace;
brahma-sütra—brähmaëa thread; kamaëòalün—and waterpot; jaöilaù—with
matted, unruly hair; adhauta—without polishing, bleaching or ironing;
dat-väsaù—the teeth and clothes; arakta-péöhaù—without accepting a
luxurious or sensuous seat; kuçän—kuça grass; dadhat—carrying in his hand.
TRANSLATION
The brahmacäré should regularly dress with a belt of straw and deerskin
garments. He should wear matted hair, carry a rod and waterpot and be
decorated with akña beads and a sacred thread. Carrying pure kuça grass in his
hand, he should never accept a luxurious or sensuous sitting place. He should
not unnecessarily polish his teeth, nor should he bleach and iron his clothes.
PURPORT
The word adhauta-dad-vasa indicates that a renounced brahmacäré is not
concerned with a glistening smile to attract the opposite sex, nor does he pay
much attention to his outer garments. Brahmacäré life is meant for austerity
and obedience to the spiritual master so that later in life, when one becomes a
businessman, politician or intellectual brähmaëa, one will be able to call upon
resources of character, discipline, self-control, austerity and humility. Student
life, as described here, is far different from the mindless hedonism known as
modern education. Of course, in the modern age, Kåñëa conscious brahmacärés
cannot artificially adopt the ancient dress and ritualistic duties described here;
but the essential values of self-control, purity and obedience to a bona fide
spiritual master are just as necessary today as they were in Vedic times.
TEXT 24
µaAnaBaAejanah"AemaeSau
japaAe»aAre" ca vaAgyata:
na icC$nâAªaKar"AemaAiNA
k(ºaAepasTagAtaAnyaipa
snäna-bhojana-homeñu
japoccäre ca väg-yataù
na cchindyän nakha-romäëi
kakñopastha-gatäny api
SYNONYMS
snäna—while bathing; bhojana—while eating; homeñu—and while attending
sacrificial performances; japa—while chanting mantras to oneself;
uccäre—while passing stool or urine; ca—also; väk-yataù—remaining silent;
na—not; chindyät—should cut; nakha—the nails; romäëi—or hairs; kakña—in
the armpits; upastha—pubic; gatäni—including; api—even.
TRANSLATION
A brahmacäré should always remain silent while bathing, eating, attending
sacrificial performances, chanting japa or passing stool and urine. He should not
cut his nails and hair, including the armpit and pubic hair.
PURPORT
Närada Muni gives a similar technical description of Vedic brahmacäré life
in Canto Seven, Chapter Twelve of Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 25
re"taAe naAvaik(re"ÀaAtau
“aö˜ataDar": svayama,
@vak(LNAeR'vagAA÷Aps$au
yataAs$auiñpad"AM japaeta,
reto nävakirej jätu
brahma-vrata-dharaù svayam
avakérëe 'vagähyäpsu
yatäsus tri-padäà japet
SYNONYMS
retaù—semen; na—not; avakiret—should spill out; jätu—ever;
brahma-vrata-dharaù—one who is maintaining the vow of celibacy, or
brahmacarya; svayam—by itself; avakérëe—having flowed out;
avagähya—bathing; apsu—in water; yata-asuù—controlling the breathing by
präëäyäma; tri-padäm-the Gäyatré mantra; japet—he should chant.
TRANSLATION
One observing the vow of celibate brahmacäré life should never pass semen.
If the semen by chance spills out by itself, the brahmacäré should immediately
take bath in water, control his breath by präëäyäma and chant the Gäyatré
mantra
TEXT 26
@gnyak(ARcaAyaRgAAeiva‘agAuç&
va{Ü"s$aur"AHzAuica:
s$amaAih"ta opaAs$aIta
s$anDyae ãe" yatavaAgjapana,
agny-arkäcärya-go-vipra1261
guru-våddha-suräï çuciù
samähita upäséta
sandhye dve yata-väg japan
SYNONYMS
agni—the fire-god; arka—the sun; äcärya—the äcärya; go—the cows;
vipra—the brähmaëas; guru—the spiritual master; våddha—elder respectable
persons; surän—the demigods; çuciù—purified; samähitaù—with fixed
consciousness; upäséta—he should worship; sandhye—in the junctions of time;
dve—two; yata-väk—observing silence; japan—silently chanting or
murmuring the proper mantras.
TRANSLATION
Purified and fixed in consciousness, the brahmacäré should worship the
fire-god, sun, äcärya, cows, brähmaëas, guru, elderly respectable persons and
demigods. He should perform such worship at sunrise and sunset, without
speaking but by silently chanting or murmuring the appropriate mantras.
TEXT 27
@AcaAya< maAM ivajaAnaIyaAna,
naAvanmanyaeta k(ihR"icata,
na matyaRbauÜ"YaAs$aUyaeta
s$avaR$de"vamayaAe gAuç&:
äcäryaà mäà vijänéyän
navamanyeta karhicit
na martya-buddhyäsüyeta
sarva-deva-mayo guruù
SYNONYMS
äcäryam—the spiritual master; mäm—Myself; vijänéyät—one should know; na
avamanyeta—one should never disrespect; karhicit—at any time; na—never;
martya-buddhyä—with the idea of his being an ordinary man; asüyeta—one
should be envious; sarva-deva—of all demigods; mayaù—representative;
guruù—the spiritual master.
TRANSLATION
One should know the äcärya as Myself and never disrespect him in any way.
One should not envy him, thinking him an ordinary man, for he is the
representative of all the demigods.
PURPORT
This verse appears in Caitanya-caritämåta (Ädi 1.46). His Divine Grace Oà
Viñëupäda Paramahaàsa Parivräjakäcärya Añöottara-çata Çré Çrémad A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda has commented on this verse as follows.
"This is a verse from Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.17.27) spoken by Lord Çré
Kåñëa when He was questioned by Uddhava regarding the four social and
spiritual orders of society. He was specifically instructing how a brahmacäré
should behave under the care of a spiritual master. A spiritual master is not an
enjoyer of facilities offered by his disciples. He is like a parent. Without the
attentive service of his parents, a child cannot grow to manhood; similarly,
without the care of the spiritual master one cannot rise to the plane of
transcendental service.
"The spiritual master is also called äcärya, or a transcendental professor of
spiritual science. Manu-saàhitä (2.140) explains the duties of an äcärya,
describing that a bona fide spiritual maser accepts charge of disciples, teaches
them the Vedic knowledge with all its intricacies, and gives them their second
birth. The ceremony performed to initiate a disciple into the study of spiritual
science is called upanéti, or the function that brings one nearer to the spiritual
master. One who cannot be brought nearer to a spiritual master cannot have a
sacred thread, and thus he is indicated to be a çüdra. The sacred thread worn
on the body of a brähmaëa, kñatriya or vaiçya is a symbol of initiation by the
spiritual master; it is worth nothing if worn merely to boast of high parentage.
The duty of the spiritual master is to initiate a disciple with the sacred thread
ceremony, and after this saàskära, or purificatory process, the spiritual master
actually begins to teach the disciple about the Vedas. A person born a çüdra is
not barred from such spiritual initiation, provided he is approved by the
spiritual master, who is duly authorized to award a disciple the right to be a
brähmaëa if he finds him perfectly qualified. In the Väyu Puräëa an äcärya is
defined as one who knows the import of all the Vedic literatures, abides by
their rules and regulations, and teaches his disciples to act in the same way.
"Only out of His immense compassion does the Personality of Godhead
reveal Himself as the spiritual master. Therefore in the dealings of an äcärya
there are no activities but those of transcendental loving service to the Lord.
He is the Supreme Personality of Servitor Godhead. It is worthwhile to take
shelter of such a steady devotee, who is called äçraya-vigraha, or the
manifestation or form of the Lord of whom one must take shelter.
"If one poses himself as an äcärya but does not have an attitude of
servitorship to the Lord, he must be considered an offender, and this offensive
attitude disqualifies him from being an äcärya. The bona fide spiritual master
always engages in unalloyed devotional service to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. By this test he is known to be a direct manifestation of the Lord and
a genuine representative of Çré Nityänanda Prabhu. Such a spiritual master is
known as äcäryadeva. Influenced by an envious temperament and dissatisfied
because of an attitude of sense gratification, mundaners criticize a real äcärya.
In fact, however, a bona fide äcärya is nondifferent from the Personality of
Godhead, and therefore to envy such an äcärya is to envy the Personality of
Godhead Himself. This will produce an effect subversive to transcendental
realization.
"As mentioned previously, a disciple should always respect the spiritual
master as a manifestation of Çré Kåñëa, but at the same time one should always
remember that a spiritual master is never authorized to imitate the
transcendental pastimes of the Lord. False spiritual masters pose themselves as
identical with Çré Kåñëa in every respect, to exploit the sentiments of their
disciples, but such impersonalists can only mislead their disciples, for their
ultimate aim is to become one with the Lord. This is against the principles of
the devotional cult.
"The real Vedic philosophy is acintya-bhedäbheda-tattva, which establishes
everything to be simultaneously one with and different from the Personality of
Godhead. Çréla Raghunätha däsa Gosvämé confirms that this is the real
position of a bona fide spiritual master and says that one should always think
of the spiritual master in terms of his intimate relationship with Mukunda (Çré
Kåñëa). Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, in his Bhakti-sandarbha (213), has clearly defined
that a pure devotee's observation of the spiritual master and Lord Çiva as one
with the Personality of Godhead exists in terms of their being very dear to the
Lord, not identical with Him in all respects. Following in the footsteps of Çréla
Raghunätha däsa Gosvämé and Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, later äcäryas like Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura have confirmed the same truths. In his
prayers to the spiritual master, Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura confirms
that all the revealed scriptures accept the spiritual master to be identical with
the Personality of Godhead because he is a very dear and confidential servant
of the Lord. Gauòéya Vaiñëavas therefore worship Çréla Gurudeva (the
spiritual master) in the light of his being the servitor of the Personality of
Godhead. In all the ancient literatures of devotional service and in the more
recent songs of Çréla Narottama däsa Öhäkura, Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura
and other unalloyed Vaiñëavas, the spiritual master is always considered to be
either one of the confidential associates of Çrématé Rädhäräëé or a manifested
representation of Çréla Nityänanda Prabhu."
TEXT 28
s$aAyaM ‘aAtaç&paAnaIya
BaEºyaM tasmaE inavaed"yaeta,
ya»aAnyad"pyanauÁaAtama,
opayauÃaIta s$aMyata:
säyaà prätar upänéya
bhaikñyaà tasmai nivedayet
yac cänyad apy anujïätam
upayuïjéta saàyataù
SYNONYMS
säyam—in the evening; prätaù—in the morning; upänéya—bringing;
bhaikñyam—food that is collected by begging; tasmai—unto him (the äcärya);
nivedayet—one should deliver; yat—that which; ca—also; anyat—other
things; api—indeed; anujïätam—that which is permitted; upayuïjéta—one
should accept; saàyataù—being fully controlled.
TRANSLATION
In the morning and evening one should collect foodstuffs and other articles
and deliver them to the spiritual master. Then, being self-controlled, one should
accept for oneself that which is allotted by the äcärya.
PURPORT
One who desires to receive the mercy of a bona fide spiritual master should
not be eager to accumulate the paraphernalia of sense gratification; rather,
whatever one is able to collect one should offer at the lotus feet of the äcärya.
Being self-controlled, one should humbly accept that which is allotted by the
bona fide spiritual master. Every living entity must ultimately be trained to
serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but until one has become expert in
the techniques of spiritual service one should offer everything to the spiritual
master, who is completely realized in the process of worshiping the Lord.
When the spiritual master sees that the disciple is advanced in Kåñëa
consciousness, he then engages the disciple in directly worshiping the
Personality of Godhead. A bona fide spiritual master does not use anything for
his personal sense gratification and entrusts to his disciple only as much
material opulence as the disciple can properly offer to the lotus feet of the
Lord. The example may be given that when an ordinary father tries to train his
son in business and other material activities, he entrusts to the son only as
much wealth as the son can intelligently engage in profitable enterprises
without foolishly wasting the father's hard-earned money.
Similarly, the bona fide spiritual master teaches his disciple to worship the
Lord, and an immature disciple must simply deliver everything to the lotus feet
of the guru, just as an immature child does not keep a personal bank account
but rather receives his maintenance from the father, who trains the son to be
responsible. If one cheats oneself by defying the order of a bona fide spiritual
master or Kåñëa, one certainly becomes a nondevotee, or sense enjoyer, and
falls from the spiritual path. Therefore, one should be trained to serve a bona
fide spiritual master and thus become mature in Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 29
zAu™aUSamaANA @AcaAya<
s$ad"AepaAs$aIta naIcavata,
yaAnazAyyaAs$anasTaAnaEr,"
naAitaäU"re" k{(taAÃaila:
çuçrüñamäëa äcäryaà
sadopäséta néca-vat
yäna-çayyäsana-sthänair
näti-düre kåtäïjaliù
SYNONYMS
çuçrüñamäëaù—engaged in serving; äcäryam—the bona fide spiritual master;
sadä—always; upäséta—one should worship; néca-vat—as a humble servant;
yäna—by humbly following behind the guru when he is walking; çayyä—by
taking rest with the spiritual master; äsana—sitting near the guru to render
service; sthänaiù—by standing and humbly waiting upon the guru; na—not;
ati—very; düre—far away; kåta-aïjaliù—with folded hands.
TRANSLATION
While engaged in serving the spiritual master one should remain as a humble
servant, and thus when the guru is walking the servant should humbly walk
behind. When the guru lies down to sleep, the servant should also lie down
nearby, and when the guru has awakened, the servant should sit near him,
massaging his lotus feet and rendering other, similar services. When the guru is
sitting down on his äsana, the servant should stand nearby with folded hands,
awaiting the guru's order. In this way one should always worship the spiritual
master.
TEXT 30
WvaMva{ÔaAe gAuç&ku(lae
vas$aeà"AegAivavaijaRta:
ivaâA s$amaApyatae yaAvaä,"
iba”aä," ˜atamaKaiNx"tama,
evaà-våtto guru-kule
vased bhoga-vivarjitaù
vidyä samäpyate yävad
bibhrad vratam akhaëòitam
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; våttaù—engaged; guru-kule—in the äçrama of the spiritual
master; vaset—he should live; bhoga—sense gratification; vivarjitaù—freed
from; vidyä—Vedic education; samäpyate—is completed; yävat—until;
bibhrat—maintaining; vratam—the vow (of brahmacarya);
akhaëòitam—unbroken.
TRANSLATION
Until the student has completed his Vedic education he should remain
engaged in the äçrama of the spiritual master, should remain completely free of
material sense gratification and should not break his vow of celibacy
[brahmacarya].
PURPORT
This verse describes the upakurväëa-brahmacäré, who enters
gåhastha-äçrama, or family life, after completing his Vedic education. The word
evaà-våttaù indicates that although one may eventually marry and become
prominent in society as an intellectual, politician or businessman, during
student life one must remain without false prestige as a humble servant of the
bona fide spiritual master. The naiñöhiki-brahmacäré, who never marries, is
described in the following verse.
TEXT 31
yaâs$aAE C$nd"s$aAM laAek(ma,
@Ar"Aeºyana, “aöivaí"pama,
gAur"vae ivanyas$aeÚe"hM"
svaADyaAyaATa< ba{h"ä,"˜ata:
yady asau chandasäà lokam
ärokñyan brahma-viñöapam
gurave vinyased dehaà
svädhyäyärthaà båhad-vrataù
SYNONYMS
yadi—if; asau—that student; chandasäm lokam—the Maharloka planet;
ärokñyan—desiring to ascend to; brahma-viñöapam—Brahmaloka;
gurave—unto the guru; vinyaset—he should offer; deham—his body;
sva-adhyäya—of superior Vedic studies; artham—for the purpose;
båhat-vrataù—observing the powerful vow of perpetual celibacy.
TRANSLATION
If the brahmacäré student desires to ascend to the Maharloka or Brahmaloka
planets, then he should completely surrender his activities to the spiritual
master and, observing the powerful vow of perpetual celibacy, dedicate himself
to superior Vedic studies.
PURPORT
One who desires the supreme perfection of life must engage his body, mind
and words in the service of a bona fide spiritual master. One desiring elevation
to superior planets such as Brahmaloka and Maharloka must fully engage in
the spiritual master's service. We can thus imagine the sincerity of purpose and
service required to achieve the Kåñëaloka planet, which lies far beyond the
material universe.
TEXT 32
@¢aAE gAur"AvaAtmaina ca
s$avaRBaUtaeSau maAM par"ma,
@pa{TagDaIç&pas$aIta
“aövacaRsvyak(lmaSa:
agnau guräv ätmani ca
sarva-bhüteñu mäà param
apåthag-dhér upaséta
brahma-varcasvy akalmañaù
SYNONYMS
agnau—in fire; gurau—in the spiritual master; ätmani—in oneself; ca—also;
sarva-bhüteñu—in all living entities; mäm—Me; param—the Supreme;
apåthak-dhéù—without any concept of duality; upäséta—one should worship;
brahma-varcasvé—possessing Vedic enlightenment; akalmañaù—sinless.
TRANSLATION
Thus enlightened in Vedic knowledge by service to the spiritual master,
freed from all sins and duality, one should worship Me as the Supersoul, as I
appear within fire, the spiritual master, one's own self and all living entities.
PURPORT
One becomes glorious and enlightened by faithfully serving a bona fide
spiritual master, who is expert in the Vedic way of life. Thus purified, one
never engages in sinful activities, which immediately extinguish the fire of
spiritual enlightenment; nor does one become foolish and small-minded, trying
to exploit material nature for personal sense gratification. A purified human
being is apåthag-dhé, or without consciousness of duality, because he has been
trained to observe the Supreme Personality of Godhead within all things. Such
sublime consciousness should be systematically taught throughout the world so
that human society will become peaceful and sublime.
TEXT 33
ñINAAM inar"IºaNAs$pazARs$
aMlaApaºvaelanaAid"k(ma,
‘aAiNAnaAe imaTaunaIBaUtaAna,
@gA{h"sTaAe'ƒatastyajaeta,
stréëäà nirékñaëa-sparçasaàläpa-
kñvelanädikam
präëino mithuné-bhütän
agåhastho 'gratas tyajet
SYNONYMS
stréëäm—in relation to women; nirékñaëa—glancing; sparça—touching;
saàläpa—conversing; kñvelana—joking or sporting; ädikam—and so on;
präëinaù—living entities; mithuné-bhütän—engaged in sex; agåha-sthaù—a
sannyäsé, vänaprastha or brahmacäré; agrataù—first of all; tyajet—should give
up.
TRANSLATION
Those who are not married—sannyäsés, vänaprasthas and
brahmacärés—should never associate with women by glancing, touching,
conversing, joking or sporting. Neither should they ever associate with any
living entity engaged in sexual activities.
PURPORT
Präëinaù indicates all living entities, whether birds, bees or human beings.
Among most species of life, sexual intercourse is preceded by diverse mating
rituals. In human society, all types of entertainment (books, music, films) and
all places of amusement (restaurants, shopping centers, resorts) are designed to
stimulate the sexual urge and create an aura of "romance." One who is not
married—a sannyäsé, brahmacäré or vänaprastha—should rigidly avoid
anything related to sex and of course should never see any living entity,
whether bird, insect or human, engaging in the various phases of sexual
intercourse. When a man jokes with a woman, an intimate, sexually-charged
atmosphere is immediately created, and this should also be avoided for those
aspiring to practice celibacy. Even a householder who becomes attached to
such activities will also fall down into the darkness of ignorance.
TEXTS 34-35
zAAEcamaAcamanaM µaAnaM
s$anDyaAepaAistamaRmaAcaRnama,
taITaRs$aevaA japaAe's$pa{zyaA1273
BaºyaAs$amBaASyavajaRnama,
s$avaAR™ama‘ayaul(Ae'yaM
inayama: ku(lanand"na
maà"Ava: s$avaRBaUtaeSau
manaAevaAfk(Ayas$aMyama:
çaucam äcamanaà snänaà
sandhyopästir mamärcanam
tértha-sevä japo 'spåçyäbhakñyäsambhäñya-
varjanam
sarväçrama-prayukto 'yaà
niyamaù kula-nandana
mad-bhävaù sarva-bhüteñu
mano-väk-käya-saàyamaù
SYNONYMS
çaucam—cleanliness; äcamanam—purifying the hands with water;
snänam—bathing; sandhyä—at sunrise, noon and sunset; upästiù—religious
services; mama—of Me; arcanam—worship; tértha-sevä—going to holy places;
japaù—chanting the holy names of the Lord; aspåçya—which are untouchable;
abhakñya—uneatable; asambhäñya—or not to be discussed;
varjanam—avoidance of things; sarva—for all; äçrama—orders of life;
prayuktaù—enjoined; ayam—this; niyamaù—rule; kula-nandana—My dear
Uddhava; mat-bhävaù—perceiving My existence; sarva-bhüteñu—in all living
entities; manaù—of the mind; väk—of words; käya—of the body;
saàyamaù—regulation.
TRANSLATION
My dear Uddhava, general cleanliness, washing the hands, bathing,
performing religious services at sunrise, noon and sunset, worshiping Me,
visiting holy places, chanting japa, avoiding that which is untouchable,
uneatable or not to be discussed, and remembering My existence within all
living entities as the Supersoul—these principles should be followed by all
members of society through regulation of the mind, words and body.
TEXT 36
WvaM ba{h"ä,"˜ataDar"Ae
“aAöNAAe'i¢air"va jvalana,
maà"l(staI˜atapas$aA
d"gDak(maARzAyaAe'mala:
evaà båhad-vrata-dharo
brähmaëo 'gnir iva jvalan
mad-bhaktas tévra-tapasä
dagdha-karmäçayo 'malaù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; båhat-vrata—that great vow of perpetual celibacy;
dharaù—maintaining; brähmaëaù—a brähmaëa; agniù—fire; iva—like;
jvalan—becoming bright; mat-bhaktaù—My devotee; tévra-tapasä—by intense
austerities; dagdha—burned; karma—of fruitive activities; äçayaù—the
propensity or mentality; amalaù—without contamination of material desire.
TRANSLATION
A brähmaëa observing the great vow of celibacy becomes brilliant like fire
and by serious austerity burns to ashes the propensity to perform material
activities. Free from the contamination of material desire, he becomes My
devotee.
PURPORT
The process of liberation is described in this verse. Once when Çréla
Prabhupäda was traveling by airplane, a fellow passenger, who happened to be
a priest, told him that he had seen his disciples and found them "bright-faced."
Çréla Prabhupäda was fond of relating this incident. The spirit soul is more
brilliant than the sun, and as the process of spiritual purification gradually
takes effect, even the external form of a devotee becomes effulgent. The
glowing fire of spiritual knowledge burns to ashes the mentality of sense
gratification, and one naturally becomes austere and disinterested in mundane
enjoyment. Among all austerities, the best is celibacy, by which the shackles of
material life immediately become slackened. One who is amala, free from
material desire, is known as a pure devotee of the Lord. On the paths of jïäna,
karma and yoga the mind retains the concept of personal interest, but on the
path of pure devotion the mind is trained to see only the interests of the
Personality of Godhead. Thus a pure devotee of the Lord is amala, completely
pure.
TEXT 37
@TaAnantar"maAvaeºyana,
yaTaAijaÁaAis$ataAgAma:
gAur"vae d"iºaNAAM d"ÔvaA
µaAyaAÖ"vaRnaumaAeid"ta:
athänantaram ävekñyan
yathä-jijïäsitägamaù
gurave dakñiëäà dattvä
snäyäd gurv-anumoditaù
SYNONYMS
atha—thus; anantaram—after that; ävekñyan—desiring to enter family life;
yathä—properly; jijïäsita—having studied; ägamaù—the Vedic literature;
gurave—to the spiritual master; dakñiëäm—remuneration; dattvä—giving;
snäyät—the brahmacäré should cleanse himself, comb his hair, put on nice
clothes, etc.; guru—by the spiritual master; anumoditaù—permitted.
TRANSLATION
A brahmacäré who has completed his Vedic education and desires to enter
household life should offer proper remuneration to the spiritual master, bathe,
cut his hair, put on proper clothes, and so on. Then, taking permission from the
guru, he should go back to his home.
PURPORT
This verse describes the process called samävartana, or returning to one's
home after finishing Vedic education in the äçrama of the spiritual master.
One who cannot concentrate all of his desires in the devotional service of the
Lord is attracted to householder life, and if this attraction is not regulated, one
will fall down. Being covered by the ignorance of fruitive activities and mental
speculation, a living entity seeks enjoyment outside the devotional service of
the Supreme Lord and becomes a nondevotee. One who takes to family life
must rigidly follow the Vedic rules and regulations in order to avoid the
collapse of his spiritual determination. One who enjoys intimate sense
gratification with women must become duplicitous in his dealings with others
and consequently falls down from the platform of simple, pure life. When the
mind is disturbed by lust, one begins to resent the principle of submission to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His pure devotee, and the dark
clouds of one's offensive mentality completely cover the light of spiritual
knowledge. One should dovetail his propensity to love someone by serving the
lotus feet of a pure devotee. As stated in Vedic literature, "One who worships
Govinda, Lord Kåñëa, but does not worship His devotees is not to be
considered an advanced Vaiñëava; rather, he is to be considered a proud
hypocrite."
TEXT 38
gA{hM" vanaM vaAepaivazAeta,
‘a˜ajaeã"A iã"jaAeÔama:
@A™amaAd"A™amaM gAcCe$na,
naAnyaTaAmatpar"êre"ta,
gåhaà vanaà vopaviçet
pravrajed vä dvijottamaù
äçramäd äçramaà gacchen
nänyathämat-paraç caret
SYNONYMS
gåham—the family home; vanam—the forest; vä—either; upaviçet—one
should enter; pravrajet—one should renounce; vä—or; dvija-uttamaù—a
brähmaëa; äçramät—from one authorized status of life; äçramam—to another
authorized status; gacchet—one should go; na—not; anyathä—otherwise;
amat-paraù—one who is not surrendered to Me; caret—should act.
TRANSLATION
A brahmacäré desiring to fulfill his material desires should live at home with
his family, and a householder who is eager to purify his consciousness should
enter the forest, whereas a purified brähmaëa should accept the renounced
order of life. One who is not surrendered to Me should move progressively from
one äçrama to another, never acting otherwise.
PURPORT
Those who are not surrendered devotees of the Lord must rigidly observe
the regulations governing one's authorized social status. There are four social
divisions of life, namely brahmacarya, gåhastha, vänaprastha and sannyäsa. One
who wants to fulfill material desires should become an ordinary householder
(gåhastha), establish a comfortable residence and maintain his family. One
desiring to accelerate the process of purification may give up his home and
business and live in a sacred place with his wife, as indicated here by the word
vanam, or "forest." There are many sacred forests in India meant for this
purpose, such as Våndävana and Mäyäpur. The word dvijottama indicates the
brähmaëas. Brähmaëas, kñatriyas and vaiçyas are all dvija, or initiated in the
Gäyatré mantra, but the brähmaëa is dvijottama, or the highest among those
who have received second birth by spiritual initiation. It is recommended that
a purified brähmaëa take to the renounced order of life (sannyäsa), giving up
further contact with his so-called wife. The brähmaëa is specifically mentioned
here, since kñatriyas and vaiçyas are not to take the renounced order of life.
Even so, there are many stories in the Bhägavatam wherein great kings retire
with their aristocratic wives to the forest to practice the austerities of
vänaprastha and thus accelerate the process of purification. The brähmaëas,
however, may directly accept the renounced order of life.
The words äçramäd äçramaà gacchet indicate that one may progressively
move from brahmacäré life to gåhastha life to vänaprastha life and then to
sannyäsa. The words äçramäd äçramam emphasize that one should never
remain without an authorized social status, nor should one go backward, falling
down from a higher position. Those who are not surrendered devotees of the
Lord must rigidly observe such injunctions, for otherwise they will quickly
become degraded, and their sins will place them outside the bounds of
authorized human civilization.
Lord Kåñëa emphasizes here that a nondevotee must rigidly observe the
rituals and regulations of Vedic social divisions, whereas the Lord's pure
devotee, engaged twenty-four hours a day in Lord Kåñëa's mission, is
transcendental to such divisions. If, however, one performs illicit activities on
the strength of being transcendental to Vedic social divisions, one is revealed
to be a materialistic neophyte and not an advanced devotee of the Lord. An
advanced devotee, who remains aloof from material sense gratification, is not
bound by the Vedic social divisions; thus even a householder may live very
austerely, traveling and preaching Kåñëa consciousness away from home, and
even a sannyäsé may sometimes engage women in the devotional service of
Lord Kåñëa. The most advanced devotees cannot be restricted by the rituals
and regulations of the varëäçrama system, and they move freely around the
world distributing love of Godhead. Mat-para indicates a pure devotee of the
Lord who always keeps the Lord fixed in his heart and consciousness. One who
falls down to become a victim of sense gratification is not fully established on
the platform of mat-para and should rigidly observe the social divisions and
regulations to remain steady on the platform of pious human life.
TEXT 39
gA{h"ATaI= s$aä{"zAI%M BaAyaARma,
oã"he"d"jaugAuips$ataAma,
yavaIyas$aI%M tau vayas$aA
yaM s$avaNAARmanau ‚(maAta,
gåhärthé sadåçéà bhäryäm
udvahed ajugupsitäm
yavéyaséà tu vayasä
yaà sa-varëäm anu kramät
SYNONYMS
gåha—household; arthé—one who desires; sadåçém—possessing similar
characteristics; bhäryäm—a wife; udvahet—one should marry;
ajugupsitäm—beyond reproach; yavéyasém—younger; tu—indeed; vayasä—by
age; yäm—another wife; sa-varëäm—the first wife who is of the same caste;
anu—after; kramät—in succession.
TRANSLATION
One who desires to establish family life should marry a wife of his own caste,
who is beyond reproach and younger in age. If one desires to accept many wives
he must marry them after the first marriage, and each wife should be of a
successively lower caste.
PURPORT
As stated in the Vedic literature,
tisro varëänupürvyeëa
dve tathaikä yathä-kramam
brähmaëa-kñatriya-viçäà
bhäryäù sväù çüdra-janmanaù
The purport of this verse is that one's first wife must always be sadåçém, or
similar to oneself. In other words, an intellectual man should marry an
intellectual wife, a heroic man should marry a heroic wife, a business minded
man should marry a woman who can encourage him in such activities, and a
çüdra should marry a less intelligent woman. The wife must be beyond
reproach in terms of her background and character and should always be
younger than oneself, ideally five to ten years younger. If one desires to marry
a second wife, then, as stated in this verse by the word varëänupürvyeëa and in
the verse spoken by Lord Kåñëa by the word anukramät, one must wait until
the first marriage is established and then select a second wife from the
next-lower caste. If one marries a third time the wife must be, again, from the
next-lower caste. For example, a brähmaëa's first wife will be a brähmaëé, his
second wife will be from the kñatriya community, his third wife from the vaiçya
community and fourth wife from the çüdra community. A kñatriya may first
marry a kñatriya lady and then vaiçya and çüdra ladies. A vaiçya can accept
wives from two classes, and a çüdra will accept a wife only from the çüdra class.
By this progression of marriages there will be relative peace in the family.
These Vedic marriage injunctions, as mentioned in the previous verse, are
especially for those who are not pure devotees of the Lord.
TEXT 40
wjyaADyayanad"AnaAina
s$avaeRSaAM ca iã"janmanaAma,
‘aitaƒah"Ae'DyaApanaM ca
“aAöNAsyaEva yaAjanama,
ijyädhyayana-dänäni
sarveñäà ca dvi-janmanäm
pratigraho 'dhyäpanaà ca
brähmaëasyaiva yäjanam
SYNONYMS
ijyä—sacrifice; adhyayana—Vedic study; dänäni—charity; sarveñäm—of all;
ca—also; dvi-janmanäm—those who are twice-born; pratigrahaù—acceptance
of charity; adhyäpanam—teaching Vedic knowledge; ca—also;
brähmaëasya—of the brähmaëa; eva—only; yäjanam—performing sacrifices
for others.
TRANSLATION
All twice-born men—brähmaëas, kñatriyas and vaiçyas—must perform
sacrifice, study the Vedic literature and give charity. Only the brähmaëas,
however, accept charity, teach the Vedic knowledge and perform sacrifice on
behalf of others.
PURPORT
All civilized men must participate in sacrificial performances, give charity
and study the Vedic literature. The best of the twice-born, namely the
brähmaëas, are specifically empowered to lead sacrificial performances on
behalf of all members of society, teach everyone Vedic knowledge and receive
everyone's charity. Without the assistance or participation of qualified
brähmaëas, the lower classes cannot properly study the Vedic literature,
perform sacrifices or give in charity, because they do not have the required
intelligence to perfectly execute such functions. When kñatriyas and vaiçyas
take shelter of bona fide brähmaëas, they are able to properly execute their
respective duties, and society functions smoothly and efficiently.
TEXT 41
‘aitaƒahM" manyamaAnas$a,
tapastaejaAeyazAAenaud"ma,
@nyaAByaAmaeva jaIvaeta
izAlaEvaAR d"AeSaä{"l(yaAe:
pratigrahaà manyamänas
tapas-tejo-yaço-nudam
anyäbhyäm eva jéveta
çilair vä doña-dåk tayoù
SYNONYMS
pratigraham—accepting charity; manyamänaù—considering; tapaù—of one's
austerity; tejaù—spiritual influence; yaçaù—and fame; nudam—destruction;
anyäbhyäm—by the other two (teaching Vedic knowledge and performing
sacrifice); eva—indeed; jéveta—a brähmaëa should live; çilaiù—by collecting
rejected grains in the field; vä—or; doña—the discrepancy; dåk—seeing;
tayoù—of those two.
TRANSLATION
A brähmaëa who considers that accepting charity from others will destroy
his austerity, spiritual influence and fame should maintain himself by the other
two brahminical occupations, namely teaching Vedic knowledge and performing
sacrifice. If the brähmaëa considers that those two occupations also compromise
his spiritual position, then he should collect rejected grains in agricultural fields
and live without any dependence on others.
PURPORT
A pure devotee of the Lord should always remember that the Supreme
Personality of Godhead will personally take care of him. As the Lord states in
Bhagavad-gétä (9.22):
ananyäç cintayanto mäà
ye janäù paryupäsate
teñäà nityäbhiyuktänäà
yoga-kñemaà vahämy aham
"But those who worship Me with devotion, meditating on My transcendental
form—to them I carry what they lack and preserve what they have."
A brähmaëa should not become a professional beggar for his personal
maintenance. In India there are many so-called brähmaëas who sit at the gates
of important temples and beg from everyone who comes and goes. If someone
does not give a donation they become angry and chase that person. Similarly,
in America there are many big preachers who collect huge amounts of money
by begging on television and radio. If a brähmaëa or Vaiñëava considers that
being a professional beggar is weakening his austerity, destroying his spiritual
influence and giving him a bad reputation, then he should give up that
process. One may beg everyone to contribute to the cause of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, but one will be diminished in austerity, influence and
reputation by begging for one's personal livelihood. A brähmaëa may then take
up the task of teaching Vedic knowledge and performing sacrifice. But even
such occupations do not bring one to the highest platform of trust in God. A
brähmaëa who teaches as a means of livelihood may often be curbed in his
teaching, and one who performs sacrifice may be manipulated by materialistic
worshipers. In this way, a brähmaëa may be placed in an embarrassing and
compromised position. Therefore a high-class brähmaëa or Vaiñëava ultimately
will depend completely on the mercy of the Lord for his maintenance. The
Lord promises to maintain His devotee, and an advanced Vaiñëava never
doubts the word of the Lord.
TEXT 42
“aAöNAsya ih" de"h"Ae'yaM
ºau"‰"k(AmaAya naeSyatae
k{(cC)$Aya tapas$ae caeh"
‘aetyaAnantas$auKaAya ca
brähmaëasya hi deho 'yaà
kñudra-kämäya neñyate
kåcchräya tapase ceha
pretyänanta-sukhäya ca
SYNONYMS
brähmaëasya—of a brähmaëa; hi—certainly; dehaù—body; ayam—this;
kñudra—insignificant; kämäya—for sense gratification; na—not; iñyate—is
meant; kåcchräya—for difficult; tapase—austerities; ca—also; iha—in this
world; pretya—after death; ananta—unlimited; sukhäya—happiness; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
The body of a brähmaëa is not intended to enjoy insignificant material sense
gratification; rather, by accepting difficult austerities in his life, a brähmaëa
will enjoy unlimited happiness after death.
PURPORT
One may ask why a brähmaëa should voluntarily accept inconvenience in
keeping his body and soul together. In this verse the Lord explains that
advanced human life is meant for serious austerity and not for insignificant
sense gratification. By spiritual advancement one is fixed in transcendental
bliss on the spiritual platform and gives up useless absorption in the temporary
material body. One should remain detached from the material body, accepting
only the bare necessities of life. The brähmaëas, by accepting a troublesome
form of livelihood, never forget that the material body is destined to grow old,
become diseased and die in misery. Thus remaining alert and transcendental,
an advanced brähmaëa, at the end of this life, goes back home, back to
Godhead, where he enjoys unlimited spiritual bliss. Without such higher
awareness, how can one be considered a qualified brähmaëa?
Those devotees engaged twenty-four hours a day in spreading the mission of
Lord Kåñëa are beyond the platform of renunciation or sense gratification
because they engage everything in Lord Kåñëa's service. A pure devotee of the
Lord eats only to get strength for serving the Lord and does not accept either
sumptuous or meager food simply for the body's sake. However, everything may
be accepted for the Lord, even sumptuous meals. A brähmaëa who is not
working day and night to spread the glories of the Lord should feel
embarrassed to eat sumptuously for his personal sense gratification, but a
renounced Vaiñëava preacher may accept invitations from all classes of pious
people, and just to bless their homes he will eat the opulent foods they offer to
him. Similarly, he sometimes eats sumptuously to get strength for defeating
atheists and impersonalists. As stated in Vedic literature, one cannot be a
highly qualified brähmaëa unless one becomes a devotee of the Lord. And
among the devotees, those who are preaching Kåñëa consciousness are the best,
as confirmed by the Lord Himself in the Eighteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä.
TEXT 43
izAlaAeHC$va{ÔyaA pair"tauí"icaÔaAe
Dama< mah"AntaM ivar"jaM jauSaANA:
mayyaipaRtaAtmaA gA{h" Wva itaï"na,
naAita‘as$al(: s$amaupaEita zAAintama,
çiloïcha-våttyä parituñöa-citto
dharmaà mahäntaà virajaà juñäëaù
mayy arpitätmä gåha eva tiñöhan
näti-prasaktaù samupaiti çäntim
SYNONYMS
çila-uïcha—of gleaning grains; våttyä—by the occupation; parituñöa—fully
satisfied; cittaù—whose consciousness; dharmam—religious principles;
mahäntam—magnanimous and hospitable; virajam—purified of material
desire; juñäëaù—cultivating; mayi—in Me; arpita—dedicated; ätmä—whose
mind; gåhe—at home; eva—even; tiñöhan—remaining; na—not; ati—very;
prasaktaù—attached; samupaiti—achieves; çäntim—liberation.
TRANSLATION
A brähmaëa householder should remain satisfied in mind by gleaning
rejected grains from agricultural fields and marketplaces. Keeping himself free
of personal desire, he should practice magnanimous religious principles, with
consciousness absorbed in Me. In this way a brähmaëa may stay at home as a
householder without very much attachment and thus achieve liberation.
PURPORT
Mahäntam refers to magnanimous religious principles such as very
hospitably receiving guests, even those who are uninvited and unexpected.
Householders must always be magnanimous and charitable to others, being
alert to curb unnecessary affection and attachment in family life. In the past,
very renounced brähmaëa householders would collect grains that had fallen on
the ground in the marketplace or those that had been left behind in the fields
after harvesting. The most important item here is mayy arpitätmä, or fixing the
mind in Lord Kåñëa. Despite his material situation, anyone who constantly
meditates upon the Lord can become a liberated soul. As stated in
Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu (1.2.187),
éhä yasya harer däsye
karmaëä manasä girä
nikhiläsv api avasthäsu
jévan-muktaù sa ucyate
"A person acting in Kåñëa consciousness [or, in other words, in the service of
Kåñëa] with his body, mind, intelligence and words is a liberated person, even
within the material world, although he may be engaged in many so-called
material activities."
TEXT 44
s$amauÜ"r"inta yae iva‘aM
s$aId"ntaM matpar"AyaNAma,
taAnauÜ"ir"Syae na icar"Aä,"
@Apaà"YaAe naAEir"vaANARvaAta,
samuddharanti ye vipraà
sédantaà mat-paräyaëam
tän uddhariñye na ciräd
äpadbhyo naur ivärëavät
SYNONYMS
samuddharanti—uplift; ye—those who; vipram—a brähmaëa or devotee;
sédantam—suffering (from poverty); mat-paräyaëam—surrendered to Me;
tän—those who have uplifted; uddhariñye—I will uplift; na cirät—in the near
future; äpadbhyaù—from all miseries; nauù—a boat; iva—like; arëavät—from
the ocean.
TRANSLATION
Just as a ship rescues those who have fallen into the ocean, similarly, I very
quickly rescue from all calamities those persons who uplift brähmaëas and
devotees suffering in a poverty-stricken condition.
PURPORT
The Lord has described how brähmaëas and devotees achieve the
perfection of life, and now a similar perfection is offered to those who utilize
their materialistic wealth to relieve the poverty-stricken condition of devotees
and brähmaëas. Although one may neglect the devotional service of the Lord
to pursue a material life of sense gratification, one can rectify one's position by
dedicating one's hard-earned money to the service of the Lord. Seeing the
difficult austerities accepted by saintly persons, a pious person should make
arrangements for their comfort. Just as a boat saves hopeless people who have
fallen into the ocean, similarly, the Lord uplifts persons who have hopelessly
fallen into the ocean of material attachment if they have been charitable to
the brähmaëas and devotees.
TEXT 45
s$avaAR: s$amauÜ"re"‰"AjaA
ipataeva vyas$anaAt‘ajaA:
@AtmaAnamaAtmanaA DaIr"Ae
yaTaA gAjapaitagARjaAna,
sarväù samuddhared räjä
piteva vyasanät prajäù
ätmänam ätmanä dhéro
yathä gaja-patir gajän
SYNONYMS
sarväù—all; samuddharet—must uplift; räjä—the king; pitä—a father;
iva—like; vyasanät—from difficulties; prajäù—the citizens;
ätmänam—himself; ätmana—by himself; dhéraù—fearless; yathä—just as;
gaja-patiù—a bull elephant; gajän—the other elephants.
TRANSLATION
Just as the chief bull elephant protects all other elephants in his herd and
defends himself as well, similarly, a fearless king, just like a father, must save all
of the citizens from difficulty and also protect himself.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa, having concluded His discussion of brahminical duties, now
describes the character and activities of a king. Protecting all of the citizens
from difficulty is an essential duty for the king.
TEXT 46
WvaMivaDaAe nar"paitar,"
ivamaAnaenaAkR(vacaRs$aA
ivaDaUyaeh"AzAuBaM k{(tµama,
wn‰e"NA s$ah" maAed"tae
evaà-vidho nara-patir
vimänenärka-varcasä
vidhüyehäçubhaà kåtsnam
indreëa saha modate
SYNONYMS
evam-vidhaù—thus (protecting himself and the citizens); nara-patiù—the king;
vimänena—with an airplane; arka-varcasä—as brilliant as the sun;
vidhüya—removing; iha—on the earth; açubham—sins; kåtsnam—all;
indreëa—Lord Indra; saha—with; modate—he enjoys.
TRANSLATION
An earthly king who protects himself and all citizens by removing all sins
from his kingdom will certainly enjoy with Lord Indra in airplanes as brilliant
as the sun.
TEXT 47
s$aId"na, iva‘aAe vaiNAgva{ÔyaA
paNyaEre"vaApadM" tare"ta,
KaËe"na vaApad"A‚(AntaAe
na ìva{ÔyaA k(TaÂana
sédan vipro vaëig-våttyä
paëyair eväpadaà taret
khaògena väpadäkränto
na çva-våttyä kathaïcana
SYNONYMS
sédan—suffering; vipraù—a brähmaëa; vaëik—of a merchant; våttyä—by the
occupation; paëyaiù—by doing business; eva—indeed; äpadam—suffering;
taret—should overcome; khaògena—with sword; vä—or; äpadä—by suffering;
äkräntaù—afflicted; na—not; çva—of the dog; våttyä—by the occupation;
kathaïcana—by any means.
TRANSLATION
If a brähmaëa cannot support himself through his regular duties and is thus
suffering, he may adopt the occupation of a merchant and overcome his
destitute condition by buying and selling material things. If he continues to
suffer extreme poverty even as a merchant, then he may adopt the occupation of
a kñatriya, taking sword in hand. But he cannot in any circumstances become
like a dog, accepting an ordinary master.
PURPORT
Çva-våttyä, or "a dog's profession," refers to the çüdras, who cannot live
without accepting a master. A destitute brähmaëa who is suffering intolerably
may become a merchant and then a kñatriya but may never take the position of
a çüdra by working in a company or accepting a master. Although a kñatriya is
ordinarily considered more elevated than a vaiçya, the Lord here recommends
that distressed brähmaëas first accept the vaiçya occupation, since it is not
violent.
TEXT 48
vaEzyava{ÔyaA tau r"AjanyaAe
jaIvaenma{gAyayaApaid"
care"ã"A iva‘aè&paeNA
na ìva{ÔyaA k(TaÂana
vaiçya-våttyä tu räjanyo
jéven mågayayäpadi
cared vä vipra-rüpeëa
na çva-våttyä kathaïcana
SYNONYMS
vaiçya—of the mercantile class; våttyä—by the occupation; tu—indeed;
räjanyaù—a king; jévet—may maintain himself; mågayayä—by hunting;
äpadi—in an emergency or disastrous situation; caret—may act; vä—or;
vipra-rüpeëa—in the form of a brähmaëa; na—never; çva—of the dog;
våttyä—by the profession; kathaïcana—in any circumstance.
TRANSLATION
A king or other member of the royal order who cannot maintain himself by
his normal occupation may act as a vaiçya, may live by hunting or may act as a
brähmaëa by teaching others Vedic knowledge. But he may not under any
circumstances adopt the profession of a çüdra.
TEXT 49
zAU#‰"va{iÔaM BajaeãE"zya:
zAU#‰": k(Aç&k(q%i‚(yaAma,
k{(cC)$Anmaul(Ae na gA÷eRNA
va{iÔaM ilaps$aeta k(maRNAA
çüdra-våttià bhajed vaiçyaù
çüdraù käru-kaöa-kriyäm
kåcchrän mukto na garhyeëa
våttià lipseta karmaëä
SYNONYMS
çüdra—of the çüdras; våttim—occupation; bhajet—may accept; vaiçyaù—a
vaiçya; çüdraù—a çüdra; käru—of the artisan; kaöa—straw baskets and mats;
kriyäm—making; kåcchrät—from the difficult situation; muktaù—freed;
na—not; garhyeëa—by that which is inferior; våttim—livelihood; lipseta—one
should desire; karmaëä—by work.
TRANSLATION
A vaiçya, or mercantile man, who cannot maintain himself may adopt the
occupation of a çüdra, snd a çüdra who cannot find a master can engage in
simple activities like making baskets and mats of straw. However, all members
of society who have adopted inferior occupations in emergency situations must
give up those substitute occupations when the difficulties have passed.
TEXT 50
vaed"ADyaAyasvaDaAsvaAh"Abalya
ªaAâEyaRTaAed"yama,
de"vaiSaRipata{BaUtaAina
maåU"paANyanvahM" yajaeta,
vedädhyäya-svadhä-svähäbaly-
annädyair yathodayam
devarñi-pitå-bhütäni
mad-rüpäëy anv-ahaà yajet
SYNONYMS
veda-adhyäya—by study of Vedic knowledge; svadhä—by offering the mantra
svadhä; svähä-by offering the mantra svähä; bali-by token offerings of food;
anna-ädyaiù—by offering grains, water, etc.; yathä—according to;
udayam—one's prosperity; deva—the demigods; åñi—sages; pitå—the
forefathers; bhütäni—and all living entities; mat-rüpäëi—manifestations of
My potency; anu-aham—daily; yajet—one should worship.
TRANSLATION
One in the gåhastha order of life should daily worship the sages by Vedic
study, the forefathers by offering the mantra svadhä, the demigods by chanting
svähä, all living entities by offering shares of one's meals, and human beings by
offering grains and water. Thus considering the demigods, sages, forefathers,
living entities and human beings to be manifestations of My potency, one
should daily perform these five sacrifices.
PURPORT
The Lord again discusses the duties of those in the household order of life.
Obviously, the five ritualistic daily sacrifices mentioned here are meant for
those who are not pure devotees of the Lord and who thus have to counteract
their exploitation of material nature by the abovementioned sacrifices. The
International Society for Krishna Consciousness (ISKCON) is training
householders, sannyäsés, brahmacärés and vänaprasthas to engage twenty-four
hours a day in the loving service of the Lord. Those who are full-time
missionary workers in ISKCON have no further obligations or sacrifices to
perform, as confirmed in the Eleventh Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.5.41):
devarñi-bhütäpta-nåëäà pitèëäà
na kiìkaro näyam åëé ca räjan
sarvätmanä yaù çaraëaà çaraëyaà
gato mukundaà parihåtya kartam
"Anyone who has taken shelter at the lotus feet of Mukunda, the giver of
liberation, giving up all kinds of obligation, and has taken to the path in all
seriousness, owes neither duties nor obligations to the demigods, sages, general
living entities, family members, humankind or forefathers."
TEXT 51
yaä{"cC$yaAepapaªaena
zAuflaenaAepaAijaRtaena vaA
DanaenaApaIx"yana, Ba{tyaAna,
nyaAyaenaEvaAh"re"t‚(taUna,
yadåcchayopapannena
çuklenopärjitena vä
dhanenäpéòayan bhåtyän
nyäyenaiväharet kratün
SYNONYMS
yadåcchayä—without endeavor; upapannena—which is acquired; çuklena—by
one's honest occupation; upärjitena—acquired; vä—or; dhanena—with money;
apéòayan—not subjecting to discomfort; bhåtyän—dependents;
nyäyena—properly; eva—indeed; äharet—one should perform;
kratün—sacrifices and other religious ceremonies.
TRANSLATION
A householder should comfortably maintain his dependents either with
money that comes of its own accord or with that gathered by honest execution
of one's duties. According to one's means, one should perform sacrifices and
other religious ceremonies.
PURPORT
The Lord here describes the religious duties that are to be performed as far
as possible, according to one's means, and when there is opportunity.
TEXT 52
ku(q%]mbaeSau na s$aÀaeta
na ‘amaAâetku(q%]mbyaipa
ivapaiêªaìrM" pazyaeä,"
@ä{"í"maipa ä{"í"vata,
kuöumbeñu na sajjeta
na pramädyet kuöumby api
vipaçcin naçvaraà paçyed
adåñöam api dåñöa-vat
SYNONYMS
kuöumbeñu—to the family members; na—not; sajjeta—one should be attached;
na—not; pramädyet—should become crazy; kuöumbé—having many dependent
family members; api—although; vipaçcit—a wise person;
naçvaram—temporary; paçyet—should see; adåñöam—future rewards such as
residence in heaven; api—indeed; dåñöa-vat—just like that which is already
experienced.
TRANSLATION
A householder taking care of many dependent family members should not
become materially attached to them, nor should he become mentally
unbalanced, considering himself to be the lord. An intelligent householder
should see that all possible future happiness, just like that which he has already
experienced, is temporary.
PURPORT
A family man often acts like a lord, protecting his wife, ordering his
children, maintaining servants, grandchildren, domestic animals, and so forth.
The words na pramädyet kuöumby api indicate that although one acts like a
little lord, surrounded by his family, servants and friends, one should not,
through false pride, become mentally unbalanced, considering oneself to be
the actual lord. The word vipaçcit indicates that one should remain sober and
intelligent, never forgetting oneself to be the eternal servant of the Supreme
Lord.
Householders of the upper, middle and lower classes become attached to
different types of sense gratification. In any economic or social class, however,
one should remember that all material enjoyment, either here or in the next
life, is temporary and ultimately useless. A responsible householder should
guide his family members and other dependents back home, back to Godhead,
for an eternal life of bliss and knowledge. One should not become a false and
puffed-up lord for a brief span of time, for then one will remain bound up,
along with his family members, in the cycle of repeated birth and death.
TEXT 53
pau‡ad"Ar"AæabanDaUnaAM
s$aËÿma: paAnTas$aËÿma:
@naude"hM" ivayantyaetae
sva«aAe ina‰"AnaugAAe yaTaA
putra-däräpta-bandhünäà
saìgamaù päntha-saìgamaù
anu-dehaà viyanty ete
svapno nidränugo yathä
SYNONYMS
putra—of children; dära—wife; äpta—relatives; bandhünäm—and friends;
saìgamaù—the association, living together; päntha—of travelers;
saìgamaù—association; anu-deham—with each change of body; viyanti—they
are separated; ete—all these; svapnaù—a dream; nidrä—in sleep;
anugaù—occurring; yathä—just as.
TRANSLATION
The association of children, wife, relatives and friends is just like the brief
meeting of travelers. With each change of body one is separated from all such
associates, just as one loses the objects one possesses in a dream when the dream
is over.
PURPORT
Päntha-saìgama indicates the momentary association of travelers at hotels,
restaurants, tourist spots or, in more traditional cultures, freshwater wells and
walking paths. We are now associated with many relatives, friends and
well-wishers, but as soon as we change our material body we will immediately
be separated from all these associates, just as upon awakening we are
immediately separated from the imaginary situation of a dream. One becomes
attached to the sense gratification of one's dream, and similarly, under the
spell of the illusory concepts of "I" and "mine," we become attached to so-called
relatives and friends who gratify our sense of false ego. Unfortunately, such
fleeting egoistic association covers our real knowledge of the self and the
Supreme, and we remain hovering in material illusion, futilely endeavoring for
permanent sense gratification. One who remains attached to the bodily
concept of family and friends cannot possibly give up the false egoism of "I"
and "mine," or "I am everything and everything is mine."
Without giving up material sense gratification we cannot become steady on
the transcendental platform of devotional service, and therefore we cannot
relish the actual flavor of eternal happiness. Unless one becomes a pure
devotee of the Lord, accepting Lord Kåñëa as one's only friend, one cannot
give up the hankering for temporary and superficial material relationships. A
traveler far away from his home and loved ones may strike up superficial
conversations with other travelers, but such relationships have no ultimate
meaning. One should therefore revive one's lost relationship with Lord Kåñëa.
We are constitutionally part and parcel of Lord Kåñëa, who is the reservoir of
all spiritual pleasure, and our original relationship with Him is full of love and
happiness. But because of our desire to enjoy independently from Him, we fall
down into the confusing, meaningless network of material relationships
created by mäyä. An intelligent person realizes there is no actual pleasure or
satisfaction for the soul on either this planet or any other material planet.
Therefore, like a weary traveler exhausted from his journey, he should go back
home, back to Godhead, for eternal peace as the faithful servant of Lord Çré
Kåñëa.
TEXT 54
wtTaM pair"ma{zAnmaul(Ae
gA{he"SvaitaiTavaã"s$ana,
na gA{hE"r"naubaDyaeta
inamaRmaAe inar"h"x.~k{(ta:
itthaà parimåçan mukto
gåheñv atithi-vad vasan
na gåhair anubadhyeta
nirmamo nirahaìkåtaù
SYNONYMS
ittham—thus; parimåçan—deeply considering; muktaù—a liberated soul;
gåheñu—at home; atithi-vat—just like a guest; vasan—living; na—not;
gåhaiù—by the domestic situation; anubadhyeta—should become bound;
nirmamaù—without any sense of personal proprietorship;
nirahaìkåtaù—without false ego.
TRANSLATION
Deeply considering the actual situation, a liberated soul should live at home
just like a guest, without any sense of proprietorship or false ego. In this way he
will not be bound or entangled by domestic affairs.
PURPORT
The word mukta, or "liberated," refers to one freed from all material
attachment. In this status, called mukta-saìga, one no longer identifies oneself
as a permanent resident of the material world. This liberated status may be
attained even by one situated in family life. The only requirement is that one
should take up a serious program of kåñëa-saìkértana, which includes constant
chanting of the holy names of the Lord, worship of the Deity and participation
in the Kåñëa consciousness movement. Without a serious program of
kåñëa-saìkértana it is very difficult to give up the iron shackles of attachment
to women and the byproducts of such attachment.
TEXT 55
k(maRiBagA{Rh"maeDaIyaEr,"
wî"A maAmaeva Bail(maAna,
itaïe"ã"naM vaAepaivazAeta,
‘ajaAvaAna, vaA pair"˜ajaeta,
karmabhir gåha-medhéyair
iñövä mäm eva bhaktimän
tiñöhed vanaà vopaviçet
prajävän vä parivrajet
SYNONYMS
karmabhiù—by activities; gåha-medhéyaiù—suitable for family life;
iñövä—worshiping; mäm—Me; eva—indeed; bhakti-män—being a devotee;
tiñöhet—one may remain at home; vanam—the forest; vä—or; upaviçet—may
enter; prajä-vän—having responsible children; vä—or; parivrajet—may take
sannyäsa.
TRANSLATION
A householder devotee who worships Me by execution of his family duties
may remain at home, go to a holy place or, if he has a responsible son, take
sannyäsa.
PURPORT
This verse describes the three alternatives for a householder. He may
continue at home, or he may take vänaprastha, which involves going to a
sacred place with one's wife. Or if he has a responsible son to take over his
family duties, he may take sannyäsa, the renounced order, for a definitive
solution to the problems of life. In all three äçramas, ultimate success depends
on sincere surrender to the Supreme Lord; therefore, the most important
qualification one can have is Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 56
yastvaAs$al(maitagAeR$he"
pau‡aivaÔaESaNAAtaur":
ñENA: k{(paNADaImaURX#Ae
mamaAh"imaita baDyatae
yas tv äsakta-matir gehe
putra-vittaiñaëäturaù
straiëaù kåpaëa-dhér müòho
mamäham iti badhyate
SYNONYMS
yaù—one who; tu—however; äsakta—attached; matiù—whose consciousness;
gehe—to his home; putra—for children; vitta—and money; eñaëa—by ardent
desire; äturaù—disturbed; straiëaù—lusty to enjoy women; kåpaëa—miserly;
dhéù—whose mentality; müòhaù—unintelligent; mama—everything is mine;
aham—I am everything; iti—thus thinking; badhyate—is bound.
TRANSLATION
But a householder whose mind is attached to his home and who is thus
disturbed by ardent desires to enjoy his money and children, who is lusty after
women, who is possessed of a miserly mentality and who unintelligently thinks,
"Everything is mine and I am everything," is certainly bound in illusion.
PURPORT
Although one may try by various analytical or psychological processes to
detach the mind from illusory family attachment, one will inevitably be drawn
back into the network of material attachment unless the heart is purified by
Kåñëa consciousness. A miserly householder thinks only of his own family or
community, without mercy for outsiders. Being egoistic, lusty, attached and
always disturbed by ardent desires to enjoy money and children, a materialistic
householder is hopelessly bound in a web of anxiety.
TEXT 57
@h"Ae mae ipatar"AE va{Ü"AE
BaAyaAR baAlaAtmajaAtmajaA:
@naATaA maAma{tae d"InaA:
k(TaM jaIvainta äu":iKataA:
aho me pitarau våddhau
bhäryä bälätmajätmajäù
anäthä mäm åte dénäù
kathaà jévanti duùkhitäù
SYNONYMS
aho—alas; me—my; pitarau—parents; våddhau—elderly; bhäryä—wife;
bäla-ätma-jä—having a mere infant in her arms; ätmä-jäù—and my other
young children; anäthäù—with no one to protect them; mäm—me;
åte—without; dénäù—wretched; katham—how in the world; jévanti—can they
live; duùkhitäù—suffering greatly.
TRANSLATION
"O my poor elderly parents, and my wife with a mere infant in her arms, and
my other young children! Without me they have absolutely no one to protect
them and will suffer unbearably. How can my poor relatives possibly live
without me?"
TEXT 58
WvaM gA{h"AzAyaAiºaæaô$
d"yaAe maUX#DaIr"yama,
@ta{æastaAnanauDyaAyana,
ma{taAe'nDaM ivazAtae tama:
evaà gåhäçayäkñiptahådayo
müòha-dhér ayam
atåptas tän anudhyäyan
måto 'ndhaà viçate tamaù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; gåha—in his domestic situation; äçaya—by intense desire;
äkñipta—overwhelmed; hådayaù—his heart; müòha—unintelligent;
dhéù—whose point of view; ayam—this person; atåptaù—unsatisfied;
tän—them (family members); anudhyäyan—constantly thinking of;
måtaù—he dies; andham—blindness; viçate—enters; tamaù—darkness.
TRANSLATION
Thus, because of his foolish mentality, a householder whose heart is
overwhelmed by family attachment is never satisfied. Constantly meditating on
his relatives, he dies and enters into the darkness of ignorance.
PURPORT
Andhaà viçate tamaù indicates that in his next life an attached householder
will certainly be degraded because of his primitive mentality of bodily
attachment, which is called müòha-dhé. In other words, after enjoying the
sense gratification of considering oneself the center of everything, one enters
into a lower species of life. Somehow or other, we must fix our minds on Lord
Kåñëa and come out of the darkness of ignorance to our real life in Kåñëa
consciousness.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Eleventh Canto, Seventeenth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Lord Kåñëa's Description of the Varëäçrama
System."
18. Description of Varëäçrama-dharma
As related in this chapter, Lord Çré Kåñëa explained to Uddhava the duties
of the vänaprastha and sannyäsa orders and the religious practices proper to
each of these levels of advancement.
One who is taking to the vänaprastha stage of life should leave his wife at
home in the care of his sons, or else take her along, and with a peaceful mind
spend the third quarter of his life in the forest. He should accept as his food
whatever bulbs, fruits, roots and so on that grow in the forest, taking
sometimes grains cooked by fire and sometimes fruits ripened by time.
Furthermore, he should take as his garments tree bark, grass, leaves or the skin
of a deer. It is prescribed that he should perform austerities by not cutting his
hair, beard, or nails. Nor should he make any special attempt to remove dirt
from his limbs. He should bathe three times daily in cold water and sleep upon
the ground. During the hot season he should stand beneath the fearsome heat
of the sun with fires blazing on four sides. During the rainy season he should
stand in the midst of the downpour of rain, and during the cold winter he
should submerge himself in water up to his neck. He is absolutely forbidden to
clean his teeth, to store food that he has collected at one time to eat at another
time, and to worship the Supreme Lord with the flesh of animals. If he can
maintain those severe practices for the remainder of his life, the vänaprastha
will achieve the Tapoloka planet.
The fourth quarter of life is meant for sannyäsa. One should develop
complete detachment from attaining residence on different planets, up to even
Brahmaloka. Such wishes for material elevation are due to desire for the fruits
of material activity. When one recognizes that endeavors to achieve residence
on the higher planets ultimately award only suffering, then it is enjoined that
one should take to sannyäsa in a spirit of renunciation. The process of
accepting sannyäsa involves worshiping the Lord with sacrifice, giving
everything one possesses in charity to the priests and establishing within one's
own heart the various sacrificial fires. For a sannyäsé, association with women
or even the sight of women is more undesirable than taking poison. Except in
emergencies, the sannyäsé should never wear more clothing than a loincloth or
some simple covering over his loincloth. He should carry no more than his
staff and waterpot. Giving up all violence to living creatures, he should
become subdued in the functions of his body, mind and speech. He should
remain detached and fixed on the self and travel alone to such pure places as
the mountains, rivers and forests. Thus engaged, he should remember the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and dwell in a place that is fearless and not
heavily populated. He should take his alms each day at seven homes chosen at
random from those of the members of the four social classes, avoiding only the
homes of those who are cursed or fallen. With a pure heart he should offer to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead whatever food he has collected and take
the mahä-prasädam remnants. In this way he should always be mindful that
hankering for sense gratification is bondage and that engaging the objects of
the senses in the service of Lord Mädhava is liberation. If one lacks knowledge
and renunciation, or continues to be troubled by the unconquered six enemies
headed by lust and the all-powerful senses, or if one accepts the tri-daëòa
renounced order simply for the purpose of carrying out a livelihood, then he
will achieve as his result only the killing of his own soul.
A paramahaàsa is not under the control of injunctions and prohibitions.
He is a devotee of the Supreme Lord, detached from external sense
gratification and completely free from desire for even such subtle gratificatory
goals as liberation. He is expert in discrimination and, just like a simple child,
is free from concepts of pride and insult. Although actually competent, he
wanders about like a dull person, and although most learned, he engages
himself like an insane fool in incoherent speech. Although actually fixed in
the Vedas, he behaves in an unordered fashion. He tolerates the evil words of
others and never shows contempt for anyone else. He avoids acting as an
enemy or vainly indulging in argument. He sees the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in all creatures and also all living beings within the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. In order to keep his body alive for performing worship
of the Lord, he accepts whatever excellent or inferior food, clothing and
bedding he can obtain without endeavor. Although he has to make some effort
to find food for maintaining his body, he does not become joyful when he finds
something, nor does he become depressed when not finding anything. The
Supreme Lord Himself, although not at all subject to the Vedic orders and
prohibitions, by His own free will executes various prescribed duties; similarly
the paramahaàsa, even while on the platform of freedom from subjugation to
Vedic rules and prohibitions, carries out various duties. Because his perception
of dualities has become completely eradicated by transcendental knowledge,
which is focused on the Supreme Lord, he obtains upon the demise of his
material body the liberation known as särñöi, in which one becomes equal in
opulence with the Lord.
The person who desires his own best interest should take shelter of a bona
fide spiritual master. Filling his mind with faith, keeping free from enviousness
and remaining fixed in devotion, the disciple should serve the spiritual master,
whom he should regard as nondifferent from the Supreme Lord. For a
brahmacäré, the primary duty is service to the spiritual master. The main duties
for a householder are protection of living beings and sacrifice, for a
vänaprastha austerities, and for a sannyäsé self-control and nonviolence.
Celibacy (practiced by householders at all times except once a month when
the wife is fertile), penance, cleanliness, self-satisfaction, friendship with all
living beings and above all worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are
duties meant for every jéva soul. One acquires firm devotion for the Supreme
Lord by always rendering service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead
through one's own particular prescribed duty, by not engaging in the worship
of any other personalities, and also by thinking of all creatures as the place of
residence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His form as the Supersoul.
The followers of the karma-käëòa section of the Vedas can attain the planets
of the forefathers and so on by their ritualistic activities, but if they become
endowed with devotion for the Supreme Lord, then by these same activities
they can achieve the supreme stage of liberation.
TEXT 1
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
vanaM ivaivaºau: pau‡aeSau
BaAyaA< nyasya s$ahE"va vaA
vana Wva vas$aecC$Antas$a,
ta{taIyaM BaAgAmaAyauSa:
çré-bhagavän uväca
vanaà vivikñuù putreñu
bhäryäà nyasya sahaiva vä
vana eva vasec chäntas
tåtéyaà bhägam äyuñaù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; vanam—the
forest; vivikñuù—desiring to enter; putreñu—among the sons; bhäryäm—wife;
nyasya—entrusting; saha—together with; eva—indeed; vä—or; vane—in the
forest; eva—certainly; vaset—one should dwell; çäntaù—with a peaceful mind;
tåtéyam—the third; bhägam—division; äyuñaù—of life.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: One who desires to adopt the
third order of life, vänaprastha, should enter the forest with a peaceful mind,
leaving his wife with his mature sons, or else taking her along with him.
PURPORT
In Kali-yuga a human being generally cannot live more than one hundred
years, and even this is becoming most unusual. A man who has a reasonable
expectation of living for one hundred years may adopt the vänaprastha order at
the age of fifty, and then at the age of seventy-five he may take sannyäsa for
complete renunciation. Since in Kali-yuga very few people live for one
hundred years, one should adjust the schedule accordingly. Vänaprastha is
intended as a gradual transition from materialistic family life to the stage of
complete renunciation.
TEXT 2
k(nd"maUlaP(laEvaRnyaEr,"
maeDyaEva{RiÔaM ‘ak(lpayaeta,
vas$aIta valk(laM vaAs$as$a,
ta{NApaNAARijanaAina vaA
kanda-müla-phalair vanyair
medhyair våttià prakalpayet
vaséta valkalaà väsas
tåëa-parëäjinäni vä
SYNONYMS
kanda—with bulbs; müla—roots; phalaiù—and fruits; vanyaiù—growing in the
forest; medhyaiù—pure; våttim—sustenance; prakalpayet—one should arrange;
vaséta—one should put on; valkalam—tree bark; väsaù—as clothes;
tåëa—grass; parëa—leaves; ajinäni—animal skins; vä—or.
TRANSLATION
Having adopted the vänaprastha order of life, one should arrange one's
sustenance by eating uncontaminated bulbs, roots and fruits that grow in the
forest. One may dress oneself with tree bark, grass, leaves or animal skins.
PURPORT
A renounced sage in the forest does not kill animals, but rather acquires
skins from animals who have suffered natural death. According to a passage
from Manu-saàhitä, quoted by Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, the
word medhyaiù, or "pure," indicates that while residing in the forest a sage may
not accept honey-based liquors, animal flesh, fungus, mushrooms, horseradish
or any hallucinogenic or intoxicating herbs, even those taken as so-called
medicine.
TEXT 3
ke(zAr"AemanaKazma™aumalaAina
ibaBa{yaAÚ"ta:
na DaAvaed"ps$au maÀaeta
i‡a k(AlaM sTaiNx"laezAya:
keça-roma-nakha-çmaçrumaläni
bibhåyäd dataù
na dhäved apsu majjeta
tri kälaà sthaëòile-çayaù
SYNONYMS
keça—hair on the head; roma—bodily hair; nakha—fingernails and toenails;
çmaçru—facial hair; maläni—bodily waste products; bibhåyät—one should
tolerate; dataù—the teeth; na dhävet—should not clean; apsu—in water;
majjeta—should bathe; tri-kälam—three times a day; sthaëòile—on the earth;
çayaù—lying down.
TRANSLATION
The vänaprastha should not groom the hair on his head, body or face, should
not manicure his nails, should not pass stool and urine at irregular times and
should not make a special endeavor for dental hygiene. He should be content to
take bath in water three times daily and should sleep on the ground.
TEXT 4
ƒaISmae tapyaeta paÂaA¢aIna,
vaSaARsvaAs$aAr"SaAx". jalae
@Ak(NTama¢a: izAizAr"
WvaM va{Ôastapaêre"ta,
gréñme tapyeta païcägnén
varñäsv äsära-ñäò jale
äkaëtha-magnaù çiçira
evaà våttas tapaç caret
SYNONYMS
gréñme—in the summer; tapyeta—one should accept as austerity;
païca-agnén—five fires (the overhead sun and fires burning on four sides);
varñäsu—during the rainy season; äsära—torrents of rain; ñäö-tolerating;
jale—in water; ä-kaëöha—up to the neck; magnaù—submerged; çiçire—in the
coldest part of winter; evam—thus; våttaù—engaged; tapaù—penance;
caret—one should execute.
TRANSLATION
Thus engaged as a vänaprastha, one should execute penance during the
hottest summer days by subjecting oneself to burning fires on four sides and the
blazing sun overhead; during the rainy season one should remain outside,
subjecting oneself to torrents of rain; and in the freezing winter one should
remain submerged in water up to one's neck.
PURPORT
One who engages in sense gratification must perform severe penances at
the end of life to counteract his sinful, hedonistic activities. A devotee of the
Lord, however, naturally develops Kåñëa consciousness and need not subject
himself to such radical penances. As stated in the Païcarätra,
ärädhito yadi haris tapasä tataù kià
närädhito yadi haris tapasä tataù kim
antar bahir yadi haris tapasä tataù kià
näntar bahir yadi haris tapasä tataù kim
"If one is worshiping the Lord properly, what is the use of severe penances?
And if one is not properly worshiping the Lord, what is the use of severe
penances? If Çré Kåñëa is realized within and without everything that exists,
what is the use of severe penances? And if Çré Kåñëa is not seen within and
without everything, then what is the use of severe penances?"
TEXT 5
@i¢apa¸M( s$ama´aIyaAta,
k(Alapa¸(maTaAipa vaA
olaUKalaAzmaku(Ä%Ae vaA
d"ntaAelaUKala Wva vaA
agni-pakvaà samaçnéyät
käla-pakvam athäpi vä
ulükhaläçma-kuööo vä
dantolükhala eva vä
SYNONYMS
agni—by fire; pakvam—made ready to eat; samaçnéyät—one should eat;
käla—by time; pakvam—right for eating; atha—else; api—indeed; vä—or;
ulükhala—with grinding mortar; açma—and stone; kuööaù—pulverized,
ground up; vä—or; danta—using the teeth; ulükhalaù—as a grinding mortar;
eva—indeed; vä—or, alternatively.
TRANSLATION
One may eat foodstuffs prepared with fire, such as grains, or fruits ripened
by time. One may grind one's food with mortar and stone or with one's own
teeth.
PURPORT
In Vedic civilization it is recommended that at the end of one's life one
should go to a holy place or forest for spiritual perfection. In sacred forests one
does not find restaurants, supermarkets, fast-food chains and so on, and thus
one must eat simply, reducing sense gratification.
Although in the Western countries people eat processed food, one living
simply must himself separate and pulverize grains and other foods before
eating. This is referred to here.
TEXT 6
svayaM s$aiÂanauyaAts$avaRma,
@AtmanaAe va{iÔak(Ar"NAma,
de"zAk(AlabalaAiBaÁaAe
naAd"d"ItaAnyad"Aô$tama,
svayaà saïcinuyät sarvam
ätmano våtti-käraëam
deça-käla-baläbhijïo
nädadétänyadähåtam
SYNONYMS
svayam—himself; saïcinuyät—should gather; sarvam—everything;
ätmanaù—his own; våtti—sustenance; käraëam—facilitating; deça—the
particular place; käla—the time; bala—and one's strength;
abhijïaù—understanding pragmatically; na ädadéta—should not take;
anyadä—for another time; ähåtam—provisions.
TRANSLATION
The vänaprastha should personally collect whatever he requires for his
bodily maintenance, carefully considering the time, place and his own capacity.
He should never collect provisions for the future.
PURPORT
According to Vedic regulations, one practicing austerity should collect only
what he requires for immediate use, and upon receiving gifts of foodstuff he
should immediately give up that which he has previously collected, so that
there will be no surplus. This regulation is meant to keep one fixed in faithful
dependence on the Supreme Lord. One should never stock food or other
bodily necessities for future use. The term deça-käla-baläbhijïa indicates that
in a particularly difficult place, or in time of emergency or personal incapacity,
this strict rule need not be followed, as confirmed by Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura points out that unless one is
completely incapacitated, one should not depend on others for one's personal
maintenance, as this will create a debt that can only be repaid by taking
another birth in the material world. This applies only to those endeavoring for
personal purification and not to those engaged full time in devotional service
to Lord Kåñëa. A pure devotee eats, dresses and speaks only for the service of
the Lord, and thus whatever assistance he accepts from others is not for
himself. He is fully surrendered to the mission of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. However, one not so surrendered will certainly have to take birth
again in the material world to repay all of his debts to others.
TEXT 7
vanyaEêç&paur"Aex"AzAEr,"
inavaR"paetk(AlacaAeid"taAna,
na tau ™aAEtaena pazAunaA
maAM yajaeta vanaA™amaI
vanyaiç caru-puroòäçair
nirvapet käla-coditän
na tu çrautena paçunä
mäà yajeta vanäçramé
SYNONYMS
vanyaiù—obtained in the forest; caru—with oblations of rice, barley and däl
beans; puroòäçaiù—and sacrificial cakes prepared with wild rice;
nirvapet—one should offer; käla-coditän—ritualistic sacrifices, such as
ägrayaëa, offered according to seasons (ägrayaëa is the offering of the first
fruits that appear after the rainy season); na—never; tu—indeed;
çrautena—mentioned in the Vedas; paçunä—with animal sacrifice; mäm—Me;
yajeta—may worship; vana-äçramé—one who has gone to the forest, taking the
vänaprastha order of life.
TRANSLATION
One who has accepted the vänaprastha order of life should perform seasonal
sacrifices by offering oblations of caru and sacrificial cakes prepared from rice
and other grains found in the forest. The vänaprastha, however, may never
offer animal sacrifices to Me, even those sacrifices mentioned in the Vedas.
PURPORT
One who has taken the vänaprastha order of life should never perform
animal sacrifices or eat meat.
TEXT 8
@i¢ah"Ae‡aM ca d"zARê
paAENARmaAs$aê paUvaRvata,
caAtaumaARsyaAina ca maunaer,"
@A°aAtaAina ca naEgAmaE:
agnihotraà ca darçaç ca
paurëamäsaç ca pürva-vat
cäturmäsyäni ca muner
ämnätäni ca naigamaiù
SYNONYMS
agni-hotram—the fire sacrifice; ca—also; darçaù—the sacrifice performed on
the new moon day; ca—also; paurëa-mäsaù—full moon sacrifice; ca—also;
pürva-vat—as previously, in the gåhastha-äçrama; cätuù-mäsyäni-the vows and
sacrifices of cäturmäsya; ca-also; muneù—of the vänaprastha;
ämnätäni—enjoined; ca—also; naigamaiù—by expert knowers of the Vedas.
TRANSLATION
The vänaprastha should perform the agnihotra, darça and paurëamäsa
sacrifices, as he did while in the gåhastha-äçrama. He should also perform the
vows and sacrifices of cäturmäsya, since all of these rituals are enjoined for the
vänaprastha-äçrama by expert knowers of the Vedas.
PURPORT
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has given a detailed explanation
of the four rituals mentioned here, namely agnihotra, darça, paurëamäsa and
cäturmäsya. The conclusion is that everyone should simply chant Hare Kåñëa,
Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma,
Hare Hare and avoid the difficult entanglement of Vedic ritualistic
ceremonies. If one neither chants Hare Kåñëa nor performs such rituals, one
certainly becomes a päñaëòé, an atheistic fool.
TEXT 9
WvaM caINAeRna tapas$aA
mauinaDaRmainas$antata:
maAM tapaAemayamaAr"ADya
[%iSalaAek(Aäu"paEita maAma,
evaà cérëena tapasä
munir dhamani-santataù
mäà tapo-mayam ärädhya
åñi-lokäd upaiti mäm
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; cérëena—by the practice; tapasä—of austerity; muniù—the
saintly vänaprastha; dhamani-santataù—emaciated so much that the veins are
visible throughout his body; mäm—Me; tapaù-mayam—the goal of all
penance; ärädhya—worshiping; rñi-lokät—beyond Mahärloka;
upaiti—achieves; mäm—Me.
TRANSLATION
The saintly vänaprastha, practicing severe penances and accepting only the
bare necessities of life, becomes so emaciated that he appears to be mere skin
and bones. Thus worshiping Me through severe penances, he goes to the
Maharloka planet and then directly achieves Me.
PURPORT
A vänaprastha who develops pure devotional service achieves the Supreme
Lord, Kåñëa, while in the vänaprastha stage of life. One who does not become
completely Kåñëa conscious, however, first goes to the planet Maharloka, or
Åñiloka, and from there directly achieves Lord Kåñëa.
One achieves Maharloka, or Åñiloka, through strict observance of positive
and negative regulations. However, without developing a taste for chanting
and hearing the glories of the Lord (çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù [SB 7.5.23]), it is
not possible to achieve the perfect liberation of going back home, back to
Godhead. Therefore, on the Maharloka planet the unsuccessful sage gives
more attention to chanting and hearing, and thus he gradually develops pure
love of Godhead.
TEXT 10
yastvaetatk{(cC)$taêINA<
tapaAe ina:™aeyas$aM mah"ta,
k(AmaAyaAlpaIyas$ae yauHjyaAä,"
baAilazA: k(Ae'par"stata:
yas tv etat kåcchrataç cérëaà
tapo niùçreyasaà mahat
kämäyälpéyase yuïjyäd
bäliçaù ko 'paras tataù
SYNONYMS
yaù—one who; tu—indeed; etat—this; kåcchrataù—with great penance;
cérëam—for a long time; tapaù—austerity; niùçreyasam—awarding ultimate
liberation; mahat—glorious; kämäya—for sense gratification;
alpéyase—insignificant; yuïjyät—practices; bäliçaù—such a fool; kaù—who;
aparaù—else; tataù—besides him.
TRANSLATION
One who with long endeavor executes this painful but exalted penance,
which awards ultimate liberation, simply to achieve insignificant sense
gratification must be considered the greatest fool.
PURPORT
Although the process of vänaprastha described by Lord Kåñëa is so glorious
that even the consolation prize is promotion to Maharloka, one who
consciously performs this process for such promotion to heaven is certainly the
greatest fool. The Lord does not want this process to be abused or exploited by
materialistic rascals, for the ultimate goal is love of Godhead.
TEXT 11
yad"As$aAE inayamae'k(lpaAe
jar"yaA jaAtavaepaTau:
@Atmanya¢aIna, s$amaAr"Aepya
mai»aÔaAe'i¢aM s$amaAivazAeta,
yadäsau niyame 'kalpo
jarayä jäta-vepathuù
ätmany agnén samäropya
mac-citto 'gnià samäviçet
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; asau—the saintly vänaprastha; niyame—in his prescribed duties;
akalpaù—unable to carry on; jarayä—due to old age; jäta—arisen;
vepathuù—trembling of the body; ätmani—within his heart; agnén—the
sacrificial fires; samäropya—placing; mat-cittaù—his mind fixed in Me;
agnim—the fire; samäviçet—should enter.
TRANSLATION
If the vänaprastha is overtaken by old age and because of his trembling body
is no longer able to execute his prescribed duties, he should place the sacrificial
fire within his heart by meditation. Then, fixing his mind on Me, he should
enter into the fire and give up his body.
PURPORT
Since the process of vänaprastha is recommended for those nearing the end
of life, there is always the likelihood that one will prematurely succumb to the
symptoms of old age and be unable to reach the final stage of sannyäsa. If one
simply cannot carry on his religious duties due to old age, it is here advised
that he fix the mind in Lord Kåñëa and enter into the sacrificial fire. Although
this may not be possible in the modern age, we can appreciate the absolute
seriousness of going back home, back to Godhead, as evidenced in this verse.
TEXT 12
yad"A k(maRivapaAke(Sau
laAeke(Sau inar"yaAtmas$au
ivar"AgAAe jaAyatae s$amyax.~
nyastaAi¢a: ‘a˜ajaeÔata:
yadä karma-vipäkeñu
lokeñu nirayätmasu
virägo jäyate samyaì
nyastägniù pravrajet tataù
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; karma—by fruitive activities; vipäkeñu—in all that which is
obtained; lokeñu—including promotion to all the planets of the universe up to
Brahmaloka; niraya-ätmasu—planets that are actually hellish, being material;
virägaù—detachment; jäyate—is born; samyak—completely; nyasta—giving
up; agniù—the sacrificial fire of vänaprastha; pravrajet—one should take
sannyäsa; tataù—at that point.
TRANSLATION
If the vänaprastha, understanding that even promotion to Brahmaloka is a
miserable situation, develops complete detachment from all possible results of
fruitive activities, then he may take the sannyäsa order of life.
TEXT 13
wî"A yaTaAepade"zAM maAM
d"ÔvaA s$avaRsvama{itvajae
@¢aIna, sva‘aANA @Avaezya
inar"paeºa: pair"˜ajaeta,
iñövä yathopadeçaà mäà
dattvä sarva-svam åtvije
agnén sva-präëa äveçya
nirapekñaù parivrajet
SYNONYMS
iñövä—having worshiped; yathä—according to; upadeçam—scriptural
injunctions; mäm—Me; dattvä—having given; sarva-svam—all one possesses;
åtvije—to the priest; agnén—the sacrificial fire; sva-präëe—within oneself;
äveçya—placing; nirapekñaù—without attachment; parivrajet—one should take
sannyäsa and set off.
TRANSLATION
Having worshiped Me according to scriptural injunctions and having given
all one's property to the sacrificial priest, one should place the fire sacrifice
within oneself. Thus, with the mind completely detached, one should enter the
sannyäsa order of life.
PURPORT
One cannot maintain the sannyäsa order of life unless one gives up all
materialistic association and engages exclusively in devotional service to the
Supreme Lord. Any material desire will gradually prove to be a stumbling block
in the prosecution of renounced life. Therefore, a liberated sannyäsé must
vigilantly keep himself free from the weeds of material desires, which surface
principally in the form of attachment to women, money and reputation. One
may possess a beautiful garden filled with fruits and flowers, but without
vigilant maintenance the garden will be overrun by weeds. Similarly, one who
achieves a beautiful state of Kåñëa consciousness takes the sannyäsa order of
life, but if he does not vigilantly and painstakingly keep his heart clean, there
is always the danger of a relapse into illusion.
TEXT 14
iva‘asya vaE s$aªyas$ataAe
de"vaA d"Ar"Aid"è&ipaNA:
iva£aAna, ku(vaRntyayaM ÷smaAna,
@A‚(mya s$aimayaAtpar"ma,
viprasya vai sannyasato
devä därädi-rüpiëaù
vighnän kurvanty ayaà hy asmän
äkramya samiyät param
SYNONYMS
viprasya—of the saintly person; vai—indeed; sannyasataù—taking sannyäsa;
deväù—the demigods; dära-ädi-rüpiëaù—appearing in the form of his wife or
other women and attractive objects; vighnän—stumbling blocks;
kurvanti—create; ayam—the sannyäsé; hi—indeed; asmän—them, the
demigods; äkramya—surpassing; samiyät—should go; param—back home, back
to Godhead.
TRANSLATION
"This man taking sannyäsa is going to surpass us and go back home, back to
Godhead." Thus thinking, the demigods create stumbling blocks on the path of
the sannyäsé by appearing before him in the shape of his former wife or other
women and attractive objects. But the sannyäsé should pay the demigods and
their manifestations no heed.
PURPORT
The demigods are empowered with universal administration and by their
potency may appear as the former wife of a sannyäsé or as other women, so that
the sannyäsé gives up his strict vows and becomes entangled in sense
gratification. Lord Kåñëa here encourages all sannyäsés by telling them, "Pay no
attention to such illusory manifestations. Continue your duties and go back
home, back to Godhead."
TEXT 15
ibaBa{yaA»aenmauinavaARs$a:
k(AEpaInaAcC$Ad"naM par"ma,
tyalM( na d"Nx"paA‡aAByaAma,
@nyaitk(iÂad"naApaid"
bibhåyäc cen munir väsaù
kaupénäcchädanaà param
tyaktaà na daëòa-päträbhyäm
anyat kiïcid anäpadi
SYNONYMS
bibhåyät—would wear; cet—if; muniù—the sannyäsé; väsaù—clothes;
kaupéna—the thick belt and underwear worn by saintly persons;
äcchädanam—covering; param—other; tyaktam—given up; na—never;
daëòa—besides his staff; päträbhyäm—and waterpot; anyat—else;
kiïcit—anything; anäpadi—when there is no emergency.
TRANSLATION
If the sannyäsé desires to wear something besides a mere kaupéna, he may use
another cloth around his waist and hips to cover the kaupéna. Otherwise, if
there is no emergency, he should not accept anything besides his daëòa and
waterpot.
PURPORT
A sannyäsé attracted to material possessions will spoil his worship of Lord
Kåñëa.
TEXT 16
ä{"ií"paUtaM nyas$aetpaAdM"
vañpaUtaM ipabaeÀalama,
s$atyapaUtaAM vade"ã"AcaM
mana:paUtaM s$amaAcare"ta,
dåñöi-pütaà nyaset pädaà
vastra-pütaà pibej jalam
satya-pütäà vaded väcaà
manaù-pütaà samäcaret
SYNONYMS
dåñöi—by the sight; pütam—ascertained as pure; nyaset—he should place;
pädam—his foot; vastra—by his cloth; pütam—filtered; pibet—he should
drink; jalam—water; satya—by truthfulness; pütäm—pure; vadet—he should
speak; väcam—words; manaù—ascertained by the mind; pütam—to be pure;
samäcaret—he should perform.
TRANSLATION
A saintly person should step or place his foot on the ground only after
verifying with his eyes that there are no living creatures, such as insects, who
might be injured by his foot. He should drink water only after filtering it
through a portion of his cloth, and he should speak only words that possess the
purity of truth. Similarly, he should perform only those activities his mind has
carefully ascertained to be pure.
PURPORT
While walking, a saintly person is careful not to kill any tiny creatures on
the ground. Similarly, he filters his drinking water through cloth to avoid
swallowing small creatures living within the water. Speaking untruths simply
for sense gratification is detrimental to devotional service and should be
avoided. Speaking impersonal philosophy and glorifying the sense gratification
of the material world, even that found in heavenly planets, contaminates the
heart and must be avoided by those desiring perfection in the loving service of
the Lord. By serious consideration one can understand that any activity other
than devotional service to Lord Kåñëa has no ultimate value; therefore one
should exclusively engage in the purified activities of Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 17
maAEnaAnaIh"AinalaAyaAmaA
d"Nx"A vaAgde"h"caetas$aAma,
na ÷etae yasya s$antyaËÿ
vaeNAuiBanaR Bavaeâita:
maunänéhäniläyämä
daëòä väg-deha-cetasäm
na hy ete yasya santy aìga
veëubhir na bhaved yatiù
SYNONYMS
mauna—avoiding useless speech; anéha—giving up fruitive activities;
anila-äyämäù—controlling the breathing process; daëòäù—strict disciplines;
väk—of the voice; deha—of the body; cetasäm—of the mind; na—not;
hi—indeed; ete—these disciplines; yasya—of whom; santi—exist; aìga—My
dear Uddhava; veëubhiù—by bamboo rods; na—never; bhavet—is; yatiù—a
real sannyäsé.
TRANSLATION
One who has not accepted the three internal disciplines of avoiding useless
speech, avoiding useless activities and controlling the life air can never be
considered a sannyäsé merely because of his carrying bamboo rods.
PURPORT
The word daëòa indicates the staff carried by those in the renounced order
of life, and daëòa also indicates severe discipline. The Vaiñëava sannyäsés
accept a staff made of three bamboo rods, signifying dedication of the body,
mind and words to the service of the Supreme Lord. Here Lord Kåñëa says that
one must first accept these three daëòas, or disciplines (namely control of the
voice, body and mind), within oneself. The practice of aniläyäma (or
präëäyäma, regulating the life air) is meant to control the mind, and one who
always thinks of service to Lord Kåñëa has certainly achieved the perfection of
präëäyäma. Merely carrying the three external daëòas without assimilating the
internal daëòas of bodily, mental and vocal discipline can never make one an
actual Vaiñëava sannyäsé, as explained here by Lord Kåñëa.
In the Haàsa-gétä section of Mahäbhärata and in Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé's
Upadeçämåta, there are instructions regarding the sannyäsa order of life. A
conditioned soul who adopts only the external ornaments of tridaëòé-sannyäsa
will not actually be able to control the senses. One who takes sannyäsa for false
prestige, making a show of saintliness without actual advancement in
kåñëa-kértana, will soon be vanquished by the external energy of the Lord.
TEXT 18
iBaºaAM catauSauR vaNAeRSau
ivagA÷ARna, vajaRyaMêre"ta,
s$aæaAgAAr"Anas$ax.~k}(æaAMs$a,
tauSyaeéabDaena taAvataA
bhikñäà caturñu varëeñu
vigarhyän varjayaàç caret
saptägärän asaìkÿptäàs
tuñyel labdhena tävatä
SYNONYMS
bhikñäm—charity obtained by begging; caturñu—among the four;
varëeñu—occupational divisions of society; vigarhyän—abominable, impure;
varjayan—rejecting; caret—one should approach; sapta—seven;
ägärän—houses; asaìkÿptän—without calculation or desire; tuñyet—one
should be satisfied; labdhena—with that obtained; tävatä—with just that
amount.
TRANSLATION
Rejecting those houses that are polluted and untouchable, one should
approach without previous calculation seven houses and be satisfied with that
which is obtained there by begging. According to necessity, one may approach
each of the four occupational orders of society.
PURPORT
Saintly persons in the renounced order of life may beg from strict followers
of Vedic culture to obtain foodstuffs and other bodily necessities. According to
Vedic injunction, a renounced saint should beg from the brähmaëa
community, but if there is danger of his starving, he may beg from kñatriyas,
then vaiçyas, and even çüdras if they are not sinful, as expressed here by the
word vigarhyän. Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura explains that
asaìkÿptän indicates that one should not approach certain houses, calculating,
"In that place I can get first-class food. That house has a big reputation among
beggars." Without discriminating, one should go to seven houses and be
satisfied with whatever may be obtained there. One should beg for one's
personal maintenance only from houses where the inhabitants, being sincere
followers of the varëäçrama culture, have earned their livelihood by honest
means and are free from sinful activities. One may beg alms from such
householders. One must not beg alms for one's personal maintenance from
those who oppose the Supreme Lord's devotional service, for such service is the
whole purpose of varëäçrama culture.
Those who oppose Vedic culture pass laws to make begging by saintly
persons a criminal act. They thus insult and persecute saintly beggars,
considering them to be ordinary vagrants. A lazy person begging to avoid work
is certainly abominable, but a saintly person dedicated to the service of the
Lord and practicing the discipline of begging to develop full dependence on
the Lord's mercy should be given all facility in human society. Çréla
Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura explains that there are three forms of
collecting alms. Mädhukara is the process of imitating the bee, who collects a
tiny amount of nectar from each flower. In this way, the saintly person accepts
a very small amount from each person, avoiding social conflict. The process
mentioned here is asaìkÿpta, by which one indiscriminately approaches seven
houses, being satisfied with whatever may be obtained. Präk-praëéta is that
process by which one establishes regular donors and collects one's maintenance
from them. In this regard Çréla Véraräghava Äcärya has described the initial
stage of sannyäsa, called kuöécaka, as follows. A man accepting the initial stage
of sannyäsa arranges for his children or other relatives and well-wishers to
build him a kuöé, or meditation cottage. He gives up worldly affairs and sits
within the cottage, trying to remain free from lust, anger, greed, illusion and so
on. According to the prescribed injunctions of regulated life, he accepts a
tri-daëòa, purifies himself with a waterpot, shaves his head (leaving a çikhä, or
tuft), chants Gäyatré mantra on the sacred thread and wears saffron garments.
Bathing regularly, cleansing, performing äcamana, chanting japa, studying the
Vedas, remaining celibate and meditating on the Lord, he receives regular
supplies of food from his children, friends and relatives. Accepting only the
bare necessities of life, he remains fixed in his cottage up to the moment of
liberation.
TEXT 19
baih"jaRlaAzAyaM gAtvaA
ta‡aAepas$pa{zya vaAgyata:
ivaBajya paAivataM zAeSaM
BauÃaItaAzAeSamaAô$tama,
bahir jaläçayaà gatvä
tatropaspåçya väg-yataù
vibhajya pävitaà çeñaà
bhuïjétäçeñam ähåtam
SYNONYMS
bahiù—outside of urban areas, in a secluded place; jala—of water; äçayam—to
a reservoir; gatvä—going; tatra—there; upaspåçya—being purified by contact
with water; väk-yataù—without speaking; vibhajya—duly distributing;
pävitam—purified; çeñam—remnants; bhuïjéta—one should eat;
açeñam—completely; ähåtam—gathered by begging.
TRANSLATION
Taking the food gathered through begging, one should leave the populated
areas and go to a reservoir of water in a secluded place. There, having taken a
bath and washed one's hands thoroughly, one should distribute portions of the
food to others who may request it. One should do this without speaking. Then,
having thoroughly cleansed the remnants, one should eat everything on one's
plate, leaving nothing for future consumption.
PURPORT
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura explains that a saintly person
should not argue or quarrel with materialistic persons who may request or
demand part of his foodstuff. The word vibhajya indicates that one should give
something to such persons to avoid disturbance, and then, offering the
remnants to Lord Viñëu, one should eat everything on one's plate, without
saving food for the future. The word bahiù indicates that one should not eat in
a public place, and väg-yata indicates that one should eat silently, meditating
upon the Lord's mercy.
TEXT 20
Wk(êre"nmah"ImaetaAM
ina:s$aËÿ: s$aMyataein‰"ya:
@Atma‚(Lx" @Atmar"ta
@AtmavaAna, s$amad"zARna:
ekaç caren mahém etäà
niùsaìgaù saàyatendriyaù
ätma-kréòa ätma-rata
ätma-vän sama-darçanaù
SYNONYMS
ekaù—alone; caret—one should move about; mahém—the earth; etäm—this;
niùsaìgaù—without any material attachment; saàyata-indriyaù—completely
controlling the senses; ätma-kréòaù—enthusiastic by realization of the
Supersoul; ätma-rataù—completely satisfied in spiritual understanding;
ätma-vän—steady on the spiritual platform; sama-darçanaù—with equal vision
everywhere.
TRANSLATION
Without any material attachment, with senses fully controlled, remaining
enthusiastic, and satisfied in realization of the Supreme Lord and his own self,
the saintly person should travel about the earth alone. Having equal vision
everywhere, he should be steady on the spiritual platform.
PURPORT
One who remains attached to material sense gratification cannot be steady
in the process of chanting Hare Kåñëa. Being shackled by illusory desires, he is
not able to fully control the senses. Actually, one should take shelter of
devotional service to Lord Kåñëa twenty-four hours a day, for by such service
one remains within the scope of spiritual reality. By chanting and hearing the
holy names of the Lord along with the Lord's glories and pastimes, one
naturally drifts away from the field of material sense gratification. Good
association with Lord Kåñëa and His devotees automatically vanquishes useless
material association, and one is able to carry out the Vedic injunctions meant
to lift the conditioned soul out of the material field and onto the liberated
platform of Kåñëa consciousness. In this regard, Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé states in
his Upadeçämåta (4),
dadäti pratigåhëäti
guhyam äkhyäti påcchati
bhuìkte bhojayate caiva
ñaò-vidhaà préti-lakñaëam
"Offering gifts in charity, accepting charitable gifts, revealing one's mind in
confidence, inquiring confidentially, accepting prasädam and offering
prasädam are the six symptoms of love shared by one devotee and another."
One who thus learns to associate with the Lord's devotees actually remains
insulated from the contamination of material life. By pure association one
gradually understands the name, form, qualities, associates, pastimes and
devotional service of Lord Çré Kåñëa, and thus even in this lifetime one can
become a resident of the spiritual world. In the association of pure devotees
there is no material contamination and no useless discussion, since all pure
devotees are fully engaged twenty-four hours a day in the loving service of the
Lord. By the influence of such devotees, one develops equal vision
(sama-darçana) and sees the realized knowledge of Kåñëa consciousness
everywhere. As one begins to understand his eternal relationship with Lord
Kåñëa, he becomes ätma-vän, situated in his constitutional position. An
advanced Vaiñëava, constantly enjoying the mellows of loving devotional
service and carrying out the mission of the Lord on the earth, is ätma-kréòa,
one who enjoys life within the internal potency of the Supreme Lord. The
advanced devotee remains constantly attracted to the Supreme Lord and His
devotees and is therefore ätma-rata, fully satisfied by constant engagement in
devotional service. One cannot possibly develop the exalted qualities
mentioned here without becoming an unalloyed devotee of Lord Kåñëa. One
who is envious of the Lord and His devotees becomes attracted to bad
association, gradually loses control of the senses and falls down into the
network of impious life. The innumerable varieties of nondevotees are like
branches sprouting from the single tree of enviousness of the Supreme Lord,
Kåñëa, and their association should be given up by all means.
Without unalloyed devotional service to the Lord, one loses touch with the
desire and mission of the Personality of Godhead and becomes attracted to
worshiping the wonderful male and female creations of the Lord's illusory
energy—demigods, demigoddesses, celebrities, politicians, prostitutes, etc. In
this way, one foolishly considers something besides Lord Kåñëa to be supremely
wonderful. Actually, Lord Kåñëa is the only true object of worship for those
desiring to experience unlimited beauty and pleasure. By seriously taking to
Kåñëa consciousness one can realize the transcendental position of Lord Kåñëa
and gradually develop all of the qualities mentioned in this verse.
TEXT 21
ivaival(ºaemazAr"NAAe
maà"AvaivamalaAzAya:
@AtmaAnaM icantayaede"k(ma,
@Baede"na mayaA mauina:
vivikta-kñema-çaraëo
mad-bhäva-vimaläçayaù
ätmänaà cintayed ekam
abhedena mayä muniù
SYNONYMS
vivikta—solitary; kñema—safe; çaraëaù—his dwelling; mat—in Me; bhäva—by
constant thought; vimala—purified; äçayaù—his consciousness; ätmänam—on
the soul; cintayet—he should concentrate; ekam—alone; abhedena—not
different; mayä—from Me; muniù—the sage.
TRANSLATION
Dwelling in a safe and solitary place, his mind purified by constant thought
of Me, the sage should concentrate on the soul alone, realizing it to be
nondifferent from Me.
PURPORT
One who is engaged exclusively in the devotional service of the Lord in one
of the five principal relationships is to be known as a pure Vaiñëava. Because
of his advanced stage of love of Godhead, a pure devotee is able to constantly
chant the glories of the Lord without material hindrance. He is not interested
in anything except Lord Kåñëa and never considers himself to be qualitatively
different from the Lord. One who is still attracted by the gross material body
and subtle material mind, which cover the eternal soul, continues to see
himself as different from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This
misconception is due to false identification with matter. With senses purified
of material contamination, one must serve the Lord, who is the master of all
senses, and thus one's devotional service is considered free from discrepancy.
One who ignores the injunctions of Vedic literature uselessly wastes his
sense activity in illusory material activities. He falsely considers himself to be
different from Lord Kåñëa and therefore imagines that he possesses an interest
independent of the Lord's interest. There is no possibility that such a person
can achieve steadiness in life, because the material field of action is constantly
being shifted and transformed by the disturbing influence of time. If a devotee
begins to cultivate an interest apart from the loving service of the Lord, his
meditation on his oneness with the Lord will be disturbed and overturned.
When the mind deviates from the lotus feet of the Lord, the duality of material
nature again becomes prominent within the mind, and one resumes a work
program based on the three modes of material nature. One who is not fixed in
one's own relationship with the Supreme Lord cannot be fearless or steady and
is deprived of the shelter of Lord Çré Kåñëa. Therefore one should seriously
contemplate, as described in this verse, one's identity as a small particle of
consciousness not different from the supreme consciousness, Lord Kåñëa. Thus
one should remain steady in Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 22
@nvaIºaetaAtmanaAe banDaM
maAeºaM ca ÁaAnainaï"yaA
banDa win‰"yaivaºaepaAe
maAeºa WSaAM ca s$aMyama:
anvékñetätmano bandhaà
mokñaà ca jïäna-niñöhayä
bandha indriya-vikñepo
mokña eñäà ca saàyamaù
SYNONYMS
anvékñeta—one should see by careful study; ätmanaù—of the soul;
bandham—the bondage; mokñam—the liberation; ca—also; jïäna—in
knowledge; niñöhayä—by steadiness; bandhaù—bondage; indriya—of the
senses; vikñepaù—deviation to sense gratification; mokñaù—liberation;
eñäm—of these senses; ca—and; saàyamaù—complete control.
TRANSLATION
By steady knowledge a sage should clearly ascertain the nature of the soul's
bondage and liberation. Bondage occurs when the senses are deviated to sense
gratification, and complete control of the senses constitutes liberation.
PURPORT
By carefully understanding one's eternal nature, one will not again be
bound up in the shackles of material energy, and by constant engagement in
the service of the Absolute Truth, one is liberated. Then the flickering
material senses can no longer drag one into the false consciousness of being a
material enjoyer. Such steady sense control gives one relief from the
harassment of material sense gratification.
TEXT 23
tasmaAiªayamya SaÒ"gA<
maà"Avaena care"nmauina:
ivar"l(: ºau"‰"k(AmaeByaAe
labDvaAtmaina s$auKaM mah"ta,
tasmän niyamya ñaò-vargaà
mad-bhävena caren muniù
viraktaù kñudra-kämebhyo
labdhvätmani sukhaà mahat
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; niyamya—completely controlling; ñaö-vargam—the six
senses (sight, hearing, smell, touch, taste and the mind); mat-bhävena—by
consciousness of Me; caret—should live; muniù—the sage; viraktaù—detached;
kñudra—insignificant; kämebhyaù—from sense gratification; labdhvä—having
experienced; ätmani—in the self; sukham—happiness; mahat—great.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, completely controlling the five senses and the mind by Kåñëa
consciousness, a sage, having experienced spiritual bliss within the self, should
live detached from insignificant material sense gratification.
TEXT 24
paur"ƒaAma˜ajaAna, s$aATaARna,
iBaºaATa< ‘aivazAMêre"ta,
pauNyade"zAs$air"cCE$lavanaA
™amavataI%M mah"Ima,
pura-gräma-vrajän särthän
bhikñärthaà praviçaàç caret
puëya-deça-saric-chailavanäçrama-
vatéà mahém
SYNONYMS
pura—cities; gräma—towns; vrajän—and pasturing grounds; sa-arthän—those
working for bodily maintenance; bhikñä-artham—for begging alms;
praviçan—entering; caret—he should travel; puëya—pure; deça—places;
sarit—with rivers; çaila—mountains; vana—and forests;
äçrama-vatém—possessing such residential places; mahém—the earth.
TRANSLATION
The sage should travel in sanctified places, by flowing rivers and within the
solitude of mountains and forests. He should enter the cities, towns and
pasturing grounds and approach ordinary working men only to beg his bare
sustenance.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, the word pura refers to cities and towns
with shopping centers, markets and other commercial enterprises, whereas
gräma refers to smaller towns, lacking such facilities. The vänaprastha or
sannyäsé trying to become free from material attachment should avoid those
who are working day and night for sense gratification, approaching them only
to engage them in necessary acts of charity. Those who are preaching Kåñëa
consciousness all over the world are understood to be liberated souls, and
therefore they constantly approach the materialistic living entities to engage
them in the devotional service of Lord Kåñëa. However, even such preachers
should strictly avoid contact with the materialistic world when not actually
necessary for advancing the mission of Kåñëa consciousness. The injunction is
that one should not deal unnecessarily with the materialistic world.
TEXT 25
vaAna‘asTaA™amapade"Sva,
@BaIºNAM BaEºyamaAcare"ta,
s$aMis$aDyatyaAìs$ammaAeh":
zAuÜ"s$aÔva: izAlaAnDas$aA
vänaprasthäçrama-padeñv
abhékñëaà bhaikñyam äcaret
saàsidhyaty äçv asammohaù
çuddha-sattvaù çiländhasä
SYNONYMS
vänaprastha-äçrama—of the vänaprastha order of life; padeñu—in the position;
abhékñëam—always; bhaikñyam—begging; äcaret—one should perform;
saàsidhyati—one becomes spiritually perfect; äçu—quickly; asammohaù—free
from illusion; çuddha—purified; sattvaù—existence; çéla—obtained by begging
or gleaning; andhasä—by food.
TRANSLATION
One in the vänaprastha order of life should always practice taking charity
from others, for one is thereby freed from illusion and quickly becomes perfect
in spiritual life. Indeed, one who subsists on food grains obtained in such a
humble manner purifies his existence.
PURPORT
In the Western countries people are generally so dull that they cannot
distinguish between a saintly beggar and an ordinary hobo or hippie. A saintly
beggar is constantly engaged in authorized devotional service to the Supreme
Lord and accepts only what he requires for his bare maintenance. The author
of this book remembers entering the Kåñëa consciousness society as an
arrogant university student and being quickly humbled by the process of
begging on the street on behalf of Kåñëa. This process is not theoretical but
actually purifies one's existence by forcing one to offer respect to all others.
Unless one offers respect to others, one's begging will be fruitless. Also, by
begging one will not often eat very sumptuously. This is good because when
the tongue is controlled the other senses are quickly pacified. A vänaprastha
should never give up the purifying process of begging for his food, and
ordinary people should not foolishly equate a lazy bum living at the cost of
others with a saintly beggar engaged in higher duties for the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 26
naEtaã"stautayaA pazyaeä,"
ä{"zyamaAnaM ivanazyaita
@s$al(icaÔaAe ivar"maeä,"
wh"Amau‡aicak(LiSaRtaAta,
naitad vastutayä paçyed
dåçyamänaà vinaçyati
asakta-citto viramed
ihämutra-cikérñität
SYNONYMS
na—never; etat—this; vastutayä—as ultimate reality; paçyet—one should see;
dåçyamänam—being observed by direct experience; vinaçyati—is destroyed;
asakta—without attachment; cittaù—whose consciousness; viramet—one
should be detached; iha—in this world; amutra—and in one's future life;
cikérñität—from activities performed for material advancement.
TRANSLATION
One should never see as ultimate reality those material things which
obviously will perish. With consciousness free from material attachment, one
should retire from all activities meant for material progress in this life and the
next.
PURPORT
One may doubt how a gentleman can retire from family life and live as a
beggar, eating meager foodstuffs. The Lord here responds by stating that
sumptuous or palatable foods—along with all other material objects, such as
the body itself—should never be seen as ultimate reality, since they are
obviously perishable items. One should retire from material programs destined
to enhance the quality of one's illusion both in this life and the next.
TEXT 27
yade"tad"Atmaina jagAna,
manaAevaAf‘aANAs$aMh"tama,
s$ava< maAyaeita takeR(NA
svasTastyaftvaA na tatsmare"ta,
yad etad ätmani jagan
mano-väk-präëa-saàhatam
sarvaà mäyeti tarkeëa
sva-sthas tyaktvä na tat smaret
SYNONYMS
yat—which; etat—this; ätmani—in the Supreme Lord; jagat—universe;
manaù—of the mind; väk—speech; präëa—and life air; saàhatam—formed;
sarvam—all; mäyä—material illusion; iti—thus; tarkeëa—by logic;
sva-sthaù—fixed in the self; tyaktvä—giving up; na—never; tat—that;
smaret—one should remember.
TRANSLATION
One should logically consider the universe, which is situated within the
Lord, and one's own material body, which is composed of mind, speech and life
air, to be ultimately products of the Lord's illusory energy. Thus situated in the
self, one should give up one's faith in these things and should never again make
them the object of one's meditation.
PURPORT
Every conditioned soul considers the material world to be the object of his
personal sense gratification and therefore considers the material body to be his
actual identity. The word tyaktvä indicates that one must give up one's false
identification with the material world and the material body, since both are
merely products of the illusory potency of the Lord. One should never again
meditate on the material world and body as objects of sense gratification but
rather should become situated in Kåñëa consciousness. Looking at things from
the eternal point of view, this world is simply illusory. The material energy of
the Lord is devoid of consciousness and thus cannot be the basis of actual
happiness. The Supreme Lord Himself is the only absolutely conscious entity.
He is absolutely self-sufficient, standing alone as Viñëu, the Personality of
Godhead. Only Viñëu, and not the insignificant workings of material nature,
can give us the actual perfection of life.
TEXT 28
ÁaAnainaï"Ae ivar"l(Ae vaA
maà"l(Ae vaAnapaeºak(:
s$ailaËÿAnaA™amaAMstyaftvaA
care"d"ivaiDagAAecar":
jïäna-niñöho virakto vä
mad-bhakto vänapekñakaù
sa-liìgän äçramäàs tyaktvä
cared avidhi-gocaraù
SYNONYMS
jïäna—to philosophical knowledge; niñöhaù—dedicated; viraktaù—detached
from external manifestations; va—either; mat-bhaktaù—My devotee; vä—or;
anapekñakaù—not desiring even liberation; sa-liìgän—with their rituals and
external regulations; äçramän—the duties pertaining to particular statuses of
life; tyaktvä—giving up; caret—one should conduct oneself;
avidhi-gocaraù—beyond the range of rules and regulations.
TRANSLATION
A learned transcendentalist dedicated to the cultivation of knowledge and
thus detached from external objects, or My devotee who is detached even from
desire for liberation—both neglect those duties based on external rituals or
paraphernalia. Thus their conduct is beyond the range of rules and regulations.
PURPORT
This verse describes the paramahaàsa stage of life, in which there is no
further need for rituals, external paraphernalia or rules and regulations. A
completely realized jïäna-yogé pursuing liberation, or beyond that, a perfect
devotee of the Lord who does not desire even liberation, has no further desire
for material engagement. When one completely purifies the mind, there is no
possibility of sinful behavior. Rules and regulations are meant for guiding those
who have a tendency to act in ignorance or for personal gratification, but one
who is perfect in spiritual consciousness can move freely, as described here by
the Lord. One who tends to drive a car recklessly or who is unfamiliar with the
local road conditions certainly needs the discipline of elaborate road signs and
police enforcement of traffic laws. A perfectly safe driver, however, is
thoroughly familiar with the local road conditions. He has no real need for the
enforcement officials or the speed limits and caution signs meant for those
unfamiliar with the road. A pure devotee of the Lord desires nothing except
service to the Lord; he automatically fulfills the purport of all negative and
positive injunctions, which is to always remember Kåñëa and never forget Him.
One should not, however, artificially imitate the exalted position of a
paramahaàsa devotee, for such imitation will quickly ruin one's spiritual
career.
In the previous verses the Lord has elaborately described various rituals,
paraphernalia and disciplines for the various spiritual orders of life. The
sannyäsé, for example, carries a tri-daëòa and a waterpot and eats and lives in a
particular way. A paramahaàsa devotee, having completely given up all
attachment and interest in the material world, is no longer attracted by such
external features of renunciation.
TEXT 29
bauDaAe baAlak(vat‚(Lxe"ta,
ku(zAlaAe jax"va»are"ta,
vade"äu"nmaÔavaiã"ã"Ana,
gAAecayaA< naEgAmaêre"ta,
budho bälaka-vat kréòet
kuçalo jaòa-vac caret
vaded unmatta-vad vidvän
go-caryäà naigamaç caret
SYNONYMS
budhaù—although intelligent; bälaka-vat—like a child (oblivious to honor and
dishonor); kréòet—he should enjoy life; kuçalaù—although expert;
jaòa-vat—like a stunted person; caret—he should act; vadet—he should speak;
unmatta-vat—like an insane person; vidvän—although most learned;
go-caryäm—unrestricted behavior; naigamaù—although expert in Vedic
injunctions; caret—he should perform.
TRANSLATION
Although most wise, the paramahaàsa should enjoy life like a child,
oblivious to honor and dishonor; although most expert, he should behave like a
stunted, incompetent person; although most learned, he should speak like an
insane person; and although a scholar learned in Vedic regulations, he should
behave in an unrestricted manner.
PURPORT
A paramahaàsa-sannyäsé, fearing that his mind may be deviated by the
tremendous prestige that people sometimes offer to a perfectly self-realized
person, conceals his position as described in this verse. A self-realized person
does not try to please the mass of people, nor does he desire social prestige,
since the mission of his life is to remain detached from the material world and
to always please the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Although neglecting
ordinary rules and regulations, a paramahaàsa does not ever become sinful or
immoral, but rather neglects ritualistic aspects of religious custom, such as
dressing in a particular way, performing certain ceremonies or executing
specific penances and austerities.
The pure devotees of the Lord who have dedicated their lives to
propagating the Lord's holy name must very expertly present Kåñëa
consciousness in a way pleasing to the mass of people so that they will accept
it. Those who are preaching should try to make Lord Çré Kåñëa popular without
trying to advance their personal prestige in the name of missionary progress. A
paramahaàsa not engaged in distributing Kåñëa consciousness, however,
should have no attachment whatsoever to public opinion.
TEXT 30
vaed"vaAd"r"taAe na syaAna,
na paASaNx"I na hE"tauk(:
zAuSk(vaAd"ivavaAde" na
k(iÂatpaºaM s$amaA™ayaeta,
veda-väda-rato na syän
na päñaëòé na haitukaù
çuñka-väda-viväde na
kaïcit pakñaà samäçrayet
SYNONYMS
veda-väda—in the karma-käëòa section of the Vedas; rataù—engaged;
na—never; syät—should be; na—nor; päñaëòé—atheistic, acting against Vedic
injunctions; na—nor; haitukaù—a mere logician or skeptic; çuñka-väda—of
useless topics; viväde—in arguments; na—never; kaïcit—any; pakñam—side;
samäçrayet—should take.
TRANSLATION
A devotee should never engage in the fruitive rituals mentioned in the
karma-käëòa section of the Vedas, nor should he become atheistic, acting or
speaking in opposition to Vedic injunctions. Similarly, he should never speak
like a mere logician or skeptic or take any side whatsoever in useless arguments.
PURPORT
Although a paramahaàsa devotee conceals his exalted position, certain
activities are forbidden even for one trying to conceal himself. Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains that in the name of concealment one
should not become a ghost. The word päsaëòa refers to atheistic philosophies
opposing the Vedas, such as Buddhism, and haituka refers to those who accept
only that which can be demonstrated by mundane logic or experimentation.
Since the whole purpose of the Vedas is to understand that which is beyond
material experience, a skeptic's so-called logic is irrelevant to spiritual progress.
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé warns us in this regard that a devotee should not read
atheistic literature, even with the purpose of refining arguments against
atheism. Such literature should be entirely avoided. The above-mentioned
prohibited activities are so detrimental to the advancement of Kåñëa
consciousness that they should not be adopted even as a superficial show.
TEXT 31
naAeiã"jaeta janaAÜ"Ir"Ae
janaM caAeãe"jayaeªa tau
@itavaAd"AMistaitaºaeta
naAvamanyaeta k(Âana
de"h"mauiÚ"zya pazAuvaä,"
vaErM" ku(yaARªa ke(naicata,
nodvijeta janäd dhéro
janaà codvejayen na tu
ati-vädäàs titikñeta
nävamanyeta kaïcana
deham uddiçya paçu-vad
vairaà kuryän na kenacit
SYNONYMS
na—never; udvijeta—should be disturbed or frightened; janät—because of
other people; dhéraù—a saintly person; janam—other people; ca—also;
udvejayet—should-frighten or disturb; na—never; tu—indeed;
ati-vädän—insulting or harsh words; titikñeta—he should tolerate; na—never;
avamanyeta—should belittle; kaïcana—anyone; deham—the body;
uddiçya—for the sake of; paçu-vat—like an animal; vairam—hostility;
kuryät—he should create; na—never; kenacit—with anyone.
TRANSLATION
A saintly person should never let others frighten or disturb him and,
similarly, should never frighten or disturb other people. He should tolerate the
insults of others and should never himself belittle anyone. He should never
create hostility with anyone for the sake of the material body, for he would thus
be no better than an animal.
PURPORT
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu has stated,
tåëäd api su-nécena
taror iva sahiñëunä
amäninä mäna-dena
kértanéyaù sadä hariù
[Cc. Ädi 17.31]
"One should chant the holy name of the Lord in a humble state of mind,
thinking oneself lower than the straw in the street; one should be more
tolerant than a tree, devoid of all sense of false prestige and ready to offer all
respect to others. In such a state of mind one can chant the holy name of the
Lord constantly."
A Vaiñëava should never disturb any other living entity with his body,
mind or words. He should always be tolerant and never belittle others.
Although a Vaiñëava may act powerfully against the demons for Lord Kåñëa's
sake—as did Arjuna, Hanumän and many other great devotees—a Vaiñëava
becomes very meek and humble in regard to his own reputation.
TEXT 32
Wk( Wva par"Ae ÷AtmaA
BaUtaeSvaAtmanyavaisTata:
yaTaenäu"ç&d"paA‡aeSau
BaUtaAnyaek(Atmak(Aina ca
eka eva paro hy ätmä
bhüteñv ätmany avasthitaù
yathendur uda-pätreñu
bhütäny ekätmakäni ca
SYNONYMS
ekaù—one; eva—indeed; paraù—Supreme; hi—certainly; ätmä—the
Personality of Godhead; bhüteñu—within all bodies; ätmani—within the living
entity; avasthitaù—situated; yathä—just as; induù—the moon; uda—of water;
pätreñu—in different reservoirs; bhütäni—all material bodies; eka—of the one
Supreme Lord; ätmakäni—composed of the energy; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
The one Supreme Lord is situated within all material bodies and within
everyone's soul. Just as the moon is reflected in innumerable reservoirs of
water, the Supreme Lord, although one, is present within everyone. Thus every
material body is ultimately composed of the energy of the one Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
All material bodies are composed of the same material nature, which is
ultimately the potency of the one Supreme Lord. Therefore, one cannot justify
feelings of hostility toward any living entity. In carrying out the Lord's mission
on earth, the bona fide representatives of God never become envious or hostile
toward anyone, even when chastised by those who flagrantly violate the laws
of God. Every living being is ultimately the son of God, and God is present
within everyone's body. Therefore, saintly persons should be very careful even
when dealing with the most insignificant person or creature.
TEXT 33
@labDvaA na ivaSaIde"ta
k(Alae k(Alae'zAnaM ¸(icata,
labDvaA na ô$Syaeä," Da{itamaAna,
oBayaM dE"vatain‡atama,
alabdhvä na viñédeta
käle käle 'çanaà kvacit
labdhvä na håñyed dhåtimän
ubhayaà daiva-tantritam
SYNONYMS
alabdhvä—not obtaining; na—not; viñédeta—he should be depressed; käle
käle—at different times; açanam—food; kvacit—whatever;
labdhvä—obtaining; na—not; håñyet—should rejoice; dhåti-män—fixed in
determination; ubhayam—both (obtaining and not obtaining good food);
daiva—of the supreme power of God; tantritam—under the control.
TRANSLATION
If at times one does not obtain proper food one should not be depressed, and
when one obtains sumptuous food one should not rejoice. Being fixed in
determination, one should understand both situations to be under the control of
God.
PURPORT
Because we desire to enjoy the material body, the varieties of material
experience bring us flickering happiness and inevitable suffering. We foolishly
consider ourselves to be controllers and doers, and thus through false egotism
we are subjected to the volatile feelings of the material body and mind.
TEXT 34
@Ah"Ar"ATa< s$amaIhe"ta
yaulM( tat‘aANADaAr"NAma,
taÔvaM ivama{zyatae taena
taiã"ÁaAya ivamaucyatae
ähärärthaà saméheta
yuktaà tat-präëa-dhäraëam
tattvaà vimåçyate tena
tad vijïäya vimucyate
SYNONYMS
ähära—to eat; artham—in order; saméheta—one should endeavor;
yuktam—proper; tat—of the person; präëa—life force; dhäraëam—sustaining;
tattvam—spiritual truth; vimåçyate—is contemplated; tena—by that strength
of the mind, senses and life air; tat—that truth; vijïäya—understanding;
vimucyate—one is liberated.
TRANSLATION
If required, one should endeavor to get sufficient foodstuffs, because it is
always necessary and proper to maintain one's health. When the senses, mind
and life air are fit, one can contemplate spiritual truth, and by understanding
the truth one is liberated.
PURPORT
If foodstuffs do not come automatically or by token begging, then one
should endeavor to keep body and soul together so that one's spiritual program
will not be disturbed. Normally, those who are endeavoring in spiritual life
cannot maintain steady concentration on the truth if their mind and body are
weakened by undereating. On the other hand, extravagant consumption of
food is a great impediment for spiritual advancement and should be given up.
The word ähärärtham in this verse indicates eating only to keep oneself fit for
spiritual advancement and does not justify unnecessary collecting or
warehousing of so-called alms. If one collects more than necessary for one's
spiritual program, the surplus becomes a heavy weight that drags one down to
the material platform.
TEXT 35
yaä{"cC$yaAepapaªaAªama,
@âAcC)e$ï"mautaApar"ma,
taTaA vaAs$astaTaA zAyyaAM
‘aAæaM ‘aAæaM Bajaenmauina:
yadåcchayopapannännam
adyäc chreñöham utäparam
tathä väsas tathä çayyäà
präptaà präptaà bhajen muniù
SYNONYMS
yadåcchayä—of its own accord; upapanna—acquired; annam—food; adyät—he
should eat; çreñöham—first class; uta—or; aparam—low class; tathä—similarly;
väsaù—clothing; tathä—similarly; çayyäm—bedding; präptam
präptam—whatever is automatically obtained; bhajet—should accept;
muniù—the sage.
TRANSLATION
A sage should accept the food, clothing and bedding—be they of excellent or
inferior quality—that come of their own accord.
PURPORT
Sometimes excellent, sumptuous food will come without endeavor, and at
other times tasteless food appears. A sage should not become happily excited
when a sumptuous plate is brought to him, nor should he angrily refuse
ordinary food that comes of its own accord. If no food comes at all, as
mentioned in the previous verse, one must endeavor to avoid starvation. From
these verses it appears that even a saintly sage must have a good dose of
common sense.
TEXT 36
zAAEcamaAcamanaM µaAnaM
na tau caAed"nayaA care"ta,
@nyaAMê inayamaAHÁaAnaI
yaTaAhM" laIlayaeìr":
çaucam äcamanaà snänaà
na tu codanayä caret
anyäàç ca niyamäï jïäné
yathähaà lélayeçvaraù
SYNONYMS
çaucam—general cleanliness; äcamanam—purifying the hands with water;
snänam—taking bath; na—not; tu—indeed; codanayä—by force; caret—one
should perform; anyän—other; ca—also; niyamän—regular duties; jïäné—one
who has realized knowledge of Me; yathä—just as; aham—I; lélayä—by My
own desire; éçvaraù—the Supreme Lord.
TRANSLATION
Just as I, the Supreme Lord, execute regulative duties by My own free will,
similarly, one who has realized knowledge of Me should maintain general
cleanliness, purify his hands with water, take bath and execute other regulative
duties not by force but by his own free will.
PURPORT
When the Supreme Personality of Godhead descends to the material world,
He generally observes the Vedic regulative duties to set a proper example for
mankind. The Lord acts by His own free will, since no one can oblige, force or
impel the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Similarly, the jïäné, or self-realized
soul, is fixed on the spiritual platform, beyond the material body, and should
therefore execute the regulative duties in relation to the material body by his
own free will and not as a servant of the rules and regulations. A self-realized
soul is a servant of Lord Kåñëa and not of rules and regulations. Nevertheless, a
transcendentalist strictly complies with regular duties for the pleasure of the
Supreme Lord. In other words, one who is advanced in loving devotional
service to Lord Kåñëa spontaneously moves according to the will of the
Supreme. One who is perfectly situated in spiritual realization cannot become
a servant of the material body or of rules and regulations concerning the
material body. However, this verse and other similar statements in Vedic
scriptures should not be ignorantly misinterpreted to justify immoral,
whimsical behavior. Lord Kåñëa is discussing the paramahaàsa stage of life,
and those who are attached to the material body have nothing to do with this
paramahaàsa stage, nor should they exploit its unique privileges and status.
TEXT 37
na ih" tasya ivak(lpaAKyaA
yaA ca maã"IºayaA h"taA
@Ade"h"AntaAt¸(icatKyaAitas$a,
tata: s$ampaâtae mayaA
na hi tasya vikalpäkhyä
yä ca mad-vékñayä hatä
ä-dehäntät kvacit khyätis
tataù sampadyate mayä
SYNONYMS
na—not; hi—certainly; tasya—for the realized person; vikalpa—of something
separate from Kåñëa; äkhyä—perception; yä—which perception; ca—also;
mat—of Me; vékñayä—by realized knowledge; hatä—is destroyed; ä-until;
deha—of the body; antät—the death; kvacit—sometimes; khyätiù—such
perception; tataù—then; sampadyate—achieves equal opulences; mayä—with
Me.
TRANSLATION
A realized soul no longer sees anything as separate from Me, for his realized
knowledge of Me has destroyed such illusory perception. Since the material
body and mind were previously accustomed to this kind of perception, it may
sometimes appear to recur; but at the time of death the self-realized soul
achieves opulences equal to Mine.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa explained in verse 32 of this chapter that all material and
spiritual objects are expansions of His potency. By realized knowledge of the
Lord one gives up the illusion that anything, anywhere, at any time, can be
separate from Lord Kåñëa. Lord Kåñëa has also explained, however, that one
must keep the material body and mind fit for executing devotional service;
therefore even a self-realized soul may sometimes appear to accept or reject
certain conditions or objects within this world. Such brief apparent duality of
concentration upon something other than Kåñëa does not change the liberated
status of a self-realized soul, who achieves at the time of death the same
opulences as Lord Kåñëa in the spiritual world. The function of illusion is to
separate one from Lord Kåñëa, but the brief and occasional appearance of
duality in the behavior or mentality of a pure devotee never separates him
from the Lord. It does not constitute actual illusion, for it lacks the essential
function of illusion, namely, the separation of one from Lord Kåñëa.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura describes the self-realized devotees
as follows. The devotee of the Lord does not see anything as separate from
Lord Kåñëa and thus does not consider himself to be a permanent resident of
the material world. At every moment the devotee is moved by his desire to
serve Lord Kåñëa. Just as those who are inclined to sense gratification pass
their time making arrangements for their enjoyment, similarly the devotees
are busy throughout the day arranging their devotional service to Lord Kåñëa.
Therefore they have no time to act like materialistic sense enjoyers. To
ordinary persons it may seem that a pure devotee is seeing something as
separate from Kåñëa, but a pure devotee is actually fixed in his status as a
liberated soul and is guaranteed to achieve a spiritual body in the kingdom of
God. Ordinary, materialistic persons cannot always understand the activities
of a pure devotee of the Lord, and thus they may try to minimize his position,
considering him to be the same as themselves. At the end of life, however, the
results achieved by the devotees of the Lord and ordinary materialists are
vastly different.
TEXT 38
äu":KaAed"keR(Sau k(AmaeSau
jaAtainavaeRd" @AtmavaAna,
@jÁaAis$atamaÜ"maAeR
mauinaM gAuç&maupa˜ajaeta,
duùkhodarkeñu kämeñu
jäta-nirveda ätmavän
ajjïäsita-mad-dharmo
munià gurum upavrajet
SYNONYMS
duùkha—unhappiness; udarkeñu—in that which brings as its future result;
kämeñu—in sense gratification; jäta—arisen; nirvedaù—detachment;
ätma-vän—desiring spiritual perfection in life; ajijïäsita—one who has not
seriously considered; mat—Me; dharmaù—the process of obtaining; munim—a
wise person; gurum—a spiritual master; upavrajet—he should approach.
TRANSLATION
One who is detached from sense gratification, knowing its result to be
miserable, and who desires spiritual perfection, but who has not seriously
analyzed the process for obtaining Me, should approach a bona fide and learned
spiritual master.
PURPORT
In the previous verses Lord Kåñëa described the duty of one who has
developed perfect knowledge. Now Lord Kåñëa discusses the situation of one
who, desiring self-realization, has become detached from material life but lacks
perfect knowledge of Kåñëa consciousness. Such a detached person desiring
self-realization must approach the lotus feet of a bona fide spiritual master in
Kåñëa consciousness, and then he will quickly come to the standard of perfect
understanding. One who is seriously inclined toward spiritual perfection
should not hesitate to adopt the regular discipline necessary for achieving the
highest perfection in life.
TEXT 39
taAvatpair"care"à"l(:
™aÜ"AvaAnanas$aUyak(:
yaAvaä," “aö ivajaAnaIyaAna,
maAmaeva gAuç&maAä{"ta:
tävat paricared bhaktaù
çraddhävän anasüyakaù
yävad brahma vijänéyän
mäm eva gurum ädåtaù
SYNONYMS
tävat—that long; paricaret—should serve; bhaktaù—the devotee;
çraddhä-vän—with great faith; anasüyakaù—being without envy;
yävat—until; brahma—spiritual knowledge; vijänéyät—he clearly realizes;
mäm—Me; eva—indeed; gurum—the spiritual master; ädåtaù—with great
respect.
TRANSLATION
Until a devotee has clearly realized spiritual knowledge, he should continue
with great faith and respect and without envy to render personal service to the
guru, who is nondifferent from Me.
PURPORT
As stated by Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura in his Gurv-añöaka
prayers, yasya prasädäd bhagavat-prasädaù: one receives the mercy of the
Supreme Lord through the mercy of the bona fide spiritual master. A devotee
who has been blessed by his guru with spiritual knowledge becomes qualified to
directly engage in the mission of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Çréla
Prabhupäda always emphasized that service to the spiritual master in
separation, pushing on the mission of the guru, is the highest form of
devotional service. The word paricaret in this verse indicates waiting upon
one's master by rendering personal service. In other words, one who has not
clearly realized the teachings of his spiritual master should remain very close to
the guru to avoid falling down into illusion, but one who has acquired realized
knowledge by the mercy of his spiritual master may expand the spiritual
master's mission by traveling around the world to preach Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXTS 40-41
yastvas$aMyataSaÒ"gAR:
‘acaNxe"in‰"yas$aAr"iTa:
ÁaAnavaEr"Agyar"ih"tas$a,
i‡ad"Nx"maupajaIvaita
$aur"AnaAtmaAnamaAtmasTaM
ina¶ú"tae maAM ca DamaRh"A
@ivapa¸(k(SaAyaAe'smaAä,"
@mauSmaA»a ivah"Iyatae
yas tv asaàyata-ñaò-vargaù
pracaëòendriya-särathiù
jïäna-vairägya-rahitas
tri-daëòam upajévati
surän ätmänam ätma-sthaà
nihnute mäà ca dharma-hä
avipakva-kañäyo 'smäd
amuñmäc ca vihéyate
SYNONYMS
yaù—one who; tu—but; asaàyata—having not controlled; ñaö-the six;
vargaù—items of contamination; pracaëòa—fierce; indriya—of the senses;
särathiù—the driver, intelligence; jïäna—of knowledge; vairägya—and
detachment; rahitaù—bereft; tri-daëòam—the sannyäsa order of life;
upajévati—utilizing for one's bodily maintenance; surän—the worshipable
demigods; ätmänam—his own self; ätma-stham—situated within himself;
nihnute—denies; mäm—Me; ca—also; dharmahä—ruining religious principles;
avipakva—not yet dissolved; kañäyaù—contamination; asmät—from this
world; amuñmät—from the next life; ca—also; vihéyate—he is lost, deviated.
TRANSLATION
One who has not controlled the six forms of illusion [lust, anger, greed,
excitement, false pride and intoxication], whose intelligence, the leader of the
senses, is extremely attached to material things, who is bereft of knowledge and
detachment, who adopts the sannyäsa order of life to make a living, who denies
the worshipable demigods, his own self and the Supreme Lord within himself,
thus ruining all religious principles, and who is still infected by material
contamination, is deviated and lost both in this life and the next.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa here condemns bogus personalities who adopt the sannyäsa
order of life for sense gratification while still maintaining all of the symptoms
of gross illusion. A false show of sannyäsa is never accepted by intelligent
followers of Vedic principles. So-called sannyäsés who ruin all Vedic religious
principles sometimes become famous among foolish persons, but they are
simply cheating themselves and their followers. These charlatan sannyäsés are
never actually engaged in the loving devotional service of Lord Kåñëa.
TEXT 42
iBaºaAeDaRmaR: zAmaAe'ihM"s$aA
tapa wRºaA vanaAEk(s$a:
gA{ih"NAAe BaUtar"ºaejyaA
iã"jasyaAcaAyaRs$aevanama,
bhikñor dharmaù çamo 'hiàsä
tapa ékñä vanaukasaù
gåhiëo bhüta-rakñejyä
dvijasyäcärya-sevanam
SYNONYMS
bhikñoù—of a sannyäsé; dharmaù—the main religious principle;
çamaù-equanimity; ahiàsä—nonviolence; tapaù—austerity;
ékñä—discrimination (between the body and the soul); vana—in the forest;
okasaù—of one dwelling, a vänaprastha; gåhiëaù—of a householder;
bhüta-rakñä—offering shelter to all living entities; ijyä—performance of
sacrifice; dvi-jasya—of a brahmacäré; äcärya—the spiritual master;
sevanam—serving.
TRANSLATION
The main religious duties of a sannyäsé are equanimity and nonviolence,
whereas for the vänaprastha austerity and philosophical understanding of the
difference between the body and soul are prominent. The main duties of a
householder are to give shelter to all living entities and perform sacrifices, and
the brahmacäré is mainly engaged in serving the spiritual master.
PURPORT
The brahmacäré lives in the äçrama of the spiritual master and personally
assists the äcärya. Householders generally are entrusted with the performance
of sacrifice and Deity worship and should provide maintenance for all living
entities. The vänaprastha must clearly understand the difference between body
and soul in order to maintain his status of renunciation, and he should also
perform austerities. The sannyäsé should fully absorb his body, mind and words
in self-realization. Having thus achieved equanimity of mind, he is the best
well-wisher of all living entities.
TEXT 43
“aöcaya< tapa: zAAEcaM
s$antaAeSaAe BaUtas$aAEô$d"ma,
gA{h"sTasyaApya{taAE gAntau:
s$avaeRSaAM maäu"paAs$anama,
brahmacaryaà tapaù çaucaà
santoño bhüta-sauhådam
gåhasthasyäpy åtau gantuù
sarveñäà mad-upäsanam
SYNONYMS
brahma-caryam—celibacy; tapaù—austerity; çaucam—purity of mind without
attachment or repulsion; santoñaù—full satisfaction; bhüta—toward all living
entities; sauhådam—friendship; gåhasthasya—of the householder; api—also;
åtau—at the proper time; gantuù—approaching his wife; sarveñäm—of all
human beings; mat—of Me; upäsanam—worship.
TRANSLATION
A householder may approach his wife for sex only at the time prescribed for
begetting children. Otherwise, the householder should practice celibacy,
austerity, cleanliness of mind and body, satisfaction in his natural position, and
friendship toward all living entities. Worship of Me is to be practiced by all
human beings, regardless of social or occupational divisions.
PURPORT
Sarveñäà mad-upäsanam indicates that all followers of the varëäçrama
system must worship Lord Kåñëa or risk falling down from their position. As
stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.5.3), na bhajanty avajänanti sthänäd bhrañöäù
patanty adhaù: even though one may be advanced in the performance of Vedic
rituals and customs, without worshiping the Supreme Lord one will certainly
fall down.
Those in the householder äçrama are not authorized to enjoy life like pigs
and dogs, freely exercising their sexual potency. A religious householder
should approach his wife at the prescribed time and place and beget a saintly
child for the pleasure of the Supreme Lord. Otherwise, it is specifically
mentioned here that a householder must practice celibacy along with all of the
other members of advanced human civilization. The word çaucam indicates
cleanliness of mind and body, or else freedom from attachment and repulsion.
One who faithfully worships God as the supreme controller experiences
santoña, full satisfaction in whatever situation the Lord arranges. By seeing
Lord Kåñëa within everyone, one becomes bhüta-suhåt, the well-wishing friend
of all.
TEXT 44
wita maAM ya: svaDamaeRNA
BajaeiªatyamananyaBaAk,(
s$avaRBaUtaeSau maà"AvaAe
maà"ilM( ivand"tae ä{"X#Ama,
iti mäà yaù sva-dharmeëa
bhajen nityam ananya-bhäk
sarva-bhüteñu mad-bhävo
mad-bhaktià vindate dåòhäm
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; mäm—Me; yaù—one who; sva-dharmeëa—by his prescribed duty;
bhajet—worships; nityam—always; ananya-bhäk—with no other object of
worship; sarva-bhüteñu—in all living entities; mat—of Me; bhävaù—being
conscious; mat-bhaktim—devotional service unto Me; vindate—achieves;
dåòhäm—unflinching.
TRANSLATION
One who worships Me by his prescribed duty, having no other object of
worship, and who remains conscious of Me as present in all living entities,
achieves unflinching devotional service unto Me.
PURPORT
It is clearly explained in this verse that loving devotional service unto Lord
Kåñëa is the ultimate goal of the entire varëäçrama system, which the Lord has
been elaborately explaining. In any social or occupational division of human
society one must be a devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and
worship Him alone. The bona fide spiritual master is the representative of
Lord Kåñëa, and worship of the äcärya goes directly to the lotus feet of the
Lord. Although ordinary householders are sometimes ordered by Vedic
injunctions to worship particular demigods or forefathers, one should
remember that Lord Kåñëa is within all living entities. As stated here,
sarva-bhüteñu mad-bhävaù. The pure devotees of the Lord worship the Lord
alone, and those who cannot come to the standard of pure devotional service
should at least meditate upon the Personality of Godhead within the demigods
and all other living entities, understanding that all religious processes are
ultimately meant for the pleasure of the Lord. In the course of missionary work
even pure devotees must deal with government leaders and other prominent
members of society, sometimes praising such persons and complying with their
orders. Yet because the devotees are always meditating on Lord Kåñëa situated
as the Supersoul within everyone, they are therefore acting for the Lord's
pleasure and not for the pleasure of any ordinary human being. Those persons
dealing with different demigods in the course of their varëäçrama duties
should similarly see the Lord as the basis of everything. They should
concentrate on pleasing the Supreme Lord by all activities. This stage of life is
called love of God, and it brings one to the point of actual liberation.
TEXT 45
BaftyaAeÜ"vaAnapaAiyanyaA
s$avaRlaAek(mahe"ìr"ma,
s$avaAeRtpaÔyapyayaM “aö
k(Ar"NAM maAepayaAita s$a:
bhaktyoddhavänapäyinyä
sarva-loka-maheçvaram
sarvotpatty-apyayaà brahma
käraëaà mopayäti saù
SYNONYMS
bhaktyä—by loving service; uddhava—My dear Uddhava;
anapäyinyä—unfailing; sarva—of all; loka—worlds; mahä-éçvaram—the
Supreme Lord; sarva—of everything; utpatti—the cause of the creation;
apyayam—and annihilation; brahma—the Absolute Truth; käraëam—the
cause of the universe; mä—to Me; upayäti—comes; saù—he.
TRANSLATION
My dear Uddhava, I am the Supreme Lord of all worlds, and I create and
destroy this universe, being its ultimate cause. I am thus the Absolute Truth,
and one who worships Me with unfailing devotional service comes to Me.
PURPORT
As described in the First Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.11), Lord Kåñëa
is understood in three features-as impersonal Brahman, localized Paramätmä
and ultimately the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, the source of
everything. Lord Kåñëa absorbs the impersonal philosophers into the rays of
His body, appears before the perfect yogés as the Lord of the heart, and
ultimately brings His pure devotees back to His own abode for an eternal life
of bliss and knowledge.
TEXT 46
wita svaDamaRinaiNARl(-
s$aÔvaAe inaÁaARtamaÕ"ita:
ÁaAnaivaÁaAnas$ampaªaAe
na icar"Ats$amaupaEita maAma,
iti sva-dharma-nirëiktasattvo
nirjïäta-mad-gatiù
jïäna-vijïäna-sampanno
na cirät samupaiti mäm
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; sva-dharma—by performing his prescribed duty; nirëikta—having
purified; sattvaù—his existence; nirjïäta—completely understanding;
mat-gatiù—My supreme position; jïäna—with knowledge of the scriptures;
vijïäna—and realized knowledge of the soul; sampannaù—endowed; na
cirät—in the near future; samupaiti—completely achieves; mäm—Me.
TRANSLATION
Thus, one who has purified his existence by execution of his prescribed
duties, who fully understands My supreme position and who is endowed with
scriptural and realized knowledge, very soon achieves Me.
TEXT 47
vaNAAR™amavataAM DamaR
WSa @AcaAr"laºaNA:
s$a Wva maà"il(yautaAe
ina:™aeyas$ak(r": par":
varëäçramavatäà dharma
eña äcära-lakñaëaù
sa eva mad-bhakti-yuto
niùçreyasa-karaù paraù
SYNONYMS
varëäçrama-vatäm—of the followers of the varëäçrama system;
dharmaù—religious principle; eñaù—this; äcära—by proper behavior
according to the authorized tradition; lakñaëaù—characterized; saù—this;
eva—indeed; mat-bhakti—with devotional service to Me; yutaù—conjoined;
niùçreyasa—the highest perfection of life; karaù—giving; paraù—supreme.
TRANSLATION
Those who are followers of this varëäçrama system accept religious
principles according to authorized traditions of proper conduct. When such
varëäçrama duties are dedicated to Me in loving service, they award the
supreme perfection of life.
PURPORT
According to the varëäçrama system, the members of different orders and
statuses of life have many traditional duties, such as worshiping the forefathers
to save them from possible sinful reactions. All such Vedic rituals, sacrifices,
austerities and so forth should be offered to the lotus feet of Lord Çré Kåñëa.
They then become the transcendental means for going back home, back to
Godhead. In other words, Kåñëa consciousness, or loving service to Lord Çré
Kåñëa, is the sum and substance of progressive human life.
TEXT 48
WtaÔae'iBaih"taM s$aADaAe
BavaAna, pa{cC$ita ya»a maAma,
yaTaA svaDamaRs$aMyaul(Ae
Bal(Ae maAM s$aimayaAtpar"ma,
etat te 'bhihitaà sädho
bhavän påcchati yac ca mäm
yathä sva-dharma-saàyukto
bhakto mäà samiyät param
SYNONYMS
etat—this; te—unto you; abhihitam—described; sädho—O saintly Uddhava;
bhavän—you; påcchati—have asked; yat—which; ca—and; mäm—from Me;
yathä—the means by which; sva-dharma—in one's prescribed duty;
saàyuktaù—perfectly engaged; bhaktaù—being a devotee; mäm—to Me;
samiyät—one may come; param—the Supreme.
TRANSLATION
My dear saintly Uddhava, I have now described to you, just as you inquired,
the means by which My devotee, perfectly engaged in his prescribed duty, can
come back to Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Eleventh Canto, Eighteenth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Description of Varëäçrama-dharma."
19. The Perfection of Spiritual Knowledge
This chapter describes how those who practice speculative knowledge
eventually give up their method, whereas the pure devotees remain engaged in
devotional service eternally. Also described are the different practices of the
yogés, beginning with yama.
The Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëa, stated to Uddhava, "One who is actually
wise, who knows the truth of the self and possesses transcendental insight,
rejects this world of dualities and the so-called knowledge meant for
facilitating enjoyment of it. He instead engages himself in trying to satisfy the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master of all. This is pure bhakti-yoga.
Transcendental knowledge is greater than such ordinary pious activities as
chanting of mantras, but pure devotional service is greater than even
knowledge."
After this, Lord Kåñëa, requested by Çré Uddhava to describe in full detail
pure transcendental knowledge and devotional service, related the same
instructions that the greatest of Vaiñëavas, Bhéñmadeva, gave on these topics
to Çré Yudhiñöhira on the occasion of the battle at Kurukñetra. Following this,
after being asked about yama and the other practices of yoga, the Lord
enumerated the twelve kinds of yama beginning with nonviolence, and the
twelve kinds of niyama, beginning with bodily cleanliness.
TEXT 1
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
yaAe ivaâA™autas$ampaªa:
@AtmavaAªaAnaumaAinak(:
mayaAmaA‡aimadM" ÁaAtvaA
ÁaAnaM ca maiya s$aªyas$aeta,
çré-bhagavän uväca
yo vidyä-çruta-sampannaù
ätmavän nänumänikaù
mayä-mätram idaà jïätvä
jïänaà ca mayi sannyaset
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; yaù—one who;
vidyä—with realized knowledge; çruta—and preliminary scriptural knowledge;
sampannaù—endowed; ätma-vän—self-realized; na—not;
änumänikaù—engaged in impersonal speculation; mäyä—illusion;
mätram—only; idam—this universe; jïätvä—knowing; jïänam—such
knowledge and the means of achieving it; ca—also; mayi—to Me;
sannyaset—one should surrender.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: A self-realized person who has
cultivated scriptural knowledge up to the point of enlightenment and who is
free from impersonal speculation, understanding the material universe to be
simply illusion, should surrender unto Me both that knowledge and the means
by which he achieved it.
PURPORT
Mäyä-mätram idaà jïätvä indicates knowledge that the eternal spirit soul
and the eternal Personality of Godhead are completely separate from the
temporary qualities of the material world. The word vidyä-çruta-sampanna
means that one should cultivate Vedic knowledge for the purpose of
enlightenment and not to make a show of mysticism, intellectuality or
impersonal speculation. Having neutralized the illusory effects of mäyä, one
should then transfer one's attention to the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
surrendering the process of philosophical negation to the Lord Himself. Çréla
Jéva Gosvämé gives the example that when there is danger the king may issue
weapons to private citizens, but after military victory the individual citizens
return the weapons to the king.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains this point of this verse as
follows. Somehow or other the living entity has to free himself from material
illusion, which has covered him since time immemorial. Cultivating
desirelessness and renunciation by practice of the mystic yoga system, the
living entity develops knowledge of illusion and may thus lift himself above
the reach of material ignorance. However, once one is situated on the
transcendental platform, both knowledge of illusion and the process of
acquiring such knowledge have no further practical application. Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura gives the example that a man may be haunted
by the ghost of a snake or a tiger. As long as the man is possessed and thinks, "I
am a snake" or "I am a tiger," attempts will be made to counteract the ghostly
influence by application of jewels, mantras and herbs. But when the man is
freed from possession by ghosts, he again thinks, "I am Mr. So-and-so, the son
of Mr. So-and-so," and returns to his original nature. At that time the jewels,
mantras and herbs have no further immediate application. The word vidyä in
this verse thus indicates knowledge acquired through philosophical analysis,
mystic yoga, austerities and renunciation. Such knowledge of the temporary,
illusory nature of this world counteracts ignorance, and there are many Vedic
scriptures that train the living entity in such knowledge. Gradually one gives
up his false identification with the material body and mind and with those
material objects that interact with the body and mind. Having realized such
counteractive knowledge, one must engage in the loving service of the
Personality of Godhead and become a pure devotee. When one is completely
perfect in Kåñëa consciousness, there is naturally little interest in the
innumerable details of illusion, and gradually one is transferred to the spiritual
world.
TEXT 2
ÁaAinanastvah"maevaeí":
svaATaAeR he"tauê s$ammata:
svagARêEvaApavagARê
naAnyaAe'TaAeR maä{"tae i‘aya:
jïäninas tv aham eveñöaù
svärtho hetuç ca sammataù
svargaç caiväpavargaç ca
nänyo 'rtho mad-åte priyaù
SYNONYMS
jïäninaù—of a learned self-realized philosopher; tu—indeed; aham—I;
eva—alone; iñöaù—the object of worship; sva-arthaù—the desired goal of life;
hetuù—the means for achieving the goal of life; ca—also; sammataù—the
settled conclusion; svargaù—the cause of all happiness in elevation to heaven;
ca—also; eva—indeed; apavargaù—freedom from all unhappiness; ca—also;
na—not; anyaù—any other; arthaù—purpose; mat—Me; rte—without;
priyaù—dear object.
TRANSLATION
For learned, self-realized philosophers I am the only object of worship, the
desired goal of life, the means for achieving that goal, and the settled conclusion
of all knowledge. Indeed, because I am the cause of their happiness and their
freedom from unhappiness, such learned souls have no effective purpose or dear
object in life except Me.
PURPORT
In the previous verse Lord Kåñëa stated that one should ultimately
surrender unto Him that knowledge by which the material world is seen as
illusion. Material attachments are certainly problems for the living entities,
since they are diseases of the spirit soul. One who has contracted a skin disease
that causes terrible itching gains only flickering relief by scratching the
unbearable sores. If he does not scratch he suffers greatly, but by scratching,
even though there is an instantaneous sensation of pleasure, unbearable misery
follows as the itching increases. Real happiness is not found in scratching one's
skin infections but rather in becoming free from such disease. Conditioned
souls are harassed by many illusory desires, and in desperation they try to
gratify their senses through the hopeless scratching processes of illicit sex,
meat-eating, gambling and intoxication. They further try to gain relief
through material society, friendship and love, but the result is unbearable
suffering. Real happiness is to eliminate completely the itching disease of
material desire. Since material desire is a disease of the soul, one must acquire
knowledge to treat this disease and eliminate it. Such therapeutic knowledge is
essential as long as one is diseased, but when one is fully healthy, such
technical medical knowledge is no longer interesting to the healthy person,
and he may leave such knowledge to the doctors. Similarly, in the advanced
stage of Kåñëa consciousness one need not think continually of one's personal
problems but may rather think of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord
Kåñëa, with love and devotion. Lord Kåñëa advises in the previous verse that
one should eliminate one's personal problems through technical knowledge of
illusion. After giving up constant meditation on such problems, one can then
become a lover of God. Lord Kåñëa certainly guides each and every sincere
devotee internally within the heart and externally through the bona fide
spiritual master. In this way, Lord Kåñëa gradually trains His sincere devotees
to give up their irrational attachment to dead matter. Once freedom has been
achieved, a devotee begins to seriously cultivate his relationship with Lord
Kåñëa in the spiritual sky.
One may falsely think that just as at a certain stage of advancement one
ceases to concentrate on technical, analytic knowledge of illusion, so, at
another stage one may give up loving devotional service to Lord Kåñëa. To
nullify such speculation Lord Çré Kåñëa here states in various ways that He is
the supreme eternal goal of all truly learned human beings. Indeed, the most
prominent scholars within the universe are the sages, such as the four
Kumäras, who accept Lord Kåñëa as their only worshipable object. Because
they have discovered that they are eternal fragmental portions of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, they are not interested in fruitive activities
and mental speculation. Lord Kåñëa awards celestial bliss and freedom from
anxiety to His sincere followers, who have no purpose or beloved object in life
other than the Lord.
TEXT 3
ÁaAnaivaÁaAnas$aMis$aÜ"A:
padM" ™aeïM" ivaäu"maRma
ÁaAnaI i‘ayatamaAe'taAe mae
ÁaAnaenaAs$aAE ibaBaitaR maAma,
jïäna-vijïäna-saàsiddhäù
padaà çreñöhaà vidur mama
jïäné priyatamo 'to me
jïänenäsau bibharti mäm
SYNONYMS
jïäna—in scriptural knowledge; vijïäna—and realized spiritual
understanding; saàsiddhäù—completely perfected; padam—the lotus feet;
çreñöham—the supreme object; viduù—they know; mama—My; jïäné—a
learned transcendentalist; priya-tamaù—most dear; ataù—thus; me—to Me;
jïänena—by spiritual knowledge; asau—that learned person;
bibharti—maintains (in happiness); mäm—Me.
TRANSLATION
Those who have achieved complete perfection through philosophical and
realized knowledge recognize My lotus feet to be the supreme transcendental
object. Thus the learned transcendentalist is most dear to Me, and by his
perfect knowledge he maintains Me in happiness.
PURPORT
The words padaà çreñöhaà vidur mama ("they recognize My lotus feet to be
supreme") certainly eliminate the impersonalist philosophers from the category
of saàsiddhäù, or completely perfected philosophers. Lord Kåñëa here refers to
such great transcendental scholars as the four Kumäras, Çukadeva Gosvämé,
Çré Vyäsadeva, Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura and Çréla A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda. The Lord similarly states in Bhagavad-gétä
(7.17-18),
teñäm jïäné nitya-yukta
eka-bhaktir viçiñyate
priyo hi jïänino 'ty-artham
ahaà sa ca mama priyaù
"Of these, the wise one who is in full knowledge in union with Me through
pure devotional service is the best. For I am very dear to him, and he is dear to
Me."
udäräù sarva evaite
jïäné tv ätmaiva me matam
ästhitaù sa hi yuktätmä
mäm evänuttamäà gatim
[Bg. 7.18]
"All these devotees are undoubtedly magnanimous souls, but he who is situated
in knowledge of Me I consider verily to dwell in Me. Being engaged in My
transcendental service, he attains Me."
Jïäna refers to an authorized philosophical and analytic perception of
reality, and when such knowledge is clearly realized through the sanctification
of consciousness the resultant comprehensive experience is called vijïäna.
Speculative, impersonal knowledge does not actually purify the heart of the
living entity but rather merges him ever deeper into forgetfulness of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Just as a father is always proud of his son's
education, similarly, Lord Kåñëa becomes very happy to see the living entities
acquiring a sound spiritual education and thus making progress on the way
back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 4
tapastaITa< japaAe d"AnaM
paiva‡aANAItar"AiNA ca
naAlaM ku(vaRinta taAM is$aiÜM"
yaA ÁaAnak(layaA k{(taA
tapas térthaà japo dänaà
paviträëétaräëi ca
nälaà kurvanti täà siddhià
yä jïäna-kalayä kåtä
SYNONYMS
tapaù—austerity; tértham—visiting holy places; japaù—offering silent prayers;
dänam—charity; paviträëi—pious activities; itaräëi—other; ca—also;
na—not; alam—up to the same standard; kurvanti—they award; täm—this;
siddhim—perfection; yä—which; jïäna—of spiritual knowledge; kalayä—by a
fraction; kåtä—is awarded.
TRANSLATION
That perfection which is produced by a small fraction of spiritual knowledge
cannot be duplicated by performing austerities, visiting holy places, chanting
silent prayers, giving in charity or engaging in other pious activities.
PURPORT
Jïäna here refers to a clear understanding of the Lord's supreme dominion
over all that be, and this realized knowledge is nondifferent from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. That the Lord is supreme is confirmed in the previous
verse by the words padam çreñöhaà vidur mama. One may perform penances or
visit holy places with a proud menta!ity or material motivation; similarly, one
may chant prayers to God, give charity or perform other externally pious
activities with many bizarre, hypocritical or even demoniac motivations.
Realized knowledge of the supremacy of Lord Kåñëa, however, is a solid
connection with the spiritual world, and if one pursues this holy
understanding one is gradually promoted to the highest level of conscious
existence, called Vaikuëöha, or the kingdom of God.
TEXT 5
tasmaAjÁaAnaena s$aih"taM
ÁaAtvaA svaAtmaAnamauÜ"va
ÁaAnaivaÁaAnas$ampaªaAe
Baja maAM Bail(BaAvata:
tasmäj jïänena sahitaà
jïätvä svätmänam uddhava
jïäna-vijïäna-sampanno
bhaja mäà bhakti-bhävataù
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; jïänena—knowledge; sahitam—with; jïätvä—knowing;
sva-ätmänam—your own self; uddhava—My dear Uddhava; jïäna—in Vedic
knowledge; vijïäna—and clear realization; sampannaù—accomplished;
bhaja—worship; mäm—Me; bhakti—of loving devotion; bhävataù—in the
mood.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, My dear Uddhava, through knowledge you should understand
your actual self. Then, advancing by clear realization of Vedic knowledge, you
should worship Me in the mood of loving devotion.
PURPORT
The word vijïäna indicates realized knowledge of one's original, spiritual
form. Every living entity has an eternal spiritual form, which lies dormant
until one arouses one's original Kåñëa consciousness. Without knowledge of
one's own spiritual personality it is not possible to cultivate love of the
Supreme Personality, Lord Kåñëa. Therefore, the words jïätvä svätmänam are
significant here, indicating that every living entity can realize his full
potential as an individual person only in the kingdom of God.
TEXT 6
ÁaAnaivaÁaAnayaÁaena
maAimaî"AtmaAnamaAtmaina
s$avaRyaÁapaitaM maAM vaE
s$aMis$aiÜM" maunayaAe'gAmana,
jïäna-vijïäna-yajïena
mäm iñövätmänam ätmani
sarva-yajïa-patià mäà vai
saàsiddhià munayo 'gaman
SYNONYMS
jïäna—of Vedic knowledge; vijïäna—and spiritual enlightenment;
yajïena—by the sacrifice; mäm—Me; iñövä—having worshiped;
ätmänam—the Supreme Lord within everyone's heart; ätmani—within
themselves; sarva—of all; yajïa—sacrifices; patim—the Lord; mäm—Me;
vai—certainly; saàsiddhim—the supreme perfection; munayaù—the sages;
agaman—achieved.
TRANSLATION
Formerly, great sages, through the sacrifice of Vedic knowledge and spiritual
enlightenment, worshiped Me within themselves, knowing Me to be the
Supreme Lord of all sacrifice and the Supersoul in everyone's heart. Thus
coming to Me, these sages achieved the supreme perfection.
TEXT 7
tvayyauÜ"vaA™ayaita yaiñivaDaAe ivak(Ar"Ae
maAyaAntar"Apataita naAâpavagARyaAeyaRta,
janmaAd"yaAe'sya yad"maI tava tasya ikM( syaur,"
@AântayaAeyaRd"s$ataAe'ista tade"va maDyae
tvayy uddhaväçrayati yas tri-vidho vikäro
mäyäntaräpatati nädy-apavargayor yat
janmädayo 'sya yad amé tava tasya kià syur
ädy-antayor yad asato 'sti tad eva madhye
SYNONYMS
tvayi—in you; uddhava—O Uddhava; äçrayati—enters and remains;
yaù—which; tri-vidhaù—in three divisions, according to the modes of nature;
vikäraù—(the material body and mind, which are subject to) constant
transformation; mäyä—illusion; antarä—during the present;
äpatati—suddenly appears; na—not; ädi—in the beginning; apavargayoù—nor
at the end; yat—since; janma—birth; ädayaù—and so on (growth, procreation,
maintenance, dwindling and death); asya—of the body; yat—when;
amé—these; tava—in relation to you; tasya—in relation to your spiritual
nature; kim—what relationship; syuù—could they have; ädi—in the
beginning; antayoù—and in the end; yat—since; asataù—of that which does
not exist; asti—exists; tat—that; eva—indeed; madhye—only in the middle, at
present.
TRANSLATION
My dear Uddhava, the material body and mind, composed of the three modes
of material nature, attach themselves to you, but they are actually illusion, since
they appear only at the present, having no original or ultimate existence. How
is it possible, therefore, that the various stages of the body, namely birth,
growth, reproduction, maintenance, dwindling and death, can have any relation
to your eternal self? These phases relate only to the material body, which
previously did not exist and ultimately will not exist. The body exists merely at
the present moment.
PURPORT
The example is given that a man walking in the forest may see a rope but
consider it to be a snake. Such perception is mäyä, or illusion, although the
rope actually exists and a snake also exists in another place. Illusion thus refers
to the false identification of one object with another. The material body exists
briefly and then disappears. In the past the body did not exist, and in the
future it will not exist; it enjoys a flickering, momentary existence in so-called
present time. If we falsely identify ourselves as the material body or mind, we
are creating an illusion. One who identifies himself as American, Russian,
Chinese, Mexican, black or white, man or woman, communist or capitalist,
and so on, accepting such designations as his permanent identity, is certainly
in deep illusion. He can be compared to a sleeping man who sees himself acting
in a different body while dreaming. In the previous verse Lord Kåñëa told
Uddhava that spiritual knowledge is the means of achieving the highest
perfection, and now the Lord is explicitly describing such knowledge.
TEXT 8
™aIoÜ"va ovaAca
ÁaAnaM ivazAuÜM" ivapaulaM yaTaEtaä,"
vaEr"AgyaivaÁaAnayautaM paur"ANAma,
@AKyaAih" ivaìeìr" ivaìmaUtaeR
tvaà"il(yaAegAM ca mah"iã"ma{gyama,
çré-uddhava uväca
jïänaà viçuddhaà vipulaà yathaitad
vairägya-vijïäna-yutaà puräëam
äkhyähi viçveçvara viçva-mürte
tvad-bhakti-yogaà ca mahad-vimågyam
SYNONYMS
çré-uddhavaù uväca—Çré Uddhava said; jïänam—knowledge;
viçuddham—transcendental; vipulam—extensive; yathä—just as; etat—this;
vairagya—detachment; vijïäna—and direct perception of the truth;
yutam—including; puräëam—traditional among great philosophers;
äkhyähi—please explain; viçva-éçvara—O Lord of the universe;
viçva-mürte—O form of the universe; tvat—unto You; bhakti-yogam—loving
devotional service; ca—also; mahat—by great souls; vimågyam—sought after.
TRANSLATION
Çré Uddhava said: O Lord of the universe! O form of the universe! Please
explain to me that process of knowledge which automatically brings detachment
and direct perception of the truth, which is transcendental, and which is
traditional among great spiritual philosophers. This knowledge, sought by
elevated personalities, describes loving devotional service unto Your Lordship.
PURPORT
Those who are able to cross over the darkness of material existence are
called mahat, or great personalities. Secondary items like cosmic consciousness
or universal control do not deviate the attention of such great souls from
loving service to the Lord. Çré Uddhava desires to hear knowledge of the
eternal religious principles that are the traditional aim and objective of all
superior personalities.
TEXT 9
taApa‡ayaeNAAiBah"tasya GaAere"
s$antapyamaAnasya BavaADvanaIzA
pazyaAima naAnyacC$r"NAM tavaAx.~i„aã"
nã"Atapa‡aAd"ma{taAiBavaSaARta,
täpa-trayeëäbhihatasya ghore
santapyamänasya bhavädhvanéça
paçyämi nänyac charaëaà taväìghridvandvätapaträd
amåtäbhivarñät
SYNONYMS
täpa—by the miseries; trayeëa—threefold; abhihatasya—of one overwhelmed;
ghore—which is terrible; santapyamänasya—being tormented; bhava—of
material existence; adhvani—in the path; éça—O Lord; paçyämi—I see;
na—none; anyat—other; çaraëam—shelter; tava—Your; aìghri—lotus feet;
dvandva—of the two; ätapaträt—than the umbrella; amåta—of nectar;
abhivarñät—the shower.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, for one who is being tormented on the terrible path of birth
and death and is constantly overwhelmed by the threefold miseries, I do not see
any possible shelter other than Your two lotus feet, which are just like a
refreshing umbrella that pours down showers of delicious nectar.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa, recognizing Uddhava's highly intellectual nature, has
repeatedly recommended to him that one should achieve perfection by
cultivation of transcendental knowledge. But the Lord has also clearly
demonstrated that such knowledge must bring one to the point of loving
devotional service to Him, for otherwise it is useless. In this verse Çré Uddhava
corroborates Lord Kåñëa's statements that actual happiness is obtained by
surrendering to His lotus feet. When the incarnation of Godhead Påthu
Mahäräja was crowned, the demigod Väyu presented him with an umbrella
that constantly sprayed fine particles of water. The Lord's two lotus feet are
similarly compared here to a wonderful umbrella that produces a constant
shower of delicious nectar, the bliss of Kåñëa consciousness. Normally,
speculative analytic knowledge terminates in an impersonal conception of the
Absolute Truth, but the so-called bliss of merging into impersonal spiritual
existence can never be compared to the bliss of Kåñëa consciousness, as stated
here by Çré Uddhava. Kåñëa consciousness thus automatically constitutes
perfect knowledge, since Lord Kåñëa is the ultimate shelter of all living
entities. The words abhihatasya and abhivarñät are significant in this verse.
Abhihatasya indicates one who is being defeated on all sides by the onslaught
of material nature, whereas abhivarñät indicates a downpour of nectar that
eliminates all of the problems of material existence. By our intelligence we
should look beyond the dull material body and nonsensical material mind to
observe the unlimited shower of blissful nectar coming from the two lotus feet
of Lord Kåñëa. Then our real good fortune will begin.
TEXT 10
d"íM" janaM s$ampaitataM ibalae'ismana,
k(AlaAih"naA ºau"‰"s$auKaAeç&taSaRma,
s$amauÜ"rE"naM k{(payaApavagyaE=r,"
vacaAeiBar"Ais$aÂa mah"AnauBaAva
dañöaà janaà sampatitaà bile 'smin
kälähinä kñudra-sukhoru-tarñam
samuddharainaà kåpayäpavargyair
vacobhir äsiïca mahänubhäva
SYNONYMS
dañöam—bitten; janam—the person; sampatitam—hopelessly fallen; bile—in
the dark hole; asmin—this; käla—of time; ahinä—by the serpent;
kñudra—insignificant; sukha—having happiness; uru—and tremendous;
tarñam—hankering; samuddhara—please uplift; enam—this person;
kåpayä—by Your causeless mercy; äpavargyaiù—that awaken one to liberation;
vacobhiù—by Your words; äsiïca—please pour; mahä-anubhäva—O mighty
Lord.
TRANSLATION
O almighty Lord, please be merciful and uplift this hopeless living entity
who has fallen into the dark hole of material existence, where the snake of time
has bitten him. In spite of such abominable conditions, this poor living entity
has tremendous desire to relish the most insignificant material happiness. Please
save me, my Lord, by pouring down the nectar of Your instructions, which
awaken one to spiritual freedom.
PURPORT
Material life, so much cherished by the nondevotees, is here compared to a
dark hole filled with poisonous snakes. In material life there is certainly no
clear understanding of one's ultimate identity, of God or of the universe.
Everything is vague and dark. In material life the poisonous snake of time is
always threatening, and at any moment our near and dear ones will be killed
by the mortal fangs of the serpent. Ultimately, we ourselves will also be bitten
and killed by the poisonous effects of time. The word sampatitam indicates that
the falldown of the living entity is complete. In other words, he cannot get up
again. Çré Uddhava therefore appeals to the Lord to be kind to these poor
fallen souls, humbly represented by his own self. If one receives the Lord's
mercy, then even without any further qualification one can go back home,
back to Godhead; and without the mercy of Lord Kåñëa, the most learned,
austere, powerful, wealthy or beautiful man will be pathetically crushed by the
material world's machinery of illusion. The Supreme Personality of Godhead,
as described here, is mahänubhäva, or the greatest, most powerful and most
merciful personality, whose influence extends everywhere. The Lord's mercy is
manifest in the form of His nectarean instructions such as Bhagavad-gétä and
the Uddhava-gétä, being spoken here. The word kñudra-sukhoru-tarñam reveals
the irony of material existence. Although material happiness is kñudra, or
ridiculous and insignificant, our desire to enjoy it is uru, tremendous. Our
disproportionate hankering to enjoy dead matter is certainly an illusory state
of mind, and it gives us constant distress, keeping us bound up in the dark hole
of material existence. Every living entity should put aside his false prestige
based on ephemeral bodily qualifications and appeal sincerely to the Supreme
Lord, Kåñëa, for His mercy. The Lord hears every sincere appeal, from even
the most fallen soul, and the effects of the Lord's mercy are wonderful.
Although jïänés, yogés and fruitive workers are laboriously endeavoring to
achieve their respective goals, their position is precarious and uncertain.
Simply by achieving the mercy of Lord Kåñëa, however, one can very easily
attain the highest perfection of life. If even one who is not a great or pure
devotee of Lord Kåñëa sincerely appeals to the Lord for His mercy, the Lord is
sure to give it generously.
TEXT 11
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
wtTamaetatpaur"A r"AjaA
BaISmaM DamaRBa{taAM var"ma,
@jaAtazA‡au: pa‘acC$
s$avaeRSaAM naAe'nauZa{NvataAma,
çré-bhagavän uväca
ittham etat purä räjä
bhéñmaà dharma-bhåtäà varam
ajäta-çatruù papraccha
sarveñäà no 'nuçåëvatäm
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; ittham—thus;
etat—this; purä—formerly; räjä—the King; bhéñmam—unto Bhéñma;
dharma—of religious principles; bhåtäm—of the upholders; varam—unto the
best; ajäta-çatruù—King Yudhiñöhira, who considered no one his enemy;
papraccha—asked; sarveñäm—while all; naù—of us; anuçåëvatäm—were
carefully listening.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Uddhava, just as you
are now inquiring from Me, similarly, in the past King Yudhiñöhira, who
considered no one his enemy, inquired from the greatest of the upholders of
religious principles, Bhéñma, while all of us were carefully listening.
TEXT 12
inava{Ôae BaAr"tae yauÜe"
s$auô$iªaDanaivaù"la:
™autvaA DamaARna, baó"na, paêAna,
maAeºaDamaARnapa{cC$ta
nivåtte bhärate yuddhe
suhån-nidhana-vihvalaù
çrutvä dharmän bahün paçcän
mokña-dharmän apåcchata
SYNONYMS
nivåtte—when it ended; bhärate—of the descendants of Bhärata (the Kurus
and Päëòavas); yuddhe—the war; suhåt—of his beloved well-wishers;
nidhana—by the destruction; vihvalaù—overwhelmed; çrutvä—having heard;
dharmän—religious principles; bahün—many; paçcät—at last;
mokña—concerning liberation; dharmän—religious principles;
apåcchata—asked about.
TRANSLATION
When the great Battle of Kurukñetra had ended, King Yudhiñöhira was
overwhelmed by the death of many beloved well-wishers, and thus, after
listening to instructions about many religious principles, he finally inquired
about the path of liberation.
TEXT 13
taAnahM" tae'iBaDaAsyaAima
de"va˜atamaKaAcC_$taAna,
ÁaAnavaEr"AgyaivaÁaAna-
™aÜ"ABaftyaupaba{Mih"taAna,
tän ahaà te 'bhidhäsyämi
deva-vrata-makhäc chrutän
jïäna-vairägya-vijïänaçraddhä-
bhakty-upabåàhitän
SYNONYMS
tän—those; aham—I; te—unto you; abhidhäsyämi—will describe;
deva-vrata—of Bhéñmadeva; mukhät—from the mouth; çrutän—heard;
jïäna—Vedic knowledge; vairägya—detachment; vijïäna—self-realization;
çraddhä—faith; bhakti—and devotional service; upa-båàhitän—consisting of.
TRANSLATION
I will now speak unto you those religious principles of Vedic knowledge,
detachment, self-realization, faith and devotional service that were heard
directly from the mouth of Bhéñmadeva.
TEXT 14
navaEk(Ad"zA paÂa ‡aIna,
BaAvaAna, BaUtaeSau yaena vaE
wRºaetaATaAwk(mapyaeSau
tajÁaAnaM mama inaiêtama,
navaikädaça païca trén
bhävän bhüteñu yena vai
ékñetäthäikam apy eñu
taj jïänaà mama niçcitam
SYNONYMS
nava—nine; ekädaça—eleven; païca—five; trén—and three;
bhävän—elements; bhüteñu—in all living beings (from Lord Brahmä down to
the immovable living entities); yena—by which knowledge; vai—certainly;
ékñeta—one may see; atha—thus; ekam—one element; api—indeed;
eñu—within these twenty-eight elements; tat—that; jïänam—knowledge;
mama—by Me; niçcitam—is authorized.
TRANSLATION
I personally approve of that knowledge by which one sees the combination of
nine, eleven, five and three elements in all living entities, and ultimately one
element within those twenty-eight.
PURPORT
The nine elements are material nature, the living entity, the mahat-tattva,
false ego, and the five objects of sense perception, namely sound, touch, form,
taste and aroma. The eleven elements are the five working senses (the voice,
hands, legs, anus and genital) plus the five knowledge-acquiring senses (the
ears, touch, eyes, tongue and nostrils), along with the coordinative sense, the
mind. The five elements are the five physical elements, namely earth, water,
fire, air and sky, and the three elements are the three modes of material
nature—goodness, passion and ignorance. All living entities, from mighty
Lord Brahmä down to an insignificant weed, manifest material bodies
composed of these twenty-eight elements. The one element within all
twenty-eight is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Supersoul, who is
all-pervading within the material and spiritual worlds.
One can easily understand that the material universe is composed of
innumerable causes and effects. Since Lord Kåñëa is the cause of all causes, all
secondary causes and their effects are ultimately nondifferent from the
Personality of Godhead. This understanding constitutes real knowledge, or
jïäna, which is essential for perfecting one's life.
TEXT 15
Wtade"va ih" ivaÁaAnaM
na taTaEke(na yaena yata,
isTatyautpaÔyapyayaAna, pazyaeä,"
BaAvaAnaAM i‡agAuNAAtmanaAma,
etad eva hi vijïänaà
na tathaikena yena yat
sthity-utpatty-apyayän paçyed
bhävänäà tri-guëätmanäm
SYNONYMS
etat—this; eva—indeed; hi—actually; vijïänam—realized knowledge; na—not;
tathä—in that way; ekena—by the one (Personality of Godhead); yena—by
whom; yat—which (universe); sthiti—maintenance; utpatti—creation;
apyayän—and annihilation; paçyet—one should see; bhävänäm—of all
material elements; tri-guëa—of the three modes of nature;
ätmanäm—composed.
TRANSLATION
When one no longer sees the twenty-eight separated material elements,
which arise from a single cause, but rather sees the cause itself, the Personality
of Godhead—at that time one's direct experience is called vijïäna, or
self-realization.
PURPORT
The difference between jïäna (ordinary Vedic knowledge) and vijïäna
(self-realization) can be understood as follows. A conditioned soul, although
cultivating Vedic knowledge, continues to identify himself to some extent with
the material body and mind and consequently with the material universe. In
trying to understand the world he lives in, the conditioned soul learns through
Vedic knowledge that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the one supreme
cause of all material manifestations. He comes to understand the world around
him, which he accepts more or less as his world. As he progresses in spiritual
realization, breaking through the barrier of bodily identification, and realizes
the existence of the eternal soul, he gradually identifies himself as part and
parcel of the spiritual world, Vaikuëöha. At that time he is no longer
interested in the Personality of Godhead merely as the supreme explanation of
the material world; rather, he begins to reorient his entire mode of
consciousness so that the central object of his attention is the Personality of
Godhead. Such a reorientation is required, since the Supreme Lord is the
factual center and cause of everything. A self-realized soul in the stage of
vijïäna thus experiences the Personality of Godhead not merely as the creator
of the material world but as the supreme living entity existing blissfully in His
own eternal context. As one progresses in one's realization of the Supreme
Lord in His own abode in the spiritual sky, one gradually becomes disinterested
in the material universe and ceases to define the Supreme Lord in terms of His
temporary manifestations. A self-realized soul in the stage of vijïäna is not at
all attracted by objects that are created, maintained and ultimately destroyed.
The stage of jïäna is the preliminary stage of knowledge for those still
identifying themselves in terms of the material universe, whereas vijïäna is the
mature stage of knowledge for those who see themselves as part and parcel of
the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 16
@Ad"Avantae ca maDyae ca
s$a{jyaAts$a{jyaM yad"invayaAta,
paunastat‘aitas$ax.~‚(Amae
yaicC$Syaeta tade"va s$ata,
ädäv ante ca madhye ca
såjyät såjyaà yad anviyät
punas tat-pratisaìkräme
yac chiñyeta tad eva sat
SYNONYMS
ädau—in the causal stage; ante—in the termination of the causal function;
ca—also; madhye—in the phase of maintenance; ca—also; såjyät—from one
production; såjyam—to another production; yat—which;
anviyät—accompanies; punaù—again; tat—of all material phases;
pratisaìkräme—in the annihilation; yat—which; çiñyeta—remains; tat—that;
eva—indeed; sat—the one eternal.
TRANSLATION
Commencement, termination and maintenance are the stages of material
causation. That which consistently accompanies all these material phases from
one creation to another and remains alone when all material phases are
annihilated is the one eternal.
PURPORT
The Lord here reiterates that the one Supreme Personality of Godhead is
the basis of unlimited material variety. Material activity is a chain of
cause-and-effect relationships by which innumerable objects are produced. A
particular material effect is converted into a subsequent cause, and when the
causal phase is terminated, the effect disappears. Fire causes firewood to burn
to ashes, and when the causal function of fire is finished, fire itself, which was
the effect of a previous cause, is also terminated. The simple fact is that all
material objects are created, maintained and ultimately annihilated by the
supreme potency of the Lord. And when the entire field of material cause and
effect is withdrawn, so that all cause-effect relationships vanish, the
Personality of Godhead remains in His own abode. Therefore, although
innumerable objects may function as causes, they are not the ultimate or
supreme cause. Only the Personality of Godhead is the absolute cause.
Similarly, although material things may exist, they do not always exist. The
Personality of Godhead alone has absolute existence. By the process of jïäna,
or knowledge, one should understand the supreme position of the Lord.
TEXT 17
™auita: ‘atyaºamaEita÷ma,
@naumaAnaM catauí"yama,
‘amaANAeSvanavasTaAnaAä,"
ivak(lpaAts$a ivar"jyatae
çrutiù pratyakñam aitihyam
anumänaà catuñöayam
pramäëeñv anavasthänäd
vikalpät sa virajyate
SYNONYMS
çrutiù—Vedic knowledge; pratyakñam—direct experience;
aitihyam—traditional wisdom; anumänam—logical induction;
catuñöayam—fourfold; pramäneñu—among all types of evidence;
anavasthänät—due to the flickering nature; vikalpät—from material diversity;
saù—a person; virajyate—becomes detached.
TRANSLATION
From the four types of evidence—Vedic knowledge, direct experience,
traditional wisdom and logical induction—one can understand the temporary,
insubstantial situation of the material world, by which one becomes detached
from the duality of this world.
PURPORT
In the çruti, or Vedic literature, it is clearly stated that everything emanates
from the Absolute Truth, is maintained by the Absolute Truth and at the end
is conserved within the Absolute Truth. Similarly, by direct experience we can
observe the creation and destruction of great empires, cities, buildings, bodies
and so on. Furthermore, we find all around the world traditional wisdom
warning people that things in this world cannot last. Finally, by logical
induction we can easily conclude that nothing in this world is permanent.
Material sense gratification—up to the highest possible living standard found
in the heavenly planets or down to the lowest conditions in the most
repugnant precincts of hell—is always unsteady and prone to collapse at any
moment. One should therefore develop vairägya, detachment, as stated here.
Another meaning of this verse is that the four types of evidence cited here
are often mutually contradictory in their description of the highest truth. One
should therefore be detached from the duality of mundane evidence, including
the portions of the Vedas that deal with the material world. Instead, one
should accept the Supreme Personality of Godhead as the actual authority.
Both in Bhagavad-gétä and here in Çrémad-Bhägavatam Lord Kåñëa is
personally speaking, and thus there is no need to enter into the bewildering
network of competing systems of mundane logic. One can directly hear from
the Absolute Truth Himself and immediately acquire perfect knowledge. One
thereby becomes detached from inferior systems of knowledge, which cause
one to hover on the material mental platform.
TEXT 18
k(maRNAAM pair"NAAimatvaAä,"
@Aivair"HcyaAd"maËÿlama,
ivapaiêªaìrM" pazyaeä,"
@ä{"í"maipa ä{"í"vata,
karmaëäà pariëämitväd
ä-viriïcyäd amaìgalam
vipaçcin naçvaraà paçyed
adåñöam api dåñöa-vat
SYNONYMS
karmaëäm—of material activities; pariëämitvät—because of being subject to
transformation; ä-up to; viriïcyät—the planet of Lord Brahmä;
amaìgalam—inauspicious unhappiness; vipaçcit—an intelligent person;
naçvaram—as temporary; paçyet—should see; adåñöam—that which he has not
yet experienced; api—indeed; dåñöa-vat—just like that already experienced.
TRANSLATION
An intelligent person should see that any material activity is subject to
constant transformation and that even on the planet of Lord Brahmä there is
thus simply unhappiness. Indeed, a wise man can understand that just as all that
he has seen is temporary, similarly, all things within the universe have a
beginning and an end.
PURPORT
The word adåñöam indicates the heavenly standard of life available in the
higher planets within this universe. Such celestial neighborhoods are not
actually experienced on the earth planet, although they are described in the
Vedic literatures. One may argue that promotion to material heaven is
recommended in the karma-käëòa portion of the Vedas and that although the
happiness available there is not eternal, at least for some time one may enjoy
life. Lord Kåñëa here states, however, that even on the planet of Lord Brahmä,
which is superior to the heavenly planets, there is no happiness whatsoever.
Even in the upper planetary systems there is rivalry, envy, irritation,
lamentation and ultimately death itself.
TEXT 19
Bail(yaAegA: paurE"vaAel(:
‘aIyamaANAAya tae'naGa
paunaê k(TaiyaSyaAima
maà"le(: k(Ar"NAM parM"
bhakti-yogaù puraivoktaù
préyamäëäya te 'nagha
punaç ca kathayiñyämi
mad-bhakteù käraëaà paraà
SYNONYMS
bhakti-yogaù—devotional service to the Lord; purä—previously; eva—indeed;
uktaù—explained; préyamäëäya—who has developed love; te—unto you;
anagha—O sinless Uddhava; punaù—again; ca—also; kathayiñyämi—I will
explain; mat—unto Me; bhakteù—of devotional service; käraëam—the actual
means; param—supreme.
TRANSLATION
O sinless Uddhava, because you love Me, I previously explained to you the
process of devotional service. Now I will again explain the supreme process for
achieving loving service unto Me.
PURPORT
Although Lord Kåñëa previously described bhakti-yoga to Çré Uddhava,
Uddhava is not yet satisfied, because he loves Lord Kåñëa. Anyone who loves
the Lord cannot be fully satiated by discussions of devotional service mixed
with descriptions of mere Vedic duties and analytic philosophy. The supreme
stage of conscious existence is pure love of Kåñëa, and one who is addicted to
Lord Kåñëa desires to constantly drink the nectar of such topics. Lord Kåñëa
has given an extensive survey of many aspects of human civilization, including
the varëäçrama-dharma system and the processes of distinguishing between
matter and spirit, renouncing sense gratification, and so forth. Now Uddhava
is hankering to hear specifically about pure devotional service to Lord Kåñëa,
and the Lord thus turns to that topic.
TEXTS 20-24
™aÜ"Ama{tak(TaAyaAM mae
zAìnmad"nauk(LtaRnama,
pair"inaï"A ca paUjaAyaAM
stauitaiBa: stavanaM mama
@Ad"r": pair"cayaARyaAM
s$avaAR$ËEÿr"iBavand"nama,
maà"l(paUjaAByaiDak(A
s$avaRBaUtaeSau manmaita:
mad"TaeRSvaËÿcaeí"A ca
vacas$aA maÖ"NAer"NAma,
mayyapaRNAM ca manas$a:
s$avaRk(AmaivavajaRnama,
mad"TaeR'TaRpair"tyaAgAAe
BaAegAsya ca s$auKasya ca
wíM" d"ÔaM ò"taM jaæaM
mad"Ta< yaä," ˜ataM tapa:
WvaM DamaE=maRnauSyaANAAma,
oÜ"vaAtmainavaeid"naAma,
maiya s$aÃaAyatae Bail(:
k(Ae'nyaAe'TaAeR'syaAvaizASyatae
çraddhämåta-kathäyäà me
çaçvan mad-anukértanam
pariniñöhä ca püjäyäà
stutibhiù stavanaà mama
ädaraù paricaryäyäà
sarväìgair abhivandanam
mad-bhakta-püjäbhyadhikä
sarva-bhüteñu man-matiù
mad-artheñv aìga-ceñöä ca
vacasä mad-guëeraëam
mayy arpaëaà ca manasaù
sarva-käma-vivarjanam
mad-arthe 'rtha-parityägo
bhogasya ca sukhasya ca
iñöaà dattaà hutaà japtaà
mad-arthaà yad vrataà tapaù
evaà dharmair manuñyäëäm
uddhavätma-nivedinäm
mayi saïjäyate bhaktiù
ko 'nyo 'rtho 'syävaçiñyate
SYNONYMS
çraddhä—faith; amåta—in the nectar; kathäyäm—of narrations; me—about
Me; çaçvat—always; mat—of Me; anukértanam—chanting the glories;
pariniñöhä—fixed in attachment; ca—also; püjäyäm—in worshiping Me;
stutibhiù—with beautiful hymns; stavanam—formal prayers; mama—in
relation to Me; ädaraù—great respect; paricaryäyäm—for My devotional
service; sarva-aìgaiù—with all the limbs of the body; abhivandanam—offering
obeisances; mat—My; bhakta—of the devotees; püjä—worship;
abhyadhikä—preeminent; sarva-bhüteñu—in all living entities; mat—of Me;
matiù—consciousness; mat-artheñu—for the sake of serving Me;
aìga-ceñöä—ordinary, bodily activities; ca—also; vacasä—with words;
mat-guëa—My transcendental qualities; éraëam—declaring; mayi—in Me;
arpaëam—placing; ca—also; manasaù—of the mind; sarva-käma—of all
material desires; vivarjanam—rejection; mat-arthe—for My sake; artha—of
wealth; parityägaù—the giving up; bhogasya—of sense gratification; ca—also;
sukhasya—of material happiness; ca—also; iñöam—desirable activities;
dattam—charity; hutam—offering of sacrifice; japtam—chanting the holy
names of the Lord; mat-artham—for the sake of achieving Me; yat—which;
vratam—vows, such as fasting on Ekädaçé; tapaù—austerities; evam—thus;
dharmaiù—by such religious principles; manuñyänäm—of human beings;
uddhava—Mv dear Uddhava; ätma-nivedinäm—who are surrendered souls;
mayi—to Me; saïjäyate—arises; bhaktiù—loving devotion; kaù—what;
anyaù—other; arthaù—purpose; asya—of My devotee; avaçiñyate—remains.
TRANSLATION
Firm faith in the blissful narration of My pastimes, constant chanting of My
glories, unwavering attachment to ceremonial worship of Me, praising Me
through beautiful hymns, great respect for My devotional service, offering
obeisances with the entire body, performing first-class worship of My devotees,
consciousness of Me in all living entities, offering of ordinary, bodily activities
in My devotional service, use of words to describe My qualities, offering the
mind to Me, rejection of all material desires, giving up wealth for My devotional
service, renouncing material sense gratification and happiness, and performing
all desirable activities such as charity, sacrifice, chanting, vows and austerities
with the purpose of achieving Me—these constitute actual religious principles,
by which those human beings who have actually surrendered themselves to Me
automatically develop love for Me. What other purpose or goal could remain for
My devotee?
PURPORT
The words mad-bhakta-püjäbhyadhikä are significant in this verse.
Abhyadhikä indicates "superior quality." The Lord is extremely satisfied with
those who offer worship to His pure devotees, and He rewards them
accordingly. Because of the Lord's generous appraisal of His pure devotees,
worship of the pure devotees is described as superior to worship of the Lord
Himself. The words mad-artheñv aìga-ceñöä state that ordinary, bodily activities
such as brushing the teeth, taking bath, eating, etc., should all be offered to the
Supreme Lord as devotional service. The words vacasä mad-guëeraëam
indicate that whether one speaks in ordinary, crude language or with learned
poetic eloquence, one should describe the glories of the Personality of
Godhead. The words mad-arthe 'rtha-parityägaù indicate that one should spend
one's money for festivals glorifying the Personality of Godhead, such as
Ratha-yäträ, Janmäñöamé and Gaura-pürëimä. Also, one is herein instructed to
spend money to assist the mission of one's spiritual master and other
Vaiñëavas. Wealth that cannot be used properly in the Lord's service and is
thus an impediment to one's clear consciousness should be given up entirely.
The word bhogasya refers to sense gratification, headed by sex enjoyment, and
sukhasya refers to sentimental material happiness, such as excessive family
attachment. The words dattaà hutam indicate that one should offer to
brähmaëas and Vaiñëavas first-class foods cooked in ghee. One should offer
the vibration svähä to Lord Viñëu in an authorized sacrificial fire along with
grains and ghee. The word japtam indicates that one should constantly chant
the holy names of the Lord.
TEXT 25
yad"AtmanyaipaRtaM icaÔaM
zAAntaM s$aÔvaAepaba{Mih"tama,
Dama< ÁaAnaM s$a vaEr"Agyama,
Weìya< caAiBapaâtae
yadätmany arpitaà cittaà
çäntaà sattvopabåàhitam
dharmaà jïänaà sa vairägyam
aiçvaryaà cäbhipadyate
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; ätmani—in the Supreme Lord; arpitam—fixed;
cittam—consciousness; çäntam-peaceful; sattva—by the mode of goodness;
upabåàhitam—strengthened; dharmam—religiosity; jïänam—knowledge;
saù—he; vairägyam—detachment; aiçvaryam—opulence; ca—also;
abhipadyate—achieves.
TRANSLATION
When one's peaceful consciousness, strengthened by the mode of goodness,
is fixed on the Personality of Godhead, one achieves religiosity, knowledge,
detachment and opulence.
PURPORT
A pure devotee becomes peaceful, çänta, by desiring everything for the
service of the Lord and nothing for himself. He is strengthened by the
transcendental, or purified, mode of goodness and thus achieves the supreme
religious principle of directly serving the Lord. He also achieves jïäna, or
knowledge of the Lord's form and his own spiritual body, detachment from
material piety and sin, and the opulences of the spiritual world. One who is
not a pure devotee of the Lord, however, but whose devotion is mixed with a
fascination for mystic knowledge, is strengthened by the material mode of
goodness. Through his meditation on the Lord he achieves the lesser results of
dharma (piety in the mode of goodness), jïäna (knowledge of spirit and
matter) and vairägya (detachment from the lower modes of nature).
Ultimately, one should be a pure devotee of the Lord, since even the best the
material world has to offer is most insignificant compared to the kingdom of
God.
TEXT 26
yad"ipaRtaM taiã"k(lpae
win‰"yaE: pair"DaAvaita
r"jasvalaM caAs$aiªaïM"
icaÔaM ivaiÜ" ivapayaRyama,
yad arpitaà tad vikalpe
indriyaiù paridhävati
rajas-valaà cäsan-niñöhaà
cittaà viddhi viparyayam
SYNONYMS
yat—when; arpitam—fixed; tat—this (consciousness); vikalpe—in material
variety (the body, home, family, etc.); indriyaiù—with the senses;
paridhävati—chasing all around; rajaù-valam—strengthened by the mode of
passion; ca—also; asat—to that which has no permanent reality;
niñöham—dedicated; cittam—consciousness; viddhi—you should understand;
viparyayam—the opposite (of what was previously mentioned).
TRANSLATION
When consciousness is fixed on the material body, home and other, similar
objects of sense gratification, one spends one's life chasing after material objects
with the help of the senses. Consciousness, thus powerfully affected by the
mode of passion, becomes dedicated to impermanent things, and in this way
irreligion, ignorance, attachment and wretchedness arise.
PURPORT
In the previous verse Lord Kåñëa explained the auspicious results of fixing
the mind in Him, and now the opposite is explained. Rajas-valam indicates
that one's passion grows so strong that one commits sinful activities and reaps
all types of misfortune. Although materialistic people are blind to their
impending wretchedness, one can confirm by all types of evidence—namely
Vedic injunctions, direct observation, traditional wisdom and inductive
logic—that the result of violating the laws of God is disastrous.
TEXT 27
DamaAeR maà"il(k{(t‘aAel(Ae
ÁaAnaM caEk(Atmyad"zARnama,
gAuNAesvas$aËÿAe vaEr"Agyama,
Weìya< caAiNAmaAd"ya:
dharmo mad-bhakti-kåt prokto
jïänaà caikätmya-darçanam
guëesv asaìgo vairägyam
aiçvaryaà cäëimädayaù
SYNONYMS
dharmaù—religion; mat—My; bhakti—devotional service; kåt—producing;
proktaù—it is declared; jïänam—knowledge; ca—also; aikätmya—the
presence of the Supreme Soul; darçanam—seeing; guëeñu—in the objects of
sense gratification; asaìgaù—having no interest; vairägyam—detachment;
aiçvaryam—opulence; ca—also; aëimä—the mystic perfection called aëimä;
ädayaù-and so forth.
TRANSLATION
Actual religious principles are stated to be those that lead one to My
devotional service. Real knowledge is the awareness that reveals My
all-pervading presence. Detachment is complete disinterest in the objects of
material sense gratification, and opulence is the eight mystic perfection, such as
aëimä-siddhi.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord is perfect knowledge; thus one who has been delivered
from ignorance automatically engages in the devotional service of the Lord
and is called religious. One who becomes detached from the three modes of
material nature and the gratificatory objects they produce is considered to be
situated in detachment. The eight mystic yoga perfections, described
previously by the Lord to Uddhava, constitute material power, or opulence, in
the highest degree.
TEXTS 28-32
™aIoÜ"va ovaAca
yama: k(itaivaDa: ‘aAel(Ae
inayamaAe vaAir"k(SaRNA
k(: zAma: k(Ae d"ma: k{(SNA
k(A itaitaºaA Da{ita: ‘aBaAe
ikM( d"AnaM ikM( tapa: zAAEya<
ik(ms$atyama{tamaucyatae
k(styaAgA: ikM( DanaM caeíM"
k(Ae yaÁa: k(A ca d"iºaNAA
pauMs$a: ikM( isvaß"laM ™aImana,
BagAAe laABaê ke(zAva
k(A ivaâA oe"I: par"A k(A ™aI:
ikM( s$auKaM äu":Kamaeva ca
k(: paiNx"ta: k(ê maUKaR:
k(: panTaA otpaTaê k(:
k(: svagAAeR nar"k(: k(: isvata,
k(Ae banDauç&ta ikM( gA{h"ma,
k( @AX#Ya: k(Ae d"ir"‰"Ae vaA
k{(paNA: k(: k( wRìr":
WtaAna, ‘a´aAnmama “aUih"
ivapar"ItaAMê s$atpatae
çré-uddhava uväca
yamaù kati-vidhaù prokto
niyamo väri-karñaëa
kaù çamaù ko damaù kåñëa
kä titikñä dhåtiù prabho
kià dänaà kià tapaù çauryaà
kim satyam åtam ucyate
kas tyägaù kià dhanaà ceñöaà
ko yajïaù kä ca dakñiëä
puàsaù kià svid balaà çréman
bhago läbhaç ca keçava
kä vidyä hréù parä kä çréù
kià sukhaà duùkham eva ca
kaù paëòitaù kaç ca mürkhaù
kaù panthä utpathaç ca kaù
kaù svargo narakaù kaù svit
ko bandhur uta kià gåham
ka äòhyaù ko daridro vä
kåpaëaù kaù ka éçvaraù
etän praçnän mama brühi
viparétäàç ca sat-pate
SYNONYMS
çré-uddhavaù uväca—Çré Uddhava said; yamaù—disciplinary regulations;
kati-vidhaù—how many different types; proktaù—are declared to exist;
niyamaù—regular daily duties; vä—or; ari-karñaëa—O Kåñëa, subduer of the
enemy; kaù—what is; çamaù—mental equilibrium; kaù—what is;
damaù—self-control; kåñëa—my dear Kåñëa; kä—what is; titikñä—tolerance;
dhåtiù—steadfastness; prabho—my Lord; kim—what is; dänam—charity;
kim—what is; tapaù—austerity; çauryam—heroism; kim—what is;
satyam—reality; åtam—truth; ucyate—is said; kaù—what is;
tyägaù—renunciation; kim—what is; dhanam—wealth; ca—also;
iñöam—desirable; kaù—what is; yajïaù—sacrifice; kä—what is; ca—also;
dakñiëä—religious remuneration; puàsaù—of a person; kim—what is;
svit—indeed; balam—strength; çré-man—O most fortunate Kåñëa;
bhagaù—opulence; läbhaù—profit; ca—also; keçava—my dear Keçava;
kä—what is; vidyä—education; hréù—humility; parä—supreme; kä—what is;
çréù—beauty; kim—what is; sukham—happiness; duùkham—unhappiness;
eva—indeed; ca—also; kaù—who is; paëòitaù—learned; kaù—who is;
ca—also; mürkhaù—a fool; kaù—what is; panthäù—the real path;
utpathaù—the false path; ca—also; kaù—what is; kaù—what is;
svargaù—heaven; narakaù—hell; kaù—what is; svit—indeed; kaù—who is;
bandhuù—a friend; uta—and; kim—what is; gåham—home; kaù—who is;
äòhyaù—wealthy; kaù—who is; daridraù—poor; vä—or; kåpaëaù—a miser;
kaù—who is; kaù—who is; éçvaraù—a controller; etän—these;
praçnän—subject matters of inquiry; mama—to me; brühi—please speak;
viparétän—the opposite qualities; ca—also; sat-pate—O Lord of the devotees.
TRANSLATION
Çré Uddhava said: My dear Lord Kåñëa, O chastiser of the enemies, please
tell me how many types of disciplinary regulations and regular daily duties there
are. Also, my Lord, tell me what is mental equilibrium, what is self-control, and
what is the actual meaning of tolerance and steadfastness. What are charity,
austerity and heroism, and how are reality and truth to he described? What is
renunciation, and what is wealth? What is desirable, what is sacrifice, and what
is religious remuneration? My dear Keçava, O most fortunate one, how am I to
understand the strength, opulence and profit of a particular person? What is the
best education, what is actual humility, and what is real beauty? What are
happiness and unhappiness? Who is learned, and who is a fool? What are the
true and the false paths in life, and what are heaven and hell? Who is indeed a
true friend, and what is one's real home? Who is a rich man, and who is a poor
man? Who is wretched, and who is an actual controller? O Lord of the devotees,
kindly explain these matters to me, along with their opposites.
PURPORT
All of the items mentioned in these five verses are defined in different ways
by different cultures and societies throughout the world. Therefore, Çré
Uddhava is directly approaching the supreme authority, Lord Kåñëa, to obtain
the standard definition for these universal aspects of civilized life.
TEXTS 33-35
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
@ihM"s$aA s$atyamastaeyama,
@s$aËÿAe oe"Ir"s$aÂaya:
@AistafyaM “aöcaya< ca
maAEnaM sTaEya< ºamaABayama,
zAAEcaM japastapaAe h"Aema:
™aÜ"AitaTyaM mad"caRnama,
taITaARq%naM par"ATaeRh"A
tauií"r"AcaAyaRs$aevanama,
Wtae yamaA: s$ainayamaA
oBayaAeã"ARd"zA sma{taA:
pauMs$aAmaupaAis$ataAstaAta
yaTaAk(AmaM äu"h"inta ih"
çré-bhagavän uväca
ahiàsä satyam asteyam
asaìgo hrér asaïcayaù
ästikyaà brahmacaryaà ca
maunaà sthairyaà kñamäbhayam
çaucaà japas tapo homaù
çraddhätithyaà mad-arcanam
térthäöanaà parärthehä
tuñöir äcärya-sevanam
ete yamäù sa-niyamä
ubhayor dvädaça småtäù
puàsäm upäsitäs täta
yathä-kämaà duhanti hi
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
ahiàsä—nonviolence; satyam—truthfulness; asteyam—never coveting or
stealing the property of others; asaìgaù—detachment; hréù—humility;
asaïcayaù—being nonpossessive; ästikyam—trust in the principles of religion;
brahmacaryam—celibacy; ca—also; maunam—silence; sthairyam—steadiness;
kñamä—forgiving; abhayam—fearless; çaucam—internal and external
cleanliness; japaù—chanting the holy names of the Lord; tapaù—austerity;
homaù—sacrifice; çraddhä—faith; ätithyam—hospitality;
mat-arcanam—worship of Me; tértha-aöanam—visiting holy places;
para-artha-éha—acting and desiring for the Supreme; tuñöiù—satisfaction;
äcärya-sevanam—serving the spiritual master; ete—these; yamäù—disciplinary
principles; sa-niyamäù—along with secondary regular duties; ubhayoù—of
each; dvädaça—twelve; småtäù—are understood; puàsäm—by human beings;
upäsitäù—being cultivated with devotion; täta—My dear Uddhava;
yathä-kämam—according to one's desire; duhanti—they supply; hi—indeed.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Nonviolence, truthfulness, not
coveting or stealing the property of others, detachment, humility, freedom from
possessiveness, trust in the principles of religion, celibacy, silence, steadiness,
forgiveness and fearlessness are the twelve primary disciplinary principles.
Internal cleanliness, external cleanliness, chanting the holy names of the Lord,
austerity, sacrifice, faith, hospitality, worship of Me, visiting holy places, acting
and desiring only for the supreme interest, satisfaction, and service to the
spiritual master are the twelve elements of regular prescribed duties. These
twenty-four elements bestow all desired benedictions upon those persons who
devotedly cultivate them.
TEXTS 36-39
zAmaAe maiªaï"taA bauÜe"r,"
d"ma win‰"yas$aMyama:
itaitaºaA äu":Kas$ammaSaAeR
ijaù"AepasTajayaAe Da{ita:
d"Nx"nyaAs$a: parM" d"AnaM
k(AmatyaAgAstapa: sma{tama,
svaBaAvaivajaya: zAAEya<
s$atyaM ca s$amad"zARnama,
@nya»a s$auna{taA vaANAI
k(ivaiBa: pair"k(LitaRtaA
k(maRsvas$aËÿma: zAAEcaM
tyaAgA: s$aªyaAs$a ocyatae
DamaR wíM" DanaM na|NAAM
yaÁaAe'hM" BagAvaÔama:
d"iºaNAA ÁaAnas$ande"zA:
‘aANAAyaAma: parM" balama,
çamo man-niñöhatä buddher
dama indriya-saàyamaù
titikñä duùkha-sammarño
jihvopastha-jayo dhåtiù
daëòa-nyäsaù paraà dänaà
käma-tyägas tapaù småtam
svabhäva-vijayaù çauryaà
satyaà ca sama-darçanam
anyac ca sunåtä väëé
kavibhiù parikértitä
karmasv asaìgamaù çaucaà
tyägaù sannyäsa ucyate
dharma iñöaà dhanaà nèëäà
yajïo 'haà bhagavattamaù
dakñiëä jïäna-sandeçaù
präëäyämaù paraà balam
SYNONYMS
çamaù—mental equilibrium; mat—in Me; niñöhatä—steady absorption;
buddheù—of the intelligence; damaù—self-control; indriya—of the senses;
saàyamaù—perfect discipline; titikñä—tolerance; duùkha—unhappiness;
sammarñaù—tolerating; jihvä—the tongue; upastha—and genitals;
jayaù—conquering; dhåtiù—steadiness; daëòa—aggression; nyäsaù—giving up;
param—the supreme; dänam—charity; käma—lust; tyägaù—giving up;
tapaù—austerity; småtam—is considered; svabhäva—one's natural tendency to
enjoy; vijayaù—conquering; çauryam—heroism; satyam—reality; ca—also;
sama-darçanam—seeing the Supreme Lord everywhere; anyat—the next
element (truthfulness); ca—and; su-nåtä—pleasing; väëé—speech;
kavibhiù—by the sages; parikértitä—is declared to be; karmasu—in fruitive
activities; asaìgamaù—detachment; çaucam—cleanliness;
tyägaù—renunciation; sannyäsaù—the sannyäsa order of life; ucyate—is said
to be; dharmaù—religiousness; iñöam—desirable; dhanam—wealth;
nèëäm—for human beings; yajïaù—sacrifice; aham—I am;
bhagavat-tamaù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; dakñiëä—religious
remuneration; jïäna-sandeçaù—the instruction of perfect knowledge;
präëäyämaù—the yogic system of controlling the breath; param—the supreme;
balam—strength.
TRANSLATION
Absorbing the intelligence in Me constitutes mental equilibrium, and
complete discipline of the senses is self-control. Tolerance means patiently
enduring unhappiness, and steadfastness occurs when one conquers the tongue
and genitals. The greatest charity is to give up all aggression toward others, and
renunciation of lust is understood to be real austerity. Real heroism is to
conquer one's natural tendency to enjoy material life, and reality is seeing the
Supreme Personality of Godhead everywhere. Truthfulness means to speak the
truth in a pleasing way, as declared by great sages. Cleanliness is detachment in
fruitive activities, whereas renunciation is the sannyäsa order of life. The true
desirable wealth for human beings is religiousness, and I, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, am sacrifice. Religious remuneration is devotion to the
äcärya with the purpose of acquiring spiritual instruction, and the greatest
strength is the präëäyäma system of breath control.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa here describes those qualities that are desirable for persons
advancing in human life. Çama, or "mental equilibrium," means to fix the
intelligence in Lord Kåñëa. Mere peacefulness without Kåñëa consciousness is a
dull and useless state of mind. Dama, or "discipline," means first to control
one's own senses. If one wants to discipline one's children, disciples or
followers without controlling one's own senses, one becomes a mere
laughingstock. Tolerance means to patiently endure unhappiness, such as that
provoked by the insults or negligence of others. One must also sometimes
accept material inconvenience to carry out the injunctions of scriptures, and
that unhappiness must also be patiently endured. If one is not tolerant of the
insults and abuse of others, nor tolerant of the inconveniences that may arise
from following authorized religious scriptures, it is simply foolishness for him
to make a whimsical show of tolerating extreme heat, cold and pain and so on,
just to impress others. Concerning steadfastness, if one does not control the
tongue and genitals, then any other steadfastness is useless. Real charity means
to renounce all aggression toward others. If one gives money to charitable
causes but at the same time engages in exploitative business enterprises or
abusive political tactics, one's charity is worth nothing at all. Austerity means
to give up lust and sense gratification and to observe prescribed vows such as
Ekädaçé; it does not mean inventing whimsical methods of torturing the
material body. Real heroism is to conquer one's lower nature. Certainly
everyone likes to propagate his own fame as a brilliant person, but everyone is
also subject to lust, anger, greed and so forth. Therefore, if one can conquer
these lower characteristics generated from the modes of passion and ignorance,
one is a greater hero than those who merely destroy their political opponents
through intrigue and violence.
One can develop equal vision by giving up jealousy and envy and by
recognizing the existence of the soul within every material body. This attitude
pleases the Supreme Lord, who then reveals Himself, solidifying forever one's
equal vision. Merely describing things that exist does not constitute the last
word in the perception of reality. One must also see the true spiritual equality
of all living entities and all situations. Truthfulness means that one should
speak in a pleasing way so that there will be a beneficial effect. If one becomes
attached to pointing out the faults of others in the name of truth, then such
faultfinding will not be appreciated by saintly persons. The bona fide spiritual
master speaks the truth in such a way that people can elevate themselves to
the spiritual platform, and one should learn this art of truthfulness. If one is
attached to material things, his body and mind are understood to be always
polluted. Cleanliness therefore means to give up material attachment, not
merely to frequently rinse one's skin with water. Real renunciation is giving up
one's false sense of proprietorship over one's relatives and wife, and not just
giving away material objects, while real wealth is to be religious. Sacrifice is
the Personality of Godhead Himself, because the performer of sacrifice, to be
successful, must absorb his consciousness in the Personality of Godhead and
not in temporary, material rewards that may accrue from sacrifice. Real
religious remuneration means that one should serve saintly persons who can
enlighten one with spiritual knowledge. One may offer remuneration to his
spiritual master, who has enlightened him, by distributing the same knowledge
to others, thereby pleasing the äcärya. Preaching work thus constitutes the
highest form of remuneration. By performing the präëäyäma system of
respiratory control, one can easily subdue the mind, and one who can in this
way perfectly control the restless mind is the most powerful person.
TEXTS 40-45
BagAAe ma Weìr"Ae BaAvaAe
laABaAe maà"il(ç&Ôama:
ivaâAtmaina iBad"AbaADaAe
jaugAups$aA oe"Ir"k(maRs$au
™aIgAuRNAA naEr"paeºyaAâA:
s$auKaM äu":Kas$auKaAtyaya:
äu":KaM k(Amas$auKaApaeºaA
paiNx"taAe banDamaAeºaivata,
maUKaAeR de"h"AâhM"bauiÜ":
panTaA maiªagAma: sma{ta:
otpaTaiêÔaivaºaepa:
svagAR: s$aÔvagAuNAAed"ya:
nar"k(stamaoªaAh"Ae
banDaugAuRç&r"hM" s$aKae
gA{hM" zAr"IrM" maAnauSyaM
gAuNAAX#YaAe ÷AX#Ya ocyatae
d"ir"‰"Ae yastvas$antauí":
k{(paNAAe yaAe'ijataein‰"ya:
gAuNAeSvas$al(DaIr"IzAAe
gAuNAs$aËÿAe ivapayaRya:
Wta oÜ"va tae ‘a´aA:
s$avaeR s$aADau inaè&ipataA:
ikM( vaiNARtaena baò"naA
laºaNAM gAuNAd"AeSayaAe:
gAuNAd"AeSaä{"izAd"AeRSaAe
gAuNAstaUBayavaijaRta:
bhago ma aiçvaro bhävo
läbho mad-bhaktir uttamaù
vidyätmani bhidä-bädho
jugupsä hrér akarmasu
çrér guëä nairapekñyädyäù
sukhaà duùkha-sukhätyayaù
duùkhaà käma-sukhäpekñä
paëòito bandha-mokña-vit
mürkho dehädy-ahaà-buddhiù
panthä man-nigamaù småtaù
utpathaç citta-vikñepaù
svargaù sattva-guëodayaù
narakas tama-unnäho
bandhur gurur ahaà sakhe
gåhaà çaréraà mänuñyaà
guëäòhyo hy äòhya ucyate
daridro yas tv asantuñöaù
kåpaëo yo 'jitendriyaù
guëeñv asakta-dhér éço
guëa-saìgo viparyayaù
eta uddhava te praçnäù
sarve sädhu nirüpitäù
kià varëitena bahunä
lakñaëaà guëa-doñayoù
guëa-doña-dåçir doño
guëas tübhaya-varjitaù
SYNONYMS
bhagaù—opulence; me—My; aiçvaraù—divine; bhävaù—nature; läbhaù—gain;
mat-bhaktiù—devotional service unto Me; uttamaù—supreme;
vidyä—education; ätmani—in the soul; bhidä—duality; bädhaù—nullifying;
jugupsä—disgust; hréù—modesty; akarmasu—in sinful activities; çréù—beauty;
guëäù—good qualities; nairapekñya—detachment from material things;
ädyäù—and so on; sukham—happiness; duùkha—material unhappiness;
sukha—and material happiness; atyayaù—transcending;
duùkham—unhappiness; käma—of lust; sukha—on the happiness;
apekñä—meditating; paëòitaù—a wise man; bandha—from bondage;
mokña—liberation; vit—one who knows; mürkhaù—a fool; deha—with the
body; ädi—and so forth (the mind); aham-buddhiù—one who identifies
himself; panthäù—the true path; mat—to Me; nigamaù—leading; småtaù—is
to be understood; utpathaù—the wrong path; citta—of consciousness;
vikñepaù—bewilderment; svargaù—heaven; sattva-guëa—of the mode of
goodness; udayaù—the predominance; narakaù—hell; tamaù—of the mode of
ignorance; unnähaù—the predominance; bandhuù—the real friend;
guruù—the spiritual master; aham—I am; sakhe—My dear friend, Uddhava;
gåham—one's home; çaréram—the body; mänuñyam—human; guëa—with
good qualities; äòhyaù—enriched; hi—indeed; äòhyaù—a rich person;
ucyate—is stated to be; daridraù—a poor person; yaù—one who; tu—indeed;
asantuñöaù—unsatisfied; kåpaëaù—a wretched person; yaù—one who;
ajita—has not conquered; indriyaù—the senses; guëeñu—in material sense
gratification; asakta—not attached; dhéù—whose intelligence; éçaù—a
controller; guëa—to sense gratification; saìgaù—attached; viparyayaù—the
opposite, a slave; ete—these; uddhava—My dear Uddhava; te—your;
praçnäù—subjects of inquiry; sarve—all; sädhu—properly;
nirüpitäù—elucidated; kim—what is the value; varëitena—of describing;
bahunä—elaborately; lakñaëam—the characteristics; guëa—of good qualities;
doñayoù—and of bad qualities; guëa-doña—good and bad qualities;
dåçiù—seeing; doñaù—a fault; guëaù—the real good quality; tu—indeed;
ubhaya—from both of them; varjitaù—distinct.
TRANSLATION
Actual opulence is My own nature as the Personality of Godhead, through
which I exhibit the six unlimited opulences. The supreme gain in life is
devotional service to Me, and actual education is nullifying the false perception
of duality within the soul. Real modesty is to be disgusted with improper
activities, and beauty is to possess good qualities such as detachment. Real
happiness is to transcend material happiness and unhappiness, and real misery is
to be implicated in searching for sex pleasure. A wise man is one who knows the
process of freedom from bondage, and a fool is one who identifies with his
material body and mind. The real path in life is that which leads to Me, and the
wrong path is sense gratification, by which consciousness is bewildered. Actual
heaven is the predominance of the mode of goodness, whereas hell is the
predominance of ignorance. I am everyone's true friend, acting as the spiritual
master of the entire universe, and one's home is the human body. My dear
friend Uddhava, one who is enriched with good qualities is actually said to be
rich, and one who is unsatisfied in life is actually poor. A wretched person is
one who cannot control his senses, whereas one who is not attached to sense
gratification is a real controller. One who attaches himself to sense gratification
is the opposite, a slave. Thus, Uddhava, I have elucidated all of the matters
about which you inquired. There is no need for a more elaborate description of
these good and bad qualities, since to constantly see good and bad is itself a bad
quality. The best quality is to transcend material good and evil.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is naturally full of six opulences,
namely unlimited beauty, wealth, fame, knowledge, strength and renunciation.
Therefore the greatest profit in life is to achieve personal loving service to the
Lord, who is naturally the reservoir of all pleasure. Real education means to
give up the false idea that anything is separate from the Lord, the source of all
potencies. Similarly, one should not falsely consider the individual soul to be
different or separate from the Supreme Soul. Mere bashfulness does not
constitute modesty. One should spontaneously withdraw in disgust from sinful
activities; then one is actually modest or humble. One who is satisfied in Kåñëa
consciousness and thus does not seek material pleasure or suffer material
unhappiness is considered to be actually situated in happiness. The most
wretched person is one addicted to sex pleasure, and a wise man is one who
knows the process of freedom from such material bondage. A fool is one who
gives up his eternal friendship with Lord Kåñëa and instead identifies himself
with his own temporary material body, mind, society, community and family.
The real path in life is not simply a modern interstate highway or, in more
simple cultures, a footpath free of thorns and mud. It is that path that leads to
Lord Kåñëa. The wrong path in life is not simply a road having many thieves or
tollbooths; it is that path that leads one to utter confusion in material sense
gratification. A heavenly situation is that in which the mode of goodness
predominates, rather than that found on the planet of Indra, where passion
and ignorance sometimes disturb the celestial atmosphere. Hell is anywhere
the mode of ignorance is predominant, and not merely the hellish planets,
where, according to Lord Çiva, a pure devotee can think of Kåñëa and remain
happy. Our actual friend in life is the bona fide spiritual master, who saves us
from all dangers. Among all gurus, Lord Kåñëa is Himself the jagat-guru, or
spiritual master of the entire universe. In material life our own material body is
our immediate home, rather than some structure of bricks, cement, stone and
wood. A rich man is one who possesses innumerable good qualities; he is not a
neurotic fool with a large bank account. A poor man is one who is unsatisfied,
which is self-explanatory. One who cannot control his senses is certainly
wretched and miserable in life, whereas one who detaches himself from
material life is actually a lord or controller. In modern times there are
remnants of aristocracy in Europe and other countries, but such so-called lords
often display the habits of lower forms of life. A real lord is one who conquers
material existence by rising to the spiritual platform. A person who is attached
to material life will undoubtedly manifest the opposites of all the good qualities
mentioned here, and he is thus the symbol of going backward in life. The Lord
concludes His analysis by stating that there is no need for further elaboration
of these good and bad qualities. Indeed, the purpose of life is to transcend
materially good and bad qualities and come to the liberated platform of pure
Kåñëa consciousness. This point will be further explained in the following
chapter.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Eleventh Canto, Nineteenth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Perfection of Spiritual Knowledge."
20. Pure Devotional Service Surpasses Knowledge and
Detachment
The processes of karma-yoga, jïäna-yoga and bhakti-yoga are explained in
this chapter, in terms of the presence of different good and bad qualities in
particular candidates.
The Vedic çästras are the words expressing the order of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. In these Vedic literatures is found an outlook of
duality, based on such concepts as the varëäçrama system, and at the same time
the Vedas reject this dualistic vision. Uddhava, desiring to understand the
reason why the scriptures contain such conflicting ideas, and how these might
be reconciled, inquired from Lord Çré Kåñëa about this matter. In response the
Supreme Lord replied that the Vedas describe the processes of karma-yoga,
jïäna-yoga and bhakti-yoga for facilitating the attainment of liberation.
Karma-yoga is designated for those persons who are not detached and who are
full of gross desires; jïäna-yoga is for those who are detached from the fruits of
activity and have given up material endeavors; and bhakti-yoga is for those
persons who have taken to the principle of yukta-vairägya, appropriate
renunciation. As long as one has not become uninterested in enjoying the
fruits of one's work, or as long as one's faith in the topics of discussion of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead on the path of devotional service has not
awakened, then one must continue to fulfill all the prescribed duties of his
karma. But neither the renunciant nor the devotee of the Supreme Lord need
carry out ritualistic duties.
Persons who follow their own duty, who abandon that which is forbidden
and who are free from greed and other unhealthy characteristics attain either
monistic knowledge or else, if they are fortunate, devotion to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Such knowledge and devotion can be achieved in the
human form of life, which is therefore a desirable object both for those living
in hell and for the demigods. The human body, even though it awards the
whole purpose of existence in the form of knowledge and devotion, is
ephemeral; therefore one who is discriminating should soberly strive for
liberation before death comes. The human body is like a boat, Çré Gurudeva is
the helmsman, and the mercy of the Supreme Lord is the favorable breeze. If
the person who has attained such a rare boat in the form of the human body
does not desire to cross over the ocean of material existence, he is in fact the
killer of the soul. The mind is fickle, but one should not indifferently allow it
to act as it will. Rather, one should conquer the senses and the vital air and by
intelligence endowed with the qualities of goodness should bring the mind
under control.
Until the mind finally becomes stable, one should continue to meditate
about the process of the creation of all material things in sequence from subtle
to gross and of their destruction in reverse sequence of gross to subtle. One
who has a sense of detachment and renunciation can give up false
identification with the body and other sense objects by constantly studying the
instructions of his spiritual master. By the yoga practice of yama, niyama and
so forth, by cultivation of transcendental knowledge and by worship of and
meditation upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one can remember the
Supersoul.
Virtue, or guëa, means to remain steadfast in the object of one's particular
platform of qualification. By developing the desire to reject one's accumulated
material association by pursuing the injunctions of what is good and what is
bad, all of one's inauspicious material activities become diminished. By
devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead all perfections are
achieved. Anyone who renders service to the Supreme Lord by constant
devotional service will be able to steadily fix his mind upon the Supreme Lord,
and thus all desires for sense gratification sitting within the heart will be
destroyed to the root. When one directly perceives the presence of the
Supreme Lord, his false ego becomes completely eradicated; all of his doubts
are shattered, and heaps of material activities become diminished to nil. For
this reason the devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead do not
consider knowledge and renunciation to be the means for achieving the
highest benefit. Only in the heart of a person who is devoid of material desire
and disinterested in material things can devotional service to the Lord arise.
The piety and impiety that result from ritualistic injunctions and prohibitions
cannot be applied to the unalloyed pure devotees of the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 1
™aIoÜ"va ovaAca
ivaiDaê ‘aitaSaeDaê
inagAmaAe h"Iìr"sya tae
@vaeºatae'r"ivaNx"Aºa
gAuNAM d"AeSaM ca k(maRNAAma,
çré-uddhava uväca
vidhiç ca pratiñedhaç ca
nigamo héçvarasya te
avekñate 'raviëòäkña
guëaà doñaà ca karmaëäm
SYNONYMS
çré-uddhavaù uväca—Çré Uddhava said; vidhiù—positive injunction; ca—also;
pratiñedhaù—prohibitive injunction; ca—and; nigamaù—the Vedic literature;
hi—indeed; éçvarasya—of the Lord; te—of You; avekñate—focuses upon;
araviëòa-akña—O lotus-eyed one; guëam—good or pious qualities;
doñam—bad or sinful qualities; ca—also; karmaëäm—of activities.
TRANSLATION
Çré Uddhava said: My dear lotus-eyed Kåñëa, You are the Supreme Lord,
and thus the Vedic literatures, consisting of positive and negative injunctions,
constitute Your order. Such literatures focus upon the good and bad qualities of
work.
PURPORT
At the end of the previous chapter, Lord Kåñëa stated, guëa-doña-dåçir doño
guëas tübhaya-varjitaù: "Focusing upon material piety and sin is itself a
discrepancy, since actual piety means to transcend both of them." Çré Uddhava
now pursues this point so that Lord Kåñëa will give a more elaborate
explanation of this difficult subject matter. Çré Uddhava here states that the
Vedic literatures, which constitute the laws of God, deal with piety and sin;
therefore, it must be clarified how one transcends activities recommended in
the Vedas. According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, Uddhava
suddenly understood Lord Kåñëa's purpose in the words He had just spoken,
and to induce the Lord to elaborate upon this interesting point Uddhava
outwardly challenged the Lord's statement.
TEXT 2
vaNAAR™amaivak(lpaM ca
‘aitalaAemaAnaulaAemajama,
‰"vyade"zAvaya:k(AlaAna,
svagA< nar"k(maeva ca
varëäçrama-vikalpaà ca
pratilomänulomajam
dravya-deça-vayaù-kälän
svargaà narakam eva ca
SYNONYMS
varëa-äçrama—of the varëäçrama system; vikalpam—the variety of superior
and inferior positions created by piety and sin; ca—and; pratiloma—birth in a
mixed family wherein the father is inferior in social status to the mother;
anuloma-jam—birth in a mixed family in which the father is superior in social
status to the mother; dravya—material objects or possessions; deça—the place;
vayaù—one's age; kälän—the time; svargam—heaven; narakam—hell;
eva—indeed; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
According to Vedic literature, the superior and inferior varieties found in
the human social system, varëäçrama, are due to pious and sinful modes of
family planning. Thus piety and sin are constant points of reference in the
Vedic analysis of the components of a given situation—namely the material
ingredients, place, age and time. Indeed, the Vedas reveal the existence of
material heaven and hell, which are certainly based on piety and sin.
PURPORT
Pratiloma indicates the combination of a superior woman with an inferior
man. For example, the vaidehaka community consists of those born of a çüdra
father and brähmaëa mother, whereas the sütas are those born from a kñatriya
father and a brähmaëa mother or from a çüdra father and kñatriya mother.
Anuloma indicates those born from a superior father and inferior mother. The
mürdhävasikta are those born of a brähmaëa father and kñatriya mother.
Ambañöhas are those born from a brähmaëa father and vaiçya mother, and they
often become medical men. Karaëa indicates those born of a vaiçya father and
çüdra mother or of a kñatriya father and vaiçya mother. That such mixing of
castes is not very much appreciated in the Vedic culture is demonstrated in the
first chapter of Bhagavad-gétä. Arjuna was very worried that the death of so
many kñatriyas on the battlefield would lead to the mixing of superior women
with inferior men, and on those grounds he objected to fighting. In any case,
the entire Vedic social system is based on distinguishing between piety and sin,
and Çré Uddhava is encouraging the Lord to explain more elaborately His
statement that one should transcend both piety and sin.
TEXT 3
gAuNAd"AeSaiBad"Aä{"ií"ma,
@ntare"NA vacastava
ina:™aeyas$aM k(TaM na|NAAM
inaSaeDaivaiDalaºaNAma,
guëa-doña-bhidä-dåñöim
antareëa vacas tava
niùçreyasaà kathaà nèëäà
niñedha-vidhi-lakñaëam
SYNONYMS
guëa—piety; doña—sin; bhidä—the difference between; dåñöim—seeing;
antareëa—without; vacaù—words; tava—Your; niùçreyasam—perfection of
life, liberation; katham—how is it possible; nèëäm—for human beings;
niñedha—prohibitions; vidhi—positive injunctions; lakñaëam—characterized
by.
TRANSLATION
Without seeing the difference between piety and sin, how can one
understand Your own instructions in the form of Vedic literatures, which order
one to act piously and forbid one to act sinfully? Furthermore, without such
authorized Vedic literatures, which ultimately award liberation, how can human
beings achieve the perfection of life?
PURPORT
If one does not accept the necessity of performing pious activities and
avoiding sinful activities, it becomes very difficult to understand authorized
religious scriptures; and without such scriptures, how can human beings attain
salvation? This is the essence of Çré Uddhava's question.
TEXT 4
ipata{de"vamanauSyaAnaAM
vaed"êºaustavaeìr"
™aeyastvanaupalabDae'TaeR
s$aADyas$aADanayaAer"ipa
pitå-deva-manuñyänäà
vedaç cakñus taveçvara
çreyas tv anupalabdhe 'rthe
sädhya-sädhanayor api
SYNONYMS
pitå—of the forefathers; deva—of the demigods; manuñyäëäm—of the human
beings; vedaù—the Vedic knowledge; cakñuù—is the eye; tava—emanating
from You; éçvara—O Supreme Lord; çreyaù—superior; tu—indeed;
anupalabdhe—in that which cannot be directly perceived; arthe—in the goals
of human life, such as sense gratification, liberation, and attainment of
heaven; sädhya-sädhanayoù—both in the means and the end; api—indeed.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, in order to understand those things beyond direct
experience—such as spiritual liberation or attainment of heaven and other
material enjoyments beyond our present capacity—and in general to understand
the means and end of all things, the forefathers, demigods and human beings
must consult the Vedic literatures, which are Your own laws, for these
constitute the highest evidence and revelation.
PURPORT
One might argue that while human beings are certainly prone to ignorance,
the elevated forefathers and demigods are considered to be all-knowing within
universal affairs. If such superior beings would communicate with the earth,
then everyone could bypass Vedic knowledge in achieving his personal desire.
This concept is denied here by the words vedaç cakñuù. Even the demigods and
forefathers have at best an ambiguous conception of supreme liberation, and
even in material affairs they are subject to personal frustration. Although the
demigods are all-powerful in awarding material benedictions to inferior species
such as human beings, they are sometimes thwarted in their personal programs
of sense gratification. A rich businessman, for example, may have no difficulty
paying the insignificant salary of one of his innumerable workers, but the same
wealthy man may be completely frustrated in his dealings with his own family
and friends and may also be defeated in his attempts to expand his fortune by
further investments. Although a rich man appears to be all-powerful to his
subordinate workers, he must personally struggle to fulfill his personal desires.
Similarly, the demigods and forefathers encounter many difficulties in
maintaining and expanding their celestial standard of living. They must
therefore constantly take shelter of superior Vedic knowledge. Even in the
administration of cosmic affairs, they strictly follow the guidelines of the
Vedas, which are the laws of God. If such fabulous entities as demigods must
take shelter of the Vedas, we can just imagine the position of human beings,
who are frustrated at virtually every step of their lives. Every human being
should accept Vedic knowledge as the highest evidence in material and
spiritual affairs. Uddhava points out to the Lord that if one accepts the
authority of Vedic knowledge, it is seemingly impossible to reject the concept
of material piety and sin. Thus Uddhava persists in examining the Lord's
controversial statement at the end of the last chapter.
TEXT 5
gAuNAd"AeSaiBad"Aä{"ií"r,"
inagAmaAÔae na ih" svata:
inagAmaenaApavaAd"ê
iBad"AyaA wita h" ”ama:
guëa-doña-bhidä-dåñöir
nigamät te na hi svataù
nigamenäpavädaç ca
bhidäyä iti ha bhramaù
SYNONYMS
guëa—piety; doña—sin; bhidä—the difference between; dåñöiù—seeing;
nigamät—from Vedic knowledge; te—Your; na—not; hi—indeed;
svataù—automatically; nigamena—by the Vedas; apavädaù—nullification;
ca—also; bhidäyäù—of such distinction; iti—thus; ha—clearly;
bhramaù—confusion.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, the distinction observed between piety and sin comes from
Your own Vedic knowledge and does not arise by itself. If the same Vedic
literature subsequently nullifies such distinction between piety and sin, there
will certainly be confusion.
PURPORT
In the Bhagavad-gétä (15.15) Lord Kåñëa states, vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva
vedyaù: "By all the Vedas I am to be known. Indeed, I am the compiler of
Vedanta, and I know the Veda as it is." Vedic knowledge emanates from the
breathing of the Personality of Godhead; therefore, whatever Lord Kåñëa
speaks is Veda, or perfect knowledge. The Vedic literatures are full of
descriptions of piety and sin, but Lord Kåñëa's statement that one should
transcend piety and sin is also to be understood as Vedic knowledge. Çré
Uddhava has understood this point and therefore requests Lord Kåñëa to clear
up an apparent contradiction. Ultimately, the material world gives the living
entities a chance to satisfy their perverted desires and at the same time
gradually achieve the liberation of going back home, back to Godhead. Thus
material piety must be considered a means and never an absolute end, since
the material world itself is not absolute, being temporary and limited. The
Personality of Godhead is Himself the reservoir of all virtue and goodness.
Those persons and activities that please the Lord are to be considered virtuous,
and those that displease Him are to be considered sinful. There cannot be any
other permanent definition of these terms. If one becomes a mundane
moralist, forgetting the Supreme Lord, one's position is certainly imperfect,
and one will not achieve the ultimate goal of piety, going back home, back to
Godhead. On the other hand, there is great fear among moralists that if the
distinction between piety and sin is minimized, people will commit many
atrocities in the name of God. In the modern world there is no clear
understanding of spiritual authority, and moral men consider any appeal to
transcend morality to be an invitation to fanaticism, anarchy, violence and
corruption. Thus they regard material moral principles as more important than
directly trying to please God. Because this point is controversial, Uddhava is
anxiously requesting the Lord to give a clear explanation.
TEXT 6
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
yaAegAAñyaAe mayaA ‘aAel(A
na|NAAM ™aeyaAeivaiDats$ayaA
ÁaAnaM k(maR ca Bail(ê
naAepaAyaAe'nyaAe'ista ku(‡aicata,
çré-bhagavän uväca
yogäs trayo mayä proktä
nèëäà çreyo-vidhitsayä
jïänaà karma ca bhaktiç ca
nopäyo 'nyo 'sti kutracit
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
yogäù—processes; trayaù—three; mayä—by Me; proktäù—described;
nèëam—of human beings; çreyaù—perfection; vidhitsayä—desiring to bestow;
jïänam—the path of philosophy; karma—the path of work; ca—also;
bhaktiù—the path of devotion; ca—also; na—no; upäyaù—means;
anyaù—other; asti—exists; kutracit—whatsoever.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Uddhava, because I
desire that human beings may achieve perfection, I have presented three paths
of advancement—the path of knowledge, the path of work and the path of
devotion. Besides these three there is absolutely no other means of elevation.
PURPORT
Ultimately, the goal of philosophical speculation, pious regulated work and
devotional service is the same—Kåñëa consciousness. As stated by the Lord in
Bhagavad-gétä (4.11),
ye yathä mäà prapadyante
täàs tathaiva bhajämy aham
mama vartmänuvartante
manuñyäù pärtha sarvaçaù
"All of them—as they surrender unto Me—I reward accordingly. Everyone
follows My path in all respects, O son of Påthä." Although all authorized
processes of human perfection ultimately lead to Kåñëa consciousness, or love
of God, various performers have specific propensities and qualifications and
thus gravitate to different methods of self-realization. Lord Kåñëa here
describes the three authorized processes together in order to emphasize that
their ultimate goal is one. At the same time, philosophical speculation and
regulated pious work can never be considered equal to pure love of Godhead,
as the Lord has elaborately clarified in the previous chapters. The word trayaù,
or "three," indicates that despite their ultimate oneness of purpose, the three
paths display diversity in progress and achievement. One cannot achieve the
same result by mere speculation or piety that one achieves by directly
surrendering to the Personality of Godhead, depending completely on His
mercy and friendship. The word karma here indicates work dedicated to the
Personality of Godhead. As described in Bhagavad-gétä (3.9),
yajïärthät karmaëo 'nyatra
loko 'yaà karma-bandhanaù
tad-arthaà karma kaunteya
mukta-saìgaù samäcara
"Work done as a sacrifice for Viñëu has to be performed, otherwise work binds
one to this material world. Therefore, O son of Kunté, perform your prescribed
duties for His satisfaction, and in that way you will always remain unattached
and free from bondage." In the process of jïäna, one seeks impersonal
liberation by merging into the glaring effulgence of the Personality of
Godhead. Such liberation is considered hellish by the devotees, because by
merging one loses all awareness of the supreme blissful feature of the Lord as
Bhagavän, the supreme person. The performers of karma, or regulated work,
seek the three aspects of human progress other than liberation—namely
religiosity, economic development and sense gratification. The fruitive
workers think that by exhausting each of their innumerable material desires
they will gradually come out of the dark tunnel of material existence into the
clear light of spiritual liberation. This process is very dangerous and uncertain,
because not only is there virtually no limit to material desires, but even a slight
flaw in the process of regulated work constitutes sin and throws one off the
path of progressive life. The devotees directly aim for love of Godhead and are
therefore most pleasing to the Supreme Lord. In any case, all three divisions of
Vedic elevation depend completely on the mercy of Lord Kåñëa. One cannot
progress along any one of these paths without the blessings of the Lord. Other
Vedic processes, such as austerity, charity and so forth, are included within the
three primary divisions described here.
TEXT 7
inaivaRNNAAnaAM ÁaAnayaAegAAe
nyaAis$anaAimah" k(maRs$au
taeSvainaivaRNNAicaÔaAnaAM
k(maRyaAegAstau k(AimanaAma,
nirviëëänäà jïäna-yogo
nyäsinäm iha karmasu
teñv anirviëëa-cittänäà
karma-yogas tu käminäm
SYNONYMS
nirviëëänäm—for those who are disgusted; jïäna-yogaù—the path of
philosophical speculation; nyäsinäm—for those who are renounced;
iha—among these three paths; karmasu—in ordinary material activities;
teñu—in those activities; anirviëëa—not disgusted; cittänäm—for those who
have consciousness; karma-yogaù—the path of karma-yoga; tu-indeed;
käminäm—for those who still desire material happiness.
TRANSLATION
Among these three paths, jïäna-yoga, the path of philosophical speculation,
is recommended for those who are disgusted with material life and are thus
detached from ordinary, fruitive activities. Those who are not disgusted with
material life, having many desires yet to fulfill, should seek perfection through
the path of karma-yoga.
PURPORT
In this verse the Lord reveals the different propensities that lead human
beings to adopt different processes of perfection. Those who are frustrated in
the ordinary material life of society, friendship and love, and who understand
that promotion to heaven simply brings further domestic miseries, take
directly to the path of knowledge. Through authorized philosophical
discrimination they transcend the bonds of material existence. Those who are
still desirous of enjoying material society, friendship and love, and who are
excited by the prospect of going with their relatives to material heavenly
planets, cannot take directly to the path of rigorous philosophical
advancement, which requires great austerity. Such persons are advised to
remain in family life and offer the fruits of their work to the Supreme. In this
way, they also can become perfect and gradually learn detachment from
material life.
TEXT 8
yaä{"cC$yaA matk(TaAd"AE
jaAta™aÜ"stau ya: paumaAna,
na inaivaRNNAAe naAitas$al(Ae
Bail(yaAegAAe'sya is$aiÜ"d":
yadåcchayä mat-kathädau
jäta-çraddhas tu yaù pumän
na nirviëëo näti-sakto
bhakti-yogo 'sya siddhi-daù
SYNONYMS
yadåcchayä—somehow or other by good fortune; mat-kathä-ädau—in the
narrations, songs, philosophy, dramatical performances, etc., that describe My
glories; jäta—awakened; çraddhaù—faith; tu—indeed; yaù-one who;
pumän—a person; na—not; nirviëëaù—disgusted; na—not; ati-saktaù—very
attached; bhakti-yogaù—the path of loving devotion; asya—his;
siddhi-daù—will award perfection.
TRANSLATION
If somehow or other by good fortune one develops faith in hearing and
chanting My glories, such a person, being neither very disgusted with nor
attached to material life, should achieve perfection through the path of loving
devotion to Me.
PURPORT
If somehow or other one gets the association of pure devotees of the Lord
and hears from them the transcendental message of Lord Kåñëa, then one has
the chance to become a devotee of the Lord. As mentioned in the previous
verse, those who become disgusted with material life take to impersonal
philosophical speculation and rigorously try to stamp out any trace of personal
existence. Those who are still attached to material sense gratification try to
purify themselves by offering the fruits of their ordinary activities to the
Supreme. A first-class candidate for pure devotional service, on the other
hand, is neither completely disgusted with nor attached to material life. He
does not desire to pursue ordinary material existence any further, because it
cannot award real happiness. Nevertheless, a candidate for devotional service
does not give up all hope for perfecting personal existence. A person who
avoids the two extremes of material attachment and impersonal reaction to
material attachment and who somehow or other gets the association of pure
devotees, faithfully hearing their message, is a good candidate for going back
home, back to Godhead, as described here by the Lord.
TEXT 9
taAvatk(maARiNA ku(vaI=ta
na inaivaRâeta yaAvataA
matk(TaA™avaNAAd"AE vaA
™aÜ"A yaAvaªa jaAyatae
tävat karmäëi kurvéta
na nirvidyeta yävatä
mat-kathä-çravaëädau vä
çraddhä yävan na jäyate
SYNONYMS
tävat—up to that time; karmäëi—fruitive activities; kurvéta—one should
execute; na nirvidyeta—is not satiated; yävatä—as long as; mat-kathä—of
discourses about Me; çravaëa-ädau—in the matter of çravaëam, kértanam and
so on; vä—or; çraddhä—faith; yävat—as long as; na—not; jäyate—is
awakened.
TRANSLATION
As long as one is not satiated by fruitive activity and has not awakened his
taste for devotional service by çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù [SB 7.5.23] one has to
act according to the regulative principles of the Vedic injunctions.
PURPORT
Unless one has developed firm faith in Lord Kåñëa by association with pure
devotees and is thus engaged full time in the devotional service of the Lord,
one should not neglect ordinary Vedic principles and duties. As stated by the
Lord Himself,
çruti-småté mamaiväjïe
yas te ullaìghya vartate
äjïä-cchedé mama dveñé
mad-bhakto 'pi na vaiñëavaù
"The çruti and småti literatures are to be understood as My injunctions, and
one who violates such codes is to be understood as violating My will and thus
opposing Me. Although such a person may claim to be My devotee, he is not
actually a Vaiñëava." The Lord here states that if one has not developed firm
faith in the process of chanting and hearing, one must comply with the
ordinary injunctions of Vedic literatures. There are many symptoms by which
one can recognize an advanced devotee of the Lord. In the First Canto of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.7) it is stated,
väsudeve bhagavati
bhakti-yogaù prayojitaù
janayaty äçu vairägyaà
jïänaà ca yad ahaitukam
One who is actually engaged in advanced devotional service immediately
develops both clear knowledge of Kåñëa consciousness and detachment from
nondevotional activities. One who is not situated on this platform must
comply with the ordinary injunctions of Vedic literature or risk becoming
inimical to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. On the other hand, one who
has developed great faith in the devotional service of Lord Kåñëa does not
hesitate to do anything that will further the mission of the Lord. As stated in
the Eleventh Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.5.41),
devarñi-bhütäpta-nåëäà pitèëäà
na kiìkaro näyam åëé ca räjan
sarvätmanä yaù çaraëaà çaraëyaà
gato mukundaà parihåtya kartam
"Anyone who has taken shelter of the lotus feet of Mukunda, the giver of
liberation, giving up all kinds of obligation, and has taken to the path in all
seriousness, owes neither duties nor obligations to the demigods, sages, general
living entities, family members, humankind or forefathers."
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé points out in this regard that when a person fully
surrenders to Lord Kåñëa, he takes shelter of the Lord's promise to liquidate all
other responsibilities and debts of the surrendered soul. The devotee thus
becomes fearless by meditating on the Lord's promise of protection. Those,
however, who are materially attached are frightened by the prospect of full
surrender to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, thereby revealing their
inimical mentality toward the Lord.
TEXT 10
svaDamaRsTaAe yajana, yaÁaEr,"
@naAzAI:k(Ama oÜ"va
na yaAita svagARnar"k(AE
yaânyaªa s$amaAcare"ta,
sva-dharma-stho yajan yajïair
anäçéù-käma uddhava
na yäti svarga-narakau
yady anyan na samäcaret
SYNONYMS
sva-dharma—in one's prescribed duties; sthaù—situated; yajan—worshiping;
yajïaiù—by prescribed sacrifices; anäçéù-kämaù—not desiring fruitive results;
uddhava—My dear Uddhava; na—does not; yäti—go; svarga—to heaven;
narakau—or to hell; yadi—if; anyat—something other than his prescribed
duty; na—does not; samäcaret—perform.
TRANSLATION
My dear Uddhava, a person who is situated in his prescribed duty, properly
worshiping by Vedic sacrifices but not desiring the fruitive result of such
worship, will not go to the heavenly planets; similarly, by not performing
forbidden activities he will not go to hell.
PURPORT
The perfection of karma-yoga is described here. One who does not desire
fruitive rewards for his religious activities does not waste time going to the
heavenly planets for celestial sense gratification. Similarly, one who does not
neglect his prescribed duty or perform forbidden activities will not be bothered
by going to hell for punishment. Thus avoiding material rewards and
punishments, such a desireless person can be promoted to the platform of pure
devotional service to Lord Kåñëa.
TEXT 11
@isma*éaAeke( vataRmaAna:
svaDamaRsTaAe'naGa: zAuica:
ÁaAnaM ivazAuÜ"maA«aAeita
maà"ilM( vaA yaä{"cC$yaA
asmiû loke vartamänaù
sva-dharma-stho 'naghaù çuciù
jïänaà viçuddham äpnoti
mad-bhaktià vä yadåcchayä
SYNONYMS
asmin—in this; loke—world; vartamänaù—existing; sva-dharma—in one's
prescribed duty; sthaù—situated; anaghaù—free from sinful activities;
çuciù—cleansed of material contamination; jïänam—knowledge;
viçuddham—transcendental; äpnoti—obtains; mat—to Me;
bhaktim—devotional service; vä—or; yadåcchayä—according to one's fortune.
TRANSLATION
One who is situated in his prescribed duty, free from sinful activities and
cleansed of material contamination, in this very life obtains transcendental
knowledge or, by fortune, devotional service unto Me.
PURPORT
Asmin loke indicates one's present duration of life. Before the death of one's
present body one can obtain transcendental knowledge or, by great fortune,
pure devotional service to the Supreme Lord. The word yadåcchayä indicates
that if one somehow or other gets the association of pure devotees and hears
from them faithfully, one can achieve Kåñëa consciousness, the highest
perfection of life. According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, through
transcendental knowledge one obtains liberation, whereas through pure
devotional service one can achieve love of Godhead, in which liberation is
automatically included. Both results are certainly superior to ordinary, fruitive
activities, by which one tries to enjoy much the same things that animals do. If
one's devotional service is mixed with a tendency toward fruitive activities or
mental speculation, then one may achieve the neutral stage of love of
Godhead, whereas those who are inclined to serve only Lord Kåñëa advance to
the higher stages of love of Godhead in servitude, friendship, parental love and
the conjugal relationship.
TEXT 12
svaigARNAAe'pyaetaimacC$inta
laAekM( inar"iyaNAstaTaA
s$aADakM( ÁaAnaBail(ByaAma,
oBayaM tad"s$aADak(ma,
svargiëo 'py etam icchanti
lokaà nirayiëas tathä
sädhakaà jïäna-bhaktibhyäm
ubhayaà tad-asädhakam
SYNONYMS
svargiëaù—the residents of the heavenly planets; api—even; etam—this;
icchanti—desire; lokam—earth planet; nirayiëaù—the residents of hell;
tathä—in the same way; sädhakam—leading to achievement;
jïäna-bhaktibhyäm—of transcendental knowledge and love of Godhead;
ubhayam—both (heaven and hell); tat—for that perfection; asädhakam—not
useful.
TRANSLATION
The residents of both heaven and hell desire human birth on the earth planet
because human life facilitates the achievement of transcendental knowledge and
love of Godhead, whereas neither heavenly nor hellish bodies efficiently provide
such opportunities.
PURPORT
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé points out that in material heaven one becomes
absorbed in extraordinary sense gratification and in hell one is absorbed in
suffering. In both cases there is little impetus to acquire transcendental
knowledge or pure love of Godhead. Excessive suffering or excessive
enjoyment are thus impediments to spiritual advancement.
TEXT 13
na nar": svagARitaM k(AÉeÿna,
naAr"k(LM vaA ivacaºaNA:
naemaM laAekM( ca k(AÉeÿta
de"h"AvaezAAt‘amaAâita
na naraù svar-gatià käìkñen
närakéà vä vicakñaëaù
nemaà lokaà ca käìkñeta
dehäveçät pramädyati
SYNONYMS
na—never; naraù—a human being; svaù-gatim—promotion to heaven;
käìkñet—should desire; närakém—to hell; vä—or; vicakñaëaù—a learned
person; na—nor; imam—this; lokam—earth planet; ca—also; käìkñeta—one
should desire; deha—in the material body; äveçät—from absorption;
pramädyati—one becomes a fool.
TRANSLATION
A human being who is wise should never desire promotion to heavenly
planets or residence in hell. Indeed, a human being should also never desire
permanent residence on the earth, for by such absorption in the material body
one becomes foolishly negligent of one's actual self-interest.
PURPORT
One who has achieved human life on the earth has an excellent
opportunity to attain spiritual liberation through Kåñëa consciousness, or
devotional service to the Lord. Thus one should not desire promotion to
heaven or risk residence in hell, where excessive enjoyment or punishment
deviate one's mind from self-realization. On the other hand, one should not
think, "The earth is so nice, I can stay here forever." One should develop
thorough detachment from all aspects and categories of material existence and
go back home, back to Godhead, where life is eternal and full of bliss and
knowledge.
Lord Kåñëa now begins to develop His conclusive proof that actual human
progress lies beyond material piety and sin. The Lord first clarified that there
are basically three methods of human elevation, namely jïäna, karma and
bhakti, and that the goal is transcendental knowledge and ultimately love of
Godhead. Now the Lord explains that promotion to heavenly planets (the
final goal of piety) as well as residence in hell (the result of sinful activities)
are both useless in fulfilling the actual purpose of life. Neither material piety
nor sin establish the eternal living entity in his constitutional position;
therefore something more is required to achieve the actual perfection of life.
TEXT 14
Wtaiã"ã"Ana, paur"A ma{tyaAer,"
@BavaAya Gaqe%ta s$a:
@‘amaÔa wdM" ÁaAtvaA
matyaRmapyaTaRis$aiÜ"d"ma,
etad vidvän purä måtyor
abhaväya ghaöeta saù
apramatta idaà jïätvä
martyam apy artha-siddhi-dam
SYNONYMS
etat—this; vidvän—knowing; purä—before; måtyoù—death; abhaväya—to
transcend material existence; ghaöeta—should act; saù—he;
apramattaù—without laziness or foolishness; idam—this; jïätvä—knowing;
martyam—subject to death; api—even though; artha—of the goal of life;
siddhi-dam—giving the perfection.
TRANSLATION
A wise person, knowing that although the material body is subject to death it
can still award the perfection of one's life, should not foolishly neglect to take
advantage of this opportunity before death arrives.
TEXT 15
iC$âmaAnaM yamaEre"taE:
k{(tanaIxM" vanas$paitama,
KagA: svake(tamauts$a{jya
ºaemaM yaAita ÷lampaq%:
chidyamänaà yamair etaiù
kåta-néòaà vanaspatim
khagaù sva-ketam utsåjya
kñemaà yäti hy alampaöaù
SYNONYMS
chidyamänam—being cut down; yamaiù—by cruel men, who are like death
personified; etaiù—by these; kåta-néòam—in which he has constructed his
nest; vanaspatim—a tree; khagaù—a bird; sva-ketam—his home;
utsåjya—giving up; kñemam—happiness; yäti—achieves; hi—indeed;
alampaöaù—without attachment.
TRANSLATION
Without attachment, a bird gives up the tree in which his nest was
constructed when that tree is cut down by cruel men who are like death
personified, and thus the bird achieves happiness in another place.
PURPORT
Here the example is given of detachment from the bodily concept of life.
The living entity resides within the body just as a bird dwells within a tree.
When thoughtless men cut down the tree, the bird, without lamenting the loss
of its previous nest, does not hesitate to establish its residence in another
place.
TEXT 16
@h"Aer"A‡aEizC$âmaAnaM
bauä,"DvaAyauBaRyavaepaTau:
maul(s$aËÿ: parM" bauä,"DvaA
inar"Ih" opazAAmyaita
aho-rätraiç chidyamänaà
buddhväyur bhaya-vepathuù
mukta-saìgaù paraà buddhvä
niréha upaçämyati
SYNONYMS
ahaù—by days; rätraiù—by nights; chidyamänam—being cut down;
buddhvä—knowing; äyuù—the duration of life; bhaya—with fear;
vepathuù—trembling; mukta-saìgaù—free from attachment; param—the
Supreme Lord; buddhvä—understanding; niréhaù—without material desire;
upaçämyati—achieves perfect peace.
TRANSLATION
Knowing that one's duration of life is being similarly cut down by the
passing of days and nights, one should be shaken by fear. In this way, giving up
all material attachment and desire, one understands the Supreme Lord and
achieves perfect peace.
PURPORT
An intelligent devotee knows that the passing days and nights are
exhausting one's duration of life, and he therefore gives up his futile
attachment to material sense objects. Instead, he strives to achieve permanent
benefit in life. Just as the detached bird immediately gives up its nest and goes
to another tree, similarly, a devotee knows that there is no permanent
opportunity for residence within the material world. Instead he dedicates his
working energy to achieving eternal residence in the kingdom of God.
Transcending the modes of material nature by attaining Kåñëa's own spiritual
nature, the devotee at last obtains perfect peace.
TEXT 17
na{de"h"maAâM s$aulaBaM s$auäu"laRBaM
plavaM s$auk(lpaM gAuç&k(NARDaAr"ma,
mayaAnaukU(laena naBasvataeir"taM
paumaAna, BavaAibDaM na tare"ts$a @Atmah"A
nå-deham ädyaà su-labhaà su-durlabhaà
plavaà su-kalpaà guru-karëadhäram
mayänukülena nabhasvateritaà
pumän bhaväbdhià na taret sa ätma-hä
SYNONYMS
nr—human; deham—body; ädyam—the source of all favorable results;
su-labham—effortlessly obtained; su-durlabham—although impossible to
obtain even with great endeavor; plavam—a boat; su-kalpam—extremely well
suited for its purpose; guru—having the spiritual master; karëa-dhäram—as
the captain of the boat; mayä—by Me; anukülena—with favorable;
nabhasvatä—winds; éritam—impelled; pumän—a person; bhava—of material
existence; abdhim—the ocean; na—does not; taret—cross over; saù—he;
ätma-hä—the killer of his own soul.
TRANSLATION
The human body, which can award all benefit in life, is automatically
obtained by the laws of nature, although it is a very rare achievement. This
human body can be compared to a perfectly constructed boat having the
spiritual master as the captain and the instructions of the Personality of
Godhead as favorable winds impelling it on its course. Considering all these
advantages, a human being who does not utilize his human life to cross the
ocean of material existence must be considered the killer of his own soul.
PURPORT
The human body, which is obtained after passing through many inferior
forms, is created in such a way that it can award the highest perfection of life.
A human being is supposed to serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
the bona fide spiritual master is the appropriate guide for such service. The
causeless mercy of Lord Kåñëa is compared to favorable winds that help the
boat of the body to ply smoothly on the course back home, back to Godhead.
Lord Kåñëa gives His personal instructions in Vedic literature, speaks through
the bona fide spiritual master, and encourages, warns and protects His sincere
devotee from within the devotee's heart. Such merciful guidance of the Lord
moves a sincere soul quickly on the path back to Godhead. But one who
cannot understand that the human body is a suitable boat for crossing the
ocean of material existence will see no need to accept a captain in the form of
the spiritual master and will not at all appreciate the favorable winds of the
Lord's mercy. He has no chance of achieving the goal of human life. Acting
against his own self-interest, he gradually becomes the killer of his own soul.
TEXT 18
yad"Ar"mBaeSau inaivaRNNAAe
ivar"l(: s$aMyataein‰"ya:
@ByaAs$aenaAtmanaAe yaAegAI
DaAr"yaed"calaM mana:
yadärambheñu nirviëëo
viraktaù saàyatendriyaù
abhyäsenätmano yogé
dhärayed acalaà manaù
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; ärambheñu—in material endeavors; nirviëëaù—hopeless;
viraktaù—detached; saàyata—completely controlling; indriyaù—the senses;
abhyäsena—by practice; ätmanaù—of the soul; yogé—the transcendentalist;
dhärayet—should concentrate; acalam—steady; manaù—the mind.
TRANSLATION
A transcendentalist, having become disgusted and hopeless in all endeavors
for material happiness, completely controls the senses and develops detachment.
By spiritual practice he should then fix the mind on the spiritual platform
without deviation.
PURPORT
The inevitable result of material sense gratification is disappointment and
pain that sears the heart. One becomes gradually hopeless and despondent in
material life; then, receiving good instructions from the Lord or His devotee,
one transforms one's material disappointment into spiritual success. Actually,
Lord Kåñëa is our only true friend, and this simple understanding can bring
one to a new life of spiritual happiness in the company of the Lord.
TEXT 19
DaAyaRmaANAM manaAe yaihR"
”aAmyad"ìnavaisTatama,
@tain‰"taAe'naur"AeDaena
maAgAeRNAAtmavazAM nayaeta,
dhäryamäëaà mano yarhi
bhrämyad açv anavasthitam
atandrito 'nurodhena
märgeëätma-vaçaà nayet
SYNONYMS
dhäryamäëam—being concentrated on the spiritual platform; manaù—the
mind; yarhi—when; bhrämyat—is deviated; äçu—suddenly;
anavasthitam—not situated on the spiritual platform; atandritaù—carefully;
anurodhena—according to the prescribed regulations; märgeëa—by the
process; ätma—of the soul; vaçam—under the control; nayet—one should
bring.
TRANSLATION
Whenever the mind, being concentrated on the spiritual platform, is
suddenly deviated from its spiritual position, one should carefully bring it under
the control of the self by following the prescribed means.
PURPORT
Although one is seriously engaging the mind in Kåñëa consciousness, the
mind is so flickering that it may suddenly be deviated from its spiritual
position. One should then carefully bring the mind back under the control of
the self. It is stated in Bhagavad-gétä that if one is too austere or too sensuous
one cannot control the mind. Sometimes one may bring the mind under
control by allowing the material senses limited satisfaction. For example,
although one may eat austerely, from time to time one may accept a reasonable
amount of mahä-prasädam, opulent foods offered to the temple Deities, so that
the mind will not become disturbed. Similarly, one may occasionally relax with
other transcendentalists through joking, swimming and so forth. But if such
activities are performed excessively, they will lead to a setback in spiritual life.
When the mind desires sinful gratification such as illicit sex or intoxication,
one must simply tolerate the mind's foolishness and by strenuous effort push
on with Kåñëa consciousness. Then the waves of illusion will soon subside, and
the path of advancement will again open wide.
TEXT 20
manaAegAitaM na ivas$a{jaeja,
ijata‘aANAAe ijataein‰"ya:
s$aÔvas$ampaªayaA bauÜ"YaA
mana @AtmavazAM nayaeta,
mano-gatià na visåjej
jita-präëo jitendriyaù
sattva-sampannayä buddhyä
mana ätma-vaçaà nayet
SYNONYMS
manaù—of the mind; gatim—goal; na—not; visåjet—should lose sight of;
jita-präëaù—one who has conquered the breath; jita-indriyaù—who has
conquered his senses; sattva—of the mode of goodness;
sampannayä—characterized by flourishing; buddhyä—by the intelligence;
manaù—the mind; ätma-vaçam—under the control of the self; nayet—one
should bring.
TRANSLATION
One should never lose sight of the actual goal of mental activities, but rather,
conquering the life air and senses and utilizing intelligence strengthened by the
mode of goodness, one should bring the mind under the control of the self.
PURPORT
Although the mind may suddenly wander outside the jurisdiction of
self-realization, one must bring the mind back under control by clear
intelligence in the mode of goodness. The best solution is to keep the mind
always busy in the service of Lord Kåñëa so that the mind cannot wander onto
the dangerous path of sense gratification, headed by sex attraction. The
material mind is naturally inclined to accept material objects at every moment.
Therefore unless the mind is seriously brought under control there is no
possibility of becoming steady on the path of spiritual advancement.
TEXT 21
WSa vaE par"maAe yaAegAAe
manas$a: s$aÍÿh": sma{ta:
ô$d"yaÁatvamainvacC$na,
d"myasyaevaAvaRtaAe mauò":
eña vai paramo yogo
manasaù saìgrahaù småtaù
hådaya-jïatvam anvicchan
damyasyevärvato muhuù
SYNONYMS
eñaù—this; vai—indeed; paramaù—supreme; yogaù—yoga process;
manasaù—of the mind; saìgrahaù—complete control; småtaù—thus declared;
hådaya-jïatvam—the characteristic of knowing intimately;
anvicchan—carefully watching; damyasya—which is to be subdued; iva—like;
arvataù—of a horse; muhuù—always.
TRANSLATION
An expert horseman, desiring to tame a headstrong horse, first lets the horse
have his way for a moment and then, pulling the reins, gradually places the
horse on the desired path. Similarly, the supreme yoga process is that by which
one carefully observes the movements and desires of the mind and gradually
brings them under full control.
PURPORT
Just as an expert rider intimately knows the propensities of an untamed
horse and gradually brings the horse under control, an expert yogé allows the
mind to reveal its materialistic propensities and then controls them through
superior intelligence. A learned transcendentalist withholds and supplies sense
objects so that the mind and senses remain fully controlled, just as the
horseman sometimes pulls sharply on the reins and sometimes allows the horse
to run freely. The rider never forgets his actual goal or destination, and
eventually places the horse on the right path. Similarly, a learned
transcendentalist, even though sometimes allowing the senses to act, never
forgets the goal of self-realization, nor does he allow the senses to engage in
sinful activity. Excessive austerity or restriction may result in great mental
disturbance, just as pulling excessively on the reins of a horse may cause the
horse to rear up against the rider. The path of self-realization depends upon
clear intelligence, and the easiest way to acquire such expertise is surrender to
Lord Kåñëa. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (10.10),
teñäà satata-yuktänäà
bhajatäà préti-pürvakam
dadämi buddhi-yogaà taà
yena mäm upayänti te
One may not be a great scholar or spiritual intellect, but if one is sincerely
engaged in loving service to the Lord without personal envy or personal
motivation the Lord will reveal from within the heart the methodology
required to control the mind. Expertly riding the waves of mental desire, a
Kåñëa conscious person does not fall from the saddle, and he eventually rides
all the way back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 22
s$aAÊÿYaena s$avaRBaAvaAnaAM
‘aitalaAemaAnaulaAemata:
BavaApyayaAvanauDyaAyaena,
manaAe yaAvat‘as$aId"ita
säìkhyena sarva-bhävänäà
pratilomänulomataù
bhaväpyayäv anudhyäyen
mano yävat prasédati
SYNONYMS
säìkhyena—by analytic study; sarva—of all; bhävänäm—material elements
(cosmic, earthly and atomic); pratiloma—by regressive function;
anulomataù—by progressive function; bhava—creation;
apyayau—annihilation; anudhyäyet—should constantly observe; manaù—the
mind; yävat—until; prasédati—is spiritually satisfied.
TRANSLATION
Until one's mind is fixed in spiritual satisfaction, one should analytically
study the temporary nature of all material objects, whether cosmic, earthly or
atomic. One should constantly observe the process of creation through the
natural progressive function and the process of annihilation through the
regressive function.
PURPORT
There is a saying that whatever goes up must come down. Similarly, Lord
Kåñëa states in the Bhagavad-gétä (2.27),
jätasya hi dhruvo måtyur
dhruvaà janma måtasya ca
tasmäd aparihärye 'rthe
na tvaà çocitum arhasi
"For one who has taken his birth, death is certain; and for one who is dead,
birth is certain. Therefore, in the unavoidable discharge of your duty, you
should not lament." Mano yävat prasédati: Until one has established one's
consciousness on the liberated platform of perfect knowledge, one must
constantly ward off the attacks of illusion through rigid analytic observation of
material nature. The material mind may be attracted to sex; therefore by
spiritual intelligence one should scrutinize the temporary nature of one's own
body and the body that has artificially become the object of one's material lust.
One may apply this rigid analysis to all material bodies, from the fantastic
cosmic body of Lord Brahmä down to that of the most insignificant germ. As
previously stated by Lord Kåñëa, one who is advanced in Kåñëa consciousness
spontaneously avoids sense gratification and is constantly drawn by spiritual
love into his relationship with Lord Kåñëa. One who has not achieved the
platform of spontaneous Kåñëa consciousness must remain constantly vigilant
so as not to be grossly cheated by the material energy of the Lord. One who
tries to exploit the material energy ruins his spiritual life and experiences
varieties of misery.
TEXT 23
inaivaRNNAsya ivar"l(sya
pauç&SasyaAel(vaeid"na:
manastyajaita d"AEr"AtmyaM
icaintatasyaAnauicantayaA
nirviëëasya viraktasya
puruñasyokta-vedinaù
manas tyajati daurätmyaà
cintitasyänucintayä
SYNONYMS
nirviëëasya—of one who is disgusted with the illusory nature of the material
world; viraktasya—and who is therefore detached; puruñasya—of such a
person; ukta-vedinaù—who is guided by the instructions of his spiritual master;
manaù—the mind; tyajati—gives up; daurätmyam—the false identification
with the material body and mind; cintitasya—of that which is contemplated;
anucintayä—by constant analysis.
TRANSLATION
When a person is disgusted with the temporary, illusory nature of this world
and is thus detached from it, his mind, guided by the instructions of his
spiritual master, considers again and again the nature of this world and
eventually gives up the false identification with matter.
PURPORT
Although it is difficult to control the mind, by constant practice the mind
can be spiritualized in Kåñëa consciousness. A sincere disciple constantly
remembers the instructions of his spiritual master and thereby faces again and
again the stark truth that the material world is not the ultimate reality. By
detachment and perseverance the mind gradually gives up its propensity
toward sense gratification; thus illusion loses its grip on a sincere Kåñëa
conscious devotee. Gradually the purified mind completely gives up the false
identification with this world and transfers its attention to the spiritual
platform. Then one is considered to be perfect in the yoga system.
TEXT 24
yamaAid"iBayaAeRgApaTaEr,"
@AnvaIiºafyaA ca ivaâyaA
mamaAcaAeRpaAs$anaAiBavaAR
naAnyaEyaAeRgyaM smare"nmana:
yamädibhir yoga-pathair
änvékñikyä ca vidyayä
mamärcopäsanäbhir vä
nänyair yogyaà smaren manaù
SYNONYMS
yama-ädibhiù—by disciplinary regulations, etc.; yoga-pathaiù—by the
procedures of the yoga system; änvékñikyä—by logical analysis; ca—also;
vidyayä—by spiritual knowledge; mama—My; arcä—worship;
upäñanäbhiù—by adoration, etc.; vä—or; na—never; anyaiù—by other
(means); yogyam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the object of
meditation; smaret—one should focus on; manaù—the mind.
TRANSLATION
Through the various disciplinary regulations and the purificatory procedures
of the yoga system, through logic and spiritual education or through worship
and adoration of Me, one should constantly engage his mind in remembering the
Personality of Godhead, the goal of yoga. No other means should be employed
for this purpose.
PURPORT
The word vä is significant in this verse, for it indicates that one engaged in
the worship and adoration of the Personality of Godhead need not trouble
himself with the disciplinary, regulatory and purificatory procedures of yoga,
nor with the grueling intricacies of Vedic studies and logic. Yogyam, or the
most appropriate object of meditation, is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
as confirmed throughout Vedic literature. One who directly takes to the
worship of the Lord should not employ other methods, for full dependence on
the Lord is in itself the supreme process of perfection.
TEXT 25
yaid" ku(yaARt‘amaAde"na
yaAegAI k(maR ivagAihR"tama,
yaAegAenaEva d"he"dM"h"Ae
naAnyaÔa‡a k(d"Acana
yadi kuryät pramädena
yogé karma vigarhitam
yogenaiva dahed aàho
nänyat tatra kadäcana
SYNONYMS
yadi—if; kuryät—should perform; pramädena—due to negligence; yogé—the
yogé; karma—an activity; vigarhitam—abominable; yogena—by the yoga
process; eva—only; dahet—he should burn up; aàhaù—that sin; na—no;
anyat—other means; tatra—in this matter; kadäcana—at any time (should be
employed).
TRANSLATION
If, because of momentary inattention, a yogi accidentally commits an
abominable activity, then by the very practice of yoga he should burn to ashes
the sinful reaction, without at any time employing any other procedure.
PURPORT
The word yogena here indicates jïänena yogena and bhaktyä yogena, since
these two transcendental systems have the power to burn sinful reactions to
ashes. It should be clearly understood that the word aàhas, or "sin," here refers
to an accidental falldown against one's desire. Premeditated exploitation of the
mercy of the Lord can never be excused.
Significantly, the Lord forbids any extraneous purificatory rites, since the
transcendental yoga systems are themselves the most purifying processes,
especially bhakti-yoga. If one gives up one's regular prescribed duties to perform
a special ritual or penance, trying to purify a sinful reaction, then one will be
guilty of the additional fault of giving up one's prescribed duties. One should
pick oneself up from an accidental falldown and go on vigorously with one's
prescribed duties in life without being unnecessarily discouraged. One should
certainly lament and feel ashamed, or there will be no purification. However,
if one becomes overly depressed at an accidental falldown one will not have
the enthusiasm to go on to perfection. Lord Kåñëa also states in the
Bhagavad-gétä (9.30),
api cet su-duräcäro
bhajate mäm ananya-bhäk
sädhur eva sa mantavyaù
samyag vyavasito hi saù
"Even if one commits the most abominable actions, if he is engaged in
devotional service, he is to be considered saintly because he is properly
situated." The most important point is that one should be properly engaged in
the devotional service of the Lord, for then the Lord will excuse and purify an
accidental falldown. One should, however, be most cautious to avoid such an
unhappy event.
TEXT 26
svae svae'iDak(Are" yaA inaï"A
s$a gAuNA: pair"k(LitaRta:
k(maRNAAM jaAtyazAuÜ"AnaAma,
@naena inayama: k{(ta:
gAuNAd"AeSaivaDaAnaena
s$aËÿAnaAM tyaAjanaecC$yaA
sve sve 'dhikäre yä niñöhä
sa guëaù parikértitaù
karmaëäà jäty-açuddhänäm
anena niyamaù kåtaù
guëa-doña-vidhänena
saìgänäà tyäjanecchayä
SYNONYMS
sve sve—each in his own; adhikäre—position; yä—which; niñöhä—steady
practice; saù—this; guëaù—piety; parikértitaù—is thoroughly declared;
karmaëäm—of fruitive activities; jäti—by nature; açuddhänäm—impure;
anena—by this; niyamaù—disciplinary control; kåtaù—is established;
guëa—of piety; doña—of sin; vidhänena—by the rule; saìgänäm—of
association with different types of sense gratification; tyäjana—of
renunciation; icchayä—by the desire.
TRANSLATION
It is firmly declared that the steady adherence of transcendentalists to their
respective spiritual positions constitutes real piety and that sin occurs when a
transcendentalist neglects his prescribed duty. One who adopts this standard of
piety and sin, sincerely desiring to give up all past association with sense
gratification, is able to subdue materialistic activities, which are by nature
impure.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa here explains more clearly that those persons directly engaged
in self-realization either through jïäna-yoga or bhakti-yoga need not give up
their regular duties and perform special penances to atone for an accidental
falldown. The actual purpose of Vedic literature is to direct one back home,
back to Godhead, and not to encourage material sense gratification. Although
the Vedas recommend innumerable rituals for promotion to heavenly planets
and enjoyment of all varieties of material opulence, such materialistic rewards
are meant only to engage materialistic people, who otherwise would become
demoniac. To purify an accidental falldown, one who is engaged in
transcendental realization need not adopt any procedure beyond his own
spiritual practice. The words saìgänäà tyäjanecchayä indicate that one should
not practice Kåñëa consciousness or self-realization superficially or casually;
rather, one should sincerely and earnestly desire freedom from one's past sinful
life. Similarly, the words yä niñöhä indicate that one must constantly practice
Kåñëa consciousness. Thus, essential piety is to give up material sense
gratification and engage in the loving service of the Lord. One who engages
his senses, mind and intelligence twenty-four hours a day in the Lord's service
is the most pious person, and the Lord personally protects such a surrendered
soul.
TEXTS 27-28
jaAta™aÜ"Ae matk(TaAs$au
inaivaRNNA: s$avaRk(maRs$au
vaed" äu":KaAtmak(Ana, k(AmaAna,
pair"tyaAgAe'pyanaIìr":
tataAe Bajaeta maAM ‘aIta:
™aÜ"Alauä{R"X#inaêya:
jauSamaANAê taAna, k(AmaAna,
äu":KaAed"k(A<ê gAhR"yana,
jäta-çraddho mat-kathäsu
nirviëëaù sarva-karmasu
veda duùkhätmakän kämän
parityäge 'py anéçvaraù
tato bhajeta mäà prétaù
çraddhälur dåòha-niçcayaù
juñamäëaç ca tän kämän
duùkhodarkäàç ca garhayan
SYNONYMS
jäta—one who has awakened; çraddhaù—faith; mat-kathäsu—in the
descriptions of My glories; nirviëëaù—disgusted; sarva—with all;
karmasu—activities; veda—he knows; duùkha—misery; ätmakän—constituted
of; kämän—all types of sense gratification; parityäge—in the process of
renouncing; api—although; anéçvaraù—unable; tataù—due to such faith;
bhajeta—he should worship; mäm—Me; prétaù—remaining happy;
çraddhäluù—being faithful; dåòha—resolute; niçcayaù—conviction;
juñamäëaù—engaging in; ca—also; tän—that; kämän—sense gratification;
duùkha—misery; udarkän—leading to; ca—also; garhayan—repenting of.
TRANSLATION
Having awakened faith in the narrations of My glories, being disgusted with
all material activities, knowing that all sense gratification leads to misery, but
still being unable to renounce all sense enjoyment, My devotee should remain
happy and worship Me with great faith and conviction. Even though he is
sometimes engaged in sense enjoyment, My devotee knows that all sense
gratification leads to a miserable result, and he sincerely repents such activities.
PURPORT
The beginning stage of pure devotional service is described here by the
Lord. A sincere devotee has practically seen that all material activities lead
only to sense gratification and all sense gratification leads only to misery. Thus
a devotee's sincere desire is to engage twenty-four hours a day in the loving
service of Lord Kåñëa without any personal motivation. The devotee sincerely
desires to be established in his constitutional position as the Lord's eternal
servitor, and he prays to the Lord to elevate him to this exalted position. The
word anéçvara indicates that because of one's past sinful activities and bad
habits one may not immediately be able to completely extinguish the enjoying
spirit. The Lord here encourages such a devotee not to be overly depressed or
morose but to remain enthusiastic and to go on with his loving service. The
word nirviëëa indicates that a sincere devotee, although somewhat entangled
in the remnants of sense gratification, is completely disgusted with material
life and under no circumstances willingly commits sinful activities. In fact, he
avoids every kind of materialistic activity. The word kämän basically refers to
sex attraction and its by-products in the form of children, home and so forth.
Within the material world, the sex impulse is so strong that even a sincere
candidate in the loving service of the Lord may sometimes be disturbed by sex
attraction or by lingering sentiments for wife and children. A pure devotee
certainly feels spiritual affection for all living entities, including the so-called
wife and children, but he knows that material bodily attraction leads to no
good, for it simply entangles one and one's so-called relatives in a miserable
chain reaction of fruitive activities. The word dåòha-niçcaya ("steadfast
conviction") indicates that in any circumstance a devotee is completely
determined to go on with his prescribed duties for Kåñëa. Thus he thinks, "By
my previous shameful life my heart is polluted with many illusory attachments.
Personally I have no power to stop them. Only Lord Kåñëa within my heart
can remove such inauspicious contamination. But whether the Lord removes
such attachments immediately or lets me go on being afflicted by them, I will
never give up my devotional service to Him. Even if the Lord places millions of
obstacles in my path, and even if because of my offenses I go to hell, I will
never for a moment stop serving Lord Kåñëa. I am not interested in mental
speculation and fruitive activities; even if Lord Brahmä personally comes
before me offering such engagements, I will not be even slightly interested.
Although I am attached to material things I can see very clearly that they lead
to no good because they simply give me trouble and disturb my devotional
service to the Lord. Therefore, I sincerely repent my foolish attachments to so
many material things, and I am patiently awaiting Lord Kåñëa's mercy."
The word préta indicates that a devotee feels exactly like the son or subject
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and is very attached to his relationship
with the Lord. Therefore, although sincerely lamenting occasional lapses into
sense enjoyment, he never gives up his enthusiasm to serve Lord Kåñëa. If a
devotee becomes too morose or discouraged in devotional service, he may drift
into an impersonal consciousness or give up his devotional service to the Lord.
Therefore, the Lord here advises that although one should sincerely repent, he
should not become chronically depressed. One should understand that because
of his past sins he must occasionally suffer disturbances from the material mind
and senses, but one should not therefore become a devotee of detachment, as
do the speculative philosophers. Although one may desire detachment to
purify one's devotional service to the Lord, if one becomes more concerned
with renunciation than with acting for the pleasure of Lord Kåñëa, he is
misunderstanding the position of loving devotional service. Faith in Lord
Kåñëa is so powerful that in due course of time it will automatically award
detachment and perfect knowledge. If one gives up Lord Kåñëa as the central
object of one's worship and concentrates more on knowledge and detachment,
one will become deviated from one's progress in going back home, back to
Godhead. A sincere devotee of the Lord must be sincerely convinced that
simply by the strength of devotional service and the mercy of Lord Kåñëa he
will achieve everything auspicious in life. One must believe that Lord Kåñëa is
all-merciful and that He is the only real goal of one's life. Such determined
faith combined with a sincere desire to give up sense enjoyment will carry one
past the obstacles of this world.
The words jäta-çraddhaù mat-kathäsu are most significant here. By faithful
hearing of the mercy and glories of the Lord one will gradually be freed from
all material desire and clearly see at every moment the utter frustration of
sense gratification. Chanting the glories of the Lord with firm faith and
conviction is a tremendously powerful spiritual process that enables one to
give up all material association.
There is actually nothing inauspicious in the devotional service of the Lord.
Occasional difficulties experienced by a devotee are due to his previous
material activities. On the other hand, the endeavor for sense gratification is
completely inauspicious. Thus sense gratification and devotional service are
directly opposed to each other. In all circumstances one should therefore
remain the Lord's sincere servant, always believing in His mercy. Then one
will certainly go back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 29
‘aAele(na Bail(yaAegAena
BajataAe maAs$ak{(nmaunae:
k(AmaA ô$d"yyaA nazyainta
s$avaeR maiya ô$id" isTatae
proktena bhakti-yogena
bhajato mäsakån muneù
kämä hådayyä naçyanti
sarve mayi hådi sthite
SYNONYMS
proktena—which has been described; bhakti-yogena—by devotional service;
bhajataù—who is worshiping; mä—Me; asakåt—constantly; muneù—of the
sage; kämäù—material desires; hådayyäù—in the heart; naçyanti—are
destroyed; sarve—all of them; mayi—in Me; hådi—when the heart; sthite—is
firmly situated.
TRANSLATION
When an intelligent person engages constantly in worshiping Me through
loving devotional service as described by Me, his heart becomes firmly situated
in Me. Thus all material desires within the heart are destroyed.
PURPORT
The material senses are engaged in gratifying the concoctions of the mind,
causing many types of material desires to become prominent, one after
another. One who constantly engages in the devotional service of the Lord by
hearing and chanting the Lord's transcendental glories with firm faith gets
relief from the harassment of material desires. By serving the Lord one
becomes strengthened in the conviction that Çré Kåñëa is the only actual
enjoyer and all others are meant to share the Lord's pleasure through
devotional service. A devotee of the Lord situates Çré Kåñëa on a beautiful
throne within his heart and there offers the Lord constant service. Just as the
rising sun gradually eliminates all trace of darkness, the Lord's presence within
the heart causes all material desires there to weaken and eventually disappear.
The words mayi hådi sthite ("when the heart is situated in Me") indicate that an
advanced devotee sees Lord Kåñëa not only within his own heart but within
the hearts of all living creatures. Thus a sincere devotee who chants and hears
the glories of Çré Kåñëa should not be discouraged by the remnants of material
desires within the heart. He should faithfully wait for the devotional process to
naturally purify the heart of all contamination.
TEXT 30
iBaâtae ô$d"yaƒainTazA,
iC$ântae s$avaRs$aMzAyaA:
ºaIyantae caAsya k(maARiNA
maiya ä{"íe"'iKalaAtmaina
bhidyate hådaya-granthiç
chidyante sarva-saàçayäù
kñéyante cäsya karmäëi
mayi dåñöe 'khilätmani
SYNONYMS
bhidyate—pierced; hådaya—heart; granthiù—knots; chidyante—cut to pieces;
sarva—all; saàçayäù—misgivings; kñéyante—terminated; ca—and; asya—his;
karmaëi—chain of fruitive actions; mayi—when I; dåñöe—am seen;
akhila-ätmani—as the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
The knot in the heart is pierced, all misgivings are cut to pieces and the
chain of fruitive actions is terminated when I am seen as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
Hådaya-granthi indicates that one's heart is bound to illusion by false
identification with the material body. One thus becomes absorbed in material
sex pleasure, dreaming of innumerable combinations of male and female
bodies. A person intoxicated by sex attraction cannot understand that the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is the reservoir of all pleasure and the
supreme enjoyer. When a devotee achieves steadiness in devotional service,
feeling transcendental pleasure at every moment in the execution of his loving
service to the Lord, the knot of false identification is pierced and all his
misgivings are cut to pieces. In illusion we imagine that the living entity
cannot be fully satisfied without material sense gratification and speculative
doubting of the Absolute Truth. Materialistic persons consider sense
enjoyment and speculative doubting to be essential for civilized life. A pure
devotee, however, realizes that Lord Kåñëa is an unlimited ocean of happiness
and the personification of all knowledge. This realization of Lord Kåñëa
completely eradicates the twin tendencies of sense gratification and mental
speculation. Thus the chain of fruitive activities, or karma, automatically
collapses, just as a fire collapses and goes out when its fuel is removed.
Advanced devotional service automatically awards one liberation from
material bondage, as confirmed by Lord Kapila: jarayaty äçu yä koçaà nigérëam
analo yathä. "Bhakti, devotional service, dissolves the subtle body of the living
entity without separate effort, just as fire in the stomach digests all that we
eat." (SB 3.25.33) Çréla Prabhupäda states in his purport to this verse, "A
devotee does not have to try separately to attain liberation. That very service
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the process of liberation, because to
engage oneself in the service of the Lord is to liberate oneself from material
entanglement. Çré Bilvamaìgala Öhäkura explained this position very nicely.
He said, 'If I have unflinching devotion unto the lotus feet of the Supreme
Lord, then mukti, or liberation, serves me as my maidservant. Mukti the
maidservant is always ready to do whatever I ask.' For a devotee, liberation is
no problem at all. Liberation takes place without separate endeavor."
TEXT 31
tasmaAnmaà"il(yaul(sya
yaAeigAnaAe vaE mad"Atmana:
na ÁaAnaM na ca vaEr"AgyaM
‘aAya: ™aeyaAe Bavaeid"h"
tasmän mad-bhakti-yuktasya
yogino vai mad-ätmanaù
na jïänaà na ca vairägyaà
präyaù çreyo bhaved iha
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; mat-bhakti-yuktasya—of one who is engaged in My loving
service; yoginaù—of a devotee; vai—certainly; mat-ätmanaù—whose mind is
fixed in Me; na—not; jïänam—the cultivation of knowledge; na—nor;
ca—also; vairägyam—the cultivation of renunciation; präyaù—generally;
çreyaù—the means of achieving perfection; bhavet—may be; iha—in this
world.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, for a devotee engaged in My loving service, with mind fixed on
Me, the cultivation of knowledge and renunciation is generally not the means of
achieving the highest perfection within this world.
PURPORT
A surrendered devotee of Lord Kåñëa does not seek perfection through the
cultivation of knowledge and renunciation outside the loving service of the
Lord. Devotional service to Lord Kåñëa, being itself the supreme
transcendental process, never depends upon the secondary methods involving
the cultivation of knowledge and renunciation. By chanting and hearing the
glories of the Personality of Godhead a devotee automatically realizes all
knowledge, and as the devotee's attachment to the Lord increases, he
automatically gives up attachment for the inferior material nature. The Lord
has explicitly declared in the previous verses that a devotee should not try to
solve his lingering problems by means other than devotional service. Although
a sincere devotee has surrendered heart and soul in loving service to the Lord,
there may be lingering material attachments that prevent the devotee from
perfectly realizing transcendental knowledge. Devotional service, however,
will automatically eradicate such lingering attachments in due course of time.
If the devotee tries to purify himself through cultivation of knowledge and
renunciation, which fall outside the scope of devotional service, there is
danger of his being deviated from the Lord's lotus feet and falling down
completely from the transcendental path. One who endeavors for purification
outside the loving service of the Lord has not actually understood the
transcendental potency of bhakti-yoga and does not appreciate the extent of
Lord Kåñëa's mercy.
Within this world one's heart is bound by sex attraction, which disturbs
one's meditation on the lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa. Intoxicated by contact with
women, the conditioned soul becomes artificially proud and forgets his loving
servitude to the Lord. Through determined cultivation of knowledge and
detachment, a conditioned soul may try to purify himself without the mercy of
Lord Kåñëa, but such false pride is to be given up, just as one must give up the
false pride of material attraction. When pure devotional service to the Lord is
available to a conditioned soul, attraction to other processes is certainly a
deviation in his devotional career. Material desire stubbornly residing within
the heart can be vanquished by taking full shelter of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Without false confidence in one's own cultivation of knowledge
and renunciation, one should depend fully on the mercy of Lord Kåñëa and at
the same time strictly follow the rules and regulations of bhakti-yoga, as
instructed by the Lord Himself.
TEXTS 32-33
yatk(maRiBayaRÔapas$aA
ÁaAnavaEr"Agyataê yata,
yaAegAena d"AnaDamaeRNA
™aeyaAeiBair"tarE"r"ipa
s$ava< maà"il(yaAegAena
maà"l(Ae laBatae'Ãas$aA
svagAARpavagA< maÜ"Ama
k(TaiÂaâid" vaAHC$ita
yat karmabhir yat tapasä
jïäna-vairägyataç ca yat
yogena däna-dharmeëa
çreyobhir itarair api
sarvaà mad-bhakti-yogena
mad-bhakto labhate 'ïjasä
svargäpavargaà mad-dhäma
kathaïcid yadi väïchati
SYNONYMS
yat—that which is obtained; karmabhiù—by fruitive activities; yat—that
which; tapasä—by penance; jïäna—by cultivation of knowledge;
vairägyataù—by detachment; ca—also; yat—that which is achieved;
yogena—by the mystic yoga system; däna—by charity; dharmeëa—by religious
duties; çreyobhiù—by processes for making life auspicious; itaraiù—by others;
api—indeed; sarvam—all; mat-bhakti-yogena—by loving service unto Me;
mat-bhaktaù—My devotee; labhate—achieves; aïjasä—easily;
svarga—promotion to heaven; apavargam—liberation from all misery;
mat-dhäma—residence in My abode; kathaïcit—somehow or other; yadi—if;
vaïchati—he desires.
TRANSLATION
Everything that can be achieved by fruitive activities, penance, knowledge,
detachment, mystic yoga, charity, religious duties and all other means of
perfecting life is easily achieved by My devotee through loving service unto Me.
If somehow or other My devotee desires promotion to heaven, liberation, or
residence in My abode, he easily achieves such benedictions.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa here reveals the transcendental glories of devotional service to
the Lord. Although pure devotees are desireless, desiring only the Lord's
service, sometimes a great devotee may desire the Lord's benediction to
facilitate his loving service. In the Sixth Canto of the Bhägavatam we find that
Çré Citraketu, a great devotee of the Lord, desired promotion to heaven so that
accompanied by the most attractive ladies of the Vidyädhara planet he could
beautifully chant the glories of the Lord. Similarly, Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé, the
great narrator of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, desiring to avoid entanglement in the
illusory potency of the Lord, would not come out of his mother's womb. In
other words, Çukadeva Gosvämé desired apavargam, or liberation from mäyä, so
that his devotional service would not be disturbed. Lord Kåñëa personally sent
the illusory energy far away so that Çukadeva Gosvämé would come out of his
mother's womb. Because of intense loving desire to serve the lotus feet of the
Lord, a devotee may also desire promotion to the spiritual world.
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, a devotee, having given
up the independent cultivation of knowledge and detachment, may have firm
faith in the devotional service of the Lord and yet remain slightly attached to
the fruits of such activities. By expert fruitive activities one gains residence in
material heaven, and by cultivation of detachment one is relieved of all bodily
distress. If Lord Kåñëa detects within a devotee's heart the desire for such
benedictions, the Lord can easily award them to His devotee.
The word itaraiù in this verse indicates visiting holy places, accepting
religious vows and so forth. Several auspicious processes of elevation are
mentioned in the verse preceding this, but all the auspicious results of these
processes are easily achieved by loving service to the Lord. Thus all devotees of
the Lord, in whatever stage of advancement, should dedicate their energy
exclusively to the Lord's service, as affirmed in the Second Canto of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam by Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé:
akämaù sarva-kämo vä
mokña-käma udära-dhéù
tévreëa bhakti-yogena
yajeta puruñaà param
"A person who has broader intelligence, whether he be full of all material
desire, without any material desire or desiring liberation, must by all means
worship the supreme whole, the Personality of Godhead." (SB 2.3.10)
TEXT 34
na ik(iÂats$aADavaAe DaIr"A
Bal(A ÷ek(AintanaAe mama
vaAHC$ntyaipa mayaA d"ÔaM
kE(valyamapaunaBaRvama,
na kiïcit sädhavo dhérä
bhaktä hy ekäntino mama
väïchanty api mayä dattaà
kaivalyam apunar-bhavam
SYNONYMS
na—never; kiïcit—anything; sädhavaù—saintly persons; dhéräù—with deep
intelligence; bhaktäù—devotees; hi—certainly; ekäntinaù—completely
dedicated; mama—unto Me; väïchanti—desire; api—indeed; mayä—by Me;
dattam—given; kaivalyam—liberation; apunaù-bhavam—freedom from birth
and death.
TRANSLATION
Because My devotees possess saintly behavior and deep intelligence, they
completely dedicate themselves to Me and do not desire anything besides Me.
Indeed, even if I offer them liberation from birth and death, they do not accept
it.
PURPORT
The words ekäntino mama indicate that the pure devotees of the Lord,
being saintly and most intelligent, dedicate themselves exclusively to the
devotional service of the Personality of Godhead. Even when the Lord offers
them personal liberation from birth and death, the devotees will not accept it.
A pure devotee automatically gains an eternal life of bliss and knowledge in
the Lord's personal abode and thus considers mere liberation without the
loving service of the Lord to be most abominable. One who chants Lord
Kåñëa's holy name or superficially serves the Lord with the motive of achieving
impersonal liberation or material sense gratification cannot be considered a
transcendental devotee of the Lord. As long as one desires mundane
religiosity, economic development, sense gratification or liberation, one
cannot achieve the platform of samädhi, or perfect self-realization. Every
living entity is actually the eternal servant of Lord Kåñëa and is
constitutionally meant to engage in the loving service of the Lord without
personal desire. This pure and supreme status of life is described in this verse
by the Lord Himself.
TEXT 35
naEr"paeºyaM parM" ‘aAò"r,"
ina:™aeyas$amanalpak(ma,
tasmaAiªar"AizASaAe Bail(r,"
inar"paeºasya mae Bavaeta,
nairapekñyaà paraà prähur
niùçreyasam analpakam
tasmän niräçiño bhaktir
nirapekñasya me bhavet
SYNONYMS
nairapekñyam—not desiring anything except devotional service; param—the
best; prähuù—it is said; niùçreyasam—highest stage of liberation;
analpakam—great; tasmät—therefore; niräçiñaù—of one who does not seek
personal rewards; bhaktiù—loving devotional service; nirapekñasya—of one
who only sees Me; me—unto Me; bhavet—may arise.
TRANSLATION
It is said that complete detachment is the highest stage of freedom.
Therefore, one who has no personal desire and does not pursue personal
rewards can achieve loving devotional service unto Me.
PURPORT
As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (2.3.10),
akämaù sarva-kämo vä
mokña-käma udära-dhéù
tévreëa bhakti-yogena
yajeta puruñaà param
"A person who has broader intelligence, whether he be full of all material
desire, without any material desire or desiring liberation, must by all means
worship the supreme whole, the Personality of Godhead." In this statement by
Çukadeva Gosvämé, the words tévreëa bhakti-yogena are very significant. Çréla
Prabhupäda remarks in this regard, "As the unmixed sun ray is very forceful
and is therefore called tévra, similarly, unmixed bhakti-yoga of hearing,
chanting, etc., may be performed by one and all regardless of inner motive."
Undoubtedly, in this age of Kali people are generally very fallen and polluted
by material lust, greed, anger, lamentation and so forth. In this age most people
are sarva-käma, or full of material desires. Still we must understand that simply
by taking shelter of Lord Kåñëa we will achieve everything in life. The living
entity should not engage in any process except the loving service of the Lord.
One must accept that Lord Kåñëa is the reservoir of all pleasure and that only
Lord Kåñëa within our heart can fulfill our real desire. This simple faith that
one will achieve everything by approaching Lord Kåñëa is the essence of all
knowledge and carries even a fallen person over the painful hurdles of this
difficult age.
TEXT 36
na mayyaek(AntaBal(AnaAM
gAuNAd"AeSaAeà"vaA gAuNAA:
s$aADaUnaAM s$amaicaÔaAnaAM
bauÜe": par"maupaeyauSaAma,
na mayy ekänta-bhaktänäà
guëa-doñodbhavä guëäù
sädhünäà sama-cittänäà
buddheù param upeyuñäm
SYNONYMS
na—not; mayi—in Me; eka-anta—unalloyed; bhaktänäm—of the devotees;
guëa—recommended as good; doña—forbidden as unfavorable;
udbhaväù—arising from such things; guëäù—piety and sin; sädhünäm—of
those who are free from material hankering; sama-cittänäm—who maintain
steady spiritual consciousness in all circumstances; buddheù—that which can
be conceived by material intelligence; param—beyond; upeyuñäm—of those
who have achieved.
TRANSLATION
Material piety and sin, which arise from the good and evil of this world,
cannot exist within My unalloyed devotees, who, being free from material
hankering, maintain steady spiritual consciousness in all circumstances. Indeed,
such devotees have achieved Me, the Supreme Lord, who am beyond anything
that can be conceived by material intelligence.
PURPORT
The words buddheù param indicate that the material modes of nature
cannot be found within a pure devotee absorbed in the transcendental
qualities of the Lord. In the Second Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä, Lord Kåñëa
clearly explains that a pure devotee is recognized by complete detachment
from personal desire; therefore, a pure devotee constantly engaged in selfless
service to Lord Kåñëa may not always observe the innumerable details of Vedic
rituals and regulations. Such occasional negligence is not to be considered a
transgression. Similarly, observance of ordinary material piety does not
constitute the ultimate qualification of a soul surrendered to God. Love of
Kåñëa and absolute surrender to the Lord's will raise one immediately to the
transcendental platform, where activities performed on the Lord's behalf are
absolute, being an expression of God's will. Ordinary materialistic persons
sometimes falsely claim this exalted status for their whimsical, immoral
activities and cause a great disturbance in society. However, just as an ordinary
person should not falsely claim the executive privileges of the personal
assistants of a national leader, similarly, an ordinary conditioned soul may not
foolishly claim that his immoral, whimsical or speculative activities are
sheltered by divine right, being the will of God. One must actually be a pure
devotee of the Lord, empowered by the Lord Himself and completely
surrendered to the will of the Lord, before one may be accepted as
transcendental to ordinary piety and sin.
There are cases of highly elevated devotees who momentarily fell down
from the saintly platform of devotional service. The Lord instructs in
Bhagavad-gétä (9.30),
api cet su-duräcäro
bhajate mäm ananya-bhäk
sädhur eva sa mantavyaù
samyag vyavasito hi saù
A momentary falldown by a sincere devotee of the Lord cannot change the
Lord's feelings toward such a person. Even an ordinary father or mother
quickly excuses a momentary transgression by their child. Just as children and
parents enjoy mutual love, the Lord's surrendered servants enjoy a loving
relationship with the Lord. An unpremeditated, accidental falldown is quickly
excused by the Lord, and all members of society must share in the Lord's own
feelings, excusing such a sincere devotee. An advanced devotee should not be
branded as materialistic or sinful because of accidental falldown. A devotee
immediately returns to the platform of saintly service and begs the Lord's
forgiveness. However, one who permanently remains in a fallen condition can
no longer be accepted as a highly elevated devotee of the Lord.
TEXT 37
WvamaetaAnmayaA id"í"Ana,
@nauitaï"inta mae paTa:
ºaemaM ivand"inta matsTaAnaM
yaä," “aö par"maM ivaäu":
evam etän mayä diñöän
anutiñöhanti me pathaù
kñemaà vindanti mat-sthänaà
yad brahma paramaà viduù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; etän—these; mayä—by Me; diñöän—instructed;
anutiñöhanti—those who follow; me—Me; pathaù—the means of achieving;
kñemam—freedom from illusion; vindanti—they achieve; mat-sthänam—My
personal abode; yat—that which; brahma paramam—the Absolute Truth;
viduù—they directly know.
TRANSLATION
Persons who seriously follow these methods of achieving Me, which I have
personally taught, attain freedom from illusion, and upon reaching My personal
abode they perfectly understand the Absolute Truth.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Eleventh Canto, Twentieth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Pure Devotional Service Surpasses
Knowledge and Detachment."
21. Lord Kåñëa's Explanation of the Vedic Path
There are persons who are unfit for all three of the forms of yoga-karma,
jïäna and bhakti. They are inimical to Lord Kåñëa, attached to sense
gratification, and are dominated by fruitive activities aimed at fulfillment of
material desires. This chapter describes their faults in terms of place, time,
substance and beneficiary of actions.
For those who are perfect in knowledge and devotion to the Lord, there are
no materially good qualities or faults. But for a candidate endeavoring on the
platform of karma to achieve cessation of material life, execution of regular
and special fruitive duties is good and the failure to execute such is evil. That
which counteracts sinful reaction is also good for him.
For one on the platform of knowledge in the pure mode of goodness and for
one on the platform of devotion, the proper actions are, respectively,
cultivation of knowledge and practice of devotional service consisting of
hearing, chanting and so forth. For both, everything detrimental to their
proper actions is bad. But for persons who are not candidates for
transcendental advancement or who are not perfected souls, namely those who
are completely inimical to spiritual life and are devoted exclusively to fruitive
work for fulfillment of lusty desires, there are numerous considerations of
purity and impurity and auspiciousness and inauspiciousness. These are to be
made in terms of one's body, the place of activity, the time, the objects utilized,
the performer, the mantras chanted and the particular activity.
In actuality, virtue and fault are not absolute but are relative to one's
particular platform of advancement. Remaining fixed in the type of
discrimination suitable to one's level of advancement is good, and anything
else is bad. This is the basic understanding of virtue and fault. Even among
objects belonging to the same category, there are different considerations of
their purity or impurity in relation to performance of religious duties, worldly
transactions, and the maintenance of one's life. These distinctions are
described in various scriptures.
The doctrine of varëäçrama codifies precepts of bodily purity and impurity.
With respect to place, purity and impurity are distinguished by such facts as
the presence of black deer. In connection with time, there are distinctions of
purity and impurity either in terms of the time itself or in terms of its specific
relation with various objects. In connection with physical substances,
distinctions of purity and impurity are made in terms of sanctification of
objects and words and by such activities as bathing, giving charity, performing
austere penances and remembering the Supreme Lord. There are also
distinctions of the purity and impurity of the performers of actions. When
one's knowledge of mantras is received from the lips of the bona fide spiritual
master, one's mantra is considered pure, and one's work is purified by offering
it unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If the six factors of place, time
and so forth are purified, then there is dharma, or virtue, but otherwise there is
adharma, or fault.
Ultimately, there is no substantial basis in distinctions of virtue and fault,
because they transform according to place, time, beneficiary and so on. In
regard to the execution of prescribed duties for sense gratification, the actual
intent of all the scriptures is the subduing of materialistic propensities; such is
the actual principle of religion that destroys sorrow, confusion and fear and
bestows all good fortune. Work performed for sense gratification is not actually
beneficial. The descriptions of such fruitive benefits offered in various
phala-çrutis are actually meant to help one gradually cultivate a taste for the
highest benefit. But persons of inferior intelligence take the flowery
benedictory verses of the scriptures to be the actual purport of the Vedas; this
opinion, however, is never held by those in factual knowledge of the truth of
the Vedas. Persons whose minds are agitated by the flowery words of the Vedas
have no attraction for hearing topics about Lord Hari. It should be understood
that there is no inner purport to the Vedas apart from the original Personality
of Godhead. The Vedas focus exclusively upon the Supreme Absolute Truth,
the Personality of Godhead. Because this material world is simply the illusory
energy of the Supreme Lord, it is by refuting material existence that one gains
disassociation from matter.
TEXT 1
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
ya WtaAnmatpaTaAe ih"tvaA
Bail(ÁaAnai‚(yaAtmak(Ana,
ºau"‰"Ana, k(AmaAMêlaE: ‘aANAEr,"
jauSanta: s$aMs$ar"inta tae
çré-bhagavän uväca
ya etän mat-patho hitvä
bhakti-jïäna-kriyätmakän
kñudrän kämäàç calaiù präëair
juñantaù saàsaranti te
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; ye—those
who; etän—these; mat-pathaù—means for achieving Me; hitvä—giving up;
bhakti—devotional service; jïäna—analytic philosophy; kriyä—regulated
work; ätmakän—consisting of; kñudrän—insignificant; kämän—sense
gratification; calaiù—by the flickering; präëaiù—senses;
juñantaù—cultivating; saàsaranti—undergo material existence; te—they.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Those who give up these
methods for achieving Me, which consist of devotional service, analytic
philosophy and regulated execution of prescribed duties, and instead, being
moved by the material senses, cultivate insignificant sense gratification,
certainly undergo the continual cycle of material existence.
PURPORT
As clearly explained by Lord Kåñëa in the previous chapters, philosophical
analysis and also the performance of prescribed duties are ultimately meant for
achieving Kåñëa consciousness, or pure love of God. Devotional service, based
on hearing and chanting the glories of the Lord, directly engages the
conditioned soul in the Lord's loving service and thus is the most efficient
means of achieving the Lord. All three processes, however, share a common
goal, Kåñëa consciousness. Now the Lord describes those who, being
completely absorbed in material sense gratification, do not adopt any
authorized means to achieve the Lord's mercy. Currently, hundreds of millions
of unfortunate human beings fit squarely into this category and, as described
here, perpetually suffer the bondage of material existence.
TEXT 2
svae svae'iDak(Are" yaA inaï"A
s$a gAuNA: pair"k(LitaRta:
ivapayaRyastau d"AeSa: syaAä,"
oBayaAere"Sa inaêya:
sve sve 'dhikäre yä niñöhä
sa guëaù parikértitaù
viparyayas tu doñaù syäd
ubhayor eña niçcayaù
SYNONYMS
sve sve—each in his own; adhikäre—position; yä—such; niñöhä—steadiness;
saù—this; guëaù—piety; parikértitaù—is declared to be; viparyayaù—the
opposite; tu—indeed; doñaù—impiety; syät—is; ubhayoù—of the two;
eñaù—this; niçcayaù—the definite conclusion.
TRANSLATION
Steadiness in one's own position is declared to be actual piety, whereas
deviation from one's position is considered impiety. In this way the two are
definitely ascertained.
PURPORT
In the previous verse Lord Kåñëa explained that the path of spiritual
progress begins with working without fruitive desires, advances to the stage of
realized spiritual knowledge, and culminates in direct engagement in the
devotional service of the Lord. Here the Lord emphasizes that a conditioned
soul should not artificially disrupt the natural evolution of his Kåñëa
consciousness by deviating from those duties prescribed by the Lord Himself.
In the lower stages of human life one is entangled in false identification with
the gross material body and desires to execute material fruitive activities based
on society, friendship and love. When such materialistic activities are offered
in sacrifice to the Supreme Lord, one becomes situated in karma-yoga. By
regulated sacrifice one gradually gives up the gross bodily concept of life and
advances to the stage of realization of spiritual knowledge, whereby one
understands oneself to be an eternal spirit soul completely different from the
material body and mind. Feeling relief from the pangs of materialism one
becomes very attached to one's spiritual knowledge, and thus one is situated in
the stage of jïäna-yoga. As the candidate further advances on the spiritual
path, he understands himself to be part and parcel of the Supreme Soul, the
Personality of Godhead, Lord Kåñëa. He then sees that his conditional life as
well as his spiritual knowledge was obtained from the Personality of Godhead,
who awards the results of all types of activities, both pious and sinful. By
directly engaging in the loving service of the Supreme Lord and understanding
oneself to be the Lord's eternal servant, one's attachment evolves into pure
love of Godhead. Thus one first gives up the lower stage of attachment to the
material body and then subsequently gives up attachment to cultivation of
spiritual knowledge. This relieves one of material life. Finally one recognizes
the Lord Himself as the resting place of one's eternal love and fully surrenders
to God in full Kåñëa consciousness.
Lord Kåñëa explains in this verse that one who is still attached to the
material body and mind cannot artificially give up the prescribed duties of
karma-yoga. In the same way, one who is a spiritual neophyte, just beginning to
realize the illusion of material life, should not artificially try to think of the
Lord's intimate pastimes twenty-four hours a day, imitating the stage of
prema-bhakti. Rather, he should cultivate analytic knowledge of the material
world, by which one gives up attachment to the material body and mind. In
Çrémad-Bhägavatam we find many analytic descriptions of the material world,
and they can free the conditioned soul from false identification with matter.
One who has achieved the perfect stage of love of Godhead, however, being
freed from all gross and subtle attachments to the material world, may give up
the lower stages of karma-yoga and jïäna-yoga and engage directly in the
Lord's loving service.
In Chapter Nineteen, verse 45, Lord Kåñëa states, guëa-doña-dåçir doño
guëas tübhaya-varjitaù. One should not see material good and evil within a
devotee of the Lord. Indeed, one becomes pious by giving up such mundane
conceptions. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura points out that occasionally
a neophyte devotee may be polluted by association with those enthusiastically
executing fruitive activities and mental speculation. Such a devotee's religious
activities may be affected by mundane tendencies. Similarly, an ordinary
person who observes the exalted status of a pure devotee sometimes externally
imitates the devotee's activities, considering himself to be on the same exalted
platform of pure devotional service. These imperfect practitioners of
bhakti-yoga are not exempt from criticism, since their fruitive activities,
mental speculation and false prestige are material intrusions in the pure loving
service of the Lord. A pure devotee engaged exclusively in the Lord's service
should not be criticized, but a devotee whose devotional service is mixed with
material qualities may be corrected so that he can rise to the platform of pure
devotional service. Innocent persons should not be misled by the mixed
devotional service of those not engaged exclusively in the bhakti-yoga system,
but those unable to fully engage in Kåñëa consciousness should nevertheless
not give up their regular prescribed duties, declaring them to be illusion. For
example, one unable to fully engage in pure Kåñëa consciousness should not
give up his family, considering it an illusion, for by doing so he will fall into
illicit sex life. Material piety and analytic knowledge of the material world
must therefore be cultivated until one comes to the stage of directly practicing
Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 3
zAuÜ"YazAuÜ"I ivaDaIyaetae
s$amaAnaeSvaipa vastauSau
‰"vyasya ivaicaik(ts$aATa<
gAuNAd"AeSaAE zAuBaAzAuBaAE
DamaARTa< vyavah"Ar"ATa<
yaA‡aATaRimaita caAnaGa
çuddhy-açuddhé vidhéyete
samäneñv api vastuñu
dravyasya vicikitsärthaà
guëa-doñau çubhäçubhau
dharmärthaà vyavahärärthaà
yäträrtham iti cänagha
SYNONYMS
çuddhi—purity; açuddhé—and impurity; vidhéyete—are established;
samäneñu—of the same category; api—indeed; vastuñu—among objects;
dravyasya—of a particular object; vicikitsä—evaluation; artham—for the
purpose of; guëa-doñau—good and bad qualities; çubha-açubhau—auspicious
and inauspicious; dharma-artham—for the purpose of religious activities;
vyavahära-artham—for the purpose of ordinary dealings; yäträ-artham—for
one's physical survival; iti—thus; ca—also; anagha—O sinless one.
TRANSLATION
O sinless Uddhava, in order to understand what is proper in life one must
evaluate a given object within its particular category. Thus, in analyzing
religious principles one must consider purity and impurity. Similarly, in one's
ordinary dealings one must distinguish between good and bad, and to insure
one's physical survival one must recognize that which is auspicious and
inauspicious.
PURPORT
In religious activities, ordinary dealings and personal survival one cannot
avoid value judgements. Morality and religion are perennial necessities in
civilized society; therefore distinctions between purity and impurity, piety and
impiety, morality and immorality must somehow be ascertained. Similarly, in
our ordinary, worldly activities we distinguish between palatable and tasteless
food, good and bad business, high-class and low-class residences, good and bad
friends, and so forth. And to insure our physical health and survival, we must
constantly distinguish between what is safe and unsafe, healthy and unhealthy,
profitable and unprofitable. Even a learned person must constantly distinguish
between good and bad within the material world, but at the same time he must
understand the transcendental position of Kåñëa consciousness. Despite one's
careful calculation of that which is materially healthy and unhealthy, the
physical body will collapse and die. Despite careful scrutiny of the socially
favorable and unfavorable, one's entire social milieu will vanish with the
passing of time. In the same way, great religions arise and disappear in the
course of history. Thus mere religiosity, social and financial expertise or
physical fitness cannot award the actual perfection of life. There is a
transcendental good beyond the relative good of the material world. Any sane
person accepts the practical and immediate necessity of material
discrimination; yet one must come ultimately to the transcendental stage of
Kåñëa consciousness, where life is eternal, full of bliss and knowledge. Lord
Kåñëa, in His elaborate teachings to Çré Uddhava, is gradually clarifying the
transcendental position of Kåñëa consciousness beyond the endless variety of
material good and evil.
TEXT 4
d"izARtaAe'yaM mayaAcaAr"Ae
DamaRmauã"h"taAM Daur"ma,
darçito 'yaà mayäcäro
dharmam udvahatäà dhuram
SYNONYMS
darçitaù—revealed; ayam—this; mayä—by Me; äcäraù—way of life;
dharmam—religious principles; udvahatäm—for those who are bearing;
dhuram—the burden.
TRANSLATION
I have revealed this way of life for those bearing the burden of mundane
religious principles.
PURPORT
Ordinary religious principles, prescribing innumerable rules, regulations
and prohibitions, are undoubtedly a great burden for those bereft of Kåñëa
consciousness. In the First Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.1.11) it is stated,
bhüréëi bhüri-karmäëi çrotavyäni vibhägaçaù: there are countless religious
scriptures in the world prescribing countless religious duties. The authorized
scriptures are those spoken by the Lord Himself or His representatives, as
stated in this verse. In the last chapter of Bhagavad-gétä (18.66) Lord Kåñëa
states, sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja: [Bg. 18.66] one
should give up the troublesome burden of mundane piety and directly take to
the loving service of the Lord, in which everything is simplified. Lord Kåñëa
also states in Bhagavad-gétä (9.2), su-sukham kartum avyayam: the bhakti-yoga
process, which depends completely upon the mercy of the Lord, is very joyful
and easily performed. Similarly, Locana däsa Öhäkura sings,
parama karuëa, pahuì dui jana,
nitäi-gauracandra
saba avatära-, sära-çiromaëi,
kevala änanda-käëòa
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, who is Lord Kåñëa Himself, appeared five hundred
years ago to distribute the sublime method of chanting the holy names of the
Lord. In this way, rather than bearing the burden of artificial austerity, one
can directly take to the Lord's service, cleansing one's heart and immediately
experiencing transcendental bliss. Those who have taken to Caitanya
Mahäprabhu's movement follow four basic principles: no illicit sex, no eating
of meat, fish or eggs, no intoxication and no gambling. They rise early in the
morning, chant Hare Kåñëa and spend the day happily engaged in the Lord's
service. Those who follow the ritualistic karma-käëòa section of the Vedas,
however, are burdened with innumerable regulations, rituals and ceremonies,
which must be personally performed by the worshipers or performed on their
behalf by qualified brähmaëas. At any moment there is danger of discrepancy
resulting in the total loss of their accumulated piety. Similarly, those on the
philosophical path must painstakingly define, refine and adjust philosophical
categories, a process that generally ends in confusion and hopelessness. The
practitioners of mystic yoga undergo grueling penances, subjecting themselves
to severe heat and cold, near starvation and so on. All such materialistic
persons have personal desires to fulfill, whereas the devotees of the Lord, who
desire the Lord's pleasure, simply depend upon the Lord's mercy and go back
home, back to Godhead. In the previous verse the Lord mentioned that in the
material world there are endless distinctions and value judgements to be made
in the course of one's life. A devotee, however, sees Kåñëa within everything
and everything within Kåñëa, remaining humble, simple and blissful in the
Lord's service. He does not perform elaborate religious ceremonies, nor does he
become antisocial or immoral. The devotee simply chants the holy name of
Kåñëa and easily achieves the highest perfection of life. Ordinary persons
endeavor for bodily maintenance, but a devotee is automatically maintained by
the Lord's mercy. A devotee's ordinary dealings and religious activities are also
all dedicated to the Personality of Godhead; thus there is nothing but Kåñëa in
a devotee's life. Kåñëa gives all protection and maintenance, and the devotee
gives everything to Kåñëa. This natural liberated situation is called Kåñëa
consciousness. It is the ultimate absolute good, as explained by the Lord
throughout this canto.
TEXT 5
BaUmyambvagnyainalaAk(AzAA
BaUtaAnaAM paÂaDaAtava:
@A“aösTaAvar"Ad"InaAM
zAAr"Ir"A @Atmas$aMyautaA:
bhümy-ambv-agny-aniläkäçä
bhütänäà païca-dhätavaù
ä-brahma-sthävarädénäà
çärérä ätma-saàyutäù
SYNONYMS
bhümi—earth; ambu—water; agni—fire; anila—air; äkäçäù—sky or ether;
bhütänäm—of all conditioned souls; païca—the five; dhätavaù—basic
elements; ä—brahma-from Lord Brahmä; sthävara-ädénäm—down to the
nonmoving creatures; çäréräù—used for the construction of the material
bodies; ätma—to the Supreme Soul; saàyutäù—equally related.
TRANSLATION
Earth, water, fire, air and ether are the five basic elements that constitute
the bodies of all conditioned souls, from Lord Brahmä himself down to the
nonmoving creatures. These elements all emanate from the one Personality of
Godhead.
PURPORT
All material bodies are composed of different proportions of the same five
gross elements, which emanate from the one Personality of Godhead and cover
the living entities, who are all in the jéva category.
The concepts of good and bad depend on the choice of the Supreme Lord
and not on inherent qualitative differences in material objects. A Kåñëa
conscious person ultimately sees all material phenomena as one. The devotee's
good behavior, intelligent discrimination and artistic sense within the material
world are all based on the will of God. The material elements, being
emanations from the Supreme Lord, are ultimately all nondifferent. However,
advocates of mundane piety fear that if the material duality of good and bad is
minimized, people will become immoral or anarchistic. Certainly the
impersonal and atheistic philosophy preached by modern scientists, in which
material variety is reduced to mere mathematical descriptions of molecular and
atomic particles, leads to immoral society. Although both material science and
Vedic knowledge uncover the illusion of material variety and reveal the
ultimate oneness of all material energy, only the devotees of Lord Kåñëa are
surrendered to the supreme absolute piety of God's will. Thus they always act
for the benefit of all living entities, accepting material variety in the Lord's
service, according to the Lord's desire. Without Kåñëa consciousness, or God
consciousness, people cannot understand the absolute position of spiritual
goodness; instead they artificially try to construct a civilization based on
interdependent self-interest on the material platform. Such a foolish
arrangement easily collapses, as evidenced by widespread social conflict and
chaos in the modern age. All members of a civilized society must accept the
absolute authority of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and then social
peace and harmony will not rest on the flimsy relative platform of mundane
piety and sin.
TEXT 6
vaede"na naAmaè&paAiNA
ivaSamaAiNA s$amaeSvaipa
DaAtauSaUÜ"va k(lpyanta
WtaeSaAM svaATaRis$aÜ"yae
vedena näma-rüpäëi
viñamäëi sameñv api
dhätuñüddhava kalpyanta
eteñäà svärtha-siddhaye
SYNONYMS
vedena—by Vedic literature; näma—names; rüpäëi—and forms;
viñamäëi—different; sameñu—which are equal; api—indeed; dhätuñu—in
(material bodies composed of) the five elements; uddhava—My dear Uddhava;
kalpyante—are conceived of; eteñäm—of them, the living entities;
sva-artha—of self-interest; siddhaye—for the achievement.
TRANSLATION
My dear Uddhava, although all material bodies are composed of the same five
elements and are thus equal, the Vedic literatures conceive of different names
and forms in relation to such bodies so that the living entities may achieve their
goal of life.
PURPORT
The words näma-rüpäëi viñamäëi refer to the system of varëäçrama-dharma,
in which members of human society are designated according to four social
and four occupational divisions. Those dedicated to intellectual or religious
perfection are called brähmaëas, those dedicated to political perfection are
called kñatriyas, those dedicated to financial perfection are called vaiçyas, and
those dedicated to eating, sleeping, sex and honest work are called çüdras. Such
propensities arise from the three modes of material nature (goodness, passion
and ignorance), because the pure soul is not materially intellectual, ambitious
for power, enterprising or servile. Rather, the pure soul is always absorbed in
loving devotion to the Supreme Lord. If the various propensities of a
conditioned soul are not engaged in the varëäçrama system, they will certainly
be misused, and thus that person will fall down from the standard of human
life. The Vedic system is designed by the Lord so that conditioned souls may
pursue their individual achievements and at the same time advance toward the
ultimate goal of life, Kåñëa consciousness. Just as a doctor deals with a crazy
man by speaking to him sympathetically in terms of his false conception of life,
one who understands the Vedic literature engages the living entities according
to their illusory identification with the elements of matter. Although all
material bodies are composed of the same material elements and are thus
qualitatively identical, as described here by the word sameñu, the Vedic social
system, varëäçrama, is created to engage all human beings in Kåñëa
consciousness according to their various degrees of material identification.
The absolute good is the Supreme Lord Himself, and that which approaches
the Supreme Lord becomes similarly good. Because the sun is the source of
heat within this world, an object that approaches the sun becomes hotter and
hotter until it merges into fire. In the same manner, as we approach the
transcendental nature of the Personality of Godhead, we automatically
become surcharged with absolute goodness. Although this knowledge is the
real basis of the Vedic literature, mundane piety is enjoined and sin is
prohibited so that one can gradually come to the platform of material
goodness, whereupon spiritual knowledge becomes visible.
TEXT 7
de"zAk(AlaAid"BaAvaAnaAM
vastaUnaAM mama s$aÔama
gAuNAd"AeSaAE ivaDaIyaetae
inayamaATa< ih" k(maRNAAma,
deça-kälädi-bhävänäà
vastünäà mama sattama
guëa-doñau vidhéyete
niyamärthaà hi karmaëäm
SYNONYMS
deça—of space; käla—time; ädi—and so on; bhävänäm—of such states of
existence; vastünäm—of things; mama—by Me; sat-tama—O most saintly
Uddhava; guëa-doñau—piety and sin; vidhéyete—are established;
niyama-artham—for the restriction; hi—certainly; karmaëäm—of fruitive
activities.
TRANSLATION
O saintly Uddhava, in order to restrict materialistic activities, I have
established that which is proper and improper among all material things,
including time, space and all physical objects.
PURPORT
The word niyamärtham ("in order to restrict") is significant in this verse. A
conditioned soul falsely identifies with his material senses and thus considers
anything giving immediate satisfaction to the body to be good and anything
inconvenient or disturbing to be bad. By higher intelligence, however, one
recognizes long-term self-interest and danger. For example, medicine may be
immediately bitter, but by calculating one's long-term interest one accepts the
bitter medicine to cure a disease that is not immediately troublesome but
ultimately fatal. Similarly, Vedic literature restricts the sinful propensities of
human beings by establishing what is proper and what is improper among all
the objects and activities of the material world. Because everyone must eat, the
Vedas prescribe foods in the mode of goodness and not those which are sinful,
such as meat, fish and eggs. Similarly, one is advised to live in a peaceful and
pious community and not in association with sinful persons, nor in an unclean
or turbulent environment. By designating and restricting the exploitation of
the material world, Vedic knowledge gradually brings a conditioned soul to the
platform of material goodness. At that stage one becomes eligible to serve the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and enter the transcendental stage of life. It
should be remembered that such mere eligibility does not constitute actual
qualification; without Kåñëa consciousness mere mundane piety can never
qualify a conditioned soul to go back home, back to Godhead. Within this
world we are all infected by false pride, which must be diminished through
submission to the Vedic injunctions. One who is completely engaged in the
loving service of the Lord need not adopt these preliminary methods, for he
directly contacts the Personality of Godhead through the spontaneous process
of surrender. In the previous verse the Lord explained why Vedic literatures
assign different values to the bodies of different living entities, and here the
Lord explains the Vedic value system in regard to the material objects that
interact with these bodies.
TEXT 8
@k{(SNAs$aAr"Ae de"zAAnaAma,
@“aöNyaAe's$auicaBaR"vaeta,
k{(SNAs$aAr"Ae'pyas$aAEvaIr"-
k(Lk(q%As$aMs$k{(taeir"NAma,
akåñëa-säro deçänäm
abrahmaëyo 'sucir bhavet
kåñëa-säro 'py asauvéra-
kékaöäsaàskåteriëam
SYNONYMS
akåñëa-säraù—without spotted antelopes; deçänäm—among places;
abrahmaëyaù—where there is no devotion to the brähmaëas;
açuciù—contaminated; bhavet—is; kåñëa-säraù—possessing spotted antelopes;
api—even; asauvéra—without saintly cultured men; kékaöa—(a place of
low-class men, such as) the state of Gayä; asaàskåta—where people do not
practice cleanliness or purificatory ceremonies; éraëam—where the land is
barren.
TRANSLATION
Among places, those bereft of the spotted antelope, those devoid of devotion
to the brähmaëas, those possessing spotted antelopes but bereft of respectable
men, provinces like Kékaöa and places where cleanliness and purificatory rites
are neglected, where meat-eaters are prominent or where the earth is barren,
are all considered to be contaminated lands.
PURPORT
The word kåñëa-sära refers to the spotted antelope, whose hide is used by
brahmacärés while residing in the äçrama of the spiritual master. Brahmacärés
never hunt in the forest, but rather accept skins from those animals already
deceased. The skin of the black or spotted antelope is also used as a garment by
those receiving instruction in the execution of Vedic sacrifice. Therefore,
since sacrifice cannot be properly performed in areas bereft of such creatures,
these places are impure. Furthermore, although the inhabitants of a particular
place may be expert in performing fruitive activities and ritualistic sacrifices, if
they are inimical to the devotional service of the Lord, such a place is also
polluted. Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura explains that previously the
provinces of Bihar and Bengal were bereft of devotional service to the Lord
and were considered impure. Then great Vaiñëavas such as Jayadeva appeared
in these territories, converting them into holy places.
The word asauvéra indicates those places without suvéras, respectable saintly
persons. Ordinarily, a person who obeys the state laws is considered a
respectable citizen. In the same way, one who strictly obeys the law of God is
considered to be a cultured or decent man, suvéra. The place where such
intelligent persons reside is called sauvéram. Kékaöa refers to the modern state
of Bihar, which traditionally has been known as a territory of uncivilized men.
Even in such provinces, however, any place where saintly persons gather is
considered to be holy. On the other hand, a province of generally respectable
persons is immediately polluted by the presence of sinful men. Asaàskåta
indicates lack of external cleanliness, as well as the absence of purificatory
ceremonies for internal cleanliness. Çréla Madhväcärya quotes from the
Skanda Puräëa as follows: "Religious persons should reside within an
eight-mile radius of rivers, oceans, mountains, hermitages, forests, spiritual
cities or places where the çälagräma-çélä is found. All other places should be
considered kékaöa, or contaminated. But if even in such contaminated places
black and spotted antelopes are found, one may reside there as long as sinful
persons are not also present. Even if sinful persons are present, if the civil
power rests with respectable authorities, one may remain. Similarly, one may
dwell wherever the Deity of Viñëu is duly installed and worshiped."
The Lord here elaborates upon the theme of piety and sin, which are based
on purity and impurity. Thus pure and contaminated places of residence are
described here.
TEXT 9
k(maRNyaAe gAuNAvaAna, k(AlaAe
‰"vyata: svata Wva vaA
yataAe inavataRtae k(maR
s$a d"AeSaAe'k(maRk(: sma{ta:
karmaëyo guëavän kälo
dravyataù svata eva vä
yato nivartate karma
sa doño 'karmakaù småtaù
SYNONYMS
karmaëyaù—suitable for executing one's prescribed duty; guëavän—pure;
kälaù—time; dravyataù—by achievement of auspicious objects; svataù—by its
own nature; eva—indeed; vä—or; yataù—due to which (time); nivartate—is
impeded; karma—one's duty; saù—this (time); doñaù—impure;
akarmakaù—inappropriate for working properly; småtaù—is considered.
TRANSLATION
A specific time is considered pure when it is appropriate, either by its own
nature or through achievement of suitable paraphernalia, for the performance of
one's prescribed duty. That time which impedes the performance of one's duty
is considered impure.
PURPORT
Having discussed pure and impure places, the Lord now discusses different
qualities of time. Certain times, such as the brähma-muhürta, the last few
hours before sunrise, are always auspicious for spiritual advancement. Other
times, not auspicious in themselves, become so by achievement of material
prosperity that facilitates one's mission in life.
Political, social or economic disturbances that obstruct the execution of
one's religious duties are considered inauspicious times. Similarly, a woman is
considered contaminated just after childbirth or during her menstrual period.
She cannot perform ordinary religious activities at such times, which are
therefore inauspicious and impure. Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura
explains that the most auspicious of all times is the moment one achieves the
mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If one neglects the loving
service of the Lord, being carried away by sense gratification, he is certainly
living in most inauspicious times. Therefore that moment in which one
achieves the association of the Supreme Lord or the Lord's pure devotee is the
most auspicious time, whereas the moment of losing such association is most
inauspicious. In other words, the perfection of life is simply Kåñëa
consciousness, by which one transcends the dualities of time and space caused
by the three modes of material nature.
TEXT 10
‰"vyasya zAuÜ"YazAuÜ"I ca
‰"vyaeNA vacanaena ca
s$aMs$k(Are"NAATa k(Alaena
mah"tvaAlpatayaATa vaA
dravyasya çuddhy-açuddhé ca
dravyeëa vacanena ca
saàskäreëätha kälena
mahatvälpatayätha vä
SYNONYMS
dravyasya—of an object; çuddhi—purity; açuddhé—or impurity; ca—and;
dravyeëa—by another object; vacanena—by speech; ca—and; saàskäreëa—by
ritual performance; atha—or else; kälena—by time; mahatva-alpatayä—by
greatness or smallness; atha vä—or else.
TRANSLATION
An object's purity or impurity is established by application of another object,
by words, by rituals, by the effects of time or according to relative magnitude.
PURPORT
Cloth is purified by application of clean water and contaminated by
application of urine. The words of a saintly brähmaëa are pure, but the sound
vibration of a materialistic person is contaminated by lust and envy. A saintly
devotee explains actual purity to others, whereas a nondevotee makes false
propaganda that leads innocent people to commit polluted, sinful activities.
Pure rituals are those meant for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord, while
materialistic ceremonies are those that lead their followers into materialistic
and demoniac activities. The word saàskäreëa also indicates that the purity or
impurity of a particular object is ascertained according to the regulations of
ritualistic performances. For example, a flower to be offered to the Deity must
be purified with water. Flowers or food cannot be offered to the Deity,
however, if they have been contaminated by being smelled or tasted before the
offering. The word kälena indicates that certain substances are purified by
time and others contaminated by time. Rainwater, for example, is considered
pure after ten days' time, and after three days in cases of emergency. On the
other hand, certain foods decay in time and thus become impure. Mahatva
indicates that great bodies of water do not become contaminated, and alpatayä
means that a small amount of water can easily become polluted or stagnant. In
the same way, a great soul is not polluted by occasional contact with
materialistic persons, whereas one whose devotion to God is very small is easily
carried away and put into doubt by bad association. In terms of combination
with other substances, and in terms of speech, ritual, time and magnitude, the
purity and impurity of all objects can be ascertained.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura remarks that impure or decayed food
is certainly forbidden for normal persons but is permissible for those who have
no other means of subsistence.
TEXT 11
zAftyaAzAftyaATa vaA bauÜ"YaA
s$ama{Ü"YaA ca yad"Atmanae
@GaM ku(vaRinta ih" yaTaA
de"zAAvasTaAnaus$aAr"ta:
çaktyäçaktyätha vä buddhyä
samåddhyä ca yad ätmane
aghaà kurvanti hi yathä
deçävasthänusärataù
SYNONYMS
çaktyä—by relative potency; açaktyä—impotence; atha vä—or; buddhyä—in
terms of understanding; samåddhyä—opulence; ca—and; yat—which;
ätmane—to oneself; agham—sinful reaction; kurvanti—cause; hi—indeed;
yathä—in actuality; deça—place; avasthä—or one's condition; anusärataù—in
accordance with.
TRANSLATION
Impure things may or may not impose sinful reactions upon a person,
depending on that person's strength or weakness, intelligence, wealth, location
and physical condition.
PURPORT
The Lord has described the purity and impurity of different places, times
and material objects. According to the laws of nature, that which is impure
contaminates a particular person in accordance with that person's situation, as
described here. For example, on certain occasions, such as a solar eclipse or just
after childbirth, one must restrict the intake of food according to ritualistic
injunctions. One who is physically weak, however, may eat without being
considered impious. Ordinary persons consider the ten days following
childbirth to be most auspicious, whereas one who is learned knows that this
period is actually impure. Ignorance of the law does not save one from being
punished, but one who consciously commits sinful activities is considered most
fallen. Concerning opulence (samåddhi), worn-out, dirty clothing or a messy
residence are considered impure for a rich man but acceptable for one who is
poor. The word deça indicates that in a safe and peaceful place one is obligated
to strictly perform religious rituals, whereas in a dangerous or chaotic situation
one may be excused for occasional negligence of secondary principles. One
who is physically healthy must offer obeisances to the Deities, attend religious
functions and execute his prescribed duties, but a young child or sickly person
may be excused from such activities, as indicated by the word avasthä.
Ultimately, as Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé states,
anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà
jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam
änukülyena kåñëänuçélanaà
bhaktir uttamä
[Cc. Madhya 19.167]
"One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord Kåñëa
favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through fruitive
activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure devotional service."
(Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.1.11) One should accept everything which is
favorable for the devotional service of Lord Kåñëa and reject whatever is
unfavorable. One must learn the process of serving God from the bona fide
spiritual master and thus always maintain one's existence pure and free from
anxiety. In general, however, when considering the relative purity and
impurity of material things, all of the above-mentioned factors must be
calculated.
TEXT 12
DaAnyad"AvaRisTatantaUnaAM
r"s$ataEjas$acamaRNAAma,
k(AlavaAyvai¢ama{ÔaAeyaE:
paAiTaRvaAnaAM yautaAyautaE:
dhänya-därv-asthi-tantünäà
rasa-taijasa-carmaëäm
käla-väyv-agni-måt-toyaiù
pärthivänäà yutäyutaiù
SYNONYMS
dhänya—of grains; däru—of wood (in the form of both ordinary objects and
sacred utensils); asthi—bone (such as elephant tusks); tantünäm—and thread;
rasa—of liquids (oil, ghee, etc.); taijasa—fiery objects (gold, etc.);
carmaëäm—and skins; käla—by time; väyu—by air; agni—by fire; måt—by
earth; toyaiù—and by water; pärthivänäm—(also) of earthen objects (such as
chariot wheels, mud, pots, bricks, etc.); yuta—in combination; ayutaiù—or
separately.
TRANSLATION
Various objects such as grains, wooden utensils, things made of bone, thread,
liquids, objects derived from fire, skins and earthy objects are all purified by
time, by the wind, by fire, by earth and by water, either separately or in
combination.
PURPORT
The word käla, or "time," is mentioned here, since all purificatory processes
take place within time.
TEXT 13
@maeDyailaæaM yaâena
gAnDalaepaM vyapaAeh"ita
Bajatae ‘ak{(itaM tasya
tacC$AEcaM taAvaid"Syatae
amedhya-liptaà yad yena
gandha-lepaà vyapohati
bhajate prakåtià tasya
tac chaucaà tävad iñyate
SYNONYMS
amedhya—by something impure; liptam—touched; yat—that thing which;
yena—by which; gandha—the bad smell; lepam—and the impure covering;
vyapohati—gives up; bhajate—the contaminated object again assumes;
prakåtim—its original nature; tasya—of that object; tat—that application;
çaucam—purification; tävat—to that extent; iñyate—is considered.
TRANSLATION
A particular purifying agent is considered appropriate when its application
removes the bad odor or dirty covering of some contaminated object and makes
it resume its original nature.
PURPORT
Furniture, kitchen utensils, clothing and other objects are purified by
application of abrasion, alkali, acid, water and so on. One thereby removes the
bad fragrance or impure coating of such objects, restoring them to their
original clean appearance.
TEXT 14
µaAnad"AnatapaAe'vasTaA1517
vaIyaRs$aMs$k(Ar"k(maRiBa:
matsma{tyaA caAtmana: zAAEcaM
zAuÜ": k(maARcare"ä," iã"ja:
snäna-däna-tapo-'vasthävérya-
saàskära-karmabhiù
mat-småtyä cätmanaù çaucaà
çuddhaù karmäcared dvijaù
SYNONYMS
snäna—by bathing; däna—charity; tapaù—austerity; avasthä—by virtue of
one's age; vérya—potency; saàskära—execution of ritual purification;
karmabhiù—and prescribed duties; mat-småtyä—by remembrance of Me;
ca—also; ätmanaù—of the self; çaucam—cleanliness; çuddhaù—pure;
karma—activity; äcaret—he should perform; dvijaù—a twice-born man.
TRANSLATION
The self can be cleansed by bathing, charity, austerity, age, personal
strength, purificatory rituals, prescribed duties and, above all, by remembrance
of Me. The brähmaëa and other twice-born men should be duly purified before
performing their specific activities.
PURPORT
The word avasthä indicates that when boys and girls are young they are
kept pure by youthful innocence and that as they grow up they are kept pure
through proper education and engagement. By one's individual potency one
should avoid sinful activities and the association of those inclined toward
sense gratification. The word karma here refers to prescribed duties, such as
worshiping the spiritual master and the Deity, chanting the Gäyatré mantra
three times daily and accepting spiritual initiation. The prescribed duties of
the varëäçrama system automatically purify one from the covering of false ego
by dovetailing one's bodily designation in appropriate religious activities.
There are specific duties for brähmaëas, kñatriyas, vaiçyas, çüdras, brahmacärés,
gåhasthas, vänaprasthas and sannyäsés, as described previously in this canto by
the Lord Himself. The most significant word here is mat-småtyä ("by
remembrance of Me"). Ultimately, one cannot avoid the infection of illusion
through any process except Kåñëa consciousness. The three modes of nature
perpetually interact, and one must sometimes fall into the mode of ignorance
and sometimes rise to the mode of goodness, uselessly rotating within the
kingdom of illusion. But by Kåñëa consciousness, remembrance of the
Personality of Godhead, one can actually uproot one's tendency to act against
the will of the Absolute Truth. Then one becomes freed from the clutches of
mäyä and goes back home, back to Godhead. As stated in the Garuòa Puräëa,
apavitraù pavitro vä
sarvävasthäà gato 'pi vä
yaù smaret puëòarékäkñaà
sa bähyäbhyantare çuciù
"Whether one is pure or contaminated, and regardless of one's external
situation, simply by remembering the lotus-eyed Personality of Godhead one
can internally and externally cleanse one's existence."
Lord Caitanya recommended that we constantly remember the Supreme
Lord by chanting His holy names, Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare
Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare. This sublime process is
essential for every human actually desirous of purifying his existence.
TEXT 15
man‡asya ca pair"ÁaAnaM
k(maRzAuiÜ"maRd"paRNAma,
DamaR: s$ampaâtae SaiÑ"r,"
@DamaRstau ivapayaRya:
mantrasya ca parijïänaà
karma-çuddhir mad-arpaëam
dharmaù sampadyate ñaòbhir
adharmas tu viparyayaù
SYNONYMS
mantrasya—(the purification) of a mantra; ca—and; parijïänam—correct
knowledge; karma—of work; çuddhiù—the purification;
mat-arpaëam—offering unto Me; dharmaù—religiousness; sampadyate—is
achieved; ñaòbhiù—by the six (purification of place, time, substance, the doer,
the mantras and the work); adharmaù—irreligiosity; tu—but;
viparyayaù—otherwise.
TRANSLATION
A mantra is purified when chanted with proper knowledge, and one's work
is purified when offered to Me. Thus by purification of the place, time,
substance, doer, mantras and work, one becomes religious, and by negligence of
these six items one is considered irreligious.
PURPORT
One receives a mantra from the mouth of a bona fide spiritual master, who
instructs the disciple in the method, meaning and ultimate purpose of the
mantra. The bona fide spiritual master in this age gives his disciple the
mahä-mantra, or holy names of God, Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa,
Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare. One who chants
this mantra, considering himself to be the eternal servant of the Lord,
gradually learns to chant offenselessly and by such purified chanting quickly
achieves the highest perfection of life. The Lord here summarizes His
discussion of purity and impurity, which manifest ultimately in religious and
irreligious life.
TEXT 16
¸(icaÖ"NAAe'ipa d"AeSa: syaAä,"
d"AeSaAe'ipa ivaiDanaA gAuNA:
gAuNAd"AeSaATaRinayamas$a,
taià"d"Amaeva baADatae
kvacid guëo 'pi doñaù syäd
doño 'pi vidhinä guëaù
guëa-doñärtha-niyamas
tad-bhidäm eva bädhate
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; guëaù—piety; api—even; doñaù—sin; syät—becomes;
doñaù—sin; api—also; vidhinä—on the strength of Vedic injunction;
guëaù—piety; guëa-doña—to piety and sin; artha—regarding;
niyamaù—restrictive regulation; tat—of them; bhidäm—the distinction;
eva—actually; bädhate—undoes.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes piety becomes sin, and sometimes what is ordinarily sin becomes
piety on the strength of Vedic injunctions. Such special rules in effect eradicate
the clear distinction between piety and sin.
PURPORT
The Lord clearly explains here that material piety and sin are always
relative considerations. For example, if a neighbor's house is on fire and one
chops a hole in the roof so that the trapped family may escape, one is
considered to be a pious hero because of the dangerous condition. In normal
conditions, however, if one chops a hole in his neighbor's roof or breaks the
neighbor's windows, he is considered a criminal. Similarly, one who abandons
one's wife and children is certainly irresponsible and thoughtless. If one takes
sannyäsa, however, and remains fixed on a higher spiritual platform, he is
considered to be a most saintly person. Piety and sin therefore depend upon
particular circumstances and are at times difficult to distinguish.
According to Çréla Madhväcärya, persons above the age of fourteen are
considered capable of distinguishing between good and bad and are thus
responsible for their pious and sinful activities. Animals, on the other hand,
being merged in ignorance, cannot be blamed for their offenses or praised for
their so-called good qualities, which all arise ultimately from ignorance.
Human beings who act like animals, with the idea that one should not feel any
guilt but should do whatever one likes, will certainly take birth as animals
absorbed in ignorance. And there are other foolish people who, observing the
relativity of material piety and sin, conclude that there is no absolute good. It
should be understood, however, that Kåñëa consciousness is absolutely good
because it involves complete obedience to the Absolute Truth, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, whose goodness is eternal and absolute. Those who
are inclined to study material piety and sin ultimately experience frustration
due to the relativity and variability of the subject matter. One should
therefore come to the transcendental platform of Kåñëa consciousness, which
is valid and perfect in all circumstances.
TEXT 17
s$amaAnak(maARcar"NAM
paitataAnaAM na paAtak(ma,
@AEtpaiÔak(Ae gAuNA: s$aËÿAe
na zAyaAna: patatyaDa:
samäna-karmäcaraëaà
patitänäà na pätakam
autpattiko guëaù saìgo
na çayänaù pataty adhaù
SYNONYMS
samäna—equal; karma—of work; äcaraëam—the performance;
patitänäm—for those who are fallen; na—is not; pätakam—a cause of
falldown; autpattikaù—dictated by one's nature; guëaù—becomes a good
quality; saìgaù—material association; na—does not; çayänaù—one who is
lying down; patati—fall; adhaù—further down.
TRANSLATION
The same activities that would degrade an elevated person do not cause
falldown for those who are already fallen. Indeed, one who is lying on the
ground cannot possibly fall further. The material association that is dictated by
one's own nature is considered a good quality.
PURPORT
The Lord here further describes the ambiguity in ascertaining material
piety and sin. Although intimate association with women is most abominable
for a renounced sannyäsé, the same association is pious for a householder, who
is ordered by Vedic injunction to approach his wife at the suitable time for
procreation. Similarly, a brähmaëa who drinks liquor is considered to be
committing a most abominable act, whereas a çüdra, a low-class man, who can
moderate his drinking is considered to be self-controlled. Piety and sin on the
material level are thus relative considerations. Any member of society,
however, who receives dékñä, initiation into the chanting of the Lord's holy
names, must strictly obey the four regulative principles: no eating of meat, fish
or eggs, no illicit sex, no intoxication and no gambling. A spiritually initiated
person neglecting these principles will certainly fall from his elevated position
of liberation.
TEXT 18
yataAe yataAe inavataeRta
ivamaucyaeta tatastata:
WSa DamaAeR na{NAAM ºaema:
zAAek(maAeh"BayaApah":
yato yato nivarteta
vimucyeta tatas tataù
eña dharmo nåëäà kñemaù
çoka-moha-bhayäpahaù
SYNONYMS
yataù yataù—from whatever; nivarteta—one desists; vimucyeta—he becomes
liberated; tataù tataù—from that; eñaù—this; dharmaù—the system of religion;
nåëäm—for humans; kñemaù—the path of auspiciousness; çoka—suffering;
moha—delusion; bhaya—and fear; apahaù—which takes away.
TRANSLATION
By refraining from a particular sinful or materialistic activity, one becomes
freed from its bondage. Such renunciation is the basis of religious and
auspicious life for human beings and drives away all suffering, illusion and fear.
PURPORT
In Caitanya-caritämåta (Antya 6.220) it is stated,
mahäprabhura bhakta-gaëera vairägya pradhäna
yähä dekhi' préta hana gaura-bhagavän
"Renunciation is the basic principle sustaining the lives of Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu's devotees. Seeing this renunciation, Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is extremely satisfied."
Because of false ego one considers oneself to be the proprietor and enjoyer
of one's activities. Actually, Lord Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead, is the
proprietor and enjoyer of our activities; recognition of this fact in Kåñëa
consciousness leads one to real renunciation. Every human being should
perform his prescribed duty as an offering to the Supreme Lord. Then there
will be no possibility of material entanglement. Lord Kåñëa clearly explains in
Bhagavad-gétä that prescribed duties performed as an offering to the Lord
award liberation from material bondage. Sinful activities cannot be offered to
the Lord but must be given up altogether. In effect, the distinction between
piety and sin is made so that the living entities will become pious and eligible
to surrender to the Supreme Lord. As explained in Bhagavad-gétä (7.28),
yeñäà tv anta-gataà päpaà
janänäà puëya-karmaëäm
te dvandva-moha-nirmuktä
bhajante mäà dåòha-vratäù
"Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life, whose sinful
actions are completely eradicated and who are freed from the duality of
delusion, engage themselves in My service with determination."
By thorough piety one's life becomes auspicious and freed from lamentation,
illusion and fear, and one can then take to the path of Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 19
ivaSayaeSau gAuNAADyaAs$aAta,
pauMs$a: s$aËÿstataAe Bavaeta,
s$aËÿAÔa‡a Bavaetk(Ama:
k(AmaAde"va k(ilana{RNAAma,
viñayeñu guëädhyäsät
puàsaù saìgas tato bhavet
saìgät tatra bhavet kämaù
kämäd eva kalir nåëäm
SYNONYMS
viñayeñu—in material objects of sense gratification; guëa-adhyäsät—because of
presuming them to be good; puàsaù—of a person; saìgaù—attachment;
tataù—from that presumption; bhavet—comes into being; saìgät—from that
material association; tatra—thus; bhavet—arises; kämaù—lust; kämät—from
lust; eva—also; kaliù—quarrel; nåëäm—among men.
TRANSLATION
One who accepts material sense objects as desirable certainly becomes
attached to them. From such attachment lust arises, and this lust creates quarrel
among men.
PURPORT
The actual goal of human life should not be material sense gratification, for
it is the basis of conflict in human society. Although the Vedic literature
sometimes sanctions sense gratification, the ultimate purpose of the Vedas is
renunciation, since Vedic culture cannot possibly recommend anything that
disturbs human life. A lusty person is easily angered and becomes inimical to
anyone frustrating his lusty desires. Since his sex desire can never be satisfied,
a lusty person ultimately becomes frustrated with his own sex partner, and thus
a "love-hate" relationship develops. A lusty person considers himself to be the
enjoyer of God's creation and is therefore full of pride and false prestige. The
lusty, proud person will not be attracted to the process of humble submission at
the lotus feet of the bona fide spiritual master. Attraction to illicit sex is thus
the direct enemy of Kåñëa consciousness, which depends upon humble
submission to the representative of the Supreme Lord. Lord Kåñëa also states
in Bhagavad-gétä that desire for illicit sex is the all-devouring, sinful enemy of
this world.
Because modern society sanctions unrestricted mixing of men and women,
its citizens cannot possibly achieve peace; rather, the regulation of conflict
becomes the basis of social survival. This is the symptom of an ignorant society
falsely accepting the material body as the highest good, as described here by
the words viñayeñu guëädhyäsät. One who is too affectionate to his own body
will inevitably be seized by sex desire.
TEXT 20
k(laeäuR"ivaRSah": ‚(AeDas$a,
tamastamanauvataRtae
tamas$aA ƒasyatae pauMs$azA,
caetanaA vyaAipanaI åu"tama,
kaler durviñahaù krodhas
tamas tam anuvartate
tamasä grasyate puàsaç
cetanä vyäpiné drutam
SYNONYMS
kaleù—from quarrel; durviñahaù—intolerable; krodhaù—anger;
tamaù—ignorance; tam—that anger; anuvartate—follows; tamasä—by
ignorance; grasyate—is seized; puàsaù—of a man; cetanä—the consciousness;
vyäpiné—broad; drutam—swiftly.
TRANSLATION
From quarrel arises intolerable anger, followed by the darkness of ignorance.
This ignorance quickly overtakes a man's broad intelligence.
PURPORT
The desire for material association arises from one's propensity to deny that
everything is God's energy. Falsely imagining material sense objects to be
separate from the Supreme Lord, one desires to enjoy them; such desire gives
rise to conflict and quarrel in human society. This conflict inevitably gives rise
to great anger, which makes human beings become foolish and destructive.
Thus the actual goal of human life is quickly forgotten.
TEXT 21
tayaA ivar"ih"ta: s$aADaAe
jantau: zAUnyaAya k(lpatae
tataAe'sya svaATaRiva”aMzAAe
maUicCR$tasya ma{tasya ca
tayä virahitaù sädho
jantuù çünyäya kalpate
tato 'sya svärtha-vibhraàço
mürcchitasya måtasya ca
SYNONYMS
tayä—of that intelligence; virahitaù—deprived; sädho—O saintly Uddhava;
jantuù—a living creature; çünyäya—practically void; kalpate—becomes;
tataù—consequently; asya—his; sva-artha—from the goals of life;
vibhraàçaù—downfall; mürcchitasya—of him who has become like dull matter;
måtasya—virtually dead; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
O saintly Uddhava, a person bereft of real intelligence is considered to have
lost everything. Deviated from the actual purpose of his life, he becomes dull,
just like a dead person.
PURPORT
Kåñëa consciousness is so vital and essential that one who has deviated from
this progressive path of self-realization is considered to be virtually
unconscious, or like a dead person. Since every living entity is part and parcel
of Kåñëa, anyone who falsely identifies with the external body is actually
unconscious of his real position. Thus it is stated, çünyäya kalpate: pursuing
that which has no factual existence, he is devoid of any tangible progress or
benefit in life. One whose consciousness is absorbed in the nonexistent
becomes himself practically nonexistent. In this way, the eternal living entities
become fallen, lost in the ocean of material existence, and it is only by the
special mercy of the pure devotees of the Lord that they can be rescued. The
Lord's devotees therefore instruct the fallen people to chant Hare Kåñëa, Hare
Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare
Hare. By this process our real consciousness and life can be quickly revived.
TEXT 22
ivaSayaAiBainavaezAena
naAtmaAnaM vaed" naApar"ma,
va{ºa jaIivak(yaA jaIvana,
vyaTa< Bañeva ya: ìs$ana,
viñayäbhiniveçena
nätmänaà veda näparam
våkña jévikayä jévan
vyarthaà bhastreva yaù çvasan
SYNONYMS
viñaya—in sense gratification; abhiniveçena—by overabsorption; na—not;
ätmänam—himself; veda—knows; na—nor; aparam—another; våkña—of a
tree; jévakayä—by the life-style; jévan—living; vyartham—in vain; bhasträ
iva—just like a bellows; yaù—who; çvasan—is breathing.
TRANSLATION
Because of absorption in sense gratification, one cannot recognize himself or
others. Living uselessly in ignorance like a tree, one is merely breathing just
like a bellows.
PURPORT
Just as trees, having no means of defending themselves, are always being cut
down, similarly, the conditioned souls are constantly being cut down by the
cruel laws of nature, which impose innumerable miseries culminating in
sudden death. Although foolish people think they are helping themselves and
others, they actually do not know their own identity, nor the identities of their
so-called friends and relatives. Absorbed in gratifying the senses of the
external body, they spend their lives uselessly, without spiritual profit. This
useless life-style can be transformed into a perfect life simply by chanting the
holy names of God in Kåñëa consciousness, as recommended by Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu.
TEXT 23
P(la™auitair"yaM na|NAAM
na ™aeyaAe r"AecanaM par"ma,
™aeyaAeivavaºayaA ‘aAelM(
yaTaA BaESajyar"Aecanama,
phala-çrutir iyaà nèëäà
na çreyo rocanaà param
çreyo-vivakñayä proktaà
yathä bhaiñajya-rocanam
SYNONYMS
phala-çrutiù—the statements of scripture promising rewards; iyam—these;
nèëäm—for men; na—are not; çreyaù—the highest good;
rocanam—enticement; param—merely; çreyaù—the ultimate good;
vivakñayä—with the idea of saying; proktam—spoken; yathä—just as;
bhaiñajya—for taking medicine; rocanam—inducement.
TRANSLATION
Those statements of scripture promising fruitive rewards do not prescribe
the ultimate good for men but are merely enticements for executing beneficial
religious duties, like promises of candy spoken to induce a child to take
beneficial medicine.
PURPORT
In the previous verse Lord Kåñëa stated that persons absorbed in sense
gratification certainly deviate from the real purpose of human life. But since
the Vedas themselves promise heavenly sense gratification as the result of
sacrifice and austerity, how can such promotion to heaven be considered a
deviation from the goal of life? The Lord here explains that the fruitive
rewards offered in religious scriptures are merely inducements, like candy that
is used to induce a child to take medicine. It is actually the medicine that is
beneficial, and not the candy. Similarly, in fruitive sacrifices it is the worship
of Lord Viñëu that is beneficial, not the fruitive reward itself. According to
Bhagavad-gétä, those professing fruitive rewards to be the ultimate goal of
religious scripture are certainly less intelligent fools inimical to the purpose of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord desires that all conditioned
souls be purified and come back home, back to Godhead, for an eternal life of
bliss and knowledge. One who opposes the Lord's purpose in the name of
religiosity is certainly bewildered about the purpose of life.
TEXT 24
otpaÔyaEva ih" k(AmaeSau
‘aANAeSau svajanaeSau ca
@As$al(manas$aAe matyaAR
@AtmanaAe'naTaR$he"tauSau
utpattyaiva hi kämeñu
präëeñu sva-janeñu ca
äsakta-manaso martyä
ätmano 'nartha-hetuñu
SYNONYMS
utpattyä eva—simply by birth; hi—indeed; kämeñu—in objects of selfish
desires; präëeñu—in vital functions (such as one's duration of life, sense
activities, physical strength and sexual potency); sva-janeñu—in his family
members; ca—and; äsakta-manasaù—having become attached within the
mind; martyäù—mortal human beings; ätmanaù—of their real self;
anartha—of defeating the purpose; hetuñu—which are the causes.
TRANSLATION
Simply by material birth, human beings become attached within their minds
to personal sense gratification, long duration of life, sense activities, bodily
strength, sexual potency and friends and family. Their minds are thus absorbed
in that which defeats their actual self-interest.
PURPORT
Our attachment to the material body and the bodies of family and friends
inevitably leads to unbearable anxiety and suffering. The mind absorbed in the
bodily concept of life cannot possibly advance in self-realization, and thus
one's hope for an eternal life of bliss and knowledge is defeated by the objects
of one's so-called affection. Activities performed in ignorance are beneficial
neither for oneself nor others, just as the charitable activities one may perform
in a dream bestow no tangible benefit on real people. The conditioned soul is
dreaming of a world separate from God, but any advancement experienced in
this dream world is merely hallucination. The Lord states in Bhagavad-gétä,
sarva-loka-maheçvaram: [Bg. 5.29] He is the supreme enjoyer and Lord of all
planets and worlds. Only by Kåñëa consciousness, recognition of the
supremacy of God, can one make actual progress in life.
TEXT 25
nataAnaivaäu"Sa: svaATa<
”aAmyataAe va{ijanaADvaina
k(TaM yauHjyaAtpaunastaeSau
taAMstamaAe ivazAtaAe bauDa:
natän aviduñaù svärthaà
bhrämyato våjinädhvani
kathaà yuïjyät punas teñu
täàs tamo viçato budhaù
SYNONYMS
natän—submissive; aviduñaù—ignorant; sva-artham—of their own interest;
bhrämyataù—wandering; våjina—of danger; adhvani—upon the path;
katham—for what purpose; yuïjyät—would cause to engage; punaù—further;
teñu—in those (modes of sense gratification); tän—them; tamaù—darkness;
viçataù—who are entering; budhaù—the intelligent (Vedic authority).
TRANSLATION
Those ignorant of their real self-interest are wandering on the path of
material existence, gradually heading toward darkness. Why would the Vedas
further encourage them in sense gratification if they, although foolish,
submissively pay heed to Vedic injunctions?
PURPORT
Materialistic persons are not prepared to renounce society, friendship and
love, which are all based on sex indulgence, to instead take to a life of
renunciation and self-realization. In order to bring such foolish persons under
the canopy of Vedic injunctions, the Vedas promise innumerable material
rewards, even promotion to heavenly planets, to those who faithfully execute
the Vedic injunctions. As explained by the Lord, such rewards are like the
candy offered to a child, who then faithfully takes his medicine. Material
enjoyment is certainly the cause of suffering, since all enjoyable objects are
subject to destruction along with the so-called enjoyer. Material life is simply
painful and full of anxiety, frustration and lamentation. We become agitated
by seeing a so-called enjoyable object, such as the naked body of a woman, a
beautiful residence, a sumptuous tray of food or the expansion of our own
prestige, but actually such imagined happiness is simply the intense
expectation of a satisfaction that never comes. One remains perpetually
frustrated in material existence, and the more one tries to enjoy, the more
one's frustration increases. Therefore, the Vedic knowledge, which aims at
ultimate peace and happiness on the spiritual platform, cannot possibly
authorize the materialistic way of life. Material rewards are employed by the
Vedas merely as inducements for the conditioned soul to take the medicine,
submission to the Supreme Lord, Viñëu, through various types of sacrifice.
Those who are veda-väda-rata claim that religious scriptures are meant to
facilitate sense gratification in the ignorance of conditioned life. The true goal
of religion, however, is spiritual liberation, in which material sense
gratification ceases to exist. The darkness of bodily attachment cannot exist in
the effulgent light of spiritual knowledge. In the ocean of spiritual bliss, the
anxiety-ridden apparent pleasure of this world vanishes completely. The true
meaning of veda, or perfect knowledge, is to surrender to the Supreme Lord in
full Kåñëa consciousness for an eternal life of bliss and knowledge as the Lord's
faithful servant.
TEXT 26
WvaM vyavais$ataM ke(icaä,"
@ivaÁaAya ku(bauÜ"ya:
P(la™auitaM ku(s$auimataAM
na vaed"ÁaA vad"inta ih"
evaà vyavasitaà kecid
avijïäya kubuddhayaù
phala-çrutià kusumitäà
na veda-jïä vadanti hi
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; vyavasitam—the actual conclusion; kecit—some people;
avijïäya—not understanding; ku-buddhayaù—having perverted intelligence;
phala-çrutim—the scriptural statements promising material rewards;
kusumitäm—flowery; na—do not; veda-jïäù—those in full knowledge of the
Vedas; vadanti—speak; hi—indeed.
TRANSLATION
Persons with perverted intelligence do not understand this actual purpose of
Vedic knowledge and instead propagate as the highest Vedic truth the flowery
statements of the Vedas that promise material rewards. Those in actual
knowledge of the Vedas never speak in that way.
PURPORT
The followers of the karma-mémäàsä philosophy declare that there is no
eternal kingdom of God beyond this universe and that one should therefore
become a professional performer of Vedic rituals in order to keep oneself in a
material heavenly planet. As explained by the Lord to Çré Uddhava in a
previous chapter, there is no actual happiness in the material world, since one
will inevitably rotate throughout the various planetary environments
stretching from heaven to hell and thus always be disturbed within the
material atmosphere. Although the doctor may give a child candy-covered
medicine, one who urges the child to eat the candy and throw away the
medicine is certainly a great fool. In the same way, the flowery statements of
the Vedas describing heavenly enjoyment do not award the real fruit of Vedic
knowledge but merely supply decorative blossoms of sense gratification. As
stated in the Vedas (Åg Veda 1.22.20), tad viñëoù paramaà padaà sadä paçyanti
sürayaù. Even the demigods, who are permanent residents of heaven, are
always looking to the eternal abode of the Supreme Lord. Foolish people who
admire the standard of living in material heaven should therefore note that
the demigods themselves are devotees of the Supreme Lord. One should not
become a bogus propagator of so-called Vedic knowledge but should take to
Kåñëa consciousness and make a genuine solution to the problem of
progressing in life.
TEXT 27
k(Aimana: k{(paNAA laubDaA:
pauSpaeSau P(labauÜ"ya:
@i¢amaugDaA DaUmataAntaA:
svaM laAekM( na ivad"inta tae
käminaù kåpaëä lubdhäù
puñpeñu phala-buddhayaù
agni-mugdhä dhüma-täntäù
svaà lokaà na vidanti te
SYNONYMS
käminaù—lusty persons; kåpaëäù—miserly; lubdhäù—greedy;
puñpeñu—flowers; phala-buddhayaù—thinking to be the ultimate fruits;
agni—by fire; mugdhäù—bewildered; dhüma-täntäù—suffocating from smoke;
svam—their own; lokam—identity; na vidanti—do not recognize; te—they.
TRANSLATION
Those who are full of lust, avarice and greed mistake mere flowers to be the
actual fruit of life. Bewildered by the glare of fire and suffocated by its smoke,
they cannot recognize their own true identity.
PURPORT
Those attached to female association become proud separatists; desiring
everything for their personal gratification and that of their lady friends, they
become greedy misers, full of anxiety and envy. Such unfortunate persons
mistake the flowery statements of the Vedas to be the highest perfection of
life. The word agni-mugdhäù, "bewildered by fire," indicates that such persons
consider Vedic fire sacrifices awarding material benefit to be the highest
religious truth, and thus they merge into ignorance. Fire produces smoke,
which obscures one's vision. Similarly, the path of fruitive fire sacrifices is
cloudy and obscure, without clear understanding of the spirit soul. The Lord
here clearly states that fruitive religionists cannot understand their actual
spiritual identity, nor do they realize the genuine shelter of the spirit soul in
the kingdom of God.
Lord Kåñëa states in Bhagavad-gétä (15.15), vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva
vedyaù: all Vedic knowledge is actually meant to lead one to pure love of
Godhead. Lord Kåñëa is certainly the Absolute Truth, and to love Him is the
ultimate purpose of our existence. The Vedic knowledge patiently tries to
bring the conditioned soul to this perfection of pure Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 28
na tae maAmaËÿ jaAnainta
ô$id"sTaM ya wdM" yata:
ofTazAñA ÷s$auta{paAe
yaTaA naIh"Ar"caºauSa:
na te mäm aìga jänanti
hådi-sthaà ya idaà yataù
uktha-çasträ hy asu-tåpo
yathä néhära-cakñuñaù
SYNONYMS
na—do not; te—they; mäm—Me; aìga—My dear Uddhava; jänanti—know;
hådi-stham—seated within the heart; yaù—who is; idam—this created
universe; yataù—from whom it comes; uktha-çasträù—who consider Vedic
ritual activities to be praiseworthy, or else, for whom their own ritualistic
performances are like the weapon that kills the sacrificial animal; hi—indeed;
asu-tåpaù—interested only in sense gratification; yathä—just as; néhära—in
fog; cakñuñaù—those whose eyes.
TRANSLATION
My dear Uddhava, persons dedicated to sense gratification obtained through
honoring the Vedic rituals cannot understand that I am situated in everyone's
heart and that the entire universe is nondifferent from Me and emanates from
Me. Indeed, they are just like persons whose eyes are covered by fog.
PURPORT
The word uktha-çasträù refers to the chanting of certain Vedic hymns, by
which one obtains fruitive results in this world and the next. The word çastra
also indicates a weapon, and thus uktha-çastra also means the weapon used in
Vedic sacrifice to kill the sacrificial animal. Persons exploiting Vedic
knowledge for bodily gratification are slaughtering themselves with the
weapon of materialistic religious principles. They are also compared to those
trying to see within a dense fog. The false bodily concept of life, in which one
ignores the eternal soul within the body, is a dense fog of ignorance that blocks
our vision of God. Lord Kåñëa therefore begins His instruction in
Bhagavad-gétä by clearing away the dense ignorance of the bodily concept of
life. Religion means the law of God. The Lord's final order, or law, is that every
conditioned soul surrender unto Him, learn to serve and love Him, and thus go
back home, back to Godhead. This is the process of Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXTS 29-30
tae mae matamaivaÁaAya
par"AeºaM ivaSayaAtmak(A:
ihM"s$aAyaAM yaid" r"AgA: syaAä,"
yaÁa Wva na caAed"naA
ihM"s$aAivah"Ar"A ÷AlabDaE:
pazAuiBa: svas$auKaecC$yaA
yajantae de"vataA yaÁaE:
ipata{BaUtapataIna, KalaA:
te me matam avijïäya
parokñaà viñayätmakäù
hiàsäyäà yadi rägaù syäd
yajïa eva na codanä
hiàsä-vihärä hy älabdhaiù
paçubhiù sva-sukhecchayä
yajante devatä yajïaiù
pitå-bhüta-patén khaläù
SYNONYMS
te—they; me—My; matam—conclusion; avijïäya—without understanding;
parokñam—confidential; viñaya-ätmakäù—absorbed in sense gratification;
hiàsäyäm—to violence; yadi—if; rägaù—attachment; syät—may be; yajïe—in
the sacrificial prescriptions; eva—certainly; na—there is not;
codanä—encouragement; hiàsä-vihäräù—those who take pleasure in violence;
hi—indeed; älabdhaiù—which have been slaughtered; paçubhiù—by means of
the animals; sva-sukha—for their own happiness; icchayä—with the desire;
yajante—they worship; devatäù—the demigods; yajïaiù—by sacrificial rituals;
pitå—the forefathers; bhüta-patén—and the leaders among the ghostly spirits;
khaläù—cruel persons.
TRANSLATION
Those who are sworn to sense gratification cannot understand the
confidential conclusion of Vedic knowledge as explained by Me. Taking
pleasure in violence, they cruelly slaughter innocent animals in sacrifice for
their own sense gratification and thus worship demigods, forefathers and leaders
among ghostly creatures. Such passion for violence, however, is never
encouraged within the process of Vedic sacrifice.
PURPORT
The Vedic scriptures sanction occasional animal sacrifice to satisfy cruel,
low-class men who cannot live without the taste of flesh and blood. Such
concessions, however, are restricted by rigorous obligatory rituals and are
meant to gradually discourage animal-killing, just as the exorbitant cost of a
liquor license restricts the number of retail outlets selling alcoholic beverages.
But unscrupulous persons misconstrue such restrictive sanctions and declare
that Vedic sacrifice is meant for killing animals in order to enjoy sense
gratification. Being materialistic, they desire to attain the planets of the
forefathers or demigods and thus worship such beings. Sometimes materialistic
persons are attracted to the subtle life-style of ghosts and worship ghostly
creatures. These methods constitute gross ignorance of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is the actual enjoyer of all sacrifice and austerity.
The demons perform Vedic sacrifice but are inimical to Lord Näräyaëa, for
they consider the demigods, the forefathers or Lord Çiva to be equal to God.
Although understanding the authority of Vedic rituals, they do not accept the
ultimate Vedic conclusion and therefore never surrender to God. Thus false
religious principles flourish in the demoniac societies of the animal-killers.
Although in countries like America people outwardly profess to be followers of
God alone, actual worship and glorification is offered to innumerable popular
heroes such as entertainers, politicians, athletes and other equally insignificant
persons. Animal-killers, being grossly materialistic, are inevitably attracted to
the extraordinary features of material illusion; they cannot understand the
real platform of Kåñëa consciousness, or spiritual life.
TEXT 31
sva«aAepamamamauM laAek(ma,
@s$antaM ™avaNAi‘ayama,
@AizASaAe ô$id" s$aÆÿlpya
tyajantyaTaARna, yaTaA vaiNAk,(
svapnopamam amuà lokam
asantaà çravaëa-priyam
äçiño hådi saìkalpya
tyajanty arthän yathä vaëik
SYNONYMS
svapna—a dream; upamam—equal to; amum—that; lokam—world (after
death); asantam—unreal; çravaëa-priyam—only enchanting to hear about;
äçiñaù—mundane achievements in this life; hådi—in their hearts;
saìkalpya—imagining; tyajanti—they give up; arthän—their wealth;
yathä—like; vaëik—a businessman.
TRANSLATION
Just as a foolish businessman gives up his real wealth in useless business
speculation, foolish persons give up all that is actually valuable in life and
instead pursue promotion to material heaven, which although pleasing to hear
about is actually unreal, like a dream. Such bewildered persons imagine within
their hearts that they will achieve all material blessings.
PURPORT
All over the world people are working hard to achieve perfect sense
gratification in this life or the next. As eternal living beings, part and parcel of
Lord Kåñëa, we are naturally endowed with all bliss and knowledge in the
association of the Lord. But giving up this exalted position of spiritual bliss and
knowledge, we foolishly waste our time pursuing the phantasmagoria of bodily
happiness, just like a foolish businessman who squanders his real assets in
imaginary business ventures that deliver no real profit.
TEXT 32
r"ja:s$aÔvatamaAeinaï"A
r"ja:s$aÔvatamaAejauSa:
opaAs$ata wn‰"mauKyaAna,
de"vaAd"Iªa yaTaEva maAma,
rajaù-sattva-tamo-niñöhä
rajaù-sattva-tamo-juñaù
upäsata indra-mukhyän
devädén na yathaiva mäm
SYNONYMS
rajaù—in the mode of passion; sattva—goodness; tamaù—or ignorance;
niñöhäù—established; rajaù—passion; sattva—goodness; tamaù—or ignorance;
juñaù—who manifest; upäsate—they worship; indra-mukhyän—headed by
Lord Indra; deva-ädén—the demigods and other deities; na—but not; yathä
eva—in the proper way; mäm—Me.
TRANSLATION
Those established in material passion, goodness and ignorance worship the
particular demigods and other deities, headed by Indra, who manifest the same
modes of passion, goodness or ignorance. They fail, however, to properly
worship Me.
PURPORT
Although the demigods are part and parcel of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, demigod worship fosters the false idea that the demigods exist apart
from the Supreme Lord. Such worship is avidhi-pürvakam, or an improper
approach to the Absolute Truth. Çréla Madhväcärya quotes from the
Hari-vaàça that among those primarily in the mode of ignorance there are
sometimes manifestations of passion and goodness. Ignorant persons possessing
a tendency toward goodness may go to hell but are also allowed a little
heavenly pleasure. Thus it can be seen that a man suffering in miserable
financial or political conditions sometimes enjoys the company of a beautiful
wife, though his general condition is hellish. Those in ignorance mixed slightly
with passion simply go to hell, and those purely in the mode of ignorance glide
down to the darkest region of hell. Those devoid of devotion to the Supreme
Lord are in ignorance in these three categories. Sometimes persons situated in
the mode of goodness accept the supremacy of the Supreme Lord but are more
attracted to the demigods, believing that through Vedic rituals they can
achieve the same standard of living as the demigods. This proud tendency is
certainly an obstacle in the loving service of the Supreme Lord and ultimately
causes falldown.
TEXTS 33-34
wîe"h" de"vataA yaÁaEr,"
gAtvaA rM"syaAmahe" id"iva
tasyaAnta wh" BaUyaAsma
mah"AzAAlaA mah"Aku(laA:
WvaM pauiSpatayaA vaAcaA
vyaAiºaæamanas$aAM na{NAAma,
maAinanaAM caAitalaubDaAnaAM
maã"AtaARipa na r"Aecatae
iñöveha devatä yajïair
gatvä raàsyämahe divi
tasyänta iha bhüyäsma
mahä-çälä mahä-kuläù
evaà puñpitayä väcä
vyäkñipta-manasäà nåëäm
mäninäà cäti-lubdhänäà
mad-värtäpi na rocate
SYNONYMS
iñövä—offering sacrifice; iha—in this world; devatäù—to the demigods;
yajïaiù—by our sacrifices; gatvä—going; raàsyämahe—we shall enjoy;
divi—in heaven; tasya—of that enjoyment; ante—at the end; iha—on this
earth; bhüyäsmaù—we shall become; mahä-çäläù—great householders;
mahä-kuläù—members of aristocratic families; evam—thus; puñpitayä—by the
flowery; väcä—words; vyäkñipta-manasäm—for those whose minds are
bewildered; nåëäm—men; mäninäm—very proud; ca—and;
ati-lubdhänäm—extremely greedy; mad-värtä—topics about Me; api—even; na
rocate—have no attraction.
TRANSLATION
The worshipers of demigods think, "We shall worship the demigods in this
life, and by our sacrifices we shall go to heaven and enjoy there. When that
enjoyment is finished we shall return to this world and take birth as great
householders in aristocratic families." Being excessively proud and greedy, such
persons are bewildered by the flowery words of the Vedas. They are not
attracted to topics about Me, the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
Real pleasure is found in the transcendental form of the Lord, who is the
supreme Cupid, engaging in pastimes of love in the spiritual world. Neglecting
the eternal bliss of the Lord's pastimes, the foolish worshipers of the demigods
dream of becoming like the Lord, but they achieve exactly the opposite result.
In other words, they continue perpetually in the cycle of birth and death.
TEXT 35
vaed"A “aöAtmaivaSayaAs$a,
i‡ak(ANx"ivaSayaA wmae
par"AeºavaAd"A [%Saya:
par"AeºaM mama ca i‘ayama,
vedä brahmätma-viñayäs
tri-käëòa-viñayä ime
parokña-vädä åñayaù
parokñaà mama ca priyam
SYNONYMS
vedäù—the Vedas; brahma-ätma—the understanding that the soul is pure
spirit; viñayäù—having as their subject matter; tri-käëòa-viñayäù—divided into
three sections (which represent fruitive work, worship of demigods and
realization of the Absolute Truth); ime—these; parokña-vädäù—speaking
esoterically; åñayaù—the Vedic authorities; parokñam—indirect explanation;
mama—to Me; ca—also; priyam—dear.
TRANSLATION
The Vedas, divided into three divisions, ultimately reveal the living entity as
pure spirit soul. The Vedic seers and mantras, however, deal in esoteric terms,
and I also am pleased by such confidential descriptions.
PURPORT
In the previous verses Lord Kåñëa clearly refuted the concept that Vedic
knowledge is meant for material enjoyment, and here the Lord summarizes the
actual purpose of Vedic literature: self-realization. Although the conditioned
souls are struggling in the network of material energy, their actual existence is
transcendental freedom in the kingdom of God. The Vedas gradually lift the
conditioned soul out of the darkness of illusion and establish him in the
eternal loving service of the Lord. As stated in the Vedänta-sütra (4.4.23),
anävåttiù çabdät: "One who properly hears Vedic knowledge does not have to
return to the cycle of birth and death."
One may ask why the Lord Himself as well as the Lord's representatives, the
Vedic seers and mantras, speak in esoteric or indirect terms. As the Lord states
in Bhagavad-gétä, näham prakäçaù sarvasya: [Bg. 7.25] the Supreme Lord does
not allow Himself to be taken cheaply, and thus He is not manifest to
superficial or inimical people. Those who are polluted by the material
atmosphere are induced to purify themselves through Vedic rituals that offer
fruitive results, just as a child is induced to take medicine by the offer of a
candy reward. Because of the confidential nature of Vedic exposition, less
intelligent persons cannot appreciate the ultimate transcendental purpose of
the Vedas, and consequently they fall down to the platform of sense
gratification.
The term brahmätma ("spirit soul") ultimately indicates the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who states in Bhagavad-gétä that knowledge of Him is
räja-guhyam, the most confidential of all secrets. One who depends upon
material sense perception remains in gross ignorance of the Absolute Truth.
One who depends upon mental and intellectual speculation may get a clue that
the eternal soul and Supersoul are both within the material body. But one who
depends upon the Lord Himself, faithfully hearing the Lord's own message in
Bhagavad-gétä, perfectly understands the entire situation and goes back home,
back to Godhead, having fulfilled the true purpose of Vedic knowledge.
TEXT 36
zAbd"“aö s$auäu"baAeRDaM
‘aANAein‰"yamanaAemayama,
@nantapaArM" gAmBaIrM"
äu"ivaRgAA÷M s$amau"‰"vata,
çabda-brahma su-durbodhaà
präëendriya-mano-mayam
ananta-päraà gambhéraà
durvigähyaà samudra-vat
SYNONYMS
çabda-brahma—the transcendental sound of the Vedas;
su-durbodham—extremely difficult to comprehend; präëa—of the vital air;
indriya—senses; manaù—and mind; mayam—manifesting on the different
levels; ananta-päram—without limit; gambhéram—deep;
durvigähyam—unfathomable; samudra-vat—like the ocean.
TRANSLATION
The transcendental sound of the Vedas is very difficult to comprehend and
manifests on different levels within the präëa, senses and mind. This Vedic
sound is unlimited, very deep and unfathomable, just like the ocean.
PURPORT
According to Vedic knowledge, the Vedic sound is divided into four phases,
which can be understood only by the most intelligent brähmaëas. This is
because three of the divisions are internally situated within the living entity
and only the fourth division is externally manifested, as speech. Even this
fourth phase of Vedic sound, called vaikharé, is very difficult to understand for
ordinary human beings. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains these
divisions as follows. The präëa phase of Vedic sound, known as parä, is situated
in the ädhära-cakra; the mental phase, known as paçyanté, is situated in the
area of the navel, on the maëipüraka-cakra; the intellectual phase, known as
madhyamä, is situated in the heart area, in the anähata-cakra. Finally, the
manifest sensory phase of Vedic sound is called vaikharé.
Such Vedic sound is ananta-pära because it comprehends all vital energies
within the universe and beyond and is thus undivided by time or space.
Actually, Vedic sound vibration is so subtle, unfathomable and deep that only
the Lord Himself and His empowered followers such as Vyäsa and Närada can
understand its actual form and meaning. Ordinary human beings cannot
comprehend all of the intricacies and subtleties of Vedic sound, but if one
takes to Kåñëa consciousness one can immediately understand the conclusion
of all Vedic knowledge, namely Lord Kåñëa Himself, the original source of
Vedic knowledge. Foolish persons devote their vital air, senses and mind to
sense gratification and thus do not understand the transcendental value of the
holy name of God. Ultimately, the essence of all Vedic sound is the holy name
of the Supreme Lord, which is not different from the Lord Himself. Since the
Lord is unlimited, His holy name is equally unlimited. No one can understand
the transcendental glories of the Lord without the Lord's direct mercy. By
offenselessly chanting the holy names Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa,
Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare, one can enter
into the transcendental mysteries of Vedic sound. Otherwise the knowledge of
the Vedas will remain durvigähyam, or impossible to penetrate.
TEXT 37
mayaAepaba{Mih"taM BaU°aA
“aöNAAnantazAil(naA
BaUtaeSau GaAeSaè&paeNA
ivas$aeSaUNAeRva laºyatae
mayopabåàhitaà bhümnä
brahmaëänanta-çaktinä
bhüteñu ghoña-rüpeëa
viseñürëeva lakñyate
SYNONYMS
mayä—by Me; upabåàhitam—established; bhümnä—by the unlimited;
brahmaëä—the changeless Absolute; ananta-çaktinä—whose potencies have
no end; bhüteñu—within the living beings; ghoña-rüpeëa—in the form of subtle
sound, the oàkära; viseñu-in the subtle fibrous covering of a lotus stalk;
ürëä—one thread; iva—as; lakñyate—appears.
TRANSLATION
As the unlimited, unchanging and omnipotent Personality of Godhead
dwelling within all living beings, I personally establish the Vedic sound
vibration in the form of oàkära within all living entities. It is thus perceived
subtly, just like a single strand of fiber on a lotus stalk.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead personally resides within the heart of
every living entity, and from this verse we can understand that the seed of all
Vedic knowledge is also situated within all living beings. In this way, the
process of awakening Vedic knowledge, and thereby awakening one's eternal
relationship with God, is natural and necessary for everyone. All perfection is
found within the heart of the living being; as soon as the heart is purified by
chanting the holy names of God, that perfection, Kåñëa consciousness,
immediately awakens.
TEXTS 38-40
yaTaAeNARnaAiBaôR$d"yaAä,"
ONAARmauã"matae mauKaAta,
@Ak(AzAAÙ"AeSavaAna, ‘aANAAe
manas$aA s$pazARè&ipaNAA
C$nd"AemayaAe'ma{tamaya:
s$ah"›apad"vaI%M ‘aBau:
Vk(Ar"Aã"YaiÃatas$pazARsvar"
AeSmaAntasTaBaUiSataAma,
ivaica‡aBaASaAivatataAM
C$nd"AeiBaêtauç&ÔarE":
@nantapaAr"AM ba{h"taI%M
s$a{jatyaAiºapatae svayama,
yathorëanäbhir hådayäd
ürëäm udvamate mukhät
äkäçäd ghoñavän präëo
manasä sparça-rüpiëä
chando-mayo 'måta-mayaù
sahasra-padavéà prabhuù
oàkäräd vyaïjita-sparçasvaroñmäntastha-
bhüñitäm
vicitra-bhäñä-vitatäà
chandobhiç catur-uttaraiù
ananta-päräà båhatéà
såjaty äkñipate svayam
SYNONYMS
yathä—just as; ürëa-näbhiù—a spider; hådayät—from its heart; ürëäm—its
web; udvamate—emits; mukhät—through its mouth; äkäçät—from the ether;
ghoña-vän—manifesting sound vibration; präëaù—the Lord in the form of the
original life air; manasä—by means of the primeval mind;
sparça-rüpiëä—which exhibits the forms of the different phonemes of the
alphabet, beginning with the sparça letters; chandaù-mayaù—comprising all
the sacred Vedic meters; amåta-mayaù—full of transcendental pleasure;
sahasra-padavém—which branches out in thousands of directions;
prabhuù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; oàkärät—from the subtle
vibration oàkära; vyaïjita-expanded; sparça—with the consonant stops;
svara—vowels; uñma—sibilants; anta-stha—and semivowels;
bhüñitäm—decorated; vicitra—variegated; bhäñä—by verbal expressions;
vitatäm—elaborated; chandobhiù—along with the metrical arrangements;
catuù-uttaraiù—each having four syllables more than the previous;
ananta-päräm—limitless; båhatém—the great expanse of Vedic literature;
såjati—He creates; äkñipate—and withdraws; svayam—Himself.
TRANSLATION
Just as a spider brings forth from its heart its web and emits it through its
mouth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead manifests Himself as the
reverberating primeval vital air, comprising all sacred Vedic meters and full of
transcendental pleasure. Thus the Lord, from the ethereal sky of His heart,
creates the great and limitless Vedic sound by the agency of His mind, which
conceives of variegated sounds such as the sparças. The Vedic sound branches
out in thousands of directions, adorned with the different letters expanded from
the syllable oà: the consonants, vowels, sibilants and semivowels. The Veda is
then elaborated by many verbal varieties, expressed in different meters, each
having four more syllables than the previous one. Ultimately the Lord again
withdraws His manifestation of Vedic sound within Himself.
PURPORT
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé has given an elaborate technical explanation of these
three verses, the understanding of which requires extensive linguistic
knowledge of the Sanskrit language. The essential point is that transcendental
knowledge is expressed through Vedic sound vibration, which is itself a
manifestation of the Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead. Vedic sound
emanates from the Supreme Lord and is vibrated to glorify and understand
Him. The conclusion of all Vedic sound vibration is found in Bhagavad-gétä,
wherein the Lord states, vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva vedyaù: [Bg. 15.15] all Vedic
knowledge is simply meant to teach us to know and love God. One who always
thinks of Lord Kåñëa, who becomes the Lord's devotee and who bows down to
and worships the Lord with faith and devotion, chanting His holy name, has
certainly achieved a perfect understanding of all that is indicated by the word
veda ("knowledge").
TEXT 41
gAAya‡yauiSNAgAnauí]"pca
ba{h"taI paiÈÿre"va ca
i‡aí]"bjagAtyaitacC$nd"Ae
÷tyaí"YaitajagAiã"r"Aq%.
gäyatry uñëig anuñöup ca
båhaté paìktir eva ca
triñöub jagaty aticchando
hy atyañöy-atijagad-viräö
SYNONYMS
gäyatré uñëik anuñöup ca—known as Gäyatré, Uñëik and Anuñöup; båhaté
paìktiù—Båhaté and Paìkti; eva ca—also; triñöup jagaté aticchandaù—Triñöup,
Jagaté and Aticchanda; hi—indeed; atyañöi-atijagat-viräö—Atyañöi, Atijagaté
and Ativiräö.
TRANSLATION
The Vedic meters are Gäyatré, Uñëik, Anuñöup, Båhaté, Paìkti, Triñöup,
Jagaté, Aticchanda, Atyañöi, Atijagaté and Ativiräö.
PURPORT
The Gäyatré meter has twenty-four syllables, the Uñëik twenty-eight, the
Anuñöup thirty-two, and so on, each meter having four more syllables than the
previous one. Vedic sound is called båhaté, or most expansive, and thus it is not
possible for ordinary living entities to understand all the technical details in
this matter.
TEXT 42
ikM( ivaDaÔae ik(maAcaíe"
ik(manaUâ ivak(lpayaeta,
wtyasyaA ô$d"yaM laAeke(
naAnyaAe maãe"d" k(êna
kià vidhatte kim äcañöe
kim anüdya vikalpayet
ity asyä hådayaà loke
nänyo mad veda kaçcana
SYNONYMS
kim—what; vidhatte—enjoins (in the ritualistic karma-käëòa); kim—what;
äcañöe—indicates (as the object of worship in the devatä-käëòa); kim—what;
anüdya—describing in different aspects; vikalpayet—raises the possibility of
alternatives (in the jïäna-käëòa); iti—thus; asyäù—of Vedic literature;
hådayam—the heart, or confidential purpose; loke—in this world; na—does
not; anyaù—other; mat—than Me; veda—know; kaçcana—anyone.
TRANSLATION
In the entire world no one but Me actually understands the confidential
purpose of Vedic knowledge. Thus people do not know what the Vedas are
actually prescribing in the ritualistic injunctions of karma-käëòa, or what object
is actually being indicated in the formulas of worship found in the
upäsanä-käëòa, or that which is elaborately discussed through various
hypotheses in the jïäna-käëòa section of the Vedas.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the Absolute Truth, Lord Çré
Kåñëa. Since the Lord is the source, maintainer and ultimate goal of Vedic
knowledge, He is veda-vit, or the only true knower of Vedic knowledge.
So-called philosophers, either Vedic scholars or ordinary men, may give their
sectarian opinion, but it is the Lord Himself who knows the confidential
purpose of the Vedas. The Lord is the only actual shelter and lovable object for
all living entities. As He states in the Tenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä (10.41):
yad yad vibhütimat sattvaà
çrémad ürjitam eva vä
tad tad evävagaccha tvaà
mama tejo-'àça-sambhavam
"Know that all beautiful, glorious and mighty creations spring from but a spark
of My splendor." All beautiful, extraordinary and powerful manifestations are
insignificant displays of the Lord's own opulences. Although ordinary people
may quarrel over the purpose of religion, the actual purpose is one, Kåñëa
consciousness, or pure love of Godhead. All Vedic formulas are understood to
be preliminary stages leading to the perfect stage of Kåñëa consciousness, in
which one fully surrenders to the devotional service of the Lord. The pure
devotees of the Lord represent Him within this world and never speak
anything which is not authorized by the Lord. Because they are repeating the
Lord's own words, they are also to be understood as true knowers of the Veda.
TEXT 43
maAM ivaDaÔae'iBaDaÔae maAM
ivak(lpyaApaAe÷tae tvah"ma,
WtaAvaAna, s$avaR"vaed"ATaR:
zAbd" @AsTaAya maAM iBad"Ama,
maAyaAmaA‡amanaUâAntae
‘aitaiSaDya ‘as$aId"ita
mäà vidhatte 'bhidhatte mäà
vikalpyäpohyate tv aham
etävän sarva-vedärthaù
çabda ästhäya mäà bhidäm
mäyä-mätram anüdyänte
pratiñidhya prasédati
SYNONYMS
mäm—Me; vidhatte—enjoins in sacrifice; abhidhatte—designates as the object
of worship; mäm—Me; vikalpya—presented as alternate hypothesis;
apohyate—am refuted; tu—also; aham—I; etävän—thus; sarva-veda—of all the
Vedas; arthaù—the meaning; çabdaù—the transcendental sound vibration;
ästhäya—establishing; mäm—Me; bhidäm—material duality;
mäyä-mätram—as simply illusion; anüdya—describing elaborately in different
aspects; ante—ultimately; pratiñidhya—negating; prasédati—becomes satisfied.
TRANSLATION
I am the ritualistic sacrifice enjoined by the Vedas, and I am the worshipable
Deity. It is I who am presented as various philosophical hypotheses, and it is I
alone who am then refuted by philosophical analysis. The transcendental sound
vibration thus establishes Me as the essential meaning of all Vedic knowledge.
The Vedas, elaborately analyzing all material duality as nothing but My illusory
potency, ultimately completely negate this duality and achieve their own
satisfaction.
PURPORT
The Lord declared in the previous verse that He alone knows the ultimate
purpose of the Vedas, and now the Lord reveals that He alone is the ultimate
basis and purpose of all Vedic knowledge. The karma-käëòa section of the
Vedas prescribes ritualistic sacrifices for promotion to heaven. Such sacrifices
are the Lord Himself. Similarly, the upäsanä-käëòa section of the Vedas
designates different demigods as objects of ritualistic worship, and these deities
are not different from the Lord Himself, being expansions of the Lord's body.
In the jïäna-käëòa section of the Vedas different philosophical methods of
analysis are presented and refuted. Such knowledge, which analyzes the
potency of the Supreme Lord, is not different from Him. Ultimately Lord
Kåñëa is everything, because everything is part and parcel of the Lord's
multipotencies. Although Vedic literature entices those absorbed in material
duality to begin the Vedic way of life by offering them materially desirable
rewards, the Vedas eventually refute all material duality by bringing one to the
stage of God consciousness, wherein there is nothing different from the
Supreme Lord.
Within the Vedic literature there are various injunctions stating that at a
particular stage of life one should give up fruitive rituals and take to the path
of knowledge. Similarly, other injunctions declare that a self-realized soul
should give up the path of speculative knowledge and take directly to the
shelter of the Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead. But nowhere is
there an injunction recommending that one give up the loving service of the
Lord, because that is the eternal constitutional position of every living entity.
Different philosophical theses are presented and rejected in the Vedas, since
one who is progressing must give up each previous stage in the advancement of
knowledge. For example, one who is addicted to sex enjoyment is taught to
accept religious marriage and enjoy sex pleasure with his wife. Such ritualistic
knowledge is to be given up when one attains the stage of detachment,
whereupon one is recommended to take the renounced order of life. In that
stage of life one is forbidden to see or speak with women. When, however, one
reaches the perfection of Kåñëa consciousness, wherein the Lord is manifest
everywhere, one may engage all living entities, including women, in the loving
service of the Lord without danger of spiritual falldown. Thus different
injunctions based on progressive stages of spiritual vision are presented and
refuted in Vedic literature. Since all such injunctions and processes are
ultimately meant for the achievement of Kåñëa consciousness, the loving
service of the Lord, they are not different from Lord Kåñëa Himself. The
conditioned soul, therefore, should not prematurely stop his progressive march
back home, back to Godhead, by foolishly mistaking an intermediate or
preliminary stage of advancement as the actual goal of life. One must
understand that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, is the source,
maintenance and resting place of everything, and that every living entity is
the Lord's eternal servant. In this way one should continue on the Vedic path
all the way back home, back to Godhead, for eternal life of bliss and
knowledge.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Eleventh Canto, Twenty-first Chapter,
of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Lord Kåñëa's Explanation of the Vedic
Path."
22. Enumeration of the Elements of Material Creation
This chapter enumerates and categorizes the natural elements, explains the
difference between the male and female natures and describes birth and death.
There are many opinions concerning the number of material elements. But
this difference of opinions, brought about by the influence of the illusory
energy, is not illogical. All the elements of nature exist everywhere; so
authorities who have accepted the illusory potency of the Supreme Personality
may propose a variety of theories. The insurmountable illusory energy of God
is the root cause of their mutually contradictory arguments.
There is no difference between the ultimate enjoyer and the supreme
controller. To presuppose any distinction between them is senseless. Ordinary
knowledge is simply a quality of material nature, not of the soul proper. The
raw substance of material nature is designated according to its different
phases. In the mode of goodness, it is known as knowledge, in the mode of
passion as activity, and in the mode of darkness as ignorance. Time is another
name of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and another name for material
propensity is sütra or mahat-tattva. The twenty-five elements of nature are the
Lord, nature, the mahat, false ego, ether, air, fire, water, earth, the eyes, the
ears, the nose, the tongue, the skin, speech, the hands, the feet, the genitals,
the anus, the mind, sound, touch, form, taste and smell.
The unmanifest Supreme Personality merely glances at nature. Material
nature, which is under the control of the Supreme Lord, then assumes the
forms of causes and effects and carries out the creation, maintenance and
destruction of the material world. Even though the puruña and prakåti appear
nondifferent to superficial vision, there is an ultimate difference between the
two. Material creation is produced from the modes of prakåti, and its quality is
transformation. The living entities who are inimical to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead take on and give up various kinds of material bodies
through the agency of their own material work. But those who are ignorant of
the self, because of being bewildered by illusion, do not understand this. The
mind, which is filled with ideas of fruitive work, simply takes the senses with it
from one body to another, while the soul follows along. Nevertheless, on
account of being totally absorbed in sense gratification, one cannot remember
his past existence.
The body undergoes nine stages of manifestation, which are brought about
by association with the qualities of material nature. These are impregnation,
gestation, birth, childhood, youth, maturity, middle age, old age and death.
From the death of one's father and the birth of one's son, a person can easily
comprehend the rise and fall of his own body. The soul, who is the perceiver, is
different from this body. But when there is no knowledge of the true facts, the
living entity, confused by the objects of sense gratification, achieves his
destinations within the cycle of material existence. Thus the living entity
continuously wanders under the spell of material work, taking birth as a sage
or a demigod when he is predominated by the mode of goodness, among the
demons or human beings when he is predominantly influenced by the mode of
passion, and in the species of ghosts, spirits or animals when he is
predominated by the mode of ignorance. The spirit soul does not engage in the
enjoyment of sense objects; rather, it is the senses that perform this activity.
Therefore the living being has no actual need for sense gratificatory pleasures.
With the exception of those peaceful personalities who have taken shelter of
the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and are dedicated to the
divine duty of His service, everyone, including so-called learned scholars, is
inevitably overcome by the all-powerful material nature.
TEXTS 1-3
™aIoÜ"va ovaAca
k(ita taÔvaAina ivaìezA
s$aÊÿYaAtaAnya{iSaiBa: ‘aBaAe
navaEk(Ad"zA paÂa ‡aINya,
@AtTa tvaimah" zAu™auma
ke(icatSaiÒM"zAitaM ‘aAò"r,"
@pare" paÂaivaMzAitaM
s$aæaEke( nava Saq%. ke(icaca,
catvaAyaeRk(Ad"zAApare"
ke(icats$aæad"zA ‘aAò":
SaAex"zAEke( ‡ayaAed"zA
WtaAvaÔvaM ih" s$aÊÿYaAnaAma,
[%SayaAe yaiã"vaºayaA
gAAyainta pa{TagAAyauSmaªa,
wdM" naAe valu(mahR"is$a
çré-uddhava uväca
kati tattväni viçveça
saìkhyätäny åñibhiù prabho
navaikädaça païca tréëy
ättha tvam iha çuçruma
kecit ñaò-viàçatià prähur
apare païca-viàçatià
saptaike nava ñaö kecic
catväry ekädaçäpare
kecit saptadaça prähuù
ñoòaçaike trayodaça
etävattvaà hi saìkhyänäm
åñayo yad-vivakñayä
gäyanti påthag äyuñmann
idaà no vaktum arhasi
SYNONYMS
çré-uddhavaù uväca—Çré Uddhava said; kati—how many; tattväni—basic
elements of creation; viçva-éça—O Lord of the universe; saìkhyätäni—have
been enumerated; åñibhiù—by great authorities; prabho—O my master;
nava—nine (God, the individual soul, the mahat-tattva, false ego and the five
gross elements); ekäkaça—plus eleven (the ten knowledge-acquiring and
working senses together with the mind); païca—plus five (the subtle forms of
the sense objects); tréëi—plus three (the modes of goodness, passion and
ignorance, making altogether a total of twenty-eight); ättha—have stated;
tvam—You; iha—during Your appearance in this world; çuçruma—so I have
heard; kecit—some; ñaö-viàçatim—twenty-six; prähuù—they say;
apare—others; païca-viàçatim—twenty-five; sapta—seven; eke—some;
nava—nine; ñaö—six; kecit—some; catväri—four; ekädaça—eleven;
apare—still others; kecit—some; saptadaça—seventeen; prähuù—say;
ñoòaça—sixteen; eke—some; trayodaça—thirteen; etävattvam—such
cakulations; hi—indeed; saìkhyänäm—of the different ways of counting the
elements; åñayaù—the sages; yat vivakñayä—with the intention of expressing
what ideas; gäyanti—they have declared; påthak—in various manners;
äyuù-man—O supreme eternal; idam—this; naù—to us; vaktum—to explain;
arhasi—You should please.
TRANSLATION
Uddhava inquired: My dear Lord, O master of the universe, how many
different elements of creation have been enumerated by the great sages? I have
heard You personally describe a total of twenty-eight—God, the jéva soul, the
mahat-tattva, false ego, the five gross elements, the ten senses, the mind, the
five subtle objects of perception and the three modes of nature. But some
authorities say that there are twenty-six elements, while others cite twenty-five
or else seven, nine, six, four or eleven, and even others say that there are
seventeen, sixteen or thirteen. What did each of these sages have in mind when
he calculated the creative elements in such different ways? O supreme eternal,
kindly explain this to me.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa thoroughly explained in the previous chapter that Vedic
knowledge is not meant for sense gratification but for liberation from material
bondage. Now Uddhava presents some intermediate questions that must be
answered so the path of liberation will be clear. Different philosophers have
historically disagreed over the exact number of material elements, about the
existence and nonexistence of particular external objects and about the
existence of the soul itself. The jïäna-käëòa section of the Vedas aims at
liberation through analytic understanding of the material world and of the
spirit soul as a transcendental element beyond matter. Ultimately the Supreme
Lord Himself stands above all elements and maintains them by His personal
potency. Uddhava mentions in numerical terms different methodologies of
various sages, citing first the Lord's own opinion. The word äyuñman, or
"possessing eternal form," is significant in this regard. Since Lord Kåñëa is
eternal, He possesses all knowledge of past, present and future and is thus the
original and supreme philosopher.
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, the different analytic
approaches mentioned by Çré Uddhava are actually not contradictory, since
they are different methods of categorizing the same reality. Atheistic
speculation on reality does not recognize the existence of God; consequently it
is a worthless attempt to explain the truth. The Lord Himself empowers
different living entities to speculate and speak on reality in different ways.
The actual reality, however, is the Lord Himself, who will now speak to Çré
Uddhava.
TEXT 4
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
yaulM( ca s$ainta s$avaR‡a
BaASantae “aAöNAA yaTaA
maAyaAM mad"IyaAmauä,"gA{÷
vad"taAM ikM( nau äu"GaRq%ma,
çré-bhagavän uväca
yuktaà ca santi sarvatra
bhäñante brähmaëä yathä
mäyäà madéyäm udgåhya
vadatäà kià nu durghaöam
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
yuktam—reasonably; ca—even; santi—they are present;
sarvatra—everywhere; bhäñante—they speak; brähmaëäù—brähmaëas;
yathä—how; mäyäm—the mystic energy; madéyam—My; udgåhya—resorting
to; vadatäm—of those who speak; kim—what; nu—after all; durghaöam—will
be impossible.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa replied: Because all material elements are present everywhere, it
is reasonable that different learned brähmaëas have analyzed them in different
ways. All such philosophers spoke under the shelter of My mystic potency, and
thus they could say anything without contradicting the truth.
PURPORT
The words santi sarvatra in this verse indicate that all material elements are
found within each other in gross and subtle forms. In this way there are
innumerable ways to categorically describe them. The material world is
ultimately illusory, undergoing constant transformation. It may be measured in
different ways, just as the mirage of an oasis may be described in different
ways, but the Lord's own analysis of twenty-eight elements is perfect and
should be accepted. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé states that the word mäyä in this verse
does not refer to mahä-mäyä, or the potency of ignorance, but to the Lord's
inconceivable mystic power, which shelters the learned followers of Vedic
knowledge. Each of the philosophers mentioned here reveals a particular
aspect of truth, and their theories are not contradictory, since they are simply
describing the same phenomena with different categorical systems. Such
philosophical disagreement is endless within the material world; thus everyone
should unite on the platform of the Lord's own opinion, as stated in this verse.
Similarly, in Bhagavad-gétä Lord Kåñëa requests all conditioned souls to give up
their various forms of worship and surrender unto Him in full Kåñëa
consciousness, becoming His devotees. Thus the whole universe can be united
in love of Godhead by chanting Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare
Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare. By the Lord's
revealing Himself to a sincere devotee, the controversy of analytic philosophy
is ended.
TEXT 5
naEtade"vaM yaTaAtTa tvaM
yad"hM" vaicma taÔaTaA
WvaM ivavad"taAM he"tauM
zAl(yaAe mae äu"r"tyayaA:
naitad evaà yathättha tvaà
yad ahaà vacmi tat tathä
evaà vivadatäà hetuà
çaktayo me duratyayäù
SYNONYMS
na—it is not; etat—this; evam—so; yathä—as; ättha—say; tvam—you;
yat—which; aham—I; vacmi—am saying; tat—that; tathä—thus; evam—in
this way; vivadatäm—for those who argue; hetum—over logical reasons;
çaktayaù—the energies (are impelling); me—My; duratyayäù—unsurpassable.
TRANSLATION
When philosophers argue, "I don't choose to analyze this particular case in
the same way that you have," it is simply My own insurmountable energies that
are motivating their analytic disagreements.
PURPORT
Because of the material potencies of the Supreme Lord, mundane
philosophers are perpetually arguing about which came first, the chicken or
the egg. By the influence of the modes of goodness, passion and ignorance,
different philosophers are attracted to different views; and by the influence of
the material atmosphere created by the Lord, these philosophers perpetually
disagree with one another. The Supreme Lord Himself, however, has given the
clear explanation. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (6.4.31),
yac-chaktayo vadatäà vädinäà vai
viväda-saàväda-bhuvo bhavanti
kurvanti caiñäà muhur ätma-mohaà
tasmai namo 'nanta-guëäya bhümne
"Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the all-pervading Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who possesses unlimited transcendental qualities.
Acting from within the cores of the hearts of all philosophers, who propagate
various views, He caused them to forget their own souls while sometimes
agreeing and sometimes disagreeing among themselves. Thus He creates within
this material world a situation in which they are unable to come to a
conclusion. I offer my respectful obeisances unto Him."
TEXT 6
yaAs$aAM vyaitak(r"Ad"As$aIä,"
ivak(lpaAe vad"taAM pad"ma,
‘aAæae zAmad"mae'pyaeita
vaAd"stamanau zAAmyaita
yäsäà vyatikaräd äséd
vikalpo vadatäà padam
präpte çama-dame 'pyeti
vädas tam anu çämyati
SYNONYMS
yäsäm—of which (energies of Mine); vyatikarät—by the interaction; äsét—has
arisen; vikalpaù—difference of opinion; vadatäm—of those arguing;
padam—the subject of discussion; präpte—when one has achieved; çama—the
ability to fix his intelligence on Me; dame—and control of his external senses;
apyeti—disappears (that difference of opinion); vädaù—the argument itself;
tam anu—consequently; çämyati—subsides.
TRANSLATION
By interaction of My energies different opinions arise. But for those who
have fixed their intelligence on Me and controlled their senses, differences of
perception disappear, and consequently the very cause for argument is removed.
PURPORT
Conflicting varieties of perception are created by the interaction of the
Lord's material energies in the minds of different philosophers, who staunchly
defend their opinions, stating, "This may be the case or perhaps that or the
other; or this may not be the case, or perhaps that is not the case." Such logical
or rational proposing, doubting, counter-proposing, counteracting, etc., take
thousands of different forms and become the basis of argument. Actually, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Kåñëa, is the basis of all existence,
since everything emanates from the Lord, is maintained by the Lord and at the
end is merged to rest within the Lord. Lord Kåñëa is para-tattva, the highest
truth underlying all other dependent truths. In a society of learned persons
who have understood the Personality of Godhead to be everything, there is no
further cause of philosophical quarrel. Such unity of opinion is not based on
the absence of philosophical inquiry, nor on the stifling of rational discussion,
but is the natural result of spiritual enlightenment. So-called philosophers
proudly boast that they are searching and researching for the Absolute Truth,
yet they somehow consider one who has found the Absolute Truth to be less
intelligent than one who has not found it but is searching. Because Lord Kåñëa
is the Absolute Truth, one who fully surrenders to the Lord becomes the most
learned person.
TEXT 7
par"s$par"Anau‘avaezAAta,
taÔvaAnaAM pauç&SaSaRBa
paAEvaARpayaR‘as$aÊÿYaAnaM
yaTaA valu(ivaRvaiºatama,
parasparänupraveçät
tattvänäà puruñarñabha
paurväparya-prasaìkhyänaà
yathä vaktur vivakñitam
SYNONYMS
paraspara—mutual; anupraveçät—because of the entrance (as subtle causes
within gross manifestations, and vice versa); tattvänäm—of the various
elements; puruña-åñabha—O best among men (Uddhava); paurva—in terms of
prior causes; aparya—or of resultant products; prasaìkhyänam—enumeration;
yathä—however; vaktuù—the speaker; vivakñitam—wants to describe.
TRANSLATION
O best among men, because subtle and gross elements mutually enter into
one another, philosophers may calculate the number of basic material elements
in different ways, according to their personal desire.
PURPORT
Material creation takes place as a chain reaction in which subtle elements
expand and transform into progressively denser elements. Since a cause is in a
sense present within its effect, and the effect is subtly present within the
cause, all subtle and gross elements have entered within one another. Thus one
may categorize basic material elements in many different ways, assigning
various numbers and names according to one's methodology. Although
material philosophers proudly assume their individual theories to be supreme,
they are all speculating according to their personal proclivities, as described in
this and the following verse.
TEXT 8
Wk(ismaªaipa ä{"zyantae
‘aivaí"AnaItar"AiNA ca
paUvaRismana, vaA par"ismana, vaA
taÔvae taÔvaAina s$avaRzA:
ekasminn api dåçyante
praviñöänétaräëi ca
pürvasmin vä parasmin vä
tattve tattväni sarvaçaù
SYNONYMS
ekasmin—in one (element); api—even; dåçyante—there are seen;
praviñöäni—entered within; itaräëi—others; ca—also; pürvasmin—in a prior
(subtle causal element, such as the dormant presence of ether within its cause,
sound); vä—either; parasmin—or in a later (produced element, such as the
subtle presence of sound within its further product, air); vä—or; tattve—in
some element; tattväni—other elements; sarvaçaù—in the cases of each of the
different enumerations.
TRANSLATION
All subtle material elements are actually present within their gross effects;
similarly, all gross elements are present within their subtle causes, since
material creation takes place by progressive manifestation of elements from
subtle to gross. Thus we can find all material elements within any single
element.
PURPORT
Since material elements are present within each other, there are
innumerable ways to construe and categorize the material creation of God.
Ultimately, however, the significant element is God Himself, who is the basis
of all the transformations and permutations of the material cosmos. The
creation of the material world takes place by a progression from subtle to gross
elements, as explained in the säìkhya-yoga system of Lord Kapila. The example
may be given that we find the dormant existence of an earthen pot within mud
and also the existence of mud within the earthen pot. Similarly, one element is
present within another, and ultimately all elements rest within the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is simultaneously within everything. By such
explanations, Kåñëa consciousness constitutes the ultimate scientific
methodology for factually understanding this universe.
TEXT 9
paAEvaARpayaRmataAe'maISaAM
‘as$aÊÿYaAnamaBaIps$ataAma,
yaTaA ivaivalM( yaã"f‡aM
gA{õ"ImaAe yauil(s$amBavaAta,
paurväparyam ato 'méñäà
prasaìkhyänam abhépsatäm
yathä viviktaà yad-vaktraà
gåhëémo yukti-sambhavät
SYNONYMS
paurva—considering causal elements to include their manifest products;
aparyam—or assuming elements to include their subtle causes;
ataù—therefore; améñäm—of these thinkers; prasaìkhyänam—the counting;
abhépsatäm—who are intending; yathä—how; viviktam—ascertained;
yat-vaktram—from whose mouth; gåhëémaù—We accept it; yukti—of reason;
sambhavät—because of the possibility.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, no matter which of these thinkers is speaking, and regardless of
whether in their calculations they include material elements within their
previous subtle causes or else within their subsequent manifest products, I
accept their conclusions as authoritative, because a logical explanation can
always be given for each of the different theories.
PURPORT
Although innumerable philosophers may rationally describe the material
creation from different points of view, one cannot perfect one's knowledge
without Kåñëa consciousness. An intellectual person should therefore not be
falsely proud simply because he has ascertained a particular truth within the
material world. The Lord here states that one who follows the Vedic way of
analysis will undoubtedly have many insights concerning the material
creation. Ultimately, however, one must become a devotee of the Supreme
Lord and perfect one's knowledge in Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 10
@naAâivaâAyaul(sya
pauç&SasyaAtmavaed"nama,
svataAe na s$amBavaAd"nyas$a,
taÔvaÁaAe ÁaAnad"Ae Bavaeta,
anädy-avidyä-yuktasya
puruñasyätma-vedanam
svato na sambhaväd anyas
tattva-jïo jïäna-do bhavet
SYNONYMS
anädi—without beginning; avidyä—with ignorance; yuktasya—who is joined;
puruñasya—of a person; ätma-vedanam—the process of self-realization;
svataù—by his own ability; na sambhavät—because it cannot occur;
anyaù—another person; tattva-jïaù—the knower of transcendental reality;
jïäna-daù—the bestower of real knowledge; bhavet—must be.
TRANSLATION
Because a person who has been covered by ignorance since time immemorial
is not capable of effecting his own self-realization, there must be some other
personality who is in factual knowledge of the Absolute Truth and can impart
this knowledge to him.
PURPORT
Although the Lord tolerates different methods of calculating material
causes within their effects and material effects within their causes, there
cannot be any speculation regarding the two spiritual elements found in this
universe, namely the individual soul and the Supersoul. Lord Kåñëa clearly
states in this verse that the living entity is incapable of effecting his own
enlightenment. The Supreme Lord is tattva-jïa, omniscient, and jïäna-da, the
spiritual master of the entire universe. Çré Uddhava mentioned that some
philosophers describe twenty-five elements and others twenty-six. The
difference is that the twenty-six elements include a separate category for the
individual soul and the Supreme Soul, Lord Kåñëa, whereas the proponents of
twenty-five elements artificially merge the two transcendental categories of
jéva-tattva and viñëu-tattva, hiding the eternal supremacy of the Personality of
Godhead.
Knowledge based on the three modes of material nature cannot rise to the
transcendental platform, where the Personality of Godhead exists as the
supreme enjoyer of eternal spiritual varieties of form, color, flavor, musical
sounds and loving affairs. Mundane philosophers simply bounce back and forth
between material enjoyment and material renunciation. Being victims of
Mäyäväda (impersonal) perception of the Absolute Truth, they cannot
achieve the shelter of the Personality of Godhead and thus cannot understand
Him. Because foolish, impersonal philosophers consider themselves supreme,
they are unable to appreciate that loving service exists on the spiritual
platform. Stubbornly rejecting subservience to the Personality of Godhead, the
impersonalists are eventually overwhelmed by the illusory potency of the Lord
and undergo the miseries of material existence. The Vaiñëavas, on the other
hand, are not envious of the Personality of Godhead. They gladly accept His
shelter and supremacy, and thus the Lord personally takes charge of His
devotees and enlightens them, filling them with His own transcendental bliss.
Spiritual service to the Supreme Lord is in this way free from the
disappointment and repression of material service.
TEXT 11
pauç&Saeìr"yaAer"‡a
na vaElaºaNyamaNvaipa
tad"nyak(lpanaApaATaAR
ÁaAnaM ca ‘ak{(taegAuRNA:
puruñeçvarayor atra
na vailakñaëyam aëv api
tad-anya-kalpanäpärthä
jïänaà ca prakåter guëaù
SYNONYMS
puruña—between the enjoyer; éçvarayoù—and the supreme controller;
atra—herein; na—there is no; vailakñaëyam—dissimilarity; aëu—minute;
api—even; tat—of them; anya—as being completely different; kalpanä—the
imagined idea; apärthä—useless; jïänam—knowledge; ca—and; prakåteù—of
material nature; guëaù—a quality.
TRANSLATION
According to knowledge in the material mode of goodness, there is no
qualitative difference between the living entity and the supreme controller. The
imagination of qualitative difference between them is useless speculation.
PURPORT
According to certain philosophers there are twenty-five elements, among
which a single category is stipulated for both the individual living entity and
the Supreme Lord. Such impersonal knowledge is declared by the Lord to be
material: jïänaà ca prakåter guëaù. Such knowledge can, however, be accepted
to establish the qualitative identity of the Supreme Lord and the living entities
who expand from Him. Materialistic persons sometimes believe that there is a
supreme spirit in heaven but also think that human beings are identical with
their material bodies and thus qualitatively and perpetually separated from the
Supreme Lord. Knowledge of the Lord's qualitative oneness with the living
entity, as described in this verse, refutes the materialistic concept of life and
partially establishes the Absolute Truth. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu described
the actual situation as acintya-bhedäbheda-tattva(96): the supreme controller
and the controlled living entities are simultaneously one and different. In the
material mode of goodness the oneness is perceived. As one proceeds further,
to the stage of viçuddha-sattva, or purified spiritual goodness, one finds
spiritual variety within the qualitative oneness, completing one's knowledge of
the Absolute Truth. The words na vailakñaëyam aëv api boldly affirm that the
individual living entity is indisputably part and parcel of the Supreme Lord
and qualitatively one with Him. Any philosophical attempt to separate the
living entity from the Supreme Lord and deny his eternal servitude to the Lord
is thus refuted. Speculation arriving at the conclusion that the living entity
has independent existence separate from the Lord is described here as apärthä,
useless. Nevertheless, the theory of twenty-five elements is acceptable to the
Lord as a preliminary phase in the evolution of spiritual knowledge.
TEXT 12
‘ak{(itagAuRNAs$aAmyaM vaE
‘ak{(taenaARtmanaAe gAuNAA:
s$aÔvaM r"jastama wita
isTatyautpaÔyantahe"tava:
prakåtir guëa-sämyaà vai
prakåter nätmano guëäù
sattvaà rajas tama iti
sthity-utpatty-anta-hetavaù
SYNONYMS
prakåtiù—material nature; guëa—of the three modes; sämyam—the original
equilibrium; vai—indeed; prakåteù—of nature; na ätmanaù—not of the spirit
soul; guëäù—these modes; sattvam—goodness; rajaù—passion;
tamaù—ignorance; iti—thus called; sthiti—of the maintenance of universal
creation; utpatti—its production; anta—and its annihilation; hetavaù—the
causes.
TRANSLATION
Nature exists originally as the equilibrium of the three material modes,
which pertain only to nature, not to the transcendental spirit soul. These
modes—goodness, passion and ignorance—are the effective causes of the
creation, maintenance and destruction of this universe.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (3.27) it is stated,
prakåteù kriyamäëäni
guëaiù karmäëi sarvaçaù
ahaìkära-vimüòhätmä
kartäham iti manyate
"The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of material
nature, thinks himself to be the doer of activities, which are in actuality
carried out by nature."
The three modes of nature, in their original state of equilibrium, as well as
the subsequent creation generated from the modes, are vastly more powerful
than the tiny living entity who is controlled by them. The living entity thus
cannot be accepted as the actual doer or creator within the material world.
The mode of goodness is symptomized by the experience of knowledge, the
mode of passion by the experience of work, and the mode of ignorance by the
experience of darkness. These modes of material knowledge, work and
darkness have no real relation with the transcendental spirit soul, who exhibits
his own qualities of eternality, bliss and knowledge (the sandhiné, saàvit and
hlädiné potencies of the Supreme Lord). The material modes have no access
within the kingdom of God, in the unbounded atmosphere of which the
eternal living entity is meant to live.
TEXT 13
s$aÔvaM ÁaAnaM r"ja: k(maR
tamaAe'ÁaAnaimah"Aecyatae
gAuNAvyaitak(r": k(Ala:
svaBaAva: s$aU‡amaeva ca
sattvaà jïänaà rajaù karma
tamo 'jïänam ihocyate
guëa-vyatikaraù kälaù
svabhävaù sütram eva ca
SYNONYMS
sattvam—the mode of goodness; jïänam—knowledge; rajaù—the mode of
passion; karma—fruitive work; tamaù—the mode of ignorance;
ajïänam—foolishness; iha—in this world; ucyate—is called; guëa—of the
modes; vyatikaraù—the agitated transformation; kälaù—time;
svabhävaù—innate tendency, nature; sütram—the mahat-tattva; eva-indeed;
ca—also.
TRANSLATION
In this world the mode of goodness is recognized as knowledge, the mode of
passion as fruitive work, and the mode of darkness as ignorance. Time is
perceived as the agitated interaction of the material modes, and the totality of
functional propensity is embodied by the primeval sütra, or mahat-tattva.
PURPORT
The impetus for the interaction of the material elements is the forward
movement of time. Because time is passing, the embryo grows within the
womb, gradually comes out, grows up, produces by-products, dwindles and dies.
All of this is due to the pushing of time. In the absence of the time factor, the
material elements do not interact but remain inert in the form of pradhäna.
Lord Kåñëa is establishing the basic categories of the material world so that
human beings can conceive of the Lord's creation. Were the categories not
condensed, analysis and conceptualization would be impossible, since the
Lord's potencies are infinite. Although there are numerous divisions of
material elements within the basic divisions, the spirit soul is always to be
understood as a distinct transcendental element, meant for residence in the
kingdom of God.
TEXT 14
pauç&Sa: ‘ak{(itavyaRl(ma,
@h"ÆÿAr"Ae naBaAe'inala:
jyaAeitar"Apa: iºaitair"ita
taÔvaAnyaul(Aina mae nava
puruñaù prakåtir vyaktam
ahaìkäro nabho 'nilaù
jyotir äpaù kñitir iti
tattväny uktäni me nava
SYNONYMS
puruñaù—the enjoyer; prakåtiù—nature; vyaktam—the primeval manifestation
of matter; ahaìkäraù—false ego; nabhaù—ether; anilaù—air; jyotiù—fire;
äpaù—water; kñitiù—earth; iti—thus; tattväni—the elements of creation;
uktäni—have been described; me—by Me; nava—nine.
TRANSLATION
I have described the nine basic elements as the enjoying soul, nature,
nature's primeval manifestation of the mahat-tattva, false ego, ether, air, fire,
water and earth.
PURPORT
Prakåti, or nature, is originally unmanifest and later becomes manifest as
the mahat-tattva. Although the living entity is puruña, an enjoyer, the real
process by which he can enjoy is by satisfying the transcendental senses of the
Lord, just as the hand eats by supplying food to the stomach. Within material
nature the living entity becomes a false enjoyer, forgetting his subservience to
the Lord. The material elements as well as the living entity and the Supersoul
are thus systematically analyzed to demonstrate to the conditioned soul his
actual constitutional position beyond material nature.
TEXT 15
™aAe‡aM tvagd"zARnaM „aANAAe
ijaùe"ita ÁaAnazAl(ya:
vaAfpaANyaupasTapaAyvax.~i„a:
k(maARNyaËÿAeBayaM mana:
çrotraà tvag darçanaà ghräëo
jihveti jïäna-çaktayaù
väk-päëy-upastha-päyv-aìghriù
karmäëy aìgobhayaà manaù
SYNONYMS
çrotram—the sense of hearing; tvak—the sense of touch, experienced upon the
skin; darçanam—sight; ghräëaù—smell; jihvä—the sense of taste, experienced
upon the tongue; iti—thus; jïäna-çaktayaù—the knowledge-acquiring senses;
väk—speech; päëi—the hands; upastha—the genitals; päyu—the anus;
aìghriù—and the legs; karmäëi—the working senses; aìga—My dear
Uddhava; ubhayam—belonging to both these categories; manaù—the mind.
TRANSLATION
Hearing, touch, sight, smell and taste are the five knowledge acquiring
senses, My dear Uddhava, and speech, the hands, the genitals, the anus and the
legs constitute the five working senses. The mind belongs to both these
categories.
PURPORT
Eleven elements are mentioned in this verse.
TEXT 16
zAbd": s$pazAAeR r"s$aAe gAnDaAe
è&paM caetyaTaRjaAtaya:
gAtyauftyauts$agARizAlpaAina
k(maARyatanais$aÜ"ya:
çabdaù sparço raso gandho
rüpaà cety artha-jätayaù
gaty-ukty-utsarga-çilpäni
karmäyatana-siddhayaù
SYNONYMS
çabdaù—sound; sparçaù—touch; rasaù—taste; gandhaù—fragrance;
rüpam—form; ca—and; iti—thus; artha—of sense objects; jätayaù—the
categories; gati—movement; ukti—speech; utsarga—excretion (by both the
genitals and anus); çilpäni—and manufacture; karma-äyatana—by the
above-mentioned working senses; siddhayaù—accomplished.
TRANSLATION
Sound, touch, taste, smell and form are the objects of the
knowledge-acquiring senses, and movement, speech, excretion and manufacture
are functions of the working senses.
PURPORT
Here the word utsarga refers to evacuation by the genitals and anus, and
thus constitutes two elements. In this way ten elements are listed here in two
sets of five.
TEXT 17
s$agAARd"AE ‘ak{(ita÷Rsya
k(AyaRk(Ar"NAè&ipaNAI
s$aÔvaAid"iBagAuRNAEDaRÔae
pauç&SaAe'vyal( wRºatae
sargädau prakåtir hy asya
kärya-käraëa-rüpiëé
sattvädibhir guëair dhatte
puruño 'vyakta ékñate
SYNONYMS
sarga—of creation; ädau—in the beginning; prakåtiù—the material nature;
hi—indeed; asya—of this universe; kärya—the manifest products;
käraëa—and subtle causes; rüpiëé—embodying; sattva-ädibhiù—by means of
goodness, passion and ignorance; guëaiù—the modes; dhatte—assumes its
position; puruñaù—the Supreme Lord; avyaktaù—not involved in material
manifestation; ékñate—witnesses.
TRANSLATION
In the beginning of creation nature assumes, by the modes of goodness,
passion and ignorance, its form as the embodiment of all subtle causes and gross
manifestations within the universe. The Supreme Personality of Godhead does
not enter the interaction of material manifestation but merely glances upon
nature.
PURPORT
The Personality of Godhead is not subject to transformation like the subtle
and gross material elements. Thus the Lord is avyakta, or not materially
manifest at any stage of cosmic evolution. Regardless of the specific method of
cataloging the material elements, the Lord remains the ultimate creator,
maintainer and annihilator of the total cosmic situation.
TEXT 18
vyal(Ad"AyaAe ivaku(vaARNAA
DaAtava: pauç&SaeºayaA
labDavaIyaAR: s$a{jantyaNxM"
s$aMh"taA: ‘ak{(taebaRlaAta,
vyaktädäyo vikurväëä
dhätavaù puruñekñayä
labdha-véryäù såjanty aëòaà
saàhatäù prakåter balät
SYNONYMS
vyakta-ädayaù—the mahat-tattva and so on; vikurväëäù—undergoing
transformation; dhätavaù—the elements; puruña—of the Lord; ékñayä—by the
glance; labdha—having attained; véryäù—their potencies; såjanti—they create;
aëòam—the egg of the universe; saàhatäù—amalgamated; prakåteù—of
nature; balät—by the power.
TRANSLATION
As the material elements, headed by the mahat-tattva, are transformed, they
receive their specific potencies from the glance of the Supreme Lord, and being
amalgamated by the power of nature, they create the universal egg.
TEXT 19
s$aæaEva DaAtava wita
ta‡aATaAR: paÂa KaAd"ya:
ÁaAnamaAtmaAeBayaADaAr"s$a,
tataAe de"he"in‰"yaAs$ava:
saptaiva dhätava iti
taträrthäù païca khädayaù
jïänam ätmobhayädhäras
tato dehendriyäsavaù
SYNONYMS
sapta—seven; eva—indeed; dhätavaù—elements; iti—thus saying;
tatra—therein; arthäù—the physical elements; païca—five;
kha-ädayaù—beginning with ether; jïänam—the spirit soul, who is the
possessor of knowledge; ätmä—the Supreme Soul; ubhaya—of both (the seen
nature and the jéva who is its seer); ädhäraù—the fundamental basis;
tataù—from these; deha—the body; indriya—senses; asavaù—and vital airs.
TRANSLATION
According to some philosophers there are seven elements, namely earth,
water, fire, air and ether, along with the conscious spirit soul and the Supreme
Soul, who is the basis of both the material elements and the ordinary spirit soul.
According to this theory, the body, senses, life air and all material phenomena
are produced from these seven elements.
PURPORT
Having explained His own viewpoint, the Lord now summarizes various
other analytic methodologies.
TEXT 20
Saix"tya‡aAipa BaUtaAina
paÂa Saï": par": paumaAna,
taEyauRwta @Atmas$amBaUtaE:
s$a{"îe"dM" s$amapaAivazAta,
ñaò ity aträpi bhütäni
païca ñañöhaù paraù pumän
tair yuita ätma-sambhütaiù
såñövedaà samapäviçat
SYNONYMS
ñaö—six; iti—thus; atra—in this theory; api—also; bhütäni—the elements;
païca—five; ñañöhaù—the sixth; paraù—the transcendental;
pumän—Supreme Personality; taiù—with those (five gross elements);
yuktaù—conjoined; ätma—from Himself; sambhütaiù—created;
såñövä—sending forth; idam—this creation; samupäviçat—He entered within
it.
TRANSLATION
Other philosophers state that there are six elements—the five physical
elements (earth, water, fire, air and ether) and the sixth element, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. That Supreme Lord, endowed with the elements that
He has brought forth from Himself, creates this universe and then personally
enters within it.
PURPORT
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé states that according to this philosophy, the ordinary
living entity is included within the category of the Supersoul. This theory thus
accepts only the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the five physical
elements.
TEXT 21
catvaAyaeR"vaeita ta‡aAipa
taeja @ApaAe'ªamaAtmana:
jaAtaAina taEir"dM" jaAtaM
janmaAvayaivana: Kalau
catväry eveti taträpi
teja äpo 'nnam ätmanaù
jätäni tair idaà jätaà
janmävayavinaù khalu
SYNONYMS
catväri—four; eva—also; iti—thus; tatra—in that case; api—even; tejaù—fire;
äpaù—water; annam—earth; ätmanaù—from the Self; jätäni—all arising;
taiù—by them; idam—this cosmos; jätam—has come about; janma—the birth;
avayavinaù—of the manifest product; khalu—indeed.
TRANSLATION
Some philosophers propose the existence of four basic elements, of which
three—fire, water and earth—emanate from the fourth, the Self. Once
existing, these elements produce the cosmic manifestation, in which all material
creation takes place.
TEXT 22
s$aÊÿYaAnae s$aæad"zAke(
BaUtamaA‡aein‰"yaAiNA ca
paÂa paÂaEk(manas$aA
@AtmaA s$aæad"zA: sma{ta:
saìkhyäne saptadaçake
bhüta-mätrendriyäëi ca
païca païcaika-manasä
ätmä saptadaçaù småtaù
SYNONYMS
saìkhyäne—in the enumeration; saptadaçake—in terms of seventeen
elements; bhüta—the five gross elements; mätra—the five subtle perceptions
pertaining to each; indriyäëi—and the five corresponding senses; ca—also;
païca païca—in groups of five; eka-manasä—along with the one mind;
ätmä—the soul; saptadaçaù—as the seventeenth; småtaù—is so considered.
TRANSLATION
Some calculate the existence of seventeen basic elements, namely the five
gross elements, the five objects of perception, the five sensory organs, the mind,
and the soul as the seventeenth element.
TEXT 23
taã"tSaAex"zAs$aÊÿYaAnae
@AtmaEva mana ocyatae
BaUtaein‰"yaAiNA paÂaEva
mana @AtmaA ‡ayaAed"zA
tadvat ñoòaça-saìkhyäne
ätmaiva mana ucyate
bhütendriyäëi païcaiva
mana ätmä trayodaça
SYNONYMS
tadvat—similarly; ñoòaça-saìkhyäne—in counting sixteen; ätmä—the soul;
eva—indeed; manaù—as the mind; ucyate—is identified; bhüta—the five gross
elements; indriyäëi—the senses; païca—five; eva—certainly; manaù—the
mind; ätmä—the soul (both the individual soul and the Supersoul);
trayodaça—thirteen.
TRANSLATION
According to the calculation of sixteen elements, the only difference from
the previous theory is that the soul is identified with the mind. If we think in
terms of five physical elements, five senses, the mind, the individual soul and
the Supreme Lord, there are thirteen elements.
PURPORT
According to the theory of thirteen elements, the sense objects—aroma,
taste, form, touch and sound—are considered by-products of the interaction of
the senses and physical matter.
TEXT 24
Wk(Ad"zAtva @AtmaAs$aAE
mah"ABaUtaein‰"yaAiNA ca
@í"AE ‘ak{(tayaêEva
pauç&Saê navaetyaTa
ekädaçatva ätmäsau
mahä-bhütendriyäëi ca
añöau prakåtayaç caiva
puruñaç ca navety atha
SYNONYMS
ekädaçatve—in the consideration of eleven; ätmä—the soul; asau—this;
mahä-bhüta—the gross elements; indriyäëi—the senses; ca—and;
añöau—eight; prakåtayaù—natural elements (earth, water, fire, air, ether,
mind, intelligence and false ego); ca—also; eva—certainly; puruñaù—the
Supreme Lord; ca—and; nava—nine; iti—thus; atha—furthermore.
TRANSLATION
Counting eleven, there are the soul, the gross elements and the senses. Eight
gross and subtle elements plus the Supreme Lord would make nine.
TEXT 25
wita naAnaA‘as$aÊÿYaAnaM
taÔvaAnaAma{iSaiBa: k{(tama,
s$ava< nyaAyyaM yauil(maÔvaAä,"
ivaäu"SaAM ik(mazAAeBanama,
iti nänä-prasaìkhyänaà
tattvänäm åñibhiù kåtam
sarvaà nyäyyaà yuktimattväd
viduñäà kim açobhanam
SYNONYMS
iti—in these ways; nänä—various; prasaìkhyänam—enumeration;
tattvänäm—of the elements; åñibhiù—by the sages; kåtam—has been done;
sarvam—all this; nyäyyam—logical; yukti-mattvät—because of the
presentation of rational arguments; viduñäm—of those who are learned;
kim—what; açobhanam—lack of brilliance.
TRANSLATION
Thus great philosophers have analyzed the material elements in many
different ways. All of their proposals are reasonable, since they are all presented
with ample logic. Indeed, such philosophical brilliance is expected of the truly
learned.
PURPORT
The material world has been analyzed in innumerable ways by innumerable
brilliant philosophers, but the conclusion is always one—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Väsudeva. Aspiring philosophers need not waste their
precious time showing off their intellectual brilliance, because there is little
left to analyze on the material platform. One should simply surrender to the
Absolute Truth, the supreme element, Lord Çré Kåñëa, and uncover one's
eternal consciousness of God.
TEXT 26
™aIoÜ"va ovaAca
‘ak{(ita: pauç&SaêAeBaAE
yaâpyaAtmaivalaºaNAAE
@nyaAenyaApaA™ayaAtk{(SNA
ä{"zyatae na iBad"A tayaAe:
‘ak{(taAE laºyatae ÷AtmaA
‘ak{(itaê taTaAtmaina
çré-uddhava uväca
prakåtiù puruñaç cobhau
yady apy ätma-vilakñaëau
anyonyäpäçrayät kåñëa
dåçyate na bhidä tayoù
prakåtau lakñyate hy ätmä
prakåtiç ca tathätmani
SYNONYMS
çré-uddhavaù uväca—Çré Uddhava said; prakåtiù—nature; puruñaù—the
enjoyer, or living entity; ca—and; ubhau—both; yadi api—although;
ätma—constitutionally; vilakñaëau—distinct; anyonya—mutual;
apäçrayät—because of shelter; kåñëa—O Lord Kåñëa; dåçyate na—it does not
appear; bhidä—any difference; tayoù—between them; prakåtau—within
nature; lakñyate—is apparently seen; hi—indeed; ätmä—the soul;
prakåtiù—nature; ca—and; tathä—also; ätmani—in the soul.
TRANSLATION
Çré Uddhava inquired: Although nature and the living entity are
constitutionally distinct, O Lord Kåñëa, there appears to be no difference
between them, because they are found residing within one another. Thus the
soul appears to be within nature and nature within the soul.
PURPORT
Çré Uddhava here expresses the doubt that arises in the heart of an ordinary
conditioned soul. Although the Vedic scriptures declare that the material body
is a temporary fabrication of the material modes of nature, the conscious living
entity within the body is actually an eternal spirit soul. In Bhagavad-gétä Lord
Kåñëa has declared the material elements constituting the body to be His
separated, inferior energy, whereas the living entity is the superior, conscious
energy of the Lord. Still, in conditioned life the material body and conditioned
soul appear inseparable and thus nondifferent. Because the living entity enters
the womb of a mother and gradually comes out in a developed body, the soul
appears to have entered deeply within material nature. Similarly, by the soul's
identification with the material body, the body appears to enter deeply within
the consciousness of the soul. What is more, the body cannot exist without the
presence of the soul. By this apparent mutual dependence, the difference
between the body and soul is obscured. Çré Uddhava therefore questions the
Lord in order to clarify this issue.
TEXT 27
WvaM mae pauNx"r"Ik(Aºa
mah"AntaM s$aMzAyaM ô$id"
Ce$ÔaumahR"is$a s$avaRÁa
vacaAeiBanaRyanaEpauNAE:
evaà me puëòarékäkña
mahäntaà saàçayaà hådi
chettum arhasi sarva-jïa
vacobhir naya-naipuëaiù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; me—my; puëòaréka-akña—O lotus-eyed Lord; mahäntam—great;
saàçayam—doubt; hådi—within my heart; chettum—cut; arhasi—You should
please; sarva-jïa—O omniscient one; vacobhiù—with Your words; naya—in
reasoning; naipuëaiù—very expert.
TRANSLATION
O lotus-eyed Kåñëa, O omniscient Lord, kindly cut this great doubt out of
my heart with Your own words, which exhibit Your great skill in reasoning.
PURPORT
Çré Uddhava requests Lord Kåñëa to clearly demonstrate the difference
between the material body and the spirit soul.
TEXT 28
tvaÔaAe ÁaAnaM ih" jaIvaAnaAM
‘amaAeSastae'‡a zAil(ta:
tvamaeva ÷AtmamaAyaAyaA
gAitaM vaetTa na caApar":
tvatto jïänaà hi jévänäà
pramoñas te 'tra çaktitaù
tvam eva hy ätma-mäyäyä
gatià vettha na cäparaù
SYNONYMS
tvattaù—from You; jïänam—knowledge; hi—indeed; jévänäm—of the living
beings; pramoñaù—stealing away; te—Your; atra—in this knowledge;
çaktitaù—by the potency; tvam—You; eva—alone; hi—indeed; ätma—Your
own; mäyäyäù—of the illusory potency; gatim—the real nature; vettha—You
know; na—not; ca—and; aparaù—any other person.
TRANSLATION
From You alone the knowledge of the living beings arises, and by Your
potency that knowledge is stolen away. Indeed, no one but Yourself can
understand the real nature of Your illusory potency.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca: [Bg. 15.15]
"From Me come remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness." By the Lord's
causeless mercy one is enlightened with knowledge, and by the Lord's illusory
potency that knowledge vanishes and one is merged into ignorance. Those
bewildered by mäyä cannot understand the difference between the material
body and the spirit soul and thus should hear from the Lord Himself to remove
this illusory covering.
TEXT 29
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
‘ak{(ita: pauç&Saêeita
ivak(lpa: pauç&SaSaRBa
WSa vaEk(Air"k(: s$agAAeR
gAuNAvyaitak(r"Atmak(:
çré-bhagavän uväca
prakåtiù puruñaç ceti
vikalpaù puruñarñabha
eña vaikärikaù sargo
guëa-vyatikarätmakaù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
prakåtiù—nature; puruñaù—the enjoyer, living entity; ca—and; iti—thus;
vikalpaù—complete distinction; puruña-åñabha—O best among men;
eñaù—this; vaikärikaù—subject to transformation; sargaù—creation; guëa—of
the modes of nature; vyatikara—the agitation; ätmakaù—based upon.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O best among men, material
nature and its enjoyer are clearly distinct. This manifest creation undergoes
constant transformation, being founded upon the agitation of the modes of
nature.
PURPORT
The word puruña indicates the living entity and also the Supreme Lord, who
is the supreme living entity. Material nature, subject to transformation, is full
of duality, whereas the Lord is one and absolute. Material nature is dependent
on its creator, maintainer and annihilator; the Lord, however, is completely
self-reliant and independent. In the same way, material nature is unconscious
and dull, lacking self-awareness, whereas the Supreme Lord is self-sufficient
omniscience. The individual living entity shares the eternality, bliss and
knowledge of the Personality of Godhead and is also completely distinct from
material nature.
The word sarga here refers to the material amalgamation of the body, which
covers the living entity. The material body undergoes constant transformation
and is thus clearly different from the living entity, who is eternally the same.
In the transcendental kingdom of God there is no conflict or agitation caused
by creation, maintenance and destruction as exhibited in the material world.
There all variety is resolved in the transcendental loving experience of Kåñëa
consciousness, the natural constitutional position of the soul.
TEXT 30
mamaAËÿ maAyaA gAuNAmayyanaek(DaA
ivak(lpabauÜ"Iê gAuNAEivaRDaÔae
vaEk(Air"k(iñivaDaAe'DyaAtmamaek(ma,
@TaAiDadE"vamaiDaBaUtamanyata,
mamäìga mäyä guëa-mayy anekadhä
vikalpa-buddhéç ca guëair vidhatte
vaikärikas tri-vidho 'dhyätmam ekam
athädhidaivam adhibhütam anyat
SYNONYMS
mama—My; aìga—My dear Uddhava; mäyä—material energy;
guëa-mayé—consisting of the three modes; anekadhä—manifold;
vikalpa—different manifestations; buddhéù—and perceptions of these
differences; ca—and; guëaiù—by the modes; vidhatte—establishes;
vaikärikaù—the full-blown manifestation of transformations;
tri-vidhaù—having three aspects; adhyätmam—called adhyätma; ekam-one;
atha—and; adhidaivam—adhidaiva; adhibhütam-adhibhüta; anyat-another.
TRANSLATION
My dear Uddhava, My material energy, comprising three modes and acting
through them, manifests the varieties of creation along with varieties of
consciousness for perceiving them. The manifest result of material
transformation is understood in three aspects: adhyätmic, adhidaivic and
adhibhautic.
PURPORT
The word vikalpa-buddhéù indicates that consciousness within various
material bodies reveals different aspects of the Lord's creation. Birds such as
seagulls glide on the ocean breezes, experiencing the Lord's creation of wind
and altitude. The fish experience life within the water, and other creatures
intimately experience life within trees or within the earth. Human society
affords its own varieties of awareness, and similarly in heaven and hell
different experiences are available. All types of material consciousness are
transformations of the three modes of material nature, the expansions of the
Lord's illusory energy.
TEXT 31
ä{"ƒaUpamaAk<( vapaur"‡a r"n‹ae
par"s$parM" is$aDyaita ya: svata: Kae
@AtmaA yade"SaAmapar"Ae ya @Aâ:
svayaAnauBaUtyaAiKalais$aÜ"is$aiÜ":
dåg rüpam ärkaà vapur atra randhre
parasparaà sidhyati yaù svataù khe
ätmä yad eñäm aparo ya ädyaù
svayänubhütyäkhila-siddha-siddhiù
SYNONYMS
dåk—the function of sight (as adhyätma); rüpam—visible form (as adhibhüta);
ärkam—of the sun; vapuù—the partial image (as adhidaiva); atra—in this;
randhre—aperture (of the eyeball); parasparam—mutually; sidhyati—cause the
manifestation of each other; yaù—which; svataù—by its own power; khe—in
the sky; ätmä—the Supersoul; yat—which; eñäm—of these (three features);
aparaù—separate; yaù—who; ädyaù—the original cause; svayä—by His own;
anubhütyä—transcendental experience; akhila—of all; siddha—manifest
phenomena; siddhiù—the source of manifestation.
TRANSLATION
Sight, visible form and the reflected image of the sun within the aperture of
the eye all work together to reveal one another. But the original sun standing in
the sky is self-manifested. Similarly, the Supreme Soul, the original cause of all
entities, who is thus separate from all of them, acts by the illumination of His
own transcendental experience as the ultimate source of manifestation of all
mutually manifesting objects.
PURPORT
Form is recognized by the function of the eye, and the eye's function is
understood by the presence of perceivable form. This interaction of sight and
form further depends on the presence of light provided by the demigods, whose
service of universal management depends on the presence of those who are to
be managed, namely the living entities experiencing form with their eyes.
Thus the three factors-adhyätma, represented by the senses such as the eye;
adhibhüta, the sense objects such as form; and adhidaiva, the influence of the
controlling deities—exist in an interdependent relationship.
The sun globe itself is said to be self-manifest, self-luminous and
self-experiencing; it does not share the interdependence of the senses and
sense objects although facilitating their function. Similarly, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead facilitates the interdependent experiences of all living
entities. For example, newspapers, radio and television reveal world events to
the mass of people. Parents reveal facts about life to their children, teachers to
their students, friends to friends, and so on. The government manifests its will
to the people and the people to their government. The sun and moon reveal
the visual forms of all objects, and the perception of sound reveals audible
form. The vibrations of particular types of music or rhetoric reveal the inner
feelings of other living beings, and other types of knowledge are revealed by
aroma, touch and taste. In this way, through the interaction of the senses and
mind with innumerable sense objects, different types of knowledge are
acquired. All such informative interactions, however, depend upon the
supreme illuminating power of the Personality of Godhead. As stated in
Brahma-saàhitä (5.52), yac-cakñur eña savitä sakala-grahäëäm: "Among all the
planets the sun is considered the eye of the Supreme Lord." The Personality of
Godhead is eternally omniscient by His own transcendental potency, and thus
no one can reveal anything to the Lord about anything. Still, Lord Kåñëa
humbly accepts our prayers offered in Kåñëa consciousness. In conclusion,
Lord Kåñëa clearly explains here that His sublime characteristics are
completely different from those of the manifest universe. The Lord is
therefore the supreme transcendental entity, free from all material influence.
TEXT 32
WvaM tvagAAid" ™avaNAAid" caºaur,"
ijaù"Aid" naAs$aAid" ca icaÔayaul(ma,
evaà tvag-ädi çravaëädi cakñur
jihvädi näsädi ca citta-yuktam
SYNONYMS
evam—in the same way; tvak-ädi—the skin, the sensation of touch and the
demigod of the wind, Väyu; çravaëa-ädi—the ears, the sensation of sound and
the demigods of the directions; cakñuù—the eyes (described in the previous
verse); jihvä-adi—the tongue, the sensation of taste and the god of water,
Varuëa; näsa-ädi—the nose, the sensation of smell and the Açviné-kumäras;
ca—also; citta-yuktam—along with consciousness (implying not only
conditioned consciousness together with the object of that consciousness and
the presiding Deity Väsudeva, but also the mind together with the object of
thought and the moon-god Candra, intelligence with the object of intelligence
and Lord Brahmä, and false ego together with the identification of false ego
and Lord Rudra).
TRANSLATION
Similarly, the sense organs, namely the skin, ears, eyes, tongue and nose—as
well as the functions of the subtle body, namely conditioned consciousness,
mind, intelligence and false ego—can all be analyzed in terms of the threefold
distinction of sense, object of perception and presiding deity.
PURPORT
The individual soul has no permanent relationship with the inter
dependent material functions of the senses, sense objects and controlling
deities. The living entity is originally pure spirit soul and is meant to depend
on the Personality of Godhead in the spiritual world. It is useless to try to
analyze matter and spirit within the same categories, since they belong to
different potencies of the Supreme Lord. Thus the act of spiritually perceiving
the Supreme Lord, His abode and one's own self is an entirely antimaterial
process realized within pure Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 33
yaAe's$aAE gAuNAºaAeBak{(taAe ivak(Ar":
‘aDaAnamaUlaAnmah"ta: ‘as$aUta:
@hM" i‡ava{nmaAeh"ivak(lpahe"taur,"
vaEk(Air"k(staAmas$a Wein‰"yaê
yo 'sau guëa-kñobha-kåto vikäraù
pradhäna-mülän mahataù prasütaù
ahaà tri-vån moha-vikalpa-hetur
vaikärikas tämasa aindriyaç ca
SYNONYMS
yaù asau—this; guëa—of the modes of nature; kñobha—by the agitation;
kåtaù—caused; vikäraù—transformation; pradhäna-mülät—which is generated
from the pradhäna, the unmanifest form of the total material nature;
mahataù—from the mahat-tattva; prasütaù-generated; aham—false ego;
tri-våt—in three phases; moha—of bewilderment; vikalpa—and material
variety; hetuù—the cause; vaikärikaù—in the mode of goodness; tämasaù—in
the mode of ignorance; aindriyaù—in the mode of passion; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
When the three modes of nature are agitated, the resultant transformation
appears as the element false ego in three phases—goodness, passion and
ignorance. Generated from the mahat-tattva, which is itself produced from the
unmanifest pradhäna, this false ego becomes the cause of all material illusion
and duality.
PURPORT
By giving up one's false ego of identification with the three modes of
nature, one can achieve Kåñëa consciousness, the pure, original state of
existence. The word moha-vikalpa-hetuù indicates that because of false ego one
considers himself to be the enjoyer of nature and thus develops a false sense of
material duality in terms of material happiness and distress. False ego is
removed by identifying oneself as the Lord's eternal servitor in full Kåñëa
consciousness.
TEXT 34
@AtmaApair"ÁaAnamayaAe ivavaAd"Ae
÷staIita naAstaIita iBad"ATaRinaï":
vyaTaAeR'ipa naEvaAepar"maeta pauMs$aAM
maÔa: par"Ava{ÔaiDayaAM svalaAek(Ata,
ätmäparijïäna-mayo vivädo
hy astéti nästéti bhidärtha-niñöhaù
vyartho 'pi naivoparameta puàsäà
mattaù parävåtta-dhiyäà sva-lokät
SYNONYMS
ätma—of the Supreme Soul; aparijïäna-mayaù—based on lack of full
knowledge; vivädaù—speculative argument; hi—indeed; asti—(this world) is
real; iti—thus saying; na asti—it is not real; iti—thus saying; bhidä—material
differences; artha-niñöhaù—having as its focus of discussion;
vyarthaù—worthless; api—although; na—does not; eva—certainly;
uparameta—cease; puàsäm—for persons; mattaù—from Me; parävåtta—who
have turned; dhiyäm—their attention; sva-lokät—who am nondifferent from
them.
TRANSLATION
The speculative argument of philosophers—"This world is real," "No, it is
not real"—is based upon incomplete knowledge of the Supreme Soul and is
simply aimed at understanding material dualities. Although such argument is
useless, persons who have turned their attention away from Me, their own true
Self, are unable to give it up.
PURPORT
If one doubts the existence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one
will inevitably doubt the reality of the Lord's creation. Thus, without
understanding Lord Kåñëa, mere argument and debate over the reality and
nonreality of the material world are useless. The material world is real
specifically because it emanates from the supreme reality, Lord Kåñëa. Without
understanding the reality of Lord Kåñëa one can never definitely ascertain the
reality of His creation; one will always wonder if he is actually seeing
something or merely thinking that he is seeing it. This kind of speculation can
never be resolved without taking shelter of the Supreme Lord and is therefore
useless. The devotees of the Lord are not inclined to such argument, because
they are factually advancing in spiritual enlightenment and are fully satisfied
with their progressively more beautiful experience of Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXTS 35-36
™aIoÜ"va ovaAca
tvaÔa: par"Ava{ÔaiDaya:
svak{(taE: k(maRiBa: ‘aBaAe
o»aAvacaAna, yaTaA de"h"Ana,
gA{õ"inta ivas$a{jainta ca
tanmamaAKyaAih" gAAeivand"
äu"ivaRBaAvyamanaAtmaiBa:
na ÷etat‘aAyazAAe laAeke(
ivaã"AMs$a: s$ainta vaiÂataA:
çré-uddhava uväca
tvattaù parävåtta-dhiyaù
sva-kåtaiù karmabhiù prabho
uccävacän yathä dehän
gåhëanti visåjanti ca
tan mamäkhyähi govinda
durvibhävyam anätmabhiù
na hy etat präyaço loke
vidväàsaù santi vaïcitäù
SYNONYMS
çré-uddhavaù uväca—Çré Uddhava said; tvattaù—from You;
parävåtta—diverted; dhiyaù—whose minds; sva-kåtaiù—done by them;
karmabhiù—by the fruitive activities; prabho—O supreme master;
ucca-avacän—higher and lower; yathä—in which way; dehän—material
bodies; gåhëanti—they accept; visåjanti—give up; ca—and; tat—that;
mama—to me; äkhyähi—please explain; govinda—O Govinda;
durvibhävyam—impossible to understand; anätmabhiù—by those who are not
intelligent; na—not; hi—indeed; etat—about this; präyaçaù—for the most
part; loke—in this world; vidväàsaù—knowledgeable; santi—they are;
vaïcitäù—who are cheated (by material illusion).
TRANSLATION
Çré Uddhava said: O supreme master, the intelligence of those dedicated to
fruitive activities is certainly deviated from You. Please explain to me how such
persons accept superior and inferior bodies by their materialistic activities and
then give up such bodies. O Govinda, this topic is very difficult for foolish
persons to understand. Being cheated by illusion in this world, they generally do
not become aware of these facts.
PURPORT
No one can be considered intelligent without understanding the science of
God, which includes a description of the negative results of those who have
forgotten their eternal relationship with Him. There are many so-called wise
men in the world, but although considering themselves to be most intelligent,
they generally do not surrender to the supreme intelligence of the Lord. Thus
they concoct varieties of philosophies according to their positions within the
modes of nature. However, one cannot escape the influence of material nature
through philosophy generated from that same illusory nature. Liberation is
achieved by perfect knowledge coming from the spiritual platform, the
kingdom of God. By faithfully hearing from Lord Kåñëa and His authorized
representatives one can easily achieve liberation and go back home, back to
Godhead.
TEXT 37
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
mana: k(maRmayaM NA|NAAma,
win‰"yaE: paÂaiBayauRtama,
laAek(AéaAekM( ‘ayaAtyanya
@AtmaA tad"nauvataRtae
çré-bhagavän uväca
manaù karma-mayaà ëèëäm
indriyaiù païcabhir yutam
lokäl lokaà prayäty anya
ätmä tad anuvartate
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; manaù—the
mind; karma-mayam—shaped by fruitive work; nèëäm—of persons;
indriyaiù—along with the senses; païcabhiù—five; yutam—conjoined;
lokät—from one world; lokam—to another world; prayäti—travels;
anyaù—separate; ätmä—the soul; tat—that mind; anuvartate—follows.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa said: The material mind of men is shaped by the reactions of
fruitive work. Along with the five senses, it travels from one material body to
another. The spirit soul, although different from this mind, follows it.
TEXT 38
DyaAyanmanaAe'nau ivaSayaAna,
ä{"í"Ana, vaAnau™autaAnaTa
oâts$aId"tk(maRtan‡aM
sma{itastad"nau zAAmyaita
dhyäyan mano 'nu viñayän
dåñöän vänuçrutän atha
udyat sédat karma-tantraà
småtis tad anu çämyati
SYNONYMS
dhyäyat—meditating; manaù—the mind; anu—regularly; viñayän—on the
sense objects; dåñöän—seen; vä—or; anuçrutän—heard from Vedic authority;
atha—subsequently; udyat—rising; sédat—dissolving; karma-tantram—bound
to the reactions of fruitive work; småtiù—remembrance; tat anu—after that;
çämyati—is destroyed.
TRANSLATION
The mind, bound to the reactions of fruitive work, always meditates on the
objects of the senses, both those that are seen in this world and those that are
heard about from Vedic authority. Consequently, the mind appears to come into
being and to suffer annihilation along with its objects of perception, and thus its
ability to distinguish past and future is lost.
PURPORT
One may ask how the subtle body, or mind, gives up its connection with
one physical body and enters another. Such entering and leaving of physical
bodies is called birth and death by conditioned souls. One utilizes his present
senses to meditate on the visible objects of this world—beautiful women,
palatial estates, and so on—and similarly one daydreams about the heavenly
planets described in the Vedas. As death occurs, the mind is pulled away from
the objects of its immediate experience and enters another body to experience
a new set of sense objects. As the mind undergoes total reorientation there is
the apparent loss of one's previous mentality and creation of a new mind,
though actually the same mind is experiencing, but in a different way.
The conditioned soul is overwhelmed by the constant flow of material
experience consisting of direct perception and abstract contemplation of the
objects of this world. One thereby loses his transcendental memory of his
relationship with God. As soon as one identifies with this world he forgets his
eternal identity and surrenders to the false ego created by mäyä.
TEXT 39
ivaSayaAiBainavaezAena
naAtmaAnaM yatsmare"tpauna:
jantaAevaE= k(syaicaÜe"taAer,"
ma{tyaur"tyantaivasma{ita:
viñayäbhiniveçena
nätmänaà yat smaret punaù
jantor vai kasyacid dhetor
måtyur atyanta-vismåtiù
SYNONYMS
viñaya—in (new) objects of perception; abhiniveçena—because of absorption;
na—not; ätmänam—his previous self; yat—the situation in which;
smaret—remembers; punaù—any more; jantoù—of the living entity;
vai—indeed; kasyacit hetoù—for any reason or other; måtyuù—known as
death; atyanta—total; vismåtiù—forgetfulness.
TRANSLATION
When the living entity passes from the present body to the next body, which
is created by his own karma, he becomes absorbed in the pleasurable and painful
sensations of the new body and completely forgets the experience of the
previous body. This total forgetfulness of one's previous material identity,
which comes about for one reason or another, is called death.
PURPORT
Depending on one's karma, or fruitive activities, one may achieve a
beautiful, wealthy or powerful body or be degraded to an abominable condition
of life. Taking birth in heaven or in hell, the living entity learns to completely
identify his ego with the new body and thus becomes absorbed in the pleasure,
fear, opulence or suffering of the new body, completely forgetting the
experiences of the previous body. Death occurs when the specific karma
allotted to a physical body is finished. Since that particular body's karma is
used up, it can no longer act upon one's mind; in that way one forgets the
previous body. The new body is created by nature so that one can experience
the karma currently in effect. Consequently one's entire consciousness
becomes absorbed in one's current body in order that one can fully experience
the results of his previous activities. Because the living entity falsely identifies
himself as the body, bodily death is experienced as death of the soul. Actually,
however, the soul is eternal and is never subject to creation or annihilation.
This analytic knowledge of self-realization is easily understood in Kåñëa
consciousness.
TEXT 40
janma tvaAtmatayaA pauMs$a:
s$avaRBaAvaena BaUir"d"
ivaSayasvaIk{(itaM ‘aAò"r,"
yaTaA sva«amanaAer"Ta:
janma tv ätmatayä puàsaù
sarva-bhävena bhüri-da
viñaya-svékåtià prähur
yathä svapna-manorathaù
SYNONYMS
janma—birth; tu—and; ätmatayä—by identification with oneself; puàsaù—of
a person; sarva-bhävena—completely; bhüri-da—O most charitable Uddhava;
viñaya—of the body; své-kåtim—the acceptance; prähuù—is called; yathä—just
as; svapna—a dream; manaù-rathaù—or a mental fantasy.
TRANSLATION
O most charitable Uddhava, what is called birth is simply a person's total
identification with a new body. One accepts the new body just as one
completely accepts the experience of a dream or a fantasy as reality.
PURPORT
Identification with one's material body surpasses the mere affection and
attachment one feels for the bodies of relatives or friends. The word
sarva-bhävena here shows that one totally accepts the material body to be
oneself, just as one completely accepts the experience of a dream as real. Mere
imagination without practical action is called a daydream; the mental
concoction that occurs in a sleeping state is called a dream. Our identification
with our own body and our blind acceptance of bodily relationships as
permanent constitute a prolonged form of dreaming or fantasy in which one
imagines oneself to be separate from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The
term birth, therefore, does not refer to the generation of a new entity but to
the blind acceptance by the spirit soul of a new material body.
TEXT 41
sva«aM manaAer"TaM caetTaM
‘aAl(naM na smar"tyas$aAE
ta‡a paUvaRimavaAtmaAnama,
@paUvaRmcaAnaupazyaita
svapnaà manorathaà cetthaà
präktanaà na smaraty asau
tatra pürvam ivätmänam
apürvam cänupaçyati
SYNONYMS
svapnam—a dream; manaù-ratham—a daydream; ca—and; ittham—thus;
präktanam—previous; na smarati—does not remember; asau—he; tatra—in
that (present body); pürvam—the previous; iva—as if; ätmänam—himself;
apürvam—having no past; ca—and; anupaçyati—he views.
TRANSLATION
Just as a person experiencing a dream or daydream does not remember his
previous dreams or daydreams, a person situated in his present body, although
having existed prior to it, thinks that he has only recently come into being.
PURPORT
The objection may be raised that sometimes when experiencing a dream
one actually remembers a previous dream. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté
Öhäkura replies that by the mystic power of jäti-smara one can remember one's
previous body, and as is well known, "The exception establishes the rule."
Normally, conditioned souls do not perceive their past existence; they think, "I
am six years old" or "I am thirty years old," and "previous to this birth I did not
exist." In such material ignorance one cannot understand the actual situation
of the soul.
TEXT 42
win‰"yaAyanas$a{í"YaedM"
‡aEivaDyaM BaAita vastauina
baih"r"ntaiBaRd"Ahe"taur,"
janaAe's$aÀanak{(âTaA
indriyäyana-såñöyedaà
trai-vidhyaà bhäti vastuni
bahir-antar-bhidä-hetur
jano 'saj-jana-kåd yathä
SYNONYMS
indriya-ayana—by the resting place of the senses (the mind); såñöyä—because
of the creation (of identification with a new body); idam—this;
trai-vidhyam—threefold variety (of high, middle and low class);
bhäti—appears; vastuni—in the reality (the soul); bahiù—external;
antaù—and internal; bhidä—of the differences; hetuù—the cause; janaù—a
person; asat-jana—of a bad person; kåt—the progenitor; yathä—as.
TRANSLATION
Because the mind, which is the resting place of the senses, has created the
identification with a new body, the threefold material variety of high, middle
and low class appears as if present within the reality of the soul. Thus the self
creates external and internal duality, just as a man might give birth to a bad son.
PURPORT
The wealth, beauty, strength, intelligence, fame and detachment of
different bodies are considered to be excellent, normal or inferior according to
the material situation. The spirit soul acquires a particular body and thus
judges himself and others to be high, middle or low class according to their
material situation. Actually, the eternal soul exists beyond material duality but
falsely mistakes the material situation to be his own. The words asaj-jana-kåd
yathä are significant. A father may by nature be peaceful, but because his bad
son gets into trouble the father is forced to defend his son and consider his
son's enemies to be enemies of the entire family. Thus the bad son implicates
the father in troublesome conflicts. Similarly, the spirit soul has no intrinsic
problems, but by creating a false identification with the material body the soul
becomes involved in the happiness and distress of the body. With this verse
the Lord summarizes His discussion of the difference between the body and the
soul.
TEXT 43
inatyad"A ÷Ëÿ BaUtaAina
Bavainta na Bavainta ca
k(AlaenaAlaºyavaegAena
s$aUºmatvaAÔaªa ä{"zyatae
nityadä hy aìga bhütäni
bhavanti na bhavanti ca
kälenälakñya-vegena
sükñmatvät tan na dåçyate
SYNONYMS
nityadä—constantly; hi—indeed; aìga—My dear Uddhava; bhütäni—created
bodies; bhavanti—come into being; na bhavanti—go out of being; ca—and;
kälena—by time; alakñya—imperceptible; vegena—whose speed;
sükñmatvät—because of being very subtle; tat—that; na dåçyate—is not seen.
TRANSLATION
My dear Uddhava, material bodies are constantly undergoing creation and
destruction by the force of time, whose swiftness is imperceptible. But because
of the subtle nature of time, no one sees this.
TEXT 44
yaTaAicaRSaAM ›aAetas$aAM ca
P(laAnaAM vaA vanas$patae:
taTaEva s$avaRBaUtaAnaAM
vayaAe'vasTaAd"ya: k{(taA:
yathärciñäà srotasäà ca
phalänäà vä vanaspateù
tathaiva sarva-bhütänäà
vayo-'vasthädayaù kåtäù
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; arciñäm—of the flames of a candle; srotasäm—of the currents of a
river; ca—and; phalänäm—of fruits; vä—or; vanaspateù—of a tree;
tathä—thus; eva—certainly; sarva-bhütänäm—of all material bodies;
vayaù—of different ages; avasthä—situations; ädayaù—and so on; kåtäù—are
created.
TRANSLATION
The different stages of transformation of all material bodies occur just like
those of the flame of a candle, the current of a river, or the fruits of a tree.
PURPORT
The wavering flame of a candle sometimes waxes brightly and again
becomes weak. Finally it vanishes altogether. The waves of a flowing river rise
and fall, creating innumerable shapes and patterns. The fruits of a tree
gradually take birth, grow, ripen, sweeten and eventually rot and die. Similarly,
one can easily understand that one's own body is undergoing constant
transformation, and that the body is certainly subject to old age, disease and
death. At different times of life the body exhibits degrees of sexual potency,
physical strength, desire, wisdom and so on. As the body grows old, physical
strength diminishes, but one's knowledge may increase even as the body
undergoes such transformation.
Material birth and death occur within the realm of segmented time. The
birth, creation or production of a material object immediately connects it with
a segmented sequence of subtle time within the material world. Thus its
destruction or death is inevitable. The irresistible force of time moves so subtly
that only the most intelligent can perceive it. Just as the candle flame
gradually diminishes, as the flowing currents move within the river or as fruits
gradually ripen on a tree, the material body is steadily moving toward
inevitable death. The temporary body should therefore never be confused with
the eternal, unchanging spirit soul.
TEXT 45
s$aAe'yaM d"IpaAe'icaRSaAM yaã"ta,
›aAetas$aAM taid"dM" jalama,
s$aAe'yaM paumaAinaita na{NAAM
ma{SaA gAIDaI=ma{RSaAyauSaAma,
so 'yaà dépo 'rciñäà yadvat
srotasäà tad idaà jalam
so 'yaà pumän iti nåëäà
måñä gér dhér måñäyuñäm
SYNONYMS
saù—this; ayam—the same; dépaù—light; arciñäm—of the radiation of a lamp;
yadvat—just as; srotasäm—of the currents flowing in a river; tat—that;
idam—the same; jalam—water; saù—this; ayam—the same; pumän—person;
iti—thus; nåëäm—of men; måñä—false; géù—statement; dhéù—thought;
måñä-äyuñäm—of those who are wasting their life.
TRANSLATION
Although the illumination of a lamp consists of innumerable rays of light
undergoing constant creation, transformation and destruction, a person with
illusory intelligence who sees the light for a moment will speak falsely, saying,
"This is the light of the lamp." As one observes a flowing river, ever-new water
passes by and goes far away, yet a foolish person, observing one point in the
river, falsely states, "This is the water of the river." Similarly, although the
material body of a human being is constantly undergoing transformation, those
who are simply wasting their lives falsely think and say that each particular
stage of the body is the person's real identity
PURPORT
Although one may say, "This is the light of the lamp," there are innumerable
rays of light being created, transformed and destroyed at every moment; and
although one may speak of the water of the river, there is an ever-new supply
of different water molecules passing by. Similarly, when one meets a young
child, one accepts that particular transitory phase of the body as the actual
identity of the person, considering him to be a child. One also considers an old
body to be an old person. In fact, however, the material body of a human
being, just like the waves of a river or the radiation of a lamp, is merely a
transformation of the three modes of material nature, the potency of the
Supreme Lord. The real identity of a person is spirit soul, part and parcel of
Lord Kåñëa, but as Lord Kåñëa proves in this verse, a conditioned soul is
incapable of observing or understanding the subtle movements of time. With
the gross vision of material consciousness one cannot ascertain the subtle
segments of material manifestation, which are impelled by the Lord Himself as
time. The word måñäyuñäm in this verse indicates those who are uselessly
wasting their time in ignorance without understanding the instructions of the
Lord. Such persons gullibly accept any particular phase of the body to be the
actual identity of the spirit soul within the body. Because the spirit soul is not
subject to material transformation, when he engages himself in the eternal
variegated pleasure of Kåñëa consciousness, loving service to the Supreme
Lord, he will experience no further ignorance and suffering.
TEXT 46
maA svasya k(maRbaIjaena
jaAyatae s$aAe'pyayaM paumaAna,
i•ayatae vaAmar"Ae ”aAntyaA
yaTaAi¢ad"ARç&s$aMyauta:
mä svasya karma-béjena
jäyate so 'py ayaà pumän
mriyate vämaro bhräntyä
yathägnir däru-saàyutaù
SYNONYMS
mä—does not; svasya—of the self; karma-béjena—by the seed of his activities;
jäyate—take birth; saù—he; api—indeed; ayam—this; pumän—personality;
mriyate—dies; vä—or; amaraù—immortal; bhräntyä—because of illusion;
yathä—as; agniù—fire; däru—with wood; saàyutaù—joined.
TRANSLATION
A person does not actually take birth out of the seed of past activities, nor,
being immortal, does he die. By illusion the living being appears to be born and
to die, just as fire in connection with firewood appears to begin and then cease
to exist.
PURPORT
The element fire exists perpetually within the material creation, but in
connection with a particular piece of wood fire apparently comes into
existence and ceases to exist. Similarly, the living entity is eternal, but in
connection with a particular body apparently takes birth and dies. The
reactions of karma thus impose an illusory suffering or enjoyment upon the
living entity, but they do not cause the entity himself to change his eternal
nature. In other words, karma represents a cycle of illusion in which each
illusory activity produces another. Kåñëa consciousness stops this cycle of
karma by engaging the living being in spiritual activities in the loving service
of the Lord. By such Kåñëa consciousness one can escape the illusory chain of
fruitive reactions.
TEXT 47
inaSaek(gABaRjanmaAina
baAlyak(AEmaAr"yaAEvanama,
vayaAemaDyaM jar"A ma{tyaur,"
wtyavasTaAstanaAenaRva
niñeka-garbha-janmäni
bälya-kaumära-yauvanam
vayo-madhyaà jarä måtyur
ity avasthäs tanor nava
SYNONYMS
niñeka—impregnation; garbha—gestation; janmäni—and birth;
bälya—infancy; kaumära—childhood; yauvanam—and youth;
vayaù-madhyam—middle age; jarä—old age; måtyuù—death; iti—thus;
avasthäù—ages; tanoù—of the body; nava—nine.
TRANSLATION
Impregnation, gestation, birth, infancy, childhood, youth, middle age, old age
and death are the nine ages of the body.
TEXT 48
WtaA manaAer"TamayaIr,"
h"AnyasyaAe»aAvacaAstanaU:
gAuNAs$aËÿAäu"paAd"Ôae
¸(icatk(iêÀah"Aita ca
etä manoratha-mayér
hänyasyoccävacäs tanüù
guëa-saìgäd upädatte
kvacit kaçcij jahäti ca
SYNONYMS
etäù—these; manaù-rathaù-mayéù—achieved by meditation of the mind;
ha—certainly; anyasya—of the body (who is separate from the self);
ucca—greater; avacäù—and lesser; tanüù—bodily conditions;
guëa-saìgät—because of associating with the modes of nature; upädatte—he
accepts; kvacit—sometimes; kaçcit—someone; jahäti—gives up; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
Although the material body is different from the self, because of the
ignorance due to material association one falsely identifies oneself with the
superior and inferior bodily conditions. Sometimes a fortunate person is able to
give up such mental concoction.
PURPORT
One who has received the special mercy of the Supreme Lord is able to give
up the mental concoction of bodily identification. Thus there is always a
chance of escaping the cycle of birth and death.
TEXT 49
@Atmana: ipata{pau‡aAByaAma,
@naumaeyaAE BavaApyayaAE
na BavaApyayavastaUnaAma,
@iBaÁaAe ã"yalaºaNA:
ätmanaù pitå-puträbhyäm
anumeyau bhaväpyayau
na bhaväpyaya-vastünäm
abhijïo dvaya-lakñaëaù
SYNONYMS
ätmanaù—one's own; pitå—from the father or ancestors; puträbhyäm—and the
son; anumeyau—can be surmised; bhava—birth; apyayau—and death; na—is
no longer; bhava-apyaya-vastünäm—of all that is subject to generation and
destruction; abhijïaù—one who is in proper knowledge; dvaya—by these
dualities; lakñaëaù—characterized.
TRANSLATION
By the death of one's father or grandfather one can surmise one's own death,
and by the birth of one's son one can understand the condition of one's own
birth. A person who thus realistically understands the creation and destruction
of material bodies is no longer subject to these dualities.
PURPORT
The Lord has described the nine stages of the material body, beginning with
impregnation, gestation and birth. One may argue that a living entity cannot
remember his presence in the mother's womb nor his birth and early infancy.
The Lord therefore states here that one can experience these phases of bodily
existence by studying one's own child. Similarly, although one may hope to live
forever, by experiencing the death of one's father, grandfather or
great-grandfather, one has definite proof that the material body will die. A
sober person, knowing the soul to be eternal, therefore gives up false
identification with the temporary, unreliable body and takes shelter of the
devotional service of the Lord. By this process one can escape the artificial
imposition of birth and death.
TEXT 50
tar"AebaI=jaivapaAk(AByaAM
yaAe ivaã"AÃanmas$aMyamaAE
tar"AeivaRlaºaNAAe ‰"í"A
WvaM ‰"í"A tanaAe: pa{Tak,(
taror béja-vipäkäbhyäà
yo vidväï janma-saàyamau
taror vilakñaëo drañöä
evaà drañöä tanoù påthak
SYNONYMS
taroù—of a tree; béja—(birth from) its seed; vipäkäbhyäm—(destruction
subsequent to) maturity; yaù—one who; vidvän—in knowledge; janma—of
birth; saàyamau—and death; taroù—from the tree; vilakñaëaù—distinct;
drañöä—the witness; evam—in the same way; drañöä—the witness; tanoù—of
the material body; påöhak—is separate.
TRANSLATION
One who observes the birth of a tree from its seed and the ultimate death of
the tree after maturity certainly remains a distinct observer separate from the
tree. In the same way, the witness of the birth and death of the material body
remains separate from it.
PURPORT
As a reference to trees, vipäka indicates the final transformation called
death. In reference to other types of plants such as rice, vipäka indicates the
stage of maturity, in which death also occurs. Thus by common observation
one can understand the actual position of one's material body and one's own
position as the transcendental observer.
TEXT 51
‘ak{(taere"vamaAtmaAnama,
@ivaivacyaAbauDa: paumaAna,
taÔvaena s$pazARs$ammaUX#:
s$aMs$aArM" ‘aitapaâtae
prakåter evam ätmänam
avivicyäbudhaù pumän
tattvena sparça-sammüòhaù
saàsäraà pratipadyate
SYNONYMS
prakåteù—from material nature; evam—in this way; ätmänam—the self;
avivicya—failing to distinguish; abudhaù—the unintelligent; pumän—person;
tattvena—because of thinking (material things) to be real; sparça—by material
contact; sammüòhaù—completely bewildered; saàsäram—the cycle of
material existence; pratipadyate—attains.
TRANSLATION
An unintelligent man, failing to distinguish himself from material nature,
thinks nature to be real. By contact with it he becomes completely bewildered
and enters into the cycle of material existence.
PURPORT
A similar verse is found in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.7.5):
yayä sammohito jéva
ätmänaà tri-guëätmakam
paro 'pi manute 'narthaà
tat-kåtaà cäbhipadyate
"Due to this external energy, the living entity, although transcendental to the
three modes of material nature, thinks of himself as a material product and
thus undergoes the reactions of material miseries."
TEXT 52
s$aÔvas$aËÿAä{"SaInde"vaAna,
r"jas$aAs$aur"maAnauSaAna,
tamas$aA BaUtaitayaRftvaM
”aAimataAe yaAita k(maRiBa:
sattva-saìgäd åñén devän
rajasäsura-mänuñän
tamasä bhüta-tiryaktvaà
bhrämito yäti karmabhiù
SYNONYMS
sattva-saìgät—by association with the mode of goodness; åñén—to the sages;
devän—to the demigods; rajasä—by the mode of passion; asura—to the
demons; mänuñän—and to human beings; tamasä—by the mode of ignorance;
bhüta—to the ghostly spirits; tiryaktvam—or the animal kingdom;
bhrämitaù—made to wander; yäti—he goes; karmabhiù—because of his fruitive
activities.
TRANSLATION
Made to wander because of his fruitive work, the conditioned soul, by
contact with the mode of goodness, takes birth among the sages or demigods. By
contact with the mode of passion he becomes a demon or human being, and by
association with the mode of ignorance he takes birth as a ghost or in the animal
kingdom.
PURPORT
The word tiryaktvam means "the status of an animal," which includes all
lower forms of life, such as beasts, birds, insects, fish and plants.
TEXT 53
na{tyataAe gAAyata: pazyana,
yaTaEvaAnauk(r"Aeita taAna,
WvaM bauiÜ"gAuNAAna, pazyaªa,
@naIh"Ae'pyanauk(AyaRtae
nåtyato gäyataù paçyan
yathaivänukaroti tän
evaà buddhi-guëän paçyann
aného 'py anukäryate
SYNONYMS
nåtyataù—persons who are dancing; gäyataù—and singing; paçyan—observing;
yathä—just as; eva—indeed; anukaroti—imitates; tän—them; evam—thus;
buddhi—of the material intelligence; guëän—the acquired qualities;
paçyan—seeing; anéhaù—although not himself engaged in activity;
api—nevertheless; anukäryate—is made to imitate.
TRANSLATION
Just as one may imitate persons whom one sees dancing and singing,
similarly the soul, although never the doer of material activities, becomes
captivated by material intelligence and is thus forced to imitate its qualities.
PURPORT
Sometimes people are captivated by professional singers and dancers and
imitate within their minds the musical rhythms and melodies of the performers
along with their romantic, humorous or heroic emotions. People sing songs
heard on the radio and imitate dances and dramatic performances seen on
television or in movies and theaters, entering into the emotions and art of the
performer. The conditioned soul is similarly captivated by the concoctions of
the material mind and intelligence, which convince him that he can become
the enjoyer of the material world. Although different from the material body
and never the actual performer of its activities, the conditioned soul is induced
to engage his body in material activities, which entangle him in the cycle of
birth and death. One should not accept the illicit propositions of material
intelligence, but rather should engage himself fully in the service of the Lord
in Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXTS 54-55
yaTaAmBas$aA ‘acalataA
tar"vaAe'ipa calaA wva
caºaus$aA ”aAmyamaANAena
ä{"zyatae ”amataIva BaU:
yaTaA manaAer"TaiDayaAe
ivaSaySaAnauBavaAe ma{SaA
sva«aä{"í"Aê d"AzAAhR"
taTaA s$aMs$aAr" @Atmana:
yathämbhasä pracalatä
taravo 'pi calä iva
cakñusä bhrämyamäëena
dåçyate bhramatéva bhüù
yathä manoratha-dhiyo
viñayñänubhavo måñä
svapna-dåñöäç ca däçärha
tathä saàsära ätmanaù
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; ambhasä—by water; pracalatä—moving, agitated; taravaù—trees;
api—indeed; caläù—moving; iva—as if; cakñuñä—by the eyes;
bhrämyamäëena—which are being turned about; dåçyate—appears;
bhramaté—moving; iva—as if; bhüù—the earth; yathä—as; manaù-ratha—of a
mental fantasy; dhiyaù—the ideas; viñaya—of sense gratification;
anubhavaù—the experience; måñä—false; svapna-dåñöaù—things seen in a
dream; ca—and; däçärha—O descendant of Daçärha; tathä—thus;
saàsäraù—the material life; ätmanaù—of the soul.
TRANSLATION
The soul's material life, his experience of sense gratification, is actually false,
O descendant of Daçärha, just like trees' appearance of quivering when the
trees are reflected in agitated water, or like the earth's appearance of spinning
due to one's spinning his eyes around, or like the world of a fantasy or dream.
PURPORT
Trees appear to be swaying when reflected in agitated water, and similarly,
when one is sitting on a moving boat the trees on the shore appear to be
moving. When the wind whips up the water, creating waves, the water appears
to have movement of its own, although it is actually being moved by the wind.
The conditioned soul in material life does not perform any activities, but
rather the material body, with the consent of the illusioned living entity, is
being moved by the modes of nature. One imposes this external movement
upon oneself, considering oneself to be dancing, singing, running, dying,
conquering and so on, although these are merely interactions of the external
body with the modes of nature.
TEXT 56
@TaeR ÷ivaâmaAnae'ipa
s$aMs$a{itanaR inavataRtae
DyaAyataAe ivaSayaAnasya
sva«ae'naTaARgAmaAe yaTaA
arthe hy avidyamäne 'pi
saàsåtir na nivartate
dhyäyato viñayän asya
svapne 'narthägamo yathä
SYNONYMS
arthe—in truth; hi—certainly; avidyamäne—not existing; api—even though;
saàsåtiù—material existence; na nivartate—does not stop; dhyäyataù—who is
meditating; viñayän—on the objects of sense gratification; asya—for him;
svapne—in a dream; anartha—of unwanted things; ägamaù—the coming;
yathä—just as.
TRANSLATION
For one who is meditating on sense gratification, material life, although
lacking factual existence, does not go away, just as the unpleasant experiences
of a dream do not.
PURPORT
One may object that if Lord Kåñëa insists that material life is false, then
why should one endeavor to stop it? The Lord therefore explains here that
although not factual, material life stubbornly continues for one addicted to
sense gratification, just as a frightening dream continues for one merged in
sleep. The word avidyamäna, "not existing," means that material life is based on
mental concoction, in which one thinks, "I am a man," "I am a woman," "I am a
doctor," "I am a senator," "I am a street sweeper" and so on. A conditioned soul
enthusiastically performs his activities based on the imaginary identification
with the body. Thus although the spirit soul exists and the body exists, the
false identification with the body does not exist. Material life, based on a false
idea, has no factual existence.
After one awakens from a dream, the dim reflection of the dream may
linger in one's memory. Similarly, one engaging in the devotional service of
the Lord may be troubled sometimes by the dim reflection of sinful life. One
should therefore become strong in Kåñëa consciousness by hearing the Lord's
instructions to Çré Uddhava.
TEXT 57
tasmaAäu"Ü"va maA Baux.~ºva
ivaSayaAnas$aid"in‰"yaE:
@AtmaAƒah"NAinaBaARtaM
pazya vaEk(ilpakM( ”amama,
tasmäd uddhava mä bhuìkñva
viñayän asad-indriyaiù
ätmägrahaëa-nirbhätaà
paçya vaikalpikaà bhramam
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; uddhava—My dear Uddhava; mä bhuìkñva—do not enjoy;
viñayän—the objects of sense gratification; asat—impure; indriyaiù—with
senses; ätma—of the self; agrahaëa—inability to realize; nirbhätam—in which
is manifest; paçya—see it; vaikalpikam—based on material duality;
bhramam—the illusion.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O Uddhava, do not try to enjoy sense gratification with the
material senses. See how illusion based on material dualities prevents one from
realizing the self.
PURPORT
Everything that exists is the potency and property of the Supreme Lord,
meant to be used in His loving service. Seeing material objects as separate from
the Lord and thus meant to be possessed and enjoyed by oneself is called
vaikalpikaà bhramam, the illusion of material duality. When selecting one's
personal object of enjoyment, such as food, clothing, residence or vehicle, one
considers the relative quality of the object to be acquired. Consequently, in
material life one is in constant anxiety, trying to acquire the most excellent
sense gratification for one's personal pleasure. If one realizes everything as the
property of the Lord, however, he will see everything as meant for the Lord's
pleasure. He will feel no personal anxiety, because he is satisfied simply to be
engaged in the Lord's loving service. It is not possible to exploit the property of
the Lord and at the same time advance in self-realization.
TEXTS 58-59
iºaæaAe'vamaAinataAe's$aià":
‘alabDaAe's$aUiyataAe'Ta vaA
taAix"ta: s$aiªaç&Ü"Ae vaA
va{ÔyaA vaA pair"h"Aipata:
inaï"YautaAe maUi‡ataAe vaAÁaEr,"
baò"DaEvaM ‘ak(impata:
™aeyas$k(Ama: k{(cC)$gAta
@AtmanaAtmaAnamauÜ"re"ta,
kñipto 'vamänito 'sadbhiù
pralabdho 'süyito 'tha vä
täòitaù sanniruddho vä
våttyä vä parihäpitaù
niñöhyuto mütrito väjïair
bahudhaivaà prakampitaù
çreyas-kämaù kåcchra-gata
ätmanätmänam uddharet
SYNONYMS
kñiptaù—insulted; avamänitaù—neglected; asadbhiù—by bad men;
pralabdhaù—ridiculed; asüyitaù—envied; atha vä—or else; täòitaù—chastised;
sanniruddhaù—tied up; vä—or; våttyä—of his means of livelihood; vä—or;
parihäpitaù—deprived; niñöhyutaù—spat upon; mütritaù—polluted with urine;
vä—or; ajïaiù—by foolish men; bahudhä—repeatedly; evam—thus;
prakampitaù—agitated; çreyaù-kämaù—one who desires the highest goal in
life; kåcchra-gataù—experiencing difficulty; ätmanä—by his intelligence;
ätmänam—himself; uddharet—should save.
TRANSLATION
Even though neglected, insulted, ridiculed or envied by bad men, or even
though repeatedly agitated by being beaten, tied up or deprived of one's
occupation, spat upon or polluted with urine by ignorant people, one who
desires the highest goal in life should in spite of all these difficulties use his
intelligence to keep himself safe on the spiritual platform.
PURPORT
Throughout history many of the above-mentioned inconveniences have
been experienced by devotees of the Lord. One who is advanced in God
consciousness does not allow himself to become obsessed with the material
body even in such conditions, but rather keeps the mind fixed on the spiritual
platform through proper intelligence.
TEXT 60
™aIoÜ"va ovaAca
yaTaEvamanaubauDyaeyaM
vad" naAe vad"taAM var"
çré-uddhava uväca
yathaivam anubudhyeyaà
vada no vadatäà vara
SYNONYMS
çré-uddhavaù uväca—Çré Uddhava said; yathä—how; evam—thus;
anubudhyeyam—I may properly understand; vada—please speak; naù—to us;
vadatäm—of all speakers; vara—O You who are the best.
TRANSLATION
Çré Uddhava said: O best of all speakers, please explain to me how I may
properly understand this.
TEXT 61
s$auäu":Sah"imamaM manya
@Atmanyas$ad"ita‚(mama,
ivaäu"SaAmaipa ivaìAtmana,
‘ak{(itaihR" balaIyas$aI
[%tae tvaÜ"maRinar"taAna,
zAAntaAMstae car"NAAlayaAna,
su-duùñaham imaà manya
ätmany asad-atikramam
viduñäm api viçvätman
prakåtir hi baléyasé
åte tvad-dharma-niratän
çäntäàs te caraëälayän
SYNONYMS
su-duùsaham—most difficult to tolerate; imam—this; manye—I consider;
ätmani—upon oneself; asat—by ignorant people; atikramam—the attacks;
viduñäm—for those who are learned; api—even; viçva-ätman—O soul of the
universe; prakåtiù—one's conditioned personality; hi—certainly;
baléyasé—very strong; åte—except for; tvat-dharma—in Your devotional
service; niratän—those who are fixed; çäntän—peaceful; te—Your;
caraëa-älayän—who reside at the lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
O soul of the universe, the conditioning of one's personality in material life
is very strong, and therefore it is very difficult even for learned men to tolerate
the offenses committed against them by ignorant people. Only Your devotees,
who are fixed in Your loving service and who have achieved peace by residing at
Your lotus feet, are able to tolerate such offenses.
PURPORT
Unless one becomes advanced in the process of hearing and chanting the
glories of the Supreme Lord, theoretical learning cannot make one actually
saintly. One's conditioned personality, the result of long material association,
is very difficult to overcome. Therefore we should humbly take shelter of the
lotus feet of the Supreme Lord, who has so wonderfully explained to Çré
Uddhava the real meaning of knowledge.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Eleventh Canto, Twenty-second
Chapter, of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Enumeration of the Elements of
Material Creation."
23. The Song of the Avanté Brähmaëa.
This chapter tells the story of a mendicant sannyäsé from the Avanté
country as an example of how one should tolerate the disturbances and
offenses created by evil persons.
The harsh words of uncouth persons pierce the heart even more severely
than arrows. Yet a mendicant brähmaëa from the city of Avanté, even while
being attacked by wicked men, considered this trouble to be simply the
consequence of his own past deeds and tolerated it with utmost sobriety.
Previously the brähmaëa had been an agriculturalist and merchant. He had
been extremely greedy, miserly and prone to anger. As a result, his wife, sons,
daughters, relatives and servants were all deprived of every kind of enjoyment
and gradually came to behave unaffectionately toward him. In due course of
time, thieves, family members and providence took away the sum total of his
wealth. Finding himself without any property and abandoned by everyone, the
brähmaëa developed a deep sense of renunciation.
He considered how the earning and preservation of wealth involve great
effort, fear, anxiety and confusion. Because of wealth, there arise fifteen
unwanted items-thievery, violence, lying, deception, lust, anger, pride,
feverishness, disagreement, hatred, distrust, conflict, attachment to women,
gambling and intoxication. When this meditation arose in his heart, the
brähmaëa could understand that the Supreme Lord Çré Hari had somehow
become satisfied with him. He felt that only because the Lord was pleased with
him had the apparently unfavorable turn of events in his life occurred. He was
grateful that a sense of detachment had arisen in his heart and considered it
the factual means for delivering his soul. In this condition he determined to
engage the duration of his life in the worship of Lord Hari and thus accepted
the mendicant order of tridaëòi-sannyäsa. Subsequently, he would enter
different villages to beg charity, but the people would harass and disturb him.
But he simply tolerated all this, remaining firm as a mountain. He remained
fixed in his chosen spiritual practice and sang a song renowned as the
Bhikñu-géta.
Neither mortal persons, the demigods, the soul, the ruling planets, the
reactions of work nor time are the causes of one's happiness and distress.
Rather, the mind alone is their cause, because it is the mind that makes the
spirit soul wander in the cycle of material life. The real purpose of all charity,
religiosity and so forth is to bring the mind under control. A person who has
already composed his mind in meditation has no need for these other
processes, and for a person who is incapable of fixing his mind they are of no
practical use. The false conception of material ego binds the transcendental
soul to material sense objects. The Avanté brähmaëa therefore became
determined to bring himself over the insurmountable ocean of material
existence by rendering service to the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord,
Mukunda, with the same perfect faith in the Lord exhibited by the great
devotees of the past.
Only when one can focus his intelligence on the lotus feet of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead can the mind be completely subdued; this is the
essence of all practical prescriptions for spiritual advancement.
TEXT 1
™aIbaAd"r"AyaiNAç&vaAca
s$a WvamaAzAMis$ata oÜ"vaena
BaAgAvatamauKyaena d"AzAAhR"mauKya:
s$aBaAjayana, Ba{tyavacaAe mauku(nd"s$a,
tamaAbaBaASae ™avaNAIyavaIyaR:
çré-bädaräyaëir uväca
sa evam äçaàsita uddhavena
bhägavata-mukhyena däçärha-mukhyaù
sabhäjayan bhåtya-vaco mukundas
tam äbabhäñe çravaëéya-véryaù
SYNONYMS
çré-bädaräyaëiù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; saù—He; evam—thus;
äçaàsitaù—respectfully requested; uddhavena—by Uddhava; bhägavata—of
the devotees; mukhyena—by the greatest; däçärha—of the dynasty of Däçärha
(the Yadus); mukhyaù—the chief; sabhäjayan—praising; bhåtya—of His
servant; vacaù—the words; mukundaù—Lord Mukunda, Kåñëa; tam—to him;
äbabhäñe—began to speak; çravaëéya—most worthy of hearing about;
véryaù—whose omnipotency.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Lord Mukunda, the chief of the Däçärhas, having
thus been respectfully requested by the best of His devotees, Çré Uddhava, first
acknowledged the fitness of his servant's statements. Then the Lord, whose
glorious exploits are most worthy of being heard, began to reply to him.
TEXT 2
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
baAhR"s$patya s$a naAstya‡a
s$aADauvaE= äu"jaR"naeir"taE:
äu"r"lE(iBaRªamaAtmaAnaM
ya: s$amaADaAtaumaIìr":
çré-bhagavän uväca
bärhaspatya sa nästy atra
sädhur vai durjaneritaiù
duraktair bhinnam ätmänaà
yaù samädhätum éçvaraù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
bärhaspatya—O disciple of Båhaspati; saù—he; na asti—there is not; atra—in
this world; sädhuù—a saintly person; vai—indeed; durjana—by uncivilized
men; éritaiù—used; duruktaiù—by insulting words; bhinnam—disturbed;
ätmänam—his mind; yaù—who; samädhätum—to compose; éçvaraù—is
capable.
TRANSLATION
Lord Çré Kåñëa said: O disciple of Båhaspati, there is virtually no saintly man
in this world capable of resettling his own mind after it has been disturbed by
the insulting words of uncivilized men.
PURPORT
In the modern age there is widespread propaganda ridiculing the path of
spiritual realization, and thus even saintly devotees are disturbed to see the
progress of human society being obstructed. Still, a devotee of the Lord must
tolerate any personal insult, though he cannot tolerate offense against the
Lord Himself or the Lord's pure devotee.
TEXT 3
na taTaA tapyatae ivaÜ":
paumaAna, baANAEstau mamaR"gAE:
yaTaA taud"inta mamaRsTaA
÷s$ataAM paç&SaeSava:
na tathä tapyate viddhaù
pumän bäëais tu marma-gaiù
yathä tudanti marma-sthä
hy asatäà paruñeñavaù
SYNONYMS
na—not; tathä—in the same way; tapyate—is caused pain; viddhaù—pierced;
pumän—a person; bäëaiù—by arrows; tu—however; marma-gaiù—going to
the heart; yathä—as; tudanti—prick; marma-sthäù—attaching within the
heart; hi—indeed; asatäm—of evil persons; paruña—harsh (words);
iñavaù—the arrows.
TRANSLATION
Sharp arrows which pierce one's chest and reach the heart do not cause as
much suffering as the arrows of harsh, insulting words that become lodged
within the heart when spoken by uncivilized men.
TEXT 4
k(Tayainta mah"tpauNyama,
witah"As$aimah"AeÜ"va
tamahM" vaNARiyaSyaAima
inabaAeDa s$aus$amaAih"ta:
kathayanti mahat puëyam
itihäsam ihoddhava
tam ahaà varëayiñyämi
nibodha su-samähitaù
SYNONYMS
kathayanti—they tell; mahat—greatly; puëyam—pious; itihäsam—story;
iha—in this regard; uddhava—My dear Uddhava; tam—that; aham—I;
varëayiñyämi—will describe; nibodha—please listen; su-samähitaù—with
careful attention.
TRANSLATION
My dear Uddhava, in this regard a most pious story is told, and I shall now
describe it to you. Please listen with careful attention.
PURPORT
The Lord will now relate to Uddhava a historical account which teaches
how to tolerate the insults of others.
TEXT 5
ke(naicaià"ºauNAA gAItaM
pair"BaUtaena äu"jaR$naE:
smar"taA Da{itayaule(na
ivapaAkM( inajak(maRNAAma,
kenacid bhikñuëä gétaà
paribhütena durjanaiù
smaratä dhåti-yuktena
vipäkaà nija-karmaëäm
SYNONYMS
kenacit—by a certain; bhikñuëä—sannyäsé; gétam—sung; paribhütena—who
was insulted; durjanaiù—by impious persons; smaratä—remembering;
dhåti-yuktena—fixing his resolution; vipäkam—the consequences;
nija-karmaëäm—of his own past activities.
TRANSLATION
Once a certain sannyäsé was insulted in many ways by impious men.
However, with determination he remembered that he was suffering the fruit of
his own previous karma. I will narrate to you his story and that which he spoke.
PURPORT
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura comments as follows. "Often those
who give up the materialistic path and devote themselves to renunciation are
attacked by impious persons. This analysis, however, is superficial, since the
punishment is actually the cumulative result of one's past karma. Some
renunciants show lack of tolerance when presented with the remnants of their
previous sins and thus are forced to enter again onto the path of impious life.
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu therefore instructs that one should become as
tolerant as a tree. If a neophyte on the path of devotional service to the Lord's
pure devotees is attacked by envious persons, he must accept it as a
consequence of his previous fruitive activities. One should be intelligent and
avoid future unhappiness by rejecting the ethic of an eye for an eye, a tooth
for a tooth. If one refuses to enter into enmity with envious men, they will
automatically leave him alone."
TEXT 6
@vaintaSau iã"ja: k(iêä,"
@As$aId"AX#Yatama: i™ayaA
vaAtaARva{iÔa: k(d"yaRstau
k(AmaI laubDaAe'itak(Aepana:
avantiñu dvijaù kaçcid
äséd äòhyatamaù çriyä
värtä-våttiù kadaryas tu
kämé lubdho 'ti-kopanaù
SYNONYMS
avantiñu—in the Avanté country; dvijaù—brähmaëa; kaçcit—a certain;
äsét—there was; äòhya-tamaù—very rich; çriyä—with opulences; värtä—by
business; våttiù—earning his livelihood; kadaryaù—miserly; tu—but;
kämé—lusty; lubdhak—greedy; ati-kopanaù—very prone to anger.
TRANSLATION
In the country of Avanté there once lived a certain brähmaëa who was very
rich and gifted with all opulences, and who was engaged in the occupation of
commerce. But he was a miserly person—lusty, greedy and very prone to anger.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, the Avanté country is the district of
Malwa. This brähmaëa was extremely wealthy, doing business in agriculture,
banking and so on. Being a miser, he suffered agony when his hard-earned
wealth was lost, as will be described by the Lord Himself.
TEXT 7
ÁaAtayaAe'itaTayastasya
vaAx.~maA‡aeNAAipa naAicaRtaA:
zAUnyaAvas$aTa @AtmaAipa
k(Alae k(AmaEr"naicaRta:
jïätayo 'tithayas tasya
väì-mätreëäpi närcitäù
çünyävasatha ätmäpi
käle kämair anarcitaù
SYNONYMS
jïätayaù—the relatives; atithayaù—and guests; tasya—his; väk-mätreëa
api—even by words; na arcitäù—were not shown respect; çünya-avasathe—in
his home deprived of religiosity and sense gratification; ätmä—himself;
api—even; käle—at the suitable times; kämaiù—with sensory enjoyment;
anarcitaù—not gratified.
TRANSLATION
In his home, devoid of religiosity and lawful sense gratification, the family
members and guests were never properly respected, even with words. He would
not even allow sufficient gratification for his own body at the suitable times.
TEXT 8
äu"h."zAIlasya k(d"yaRsya
åu"÷ntae pau‡abaAnDavaA:
d"Ar"A äu"ih"tar"Ae Ba{tyaA
ivaSaNNAA naAcar"na, i‘ayama,
duhçélasya kadaryasya
druhyante putra-bändhaväù
därä duhitaro bhåtyä
viñaëëä näcaran priyam
SYNONYMS
duùçélasya—having a bad character; kadaryasya—toward the miser;
druhyante—they developed enmity; putra—his sons; bändhaväù—and in-laws;
däräù—his wife; duhitaraù—his daughters; bhåtyäù—the servants;
visaëëäù—disgusted; na äcaran—they did not act; priyam—affectionately.
TRANSLATION
Since he was so hardhearted and miserly, his sons, in-laws, wife, daughters
and servants began to feel inimical toward him. Becoming disgusted, they would
never treat him with affection.
TEXT 9
tasyaEvaM yaºaivaÔasya
cyautasyaAeBayalaAek(ta:
DamaRk(Amaivah"Inasya
cau‚u(Dau: paÂaBaAigAna:
tasyaivaà yakña-vittasya
cyutasyobhaya-lokataù
dharma-käma-vihénasya
cukrudhuù païca-bhäginaù
SYNONYMS
tasya—at him; evam—in this way; yakña-vittasya—who simply kept his wealth
without spending it, like the Yakñas, who guard the treasury of Kuvera;
cyutasya—who was deprived; ubhaya—of both; lokataù—worlds (this life and
the next); dharma—religiosity; käma—and sense gratification;
vihénasya—lacking; cakrudhuù—they became angry; païca-bhäginaù—the
deities of the five prescribed household sacrifices.
TRANSLATION
In this way the presiding deities of the five family sacrifices became angry at
the båähmaëa, who, being niggardly, guarded his wealth like a Yakña, who had
no good destination either in this world or the next, and who was totally
deprived of religiosity and sense enjoyment.
TEXT 10
tad"vaDyaAnaiva›astapauNyas$
k(nDasya BaUir"d"
@TaAeR'pyagAcC$iªaDanaM
baù"AyaAs$apair"™ama:
tad-avadhyäna-visrastapuëya-
skandhasya bhüri-da
artho 'py agacchan nidhanaà
bahv-äyäsa-pariçramaù
SYNONYMS
tat—of them; avadhyäna—because of his neglect; visrasta—depleted;
puëya—of piety; skandhasya—whose portion; bhüri-da—O magnanimous
Uddhava; arthaù—the wealth; api—indeed; agacchat nidhanam—became lost;
bahu—much; äyäsa—of endeavor; pariçramaù—which consisted only of the
labor.
TRANSLATION
O magnanimous Uddhava, by his neglect of these demigods he depleted his
stock of piety and all his wealth. The accumulation of his repeated exhaustive
endeavors was totally lost.
PURPORT
The brähmaëa's stock of piety became like a withered branch that no
longer gives fruits or flowers. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé comments that the brähmaëa
had a trace of piety directed at the Supreme Lord with hopes of liberation.
That pure portion of the branch of his piety remained unwithered, eventually
giving the fruit of knowledge.
TEXT 11
ÁaAtyaAe jagA{"ò": ik(iÂata,
ik(iÂaÚ"syava oÜ"va
dE"vata: k(Alata: ik(iÂaä,"
“aöbanDaAena{RpaAiTaRvaAta,
jïätyo jagåhuù kiïcit
kiïcid dasyava uddhava
daivataù kälataù kiïcid
brahma-bandhor nå-pärthivät
SYNONYMS
jïätayaù—the relatives; jagåhuù—took away; kiïcit—some; kiïcit—some;
dasyavaù—thieves; uddhava—O Uddhava; daivataù—by providence;
kälataù—by time; kiïcit—some; brahma-bandhoù—of the so-called brähmaëa;
nå—by common men; pärthivät—and by elevated government officials.
TRANSLATION
Some of the wealth of this so-called brähmaëa was taken away by his
relatives, My dear Uddhava, some by thieves, some by the whims of providence,
some by the effects of time, some by ordinary men and some by government
authorities.
PURPORT
It appears that even though the so-called brähmaëa was determined not to
spend his money, his wife and other relatives managed to squeeze out a
portion. According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, providence here refers to fires in
the home and other types of occasional misfortune. Effects of time here refers
to the destruction of agricultural crops through seasonal irregularities and
other such occurrences. Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura points out
that one should not merely proclaim oneself to be a brähmaëa but should
actually understand one's original identity as a servant of the Lord. One
declaring himself to be a brähmaëa but maintaining a materialistic mentality is
not a real brähmaëa, but rather a brahma-bandhu, or so-called brähmaëa. The
humble devotees of Lord Viñëu, following the indications of the Vedic
scriptures, refer to themselves as unfortunate and unable to understand the
kingdom of God; they do not proudly proclaim themselves to be brähmaëas.
Those who are wise, however, know that such humble devotees are actually
brähmaëas whose hearts are cleansed by the pure mode of goodness.
TEXT 12
s$a WvaM ‰"ivaNAe naíe"
DamaRk(AmaivavaijaRta:
opaeiºataê svajanaEzA,
icantaAmaApa äu"r"tyayaAma,
sa evaà draviëe nañöe
dharma-käma-vivarjitaù
upekñitaç ca sva-janaiç
cintäm äpa duratyayäm
SYNONYMS
saù—he; evam—thus; draviëe—when his property; nañöe—was lost;
dharma—religiosity; käma—and sense enjoyment; vivarjitaù—devoid of;
upekñitaù—neglected; ca—and; sva-janaiù—by his family members;
cintäm—anxiety; äpa—he obtained; duratyayäm—insurmountable.
TRANSLATION
Finally, when his property was completely lost, he who never engaged in
religiosity or sense enjoyment became ignored by his family members. Thus he
began to feel unbearable anxiety.
TEXT 13
tasyaEvaM DyaAyataAe d"IGa<
naí"r"Ayastapaisvana:
iKaâtaAe baASpak(NQ&sya
inavaeRd": s$aumah"AnaBaUta,
tasyaivaà dhyäyato dérghaà
nañöa-räyas tapasvinaù
khidyato bäñpa-kaëöhasya
nirvedaù su-mahän abhüt
SYNONYMS
tasya—of him; evam—thus; dhyäyataù—thinking; dérgham—for a long time;
nañöa-räyaù—his wealth lost; tapasvinaù—experiencing agony;
khidyataù—lamenting; bäñpa-kaëöhasya—his throat choked with tears;
nirvedaù—a sense of renunciation; su-mahän—very great; abhüt—arose.
TRANSLATION
Having lost all his wealth, he felt great pain and lamentation. His throat
choked up with tears, and he meditated for a long time on his fortune. Then a
powerful feeling of renunciation came over him.
PURPORT
The brähmaëa had previously been trained in pious life, but his past
goodness was covered by his offensive behavior. Finally, his previous purity
was reawakened within him.
TEXT 14
s$a caAhe"d"mah"Ae k(íM"
va{TaAtmaA mae'nautaAipata:
na DamaARya na k(AmaAya
yasyaATaARyaAs$a wRä{"zA:
sa cähedam aho kañöaà
våthätmä me 'nutäpitaù
na dharmäya na kämäya
yasyärthäyäsa édåçaù
SYNONYMS
saù—he; ca—and; aha—spoke; idam—this; aho—alas; kañöam—the painful
misfortune; våthä—vainly; ätmä—the self; me—my; anutäpitaù—distressed;
na—not; dharmäya—for religiosity; na—nor; kämäya—for sense gratification;
yasya—whose; artha—for wealth; äyäsaù-labor; édåçaù—such as this.
TRANSLATION
The brähmaëa spoke as follows: O what great misfortune! I have simply
tormented myself uselessly, struggling so hard for money that was not even
intended for religiosity or material enjoyment.
TEXT 15
‘aAyaeNAATaA: k(d"yaARNAAM
na s$auKaAya k(d"Acana
wh" caAtmaAepataApaAya
ma{tasya nar"k(Aya ca
präyeëäthäù kadaryäëäà
na sukhäya kadäcana
iha cätmopatäpäya
måtasya narakäya ca
SYNONYMS
präyeëa—generally; arthäù—items of wealth; kadaryäëäm—of those who are
misers; na—do not; sukhäya—lead to happiness; kadäcana—at any time;
iha—in this life; ca—both; ätma—of himself; upatäpäya—result in the
torment; måtasya—and of him when he has died; narakäya—in the
attainment of hell; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
Generally, the wealth of misers never allows them any happiness. In this life
it causes their self-torment, and when they die it sends them to hell.
PURPORT
A miser is afraid to spend his money even for obligatory religious and social
duties. Offending God and people in general, he goes to hell.
TEXT 16
yazAAe yazAisvanaAM zAuÜM"
ëAGyaA yae gAuiNAnaAM gAuNAA:
laAeBa: svalpaAe'ipa taAna, h"inta
iì‡aAe è&paimavaeips$atama,
yaço yaçasvinäà çuddhaà
çläghyä ye guëinäà guëäù
lobhaù sv-alpo 'pi tän hanti
çvitro rüpam ivepsitam
SYNONYMS
yaçaù—the fame; yaçasvinäm—of those who are famous; çuddham—pure;
çläghyäù—praiseworthy; ye—which; guëinäm—of those endowed with good
qualities; guëäù—the qualities; lobhaù—greed; su-alpaù—a little; api—even;
tän—these; hanti—destroys; çvitraù—white leprosy; rüpam—physical beauty;
iva—just as; épsitam—enchanting.
TRANSLATION
Whatever pure fame is possessed by the famous and whatever praiseworthy
qualities are found in the virtuous are destroyed by even a small amount of
greed, just as one's attractive physical beauty is ruined by a trace of white
leprosy.
TEXT 17
@TaRsya s$aADanae is$aÜe"
otk(SaeR r"ºaNAe vyayae
naAzAAepaBaAegA @AyaAs$as$a,
‡aAs$aiêntaA ”amaAe na{NAAma,
arthasya sädhane siddhe
utkarñe rakñaëe vyaye
näçopabhoga äyäsas
träsaç cintä bhramo nåëäm
SYNONYMS
arthaysa—of wealth; sädhane—in the earning; siddhe—in the attainment;
utkarñe—in the increasing; rakñaëe—in the protecting; vyaye—in the
expending; näça—in the loss; upabhoge—and in the enjoyment;
äyäsaù—labor; träsaù—fear; cintä—anxiety; bhramaù—confusion;
nåëäm—for men.
TRANSLATION
In the earning, attainment, increase, protection, expense, loss and enjoyment
of wealth, all men experience great labor, fear, anxiety and delusion.
TEXTS 18-19
staeyaM ihM"s$aAna{taM d"mBa:
k(Ama: ‚(AeDa: smayaAe mad":
Baed"Ae vaEr"maivaìAs$a:
s$aMs$paDaAR vyas$anaAina ca
Wtae paÂad"zAAnaTaAR
÷TaRmaUlaA mataA na{NAAma,
tasmaAd"naTaRmaTaARKyaM
™aeyaAe'TaI= äU"r"tastyajaeta,
steyaà hiàsänåtaà dambhaù
kämaù krodhaù smayo madaù
bhedo vairam aviçväsaù
saàspardhä vyasanäni ca
ete païcadaçänarthä
hy artha-mülä matä nåëäm
tasmäd anartham arthäkhyaà
çreyo-'rthé düratas tyajet
SYNONYMS
steyam—theft; hiàsä—violence; anåtam—lying; dambhaù—duplicity;
kämaù—lust; krodhaù—anger; smayaù—perplexity; madaù—pride;
bhedaù—disagreement; vairam—enmity; aviçväsaù—lack of faith;
saàspardhä—rivalry; vyasanäni—the dangers (coming from women, gambling
and intoxication); ca—and; ete—these; païcadaça—fifteen;
anarthäù—unwanted things; hi—indeed; artha-müläù—based on wealth;
matäù—are known; nåëäm—by men; tasmät—therefore; anartham—that
which is undesirable; artha-äkhyam—wealth, spoken of as if desirable;
çreyaù-arthé—one who desires the ultimate benefit of life; dürataù—at a great
distance; tyajet—should leave.
TRANSLATION
Theft, violence, speaking lies, duplicity, lust, anger, perplexity, pride,
quarreling, enmity, faithlessness, envy and the dangers caused by women,
gambling and intoxication are the fifteen undesirable qualities that contaminate
men because of greed for wealth. Although these qualities are undesirable, men
falsely ascribe value to them. One desiring to achieve the real benefit of life
should therefore remain aloof from undesirable material wealth.
PURPORT
The words anartham arthäkhyam, or "undesirable wealth," indicate wealth
that cannot be efficiently engaged in the loving service of the Lord. Such
superfluous money or property will undoubtedly pollute a man with all of the
above-mentioned qualities and therefore should be given up.
TEXT 20
iBaântae ”aAtar"Ae d"Ar"A:
ipatar": s$auô$d"staTaA
Wk(AiµagDaA: k(Aik(iNAnaA
s$aâ: s$avaeR'r"ya: k{(taA:
bhidyante bhrätaro däräù
pitaraù suhådas tathä
ekäsnigdhäù käkiëinä
sadyaù sarve 'rayaù kåtäù
SYNONYMS
bhidyante—they break off; bhrätaraù—the brothers; däräù—wife;
pitaraù—parents; suhådaù—friends; tathä—and; eka—as if one;
äsnigdhäù—very dear; käkiëinä—by a small coin; sadyaù—immediately;
sarve—all of them; arayaù—enemies; kåtäù—made.
TRANSLATION
Even a man's brothers, wife, parents and friends united with him in love will
immediately break off their affectionate relationships and become enemies over
a single coin.
TEXT 21
@TaeRnaAlpaIyas$aA ÷etae
s$aMr"bDaA d"Iæamanyava:
tyajantyaAzAu s$pa{DaAe £ainta
s$ah"s$aAets$a{jya s$aAEô$d"ma,
arthenälpéyasä hy ete
saàrabdhä dépta-manyavaù
tyajanty äçu spådho ghnanti
sahasotsåjya sauhådam
SYNONYMS
arthena—by wealth; alpéyasä—insignificant; hi—even; ete—they;
saàrabdhäù—agitated; dépta—inflamed; manyavaù—their anger;
tyajanti—they give up; äçu—very quickly; spådhaù—becoming quarrelsome;
ghnanti—they destroy; sahasä—quickly; utsåjya—rejecting;
sauhådam—goodwill.
TRANSLATION
For even a small amount of money these relatives and friends become very
agitated and their anger is inflamed. Acting as rivals, they quickly give up all
sentiments of goodwill and will reject one at a moment's notice, even to the
point of committing murder.
TEXT 22
labDvaA janmaAmar"‘aATya<
maAnauSyaM taä," iã"jaAƒyataAma,
tad"naAä{"tya yae svaATa<
£ainta yaAntyazAuBaAM gAitama,
labdhvä janmämara-prärthyaà
mänuñyaà tad dvijägryatäm
tad anädåtya ye svärthaà
ghnanti yänty açubhäà gatim
SYNONYMS
labdhvä—having attained; janma—the birth; amara—by the demigods;
prärthyam—prayed for; mänuñyam—human; tat—and in that;
dvija-ägryatäm—the status of being the best of the twice-born; tat—that;
anädåtya—not appreciating; ye—those who; sva-artham—their own best
interest; ghnanti—destroy; yänti—they go; açubhäm—to an inauspicious;
gatim—destination.
TRANSLATION
Those who obtain human life, which is prayed for even by the demigods, and
in that human birth become situated as first-class brähmaëas, are extremely
fortunate. If they disregard this important opportunity, they are certainly
killing their own self-interest and thus achieve a most unfortunate end.
PURPORT
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura comments as follows. "Human
birth is better than that of the demigods, ghosts, spirits, animals, trees, lifeless
stones, and so forth, because the demigods simply enjoy celestial pleasures, and
in other forms of life there is excessive suffering. It is only in human life that
one deeply considers one's ultimate benefit in life. Human birth is therefore
more desirable than even that of the demigods." Within human life the
position of a high-class brähmaëa is certainly most desirable. If a brähmaëa,
however, gives up the devotional service of the Lord and works hard like a
çüdra simply for the prestige of his community, he is certainly on the platform
of material sense gratification. The special qualification of the brähmaëas is
the spiritual knowledge by which they recognize every living entity to be an
eternal servant of the Lord. A brähmaëa, free from false ego, thus feels himself
lower than a blade of grass and tolerantly offers respect to all living entities.
All human beings, and especially the brähmaëas, should avoid becoming killers
of their own self-interest by neglecting Kåñëa consciousness, the loving service
of the Lord. Such neglect paves the way for future suffering.
TEXT 23
svagAARpavagARyaAeã"ARrM"
‘aApya laAek(imamaM paumaAna,
‰"ivaNAe k(Ae'nauSaÀaeta
matyaAeR'naTaRsya DaAmaina
svargäpavargayor dväraà
präpya lokam imaà pumän
draviëe ko 'nuñajjeta
martyo 'narthasya dhämani
SYNONYMS
svarga—of heaven; apavargayoù—and liberation; dväram—the gateway;
präpya—achieving; lokam—the human life; imam—this; pumän—a person;
draviëe—to property; kaù—who; anuñajjeta—will become attached;
martyaù—prone to death; anarthasya—of worthlessness; dhämani—in the
realm.
TRANSLATION
What mortal man, having achieved this human life, which is the very
gateway to both heaven and liberation, would willingly become attached to that
abode of worthlessness, material property?
PURPORT
That which one intends to use for one's personal sense gratification is
called material property, whereas paraphernalia to be used in the Lord's loving
service is understood to be spiritual. One should give up all one's material
property by utilizing it completely in the devotional service of the Lord. A
person who owns a luxurious mansion should install the Deity of the Lord and
hold regular programs to propagate Kåñëa consciousness. Similarly, wealth
should be used to build temples of the Lord and publish literature scientifically
explaining the Personality of Godhead. One who blindly renounces material
property without utilizing it in the service of the Lord does not understand
that everything belongs to the Personality of Godhead. Such blind
renunciation is based on the material idea that "This property could belong to
me, but I don't want it." Everything, in fact, belongs to God; knowing this one
neither tries to enjoy nor to reject the things of this world, but peacefully
engages them in the service of the Lord.
TEXT 24
de"vaiSaRipata{BaUtaAina
ÁaAtaIna, banDaUMê BaAigAna:
@s$aMivaBajya caAtmaAnaM
yaºaivaÔa: patatyaDa:
devarñi-pitå-bhütäni
jïätén bandhüàç ca bhäginaù
asaàvibhajya cätmänaà
yakña-vittaù pataty adhaù
SYNONYMS
deva—the demigods; åñi—sages; pitå—departed forefathers; bhütäni—and
living entities in general; jïätén—one's immediate relatives;
bandhün—extended family; ca—and; bhäginaù—to the shareholders;
asaàvibhajya—not distributing; ca—and; ätmänam—to oneself;
yakña-vittaù—whose wealth is simply like that of a Yakña; patati—he falls;
adhaù—down.
TRANSLATION
One who fails to distribute his wealth to the proper shareholders—the
demigods, sages, forefathers and ordinary living entities, as well as his
immediate relatives, in-laws and own self—is maintaining his wealth simply
like a Yakña and will fall down.
PURPORT
One who does not share his wealth with the above-mentioned authorized
persons and does not even enjoy the wealth himself will certainly suffer
unlimited problems in life.
TEXT 25
vyaTaRyaATaeRh"yaA ivaÔaM
‘amaÔasya vayaAe balama,
ku(zAlaA yaena is$aDyainta
jar"Q&: ikM( nau s$aADayae
vyarthayärthehayä vittaà
pramattasya vayo balam
kuçalä yena sidhyanti
jaraöhaù kià nu sädhaye
SYNONYMS
vyarthayä—useless; artha—for wealth; éhayä—by the endeavor;
vittam—money; pramattasya—of the maddened; vayaù—youth;
balam—strength; kuçaläù—those who are discriminating; yena—by means of
which; sidhyanti—become perfect; jaraöhaù—an old man; kim—what;
nu—indeed; sädhaye—can I achieve.
TRANSLATION
Discriminating persons are able to utilize their money, youth and strength to
achieve perfection. But I have feverishly squandered these in the useless
endeavor for further wealth. Now that I am an old man, what can I achieve?
TEXT 26
k(smaAts$ax.~iflazyatae ivaã"Ana,
vyaTaRyaATaeRh"yaAs$ak{(ta,
k(syaicanmaAyayaA naUnaM
laAek(Ae'yaM s$auivamaAeih"ta:
kasmät saìkliçyate vidvän
vyarthayärthehayäsakåt
kasyacin mäyayä nünaà
loko 'yaà su-vimohitaù
SYNONYMS
kasmät—why; saìkliçyate—suffers; vidvän—one who is wise; vyarthayä—vain;
artha-éhayä—in the pursuit of wealth; asakåt—constantly; kasyacit—of
someone; mäyayä—by the illusory potency; nünam—certainly; lokaù—the
world; ayam—this; su-vimohitaù—very much bewildered.
TRANSLATION
Why must an intelligent man suffer by his constant vain efforts to get
wealth? Indeed, this whole world is most bewildered by someone's illusory
potency.
TEXT 27
ikM( DanaEDaRnadE"vaAR ikM(
k(AmaEvaAR k(AmadE"ç&ta
ma{tyaunaA ƒasyamaAnasya
k(maRiBavaAeRta janmadE":
kià dhanair dhana-dair vä kià
kämair vä käma-dair uta
måtyunä grasyamänasya
karmabhir vota janma-daiù
SYNONYMS
kim—of what use; dhanaiù—are different kinds of wealth; dhana-daiù—the
givers of wealth; vä—or; kim—what is the use; kämaiù—of the objects of sense
gratification; vä—or; käma-daiù—those who give such sense gratification;
uta—or; måtyunä—by death; grasyamänasya—for one who is being seized;
karmabhiù—by fruitive activities; vä uta—or else; janma-daiù—which give
him his next birth.
TRANSLATION
For one who is in the grips of death, what is the use of wealth or those who
offer it, sense gratification or those who offer it, or, for that matter, any type of
fruitive activity, which simply causes one to again take birth in the material
world?
TEXT 28
naUnaM mae BagAvaAMstauí":
s$avaR$de"vamayaAe h"ir":
yaena naItaAe d"zAAmaetaAM
inavaeRd"êAtmana: plava:
nünaà me bhagaväàs tuñöaù
sarva-deva-mayo hariù
yena néto daçäm etäà
nirvedaç cätmanaù plavaù
SYNONYMS
nünam—certainly; me—with Me; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; tuñöaù—is satisfied; sarva-deva-mayaù—who comprises all the
demigods; hariù—Lord Viñëu; yena—by whom; nétaù—I have been brought;
daçäm—to the condition; etäm—this; nirvedaù—detachment; ca—and;
ätmanaù—of the self; plavaù—the boat (to carry me over the ocean of material
suffering).
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Hari, who contains within
Himself all the demigods, must be satisfied with me. Indeed, He has brought me
to this suffering condition and forced me to experience detachment, which is
the boat to carry me over this ocean of material life.
PURPORT
The brähmaëa could understand that the demigods, who award different
types of sense gratification as the result of one's fruitive activities, cannot
bestow the highest benefit in life. When the brähmaëa lost all his property he
could understand that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who comprises all
the demigods, had given him the highest perfection, not by awarding sense
gratification but by saving him from the ocean of material enjoyment. Being
thus deprived of the opportunity to cultivate religiosity, wealth, sense
gratification and liberation, the brähmaëa became detached, and
transcendental knowledge awakened within his heart.
TEXT 29
s$aAe'hM" k(AlaAvazAeSaeNA
zAAeSaiyaSyae'ËÿmaAtmana:
@‘amaÔaAe'iKalasvaATaeR
yaid" syaAits$aÜ" @Atmaina
so 'haà kälävaçeñeëa
çoñayiñye 'ìgam ätmanaù
apramatto 'khila-svärthe
yadi syät siddha ätmani
SYNONYMS
saù aham—I; käla-avaçeñeëa—with whatever time remains; çoñayiñye—shall
reduce to the minimum; aìgam—this body; ätmanaù—my;
apramattaù—unbewildered; akhila—entire; sva-arthe—in the real
self-interest; yadi—if; syät—there remains any (time); siddhaù—satisfied;
ätmani—within myself.
TRANSLATION
If there is any time remaining in my life, I will perform austerities and force
my body to subsist on the bare necessities. Without further confusion I shall
pursue that which constitutes my entire self-interest in life, and I shall remain
satisfied within the self.
TEXT 30
ta‡a maAmanaumaAede"r"na,
de"vaAiñBauvanaeìr"A:
mauó"taeRna “aölaAekM(
KaÅ%AËÿ: s$amas$aADayata,
tatra mäm anumoderan
deväs tri-bhuvaneçvaräù
muhürtena brahma-lokaà
khaöväìgaù samasädhayat
SYNONYMS
tatra—in this regard; mäm—with me; anumoderan—may they kindly be
pleased; deväù—the demigods; tri-bhuvana—of the three worlds; éçvaräù—the
controllers; muhürtena—in a single moment; brahmalokam—the spiritual
world; khaöväìga—King Khaöväìga; samasädhayat—achieved.
TRANSLATION
Thus may the presiding demigods of these three worlds kindly show their
mercy upon me. Indeed, Mahäräja Khaöväìga was able to achieve the spiritual
world in a single moment.
PURPORT
The brähmaëa of Avanté thought that although he was an old man who
might die at any moment he could follow the example of Mahäräja Khaöväìga,
who achieved the Lord's mercy in a single moment. Mahäräja Khaöväìga, as
described in the Second Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, fought valiantly on
behalf of the demigods, and they offered the king any benediction he might
desire. Khaöväìga Mahäräja chose to find out the remaining duration of his
life, which unfortunately was a single moment. The king therefore
immediately surrendered to Lord Kåñëa and achieved the spiritual world. The
brähmaëa of Avanté desired to follow this example; with the blessings of the
demigods, who are all devotees of the Lord, he hoped to become fully Kåñëa
conscious before giving up his body.
TEXT 31
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
wtyaiBa‘aetya manas$aA
÷AvantyaAe iã"jas$aÔama:
onmaucya ô$d"yaƒanTaIna,
zAAntaAe iBaºaur"BaUnmauina:
çré-bhagavän uväca
ity abhipretya manasä
hy ävantyo dvija-sattamaù
unmucya hådaya-granthén
çänto bhikñur abhün muniù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Lord said; iti—thus;
abhipretya—concluding; manasä—within his mind; hi—indeed; ävantyaù—of
the district of Avanté; dvija-sat-tamaù—now the most pious brähmaëa;
unmucya—untying; hådaya—in his heart; granthén—the knots (of desire);
çäntaù—peaceful; bhikñuù—a mendicant sannyäsé; abhüt—he became;
muniù—silent.
TRANSLATION
Lord Çré Kåñëa continued: His mind thus determined, that most excellent
Avanté brähmaëa was able to untie the knots of desire within his heart. He
then assumed the role of a peaceful and silent sannyäsé mendicant.
TEXT 32
s$a cacaAr" mah"ImaetaAM
s$aMyataAtmaein‰"yaAinala:
iBaºaATa< nagAr"ƒaAmaAna,
@s$aËÿAe'laiºataAe'ivazAta,
sa cacära mahém etäà
saàyatätmendriyänilaù
bhikñärthaà nagara-grämän
asaìgo 'lakñito 'viçat
SYNONYMS
saù—he; cacära—wandered; mahém—the earth; etäm—this;
saàyata—controlled; ätma—his consciousness; indriya—senses; anilaù—and
vital air; bhikñä-artham—for the purpose of taking charity; nagara—the cities;
grämän—and villages; asaìgaù—without any association; alakñitaù—not
making himself prominent, thus unrecognized; aviçat—he entered.
TRANSLATION
He wandered about the earth, keeping his intelligence, senses and life air
under control. To beg charity he traveled alone to various cities and villages. He
did not advertise his advanced spiritual position and thus was not recognized by
others.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, the acceptance of
the tridaëòi-sannyäsa order of life is the chief indication that one has actually
taken shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The three rods of the
daëòa, or staff, of the Vaiñëava sannyäsé indicate control of the body, mind
and words by engaging them only in the loving service of the Lord. This
procedure helps one to become more tolerant than a tree, as recommended by
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. By strict control of one's body, mind and speech,
the quality of tolerance becomes strengthened, and thus one manifests the
further qualities of forgiving others, never wasting one's time, detachment
from sense gratification, lack of false pride in one's work and not hankering for
liberation. One in this way gives up the mentality of materialistic persons, who
establish so-called affectionate relationships of mutual flattery and exploit
each other for sense gratification. One who adopts the strict path of Kåñëa
consciousness, following in the footsteps of great souls, can achieve the shelter
of the Lord.
TEXT 33
taM vaE ‘avayas$aM iBaºauma,
@vaDaUtamas$aÀanaA:
ä{"î"A payaRBavana, Ba‰"
baù"IiBa: pair"BaUitaiBa:
taà vai pravayasaà bhikñum
avadhütam asaj-janäù
dåñövä paryabhavan bhadra
bahvébhiù paribhütibhiù
SYNONYMS
tam—him; vai—indeed; pravayasam—old; bhikñum—the beggar;
avadhütam—unclean; asat—low-class; janäù—persons; dåñövä—seeing;
paryabhavan—dishonored; bhadra—O kind Uddhava; bahvébhiù—with many;
paribhütibhiù—insults
TRANSLATION
O kind Uddhava, seeing him as an old, dirty beggar, rowdy persons would
dishonor him with many insults.
TEXT 34
ke(icait‡avaeNAuM jagA{"ò"r,"
Wke( paA‡aM k(maNx"lauma,
paIQM& caEke('ºas$aU‡aM ca
k(nTaAM caIr"AiNA ke(cana
‘ad"Aya ca paunastaAina
d"izARtaAnyaAd"äu"mauR"nae:
kecit tri-veëuà jagåhur
eke pätraà kamaëòalum
péöhaà caike 'kña-sütraà ca
kanthäà céräëi kecana
pradäya ca punas täni
darçitäny ädadur muneù
SYNONYMS
kecit—some of them; tri-veëum—his sannyäsé triple staff; jagåhuù—they took
away; eke—some; pätram—his begging bowl; kamaëòalum—waterpot;
péöham—seat; ca—and; eke—some; akña-sütram—chanting beads; ca—and;
kanthäm—rags; céräëi—torn; kecana—some of them; pradäya—offering back;
ca—and; punaù—again; täni—they; darçitäni—which were being shown;
ädaduù—they took away; muneù—of the sage.
TRANSLATION
Some of these persons would take away his sannyäsé rod, and some the
waterpot which he was using as a begging bowl. Some took his deerskin seat,
some his chanting beads, and some would steal his torn, ragged clothing.
Displaying these things before him, they would pretend to offer them back but
would then hide them again.
TEXT 35
@ªaM ca BaEºyas$ampaªaM
BauÃaAnasya s$air"Ôaqe%
maU‡ayainta ca paAipaï"A:
ï"Ivantyasya ca maUDaRina
annaà ca bhaikñya-sampannaà
bhuïjänasya sarit-taöe
mütrayanti ca päpiñöhäù
ñöhévanty asya ca mürdhani
SYNONYMS
annam—food; ca—and; bhaikñya—by his begging; sampannam—acquired;
bhuïjänasya—of him who was about to partake; sarit—of a river; taöe—on the
shore; mütrayanti—they urinate upon; ca—and; päpiñöhäù—most sinful
persons; ñöhévanti—they spit; asya—his; ca—and; mürdhani—on his head.
TRANSLATION
When he was sitting on the bank of a river about to partake of the food that
he had collected by his begging, such sinful rascals would come and pass urine
on it, and they would dare to spit on his head.
TEXT 36
yatavaAcaM vaAcayainta
taAx"yainta na vail( caeta,
tajaRyantyapare" vaAigBa:
staenaAe'yaimaita vaAid"na:
ba©ainta r"jjvaA taM ke(icaä,"
baDyataAM baDyataAimaita
yata-väcaà väcayanti
täòayanti na vakti cet
tarjayanty apare vägbhiù
steno 'yam iti vädinaù
badhnanti rajjvä taà kecid
badhyatäà badhyatäm iti
SYNONYMS
yata-väcam—who had taken a vow of silence; väcayanti—they try to make
speak; täòayanti—they beat; na vakti—he does not speak; cet—if;
tarjayanti—they cajole; apare—others; vägbhiù—with their words;
stenaù—thief; ayam—this person; iti—thus; vädinaù—saying;
badhnanti—they bind up; rajjvä—with rope; tam—him; kecit—some;
badhyatäm badhyatäm—"Bind him up! Bind him up!"; iti—thus saying.
TRANSLATION
Although he had taken a vow of silence, they would try to make him speak,
and if he did not speak they would beat him with sticks. Others would chastise
him, saying, "This man is just a thief." And others would bind him up with
rope, shouting, "Tie him up! Tie him up!"
TEXT 37
iºapantyaeke('vajaAnanta
WSa DamaRDvaja: zAQ&:
ºaINAivaÔa wmaAM va{iÔama,
@ƒah"ItsvajanaAeijJata:
kñipanty eke 'vajänanta
eña dharma-dhvajaù çaöhaù
kñéëa-vitta imäà våttim
agrahét sva-janojjhitaù
SYNONYMS
kñipanti—they criticize; eke—some; avajänantaù—committing insults;
eñaù—this person; dharma-dhvajaù—a religious hypocrite; çaöhaù—a cheater;
kñéëa-vittaù—having lost his wealth; imäm—this; våttim—occupation;
agrahét—has taken; sva-jana—by his family; ujjhitaù—turned out.
TRANSLATION
They would criticize and insult him, saying, "This man is just a hypocrite
and a cheat. He makes a business of religion simply because he lost all his
wealth and his family threw him out."
TEXTS 38-39
@h"Ae WSa mah"As$aAr"Ae
Da{itamaAna, igAir"r"Aix"va
maAEnaena s$aADayatyaTa<
bak(vaä," ä{"X#inaêya:
wtyaeke( ivah"s$antyaenama,
Wke( äu"vaARtayainta ca
taM babanDauinaRç&ç&Daur,"
yaTaA ‚(Lx"nakM( iã"jama,
aho eña mahä-säro
dhåtimän giri-räò iva
maunena sädhayaty arthaà
baka-vad dåòha-niçcayaù
ity eke vihasanty enam
eke durvätayanti ca
taà babandhur nirurudhur
yathä kréòanakaà dvijam
SYNONYMS
aho—just see; eñaù—this person; mahä-säraù—very powerful;
dhåtimän—steadfast; giri-räö—the Himalaya Mountains; iva—just like;
maunena—with his vow of silence; sädhayati—he is striving; artham—for his
goal; baka-vat—just like a duck; dåòha—firm; niçcayaù—his determination;
iti—thus speaking; eke—some; vihasanti—ridicule; enam—him; eke—some;
durvätayanti—pass foul air; ca—and; tam—him; babandhuù—they bound in
chains; nirurudhuù—kept captive; yathä—as; kréòanakam—a pet animal;
dvijam—that brähmaëa.
TRANSLATION
Some would ridicule him by saying, "Just see this greatly powerful sage! He
is as steadfast as the Himalaya Mountains. By practice of silence he strives for
his goal with great determination, just like a duck." Other persons would pass
foul air upon him, and sometimes others would bind this twice-born brähmaëa
in chains and keep him captive like a pet animal.
TEXT 40
WvaM s$a BaAEitakM( äu":KaM
dE"ivakM( dE"ih"kM( ca yata,
BaAel(vyamaAtmanaAe id"íM"
‘aAæaM ‘aAæamabauDyata
evaà sa bhautikaà duùkhaà
daivikaà daihikaà ca yat
bhoktavyam ätmano diñöaà
präptaà präptam abudhyata
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; saù—he; bhautikam—due to other living entities;
duùkham—suffering; daivikam—due to higher powers; daihikam—due to his
own body; ca—and; yat—whatever; bhoktavyam—destined to be suffered;
ätmanaù—his own; diñöam—allotted by destiny; präptam präptam—whatever
was received; abudhyata—he understood.
TRANSLATION
The brähmaëa understood that all his suffering—from other living beings,
from the higher forces of nature and from his own body—was unavoidable,
being allotted to him by providence.
PURPORT
Many cruel persons harassed the brähmaëa, and his own body caused him
suffering in the form of fever, hunger, thirst, fatigue, etc. The higher forces of
nature are those that cause excessive heat, cold, wind and rain. The brähmaëa
realized that his suffering was due to his false identification with his material
body, and not to the interaction of his body with external phenomena. Rather
than try to adjust his external situation, he tried to adjust his Kåñëa
consciousness and thus realize his actual identity as eternal spirit soul.
TEXT 41
pair"BaUta wmaAM gAATaAma,
@gAAyata nar"ADamaE:
paAtayaià": sva DamaRsTaAe
Da{itamaAsTaAya s$aAiÔvak(Lma,
paribhüta imäà gäthäm
agäyata narädhamaiù
pätayadbhiù sva dharma-stho
dhåtim ästhäya sättvikém
SYNONYMS
paribhütaù—insulted; imäm—this; gäthäm—song; agäyata—he sang;
nara-adhamaiù—by low-class men; pätayadbhiù—who were trying to make him
fall down; sva-dharma—in his own duty; sthaù—remaining firm; dhåtim—his
resolution; ästhäya—fixing; sättvikém—in the mode of goodness.
TRANSLATION
Even while being insulted by these low-class men who were trying to effect
his downfall, he remained steady in his spiritual duties. Fixing his resolution in
the mode of goodness, he began to chant the following song.
PURPORT
Resolution in the mode of goodness is described in Bhagavad-gétä (18.33):
dhåtyä yayä dhärayate
manaù-präëendriya-kriyäù
yogenävyabhicäriëyä
dhåtiù sä pärtha sättviké
"O son of Påthä, that determination which is unbreakable, which is sustained
with steadfastness by yoga practice, and thus controls the mind, life and the
acts of the senses, is in the mode of goodness."
Atheists who are envious of the devotees of the Supreme Lord are called
narädhamas, or the lowest of men, and undoubtedly are enroute to hell. By all
means at their disposal they disturb the devotional service of the Lord,
sometimes by direct attack and sometimes by mockery. The devotees, however,
remain tolerant, fixing their determination in the mode of goodness. As
described by Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé in Çré Upadeçämåta (1),
väco vegaà manasaù krodha-vegaà
jihvä-vegam udaropastha-vegam
etän vegän yo viñaheta dhéraù
sarväm apémäà påthivéà sa çiñyät
"A sober person who can tolerate the urge to speak, the mind's demands, the
actions of anger and the urges of the tongue, belly and genitals is qualified to
make disciples all over the world."
TEXT 42
iã"ja ovaAca
naAyaM janaAe mae s$auKaäu":Kahe"taur,"
na de"vataAtmaA ƒah"k(maRk(AlaA:
mana: parM" k(Ar"NAmaAmanainta
s$aMs$aAr"ca‚M( pair"vataRyaeâta,
dvija uväca
näyaà jano me sukha-duùkha-hetur
na devatätmä graha-karma-käläù
manaù paraà käraëam ämananti
saàsära-cakraà parivartayed yat
SYNONYMS
dvijaù uväca—the brähmaëa said; na—not; ayam—these; janaù—people;
me—my; sukha—of happiness; duùkha—and distress; hetuù—the cause;
na—nor; devatä—the demigods; ätmä—my own body; graha—the controlling
planets; karma—my past work; käläù—or time; manaù—the mind;
param—rather only; käraëaà—the cause; ämananti—is called by standard
authorities; saàsära—of material life; cakram—the cycle; parivartayet—causes
to rotate; yat—which.
TRANSLATION
The brähmaëa said: These people are not the cause of my happiness and
distress. Neither are the demigods, my own body, the planets, my past work, or
time. Rather, it is the mind alone that causes happiness and distress and
perpetuates the rotation of material life.
TEXT 43
manaAe gAuNAAna, vaE s$a{jatae balaIyas$a,
tataê k(maARiNA ivalaºaNAAina
zAuflaAina k{(SNAAnyaTa laAeih"taAina
taeBya: s$avaNAAR: s$a{tayaAe Bavainta
mano guëän vai såjate baléyas
tataç ca karmäëi vilakñaëäni
çukläni kåñëäny atha lohitäni
tebhyaù sa-varëäù såtayo bhavanti
SYNONYMS
manaù—the mind; guëän—the activities of the modes of nature; vai—indeed;
såjate—manifests; baléyaù—very strong; tataù—by those qualities; ca—and;
karmäëi—material activities; vilakñaëäni—of different varieties;
çukläni—white (in the mode of goodness); kåñëäni—black (in the mode of
ignorance); atha—and; lohitäni—red (in the mode of passion); tebhyaù—from
those activities; sa-varëäù—having the same corresponding colors;
såtayaù—created conditions; bhavanti—arise.
TRANSLATION
The powerful mind actuates the functions of the material modes, from which
evolve the different kinds of material activities in the modes of goodness,
ignorance and passion. From the activities in each of these modes develop the
corresponding statuses of life.
PURPORT
In the mode of goodness one considers oneself to be a saintly or wise person,
in the mode of passion one struggles for material success, and in the mode of
ignorance one becomes cruel, lazy and sinful. By the combination of the
material modes one identifies oneself as a demigod, a king, a rich capitalist, a
wise scholar, etc. These conceptions are material designations generated from
the modes of nature, and they arrange themselves according to the tendency of
the powerful mind to enjoy temporary sense gratification. The word baléyas in
this verse, meaning "very strong," indicates that the material mind becomes
insensitive to intelligent advice. Even if we are informed that we are
committing many sins and offenses in order to earn money, we may still think
that money should be acquired at all costs, since without it one can neither
perform religious ceremonies nor gratify the senses with beautiful women,
mansions and vehicles. Once the money is achieved, one suffers further
problems, but the stubborn mind will never heed good advice in this regard.
One must therefore give up mental concoction and control the mind in Kåñëa
consciousness, as exemplified here by the brähmaëa from Avanté.
TEXT 44
@naIh" @AtmaA manas$aA s$amaIh"taA
ih"r"NmayaAe mats$aKa oiã"caíe"
mana: svailaËMÿ pair"gA{÷ k(AmaAna,
jauSaiªabaÜ"Ae gAuNAs$aËÿtaAe's$aAE
anéha ätmä manasä saméhatä
hiraë-mayo mat-sakha udvicañöe
manaù sva-liìgaà parigåhya kämän
juñan nibaddho guëa-saìgato 'sau
SYNONYMS
anéhaù—not endeavoring; ätmä—the Supreme Soul; manasä—along with the
mind; saméhatä—which is struggling; hiraë-mayaù—exhibiting transcendental
enlightenment; mat-sakhaù—my friend; udvicañöe—looks down from above;
manaù—the mind; sva-lingam—which projects the image of the material
world upon him (the soul); parigåhya—embracing; kämän—objects of desire;
juñan—engaging with; nibaddhaù—becomes bound; guëa-saìgataù—because
of association with the modes of nature; asau—that infinitesimal spirit soul.
TRANSLATION
Although present along with the struggling mind within the material body,
the Supersoul is not endeavoring, because He is already endowed with
transcendental enlightenment. Acting as my friend, He simply witnesses from
His transcendental position. I, the infinitesimal spirit soul, on the other hand,
have embraced this mind, which is the mirror reflecting the image of the
material world. Thus I have become engaged in enjoying objects of desire and
am entangled due to contact with the modes of nature.
TEXT 45
d"AnaM svaDamaAeR inayamaAe yamaê
™autaM ca k(maARiNA ca s$aä,"˜ataAina
s$avaeR manaAeinaƒah"laºaNAAntaA:
par"Ae ih" yaAegAAe manas$a: s$amaAiDa:
dänaà sva-dharmo niyamo yamaç ca
çrutaà ca karmäëi ca sad-vratäni
sarve mano-nigraha-lakñaëäntäù
paro hi yogo manasaù samädhiù
SYNONYMS
dänam—giving of charity; sva-dharmaù—carrying out one's prescribed duties;
niyamaù—the regulations of day-to-day life; yamaù—the major regulations of
spiritual practice; ca—and; çrutam—listening to scripture; ca—and;
karmäëi—pious work; ca—and; sat—pure; vratäni—vows; sarve—all;
manaù-nigrahaù—the subduing of the mind; lakñaëa—consisting of;
antäù—their aim; paraù—supreme; hi—indeed; yogaù—transcendental
knowledge; manasaù—of the mind; samädhiù—meditation on the Supreme in
trance.
TRANSLATION
Charity, prescribed duties, observance of major and minor regulative
principles, hearing from scripture, pious works and purifying vows all have as
their final aim the subduing of the mind. Indeed, concentration of the mind on
the Supreme is the highest yoga.
TEXT 46
s$amaAih"taM yasya mana: ‘azAAntaM
d"AnaAid"iBa: ikM( vad" tasya k{(tyama,
@s$aMyataM yasya manaAe ivanazyaä,"
d"AnaAid"iBaêed"parM" ik(maeiBa:
samähitaà yasya manaù praçäntaà
dänädibhiù kià vada tasya kåtyam
asaàyataà yasya mano vinaçyad
dänädibhiç ced aparaà kim ebhiù
SYNONYMS
samähitam—perfectly fixed; yasya—whose; manaù—mind;
praçäntam—pacified; däna-ädibhiù—by charity and the other processes;
kim—what; vada—please tell; tasya—of those processes; kåtyam—use;
asaàyatam—uncontrolled; yasya—whose; manaù—mind;
vinaçyat—dissolving; däna-ädibhiù—by these processes of charity and so on;
cet—if; aparam—further; kim—what use; ebhiù—of these.
TRANSLATION
If one's mind is perfectly fixed and pacified, then tell me what need does one
have to perform ritualistic charity and other pious rituals? And if one's mind
remains uncontrolled, lost in ignorance, then of what use are these engagements
for him?
TEXT 47
manaAevazAe'nyae ÷Bavana, sma de"vaA
manaê naAnyasya vazAM s$amaeita
BaISmaAe ih" de"va: s$ah"s$a: s$ah"IyaAna,
yauHjyaAã"zAe taM s$a ih" de"vade"va:
mano-vaçe 'nye hy abhavan sma devä
manaç ca nänyasya vaçaà sameti
bhéñmo hi devaù sahasaù sahéyän
yuïjyäd vaçe taà sa hi deva-devaù
SYNONYMS
manaù—of the mind; vaçe—under the control; anye—others; hi—indeed;
abhavan—have become; sma—in the past; deväù—the senses (represented by
their presiding deities); manaù—the mind; ca—and; na—never; anyasya—of
another; vaçam—under the control; sameti—comes; bhéñmaù—fearsome;
hi—indeed; devaù—the godlike power; sahasaù—than the strongest;
sahéyän—stronger; yuïjyät—can fix; vaçe—under control; tam—that mind;
saù—such a person; hi—indeed; deva-devaù—the master of all the senses.
TRANSLATION
All the senses have been under the control of the mind since time
immemorial, and the mind himself never comes under the sway of any other.
He is stronger than the strongest, and his godlike power is fearsome. Therefore,
anyone who can bring the mind under control becomes the master of all the
senses.
TEXT 48
tamäu"jaRyaM zA‡aumas$a÷vaegAma,
@ç&ntaudM" taªa ivaijatya ke(icata,
ku(vaRntyas$aiã"ƒah"ma‡a matyaE=r,"
ima‡aANyaud"As$aInair"paUna, ivamaUX#A:
tam durjayaà çatrum asahya-vegam
arun-tudaà tan na vijitya kecit
kurvanty asad-vigraham atra martyair
miträëy udäséna-ripün vimüòhäù
SYNONYMS
tam—that; durjayam—difficult to conquer; çatrum—enemy;
asahya—intolerable; vegam—whose urges; arum-tudam—capable of
tormenting the heart; tat—therefore; na vijitya—failing to conquer over;
kecit—some people; kurvanti—they create; asat—useless; vigraham—quarrel;
atra—in this world; martyaiù—with mortal living beings; miträëi—friends;
udäséna—indifferent persons; ripün—and rivals; vimüòhäù—completely
bewildered.
TRANSLATION
Failing to conquer this irrepressible enemy, the mind, whose urges are
intolerable and who torments the heart, many people are completely bewildered
and create useless quarrel with others. Thus they conclude that other people are
either their friends, their enemies or parties indifferent to them.
PURPORT
Falsely identifying oneself as the material body, and accepting bodily
expansions such as children and grandchildren to be one's eternal property,
one completely forgets that every living being is qualitatively one with God.
There is no essential difference between one individual being and another,
since all are eternal expansions of the Supreme Lord. The mind absorbed in
false ego creates the material body, and by identification with the body, the
conditioned soul is overwhelmed by false pride and ignorance, as described
here.
TEXT 49
de"hM" manaAemaA‡aimamaM gA{h"ItvaA
mamaAh"imatyanDaiDayaAe manauSyaA:
WSaAe'h"manyaAe'yaimaita ”amaeNA
äu"r"ntapaAre" tamais$a ”amainta
dehaà mano-mätram imaà gåhétvä
mamäham ity andha-dhiyo manuñyäù
eño 'ham anyo 'yam iti bhrameëa
duranta-päre tamasi bhramanti
SYNONYMS
deham—the material body; manaù-mätram—coming simply from the mind;
imam—this; gåhétvä—having accepted; mama—mine; aham—I; iti—thus;
andha—blinded; dhiyaù—their intelligence; manuñyäù—human beings;
eñaù—this; aham—I am; anyaù—someone else; ayam—this is; iti—thus;
bhrameëa—by the illusion; duranta-päre—unsurpassable; tamasi—within the
darkness; bhramanti—they wander.
TRANSLATION
Persons who identify with this body, which is simply the product of the
material mind, are blinded in their intelligence, thinking in terms of "I" and
"mine." Because of their illusion of "this is I, but that is someone else," they
wander in endless darkness.
TEXT 50
janastau he"tau: s$auKaäu":KayaAeêeta,
ik(maAtmanaêA‡a ih" BaAEmayaAestata,
ijaù"AM ¸(icats$and"zAita svad"ià"s$a,
taãe"d"naAyaAM k(tamaAya ku(pyaeta,
janas tu hetuù sukha-duùkhayoç cet
kim ätmanaç cätra hi bhaumayos tat
jihväà kvacit sandaçati sva-dadbhis
tad-vedanäyäà katamäya kupyet
SYNONYMS
janaù—these people; tu—but; hetuù—the cause; sukha-duùkhayoù—of my
happiness and distress; cet—if; kim—what; ätmanaù—for the self; ca—and;
atra—in this conception; hi—indeed; bhaumayoù—they pertain to the
material bodies; tat—that (status of being the performer and the sufferer);
jihväm—the tongue; kvacit—sometimes; sandaçati—is bitten; sva—by one's
own; dadbhiù—teeth; tat—of that; vedanäyäm—in the distress;
katamäya—with whom; kupyet—can one get angry.
TRANSLATION
If you say that these people are the cause of my happiness and distress, then
where is the place of the soul in such a conception? This happiness and distress
pertain not to the soul but to the interactions of material bodies. If someone
bites his tongue with his own teeth, at whom can he become angry in his
suffering?
PURPORT
Although bodily pleasure and pain are felt by the soul, one must tolerate
such duality, understanding it to be a creation of one's own material mind. If
one accidentally bites his own tongue or lip, he cannot become angry and pull
out his own teeth. Similarly, all living beings are individual parts and parcels of
God, and thus nondifferent from each other. All of them are meant to serve
the Supreme Lord in spiritual equality. If the living beings give up their
master's service and instead quarrel among themselves, they will be forced to
suffer by the laws of nature. If the conditioned souls establish artificial
relationships of affection based on the material body and having nothing to do
with God, then time itself will destroy such relationships, and they will be
subjected to further suffering. But if the individual living entities understand
each other to be of the same family, all having connection with the Supreme
Lord, their mutual friendship will develop. Thus one should not exhibit anger
that will be harmful to oneself and others. Although the brähmaëa was
receiving kind offerings of charity from some people and being harassed and
beaten by others, he denied that these people were the ultimate cause of his
happiness and distress, for he was fixed on the platform of self-realization
beyond the material body and mind.
TEXT 51
äu":Kasya he"tauyaRid" de"vataAstau
ik(maAtmanasta‡a ivak(Ar"yaAestata,
yad"ËÿmaËeÿna inah"nyatae ¸(icata,
‚u(Dyaeta k(smaE pauç&Sa: svade"he"
duùkhasya hetur yadi devatäs tu
kim ätmanas tatra vikärayos tat
yad aìgam aìgena nihanyate kvacit
krudhyeta kasmai puruñaù sva-dehe
SYNONYMS
duùkhasya—of suffering; hetuù—the cause; yadi—if; devatäù—the demigods
(who rule over the different senses within the body); tu—but; kim—what;
ätmanaù—for the soul; tatra—in that connection; vikärayoù—which pertain
to the transformable (senses and their deities); tat—that (acting and being
acted upon); yat—when; aìgam—a limb; aìgena—by another limb;
nihanyate—is hurt; kvacit—ever; krudhyeta—should become angry;
kasmai—at whom; puruñaù—the living entity; sva-dehe—within his own body.
TRANSLATION
If you say that the demigods who rule the bodily senses cause suffering, still,
how can such suffering apply to the spirit soul? This acting and being acted
upon are merely interactions of the changeable senses and their presiding
deities. When one limb of the body attacks another, with whom can the person
in that body be angry?
PURPORT
The brähmaëa is elaborately explaining the condition of self-realization, in
which one understands oneself to be totally distinct from the material body
and mind and the demigods who control them. By cultivating bodily happiness
we are forced to accept bodily pain. Foolish conditioned souls endeavor to
eliminate distress and enjoy happiness, but material happiness and distress are
two sides of the same coin. One cannot relish bodily happiness without
identifying oneself as the body. But as soon as such identification occurs, one is
harassed by the innumerable pains and sufferings also inevitably present
within the same body. Bodily happiness and distress are administered by the
demigods, who can never be brought under our control; thus one remains
subject to the whims of providence on the material platform. If, however, one
surrenders to the Personality of Godhead, Lord Kåñëa, the reservoir of all
pleasure, one can reach the spiritual platform, where transcendental bliss
enlivens the liberated souls without any interrupting anxiety or unhappiness.
TEXT 52
@AtmaA yaid" syaAts$auKaäu":Kahe"tau:
ik(manyatasta‡a inajasvaBaAva:
na ÷AtmanaAe'nyaâid" tanma{SaA syaAta,
‚u(Dyaeta k(smaAªa s$auKaM na äu":Kama,
ätmä yadi syät sukha-duùkha-hetuù
kim anyatas tatra nija-svabhävaù
na hy ätmano 'nyad yadi tan måñä syät
krudhyeta kasmän na sukhaà na duùkham
SYNONYMS
ätmä—the soul himself; yadi—if; syät—should be; sukha-duùkha—of
happiness and distress; hetuù—the cause; kim—what; anyataù—other;
tatra—in that theory; nija—his own; svabhävaù—nature; na—not;
hi—indeed; ätmanaù—than the soul; anyat—anything separate; yadi—if;
tat—that; måñä—false; syät—would be; krudhyeta—one can become angry;
kasmät—at whom; na—there is no; sukham—happiness; na—nor;
duùkham—misery.
TRANSLATION
If the soul himself were the cause of happiness and distress, then we could
not blame others, since happiness and distress would be simply the nature of the
soul. According to this theory, nothing except the soul actually exists, and if we
were to perceive something besides the soul, that would be illusion. Therefore,
since happiness and distress do not actually exist in this concept, why become
angry at oneself or others?
PURPORT
Because a dead body does not feel pleasure or pain, our happiness and
distress are due to our own consciousness, which is the nature of the soul. It is
not, however, the original function of the soul to enjoy material happiness and
suffer material distress. These are produced by ignorant material affection and
enmity based on false ego. Our involvement in sense gratification drags our
consciousness into the material body, where it is shocked by the inevitable
bodily pains and problems.
On the spiritual platform there is neither material happiness nor distress
because there the living consciousness is fully engaged, without personal
desire, in the devotional service of the Supreme Lord. This is the actual
position of happiness, aloof from false bodily identification. Rather than
uselessly becoming enraged with others for one's own foolishness, one should
take to self-realization and solve the problems of life.
TEXT 53
ƒah"A inaimaÔaM s$auKaäu":KayaAeêeta,
ik(maAtmanaAe'jasya janasya tae vaE
ƒahE"ƒaRh"syaEva vad"inta paIx"AM
‚u(Dyaeta k(smaE pauç&SastataAe'nya:
grahä nimittaà sukha-duùkhayoç cet
kim ätmano 'jasya janasya te vai
grahair grahasyaiva vadanti péòäà
krudhyeta kasmai puruñas tato 'nyaù
SYNONYMS
grahäù—the controlling planets; nimittam—the immediate cause;
sukha-duùkhayoù—of happiness and distress; cet—if; kim—what;
ätmanaù—for the soul; ajasya—who is unborn; janasya—of that which is
born; te—those planets; vai—indeed; grahaiù—by other planets; grahasya—of
a planet; eva—only; vadanti—(expert astrologers) say; péòäm—suffering;
krudhyeta—should become angry; kasmai—at whom; puruñaù—the living
entity; tataù—from that material body; anyaù—distinct.
TRANSLATION
And if we examine the hypothesis that the planets are the immediate cause
of suffering and happiness, then also where is the relationship with the soul,
who is eternal? After all, the effect of the planets applies only to things that
have taken birth. Expert astrologers have moreover explained how the planets
are only causing pain to each other. Therefore, since the living entity is distinct
from these planets and from the material body, against whom should he vent his
anger?
TEXT 54
k(maARstau he"tau: s$auKaäu":KayaAeêeta,
ik(maAtmanastaiÜ" jax"Ajax"tvae
de"h"stvaicatpauç&SaAe'yaM s$aupaNAR:
‚u(Dyaeta k(smaE na ih" k(maR maUlama,
karmästu hetuù sukha-duùkhayoç cet
kim ätmanas tad dhi jaòäjaòatve
dehas tv acit puruño 'yaà suparëaù
krudhyeta kasmai na hi karma mülam
SYNONYMS
karma—one's fruitive activities; astu—hypothetically granted; hetuù—the
cause; sukha-duùkhayoù—of happiness and distress; cet—if; kim—what;
ätmanaù—for the soul; tat—that karma; hi—certainly; jaòa-ajaòatve—in
being both material and not material; dehaù—the body; tu—on the one hand;
acit—not living; puruñaù—the person; ayam—this; su-parëaù—endowed with
living consciousness; krudhyeta—one should become angry; kasmai—at whom;
na—are not; hi—certainly; karma—fruitive activities; mülam—the root cause.
TRANSLATION
If we assume that fruitive work is the cause of happiness and distress, we
still are not dealing with the soul. The idea of material work arises when there
is a spiritual actor who is conscious and a material body that undergoes the
transformation of happiness and distress as a reaction to such work. Since the
body has no life, it cannot be the actual recipient of happiness and distress, nor
can the soul, who is ultimately completely spiritual and aloof from the material
body. Since karma thus has no ultimate basis in either the body or the soul, at
whom can one become angry?
PURPORT
The material body is composed of earth, water, fire and air, just like bricks,
stones and other objects. Our consciousness, falsely absorbed in the body,
experiences happiness and distress, and fruitive work (karma) is performed
when we falsely consider ourselves to be the enjoyers of the material world.
False ego is thus the illusory combination within our minds of the self and the
body, which are actually two separate objects. Since karma, or material work, is
based on illusory consciousness, these activities are also illusory and have no
factual basis in either the body or the soul. When a conditioned soul falsely
considers himself to be the body, and consequently the enjoyer of the material
world, he tries to find pleasure in illicit connection with women. Such sinful
activity is based on his false concept of being the body and thus the enjoyer of
women and of the world. Since he is not the body, his activity of enjoying a
woman does not actually exist. There is merely the interaction of two
machines, namely the two bodies, and the interaction of the illusory
consciousness of the man and woman. The sensation of illicit sex occurs
within the material body and is falsely assimilated by the false ego as its own
experience. Thus the miserable or pleasurable reactions of karma ultimately
act upon the false ego and not upon the body, which is composed of dull
matter, nor upon the soul, which has nothing to do with matter. False ego is
the illusory concoction of the mind; it is specifically this false ego that is
suffering happiness and distress. The soul cannot become angry at others, since
he is not personally enjoying or suffering. Rather, the false ego is doing this.
TEXT 55
k(Alastau he"tau: s$auKaäu":KayaAeêeta,
ik(maAtmanasta‡a tad"Atmak(Ae's$aAE
naA¢aeihR" taApaAe na ih"masya tatsyaAta,
‚u(Dyaeta k(smaE na par"sya ã"nã"ma,
kälas tu hetuù sukha-duùkhayoç cet
kim ätmanas tatra tad-ätmako 'sau
nägner hi täpo na himasya tat syät
krudhyeta kasmai na parasya dvandvam
SYNONYMS
kälaù—time; tu—but; hetuù—the cause; sukha-duùkhayoù—of happiness and
distress; cet—if; kim—what; ätmanaù—for the soul; tatra—in that idea;
tat-ätmakaù—based on time; asau—the soul; na—not; agneù—from fire;
hi—indeed; täpaù—burning; na—not; himasya—of snow; tat—that;
syät—becomes; krudhyeta—should become angry; kasmai—at whom;
na—there is not; parasya—for the transcendental soul; dvandvam—duality.
TRANSLATION
If we accept time as the cause of happiness and distress, that experience still
cannot apply to the spirit soul, since time is a manifestation of the Lord's
spiritual potency and the living entities are also expansions of the Lord's
spiritual potency manifesting through time. Certainly a fire does not burn its
own flames or sparks, nor does the cold harm its own snowflakes or hail. In
fact, the spirit soul is transcendental and beyond the experience of material
happiness and distress. At whom, therefore, should one become angry?
PURPORT
The material body is dull matter and does not experience happiness, distress
or anything else. Because the spirit soul is completely transcendental, he
should fix his consciousness on the transcendental Lord, who is beyond
material happiness and distress. It is only when transcendental consciousness
falsely identifies with dull matter that the living entity imagines he is enjoying
and suffering in the material world. This illusory identification of
consciousness with matter is called false ego and is the cause of material
existence.
TEXT 56
na ke(naicat¸(Aipa k(TaÂanaAsya
ã"nã"Aepar"AgA: par"ta: par"sya
yaTaAh"ma: s$aMs$a{itaè&ipaNA: syaAä,"
WvaM ‘abauÜ"Ae na ibaBaeita BaUtaE:
na kenacit kväpi kathaïcanäsya
dvandvoparägaù parataù parasya
yathähamaù saàsåti-rüpiëaù syäd
evaà prabuddho na bibheti bhütaiù
SYNONYMS
na—there is not; kenacit—by the agency of anyone; kva api—anywhere;
kathaïcana—by any means; asya—for him, the soul; dvandva—of the duality
(of happiness and distress); uparägaù—the influence; parataù parasya—who is
transcendental to material nature; yathä—in the same way as; ahamaù—for
the false ego; saàsåti—to material existence; rüpiëaù—which give shape;
syät—arises; evam—thus; prabuddhaù—one whose intelligence is awakened;
na bibheti—does not fear; bhütaiù—on the basis of material creation.
TRANSLATION
The false ego gives shape to illusory material existence and thus experiences
material happiness and distress. The spirit soul, however, is transcendental to
material nature; he can never actually be affected by material happiness and
distress in any place, under any circumstance or by the agency of any person. A
person who understands this has nothing whatsoever to fear from the material
creation.
PURPORT
The brähmaëa has refuted six specific explanations of the happiness and
distress of the living entity, and now he refutes any other explanation that
might be given. On the basis of false ego, the bodily covering factually
overwhelms the spirit soul, and thus one falsely enjoys and suffers that which
has no real relationship with oneself. One who can understand this sublime
teaching of the brähmaëa, spoken by the Lord to Uddhava, will never again
suffer the terrible anxiety of fear within the material world.
TEXT 57
WtaAM s$a @AsTaAya par"Atmainaï"Ama,
@DyaAis$ataAM paUvaRtamaEmaRh"iSaRiBa:
@hM" tair"SyaAima äu"r"ntapaArM"
tamaAe mauku(nd"Ax.~i„ainaSaevayaEva
etäà sa ästhäya parätma-niñöhäm
adhyäsitäà pürvatamair maharñibhiù
ahaà tariñyämi duranta-päraà
tamo mukundäìghri-niñevayaiva
SYNONYMS
etäm—this; saù—such; ästhäya—becoming completely fixed in;
para-ätma-niñöhäm—devotion to the Supreme Person, Kåñëa;
adhyäsitäm—worshiped; pürva-tamaiù—by previous; mahä-åñibhiù—äcäryas;
aham—I; tariñyämi—shall cross over; duranta-päram—the insurmountable;
tamaù—the ocean of nescience; mukunda-aìghri—of the lotus feet of
Mukunda; niñevayä—by worship; eva—certainly.
TRANSLATION
I shall cross over the insurmountable ocean of nescience by being firmly
fixed in the service of the lotus feet of Kåñëa. This was approved by the
previous äcäryas, who were fixed in firm devotion to the Lord, Paramätmä, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
This verse is quoted by Kåñëadäsa Kaviräja in his Caitanya-caritämåta
(Madhya 3.6). Çréla Prabhupäda comments as follows. "In connection with this
verse, which is a quotation from Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.23.57), Çréla
Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura says that of the sixty-four items required
for rendering devotional service, acceptance of the symbolic marks of sannyäsa
is a regulative principle. If one accepts the sannyäsa order, his main business is
to devote his life completely to the service of Mukunda, Kåñëa. If one does not
completely devote his mind and body to the service of the Lord, he does not
actually become a sannyäsé. It is not simply a matter of changing dress. In
Bhagavad-gétä (6.1) it is also stated, anäçritaù karma-phalaà käryaà karma
karoti yaù/ sa sannyäsé ca yogé ca: one who works devotedly for the satisfaction
of Kåñëa is a sannyäsé. The dress is not sannyäsa, but the attitude of service to
Kåñëa is.
"The word parätma-niñöhä means being a devotee of Lord Kåñëa. Parätmä,
the Supreme Person, is Kåñëa. Éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù
[Bs. 5.1]. Those who are completely dedicated to the lotus feet of Kåñëa in
service are actually sannyäsés. As a matter of formality, the devotee accepts the
sannyäsa dress as previous äcäryas did. He also accepts the three daëòas. Later
Viñëu Svämé considered that accepting the dress of a tri-daëòé was
parätma-niñöhä. Therefore sincere devotees add another daëòa, the jéva-daëòa,
to the three existing daëòas. The Vaiñëava sannyäsé is known as a
tridaëòi-sannyäsé. The Mäyävädé sannyäsé accepts only one daëòa, not
understanding the purpose of tri-daëòa. Later, many persons in the community
of Çiva Svämé gave up the ätma-niñöhä (devotional service) of the Lord and
followed the path of Çaìkaräcärya. Instead of accepting 108 names, those in
the Çiva Svämé sampradäya follow the path of Çaìkaräcärya and accept the ten
names of sannyäsa. Although Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu accepted the
then-existing order of sannyäsa (namely eka-daëòa), He still recited a verse
from Çrémad-Bhägavatam about the tridaëòa-sannyäsa accepted by the
brähmaëa of Avantépura. Indirectly He declared that within that ekadaëòa
(one daëòa), four daëòas existed as one. Accepting ekadaëòa sannyäsa without
parätma-niñöhä (devotional service to Lord Kåñëa) is not acceptable to Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu. In addition, according to the exact regulative
principles, one should add the jéva-daëòa to the tri-daëòa. These four daëòas,
bound together as one, are symbolic of unalloyed devotional service to the
Lord. Because the ekadaëòi-sannyäsés of the Mäyäväda school are not devoted
to the service of Kåñëa, they try to merge into the Brahman effulgence, which
is a marginal position between material and spiritual existence. They accept
this impersonal position as liberation. Mäyävädé sannyäsés, not knowing that
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu was a tri-daëòé, think of Caitanya Mahäprabhu as
an ekadaëòi-sannyäsé. This is due to their vivarta, bewilderment. In
Çrémad-Bhägavatam there is no such thing as an ekadaëòi-sannyäsé; indeed, the
tridaëòi-sannyäsé is accepted as the symbolic representation of the sannyäsa
order. By citing this verse from Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu
accepted the sannyäsa order recommended in Çrémad-Bhägavatam. The
Mäyävädé sannyäsés, who are enamored of the external energy of the Lord,
cannot understand the mind of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu.
"To date, all the devotees of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, following in His
footsteps, accept the sannyäsa order and keep the sacred thread and tuft of
unshaved hair. The ekadaëòi-sannyäsés of the Mäyävädé school give up the
sacred thread and do not keep any tuft of hair. Therefore they are unable to
understand the purport of tridaëòa-sannyäsa, and as such they are not inclined
to dedicate their lives to the service of Mukunda. They simply think of
merging into the existence of Brahman because of their disgust with the
material existence. The äcäryas who advocate the daiva-varëäçrama (the social
order of cätur-varëyam mentioned in Bhagavad-gétä) do not accept the
proposition of äsura-varëäçrama, which maintains that the social order of
varëa is indicated by birth.
"The most intimate devotee of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, namely
Gadädhara Paëòita, accepted the tridaëòa-sannyäsa and also accepted
Mädhava Upädhyäya as his tridaëòi-sannyäsé disciple. It is said that from this
Madhväcärya the sampradäya known in western India as the
Vallabhäcärya-sampradäya has begun. Çréla Gopäla Bhaööa Vasu, who is known
as a småty-äcärya in the Gauòéya Vaiñëava-sampradäya, later accepted the
tridaëòa-sannyäsa order from Tridaëòipäda Prabodhänanda Sarasvaté.
Although acceptance of tridaëòa-sannyäsa is not distinctly mentioned in the
Gauòéya Vaiñëava literature, the first verse of Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé's
Upadeçämåta advocates that one should accept the tridaëòa-sannyäsa order by
controlling the six forces:
väco vegaà manasaù krodha-vegaà
jihvä-vegam udaropastha-vegam
etän vegän yo viñaheta dhéraù
sarväm apémäà påthivéà sa çiñyät
[NoI 1]
"One who can control the forces of speech, mind, anger, belly, tongue and
genitals is known as a gosvämé and is competent to accept disciples all over the
world.' The followers of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu never accepted the
Mäyäväda order of sannyäsa, and for this they cannot be blamed. Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu accepted Çrédhara Svämé, who was a tridaëòi-sannyäsé, but the
Mäyävädé sannyäsés, not understanding Çrédhara Svämé, sometimes think that
Çrédhara Svämé belonged to the Mäyäväda ekadaëòa-sannyäsa community.
Actually this was not the case."
TEXT 58
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
inaivaRâ naí"‰"ivaNAe gAtaflama:
‘a˜ajya gAAM payaRq%maAna wtTama,
inar"Ak{(taAe's$aià"r"ipa svaDamaARä,"
@k(impataAe'maUM mauinar"Ah" gAATaAma,
çré-bhagavän uväca
nirvidya nañöa-draviëe gata-klamaù
pravrajya gäà paryaöamäna ittham
niräkåto 'sadbhir api sva-dharmäd
akampito 'müà munir äha gäthäm
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
nirvidya—becoming detached; nañöa-draviëe—his wealth having been
destroyed; gata-klamaù—free from moroseness; pravrajya—leaving home;
gäm—the earth; paryaöamänaù—traveling; ittham—in this way;
niräkåtaù—insulted; asadbhiù—by rascals; api—even though;
sva-dharmät—from his prescribed duties; akampitaù—unswerved;
amüm—this; muniù—the sage; äha—spoke; gäthäm—song.
TRANSLATION
Lord Çré Kåñëa said: Thus becoming detached upon the loss of his property,
this sage gave up his moroseness. He left home, taking sannyäsa, and began to
travel about the earth. Even when insulted by foolish rascals he remained
unswerved from his duty and chanted this song.
PURPORT
Those becoming free from the materialistic way of life, which involves
grueling austerities performed to acquire money, may chant the preceding song
of the Vaiñëava sannyäsé. Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura states that
if one is not capable of listening to the song of this sannyäsé, then one will
certainly remain an obedient servant of material illusion.
TEXT 59
s$auKaäu":Ka‘ad"Ae naAnya:
pauç&SasyaAtmaiva”ama:
ima‡aAed"As$aInair"pava:
s$aMs$aAr"stamas$a: k{(ta:
sukha-duùkha-prado nänyaù
puruñasyätma-vibhramaù
mitrodäséna-ripavaù
saàsäras tamasaù kåtaù
SYNONYMS
sukha-duùkha-pradaù—giver of happiness and distress; na—there is no;
anyaù—other; puruñasya—of the soul; ätma—of the mind;
vibhramaù—bewilderment; mitra—friends; udäséna—indifferent parties;
ripavaù—and enemies; saàsäraù—material life; tamasaù—out of ignorance;
kåtaù—created.
TRANSLATION
No other force besides his own mental confusion makes the soul experience
happiness and distress. His perception of friends, neutral parties and enemies
and the whole material life he builds around this perception are simply created
out of ignorance.
PURPORT
Everyone is working hard to please their friends, defeat their enemies and
maintain the status quo with neutral parties. These relations are certainly
based on the material body and do not exist beyond the body's inevitable
demise. They are called ignorance, or material illusion.
TEXT 60
tasmaAts$avaARtmanaA taAta
inagA{h"ANA manaAe iDayaA
mayyaAvaeizAtayaA yaul(
WtaAvaAna, yaAegAs$aÍÿh":
tasmät sarvätmanä täta
nigåhäëa mano dhiyä
mayy äveçitayä yukta
etävän yoga-saìgrahaù
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; sarva-ätmanä—in all respects; täta-My dear Uddhava;
nigåhäëa—bring under control; manaù—the mind; dhiyä-with intelligence;
mayi—in Me; äveçitayä—which is absorbed; yuktaù—linked up; etävän—thus;
yoga-saìgrahaù—the essence of spiritual practice.
TRANSLATION
My dear Uddhava, fixing your intelligence on Me, you should thus
completely control the mind. This is the essence of the science of yoga.
TEXT 61
ya WtaAM iBaºauNAA gAItaAM
“aöinaï"AM s$amaAih"ta:
DaAr"yaHC)$AvayaHC+$Nvana,
ã"nãE"naE=vaAiBaBaUyatae
ya etäà bhikñuëä gétäà
brahma-niñöhäà samähitaù
dhärayaï chrävayaï chåëvan
dvandvair naiväbhibhüyate
SYNONYMS
yaù—whoever; etäm—this; bhikñuëä—by the sannyäsé; gétäm—sung;
brahma—knowledge of the Absolute; niñöhäm—based upon; samähitaù—with
full attention; dhärayan—meditating; çrävayan—causing others to hear;
çåëvan—himself hearing; dvandvaiù—by dualities; na—never; eva—indeed;
abhibhüyate—will become overwhelmed.
TRANSLATION
Anyone who listens to or recites to others this song of the sannyäsé, which
presents scientific knowledge of the Absolute, and who thus meditates upon it
with full attention, will never again be overwhelmed by the dualities of material
happiness and distress.
PURPORT
The Vaiñëava sannyäsé took shelter of the devotional service of the Lord
and thus could overcome the illusory potency of his worshipable object, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. He himself meditated upon and heard this
song, and also taught it to others. Having received the Lord's mercy, he
enlightened other conditioned souls with transcendental intelligence so that
they could also follow in the footsteps of the devotees of the Lord. Religion
actually means to become a pure devotee of the Supreme Lord in loving
service. Those who are trying to enjoy the material world or merely renounce
it to avoid personal inconvenience cannot actually understand love of
Godhead, in which the only objective is the satisfaction of the Lord.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Eleventh Canto, Twenty-third Chapter,
of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Song of the Avanté Brähmaëa."
24. The Philosophy of Säìkhya
In this chapter Lord Kåñëa gives instruction how bewilderment of the mind
can be dispelled by the science of Säìkhya. Herein the Supreme Lord again
imparts to Uddhava instruction about the analysis of material nature. By
assimilating this knowledge the spirit soul can drive away his confusion based
on false dualities.
In the beginning of creation, the seer and seen are one and
indistinguishable. This Supreme Absolute Truth, one without a second and
inaccessible to words and mind, then separates into two-the seer, which means
consciousness or personality, and the seen, which means substance or nature.
The material nature, which comprises the three modes of matter, is agitated by
the controlling male factor. The mahat-tattva then becomes manifest together
with the energies of consciousness and activity. From these come the principle
of false ego in its three aspects of goodness, passion and ignorance. From false
ego in the mode of ignorance arise fifteen subtle forms of sense perception,
followed by the fifteen physical elements. From false ego in the mode of
passion come the ten senses, and from false ego in the mode of goodness come
the mind and the eleven demigods who preside over the senses. By the
conglomeration of all of these elements grows the universal egg, in the midst of
which the Supreme Personality of Godhead as the creating Lord of the
universe takes up residence in the role of indwelling Supersoul. From the navel
of this ultimate creator comes a lotus, upon which Brahma takes birth. Lord
Brahma, invested with the mode of passion, executes austerities by the grace of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and on the strength of these penances
he is able to create all the planets of the universe. The region of heaven is
meant for the demigods, that of inner space for ghostly spirits and that of the
earth for human beings and others. In the region above these three planetary
systems are the places of advanced sages, and in the lower worlds are those of
the demons, Näga serpents and so forth. The goals achieved by activities based
on the three modes of material nature are all within the three mortal worlds.
The destinations of yoga, severe austerity and the renounced order of life are
the worlds known as Mahar, Janas, Tapas and Satya. The goal of devotional
service to the Supreme Lord, on the other hand, is the lotus feet of the
Personality of Godhead in His abode, Vaikuëöha. This universe of material
action and reaction is constituted under the control of time and the three
modes of material nature. Moreover, whatever exists in this universe is simply
the product of the combination of material nature and her Lord. In the same
way that creation proceeds gradually from the one and supremely subtle to the
multitudinous and very gross, the process of annihilation proceeds from the
grossest to the subtlest manifestation of nature, leaving only the eternal
spiritual substance. This ultimate Soul remains situated within Himself, alone
and without end. The mind of a person who meditates on these ideas does not
become bewildered by material dualities. This science of Säìkhya, narrated in
alternating sequences of creation and annihilation, serves to cut off all doubts
and bondage.
TEXT 1
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
@Ta tae s$am‘avaºyaAima
s$aAÊÿYaM paUvaE=#ivaRinaiêtama,
yaiã"ÁaAya paumaAna, s$aâAe
ja÷AãE"k(ilpakM( ”amama,
çré-bhagavän uväca
atha te sampravakñyämi
säìkhyaà pürvair viniçcitam
yad vijïäya pumän sadyo
jahyäd vaikalpikaà bhramam
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; atha—now;
te—unto you; sampravakñyämi—I shall speak; säìkhyam—the knowledge of
the evolution of the elements of creation; pürvaiù—by previous authorities;
viniçcitam—ascertained; yat—which; vijëäya—knowing; pumän—a person;
sadyaù—immediately; jahyät—can give up; vaikalpikam—based on false
duality; bhramam—the illusion.
TRANSLATION
Lord Çré Kåñëa said: Now I shall describe to you the science of Säìkhya,
which has been perfectly established by ancient authorities. By understanding
this science a person can immediately give up the illusion of material duality.
PURPORT
In the previous chapter the Lord explained that one can give up material
duality by controlling the mind and fixing it in Kåñëa consciousness. This
chapter describes the Säìkhya system, in which the difference between matter
and spirit is elaborately explained. By hearing this knowledge one can easily
separate the mind from material contamination and fix it on the spiritual
platform in Kåñëa consciousness. The Säìkhya philosophy system mentioned
here is that presented by Lord Kapila in the Third Canto of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam and not the atheistic Säìkhya presented later by
materialists and Mäyävädés. The material elements, which emanate from the
potency of the Lord, evolve in a progressive sequence. One should not
foolishly think that such evolution begins from an original material element
without the assistance of the Lord. This speculative theory is generated from
the false ego of conditioned life and constitutes gross ignorance, unacceptable
to the Personality of Godhead and His followers.
TEXT 2
@As$aIjÁaAnamaTaAe @TaR
Wk(maevaAivak(ilpatama,
yad"A ivavaek(inapauNAA
@Ad"AE k{(tayaugAe'yaugAe
äséj jïänam atho artha
ekam evävikalpitam
yadä viveka-nipuëä
ädau kåta-yuge 'yuge
SYNONYMS
äsét—there existed; jïänam—the seer; atha u—thus; arthaù—the seen;
ekam—one; eva—simply; avikalpitam—undifferentiated; yadä—when;
viveka—in discrimination; nipuëäù—persons who were expert; ädau—in the
beginning; kåta-yuge—in the age of purity; ayuge—and before that, during the
time of annihilation.
TRANSLATION
Originally, during the Kåta-yuga, when all men were very expert in spiritual
discrimination, and also previous to that, during the period of annihilation, the
seer existed alone, nondifferent from the seen object.
PURPORT
Kåta-yuga is the first age, also known as Satya-yuga, in which knowledge,
being perfect, is not different from its object. In modern society, knowledge is
highly speculative and constantly changing. There is often a vast difference
between people's theoretical ideas and actual reality. In Satya-yuga, however,
people are viveka-nipuëäù, or expert in intelligent discrimination, and thus
there is no difference between their vision and reality. In Satya-yuga, the
population in general is self-realized. Seeing everything as the potency of the
Supreme Lord, they do not artificially create duality between themselves and
other living entities. This is a further aspect of the oneness of Satya-yuga. At
the time of annihilation, everything merges to rest within the Lord, and at
that time also there is no difference between the Lord, who becomes the only
seer, and the objects of knowledge, which are contained within the Lord. The
liberated living entities in the eternal spiritual world are never subject to such
merging but remain forever undisturbed in their spiritual forms. Because they
are voluntarily one with the Lord in love, their abode is never annihilated.
TEXT 3
tanmaAyaAP(laè&paeNA
ke(valaM inaivaRk(ilpatama,
vaAx.~manaAe'gAAecarM" s$atyaM
iã"DaA s$amaBavaä," ba{h"ta,
tan mäyä-phala-rüpeëa
kevalaà nirvikalpitam
väì-mano-'gocaraà satyaà
dvidhä samabhavad båhat
SYNONYMS
tat—that (Supreme); mäyä—of the material nature; phala—and the enjoyer of
its manifestations; rüpeëa—in the two forms; kevalam—one;
nirvikalpitam—nondifferentiated; väk—to speech; manaù—and the mind;
agocaram—inaccessible; satyam—true; dvidhä—twofold; samabhavat—He
became; båhat—the Absolute Truth.
TRANSLATION
That one Absolute Truth, remaining free from material dualities and
inaccessible to ordinary speech and mind, divided Himself into two
categories—the material nature and the living entities who are trying to enjoy
the manifestations of that nature.
PURPORT
Both material nature and the living entity are potencies of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 4
tayaAere"k(tar"Ae ÷TaR:
‘ak{(ita: s$aAeBayaAitmak(A
ÁaAnaM tvanyatamaAe BaAva:
pauç&Sa: s$aAe'iBaDaIyatae
tayor ekataro hy arthaù
prakåtiù sobhayätmikä
jïänaà tv anyatamo bhävaù
puruñaù so 'bhidhéyate
SYNONYMS
tayoù—of the two; ekataraù—one; hi—indeed; arthaù—entity;
prakåtiù—nature; sä—she; ubhaya-ätmikä—consisting of both the subtle
causes and their manifest products; jïänam—(who possesses) consciousness;
tu—and; anyatamaù—the other; bhävaù—entity; puruñaù—the living soul;
saù—he; abhidhéyate—is called.
TRANSLATION
Of these two categories of manifestation, one is material nature, which
embodies both the subtle causes and manifests products of matter. The other is
the conscious living entity, designated as the enjoyer.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, prakåti here refers to the subtle pradhäna,
which later becomes manifest as mahat-tattva.
TEXT 5
tamaAe r"ja: s$aÔvaimaita
‘ak{(taer"Bavana, gAuNAA:
mayaA ‘aºaAeByamaANAAyaA:
pauç&SaAnaumataena ca
tamo rajaù sattvam iti
prakåter abhavan guëäù
mayä prakñobhyamäëäyäù
puruñänumatena ca
SYNONYMS
tamaù—ignorance; rajaù—passion; sattvam—goodness; iti—thus;
prakåteù—from nature; abhavan—became manifest; guëäù—the modes;
mayä—by Me; prakñobhyamäëäyäù—who was being agitated; puruña—of the
living entity; anumatena—in order to fulfill the desires; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
When material nature was agitated by My glance, the three material
modes—goodness, passion and ignorance—became manifest to fulfill the
pending desires of the conditioned souls.
PURPORT
The Lord casts His glance over material nature to remind her that the
conditioned souls have not worked out their chain of fruitive activity and
mental speculation and that creation is therefore again necessary. The Lord
desires that the conditioned souls get the opportunity to become Kåñëa
conscious in love of Godhead by understanding the futility of life without the
Lord. The modes of nature arise after the glance of the Lord and become
inimical to one another, each mode attempting to conquer the other two.
There is constant competition between birth, maintenance and annihilation.
Although a child desires to take birth, the cruel mother may desire to kill the
child through abortion. Although we may desire to kill the weeds in a field,
they stubbornly take birth again and again. Similarly, we often desire to
maintain our physical status quo, but still deterioration sets in. Thus there is
constant competition among the modes of nature, and by their combinations
and permutations the living entities try to enjoy innumerable material
situations without Kåñëa consciousness. The word puruñänumatena indicates
that the Lord sets the stage for such material futility so that the conditioned
souls will eventually come back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 6
taeBya: s$amaBavats$aU‡aM
mah"Ana, s$aU‡aeNA s$aMyauta:
tataAe ivaku(vaRtaAe jaAtaAe
yaAe'h"ÆÿAr"Ae ivamaAeh"na:
tebhyaù samabhavat sütraà
mahän sütreëa saàyutaù
tato vikurvato jäto
yo 'haìkäro vimohanaù
SYNONYMS
tebhyaù—from those modes; samabhavat—arose; sütram—the first
transformation of nature, endowed with the potency of activity;
mahän—primeval nature endowed with the potency of knowledge;
sütreëa—with this sütra-tattva; saàyütaù-conjoined; tataù—from the mahat;
vikurvataù-transforming; jätaù—was generated; yaù—which; ahaìkäraù—false
ego; vimohanaù—the cause of bewilderment.
TRANSLATION
From these modes arose the primeval sütra, along with the mahat-tattva. By
the transformation of the mahat-tattva was generated the false ego, the cause of
the living entities' bewilderment.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, sütra is the first transformation of
material nature that manifests the potency of activity, and it is accompanied
by the mahat-tattva, which is endowed with the potency of knowledge. In the
material world, one's real knowledge is covered by fruitive activity and mental
speculation. As one's devotional service to the Lord slackens, these two
tendencies grow automatically, just as the diminishing of light automatically
brings an increase in darkness.
TEXT 7
vaEk(Air"k(staEjas$aê
taAmas$aêetyahM" i‡ava{ta,
tanmaA‡aein‰"yamanas$aAM
k(Ar"NAM icad"icanmaya:
vaikärikas taijasaç ca
tämasaç cety ahaà tri-våt
tan-mätrendriya-manasäà
käraëaà cid-acin-mayaù
SYNONYMS
vaikärikaù—in the mode of goodness; taijasaù—in the mode of passion;
ca—and; tämasaù—in the mode of ignorance; ca—also; iti—thus; aham—false
ego; tri-våt—in three categories; tat-mätra—of the subtle forms of sense
objects; indriya—of the senses; manasäm—and of the mind; käraëam—the
cause; cit-acit—both spirit and matter; mayaù—encompassing.
TRANSLATION
False ego, which is the cause of physical sensation, the senses, and the mind,
encompasses both spirit and matter and manifests, in three varieties: in the
modes of goodness, passion and ignorance.
PURPORT
The word cid-acin-maya, "encompassing both spirit and matter," is
significant in this regard. The false ego is the illusory combination of the
eternal conscious soul and the temporary unconscious body. Because the spirit
soul desires to exploit illicitly the creation of God, he is bewildered by the
three modes of nature and assumes an illusory identity within the material
world. Struggling to enjoy, he becomes more and more entangled in the
complexities of illusion and only increases his anxiety. This hopeless situation
can be overcome by taking to pure Kåñëa consciousness, in which the pleasure
of the Supreme Lord becomes the only goal of one's life.
TEXT 8
@TaRstanmaAi‡ak(AÀaÁae
taAmas$aAid"in‰"yaAiNA ca
taEjas$aAÚe"vataA @As$aªa,
Wk(Ad"zA ca vaEk{(taAta,
arthas tan-mätrikäj jajïe
tämasäd indriyäëi ca
taijasäd devatä äsann
ekädaça ca vaikåtät
SYNONYMS
arthaù—the gross elements; tat-mätrikät—from the subtle sensations (which
themselves are derived from false ego in the mode of goodness); jajïe—became
generated; tämasät—from false ego in the mode of ignorance; indriyäëi—the
senses; ca—and; taijasät—from false ego in the mode of passion; devatäù—the
demigods; äsan—arose; ekädaça—eleven; ca—and; vaikåtät—from false ego in
the mode of goodness.
TRANSLATION
From false ego in the mode of ignorance came the subtle physical
perceptions, from which the gross elements were generated. From false ego in
the mode of passion came the senses, and from false ego in the mode of goodness
arose the eleven demigods.
PURPORT
From false ego in the mode of ignorance, sound is generated along with the
sense of hearing to receive it and the sky as its medium. Next, the sensation of
touch, air and the sense of touch are generated, and thus from subtle to gross
all of the elements and their perceptions are generated. The senses, because
they are busily engaged in activity, are created from false ego in the mode of
passion. From false ego in goodness come eleven demigods: the deities of the
directions, the wind and the sun, Varuëa, the Açviné deities, Agni, Indra,
Upendra, Mitra, Brahmä and Candra.
TEXT 9
mayaA s$aÂaAeid"taA BaAvaA:
s$avaeR s$aMh"tyak(Air"NA:
@Nx"mautpaAd"yaAmaAs$aur,"
mamaAyatanamauÔamama,
mayä saïcoditä bhäväù
sarve saàhatya-käriëaù
aëòam utpädayäm äsur
mamäyatanam uttamam
SYNONYMS
mayä—by Me; saïcoditäù—impelled; bhäväù—elements; sarve—all;
saàhatya—by amalgamation; käriëaù—functioning; aëòam—the egg of the
universe; utpädayäm äsuù—they brought into being; mama—My;
äyatanam—residence; uttamam—superior.
TRANSLATION
Impelled by Me, all these elements combined to function in an orderly
fashion and together gave birth to the universal egg, which is My excellent place
of residence.
TEXT 10
taismaªahM" s$amaBavama,
@Nxe" s$ailalas$aMisTataAE
mama naAByaAmaBaUtpaáM
ivaìAKyaM ta‡a caAtmaBaU:
tasminn ahaà samabhavam
aëòe salila-saàsthitau
mama näbhyäm abhüt padmaà
viçväkhyaà tatra cätma-bhüù
SYNONYMS
tasmin—within that; aham—I; samabhavam—appeared; aëòe—in the egg of
the universe; salila—in the water of the Causal Ocean; saàsthitau—which was
situated; mama—My; näbhyäm—from the navel; abhüt—arose; padmam—a
lotus; viçva-äkhyam—known as universal; tatra—in that; ca—and;
ätma-bhüù—self-born Brahmä.
TRANSLATION
I Myself appeared within that egg, which was floating on the causal water,
and from My navel arose the universal lotus, the birthplace of self-born
Brahmä.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord here describes His appearance in His transcendental
pastime form of Çré Näräyaëa. Lord Näräyaëa enters within the universe but
does not give up His purely transcendental body of knowledge and bliss. Lord
Brahmä, however, born from the Lord's navel lotus, has a material body.
Although Lord Brahmä is the most powerful mystic, his body, which pervades
all material existence, is material, whereas the body of the Supreme Lord Hari,
Näräyaëa, is always transcendental.
TEXT 11
s$aAe's$a{jaÔapas$aA yaul(Ae
r"jas$aA mad"nauƒah"Ata,
laAek(Ana, s$apaAlaAna, ivaìAtmaA
BaUBauRva: svair"ita i‡aDaA
so 'såjat tapasä yukto
rajasä mad-anugrahät
lokän sa-pälän viçvätmä
bhür bhuvaù svar iti tridhä
SYNONYMS
saù—he, Brahmä; asåjat—created; tapasä—by his austerity; yuktaù—endowed;
rajasä—with the potency of the mode of passion; mat—My;
anugrahät—because of the mercy; lokän—the different planets;
sa-pälän—along with their presiding demigods; viçva—of the universe;
ätmä—the soul; bhüù bhuvaù svaù iti—called Bhür, Bhuvar and Svar;
tridhä—three divisions.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä, the soul of the universe, being endowed with the mode of
passion, performed great austerities by My mercy and thus created the three
planetary divisions, called Bhür, Bhuvar and Svar, along with their presiding
deities.
TEXT 12
de"vaAnaAmaAek( @As$aItsvar,"
BaUtaAnaAM ca Bauva: pad"ma,
matyaARd"InaAM ca BaUlaAeRk(:
is$aÜ"AnaAM i‡atayaAtpar"ma,
devänäm oka äsét svar
bhütänäà ca bhuvaù padam
martyädénäà ca bhür lokaù
siddhänäà tritayät param
SYNONYMS
devänäm—of the demigods; okaù—the home; äsét—became; svaù—heaven;
bhütänäm—of ghostly spirits; ca—and; bhuvaù—Bhuvar; padam—the place;
martya-ädénäm—of ordinary mortal humans and other beings; ca—and; bhüù
lokaù—the planet called Bhür; siddhänäm—(the place) of those striving for
liberation; tritayät—these three divisions; param—beyond.
TRANSLATION
Heaven was established as the residence of the demigods, Bhuvarloka as that
of the ghostly spirits, and the earth system as the place of human beings and
other mortal creatures. Those mystics who strive for liberation are promoted
beyond these three divisions.
PURPORT
Planets such as Indraloka and Candraloka are meant for the heavenly
enjoyment of the most pious fruitive workers. The highest four planets,
however, Satyaloka, Maharloka, Janaloka and Tapoloka, are meant for those
who are most perfectly endeavoring for liberation. Caitanya Mahäprabhu is so
inconceivably merciful that He is promoting the most fallen victims of
Kali-yuga beyond these four planets and even beyond Vaikuëöha, to the
supreme planet of Lord Kåñëa in the spiritual sky, called Goloka Våndävana.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura explains that heaven is the residence
of the demigods, the earth is the residence of the human beings, and in
between is a temporary residence for both classes of beings.
TEXT 13
@DaAe's$aur"ANAAM naAgAAnaAM
BaUmaer"Aek(Ae's$a{jat‘aBau:
i‡alaAefyaAM gAtaya: s$avaAR:
k(maRNAAM i‡agAuNAAtmanaAma,
adho 'suräëäà nägänäà
bhümer oko 'såjat prabhuù
tri-lokyäà gatayaù sarväù
karmaëäà tri-guëätmanäm
SYNONYMS
adhaù—below; asuräëäm—of the demons; nägänäm—of the celestial snakes;
bhümeù—from the earth; okaù—the residence; asåjat—created;
prabhuù—Lord Brahmä; tri-lokyäm—of the three worlds; gatayaù—the
destinations; sarväù—all; karmaëäm—of fruitive activities;
tri-guëa-ätmanäm—partaking of the three modes.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä created the region below the earth for the demons and the
Näga snakes. In this way the destinations of the three worlds were arranged as
the corresponding reactions for different kinds of work performed within the
three modes of nature.
TEXT 14
yaAegAsya tapas$aêEva
nyaAs$asya gAtayaAe'malaA:
mah"jaRnastapa: s$atyaM
Bail(yaAegAsya maÕ"ita:
yogasya tapasaç caiva
nyäsasya gatayo 'maläù
mahar janas tapaù satyaà
bhakti-yogasya mad-gatiù
SYNONYMS
yogasya—of mystic yoga; tapasaù—of great austerity; ca—and; eva—certainly;
nyäsasya—of the renounced order of life; gatayaù—the destinations;
amaläù—spotless; mahaù—Mahar; janaù—Janas; tapaù—Tapas;
satyam—Satya; bhakti-yogasya—of devotional service; mat—My;
gatiù—destination.
TRANSLATION
By mystic yoga, great austerities and the renounced order of life, the pure
destinations of Maharloka, Janaloka, Tapoloka and Satyaloka are attained. But
by devotional yoga, one achieves My transcendental abode.
PURPORT
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé explains that the word tapasaù in this verse refers to
austerities performed by brahmacärés and vänaprasthas. A brahmacäré who
practices celibacy perfectly in some particular stage of his life achieves
Maharloka, and one who perfectly practices lifelong celibacy achieves
Janaloka. By perfect execution of vänaprastha one may achieve Tapoloka, and
one in the renounced order of life goes to Satyaloka. These different
destinations certainly depend on one's seriousness in the yoga system. In the
Third Canto of the Bhägavatam, Lord Brahmä explains to the demigods, "The
inhabitants of Vaikuëöha travel in their airplanes made of lapis lazuli,
emeralds and gold. Although crowded by their consorts, who have large hips
and beautiful smiling faces, they cannot be stimulated to passion by their mirth
and beautiful charms." (SB 3.15.20) Thus in the spiritual world, the kingdom of
God, the inhabitants have absolutely no desire for personal satisfaction, since
they are completely satisfied in love of Godhead. Because they only think of
the Lord's pleasure, there is no possibility of cheating, anxiety, lust,
disappointment, and so on. As described in Bhagavad-gétä (18.62),
tam eva çaraëaà gaccha
sarva-bhävena bhärata
tat-prasädät paräm çäntià
sthänaà präpsyasi çäçvatam
"O scion of Bharata, surrender unto Him utterly. By His grace you will attain
transcendental peace and the supreme and eternal abode."
TEXT 15
mayaA k(AlaAtmanaA DaA‡aA
k(maRyaul(imadM" jagAta,
gAuNA‘avaAh" Wtaismaªa,
onmaÀaita inamaÀaita
mayä kälätmanä dhäträ
karma-yuktam idaà jagat
guëa-praväha etasminn
unmajjati nimajjati
SYNONYMS
mayä—by Me; käla-ätmanä—who contains the energy of time; dhäträ—the
creator; karma-yuktam—full of fruitive activities; idam—this; jagat—world;
guëa-pravähe—in the mighty current of the modes; etasmin—in this;
unmajjati—one rises up; nimajjati—one drowns.
TRANSLATION
All results of fruitive work have been arranged within this world by Me, the
supreme creator acting as the force of time. Thus one sometimes rises up toward
the surface of this mighty river of the modes of nature and sometimes again
submerges.
PURPORT
Unmajjati refers to one's promotion to the higher planetary systems, as
mentioned in previous verses, and nimajjati refers to being submerged in a
miserable condition of life by impious activities. In both cases one is drowning
within the mighty river of material existence, which carries one far away from
one's real home in the kingdom of God.
TEXT 16
@NAuba{Rh"tk{(zA: sTaUlaAe
yaAe yaAe BaAva: ‘ais$aDyaita
s$avaAeR'pyauBayas$aMyaul(:
‘ak{(tyaA pauç&SaeNA ca
aëur båhat kåçaù sthülo
yo yo bhävaù prasidhyati
sarvo 'py ubhaya-saàyuktaù
prakåtyä puruñeëa ca
SYNONYMS
aëuù—small; båhat—great; kåçaù—thin; sthülaù—stout; yaù yaù—whatever;
bhävaù—manifestation; prasidhyati—is established; sarvaù—all; api—indeed;
ubhaya—by both; saàyuktaù—conjoined; prakåtyä—by nature; puruñeëa—by
the enjoying spirit soul; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
Whatever features visibly exist within this world—small or great, thin or
stout—certainly contain both the material nature and its enjoyer, the spirit
soul.
TEXT 17
yastau yasyaAid"r"ntaê
s$a vaE maDyaM ca tasya s$ana,
ivak(Ar"Ae vyavah"Ar"ATaAeR
yaTaA taEjas$apaAiTaRvaA:
yas tu yasyädir antaç ca
sa vai madhyaà ca tasya san
vikäro vyavahärärtho
yathä taijasa-pärthiväù
SYNONYMS
yaù—which (cause); tu—and; yasya—of which (product); ädiù—the
beginning; antaù—the end; ca—and; saù—that; vai—indeed; madhyam—the
middle; ca—and; tasya—of that product; san—being (real); vikäraù—the
transformation; vyavahära-arthaù—for ordinary purposes; yathä—as;
taijasa—things produced from gold (which is itself derived from fire);
pärthivaù—and things produced from earth.
TRANSLATION
Gold and earth are originally existing as ingredients. From gold one may
fashion golden ornaments such as bracelets and earrings, and from earth one
may fashion clay pots and saucers. The original ingredients gold and earth exist
before the products made from them, and when the products are eventually
destroyed, the original ingredients, gold and earth, will remain. Thus, since the
ingredients are present in the beginning and at the end, they must also be
present in the middle phase, taking the form of a particular product to which we
assign for convenience a particular name, such as bracelet, earring, pot or
saucer. We can therefore understand that since the ingredient cause exists
before the creation of a product and after the product's destruction, the same
ingredient cause must be present during the manifest phase, supporting the
product as the basis of its reality.
PURPORT
The Lord here explains that the original cause is certainly present in its
effect, citing the example of gold and clay functioning as the causal
ingredients of many different products in which gold and clay continue to be
present. For our convenience, we assign different names to temporary
products, although their essential nature continues to be that of the
ingredient, and not of the temporary product.
TEXT 18
yaäu"paAd"Aya paUvaRstau
BaAvaAe ivaku(ç&tae'par"ma,
@Aid"r"ntaAe yad"A yasya
tats$atyamaiBaDaIyatae
yad upädäya pürvas tu
bhävo vikurute 'param
ädir anto yadä yasya
tat satyam abhidhéyate
SYNONYMS
yat—which (form); upädäya—accepting as the ingredient cause; pürvaù—the
previous cause (such as the mahat-tattva); tu—and; bhävaù—thing;
vikurute—produces as transformation; aparam—the second thing (such as the
element ahaìkära); ädiù—the beginning; antaù—the end; yadä—when;
yasya—of which (product); tat—that (cause); satyam—real; abhidhéyate—is
called.
TRANSLATION
A material object, itself composed of an essential ingredient, creates another
material object through transformation. Thus one created object becomes the
cause and basis of another created object. A particular thing may thus be called
real in that it possesses the basic nature of another object that constitutes its
origin and final state.
PURPORT
One may understand the purport of this verse through the simple analogy
of a clay pot. A clay pot is formed from a lump of clay, which is itself prepared
from the earth. In this case earth is the original ingredient forming the clay
lump, and the clay lump is in a sense the original cause of the pot. When the
pot is destroyed, it will again assume the designation clay and ultimately merge
back into the earth, its original cause. In relation to the clay pot, clay is the
beginning and final state; thus the pot is called real, for it possesses the
essential characteristics of clay, which exists before and after the existence of
the functioning instrument known as the pot. Similarly, earth exists before
and after the clay, and thus clay may be considered real because it possesses the
essential characteristics of earth, which exists before and after the existence of
the clay. Similarly, earth and other elements are created from the mahat-tattva,
which exists before and after the existence of the elements, which may be
considered real because they possess the essential characteristics of the
mahat-tattva. The mahat-tattva is ultimately the creation of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the cause of all causes, who exists after all is
annihilated. The Absolute Truth is the Supreme Lord Himself, who step by
step gives meaning and character to all that exists.
TEXT 19
‘ak{(itayaRsyaAepaAd"Anama,
@ADaAr": pauç&Sa: par":
s$ataAe'iBavyaÃak(: k(AlaAe
“aö tait‡atayaM tvah"ma,
prakåtir yasyopädänam
ädhäraù puruñaù paraù
sato 'bhivyaïjakaù kälo
brahma tat tritayaà tv aham
SYNONYMS
prakåtiù—material nature; yasya—of which (produced manifestation of the
universe); upädänam—the ingredient cause; ädhäraù—the foundation;
puruñaù—the Personality of Godhead; paraù—Supreme; sataù—of the real
(nature); abhivyaïjakaù—the agitating agent; kälaù—time; brahma—the
Absolute Truth; tat—this; tritayam—group of three; tu—but; aham—I.
TRANSLATION
The material universe may be considered real, having nature as its original
ingredient and final state. Lord Mahä-Viñëu is the resting place of nature,
which becomes manifest by the power of time. Thus nature, the almighty Viñëu
and time are not different from Me, the Supreme Absolute Truth.
PURPORT
Material nature is the energy of the Lord, Mahä-Viñëu is His plenary
portion, and time represents the Lord's activity. In this way, time and nature
are always subservient to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who creates,
maintains and annihilates all that exists through the agency of His potencies
and plenary portions. In other words, Lord Kåñëa is the Absolute Truth
because He contains all existence within Himself.
TEXT 20
s$agAR: ‘avataRtae taAvata,
paAEvaARpayaeRNA inatyazA:
mah"Ana, gAuNAivas$agAARTaR:
isTatyantaAe yaAvad"IºaNAma,
sargaù pravartate tävat
paurväparyeëa nityaçaù
mahän guëa-visargärthaù
sthity-anto yävad ékñaëam
SYNONYMS
sargaù—the creation; pravartate—continues to exist; tävat—to that extent;
paurva-aparyeëa—in the form of parents and children; nityaçaù—perpetually;
mahän—bountiful; guëa-visarga—of the variegated manifestation of the
material modes; arthaù—for the purpose; sthiti-antaù—until the end of its
maintenance; yävat—as long as; ékñaëam—the glance of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
As long as the Supreme Personality of Godhead continues to glance upon
nature, the material world continues to exist, perpetually manifesting through
procreation the great and variegated flow of universal creation.
PURPORT
Although the mahat-tattva, impelled by the force of time, is the ingredient
cause of this world, it is clearly explained here that the Supreme Lord is
personally the only ultimate cause of all that exists. Time and nature are
powerless to act without the glance of the Personality of Godhead. He creates
unlimited material variety for the sense gratification of the conditioned souls,
who try to enjoy life as the children of particular parents and as the parents of
particular children, throughout the 8,400,000 species of life.
TEXT 21
ivar"ANmayaAs$aAâmaAnaAe
laAek(k(lpaivak(lpak(:
paÂatvaAya ivazAeSaAya
k(lpatae BauvanaE: s$ah"
viräë mayäsädyamäno
loka-kalpa-vikalpakaù
païcatväya viçeñäya
kalpate bhuvanaiù saha
SYNONYMS
viräö—the universal form; mayä—by Me; äsädyamänaù—being pervaded;
loka—of the planets; kalpa—of repeated creation, maintenance and
destruction; vikalpakaù—manifesting the variety; païcatväya—the elemental
manifestation of creation of the five elements; viçeñäya—in varieties;
kalpate—is capable of displaying; bhuvanaiù—with the different planets;
saha—being endowed.
TRANSLATION
I am the basis of the universal form, which displays endless variety through
the repeated creation, maintenance and destruction of the planetary systems.
Originally containing within itself all planets in their dormant state, My
universal form manifests the varieties of created existence by arranging the
coordinated combination of the five elements.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, the word mayä refers to the Lord in His
form as eternal time.
TEXTS 22-27
@ªae ‘alaIyatae matyaRma,
@ªaM DaAnaAs$au laIyatae
DaAnaA BaUmaAE ‘alaIyantae
BaUimagARnDae ‘alaIyatae
@ps$au ‘alaIyatae gAnDa
@Apaê svagAuNAe r"s$ae
laIyatae jyaAeitaiSa r"s$aAe
jyaAetaI è&pae ‘alaIyatae
è&paM vaAyaAE s$a ca s$pazAeR
laIyatae s$aAe'ipa caAmbare"
@mbarM" zAbd"tanmaA‡a
win‰"yaAiNA svayaAeinaSau
yaAeinavaE=k(Air"ke( s$aAEmya
laIyatae manas$aIìre"
zAbd"Ae BaUtaAid"mapyaeita
BaUtaAid"maRh"ita ‘aBau:
s$a laIyatae mah"Ana, svaeSau
gAuNAes$au gAuNAvaÔama:
tae'vyale( s$am‘alaIyantae
tatk(Alae laIyatae'vyayae
k(AlaAe maAyaAmayae jaIvae
jaIva @Atmaina mayyajae
@AtmaA ke(vala @AtmasTaAe
ivak(lpaApaAyalaºaNA:
anne praléyate martyam
annaà dhänäsu léyate
dhänä bhümau praléyante
bhümir gandhe praléyate
apsu praléyate gandha
äpaç ca sva-guëe rase
léyate jyotiñi raso
jyoté rüpe praléyate
rüpaà väyau sa ca sparçe
léyate so 'pi cämbare
ambaraà çabda-tan-mätra
indriyäëi sva-yoniñu
yonir vaikärike saumya
léyate manaséçvare
çabdo bhütädim apyeti
bhütädir mahati prabhuù
sa léyate mahän sveñu
guëesu guëa-vattamaù
te 'vyakte sampraléyante
tat käle léyate 'vyaye
kälo mäyä-maye jéve
jéva ätmani mayy aje
ätmä kevala ätma-stho
vikalpäpäya-lakñaëaù
SYNONYMS
anne—in food; praléyate—becomes merged; martyam—the mortal body;
annam—food; dhänäsu—within the grains; léyate—becomes merged;
dhänäù—the grains; bhümau—in the earth; praléyante—become merged;
bhümiù—the earth; gandhe—within fragrance; praléyate—becomes merged;
apsu—in water; praléyate—becomes merged; gandhaù—fragrance;
äpaù—water; ca—and; sva-guëe—within its own quality; rase—taste;
léyate—becomes merged; jyotiñi—within fire; rasaù—taste; jyotiù—fire;
rüpe—within form; praléyate—becomes merged; rüpam—form; väyau—in air;
saù—it; ca—and; sparçe—in touch; léyate—becomes merged; saù—it;
api—also; ca—and; ambare—in ether; ambaram—ether; çabda—in sound;
tat-mätre—its corresponding subtle sensation; indriyäëi—the senses;
sva-yoniñu—in their sources, the demigods; yoniù—the demigods;
vaikärike—in false ego in the mode of goodness; saumya—My dear Uddhava;
léyate—become merged; manasi—in the mind; éçvare—which is the controller;
çabdaù—sound; bhüta-ädim—in the original false ego; apyeti—becomes
merged; bhüta-ädiù—false ego; mahati—in the total material nature;
prabhuù—powerful; saù—that; léyate—becomes merged; mahän—the total
material nature; sveñu—in its own; guëeñu—three modes;
guëa-vat-tamaù—being the ultimate abode of these modes; te—they;
avyakte—in the unmanifest form of nature; sampraléyante—become
completely merged; tat—that; käle—in time; léyate—become merged;
avyaye—in the infallible; kälaù—time; mäyä-maye—who is full of
transcendental knowledge; jéve—in the Supreme Lord, who activates all living
beings; jévaù—that Lord; ätmani—in the Supreme Self; mayi—in Me; aje—the
unborn; ätmä—the original Self; kevalaù—alone; ätma-sthaù—self-situated;
vikalpa—by creation; apäya—and annihilation; lakñaëaù—characterized.
TRANSLATION
At the time of annihilation, the mortal body of the living being becomes
merged into food. Food merges into the grains, and the grains merge back into
the earth. The earth merges into its subtle sensation, fragrance. Fragrance
merges into water, and water further merges into its own quality, taste. That
taste merges into fire, which merges into form. Form merges into touch, and
touch merges into ether. Ether finally merges into the sensation of sound. The
senses all merge into their own origins, the presiding demigods, and they, O
gentle Uddhava, merge into the controlling mind, which itself merges into false
ego in the mode of goodness. Sound becomes one with false ego in the mode of
ignorance, and all-powerful false ego, the first of all the physical elements,
merges into the total nature. The total material nature, the primary repository
of the three basic modes, dissolves into the modes. These modes of nature then
merge into the unmanifest form of nature, and that unmanifest form merges
into time. Time merges into the Supreme Lord, present in the form of the
omniscient Mahä-puruña, the original activator of all living beings. That origin
of all life merges into Me, the unborn Supreme Soul, who remains alone,
established within Himself. It is from Him that all creation and annihilation are
manifested.
PURPORT
The annihilation of the material world is the reversal of the process of
creation, and ultimately everything is merged to rest within the Supreme Lord,
who remains full in His absolute position.
TEXT 28
WvamanvaIºamaANAsya
k(TaM vaEk(ilpak(Ae ”ama:
manas$aAe ô$id" itaïe"ta
vyaAe°aIvaAk(AeRd"yae tama:
evam anvékñamäëasya
kathaà vaikalpiko bhramaù
manaso hådi tiñöheta
vyomnévärkodaye tamaù
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; anvékñamäëasya—of one who is carefully examining;
katham—how; vaikalpikaù—based on duality; bhramaù—illusion;
manasaù—of his mind; hådi—in the heart; tiñöheta—can remain; vyomni—in
the sky; iva—just as; arka—of the sun; udaye—upon the rising;
tamaù—darkness.
TRANSLATION
Just as the rising sun removes the darkness of the sky, similarly, this
scientific knowledge of cosmic annihilation removes all illusory duality from the
mind of a serious student. Even if illusion somehow enters his heart, it cannot
remain there.
PURPORT
Just as the brilliant sun removes all darkness from the sky, a clear
understanding of the knowledge spoken by Lord Kåñëa to Uddhava removes all
ignorance concocted by the material mind. One will then no longer accept the
material body as the self. Even if such illusion temporarily manifests within
one's consciousness, it will be driven away by the resurgence of one's spiritual
knowledge.
TEXT 29
WSa s$aAÊÿYaivaiDa: ‘aAel(:
s$aMzAyaƒainTaBaed"na:
‘aitalaAemaAnaulaAemaAByaAM
par"Avar"ä{"zA mayaA
eña säìkhya-vidhiù proktaù
saàçaya-granthi-bhedanaù
pratilomänulomäbhyäà
parävara-dåça mayä
SYNONYMS
eñaù—this; säìkhya-vidhiù—method of Säìkhya (analytic philosophy);
proktaù—spoken; saàçaya—of doubts; granthi—the bondage;
bhedanaù—which breaks; pratiloma-anulomäbhyäm—in both direct and
reverse order; para—the situation of the spiritual world; avara—and the
inferior situation of the material world; dåçä—by Him who sees perfectly;
mayä—by Me.
TRANSLATION
Thus I, the perfect seer of everything material and spiritual, have spoken
this knowledge of Säìkhya, which destroys the illusion of doubt by scientific
analysis of creation and annihilation.
PURPORT
Lord Çré Kåñëa has explained that the material mind accepts and rejects
many different concepts of life, generating innumerable false arguments about
the actual process of perfection. But a person who takes shelter of the lotus
feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead can see everything with clear
intelligence. One who understands how the Supreme Lord creates and
annihilates can be liberated from material bondage and devote himself to the
eternal service of the Supreme Lord.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Eleventh Canto, Twenty-fourth
Chapter, of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Philosophy of Säìkhya."
25. The Three Modes of Nature and Beyond
To establish the transcendental nature of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, this chapter describes the various functional manifestations of the
three modes (goodness, passion and ignorance), which arise in the mind.
Control of the mind, control of the senses, tolerance and so forth are
manifestations of the unmixed mode of goodness. Desire, endeavor, false pride
and so on are manifestations of the unmixed mode of passion. And anger,
greed and bewilderment are among the functions of the unmixed mode of
ignorance. In the admixture of the three modes we find the concept of "I" and
"my," behavior in accordance with this mentality by body, mind and words,
adherence to the principles of religiosity, economic development and sense
gratification, and the fixed pursuit of one's occupational duty for material
interest.
A person whose character is in the mode of goodness worships Lord Hari in
a spirit of devotion, without regard to profit. On the other hand, one who
hankers after the fruits of his worship of the Lord is passionate by nature. And
one who desires violence is in the mode of ignorance. These modes of
goodness, passion and ignorance are present in the infinitesimal living entity,
whereas the Supreme Personality of Godhead is transcendental to the three
modes of material nature.
The substance, place and result of activity, along with the time, the
knowledge underlying action, the activity itself, the performer, his faith, his
level of awareness, his spiritual progress and his destination after death, all
partake of the three modes and manifest variously in terms of distinctions and
hierarchies. But objects related to the Supreme Personality, places connected
with Him, happiness based on Him, the time occupied in His worship,
knowledge related to Him, work offered to Him, the performer of work who
acts under His shelter, faith in His devotional service, progress toward the
spiritual realm, and the destination of the Supreme Lord's personal abode all
transcend the material modes.
There are many different destinations and conditions of life for the spirit
soul within the cycle of material existence. These are all based on the modes of
nature and on fruitive activities, which are governed by the modes. It is only
by practicing the yoga of pure devotional service to the Supreme Lord that one
can conquer the three modes, which arise originally from the mind. After
obtaining a human body, which has the potential for developing knowledge
and realization, a person who is intelligent should renounce association with
the three modes of nature and then worship the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. First, by increasing the mode of goodness, one can defeat passion
and ignorance. Then one can conquer material goodness by evolving his
consciousness to the platform of transcendence. At that time he becomes
entirely liberated from the material modes, gives up his subtle body (the
material mind, intelligence and false ego) and attains the association of the
Personality of Godhead. By the shattering of his subtle covering, the living
entity is able to come face to face with the Supreme Lord and thus achieve
absolute fulfillment by His grace.
TEXT 1
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
gAuNAAnaAmas$aimma™aANAAM
paumaAna, yaena yaTaA Bavaeta,
tanmae pauç&SavayaeRd"ma,
opaDaAr"ya zAMs$ata:
çré-bhagavän uväca
guëänäm asammiçräëäà
pumän yena yathä bhavet
tan me puruña-varyedam
upadhäraya çaàsataù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; guëänäm—of
the modes of nature; asammiçräëäm—in their unmixed state; pumän—a
person; yena—by which mode; yathä—how; bhavet—he becomes; tat—that;
me—by Me; puruña-varya—O best among men; idam—this;
upadhäraya—please try to understand; çaàsataù—as I speak.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O best among men, please listen
as I describe to you how the living entity attains a particular nature by
association with individual material modes.
PURPORT
The word asammiçra indicates that which is not mixed with anything else.
Lord Kåñëa now explains how each of the three material modes (goodness,
passion and ignorance), acting separately, causes a conditioned soul to
manifest a particular type of existence. The living entity is ultimately
transcendental to the modes of nature, being part and parcel of Lord Kåñëa,
but in conditioned life he manifests material qualities. This is described in the
following verses.
TEXTS 2-5
zAmaAe d"maistaitaºaeºaA
tapa: s$atyaM d"yaA sma{ita:
tauií"styaAgAAe's$pa{h"A ™aÜ"A
oe"IdR"yaAid": svainava{Rita:
k(Ama wRh"A mad"sta{SNAA
stamBa @AzAIiBaRd"A s$auKama,
mad"Aets$aAh"Ae yazA:‘aIitar,"
h"AsyaM vaIya< balaAeâma:
‚(AeDaAe laAeBaAe'na{taM ihM"s$aA
yaA¿aA d"mBa: flama: k(ila:
zAAek(maAeh"AE ivaSaAd"AtaI=
ina‰"AzAA BaIr"nauâma:
s$aÔvasya r"jas$aêEtaAs$a,
tamas$aêAnaupaUvaRzA:
va{ÔayaAe vaiNARta‘aAyaA:
s$aiªapaAtamaTaAe Za{NAu
çamo damas titikñekñä
tapaù satyaà dayä småtiù
tuñöis tyägo 'spåhä çraddhä
hrér dayädiù sva-nirvåtiù
käma éhä madas tåñëä
stambha äçér bhidä sukham
madotsäho yaçaù-prétir
häsyaà véryaà balodyamaù
krodho lobho 'nåtaà hiàsä
yäcïä dambhaù klamaù kaliù
çoka-mohau viñädärté
nidräçä bhér anudyamaù
sattvasya rajasaç caitäs
tamasaç cänupürvaçaù
våttayo varëita-präyäù
sannipätam atho çåëu
SYNONYMS
çamaù—mind control; damaù—sense control; titikñä—tolerance;
ékñä—discrimination; tapaù—strictly following one's prescribed duty;
satyam—truthfulness; dayä—mercy; småtiù—observation of the past and
future; tuñöiù—satisfaction; tyägaù—generosity; aspåhä—detachment from
sense gratification; çraddhä—faith (in the guru and other bona fide
authorities); hréù—shame (due to improper activities); dayä-ädiù—charity,
simplicity, humility and so on; sva-nirvåtiù—taking one's pleasure from within;
kämaù—material desire; éhä—endeavor; madaù—audacity;
tåñëa—dissatisfaction even in gain; stambhaù—false pride; äçéù—praying to
the demigods and other deities with desire for material gain; bhidä—separatist
mentality; sukham—sense gratification; mada-utsähaù—courage based on
intoxication; yaçaù-prétiù—being fond of praise; häsyam—indulging in
ridicule; véryam—advertising one's power; bala-udyamaù—acting on the
sanction of one's own strength; krodhaù—intolerant anger; lobhaù—stinginess;
anåtam—false speech (speaking what is not stated in scripture as if it were
evidence); hiàsä—enmity; yäcïä—begging; dambhaù—hypocrisy;
klamaù—fatigue; kaliù—quarrel; çoka-mohau—lamentation and delusion;
viñäda-ärté—unhappiness and false humility; nidrä—sloth; äçä—false
expectations; bhéù—fear; anudyamaù—lack of endeavor; sattvasya—of the
mode of goodness; rajasaù—of the mode of passion; ca—and; etäù—these;
tamasaù—of the mode of ignorance; ca—and; änupürvaçaù—one after
another; våttayaù—the functions; varëita—have been described; präyäù—for
the most part; sannipätam—the combination of these; atho—now;
çåëu—please hear.
TRANSLATION
Mind and sense control, tolerance, discrimination, sticking to one's
prescribed duty, truthfulness, mercy, careful study of the past and future,
satisfaction in any condition, generosity, renunciation of sense gratification,
faith in the spiritual master, being embarrassed at improper action, charity,
simplicity, humbleness and satisfaction within oneself are qualities of the mode
of goodness. Material desire, great endeavor, audacity, dissatisfaction even in
gain, false pride, praying for material advancement, considering oneself different
and better than others, sense gratification, rash eagerness to fight, a fondness
for hearing oneself praised, the tendency to ridicule others, advertising one's
own prowess and justifying one's actions by one's strength are qualities of the
mode of passion. Intolerant anger, stinginess, speaking without scriptural
authority, violent hatred, living as a parasite, hypocrisy, chronic fatigue,
quarrel, lamentation, delusion, unhappiness, depression, sleeping too much,
false expectations, fear and laziness constitute the major qualities of the mode of
ignorance. Now please hear about the combination of these three modes.
TEXT 6
s$aiªapaAtastvah"imaita
mamaetyauÜ"va yaA maita:
vyavah"Ar": s$aiªapaAtaAe
manaAemaA‡aein‰"yaAs$auiBa:
sannipätas tv aham iti
mamety uddhava yä matiù
vyavahäraù sannipäto
mano-mätrendriyäsubhiù
SYNONYMS
sannipätaù—the combination of the modes; tu—and; aham iti—"I"; mama
iti—"mine"; uddhava—O Uddhava; yä—which; matiù—mentality;
vyavahäraù—ordinary activities; sannipätaù—the combination; manaù—by
the mind; mäträ—the objects of perception; indriya—the senses; asubhiù—and
the vital airs.
TRANSLATION
My dear Uddhava, the combination of all three modes is present in the
mentality of "I" and "mine." The ordinary transactions of this world, which are
carried out through the agency of the mind, the objects of perception, the senses
and the vital airs of the physical body, are also based on the combination of the
modes.
PURPORT
The illusory concept of "I" and "mine" occurs by the mixture of the three
modes of nature. A person in goodness may feel, "I am peaceful." One in
passion may think, "I am lusty." And one in ignorance may think, "I am angry."
Similarly, one may think "my peace," "my lust" or "my anger." One completely
absorbed in the mentality of being peaceful could not work in the material
world; he would lack any impulse to perform activity. Similarly, one absorbed
in lust would be blinded without at least a tinge of peacefulness or restraint.
One overwhelmed with anger could not function properly in the material
world without the mixture of other qualities. Thus we find that a material
mode does not occur in a pure, isolated form but rather is mixed with other
modes, thereby making possible normal functioning within this world.
Ultimately one should think, "I am an eternal servant of Lord Kåñëa" and "My
only possession is loving service to the Lord." This is the pure state of
consciousness, beyond the material modes of nature.
TEXT 7
DamaeR caATaeR ca k(Amae ca
yad"As$aAE pair"inaiï"ta:
gAuNAAnaAM s$aiªak(SaAeR'yaM
™aÜ"Ar"itaDanaAvah":
dharme cärthe ca käme ca
yadäsau pariniñöhitaù
guëänäà sannikarño 'yaà
çraddhä-rati-dhanävahaù
SYNONYMS
dharme—in religiosity; ca—and; arthe—in economic development; ca-and;
käme—in sense gratification; ca—and; yadä—when; asau—this living entity;
pariniñöhitaù—is fixed; guëänäm—of the modes of nature; sannikarñaù—the
intermingling; ayam—this; çraddhä—faith; rati—sensual enjoyment;
dhana—and wealth; ävahaù—which each bring.
TRANSLATION
When a person devotes himself to religiosity, economic development and
sense gratification, the faith, wealth and sensual enjoyment obtained by his
endeavors display the interaction of the three modes of nature.
PURPORT
Religiosity, economic development and sense gratification are situated
within the modes of nature, and the faith, wealth and enjoyment obtained by
them clearly reveal the particular situation of a person within the modes of
nature.
TEXT 8
‘ava{iÔalaºaNAe inaï"A
paumaAna, yaihR" gA{h"A™amae
svaDamaeR caAnau itaïe"ta
gAuNAAnaAM s$aimaitaihR" s$aA
pravåtti-lakñaëe niñöhä
pumän yarhi gåhäçrame
sva-dharme cänu tiñöheta
guëänäà samitir hi sä
SYNONYMS
pravåtti—of the path of material enjoyment; lakñaëe—in that which is the
symptom; niñöhä—dedication; pumän—a person; yarhi—when;
gåha-äçrame—in family life; sva-dharme—in prescribed duties; ca—and;
anu—later; tiñöheta—he stands; guëänäm—of the modes of nature;
samitiù—the combination; hi—indeed; sä—this.
TRANSLATION
When a man desires sense gratification, being attached to family life, and
when he consequently becomes established in religious and occupational duties,
the combination of the modes of nature is manifest.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, religious duties performed for
promotion to heaven are understood to be in the mode of passion, those
performed to enjoy ordinary family life are in the mode of ignorance, and
those performed selflessly to fulfill one's occupational duty in the varëäçrama
system are in the mode of goodness. The Lord has thus explained how
mundane religiosity is manifest within the modes of nature.
TEXT 9
pauç&SaM s$aÔvas$aMyaul(ma,
@naumaIyaAcC$maAid"iBa:
k(AmaAid"BaI r"jaAeyaulM(
‚(AeDaAâEstamas$aA yautama,
puruñaà sattva-saàyuktam
anuméyäc chamädibhiù
kämädibhé rajo-yuktaà
krodhädyais tamasä yutam
SYNONYMS
puruñam—a person; sattva-saàyuktam—endowed with the mode of goodness;
anuméyät—can be deduced; çama-ädibhiù—by his qualities of sense control
and so on; käma-ädibhiù—by lust and so on; rajaù-yuktam—one who is in the
mode of passion; krodha-ädyaiù—by anger and so on; tamasä—with the mode
of ignorance; yutam—one who is endowed.
TRANSLATION
A person exhibiting qualities such as self-control is understood to be
predominantly in the mode of goodness. Similarly, a passionate person is
recognized by his lust, and one in ignorance is recognized by qualities such as
anger.
TEXT 10
yad"A Bajaita maAM BaftyaA
inar"paeºa: svak(maRiBa:
taM s$aÔva‘ak{(itaM ivaâAta,
pauç&SaM iñyamaeva vaA
yadä bhajati mäà bhaktyä
nirapekñaù sva-karmabhiù
taà sattva-prakåtià vidyät
puruñaà striyam eva vä
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; bhajati—a person worships; mäm—Me; bhaktyä—with devotion;
nirapekñaù—indifferent to results; sva-karmabhiù—by his own prescribed
duties; tam—him; sattva-prakåtim—a person whose nature is in the mode of
goodness; vidyät—one should understand; puruñam—a man; striyam—a
woman; eva—even; vä—or.
TRANSLATION
Any person, whether man or woman, who worships Me with loving
devotion, offering his or her prescribed duties unto Me without material
attachment, is understood to be situated in goodness.
TEXT 11
yad"A @AizASa @AzAAsya
maAM Bajaeta svak(maRiBa:
taM r"ja:‘ak{(itaM ivaâAta,
ihM"s$aAmaAzAAsya taAmas$ama,
yadä äçiña äçäsya
mäà bhajeta sva-karmabhiù
taà rajaù-prakåtià vidyät
hiàsäm äçäsya tämasam
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; äçiñaù—benedictions; äçäsya—hoping for; mäm—Me;
bhajeta—a person worships; sva-karmabhiù—by his duties; tam—that;
rajaù-prakåtim—a person situated in the mode of passion; vidyät—one should
understand; hiàsäm—violence; äçäsya—hoping for; tämasam—a person in the
mode of ignorance.
TRANSLATION
When a person worships Me by his prescribed duties with the hope of
gaining material benefit, his nature should be understood to be in passion, and
one who worships Me with the desire to commit violence against others is in
ignorance.
TEXT 12
s$aÔvaM r"jastama wita
gAuNAA jaIvasya naEva mae
icaÔajaA yaEstau BaUtaAnaAM
s$aÀamaAnaAe inabaDyatae
sattvaà rajas tama iti
guëä jévasya naiva me
citta-jä yais tu bhütänäà
sajjamäno nibadhyate
SYNONYMS
sattvam—the mode of goodness; rajaù—the mode of passion; tamaù—the
mode of ignorance; iti—thus; guëäù—the modes; jévasya—pertaining to the
spirit soul; na—not; eva—indeed; me—to Me; citta-jäù—manifest within the
mind; yaiù—by which modes; tu—and; bhütänäm—to material creations;
sajjamänaù—becoming attached; nibadhyate—one is bound up.
TRANSLATION
The three modes of material nature—goodness, passion and
ignorance—influence the living entity but not Me. Manifesting within his
mind, they induce the living entity to become attached to material bodies and
other created objects. In this way the living entity is bound up.
PURPORT
The living entity is the marginal potency of the Supreme Lord, having the
tendency to be overwhelmed by the Lord's illusory material energy. The
Personality of Godhead, however, is the absolute controller of illusion. Illusion
can never control the Lord. Thus the Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëa, is the eternal
object of service for all living beings, who are eternally servants of the Lord.
The three modes of nature manifest within the material energy. When a
conditioned soul adopts a material mentality, the modes exert their influence
within the jurisdiction of that mentality. But if one purifies one's mind in the
devotional service of the Lord, the modes of nature can no longer act upon
him, since they have no influence on the spiritual platform.
TEXT 13
yade"tar"AE jayaets$aÔvaM
BaAsvarM" ivazAdM" izAvama,
tad"A s$auKaena yaujyaeta
DamaRÁaAnaAid"iBa: paumaAna,
yadetarau jayet sattvaà
bhäsvaraà viçadaà çivam
tadä sukhena yujyeta
dharma-jïänädibhiù pumän
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; itarau—the other two; jayet—overcomes; sattvam—the mode of
goodness; bhäsvaram—luminous; viçadam—pure; çivam—auspicious;
tadä—then; sukhena—with happiness; yujyeta—he becomes endowed;
dharma—with religiousness; jïäna—knowledge; ädibhiù—and other good
qualities; pumän—a man.
TRANSLATION
When the mode of goodness, which is luminous, pure and auspicious,
predominates over passion and ignorance, a man becomes endowed with
happiness, virtue, knowledge and other good qualities.
PURPORT
One can control one's mind and senses in the mode of goodness.
TEXT 14
yad"A jayaeÔama: s$aÔvaM
r"ja: s$aËMÿ iBad"A calama,
tad"A äu":Kaena yaujyaeta
k(maRNAA yazAs$aA i™ayaA
yadä jayet tamaù sattvaà
rajaù saìgaà bhidä calam
tadä duùkhena yujyeta
karmaëä yaçasä çriyä
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; jayet—conquers; tamaù sattvam—both ignorance and goodness;
rajaù—passion; saìgam—(the cause of) attachment; bhidä—separatism;
calam—and change; tadä—then; duùkhena—with misery; yujyeta—one
becomes endowed; karmaëä—with material work; yaçasä—with (the desire
for) fame; çriyä—and with opulence.
TRANSLATION
When the mode of passion, which causes attachment, separatism and
activity, conquers ignorance and goodness, a man begins to work hard to acquire
prestige and fortune. Thus in the mode of passion he experiences anxiety and
struggle.
TEXT 15
yad"A jayae‰"ja: s$aÔvaM
tamaAe maUXM# layaM jax"ma,
yaujyaeta zAAek(maAeh"AByaAM
ina‰"yaA ihM"s$ayaAzAyaA
yadä jayed rajaù sattvaà
tamo müòhaà layaà jaòam
yujyeta çoka-mohäbhyäà
nidrayä hiàsayäçayä
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; jayet—conquers; rajaù sattvam—the modes of passion and
goodness; tamaù—the mode of darkness; müòham—defeating one's
discrimination; layam—covering over consciousness; jaòam—devoid of
endeavor; yujyeta—one becomes endowed; çoka—with lamentation;
mohäbhyäm—and bewilderment; nidrayä—with oversleeping; hiàsayä—with
violent qualities; äçayä—and false hopes.
TRANSLATION
When the mode of ignorance conquers passion and goodness, it covers one's
consciousness and makes one foolish and dull. Falling into lamentation and
illusion, a person in the mode of ignorance sleeps excessively, indulges in false
hopes, and displays violence toward others.
TEXT 16
yad"A icaÔaM ‘as$aIde"ta
win‰"yaANAAM ca inava{Rita:
de"he"'BayaM manaAe's$aËMÿ
tats$aÔvaM ivaiÜ" matpad"ma,
yadä cittaà prasédeta
indriyäëäà ca nirvåtiù
dehe 'bhayaà mano-'saìgaà
tat sattvaà viddhi mat-padam
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; cittam—the consciousness; prasédeta—becomes clear;
indriyäëäm—of the senses; ca—and; nirvåtiù—cessation of their mundane
activities; dehe—in the body; abhayam—fearlessness; manaù—of the mind;
asaìgam—detachment; tat—that; sattvam—the mode of goodness;
viddhi—know it; mat—realization of Me; padam—the situation in which such
can be achieved.
TRANSLATION
When consciousness becomes clear and the senses are detached from matter,
one experiences fearlessness within the material body and detachment from the
material mind. You should understand this situation to be the predominance of
the mode of goodness, in which one has the opportunity to realize Me.
TEXT 17
ivaku(vaRna, i‚(yayaA caADaIr,"
@inava{iÔaê caetas$aAma,
gAA‡aAsvaAs$TyaM manaAe ”aAntaM
r"ja WtaEinaRzAAmaya
vikurvan kriyayä cä-dhér
anivåttiç ca cetasäm
gäträsvästhyaà mano bhräntaà
raja etair niçämaya
SYNONYMS
vikurvan—becoming distorted; kriyayä—by activity; ca—and; ä—even up to;
dhéù—the intelligence; anivåttiù—failure to stop; ca—and; cetasäm—on the
part of the conscious faculties of intelligence and the senses; gätra—of the
working senses; asvästhyam—unhealthy condition; manaù—the mind;
bhräntam—unsteady; rajaù—passion; etaiù—by these symptoms;
niçämaya—you should understand.
TRANSLATION
You should discern the mode of passion by its symptoms—the distortion of
the intelligence because of too much activity, the inability of the perceiving
senses to disentangle themselves from mundane objects, an unhealthy condition
of the working physical organs, and the unsteady perplexity of the mind.
TEXT 18
s$aId"i»aÔaM ivalaIyaeta
caetas$aAe ƒah"NAe'ºamama,
manaAe naíM" tamaAe glaAinas$a,
tamastaäu"paDaAr"ya
sédac cittaà viléyeta
cetaso grahaëe 'kñamam
mano nañöaà tamo glänis
tamas tad upadhäraya
SYNONYMS
sédat—failing; cittam—the higher faculties of consciousness; viléyeta—become
dissolved; cetasaù—awareness; grahaëe—in controlling; akñamam—incapable;
manaù—the mind; nañöam—ruined; tamaù—ignorance; gläniù—depression;
tamaù—the mode of ignorance; tat—that; upadhäraya—you should
understand.
TRANSLATION
When one's higher awareness fails and finally disappears and one is thus
unable to concentrate his attention, his mind is ruined and manifests ignorance
and depression. You should understand this situation to be the predominance of
the mode of ignorance.
TEXT 19
WDamaAnae gAuNAe s$aÔvae
de"vaAnaAM balamaeDatae
@s$aur"ANAAM ca r"jais$a
tamasyauÜ"va r"ºas$aAma,
edhamäne guëe sattve
devänäà balam edhate
asuräëäà ca rajasi
tamasy uddhava rakñasäm
SYNONYMS
edhamäne—when it is increasing; guëe—the mode; sattve—of goodness;
devänäm—of the demigods; balam—the strength; edhate—increases;
asuräëäm—of the enemies of the demigods; ca—and; rajasi—when the mode
of passion increases; tamasi—when the mode of ignorance increases;
uddhava—O Uddhava; rakñasäm—of the man-eating monsters.
TRANSLATION
With the increase of the mode of goodness, the strength of the demigods
similarly increases. When passion increases, the demoniac become strong. And
with the rise of ignorance, O Uddhava, the strength of the most wicked
increases.
TEXT 20
s$aÔvaAÀaAgAr"NAM ivaâAä,"
r"jas$aA sva«amaAid"zAeta,
‘asvaApaM tamas$aA jantaAes$a,
taur"IyaM i‡aSau s$antatama,
sattväj jägaraëaà vidyäd
rajasä svapnam ädiçet
prasväpaà tamasä jantos
turéyaà triñu santatam
SYNONYMS
sattvät—by the mode of goodness; jägaraëam—waking consciousness;
vidyät—one should understand; rajasä—by passion; svapnam—sleep;
ädiçet—is indicated; prasväpam—deep sleep; tamasä—by the mode of
ignorance; jantoù—of the living entity; turéyam—the fourth, transcendental
state; triñu—throughout the three; santatam—pervading.
TRANSLATION
It should be understood that alert wakefulness comes from the mode of
goodness, sleep with dreaming from the mode of passion, and deep, dreamless
sleep from the mode of ignorance. The fourth state of consciousness pervades
these three and is transcendental.
PURPORT
Our original Kåñëa consciousness exists eternally within the soul, and it is
also present in all the three phases of awareness, namely normal wakefulness,
dreaming and dreamless sleep. Being covered by the modes of nature, this
spiritual consciousness may not be manifest, but it continues to exist eternally
as the real nature of the living entity.
TEXT 21
opayauRpair" gAcC$inta
s$aÔvaena “aAöNAA janaA:
tamas$aADaAe'Da @AmauKyaAä,"
r"jas$aAntar"caAir"NA:
upary upari gacchanti
sattvena brähmaëä janäù
tamasädho 'dha ä-mukhyäd
rajasäntara-cäriëaù
SYNONYMS
upari upari—higher and higher; gacchanti—they go; sattvena—by the mode of
goodness; brähmaëäù—persons dedicated to Vedic principles; janäù—such
men; tamasä—by the mode of ignorance; adhaù adhaù—lower and lower;
ä-mukhyät—headfirst; rajasä—by the mode of passion;
antara-cäriëaù—remaining in intermediate situations.
TRANSLATION
Learned persons dedicated to Vedic culture are elevated by the mode of
goodness to higher and higher positions. The mode of ignorance, on the other
hand, forces one to fall headfirst into lower and lower births. And by the mode
of passion one continues transmigrating through human bodies.
PURPORT
Çüdras, persons in the mode of ignorance, are generally in deep illusion
about the purpose of life, accepting the gross material body as the self. Those
in passion and ignorance are called vaiçyas and hanker intensely for wealth,
whereas kñatriyas, who are in the mode of passion, are eager for prestige and
power. Those in the mode of goodness, however, hanker after perfect
knowledge; they are therefore called brähmaëas. Such a person is promoted up
to the supreme material position of Brahmaloka, the planet of Lord Brahmä.
One who is in the mode of ignorance gradually falls to the level of unmoving
species, such as trees and stones, while one in the mode of passion, filled with
material desire but satisfying it within Vedic culture, is allowed to remain in
human society.
TEXT 22
s$aÔvae ‘alaInaA: svayaARinta
nar"laAekM( r"jaAelayaA:
tamaAelayaAstau inar"yaM
yaAinta maAmaeva inagAuRNAA:
sattve pralénäù svar yänti
nara-lokaà rajo-layäù
tamo-layäs tu nirayaà
yänti mäm eva nirguëäù
SYNONYMS
sattve—in the mode of goodness; pralénäù—those who die; svaù—to heaven;
yänti—they go; nara-lokam—to the world of human beings;
rajaù-layäù—those who die in the mode of passion; tamaù-layäù—those who
die in the mode of ignorance; tu—and; nirayam—to hell; yänti—they go;
mäm—to Me; eva—however; nirguëäù—those who are free from all the
modes.
TRANSLATION
Those who leave this world in the mode of goodness go to the heavenly
planets, those who pass away in the mode of passion remain in the world of
human beings, and those dying in the mode of ignorance must go to hell. But
those who are free from the influence of all modes of nature come to Me.
TEXT 23
mad"paRNAM inaSP(laM vaA
s$aAiÔvakM( inajak(maR tata,
r"Ajas$aM P(las$aÆÿlpaM
ihM"s$aA‘aAyaAid" taAmas$ama,
mad-arpaëaà niñphalaà vä
sättvikaà nija-karma tat
räjasaà phala-saìkalpaà
hiàsä-präyädi tämasam
SYNONYMS
mat-arpaëam—offered unto Me; niñphalam—done without expectation of
result; vä—and; sättvikam—in the mode of goodness; nija—accepted as one's
prescribed duty; karma—work; tat—that; räjasam—in the mode of passion;
phala-saìkalpam—done in expectation of some result; hiàsä-präya-ädi—done
with violence, envy and so on; tämasam—in the mode of ignorance.
TRANSLATION
Work performed as an offering to Me, without consideration of the fruit, is
considered to be in the mode of goodness. Work performed with a desire to
enjoy the results is in the mode of passion. And work impelled by violence and
envy is in the mode of ignorance.
PURPORT
Ordinary work performed as an offering to God, without desire for the
result, is understood to be in the mode of goodness, whereas activities of
devotion—such as chanting and hearing the glories of the Lord—are
transcendental forms of work beyond the modes of nature.
TEXT 24
kE(valyaM s$aAiÔvakM( ÁaAnaM
r"jaAe vaEk(ilpakM( ca yata,
‘aAk{(taM taAmas$aM ÁaAnaM
maiªaïM" inagAuRNAM sma{tama,
kaivalyaà sättvikaà jïänaà
rajo vaikalpikaà ca yat
präkåtaà tämasaà jïänaà
man-niñöhaà nirguëaà småtam
SYNONYMS
kaivalyam—absolute; sättvikam—in the mode of goodness;
jïänam—knowledge; rajaù—in the mode of passion; vaikalpikam—manifold;
ca—and; yat—which; präkåtam—materialistic; tämasam—in the mode of
ignorance; jïänam—knowledge; mat-niñöham—concentrated upon Me;
nirguëam—transcendental; småtam—is considered.
TRANSLATION
Absolute knowledge is in the mode of goodness, knowledge based on duality
is in the mode of passion, and foolish, materialistic knowledge is in the mode of
ignorance. Knowledge based upon Me, however, is understood to be
transcendental.
PURPORT
The Lord clearly explains here that spiritual knowledge of His supreme
personality is transcendental to ordinary religious knowledge in the mode of
goodness. In the mode of goodness one understands the existence of a higher
spiritual nature within all things. In the mode of passion one acquires
scientific knowledge of the material body. And in the mode of ignorance one
fixes one's mind on the sense objects without higher awareness, perceiving
things as a small child or a retarded person does.
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé elaborately explains in his commentary on this verse
that the material mode of goodness does not award perfect knowledge of the
Absolute Truth. He quotes from Çrémad-Bhägavatam (6.14.2), proving that
many great demigods in the mode of goodness could not understand the
transcendental personality of Lord Kåñëa. In the material mode of goodness,
one becomes pious or religious, aware of a higher, spiritual nature. On the
spiritual platform of purified goodness, however, one establishes a direct,
loving relationship with the Absolute Truth, rendering service to the Lord
rather than merely maintaining a connection to mundane piety. In the mode
of passion the conditioned soul speculates about the reality of his own
existence and of the world around him, and considers speculatively the
existence of a kingdom of God. In the mode of ignorance one acquires
knowledge for sense gratification, absorbing the mind in varieties of eating,
sleeping, defending and sex, without any higher purpose. Thus, within the
modes of nature the conditioned souls are trying to gratify their senses, or else
they are trying to free themselves from sense gratification. But they cannot
directly engage themselves in their constitutional, liberated activities until
they come to the transcendental position of Kåñëa consciousness, beyond the
modes of nature.
TEXT 25
vanaM tau s$aAiÔvak(Ae vaAs$aAe
ƒaAmaAe r"Ajas$a ocyatae
taAmas$aM âUtas$ad"naM
maiªake(taM tau inagAuRNAma,
vanaà tu sättviko väso
grämo räjasa ucyate
tämasaà dyüta-sadanaà
man-niketaà tu nirguëam
SYNONYMS
vanam—the forest; tu—whereas; sättvikaù—in the mode of goodness;
väsaù—residence; grämaù—the village neighborhood; räjasaù—in the mode of
passion; ucyate—is said; tämasam—in the mode of ignorance;
dyüta-sadanam—the gambling house; mat-niketam—My residence; tu—but;
nirguëam—transcendental.
TRANSLATION
Residence in the forest is in the mode of goodness, residence in a town is in
the mode of passion, residence in a gambling house displays the quality of
ignorance, and residence in a place where I reside is transcendental.
PURPORT
Many creatures in the forest, such as the trees, wild boars and insects, are
actually in the modes of passion and ignorance. But residence in the forest is
designated as being in the mode of goodness because there one may live a
solitary life free from sinful activities, material opulence and passionate
ambition. Throughout the history of India, many millions of persons from all
walks of life have adopted the orders of vänaprastha and sannyäsa and have
gone to sacred forests to practice austerity and perfect their self-realization.
Even in America and other Western countries, persons such as Thoreau
achieved fame by retiring to the forest to reduce the scope and opulence of
material involvement.
The word gräma here indicates residence in the village of one's family.
Family life is certainly full of false pride, false hopes, false affection,
lamentation and illusion, since the family connection is squarely resting on
the bodily concept of life, the very opposite of self-realization. The word
dyüta-sadanam, "gambling house," refers to pool halls, racetracks, poker clubs,
bars and other sinful places that maintain an abysmal level of consciousness in
the mode of ignorance. Man-niketam refers to the Lord's own abode in the
spiritual world as well as the Lord's temples within this world, wherein the
Deity form of the Lord is appropriately worshiped. One who lives in the
temple of Lord Kåñëa, following the rules and regulations of temple life, is
understood to be residing on the transcendental platform. In these verses the
Lord clearly explains that all material phenomena may be divided into three
divisions according to the modes of nature, and that ultimately there is the
fourth, or transcendental, division—Kåñëa consciousness—which elevates all
aspects of human culture to the liberated platform.
TEXT 26
s$aAiÔvak(: k(Ar"k(Ae's$aËÿL
r"AgAAnDaAe r"Ajas$a: sma{ta:
taAmas$a: sma{itaiva”aí"Ae
inagAuRNAAe mad"paA™aya:
sättvikaù kärako 'saìgé
rägändho räjasaù småtaù
tämasaù småti-vibhrañöo
nirguëo mad-apäçrayaù
SYNONYMS
sättvikaù—in the mode of goodness; kärakaù—the performer of activities;
asaìgé—free from attachment; räga-andhaù—blinded by personal desire;
räjasaù—the performer in the mode of passion; småtaù—is considered;
tämasaù—the performer in the mode of ignorance; småti—from remembrance
of what is what; vibhrañöaù—fallen; nirguëaù—transcendental;
mat-apäçrayaù—he who has taken shelter of Me.
TRANSLATION
A worker free of attachment is in the mode of goodness, a worker blinded by
personal desire is in the mode of passion, and a worker who has completely
forgotten how to tell right from wrong is in the mode of ignorance. But a
worker who has taken shelter of Me is understood to be transcendental to the
modes of nature.
PURPORT
A transcendental worker performs his activities in strict accordance with
the directions of Lord Kåñëa and the Lord's bona fide representatives. Taking
shelter of the Lord's guidance, such a worker remains transcendental to the
material modes of nature.
TEXT 27
s$aAiÔvafyaADyaAitmak(L ™aÜ"A
k(maR™aÜ"A tau r"Ajas$aI
taAmasyaDamaeR yaA ™aÜ"A
mats$aevaAyaAM tau inagAuRNAA
sättviky ädhyätmiké çraddhä
karma-çraddhä tu räjasé
tämasy adharme yä çraddhä
mat-seväyäà tu nirguëä
SYNONYMS
sättviké—in the mode of goodness; ädhyätmiké—spiritual; çraddhä—faith;
karma—in work; çraddhä—faith; tu—but; räjasé—in the mode of passion;
tämasé—in the mode of ignorance; adharme—in irreligion; yä—which;
çraddhä—faith; mat-seväyäm—in My devotional service; tu—but;
nirguëä—transcendental.
TRANSLATION
Faith directed toward spiritual life is in the mode of goodness, faith rooted in
fruitive work is in the mode of passion, faith residing in irreligious activities is
in the mode of ignorance, but faith in My devotional service is purely
transcendental.
TEXT 28
paTyaM paUtamanaAyastama,
@Ah"Aya< s$aAiÔvakM( sma{tama,
r"Ajas$aM caein‰"ya‘aeïM"
taAmas$aM caAitaRd"AzAuica
pathyaà pütam anäyastam
ähäryaà sättvikaà småtam
räjasaà cendriya-preñöhaà
tämasaà cärti-däçuci
SYNONYMS
pathyam—beneficial; pütam—pure; anäyastam—attained without difficulty;
ähäryam—food; sättvikam—in the mode of goodness; småtam—is considered;
räjasam—in the mode of passion; ca—and; indriya-preñöham—very dear to the
senses; tämasam—in the mode of ignorance; ca—and; ärti-da—which creates
suffering; açuci—is impure.
TRANSLATION
Food that is wholesome, pure and obtained without difficulty is in the mode
of goodness, food that gives immediate pleasure to the senses is in the mode of
passion, and food that is unclean and causes distress is in the mode of ignorance.
PURPORT
Food in the mode of ignorance causes painful disease and ultimately
premature death.
TEXT 29
s$aAiÔvakM( s$auKamaAtmaAetTaM
ivaSayaAetTaM tau r"Ajas$ama,
taAmas$aM maAeh"dE"nyaAetTaM
inagAuRNAM mad"paA™ayama,
sättvikaà sukham ätmotthaà
viñayotthaà tu räjasam
tämasaà moha-dainyotthaà
nirguëaà mad-apäçrayam
SYNONYMS
sättvikam—in the mode of goodness; sukham—happiness;
ätma-uttham—generated from the self; viñaya-uttham—generated from sense
objects; tu—but; räjasam—in the mode of passion; tämasam—in the mode of
ignorance; moha—from delusion; dainya—and degradation; uttham—derived;
nirguëam—transcendental; mat-apäçrayam—within Me.
TRANSLATION
Happiness derived from the self is in the mode of goodness, happiness based
on sense gratification is in the mode of passion, and happiness based on delusion
and degradation is in the mode of ignorance. But that happiness found within
Me is transcendental.
TEXT 30
‰"vyaM de"zA: P(laM k(AlaAe
ÁaAnaM k(maR ca k(Ar"k(:
™aÜ"AvasTaAk{(itainaRï"A
‡aEgAuNya: s$avaR Wva ih"
dravyaà deçaù phalaà kälo
jïänaà karma ca kärakaù
çraddhävasthäkåtir niñöhä
trai-guëyaù sarva eva hi
SYNONYMS
dravyam—object; deçaù—place; phalam—result; kälaù—time;
jïänam—knowledge; karma—activity; ca—and; kärakaù—performer;
çraddhä—faith; avasthä—state of consciousness; äkåtiù—species;
niñöhä—destination; trai-guëyaù—partaking of the three modes; sarvaù—all
these; eva hi—certainly.
TRANSLATION
Therefore material substance, place, result of activity, time, knowledge,
work, the performer of work, faith, state of consciousness, species of life and
destination after death are all based on the three modes of material nature.
TEXT 31
s$avaeR gAuNAmayaA BaAvaA:
pauç&SaAvyal(iDaiï"taA:
ä{"íM" ™autaM @nauDyaAtaM
bauÜ"YaA vaA pauç&SaSaRBa
sarve guëa-mayä bhäväù
puruñävyakta-dhiñöhitäù
dåñöaà çrutaà anudhyätaà
buddhyä vä puruñarñabha
SYNONYMS
sarve—all; guëa-mayaù—composed of the modes of nature; bhävaù—states of
existence; puruña—by the enjoying soul; avyakta—and subtle nature;
dhiñöhitäù-established and maintained; dåñöam—seen; çrutam—heard;
anudhyätam—conceived; buddhyä—by the intelligence; vä—or;
puruña-åñabha—O best among men.
TRANSLATION
O best of human beings, all states of material being are related to the
interaction of the enjoying soul and material nature. Whether seen, heard of or
only conceived within the mind, they are without exception constituted of the
modes of nature.
TEXT 32
WtaA: s$aMs$a{taya: pauMs$aAe
gAuNAk(maRinabanDanaA:
yaenaemae inaijaRtaA: s$aAEmya
gAuNAA jaIvaena icaÔajaA:
Bail(yaAegAena maiªaï"Ae
maà"AvaAya ‘apaâtae
etäù saàsåtayaù puàso
guëa-karma-nibandhanäù
yeneme nirjitäù saumya
guëä jévena citta-jäù
bhakti-yogena man-niñöho
mad-bhäväya prapadyate
SYNONYMS
etäù—these; saàsåtayaù—created aspects of existence; puàsaù—of a living
being; guëa—with the material qualities; karma—and work;
nibandhanäù—connected; yena—by whom; ime—these; nirjitäù—are
conquered; saumya—O gentle Uddhava; guëäù—the modes of nature;
jévena—by a living entity; citta-jäù—which are manifested from the mind;
bhakti-yogena—through the process of devotional service;
mat-niñöhaù—dedicated to Me; mat-bhäväya—of love for Me;
prapadyate—receives the qualification.
TRANSLATION
O gentle Uddhava, all these different phases of conditioned life arise from
work born of the modes of material nature. The living entity who conquers
these modes, manifested from the mind, can dedicate himself to Me by the
process of devotional service and thus attain pure love for Me.
PURPORT
The words mad-bhäväya prapadyate indicate the attainment of love for God
or of the same state of existence as that of the Supreme Lord. Actual liberation
is residence within the eternal kingdom of God, where life is full of bliss and
knowledge. The conditioned soul falsely imagines himself to be the enjoyer of
the modes of nature, and thus a particular type of material work is generated,
the reaction of which binds the conditioned soul to repeated birth and death.
This fruitless process can be counteracted by loving service to the Lord, as
described here.
TEXT 33
tasmaAÚe"h"imamaM labDvaA
ÁaAnaivaÁaAnas$amBavama,
gAuNAs$aËMÿ ivainaDaURya
maAM Bajantau ivacaºaNAA:
tasmäd deham imaà labdhvä
jïäna-vijïäna-sambhavam
guëa-saìgaà vinirdhüya
mäà bhajantu vicakñaëäù
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; deham—body; imam—this; labdhvä—having obtained;
jïäna—of theoretical knowledge; vijïäna—and realized knowledge;
sambhavam—the place of generation; guëa-saìgam—association with the
modes of nature; vinirdhüya—washing out completely; mäm—Me;
bhajantu—they should worship; vicakñaëäù—persons who are very intelligent.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, having achieved this human form of life, which allows one to
develop full knowledge, those who are intelligent should free themselves from
all contamination of the modes of nature and engage exclusively in loving
service to Me.
TEXT 34
ina:s$aËÿAe maAM Bajaeiã"ã"Ana,
@‘amaÔaAe ijataein‰"ya:
r"jastamaêAiBajayaeta,
s$aÔvas$aMs$aevayaA mauina:
niùsaìgo mäà bhajed vidvän
apramatto jitendriyaù
rajas tamaç cäbhijayet
sattva-saàsevayä muniù
SYNONYMS
niùsaìgaù—free from material association; mäm—Me; bhajet—should worship;
vidvän—a wise person; apramattaù—not bewildered; jita-indriyaù—having
subdued his senses; rajaù—the mode of passion; tamaù—the mode of
ignorance; ca—and; abhijayet—he should conquer; sattva-saàsevayä—by
taking to the mode of goodness; muniù—the sage.
TRANSLATION
A wise sage, free from all material association and unbewildered, should
subdue his senses and worship Me. He should conquer the modes of passion and
ignorance by engaging himself only with things in the mode of goodness.
TEXT 35
s$aÔvaM caAiBajayaeâul(Ae
naEr"paeºyaeNA zAAntaDaI:
s$ampaâtae gAuNAEmauRl(Ae
jaIvaAe jaIvaM ivah"Aya maAma,
sattvaà cäbhijayed yukto
nairapekñyeëa çänta-dhéù
sampadyate guëair mukto
jévo jévaà vihäya mäm
SYNONYMS
sattvam—the mode of goodness; ca—also; abhijayet—he should conquer;
yuktaù—engaged in devotional service; nairapekñyeëa—by being indifferent to
the modes; çänta—pacified; dhéù—whose intelligence; sampadyate—he
achieves; guëaiù—from the modes of nature; muktaù—liberated; jévaù—the
living entity; jévam—the cause of his being conditioned; vihäya—giving up;
mäm—Me.
TRANSLATION
Then, being fixed in devotional service, the sage should also conquer the
material mode of goodness by indifference toward the modes. Thus pacified
within his mind, the spirit soul, freed from the modes of nature, gives up the
very cause of his conditioned life and attains Me.
PURPORT
The word nairapekñyeëa refers to complete detachment from the modes of
material nature. By attachment to the loving service of the Lord, which is
completely transcendental, one gives up one's interest in the modes of nature.
TEXT 36
jaIvaAe jaIvaivainamauRl(Ae
gAuNAEêAzAyas$amBavaE:
mayaEva “aöNAA paUNAAeR
na baih"naARntar"êre"ta,
jévo jéva-vinirmukto
guëaiç cäçaya-sambhavaiù
mayaiva brahmaëä pürëo
na bahir näntaraç caret
SYNONYMS
jévaù—the living entity; jéva-vinirmuktaù—freed from the subtle conditioning
of material consciousness; guëaiù—from the modes of nature; ca—and;
äçaya-sambhavaiù—which have manifested in his own mind; mayä—by Me;
eva—indeed; brahmaëä—by the Supreme Absolute Truth; pürëaù—made full
in satisfaction; na—not; bahiù—in the external (sense gratification); na—nor;
antaraù—in the internal (remembrance of sense gratification); caret—he
should wander.
TRANSLATION
Freed from the subtle conditioning of the mind and from the modes of
nature born of material consciousness, the living entity becomes completely
satisfied by experiencing My transcendental form. He no longer searches for
enjoyment in the external energy, nor does he contemplate or remember such
enjoyment within himself.
PURPORT
The human form of life is a rare opportunity for achieving spiritual
liberation in Kåñëa consciousness. Lord Kåñëa has elaborately described in this
chapter the characteristics of the three modes of nature and the
transcendental situation of Kåñëa consciousness. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu
has ordered us to take shelter of the holy name of Lord Kåñëa, by which
process we can easily transcend the modes of nature and begin our real life of
loving devotional service to Lord Kåñëa.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Eleventh Canto, Twenty-fifth Chapter,
of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Three Modes of Nature and Beyond."
26. The Aila-gétä
This chapter explains how unfavorable association is a threat to one's
position in devotional service and how by associating with saintly persons one
can attain the highest platform of devotion.
The jéva who has received a human body, which is in itself most conducive
toward achieving the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and who has situated
himself in the duties of devotional service to the Lord becomes capable of
realizing Him, the very identity of spiritual bliss. Such a person, fully dedicated
to the Supreme Personality, is liberated from the influence of Mäyä; even
while continuing to reside in this world created by illusion he is totally
untouched by it. Those souls, on the other hand, who are bound up by Mäyä are
devoted only to their bellies and genitals. They are impure, and by associating
with them one will fall down into the dark pit of ignorance.
The emperor Purüravä, who was bewildered by the association of the
heavenly lady Urvaçé, later became renounced after being separated from her.
He thus sang a song expressing his contempt for womanly connection. He
described that persons who are attached to the body of a woman (or a
man)-which is simply a mass of skin, meat, blood, sinew, brain tissue, marrow
and bones-are not much different from worms. What is the worth of the
education, austerity, renunciation, reception of the Vedas, solitary living and
silence of one whose mind becomes stolen away by the body of a woman?
Learned men should distrust their six mental enemies, headed by lust, and thus
avoid associating with women or with men who are controlled by women.
After declaring these facts, King Purüravä, now freed from the illusion of
material existence, attained realization of the Supreme Lord in His form as the
indwelling Supersoul.
In conclusion, one who is intelligent should give up bad association and let
himself become attracted to the company of saintly persons. By their
transcendental instructions, the saintly devotees of the Lord can break the
false attachments of one's mind. Real saints are always liberated and devoted
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In their association there are constant
discussions about the Supreme Lord, by serving whom the spirit soul
completely eradicates his material sins and obtains pure devotional service.
And when one gains the devotional service of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is the original ocean of unlimited perfect qualities, what else
remains to be gained?
TEXT 1
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
maéaºaNAimamaM k(AyaM
labDvaA maÜ"maR @AisTata:
@AnandM" par"maAtmaAnama,
@AtmasTaM s$amaupaEita maAma,
çré-bhagavän uväca
mal-lakñaëam imaà käyaà
labdhvä mad-dharma ästhitaù
änandaà paramätmänam
ätma-sthaà samupaiti mäm
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
mat-lakñaëam—in which I can be realized; imam—this; käyam—human body;
labdhvä—having achieved; mat-dharme—in devotional service to Me;
ästhitaù—situated; änandam—who is pure ecstasy; parama-ätmänam—the
Supreme Soul; ätma-stham—situated within the heart; samapaiti—he
achieves; mäm—Me.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Having achieved this human
form of life, which affords one the opportunity to realize Me, and being situated
in My devotional service, one can achieve Me, the reservoir of all pleasure and
the Supreme Soul of all existence, residing within the heart of every living
being.
PURPORT
Because of bad association, even those who are spiritually liberated may fall
down from self-realization. Within the material world the association of
women is especially dangerous, and therefore in this chapter the Aila-géta is
spoken to prevent such a falldown. One can be saved from sex attraction by
association with saintly persons, who awaken one's real spiritual intelligence.
Therefore Lord Kåñëa will speak to Uddhava the amazing song of Purüravä,
also known as the Aila-gétä.
TEXT 2
gAuNAmayyaA jaIvayaAenyaA
ivamaul(Ae ÁaAnainaï"yaA
gAuNAeSau maAyaAmaA‡aeSau
ä{"zyamaAnaeSvavastauta:
vataRmaAnaAe'ipa na paumaAna,
yaujyatae'vastauiBagAuRNAE:
guëa-mayyä jéva-yonyä
vimukto jïäna-niñöhayä
guëeñu mäyä-mätreñu
dåçyamäneñv avastutaù
vartamäno 'pi na pumän
yujyate 'vastubhir guëaiù
SYNONYMS
guëa-mayyä—based on the modes of nature; jéva-yonyä—from the cause of
material life, false identification; vimuktaù—one who has become completely
free; jïäna—in transcendental knowledge; niñöhayä—by being properly fixed;
guëeñu—among the products of the modes of nature; mäyä-mätreñu—which
are simply illusion; dåçyamäneñu—appearing before the eyes;
avastutaù—although not real; vartamänaù—living; api—although; na—does
not; pumän—that person; yujyate—become entangled; avastubhiù—unreal;
guëaiù—with the manifestations of the modes of nature.
TRANSLATION
A person fixed in transcendental knowledge is freed from conditioned life by
giving up his false identification with the products of the material modes of
nature. Seeing these products as simply illusion, he avoids entanglement with
the modes of nature, although constantly among them. Because the modes of
nature and their products are simply not real, he does not accept them.
PURPORT
The three modes of nature become manifest as varieties of material bodies,
places, families, countries, foods, sports, war, peace and so forth. In other
words, everything we see within the material world is constituted of the modes
of nature. A liberated soul, although existing within the ocean of material
energy, sees everything as the property of the Lord and is thus not entangled.
Although Mäyä tempts such a liberated soul to become a thief—to steal the
property of the Lord for sense gratification—a Kåñëa conscious person does
not bite the bait of Mäyä; he remains honest and pure in Kåñëa consciousness.
In other words, he does not believe that anything within the universe can
become his personal property for sense gratification, especially the illusory
form of a woman.
TEXT 3
s$aËMÿ na ku(yaARd"s$ataAM
izA´aAed"r"ta{paAM ¸(icata,
tasyaAnaugAstamasyanDae
patatyanDaAnaugAAnDavata,
saìgaà na kuryäd asatäà
çiçnodara-tåpäà kvacit
tasyänugas tamasy andhe
pataty andhänugändha-vat
SYNONYMS
saìgam—association; na kuryät—one should never make; asatäm—of those
who are materialistic; çiçna—the genitals; udara—and the belly; tåpäm—who
are devoted to gratifying; kvacit—at any time; tasya—of any such person;
anugaù—the follower; tamasi andhe—into the darkest pit; patati—he falls;
andha-anuga—following a blind man; andha-vat—just like another blind man.
TRANSLATION
One should never associate with materialists, those dedicated to gratifying
their genitals and bellies. By following them one falls into the deepest pit of
darkness, just like a blind man who follows another blind man.
TEXT 4
Wela: s$a•aAix"maAM gAATaAma,
@gAAyata ba{h"cC)$vaA:
ovaRzAIivar"h"Anmau÷na,
inaivaRNNA: zAAek(s$aMyamae
ailaù samräò imäà gäthäm
agäyata båhac-chraväù
urvaçé-virahän muhyan
nirviëëaù çoka-saàyame
SYNONYMS
ailaù—King Purüravä; samräö—the great emperor; imäm—this;
gäthäm—song; agäyata—sang; båhat—mighty; çraväù—whose fame;
urvaçé-virahät—because of experiencing separation from Urvaçé;
muhyan-becoming bewildered; nirviëëaù—feeling detached; çoka—his
lamentation; saàyame—when he was finally able to bring under control.
TRANSLATION
The following song was sung by the famous emperor Purüravä. When
deprived of his wife, Urvaçé, he was at first bewildered, but by controlling his
lamentation he began to feel detachment.
PURPORT
This story is also narrated in the Ninth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Aila,
or Purüravä, was a great king whose glories were vast. On being separated from
Urvaçé, he felt great bewilderment at first. But after meeting her briefly at
Kurukñetra, he worshiped the demigods with the sacrificial fire given him by
the Gandharvas and received the privilege of entering the planet where she
resided.
TEXT 5
tyaftvaAtmaAnaM ˜ayantaI%M taAM
na¢a onmaÔavaªa{pa:
ivalapaªanvagAAÀaAyae
GaAere" itaïe"ita ivaflava:
tyaktvätmänaà vrayantéà täà
nagna unmatta-van nåpaù
vilapann anvagäj jäye
ghore tiñöheti viklavaù
SYNONYMS
tyaktvä—abandoning; ätmänam—him; vrajantém—going away; täm—unto
her; nagnaù—being naked; unmatta-vat—like a madman; nåpaù—the king;
vilapan—crying out; anvagät—followed; jäye—O my wife; ghore—O terrible
woman; tiñöha—please stop; iti—thus speaking; viklavaù—overwhelmed with
distress.
TRANSLATION
When she was leaving him, even though he was naked he ran after her just
like a madman and called out in great distress, "O my wife, O terrible lady!
Please stop!"
PURPORT
As his beloved wife was leaving him, the shocked king was crying out, "My
dear wife, please think for a moment. Just stop! You terrible lady, can't you
stop? Why don't we speak together for a while? Why are you killing me?" Thus
lamenting, he followed her.
TEXT 6
k(AmaAnata{æaAe'naujauSana,
ºauéak(Ana, vaSaRyaAimanaI:
na vaed" yaAntaInaARyaAntaIr,"
ovaRzyaAk{(í"caetana:
kämän atåpto 'nujuñan
kñullakän varña-yäminéù
na veda yäntér näyäntér
urvaçy-äkåñöa-cetanaù
SYNONYMS
kämän—lusty desires; atåptaù—unsatiated; anujuñan—gratifying;
kñullakän—insignificant; varña—of many years; yäminéù-the nights; na
veda—he did not know; yäntéù—going; na—nor; äyäntéù—approaching;
urvaçé—by Urvañé; äkåñöa—attracted; cetanaù—his mind.
TRANSLATION
Although for many years Purüravä had enjoyed sex pleasure in the evening
hours, still he was not satisfied by such insignificant enjoyment. His mind was
so attracted to Urvaçé that he did not notice how the nights were coming and
going.
PURPORT
This verse refers to Purüravä's materialistic experience with Urvaçé.
TEXT 7
Wela ovaAca
@h"Ae mae maAeh"ivastaAr":
k(Amak(zmalacaetas$a:
de"vyaA gA{h"Itak(NQ&sya
naAyau:KaNx"A wmae sma{taA:
aila uväca
aho me moha-vistäraù
käma-kaçmala-cetasaù
devyä gåhéta-kaëöhasya
näyuù-khaëòä ime småtäù
SYNONYMS
ailaù uväca—King Purüravä said; aho—alas; me—my; moha—of the delusion;
vistäraù—the extent; käma—by lust; kaçmala—contaminated; cetasaù—my
consciousness; devyä—by this goddess; gåhéta—is seized; kaëöhasya—whose
neck; na—have not; äyuù—of my life span; khaëòäù—the divisions;
ime—these; småtäù—been taken notice of.
TRANSLATION
King Aila said: Alas, just see the extent of my delusion! This goddess was
embracing me and held my neck in her grip. My heart was so polluted by lust
that I had no idea how my life was passing.
TEXT 8
naAhM" vaed"AiBainamauRl(:
s$aUyaAeR vaAByauid"taAe'mauyaA
maUiSataAe vaSaRpaUgAAnaAM
bataAh"Aina gAtaAnyauta
nähaà vedäbhinirmuktaù
süryo väbhyudito 'muyä
müñito varña-pügänäà
batähäni gatäny uta
SYNONYMS
na—did not; aham—I; veda—know; abhinirmuktaù—having set; süryaù—the
sun; vä—or; abhyuditaù—risen; amuyä—by her; müñitaù—deceived;
varña—years; pügänäm—comprising many; bata—alas; ahäni—days;
gatäni—have gone; uta—certainly.
TRANSLATION
That lady cheated me so much that I did not even see the rising or setting of
the sun. Alas, for so many years I passed my days in vain!
PURPORT
Due to attachment to the goddess, King Purüravä forgot his devotional
service to the Supreme Lord and became more concerned with pleasing this
beautiful young lady. Thus he later lamented, having wasted his valuable time.
Those who are Kåñëa conscious utilize every moment in the Lord's loving
service.
TEXT 9
@h"Ae mae @Atmas$ammaAeh"Ae
yaenaAtmaA yaAeiSataAM k{(ta:
‚(Lx"Ama{gAê‚(vataI=
nar"de"vaizAKaAmaiNA:
aho me ätma-sammoho
yenätmä yoñitäà kåtaù
kréòä-mågaç cakravarté
naradeva-çikhämaëiù
SYNONYMS
aho—alas; me—my; ätma—of myself; sammohaù—total bewilderment;
yena—by which; ätmä—my body; yoñitäm—of women; kåtaù—became;
kréòä-mågaù—a toy animal; cakravarté—mighty emperor; naradeva—of kings;
çikhä-maëiù—the crown jewel.
TRANSLATION
Alas, although I am supposed to be a mighty emperor, the crown jewel of all
kings on this earth, just see how my bewilderment has rendered me a toy animal
in the hands of women!
PURPORT
Since the king's body had become fully engaged in satisfying the superficial
desires of women, his body was now like a toy animal in their hands.
TEXT 10
s$apair"cC$d"maAtmaAnaM
ih"tvaA ta{NAimavaeìr"ma,
yaAntaI%M iñyaM caAnvagAmaM
na¢a onmaÔavaåu"d"na,
sa-paricchadam ätmänaà
hitvä tåëam iveçvaram
yäntéà striyaà cänvagamaà
nagna unmatta-vad rudan
SYNONYMS
sa-paricchadam—along with my kingdom and all paraphernalia;
ätmänam—myself; hitvä—abandoning; tåëam—a blade of grass; iva—as if;
éçvaram—the powerful lord; yäntém—going away; striyam—the woman;
ca—and; anvagaman—I followed; nagnaù—naked; unmatta-vat—like a
madman; rudan—crying out.
TRANSLATION
Although I was a powerful lord with great opulence, that woman gave me up
as if I were no more than an insignificant blade of grass. And still, naked and
without shame, I followed her, crying out to her like a madman.
TEXT 11
ku(tastasyaAnauBaAva: syaAta,
taeja wRzAtvamaeva vaA
yaAe'nvagAcCM$ iñyaM yaAntaI%M
Kar"vatpaAd"taAix"ta:
kutas tasyänubhävaù syät
teja éçatvam eva vä
yo 'nvagacchaà striyaà yäntéà
khara-vat päda-täòitaù
SYNONYMS
kutaù—where; tasya—of that person (myself); anubhävaù—the influence;
syät—is; tejaù—strength; éçatvam—sovereignty; eva—indeed; vä—or;
yaù—who; anvagaccham—ran after; striyam—this woman; yäntém—while
going away; khara-vat—just like an ass; päda—by the foot; täòitaù—punished.
TRANSLATION
Where are my so-called great influence, power and sovereignty? Just like an
ass being kicked in the face by his she-ass, I ran after that woman, who had
already given me up.
TEXT 12
ikM( ivaâyaA ikM( tapas$aA
ikM( tyaAgAena ™autaena vaA
ikM( ivaivale(na maAEnaena
ñIiBayaRsya manaAe ô$tama,
kià vidyayä kià tapasä
kià tyägena çrutena vä
kià viviktena maunena
strébhir yasya mano håtam
SYNONYMS
kim—what is the use; vidyayä—of knowledge; kim—what; tapasä—of
austerities; kim—what; tyägena—of renunciation; çrutena—of having studied
the scriptures; vä—or; kim—what; viviktena—of solitude; maunena—of
silence; strébhiù—by women; yasya—whose; manaù—the mind; håtam—taken
away.
TRANSLATION
What is the use of a big education or the practice of austerities and
renunciation, and what is the use of studying religious scriptures, of living in
solitude and silence, if, after all that, one's mind is stolen by a woman?
PURPORT
All of the above-mentioned processes are useless if one's heart and mind are
stolen by an insignificant woman. One who hankers after a woman's
association certainly spoils his spiritual progress. Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta
Sarasvaté Öhäkura states that if one worships the example of the liberated gopés
of Våndävana, who accepted Lord Çré Kåñëa as their paramour, one can free
one's mental activities from the contamination of lust.
TEXT 13
svaATaRsyaAk(AeivadM" iDax.~ maAM
maUKa< paiNx"tamaAinanama,
yaAe'h"maIìr"taAM ‘aApya
ñIiBagAAeRKar"vaiÀata:
svärthasyäkovidaà dhiì mäà
mürkhaà paëòita-mäninam
yo 'ham éçvaratäà präpya
strébhir go-khara-vaj jitaù
SYNONYMS
sva-arthasya—his own best interest; akovidam—who does not know; dhik—to
hell; mäm—with me; mürkham—a fool; paëòita-mäninam—imagining himself
to be a great scholar; yaù—who; aham—I; éçvaratäm—the position of lordship;
präpya—achieving; strébhiù—by women; go-khara-vat—like a bullock or an
ass; jitaù—conquered.
TRANSLATION
To hell with me! I am such a fool that I didn't even know what was good for
me, although I arrogantly thought I was highly intelligent. Although I achieved
the exalted position of a lord, I allowed myself to be conquered by women as if I
were a bullock or a jackass.
PURPORT
All the fools of this world consider themselves very wise scholars even
though, intoxicated by sense gratification and maddened by their lust for
women's association, they become just like bullocks and jackasses. By the
mercy of a saintly spiritual master, this lusty propensity can gradually be
removed and one can understand the terrible, contemptible nature of material
sense gratification. In this verse King Purüravä is coming to his senses in Kåñëa
consciousness.
TEXT 14
s$aevataAe vaSaRpaUgAAnmae
ovaRzyaA @Dar"As$avama,
na ta{pyatyaAtmaBaU: k(AmaAe
vai¶"r"Aò"itaiBayaRTaA
sevato varña-pügän me
urvaçyä adharäsavam
na tåpyaty ätma-bhüù kämo
vahnir ähutibhir yathä
SYNONYMS
sevataù—who was serving; varña-pügän—for many years; me—my;
urvaçyäù—of Urvaçé; adhara—of the lips; äsavam—the nectar; na
tåpyati—never became satisfied; ätma-bhüù—born from the mind; kämaù—the
lust; vahniù—fire; ähutibhiù—by oblations; yathä—just as.
TRANSLATION
Even after I had served the so-called nectar of the lips of Urvaçé for many
years, my lusty desires kept rising again and again within my heart and were
never satisfied, just like a fire that can never be extinguished by the oblations of
ghee poured into its flames.
TEXT 15
pauMêlyaApaô$taM icaÔaM
k(Ae nvanyaAe maAeicatauM ‘aBau:
@AtmaAr"Amaeìr"ma{tae
BagAvantamaDaAeºajama,
puàçcalyäpahåtaà cittaà
ko nv anyo mocituà prabhuù
ätmärämeçvaram åte
bhagavantam adhokñajam
SYNONYMS
puàçcalya—by a prostitute; apahåtam—stolen; cittam—the intelligence;
kaù—who; nu—indeed; anyaù—other person; mocitum—to free; prabhuù—is
capable; ätma-äräma—of the self-satisfied sages; éçvaram—the Lord;
åte—except for; bhagavantam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
adhokñajam—who lies beyond the purview of material senses.
TRANSLATION
Who but the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who lies beyond material
perception and is the Lord of self-satisfied sages, can possibly save my
consciousness, which has been stolen by a prostitute?
TEXT 16
baAeiDatasyaAipa de"vyaA mae
s$aUl(vaAfyaena äu"maRtae:
manaAegAtaAe mah"AmaAeh"Ae
naApayaAtyaijataAtmana:
bodhitasyäpi devyä me
sükta-väkyena durmateù
mano-gato mahä-moho
näpayäty ajitätmanaù
SYNONYMS
bodhitasya—who had been informed; api—even; devyä—by the goddess
Urvaçé; me—of me; su-ukta—well-spoken; väkyena—by words;
durmateù—whose intelligence was dull; manaù-gataù—within the mind;
mahä-mohaù—the great confusion; na apayäti—did not cease;
ajita-ätmanaù—who had failed to control his senses.
TRANSLATION
Because I allowed my intelligence to become dull and because I failed to
control my senses, the great confusion in my mind did not go away, even
though Urvaçé herself gave me wise counsel with well-spoken words.
PURPORT
As described in the Ninth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the goddess Urvaçé
plainly told Purüravä that he should never trust women or believe their
promises. Despite this frank advice, he became fully attached and thus suffered
great mental anguish.
TEXT 17
ik(maetayaA naAe'pak{(taM
r"jjvaA vaA s$apaRcaetas$a:
‰"í]": svaè&paAivaäu"SaAe
yaAe'hM" yad"ijataein‰"ya:
kim etayä no 'pakåtaà
rajjvä vä sarpa-cetasaù
drañöuù svarüpäviduño
yo 'haà yad ajitendriyaù
SYNONYMS
kim—what; etayä—by her; naù—to us; apakåtam—offense has been done;
rajjvä—by a rope; vä—or; sarpa-cetasaù—who is thinking it to be a snake;
drañöuù—of such a seer; svarüpa—the real identity; aviduñaù—who does not
understand; yaù—who; aham—I; yat—because of; ajita-indriyaù—having not
controlled the senses.
TRANSLATION
How can I blame her for my trouble when I myself am ignorant of my real,
spiritual nature? I did not control my senses, and so I am like a person who
mistakenly sees a harmless rope as a snake.
PURPORT
When a person mistakes a rope for a snake, he becomes fearful and anxious.
Such fear and anxiety are, of course, illusion, since the rope can never bite.
Similarly, one who mistakenly thinks that the material, illusory energy of the
Lord exists for his personal sense gratification will certainly bring down on his
head an avalanche of material, illusory fear and anxiety. King Purüravä
frankly admits here that the young lady Urvaçé is not to blame. After all, it was
Purüravä who mistakenly considered her to be an object of his personal
enjoyment, and therefore he suffered the reaction by the laws of nature.
Purüravä himself was the offender for trying to exploit the external form of
Urvaçé.
TEXT 18
¸(AyaM malaImas$a: k(AyaAe
d"AEgARnDyaAâAtmak(Ae'zAuica:
¸( gAuNAA: s$aAEmanasyaAâA
÷DyaAs$aAe'ivaâyaA k{(ta:
kväyaà malémasaù käyo
daurgandhyädy-ätmako 'çuciù
kva guëäù saumanasyädyä
hy adhyäso 'vidyayä kåtaù
SYNONYMS
kva—where; ayam—this; malémasaù—very filthy; käyaù—material body;
daurgandhya—bad odor; ädi—and so on; ätmakaù—consisting of;
açuciù—unclean; kva—where; guëäù—the so-called good qualities;
saumanasya—the fragrance and tenderness of flowers; ädyäù—and so on;
hi—certainly; adhyäsaù—the superficial imposition; avidyayä—by ignorance;
kåtaù—created.
TRANSLATION
What is this polluted body anyway—so filthy and full of bad odors? I was
attracted by the fragrance and beauty of a woman's body, but what are those
so-called attractive features? They are simply a false covering created by
illusion.
PURPORT
Purüravä now understands that although he was madly attracted to the
fragrant, shapely body of Urvaçé, in fact that body was a sack of stool, gas, bile,
mucus, hairs and other repugnant elements. In other words, Purüravä is now
becoming sane.
TEXTS 19-20
ipa‡aAe: ikM( svaM nau BaAyaARyaA:
svaAimanaAe'¢ae: ìgA{‹ayaAe:
ik(maAtmana: ikM( s$auô$d"Ama,
wita yaAe naAvas$aIyatae
taismana, k(laevare"'maeDyae
taucC$inaïe" ivaSaÀatae
@h"Ae s$auBa‰M" s$aunas$aM
s$auismataM ca mauKaM iñya:
pitroù kià svaà nu bhäryäyäù
svämino 'gneù çva-gådhrayoù
kim ätmanaù kià suhådäm
iti yo nävaséyate
tasmin kalevare 'medhye
tuccha-niñöhe viñajjate
aho su-bhadraà su-nasaà
su-smitaà ca mukhaà striyaù
SYNONYMS
pitroù—of the parents; kim—whether; svam—the property; nu—or;
bhäryäyäù—of the wife; sväminaù—of the employer; agneù—of the fire;
çva-gådhrayoù—of the dogs and jackals; kim—whether; ätmanaù—of the soul;
kim—whether; suhådam—of friends; iti—thus; yaù—who; na avaséyate—can
never decide; tasmin—to that; kalevare—material body;
amedhye—abominable; tuccha-niñöhe—heading toward the lowest destination;
viñajjate—becomes attached; aho—ah; su-bhadram—very attractive;
su-nasam—having a beautiful nose; su-smitam—beautiful smile; ca—and;
mukham—the face; striyaù—of a woman.
TRANSLATION
One can never decide whose property the body actually is. Does it belong to
one's parents, who have given birth to it, to one's wife, who gives it pleasure, or
to one's employer, who orders the body around? Is it the property of the funeral
fire or of the dogs and jackals who may ultimately devour it? Is it the property
of the indwelling soul, who partakes in its happiness and distress, or does the
body belong to intimate friends who encourage and help it? Although a man
never definitely ascertains the proprietor of the body, he becomes most attached
to it. The material body is a polluted material form heading toward a lowly
destination, yet when a man stares at the face of a woman he thinks, "What a
good-looking lady! What a charming nose she's got, and see her beautiful
smile!"
PURPORT
The phrase tuccha-niñöhe, or "headed toward a lowly destination," indicates
that if buried, the body will be consumed by worms; if burned, it will turn to
ashes; and if dying in a lonely place, it will be consumed by dogs and vultures.
The illusory potency of Mäyä enters within the female form and bewilders a
man's mind. The man is attracted to Mäyä appearing within the female form,
but when he embraces the woman's body he ends up with two handfuls of
stool, blood, mucus, pus, skin, bone, hairs and flesh. People should not be like
cats and dogs, in the ignorance of bodily consciousness. A human being should
be enlightened in Kåñëa consciousness and learn to serve the Supreme Lord
without falsely trying to exploit His potencies.
TEXT 21
tvax.~maAMs$aç&iDar"µaAyaumaed"
AemaÀaAisTas$aMh"taAE
ivaNmaU‡apaUyae r"mataAM
k{(maINAAM ik(yad"ntar"ma,
tvaì-mäàsa-rudhira-snäyumedo-
majjästhi-saàhatau
vië-mütra-püye ramatäà
kåméëäà kiyad antaram
SYNONYMS
tvak—out of skin; mäàsa—flesh; rudhira—blood; snäyu—muscle; medaù—fat;
majjä—marrow; asthi—and bone; saàhatau—composed; viö—of stool;
mütra—urine; püye—and pus; ramatäm—enjoying; kåméëäm—compared to
the worms; kiyat—how much; antaram—difference.
TRANSLATION
What difference is there between ordinary worms and persons who try to
enjoy this material body composed of skin, flesh, blood, muscle, fat, marrow,
bone, stool, urine and pus?
TEXT 22
@TaAipa naAepas$aÀaeta
ñISau ñENAeSau caATaRivata,
ivaSayaein‰"yas$aMyaAegAAna,
mana: ºauByaita naAnyaTaA
athäpi nopasajjeta
stréñu straiëeñu cärtha-vit
viñayendriya-saàyogän
manaù kñubhyati nänyathä
SYNONYMS
atha api—yet therefore; na upasajjeta—he should never make contact;
stréñu—with women; straiëeñu—with men who are attached to women; ca—or;
artha-vit—one who knows what is best for him; viñaya—of the objects of
enjoyment; indriya—with the senses; saàyogät—because of the connection;
manaù—the mind; kñubhyati—becomes agitated; na—not;
anyathä—otherwise.
TRANSLATION
Yet even one who theoretically understands the actual nature of the body
should never associate with women or with men attached to women. After all,
the contact of the senses with their objects inevitably agitates the mind.
TEXT 23
@ä{"í"Ad"™autaAà"AvaAna,
na BaAva opajaAyatae
@s$am‘ayauÃata: ‘aANAAna,
zAAmyaita istaimataM mana:
adåñöäd açrutäd bhävän
na bhäva upajäyate
asamprayuïjataù präëän
çämyati stimitaà manaù
SYNONYMS
adåñöät—which is not seen; açrutät—which is not heard; bhävät—from a thing;
na—does not; bhävaù—mental agitation; upajäyate—arise;
asamprayuïjataù—for one who is not using; präëän—the senses;
çämyati—becomes pacified; stimitam—checked; manaù—the mind.
TRANSLATION
Because the mind is not disturbed by that which is neither seen nor heard,
the mind of a person who restricts the material senses will automatically be
checked in its material activities and become pacified.
PURPORT
It may be argued that even while closing one's eyes, while dreaming or while
living in a solitary place, one may remember or contemplate sense
gratification. Such an experience, however, is due to previous sense
gratification that one repeatedly saw and heard about. When one restricts the
senses from their objects, especially from intimate contact with women, the
mind's material propensity will slacken and, like a fire without fuel, eventually
die.
TEXT 24
tasmaAts$aËÿAe na k(taRvya:
ñISau ñENAeSau caein‰"yaE:
ivaäu"SaAM caApyaiva›abDa:
SaÒ"gAR: ik(mau maAä{"zAAma,
tasmät saìgo na kartavyaù
stréñu straiëeñu cendriyaiù
viduñäà cäpy avisrabdhaù
ñaò-vargaù kim u mädåçäm
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; saìgaù—association; na kartavyaù—should never be made;
stréñu—with women; straiëeñu—with men attached to women; ca—and;
indriyaiù—by one's senses; viduñäm—of wise men; ca api—even;
avisrabdhaù—untrustworthy; ñaö-vargaù—the six enemies of the mind (lust,
anger, greed, bewilderment, intoxication and envy); kim u—what to speak;
mädåçäm—of persons like me.
TRANSLATION
Therefore one should never let his senses associate freely with women or
with men attached to women. Even those who are highly learned cannot trust
the six enemies of the mind; what to speak, then, of foolish persons like me.
TEXT 25
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
WvaM ‘agAAyaªa{pade"vade"va:
s$a ovaRzAIlaAek(maTaAe ivah"Aya
@AtmaAnamaAtmanyavagAmya maAM vaE
opaAr"majÁaA@naivaDaUtamaAeh":
çré-bhagavän uväca
evaà pragäyan nåpa-deva-devaù
sa urvaçé-lokam atho vihäya
ätmänam ätmany avagamya mäà vai
upäramaj jïäana-vidhüta-mohaù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; evam—in this
way; pragäyan—singing; nåpa—among men; deva—and among demigods;
devaù—who was eminent; saù—he, King Purüravä; urvaçé-lokam—the planet
of Urvaçé, Gandharvaloka; atha u—then; vihäya-giving up; ätmänam—the
Supreme Soul; ätmani—within his own heart; avagamya—realizing;
mäm—Me; vai—indeed; upäramat—he became peaceful; jïäna—by
transcendental knowledge; vidhüta—removed; mohaù—his illusion.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Having thus chanted this song,
Mahäräja Purüravä, eminent among the demigods and human beings, gave up
the position he had achieved in the planet of Urvaçé. His illusion cleansed away
by transcendental knowledge, he understood Me to be the Supreme Soul within
his heart and so at last achieved peace.
TEXT 26
tataAe äu":s$aËÿmauts$a{jya
s$ats$au s$aÀaeta bauiÜ"maAna,
s$anta WvaAsya iC$nd"inta
manaAevyaAs$aËÿmauil(iBa:
tato duùsaìgam utsåjya
satsu sajjeta buddhimän
santa eväsya chindanti
mano-vyäsaìgam uktibhiù
SYNONYMS
tataù—therefore; duùsaìgam—bad association; utsåjya—throwing away;
satsu—to saintly devotees; sajjeta—he should become attached;
buddhi-man—one who is intelligent; santaù—saintly persons; eva—only;
asya—his; chindanti—cut off; manaù—of the mind; vyäsaìgam—excessive
attachment; uktibhiù—by their words.
TRANSLATION
An intelligent person should therefore reject all bad association and instead
take up the association of saintly devotees, whose words cut off the excessive
attachment of one's mind.
TEXT 27
s$antaAe'napaeºaA mai»aÔaA:
‘azAAntaA: s$amad"izARna:
inamaRmaA inar"h"ÆÿAr"A
inaãR"nã"A inaSpair"ƒah"A:
santo 'napekñä mac-cittäù
praçäntäù sama-darçinaù
nirmamä nirahaìkärä
nirdvandvä niñparigrahäù
SYNONYMS
santaù—the saintly devotees; anapekñäù—not dependent on anything
material; mat-cittäù—who have fixed their minds on Me;
praçäntäù—completely peaceful; sama-darçinaù—endowed with equal vision;
nirmamaù-free from possessiveness; nirahaìkäräù—free from false ego;
nirdvandväù—free from all dualities; niñparigrahäù—free from greed.
TRANSLATION
My devotees fix their minds on Me and do not depend upon anything
material. They are always peaceful, endowed with equal vision, and free from
possessiveness, false ego, duality and greed.
TEXT 28
taeSau inatyaM mah"ABaAgA
mah"ABaAgAeSau matk(TaA:
s$amBavainta ih" taA na|NAAM
jauSataAM ‘apaunantyaGama,
teñu nityaà mahä-bhäga
mahä-bhägeñu mat-kathäù
sambhavanti hi tä nèëäà
juñatäà prapunanty agham
SYNONYMS
teñu—among them; nityam—constantly; mahä-bhäga—O greatly fortunate
Uddhava; mahä-bhägeñu—among these greatly fortunate devotees;
mat-kathäù—discussions about Me; sambhavanti—arise; hi—indeed;
täù—these topics; nèëäm—of persons; juñatäm—who are partaking in them;
prapunanti—totally purify; agham—the sins.
TRANSLATION
O greatly fortunate Uddhava, in the association of such saintly devotees
there is constant discussion of Me, and those partaking in this chanting and
hearing of My glories are certainly purified of all sins.
PURPORT
Even if one does not receive direct instructions from a pure devotee, simply
by hearing him glorify the Supreme Personality of Godhead one can be
purified of all sinful reactions caused by one's involvement in illusion.
TEXT 29
taA yae Za{Nvainta gAAyainta
÷naumaAed"inta caAä{"taA:
matpar"A: ™aÚ"DaAnaAê
BailM( ivand"inta tae maiya
tä ye çåëvanti gäyanti
hy anumodanti cädåtäù
mat-paräù çraddadhänäç ca
bhaktià vindanti te mayi
SYNONYMS
täù—those topics; ye—persons who; çåëvanti—hear; gäyanti—chant;
hi—indeed; anumodanti—take to heart; ca—and; ädåtäù—with respect;
mat-paräù—dedicated to Me; çraddadhänäù—faithful; ca—and;
bhaktim—devotional service; vindanti—achieve; te—they; mayi—for Me.
TRANSLATION
Whoever hears, chants and respectfully takes to heart these topics about Me
becomes faithfully dedicated to Me and thus achieves My devotional service.
PURPORT
One who hears from advanced devotees of Lord Kåñëa can be saved from
the ocean of material existence. When one obeys the order of a bona fide
spiritual master, the polluted workings of the mind are checked, one sees
things in a new, spiritual light, and there blossoms the propensity for selfless
loving service to the Lord, which gives the fruit of love of Godhead.
TEXT 30
BailM( labDavata: s$aADaAe:
ik(manyad"vaizASyatae
mayyanantagAuNAe “aöNya,
@Anand"AnauBavaAtmaina
bhaktià labdhavataù sädhoù
kim anyad avaçiñyate
mayy ananta-guëe brahmaëy
änandänubhavätmani
SYNONYMS
bhaktim—devotional service to the Supreme Lord; labdhavataù—who has
achieved; sädhoù—for the devotee; kim—what; anyat—else;
avaçiñyate—remains; mayi—to Me; ananta-guëe—whose qualities are
countless; brahmaëi—to the Absolute Truth; änanda—of ecstasy;
anubhava—the experience; ätmani—who comprises.
TRANSLATION
What more remains to be accomplished for the perfect devotee after
achieving devotional service unto Me, the Supreme Absolute Truth, whose
qualities are innumerable and who am the embodiment of all ecstatic
experience?
PURPORT
Devotional service to Lord Kåñëa is so pleasing that a pure devotee cannot
desire anything except service to the Lord. In the Tenth Canto of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Lord Kåñëa told the gopés that they would have to accept
their own service as the ultimate reward of their devotion to Him, since
nothing awards as much happiness and knowledge as devotional service itself.
When one sincerely chants and hears the holy name and fame of Lord Kåñëa,
the heart is purified ad gradually one can appreciate the actual, blissful nature
of Kåñëa consciousness, loving service to the Lord.
TEXT 31
yaTaAepa™ayamaANAsya
BagAvantaM ivaBaAvas$auma,
zAItaM BayaM tamaAe'pyaeita
s$aADaUna, s$aMs$aevatastaTaA
yathopaçrayamäëasya
bhagavantaà vibhävasum
çétaà bhayaà tamo 'pyeti
sädhün saàsevatas tathä
SYNONYMS
yathä—just as; upaçrayamäëasya—of one who is approaching;
bhagavantam—the powerful; vibhävasum—fire; çétam—cold; bhayam—fear;
tamaù—darkness; apyeti—are removed; sädhün—saintly devotees;
saàsevataù—for one who is serving; tathä—similarly.
TRANSLATION
Just as cold, fear and darkness are eradicated for one who has approached the
sacrificial fire, so dullness, fear and ignorance are destroyed for one engaged in
serving the devotees of the Lord.
PURPORT
Those engaged in fruitive activities are certainly dull; they lack higher
awareness of the Supreme Lord and the soul. Materialists are engaged more or
less mechanically in gratifying their senses and ambitions, and thus they are
considered dull or practically unconscious. All such dullness, fear and
ignorance are removed when one serves the lotus feet of the Lord, just as cold,
fear and darkness are removed when one approaches a fire.
TEXT 32
inamajjyaAenmaÀataAM GaAere"
BavaAbDaAE par"maAyaNAma,
s$antaAe “aöivad": zAAntaA
naAEä{R"#Xe#vaAps$au maÀataAma,
nimajjyonmajjatäà ghore
bhaväbdhau paramäyaëam
santo brahma-vidaù çäntä
naur dåòheväpsu majjatäm
SYNONYMS
nimajjya—of those who are submerging; unmajjatäm—and rising again;
ghore—in the horrible; bhava—of material life; abdhau—ocean;
parama—supreme; ayanam—shelter; santaù—saintly devotees;
brahma-vidaù—who understand the Absolute Truth; çäntäù—peaceful;
nauù—a boat; dåòhä—strong; iva—just as; apsu—in the water; majjatäm—for
those who are drowning.
TRANSLATION
The devotees of the Lord, peacefully fixed in absolute knowledge, are the
ultimate shelter for those who are repeatedly rising and falling within the
fearful ocean of material life. Such devotees are just like a strong boat that
comes to rescue persons who are at the point of drowning.
TEXT 33
@ªaM ih" ‘aAiNAnaAM ‘aANA
@AtaARnaAM zAr"NAM tvah"ma,
DamaAeR ivaÔaM na{NAAM ‘aetya
s$antaAe'vaARigbaByataAe'r"NAma,
annaà hi präëinäà präëa
ärtänäà çaraëaà tv aham
dharmo vittaà nåëäà pretya
santo 'rväg bibhyato 'raëam
SYNONYMS
annam—food; hi—indeed; präëinäm—of living entities; präëaù—the very life;
ärtänäm—of those who are distressed; çaraëam—the shelter; tu—and;
aham—I; dharmaù—religion; vittam—the wealth; nåëäm—of men;
pretya—when they have passed away from this world; santaù—the devotees;
arväk—of going downward; bibhyataù—for those who are fearful;
araëam—the refuge.
TRANSLATION
Just as food is the life of all creatures, just as I am the ultimate shelter for
the distressed, and just as religion is the wealth of those who are passing away
from this world, so My devotees are the only refuge of persons fearful of falling
into a miserable condition of life.
PURPORT
Those fearful of being dragged down by material lust and anger should take
shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord's devotees, who can engage one safely in
the Lord's loving service.
TEXT 34
s$antaAe id"zAinta caºaUMis$a
baih"r"kR(: s$amauitTata:
de"vataA baAnDavaA: s$anta:
s$anta @AtmaAh"maeva ca
santo diçanti cakñüàsi
bahir arkaù samutthitaù
devatä bändhaväù santaù
santa ätmäham eva ca
SYNONYMS
santaù—the devotees; diçanti—bestow; cakñüàñi—eyes; bahiù—external;
arkaù—the sun; samutthitaù—when it is fully risen; devatäù—worshipable
deities; bändhaväù—relatives; santaù—the devotees; santaù—the devotees;
ätmä—one's very soul; aham—Myself; eva ca—as well.
TRANSLATION
My devotees bestow divine eyes, whereas the sun allows only external sight,
and that only when it is risen in the sky. My devotees are one's real
worshipable deities and real family; they are one's own self, and ultimately they
are nondifferent from Me.
PURPORT
Foolishness is the wealth of the impious, who place great value on their
treasure and firmly make up their minds to remain in the darkness of
ignorance. Saintly devotees of the Lord are just like the sun. By the light of
their words, the living entities' eyes of knowledge are opened and the darkness
of ignorance is destroyed. Thus the saintly devotees are one's real friends and
relatives. They are the proper recipients of service—not the gross material
body, which merely clamors for sense gratification.
TEXT 35
vaEtas$aenastataAe'pyaevama,
ovaRzyaA laAek(inaSpa{h":
maul(s$aËÿAe mah"ImaetaAma,
@AtmaAr"AmaêcaAr" h"
vaitasenas tato 'py evam
urvaçyä loka-niñpåhaù
mukta-saìgo mahém etäm
ätmärämaç cacära ha
SYNONYMS
vaitasenaù—King Purüravä; tataù api—for that reason; evam—thus;
urvaçyäù—of Urvaçé; loka—of being on the same planet; niñpåhaù—freed from
the desire; mukta—liberated; saìgaù—from all material association;
mahém—the earth; etäm—this; ätma-ärämaù—self-satisfied; cacära—he
traveled; ha—indeed.
TRANSLATION
Thus losing his desire to be on the same planet as Urvaçé, Mahäräja
Purüravä began to wander the earth free of all material association and
completely satisfied within the self.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Eleventh Canto, Twenty-sixth Chapter,
of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Aila-gétä."
27. Lord Kåñëa's Instructions on the Process of Deity
Worship
In this chapter the Supreme Personality of Godhead explains the process of
kriyä-yoga, or Deity worship.
Worshiping the Deity form of the Supreme Lord automatically brings purity
and satisfaction to the mind. Thus it is the source of all desirable gains. If a
person has no engagement in Deity service he will simply remain attracted to
material sense gratification, and he will have no hope of giving up bad
association. The Personality of Godhead has given instruction, among the
regulations of the Sätvata scriptures, on the process of worshiping Him as the
bona fide Deity. Brahmä, Çiva, Närada, Vyäsa and all other sages have
recommended this process described by the Lord as most perfectly beneficial
for all the occupational classes and spiritual orders of human society, including
even the women and çüdras.
There are three varieties of arcana, Deity worship, based on either the
original Vedas, the secondary tantras, or a combination of these. The Deity
image, the ground, the fire, the sun, the water and the heart of the worshiper
are all true locations of the Deity's presence. The Deity form to be worshiped
may be constructed of any one of eight substances-stone, wood, metal, clay,
paint, sand (drawn upon the ground), the mind or jewels. These categories are
further subdivided into two: temporary and permanent.
The details of the worshiping process are as follows: The devotee should
bathe both physically and by chanting mantras, and then he should perform
the utterance of Gäyatré at the prescribed juncture of the day. He should
arrange a seat facing either east or north, or else directly facing the Deity, and
should bathe and clean the Deity. Then he should present clothing and
ornaments, sprinkle water on the vessels and other paraphernalia to be used in
the worship, and offer water for bathing the Deity's feet, arghya, water for
washing His mouth, fragrant oils, incense, lamps, flowers and food
preparations. After this, one should worship the Lord's personal servants and
bodyguards, His consort energies, and the spiritual masters by chanting their
respective müla-mantras. The worshiper should recite prayers from the
Puräëas and other sources, offer obeisances flat on the ground, beg for
benediction, and place on himself the remnants of the Lord's garlands.
Included in this method of Deity worship are the proper installation of the
transcendental Deity by constructing a fine temple, and also the conducting of
processions and other festivals. By worshiping Lord Çré Hari with
unconditional devotion in this manner, one gains access to pure loving service
to His lotus feet. But if one steals property that has been given as charity to the
Deity or the brähmaëas, whether given by himself or by others, he will have to
take his next birth as a stool-eating worm.
TEXT 1
™aIoÜ"va ovaAca
i‚(yaAyaAegAM s$amaAcaºva
Bavad"Ar"ADanaM ‘aBaAe
yasmaAÔvaAM yae yaTaAcaRinta
s$aAtvataA: s$aAtvataSaRBa
çré-uddhava uväca
kriyä-yogaà samäcakñva
bhavad-ärädhanaà prabho
yasmät tväà ye yathärcanti
sätvatäù sätvatarñabha
SYNONYMS
çré-uddhavaù uväca—Çré Uddhava said; kriyä-yogam—the prescribed method
of activity; samäcakñva—please explain; bhavat—of You; ärädhanam—the
Deity worship; prabho—O Lord; yasmät—based on what kind of form;
tväm—You; ye—who; yathä—in what manner; arcanti—they worship;
sätvatäù—the devotees; sätvata-åñabha—O master of the devotees.
TRANSLATION
Çré Uddhava said: My dear Lord, O master of the devotees, please explain to
me the prescribed method of worshiping You in Your Deity form. What are the
qualifications of those devotees who worship the Deity, on what basis is such
worship established, and what is the specific method of worship?
PURPORT
In addition to performing their prescribed duties, devotees of the Lord
engage in regulated worship of the Lord in His Deity form in the temple. Such
worship acts powerfully to cleanse the heart of both the lust to enjoy one's
material body and the material family attachment that results directly from
this lust. To be effective, however, the process of Deity worship must be
performed in the authorized way. Therefore Uddhava now inquires from the
Lord about this subject.
TEXT 2
Wtaã"d"inta maunayaAe
mauò"inaR:™aeyas$aM na{NAAma,
naAr"d"Ae BagAvaAna, vyaAs$a
@AcaAyaAeR'iËÿr"s$a: s$auta:
etad vadanti munayo
muhur niùçreyasaà nåëäm
närado bhagavän vyäsa
äcäryo 'ìgirasaù sutaù
SYNONYMS
etat—this; vadanti—they say; munayaù—the great sages; muhuù—repeatedly;
niùçreyasam—the highest goal of life; nåëäm—for men; näradaù—Närada
Muni; bhagavän vyäsaù—Çréla Vedavyäsa; äcäryaù—my spiritual master;
aìgirasaù—of Aìgirä; sutaù—the son.
TRANSLATION
All the great sages repeatedly declare that such worship brings the greatest
benefit possible in human life. This is the opinion of Närada Muni, the great
Vyäsadeva and my own spiritual master, Båhaspati.
TEXTS 3-4
ina:s$a{taM tae mauKaAmBaAejaAä,"
yad"Ah" BagAvaAnaja:
pau‡aeByaAe Ba{gAumauKyaeByaAe
de"vyaE ca BagAvaAna, Bava:
WtaãE" s$avaRvaNAARnaAma,
@A™amaANAAM ca s$ammatama,
™aeyas$aAmauÔamaM manyae
ñIzAU#‰"ANAAM ca maAnad"
niùsåtaà te mukhämbhojäd
yad äha bhagavän ajaù
putrebhyo bhågu-mukhyebhyo
devyai ca bhagavän bhavaù
etad vai sarva-varëänäm
äçramäëäà ca sammatam
çreyasäm uttamaà manye
stré-çüdräëäà ca mäna-da
SYNONYMS
niùsåtam—emanated; te—Your; mukha-ambhojät—from the lotus mouth;
yat—which; äha—spoke; bhagavän—the great lord; ajaù—self-born Brahmä;
putrebhyaù—to his sons; bhågu-mukhyebhyaù—headed by Bhågu; devyai—to
the goddess Pärvaté; ca—and; bhagavän bhavaù—Lord Çiva; etat—this (process
of Deity worship); vai—indeed; sarva-varëänäm—by all the occupational
classes of society; äçramäëäm—and spiritual orders; ca—also;
sammatam—approved; çreyasäm—of different kinds of benefit in life;
uttamam—the topmost; manye—I think; stré—for women; çüdräëäm—and
low-class workers; ca—also; mäna-da—O magnanimous Lord.
TRANSLATION
O most magnanimous Lord, the instructions on this process of Deity worship
first emanated from Your lotus mouth. Then they were spoken by the great
Lord Brahmä to his sons, headed by Bhågu, and by Lord Çiva to his wife,
Pärvaté. This process is accepted by and appropriate for all the occupational and
spiritual orders of society. Therefore I consider worship of You in Your Deity
form to be the most beneficial of all spiritual practices, even for women and
çüdras.
TEXT 5
Wtatk(malapa‡aAºa
k(maRbanDaivamaAecanama,
Bal(Aya caAnaur"l(Aya
“aUih" ivaìeìre"ìr"
etat kamala-paträkña
karma-bandha-vimocanam
bhaktäya cänuraktäya
brühi viçveçvareçvara
SYNONYMS
etat—this; kamala-patra-akña—O lotus-eyed Lord; karma-bandha—from the
bondage of material work; vimocanam—the means of liberation; bhaktäya—to
Your devotee; anuraktäya—who is very attached; brühi—please speak;
viçva-éçvara—of all the lords of the universe; éçvara—O Supreme Lord.
TRANSLATION
O lotus-eyed one, O Supreme Lord of all lords of the universe, please explain
to Your devoted servant this means of liberation from the bondage of work.
TEXT 6
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
na ÷ntaAe'nantapaAr"sya
k(maRk(ANx"sya caAeÜ"va
s$aiÉÿæaM vaNARiyaSyaAima
yaTaAvad"naupaUvaRzA:
çré-bhagavän uväca
na hy anto 'nanta-pärasya
karma-käëòasya coddhava
saìkñiptaà varëayiñyämi
yathävad anupürvaçaù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; na—there is
not; hi—indeed; antaù—any end; ananta-pärasya—of the boundless;
karma-käëòasya—Vedic prescriptions for the execution of worship; ca—and;
uddhava—O Uddhava; saìkñiptam—in brief; varëayiñyämi—I shall explain;
yathä-vat—in a suitable manner; anupürvaçaù—in the appropriate order.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Uddhava, there is no
end to the innumerable Vedic prescriptions for executing Deity worship; so I
shall explain this topic to you briefly, one step at a time.
PURPORT
Here the word karma-käëòa refers to the various Vedic methods of worship,
culminating in Deity worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Just as
the means of sense gratification and material renunciation are innumerable,
the transcendental pastimes and qualities the Supreme Personality of Godhead
enjoys in His own abode, called Vaikuëöha, are also innumerable. The various
concepts of piety and methods of purification in the material world ultimately
cannot be reconciled amongst themselves without accepting the Absolute
Truth, the Personality of Godhead, since without appreciation of Him there is
no definitive understanding of what is actually obligatory for a human being.
Even though almost all human beings are engaged in various processes of
worship, the Lord will now summarize this topic, describing how one should
worship Him in His Deity form.
TEXT 7
vaEid"k(staAin‡ak(Ae ima™a
wita mae i‡aivaDaAe maKa:
‡ayaANAAmaIips$ataenaEva
ivaiDanaA maAM s$amacaR&#re"ta,
vaidikas täntriko miçra
iti me tri-vidho makhaù
trayäëäm épsitenaiva
vidhinä mäà samarcaret
SYNONYMS
vaidikaù—according to the four Vedas; täntrikaù—according to practical,
explanatory literatures; miçraù—mixed; iti—thus; me—of Me; tri-vidhaù—of
three kinds; makhaù—sacrifice; trayäëäm—of the three; épsitena—that which
one feels to be most suitable; eva—certainly; vidhinä—by the process;
mäm—Me; samarcaret—one should properly worship.
TRANSLATION
One should carefully worship Me by selecting one of the three methods by
which I receive sacrifice: Vedic, tantric or mixed.
PURPORT
Vaidika refers to sacrifice performed with mantras from the four Vedas and
auxiliary Vedic literature. Täntrika refers to such literatures as the Païcarätra
and the Gautaméya-tantra. And "mixed" indicates utilization of both
literatures. It should be remembered that superficial imitation of elaborate
Vedic sacrifices will not bring one the actual perfection of life. One must
perform sacrifice according to the prescription of the Supreme Lord, who
recommends for this age the chanting of His holy names: Hare Kåñëa, Hare
Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare
Hare.
TEXT 8
yad"A svainagAmaenaAelM(
iã"jatvaM ‘aApya paUç&Sa:
yaTaA yajaeta maAM BaftyaA
™aÜ"yaA taiªabaAeDa mae
yadä sva-nigamenoktaà
dvijatvaà präpya püruñaù
yathä yajeta mäà bhaktyä
çraddhayä tan nibodha me
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; sva—specified according to one's qualification; nigamena—by
the Vedas; uktam—enjoined; dvijatvam—the status of becoming twice-born;
präpya—achieving; püruñaù—a person; yathä—in which way; yajeta—he
should execute worship; mäm—unto Me; bhaktyä—with devotion;
çraddhayä—with faith; tat—that; nibodha—please hear; me—from Me.
TRANSLATION
Now please listen faithfully as I explain exactly how a person who has
achieved twice-born status through the relevant Vedic prescriptions should
worship Me with devotion.
PURPORT
The word sva-nigamena refers to the particular Vedic injunctions relevant
to one's social and occupational status. Members of the brähmaëa, kñatriya and
vaiçya communities all achieve dvijatvam, twice-born status, by initiation into
the Gäyatré mantra. Traditionally, fully qualified brähmaëa boys may be
initiated at age eight, kñatriyas at eleven and vaiçyas at twelve, provided the
proper conditions are met. Having achieved twice-born status, one should
faithfully worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His form of the
Deity, as the Lord Himself will describe.
TEXT 9
@caARyaAM sTaiNx"lae'¢aAE vaA
s$aUyaeR vaAps$au ô$id" iã"ja:
‰"vyaeNA Bail(yaul(Ae'caeRta,
svagAuçM& maAmamaAyayaA
arcäyäà sthaëòile 'gnau vä
sürye väpsu hådi dvijaù
dravyeëa bhakti-yukto 'rcet
sva-guruà mäm amäyayä
SYNONYMS
arcäyäm—within the Deity form; sthaëòile—in the earth; agnau—in fire;
vä—or; sürye—in the sun; vä—or; apsu—in water; hådi—in the heart;
dvijaù—the brähmaëa; dravyeëa—by various paraphernalia;
bhakti-yuktaù—endowed with devotion; arcet—he should worship;
sva-gurum—his worshipable Lord; mäm—Me; amäyayä—without any
deception.
TRANSLATION
A twice-born person should worship Me, his worshipable Lord, without
duplicity, offering appropriate paraphernalia in loving devotion to My Deity
form or to a form of Me appearing upon the ground, in fire, in the sun, in water
or within the worshiper's own heart.
TEXT 10
paUva< µaAnaM ‘aku(vaI=ta
DaAEtad"ntaAe'ËÿzAuÜ"yae
oBayaEr"ipa ca µaAnaM
man‡aEma{RØ"h"NAAid"naA
pürvaà snänaà prakurvéta
dhauta-danto 'ìga-çuddhaye
ubhayair api ca snänaà
mantrair måd-grahaëädinä
SYNONYMS
pürvam—first; snänam—bath; prakurvéta—one should perform;
dhauta—having cleaned; dantaù—his teeth; aìga—of the body; çuddhaye—for
purification; ubhayaiù—with both kinds; api ca—also; snänam—bathing;
mantraiù—with mantras; måt-grahaëa-ädinä—by smearing with earth and so
on.
TRANSLATION
One should first purify his body by cleansing his teeth and bathing. Then
one should perform a second cleansing by smearing the body with earth and
chanting both Vedic and tantric mantras.
TEXT 11
s$anDyaAepaAstyaAid"k(maARiNA
vaede"naAcaAeid"taAina mae
paUjaAM taE: k(lpayaets$amyak,(-
s$aÆÿlpa: k(maRpaAvanaIma,
sandhyopästyädi-karmäëi
vedenäcoditäni me
püjäà taiù kalpayet samyaksaìkalpaù
karma-pävaném
SYNONYMS
sandhyä—at the three junctures of the day (dawn, noon and sunset);
upästi—worship (by chanting the Gäyatré mantra); ädi—and so on;
karmäëi—prescribed duties; vedena—by the Vedas; äcoditäni—recommended;
me—My; püjäm—worship; taiù—by these activities; kalpayet—one should
perform; samyak-saìkalpaù—who has perfectly fixed his determination (that
the object of his endeavor will be the Personality of Godhead); karma—the
reaction of fruitive work; pävaném—which eradicates.
TRANSLATION
Fixing the mind on Me, one should worship Me by his various prescribed
duties, such as chanting the Gäyatré mantra at the three junctures of the day.
Such performances are enjoined by the Vedas and purify the worshiper of
reactions to fruitive activities.
TEXT 12
zAElaI d"Aç&mayaI laAEh"I
laepyaA laeKyaA ca s$aEk(taI
manaAemayaI maiNAmayaI
‘aitamaAí"ivaDaA sma{taA
çailé däru-mayé lauhé
lepyä lekhyä ca saikaté
mano-mayé maëi-mayé
pratimäñöa-vidhä småtä
SYNONYMS
çailé—made of stone; däru-mayé—made of wood; lauhé—made of metal;
lepyä—made of clay, sandalwood and other substances laid down as a paste;
lekhyä—painted; ca—and; saikaté—made of sand; manaù-mayé—conceived of
in the mind; maëi-mayé—made of jewels; pratimä—the Deity; añöa-vidhä—in
eight varieties; småtä—it is remembered.
TRANSLATION
The Deity form of the Lord is said to appear in eight varieties—stone, wood,
metal, earth, paint, sand, the mind or jewels.
PURPORT
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé explains that certain Deity forms, such as those made of
sand, are manifested for a brief time to fulfill a personal desire of the
worshiper. Those, however, who desire to attain pure love of God should
worship the permanent form of the Deity (made, for instance, of marble, gold
or brass), and they should maintain continual worship. In Kåñëa consciousness
there is no scope for neglecting the worship of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
TEXT 13
calaAcalaeita iã"ivaDaA
‘aitaï"A jaIvamaind"r"ma,
oã"As$aAvaAh"nae na sta:
isTar"AyaAmauÜ"vaAcaR"nae
caläcaleti dvi-vidhä
pratiñöhä jéva-mandiram
udväsävähane na staù
sthiräyäm uddhavärcane
SYNONYMS
calä—movable; acalä—immovable; iti—thus; dvi-vidhä—of two varieties;
pratiñöä—the installation; jéva-mandiram—of the Deity, who is the shelter of
all living entities; udväsa—sending away; ävähane—and calling forth; na
staù—are not done; sthiräyäm—for the permanently established Deity;
uddhava—My dear Uddhava; arcane—in His worship.
TRANSLATION
The Deity form of the Lord, who is the shelter of all living entities, can be
established in two ways: temporarily or permanently. But a permanent Deity,
having been called, can never be sent away, My dear Uddhava.
PURPORT
The devotees of the Lord understand themselves to be the Lord's eternal
servitors; recognizing the Deity to be the Lord Himself, they permanently
install the Deity and engage in perpetual worship. The impersonalists,
however, regard the eternal form of the Lord as a temporary manifestation of
illusion. In fact, they regard the Deity form as a mere stepping—stone in their
ambitious program to become God. Materialistic persons of whatever stripe
consider the Lord to be their order supplier, and so they make temporary
arrangements for religious ceremonies to achieve temporary material sense
gratification. This temporary mode of worship is favored by those desiring to
exploit the Personality of Godhead for their personal ends, whereas the loving
devotees in Kåñëa consciousness eternally engage in worship of the Personality
of Godhead. They install permanent Deities meant to be worshiped
perpetually.
TEXT 14
@isTar"AyaAM ivak(lpa: syaAta,
sTaiNx"lae tau Bavaeä," ã"yama,
µapanaM tvaivalaepyaAyaAma,
@nya‡a pair"maAjaRnama,
asthiräyäà vikalpaù syät
sthaëòile tu bhaved dvayam
snapanaà tv avilepyäyäm
anyatra parimärjanam
SYNONYMS
asthiräyäm—in the case of the temporarily installed Deity; vikalpaù—an
option (as to whether the Deity is to be called and sent away); syät—there is;
sthaëòile—in the case of the Deity traced upon the ground; tu—but;
bhavet—do occur; dvayam—these two rituals; snapanam—the bathing;
tu—but; avilepyäyäm—in the case when the Deity is not made out of clay (or
paint or wood); anyatra—in the other cases; parimärjanam—thorough
cleansing, but without water.
TRANSLATION
The Deity that is temporarily established can optionally be called forth and
sent away, but these two rituals should always be performed when the Deity is
traced upon the ground. Bathing should be done with water except if the Deity
is made of clay, paint or wood, in which cases a thorough cleansing without
water is enjoined.
PURPORT
Various classes of devotees worship the Deity of the Personality of Godhead
according to their various stages of faith in the Lord. An advanced devotee of
Lord Kåñëa understands his eternal loving relationship with the Lord and,
seeing the Deity as the Lord Himself, establishes an eternal relationship with
the Deity based on loving servitude to Him. Understanding Lord Kåñëa to be
the eternal form of bliss and knowledge, a faithful devotee makes a permanent
arrangement for Deity worship, installing the Lord's form made of, for
example, stone, wood or marble.
The çälagräma-çilä is considered to be automatically installed even without
the formal ceremony, and so it is forbidden to call the Deity with mantras or
ask the Deity to leave. On the other hand, if one prepares a Deity form by
drawing on sanctified ground or by constructing a sand image, one must call
the Deity with mantras and then ask the Deity to leave the external form,
which will soon be demolished by the natural elements.
The general principle is that a pure devotee of the Lord understands his
relationship with the Deity to be eternal. The more one surrenders in loving
devotion to the Deity, the more one can understand the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Lord Kåñëa is a person, but He is the Supreme Person, possessing
His own unique feelings. One can easily please the Lord by devotional service
offered to His Deity form. By pleasing the Lord one can gradually progress in
the mission of human life and eventually go back home, back to Godhead,
where the Deity personally appears before the devotee and welcomes the
devotee to His personal abode, known throughout the world as the kingdom of
God.
TEXT 15
‰"vyaE: ‘ais$aÜE"maRâAgA:
‘aitamaAid"SvamaAiyana:
Bal(sya ca yaTaAlabDaEr,"
ô$id" BaAvaena caEva ih"
dravyaiù prasiddhair mad-yägaù
pratimädiñv amäyinaù
bhaktasya ca yathä-labdhair
hådi bhävena caiva hi
SYNONYMS
dravyaiù—with items of paraphernalia; prasiddhaiù—excellent;
mat-yägaù—My worship; pratimä-ädiñu—in the different Deity forms;
amäyinaù—who has no material desire; bhaktasya—of a devotee; ca—and;
yathä-labdhaiù—by whatever paraphernalia he can easily obtain; hådi—in the
heart; bhävena—by mental conception; ca—and; eva hi—certainly.
TRANSLATION
One should worship Me in My Deity forms by offering the most excellent
paraphernalia. But a devotee completely freed from material desire may worship
Me with whatever he is able to obtain, and may even worship Me within his
heart with mental paraphernalia.
PURPORT
A devotee still troubled by material desire tends to see the world as an
object of sense gratification. Such a neophyte devotee may misunderstand the
Lord's supreme position and may even consider the Lord an object of his own
enjoyment. Hence the neophyte must offer opulent paraphernalia to the Deity
so that he may constantly remember that the Deity is the supreme enjoyer and
that he, the neophyte, is simply the worshiper and is actually meant for the
Deity's pleasure. In contrast, an advanced devotee, one fixed in Kåñëa
consciousness, never forgets that the Supreme Lord is the actual enjoyer and
controller of everything. The pure devotee offers his unalloyed love to the
Personality of Godhead along with whatever paraphernalia is easily obtained.
A Kåñëa conscious devotee does not waver in his devotion to Lord Kåñëa, and
even with the simplest offering he completely satisfies the Personality of
Godhead.
TEXTS 16-17
µaAnaAlaÆÿr"NAM ‘aeï"ma,
@caARyaAmaeva taUÜ"va
sTaiNx"lae taÔvaivanyaAs$aAe
va¶"AvaAjyaplautaM h"iva:
s$aUyaeR caAByahR"NAM ‘aeïM"
s$ailalae s$ailalaAid"iBa:
™aÜ"yaAepaAô$taM ‘aeïM"
Bale(na mama vaAyaRipa
snänälaìkaraëaà preñöham
arcäyäm eva tüddhava
sthaëòile tattva-vinyäso
vahnäv äjya-plutaà haviù
sürye cäbhyarhaëaà preñöhaà
salile salilädibhiù
çraddhayopähåtaà preñöhaà
bhaktena mama väry api
SYNONYMS
snäna—bathing; alaìkaraëam—and decorating with clothing and ornaments;
preñöham—is most appreciated; arcäyäm—for the Deity form; eva—certainly;
tu—and; uddhava—O Uddhava; sthaëòile—for the Deity drawn upon the
ground; tattva-vinyäsaù—establishing the expansions and potencies of the
Lord within the various limbs of the Deity by chanting the respective mantras;
vahnau—for the sacrificial fire; äjya—in ghee; plutam—drenched; haviù—the
oblations of sesame, barley and so on; sürye—for the sun; ca—and;
abhyarhaëam—the yoga meditation of twelve äsanas and offerings of arghya;
preñöham-most dear; salile—for the water; salila-ädibhiù—by offerings of water
and so on; çraddhayä—with faith; upähåtam—presented; preñöham—most dear;
bhaktena—by the devotee; mama—My; väri—water; api—even.
TRANSLATION
In worshiping the temple Deity, my dear Uddhava, bathing and decoration
are the most pleasing offerings. For the Deity traced on sacred ground, the
process of tattva-vinyäsa is most dear. Oblations of sesame and barley soaked in
ghee are the preferred offering to the sacrificial fire, whereas worship consisting
of upasthäna and arghya is preferred for the sun. One should worship Me in the
form of water by offering water itself. Actually, whatever is offered to Me with
faith by My devotee—even if only a little water—is most dear to Me.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is present everywhere, and Vedic
culture prescribes various ritualistic methods for worshiping the Lord in His
various manifestations. The principal item is the faith and devotion of the
worshiper, without which everything else is useless, as the Lord describes in
the next verse.
TEXT 18
BaUyaRpyaBal(AepaAô$taM
na mae taAeSaAya k(lpatae
gAnDaAe DaUpa: s$aumanas$aAe
d"IpaAe'ªaAâM ca ikM( pauna:
bhüry apy abhaktopähåtaà
na me toñäya kalpate
gandho dhüpaù sumanaso
dépo 'nnädyaà ca kià punaù
SYNONYMS
bhüri—opulent; api—even; abhakta—by a nondevotee; upähåtam—offered;
na—does not; me—My; toñäya—satisfaction; kalpate—create;
gandhaù—fragrance; dhüpaù—incense; sumanasaù—flowers; dépaù—lamps;
anna-ädyam—foodstuffs; ca—and; kim punaù—what to speak of.
TRANSLATION
Even very opulent presentations do not satisfy Me if they are offered by
nondevotees. But I am pleased by any insignificant offering made by My loving
devotees, and I am certainly most pleased when nice presentations of fragrant
oil, incense, flowers and palatable foods are offered with love.
PURPORT
The Lord has stated in the previous verse that even a little water offered
with love and devotion gives Him great pleasure. Therefore the words kià
punaù indicate the Lord's complete happiness when a suitably opulent offering
is made with love and devotion. But an opulent offering made by a nondevotee
cannot please the Lord. As Çréla Jéva Gosvämé explains, the rules and
regulations concerning Deity worship and the listing of offenses against the
Deities are all meant for helping one avoid precisely this kind of disrespectful
or neglectful attitude toward the Personality of Godhead in His Deity form. In
fact, all offenses against the Deity are based upon irreverence and disregard for
the Lord's position as master, and thus upon disobedience to His orders. Since
one must worship the Deity with reverence, one should offer opulent
presentations to the Deity with love, for such presentations both enhance the
respectfulness of the worshiper and help him avoid offenses in his worship.
TEXT 19
zAuica: s$amBa{tas$amBaAr":
‘aAgd"BaE=: k(ilpataAs$ana:
@As$aIna: ‘aAgAud"gvaAcaeRä,"
@caARyaAM tvaTa s$ammauKa:
çuciù sambhåta-sambhäraù
präg-darbhaiù kalpitäsanaù
äsénaù präg udag värced
arcäyäà tv atha sammukhaù
SYNONYMS
çuciù—clean; sambhåta—having collected; sambhäraù—the paraphernalia;
präk—their tips facing the east; darbhaiù—with blades of kuça grass;
kalpita—having arranged; äsanaù—his own seat; äsénaù—sitting;
präk—facing the east; udak—facing the north; vä—or; arcet—he should
perform the worship; arcäyäm—of the Deity; tu—but; atha—or else;
sammukhaù—directly facing.
TRANSLATION
After cleansing himself and collecting all the paraphernalia, the worshiper
should arrange his own seat with blades of kuça grass whose tips point eastward.
He should then sit facing either east or north, or else, if the Deity is fixed in
one place, he should sit directly facing the Deity.
PURPORT
The word sambhåta-sambhära means that before beginning the Deity
worship one should place all necessary paraphernalia nearby. In this way one
will not have to get up continually to search for different items. If the Deity
has been permanently installed, then one should sit facing the Deity.
TEXT 20
k{(tanyaAs$a: k{(tanyaAs$aAM
mad"caA< paAiNAnaAma{jaeta,
k(lazAM ‘aAeºaNAIyaM ca
yaTaAvaäu"pas$aADayaeta,
kåta-nyäsaù kåta-nyäsäà
mad-arcäà päëinämåjet
kalaçaà prokñaëéyaà ca
yathävad upasädhayet
SYNONYMS
kåta-nyäsaù—having sanctified his own body (by touching various parts and
chanting appropriate mantras while meditating on the corresponding forms of
the Supreme Lord); kåta-nyäsäm—(the Deity) upon which the same process
has been applied; mat-arcäm—My Deity manifestation; päëinä—with his
hand; ämåjet—should clean (by removing remnants of old offerings);
kalaçam—the ritual pot filled with auspicious substances; prokñaëéyam—the
vessel containing water for sprinkling; ca—and; yathä-vat—appropriately;
upasädhayet—he should prepare.
TRANSLATION
The devotee should sanctify the various parts of his body by touching them
and chanting mantras. He should do the same for My Deity forms and then
with his hands he should clean the Deity of old flowers and the remnants of
previous offerings. He should properly prepare the sacred pot and the vessel
containing water for sprinkling.
PURPORT
Before beginning the process of worship mentioned here, one should offer
obeisances to one's spiritual master, the Deity and other worshipable
personalities.
TEXT 21
tad"ià"deR"vayajanaM
‰"vyaANyaAtmaAnamaeva ca
‘aAeºya paA‡aAiNA ‡aINyaià"s$a,
taEstaE‰R"vyaEê s$aADayaeta,
tad-adbhir deva-yajanaà
dravyäëy ätmänam eva ca
prokñya päträëi tréëy adbhis
tais tair dravyaiç ca sädhayet
SYNONYMS
tat—of the vessel for sprinkling; adbhiù—with the water; deva-yajanam—the
place where the Deity is worshiped; dravyäëi—the paraphernalia;
ätmänam—one's own body; eva—indeed; ca—also; prokñya—sprinkling;
päträëi—the vessels; tréëi—three; adbhiù—with water; taiù taiù—with those
available; dravyaiù—auspicious items; ca—and; sädhayet—he should arrange.
TRANSLATION
Then, with the water of that prokñaëéya vessel he should sprinkle the area
where the Deity is being worshiped, the offerings that are going to be presented,
and his own body. Next he should decorate with various auspicious substances
three vessels filled with water.
PURPORT
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé gives references from Vedic literature stating that the
water meant for bathing the feet should be combined with millet seeds, dürvä
grass mixed in water, viñëukränta flowers and other items. The water used for
arghya should include the following eight items: fragrant oil, flowers, unbroken
barleycorns, husked barleycorns, the tips of kuça grass, sesame seeds, mustard
seeds and dürvä grass. The water for sipping should include jasmine flowers,
ground cloves and kakkola berries.
TEXT 22
paAâAGyaARcamanaIyaATa<
‡aIiNA paA‡aAiNA de"izAk(:
ô$d"A zAISNAARTa izAKayaA
gAAya‡yaA caAiBaman‡ayaeta,
pädyärghyäcamanéyärthaà
tréëi päträëi deçikaù
hådä çérñëätha çikhayä
gäyatryä cäbhimantrayet
SYNONYMS
pädya—of the water offered to the Lord for bathing His feet; arghya—the
water offered to the Lord as a token of respectful greeting; äcamanéya—and
the water offered to the Lord for washing His mouth; artham—placed there for
the purpose; tréëi—three; päträëi—the vessels; deçikaù—the worshiper;
hådä—by the "heart" mantra; çérñëä—by the "head" mantra; atha—and;
çikhayä—by the "crown" mantra; gäyatryä—and by the Gäyatré mantra;
ca—also; abhimantrayet—he should perform purification by chanting.
TRANSLATION
The worshiper should then purify those three vessels. He should sanctify the
vessel holding water for washing the Lord's feet by chanting hådayäya namaù,
the vessel containing water for arghya by chanting çirase svähä, and the vessel
containing water for washing the Lord's mouth by chanting çikhäyai vañaö. Also,
the Gäyatré mantra should be chanted for all three vessels.
TEXT 23
ipaNxe" vaAyvai¢as$aMzAuÜe"
ô$tpaásTaAM par"AM mama
@NvaI%M jaIvak(laAM DyaAyaena,
naAd"Antae is$aÜ"BaAivataAma,
piëòe väyv-agni-saàçuddhe
håt-padma-sthäà paräà mama
aëvéà jéva-kaläà dhyäyen
nädänte siddha-bhävitäm
SYNONYMS
piëòe—within the body; väyu—by air; agni—and by fire; saàçuddhe—which
has become completely purified; håt—of the heart; padma—upon the lotus;
sthäm—situated; paräm—the transcendental form; mama—of Mine;
aëvém—very subtle; jéva-kaläm—the Personality of Godhead, from whom all
living entities expand; dhyäyet—he should meditate upon; näda-ante—at the
end of the vibration of oà; siddha-by perfected sages; bhävitäm—experienced.
TRANSLATION
The worshiper should meditate upon My subtle form—which is situated
within the worshiper's own body, now purified by air and fire—as the source of
all living entities. This form of the Lord is experienced by self-realized sages in
the last part of the vibration of the sacred syllable oà.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, the praëava, or oàkära, has five parts:
A, U, M, the nasal bindu and the reverberation (näda). Liberated souls
meditate upon the Lord at the end of that reverberation.
TEXT 24
tayaAtmaBaUtayaA ipaNxe"
vyaAæae s$ampaUjya tanmaya:
@AvaA÷AcaARid"Sau sTaApya
nyastaAËMÿ maAM ‘apaUjayaeta,
tayätma-bhütayä piëòe
vyäpte sampüjya tan-mayaù
ävähyärcädiñu sthäpya
nyastäìgaà mäà prapüjayet
SYNONYMS
tayä—by that form meditated upon; ätma-bhütayä—conceived of according to
one's own realization; piëòe—in the physical body; vyäpte—which has become
pervaded; sampüjya—perfectly worshiping that form; tat-mayaù—surcharged
by His presence; ävähya—inviting; arcä-ädiñu—within the various Deities
being worshiped; sthäpya—establishing Him; nyasta-aìgam—having touched
the Deity's various limbs with the chanting of appropriate mantras; mäm—to
Me; prapüjayet—he should carry out all the details of worship.
TRANSLATION
The devotee conceives of the Supersoul, whose presence surcharges the
devotee's body, in the form corresponding to his realization. Thus the devotee
worships the Lord to his full capacity and becomes fully absorbed in Him. By
touching the various limbs of the Deity and chanting appropriate mantras, the
devotee should invite the Supersoul to join the Deity's form, and then the
devotee should worship Me.
PURPORT
The body of a devotee is pervaded by the Supreme Lord just as a house is
pervaded by the glow of a lamp. Just as one gestures in a friendly way to
indicate that a guest should enter one's house, one touches the body of the
Deity, chants appropriate mantras, and enthusiastically invites the Supersoul
to enter the form of the Deity. Since both the Deity and the Supersoul are the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, they are not different. One form of the Lord
can immediately become manifest in another.
TEXTS 25-26
paAâAepas$pazAARhR"NAAd"Ina,
opacaAr"Ana, ‘ak(lpayaeta,
DamaARid"iBaê navaiBa:
k(lpaiyatvaAs$anaM mama
paámaí"d"laM ta‡a
k(iNARk(Ake(s$ar"Aejjvalama,
oBaAByaAM vaed"tan‡aAByaAM
ma÷M taUBayais$aÜ"yae
pädyopasparçärhaëädén
upacärän prakalpayet
dharmädibhiç ca navabhiù
kalpayitväsanaà mama
padmam añöa-dalaà tatra
karëikä-kesarojjvalam
ubhäbhyäà veda-tanträbhyäà
mahyaà tübhaya-siddhaye
SYNONYMS
pädya—water for washing the Lord's feet; upasparça—water for washing the
Lord's mouth; arhaëa—water presented as arghya; ädén-and other
paraphernalia; upacärän—the offerings; prakalpayet—one should make;
dharma-ädibhiù—with the personifications of religion, knowledge,
renunciation and opulence; ca—and; navabhiù—with the nine (energies of
the Lord); kalpayitvä—having imagined; äsanam—the seat; mama—My;
padmam—a lotus; añöa-dalam—having eight petals; tatra—therein;
karëikä—in the whorl; kesara—with saffron filaments; ujjvalam—effulgent;
ubhäbhyäm—by both means; veda-tanträbhyäm—of the Vedas and tantras;
mahyam-to Me; tu—and; ubhaya—of both (enjoyment and liberation);
siddhaye—for the achievement.
TRANSLATION
The worshiper should first imagine My seat as decorated with the
personified deities of religion, knowledge, renunciation and opulence and with
My nine spiritual energies. He should think of the Lord's sitting place as an
eight-petaled lotus, effulgent on account of the saffron filaments within its
whorl. Then, following the regulations of both the Vedas and the tantras, he
should offer Me water for washing the feet, water for washing the mouth,
arghya and other items of worship. By this process he achieves both material
enjoyment and liberation.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, religion, knowledge, renunciation and
opulence are the legs of the Lord's sitting platform and occupy the four
corners, beginning with the southeast. Irreligion, ignorance, attachment and
wretchedness are the intermediate legs, standing in the four directions
beginning with the east. The nine çaktis, or potencies, of the Lord are Vimalä,
Utkarñiëé, Jïäna, Kriyä, Yogä, Prahvé, Satyä, Éçänä and Anugrahä.
TEXT 27
s$aud"zARnaM paAÂajanyaM
gAd"As$aISauDanauhR"laAna,
mauSalaM k(AEstauBaM maAlaAM
™aIvats$aM caAnaupaUjayaeta,
sudarçanaà päïcajanyaà
gadäséñu-dhanur-halän
muñalaà kaustubhaà mäläà
çrévatsaà cänupüjayet
SYNONYMS
sudarçanam—the Lord's disc; päïcajanyam—the Lord's conchshell; gadä—His
club; asi—sword; iñu—arrows; dhanuù—bow; halän—and plow; muñalam—His
muñala weapon; kaustubham—the Kaustubha gem; mäläm—His garland;
çrévatsam—the decoration of Çrévatsa on His chest; ca—and; anupüjayet—one
should worship one after another.
TRANSLATION
One should worship, in order, the Lord's Sudarçana disc, His Päïcajanya
conchshell, His club, sword, bow, arrows and plow, His muñala weapon, His
Kaustubha gem, His flower garland and the Çrévatsa curl of hair on His chest.
TEXT 28
nandM" s$aunandM" gAç&xM"
‘acaNxM" caNxM" Wva ca
mah"AbalaM balaM caEva
ku(maudM" k(maude"ºaNAma,
nandaà sunandaà garuòaà
pracaëòaà caëòaà eva ca
mahäbalaà balaà caiva
kumudaà kamudekñaëam
SYNONYMS
nandam sunandam garuòam—named Nanda, Sunanda and Garuòa; pracaëòam
caëòam—Pracaëòa and Caëòa; eva—indeed; ca—also; mahä-balam
balam—Mahäbala and Bala; ca—and; eva—indeed; kumudam
kumuda-ékñaëam—Kumuda and Kumudekñaëa.
TRANSLATION
One should worship the Lord's associates Nanda and Sunanda, Garuòa,
Pracaëòa and Caëòa, Mahäbala and Bala, and Kumuda and Kumudekñaëa.
TEXT 29
äu"gAA< ivanaAyakM( vyaAs$aM
ivaSvaºaenaM gAuè&na, s$aur"Ana,
svae svae sTaAnae tvaiBamauKaAna,
paUjayaet‘aAeºaNAAid"iBa:
durgäà vinäyakaà vyäsaà
viñvakñenaà gurün surän
sve sve sthäne tv abhimukhän
püjayet prokñaëädibhiù
SYNONYMS
durgäm—the Lord's spiritual energy; vinäyakam—the original Gaëeça;
vyäsam—the compiler of the Vedas; viñvaksenam—Viñvaksena; gurün—one's
spiritual masters; surän—the demigods; sve sve—each in his own;
sthäne—place; tu—and; abhimukhän—all facing the Deity; püjayet—one
should worship; prokñaëa-ädibhiù—by the various prescriptions beginning with
sprinkling of water for purification.
TRANSLATION
With offerings such as prokñaëa one should worship Durgä, Vinäyaka,
Vyäsa, Viñvaksena, the spiritual masters and the various demigods. All these
personalities should be in their proper places facing the Deity of the Lord.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, the Gaëeça and Durgä mentioned in this
verse are not the same personalities present within the material world; rather,
they are eternal associates of the Lord in Vaikuëöha. In this world Gaëeça, the
son of Lord Çiva, is famous for awarding financial success, and the goddess
Durgä, the wife of Lord Çiva, is famous as the external, illusory potency of the
Supreme Lord. The personalities mentioned here, however, are eternally
liberated associates of the Lord who reside in the spiritual sky, beyond the
material manifestation. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé quotes from various Vedic
literatures to prove that the name Durgä may also indicate the internal
potency of the Lord, who is nondifferent from Him. The external, or covering,
potency of the Lord expands from this original Durgä. The Durgä of the
material world, called Mahä-mäyä, assumes the function of bewildering the
living entities. Thus a devotee should not fear becoming polluted by
worshiping the Durgä mentioned here, who has the same name as illusion, but
rather the devotee must show respect to these eternal servitors of the Supreme
Lord in Vaikuëöha.
TEXTS 30-31
cand"naAezAIr"k(paURr"-
ku(ÇÿmaAgAuç&vaAis$ataE:
s$ailalaE: µaApayaenman‡aEr,"
inatyad"A ivaBavae s$aita
svaNARGamaARnauvaAke(na
mah"Apauç&SaivaâyaA
paAEç&SaeNAAipa s$aUle(na
s$aAmaBaI r"AjanaAid"iBa:
candanoçéra-karpürakuìkumäguru-
väsitaiù
salilaiù snäpayen mantrair
nityadä vibhave sati
svarëa-gharmänuväkena
mahäpuruña-vidyayä
pauruñeëäpi süktena
sämabhé räjanädibhiù
SYNONYMS
candana—with sandalwood paste; uçéra—the fragrant uçéra root;
karpüra—camphor; kuìkuma—vermilion; aguru—aloes wood;
väsitaiù—which are perfumed; salilaiù—by different kinds of water;
snäpayet—one should bathe the Deity; mantraiù—with mantras;
nityadä—every day; vibhave—assets; sati—to the extent that there are;
svarëa-gharma-anuväkena—by the chapter of the Vedas known as
Svarëa-gharma; mahä-puruña-vidyayä-by the incantation called Mahäpuruña;
pauruñeëa-by the Puruña-sükta; api-also; süktena—the Vedic hymn;
sämabhiù—by songs from the Säma Veda; räjana-ädibhiù—known as Räjana
and so on.
TRANSLATION
The worshiper should bathe the Deity every day, as opulently as his assets
permit, using waters scented with sandalwood, uçéra root, camphor, kuìkuma
and aguru. He should also chant various Vedic hymns, such as the anuväka
known as Svarëa-gharma, the Mahäpuruña-vidyä, the Puruña-sükta and various
songs of the Säma Veda, such as the Räjana and the Rohiëya.
PURPORT
The Puruña-sükta prayer, beginning oà sahasra-çérñä-puruñaù sahasräkñaù
sahasra-pät, is contained within the Åg Veda.
TEXT 32
vañAepavaItaABar"NApa‡
a›aggAnDalaepanaE:
@laÇÿvaI=ta s$a‘aema
maà"l(Ae maAM yaTaAeicatama,
vastropavétäbharaëa1856
patra-srag-gandha-lepanaiù
alaìkurvéta sa-prema
mad-bhakto mäà yathocitam
SYNONYMS
vastra—with clothing; upavéta—a brähmaëa thread; äbharaëa—ornaments;
patra—decorations drawn on various parts of the body with tilaka;
srak-garlands; gandha-lepanaiù—and smearing of fragrant oils;
alaìkurvéta—he should decorate; sa-prema—with love; mat-bhaktaù—My
devotee; mäm—Me; yathä ucitam—as is enjoined.
TRANSLATION
My devotee should then lovingly decorate Me with clothing, a brähmaëa
thread, various ornaments, marks of tilaka and garlands, and he should anoint
My body with fragrant oils, all in the prescribed manner.
PURPORT
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé quotes Lord Çré Viñëu's instructions to Ambaréña
Mahäräja in the Viñëu-dharma Upapuräëa as follows: "Absorbing your mind
completely in the Deity, you should give up all other shelter and consider the
Deity your intimate well-wisher. You should mentally worship Him and
meditate upon Him while you walk, while you stand, while you sleep and eat.
You should see the Deity in front of you, behind, above, below and on both
sides. In this way you should constantly remember My Deity form." In the
Gautaméya-tantra one is enjoined to give the Deity of the Lord a brähmaëa
thread, if possible one made of gold. In the Nåsiàha Puräëa it is stated, "If one
offers to Lord Govinda a yellow sacred thread containing three strands of silk,
he will become an expert in Vedänta."
TEXT 33
paAâmaAcamanaIyaM ca
gAnDaM s$aumanas$aAe'ºataAna,
DaUpad"IpaAepah"AyaARiNA
d"âAnmae ™aÜ"yaAcaRk(:
pädyam äcamanéyaà ca
gandhaà sumanaso 'kñatän
dhüpa-dépopahäryäëi
dadyän me çraddhayärcakaù
SYNONYMS
pädyam—water for washing the feet; äcamanéyam—water for washing the
mouth; ca—and; gandham—fragrances; sumanasaù—flowers;
akñatän—unbroken grains; dhüpa—incense; dépa—lamps; upahäryäëi—such
items of paraphernalia; dadyät—he should present; me—to Me;
çraddhayä—with faith; arcakaù—the worshiper.
TRANSLATION
The worshiper should faithfully present Me with water for washing My feet
and mouth, fragrant oils, flowers and unbroken grains, along with incense,
lamps and other offerings.
TEXT 34
gAux"paAyas$as$apaI>#iSa
zASku(lyaApaUpamaAed"k(Ana,
s$aMyaAvad"iDas$aUpaAMê
naEvaeâM s$aita k(lpayaeta,
guòa-päyasa-sarpéàñi
çañkuly-äpüpa-modakän
saàyäva-dadhi-süpäàç ca
naivedyaà sati kalpayet
SYNONYMS
guòa—sugar candy; päyasa—sweet rice; sarpéàñi—and ghee; çañkulé—a kind
of large, ear-shaped cake made of rice flour, sugar and sesame and fried in
ghee; äpüpa—various kinds of sweet cakes; modakän—small conical steamed
dumplings made of rice flour and filled with sweet coconut and sugar;
saàyäva—an oblong cake made of wheat, ghee and milk and covered with
sugar and spices; dadhi—yogurt; süpän—vegetable soups; ca—and;
naivedyam—offerings of food; sati—if he has sufficient means; kalpayet—the
devotee should arrange.
TRANSLATION
Within his means, the devotee should arrange to offer Me sugar candy, sweet
rice, ghee, çañkulé [rice-flour cakes], äpüpa [various sweet cakes], modaka
[steamed rice-flour dumplings filled with sweet coconut and sugar], saàyäva
[wheat cakes made with ghee and milk and covered with sugar and spices],
yogurt, vegetable soups and other palatable foods.
PURPORT
One can acquire detailed information of proper and improper foods to offer
in Deity worship by consulting Çré Hari-bhakti-viläsa, Eighth viläsa, verses
152-164.
TEXT 35
@ByaËÿAenmadR"naAd"zARd"
ntaDaAvaAiBaSaecanama,
@ªaAâgAItana{tyaAina
pavaRiNA syauç&taAnvah"ma,
abhyaìgonmardanädarçadanta-
dhäväbhiñecanam
annädya-géta-nåtyäni
parvaëi syur utänv-aham
SYNONYMS
abhyaìga—with ointment; unmardana—massaging; ädarça—offering a mirror;
danta-dhäva—washing the teeth; abhiñecanam—bathing; anna—offering food
that can be eaten without chewing; ädya—offering food that is chewed;
gétä—singing; nåtyäni—and dancing; parvaëi—on special holidays;
syuù—these offerings should be made; uta—or else (if it is within one's
means); anu-aham—every day.
TRANSLATION
On special occasions, and daily if possible, the Deity should be massaged
with ointment, shown a mirror, offered a eucalyptus stick for brushing His
teeth, bathed with the five kinds of nectar, offered all kinds of opulent foods,
and entertained with singing and dancing.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura describes the process of Deity worship
as follows: "First the Deity's teeth should be cleaned and His body massaged
with fragrant oil and rubbed with vermilion, camphor powder and so forth.
Then He should be bathed with fragrant water and the five kinds of nectar.
Next one should offer valuable silk garments and jeweled ornaments to the
Deity, smear His body with sandalwood paste, and offer Him garlands and
other gifts. After this, one should hold a mirror in front of the Deity and then
offer fragrant oil, flowers, incense, lamps and scented water for refreshing the
mouth. One should offer all types of palatable foods, fragrant water, betel nuts,
garlands, ärati lamps, a bed to rest on, and so on. One should also fan the Deity
and perform instrumental music, singing and dancing. This Deity worship
must be performed on special occasions like religious holidays or else, if one
can afford it, daily." According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, Ekädaçé is an
appropriate day for performing special Deity worship.
TEXT 36
ivaiDanaA ivaih"tae ku(Nxe"
maeKalaAgAtaR"vaeid"iBa:
@i¢amaADaAya pair"ta:
s$amaUhe"tpaAiNAnaAeid"tama,
vidhinä vihite kuëòe
mekhalä-garta-vedibhiù
agnim ädhäya paritaù
samühet päëinoditam
SYNONYMS
vidhinä—according to scriptural injunctions; vihite—constructed; kuëòe—in
the sacrificial arena; mekhalä—with the paraphernalia of the sacred belt;
garta—the sacrificial pit; vedibhiù—and the altar mound; agnim—the fire;
ädhäya—establishing; paritaù—on all sides; samühet—one should build up;
päëinä—with his hands; uditam—blazing.
TRANSLATION
In an arena constructed according to scriptural injunctions, the devotee
should perform a fire sacrifice, utilizing the sacred belt, the sacrificial pit and
the altar mound. When igniting the sacrificial fire, the devotee should bring it
to a blaze with wood piled up by his own hands.
TEXT 37
pair"staIyaARTa payauRºaeä,"
@nvaADaAya yaTaAivaiDa
‘aAeºaNyaAs$aAâ ‰"vyaAiNA
‘aAeºyaA¢aAE BaAvayaeta maAma,
paristéryätha paryukñed
anvädhäya yathä-vidhi
prokñaëyäsädya dravyäëi
prokñyägnau bhävayeta mäm
SYNONYMS
paristérya—scattering (kuça grass); atha—then; paryukñet—he should sprinkle
with water; anvädhäya—performing the ritual of anvädhäna (placing wood
into the fire with recitations of oà bhür bhuvaù svaù); yathä-vidhi—according
to the standard prescription; prokñaëyä—by the water in the äcamana vessel;
äsädya—having arranged; dravyäëi—the items to be offered as oblations;
prokñya—sprinkling them; agnau—within the fire; bhävayeta—he should
meditate; mäm—on Me.
TRANSLATION
After spreading kuça grass on the ground and sprinkling it with water, one
should perform the anvädhäna ritual according to the prescribed rules. Then
one should arrange the items to be offered as oblations and should sanctify them
with water from the sprinkling vessel. The worshiper should next meditate
upon Me within the fire.
PURPORT
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé mentions that one should meditate upon the Lord as the
Supersoul within the sacrificial fire.
TEXTS 38-41
taæajaAmbaUnad"‘aKyaM
zAÊÿca‚(gAd"AmbaujaE:
las$a»atauBauRjaM zAAntaM
paáik(Ãalk(vaAs$as$ama,
s$Pu(r"itk(r"Iq%k(q%k(
k(iq%s$aU‡avar"AËÿd"ma,
™aIvats$avaºas$aM ”aAjata,-
k(AEstauBaM vanamaAilanama,
DyaAyaªaByacyaR d"Aè&iNA
h"ivaSaAiBaGa{taAina ca
‘aAsyaAjyaBaAgAAvaAGaAr"AE
d"ÔvaA caAjyaplautaM h"iva:
jauò"yaAnmaUlaman‡aeNA
SaAex"zAcaARvad"Anata:
DamaARid"ByaAe yaTaAnyaAyaM
man‡aE: isvaií"k{(taM bauDa:
tapta-jämbünada-prakhyaà
çaìkha-cakra-gadämbujaiù
lasac-catur-bhujaà çäntaà
padma-kiïjalka-väsasam
sphurat-kiréöa-kaöaka
kaöi-sütra-varäìgadam
çrévatsa-vakñasaà bhräjatkaustubhaà
vana-mälinam
dhyäyann abhyarcya därüëi
haviñäbhighåtäni ca
präsyäjya-bhägäv äghärau
dattvä cäjya-plutaà haviù
juhuyän müla-mantreëa
ñoòaçarcävadänataù
dharmädibhyo yathä-nyäyaà
mantraiù sviñöi-kåtaà budhaù
SYNONYMS
tapta—molten; jämbü-nada—of gold; prakhyam—the color; çaìkha—with His
conchshell; cakra—disc; gadä—club; ambujaiù—and lotus flower;
lasat—brilliant; catuù-bhujam—having four arms; çäntam—peaceful;
padma—of a lotus; kiïjalka—colored like the filaments; väsasam—His
garment; sphurat—shining; kiréöa—helmet; kaöaka—bracelets;
kati-sütra—belt; vara-aìgadam—fine ornaments on the arms; çré-vatsa—the
emblem of the goddess of fortune; vakñasam—upon His chest;
bhräjat—effulgent; kaustubham—the Kaustubha gem; vana-mälinam—wearing
a flower garland; dhyäyan—meditating upon Him; abhyarcya—performing
worship of Him; därüëi—pieces of dry wood; haviñä—with the purified butter;
abhighåtäni—soaked; ca—and; präsya—throwing into the fire; äjya—of the
ghee; bhägau—the two designated portions; äghärau—in the course of
performing the äghära ritual; dattvä—offering; ca—and; äjya—with ghee;
plutam—drenched; haviù—various oblations; juhuyät—one should offer into
the fire; müla-mantreëa—with the primary mantras naming each deity;
ñoòaça-åcä—with the hymn Puruña-sükta, consisting of sixteen lines of verse;
avadänataù—pouring an oblation after each line; dharma-ädibhyaù—to the
demigods, beginning with Yamaräja; yathä-nyäyam—in the proper order;
mantraiù—with the specific mantras naming each demigod; sviñöi-kåtam—the
ritual of this name; budhaù—the intelligent devotee.
TRANSLATION
The intelligent devotee should meditate upon that form of the Lord whose
color is like molten gold, whose four arms are resplendent with the conchshell,
disc, club and lotus flower, and who is always peaceful and dressed in a garment
colored like the filaments within a lotus flower. His helmet, bracelets, belt and
fine arm ornaments shine brilliantly. The symbol of Çrévatsa is on His chest,
along with the glowing Kaustubha gem and a garland of forest flowers. The
devotee should then worship that Lord by taking pieces of firewood soaked in
the sacrificial ghee and throwing them into the fire. He should perform the
ritual of äghära, presenting into the fire the various items of oblation drenched
in ghee. He should then offer to sixteen demigods, beginning with Yamaräja,
the oblation called sviñöi-kåt, reciting the basic mantras of each deity and the
sixteen-line Puruña-sükta hymn. Pouring one oblation after each line of the
Puruña-sükta, he should utter the particular mantra naming each deity.
TEXT 42
@ByacyaARTa namas$k{(tya
paASaR$de"ByaAe bailaM h"re"ta,
maUlaman‡aM japaeä," “aö
smar"ªaAr"AyaNAAtmak(ma,
abhyarcyätha namaskåtya
pärñadebhyo balià haret
müla-mantraà japed brahma
smaran näräyaëätmakam
SYNONYMS
abhyarcya—having thus worshiped; atha—then; namaskåtya—offering his
obeisances by bowing down; pärñadebhyaù—unto the Lord's personal
associates; balim—offerings; haret—he should present; müla-mantram—the
basic mantra for the Deity; japet—he should chant quietly; brahma—the
Absolute Truth; smaran—remembering; näräyaëa-ätmakam—as the Supreme
Personality, Lord Näräyaëa.
TRANSLATION
Having thus worshiped the Lord in the sacrificial fire, the devotee should
offer his obeisances to the Lord's personal associates by bowing down and
should then present offerings to them. He should then chant quietly the
müla-mantra of the Deity of the Lord, remembering the Absolute Truth as the
Supreme Personality, Näräyaëa.
TEXT 43
d"ÔvaAcamanamaucCe$SaM
ivaSvaºaenaAya k(lpayaeta,
mauKavaAs$aM s$aur"iBamata,
taAmbaUlaAâmaTaAhR"yaeta,
dattväcamanam uccheñaà
viñvakñenäya kalpayet
mukha-väsaà surabhimat
tämbülädyam athärhayet
SYNONYMS
dattvä—offering; äcamanam—water for washing the Lord's mouth;
uccheñam—the remnants of His food; viñvaksenäya—to the personal associate
of Lord Viñëu, Viñvaksena; kalpayet—one should give; mukha-väsam—cologne
for the mouth; surabhi-mat—fragrant; tämbüla-ädyam—betel-nut preparation;
atha-then; arhayet—one should present.
TRANSLATION
Once again he should offer the Deity water for washing His mouth, and he
should give the remnants of the Lord's food to Viñvaksena. Then he should
present the Deity with fragrant perfume for the mouth and prepared betel nut.
TEXT 44
opagAAyana, gA{NAªa{tyana,
k(maARNyaiBanayanmama
matk(TaA: ™aAvayana, Za{Nvana,
mauó"ta< ºaiNAk(Ae Bavaeta,
upagäyan gåëan nåtyan
karmäëy abhinayan mama
mat-kathäù çrävayan çåëvan
muhürtaà kñaëiko bhavet
SYNONYMS
upagäyan—singing along; gåëan—loudly vibrating; nåtyan—dancing;
karmäëi—transcendental activities; abhinayan—imitating by acting out;
mama—My; mat-kathäù—stories about Me; çrävayan—causing others to hear;
çåëvan—hearing himself; muhürtam—for some time; kñaëikaù—absorbed in
the celebration; bhavet—he should become.
TRANSLATION
Singing along with others, chanting loudly and dancing, acting out My
transcendental pastimes, and hearing and telling stories about Me, the devotee
should for some time absorb himself in such festivity.
PURPORT
A devotee engaged in regulative worship of the Supreme Lord should
sometimes become ecstatically absorbed in chanting and hearing the pastimes
of the Lord, dancing, and other festivities. The word muhürtam, "for some
time," indicates that a devotee should be careful not to neglect his regulative
principles and service to the Lord in the name of so-called ecstasy. Although
one may be ecstatically engaged in chanting, hearing and dancing, he cannot
give up the formality of regulated service to the Lord.
TEXT 45
stavaEç&»aAvacaE: staAe‡aE:
paAEr"ANAE: ‘aAk{(taEr"ipa
stautvaA ‘as$aId" BagAvaªa,
wita vande"ta d"Nx"vata,
stavair uccävacaiù stotraiù
pauräëaiù präkåtair api
stutvä praséda bhagavann
iti vandeta daëòa-vat
SYNONYMS
stavaiù—with prayers from the scriptures; ucca-avacaiù—of greater and lesser
varieties; stotraiù—and with prayers written by human authors;
pauräëaiù—from the Puräëas; präkåtaiù-from ordinary sources; api—also;
stutvä—thus praying to the Lord; praséda—please show Your mercy;
bhagavan—O Lord; iti—thus saying; vandeta—one should pay homage;
daëòa-vat—falling down on the ground like a rod.
TRANSLATION
The devotee should offer homage to the Lord with all kinds of hymns and
prayers, both from the Puräëas and from other ancient scriptures, and also from
ordinary traditions. Praying, "O Lord, please be merciful to me! "he should fall
down flat like a rod to offer his obeisances.
TEXT 46
izAr"Ae matpaAd"yaAe: k{(tvaA
baAò"ByaAM ca par"s$par"ma,
‘apaªaM paAih" maAmaIzA
BaItaM ma{tyauƒah"ANARvaAta,
çiro mat-pädayoù kåtvä
bähubhyäà ca parasparam
prapannaà pähi mäm éça
bhétaà måtyu-grahärëavät
SYNONYMS
çiraù—his head; mat-pädayoù—at My two feet; kåtvä—placing;
bähubhyäm—with the hands; ca—and; parasparam—together (grasping the
feet of the Deity); prapannam—who am surrendered; pähi—please protect;
mäm—me; éça—O Lord; bhétam—afraid; måtyu—of death; graha—the mouth;
arëavät—of this material ocean.
TRANSLATION
Placing his head at the feet of the Deity, he should then stand with folded
hands before the Lord and pray, "O my Lord, please protect me, who am
surrendered unto You. I am most fearful of this ocean of material existence,
standing as I am in the mouth of death."
TEXT 47
wita zAeSaAM mayaA d"ÔaAM
izAr"syaADaAya s$aAd"r"ma,
oã"As$ayae»aeäu"ã"AsyaM
jyaAeitajyaAeRitaiSa tatpauna:
iti çeñäà mayä dattäà
çirasy ädhäya sädaram
udväsayec ced udväsyaà
jyotir jyotiñi tat punaù
SYNONYMS
iti—thus praying; çeñäm—the remnants; mayä—by Me; dattäm—given;
çirasi—on one's head; ädhäya—placing; sa-ädaram—respectfully;
udväsayet—should send the Deity away; cet—if; udväsyam—if such is meant to
be performed; jyotiù—the light; jyotiñi—within the light; tat—that;
punaù—once again.
TRANSLATION
Praying in this way, the devotee should respectfully place upon his head the
remnants I offer to him. And if the particular Deity is meant to be sent away at
the end of the worship, then this should be performed, the devotee once again
placing the light of the Deity's presence inside the light of the lotus within his
own heart.
TEXT 48
@caARid"Sau yad"A ya‡a
™aÜ"A maAM ta‡a caAcaRyaeta,
s$avaRBaUtaeSvaAtmaina ca
s$avaARtmaAh"mavaisTata:
arcädiñu yadä yatra
çraddhä mäà tatra cärcayet
sarva-bhüteñv ätmani ca
sarvätmäham avasthitaù
SYNONYMS
arcä-ädiñu—in the Deity form and other manifestations of the Supreme Lord;
yadä—whenever; yatra—in whichever form; çraddhä—faith develops;
mäm—Me; tatra—there; ca—and; arcayet—he should worship;
sarva-bhüteñu—within all created beings; ätmani—separately, in My original
form; ca—also; sarva-ätmä—the original soul of all; aham—I am;
avasthitaù—so situated.
TRANSLATION
Whenever one develops faith in Me—in My form as the Deity or in other
bona fide manifestations—one should worship Me in that form. I certainly exist
both within all created beings and also separately in My original form, since I
am the Supreme Soul of all.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is worshiped according to the faith of
a particular worshiper. The Deity form, arcä, is specifically mentioned here
because Deity worship is essential for spiritual progress. Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta
Sarasvaté Öhäkura mentions that inexperienced persons may think that the
Deity is meant for the sense gratification of the worshiper, since superficially
the Deity is made of external substances such as marble or brass. But through
the process of installing the Deity by chanting of authorized mantras, one
invites the Supreme Personality of Godhead to enter the Deity form. By
regulated, faithful worship one gradually understands that the Deity is
completely nondifferent from the Supreme Lord Himself. At that stage, on the
strength of Deity worship, one rises to the second-class platform of devotional
service. At this more developed stage one desires to make friendship with
other devotees of the Lord, and as one becomes solidly established in the
community of Vaiñëavas, one completely gives up material life and gradually
becomes perfect in Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 49
WvaM i‚(yaAyaAegApaTaE:
paumaAna, vaEid"k(taAin‡akE(:
@caRªauBayata: is$aiÜM"
maÔaAe ivand"tyaBaIips$ataAma,
evaà kriyä-yoga-pathaiù
pumän vaidika-täntrikaiù
arcann ubhayataù siddhià
matto vindaty abhépsitäm
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; kriyä-yoga—of regulated Deity worship; pathaiù—by the
processes; pumän—a person; vaidika-täntrikaiù—presented in the Vedas and
tantras; arcan-worshiping; ubhayataù—in both this life and the next;
siddhim—perfection; mattaù—from Me; vindati—he achieves;
abhépsitäm—desired.
TRANSLATION
By worshiping Me through the various methods prescribed in the Vedas and
tantras, one will gain from Me his desired perfection in both this life and the
next.
TEXT 50
mad"caA< s$am‘aitaï"Apya
maind"rM" k(Ar"yaeä," ä{"X#ma,
pauSpaAeâAnaAina r"myaAiNA
paUjaAyaA‡aAets$avaAi™ataAna,
mad-arcäà sampratiñöhäpya
mandiraà kärayed dåòham
puñpodyänäni ramyäëi
püjä-yätrotsaväçritän
SYNONYMS
mat-arcäm—My Deity form; sampratiñöhäpya—properly establishing;
mandiram—a temple; kärayet—he should construct; dåòham—strong;
puñpa-udyänäni—flower gardens; ramyäëi—beautiful; püjä—for regular, daily
worship; yäträ—special festivals; utsava—and yearly holidays; äçritän—set
aside.
TRANSLATION
The devotee should more fully establish My Deity by solidly constructing a
temple, along with beautiful gardens. These gardens should be set aside to
provide flowers for the regular daily worship, special Deity processions and
holiday observances.
PURPORT
Wealthy, pious persons should be engaged in constructing temples and
gardens for the pleasure of the Deity. The word dåòham indicates that the most
solid means of construction should be employed.
TEXT 51
paUjaAd"InaAM ‘avaAh"ATa<
mah"ApavaRsvaTaAnvah"ma,
ºae‡aApaNApaur"ƒaAmaAna,
d"ÔvaA mats$aAiíR"taAimayaAta,
püjädénäà pravähärthaà
mahä-parvasv athänv-aham
kñeträpaëa-pura-grämän
dattvä mat-särñöitäm iyät
SYNONYMS
püjä-ädénäm—of the regular worship and special festivals; praväha-artham—in
order to assure the continuance; mahä-parvasu—on auspicious occasions;
atha—and; anu-aham—daily; kñetra—land; äpaëa—shops; pura—cities;
grämän—and villages; dattvä—bestowing as a gift to the Deity;
mat-särñöitäm—opulence equal to Mine; iyät—he achieves.
TRANSLATION
One who offers the Deity gifts of land, markets, cities and villages so that
the regular daily worship and special festivals of the Deity may go on
continually will achieve opulence equal to My own.
PURPORT
By placing tracts of land in the Deity's name, there will be regular income
for opulent Deity worship, both from rent and from agricultural production. A
worshiper who makes the arrangements mentioned above will certainly
achieve opulence like that of the Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 52
‘aitaï"yaA s$aAvaRBaAEmaM
s$aánaA Bauvana‡ayama,
paUjaAid"naA “aölaAekM(
i‡aiBamaRts$aAmyataAimayaAta,
pratiñöhayä särvabhaumaà
sadmanä bhuvana-trayam
püjädinä brahma-lokaà
tribhir mat-sämyatäm iyät
SYNONYMS
pratiñöhayä—by having installed the Deity; särva-bhaumam—sovereignty over
the entire earth; sadmanä—by building a temple for the Lord;
bhuvana-trayam—rulership over the three worlds; püjä-ädinä—by worship and
other service; brahma-lokam—the planet of Lord Brahmä; tribhiù—by all
three; mat-sämyatäm—the status of equality with Me (by having a
transcendental, spiritual body similar to Mine); iyät—he attains.
TRANSLATION
By installing the Deity of the Lord one becomes king of the entire earth, by
building a temple for the Lord one becomes ruler of the three worlds, by
worshiping and serving the Deity one goes to the planet of Lord Brahmä, and by
performing all three of these activities one achieves a transcendental form like
My own.
TEXT 53
maAmaeva naEr"paeºyaeNA
Bail(yaAegAena ivand"ita
Bail(yaAegAM s$a laBata
WvaM ya: paUjayaeta maAma,
mäm eva nairapekñyeëa
bhakti-yogena vindati
bhakti-yogaà sa labhata
evaà yaù püjayeta mäm
SYNONYMS
mäm—Me; eva—indeed; nairapekñyeëa—by being free from motivation;
bhakti-yogena—by the performance of devotional service; vindati—achieves;
bhakti-yogam—devotional service; saù—he; labhate—receives; evam—thus;
yaù—whom; püjayeta—worships; mäm—Me.
TRANSLATION
But one who simply engages in devotional service with no consideration of
fruitive results attains Me. Thus whoever worships Me according to the process
I have described will ultimately attain pure devotional service unto Me.
PURPORT
The previous two verses were spoken by the Lord to attract those interested
in fruitive results, and now the ultimate purpose of worshiping the Lord is
described. The ultimate goal in life is Lord Kåñëa Himself. Love for the Lord is
the highest bliss, although ordinary people cannot understand this.
TEXT 54
ya: svad"ÔaAM parE"dR"ÔaAM
h"re"ta s$aur"iva‘ayaAe:
va{iÔaM s$a jaAyatae ivax".BaugA,
vaSaARNAAmayautaAyautama,
yaù sva-dattäà parair dattäà
hareta sura-viprayoù
våttià sa jäyate viò-bhug
varñäëäm ayutäyutam
SYNONYMS
yaù—who; sva-dattäm—given previously by himself; paraiù—by others;
dattäm—given; hareta—takes away; sura-viprayoù—belonging to the demigods
or brähmaëas; våttim—property; saù—he; jäyate—takes birth; viö-bhuk—as a
stool-eating worm; varñäëäm—for years; ayuta—ten thousand; ayutam—times
ten thousand.
TRANSLATION
Anyone who steals the property of the demigods or the brähmaëas, whether
originally given to them by himself or someone else, must live as a worm in
stool for one hundred million years.
TEXT 55
k(tauRê s$aAr"TaeheR"taAer,"
@naumaAeid"taure"va ca
k(maRNAAM BaAigAna: ‘aetya
BaUyaAe BaUyais$a tatP(lama,
kartuç ca särather hetor
anumoditur eva ca
karmaëäà bhäginaù pretya
bhüyo bhüyasi tat-phalam
SYNONYMS
kartuù—of the performer; ca—and; säratheù—of the assistant; hetoù—of the
instigator; anumodituù—of the person who approves; eva ca—also;
karmaëäm—of the fruitive reactions; bhäginaù—of the shareholder;
pretya—in the next life; bhüyaù—more grievously; bhüyasi—to the extent that
the action is grievous; tat—(must suffer) of that; phalam—the result.
TRANSLATION
Not only the performer of the theft but also anyone who assists him,
instigates the crime, or simply approves of it must also share the reaction in the
next life. According to their degree of participation, they each must suffer a
proportionate consequence.
PURPORT
Stealing paraphernalia meant for worshiping the Supreme Lord or His
authorized representatives should be avoided at all costs.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Eleventh Canto, Twenty-seventh
Chapter, of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Lord Kåñëa's Instructions on the
Process of Deity Worship."
28. Jïäna-yoga
This chapter briefly summarizes the process of jïäna-yoga, which previous
chapters described in detail.
Every created thing in this universe is a material product of the three
modes of nature, is subject to sensory perception, and is essentially unreal.
Actually, the designations of "good" and "bad" that we assign to the various
objects and activities of this world are all superficial. It is better to avoid
condemning or praising anything of this world, because doing so simply
entangles one in matter and deprives one of the higher goals of spiritual life.
Hidden within every object of the material universe is the spirit soul, who
underlies both the causes and products of manifest existence. One should see
things in this light and thus move about the material world in a mood of
detachment.
As long as there is a relationship between the bodily senses, which are
comprised of matter, and the soul, which is the reality, one will continue in
false consciousness. Although material existence is unreal, those who lack
discrimination remain entangled in the cycle of birth and death because of
their absorption in sense gratification. All the phases of material life-such as
birth, death, sorrow and happiness-belong not to the soul but to the
materialistic false ego. By learning to distinguish between the soul and its
opposite, matter, one can destroy this false identification.
There is a single Absolute Truth present at the beginning and at the end of
this world. During its interim, or maintenance, phase the cosmic manifestation
is also founded upon the same Absolute Truth. This Absolute, Brahman, exists
everywhere, both positively by its manifestations and negatively by its
aloofness. Brahman is unique in being self-sufficient, whereas this world is the
expansion of Brahman produced through the material mode of passion.
By the mercy of a bona fide spiritual master, one can understand the
Absolute Truth and come to appreciate the nonspiritual nature of the material
body and its extensions. Desisting from engagement in material sense
enjoyment, one then becomes satisfied in the ecstasy of the self. Just as the sun
remains untouched by the coming and going of clouds, the discriminating,
liberated person remains unaffected by the activities of his senses.
Nevertheless, until one becomes perfectly fixed in bhakti-yoga, pure devotional
service to the Supreme Lord, one should carefully avoid contacting material
sense objects. An aspiring devotee may meet various obstacles and fall down,
but in his next life he will continue his practice by dint of what he has already
accomplished in devotional service. He will never again become bound up by
the laws of karma. The man who is liberated and established in discrimination
will under no circumstances seek false enjoyment by indulging in material
sense gratification. He knows that the soul is changeless and that any contrary
conception imposed on the pure self is sheer illusion.
If, during the immature stage of spiritual practice, one suffers physical
disease or other disturbances, the Vedas enjoin that he should certainly take
proper measures to eradicate the problem. The prescribed remedies for lust and
the other enemies of the mind are meditation on the Supreme Lord and
saìkértana, the loud chanting of His names. The remedy for the disease of false
ego is rendering service to the Supreme Lord's saintly devotees.
By practicing yoga, some nondevotees keep their bodies youthful and fit,
and may even achieve mystic perfections or long life. But these attainments
are actually worthless, because they are perfections only of the material body.
An intelligent person is therefore uninterested in this kind of process. Rather,
by taking shelter of the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord, an aspiring devotee
who is seriously dedicated to the Lord rids himself of all disturbances and
becomes empowered to attain the highest perfection, the full bliss of spiritual
life.
TEXT 1
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
par"svaBaAvak(maARiNA
na ‘azAMs$aeªa gAhR"yaeta,
ivaìmaek(AmakM( pazyana,
‘ak{(tyaA pauç&SaeNA ca
çré-bhagavän uväca
para-svabhäva-karmäëi
na praçaàsen na garhayet
viçvam ekämakaà paçyan
prakåtyä puruñeëa ca
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; para—anyone
else's; svabhäva—nature; karmäëi—and activities; na praçaàset—one should
not praise; na garhayet—one should not criticize; viçvam—the world;
eka-ätmakam—based on one reality; paçyan—seeing; prakåtyä—along with
nature; puruñeëa—with the enjoying soul; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: One should neither praise nor
criticize the conditioned nature and activities of other persons. Rather, one
should see this world as simply the combination of material nature and the
enjoying souls, all based on the one Absolute Truth.
PURPORT
Material situations and activities appear to be good, passionate or ignorant
according to the interaction of the modes of nature. These modes are produced
by the illusory potency of the Lord, which is itself not different from its
master, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So a devotee of the Lord remains
aloof from the illusory, temporary manifestations of material nature. At the
same time, he accepts material nature as the potency of the Lord and thus
essentially real. The example may be given that modeling clay is shaped by a
child into various playful forms such as tigers, men or houses. The modeling
clay is real, whereas the temporary shapes it assumes are illusory, not being
actual tigers, men or houses. Similarly, the entire cosmic manifestation is
modeling clay in the hands of the Supreme Lord, who acts through mäyä to
shape the glaring temporary forms of illusion, which absorb the minds of those
who are not devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 2
par"svaBaAvak(maARiNA
ya: ‘azAMs$aita inand"ita
s$a @AzAu ”azyatae svaATaARä,"
@s$atyaiBainavaezAta:
para-svabhäva-karmäëi
yaù praçaàsati nindati
sa äçu bhraçyate svärthäd
asaty abhiniveçataù
SYNONYMS
para—another's; svabhäva—personality; karmäëi—and work; yaù—who;
praçaàsati—praises; nindati—criticizes; saù—he; äçu—quickly;
bhraçyate—falls down; sva-arthät—from his own interest; asati—in unreality;
abhiniveçataù—because of becoming entangled.
TRANSLATION
Whoever indulges in praising or criticizing the qualities and behavior of
others will quickly become deviated from his own best interest by his
entanglement in illusory dualities.
PURPORT
A conditioned soul desires to lord it over material nature and thus criticizes
another conditioned soul whom he considers inferior. Similarly, one praises a
superior materialist because one aspires to that superior position, in which one
may dominate others. Praising and criticizing other materialistic people are
thus directly or indirectly based on envy of other living entities and cause one
to fall down from sva-artha, one's real self-interest, Kåñëa consciousness.
The words asaty abhiniveçataù, "by absorption in the temporary, or unreal,"
indicate that one should not adopt a concept of material duality and praise or
criticize other materialistic persons. Rather, one should praise the pure
devotees of the Supreme Lord and criticize the mentality of rebellion against
the Personality of Godhead, by which one becomes a nondevotee. One should
not criticize a low-class materialist, thinking that a high-class materialist is
nice. In other words, one should distinguish between the material and the
spiritual and should not become absorbed in good and bad on the material
platform. For example, an honest citizen distinguishes between the life of civil
freedom and that of imprisonment, whereas a foolish prisoner distinguishes
between comfortable and uncomfortable prison cells. Just as for a free citizen
any situation in prison is unacceptable, for a liberated, Kåñëa conscious
devotee any material position is unappealing.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura indicates that rather than trying
to separate conditioned souls by materialistic distinctions, one should bring
them together to chant the holy names of the Lord and propagate the
saìkértana movement of Lord Caitanya. A nondevotee, or even an envious
third-class devotee, is not interested in uniting people on the platform of love
of Godhead. Instead he unnecessarily separates them by emphasizing material
distinctions like "communist," "capitalist," "black," "white," "rich," "poor,"
"liberal," "conservative" and so on. Material life is always imperfect, full of
ignorance and disappointing in the end. Rather than praising and criticizing
the high and low features of ignorance, one should be absorbed in Kåñëa
consciousness, on the spiritual platform of eternity, bliss and knowledge.
TEXT 3
taEjas$ae ina‰"yaApaªae
ipaNx"sTaAe naí"caetana:
maAyaAM ‘aA«aAeita ma{tyauM vaA
taã"ªaAnaATaRä{"fpaumaAna,
taijase nidrayäpanne
piëòa-stho nañöa-cetanaù
mäyäà präpnoti måtyuà vä
tadvan nänärtha-dåk pumän
SYNONYMS
taijase—when the senses, which are the products of false ego in the mode of
passion; nidrayä—by sleep; äpanne—are overcome; piëòa—in the shell of the
material body; sthaù—(the soul) who is situated; nañöa-cetanaù—having lost
his consciousness; mäyäm—the illusion of dreaming; präpnoti—he
experiences; måtyum—the deathlike condition of deep sleep; vä—or;
tadvat—in the same way; nänä-artha—in terms of material varieties;
dåk—who sees; pumän—a person.
TRANSLATION
Just as the embodied spirit soul loses external consciousness when his senses
are overcome by the illusion of dreaming or the deathlike state of deep sleep, so
a person experiencing material duality must encounter illusion and death.
PURPORT
The material senses are described here as taijasa because they are born of
false ego in the mode of passion. Impelled by false ego, one dreams of the
material world without the Personality of Godhead and makes plans to lord it
over nature, to exploit her resources. Modern atheistic scientists have
developed this false ego to a fine art and imagine themselves great heroes
conquering the obstacles of nature and moving forward toward inevitable
omniscience. Such dreamy materialists are repeatedly stunned by the crushing
reactions of the laws of nature, and their arrogant, agnostic civilizations are
repeatedly annihilated by world wars, natural disasters and violent shifts of the
cosmic situation.
On a simpler level, all conditioned souls are captivated by sex attraction
and thus bound to the illusion of material society, friendship and love. They
imagine themselves to be wonderful enjoyers of the material nature, which
suddenly turns against them and kills them just like the "tamed" animal that
suddenly turns on its master and kills him.
TEXT 4
ikM( Ba‰M" ik(maBa‰M" vaA
ãE"tasyaAvastauna: ik(yata,
vaAcaAeid"taM tad"na{taM
manas$aA DyaAtamaeva ca
kià bhadraà kim abhadraà vä
dvaitasyävastunaù kiyat
väcoditaà tad anåtaà
manasä dhyätam eva ca
SYNONYMS
kim—what; bhadram—good; kim—what; abhadram—bad; vä—or;
dvaitasya—of this duality; avastunaù—insubstantial; kiyat—how much;
väcä—by words; uditam—generated; tat—that; anåtam—false; manasä—by
the mind; dhyätam—meditated upon; eva—indeed; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
That which is expressed by material words or meditated upon by the material
mind is not ultimate truth. What, therefore, is actually good or bad within this
insubstantial world of duality, and how can the extent of such good and bad be
measured?
PURPORT
The actual truth is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, from whom
everything emanates, by whom everything is maintained, and in whom
everything merges to rest. Material nature is the reflection of the Absolute
Truth, and by the interaction of the material modes of nature the innumerable
varieties of matter appear to be separate, independent truths. Mäyä, illusion,
distracts the conditioned soul from the Absolute Truth and absorbs his mind
in the glaring manifestation of matter, which ultimately is nondifferent from
the Absolute Truth, being an emanation from Him. The sense of good and bad
as separate from the Supreme Lord is like the good and bad dreams
experienced by a sleeping person. Good and bad dreams are equally unreal.
Similarly, material good and evil have no permanent existence separate from
the Personality of Godhead.
The Supreme Lord is the well-wisher of every living entity, and therefore
execution of His order is good, whereas disobeying His order is bad. Lord Kåñëa
has created a perfect social and occupational system called
varëäçrama-dharma, and the Lord has further given perfect spiritual
knowledge in Bhagavad-gétä and other literatures. Execution of Lord Kåñëa's
order will bring complete social, psychological, political, economic and
spiritual success to human society. We should not foolishly look for so-called
good outside the orders of the Personality of Godhead. Such orders are called
the laws of God and constitute the essence, or substance, of religion.
TEXT 5
C$AyaA‘atyaAù"yaABaAs$aA
÷s$antaAe'pyaTaRk(Air"NA:
WvaM de"h"Ad"yaAe BaAvaA
yacC$ntyaAma{tyautaAe Bayama,
chäyä-pratyähvayäbhäsä
hy asanto 'py artha-käriëaù
evaà dehädayo bhävä
yacchanty ä-måtyuto bhayam
SYNONYMS
chäyä—shadows; pratyähvaya—echoes; äbhäsäù—and false appearances;
hi—indeed; asantaù—nonexistent; api—although; artha—ideas;
käriëaù—creating; evam—in the same way; deha-ädayaù—the body and so on;
bhäväù—material conceptions; yacchanti—they give; ä-måtyutaù—up to the
point of death; bhayam—fear.
TRANSLATION
Although shadows, echoes and mirages are only illusory reflections of real
things, such reflections do cause a semblance of meaningful or comprehensible
perception. In the same way, although the identification of the conditioned soul
with the material body, mind and ego is illusory, this identification generates
fear within him even up to the moment of death.
PURPORT
Although shadows, echoes and mirages are mere reflections of real
substances, they create strong emotions in persons falsely accepting them as
real. In the same manner, a conditioned soul is seized by such emotions as fear,
lust, anger and hope because of his illusory perception of himself as the
material body, mind and false ego. By practical example it is thus shown that
even illusory objects may cause highly emotional reactions. Ultimately our
emotions should be absorbed in the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is
eternal truth. Fear is forever vanquished when one takes shelter of the Lord's
lotus feet. One can then enjoy the pure emotions of liberated life.
TEXTS 6-7
@AtmaEva taid"dM" ivaìM
s$a{jyatae s$a{jaita ‘aBau:
‡aAyatae ‡aAita ivaìAtmaA
ioe"yatae h"r"taIìr":
tasmaAªa ÷AtmanaAe'nyasmaAä,"
@nyaAe BaAvaAe inaè&ipata:
inaè&ipatae'yaM i‡aivaDaA
inamaURla BaAitar"Atmaina
wdM" gAuNAmayaM ivaiÜ"
i‡aivaDaM maAyayaA k{(tama,
ätmaiva tad idaà viçvaà
såjyate såjati prabhuù
träyate träti viçvätmä
hriyate haratéçvaraù
tasmän na hy ätmano 'nyasmäd
anyo bhävo nirüpitaù
nirüpite 'yaà tri-vidhä
nirmüla bhätir ätmani
idaà guëa-mayaà viddhi
tri-vidhaà mäyayä kåtam
SYNONYMS
ätmä—the Supreme Soul; eva—alone; tat idam—this; viçvam—universe;
såjyate—is created; såjati—and creates; prabhuù—the Supreme Lord;
träyate—is protected; träti—protects; viçva-ätmä—the Soul of all that be;
hriyate—is withdrawn; harati—withdraws; éçvaraù—the supreme controller;
tasmät—than Him; na—no; hi—indeed; ätmanaù—than the Soul;
anyasmät—who is distinct; anyaù—other; bhävaù—entity; nirüpitaù—is
ascertained; nirüpite—thus established; ayam—this; tri-vidhä—threefold;
nirmülä—without basis; bhätiù—appearance; ätmani—within the Supersoul;
idam—this; guëa-mayam—consisting of the modes of nature; viddhi—you
should know; tri-vidham—threefold; mäyayä—by the illusory energy;
kåtam—created.
TRANSLATION
The Supersoul alone is the ultimate controller and creator of this world, and
thus He alone is also the created. Similarly, the Soul of all existence Himself
both maintains and is maintained, withdraws and is withdrawn. No other entity
can be properly ascertained as separate from Him, the Supreme Soul, who
nonetheless is distinct from everything and everyone else. The appearance of
the threefold material nature, which is perceived within Him, has no actual
basis. Rather, you should understand that this material nature, composed of the
three modes, is simply the product of His illusory potency.
PURPORT
The Absolute Truth, Lord Çré Kåñëa, expands His external potency and
thus creates the material cosmos. As with the sun globe and its expanded rays,
the Lord and His expanded potency are simultaneously one and different.
Although to conditioned souls material duality seems to be based on the modes
of nature, the entire material manifestation is actually nondifferent from the
Lord and is of one ultimately spiritual nature. The modes of nature create
sense objects, demigods, human beings, animals, friends, enemies and so forth.
But in reality, everything is simply an expansion of the potency of the
Supreme Lord.
Foolishly, the conditioned soul tries to lord it over material nature, but the
Lord Himself, being nondifferent from that nature, is its only true proprietor.
In several places the Çrémad-Bhägavatam has given the example of the spider
spinning its web by expanding thread from its own mouth. Similarly, through
His own potency the Lord manifests the material world, maintains it and
eventually withdraws it within Himself. Although the Lord is the unique
Supreme Personality of Godhead, above everyone and everything, He is
simultaneously and inconceivably nondifferent from everything. Therefore it
is the Lord Himself who is manifested when the Lord creates, it is the Lord
Himself who is maintained when the Lord maintains, and it is the Lord
Himself who is withdrawn at the time of annihilation.
Although the Lord is nondifferent from both His spiritual abode and His
material creation, still the spiritual abode, Vaikuëöha, is always superior to the
material manifestation. Both matter and spirit are energies of the Lord, yet the
spiritual energy is molded into the eternal forms of bliss and knowledge,
whereas the temporary forms of matter are symbols of ignorance and
frustration for the conditioned souls who covet them. The Supreme Lord is
Himself the reservoir of all pleasure and is thus dear to His devotees. The
presumption that the Lord cannot give us complete pleasure is due to our
misidentifying Him as a product of the material modes of nature. As a result,
we pursue false happiness in the deadly embrace of mäyä and thus deviate from
our eternal loving relationship with Lord Kåñëa.
TEXT 8
Wtaiã"ã"Anmaäu"id"taM
ÁaAnaivaÁaAnanaEpauNAma,
na inand"ita na ca staAEita
laAeke( car"ita s$aUyaRvata,
etad vidvän mad-uditaà
jïäna-vijïäna-naipuëam
na nindati na ca stauti
loke carati sürya-vat
SYNONYMS
etat—this; vidvän—one who knows; mat—by Me; uditam—described;
jïäna—in knowledge; vijïäna—and realization; naipuëam—the status of
being fixed; na nindati—does not criticize; na ca—nor; stauti—praise;
loke—within the world; carati—he wanders; sürya-vat—just like the sun.
TRANSLATION
One who has properly understood the process of becoming firmly fixed in
theoretical and realized knowledge, as described herein by Me, does not indulge
in material criticism or praise. Like the sun, he wanders freely throughout this
world.
PURPORT
Every living entity emanates from the Supreme Lord and is thus naturally
full of realized knowledge. But when one becomes attached to praising or
criticizing material good and bad for one's personal sense gratification, one's
expert knowledge of the Lord becomes covered. A pure devotee should neither
love nor hate any aspect of material illusion; he should rather accept whatever
is favorable for serving Kåñëa and reject whatever is unfavorable, following the
guidance of a bona fide spiritual master.
TEXT 9
‘atyaºaeNAAnaumaAnaena
inagAmaenaAtmas$aMivad"A
@Aântavad"s$ajÁaAtvaA
ina:s$aËÿAe ivacare"id"h"
pratyakñeëänumänena
nigamenätma-saàvidä
ädy-antavad asaj jïätvä
niùsaìgo vicared iha
SYNONYMS
pratyakñeëa—by direct perception; anumänena—by logical deduction;
nigamena—by the statements of scripture; ätma-saàvidä—and by one's own
realization; ädi-anta-vat—having a beginning and an end; asat—unreal;
jïätvä—knowing; niùsaìgaù—free from attachment; vicaret—one should
move about; iha—in this world.
TRANSLATION
By direct perception, logical deduction, scriptural testimony and personal
realization, one should know that this world has a beginning and an end and so
is not the ultimate reality. Thus one should live in this world without
attachment.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, there are two main material dualities. The
first duality is that one sees material good and bad, beautiful and ugly, rich and
poor, and so on. The second is that one sees the entire material world as
separate from or independent of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The
first duality, that of opposites, is subject to dissolution by the influence of time,
and the second duality, that of separateness, is merely a hallucination. One
who is firmly convinced of the temporary, illusory nature of this world moves
about freely, without attachment. Although engaging in all types of devotional
service for the Lord, such a person is never entangled and remains cheerful
and satisfied in spiritual consciousness.
TEXT 10
™aIoÜ"va ovaAca
naEvaAtmanaAe na de"h"sya
s$aMs$a{ita‰R"í+"ä{"zyayaAe:
@naAtmasvaä{"zAAer"IzA
k(sya syaAäu"palaByatae
çré-uddhava uväca
naivätmano na dehasya
saàsåtir drañöå-dåçyayoù
anätma-sva-dåçor éça
kasya syäd upalabhyate
SYNONYMS
çré-uddhavaù uväca—Çré Uddhava said; na—there is not; eva—indeed;
ätmanaù—of the self; na—nor; dehasya—of the body; saàsåtiù—material
existence; drañöå-dåçyayoù-of the seer or the seen; anätma—of that which is
not spirit; sva-dåçoù—or of him who has innate knowledge; éça—O Lord;
kasya—of whom; syät—may be; upalabhyate—which is experienced.
TRANSLATION
Çré Uddhava said: My dear Lord, it is not possible for this material existence
to be the experience of either the soul, who is the seer, or of the body, which is
the seen object. On the one hand, the spirit soul is innately endowed with
perfect knowledge, and on the other hand, the material body is not a conscious,
living entity. To whom, then, does this experience of material existence pertain?
PURPORT
Since the living entity is pure spirit soul, innately full of perfect knowledge
and bliss, and since the material body is a biochemical machine without
knowledge or personal consciousness, who or what is actually experiencing the
ignorance and anxiety of this material existence? The conscious experience of
material life cannot be denied, and thus Uddhava asks Lord Kåñëa this
question to elicit a more precise understanding of the process by which illusion
occurs.
TEXT 11
@AtmaAvyayaAe'gAuNA: zAuÜ":
svayaMjyaAeitar"naAva{ta:
@i¢avaÚ"Aç&vad"icaä,"
de"h": k(syaeh" s$aMs$a{ita:
ätmävyayo 'guëaù çuddhaù
svayaà-jyotir anävåtaù
agni-vad däru-vad acid
dehaù kasyeha saàsåtiù
SYNONYMS
ätmä—the spirit soul; avyayaù—inexhaustible; aguëaù—transcendental to the
material modes; çuddhaù—pure; svayam-jyotiù—self-luminous;
anävåtaù—uncovered; agni-vat—like fire; däru-vat—like firewood;
acit—nonliving; dehaù—the material body; kasya—of which; iha—in this
world; saàsåtiù—the experience of material life.
TRANSLATION
The spirit soul is inexhaustible, transcendental, pure, self-luminous and
never covered by anything material. It is like fire. But the nonliving material
body, like firewood, is dull and unaware. So in this world, who is it that
actually undergoes the experience of material life?
PURPORT
The words anävåtaù and agni-vat are significant here. Fire can never be
covered with darkness because by nature fire is illuminating. Similarly, the
spirit soul is svayaà-jyotiù, or self-luminous, and thus the soul is
transcendental—he can never be covered by the darkness of material life. On
the other hand, the material body, like firewood, is by nature dull and
unilluminated. In itself it does not have any awareness of life. If the soul is
transcendental to material life and the body is not even conscious of it, the
following question arises: How does our experience of material existence
actually take place?
TEXT 12
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
yaAvaÚe"he"in‰"ya‘aANAEr,"
@Atmana: s$aiªak(SaRNAma,
s$aMs$aAr": P(lavaAMstaAvaä,"
@paATaAeR'pyaivavaeik(na:
çré-bhagavän uväca
yävad dehendriya-präëair
ätmanaù sannikarñaëam
saàsäraù phalaväàs tävad
apärtho 'py avivekinaù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; yävat—as long
as; deha—by the body; indriya—senses; präëaiù—and vital force;
ätmanaù——of the soul; sannikarñaëam—attraction; saàsäraù—material
existence; phala-vän—fruitful; tävat—for that duration;
apärthaù—meaningless; api—although; avivekinaù—for the undiscriminating.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: As long as the foolish spirit soul
remains attracted to the material body, senses and vital force, his material
existence continues to flourish, although it is ultimately meaningless.
PURPORT
Here the word sannikarñaëam indicates that the pure spirit soul voluntarily
connects himself with the material body, considering this a most fruitful
arrangement. Actually, the situation is apärtha, useless, unless one uses one's
embodied situation to engage in the loving service of the Lord. At that time
one's connection is actually with Lord Kåñëa, not with the body, which
becomes a mere instrument for executing one's higher purpose.
TEXT 13
@TaeR ÷ivaâmaAnae'ipa
s$aMs$a{itanaR inavataRtae
DyaAyataAe ivaSayaAnasya
sva«ae'naTaARgAmaAe yaTaA
arthe hy avidyamäne 'pi
saàsåtir na nivartate
dhyäyato viñayän asya
svapne 'narthägamo yathä
SYNONYMS
arthe—real cause; hi—certainly; avidyamäne—not existing; api—although;
saàsåtiù—the material existential condition; na—not; nivartate—does cease;
dhyäyataù—contemplating; viñayän—objects of the senses; asya—of the living
entity; svapne—in a dream; anartha—of disadvantages; ägamaù—arrival;
yathä—like.
TRANSLATION
Actually, the living entity is transcendental to material existence. But
because of his mentality of lording it over material nature, his material
existential condition does not cease, and, just as in a dream, he is affected by all
sorts of disadvantages.
PURPORT
This same verse and other very similar verses occur elsewhere in the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam: Third Canto, Chapter twenty-seven, verse 4; Fourth
Canto, Chapter twenty-nine, verses 35 and 73; and Eleventh Canto, Chapter
twenty-two, verse 56. In fact, this verse completely explains the essence of
illusion.
TEXT 14
yaTaA ÷‘aitabauÜ"sya
‘asvaApaAe baù"naTaRBa{ta,
s$a Wva ‘aitabauÜ"sya
na vaE maAeh"Aya k(lpatae
yathä hy apratibuddhasya
prasväpo bahv-anartha-bhåt
sa eva pratibuddhasya
na vai mohäya kalpate
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; hi—indeed; apratibuddhasya—for one who has not awakened;
prasväpaù—sleep; bahu—many; anartha—undesirable experiences;
bhåt—presenting; saù—that same dream; eva—indeed; pratibuddhasya—for
one who has awakened; na—not; vai—certainly; mohäya—confusion;
kalpate—generates.
TRANSLATION
Although while dreaming a person experiences many undesirable things,
upon awakening he is no longer confused by the dream experiences.
PURPORT
Even a liberated soul must observe material objects while living in this
world. But being awake to Kåñëa consciousness, he understands that sensory
pains and pleasures, like dreams, are without substance. Thus the liberated soul
is not bewildered by illusion.
TEXT 15
zAAek(h"SaRBaya‚(AeDalaAeBamaAeh"
s$pa{h"Ad"ya:
@h"ÆÿAr"sya ä{"zyantae
janmama{tyauê naAtmana:
çoka-harña-bhaya-krodhalobha-
moha-spåhädayaù
ahaìkärasya dåçyante
janma-måtyuç ca nätmanaù
SYNONYMS
çoka—lamentation; harña—elation; bhaya—fear; krodha—anger;
lobha—greed; moha—confusion; spåhä—hankering; ädayaù—and so on;
ahaìkärasya—of false ego; dåçyante—they appear; janma—birth;
måtyuù—death; ca—and; na—not; ätmanaù—of the soul.
TRANSLATION
Lamentation, elation, fear, anger, greed, confusion and hankering, as well as
birth and death, are experiences of the false ego and not of the pure soul.
PURPORT
False ego is the pure soul's illusory identification with the subtle material
mind and the gross material body. As a result of this illusory identification, the
conditioned soul feels lamentation for things lost, jubilation over things
gained, fear of things inauspicious, anger at the frustration of his desires, and
greed for sense gratification. And so, bewildered by such false attractions and
aversions, the conditioned soul must accept further material bodies, which
means he must undergo repeated births and deaths. One who is self-realized
knows that all such mundane emotions have nothing to do with the pure soul,
whose natural propensity is to engage in the loving service of the Lord.
TEXT 16
de"he"in‰"ya‘aANAmanaAe'iBamaAnaAe
jaIvaAe'ntar"AtmaA gAuNAk(maRmaUitaR:
s$aU‡aM mah"Ainatyauç&Daeva gAIta:
s$aMs$aAr" @ADaAvaita k(Alatan‡a:
dehendriya-präëa-mano-'bhimäno
jévo 'ntar-ätmä guëa-karma-mürtiù
sütraà mahän ity urudheva gétaù
saàsära ädhävati käla-tantraù
SYNONYMS
deha—with the material body; indriya—senses; präëa—life air; manaù—and
mind; abhimänaù—who is falsely identifying; jévaù—the living entity;
antaù—situated within; ätmä—the soul; guëa—according to his material
qualities; karma—and work; mürtiù—assuming his form; sütram—the
sütra-tattva; mahän-the original form of material nature; iti—thus; urudhä—in
many different ways; iva—indeed; gétaù—described; saàsäre—in material life;
ädhävati—he runs about; käla—of time; tantraù—under the strict control.
TRANSLATION
The living entity who falsely identifies with his body, senses, life air and
mind, and who dwells within these coverings, assumes the form of his own
materially conditioned qualities and work. He is designated variously in relation
to the total material energy, and thus, under the strict control of supreme time,
he is forced to run here and there within material existence.
PURPORT
False ego, which causes the living entity to suffer material existence, is here
described in detail as the illusory identification with the material body, senses,
life air and mind. The word käla refers directly to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who imposes the limiting segments of time upon the conditioned
souls, keeping them tightly bound under the laws of nature. Liberation is not
an impersonal experience; liberation is attainment of one's eternal body,
senses, mind and intelligence in the association of the Personality of Godhead.
We can revive our eternal, liberated personality, free from the contamination
of false ego, by dedicating ourselves to the loving service of the Lord in Kåñëa
consciousness. When the pure spirit soul accepts the false ego, he must
undergo material suffering. One automatically conquers the false ego by
accepting oneself, in pure Kåñëa consciousness, to be the eternal servant of
Lord Kåñëa.
TEXT 17
@maUlamaetaß"ò"è&paè&ipataM
manaAevaca:‘aANAzAr"Ir"k(maR
ÁaAnaAis$anaAepaAs$anayaA izAtaena
icC$ÔvaA mauinagAA< ivacar"tyata{SNA:
amülam etad bahu-rüpa-rüpitaà
mano-vacaù-präëa-çaréra-karma
jïänäsinopäsanayä çitena
cchittvä munir gäà vicaraty atåñëaù
SYNONYMS
amülam—without foundation; etat—this (false ego); bahu-rüpa—in many
forms; rüpitam—ascertained; manaù—of the mind; vacaù—speech;
präëa—the life air; çaréra—and the gross body; karma—the functions;
jïäna—of transcendental knowledge; asinä—by the sword;
upäsanayä—through devotional worship (of the spiritual master);
çitena—which has been sharpened; chittvä—cutting off; muniù—a sober sage;
gäm—this earth; vicarati—wanders; atåñëaù—free from material desires.
TRANSLATION
Although the false ego has no factual basis, it is perceived in many
forms—as the functions of the mind, speech, life air and bodily faculties. But
with the sword of transcendental knowledge, sharpened by worship of a bona
fide spiritual master, a sober sage will cut off this false identification and live in
this world free from all material attachment.
PURPORT
The word bahu-rüpa-rüpitam, "perceived in many forms," also indicates that
the false ego is manifest in the belief that one is a demigod, a great man, a
beautiful lady, an oppressed worker, a tiger, a bird, an insect and so on. By the
influence of false ego, the pure soul accepts some material covering to be his
ultimate self, but such ignorance can be removed by the process described in
this verse.
TEXT 18
ÁaAnaM ivavaek(Ae inagAmastapaê
‘atyaºamaEita÷maTaAnaumaAnama,
@AântayaAer"sya yade"va ke(valaM
k(Alaê he"tauê tade"va maDyae
jïänaà viveko nigamas tapaç ca
pratyakñam aitihyam athänumänam
ädy-antayor asya yad eva kevalaà
kälaç ca hetuç ca tad eva madhye
SYNONYMS
jïänam—transcendental knowledge; vivekaù—discrimination; nigamaù—the
scripture; tapaù—austerity; ca—and; pratyakñam—direct perception;
aitihyam—the historical accounts of the Puräëas; atha-and;
anumänam—logic; ädi—in the beginning; antayoù—and the end; asya—of
this creation; yat—which; eva—indeed; kevalam—alone; kälaù—the
controlling factor of time; ca—and; hetuù—the ultimate cause; ca—and;
tat—that; eva—alone; madhye—in the middle.
TRANSLATION
Real spiritual knowledge is based on the discrimination of spirit from matter,
and it is cultivated by scriptural evidence, austerity, direct perception, reception
of the Puräëas' historical narrations, and logical inference. The Absolute
Truth, which alone was present before the creation of the universe and which
alone will remain after its destruction, is also the time factor and the ultimate
cause. Even in the middle stage of this creation's existence, the Absolute Truth
alone is the actual reality.
PURPORT
Material scientists and philosophers are desperately searching for the
ultimate material cause or principle, which is described here as käla, the time
factor. The material process of cause and effect takes place entirely within a
sequence of time; in other words, the time factor is the motivating impetus for
material cause and effect. This time factor is a manifestation of the Supersoul,
the form of the Supreme Lord that pervades and supports the cosmic
manifestation. The method for acquiring knowledge is scientifically described
here, and those who are serious, reasonable scholars will take advantage of the
transcendental epistemology revealed here by the Lord.
TEXT 19
yaTaA ih"r"NyaM svak{(taM paur"staAta,
paêA»a s$avaRsya ih"r"Nmayasya
tade"va maDyae vyavah"AyaRmaANAM
naAnaApade"zAEr"h"masya taã"ta,
yathä hiraëyaà sv-akåtaà purastät
paçcäc ca sarvasya hiraë-mayasya
tad eva madhye vyavahäryamäëaà
nänäpadeçair aham asya tadvat
SYNONYMS
yathä—just as; hiraëyam—gold; su-akåtam—unmanifest as manufactured
products; purastät—previously; paçcät—subsequently; ca—and; sarvasya—of
everything; hiraë-mayasya—that is made of gold; tat—that gold; eva—alone;
madhye—in the middle; vyavahäryamäëam—being utilized; nänä—various;
apadeçaiù—in terms of designations; aham—I; asya—of this created universe;
tadvat—in the same way.
TRANSLATION
Gold alone is present before its manufacture into gold products, the gold
alone remains after the products' destruction, and the gold alone is the essential
reality while it is being utilized under various designations. Similarly, I alone
exist before the creation of this universe, after its destruction and during its
maintenance.
PURPORT
Gold is manufactured into many types of jewelry, as well as into coins and
other luxurious products. But at each stage—before manufacture, during
manufacture, during utilization and afterward—the essential reality is gold. In
the same way, the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the essential
reality—both the dynamic and the ingredient cause of everything. All
throughout the material creation, the Lord is simply setting into motion His
own potency, which is not different from Him.
TEXT 20
ivaÁaAnamaetait‡ayavasTamaËÿ
gAuNA‡ayaM k(Ar"NAk(yaRk(ta{R
s$amanvayaena vyaitare"k(taê
yaenaEva tauyaeRNA tade"va s$atyama,
vijïänam etat triy-avastham aìga
guëa-trayaà käraëa-karya-kartå
samanvayena vyatirekataç ca
yenaiva turyeëa tad eva satyam
SYNONYMS
vijïänam—(the mind, whose symptom is) full knowledge; etat—this;
tri-avastham—existing in three conditions (wakeful consciousness, sleep and
deep sleep); aìga—My dear Uddhava; guëa-trayam—manifesting through the
three modes of nature; käraëa—as the subtle cause (adhyätma); kärya—the
gross product (adhibhüta); kartå—and the producer (adhidaiva);
samanvayena—in each of them, one after another; vyatirekataù—as separate;
ca—and; yena—by which; eva—indeed; turyeëa—fourth factor; tat—that;
eva—alone; satyam—is the Absolute Truth.
TRANSLATION
The material mind manifests in three phases of consciousness—wakefulness,
sleep and deep sleep—which are products of the three modes of nature. The
mind further appears in three different roles—the perceiver, the perceived and
the regulator of perception. Thus the mind is manifested variously throughout
these threefold designations. But it is the fourth factor, existing separately from
all this, that alone constitutes the Absolute Truth.
PURPORT
As stated in Kaöha Upaniñad (2.2.15), tam eva bhäntam anubhäti sarvaà/
tasya bhäsä sarvam idaà vibhäti: "Everything radiates its illumination in
pursuance of His original illumination; His light illuminates everything in this
universe." As thus described, the entire range of perception, cognition and
sensitivity is an insignificant expansion of the perception, cognition and
sensitivity of the Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 21
na yatpaur"staAäu"ta yaªa paêAna,
maDyae ca taªa vyapade"zAmaA‡ama,
BaUtaM ‘ais$aÜM" ca pare"NA yaâta,
tade"va tatsyaAid"ita mae manaISaA
na yat purastäd uta yan na paçcän
madhye ca tan na vyapadeça-mätram
bhütaà prasiddhaà ca pareëa yad yat
tad eva tat syäd iti me manéñä
SYNONYMS
na—does not exist; yat—that which; purastät—previously; uta—nor;
yat—which; na—not; paçcät—afterward; madhye—in between; ca—and;
tat—that; na—does not exist; vyapadeça-mätram—merely a designation;
bhütam—created; prasiddham—made known; ca—and; pareëa—by another;
yat yat—whatever; tat—that; eva—only; tat—that other; syät—actually is;
iti—thus; me—My; manéñä—idea.
TRANSLATION
That which did not exist in the past and will not exist in the future also has
no existence of its own for the period of its duration, but is only a superficial
designation. In My opinion, whatever is created and revealed by something else
is ultimately only that other thing.
PURPORT
Although all material products, such as our own bodies, are temporary and
thus ultimately false, the material world is a real manifestation of the Lord's
potency. The basic substance, or reality, of this world is the Personality of
Godhead Himself, whereas the temporary designations imposed by the
conditioned souls are illusion. Thus we consider ourselves American, Russian,
British, German, Indian, black, white, Hindu, Muslim, Christian and so forth.
In fact, we are the marginal potency of the Supreme Lord, but by attempting to
exploit the Lord's inferior material potency we have become entangled in
illusion. Everything should be properly defined in terms of the Personality of
Godhead, who is the essential reality of this and all other worlds.
TEXT 22
@ivaâmaAnaAe'pyavaBaAs$atae yaAe
vaEk(Air"k(Ae r"Ajas$as$agAR Ws$a:
“aö svayaM jyaAeitar"taAe ivaBaAita
“aöein‰"yaATaARtmaivak(Ar"ica‡ama,
avidyamäno 'py avabhäsate yo
vaikäriko räjasa-sarga esaù
brahma svayaà jyotir ato vibhäti
brahmendriyärthätma-vikära-citram
SYNONYMS
avidyamänaù—actually not existing; api—although; avabhäsate—appears;
yaù—which; vaikärikaù—manifestation of transformations; räjasa—of the
mode of passion; sargaù—the creation; eñaù—this; brahma—the Absolute
Truth (on the other hand); svayam—established in Himself; jyotiù—luminous;
ataù—therefore; vibhäti—becomes manifest; brahma—the Absolute Truth;
indriya—of the senses; artha—their objects; ätma—the mind; vikära—and of
the transformations of the five gross elements; citram—as the variety.
TRANSLATION
Although thus not existing in reality, this manifestation of transformations
created from the mode of passion appears real because the self-manifested,
self-luminous Absolute Truth exhibits Himself in the form of the material
variety of the senses, the sense objects, the mind and the elements of physical
nature.
PURPORT
The total material nature, pradhäna, is originally undifferentiated and
inert, but later it undergoes transformation when the Supreme Lord, through
His time agent, glances upon it and activates the mode of passion. Material
transformation thus takes place and is exhibited as the Lord's inferior energy.
In contrast, the Supreme Lord's personal abode possesses eternal variety, which
is the self-luminous, internal opulence of the Absolute Truth and is not
subject to material creation, transformation or annihilation. The material
world is in this way simultaneously one with and different from the Absolute
Truth.
TEXT 23
WvaM s$Pu(taM “aöivavaek(he"tauiBa:
par"ApavaAde"na ivazAAr"de"na
iC$ÔvaAtmas$ande"h"maupaAr"maeta
svaAnand"tauí"Ae'iKalak(Amauke(Bya:
evaà sphutaà brahma-viveka-hetubhiù
paräpavädena viçäradena
chittvätma-sandeham upärameta
svänanda-tuñöo 'khila-kämukebhyaù
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; sphuöam—clearly; brahma—of the Absolute Truth;
viveka-hetubhiù—by discriminating, logical arguments; para—of
misidentification with other conceptions; apavädena—by refutation;
viçäradena—expert; chittvä—cutting off; ätma—regarding the identity of the
self; sandeham—doubt; upärameta—one should desist; sva-änanda—in his own
transcendental ecstasy; tuñöaù—satisfied; akhila—from all;
kämukebhyaù—things of lust.
TRANSLATION
Thus clearly understanding by discriminating logic the unique position of
the Absolute Truth, one should expertly refute one's misidentification with
matter and cut to pieces all doubts about the identity of the self. Becoming
satisfied in the soul's natural ecstasy, one should desist from all lusty
engagements of the material senses.
TEXT 24
naAtmaA vapau: paAiTaRvaimain‰"yaAiNA
de"vaA ÷s$auvaARyaujaRlamò"taAzA:
manaAe'ªamaA‡aM iDaSaNAA ca s$aÔvama,
@h"x.~k{(ita: KaM iºaitar"TaRs$aAmyama,
nätmä vapuù pärthivam indriyäëi
devä hy asur väyur jalam hutäçaù
mano 'nna-mätraà dhiñaëä ca sattvam
ahaìkåtiù khaà kñitir artha-sämyam
SYNONYMS
na—is not; ätmä—the self; vapuù—the body; pärthivam—made of earth;
indriyäëi—the senses; deväù—the presiding demigods; hi—indeed; asuù—the
living air; väyuù—the external air; jalam—water; huta-äçaù—fire;
manaù—the mind; anna-mätram—being only matter; dhiñaëä—intelligence;
ca—and; sattvam—material consciousness; ahaìkåtiù—false ego; kham—the
ether; kñitiù—earth; artha—the objects of sense perception; sämyam—and the
original, undifferentiated state of nature.
TRANSLATION
The material body made of earth is not the true self; nor are the senses, their
presiding demigods or the air of life; nor is the external air, water or fire or
one's mind. All these are simply matter. Similarly, neither one's intelligence,
material consciousness nor ego, nor the elements of ether or earth, nor the
objects of sense perception, nor even the primeval state of material equilibrium
can be considered the actual identity of the soul.
TEXT 25
s$amaAih"taE: k(: k(r"NAEgAuRNAAtmaiBar,"
gAuNAAe Bavaenmats$auivaival(DaA°a:
ivaiºapyamaANAEç&ta ikM( nau äU"SaNAM
GanaEç&paetaEivaRgAtaE r"vae: ik(ma,
samähitaiù kaù karaëair guëätmabhir
guëo bhaven mat-suvivikta-dhämnaù
vikñipyamäëair uta kià nu düñaëaà
ghanair upetair vigatai raveù kim
SYNONYMS
samähitaiù—which are perfectly concentrated in meditation; kaù—what;
karaëaiù—by senses; guëa-ätmabhiù—which are basically manifestations of
the modes of nature; guëaù—virtue; bhavet—will be; mat—My;
su-vivikta—who has properly ascertained; dhämnaù—the personal identity;
vikñipyamäëaiù—which are being agitated; uta—on the other hand;
kim—what; nu—indeed; düñaëam—blame; ghanaiù—by clouds;
upetaiù—which have come; vigataiù—or which have gone away; raveù—of the
sun; kim—what.
TRANSLATION
For one who has properly realized My personal identity as the Supreme
Godhead, what credit is there if his senses—mere products of the material
modes—are perfectly concentrated in meditation? And on the other hand, what
blame is incurred if his senses happen to become agitated? Indeed, what does it
mean to the sun if the clouds come and go?
PURPORT
A pure devotee of the Lord is considered eternally liberated, because he has
perfectly understood the Lord's transcendental personality and abode and is
always engaged in serving the Lord's mission within this world. Although
superficially such a devotee may appear agitated by events in the material
world while engaged in the Lord's mission, this does not change his exalted
status as the Lord's eternal servitor, just as the exalted status of the sun is not
changed even when the sun is apparently covered by clouds.
TEXT 26
yaTaA naBaAe vaAyvanalaAmbauBaUgAuNAEr,"
gAtaAgAtaEvaRtauRgAuNAEnaR s$aÀatae
taTaAºarM" s$aÔvar"jastamaAemalaEr,"
@hM"matae: s$aMs$a{itahe"tauiBa: par"ma,
yathä nabho väyv-analämbu-bhü-guëair
gatägatair vartu-guëair na sajjate
tathäkñaraà sattva-rajas-tamo-malair
ahaà-mateù saàsåti-hetubhiù param
SYNONYMS
yathä—just as; nabhaù—the sky; väyu—of air; anala—fire; ambu—water;
bhü—and earth; guëaiù—by the qualities; gata-ägataiù—which come and go;
vä—or; åtu-guëaiù—by the qualities of the seasons (such as heat and cold); na
sajjate—is not entangled; tathä—similarly; akñaram—the Absolute Truth;
sattva-rajaù-tamaù—of the modes of goodness, passion and ignorance;
malaiù—by the contaminations; aham-mateù—of the conception of false ego;
saàsåti-hetubhiù—by the causes of material existence; param—the Supreme.
TRANSLATION
The sky may display the various qualities of the air, fire, water and earth
that pass through it, as well as such qualities as heat and cold, which
continually come and go with the seasons. Yet the sky is never entangled with
any of these qualities. Similarly, the Supreme Absolute Truth is never
entangled with the contaminations of goodness, passion and ignorance, which
cause the material transformations of the false ego.
PURPORT
The word ahaà-mateù here indicates the conditioned living entity, who
becomes manifest with the false ego of a particular material body. By contrast,
the Personality of Godhead is unaffected by the modes of nature, and thus He
is never covered by a material body and never subject to false ego. As described
here, the Lord is eternally infallible and pure.
TEXT 27
taTaAipa s$aËÿ: pair"vajaRnaIyaAe
gAuNAeSau maAyaAr"icataeSau taAvata,
maà"il(yaAegAena ä{"Xe#na yaAvaä,"
r"jaAe inar"syaeta mana:k(SaAya:
tathäpi saìgaù parivarjanéyo
guëeñu mäyä-raciteñu tävat
mad-bhakti-yogena dåòhena yävad
rajo nirasyeta manaù-kañäyaù
SYNONYMS
tathä api—nevertheless; saìgaù—association; parivarjanéyaù—must be
rejected; guëeñu—with the modes; mäyä-raciteñu—produced by the illusory
material energy; tävat—for that long; mat-bhakti-yogena—by devotional
service to Me; dåòhena—firm; yävat—until; rajaù—passionate attraction;
nirasyeta—is eliminated; manaù—of the mind; kañäyaù—the dirt.
TRANSLATION
Nevertheless, until by firmly practicing devotional service to Me one has
completely eliminated from his mind all contamination of material passion, one
must very carefully avoid associating with the material modes, which are
produced by My illusory energy.
PURPORT
The word tathäpi in this verse indicates that even though the material
nature is nondifferent from the Supreme Lord (as elaborately described in this
chapter), one who has yet to conquer material desire should not artificially
associate with material things, declaring them to be nondifferent from the
Lord. Thus one aspiring to be Kåñëa conscious should not loosely associate
with women, claiming them to be nondifferent from the Personality of
Godhead, for by such imitation of the most advanced devotees one will become
a sense gratifier. A neophyte devotee who presumes himself liberated is
impelled by the mode of passion to become falsely proud of his position, and
thus he neglects the actual process of devotional service to the Lord. One must
have firm and steady engagement in the loving service of the Lord, under the
direction of higher authorities; then advancement in Kåñëa consciousness will
be easy and sublime.
TEXT 28
yaTaAmayaAe's$aADau icaik(its$ataAe na{NAAM
pauna: pauna: s$antaud"ita ‘ar"Aeh"na,
WvaM manaAe'pa¸(k(SaAyak(maR
ku(yaAeigAnaM ivaDyaita s$avaRs$aËÿma,
yathämayo 'sädhu cikitsito nåëäà
punaù punaù santudati prarohan
evaà mano 'pakva-kañäya-karma
kuyoginaà vidhyati sarva-saìgam
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; ämayaù—a disease; asädhu—imperfectly; cikitsitaù—treated;
nåëäm—of men; punaù punaù—again and again; santudati—gives distress;
prarohan—rising up; evam—in the same way; manaù—the mind;
apakva—unpurified; kañäya—of contamination; karma—from its activities;
ku-yoginam—the imperfect yogé; vidhyati—torments; sarva-saìgam—who is
full of all kinds of material attachment.
TRANSLATION
Just as an improperly treated disease recurs and gives repeated distress to the
patient, the mind that is not completely purified of its perverted tendencies will
remain attached to material things and repeatedly torment the imperfect yogé.
PURPORT
Sarva-saìgam refers to one's stubborn attachment to material objects of
so-called enjoyment, such as children, wife, money, nation and friends. One
who increases his attachment to children, wife and so on, although supposedly
performing devotional service to Lord Kåñëa, is understood to be either a
kuyogé, as described in this verse, or a bewildered neophyte who has failed to
properly treat the disease of the heart called material attachment. If one has
repeated relapses into material attachment, he has failed to eradicate the
darkness of ignorance from his heart.
TEXT 29
ku(yaAeigAnaAe yae ivaih"taAntar"AyaEr,"
manauSyaBaUtaEiñd"zAAepas$a{íE":
tae ‘aAl(naAByaAs$abalaena BaUyaAe
yauÃainta yaAegAM na tau k(maRtan‡ama,
kuyogino ye vihitäntaräyair
manuñya-bhütais tridaçopasåñöaiù
te präktanäbhyäsa-balena bhüyo
yuïjanti yogaà na tu karma-tantram
SYNONYMS
ku-yoginaù—those practitioners of yoga whose knowledge is not complete;
ye—who; vihita—imposed; antaräyaiù—by obstructions; manuñya-bhütaiù—in
the form of human beings (their relatives, disciples and so on); tridaça—by the
demigods; upasåñöaiù—sent; te—they; präktana—of the previous life;
abhyäsa—of the accumulated practice; balena—on the strength;
bhüyaù—once again; yuïjanti—engage; yogam—in spiritual practice;
na—never; tu—however; karma-tantram—the entanglement of fruitive work.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes the progress of imperfect transcendentalists is checked by
attachment to family members, disciples or others, who are sent by envious
demigods for that purpose. But on the strength of their accumulated
advancement, such imperfect transcendentalists will resume their practice of
yoga in the next life. They will never again be trapped in the network of
fruitive work.
PURPORT
Sometimes sannyäsés and other spiritual teachers are bewildered by
flattering followers and disciples sent by the demigods to embarrass spiritual
leaders who are lacking complete spiritual knowledge. Similarly, spiritual
progress is sometimes checked by attachment to one's bodily relatives.
Although an imperfect transcendentalist may fall down from yoga practice in
this life, he will resume it in the next life on the strength of his accumulated
merit, as described in the Bhagavad-gétä. The words na tu karma-tantram
indicate that a fallen transcendentalist does not have to pass through the
lower stages of fruitive activity and gradually be promoted to the practice of
yoga. Rather, he will immediately resume his yoga practice at that point at
which he left it. Of course, one should not presume to fall back on the facility
offered here but should try to become perfect in this lifetime. Sannyäsés,
especially, should remove the knot of lust from their hearts and should avoid
falling into the clutches of flattering followers or female disciples sent by the
demigods to expose a so-called spiritual leader who is imperfect in Kåñëa
conscious knowledge.
TEXT 30
k(r"Aeita k(maR i‚(yatae ca jantau:
ke(naApyas$aAE caAeid"ta @AinapataAta,
na ta‡a ivaã"Ana, ‘ak{(taAE isTataAe'ipa
inava{Ôata{SNA: svas$auKaAnauBaUtyaA
karoti karma kriyate ca jantuù
kenäpy asau codita ä-nipatät
na tatra vidvän prakåtau sthito 'pi
nivåtta-tåñëaù sva-sukhänubhütyä
SYNONYMS
karoti—he performs; karma—material work; kriyate—is acted upon; ca—also;
jantuù—the living entity; kena api—by some force or other; asau—he;
coditaù—impelled; ä-nipätät—up to the point of death; na—not; tatra—there;
vidvän—a wise person; prakåtau—in material nature; sthitaù—situated;
api—even though; nivåtta—having given up; tåñëaù—material desire; sva—by
his own; sukha—of happiness; anubhütyä—experience.
TRANSLATION
An ordinary living entity performs material work and is transformed by the
reaction to such work. Thus he is driven by various desires to continue working
fruitively up to the very moment of his death. A wise person, however, having
experienced his own constitutional bliss, gives up all material desires and does
not engage in fruitive work.
PURPORT
By sexual association with women, a man is driven to enjoy the female form
again and again, and indeed he remains lusty up to the moment of death.
Similarly, through association with family and friends the knot of material
attachment becomes very tight. Thus the reactions of fruitive work bind one
more and more in the cycle of material defeat. But a learned person, one who
is in touch with the Supreme Lord within his heart, realizes the ultimate
frustration of material work and the danger of entering the womb of a pig or
dog in a future life as the result of sinful activities. One on the platform of
self-realization does not regard himself as an enjoyer of the world. Rather, he
regards the entire cosmos as simply an insignificant expansion of the Lord's
potency—and himself as the Lord's humble servant.
TEXT 31
itaï"ntamaAs$aInamauta ˜ajantaM
zAyaAnamauºantamad"ntamaªama,
svaBaAvamanyaitk(mapaIh"maAnama,
@AtmaAnamaAtmasTamaitanaR vaed"
tiñöhantam äsénam uta vrajantaà
çayänam ukñantam adantam annam
svabhävam anyat kim apéhamänam
ätmänam ätma-stha-matir na veda
SYNONYMS
tiñöhantam—standing; äsénam—sitting; uta—or; vrajantam—walking;
çayänam—lying down; ukñantam—urinating; adantam—eating; annam—food;
sva-bhävam—manifested from his conditioned nature; anyat—other; kim
api—whatever; éhamänam—executing; ätmänam—his own bodily self;
ätma-stha—fixed in the true self; matiù—whose consciousness; na veda—he
does not recognize.
TRANSLATION
The wise man, whose consciousness is fixed in the self, does not even notice
his own bodily activities. While standing, sitting, walking, lying down,
urinating, eating or performing other bodily functions, he understands that the
body is acting according to its own nature.
TEXT 32
yaid" sma pazyatyas$aid"in‰"yaATa<
naAnaAnaumaAnaena ivaç&Ü"manyata,
na manyatae vastautayaA manaISaI
svaA«aM yaTaAetTaAya itar"Aed"DaAnama,
yadi sma paçyaty asad-indriyärthaà
nänänumänena viruddham anyat
na manyate vastutayä manéñé
sväpnaà yathotthäya tirodadhänam
SYNONYMS
yadi—if; sma—ever; paçyati—he sees; asat—impure; indriya-artham—sense
objects; nänä—of their being based on duality; anumänena—by the logical
inference; viruddham—refuted; anyat—separate from true reality; na
manyate—does not accept; vastutayä—as real; manéñé—the intelligent man;
sväpnam—of a dream; yathä—as if; utthäya—waking; tirodadhänam—which is
in the process of disappearing.
TRANSLATION
Although a self-realized soul may sometimes see an impure object or activity,
he does not accept it as real. By logically understanding impure sense objects to
be based on illusory material duality, the intelligent person sees them to be
contrary to and distinct from reality, in the same way that a man awakening
from sleep views his fading dream.
PURPORT
A sane person can clearly distinguish between a dream experience and his
real life. Similarly a manéñé, or intelligent person, can clearly perceive polluted
material sense objects to be creations of the Lord's illusory energy and not
factual reality. This is the practical test of realized intelligence.
TEXT 33
paUva< gA{h"ItaM gAuNAk(maRica‡ama,
@ÁaAnamaAtmanyaivaival(maËÿ
inavataRtae tatpaunar"IºayaEva
na gA{÷tae naAipa ivas$a{yya @AtmaA
pürvaà gåhétaà guëa-karma-citram
ajïänam ätmany aviviktam aìga
nivartate tat punar ékñayaiva
na gåhyate näpi visåyya ätmä
SYNONYMS
pürvam—previously; gåhétam—accepted; guëa—of the modes of nature;
karma—by the activities; citram—made varied; ajïänam—the ignorance;
ätmani—upon the soul; aviviktam—imposed as identical; aìga—My dear
Uddhava; nivartate—ceases; tat—that; punaù—again; ékñayä—by knowledge;
eva—alone; na gåhyate—is not accepted; na—nor; api—indeed; visåjya—being
rejected; ätmä—the soul.
TRANSLATION
Material nescience, which expands into many varieties by the activities of
the modes of nature, is wrongly accepted by the conditioned soul to be identical
with the self. But through the cultivation of spiritual knowledge, My dear
Uddhava, this same nescience fades away at the time of liberation. The eternal
self, on the other hand, is never assumed and never abandoned.
PURPORT
It is emphasized here that the eternal self is never assumed or imposed as a
material designation, nor is it ever abandoned. As explained in the
Bhagavad-gétä, the soul is eternally the same and does not undergo
transformation. The modes of nature, however, create the gross material body
and subtle mind as a result of one's previous fruitive activities, and these gross
and subtle bodies are imposed upon the soul. Thus the living entity can neither
assume nor reject the soul, which is an eternal fact. Rather, he should give up
the gross ignorance of material consciousness by cultivating spiritual
knowledge, as indicated here.
TEXT 34
yaTaA ih" BaAnaAeç&d"yaAe na{caºauSaAM
tamaAe inah"nyaAªa tau s$aiã"DaÔae
WvaM s$amaIºaA inapauNAA s$ataI mae
h"nyaAÔaima›aM pauç&Sasya bauÜe":
yathä hi bhänor udayo nå-cakñuñäà
tamo nihanyän na tu sad vidhatte
evaà samékñä nipuëä saté me
hanyät tamisraà puruñasya buddheù
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; hi—indeed; bhänoù—of the sun; udayaù—the rising; nå—human;
cakñuñäm—of eyes; tamaù—the darkness; nihanyät—destroys; na—not;
tu—but; sat—objects that exist; vidhatte—creates; evam—similarly;
samékñä—full realization; nipuëä—potent; saté—true; me—of Me;
hanyät—destroys; tamisram—the darkness; puruñasya—of a person;
buddheù—in the intelligence.
TRANSLATION
When the sun rises it destroys the darkness covering men's eyes, but it does
not create the objects they then see before them, which in fact were existing all
along. Similarly, potent and factual realization of Me will destroy the darkness
covering a person's true consciousness.
TEXT 35
WSa svayaMjyaAeitar"jaAe'‘amaeyaAe
mah"AnauBaUita: s$ak(laAnauBaUita:
Wk(Ae'iã"taIyaAe vacas$aAM ivar"Amae
yaenaeiSataA vaAgAs$avaêr"inta
eña svayaà-jyotir ajo 'prameyo
mahänubhütiù sakalänubhütiù
eko 'dvitéyo vacasäà viräme
yeneñitä väg-asavaç caranti
SYNONYMS
eñaù—this (Supersoul); svayam-jyotiù—self-luminous; ajaù—unborn;
aprameyaù—impossible to measure; mahä-anubhütiù—full of transcendental
consciousness; sakala-anubhütiù—aware of everything; ekaù—one;
advitéyaù—without a second; vacasäm viräme—(realized only) when material
words cease; yena—by whom; éñitäù—impelled; väk—speech; asavaù—and the
life airs; caranti—move.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord is self-luminous, unborn and immeasurable. He is pure
transcendental consciousness and perceives everything. One without a second,
He is realized only after ordinary words cease. By Him the power of speech and
the life airs are set into motion.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord is self-luminous, self-manifested, whereas the individual
living entity is manifested by Him. The Lord is unborn, but the living entity,
because of material, designative coverings, takes birth in conditioned life. The
Lord is immeasurable, being all-pervasive, whereas the living entity is localized.
The Supreme Lord is mahänubhüti, the totality of consciousness, whereas the
living entity is a tiny spark of consciousness. The Lord is sakalänubhüti,
omniscient, whereas the living entity is aware only of his own limited
experience. The Supreme Lord is one, whereas the living entities are
innumerable. Considering all these contrasts between the Lord and ourselves,
we should not waste time like the foolish material scientists and philosophers,
who struggle to find the origin of this world by their insignificant mental
speculation and word jugglery. Although one may discover some of the gross
laws of material nature through material research, there is no hope of
achieving the Absolute Truth by such petty endeavors.
TEXT 36
WtaAvaAnaAtmas$ammaAeh"Ae
yaiã"k(lpastau ke(valae
@Atmana{tae svamaAtmaAnama,
@valambaAe na yasya ih"
etävän ätma-sammoho
yad vikalpas tu kevale
ätman åte svam ätmänam
avalambo na yasya hi
SYNONYMS
etävän—whatever; ätma—of the self; sammohaù—delusion; yat—which;
vikalpaù—idea of duality; tu—but; kevale—in the unique; ätman—in the self;
rte—without; svam—that very; ätmänam—self; avalambaù—basis; na—there
is not; yasya—of which (duality); hi—indeed.
TRANSLATION
Whatever apparent duality is perceived in the self is simply the confusion of
the mind. Indeed, such supposed duality has no basis to rest upon apart from
one's own soul.
PURPORT
As explained in verse 33 of this chapter, the eternal self is neither assumed
nor lost, since every living entity is an eternal reality. The word vikalpa, or
"duality," here refers to the mistaken idea that the spirit soul is partly
composed of matter in the form of the gross body or subtle mind. It is thus that
foolish persons consider the material body or mind to be an intrinsic or
fundamental component of the self. In fact the living entity is pure spirit,
without any tinge of matter. Consequently the false ego, which is generated by
the false identification with matter, is a mistaken identity imposed upon the
pure spirit soul. The sense of ego, or "I am" in other words, the sense of one's
individual identity—comes from the spirit soul, because there is no other
possible basis for such self-awareness. By studying one's false sense of ego, one
can analytically understand that there is a pure ego, which is expressed by the
words ahaà brahmäsmi(97), "I am pure spirit soul." One can easily understand
in a similar way that there is a supreme spirit soul, the Personality of Godhead,
who is the omniscient controller of everything. Such understanding in Kåñëa
consciousness constitutes perfect knowledge, as described here by the Lord.
TEXT 37
yaªaAmaAk{(itaiBaƒaAR÷M
paÂavaNARmabaAiDatama,
vyaTaeRnaApyaTaRvaAd"Ae'yaM
ã"yaM paiNx"tamaAinanaAma,
yan nämäkåtibhir grähyaà
païca-varëam abädhitam
vyarthenäpy artha-vädo 'yaà
dvayaà paëòita-mäninäm
SYNONYMS
yat—which; näma—by names; äkåtibhiù—and forms; grähyam—perceivable;
païca-varëam—consisting of the five material elements;
abädhitam—undeniable; vyarthena—in vain; api—indeed; artha-vädaù—the
imaginative interpretation; ayam—this; dvayam—duality;
paëòita-mäninäm—of so-called scholars.
TRANSLATION
The duality of the five material elements is perceived only in terms of names
and forms. Those who say this duality is real are pseudoscholars vainly
proposing fanciful theories without basis in fact.
PURPORT
Material names and forms, subject as they are to creation and annihilation,
have no permanent existence and so do not constitute essential, fundamental
principles of reality. The material world consists of variegated transformations
of the potency of God. Although God is real and His potency is real, the
particular forms and names that temporarily or circumstantially appear have
no ultimate reality. Gross ignorance occurs when the conditioned soul
imagines himself to be material or a mixture of matter and spirit. Some
philosophers argue that the eternal soul in contact with matter is permanently
transformed and that the false ego represents a new and permanent reality of
the soul. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé replies that spirit is the living, superior energy of
the Lord, whereas matter is the inferior, unconscious energy of the Lord, and
that these two energies thus possess opposite qualities, as with light and
darkness. The superior living entity and inferior matter therefore cannot
possibly merge into a common existence, since they eternally possess opposite
and incompatible characteristics. The hallucination of a mixture of matter and
spirit is called illusion; it becomes specifically manifest as false ego, which
identifies with a specific material body or mind created by illusion. Clearly
those scientists or philosophers who are embedded in gross ignorance cannot
be real scientists and philosophers. The simple criterion of spiritual
self-awareness unfortunately eliminates a huge percentage of modern so-called
scientists and philosophers, who bury their foolish noses in the Lord's material
energy, without any knowledge of or interest in the Lord Himself.
TEXT 38
yaAeigAnaAe'pa¸(yaAegAsya
yauÃata: k(Aya oitTataE:
opas$agAE=#ivaRh"nyaeta
ta‡aAyaM ivaih"taAe ivaiDa:
yogino 'pakva-yogasya
yuïjataù käya utthitaiù
upasargair vihanyeta
taträyaà vihito vidhiù
SYNONYMS
yoginaù—of the yogé; apakva-yogasya—who is immature in the practice of
yoga; yuïjataù—trying to engage; käyaù—the body; utthitaiù—which have
arisen; upasargaiù—by disturbances; vihanyeta—may be frustrated; tatra—in
that connection; ayam—this; vihitaù—is prescribed; vidhiù—recommended
process.
TRANSLATION
The physical body of the endeavoring yogé who is not yet mature in his
practice may sometimes be overcome by various disturbances. Therefore the
following process is recommended.
PURPORT
Having described the process of cultivating knowledge, the Lord now gives
instructions to the yogé whose body may be disturbed by disease or other
impediments. Those inferior yogés who are attached to the body and bodily
exercises are often incomplete in their realization, and thus the Lord here
offers them some assistance.
TEXT 39
yaAegADaAr"NAyaA k(AMiêä,"
@As$anaEDaARr"NAAinvataE:
tapaAeman‡aAESaDaE: k(AMiêä,"
opas$agAARna, ivainadR"#he"ta,
yoga-dhäraëayä käàçcid
äsanair dhäraëänvitaiù
tapo-mantrauñadhaiù käàçcid
upasargän vinirdahet
SYNONYMS
yoga-dhäraëayä—by yogic meditation; käàçcit—some disturbances;
äsanaiù—by prescribed postures; dhäraëä-anvitaiù—together with meditation
on controlled breathing; tapaù—by special austerities; mantra—magical
chants; auñadhaiù—and medicinal herbs; käàçcit—some;
upasargän—obstructions; vinirdahet—can be eradicated.
TRANSLATION
Some of these obstructions may be counteracted by yogic meditation or by
sitting postures, practiced together with concentration on controlled breathing,
and others may be counteracted by special austerities, mantras or medicinal
herbs.
TEXT 40
k(AMiênmamaAnauDyaAnaena
naAmas$aÆÿLtaRnaAid"iBa:
yaAegAeìr"Anauva{ÔyaA vaA
h"nyaAd"zAuBad"Ana, zAnaE:
käàçcin mamänudhyänena
näma-saìkértanädibhiù
yogeçvaränuvåttyä vä
hanyäd açubha-dän çanaiù
SYNONYMS
käàçcit—some; mama—of Me; anudhyänena—by constant thought; näma—of
the holy names; saìkéåtana—by the loud chanting; ädibhiù—and so on;
yoga-éçvara—of the great masters of yoga; anuvåttyä—by following in the
footsteps; vä—or; hanyät—may be destroyed; açubha-dän—(the obstructions)
that create inauspicious situations; çanaiù—gradually.
TRANSLATION
These inauspicious disturbances can be gradually removed by constant
remembrance of Me, by congregational hearing and chanting of My holy names,
or by following in the footsteps of the great masters of yoga.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, by meditation on the Supreme Lord one
can overcome lust and other mental disturbances, and by following in the
footsteps of great transcendentalists one can overcome hypocrisy, false pride
and other types of mental imbalance.
TEXT 41
ke(icaÚe"h"imamaM DaIr"A:
s$auk(lpaM vayais$a isTar"ma,
ivaDaAya ivaivaDaAepaAyaEr,"
@Ta yauÃainta is$aÜ"yae
kecid deham imaà dhéräù
su-kalpaà vayasi sthiram
vidhäya vividhopäyair
atha yuïjanti siddhaye
SYNONYMS
kecit—some; deham—the material body; imam—this; dhéräù—self-controlled;
su-kalpam—fit; vayasi—in youth; sthiram—fixed; vidhäya—making;
vividha—by various; upäyaiù—means; atha—thus; yuïjanti—they engage;
siddhaye—for the achievement of material perfections.
TRANSLATION
By various methods, some yogés free the body from disease and old age and
keep it perpetually youthful. Thus they engage in yoga for the purpose of
achieving material mystic perfections.
PURPORT
The process described here is meant to fulfill one's material desires, not to
bring one transcendental knowledge. Therefore this process cannot be
accepted as devotional service to the Lord, according to Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta
Sarasvaté Öhäkura. Despite all such mystic perfections, the material body will
ultimately die. Actual eternal youth and happiness are available only on the
spiritual platform of Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 42
na ih" tatku(zAlaAä{"tyaM
tad"AyaAs$aAe ÷paATaRk(:
@ntavaÔvaAcC$r"Ir"sya
P(lasyaeva vanas$patae:
na hi tat kuçalädåtyaà
tad-äyäso hy apärthakaù
antavattväc charérasya
phalasyeva vanaspateù
SYNONYMS
na—not; hi—indeed; tat—that; kuçala—by those expert in transcendental
knowledge; ädåtyam—to be respected; tat—of that; äyäsaù—the endeavor;
hi—certainly; apärthakaù—useless; anta-vattvät—because of being subject to
destruction; çarérasya—on the part of the material body; phalasya—of the
fruit; iva—just as; vanaspateù—of a tree.
TRANSLATION
This mystic bodily perfection is not valued very highly by those expert in
transcendental knowledge. Indeed, they consider endeavor for such perfection
useless, since the soul, like a tree, is permanent, but the body, like a tree's fruit,
is subject to destruction.
PURPORT
The example given here is of a tree that seasonally bears fruit. The fruit
exists for a very short time, whereas the tree may exist for thousands of years.
Similarly, the spirit soul is eternal, whereas the material body, even when
preserved as long as possible, is destroyed relatively quickly. The body should
never be equated with the eternally existing spirit soul. Those who are actually
intelligent, who actually have spiritual knowledge, are not interested in
material mystic perfections.
TEXT 43
yaAegAM inaSaevataAe inatyaM
k(Ayaêetk(lpataAimayaAta,
tacC)$Ú"DyaAªa maitamaAna,
yaAegAmauts$a{jya matpar":
yogaà niñevato nityaà
käyaç cet kalpatäm iyät
tac chraddadhyän na matimän
yogam utsåjya mat-paraù
SYNONYMS
yogam—the practice of yoga; niñevataù—of one executing; nityam—regularly;
käyaù—the material body; cet—even if; kalpatäm—fitness; iyät—attains;
tat—in that; çraddadhyät—take faith; na—does not; mati-män—who is
intelligent; yogam—the system of mystic yoga; utsåjya—giving up;
mat-paraù—the devotee dedicated to Me.
TRANSLATION
Although the physical body may be improved by various processes of yoga,
an intelligent person who has dedicated his life to Me does not place his faith in
the prospect of perfecting his physical body through yoga, and in fact he gives
up such procedures.
PURPORT
A devotee of the Lord keeps his body fit by eating nourishing Kåñëa
prasädam, by maintaining a clean and regulated life, free from unnecessary
anxiety, and by chanting and dancing before the Deity of the Lord. When a
devotee is sick, he accepts medical treatment by normal methods, but beyond
this there is no need to absorb one's mind in the physical body in the name of
so-called yoga practice. Ultimately one must accept the destiny that has been
ordained by the Lord.
TEXT 44
yaAegAcayaARimamaAM yaAegAI
ivacar"nmad"paA™aya:
naAntar"AyaEivaRh"nyaeta
ina:s$pa{h": svas$auKaAnauBaU:
yoga-caryäm imäà yogé
vicaran mad-apäçrayaù
näntaräyair vihanyeta
niùspåhaù sva-sukhänubhüù
SYNONYMS
yoga-caryäm—the prescribed process of yoga; imäm—this; yogé—the
practitioner; vicaran—executing; mat-apäçrayaù—having taken shelter of Me;
na—not; antaräyaiù—by obstacles; vihanyeta—is checked; niùspåhaù—free
from hankering; sva—of the soul; sukha—the happiness;
anubhüù—experiencing within.
TRANSLATION
The yogé who has taken shelter of Me remains free from hankering because
he experiences the happiness of the soul within. Thus while executing this
process of yoga, he is never defeated by obstacles.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, the Supreme Lord has briefly described
to Uddhava the essential wisdom of all the Upaniñads, with the conclusion
that pure devotional service to the Lord is the real means of ultimate
liberation. In this regard Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura emphasizes
that although haöha-yogés and räja-yogés try to make progress along their
prescribed paths, they confront obstacles and often fail to achieve their desired
goals. However, one who surrenders to the Supreme Lord will certainly be
victorious on his spiritual path back home, back to Godhead.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Eleventh Canto, Twenty-eighth Chapter,
of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Jïäna-yoga."
29. Bhakti-yoga
Thinking that the previously described spiritual practice, based on
detachment, is too difficult, Uddhava inquired about an easier method. In
reply, Lord Çré Kåñëa gave brief instructions on devotional service.
The fruitive workers and mystic yogés, who are bewildered by the illusory
energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and puffed up by their false
identifications, refuse to take shelter of the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord. But
the swanlike men, those who know how to discriminate between the essential
and nonessential, always take shelter at the lotus feet of the Personality of
Godhead. The Supreme Lord Himself-within the living entity as the
caittya-guru and without as the spiritual master who teaches by
example-eradicates all the misfortune of the spirit soul and reveals His own
personal form.
One should execute all duties for the sake of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, keeping one's mind absorbed in Him. One should take advantage of
the sacred abodes of the Lord, where His devotees reside, and one should serve
the Lord and celebrate the festivals and holidays in His honor. By
understanding all living beings to be Lord Kåñëa's place of residence, one can
attain the ability to see equally everywhere, and thus all faulty qualities of
envy, false ego and so on will be removed. Bearing this in mind, the devotee
should give up his proud relatives, his separatist outlook and his mundane
embarrassment and should offer obeisances flat on the ground to all, even the
dogs and outcastes. As long as one has not learned to see the presence of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in all creatures, he must continue to use his
body, mind and speech to worship the Supreme Lord in that manner of
offering full obeisances to all.
Because this eternal process of devotional service to the Supreme Lord is
transcendental and has been established by the Lord Himself, it can never, to
the slightest extent, be defeated or prove fruitless. When one offers himself
completely to the Supreme Lord with exclusive devotion, the Lord becomes
particularly pleased, and thus the devotee achieves immortality, becoming
qualified to obtain opulence equal to that of the Lord.
After receiving these instructions, Çré Uddhava went to Badarikäçrama in
pursuance of Lord Kåñëa's order, and by perfectly carrying out the instructions
of the Supreme Lord, he attained the Lord's transcendental abode. By
faithfully serving these instructions spoken by the Personality of Godhead to
Uddhava, the greatest of devotees, the entire world can become liberated.
TEXT 1
™aIoÜ"va ovaAca
s$auäu"star"AimamaAM manyae
yaAegAcayaARmanaAtmana:
yaTaAÃas$aA paumaAna, is$aÜ"Yaeta,
tanmae “aU÷Ãas$aAcyauta
çré-uddhava uväca
su-dustaräm imäà manye
yoga-caryäm anätmanaù
yathäïjasä pumän siddhyet
tan me brühy aïjasäcyuta
SYNONYMS
çré-uddhavaù uväca—Çré Uddhava said; su-dustaräm—very difficult to execute;
imäm—this; manye—I think; yoga-caryäm—process of yoga; anätmanaù—for
one who has not controlled his mind; yathä—how; aïjasä—easily; pumän—a
person; siddhyet—may accomplish it; tat—that; me—to me; brühi—please tell;
aïjasä—in a simple manner; acyuta—O infallible Lord.
TRANSLATION
Çré Uddhava said: My dear Lord Acyuta, I fear that the method of yoga
described by You is very difficult for one who cannot control his mind.
Therefore please explain to me in simple terms how someone can more easily
execute it.
TEXT 2
‘aAyazA: pauNd"r"Ik(Aºa
yauHyantaAe yaAeigAnaAe mana:
ivaSaId"ntyas$amaADaAnaAna,
manaAeinaƒah"k(izARtaA:
präyaçaù puëdarékäkña
yuïyanto yogino manaù
viñédanty asamädhänän
mano-nigraha-karçitäù
SYNONYMS
präyaçaù—for the most part; puëòaréka-akña—O lotus-eyed Lord;
yuïjantaù—who engage; yoginaù—yogés; manaù—the mind;
viñédanti—become frustrated; asamädhänät—because of inability to attain
trance; manaù-nigraha—by the attempt to subdue the mind; karçitäù—weary.
TRANSLATION
O lotus-eyed Lord, generally those yogés who try to steady the mind
experience frustration because of their inability to perfect the state of trance.
Thus they weary in their attempt to bring the mind under control.
PURPORT
Without the shelter of the Supreme Lord, a yogé easily becomes discouraged
in the difficult task of fixing his mind on the Supreme.
TEXT 3
@TaAta @Anand"äu"GaM pad"AmbaujaM
hM"s$aA: ™ayaer"ªar"ivand"laAecana
s$auKaM nau ivaìeìr" yaAegAk(maRiBas$a,
tvanmaAyayaAmaI ivah"taA na maAinana:
athäta änanda-dughaà padämbujaà
haàsäù çrayerann aravinda-locana
sukhaà nu viçveçvara yoga-karmabhis
tvan-mäyayämé vihatä na mäninaù
SYNONYMS
atha—now; ataù—therefore; änanda-dugham—the source of all ecstasy;
pada-ambujam—Your lotus feet; haàsäù—the swanlike men; çrayeran—take
shelter of; aravinda-locana—O lotus-eyed; sukham—happily; nu—indeed;
viçva-éçvara—Lord of the universe; yoga-karmabhiù—because of their practice
of mysticism and fruitive work; tvat-mäyayä—by Your material energy;
amé—these; vihatäù—defeated; na—do not (take shelter); mäninaù—those
who are falsely proud.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O lotus-eyed Lord of the universe, swanlike men happily take
shelter of Your lotus feet, the source of all transcendental ecstasy. But those
who take pride in their accomplishments in yoga and karma fail to take shelter
of You and are defeated by Your illusory energy.
PURPORT
Çré Uddhava emphasizes here that one can achieve spiritual perfection
simply by taking shelter of the Personality of Godhead. Those who do so are
called haàsäù, the most discriminating human beings, since they are able to
locate the actual source of spiritual happiness, the Lord's lotus feet. The word
yoga-karmabhiù indicates that those who are attracted to or proud of
achievements in the field of mystic yoga or ordinary material endeavor cannot
appreciate the great advantage of obediently surrendering to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Generally the yogés and fruitive workers are proud of
their so-called achievements and are more attracted to their own endeavor
than to the Lord Himself. By humbly taking shelter of Lord Kåñëa, one can
advance easily and quickly on the path of Kåñëa consciousness and go back
home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 4
ikM( ica‡amacyauta tavaEtad"zAeSabanDaAe
d"As$aeSvananyazAr"NAes$au yad"Atmas$aAÔvama,
yaAe'r"Aecayats$ah" ma{gAE: svayamaIìr"ANAAM ™aImaitk(r"Iq%taq%paIix"tapaAd"paIQ&:
kià citram acyuta tavaitad açeña-bandho
däseñv ananya-çaraëesu yad ätma-sättvam
yo 'rocayat saha mågaiù svayam éçvaräëäà çrémat-kiréöa-taöa-péòita-päda-péöhaù
SYNONYMS
kim—what; citram—wonder; acyuta—O infallible Lord; tava—Your;
etat—this; açeña-bandho—O friend of all; däseñu—for the servants;
ananya-çaraëeñu—who have taken no other shelter; yat—which;
ätma-sättvam—intimacy with You; yaù—who; arocayat—acted affectionately;
saha—with; mågaiù—the animals (monkeys); svayam—Yourself;
éçvaräëäm—of the great demigods; çrémat—effulgent; kiréöa—of the helmets;
taöa—by the edges; péòita—shaken; päda-péöhaù—whose footstool.
TRANSLATION
My dear infallible Lord, it is not very astonishing that You intimately
approach Your servants who have taken exclusive shelter of You. After all,
during Your appearance as Lord Rämacandra, even while great demigods like
Brahmä were vying to place the effulgent tips of their helmets upon the cushion
where Your lotus feet rested, You displayed special affection for monkeys such
as Hanumän because they had taken exclusive shelter of You.
PURPORT
The devotees of the Lord become completely successful by the Lord's
causeless mercy. Sometimes Lord Kåñëa accepts a position of subservience to
His great devotees, as with Nanda Mahäräja, the gopés, Bali Mahäräja and
others. Although demigods like Lord Brahmä were standing in line to touch
their helmets to the Lord's foot cushion, still Lord Rämacandra awarded His
most intimate friendship to subhumans, such as the monkeys headed by
Hanumän. Similarly Lord Kåñëa's affection for the deer and cows, and even for
the trees of Våndävana, is well known. Further, the Lord gladly drove the
chariot of Arjuna and acted as the messenger and faithful subordinate of King
Yudhiñöhira. Such devotees have no need for the elaborate jïäna-yoga systems
or the process for achieving mystic powers. All these devotees are represented
here by Çré Uddhava, who frankly informs the Lord that the sophisticated
systems of philosophical speculation and mystic yoga are not appealing for one
who has developed a taste for direct loving service to the Lord.
TEXT 5
taM tvaAiKalaAtmad"iyataeìr"maAi™ataAnaAM
s$avaARTaRdM" svak{(taivaiã"s$a{jaeta k(Ae nau
k(Ae vaA Bajaeitk(maipa ivasma{tayae'nau BaUtyaE
ikM( vaA Bavaeªa tava paAd"r"jaAejauSaAM na:
taà tväkhilätma-dayiteçvaram äçritänäà
sarvärtha-daà sva-kåta-vid visåjeta ko nu
ko vä bhajet kim api vismåtaye 'nu bhütyai
kià vä bhaven na tava päda-rajo-juñäà naù
SYNONYMS
tam—that; tvä—You; akhila—of all; ätma—the Supreme Soul; dayita—the
most dear; éçvaram—and the supreme controller; äçrétänäm—of those who
take shelter of You; sarva-artha—of all perfections; dam—the bestower;
sva-kåta—the benefit you have given; vit—who knows; visåjeta-can reject;
kaù—who; nu—indeed; kaù—who; vä—or; bhajet—can accept; kim
api—anything; vismåtaye—for forgetfulness; anu—consequently; bhütyai—for
sense gratification; kim—what; vä—or; bhavet—is; na—not; tava—Your;
päda—of the lotus feet; rajaù—the dust; juñäm—for those who are serving;
naù—ourselves.
TRANSLATION
Who, then, could dare reject You, the very Soul, the most dear object of
worship, and the Supreme Lord of all—You who give all possible perfections to
the devotees who take shelter of You? Who could be so ungrateful, knowing the
benefits You bestow? Who would reject You and accept something for the sake
of material enjoyment, which simply leads to forgetfulness of You? And what
lack is there for us who are engaged in the service of the dust of Your lotus
feet?
PURPORT
As stated in the Näräyaëéya of the Mokña-dharma, in Çré Mahäbhärata,
yä vai sädhana-sampattiù
puruñärtha-catuñöaye
tayä vinä tad äpnoti
naro näräyaëäçrayaù
"Whatever among the four goals of human life can be achieved by various
spiritual practices is automatically achieved without such endeavors by the
person who has taken shelter of Lord Näräyaëa, the refuge of all persons."
Thus a Kåñëa conscious person knows that he will obtain all perfection of life
simply by surrendering to the devotional service of Lord Kåñëa. This is the
highest stage of yoga, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä.
TEXT 6
naEvaAepayantyapaicaitaM k(vayastavaezA
“aöAyauSaAipa k{(tama{Ü"maud": smar"nta:
yaAe'ntabaRih"stanauBa{taAmazAuBaM ivaDaunvaªa,
@AcaAyaRcaEÔyavapauSaA svagAitaM vyanail(
naivopayanty apacitià kavayas taveça
brahmäyuñäpi kåtam åddha-mudaù smarantaù
yo 'ntar bahis tanu-bhåtäm açubhaà vidhunvann
äcärya-caittya-vapuñä sva-gatià vyanakti
SYNONYMS
na eva—not at all; upayanti—are able to express; apacitim—their gratitude;
kavayaù—learned devotees; tava—Your; éça—O Lord; brahma-äyuñä—with a
lifetime equal to Lord Brahmä's; api—in spite of; kåtam—magnanimous work;
åddha—increased; mudaù—joy; smarantaù—remembering; yaù—who;
antaù—within; bahiù—outside; tanu-bhåtäm—of those who are embodied;
açubham—misfortune; vidhunvan—dissipating; äcärya—of the spiritual
master; caittya—of the Supersoul; vapuñä—by the forms; sva—own;
gatim—path; vyanakti—shows.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord! Transcendental poets and experts in spiritual science could not
fully express their indebtedness to You, even if they were endowed with the
prolonged lifetime of Brahmä, for You appear in two features—externally as the
äcärya and internally as the Supersoul—to deliver the embodied living being by
directing him how to come to You.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, Lord Kåñëa is ten million times more dear
to a devotee than life itself. And according to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté
Öhäkura, even by rendering devotional service for the total duration of one
thousand universal creations, a devotee cannot repay the debt he feels to the
Lord for having awarded him loving service to the Lord's lotus feet. The Lord
appears within the heart as the Supersoul and externally both as the spiritual
master and as His literary incarnation—the supreme Vedic knowledge of
Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 7
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
wtyauÜ"vaenaAtyanaur"l(caetas$aA
pa{í"Ae jagAt‚(Lx"nak(: svazAil(iBa:
gA{h"ItamaUitaR‡aya wRìre"ìr"Ae

çré-çuka uväca
ity uddhavenäty-anurakta-cetasä
påñöo jagat-kréòanakaù sva-çaktibhiù
gåhéta-mürti-traya éçvareçvaro
jagäda sa-prema-manohara-smitaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; uddhavena—by
Uddhava; ati-anurakta—extremely attached; cetasä—whose heart;
påñöaù—asked; jagat—the universe; kréòanakaù—whose plaything;
sva-çaktibhiù—by His own energies; gåhéta—who has assumed; mürti—personal
forms; trayaù—three; éçvara—of all controllers; éçvaraù—the supreme
controller; jagäda—He spoke; sa-prema—loving; manaù-hara—attractive;
smitaù—whose smile.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Thus questioned by the most affectionate Uddhava,
Lord Kåñëa, the supreme controller of all controllers, who takes the entire
universe as His plaything and assumes the three forms of Brahmä, Viñëu and
Çiva, began to reply, lovingly displaying His all-attractive smile.
TEXT 8
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
h"nta tae k(TaiyaSyaAima
mama DamaARna, s$aumaËÿlaAna,
yaAna, ™aÜ"yaAcar"nmatyaAeR

çré-bhagavän uväca
hanta te kathayiñyämi
mama dharmän su-maìgalän
yän çraddhayäcaran martyo
måtyuà jayati durjayam
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; hanta—yes;
te—to you; kathayiñyämi—I shall speak; mama—relating to Me;
dharmän—religious principles; su-maìgalän—most auspicious; yän—which;
çraddhayä—with faith; äcaran—executing; martyaù—a mortal human being;
måtyum—death; jayati—conquers; durjayam—unconquerable.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Yes, I shall describe to you the
principles of devotion to Me, by executing which a mortal human being will
conquer unconquerable death.
TEXT 9
ku(yaARts$avaARiNA k(maARiNA
mad"Ta< zAnakE(: smar"na,
mayyaipaRtamanaiêÔaAe
maÜ"maARtmamanaAer"ita:
kuryät sarväëi karmäëi
mad-arthaà çanakaiù smaran
mayy arpita-manaç-citto
mad-dharmätma-mano-ratiù
SYNONYMS
kuryät—one should perform; sarväëi—all; karmäëi—prescribed activities;
mat-artham—for Me; çanakaiù—without becoming impetuous;
smaran—remembering; mayi—unto Me; arpita—who has offered;
manaù-cittaù—his mind and his intelligence; mat-dharma—My devotional
service; ätma-manaù—of his own mind; ratiù—the attraction.
TRANSLATION
Always remembering Me, one should perform all his duties for Me without
becoming impetuous. With mind and intelligence offered to Me, one should fix
his mind in attraction to My devotional service.
PURPORT
The words mad-dharmätma-mano-ratiù mean that all of one's love and
affection should be devoted to pleasing the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
It is not indicated here that one should try to relish selfish satisfaction in
devotional service, but rather that one should be attracted to the Lord's own
satisfaction, which one achieves by faithfully executing the order of a bona
fide spiritual master coming in disciplic succession from Lord Kåñëa Himself.
Attachment to one's own satisfaction, even within devotional service, is
materialistic, whereas attachment to the satisfaction of the Lord is pure
spiritual emotion.
TEXT 10
de"zAAna, pauNyaAnaA™ayaeta
maà"lE(: s$aADauiBa: i™ataAna,
de"vaAs$aur"manauSyaeSau
maà"l(Acair"taAina ca
deçän puëyän äçrayeta
mad-bhaktaiù sädhubhiù çritän
deväsura-manuñyeñu
mad-bhaktäcaritäni ca
SYNONYMS
deçän—places; puëyän—sacred; äçrayeta—he should take shelter of;
mat-bhaktaiù—by My devotees; sädhubhiù—saintly; çritän—resorted to;
deva—among the demigods; asura—demons; manuñyeñu—and human beings;
mat-bhakta—of My devotees; äcaritäni—the activities; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
One should take shelter of holy places where My saintly devotees reside, and
one should be guided by the exemplary activities of My devotees, who appear
among the demigods, demons and human beings.
PURPORT
Närada Muni is one of the great devotees of the Lord who appeared among
the demigods. Prahläda Mahäräja appeared among the demons, and many
other great devotees, such as Ambaréña Mahäräja and the Päëòavas, appeared
among human beings. One should take shelter of the devotees' exemplary
activities and also the holy places where devotees reside. Thus one will remain
safe on the path of devotional service.
TEXT 11
pa{Tafs$a‡aeNA vaA ma÷M
pavaRyaA‡aAmah"Aets$avaAna,
k(Ar"yaeÕ"Itana{tyaAâEr,"
mah"Ar"AjaivaBaUitaiBa:
påthak satreëa vä mahyaà
parva-yäträ-mahotsavän
kärayed géta-nåtyädyair
mahäräja-vibhütibhiù
SYNONYMS
påthak—alone; satreëa—in assembly; vä—or; mahyam—for Me;
parva—monthly observances, such as Ekädaçi; yäträ—special gatherings;
mahä-utsavän—and festivals; kärayet—one should arrange to perform;
géta—with singing; nåtya-ädyaiù—dancing and so on; mahä-räja—royal;
vibhütibhiù—with signs of opulence.
TRANSLATION
Either alone or in public gatherings, with singing, dancing and other
exhibitions of royal opulence, one should arrange to celebrate those holy days,
ceremonies and festivals set aside specially for My worship.
TEXT 12
maAmaeva s$avaRBaUtaeSau
baih"r"ntar"paAva{tama,
wRºaetaAtmaina caAtmaAnaM
yaTaA KamamalaAzAya:
mäm eva sarva-bhüteñu
bahir antar apävåtam
ékñetätmani cätmänaà
yathä kham amaläçayaù
SYNONYMS
mäm—Me; eva—indeed; sarva-bhüteñu—within all living beings;
bahiù—externally; antaù—internally; apävåtam—uncovered; ékñeta—one
should see; ätmani—within himself; ca—also; ätmänam—the Supreme Soul;
yathä—as; kham—the sky; amala-äçayaù—having a pure heart.
TRANSLATION
With a pure heart one should see Me, the Supreme Soul within all beings
and also within oneself, to be both unblemished by anything material and also
present everywhere, both externally and internally, just like the omnipresent
sky.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, the Lord has spoken
the present verse to attract those who are inclined toward philosophical
speculation about the Absolute Truth. Such transcendental scholars searching
for the ultimate unity will be attracted by the Lord's manifestation described
here.
TEXTS 13-14
wita s$avaARiNA BaUtaAina
maà"Avaena mah"Aâutae
s$aBaAjayanmanyamaAnaAe
ÁaAnaM ke(valamaAi™ata:
“aAöNAe paufk(s$ae staenae
“aöNyae'keR( s$Pu(ilaËÿke(
@‚U(re" ‚U(r"ke( caEva
s$amaä{"fpaiNx"taAe mata:
iti sarväëi bhütäni
mad-bhävena mahä-dyute
sabhäjayan manyamäno
jïänaà kevalam äçritaù
brähmaëe pukkase stene
brahmaëye 'rke sphuliìgake
akrüre krürake caiva
sama-dåk paëòito mataù
SYNONYMS
iti—in this way; sarväëi—to all; bhütäni—living beings; mat-bhävena—with
the sense of My presence; mahä-dyute—O greatly effulgent Uddhava;
sabhäjayan—giving respect; manyamänaù—so considering;
jïänam—knowledge; kevalam—transcendental; äçritaù—taking shelter of;
brähmaëe—in the brähmaëa; pukkase—in the outcaste of the Pukkasa tribe;
stene—in the thief; brahmaëye—in the man who respects brahminical culture;
arke—in the sun; sphuliìgake—in the spark of the fire; akrüre—in the gentle;
krürake—in the cruel; ca—also; eva—indeed; sama-dåk—having equal vision;
paëòitaù—a learned scholar; mataù—is considered.
TRANSLATION
O brilliant Uddhava, one who thus views all living entities with the idea that
I am present within each of them, and who by taking shelter of this divine
knowledge offers due respect to everyone, is considered actually wise. Such a
man sees equally the brähmaëa and the outcaste, the thief and the charitable
promoter of brahminical culture, the sun and the tiny sparks of fire, the gentle
and the cruel.
PURPORT
A series of opposites is set forth here—namely the high-class brähmaëa and
the low-class aborigine, the thief who steals from respectable persons and the
respecter of brahminical culture who gives charity to brähmaëas, the
all-powerful sun and the insignificant spark, and finally the kind and the cruel.
Ordinarily, the ability to distinguish between such opposites qualifies one as
intelligent. How, then, can the Lord state that ignoring such obvious
differences establishes one as a wise man? The answer is given by the words
mad-bhävena: a wise person sees the Supreme Personality of Godhead within
everything. Therefore, although externally perceiving and dealing with the
varieties of material situations, a wise man is more impressed by and concerned
with the overwhelming unity of all existence, which is based on the presence
of the Supreme Lord within everything. As explained here, a truly wise person
is not limited to superficial material discrimination.
TEXT 15
nare"SvaBaIºNAM maà"AvaM
pauMs$aAe BaAvayataAe'icar"Ata,
s$paDaARs$aUyaAitar"s$k(Ar"A:
s$aAh"ÆÿAr"A ivayainta ih"
nareñv abhékñëaà mad-bhävaà
puàso bhävayato 'cirät
spardhäsüyä-tiraskäräù
sähaìkärä viyanti hi
SYNONYMS
nareñu—in all persons; abhékñëam—constantly; mat-bhävam—the personal
presence of Me; puàsaù—of the person; bhävayataù—who is meditating upon;
acirät—quickly; spardhä—the tendency to feel rivalry (against equals);
asüyä—envy (of superiors); tiraskäräù—and abuse (of inferiors); sa—along
with; ahaìkäräù—false ego; viyanti—they disappear; hi—indeed.
TRANSLATION
For him who constantly meditates upon My presence within all persons, the
bad tendencies of rivalry, envy and abusiveness, along with false ego, are very
quickly destroyed.
PURPORT
We conditioned souls tend to feel rivalry toward our equals, envy toward
our superior, and the desire to belittle our subordinates. These contaminated
propensities, along with their very basis, false ego, can be quickly vanquished
by meditating upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead within every living
being.
TEXT 16
ivas$a{jya smayamaAnaAna, svaAna,
ä{"zAM ˜aIx"AM ca dE"ih"k(Lma,
‘aNAmaeÚ"Nx"vaàU"maAva,
@AìcaANx"AlagAAeKar"ma,
visåjya smayamänän svän
dåçaà vréòäà ca daihikém
praëamed daëòa-vad bhümäv
ä-çva-cäëòäla-go-kharam
SYNONYMS
visåjya—giving up; smayamänän—who are laughing; svän—one's own friends;
dåçam—the outlook; vréòäm—the embarrassment; ca—and; daihikém—of the
bodily conception; praëamet—one should offer obeisances; daëòa-vat—falling
down like a rod; bhümau—upon the ground; ä-even; çva—to the dogs;
cäëòäla—outcastes; go—cows; kharam—and asses.
TRANSLATION
Disregarding the ridicule of one's companions, one should give up the bodily
conception and its accompanying embarrassment. One should offer obeisances
before all—even the dogs, outcastes, cows and asses—falling flat upon the
ground like a rod.
PURPORT
One should practice seeing the Supreme Personality of Godhead within all
creatures. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu advised all devotees to consider
themselves lower than a blade of grass and to be more tolerant than a tree. In
such a humble position, one will not be disturbed in the prosecution of pure
devotional service to the Lord. A devotee does not foolishly think that a cow
or an ass is God, but rather the devotee sees the Supreme Lord within all
creatures, and on this higher, spiritual plane he does not discriminate.
TEXT 17
yaAvats$avaeRSau BaUtaeSau
maà"AvaAe naAepajaAyatae
taAvade"vamaupaAs$aIta
vaAx.~mana:k(Ayava{iÔaiBa:
yävat sarveñu bhüteñu
mad-bhävo nopajäyate
tävad evam upäséta
väì-manaù-käya-våttibhiù
SYNONYMS
yävat—as long as; sarveñu—in all; bhüteñu—living entities; mat-bhävaù—the
vision of My presence; na upajäyate—does not fully develop; tävat—for that
long; evam—in this way; upäséta—one must worship; väk—of his speech;
manaù—mind; käya—and body; våttibhiù—by the functions.
TRANSLATION
Until one has fully developed the ability to see Me within all living beings,
one must continue to worship Me by this process with the activities of his
speech, mind and body.
PURPORT
Until one fully realizes the Supreme Lord within all beings, he should
continue the process of offering obeisances to all creatures. Although one may
not be able to actually fall on the ground before all creatures, at least within
his mind or by his words one should offer respect to all living beings. This will
accelerate the devotee's self-realization.
TEXT 18
s$ava< “aöAtmakM( tasya
ivaâyaAtmamanaISayaA
pair"pazyaªaupar"maeta,
s$avaRtaAe mauwtas$aMzAya:
sarvaà brahmätmakaà tasya
vidyayätma-manéñayä
paripaçyann uparamet
sarvato muita-saàçayaù
SYNONYMS
sarvam—everything; brahma-ätmakam—based on the Absolute Truth;
tasya—for him; vidyayä—by transcendental knowledge; ätma-manéñayä—by
realization of the Supreme Soul; paripaçyan—seeing everywhere;
uparamet—he should desist from material activities; sarvataù—in all cases;
mukta-saàçayaù—freed from doubts.
TRANSLATION
By such transcendental knowledge of the all-pervading Personality of
Godhead, one is able to see the Absolute Truth everywhere. Freed thus from all
doubts, one gives up fruitive activities.
TEXT 19
@yaM ih" s$avaRk(lpaAnaAM
s$a‹aIcaInaAe mataAe mama
maà"Ava: s$avaRBaUtaeSau
manaAevaAfk(Ayava{iÔaiBa:
ayaà hi sarva-kalpänäà
sadhrécéno mato mama
mad-bhävaù sarva-bhüteñu
mano-väk-käya-våttibhiù
SYNONYMS
ayam—this; hi—indeed; sarva—of all; kalpänäm—processes; sadhrécénaù—the
most appropriate; mataù—is considered; mama—by Me; mat-bhävaù—seeing
Me; sarva-bhüteñu—within all living entities; manaù-väk-käya-våttibhiù—by
the functions of one's mind, words and body.
TRANSLATION
Indeed, I consider this process—using one's mind, words and bodily
functions for realizing Me within all living beings—to be the best possible
method of spiritual enlightenment.
TEXT 20
na ÷ËÿAepa‚(mae DvaMs$aAe
maÜ"maRsyaAeÜ"vaANvaipa
mayaA vyavais$ata: s$amyax.~
inagAuRNAtvaAd"naAizASa:
na hy aìgopakrame dhvaàso
mad-dharmasyoddhaväëv api
mayä vyavasitaù samyaì
nirguëatväd anäçiñaù
SYNONYMS
na—there is not; hi—indeed; aìga—My dear Uddhava; upakrame—in the
attempt; dhvaàsaù—destruction; mat-dharmasya—of My devotional service;
uddhava—My dear Uddhava; aëu—the slightest; api—even; mayä—by Me;
vyavasitaù—established; samyak—perfectly; nirguëa-tvät—because of its being
transcendental; anäçiñaù—having no ulterior motive.
TRANSLATION
My dear Uddhava, because I have personally established it, this process of
devotional service unto Me is transcendental and free from any material
motivation. Certainly a devotee never suffers even the slightest loss by adopting
this process.
PURPORT
Although great sages and authorities have established various methods of
human progress, the Supreme Lord Himself has introduced the system of
bhakti-yoga, wherein one directly takes shelter of the Lord in loving service.
One who serves the Lord without personal motivation can never be defeated
in his progress and will certainly go back home, back to Godhead, in the near
future.
TEXT 21
yaAe yaAe maiya pare" DamaR:
k(lpyatae inaSP(laAya caeta,
tad"AyaAs$aAe inar"TaR: syaAä,"
BayaAde"ir"va s$aÔama
yo yo mayi pare dharmaù
kalpyate niñphaläya cet
tad-äyäso nirarthaù syäd
bhayäder iva sattama
SYNONYMS
yaù, yaù—whatever; mayi—unto Me; pare—the Supreme; dharmaù—is
religion; kalpyate—tends; niñphaläya—toward becoming free from the result of
material work; cet—if; tat—of that; äyäsaù—the endeavor; nirarthaù—futile;
syät—may be; bhaya-ädeù—of fear and so on; iva—as; sat-tama—O best of
saintly persons.
TRANSLATION
O Uddhava, greatest of saints, in a dangerous situation an ordinary person
cries, becomes fearful and laments, although such useless emotions do not
change the situation. But activities offered to Me without personal motivation,
even if they are externally useless, amount to the actual process of religion.
PURPORT
Even the most insignificant activity, when offered to the Supreme Lord
without personal desire, can elevate one to the perfection of spiritual life.
Actually, Lord Kåñëa always protects and maintains His devotee. But if a
devotee cries to the Lord for protection or maintenance, desiring to continue
his devotional service unimpeded, Lord Kåñëa accepts such apparently
unnecessary appeals to be the highest religious process.
TEXT 22
WSaA bauiÜ"mataAM bauiÜ"r,"
manaISaA ca manaIiSaNAAma,
yats$atyamana{taenaeh"
matyaeRnaA«aAeita maAma{tama,
eñä buddhimatäà buddhir
manéñä ca manéñiëäm
yat satyam anåteneha
martyenäpnoti mämåtam
SYNONYMS
eñä—this; buddhi-matäm—of the intelligent; buddhiù—the intelligence;
manéñä—the cleverness; ca—and; manéñiëäm—of the clever; yat—which;
satyam—the real; anåtena—by the false; iha—in this life; martyena—by the
mortal; äpnoti—obtains; mä—Me; amåtam—the immortal.
TRANSLATION
This process is the supreme intelligence of the intelligent and the cleverness
of the most clever, for by following it one can in this very life make use of the
temporary and unreal to achieve Me, the eternal reality.
PURPORT
As described in this chapter, one who desires personal prestige in the Lord's
service cannot be considered intelligent and clever. Similarly, one who is
anxious to become a sophisticated transcendental philosopher is not the most
intelligent. Nor is one who is expert in accumulating money. The Lord here
states that the most intelligent and clever person is the devotee who offers his
temporary, illusory material body and possessions to Him with love and
without personal motivation. The devotee thus obtains the eternal Absolute
Truth. In other words, real intelligence is to actually surrender to Lord Kåñëa,
without personal desire or duplicity. That is the Lord's opinion.
TEXT 23
WSa tae'iBaih"ta: k{(tµaAe
“aövaAd"sya s$aÍÿh":
s$amaAs$avyaAs$aivaiDanaA
de"vaAnaAmaipa äu"gARma:
eña te 'bhihitaù kåtsno
brahma-vädasya saìgrahaù
samäsa-vyäsa-vidhinä
devänäm api durgamaù
SYNONYMS
eñaù—this; te—unto you; abhihitaù—has been described; kåtsnaù—completely;
brahma-vädasya—of the science of the Absolute Truth; saìgrahaù—the
survey; samäsa—in brief; vyäsa—in detail; vidhinä—by both means;
devänäm—for the demigods; api—even; durgamaù—inaccessible.
TRANSLATION
Thus have I related to you—both in brief and in detail—a complete survey
of the science of the Absolute Truth. Even for the demigods, this science is
very difficult to comprehend.
PURPORT
The word devänäm indicates those living beings in the mode of goodness
(such as demigods, saints and pious philosophers) who nevertheless cannot
understand the Absolute Truth because they lack full surrender to the
Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 24
@BaIºNAzAstae gAid"taM
ÁaAnaM ivas$paí"yauil(mata,
Wtaiã"ÁaAya maucyaeta
pauç&SaAe naí"s$aMzAya:
abhékñëaças te gaditaà
jïänaà vispañöa-yuktimat
etad vijïäya mucyeta
puruño nañöa-saàçayaù
SYNONYMS
abhékñëaçaù—repeatedly; te—to you; gaditam—spoken; jïänam—knowledge;
vispañöa—clear; yukti—logical arguments; mat—having; etat—this;
vijïäya—properly understanding; mucyeta—will become liberated; puruñaù—a
person; nañöa—destroyed; saàçayaù—his doubts.
TRANSLATION
I have repeatedly spoken this knowledge to you with clear reasoning.
Anyone who properly understands it will become free from all doubts and attain
liberation.
TEXT 25
s$auivaivalM( tava ‘a´aM
mayaEtad"ipa DaAr"yaeta,
s$anaAtanaM “aögAu÷M
parM" “aöAiDagAcC$ita
su-viviktaà tava praçnaà
mayaitad api dhärayet
sanätanaà brahma-guhyaà
paraà brahmädhigacchati
SYNONYMS
sa-viviktam—clearly elucidated; tava—your; praçnam—question; mayä—by
Me; etat—this; api—even; dhärayet—fixes his attention upon;
sanätanam—eternal; brahma-guhyam—secret of the Vedas; param—supreme;
brahma—the Absolute Truth; adhigacchati—he attains.
TRANSLATION
Anyone who fixes his attention on these clear answers to your questions will
attain to the eternal, confidential goal of the Vedas—the Supreme Absolute
Truth.
TEXT 26
ya Wtanmama Bale(Sau
s$am‘ad"âAts$aupauSk(lama,
tasyaAhM" “aöd"Ayasya
d"d"AmyaAtmaAnamaAtmanaA
ya etan mama bhakteñu
sampradadyät su-puñkalam
tasyähaà brahma-däyasya
dadämy ätmänam ätmanä
SYNONYMS
yaù—who; etat—this; mama—My; bhakteñu—among the devotees;
sampradadyät—instructs; su-puñkalam—liberally; tasya—to him; aham—I;
brahma-däyasya—to the person who is the bestower of knowledge of the
Absolute; dadämi—I give; ätmänam—Myself; ätmanä—by Myself.
TRANSLATION
One who liberally disseminates this knowledge among My devotees is the
bestower of the Absolute Truth, and to him I give My very own self.
TEXT 27
ya Wtats$amaDaIyaIta
paiva‡aM par"maM zAuica
s$a paUyaetaAh"r"h"maA<
ÁaAnad"Ipaena d"zARyana,
ya etat samadhéyéta
pavitraà paramaà çuci
sa püyetähar ahar mäà
jïäna-dépena darçayan
SYNONYMS
yaù—who; etat—this; samadhéyéta—recites loudly; pavitram—the purifying
agent; paramam—supreme; çuci—clear and transparent; saù—he;
püyeta—becomes purified; ahaù ahaù—day after day; mäm—Me;
jïäna-dépena—with the lamp of knowledge; darçayan—exhibiting.
TRANSLATION
He who loudly recites this supreme knowledge, which is the most lucid and
purifying, becomes purified day by day, for he reveals Me to others with the
lamp of transcendental knowledge.
TEXT 28
ya WtacC)$Ü"yaA inatyama,
@vyaƒa: Za{NAuyaAªar":
maiya BailM( par"AM ku(vaRna,
k(maRiBanaR s$a baDyatae
ya etac chraddhayä nityam
avyagraù çåëuyän naraù
mayi bhaktià paräà kurvan
karmabhir na sa badhyate
SYNONYMS
yaù—who; etat—this; çraddhayä—with faith; nityam—regularly;
avyagraù—free from distraction; çåëuyät—listens; naraù—a person; mayi—to
Me; bhaktim—devotional service; paräm—transcendental;
kurvan—performing; karmabhiù—by fruitive actions; na—not; saù—he;
badhyate—becomes bound up.
TRANSLATION
Anyone who regularly listens to this knowledge with faith and attention, all
the while engaging in My pure devotional service, will never become bound by
the reactions of material work.
TEXT 29
@pyauÜ"va tvayaA “aö
s$aKae s$amavaDaAir"tama,
@ipa tae ivagAtaAe maAeh":
zAAek(êAs$aAE manaAeBava:
apy uddhava tvayä brahma
sakhe samavadhäritam
api te vigato mohaù
çokaç cäsau mano-bhavaù
SYNONYMS
api—whether; uddhava—O Uddhava; tvayä—by you; brahma—spiritual
knowledge; sakhe—O friend; samavadhäritam—sufficiently understood;
api—whether; te—your; vigataù—is removed; mohaù—the illusion;
çokaù—lamentation; ca—and; asau—this; manaù-bhavaù—born of your mind.
TRANSLATION
My dear friend Uddhava, have you now completely understood this
transcendental knowledge? Are the confusion and lamentation that arose in
your mind now dispelled?
PURPORT
Çré Uddhava had been bewildered by considering manifestations of Lord
Kåñëa's own potency to be separate from Him. Uddhava's lamentation arose
because he thought himself separated from Lord Kåñëa. Actually, Çré Uddhava
is an eternally liberated soul, but the Lord placed him in bewilderment and
lamentation so that this supreme knowledge of the Uddhava-géta could be
spoken. Lord Kåñëa's question here indicates that if Uddhava had not perfectly
understood this knowledge, Lord Kåñëa would have explained the same thing
again. According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, since Çré Uddhava
is the intimate friend of Lord Kåñëa, the Lord's question here was in a friendly,
playful spirit. The Lord was well aware of Uddhava's complete enlightenment
in Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 30
naEtaÔvayaA d"AimBak(Aya
naAistak(Aya zAQ&Aya ca
@zAu™aUSaAer"Bal(Aya
äu"ivaRnaItaAya d"IyataAma,
naitat tvayä dämbhikäya
nästikäya çaöhäya ca
açuçrüñor abhaktäya
durvinétäya déyatäm
SYNONYMS
na—not; etat—this; tvayä—by you; dämbhikäya—to a hypocrite;
nästikäya—to an atheist; çaöhäya—to a cheat; ca—and; açuçrüñoù—to one
who does not listen with faith; abhaktäya—to a nondevotee; durvinétäya—to
one who is not humbly submissive; déyatäm—should be given.
TRANSLATION
You should not share this instruction with anyone who is hypocritical,
atheistic or dishonest, or with anyone who will not listen faithfully, who is not
a devotee, or who is simply not humble.
TEXT 31
WtaEd"AeR$SaEivaRh"InaAya
“aöNyaAya i‘ayaAya ca
s$aADavae zAucayae “aUyaAä,"
Bail(: syaAcC^$‰"yaAeiSataAma,
etair doñair vihénäya
brahmaëyäya priyäya ca
sädhave çucaye brüyäd
bhaktiù syäc chüdra-yoñitäm
SYNONYMS
etaiù—of these; doñaiù—faulty qualities; vihénäya—to the person who is
devoid; brahmaëyäya—to one dedicated to the welfare of the brähmaëas;
priyäya—kindly disposed; ca-and; sädhave—saintly; çucaye—pure;
brüyät—one should speak; bhaktiù—devotion; syät—if it is present; çüdra—of
the common workers; yoñitäm—and women.
TRANSLATION
This knowledge should be taught to one who is free from these bad qualities,
who is dedicated to the welfare of the brähmaëas, and who is kindly disposed,
saintly and pure. And if common workers and women are found to have
devotion for the Supreme Lord, they are also to be accepted as qualified hearers.
TEXT 32
naEtaiã"ÁaAya ijaÁaAs$aAer,"
ÁaAtavyamavaizASyatae
paItvaA paIyaUSamama{taM
paAtavyaM naAvaizASyatae
naitad vijïäya jijïäsor
jïätavyam avaçiñyate
pétvä péyüñam amåtaà
pätavyaà nävaçiñyate
SYNONYMS
na—not; etat—this; vijïäya—fully understanding; jijïäsoù—of the inquisitive
person; jïätavyam—matter to be understood; avaçiñyate—remains;
pétvä—having drunk; péyüñam—palatable; amåtam—nectarean beverage;
pätavyam—to be drunk; na—nothing; avaçiñyate—remains.
TRANSLATION
When an inquisitive person comes to understand this knowledge, he has
nothing further to know. After all, one who has drunk the most palatable
nectar cannot remain thirsty.
TEXT 33
ÁaAnae k(maRiNA yaAegAe ca
vaAtaARyaAM d"Nx"DaAr"NAe
yaAvaAnaTaAeR na{NAAM taAta
taAvaAMstae'hM" catauivaRDa:
jïäne karmaëi yoge ca
värtäyäà daëòa-dhäraëe
yävän artho nåëäà täta
täväàs te 'haà catur-vidhaù
SYNONYMS
jïäne—in the process of knowledge; karmaëi—in fruitive work; yoge—in
mystic yoga; ca—and; värtäyäm—in ordinary business; daëòa-dhäraëe—in
political rule; yävän—whatever; arthaù—accomplishment; nåëäm—of men;
täta—My dear Uddhava; tävän—that much; te—to you; aham—I;
catuù-vidhaù—fourfold (i.e., the fourfold goals of human life: religiosity,
economic development, sense gratification and liberation).
TRANSLATION
Through analytic knowledge, ritualistic work, mystic yoga, mundane
business and political rule, people seek to advance in religiosity, economic
development, sense gratification and liberation. But because you are My
devotee, whatever men can accomplish in these multifarious ways you will very
easily find within Me.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa is the basis of all that exists, and one who takes exclusive shelter
of the Lord never suffers any loss whatsoever for his intelligent decision to
surrender to Kåñëa.
TEXT 34
matyaAeR yad"A tyal(s$amastak(maAR
inavaeid"taAtmaA ivaicak(LiSaRtaAe mae
tad"Ama{tatvaM ‘aitapaâmaAnaAe
mayaAtmaBaUyaAya ca k(lpatae vaE
martyo yadä tyakta-samasta-karmä
niveditätmä vicikérñito me
tadämåtatvaà pratipadyamäno
mayätma-bhüyäya ca kalpate vai
SYNONYMS
martyaù—a mortal; yadä—when; tyakta—having given up; samasta—all;
karmä—his fruitive activities; nivedita-ätmä—having offered his very self;
vicikérñitaù—desirous of doing something special; me—for Me; tadä—at that
time; amåtatvam—immortality; pratipadyamänaù—in the process of attaining;
mayä—with Me; ätma-bhüyäya—for equal opulence; ca—also; kalpate—he
becomes qualified; vai—indeed.
TRANSLATION
A person who gives up all fruitive activities and offers himself entirely unto
Me, eagerly desiring to render service unto Me, achieves liberation from birth
and death and is promoted to the status of sharing My own opulences.
TEXT 35
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
s$a WvamaAd"izARtayaAegAmaAgARs$a,
tad"AeÔama:ëAek(vacaAe inazAmya
baÜ"AÃaila: ‘aItyaupaç&Ü"k(NQ&Ae
na ik(iÂaäU"cae'™aupair"plautaAºa:
çré-çuka uväca
sa evam ädarçita-yoga-märgas
tadottamaùçloka-vaco niçamya
baddhäïjaliù préty-uparuddha-kaëöho
na kiïcid üce 'çru-pariplutäkñaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; saù—he (Uddhava);
evam—thus; ädarçita—shown; yoga-märgaù—the path of yoga; tadä—then;
uttamaù-çloka—of Lord Çré Kåñëa; vacaù—the words; niçamya—having heard;
baddha-aïjaliù—with hands folded in prayer; préti—out of love;
uparuddha—choked; kaëöhaù—his throat; na kiïcit—nothing; üce—he said;
açru—with tears; paripluta—overflowing; akñaù—his eyes.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Hearing these words spoken by Lord Kåñëa, and
having thus been shown the entire path of yoga, Uddhava folded his hands to
offer obeisances. But his throat choked up with love and his eyes overflowed
with tears; so he could say nothing.
TEXT 36
ivaí"Bya icaÔaM ‘aNAyaAvaGaUNA<
DaEyaeRNA r"Ajana, baò"manyamaAna:
k{(taAÃaila: ‘aAh" yaäu"‘avaIrM"
zAISNAAR s$pa{zAMsta»ar"NAAr"ivand"ma,
viñöabhya cittaà praëayävaghürëaà
dhairyeëa räjan bahu-manyamänaù
kåtäïjaliù präha yadu-pravéraà
çérñëä spåçaàs tac-caraëäravindam
SYNONYMS
viñöabhya—restraining; cittam—his mind; praëaya—with love;
avaghürëam—completely agitated; dhairyeëa—with steadfastness; räjan—O
King; bahu-manyamänaù—feeling grateful; kåta-aïjaliù—his hands folded;
präha—he spoke; yadu-pravéram—to the greatest hero of the Yadus;
çérñëä—with his head; spåçan—touching; tat—His; caraëa-aravindam—lotus
feet.
TRANSLATION
Steadying his mind, which had become overwhelmed with love, Uddhava felt
extremely grateful to Lord Kåñëa, the greatest hero of the Yadu dynasty. My
dear King Parékñit, Uddhava bowed down to touch the Lord's lotus feet with
his head and then spoke with folded hands.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, the fear of separation from Lord Kåñëa
was continually entering the mind of Çré Uddhava, and thus he tried to
maintain his enthusiasm by remembering the Lord's great kindness upon him.
He steadied his mind with feelings of gratitude toward the Lord.
TEXT 37
™aIoÜ"va ovaAca
iva‰"AivataAe maAeh"mah"AnDak(Ar"Ae
ya @Ai™ataAe mae tava s$aiªaDaAnaAta,
ivaBaAvas$aAe: ikM( nau s$amaIpagAsya
zAItaM tamaAe BaI: ‘aBavantyajaAâ
çré-uddhava uväca
vidrävito moha-mahändhakäro
ya äçrito me tava sannidhänät
vibhävasoù kià nu samépa-gasya
çétaà tamo bhéù prabhavanty ajädya
SYNONYMS
çré-uddhavaù uväca—Çré Uddhava said; vidrävitaù—is driven away; moha—of
delusion; mahä-andhakäraù—the great darkness; yaù—which; äçritaù—was
taken shelter of; me—by me; tava—Your; sannidhänät—by the presence;
vibhävasoù—of the sun; kim—what; nu—indeed; samépa-gasya—for one who
has come into the proximity; çétam—cold; tamaù—darkness; bhéù—fear;
prabhavanti—have power; aja—O unborn; ädya-O primeval Lord.
TRANSLATION
Çré Uddhava said: O unborn, primeval Lord, although I had fallen into the
great darkness of illusion, my ignorance has now been dispelled by Your
merciful association. Indeed, how can cold, darkness and fear exert their power
over one who has approached the brilliant sun?
PURPORT
Although Çré Uddhava feared separation from the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Lord Kåñëa, he now understands that in a fundamental sense the
Lord is everything. Kåñëa consciousness can never be threatened or
diminished for one who has taken full shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord.
TEXT 38
‘atyaipaRtaAe mae BavataAnauk(impanaA
Ba{tyaAya ivaÁaAnamaya: ‘ad"Ipa:
ih"tvaA k{(taÁastava paAd"maUlaM
k(Ae'nyaM s$amaIyaAcC$r"NAM tvad"Iyama,
pratyarpito me bhavatänukampinä
bhåtyäya vijïäna-mayaù pradépaù
hitvä kåta-jïas tava päda-mülaà
ko 'nyaà saméyäc charaëaà tvadéyam
SYNONYMS
pratyarpitaù—offered in return; me—to me; bhavatä—by Your good self;
anukampinä—who is merciful; bhåtyäya—to Your servant; vijïäna-mayaù—of
transcendental knowledge; pradépaù—the torchlight; hitvä—giving up;
kåta-jïaù—who is grateful; tava—Your; päda-mülam—the sole of the lotus
feet; kaù—who; anyam—to another; saméyät—can go; çaraëam—for shelter;
tvadéyam—Your.
TRANSLATION
In return for my insignificant surrender, You have mercifully bestowed upon
me, Your servant, the torchlight of transcendental knowledge. Therefore, what
devotee of Yours who has any gratitude could ever give up Your lotus feet and
take shelter of another master?
TEXT 39
va{fNAê mae s$auä{"X#: µaeh"paAzAAe
d"AzAAhR"va{SNyanDak(s$aAtvataeSau
‘as$aAir"ta: s$a{ií"ivava{Ü"yae tvayaA
svamaAyayaA ÷Atmas$aubaAeDahe"itanaA
våkëaç ca me su-dåòhaù sneha-päço
däçärha-våñëy-andhaka-sätvateñu
prasäritaù såñöi-vivåddhaye tvayä
sva-mäyayä hy ätma-subodha-hetinä
SYNONYMS
våkëaù—cut off; ca—and; me—my; su-dåòhaù—very firm;
sneha-päçaù—binding rope of affection; däçärha-våñëi-andhaka-sätvateñu—for
the Däçärhas, Våñëis, Andhakas and Sätvatas; prasäritaù—cast; såñöi—of Your
creation; vivåddhaye—for the increase; tvayä—by You; sva-mäyayä—through
Your illusory energy; hi—indeed; ätma—of the soul; su-bodha—of proper
knowledge; hetinä—by the sword.
TRANSLATION
The firmly binding rope of my affection for the families of the Däçärhas,
Våñëis, Andhakas and Sätvatas—a rope You originally cast over me by Your
illusory energy for the purpose of developing Your creation—is now cut off by
the weapon of transcendental knowledge of the self.
PURPORT
Although the members of the families mentioned in this verse are eternal
associates of Lord Kåñëa and thus proper objects of affection, Çré Uddhava had
regarded them as his personal relatives rather than simply as pure devotees of
the Lord. Influenced by the Lord's illusory potency, Uddhava had desired the
prosperity and victory of these dynasties. But now, by hearing Lord Kåñëa's
instructions, he has again fixed his mind exclusively upon Lord Kåñëa, and
thus he regards his so-called family members without any mundane
conception—as eternal servants of the Lord.
TEXT 40
namaAe'stau tae mah"AyaAeigAna,
‘apaªamanauzAAiDa maAma,
yaTaA tva»ar"NAAmBaAejae
r"ita: syaAd"napaAiyanaI
namo 'stu te mahä-yogin
prapannam anuçädhi mäm
yathä tvac-caraëämbhoje
ratiù syäd anapäyiné
SYNONYMS
namaù astu—let me offer my obeisances; te—unto You; mahä-yogin—O
greatest of mystics; prapannam—who am surrendered; anuçädhi—please
instruct; mäm—me; yathä—how; tvat—Your; caraëa-ambhoje—at the lotus
feet; ratiù—transcendental attraction; syät—may be; anapäyiné—undeviating.
TRANSLATION
Obeisances unto You, O greatest of yogés. Please instruct me, who am
surrendered unto You, how I may have undeviating attachment to Your lotus
feet.
TEXTS 41-44
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
gAcC$AeÜ"va mayaAid"í"Ae
bad"yaARKyaM mamaA™amama,
ta‡a matpaAd"taITaAeR$de"
µaAnaAepas$pazAR$naE: zAuica:
wRºayaAlak(nand"AyaA
ivaDaUtaAzAeSak(lmaSa:
vas$aAnaAe valk(laAnyaËÿ
vanyaBaufs$auKaina:s$pa{h":
itaitaºauãR"nã"maA‡aANAAM
s$auzAIla: s$aMyataein‰"ya:
zAAnta: s$amaAih"taiDayaA
ÁaAnaivaÁaAnas$aMyauta:
maÔaAe'nauizAiºataM yaÔae
ivaival(manauBaAvayana,
mayyaAvaeizAtavaAifcaÔaAe
maÜ"maRinar"taAe Bava
@ita˜ajya gAtaIista›aAe
maAmaeSyais$a tata: par"ma,
çré-bhagavän uväca
gacchoddhava mayädiñöo
badary-äkhyaà mamäçramam
tatra mat-päda-térthode
snänopasparçanaiù çuciù
ékñayälakanandäyä
vidhütäçeña-kalmañaù
vasäno valkaläny aìga
vanya-bhuk sukha-niùspåhaù
titikñur dvandva-mäträëäà
suçélaù saàyatendriyaù
çäntaù samähita-dhiyä
jïäna-vijïäna-saàyutaù
matto 'nuçikñitaà yat te
viviktam anubhävayan
mayy äveçita-väk-citto
mad-dharma-nirato bhava
ativrajya gatés tisro
mäm eñyasi tataù param
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; gaccha—please
go; uddhava—O Uddhava; mayä—by Me; ädiñöaù—ordered;
badaré-äkhyam—named Badarikä; mama—My; äçramam—to the hermitage;
tatra—there; mat-päda—emanating from My feet; tértha—of the holy places;
ude—in the water; snäna—by bathing; upasparçanaiù—and by touching for
purification; çuciù—cleansed; ékñayä—by glancing; alakanandäyäù—upon the
river Gaìgä; vidhüta—cleansed; açeña—of all; kalmañaù—sinful reactions;
vasänaù—wearing; valkaläni—bark; aìga—My dear Uddhava; vanya—fruits,
nuts, roots, etc., of the forest; bhuk—eating; sukha—happy; niùspåhaù—and
free from desire; titikñuù—tolerant; dvandva-mäträëäm—of all dualities;
su-çélaù—exhibiting saintly character; saàyata-indriyaù—with controlled
senses; çäntaù—peaceful; samähita—perfectly concentrated; dhiyä—with
intelligence; jïäna-with knowledge; vijïäna—and realization;
saàyutaù—endowed; mattaù—from Me; anuçikñitam—learned; yat—that
which; te—by you; viviktam—ascertained with discrimination;
anubhävayan—thoroughly meditating upon; mayi—in Me; äveçita—absorbed;
väk—your words; cittaù—and mind; mat-dharma—My transcendental
qualities; nirataù—constantly endeavoring to realize; bhava—be thus situated;
ativrajya—crossing beyond; gatéù—the destinations of material nature;
tisraù—three; mäm—unto Me; eñyasi—you will come; tataù
param—thereafter.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Uddhava, take My
order and go to My äçrama called Badarikä. Purify yourself by both touching
and also bathing in the holy waters there, which have emanated from My lotus
feet. Rid yourself of all sinful reactions with the sight of the sacred Alakanandä
River. Dress yourself in bark and eat whatever is naturally available in the
forest. Thus you should remain content and free from desire, tolerant of all
dualities, good-natured, self-controlled, peaceful and endowed with
transcendental knowledge and realization. With fixed attention, meditate
constantly upon these instructions I have imparted to you and assimilate their
essence. Fix your words and thoughts upon Me, and always endeavor to increase
your realization of My transcendental qualities. In this way you will cross
beyond the destinations of the three modes of nature and finally come back to
Me.
TEXT 45
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
s$a Wvamaul(Ae h"ir"maeDas$aAeÜ"va:
‘ad"iºaNAM taM pair"s$a{tya paAd"yaAe:
izAr"Ae inaDaAyaA™auk(laAiBar"A‰R"DaIr,"
nyaiSaÂad"ã"nã"par"Ae'pyapa‚(mae
çré-çuka uväca
sa evam ukto hari-medhasoddhavaù
pradakñiëaà taà parisåtya pädayoù
çiro nidhäyäçru-kaläbhir ärdra-dhér
nyañiïcad advandva-paro 'py apakrame
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; saù—he; evam—thus;
uktaù—addressed; hari-medhasä—by the Supreme Lord, whose intelligence
takes away the misery of material life; uddhavaù—Uddhava;
pradakñiëam—facing with his right side; tam—Him;
parisåtya—circumambulating; pädayoù—at the two feet; çiraù—his head;
nidhäya—placing; açru-kaläbhiù—with the teardrops; ärdra—melted;
dhéù—whose heart; nyañiïcat—he drenched; advandva-paraù—uninvolved in
material dualities; api—although; apakrame—at the time of leaving.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Thus addressed by Lord Kåñëa, whose intelligence
destroys all the suffering of material life, Çré Uddhava circumambulated the
Lord and then fell down, placing his head upon the Lord's feet. Although
Uddhava was free from the influence of all material dualities, his heart was
breaking, and at this time of departure he drenched the Lord's lotus feet with
his tears.
TEXT 46
s$auäu"styajaµaeh"ivayaAegAk(Atar"Ae
na zA¡u(vaMstaM pair"h"AtaumaAtaur":
k{(cC)M$ yayaAE maUDaRina Bata{RpaAäu"ke(
iba”aªamas$k{(tya yayaAE pauna: pauna:
su-dustyaja-sneha-viyoga-kätaro
na çaknuvaàs taà parihätum äturaù
kåcchraà yayau mürdhani bhartå-päduke
bibhran namaskåtya yayau punaù punaù
SYNONYMS
su-dustyaja—impossible to give up; sneha—(from Him) in whom he had
reposed such affection; viyoga—because of separation; kätaraù—beside
himself; na çaknuvan—being incapable; tam—Him; parihätum—to abandon;
äturaù—overwhelmed; kåcchram yayau—he experienced great pain;
mürdhani—upon his head; bhartå—of his master; päduke—the slippers;
bibhran—carrying; namaskåtya—bowing down to offer obeisances; yayau—he
went away; punaù punaù—again and again.
TRANSLATION
Greatly fearing separation from Him for whom he felt such indestructible
affection, Uddhava was distraught, and he could not give up the Lord's
company. Finally, feeling great pain, he bowed down to the Lord again and
again, placed the slippers of his master upon his head, and departed.
PURPORT
According to the Çrémad-Bhägavatam (3.4.5), while Uddhava was enroute
to Badarikäçrama he heard about the Lord's journey to Prabhäsa. Turning back
and following Lord Kåñëa from behind, he saw the Lord alone just after the
withdrawal of the Yadu dynasty. After being again mercifully instructed by the
Personality of Godhead (along with Maitreya, who had just arrived), Uddhava
felt his knowledge of the truth reawaken, and then, by the order of the Lord,
he went on his way.
TEXT 47
tatastamantaôR$id" s$aiªavaezya
gAtaAe mah"ABaAgAvataAe ivazAAlaAma,
yaTaAepaid"í"AM jagAde"k(banDaunaA
tapa: s$amaAsTaAya h"re"r"gAAÕ"itama,
tatas tam antar hådi sanniveçya
gato mahä-bhägavato viçäläm
yathopadiñöäà jagad-eka-bandhunä
tapaù samästhäya harer agäd gatim
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; tam—Him; antaù—within; hådi—his mind; sanniveçya—placing;
gataù—going; mahä-bhägavataù—the great devotee; viçäläm—to
Badarikäçrama; yathä—as; upadiñöäm—described; jagat—of the universe;
eka—by the only; bandhunä—friend; tapaù—austerities;
samästhäya—properly executing; hareù—of the Supreme Lord; agät—he
attained; gatim—the destination.
TRANSLATION
Thereupon, placing the Lord deeply within his heart, the great devotee
Uddhava went to Badarikäçrama. By engaging there in austerities, he attained
to the Lord's personal abode, which had been described to him by the only
friend of the universe, Lord Kåñëa Himself.
PURPORT
Çré Uddhava returned to Dvärakä in the spiritual sky, according to Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura.
TEXT 48
ya Wtad"Anand"s$amau"‰"s$amBa{taM
ÁaAnaAma{taM BaAgAvataAya BaAiSatama,
k{(SNAena yaAegAeìr"s$aeivataAx.~i„aNAA
s$acC)$Ü"yaAs$aevya jagAiã"maucyatae
ya etad änanda-samudra-sambhåtaà
jïänämåtaà bhägavatäya bhäñitam
kåñëena yogeçvara-sevitäìghriëä
sac-chraddhayäsevya jagad vimucyate
SYNONYMS
yaù—anyone who; etat—this; änanda—of ecstasy; samudra—ocean;
sambhåtam—collected; jïäna—of knowledge; amåtam—the nectar;
bhägavatäya—to His devotee; bhäñitam—spoken; kåñëena—by Kåñëa;
yoga-éçvara—by the masters of yoga; sevita—served; aìghriëä—whose lotus
feet; sat—true; çraddhayä—with faith; äsevya—rendering service; jagat—the
whole world; vimucyate—becomes liberated.
TRANSLATION
Thus Lord Kåñëa, whose lotus feet are served by all great yoga masters,
spoke to His devotee this nectarean knowledge, which comprises the entire
ocean of spiritual bliss. Anyone within this universe who receives this narration
with great faith is assured of liberation.
TEXT 49
BavaBayamapah"ntauM ÁaAnaivaÁaAnas$aArM"
inagAmak{(äu"pajaoee" Ba{"Ëÿvaãe"d"s$aAr"ma,
@ma{tamaud"iDataêApaAyayaà{"tyavagAARna,
pauç&Sama{SaBamaAâM k{(SNAs$aMÁaM nataAe'isma
bhava-bhayam apahantuà jïäna-vijïäna-säraà
nigama-kåd upajahre bhåìga-vad veda-säram
amåtam udadhitaç cäpäyayad bhåtya-vargän
puruñam åñabham ädyaà kåñëa-saàjïaà nato 'smi
SYNONYMS
bhava—of material life; bhayam—the fear; apahantum—in order to take away;
jïäna-vijïäna—of knowledge and self-realization; säram—the essence;
nigama—of the Vedas; kåt—the author; upajahre—delivered; bhåìga-vat—like
a bee; veda-säram—the essential meaning of the Vedas; amåtam—the nectar;
udadhitaù—from the ocean; ca—and; apäyayat—made to drink;
bhåtya-vargän—His many devotees; puruñam—to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; åñabham—the greatest; ädyam—the first of all beings;
kåñëa-saàjïam—named Lord Kåñëa; nataù—bowed down; asmi—I am.
TRANSLATION
I offer my obeisances to that Supreme Personality of Godhead, the original
and greatest of all beings, Lord Çré Kåñëa. He is the author of the Vedas, and
just to destroy His devotees' fear of material existence, like a bee He has
collected this nectarean essence of all knowledge and self-realization. Thus He
has awarded to His many devotees this nectar from the ocean of bliss, and by
His mercy they have drunk it.
PURPORT
Just as a bee extracts nectar from a flower without harming the flower, Lord
Çré Kåñëa extracts the essence of all Vedic knowledge without disturbing the
elaborate system of Vedic advancement. In other words, Lord Çré Kåñëa
establishes Himself as the goal of Vedic knowledge without destroying
preliminary, inferior processes that may be applicable to grossly materialistic
men. Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé thus concludes by offering his obeisances to the
spiritual master of the entire universe, Lord Çré Kåñëa.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Eleventh Canto, Twenty-ninth Chapter,
of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Bhakti-yoga."
30. The Disappearance of the Yadu Dynasty
This chapter discusses the destruction of the Yadu dynasty in connection
with the winding up of the pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
After Çré Uddhava left for Badarikäçrama, Lord Çré Kåñëa, taking note of
many bad omens, advised the Yädavas to abandon Dvärakä and go to Prabhäsa,
on the bank of the Sarasvaté, to perform svasty-ayana and other rituals for
counteracting bad fortune. They followed His advice and went to Prabhäsa.
There they became absorbed in festivity, and by the illusory power of Lord
Kåñëa they became intoxicated from drinking liquor. Thus losing their
intelligence, they quarreled among themselves and began killing one another,
until not a man was left alive.
Afterward, Çré Baladeva went to the shore of the ocean and by the mystic
strength of yoga gave up His body. Seeing the disappearance of Baladeva, Lord
Çré Kåñëa sat down silently upon the ground. Then a hunter named Jarä,
mistaking the sole of the Lord's left foot for a deer, pierced it with an arrow.
The hunter immediately understood his mistake and, falling at the feet of Lord
Çré Kåñëa, begged to be punished. In reply Lord Kåñëa told the hunter that
what he had done was actually according to His own desire. The Lord then
sent the hunter to Vaikuëöha.
When Däruka, Kåñëa's charioteer, arrived on the scene and saw Lord Kåñëa
in that condition, he began to lament. Kåñëa told him that he should go to
Dvärakä, inform the residents about the annihilation of the Yadu dynasty, and
advise them all to leave Dvärakä for Indraprastha. Däruka obediently carried
out this order.
TEXT 1
™aIr"AjaAevaAca
tataAe mah"ABaAgAvata
oÜ"vae inagARtae vanama,
ã"Ar"vatyaAM ik(mak(r"Aeä,"
BagAvaAna, BaUtaBaAvana:
çré-räjoväca
tato mahä-bhägavata
uddhave nirgate vanam
dväravatyäà kim akarod
bhagavän bhüta-bhävanaù
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—the king said; tataù—then; mahä-bhägavate—the great
devotee; uddhave—Uddhava; nirgate—when he had gone; vanam—to the
forest; dväravatyäm—in Dvärakä; kim—what; akarot—did; bhagavän—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhüta—of all living beings; bhävanaù—the
protector.
TRANSLATION
King Parékñit said: After the great devotee Uddhava left for the forest, what
did the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the protector of all living beings, do in
the city of Dvärakä?
PURPORT
Parékñit Mahäräja now inquires from Çukadeva Gosvämé about the topic of
Chapter One of this canto, namely the annihilation of the Yadu dynasty and
Lord Kåñëa's return to the spiritual sky. Because Lord Kåñëa was playing the
part of an ordinary member of the Yadu dynasty, He appeared to react to the
curse of the brähmaëas by giving up His earthly pastimes. Lord Kåñëa cannot
actually be cursed by anyone. Närada Muni and the other sages who cursed the
Yadu dynasty are eternal devotees of Lord Kåñëa and could hardly curse Him.
Therefore, in giving up His pastimes and leaving the earth with the Yadu
dynasty, Lord Kåñëa demonstrated His internal potency and personal will,
since no one can challenge the supreme potency of the Personality of
Godhead.
TEXT 2
“aözAApaAepas$aMs$a{íe"
svaku(lae yaAd"vaSaRBa:
‘aeyas$aI%M s$avaR"nae‡aANAAM
tanauM s$a k(Tamatyajata,
brahma-çäpopasaàsåñöe
sva-kule yädavarñabhaù
preyaséà sarva-neträëäà
tanuà sa katham atyajat
SYNONYMS
brahma-çäpa—by the curse of the brähmaëas; upasaàsåñöe—having been
destroyed; sva-kule—His own family; yädava-åñabhaù—the chief of the Yadus;
preyasém—most dear; sarva-neträëäm—to all eyes; tanum—the body; saù—He;
katham—how; atyajat—gave up.
TRANSLATION
After His own dynasty met destruction from the curse of the brähmaëas,
how could the best of the Yadus give up His body, the dearmost object of all
eyes?
PURPORT
In relation to this verse, Çréla Jéva Gosvämé explains that the Personality of
Godhead never gives up His spiritual body, which is eternal, full of bliss and
knowledge. The word katham therefore indicates "How is it possible?", meaning
it is not actually possible for Lord Kåñëa to give up His eternal form, which is
preyaséà sarva-neträëäm, the most attractive object of pleasure for the eyes
and all other senses.
TEXT 3
‘atyaA‚(í]M" nayanamabalaA ya‡a la¢aM na zAeku(:
k(NAARivaíM" na s$ar"ita tataAe yats$ataAmaAtmala¢ama,
yacC)$IvaARcaAM janayaita r"itaM ikM( nau maAnaM k(vaInaAM
ä{"î"A ijaSNAAeyauRiDa r"TagAtaM ya»a tats$aAmyamaIyau:
pratyäkrañöuà nayanam abalä yatra lagnaà na çekuù
karëäviñöaà na sarati tato yat satäm ätma-lagnam
yac-chrér väcäà janayati ratià kià nu mänaà kavénäà
dåñövä jiñëor yudhi ratha-gataà yac ca tat-sämyam éyuù
SYNONYMS
pratyäkrañöum—to withdraw; nayanam—their eyes; abaläù—the women;
yatra—in which; lagnam—attached; na çekuù—were not able; karëa—the
ears; äviñöam—having entered; na sarati—would not leave; tataù—thence;
yat—which; satäm—of the sages; ätma—in their hearts; lagnam—attached;
yat—of which; çréù—the beauty; väcäm—of the words; janayati—generates;
ratim—special pleasurable attraction; kim nu—what to speak of; mänam—the
reputation; kavénäm—of the poets; dåñövä—seeing; jiñëoù—of Arjuna;
yudhi—on the battlefield; ratha-gatam—on the chariot; yat—which; ca—and;
tat-sämyam—an equal status with Him; éyuù—they attained.
TRANSLATION
Once their eyes were fixed upon His transcendental form, women were
unable to withdraw them, and once that form had entered the ears of the sages
and become fixed in their hearts, it would never depart. What to speak of
acquiring fame, the great poets who described the beauty of the Lord's form
would have their words invested with transcendentally pleasing attraction. And
by seeing that form on Arjuna's chariot, all the warriors on the battlefield of
Kurukñetra attained the liberation of gaining a spiritual body similar to the
Lord's.
PURPORT
Transcendental, liberated personalities such as the gopés of Våndävana and
Rukmiëé, the original goddess of fortune, were constantly meditating on the
Lord's spiritual body. Great liberated sages (satäm), having heard about Lord
Kåñëa's body, could not take it out of their hearts. The Lord's bodily beauty
expanded the love and poetic output of great liberated poets, and simply by
seeing Lord Kåñëa's body, the warriors at Kurukñetra achieved spiritual
liberation with an eternal body similar to the Lord's. Therefore it is impossible
to imagine Lord Kåñëa's eternal form of bliss to be in any way material. Those
who imagine that Lord Kåñëa gave up His eternal form are certainly
bewildered by the Lord's illusory energy.
TEXT 4
™aI [%iSaç&vaAca
id"iva Bauvyantair"ºae ca
mah"AetpaAtaAna, s$amauitTataAna,
ä{"î"As$aInaAna, s$auDamaARyaAM
k{(SNA: ‘aAh" yaäU"inad"ma,
çré åñir uväca
divi bhuvy antarikñe ca
mahotpätän samutthitän
dåñöväsénän su-dharmäyäà
kåñëaù präha yadün idam
SYNONYMS
çré-åñiù uväca—the sage (Çukadeva Gosvämé) said; divi—in the sky; bhuvi—on
the earth; antarikñe—in outer space; ca—and; mahä-utpätän—great
disturbances; samutthitän—which had appeared; dåñövä—seeing; äsénän—who
were seated; su-dharmäyäm—in the legislative assembly called the Sudharmä;
kåñëaù—Lord Kåñëa; präha—spoke; yadün—to the Yadus; idam—this.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Having observed many disturbing signs in the sky,
on the earth and in outer space, Lord Kåñëa addressed the Yadus assembled in
the Sudharmä council hall as follows.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, the inauspicious sign in the sky was the
appearance of a halo around the sun, on the earth there were small
earthquakes, and in outer space there was an unnatural redness on the
horizon. These and other, similar omens were impossible to counteract,
because they were personally arranged by Lord Kåñëa.
TEXT 5
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
Wtae GaAer"A mah"AetpaAtaA
ã"AvaRtyaAM yamake(tava:
mauó"taRmaipa na sTaeyama,
@‡a naAe yaäu"pauËÿvaA:
çré-bhagavän uväca
ete ghorä mahotpätä
dvärvatyäà yama-ketavaù
muhürtam api na stheyam
atra no yadu-puìgaväù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; ete—these;
ghoräù—fearful; mahä—great; utpätäù—inauspicious omens; dvärvatyäm—in
Dvärakä; yama—of the king of death; ketavaù—the flags; muhürtam—a
moment; api—even; na stheyam—should not remain; atra—here; naù—we;
yadu-puìgaväù—O best of the Yadus.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O leaders of the Yadu dynasty,
please note all these terrible omens that have appeared in Dvärakä just like the
flags of death. We should not remain here a moment longer.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has given a great amount of evidence
from the Vedic literatures proving that the humanlike form of the Personality
of Godhead and His holy name, abode, paraphernalia and associates are all
eternal, spiritual manifestations without any tinge of material contamination.
(See Appendix). In this regard the äcärya has further explained that because
the living entities must suffer the reactions to their sinful activities, the Lord
arranges for them to be punished during the Kali-yuga. In other words, it is not
Lord Kåñëa's desire that conditioned souls be sinful and suffer, but since they
are already sinful, the Lord creates an appropriate age during which they can
experience the bitter fruits of irreligiosity.
Since Lord Kåñëa personally establishes religious principles in His various
appearances in this material world, at the end of Dväpara-yuga religion on the
earth was overwhelmingly powerful. All the significant demons had been
killed; the great sages, saints and devotees had been greatly encouraged,
enlightened and fortified; and there was little scope for irreligion. Had Lord
Kåñëa ascended to the spiritual sky in His spiritual body before the eyes of the
world, it would have been very difficult for Kali-yuga to flourish. Lord Kåñëa
left the world in exactly that way during His appearance as Rämacandra, and
hundreds of thousands of years later, hundreds of millions of pious persons still
discuss this wonderful pastime of the Lord. To pave the way for Kali-yuga,
however, Lord Kåñëa left this world in a way that puzzles those who are not His
staunch devotees.
The eternal form of the Lord is described throughout Vedic literature, and
His eternal form constitutes the highest understanding of the Absolute Truth
according to all great äcäryas, including Çaìkaräcärya and Caitanya
Mahäprabhu. Yet although Lord Kåñëa's eternal, spiritual form is a realized fact
for advanced devotees, for those who are weak in Kåñëa consciousness the
inconceivable pastimes and plan of the Lord are sometimes hard to appreciate
properly.
TEXT 6
iñyaAe baAlaAê va{Ü"Aê
zAÊÿAeÜ"ArM" ˜ajaintvata:
vayaM ‘aBaAs$aM yaAsyaAmaAe
ya‡a ‘atyafs$ar"svataI
striyo bäläç ca våddhäç ca
çaìkhoddhäraà vrajantv itaù
vayaà prabhäsaà yäsyämo
yatra pratyak sarasvaté
SYNONYMS
striyaù—the women; bäläù—children; ca—and; våddhäù—old men; ca—and;
çaìkha-uddhäram—to the holy place called Çaìkhoddhära (about halfway
between Dvärakä and Prabhäsa); vrajantu—they should go; itaù—from here;
vayam—we; prabhäsam—to Prabhäsa; yäsyämaù—shall go; yatra—where;
pratyak—flowing west; sarasvaté—the river Sarasvaté
TRANSLATION
The women, children and old men should leave this city and go to
Çaìkhoddhära. We shall go to Prabhäsa-kñetra, where the river Sarasvaté flows
toward the west.
PURPORT
The word vayam here refers to the able-bodied male members of the Yadu
dynasty.
TEXT 7
ta‡aAiBaiSacya zAucaya
opaAeSya s$aus$amaAih"taA:
de"vataA: paUjaiyaSyaAma:
µapanaAlaepanaAhR"NAE:
taträbhiñicya çucaya
upoñya su-samähitäù
devatäù püjayiñyämaù
snapanälepanärhaëaiù
SYNONYMS
tatra—there; abhiñicya—taking bath; çucayaù—cleansed; upoñya—fasting;
su-samähitäù—fixing our minds; devatäù—the demigods; püjayiñyämaù—we
shall worship; snapana—by bathing; älepana—smearing with sandalwood;
arhaëaiù—and by various offerings.
TRANSLATION
There we should bathe for purification, fast, and fix our minds in
meditation. We should then worship the demigods by bathing their images,
anointing them with sandalwood pulp, and presenting them various offerings.
TEXT 8
“aAöNAAMstau mah"ABaAgAAna,
k{(tasvastyayanaA vayama,
gAAeBaUih"r"NyavaAs$aAeiBar,"
gAjaAìr"TavaezmaiBa:
brähmaëäàs tu mahä-bhägän
kåta-svastyayanä vayam
go-bhü-hiraëya-väsobhir
gajäçva-ratha-veçmabhiù
SYNONYMS
brähmaëän—the brähmaëas; tu—and; mahä-bhägän—greatly fortunate;
kåta—having performed; svasti-ayanäù—the ceremonies for good fortune;
vayam—we; go—with cows; bhü—land; hiraëya—gold; väsobhiù—and
clothing; gaja—with elephants; açva—horses; ratha—chariots;
veçmabhiù—and houses.
TRANSLATION
After performing the expiatory rituals with the help of greatly fortunate
brähmaëas, we will worship those brähmaëas by offering them cows, land, gold,
clothing, elephants, horses, chariots and dwelling places.
TEXT 9
ivaiDare"Sa ÷ir"í"£aAe
maËÿlaAyanamauÔamama,
de"vaiã"jagAvaAM paUjaA
BaUtaeSau par"maAe Bava:
vidhir eña hy ariñöa-ghno
maìgaläyanam uttamam
deva-dvija-gaväà püjä
bhüteñu paramo bhavaù
SYNONYMS
vidhiù—the prescribed process; eñaù—this; hi—indeed; ariñöa—inauspicious
obstacles; ghnaù—which destroys; maìgala-ayanam—which brings good
fortune; uttamam—the best; deva—of the demigods; dvija—brähmaëas;
gaväm—and cows; püjä—worship; bhüteñu—among living beings;
paramaù—excellent; bhavaù—rebirth.
TRANSLATION
This is indeed the appropriate process for counteracting our imminent
adversity, and it is sure to bring about the highest good fortune. Such worship
of the demigods, brähmaëas and cows can earn the highest birth for all living
entities.
TEXT 10
wita s$avaeR s$amaAk(NyaR
yaäu"va{Ü"A maDauiã"Sa:
taTaeita naAEiBaç&ÔaIyaR
‘aBaAs$aM ‘ayayaU r"TaE:
iti sarve samäkarëya
yadu-våddhä madhu-dviñaù
tatheti naubhir uttérya
prabhäsaà prayayü rathaiù
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; sarve—all of them; samäkarëya—hearing; yadu-våddhäù—the elders
of the Yadu dynasty; madhu-dviñaù—from Lord Kåñëa, the enemy of the
demon Madhu; tathä—so be it; iti—thus saying; naubhiù—by boats;
uttérya—crossing over (the ocean); prabhäsam—to Prabhäsa; prayayuù—they
went; rathaiù—in chariots.
TRANSLATION
Having heard these words from Lord Kåñëa, the enemy of Madhu, the elders
of the Yadu dynasty gave their assent, saying, "So be it." After crossing over
the ocean in boats, they proceeded on chariots to Prabhäsa.
TEXT 11
taismana, BagAvataAid"íM"
yaäu"de"vaena yaAd"vaA:
ca‚u(: par"mayaA BaftyaA
s$avaR™aeyaAepaba{Mih"tama,
tasmin bhagavatädiñöaà
yadu-devena yädaväù
cakruù paramayä bhaktyä
sarva-çreyopabåàhitam
SYNONYMS
tasmin—there; bhagavatä—by the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
ädiñöam—what was instructed; yadu-devena—by the Lord of the Yadus;
yädaväù—the Yadus; cakruù—performed; paramayä—with transcendental;
bhaktyä—devotion; sarva—all; çreyaù—with auspicious rituals;
upabåàhitam—enriched.
TRANSLATION
There, with great devotion, the Yädavas performed the religious ceremonies
according to the instructions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, their
personal Lord. They also performed various other auspicious rituals.
TEXT 12
tatastaismanmah"ApaAnaM
papaumaE=("re"yakM( maDau
id"í"iva”aMizAtaiDayaAe
yaÛ"vaE”aRzyatae maita:
tatas tasmin mahä-pänaà
papur maireyakaà madhu
diñöa-vibhraàçita-dhiyo
yad-dravair bhraçyate matiù
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; tasmin—there; mahä—a large amount; pänam—drink;
papuù—they drank; maireyakam—called maireya; madhu-sweet-tasting;
diñöa—by destiny; vibhraàçita—having lost; dhiyaù—their intelligence;
yat—of which beverage; dravaiù—by the liquid ingredients; bhraçyate—is
disrupted; matiù—the mind.
TRANSLATION
Then, their intelligence covered by Providence, they liberally indulged in
drinking the sweet maireya beverage, which can completely intoxicate the mind.
PURPORT
The word diñöa here indicates the desire of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. In the first chapter of this Canto, "The Curse Upon the Yadu
Dynasty," this incident is elaborately explained.
TEXT 13
mah"ApaAnaAiBamaÔaAnaAM
vaIr"ANAAM ä{"æacaetas$aAma,
k{(SNAmaAyaAivamaUX#AnaAM
s$aÎÿSaR: s$aumah"AnaBaUta,
mahä-pänäbhimattänäà
véräëäà dåpta-cetasäm
kåñëa-mäyä-vimüòhänäà
saìgharñaù su-mahän abhüt
SYNONYMS
mahä-päna—by the excessive drinking; abhimattänäm—who became
intoxicated; véräëäm—of the heroes; dåpta—becoming arrogant;
cetasäm—their minds; kåñëa-mäyä—by the illusory energy of Lord Kåñëa;
vimüòhänäm—who became bewildered; saìgharñaù—friction; su-mahän—very
great; abhüt—arose.
TRANSLATION
The heroes of the Yadu dynasty became intoxicated from their extravagant
drinking and began to feel arrogant. When they were thus bewildered by the
personal potency of Lord Kåñëa, a terrible quarrel arose among them.
TEXT 14
yauyauDau: ‚(AeDas$aMr"bDaA
vaelaAyaAmaAtataAiyana:
DanauiBaRr"is$aiBaBaRéaEr,"
gAd"AiBastaAemar"iíR"iBa:
yuyudhuù krodha-saàrabdhä
veläyäm ätatäyinaù
dhanurbhir asibhir bhallair
gadäbhis tomararñöibhiù
SYNONYMS
yuyudhuù—they fought; krodha—with anger; saàrabdhäù—thoroughly
agitated; veläyäm—on the shore; ätatäyinaù—bearing weapons;
dhanurbhiù—with bows; asibhiù—with swords; bhallaiù—with a peculiarly
shaped arrow; gadäbhiù—with clubs; tomara—with lances; åñöibhiù—and
spears.
TRANSLATION
Infuriated, they seized their bows and arrows, swords, bhallas, clubs, lances
and spears and attacked one another on the shore of the ocean.
TEXT 15
patatpataAkE( r"Taku(Ãar"Aid"iBa:
Kar"Aeí)"gAAeiBamaRih"SaEnaR(rE"r"ipa
imaTa: s$amaetyaAìtarE": s$auäu"maRd"A
nyah"na, zArE"dR"ià"ir"va iã"paA vanae
patat-patäkai ratha-kuïjarädibhiù
kharoñöra-gobhir mahiñair narair api
mithaù sametyäçvataraiù su-durmadä
nyahan çarair dadbhir iva dvipä vane
SYNONYMS
patat-patäkaiù—with flags flying; ratha—on chariots; kuïjara—elephants;
ädibhiù—and other carriers; khara—on asses; uñöra—camels; gobhiù—and
bulls; mahiñaiù—on buffalos; naraiù—on human beings; api—even;
mithaù—together; sametya—meeting; açvataraiù—and on mules;
su-durmadäù—very much enraged; nyahan—they attacked; çaraiù—with
arrows; dadbhiù—with their tusks; iva—as if; dvipäù—elephants; vane—in the
forest.
TRANSLATION
Riding on elephants and chariots with flags flying, and also on donkeys,
camels, bulls, buffalos, mules and even human beings, the extremely enraged
warriors came together and violently attacked one another with arrows, just as
elephants in the forest attack one another with their tusks.
TEXT 16
‘aâu°as$aAmbaAE yauiDa è&X#mats$ar"Ava,
@‚U(r"BaAejaAvainaç&Ü"s$aAtyak(L
s$auBa‰"s$aÍÿAmaijataAE s$aud"Aç&NAAE
gAd"AE s$auima‡aAs$aur"TaAE s$amaIyatau:
pradyumna-sämbau yudhi rüòha-matsaräv
akrüra-bhojäv aniruddha-sätyaké
subhadra-saìgrämajitau su-däruëau
gadau sumiträ-surathau saméyatuù
SYNONYMS
pradyumna-sämbau—Pradyumna and Sämba; yudhi—in the battle;
rüòha—aroused; matsarau—their enmity; akrüra-bhojau—Akrüra and Bhoja;
aniruddha-sätyaké—Aniruddha and Sätyaki;
subhadra-saìgrämajitau—Subhadra and Saìgrämajit; su-däruëau—ferocious;
gadau—the two Gadas (one the brother of Çré Kåñëa and the other His son);
sumiträ-surathau—Sumitra and Suratha; saméyatuù—met together.
TRANSLATION
Their mutual enmity aroused, Pradyumna fought fiercely against Sämba,
Akrüra against Kuntibhoja, Aniruddha against Sätyaki, Subhadra against
Saìgrämajit, Sumitra against Suratha, and the two Gadas against each other.
TEXT 17
@nyae ca yae vaE inazAQ&Aelmauk(Ad"ya:
s$ah"›aijacC$taijaà"AnaumauKyaA:
@nyaAenyamaAs$aAâ mad"AnDak(Air"taA
ja£aumauRku(nde"na ivamaAeih"taA Ba{zAma,
anye ca ye vai niçaöholmukädayaù
sahasrajic-chatajid-bhänu-mukhyäù
anyonyam äsädya madändha-käritä
jaghnur mukundena vimohitä bhåçam
SYNONYMS
anye—others; ca—and; ye—those who; vai—indeed;
niçaöha-ulmaka-ädayaù—Niçaöha, Ulmuka and so on;
sahasrajit-çatajit-bhänu-mukhyaù—headed by Sahasrajit, Çatajit and Bhänu;
anyonyam—each other; äsädya—meeting; mada—by intoxication;
andha-käritäù—blinded; jaghnuù—they killed; mukundena—by Lord
Mukunda; vimohitäù—confused; bhåçam—totally.
TRANSLATION
Others also, such as Niçaöha, Ulmuka, Sahasrajit, Çatajit and Bhänu,
confronted and killed one another, being blinded by intoxication and thus
completely bewildered by Lord Mukunda Himself.
TEXT 18
d"AzAAhR"va{SNyanDak(BaAejas$aAtvataA
maDvabauRd"A maATaur"zAUr"s$aenaA:
ivas$ajaRnaA: ku(ku(r"A: ku(ntayaê
imaTastau ja£au: s$auivas$a{jya s$aAEô$d"ma,
däçärha-våñëy-andhaka-bhoja-sätvatä
madhv-arbudä mäthura-çürasenäù
visarjanäù kukuräù kuntayaç ca
mithas tu jaghnuù su-visåjya sauhådam
SYNONYMS
däçärha-våñëi-andhaka-bhoja-sätvatäù—the Däçärhas, Våñëis, Andhakas,
Bhojas and Sätvatas; madhu-arbudäù—the Madhus and Arbudas;
mäthura-çürasenäù—the inhabitants of Mathurä and Çürasena;
visarjanäù—the Visarjanas; kukuräù—the Kukuras; kuntayaù—the Kuntis;
ca—also; mithaù—each other; tu—and; jaghnuù—they killed;
su-visåjya—completely abandoning; sauhådam—their friendship.
TRANSLATION
Completely abandoning their natural friendship, the members of the various
Yadu clans—the Däçärhas, Våñëis and Andhakas, the Bhojas, Sätvatas, Madhus
and Arbudas, the Mäthuras, Çürasenas, Visarjanas, Kukuras and Kuntis—all
slaughtered one another.
TEXT 19
pau‡aA @yauDyana, ipata{iBa”aARta{iBaê
sva›aIyad"AEih"‡aipata{vyamaAtaulaE:
ima‡aAiNA ima‡aE: s$auô$d": s$auô$ià"r,"
ÁaAtaI%Mstvah"na, ÁaAtaya Wva maUX#A:
puträ ayudhyan pitåbhir bhrätåbhiç ca
svasréya-dauhitra-pitåvya-mätulaiù
miträëi mitraiù suhådaù suhådbhir
jïätéàs tv ahan jïätaya eva müòhäù
SYNONYMS
puträù—sons; ayudhyan—fought; pitåbhiù—with their fathers;
bhrätåbhiù—with brothers; ca—and; svasréya—with the sons of sisters;
dauhitra—the sons of daughters; pitåvya—paternal uncles; mätulaiù—and
maternal uncles; miträëi—friends; mitraiù—with friends;
suhådaù—well-wishers; suhådbhiù—with well-wishers; jïätén—intimate
relatives; tu—and; ahan—killed; jïätayaù—intimate relatives; eva—indeed;
müòhäù—bewildered.
TRANSLATION
Thus bewildered, sons fought with fathers, brothers with brothers, nephews
with paternal and maternal uncles, and grandsons with grandfathers. Friends
fought with friends, and well-wishers with well-wishers. In this way intimate
friends and relatives all killed one another.
TEXT 20
zAre"Sau h"IyamaAWSau
BajyamaAnaes$au Danvas$au
zAñeSau ºaIyamaAnaeSau
mauií"iBajaRoeú"re"r"k(A:
çareñu héyamäeñu
bhajyamänesu dhanvasu
çastreñu kñéyamäneñu
muñöibhir jahrur erakäù
SYNONYMS
çareñu—the arrows; héyamäneñu—as they became depleted; bhajyamäneñu—as
they became broken; dhanvasu—the bows; çastreñu—the missile weapons;
kñéyamäneñu—as they were used up; muñöibhiù—with their fists; jahruù—they
seized; erakäù—cane stalks.
TRANSLATION
When all their bows had been broken and their arrows and other missiles
spent, they seized the tall stalks of cane with their bare hands.
TEXT 21
taA va†ak(lpaA ÷Bavana,
pair"GaA mauií"naA Ba{taA:
ja£auiãR"SastaE: k{(SNAena
vaAyaRmaANAAstau taM ca tae
tä vajra-kalpä hy abhavan
parighä muñöinä bhåtäù
jaghnur dviñas taiù kåñëena
väryamäëäs tu taà ca te
SYNONYMS
täù—those stalks; vajra-kalpäù—as strong as thunderbolts; hi—indeed;
abhavan—became; parighäù—iron staffs; muñöinä—with their fists;
bhåtäù—held; jaghnuù—they attacked; dviñaù—their enemies; taiù—with
these; kåñëena—by Lord Kåñëa; väryamäëäù—being checked; tu—although;
tam—Him; ca—as well; te—they.
TRANSLATION
As soon as they took these cane stalks in their fists, the stalks changed into
iron rods as hard as thunderbolts. With these weapons the warriors began
attacking one another again and again, and when Lord Kåñëa tried to stop them
they attacked Him as well.
TEXT 22
‘atyanaIkM( manyamaAnaA
balaBa‰M" ca maAeih"taA:
h"ntauM k{(taiDayaAe r"Ajaªa,
@ApaªaA @AtataAiyana:
pratyanékaà manyamänä
balabhadraà ca mohitäù
hantuà kåta-dhiyo räjann
äpannä ätatäyinaù
SYNONYMS
pratyanékam—an enemy; manyamänäù—thinking; balabhadram—Lord
Balaräma; ca—also; mohitäù—confused; hantum—to kill; kåta-dhiyaù—having
made up their minds; räjan—O King Parékñit; äpannäù—they set upon Him;
ätatäyinaù—wielding weapons.
TRANSLATION
In their confused state, O King, they also mistook Lord Balaräma for an
enemy. Weapons in hand, they ran toward Him with the intention of killing
Him.
TEXT 23
@Ta taAvaipa s$ax.~‚u(Ü"Ava,
oâmya ku(ç&nand"na
Wr"k(Amauií"pair"GaAE
car"ntaAE ja£atauyauRiDa
atha täv api saìkruddhäv
udyamya kuru-nandana
erakä-muñöi-parighau
carantau jaghnatur yudhi
SYNONYMS
atha—then; tau—those two (Kåñëa and Balaräma); api—also;
saìkruddhau—greatly angered; udyamya—joining the fight;
kuru-nandana—O favorite son of the Kurus; erakä-muñöi—the canes in their
fists; parighau—using as clubs; carantau—moving about; jaghnatuù—they
began to kill; yudhi—in the battle.
TRANSLATION
O son of the Kurus, Kåñëa and Balaräma then became very angry. Picking
up cane stalks, They moved about within the battle and began to kill with these
clubs.
TEXT 24
“aözAApaAepas$a{í"AnaAM
k{(SNAmaAyaAva{taAtmanaAma,
s$paDaAR‚(AeDa: ºayaM inanyae
vaENAvaAe'i¢ayaRTaA vanama,
brahma-çäpopasåñöänäà
kåñëa-mäyävåtätmanäm
spardhä-krodhaù kñayaà ninye
vaiëavo 'gnir yathä vanam
SYNONYMS
brahma-çäpa—by the curse of the brähmaëas; upasåñöänäm—who were
overtaken; kåñëa-mäyä—by the illusory energy of Lord Kåñëa; ävåta—covered;
ätmanäm—of those whose minds; spardhä—arising from rivalry; krodhaù—the
anger; kñayam—to destruction; ninye—led; vaiëavaù—of bamboo trees;
agniù—a fire; yathä—as; vanam—the forest.
TRANSLATION
The violent anger of these warriors, who were overcome by the brähmaëas'
curse and bewildered by Lord Kåñëa's illusory potency, now led them to their
annihilation, just as a fire that starts in a bamboo grove destroys the entire
forest.
TEXT 25
WvaM naíe"Sau s$avaeRSau
ku(laeSau svaeSau ke(zAva:
@vataAir"taAe BauvaAe BaAr"
wita maenae'vazAeiSata:
evaà nañöeñu sarveñu
kuleñu sveñu keçavaù
avatärito bhuvo bhära
iti mene 'vaçeñitaù
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; nañöeñu—when they had been destroyed; sarveñu—all;
kuleñu—the clans of the dynasty; sveñu—His own; keçavaù—Lord Kåñëa;
avatäritaù—diminished; bhuvaù—of the earth; bhäraù—the burden; iti—thus;
mene—He thought; avaçeñitaù—remaining.
TRANSLATION
When all the members of His own dynasty were thus destroyed, Lord Kåñëa
thought to Himself that at last the burden of the earth had been removed.
TEXT 26
r"Ama: s$amau"‰"vaelaAyaAM
yaAegAmaAsTaAya paAEç&Sama,
tatyaAja laAekM( maAnauSyaM
s$aMyaAejyaAtmaAnamaAtmaina
rämaù samudra-veläyäà
yogam ästhäya pauruñam
tatyäja lokaà mänuñyaà
saàyojyätmänam ätmani
SYNONYMS
rämaù—Lord Balaräma; samudra—of the ocean; veläyäm—on the shore;
yogam—meditation; ästhäya—resorting to; pauruñam—upon the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; tatyäja—He gave up; lokam—the world;
mänuñyam—human; saàyojya—merging; ätmänam—Himself; ätmani—within
Himself.
TRANSLATION
Lord Balaräma then sat down on the shore of the ocean and fixed Himself in
meditation upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Merging Himself within
Himself, He gave up this mortal world.
TEXT 27
r"AmainayaARNAmaAlaAefya
BagAvaAnde"vak(Ls$auta:
inaSas$aAd" Dar"AepasTae
tauSNAImaAs$aAâ ipappalama,
räma-niryäëam älokya
bhagavän devaké-sutaù
niñasäda dharopasthe
tuñëém äsädya pippalam
SYNONYMS
räma-niryäëam—the departure of Lord Balaräma; älokya—observing;
bhagavän—the Supreme Lord; devaké-sutaù—the son of Devaké; niñasäda—sat
down; dharä-upasthe—on the lap of the earth; tuñëém—silently;
äsädya—finding; pippalam—a pippala tree.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa, the son of Devaké, having seen the departure of Lord Räma, sat
down silently on the ground under a nearby pippala tree.
TEXTS 28-32
iba”a»atauBauRjaM è&paM
”aAiyaSNAu ‘aBayaA svayaA
id"zAAe ivaitaimar"A: ku(vaRna,
ivaDaUma wva paAvak(:
™aIvats$aAÆMÿ GanazyaAmaM
taæah"Aq%k(vacaRs$ama,
k(AEzAeyaAmbar"yaugmaena
pair"vaItaM s$aumaËÿlama,
s$aund"r"ismatavaf‡aAbjaM
naIlaku(ntalamaiNx"tama,
pauNx"r"Ik(AiBar"AmaAºaM
s$Pu(r"nmak(r"ku(Nx"lama,
k(iq%s$aU‡a“aös$aU‡aik(
r"Iq%k(q%k(AËÿdE":
h"Ar"naUpaur"mau"‰"AiBa:
k(AEstauBaena ivar"Aijatama,
vanamaAlaApar"ItaAËMÿ
maUitaRmaià"inaRjaAyauDaE:
k{(tvaAer"AE d"iºaNAe paAd"ma,
@As$aInaM paÆÿjaAç&NAma,
bibhrac catur-bhujaà rüpaà
bhräyiñëu prabhayä svayä
diço vitimiräù kurvan
vidhüma iva pävakaù
çrévatsäìkaà ghana-çyämaà
tapta-häöaka-varcasam
kauçeyämbara-yugmena
parivétaà su-maìgalam
sundara-smita-vakträbjaà
néla-kuntala-maëòitam
puëòarékäbhirämäkñaà
sphuran makara-kuëòalam
kaöi-sütra-brahma-sütrakiréöa-
kaöakäìgadaiù
hära-nüpura-mudräbhiù
kaustubhena viräjitam
vana-mälä-parétäìgaà
mürtimadbhir nijäyudhaiù
kåtvorau dakñiëe pädam
äsénaà paìkajäruëam
SYNONYMS
bibhrat—bearing; catuù-bhujam—with four arms; rüpam—His form;
bhräjiñëu—brilliant; prabhayä—with its effulgence; svayä—own; diçaù—all
the directions; vitimiräù—devoid of darkness; kurvan—making;
vidhümaù—without smoke; iva—as; pävakaù—a fire; çrévatsa-aìkam—with
the mark of Çrévatsa; ghana-çyämam—dark blue like the clouds;
tapta—molten; häöaka—like gold; varcasam—His glowing effulgence;
kauçeya—of silk; ambara—of garments; yugmena—a pair; parivétam—wearing;
su-maìgalam—all-auspicious; sundara—beautiful; smita—with smiling;
vaktra—His face; abjam—like a lotus; néla—blue; kuntala—with locks of hair;
maëòitam—(His head) adorned; puëòaréka—lotus; abhiräma—charming;
akñam—eyes; sphurat—trembling; makara—shaped like sharks;
kuëòalam—His earrings; kati-sütra—with belt; brahma-sütra—sacred thread;
kiréöa—helmet; kaöaka—bracelets; aìgadaiù—and arm ornaments; hära—with
necklaces; nüpura—ankle bells; mudräbhiù—and His royal symbols;
kaustubhena—with the Kaustubha gem; viräjitam—splendid; vana-mälä—by a
flower garland; paréta—encircled; aìgam—His limbs;
mürti-madbhiù—personified; nija—His own; äyudhaiù—and by the weapons;
kåtvä—placing; urau—on His thigh; dakñiëe—right; pädam—His foot;
äsénam—sitting; paìkaja—like a lotus; aruëam—reddish.
TRANSLATION
The Lord was exhibiting His brilliantly effulgent four-armed form, the
radiance of which, just like a smokeless fire, dissipated the darkness in all
directions. His complexion was the color of a dark blue cloud and His
effulgence the color of molten gold, and His all-auspicious form bore the mark
of Çrévatsa. A beautiful smile graced His lotus face, locks of dark blue hair
adorned His head, His lotus eyes were very attractive, and His shark-shaped
earrings glittered. He wore a pair of silken garments, an ornamental belt, the
sacred thread, bracelets and arm ornaments, along with a helmet, the Kaustubha
jewel, necklaces, anklets and other royal emblems. Encircling His body were
flower garlands and His personal weapons in their embodied forms. As He sat
He held His left foot, with its lotus-red sole, upon His right thigh.
TEXT 33
mauSalaAvazAeSaAya:KaNx"-
k{(taeSaulauRbDak(Ae jar"A
ma{gAAsyaAk(ArM" ta»ar"NAM
ivavyaADa ma{gAzAÆÿyaA
muñalävaçeñäyaù-khaëòakåteñur
lubdhako jarä
mågäsyäkäraà tac-caraëaà
vivyädha måga-çaìkayä
SYNONYMS
muñala—from the iron club; avaçeña—remaining; ayaù—of iron;
khaëòa—with the fragment; kåta—who had made; iñuù—his arrow;
lubdhakaù—the hunter; jarä—named Jarä; måga—of a deer; äsya—of the face;
äkäram—having the form; tat—His; caraëam—lotus foot; vivyädha—pierced;
måga-çaìkayä—thinking it to be a deer.
TRANSLATION
Just then a hunter named Jarä, who had approached the place, mistook the
Lord's foot for a deer's face. Thinking he had found his prey, Jarä pierced the
foot with his arrow, which he had fashioned from the remaining iron fragment
of Sämba's club.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, the statement that the
arrow "pierced the Lord's foot" expresses the point of view of the hunter, who
thought he had struck a deer. In fact the arrow merely touched the Lord's lotus
foot and did not pierce it, since the Lord's limbs are composed of eternity,
knowledge and bliss. Otherwise, in the description of the next verse (that the
hunter became fearful and fell down with his head upon the Lord's feet),
Çukadeva Gosvämé would have stated that he extracted his arrow from the
Lord's foot.
TEXT 34
catauBauRjaM taM pauç&SaM
ä{"î"A s$a k{(taik(ilbaSa:
BaIta: papaAta izAr"s$aA
paAd"yaAer"s$aur"iã"Sa:
catur-bhujaà taà puruñaà
dåñövä sa kåta-kilbiñaù
bhétaù papäta çirasä
pädayor asura-dviñaù
SYNONYMS
catuù-bhujam—four-armed; tam—that; puruñam—personality; dåñövä—seeing;
saù—he; kåta-kilbiñaù—having committed an offense; bhétaù—afraid;
papäta—fell; çirasä—with his head; pädayoù—at the feet; asura-dviñaù—of the
Supreme Lord, the enemy of the demons.
TRANSLATION
Then, seeing that four-armed personality, the hunter became terrified of the
offense he had committed, and he fell down, placing his head upon the feet of
the enemy of the demons.
TEXT 35
@jaAnataA k{(taimadM"
paApaena maDaus$aUd"na
ºantaumahR"is$a paApasya
oÔama:ëAek( mae'naGa
ajänatä kåtam idaà
päpena madhusüdana
kñantum arhasi päpasya
uttamaùçloka me 'nagha
SYNONYMS
ajänatä—who was acting without knowledge; kåtam—has been done;
idam—this; päpena—by a sinful person; madhusüdana—O Madhusüdana;
kñantum arhasi—please forgive; päpasya—of the sinful person;
uttamaù-çloka—O glorious Lord; me—my; anagha—O sinless one.
TRANSLATION
Jarä said: O Lord Madhusüdana, I am a most sinful person. I have committed
this act out of ignorance. O purest Lord, O Uttamaùçloka, please forgive this
sinner.
TEXT 36
yasyaAnausmar"NAM na{NAAma,
@ÁaAnaDvaAntanaAzAnama,
vad"inta tasya tae ivaSNAAe
mayaAs$aADau k{(taM ‘aBaAe
yasyänusmaraëaà nåëäm
ajïäna-dhvänta-näçanam
vadanti tasya te viñëo
mayäsädhu kåtaà prabho
SYNONYMS
yasya—of whom; anusmaraëam—the constant remembrance; nåëäm—of all
men; ajïäna—of ignorance; dhvänta—the darkness; näçanam—that which
destroys; vadanti—they say; tasya—toward Him; te—You; viñëo—O Lord
Viñëu; mayä—by me; asädhu—wrongly; kåtam—this has been done;
prabho—O master.
TRANSLATION
O Lord Viñëu, the learned say that for any man, constant remembrance of
You will destroy the darkness of ignorance. O master, I have wronged You!
TEXT 37
tanmaAzAu jaih" vaEku(NQ&
paApmaAnaM ma{gAlaubDak(ma,
yaTaA paunar"hM" tvaevaM
na ku(yaA< s$ad"ita‚(mama,
tan mäçu jahi vaikuëöha
päpmänaà måga-lubdhakam
yathä punar ahaà tv evaà
na kuryäà sad-atikramam
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; mä—me; äçu—quickly; jahi—please kill; vaikuëöha—O Lord of
Vaikuëöha; päpmänam—the sinful; måga-lubdhakam—hunter of deer;
yathä—so that; punaù—again; aham—I; tu—indeed; evam—thus; na
kuryäm—may not do; sat—against saintly persons; atikramam—transgression.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O Lord of Vaikuëöha, please kill this sinful hunter of animals
immediately so he may not again commit such offenses against saintly persons.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains that the fratricidal battle of
the Yadu dynasty and the hunter's attack upon Lord Kåñëa are clearly
activities of the Lord's internal potency for the purpose of fulfilling the Lord's
pastime desires. According to the evidence, the quarrel among the members of
the Yadu dynasty occurred at sunset; then the Lord sat down on the bank of
the Sarasvaté River. It is stated that a hunter then arrived with the intention
of killing a deer, but it is highly unlikely—when more than 560 million
warriors had just been killed in a great uproarious battle and the place had
been flooded with blood and strewn with corpses—that a simple hunter would
somehow come along trying to kill a deer. Since deer are by nature fearful and
timid, how could any deer possibly be on the scene of such a huge battle, and
how could a hunter calmly go about his business in the midst of such carnage?
Therefore, the withdrawal of the Yadu dynasty and Lord Kåñëa's own
disappearance from this earth were not material historical events; they were
instead a display of the Lord's internal potency for the purpose of winding up
His manifest pastimes on earth.
TEXT 38
yasyaAtmayaAegAr"icataM na ivaäu"ivaRir"ÂaAe
ç&‰"Ad"yaAe'sya tanayaA: patayaAe igAr"AM yae
tvanmaAyayaA ipaih"taä{"í"ya Wtad"Ãa:
ikM( tasya tae vayamas$aÕ"tayaAe gA{NAIma:
yasyätma-yoga-racitaà na vidur viriïco
rudrädayo 'sya tanayäù patayo giräà ye
tvan-mäyayä pihita-dåñöaya etad aïjaù
kià tasya te vayam asad-gatayo gåëémaù
SYNONYMS
yasya—whose; ätma-yoga—by the personal mystic power; racitam—produced;
na vidaù—they do not understand; viriïcaù—Lord Brahmä;
rudra-ädayaù—Çiva and others; asya—his; tanayäù—sons; patayaù—masters;
giräm—of the words of the Vedas; ye—who are; tvat-mäyayä—by Your illusory
potency; pihita—covered; dåñöayaù—whose vision; etat—of this;
aïjaù—directly; kim—what; tasya—of Him; te—of You; vayam—we;
asat—impure; gatayaù—whose birth; gåëémaù—shall say.
TRANSLATION
Neither Brahmä nor his sons, headed by Rudra, nor any of the great sages
who are masters of the Vedic mantras can understand the function of Your
mystic power. Because Your illusory potency has covered their sight, they
remain ignorant of how Your mystic power works. Therefore, what can I, such
a low-born person, possibly say?
TEXT 39
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
maA BaEjaR&#re" tvamauiÔaï"
k(Ama WSa k{(taAe ih" mae
yaAih" tvaM mad"nauÁaAta:
svagA< s$auk{(itanaAM pad"ma,
çré-bhagavän uväca
mä bhair jare tvam uttiñöha
käma eña kåto hi me
yähi tvaà mad-anujïätaù
svargaà su-kåtinäà padam
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; mä bhaiù—do
not fear; jare—O Jarä; tvam—you; uttiñöha—please get up; kämaù—the desire;
eñaù—this; kåtaù—done; hi—indeed; me—My; yähi—go; tvam—you;
mat-anujïätaù—given permission by Me; svargam—to the spiritual world;
su-kåtinäm—of the pious; padam—the abode.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Jarä, do not fear. Please
get up. What has been done is actually My own desire. With My permission, go
now to the abode of the pious, the spiritual world.
TEXT 40
wtyaAid"í"Ae BagAvataA
k{(SNAenaecC$AzAr"Iir"NAA
i‡a: pair"‚(mya taM natvaA
ivamaAnaena id"vaM yayaAE
ity ädiñöo bhagavatä
kåñëenecchä-çarériëä
triù parikramya taà natvä
vimänena divaà yayau
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; ädiñöaù—instructed; bhagavatä—by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; kåñëena—by Lord Kåñëa; icchä-çarériëä—whose transcendental
body is manifested simply by His own will; triù—three times;
parikramya—circumambulating; tam—to Him; natvä—bowing down;
vimänena—by a celestial airplane; divam—into the sky; yayau—he went.
TRANSLATION
So instructed by the Supreme Lord Kåñëa, who assumes His transcendental
body by His own will, the hunter circumambulated the Lord three times and
bowed down to Him. Then the hunter departed in an airplane that had appeared
just to carry him to the spiritual sky.
TEXT 41
d"Aç&k(: k{(SNApad"vaIma,
@invacC$ªaiDagAmya taAma,
vaAyauM taulais$ak(AmaAed"ma,
@A„aAyaAiBamauKaM yayaAE
därukaù kåñëa-padavém
anvicchann adhigamya täm
väyuà tulasikämodam
äghräyäbhimukhaà yayau
SYNONYMS
därukaù—Däruka, the chariot driver of Lord Kåñëa; kåñëa—of Lord Kåñëa;
padavém—the trail; anvicchan—seeking out; adhigamya—coming upon;
täm—i; väyum-the air; tulasikä-ämodam-fragrant with the aroma of tulasé
flowers; äghräya—scenting; abhimukham—toward Him; yayau—he went.
TRANSLATION
At that time Däruka was searching for his master, Kåñëa. As he neared the
place where the Lord was sitting, he perceived the aroma of tulasé flowers in the
breeze and went in its direction.
TEXT 42
taM ta‡a itagmaâuiBar"AyauDaEva{RtaM
÷ìtTamaUlae k{(take(tanaM paitama,
µaeh"plautaAtmaA inapapaAta paAd"yaAe
r"TaAd"vaplautya s$abaASpalaAecana:
taà tatra tigma-dyubhir äyudhair våtaà
hy açvattha-müle kåta-ketanaà patim
sneha-plutätmä nipapäta pädayo
rathäd avaplutya sa-bäñpa-locanaù
SYNONYMS
tam—Him; tatra—there; tigma—brilliant; dyubhiù—the effulgence of which;
äyudhaiù—by His weapons; våtam—surrounded; hi—indeed; açvattha—of the
banyan tree; müle—at the base; kåta-ketanam—resting; patim—his master;
sneha—with affection; pluta—overwhelmed; ätmä—his heart; nipapäta—he
fell down; pädayoù—at His feet; rathät—from the chariot; avaplutya—rushing
down; sa-bäñpa—filled with tears; locanaù—his eyes.
TRANSLATION
Upon seeing Lord Kåñëa resting at the foot of a banyan tree, surrounded by
His shining weapons, Däruka could not control the affection he felt in his
heart. His eyes filled with tears as he rushed down from the chariot and fell at
the Lord's feet.
TEXT 43
@pazyatastva»ar"NAAmbaujaM ‘aBaAe
ä{"ií": ‘aNAí"A tamais$a ‘aivaí"A
id"zAAe na jaAnae na laBae ca zAAintaM
yaTaA inazAAyaAmaux"]pae ‘aNAíe"
apaçyatas tvac-caraëämbujaà prabho
dåñöiù praëañöä tamasi praviñöä
diço na jäne na labhe ca çäntià
yathä niçäyäm uòupe praëañöe
SYNONYMS
apaçyataù—of me, who am not seeing; tvat—Your; caraëa-ambujam—lotus
feet; prabho—O master; dåñöiù—the power of vision; praëañöä—is destroyed;
tamasi—into darkness; praviñöä—having entered; diçaù—the directions; na
jäne—I do not know; na labhe—I cannot obtain; ca—and; çäntim—peace;
yathä—just as; niçäyäm—in the night; uòupe—when the moon; praëañöe—has
become new.
TRANSLATION
Däruka said: Just as on a moonless night people are merged into darkness
and cannot find their way, now that I have lost sight of Your lotus feet, my
Lord, I have lost my vision and am wandering blindly in darkness. I cannot tell
my direction, nor can I find any peace.
TEXT 44
wita “auvaita s$aUtae vaE
r"TaAe gAç&x"laAHC$na:
KamautpapaAta r"Ajaen‰"
s$aAìDvaja od"Iºata:
iti bruvati süte vai
ratho garuòa-läïchanaù
kham utpapäta räjendra
säçva-dhvaja udékñataù
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; bruvati—while he was speaking; süte—the chariot driver;
vai—indeed; rathaù—the chariot; garuòa-läïchanaù—marked with the flag of
Garuòa; kham—into the sky; utpapäta—arose; räja-indra—O king of kings
(Parékñit); sa-açva—along with the horses; dhvajaù—and flag; udékñataù—as
he looked up, watching.
TRANSLATION
[Çukadeva Gosvämé continued:] O foremost of kings, while the chariot
driver was still speaking, before his very eyes the Lord's chariot rose up into the
sky along with its horses and its flag, which was marked with the emblem of
Garuòa.
TEXT 45
tamanvagAcC$ind"vyaAina
ivaSNAu‘ah"r"NAAina ca
taenaAitaivaismataAtmaAnaM
s$aUtamaAh" janaAdR"na:
tam anvagacchan divyäni
viñëu-praharaëäni ca
tenäti-vismitätmänaà
sütam äha janärdanaù
SYNONYMS
tam—that chariot; anvagacchan—they followed; divyäni—divine; viñëu—of
Lord Viñëu; praharaëäni—the weapons; ca—and; tena—by that occurrence;
ati-vismita—astonished; ätmänam—his mind; sütam—to the driver;
äha—spoke; janärdanaù—Lord Çré Kåñëa.
TRANSLATION
All the divine weapons of Viñëu rose up and followed the chariot. The Lord,
Janärdana, then spoke to His chariot driver, who was most astonished to see all
this.
TEXT 46
gAcC$ ã"Ar"vataI%M s$aUta
ÁaAtaInaAM inaDanaM imaTa:
s$aÆÿSaRNAsya inayaARNAM
banDauByaAe “aUih" maÚ"zAAma,
gaccha dväravatéà süta
jïäténäà nidhanaà mithaù
saìkarñaëasya niryäëaà
bandhubhyo brühi mad-daçäm
SYNONYMS
gaccha—just go; dväravatém—to Dvärakä; süta—O chariot driver;
jïäténäm—of their close relatives; nidhanam—the destruction;
mithaù—mutual; saìkarñaëasya—of Lord Balaräma; niryäëam—the passing
away; bandhubhyaù—to Our family members; brühi—speak; mat-daçäm—My
condition.
TRANSLATION
O driver, go to Dvärakä and tell Our family members how their loved ones
destroyed one another. Also tell them of the disappearance of Lord Saìkarñaëa
and of My present condition.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa sent His chariot driverless back to Vaikuëöha, along with the
horses and weapons, because the chariot driver, Däruka, had some final service
to do on earth.
TEXT 47
ã"Ar"k(AyaAM ca na sTaeyaM
Bavaià"ê svabanDauiBa:
mayaA tyal(AM yaäu"paur"I%M
s$amau"‰": plaAvaiyaSyaita
dvärakäyäà ca na stheyaà
bhavadbhiç ca sva-bandhubhiù
mayä tyaktäà yadu-puréà
samudraù plävayiñyati
SYNONYMS
dvärakäyäm—in Dvärakä; ca—and; na stheyam—should not remain;
bhavadbhiù—you; ca—and; sva-bandhubhiù—along with your relatives;
mayä—by Me; tyaktäm—abandoned; yadu-purém—the capital of the Yadus;
samudraù—the ocean; plävayiñyati—will drown.
TRANSLATION
You and your relatives should not remain in Dvärakä, the capital of the
Yadus, because once I have abandoned that city it will be inundated by the
ocean.
TEXT 48
svaM svaM pair"ƒahM" s$avaeR
@Ad"Aya ipatar"AE ca na:
@jauR"naenaAivataA: s$avaR
wn‰"‘asTaM gAimaSyaTa
svaà svaà parigrahaà sarve
ädäya pitarau ca naù
arjunenävitäù sarva
indraprasthaà gamiñyatha
SYNONYMS
svam svam—each his own; parigraham—family; sarve—all of them;
ädäya—taking; pitarau—parents; ca—and; naù—Our; arjunena—by Arjuna;
avitäù—protected; sarve—all; indraprastham—to Indraprastha;
gamiñyatha—you should go.
TRANSLATION
You should all take your own families, together with My parents, and under
Arjuna's protection go to Indraprastha.
TEXT 49
tvaM tau maÜ"maRmaAsTaAya
ÁaAnainaï" opaeºak(:
manmaAyaAr"icataAmaetaAM
ivaÁayaAepazAmaM ˜aja
tvaà tu mad-dharmam ästhäya
jïäna-niñöha upekñakaù
man-mäyä-racitäm etäà
vijïayopaçamaà vraja
SYNONYMS
tvam—you; tu—however; mat-dharmam—in My devotional service;
ästhäya—remaining firm; jïäna-niñöhaù—fixed in knowledge;
upekñakaù—indifferent; mat-mäyä—by My illusory energy; racitäm—created;
etäm—this; vijïäya—understanding; upaçamam—cessation from agitation;
vraja—obtain.
TRANSLATION
You, Däruka, should be firmly situated in devotion to Me, remaining fixed
in spiritual knowledge and unattached to material considerations.
Understanding these pastimes to be a display of My illusory potency, you
should remain peaceful.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, the word tu here emphasizes that Däruka
is an eternally liberated associate of Lord Kåñëa, having descended from
Vaikuëöha. Therefore, even though others might be bewildered by the Lord's
pastimes, Däruka should remain peaceful and fixed in spiritual knowledge.
TEXT 50
wtyaul(staM pair"‚(mya
namas$k{(tya pauna: pauna:
tatpaAd"AE zAISNyauRpaADaAya
äu"maRnaA: ‘ayayaAE paur"Ima,
ity uktas taà parikramya
namaskåtya punaù punaù
tat-pädau çérñëy upädhäya
durmanäù prayayau purém
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; uktaù—spoken to; tam—Him; parikramya—circumambulating;
namaù-kåtya—offering obeisances; punaù punaù—again and again;
tat-pädau—His lotus feet; çérñëi—upon his head; upädhäya—placing;
durmanäù—unhappy in his mind; prayayau—he went; purém—to the city.
TRANSLATION
Thus ordered, Däruka circumambulated the Lord and offered obeisances to
Him again and again. He placed Lord Kåñëa's lotus feet upon his head and then
with a sad heart went back to the city.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Eleventh Canto, Thirtieth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Disappearance of the Yadu Dynasty."
31. The Disappearance of Lord Çré Kåñëa
This chapter describes the return of the Supreme Personality of Godhead to
His own abode, along with all the Yadus.
Upon learning from Däruka that Lord Çré Kåñëa had returned to His abode,
Vasudeva and all the others remaining in Dvärakä became very much agitated
by lamentation and went out from the city to find Him. All the demigods who,
in pursuance of the desire of Lord Kåñëa, had taken birth in the Yadu dynasty
to render assistance in His pastimes followed Lord Kåñëa and returned to their
respective abodes. The Lord's activities of creating a life for Himself and then
dismantling it are simply tricks of Mäyä, like an actor's performance. Actually,
He creates the entire universe, and then He enters within it as the Supersoul.
In the end, He again winds up the entire universe within Himself and,
remaining in His private glory, desists from external pastimes.
Though overcome by feelings of separation from Kåñëa, Arjuna was
nevertheless able to pacify himself by remembering all the various instructions
given to him by the Lord. Arjuna then carried out the rituals of offering piëòa
and so on for his dead relatives. At that time the ocean swallowed up all of
Dvärakä-puré except for the Lord's own residence. Arjuna took the remaining
members of the Yadu dynasty to Indraprastha, where he installed Vajra upon
the throne. Hearing of these events, the Päëòavas, led by Yudhiñöhira, placed
Parékñit upon their throne and left for the great journey.
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
@Ta ta‡aAgAmaä," “aöA
BavaAnyaA ca s$amaM Bava:
mahe"n‰"‘amauKaA de"vaA
maunaya: s$a‘ajaeìr"A:
çré-çuka uväca
atha taträgamad brahmä
bhavänyä ca samaà bhavaù
mahendra-pramukhä devä
munayaù sa-prajeçvaräù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; atha—then; tatra—there;
ägamat—came; brahmä—Lord Brahmä; bhavänyä—his consort, Bhaväné;
ca—and; samam—along with; bhavaù—Lord Çiva;
mahä-indra-pramukhäù—led by Lord Indra; deväù—the demigods;
munayaù—the sages; sa—with; prajä-éçvaräù—the progenitors of the
universe's population.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Then Lord Brahmä arrived at Prabhäsa along with
Lord Çiva and his consort, the sages, the Prajäpatis and all the demigods, headed
by Indra.
TEXTS 2-3
ipatar": is$aÜ"gAnDavaAR
ivaâADar"mah"Aer"gAA:
caAr"NAA yaºar"ºaAMis$a
ik(ªar"Aps$ar"s$aAe iã"jaA:
‰"í]"k(AmaA BagAvataAe
inayaARNAM par"maAets$auk(A:
gAAyantaê gA{NAntaê
zAAEre": k(maARiNA janma ca
pitaraù siddha-gandharvä
vidyädhara-mahoragäù
cäraëä yakña-rakñäàsi
kinnaräpsaraso dvijäù
drañöu-kämä bhagavato
niryäëaà paramotsukäù
gäyantaç ca gåëantaç ca
çaureù karmäëi janma ca
SYNONYMS
pitaraù—the forefathers; siddha-gandharväù—the Siddhas and Gandharvas;
vidyädhara-mahä-uragäù—the Vidyädharas and the great serpents;
cäraëäù—the Cäraëas; yakña-rakñäàsi—the Yakñas and Räkñasas;
kinnara-apsarasaù—the Kinnaras and Apsaräs; dvijäù—the great birds;
drañöu-kämäù—desirous of seeing; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; niryäëam—the passing away; parama-utsukäù—very eager;
gäyantaù—chanting; ca—and; gåëantaù—praising; ca—and; çaureù—of Lord
Çauri (Kåñëa); karmäëi—the activities; janma—the birth; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
The forefathers, Siddhas, Gandharvas, Vidyädharas and great serpents also
came, along with the Cäraëas, Yakñas, Räkñasas, Kinnaras, Apsaräs and
relatives of Garuòa, greatly eager to witness the departure of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. As they were coming, all these personalities variously
chanted and glorified the birth and activities of Lord Çauri [Kåñëa].
TEXT 4
vava{Sau: pauSpavaSaARiNA
ivamaAnaAvailaiBanaRBa:
ku(vaRnta: s$aÇÿlaM r"Ajana,
BaftyaA par"mayaA yautaA:
vavåñuù puñpa-varñäëi
vimänävalibhir nabhaù
kurvantaù saìkulaà räjan
bhaktyä paramayä yutäù
SYNONYMS
vavåñuù—they showered; puñpa-varñäëi—showers of flowers; vimäna—of
airplanes; ävalibhiù—by great numbers; nabhaù—the sky; kurvantaù—making;
saìkulam—filled up; räjan—O King Parékñit; bhaktyä—with devotion;
paramayä—transcendental; yutäù—endowed.
TRANSLATION
O King, crowding the sky with their many airplanes, they showered down
flowers with great devotion.
TEXT 5
BagAvaAna, ipataAmahM" vaIºya
ivaBaUtaIr"AtmanaAe ivaBau:
s$aMyaAejyaAtmaina caAtmaAnaM
paánae‡ae nyamaIlayata,
bhagavän pitämahaà vékñya
vibhütér ätmano vibhuù
saàyojyätmani cätmänaà
padma-netre nyamélayat
SYNONYMS
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pitämaham—Lord Brahmä;
vékñya—seeing; vibhütéù—the powerful expansions, the demigods;
ätmanaù—His own; vibhuù—the Almighty Lord; saàyojya—fixing;
ätmani—in Himself; ca—and; ätmänam—His consciousness;
padma-netre—His lotus eyes; nyamélyat—closed.
TRANSLATION
Seeing before Him Brahmä, the grandfather of the universe, along with the
other demigods, who are all His personal and powerful expansions, the
Almighty Lord closed His lotus eyes, fixing His mind within Himself, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, Lord Kåñëa had previously answered the
prayers of Lord Brahmä and the other demigods, who had requested the Lord
to descend within this universe for the protection of His servants, the
demigods. Now the demigods arrived before the Lord, each one desiring to take
the Lord to his own planet. To avoid these innumerable social obligations, the
Lord closed His eyes as if absorbed in samädhi.
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé adds that Lord Kåñëa closed His eyes to instruct the yogés
how to leave this mortal world without attachment to one's mystic opulences.
All the demigods, including Brahmä, are mystic expansions of Lord Kåñëa, and
yet the Lord closed His eyes to emphasize that one should fix one's mind on the
Supreme Personality of Godhead when departing from this world.
TEXT 6
laAek(AiBar"AmaAM svatanauM
DaAr"NAADyaAnamaËÿlama,
yaAegADaAr"NAyaA¢aeyyaAd"
gDvaA DaAmaAivazAtsvak(ma,
lokäbhirämäà sva-tanuà
dhäraëä-dhyäna-maìgalam
yoga-dhäraëayägneyyädagdhvä
dhämäviçat svakam
SYNONYMS
loka—to all the worlds; abhirämäm—most attractive; sva-tanum—His own
transcendental body; dhäraëä—of all trance; dhyäna—and meditation;
maìgalam—the auspicious object; yoga-dhäraëayä—by mystic trance;
ägneyyä—focused on fire; adagdhvä—without burning; dhäma—the abode;
äviçat—He entered; svakam—His own.
TRANSLATION
Without employing the mystic ägneyé meditation to burn up His
transcendental body, which is the all-attractive resting place of all the worlds
and the object of all contemplation and meditation, Lord Kåñëa entered into His
own abode.
PURPORT
A yogé empowered to select the moment of leaving his body can cause it to
burst into flames by engaging in the yogic meditation called ägneyé, and thus
he passes into his next life. The demigods similarly employ this mystic fire
when being transferred to the spiritual world. But the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is completely different from conditioned souls like yogés and
demigods, since the Lord's eternal, spiritual body is the source of all existence,
as indicated here by the words lokäbhirämäà sva-tanum. Lord Kåñëa's body is
the source of pleasure for the entire universe. The word
dhäraëä-dhyäna-maìgalam indicates that those trying for spiritual elevation
through meditation and yoga achieve all auspiciousness through meditation on
the Lord's body. Since yogés are liberated simply by thinking of Lord Kåñëa's
body, that body is certainly not material and therefore not subject to burning
by mundane mystic fire or any other type of fire.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura reminds us of Lord Kåñëa's statement
in the Eleventh Canto, Chapter Fourteen, verse 37: vahni-madhye smared
rüpaà mamaitad dhyäna-maìgalam. "Within the fire one should meditate upon
My form, which is the auspicious object of all meditation." Since Lord Kåñëa's
transcendental form is present within fire as the maintaining principle, how
can fire affect that form? Thus although the Lord appeared to enter the mystic
yoga trance, the word adagdhvä indicates that the Lord, since His body is
purely spiritual, bypassed the formality of burning and directly entered His
own abode in the spiritual sky. This point has also been elaborately explained
by Çréla Jéva Gosvämé in his commentary to this verse.
TEXT 7
id"iva äu"näu"BayaAe naeäu":
paetau: s$aumanas$aê KaAta,
s$atyaM DamaAeR Da{itaBaURmae:
k(LitaR: ™aIêAnau taM yayau:
divi dundubhayo neduù
petuù sumanasaç ca khät
satyaà dharmo dhåtir bhümeù
kértiù çréç cänu taà yayuù
SYNONYMS
divi—in heaven; dundubhayaù—kettledrums; neduù—sounded; petuù—fell;
sumanasaù—flowers; ca—and; khät—from the sky; satyam—Truth;
dharmaù—Religion; dhåtiù—Faithfulness; bhümeù—from the earth;
kértiù—Fame; çréù—Beauty; ca—and; anu—following; tam—Him;
yayuù—they went.
TRANSLATION
As soon as Lord Çré Kåñëa left the earth, Truth, Religion, Faithfulness,
Glory and Beauty immediately followed Him. Kettledrums resounded in the
heavens and flowers showered from the sky.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, all the demigods were jubilant because
each one thought Lord Kåñëa was coming to his own planet.
TEXT 8
de"vaAd"yaAe “aömauKyaA
na ivazAntaM svaDaAmaina
@ivaÁaAtagAitaM k{(SNAM
d"ä{"zAuêAitaivaismataA:
devädayo brahma-mukhyä
na viçantaà sva-dhämani
avijïäta-gatià kåñëaà
dadåçuç cäti-vismitäù
SYNONYMS
deva-ädayaù—the demigods and others; brahma-mukhyäù—headed by Brahmä;
na—not; viçantam—entering; sva-dhämani—His own abode;
avijïäta—unknown; gatim—His movements; kåñëam—Lord Kåñëa;
dadåçuù—they saw; ca—and; ati-vismitäù—very amazed.
TRANSLATION
Most of the demigods and other higher beings led by Brahmä could not see
Lord Kåñëa as He was entering His own abode, since He did not reveal His
movements. But some of them did catch sight of Him, and they were extremely
amazed.
TEXT 9
s$aAEd"AmanyaA yaTaAflaAzAe
yaAntyaA ih"tvaA”amaNx"lama,
gAitanaR laºyatae matyaE=s$a,
taTaA k{(SNAsya dE"vataE:
saudämanyä yathäkläçe
yäntyä hitväbhra-maëòalam
gatir na lakñyate martyais
tathä kåñëasya daivataiù
SYNONYMS
saudämanyäù—of lightning; yathä—just as; äkäçe—in the sky;
yäntyäù—which is traveling; hitvä—having left; abhra-maëòalam—the clouds;
gatiù—the movement; na lakñyate—cannot be ascertained; martyaiù—by
mortals; tathä—similarly; kåñëasya—of Lord Kåñëa; daivataiù—by the
demigods.
TRANSLATION
Just as ordinary men cannot ascertain the path of a lightning bolt as it leaves
a cloud, the demigods could not trace out the movements of Lord Kåñëa as He
returned to His abode.
PURPORT
The sudden movements of a lightning bolt are seen by the demigods but not
by human beings. Similarly, the sudden departure of Lord Kåñëa could be
understood by the Lord's intimate associates in the spiritual sky but not by the
demigods.
TEXT 10
“aöç&‰"Ad"yastae tau
ä{"î"A yaAegAgAitaM h"re":
ivaismataAstaAM ‘azAMs$anta:
svaM svaM laAekM( yayaustad"A
brahma-rudrädayas te tu
dåñövä yoga-gatià hareù
vismitäs täà praçaàsantaù
svaà svaà lokaà yayus tadä
SYNONYMS
brahma-rudra-ädayaù—Brahmä, Rudra and others; te—they; tu—but;
dåñövä—seeing; yoga-gatim—the mystic power; hareù—of Lord Kåñëa;
vismitäù—astonished; täm—that power; praçaàsantaù—glorifying; svam
svam—each to his own; lokam—world; yayuù—went; tadä—then.
TRANSLATION
A few of the demigods, however—notably Lord Brahmä and Lord
Çiva—could ascertain how the Lord's mystic power was working, and thus they
became astonished. All the demigods praised the Lord's mystic power and then
returned to their own planets.
PURPORT
Although the demigods are virtually omniscient within this universe, they
could not understand the movements of Lord Kåñëa's mystic potency. Thus
they were astonished.
TEXT 11
r"Ajana, par"sya tanauBa{ÀananaApyayaeh"A
maAyaAivax"mbanamavaeih" yaTaA naq%sya
s$a{"î"Atmanaed"manauivazya ivaô$tya caAntae
s$aMô$tya caAtmamaih"naAepar"ta: s$a @Astae
räjan parasya tanu-bhåj-jananäpyayehä
mäyä-viòambanam avehi yathä naöasya
såñövätmanedam anuviçya vihåtya cänte
saàhåtya cätma-mahinoparataù sa äste
SYNONYMS
räjan—O King Parékñit; parasya—of the Supreme; tanu-bhåt—resembling the
embodied living beings; janana—of birth; apyaya—and disappearance;
éhäù—the activities; mäyä—of His illusory potency; viòambanam—the false
show; avehi—you should understand; yathä—just as; naöasya—of an actor;
såñövä—creating; ätmanä—by Himself; idam—this universe;
anuviçya—entering it; vihåtya—playing; ca—and; ante—in the end;
saàhåtya—winding it up; ca—and; ätma-mahinä—with His own glory;
uparataù—having ceased; saù—He; äste—remains.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, you should understand that the Supreme Lord's appearance
and disappearance, which resemble those of embodied conditioned souls, are
actually a show enacted by His illusory energy, just like the performance of an
actor. After creating this universe He enters into it, plays within it for some
time, and at last winds it up. Then the Lord remains situated in His own
transcendental glory, having ceased from the functions of cosmic manifestation.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, the so-called fight among the members of
the Yadu dynasty was actually a display of the pastime potency of the Lord,
since Lord Kåñëa's personal associates are never subject to ordinary birth and
death like conditioned souls. This being the case, certainly the Supreme
Personality of Godhead Himself is transcendental to material birth and death,
as clearly stated in this verse.
The word naöasya, "of an actor or magician," is significant here. Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura tells the following story of a certain magician
who exhibits the trick of dying:
"In front of a great king, a magician approaches a stack of valuable
garments, jewels, coins and so forth, all placed there by the king. Taking a
jeweled necklace, the magician tells the king, 'Now I am taking this necklace,
and you can't have it,' and he makes the necklace disappear. 'Now I'm taking
this gold coin, and you can't have it,' he says, and makes the gold coin
disappear. Next, challenging the king in the same way, the magician makes
seven thousand horses disappear. Then the magician creates the illusion that
the king's children, grandchildren, brothers and other family members have
attacked each other and that nearly all are dead from the violent quarrel. The
king hears the magician speaking and at the same time observes these things
taking place before him as he sits in the great assembly hall.
"Then the magician says, 'O King, I no longer wish to live. Just as I have
studied magic, so also, by the mercy of the lotus feet of my guru, I have learned
the mystic meditation of yoga. One is supposed to give up one's body while
meditating in a holy place, and since you have performed so many pious
activities, you are a holy place yourself. Therefore I shall now give up my body.'
"Thus speaking, the magician sits down in the proper yoga posture, fixes
himself in präëäyäma, pratyähära, dhäraëä, dhyäna and samädhi and becomes
silent. A moment later, a fire generated from his trance blazes forth out of his
body and burns it to ashes. Then all the wives of the magician, distraught with
lamentation, enter into that fire.
"Three or four days later, after the magician has returned to his own
province, he sends one of his daughters to the king. The daughter tells him, 'O
King, I have just come to your palace, bringing along with me, invisibly, all
your sons, grandsons and brothers in good health—along with all the jewels
and other items given by you. Please, therefore, give me whatever you consider
fitting remuneration for the wisdom of the magic that has been exhibited
before you.' In this way, even by ordinary magic one can simulate birth and
death."
It is not difficult to understand, therefore, that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, although transcendental to the laws of nature, exhibits His illusory
potency so that ordinary fools will think the Lord has left His body like a
human being. Actually, Lord Kåñëa returned to His abode in His own eternal
body, as confirmed throughout the Vedic literature.
TEXT 12
matyaeRna yaAe gAuç&s$autaM yamalaAek(naItaM
tvaAM caAnayacC$r"NAd": par"maAñd"gDama,
ijagyae'ntak(Antak(mapaIzAmas$aAvanaIzA:
ikM( svaAvanae svar"nayanma{gAyauM s$ade"h"ma,
martyena yo guru-sutaà yama-loka-nétaà
tväà cänayac charaëa-daù paramästra-dagdham
jigye 'ntakäntakam apéçam asäv anéçaù
kià svävane svar anayan mågayuà sa-deham
SYNONYMS
martyena—in the same human body; yaù—who; guru-sutam—the son of His
spiritual master; yama-loka—to the planet of Yamaräja; nétam—brought;
tväm—you; ca—and; änayat—brought back; çaraëa-daù—the giver of shelter;
parama-astra—by the supreme weapon, the brahmästra; dagdham-burned;
jigye—He conquered; antaka—of the agents of death; antakam—who is the
death; api—even; éçam—Lord Çiva; asau—He, Kåñëa; anéçaù—incapable;
kim—whether; sva—of Himself; avane—in the protection; svaù—to the
spiritual world; anayat—brought; mågayum—the hunter; sa-deham—in the
same body.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa brought the son of His guru back from the planet of the lord of
death in the boy's selfsame body, and as the ultimate giver of protection He
saved you also when you were burned by the brahmästra of Açvatthämä. He
conquered in battle even Lord Çiva, who deals death to the agents of death, and
He sent the hunter Jarä directly to Vaikuëöha in his human body. How could
such a personality be unable to protect His own Self?
PURPORT
To mitigate his own and Parékñit Mahäräja's distress at the narration of
Lord Kåñëa's departure from this world, Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé here gives
several clear examples proving that Lord Kåñëa is far beyond the influence of
death. Although the son of Lord Kåñëa's spiritual master (Sändépani Muni)
had been taken by death, the Lord brought him back in his same body.
Similarly, the power of Brahman cannot touch Lord Kåñëa, since Parékñit
Mahäräja, though burned by the brahmästra weapon, was easily saved by the
Lord. Lord Çiva was clearly defeated by Lord Kåñëa in the battle with
Bäëäsura, and the hunter Jarä was sent to a Vaikuëöha planet in his same
human body. Death is an insignificant expansion of Lord Kåñëa's external
potency and cannot possibly act upon the Lord Himself. Those who actually
understand the transcendental nature of Lord Kåñëa's activities will find
convincing evidence in these examples.
TEXT 13
taTaApyazAeSaisTaitas$amBavaApyayaeSva,
@nanyahe"tauyaRd"zAeSazAil(Da{k,(
naEcC$t‘aNAetauM vapaur"‡a zAeiSataM
matyaeRna ikM( svasTagAitaM ‘ad"zARyana,
tathäpy açeña-sthiti-sambhaväpyayeñv
ananya-hetur yad açeña-çakti-dhåk
naicchat praëetuà vapur atra çeñitaà
martyena kià sva-stha-gatià pradarçayan
SYNONYMS
tathä api—nevertheless; açeña—of all created beings; sthiti—in the
maintenance; sambhava—creation; apyayeñu—and annihilation;
ananya-hetuù—the exclusive cause; yat—because; açeña—unlimited;
çakti—potencies; dhåk—possessing; na aicchat—He did not desire;
praëetum—to keep; vapuù—His transcendental body; atra—here;
çeñitam—remaining; martyena—with this mortal world; kim—what use;
sva-stha—of those who are fixed in Him; gatim—the destination;
pradarçayan—showing.
TRANSLATION
Although Lord Kåñëa, being the possessor of infinite powers, is the only
cause of the creation, maintenance and destruction of innumerable living
beings, He simply did not desire to keep His body in this world any longer.
Thus He revealed the destination of those fixed in the self and demonstrated
that this mortal world is of no intrinsic value.
PURPORT
Although Lord Kåñëa descended to this world to save the fallen souls, He
did not want to encourage people in the future to loiter here unnecessarily. In
other words, as soon as possible one should perfect one's Kåñëa consciousness
and go back home, back to Godhead. If Lord Kåñëa had remained longer on
the earth, He would have unnecessarily increased the prestige of the material
world.
As stated by Çré Uddhava in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (3.2.11), ädäyäntar adhäd
yas tu sva-bimbaà loka-locanam: "Lord Çré Kåñëa, who manifested His eternal
form before the vision of all on the earth, performed His disappearance by
removing His form from the sight of those who are unable to see Him [as He is]
due to not executing the required penance. " Uddhava also states in the
Bhägavatam (3.2.10):
devasya mäyayä spåñöä
ye cänyad-asad-äçritäù
bhrämyate dhér na tad-väkyair
ätmany uptätmano harau
"Under no circumstances can the words of persons bewildered by the illusory
energy of the Lord deviate the intelligence of those who are completely
surrendered souls." One who follows the Vaiñëava authorities in his attempt to
understand Lord Kåñëa's transcendental disappearance easily appreciates that
the Lord is the omnipotent Personality of Godhead and that His spiritual body
is identical with His eternal spiritual potency.
TEXT 14
ya WtaAM ‘aAtaç&tTaAya
k{(SNAsya pad"vaI%M par"Ama,
‘ayata: k(LtaRyaeà"ftyaA
taAmaevaA«aAetyanauÔamaAma,
ya etäà prätar utthäya
kåñëasya padavéà paräm
prayataù kértayed bhaktyä
täm eväpnoty anuttamäm
SYNONYMS
yaù—anyone who; etäm—this; prätaù—early in the morning; utthäya—getting
up; kåñëasya—of Lord Kåñëa; padavém—the destination; paräm—supreme;
prayataù—with careful attention; kértayet—glorifies; bhaktyä—with devotion;
täm—that destination; eva—indeed; äpnoti—he obtains;
anuttamam—unsurpassable.
TRANSLATION
Anyone who regularly rises early in the morning and carefully chants with
devotion the glories of Lord Çré Kåñëa's transcendental disappearance and His
return to His own abode will certainly achieve that same supreme destination.
TEXT 15
d"Aç&k(Ae ã"Ar"k(Amaetya
vas$aude"vaAeƒas$aenayaAe:
paitatvaA car"NAAva›aEr,"
nyaiSaÂatk{(SNAivacyauta:
däruko dvärakäm etya
vasudevograsenayoù
patitvä caraëäv asrair
nyañiïcat kåñëa-vicyutaù
SYNONYMS
därukaù—Däruka; dvärakäm—in Dvärakä; etya—arriving;
vasudeva-ugrasenayoù—of Vasudeva and Ugrasena; patitvä—falling down;
caraëau—at the feet; asraiù—with his tears; nyañiïcat—drenched;
kåñëa-vicyutaù—deprived of Lord Kåñëa.
TRANSLATION
As soon as Däruka reached Dvärakä, he threw himself at the feet of
Vasudeva and Ugrasena and drenched their feet with his tears, lamenting the
loss of Lord Kåñëa.
TEXTS 16-17
k(TayaAmaAs$a inaDanaM
va{SNAInaAM k{(tµazAAe na{pa
tacC_$tvaAeiã"¢aô$d"yaA
janaA: zAAek(ivamaURicCR$taA:
ta‡a sma tvair"taA jagmau:
k{(SNAivaëeSaivaù"laA:
vyas$ava: zAer"tae ya‡a
ÁaAtayaAe £anta @Ananama,
kathayäm äsa nidhanaà
våñëénäà kåtsnaço nåpa
tac chrutvodvigna-hådayä
janäù çoka-virmürcchitäù
tatra sma tvaritä jagmuù
kåñëa-viçleña-vihvaläù
vyasavaù çerate yatra
jïätayo ghnanta änanam
SYNONYMS
kathayäm äsa—he related; nidhanam—the destruction; våñëénäm—of the
Våñëis; kåtsnaçaù—total; nåpa—O King Parékñit; tat—that; çrutvä—hearing;
udvigna—agitated; hådayäù—their hearts; janäù—the people; çoka—by
sorrow; virmürcchitäù—rendered senseless; tatra—there; sma—indeed;
tvaritäù—swiftly; jagmuù—they went; kåñëa-viçleña—by separation from Lord
Kåñëa; vihvaläù—overwhelmed; vyasavaù—lifeless; çerate—they lay;
yatra—where; jïätayaù—their relatives; ghnantaù—striking; änanam—their
own faces.
TRANSLATION
Däruka delivered the account of the total destruction of the Våñëis, and
upon hearing this, O Parékñit, the people became deeply distraught in their
hearts and stunned with sorrow. Feeling the overwhelming pain of separation
from Kåñëa, they struck their own faces while hurrying to the place where their
relatives lay dead.
TEXT 18
de"vak(L r"Aeih"NAI caEva
vas$aude"vastaTaA s$autaAE
k{(SNAr"AmaAvapazyanta:
zAAek(AtaAR ivajaò": sma{itama,
devaké rohiëé caiva
vasudevas tathä sutau
kåñëa-rämäv apaçyantaù
çokärtä vijahuù småtim
SYNONYMS
devaké—Devaké; rohiëé—Rohiëé; ca—also; eva—indeed;
vasudevaù—Vasudeva; tathä—as well; sutau—their two sons;
kåñëa-rämau—Kåñëa and Räma; apaçyantaù—not seeing; çoka-ärtäù—feeling
the pain of lamentation; vijahuù—they lost; småtim—their consciousness.
TRANSLATION
When Devaké, Rohiëé and Vasudeva could not find their sons, Kåñëa and
Räma, they lost consciousness out of anguish.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, the original Devaké,
Rohiëé and other ladies of Dvärakä actually remained in Dvärakä, invisible to
the eyes of the material world, whereas the demigods who represented partial
aspects of Devaké, Rohiëé and so on went to Prabhäsa to see their dead
relatives.
TEXT 19
‘aANAAMê ivajaò"sta‡a
BagAvaiã"r"h"Ataur"A:
opagAu÷ pataI%MstaAta
icataAmaAç&ç&ò": iñya:
präëäàç ca vijahus tatra
bhagavad-virahäturäù
upaguhya patéàs täta
citäm äruruhuù striyaù
SYNONYMS
präëän—their lives; ca—and; vijahuù—they gave up; tatra—there;
bhagavat—from the Personality of Godhead; viraha—because of separation;
äturäù—tormented; upagahya—embracing; patén—their husbands; täta—my
dear Parékñit; citäm—the funeral pyre; äruruhuù—they climbed upon;
striyaù—the wives.
TRANSLATION
Tormented by separation from the Lord, His parents gave up their lives at
that very spot. My dear Parékñit, the wives of the Yädavas then climbed onto
the funeral pyres, embracing their dead husbands.
TEXT 20
r"Amapatnyaê taÚe"h"ma,
opagAu÷Ai¢amaAivazAna,
vas$aude"vapatnyastaÕ"A‡aM
‘aâu°aAd"Ina, h"re": µauSaA:
k{(SNApatnyaAe'ivazAªai¢aM
ç&ifmaNyaAâAstad"Aitmak(A:
räma-patnyaç ca tad-deham
upaguhyägnim äviçan
vasudeva-patnyas tad-gätraà
pradyumnädén hareù snuñäù
kåñëa-patnyo 'viçann agnià
rukmiëy-ädyäs tad-ätmikäù
SYNONYMS
räma-patnyaù—the wives of Lord Balaräma; ca—and; tat-deham—His body;
upaguhya—embracing; agnim—the fire; äviçan—entered;
vasudeva-patnyaù—the wives of Vasudeva; tat-gätram—his body;
pradyumna-ädén—Pradyumna and the others; hareù—of Lord Hari;
snuñäù—the daughters-in-law; kåñëa-patnyaù—the wives of Lord Kåñëa;
aviçan—entered; agnim—the fire; rukmiëé-ädyäù—led by Queen Rukmiëé;
tat-ätmikäù—whose consciousness was completely absorbed in Him.
TRANSLATION
The wives of Lord Balaräma also entered the fire and embraced His body,
and Vasudeva's wives entered his fire and embraced his body. The
daughters-in-law of Lord Hari entered the funeral fires of their respective
husbands, headed by Pradyumna. And Rukmiëé and the other wives of Lord
Kåñëa—whose hearts were completely absorbed in Him—entered His fire.
PURPORT
It is understood that the anguished scene described here is a display of the
Lord's illusory potency, adding a final dramatic note to Lord Kåñëa's pastimes
on the earth. In reality, Lord Kåñëa returned to His eternal abode in His
original body, and His eternal associates returned with Him. This final
heartbreaking scene of the Lord's pastimes is a creation of the Lord's internal
potency that brings the Lord's manifest pastimes to a perfect dramatic end.
TEXT 21
@jauRna: ‘aeyas$a: s$aKyau:
k{(SNAsya ivar"h"Ataur":
@AtmaAnaM s$aAntvayaAmaAs$a
k{(SNAgAItaE: s$aäu"il(iBa:
arjunaù preyasaù sakhyuù
kåñëasya virahäturaù
ätmänaà säntvayäm äsa
kåñëa-gétaiù sad-uktibhiù
SYNONYMS
arjunaù—Arjuna; preyasaù—of his dear; sakhyuù—friend; kåñëasya—Lord
Kåñëa; viraha—because of the separation; äturaù—distressed;
ätmänam—himself; säntvayäm äsa—consoled; kåñëa-gétaiù—with the song
sung by Lord Kåñëa (the Bhagavad-gétä); sat-uktibhiù—with the transcendental
words.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna felt great distress over separation from Lord Kåñëa, his dearmost
friend. But he consoled himself by remembering the transcendental words the
Lord had sung to him.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, Arjuna remembered such verses from
the Gétä as:
nähaà prakäçaù sarvasya
yoga-mäyä-samävåtaù
müòho 'yaà näbhijänäti
loko mäm ajam avyayam
(Bg. 7.25)
"I am never manifest to the foolish and unintelligent. For them I am covered
by My eternal creative potency (yoga-mäyä), and so the deluded world knows
Me not, who am unborn and infallible."
Similarly, Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has mentioned the Gétä verse mäm evaiñyasi
satyaà te pratijäne priyo 'si me (Bg. 18.65): "You will come to Me without fail. I
promise you this because you are My very dear friend." He has also quoted from
the Svarga-parva of the Mahäbhärata as follows:
dadarça tatra govindaà
brahmaëe vapuñänvitam
tenaiva dåñöa-pürveëa
sädåçyenopasücitam
dépyamänaà sva-vapuñä
divyair astrair upaskåtam
cakra-prabhåtibhir ghorair
divyaiù puruña-vigrahaiù
upäsyamänaà véreëa
phälgunena su-varcasä
yathä-svarüpaà kaunteya
tathaiva madhusüdanam
täv ubhau puruña-vyäghrau
samudvékñya yudhiñöhiram
yathärhaà pratipedäte
püjayä deva-püjitau
"There Yudhiñöhira saw Lord Govinda as the Absolute Truth in His original,
personal form. He appeared just as Yudhiñöhira had seen Him before, with all
the same characteristics. He was glowing brilliantly with the effulgence
coming from His own body, and He was surrounded by His transcendental
weapons—the disc and so on—which appeared in their fearsome personified
forms. O descendant of Kunté, Lord Madhusüdana was being worshiped by the
effulgent hero Arjuna, who also appeared in his original form. When these two
lions among men, who are worshipable by the demigods, noticed the presence
of Yudhiñöhira, they approached him with proper respect and offered him
worship."
TEXT 22
banDaUnaAM naí"gAAe‡aANAAma,
@jauRna: s$aAmpar"Aiyak(ma,
h"taAnaAM k(Ar"yaAmaAs$a
yaTaAvad"naupaUvaRzA:
bandhünäà nañöa-goträëäm
arjunaù sämparäyikam
hatänäà kärayäm äsa
yathä-vad anupürvaçaù
SYNONYMS
bandhünäm—of the relatives; nañöa-goträëäm—who had no remaining
immediate family members; arjunaù—Arjuna; sämparäyikam—the funeral
rites; hatänäm—of the killed; kärayäm äsa—had executed; yathä-vat—as
prescribed in the Vedas; anupürvaçaù—in order of the seniority of the
deceased.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna then saw to it that the funeral rites were properly carried out for the
dead, who had no remaining male family members. He executed the required
ceremonies for each of the Yadus, one after another.
TEXT 23
ã"Ar"k(AM h"ir"NAA tyal(AM
s$amau"‰"Ae'plaAvayatºaNAAta,
vajaRiyatvaA mah"Ar"Aja
™aImaà"gAvad"Alayama,
dvärakäà hariëä tyaktäà
samudro 'plävayat kñaëät
varjayitvä mahä-räja
çrémad-bhagavad-älayam
SYNONYMS
dvärakäm—Dvärakä; hariëä—by Lord Hari; tyaktäm—abandoned;
samudraù—the ocean; aplävayat—overflooded; kñaëät—immediately;
varjayitvä—except for; mahä-räja—O King; çrémat-bhagavat—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; älayam—the residence.
TRANSLATION
As soon as Dvärakä was abandoned by the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
the ocean flooded it on all sides, O King, sparing only His palace.
PURPORT
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé explains that whereas the external manifestation of the
Lord's abode was covered by the ocean, the Lord's eternal Dvärakä exists
beyond the material universe and certainly beyond the material ocean.
Dvärakä had been constructed by Viçvakarmä, the architect of the demigods,
and the Sudharmä assembly hall had been brought from heaven. In that city
there were many beautiful and splendorous residences of the aristocratic Yadu
dynasty, and the most beautiful residence of all was that of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé mentions that even in the modern
age, people who live near the site of the original Dvärakä sometimes catch a
glimpse of it in the ocean. Ultimately, the Lord's associates and abode are
eternal, and one who understands this is qualified to become fully Kåñëa
conscious.
TEXT 24
inatyaM s$aiªaih"tasta‡a
BagAvaAnmaDaus$aUd"na:
sma{tyaAzAeSaAzAuBah"rM"
s$avaRmaËÿlamaËÿlama,
nityaà sannihitas tatra
bhagavän madhusüdanaù
småtyäçeñäçubha-haraà
sarva-maìgala-maìgalam
SYNONYMS
nityam—eternally; sannihitaù—present; tatra—there; bhagavän—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; madhusüdanaù—Madhusüdana; småtyä—by
remembrance; açeña-açubha—of everything inauspicious; haram—which takes
away; sarva-maìgala—of all auspicious things; maìgalam—the most
auspicious.
TRANSLATION
Lord Madhusüdana, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is eternally
present in Dvärakä. It is the most auspicious of all auspicious places, and merely
remembering it destroys all contamination.
TEXT 25
ñIbaAlava{Ü"AnaAd"Aya
h"tazAeSaAnDanaÃaya:
wn‰"‘asTaM s$amaAvaezya
va†aM ta‡aAByaSaecayata,
stré-bäla-våddhän ädäya
hata-çeñän dhanaïjayaù
indraprasthaà samäveçya
vajraà taträbhyañecayat
SYNONYMS
stré—the women; bäla—children; våddhän—and elders; ädäya—taking;
hata—of the killed; çeñän—the survivors; dhanaïjayaù—Arjuna;
indraprastham—in the capital of the Päëòavas; samäveçya—resettling;
vajram—Vajra, the son of Aniruddha; tatra—there; abhyañecayat—placed
upon the throne.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna took the survivors of the Yadu dynasty—the women, children and
old men—to Indraprastha, where he installed Vajra as ruler of the Yadus.
TEXT 26
™autvaA s$auô$ã"DaM r"Ajaªa,
@jauRnaAÔae ipataAmah"A:
tvaAM tau vaMzADarM" k{(tvaA
jagmau: s$avaeR mah"ApaTama,
çrutvä suhåd-vadhaà räjann
arjunät te pitämahäù
tväà tu vaàça-dharaà kåtvä
jagmuù sarve mahä-patham
SYNONYMS
çrutvä—hearing; suhåt—of their friend; vadham—the death; räjan—O King;
arjunät—from Arjuna; te—your; pitämahäù—grandfathers (Yudhiñöhira and
his brothers); tväm—you; tu—and; vaàça-dharam—the maintainer of the
dynasty; kåtvä—making; jagmuù—they left; sarve—all of them;
mahä-patham—for the great journey.
TRANSLATION
Hearing from Arjuna of the death of their friend, my dear King, your
grandfathers established you as the maintainer of the dynasty and left to prepare
for their departure from this world.
TEXT 27
ya WtaÚe"vade"vasya
ivaSNAAe: k(maARiNA janma ca
k(LtaRyaecC)$Ü"yaA matyaR:
s$avaRpaApaE: ‘amaucyatae
ya etad deva-devasya
viñëoù karmäëi janma ca
kértayec chraddhayä martyaù
sarva-päpaiù pramucyate
SYNONYMS
yaù—who; etat—these; deva-devasya—of the Lord of lords; viñëoù—of Lord
Viñëu; karmäëi—the activities; janma—the birth; ca—and; kértayet—chants;
çraddhayä—with faith; martyaù—a human being; sarva-päpaiù—from all sins;
pramucyate—becomes completely liberated.
TRANSLATION
A person who with faith engages in chanting the glories of these various
pastimes and incarnations of Viñëu, the Lord of lords, will gain liberation from
all sins.
TEXT 28
wtTaM h"re"BaRgAvataAe ç&icar"AvataAr"-
vaIyaARiNA baAlacair"taAina ca zAntamaAina
@nya‡a caeh" ca ™autaAina gA{NAnmanauSyaAe
BailM( par"AM par"mahM"s$agAtaAE laBaeta
itthaà harer bhagavato rucirävatäravéryäëi
bäla-caritäni ca çantamäni
anyatra ceha ca çrutäni gåëan manuñyo
bhaktià paräà paramahaàsa-gatau labheta
SYNONYMS
ittham—thus; hareù—of Lord Hari; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; rucira—attractive; avatära—of the incarnations; véryäëi—the
exploits; bäla—childhood; caritäni—pastimes; ca—and; çam-tamäni—most
auspicious; anyatra—elsewhere; ca—and; iha—here; ca—also; çrutäni—heard;
gåëan—clearly chanting; manuñyaù—a person; bhaktim—devotional service;
paräm—transcendental; paramahaàsa—of the perfect sages; gatau—for the
destination (Lord Çré Kåñëa); labheta—will attain.
TRANSLATION
The all-auspicious exploits of the all-attractive incarnations of Lord Çré
Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and also the pastimes He
performed as a child, are described in this Çrémad-Bhägavatam and in other
scriptures. Anyone who clearly chants these descriptions of His pastimes will
attain transcendental loving service unto Lord Kåñëa, who is the goal of all
perfect sages.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Eleventh Canto, Thirty-first Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Disappearance of Lord Çré Kåñëa."
The Eleventh Canto was completed at the New Gokula South American
pilgrimage site, state of Sao Paulo, Brazil, on Friday, March 26, 1982.
END OF THE ELEVENTH CANTO