14. Brahmä's Prayers to Lord Kåñëa
This chapter describes the prayers Brahmä offered to Lord Kåñëa, who is
also known as Nanda-nandana.
For His satisfaction, Brahmä first praised the beauty of the Lord's
transcendental limbs and then declared that His original identity of sweetness
is even more difficult to comprehend than His opulence. Only by the
devotional process of hearing and chanting transcendental sounds received
from Vedic authorities can one realize the Personality of Godhead. It is
fruitless to try to realize God through processes outside the scope of Vedic
authority.
The mystery of the Personality of Godhead, who is the reservoir of
unlimited spiritual qualities, is inconceivable; it is even more difficult to
understand than the impersonal Supreme. Thus only by the mercy of God can
one understand His glories. Finally realizing this, Brahmä repeatedly
condemned his own actions and recognized that Lord Çré Kåñëa, the ultimate
shelter of the universe, is Brahmä's own father, the original Näräyaëa. In this
way Brahmä begged the Lord's forgiveness.
Brahmä then glorified the inconceivable opulence of the Personality of
Godhead and described the ways in which Brahmä and Çiva differ from Lord
Viñëu, the reason for the Supreme Lord's appearance in various species of
demigods, animals and so on, the eternal nature of the pastimes of the
Personality of Godhead, and the temporality of the material world. By
knowing the Supreme Personality in truth, the individual spirit soul can
achieve liberation from bondage. In actuality, however, both liberation and
bondage are unreal, for it is only from the living entity's conditioned outlook
that his bondage and liberation are produced. Thinking the personal form of
Lord Kåñëa illusory, fools reject His lotus feet and look elsewhere to find the
Supreme Self. But the futility of their search is the obvious proof of their
foolishness. There is simply no way to understand the truth of the Personality
of Godhead without His mercy.
Having established this conclusion, Lord Brahmä analyzed the great good
fortune of the residents of Vraja and then personally prayed to be born there
even as a blade of grass, a bush or a creeper. Indeed, the homes of the residents
of Våndävana are not prisons of material existence but rather abodes envied
even by the jïänés and yogés. On the other hand, any home without a
connection to Lord Kåñëa is in fact a prison cell of material existence. Finally,
Brahmä offered his whole self at the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord and,
praising Him again and again, circumambulated Him and took his leave.
Lord Kåñëa then gathered the animals Brahmä stole and led them to the
place on the Yamunä's bank where the cowherd boys had been taking lunch.
The same friends who had been present before were sitting there now. By the
power of Kåñëa's illusory energy, they were not at all aware of what had
happened. Thus when Kåñëa arrived with the calves, the boys told Him,
"You've returned so quickly! Very good. As long as You were gone we couldn't
take even a morsel of food, so come and eat."
Laughing at the words of the cowherd boys, Lord Kåñëa began taking His
meal in their company. While eating, Kåñëa pointed out to His young friends
the skin of the python, and the boys thought, "Kåñëa has just now killed this
terrible snake." Indeed, later they related to the residents of Våndävana the
incident of Kåñëa's killing the Agha demon. In this way, the cowherd boys
described pastimes that Lord Kåñëa had performed in His bälya age (one to
five), even though His paugaëòa age (six to ten) had begun.
Çukadeva Gosvämé concludes this chapter by explaining how the gopés
loved Lord Kåñëa even more than they loved their own sons.
TEXT 1
™aI“aöAevaAca
naAEmaIx"Ya tae'”avapauSae taix"d"mbar"Aya
gAuÃaAvataMs$apair"ipacC$las$anmauKaAya
vanya›ajae k(valavae‡aivaSaANAvaeNAula
ºmai™ayae ma{äu"pade" pazAupaAËÿjaAya
çré-brahmoväca
nauméòya te 'bhra-vapuñe taòid-ambaräya
guïjävataàsa-paripiccha-lasan-mukhäya
vanya-sraje kavala-vetra-viñäëa-veëulakñma-
çriye mådu-pade paçupäìgajäya
SYNONYMS
çré-brahmä uväca—Lord Brahmä said; naumi—I offer praise; éòya—O most
worshipable one; te—unto You; abhra—like a dark cloud; vapuñe—whose body;
taòit—like lightning; ambaräya—whose garment; guïjä—made of small
berries; avataàsa—with ornaments (for the ears); paripiccha—and peacock
feathers; lasat—resplendent; mukhäya-whose face; vanya-sraje—wearing
garlands of forest flowers; kavala—a morsel of food; vetra—a stick; viñäëa—a
buffalo-horn bugle; veëu—and a flute; lakñma—characterized by; çriye—whose
beauty; mådu—soft; pade—whose feet; paçu-pa—of the cowherd (Nanda
Mahäräja); aìga-jäya—unto the son.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä said: My dear Lord, You are the only worshipable Lord, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore I offer my humble obeisances
and prayers just to please You. O son of the king of the cowherds, Your
transcendental body is dark blue like a new cloud, Your garment is brilliant like
lightning, and the beauty of Your face is enhanced by Your guïjä earrings and
the peacock feather on Your head. Wearing garlands of various forest flowers
and leaves, and equipped with a herding stick, a buffalo horn and a flute, You
stand beautifully with a morsel of food in Your hand.
PURPORT
In the previous chapter Brahmä, the creator of the universe, tried to
bewilder the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Kåñëa, by stealing His
cowherd boyfriends and calves. But by a slight exhibition of Kåñëa's own
mystic potency, Brahmä himself was completely bewildered, and now with
great humility and devotion he offers his humble obeisances and prayers unto
the Lord.
The word kavala in this verse refers to a morsel of rice mixed with yogurt
that Kåñëa held in His left hand. According to Sanätana Gosvämé, the Lord
held a cowherding stick and a buffalo horn pressed under His left arm, and His
flute was placed under His belt. Beautiful young Kåñëa, decorated with
multicolored forest minerals, exhibited opulences far greater than those of
Vaikuëöha. Although Brahmä had seen innumerable four-armed forms of the
Lord, he now surrendered unto the lotus feet of the two-armed form of Kåñëa,
who appeared as the son of Nanda Mahäräja. Brahmä offered his prayers to
that form.
TEXT 2
@syaAipa de"va vapauSaAe mad"nauƒah"sya
svaecC$Amayasya na tau BaUtamayasya k(Ae'ipa
naezAe maih" tvavais$atauM manas$aAntare"NA
s$aAºaAÔavaEva ik(mautaAtmas$auKaAnauBaUtae:
asyäpi deva vapuño mad-anugrahasya
svecchä-mayasya na tu bhüta-mayasya ko 'pi
neçe mahi tv avasituà manasäntareëa
säkñät tavaiva kim utätma-sukhänubhüteù
SYNONYMS
asya—of this; api—even; deva—O Lord; vapuñaù—the body;
mat-anugrahasya—which has shown mercy to me; sva-icchä-mayasya—which
appears in response to the desires of Your pure devotees; na—not; tu—on the
other hand; bhüta-mayasya—a product of matter; kaù—Brahmä; api—even; na
éçe—I am not able; mahi—the potency; tu—indeed; avasitum—to estimate;
manasä—with my mind; antareëa—which is controlled and withdrawn;
säkñät—directly; tava—Your; eva—indeed; kim uta—what to speak;
ätma—within Yourself; sukha—of happiness; anubhüteù—of Your experience.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, neither I nor anyone else can estimate the potency of this
transcendental body of Yours, which has shown such mercy to me and which
appears just to fulfill the desires of Your pure devotees. Although my mind is
completely withdrawn from material affairs, I cannot understand Your personal
form. How, then, could I possibly understand the happiness You experience
within Yourself?
PURPORT
In Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Chapter Fourteen, Çréla
Prabhupäda explains that in the present verse Lord Brahmä expressed the
following prayerful sentiment: "Your appearance as a cowherd child is for the
benefit of the devotees, and although I have committed an offense at Your
lotus feet by stealing away Your boys and calves, I can understand that You
have bestowed Your mercy upon me. That is Your transcendental quality: You
are very affectionate toward Your devotees. But in spite of Your great affection
for me, I cannot estimate the potency of Your bodily activities. It is to be
understood that when I, Lord Brahmä, the supreme personality of this
universe, cannot estimate the childlike body of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, then what to speak of others? And if I cannot estimate the spiritual
potency of Your childlike body, then what can I understand about Your
transcendental pastimes? Therefore, as it is said in the Bhagavad-gétä, anyone
who can understand a little of the transcendental pastimes, appearance and
disappearance of the Lord immediately becomes eligible to enter the kingdom
of God after quitting the material body. This statement is confirmed in the
Vedas, where it is stated. Simply by understanding the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, one can overcome the chain of repeated birth and death. I therefore
recommend that people should not try to understand You by their speculative
knowledge."
When Brahmä disrespected the supreme status of the Personality of
Godhead, Lord Kåñëa first bewildered him by exhibiting the Lord's own
transcendental power. Then, having humbled His devotee Brahmä, Kåñëa gave
him His personal audience.
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, Lord Kåñëa's
transcendental body can also function through the agency of His plenary
expansions, called viñëu-tattva. As stated by Brahmä himself in the
Brahma-saàhitä (5.32): aìgäni yasya sakalendriya-våttimanti. This verse
indicates not only that the Lord can perform any bodily function with any of
His limbs but also that He can see through the eyes of His Viñëu expansions or,
indeed, through the eyes of any living entity, and similarly that He can hear
through the ears of any Viñëu or jéva expansion. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté
Öhäkura points out that although the Lord can perform any function with any
one of His senses, in His transcendental pastimes as Çré Kåñëa He generally
sees with His eyes, touches with His hands, hears with His ears and so on. Thus
He behaves like the most beautiful and charming young cowherd boy.
The Vedic knowledge expands from Lord Brahmä, who is described in the
first verse of Çrémad-Bhägavatam as ädi-kavi, the primeval Vedic scholar. Yet
Brahmä could not understand the transcendental body of Lord Kåñëa, because
it is beyond the reach of ordinary Vedic knowledge. Among all the
transcendental forms of the Lord, the two-armed form of Govinda-Kåñëa—is
original and supreme. Thus Lord Govinda's pastimes of stealing butter,
drinking the gopés' breast-milk, tending the calves, playing His flute and
playing childhood sports are extraordinary even in comparison with the
activities of the Lord's Viñëu expansions.
TEXT 3
ÁaAnae ‘ayaAs$amaud"paAsya namanta Wva
jaIvainta s$anmauKair"taAM Bavad"IyavaAtaARma,
sTaAnae isTataA: ™auitagAtaAM tanauvaAx.~manaAeiBar,"
yae ‘aAyazAAe'ijata ijataAe'pyais$a taEiñlaAefyaAma,
jïäne prayäsam udapäsya namanta eva
jévanti san-mukharitäà bhavadéya-värtäm
sthäne sthitäù çruti-gatäà tanu-väì-manobhir
ye präyaço 'jita jito 'py asi tais tri-lokyäm
SYNONYMS
jïäne—for knowledge; prayäsam—the endeavor; udapäsya—giving up
completely; namantaù—offering obeisances; eva—simply; jévanti—live;
sat-mukharitäm—chanted by the pure devotees; bhavadéya-värtäm—topics
related to You; sthäne—in their material position; sthitäù—remaining;
çruti-gatäm—received by hearing; tanu—with their body; väk—words;
manobhiù—and mind; ye—who; präyaçaù—for the most part; ajita—O
unconquerable one; jitaù—conquered; api—nevertheless; asi—You become;
taiù—by them; tri-lokyäm—within the three worlds.
TRANSLATION
Those who, even while remaining situated in their established social
positions, throw away the process of speculative knowledge and with their body,
words and mind offer all respects to descriptions of Your personality and
activities, dedicating their lives to these narrations, which are vibrated by You
personally and by Your pure devotees, certainly conquer Your Lordship,
although You are otherwise unconquerable by anyone within the three worlds.
PURPORT
Here the word udapäsya clearly indicates that one should not even slightly
endeavor to understand the Absolute Truth by the process of mental
speculation, for it invariably carries one to an imperfect, impersonal
understanding of God. The word jévanti indicates that a devotee who always
hears about Lord Kåñëa will go back home, back to Godhead, even if he can do
nothing except maintain his existence and hear topics concerning the Lord.
Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé has explained the words tanu-väì-manobhiù ("by
the body, words and mind") in three ways. In reference to devotees, through
their body, words and mind they are able to conquer Lord Kåñëa. Thus
becoming perfect in Kåñëa consciousness, they can touch His lotus feet with
their hands, call Him to come with their words, and attain His direct audience
within their mind simply by thinking about Him.
In the case of nondevotees, the words tanu-väì-manobhiù refer to the word
ajita, "unconquered," and indicate that those not engaged in the loving service
of Lord Kåñëa cannot conquer the Absolute Truth by their bodily strength,
verbal expertise or mental power. Despite all their endeavors, the ultimate
truth remains beyond their reach.
In reference to the word jitaù, "conquered," the words tanu-väì-manobhiù
indicate that the pure devotees of Lord Kåñëa conquer His body, words and
mind. Lord Kåñëa's body is conquered because He always remains by the side of
His pure devotees; Lord Kåñëa's words are conquered because He always chants
the glories of His devotees; and Lord Kåñëa's mind is conquered because He
always thinks about His loving devotees.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has explained the words
tanu-väì-manobhiù in regard to the word namantaù, "offering obeisances." He
explains that the devotees can take full advantage of the transcendental topics
of the Lord by offering all respects to those topics with their body, words and
mind. One should engage his body by touching the ground with his hands and
head while offering obeisances to the topics of the Lord; one should engage his
words by praising transcendental literatures such as Bhagavad-gétä and
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, as well as the devotees who are preaching such literatures;
and one should engage his mind by feeling great reverence and pleasure while
hearing the transcendental topics of the Lord. In this way, a sincere devotee
who has acquired even a small amount of transcendental knowledge about
Lord Kåñëa can conquer Him and thus go back home, back to Godhead, for
eternal life at the Lord's side.
TEXT 4
™aeya:s$a{itaM Bail(maud"sya tae ivaBaAe
iflazyainta yae ke(valabaAeDalabDayae
taeSaAmas$aAE flaezAla Wva izASyatae
naAnyaâTaA sTaUlatauSaAvaGaAitanaAma,
çreyaù-såtià bhaktim udasya te vibho
kliçyanti ye kevala-bodha-labdhaye
teñäm asau kleçala eva çiñyate
nänyad yathä sthüla-tuñävaghätinäm
SYNONYMS
çreyaù—of supreme benefit; såtim—the path; bhaktim—devotional service;
udasya—rejecting; te—they; vibho—O almighty Lord; kliçyanti—struggle;
ye—who; kevala—exclusive; bodha—of knowledge; labdhaye—for the
achievement; teñäm—for them; asau—this; kleçalaù—botheration;
eva—merely; çiñyate—remains; na—nothing; anyat—other; yathä—just as;
sthüla-tuña—empty husks; avaghätinäm—for those who are beating.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, devotional service unto You is the best path for
self-realization. If someone gives up that path and engages in the cultivation of
speculative knowledge, he will simply undergo a troublesome process and will
not achieve his desired result. As a person who beats an empty husk of wheat
cannot get grain, one who simply speculates cannot achieve self-realization. His
only gain is trouble.
PURPORT
Loving service to the Supreme Person is the natural and eternal function of
every living entity. If a person renounces his own constitutional function and
instead laboriously seeks so-called enlightenment through impersonal,
speculative knowledge, his result is simply the trouble and bother that come
from following an artificial process. A fool may beat an empty husk, not
knowing that the grain has already been removed. Similarly foolish is the
person who throws his mind again and again into the pursuit of knowledge
without surrendering to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for it is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead who is the very substance and goal of
knowledge, just as grain is the substance and goal of the entire agricultural
effort. Vedic knowledge or, indeed, material science without the Personality of
Godhead is exactly like an empty and useless husk of wheat.
One may argue that by practicing yoga or cultivating impersonal knowledge
one can acquire prestige, wealth, mystic powers or even impersonal liberation.
But these so-called gains are actually useless, because they do not situate the
living being in his constitutional position of loving service to the Supreme
Lord. Therefore such results, being superfluous to the living being's essential
nature, are impermanent. As stated in the Nåsiàha Puräëa, patreñu puñpeñu
phaleñu toyeñv akréta-labhyeñu vadaiva satsu/ bhaktyä su-labhye puruñe puräëe
muktyai kim arthaà kriyate prayatnaù: "Since the primeval Personality of
Godhead is easily attained by offering Him such things as leaves, flowers, fruits
and water, which are all found without difficulty, why does one need to
endeavor for liberation separately?"
Although the process of devotional service to Lord Kåñëa is very simple, it
is extremely difficult for stubborn conditioned souls to completely humble
themselves before the Supreme Personality of Godhead and absorb themselves
twenty-four hours a day in His loving service. The mood of loving service is
anathema to belligerent conditioned souls determined to defy God and enjoy.
When such stubborn conditioned souls attempt to bypass surrendering to God
through proud attempts at philosophical speculation, austerity, and yoga, they
are turned back to the material platform by the powerful laws of God and
violently merged into the heaving ocean of insignificance called the material
world.
TEXT 5
paure"h" BaUmana, bah"vaAe'ipa yaAeigAnas$a,
tvad"ipaRtaeh"A inajak(maRlabDayaA
ivabauDya BaftyaEva k(TaAepanaItayaA
‘apaeid"re"'ÃaAe'cyauta tae gAitaM par"Ama,
pureha bhüman bahavo 'pi yoginas
tvad-arpitehä nija-karma-labdhayä
vibudhya bhaktyaiva kathopanétayä
prapedire 'ïjo 'cyuta te gatià paräm
SYNONYMS
purä—previously; iha—in this world; bhüman—O almighty Lord;
bahavaù—many; api—indeed; yoginaù—followers of the path of yoga;
tvat—unto You; arpita—having offered; éhäù—all their endeavors;
nija-karma—by their prescribed duties; labdhayä—which is achieved;
vibudhya—coming to understand; bhaktyä—by devotional service;
eva—indeed; kathä-upanétayä—cultivated through hearing and chanting
topics about You; prapedire—they achieved by surrender; aïjaù—easily;
acyuta—O infallible one; te—Your; gatim—destination; paräm—supreme.
TRANSLATION
O almighty Lord, in the past many yogés in this world achieved the platform
of devotional service by offering all their endeavors unto You and faithfully
carrying out their prescribed duties. Through such devotional service, perfected
by the processes of hearing and chanting about You, they came to understand
You, O infallible one, and could easily surrender to You and achieve Your
supreme abode.
TEXT 6
taTaAipa BaUmanmaih"maAgAuNAsya tae
ivabaAeä,"DaumahR"tyamalaAntar"AtmaiBa:
@ivai‚(yaAtsvaAnauBavaAd"è&pataAe
÷nanyabaAeDyaAtmatayaA na caAnyaTaA
tathäpi bhüman mahimäguëasya te
viboddhum arhaty amaläntar-ätmabhiù
avikriyät svänubhaväd arüpato
hy ananya-bodhyätmatayä na cänyathä
SYNONYMS
tathä api—nevertheless; bhüman—O limitless one; mahimä—the potency;
aguëasya—of Him who has no material qualities; te—of You; viboddhum—to
understand; arhati—one is able; amala—spotless; antaù-ätmabhiù—with mind
and senses; avikriyät—not based on material differentiations;
sva-anubhavät—by perception of the Supreme Soul; arüpataù—without
attachment to material forms; hi—indeed; ananya-bodhya-ätmatayä—as
self-manifested, without the help of any other illuminating agent; na—not;
ca—and; anyathä—otherwise.
TRANSLATION
Nondevotees, however, cannot realize You in Your full personal feature.
Nevertheless, it may be possible for them to realize Your expansion as the
impersonal Supreme by cultivating direct perception of the Self within the
heart. But they can do this only by purifying their mind and senses of all
conceptions of material distinctions and all attachment to material sense objects.
Only in this way will Your impersonal feature manifest itself to them.
PURPORT
It is difficult for conditioned souls to understand all the transcendental
features of the Supreme Lord. As confirmed in the First Canto of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.11): brahmeti paramätmeti bhagavän iti çabdyate. The
transcendental existence of God is understood progressively as the impersonal
effulgence, the localized Supersoul in one's heart, and finally the Supreme
Personality of Godhead existing in His eternal abode. Lord Kåñëa's
transcendental existence is beyond the qualities of material nature. Thus here
the Lord is referred to as aguëasya, without material qualities.
Even by practicing yoga or engaging in advanced philosophical speculation,
one will find it very difficult to understand clearly the transcendental
existence beyond the modes of material nature. And these processes are
virtually useless for understanding the Lord's own unlimited transcendental
qualities, which are far beyond the impersonal conception of spiritual
existence. Only by the mercy of the pure devotees of the Lord or by associating
with the Lord Himself can one begin the process of realizing the personal
feature of God—a process that culminates in pure Kåñëa consciousness, the
final and supreme perfection of knowledge.
TEXT 7
gAuNAAtmanastae'ipa gAuNAAna, ivamaAtauM
ih"taAvataI[%nasya k( wRizAre"'sya
k(Alaena yaEvaAR ivaimataA: s$auk(lpaEr,"
BaUpaAMzAva: Kae imaih"k(A âuBaAs$a:
guëätmanas te 'pi guëän vimätuà
hitävatéånasya ka éçire 'sya
kälena yair vä vimitäù su-kalpair
bhü-päàçavaù khe mihikä dyu-bhäsaù
SYNONYMS
guëa-ätmanaù—of the possessor of all superior qualities; te—You;
api—certainly; guëän—the qualities; vimätum—to count;
hita-avatérëasya—who have descended for the benefit of all living entities;
ke—who; éçire—are able; asya—of the universe; kälena—in due course of
time; yaiù—by whom; vä—or; vimitäù—counted; su-kalpaiù—by great
scientists; bhü-päàçavaù—the atoms of an earthly planet; khe—in the sky;
mihikäù—the particles of snow; dyu-bhäsaù—the illumination of stars and
planets.
TRANSLATION
In time, learned philosophers or scientists might be able to count all the
atoms of the earth, the particles of snow, or perhaps even the shining molecules
radiating from the sun, the stars and other luminaries. But among these learned
men, who could possibly count the unlimited transcendental qualities possessed
by You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who have descended onto the
surface of the earth for the benefit of all living entities?
PURPORT
Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé explains that Lord Kåñëa is guëätmä, "the soul of
all superior qualities," because He gives them life. For example, one may discuss
in an abstract way such qualities as generosity, intelligence and mercy, but
they come to life only when a living person exhibits them. Thus Lord Kåñëa is
guëätmä because He descends to the material world and reestablishes religious
principles by exhibiting all godly qualities Himself and inspiring them in
others. A living entity who develops the transcendental qualities found in the
Lord receives immeasurable benefit and eventually goes with the Lord back to
His own abode, where all living beings are liberated and fully endowed with
the transcendental nature.
Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé further explains that the Lord manifests a specific
spiritual quality for the benefit of each living entity. Since there are
innumerable living entities within the confines of the material creation, the
Lord manifests infinite qualities. Thus every conditioned soul can appreciate
the Supreme Lord in a particular way.
The example is given here that even if the most learned scholars could
someday count the particles of earth, snow and light, they would still fail to
understand the qualities of the Lord. In this example earth, snow and light are
progressively more subtle; thus it is to be understood that there is an increasing
difficulty in counting their virtually infinite particles.
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, great personalities like
Lord Saìkarñaëa actually have counted the number of atoms on the earth, and
even the molecules in the entire universe. Yet even such a personality as
Saìkarñaëa, who has been continuously chanting the glories of the Lord since
time immemorial, has not even approached a final count of those glories.
Lord Kåñëa exhibits His most astonishing qualities during His childhood
pastimes in Våndävana, where He steals butter from the cowherd ladies,
dances with His girlfriends, and plays with His cowherd boyfriends as their
most dear companion. Although appearing like ordinary human activities,
such sublime pastimes embody Lord Kåñëa's immeasurable and innumerable
beautiful transcendental qualities, which are the life and soul of the pure
devotees.
TEXT 8
taÔae'nauk(mpaAM s$aus$amaIºamaANAAe
BauÃaAna WvaAtmak{(taM ivapaAk(ma,
ô$ã"AgvapauiBaRivaRd"Daªamastae
jaIvaeta yaAe mauil(pade" s$a d"AyaBaAk,(
tat te 'nukampäà su-samékñamäëo
bhuïjäna evätma-kåtaà vipäkam
håd-väg-vapurbhir vidadhan namas te
jéveta yo mukti-pade sa däya-bhäk
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; te—Your; anukampäm—compassion;
su-samékñamäëaù—earnestly hoping for; bhuïjänaù—enduring;
eva—certainly; ätma-kåtam—done by himself; vipäkam—the fruitive results;
håt—with his heart; väk—words; vapurbhiù—and body; vidadhan—offering;
namaù—obeisances; te—unto You; jéveta—lives; yaù—anyone who;
mukti-pade—to the position of liberation; saù—he; däya-bhäk—the rightful
heir.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, one who earnestly waits for You to bestow Your causeless
mercy upon him, all the while patiently suffering the reactions of his past
misdeeds and offering You respectful obeisances with his heart, words and body,
is surely eligible for liberation, for it has become his rightful claim.
PURPORT
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé explains in his commentary that just as a legitimate
son has to simply remain alive to gain an inheritance from his father, one who
simply remains alive in Kåñëa consciousness, following the regulative
principles of bhakti-yoga, automatically becomes eligible to receive the mercy
of the Personality of Godhead. In other words, he will be promoted to the
kingdom of God.
The word su-samékñamäëa indicates that a devotee earnestly awaits the
mercy of the Supreme Lord even while suffering the painful effects of previous
sinful activities. Lord Kåñëa explains in the Bhagavad-gétä that a devotee who
fully surrenders unto Him is no longer liable to suffer the reactions of his
previous karma. However, because in his mind a devotee may still maintain the
remnants of his previous sinful mentality, the Lord removes the last vestiges of
the enjoying spirit by giving His devotee punishments that may sometimes
resemble sinful reactions. The purpose of the entire creation of God is to
rectify the living entity's tendency to enjoy without the Lord, and therefore
the particular punishment given for a sinful activity is specifically designed to
curtail the mentality that produced the activity. Although a devotee has
surrendered to the Lord's devotional service, until he is completely perfect in
Kåñëa consciousness he may maintain a slight inclination to enjoy the false
happiness of this world. The Lord therefore creates a particular situation to
eradicate this remaining enjoying spirit. This unhappiness suffered by a
sincere devotee is not technically a karmic reaction; it is rather the Lord's
special mercy for inducing His devotee to completely let go of the material
world and return home, back to Godhead.
A sincere devotee earnestly desires to go back to the Lord's abode.
Therefore he willingly accepts the Lord's merciful punishment and continues
offering respects and obeisances to the Lord with his heart, words and body.
Such a bona fide servant of the Lord, considering all hardship a small price to
pay for gaining the personal association of the Lord, certainly becomes a
legitimate son of God, as indicated here by the words däya-bhäk. Just as one
cannot approach the sun without becoming fire, one cannot approach the
supreme pure, Lord Kåñëa, without undergoing a rigid purificatory process,
which may appear like suffering but which is in fact a curative treatment
administered by the personal hand of the Lord.
TEXT 9
pazyaezA mae'naAyaRmananta @Aâe
par"Atmaina tvayyaipa maAiyamaAiyaina
maAyaAM ivatatyaeiºataumaAtmavaEBavaM
÷hM" ik(yaAnaEcC$imavaAicaRr"¢aAE
paçyeça me 'näryam ananta ädye
parätmani tvayy api mäyi-mäyini
mäyäà vitatyekñitum ätma-vaibhavaà
hy ahaà kiyän aiccham ivärcir agnau
SYNONYMS
paçya—just see; éça—O Lord; me—my; anäryam—contemptible behavior;
anante—against the unlimited; ädye—the primeval; para-ätmani—the
Supersoul; tvayi—You; api—even; mäyi-mäyini—for the masters of illusion;
mäyäm—(my) illusory potency; vitatya—spreading; ékñitum—to see;
ätma—Your; vaibhavam—power; hi—indeed; aham—I; kiyän—how much;
aiccham—I desired; iva—just like; arciù—a small spark; agnau—in comparison
to the whole fire.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, just see my uncivilized impudence! To test Your power I tried to
extend my illusory potency to cover You, the unlimited and primeval Supersoul,
who bewilder even the masters of illusion. What am I compared to You? I am
just like a small spark in the presence of a great fire.
PURPORT
A great fire produces many sparks, which are insignificant in comparison to
it. Indeed, if one of the small sparks were to try to burn the original fire, the
attempt would be simply ludicrous. Similarly, even the creator of the entire
universe, Lord Brahmä, is an insignificant spark of the potency of God, and
therefore Brahmä's attempt to bewilder the Supreme Lord was certainly
ludicrous.
Brahmä here addresses Lord Kåñëa as éça, which indicates that Kåñëa is not
only the supreme master of everyone but is also specifically the master of
Brahmä, who creates the universe directly under the guidance of the Lord and
who, indeed, is born directly from the Lord's own body.
Brahmä felt ashamed of his impudent attempt at deluding Lord Kåñëa, and
he was therefore perfectly willing to be punished or forgiven by the Lord,
according to His decision. If Lord Kåñëa does not mercifully punish His
devotees when they act improperly, their foolishness will simply increase and
gradually completely overwhelm their devotional sentiments. Therefore Lord
Kåñëa kindly disciplines His devotees and maintains them on the progressive
path back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 10
@ta: ºamasvaAcyauta mae r"jaAeBauvaAe
÷jaAnatastvatpa{TagAIzAmaAinana:
@jaAvalaepaAnDatamaAe'nDacaºauSa
WSaAe'nauk(mpyaAe maiya naATavaAinaita
ataù kñamasväcyuta me rajo-bhuvo
hy ajänatas tvat-påthag-éça-mäninaù
ajävalepändha-tamo-'ndha-cakñuña
eño 'nukampyo mayi näthavän iti
SYNONYMS
ataù—therefore; kñamasva—please excuse; acyuta—O infallible Lord;
me—me; rajaù-bhuvaù—who have taken birth in the mode of passion;
hi—indeed; ajänataù—being ignorant; tvat—from You; påthak—separate;
éça—a controller; mäninaù—presuming myself; aja—the unborn creator;
avalepa—the covering; andha-tamaù—by such darkness of ignorance;
andha—blinded; cakñuñaù—my eyes; eñaù—this person; anukampyaù—should
be shown mercy; mayi—Me; nätha-vän—having as his master; iti—thus
thinking.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O infallible Lord, kindly excuse my offenses. I have taken birth
in the mode of passion and am therefore simply foolish, presuming myself a
controller independent of Your Lordship. My eyes are blinded by the darkness
of ignorance, which causes me to think of myself as the unborn creator of the
universe. But please consider that I am Your servant and therefore worthy of
Your compassion.
PURPORT
In his commentary, Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains that
Brahmä wanted to present the following argument to the Lord: "My dear Lord,
because I have acted so badly I certainly deserve to be punished. On the other
hand, because I am so ignorant You should consider me an innocent fool and
be merciful to me. Thus, although I deserve both punishment and forgiveness,
I humbly beg You to exercise tolerance in this matter and simply forgive me
and show me Your mercy."
The words näthavän iti indicate that Lord Brahmä wanted to humbly
remind Lord Kåñëa that He was, after all, Brahmä's father and master and
should therefore forgive the unfortunate transgressions of His humble servant.
Every conditioned soul, whether he be Lord Brahmä or an insignificant ant,
falsely identifies himself with the material world and in this way forgets his
eternal relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Lord Brahmä,
because of his prestigious position as the cosmic creator, also tends to identify
himself as the lord of this world, and thus he sometimes forgets his position as
an insignificant servant of the Supreme Lord. Now, by Lord Kåñëa's mercy,
this false identification is being rectified and Lord Brahmä is remembering his
constitutional position as the eternal servant of God.
TEXT 11
¸(AhM" tamaAemah"d"hM"Kacar"Ai¢avaABaURs$
aMvaeií"taANx"Gaq%s$aæaivataistak(Aya:
¸e(ä{"igvaDaAivagAiNAtaANx"par"ANAucayaARvaAtaADvar"
Aemaivavar"sya ca tae maih"tvama,
kvähaà tamo-mahad-ahaà-kha-carägni-vär-bhüsaàveñöitäëòa-
ghaöa-sapta-vitasti-käyaù
kvedåg-vidhävigaëitäëòa-paräëu-caryävätädhva-
roma-vivarasya ca te mahitvam
SYNONYMS
kva—where; aham—I; tamaù—the material nature; mahat—the total material
energy; aham—false ego; kha—ether; cara—air; agni—fire; väù—water;
bhü—earth; saàveñöita—surrounded by; aëòa-ghaöa—a potlike universe;
sapta-vitasti—seven spans; käyaù—body; kva—where; édåk—such; vidhä—like;
avigaëita—unlimited; aëòa—universes; para-aëu—like the atomic dust;
caryä—moving; väta-adhva—airholes; roma—of hair on the body;
vivarasya—of the holes; ca—also; te—Your; mahitvam—greatness.
TRANSLATION
What am I, a small creature measuring seven spans of my own hand? I am
enclosed in a potlike universe composed of material nature, the total material
energy, false ego, ether, air, water and earth. And what is Your glory?
Unlimited universes pass through the pores of Your body just as particles of
dust pass through the openings of a screened window.
PURPORT
In the Caitanya-caritämåta, Ädi-lélä, Chapter Five, Text 72, Çréla
Prabhupäda gives the following purport for this verse: "Then Lord Brahmä,
after having stolen all Kåñëa's cows and cowherd boys, returned and saw that
the cows and boys were still roaming with Kåñëa, he offered this prayer in his
defeat. A conditioned soul—even one so great as Brahmä, who manages the
affairs of the entire universe—cannot compare to the Personality of Godhead,
for He can produce numberless universes simply by the spiritual rays
emanating from the pores of His body. Material scientists should take lessons
from the utterances of Çré Brahmä regarding our insignificance in comparison
with God. In these prayers of Brahmä there is much to learn for those who are
falsely puffed up by the accumulation of power."
In Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Chapter Fourteen, Çréla
Prabhupäda further comments on this verse: "Lord Brahmä realized his actual
position. He is certainly the supreme teacher of this universe, in charge of the
production of material nature, consisting of the complete material energy, false
ego, sky, air, fire, water and earth. Such a universe may be gigantic, but it can
be measured, just as we measure our body as seven spans. Generally, everyone's
personal bodily measurement is calculated to be seven spans of his hand. This
particular universe may appear to be a very gigantic body, but it is nothing but
the measurement of seven spans for Lord Brahmä."
Aside from this universe, there are unlimited other universes outside the
jurisdiction of this particular Lord Brahmä. Just as innumerable atomic
infinitesimal fragments pass through the holes of a screened window, so
millions and trillions of universes in their seedling form are coming out from
the bodily pores of Mahä-Viñëu, and that Mahä-Viñëu is but a part of the
plenary expansion of Kåñëa. Under these circumstances, although Lord
Brahmä is the supreme creature within this universe, what is his importance in
the presence of Lord Kåñëa?
TEXT 12
otºaepaNAM gABaRgAtasya paAd"yaAe:
ikM( k(lpatae maAtaur"DaAeºajaAgAs$ae
ik(maistanaAistavyapade"zABaUiSataM
tavaAista ku(ºae: ik(yad"pyananta:
utkñepaëaà garbha-gatasya pädayoù
kià kalpate mätur adhokñajägase
kim asti-nästi-vyapadeça-bhüñitaà
tavästi kukñeù kiyad apy anantaù
SYNONYMS
utkñepaëam—the kicking; garbha-gatasya—of a child in the womb;
pädayoù—of the legs; kim—what; kalpate—amounts to; mätuù—for the
mother; adhokñaja—O transcendental Lord; ägase—as an offense; kim—what;
asti—it exists; na asti—it does not exist; vyapadeça—by the designations;
bhüñitam—decorated; tava—Your; asti—there is, kukñeù-of the abdomen;
kiyat—how much; api—even; anantaù—external.
TRANSLATION
O Lord Adhokñaja, does a mother take offense when the child within her
womb kicks with his legs? And is there anything in existence—whether
designated by various philosophers as real or as unreal—that is actually outside
Your abdomen?
PURPORT
Çréla Prabhupäda comments as follows on this verse in Kåñëa, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Chapter Fourteen: "Lord Brahmä therefore compared
himself to a little child within the womb of his mother. If the child within the
womb plays with his hands and legs, and while playing touches the body of the
mother, is the mother offended with the child? Of course she isn't. Similarly,
Lord Brahmä may be a very great personality, and yet not only Brahmä but
everything that be is existing within the womb of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. The Lord's energy is all-pervading: there is no place in the creation
where it is not acting. Since everything is existing within the energy of the
Lord, the Brahmä of this universe or the Brahmäs of the many other millions
and trillions of universes are existing within the energy of the Lord; therefore
the Lord is considered to be the mother, and everything existing within the
womb of the mother is considered to be the child. And the good mother is
never offended with the child, even if he touches the body of the mother by
kicking his legs."
TEXT 13
jagAt‡ayaAntaAed"iDas$amplavaAede"
naAr"AyaNAsyaAed"r"naAiBanaAlaAta,
ivainagARtaAe'jaistvaita vaAx.~ na vaE ma{SaA
ik(ntvaIìr" tvaªa ivainagARtaAe'isma
jagat-trayäntodadhi-samplavode
näräyaëasyodara-näbhi-nälät
vinirgato 'jas tv iti väì na vai måñä
kintv éçvara tvan na vinirgato 'smi
SYNONYMS
jagat-traya—of the three worlds; anta—in the dissolution; udadhi—of all the
oceans; samplava—of the total deluge; ude—in the water; näräyaëasya—of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa; udara—growing from the
abdomen; näbhi—from the navel; nälät—out of the lotus stem;
vinirgataù—came out; ajaù—Brahmä; tu—indeed; iti—thus speaking;
väk—the words; na—are not; vai—certainly; måñä—false; kintu—thus;
éçvara—O Lord; tvat—from You; na—not; vinirgataù—specifically emanated;
asmi—am I.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, it is said that when the three planetary systems are merged
into the water at the time of dissolution, Your plenary portion, Näräyaëa, lies
down on the water, gradually a lotus flower grows from His navel, and Brahmä
takes birth upon that lotus flower. Certainly, these words are not false. Thus
am I not born from You?
PURPORT
Although every living being is a child of God, Lord Brahmä here makes a
special claim because he takes birth on a lotus flower that emanates from the
navel of Näräyaëa, the Personality of Godhead. Ultimately, all living beings
are equally expansions of the transcendental body of the Supreme Lord. But
Brahmä has an intimate relationship with the Lord because of the activities of
universal creation, and so he uses the prefix vi in the word vinirgata to beg the
Lord's special mercy. Lord Brahmä is called aja because he is not born from any
mother but rather emanates directly from the body of the Lord. As Çréla
Prabhupäda states in Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, "It is naturally
concluded that the mother of Brahmä is Näräyaëa." On these grounds, Lord
Brahmä is requesting special forgiveness for his offenses.
TEXT 14
naAr"AyaNAstvaM na ih" s$avaR$de"ih"naAma,
@AtmaAsyaDaIzAAiKalalaAek(s$aAºaI
naAr"AyaNAAe'ËMÿ nar"BaUjalaAyanaAta,
ta»aAipa s$atyaM na tavaEva maAyaA
näräyaëas tvaà na hi sarva-dehinäm
ätmäsy adhéçäkhila-loka-säkñé
näräyaëo 'ìgaà nara-bhü-jaläyanät
tac cäpi satyaà na tavaiva mäyä
SYNONYMS
näräyaëaù—the Supreme Lord Näräyaëa; tvam—You; na—not; hi—whether;
sarva—of all; dehinäm—embodied living beings; ätmä—the Supersoul;
asi—You are; adhéça—O supreme controller; akhila—of all; loka—planets;
säkñé—the witness; näräyaëaù—Lord Çré Näräyaëa; aìgam—the expanded
plenary portion; nara—from the Supreme Personality; bhü—originating;
jala—of the water; ayanät—because of being the manifesting source; tat—that
(expansion); ca—and; api—indeed; satyam—true; na—not; tava—Your;
eva—at all; mäyä—illusory energy.
TRANSLATION
Are You not the original Näräyaëa, O supreme controller, since You are the
Soul of every embodied being and the eternal witness of all created realms?
Indeed, Lord Näräyaëa is Your expansion, and He is called Näräyaëa because
He is the generating source of the primeval water of the universe. He is real,
not a product of Your illusory Mäyä.
PURPORT
In the Caitanya-caritämåta, Ädi-lélä, Chapter Two, Text 30, Çréla
Prabhupäda comments on this verse as follows: "This statement was spoken by
Lord Brahmä in his prayers to Lord Kåñëa after the Lord defeated him by
displaying His mystic powers. Brahmä had tried to test Lord Kåñëa to see if He
was really the Supreme Personality of Godhead playing as a cowherd boy.
Brahmä stole all the other boys and their cows from the pasturing grounds, but
when he returned to the pastures he saw that all the boys and cows were still
there, for Lord Kåñëa had created them all again. When Brahmä saw this
mystic power of Lord Kåñëa, he admitted defeat and offered prayers to the
Lord, addressing Him as the proprietor and seer of everything in the creation
and as the Supersoul who is within each and every living entity and is dear to
all. Lord Kåñëa is Näräyaëa, the father of Brahmä, because Lord Kåñëa's
plenary expansion Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, after placing Himself on the Garbha
Ocean, created Brahmä from His own body. Mahä-Viñëu in the Causal Ocean
and Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu, the Supersoul in everyone's heart, are also
transcendental expansions of the Supreme Truth."
In his commentary on this verse, Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé has elaborately
explained the expansion of the Viñëu, or Näräyaëa, incarnations from the
original form of Godhead, Lord Çré Kåñëa. The essence is that although Lord
Brahmä was born from Lord Näräyaëa, Brahmä now understands that
Näräyaëa is Himself a mere expansion of the original Personality of Godhead,
Lord Çré Kåñëa.
TEXT 15
ta»aeÀalasTaM tava s$aÀagAã"pau:
ikM( mae na ä{"íM" BagAvaMstadE"va
ikM( vaA s$auä{"íM" ô$id" mae tadE"va
ikM( naAe s$apaâeva paunavyaRd"izAR
tac cej jala-sthaà tava saj jagad-vapuù
kià me na dåñöaà bhagavaàs tadaiva
kià vä su-dåñöaà hådi me tadaiva
kià no sapady eva punar vyadarçi
SYNONYMS
tat—that; cet—if; jala-stham—situated upon the water; tava—Your; sat—real;
jagat—sheltering the entire universe; vapuù—the transcendental body;
kim—why; me—by me; na dåñöam—was not seen; bhagavan—O Supreme
Lord; tadä eva—at that very time; kim—why; vä—or; su-dåñöam—perfectly
seen; hådi—within the heart; me—by me; tadä eva—just then; kim—why;
na—not; u—on the other hand; sapadi—suddenly; eva—indeed;
punaù—again; vyadarçi—was seen.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, if Your transcendental body, which shelters the entire
universe, is actually lying upon the water, then why were You not seen by me
when I searched for You? And why, though I could not envision You properly
within my heart, did You then suddenly reveal Yourself?
PURPORT
Lord Brahmä here refers to his experience at the dawn of cosmic creation.
As described in the Second Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Lord Brahmä took
birth on the seat of a giant lotus whose stem emanated from the navel of
Näräyaëa. Brahmä was bewildered as to his whereabouts, function and
identity, and therefore he tried to trace out the source of the lotus stem,
searching for clear information. Unable to find the Personality of Godhead, he
returned to his seat and engaged in severe austerities, having been ordered to
do so by the transcendental voice of the Lord, who could be heard but not
seen. After long meditation, Brahmä saw the Lord but then again lost sight of
Him. Thus Brahmä concludes that the transcendental body of the Personality
of Godhead is not material but rather an eternal, spiritual form endowed with
inconceivable mystic potencies. In other words, Lord Brahmä should not have
challenged the Personality of Godhead, the Lord of all mystic power.
TEXT 16
@‡aEva maAyaADamanaAvataAre"
÷sya ‘apaÂasya baih": s$Pu(q%sya
k{(tµasya caAntajaRQ&re" jananyaA
maAyaAtvamaeva ‘ak(q%Ik{(taM tae
atraiva mäyä-dhamanävatäre
hy asya prapaïcasya bahiù sphuöasya
kåtsnasya cäntar jaöhare jananyä
mäyätvam eva prakaöé-kåtaà te
SYNONYMS
atra—in this; eva—indeed; mäyä-dhamana—O subduer of Mäyä; avatäre—in
the incarnation; hi—certainly; asya—of this; prapaïcasya—created material
manifestation; bahiù—externally; sphuöasya—which is visible;
kåtsnasya—entire; ca—and; antaù—within; jaöhare—Your abdomen;
jananyäù—unto Your mother; mäyätvam—Your bewildering potency;
eva—indeed; prakaöé-kåtam—has been demonstrated; te—by You.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, in this incarnation You have proved that You are the supreme
controller of Mäyä. Although You are now within this universe, the whole
universal creation is within Your transcendental body—a fact You
demonstrated by exhibiting the universe within Your abdomen before Your
mother, Yaçodä.
PURPORT
Lord Brahmä here describes the inconceivable spiritual potency of the
Lord. We may find a pot within a house, but we can hardly expect to find the
house within the same pot. By the Lord's spiritual potency, however, He can
appear within this universe and simultaneously exhibit all the universes within
His body. One may argue that since the universes seen by mother Yaçodä
within Lord Kåñëa's abdomen were within the Lord's body, they are different
from the illusory material universes manifest externally. Here Lord Brahmä
refutes that argument, however. Lord Kåñëa is mäyä-dhamana, the supreme
controller of illusion. By the Lord's own supreme mystic potency, He can
bewilder even illusion herself, and thus the Lord actually exhibited all the
material universes within His body. This is mäyätvam, the supreme bewildering
potency of the Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 17
yasya ku(ºaAivadM" s$ava<
s$aAtmaM BaAita yaTaA taTaA
taÔvayyapaIh" tats$ava<
ik(imadM" maAyayaA ivanaA
yasya kukñäv idaà sarvaà
sätmaà bhäti yathä tathä
tat tvayy apéha tat sarvaà
kim idaà mäyayä vinä
SYNONYMS
yasya—of whom; kukñau—within the abdomen; idam—this cosmic
manifestation; sarvam—all; sa-ätmam—including Yourself; bhäti—is
manifested; yathä—as; tathä—so; tat—that; tvayi—within You; api—although;
iha—here externally; tat—that cosmic manifestation; sarvam—whole;
kim—what; idam—this; mäyayä—the influence of Your inconceivable energy;
vinä—without.
TRANSLATION
Just as this entire universe, including You, was exhibited within Your
abdomen, so it is now manifested here externally in the same exact form. How
could such things happen unless arranged by Your inconceivable energy?
PURPORT
Çréla Prabhupäda comments on this verse as follows in Kåñëa, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead: "Lord Brahmä stressed herein that without accepting
the inconceivable energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one cannot
explain things as they are."
TEXT 18
@âEva tvaä{"tae'sya ikM( mama na tae maAyaAtvamaAd"izARtama,
Wk(Ae'is$a ‘aTamaM tataAe ˜ajas$auô$ã"ts$aA: s$amastaA @ipa
taAvantaAe'is$a catauBauRjaAstad"iKalaE: s$aAkM( mayaAepaAis$ataAs$a,
taAvantyaeva jagAntyaBaUstad"imataM “aöAã"yaM izASyatae
adyaiva tvad åte 'sya kià mama na te mäyätvam ädarçitam
eko 'si prathamaà tato vraja-suhåd-vatsäù samastä api
tävanto 'si catur-bhujäs tad akhilaiù säkaà mayopäsitäs
tävanty eva jaganty abhüs tad amitaà brahmädvayaà çiñyate
SYNONYMS
adya—today; eva—just; tvat åte—apart from You; asya—of this universe;
kim—what; mama—to me; na—not; te—by You; mäyätvam—the basis in Your
inconceivable potency; ädarçitam—shown; ekaù—alone; asi—You are;
prathamam—first of all; tataù—then; vraja-suhåt—Your cowherd boyfriends of
Våndävana; vatsäù—and the calves; samastäù—all; api—even; tävantaù—of
the same number; asi—You became; catuù-bhujäù—four-handed forms of Lord
Viñëu; tat—then; akhilaiù—by all; säkam—together with; mayä—myself;
upäsitäù—being worshiped; tävanti—of the same number; eva—also;
jaganti—universes; abhüù—You became; tat—then; amitam—the unlimited;
brahma—Absolute Truth; advayam—one without a second; çiñyate—You now
remain.
TRANSLATION
Have You not shown me today that both You Yourself and everything
within this creation are manifestations of Your inconceivable potency? First
You appeared alone, and then You manifested Yourself as all of Våndävana's
calves and cowherd boys, Your friends. Next You appeared as an equal number
of four-handed Viñëu forms, who were worshiped by all living beings, including
me, and after that You appeared as an equal number of complete universes.
Finally, You have now returned to Your unlimited form as the Supreme
Absolute Truth, one without a second.
PURPORT
As stated in the Vedic literature, sarvaà khalv idaà brahma: everything
that exists is an expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus
everything is ultimately part and parcel of the Lord's spiritual existence. By
Lord Kåñëa's causeless mercy, Lord Brahmä personally experienced that all
existence, being the potency of God, is nondifferent from Him.
TEXT 19
@jaAnataAM tvatpad"vaImanaAtmanya,
@AtmaAtmanaA BaAis$a ivatatya maAyaAma,
s$a{í"AivavaAhM" jagAtaAe ivaDaAna
wva tvamaeSaAe'nta wva i‡anae‡a:
ajänatäà tvat-padavém anätmany
ätmätmanä bhäsi vitatya mäyäm
såñöäv ivähaà jagato vidhäna
iva tvam eño 'nta iva trinetraù
SYNONYMS
ajänatäm—to persons who are in ignorance; tvat-padavém—of Your
transcendental position; anätmani—in the material energy; ätmä—Yourself;
ätmanä—by Yourself; bhäsi—appear; vitatya—expanding; mäyäm—Your
inconceivable energy; såñöau—in the matter of creation; iva—as if; aham—I,
Brahmä; jagataù—of the universe; vidhäne—in the maintenance; iva—as if;
tvam eñaù—Yourself; ante—in the annihilation; iva—as if; tri-netraù—Lord
Çiva.
TRANSLATION
To persons ignorant of Your actual transcendental position, You appear as
part of the material world, manifesting Yourself by the expansion of Your
inconceivable energy. Thus for the creation of the universe You appear as me
[Brahmä], for its maintenance You appear as Yourself [Viñëu], and for its
annihilation You appear as Lord Trinetra [Çiva].
PURPORT
Although the impersonal Mäyävädé philosophers think that the demigods
are illusory, Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva and Lord Viñëu are stated here to be
expansions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and are thus real. Indeed,
they are the extraordinarily powerful controllers of the universe. The ultimate
truth is a supreme and beautiful person, and thus throughout the creation of
God we will always find the personal touch.
TEXT 20
s$aure"Sva{iSaSvaIzA taTaEva na{Svaipa
itayaRºau yaAd":svaipa tae'janasya
janmaAs$ataAM äu"maRd"inaƒah"Aya
‘aBaAe ivaDaAta: s$ad"nauƒah"Aya ca
sureñv åñiñv éça tathaiva nåñv api
tiryakñu yädaùsv api te 'janasya
janmäsatäà durmada-nigrahäya
prabho vidhätaù sad-anugrahäya ca
SYNONYMS
sureñu—among the demigods; åñiñu—among the great sages; éça—O Lord;
tathä—as well as; eva—indeed; nåñu—among the human beings; api—and;
tiryakñu—among animals; yädaùsu—among aquatics; api—also; te—of You;
ajanasya—who never takes material birth; janma—the birth; asatäm—of the
nondevotees; durmada—the false pride; nigrahäya—for the purpose of
subduing; prabho—O master; vidhätaù—O creator; sat—to the faithful
devotees; anugrahäya—for the purpose of showing mercy; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, O supreme creator and master, You have no material birth, yet to
defeat the false pride of the faithless demons and show mercy to Your saintly
devotees, You take birth among the demigods, sages, human beings, animals and
even the aquatics.
PURPORT
Among the demigods Lord Kåñëa appears in such forms as Vämanadeva,
among the sages as Paraçuräma, among human beings as Lord Kåñëa Himself
and as Lord Rämacandra, and among animals as the boar incarnation. Lord
Kåñëa appears among the aquatics as Matsya, the gigantic fish. Indeed, the
plenary expansions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are innumerable,
as the Lord relentlessly comes down within the universes to smash the false
pride of the atheists and show mercy to the saintly devotees.
In another sense, the Lord never appears, since He exists eternally. His
appearance is like that of the sun, which is always present in the sky but which
periodically appears to our vision.
TEXT 21
k(Ae vaeiÔa BaUmana, BagAvana, par"Atmana,
yaAegAeìr"AetaIBaRvataiñlaAefyaAma,
¸( vaA k(TaM vaA k(ita vaA k(de"ita
ivastaAr"yana, ‚(Lx"is$a yaAegAmaAyaAma,
ko vetti bhüman bhagavan parätman
yogeçvarotér bhavatas tri-lokyäm
kva vä kathaà vä kati vä kadeti
vistärayan kréòasi yoga-mäyäm
SYNONYMS
kaù—who; vetti—knows; bhüman—O supreme great one; bhagavan—O
Supreme Personality of Godhead; para-ätman—O Supreme Soul;
yoga-éçvara—O master of mystic power; ütéù—the pastimes; bhavataù—of
Your Lordship; tri-lokyäm—in the three worlds; kva—where; vä—or;
katham—how; vä—or; kati—how many; vä—or; kadä—when; iti—thus;
vistärayan—expanding; kréòasi—You play; yoga-mäyäm—Your spiritual
energy.
TRANSLATION
O supreme great one! O Supreme Personality of Godhead! O Supersoul,
master of all mystic power! Your pastimes are taking place continuously in these
three worlds, but who can estimate where, how and when You are employing
Your spiritual energy and performing these innumerable pastimes? No one can
understand the mystery of how Your spiritual energy acts.
PURPORT
Brahmä previously stated that Lord Kåñëa incarnates among the demigods,
human beings, animals, fish and so on. This does not mean, however, that the
Lord is degraded by His incarnations. As Brahmä clarifies here, no conditioned
soul can understand the transcendental nature of the Lord's activities, which
He enacts through His spiritual potency. Although the Lord is bhüman, the
supremely great one, He is still Bhagavän, the supremely beautiful personality
exhibiting pastimes of love in His own abode. At the same time He is
Paramätmä, the all-pervading Supersoul, who witnesses and sanctions all the
activities of conditioned souls. The Lord's multiple identity is explained by the
term yogeçvara. The Absolute Truth is the master of all mystic potencies, and
although He is one and supreme, He manifests His greatness and opulence in
many different ways.
Such elevated spiritual matters can hardly be understood by foolish persons
primitively identifying themselves with the insignificant material body. These
conditioned souls, such as atheistic scientists, consider their own puffed-up
intelligence supreme. Gullibly placing their firm faith in material illusion, they
are captured by the modes of nature and driven far away from knowledge of
God.
TEXT 22
tasmaAid"dM" jagAd"zAeSamas$atsvaè&paM
sva«aABamastaiDaSaNAM pauç&äu":Kaäu":Kama,
tvayyaeva inatyas$auKabaAeDatanaAvanantae
maAyaAta oâd"ipa yats$aid"vaAvaBaAita
tasmäd idaà jagad açeñam asat-svarüpaà
svapnäbham asta-dhiñaëaà puru-duùkha-duùkham
tvayy eva nitya-sukha-bodha-tanäv anante
mäyäta udyad api yat sad ivävabhäti
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; idam—this; jagat—cosmic manifestation; açeñam—entire;
asat-svarüpam—whose existence is unreal in the sense of temporary;
svapna-äbham—like a dream; asta-dhiñaëam—wherein awareness becomes
covered over; puru-duùkha-duùkham—full of repeated miseries; tvayi—within
You; eva—indeed; nitya—eternal; sukha—happy; bodha—conscious;
tanau—whose personal appearances; anante—who is unlimited; mäyätaù—by
the illusory energy; udyat—coming forth; api—although; yat—which;
sat—real; iva—as if; avabhäti—appears.
TRANSLATION
Therefore this entire universe, which like a dream is by nature unreal,
nevertheless appears real, and thus it covers one's consciousness and assails one
with repeated miseries. This universe appears real because it is manifested by
the potency of illusion emanating from You, whose unlimited transcendental
forms are full of eternal happiness and knowledge.
PURPORT
As an object of enjoyment or a permanent residence for the conditioned
souls, the material universe is certainly illusion, nothing more than a dream.
One may give the analogy that the vision of abundant water in a desert is no
more than a dream, although real water exists elsewhere. Similarly, the vision
of home, happiness and reality within matter is certainly no better than a
foolish dream in which repeated miseries appear.
In another sense, however, the universe is real. In his commentary on
Vedanta-sütra, Çréla Madhväcärya has confirmed this by quoting the following
statement from the Vedic çruti-mantras: satyaà hy evedaà viçvam asåjata. "This
universe, created by the Lord, is real." The perfect authority of the Vedas thus
certifies this universe to be real; nevertheless, because our knowledge is stolen
by illusion (as indicated here by the words asta-dhiñaëam), we cannot properly
understand this universe or the Supreme Lord who has created it. As the
expansion of Lord Kåñëa, the universe is real and is meant for being engaged
in His service. One who accepts the kingdom of God as home, the Lord
Himself as the object of love, and the material universe as paraphernalia for
being engaged in the Lord's service dwells within eternal reality wherever he
may go within the material and spiritual worlds.
TEXT 23
Wk(stvamaAtmaA pauç&Sa: paur"ANA:
s$atya: svayaMjyaAeitar"nanta @Aâ:
inatyaAe'ºar"Ae'ja›as$auKaAe inar"Ãana:
paUNAARã"yaAe maul( opaAiDataAe'ma{ta:
ekas tvam ätmä puruñaù puräëaù
satyaù svayaà-jyotir ananta ädyaù
nityo 'kñaro 'jasra-sukho niraïjanaù
pürëädvayo mukta upädhito 'måtaù
SYNONYMS
ekaù—one; tvam—You; ätmä—the Supreme Soul; puruñaù—the Supreme
Person; puräëaù—the oldest; satyaù—the Absolute Truth;
svayam-jyotiù—self-manifested; anantaù—without end; ädyaù—without
beginning; nityaù—eternal; akñaraù—indestructible; ajasra-sukhaù—whose
happiness cannot be obstructed; niraïjanaù—devoid of contamination;
pürëa—complete; advayaù—without a second; muktaù—free;
upädhitaù—from all material designations; amåtaù—deathless.
TRANSLATION
You are the one Supreme Soul, the primeval Supreme Personality, the
Absolute Truth—self-manifested, endless and beginningless. You are eternal
and infallible, perfect and complete, without any rival and free from all material
designations. Your happiness can never be obstructed, nor have You any
connection with material contamination. Indeed, You are the indestructible
nectar of immortality.
PURPORT
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé explains how the various terms of this verse
demonstrate that the transcendental body of Lord Kåñëa is free from the
characteristics of material bodies. All material bodies go through six phases:
birth, growth, maturity, reproduction, decline and destruction. But Lord Kåñëa
does not take material birth, since He is the original reality, a fact clearly
indicated here by the word adya, "original." We take our material birth within
a particular material atmosphere, in material bodies that are amalgamations of
various material elements. Since Lord Kåñëa existed long before the creation
of any material atmosphere or element, there is no question of material birth
for His transcendental body.
Similarly, the word pürëa, meaning "full and complete," refutes the concept
that Lord Kåñëa could grow, since He is ever-existing in fullness. When one's
material body becomes mature, one can no longer enjoy as in youth; but the
words ajasra-sukha, "enjoying unobstructed happiness," indicate that Lord
Kåñëa's body never reaches so-called middle age, since it is always full of
spiritual youthful bliss. The word akñara, "undiminishing," refutes the
possibility that Lord Kåñëa's body grows old or declines, and the word amåta,
"immortal" negates the possibility of death.
In other words, Lord Kåñëa's transcendental body is free from the
transformations of material bodies. The Lord does, however, create
innumerable worlds and expand Himself as innumerable living entities. But
the Lord's so-called reproduction is completely spiritual and does not take
place at a certain phase of bodily existence; rather, it constitutes the Lord's
eternal proclivity to expand His spiritual bliss and glories.
As the Lord states in çruti, pürvam eväham ihäsam: "I alone existed in the
beginning." Therefore here the Lord is called puruñaù puräëaù, "the primeval
enjoyer. "This original puruña expands Himself as the Supersoul and enters
every living being. Still, He is ultimately the Absolute Truth, Kåñëa, as stated
in the Gopäla-täpané Upaniñad: yaù säkñät para-brahmeti govindaà
sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaà våndävana-sura-bhüruha-taläsénam. "The Absolute
Truth Himself is Govinda, who has an eternal form of bliss and knowledge and
who is sitting beneath the shady desire trees of Våndävana." This Absolute
Truth is beyond material ignorance and beyond even ordinary spiritual
knowledge, as stated in the same Gopäla-täpané çruti: vidyävidyäbhyäà
bhinnaù. Thus, in many ways the supremacy of Lord Kåñëa has been
established in the Vedic literature, and it is here confirmed by Lord Brahmä
himself.
TEXT 24
WvaMivaDaM tvaAM s$ak(laAtmanaAmaipa
svaAtmaAnamaAtmaAtmatayaA ivacaºatae
gAuvaRkR(labDaAepainaSats$aucaºauSaA
yae tae tar"ntaIva BavaAna{taAmbauiDama,
evaà-vidhaà tväà sakalätmanäm api
svätmänam ätmätmatayä vicakñate
gurv-arka-labdhopaniñat-sucakñuñä
ye te tarantéva bhavänåtämbudhim
SYNONYMS
evam-vidham—as thus described; tväm—You; sakala—of all; ätmanäm—souls;
api—indeed; sva-ätmänam—the very Soul; ätma-ätmatayä—as the Supersoul;
vicakñate—they see; guru—from the spiritual master; arka—who is like the
sun; labdha—received; upaniñat—of confidential knowledge; su-cakñuñä—by
the perfect eye; ye—who; te—they; taranti—cross over; iva—easily; bhava—of
material existence; anåta—which is not real; ambudhim—the ocean.
TRANSLATION
Those who have received the clear vision of knowledge from the sunlike
spiritual master can see You in this way, as the very Soul of all souls, the
Supersoul of everyone's own self. Thus understanding Your original
personality, they are able to cross over the ocean of illusory material existence.
PURPORT
As confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä (4.9),
janma karma ca me divyam
evaà yo vetti tattvataù
tyaktvä dehaà punar janma
naiti mäm eti so 'rjuna
"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities
does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but
attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna."
TEXT 25
@AtmaAnamaevaAtmatayaAivajaAnataAM
taenaEva jaAtaM inaiKalaM ‘apaiÂatama,
ÁaAnaena BaUyaAe'ipa ca tat‘alaIyatae
r"jjvaAmahe"BaAeRgABavaABavaAE yaTaA
ätmänam evätmatayävijänatäà
tenaiva jätaà nikhilaà prapaïcitam
jïänena bhüyo 'pi ca tat praléyate
rajjväm aher bhoga-bhaväbhavau yathä
SYNONYMS
ätmänam—Yourself; eva—indeed; ätmatayä—as the Supreme Soul;
avijänatäm—for those who do not understand; tena—by that; eva—alone;
jätam—is generated; nikhilam—the entire; prapaïcitam—material existence;
jïänena—by knowledge; bhüyaù api—once again; ca—and; tat—that material
existence; praléyate—disappears; rajjväm—within a rope; aheù—of a snake;
bhoga—of the body; bhava-abhavau—the apparent appearance and
disappearance; yathä—just as.
TRANSLATION
A person who mistakes a rope for a snake becomes fearful, but he then gives
up his fear upon realizing that the so-called snake does not exist. Similarly, for
those who fail to recognize You as the Supreme Soul of all souls, the expansive
illusory material existence arises, but knowledge of You at once causes it to
subside.
PURPORT
Those submerged in illusion see material existence as infinite, just as one
who is submerged in water sees only water all around him. For example,
material scientists and philosophers, submerged deep within the ocean of
material illusion, imagine that material nature extends infinitely in all
directions. In fact, the material creation is a finite ocean of ignorance in which
foolish living entities, such as material scientists, are unceremoniously dunked
by the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
To be trapped in a world in which all things are born and die is certainly a
fearful experience. Anyone trapped in a dark place naturally becomes fearful.
Since material life is always covered by the darkness of ignorance, every
conditioned soul is fearful. The material nature is not ultimate reality, and
thus analysis of matter can never provide answers to ultimate questions. This
dark, snakelike existence called material life immediately disappears as soon as
one opens his eyes to the bright light of Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 26
@ÁaAnas$aMÁaAE BavabanDamaAeºaAE
ã"AE naAma naAnyaAE sta [%taÁaBaAvaAta,
@ja›aicatyaAtmaina ke(valae pare"
ivacaAyaRmaANAe tar"NAAivavaAh"naI
ajïäna-saàjïau bhava-bandha-mokñau
dvau näma nänyau sta åta-jïa-bhävät
ajasra-city ätmani kevale pare
vicäryamäëe taraëäv ivähané
SYNONYMS
ajïäna—manifesting from ignorance; saàjïau—which designations;
bhava-bandha—bondage to material existence; mokñau—and liberation;
dvau—the two; näma—indeed; na—not; anyau—separate; staù—are;
åta—true; jïa-bhävät—from knowledge; ajasra-citi—whose awareness is
unimpeded; ätmani—the spirit soul; kevale—who is separate from matter;
pare—who is pure; vicäryamäëe—when he is properly distinguished;
taraëau—within the sun; iva—just as; ahané—day and night.
TRANSLATION
The conception of material bondage and the conception of liberation are both
manifestations of ignorance. Being outside the scope of true knowledge, they
cease to exist when one correctly understands that the pure spirit soul is
distinct from matter and always fully conscious. At that time bondage and
liberation no longer have any significance, just as day and night have no
significance from the perspective of the sun.
PURPORT
Material bondage is illusion because the living entity actually has no real
relationship with the material world. Because of false ego, the conditioned soul
identifies himself with matter. Therefore so-called liberation is simply the
giving up of an illusion rather than release from actual bondage. Yet even if we
think that the suffering of material illusion is real and that liberation is thus a
meaningful release from suffering, the mere absence of material existence is
still insignificant compared to the achievement of factual spiritual life, which
is the positive eternal reality opposed to the negative illusion of material life.
Ultimately, Kåñëa consciousness, or pure love of Godhead, is the only
significant, meaningful and permanent status for every living entity.
Since the darkness of night is caused by the absence of the sun, one would
not experience night within the sun itself, nor would one experience
individual days separated by nights. Similarly, within the pure living entity
there is no material darkness and thus no experience of liberation from such
darkness. When the conditioned soul comes to this platform of pure
consciousness, he becomes fit to associate with the supreme pure, the
Personality of Godhead Himself, in the Lord's own abode.
TEXT 27
tvaAmaAtmaAnaM parM" matvaA
par"maAtmaAnamaeva ca
@AtmaA paunabaRih"ma{Rgya
@h"Ae'ÁajanataAÁataA
tväm ätmänaà paraà matvä
param ätmänam eva ca
ätmä punar bahir mågya
aho 'jïa-janatäjïatä
SYNONYMS
tväm—You; ätmänam—the real self; param—something else;
matvä—thinking; param—something else; ätmänam—Yourself; eva—indeed;
ca—also; ätmä—the Supreme Self; punaù—again; bahiù—outside;
mågyaù—must be searched out; aho—oh; ajïa—ignorant; janatä—of persons;
ajïatä—the ignorance.
TRANSLATION
Just see the foolishness of those ignorant persons who consider You to be
some separated manifestation of illusion and who consider the self, which is
actually You, to be something else, the material body. Such fools conclude that
the supreme soul is to be searched for somewhere outside Your supreme
personality.
PURPORT
Lord Brahmä is amazed at the gross ignorance of conditioned souls who
consider Lord Kåñëa's supreme spiritual body to be material. Ignorant of the
spiritual form of the Lord, such persons also consider their own material bodies
to be the self, and therefore they conclude that spiritual reality is to be found
somewhere beyond the supreme personality of Lord Kåñëa. Sometimes such
fools consider Lord Kåñëa to be one of many individual souls who together
constitute a single impersonal spiritual entity. Unfortunately, such speculators
are not inclined to hear from the Lord Himself or from the Lord's authorized
representatives, such as Lord Brahmä. Because they whimsically speculate on
the nature of the Supreme, their ultimate result is confusion and ignorance,
which they euphemistically describe as "the mystery of life."
TEXT 28
@ntaBaR"vae'nanta Bavantamaeva
÷taÔyajantaAe ma{gAyainta s$anta:
@s$antamapyantyaih"mantare"NA
s$antaM gAuNAM taM ik(mau yainta s$anta:
antar-bhave 'nanta bhavantam eva
hy atat tyajanto mågayanti santaù
asantam apy anty ahim antareëa
santaà guëaà taà kim u yanti santaù
SYNONYMS
antaù-bhave—within the body; ananta—O unlimited Lord;
bhavantam—Yourself; eva—indeed; hi—certainly; atat—everything separate
from You; tyajantaù—rejecting; mågayanti—search out; santaù—the saintly
devotees; asantam—unreal; api—even; anti—present nearby; ahim—(the
illusion of) a snake; antareëa—without (negating); santam—real; guëam—the
rope; tam—that; kim u—whether; yanti—appreciate; santaù—persons who are
spiritually situated.
TRANSLATION
O unlimited Lord, the saintly devotees seek You out within their own bodies
by rejecting everything separate from You. Indeed, how can discriminating
persons appreciate the real nature of a rope lying before them until they refute
the illusion that it is a snake?
PURPORT
One may argue that a person should cultivate self-realization and at the
same time pursue sense gratification for the material body. This proposition is
herein refuted by the example of misidentifying a rope as a snake. One who
mistakes a rope for a snake becomes fearful and thinks of the so-called snake.
But upon discovering that the so-called snake is actually a rope, he experiences
a different emotion—relief—and can then ignore the rope. Similarly, because
we misunderstand the material body to be the self, we are experiencing many
emotions in relation to the body. Upon discovering, however, that the body is
simply a bag of material chemicals, we carefully note how this illusion was
created and then lose interest in the body. Discovering that we are actually an
eternal soul within the body, we naturally focus our attention on that real self.
Those who are saintly and wise always cultivate Kåñëa consciousness,
spiritual knowledge, having transcended the foolish misidentification of the
body as the self. Such Kåñëa conscious persons go on to realize the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who dwells within the material body as the
Supersoul—the witness and guide of every living entity. Realization of the
Supersoul and the individual soul is so pleasing and satisfying that a
self-realized person automatically gives up everything irrelevant to his spiritual
advancement.
TEXT 29
@TaAipa tae de"va pad"Ambaujaã"ya-
‘as$aAd"laezAAnaugA{h"Ita Wva ih"
jaAnaAita taÔvaM BagAvanmaih"°aAe
na caAnya Wk(Ae'ipa icarM" ivaicanvana,
athäpi te deva padämbuja-dvayaprasäda-
leçänugåhéta eva hi
jänäti tattvaà bhagavan-mahimno
na cänya eko 'pi ciraà vicinvan
SYNONYMS
atha—therefore; api—indeed; te—Your; deva—my Lord;
pada-ambuja-dvaya—of the two lotus feet; prasäda—of the mercy; leça—by
only a trace; anugåhétaù—favored; eva—certainly; hi—indeed; jänäti—one
knows; tattvam—the truth; bhagavat—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
mahimnaù—of the greatness; na—never; ca—and; anyaù—another;
ekaù—one; api—although; ciram—for a long period; vicinvan—speculating.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, if one is favored by even a slight trace of the mercy of Your lotus
feet, he can understand the greatness of Your personality. But those who
speculate to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead are unable to
know You, even though they continue to study the Vedas for many years.
PURPORT
This translation is quoted from Çréla Prabhupäda's Caitanya-caritämåta,
Madhya-léla, Chapter Six, Text 84.
Lord Kåñëa is very eager to bestow His mercy upon the conditioned living
beings, who are uselessly struggling with the Lord's illusory energy, Mäyä. The
conditioned soul struggles for happiness through sense gratification and for
knowledge through mental speculation. Both processes ultimately bring him to
a morose and hopeless condition. If the conditioned soul surrenders to the
lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa and thus acquires even a trace of His causeless mercy,
the whole situation is changed, and the living entity can begin his real life of
bliss and knowledge in Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 30
tad"stau mae naATa s$a BaUir"BaAgAAe
Bavae'‡a vaAnya‡a tau vaA itar"êAma,
yaenaAh"maek(Ae'ipa BavaÀanaAnaAM
BaUtvaA inaSaevae tava paAd"paéavama,
tad astu me nätha sa bhüri-bhägo
bhave 'tra vänyatra tu vä tiraçcäm
yenäham eko 'pi bhavaj-janänäà
bhütvä niñeve tava päda-pallavam
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; astu—may it be; me—my; nätha—O master; saù—that;
bhüri-bhägaù—greatest good fortune; bhave—in the birth; atra—this; vä—or;
anyatra—in some other birth; tu—indeed; vä—or; tiraçcäm—among the
animals; yena—by which; aham—I; ekaù—one; api—even; bhavat—or Your;
janänäm—devotees; bhütvä—becoming; niñeve—I may fully engage in serving;
tava—Your; päda-pallavam—lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, I therefore pray to be so fortunate that in this life as Lord
Brahmä or in another life, wherever I take my birth, I may be counted as one of
Your devotees. I pray that wherever I may be, even among the animal species, I
can engage in devotional service to Your lotus feet.
TEXT 31
@h"Ae'itaDanyaA ˜ajagAAer"maNya:
stanyaAma{taM paItamataIva tae maud"A
yaAs$aAM ivaBaAe vats$atar"AtmajaAtmanaA
yaÔa{æayae'âAipa na caAlamaDvar"A:
aho 'ti-dhanyä vraja-go-ramaëyaù
stanyämåtaà pétam atéva te mudä
yäsäà vibho vatsatarätmajätmanä
yat-tåptaye 'dyäpi na cälam adhvaräù
SYNONYMS
aho—oh; ati-dhanyäù—most fortunate; vraja—of Våndävana; go—the cows;
ramaëyaù—and the gopés; stanya—the breast-milk; amåtam—which is like
nectar; pétam—has been drunk; atéva—fully; te—by You; mudä—with
satisfaction; yäsäm—of whom; vibho—O almighty Lord;
vatsatara-ätmaja-ätmanä—in the form of the calves and the sons of the
cowherd women; yat—whose; tåptaye—for the satisfaction; adya api—even
until now; na—not; ca—and; alam—sufficient; adhvaräù—the Vedic
sacrifices.
TRANSLATION
O almighty Lord, how greatly fortunate are the cows and ladies of
Våndävana, the nectar of whose breast-milk You have happily drunk to Your
full satisfaction, taking the form of their calves and children! All the Vedic
sacrifices performed from time immemorial up to the present day have not given
You as much satisfaction.
TEXT 32
@h"Ae BaAgyamah"Ae BaAgyaM
nand"gAAepa˜ajaAEk(s$aAma,
yainma‡aM par"maAnandM"
paUNA< “aö s$anaAtanama,
aho bhägyam aho bhägyaà
nanda-gopa-vrajaukasäm
yan-mitraà paramänandaà
pürëaà brahma sanätanam
SYNONYMS
aho—what great; bhägyam—fortune; aho—what great; bhägyam—fortune;
nanda—of Mahäräja Nanda; gopa—of the other cowherd men;
vraja-okasäm—of the inhabitants of Vrajabhümi; yat—of whom; mitram—the
friend; parama-änandam—the supreme bliss; pürëam—complete;
brahma—the Absolute Truth; sanätanam—eternal.
TRANSLATION
How greatly fortunate are Nanda Mahäräja, the cowherd men and all the
other inhabitants of Vrajabhümi! There is no limit to their good fortune,
because the Absolute Truth, the source of transcendental bliss, the eternal
Supreme Brahman, has become their friend.
PURPORT
This translation is quoted from Çréla Prabhupäda's Caitanya-caritämåta,
Madhya-lélä, Chapter Six, Text 149.
TEXT 33
WSaAM tau BaAgyamaih"maAcyauta taAvad"AstaAma,
Wk(Ad"zAEva ih" vayaM bata BaUir"BaAgAA:
Wtaä,"Da{SaIk(caSakE(r"s$ak{(itpabaAma:
zAvaARd"yaAe'x.~„yaud"jamaDvama{taAs$avaM tae
eñäà tu bhägya-mahimäcyuta tävad ästäm
ekädaçaiva hi vayaà bata bhüri-bhägäù
etad-dhåñéka-cañakair asakåt pibämaù
çarvädayo 'ìghry-udaja-madhv-amåtäsavaà te
SYNONYMS
eñäm—of these (residents of Våndävana); tu—however; bhägya—of the good
fortune; mahimä—the greatness; acyuta—O infallible Supreme Lord;
tävat—so much; ästäm—let it be; ekädaça—the eleven; eva hi—indeed;
vayam—we; bata—oh; bhüri-bhägäù—are most fortunate; etat—of these
devotees; håñéka—by the senses; cañakaiù—(which are like) drinking cups;
asakåt—repeatedly; pibämaù—we are drinking; çarva-ädayaù—Lord Çiva and
the other chief demigods; aìghri-udaja—of the lotus feet; madhu—the honey;
amåta-äsavam—which is a nectarean, intoxicating beverage; te—of You.
TRANSLATION
Yet even though the extent of the good fortune of these residents of
Våndävana is inconceivable, we eleven presiding deities of the various senses,
headed by Lord Çiva, are also most fortunate, because the senses of these
devotees of Våndävana are the cups through which we repeatedly drink the
nectarean, intoxicating beverage of the honey of Your lotus feet.
TEXT 34
taàU"ir"BaAgyaimah" janma ik(mapyaq%vyaAM
yaÕ"Aeku(lae'ipa k(tamaAx.~i„ar"jaAe'iBaSaek(ma,
yaÀaIivataM tau inaiKalaM BagAvaAnmauku(nd"s$a,
tvaâAipa yatpad"r"ja: ™auitama{gyamaeva
tad bhüri-bhägyam iha janma kim apy aöavyäà
yad gokule 'pi katamäìghri-rajo-'bhiñekam
yaj-jévitaà tu nikhilaà bhagavän mukundas
tv adyäpi yat-pada-rajaù çruti-mågyam eva
SYNONYMS
tat—that; bhüri-bhägyam—the greatest good fortune; iha—here; janma—the
birth; kim api—any whatsoever; aöavyäm—in the forest (of Våndävana);
yat—which; gokule—in Gokula; api—even; katama—of any (of the devotees);
aìghri—of the feet; rajaù—by the dust; abhiñekam—bathing; yat—whose;
jévitam—life; tu—indeed; nikhilam—whole; bhagavän—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; mukundaù—Lord Mukunda; tu—but; adya api—even
until now; yat—whose; päda-rajaù—dust of the feet; çruti—by the Vedas;
mågyam—sought after; eva—certainly.
TRANSLATION
My greatest possible good fortune would be to take any birth whatever in
this forest of Gokula and have my head bathed by the dust falling from the lotus
feet of any of its residents. Their entire life and soul is the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Mukunda, the dust of whose lotus feet is still being searched for in
the Vedic mantras.
PURPORT
This verse indicates that Lord Brahmä desires to take birth even as the
smallest blade of grass in Våndävana so that the holy residents of the Lord's
abode may walk upon his head and bless him with the dust of their feet. Being
realistic, Lord Brahmä does not aspire to directly achieve the dust of Lord
Kåñëa's feet; rather, he aspires for the mercy of the Lord's devotees. Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains that Brahmä is willing to take birth
even as a stone in a paved footpath in the Lord's abode. Since Brahmä is the
creator of the entire universe, we can just imagine the glorious position of the
residents of Våndävana.
The Lord's devotees achieve their exalted position by unalloyed devotion
and love. One cannot achieve such spiritual opulence by any puffed-up
material process of personal improvement. In Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Çréla Prabhupäda reveals the mind of Brahmä as follows: "But if I am
not so fortunate as to take birth within the forest of Våndävana, I beg to be
allowed to take birth outside the immediate area of Våndävana so that when
the devotees go out they will walk over me. Even that would be a great fortune
for me. I am just aspiring for a birth in which I will be smeared by the dust of
the devotees' feet."
TEXT 35
WSaAM GaAeSainavaAis$anaAmauta BavaAna, ikM( de"va r"Ataeita nazA,
caetaAe ivaìP(laAtP(laM tvad"parM" ku(‡aApyayanmau÷ita
s$aãe"SaAid"va paUtanaAipa s$aku(laA tvaAmaeva de"vaAipataA
yaÜ"AmaATaRs$auô$it‘ayaAtmatanaya‘aANAAzAyaAstvatk{(tae
eñäà ghoña-niväsinäm uta bhavän kià deva räteti naç
ceto viçva-phalät phalaà tvad-aparaà kuträpy ayan muhyati
sad-veñäd iva pütanäpi sa-kulä tväm eva deväpitä
yad-dhämärtha-suhåt-priyätma-tanaya-präëäçayäs tvat-kåte
SYNONYMS
eñäm—to these; ghoña-niväsinäm—residents of the cowherd community;
uta—indeed; bhavän—Your Lordship; kim—what; deva—O Supreme
Personality of Godhead; rätä—will give; iti—thinking thus; naù—our;
cetaù—mind; viçva-phalät—than the supreme source of all benedictions;
phalam—a reward; tvat—than You; aparam—other; kutra api—anywhere;
ayat—considering; muhyati—becomes bewildered; sat-veñät—by disguising
herself as a devotee; iva—indeed; pütanä—the demoness Pütanä; api—even;
sa-kulä—along with her family members, Bakäsura and Aghäsura; tväm—You;
eva—certainly; deva—O Lord; äpitä—was made to attain; yat—whose;
dhäma—homes; artha—wealth; suhåt—friends; priya—dear relatives;
ätma—bodies; tanaya—children; präëa—life air; äçayäù—and minds;
tvat-kåte—dedicated to You.
TRANSLATION
My mind becomes bewildered just trying to think of what reward other than
You could be found anywhere. You are the embodiment of all benedictions,
which You bestow upon these residents of the cowherd community of
Våndävana. You have already arranged to give Yourself to Pütanä and her
family members in exchange for her disguising herself as a devotee. So what is
left for You to give these devotees of Våndävana, whose homes, wealth, friends,
dear relations, bodies, children and very lives and hearts are all dedicated only
to You?
TEXT 36
taAva‰"AgAAd"ya: staenaAs$a,
taAvatk(Ar"AgA{hM" gA{h"ma,
taAvanmaAeh"Ae'x.~i„ainagAx"Ae
yaAvatk{(SNA na tae janaA:
tävad rägädayaù stenäs
tävat kärä-gåhaà gåham
tävan moho 'ìghri-nigaòo
yävat kåñëa na te janäù
SYNONYMS
tävat—for that long; räga-ädayaù—material attachment and so on;
stenäù—thieves; tävat—for that long; kärä-gåham—a prison; gåham—one's
home; tävat—for that long; mohaù—the bewilderment of family affection;
aìghri—upon their feet; nigaòaù—shackles; yävat—as long as; kåñëa—O Lord
Kåñëa; na—do not become; te—Your (devotees); janäù—any persons.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord Kåñëa, until people become Your devotees, their material
attachments and desires remain thieves, their homes remain prisons, and their
affectionate feelings for their family members remain foot-shackles.
PURPORT
Apparently, the residents of Våndävana, the abode of Lord Kåñëa, are
simple householders engaged in ordinary affairs such as herding cows, cooking,
rearing children and performing religious ceremonies. However, all these
activities are intensely engaged in the loving service of Lord Kåñëa. The
residents of Våndävana perform all activities in pure Kåñëa consciousness and
thus exist on the most exalted platform of liberated life. Otherwise, the same
activities performed without Kåñëa consciousness constitute ordinary bondage
to the material world.
Thus, one should not misunderstand the exalted position of the residents of
Våndävana, nor should one consider oneself highly religious simply because
one performs ordinary domestic affairs very enthusiastically, but without
Kåñëa consciousness. By focusing our passionate attachment on our family and
society, we are completely deviated from the progressive path of Kåñëa
consciousness. Conversely, if we engage our family in the loving service of the
Lord, our endeavors to maintain our family become part and parcel of our
progressive spiritual duties.
In conclusion, by studying the extraordinary status of the residents of
Våndävana, we can see that the essential quality of their lives is pure Kåñëa
consciousness—the rendering of loving service to the Lord without a trace of
material desire or mental speculation. Such loving service to the original
Personality of Godhead immediately creates the atmosphere of Çré
Våndävana-dhäma, the kingdom of God.
TEXT 37
‘apaÂaM inaS‘apaÂaAe'ipa
ivax"mbayais$a BaUtalae
‘apaªajanataAnand"-
s$and"AehM" ‘aiTatauM ‘aBaAe
prapaïcaà niñprapaïco 'pi
viòambayasi bhü-tale
prapanna-janatänandasandohaà
prathituà prabho
SYNONYMS
prapaïcam—that which is material; niñprapaïcaù—completely transcendental
to material existence; api—although; viòambayasi—You imitate; bhü-tale—on
the surface of the earth; prapanna—who are surrendered; janatä—of people;
änanda-sandoham—the great variety of different kinds of ecstasies;
prathitum—in order to spread; prabho—O master.
TRANSLATION
My dear master, although You have nothing to do with material existence,
You come to this earth and imitate material life just to expand the varieties of
ecstatic enjoyment for Your surrendered devotees.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura points out that just as a lamp does not
seem to shine as brightly in sunlight as it does in the shade, or as a diamond
does not seem as brilliant on a silver platter as it does on a plate of blue glass,
the Lord's pastimes as Govinda do not seem as amazing in the transcendental
abode of Vaikuëöha as they do within the material realm of Mäyä. Lord Kåñëa
comes to the earth and acts toward His pure devotees exactly like a devoted
son, boyfriend, husband, father, friend and so on, and within the darkness of
material existence these brilliant, liberated pastimes give unlimited ecstasy to
the surrendered devotees of the Lord.
In his Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çréla Prabhupäda quotes
Lord Brahmä as follows: "I can also understand that Your appearance as a small
cowherd boy, a child of the cowherd men, is not at all a material activity. You
are so much obliged by their affection that You are here to enthuse them with
more loving service by Your transcendental presence. "
TEXT 38
jaAnanta Wva jaAnantau
ikM( baó"ftyaA na mae ‘aBaAe
manas$aAe vapauSaAe vaAcaAe
vaEBavaM tava gAAecar":
jänanta eva jänantu
kià bahüktyä na me prabho
manaso vapuño väco
vaibhavaà tava go-caraù
SYNONYMS
jänantaù—persons who think they are aware of Your unlimited potency;
eva—certainly; jänantu—let them think like that; kim—what is the use;
bahu-uktyä—with many words; na—not; me—my; prabho—O Lord;
manasaù—of the mind; vapuñaù—of the body; väcaù—of the words;
vaibhavam—opulences; tava—Your; go-caraù—within the range.
TRANSLATION
There are people who say, "I know everything about Kåñëa." Let them think
that way. As far as I am concerned, I do not wish to speak very much about this
matter. O my Lord, let me say this much: As far as Your opulences are
concerned, they are all beyond the reach of my mind, body and words.
PURPORT
This translation is quoted from Çréla Prabhupäda's Caitanya-caritämåta,
Madhya-léla, Chapter Twenty-one, Text 27.
TEXT 39
@naujaAnaIih" maAM k{(SNA
s$ava< tvaM vaeits$a s$avaRä{"k,(
tvamaeva jagAtaAM naATaAe
jagAde"taÔavaAipaRtama,
anujänéhi mäà kåñëa
sarvaà tvaà vetsi sarva-dåk
tvam eva jagatäà nätho
jagad etat tavärpitam
SYNONYMS
anujänéhi—please give leave; mäm—to me; kåñëa—O Lord Kåñëa;
sarvam—everything; tvam—You; vetsi—know; sarva-dåk—all-seeing;
tvam—You; eva—alone; jagatäm—of all the universes; näthaù—the master;
jagat—universe; etat—this; tava—to You; arpitam—is offered.
TRANSLATION
My dear Kåñëa, I now humbly request permission to leave. Actually, You are
the knower and seer of all things. Indeed, You are the Lord of all the universes,
and yet I offer this one universe unto You.
PURPORT
In his Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çréla Prabhupäda has
quoted Lord Brahmä as follows: "My dear Lord, although You are the Supreme
Lord of all creation, I sometimes falsely think that I am the master of this
universe. I may be master of this universe, but there are innumerable
universes, and there are also innumerable Brahmäs who preside over these
universes. But actually You are the master of them all. As the Supersoul in
everyone's heart, You know everything. Please, therefore, accept me as Your
surrendered servant. I hope that You will excuse me for disturbing You in Your
pastimes with Your friends and calves. Now if You will kindly allow me, I will
immediately leave so You can enjoy Your friends and calves without my
presence."
The words sarvaà tvaà vetsi sarva-dåk are very significant here. Lord Kåñëa
knows everything and sees everything, and therefore Lord Brahmä did not
need to remain in Våndävana to maintain his personal loving contact with the
Lord. In fact, as the creator of the universe, Lord Brahmä was somewhat out of
place in the simple, blissful atmosphere of Våndävana, where Lord Kåñëa was
exhibiting His supreme opulences in herding cows, enjoying picnics, playing
games and so on.
Upon seeing the intense love the residents of Våndävana had for Lord
Kåñëa, Brahmä felt unqualified to remain there. He was not eager to give up
the Lord's association, but he felt it better to return to his personal devotional
service in Brahmaloka. Somewhat embarrassed and unhappy over his foolish
attempt at bewildering the Lord, Brahmä preferred to resume his
transcendental loving service rather than try to enjoy the Lord's presence.
TEXT 40
™aIk{(SNA va{iSNAku(lapauSk(r"jaAeSad"Aiyana,
ºmaAinajaRr"iã"japazAUd"iDava{iÜ"k(Air"na,
oÜ"maRzAAvaRr"h"r" iºaitar"Aºas$a‹augA,
@Ak(lpamaAkR(mahR"na, BagAvaªamastae
çré-kåñëa våñëi-kula-puñkara-joña-däyin
kñmä-nirjara-dvija-paçüdadhi-våddhi-kärin
uddharma-çärvara-hara kñiti-räkñasa-dhrug
ä-kalpam ärkam arhan bhagavan namas te
SYNONYMS
çré-kåñëa—O Lord Kåñëa; våñëi-kula—of the Yadu dynasty; puñkara—to the
lotus; joña—pleasure; däyin—O You who bestow; kñmä—of the earth;
nirjara—the demigods; dvija—the brähmaëas; paçu—and of the animals;
udadhi—of the great oceans; våddhi—the increase; kärin—O You who cause;
uddharma—of atheistic principles; çärvara—of the darkness; hara—O
dispeller; kñiti—upon the earth; räkñasa—of the demons; dhruk—the
opponent; ä-kalpam—until the end of the universe; ä-arkam—as long as the
sun shines; arhan—O supremely worshipable Deity; bhagavan—O Supreme
Personality of Godhead; namaù—I offer my respectful obeisances; te—unto
You.
TRANSLATION
My dear Çré Kåñëa, You bestow happiness upon the lotuslike Våñëi dynasty
and expand the great oceans consisting of the earth, the demigods, the
brähmaëas and the cows. You dispel the dense darkness of irreligion and oppose
the demons who have appeared on this earth. O Supreme Personality of
Godhead, as long as this universe exists and as long as the sun shines, I will
offer my obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé, Lord Brahmä is here engaged in the
ecstasy of näma-saìkértana, glorifying various holy names of Lord Kåñëa that
indicate His variegated pastimes. Lord Kåñëa expertly suppressed the demoniac
population of the earth, which became unbearable with the advent of
demoniac politicians like Kaàsa, Jaräsandha and Çiçupäla. Similarly, in
modern society there are many so-called God-fearing people who are actually
attracted to demoniac existence. Such persons become enlivened with the
setting of the sun and go out in the darkness to enjoy life in restaurants,
nightclubs, discotheques, hotels and so on, which are all simply meant for
illicit sex, intoxication, gambling and meat-eating. Then there are those who
openly defy God and His laws, declaring themselves atheists and demons. Both
the covert and the overt enemies of the Lord constitute an unholy burden for
the earth, and Lord Kåñëa descends to expertly remove this burden.
Here Lord Brahmä indirectly states that Lord Kåñëa should remove
Brahmä's own subtle atheism, which had led him to try to exert illusory power
over Lord Kåñëa. According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, Lord
Brahmä, in his shame, felt himself to be like a brahma-räkñasa from Satyaloka
who had come to the earth to disturb Lord Kåñëa and His intimate friends and
calves. Brahmä is lamenting that although Lord Kåñëa is most exalted, the
Lord of all lords, because He had appeared before Brahmä in such a simple and
innocent feature—decorated with a stick, a conchshell, ornaments, red clay, a
peacock feather and so on, and sporting with His cowherd
boyfriends—Brahmä dared to challenge Him. Concerning Brahmä's prayers, of
which this verse is the conclusion, Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura states,
"May these prayers of Brahmä, which take away all doubts and broadcast all
the definitive conclusions of devotional service, become the expert
craftsmanship of the foundation of my consciousness."
TEXT 41
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
wtyaiBaí^"ya BaUmaAnaM
i‡a: pair"‚(mya paAd"yaAe:
natvaABaIíM" jagAÜ"AtaA
svaDaAma ‘atyapaâta
çré-çuka uväca
ity abhiñöüya bhümänaà
triù parikramya pädayoù
natväbhéñöaà jagad-dhätä
sva-dhäma pratyapadyata
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; abhiñöüya—offering
praise; bhümänam—to the unlimited Supreme Lord; triù—three times;
parikramya—circumambulating; pädayoù—at His feet; natvä—bowing down;
abhéñöam—desired; jagat—of the universe; dhätä—the creator; sva-dhäma—to
his personal abode; pratyapadyata—returned.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Having thus offered his prayers, Brahmä
circumambulated his worshipable Lord, the unlimited Personality of Godhead,
three times and then bowed down at His lotus feet. The appointed creator of
the universe then returned to his own residence.
PURPORT
Although Lord Brahmä had prayed to take birth as a blade of grass in
Våndävana or even in the area surrounding Våndävana, Lord Kåñëa, by His
silent response to Brahmä's prayers, indicated that Brahmä should return to his
own abode. First Brahmä had to complete his personal devotional service of
universal creation; then he could come to Våndävana and get the mercy of the
inhabitants there. In other words, a devotee should always be attentive to
executing his personal devotional service properly. This is more important
than trying to live in the Lord's abode.
TEXT 42
tataAe'nauÁaApya BagAvaAna,
svaBauvaM ‘aAgAvaisTataAna,
vats$aAna, pauilanamaAinanyae
yaTaApaUvaRs$aKaM svak(ma,
tato 'nujïäpya bhagavän
sva-bhuvaà präg avasthitän
vatsän pulinam äninye
yathä-pürva-sakhaà svakam
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; anujïäpya—giving permission; bhagavän—the Supreme Lord;
sva-bhuvam—to His own son (Brahmä); präk—from before;
avasthitän—situated; vatsän—the calves; pulinam—to the shore of the river;
äninye—He brought; yathä-pürva—just as before; sakham—where the friends
were present; svakam—His own.
TRANSLATION
After granting His son Brahmä permission to leave, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead took the calves, who were still where they had been a year earlier,
and brought them to the riverbank, where He had been taking His meal and
where His cowherd boyfriends remained just as before.
PURPORT
The word sva-bhuvam, "to His own son," indicates that Lord Kåñëa forgave
the offense Brahmä had committed and treated him with affection, as His son.
It is stated in this verse that the original cowherd boyfriends and calves were
situated just as before: near the bank of the Yamunä River and in the forest,
respectively. Previously the calves had disappeared within the forest and Lord
Kåñëa had gone to search for them. Not finding them, the Lord had returned
to the riverbank to discuss the situation with His cowherd boyfriends, but they
had also disappeared. Now the cows were once again in the forest and the
boyfriends once again on the bank of the river, ready to take their lunch.
According to Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé, the calves and boys remained in the
forest and on the riverbank, respectively, for one full year. Lord Brahmä did
not actually take them away to another place. By the Lord's omnipotent
illusory energy, the gopés and other residents of Våndävana did not notice the
calves and boys, nor did the calves and boys notice the passing of a year's time
or feel any hunger, cold or thirst. All this was part of the pastime arranged by
the Lord's illusory potency. Lord Brahmä thought, "I have kept all the boys and
calves of Gokula sleeping on the bed of my mystic potency, and to this very
day they have not risen. A similar number of boys and calves have been
playing with Kåñëa for one whole year, yet they are different from the ones
illusioned by my mystic potency. Who are they? Where did they come from?"
Nothing is invisible to the Supreme Lord. Thus Lord Kåñëa appeared to be
searching for the calves and boys only to enact the dramatic pastime of
bewildering Lord Brahmä. After Brahmä surrendered and offered prayers,
Lord Kåñëa returned to the original boys and calves, who appeared exactly as
before, although their size had somewhat increased because of one year's
growth.
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, since Lord Kåñëa was
playing exactly like an innocent young cowherd boy in Våndävana, after
four-headed Brahmä offered his prayers the Lord maintained His role as a
young cowherd boy and thus remained silent before Brahmä. Kåñëa's silence
indicates the following thoughts: "Where did this four-headed Brahmä come
from? What is he doing? What are these words he keeps on speaking? I am busy
looking for My calves. I am just a cowherd boy and do not understand all this."
Lord Brahmä had considered Lord Kåñëa an ordinary cowherd boy and had
treated Him as such. After accepting Brahmä's prayers, Kåñëa continued to
play as a cowherd boy and thus did not answer the four-headed Brahmä.
Rather, Kåñëa was more interested in rejoining His cowherd boyfriends for the
picnic lunch on the bank of the Yamunä River.
TEXT 43
Wk(ismaªaipa yaAtae'bde"
‘aANAezAM caAntar"Atmana:
k{(SNAmaAyaAh"taA r"Ajana,
ºaNAADa< maeinare"'BaRk(A:
ekasminn api yäte 'bde
präëeçaà cäntarätmanaù
kåñëa-mäyähatä räjan
kñaëärdhaà menire 'rbhakäù
SYNONYMS
ekasmin—one; api—although; yäte—having passed; abde—year;
präëa-éçam—the Lord of their lives; ca—and; antarä—without; ätmanaù—of
themselves; kåñëa—of Lord Kåñëa; mäyä—by the illusory potency;
ähatäù—covered; räjan—O King; kñaëa-ardham—half a moment;
menire—they thought; arbhakäù—the boys.
TRANSLATION
O King, although the boys had passed an entire year apart from the Lord of
their very lives, they had been covered by Lord Kåñëa's illusory potency and
thus considered that year merely half a moment.
TEXT 44
ikM( ikM( na ivasmar"ntaIh"
maAyaAmaAeih"tacaetas$a:
yanmaAeih"taM jagAts$avaRma,
@BaIºNAM ivasma{taAtmak(ma,
kià kià na vismarantéha
mäyä-mohita-cetasaù
yan-mohitaà jagat sarvam
abhékñëaà vismåtätmakam
SYNONYMS
kim kim—what indeed; na vismaranti—persons do not forget; iha—in this
world; mäyä-mohita—bewildered by illusion; cetasaù—whose minds; yat—by
which; mohitam—bewildered; jagat—the world; sarvam—entire;
abhékñëam—constantly; vismåta-ätmakam—making one forget even one's own
self.
TRANSLATION
What indeed is not forgotten by those whose minds are bewildered by the
Lord's illusory potency? By that power of Mäyä, this entire universe remains in
perpetual bewilderment, and in this atmosphere of forgetfulness no one can
understand his own identity.
PURPORT
It is clearly stated here that the entire universe is bewildered. Thus even
great demigods like Indra and Brahmä are not exempt from the principle of
forgetfulness. Since Lord Kåñëa exercised His internal illusory potency over
His cowherd boyfriends and calves, it is not at all astonishing that for one year
they could not remember their position. Indeed, by the Lord's external illusory
potency the conditioned souls forget their existence not only for one year but
for many billions and billions of years as they transmigrate throughout the
kingdom of ignorance called the material world.
TEXT 45
Ocauê s$auô$d": k{(SNAM
svaAgAtaM tae'itarM"h"s$aA
naEk(Ae'pyaBaAeija k(vala
Wh"Ita: s$aADau BaujyataAma,
ücuç ca suhådaù kåñëaà
sv-ägataà te 'ti-raàhasä
naiko 'py abhoji kavala
ehétaù sädhu bhujyatäm
SYNONYMS
ücuù—they spoke; ca—and; suhådaù—the friends; kåñëam—to Lord Kåñëa;
su-ägatam—have come all the way back; te—You; ati-raàhasä—very quickly;
na—not; ekaù—one; api—even; abhoji—has been eaten; kavalaù—morsel;
ehi—please come; itaù—here; sädhu—properly; bhujyatäm—take Your meal.
TRANSLATION
The cowherd boyfriends said to Lord Kåñëa: You have returned so quickly!
We have not eaten even one morsel in Your absence. Please come here and take
Your meal without distraction.
PURPORT
The words sv-ägataà te 'ti-raàhasä indicate that the cowherd boys were
congratulating Lord Kåñëa for having brought the calves back so quickly from
the forest. Now Lord Kåñëa's beloved friends urged Him to sit down properly
and eat to His full satisfaction. According to Çréla Prabhupäda's Kåñëa, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the cowherd boyfriends felt quite jubilant and
were eager to eat with their dear friend, Kåñëa.
TEXT 46
tataAe h"s$ana, ô$SaIke(zAAe
'Byavaô$tya s$ah"ABaR&kE(:
d"zARyaMêmaARjagArM"
nyavataRta vanaAä," ˜ajama,
tato hasan håñékeço
'bhyavahåtya sahärbhakaiù
darçayaàç carmäjagaraà
nyavartata vanäd vrajam
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; hasan—smiling; håñékeçaù—Lord Kåñëa, the master of everyone's
senses; abhyavahåtya—taking lunch; saha—along with; arbhakaiù—the
cowherd boys; darçayan—showing; carma—the skin; äjagaram—of the python
Aghäsura; nyavartata—He returned; vanät—from the forest; vrajam—to the
village of Vraja.
TRANSLATION
Then Lord Håñékeça, smiling, finished His lunch in the company of His
cowherd friends. While they were returning from the forest to their homes in
Vraja, Lord Kåñëa showed the cowherd boys the skin of the dead serpent
Aghäsura.
TEXT 47
bahR"‘as$aUnavanaDaAtauivaicai‡ataAËÿ:
‘aAeÚ"AmavaeNAud"laZa{"Ëÿr"vaAets$avaAX#Ya:
vats$aAna, gA{NAªanaugAgAItapaiva‡ak(LitaRr,"
gAAepaIä{"gAuts$avaä{"izA: ‘aivavaezA gAAeï"ma,
barha-prasüna-vana-dhätu-vicitritäìgaù
proddäma-veëu-dala-çåìga-ravotsaväòhyaù
vatsän gåëann anuga-géta-pavitra-kértir
gopé-dåg-utsava-dåçiù praviveça goñöham
SYNONYMS
barha—with peacock feathers; prasüna—flowers; vana-dhätu—and forest
minerals; vicitrita—decorated; aìgaù—His transcendental body;
proddäma—great; veëu-dala—a flute made from the branch of a bamboo tree;
çåìga—of the buffalo horn; rava—by the resounding; utsava—with a festival;
äòhyaù—resplendent; vatsän—the calves; gåëan—calling; anuga—by His
companions; géta—sung; pavitra—purifying; kértiù—His glories; gopé—of the
cowherd women; dåk—for the eyes; utsava—a festival; dåçiù—the vision of
Him; praviveça—He entered; goñöham—the cow pasture.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa's transcendental body was decorated with peacock feathers and
flowers and painted with forest minerals, and His bamboo flute loudly and
festively resounded. As He called out to His calves by name, His cowherd
boyfriends purified the whole world by chanting His glories. Thus Lord Kåñëa
entered the cow pasture of His father, Nanda Mahäräja, and the sight of His
beauty at once produced a great festival for the eyes of all the cowherd women.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé and Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura,
the gopés mentioned here are the elder cowherd ladies such as mother Yaçodä,
who loved Kåñëa with parental affection. Kåñëa's cowherd boyfriends were so
proud of Kåñëa's wonderful activities that while entering the village they all
sang His glories.
TEXT 48
@âAnaena mah"AvyaAlaAe
yazAAed"Anand"s$aUnaunaA
h"taAe'ivataA vayaM caAsmaAä,"
wita baAlaA ˜ajae jagAu:
adyänena mahä-vyälo
yaçodä-nanda-sünunä
hato 'vitä vayaà cäsmäd
iti bälä vraje jaguù
SYNONYMS
adya—today; anena—by Him; mahä-vyälaù—a great serpent; yaçodä—of
Yaçodä; nanda—and Mahäräja Nanda; sünunä—by the son; hataù—has been
killed; avitäù—have been saved; vayam—we; ca—and; asmät—from that
demon; iti—thus; bäläù—the boys; vraje—in Våndävana; jaguù—sang.
TRANSLATION
As the cowherd boys reached the village of Vraja, they sang, "Today Kåñëa
saved us by killing a great serpent!" Some of the boys described Kåñëa as the
son of Yaçodä, and others as the son of Nanda Mahäräja.
PURPORT
Actually, Lord Kåñëa had killed the demon Aghäsura one-year earlier, but
the boys, bewildered by the mystic potency of Brahmä for one year, did not
notice the time passing and thus thought that on that very day Lord Kåñëa had
killed the demon Aghäsura and was now returning home with them.
TEXT 49
™aIr"AjaAevaAca
“aöna, par"Aeà"vae k{(SNAe
wyaAna, ‘aemaA k(TaM Bavaeta,
yaAe'BaUtapaUvaRstaAeke(Sau
svaAeà"vaeSvaipa k(TyataAma,
çré-räjoväca
brahman parodbhave kåñëe
iyän premä kathaà bhavet
yo 'bhüta-pürvas tokeñu
svodbhaveñv api kathyatäm
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—the King said; brahman—O brähmaëa, Çukadeva;
para-udbhave—for the offspring of another; kåñëe—Lord Kåñëa; iyän—so
much; premä—love; katham—how; bhavet—can be; yaù—which;
abhüta-pürvaù—unprecedented; tokeñu-for the children; sva-udbhaveñu—their
own offspring; api—even; kathyatäm—please explain.
TRANSLATION
King Parékñit said: O brähmaëa, how could the cowherd women have
developed for Kåñëa, someone else's son, such unprecedented pure love-love
they never felt even for their own children? Please explain this.
TEXT 50
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
s$avaeRSaAmaipa BaUtaAnaAM
na{pa svaAtmaEva vaéaBa:
wtare"'patyaivaÔaAâAs$a,
taã"éaBatayaEva ih"
çré-çuka uväca
sarveñäm api bhütänäà
nåpa svätmaiva vallabhaù
itare 'patya-vittädyäs
tad-vallabhatayaiva hi
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; sarveñäm—for all; api—indeed;
bhütänäm—created living beings; nåpa—O King; sva-ätmä—one's own self;
eva—certainly; vallabhaù—dearmost; itare—others; apatya—children;
vitta—wealth; ädyäù—and so on; tat—of that self; vallabhatayä—based on the
dearness; eva hi—indeed.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O King, for every created being the dearmost
thing is certainly his own self. The dearness of everything else—children,
wealth and so on—is due only to the dearness of the self.
PURPORT
Sometimes modern thinkers become puzzled when they study the
psychology of moral behavior. Although every living entity is inclined toward
self-preservation, as stated here, sometimes a person voluntarily sacrifices his
own apparent interest through philanthropic or patriotic activities, such as
giving his money for the benefit of others or giving his life for the national
interest. Such so-called selfless behavior appears to contradict the principle of
material self-centeredness and self-preservation.
As explained in this verse, however, a living entity serves his society,
nation, family and so on only because these objects of affection represent the
expanded concept of false ego. A patriot sees himself as a great servitor of a
great nation, and thus he sacrifices his life to gratify his sense of egotism.
Similarly, it is common knowledge that a man feels great pleasure by thinking
that he is sacrificing everything to please his dear wife and children. A man
derives great egotistic pleasure by seeing himself as a selfless well-wisher of his
so-called family and community. Thus, to gratify his proud sense of false ego, a
man is prepared even to lay down his life. This apparently contradictory
behavior is yet another demonstration of the bewilderment of material life,
which has neither rhyme nor reason, being a manifestation of gross ignorance
of the nonmaterial soul.
TEXT 51
ta‰"Ajaen‰" yaTaA µaeh":
svasvak(Atmaina de"ih"naAma,
na taTaA mamataAlaimbapau‡
aivaÔagA{h"Aid"Sau
tad räjendra yathä snehaù
sva-svakätmani dehinäm
na tathä mamatälambiputra-
vitta-gåhädiñu
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; räja-indra—O best of kings; yathä—as; snehaù—the affection;
sva-svaka—of each individual; ätmani—for the self; dehinäm—of the
embodied beings; na—not; tathä—thus; mamatä-älambi—for that which one
identifies with as his possessions; putra—sons; vitta—wealth; gåha—homes;
ädiñu—and so on.
TRANSLATION
For this reason, O best of kings, the embodied soul is self-centered: he is
more attached to his own body and self than to his so-called possessions like
children, wealth and home.
PURPORT
It is now common practice all over the world for a mother to kill her own
child within the womb if the birth of that child represents any inconvenience
for her. Similarly, grown children eagerly place their elderly parents in lonely
institutions rather than be inconvenienced by their presence at home. These
and innumerable other examples prove that people in general are more
attached to their own body and self, which represent "I-ness," than to their
family and other possessions, which represent "my-ness." Although
conditioned souls are very proud of their so-called love for society, family and
so forth, in reality every conditioned soul is acting on the platform of gross or
subtle selfishness.
TEXT 52
de"h"AtmavaAid"naAM pauMs$aAma,
@ipa r"Ajanyas$aÔama
yaTaA de"h": i‘ayatamas$a,
taTaA na ÷nau yae ca tama,
dehätma-vädinäà puàsäm
api räjanya-sattama
yathä dehaù priyatamas
tathä na hy anu ye ca tam
SYNONYMS
deha-ätma-vädinäm—who ascribe to the view that the body is the self;
puàsäm—for persons; api—indeed; räjanya-sat-tama—O best of kings;
yathä—as; dehaù—the body; priya-tamaù—most dear; tathä—thus; na—not;
hi—certainly; anu—relative; ye—which things; ca—and; tam—to that.
TRANSLATION
Indeed, for persons who think the body is the self, O best of kings, those
things whose importance lies only in their relationship to the body are never as
dear as the body itself.
TEXT 53
de"h"Ae'ipa mamataABaAfcaeta,
ta÷Rs$aAE naAtmavait‘aya:
yaÀaIyaRtyaipa de"he"'ismana,
jaIivataAzAA balaIyas$aI
deho 'pi mamatä-bhäk cet
tarhy asau nätma-vat priyaù
yaj jéryaty api dehe 'smin
jévitäçä baléyasé
SYNONYMS
dehaù—the body; api—also; mamatä—of possessiveness; bhäk—the focus;
cet—if; tarhi—then; asau—that body; na—not; ätma-vat—in the same way as
the soul; priyaù—dear; yat—because; jéryati—when it is growing old;
api—even; dehe—the body; asmin—this; jévita-äçä—the desire to remain
living; baléyasé—very strong.
TRANSLATION
If a person comes to the stage of considering the body "mine" instead of
"me," he will certainly not consider the body as dear as his own self. After all,
even as the body is growing old and useless, one's desire to continue living
remains strong.
PURPORT
The word mamatä-bhäk is very significant here. An ordinary, foolish person
thinks, "I am this body." A more discriminating, intelligent person thinks,
"This is my body." In the literature and folklore of ordinary people we find the
common theme of an old, decrepit person dreaming of obtaining a new, young
body. Thus, even ordinary persons pick up the notion of self-realization,
instinctively understanding that it is possible for the soul to exist in many
different bodies.
As the body of an intelligent person becomes old and useless, he strongly
desires to live, even when he knows that his body cannot live much longer.
This indicates he is gradually becoming aware that his self is more important
than his body. Thus simply the desire for life can indirectly bring one to a
preliminary understanding of self-realization. And in this case as well, one's
basic attachment is to one's own self and not to that which supposedly belongs
to oneself.
It may be pointed out that the entire discussion between King Parékñit and
Çukadeva Gosvämé regarding the dearness of one's own self is ultimately meant
for broaching the subject of why the cows and cowherd ladies of Våndävana
considered Kåñëa more dear than their own selves and certainly more dear
than their own offspring. The discussion proceeds as follows.
TEXT 54
tasmaAit‘ayatama: svaAtmaA
s$avaeRSaAmaipa de"ih"naAma,
tad"TaRmaeva s$ak(laM
jagAde"ta»ar"Acar"ma,
tasmät priyatamaù svätmä
sarveñäm api dehinäm
tad-artham eva sakalaà
jagad etac caräcaram
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; priya-tamaù—most dear; sva-ätmä—one's own self;
sarveñäm—for all; api—indeed; dehinäm—embodied living beings;
tat-artham—for the sake of it; eva—certainly; sakalam—all; jagat—the
created universe; etat—this; cara-acaram—with its moving and nonmoving
entities.
TRANSLATION
Therefore it is his own self that is most dear to every embodied living being,
and it is simply for the satisfaction of this self that the whole material creation
of moving and nonmoving entities exists.
PURPORT
The word caräcaram indicates moving living entities, such as animals, and
nonmoving living entities, such as trees. Or the word may also refer to moving
possessions, such as one's family and pets, and nonmoving possessions, such as
one's house and household paraphernalia.
TEXT 55
k{(SNAmaenamavaeih" tvama,
@AtmaAnamaiKalaAtmanaAma,
jagAiÜ"taAya s$aAe'pya‡a
de"h"IvaABaAita maAyayaA
kåñëam enam avehi tvam
ätmänam akhilätmanäm
jagad-dhitäya so 'py atra
dehéväbhäti mäyayä
SYNONYMS
kåñëam—Lord Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; enam—this;
avehi—just try to understand; tvam—you; ätmänam—the Soul;
akhila-ätmanäm—of all living entities; jagat-hitäya—for the benefit of the
whole universe; saù—He; api—certainly; atra—here; dehé—a human being;
iva—like; äbhäti—appears; mäyayä—by His internal potency.
TRANSLATION
You should know Kåñëa to be the original Soul of all living entities. For the
benefit of the whole universe, He has, out of His causeless mercy, appeared as
an ordinary human being. He has done this by the strength of His internal
potency.
PURPORT
In the Caitanya-caritämåta, Madhya-léla, Chapter Twenty, Text 162, Çréla
Prabhupäda comments on this verse as follows: "Parékñit Mahäräja asked
Çukadeva Gosvämé why Kåñëa was so beloved by the residents of Våndävana,
who loved Him even more than their own offspring or life itself. At that time,
Çukadeva Gosvämé replied that everyone's ätmä, or soul, is very, very dear,
especially to all living entities who have accepted material bodies. However,
that ätmä, the spirit soul, is part and parcel of Kåñëa. For this reason, Kåñëa is
very dear to every living entity. Everyone's body is very dear to oneself, and
one wants to protect the body by all means because within the body the soul is
living. Due to the intimate relationship between the soul and the body, the
body is important and dear to everyone. Similarly, the soul, being part and
parcel of Kåñëa, the Supreme Lord, is very, very dear to all living entities.
Unfortunately, the soul forgets his constitutional position and thinks he is
only the body (dehätma-buddhi). Thus the soul is subjected to the rules and
regulations of material nature. When a living entity, by his intelligence,
reawakens his attraction for Kåñëa, he can understand that he is not the body
but part and parcel of Kåñëa. Thus filled with knowledge, he no longer labors
under attachment to the body and everything related to the body (janasya
moho 'yam ahaà mameti [SB 5.5.8]). Material existence, wherein one thinks, 'I
am the body, and this belongs to me,' is also illusory. One must redirect his
attraction to Kåñëa. Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.7) states,
väsudeve bhagavati
bhakti-yogaù prayojitaù
janayaty äçu vairägyaà
jïänaà ca yad ahaitukam
'By rendering devotional service unto the Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa,
one immediately acquires causeless knowledge and detachment from the
world.' "
TEXT 56
vastautaAe jaAnataAma‡a
k{(SNAM sTaAµau cair"SNAu ca
BagAvaåU"pamaiKalaM
naAnyaã"istvah" ik(Âana
vastuto jänatäm atra
kåñëaà sthäsnu cariñëu ca
bhagavad-rüpam akhilaà
nänyad vastv iha kiïcana
SYNONYMS
vastutaù—in fact; jänatäm—for those who understand; atra—in this world;
kåñëam—Lord Kåñëa; sthäsnu—stationary; cariñëu—moving; ca—and;
bhagavat-rüpam—the manifest forms of the Personality of Godhead;
akhilam—everything; na—nothing; anyat—else; vastu—substance; iha—here;
kiïcana—at all.
TRANSLATION
Those in this world who understand Lord Kåñëa as He is see all things,
whether stationary or moving, as manifest forms of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Such enlightened persons recognize no reality apart from the Supreme
Lord Kåñëa.
PURPORT
Everything exists within Lord Kåñëa, and Lord Kåñëa exists within
everything. Still, the order of progression is always from the energetic to the
expanded energy. Lord Kåñëa is the original identity, from whom all other
identities emanate. He is the supreme energetic, from whom all categories and
dimensions of energy become manifest. Thus, our personal bodies, self, family,
friends, nation, planet, universe and so on are all manifestations of the
Supreme Lord, who expands Himself through His personal potencies. Lord
Kåñëa is certainly the supreme object of our love and attraction, and other
objects, such as body, family and home, should be secondary objects of our
affection. Moreover, a close analytic study of the actual situation will reveal
that even the secondary objects of love are also manifestations of Lord Kåñëa.
The conclusion is that Lord Kåñëa is our only friend and object of love.
In his Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çréla Prabhupäda
comments on this verse as follows: "Without being an expansion of Kåñëa,
nothing can be attractive. Whatever is attractive within the cosmic
manifestation is due to Kåñëa. Kåñëa is therefore the reservoir of all pleasure.
The active principle of everything is Kåñëa, and highly elevated
transcendentalists see everything in connection with Him. In the
Caitanya-caritämåta it is stated that a mahä-bhägavata, a highly advanced
devotee, sees Kåñëa as the active principle in all movable and immovable living
entities. Therefore he sees everything within this cosmic manifestation in
relation to Kåñëa."
TEXT 57
s$avaeRSaAmaipa vastaUnaAM
BaAvaATaAeR Bavaita isTata:
tasyaAipa BagAvaAna, k{(SNA:
ik(mataã"stau è&pyataAma,
sarveñäm api vastünäà
bhävärtho bhavati sthitaù
tasyäpi bhagavän kåñëaù
kim atad vastu rüpyatäm
SYNONYMS
sarveñäm—of all; api—indeed; vastünäm—entities; bhäva-arthaù—the
original, unmanifested causal phase of material nature; bhavati—is;
sthitaù—established; tasya—of that unmanifest nature; api—even;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kåñëaù—Lord Kåñëa;
kim—what; atat—separate from Him; vastu—thing; rüpyatäm—may be
ascertained.
TRANSLATION
The original, unmanifested form of material nature is the source of all
material things, and the source of even that subtle material nature is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. What, then, could one ascertain to be
separate from Him?
TEXT 58
s$amaAi™ataA yae pad"paéavaplavaM
mah"tpadM" pauNyayazAAe maur"Are":
BavaAmbauiDavaRts$apadM" parM" padM"
padM" padM" yaiã"pad"AM na taeSaAma,
samäçritä ye pada-pallava-plavaà
mahat-padaà puëya-yaço muräreù
bhavämbudhir vatsa-padaà paraà padaà
padaà padaà yad vipadäà na teñäm
SYNONYMS
samäçritäù—having taken shelter; ye—those who; pada—of the feet;
pallava—like flower buds; plavam—which are a boat; mahat—of the total
material creation, or of the great souls; padam—the shelter; puëya—supremely
pious; yaçaù—whose fame; mura-areù—of the enemy of the demon Mura;
bhava—of the material existence; ambudhiù—the ocean; vatsa-padam—the
hoof-print of a calf; param padam—the supreme abode, Vaikuëöha; padam
padam—at every step; yat—where; vipadäm—of material miseries; na—none;
teñäm—for them.
TRANSLATION
For those who have accepted the boat of the lotus feet of the Lord, who is
the shelter of the cosmic manifestation and is famous as Muräri, the enemy of
the Mura demon, the ocean of the material world is like the water contained in
a calf's hoof-print. Their goal is paraà padam, Vaikuëöha, the place where
there are no material miseries, not the place where there is danger at every step.
PURPORT
This translation is taken from Çréla Prabhupäda's commentary on the
Bhagavad-gétä As It Is, Chapter Two, Text 51.
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, this verse summarizes the knowledge
presented in this section of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Lord Kåñëa's lotus feet are
described as pallava, flower buds, because they are most tender and of a pinkish
hue. According to Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé, the word pallava also indicates
that Lord Kåñëa's lotus feet are just like desire trees, which can fulfill all the
desires of the Lord's pure devotees. Even exalted devotees like Çré Närada, who
are themselves the great shelter for the conditioned souls in this universe,
personally take shelter of the lotus feet of Lord Çré Kåñëa. Thus it is natural
that when Lord Kåñëa manifested Himself as all the young boys and calves of
Våndävana, their parents were more attracted to them than previously. Lord
Kåñëa is the reservoir of all pleasure and, being all-attractive, the ultimate
object of everyone's love.
TEXT 59
WtaÔae s$avaRmaAKyaAtaM
yatpa{í"Ae'h"imah" tvayaA
tatk(AEmaAre" h"ir"k{(taM
paAEgANxe" pair"k(LitaRtama,
etat te sarvam äkhyätaà
yat påñöo 'ham iha tvayä
tat kaumäre hari-kåtaà
paugaëòe parikértitam
SYNONYMS
etat—this; te—unto you; sarvam—all; äkhyätam—described; yat—which;
påñöaù—requested; aham—I; iha—in this regard; tvayä—by you; tat—that;
kaumäre—in His early childhood (up to the end of His fifth year);
hari-kåtam—performed by Lord Hari; paugaëòe—in later childhood
(beginning with His sixth year); parikértitam—glorified.
TRANSLATION
Since you inquired from me, I have fully described to you those activities of
Lord Hari that were performed in His fifth year but not celebrated until His
sixth.
TEXT 60
Wtats$auô$ià"êir"taM maur"Are"r,"
@GaAdR"naM zAAã"lajaemanaM ca
vyale(tar"åU"pamajaAevaRiBaí"vaM
Za{Nvana, gA{NAªaeita nar"Ae'iKalaATaARna,
etat suhådbhiç caritaà murärer
aghärdanaà çädvala-jemanaà ca
vyaktetarad rüpam ajorv-abhiñöavaà
çåëvan gåëann eti naro 'khilärthän
SYNONYMS
etat—these; suhådbhiù—along with the cowherd friends; caritam—pastimes;
muräreù—of Lord Muräri; agha-ardanam—the subduing of the demon
Aghäsura; çädvala—on the grass in the forest; jemanam—the taking of lunch;
ca—and; vyakta-itarat—supramundane; rüpam—the transcendental form of
the Lord; aja—by Lord Brahmä; uru—elaborate; abhiñöavam—the offering of
prayers; çåëvan—hearing; gåëan—chanting; eti—attains; naraù—any person;
akhila-arthän—all desirable things.
TRANSLATION
Any person who hears or chants these pastimes Lord Muräri performed with
His cowherd friends—the killing of Aghäsura, the taking of lunch on the forest
grass, the Lord's manifestation of transcendental forms, and the wonderful
prayers offered by Lord Brahmä—is sure to achieve all his spiritual desires.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé, even one who is only inclined to
hear and chant the pastimes of Lord Kåñëa will achieve spiritual perfection.
Many devotees seriously engaged in propagating Kåñëa consciousness are often
so busy that they cannot chant and hear the pastimes of the Lord to their full
satisfaction. However, simply by their intense desire to always chant and hear
about Lord Kåñëa, they will achieve spiritual perfection. Of course, as far as
possible one should actually vibrate these transcendental pastimes of the Lord.
TEXT 61
WvaM ivah"ArE": k(AEmaArE":
k(AEmaArM" jah"tau˜aRjae
inalaAyanaE: s$aetaubanDaEr,"
makR(q%AetplavanaAid"iBa:
evaà vihäraiù kaumäraiù
kaumäraà jahatur vraje
niläyanaiù setu-bandhair
markaöotplavanädibhiù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; vihäraiù—with pastimes; kaumäraiù—of boyhood;
kaumäram—the childhood age up to five years; jahatuù—they passed;
vraje—in the land of Våndävana; niläyanaiù—with sports of chasing about;
setu-bandhaiù—with the building of bridges; markaöa-utplavana—with the
jumping around of monkeys; ädibhiù—and so on.
TRANSLATION
In this way the boys spent their childhood in the land of Våndävana playing
hide-and-go-seek, building play bridges, jumping about like monkeys and
engaging in many other such games.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé, the word niläyanaiù refers to games
such as hide-and-go-seek or cops and robbers. Sometimes the boys would jump
around like the monkeys in Lord Rämacandra's army and then enact the
building of the bridge to Çré Laìkä by constructing play bridges in lakes or
ponds. Sometimes the boys would imitate the pastime of churning the ocean of
milk, and sometimes they would play catch with balls. We can find full
pleasure in the spiritual world, with the simple condition that everything be
performed in pure love of Godhead, Kåñëa consciousness.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Tenth Canto, Fourteenth Chapter of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Brahmä's Prayers to Lord Kåñëa."
15. The Killing of Dhenuka, the Ass Demon
This chapter describes how Lord Balaräma and Lord Kåñëa, while tending
Their cows in the pastures of Våndävana, killed Dhenukäsura, enabled the
residents of Våndävana to eat the fruits of the täla trees and saved the young
cowherds from Käliya's poison.
Revealing Their boyhood (paugaëòa) phase of pastimes, Räma and Kåñëa
were one day bringing the cows to pasture when They entered an attractive
forest decorated with a clear lake. There They began playing forest sports
along with Their friends. Pretending to tire, Lord Baladeva laid His head upon
the lap of a cowherd boy and rested as Lord Kåñëa helped relieve His elder
brother's fatigue by massaging His feet. Then Kåñëa also placed His head on
the lap of a cowherd boy to rest, and another cowherd boy massaged His feet.
In this way Kåñëa, Balaräma and Their cowherd friends enjoyed various
pastimes.
During this play, Çrédämä, Subala, Stoka-kåñëa and other cowherd boys
described to Räma and Kåñëa a wicked and irrepressible demon named
Dhenuka, who had assumed the form of a jackass and was living in the
Tälavana forest near Govardhana Hill. This forest was full of many varieties of
sweet fruits. But fearing this demon, no one dared try to relish the taste of
those fruits, and thus someone had to kill the demon and all his associates.
Lord Räma and Lord Kåñëa, hearing of the situation, set off for this forest to
fulfill the desire of Their companions.
Arriving at the Tälavana, Lord Balaräma shook many fruits out of the palm
trees, and as soon as He did so the jackass demon, Dhenuka, ran swiftly to
attack Him. But Balaräma grabbed his hind legs with one hand, whirled him
around and threw him into the top of a tree, thus slaying him. All of
Dhenukäsura's friends, overcome by fury, then rushed to attack, but Räma and
Kåñëa took hold of them one by one, swung them around and killed them,
until the disturbance was finally finished. When Kåñëa and Balaräma returned
to the cowherd community, Yaçodä and Rohiëé placed Them on their
respective laps. They kissed Their faces, fed Them with finely prepared food
and then put Them to bed.
Some days later Lord Kåñëa went with His friends, but without His older
brother, to the banks of the Kälindé in order to tend the cows. The cows and
cowherd boys became very thirsty and drank some water from the Kälindé. But
it had been contaminated with poison, and they all fell unconscious on the
riverbank. Kåñëa then brought them back to life by the merciful rain of His
glance, and all of them, regaining their consciousness, appreciated His great
mercy.
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
tataê paAEgANx"vaya:™aItaAE ˜ajae
baBaUvataustaAE pazAupaAlas$ammataAE
gAAêAr"yantaAE s$aiKaiBa: s$amaM padE"r,"
va{nd"AvanaM pauNyamataIva ca‚(tau:
çré-çuka uväca
tataç ca paugaëòa-vayaù-çrétau vraje
babhüvatus tau paçu-päla-sammatau
gäç cärayantau sakhibhiù samaà padair
våndävanaà puëyam atéva cakratuù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; tataù—then; ca—and; paugaëòa
vayaù—the age of paugaëòa (years six to ten); çritau—attaining; vraje—in
Våndävana; babhüvatuù—They (Räma and Kåñëa) became; tau—the two of
Them; paçu-päla—as cowherds; sammatau—appointed; gäù—the cows;
cärayantau—tending; sakhibhiù samam—along with Their friends;
padaiù—with the marks of Their feet våndävanam-Çré Våndävana;
puëyam—auspicious; atéva—extremely, cakratuù-They made.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: When Lord Räma and Lord Kåñëa attained the age
of paugaëòa [six to ten] while living in Våndävana, the cowherd men allowed
Them to take up the task of tending the cows. Engaging thus in the company of
Their friends, the two boys rendered the land of Våndävana most auspicious by
imprinting upon it the marks of Their lotus feet.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa wanted to encourage His cowherd boyfriends, who had been
swallowed by Aghäsura and then stolen by Lord Brahmä. Therefore the Lord
decided to bring them into the palm-tree forest called Tälavana, where there
were many delicious ripe fruits. Since Lord Kåñëa's spiritual body had
apparently grown slightly in age and strength, the senior men of Våndävana,
headed by Nanda Mahäräja, decided to promote Kåñëa from the task of
herding calves to the status of a regular cowherd boy. He would now take care
of the full-grown cows, bulls and oxen. Out of great affection, Nanda Mahäräja
had previously considered Kåñëa too small and immature to take care of
full-grown cows and bulls. It is stated in the Kärttika-mähätmya section of the
Padma Puräëa:
çukläñöamé kärttike tu
småtä gopäñöamé budhaiù
tad-dinäd väsudevo 'bhüd
gopaù pürvaà tu vatsapaù
"The eighth lunar day of the bright fortnight of the month of Kärttika is
known by authorities as Gopäñöamé. From that day, Lord Väsudeva served as a
cowherd, whereas previously He had tended the calves."
The word padaiù indicates that Lord Kåñëa blessed the earth by walking on
her surface with His lotus feet. The Lord wore no shoes or other footgear but
walked barefoot in the forest, giving great anxiety to the girls of Våndävana,
who feared that His soft lotus feet would be injured.
TEXT 2
tanmaADavaAe vaeNAumaud"Ir"yana, va{taAe
gAAepaEgA{RNAià": svayazAAe balaAinvata:
pazAUna, paur"s$k{(tya pazAvyamaAivazAä,"
ivah"tauRk(Ama: ku(s$aumaAk(rM" vanama,
tan mädhavo veëum udérayan våto
gopair gåëadbhiù sva-yaço balänvitaù
paçün puraskåtya paçavyam äviçad
vihartu-kämaù kusumäkaraà vanam
SYNONYMS
tat—thus; mädhavaù—Lord Çré Mädhava; veëum—His flute;
udérayan—sounding; våtaù—surrounded; gopaiù—by the cowherd boys;
gåëadbhiù—who were chanting; sva-yaçaù—His glories;
bala-anvitaù—accompanied by Lord Balaräma; paçün—the animals;
puraskåtya—keeping in front; paçavyam—full of nourishment for the cows;
äviçat—He entered; vihartu-kämaù—desiring to enjoy pastimes;
kusuma-äkaram—rich with flowers; vanam—the forest.
TRANSLATION
Thus desiring to enjoy pastimes, Lord Mädhava, sounding His flute,
surrounded by cowherd boys who were chanting His glories, and accompanied
by Lord Baladeva, kept the cows before Him and entered the Våndävana forest,
which was full of flowers and rich with nourishment for the animals.
PURPORT
Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé has explained the various meanings of the word
mädhava as follows: Mädhava normally indicates Kåñëa to be "the Lord, who is
the consort of the goddess of fortune, Lakñmé." This name also implies that
Lord Kåñëa descended in the dynasty of Madhu. Since the spring season is also
known as Mädhava, it is understood that as soon as Lord Kåñëa entered the
Våndävana forest, it automatically exhibited all the opulences of spring,
becoming filled with flowers, breezes and a celestial atmosphere. Another
reason Lord Kåñëa is known as Mädhava is that He enjoys His pastimes in
madhu, the taste of conjugal love.
Lord Kåñëa would loudly sound His flute as He entered the forest of Çré
Våndävana, thus giving inconceivable bliss to all the residents of His
hometown, Vraja-dhäma. These simple pastimes of playfully entering the
forest, playing on the flute and so forth were performed daily in the spiritual
land of Våndävana.
TEXT 3
tanmaÃauGaAeSaAilama{gAiã"jaAku(laM
mah"nmana:‘aKyapaya:s$ar"svataA
vaAtaena jauíM" zAtapa‡agAinDanaA
inar"Iºya r"ntauM BagAvaAnmanaAe d"Dae
tan maïju-ghoñäli-måga-dvijäkulaà
mahan-manaù-prakhya-payaù-sarasvatä
vätena juñöaà çata-patra-gandhinä
nirékñya rantuà bhagavän mano dadhe
SYNONYMS
tat—that forest; maïju—charming; ghoña—whose sounds; ali—with bees;
måga—animals; dvija—and birds; äkulam—filled; mahat—of great souls;
manaù—the minds; prakhya—resembling; payaù—whose water;
sarasvatä—with a lake; vätena—by the wind; juñöam—served; çata-patra—of
hundred-petaled lotuses; gandhinä—with the fragrance; nirékñya—observing;
rantum—to take pleasure; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
manaù—His mind; dadhe—turned.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead looked over that forest, which
resounded with the charming sounds of bees, animals and birds, and which was
enhanced by a lake whose clear water resembled the minds of great souls and by
a breeze carrying the fragrance of hundred-petaled lotuses. Seeing all this, Lord
Kåñëa decided to enjoy the auspicious atmosphere.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa saw that the Våndävana forest was giving pleasure to all five
senses. The bees, birds, and animals made charming sounds that brought sweet
pleasure to the ears. The wind was faithfully rendering service to the Lord by
blowing throughout the forest, carrying the cool moisture of a transparent lake
and thus giving pleasure to the sense of touch. By the sweetness of the wind,
even the sense of taste was being stimulated, and the fragrance of lotus flowers
was bringing pleasure to the nostrils. And the entire forest was endowed with
heavenly beauty, which was giving spiritual bliss to the eyes. Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura has thus explained the significance of this verse.
TEXT 4
s$a ta‡a ta‡aAç&NApaéavai™ayaA
P(la‘as$aUnaAeç&Bare"NA paAd"yaAe:
s$pa{zAicC$KaAna, vaIºya vanas$pataInmaud"A
smayaiªavaAh"AƒajamaAid"paUç&Sa:
sa tatra taträruëa-pallava-çriyä
phala-prasünoru-bhareëa pädayoù
spåçac chikhän vékñya vanaspatén mudä
smayann ivähägra-jam ädi-püruñaù
SYNONYMS
saù—He; tatra tatra—all around; aruëa—reddish; pallava—of their buds;
çréyä—with the beauty; phala—of their fruits; prasüna—and flowers;
uru-bhareëa—with the heavy burden; pädayoù—at His two feet;
spåçat—touching; çikhän—the tips of their branches; vékñya—seeing;
vanaspatén—the lordly trees; mudä—with joy; smayan—laughing; iva—almost;
äha—spoke; agra-jam—to His elder brother, Lord Balaräma; ädi-püruñaù—the
primeval Supreme Lord.
TRANSLATION
The primeval Lord saw that the stately trees, with their beautiful reddish
buds and their heavy burden of fruits and flowers, were bending down to touch
His feet with the tips of their branches. Thus He smiled gently and addressed
His elder brother.
PURPORT
The words mudä smayann iva indicate that Lord Kåñëa was in a joking
mood. He knew that the trees were actually bowing down to worship Him. But
in the following verse the Lord, speaking in a friendly, lighthearted mood,
gives the credit to His brother, Balaräma.
TEXT 5
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
@h"Ae @maI de"vavar"Amar"AicaRtaM
paAd"AmbaujaM tae s$aumana:P(laAhR"NAma,
namantyaupaAd"Aya izAKaAiBar"Atmanas$a,
tamaAe'pah"tyaE taç&janma yatk{(tama,
çré-bhagavän uväca
aho amé deva-varämarärcitaà
pädämbujaà te sumanaù-phalärhaëam
namanty upädäya çikhäbhir ätmanas
tamo-'pahatyai taru-janma yat-kåtam
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—Lord Çré Kåñëa said; aho—oh; amé—these; deva-vara—O
best of Lords (Çré Balaräma); amara—by the immortal demigods;
arcitam—worshiped; päda-ambujam—to the lotus feet; te—of You;
sumanaù—of flowers; phala—and fruits; arhaëam—offerings; namanti—they
are bowing down; upädäya—presenting; çikhäbhiù—with their heads;
ätmanaù—their own; tamaù—darkness of ignorance; apahatyai—for the
purpose of eliminating; taru-janma—their birth as trees; yat—by which
ignorance; kåtam—created.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O greatest of Lords, just see how
these trees are bowing their heads at Your lotus feet, which are worshipable by
the immortal demigods. The trees are offering You their fruits and flowers to
eradicate the dark ignorance that has caused their birth as trees.
PURPORT
The trees of Våndävana were thinking that because of past offenses they
had now taken birth as trees and, being immovable, could not accompany Lord
Kåñëa in His wanderings throughout the Våndävana area. In fact, all the
creatures of Våndävana, including the trees and cows, were great souls who
could personally associate with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But
because of ecstatic sentiments of separation, the trees considered themselves in
ignorance and thus tried to purify themselves by bowing down at the lotus feet
of Kåñëa and Balaräma. Lord Kåñëa understanding their mentality,
simultaneously glanced at them with affection and praised their devotional
service before His older brother, Balaräma.
TEXT 6
Wtae'ilanastava yazAAe'iKalalaAek(taITa<
gAAyanta @Aid"pauç&SaAnaupaTaM Bajantae
‘aAyaAe @maI mauinagANAA Bavad"IyamauKyaA
gAUXM# vanae'ipa na jah"tyanaGaAtmadE"vama,
ete 'linas tava yaço 'khila-loka-térthaà
gäyanta ädi-puruñänupathaà bhajante
präyo amé muni-gaëä bhavadéya-mukhyä
güòhaà vane 'pi na jahaty anaghätma-daivam
SYNONYMS
ete—these; alinaù—bees; tava—Your; yaçaù—glories; akhila-loka—for all
worlds; tértham—the place of pilgrimage; gäyantaù—are chanting;
ädi-puruña—O original Personality of Godhead; anupatham—following You
along the path; bhajante—they are engaged in worshiping; präyaù—for the
most part; amé—these; muni-gaëäù—great sages; bhavadéya—among Your
devotees; mukhyäù—the most intimate; güòham—hidden; vane—within the
forest; api—even though; na jahati—they do not abandon; anagha—O sinless
one; ätma-daivam—their own worshipable Deity.
TRANSLATION
O original personality, these bees must all be great sages and most elevated
devotees of Yours, for they are worshiping You by following You along the path
and chanting Your glories, which are themselves a holy place for the entire
world. Though You have disguised Yourself within this forest, O sinless one,
they refuse to abandon You, their worshipable Lord.
PURPORT
The word güòham is significant in this verse. It indicates that although the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in His form of Kåñëa or Balaräma appears
like an ordinary human being within the material world, great sages always
recognize the Lord as the Supreme Absolute Truth. All the transcendental
forms of Godhead are eternal and full of bliss and knowledge, exactly the
opposite of our material bodies, which are temporary and full of misery and
ignorance.
One meaning of the word tértha is "the means for crossing beyond material
existence." Simply by hearing the glories of the Supreme Lord or by chanting
them, one immediately comes to the spiritual platform, beyond material
existence. Thus the Lord's transcendental glories are here described as a tértha
for everyone in the world. The word gäyantaù indicates that great sages give up
their vows of silence and other selfish processes to glorify the activities of the
Supreme Lord. Real silence means to not speak nonsense, to limit one's verbal
activities to those sounds, statements and discussions relevant to the loving
service of the Supreme Lord.
The word anagha indicates that the Supreme Lord never performs sinful or
offensive activities. The word also indicates that the Lord immediately excuses
a sin or offense committed by a sincere loving devotee who may accidentally
deviate from the Lord's service. In the specific context of this verse, the word
anagha indicates that Lord Balaräma was not disturbed by the bees who were
constantly following Him (anupatham). The Lord blessed them by saying, "O
bees, come into My confidential grove and feel free to taste its fragrance."
TEXT 7
na{tyantyamaI izAiKana wRx"Ya maud"A h"ir"Nya:
ku(vaRinta gAAepya wva tae i‘ayamaIºaNAena
s$aUlE(ê k(Aeik(lagANAA gA{h"maAgAtaAya
DanyaA vanaAEk(s$a wyaAna, ih" s$ataAM inas$agAR:
nåtyanty amé çikhina éòya mudä hariëyaù
kurvanti gopya iva te priyam ékñaëena
süktaiç ca kokila-gaëä gåham ägatäya
dhanyä vanaukasa iyän hi satäà nisargaù
SYNONYMS
nåtyanti—are dancing; amé—these; çikhinaù—peacocks; éòya—O worshipable
Lord; mudä—with joy; hariëyaù—the female deer; kurvanti—are making;
gopyaù—the gopés; iva—as if; te—for You; priyam—gratification;
ékñaëena—by their glancing; süktaiù—with Vedic prayers; ca—and;
kokila-gaëäù—the cuckoos; gåham—to their home; ägatäya—who has arrived;
dhanyäù—fortunate; vana-okasaù—the residents of the forest; iyän—such;
hi—indeed; satäm—of saintly personalities; nisargaù—the nature.
TRANSLATION
O worshipable one, these peacocks are dancing before You out of joy, these
doe are pleasing You with affectionate glances, just as the gopés do, and these
cuckoos are honoring You with Vedic prayers. All these residents of the forest
are most fortunate, and their behavior toward You certainly befits great souls
receiving another great soul at home.
TEXT 8
Danyaeyamaâ Dar"NAI ta{NAvaIç&Dastvata,-
paAd"s$pa{zAAe åu"malataA: k(r"jaAiBama{í"A:
naâAe'‰"ya: KagAma{gAA: s$ad"yaAvalaAekE(r,"
gAAepyaAe'ntare"NA BaujayaAer"ipa yats$pa{h"A ™aI:
dhanyeyam adya dharaëé tåëa-vérudhas tvatpäda-
spåço druma-latäù karajäbhimåñöäù
nadyo 'drayaù khaga-mågäù sadayävalokair
gopyo 'ntareëa bhujayor api yat-spåhä çréù
SYNONYMS
dhanyä—fortunate; iyam—this; adya—now; dharaëé—the earth; tåëa—her
grasses; vérudhaù—and bushes; tvat—Your; päda—of the feet;
spåçaù—receiving the touch; druma—the trees; latäù—and creepers;
kara-ja—by Your fingernails; abhimåñöäù—touched; nadyaù—the rivers;
adrayaù—and mountains; khaga—the birds; mågäù—and animals;
sadaya—merciful; avalokaiù—by Your glances; gopyaù—the gopés;
antareëa—in between; bhujayoù—Your two arms; api—indeed; yat—for
which; spåhä—maintains the desire; çréù—the goddess of fortune.
TRANSLATION
This earth has now become most fortunate, because You have touched her
grass and bushes with Your feet and her trees and creepers with Your
fingernails, and because You have graced her rivers, mountains, birds and
animals with Your merciful glances. But above all, You have embraced the
young cowherd women between Your two arms-a favor hankered after by the
goddess of fortune herself.
PURPORT
The word adya, "now," indicates the time of Lord Balaräma and Lord
Kåñëa's appearance on the earth. In His form of Varäha, Lord Kåñëa personally
saved the earth, and, indeed, the earth is understood to rest perpetually on the
potency of Çeña. Both Varäha and Çeña are expansions of Balaräma, who is
Himself an expansion of Lord Kåñëa, the original Personality of Godhead.
Lord Kåñëa's statement that "this earth has now become most fortunate"
(dhanyeyam adya dharaëé) indicates that nothing can equal the blessings of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in His personal form as Kåñëa, appearing
simultaneously with His plenary expansion, Balaräma. The compound word
karajäbhimåñöäù, "touched by Your fingernails," indicates that as Kåñëa and
Balaräma would move through the forest They would pick fruits and flowers
from the trees, bushes and creepers and use this paraphernalia in Their
pleasure pastimes. Sometimes They would break leaves off the plants and use
them with the flowers to decorate Their bodies.
Kåñëa and Balaräma would glance lovingly and mercifully at all the rivers,
hills and creatures in Våndävana. But the blessing received by the
gopés—being embraced directly between the Lord's arms—was the supreme
benediction, desired even by the goddess of fortune herself. The goddess of
fortune, who lives in Vaikuëöha on the chest of Lord Näräyaëa, once desired
to be embraced on the chest of Çré Kåñëa, and thus she performed severe
austerities to achieve this blessing. Çré Kåñëa informed her that her actual
place was in Vaikuëöha and that it was not possible for her to dwell upon His
chest in Våndävana. Therefore she begged Kåñëa to allow her to remain on His
chest in the form of a golden line, and He granted her this benediction. Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura recounts this incident from the Puräëas.
TEXT 9
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
WvaM va{nd"AvanaM ™aImata,
k{(SNA: ‘aItamanaA: pazAUna,
re"mae s$aÂaAr"yaªa‰e":
s$air"‰"AeDa:s$au s$aAnaugA:
çré-çuka uväca
evaà våndävanaà çrémat
kåñëaù préta-manäù paçün
reme saïcärayann adreù
sarid-rodhaùsu sänugaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—in this way;
våndävanam—with the forest of Våndävana and its inhabitants;
çrémat—beautiful; kåñëaù—Lord Kåñëa; préta-manäù—being satisfied in His
mind; paçün—the animals; reme—He took pleasure; saïcärayan—making
them graze; adreù—in the vicinity of the mountain; sarit—of the river;
rodhaùsu—upon the banks; sa-anugaù—together with His companions.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Thus expressing His satisfaction with the beautiful
forest of Våndävana and its inhabitants, Lord Kåñëa enjoyed tending the cows
and other animals with His friends on the banks of the river Yamunä below
Govardhana Hill.
TEXTS 10-12
¸(icaÕ"Ayaita gAAyats$au
mad"AnDaAilaSvanau˜ataE:
opagAIyamaAnacair"ta:
paiTa s$aÆÿSaRNAAinvata:
@naujalpaita jalpantaM
k(lavaAfyaE: zAukM( ¸(icata,
¸(icats$avalgAu kU(jantama,
@naukU(jaita k(Aeik(lama,
¸(ica»a k(AlahM"s$aAnaAma,
@naukU(jaita kU(ijatama,
@iBana{tyaita na{tyantaM
baihR"NAM h"As$ayana, ¸(icata,
maeGagAmBaIr"yaA vaAcaA
naAmaiBaäUR"r"gAAna, pazAUna,
¸(icad"Aù"yaita ‘aItyaA
gAAegAAepaAlamanaAeÁayaA
kvacid gäyati gäyatsu
madändhäliñv anuvrataiù
upagéyamäna-caritaù
pathi saìkarñaëänvitaù
anujalpati jalpantaà
kala-väkyaiù çukaà kvacit
kvacit sa-valgu küjantam
anuküjati kokilam
kvacic ca käla-haàsänäm
anuküjati küjitam
abhinåtyati nåtyantaà
barhiëaà häsayan kvacit
megha-gambhérayä väcä
nämabhir düra-gän paçün
kvacid ähvayati prétyä
go-gopäla-manojïayä
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; gäyati—He sings; gäyatsu—when they are singing;
mada-andha—blinded by intoxication; aliñu—the bees; anuvrataiù—along
with His companions; upagéyamäna—being chanted; caritaù—His pastimes;
pathi—upon the path; saìkarñaëa-anvitaù—accompanied by Lord Baladeva;
anujalpati—He chatters in imitation; jalpantam—of the chattering;
kala-väkyaiù—with broken speech; çukam—parrot; kvacit—sometimes;
kvacit—sometimes; sa—with; valgu—charming; küjantam—cuckooing;
anuküjati—He imitates the cuckooing; kokilam—of a cuckoo;
kvacit—sometimes; ca—and; kala-haàsänäm—of the swans; anuküjati
küjitam—imitates the cooing; abhinåtyati—He dances in front of;
nåtyantam—dancing; barhiëam—a peacock; häsayan—making laugh;
kvacit—sometimes; megha—like clouds; gambhirayä—grave; väcä—with His
voice; nämabhiù—by name; düra-gän—who had strayed far away; paçün—the
animals; kvacit—sometimes; ähvayati—He calls; prétyä—affectionately; go—to
the cows; gopäla—and the cowherd boys; manaù-jïayä—which (voice) charms
the mind.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes the honeybees in Våndävana became so mad with ecstasy that
they closed their eyes and began to sing. Lord Kåñëa, moving along the forest
path with His cowherd boyfriends and Baladeva, would then respond to the
bees by imitating their singing while His friends sang about His pastimes.
Sometimes Lord Kåñëa would imitate the chattering of a parrot, sometimes,
with a sweet voice, the call of a cuckoo, and sometimes the cooing of swans.
Sometimes He vigorously imitated the dancing of a peacock, making His
cowherd boyfriends laugh. Sometimes, with a voice as deep as the rumbling of
clouds, He would call out with great affection the names of the animals who had
wandered far from the herd, thus enchanting the cows and the cowherd boys.
PURPORT
Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé explains that Lord Kåñëa would joke with His
friends, saying, "Just look, this peacock does not know how to dance properly,"
whereupon the Lord would vigorously imitate the peacock's dancing, causing
great laughter among His friends. The bees in Våndävana would drink the sap
of the forest flowers, and the combination of this nectar and the association of
Çré Kåñëa made them mad with intoxication. Thus they closed their eyes in
ecstasy and expressed their satisfaction by humming. And this humming was
also expertly imitated by the Lord.
TEXT 13
cak(Aer"‚(AEÂaca‚(Aù"-
BaAr"ã"AjaAMê baihR"NA:
@naur"AEita sma s$aÔvaAnaAM
BaItavaã"YaA„ais$aMh"yaAe:
cakora-krauïca-cakrähvabhäradväjäàç
ca barhiëaù
anurauti sma sattvänäà
bhéta-vad vyäghra-siàhayoù
SYNONYMS
cakora-krauïca-cakrähva-bhäradväjän ca—the cakora, krauïca, cakrähva and
bhäradväja birds; barhiëaù—the peacocks; anurauti sma—He would call out in
imitation of; sattvänäm—together with the other creatures; bhéta-vat—acting
as if afraid; vyäghra-siàhayoù—of the tigers and lions.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes He would cry out in imitation of birds such as the cakoras,
krauïcas, cakrähvas, bhäradväjas and peacocks, and sometimes He would run
away with the smaller animals in mock fear of lions and tigers.
PURPORT
The word bhéta-vat, "as if afraid," indicates that Lord Kåñëa played just like
an ordinary boy and ran with the smaller forest creatures in mock fear of the
lions and tigers. Actually, in Våndävana, the abode of the Lord, the lions and
tigers are not violent, and thus there is no reason to fear them.
TEXT 14
¸(icat‚(Lx"Apair"™aAntaM
gAAepaAets$aËÿAepabahR"NAma,
svayaM iva™amayatyaAya<
paAd"s$aMvaAh"naAid"iBa:
kvacit kréòä-pariçräntaà
gopotsaìgopabarhaëam
svayaà viçramayaty äryaà
päda-saàvähanädibhiù
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; kréòä—by playing; pariçräntam—fatigued; gopa—of a
cowherd boy; utsaìga—the lap; upabarhaëam—using as His pillow;
svayam—personally; viçramayati—relieves Him from His fatigue; äryam—His
elder brother; päda-saàvähana-ädibhiù—by massaging His feet and offering
other services.
TRANSLATION
When His elder brother, fatigued from playing, would lie down with His
head upon the lap of a cowherd boy, Lord Kåñëa would help Him relax by
personally massaging His feet and offering other services.
PURPORT
The word päda-saàvähanädibhiù indicates that Lord Kåñëa would massage
Balaräma's feet, fan Him and bring Him river water to drink.
TEXT 15
na{tyataAe gAAyata: ¸(Aipa
valgAtaAe yauDyataAe imaTa:
gA{h"Itah"staAE gAAepaAlaAna,
h"s$antaAE ‘azAzAMs$atau:
nåtyato gäyataù kväpi
valgato yudhyato mithaù
gåhéta-hastau gopälän
hasantau praçaçaàsatuù
SYNONYMS
nåtyataù—who were dancing; gäyataù—singing; kva api—sometimes;
valgataù—moving about; yudhyataù—fighting; mithaù—with one another;
gåhéta-hastau—holding Their hands together; gopälän—the cowherd boys;
hasantau—laughing; praçaçaàsatuù—They offered praise.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes, as the cowherd boys danced, sang, moved about and playfully
fought with each other, Kåñëa and Balaräma, standing nearby hand in hand,
would glorify Their friends' activities and laugh.
TEXT 16
¸(icatpaéavatalpaeSau
inayauÜ"™amak(izARta:
va{ºamaUlaA™aya: zAetae
gAAepaAets$aËÿAepabahR"NA:
kvacit pallava-talpeñu
niyuddha-çrama-karçitaù
våkña-müläçrayaù çete
gopotsaìgopabarhaëaù
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; pallava—made from new twigs and buds; talpeñu—upon
beds; niyuddha—from the fighting; çrama—by fatigue; karçitaù—worn out;
våkña—of a tree; müla—at the base; äçrayaù—taking shelter; çete—He lay
down; gopa-utsaìga—the lap of a cowherd boy; upabarhaëaù—as His pillow.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes Lord Kåñëa grew tired from fighting and lay down at the base of a
tree, resting upon a bed made of soft twigs and buds and using the lap of a
cowherd friend as His pillow.
PURPORT
The word pallava-talpeñu implies that Lord Kåñëa expanded Himself into
many forms and lay down upon the many beds of twigs, leaves and flowers
hastily constructed by His enthusiastic cowherd friends.
TEXT 17
paAd"s$aMvaAh"naM ca‚u(:
ke(icaÔasya mah"Atmana:
@pare" h"tapaApmaAnaAe
vyajanaE: s$amavaIjayana,
päda-saàvähanaà cakruù
kecit tasya mahätmanaù
apare hata-päpmäno
vyajanaiù samavéjayan
SYNONYMS
päda-saàvähanam—the massaging of the feet; cakruù—did; kecit—some of
them; tasya—of Him; mahä-ätmanaù—great souls; apare—others;
hata-päpmänaù—who were free from all sins; vyajanaiù—with fans;
samavéjayan—perfectly fanned Him.
TRANSLATION
Some of the cowherd boys, who were all great souls, would then massage His
lotus feet, and others, qualified by being free of all sin, would expertly fan the
Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
The word samavéjayan indicates that the cowherd boys fanned the Lord
very carefully and expertly, creating gentle and cooling breezes.
TEXT 18
@nyae tad"nauè&paAiNA
manaAeÁaAina mah"Atmana:
gAAyainta sma mah"Ar"Aja
µaeh"iflaªaiDaya: zAnaE:
anye tad-anurüpäëi
manojïäni mahätmanaù
gäyanti sma mahä-räja
sneha-klinna-dhiyaù çanaiù
SYNONYMS
anye—others; tat-anurüpäëi—suitable for the occasion;
manaù-jïäni—attractive to the mind; mahä-ätmanaù—of the great personality
(Lord Kåñëa); gäyanti sma—they would sing; mahä-räja—O King Parékñit;
sneha—by love; klinna—melted; dhiyaù—their hearts; çanaiù—slowly.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, other boys would sing enchanting songs appropriate to the
occasion, and their hearts would melt out of love for the Lord.
TEXT 19
WvaM inagAUX#AtmagAita: svamaAyayaA
gAAepaAtmajatvaM cair"taEivaRx"mbayana,
re"mae r"maAlaAilatapaAd"paéavaAe
ƒaAmyaE: s$amaM ƒaAmyavad"IzAcaeií"ta:
evaà nigüòhätma-gatiù sva-mäyayä
gopätmajatvaà caritair viòambayan
reme ramä-lälita-päda-pallavo
grämyaiù samaà grämya-vad éça-ceñöitaù
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; nigüòha—hidden away; ätma-gatiù—His personal
opulence; sva-mäyayä—by His own mystical potency; gopa-ätmajatvam—the
status of being the son of a cowherd; caritaiù—by His activities;
viòambayan—pretending; reme—He enjoyed; ramä—by the goddess of
fortune; lälita—attended; päda-pallavaù—His feet, which are tender like new
buds; grämyaiù samam—together with village persons; grämya-vat—like a
village personality; éça-ceñöitaù—although also displaying feats unique to the
Supreme Lord.
TRANSLATION
In this way the Supreme Lord, whose soft lotus feet are personally attended
by the goddess of fortune, concealed His transcendental opulences by His
internal potency and acted like the son of a cowherd. Yet even while enjoying
like a village boy in the company of other village residents, He often exhibited
feats only God could perform.
TEXT 20
™aId"AmaA naAma gAAepaAlaAe
r"Amake(zAvayaAe: s$aKaA
s$aubalastaAek(k{(SNAAâA
gAAepaA: ‘aemNAed"ma“auvana,
çrédämä näma gopälo
räma-keçavayoù sakhä
subala-stokakåñëädyä
gopäù premëedam abruvan
SYNONYMS
çrédämä näma—named Çrédämä; gopälaù—the cowherd boy;
räma-keçavayoù—of Lord Räma and Lord Kåñëa; sakhä—the friend;
subala-stokakåñëa-ädyäù—Subala, Stokakåñëa and others; gopäù—cowherd
boys; premëä—with love; idam—this; abruvan—spoke.
TRANSLATION
Once, some of the cowherd boys—Çrédämä, the very close friend of Räma
and Kåñëa, along with Subala, Stokakåñëa and others—lovingly spoke the
following words.
PURPORT
The word premëä, "with love," indicates that the request the cowherd boys
are about to place before Lord Kåñëa and Lord Balaräma is motivated by love,
not personal desire. The cowherd boys were eager for Kåñëa and Balaräma to
exhibit Their pastimes of killing demons and to enjoy the delicious fruits of
the Täla forest, and therefore they made the following request.
TEXT 21
r"Ama r"Ama mah"AbaAh"Ae
k{(SNA äu"í"inabahR"NA
wtaAe'ivaäU"re" s$aumah"ä,"
vanaM taAlaAilas$aÇÿlama,
räma räma mahä-bäho
kåñëa duñöa-nibarhaëa
ito 'vidüre su-mahad
vanaà täläli-saìkulam
SYNONYMS
räma räma—O Räma: mahä-bäho-O mighty-armed one; kåñëa—O Kåñëa;
duñöa-nibarhaëa—O eliminator of the miscreants; itaù—from here;
avidüre—not far; su-mahat—very expansive; vanam—a forest; täla-äli—with
rows of palm trees; saìkulam—filled.
TRANSLATION
[The cowherd boys said:] O Räma, Räma, mighty-armed one! O Kåñëa,
destroyer of the miscreants! Not far from here is a very great forest filled with
rows of palm trees.
PURPORT
As stated in the Çré Varäha Puräëa:
asti govardhanaà näma
kñetraà parama-durlabham
mathurä-paçcime bhäge
adüräd yojana-dvayam
"Not far from the western side of Mathurä, at a distance of two yojanas [sixteen
miles], is the holy place named Govardhana, which is most difficult to attain."
It is also stated in the Varäha Puräëa:
asti täla-vanaà näma
dhenakäsura-rakñitam
mathurä-paçcime bhäge
adüräd eka-yojanam
"Not far from the western side of Mathurä, one yojana away [eight miles], is the
forest known as Tälavana, which was guarded by Dhenukäsura." Thus it
appears that the Tälavana forest is located midway between Mathurä and
Govardhana Hill. The forest of Tälavana is described in the Çré Hari-vaàça as
follows:
sa tu deçaù samaù snigdhaù
su-mahän kåñëa-måttikaù
darbha-präyaù sthulé-bhüto
loñöra-päñäëa-varjitaù
"The land there is even, smooth and very expansive. The earth is black,
densely covered with darbha grass and devoid of stones and pebbles."
TEXT 22
P(laAina ta‡a BaUr"IiNA
patainta paitataAina ca
s$ainta ik(ntvavaç&Ü"Aina
Daenauke(na äu"r"AtmanaA
phaläni tatra bhüréëi
patanti patitäni ca
santi kintv avaruddhäni
dhenukena durätmanä
SYNONYMS
phaläni—the fruits; tatra—there; bhüréëi—very many; patanti—are falling;
patitäni—have already fallen; ca—and; santi—they are; kintu—however;
avaruddhäni—kept under control; dhenukena—by Dhenuka; durätmanä—the
evil one.
TRANSLATION
In that Tälavana forest many fruits are falling from the trees, and many are
already lying on the ground. But all the fruits are being guarded by the evil
Dhenuka.
PURPORT
The demon Dhenuka would not allow anyone to eat the delicious ripe palm
fruits of the Tälavana, and Kåñëa's young boyfriends protested this unjust
usurpation of the right to enjoy the fruits of a public forest.
TEXT 23
s$aAe'itavaIyaAeR's$aur"Ae r"Ama
he" k{(SNA Kar"è&paDa{k,(
@AtmataulyabalaEr"nyaEr,"
ÁaAitaiBabaRò"iBava{Rta:
so 'ti-véryo 'suro räma
he kåñëa khara-rüpa-dhåk
ätma-tulya-balair anyair
jïätibhir bahubhir våtaù
SYNONYMS
saù—he; ati-véryaù—very powerful; asuraù—a demon; räma—O Räma; he
kåñëa—O Kåñëa; khara-rüpa—the form of an ass; dhåk—assuming;
ätma-tulya—equal to himself; balaiù—whose strength; anyaiù—with others;
jïätibhiù—companions; bahubhiù—many; våtaù—surrounded.
TRANSLATION
O Räma, O Kåñëa! Dhenuka is a most powerful demon and has assumed the
form of an ass. He is surrounded by many friends who have assumed a similar
shape and who are just as powerful as he.
TEXT 24
tasmaAtk{(tanar"Ah"Ar"Aä,"
BaItaEna{RiBar"ima‡ah"na,
na s$aevyatae pazAugANAE:
paiºas$aÎEÿivaRvaijaRtama,
tasmät kåta-narähäräd
bhétair nåbhir amitra-han
na sevyate paçu-gaëaiù
pakñi-saìghair vivarjitam
SYNONYMS
tasmät—of him; kåta-nara-ähärät—who has eaten human beings;
bhétaiù—who are afraid; nåbhiù—by the human beings; amitra-han—O killer
of enemies; na sevyate—is not resorted to; paçu-gaëaiù—by the various
animals; pakñi-saìghaiù—by the flocks of birds; vivarjitam—abandoned.
TRANSLATION
The demon Dhenuka has eaten men alive, and therefore all people and
animals are terrified of going to the Täla forest. O killer of the enemy, even the
birds are afraid to fly there.
PURPORT
The cowherd boyfriends of Lord Kåñëa and Lord Balaräma encouraged the
two brothers to go at once to the Täla forest and kill the ass demon. Indeed,
here they address the brothers as amitra-han, "killer of the enemy." The
cowherd boys were engaged in ecstatic meditation upon the potency of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and reasoned thus: "Kåñëa has already killed
terrible demons like Baka and Agha, so what is so special about this obnoxious
jackass named Dhenuka, who has become public enemy number one in
Våndävana?"
The cowherd boys wanted Kåñëa and Balaräma to kill the demons so that all
the pious inhabitants of Våndävana could enjoy the fruits in the Täla forest.
Thus they requested the special favor that the ass demons be killed.
TEXT 25
ivaântae'Baul(paUvaARiNA
P(laAina s$aur"BaIiNA ca
WSa vaE s$aur"iBagARnDaAe
ivaSaUcaInaAe'vagA{÷tae
vidyante 'bhukta-pürväëi
phaläni surabhéëi ca
eña vai surabhir gandho
viñücéno 'vagåhyate
SYNONYMS
vidyante—are present; abhukta-pürväëi—never before tasted; phaläni—fruits;
surabhéëi—fragrant; ca—and; eñaù—this; vai—indeed; surabhiù—fragrant;
gandhaù—aroma; viñücénaù—spreading everywhere; avagåhyate—is perceived.
TRANSLATION
In the Täla forest are sweet-smelling fruits no one has ever tasted. Indeed,
even now we can smell the fragrance of the täla fruits spreading all about.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, the sweet fragrance of the täla fruits
was carried by an easterly wind, which is conducive to rain in the Våndävana
area. This easterly wind generally blows in the month of Bhädra and thus
indicates the excellent ripeness of the fruits, while the fact that the boys could
smell them indicates the nearness of the Täla forest.
TEXT 26
‘ayacC$ taAina na: k{(SNA
gAnDalaAeiBatacaetas$aAma,
vaAHC$Aista mah"taI r"Ama
gAmyataAM yaid" r"Aecatae
prayaccha täni naù kåñëa
gandha-lobhita-cetasäm
väïchästi mahaté räma
gamyatäà yadi rocate
SYNONYMS
prayaccha—please give; täni—them; naù—to us; kåñëa—O Kåñëa; gandha—by
the fragrance; lobhita—made greedy; cetasäm—whose minds; väïchä—the
desire; asti—is; mahaté—great; räma—O Räma; gamyatäm—let us go; yadi—if;
rocate—it appears like a good idea.
TRANSLATION
O Kåñëa! Please get those fruits for us. Our minds are so attracted by their
aroma! Dear Balaräma, our desire to have those fruits is very great. If You
think it's a good idea, let's go to that Täla forest.
PURPORT
Although neither man nor bird nor beast could even approach the Täla
forest, the cowherd boys had so much faith in Lord Kåñëa and Lord Balaräma
that they took it for granted the two Lords could effortlessly kill the sinful ass
demons and acquire the delicious täla fruits. Lord Kåñëa's cowherd boyfriends
are exalted, self-realized souls who would not ordinarily become greedy for
sweet fruits. In fact, they are simply joking with the Lord and enthusing His
pastimes, urging Him to perform unprecedented heroic feats in the Täla forest.
Innumerable demons disturbed the sublime atmosphere of Våndävana during
Lord Kåñëa's presence there, and the Lord would kill such demons as a popular
daily event.
Since Lord Kåñëa had already killed many demons, on this particular day
He decided to give first honors to Lord Balaräma, who would demolish the first
demon, Dhenuka. By the words yadi rocate, the cowherd boys indicate that
Lord Kåñëa and Lord Balaräma need not kill the demon simply to satisfy them;
rather, They should do so only if the Lords Themselves found the concept
appealing.
TEXT 27
WvaM s$auô$ã"ca: ™autvaA
s$auô$it‘ayaicak(LSaRyaA
‘ah"sya jagmataugAAeR$paEr,"
va{taAE taAlavanaM ‘aBaU
evaà suhåd-vacaù çrutvä
suhåt-priya-cikérñayä
prahasya jagmatur gopair
våtau tälavanaà prabhü
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; suhåt—of Their friends; vacaù—the words; çrutvä—hearing;
suhåt—to Their friends; priya—pleasure; cikérñayä—desiring to give;
prahasya—laughing; jagmatuù—the two of Them went; gopaiù—by the
cowherd boys; våtau—surrounded; täla-vanam—to the Täla forest;
prabhü—the two Lords.
TRANSLATION
Hearing the words of Their dear companions, Kåñëa and Balaräma laughed
and, desiring to please them, set off for the Tälavana surrounded by Their
cowherd boyfriends.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa was thinking, "How can a mere ass be so formidable?" And thus
He smiled at the petition of His boyfriends. As stated by Lord Kapila in the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (3.28.32), häsaà harer
avanatäkhila-loka-tévra-çokäçru-sägara-viçoñaëam aty-udäram: "The smile and
laughter of the Supreme Lord Hari is most magnanimous. Indeed, for those
who bow down to the Lord, His smile and laughter dry up the ocean of tears
caused by the intense suffering of this world." Thus, to encourage Their
boyfriends, Lord Kåñëa and Lord Balaräma smiled, laughed and immediately
set out with them for the Täla forest.
TEXT 28
bala: ‘aivazya baAò"ByaAM
taAlaAna, s$ampair"k(mpayana,
P(laAina paAtayaAmaAs$a
mataËÿja wvaAEjas$aA
balaù praviçya bähubhyäà
tälän samparikampayan
phaläni pätayäm äsa
mataì-gaja ivaujasä
SYNONYMS
balaù—Balaräma; praviçya—entering; bähubhyäm—with His two arms;
tälän—the palm trees; samparikampayan—making shake all around;
phaläni—the fruits; pätayäm äsa—He made fall; matam-gajaù—a maddened
elephant; iva—just as; ojasä—by His strength.
TRANSLATION
Lord Balaräma entered the Täla forest first. Then with His two arms He
began forcefully shaking the trees with the power of a maddened elephant,
causing the täla fruits to fall to the ground.
TEXT 29
P(laAnaAM patataAM zAbdM"
inazAmyaAs$aur"r"As$aBa:
@ByaDaAvaitºaitatalaM
s$anagAM pair"k(mpayana,
phalänäà patatäà çabdaà
niçamyäsura-räsabhaù
abhyadhävat kñiti-talaà
sa-nagaà parikampayan
SYNONYMS
phalänäm—of the fruits; patatäm—which are falling; çabdam—the sound;
niçamya—hearing; asura-räsabhaù—the demon in the form of a jackass;
abhyadhävat—ran forward; kñiti-talam—the surface of the earth;
sa-nagam—together with the trees; parikampayan—making tremble.
TRANSLATION
Hearing the sound of the falling fruits, the ass demon Dhenuka ran forward
to attack, making the earth and trees tremble.
TEXT 30
s$amaetya tar"s$aA ‘atyagA,
ã"AByaAM paà"YaAM balaM balaI
inah"tyaAer"is$a k(AzAbdM"
mauÂana, payaRs$ar"tKala:
sametya tarasä pratyag
dväbhyäà padbhyäà balaà balé
nihatyorasi kä-çabdaà
muïcan paryasarat khalaù
SYNONYMS
sametya—meeting Him; tarasä—swiftly; pratyak—hind; dväbhyäm—with the
two; padbhyäm—legs; balam—Lord Baladeva; balé—the powerful demon;
nihatya—striking; urasi—upon the chest; kä-çabdam—an ugly braying sound;
muïcan—releasing; paryasarat—ran around; khalaù—the jackass.
TRANSLATION
The powerful demon rushed up to Lord Baladeva and sharply struck the
Lord's chest with the hooves of his hind legs. Then Dhenuka began to run
about, braying loudly.
TEXT 31
paunar"As$aAâ s$aMr"bDa
opa‚(Aeí"A par"AifsTata:
car"NAAvapar"AE r"Ajana,
balaAya ‘aAiºapaåu"SaA
punar äsädya saàrabdha
upakroñöä paräk sthitaù
caraëäv aparau räjan
baläya präkñipad ruñä
SYNONYMS
punaù—again; äsädya—approaching Him; saàrabdhaù—furious;
upakroñöä—the ass; paräk—with his back toward the Lord; sthitaù—standing;
caraëau—two legs; aparau—hind; räjan—O King Parékñit; baläya—at Lord
Balaräma; präkñipat—he hurled; ruñä—with anger.
TRANSLATION
Moving again toward Lord Balaräma, O King, the furious ass situated
himself with his back toward the Lord. Then, screaming in rage, the demon
hurled his two hind legs at Him.
PURPORT
The word upakroñöä indicates an ass and also one who is crying out nearby.
Thus it is indicated herein that the powerful Dhenuka made horrible, angry
sounds.
TEXT 32
s$a taM gA{h"ItvaA ‘apad"Aer,"
”aAmaiyatvaEk(paAiNAnaA
icaºaepa ta{NAr"AjaAƒae
”aAmaNAtyal(jaIivatama,
sa taà gåhétvä prapador
bhrämayitvaika-päëinä
cikñepa tåëa-räjägre
bhrämaëa-tyakta-jévitam
SYNONYMS
saù—He; tam—him; gåhétvä—seizing; prapadoù—by the hooves;
bhrämayitvä—whirling around; eka-päëinä—with a single hand; cikñepa—He
threw; tåëa-räja-agre—into the top of a palm tree; bhrämaëa—by the whirling;
tyakta—giving up; jévitam—his life.
TRANSLATION
Lord Balaräma seized Dhenuka by his hooves, whirled him about with one
hand and threw him into the top of a palm tree. The violent wheeling motion
killed the demon.
TEXT 33
taenaAh"taAe mah"AtaAlaAe
vaepamaAnaAe ba{h"icC$r"A:
paAìRsTaM k(mpayana, Ba¢a:
s$a caAnyaM s$aAe'ipa caApar"ma,
tenähato mahä-tälo
vepamäno båhac-chiräù
pärçva-sthaà kampayan bhagnaù
sa cänyaà so 'pi cäparam
SYNONYMS
tena—by that (body of the dead Dhenukäsura); ähataù—struck;
mahä-tälaù—the great palm tree; vepamänaù—trembling; båhat-çiräù—which
had a large top; pärçva-stham—another situated beside it; kampayan—making
shake; bhagnaù—broken; saù—that; ca—and; anyam—another; saù—that;
api—yet; ca—and; aparam—another.
TRANSLATION
Lord Balaräma threw the dead body of Dhenukäsura into the tallest palm
tree in the forest, and when the dead demon landed in the treetop, the tree
began shaking. The great palm tree, causing a tree by its side also to shake,
broke under the weight of the demon. The neighboring tree caused yet another
tree to shake, and this one struck yet another tree, which also began shaking. In
this way many trees in the forest shook and broke.
PURPORT
Lord Balaräma threw the demon Dhenuka so violently into the great palm
tree that a chain reaction was unleashed, and many towering palm trees shook
and then broke with a great crashing sound.
TEXT 34
balasya laIlayaAets$a{í"-
Kar"de"h"h"taAh"taA:
taAlaAêk(impare" s$avaeR
mah"AvaAtaeir"taA wva
balasya lélayotsåñöakhara-
deha-hatähatäù
täläç cakampire sarve
mahä-väteritä iva
SYNONYMS
balasya—of Lord Balaräma; lélayä—as the pastime; utsåñöa—thrown upward;
khara-deha—by the body of the ass; hata-ähatäù—which were striking one
another; täläù—the palm trees; cakampire—shook; sarve—all; mahä-väta—by
a powerful wind; éritäù—blown; iva—as if.
TRANSLATION
Because of Lord Balaräma's pastime of throwing the body of the ass demon
into the top of the tallest palm tree, all the trees began shaking and striking
against one another as if blown about by powerful winds.
TEXT 35
naEtai»a‡aM BagAvaita
÷nantae jagAd"Iìre"
@Aeta‘aAetaimadM" yaismaMs$a,
tantauSvaËÿ yaTaA paq%:
naitac citraà bhagavati
hy anante jagad-éçvare
ota-protam idaà yasmiàs
tantuñv aìga yathä paöaù
SYNONYMS
na—not; etat—this; citram—surprising; bhagavati—for the Personality of
Godhead; hi—indeed; anante—who is the unlimited; jagat-éçvare—the Lord of
the the universe; ota-protam—spread out horizontally and vertically;
idam—this universe; yasmin—upon whom; tantuñu—upon its threads;
aìga—my dear Parékñit; yathä—just as, paöaù-a cloth.
TRANSLATION
My dear Parékñit, that Lord Balaräma killed Dhenukäsura is not such a
wonderful thing, considering that He is the unlimited Personality of Godhead,
the controller of the entire universe. Indeed, the entire cosmos rests upon Him
just as a woven cloth rests upon its own horizontal and vertical threads.
PURPORT
Unfortunate persons cannot appreciate the blissful pastimes of the
Supreme Lord. In this connection Çréla Jéva Gosvämé explains that the
Supreme Lord possesses unlimited potency and strength, as expressed here by
the word anante. The Lord exhibits a tiny fraction of His power according to
the need of a particular situation. Lord Balaräma desired to vanquish the gang
of demoniac asses who had unlawfully seized the Tälavana forest, and
therefore He exhibited just enough divine opulence to easily kill Dhenukäsura
and the other demons.
TEXT 36
tata: k{(SNAM ca r"AmaM ca
ÁaAtayaAe Daenauk(sya yae
‚(Aeí"Ar"Ae'Bya‰"vana, s$avaeR
s$aMr"bDaA h"tabaAnDavaA:
tataù kåñëaà ca rämaà ca
jïätayo dhenukasya ye
kroñöäro 'bhyadravan sarve
saàrabdhä hata-bändhaväù
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; kåñëam—at Lord Kåñëa; ca—and; rämam—Lord Räma; ca—and;
jïätayaù—the intimate companions; dhenukasya—of Dhenuka; ye—who;
kroñöäraù—the asses; abhyadravan—attacked; sarve—all saàrabdhäù-enraged;
hata-bändhaväù—their friend having been killed.
TRANSLATION
The other ass demons, close friends of Dhenukäsura, were enraged upon
seeing his death, and thus they all immediately ran to attack Kåñëa and
Balaräma.
PURPORT
Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé makes the following comment on this verse: "It is
stated here that the ass demons first attacked Kåñëa and then Balaräma
(kåñëaà ca rämaà ca). One reason for this is that the demons, having seen the
prowess of Lord Balaräma, thought it wise to attack Kåñëa first. Or it may be
that out of affection for His elder brother, Lord Kåñëa placed Himself between
Balaräma and the ass demons. The words kåñëaà ca rämaà ca may also be
understood to indicate that Lord Balaräma, out of affection for His younger
brother, went to Lord Kåñëa's side.
TEXT 37
taAMstaAnaApatata: k{(SNAAe
r"Amaê na{pa laIlayaA
gA{h"ItapaêA»ar"NAAna,
‘aAih"NAAeÔa{NAr"Ajas$au
täàs tän äpatataù kåñëo
rämaç ca nåpa lélayä
gåhéta-paçcäc-caraëän
prähiëot tåëa-räjasu
SYNONYMS
tän tän—all of them, one by one; äpatataù—attacking; kåñëaù—Lord Kåñëa;
rämaù—Lord Balaräma; ca—and; nåpa—O King; lélayä—easily;
gåhéta—seizing; paçcät-caraëän—their hind legs; prähiëot—threw;
tåëa-räjasu—into the palm trees.
TRANSLATION
O King, as the demons attacked, Kåñëa and Balaräma easily seized them one
after another by their hind legs and threw them all into the tops of the palm
trees.
TEXT 38
P(la‘ak(r"s$aÆÿLNA<
dE"tyade"hE"gARtaAs$auiBa:
r"r"Aja BaU: s$ataAlaAƒaEr,"
GanaEir"va naBastalama,
phala-prakara-saìkérëaà
daitya-dehair gatäsubhiù
raräja bhüù sa-tälägrair
ghanair iva nabhas-talam
SYNONYMS
phala-prakara—with heaps of fruits; saìkérëam—covered; daitya-dehaiù—with
the bodies of the demons; gata-asubhiù—which were lifeless; raräja—shone
forth; bhüù—the earth; sa-täla-agraiù—with the tops of the palm trees;
ghanaiù—with clouds; iva—as; nabhaù-talam—the sky.
TRANSLATION
The earth then appeared beautifully covered with heaps of fruits and with
the dead bodies of the demons, which were entangled in the broken tops of the
palm trees. Indeed, the earth shone like the sky decorated with clouds.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, the bodies of the
demons were dark, like dark blue clouds, and the large quantity of blood that
had flowed from their bodies appeared like bright red clouds. Thus the whole
scene was very beautiful. The Supreme Personality of Godhead in His various
forms, such as Räma and Kåñëa, is always transcendental, and when He enacts
His transcendental pastimes the result is always beautiful and transcendental,
even when the Lord performs violent acts like killing the stubborn ass demons.
TEXT 39
tayaAestats$aumah"tk(maR
inazAmya ivabauDaAd"ya:
maumaucau: pauSpavaSaARiNA
ca‚u(vaARâAina tauí]"vau:
tayos tat su-mahat karma
niçamya vibudhädayaù
mumucuù puñpa-varñäëi
cakrur vädyäni tuñöuvuù
SYNONYMS
tayoù—of the two brothers; tat—that; su-mahat—very great; karma—act;
niçamya—hearing of; vibudha-ädayaù—the demigods and other elevated living
beings; mumucuù—they released; puñpa-varñäëi—downpours of flowers;
cakruù—they performed; vädyäni—music; tuñöuvuù—they offered prayers.
TRANSLATION
Hearing of this magnificent feat of the two brothers, the demigods and other
elevated living beings rained down flowers and offered music and prayers in
glorification.
PURPORT
Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé comments that the demigods, great sages and other
exalted beings were all astonished and ecstatic upon seeing the unusually swift
and nonchalant way in which Kåñëa and Balaräma killed the very powerful ass
demons in the Täla forest.
TEXT 40
@Ta taAlaP(laAnyaAd"na,
manauSyaA gAtas$aADvas$aA:
ta{NAM ca pazAvaêeç&r,"
h"taDaenauk(k(Ananae
atha täla-phaläny ädan
manuñyä gata-sädhvasäù
tåëaà ca paçavaç cerur
hata-dhenuka-känane
SYNONYMS
atha—then; täla—of the palm trees; phaläni—the fruits; ädan—ate;
manuñyäù—the human beings; gata-sädhvasäù—having lost their fear;
tåëam—upon the grass; ca—and; paçavaù—the animals; ceruù—grazed;
hata—killed; dhenuka—of the demon Dhenuka; känane—in the forest.
TRANSLATION
People now felt free to return to the forest where Dhenuka had been killed,
and without fear they ate the fruits of the palm trees. Also, the cows could now
graze freely upon the grass there.
PURPORT
According to the äcäryas, low-class people such as the pulindas ate the fruits
of the palm trees, but Kåñëa's cowherd boyfriends considered them
undesirable, since they had been tainted with the blood of the asses.
TEXT 41
k{(SNA: k(malapa‡aAºa:
pauNya™avaNAk(LtaRna:
staUyamaAnaAe'naugAEgAAeR$paE:
s$aAƒajaAe ˜ajamaA˜ajata,
kåñëaù kamala-paträkñaù
puëya-çravaëa-kértanaù
stüyamäno 'nugair gopaiù
sägrajo vrajam ävrajat
SYNONYMS
kåñëaù—Lord Çré Kåñëa; kamala-patra-akñaù—whose eyes are like lotus petals;
puëya-çravaëa-kértanaù—hearing and chanting about whom is the most pious
activity; stüyamänaù—being glorified; anugaiù—by His followers; gopaiù—the
cowherd boys; sa-agra-jaù—together with His elder brother, Balaräma;
vrajam—to Vraja; ävrajat—He returned.
TRANSLATION
Then lotus-eyed Lord Çré Kåñëa, whose glories are most pious to hear and
chant, returned home to Vraja with His elder brother, Balaräma. Along the
way, the cowherd boys, His faithful followers, chanted His glories.
PURPORT
When the glories of Çré Kåñëa are vibrated, both the speakers and the
hearers are purified and become pious.
TEXT 42
taM gAAer"jazC]$ir"taku(ntalabaÜ"bahR"-
vanya‘as$aUnaç&icare"ºaNAcaAç&h"As$ama,
vaeNAum¸(NAntamanaugAEç&pagAItak(Lita<
gAAepyaAe id"ä{"iºataä{"zAAe'ByagAmana, s$amaetaA:
taà gorajaç-churita-kuntala-baddha-barhavanya-
prasüna-rucirekñaëa-cäru-häsam
veëum kvaëantam anugair upagéta-kértià
gopyo didåkñita-dåço 'bhyagaman sametäù
SYNONYMS
tam—Him; go-rajaù—with the dust raised by the cows; churita—smeared;
kuntala—within His locks of hair; baddha—placed; barha—a peacock feather;
vanya-prasüna—with forest flowers; rucira-ékñaëa—charming eyes;
cäru-häsam—and a beautiful smile; veëum—His flute; kvaëantam—sounding;
anugaiù—by His companions; upagéta—being chanted; kértim—His glories;
gopyaù—the gopés; didåkñita—eager to see; dåçaù—their eyes;
abhyagaman—came forward; sametäù—in a body.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa's hair, powdered with the dust raised by the cows, was decorated
with a peacock feather and forest flowers. The Lord glanced charmingly and
smiled beautifully, playing upon His flute while His companions chanted His
glories. The gopés, all together, came forward to meet Him, their eyes very eager
to see Him.
PURPORT
Superficially, the gopés were young married girls, and therefore they would
naturally be ashamed and fearful of casting loving glances at a beautiful young
boy like Çré Kåñëa. But Çré Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
all living beings are His eternal servants. Thus the gopés, although the most
pure-hearted of all great souls, did not hesitate to come forward and satisfy
their love-struck eyes by drinking in the sight of beautiful young Kåñëa. The
gopés also relished the sweet sound of His flute and the enchanting fragrance of
His body.
TEXT 43
paItvaA mauku(nd"mauKas$aAr"GamaiºaBa{"ËEÿs$a,
taApaM jaò"ivaRr"h"jaM ˜ajayaAeiSataAe'i¶"
tats$atk{(itaM s$amaiDagAmya ivavaezA gAAeïM"
s$a˜aIx"h"As$aivanayaM yad"paAËÿmaAeºama,
pétvä mukunda-mukha-säragham akñi-bhåìgais
täpaà jahur viraha-jaà vraja-yoñito 'hni
tat sat-kåtià samadhigamya viveça goñöhaà
savréòa-häsa-vinayaà yad apäìga-mokñam
SYNONYMS
pétvä—drinking; mukunda-mukha—of the face of Lord Mukunda;
säragham—the honey; akñi-bhåìgaiù—with their beelike eyes; täpam—distress;
jahuù—gave up; viraha-jam—based on separation; vraja-yoñitaù—the ladies of
Våndävana; ahni—during the day; tat—that; sat-kåtim—offering of respect;
samadhigamya—fully accepting; viveça—He entered; goñöham—the cowherd
village; sa-vréòa—with shame; häsa—laughter; vinayam—and humbleness;
yat—which; apäìga—of their sidelong glances; mokñam—the release.
TRANSLATION
With their beelike eyes, the women of Våndävana drank the honey of the
beautiful face of Lord Mukunda, and thus they gave up the distress they had
felt during the day because of separation from Him. The young Våndävana
ladies cast sidelong glances at the Lord—glances filled with bashfulness,
laughter and submission—and Çré Kåñëa, completely accepting these glances as
a proper offering of respect, entered the cowherd village.
PURPORT
In Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çréla Prabhupäda describes
this incident as follows: "All the gopés in Våndävana remained very morose on
account of Kåñëa's absence. All day they were thinking of Kåñëa in the forest
or of Him herding cows in the pasture. When they saw Kåñëa returning, all
their anxieties were immediately relieved, and they began to look at His face
the way drones hover over the honey of the lotus flower. When Kåñëa entered
the village, the young gopés smiled and laughed. Kåñëa, while playing the flute,
enjoyed the beautiful smiling faces of the gopés."
The Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëa, is the supreme master of romantic skills, and
thus He expertly exchanged loving feelings with the young cowherd girls of
Våndävana. When a chaste young girl is in love, she glances at her beloved
with shyness, jubilation and submission. When the beloved accepts her
offering of love by receiving her glance and is thus satisfied with her, the
loving young girl's heart becomes filled with happiness. These were exactly the
romantic exchanges taking place between beautiful young Kåñëa and the
loving cowherd girls of Våndävana.
TEXT 44
tayaAeyaRzAAed"Ar"Aeih"NyaAE
pau‡ayaAe: pau‡avats$alae
yaTaAk(AmaM yaTaAk(AlaM
vyaDaÔaAM par"maAizASa:
tayor yaçodä-rohiëyau
putrayoù putra-vatsale
yathä-kämaà yathä-kälaà
vyadhattäà paramäçiñaù
SYNONYMS
tayoù—to the two; yaçodä-rohiëyau—Yaçodä and Rohiëé (the mothers of
Kåñëa and Balaräma, respectively); putrayoù—to their sons;
putra-vatsale—who were very affectionate to their sons; yathä-kämam—in
accordance with Their desires; yathä-kälam—in accordance with the time and
circumstances; vyadhattäm—presented; parama-äçiñaù—first-class enjoyable
offerings.
TRANSLATION
Mother Yaçodä and mother Rohiëé, acting most affectionately toward their
two sons, offered all the best things to Them in response to Their every desire
and at the various appropriate times.
PURPORT
The word paramäçiñaù indicates the attractive blessings of a loving mother,
which include wonderful food, beautiful clothes, jewelry, toys and constant
affection. The words yathä-kämaà yathä-kälam indicate that although Yaçodä
and Rohiëé satisfied all the desires of their sons, Kåñëa and Balaräma, they also
properly regulated the boys' activities. In other words, they prepared wonderful
food for their children, but they saw to it that the boys ate at the proper time.
Similarly, their children would play at the proper time and sleep at the proper
time. The word yathä-kämam does not indicate that the mothers
indiscriminately allowed the boys to do whatever They liked, but in the
proper, civilized way they showered their blessings upon their children.
Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé comments that the mothers loved their sons so
much that as they embraced Them they would carefully check all Their limbs
to see if They were healthy and strong.
TEXT 45
gAtaADvaAna™amaAE ta‡a
maÀanaAenmadR"naAid"iBa:
naIvaI%M vais$atvaA ç&icar"AM
id"vya›aggAnDamaiNx"taAE
gatädhväna-çramau tatra
majjanonmardanädibhiù
névéà vasitvä ruciräà
divya-srag-gandha-maëòitau
SYNONYMS
gata—gone; adhväna-çramau—whose weariness from being upon the road;
tatra—there (in Their home); majjana—by bathing; unmardana—massaging;
ädibhiù—and so on; névém—in undergarments; vasitvä—being dressed;
ruciräm—charming; divya—transcendental; srak—with garlands;
gandha—and fragrances; maëòitau—decorated.
TRANSLATION
By being bathed and massaged, the two young Lords were relieved of the
weariness caused by walking on the country roads. Then They were dressed in
attractive robes and decorated with transcendental garlands and fragrances.
TEXT 46
jananyaupaô$taM ‘aAzya
svaAâªamaupalaAilataAE
s$aMivazya var"zAyyaAyaAM
s$auKaM s$auSaupatau˜aRjae
janany-upahåtaà präçya
svädy annam upalälitau
saàviçya vara-çayyäyäà
sukhaà suñupatur vraje
SYNONYMS
janané—by Their mothers; upahåtam—offered; präçya—eating fully;
svädu—delicious; annam—food; upalälitau—being pampered;
saàviçya—entering; vara—excellent; çayyäyäm—upon bedding;
sukham—happily; suñupatuù—the two of Them slept; vraje—in Vraja.
TRANSLATION
After dining sumptuously on the delicious food given Them by Their
mothers and being pampered in various ways, the two brothers lay down upon
Their excellent beds and happily went to sleep in the village of Vraja.
TEXT 47
WvaM s$a BagAvaAna, k{(SNAAe
va{nd"Avanacar": ¸(icata,
yayaAE r"Amama{tae r"Ajana,
k(Ailand"I%M s$aiKaiBava{Rta:
evaà sa bhagavän kåñëo
våndävana-caraù kvacit
yayau rämam åte räjan
kälindéà sakhibhir våtaù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; saù—He; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
kåñëaù—Kåñëa; våndävana-caraù—wandering, and acting, in Våndävana;
kvacit—once; yayau—went; rämam åte—without Lord Balaräma; räjan—O
King Parékñit; kälindém—to the river Yamunä; sakhibhiù—by His friends;
våtaù—surrounded.
TRANSLATION
O King, the Supreme Lord Kåñëa thus wandered about the Våndävana area,
performing His pastimes. Once, surrounded by His boyfriends, He went
without Balaräma to the Yamunä River.
TEXT 48
@Ta gAAvaê gAAepaAê
inad"AGaAtapapaIix"taA:
äu"íM" jalaM papaustasyaAs$a,
ta{SNAAtaAR ivaSaäU"iSatama,
atha gävaç ca gopäç ca
nidäghätapa-péòitäù
duñöaà jalaà papus tasyäs
tåñëärtä viña-düñitam
SYNONYMS
atha—then; gävaù—the cows; ca—and; gopäù—the cowherd boys; ca—and;
nidägha—of the summer; ätapa—by the glaring sun; péòitäù—distressed;
duñöam—contaminated; jalam—the water; papuù—they drank; tasyäù—of the
river; tåña-ärtäù—tormented by thirst; viña—by poison; düñitam—spoiled.
TRANSLATION
At that time the cows and cowherd boys were feeling acute distress from the
glaring summer sun. Afflicted by thirst, they drank the water of the Yamunä
River. But it had been contaminated with poison.
TEXTS 49-50
ivaSaAmBastaäu"pas$pa{zya
dE"vaAepah"tacaetas$a:
inapaetauvyaRs$ava: s$avaeR
s$ailalaAntae ku(è&ã"h"
vaIºya taAna, vaE taTaABaUtaAna,
k{(SNAAe yaAegAeìre"ìr":
wRºayaAma{tavaiSaRNyaA
svanaATaAna, s$amajaIvayata,
viñämbhas tad upaspåçya
daivopahata-cetasaù
nipetur vyasavaù sarve
salilänte kurüdvaha
vékñya tän vai tathä-bhütän
kåñëo yogeçvareçvaraù
ékñayämåta-varñiëyä
sva-näthän samajévayat
SYNONYMS
viña-ambhaù—the poisoned water; tat—that; upaspåçya—simply touching;
daiva—by the mystic potency of the Personality of Godhead; upahata—lost;
cetasaù—their consciousness; nipetuù—they fell down; vyasavaù—lifeless;
sarve—all of them; salila-ante—at the edge of the water; kuru-udvaha—O
hero of the Kuru dynasty; vékñya—seeing; tän—them; vai—indeed;
tathä-bhütän—in such a condition; kåñëaù—Lord Kåñëa;
yoga-éçvara-éçvaraù—the master of all masters of yoga; ékñayä—by His glance;
amåta-varñiëyä—which is a shower of nectar; sva-näthän—those who accepted
only Him as their master; samajévayat—brought back to life.
TRANSLATION
As soon as they touched the poisoned water, all the cows and boys lost their
consciousness by the divine power of the Lord and fell lifeless at the water's
edge. O hero of the Kurus, seeing them in such a condition, Lord Kåñëa, the
master of all masters of mystic potency, felt compassion for these devotees, who
had no Lord other than Him. Thus He immediately brought them back to life
by showering His nectarean glance upon them.
TEXT 51
tae s$am‘ataItasma{taya:
s$amautTaAya jalaAintak(Ata,
@As$ana, s$auivaismataA: s$avaeR
vaIºamaANAA: par"s$par"ma,
te sampratéta-småtayaù
samutthäya jaläntikät
äsan su-vismitäù sarve
vékñamäëäù parasparam
SYNONYMS
te—they; sampratéta—regaining perfectly; småtayaù—their memory;
samutthäya—rising up; jala-antikät—from out of the water; äsan—they
became; su-vismitäù—very surprised; sarve—all; vékñamäëäù—looking;
parasparam—at one another.
TRANSLATION
Regaining their full consciousness, the cows and boys stood up out of the
water and began to look at one another in great astonishment.
TEXT 52
@nvamaMs$ata ta‰"Ajana,
gAAeivand"Anauƒahe"iºatama,
paItvaA ivaSaM pare"tasya
paunaç&tTaAnamaAtmana:
anvamaàsata tad räjan
govindänugrahekñitam
pétvä viñaà paretasya
punar utthänam ätmanaù
SYNONYMS
anvamaàsata—they subsequently thought; tat—that; räjan—O King Parékñit;
govinda—of Lord Govinda; anugraha-ékñitam—due to the merciful glance;
pétvä—having drunk; viñam—poison; paretasya—of those who have lost their
lives; punaù—once again; utthänam—rising up; ätmanaù—on their own.
TRANSLATION
O King, the cowherd boys then considered that although they had drunk
poison and in fact had died, simply by the merciful glance of Govinda they had
regained their lives and stood up by their own strength.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Tenth Canto, Fifteenth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Killing of Dhenuka, the Ass Demon."
16. Kåñëa Chastises the Serpent Käliya
This chapter describes Lord Çré Kåñëa's pastime of subduing the serpent
Käliya within the lake adjoining the river Yamunä and His showing mercy to
Käliya in response to the prayers offered by Käliya's wives, the Näga-patnés.
To restore the purity of the Yamunä's waters, which had been contaminated
by Käliya's poison, Lord Kåñëa climbed into a kadamba tree on the riverbank
and jumped into the water. Then He began fearlessly playing within the water
like a maddened elephant. Käliya could not tolerate Kåñëa's trespassing upon
his personal residence, and the serpent quickly went up to the Lord and bit
Him on the chest. When Kåñëa's friends saw this, they fell down on the ground
unconscious. At that time all sorts of evil omens appeared in Vraja, such as
earth tremors, falling stars and the trembling of various creatures' left limbs.
The residents of Våndävana thought, "Today Kåñëa went to the forest
without Balaräma, so we do not know what great misfortune may have befallen
Him." Thinking in this way, they traced the path of Kåñëa's footprints to the
bank of the Yamunä. Within the water of the lake adjoining the river they saw
Lord Kåñëa, the very essence of their lives, enwrapped in the coils of a black
snake. The residents thought the three worlds had become empty, and they all
prepared to enter the water. But Lord Balaräma checked them, knowing well
the power of Kåñëa.
Then Lord Kåñëa, seeing how disturbed His friends and relatives had
become, expanded His body greatly and forced the serpent to loosen his grip
and release Him. Next the Lord began playfully dancing about on the serpent's
hoods. By this wonderful, boisterous dancing, Çré Kåñëa trampled the serpent's
one thousand hoods until his body slackened. Vomiting blood from his mouths,
Käliya finally understood that Kåñëa was the primeval personality, Lord
Näräyaëa, the spiritual master of all moving and nonmoving creatures, and he
took shelter of Him.
Seeing how very weary Käliya had become, his wives, the Näga-patnés,
bowed down at Lord Kåñëa's lotus feet. Then they offered Him various prayers
in hopes of gaining their husband's freedom: "It is quite fitting that You have
brought our cruel husband to this condition. Indeed, by Your anger he has
gained great benefit. What piety Käliya must have amassed in his previous
lives! Today he has borne upon his head the dust of the lotus feet of the
Personality of Godhead, the attainment of which is difficult for even the
mother of the universe, goddess Lakñmé. Please kindly forgive the offense
Käliya has committed out of ignorance, and allow him to live."
Satisfied by the Näga-patnés' prayers, Kåñëa released Käliya, who slowly
regained his sensory and vital powers. Then Käliya, in a distressed voice,
acknowledged the offense he had committed, and finally he offered Kåñëa
many prayers and said he was ready to accept His command. Kåñëa told him to
leave the Yamunä lake with his family and return to Ramaëaka Island.
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
ivalaAefya äU"iSataAM k{(SNAAM
k{(SNA: k{(SNAAih"naA ivaBau:
tasyaA ivazAuiÜ"mainvacC$na,
s$apa< tamaud"vaAs$ayata,
çré-çuka uväca
vilokya düñitäà kåñëäà
kåñëaù kåñëähinä vibhuù
tasyä viçuddhim anvicchan
sarpaà tam udaväsayat
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; vilokya—seeing;
düñitäm—contaminated; kåñëäm—the river Yamunä; kåñëaù—Lord Çré Kåñëa;
kåñëa-ahinä—by the black serpent; vibhuù—the almighty Lord; tasyäù—of the
river; viçuddhim—the purification; anvicchan—desiring; sarpam—serpent;
tam—that; udaväsayat—sent away.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Lord Çré Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, seeing that the Yamunä River had been contaminated by the black
snake Käliya, desired to purify the river, and thus the Lord banished him from
it.
TEXT 2
™aIr"AjaAevaAca
k(TamantajaRlae'gAADae
nyagA{õ"Aà"gAvaAnaih"ma,
s$a vaE baò"yaugAAvaAs$aM
yaTaAs$aIiã"‘a k(TyataAma,
çré-räjoväca
katham antar-jale 'gädhe
nyagåhëäd bhagavän ahim
sa vai bahu-yugäväsaà
yathäséd vipra kathyatäm
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—King Parékñit said; katham—how; antaù-jale—within the
water; agädhe—unfathomable; nyagåhëät—subdued; bhagavän—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; ahim—the serpent; saù—he, Käliya; vai—indeed;
bahu-yuga—for many ages; äväsam—having residence; yathä—how; äsét—so
became; vipra—O learned brähmaëa; kathyatäm—please explain.
TRANSLATION
King Parékñit inquired: O learned sage, please explain how the Supreme
Personality of Godhead chastised the serpent Käliya within the unfathomable
waters of the Yamunä, and how it was that Käliya had been living there for so
many ages.
TEXT 3
“aöna, BagAvatastasya
BaU°a: svacC$nd"vaitaRna:
gAAepaAlaAed"Ar"cair"taM
k(sta{pyaetaAma{taM jauSana,
brahman bhagavatas tasya
bhümnaù svacchanda-vartinaù
gopälodära-caritaà
kas tåpyetämåtaà juñan
SYNONYMS
brahman—O brähmaëa; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Lord; tasya—of Him;
bhümnaù—the unlimited; sva-chanda-vartinaù—who acts according to His
own desires; gopäla—as a cowherd boy; udära—magnanimous; caritam—the
pastimes; kaù—who; tåpyeta—can be satiated; amåtam—such nectar;
juñan—partaking of.
TRANSLATION
O brähmaëa, the unlimited Supreme Personality of Godhead freely acts
according to His own desires. Who could be satiated when hearing the nectar of
the magnanimous pastimes He performed as a cowherd boy in Våndävana?
TEXT 4
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
k(AilanâAM k(AilayasyaAs$aIä,"
oe"d": k(iêiã"SaAi¢anaA
™apyamaANApayaA yaismana,
patantyaupair"gAA: KagAA:
çré-çuka uväca
kälindyäà käliyasyäséd
hradaù kaçcid viñägninä
çrapyamäëa-payä yasmin
patanty upari-gäù khagäù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; kälindyäm—within the river
Yamunä; käliyasya—of the serpent Käliya; äsét—there was; hradaù—lake;
kaçcit—a certain; viña—of his poison; agninä—by the fire; çrapyamäëa—being
heated and boiled; payäù—its water; yasmin—into which; patanti—would fall
down; upari-gäù—traveling above; khagäù—the birds.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Within the river Kälindé [Yamunä] was a lake
inhabited by the serpent Käliya, whose fiery poison constantly heated and
boiled its waters. Indeed, the vapors thus created were so poisonous that birds
flying over the contaminated lake would fall down into it.
PURPORT
In this regard the äcäryas explain that the Käliya lake was situated apart
from the main current of the river; otherwise the Yamunä's waters would have
been poisonous even in cities like Mathurä and in other places farther away.
TEXT 5
iva‘auSmataA ivaSad"AeimaRmaAç&
taenaAiBamaizARtaA:
i•ayantae taIr"gAA yasya
‘aAiNAna: isTar"jaËÿmaA:
vipruñmatä viñadormi
märutenäbhimarçitäù
mriyante téra-gä yasya
präëinaù sthira-jaìgamäù
SYNONYMS
vipruö-matä—containing droplets of the water; viña-da—poisonous;
ürmi—(having touched) the waves; märutena—by the wind;
abhimarçitäù—contacted; mriyante—would die; téra-gäù—present upon the
shore; yasya—of which; präëinaù—all living entities; sthira-jaìgamäù—both
nonmoving and moving.
TRANSLATION
The wind blowing over that deadly lake carried droplets of water to the
shore. Simply by coming in contact with that poisonous breeze, all vegetation
and creatures on the shore died.
PURPORT
The word sthira, "unmoving creatures," refers to various types of vegetation
including trees, and jaìgama refers to moving creatures such as animals,
reptiles, birds and insects. Çréla Çrédhara Svämé has quoted a further
description of this lake from the Çré Hari-vaàça (Viñëu-parva 11.42, 11.44 and
11.46):
dérghaà yojana-vistäraà
dustaraà tridaçair api
gambhéram akñobhya-jalaà
niñkampam iva sägaram
duùkhopasarpaà téreñu
sa-sarpair vipulair bilaiù
viñäraëi-bhavasyägner
dhümena pariveñöitam
tåëeñv api patatsv apsu
jvalantam iva tejasä
samantäd yojanaà sägraà
téreñv api duräsadam
"The lake was quite wide—eight miles across at some points—and even the
demigods could not cross over it. The water in the lake was very deep and, like
the immovable depths of the ocean, could not be agitated. Approaching the
lake was difficult, for its shores were covered with holes in which serpents
lived. All around the lake was a fog generated by the fire of the serpents'
poison, and this powerful fire would at once burn up every blade of grass that
happened to fall into the water. For a distance of eight miles from the lake, the
atmosphere was most unpleasant."
Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé states that by the mystical science of jala-stambha,
making solid items out of water, Käliya had built his own city within the lake.
TEXT 6
taM caNx"vaegAivaSavaIyaRmavaeºya taena
äu"í"AM nad"I%M ca Kalas$aMyamanaAvataAr":
k{(SNA: k(d"mbamaiDaç&÷ tataAe'itatauËÿma,
@As$P(Aeq"Ya gAAX#r"zAnaAe nyapataiã"SaAede"
taà caëòa-vega-viña-véryam avekñya tena
duñöäà nadéà ca khala-saàyamanävatäraù
kåñëaù kadambam adhiruhya tato 'ti-tuìgam
äsphoöya gäòha-raçano nyapatad viñode
SYNONYMS
tam—him, Käliya; caëòa-vega—of fearsome power; viña—the poison;
véryam—whose strength; avekñya—seeing; tena—by him;
duñöäm—contaminated; nadém—the river; ca—and; khala—the envious
demons; saàyamana—for subduing; avatäraù—whose descent from the
spiritual world; kåñëaù—Lord Kåñëa; kadambam—a kadamba tree;
adhiruhya—climbing up on; tataù—from it; ati-tuìgam—very high;
äsphoöya—slapping His arms; gäòha-raçanaù—tying His belt firmly;
nyapatat—He jumped; viña-ude—into the poisoned water.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa saw how the Käliya serpent had polluted the Yamunä River with
his terribly powerful poison. Since Kåñëa had descended from the spiritual
world specifically to subdue envious demons, the Lord immediately climbed to
the top of a very high kadamba tree and prepared Himself for battle. He
tightened His belt, slapped His arms and then jumped into the poisonous water.
PURPORT
According to the äcäryas, Lord Kåñëa also tied back the locks of His hair as
He prepared to do battle with Käliya.
TEXT 7
s$apaRoe"d": pauç&Sas$aAr"inapaAtavaegAs$
aÉÿAeiBataAer"gAivaSaAecC.$vais$ataAmbaur"AizA:
payaRfplautaAe ivaSak(SaAyaibaBaISaNAAeimaRr,"
DaAvanDanau:zAtamanantabalasya ikM( tata,
sarpa-hradaù puruña-sära-nipäta-vegacopyright
©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
161
saìkñobhitoraga-viñocchvasitämbu-räçiù
paryak pluto viña-kañäya-bibhéñaëormir
dhävan dhanuù-çatam ananta-balasya kià tat
SYNONYMS
sarpa-hradaù—the serpent's lake; puruña-sära—of the most exalted Supreme
Personality of Godhead; nipäta-vega—by the force of the fall;
saìkñobhita—completely agitated; uraga—of the snakes;
viña-ucchvasita—breathed upon with the poison; ambu-räçiù—all of whose
water; paryak—on all sides; plutaù—flooding; viña-kañäya—because of the
contamination of the poison; bibhéñaëa—fearsome; ürmiù—whose waves;
dhävan—flowing; dhanuù-çatam—the extent of one hundred bow-lengths;
ananta-balasya—for Him whose strength is immeasurable; kim—what;
tat—that.
TRANSLATION
When the Supreme Personality of Godhead landed in the serpent's lake, the
snakes there became extremely agitated and began breathing heavily, further
polluting it with volumes of poison. The force of the Lord's entrance into the
lake caused it to overflow on all sides, and poisonous, fearsome waves flooded
the surrounding lands up to a distance of one hundred bow-lengths. This is not
at all amazing, however, for the Supreme Lord possesses infinite strength.
TEXT 8
tasya oe"de" ivah"r"taAe Baujad"Nx"GaUNARvaAGaAeRSamaËÿ
var"vaAr"NAiva‚(masya
@A™autya tatsvas$ad"naAiBaBavaM inar"Iºya
caºau:™avaA: s$amas$ar"Ôad"ma{SyamaANA:
tasya hrade viharato bhuja-daëòa-ghürëavär-
ghoñam aìga vara-väraëa-vikramasya
äçrutya tat sva-sadanäbhibhavaà nirékñya
cakñuù-çraväù samasarat tad amåñyamäëaù
SYNONYMS
tasya—of Him; hrade—in his lake; viharataù—who was playing;
bhuja-daëòa—by His mighty arms; ghürëa—swirled about; väù—of the water;
ghoñam—the resounding; aìga—my dear King; vara-väraëa—like a great
elephant; vikramasya—whose prowess; äçrutya—hearing; tat—that;
sva-sadana—of his own residence; abhibhavam—the trespassing;
nirékñya—taking note of; cakñuù-çraväù—Käliya; samasarat—came forward;
tat—that; amåñyamäëaù—being unable to tolerate.
TRANSLATION
Kåñëa began sporting in Käliya's lake like a lordly elephant—swirling His
mighty arms and making the water resound in various ways. When Käliya heard
these sounds, he understood that someone was trespassing in his lake. The
serpent could not tolerate this and immediately came forward.
PURPORT
According to the äcäryas, Lord Kåñëa was producing wonderful musical
sounds within the water simply by splashing His hands and arms.
TEXT 9
taM ‘aeºaNAIyas$auku(maAr"GanaAvad"AtaM
™aIvats$apaItavas$anaM ismatas$aund"r"Asyama,
‚(Lx"ntama‘aitaBayaM k(malaAed"r"Ax.~i„aM
s$and"zya mamaRs$au ç&SaA BaujayaA caC$Ad"
taà prekñaëéya-sukumära-ghanävadätaà
çrévatsa-péta-vasanaà smita-sundaräsyam
kréòantam apratibhayaà kamalodaräìghrià
sandaçya marmasu ruñä bhujayä cachäda
SYNONYMS
tam—Him; prekñaëéya—attractive to look at; su-kumära—most delicate;
ghana—like a cloud; avadätam—glowing white; çrévatsa—wearing the Çrévatsa
mark; péta—and yellow; vasanam—garments; smita—smiling;
sundara—beautiful; äsyam—whose face; kréòantam—playing;
aprati-bhayam—without fear of others; kamala—of a lotus; udara—like the
inside; aìghrim—whose feet; sandaçya—biting; marmasu—upon the chest;
ruñä—with anger; bhujayä—with his snake coils; cachäda—enveloped.
TRANSLATION
Käliya saw that Çré Kåñëa, who wore yellow silken garments, was very
delicate, His attractive body shining like a glowing white cloud, His chest
bearing the mark of Çrévatsa, His face smiling beautifully and His feet
resembling the whorl of a lotus flower. The Lord was playing fearlessly in the
water. Despite His wonderful appearance, the envious Käliya furiously bit Him
on the chest and then completely enwrapped Him in his coils.
TEXT 10
taM naAgABaAegApair"vaItamaä{"í"caeí"ma,
@AlaAefya tait‘ayas$aKaA: pazAupaA Ba{zAAtaAR:
k{(SNAe'ipaRtaAtmas$auô$d"TaRk(la‡ak(AmaA
äu":KaAnauzAAek(BayamaUX#iDayaAe inapaetau:
taà näga-bhoga-parivétam adåñöa-ceñöam
älokya tat-priya-sakhäù paçupä bhåçärtäù
kåñëe 'rpitätma-suhåd-artha-kalatra-kämä
duùkhänuçoka-bhaya-müòha-dhiyo nipetuù
SYNONYMS
tam—Him; näga—of the serpent; bhoga—within the coils;
parivétam—enveloped; adåñöa-ceñöam—not exhibiting any movement;
älokya—seeing; tat-priya-sakhäù—His dear friends; paçu-päù—the cowherds;
bhåça-ärtäù—greatly disturbed; kåñëe—unto Lord Kåñëa; arpita—offered;
ätma—their very selves; su-håt—their relations; artha—wealth;
kalatra—wives; kämäù—and all objects of desire; duùkha—by pain;
anuçoka—remorse; bhaya—and fear; müòha—bewildered; dhiyaù—their
intelligence; nipetuù—they fell down.
TRANSLATION
When the members of the cowherd community, who had accepted Kåñëa as
their dearmost friend, saw Him enveloped in the snake's coils, motionless, they
were greatly disturbed. They had offered Kåñëa everything—their very selves,
their families, their wealth, wives and all pleasures. At the sight of the Lord in
the clutches of the Käliya snake, their intelligence became deranged by grief,
lamentation and fear, and thus they fell to the ground.
PURPORT
Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé explains that the cowherd boys, along with some
cowherd men and farmers who happened to be in the vicinity and who were
also devotees of Kåñëa, fell to the ground just like trees that had been cut at
the root.
TEXT 11
gAAvaAe va{SaA vats$atayaR:
‚(nd"maAnaA: s$auäu":iKataA:
k{(SNAe nyastaeºaNAA BaItaA
ç&d"ntya wva taisTare"
gävo våñä vatsataryaù
krandamänäù su-duùkhitäù
kåñëe nyastekñaëä bhétä
rudantya iva tasthire
SYNONYMS
gävaù—the cows; våñäù—the bulls; vatsataryaù—the female calves;
krandamänäù—crying loudly; su-duùkhitäù—very much distressed;
kåñëe—upon Lord Kåñëa; nyasta—fixed; ékñaëäù—their sight; bhétäù—fearful;
rudantyaù—crying; iva—as if; tasthire—they stood still.
TRANSLATION
The cows, bulls and female calves, in great distress, called out piteously to
Kåñëa. Fixing their eyes on Him, they stood still in fear, as if ready to cry but
too shocked to shed tears.
TEXT 12
@Ta ˜ajae mah"AetpaAtaAs$a,
i‡aivaDaA ÷itad"Aç&NAA:
otpaetauBauRiva id"vyaAtmanya,
@As$aªaBayazAMis$ana:
atha vraje mahotpätäs
tri-vidhä hy ati-däruëäù
utpetur bhuvi divy ätmany
äsanna-bhaya-çaàsinaù
SYNONYMS
atha—then; vraje—in Våndävana; mahä-utpätäù—very ominous disturbances;
tri-vidhäù—of the three varieties; hi—indeed; ati-däruëäù—most fearsome;
utpetuù—arose; bhuvi—upon the earth; divi—in the sky; ätmani—in the
bodies of living creatures; äsanna—imminent; bhaya—danger;
saàçinaù—announcing.
TRANSLATION
In the Våndävana area there then arose all three types of fearful
omens—those on the earth, those in the sky and those in the bodies of living
creatures—which announced imminent danger.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, the omens were as follows: on the earth
there were disturbing tremors, in the sky there were meteors falling, and in the
bodies of creatures there was shivering, as well as quivering of the left eye and
other parts of the body. These omens announce imminent danger.
TEXTS 13-15
taAnaAlaºya BayaAeiã"¢aA
gAAepaA nand"paur"AegAmaA:
ivanaA r"AmaeNA gAA: k{(SNAM
ÁaAtvaA caAr"iyatauM gAtama,
taEäuR"inaRimaÔaEinaRDanaM
matvaA ‘aAæamataiã"d":
tat‘aANAAstanmanas$k(Astae
äu":KazAAek(BayaAtaur"A:
@AbaAlava{Ü"vainataA:
s$avaeR'Ëÿ pazAuva{Ôaya:
inajaRgmaugAAeRku(laAÚ"InaA:
k{(SNAd"zARnalaAlas$aA:
tän älakñya bhayodvignä
gopä nanda-purogamäù
vinä rämeëa gäù kåñëaà
jïätvä cärayituà gatam
tair durnimittair nidhanaà
matvä präptam atad-vidaù
tat-präëäs tan-manaskäs te
duùkha-çoka-bhayäturäù
ä-bäla-våddha-vanitäù
sarve 'ìga paçu-våttayaù
nirjagmur gokuläd dénäù
kåñëa-darçana-lälasäù
SYNONYMS
tän—these signs; älakñya—seeing; bhaya-udvignäù—agitated by fear;
gopäù—the cowherds; nanda-puraù-gamäù—headed by Nanda Mahäräja;
vinä—without; rämeëa—Balaräma; gäù—the cows; kåñëam—Kåñëa;
jïätvä—understanding; cärayitum—to herd; gatam—gone; taiù—from those;
durnimittaiù—bad omens; nidhanam—destruction; matvä—considering;
präptam—attained; atat-vidaù—not knowing His opulences;
tat-präëäù—having Him as their very source of life; tat-manaskäù—their
minds being absorbed in Him; te—they; duùkha—by pain; çoka—unhappiness;
bhaya—and fear; äturäù—overwhelmed; ä-bäla—including the children;
våddha—old persons; vanitäù—and ladies; sarve—all; aìga—my dear King
Parékñit; paçu-våttayaù—behaving as an affectionate cow does toward her calf;
nirjagmuù—they went out; gokulät—from Gokula; dénäù—feeling wretched;
kåñëa-darçana—for the sight of Lord Kåñëa; lälasäù—anxious.
TRANSLATION
Seeing the inauspicious omens, Nanda Mahäräja and the other cowherd men
were fearful, for they knew that Kåñëa had gone to herd the cows that day
without His elder brother, Balaräma. Because they had dedicated their minds to
Kåñëa, accepting Him as their very life, they were unaware of His great power
and opulence. Thus they concluded that the inauspicious omens indicated He
had met with death, and they were overwhelmed with grief, lamentation and
fear. All the inhabitants of Våndävana, including the children, women and
elderly persons, thought of Kåñëa just as a cow thinks of her helpless young
calf, and thus these poor, suffering people rushed out of the village, intent upon
finding Him.
TEXT 16
taAMstaTaA k(Atar"Ana, vaIºya
BagAvaAnmaADavaAe bala:
‘ah"sya ik(iÂaªaAevaAca
‘aBaAvaÁaAe'naujasya s$a:
täàs tathä kätarän vékñya
bhagavän mädhavo balaù
prahasya kiïcin noväca
prabhäva-jïo 'nujasya saù
SYNONYMS
tän-them; tathä-in such a condition; kätarän-distressed; vékñya-seeing;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mädhavaù—the master of all
mystic knowledge; balaù—Lord Balaräma; prahasya—gently smiling;
kiïcit—anything at all; na—did not; uväca—say; prabhäva-jïaù-knowing the
power; anujasya-of His younger brother; saù-He.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord Balaräma, the master of all transcendental knowledge,
smiled and said nothing when He saw the residents of Våndävana in such
distress, since He understood the extraordinary power of His younger brother.
PURPORT
Çré Balaräma is the plenary expansion of Lord Kåñëa and is thus
nondifferent from Him. They are, in fact, the same Absolute Truth manifest
in separate forms. According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, Lord
Balaräma was laughing because He thought, "Kåñëa never cares to play with
Me in My form of Çeña Näga, but now He is playing with this ordinary,
mundane snake named Käliya."
The question may arise as to why Kåñëa and Balaräma allowed Their loving
devotees to suffer such great anguish during Kåñëa's temporary imprisonment
within the coils of Käliya. It must be remembered that because the inhabitants
of Våndävana were completely liberated souls, they did not experience
material emotions. When they saw their beloved Kåñëa in apparent danger,
their love for Him intensified to the highest degree, and thus they merged
completely into the ecstasy of love for Him. The whole situation has to be seen
from the spiritual point of view, or it will not be seen at all.
TEXT 17
tae'nvaeSamaANAA d"iyataM
k{(SNAM s$aUicatayaA padE":
BagAvaéaºaNAEjaRgmau:
pad"vyaA yamaunaAtaq%ma,
te 'nveñamäëä dayitaà
kåñëaà sücitayä padaiù
bhagaval-lakñaëair jagmuù
padavyä yamunä-taöam
SYNONYMS
te—they; anveñamäëäù—searching out; dayitam—their dearmost;
kåñëam—Kåñëa; sücitayä—(along the path) which was marked; padaiù—by
His footprints; bhagavat-lakñaëaiù—the symbolic markings of the Personality
of Godhead; jagmuù—they went; padavyä—along the path; yamunä-taöam—to
the bank of the Yamunä.
TRANSLATION
The residents hurried toward the banks of the Yamunä in search of their
dearmost Kåñëa, following the path marked by His footprints, which bore the
unique signs of the Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 18
tae ta‡a ta‡aAbjayavaAÇÿzAAzAina-
DvajaAepapaªaAina pad"Aina ivazpatae:
maAgAeR gAvaAmanyapad"Antar"Antare"
inar"IºamaANAA yayaur"Ëÿ s$atvar"A:
te tatra taträbja-yaväìkuçäçanidhvajopapannäni
padäni viç-pateù
märge gaväm anya-padäntaräntare
nirékñamäëä yayur aìga satvaräù
SYNONYMS
te—they; tatra tatra—here and there; abja—with the lotus flower;
yava—barleycorn; aìkuça—elephant goad; açani—thunderbolt; dhvaja—and
flag; upapannäni—adorned; padäni—the footprints; viö-pateù—of Lord Kåñëa,
the master of the cowherd community; märge—upon the path; gaväm—of the
cows; anya-pada—the other footprints; antara-antare—dispersed among;
nirékñamäëäù—seeing; yuyuù—they went; aìga—my dear King;
sa-tvaräù—rapidly.
TRANSLATION
The footprints of Lord Kåñëa, the master of the entire cowherd community,
were marked with the lotus flower, barleycorn, elephant goad, thunderbolt and
flag. My dear King Parékñit, seeing His footprints on the path among the cows'
hoofprints, the residents of Våndävana rushed along in great haste.
PURPORT
Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé comments as follows: "Since Lord Kåñëa had passed
along the path some time previously, why weren't His footprints, which were
surrounded by those of cows, cowherd boys and so on, smudged over and
brushed away? Why hadn't His footprints been obliterated by those of the
beasts and birds of Våndävana forest? The answer is indicated by the word
viç-pati, master of the cowherd community. Since Lord Kåñëa is actually the
wealth of all living beings, all the inhabitants of the forest of Vraja would
carefully preserve His footprints as great treasures, the very ornaments of the
earth. Thus no creature within Våndävana would ever walk upon Lord Kåñëa's
footprints."
TEXT 19
@ntaoeR"#de" BaujagABaAegApar"ItamaAr"Ata,
k{(SNAM inar"Ih"maupalaBya jalaAzAyaAntae
gAAepaAMê maUX#iDaSaNAAna, pair"ta: pazAUMê
s$ax.~‚(nd"ta: par"mak(zmalamaApaur"AtaAR:
antar hrade bhujaga-bhoga-parétam ärät
kåñëaà niréham upalabhya jaläçayänte
gopäàç ca müòha-dhiñaëän paritaù paçüàç ca
saìkrandataù parama-kaçmalam äpur ärtäù
SYNONYMS
antaù—within; hrade—the lake; bhujaga—of the serpent; bhoga—within the
body; parétam—enveloped; ärät—from a distance; kåñëam—Lord Kåñëa;
niréham—not moving; upalabhya—seeing; jala-äçaya—the body of water;
ante—within; gopän—the cowherd boys; ca—and;
müòha-dhiñaëän—unconscious; paritaù—surrounding; paçün—the animals;
ca—and; saìkrandataù—crying out; parama-kaçmalam—the greatest
bewilderment; äpuù—they experienced; ärtäù—being distressed.
TRANSLATION
As they hurried along the path to the bank of the Yamunä River, they saw
from a distance that Kåñëa was in the lake, motionless within the coils of the
black serpent. They further saw that the cowherd boys had fallen unconscious
and that the animals were standing on all sides, crying out for Kåñëa. Seeing all
this, the residents of Våndävana were overwhelmed with anguish and
confusion.
PURPORT
In their grief and panic, the residents of Våndävana tried to find out
whether Käliya had forcibly dragged young Kåñëa from the shore into the
water, or whether Kåñëa had Himself jumped from the shore and fallen into
the clutches of the snake. They could not understand anything about the
situation, and Kåñëa's cowherd boyfriends, being unconscious, were unable to
tell them anything. The cows and calves were crying out for Kåñëa, and thus
the whole situation was overwhelming and created a state of shock and panic
among the residents of Våndävana.
TEXT 20
gAAepyaAe'naur"l(manas$aAe BagAvatyanantae
tats$aAEô$d"ismataivalaAek(igAr": smar"ntya:
ƒastae'ih"naA i‘ayatamae Ba{zAäu":KataæaA:
zAUnyaM i‘ayavyaitaô$taM d"ä{"zAuiñlaAek(ma,
gopyo 'nurakta-manaso bhagavaty anante
tat-sauhåda-smita-viloka-giraù smarantyaù
graste 'hinä priyatame bhåça-duùkha-taptäù
çünyaà priya-vyatihåtaà dadåçus tri-lokam
SYNONYMS
gopyaù—the cowherd girls; anurakta-manasaù—their minds very much
attached to Him; bhagavati—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
anante—the unlimited one; tat—His; sauhåda—loving; smita—smiling;
viloka—glances; giraù—and words; smarantyaù—remembering; graste—being
seized; ahinä—by the serpent; priya-tame—their most dear; bhåça—extremely;
duùkha—by pain; taptäù—tormented; çünyam—empty;
priya-vyatihåtam—deprived of their darling; dadåçuù—they saw; tri-lokam—all
the three worlds (the entire universe).
TRANSLATION
When the young gopés, whose minds were constantly attached to Kåñëa, the
unlimited Supreme Lord, saw that He was now within the grips of the serpent,
they remembered His loving friendship, His smiling glances and His talks with
them. Burning with great sorrow, they saw the entire universe as void.
TEXT 21
taA: k{(SNAmaAtar"mapatyamanau‘aivaí"AM
taulyavyaTaA: s$amanaugA{÷ zAuca: ›avantya:
taAstaA ˜ajai‘ayak(TaA: k(Tayantya @As$ana,
k{(SNAAnanae'ipaRtaä{"zAAe ma{tak(‘ataIk(A:
täù kåñëa-mätaram apatyam anupraviñöäà
tulya-vyathäù samanugåhya çucaù sravantyaù
täs tä vraja-priya-kathäù kathayantya äsan
kåñëänane 'rpita-dåço måtaka-pratékäù
SYNONYMS
täù—those ladies; kåñëa-mätaram—the mother of Kåñëa (Yaçodä);
apatyam—upon her son; anupraviñöäm—fixing her vision; tulya—equally;
vyathäù—pained; samanugåhya—holding back firmly; çucaù—floods of sorrow;
sravantyaù—spilling forth; täù täù—each of them; vraja-priya—of the darling
of Vraja; kathäù—topics; kathayantyaù—speaking; äsan—they stood;
kåñëa-änane—unto the face of Lord Kåñëa; arpita—offered; dåçaù—their eyes;
måtaka—corpses; pratékäù—resembling.
TRANSLATION
Although the elder gopés were feeling just as much distress as she and were
pouring forth a flood of sorrowful tears, they had to forcibly hold back Kåñëa's
mother, whose consciousness was totally absorbed in her son. Standing like
corpses, with their eyes fixed upon His face, these gopés each took turns
recounting the pastimes of the darling of Vraja.
TEXT 22
k{(SNA‘aANAAiªaivaRzAtaAe
nand"Ad"Ina, vaIºya taM oe"d"ma,
‘atyaSaeDats$a BagAvaAna,
r"Ama: k{(SNAAnauBaAvaivata,
kåñëa-präëän nirviçato
nandädén vékñya taà hradam
pratyañedhat sa bhagavän
rämaù kåñëänubhäva-vit
SYNONYMS
kåñëa-präëän—the men whose very life and soul was Kåñëa;
nirviçataù—entering; nanda-ädén—headed by Nanda Mahäräja;
vékñya—seeing; tam—that; hradam—lake; pratyañedhat—forbade; saù—He;
bhagavän—the all-powerful Lord; rämaù—Balaräma; kåñëa—of Lord Kåñëa;
anubhäva—the power; vit—knowing well.
TRANSLATION
Lord Balaräma then saw that Nanda Mahäräja and the other cowherd men,
who had dedicated their very lives to Kåñëa, were beginning to enter the
serpent's lake. As the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Balaräma fully
knew Lord Kåñëa's actual power, and therefore He restrained them.
PURPORT
Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé explains that Lord Balaräma checked some of the
cowherd men by speaking to them, others by physically holding them and still
others by casting upon them His potent smiling glance. Distraught over the
situation, they were prepared to give up their lives for Lord Kåñëa by entering
the serpent's lake.
TEXT 23
wtTamsvagAAeku(lamananyagAitaM inar"Iºya
s$añIku(maAr"maitaäu":iKatamaAtmahe"taAe:
@AÁaAya matyaRpad"vaImanauvataRmaAna:
isTatvaA mauó"taRmaud"itaï"äu"r"ËÿbanDaAta,
ittham sva-gokulam ananya-gatià nirékñya
sa-stré-kumäram ati-duùkhitam ätma-hetoù
äjïäya martya-padavém anuvartamänaù
sthitvä muhürtam udatiñöhad uraìga-bandhät
SYNONYMS
ittham—in this fashion; sva-gokulam—His own community of Gokula;
ananya-gatim—having no other goal or shelter (than Him);
nirékñya—observing; sa-stré—including the women; kumäram—and children;
ati-duùkhitam—extremely distressed; ätma-hetoù—on His account;
äjïäya—understanding; martya-padavém—the way of mortals;
anuvartamänaù—imitating; sthitvä—remaining; muhürtam—for some time;
udatiñöhat—He rose up; uraìga—of the serpent; bandhät—from the bonds.
TRANSLATION
The Lord remained for some time within the coils of the serpent, imitating
the behavior of an ordinary mortal. But when He understood that the women,
children and other residents of His village of Gokula were in acute distress
because of their love for Him, their only shelter and goal in life, He
immediately rose up from the bonds of the Käliya serpent.
TEXT 24
tat‘aTyamaAnavapauSaA vyaiTataAtmaBaAegAs$a,
tyaftvaAeªamayya ku(ipata: svaP(NAAna, BaujaËÿ:
tasTaAE ìs$aHC.$vas$anar"n‹aivaSaAmbar"ISastabDae
ºaNAAelmauk(mauKaAe h"ir"maIºamaANA:
tat-prathyamäna-vapuñä vyathitätma-bhogas
tyaktvonnamayya kupitaù sva-phaëän bhujaìgaù
tasthau çvasaï chvasana-randhra-viñämbaréñastabdhekñaëolmuka-
mukho harim ékñamäëaù
SYNONYMS
tat—of Him, Lord Kåñëa; prathyamäna—expanding; vapuñä—by the
transcendental body; vyathita—pained; ätma—his own; bhogaù—serpent body;
tyaktvä—giving Him up; unnamayya—raising high; kupitaù—angered;
sva-phaëän—his hoods; bhujaìga—the serpent; tasthau—stood still;
çvasan—breathing heavily; çvasana-randhra—his nostrils; viña-ambaréña—like
two vessels for cooking poison; stabdha—fixed; ékñaëa—his eyes; ulmuka—like
firebrands; mukhaù—his face; harim—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
ékñamäëaù—observing.
TRANSLATION
His coils tormented by the expanding body of the Lord, Käliya released Him.
In great anger the serpent then raised his hoods high and stood still, breathing
heavily. His nostrils appeared like vessels for cooking poison, and the staring
eyes in his face like firebrands. Thus the serpent looked at the Lord.
TEXT 25
taM ijaù"yaA iã"izAKayaA pair"laeilah"AnaM
ãe" s$a{¸(NAI ÷itak(r"AlaivaSaAi¢aä{"ií"ma,
‚(Lx"ªamauM pair"s$as$aAr" yaTaA KagAen‰"Ae
ba”aAma s$aAe'pyavas$arM" ‘as$amaIºamaANA:
taà jihvayä dvi-çikhayä parilelihänaà
dve såkvaëé hy ati-karäla-viñägni-dåñöim
kréòann amuà parisasära yathä khagendro
babhräma so 'py avasaraà prasamékñamäëaù
SYNONYMS
tam—him, Käliya; jihvayä—with his tongue; dvi-çikhayä—having two points;
parilelihänam—repeatedly licking; dve—his two; såkvaëé—lips; hi—indeed;
ati-karäla—most terrible; viña-agni—full of poisonous fire; dåñöim—whose
glance; kréòan—playing; amum—him; parisasära—moved around; yathä—just
as; khaga-indraù—the king of birds, Garuòa; babhräma—wandered around;
saù—Käliya; api—also; avasaram—the opportunity (to strike);
prasamékñamäëaù—carefully looking for.
TRANSLATION
Again and again Käliya licked his lips with his bifurcated tongues as He
stared at Kåñëa with a glance full of terrible, poisonous fire. But Kåñëa playfully
circled around him, just as Garuòa would play with a snake. In response, Käliya
also moved about, looking for an opportunity to bite the Lord.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa moved around the serpent so skillfully that Käliya could find no
opportunity to bite Him. Thus the snake was defeated by Çré Kåñëa's
transcendental agility.
TEXT 26
WvaM pair"”amah"taAEjas$amauªataAMs$ama,
@Anamya tatpa{TauizAr":svaiDaè&X# @Aâ:
tanmaUDaRr"¥ainak(r"s$pazAARitataA•apaAd"
AmbaujaAe'iKalak(laAid"gAuç&naRnataR
evaà paribhrama-hataujasam unnatäàsam
änamya tat-påthu-çiraùsv adhirüòha ädyaù
tan-mürdha-ratna-nikara-sparçäti-tämrapädämbujo
'khila-kalädi-gurur nanarta
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; paribhrama—because of the Lord's moving around him;
hata—spoiled; ojasam—whose strength; unnata—raised high; aàsam—whose
shoulders; änamya—making him bend down; tat—his; påthu-çiraùsu—onto the
broad heads; adhirüòhaù—having climbed up; ädyaù—the ultimate origin of
everything; tat—his; mürdha—on the heads; ratna-nikara—the numerous
jewels; sparça—because of touching; ati-tämra—very much reddened;
päda-ambujaù—whose lotus feet; akhila-kalä—of all arts; ädi-guruù—the
original spiritual master; nanarta—began to dance.
TRANSLATION
Having severely depleted the serpent's strength with His relentless circling,
Çré Kåñëa, the origin of everything, pushed down Käliya's raised shoulders and
mounted his broad serpentine heads. Thus Lord Çré Kåñëa, the original master
of all fine arts, began to dance, His lotus feet deeply reddened by the touch of
the numerous jewels upon the serpent's heads.
PURPORT
Çré Hari-vaàça states, çiraù sa kåñëo jagräha sva-hastenävanamya: "Kåñëa
grabbed Käliya's head with His hand and forced it to bow down." Most people
in this world are quite reluctant to bow down to the Supreme Person, the
Absolute Truth. In the contaminated state called material consciousness, we
conditioned souls become proud of our insignificant position and are thus
reluctant to bow our heads before the Lord. Yet just as Lord Kåñëa forcibly
pushed Käliya's heads down and thus defeated him, the Supreme Lord's energy
in the form of irresistible time kills all conditioned souls and thus forces them
to bow down their arrogant heads. We should therefore give up the artificial
position of material life and become faithful servants of the Supreme Lord,
enthusiastically bowing down at His lotus feet.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains that Lord Kåñëa's lotus feet
became red like copper because of their contact with the numerous hard jewels
upon the heads of Käliya. Lord Kåñëa, with those glowing reddish feet, then
began to demonstrate His artistic skill by dancing on the unsteady, moving
surface of the serpent's hoods. This extraordinary demonstration of dancing
skill was meant for the pleasure of the young women of Våndävana, who at this
phase of their relationship with Kåñëa were seriously falling in love with Him.
TEXT 27
taM natauRmauâtamavaeºya tad"A tad"IyagAnDavaRis$
aÜ"mauinacaAr"NAde"vavaDva:
‘aItyaA ma{d"ËÿpaNAvaAnak(vaAâgAItapauSpaAepah"
Ar"nauitaiBa: s$ah"s$aAepas$aeäu":
taà nartum udyatam avekñya tadä tadéyagandharva-
siddha-muni-cäraëa-deva-vadhvaù
prétyä mådaìga-paëavänaka-vädya-gétapuñpopahära-
nutibhiù sahasopaseduù
SYNONYMS
tam—Him; nartum—in dancing; udyatam—engaged; avekñya—taking note of;
tadä—then; tadéya—His servants; gandharva-siddha—the Gandharvas and
Siddhas; muni-cäraëa—the sages and the Cäraëas; deva-vadhvaù—the wives of
the demigods; prétyä—with great pleasure; mådaìga-paëava-änaka—of various
kinds of drums; vädya—with musical accompaniment; géta—song;
puñpa—flowers; upahära—other presentations; nutibhiù—and prayers;
sahasä—immediately; upaseduù—arrived.
TRANSLATION
Seeing the Lord dancing, His servants in the heavenly planets—the
Gandharvas, Siddhas, sages, Cäraëas and wives of the demigods—immediately
arrived there. With great pleasure they began accompanying the Lord's dancing
by playing drums such as mådaìgas, paëavas and änakas. They also made
offerings of songs, flowers and prayers.
PURPORT
When the demigods and other residents of higher planetary systems became
aware that Lord Çré Kåñëa was personally putting on a wonderful
demonstration of the art of dancing, they immediately came to offer their
services. Dancing becomes more enjoyable and beautiful to watch when it is
accompanied by expert drum-playing, singing and the chanting of prayers. The
artistic atmosphere was also enhanced by the showering of a multitude of
flowers upon Lord Çré Kåñëa, who was blissfully engaged in dancing upon the
hoods of the Käliya serpent.
TEXT 28
yaâicC$r"Ae na namatae'Ëÿ zAtaEk(zAISNARs$a,
taÔanmamadR" Kar"d"Nx"Dar"Ae'x.~i„apaAtaE:
ºaINAAyauSaAe ”amata olbaNAmaAsyataAe's$a{x.~
nastaAe vamana, par"mak(zmalamaApa naAgA:
yad yac chiro na namate 'ìga çataika-çérñëas
tat tan mamarda khara-daëòa-dharo 'ìghri-pätaiù
kñéëäyuño bhramata ulbaëam äsyato 'såì
nasto vaman parama-kaçmalam äpa nägaù
SYNONYMS
yat yat—whichever; çiraù—heads; na namate—would not bow down;
aìga—my dear King Parékñit; çata-eka-çérñëaù—of him who had 101 heads; tat
tat—those; mamarda—trampled down; khara—on those who are evil;
daëòa—punishment; dharaù—the Lord who exerts; aìghri-pätaiù—with the
blows of His feet; kñéëa-äyuñaù—of Käliya, whose life was becoming depleted;
bhramataù—who was still moving about; ulbaëam—terrible; äsyataù—from his
mouths; asåk—blood; nastaù—from his nostrils; vaman—vomiting;
parama—extreme; kaçmalam—trouble; äpa—experienced; nägaù—the
serpent.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, Käliya had 101 prominent heads, and when one of them
would not bow down, Lord Çré Kåñëa, who inflicts punishment on cruel
wrong-doers, would smash that stubborn head by striking it with His feet.
Then, as Käliya entered his death throes, he began wheeling his heads around
and vomiting ghastly blood from his mouths and nostrils. The serpent thus
experienced extreme pain and misery.
TEXT 29
tasyaAiºaiBagARr"lamauã"mata: izAr":s$au
yaâts$amauªamaita ina:ìs$ataAe ç&SaAe»aE:
na{tyana, pad"Anaunamayand"mayaAM baBaUva
pauSpaE: ‘apaUijata wvaeh" paumaAna, paur"ANA:
tasyäkñibhir garalam udvamataù çiraùsu
yad yat samunnamati niùçvasato ruñoccaiù
nåtyan padänunamayan damayäà babhüva
puñpaiù prapüjita iveha pumän puräëaù
SYNONYMS
tasya—of him; akñibhiù-from the eyes; garalam—poisonous waste;
udvamataù—who was vomiting; çiraùsu—among the heads; yat
yat—whichever; samunnamati—would rise up; niùçvasataù—who was
breathing; ruñä—out of anger; uccaiù—heavily; nåtyan—while dancing;
padä—with His foot; anunamayan—making bow down; damayäm
babhüva—He subdued; puñpaiù—with flowers; prapüjitaù—being worshiped;
iva—indeed; iha—on this occasion; pumän—the Personality of Godhead;
puräëaù—original.
TRANSLATION
Exuding poisonous waste from his eyes, Käliya, would occasionally dare to
raise up one of his heads, which would breathe heavily with anger. Then the
Lord would dance on it and subdue it, forcing it to bow down with His foot.
The demigods took each of these exhibitions as an opportunity to worship Him,
the primeval Personality of Godhead, with showers of flowers.
TEXT 30
tai»a‡ataANx"vaivaç&¢aP(NAAs$ah"›aAe
r"lM( mauKaEç&ç& vamaªa{pa Ba¢agAA‡a:
sma{tvaA car"Acar"gAuçM& pauç&SaM paur"ANAM
naAr"AyaNAM tamar"NAM manas$aA jagAAma
tac-citra-täëòava-virugna-phaëä-sahasro
raktaà mukhair uru vaman nåpa bhagna-gätraù
småtvä caräcara-guruà puruñaà puräëaà
näräyaëaà tam araëaà manasä jagäma
SYNONYMS
tat—of Him; citra—amazing; täëòava—by the powerful dancing;
virugna—broken; phaëä-sahasraù—his one thousand hoods; raktam—blood;
mukhaiù—from his mouths; uru—profusely; vaman—vomiting; nåpa—O King
Parékñit; bhagna-gätraù—his limbs crushed; småtvä—remembering;
cara-acara—of all moving and nonmoving beings; gurum—the spiritual
master; puruñam—the Personality of Godhead; puräëam—ancient;
näräyaëam—Lord Näräyaëa; tam—to Him; araëam—for shelter;
manasä—within his mind, jagäma-he approached.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Parékñit, Lord Kåñëa's wonderful, powerful dancing trampled
and broke all of Käliya's one thousand hoods. Then the serpent, profusely
vomiting blood from his mouths, finally recognized Çré Kåñëa to be the eternal
Personality of Godhead, the supreme master of all moving and nonmoving
beings, Çré Näräyaëa. Thus within his mind Käliya took shelter of the Lord.
PURPORT
In Chapter Sixteen of Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çréla
Prabhupäda points out that whereas previously Käliya was vomiting poison,
now his poison was exhausted and he began to vomit blood. Thus he had been
cleansed of the vile contamination within his heart that had manifested as
serpent's venom. The word småtvä, "remembering," is very significant here. The
wives of Käliya were actually serious devotees of Lord Kåñëa, and according to
the äcäryas they had often tried to convince their husband to surrender to
Him. Finally, finding himself in unbearable agony, Käliya remembered his
wives' advice and took shelter of the Lord. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté
Öhäkura explains that Käliya's archrival had traditionally been Garuòa, the
carrier of Viñëu. But now Käliya realized that he was fighting an opponent
who was thousands of times stronger than Garuòa and who therefore could be
only the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus Käliya took shelter of Lord
Kåñëa.
TEXT 31
k{(SNAsya gABaRjagAtaAe'itaBar"Avas$aªaM
paAiSNAR‘ah"Ar"pair"ç&¢aP(NAAtapa‡ama,
ä{"î"Aih"maAâmaupas$aeäu"r"mauSya patnya
@AtaAR: ëTaã"s$anaBaUSaNAke(zAbanDaA:
kåñëasya garbha-jagato 'ti-bharävasannaà
pärñëi-prahära-parirugna-phaëätapatram
dåñövähim ädyam upasedur amuñya patnya
ärtäù çlathad-vasana-bhüñaëa-keça-bandhäù
SYNONYMS
kåñëasya—of Lord Kåñëa; garbha—in whose abdomen; jagataù—is found the
entire universe; ati-bhara—by the extreme weight; avasannam—fatigued;
pärñëi—of His heels; prahära—by the striking; parirugna—shattered;
phaëä—his hoods; ätapatram—which were like umbrellas; dåñövä—seeing;
ahim—the serpent; ädyam—the primeval Lord; upaseduù—approached;
amuñya—of Käliya; patnyaù—the wives; ärtäù—feeling distressed;
çlathat—disarrayed; vasana—their clothing; bhüñaëa—ornaments;
keça-bandhäù—and the locks of their hair.
TRANSLATION
When Käliya's wives saw how the serpent had become so fatigued from the
excessive weight of Lord Kåñëa, who carries the entire universe in His
abdomen, and how Käliya's umbrellalike hoods had been shattered by the
striking of Kåñëa's heels, they felt great distress. With their clothing, ornaments
and hair scattered in disarray, they then approached the eternal Personality of
Godhead.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, Käliya's wives had been
disgusted with their husband because of his demoniac activities. They had
been thinking, "If this atheist is killed by the punishment of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, then let him be killed. We will become widows and
engage in the worship of the Supreme Lord." But then the ladies noticed
Käliya's facial expression and other bodily features, and they understood that
Käliya had indeed taken shelter of the Lord within his mind. Seeing that he
was manifesting symptoms of humility, remorse, regret and doubt, they
thought, "Just see how fortunate we are! Our husband has now become a
Vaiñëava. Therefore we must now endeavor to protect him." They felt
affection for their repentant husband and severe distress because of his
miserable position, and thus all together they went into the presence of the
Supreme Lord.
TEXT 32
taAstaM s$auiva¢amanas$aAe'Ta paur"s$k{(taABaAR:
k(AyaM inaDaAya Bauiva BaUtapaitaM ‘aNAemau:
s$aADvya: k{(taAÃailapauq%A: zAmalasya BatauRr,"
maAeºaeps$ava: zAr"NAdM" zAr"NAM ‘apaªaA:
täs taà su-vigna-manaso 'tha puraskåtärbhäù
käyaà nidhäya bhuvi bhüta-patià praëemuù
sädhvyaù kåtäïjali-puöäù çamalasya bhartur
mokñepsavaù çaraëa-daà çaraëaà prapannäù
SYNONYMS
täù—they, the wives of Käliya; tam—to Him; su-vigna—very much agitated;
manasaù—their minds; atha—then; puraù-kåta—placing in front;
arbhäù—their children; käyam—their bodies; nidhäya—putting; bhuvi—upon
the ground; bhüta-patim—to the Lord of all creatures; praëemuù—they bowed
down; sädhvyaù—the saintly ladies; kåta-aïjali-puöäù—folding their hands in
supplication; çamalasya—who was sinful; bhartuù—of their husband;
mokña—the liberation; épsavaù—desiring; çaraëa-dam—He who grants
shelter; çaraëam—for shelter; prapannäù—they approached.
TRANSLATION
Their minds very much disturbed, those saintly ladies placed their children
before them and then bowed down to the Lord of all creatures, laying their
bodies flat upon the ground. They desired the liberation of their sinful husband
and the shelter of the Supreme Lord, the giver of ultimate shelter, and thus
they folded their hands in supplication and approached Him.
TEXT 33
naAgApatnya Ocau:
nyaAyyaAe ih" d"Nx": k{(taik(ilbaSae'ismaMs$a,
tavaAvataAr": Kalainaƒah"Aya
ir"paAe: s$autaAnaAmaipa taulyaä{"ií"r,"
Dats$ae d"maM P(lamaevaAnauzAMs$ana,
näga-patnya ücuù
nyäyyo hi daëòaù kåta-kilbiñe 'smiàs
tavävatäraù khala-nigrahäya
ripoù sutänäm api tulya-dåñöir
dhatse damaà phalam evänuçaàsan
SYNONYMS
näga-patnyaù ücuù—the wives of the serpent said; nyäyyaù—fair and just;
hi—indeed; daëòaù—punishment; kåta-kilbiñe—to him who has committed
offense; asmin—this person; tava—Your; avatäraù—descent into this world;
khala—of the envious; nigrahäya—for the subjugation; ripoù—to an enemy;
sutänäm—to Your own sons; api—also; tulya-dåñöiù—having equal vision;
dhatse—You give; damam—punishment; phalam—the ultimate result;
eva—indeed; anuçaàsam—considering.
TRANSLATION
The wives of the Käliya serpent said: The punishment this offender has
been subjected to is certainly just. After all, You have incarnated within this
world to curb down envious and cruel persons. You are so impartial that You
look equally upon Your enemies and Your own sons, for when You impose a
punishment on a living being You know it to be for his ultimate benefit.
TEXT 34
@nauƒah"Ae'yaM Bavata: k{(taAe ih" naAe
d"Nx"Ae's$ataAM tae Kalau k(lmaSaApah":
yaÚ"nd"zAUk(tvamamauSya de"ih"na:
‚(AeDaAe'ipa tae'nauƒah" Wva s$ammata:
anugraho 'yaà bhavataù kåto hi no
daëòo 'satäà te khalu kalmañäpahaù
yad dandaçükatvam amuñya dehinaù
krodho 'pi te 'nugraha eva sammataù
SYNONYMS
anugrahaù—mercy; ayam—this; bhavataù—by You; kåtaù—done; hi—indeed;
naù—to us; daëòaù—punishment; asatäm—of the evil; te—by You;
khalu—indeed; kalmaña-apahaù—the dispelling of their contamination;
yat—because; dandaçükatvam—the condition of appearing as a serpent;
amuñya—of this Käliya; dehinaù—the conditioned soul; krodhaù—anger;
api—even; te—Your; anugrahaù—as mercy; eva—actually; sammataù—is
accepted.
TRANSLATION
What You have done here is actually mercy for us, since the punishment
You give to the wicked certainly drives away all their contamination. Indeed,
because this conditioned soul, our husband, is so sinful that he has assumed the
body of a serpent, Your anger toward him is obviously to be understood as Your
mercy.
PURPORT
Çréla Madhväcärya points out in this connection that when a pious person
suffers in this world, he realizes, "The punishment the Supreme Lord is meting
out to me is actually His causeless mercy." Envious persons, however, even
after being punished by the Lord for their purification, continue to envy Him
and be resentful, and this attitude is the reason for their continued failure to
understand the Absolute Truth.
TEXT 35
tapa: s$autaæaM ik(manaena paUva<
inar"stamaAnaena ca maAnade"na
DamaAeR'Ta vaA s$avaRjanaAnauk(mpayaA
yataAe BavaAMstauSyaita s$avaRjaIva:
tapaù sutaptaà kim anena pürvaà
nirasta-mänena ca mäna-dena
dharmo 'tha vä sarva-janänukampayä
yato bhaväàs tuñyati sarva-jévaù
SYNONYMS
tapaù—austerity; su-taptam—properly performed; kim—what; anena—by this
Käliya; pürvam—in previous lives; nirasta-mänena—being free from false
pride; ca—and; mäna-dena—giving respect to others; dharmaù—religious
duty; atha vä—or else; sarva-jana—to all persons; anukampayä—with
compassion; yataù—by which; bhavän—Your good self; tuñyati—is satisfied;
sarva-jévaù—the source of life for all beings.
TRANSLATION
Did our husband carefully perform austerities in a previous life, with his
mind free of pride and full of respect for others? Is that why You are pleased
with him? Or did he in some previous existence carefully execute religious
duties with compassion for all living beings, and is that why You, the life of all
living beings, are now satisfied with Him?
PURPORT
In this regard Çréla Prabhupäda comments in his Kåñëa, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Chapter Sixteen: "The Näga-patnés confirm that one
cannot come in contact with Kåñëa without having executed pious activities in
devotional service in one's previous lives. As Lord Caitanya advised in His
Çikñäñöaka, one has to execute devotional service by humbly chanting the Hare
Kåñëa mantra, thinking oneself lower than the straw in the street and not
expecting honor for oneself but offering all kinds of honor to others. The
Näga-patnés were astonished that, although Käliya had the body of a serpent as
the result of grievous sinful activities, at the same time he was in contact with
the Lord to the extent that the Lord's lotus feet were touching his hoods.
Certainly this was not the ordinary result of pious activities. These two
contradictory facts astonished them."
TEXT 36
k(syaAnauBaAvaAe'sya na de"va ivaáhe"
tavaAx.~i„are"NAus$par"zAAiDak(Ar":
yaã"AHC$yaA ™aIlaRlanaAcar"ÔapaAe
ivah"Aya k(AmaAna, s$auicarM" Da{ta˜ataA
kasyänubhävo 'sya na deva vidmahe
taväìghri-reëu-sparaçädhikäraù
yad-väïchayä çrér lalanäcarat tapo
vihäya kämän su-ciraà dhåta-vratä
SYNONYMS
kasya—of what; anubhävaù—a result; asya—of the serpent (Käliya); na—not;
deva—my Lord; vidmahe—we know; tava—Your; aìghri—of the lotus feet;
reëu—of the dust; sparaça—for touching; adhikäraù—qualification; yat—for
which; väïchayä—with the desire; çréù—the goddess of fortune; lalanä—(the
topmost) woman; äcarat—performed; tapaù—austerity; vihäya—giving up;
kämän—all desires; su-ciram—for a long time; dhåta—upheld; vratä—her vow.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, we do not know how the serpent Käliya has attained this great
opportunity of being touched by the dust of Your lotus feet. For this end, the
goddess of fortune performed austerities for centuries, giving up all other
desires and taking austere vows.
TEXT 37
na naAk(pa{ïM" na ca s$aAvaRBaAEmaM
na paAr"maeï"YaM na r"s$aAiDapatyama,
na yaAegAis$aÜ"Ir"paunaBaRvaM vaA
vaAHC$inta yatpaAd"r"ja:‘apaªaA:
na näka-påñöhaà na ca särva-bhaumaà
na pärameñöhyaà na rasädhipatyam
na yoga-siddhér apunar-bhavaà vä
väïchanti yat-päda-rajaù-prapannäù
SYNONYMS
na—not; näka-påñöham—heaven; na ca—nor; särva-bhaumam—supreme
sovereignty; na—not; pärameñöhyam—the topmost position of Brahmä;
na—not; rasa-adhipatyam—rulership over the earth; na—not;
yoga-siddhéù—the perfections of yogic practice; apunaù-bhavam—freedom
from rebirth; vä—or; väïchanti—desire; yat—whose; päda-of the lotus feet;
rajaù—the dust; prapannäù—those who have attained.
TRANSLATION
Those who have attained the dust of Your lotus feet never hanker for the
kingship of heaven, limitless sovereignty, the position of Brahmä or rulership
over the earth. They are not interested even in the perfections of yoga or in
liberation itself.
TEXT 38
tade"Sa naATaApa äu"r"ApamanyaEs$a,
tamaAejaina: ‚(AeDavazAAe'pyah"IzA:
s$aMs$aAr"ca‚e( ”amata: zAr"Iir"NAAe
yaid"cC$ta: syaAiã"Bava: s$amaºa:
tad eña näthäpa duräpam anyais
tamo-janiù krodha-vaço 'py ahéçaù
saàsära-cakre bhramataù çarériëo
yad-icchataù syäd vibhavaù samakñaù
SYNONYMS
tat—that; eñaù—this Käliya; nätha—O Lord; äpa—has achieved;
duräpam—difficult to achieve; anyaiù—by others; tamaù-janiù—who was born
in the mode of ignorance; krodha-vaçaù—who was under the sway of anger;
api—even; ahi-éçaù—the king of serpents; saàsära-cakre—within the cycle of
material existence; bhramataù—wandering; çarériëaù—for the embodied living
entity; yat—by which (dust of Your lotus feet); icchataù—who has material
desires; syät—manifests; vibhavaù—all opulences; samakñaù—before his eyes.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, although this Käliya, the king of the serpents, has taken birth in the
mode of ignorance and is controlled by anger, he has achieved that which is
difficult for others to achieve. Embodied souls, who are full of desires and are
thus wandering in the cycle of birth and death, can have all benedictions
manifested before their eyes simply by receiving the dust of Your lotus feet.
PURPORT
It is very rare for a conditioned soul to free himself from the contamination
of illusion and thus become established in perfect consciousness of the
Absolute Truth. And yet this benediction was achieved by the serpent Käliya
because the Lord personally danced upon the serpent's hoods with His lotus
feet. Although we conditioned souls may not receive the mercy of having the
Lord dance on our head, we can receive the dust of the lotus feet of the
Absolute through the Lord's representative, the bona fide spiritual master, and
thus go back home, back to Godhead, forever freed from the misery and
ignorance of the mundane universe.
TEXT 39
namastauByaM BagAvatae
pauç&SaAya mah"Atmanae
BaUtaAvaAs$aAya BaUtaAya
par"Aya par"maAtmanae
namas tubhyaà bhagavate
puruñäya mahätmane
bhütäväsäya bhütäya
paräya paramätmane
SYNONYMS
namaù—obeisances; tubhyam—to You; bhagavate—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; puruñäya—who are present within as the Supersoul;
mahä-ätmane—who are all-pervasive; bhüta-äväsäya—who are the shelter of
the material elements (beginning with the ethereal sky); bhütäya—who exist
even prior to the creation; paräya—to the supreme cause;
parama-ätmane—who are beyond all material cause.
TRANSLATION
We offer our obeisances unto You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Although present in the hearts of all living beings as the Supersoul, You are
all-pervasive. Although the original shelter of all created material elements, You
exist prior to their creation. And although the cause of everything, You are
transcendental to all material cause and effect, being the Supreme Soul.
PURPORT
The beautiful Sanskrit poetry of this verse should be chanted out loud for
the transcendental pleasure of the reciter and the hearer.
TEXT 40
ÁaAnaivaÁaAnanaIDayae
“aöNAe'nantazAl(yae
@gAuNAAyaAivak(Ar"Aya
namastae ‘aAk{(taAya ca
jïäna-vijïäna-nédhaye
brahmaëe 'nanta-çaktaye
aguëäyävikäräya
namas te präkåtäya ca
SYNONYMS
jïäna—of consciousness; vijïäna—and spiritual potency; nidhaye—to the
ocean; brahmaëe—to the Absolute Truth; ananta-çaktaye—whose potencies
are unlimited; aguëäya—to Him who is never affected by the qualities of
matter; avikäräya—who does not undergo any material transformation;
namaù—obeisances; te—unto You; präkåtäya—to the prime mover of material
nature; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
Obeisances unto You, the Absolute Truth, who are the reservoir of all
transcendental consciousness and potency and the possessor of unlimited
energies. Although completely free of material qualities and transformations,
You are the prime mover of material nature.
PURPORT
Those who consider themselves intellectual, philosophic or rational should
carefully note here that the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, is the ocean of all knowledge and consciousness. Thus surrendering
unto the Supreme Lord does not entail giving up the method of rationally
comprehending reality. Rather, one merges into the ocean of rational, logical
comprehension. The Supreme Lord is the perfection of all sciences and all
forms of knowledge, and only envious and trivial minds would deny this
obvious fact.
TEXT 41
k(AlaAya k(AlanaABaAya
k(AlaAvayavas$aAiºaNAe
ivaìAya taäu"pa‰"í)e"
tatk(‡aeR ivaìhe"tavae
käläya käla-näbhäya
kälävayava-säkñiëe
viçväya tad-upadrañöre
tat-kartre viçva-hetave
SYNONYMS
käläya—unto time; käla-näbhäya—unto Him who is the shelter of time;
käla-avayava—of the various phases of time; säkñiëe—to the witness;
viçväya—to the form of the universe; tad-upadrañöre—to the observer of it;
tat-kartre—to the creator of it; viçva—of the universe; hetave—to the total
cause.
TRANSLATION
Obeisances unto You, who are time itself, the shelter of time and the witness
of time in all its phases. You are the universe, and also its separate observer.
You are its creator, and also the totality of all its causes.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, although appearing in different
incarnations, can never be limited by time, since He is time itself, the shelter
of time, and the witness of time in all its phases.
TEXTS 42-43
BaUtamaA‡aein‰"ya‘aANAmanaAebauÜ"
YaAzAyaAtmanae
i‡agAuNAenaAiBamaAnaena
gAUX#svaAtmaAnauBaUtayae
namaAe'nantaAya s$aUºmaAya
kU(q%sTaAya ivapaiêtae
naAnaAvaAd"Anaur"AeDaAya
vaAcyavaAcak(zAl(yae
bhüta-mätrendriya-präëamano-
buddhy-äçayätmane
tri-guëenäbhimänena
güòha-svätmänubhütaye
namo 'nantäya sükñmäya
küöa-sthäya vipaçcite
nänä-vädänurodhäya
väcya-väcaka-çaktaye
SYNONYMS
bhüta—of the physical elements; mätra—the subtle basis of perception;
indriya—the senses; präëa—the vital air of life; manaù—the mind;
buddhi—the intelligence; äçaya—and of material consciousness; ätmane—to
the ultimate soul; tri-guëena—by the three modes of material nature;
abhimänena—by false identification; güòha—who causes to become covered
over; sva—one's own; ätma—of the self; anubhütaye—perception;
namaù—obeisances; anantäya—to the unlimited Lord; sükñmäya—to the
supremely subtle; küöa-sthäya—who is fixed in the center; vipaçcite—to the
omniscient one; nänä—various; väda—philosophies; anurodhäya—who
sanctions; väcya—of expressed ideas; väcaka—and expressing words;
çaktaye—who possesses the potencies.
TRANSLATION
Obeisances unto You, who are the ultimate soul of the physical elements, of
the subtle basis of perception, of the senses, of the vital air of life, and of the
mind, intelligence and consciousness. By Your arrangement the infinitesimal
spirit souls falsely identify with the three modes of material nature, and their
perception of their own true self thus becomes clouded. We offer our obeisances
unto You, the unlimited Supreme Lord, the supremely subtle one, the
omniscient Personality of Godhead, who are always fixed in unchanging
transcendence, who sanction the opposing views of different philosophies, and
who are the power upholding expressed ideas and the words that express them.
TEXT 44
nama: ‘amaANAmaUlaAya
k(vayae zAAñyaAenayae
‘ava{ÔaAya inava{ÔaAya
inagAmaAya namaAe nama:
namaù pramäëa-müläya
kavaye çästra-yonaye
pravåttäya nivåttäya
nigamäya namo namaù
SYNONYMS
namaù—obeisances; pramäëa—of authoritative evidence; müläya—to the
basis; kavaye—to the author; çästra—of the revealed scripture; yonaye—to the
source; pravåttäya—which encourages sense gratification; nivåttäya—which
encourages renunciation; nigamäya—to Him who is the origin of both kinds of
scripture; namaù namaù—repeated obeisances.
TRANSLATION
We offer our obeisances again and again to You, who are the basis of all
authoritative evidence, who are the author and ultimate source of the revealed
scriptures, and who have manifested Yourself in those Vedic literatures
encouraging sense gratification as well as in those encouraging renunciation of
the material world.
PURPORT
If we did not have the powers of perception and cognition, evidence could
not be transmitted, and if we had no tendency to believe in particular modes
of evidence, persuasion could not take place. All of these
processes—perception, cognition, persuasion and transmission—take place
through the various potencies of the Supreme Lord. The Supreme Lord Kåñëa
is Himself the greatest scholar and intellectual being. He manifests the
transcendental scriptures within the hearts of great devotees like Brahmä and
Närada, and in addition He incarnates as Vedavyäsa, the compiler of all Vedic
knowledge. In multifarious ways the Lord generates a variety of religious
scriptures, which gradually bring the conditioned souls through the various
phases of re-entry into the kingdom of God.
TEXT 45
nama: k{(SNAAya r"AmaAya
vas$aude"vas$autaAya ca
‘aâu°aAyaAinaç&Ü"Aya
s$aAtvataAM patayae nama:
namaù kåñëäya rämäya
vasudeva-sutäya ca
pradyumnäyäniruddhäya
sätvatäà pataye namaù
SYNONYMS
namaù—obeisances; kåñëäya—to Lord Kåñëa; rämäya—to Lord Räma;
vasudeva-sutäya—the son of Vasudeva; ca—and; pradyumnäya—to Lord
Pradyumna; aniruddhäya—to Lord Aniruddha; sätvatäm—of the devotees;
pataye—to the Lord; namaù—obeisances.
TRANSLATION
We offer our obeisances to Lord Kåñëa and Lord Räma, the sons of
Vasudeva, and to Lord Pradyumna and Lord Aniruddha. We offer our
respectful obeisances unto the master of all the saintly devotees of Viñëu.
TEXT 46
namaAe gAuNA‘ad"IpaAya
gAuNAAtmacC$Ad"naAya ca
gAuNAva{ÔyaupalaºyaAya
gAuNA‰"í)e" svas$aMivade"
namo guëa-pradépäya
guëätma-cchädanäya ca
guëa-våtty-upalakñyäya
guëa-drañöre sva-saàvide
SYNONYMS
namaù—obeisances; guëa-pradépäya—to Him who manifests various qualities;
guëa—by the material modes; ätma—Himself; chädanäya—who disguises;
ca—and; guëa—of the modes; våtti—by the functioning; upalakñyäya—who
can be ascertained; guëa-drañöre—to the separate witness of the material
modes; sva—to His own devotees; saàvide—who is known.
TRANSLATION
Obeisances to You, O Lord, who manifest varieties of material and spiritual
qualities. You disguise Yourself with the material qualities, and yet the
functioning of those same material qualities ultimately reveals Your existence.
You stand apart from the material qualities as a witness and can be fully known
only by Your devotees.
PURPORT
The word guëa conveys various meanings: the three basic qualities of
material nature, i.e., goodness, passion and ignorance; excellent qualities one
manifests because of piety and spiritual achievement; or the internal senses,
such as the mind and intelligence. The word pradépäya means "unto Him who
manifests or illumines." Thus here the Näga-patnés are addressing the Supreme
Lord as "He who manifests all material and spiritual qualities and who causes
the living entities to be conscious." One can see the Lord by going beyond the
screen of material nature, and therefore He is called guëätma-cchädanäya. If
one methodically and intelligently studies the functioning of the material
qualities, he will ultimately conclude that there is a Supreme Personality of
Godhead and that He exhibits His illusory potency to bewilder those who do
not surrender unto Him.
The Lord is never affected by the modes of nature, being their witness, and
thus He is called guëa-drañöre. The word sva indicates "one's own," and thus
sva-saàvide means that Lord Kåñëa can be known only by His own people, the
devotees, and also that ultimately only the Lord can know Himself perfectly.
Therefore we should take Lord Kåñëa's instructions in Bhagavad-gétä and
immediately come to the right conclusion: full surrender to the Lord's lotus
feet. Thus we should humbly glorify the Lord, following the example of the
Näga-patnés.
TEXT 47
@vyaAk{(taivah"Ar"Aya
s$avaRvyaAk{(tais$aÜ"yae
ô$SaIke(zA namastae'stau
maunayae maAEnazAIilanae
avyäkåta-vihäräya
sarva-vyäkåta-siddhaye
håñékeça namas te 'stu
munaye mauna-çéline
SYNONYMS
avyäkåta-vihäräya—to Him whose glories are unfathomable;
sarva-vyäkåta—the creation and manifestation of all things; siddhaye—to Him
who can be understood as existent on the basis of; håñéka-éça—O motivator of
the senses; namaù—obeisances; te—unto You, astu-let there be; munaye—to
the silent; mauna-çéline—to Him who acts in silence.
TRANSLATION
O Lord Håñékeça, master of the senses, please let us offer our obeisances
unto You, whose pastimes are inconceivably glorious. Your existence can be
inferred from the necessity for a creator and revealer of all cosmic
manifestations. But although Your devotees can understand You in this way, to
the nondevotees You remain silent, absorbed in self-satisfaction.
TEXT 48
par"Avar"gAitaÁaAya
s$avaARDyaºaAya tae nama:
@ivaìAya ca ivaìAya
taÛ"í)e"'sya ca he"tavae
parävara-gati-jïäya
sarvädhyakñäya te namaù
aviçväya ca viçväya
tad-drañöre 'sya ca hetave
SYNONYMS
para-avara—of all things, both superior and inferior; gati—the destinations;
jïäya—to Him who knows; sarva—of all things; adhyakñäya—to the regulator;
te—You; namaù—our obeisances; aviçväya—to Him who is distinct from the
universe; ca—and; viçväya—in whom the illusion of material creation
manifests; tat-drañöre—to the witness of such illusion; asya—of this world;
ca—and; hetave—to the root cause.
TRANSLATION
Obeisances unto You, who know the destination of all things, superior and
inferior, and who are the presiding regulator of all that be. You are distinct from
the universal creation, and yet You are the basis upon which the illusion of
material creation evolves, and also the witness of this illusion. Indeed, You are
the root cause of the entire world.
PURPORT
The words para and avara indicate superior, subtle elements and inferior,
gross ones. The words also indicate superior personalities—devotees of the
Lord—and inferior personalities, who are unaware of the glories of God. Lord
Kåñëa knows the destiny of all superior and inferior entities, animate and
inanimate, and as the Supreme Absolute Truth He remains in His unique
position above everything, as indicated by the word sarvädhyakñäya.
TEXT 49
tvaM ÷sya janmaisTaitas$aMyamaAna, ivaBaAe
gAuNAEr"naIh"Ae'k{(tak(AlazAil(Da{k,(
taÔatsvaBaAvaAna, ‘aitabaAeDayana, s$ata:
s$amaIºayaAmaAeGaivah"Ar" wRh"s$ae
tvaà hy asya janma-sthiti-saàyamän vibho
guëair aného 'kåta-käla-çakti-dhåk
tat-tat-svabhävän pratibodhayan sataù
samékñayämogha-vihära éhase
SYNONYMS
tvam—You; hi—indeed; asya—of this universe; janma-sthiti-saàyamän—the
creation, maintenance and destruction; vibho—O almighty Lord; guëaiù—by
the modes of nature; anéhaù—although uninvolved in any material endeavor;
akåta—beginningless; käla-çakti—of the potency of time; dhåk—the holder;
tat-tat—of each of the modes; sva-bhävän—the distinctive characteristics;
pratibodhayan—awakening; sataù—which are already present in their
dormant state; samékñayä—by Your glance; amogha-vihäraù—whose playful
activities are impeccable; éhase—You act.
TRANSLATION
O almighty Lord, although You have no reason to become involved in
material activity, still You act through Your eternal potency of time to arrange
for the creation, maintenance and destruction of this universe. You do this by
awakening the distinct functions of each of the modes of nature, which before
the creation lie dormant. Simply by Your glance You perfectly execute all these
activities of cosmic control in a sporting mood.
PURPORT
Sceptics may question why the Supreme Lord has created the material
world, which is full of birth, maintenance and death. Here the Näga-patnés
point out that the Lord's pastimes are amogha, beyond any discrepancy. Çré
Kåñëa actually desires that all conditioned souls live with Him in His eternal
kingdom, but those forgetful souls who are inimical to their loving relationship
with God must go to the material world and be subjected to the conditions of
time. The fortunate conditioned souls are startled into remembrance of their
actual position as loving servants of the Lord, and from within the heart the
Lord then encourages them to come back home, back to Godhead, where time
is conspicuous by its absence and where eternal, blissful existence supersedes
the dramatic but disturbing functions of cosmic creation and annihilation.
TEXT 50
tasyaEva tae'maUstanavaiñlaAefyaAM
zAAntaA @zAAntaA ota maUX#yaAenaya:
zAAntaA: i‘ayaAstae ÷DaunaAivatauM s$ataAM
sTaAtauê tae DamaRpar"Ips$ayaeh"ta:
tasyaiva te 'müs tanavas tri-lokyäà
çäntä açäntä uta müòha-yonayaù
çäntäù priyäs te hy adhunävituà satäà
sthätuç ca te dharma-parépsayehataù
SYNONYMS
tasya—of Him; eva—indeed; te—of You; amüù—these; tanavaù—material
bodies; tri-lokyäm—throughout the three worlds; çäntäù—peaceful (in the
mode of goodness); açäntäù—not peaceful (in the mode of passion); uta—and
also; müòha-yonayaù—born in ignorant species; çäntäù—the peaceful persons
in the mode of goodness; priyäù—dear; te—to You; hi—certainly;
adhunä—now; avitum—to protect; satäm—of the saintly devotees;
sthätuù—who are present; ca—and; te—of You; dharma—their principles of
religion; parépsayä—with the desire of maintaining; éhataù—who is acting.
TRANSLATION
Therefore all material bodies throughout the three worlds—those that are
peaceful, in the mode of goodness; those that are agitated, in the mode of
passion; and those that are foolish, in the mode of ignorance—all are Your
creations. Still, those living entities whose bodies are in the mode of goodness
are especially dear to You, and it is to maintain them and protect their religious
principles that You are now present on the earth.
TEXT 51
@par"ADa: s$ak{(à"‡aAR
s$aAeX#vya: sva‘ajaAk{(ta:
ºantaumahR"is$a zAAntaAtmana,
maUX#sya tvaAmajaAnata:
aparädhaù sakåd bharträ
soòhavyaù sva-prajä-kåtaù
kñantum arhasi çäntätman
müòhasya tväm ajänataù
SYNONYMS
aparädhaù—the offense; sakåt—just once; bharträ—by the master;
soòhavyaù—should be tolerated; sva-prajä—by Your own subject;
kåtaù—committed; kñantum—to tolerate; arhasi—it is befitting for You;
çänta-ätman—O You who are always peaceful; müòhasya—of the foolish one;
tväm—You; ajänataù—who does not understand.
TRANSLATION
At least once, a master should tolerate an offense committed by his child or
subject. O supreme peaceful Soul, You should therefore forgive our foolish
husband, who did not understand who You are.
PURPORT
Because of their extreme anxiety, in this verse Käliya's wives mention the
same idea twice: that the Supreme Lord should kindly forgive their foolish
husband. The Supreme Lord is çäntätmä, the supreme peaceful Soul, and
therefore the Näga-patnés suggest it would be proper for Him to overlook, at
least this once, the great offense committed by the ignorant Käliya.
TEXT 52
@naugA{õ"ISva BagAvana,
‘aANAAMstyajaita paªagA:
ñINAAM na: s$aADauzAAecyaAnaAM
paita: ‘aANA: ‘ad"IyataAma,
anugåhëéñva bhagavan
präëäàs tyajati pannagaù
stréëäà naù sädhu-çocyänäà
patiù präëaù pradéyatäm
SYNONYMS
anugåhëéñva—please show mercy; bhagavan—O Supreme Lord; präëän—his
life airs; tyajati—is giving up; pannagaù—the serpent; stréëäm—for women;
naù—us; sädhu-çocyänäm—who are to be pitied by saintly personalities;
patiù—the husband; präëaù—life itself; pradéyatäm—should be given back.
TRANSLATION
O Supreme Lord, please be merciful. It is proper for the saintly to feel
compassion for women like us. This serpent is about to give up his life. Please
give us back our husband, who is our life and soul.
TEXT 53
ivaDaeih" tae ik(Æÿr"INAAma,
@nauïe"yaM tavaAÁayaA
yacC)$Ü"yaAnauitaï"na, vaE
maucyatae s$avaRtaAe BayaAta,
vidhehi te kiìkaréëäm
anuñöheyaà taväjïayä
yac-chraddhayänutiñöhan vai
mucyate sarvato bhayät
SYNONYMS
vidhehi—please order; te—Your; kiìkaréëäm—by the maidservants;
anuñöheyam—what should be done; tava—Your; äjïayä—by the command;
yat—which; çraddhayä—with faith; anutiñöhan—executing; vai—certainly;
mucyate—one will become freed; sarvataù—from all; bhayät—fear.
TRANSLATION
Now please tell us, Your maidservants, what we should do. Certainly anyone
who faithfully executes Your order is automatically freed from all fear.
PURPORT
The surrender of Käliya's wives was now complete, and Lord Kåñëa
immediately gave them His mercy, as described in the following verses.
TEXT 54
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
wtTaM s$a naAgApa¥aIiBar,"
BagAvaAna, s$amaiBaí]"ta:
maUicCR$taM Ba¢aizAr"s$aM
ivas$as$ajaARx.~i„aku(Ä%naE:
çré-çuka uväca
itthaà sa näga-patnébhir
bhagavän samabhiñöutaù
mürcchitaà bhagna-çirasaà
visasarjäìghri-kuööanaiù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; ittham—in this way; saù—He,
Lord Kåñëa; näga-patnébhiù—by the wives of Käliya; bhagavän—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; samabhiñöutaù—fully praised; mürcchitam—who was
unconscious; bhagna-çirasam—his heads crushed; visasarja—He let go;
aìghri-kuööanaiù—by the striking of His feet.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Thus praised by the Näga-patnés, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead released the serpent Käliya, who had fallen
unconscious, his heads battered by the striking of the Lord's lotus feet.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, Lord Kåñëa, upon
reaching His decision, immediately jumped down from Käliya's hoods and
stood before the serpent and his wives. We should remember that when Lord
Kåñëa executed these pastimes, He was just a young village boy in Våndävana.
TEXT 55
‘aitalabDaein‰"ya‘aANA:
k(Ailaya: zAnakE(hR"ir"ma,
k{(cC)$Ats$amaucC.$vas$and"Ina:
k{(SNAM ‘aAh" k{(taAÃaila:
pratilabdhendriya-präëaù
käliyaù çanakair harim
kåcchrät samucchvasan dénaù
kåñëaà präha kåtäïjaliù
SYNONYMS
pratilabdha—regaining; indriya—the function of his senses; präëaù—and his
vital force; käliyaù—Käliya; çanakaiù—gradually; harim—to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; kåcchrät—with difficulty; samucchvasan—breathing
loudly; dénaù—wretched; kåñëam—to Lord Kåñëa; präha—spoke;
kåta-aïjaliù—in humble submission.
TRANSLATION
Käliya slowly regained his vital force and sensory functions. Then, breathing
loudly and painfully, the poor serpent addressed Lord Kåñëa, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, in humble submission.
TEXT 56
k(Ailaya ovaAca
vayaM KalaA: s$ah"AetpaÔyaA
tamas$aA d"IGaRmanyava:
svaBaAvaAe äu"styajaAe naATa
laAek(AnaAM yad"s$aØ"h":
käliya uväca
vayaà khaläù sahotpattyä
tamasä dérgha-manyavaù
svabhävo dustyajo nätha
lokänäà yad asad-grahaù
SYNONYMS
käliyaù uväca—Käliya said; vayam—we; khaläù—envious; saha utpattyä—by
our very birth; tämasäù—of ignorant nature; dérgha-manyavaù—constantly
angry; svabhävaù—one's material nature; dustyajaù—is very difficult to give
up; nätha—O Lord; lokänäm—for ordinary persons; yat—because of which;
asat—of the unreal and impure; grahaù—the acceptance.
TRANSLATION
The serpent Käliya said: Our very birth as a snake has made us envious,
ignorant and constantly angry. O my Lord, it is so difficult for people to give up
their conditioned nature, by which they identify with that which is unreal.
PURPORT
Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé points out that because of his wretched condition,
Käliya was unable to compose original prayers to the Lord, and thus he
paraphrased some of the prayers offered by his wives. The word asad-graha
indicates that a conditioned soul seizes upon impermanent and impure things
such as his own body, the bodies of others, and other countless varieties of
material sense objects. The ultimate result of such material attachment is
frustration, disappointment and anguish—a fact that has now become crystal
clear to the poor serpent Käliya.
TEXT 57
tvayaA s$a{í"imadM" ivaìM
DaAtagAuRNAivas$ajaRnama,
naAnaAsvaBaAvavaIyaAE=jaAeyaAeinabaIjaAzAyaAk{(
ita
tvayä såñöam idaà viçvaà
dhätar guëa-visarjanam
nänä-svabhäva-véryaujoyoni-
béjäçayäkåti
SYNONYMS
tvayä—by You; såñöam—created; idam—this; viçvam—universe; dhätaù—O
supreme provider; guëa—of the material modes; visarjanam—the variegated
creation; nänä—various; sva-bhäva—personal natures; vérya—varieties of
sensory strength; ojaù—and physical strength; yoni—wombs; béja—seeds;
äçaya—mentalities; äkåti—and forms.
TRANSLATION
O supreme creator, it is You who generate this universe, composed of the
variegated arrangement of the material modes, and in the process You manifest
various kinds of personalities and species, varieties of sensory and physical
strength, and varieties of mothers and fathers with variegated mentalities and
forms.
PURPORT
Commenting on this verse, Çréla Madhväcärya has quoted the Närada
Puräëa as follows: "From Hiraëyagarbha, Brahmä, comes the second creation
of this universe, but the universe is primarily created by Viñëu Himself. Viñëu
is thus the primary creator, and four-headed Brahmä is merely the secondary
creator."
TEXT 58
vayaM ca ta‡a BagAvana,
s$apaAR jaAtyauç&manyava:
k(TaM tyajaAmastvanmaAyaAM
äu"styajaAM maAeih"taA: svayama,
vayaà ca tatra bhagavan
sarpä jäty-uru-manyavaù
kathaà tyajämas tvan-mäyäà
dustyajäà mohitäù svayam
SYNONYMS
vayam—we; ca—and; tatra—within that material creation; bhagavan—O
Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarpäù—serpents; jäti—by species;
uru-manyavaù—too much absorbed in anger; katham—how; tyajämaù—we
can give up; tvat-mäyäm—Your illusory potency; dustyajäm—which is
impossible to give up; mohitäù—bewildered; svayam—on our own.
TRANSLATION
O Supreme Personality of Godhead, among all the species within Your
material creation, we serpents are by nature always enraged. Being thus deluded
by Your illusory energy, which is very difficult to give up, how can we possibly
give it up on our own?
PURPORT
Käliya is here indirectly begging for the Lord's mercy, realizing that on his
own he can never become free from illusion and suffering. Only by
surrendering to the Lord and obtaining His mercy can one be released from
the painful conditions of material life.
TEXT 59
BavaAna, ih" k(Ar"NAM ta‡a
s$avaRÁaAe jagAd"Iìr":
@nauƒahM" inaƒahM" vaA
manyas$ae taiã"Daeih" na:
bhavän hi käraëaà tatra
sarva-jïo jagad-éçvaraù
anugrahaà nigrahaà vä
manyase tad vidhehi naù
SYNONYMS
bhavän—Your good self; hi—certainly; käraëam—the cause; tatra—in that
matter (the removal of illusion); sarva-jïaù—the knower of everything;
jagat-éçvaraù—the supreme controller of the universe; anugraham—favor;
nigraham—punishment; vä—or; manyase—(whatever) You consider;
tat—that; vidhehi—arrange; naù—for us.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, since You are the omniscient Lord of the universe, You are the
actual cause of freedom from illusion. Please arrange for us whatever You
consider proper, whether it be mercy or punishment.
TEXT 60
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
wtyaAk(NyaR vaca: ‘aAh"
BagAvaAna, k(AyaRmaAnauSa:
naA‡a sTaeyaM tvayaA s$apaR
s$amau"‰M" yaAih" maA icar"ma,
svaÁaAtyapatyad"Ar"AX#YaAe
gAAena{iBaBauRjyatae nad"I
çré-çuka uväca
ity äkarëya vacaù präha
bhagavän kärya-mänuñaù
nätra stheyaà tvayä sarpa
samudraà yähi mä ciram
sva-jïäty-apatya-däräòhyo
go-nåbhir bhujyate nadé
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; äkarëya—hearing;
vacaù—these words; präha—then spoke; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; kärya-mänuñaù—who was acting like a human being; na—not;
atra—here; stheyam—should remain; tvayä—you; sarpa—My dear serpent;
samudram—to the ocean; yähi—go; mä ciram—without delay; sva—your own;
jïäti—by the companions; apatya—children; dära—and wife;
äòhyaù—adequately accompanied; go—by the cows; nåbhiù—and the humans;
bhujyate—let it be enjoyed; nadé—the river Yamunä.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: After hearing Käliya's words, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who was acting the role of a human being, replied: O
serpent, you may not remain here any longer. Go back to the ocean
immediately, accompanied by your retinue of children, wives, other relatives
and friends. Let this river be enjoyed by the cows and humans.
TEXT 61
ya Wtats$aMsmare"nmatyaRs$a,
tauByaM mad"nauzAAs$anama,
k(LtaRyaªauBayaAe: s$anDyaAer,"
na yauSmaà"yamaA«auyaAta,
ya etat saàsmaren martyas
tubhyaà mad-anuçäsanam
kértayann ubhayoù sandhyor
na yuñmad bhayam äpnuyät
SYNONYMS
yaù—who; etat—this; saàsmaret—remembers; martyaù—a mortal;
tubhyam—to you; mat—My; anuçäsanam—command; kértayan—chanting;
ubhayoù—at both; sandhyoù—junctures of the day; na—not; yuñmat—from
you; bhayam—fear; äpnuyät—obtains.
TRANSLATION
If a mortal being attentively remembers My command to you—to leave
Våndävana and go to the ocean—and narrates this account at sunrise and
sunset, he will never be afraid of you.
TEXT 62
yaAe'ismana, µaAtvaA mad"A‚(Lxe"
de"vaAd"I%MstapaRyaeÀalaE:
opaAeSya maAM smar"ªacaeRta,
s$avaRpaApaE: ‘amaucyatae
yo 'smin snätvä mad-äkréòe
devädéàs tarpayej jalaiù
upoñya mäà smarann arcet
sarva-päpaiù pramucyate
SYNONYMS
yaù—who; asmin—in this (Käliya's lake in the Yamunä River);
snätvä—bathing; mat-äkréòe—the place of My pastime; deva-ädén—the
demigods and other worshipable personalities; tarpayet—gratifies; jalaiù—with
the water (of that lake); upoñya—observing a fast; mäm—Me;
smaran—remembering; arcet—performs worship; sarva-päpaiù—from all
sinful reactions; pramucyate—he becomes freed.
TRANSLATION
If one bathes in this place of My pastimes and offers the water of this lake to
the demigods and other worshipable personalities, or if one observes a fast and
duly worships and remembers Me, he is sure to become free from all sinful
reactions.
PURPORT
According to the äcäryas, the Lord spoke this verse to make it clear to
Käliya that he could by no means remain in the Yamunä lake. Although the
Lord had mercifully pardoned the serpent and ordered him to go to the ocean
with all his associates, Käliya should not even consider requesting to remain in
the lake, because it was now to become a holy place for spiritual pilgrims.
TEXT 63
ã"IpaM r"maNAkM( ih"tvaA
oe"d"maetamaupaAi™ata:
yaà"yaAts$a s$aupaNARstvaAM
naAâAnmatpaAd"laAiHC$tama,
dvépaà ramaëakaà hitvä
hradam etam upäçritaù
yad-bhayät sa suparëas tväà
nädyän mat-päda-läïchitam
SYNONYMS
dvépam—the great island; ramaëakam—named Ramaëaka;
hitvä—abandoning; hradam—the small lake; etam—this; upäçritaù—taken
shelter of; yat—of whom; bhayät—because of the fear; saù—that;
suparëaù—Garuòa; tväm—you; na adyät—will not eat; mat-päda—with My
feet; läïchitam—marked.
TRANSLATION
Out of fear of Garuòa, you left Ramaëaka Island and came to take shelter of
this lake. But because you are now marked with My footprints, Garuòa will no
longer try to eat you.
TEXT 64
™aI[%iSaç&vaAca
maul(Ae BagAvataA r"Ajana,
k{(SNAenaAàu"tak(maRNAA
taM paUjayaAmaAs$a maud"A
naAgApatnyaê s$aAd"r"ma,
çré-åñir uväca
mukto bhagavatä räjan
kåñëenädbhuta-karmaëä
taà püjayäm äsa mudä
näga-patnyaç ca sädaram
SYNONYMS
çré-åñiù uväca—the sage (Çukadeva) said; muktaù—freed; bhagavatä—by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; räjan—O King Parékñit; kåñëena—by Lord
Kåñëa; adbhuta-karmaëä—whose activities are very wonderful; tam—Him;
püjayäm äsa—worshiped; mudä—with pleasure; näga—of the serpent;
patnyaù—the wives; ca—and; sa-ädaram—with reverence.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: My dear King, having been released by Lord
Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose activities are wonderful,
Käliya joined his wives in worshiping Him with great joy and reverence.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura comments as follows on this verse:
"The word adbhuta-karmaëä indicates the Lord's wonderful activities of saving
the residents of Våndävana from Käliya, saving Käliya himself from Garuòa,
and bestowing grace upon both the victims of violence and the committer of
that violence." The word kåñëena, "by Kåñëa," indicates that because Käliya's
wives were great devotees of the Lord and offered Him loving affection, Kåñëa
withdrew (karñaëam) both Käliya's offense against the Lord's devotee Garuòa
and that against the residents of Våndävana, who were very dear to Him.
TEXTS 65-67
id"vyaAmbar"›ax.~maiNAiBa:
par"ADyaE=r"ipa BaUSaNAE:
id"vyagAnDaAnaulaepaEê
mah"tyaAetpalamaAlayaA
paUjaiyatvaA jagAªaATaM
‘as$aAâ gAç&x"Dvajama,
tata: ‘aItaAe'ByanauÁaAta:
pair"‚(myaAiBavanâ tama,
s$ak(la‡as$auô$tpau‡aAe
ã"IpamabDaejaRgAAma h"
tadE"va s$aAma{tajalaA
yamaunaA inaivaRSaABavata,
@nauƒah"Aà"gAvata:
‚(Lx"AmaAnauSaè&ipaNA:
divyämbara-sraì-maëibhiù
parärdhyair api bhüñaëaiù
divya-gandhänulepaiç ca
mahatyotpala-mälayä
püjayitvä jagan-näthaà
prasädya garuòa-dhvajam
tataù préto 'bhyanujïätaù
parikramyäbhivandya tam
sa-kalatra-suhåt-putro
dvépam abdher jagäma ha
tadaiva sämåta-jalä
yamunä nirviñäbhavat
anugrahäd bhagavataù
kréòä-mänuña-rüpiëaù
SYNONYMS
divya—divine; ambara—with clothing; srak—garlands; maëibhiù—and jewels;
para-ardhyaiù—most valuable; api—also; bhüñaëaiù—ornaments;
divya—divine; gandha—with scents; anulepaiù—and ointments; ca—as well;
mahatyä—fine; utpala—of lotuses; mälayä—with a garland;
püjayitvä—worshiping; jagat-nätham—the Lord of the universe;
prasädya—satisfying; garuòa-dhvajam—Him whose flag is marked with the
emblem of Garuòa; tataù—then; prétaù—feeling happy; abhyanujïätaù—given
permission to leave; parikramya—circumambulating; abhivandya—offering
obeisances; tam—to Him; sa—along with; kalatra—his wives; suhåt—friends;
putraù—and children; dvépam—to the island; abdheù—in the sea; jagäma—he
went; ha—indeed; tadä eva—at that very moment; sa-amåta—nectarean;
jalä—her water; yamunä—the river Yamunä; nirviñä—free from poison;
abhavat—she became; anugrahät—by the mercy; bhagavataù—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; kréòä—for pleasure pastimes; mänuña—humanlike;
rüpiëaù—manifesting a form.
TRANSLATION
Käliya worshiped the Lord of the universe by offering Him fine garments,
along with necklaces, jewels and other valuable ornaments, wonderful scents
and ointments, and a large garland of lotus flowers. Having thus pleased the
Lord, whose flag is marked with the emblem of Garuòa, Käliya felt satisfied.
Receiving the Lord's permission to leave, Käliya circumambulated Him and
offered Him obeisances. Then, taking his wives, friends and children, he went
to his island in the sea. The very moment Käliya left, the Yamunä was
immediately restored to her original condition, free from poison and full of
nectarean water. This happened by the mercy of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who was manifesting a humanlike form to enjoy His pastimes.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has commented extensively on this
verse. To explain the word maëibhiù—"(Käliya worshiped the Lord) with
jewels"—the äcärya has quoted from the Çré Rädhä-kåñëa-gaëoddeça-dépikä, by
Rüpa Gosvämé, as follows:
kaustubhäkhyo maëir yena
praviçya hradam auragam
käliya-preyasi-våndahastair
ätmopahäritaù
"The Lord had made His Kaustubha gem enter the serpent's lake, and then He
arranged for it to be presented to Himself by the hands of Käliya's wives." In
other words, because Lord Kåñëa wanted to act just like an ordinary human
being, He made the transcendental Kaustubha gem invisible and caused it to
enter within Käliya's treasury. Then when the appropriate moment came for
Käliya to worship the Lord with many different jewels and ornaments, the
serpent's wives, unaware of the Lord's transcendental trick, presented Him
with the Kaustubha gem, thinking it was simply one of the jewels in their
possession.
The äcärya has further commented that the reason Lord Kåñëa is described
in this verse as garuòa-dhvaja, "He whose flag is marked by the symbol of His
carrier, Garuòa," is that Käliya also desired to become Lord Kåñëa's carrier.
Garuòa and the serpents are originally related as brothers, and therefore
Käliya wanted to indicate to Lord Kåñëa, "If You ever have to go to a distant
place, You should also think of me as Your personal carrier. I am the servant of
Your servant, and in the wink of an eye I can travel hundreds of millions of
yojanas." Thus the Puräëas narrate that in the course of Lord Kåñëa's eternal
cycle of pastimes, when Kaàsa orders the Lord to come to Mathurä, He
sometimes goes there mounted upon Käliya.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Tenth Canto, Sixteenth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Kåñëa Chastises the Serpent Käliya."
17. The History of Käliya
This chapter describes how Käliya left the island of the snakes and how the
sleeping residents of Våndävana were saved from a forest fire.
When King Parékñit inquired about Käliya's leaving Ramaëaka Island, the
abode of the serpents, and about why Garuòa acted inimically toward him, Çré
Çukadeva Gosvämé replied as follows: All the serpents on the island were
afraid of being devoured by Garuòa. To placate him, every month they would
leave various offerings for him at the foot of a banyan tree. But Käliya,
puffed-up as he was with false pride, would eat these offerings himself. Hearing
of this, Garuòa became furious and went to kill Käliya, whereupon the snake
began biting the great bird. Garuòa fiercely beat him with his wing, sending
Käliya fleeing for his life to a lake adjoining the Yamunä River.
Prior to the above incident, Garuòa had once come to the Yamunä and
started eating some fish. Saubhari Åñi had tried to stop him, but Garuòa,
agitated by hunger, had refused to heed the sage's prohibitions, and in response
the sage had cursed Garuòa that if he ever came there again he would
immediately die. Käliya had heard of this, and thus he lived there without fear.
In the end, however, he was driven out by Çré Kåñëa.
When Lord Balaräma and all the residents of Våndävana saw Çré Kåñëa rise
up out of the lake, beautifully decorated with many different gems and
ornaments, they embraced Him in great pleasure. The spiritual masters, priests
and learned brähmaëas then told Nanda Mahäräja, the king of the cowherds,
that although his son had been caught in the grips of Käliya, it was by the
king's good fortune that He was now free again.
Because the people of Våndävana were quite worn out by hunger, thirst and
fatigue, they spent that night on the banks of the Yamunä. In the middle of
the night, a fire happened to blaze up within the forest, which had become dry
during the hot season. As the fire surrounded the sleeping inhabitants of
Våndävana, they suddenly awoke and rushed to Çré Kåñëa for protection. Then
the unlimitedly powerful Lord Çré Kåñëa, seeing His dear relatives and friends
so distressed, immediately swallowed up the terrible forest fire.
TEXT 1
™aIr"AjaAevaAca
naAgAAlayaM r"maNAkM(
k(TaM tatyaAja k(Ailaya:
k{(taM ikM( vaA s$aupaNARsya
taenaEke(naAs$amaÃas$ama,
çré-räjoväca
nägälayaà ramaëakaà
kathaà tatyäja käliyaù
kåtaà kià vä suparëasya
tenaikenäsamaïjasam
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—the King said; näga—of the serpents; älayam—the residence;
ramaëakam—the island named Ramaëaka; katham—why; tatyäja—gave up;
käliyaù—Käliya; kåtam—was made; kim vä—and why; suparëasya—of Garuòa;
tena—with him, Käliya; ekena—alone; asamaïjasam—enmity.
TRANSLATION
[Having thus heard how Lord Kåñëa chastised Käliya,] King Parékñit
inquired: Why did Käliya leave Ramaëaka Island, the abode of the serpents,
and why did Garuòa become so antagonistic toward him alone?
TEXTS 2-3
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
opah"AyaE=: s$apaRjanaEr,"
maAis$a maAs$aIh" yaAe baila:
vaAnas$patyaAe mah"AbaAh"Ae
naAgAAnaAM ‘aAx.~inaè&ipata:
svaM svaM BaAgAM ‘ayacC$inta
naAgAA: pavaRiNA pavaRiNA
gAAepaITaAyaAtmana: s$avaeR
s$aupaNAARya mah"Atmanae
çré-çuka uväca
upahäryaiù sarpa-janair
mäsi mäséha yo baliù
vänaspatyo mahä-bäho
nägänäà präì-nirüpitaù
svaà svaà bhägaà prayacchanti
nägäù parvaëi parvaëi
gopéthäyätmanaù sarve
suparëäya mahätmane
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; upahäryaiù—who were qualified to
make offerings; sarpa-janaiù—by the serpent race; mäsi mäsi—each month;
iha—here (in Nägälaya); yaù—which; baliù—offering of tribute;
vänaspatyaù—at the base of a tree; mahä-bäho—O mighty-armed Parékñit;
nägänäm—for the serpents; präk—previously; nirüpitaù—ordained; svam
svam—each his own; bhägam—portion; prayacchanti—they present;
nägäù—the serpents; parvaëi parvaëi—once each month; gopéthäya—for the
protection; ätmanaù—of themselves; sarve—all of them; suparëäya—to
Garuòa; mahä-ätmane—the powerful .
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: To avoid being eaten by Garuòa, the serpents had
previously made an arrangement with him whereby they would each make a
monthly offering of tribute at the base of a tree. Thus every month on schedule,
O mighty-armed King Parékñit, each serpent would duly make his offering to
that powerful carrier of Viñëu as a purchase of protection.
PURPORT
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé has given an alternate explanation of this verse.
Upahäryaiù may also be translated as "by those who are to be eaten," and
sarpa-janaiù as "those human beings who were dominated by or who belonged
to the serpent race." According to this reading, a group of human beings had
fallen under the control of the serpents and were prone to be eaten by them.
To avoid this, the human beings would make a monthly offering to the
serpents, who in turn would offer a portion of that offering to Garuòa so that
he would not eat them. The particular translation given above is based on the
commentary of Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé and the translation by Çréla
Prabhupäda in his Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In any case, all
the äcäryas agree that the serpents purchased protection from Garuòa.
TEXT 4
ivaSavaIyaRmad"Aivaí":
k(A‰"vaeyastau k(Ailaya:
k(d"TaI=k{(tya gAç&xM"
svayaM taM bauBaujae bailama,
viña-vérya-madäviñöaù
kädraveyas tu käliyaù
kadarthé-kåtya garuòaà
svayaà taà bubhuje balim
SYNONYMS
viña—because of his poison; vérya—and his strength; mada—in intoxication;
äviñöaù—absorbed; kädraveyaù—the son of Kadru; tu—on the other hand;
käliyaù—Käliya; kadarthé-kåtya—disregarding; garuòam—Garuòa;
svayam—himself; tam—that; bubhuje—ate; balim—the offering.
TRANSLATION
Although all the other serpents were dutifully making offerings to Garuòa,
one serpent—the arrogant Käliya, son of Kadru—would eat all these offerings
before Garuòa could claim them. Thus Käliya directly defied the carrier of Lord
Viñëu.
TEXT 5
tacC_$tvaA ku(ipataAe r"Ajana,
BagAvaAna, BagAvait‘aya:
ivaijaGaAMs$aumaRh"AvaegA:
k(AilayaM s$amapaA‰"vata,
tac chrutvä kupito räjan
bhagavän bhagavat-priyaù
vijighäàsur mahä-vegaù
käliyaà samapädravat
SYNONYMS
tat—that; çrutvä—hearing; kupitaù—angered; räjan—O King; bhagavän—the
powerful Garuòa; bhagavat-priyaù—the dear devotee of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; vijighäàsuù—desiring to kill; mahä-vegaù—the
greatly swift; käliyam—to Käliya; samupädravat—he rushed.
TRANSLATION
O King, the greatly powerful Garuòa, who is very dear to the Supreme Lord,
became angry when he heard of this. Desiring to kill Käliya, he rushed toward
the serpent with tremendous speed.
PURPORT
Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé explains that the word mahä-vega indicates that
the great speed of Garuòa cannot be checked by anyone.
TEXT 6
tamaApatantaM tar"s$aA ivaSaAyauDa:
‘atyaByayaAäu"itTatanaEk(mastak(:
d"ià": s$aupaNA< vyad"zAÚ"d"AyauDa:
k(r"Alaijaoe"AecC.$vais$ataAeƒalaAecana:
tam äpatantaà tarasä viñäyudhaù
pratyabhyayäd utthita-naika-mastakaù
dadbhiù suparëaà vyadaçad dad-äyudhaù
karäla-jihrocchvasitogra-locanaù
SYNONYMS
tam—him, Garuòa; äpatantam—attacking; tarasä—swiftly; viña—of poison;
äyudhaù—who possessed the weapon; prati—towards; abhyayät—ran;
utthita—raised; na eka—many; mastakaù—his heads; dadbhiù—with his fangs;
suparëam—Garuòa; vyadaçat—he bit; dat-äyudhaù—whose fangs were
weapons; karäla—fearsome; jihvä—his tongues; ucchvasita—expanded;
ugra—and terrible; locanaù—his eyes.
TRANSLATION
As Garuòa swiftly fell upon him, Käliya, who had the weapon of poison,
raised his numerous heads to counterattack. Showing his ferocious tongues and
expanding his horrible eyes, Käliya then bit Garuòa with the weapons of his
fangs.
PURPORT
The äcäryas explain that Käliya used his weapon of poison at a distance by
spitting venom upon his enemy and at short range by biting him with his
terrible fangs.
TEXT 7
taM taAºyaRpau‡a: s$a inar"sya manyaumaAna,
‘acaNx"vaegAAe maDaus$aUd"naAs$ana:
paºaeNA s$avyaena ih"r"Nyar"AeicaSaA
jaGaAna k(åu"s$autamauƒaiva‚(ma:
taà tärkñya-putraù sa nirasya manyumän
pracaëòa-vego madhusüdanäsanaù
pakñeëa savyena hiraëya-rociñä
jaghäna kadru-sutam ugra-vikramaù
SYNONYMS
tam—him, Käliya; tärkñya-putraù—the son of Kaçyapa; saù—he, Garuòa;
nirasya—warding off; manyu-män—full of anger; pracaëòa-vegaù—moving
with terrible swiftness; madhusüdana-äsanaù—the carrier of Lord
Madhusüdana, Kåñëa; pakñeëa—with his wing; savyena—left; hiraëya—like
gold; rociñä—the effulgence of which; jaghäna—he struck; kadru-sutam—the
son of Kadru (Käliya); ugra—mighty; vikramaù—his prowess.
TRANSLATION
The angry son of Tärkñya moved with overwhelming speed in repelling
Käliya's attack. That terribly powerful carrier of Lord Madhusüdana struck the
son of Kadru with his left wing, which shone like gold.
TEXT 8
s$aupaNARpaºaAiBah"ta:
k(AilayaAe'taIva ivaù"la:
oe"dM" ivavaezA k(AilanâAs$a,
tad"gAmyaM äu"r"As$ad"ma,
suparëa-pakñäbhihataù
käliyo 'téva vihvalaù
hradaà viveça kälindyäs
tad-agamyaà duräsadam
SYNONYMS
suparëa—of Garuòa; pakña—by the wing; abhihataù—beaten;
käliyaù—Käliya; atéva—extremely; vihvalaù—distraught; hradam—a lake;
viveça—he entered; kälindyäù—of the river Yamunä;
tat-agamyam—unapproachable by Garuòa; duräsadam—difficult to enter.
TRANSLATION
Beaten by Garuòa's wing, Käliya was extremely distraught, and thus he took
shelter of a lake adjoining the river Yamunä. Garuòa could not enter this lake.
Indeed, he could not even approach it.
TEXT 9
ta‡aEk(d"A jalacarM"
gAç&x"Ae BaºyamaIips$atama,
inavaAir"ta: s$aAEBair"NAA
‘as$a÷ ºauiDataAe'h"r"ta,
tatraikadä jala-caraà
garuòo bhakñyam épsitam
niväritaù saubhariëä
prasahya kñudhito 'harat
SYNONYMS
tatra—there (in that lake); ekadä—once; jala-caram—an aquatic creature;
garuòaù—Garuòa; bhakñyam—his proper food; épsitam—desired;
niväritaù—forbidden; saubhariëä—by Saubhari Muni; prasahya—taking
courage; kñudhitaù—feeling hunger; aharat—he took.
TRANSLATION
In that very lake Garuòa had once desired to eat a fish-fish being, after all,
his normal food. Although forbidden by the sage Saubhari, who was meditating
there within the water, Garuòa took courage and, feeling hungry, seized the
fish.
PURPORT
Çukadeva Gosvämé is now explaining why Garuòa could not approach the
lake in the Yamunä River. It is the nature of birds to eat fish, and thus, by the
arrangement of the Lord, the great bird Garuòa does not commit any offense
by nourishing himself with fish. On the other hand, Saubhari Muni's
forbidding a much greater personality to eat his normal food did constitute an
offense. According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, Saubhari
committed two offenses: first, he dared to give an order to a supremely exalted
soul like Garuòa, and second, he obstructed Garuòa from satisfying his desire.
TEXT 10
maInaAna, s$auäu":iKataAnä{"î"A
d"InaAnmaInapataAE h"tae
k{(payaA s$aAEBair": ‘aAh"
ta‡atyaºaemamaAcar"na,
ménän su-duùkhitän dåñövä
dénän ména-patau hate
kåpayä saubhariù präha
tatratya-kñemam äcaran
SYNONYMS
ménän—the fish; su-duùkhitän—most unhappy; dåñövä—seeing;
dénän—wretched; ména-patau—the lord of the fish; hate—being killed;
kåpayä—out of compassion; saubhariù—Saubhari; präha—spoke; tatratya—for
those living there; kñemam—the welfare; äcaran—trying to enact .
TRANSLATION
Seeing how the unfortunate fish in that lake had become most unhappy at
the death of their leader, Saubhari uttered the following curse under the
impression that he was mercifully acting for the benefit of the lake's residents.
PURPORT
In this regard Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains that when our
so-called compassion does not tally with the order of the Supreme Lord, it
merely causes a disturbance. Because Saubhari had forbidden Garuòa's coming
to that lake, Käliya moved in and made his headquarters there, and this spelled
doom for all the lake's residents.
TEXT 11
@‡a ‘aivazya gAç&x"Ae
yaid" matsyaAna, s$a KaAd"ita
s$aâ: ‘aANAEivaRyaujyaeta
s$atyamaetaä," “avaImyah"ma,
atra praviçya garuòo
yadi matsyän sa khädati
sadyaù präëair viyujyeta
satyam etad bravémy aham
SYNONYMS
atra—in this lake; praviçya—entering; garuòaù—Garuòa; yadi—if;
matsyän—the fish; saù—he; khädati—eats; sadyaù—immediately; präëaiù—of
his force of life; viyujyeta—will become deprived; satyam—truthfully;
etat—this; bravémi—am speaking; aham—I.
TRANSLATION
If Garuòa ever again enters this lake and eats the fish here, he will
immediately lose his life. What I am saying is the truth.
PURPORT
The äcäryas explain in this regard that because of Saubhari Muni's material
attachment and affection for a fish, he failed to see the situation from the
spiritual viewpoint. The Ninth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam describes his
falldown for this offense. Because of false pride, Saubhari Muni lost his power
of austerity, and with it his spiritual beauty and happiness. When Garuòa came
to the Yamunä, Saubhari Muni thought, "Although he may be a personal
associate of the Supreme Lord, I will still curse him and even kill him if he
disobeys my order." Such an offensive attitude against an exalted Vaiñëava will
certainly destroy one's auspicious position in life.
As the Ninth Canto describes, Saubhari Muni married many beautiful
women, and suffered greatly in their association. But because he had once
become glorious by taking shelter of the Yamunä River in Çré Våndävana, he
was ultimately delivered.
TEXT 12
tatk(Ailaya: parM" vaed"
naAnya: k(êna laeilah":
@vaAts$aIÕ"ç&x"Aà"Ita:
k{(SNAena ca ivavaAis$ata:
tat käliyaù paraà veda
nänyaù kaçcana lelihaù
avätséd garuòäd bhétaù
kåñëena ca viväsitaù
SYNONYMS
tam—that; käliyaù—Käliya; param—only; veda—knew; na—not;
anyaù—other; kaçcana—any; lelihaù—serpent; avätsét—he dwelt; garuòät—of
Garuòa; bhétaù—afraid; kåñëena—by Kåñëa; ca—and; viväsitaù—expelled.
TRANSLATION
Of all the serpents, only Käliya came to know of this affair, and in fear of
Garuòa he took up residence in that Yamunä lake. Later Lord Kåñëa drove him
out.
TEXTS 13-14
k{(SNAM oe"d"Aiã"inaS‚(AntaM
id"vya›aggAnDavaAs$as$ama,
mah"AmaiNAgANAAk(LNA<
jaAmbaUnad"pair"Sk{(tama,
opalaByaAeitTataA: s$avaeR
labDa‘aANAA wvaAs$ava:
‘amaAed"inaBa{taAtmaAnaAe
gAAepaA: ‘aItyaAiBare"iBare"
kåñëaà hradäd viniñkräntaà
divya-srag-gandha-väsasam
mahä-maëi-gaëäkérëaà
jämbünada-pariñkåtam
upalabhyotthitäù sarve
labdha-präëä iväsavaù
pramoda-nibhåtätmäno
gopäù prétyäbhirebhire
SYNONYMS
kåñëam—Lord Kåñëa; hradät—from out of the lake; viniñkräntam—rising up;
divya—divine; srak—wearing garlands; gandha—fragrances; väsasam—and
garments; mahä-maëi-gaëa—by many fine jewels; äkérëam—covered;
jämbünada—with gold; pariñkåtam—decorated; upalabhya—seeing;
utthitäù—rising up; sarve—all of them; labdha-präëäù—which have regained
their vital force; iva—just as; asavaù—senses; pramoda—with joy;
nibhåta-ätmänaù—being filled; gopäù—the cowherds; prétyä—with affection;
abhirebhire—embraced Him.
TRANSLATION
[Resuming his description of Kåñëa's chastisement of Käliya, Çukadeva
Gosvämé continued:] Kåñëa rose up out of the lake wearing divine garlands,
fragrances and garments, covered with many fine jewels, and decorated with
gold. When the cowherds saw Him they all stood up immediately, just like an
unconscious person's senses coming back to life. Filled with great joy, they
affectionately embraced Him.
TEXT 15
yazAAed"A r"Aeih"NAI nand"Ae
gAAepyaAe gAAepaAê k(AEr"va
k{(SNAM s$amaetya labDaeh"A
@As$ana, zAuSk(A nagAA @ipa
yaçodä rohiëé nando
gopyo gopäç ca kaurava
kåñëaà sametya labdhehä
äsan çuñkä nagä api
SYNONYMS
yaçodä rohiëé nandaù—Yaçodä, Rohiëé and Nanda Mahäräja; gopyaù—the
cowherd ladies; gopäù—the cowherd men; ca—and; kaurava—O Parékñit,
descendant of Kuru; kåñëam—Lord Kåñëa; sametya—meeting; labdha—having
regained; éhäù—their conscious functions; äsan—they became; çuñkäù—dried
up; nagäù—the trees; api—even.
TRANSLATION
Having regained their vital functions, Yaçodä, Rohiëé, Nanda and all the
other cowherd women and men went up to Kåñëa. O descendant of Kuru, even
the dried-up trees came back to life.
TEXT 16
r"AmaêAcyautamaAilaËÿYa
jah"As$aAsyaAnauBaAvaivata,
‘aemNAA tamaÆÿmaAr"Aepya
pauna: paunaç&dE"ºata
gAAvaAe va{SaA vats$atayaAeR
laeiBare" par"maAM maud"ma,
rämaç cäcyutam äliìgya
jahäsäsyänubhäva-vit
premëä tam aìkam äropya
punaù punar udaikñata
gävo våñä vatsataryo
lebhire paramäà mudam
SYNONYMS
rämaù—Lord Balaräma; ca—and; acyutam—Kåñëa, the infallible Supreme
Personality of Godhead; äliìgya—embracing, jahäsa-laughed; asya—His;
anubhäva-vit—knowing well the omnipotence; premëä—out of love;
tam—Him; aìkam—up on His own lap; äropya—raising; punaù punaù—again
and again; udaikñata—looked upon; gävaù—the cows; våñäù—the bulls;
vatsataryaù—the female calves; lebhire—they attained; paramäm—supreme;
mudam—pleasure.
TRANSLATION
Lord Balaräma embraced His infallible brother and laughed, knowing well
the extent of Kåñëa's potency. Out of great feelings of love, Balaräma lifted
Kåñëa up on His lap and repeatedly looked at Him. The cows, bulls and young
female calves also achieved the highest pleasure.
TEXT 17
nandM" iva‘aA: s$amaAgAtya
gAur"va: s$ak(la‡ak(A:
Ocaustae k(AilayaƒastaAe
id"í"YaA maul(stavaAtmaja:
nandaà vipräù samägatya
guravaù sa-kalatrakäù
ücus te käliya-grasto
diñöyä muktas tavätmajaù
SYNONYMS
nandam—to Nanda Mahäräja; vipräù—the brähmaëas; samägatya—coming
up; guravaù—respectable personalities; sa-kalatrakäù—along with their wives;
ücuù—said; te—they; käliya-grastaù—seized by Käliya; diñöyä—by Providence;
muktaù—freed; tava—your; ätma-jaù—son.
TRANSLATION
All the respectable brähmaëas, together with their wives, came forward to
greet Nanda Mahäräja. They said to him, "Your son was in the grips of Käliya,
but by the grace of Providence He is now free."
TEXT 18
de"ih" d"AnaM iã"jaAtaInaAM
k{(SNAinamauRil(he"tavae
nand": ‘aItamanaA r"Ajana,
gAA: s$auvaNA< tad"Aid"zAta,
dehi dänaà dvi-jäténäà
kåñëa-nirmukti-hetave
nandaù préta-manä räjan
gäù suvarëaà tadädiçat
SYNONYMS
dehi—you should give; dänam—charity; dvi-jäténäm—to the brähmaëas;
kåñëa-nirmukti—the safety of Kåñëa; hetave—for the purpose of;
nandaù—Nanda Mahäräja; préta-manäù—satisfied within his mind; räjan—O
King Parékñit; gäù—cows; suvarëam—gold; tadä—then; ädiçat—gave.
TRANSLATION
The brähmaëas then advised Nanda Mahäräja, "To assure that your son
Kåñëa will always be free from danger, you should give charity to the
brähmaëas." With a satisfied mind, O King, Nanda Mahäräja then very gladly
gave them gifts of cows and gold.
TEXT 19
yazAAed"Aipa mah"ABaAgAA
naí"labDa‘ajaA s$ataI
pair"SvajyaAÆÿmaAr"Aepya
maumaAecaA™auk(laAM mauò":
yaçodäpi mahä-bhägä
nañöa-labdha-prajä saté
pariñvajyäìkam äropya
mumocäçru-kaläà muhuù
SYNONYMS
yaçodä—mother Yaçodä; api—and; mahä-bhägä—the greatly fortunate;
nañöa—having lost; labdha—and regained; prajä—her son; saté—the chaste
lady; pariñvajya—embracing; aìkam—upon her lap); äropya—raising;
mumoca—she released; açru—of tears; kaläm—a torrent; muhuù—repeatedly.
TRANSLATION
The greatly fortunate mother Yaçodä, having lost her son and then regained
Him, placed Him on her lap. That chaste lady cried constant torrents of tears as
she repeatedly embraced Him.
TEXT 20
taAM r"Ai‡aM ta‡a r"Ajaen‰"
ºauÔa{Ñ"YaAM ™amak(iSaRtaA:
OSau˜aRyaAEk(s$aAe gAAva:
k(AilanâA opakU(lata:
täà rätrià tatra räjendra
kñut-tåòbhyäà çrama-karñitäù
üñur vrayaukaso gävaù
kälindyä upakülataù
SYNONYMS
täm—that; rätrim—night; tatra—there; räja-indra—O most exalted of kings;
kñut-tåòbhyäm-by hunger and thirst; çrama—and by fatigue;
karñitäù—weakened; üñuù—they remained; vraja-okasaù—the people of
Våndävana; gävaù—and the cows; kälindyäù—of the Yamunä;
upakülataù—near the shore.
TRANSLATION
O best of kings [Parékñit], because the residents of Våndävana were feeling
very weak from hunger, thirst and fatigue, they and the cows spent the night
where they were, lying down near the bank of the Kälindé.
PURPORT
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé points out that although the people were weak from
hunger and thirst, they did not drink the milk from the cows present there
because they feared it had been contaminated by the serpent's poison. The
residents of Våndävana were so overjoyed to get back their beloved Kåñëa that
they did not want to go back to their houses. They wanted to stay with Kåñëa
on the bank of the Yamunä so that they could continuously see Him. Thus
they decided to take rest near the riverbank.
TEXT 21
tad"A zAuicavanaAeàU"taAe
d"AvaAi¢a: s$avaRtaAe ˜ajama,
s$auæaM inazAITa @Ava{tya
‘ad"gDaumaupaca‚(mae
tadä çuci-vanodbhüto
dävägniù sarvato vrajam
suptaà niçétha ävåtya
pradagdhum upacakrame
SYNONYMS
tadä—then; çuci—of the summer; vana—in the forest; udbhütaù—arising;
däva-agniù—a conflagration; sarvataù—on all sides; vrajam—the people of
Våndävana; suptam—sleeping; niçéthe—in the middle of the night;
ävåtya—surrounding; pradagdhum—to burn; upacakrame—began.
TRANSLATION
During the night, while all the people of Våndävana were asleep, a great fire
blazed up within the dry summer forest. The fire surrounded the inhabitants of
Vraja on all sides and began to scorch them.
PURPORT
Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé and Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura have
commented that perhaps a loyal friend of Käliya had assumed the form of a
forest fire to avenge his friend, or perhaps the forest fire was manifest by a
demon who was a follower of Kaàsa's.
TEXT 22
tata otTaAya s$am”aAntaA
d"÷maAnaA ˜ajaAEk(s$a:
k{(SNAM yayaustae zAr"NAM
maAyaAmanaujamaIìr"ma,
tata utthäya sambhräntä
dahyamänä vrajaukasaù
kåñëaà yayus te çaraëaà
mäyä-manujam éçvaram
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; utthäya—waking up; sambhräntäù—agitated;
dahyamänäù—about to be burned; vraja-okasaù—the people of Vraja;
kåñëam—to Kåñëa; yayuù—went; te—they; çaraëam—for shelter; mäyä—by
His potency; manujam—appearing like a human being; éçvaram—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Then the residents of Våndävana woke up, extremely disturbed by the great
fire threatening to burn them. Thus they took shelter of Kåñëa, the Supreme
Lord, who by His spiritual potency appeared like an ordinary human being.
PURPORT
The çruti, or Vedic mantras, state, svarüpa-bhütayä nitya-çaktyä
mäyäkhyayä: "The Lord's eternal potency named mäyä is innate in His original
form." Thus within the eternal spiritual body of the Supreme Lord there is
infinite potency, which effortlessly manipulates all existence according to the
omniscient desire of the Absolute Truth. The residents of Våndävana took
shelter of Kåñëa, thinking, "This blessed boy will certainly be empowered by
God to save us." They remembered the words of the sage Garga Muni, spoken
at the birth ceremony of Lord Kåñëa: anena sarva-durgäëi yüyam aïjas
tariñyatha. "By His power you will easily be able to cross over all obstacles." (SB
10.8.16) Therefore the residents of Våndävana, who had full faith in Kåñëa,
took shelter of the Lord in hopes of being saved from the impending disaster
threatened by the forest fire.
TEXT 23
k{(SNA k{(SNA mah"ABagA
he" r"AmaAimataiva‚(ma
WSa GaAer"tamaAe vai¶"s$a,
taAvak(Ana, ƒas$atae ih" na:
kåñëa kåñëa mahä-bhaga
he rämämita-vikrama
eña ghoratamo vahnis
tävakän grasate hi naù
SYNONYMS
kåñëa—O Kåñëa; kåñëa—O Kåñëa; mahä-bhäga—O Lord of all opulence; he
räma—O Lord Balaräma, source of all happiness; amita-vikrama—You whose
power is unlimited; eñaù—this; ghora-tamaù—most terrible; vahniù—fire;
tävakän—who are Yours; grasate—is devouring; hi—indeed; naù—us.
TRANSLATION
[Våndävana's residents said:] Kåñëa, Kåñëa, O Lord of all opulence! O Räma,
possessor of unlimited power! This most terrible fire is about to devour us,
Your devotees!
TEXT 24
s$auäu"star"Aªa: svaAna, paAih"
k(AlaA¢ae: s$auô$d": ‘aBaAe
na zA¡u(mastva»ar"NAM
s$antyalu(maku(taAeBayama,
su-dustarän naù svän pähi
kälägneù suhådaù prabho
na çaknumas tvac-caraëaà
santyaktum akuto-bhayam
SYNONYMS
su-dustarät—from the insurmountable; naù—us; svän—Your own devotees;
pähi—please protect; käla-agneù—from the fire of death; suhådaù—Your true
friends; prabho—O supreme master; na çaknumaù—we are incapable;
tvat-caraëam—Your feet; santyaktum—to give up; akutaù-bhayam—which
drive away all fear.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, we are Your true friends and devotees. Please protect us from this
insurmountable fire of death. We can never give up Your lotus feet, which
drive away all fear.
PURPORT
The residents of Våndävana told Kåñëa, "If this deadly fire overcomes us, we
will be separated from Your lotus feet, and this is unbearable for us. Therefore,
just so that we can go on serving Your lotus feet, please protect us."
TEXT 25
wtTaM svajanavaEflavyaM
inar"Iºya jagAd"Iìr":
tamai¢amaipabaÔaI˜ama,
@nantaAe'nantazAil(Da{k,(
itthaà sva-jana-vaiklavyaà
nirékñya jagad-éçvaraù
tam agnim apibat tévram
ananto 'nanta-çakti-dhåk
SYNONYMS
ittham—in this manner; sva-jana—of His own devotees; vaiklavyam—the
disturbed condition; nirékñya—seeing; jagat-éçvaraù—the Lord of the universe;
tam—that; agnim—fire; apibat—drank; tévram—terrible; anantaù—the
unlimited Lord; ananta-çakti-dhåk—the possessor of unlimited potencies.
TRANSLATION
Seeing His devotees so disturbed, Çré Kåñëa, the infinite Lord of the
universe and possessor of infinite power, then swallowed the terrible forest fire.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Tenth Canto, Seventeenth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The History of Käliya."
18. Lord Balaräma Slays the Demon Pralamba
The killing of Pralambäsura is described in this chapter. While playing
happily in Våndävana, Lord Baladeva climbed up on the shoulders of the
demon Pralamba and struck his head with His fist, destroying him.
Çré Våndävana, where Kåñëa and Balaräma enacted Their pastimes, was
even during the summer decorated with all the qualities of spring. At that time
Lord Çré Kåñëa would become absorbed in various sports, surrounded by
Balaräma and all the cowherd boys. One day they were intently dancing,
singing and playing when a demon named Pralamba entered their midst,
disguised as a cowherd boy. The omniscient Lord Kåñëa saw through the
disguise, but even as He thought of how to kill the demon, He treated him as a
friend.
Kåñëa then suggested to His young friends and Baladeva that they play a
game involving contending parties. Taking the role of leaders, Kåñëa and
Balaräma divided the boys into two groups and determined that the losers
would have to carry the winners on their shoulders. Thus when Çrédämä and
Våñabha, members of Balaräma's party, were victorious, Kåñëa and another boy
in His party carried them on their shoulders. Pralambäsura thought that the
unconquerable Lord Çré Kåñëa would be too great an opponent to contend
with, so the demon fought with Balaräma instead and was defeated. Taking
Lord Balaräma on his back, Pralambäsura began to walk away very swiftly. But
Balaräma became as heavy as Mount Sumeru, and the demon, unable to carry
Him, had to reveal his true, demoniac form. When Balaräma saw this terrible
form, He struck the demon a ferocious blow on the head with His fist. This
blow shattered Pralambäsura's head just as lightning bolts hurled by the king of
the demigods shatter mountains. The demon repeatedly vomited blood and
then fell upon the ground. When the cowherd boys saw Lord Balaräma return,
they joyfully embraced and congratulated Him as the demigods showered
garlands of flowers from the heavens and glorified Him.
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
@Ta k{(SNA: pair"va{taAe
ÁaAitaiBamauRid"taAtmaiBa:
@naugAIyamaAnaAe nyaivazAä,"
˜ajaM gAAeku(lamaiNx"tama,
çré-çuka uväca
atha kåñëaù parivåto
jïätibhir muditätmabhiù
anugéyamäno nyaviçad
vrajaà gokula-maëòitam
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; atha—next; kåñëaù—Lord
Kåñëa; parivåtaù—surrounded; jïätibhiù—by His companions;
mudita-ätmabhiù—who were joyful by nature; anugéyamänaù—His glories
being chanted; nyaviçat—entered; vrajam—Vraja; go-kula—by the herds of
cows; maëòitam—decorated.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Surrounded by His blissful companions, who
constantly chanted His glories, Çré Kåñëa then entered the village of Vraja,
which was decorated with herds of cows.
TEXT 2
˜ajae iva‚(Lx"taAere"vaM
gAAepaAlacC$ámaAyayaA
ƒaISmaAe naAmatauRr"Bavana,
naAita‘aeyaAHC$r"Iir"NAAma,
vraje vikréòator evaà
gopäla-cchadma-mäyayä
gréñmo nämartur abhavan
näti-preyäï charériëäm
SYNONYMS
vraje—in Våndävana; vikréòatoù—while the two of Them were sporting;
evam—in this way; gopäla—as cowherd boys; chadma—of the disguise;
mäyayä—by the illusion; gréñmaù—summer; näma—thus designated;
åtuù—the season; abhavat—came about; na—not; ati-preyän—very much
favored; çarériëäm—by embodied beings.
TRANSLATION
While Kåñëa and Balaräma were thus enjoying life in Våndävana in the guise
of ordinary cowherd boys, the summer season gradually appeared. This season is
not very pleasing to embodied souls.
PURPORT
In Chapter Eighteen, of Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çréla
Prabhupäda comments as follows: "The summer season in India is not very
much welcomed because of the excessive heat, but in Våndävana everyone was
pleased because summer there appeared just like spring."
TEXT 3
s$a ca va{nd"AvanagAuNAEr,"
vas$anta wva laiºata:
ya‡aAstae BagAvaAna, s$aAºaAä,"
r"AmaeNA s$ah" ke(zAva:
sa ca våndävana-guëair
vasanta iva lakñitaù
yaträste bhagavän säkñäd
rämeëa saha keçavaù
SYNONYMS
saù—this (hot season); ca—nevertheless; våndävana—of Çré Våndävana;
guëaiù—by the transcendental qualities; vasantaù—springtime; iva—as if;
lakñitaù—manifesting symptoms; yatra—in which (Våndävana);
äste—remains; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
säkñät—personally; rämeëa saha—together with Lord Balaräma;
keçavaù—Lord Çré Kåñëa.
TRANSLATION
Nevertheless, because the Supreme Personality of Godhead was personally
staying in Våndävana along with Balaräma, summer manifested the qualities of
spring. Such are the features of the land of Våndävana.
TEXT 4
ya‡a inaJaRr"inaoe"ARd"-
inava{ÔasvanaiJaiéak(ma,
zAìÔacC$Ik(r"jaI=Saåu"
mamaNx"lamaiNx"tama,
yatra nirjhara-nirhrädanivåtta-
svana-jhillikam
çaçvat tac-chékararjéñadruma-
maëòala-maëòitam
SYNONYMS
yatra—in which (Våndävana); nirjhara—of the waterfalls; nirhräda—by the
resounding; nivåtta—stopped; svana—the sound; jhillikam—of the crickets;
çaçvat—constant; tat—of those (waterfalls); çékara—by the drops of water;
åjéña—moistened; druma—of trees; maëòala—with the groups;
maëòitam—decorated.
TRANSLATION
In Våndävana, the loud sound of waterfalls covered the crickets' noise, and
clusters of trees constantly moistened by spray from those waterfalls beautified
the entire area.
PURPORT
This and the following three verses describe how Våndävana manifested
the features of spring, even during the summer season.
TEXT 5
s$air"ts$ar":‘a›avaNAAeimaRvaAyaunaA
k(ø"Ar"k(ÃaAetpalare"NAuh"Air"NAA
na ivaâtae ya‡a vanaAEk(s$aAM d"vaAe
inad"AGava¶"YakR(BavaAe'itazAAã"lae
sarit-saraù-prasravaëormi-väyunä
kahlära-kaïjotpala-reëu-häriëä
na vidyate yatra vanaukasäà davo
nidägha-vahny-arka-bhavo 'ti-çädvale
SYNONYMS
sarit—of the rivers; saraù—and the lakes; prasravaëa—(coming into contact
with) the currents; ürmi—and waves; väyunä—by the wind;
kahlära-kaïja-utpala—of the kahlära, kaïja and utpala lotuses; reëu—the
pollen; häriëä—which was taking away; na vidyate—there was not; yatra—in
which; vana-okasäm—for the residents of the forest; davaù—tormenting heat;
nidägha—of the summer season; vahni—by forest fires; arka—and the sun;
bhavaù—generated; ati-çädvale—where there was an abundance of green grass.
TRANSLATION
The wind wafting over the waves of the lakes and flowing rivers carried
away the pollen of many varieties of lotuses and water lilies and then cooled the
entire Våndävana area. Thus the residents there did not suffer from the heat
generated by the blazing summer sun and seasonal forest fires. Indeed,
Våndävana was abundant with fresh green grass.
TEXT 6
@gAADataAeyaoe"id"naItaq%AeimaRiBar,"
‰"vatpaur"ISyaA: pauilanaE: s$amantata:
na ya‡a caNx"AMzAuk(r"A ivaSaAelbaNAA
BauvaAe r"s$aM zAAã"ilataM ca gA{õ"tae
agädha-toya-hradiné-taöormibhir
dravat-puréñyäù pulinaiù samantataù
na yatra caëòäàçu-karä viñolbaëä
bhuvo rasaà çädvalitaà ca gåhëate
SYNONYMS
agädha—very deep; toya—whose water; hradiné—of the rivers; taöa—upon the
shores; ürmibhiù—by the waves; dravat—liquefied; puréñyäù—whose mud;
pulinaiù—by the sandy banks; samantataù—on all sides; na—not; yatra—upon
which; caëòa—of the sun; aàçu-karäù—the rays; viña—like poison;
ulbaëäù—fierce; bhuvaù—of the earth; rasam—the juice; çädvalitam—the
greenness; ca—and; gåhëate—take away.
TRANSLATION
With their flowing waves the deep rivers drenched their banks, making them
damp and muddy. Thus the rays of the sun, which were as fierce as poison,
could not evaporate the earth's sap or parch its green grass.
TEXT 7
vanaM ku(s$auimataM ™aImana,
nad"i»a‡ama{gAiã"jama,
gAAyanmayaUr"”amarM"
kU(jatk(Aeik(las$aAr"s$ama,
vanaà kusumitaà çréman
nadac-citra-måga-dvijam
gäyan mayüra-bhramaraà
küjat-kokila-särasam
SYNONYMS
vanam—the forest; kusumitam—full of flowers; çrémat—very beautiful;
nadat—making sounds; citra—variegated; måga—animals; dvijam—and birds;
gäyan—singing; mayüra—peacocks; bhramaram—and bees; küjat—cooing;
kokila—cuckoos; särasam—and cranes.
TRANSLATION
Flowers beautifully decorated the forest of Våndävana, and many varieties of
animals and birds filled it with sound. The peacocks and bees sang, and the
cuckoos and cranes cooed.
TEXT 8
‚(Lix"SyamaANAstatfr,"SNAAe
BagAvaAna, balas$aMyauta:
vaeNAuM ivar"NAyana, gAAepaEr,"
gAAeDanaE: s$aMva{taAe'ivazAta,
kréòiñyamäëas tat krñëo
bhagavän bala-saàyutaù
veëuà viraëayan gopair
go-dhanaiù saàvåto 'viçat
SYNONYMS
kréòiñyamäëaù—intending to play; tat—that (Våndävana forest);
kåñëaù—Kåñëa; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
bala-saàyutaù—accompanied by Balaräma; veëum—His flute;
viraëayan—sounding; gopaiù—by the cowherd boys; go-dhanaiù—and the
cows, who are their wealth; saàvåtaù—surrounded; aviçat—He entered.
TRANSLATION
Intending to engage in pastimes, Lord Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, accompanied by Lord Balaräma and surrounded by the cowherd boys
and the cows, entered the forest of Våndävana as He played His flute.
TEXT 9
‘avaAlabahR"stabak(-
›agDaAtauk{(taBaUSaNAA:
r"Amak{(SNAAd"yaAe gAAepaA
nana{tauyauRyauDaujaRgAu:
praväla-barha-stabakasrag-
dhätu-kåta-bhüñaëäù
räma-kåñëädayo gopä
nanåtur yuyudhur jaguù
SYNONYMS
praväla—newly grown leaves; barha—peacock feathers; stabaka—bunches of
small flowers; srak—garlands; dhätu—and colored minerals;
kåta-bhüñaëäù—wearing as their ornaments; räma-kåñëa-ädayaù—headed by
Lord Balaräma and Lord Kåñëa; gopäù—the cowherd boys; nanåtuù—danced;
yuyudhuù—fought; jaguù—sang.
TRANSLATION
Decorating themselves with newly grown leaves, along with peacock
feathers, garlands, clusters of flower buds, and colored minerals, Balaräma,
Kåñëa and Their cowherd friends danced, wrestled and sang.
TEXT 10
k{(SNAsya na{tyata: ke(icaja,
jagAu: ke(icad"vaAd"yana,
vaeNAupaAiNAtalaE: Za{"ËEÿ:
‘azAzAMs$aur"TaApare"
kåñëasya nåtyataù kecij
jaguù kecid avädayan
veëu-päëitalaiù çåìgaiù
praçaçaàsur athäpare
SYNONYMS
kåñëasya nåtyataù—while Kåñëa was dancing; kecit—some of them;
jaguù—sang; kecit—some; avädayan—accompanied musically; veëu—with
flutes; päëi-talaiù—and hand cymbals; çåìgaiù—with buffalo horns;
praçaçaàsuù—offered praise; atha—and; apare—others.
TRANSLATION
As Kåñëa danced, some of the boys accompanied Him by singing, and others
by playing flutes, hand cymbals and buffalo horns, while still others praised His
dancing.
PURPORT
Wanting to encourage Çré Kåñëa, some of the cowherd boys openly praised
His dancing.
TEXT 11
gAAepajaAita‘aitacC$ªaA
de"vaA gAAepaAlaè&ipaNAAE
wRix"re" k{(SNAr"AmaAE ca
naq%A wva naqM% na{pa
gopa-jäti-praticchannä
devä gopäla-rüpiëau
éòire kåñëa-rämau ca
naöä iva naöaà nåpa
SYNONYMS
gopa-jäti—as members of the cowherd community; praticchannäù—disguised;
deväù—demigods; gopäla-rüpiëau—who had assumed the forms of cowherd
boys; éòire—they worshiped; kåñëa-rämau—Lord Kåñëa and Lord Räma;
ca—and; naöäù—professional dancers; iva—just as; naöam—another dancer;
nåpa—O King.
TRANSLATION
O King, demigods disguised themselves as members of the cowherd
community and, just as dramatic dancers praise another dancer, worshiped
Kåñëa and Balaräma, who were also appearing as cowherd boys.
TEXT 12
”amaNAElaRÎÿnaE: ºaepaEr,"
@As$P(Aeq%naivak(SaRNAE:
ica‚(Lx"tauinaRyauÜe"na
k(Ak(paºaDar"AE ¸(icata,
bhramaëair laìghanaiù kñepair
äsphoöana-vikarñaëaiù
cikréòatur niyuddhena
käka-pakña-dharau kvacit
SYNONYMS
bhramaëaiù—with whirling about; laìghanaiù—jumping; kñepaiù—throwing;
äsphoöana—slapping; vikarñaëaiù—and dragging; cikåéòatuù—They(Kåñëa and
Balaräma) played; niyuddhena—with fighting; käka-pakña—the locks of hair
on the sides of Their heads; dharau—holding; kvacit—sometimes.
TRANSLATION
Kåñëa and Balaräma played with their cowherd boyfriends by whirling about,
leaping, hurling, slapping and fighting. Sometimes Kåñëa and Balaräma would
pull the hair on the boys' heads.
PURPORT
The äcäryas have explained this verse as follows: The word bhramaëaiù
indicates that the boys, pretending they were machines, would sometimes
whirl about until they became dizzy. They would also sometimes jump about
(laìghanaiù). The word kñepaiù indicates that sometimes they would hurl
objects like balls or stones and that sometimes they would grab each other by
the arms and throw one another about. Äsphoöana means that sometimes they
would slap one another's shoulders or backs, and vikarñaëaiù indicates they
would drag one another about in the midst of their play. By the word
niyuddhena arm wrestling and other types of friendly fighting are indicated,
and the word käka-pakña-dharau means that Kåñëa and Balaräma would
sometimes grab the hair on the other boys' heads in a playful manner.
TEXT 13
¸(icaªa{tyats$au caAnyaeSau
gAAyak(AE vaAd"k(AE svayama,
zAzAMs$ataumaRh"Ar"Aja
s$aADau s$aAiDvaita vaAid"naAE
kvacin nåtyatsu cänyeñu
gäyakau vädakau svayam
çaçaàsatur mahä-räja
sädhu sädhv iti vädinau
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; nåtyatsu—while they were dancing; ca—and;
anyeñu—others; gäyakau—the two of Them (Kåñëa and Balaräma) singing;
vädakau—both playing musical instruments; svayam—Themselves;
çaçaàsatuù—They praised; mahä-räja—O great King; sädhu sädhu iti—"very
good, very good"; vädinau—speaking.
TRANSLATION
While the other boys were dancing, O King, Kåñëa and Balaräma would
sometimes accompany them with song and instrumental music, and sometimes
the two Lords would praise the boys, saying, "Very good! Very good!"
TEXT 14
¸(icaiß"lvaE: ¸(icatku(mBaE:
¸(caAmalak(mauií"iBa:
@s$pa{zyanae‡abanDaAâE:
¸(icanma{gAKagAeh"yaA
kvacid bilvaiù kvacit kumbhaiù
kvacämalaka-muñöibhiù
aspåçya-netra-bandhädyaiù
kvacin måga-khagehayä
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; bilvaiù—with bilva fruits; kvacit—sometimes;
kumbhaiù—with kumbha fruits; kvaca—and sometimes;
ämalaka-muñöibhiù—with palmfuls of ämalaka fruits; aspåçya—with games
such as tåying to touch one another; netra-bandha—trying to identify another
when one is blindfolded; ädyaiù—and so on; kvacit—sometimes; måga—like
animals; khaga—and birds; éhayä—acting.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes the cowherd boys would play with bilva or kumbha fruits, and
sometimes with handfuls of ämalaka fruits. At other times they would play the
games of trying to touch one another or of trying to identify somebody while
one is blindfolded, and sometimes they would imitate animals and birds.
PURPORT
Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé explains that the word ädyaiù, "by other such
sports," indicates such games as chasing one another and building bridges.
Another pastime would occur at noon, while Lord Kåñëa was taking rest.
Nearby, the young cowherd girls would be passing by, singing, and Kåñëa's
boyfriends would pretend to inquire from them about the price of milk. Then
the boys would steal yogurt and other items from them and run away. Kåñëa,
Balaräma and Their friends would also play games in which they would cross
the river in boats.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura further explains that the boys would
play with fruits by throwing a few in the air and then throwing others to try to
hit them. The word netra-bandha indicates a game in which one boy would
approach a blindfolded boy from behind and place his palms over the
blindfolded boy's eyes. Then, simply by the feel of his palms, the blindfolded
boy would have to guess who the other boy was. In all such games the boys put
up stakes for the winner, such as flutes or walking sticks. Sometimes the boys
would imitate the various fighting methods of the forest animals, and at other
times they would chirp like birds.
TEXT 15
¸(ica»a d"äuR"r"plaAvaEr,"
ivaivaDaEç&pah"As$akE(:
k(d"Aicatsyand"Aeilak(yaA
k(ihR"icaªa{pacaeí"yaA
kvacic ca dardura-plävair
vividhair upahäsakaiù
kadäcit syandolikayä
karhicin nåpa-ceñöayä
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; ca—and; dardura—like frogs; plävaiù—with jumping;
vividhaiù—various; upahäsakaiù—with jokes; kadäcit—sometimes;
syandolikayä—with riding in swings; karhicit—and sometimes;
nåpa-ceñöayä—with pretending to be kings.
TRANSLATION
They would sometimes jump around like frogs, sometimes play various jokes,
sometimes ride in swings and sometimes imitate monarchs.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains the word nåpa-ceñöayä as
follows: In Våndävana there was a particular place on the riverbank where
people who wanted to cross the Yamunä would pay a small tax. At times the
cowherd boys would assemble in this area and prevent the young girls of
Våndävana from crossing the river, insisting that they had to pay a customs
duty first. Such activities were full of joking and laughter.
TEXT 16
WvaM taAE laAek(is$aÜ"AiBa:
‚(Lx"AiBaêer"tauvaR"nae
naâi‰"‰"AeiNAku(ÃaeSau
k(AnanaeSau s$ar":s$au ca
evaà tau loka-siddhäbhiù
kréòäbhiç ceratur vane
nady-adri-droëi-kuïjeñu
känaneñu saraùsu ca
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; tau—the two of Them, Kåñëa and Balaräma;
loka-siddhäbhiù—which are well known in human society; kréòäbhiù—with
games; ceratuù—They wandered; vane—in the forest; nadé—among the rivers;
adri—mountains; droëi—valleys; kuïjeñu—and groves; känaneñu—in the
smaller forests; saraùsu—along the lakes; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
In this way Kåñëa and Balaräma played all sorts of well-known games as
They wandered among the rivers, hills, valleys, bushes, trees and lakes of
Våndävana.
TEXT 17
pazAUMêAr"yataAegAAeR$paEs$a,
taã"nae r"Amak{(SNAyaAe:
gAAepaè&paI ‘alambaAe'gAAä,"
@s$aur"staiÀah"ISaRyaA
paçüàç cärayator gopais
tad-vane räma-kåñëayoù
gopa-rüpé pralambo 'gäd
asuras taj-jihérñayä
SYNONYMS
paçün—the animals; cärayatoù—while the two of Them were herding;
gopaiù—along with the cowherd boys; tat-vane—in that forest, Våndävana;
räma-kåñëayoù—Lord Räma and Lord Kåñëa; gopa-rüpé—assuming the form of
a cowherd boy; pralambaù—Pralamba; agät—came; asuraù—the demon;
tat—Them; jihérñayä—with the desire of kidnapping.
TRANSLATION
While Räma, Kåñëa and Their cowherd friends were thus tending the cows
in that Våndävana forest, the demon Pralamba entered their midst. He had
assumed the form of a cowherd boy with the intention of kidnapping Kåñëa and
Balaräma.
PURPORT
Having described how Kåñëa and Balaräma acted just like ordinary boys,
Çukadeva Gosvämé will now reveal one of the Lord's transcendental pastimes
that is beyond the range of human activity. According to Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura, the demon Pralamba disguised himself as a particular
cowherd boy who on that day had remained at home with duties to perform.
TEXT 18
taM ivaã"Anaipa d"AzAAh"AeR
BagAvaAna, s$avaRd"zARna:
@nvamaAed"ta tats$aKyaM
vaDaM tasya ivaicantayana,
taà vidvän api däçärho
bhagavän sarva-darçanaù
anvamodata tat-sakhyaà
vadhaà tasya vicintayan
SYNONYMS
tam—him, Pralambäsura; vidvän—knowing quite well; api—even though;
däçärhaù—the descendant of Daçärha; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; sarva-darçanaù—the omniscient; anvamodata—accepted; tat—with
him; sakhyam—friendship; vadham—the killing; tasya—of him;
vicintayan—meditating upon.
TRANSLATION
Since the Supreme Lord Kåñëa, who had appeared in the Daçärha dynasty,
sees everything, He understood who the demon was. Still, the Lord pretended
to accept the demon as a friend, while at the same time seriously considering
how to kill him.
TEXT 19
ta‡aAepaAó"ya gAAepaAlaAna,
k{(SNA: ‘aAh" ivah"Ar"ivata,
he" gAAepaA ivah"ir"SyaAmaAe
ã"nã"IBaUya yaTaAyaTama,
tatropähüya gopälän
kåñëaù präha vihära-vit
he gopä vihariñyämo
dvandvé-bhüya yathä-yatham
SYNONYMS
tatra—thereupon; upähüya—calling; gopälän—the cowherd boys;
kåñëaù—Lord Kåñëa; präha—spoke; vihära-vit—the knower of all sports and
games; he gopäù—O cowherd boys; vihariñyämaù—let us play,
dvandvé-bhüya-dividing into two groups; yathä-yatham—suitably.
TRANSLATION
Kåñëa, who knows all sports and games, then called together the cowherd
boys and spoke as follows: "Hey cowherd boys! Let's play now! We'll divide
ourselves into two even teams."
PURPORT
The word yathä-yatham means that Kåñëa naturally wanted the two teams
to be evenly matched so that there would be a good game. In addition to the
pleasure of sporting, the purpose of the game was to kill the demon Pralamba.
TEXT 20
ta‡a ca‚u(: pair"va{X#AE
gAAepaA r"AmajanaAdR"naAE
k{(SNAs$aÎÿiÄ%na: ke(icaä,"
@As$ana, r"Amasya caApare"
tatra cakruù parivåòhau
gopä räma-janärdanau
kåñëa-saìghaööinaù kecid
äsan rämasya cäpare
SYNONYMS
tatra—in that game; cakruù—they made; parivåòhau—the two leaders;
gopäù—the cowherd boys; räma-janärdanau—Lord Balaräma and Kåñëa;
kåñëa-saìghaööinaù—members of Kåñëa's party; kecit—some of them;
äsan—became; rämasya—of Balaräma; ca—and; apare—others.
TRANSLATION
The cowherd boys chose Kåñëa and Balaräma as the leaders of the two
parties. Some of the boys were on Kåñëa's side, and others joined Balaräma.
TEXT 21
@Acaeç&ivaRivaDaA: ‚(Lx"A
vaA÷vaAh"k(laºaNAA:
ya‡aAr"Aeh"inta jaetaAr"Ae
vah"inta ca par"AijataA:
äcerur vividhäù kréòä
vähya-vähaka-lakñaëäù
yaträrohanti jetäro
vahanti ca paräjitäù
SYNONYMS
äceruù—they performed; vividhäù—various; kréòäù—sports; vähya—by the
carried; vähaka—the carrier; lakñaëäù—characterized; yatra—in which;
ärohanti—climb; jetäraù—the winners; vahanti—carry; ca—and;
paräjitäù—the defeated.
TRANSLATION
The boys played various games involving carriers and passengers. In these
games the winners would climb up on the backs of the losers, who would have
to carry them.
PURPORT
Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé quotes the following relevant verse from the Viñëu
Puräëa (5.9.12):
hariëäkréòanaà näma
bäla-krédaëakaà tataù
prakréòatä hi te sarve
dvau dvau yugapad utpatan
"They then played the childhood game known as hariëäkréòanam, in which
each boy paired off with an opponent and all the boys simultaneously attacked
their respective rivals."
TEXT 22
vah"ntaAe vaA÷maAnaAê
caAr"yantaê gAAeDanama,
BaANx"Ir"kM( naAma vaqM%
jagmau: k{(SNApaur"AegAmaA:
vahanto vähyamänäç ca
cärayantaç ca go-dhanam
bhäëòérakaà näma vaöaà
jagmuù kåñëa-purogamäù
SYNONYMS
vahantaù—carrying; vähyamänäù—being carried; ca—and;
cärayantaù—tending; ca—also; go-dhanam—the cows; bhäëòérakam
näma—named Bhäëòéraka; vaöam—to the banyan tree; jagmuù—they went;
kåñëa-puraù-gamäù—led by Lord Kåñëa.
TRANSLATION
Thus carrying and being carried by one another, and at the same time
tending the cows, the boys followed Kåñëa to a banyan tree known as
Bhäëòéraka.
PURPORT
Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé quotes the following verses from Çré Harivaàça
(Viñëu-parva 11.18-22), which describe the banyan tree:
dadarça vipulodagraçäkhinaà
çäkhinäà varam
sthitaà dharaëyäà meghäbhaà
nibiòaà dala-saïcayaiù
gaganärdhocchritäkäraà
parvatäbhoga-dhäriëam
néla-citräìga-varëaiç ca
sevitaà bahubhiù khagaiù
phalaiù pravälaiç ca ghanaiù
sendracäpa-ghanopamam
bhavanäkära-viöapaà
latä-puñpa-sumaëòitam
viçäla-mülävanataà
pävanämbhoda-dhäriëam
ädhipatyam ivänyeñäà
tasya deçasya çäkhinäm
kurväëaà çubha-karmäëaà
nirävarñam anätapam
nyagrodhaà parvatägräbhaà
bhäëòéraà näma nämataù
"They saw that best of all trees, which had many long branches. With its dense
covering of leaves, it resembled a cloud sitting on the earth. Indeed, its form
was so large that it appeared like a mountain covering half the sky. Many birds
with charming blue wings frequented that great tree, whose dense fruits and
leaves made it seem like a cloud accompanied by a rainbow or like a house
decorated with creepers and flowers. It spread its broad roots downward and
carried upon itself the sanctified clouds. That banyan tree was like the lordly
master of all other trees in that vicinity, as it performed the all-auspicious
functions of warding off the rain and the heat of the sun. Such was the
appearance of that nyagrodha tree known as Bhäëòéra, which seemed just like
the peak of a great mountain."
TEXT 23
r"Amas$aÎÿiÄ%naAe yaihR"
™aId"Amava{SaBaAd"ya:
‚(Lx"AyaAM jaiyanastaAMstaAna,
Oò": k{(SNAAd"yaAe na{pa
räma-saìghaööino yarhi
çrédäma-våñabhädayaù
kréòäyäà jayinas täàs tän
ühuù kåñëädayo nåpa
SYNONYMS
räma-saìghaööinaù—the members of Lord Balaräma's party; yarhi—when;
çrédäma-våñabha-ädayaù—Çrédämä, Våñabha and others (such as Subala);
kréòäyäm—in the games; jayinaù—victorious; tän tän—each of them;
ühuù—carried; kåñëa-ädayaù—Kåñëa and the members of His party; nåpa—O
King.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Parékñit, when Çrédämä, Våñabha and the other members of
Lord Balaräma's party were victorious in these games, Kåñëa and His followers
had to carry them.
TEXT 24
ovaAh" k{(SNAAe BagAvaAna,
™aId"AmaAnaM par"Aijata:
va{SaBaM Ba‰"s$aenastau
‘alambaAe r"Aeih"NAIs$autama,
uväha kåñëo bhagavän
çrédämänaà paräjitaù
våñabhaà bhadrasenas tu
pralambo rohiëé-sutam
SYNONYMS
uväha—carried; kåñëaù—Lord Çré Kåñëa; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; çrédämänam—His devotee and friend Çrédämä; paräjitaù—being
defeated; våñabham—Våñabha; bhadrasenaù—Bhadrasena; tu—and;
pralambaù—Pralamba; rohiëé-sutam—the son of Rohiëé (Balaräma) .
TRANSLATION
Defeated, the Supreme Lord Kåñëa carried Çrédämä. Bhadrasena carried
Våñabha, and Pralamba carried Balaräma, the son of Rohiëé.
PURPORT
One may ask how Bhagavän, the Supreme Lord, can be defeated by His
boyfriends. The answer is that in His original form, God has a most playful
nature and occasionally enjoys submitting to the strength or desire of His
loving friends. A father may sometimes playfully fall down on the ground
when struck by his beloved little child. These acts of love give pleasure to all
parties. Thus Çrédämä agreed to ride on Lord Kåñëa's shoulders to please his
beloved friend, who happened to be Bhagavän, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
TEXT 25
@ivaSa÷M manyamaAna:
k{(SNAM d"AnavapauËÿva:
vah"nåu"tatarM" ‘aAgAAä,"
@var"Aeh"NAta: par"ma,
aviñahyaà manyamänaù
kåñëaà dänava-puìgavaù
vahan drutataraà prägäd
avarohaëataù param
SYNONYMS
aviñahyam—invincible; manyamänaù—considering; kåñëam—Lord Kåñëa;
dänava-puìgavaù—that foremost demon; vahan—carrying; druta-taram—very
quickly; prägät—he went off; avarohaëataù param—beyond the place marked
for climbing down.
TRANSLATION
Considering Lord Kåñëa invincible, that foremost demon [Pralamba] quickly
carried Balaräma far beyond the spot where he was supposed to put his
passenger down.
PURPORT
Pralamba wanted to carry Balaräma out of Lord Kåñëa's sight so that he
could cruelly attack Him.
TEXT 26
tamauã"h"nDar"iNADare"n‰"gAAEr"vaM
mah"As$aur"Ae ivagAtar"yaAe inajaM vapau:
s$a @AisTata: paur"q%pair"cC$d"Ae baBaAE
taix"ä,"âumaAnaux"]paitavaAix"vaAmbaud":
tam udvahan dharaëi-dharendra-gauravaà
mahäsuro vigata-rayo nijaà vapuù
sa ästhitaù puraöa-paricchado babhau
taòid-dyumän uòupati-väò ivämbudaù
SYNONYMS
tam—Him, Lord Baladeva; udvahan—carrying high;
dharaëi-dhara-indra—like the king of the mountains, Sumeru;
gauravam—whose weight; mahä-asuraù—the great demon;
vigata-rayaù—losing his momentum; nijam—his original; vapuù—body;
saù—he; ästhitaù—becoming situated in; puraöa—golden;
paricchadaù—having ornaments; babhau—he shone; taòit—like lightning;
dyu-män—flashing; uòu-pati—the moon; väö—carrying; iva—just as;
ambu-daù—a cloud.
TRANSLATION
As the great demon carried Balaräma, the Lord became as heavy as massive
Mount Sumeru, and Pralamba had to slow down. He then resumed his actual
form—an effulgent body that was covered with golden ornaments and that
resembled a cloud flashing with lightning and carrying the moon.
PURPORT
Here the demon Pralamba is compared to a cloud, his golden ornaments to
lightning within that cloud, and Lord Balaräma to the moon shining through
it. Great demons can assume various forms by exerting their mystic power, but
when the Lord's spiritual potency curtails their power, they can no longer
maintain an artificial form and must again manifest their actual, demoniac
body. Lord Balaräma suddenly became as heavy as a great mountain, and
although the demon tried to carry Him high on his shoulders, he could not go
on.
TEXT 27
inar"Iºya taã"paur"lamambare" car"ta,
‘ad"Iæaä{"g”auku(iq%taq%AeƒadM"í)"k(ma,
jvalaicC$KaM k(q%k(ik(r"Iq%ku(Nx"laitvaSaAàu"
taM h"laDar" wRSad"‡as$ata,
nirékñya tad-vapur alam ambare carat
pradépta-dåg bhru-kuöi-taöogra-daàñörakam
jvalac-chikhaà kaöaka-kiréöa-kuëòalatviñädbhutaà
haladhara éñad atrasat
SYNONYMS
nirékñya—seeing; tat—of Pralambäsura; vapuù—the body; alam—quickly;
ambare—in the sky; carat—moving; pradépta—blazing; dåk—his eyes;
bhru-kuöi—of his frown upon his eyebrows; taöa—on the edge; ugra—terrible;
daàñörakam—his teeth; jvalat—fiery; çikham—hair; kaöaka—of his armlets;
kiréöa—crown; kuëòala—and earrings; tviñä—by the effulgence;
adbhutam—astonishing; hala-dharaù—Lord Balaräma, the carrier of the plow
weapon; éñat—a little; atrasat—became frightened.
TRANSLATION
When Lord Balaräma, who carries the plow weapon, saw the gigantic body of
the demon as he moved swiftly in the sky—with his blazing eyes, fiery hair,
terrible teeth reaching toward his scowling brows, and an amazing effulgence
generated by his armlets, crown and earrings—the Lord seemed to become a
little frightened.
PURPORT
Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé explains Lord Baladeva's so-called fear as follows:
Balaräma was playfully acting out the role of an ordinary cowherd boy, and to
maintain the mood of this pastime He appeared slightly disturbed by the
horrible demoniac body. Also because the demon had appeared as a cowherd
boyfriend of Kåñëa's and because Kåñëa had accepted him as a friend, Baladeva
was slightly apprehensive about killing him. Balaräma could also have been
worried that since this cowherd boy was actually a demon in disguise, at that
very moment another such demon might have been attacking Lord Kåñëa
Himself. Thus the omniscient and omnipotent Supreme Lord Balaräma
exhibited the pastime of becoming slightly nervous in the presence of the
horrible demon Pralamba.
TEXT 28
@TaAgAtasma{itar"BayaAe ir"pauM balaAe
ivah"Aya s$aATaRimava h"r"ntamaAtmana:
ç&SaAh"naicC$r"is$a ä{"Xe#na mauií"naA
s$aur"AiDapaAe igAir"imava va†arM"h"s$aA
athägata-småtir abhayo ripuà balo
vihäya särtham iva harantam ätmanaù
ruñähanac chirasi dåòhena muñöinä
surädhipo girim iva vajra-raàhasä
SYNONYMS
atha—then; ägata-småtiù—remembering Himself; abhayaù—without fear;
ripum—His enemy; balaù—Lord Balaräma; vihäya—leaving aside;
särtham—the company; iva—indeed; harantam—kidnapping;
ätmanaù—Himself; ruñä—angrily; ahanat—He struck; çirasi—upon the head;
dåòhena—hard; muñöinä—with His fist; sura-adhipaù—the king of the
demigods, Indra; girim—a mountain; iva—just as; vajra—of his thunderbolt
weapon; raàhasä—with the swiftness.
TRANSLATION
Remembering the actual situation, the fearless Balaräma understood that the
demon was tåying to kidnap Him and take Him away from His companions.
The Lord then became furious and struck the demon's head with His hard fist,
just as Indra, the king of the demigods, strikes a mountain with his thunderbolt
weapon.
PURPORT
Lord Balaräma's powerful fist came crashing down upon the demon's head,
just as a huge lightning bolt comes crashing into a mountain, cracking its stone
surface into pieces. The words vihäya särtham iva may also be divided vihäyasä
artham iva, meaning that the demon was flying in the sky on the cosmic path,
vihäyas, with the purpose of carrying off Balaräma, who was his artham, or
object of pursuit.
TEXT 29
s$a @Ah"ta: s$apaid" ivazAINARmastak(Ae
mauKaAã"mana, ç&iDar"mapasma{taAe's$aur":
mah"Ar"vaM vyas$aur"patats$amaIr"yana,
igAir"yaRTaA maGavata @AyauDaAh"ta:
sa ähataù sapadi viçérëa-mastako
mukhäd vaman rudhiram apasmåto 'suraù
mahä-ravaà vyasur apatat samérayan
girir yathä maghavata äyudhähataù
SYNONYMS
saù—he, Pralambäsura; ähataù—struck; sapadi—at once; viçérëa—split;
mastakaù—his head; mukhät—from his mouth; vaman—vomiting;
rudhiram—blood; apasmåtaù—unconscious; asuraù—the demon;
mahä-ravam—a great noise; vyasuù—lifeless; apatat—he fell;
samérayan—sounding; giriù—a mountain; yathä—as; maghavataù—of Lord
Indra; äyudha—by the weapon; ähataù—hit.
TRANSLATION
Thus smashed by Balaräma's fist, Pralamba's head immediately cracked
open. The demon vomited blood from his mouth and lost all consciousness, and
then with a great noise he fell lifeless on the ground, like a mountain devastated
by Indra.
TEXT 30
ä{"î"A ‘alambaM inah"taM
balaena balazAAilanaA
gAAepaA: s$auivaismataA @As$ana,
s$aADau s$aAiDvaita vaAid"na:
dåñövä pralambaà nihataà
balena bala-çälinä
gopäù su-vismitä äsan
sädhu sädhv iti vädinaù
SYNONYMS
dåñövä—seeing; pralambam—Pralambäsura; nihatam—killed; balena—by Lord
Balaräma; bala-çälinä—who is by nature very powerful; gopäù—the cowherd
boys; su-vismitäù—most astonished; äsan—became; sädhu sädhu—"very
wonderful, very wonderful"; iti—these words; vädinaù—speaking.
TRANSLATION
The cowherd boys were most astonished to see how the powerful Balaräma
had killed the demon Pralamba, and they exclaimed, "Excellent! Excellent!"
TEXT 31
@AizASaAe'iBagA{NAntastaM
‘azAzAMs$austad"hR"NAma,
‘aetyaAgAtaimavaAilaËÿYa
‘aemaivaù"lacaetas$a:
äçiño 'bhigåëantas taà
praçaçaàsus tad-arhaëam
pretyägatam iväliìgya
prema-vihvala-cetasaù
SYNONYMS
äçiñaù—benedictions; abhigåëantaù—offering profusely; tam—to Him;
praçaçaàsuù—they praised; tat-arhaëam—Him who was worthy of such;
pretya—having died; ägatam—come back; iva—as if; älingya—embracing;
prema—out of love; vihvala—overwhelmed; cetasaù—their minds.
TRANSLATION
They offered Balaräma profuse benedictions and then glorified Him, who
deserves all glorification. Their minds overwhelmed with ecstatic love, they
embraced Him as if He had come back from the dead.
TEXT 32
paApae ‘alambae inah"tae
de"vaA: par"mainava{RtaA:
@ByavaSaRna, balaM maAlyaE:
zAzAMs$au: s$aADau s$aAiDvaita
päpe pralambe nihate
deväù parama-nirvåtäù
abhyavarñan balaà mälyaiù
çaçaàsuù sädhu sädhv iti
SYNONYMS
päpe—the sinful; pralambe—Pralambäsura; nihate—being killed; deväù—the
demigods; parama—extremely; nirvåtäù—satisfied; abhyavarñan—showered;
balam—Lord Balaräma; mälyaiù—with flower garlands; çaçaàsuù—they
offered prayers; sädhu sädhu iti—crying "excellent, excellent."
TRANSLATION
The sinful Pralamba having been killed, the demigods felt extremely happy,
and they showered flower garlands upon Lord Balaräma and praised the
excellence of His deed.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Tenth Canto, Eighteenth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Lord Balaräma Slays the Demon Pralamba."
19. Swallowing the Forest Fire
This chapter describes how Lord Kåñëa saved the cows and the cowherd
boys from a great fire in the Muïjäraëya forest.
One day the cowherd boys became absorbed in sporting and allowed the
cows to wander into a dense forest. Suddenly a forest fire blazed up, and to
escape its flames the cows took refuge in a grove of sharp canes. When the
cowherd boys missed their animals, they went searching for them, following
their hoofprints and the trail of blades of grass and other plants they had
trampled or had broken with their teeth. Finally the boys found the cows and
removed them from the cane forest, but by that time the forest fire had grown
strong and was threatening both the boys and the cows. Thus the cowherd
boys took shelter of Çré Kåñëa, the master of all mystic power, who told them to
close their eyes. They did so, and in a moment He had swallowed up the fierce
forest fire and brought them all back to the Bhäëòéra tree mentioned in the
last chapter. Seeing this wonderful display of mystic potency, the cowherd boys
thought Kåñëa must be a demigod, and they began to praise Him. Then they all
returned home.
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
‚(Lx"As$ale(Sau gAAepaeSau
taÕ"AvaAe äU"r"caAir"NAI:
svaErM" car"ntyaAe ivaivazAus$a,
ta{NAlaAeBaena gAù"r"ma,
çré-çuka uväca
kréòäsakteñu gopeñu
tad-gävo düra-cäriëéù
svairaà carantyo viviçus
tåëa-lobhena gahvaram
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; kréòä—in their playing;
äsakteñu—while they were completely absorbed; gopeñu—the cowherd boys;
tat-gävaù—their cows; düra-cäriëéù—wandering far away;
svairam—independently; carantyaù—grazing; viviçuù—they entered;
tåëa—for grass; lobhena—out of greed; gahvaram—a dense forest.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: While the cowherd boys were completely absorbed
in playing, their cows wandered far away. They hungered for more grass, and
with no one to watch them they entered a dense forest.
TEXT 2
@jaA gAAvaAe maih"Syaê
inaivaRzAntyaAe vanaAã"nama,
wRSaIk(Aq%vaI%M inaivaRivazAu:
‚(nd"ntyaAe d"AvataiSaRtaA:
ajä gävo mahiñyaç ca
nirviçantyo vanäd vanam
éñékäöavéà nirviviçuù
krandantyo däva-tarñitäù
SYNONYMS
ajäù—the goats; gävaù—the cows; mahiñyaù—the buffalo; ca—and;
nirviçantyaù—entering; vanät—from one forest; vanam—to another forest;
éñékä-aöavém—a forest of canes; nirviviçuù—they entered; krandantyaù-crying
out; däva—because of a forest fire; tarñitäù—thirsty .
TRANSLATION
Passing from one part of the great forest to another, the goats, cows and
buffalo eventually entered an area overgrown with sharp canes. The heat of a
nearby forest fire made them thirsty, and they cried out in distress.
TEXT 3
tae'pazyanta: pazAUna, gAAepaA:
k{(SNAr"AmaAd"yastad"A
jaAtaAnautaApaA na ivaäu"r,"
ivaicanvantaAe gAvaAM gAitama,
te 'paçyantaù paçün gopäù
kåñëa-rämädayas tadä
jätänutäpä na vidur
vicinvanto gaväà gatim
SYNONYMS
te—they; apaçyantaù—not seeing; paçün—the animals; gopäù—the cowherd
boys; kåñëa-räma-ädayaù—led by Kåñëa and Räma; tadä—then;
jäta-anutäpäù—feeling remorse; na viduù—they did not know;
vicinvantaù—searching out; gaväm—of the cows; gatim—the path.
TRANSLATION
Not seeing the cows before them, Kåñëa, Räma and Their cowherd friends
suddenly felt repentant for having neglected them. The boys searched all
around, but could not discover where they had gone.
TEXT 4
ta{NAEstatKaur"d"icC$ªaEr,"
gAAeSpadE"r"iÆÿtaEgARvaAma,
maAgARmanvagAmana, s$avaeR
naí"AjaIvyaA ivacaetas$a:
tåëais tat-khura-dac-chinnair
goñ-padair aìkitair gaväm
märgam anvagaman sarve
nañöäjévyä vicetasaù
SYNONYMS
tåëaiù—by the blades of grass; tat—of those cows; khura—by the hooves;
dat—and the teeth; chinnaiù—which were broken; goù-padaiù—with the
hoofprints; aìkitaiù—(by places in the ground) which were marked;
gaväm—of the cows; märgam—the path; anvagaman—they followed;
sarve—all of them; nañöa-äjévyäù—having lost their livelihood; vicetasaù—in
anxiety.
TRANSLATION
Then the boys began tracing out the cows' path by noting their hoofprints
and the blades of grass the cows had broken with their hooves and teeth. All the
cowherd boys were in great anxiety because they had lost their source of
livelihood.
TEXT 5
mauÃaAq%vyaAM ”aí"maAgA<
‚(nd"maAnaM svagAAeDanama,
s$am‘aApya ta{iSataA: ™aAntaAs$a,
tatastae s$aªyavataRyana,
muïjäöavyäà bhrañöa-märgaà
krandamänaà sva-godhanam
sampräpya tåñitäù çräntäs
tatas te sannyavartayan
SYNONYMS
muïjä-aöavyäm—in the Muïjä forest; bhrañöa-märgam—who had lost their
way; krandamänam—crying; sva—their own; go-dhanam—cows (and other
animals); sampräpya—finding; tåñitäù—who were thirsty; çräntäù—and tired;
tataù—then; te—they, the cowherd boys; sannyavartayan—turned them all
back.
TRANSLATION
Within the Muïjä forest the cowherd boys finally found their valuable cows,
who had lost their way and were crying. Then the boys, thirsty and tired,
herded the cows onto the path back home.
TEXT 6
taA @Aó"taA BagAvataA
maeGagAmBaIr"yaA igAr"A
svanaA°aAM inanadM" ™autvaA
‘aitanaeäu": ‘ah"iSaRtaA:
tä ähütä bhagavatä
megha-gambhérayä girä
sva-nämnäà ninadaà çrutvä
pratineduù praharñitäù
SYNONYMS
täù—they; ähütäù—called; bhagavatä—by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; megha-gambhérayä—as deep as a cloud; girä—with His voice;
sva-nämnäm—of their own names; ninadam—the sound; çrutvä—hearing;
pratineduù—they replied; praharñitäù—greatly enlivened.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead called out to the animals in a voice
that resounded like a rumbling cloud. Hearing the sound of their own names,
the cows were overjoyed and called out to the Lord in reply.
TEXT 7
tata: s$amantaAÚ"vaDaUmake(taur,"
yaä{"cC$yaABaUtºayak{(ã"naAEk(s$aAma,
s$amaIir"ta: s$aAr"iTanaAelbaNAAelmaukE(r,"
ivalaeilah"Ana: isTar"jaËÿmaAnmah"Ana,
tataù samantäd dava-dhümaketur
yadåcchayäbhüt kñaya-kåd vanaukasäm
saméritaù särathinolbaëolmukair
vilelihänaù sthira-jaìgamän mahän
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; samantät—on all sides; dava-dhümaketuù—a terrible forest fire;
yadåcchayä—suddenly; abhüt—appeared; kñaya-kåt—threatening destruction;
vana-okasäm—for all those present in the forest; saméritaù—driven;
särathinä—by its chariot driver, the wind; ulbaëa—terrible; ulmukaiù—with
meteorlike sparks; vilelihänaù—licking; sthira-jaìgamän—all moving and
nonmoving creatures; mahän—very great.
TRANSLATION
Suddenly a great forest fire appeared on all sides, threatening to destroy all
the forest creatures. Like a chariot driver, the wind swept the fire onward, and
terrible sparks shot in all directions. Indeed, the great fire extended its tongues
of flame toward all moving and nonmoving creatures.
PURPORT
Just as Kåñëa, Balaräma and the cowherd boys were about to take their cows
back home, the forest fire previously mentioned raged out of control and
surrounded all of them.
TEXT 8
tamaApatantaM pair"taAe d"vaAi¢aM
gAAepaAê gAAva: ‘as$amaIºya BaItaA:
Ocauê k{(SNAM s$abalaM ‘apaªaA
yaTaA h"ir$M ma{tyauBayaAidR"taA janaA:
tam äpatantaà parito davägnià
gopäç ca gävaù prasamékñya bhétäù
ücuç ca kåñëaà sa-balaà prapannä
yathä harià måtyu-bhayärditä janäù
SYNONYMS
tam—that; äpatantam—setting upon them; paritaù—on all sides;
dava-agnim—the forest fire; gopäù—the cowherd boys; ca—and; gävaù—the
cows; prasamékñya—intensely watching; bhétäù—afraid; ücuù—they addressed;
ca—and; kåñëam—Lord Kåñëa; sa-balam—and Lord Balaräma;
prapannäù—taking shelter; yathä—as; harim—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; måtyu—of death; bhaya—by fear; arditäù—troubled;
janäù—persons.
TRANSLATION
As the cows and cowherd boys stared at the forest fire attacking them on all
sides, they became fearful. The boys then approached Kåñëa and Balaräma for
shelter, just as those who are disturbed by fear of death approach the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The boys addressed Them as follows.
TEXT 9
k{(SNA k{(SNA mah"AvaIr"
he" r"AmaAmaAeGa iva‚(ma
d"AvaAi¢anaA d"÷maAnaAna,
‘apaªaAMñAtaumahR"Ta:
kåñëa kåñëa mahä-véra
he rämämogha vikrama
dävägninä dahyamänän
prapannäàs trätum arhathaù
SYNONYMS
kåñëa kåñëa—O Kåñëa, Kåñëa; mahä-véra—O most powerful one; he räma—O
Räma; amogha-vikrama—You whose prowess is never thwarted;
däva-agninä—by the forest fire; dahyamänän—who are being burned;
prapannän—who are surrendered; trätum arhathaù—please save.
TRANSLATION
[The cowherd boys said:] O Kåñëa ! Kåñëa! Most powerful one ! O Räma!
You whose prowess never fails! Please save Your devotees, who are about to be
burned by this forest fire and have come to take shelter of You!
TEXT 10
naUnaM tvaß"AnDavaA: k{(SNA
na caAhR"ntyavas$aAid"tauma,
vayaM ih" s$avaRDamaRÁa
tvaªaATaAstvatpar"AyaNAA:
nünaà tvad-bändhaväù kåñëa
na cärhanty avasäditum
vayaà hi sarva-dharma-jïa
tvan-näthäs tvat-paräyaëäù
SYNONYMS
nünam—certainly; tvat—Your; bändhaväù—friends; kåñëa—our dear Çré
Kåñëa; na—never; ca—and; arhanti—deserve; avasäditum—to suffer
destruction; vayam—we; hi—moreover; sarva-dharma-jïa—O perfect knower
of the nature of all beings; tvat-näthäù—having You as our Lord;
tvat-paräyaëaù—devoted to You.
TRANSLATION
Kåñëa! Certainly Your own friends shouldn't be destroyed. O knower of the
nature of all things, we have accepted You as our Lord, and we are souls
surrendered unto You!
TEXT 11
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
vacaAe inazAmya k{(paNAM
banDaUnaAM BagAvaAna, h"ir":
inamaIlayata maA BaEí"
laAecanaAnaItyaBaASata
çré-çuka uväca
vaco niçamya kåpaëaà
bandhünäà bhagavän hariù
nimélayata mä bhaiñöa
locanänéty abhäñata
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; vacaù—the words;
niçamya—hearing; kåpaëam—pitiful; bandhünäm—of His friends;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hariù—Hari;
nimélayata—just close; mä bhaiñöa—do not be afraid; locanäni—your eyes;
iti—thus; abhäñata—He spoke.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Hearing these pitiful words from His friends, the
Supreme Lord Kåñëa told them, "Just close your eyes and do not be afraid."
PURPORT
This verse clearly reveals the simple, sublime relationship between Kåñëa
and His pure devotees. The Absolute Truth, the supreme almighty Lord, is
actually a young, blissful cowherd boy named Kåñëa. God is youthful, and His
mentality is playful. When He saw that His beloved friends were terrified of
the forest fire, He simply told them to close their eyes and not be afraid. Then
Lord Kåñëa acted, as described in the next verse.
TEXT 12
taTaeita maIilataAºaeSau
BagAvaAnai¢amaulbaNAma,
paItvaA mauKaena taAna, k{(cC)$Aä,"
yaAegAADaIzAAe vyamaAecayata,
tatheti mélitäkñeñu
bhagavän agnim ulbaëam
pétvä mukhena tän kåcchräd
yogädhéço vyamocayat
SYNONYMS
tathä—all right; iti—thus speaking; mélita—closing; akñeñu—their eyes;
bhagavän—the Supreme Lord; agnim—the fire; ulbaëam—terrible;
pétvä—drinking; mukhena—with His mouth; tän—them; kåcchrät—from the
danger; yoga-adhéçaù—the supreme controller of all mystic power;
vyamocayat—delivered .
TRANSLATION
"All right," the boys replied, and immediately closed their eyes. Then the
Supreme Lord, the master of all mystic power, opened His mouth and
swallowed the terrible fire, saving His friends from danger.
PURPORT
The cowherd boys were suffering from extreme fatigue, hunger and thirst,
and were about to be consumed by a horrible forest fire. All this is indicated
here by the word kåcchrät.
TEXT 13
tataê tae'ºaINyaunmaIlya
paunaBaARNx"Ir"maAipataA:
inazAmya ivaismataA @As$aªa,
@AtmaAnaM gAAê maAeicataA:
tataç ca te 'kñéëy unmélya
punar bhäëòéram äpitäù
niçamya vismitä äsann
ätmänaà gäç ca mocitäù
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; ca—and; te—they; akñéëi—their eyes; unmélya—opening;
punaù—again; bhäëòéram—to Bhäëòéra; äpitäù—brought; niçamya—seeing;
vismitäù—amazed; äsan—they became; ätmänam—themselves; gäù—the cows;
ca—and; mocitäù—saved.
TRANSLATION
The cowherd boys opened their eyes and were amazed to find not only that
they and the cows had been saved from the terrible fire but that they had all
been brought back to the Bhäëòéra tree.
TEXT 14
k{(SNAsya yaAegAvaIya< taä,"
yaAegAmaAyaAnauBaAivatama,
d"AvaA¢aer"Atmana: ºaemaM
vaIºya tae maeinare"'mar"ma,
kåñëasya yoga-véryaà tad
yoga-mäyänubhävitam
dävägner ätmanaù kñemaà
vékñya te menire 'maram
SYNONYMS
kåñëasya—of Lord Kåñëa; yoga-véryam—the mystic power; tat—that;
yoga-mäyä—by His internal power of illusion; anubhävitam—effected;
däva-agneù—from the forest fire; ätmanaù—of themselves; kñemam—the
deliverance; vékñya—seeing; te—they; menire—thought; amaram—a demigod.
TRANSLATION
When the cowherd boys saw that they had been saved from the forest fire by
the Lord's mystic power, which is manifested by His internal potency, they
began to think that Kåñëa must be a demigod.
PURPORT
The cowherd boys of Våndävana simply loved Kåñëa as their only friend
and exclusive object of devotion. To increase their ecstasy, Kåñëa displayed to
them His mystic potency and saved them from a terrible forest fire.
The cowherd boys could never give up their ecstatic loving friendship with
Kåñëa. Therefore, rather than considering Kåñëa to be God, after they saw His
extraordinary power they thought that perhaps He was a demigod. But since
Lord Kåñëa was their beloved friend, they were on the same level with Him,
and thus they thought that they too must be demigods. In this way Kåñëa's
cowherd friends became overwhelmed with ecstasy.
TEXT 15
gAA: s$aiªavatyaR s$aAyaA¶e"
s$ah"r"AmaAe janaAdR"na:
vaeNAuM ivar"NAyana, gAAeï"ma,
@gAAÕ"AepaEr"iBaí]"ta:
gäù sannivartya säyähne
saha-rämo janärdanaù
veëuà viraëayan goñöham
agäd gopair abhiñöutaù
SYNONYMS
gäù—the cows; sannivartya—turning back; säya-ahne—in the late afternoon;
saha-rämaù—together with Lord Balaräma; janärdanaù—Çré Kåñëa;
veëum—His flute; viraëayan—playing in a specific way; goñöham—to the
cowherd village; agät—He went; gopaiù—by the cowherd boys;
abhiñöutaù—being praised.
TRANSLATION
It was now late in the afternoon, and Lord Kåñëa, accompanied by Balaräma,
turned the cows back toward home. Playing His flute in a special way, Kåñëa
returned to the cowherd village in the company of His cowherd friends, who
chanted His glories.
TEXT 16
gAAepaInaAM par"maAnand"
@As$aIÕ"Aeivand"d"zAR"nae
ºaNAM yaugAzAtaimava
yaAs$aAM yaena ivanaABavata,
gopénäà paramänanda
äséd govinda-darçane
kñaëaà yuga-çatam iva
yäsäà yena vinäbhavat
SYNONYMS
gopénäm—for the young cowherd girls; parama-änandaù—the greatest
happiness; äsét—arose; govinda-darçane—in seeing Govinda; kñaëam—a
moment; yuga-çatam—a hundred millenniums; iva—just as; yäsäm—for
whom; yena—whom (Kåñëa); vinä—without; abhavat—became.
TRANSLATION
The young gopés took the greatest pleasure in seeing Govinda come home,
since for them even a moment without His association seemed like a hundred
ages.
PURPORT
After saving the cowherd boys from the blazing forest fire, Kåñëa saved the
cowherd girls from the blazing fire of separation from Him. The gopés, headed
by Çrématé Rädhäräëé, have the greatest love for Kåñëa, and even a single
moment's separation from Him seems like millions of years to them. The gopés
are the greatest devotees of God, and their specific pastimes with Kåñëa will be
described later in this work.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Tenth Canto, Nineteenth Chapter of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Swallowing the Forest Fire."
20. The Rainy Season and Autumn in Våndävana
To enhance the description of Lord Kåñëa's pastimes, Çré Çukadeva
Gosvämé describes in this chapter the beauty of Våndävana during autumn and
the rainy season. In the course of his presentation he gives various charming
instructions in metaphorical terms.
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
tayaAestad"àu"taM k(maR
d"AvaA¢aemaAeRºamaAtmana:
gAAepaA: ñIBya: s$amaAcaKyau:
‘alambavaDamaeva ca
çré-çuka uväca
tayos tad adbhutaà karma
dävägner mokñam ätmanaù
gopäù strébhyaù samäcakhyuù
pralamba-vadham eva ca
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; tayoù—of the two of Them, Lord
Kåñëa and Lord Balaräma; tat—that; adbhutam—amazing; karma—action;
däva-agneù—from the forest fire; mokñam—the deliverance; ätmanaù—of
themselves; gopäù—the cowherd boys; strébhyaù—to the ladies;
samäcakhyuù—they described in detail; pralamba-vadham—the killing of
Pralambäsura; eva—indeed; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said:To the ladies of Våndävana, the cowherd boys then
related in full detail Kåñëa's and Balaräma's wonderful activities of delivering
them from the forest fire and killing the demon Pralamba.
TEXT 2
gAAepava{Ü"Aê gAAepyaê
taäu"paAk(NyaR ivaismataA:
maeinare" de"va‘avar"AE
k{(SNAr"AmaAE ˜ajaM gAtaAE
gopa-våddhäç ca gopyaç ca
tad upäkarëya vismitäù
menire deva-pravarau
kåñëa-rämau vrajaà gatau
SYNONYMS
gopa-våddhäù—the elder cowherd men; ca—and; gopyaù—the cowherd ladies;
ca—also; tat—that; upäkarëya—hearing; vismitäù—surprised; menire—they
considered; deva-pravarau—two eminent demigods; kåñëa-rämau-the brothers
Kåñëa and Balaräma; vrajam—to Våndävana; gatau-come.
TRANSLATION
The elder cowherd men and ladies were amazed to hear this account, and
they concluded that Kåñëa and Balaräma must be exalted demigods who had
appeared in Våndävana.
TEXT 3
tata: ‘aAvataRta ‘aAva{q%.
s$avaRs$aÔvas$amauà"vaA
ivaâAetamaAnapair"iDar,"
ivas$PU(ijaRtanaBastalaA
tataù prävartata prävåö
sarva-sattva-samudbhavä
vidyotamäna-paridhir
visphürjita-nabhas-talä
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; prävartata—began; prävåö—the rainy season; sarva-sattva—of all
living beings; samudbhavä—the source of generation; vidyotamäna—flashing
with lightning; paridhiù—its horizon; visphürjita—agitated (by thunder);
nabhaù-talä—the sky.
TRANSLATION
Then the rainy season began, giving life and sustenance to all living beings.
The sky began to rumble with thunder, and lightning flashed on the horizon.
TEXT 4
s$aAn‰"naIlaAmbaudE"vyaAeRma
s$aivaâutstanaiya¥auiBa:
@s$paí"jyaAeitar"AcC$ªaM
“aöeva s$agAuNAM baBaAE
sändra-nélämbudair vyoma
sa-vidyut-stanayitnubhiù
aspañöa-jyotir äcchannaà
brahmeva sa-guëaà babhau
SYNONYMS
sändra—dense; néla—blue; ambudaiù—by the clouds; vyoma—the sky;
sa-vidyut—along with lightning; stanayitnubhiù—and thunder;
aspañöa—diffuse; jyotiù—its illumination; äcchannam—covered; brahma—the
spirit soul; iva—as if; sa-guëam—with the material qualities of nature;
babhau—was manifest.
TRANSLATION
The sky was then covered by dense blue clouds accompanied by lightning
and thunder. Thus the sky and its natural illumination were covered in the
same way that the spirit soul is covered by the three modes of material nature.
PURPORT
Lightning is compared to the mode of goodness, thunder to the mode of
passion, and clouds to the mode of ignorance. Thus the cloudy sky at the onset
of the rainy season is analogous to the pure spirit soul when he becomes
disturbed by the modes of nature, for at that time he is covered and his original
brilliant nature is only dimly reflected through the haze of the material
qualities.
TEXT 5
@í"AE maAs$aAiªapaItaM yaä,"
BaUmyaAêAed"mayaM vas$au
svagAAeiBamaAeRlu(maAre"Bae
pajaRnya: k(Ala @AgAtae
añöau mäsän nipétaà yad
bhümyäç coda-mayaà vasu
sva-gobhir moktum ärebhe
parjanyaù käla ägate
SYNONYMS
añöau—eight; mäsän—during months; nipétam—drunk; yat—which:
bhümyäù-of the earth; ca—and; uda-mayam—consisting of water; vasu—the
wealth; sva-gobhiù—by his own rays; moktum—to release; ärebhe—began;
parjanyaù—the sun; käle—the proper time; ägate—when it arrived.
TRANSLATION
With its rays, the sun had for eight months drunk up the earth's wealth in
the form of water. Now that the proper time had arrived, the sun began
releasing this accumulated wealth.
PURPORT
The äcäryas compare the sun's evaporating the earth's wealth of water to a
king's collecting taxes. In Chapter Twenty, of Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Çréla Prabhupäda explains this analogy as follows: "Clouds are
accumulated water drawn from the land by the sunshine. Continually for eight
months the sun evaporates all kinds of water from the surface of the globe, and
this water is accumulated in the shape of clouds, which are distributed as water
when there is need. Similarly, a government exacts various taxes from the
citizens, such as income tax and sales tax, which the citizens are able to pay by
their different material activities: agriculture, trade, industry and so on. This
taxation is compared to the sun's drawing water from the earth. When there is
again need of water on the surface of the globe, the same sunshine converts
the water into clouds and distributes it all over the globe. Similarly, the taxes
collected by the government must be distributed to the people again, as
educational work, public work, sanitation work and so on. This is very
essential for a good government. The government should not simply exact
taxes for useless squandering; the tax collection should be utilized for the
public welfare of the state."
TEXT 6
taix"ã"ntaAe mah"AmaeGaAzA,
caNx" ìs$ana vaeipataA:
‘aINAnaM jaIvanaM ÷sya
maumaucau: k(ç&NAA wva
taòidvanto mahä-meghäç
caëòa -çvasana -vepitäù
préëanaà jévanaà hy asya
mumucuù karuëä iva
SYNONYMS
taòit-vantaù—displaying lightning; mahä-meghäù—the great clouds;
caëòa—fierce; çvasana—by the wind; vepitäù—shaken; préëanam—the
gratification; jévanam—their life (their water); hi—indeed; asya—of this
world; mumucuù—they released; karuëäù—merciful personalities; iva—just as.
TRANSLATION
Flashing with lightning, great clouds were shaken and swept about by fierce
winds. Just like merciful persons, the clouds gave their lives for the pleasure of
this world.
PURPORT
Just as great, compassionate personalities sometimes give their lives or
wealth for the happiness of society, the rain clouds poured down their rain
upon the parched earth. Although the clouds were thus dissipated, they freely
provided rainfall for the happiness of the earth.
In Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çréla Prabhupäda comments
as follows on this verse: "During the rainy season, there are strong winds
blustering all over the country and carrying clouds from one place to another
to distribute water. When water is urgently needed after the summer season,
the clouds are just like a rich man who, in times of need, distributes his money
even by exhausting his whole treasury. So the clouds exhaust themselves by
distributing water all over the surface of the globe.
"Then Mahäräja Daçaratha, the father of Lord Rämacandra, used to fight
with his enemies, it was said that he approached them just like a farmer
uprooting unnecessary plants and trees. And when there was need of giving
charity, he used to distribute money exactly as the cloud distributes rain. The
distribution of rain by clouds is so sumptuous that it is compared to the
distribution of wealth by a great, munificent person. The clouds' downpour is
so sufficient that the rains even fall on rocks and hills and on the oceans and
seas, where there is no need for water. A cloud is like a charitable person who
opens his treasury for distribution and does not discriminate whether the
charity is needed or not. He gives in charity openhandedly."
Metaphorically speaking, the lightning in rain clouds is the light by which
they see the distressed condition of the earth, and the blowing winds are their
heavy breathing, such as that found in a distressed person. Distressed to see
the condition of the earth, the clouds tremble in the wind like a compassionate
person. Thus they pour down their rain.
TEXT 7
tapa:k{(zAA de"vamaIX#A
@As$aIã"SaI=yas$aI mah"I
yaTaEva k(Amyatapas$as$a,
tanau: s$am‘aApya tatP(lama,
tapaù-kåçä deva-méòhä
äséd varñéyasé mahé
yathaiva kämya-tapasas
tanuù sampräpya tat-phalam
SYNONYMS
tapaù-kåçä—emaciated by the summer heat; deva-méòhä—mercifully sprinkled
by the god of rain; äsét—became; varñéyasé—fully nourished; mahé-the earth;
yathä eva—just as; kämya—based on sense gratification; tapasaù—of one
whose austerities; tanuù—the body; sampräpya—after obtaining; tat—of those
austere practices; phalam—the fruit.
TRANSLATION
The earth had been emaciated by the summer heat, but she became fully
nourished again when moistened by the god of rain. Thus the earth was like a
person whose body has been emaciated by austerities undergone for a material
purpose, but who again becomes fully nourished when he achieves the fruit of
those austerities.
PURPORT
In Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çréla Prabhupäda comments
on this verse as follows: "Before the rainfall, the whole surface of the globe
becomes almost depleted of all kinds of energies and appears very lean. After
the rainfall, the whole surface of the earth becomes green with vegetation and
appears very healthy and strong. Here, a comparison is made to the person
undergoing austerities for fulfillment of a material desire. The flourishing
condition of the earth after a rainy season is compared to the fulfillment of
material desires. Sometimes, when a country is subjugated by an undesirable
government, persons and parties undergo severe penances and austerities to
get control of the government, and when they attain control they flourish by
giving themselves generous salaries. This also is like the flourishing of the
earth in the rainy season. Actually, one should undergo severe austerities and
penances only to achieve spiritual happiness. In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam it is
recommended that tapasya, or austerities, should be accepted only for realizing
the Supreme Lord. By accepting austerity in devotional service, one regains his
spiritual life, and as soon as one regains his spiritual life, he enjoys unlimited
spiritual bliss. But if someone undertakes austerities and penances for some
material gain, then, as stated in the Bhagavad-gétä, the results are temporary
and are desired only by persons of less intelligence. "
TEXT 8
inazAAmauKaeSau KaâAetaAs$a,
tamas$aA BaAinta na ƒah"A:
yaTaA paApaena paASaNx"A
na ih" vaed"A: k(laAE yaugAe
niçä-mukheñu khadyotäs
tamasä bhänti na grahäù
yathä päpena päñaëòä
na hi vedäù kalau yuge
SYNONYMS
niçä-mukheñu—during the moments of evening twilight; khadyotäù——the
glowworms; tamasä—because of the darkness; bhänti—shine; na——not;
grahäù—the planets; yathä—as; päpena—because of sinful activities;
päñaëòäù—atheistic doctrines; na—and not; hi—certainly; vedäù—the Vedas;
kalau yuge-in the age of Kali.
TRANSLATION
In the evening twilight during the rainy season, the darkness allowed the
glowworms but not the stars to shine forth, just as in the age of Kali the
predominance of sinful activities allows atheistic doctrines to overshadow the
true knowledge of the Vedas.
PURPORT
Çréla Prabhupäda comments as follows: "During the rainy season, in the
evening there are many glowworms visible about the tops of trees, hither and
thither, and they glitter just like lights. But the luminaries of the sky, the stars
and the moon, are not visible. Similarly, in the age of Kali, persons who are
atheists or miscreants become very prominently visible, whereas persons who
are actually following the Vedic principles for spiritual emancipation are
practically obscured. This age, Kali-yuga, is compared to the cloudy season of
the living entities. In this age, real knowledge is covered by the influence of
the material advancement of civilization. The cheap mental speculators,
atheists and manufacturers of so-called religious principles become prominent
like the glowworms, whereas persons strictly following the Vedic principles, or
scriptural injunctions, become covered by the clouds of this age.
"People should learn to take advantage of the actual luminaries of the
sky—the sun, moon and stars—instead of the glowworms' light. Actually, the
glowworms cannot give any light in the darkness of night. As clouds sometimes
clear, even in the rainy season, and the moon, stars and sun become visible, so
even in this Kali-yuga there are sometimes advantages. The Vedic movement
of Lord Caitanya—the distribution of the chanting of the Hare Kåñëa
mantra—is understood in this way. People seriously anxious to find real life
should take advantage of this movement instead of looking toward the
so-called light of mental speculators and atheists."
TEXT 9
™autvaA pajaRnyainanadM"
maNx"]k(A: s$as$a{jauigARr":
taUSNAI%M zAyaAnaA: ‘aAgyaã"ä,"
“aAöNAA inayamaAtyayae
çrutvä parjanya-ninadaà
maëòukäù sasåjur giraù
tüñëéà çayänäù präg yadvad
brähmaëä niyamätyaye
SYNONYMS
çrutvä—hearing; parjanya—of the rain clouds; ninadam—the resounding;
maëòukäù—the frogs; sasåjuù—emitted; giraù—their sounds; tüñëém—silently;
çayänäù—lying; präk—previously; yadvat—just as; brähmaëäù—brähmaëa
students; niyama-atyaye—after finishing their morning duties.
TRANSLATION
The frogs, who had all along been lying silent, suddenly began croaking
when they heard the rumbling of the rain clouds, in the same way that
brähmaëa students, who perform their morning duties in silence begin reciting
their lessons when called by their teacher.
PURPORT
Çréla Prabhupäda comments, "After the first rainfall, when there is a
thundering sound in the clouds, all the frogs begin to croak, like students
suddenly engaged in reading their studies. Students are generally supposed to
rise early in the morning. They do not usually arise of their own accord,
however, but only when there is a bell sounded in the temple or in the cultural
institution. By the order of the spiritual master they immediately rise, and
after finishing their morning duties they sit down to study the Vedas or chant
Vedic mantras. Similarly, everyone is sleeping in the darkness of Kali-yuga, but
when there is a great äcärya, by his calling only everyone takes to the study of
the Vedas to acquire actual knowledge."
TEXT 10
@As$aªautpaTagAAimanya:
ºau"‰"naâAe'nauzAuSyataI:
pauMs$aAe yaTaAsvatan‡asya
de"h"‰"ivaNA s$ampad":
äsann utpatha-gäminyaù
kñudra-nadyo 'nuçuñyatéù
puàso yathäsvatantrasya
deha-draviëa -sampadaù
SYNONYMS
äsan—they became; utpatha-gäminyaù—strayed from their courses;
kñudra—insignificant; nadyaù—the rivers; anuçuñyatéù—drying up;
puàsaù—of a person; yathä—as; asvatantrasya—who is not independent (that
is, who is under the control of his senses); deha—the body; draviëa—physical
property; sampadaù—and riches.
TRANSLATION
With the advent of the rainy season, the insignificant streams, which had
become dry, began to swell and then strayed from their proper courses, like the
body, property and money of a man controlled by the urges of his senses.
PURPORT
Çréla Prabhupäda comments, "During the rainy season, many small ponds,
lakes and rivulets become filled with water; otherwise the rest of the year they
remain dry. Similarly, materialistic persons are dry, but sometimes, when they
are in a so-called opulent position, with a home or children or a little bank
balance, they appear to be flourishing, but immediately afterwards they
become dry again, like the small rivulets and ponds. The poet Vidyäpati said
that in the society of friends, family, children, wife and so on, there is certainly
some pleasure, but that pleasure is compared to a drop of water in the desert.
Everyone is hankering after happiness, just as in the desert everyone is
hankering after water. If in the desert there is a drop of water, the water is
there, of course, but the benefit from that drop of water is very insignificant.
In our materialistic way of life, we are hankering after an ocean of happiness,
but in the form of society, friends and mundane love we are getting no more
than a drop of water. Our satisfaction is never achieved, as the small rivulets,
lakes and ponds are never filled with water in the dry season."
TEXT 11
h"ir"taA h"ir"iBa: zASpaEr,"
wn‰"gAAepaEê laAeih"taA
oicC$laIn‹ak{(tacC$AyaA
na{NAAM ™aIir"va BaUr"BaUta,
haritä haribhiù çañpair
indragopaiç ca lohitä
ucchiléndhra-kåta-cchäyä
nåëäà çrér iva bhür abhüt
SYNONYMS
haritäù—greenish; haribhiù—which is green; çañpaiù—because of the newly
grown grass; indragopaiù—because of the indragopa insects; ca—and;
lohitä—reddish; ucchiléndhra—by the mushrooms; kåta—afforded;
chäyä—shelter; nåëäm—of men; çréù—the opulence; iva—just as; bhüù—the
earth; abhüt—became.
TRANSLATION
The newly grown grass made the earth emerald green, the indragopa insects
added a reddish hue, and white mushrooms added further color and circles of
shade. Thus the earth appeared like a person who has suddenly become rich.
PURPORT
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé comments that the word nåëäm indicates men of the
royal order. Thus the colorful display of dark green fields decorated with bright
red insects and white mushroom umbrellas can be compared to a royal parade
displaying the military strength of a king.
TEXT 12
ºae‡aAiNA zASyas$ampaià":
k(SaRk(ANAAM maudM" d"äu":
maAinanaAmanautaApaM vaE
dE"vaADaInamajaAnataAma,
kñeträëi çañya-sampadbhiù
karñakäëäà mudaà daduù
mäninäm anutäpaà vai
daivädhénam ajänatäm
SYNONYMS
kñeträëi—the fields; çañya-sampadbhiù—with their wealth of grains;
karñakäëäm—to the farmers; mudam—joy; daduù—gave; mäninäm—to others
who are falsely proud; anutäpam—remorse; vai—indeed; daiva-adhénam—the
control of destiny; ajänatäm—not understanding.
TRANSLATION
With their wealth of grains, the fields gave joy to the farmers. But those
fields created remorse in the hearts of those who were too proud to engage in
farming and who failed to understand how everything is under the control of
the Supreme.
PURPORT
It is common for people living in large cities to become miserable and
disgusted when there is ample rainfall. They do not understand or have
forgotten that the rain is nourishing the crops they will eat. Although they
certainly enjoy eating, they do not appreciate that with the rain the Supreme
Lord is feeding not only human beings but also plants, animals and the earth
itself.
Modern, sophisticated people often look down their noses at those engaged
in agricultural work. In fact, in American slang, a simple, unintelligent person
is sometimes called "a farmer." There are also government agencies that restrict
agricultural production because certain capitalists fear the effect on market
prices. Because of various artificial and manipulative practices in modern
governments, we find widespread food shortages throughout the world—even
in the United States, among the poverty-stricken—and at the same time we
find the governments paying farmers not to plant crops. Sometimes these
governments throw huge amounts of food into the ocean. Thus the
administration of the arrogant and ignorant, those who are too proud to obey
the laws of God or too ignorant to recognize them, will always cause frustration
among the people, whereas a God conscious government will provide
abundance and happiness for all.
TEXT 13
jalasTalaAEk(s$a: s$avaeR
navavaAir"inaSaevayaA
@iba”ana, ç&icarM" è&paM
yaTaA h"ir"inaSaevayaA
jala-sthalaukasaù sarve
nava-väri-niñevayä
abibhran ruciraà rüpaà
yathä hari-niñevayä
SYNONYMS
jala—of the water; sthala—and the land; okasaù—the residents; sarve—all;
nava—new; väri—of the water; niñevayä—by taking recourse; abibhran—they
took on; ruciram—attractive; rüpam—form; yathä—just as; hari-niñevayä—by
rendering devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
As all creatures of the land and water took advantage of the newly fallen
rainwater, their forms became attractive and pleasing, just as a devotee becomes
beautiful by engaging in the service of the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
Çréla Prabhupäda comments as follows: "We have practical experience of
this with our students in the International Society for Krishna Consciousness.
Before becoming students, they were dirty-looking, although they had
naturally beautiful personal features; but due to having no information of
Kåñëa consciousness they appeared very dirty and wretched. Since they have
taken to Kåñëa consciousness, their health has improved, and by following the
rules and regulations they have increased their bodily luster. When they are
dressed with saffron-colored cloth, with tilaka on their foreheads and beads in
their hands and on their necks, they look exactly as if they have come directly
from Vaikuëöha."
TEXT 14
s$air"ià": s$aËÿta: is$anDauzA,
cauºaAeBa ìs$anaAeimaRmaAna,
@pa¸(yaAeigAnaiêÔaM
k(AmaAlM( gAuNAyaugyaTaA
saridbhiù saìgataù sindhuç
cukñobha çvasanormimän
apakva-yoginaç cittaà
kämäktaà guëa-yug yathä
SYNONYMS
saridbhiù—with the rivers; saìgataù—on account of meeting; sindhuù—the
ocean; cukñobha—became agitated; çvasana—blown by the wind;
ürmi-män—having waves; apakva—immature; yoginaù—of a yogé; cittam—the
mind; käma-aktam—tainted with lust; guëa-yuk—maintaining connection
with objects of sense gratification; yathä—just as.
TRANSLATION
Where the rivers joined the ocean it became agitated, its waves blown about
by the wind, just as the mind of an immature yogé becomes agitated because he
is still tainted by lust and attached to the objects of sense gratification.
TEXT 15
igAr"yaAe vaSaRDaAr"AiBar,"
h"nyamaAnaA na ivavyaTau:
@iBaBaUyamaAnaA vyas$anaEr,"
yaTaADaAeºajacaetas$a:
girayo varña-dhäräbhir
hanyamänä na vivyathuù
abhibhüyamänä vyasanair
yathädhokñaja-cetasaù
SYNONYMS
girayaù—the mountains; varña-dhäräbhiù—by the rain-bearing clouds;
hanyamänäù—being struck; na vivyathuù—did not shake;
abhibhüyamänäù—being attacked; vyasanaiù—by dangers; yathä—as;
adhokñaja-cetasaù—those whose minds are absorbed in the Supreme Lord.
TRANSLATION
Just as devotees whose minds are absorbed in the Personality of Godhead
remain peaceful even when attacked by all sorts of dangers, the mountains in
the rainy season were not at all disturbed by the repeated striking of the
rain-bearing clouds.
PURPORT
When splashed by torrents of rain, the mountains are not shaken; rather,
they are cleansed of dirt and become resplendent and beautiful. Similarly, an
advanced devotee of the Supreme Lord is not shaken from his devotional
program by disturbing conditions, which instead cleanse his heart of the dust
of attachment to this world. Thus the devotee becomes beautiful and
resplendent by tolerating difficult conditions. In fact, a devotee accepts all
reverses in life as the mercy of Lord Kåñëa, realizing that all suffering is due to
the sufferer's own previous misdeeds.
TEXT 16
maAgAAR baBaUvau: s$aind"gDaAs$a,
ta{NAEzC$ªaA ÷s$aMs$k{(taA:
naAByasyamaAnaA: ™autayaAe
iã"jaE: k(Alaena caAh"taA:
märgä babhüvuù sandigdhäs
tåëaiç channä hy asaàskåtäù
näbhyasyamänäù çrutayo
dvijaiù kälena cähatäù
SYNONYMS
märgäù—the roads; babhüvuù—became; sandigdhäù—obscured; tåëaiù—by
grass; channäù—covered over; hi—indeed; asaàskåtäù—not cleansed; na
abhyasyamänäù—not being studied; çrutayaù—the scriptures; dvijaiù—by the
brähmaëas; kälena-by the effects of time; ca—and; ähatäù—corrupted.
TRANSLATION
During the rainy season the roads, not being cleansed, became covered with
grass and debris and were thus difficult to make out. These roads were like
religious scriptures that brähmaëas no longer study and that thus become
corrupted and covered over with the passage of time.
TEXT 17
laAek(banDauSau maeGaeSau
ivaâutaêlas$aAEô$d"A:
sTaEya< na ca‚u(: k(Aimanya:
pauç&SaeSau gAuiNAiSvava
loka-bandhuñu megheñu
vidyutaç cala-sauhådäù
sthairyaà na cakruù käminyaù
puruñeñu guëiñv iva
SYNONYMS
loka—of all the world; bandhuñu—who are the friends; megheñu—among the
clouds; vidyutaù—the lightning; cala-sauhådäù—fickle in their friendship;
sthairyam—steadiness; na cakruù—did not maintain; käminyaù—lusty women;
puruñeñu—among men; guëiñu—who are virtuous; iva—as.
TRANSLATION
Though the clouds are the well-wishing friends of all living beings, the
lightning, fickle in its affinities, moved from one group of clouds to another,
like lusty women unfaithful even to virtuous men.
PURPORT
Çréla Prabhupäda comments, "During the rainy season, lightning appears in
one group of clouds and then immediately in another group of clouds. This
phenomenon is compared to a lusty woman who does not fix her mind on one
man. A cloud is compared to a qualified person because it pours rain and gives
sustenance to many people; a man who is qualified similarly gives sustenance
to many living creatures, such as family members or many workers in business.
Unfortunately, his whole life can be disturbed by a wife who divorces him;
when the husband is disturbed, the whole family is ruined, the children are
dispersed or the business is closed, and everything is affected. It is therefore
recommended that a woman desiring to advance in Kåñëa consciousness
peacefully live with a husband and that the couple not separate under any
condition. The husband and wife should control sex indulgence and
concentrate their minds on Kåñëa consciousness so their life may be successful.
After all, in the material world a man requires a woman, and a woman requires
a man. When they are combined, they should live peacefully in Kåñëa
consciousness and should not be restless like the lightning flashing from one
group of clouds to another."
TEXT 18
DanauivaRyaita maAhe"n‰M"
inagAuRNAM ca gAuiNAnyaBaAta,
vyale( gAuNAvyaitak(re"
'gAuNAvaAna, pauç&SaAe yaTaA
dhanur viyati mähendraà
nirguëaà ca guëiny abhät
vyakte guëa-vyatikare
'guëavän puruño yathä
SYNONYMS
dhanuù—the bow (rainbow); viyati—within the sky; mähä-indram—of Lord
Indra; nirguëam—without qualities (or without a bowstring); ca—although;
guëini—within the sky, which has definite qualities like sound;
abhät—appeared; vyakte—within the manifest material nature;
guëa-vyatikare—which consists of the interactions of material qualities;
aguëa-vän—He who has no contact with material qualities; puruñaù—the
Supreme Personality; yathä—just as.
TRANSLATION
When the curved bow of Indra [the rainbow] appeared in the sky, which had
the quality of thundering sound, it was unlike ordinary bows because it did not
rest upon a string. Similarly, when the Supreme Lord appears in this world,
which is the interaction of the material qualities, He is unlike ordinary persons
because He remains free from all material qualities and independent of all
material conditions.
PURPORT
Çréla Prabhupäda comments as follows: "Sometimes, in addition to the
roaring thunder of the clouds, there is an appearance of a rainbow, which
stands as a bow without a string. Usually, a bow stays in the curved position
because it is tied at its two ends by the bowstring; but in the rainbow there is
no such string, and yet it rests in the sky so beautifully. Similarly, when the
Supreme Personality of Godhead descends to this material world, He appears
just like an ordinary human being, but He is not resting on any material
condition. In the Bhagavad-gétä, the Lord says that He appears by His internal
potency, which is free from the bondage of the external potency. What is
bondage for the ordinary creature is freedom for the Personality of Godhead."
TEXT 19
na r"r"AjaAex"]pazC$ªa:
svajyaAetµaAr"AijataEGaR$naE:
@hM"matyaA BaAis$atayaA
svaBaAs$aA pauç&SaAe yaTaA
na raräjoòupaç channaù
sva-jyotsnä-räjitair ghanaiù
ahaà-matyä bhäsitayä
sva-bhäsä puruño yathä
SYNONYMS
na raräja—did not shine forth; uòupaù—the moon; channaù—covered;
sva-jyotsnä—by its own light; räjitaiù—which are illuminated; ghanaiù—by
the clouds; aham-matyä—by false ego; bhäsitayä—which is illuminated;
sva-bhäsä—by his own luster; puruñaù—the living entity; yathä—as.
TRANSLATION
During the rainy season the moon was prevented from appearing directly by
the covering of the clouds, which were themselves illumined by the moon's
rays. Similarly, the living being in material existence is prevented from
appearing directly by the covering of the false ego, which is itself illumined by
the consciousness of the pure soul.
PURPORT
The analogy given here is excellent. During the rainy season we cannot see
the moon in the sky, because the moon is covered by clouds. These clouds,
however, are radiant with the glow of the moon's own rays. Similarly, in our
conditioned, material existence we cannot directly perceive the soul, because
our consciousness is covered by the false ego, which is the false identification
with the material world and the material body. Yet it is the soul's own
consciousness that illumines the false ego.
As the Gétä describes, the energy of the soul is consciousness, and when this
consciousness manifests through the screen of false ego, it appears as dull,
material consciousness, in which there is no direct vision of the soul or God. In
the material world, even great philosophers ultimately resort to hazy
ambiguities when speaking about the Absolute Truth, just as the cloudy sky
manifests only in a dull and indirect way the iridescent light of the moon.
In material life, our false ego is often enthusiastic, hopeful and apparently
aware of various material affairs, and such consciousness encourages us to push
on in material existence. But in truth we are merely experiencing the dull
reflection of our original, pure consciousness, which is Kåñëa
consciousness—direct perception of the soul and God. Not realizing that the
false ego merely hampers and dulls our real, spiritual consciousness, which is
fully enlightened and blissful, we mistakenly think that material consciousness
is full of knowledge and happiness. This is comparable to thinking that the
luminous clouds are lighting up the night sky, while in fact it is the moonshine
that illumines the sky, and the clouds that merely dull and hamper the
moonshine. The clouds appear luminous because they are filtering and
impeding the brilliant rays of the moon. Similarly, at times material
consciousness appears pleasurable or enlightened because it is screening or
filtering the original, blissful and enlightened consciousness coming directly
from the soul. If we can understand the ingenious analogy given in this verse,
we can easily advance in Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 20
maeGaAgAmaAets$avaA ô$í"A:
‘atyanand"iHC$KaiNx"na:
gA{he"Sau taæainaivaRNNAA
yaTaAcyautajanaAgAmae
meghägamotsavä håñöäù
pratyanandaï chikhaëòinaù
gåheñu tapta-nirviëëä
yathäcyuta-janägame
SYNONYMS
megha—of clouds; ägama—because of the arrival; utsaväù—who celebrate a
festival; håñöäù—becoming joyful; pratyanandan—they cried out in greeting;
çikhaëòinaù—the peacocks; gåheñu—within their homes; tapta—those who are
distressed; nirviëëäù—and then become happy; yathä—just as; acyuta—of the
infallible Personality of Godhead; jana—of the devotees; ägame—upon the
arrival.
TRANSLATION
The peacocks became festive and cried out a joyful greeting when they saw
the clouds arrive, just as people distressed in household life feel pleasure when
the pure devotees of the infallible Supreme Lord visit them.
PURPORT
After the dry summer season, the peacocks become jubilant with the arrival
of the first thundering rain clouds, and thus they dance in great happiness.
Çréla Prabhupäda comments, "We have practical experience that many of our
students were dry and morose previous to their coming to Kåñëa consciousness,
but having come in contact with devotees they are now dancing like jubilant
peacocks."
TEXT 21
paItvaApa: paAd"paA: paià"r,"
@As$aªaAnaAtmamaUtaRya:
‘aAfºaAmaAstapas$aA ™aAntaA
yaTaA k(AmaAnaus$aevayaA
pétväpaù pädapäù padbhir
äsan nänätma-mürtayaù
präk kñämäs tapasä çräntä
yathä kämänusevayä
SYNONYMS
pétvä—having drunk; äpaù—water; päda-päù—the trees; padbhiù—with their
feet; äsan—assumed; nänä—various; ätma-mürtayaù—bodily features;
präk—previously; kñämäù—emaciated; tapasä—by austerities;
çräntäù—fatigued; yathä—as; käma-anusevayä—by enjoying acquired desired
objects.
TRANSLATION
The trees had grown thin and dry, but after they drank the newly fallen
rainwater through their feet, their various bodily features blossomed. Similarly,
one whose body has grown thin and weak from austerity again exhibits his
healthy bodily features upon enjoying the material objects gained through that
austerity.
PURPORT
The word päda means foot, and pä means drinking. Trees are called pädapa
because they drink through their roots, which are likened to feet. Upon
drinking the newly fallen rainwater, the trees in Våndävana began to manifest
new leaves, sprouts and blossoms, and they thus enjoyed new growth.
Similarly, materialistic persons often perform severe austerities to acquire the
object of their desire. For example, politicians in America undergo grueling
austerities while traveling about the countryside campaigning for election.
Businessmen also will often deny personal comfort to make their business
successful. Such austere persons, upon acquiring the fruits of their austerity,
again become healthy and satisfied, like trees eagerly drinking rainwater after
enduring the austerity of a dry, hot summer.
TEXT 22
s$ar":svazAAntar"AeDa:s$au
nyaUSaur"ËÿAipa s$aAr"s$aA:
gA{he"SvazAAntak{(tyaeSau
ƒaAmyaA wva äu"r"AzAyaA:
saraùsv açänta-rodhaùsu
nyüñur aìgäpi särasäù
gåheñv açänta-kåtyeñu
grämyä iva duräçayäù
SYNONYMS
saraùsu—upon the lakes; açänta—disturbed; rodhaùsu—whose banks;
nyüñuù—continued to dwell; aìga—my dear King; api—indeed; särasäù—the
cranes; gåheñu—in their homes; açänta—feverish; kåtyeñu—where activities
are performed; grämyäù—materialistic men; iva-indeed; duräçayäù—whose
minds are contaminated.
TRANSLATION
The cranes continued dwelling on the shores of the lakes, although the
shores were agitated during the rainy season, just as materialistic persons with
contaminated minds always remain at home, despite the many disturbances
there.
PURPORT
During the rainy season there are often mud slides around the shores of
lakes, and thorny hushes, stones and other debris sometimes accumulate there.
Despite all these inconveniences, ducks and cranes continue meandering
around the lakeshores. Similarly, innumerable painful occurrences are always
disturbing family life, but a materialistic man never even considers leaving his
family in the hands of his grown sons and going away for spiritual
improvement. He regards such an idea as shocking and uncivilized, because he
is completely ignorant of the Absolute Truth and his relationship to that
Truth.
TEXT 23
jalaAEGaEinaRr"iBaânta
s$aetavaAe vaSaRtaIìre"
paASaiNx"naAmas$aã"AdE"r,"
vaed"maAgAAR: k(laAE yaTaA
jalaughair nirabhidyanta
setavo varñatéçvare
päñaëòinäm asad-vädair
veda-märgäù kalau yathä
SYNONYMS
jala-oghaiù—by the floodwater; nirabhidyanta—became broken; setavaù—the
dikes; varñati—when he is showering rain; éçvare—Lord Indra;
päñaëòinäm—of the atheists; asat-vädaiù—by the false theories;
veda-märgäù—the paths of the Vedas; kalau-in the Kali-yuga; yathä—as.
TRANSLATION
When Indra sent forth his rains, the floodwaters broke through the
irrigation dikes in the agricultural fields, just as in the Kali-yuga the atheists'
false theories break down the boundaries of Vedic injunctions.
TEXT 24
vyamauÂana, vaAyauiBanauRªaA
BaUtaeByaêAma{taM GanaA:
yaTaAizASaAe ivazpataya:
k(Alae k(Alae iã"jaeir"taA:
vyamuïcan väyubhir nunnä
bhütebhyaç cämåtaà ghanäù
yathäçiño viç-patayaù
käle käle dvijeritäù
SYNONYMS
vyamuïcan—they released; väyubhiù—by the winds; nunnäù—impelled;
bhütebhyaù—to all living beings; ca—and; amåtam—their nectarean water;
ghanäù—the clouds; yathä—as; äçiñaù—charitable benedictions;
viö-patayaù—kings; käle käle—from time to time; dvija—by the brähmaëas;
éritäù-encouraged.
TRANSLATION
The clouds, impelled by the winds, released their nectarean water for the
benefit of all living beings, just as kings, instructed by their brähmaëa priests,
dispense charity to the citizens.
PURPORT
Çréla Prabhupäda comments, "In the rainy season, the clouds, tossed by the
wind, deliver water that is welcomed like nectar. When the Vedic followers,
the brähmaëas, inspire rich men like kings and the wealthy mercantile
community to give charity in the performance of great sacrifices, the
distribution of such wealth is also nectarean. The four sections of human
society, namely the brähmaëas, the kñatriyas, the vaiçyas and the çüdras, are
meant to live peacefully in a cooperative mood; this is possible when they are
guided by expert Vedic brähmaëas who perform sacrifices and distribute
wealth equally."
TEXT 25
WvaM vanaM taã"iSaRïM"
pa¸(KajauRr"jambaumata,
gAAegAAepaAlaEva{RtaAe r"ntauM
s$abala: ‘aAivazAÜ"ir":
evaà vanaà tad varñiñöhaà
pakva-kharjura-jambumat
go-gopälair våto rantuà
sa-balaù präviçad dhariù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; vanam—forest; tat—that; varñiñöham—most resplendent;
pakva—ripe; kharjura—dates; jambu—and jambu fruits; mat—having; go—by
the cows; gopälaiù—and the cowherd boys; våtaù—surrounded; rantum—with
the purpose of playing; sa-balaù—accompanied by Lord Balaräma;
präviçat—He entered; hariù—Lord Kåñëa.
TRANSLATION
When the Våndävana forest had thus become resplendent, filled with ripe
dates and jambu fruits, Lord Kåñëa, surrounded by His cows and cowherd
boyfriends and accompanied by Çré Balaräma, entered that forest to enjoy.
TEXT 26
DaenavaAe mand"gAAimanya
ODaAeBaAre"NA BaUyas$aA
yayauBaRgAvataAó"taA
åu"taM ‘aItyaA µautastanaA:
dhenavo manda-gäminya
üdho-bhäreëa bhüyasä
yayur bhagavatähütä
drutaà prétyä snuta-stanäù
SYNONYMS
dhenavaù—the cows; manda-gäminyaù—moving slowly; üdhaù—of their
udders; bhäreëa—because of the weight; bhüyasä—very great; yayuù—they
went; bhagavatä—by the Lord; ähütäù—being called; drutam—quickly;
prétyä—out of affection; snuta—wet; stanäù—their udders.
TRANSLATION
The cows had to move slowly because of their weighty milk bags, but they
quickly ran to the Supreme Personality of Godhead as soon as He called them,
their affection for Him causing their udders to become wet.
PURPORT
Çréla Prabhupäda comments, "The cows, being fed by new grasses, became
very healthy, and their milk bags were all very full. When Lord Kåñëa called
them by name, they immediately came to Him out of affection, and in their
joyful condition the milk flowed from their bags."
TEXT 27
vanaAEk(s$a: ‘amauid"taA
vanar"AjaImaRDaucyauta:
jalaDaAr"A igAre"naARd"Aä,"
@As$aªaA d"ä{"zAe gAuh"A:
vanaukasaù pramuditä
vana-räjér madhu-cyutaù
jala-dhärä girer nädäd
äsannä dadåçe guhäù
SYNONYMS
vana-okasaù—the aborigine girls of the forest; pramuditäù—joyful;
vana-räjéù—the trees of the forest; madhu-cyutaù—dripping sweet sap;
jala-dhäräù—waterfalls; gireù—on the mountains; nädät—from their
resounding; äsannäù—nearby; dadåçe—He observed; guhäù—caves.
TRANSLATION
The Lord saw the joyful aborigine girls of the forest, the trees dripping sweet
sap, and the mountain waterfalls, whose resounding indicated that there were
caves nearby.
TEXT 28
¸(icaã"nas$paita‚(Aexe"
gAuh"AyaAM caAiBavaSaRita
inaivaRzya BagAvaAna, re"mae
k(nd"maUlaP(laAzAna:
kvacid vanaspati-kroòe
guhäyäà cäbhivarñati
nirviçya bhagavän reme
kanda-müla-phaläçanaù
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; vanaspati—of a tree; kroòe—in the hollow; guhäyäm—in a
cave; ca—or; abhivarñati—when it was raining; nirviçya—entering;
bhagavän—the Supreme Lord; reme—enjoyed; kanda-müla—roots;
phala—and fruits; açanaù—eating.
TRANSLATION
When it rained, the Lord would sometimes enter a cave or the hollow of a
tree to play and to eat roots and fruits.
PURPORT
Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé explains that during the rainy season bulbs and
roots are very tender and palatable, and Lord Kåñëa would eat them along with
wild fruits found in the forest. Lord Kåñëa and His young boyfriends would sit
in the hollow of a tree or within a cave and enjoy pastimes while waiting for
the rain to stop.
TEXT 29
d"DyaAed"naM s$amaAnaItaM
izAlaAyaAM s$ailalaAintake(
s$amBaAejanaIyaEbauRBaujae
gAAepaE: s$aÆÿSaRNAAinvata:
dadhy-odanaà samänétaà
çiläyäà saliläntike
sambhojanéyair bubhuje
gopaiù saìkarñaëänvitaù
SYNONYMS
dadhi-odanam—boiled rice mixed with yogurt; samänétam—sent; çéläyäm—on
a stone; salila-antike—near the water; sambhojanéyaiù—who would take meals
with Him; bubhuje—He ate; gopaiù—together with the cowherd boys;
saìkarñaëa-anvitaù—in the company of Lord Balaräma.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa would take His meal of boiled rice and yogurt, sent from home,
in the company of Lord Saìkarñaëa and the cowherd boys who regularly ate
with Him. They would all sit down to eat on a large stone near the water.
TEXTS 30-31
zAAã"laAepair" s$aMivazya
cavaRtaAe maIilataeºaNAAna,
ta{æaAna, va{SaAna, vats$atar"Ana,
gAAê svaAeDaAeBar"™amaA:
‘aAva{q%.i™ayaM ca taAM vaIºya
s$avaRk(Alas$auKaAvah"Ama,
BagAvaAna, paUjayaAM ca‚e(
@AtmazAftyaupaba{Mih"taAma,
çädvalopari saàviçya
carvato mélitekñaëän
tåptän våñän vatsatarän
gäç ca svodho-bhara-çramäù
prävåö-çriyaà ca täà vékñya
sarva-käla-sukhävahäm
bhagavän püjayäà cakre
ätma-çakty-upabåàhitäm
SYNONYMS
çädvala—a grassy patch; upari—upon; saàviçya—sitting; carvataù—who were
grazing; mélita—closed; ékñaëän—their eyes; tåptän—satisfied; våñän—the
bulls; vatsatarän—the calves; gäù—the cows; ca—and; sva—their own;
üdhaù—of the milk bags; bhara—by the weight; çramäù—fatigued; prävåö—of
the rainy season; çriyam—the opulence; ca—and; täm—that; vékñya—seeing;
sarva-käla—always; sukha—pleasure; ävahäm—giving; bhagavän—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; püjayäm cakre—honored; ätma-çakti—from
His internal potency; upabåàhitäm—expanded.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa watched the contented bulls, calves and cows sitting on the
green grass and grazing with closed eyes, and He saw that the cows were tired
from the burden of their heavy milk bags. Thus observing the beauty and
opulence of Våndävana's rainy season, a perennial source of great happiness, the
Lord offered all respect to that season, which was expanded from His own
internal potency.
PURPORT
The lush beauty of the rainy season in Våndävana is meant to enhance the
pleasure pastimes of Çré Kåñëa. Thus, to set the scene for the Lord's loving
affairs, His internal potency makes all the arrangements described in this
chapter.
TEXT 32
WvaM inavas$ataAestaismana,
r"Amake(zAvayaAe˜aRjae
zAr"ts$amaBavaã"Ya”aA
svacC$Ambvapaç&SaAinalaA
evaà nivasatos tasmin
räma-keçavayor vraje
çarat samabhavad vyabhrä
svacchämbv-aparuñänilä
SYNONYMS
evam—in this manner; nivasatoù—while the two of Them were dwelling;
tasmin—in that; räma-keçavayoù—Lord Räma and Lord Keçava; vraje—in
Våndävana; çarat—the fall season; samabhavat—became fully manifest;
vyabhrä—free from clouds in the sky; svaccha-ambu—in which the water was
clear; aparuña-anilä—and the wind was gentle.
TRANSLATION
While Lord Räma and Lord Keçava were thus dwelling in Våndävana, the
fall season arrived, when the sky is cloudless, the water clear and the wind
gentle.
TEXT 33
zAr"d"A naIr"jaAetpaÔyaA
naIr"AiNA ‘ak{(itaM yayau:
”aí"AnaAimava caetaAMis$a
paunayaAeRgAinaSaevayaA
çaradä nérajotpattyä
néräëi prakåtià yayuù
bhrañöänäm iva cetäàsi
punar yoga-niñevayä
SYNONYMS
çaradä—by the effect of the autumn season; néraja—the lotus flowers;
utpattyä—which regenerates; néräëi—the bodies of water; prakåtim—to their
natural state (of cleanliness); yayuù—returned; bhrañöänäm—of those who are
fallen; iva—just as; cetäàsi—the minds; punaù—once again; yoga—of
devotional service; niñevayä—by practice.
TRANSLATION
The autumn season, which regenerated the lotus flowers, also restored the
various bodies of water to their original purity, just as the process of devotional
service purifies the minds of the fallen yogés when they return to it.
TEXT 34
vyaAe°aAe'b”aM BaUtazAAbalyaM
Bauva: paÆÿmapaAM malama,
zAr"Àah"Ar"A™aimaNAAM
k{(SNAe Bail(yaRTaAzAuBama,
vyomno 'bbhraà bhüta-çäbalyaà
bhuvaù paìkam apäà malam
çaraj jahäräçramiëäà
kåñëe bhaktir yathäçubham
SYNONYMS
vyomnaù—in the sky; ap-bhram—the clouds; bhüta—of the animals;
çäbalyam—the crowded condition; bhuvaù—of the earth; paìkam—the muddy
covering; apäm—of the water; malam—the contamination; çarat—the
autumn season; jahära—removed; äçramiëäm—of the members of the four
different spiritual orders of human society; kåñëe—for Lord Kåñëa;
bhaktiù—devotional service; yathä—just as; açubham—all inauspiciousness.
TRANSLATION
Autumn cleared the sky of clouds, let the animals get out of their crowded
living conditions, cleaned the earth of its covering of mud, and purified the
water of contamination, in the same way that loving service rendered to Lord
Kåñëa frees the members of the four spiritual orders from their respective
troubles.
PURPORT
Every human being must perform the prescribed duties corresponding to
one of the four spiritual orders of life. These divisions are 1) celibate student
life, brahmacarya; 2) married life, gåhastha; 3) retired life, vänaprastha; and 4)
renounced life, sannyäsa. A brahmacäré must perform many menial duties
during his student life, but as he becomes advanced in loving service to Kåñëa,
his superiors recognize his spiritual status and elevate him to higher duties.
The innumerable obligations performed on behalf of wife and children
constantly harass a householder, but as he becomes advanced in loving service
to Kåñëa, he is automatically elevated by the laws of nature to more enjoyable,
spiritual occupations, and he somehow minimizes material duties.
Those in the vänaprastha, or retired, order of life also perform many duties,
and these can also be replaced by ecstatic loving service to Kåñëa. Similarly,
renounced life has many natural difficulties, not the least of which is that
sannyäsés, or renounced men, are inclined to meditate on the impersonal
aspect of the Absolute Truth. As stated in the Bhagavad-gétä (12.5), kleço
'dhikataras teñäm avyaktäsakta-cetasäm: "For those whose minds are attached to
the unmanifested, impersonal feature of the Lord, advancement is exceedingly
painful." But as soon as a sannyäsé takes to preaching the glories of Kåñëa in
every town and village, his life becomes a blissful sequence of beautiful
spiritual realizations.
In the autumn season the sky returns to its natural blue color. The
vanishing of the clouds is like the vanishing of troublesome duties in
brahmacäré life. Just after summer comes the rainy season, when the animals
sometimes become disturbed by the torrential storms and thus huddle together.
But the autumn season signals the time for the animals to go to their
respective areas and live more peacefully. This represents a householder's
becoming free from the harassment of family duties and being able to devote
more of his time to spiritual responsibilities, which are the real goal of life both
for himself and his family. The removal of the muddy layer on the earth is like
the removal of the inconveniences of vänaprastha life, and the purification of
the water is like the sanctification of sannyäsa life by one's preaching the
glories of Kåñëa without sex desire.
TEXT 35
s$avaRsvaM jalad"A ih"tvaA
ivare"jau: zAu”avacaRs$a:
yaTaA tyalE(SaNAA: zAAntaA
maunayaAe maul(ik(ilbaSaA:
sarva-svaà jaladä hitvä
virejuù çubhra-varcasaù
yathä tyaktaiñaëäù çäntä
munayo mukta-kilbiñäù
SYNONYMS
sarva-svam—everything they possess; jala-däù—the clouds; hitvä—having
given up; virejuù—shone forth; çubhra—pure; varcasaù—their effulgence;
yathä—just as; tyakta-eñaëäù—who have given up all desires;
çäntäù—pacified; munayaù—sages; mukta-kilbiñäù—freed from evil
propensities.
TRANSLATION
The clouds, having given up all they possessed, shone forth with purified
effulgence, just like peaceful sages who have given up all material desires and
are thus free of all sinful propensities.
PURPORT
When the clouds are filled with water, they are dark and cover the sun's
rays, just as the material mind of an impure man covers the soul shining
within. But when the clouds pour down their rain, they become white and
then brilliantly reflect the shining sun, just as a man who gives up all material
desires and sinful propensities becomes purified and then brilliantly reflects
his own soul and the Supreme Soul within.
TEXT 36
igAr"yaAe maumaucaustaAeyaM
¸(icaªa maumaucau: izAvama,
yaTaA ÁaAnaAma{taM k(Alae
ÁaAinanaAe d"d"tae na vaA
girayo mumucus toyaà
kvacin na mumucuù çivam
yathä jïänämåtaà käle
jïänino dadate na vä
SYNONYMS
girayaù—the mountains; mumucuù—released; toyam—their water;
kvacit—sometimes; na mumucuù—they did not release; çivam—pure;
yathä—just as; jïäna—of transcendental knowledge; amåtam—the nectar;
käle—at the appropriate time; jïäninaù—experts in spiritual knowledge;
dadate—bestow; na vä—or not.
TRANSLATION
During this season the mountains sometimes released their pure water and
sometimes did not, just as experts in transcendental science sometimes give the
nectar of transcendental knowledge and sometimes do not.
PURPORT
The first part of this chapter described the rainy season, and the second
part has been dealing with the autumn season, which begins when the rain
stops. During the rainy season water always flows from the mountains, but
during the autumn the water sometimes flows and sometimes does not.
Similarly, great saintly teachers sometimes speak expansively on spiritual
knowledge, and sometimes they are silent. The self-realized soul is closely in
touch with the Supreme Soul, and according to His desires a competent
spiritual scientist may or may not describe the Absolute Truth, depending on
the specific circumstances.
TEXT 37
naEvaAivad"na, ºaIyamaANAM
jalaM gAADajalaecar"A:
yaTaAyaur"nvahM" ºayyaM
nar"A maUX#A: ku(q%]imbana:
naivävidan kñéyamäëaà
jalaà gädha-jale-caräù
yathäyur anv-ahaà kñayyaà
narä müòhäù kuöumbinaù
SYNONYMS
na—not; eva—indeed; avidan—appreciated; kñéyamäëam—diminishing;
jalam—the water; gädha-jale—in shallow water; caräù—those who move;
yathä—as; äyuù—their life span; anu-aham—every day;
kñayyam—diminishing; naräù—men; müòhäù—foolish; kuöumbinaù—living
with family members.
TRANSLATION
The fish swimming in the increasingly shallow water did not at all
understand that the water was diminishing, just as foolish family men cannot
see how the time they have left to live is diminishing with every passing day.
PURPORT
After the rainy season the water gradually goes down, but stupid fish do not
understand this; thus they are often stranded on the lakeshores and
riverbanks. Similarly, those infatuated with family life do not understand that
the remainder of their life is constantly decreasing; thus they fail to perfect
their Kåñëa consciousness and are stranded in the cycle of birth and death.
TEXT 38
gAADavaAir"car"AstaApama,
@ivand"HC$r"d"kR(jama,
yaTaA d"ir"‰": k{(paNA:
ku(q%]mbyaivaijataein‰"ya:
gädha-väri-caräs täpam
avindaï charad-arka-jam
yathä daridraù kåpaëaù
kuöumby avijitendriyaù
SYNONYMS
gädha-väri-caräù—those who were moving in shallow water; täpam—suffering;
avindan—experienced; çarat-arka-jam—due to the sun in the autumn season;
yathä—as; daridraù—a poor person; kåpaëaù—miserly; kuöumbé—absorbed in
family life; avijita-indriyaù—who has not controlled the senses.
TRANSLATION
Just as a miserly, poverty-stricken person overly absorbed in family life
suffers because he cannot control his senses, the fish swimming in the shallow
water had to suffer the heat of the autumn sun.
PURPORT
Although, as described in the previous verse, unintelligent fish are not
aware of the diminishing water, one may think these fish are still happy
according to the old proverb "Ignorance is bliss." But even the ignorant fish are
scorched by the autumn sun. Similarly, although an attached family man may
consider his ignorance of spiritual life blissful, he is constantly disturbed by the
problems of family life, and, indeed, his uncontrolled senses lead him into a
situation of unrelieved anguish.
TEXT 39
zAnaE: zAnaEjaRò": paÆMÿ
sTalaAnyaAmaM ca vaIç&Da:
yaTaAhM"mamataAM DaIr"A:
zAr"Ir"Aid"SvanaAtmas$au
çanaiù çanair jahuù paìkaà
sthaläny ämaà ca vérudhaù
yathähaà-mamatäà dhéräù
çarérädiñv anätmasu
SYNONYMS
çanaiù çanaiù—very gradually; jahuù—gave up; paìkam—their mud;
sthaläni—the places of land; ämam—their unripe condition; ca—and;
vérudhaù—the plants; yathä—as; aham-mamatäm—egotism and possessiveness;
dhéräù—sober sages; çaréra-ädiñu—focused upon the material body and other
external objects; anätmasu—which are completely distinct from the real self.
TRANSLATION
Gradually the different areas of land gave up their muddy condition and the
plants grew past their unripe stage, in the same way that sober sages give up
egotism and possessiveness. These are based on things different from the real
self-namely, the material body and its by-products.
PURPORT
The word ädiñu in this verse indicates the by-products of the body, such as
children, home and wealth.
TEXT 40
inaêlaAmbaur"BaUÔaUSNAI%M
s$amau"‰": zAr"d"AgAmae
@Atmanyaupar"tae s$amyax.~
mauinavyauRpar"taAgAma:
niçcalämbur abhüt tüñëéà
samudraù çarad-ägame
ätmany uparate samyaì
munir vyuparatägamaù
SYNONYMS
niçcala—motionless; ambuù—its water; abhüt—became; tüñném—quiet;
samudraù—the ocean; çarat—of the fall season; ägame—with the coming;
ätmani—when the self; uparate—has desisted from material activities;
samyak—completely; muniù—a sage; vyuparata—giving up;
ägamaù—recitation of the Vedic mantras.
TRANSLATION
With the arrival of autumn, the ocean and the lakes became silent, their
water still, just like a sage who has desisted from all material activities and given
up his recitation of Vedic mantras.
PURPORT
One recites ordinary Vedic mantras for material promotion, mystic power
and impersonal salvation. But when a sage is completely free of personal desire,
he vibrates the transcendental glories of the Supreme Lord exclusively.
TEXT 41
ke(d"Are"ByastvapaAe'gA{õ"na,
k(SaRk(A ä{"X#s$aetauiBa:
yaTaA ‘aANAE: ›avajÁaAnaM
taiªar"AeDaena yaAeigAna:
kedärebhyas tv apo 'gåhëan
karñakä dåòha-setubhiù
yathä präëaiù sravaj jïänaà
tan-nirodhena yoginaù
SYNONYMS
kedärebhyaù—from the flooded fields of rice paddy; tu—and; apaù—the water;
agåhëan—took; karñakäù—the farmers; dåòha—strong; setubhiù—with dikes;
yathä—as; präëaiù—through the senses; sravat—flowing out;
jïänam—consciousness; tat—of those senses; nirodhena—by the strict control;
yoginaù—yogés.
TRANSLATION
In the same way that the practitioners of yoga bring their senses under strict
control to check their consciousness from flowing out through the agitated
senses, the farmers erected strong mud banks to keep the water within their
rice fields from draining out.
PURPORT
Çréla Prabhupäda comments, "In autumn, farmers save the water within the
fields by building strong walls so that the water contained within the field
cannot run out. There is hardly any hope for new rainfall; therefore they want
to save whatever is in the field. Similarly, a person who is actually advanced in
self-realization protects his energy by controlling the senses. It is advised that
after the age of fifty, one should retire from family life and conserve the
energy of the body for utilization in the advancement of Kåñëa consciousness.
Unless one is able to control the senses and engage them in the transcendental
loving service of Mukunda, there is no possibility of salvation."
TEXT 42
zAr"d"k(A<zAujaAMstaApaAna,
BaUtaAnaAmaux"]paAe'h"r"ta,
de"h"AiBamaAnajaM baAeDaAe
mauku(nd"Ae ˜ajayaAeiSataAma,
çarad-arkäàçu-jäàs täpän
bhütänäm uòupo 'harat
dehäbhimäna-jaà bodho
mukundo vraja-yoñitäm
SYNONYMS
çarat-arka—of the autumn sun; aàçu—from the rays; jän—generated;
täpän—suffering; bhütänäm—of all creatures; uòupaù—the moon;
aharat—has taken away; deha—with the material body; abhimäna-jam—based
on false identification; bodhaù—wisdom; mukundaù—Lord Kåñëa;
vraja-yoñitäm—of the women of Våndävana.
TRANSLATION
The autumn moon relieved all creatures of the suffering caused by the sun's
rays, just as wisdom relieves a person of the misery caused by his identifying
with his material body and as Lord Mukunda relieves Våndävana's ladies of the
distress caused by their separation from Him.
TEXT 43
KamazAAeBata inamaeRGaM
zAr"iã"malataAr"k(ma,
s$aÔvayaulM( yaTaA icaÔaM
zAbd"“aöATaRd"zARnama,
kham açobhata nirmeghaà
çarad-vimala-tärakam
sattva-yuktaà yathä cittaà
çabda-brahmärtha-darçanam
SYNONYMS
kham—the sky; açobhata—shone brilliantly; nirmegham—free from clouds;
çarat—in the fall; vimala—clear; tärakam—and starry;
sattva-yuktam—endowed with (spiritual) goodness; yathä—just as; cittam—the
mind; çabda-brahma—of the Vedic scripture; artha—the purport;
darçanam—which directly experiences.
TRANSLATION
Free of clouds and filled with clearly visible stars, the autumn sky shone
brilliantly, just like the spiritual consciousness of one who has directly
experienced the purport of the Vedic scriptures.
PURPORT
The clear and starry autumn sky can also be compared to the pure heart of
the devotee. The spiritual nature is always brilliant, clean and blissful, and this
spiritual nature, called vaikuëöha, immediately satisfies all the desires of the
soul. This is the secret of Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 44
@KaNx"maNx"laAe vyaAei°a
r"r"AjaAex"]gANAE: zAzAI
yaTaA yaäu"paita: k{(SNAAe
va{iSNAca‚(Ava{taAe Bauiva
akhaëòa-maëòalo vyomni
raräjoòu-gaëaiù çaçé
yathä yadu-patiù kåñëo
våñëi-cakrävåto bhuvi
SYNONYMS
akhaëòa—unbroken; maëòalaù—its sphere; vyomni—in the sky;
raräja—shone forth; uòu-gaëaiù—along with the stars; çaçé—the moon;
yathä—as; yadu-patiù—the master of the Yadu dynasty; kåñëaù—Lord Kåñëa;
våñëi-cakra—by the circle of Våñëis; ävåtaù—surrounded; bhuvi—upon the
earth.
TRANSLATION
The full moon shone in the sky, surrounded by stars, just as Çré Kåñëa, the
Lord of the Yadu dynasty, shone brilliantly on the earth, surrounded by all the
Våñëis.
PURPORT
Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé explains that in Våndävana the full moon is
eternally risen, and this full moon is like the full manifestation of the Absolute
Truth, Çré Kåñëa. When He was manifest on earth, Lord Kåñëa was surrounded
by prominent members of the Våñëi dynasty such as Nanda, Upananda,
Vasudeva and Akrüra.
TEXT 45
@AiëSya s$amazAItaAeSNAM
‘as$aUnavanamaAç&tama,
janaAstaApaM jaò"gAAeRpyaAe
na k{(SNAô$tacaetas$a:
äçliñya sama-çétoñëaà
prasüna-vana-märutam
janäs täpaà jahur gopyo
na kåñëa-håta-cetasaù
SYNONYMS
äçliñya—embracing; sama—equal; çéta-uñëam-between cold and heat;
prasüna-vana—of the forest of flowers; märutam—the wind; janäù—the
people in general; täpam—suffering; jahuù—were able to abandon;
gopyaù—the gopés; na-not; kåñëa—by Lord Kåñëa; håta—stolen;
cetasaù—whose hearts.
TRANSLATION
Except for the gopés, whose hearts had been stolen by Kåñëa, the people
could forget their suffering by embracing the wind coming from the
flower-filled forest. This wind was neither hot nor cold.
TEXT 46
gAAvaAe ma{gAA: KagAA naAyaR:
pauiSpaNya: zAr"d"ABavana,
@nvaIyamaAnaA: svava{SaE:
P(laEr"IzAi‚(yaA wva
gävo mågäù khagä näryaù
puñpiëyaù çaradäbhavan
anvéyamänäù sva-våñaiù
phalair éça-kriyä iva
SYNONYMS
gävaù—the cows; mågäù—the female deer; khagäù—the female birds;
näryaù—the women; puñpiëyaù—in their fertile periods; çaradä—because of
the autumn; abhavan—became; anvéyamänäù—followed; sva-våñaiù—by their
respective mates; phalaiù—by good results; éça-kriyäù—activities performed in
service to the Supreme Lord; iva—as.
TRANSLATION
By the influence of the autumn season, all the cows, doe, women and female
birds became fertile and were followed by their respective mates in search of
sexual enjoyment, just as activities performed for the service of the Supreme
Lord are automatically followed by all beneficial results.
PURPORT
Çréla Prabhupäda comments, "On the arrival of the autumn season, all the
cows, deer, birds and females in general become pregnant, because in that
season generally all the husbands become impelled by sex desire. This is exactly
like the transcendentalists who, by the grace of the Supreme Lord, are
bestowed with the benediction of their destinations in life. Çréla Rüpa
Gosvämé has instructed in his Upadeçämåta that one should perform
devotional service with great enthusiasm. patience and conviction and should
follow the rules and regulations, keep oneself clean from material
contamination and stay in the association of devotees. By following these
principles, one is sure to achieve the desired result of devotional service. For
he who patiently follows the regulative principles of devotional service, the
time will come when he will achieve the result, as the wives reap results by
becoming pregnant."
TEXT 47
od"ô$Syana, vaAir"jaAina
s$aUyaAeRtTaAnae ku(mauiã"naA
r"AÁaA tau inaBaRyaA laAek(A
yaTaA d"syaUna, ivanaA na{pa
udahåñyan värijäni
süryotthäne kumud vinä
räjïä tu nirbhayä lokä
yathä dasyün vinä nåpa
SYNONYMS
udahåñyan—blossomed abundantly; väri-jäni—the lotuses; sürya—the sun;
utthäne—when it had arisen; kumut—the night-blooming kumut lotus;
vinä—except; räjïä—because of the presence of a king; tu—indeed;
nirbhayäù—fearless; lokäù—the populace; yathä—as; dasyün—the thieves;
vinä—except for; nåpa—O King.
TRANSLATION
O King Parékñit, when the autumn sun rose, all the lotus flowers blossomed
happily, except the night-blooming kumut, just as in the presence of a strong
ruler everyone becomes fearless, except the thieves.
TEXT 48
paur"ƒaAmaeSvaAƒayaNAEr,"
win‰"yaEê mah"Aets$avaE:
baBaAE BaU: pa¸(zASyaAX#YaA
k(laAByaAM inatar"AM h"re":
pura-grämeñv ägrayaëair
indriyaiç ca mahotsavaiù
babhau bhüù pakva-çañyäòhyä
kaläbhyäà nitaräà hareù
SYNONYMS
pura—in the towns; grämeñu—and villages; ägrayaëaiù—with performances of
the Vedic sacrifice for tasting the first grains of the new harvest;
indriyaiù—with other (worldly) celebrations; ca—and; mahä-utsavaiù—great
celebrations; babhau—shone; bhüù—the earth; pakva—ripe; çañya—with her
grains; äòhyä—rich; kalä—she who is the expansion of the Lord;
äbhyäm—with those two (Kåñëa and Balaräma); nitaräm—very much;
hareù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
In all the towns and villages people held great festivals, performing the Vedic
fire sacrifice for honoring and tasting the first grains of the new harvest, along
with similar celebrations that followed local custom and tradition. Thus the
earth, rich with newly grown grain and especially beautified by the presence of
Kåñëa and Balaräma, shone beautifully as an expansion of the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
The word ägrayaëaiù refers to a particular authorized Vedic sacrifice, and
the word indriyaiù refers to folk ceremonies that have somewhat worldly
objectives.
Çréla Prabhupäda comments as follows: "During autumn, the fields become
filled with ripened grains. At that time, the people become happy over the
harvest and observe various ceremonies, such as Navänna—the offering of
new grains to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The new grains are first
offered to the Deities in various temples, and all are invited to take sweet rice
made with these new grains. There are other religious ceremonies and methods
of worship, particularly in Bengal, where the greatest of all such ceremonies is
held, called Durgä-püjä."
TEXT 49
vaiNAx.~mauinana{paµaAtaA
inagARmyaATaARna, ‘apaeid"re"
vaSaRç&Ü"A yaTaA is$aÜ"A:
svaipaNx"Ana, k(Ala @AgAtae
vaëiì-muni-nåpa-snätä
nirgamyärthän prapedire
varña-ruddhä yathä siddhäù
sva-piëòän käla ägate
SYNONYMS
vaëik—the merchants; muni—renunciant sages; nåpa—kings; snätäù—and
brahmacäré students; nirgamya—going out; arthän—their desired objects;
prapedire—obtained; varña—by the rain; ruddhäù—checked; yathä—as;
siddhäù—perfected persons; sva-piëòän—the forms they aspire for;
käle—when the time; ägate—has come.
TRANSLATION
The merchants, sages, kings and brahmacäré students, kept in by the rain,
were at last free to go out and attain their desired objects, just as those who
achieve perfection in this life can, when the proper time comes, leave the
material body and attain their respective forms.
PURPORT
Çréla Prabhupäda comments, "In Våndävana the autumn season was very
beautiful then because of the presence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Kåñëa and Balaräma. The mercantile community, the royal order and the great
sages were free to move to achieve their desired benedictions. Similarly, the
transcendentalists, when freed from the encagement of the material body, also
achieved their desired goal. During the rainy season, the mercantile
community cannot move from one place to another and so do not get their
desired profit. Nor can the royal order go from one place to another to collect
taxes from the people. As for saintly persons who must travel to preach
transcendental knowledge, they also are restrained by the rainy season. But
during the autumn, all of them leave their confines. In the case of the
transcendentalist, be he a jïäné, a yogé or a devotee, because of the material
body he cannot actually enjoy spiritual achievement. But as soon as he gives up
the body, or after death, the jïäné merges into the spiritual effulgence of the
Supreme Lord, the yogé transfers himself to the various higher planets, and the
devotee goes to the planet of the Supreme Lord, Goloka Våndävana, or the
Vaikuëöhas, and thus enjoys his eternal spiritual life."
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A . C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Tenth Canto, Twentieth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Rainy Season and Autumn in Våndävana."
21. The Gopés Glorify the Song of Kåñëa's Flute
This chapter describes how Lord Çré Kåñëa entered the enchanting forest of
Våndävana upon the arrival of autumn, and the praises the young cowherd
girls sang when they heard the vibration of His flute.
As Lord Kåñëa, Lord Balaräma and Their cowherd friends entered the
forest to graze the cows, Kåñëa began playing His flute. The gopés heard the
enchanting flute-song and understood that Kåñëa was entering the forest.
Then they narrated to each other the Lord's various activities.
The gopés declared, "To see Lord Kåñëa playing His flute while taking the
cows to pasture is the highest perfection for the eyes. What pious activities has
this flute performed that enable him to freely drink the nectar of Çré Kåñëa's
lips-a blessing we cowherd girls find difficult to achieve? Hearing the song of
Kåñëa's flute, the peacocks dance, and all the other creatures become stunned
when they see them. Demigoddesses traveling through the sky in their
airplanes are vexed by Cupid, and their garments become loose. The ears of
the cows stand on end as they drink the nectar of this flute-song, and their
calves simply stand stunned, the milk they have been drinking from their
mothers' udders still in their mouths. The birds take shelter of the branches of
the trees and close their eyes, listening to the song of Kåñëa's flute with rapt
attention. The flowing rivers become perturbed by conjugal attraction for
Kåñëa and, stopping their flow, embrace Kåñëa's lotus feet with the arms of
their waves, while the clouds serve as parasols to shade Kåñëa's head from the
hot sun. The aborigine women of the Çabara race, seeing the grass stained by
the red kuìkuma adorning the Lord's lotus feet, smear this vermilion powder
upon their breasts and faces to alleviate the distress created by Cupid.
Govardhana Hill offers grass and various kinds of fruits and bulbous roots in
worship of Lord Çré Kåñëa. All the nonmoving living beings take on the
characteristics of moving creatures, and the moving living beings become
stationary. These things are all very wonderful."
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
wtTaM zAr"tsvacC$jalaM
paáAk(r"s$augAinDanaA
nyaivazAã"AyaunaA vaAtaM
s$a gAAegAAepaAlak(Ae'cyauta:
çré-çuka uväca
itthaà çarat-svaccha-jalaà
padmäkara-sugandhinä
nyaviçad väyunä vätaà
sa -go-gopälako 'cyutaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; ittham—in this way; çarat—of
the fall season; svaccha—clear; jalam—having water; padma-äkara—from the
lake filled with lotus flowers; su-gandhinä—with the sweet fragrance;
nyaviçat—He entered; väyunä—by the breeze; vätam-ventilated; sa—with;
go—the cows; gopälakaù—and the cowherd boys; acyutaù—the infallible
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Thus the Våndävana forest was filled with
transparent autumnal waters and cooled by breezes perfumed with the fragrance
of lotus flowers growing in the clear lakes. The infallible Lord, accompanied by
His cows and cowherd boyfriends, entered that Våndävana forest.
TEXT 2
ku(s$auimatavanar"AijazAuiSmaBa{"Ëÿ
iã"jaku(laGauí"s$ar":s$air"nmah"I‹ama,
maDaupaitar"vagAA÷ caAr"yana, gAA:
s$ah"pazAupaAlabalaêukU(ja vaeNAuma,
kusumita-vanaräji-çuñmi-bhåìga
dvija-kula-ghuñöa-saraù-sarin-mahédhram
madhupatir avagähya cärayan gäù
saha-paçu-päla-balaç cuküja veëum
SYNONYMS
kusumita—flowering; vana-räji—among the groups of trees;
çuñmi—maddened; bhåìga—with bees; dvija—of birds; kula—and flocks;
ghuñöa—resounding; saraù—its lakes; sarit—rivers; mahédhram—and hills;
madhu-patiù—the Lord of Madhu (Kåñëa); avagähya—entering;
cärayan—while tending; gäù—the cows; saha-paçu-päla-balaù—in the
company of the cowherd boys and Lord Balaräma; cuküja—vibrated;
veëum—His flute.
TRANSLATION
The lakes, rivers and hills of Våndävana resounded with the sounds of
maddened bees and flocks of birds moving about the flowering trees. In the
company of the cowherd boys and Balaräma, Madhupati [Çré Kåñëa] entered
that forest, and while herding the cows He began to vibrate His flute.
PURPORT
As suggested by the words cuküja veëum, Lord Kåñëa skillfully blended the
sound of His flute with the lovely sounds of Våndävana's multicolored birds.
Thus an irresistible, heavenly vibration was created.
TEXT 3
taä," ˜ajaiñya @A™autya
vaeNAugAItaM smar"Aed"yama,
k(Aiêtpar"AeºaM k{(SNAsya
svas$aKaIByaAe'nvavaNARyana,
tad vraja-striya äçrutya
veëu-gétaà smarodayam
käçcit parokñaà kåñëasya
sva-sakhébhyo 'nvavarëayan
SYNONYMS
tat—that; vraja-striyaù—the ladies in the cowherd village; äçrutya—hearing;
veëu-gétam—the song of the flute; smara-udayam—which gives rise to the
influence of Cupid; käçcit—some of them; parokñam—privately;
kåñëasya—about Kåñëa; sva-sakhébhyaù—to their intimate companions;
anvavarëayan—described.
TRANSLATION
When the young ladies in the cowherd village of Vraja heard the song of
Kåñëa's flute, which arouses the influence of Cupid, some of them privately
began describing Kåñëa's qualities to their intimate friends.
TEXT 4
taã"NARiyataumaAr"bDaA:
smar"ntya: k{(SNAcaeií"tama,
naAzAk(na, smar"vaegAena
ivaiºaæamanas$aAe na{pa
tad varëayitum ärabdhäù
smarantyaù kåñëa-ceñöitam
näçakan smara-vegena
vikñipta-manaso nåpa
SYNONYMS
tat—that; varëayitum—to describe; ärabdhäù—beginning;
smarantyaù—remembering; kåñëa-ceñöitam—the activities of Kåñëa; na
açakan—they were incapable; smara-vegena—by the force of Cupid;
vikñipta—agitated; manasaù—whose minds; nåpa—O King Parékñit.
TRANSLATION
The cowherd girls began to speak about Kåñëa, but when they remembered
His activities, O King, the power of Cupid disturbed their minds, and thus they
could not speak.
TEXT 5
bah"ARpaIxM" naq%var"vapau: k(NARyaAe: k(iNARk(ArM"
iba”aã"As$a: k(nak(k(ipazAM vaEjayantaI%M ca maAlaAma,
r"n‹aAna, vaeNAAer"Dar"s$auDayaApaUr"yana, gAAepava{ndE"r,"
va{nd"Ar"NyaM svapad"r"maNAM ‘aAivazAÕ"Itak(LitaR:
barhäpéòaà naöa-vara-vapuù karëayoù karëikäraà
bibhrad väsaù kanaka-kapiçaà vaijayantéà ca mäläm
randhrän veëor adhara-sudhayäpürayan gopa-våndair
våndäraëyaà sva-pada-ramaëaà präviçad géta-kértiù
SYNONYMS
barha—a peacock feather; äpéòam—as the decoration of His head;
naöa-vara—of the best of dancers; vapuù—the transcendental body;
karëayoù—on the ears; karëikäram—a particular kind of blue lotuslike flower;
bibhrat—wearing; väsaù—garments; kanaka—like gold; kapiçam—yellowish;
vaijayantém—named Vaijayanté; ca—and; mäläm—the garland;
randhrän—the holes; veëoù—of His flute; adhara—of His lips; sudhayä—with
the nectar; äpürayan—filling up; gopa-våndaiù—by the cowherd boys;
våndä-araëyam—the forest of Våndävana; sva-pada—because of the marks of
His lotus feet; ramaëam—enchanting; präviçat—He entered; géta—being sung;
kértiù—His glories.
TRANSLATION
Wearing a peacock-feather ornament upon His head, blue karëikära flowers
on His ears, a yellow garment as brilliant as gold, and the Vaijayanté garland,
Lord Kåñëa exhibited His transcendental form as the greatest of dancers as He
entered the forest of Våndävana, beautifying it with the marks of His
footprints. He filled the holes of His flute with the nectar of His lips, and the
cowherd boys sang His glories.
PURPORT
The gopés remembered all the transcendental qualities of Kåñëa mentioned
in this verse. Kåñëa's artful way of dressing and the beautiful blue flowers
placed over His ears excited the gopés' romantic desires, and as He poured the
nectar of His lips into His flute, they simply lost themselves in ecstatic love for
Him.
TEXT 6
wita vaeNAur"vaM r"Ajana,
s$avaRBaUtamanaAeh"r"ma,
™autvaA ˜ajaiñya: s$avaAR
vaNARyantyaAe'iBare"iBare"
iti veëu-ravaà räjan
sarva-bhüta-manoharam
çrutvä vraja-striyaù sarvä
varëayantyo 'bhirebhire
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; veëu-ravam—the vibration of the flute; räjan—O King Parékñit;
sarva-bhüta—of all living beings; manaù-haram—stealing the minds;
çrutvä—hearing; vraja-striyaù—the ladies standing in the village of Vraja;
sarväù—all of them; varëayantyaù—engaged in describing;
abhirebhire—embraced one another.
TRANSLATION
O King, when the young ladies in Vraja heard the sound of Kåñëa's flute,
which captivates the minds of all living beings, they all embraced one another
and began describing it.
PURPORT
The word iti here indicates that after becoming speechless by remembering
Kåñëa, the cowherd damsels then regained their composure and were thus able
to ecstatically describe the sound of Kåñëa's flute. As a few gopés began to
exclaim, and the other gopés realized that they shared the same ecstatic love
within their hearts, all of them started embracing one another, overwhelmed
with conjugal love for young Kåñëa.
TEXT 7
™aIgAAepya Ocau:
@ºaNvataAM P(laimadM" na parM" ivad"Ama:
s$aKya: pazAUnanaivavaezAyataAevaRyasyaE:
vaf‡aM ˜ajaezAs$autayaAer"navaeNAujauíM"
yaEvaAR inapaItamanaur"l(k(q%AºamaAeºama,
çré-gopya ücuù
akñaëvatäà phalam idaà na paraà vidämaù
sakhyaù paçün anuviveçayator vayasyaiù
vaktraà vrajeça-sutayor anaveëu-juñöaà
yair vä nipétam anurakta-kaöäkña-mokñam
SYNONYMS
çré-gopyaù ücuù—the gopés said; akñaëvatäm—of those who have eyes;
phalam—the fruit; idam—this; na—not; param—other; vidämaù—we know;
sakhyaù—O friends; paçün—the cows; anuviveçayatoù—causing to enter one
forest after another; vayasyaiù—with Their friends of the same age;
vaktram—the faces; vraja-éça—of Mahäräja Nanda; sutayoù—of the two sons;
anu-veëu-juñöam—possessed of flutes; yaiù—by which; vä—or;
nipétam—imbibed; anurakta—loving; kaöa-akña—glances; mokñam—giving
off.
TRANSLATION
The cowherd girls said: O friends, those eyes that see the beautiful faces of
the sons of Mahäräja Nanda are certainly fortunate. As these two sons enter the
forest, surrounded by Their friends, driving the cows before Them, They hold
Their flutes to Their mouths and glance lovingly upon the residents of
Våndävana. For those who have eyes, we think there is no greater object of
vision.
PURPORT
This translation is quoted from Çréla Prabhupäda's Caitanya-caritämåta
(Ädi-lélä 4.155).
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has commented as follows: "The gopés
meant to say, 'O friends, if you simply remain in the shackles of family life in
this material world, what will you ever get to see? The creator has granted us
these eyes, so let us see the most wonderful thing there is to see, Kåñëa.' "
The gopés were aware that their mothers or other elder persons might hear
their romantic words and disapprove, and thus they said, akñaëvatäà phalam:
"To see Kåñëa is the goal for all persons and not simply ourselves." In other
words, the gopés indicated that since Kåñëa is the supreme object of love for
everyone, why couldn't they also love Him in spiritual ecstasy?
According to the äcäryas, a different gopé spoke this and each of the
following verses (through Text 19).
TEXT 8
caUta‘avaAlabahR"stabak(AetpalaAbja
maAlaAnaupa{l(pair"DaAnaivaica‡avaezAAE
maDyae ivare"jataur"laM pazAupaAlagAAeï"YaAM
r"Ëeÿ yaTaA naq%var"AE ¸(ca gAAyamaAnaAE
cüta-praväla-barha-stabakotpaläbja
mälänupåkta-paridhäna-vicitra-veçau
madhye virejatur alaà paçu-päla-goñöhyäà
raìge yathä naöa-varau kvaca gäyamänau
SYNONYMS
cüta—of a mango tree; praväla—with young sprouts; barha—peacock feathers;
stabaka—bunches of flowers; utpala—lotuses; abja—and lilies; mälä—with
garlands; anupåkta—touched; paridhäna—Their garments; vicitra—with great
variety; veçau—being dressed; madhye—in the midst; virejatuù—the two of
Them shone forth; alam—magnificently; paçu-päla—of the cowherd boys;
goñöhyäm—within the assembly; raìge—upon a stage; yathä—just as;
naöa-varau—two most excellent dancers; kvaca—sometimes;
gäyamänau—Themselves singing.
TRANSLATION
Dressed in a charming variety of garments, upon which Their garlands rest,
and decorating Themselves with peacock feathers, lotuses, lilies, newly grown
mango sprouts and clusters of flower buds, Kåñëa and Balaräma shine forth
magnificently among the assembly of cowherd boys. They look just like the best
of dancers appearing on a dramatic stage, and sometimes They sing.
PURPORT
The gopés continue singing their ecstatic song as they remember the
pastimes of Lord Kåñëa. The gopés wanted to go to the forest where Kåñëa was
performing His pastimes and, while remaining concealed, peer through the
leaves of the creepers and see the wonder of Kåñëa and Balaräma dancing and
singing with Their boyfriends. This was their desire, but because they could
not go, they sang this song in ecstatic love.
TEXT 9
gAAepya: ik(maAcar"d"yaM ku(zAlaM sma vaeNAur,"
d"AmaAed"r"ADar"s$auDaAmaipa gAAeipak(AnaAma,
BauÈeÿ svayaM yad"vaizAí"r"s$aM oe"id"nyaAe
ô$SyaÔvacaAe'™au maumaucaustar"vaAe yaTaAyaR:
gopyaù kim äcarad ayaà kuçalaà sma veëur
dämodarädhara-sudhäm api gopikänäm
bhuìkte svayaà yad avaçiñöa-rasaà hradinyo
håñyat-tvaco 'çru mumucus taravo yathäryaù
SYNONYMS
gopyaù—O gopés; kim-what; äcarat—performed; ayam—this;
kuçalam—auspicious activities; sma—certainly; veëuù—the flute;
dämodara—of Kåñëa; adhara-sudhäm—the nectar of the lips; api—even;
gopikänäm—which is owed to the gopés; bhuìkte-enjoys;
svayam—independently; yat—from which; avaçiñöa—remaining; rasam—the
taste only; hradinyaù—the rivers; håñyat—feeling jubilant; tvacaù—whose
bodies; açru—tears; mumucuù—shed; taravaù—the trees; yathä—exactly like;
äryäù—old forefathers.
TRANSLATION
My dear gopés, what auspicious activities must the flute have performed to
enjoy the nectar of Kåñëa's lips independently and leave only a taste for us
gopés, for whom that nectar is actually meant! The forefathers of the flute, the
bamboo trees, shed tears of pleasure. His mother, the river on whose bank the
bamboo was born, feels jubilation, and therefore her blooming lotus flowers are
standing like hair on her body.
PURPORT
This translation is quoted from Çréla Prabhupäda's Caitanya-caritämåta
(Antya 16.140).
In the guise of releasing flowing sap, the bamboo trees are actually crying
tears of ecstasy upon seeing their child become an exalted devotee-flute of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa.
Sanätana Gosvämé gives an alternate explanation: The trees are crying
because they are unhappy at not being able to play with Kåñëa themselves.
One may object that the trees in Våndävana should not lament for that which
is impossible for them to obtain, just as a beggar certainly doesn't lament
because he is forbidden to meet the king. But the trees are actually just like
intelligent persons who suffer when they cannot obtain the goal of life. Thus
the trees are crying because they cannot get the nectar of Kåñëa's lips.
TEXT 10
va{nd"AvanaM s$aiKa BauvaAe ivatanaAeita k(L[%itaM
yaÚe"vak(Ls$autapad"AmbaujalabDalaiºma
gAAeivand"vaeNAumanau maÔamayaUr"na{tyaM ‘aeºyaAi‰"s$aAnvavar"taAnyas$amastas$aÔvama,
våndävanaà sakhi bhuvo vitanoti kéåtià
yad devaké-suta-padämbuja-labdha-lakñmi
govinda-veëum anu matta-mayüra-nåtyaà
prekñyädri-sänv-avaratänya-samasta-sattvam
SYNONYMS
våndävanam—Våndävana; sakhi—O friend; bhuvaù—of the earth;
vitanoti—spreads; kértim—the glories; yat—because; devaké-suta—of the son of
Devaké; pada-ambuja—from the lotus feet; labdha—received; lakñmi—the
treasure; govinda-veëum—the flute of Govinda; anu—upon hearing;
matta—maddened; mayüra—of the peacocks; nåtyam—in which there is the
dancing; prekñya—seeing; adri-sänu—upon the peaks of the hills;
avarata—stunned; anya—other; samasta—all; sattvam—creatures.
TRANSLATION
O friend, Våndävana is spreading the glory of the earth, having obtained the
treasure of the lotus feet of Kåñëa, the son of Devaké. The peacocks dance
madly when they hear Govinda's flute, and when other creatures see them from
the hilltops, they all become stunned.
PURPORT
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé explains that because activities such as those described
in this verse do not occur in any other world, the earth is unique. In fact, the
earth's glories are being spread by wonderful Våndävana because it is the place
of Kåñëa's pastimes.
The name Devaké also refers to mother Yaçodä, as stated in the Båhad-viñëu
Puräëa:
dve nämné nanda-bhäryäyä
yaçodä devakéti ca
ataù sakhyam abhüt tasya
devakyä çauri-jäyayä
"The wife of Nanda had two names, Yaçodä and also Devaké. Therefore it was
natural that she [the wife of Nanda] develop friendship with Devaké, the wife
of Çauri [Vasudeva]."
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains kåñëa-lélä as follows: "In
Våndävana, the peacocks request Kåñëa, 'Govinda, please make us dance.' Thus
Kåñëa plays His flute, and they surround Him in a circle and dance in time
with the rhythm of His melody. And while standing in the midst of their
dancing, He also sings and dances. Then those peacocks, who are fully satisfied
with His musical performance, out of gratitude offer for His pleasure their own
divine feathers. In the usual manner of musical performers, Kåñëa gladly
accepts these presentations and places a feather upon the turban atop His
head. Gentle animals such as deer and doves greatly relish the transcendental
entertainment presented by Kåñëa, and to get a good view they flock to the
peaks of hills. Then, as they watch the breathtaking program, they become
stunned in ecstasy."
Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé comments that because in Våndävana Kåñëa goes
barefoot and can thus directly mark the earth with the symbols of His lotus
feet, that transcendental land is even more glorious than Vaikuëöha, where
Viñëu wears slippers.
TEXT 11
DanyaA: sma maUX#gAtayaAe'ipa h"ir"Nya WtaA
yaA nand"nand"namaupaAÔaivaica‡avaezAma,
@Ak(NyaR vaeNAur"iNAtaM s$ah"k{(SNAs$aAr"A:
paUjaAM d"DauivaRr"icataAM ‘aNAyaAvalaAekE(:
dhanyäù sma müòha-gatayo 'pi hariëya etä
yä nanda-nandanam upätta-vicitra-veçam
äkarëya veëu-raëitaà saha-kåñëa-säräù
püjäà dadhur viracitäà praëayävalokaiù
SYNONYMS
dhanyäù—fortunate, blessed; sma—certainly; müòha-gatayaù—having taken
birth in an ignorant animal species; api—although; hariëyaù—she-deer;
etäù—these; yäù—who; nanda-nandanam—the son of Mahäräja Nanda;
upätta-vicitra-veçam—dressed very attractively; äkarëya—hearing;
veëu-raëitam—the sound of His flute; saha-kåñëa-säräù—accompanied by the
black deer (their husbands); püjäm dadhuù—they worshiped;
viracitäm—performed; praëaya-avalokaiù—by their affectionate glances.
TRANSLATION
Blessed are all these foolish deer because they have approached Mahäräja
Nanda's son, who is gorgeously dressed and is playing on His flute. Indeed, both
the doe and the bucks worship the Lord with looks of love and affection.
PURPORT
This translation is quoted from Çréla Prabhupäda's Caitanya-caritämåta
(Madhya 17.36).
According to the äcäryas, the gopés were thinking as follows: "The female
deer can approach Kåñëa along with their husbands because Kåñëa is the
ultimate object of affection for the male deer. Because of their affection for
Kåñëa, they are encouraged by seeing their wives attracted to Him and thus
consider their household lives fortunate. Indeed, they become joyful upon
seeing how their wives are searching after Kåñëa, and, following along, they
urge their wives to go to the Lord. On the other hand, our husbands are jealous
of Kåñëa, and because of their lack of devotion to Him they cannot even stand
to smell His fragrance. Therefore what is the use of our lives?"
TEXT 12
k{(SNAM inar"Iºya vainataAets$avaè&pazAIlaM
™autvaA ca tat¸(iNAtavaeNAuivaival(gAItama,
de"vyaAe ivamaAnagAtaya: smar"nauªas$aAr"A
”azyat‘as$aUnak(bar"A maumauò"ivaRnaIvya:
kåñëaà nirékñya vanitotsava-rüpa-çélaà
çrutvä ca tat-kvaëita-veëu-vivikta-gétam
devyo vimäna-gatayaù smara-nunna-särä
bhraçyat-prasüna-kabarä mumuhur vinévyaù
SYNONYMS
kåñëam—Lord Kåñëa; nirékñya—observing; vanitä—for all women; utsava—a
festival; rüpa—whose beauty; çélam—and character; çrutvä—hearing;
ca—and; tat—by Him; kvaëita—vibrated; veëu—of the flute; vivikta—clear;
gétam—song; devyaù—the wives of the demigods; vimäna-gatayaù—traveling
in their airplanes; smara—by Cupid; nunna—agitated; säräù—their hearts;
bhraçyat—slipping; prasüna-kabaräù—the flowers tied in their hair;
mumuhuù—they became bewildered; vinévyaù—their belts loosening.
TRANSLATION
Kåñëa's beauty and character create a festival for all women. Indeed, when
the demigods' wives flying in airplanes with their husbands catch sight of Him
and hear His resonant flute-song, their hearts are shaken by Cupid, and they
become so bewildered that the flowers fall out of their hair and their belts
loosen.
PURPORT
In Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çréla Prabhupäda comments:
"[This verse indicates] that the transcendental sound of the flute of Kåñëa
extended to all corners of the universe. Also, it is significant that the gopés
knew about the different kinds of airplanes flying in the sky."
In fact, even while sitting on the laps of their demigod husbands, the
demigoddesses became agitated by hearing the sounds of Kåñëa's flute. Thus
the gopés thought that they themselves should not be blamed for their ecstatic
conjugal attraction for Kåñëa, who after all was a cowherd boy from their own
village and thus a natural object of their love. If even demigoddesses became
mad after Kåñëa, how could poor, earthly cowherd girls from Kåñëa's own
village avoid having their hearts completely conquered by His loving glances
and the sounds of His flute?
The gopés also considered that the demigods, although noting their wives'
attraction to Kåñëa, did not become envious. The demigods are actually very
refined in culture and intelligence, and therefore when flying in their
airplanes they regularly take their wives along to see Kåñëa. The gopés thought,
"Our husbands, on the other hand, are envious. Therefore even the inferior
deer are better off than we, and the demigoddesses are also very fortunate,
whereas we poor human beings in an intermediate position are most
unfortunate."
TEXT 13
gAAvaê k{(SNAmauKainagARtavaeNAugAIta
paIyaUSamauÔaiBatak(NARpauqE%: ipabantya:
zAAvaA: µautastanapaya:k(valaA: sma tasTaur,"
gAAeivand"maAtmaina ä{"zAA™auk(laA: s$pa{zAntya:
gävaç ca kåñëa-mukha-nirgata-veëu-géta
péyüñam uttabhita-karëa-puöaiù pibantyaù
çäväù snuta-stana-payaù-kavaläù sma tasthur
govindam ätmani dåçäçru-kaläù spåçantyaù
SYNONYMS
gävaù—the cows; ca—and; kåñëa-mukha—from the mouth of Lord Kåñëa;
nirgata—emitted; veëu—of the flute; géta—of the song; péyüñam—the nectar;
uttabhita—raised high; karëa—with their ears; puöaiù—which were acting as
vessels; pibantyaù—drinking; çäväù—the calves; snuta—exuding; stana—from
their udders; payaù—the milk; kavaläù—whose mouthfuls; sma—indeed;
tasthuù—stood still; govindam—Lord Kåñëa; ätmani—within their minds;
dåçä—with their vision; açru-kaläù—their eyes full of tears;
spåçantyaù—touching.
TRANSLATION
Using their upraised ears as vessels, the cows are drinking the nectar of the
flute-song flowing out of Kåñëa's mouth. The calves, their mouths full of milk
from their mothers' moist nipples, stand still as they take Govinda within
themselves through their tear-filled eyes and embrace Him within their hearts.
TEXT 14
‘aAyaAe bataAmba ivah"gAA maunayaAe vanae'ismana,
k{(SNAeiºataM taäu"id"taM k(lavaeNAugAItama,
@Aç&÷ yae åu"maBaujaAna, ç&icar"‘avaAlaAna,
Za{Nvainta maIilataä{"zAAe ivagAtaAnyavaAca:
präyo batämba vihagä munayo vane 'smin
kåñëekñitaà tad-uditaà kala-veëu-gétam
äruhya ye druma-bhujän rucira-pravälän
çåëvanti mélita-dåço vigatänya-väcaù
SYNONYMS
präyaù—almost; bata—certainly; amba—O mother; vihagäù—the birds;
munayaù—great sages; vane—in the forest; asmin—this; kåñëa-ékñitam—in
order to see Kåñëa; tat-uditam—created by Him; kala-veëu-gétam—sweet
vibrations made by playing the flute; äruhya—rising; ye—who;
druma-bhujän—to the branches of the trees; rucira-pravälän—having
beautiful creepers and twigs; çåëvanti—they hear; mélita-dåçaù—closing their
eyes; vigata-anya-väcaù—stopping all other sounds.
TRANSLATION
O mother, in this forest all the birds have risen onto the beautiful branches
of the trees to see Kåñëa. With closed eyes they are simply listening in silence to
the sweet vibrations of His flute, and they are not attracted by any other sound.
Surely these birds are on the same level as great sages.
PURPORT
The birds resemble sages because they live in the forest, keep their eyes
closed, observe silence and remain motionless. Significantly, it is stated here
that even great sages become maddened by the sound of Kåñëa's flute, which is
a completely spiritual vibration.
The word rucira-pravälän indicates that even the branches of the trees are
transformed in ecstasy when struck by the vibration of Kåñëa's flute-song.
Indra, Brahmä, Çiva and Viñëu, being primordial gods, travel throughout the
universe and have extensive knowledge of the science of music, and yet even
these great personalities have never heard or composed music like that which
emanates from Kåñëa's flute. Indeed, the birds are so moved by the blissful
sound that in their ecstasy they close their eyes and cling to the branches to
avoid falling off the trees.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains that the gopés would
sometimes address each other as amba, "mother."
TEXT 15
naâstad"A taäu"paDaAyaR mauku(nd"gAItama,
@AvataRlaiºatamanaAeBavaBa¢avaegAA:
@AilaËÿnasTaigAtamaUimaRBaujaEmauRr"Are"r,"
gA{õ"inta paAd"yaugAlaM k(malaAepah"Ar"A:
nadyas tadä tad upadhärya mukunda-gétam
ävarta-lakñita-manobhava-bhagna-vegäù
äliìgana-sthagitam ürmi-bhujair murärer
gåhëanti päda-yugalaà kamalopahäräù
SYNONYMS
nadyaù—the rivers; tadä—then; tat—that; upadhärya—perceiving;
mukunda—of Lord Kåñëa; gétam—the song of His flute; ävarta—by their
whirlpools; lakñita—manifest; manaù-bhava—by their conjugal desire;
bhagna—broken; vegäù—their currents; äliìgana—by their embrace;
sthagitam—held stationary; ürmi-bhujaiù—by the arms of their waves;
muräreù—of Lord Muräri; gåhëanti—they seize; päda-yugalam—the two lotus
feet; kamala-upahäräù—carrying offerings of lotus flowers.
TRANSLATION
When the rivers hear the flute-song of Kåñëa, their minds begin to desire
Him, and thus the flow of their currents is broken and their waters are agitated,
moving around in whirlpools. Then with the arms of their waves the rivers
embrace Muräri's lotus feet and, holding on to them, present offerings of lotus
flowers.
PURPORT
Even such sacred bodies of water as the Yamunä and the Mänasa-gaìgä are
enchanted by the flute-song, and thus they are disturbed by conjugal
attraction for young Kåñëa. The gopés are implying that since many different
types of living beings are overwhelmed by conjugal love for Kåñëa, why should
the gopés be criticized for their intense desire to serve Kåñëa in the conjugal
relationship?
TEXT 16
ä{"î"Atapae ˜ajapazAUna, s$ah" r"AmagAAepaE:
s$aÂaAr"yantamanau vaeNAumaud"Ir"yantama,
‘aema‘ava{Ü" oid"ta: ku(s$aumaAvalaIiBa:
s$aKyauvyaRDaAtsvavapauSaAmbaud" @Atapa‡ama,
dåñövätape vraja-paçün saha räma-gopaiù
saïcärayantam anu veëum udérayantam
prema-pravåddha uditaù kusumävalébhiù
sakhyur vyadhät sva-vapuñämbuda ätapatram
SYNONYMS
dåñövä—seeing; ätape—in the full heat of the sun; vraja-paçün—the domestic
animals of Vraja; saha—together with; räma-gopaiù—Lord Balaräma and the
cowherd boys; saïcärayantam—herding together; anu—repeatedly;
veëum—His flute; udérayantam—loudly playing; prema—out of love;
pravåddhaù—expanded; uditaù—rising high; kusuma-ävalébhiù—(with droplets
of water vapor, which are like) groups of flowers; sakhyuù—for his friend;
vyadhät—he constructed; sva-vapuñä—out of his own body; ambudaù—the
cloud; ätapatram—an umbrella.
TRANSLATION
In the company of Balaräma and the cowherd boys, Lord Kåñëa is
continually vibrating His flute as He herds all the animals of Vraja, even under
the full heat of the summer sun. Seeing this, the cloud in the sky has expanded
himself out of love. He is rising high and constructing out of his own body,
with its multitude of flower-like droplets of water, an umbrella for the sake of
his friend.
PURPORT
Çréla Prabhupäda states in his Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead:
"The scorching heat of the autumn sunshine was sometimes intolerable, and
therefore the clouds in the sky appeared in sympathy above Kåñëa and
Balaräma and Their boyfriends while They engaged in blowing Their flutes.
The clouds served as a soothing umbrella over Their heads just to make
friendship with Kåñëa."
TEXT 17
paUNAAR: pauilanâ oç&gAAyapad"Abjar"AgA
™aIku(Çÿmaena d"iyataAstanamaiNx"taena
taÚ"zARnasmar"ç&jasta{NAè&iSataena
ilampantya @Ananaku(caeSau jaò"stad"AiDama,
pürëäù pulindya urugäya-padäbja-räga
çré-kuìkumena dayitä-stana-maëòitena
tad-darçana-smara-rujas tåëa-rüñitena
limpantya änana-kuceñu jahus tad-ädhim
SYNONYMS
pürëäù—fully satisfied; pulindyaù—the wives of the Çabara tribe; urugäya—of
Lord Kåñëa; pada-abja—from the lotus feet; räga—of reddish color;
çré-kuìkumena—by the transcendental kuìkuma powder; dayitä—of His
girlfriends; stana—the breasts; maëòitena—which had decorated; tat—of that;
darçana—by the sight; smara—of Cupid; rujaù—feeling the torment;
tåëa—upon the blades of grass; rüñitena—attached; limpantyaù—smearing;
änana—upon their faces; kuceñu—and breasts; jahuù—they gave up;
tat—that; ädhim—mental pain.
TRANSLATION
The aborigine women of the Våndävana area become disturbed by lust when
they see the grass marked with reddish kuìkuma powder. Endowed with the
color of Kåñëa's lotus feet, this powder originally decorated the breasts of His
beloveds, and when the aborigine women smear it on their faces and breasts,
they feel fully satisfied and give up all their anxiety.
PURPORT
Çréla Prabhupäda explains this verse as follows: "The wanton aborigine girls
also became fully satisfied when they smeared their faces and breasts with the
dust of Våndävana, which was reddish from the touch of Kåñëa's lotus feet.
The aborigine girls had very full breasts, and they were also very lusty, but
when their lovers felt their breasts, they were not very satisfied. When they
came out into the midst of the forest, they saw that while Kåñëa was walking,
some of the leaves and creepers of Våndävana turned reddish from the
kuìkuma powder that fell from His lotus feet. His lotus feet were held by the
gopés on their breasts, which were also smeared with kuìkuma powder, but
when Kåñëa traveled in the Våndävana forest with Balaräma and His
boyfriends, the reddish powder fell on the ground of the Våndävana forest. So
the lusty aborigine girls, while looking toward Kåñëa playing His flute, saw the
reddish kuìkuma on the ground and immediately took it and smeared it over
their faces and breasts. In this way they became fully satisfied, although they
were not satisfied when their lovers touched their breasts. All material lusty
desires can be immediately satisfied if one comes in contact with Kåñëa
consciousness."
TEXT 18
h"ntaAyamai‰"r"balaA h"ir"d"As$avayaAeR
ya‰"Amak{(SNAcar"NAs$par"zA‘amaAed":
maAnaM tanaAeita s$ah"gAAegANAyaAestayaAeyaRta,
paAnaIyas$aUyavas$ak(nd"r"k(nd"maUlaE:
hantäyam adrir abalä hari-däsa-varyo
yad räma-kåñëa-caraëa-sparaça-pramodaù
mänaà tanoti saha-go-gaëayos tayor yat
pänéya-süyavasa-kandara-kandamülaiù
SYNONYMS
hanta—oh; ayam—this; adriù—hill; abaläù—O friends; hari-däsa-varyaù—the
best among the servants of the Lord; yat—because; räma-kåñëa-caraëa—of the
lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa and Balaräma; sparaça—by the touch;
pramodaù—jubilant; mänam—respect; tanoti—offers; saha—with;
go-gaëayoù—the cows, calves and cowherd boys; tayoù—to Them (Çré Kåñëa
and Balaräma); yat—because; pänéya—with drinking water; süyavasa—very
soft grass; kandara—caves; kanda-mülaiù—and edible roots.
TRANSLATION
Of all the devotees, this Govardhana Hill is the best! O my friends, this hill
supplies Kåñëa and Balaräma, along with Their calves, cows and cowherd
friends, with all kinds of necessities—water for drinking, very soft grass, caves,
fruits, flowers and vegetables. In this way the hill offers respects to the Lord.
Being touched by the lotus feet of Kåñëa and Balaräma, Govardhana Hill
appears very jubilant.
PURPORT
This translation is quoted from Çréla Prabhupäda's Caitanya-caritämåta
(Madhya 18.34).
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains the opulence of Govardhana
Hill as follows: Pänéya refers to the fragrant, cool water from the Govardhana
waterfalls, which Kåñëa and Balaräma drink and use to wash Their feet and
mouths. Govardhana also offers other beverages, such as honey, mango juice
and pélu juice. Süyavasa indicates dürvä grass, used to make the religious
offering of arghya. Govardhana also has grass that is fragrant, soft and
conducive to the strong growth of cows and increased production of milk.
Thus this grass is used for feeding the transcendental herds. Kandara refers to
the caves where Kåñëa, Balaräma and Their friends play, sit and lie down.
These caves give pleasure when the weather is too hot or too cold, or when it is
raining. Govardhana also features soft roots for eating, jewels for ornamenting
the body, flat places for sitting, and lamps and mirrors in the form of smooth
stones, glistening water and other natural substances.
TEXT 19
gAA gAAepakE(r"nauvanaM nayataAeç&d"Ar"
vaeNAusvanaE: k(lapadE"stanauBa{ts$au s$aKya:
@s$pand"naM gAitamataAM paulak(staç&NAAM
inayaAeRgApaAzAk{(talaºaNAyaAeivaRica‡ama,
gä gopakair anu-vanaà nayator udära
veëu-svanaiù kala-padais tanu-bhåtsu sakhyaù
aspandanaà gati-matäà pulakas taruëäà
niryoga-päça-kåta-lakñaëayor vicitram
SYNONYMS
gäù—the cows; gopakaiù—with the cowherd boys; anu-vanam—to each forest;
nayatoù—leading; udära—very liberal; veëu-svanaiù—by the vibrations of the
Lord's flute; kala-padaiù—having sweet tones; tanubhåtsu—among the living
entities; sakhyaù—O friends; aspandanam—the lack of movement;
gati-matäm—of those living entities that can move; pulakaù—the ecstatic
jubilation; taruëam—of the otherwise nonmoving trees; niryoga-päça—the
ropes for binding the rear legs of the cows; kåta-lakñaëayoù—of those two
(Kåñëa and Balaräma), who are characterized by; vicitram—wonderful.
TRANSLATION
My dear friends, as Kåñëa and Balaräma pass through the forest with Their
cowherd friends, leading Their cows, They carry ropes to bind the cows' rear
legs at the time of milking. When Lord Kåñëa plays on His flute, the sweet
music causes the moving living entities to become stunned and the nonmoving
trees to tremble with ecstasy. These things are certainly very wonderful.
PURPORT
Kåñëa and Balaräma would sometimes wear Their cowherding ropes on
Their heads and sometimes carry them on Their shoulders, and thus They
were beautifully decorated with all the equipment of cowherd boys.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains that the ropes of Kåñëa and
Balaräma are made of yellow cloth and have clusters of pearls at both ends.
Sometimes They wear these ropes around Their turbans, and the ropes thus
become wonderful decorations.
TEXT 20
WvaMivaDaA BagAvataAe
yaA va{nd"AvanacaAir"NA:
vaNARyantyaAe imaTaAe gAAepya:
‚(Lx"AstanmayataAM yayau:
evaà-vidhä bhagavato
yä våndävana-cäriëaù
varëayantyo mitho gopyaù
kréòäs tan-mayatäà yayuù
SYNONYMS
evam-vidhäù—such; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
yäù—which; våndävana-cäriëaù—who was wandering in the Våndävana
forest; varëayantyaù—engaged in describing; mithaù—among one another;
gopyaù—the gopés; kréòaù-the pastimes; tat-mayatäm—fullness in ecstatic
meditation upon Him; yayuù—they attained.
TRANSLATION
Thus narrating to one another the playful pastimes of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead as He wandered about in the Våndävana forest, the
gopés became fully absorbed in thoughts of Him.
PURPORT
In this regard Çréla Prabhupäda comments, "This is the perfect example of
Kåñëa consciousness: to somehow or other remain always engrossed in
thoughts of Kåñëa. The vivid example is always present in the behavior of the
gopés; therefore Lord Caitanya declared that no one can worship the Supreme
Lord by any method that is better than the method of the gopés. The gopés were
not born in very high brähmaëa or kñatriya families; they were born in the
families of vaiçyas, and not in big mercantile communities but in the families
of cowherd men. They were not very well educated, although they heard all
sorts of knowledge from the brähmaëas, the authorities of Vedic knowledge.
The gopés' only purpose was to remain always absorbed in thoughts of Kåñëa."
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A . C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Tenth Canto, Twenty-first Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Gopés Glorify the Song of Kåñëa's
Flute."
22. Kåñëa Steals the Garments of the Unmarried Gopés
This chapter describes how the marriageable daughters of the cowherd men
worshiped Kätyäyané to get Lord Çré Kåñëa as their husband, and how Kåñëa
stole the garments of the young girls and gave the girls benedictions.
During the month of Märgaçérña, every day early in the morning the young
daughters of the cowherds would take one another's hands and, singing of
Kåñëa's transcendental qualities, go to the Yamunä to bathe. Desiring to obtain
Kåñëa as their husband, they would then worship the goddess Kätyäyané with
incense, flowers and other items.
One day, the young gopés left their garments on the shore as usual and
began playing in the water while chanting of Lord Kåñëa's activities. Suddenly
Kåñëa Himself came there, took away all the garments and climbed a nearby
kadamba tree. Wanting to tease the gopés, Kåñëa said, "I understand how
fatigued you gopés are from your austerities, so please come onto the shore and
take back your clothes."
The gopés then pretended to become angry and said the cold water of the
Yamunä was giving them great pain. If Kåñëa did not give them back their
garments, they said, they would inform King Kaàsa of all that had happened.
But if He did give the clothes back, they would willingly carry out His orders in
the mood of humble servants.
Çré Kåñëa replied that He had no fear of King Kaàsa, and that if the girls
really intended to follow His command and be His maidservants they should
each immediately come onto the shore and take their respective garments. The
girls, trembling from the cold, climbed out of the water with their two hands
covering their private parts. Kåñëa, who felt great affection for them, again
spoke: "Because while executing a vow you bathed in the water naked, you
have committed an offense against the demigods, and to counteract it you
should offer obeisances with joined palms. Then your vow of austerity will
achieve its full result."
The gopés followed this instruction and, folding their hands in respect,
offered obeisances to Çré Kåñëa. Satisfied, He gave them back their clothing.
But the young girls had become so attracted to Him that they could not leave.
Understanding their minds, Kåñëa said that He knew they had worshiped
Kätyäyané to get Him as their husband. Because they had offered their hearts
to Him, their desires would never again become tainted by the mood of
materialistic enjoyment, just as fried barleycorns can no longer grow into
shoots. Next autumn, He told them, their most cherished desire would be
fulfilled.
Then the gopés, fully satisfied, returned to Vraja, and Çré Kåñëa and His
cowherd friends went off to a distant place to graze the cows.
Sometime later, when the boys felt disturbed by the great heat of summer,
they took shelter at the base of a tree that stood just like an umbrella. The
Lord then said that the life of a tree is most excellent, for even while feeling
pain a tree continues to protect others from heat, rain, snow and so on. With
its leaves, flowers, fruits, shade, roots, bark, wood, fragrance, sap, ashes, pulp
and sprouts, a tree fulfills the desires of everyone. This kind of life is ideal.
Indeed, said Kåñëa, the perfection of life is to act with one's vital energy,
wealth, intelligence and words for the benefit of all.
After the Lord had glorified the trees in this way, the entire company went
to the Yamunä, where the cowherd boys let the cows drink the sweet water
and also drank some themselves.
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
he"mantae ‘aTamae maAis$a
nand"˜ajak(maAir"k(A:
caeç&hR"ivaSyaM BauÃaAnaA:
k(AtyaAyanyacaRna˜atama,
çré-çuka uväca
hemante prathame mäsi
nanda-vraja-kamärikäù
cerur haviñyaà bhuïjänäù
kätyäyany-arcana-vratam
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; hemante—during the winter;
prathame—in the first; mäsi—month; nanda-vraja—of the cowherd village of
Nanda Mahäräja; kumärikäù—the unmarried young girls; ceruù—performed;
haviñyam—unseasoned khichré; bhuïjänäù-subsisting on; kätyäyané—of the
goddess Kätyäyané; arcana-vratam—the vow of worship.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: During the first month of the winter season, the
young unmarried girls of Gokula observed the vow of worshiping goddess
Kätyäyané. For the entire month they ate only unspiced khichré.
PURPORT
The word hemante refers to the month of Märgaçérña—from approximately
the middle of November to the middle of December, according to the Western
calendar. In Chapter Twenty-two, of Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Çréla Prabhupäda comments that the gopés "first ate haviñyänna, a
kind of food prepared by boiling together mung dhäl and rice without any
spices or turmeric. According to Vedic injunction, this kind of food is
recommended to purify the body before one enacts a ritualistic ceremony."
TEXTS 2-3
@AplautyaAmBais$a k(AilanâA
jalaAntae caAeid"tae'ç&NAe
k{(tvaA ‘aitak{(itaM de"vaIma,
@AnacauRna{Rpa s$aEk(taIma,
gAnDaEmaARlyaE: s$aur"iBaiBar,"
bailaiBaDaURpad"IpakE(:
o»aAvacaEêAepah"ArE":
‘avaAlaP(lataNx"]laE:
äplutyämbhasi kälindyä
jalänte codite 'ruëe
kåtvä pratikåtià devém
änarcur nåpa saikatém
gandhair mälyaiù surabhibhir
balibhir dhüpa-dépakaiù
uccävacaiç copahäraiù
praväla-phala-taëòulaiù
SYNONYMS
äplutya—bathing; ambhasi—in the water; kälindyäù—of the Yamunä;
jala-ante—on the shore of the river; ca—and; udite—as was arising;
aruëe—the dawn; kåtva—making; prati-kåtim—a deity; devém—the goddess;
änarcuù—they worshiped; nåpa—O King Parékñit; saikatém—made of earth;
gandhaiù—with sandalwood pulp and other fragrant articles; mälyaiù—with
garlands; surabhibhiù—fragrant; balibhiù—with gifts; dhüpa-dépakaiù—with
incense and lamps; ucca-avacaiù—opulent and also simple; ca—and;
upahäraiù—with presentations; praväla—newly grown leaves; phala—fruit;
taëòulaiù—and betel nuts.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, after they had bathed in the water of the Yamunä just as the
sun was rising, the gopés made an earthen deity of goddess Durgä on the
riverbank. Then they worshiped her with such aromatic substances as
sandalwood pulp, along with other items both opulent and simple, including
lamps, fruits, betel nuts, newly grown leaves, and fragrant garlands and incense.
PURPORT
The word balibhiù in this verse indicates offerings of clothing, ornaments,
food and so on.
TEXT 4
k(AtyaAyaina mah"AmaAyae
mah"AyaAeigAnyaDaIìir"
nand"gAAepas$autaM de"iva
paitaM mae ku(ç& tae nama:
wita man‡aM japantyastaA:
paUjaAM ca‚u(: k(maAir"k(A:
kätyäyani mahä-mäye
mahä-yoginy adhéçvari
nanda-gopa-sutaà devi
patià me kuru te namaù
iti mantraà japantyas täù
püjäà cakruù kamärikäù
SYNONYMS
kätyäyané—O goddess Kätyäyané; mahä-mäye—O great potency;
mahä-yogini—O possessor of great mystic power; adhéçvari—O mighty
controller; nanda-gopa-sutam—the son of Mahäräja Nanda; devi—O goddess;
patim—the husband; me—my; kuru—please make; te—unto you; namaù—my
obeisances; iti—with these words; mantram—the hymn; japantyaù—chanting;
täù—they; püjäm—worship; cakruù—performed; kumärikäù—the unmarried
girls.
TRANSLATION
Each of the young unmarried girls performed her worship while chanting the
following mantra. "O goddess Kätyäyané, O great potency of the Lord, O
possessor of great mystic power and mighty controller of all, please make the
son of Nanda Mahäräja my husband. I offer my obeisances unto you."
PURPORT
According to various äcäryas, the goddess Durgä mentioned in this verse is
not the illusory energy of Kåñëa called Maya but rather the internal potency of
the Lord known as Yoga-mäyä. The distinction between the internal and
external, or illusory, potency of the Lord is described in the
Närada-païcarätra, in the conversation between Çruti and Vidyä:
jänäty ekäparä käntaà
saivä durgä tad-ätmikä
yä parä paramä çaktir
mahä-viñëu-svarüpiëé
yasyä vijïäna-mätreëa
paräëäà paramätmanaù
mahürtäd deva-devasya
präptir bhavati nänyathä
ekeyaà prema-sarvasva
svabhävä gokuleçvaré
anayä su-labho jïeya
ädi-devo 'khileçvaraù
asyä ävärika-çaktir
mahä-mäyäkhileçvaré
yayä mugdaà jagat sarvaà
sarve dehäbhimäninaù
"The Lord's inferior potency, known as Durgä, is dedicated to His loving
service. Being the Lord's potency, this inferior energy is nondifferent from
Him. There is another, superior potency, whose form is on the same spiritual
level as that of God Himself. Simply by scientifically understanding this
supreme potency, one can immediately achieve the Supreme Soul of all souls,
who is the Lord of all lords. There is no other process to achieve Him. That
supreme potency of the Lord is known as Gokuleçvaré, the goddess of Gokula.
Her nature is to be completely absorbed in love of God, and through Her one
can easily obtain the primeval God, the Lord of all that be. This internal
potency of the Lord has a covering potency, known as Mahä-mäyä, who rules
the material world. In fact she bewilders the entire universe, and thus
everyone within the universe falsely identifies himself with the material body."
From the above we can understand that the internal and external, or
superior and inferior, potencies of the Supreme Lord are personified as
Yoga-mäyä and Mahä-mäyä, respectively. The name Durgä is sometimes used
to refer to the internal, superior potency, as stated in the Païcarätra: "In all
mantras used to worship Kåñëa, the presiding deity is known as Durgä." Thus in
the transcendental sound vibrations glorifying and worshiping the Absolute
Truth, Kåñëa, the presiding deity of the particular mantra or hymn is called
Durgä. The name Durgä therefore refers also to that personality who functions
as the internal potency of the Lord and who is thus on the platform of
çuddha-sattva, pure transcendental existence. This internal potency is
understood to be Kåñëa's sister, known also as Ekänaàçä or Subhadrä. This is
the Durgä who was worshiped by the gopés in Våndävana. Several äcäryas have
pointed out that ordinary people are sometimes bewildered and think that the
names Mahä-mäyä and Durgä refer exclusively to the external potency of the
Lord.
Even if we accept hypothetically that the gopés were worshiping the
external Mäyä, there is no fault on their part, since in their pastimes of loving
Kåñëa they were acting as ordinary members of society. Çréla Prabhupäda
comments in this regard: "The Vaiñëavas generally do not worship any
demigods. Çréla Narottama däsa Öhäkura has strictly forbidden all worship of
the demigods for anyone who wants to advance in pure devotional service. Yet
the gopés, who are beyond compare in their affection for Kåñëa, were seen to
worship Durgä. The worshipers of demigods also sometimes mention that the
gopés also worshiped goddess Durgä, but we must understand the purpose of the
gopés. Generally, people worship goddess Durgä for some material benediction.
Here, the gopés could adopt any means to satisfy or serve Kåñëa. That was the
superexcellent characteristic of the gopés. They worshiped goddess Durgä
completely for one month in order to have Kåñëa as their husband. Every day
they prayed for Kåñëa, the son of Nanda Mahäräja, to become their husband."
The conclusion is that a sincere devotee of Kåñëa will never imagine any
material quality to exist in the transcendental gopés, who are the most exalted
devotees of the Lord. The only motivation in all their activities was simply to
love and satisfy Kåñëa, and if we foolishly consider their activities to be
mundane in any way, it will be impossible for us to understand Kåñëa
consciousness.
TEXT 5
WvaM maAs$aM ˜ataM caeç&:
ku(maAyaR: k{(SNAcaetas$a:
Ba‰"k(AlaI%M s$amaAnacauRr,"
BaUyaAªand"s$auta: paita:
evaà mäsaà vrataà ceruù
kumäryaù kåñëa-cetasaù
bhadrakäléà samänarcur
bhüyän nanda-sutaù patiù
SYNONYMS
evam—in this manner; mäsam—an entire month; vratam—their vow;
ceruù—they executed; kumäryaù—the girls; kåñëa-cetasaù—their minds
absorbed in Kåñëa; bhadra-kälém—the goddess Kätyäyané; samänarcuù—they
properly worshiped; bhüyät—may He become; nanda-sutaù—the son of King
Nanda; patiù—my husband.
TRANSLATION
Thus for an entire month the girls carried out their vow and properly
worshiped the goddess Bhadrakälé, fully absorbing their minds in Kåñëa and
meditating upon the following thought: "May the son of King Nanda become
my husband."
TEXT 6
OSasyautTaAya gAAe‡aE: svaEr,"
@nyaAenyaAbaÜ"baAh"va:
k{(SNAmau»aEjaRgAuyaARntya:
k(AilanâAM µaAtaumanvah"ma,
üñasy utthäya gotraiù svair
anyonyäbaddha-bähavaù
kåñëam uccair jagur yäntyaù
kälindyäà snätum anvaham
SYNONYMS
üñasi—at dawn; utthäya—rising; gotraiù—by their names; svaiù—proper;
anyonya—one with another; äbaddha—holding; bähavaù—their hands;
kåñëam—in glorification of Kåñëa; uccaiù—loudly; jaguù—they sang;
yäntyaù—while going; kälindyäm—to the Yamunä; snätum—in order to bathe;
anu-aham—each day.
TRANSLATION
Each day they rose at dawn. Calling out to one another by name, they all
held hands and loudly sang the glories of Kåñëa while going to the Kälindé to
take their bath.
TEXT 7
naâA: k(d"Aicad"AgAtya
taIre" inaiºapya paUvaRvata,
vaAs$aAMis$a k{(SNAM gAAyantyaAe
ivajaoeú": s$ailalae maud"A
nadyäù kadäcid ägatya
tére nikñipya pürva-vat
väsäàsi kåñëaà gäyantyo
vijahruù salile mudä
SYNONYMS
nadyäù—of the river; kadäcit—once; ägatya—coming; tére—to the shore;
nikñipya—throwing down; pürva-vat—as previously; väsäàsi—their clothing;
kåñëam—about Kåñëa; gäyantyaù—singing; vijahruù—they played; salile—in
the water; mudä—with pleasure.
TRANSLATION
One day they came to the riverbank and, putting aside their clothing as they
had done before, happily played in the water while singing the glories of Kåñëa.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, this incident occurred
on the day the young gopés completed their vow, which was a full-moon day.
To celebrate the successful completion of their vow, the girls invited young
Rädhäräëé—the daughter of Våñabhänu and the special object of their
affection—along with other important gopés, and brought them all to the river
to bathe. Their playing in the water was meant to serve as the
avabhåtha-snäna, the ceremonial bath taken immediately upon the completion
of a Vedic sacrifice.
Çréla Prabhupäda comments as follows: "It is an old system among Indian
girls and women that when they take bath in the river they place their
garments on the bank and dip into the water completely naked. The portion of
the river where the girls and women take bath was strictly prohibited to any
male, and this is still the system. The Supreme Personality of Godhead,
knowing the minds of the unmarried young gopés, awarded them their desired
objective. They had prayed for Kåñëa to become their husband, and Kåñëa
wanted to fulfill their desires."
TEXT 8
BagAvaAMstad"iBa‘aetya
k{(SnaAe yaAegAeìre"ìr":
vayasyaEr"Ava{tasta‡a
gAtastatk(maRis$aÜ"yae
bhagaväàs tad abhipretya
kåñno yogeçvareçvaraù
vayasyair ävåtas tatra
gatas tat-karma-siddhaye
SYNONYMS
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tat—that;
abhipretya—seeing; kåñëaù—Lord Kåñëa; yoga-éçvara-éçvaraù—the master of
all masters of mystic power; vayasyaiù—by young companions;
ävåtaù—surrounded; tatra—there; gataù—went; tat—of those girls;
karma—the ritualistic activities; siddhaye—for assuring the result.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead and master of all masters
of mystic yoga, was aware of what the gopés were doing, and thus He went there
surrounded by His young companions to award the gopés the perfection of their
endeavor.
PURPORT
As the master of all masters of mystic power, Lord Kåñëa could easily
understand the desires of the gopés, and He could also fulfill them. The gopés,
like all young girls from respectable families, considered the embarrassment of
appearing naked before a young boy to be worse than giving up their lives. Yet
Lord Kåñëa made them come out of the water and bow down to Him. Although
the bodily forms of the gopés were all fully developed, and although Kåñëa met
them in a secluded place and brought them fully under His control, because
the Lord is completely transcendental there was not a trace of material desire
in His mind. Lord Kåñëa is the ocean of transcendental bliss, and He wanted to
share His bliss with the gopés on the spiritual platform, completely free of
ordinary lust.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains that the companions of
Kåñëa mentioned here were mere toddlers two or three years old. They were
completely naked and were unaware of the difference between male and
female. When Kåñëa went out to herd the cows, they followed Him because
they were so attached to Him that they could not bear to be without His
association.
TEXT 9
taAs$aAM vaAs$aAMsyaupaAd"Aya
naIpamaAç&÷ s$atvar":
h"s$aià": ‘ah"s$ana, baAlaE:
pair"h"As$amauvaAca h"
täsäà väsäàsy upädäya
népam äruhya satvaraù
hasadbhiù prahasan bälaiù
parihäsam uväca ha
SYNONYMS
täsäm—of those girls; väsäàsi—the garments; upädäya—taking; népam—a
kadamba tree; äruhya—climbing; satvaraù—quickly; hasadbhiù—who were
laughing; prahasan—Himself laughing loudly; bälaiù—with the boys;
parihäsam—joking words; uväca ha—He spoke.
TRANSLATION
Taking the girls' garments, He quickly climbed to the top of a kadamba tree.
Then, as He laughed loudly and His companions also laughed, He addressed the
girls jokingly.
TEXT 10
@‡aAgAtyaAbalaA: k(AmaM
svaM svaM vaAs$a: ‘agA{÷taAma,
s$atyaM “avaAiNA naAe namaR
yaâUyaM ˜atak(izARtaA:
aträgatyäbaläù kämaà
svaà svaà väsaù pragåhyatäm
satyaà braväëi no narma
yad yüyaà vrata-karçitäù
SYNONYMS
atra—here; ägatya—coming; abaläù—O girls; kämam—as you wish; svam
svam—each your own; väsaù—clothing; pragåhyatäm—please take;
satyam—the truth; bruväëi—I am speaking; na—not; u—rather; narma—jest;
yat—because; yüyam—you; vrata—by your vow of austerity;
karçitäù—fatigued.
TRANSLATION
[Lord Kåñëa said:] My dear girls, you may each come here as you wish and
take back your garments. I'm telling you the truth and am not joking with you,
since I see you're fatigued from executing austere vows.
TEXT 11
na mayaAeid"tapaUva< vaA
@na{taM taid"mae ivaäu":
WkE(k(zA: ‘ataIcC$DvaM
s$ahE"vaeita s$aumaDyamaA:
na mayodita-pürvaà vä
anåtaà tad ime viduù
ekaikaçaù pratécchadhvaà
sahaiveti su-madhyamäù
SYNONYMS
na—never; mayä—by Me; udita—spoken; pürvam—previously;
vai—definitely; anåtam—anything false; tat—that; ime—these young boys;
viduù—know; eka-ekaçaù—one by one; pratécchadhvam—pick out (your
garments); saha—or all together; eva—indeed; iti—thus; su-madhyamäù—O
slender-waisted girls.
TRANSLATION
I have never before spoken a lie, and these boys know it. Therefore, O
slender-waisted girls, please come forward, either one by one or all together, and
pick out your clothes.
TEXT 12
tasya tatºvaeilataM ä{"î"A
gAAepya: ‘aemapair"plautaA:
˜aIix"taA: ‘aeºya caAnyaAenyaM
jaAtah"As$aA na inayaRyau:
tasya tat kñvelitaà dåñövä
gopyaù prema-pariplutäù
vréòitäù prekñya cänyonyaà
jäta-häsä na niryayuù
SYNONYMS
tasya—His; tat—that; kñvelitam—joking behavior; dåñövä—seeing;
gopyaù—the gopés; prema-pariplutäù-fully immersed in pure love of Godhead;
vréòitäù—embarrassed; prekñya—glancing; ca—and; anyonyam—upon one
another; jäta-häsäù—beginning to laugh; na niryayuù—they did not come out.
TRANSLATION
Seeing how Kåñëa was joking with them, the gopés became fully immersed in
love for Him, and as they glanced at each other they began to laugh and joke
among themselves, even in their embarrassment. But still they did not come out
of the water.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains this verse as follows:
"The gopés were from most respectable families, and they might have argued
with Kåñëa: 'Why don't You simply leave our clothes on the bank of the river
and go away?'
"Kåñëa might have replied, 'But there are so many of you that some of the
girls might take clothes belonging to another.'
"The gopés would reply, 'We are honest and never steal anything. We never
touch another's property.'
"Then Kåñëa would say, 'If that's true, then simply come and get your
clothes. What is the difficulty?'
"When the gopés saw Kåñëa's determination, they were filled with loving
ecstasy. Although embarrassed, they were overjoyed to receive such attention
from Kåñëa. He was joking with them as if they were His wives or girlfriends,
and the gopés' only desire was to achieve such a relationship with Him. At the
same time, they were embarrassed to be seen naked by Him. But still they could
not help laughing at His joking words and even began to joke among
themselves, one gopé urging another, 'Go ahead, you go first, and let us see if
Kåñëa plays any tricks on you. Then we will go later.' "
TEXT 13
WvaM “auvaita gAAeivande"
namaRNAAiºaæacaetas$a:
@Ak(NQ&ma¢aA: zAItaAede"
vaepamaAnaAstama“auvana,
evaà bruvati govinde
narmaëäkñipta-cetasaù
ä-kaëöha-magnäù çétode
vepamänäs tam abruvan
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; bruvati—speaking; govinde—Lord Govinda; narmaëä—by His
joking words; äkñipta—agitated; cetasaù-their minds; ä-kaëöha—up to their
necks; magnäù—submerged; çéta—cold; ude—in the water;
vepamänäù—shivering; tam—to Him; abruvan—they spoke.
TRANSLATION
As Çré Govinda spoke to the gopés in this way, His joking words completely
captivated their minds. Submerged up to their necks in the cold water, they
began to shiver. Thus they addressed Him as follows.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura gives the following example of joking
between Kåñëa and the gopés.
Kåñëa: O birdlike girls, if you do not come here, then with these garments
caught in the branches I will make a swing and a hammock. I need to lie down,
since I have spent the entire night awake and am now becoming sleepy.
Gopés: Our dear cowherd boy, Your cows, greedy for grass, have gone into a
cave. So You must quickly go there to herd them back on the proper path.
Kåñëa: Come now, My dear cowherd girls, you must quickly go from here to
Vraja and perform your household duties. Don't become a disturbance to your
parents and other elders.
Gopés: Our dear Kåñëa, we will not go home for an entire month, for it is by
the order of our parents and other elders that we are executing this vow of
fasting, the Kätyäyané-vrata.
Kåñëa: .My dear austere ladies, I too, by the strength of seeing you, have
now developed a surprising mood of detachment from family life. I wish to stay
here for a month and execute the vow of dwelling in the clouds. And if you
show mercy to Me, I can come down from here and observe the vow of fasting
in your company.
The gopés were completely captivated by Kåñëa's joking words, but out of
shyness they submerged themselves in the water up to their necks. Shaking
from the cold, they addressed Kåñëa as follows.
TEXT 14
maAnayaM BaAe: k{(TaAstvaAM tau
nand"gAAepas$autaM i‘ayama,
jaAnaImaAe'Ëÿ ˜ajaëAGyaM
de"ih" vaAs$aAMis$a vaeipataA:
mänayaà bhoù kåthäs tväà tu
nanda-gopa-sutaà priyam
jänémo 'ìga vraja-çläghyaà
dehi väsäàsi vepitäù
SYNONYMS
mä—do not; anayam—injustice; bhoù—our dear Kåñëa; kåthäù—do;
tväm—You; tu—on the other hand; nanda-gopa—of Mahäräja Nanda;
sutam—the son; priyam—loved; jänémaù—we know; aìga—O dear one;
vraja-çläghyam—renowned throughout Vraja; dehi—please give; väsäàsi—our
garments; vepitäù—(to us) who are shivering.
TRANSLATION
[The gopés said:] Dear Kåñëa, don't be unfair! We know that You are the
respectable son of Nanda and that You are honored by everyone in Vraja. You
are also very dear to us. Please give us back our clothes. We are shivering in the
cold water.
TEXT 15
zyaAmas$aund"r" tae d"Asya:
k(r"vaAma tavaAeid"tama,
de"ih" vaAs$aAMis$a DamaRÁa
naAe cae‰"AÁae “auvaAma he"
çyämasundara te däsyaù
karaväma tavoditam
dehi väsäàsi dharma-jïa
no ced räjïe bruväma he
SYNONYMS
çyämasundara—O Lord Çyämasundara; te—Your; däsyaù—maidservants;
karaväma—we shall do; tava—by You; uditam—what is spoken; dehi—please
give; väsäàsi—our clothing; dharma-jïa—O knower of religion; na—not;
u—indeed; cet—if; räjïe—to the king; bruvämaù—we shall tell; he—O Kåñëa.
TRANSLATION
O Çyämasundara, we are Your maidservants and must do whatever You say.
But give us back our clothing. You know what the religious principles are, and
if You don't give us our clothes we will have to tell the king. Please!
TEXT 16
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
BavatyaAe yaid" mae d"AsyaAe
mayaAelM( vaA k(ir"SyaTa
@‡aAgAtya svavaAs$aAMis$a
‘ataIcC$ta zAuicaismataA:
naAe caeªaAhM" ‘ad"Asyae ikM(
‚u(Ü"Ae r"AjaA k(ir"Syaita
çré-bhagavän uväca
bhavatyo yadi me däsyo
mayoktaà vä kariñyatha
aträgatya sva-väsäàsi
pratécchata çuci-smitäù
no cen nähaà pradäsye kià
kruddho räjä kariñyati
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
bhavatyaù—you; yadi—if; me—My; däsyaù—servants; mayä—by Me;
uktam—what has been spoken; vä—or; kariñyatha—you will do; atra—here;
ägatya—coming; sva-väsäàsi—your own garments; pratécchata—pick out;
çuci—fresh; smitäù—whose smiles; na u—not; cet—if; na—not; aham—I ;
pradäsye—will give; kim—what; kruddhaù—angry; räjä—the king;
kariñyati—will be able to do.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: If you girls are actually My
maidservants, and if you will really do what I say, then come here with your
innocent smiles and let each girl pick out her clothes. If you don't do what I
say, I won't give them back to you. And even if the king becomes angry, what
can he do?
PURPORT
Çréla Prabhupäda comments, "When the gopés saw that Kåñëa was strong
and determined, they had no alternative but to abide by His order."
TEXT 17
tataAe jalaAzAyaAts$avaAR
d"Air"k(A: zAItavaeipataA:
paAiNAByaAM yaAeinamaAcC$Aâ
‘aAeÔaeç&: zAItak(izARtaA:
tato jaläçayät sarvä
därikäù çéta-vepitäù
päëibhyäà yonim äcchädya
protteruù çéta-karçitäù
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; jala-äçayät—out of the river; sarväù—all; därikäù—the young
girls; çéta-vepitäù—shivering from the cold; päëibhyäm—with their hands;
yonim—their pubic area; äcchädya—covering; protteruù—they came up;
çéta-karçitäù—pained by the cold.
TRANSLATION
Then, shivering from the painful cold, all the young girls rose up out of the
water, covering their pubic area with their hands.
PURPORT
The gopés had assured Kåñëa that they were His eternal servants and would
do whatever He said, and thus they were now defeated by their own words. If
they delayed any longer, they thought, some other man might come along, and
this would be unbearable for them. The gopés loved Kåñëa so much that even in
that awkward situation their attachment to Him was increasing more and
more, and they were very eager to stay in His company. Thus they did not even
consider drowning themselves in the river because of the embarrassing
situation.
They concluded that they could do nothing but go forward to their beloved
Kåñëa, putting aside their embarrassment. Thus the gopés assured each other
that there was no alternative and rose up out of the water to meet Him.
TEXT 18
BagAvaAnaAh"taA vaIºya
zAuÜ" BaAva‘as$aAid"ta:
s$k(nDae inaDaAya vaAs$aAMis$a
‘aIta: ‘aAevaAca s$aismatama,
bhagavän ähatä vékñya
çuddha -bhäva-prasäditaù
skandhe nidhäya väsäàsi
prétaù proväca sa-smitam
SYNONYMS
bhagavän—the Supreme Lord; ähatäù—struck; vékñya—seeing; çuddha—pure;
bhäva—by their loving affection; prasäditaù—satisfied; skandhe—upon His
shoulder; nidhäya—placing; väsäàsi—their garments; prétaù—lovingly;
proväca—spoke; sa-smitam—while smiling.
TRANSLATION
When the Supreme Lord saw how the gopés were struck with
embarrassment, He was satisfied by their pure loving affection. Putting their
clothes on His shoulder, the Lord smiled and spoke to them with affection.
PURPORT
Çréla Prabhupäda comments, "The gopés' simple presentation was so pure
that Lord Kåñëa immediately became pleased with them. All the unmarried
gopés who prayed to Kätyäyané to have Kåñëa as their husband were thus
satisfied. A woman cannot be naked before any male except her husband. The
unmarried gopés desired Kåñëa as their husband, and He fulfilled their desire in
this way."
For aristocratic girls like the gopés, standing naked before a young boy was
worse than death, and yet they decided to give up everything for the pleasure
of Lord Kåñëa. He wanted to see the power of their love for Him, and He was
completely satisfied by their unalloyed devotion.
TEXT 19
yaUyaM ivavañA yad"paAe Da{ta˜ataA
vyagAAh"taEtaÔaäu" de"vahe"lanama,
baä,"DvaAÃailaM maUDnyaRpanauÔayae"M'h"s$a:
k{(tvaA namaAe'DaAevas$anaM ‘agA{÷taAma,
yüyaà vivasträ yad apo dhåta-vratä
vyagähataitat tad u deva-helanam
baddhväïjalià mürdhny apanuttaye 'àhasaù
kåtvä namo 'dho-vasanaà pragåhyatäm
SYNONYMS
yüyam—you; vivasträù—naked; yat—because; apaù—in the water;
dhåta-vratäù—while executing a Vedic ritualistic vow; vyagähata—bathed; etat
tat—this; u—indeed; deva-helanam—an offense against Varuëa and the other
gods; baddhvä aïjalim—with palms joined together; mürdhni—upon your
heads; apanuttaye—for counteracting; aàhasaù—your sinful action; kåtvä
namaù—paying obeisances; adhaù-vasanam—your lower garments;
pragåhyatäm—please take back.
TRANSLATION
[Lord Kåñëa said:] You girls bathed naked while executing your vow, and
that is certainly an offense against the demigods. To counteract your sin you
should offer obeisances while placing your joined palms above your heads. Then
you should take back your lower garments.
PURPORT
Kåñëa wanted to see the full surrender of the gopés, and thus He ordered
them to offer obeisances with their palms joined above their heads. In other
words, the gopés could no longer cover their bodies. We should not foolishly
think that Lord Kåñëa is an ordinary lusty boy enjoying the naked beauty of
the gopés. Kåñëa is the Supreme Absolute Truth, and He was acting to fulfill
the loving desire of the young cowherd girls of Våndävana. In this world we
would certainly become lusty in a situation like this. But to compare ourselves
to God is a great offense, and because of this offense we will not be able to
understand Kåñëa's transcendental position, for we will wrongly take Him to
be materially conditioned like ourselves. To lose transcendental sight of Kåñëa
is certainly a great disaster for one trying to relish the bliss of the Absolute
Truth.
TEXT 20
wtyacyautaenaAiBaih"taM ˜ajaAbalaA
matvaA ivavañAplavanaM ˜atacyauitama,
tatpaUitaRk(AmaAstad"zAeSak(maRNAAM
s$aAºaAtk{(taM naemaur"vaâma{gyata:
ity acyutenäbhihitaà vrajäbalä
matvä vivasträplavanaà vrata-cyutim
tat-pürti-kämäs tad-açeña-karmaëäà
säkñät-kåtaà nemur avadya-måg yataù
SYNONYMS
iti—in these words; acyutena—by the infallible Supreme Lord;
abhihitam—indicated; vraja-abaläù—the girls of Vraja; matvä—considering;
vivastra—naked; äplavanam—the bathing; vraja-cyutim—a falldown from
their vow; tat-pürti—the successful completion of that; kämäù—intently
desiring; tat—of that performance; açeña-karmarëäm—and of unlimited other
pious activities; säkñät-kåtam—to the directly manifest fruit; nemuù—they
offered their obeisances; avadya-måk—the cleanser of all sins; yataù—because.
TRANSLATION
Thus the young girls of Våndävana, considering what Lord Acyuta had told
them, accepted that they had suffered a falldown from their vow by bathing
naked in the river. But they still desired to successfully complete their vow, and
since Lord Kåñëa is Himself the ultimate result of all pious activities, they
offered their obeisances to Him to cleanse away all their sins.
PURPORT
The transcendental position of Kåñëa consciousness is clearly described
here. The gopés decided that it was better to renounce their so-called family
tradition and traditional morality and simply surrender unto the Supreme
Lord Kåñëa. This does not mean that the Kåñëa consciousness movement
advocates immoral activities. In fact, the devotees of ISKCON practice the
highest standard of restraint and morality, but at the same time we recognize
the transcendental position of Kåñëa. Lord Kåñëa is God and therefore has no
material desire to enjoy young girls in sexual affairs. As will be seen in this
chapter, Lord Kåñëa was not at all attracted to enjoying the gopés; rather He
was attracted to their love and wanted to satisfy them.
The greatest offense is to imitate the activities of Lord Kåñëa. In India there
is a group called präkåta-sahajiyä, who imitate these affairs of Kåñëa and try to
enjoy naked young girls in the name of worshiping Kåñëa. The ISKCON
movement sternly rejects this mockery of religion, because the greatest offense
is for a human being to ludicrously imitate the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. In the ISKCON movement there are no cheap incarnations, and it
is not possible for a devotee of this movement to promote himself to the
position of Kåñëa.
Five hundred years ago Kåñëa appeared as Lord Caitanya Mahäprabhu, who
practiced strict celibacy throughout His student life and at the age of
twenty-four took sannyäsa, a lifelong vow of celibacy. Caitanya Mahäprabhu
rigidly avoided contact with women in order to carry out His vow of loving
service to Kåñëa. When Kåñëa personally appeared five thousand years ago, He
exhibited these wonderful pastimes, which attract our attention. We should
not become envious or shocked when we hear that God can perform such
pastimes. Our shock is due to our ignorance, because if we tried to perform
these activities our bodies would be afflicted by lust. Lord Kåñëa, however, is
the Supreme Absolute Truth and is therefore never disturbed by any material
desire whatsoever. Thus, this incident—in which the gopés gave up normal
standards of morality and, raising their hands to their head, bowed down in
compliance with Kåñëa's order—is an example of pure devotional surrender
and not a discrepancy in religious principles.
In fact, the gopés' surrender is the perfection of all religion, as Çréla
Prabhupäda describes in Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead: "The gopés
were all simple souls, and whatever Kåñëa said, they took to be true. In order to
be freed from the wrath of Varuëadeva, as well as to fulfill the desired end of
their vows and ultimately to please their worshipable Lord, Kåñëa, they
immediately abided by His order. Thus they became the greatest lovers of
Kåñëa, and His most obedient servitors.
"Nothing can compare to the Kåñëa consciousness of the gopés. Actually the
gopés did not care for Varuëa or any other demigod; they only wanted to satisfy
Kåñëa."
TEXT 21
taAstaTaAvanataA ä{"î"A
BagAvaAnde"vak(Ls$auta:
vaAs$aAMis$a taABya: ‘aAyacC$ta,
k(ç&NAstaena taAeiSata:
täs tathävanatä dåñövä
bhagavän devaké-sutaù
väsäàsi täbhyaù präyacchat
karuëas tena toñitaù
SYNONYMS
täù—then; tathä—thus; avanatäù—bowed down; dåñövä—seeing;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; devaké-sutaù—Kåñëa, the
son of Devaké; väsäàsi—the garments; täbhyaù—to them; präyacchat—He
returned; karuëaù—compassionate; tena—by that act; toñitaù—satisfied .
TRANSLATION
Seeing them bow down like that, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
son of Devaké, gave them back their garments, feeling compassionate toward
them and satisfied by their act.
TEXT 22
ä{"XM# ‘alabDaAñpayaA ca h"AipataA:
‘astaAeiBataA: ‚(Lx"nava»a k(Air"taA:
vañAiNA caEvaApaô$taAnyaTaApyamauM
taA naAByas$aUyana, i‘ayas$aËÿinava{RtaA:
dåòhaà pralabdhäs trapayä ca häpitäù
prastobhitäù kréòana-vac ca käritäù
vasträëi caiväpahåtäny athäpy amuà
tä näbhyasüyan priya-saìga-nirvåtäù
SYNONYMS
dåòham—thoroughly; pralabdhäù—cheated; trapayä—of their shame;
ca—and; häpitäù—deprived; prastobhitäù—laughed at; kréòana-vat—just like
toy dolls; ca—and; käritäù—made to act; vasträëi—their clothing; ca—and;
eva—indeed; apahåtäni—stolen; atha api—nevertheless; amum—toward Him;
täù—they; na abhyasüyan—did not feel inimical; priya—of their beloved;
saìga—by the association; nirvåtäù—joyful.
TRANSLATION
Although the gopés had been thoroughly cheated, deprived of their modesty,
ridiculed and made to act just like toy dolls, and although their clothing had
been stolen, they did not feel at all inimical toward Çré Kåñëa. Rather, they
were simply joyful to have this opportunity to associate with their beloved.
PURPORT
Çréla Prabhupäda comments, "This attitude of the gopés is described by Lord
Caitanya Mahäprabhu when he prays, 'My dear Lord Kåñëa, You may embrace
Me or trample Me under Your feet, or You may make Me brokenhearted by
never being present before Me. Whatever You like, You can do, because You
have complete freedom to act. But in spite of all of Your dealings, You are My
Lord eternally, and I have no other worshipable object.' This is the attitude of
the gopés toward Kåñëa."
TEXT 23
pair"DaAya svavaAs$aAMis$a
‘aeï"s$aËÿmas$aiÀataA:
gA{h"ItaicaÔaA naAe caelaus$a,
taismanlaÀaAiyataeºaNAA:
paridhäya sva-väsäàsi
preñöha-saìgama-sajjitäù
gåhéta-cittä no celus
tasmin lajjäyitekñaëäù
SYNONYMS
paridhäya—putting on; sva-väsäàsi—their own garments; preñöha—of their
beloved; saìgama—by this association; sajjitäù—becoming completely
attached to Him; gåhéta—taken away; cittäù—whose minds; na—could not;
u—indeed; celuù—move; tasmin—upon Him; lajjäyita—full of shyness;
ékñaëäù—whose glances.
TRANSLATION
The gopés were addicted to associating with their beloved Kåñëa, and thus
they became captivated by Him. Thus, even after putting their clothes on they
did not move. They simply remained where they were, shyly glancing at Him.
PURPORT
By association with their beloved Kåñëa, the gopés had become more
attached to Him than ever. Just as Kåñëa had stolen their clothes, He had also
stolen their minds and their love. The gopés interpreted the whole incident as
proof that Kåñëa was also attached to them. Otherwise, why would He have
gone to the trouble of playing with them in this way? Because they thought
that Kåñëa was now attached to them, they glanced at Him with shyness, and
being stunned by the rising of their ecstatic love, they could not move from
where they stood. Kåñëa had overcome their shyness and forced them to come
out of the water naked, but now, having dressed properly, they again became
shy in His presence. In fact, this incident increased their humbleness before
Kåñëa. They did not want Kåñëa to see them staring at Him, but they
cautiously took the opportunity to glance at the Lord.
TEXT 24
taAs$aAM ivaÁaAya BagAvaAna,
svapaAd"s$pazARk(AmyayaA
Da{ta˜ataAnaAM s$aÆÿlpama,
@Ah" d"AmaAed"r"Ae'balaA:
täsäà vijïäya bhagavän
sva-päda-sparça-kämyayä
dhåta-vratänäà saìkalpam
äha dämodaro 'baläù
SYNONYMS
täsäm—of these girls; vijïäya—understanding; bhagavän—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; sva-päda—of His own feet; sparça—for the touch;
kämyayä—with the desire; dhåta-vratänäm—who had taken their vow;
saìkalpam—the motivation; äha—spoke; dämodaraù—Lord Dämodara;
abaläù—to the girls.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord understood the determination of the gopés in executing
their strict vow. The Lord also knew that the girls desired to touch His lotus
feet, and thus Lord Dämodara, Kåñëa, spoke to them as follows.
TEXT 25
s$aÆÿlpaAe ivaid"ta: s$aADvyaAe
BavataInaAM mad"caRnama,
mayaAnaumaAeid"ta: s$aAe's$aAE
s$atyaAe BaivataumahR"ita
saìkalpo viditaù sädhvyo
bhavaténäà mad-arcanam
mayänumoditaù so 'sau
satyo bhavitum arhati
SYNONYMS
saìkalpaù—the motivation; viditaù—understood; sädhvyaù—O pious girls;
bhavaténäm—your; mat-arcanam—worship of Me; mayä—by Me;
anumoditaù—approved of; saù asau—that; satyaù—true; bhavitum—to
become; arhati—must.
TRANSLATION
[Lord Kåñëa said:] O saintly girls, I understand that your real motive in this
austerity has been to worship Me. That intent of yours is approved of by Me,
and indeed it must come to pass.
PURPORT
Just as Kåñëa is free of all impure desire, so are the gopés. Their attempt to
gain Kåñëa as their husband was therefore motivated not by a desire for
personal sense gratification but by their overwhelming desire to serve Kåñëa
and to please Him. Because of their intense love, the gopés did not see Kåñëa as
God but rather as the most wonderful boy in all creation, and being beautiful
young girls, they desired only to please Him by loving service. Lord Kåñëa
understood the pure desire of the gopés and was thus satisfied. The Lord could
certainly not be satisfied by ordinary lust, but He was moved by the intense
loving devotion of the cowherd girls of Våndävana.
TEXT 26
na mayyaAvaeizAtaiDayaAM
k(Ama: k(AmaAya k(lpatae
BaijaRtaA ¸(iTataA DaAnaA:
‘aAyaAe baIjaAya naezAtae
na mayy äveçita-dhiyäà
kämaù kämäya kalpate
bharjitä kvathitä dhänäù
präyo béjäya neçate
SYNONYMS
na—not; mayi—in Me; äveçita—fully absorbed; dhiyäm—of those whose
consciousness; kämaù—desire; kämäya—to material lust; kalpate—leads;
bharjitäù—burned; kvathitäù—cooked; dhänäù—grains; präyaù—for the most
part; béjäya—new growth; na iñyate—are not capable of causing.
TRANSLATION
The desire of those who fix their minds on Me does not lead to material
desire for sense gratification, just as barleycorns burned by the sun and then
cooked can no longer grow into new sprouts.
PURPORT
The words mayy äveçita-dhiyäm are very significant here. Unless one has
achieved an advanced degree of devotion, one cannot fix the mind and
intelligence on Kåñëa, since Kåñëa is pure spiritual existence. Self-realization is
a state not of desirelessness but rather of purified desire, wherein one desires
only the pleasure of Lord Kåñëa. The gopés were certainly attracted to Kåñëa in
a mood of conjugal love, and yet, having fixed their minds and indeed their
entire existence completely on Kåñëa, their conjugal desire could never
manifest as material lust; rather, it became the most exalted form of love of
Godhead ever seen within the universe.
TEXT 27
yaAtaAbalaA ˜ajaM is$aÜ"A
mayaemaA rM"syaTaA ºapaA:
yaäu"iÚ"zya ˜ataimadM"
caeç&r"AyaARcaRnaM s$ataI:
yätäbalä vrajaà siddhä
mayemä raàsyathä kñapäù
yad uddiçya vratam idaà
cerur äryärcanaà satéù
SYNONYMS
yäta—go now; abaläù—My dear girls; vrajam—to Vraja; siddhäù—having
achieved your desire; mayä—with Me; imäù—these; raàsyatha—you will
enjoy; kñapäù—the nights; yat—which; uddiçya—having in mind;
vratam—vow; idam—this; ceruù—you executed; äryä—of goddess Kätyäyané;
arcanam—the worship; satéù—being pure.
TRANSLATION
Go now, girls, and return to Vraja. Your desire is fulfilled, for in My
company you will enjoy the coming nights. After all, this was the purpose of
your vow to worship goddess Kätyäyané, O pure-hearted ones.
TEXT 28
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
wtyaAid"í"A BagAvataA
labDak(AmaA: ku(maAir"k(A:
DyaAyantyastatpad"AmBaAejama,
k{(cC)$AiªaivaRivazAu˜aRjama,
çré-çuka uväca
ity ädiñöä bhagavatä
labdha-kämäù kumärikäù
dhyäyantyas tat-padämbhojam
kåcchrän nirviviçur vrajam
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; ädiñöäù—instructed;
bhagavatä—by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; labdha—having
obtained; kämäù—their desire; kumärikäù—the young girls;
dhyäyantyaù—meditating; tat—His; pada-ambhojam—upon the lotus feet;
kåcchrät—with difficulty; nirviviçuù—they returned; vrajam—to the cowherd
village.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Thus instructed by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the young girls, their desire now fulfilled, could bring themselves only
with great difficulty to return to the village of Vraja, meditating all the while
upon His lotus feet.
PURPORT
The gopés' desire was fulfilled because Lord Kåñëa had agreed to act as their
husband. A young girl can never spend the night with any man except her
husband, and thus when Kåñëa agreed to engage the girls in the nocturnal räsa
dance during the coming autumn season, in effect He was agreeing to
reciprocate their love for Him in the role of a husband.
TEXT 29
@Ta gAAepaE: pair"va{taAe
BagAvaAnde"vak(Ls$auta:
va{nd"AvanaAÕ"taAe äU"rM"
caAr"yana, gAA: s$ah"Aƒaja:
atha gopaiù parivåto
bhagavän devaké-sutaù
våndävanäd gato düraà
cärayan gäù sahägrajaù
SYNONYMS
atha—some time later; gopaiù—by the cowherd boys; parivåtaù—surrounded;
bhagavän—the Supreme Lord; devaké-sutaù—the son of Devaké;
våndävanät—from Våndävana; gataù—He went; düram—a distance;
cärayan—grazing; gäù—the cows; saha-agrajaù—together with His brother
Balaräma.
TRANSLATION
Some time later Lord Kåñëa, the son of Devaké, surrounded by His cowherd
friends and accompanied by His elder brother, Balaräma, went a good distance
away from Våndävana, herding the cows.
PURPORT
Having described how Lord Kåñëa stole the garments of the young gopés,
Çukadeva Gosvämé now begins introducing the description of Lord Kåñëa's
blessings upon the wives of some ritualistic brähmaëas.
TEXT 30
inad"GaAk(ARtapae itagmae
C$AyaAiBa: svaAiBar"Atmana:
@Atapa‡aAiyataAna, vaIºya
åu"maAnaAh" ˜ajaAEk(s$a:
nidaghärkätape tigme
chäyäbhiù sväbhir ätmanaù
ätapaträyitän vékñya
drumän äha vrajaukasaù
SYNONYMS
nidägha—of the hot season; arka—of the sun; ätape—in the heat;
tigme—fierce; chayabhiù—with the shade; sväbhiù—their own; ätmanaù—for
Himself; ätapaträyitän—serving as umbrellas; vékñya—observing; drumän—the
trees; aha—He said; vraja-okasaù—to the boys of Vraja.
TRANSLATION
Then the sun's heat became intense, Lord Kåñëa saw that the trees were
acting as umbrellas by shading Him, and thus He spoke as follows to His
boyfriends.
TEXTS 31-32
he" staAek(k{(SNA he" @MzAAe
™aId"Amana, s$aubalaAjauRna
ivazAAla va{SaBaAEjaisvana,
de"va‘asTa vaè&Tapa
pazyataEtaAnmah"ABaAgAAna,
par"ATaE=k(AntajaIivataAna,
vaAtavaSaARtapaih"maAna,
s$ah"ntaAe vaAr"yainta na:
he stoka-kåñëa he aàço
çrédäman subalärjuna
viçäla våñabhaujasvin
devaprastha varüthapa
paçyataitän mahä-bhägän
parärthaikänta-jévitän
väta-varñätapa-himän
sahanto värayanti naù
SYNONYMS
he stoka-kåñëa—O Stoka Kåñëa; he aàço—O Aàçu; çrédäman subala
arjuna—O Çrédämä, Subala and Arjuna; viçäla våñabha ojasvin—O Viçäla,
Våñabha and Ojasvé; devaprastha varüthapa—O Devaprastha and Varüthapa;
paçyata—just see; etän—these; mahä-bhägän—most fortunate; para-artha—for
the benefit of others; ekänta—exclusively; jévitän—whose life; väta—the wind;
varña—rain; ätapa—heat of the sun; himän—and snow; sahantaù—tolerating;
värayanti—keep off; naù—for us.
TRANSLATION
[Lord Kåñëa said:] O Stoka Kåñëa and Aàçu, O Çrédäma, Subala and
Arjuna, O Våñabha, Ojasvé, Devaprastha and Varüthapa, just see these greatly
fortunate trees, whose lives are completely dedicated to the benefit of others.
Even while tolerating the wind, rain, heat and snow, they protect us from these
elements.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa was preparing to bestow His mercy on the wives of the
hard-hearted ritualistic brähmaëas, and in these verses the Lord indicates that
even trees who are dedicated to the welfare of others are superior to
brähmaëas who are not. Certainly the members of the Kåñëa consciousness
movement should soberly study this point.
TEXT 33
@h"Ae WSaAM varM" janma
s$avaR ‘aANyaupajaIvanama,
s$aujanasyaeva yaeSaAM vaE
ivamauKaA yaAinta naAiTaRna:
aho eñäà varaà janma
sarva -präëy-upajévanam
su-janasyeva yeñäà vai
vimukhä yänti närthinaù
SYNONYMS
aho—oh, just see; eñäm—of these trees; varam—superior; janma—birth;
sarva—for all; präëi—living entities; upajévinam—who provide maintenance;
su-janasya iva—like a great personality; yeñäm—from whom; vai—certainly;
vimukhäù—disappointed; yänti—go away; na—never; arthinaù—those who
are asking for something.
TRANSLATION
Just see how these trees are maintaining every living entity! Their birth is
successful. Their behavior is just like that of great personalities, for anyone who
asks anything from a tree never goes away disappointed.
PURPORT
This translation is quoted from Çréla Prabhupäda's Caitanya-caritämåta (Ädi
9.46).
TEXT 34
pa‡apauSpaP(lacC$AyaAmaUlavalk(
lad"Aç&iBa:
gAnDainayaARs$aBasmaAisTataAefmaE:
k(AmaAna, ivatanvatae
patra-puñpa-phala-cchäyämüla-
valkala-därubhiù
gandha-niryäsa-bhasmästhitokmaiù
kämän vitanvate
SYNONYMS
patra—by their leaves; puñpa—flowers; phala—fruits; chäyä—shade;
müla—roots; valkala—bark; därubhiù—and wood; gandha—by their fragrance;
niryäsa—sap; bhasma—ashes; asthi—pulp; tokmaiù—and young shoots;
kämän—desirable things; vitanvate—they award.
TRANSLATION
These trees fulfill one's desires with their leaves, flowers and fruits, their
shade, roots, bark and wood, and also with their fragrance, sap, ashes, pulp and
shoots.
TEXT 35
WtaAvaÀanmas$aAP(lyaM
de"ih"naAimah" de"ih"Sau
‘aANAEr"TaE=#iDaRyaA vaAcaA
™aeya@Acar"NAM s$ad"A
etävaj janma-säphalyaà
dehinäm iha dehiñu
präëair arthair dhiyä väcä
çreya-äcaraëaà sadä
SYNONYMS
etävat—up to this; janma—of birth; säphalyam—perfection; dehinäm—of
every living being; iha—in this world; dehiñu—toward those who are
embodied; präëaiù—by life; arthaiù—by wealth; dhiyä—by intelligence;
väcä—by words; çreyaù—eternal good fortune; äcaraëam—acting practically;
sadä—always.
TRANSLATION
It is the duty of every living being to perform welfare activities for the
benefit of others with his life, wealth, intelligence and words.
PURPORT
This translation is quoted from Çréla Prabhupäda's Caitanya-caritämåta (Ädi
9.42).
TEXT 36
wita ‘avaAlastabak(-
P(lapauSpad"laAetk(rE":
taè&NAAM na•azAAKaAnaAM
maDyataAe yamaunaAM gAta:
iti praväla-stabakaphala-
puñpa-dalotkaraiù
tarüëäà namra-çäkhänäà
madhyato yamunäà gataù
SYNONYMS
iti—thus speaking; praväla—of new branches; stabaka—by the clusters;
phala—of fruit; puñpa—flowers; dala—and leaves; utkaraiù—by the
abundance; tarüëäm—of the trees; namra—bowed down; çäkhänäm—whose
branches; madhyataù—from within the midst; yamunäm—the Yamunä River;
gataù—He came upon.
TRANSLATION
Thus moving among the trees, whose branches were bent low by their
abundance of twigs, fruits, flowers and leaves, Lord Kåñëa came to the Yamunä
River.
TEXT 37
ta‡a gAA: paAyaiyatvaApa:
s$auma{í"A: zAItalaA: izAvaA:
tataAe na{pa svayaM gAAepaA:
k(AmaM svaAäu" papaujaRlama,
tatra gäù päyayitväpaù
su-måñöäù çétaläù çiväù
tato nåpa svayaà gopäù
kämaà svädu papur jalam
SYNONYMS
tatra—there; gäù—the cows; päyayitvä—making drink; apaù—the water;
su-måñöäù—very clear; çétaläù—cool; çiväù—wholesome; tataù—then;
nåpa—O King Parékñit; svayam—themselves; gopäù—the cowherd boys;
kämam—freely; svädu—sweet-tasting; papuù—they drank; jalam—the water.
TRANSLATION
The cowherd boys let the cows drink the clear, cool and wholesome water of
the Yamunä. O King Parékñit, the cowherd boys themselves also drank that
sweet water to their full satisfaction.
TEXT 38
tasyaA opavanae k(AmaM
caAr"yanta: pazAUªa{pa
k{(SNAr"AmaAvaupaAgAmya
ºauDaAtaAR wd"ma“avana,
tasyä upavane kämaà
cärayantaù paçün nåpa
kåñëa-rämäv upägamya
kñudh-ärtä idam abravan
SYNONYMS
tasyäù—along the Yamunä; upavane—within a small forest; kämam—here and
there, as they wished; cärayantaù—tending; paçün—the animals; nåpa—O
King; kåñëa-rämau—Lord Kåñëa and Lord Räma; upägamya—approaching;
kñut-ärtäù—disturbed by hunger; idam—this; abruvan—they (the cowherd
boys) said.
TRANSLATION
Then, O King, the cowherd boys began herding the animals in a leisurely
way within a small forest along the Yamunä. But soon they became afflicted by
hunger and, approaching Kåñëa and Balaräma, spoke as follows.
PURPORT
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé explains that the cowherd boys were concerned that
Kåñëa would be hungry, and thus they feigned their own hunger so that Kåñëa
and Balaräma would make suitable arrangements to eat.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A . C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Tenth Canto, Twenty-second Chapter,
of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Kåñëa Steals the Garments of the
Unmarried Gopés."
23. The Brähmaëas' Wives Blessed
This chapter describes how Lord Çré Kåñëa, after inducing the cowherd boys
to beg for food, showed mercy to the wives of some brähmaëas performing a
sacrifice and made the brähmaëas themselves feel remorse.
When the cowherd boys became very hungry, they asked Çré Kåñëa about
obtaining food, and He sent them to beg some from a group of brähmaëas who
were performing a sacrifice nearby. But these brähmaëas ignored the boys,
thinking Çré Kåñëa an ordinary human being. The boys returned disappointed,
but the Lord sent them off again, advising them to ask the brähmaëas' wives
for the food. These ladies had heard of Kåñëa's transcendental qualities and
were very much attached to Him. Thus as soon as they learned He was nearby,
they went to Him in great haste, bringing all four varieties of food. In this way
they offered themselves to Çré Kåñëa.
Kåñëa told the women that while one can develop transcendental love for
Him by seeing His Deity form in the temple, meditating upon Him and
chanting His glories, one cannot achieve this result simply by being in His
physical presence. He advised them that since they were housewives, their
particular duty was to help their husbands perform sacrifices. He therefore
instructed them to return to their homes.
When the ladies went back home, their brähmaëa husbands at once felt
remorse, and they lamented, "For anyone inimical to Kåñëa, his three
births-seminal, brahminical and sacrificial-are all condemned. On the other
hand, these womenfolk, who have not undergone the purificatory processes of
the brahminical class or performed any austerity or pious rituals, have through
devotion for Kåñëa easily cut off the bondage of death.
"Since Lord Kåñëa's every desire is completely fulfilled, His begging for food
was simply an act of mercy toward us brähmaëas. All the fruits of Vedic
sacrifice-and indeed all things on earth-are His opulences, yet out of ignorance
we could not appreciate this fact."
Having spoken thus, all the brähmaëas offered their obeisances to Lord Çré
Kåñëa, hoping to counteract their offense. Nonetheless, out of fear of King
Kaàsa they did not go to see the Lord in person.
TEXT 1
™aIgAAepa Ocau:
r"Ama r"Ama mah"AbaAh"Ae
k{(SNA äu"í"inabahR"NA
WSaA vaE baADatae ºauªas$a,
tacC$AintaM k(tauRmahR"Ta:
çré-gopa ücuù
räma räma mahä-bäho
kåñëa duñöa-nibarhaëa
eñä vai bädhate kñun nas
tac-chäntià kartum arhathaù
SYNONYMS
çré-gopäù ücuù—the cowherd boys said; räma räma—O Lord Räma, Lord
Räma; mahä-bäho—O mighty-armed one; kåñëa—O Lord Kåñëa; duñöa—of the
wicked; nibarhaëa—O destroyer; eñä—this; vai—indeed; bädhate—is causing
distress; kñut—hunger; naù—to us; tat-çäntim—its counteraction; kartum
arhathaù—You ought to do.
TRANSLATION
The cowherd boys said: O Räma, Räma, mighty-armed one! O Kåñëa,
chastiser of the wicked ! We are being harassed by hunger, and You should do
something about it.
PURPORT
The cowherd boys jokingly implied that since Çré Kåñëa is the subduer of all
bad things, the Lord should subdue their hunger by arranging for them to eat.
In this statement by the cowherd boys, we observe the intimate loving
friendship they enjoyed with the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 2
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
wita ivaÁaAipataAe gAAepaEr,"
BagAvaAnde"vak(Ls$auta:
Bal(AyaA iva‘aBaAyaARyaA:
‘as$aId"iªad"ma“avaIta,
çré-çuka uväca
iti vijïäpito gopair
bhagavän devaké-sutaù
bhaktäyä vipra-bhäryäyäù
prasédann idam abravét
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; vijïäpitaù—informed;
gopaiù—by the cowherd boys; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; devaké-sutaù—the son of Devaké; bhaktäyäù—His devotees;
vipra-bhäryäyäù—the wives of the brähmaëas; prasédan-desiring to satisfy;
idam—this; abravét—He spoke.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Thus entreated by the cowherd boys, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the son of Devaké, replied as follows, desiring to please
certain of His devotees who were brähmaëas' wives.
TEXT 3
‘ayaAta de"vayajanaM
“aAöNAA “aövaAid"na:
s$a‡amaAiËÿr"s$aM naAma
÷As$atae svagARk(AmyayaA
prayäta deva-yajanaà
brähmaëä brahma-vädinaù
satram äìgirasaà näma
hy äsate svarga-kämyayä
SYNONYMS
prayäta—please go; deva-yajanam—to the sacrificial arena;
brähmaëäù—brähmaëas; brahma-vädinaù-followers of the Vedic injunctions;
satram—a sacrifice; äìgirasam näma—known as Äìgirasa; hi—indeed;
äsate—they are now performing; svarga-kämyayä—with the motive of
promotion to heaven.
TRANSLATION
[Lord Kåñëa said:] Please go to the sacrificial arena where a group of
brähmaëas, learned in the Vedic injunctions, are now performing the Äìgirasa
sacrifice to gain promotion to heaven.
TEXT 4
ta‡a gAtvaAEd"naM gAAepaA
yaAcataAsmaiã"s$aijaRtaA:
k(LtaRyantaAe BagAvata
@AyaRsya mama caAiBaDaAma,
tatra gatvaudanaà gopä
yäcatäsmad-visarjitäù
kértayanto bhagavata
äryasya mama cäbhidhäm
SYNONYMS
tatra—there; gatvä—going; odanam—food; gopäù—My dear cowherd boys;
yäcata—just request; asmat—by Us; visarjitäù—dispatched;
kértayantaù—announcing; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Lord; äryasya—the
elder; mama—My; ca—also; abhidhäm—name.
TRANSLATION
When you go there, My dear cowherd boys, simply request some food.
Declare to them the name of My elder brother, the Supreme Lord Balaräma,
and also My name, and explain that you have been sent by Us.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa encouraged His boyfriends to request charity without being
embarrassed. In case the boys felt they had no right to personally approach
such respectable brähmaëas, the Lord told them to mention the names of
Balaräma and Kåñëa, the holy names of God.
TEXT 5
wtyaAid"í"A BagAvataA
gAtvaA yaAcanta tae taTaA
k{(taAÃailapauq%A iva‘aAna,
d"Nx"vatpaitataA Bauiva
ity ädiñöä bhagavatä
gatvä yäcanta te tathä
kåtäïjali-puöä viprän
daëòa-vat patitä bhuvi
SYNONYMS
iti—in these words; ädiñöaù—ordered; bhagavatä—by the Supreme Lord Kåñëa;
gatvä—going; ayäcanta—begged; te—they; tathä—in that manner;
kåta-aïjali-puöäù—joining their palms in humble supplication; viprän—to the
brähmaëas; daëòa-vat-like sticks; patitäù—falling; bhuvi—upon the ground.
TRANSLATION
Thus instructed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the cowherd boys
went there and submitted their request. They stood before the brähmaëas with
palms joined in supplication and then fell flat on the ground to offer respect.
TEXT 6
he" BaUimade"vaA: Za{NAuta
k{(SNAsyaAde"zAk(Air"NA:
‘aAæaAÃaAnaIta Ba‰M" vaAe
gAAepaAªaAe r"AmacaAeid"taAna,
he bhümi-deväù çåëuta
kåñëasyädeça-käriëaù
präptäï jänéta bhadraà vo
gopän no räma-coditän
SYNONYMS
he bhümi-deväù—O earthly gods; çåëuta—please hear us; kåñëasya ädeça—of
the order of Kåñëa; käriëaù—the executors; präptän—arrived; jänéta—please
recognize; bhadram—all good; vaù—unto you; gopän—cowherd boys; naù—us;
räma-coditän—sent by Lord Räma.
TRANSLATION
[The cowherd boys said:] O earthly gods, please hear us. We cowherd boys
are executing the orders of Kåñëa, and we have been sent here by Balaräma. We
wish all good for you. Please acknowledge our arrival.
PURPORT
The term bhümi-deväù, "gods on earth," refers here to the brähmaëas, who
are supposed to closely represent the will of the Supreme Lord. The philosophy
of Kåñëa consciousness is not a primitive polytheistic doctrine holding that
human beings on the earth are gods. Rather, it is a science that traces the
descent of authority from the Absolute Truth Himself, Çré Kåñëa. The
authority and power of God naturally extend along with the extension of His
creation, and on the earth the Lord's will and authority are represented by
purified, enlightened men called brähmaëas.
This account will illustrate that the ritualistic brähmaëas approached by the
cowherd boys were not at all properly enlightened and thus could not
appreciate the position of Kåñëa and Balaräma or that of Their intimate
associates. In fact, this pastime exposes the pretentious position of so-called
brähmaëas who are not faithful devotees of the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 7
gAAêAr"yantaAvaivaäU"r" @Aed"naM
r"AmaAcyautaAE vaAe laSataAe bauBauiºataAE
tayaAeiãR"jaA @Aed"namaiTaRnaAeyaRid"
™aÜ"A ca vaAe yacC$ta DamaRivaÔamaA:
gäç cärayantäv avidüra odanaà
rämäcyutau vo lañato bubhukñitau
tayor dvijä odanam arthinor yadi
çraddhä ca vo yacchata dharma-vittamäù
SYNONYMS
gäù—Their cows; cärayantau—grazing; avidüre—not far away; odanam—food;
räma-acyutau—Lord Räma and Lord Acyuta; vaù—from you; lañataù—are
desiring; bubhukñitau—being hungry; tayoù—for Them; dvijäù—O brähmaëas;
odanam-food; arthinoù—begging; yadi—if; çraddhä—any faith; ca—and;
vaù—on your part; yacchata—please give; dharma-vit-tamäù—O best knowers
of the principles of religion.
TRANSLATION
Lord Räma and Lord Acyuta are tending Their cows not far from here. They
are hungry and want you to give Them some of your food. Therefore, O
brähmaëas, O best of the knowers of religion, if you have faith please give some
food to Them.
PURPORT
The cowherd boys doubted the generosity of the brähmaëas, and thus they
used the word bubhukñitau, meaning that Kåñëa and Balaräma were hungry.
The boys expected the brähmaëas to know the Vedic injunction annasya
kñuditaà pätram: "Anyone who is hungry is a fit candidate for receiving food
in charity." But if the brähmaëas would not recognize the authority of Kåñëa
and Balaräma, their title dvija would be taken to mean merely "born from two
parents" (dvi-from two, ja-born) rather than "twice-born." When the
brähmaëas did not respond to the cowherd boys' initial request, the boys
addressed the brähmaëas, with a slight trace of sarcasm, as dharma-vit-tamäù,
"O best of the knowers of religion."
TEXT 8
d"IºaAyaA: pazAus$aMsTaAyaA:
s$aAE‡aAmaNyaAê s$aÔamaA:
@nya‡a d"IiºatasyaAipa
naAªama´ana, ih" äu"Syaita
dékñäyäù paçu-saàsthäyäù
sauträmaëyäç ca sattamäù
anyatra dékñitasyäpi
nännam açnan hi duñyati
SYNONYMS
dékñäyäù—beginning with the initiation for a sacrifice;
paçu-saàsthäyäù—until sacrificing the animal; sauträmaëyäù—outside of the
sacrifice known as Sauträmaëi; ca—and; sat-tamäù—O purest ones;
anyatra—elsewhere; dékñitasya—of one who has been initiated for the
sacrifice; api—even; na—not; annam—food; açnan—eating; hi—indeed;
duñyati—creates offense.
TRANSLATION
Except during the interval between the initiation of the performer of a
sacrifice and the actual sacrifice of the animal, O most pure brähmaëas, it is not
contaminating for even the initiated to partake of food, at least in sacrifices
other than the Sauträmaëi.
PURPORT
The cowherd boys anticipated the possible objection from the brähmaëas
that they couldn't give the boys any food because they themselves had not yet
eaten, and that a priest initiated to perform a sacrifice should not eat.
Therefore the boys humbly informed the brähmaëas about various
technicalities of ritualistic sacrifice. The cowherd boys were not unaware of
the formalities of Vedic culture, but their real intention was simply to render
loving service to Lord Kåñëa.
TEXT 9
wita tae BagAvaâA¿aAM
Za{NvantaAe'ipa na zAu™auvau:
ºau"‰"AzAA BaUir"k(maARNAAe
baAilazAA va{Ü"maAinana:
iti te bhagavad-yäcïäà
çåëvanto 'pi na çuçruvuù
kñudräçä bhüri-karmäëo
bäliçä våddha-mäninaù
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; te—they, the brähmaëas; bhagavat-of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; yäcïäm—the supplication; çåëvantaù—hearing; api—although; na
çuçruvuù—they did not hear; kñudra-äçäù—full of petty desire;
bhüri-karmäëaù—entangled in elaborate ritualistic activities;
bäliçäù—childish fools; våddha-mäninaù—presuming themselves to be wise
men.
TRANSLATION
The brähmaëas heard this supplication from the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, yet they refused to pay heed. Indeed, they were full of petty desires
and entangled in elaborate rituals. Though presuming themselves advanced in
Vedic learning, they were actually inexperienced fools.
PURPORT
These childish brähmaëas were full of petty desires, such as the desire to
attain to material heaven, and therefore they could not recognize the golden
transcendental opportunity offered them by the arrival of Kåñëa's personal
boyfriends. Presently, throughout the world, people are madly pursuing
material advancement and thus cannot hear the message of the Supreme Lord
Kåñëa that is being broadcast through the missionary activities of the Kåñëa
consciousness movement. Times have hardly changed, and proud, materialistic
priests are still prevalent on the earth.
TEXTS 10-11
de"zA: k(Ala: pa{Tag‰"vyaM
man‡atan‡aitvaRjaAe'¢aya:
de"vataA yajamaAnaê
‚(tauDaRmaRê yanmaya:
taM “aö par"maM s$aAºaAä,"
BagAvantamaDaAeºajama,
manauSyaä{"í"YaA äu"S‘aÁaA
matyaARtmaAnaAe na maeinare"
deçaù kälaù påthag dravyaà
mantra-tantrartvijo 'gnayaù
devatä yajamänaç ca
kratur dharmaç ca yan-mayaù
taà brahma paramaà säkñäd
bhagavantam adhokñajam
manuñya-dåñöyä duñprajïä
martyätmäno na menire
SYNONYMS
deçaù—the place; kälaù—time; påthak dravyam—particular items of
paraphernalia; mantra—Vedic hymns; tantra—prescribed rituals;
åtvijaù—priests; agnayaù—sacrificial fires; devatäù—the presiding demigods;
yajamänaù—the performer of the sacrifice; ca—and; kratuù—the offering;
dharmaù—the invisible power of fruitive results; ca—and; yat—whom;
mayaù—constituting; tam—Him; brahma paramam—the Supreme Absolute
Truth; säkñät—directly manifest; bhagavantam—the Personality of Godhead;
adhokñajam—who is transcendental to material senses;
manuñya-dåñöyä—seeing Him as an ordinary man; duñprajïäù—perverted in
their intelligence; martya-ätmänaù—falsely identifying themselves with the
material body; na menire—they did not properly honor.
TRANSLATION
Although the ingredients of sacrificial performance—the place, time,
particular paraphernalia, mantras, rituals, priests, fires, demigods, performer,
offering and the as yet unseen beneficial results—are all simply aspects of His
opulences, the brähmaëas saw Lord Kåñëa as an ordinary human because of
their perverted intelligence. They failed to recognize that He is the Supreme
Absolute Truth, the directly manifest Personality of Godhead, whom the
material senses cannot ordinarily perceive. Thus bewildered by their false
identification with the mortal body, they did not show Him proper respect.
PURPORT
The ritualistic brähmaëas could not understand why the sacrificial food
should be offered to Lord Kåñëa, whom they considered an ordinary human
being. Just as a person with rose-colored glasses sees the entire world as
rose-colored, a conditioned soul with mundane vision sees even God Himself
as mundane and thus loses the opportunity to go back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 12
na tae yad"Aeimaita ‘aAecaur,"
na naeita ca par"ntapa
gAAepaA inar"AzAA: ‘atyaetya
taTaAecau: k{(SNAr"AmayaAe:
na te yad om iti procur
na neti ca parantapa
gopä niräçäù pratyetya
tathocuù kåñëa-rämayoù
SYNONYMS
na—not; te—they; yat—when; om—"so be it"; iti—thus; procuù—did speak;
na—not; na—"no"; iti—thus; ca—either; parantapa—O chastiser of the
enemies, Parékñit Mahäräja; gopäù—the cowherd boys; niräçäù—discouraged;
pratyetya—returning; tathä—thus; ücuù—described; kåñëa-rämayoù—to Lord
Kåñëa and Lord Räma.
TRANSLATION
When the brähmaëas failed to reply even with a simple yes or no, O
chastiser of the enemy [Parékñit], the cowherd boys returned disappointed to
Kåñëa and Räma and reported this to Them.
TEXT 13
taäu"paAk(NyaR BagAvaAna,
‘ah"sya jagAd"Iìr":
vyaAjah"Ar" paunagAAeRpaAna,
d"zARyanlaAEik(k(LM gAitama,
tad upäkarëya bhagavän
prahasya jagad-éçvaraù
vyäjahära punar gopän
darçayan laukikéà gatim
SYNONYMS
tat-that; upäkarëya—hearing; bhagavän—the Supreme Lord;
prahasya—laughing; jagat-éçvaraù—the controller of the entire universe;
vyäjahära—addressed; punaù—again; gopän—the cowherd boys;
darçayan—showing; laukikém—of the ordinary world; gatim—the way.
TRANSLATION
Hearing what had happened, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Lord
of the universe, simply laughed. Then He again addressed the cowherd boys,
showing them the way men act in this world.
PURPORT
By laughing, Lord Kåñëa indicated to the cowherd boys that they need not
be angry at the ritualistic brähmaëas but should understand that one who begs
will often be refused.
TEXT 14
maAM ÁaApayata pa¥aIBya:
s$as$aÆÿSaRNAmaAgAtama,
d"Asyainta k(AmamaªaM va:
iµagDaA mayyauiSataA iDayaA
mäà jïäpayata patnébhyaù
sa-saìkarñaëam ägatam
däsyanti kämam annaà vaù
snigdhä mayy uñitä dhiyä
SYNONYMS
mäm—Me; jïäpayata—please announce; patnébhyaù—to the wives;
sa-saìkarñaëam—together with Lord Balaräma; ägatam—arrived;
däsyanti—they will give; kämam—as much as you desire; annam—food;
vaù—to you; snigdhäù—affectionate; mayi—in Me; uñitäù—residing;
dhiyä—with their intelligence.
TRANSLATION
[Lord Kåñëa said:] Tell the wives of the brähmaëas that I have come here
with Lord Saìkarñaëa. They will certainly give you all the food you want, for
they are most affectionate toward Me and, indeed, with their intelligence reside
in Me alone.
PURPORT
While physically the wives of the brähmaëas remained at home, within
their minds they resided in the Supreme Lord Kåñëa because of intense
affection for Him. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains that the
reason Lord Kåñëa did not have the cowherd boys tell the brähmaëas' wives He
was hungry is that He knew this would severely distress these devoted ladies.
Simply out of affection for Lord Kåñëa, however, the wives would be happy to
give all the food requested of them. They would not heed their husbands'
prohibitions, since they resided within the Lord through their transcendental
intelligence.
TEXT 15
gAtvaATa pa¥aIzAAlaAyaAM
ä{"î"As$aInaA: svalax.~k{(taA:
natvaA iã"jas$ataIgAAeRpaA:
‘ai™ataA wd"ma“auvana,
gatvätha patné-çäläyäà
dåñöväsénäù sv-alaìkåtäù
natvä dvija-satér gopäù
praçritä idam abruvan
SYNONYMS
gatvä—going; atha—then; patné-çäläyäm—in the house of the wives of the
brähmaëas; dåñövä-seeing them; asénäù—sitting; su-alaìkåtäù—nicely
ornamented; natvä—bowing down to offer obeisances; dvija-satéù—to the
chaste wives of the brähmaëas; gopäù-the cowherd boys; praçritäù—humbly;
idam—this; abruvan—spoke.
TRANSLATION
The cowherd boys then went to the house where the brähmaëas' wives were
staying. There the boys saw those chaste ladies sitting, nicely decorated with
fine ornaments. Bowing down to the brähmaëa ladies, the boys addressed them
in all humility.
TEXT 16
namaAe vaAe iva‘apa¥aIByaAe
inabaAeData vacaAMis$a na:
wtaAe'ivaäU"re" car"taA
k{(SNAenaehe"iSataA vayama,
namo vo vipra-patnébhyo
nibodhata vacäàsi naù
ito 'vidüre caratä
kåñëeneheñitä vayam
SYNONYMS
namaù—obeisances; vaù—unto you; vipra-patnébhyaù—the wives of the
brähmaëas; nibodhata-please hear; vacäàsi—words; naù—our; itaù—from
here; avidüre—not distant; caratä—who is going; kåñëena—by Lord Kåñëa;
iha—here; iñitäù—sent; vayam—we.
TRANSLATION
[The cowherd boys said:] Obeisances unto you, O wives of the learned
brähmaëas. Kindly hear our words. We have been sent here by Lord Kåñëa,
who is passing by not far from here.
TEXT 17
gAAêAr"yana, s$a gAAepaAlaE:
s$ar"AmaAe äU"r"maAgAta:
bauBauiºatasya tasyaAªaM
s$aAnaugAsya ‘ad"IyataAma,
gäç cärayan sa gopälaiù
sa-rämo düram ägataù
bubhukñitasya tasyännaà
sänugasya pradéyatäm
SYNONYMS
gäù—the cows; cärayan—tending; saù—He; gopälaiù—in the company of the
cowherd boys; sa-rämaù—together with Lord Balaräma; düram—from far
away; ägataù—has come; bubhukñitasya—who is hungry; tasya—for Him;
annam—food; sa-anugasya—together with His companions;
pradéyatäm—should be given.
TRANSLATION
He has come a long way with the cowherd boys and Lord Balaräma, tending
the cows. Now He is hungry, so some food should be given for Him and His
companions.
TEXT 18
™autvaAcyautamaupaAyaAtaM
inatyaM taÚ"zARnaAets$auk(A:
tatk(TaAiºaæamanas$aAe
baBaUvaujaARtas$am”amaA:
çrutväcyutam upäyätaà
nityaà tad-darçanotsukäù
tat-kathäkñipta-manaso
babhüvur jäta-sambhramäù
SYNONYMS
çrutvä—hearing; acyutam—Lord Kåñëa; upäyätam—come nearby;
nityam—constantly; tat-darçana—for the sight of Him; utsukäù—eager;
tat-kathä—by descriptions of Him; äkñpita—enchanted; manasaù—their
minds; babhüvuù—they became; jäta-sambhramäù—excited.
TRANSLATION
The wives of the brähmaëas were always eager to see Kåñëa, for their minds
had been enchanted by descriptions of Him. Thus as soon as they heard that He
had come, they became very excited.
TEXT 19
catauivaRDaM baò"gAuNAma,
@ªamaAd"Aya BaAjanaE:
@iBas$a›au: i‘ayaM s$avaAR:
s$amau"‰"imava ina°agAA:
catur-vidhaà bahu-guëam
annam ädäya bhäjanaiù
abhisasruù priyaà sarväù
samudram iva nimnagäù
SYNONYMS
catuù-vidham—of the four varieties (that which is chewed, that which is
drunk, that which is licked and that which is sucked); bahu-guëam—endowed
with many rich tastes and fragrances; annam—food; ädäya—bringing;
bhäjanaiù—in large vessels; abhisasruù—they went forward; priyam—to their
beloved; sarväù—all of them; samudram—to the ocean; iva—just as;
nimna-gäù—the rivers.
TRANSLATION
Taking along in large vessels the four kinds of foods, full of fine tastes and
aromas, all the ladies went forth to meet their beloved, just as rivers flow
toward the sea.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains that the wives of the
brähmaëas experienced conjugal feelings toward Kåñëa, as if He were their
paramour; thus they could not be checked as they rushed to see Him.
TEXT 20-21
inaiSaDyamaAnaA: paitaiBar,"
”aAta{iBabaRnDauiBa: s$autaE:
BagAvatyauÔamaëAeke(
d"IGaR™auta Da{taAzAyaA:
yamaunaAepavanae'zAAek(
navapaéavamaiNx"tae
ivacar"ntaM va{taM gAAepaE:
s$aAƒajaM d"ä{"zAu: iñya:
niñidhyamänäù patibhir
bhrätåbhir bandhubhiù sutaiù
bhagavaty uttama-çloke
dérgha-çruta -dhåtäçayäù
yamunopavane 'çoka
nava-pallava-maëòite
vicarantaà våtaà gopaiù
sägrajaà dadåçuù striyaù
SYNONYMS
niñidhyamänäù—being forbidden; patibhiù—by their husbands; bhrätåbhiù—by
their brothers; bandhubhiù—by other relatives; sutaiù—and by their sons;
bhagavati—directed toward the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
uttama-çloke—who is praised with transcendental hymns; dérgha—for a long
time; çruta—because of hearing; dhåta—acquired; äçayäù—whose
expectations; yamunä-upavane—in a garden along the river Yamunä;
açoka-nava-pallava—by the buds of the açoka trees; maëòite—decorated;
vicarantam—wandering; våtam—surrounded; gopaiù—by the cowherd boys;
sa-agrajam—together with His elder brother; dadåçuù—they saw; striyaù—the
ladies.
TRANSLATION
Although their husbands, brothers, sons and other relatives tried to forbid
them from going, their hope of seeing Kåñëa, cultivated by extensive hearing of
His transcendental qualities, won out. Along the river Yamunä, within a garden
decorated with buds of açoka trees, they caught sight of Him strolling along in
the company of the cowherd boys and His elder brother, Balaräma.
TEXT 22
zyaAmaM ih"r"Nyapair"iDaM vanamaAlyabahR"-
DaAtau‘avaAlanaq%vaeSamana˜ataAMs$ae
ivanyastah"staimatare"NA DaunaAnamabjaM
k(NAAeRtpalaAlak(k(paAelamauKaAbjah"As$ama,
çyämaà hiraëya-paridhià vanamälya-barhadhätu-
praväla-naöa-veñam anavratäàse
vinyasta-hastam itareëa dhunänam abjaà
karëotpalälaka-kapola-mukhäbja-häsam
SYNONYMS
çyämam—dark blue in complexion; hiraëya—golden; paridhim—whose
garment; vana-mälya—with a forest garland; barha—peacock feather;
dhätu—colored minerals; praväla—and sprigs of buds; naöa—like a dancer
upon the stage; veñam—dressed; anuvrata—of a friend; aàse—upon the
shoulder; vinyasta—placed; hastam—His hand; itareëa—with the other;
dhunänam—twirling; abjam—a lotus; karëa—upon His ears; utpala—lilies;
alaka-kapola—with hair extending over His cheeks; mukha-abja—upon His
lotuslike face; häsam—having a smile.
TRANSLATION
His complexion was dark blue and His garment golden. Wearing a peacock
feather, colored minerals, sprigs of flower buds, and a garland of forest flowers
and leaves, He was dressed just like a dramatic dancer. He rested one hand
upon the shoulder of a friend and with the other twirled a lotus. Lilies graced
His ears, His hair hung down over His cheeks, and His lotuslike face was
smiling.
TEXT 23
‘aAya:™autai‘ayatamaAed"yak(NARpaUrE"r,"
yaismaiªama¢amanas$astamaTaAiºar"n‰E":
@nta: ‘avaezya s$auicarM" pair"r"Bya taApaM
‘aAÁaM yaTaAiBamatayaAe ivajaò"naR&#re"n‰"
präyaù-çruta-priyatamodaya-karëa-pürair
yasmin nimagna-manasas tam athäkñi-randraiù
antaù praveçya su-ciraà parirabhya täpaà
präjïaà yathäbhimatayo vijahur narendra
SYNONYMS
präyaù—repeatedly; çruta—heard; priya-tama—of their dearmost; udaya—the
glories; karëa-püraiù—which were the ornaments of their ears; yasmin—in
whom; nimagna—submerged; manasaù—their minds; tam—Him; atha—then;
akñi-randhraiù—through the apertures of their eyes; antaù—within;
praveçya—making enter; su-ciram—for a long time; parirabhya—embracing;
täpam—their distress; präjïam—the inner consciousness; yathä—as;
abhimatayaù—the functions of false ego; vijahuù—they gave up;
nara-indra—O ruler of men.
TRANSLATION
O ruler of men, for a long time those brähmaëa ladies had heard about
Kåñëa, their beloved, and His glories had become the constant ornaments of
their ears. Indeed, their minds were always absorbed in Him. Through the
apertures of their eyes they now forced Him to enter within their hearts, and
then they embraced Him within for a long time. In this way they finally gave
up the pain of separation from Him, just as sages give up the anxiety of false ego
by embracing their innermost consciousness.
TEXT 24
taAstaTaA tyal(s$avaARzAA:
‘aAæaA @Atmaid"ä{"ºayaA
ivaÁaAyaAiKalaä{"g‰"í"A
‘aAh" ‘ah"is$ataAnana:
täs tathä tyakta-sarväçäù
präptä ätma-didåkñayä
vijïäyäkhila-dåg-drañöä
präha prahasitänanaù
SYNONYMS
täù—those ladies; tathä—in such a state; tyakta-sarva-äçäù—having given up
all material desires; präptäù—arrived; ätma-didåkñayä—with the desire of
seeing Himself; vijïäya—understanding; akhila-dåk—of the vision of all
creatures; drañöä—the seer; präha—He spoke; prahasita-änanaù—with a smile
upon His face.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa, who witnesses the thoughts of all creatures, understood how
those ladies had abandoned all worldly hopes and come there simply to see Him.
Thus He addressed them as follows with a smile upon His face.
TEXT 25
svaAgAtaM vaAe mah"ABaAgAA
@AsyataAM k(r"vaAma ik(ma,
yaªaAe id"ä{"ºayaA ‘aAæaA
opapaªaimadM" ih" va:
svägataà vo mahä-bhägä
äsyatäà karaväma kim
yan no didåkñayä präptä
upapannam idaà hi vaù
SYNONYMS
su-ägatam—auspicious welcome; vaù—for you; mahä-bhägäù—O fortunate
ladies; äsyatäm—please come sit; karaväma—I can do, kim-what;
yat—because; naù—Us; didåkñayä—with the desire of seeing; präptäù—you
have come; upapannam—fitting; idam—this; hi—certainly; vaù—on your part.
TRANSLATION
[Lord Kåñëa said:] Welcome, O most fortunate ladies. Please sit down and
make yourselves comfortable. What can I do for you? That you have come here
to see Me is most appropriate.
PURPORT
Just as Çré Kåñëa welcomed the gopés who came to dance with Him at night,
He similarly welcomed the brähmaëas' wives, whose pure love for Him was
proved by their overcoming many hindrances to see the Lord. The word
upapannam indicates that although these ladies had rejected their husbands'
orders, their behavior was not at all inappropriate, since their husbands had
obviously tried to obstruct their loving service to Lord Kåñëa.
TEXT 26
nanvaÜ"A maiya ku(vaRinta
ku(zAlaA: svaATaRd"izARna:
@hE"taufyavyavaih"taAM
Bail(maAtmai‘ayae yaTaA
nanv addhä mayi kurvanti
kuçaläù svärtha-darçinaù
ahaituky avyavahitäà
bhaktim ätma-priye yathä
SYNONYMS
nanu—certainly; addhä—directly; mayi—unto Me; kurvanti—they perform;
kuçaläù—those who are expert; sva-artha—their own true benefit;
darçinaù—who perceive; ahaituké—unmotivated;
avyavahitäm—uninterrupted; bhaktim—devotional service; ätma—to the soul;
priye—who am most dear; yathä—properly.
TRANSLATION
Certainly expert personalities, who can see their own true interest, render
unmotivated and uninterrupted devotional service directly unto Me, for I am
most dear to the soul.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord informed the brähmaëas' wives that not only they but
all people who recognize their true self-interest take to the spiritual process of
loving service to the Lord. Lord Kåñëa is ätma-priya, the real object of love for
everyone. Although each individual has his own taste and freedom, ultimately
every living being is a spiritual spark of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
thus everyone's primary loving attraction is constitutionally meant for Lord Çré
Kåñëa. Loving service to the Lord should be ahaituké, without personal motive,
and avyavahitä, unobstructed by mental speculation, selfish desire or any quirk
of time and circumstance.
TEXT 27
‘aANAbauiÜ"mana:svaAtma
d"Ar"ApatyaDanaAd"ya:
yats$ampak(ARit‘ayaA @As$aMs$a,
tata: k(Ae nvapar": i‘aya:
präëa-buddhi-manaù-svätma
däräpatya-dhanädayaù
yat-samparkät priyä äsaàs
tataù ko nv aparaù priyaù
SYNONYMS
präëa—one's vital force; buddhi—intelligence; manaù—mind; sva—relatives;
ätma—body; dära—wife; apatya—children; dhana—wealth; ädayaù—and so
forth; yat—with which (self); samparkät—because of contact; priyäù—dear;
äsan—have become; tataù—than that; kaù—what; nu—indeed;
aparaù—other; priyaù—dear object.
TRANSLATION
It is only by contact with the self that one's vital breath, intelligence, mind,
friends, body, wife, children, wealth and so on are dear. Therefore what object
can possibly be more dear than one's own self?
PURPORT
The word yat-samparkät in this verse refers to contact with the individual
self and ultimately with the Supreme Self, the Lord, who is the origin of the
individual living being. By developing Kåñëa consciousness, one automatically
becomes self-realized, and thus one's vital strength, intelligence, mind,
relatives, body, family and wealth all become enhanced and brilliant by the
central influence of Kåñëa consciousness. This happens because Kåñëa
consciousness is the optimum efficient conjunction of the individual self, who
is pure consciousness, with the Supreme Self and supreme consciousness,
Kåñëa.
TEXT 28
taâAta de"vayajanaM
patayaAe vaAe iã"jaAtaya:
svas$a‡aM paAr"iyaSyainta
yauSmaAiBagA{Rh"maeiDana:
tad yäta deva-yajanaà
patayo vo dvijätayaù
sva-satraà pärayiñyanti
yuñmäbhir gåha-medhinaù
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; yäta—go; deva-yajanam—to the sacrificial arena; patayaù—the
husbands; vaù—your; dvi-jätayaù—the brähmaëas; sva-satram-their own
sacrifices; pärayiñyanti—will be able to finish; yuñmäbhiù—together with you;
gåha-medhinaù—the householders.
TRANSLATION
You should thus return to the sacrificial arena, because your husbands, the
learned brähmaëas, are householders and need your assistance to finish their
respective sacrifices.
TEXT 29
™aIpatnya Ocau:
maEvaM ivaBaAe'hR"ita BavaAna, gAid"tauM OEzAMs$aM
s$atyaM ku(ç&Sva inagAmaM tava pad"maUlama,
‘aAæaA vayaM taulais$ad"Ama pad"Avas$a{íM"
ke(zAEinaRvaAeX#]maitalaÎÿYa s$amastabanDaUna,
çré-patnya ücuù
maivaà vibho 'rhati bhavän gadituà nr-çaàsaà
satyaà kuruñva nigamaà tava pada-mülam
präptä vayaà tulasi-däma padävasåñöaà
keçair nivoòhum atilaìghya samasta-bandhün
SYNONYMS
çré-patnyaù ücuù—the wives of the brähmaëas said; mä—not; evam—like this;
vibho—O almighty Lord; arhati—ought; bhavän—You; gaditum—to speak;
nå-çaàsam—harshly; satyam—true; kuruñva—please make; nigamam—the
promise given in the revealed scripture; tava—Your; päda-mülam—the base of
the lotus feet; präptäù—having obtained; vayam—we; tulasi-däma—the
garland of tulasé leaves; padä—by Your foot; avasåñöam—neglectfully kicked
away; keçaiù—upon our hair; nivoòhum—in order to carry;
atilaìghya—rejecting; samasta—all; bandhün—relations.
TRANSLATION
The wives of the brähmaëas replied: O almighty one, please do not speak
such cruel words. Rather, You should fulfill Your promise that You always
reciprocate with Your devotees in kind. Now that we have attained Your lotus
feet, we simply wish to remain here in the forest so we may carry upon our
heads the garlands of tulasé leaves You may neglectfully kick away with Your
lotus feet. We are ready to give up all material relationships.
PURPORT
Here the brähmaëas' wives are saying something similar to what the gopés
say at the beginning of the räsa dance (SB 10.29.31), when Lord Kåñëa tells
them to go home as well. Like this verse, the gopés' statement begins with the
words maivaà vibho 'rhati bhavän gadituà nå-çaàsam.
Nigama refers to the Vedic literature, which states that one who surrenders
at the lotus feet of the Lord does not return to this material world. Thus the
brähmaëas' wives appealed to the Lord that since they had surrendered to Him,
it was unfair for Him to order them to return to their materialistic husbands.
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, Lord Kåñëa might have
pointed out to the brähmaëas' wives, "You young ladies are members of the
aristocratic brähmaëa community, so how can you surrender at the feet of a
mere cowherd boy?"
To this the ladies might have replied, "Since we have already surrendered at
Your lotus feet, and since we desire to become Your servants, we are obviously
not maintaining a false identification as members of the so-called brähmaëa
community. You can easily ascertain this from our words."
Lord Kåñëa might have replied, "I am a cowherd boy, and My proper
maidservants and girlfriends are the cowherd girls, the gopés. "
The wives might have answered, "True, let them be so. Let them shine forth
if You are embarrassed in front of Your relatives to make brähmaëa ladies Your
maidservants. We certainly don't want to embarrass You. We will not go to
Your village but will rather remain in Våndävana, like presiding deities of the
forest. We simply desire to perfect our lives by even a slight trace of
connection with You."
Thus by the spiritual insight of Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, we
learn that the brähmaëas' wives offered to remain at a distance and simply take
the tulasé leaves that would fall from the lotus feet of Kåñëa or be crushed by
the feet of His girlfriends when He would embrace them.
The ladies offered to carry these tulasé leaves upon their heads. Thus
renouncing the desire to become Kåñëa's intimate girlfriends or maidservants
(a position they knew was difficult to achieve), the young brähmaëa ladies
begged to remain in Våndävana forest. If the Lord had then asked "Then what
will your family members say?" they would have replied "We have already
transcended our so-called relatives because we are seeing You, the Supreme
Lord, face to face."
TEXT 30
gA{õ"inta naAe na pataya: ipatar"AE s$autaA vaA
na ”aAta{banDaus$auô$d": ku(ta Wva caAnyae
tasmaAà"vat‘apad"yaAe: paitataAtmanaAM naAe
naAnyaA BavaeÕ"itar"ir"nd"ma taiã"Daeih"
gåhëanti no na patayaù pitarau sutä vä
na bhrätå-bandhu-suhådaù kuta eva cänye
tasmäd bhavat-prapadayoù patitätmanäà no
nänyä bhaved gatir arindama tad vidhehi
SYNONYMS
gåhëanti—they will accept; naù—us; na—not; patayaù—our husbands;
pitarau—fathers; sutäù—sons; vä—or; na—not; bhrätå—brothers;
bandhu—other relatives; suhådaù—and friends; kutaù—how then;
eva—indeed; ca—and; anye—other people; tasmät—therefore; bhavat—Your;
prapadayoù—at the tips of the lotus feet; patita—fallen; ätmanäm—whose
bodies; naù—for us; na—not; anyä—any other; bhavet—there can be;
gatiù—destination; arim-dama—O chastiser of enemies; tat—that;
vidhehi—kindly bestow upon us.
TRANSLATION
Our husbands, fathers, sons, brothers, other relatives and friends will no
longer take us back, and how could anyone else be willing to give us shelter?
Therefore, since we have thrown ourselves at Your lotus feet and have no other
destination, please, O chastiser of enemies, grant our desire.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura comments as follows: "From their very
youth the brähmaëas' wives had heard about Lord Kåñëa's beauty, qualities and
sweetness from the womenfolk of Våndävana village, and also from the flower
ladies, the betel-nut sellers and others. Consequently they always felt ecstatic
love for Kåñëa and were indifferent to their household duties. Their husbands,
seeing them as deviant, doubted them and avoided dealing with them as far as
possible. Now the wives of the brähmaëas were ready to formally reject their
so-called families and neighbors, and out of great agitation they were crying
and placing their heads upon Lord Kåñëa's lotus feet, offering obeisances. In
this way, with choking voices, they spoke the above verse. They begged that
Lord Kåñëa bestow upon them the benediction that He be their only
destination, that He, the chastiser of enemies, subdue all their enemies—those
difficulties obstructing them from attaining the Lord."
The wives of the brähmaëas simply wanted to serve Lord Kåñëa, and this is
pure Kåñëa consciousness in ecstatic love of Godhead.
TEXT 31
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
patayaAe naAByas$aUyaer"na,
ipata{”aAta{s$autaAd"ya:
laAek(Aê vaAe mayaAepaetaA
de"vaA @pyanaumanvatae
çré-bhagavän uväca
patayo näbhyasüyeran
pitå-bhrätå-sutädayaù
lokäç ca vo mayopetä
devä apy anumanvate
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; patayaù—your
husbands; na abhyasüyeran—will not feel inimical;
pitå-bhrätå-suta-ädayaù—your fathers, brothers, sons and others; lokäù—the
general populace; ca—also; vaù—toward you; mayä—by Me; upetäù—advised;
deväù—the demigods; api—even; anumanvate—regard favorably.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead replied: Rest assured that your
husbands will not be inimical toward you, nor will your fathers, brothers, sons,
other relatives or the general populace. I will personally advise them of the
situation. Indeed, even the demigods will express their approval.
TEXT 32
na ‘aItayae'naur"AgAAya
÷Ëÿs$aËÿAe na{NAAimah"
tanmanaAe maiya yauÃaAnaA
@icar"AnmaAmavaApsyaTa
na prétaye 'nurägäya
hy aìga-saìgo nåëäm iha
tan mano mayi yuïjänä
acirän mäm aväpsyatha
SYNONYMS
na—not; prétaye—for satisfaction; anurägäya—for loving attraction;
hi—certainly; aìga-saìgaù—physical association; nåëäm—for people; iha—in
this world; tat—therefore; manaù—your minds; mayi—upon Me;
yuïjänäù—fixing; acirät—very quickly; mäm—Me; aväpsyatha—you will
achieve.
TRANSLATION
For you to remain in My bodily association would certainly not please people
in this world, nor would it be the best way for you to increase your love for Me.
Rather, you should fix your minds on Me, and very soon you will achieve Me.
PURPORT
The Lord pointed out that people in general would not appreciate a loving
affair between Lord Kåñëa, who superficially was appearing as a cowherd boy,
and the wives from the brähmaëa community. Also, the brähmaëa ladies' own
devotion and love would increase most efficiently in separation. In other
words, it would be best all around if they continued to fix their minds on Lord
Kåñëa and thus went on with the process they had been practicing throughout
their lives. The Lord and His bona fide representative, the spiritual master,
expertly engage the Lord's devotees in different types of service so that all of
them can quickly return to His lotus feet.
TEXT 33
™avaNAAÚ"zARnaAÜ"YaAnaAna,
maiya BaAvaAe'nauk(LtaRnaAta,
na taTaA s$aiªak(SaeRNA
‘aitayaAta tataAe gA{h"Ana,
çravaëäd darçanäd dhyänän
mayi bhävo 'nukértanät
na tathä sannikarñeëa
pratiyäta tato gåhän
SYNONYMS
çravaëät—by hearing; darçanät—by seeing the Deity form; dhyänät—by
meditation; mayi—for Me; bhävaù—love; anukértanät—by chanting My names
and qualities; na—not; tathä—in the same way; sannikarñeëa—by literal
proximity; pratiyäta—return; tataù—therefore; gåhän—to your homes.
TRANSLATION
It is by hearing about Me, seeing My Deity form, meditating upon Me and
chanting My names and glories that love for Me develops, not by physical
proximity. Therefore please go back to your homes.
TEXT 34
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
wtyaul(A iã"japatnyastaA
yaÁavaAqM% paunagARtaA:
tae caAnas$aUyavastaAiBa:
ñIiBa: s$a‡amapaAr"yana,
çré-çuka uväca
ity uktä dvija-patnyas tä
yajïa-väöaà punar gatäù
te cänasüyavas täbhiù
strébhiù satram apärayan
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—with these words;
uktäù—spoken to; dvija-patnyaù—the wives of the brähmaëas; täù-they;
yajïa-väöam—to the place of sacrifice; punaù—again; gatäù—went; te—they,
their husbands; ca—and; anasüyavaù—not inimical; täbhiù—together with
them; strébhiù—their wives; satram—the sacrificial performance;
apärayan—they completed.
TRANSLATION
Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Thus instructed, the wives of the brähmaëas
returned to the place of sacrifice. The brähmaëas did not find any fault with
their wives, and together with them they finished the sacrifice.
PURPORT
The wives of the brähmaëas obeyed Lord Kåñëa's order and returned to the
sacrificial arena of their husbands, whereas the gopés, although ordered by
Kåñëa to go home, remained in the forest to dance with Him through the
full-moon night. Both the gopés and the brähmaëas' wives achieved pure love
of Godhead.
TEXT 35
ta‡aEk(A ivaDa{taA Ba‡aAR
BagAvantaM yaTaA™autama,
ô$x"AepagAu÷ ivajah"AE
de"hM" k(maARnaubanDanama,
tatraikä vidhåtä bharträ
bhagavantaà yathä-çrutam
håòopaguhya vijahau
dehaà karmänubandhanam
SYNONYMS
tatra—there; ekä—one of them; vidhåtä—held back by force; bharträ—by her
husband; bhagavantam—the Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëa; yathä-çrutam—as she
heard about Him from the others; hådä—within her heart;
upaguhya—embracing; vijahau—she gave up; deham—her material body;
karma-anubandhanam—which is simply the basis of bondage to material
activity.
TRANSLATION
One of the ladies had been forcibly kept back by her husband. When she
heard the others describe the Supreme Lord Kåñëa, she embraced Him within
her heart and gave up her material body, the basis of bondage to material
activity.
PURPORT
The lady described here was especially devoted to Lord Kåñëa. Upon giving
up her material body, she immediately attained a spiritual body and left the
sacrificial arena to join the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 36
BagAvaAnaipa gAAeivand"s$a,
taenaEvaAªaena gAAepak(Ana,
catauivaRDaenaAzAiyatvaA
svayaM ca bauBaujae ‘aBau:
bhagavän api govindas
tenaivännena gopakän
catur-vidhenäçayitvä
svayaà ca bubhuje prabhuù
SYNONYMS
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; api—moreover;
govindaù—Lord Govinda; tena—with that; eva—very same; annena—food;
gopakän—the cowherd boys; catuù-vidhena—of four varieties;
açayitvä—feeding; svayam—Himself; ca—and; bubhuje—partook;
prabhuù—the Almighty.
TRANSLATION
Govinda, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, fed the cowherd boys with
that food of four varieties. Then the all-powerful Lord Himself partook of the
preparations.
TEXT 37
WvaM laIlaAnar"vapaur,"
OElaAek(manauzAIlayana,
re"mae gAAegAAepagAAepaInaAM
r"mayana, è&pavaAfk{(taE:
evaà lélä-nara-vapur
nr-lokam anuçélayan
reme go-gopa-gopénäà
ramayan rüpa-väk-kåtaiù
SYNONYMS
evam—in this manner; lélä—for pastimes; nara—appearing as a human being;
vapuù—whose transcendental body; nå-lokam—human society;
anuçélayan—imitating; reme—He took pleasure; go—the cows; gopa—cowherd
boys; gopénäm—the cowherd girls; ramayan—pleasing; rüpa—with His beauty;
väk—words; kåtaiù—and actions.
TRANSLATION
Thus the Supreme Lord, appearing like a human being to perform His
pastimes, imitated the ways of human society. He enjoyed pleasing His cows,
cowherd boyfriends and cowherd girlfriends with His beauty, words and
actions.
TEXT 38
@TaAnausma{tya iva‘aAstae
@nvatapyana, k{(taAgAs$a:
yaiã"ìeìr"yaAeyaAR¿aAma,
@h"nma na{ivax"mbayaAe:
athänusmåtya vipräs te
anvatapyan kåtägasaù
yad viçveçvarayor yäcïäm
ahanma nå-viòambayoù
SYNONYMS
atha—then; anusmåtya—coming to their senses; vipräù—the brähmaëas;
te-they; anvatapyan—felt great remorse; kåta-agasaù—having committed sinful
offenses; yat—because; viçva-éçvarayoù—of the two Lords of the universe,
Kåñëa and Balaräma; yäcïäm—the humble supplication; ahanma—we
transgressed; nr-viòambayoù—of those who were deceptively appearing as
human beings.
TRANSLATION
The brähmaëas then came to their senses and began to feel great remorse.
They thought, "We have sinned, for we have denied the request of the two
Lords of the universe, who deceptively appeared as ordinary human beings."
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa and Lord Balaräma did not try to deceive the brähmaëas: They
straightforwardly requested food from them. Rather, the brähmaëas deceived
themselves, as indicated by the Sanskrit word nå-viòambayoù, which means
that Kåñëa and Balaräma are bewildering for an ordinary human being who
considers Them also to be human. Still, because the wives of the brähmaëas
were great devotees of the Lord, the foolish brähmaëas received spiritual
benefit and finally came to their senses.
TEXT 39
ä{"î"A ñINAAM BagAvaita
k{(SNAe Bail(malaAEik(k(Lma,
@AtmaAnaM ca tayaA h"Inama,
@nautaæaA vyagAhR"yana,
dåñövä stréëäà bhagavati
kåñëe bhaktim alaukikém
ätmänaà ca tayä hénam
anutaptä vyagarhayan
SYNONYMS
dåñövä—observing; stréëäm—of their wives; bhagavati—for the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; kåñëe—Çré Kåñëa; bhaktim—the pure devotion;
alaukikém—transcendental to this world; ätmänam—themselves; ca—and;
tayä—of that; hénam—devoid; anutaptäù—lamenting; vyagarhayan—they
condemned.
TRANSLATION
Taking note of their wives' pure, transcendental devotion for Lord Kåñëa,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and seeing their own lack of devotion, the
brähmaëas felt most sorrowful and began to condemn themselves.
TEXT 40
iDagjanma naiñva{âÔaä,"
iDag˜ataM iDagbaò"ÁataAma,
iDafku(laM iDaif‚(yaAd"AºyaM
ivamauKaA yae tvaDaAeºajae
dhig janma nas tri-våd yat tad
dhig vrataà dhig bahu-jïatäm
dhik kulaà dhik kriyä-däkñyaà
vimukhä ye tv adhokñaje
SYNONYMS
dhik—to hell; janma—with the birth; naù—our; tri-våt—threefold (the first
from the physical parents, the second at the time of brahminical initiation,
and the third at the time of initiation into the performances of Vedic
sacrifice); yat tat—whatever; dhik—to hell; vratam—with our vow (of
celibacy); dhik—to hell; bahu-jïatäm—with our extensive knowledge;
dhik—to hell; kulam—with our aristocratic lineage; dhik—to hell;
kriyä-däkñyam—with our expertise in ritualistic activities;
vimukhaù—inimical; ye—who; tu—however; adhokñaje—to the
transcendental Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
[The brähmaëas said:] To hell with our threefold birth, our vow of celibacy
and our extensive learning! To hell with our aristocratic background and our
expertise in the rituals of sacrifice! These are all condemned because we were
inimical to the transcendental Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
As explained in the definitions above, the words tri-våò janma, or "threefold
birth," refer to 1) physical birth, 2) brahminical initiation and 3) initiation into
the performance of Vedic sacrifice. Everything is useless if one is ignorant of
the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Lord Kåñëa.
TEXT 41
naUnaM BagAvataAe maAyaA
yaAeigAnaAmaipa maAeih"naI
yaã"yaM gAur"vaAe na{NAAM
svaATaeR mau÷Amahe" iã"jaA:
nünaà bhagavato mäyä
yoginäm api mohiné
yad vayaà guravo nåëäà
svärthe muhyämahe dvijäù
SYNONYMS
nünam—indeed; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Lord; mäyä—the illusory
potency; yoginäm—for great mystics; api—even; mohiné—is bewildering;
yat—since; vayam—we; guravaù—the spiritual masters; nåëäm—of society in
general; sva-arthe—about our own real interest; muhyämahe—have become
bewildered; dvijäù—brähmaëas.
TRANSLATION
The illusory potency of the Supreme Lord certainly bewilders even the great
mystics, what to speak of us. As brähmaëas we are supposed to be the spiritual
masters of all classes of men, yet we have been bewildered about our own real
interest.
TEXT 42
@h"Ae pazyata naAr"INAAma,
@ipa k{(SNAe jagAÖ"r"AE
äu"r"ntaBaAvaM yaAe'ivaDyana,
ma{tyaupaAzAAna, gA{h"AiBaDaAna,
aho paçyata näréëäm
api kåñëe jagad-gurau
duranta-bhävaà yo 'vidhyan
måtyu-päçän gåhäbhidhän
SYNONYMS
aho paçyata—just see; näréëäm—of these women; api—even; kåñëe—for Lord
Kåñëa; jagat-gurau—the spiritual master of the entire universe;
duranta—unlimited; bhävam—the devotion; yaù—which; avidhyat—has
broken; måtyu—of death; päçän—the bonds; gåha-abhidhän—known as family
life.
TRANSLATION
Just see the unlimited love these women have developed for Lord Kåñëa, the
spiritual master of the entire universe! This love has broken for them the very
bonds of death—their attachment to family life.
PURPORT
Superficially, the husbands, fathers, fathers-in-law and so on were the
ladies' gurus, or teachers. Yet the women had become perfect in Kåñëa
consciousness, whereas the men had fallen into the darkness of Ignorance.
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, upon returning home
the ladies showed transcendental ecstatic symptoms, such as trembling of the
body, shedding of tears, standing of the bodily hairs on end, discoloration of
the complexion, crying out "O pleasure of my life, O Kåñëa!" with faltering
words, and so forth.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté goes on to state that while one may object that
it is not fitting for a woman to love anyone other than her husband, here the
husbands themselves point out that they are gurus only in imitation of the
Supreme Lord, who is jagad-guru, the universal teacher and spiritual master.
The husbands noted that the women, having perfected their transcendental
attachment for Kåñëa, did not have even a trace of attachment left for home,
husband, children and so forth. Therefore from that day on the husbands
accepted those ladies as their worshipable spiritual masters and no longer
thought of them as their wives or property.
TEXTS 43-44
naAs$aAM iã"jaAitas$aMs$k(Ar"Ae
na inavaAs$aAe gAur"Avaipa
na tapaAe naAtmamaImaAMs$aA
na zAAEcaM na i‚(yaA: zAuBaA:
taTaAipa ÷uÔama:ëAeke(
k{(SNAe yaAegAeìre"ìre"
Bail(ä{R"X#A na caAsmaAkM(
s$aMs$k(Ar"Aid"mataAmaipa
näsäà dvijäti-saàskäro
na niväso guräv api
na tapo nätma-mémäàsä
na çaucaà na kriyäù çubhäù
tathäpi hy uttamaù-çloke
kåñëe yogeçvareçvare
bhaktir dåòhä na cäsmäkaà
saàskärädimatäm api
SYNONYMS
na—there is not; äsäm—on their part; dvijäti-saàskäraù—the purificatory
rituals pertaining to the twice-born classes of society; na—nor;
niväsaù—residence; gurau—in the äçrama of a spiritual master (that is,
training as a brahmacäré); api—even; na—no; tapaù—execution of austerities;
na—no; ätma-mémäàsä—philosophical inquiry into the reality of the self;
na—no; çaucam—rituals of cleanliness; na—no; kriyäù—ritualistic activities;
çubhäù—pious; tathä api—nevertheless; hi—indeed; uttamaù-çloke—whose
glories are chanted by the exalted mantras of the Vedas; kåñëe-for Lord Kåñëa;
yoga-éçvara-éçvare—the supreme master of all masters of mystic power;
bhaktiù—pure devotional service; dåòhä—firm; na—not; ca—on the other
hand; asmäkam—of us; saàskära-ädi-matäm—who possess such purification
and so forth; api—even though.
TRANSLATION
These women have never undergone the purificatory rites of the twice-born
classes, nor have they lived as brahmacärés in the äçrama of a spiritual master,
nor have they executed austerities, speculated on the nature of the self,
followed the formalities of cleanliness or engaged in pious rituals. Nevertheless,
they have firm devotion for Lord Kåñëa, whose glories are chanted by the
exalted hymns of the Vedas and who is the supreme master of all masters of
mystic power. We, on the other hand, have no such devotion for the Lord,
although we have executed all these processes.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, the husbands were not aware that their
wives had occasionally associated with residents of Våndävana, such as the
flower ladies, and had heard about the beauty and qualities of Kåñëa. The
brähmaëas were astonished at their wives' loving devotion for Lord Kåñëa, not
realizing that this devotion had developed as a result of hearing and chanting
about the Lord in the association of His pure devotees.
TEXT 45
nanau svaATaRivamaUX#AnaAM
‘amaÔaAnaAM gA{he"h"yaA
@h"Ae na: smaAr"yaAmaAs$a
gAAepavaAfyaE: s$ataAM gAita:
nanu svärtha-vimüòhänäà
pramattänäà gåhehayä
aho naù smärayäm äsa
gopa-väkyaiù satäà gatiù
SYNONYMS
nanu—indeed; sva-artha—about their own true benefit; vimüòhänäm—who
were bewildered; pramattänäm—who were intoxicated; gåha-éhayä—with their
household endeavors; aho—ah; naù—us; smärayäm äsa—He reminded about;
gopa-väkyaiù—by the words of cowherds; satäm—of the transcendental souls;
gatiù—the ultimate destination .
TRANSLATION
Indeed, infatuated as we are with our household affairs, we have deviated
completely from the real aim of our life. But now just see how the Lord,
through the words of these simple cowherd boys, has reminded us of the
ultimate destination of all true transcendentalists.
TEXT 46
@nyaTaA paUNARk(Amasya
kE(valyaAâizASaAM patae:
wRizAtavyaE: ik(masmaAiBar,"
wRzAsyaEtaiã"x"mbanama,
anyathä pürëa-kämasya
kaivalyädy-açiñäà pateù
éçitavyaiù kim asmäbhir
éçasyaitad viòambanam
SYNONYMS
anyathä—otherwise; pürëa-kämasya—of Him whose every possible desire is
fulfilled; kaivalya—of liberation; ädi—and others; äçiñäm—benedictions;
pateù—the master; éçitavyaiù—with those who are meant to be controlled;
kim—what; asmäbhiù—with us; éçasya—of Him who is the absolute controller;
etat—this; viòambanam—pretense.
TRANSLATION
Otherwise, why would the supreme controller—whose every desire is
already fulfilled and who is the master of liberation and all other transcendental
benedictions—enact this pretense with us, who are always to be controlled by
Him?
PURPORT
Although Lord Kåñëa is the Absolute Truth, He humbly sent His cowherd
boyfriends to beg food from the brähmaëas. In so doing, He exposed the
brähmaëas' foolish arrogance and established the glories of His own
transcendental beauty by attracting their very wives to surrender at His lotus
feet.
TEXT 47
ih"tvaAnyaAna, Bajatae yaM ™aI:
paAd"s$pazAARzAyaAs$ak{(ta,
svaAtmad"AeSaApavagAeRNA
taâA¿aA janamaAeih"naI
hitvänyän bhajate yaà çréù
päda-sparçäçayäsakåt
svätma-doñäpavargeëa
tad-yäcïä jana-mohiné
SYNONYMS
hitvä—giving up; anyän—others; bhajate—worships; yam-which Lord;
çréù—the goddess of fortune; päda-sparça—for the touch of His lotus feet;
äçayä—with the desire; asakåt—constantly; sva-ätma—of herself; doña—the
faults (of fickleness and pride); apavargeëa—putting aside; tat—His;
yäcïä—begging; jana—ordinary humans; mohiné—bewildering.
TRANSLATION
Hoping for the touch of His lotus feet, the goddess of fortune perpetually
worships Him alone, leaving aside all others and renouncing her pride and
fickleness. That He begs is certainly astonishing to everyone.
PURPORT
The supreme master of the goddess of fortune herself obviously does not
have to beg for food, as pointed out here by the brähmaëas, who are finally
manifesting real spiritual intelligence.
TEXTS 48-49
de"zA: k(Ala: pa{Tag‰"vyaM
man‡atan‡aitvaRjaAe'¢aya:
de"vataA yajamaAnaê
‚(tauDaRmaRê yanmaya:
s$a Wva BagAvaAna, s$aAºaAä,"
ivaSNAuyaAeRgAeìre"ìr":
jaAtaAe yaäu"iSvatyaAZa{Nma
÷ipa maUX#A na ivaáhe"
deçaù kälaù påthag dravyaà
mantra-tantrartvijo 'gnayaù
devatä yajamänaç ca
kratur dharmaç ca yan-mayaù
sa eva bhagavän säkñäd
viñëur yogeçvareçvaraù
jäto yaduñv ity äçåëma
hy api müòhä na vidmahe
SYNONYMS
deçaù—the place; kälaù—time; påthak dravyam—particular items of
paraphernalia; mantra—Vedic hymns; tantra—prescribed rituals;
åtvijaù—priests; agnayaù—and the sacrificial fires; devatä—the presiding
demigods; yajamänaù—the performer; ca—and; kratuù—the offering;
dharmaù—the pious reaction; ca—and; yat—whom; mayaù—constituting;
saù—He; eva—indeed; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
säkñät—directly; viñëuù—Lord Viñëu; yoga-éçvara-éçvaraù—the Lord of all
mystic controllers; jätaù—taken birth; yaduñu—among the Yadu dynasty;
iti—thus; äçåëma—we have heard; hi—certainly; api—nevertheless;
müòhäù—foolish; na vidmahe—we could not understand.
TRANSLATION
All the aspects of sacrifice—the auspicious place and time, the various items
of paraphernalia, the Vedic hymns, the prescribed rituals, the priests and
sacrificial fires, the demigods, the patron of the sacrifice, the sacrificial offering
and the pious results obtained—all are simply manifestations of His opulences.
Yet even though we had heard that the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Viñëu, the Lord of all mystic controllers, had taken birth in the Yadu dynasty,
we were so foolish that we could not recognize Çré Kåñëa to be none other than
Him.
TEXT 50
tasmaE namaAe BagAvatae
k{(SNAAyaAku(NQ&maeDas$ae
yanmaAyaAmaAeih"taiDayaAe
”amaAma: k(maRvatmaRs$au
tasmai namo bhagavate
kåñëäyäkuëöha-medhase
yan-mäyä-mohita-dhiyo
bhramämaù karma-vartmasu
SYNONYMS
tasmai—unto Him; namaù—obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; kåñëäya—Lord Kåñëa; akuëöha-medhase—whose
intelligence is never restricted; yat-mäyä—by whose illusory potency;
mohita—bewildered; dhiyaù—whose minds; bhramämaù—we are wandering;
karma-vartmasu—upon the paths of fruitive activity.
TRANSLATION
Let us offer our obeisances unto Lord Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. His intelligence is never bewildered, whereas we, confused by His
power of illusion, are simply wandering about on the paths of fruitive work.
TEXT 51
s$a vaE na @Aâ: pauç&Sa:
svamaAyaAmaAeih"taAtmanaAma,
@ivaÁataAnauBaAvaAnaAM
ºantaumahR"tyaita‚(mama,
sa vai na ädyaù puruñaù
sva-mäyä-mohitätmanäm
avijïatänubhävänäà
kñantum arhaty atikramam
SYNONYMS
saù—He; vai—indeed; naù—our; ädyaù—the primeval Lord; puruñaù—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; sva-mayä-mohita-ätmanäm—of those whose
minds have been bewildered by His illusory potency; avijïäta—who did not
understand; anubhävänäm—His influence; kñantum—to forgive;
arhati—should; atikramam—the offense.
TRANSLATION
We were bewildered by Lord Kåñëa's illusory potency and thus could not
understand His influence as the original Personality of Godhead. Now we hope
He will kindly forgive our offense.
TEXT 52
wita svaAGamanausma{tya
k{(SNAe tae k{(tahe"lanaA:
id"ä{"ºavaAe ˜ajamaTa
kM(s$aAà"ItaA na caAcalana,
iti svägham anusmåtya
kåñëe te kåta-helanäù
didåkñavo vrajam atha
kaàsäd bhétä na cäcalan
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; sva-agham—their own offense; anusmåtya—thinking back upon;
kåñëe—against Lord Kåñëa; te—they; kåta-helanäù—having shown contempt;
didåkñavaù—wishing to see; vrajam—to the village of Nanda Mahäräja;
atha—then; kaàsät—of Kaàsa; bhétäù—afraid; na—not; ca—and;
acalan—they went.
TRANSLATION
Thus reflecting on the sin they had committed by neglecting Lord Kåñëa,
they became very eager to see Him. But being afraid of King Kaàsa, they did
not dare go to Vraja.
PURPORT
Realizing their offense against Lord Kåñëa, and finally appreciating His
almighty position, the brähmaëas naturally wanted to rush to Vraja and
surrender at the lotus feet of the Lord. But they were afraid that Kaàsa would
certainly kill them when his spies reported that they had gone to Kåñëa. The
brähmaëas' wives were absorbed in ecstatic Kåñëa consciousness and thus went
to Kåñëa anyway, just as the gopés, simply to dance with the Lord, traveled in
the dead of night through a forest inhabited by wild animals. But the
brähmaëas were not on such an advanced platform of Kåñëa consciousness and
thus, overcome by fear of Kaàsa, could not see the Lord face to face.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A . C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Tenth Canto, Twenty-third Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Brähmaëas' Wives Blessed."
24. Worshiping Govardhana Hill
In this chapter Lord Çré Kåñëa crushes the pride of Indra by prohibiting a
sacrifice intended for him and initiating a substitute sacrifice in worship of
Govardhana Hill.
When Çré Kåñëa saw the cowherd men busily preparing for a sacrifice to
Indra, He inquired about it from their king, Nanda. Nanda explained that the
rain given by Indra enables all living entities to maintain their lives, and
therefore this sacrifice would be executed to satisfy him. Kåñëa responded, "It
is because of karma alone that living entities take their birth in a certain body,
experience varieties of happiness and suffering in that body, and then give it
up as the karma pertaining to it runs out. Thus it is karma alone that is our
enemy, our friend, our guru and our lord, and Indra can do nothing to alter the
happiness and distress of anyone, for everyone is tightly bound by his karmic
reactions. The material modes of goodness, passion and ignorance bring about
the creation, maintenance and destruction of this world. The clouds give forth
rain when they are impelled by the mode of passion, and cowherds prosper by
protecting the cows. Furthermore, the cowherds' proper residence is in the
forest and on the hills. Therefore you should offer worship to the cows, the
brähmaëas and Govardhana Hill."
After Kåñëa spoke thus, He arranged for the cowherd men to worship
Govardhana with the paraphernalia collected for the sacrifice to Indra. He
then assumed a huge, unprecedented transcendental form and devoured all the
food and other offerings presented to Govardhana. As He did so He
proclaimed to the cowherd community that although they had worshiped
Indra for so long, he had never appeared in person, whereas Govardhana
himself had now manifested before their eyes and eaten their offerings of
foodstuffs. Therefore they should all now offer obeisances to Govardhana Hill.
Then Lord Kåñëa joined the cowherds in offering obeisances to His own newly
assumed form.
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
BagAvaAnaipa ta‡aEva
balade"vaena s$aMyauta:
@pazyaiªavas$ana, gAAepaAna,
wn‰"yaAgAk{(taAeâmaAna,
çré-çuka uväca
bhagavän api tatraiva
baladevena saàyutaù
apaçyan nivasan gopän
indra-yäga-kåtodyamän
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; bhagavän—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; api—also; tatra eva—in that same place;
baladevena—by Lord Balaräma; saàyutaù—joined; apaçyat—saw;
nivasan—staying; gopän—the cowherd men; indra—for Indra, the King of
heaven; yäga—for the sake of a sacrifice; kåta—making; udyamän—great
endeavor.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: While staying in that very place with His brother
Baladeva, Lord Kåñëa happened to see the cowherd men busily arranging for a
sacrifice to Indra.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé and other äcäryas, the words tatra eva in
this verse indicate that Lord Kåñëa stayed in the village of the brähmaëas
whose wives had satisfied Him by their devotion. Thus He gave His mercy to
those brähmaëas as well as to their chaste wives, who had no one to associate
with except their husbands. In that place the cowherd men, headed by Lord
Kåñëa's father, Nanda Mahäräja, were somehow or other preparing an
elaborate sacrifice to Lord Indra, and Lord Kåñëa reacted as follows.
TEXT 2
tad"iBaÁaAe'ipa BagAvaAna,
s$avaARtmaA s$avaRd"zARna:
‘a™ayaAvanataAe'pa{cC$ä,"
va{Ü"Aªand"paur"AegAmaAna,
tad-abhijïo 'pi bhagavän
sarvätmä sarva-darçanaù
praçrayävanato 'påcchad
våddhän nanda-purogamän
SYNONYMS
tat-abhijïaù—being in full knowledge about it; api—although; bhagavän—the
Supreme Lord; sarva-ätmä—the Supersoul within everyone's heart;
sarva-darçanaù—the omniscient Personality of Godhead;
praçraya-avanataù—bowing down humbly; apåcchat—He inquired;
våddhän—from the elders; nanda-puraù-gamän—headed by Mahäräja Nanda.
TRANSLATION
Being the omniscient Supersoul, the Supreme Lord Kåñëa already
understood the situation, yet He still humbly inquired from the elders, headed
by His father, Nanda Mahäräja.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa was eager to enact His pastime of lifting Govardhana Hill and
defeating the false pride of Indra, and thus He cleverly inquired from His
father about the imminent sacrifice.
TEXT 3
k(TyataAM mae ipata: k(Ae'yaM
s$am”amaAe va opaAgAta:
ikM( P(laM k(sya vaAeÚe"zA:
ke(na vaA s$aADyatae maKa:
kathyatäà me pitaù ko 'yaà
sambhramo va upägataù
kià phalaà kasya voddeçaù
kena vä sädhyate makhaù
SYNONYMS
kathyatäm—let it be explained; me—to Me; pitaù—My dear father;
kaù—what; ayam—this; sambhramaù—flurry of activity; vaù—upon you;
upägataù—come; kim—what; phalam—the consequence; kasya—for whose;
vä—and; uddeçaù—sake; kena—by what means; vä—and; sädhyate—is to be
accomplished; makhaù—this sacrifice.
TRANSLATION
[Lord Kåñëa said:] My dear father, kindly explain to Me what this great
endeavor of yours is all about. What is it meant to accomplish? If this is a ritual
sacrifice, then for whose satisfaction is it intended and by what means is it
going to be executed?
TEXT 4
Wtaä," “aUih" mah"Ana, k(AmaAe
ma÷M zAu™aUSavae ipata:
na ih" gAAepyaM ih" s$aDaUnaAM
k{(tyaM s$avaARtmanaAimah"
@styasvapar"ä{"í"InaAma,
@ima‡aAed"Astaivaiã"SaAma,
etad brühi mahän kämo
mahyaà çuçrüñave pitaù
na hi gopyaà hi sadhünäà
kåtyaà sarvätmanäm iha
asty asva-para-dåñöénäm
amitrodästa-vidviñäm
SYNONYMS
etat—this; brühi—please speak; mahän—great; kämaù—desire; mahyam—to
Me; çuçrüñave—who am ready to hear faithfully; pitaù—O father; na—not;
hi—indeed; gopyam—to be kept secret; hi—certainly; sädhünäm-of saintly
persons; kåtyam—the activities; sarva-ätmanäm—who see everyone as equal to
themselves; iha—in this world; asti—there is; asva-para-dåñöénäm—who do not
distinguish between what is their own and what is another's;
amitra-udästa-vidviñäm—who do not distinguish between friends, neutral
parties and enemies.
TRANSLATION
Please tell Me about it, O father. I have a great desire to know and am ready
to hear in good faith. Certainly, no secrets are to be kept by saintly
personalities, who see all others as equal to themselves, who have no conception
of "mine" or "another's" and who do not consider who is a friend, who is an
enemy and who is neutral.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa's father might have thought that his son was a mere child and
thus could not properly question the validity of a Vedic sacrifice. But the
Lord's clever statement here would certainly have convinced Nanda that Çré
Kåñëa was making a serious, not a whimsical, inquiry and that a serious answer
should thus be given.
TEXT 5
od"As$aInaAe'ir"vaã"jyaR
@Atmavats$auô$äu"cyatae
udäséno 'ri-vad varjya
ätma-vat suhåd ucyate
SYNONYMS
udäsénaù—one who is indifferent; ari-vat—just like an enemy; varjyaù—is to
be avoided; ätma-vat—like one's own self; suhåt—a friend; ucyate—is said to
be.
TRANSLATION
One who is neutral may be avoided like an enemy, but a friend should be
considered like one's own self.
PURPORT
Even if Nanda Mahäräja did not see friends, enemies and neutral parties as
entirely equal, Lord Kåñëa, being Nanda Mahäräja's son, was certainly a most
trustworthy friend and should therefore not be left out of intimate discussions.
In other words, Nanda Mahäräja might have thought that as a householder he
could not act on the highest saintly platform, and thus Lord Kåñëa furnished
additional reasons why His father should trust Him and reveal the entire
purpose of the sacrifice.
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, Nanda Mahäräja stood silent, doubting his
position of parental aloofness, since Garga Muni had predicted that his son
would be "equal to Näräyaëa in His qualities," and the young boy had already
conquered and killed many powerful demons.
TEXT 6
ÁatvaAÁaAtvaA ca k(maARiNA
janaAe'yamanauitaï"ita
ivaäu"Sa: k(maRis$aiÜ": syaAä,"
yaTaA naAivaäu"SaAe Bavaeta,
jïatväjïätvä ca karmäëi
jano 'yam anutiñöhati
viduñaù karma-siddhiù syäd
yathä näviduño bhavet
SYNONYMS
jïätvä—understanding; ajïätvä—not understanding; ca—also;
karmäëi—activities; janaù—the common people; ayam—these;
anutiñöhati—perform; viduñaù—for one who is wise;
karma-siddhiù—achievement of the intended goal of activity; syät—arises;
yathä—as; na—not; aviduñaù—for one who is foolish; bhavet—occurs.
TRANSLATION
When people in this world perform activities, sometimes they understand
what they are doing and sometimes they don't. Those who know what they are
doing achieve success in their work, whereas ignorant people do not.
PURPORT
The Lord here informs His father that people should perform a particular
ceremony or activity only after thoroughly understanding it through
discussion with friends. We should not be blind followers of tradition. If a
person doesn't even know what he's doing, how can he be successful in his
work? This, essentially, is the Lord's argument in this verse. Since Çré Kåñëa, as
the young child of Nanda, would naturally be expected to show enthusiasm for
His father's religious activities, it was the father's duty to give the son a
thorough explanation of the ceremony.
TEXT 7
ta‡a taAvait‚(yaAyaAegAAe
BavataAM ikM( ivacaAir"ta:
@Ta vaA laAEik(k(stanmae
pa{cC$ta: s$aADau BaNyataAma,
tatra tävat kriyä-yogo
bhavatäà kià vicäritaù
atha vä laukikas tan me
påcchataù sädhu bhaëyatäm
SYNONYMS
tatra tävat—that being the case; kriyä-yogaù—this fruitive endeavor;
bhavatäm—of yours; kim—whether; vicäritaù—learned from the scriptures;
atha vä—or else; laukikaù—of ordinary custom; tat—that; me—to Me;
påcchataù—who am inquiring; sädhu—clearly; bhaëyatäm—it should be
explained.
TRANSLATION
Such being the case, this ritualistic endeavor of yours should be clearly
explained to Me. Is it a ceremony based on scriptural injunction, or simply a
custom of ordinary society?
TEXT 8
™aInand" ovaAca
pajaRnyaAe BagAvaAinan‰"Ae
maeGaAstasyaAtmamaUtaRya:
tae'iBavaSaRinta BaUtaAnaAM
‘aINAnaM jaIvanaM paya:
çré-nanda uväca
parjanyo bhagavän indro
meghäs tasyätma-mürtayaù
te 'bhivarñanti bhütänäà
préëanaà jévanaà payaù
SYNONYMS
çré-nandaù uväca—Çré Nanda Mahäräja said; parjanyaù—the rain;
bhagavän—the great lord; indraù—Indra; meghäù—the clouds; tasya—his;
ätma-mürtayaù—personal representatives; te—they; abhivarñanti—directly
give rain; bhütänäm—for all living entities; préëanam—the gratification;
jévanam—the life-giving force; payaù—(like) milk.
TRANSLATION
Nanda Mahäräja replied: The great Lord Indra is the controller of the rain.
The clouds are his personal representatives, and they directly provide
rainwater, which gives happiness and sustenance to all creatures.
PURPORT
Without clean rainwater, the earth could not possibly provide food or drink
for anyone, nor could there be cleanliness. Thus it would be difficult to
overestimate the value of rain.
TEXT 9
taM taAta vayamanyae ca
vaAmauRcaAM paitamaIìr"ma,
‰"vyaEsta‰e"tas$aA is$aÜE"r,"
yajantae ‚(tauiBanaRr"A:
taà täta vayam anye ca
värmucäà patim éçvaram
dravyais tad-retasä siddhair
yajante kratubhir naräù
SYNONYMS
tam—him; täta—my dear son; vayam—we; anye—others; ca—also;
väù-mucäm—of the clouds; patim—the master; éçvaram—the powerful
controller; dravyaiù—with various items; tat-retasä—by his liquid discharge;
siddhaiù—produced; yajante—they worship; kratubhiù—by fire sacrifices;
naräù—men.
TRANSLATION
Not only we, my dear son, but also many other men worship him, the lord
and master of the rain-giving clouds. We offer him grain and other
paraphernalia of worship produced through his own discharge in the form of
rain.
PURPORT
Nanda Mahäräja patiently tried to explain the "facts of life" to his young
son, Çré Kåñëa, but in fact Nanda and all the residents of Våndävana would
learn an astonishing lesson, as explained in this chapter.
TEXT 10
tacCe$SaeNAAepajaIvainta
i‡avagARP(lahe"tavae
pauMs$aAM pauç&Sak(Ar"ANAAM
pajaRnya: P(laBaAvana:
tac-cheñeëopajévanti
tri-varga-phala-hetave
puàsäà puruña-käräëäà
parjanyaù phala-bhävanaù
SYNONYMS
tat—of that sacrifice; çeñeëa—by the remnants; upajévanti—they sustain their
lives; tri-varga—consisting of the three aims of human life (religiosity,
economic development and sense gratification); phala-hetave—for the sake of
fruit; puàsäm—for persons; puruña-käräëäm—engaged in human endeavor;
parjanyaù—Lord Indra; phala-bhävanaù—the means of effecting the intended
goals.
TRANSLATION
By accepting the remnants of sacrifices performed to Indra, people sustain
their lives and accomplish the threefold aims of religiosity, economic
development and sense gratification. Thus Lord Indra is the agent responsible
for the fruitive success of industrious people.
PURPORT
One might object that people sustain themselves by farming, industry and
so on. But as previously mentioned, all human and nonhuman endeavor
depends on food and drink, which cannot be produced without ample rain. By
the word tri-varga Nanda further points out that the prosperity achieved
through sacrifice for Indra is meant not merely for sense gratification but also
for religiosity and economic development. Unless people are well fed, it is
difficult for them to execute their duties, and without performance of duty, it
is very difficult to be religious.
TEXT 11
ya WnaM ivas$a{jaeÜ"ma<
par"mpayaARgAtaM nar":
k(AmaAä," ãe"SaAà"yaAéaAeBaAta,
s$a vaE naA«aAeita zAAeBanama,
ya enaà visåjed dharmaà
paramparyägataà naraù
kämäd dveñäd bhayäl lobhät
sa vai näpnoti çobhanam
SYNONYMS
yaù—anyone who; enam—this; visåjet—rejects; dharmam—the religious
principle; paramparya—from traditional authority; ägatam—received;
naraù—a person; kämät—because of lust; dveñät—because of enmity;
bhayät—because of fear; lobhät—or because of greed; saù—he; vai—certainly;
na äpnoti—cannot achieve; çobhanam—auspiciousness.
TRANSLATION
This religious principle is based on sound tradition. Anyone who rejects it
out of lust, enmity, fear or greed will certainly fail to achieve good fortune.
PURPORT
If a person neglects his religious duties because of lust, envy, fear or greed,
his life will never be brilliant or perfect.
TEXT 12
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
vacaAe inazAmya nand"sya
taTaAnyaeSaAM ˜ajaAEk(s$aAma,
wn‰"Aya manyauM janayana,
ipatarM" ‘aAh" ke(zAva:
çré-çuka uväca
vaco niçamya nandasya
tathänyeñäà vrajaukasäm
indräya manyuà janayan
pitaraà präha keçavaù
SYNONYMS
çré çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; vacaù-the words;
niçamya-hearing; nandasya—of Mahäräja Nanda; tathä—and also; anyeñäm-of
the others; vraja-okasäm—the residents of Vraja; indräya—in Lord Indra;
manyum—anger; janayan—generating; pitaram—to His father; präha—spoke;
keçavaù—Lord Keçava.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: When Lord Keçava [Kåñëa] heard the statements of
His father, Nanda, and other senior residents of Vraja, He addressed His father
as follows, to arouse anger in Lord Indra.
PURPORT
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé explains that Lord Kåñëa's intention was not simply to
insult a demigod, but rather to knock down the great mountain of false pride
that had arisen within the Lord's tiny servant, who was supposed to represent
the Lord as Indra. By lifting Govardhana Hill Lord Kåñëa would thus initiate a
blissful annual festival called Govardhana-püjä, and He would further enjoy
the pleasant pastime of dwelling for several days beneath the hill with all His
loving devotees.
TEXT 13
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
k(maRNAA jaAyatae jantau:
k(maRNAEva ‘alaIyatae
s$auKaM äu":KaM BayaM ºaemaM
k(maRNAEvaAiBapaâtae
çré-bhagavän uväca
karmaëä jäyate jantuù
karmaëaiva praléyate
sukhaà duùkhaà bhayaà kñemaà
karmaëaiväbhipadyate
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; karmaëä—by
the force of karma; jäyate—takes birth; jantuù—the living entity;
karmaëä—by karma; eva—alone; praléyate—he meets his destruction;
sukham—happiness; duùkham—unhappiness; bhayam—fear;
kñemam—security; karmaëä eva—by karma alone; abhipadyate—are obtained.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa said: It is by the force of karma that a living entity takes birth,
and it is by karma alone that he meets his destruction. His happiness, distress,
fear and sense of security all arise as the effects of karma.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa minimized the importance of the demigods by speaking the
philosophy known as Karma-väda or Karma-mémäàsä, which, basically, is
atheism with a belief in reincarnation. According to this philosophy, there are
subtle laws of nature that reward or punish us according to how we act: "As
you sow, so shall you reap." In a future life one reaps the fruit of his present
work, and this is the sum and substance of reality. Lord Kåñëa, being God
Himself, could hardly be a serious proponent of this mediocre philosophy. In
the role of a young boy He was simply teasing His pure devotees by preaching
it.
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé points out that Lord Kåñëa was thinking, "Why are these
eternal associates of Mine, appearing as My father and other relatives and
friends, so caught up in this worship of Indra?" Thus although the Lord's main
purpose was to take away the false pride of Indra, He also wanted to remind
His eternal devotees that they need not divert their attention to other
so-called gods, since in fact His devotees were already living with the Supreme
Absolute Truth, the almighty Lord Himself.
TEXT 14
@ista caed"Iìr": k(iêta,
P(laè&pyanyak(maRNAAma,
k(taARrM" Bajatae s$aAe'ipa
na ÷k(tauR: ‘aBauihR" s$a:
asti ced éçvaraù kaçcit
phala-rüpy anya-karmaëäm
kartäraà bhajate so 'pi
na hy akartuù prabhur hi saù
SYNONYMS
asti—there is; cet—if hypothetically; éçvaraù—a supreme controller;
kaçcit—someone; phala-rüpé—serving to award fruitive results;
anya-karmaëäm—of the activities of other persons; kartäram—the performer
of activity; bhajate—depends upon; saù—He; api—even; na—not; hi—after
all; akartuù—of one who performs no activity; prabhuù—the master;
hi—certainly; saù—He.
TRANSLATION
Even if there is some supreme controller who awards all others the results of
their activities, He must also depend upon a performer's engaging in activity.
After all, there is no question of being the bestower of fruitive results unless
fruitive activities have actually been performed.
PURPORT
Here Lord Kåñëa argues that if there is a supreme controller, He must
depend on a performer of activity to reciprocate with and must therefore also
be subject to the laws of karma, being obliged to award happiness and distress
to conditioned souls according to the laws of good and evil.
This superficial argument neglects the obvious point that the laws of nature
that prescribe the good and bad results of pious and impious acts are
themselves creations of the all-good Supreme Lord. Being the creator and
sustainer of these laws, the Lord is not subject to them. Furthermore, the Lord
is not dependent on the work of the conditioned souls, since He is satisfied
and complete within Himself. Out of His all-merciful nature He awards the
results appropriate to our activities. That which we call destiny, fate or karma
is an elaborate and subtle system of rewards and punishments meant for
gradually encouraging conditioned souls to evolve to the stage of perfect
consciousness, which is their original, constitutional nature.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead has so dexterously formulated and
applied the laws of material nature governing punishment and reward for
human behavior that the living being is discouraged from sin and encouraged
toward goodness without suffering any significant interference with his free
will as an eternal soul.
In contrast to the material nature, the Lord exhibits His essential nature in
the spiritual world, where He reciprocates the eternal love of His pure
devotees. Such loving affairs are based completely on the mutual freedom of
the Lord and His devotees, not on a mechanical reciprocation of coinciding
selfish interests. The Supreme Lord, assisted by His pure devotees, repeatedly
offers the conditioned souls of this world the opportunity to give up their
bizarre attempt at exploiting the material universe and go back home, back to
Godhead, for an eternal life of bliss and knowledge. Considering all these
points, the atheistic arguments given here by Lord Kåñëa in a playful mood are
not to be taken seriously.
TEXT 15
ik(iman‰e"NAeh" BaUtaAnaAM
svasvak(maARnauvaitaRnaAma,
@naIzAenaAnyaTaA k(tau<
svaBaAvaivaih"taM na{NAAma,
kim indreëeha bhütänäà
sva-sva-karmänuvartinäm
anéçenänyathä kartuà
svabhäva-vihitaà nåëäm
SYNONYMS
kim—what; indreëa—with Indra; iha—here; bhütänäm—for living entities;
sva-sva—each their own; karma—of fruitive action; anuvartinäm—who are
experiencing the consequences; anéçena—(Indra) who is incapable;
anyathä—otherwise; kartum—to make; svabhäva—by their conditioned
natures; vihitam—that which is ordained; nåëäm—for men.
TRANSLATION
Living beings in this world are forced to experience the consequences of
their own particular previous work. Since Lord Indra cannot in any way change
the destiny of human beings, which is born of their own nature, why should
people worship him?
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa's argument here is not a negation of free will. If one accepts the
existence of karma as a system of laws awarding reactions for our present
activities, then we ourselves, according to our nature, will decide our future.
Our happiness and distress in this life have already been adjudicated and fixed
according to our previous activities, and not even the demigods can change
that. They must award us the prosperity or poverty, sickness or health,
happiness or distress due us by our previous work. However, we still retain the
freedom to select a pious or impious mode of activity in this life, and the
choice we make will determine our future suffering and enjoyment.
For example, if I was pious in my last life, in this life the demigods may
award me great material wealth. But I am free to spend my riches for good or
for bad purposes, and my choice will determine my future life. Thus, although
no one can change the karmic results due him in this life, everyone still retains
his free will, by which he determines what his future situation will be. Lord
Kåñëa's argument here is quite interesting; however, it neglects the overriding
consideration that we are all eternal servants of God and must satisfy Him by
all that we do.
TEXT 16
svaBaAvatan‡aAe ih" jana:
svaBaAvamanauvataRtae
svaBaAvasTaimadM" s$ava<
s$ade"vaAs$aur"maAnauSama,
svabhäva-tantro hi janaù
svabhävam anuvartate
svabhäva-stham idaà sarvaà
sa-deväsura-mänuñam
SYNONYMS
svabhäva—of his conditioned nature; tantraù—under the control; hi-indeed;
janaù—a person; svabhävam—his nature; anuvartate—he follows;
svabhäva-stham—based on conditioned propensities; idam—this world;
sarvam—entire; sa—together with; deva—the demigods; asura—the demons;
mänuñam—and humankind.
TRANSLATION
Every individual is under the control of his own conditioned nature, and
thus he must follow that nature. This entire universe, with all its demigods,
demons and human beings, is based on the conditioned nature of the living
entities.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa here elaborates upon the argument given in the previous verse.
Since everything depends on svabhäva, or one's conditioned nature, why
bother worshiping God or the demigods? This argument would be sublime if
svabhäva, or conditioned nature, were all-powerful. But unfortunately it is not.
There is a supreme controller and we must worship Him, as Lord Kåñëa will
emphatically reveal in this chapter of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam. For now,
however, He is content to tease His relatives.
TEXT 17
de"h"Anau»aAvacaAÃantau:
‘aApyaAets$a{jaita k(maRNAA
zA‡auimaR‡amaud"As$aIna:
k(maE=va gAuç&r"Iìr":
dehän uccävacäï jantuù
präpyotsåjati karmaëä
çatrur mitram udäsénaù
karmaiva gurur éçvaraù
SYNONYMS
dehän—material bodies; ucca-avacän—high-and low-class; jantuù—the
conditioned living entity; präpya—obtaining; utsåjati—gives up; karmaëä—by
the reactions of his material activities; çatruù—his enemy; mitram—friend;
udäsénaù—and neutral party; karma—material work: eva-alone; guruù—his
spiritual master; éçvaraù—his lord.
TRANSLATION
Because it is karma that causes the conditioned living entity to accept and
then give up different high-and low-grade material bodies, this karma is his
enemy, friend and neutral witness, his spiritual master and controlling lord.
PURPORT
Even the demigods are bound and limited by the laws of karma. That Indra
himself is subordinate to the laws of karma is explicitly stated in the
Brahma-saàhitä (5.54): yas tv indra-gopam atha vendram aho
sva-karma-bandhänurüpa-phala-bhäjanam ätanoti. The Supreme Lord,
Govinda, awards all creatures the appropriate results of their work. This is as
true for mighty Indra, the lord of the material heavens, as it is for the germ
called indra-gopa. The Bhagavad-gétä (7.20) also states, kämais tais tair
håta-jïänäù prapadyante 'nya-devatäù. Only those who have lost their
intelligence because of various material desires surrender unto demigods rather
than worship the Supreme Lord. In fact, the demigods cannot award benefits
to anyone independently, as stated by Lord Kåñëa in the Gétä: mayaiva vihitän
hi tän. All benefits are ultimately issued by the Lord Himself.
Thus it is not altogether incorrect to say that demigod worship is useless,
since even the demigods are under the laws of karma. In fact, this is the case.
But Lord Kåñëa, the Supreme Absolute Truth, is not subordinate to the law of
karma; rather, He can independently offer or withhold His favor. This is
confirmed in the verse from the Brahma-saàhitä quoted above, the third line
of which is karmäëi nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhäjäm: [Bs. 5.54] "The Supreme
Lord burns up all the accumulated karma of those engaged in His loving
service." Not only is Lord Kåñëa above the laws of material action and
reaction, but He can immediately dissolve these laws for anyone who satisfies
Him through loving service. Thus the almighty God is supreme in absolute
freedom, and by surrendering to Him we can escape the bonds of karma and
stop accepting their dismal rule as supreme.
TEXT 18
tasmaAts$ampaUjayaetk(maR
svaBaAvasTa: svak(maRk{(ta,
@njas$aA yaena vataeRta
tade"vaAsya ih" dE"vatama,
tasmät sampüjayet karma
svabhäva-sthaù sva-karma-kåt
anjasä yena varteta
tad eväsya hi daivatam
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; sampüjayet—one should fully worship; karma—his
prescribed activity; svabhäva—in the position corresponding to his own
conditioned nature; sthaù—remaining; sva-karma—his own prescribed duty;
kåt—performing; aïjasä—without difficulty; yena—by which; varteta—one
lives; tat—that; eva—certainly; asya—his; hi-indeed; daivatam—worshipable
deity.
TRANSLATION
Therefore one should seriously worship work itself. A person should remain
in the position corresponding to his nature and should perform his own duty.
Indeed, that by which we may live nicely is really our worshipable deity.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa here proposes the modern if absurd philosophy that our work or
occupation is really God and that we should therefore simply worship our
work. Upon close scrutiny, we observe that our work is nothing more than the
interaction of the material body with material nature, as Lord Kåñëa Himself
states~ in a more serious mood, in the Bhagavad-gétä (3.28): guëä guëeñu
vartanta. Karma-mémäàsä philosophy accepts that good activity in this life will
give us a better next life. If this is true, there must be some type of conscious
soul different from the body. And if that is the case, why should a
transcendental soul worship the interaction of the temporary body with
material nature? If the words sampüjayet karma here mean that one should
worship the laws of karma governing our activities, then one may astutely ask
what it means to worship laws and, indeed, what might be the origin of such
laws and who is maintaining them. To say that laws have created or are
maintaining the world is a meaningless proposition, since there is nothing
about the nature of a law that indicates it could generate the existential
situation it is supposed to govern. In fact, worship is meant for Kåñëa Himself,
and this real conclusion will be clearly revealed in this chapter.
TEXT 19
@AjaIvyaEk(tarM" BaAvaM
yastvanyamaupajaIvaita
na tasmaAiã"nd"tae ºaemaM
jaAr"AªaAyaRs$ataI yaTaA
äjévyaikataraà bhävaà
yas tv anyam upajévati
na tasmäd vindate kñemaà
järän näry asaté yathä
SYNONYMS
äjévya—sustaining his life; ekataram—one; bhävam—entity; yaù—who;
tu—but; anyam—another; upajévati—resorts to; na—not; tasmät—from that
one; vindate—gains; kñemam—real benefit; järät—from a paramour; näré—a
woman; asaté—who is unchaste; yathä—as.
TRANSLATION
If one thing is actually sustaining our life but we take shelter of something
else, how can we achieve any real benefit? We would be like an unfaithful
woman, who can never achieve any actual benefit by consorting with her
paramour.
PURPORT
The word kñemam means actual prosperity, not merely the accumulation of
money. Here Lord Kåñëa boldly argues that just as a woman can never achieve
actual dignity or enlightenment from an illicit lover, the residents of
Våndävana will never be happy by neglecting the real source of their
prosperity and worshiping Indra instead. According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, the
audacity that child Kåñëa displayed before His father and other elders should
be understood as an exhibition of transcendental anger aroused when He saw
His eternal devotees worshiping an insignificant demigod.
TEXT 20
vataeRta “aöNAA iva‘aAe
r"AjanyaAe r"ºayaA Bauva:
vaEzyastau vaAtaRyaA jaIvaeca,
C^$‰"stau iã"jas$aevayaA
varteta brahmaëä vipro
räjanyo rakñayä bhuvaù
vaiçyas tu värtayä jévec
chüdras tu dvija-sevayä
SYNONYMS
varteta—lives; brahmaëä—by the Vedas; vipraù—the brähmaëa;
räjanyaù—the member of the ruling class; rakñayä—by protection; bhuvaù—of
the earth; vaiçyaù—the vaiçya; tu—on the other hand; värtayä—by trade;
jévet—lives; çüdraù—the çüdra; tu—and; dvija-sevayä—by serving the
twice-born brähmaëas, kñatriyas and vaiçyas.
TRANSLATION
The brähmaëa maintains his life by studying and teaching the Vedas, the
member of the royal order by protecting the earth, the vaiçya by trade, and the
çüdra by serving the higher, twice-born classes.
PURPORT
After glorifying karma, or work, Lord Kåñëa now explains what He means
by prescribed duties born of one's nature. He was not referring to anv
whimsical activity, but rather to the religious duties prescribed in the
varëäçrama, or Vedic social system.
TEXT 21
k{(iSavaAiNAjyagAAer"ºaA
ku(s$aIdM" taUyaRmaucyatae
vaAtaAR catauivaRDaA ta‡a
vayaM gAAeva{ÔayaAe'inazAma,
kåñi-väëijya-go-rakñä
kusédaà türyam ucyate
värtä catur-vidhä tatra
vayaà go-våttayo 'niçam
SYNONYMS
kåñi—farming; väëijya—commerce; go-rakñä—and protecting cows;
kusédam-banking; türyam—the fourth; ucyate—is said; värtä—the
occupational duty; catuù-vidhä—fourfold; tatra—among these; vayam—we;
go-våttayaù—engaged in protecting the cows; aniçam—without cessation.
TRANSLATION
The occupational duties of the vaiçya are conceived in four divisions:
farming, commerce, cow protection and moneylending. Out of these, we as a
community are always engaged in cow protection.
TEXT 22
s$aÔvaM r"jastama wita
isTatyautpaÔyantahe"tava:
r"jas$aAetpaâtae ivaìma,
@nyaAenyaM ivaivaDaM jagAta,
sattvaà rajas tama iti
sthity-utpatty-anta-hetavaù
rajasotpadyate viçvam
anyonyaà vividhaà jagat
SYNONYMS
sattvam—goodness; rajaù—passion; tamaù—and ignorance; iti—thus;
sthiti—of maintenance; utpatti—creation; anta—and destruction;
hetavaù—the causes; rajasä—by the mode of passion; utpadyate—is generated;
viçvam—this universe; anyonyam—by combination of male and female;
vividham—becomes variegated; jagat—the world.
TRANSLATION
The causes of creation, maintenance and destruction are the three modes of
nature—namely goodness, passion and ignorance. In particular, the mode of
passion creates this universe and through sexual combination causes it to
become full of variety.
PURPORT
Anticipating the possible objection that a livelihood based on cows
certainly depends on Lord Indra, who supplies rain, Lord Kåñëa here
introduces a mechanistic theory of existence known as atheistic Säìkhya. The
tendency to attribute exclusive causality to the apparently mechanistic
functions of nature is an old tendency indeed. Five thousand years ago Lord
Kåñëa referred to a doctrine already well known in human society.
TEXT 23
r"jas$aA caAeid"taA maeGaA
vaSaRntyambaUina s$avaRta:
‘ajaAstaEre"va is$aDyainta
mahe"n‰": ikM( k(ir"Syaita
rajasä coditä meghä
varñanty ambüni sarvataù
prajäs tair eva sidhyanti
mahendraù kià kariñyati
SYNONYMS
rajasä—by passion; coditäù—impelled; meghäù—the clouds; varñanti—pour
down; ambüni—their water; sarvataù—everywhere; prajäù—the population;
taiù—by that water; eva—simply; sidhyanti—maintain their existence;
mahä-indraù—the great Indra; kim—what; kariñyati—can do.
TRANSLATION
Impelled by the material mode of passion, the clouds pour down their rain
everywhere, and by this rain all creatures gain their sustenance. What has the
great Indra to do with this arrangement?
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa continues His mechanistic explanation of existence, concluding
mahendraù kià kariñyati: "Who needs the great Indra, since the rain, sent by
the clouds, which in turn are impelled by the mode of passion, is actually
producing everyone's food?" The word sarvataù indicates that the clouds
magnanimously send their rain even on the ocean, rocks and barren land,
where there is no apparent necessity for such sweet water.
TEXT 24
na na: paur"Aejanapad"A
na ƒaAmaA na gA{h"A vayama,
vanaAEk(s$astaAta inatyaM
vanazAElainavaAis$ana:
na naù purojanapadä
na grämä na gåhä vayam
vanaukasas täta nityaà
vana-çaila-niväsinaù
SYNONYMS
na—not; naù—for us; puraù—the cities; jana-padäù—developed inhabited
area; na—not; grämäù—villages; na—not; gåhäù—living in permanent homes;
vayam—we; vana-okasaù—dwelling in the forests; täta—My dear father;
nityam—always; vana—in the forests; çaila—and on the hills;
niväsinaù—living.
TRANSLATION
My dear father, our home is not in the cities or towns or villages. Being
forest dwellers, we always live in the forest and on the hills.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa here points out that the residents of Våndävana should
recognize their relationship with Govardhana Hill and with the forests of
Våndävana, and not worry about a distant demigod like Indra. Having
concluded His argument, Lord Kåñëa makes a radical proposal in the following
verse.
TEXT 25
tasmaAÕ"vaAM “aAöNAAnaAma,
@‰e"êAr"ByataAM maKa:
ya wn‰"yaAgAs$amBaAr"As$a,
taEr"yaM s$aADyataAM maKa:
tasmäd gaväà brähmaëänäm
adreç cärabhyatäà makhaù
ya indra-yäga-sambhäräs
tair ayaà sädhyatäà makhaù
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; gaväm—of the cows; brähmaëänäm—of the brähmaëas;
adreù—and of the hill (Govardhana); ca—also; ärabhyatäm—let it begin;
makhaù—the sacrifice; ye—which; indra-yäga—for the sacrifice to Indra;
sambhäräù—the ingredients; taiù—by them; ayam—this; sädhyatäm—may it
be carried out; makhaù—the sacrifice.
TRANSLATION
Therefore may a sacrifice for the pleasure of the cows, the brähmaëas and
Govardhana Hill begin! With all the paraphernalia collected for worshiping
Indra, let this sacrifice be performed instead.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa is famous as go-brähmaëa-hita, the well-wishing friend of the
cows and the brähmaëas. Lord Kåñëa specifically included the local brähmaëas
in His proposal because He is always devoted to those who are devoted to the
godly Vedic culture.
TEXT 26
pacyantaAM ivaivaDaA: paAk(A:
s$aUpaAntaA: paAyas$aAd"ya:
s$aMyaAvaApaUpazASku(lya:
s$avaRd"Aeh"ê gA{÷taAma,
pacyantäà vividhäù päkäù
süpäntäù päyasädayaù
saàyäväpüpa-çañkulyaù
sarva-dohaç ca gåhyatäm
SYNONYMS
pacyantäm—let the people cook; vividhäù—many varieties; päkäù—of cooked
foods; süpa-antäù—ending with liquid vegetable preparations;
päyasa-ädayaù—beginning with sweet rice; saàyäva-äpüpa—fried and baked
cakes; çañkulyaù—large, round cakes made from rice flour; sarva-all;
dohaù—what is obtained by milking the cows; ca—and; gåhyatäm—let it be
taken.
TRANSLATION
Let many different kinds of food be cooked, from sweet rice to vegetable
soups! Many kinds of fancy cakes, both baked and fried, should be prepared.
And all the available milk products should be taken for this sacrifice.
PURPORT
The word süpa indicates bean broth and also liquid vegetables. Thus to
celebrate the Govardhana-püjä, Lord Kåñëa called for hot preparations such as
soup, cold preparations like sweet rice, and all types of milk products.
TEXT 27
ó"yantaAma¢aya: s$amyagA,
“aAöNAE“aRövaAid"iBa:
@ªaM baò"gAuNAM taeByaAe
de"yaM vaAe Daenaud"iºaNAA:
hüyantäm agnayaù samyag
brähmaëair brahma-vädibhiù
annaà bahu-guëaà tebhyo
deyaà vo dhenu-dakñiëäù
SYNONYMS
hüyantäm—should be invoked; agnayaù—the sacrificial fires; samyak—in the
proper manner; brähmaëaiù—by the brähmaëas; brahma-vädibhiù-who are
learned in the Vedas; annam-food; bahu-guëam—well prepared; tebhyaù—to
them; deyam—should be given; vaù—by you; dhenu-dakñiëäù—cows and other
gifts as remuneration.
TRANSLATION
The brähmaëas who are learned in the Vedic mantras must properly invoke
the sacrificial fires. Then you should feed the priests with nicely prepared food
and reward them with cows and other gifts.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, Lord Çré Kåñëa instructed His father
and other residents of Våndävana in the technical details of this Vedic
sacrifice to assure the quality of the sacrifice and also to inspire Nanda and the
others with faith in the concept of such a sacrifice. Thus the Lord mentioned
that there must be orthodox brähmaëas, regular sacrificial fires and proper
distribution of charity. And things were to be done in the order given by the
Lord.
TEXT 28
@nyaeByaêAìcaANx"AlapaitataeByaAe
yaTaAhR"ta:
yavas$aM ca gAvaAM d"ÔvaA
igAr"yae d"IyataAM baila:
anyebhyaç cäçva-cäëòälapatitebhyo
yathärhataù
yavasaà ca gaväà dattvä
giraye déyatäà baliù
SYNONYMS
anyebhyaù—to the others; ca—also; ä-çva-cäëòäla—even down to the dogs
and the dog-eaters; patitebhyaù—to such fallen persons; yathä—as; arhataù—is
proper in each case; yavasam—grass; ca—and; gaväm—to the cows;
dattvä—having given; giraye—to the mountain called Govardhana;
déyatäm—should be presented; baliù—respectful offerings.
TRANSLATION
After giving the appropriate food to everyone else, including such fallen
souls as dogs and dog-eaters, you should give grass to the cows and then present
your respectful offerings to Govardhana Hill.
TEXT 29
svalax.~k{(taA Baul(vanta:
svanauilaæaA: s$auvaAs$as$a:
‘ad"iºaNAAM ca ku(ç&ta
gAAeiva‘aAnalapavaRtaAna,
sv-alaìkåtä bhuktavantaù
sv-anuliptäù su-väsasaù
pradakñiëäà ca kuruta
go-vipränala-parvatän
SYNONYMS
su-alaìkåtäù—handsomely adorned; bhuktavantaù—having eaten to your
satisfaction; su-anuliptäù—anointed with auspicious sandalwood pulp;
su-väsasaù—wearing fine garments; pradakñiëäm—circumambulation;
ca—and; kuruta—you should perform; go—of the cows; vipra—the
brähmaëas; anala—the sacrificial fires; parvatän—and the hill, Govardhana.
TRANSLATION
After everyone has eaten to his satisfaction, you should all dress and
decorate yourselves handsomely, smear your bodies with sandalwood paste and
then circumambulate the cows, the brähmaëas, the sacrificial fires and
Govardhana Hill.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa wanted all the human beings and even the animals to eat nice
bhagavat-prasädam, sanctified foods offered to the Lord. To enthuse His
relatives with a festive mood, He requested them to dress beautifully with fine
clothes and ornaments and to refresh their bodies with luxurious sandalwood
paste. The essential activity, however, was the circumambulation of the holy
brähmaëas, cows, sacrificial fires and especially Govardhana Hill.
TEXT 30
Wtanmama mataM taAta
i‚(yataAM yaid" r"Aecatae
@yaM gAAe“aAöNAA‰"INAAM
ma÷M ca d"iyataAe maKa:
etan mama mataà täta
kriyatäà yadi rocate
ayaà go-brähmaëädréëäà
mahyaà ca dayito makhaù
SYNONYMS
etat—this; mama—My; matam—idea; täta—O father; kriyatäm—may it be
carried out; yadi—if; rocate—it is pleasing; ayam—this;
go-brähmaëa-adréëäm—for the cows, brähmaëas and Govardhana Hill;
mahyam—for Me; ca—also; dayitaù—cherished; makhaù—sacrifice.
TRANSLATION
This is My idea, O father, and you may carry it out if it appeals to you. Such
a sacrifice will be very dear to the cows, the brähmaëas and Govardhana Hill,
and also to Me.
PURPORT
Whatever is pleasing to the brähmaëas, the cows and the Supreme Lord
Himself is auspicious and beneficial for the entire world. Spiritually blind
"modern" people do not understand this and instead adopt a "scientific"
approach to life that is rapidly destroying the entire earth.
TEXT 31
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
k(AlaAtmanaA BagAvataA
zA‚(d"paRijaGaAMs$ayaA
‘aAelM( inazAmya nand"AâA:
s$aADvagA{õ"nta taã"ca:
çré-çuka uväca
kälätmanä bhagavatä
çakra-darpa-jighäàsayä
proktaà niçamya nandädyäù
sädhv agåhëanta tad-vacaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; käla-ätmanä—manifesting as the
force of time; bhagavatä—by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; çakra—of
Indra; darpa—the pride; jighäàsayä—with a desire to destroy; proktam—what
was spoken; niçamya—hearing; nanda-ädyäù—Nanda and the other elder
cowherd men; sädhu—as excellent; agåhëanta—they accepted; tat-vacaù—His
words.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Lord Kåñëa, who is Himself powerful time, desired
to destroy the false pride of Lord Indra. When Nanda and the other senior men
of Våndävana heard Çré Kåñëa's statement, they accepted His words as proper.
TEXTS 32-33
taTaA ca vyad"Dau: s$ava<
yaTaAh" maDaus$aUd"na:
vaAcaiyatvaA svastyayanaM
taÛ"vyaeNA igAir"iã"jaAna,
opaô$tya balaIna, s$amyagA,
@Aä{"taA yavas$aM gAvaAma,
gAAeDanaAina paur"s$k{(tya
igAir$M ca‚u(: ‘ad"iºaNAma,
tathä ca vyadadhuù sarvaà
yathäha madhusüdanaù
väcayitvä svasty-ayanaà
tad-dravyeëa giri-dvijän
upahåtya balén samyag
ädåtä yavasaà gaväm
go-dhanäni puraskåtya
girià cakruù pradakñiëam
SYNONYMS
tathä—thus; ca—and; vyadadhuù—they executed; sarvam—everything;
yathä—as; äha—He spoke; madhusüdanaù—Lord Kåñëa; väcayitvä—making
(the brähmaëas) recite; svasti-ayanam—the auspicious chants;
tat-dravyeëa—with the paraphernalia intended for Indra's sacrifice; giri—to
the hill; dvijän—and the brähmaëas; upahåtya—offering; balén—the
presentations of tribute; samyak—all together; ädåtäù—respectfully;
yavasam—grass; gaväm—to the cows; go-dhanäni—the bulls, cows and calves;
puraskåtya—placing in front; girim—of the hill; cakruù—they performed;
pradakñiëam—circumambulation.
TRANSLATION
The cowherd community then did all that Madhusüdana had suggested.
They arranged for the brähmaëas to recite the auspicious Vedic mantras, and
using the paraphernalia that had been intended for Indra's sacrifice, they
presented offerings to Govardhana Hill and the brähmaëas with reverential
respect. They also gave grass to the cows. Then, placing the cows, bulls and
calves in front of them, they circumambulated Govardhana.
PURPORT
The residents of Våndävana were simply devoted to Lord Kåñëa; that was
the sum and substance of their existence. Being the Lord's eternal associates,
they were ultimately not concerned with Lord Indra or ritualistic sacrifice, and
they were certainly not interested in the mechanistic philosophy that Kåñëa
had just spoken to them. They simply loved Kåñëa, and out of intense affection
they did exactly what He had requested.
Their simple loving mentality was not small-mindedness or ignorance, since
they were devoted to the Supreme Absolute Truth, who contains within
Himself all existence. Thus the residents of Våndävana constantly experienced
the highest, essential truth underlying all other truths—and that is Çré Kåñëa
Himself, the cause of all causes and that which sustains the existence of all
that exists. The residents of Våndävana were overwhelmed in loving service to
that Supreme Absolute Truth; therefore they were the most fortunate, most
intelligent and most pragmatic of all living beings.
TEXT 34
@naAMsyanax"]âul(Aina
tae caAç&÷ svalax.~k{(taA:
gAAepyaê k{(SNAvaIyaARiNA
gAAyantya: s$aiã"jaAizASa:
anäàsy anaòud-yuktäni
te cäruhya sv-alaìkåtäù
gopyaç ca kåñëa-véryäëi
gäyantyaù sa-dvijäçiñaù
SYNONYMS
anäàsi—wagons; anaòut-yuktäni—yoked with oxen; te—they; ca—and;
äruhya—riding; su-alaìkåtäù—nicely ornamented; gopyaù—the cowherd
women; ca—and; kåñëa-véryäëi—the glories of Lord Kåñëa;
gäyantyaù—singing; sa—together with; dvija—of the brähmaëas; äçiñaù—the
benedictions.
TRANSLATION
As the beautifully ornamented cowherd ladies followed along, riding on
wagons drawn by oxen, they sang the glories of Lord Kåñëa, and their songs
mingled with the brähmaëas' chanting of benedictions.
TEXT 35
k{(SNAstvanyatamaM è&paM
gAAepaiva™amBaNAM gAta:
zAElaAe'smaIita “auvana, BaUir"
bailamaAd"ä," ba{h"ã"pau:
kåñëas tv anyatamaà rüpaà
gopa-viçrambhaëaà gataù
çailo 'sméti bruvan bhüri
balim ädad båhad-vapuù
SYNONYMS
kåñëaù—Lord Kåñëa; tu—and then; anyatamam—another;
rüpam—transcendental form; gopa-viçrambhaëam—for generating the faith of
the cowherds; gataù—assumed; çailaù—the mountain; asmi—I am, iti-these
words; bruvan—saying; bhüri—abundant; balim—the offerings; ädat—He
devoured; båhat-vapuù—in His huge form.
TRANSLATION
Kåñëa then assumed an unprecedented, huge form to instill faith in the
cowherd men. Declaring "I am Govardhana Mountain!" He ate the abundant
offerings.
PURPORT
In Chapter Twenty-four of Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çréla
Prabhupäda writes, "When everything was complete, Kåñëa assumed a great
transcendental form and declared to the inhabitants of Våndävana that He
was Himself Govardhana Hill in order to convince the devotees that
Govardhana Hill and Kåñëa are identical. Then Kåñëa began to eat all the food
offered there. The identity of Kåñëa and Govardhana Hill is still honored, and
great devotees take rocks from Govardhana Hill and worship them exactly as
they worship the Deity of Kåñëa in the temples. The followers of the Krsna
consciousness movement may therefore collect small rocks or pebbles from
Govardhana Hill and worship them at home, because this worship is as good as
Deity worship."
Lord Kåñëa had induced the residents of Våndävana to assume a significant
risk on His behalf. He convinced them to neglect a sacrifice to what is, after
all, the powerful government of the universe and to worship a hill called
Govardhana instead. The cowherd community did all this simply out of love
for Kåñëa, and now to convince them that their decision was correct, Lord
Kåñëa appeared in an unprecedented, huge transcendental form and
demonstrated that He Himself was Govardhana Hill.
TEXT 36
tasmaE namaAe ˜ajajanaE:
s$ah" ca‚( @AtmanaAtmanae
@h"Ae pazyata zAElaAe's$aAE
è&paI naAe'nauƒahM" vyaDaAta,
tasmai namo vraja-janaiù
saha cakra ätmanätmane
aho paçyata çailo 'sau
rüpé no 'nugrahaà vyadhät
SYNONYMS
tasmai—to Him; namaù—obeisances; vraja-janaiù—with the people of Vraja;
saha—together; cakre—He made; ätmanä—by Himself; ätmane—to Himself;
aho—ah; paçyata—just see; çailaù—hill; asau—this; rüpé—manifest in person;
naù—upon us; anugraham—mercy; vyadhät—has bestowed.
TRANSLATION
Together with the people of Vraja, the Lord bowed down to this form of
Govardhana Hill, thus in effect offering obeisances to Himself. Then He said,
"Just see how this hill has appeared in person and bestowed mercy upon us!
PURPORT
It is clear from this verse that Lord Kåñëa had expanded Himself and was
appearing in His normal form among the festival-goers of Våndävana while
simultaneously manifesting Himself as the great form of Govardhana Hill.
Thus, in His form as a child, Kåñëa led the residents of Våndävana in bowing
down to His new incarnation as Govardhana Hill, and to all He pointed out
the great mercy bestowed by this divine form of Govardhana. Lord Kåñëa's
amazing transcendental activities were certainly in keeping with the festive
atmosphere.
TEXT 37
WSaAe'vajaAnataAe matyaARna,
k(Amaè&paI vanaAEk(s$a:
h"inta ÷smaE namasyaAma:
zAmaRNAe @AtmanaAe gAvaAma,
eño 'vajänato martyän
käma-rüpé vanaukasaù
hanti hy asmai namasyämaù
çarmaëe ätmano gaväm
SYNONYMS
eñaù—this one; avajänataù—those who are neglectful; martyän—mortals;
käma-rüpé—assuming any form at will (such as that of the snakes who live
upon the hill); vana-okasaù—residents of the forest; hanti—will kill;
hi—certainly; asmai—to him; namasyämaù—let us pay our obeisances;
çarmaëe—for the protection; ätmanaù—of ourselves; gaväm—and of the cows.
TRANSLATION
"This Govardhana Hill, assuming any form he wishes, will kill any residents
of the forest who neglect him. Therefore let us pay our obeisances to him for
the safety of ourselves and our cows."
PURPORT
Käma-rüpé indicates that the form of Govardhana can manifest as
poisonous snakes, wild animals, falling rocks and so on, all of which are
competent to kill a human being.
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, the Lord presented six theoretical
points in this chapter: 1) that karma alone is sufficient to determine one's
destiny; 2) that one's conditioned nature is the supreme controller; 3) that the
modes of nature are the supreme controller; 4) that the Supreme Lord is simply
a dependent aspect of karma; 5) that He is under the control of karma; and 6)
that one's occupation is the actual worshipable deity.
The Lord presented these arguments not because He believed them but
rather because He wanted to stop the impending sacrifice to Indra and divert
it to Himself in the form of Govardhana Hill. In this way the Lord desired to
agitate that falsely proud demigod.
TEXT 38
wtyai‰"gAAeiã"jamaKaM
vaAs$aude"va‘acaAeid"taA:
yaTaA ivaDaAya tae gAAepaA
s$ah"k{(SNAA ˜ajaM yayau:
ity adri-go-dvija-makhaà
väsudeva-pracoditäù
yathä vidhäya te gopä
saha-kåñëä vrajaà yayuù
SYNONYMS
iti—in this manner; adri—to Govardhana Hill; go—the cows; dvija—and the
brähmaëas; makham—the great sacrifice; väsudeva—by Lord Kåñëa;
pracoditäù—urged; yathä—properly; vidhäya—executing; te—they;
gopäù—the cowherds; saha-kåñëäù—together with Lord Kåñëa; vrajam—to
Vraja; yayuù—they went.
TRANSLATION
The members of the cowherd community, having thus been inspired by Lord
Väsudeva to properly execute the sacrifice to Govardhana Hill, the cows and
the brähmaëas, returned with Lord Kåñëa to their village, Vraja.
PURPORT
Although the Govardhana-püjä was performed in a blissful and successful
way, the matter was hardly finished. Lord Indra is, after all, tremendously
powerful, and he received the news of the Govardhana sacrifice with burning
anger. What ensued will be described in the following chapter.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Tenth Canto, Twenty-fourth Chapter,
of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Worshiping Govardhana Hill."
25. Lord Kåñëa Lifts Govardhana Hill
This chapter describes how Lord Indra was overcome by anger when the
residents of Vraja canceled his sacrifice, how he tried to punish them by
sending forth a devastating rainfall to Våndävana, and how Lord Çré Kåñëa
protected Gokula by lifting Govardhana Hill and for seven days using it as an
umbrella to ward off the rain.
Indra, angered at the disruption of the sacrifice meant for him and falsely
presuming himself the supreme controller, said, "People often give up the
pursuit of transcendental knowledge-the means for self-realization-and
imagine that they can cross over the ocean of material existence by mundane
fruitive sacrifices. Similarly, these cowherd men have become intoxicated by
pride and have offended me by taking shelter of an ignorant, ordinary
child-Kåñëa."
To remove this supposed pride of the residents of Vraja, Indra sent the
clouds known as Säàvartaka, whose function is to facilitate the destruction of
the world. He sent them to harass the Vrajaväsés with downpours of rain and
hail. The cowherd community was very disturbed by this and approached
Kåñëa for shelter. Understanding that this trouble was the work of Indra,
Kåñëa decided to smash to pieces Indra's false prestige, and thus He lifted
Govardhana Hill with one hand. He then invited the entire cowherd
community to take shelter in the dry space beneath the mountain. For seven
successive days He held up the hill, until Indra finally understood Kåñëa's
mystic power and ordered the clouds to withdraw.
When the cowherd villagers emerged from beneath the mountain, Kåñëa
put Govardhana Hill back in its proper place. The cowherds were in ecstasy,
showing loving symptoms such as flowing tears and bodily hairs standing on
end. They embraced Kåñëa and offered Him benedictions according to their
respective positions, while the demigods in heaven rained down flowers and
sang the Lord's praises.
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
wn‰"stad"Atmana: paUjaAM
ivaÁaAya ivah"taAM na{pa
gAAepaeBya: k{(SNAnaATaeByaAe
nand"Aid"Byaêuk(Aepa h"
çré-çuka uväca
indras tadätmanaù püjäà
vijïäya vihatäà nåpa
gopebhyaù kåñëa-näthebhyo
nandädibhyaç cukopa ha
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; indraù—Lord Indra; tadä—then;
ätmanaù—his own; püjäm—worship; vijïäya—understanding;
vihatäm—diverted; nåpa—O King (Parékñit); gopebhyaù—at the cowherds;
kåñëa-näthebhyaù—who took Kåñëa as their Lord; nanda-ädibhyaù-headed by
Nanda Mahäräja; cukopa ha—he became angry.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: My dear King Parékñit, when Indra understood that
his sacrifice had been put aside, he became furious with Nanda Mahäräja and
the other cowherd men, who were accepting Kåñëa as their Lord.
PURPORT
At the very beginning of this chapter Çukadeva Gosvämé reveals the
foolishness of Indra and the absurdity of his anger. Indra was frustrated
because the residents of Våndävana accepted Çré Kåñëa as their Lord. But the
simple fact is that Çré Kåñëa is the Lord, not only of the residents of
Våndävana but of all that exists, including Indra himself. Thus Indra's petulant
reaction was ridiculous. As the common saying goes, "Pride goes before a fall."
TEXT 2
gANAM s$aAMvataRkM( naAma
maeGaAnaAM caAntak(Ar"INAAma,
wn‰": ‘acaAed"yat‚u(Ü"Ae
vaAfyaM caAhe"zAmaAnyauta
gaëaà säàvartakaà näma
meghänäà cänta-käréëäm
indraù pracodayat kruddho
väkyaà cäheça-mäny uta
SYNONYMS
gaëam—the group; säàvartakam näma—named Säàvartaka; meghänäm—of
clouds; ca—and; anta-käriëäm—who effect the end of the universe;
indraù—Indra; pracodayat—sent forth; kruddhaù—angry; väkyam—words;
ca—and; äha—spoke; éça-mäné—falsely thinking himself the supreme
controller; uta—indeed.
TRANSLATION
Angry Indra sent forth the clouds of universal destruction, known as
Säàvartaka. Imagining himself the supreme controller, he spoke as follows.
PURPORT
The word éça-mäné here is very significant. Indra arrogantly considered
himself to be the Lord, and thus he exhibited the typical attitude of a
conditioned soul. Many thinkers in the twentieth century have noted the
exaggerated sense of individual prestige characteristic of our culture; indeed,
writers have even coined the phrase "the me generation." Everyone in this
world is more or less guilty of the syndrome called éça-mäna, or proudly
considering oneself the Lord.
TEXT 3
@h"Ae ™aImad"maAh"AtmyaM
gAAepaAnaAM k(AnanaAEk(s$aAma,
k{(SNAM matyaRmaupaAi™atya
yae ca‚u(deR"vahe"lanama,
aho çré-mada-mähätmyaà
gopänäà känanaukasäm
kåñëaà martyam upäçritya
ye cakrur deva-helanam
SYNONYMS
aho—just see; çré—because of opulence; mada—of intoxication;
mähätmyam—the great extent; gopänäm—of the cowherds; känana—in the
forest; okasäm—who dwell; kåñëam—Kåñëa; martyam—an ordinary human;
upäçritya—taking shelter of; ye—who; cakruù—have committed;
deva—against the demigods; helanam—offense.
TRANSLATION
[Indra said:] Just see how these cowherd men living in the forest have
become so greatly intoxicated by their prosperity! They have surrendered to an
ordinary human being, Kåñëa, and thus they have offended the gods.
PURPORT
Of course, Indra was really saying that the cowherd men had offended him,
Indra, by taking shelter of Kåñëa, whom Indra considered to be martya, a
mortal. This was certainly a gross miscalculation on Indra's part.
TEXT 4
yaTaAä{"XE#: k(maRmayaE:
‚(tauiBanaARmanaAEinaBaE:
ivaâAmaAnvaIiºak(LM ih"tvaA
itataISaRinta BavaANARvama,
yathädåòhaiù karma-mayaiù
kratubhir näma-nau-nibhaiù
vidyäm änvékñikéà hitvä
titérñanti bhavärëavam
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; adåòhaiù—which are inadequate; karma-mayaiù—based on fruitive
activity; kratubhiù—by ritual sacrifices; näma—in name only;
nau-nibhaiù—which serve as boats; vidyäm—knowledge; änvékñikém—spiritual;
hitvä—abandoning; titérñanti—they try to cross beyond; bhava-arëavam-the
ocean of material existence.
TRANSLATION
Their taking shelter of Kåñëa is just like the foolish attempt of men who
abandon transcendental knowledge of the self and instead try to cross over the
great ocean of material existence in the false boats of fruitive, ritual sacrifices.
TEXT 5
vaAcaAlaM baAilazAM stabDama,
@ÁaM paiNx"tamaAinanama,
k{(SNAM matyaRmaupaAi™atya
gAAepaA mae ca‚u(r"i‘ayama,
väcälaà bäliçaà stabdham
ajïaà paëòita-mäninam
kåñëaà martyam upäçritya
gopä me cakrur apriyam
SYNONYMS
7-overtalkative; bäliçam—child; stabdham—arrogant; ajïam—foolish;
paëòita-mäninam—thinking Himself wise; kåñëam—Kåñëa; martyam—a
human being; upäçritya—taking shelter of; gopäù—the cowherds; me—against
me; cakruù—have acted; apriyam—unfavorably.
TRANSLATION
These cowherd men have acted inimically toward me by taking shelter of
this ordinary human being, Kåñëa, who thinks Himself very wise but who is
simply a foolish, arrogant, overtalkative child.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, through the insults of Indra Goddess
Sarasvaté is actually praising Kåñëa. The äcärya explains: "Väcälam means 'one
who can speak according to Vedic authority.' Bäliçam means 'free from
pretension, just like a child.' Stabdham means that He bows down to no one
because there is no one for Him to offer homage to, ajïam means that there is
nothing more for Him to know because He is omniscient, paëòita-mäninam
means that He is highly honored by the knowers of the Absolute Truth, and
kåñëam means He is the Supreme Absolute Truth, whose transcendental form
is full of eternity and ecstasy. Martyam means that although He is the
Absolute Truth, He nevertheless appears in this world as a human being out of
affection for His devotees."
Indra wanted to rebuke Kåñëa as väcälam because the Lord had presented
many audacious arguments in the line of Karma-mémäàsä and Säìkhya
philosophy even though He did not accept these arguments; thus Indra called
the Lord bäliça, "foolish." Indra called Him stabdha because He had spoken
boldly even in the presence of His own father. Thus although Indra attempted
to criticize Çré Kåñëa, the Lord's transcendental character is in fact impeccable,
and this chapter will demonstrate how Indra came to recognize the position of
the Lord.
TEXT 6
WSaAM i™ayaAvailaæaAnaAM
k{(SNAenaADmaAipataAtmanaAma,
Daunauta ™aImad"stamBaM
pazAUªayata s$aÉÿyama,
eñäà çriyävaliptänäà
kåñëenädhmäpitätmanäm
dhunuta çré-mada-stambhaà
paçün nayata saìkñayam
SYNONYMS
eñäm—of them; çriyä—by their opulences; avaliptänäm—who are intoxicated;
kåñëena—by Kåñëa; ädhmäpita—fortified; ätmanäm—whose hearts;
dhunuta—remove; çré—based on their wealth; mada—being maddened;
stambham—their false pride; paçün—their animals; nayata—bring;
saìkñayam—to destruction.
TRANSLATION
[To the clouds of destruction King Indra said:] The prosperity of these
people has made them mad with pride, and their arrogance is backed up by
Kåñëa. Now go and remove their pride and bring their animals to destruction.
PURPORT
It is clear from this verse that the residents of Våndävana had become
highly prosperous simply by protecting cows, since Indra wanted to destroy
their so-called pride based on wealth by killing their animals. Well-tended
cows produce large quantities of milk, from which come cheese, butter, yogurt,
ghee and so on. These foods are delicious by themselves and also enhance
other foods, such as fruits, vegetables and grains. Bread and vegetables are
delicious with butter, and fruit is especially appetizing when mixed with cream
or yogurt. Dairy products are always desirable in civilized society, and the
surplus can be traded for many valuable commodities. Thus, simply by a Vedic
dairy enterprise, the residents of Våndävana were wealthy, healthy and happy,
even in the material sense, and most of all they were eternal associates of the
Supreme Lord Kåñëa.
TEXT 7
@hM" caEr"AvataM naAgAma,
@Aç&÷Anau˜ajae ˜ajama,
maç&Õ"NAEmaRh"AvaegAEr,"
nand"gAAeï"ijaGaAMs$ayaA
ahaà cairävataà nägam
äruhyänuvraje vrajam
marud-gaëair mahä-vegair
nanda-goñöha-jighäàsayä
SYNONYMS
aham—I; ca—also; airävatam—named Airävata; nägam—my elephant;
äruhya—riding; anuvraje—will follow along; vrajam—to Vraja;
marut-gaëaiù—accompanied by the wind-gods; mahä-vegaiù—who move with
great power; nanda-goñöha—the cowherd community of Nanda Mahäräja;
jighäàsayä—with the intent of destroying.
TRANSLATION
I will follow you to Vraja, riding on my elephant Airävata and taking with
me the swift and powerful wind-gods to decimate the cowherd village of Nanda
Mahäräja.
PURPORT
The Säàvartaka clouds were frightened by Indra's powerful mood and thus
carried out his order, as described in the following verse.
TEXT 8
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
wtTaM maGavataAÁaæaA
maeGaA inamauRl(banDanaA:
nand"gAAeku(lamaAs$aArE":
paIx"yaAmaAs$aur"Aejas$aA
çré-çuka uväca
itthaà maghavatäjïaptä
meghä nirmukta-bandhanäù
nanda-gokulam äsäraiù
péòayäm äsur ojasä
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; ittham—in this manner;
maghavatä—by Indra; äjïaptäù—ordered; meghäù—the clouds;
nirmukta-bandhanäù—released from their bonds (although they were supposed
to be kept in check until the time for the destruction of the world);
nanda-gokulam—the cowherd pastures of Nanda Mahäräja; äsäraiù—by great
downpours of rain; péòayäm äsuù—they tormented; ojasä—with all their
power.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: On Indra's order the clouds of universal
destruction, released untimely from their bonds, went to the cowherd pastures
of Nanda Mahäräja. There they began to torment the inhabitants by powerfully
pouring down torrents of rain upon them.
PURPORT
The Säàvartaka clouds could cover the entire earth with a single vast
ocean. With great strength, these clouds began flooding the simple land of
Vraja.
TEXT 9
ivaâAetamaAnaA ivaâuià":
stananta: stanaiya¥auiBa:
taI˜aEmaRç&Õ"NAEnauRªaA
vava{SaujaRlazAkR(r"A:
vidyotamänä vidyudbhiù
stanantaù stanayitnubhiù
tévrair marud-gaëair nunnä
vavåñur jala-çarkaräù
SYNONYMS
vidyotamänäù—being illuminated; vidyudbhiù—by bolts of lightning;
stanantaù—roaring; stanayitnubhiù—with thunder; tévraiù—fearsome;
marut-gaëaiù—by the wind-gods; nunnäù—propelled; vavåñuù—they poured
down; jala-çarkaräù—hailstones.
TRANSLATION
Propelled by the fearsome wind-gods, the clouds blazed with lightning bolts
and roared with thunder as they hurled down hailstones.
PURPORT
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé explains that the word marud-gaëaiù indicates the
seven great winds, such as Ävaha, who presides over the region of Bhuvarloka,
and Pravaha, who holds the planets in their places.
TEXT 10
sTaUNAAsTaUlaA vaSaRDaAr"A
mauÂatsva”aeSvaBaIºNAzA:
jalaAEGaE: plaAvyamaAnaA BaUr,"
naAä{"zyata nataAeªatama,
sthüëä-sthülä varña-dhärä
muïcatsv abhreñv abhékñëaçaù
jalaughaiù plävyamänä bhür
nädåçyata natonnatam
SYNONYMS
sthüëä—like columns; sthüläù—massive; varsa-dhäräù—downpours of rain;
muïcatsu—releasing; abhreñu—the clouds; abhékñëaçaù—incessantly;
jala-oghaiù—by the flood of water; plävyamänä—being submerged; bhüù—the
earth; na adåçyata—could not be seen; nataunnatam—low or high.
TRANSLATION
As the clouds released torrents of rain as thick as massive columns, the earth
was submerged in the flood, and high ground could no longer be distinguished
from low.
TEXT 11
@tyaAs$aAr"AitavaAtaena
pazAvaAe jaAtavaepanaA:
gAAepaA gAAepyaê zAItaAtaAR
gAAeivandM" zAr"NAM yayau:
aty-äsäräti-vätena
paçavo jäta-vepanäù
gopä gopyaç ca çétärtä
govindaà çaraëaà yayuù
SYNONYMS
ati-äsära—by the excessive rainfall; ati-vätena—and the excessive wind;
paçavaù—the cows and other animals; jäta-vepanäù—trembling; gopäù—the
cowherd men; gopyaù—the cowherd ladies; ca—also; çéta—by the cold;
ärtäù—distressed; govindam—to Lord Govinda; çaraëam—for shelter;
yayuù—they went.
TRANSLATION
The cows and other animals, shivering from the excessive rain and wind, and
the cowherd men and ladies, pained by the cold, all approached Lord Govinda
for shelter.
TEXT 12
izAr": s$autaAMê k(Ayaena
‘acC$AâAs$aAr"paIix"taA:
vaepamaAnaA BagAvata:
paAd"maUlamaupaAyayau:
çiraù sutäàç ca käyena
pracchädyäsära-péòitäù
vepamänä bhagavataù
päda-mülam upäyayuù
SYNONYMS
çiraù—their heads; sutän—their children; ca—and; käyena—by their bodies;
pracchädya—covering; äsära-péòitäù—distressed by the rainfall;
vepamänäù—trembling; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
päda-mülam—the base of the lotus feet; upäyayuù—they approached .
TRANSLATION
Trembling from the distress brought about by the severe rainfall, and trying
to cover their heads and calves with their own bodies, the cows approached the
lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 13
k{(SNA k{(SNA mah"ABaAgA
tvaªaATaM gAAeku(laM ‘aBaAe
‡aAtaumahR"is$a de"vaAªa:
ku(ipataAà"l(vats$ala
kåñëa kåñëa mahä-bhäga
tvan-näthaà gokulaà prabho
trätum arhasi devän naù
kupitäd bhakta-vatsala
SYNONYMS
kåñëa kåñëa—O Kåñëa, Kåñëa; mahä-bhaga—O all-fortunate one;
tvat-nätham—whose master is Yourself; go-kulam—the community of cows;
prabho—O Lord; trätum arhasi—kindly protect; devät—from the demigod
Indra; naù—us; kupität—who is angry; bhakta-vatsala—O You who are very
affectionate to Your devotees.
TRANSLATION
[The cowherd men and women addressed the Lord:] Kåñëa, Kåñëa, O most
fortunate one, please deliver the cows from the wrath of Indra! O Lord, You are
so affectionate to Your devotees. Please save us also.
PURPORT
At the time of Lord Kåñëa's birth, Garga Muni had predicted, anena
sarva-durgäëi yüyam aïjas tariñyathä (SB 10.8.16): "By His grace you will easily
cross beyond all difficulties." The residents of Våndävana were confident that
in such a great emergency Lord Çré Näräyaëa would empower Kåñëa to protect
them. They accepted Kåñëa as everything, and Kåñëa reciprocated their love.
TEXT 14
izAlaAvaSaARitavaAtaena
h"nyamaAnamacaetanama,
inar"Iºya BagAvaAnmaenae
ku(ipataen‰"k{(taM h"ir":
çilä-varñäti-vätena
hanyamänam acetanam
nirékñya bhagavän mene
kupitendra-kåtaà hariù
SYNONYMS
çilä—of (hail)stones; varña—by the rain; ati-vätena—and by the extreme wind
; hanyamänam—being attacked; acetanam—unconscious; nirékñya—seeing;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mene—considered;
kupita—angry; indra—by Indra; kåtam—done; hariù—Lord Hari.
TRANSLATION
Seeing the inhabitants of His Gokula rendered practically unconscious by
the onslaught of hail and blasting wind, the Supreme Lord Hari understood that
this was the work of angry Indra.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains that the severe distress Indra
apparently inflicted upon the residents of Våndävana was an arrangement
made by Çré Kåñëa's pastime potency to enhance the loving dealings between
the residents and the Lord. The äcärya gives the analogy that for a hungry
person, the pain of hunger increases the happiness he feels when he finally
eats excellent food, and thus hunger can be said to enhance the pleasure of
eating. Similarly, the residents of Våndävana, although not experiencing
ordinary, material anxiety, felt a type of distress at the activities of Indra and
thus intensified their meditation on Kåñëa. When the Lord finally acted, the
result was wonderful.
TEXT 15
@patvaRtyaulbaNAM vaSaRma,
@itavaAtaM izAlaAmayama,
svayaAgAe ivah"tae'smaAiBar,"
wn‰"Ae naAzAAya vaSaRita
apartv aty-ulbaëaà varñam
ati-vätaà çilä-mayam
sva-yäge vihate 'smäbhir
indro näçäya varñati
SYNONYMS
apa-åtu—out of season; ati-ulbaëam—unusually fierce; varñam—rain;
ati-vätam—accompanied by great wind; çilä-mayam—full of hailstones;
sva-yage—his sacrifice; vihate—having been stopped; asmäbhiù—by Ourselves;
indraù—King Indra; näçäya—for destruction; varñati—is raining.
TRANSLATION
[Çré Kåñëa said to Himself:] Because We have stopped his sacrifice, Indra
has caused this unusually fierce, unseasonable rain, together with terrible winds
and hail.
TEXT 16
ta‡a ‘aitaivaiDaM s$amyagA,
@AtmayaAegAena s$aADayae
laAeke(zAmaAinanaAM maAEX#YaAä,"
DainaSyae ™aImadM" tama:
tatra pratividhià samyag
ätma-yogena sädhaye
lokeça-mäninäà mauòhyäd
dhaniñye çré-madaà tamaù
SYNONYMS
tatra—in that regard; prati-vidhim—counteracting measures;
samyak—properly; ätma-yogena—by My mystic power; sädhaye—I shall
arrange; loka-éça—lords of the world; mäninäm—of those who falsely consider
themselves; mauòhyät—out of foolishness; haniñye—I shall defeat;
çré-madam—their pride in opulence; tamaù—the ignorance.
TRANSLATION
By My mystic power I will completely counteract this disturbance caused by
Indra. Demigods like Indra are proud of their opulence, and out of foolishness
they falsely consider themselves the Lord of the universe. I will now destroy
such ignorance.
TEXT 17
na ih" s$aà"Avayaul(AnaAM
s$aur"ANAAmaIzAivasmaya:
maÔaAe's$ataAM maAnaBaËÿ:
‘azAmaAyaAepak(lpatae
na hi sad-bhäva-yuktänäà
suräëäm éça-vismayaù
matto 'satäà mäna-bhaìgaù
praçamäyopakalpate
SYNONYMS
na—not; hi—certainly; sat-bhäva—with the mode of goodness;
yuktänäm—who are endowed; suräëäm—of the demigods; éça—as controlling
lords; vismayaù—false identification; mattaù—by Me; asatäm—of the impure;
mäna—of the false prestige; bhaìgaù—the eradication; praçamäya—for
relieving them; upakalpate—is intended.
TRANSLATION
Since the demigods are endowed with the mode of goodness, the false pride
of considering oneself the Lord should certainly not affect them. When I break
the false prestige of those bereft of goodness, My purpose is to bring them relief.
PURPORT
The demigods are supposed to be sad-bhäva-yukta, endowed with spiritual
existence, since they are deputed servants of the Supreme Lord. In the
Bhagavad-gétä (4.24) it is stated:
brahmärpaëaà brahma havir
brahmägnau brahmaëä hutam
brahmaiva tena gantavyaà
brahma-karma-samädhinä
"That which is duly offered to the Lord becomes spiritualized." The demigods
engage in the devotional service of the Lord by managing various departments
of cosmic administration. Therefore as demigods, or as servants of the Lord,
their existence is pure (sad-bhäva). When the demigods fail to live up to the
high position given them by the Lord and deviate from proper behavior, they
are not acting as demigods but rather as conditioned souls.
Mäna, or false prestige, is certainly an anxiety-ridden burden for the
conditioned soul. A falsely proud person is not truly peaceful or satisfied,
because his understanding of himself is false and inflated. When a servant of
the Lord becomes asat, or irreligious, the Lord saves him from impiety by
breaking the false prestige that has led him to be offensive or sinful. As stated
by the Lord Himself, yasyäham anugåhëämi hariñye tad-dhanaà çanaiù: [SB
10.88.8] "I give My blessings to a person by taking away his so-called opulence."
Of course, the advanced stage of devotional service to the Lord, as
described by Rüpa Gosvämé, is yukta-vairägya, utilizing the opulence of this
world to execute the Lord's mission. Obviously the things of this world can be
used wonderfully to spread the glories of God and to create a godly society, and
a more advanced devotee will not be seduced by material paraphernalia but
will dutifully and honestly engage it solely for the pleasure of the Lord. In this
particular case, Lord Indra forgot that he was a humble servant of God, and
Lord Kåñëa therefore arranged to bring this bewildered demigod to his senses.
TEXT 18
tasmaAnmacC$r"NAM gAAeïM"
maªaATaM matpair"ƒah"ma,
gAAepaAyae svaAtmayaAegAena
s$aAe'yaM mae ˜ata @Aih"ta:
tasmän mac-charaëaà goñöhaà
man-näthaà mat-parigraham
gopäye svätma-yogena
so 'yaà me vrata ähitaù
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; mat-çaraëam—having taken shelter of Me; goñöham—the
cowherd community; mat-nätham—who have Me as their master;
mat-parigraham—My own family; gopäye—I shall protect;
sva-ätma-yogena—by My personal mystic power; saù ayam—this; me—by Me;
vrataù—vow; ähitaù—has been taken.
TRANSLATION
I must therefore protect the cowherd community by My transcendental
potency, for I am their shelter, I am their master, and indeed they are My own
family. After all, I have taken a vow to protect My devotees.
PURPORT
The word mac-charaëam indicates not only that Lord Kåñëa was the sole
shelter for the vraja-jana, the people of Våndävana, but also that Lord Kåñëa
had established His home among them. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura
quotes from the Anekärtha-varga dictionary, çaraëaà gåha-rakñitroù: "The
word çaraëam can represent either home or protector." The residents of
Våndävana adopted Kåñëa as their beloved child, friend, lover and life itself,
and the Lord reciprocated their feelings. Thus Çré Kåñëa lived among these
fortunate people, moving in their houses and fields; naturally He would protect
such intimate devotees from all types of danger.
TEXT 19
wtyauftvaEke(na h"staena
k{(tvaA gAAevaDaRnaAcalama,
d"DaAr" laIlayaA ivaSNAuzA,
C$‡aAk(imava baAlak(:
ity uktvaikena hastena
kåtvä govardhanäcalam
dadhära lélayä viñëuç
chaträkam iva bälakaù
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; uktvä—having spoken; ekena—with one; hastena—hand;
kåtvä—taking; govardhana-acalam—Govardhana Hill; dadhära—He held it;
lélayä—very easily; viñëuù—Lord Viñëu; chaträkam—a mushroom; iva—just
as; bälakaù—a child.
TRANSLATION
Having said this, Lord Kåñëa, who is Viñëu Himself, picked up Govardhana
Hill with one hand and held it aloft just as easily as a child holds up a
mushroom.
PURPORT
It is confirmed in the Hari-vaàça that Çré Kåñëa picked up the Govardhana
Mountain with His left hand: sa dhåtaù saìgato meghair giriù savyena päëinä.
"With His left hand He picked up that mountain, which was touching the
clouds." According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, when Lord Kåñëa
was preparing to lift Govardhana Hill, a partial expansion of His Yogamäyä
potency named Saàhäriké temporarily removed all the rain from the sky so
that as He ran very swiftly from the porch of His house to the mountain,
neither His turban nor other garments became wet.
TEXT 20
@TaAh" BagAvaAna, gAAepaAna,
he"'mba taAta ˜ajaAEk(s$a:
yaTaAepajaAeSaM ivazAta
igAir"gAta< s$agAAeDanaA:
athäha bhagavän gopän
he 'mba täta vrajaukasaù
yathopajoñaà viçata
giri-gartaà sa-go-dhanäù
SYNONYMS
atha—then; äha—addressed; bhagavän—the Supreme Lord; gopän—the
cowherds; he—O; amba—mother; täta—O father; vraja-okasaù—O residents
of Vraja; yathä-upajoñam—as suits your pleasure; viçata—please enter;
giri—this hill; gartam—the empty space below; sa-godhanäù—together with
your cows.
TRANSLATION
The Lord then addressed the cowherd community: O Mother, O Father, O
residents of Vraja, if you wish you may now come under this hill with your
cows.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura provides the following insight in this
regard: Ordinarily a large cowherd community, which included many
thousands of cows, calves, bulls and so on, could not fit under the base of a
medium-sized hill like Çré Govardhana. However, because the hill was in
ecstasy, being touched by the hand of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, it
acquired inconceivable power and even felt the hundreds of deadly
thunderbolts thrown upon its back by angry Indra to be offerings of soft,
fragrant flowers. At times Çré Govardhana was not even aware that the
thunderbolts were striking. From the Hari-vaàça the äcärya has also quoted
Çré Kåñëa Himself as saying, trai-lokyam apy utsahate rakñituà kià punar
vrajam: "Çré Govardhana can give shelter to all the three worlds, what to speak
of the simple land of Vraja."
When Indra's attack began and Kåñëa lifted the hill, the deer, wild hogs,
and other animals and birds standing on the hill's flanks climbed up to its
peaks, and even they did not experience the slightest distress.
TEXT 21
na ‡aAs$a wh" va: k(AyaAeR
maÜ"staAi‰"inapaAtanaAta,
vaAtavaSaRBayaenaAlaM
tat‡aANAM ivaih"taM ih" va:
na träsa iha vaù käryo
mad-dhastädri-nipätanät
väta-varña-bhayenälaà
tat-träëaà vihitaà hi vaù
SYNONYMS
na—not; träsaù—fear; iha—in this matter; vaù—by you; käryaù—should be
felt; mat-hasta—from My hand; adri—of the mountain; nipätanät—of the
falling; väta—of the wind; varña—and the rain; bhayena—with fear;
alam—enough; tat-träëam—the deliverance from that; vihitam—has been
provided; hi—certainly; vaù—for you.
TRANSLATION
You should have no fear that this mountain will fall from My hand. And
don't be afraid of the wind and rain, for your deliverance from these afflictions
has already been arranged.
TEXT 22
taTaA inaivaRivazAugARta<
k{(SNAAìAis$atamaAnas$a:
yaTaAvak(AzAM s$aDanaA:
s$a˜ajaA: s$aAepajaIivana:
tathä nirviviçur gartaà
kåñëäçväsita-mänasaù
yathävakäçaà sa-dhanäù
sa-vrajäù sopajévinaù
SYNONYMS
tathä—thus; nirviviçuù—they entered; gartam—the hollow; kåñëa—by Lord
Kåñëa; äçväsita—pacified; mänasaù—their minds;
yathä-avakäçam—comfortably; sa-dhanäù—with their cows; sa-vrajäù—and
with their wagons; sa-upajévinaù—together with their dependents (such as
their servants and brähmaëa priests).
TRANSLATION
Their minds thus pacified by Lord Kåñëa, they all entered beneath the hill,
where they found ample room for themselves and all their cows, wagons,
servants and priests, and for all other members of the community as well.
PURPORT
All the domestic animals of Våndävana were brought beneath Govardhana
Hill for shelter.
TEXT 23
ºauÔa{Ò"YaTaAM s$auKaApaeºaAM
ih"tvaA taE˜aRjavaAis$aiBa:
vaIºyamaANAAe d"DaAr"Ai‰M"
s$aæaAhM" naAcalatpad"Ata,
kñut-tåò-vyathäà sukhäpekñäà
hitvä tair vraja-väsibhiù
vékñyamäëo dadhärädrià
saptähaà näcalat padät
SYNONYMS
kñut—of hunger; tåö—and thirst; vyathäm—the pain; sukha—of personal
happiness; apekñäm—all consideration; hitvä—putting aside; taiù—by them;
vraja-väsibhiù—the residents of Vraja; vékñyamäëaù—being glanced upon;
dadhära—He held; adrim—the mountain; sapta-aham—for seven days; na
acalat—He did not move; padät—from that place .
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa, forgetting hunger and thirst and putting aside all considerations
of personal pleasure, stood there holding up the hill for seven days as the people
of Vraja gazed upon Him.
PURPORT
According to the Viñëu Puräëa,
vrajaika-väsibhir harñavismitäkñair
niåékñitaù
gopa-gopé-janair håñöaiù
préti-visphäritekñaëaiù
saàstüyamäna-caritaù
kåñëaù çailam adhärayat
"Lord Kåñëa held up the mountain while His praises were chanted by the
residents of Vraja, all of whom now had the opportunity to dwell together with
Him, and who glanced at Him with joyful and amazed eyes. Thus the cowherd
men and women were all elated, and out of loving affection they opened their
eyes wide."
By continuously drinking the nectar of the beauty and sweetness of Çré
Kåñëa, the residents of Våndävana felt no hunger, thirst or fatigue, and Lord
Kåñëa, by seeing their beautiful forms, also forgot about eating, drinking and
sleeping. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura points out that seven days of
continuous rain from the Säàvartaka clouds failed to flood the district of
Mathurä because the Supreme Lord, simply by His potency, immediately dried
up the water as it fell to the ground. Thus Kåñëa's lifting of Govardhana Hill is
full of fascinating details and has for thousands of years remained one of His
most famous pastimes.
TEXT 24
k{(SNAyaAegAAnauBaAvaM taM
inazAmyaen‰"Ae'itaivaismata:
inastamBaAe ”aí"s$aÆÿlpa:
svaAnmaeGaAna, s$aªyavaAr"yata,
kåñëa-yogänubhävaà taà
niçamyendro 'ti-vismitaù
nistambho bhrañöa-saìkalpaù
svän meghän sannyavärayat
SYNONYMS
kåñëa—of Lord Kåñëa; yoga—of the mystic power; anubhävam—the influence;
tam—that; niçamya—seeing; indraù—Lord Indra; ati-vismitaù—most amazed;
nistambhaù—whose false pride was brought down; bhrañöa—ruined;
saìkalpaù—whose determination; svän—his own; meghän—clouds;
sannyavärayat—stopped.
TRANSLATION
When Indra observed this exhibition of Lord Kåñëa's mystic power, he
became most astonished. Pulled down from his platform of false pride, and his
intentions thwarted, he ordered his clouds to desist.
TEXT 25
KaM vya”amauid"taAid"tyaM
vaAtavaSa< ca d"Aç&NAma,
inazAmyaAepar"taM gAAepaAna,
gAAevaDaRnaDar"Ae'“avaIta,
khaà vyabhram uditädityaà
väta-varñaà ca däruëam
niçamyoparataà gopän
govardhana-dharo 'bravét
SYNONYMS
kham—the sky; vi-abhram—empty of clouds; udita—arisen; ädityam—with the
sun; väta-varñam—the wind and rain; ca—and; däruëam—fierce;
niçamya—seeing; uparatam—ceased; gopän—to the cowherds;
govardhana-dharaù—the lifter of Govardhana Hill; abravét—spoke.
TRANSLATION
Seeing that the fierce wind and rain had now ceased, the sky had become
clear of rainclouds, and the sun had risen, Lord Kåñëa, the lifter of Govardhana
Hill, spoke to the cowherd community as follows.
TEXT 26
inayaARta tyajata ‡aAs$aM
gAAepaA: s$añIDanaABaRk(A:
opaAr"taM vaAtavaSa<
vyaud"‘aAyaAê ina°agAA:
niryäta tyajata träsaà
gopäù sa-stré-dhanärbhakäù
upärataà väta-varñaà
vyuda-präyäç ca nimnagäù
SYNONYMS
niryäta—please go out; tyajata—give up; träsam—your fear; gopäù—O
cowherd men; sa—together with; stré—your women; dhana—property;
arbhakäù—and children; upäratam—finished; väta-varñam—the wind and
rain; vi-uda—without water; präyäù—practically; ca—and; nimnagäù—the
rivers.
TRANSLATION
[Lord Kåñëa said:] My dear cowherd men, please go out with your wives,
children and possessions. Give up your fear. The wind and rain have stopped,
and the rivers' high waters have subsided.
TEXT 27
tatastae inayaRyaugAAeRpaA:
svaM svamaAd"Aya gAAeDanama,
zAk(q%AeX#Aepak(r"NAM
ñIbaAlasTaivar"A: zAnaE:
tatas te niryayur gopäù
svaà svam ädäya go-dhanam
çakaöoòhopakaraëaà
stré-bäla-sthaviräù çanaiù
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; te—they; niryayuù—went out; gopäù—the cowherd men; svam
svam—each his own; ädäya—taking; go-dhanam—their cows; çakaöa—upon
their wagons; üòha—loaded; upakaraëam—their paraphernalia; stré—the
women; bäla—children; sthaviräù—and old people; çanaiù—slowly.
TRANSLATION
After collecting their respective cows and loading their paraphernalia into
their wagons, the cowherd men went out. The women, children and elderly
persons gradually followed them.
TEXT 28
BagAvaAnaipa taM zAElaM
svasTaAnae paUvaRvat‘aBau:
pazyataAM s$avaRBaUtaAnaAM
sTaApayaAmaAs$a laIlayaA
bhagavän api taà çailaà
sva-sthäne pürva-vat prabhuù
paçyatäà sarva-bhütänäà
sthäpayäm äsa lélayä
SYNONYMS
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; api—and; tam—that;
çailam—hill; sva-sthäne—upon its place; pürva-vat—as originally;
prabhuù—the almighty Lord; paçyatäm—while they were looking on;
sarva-bhütänäm—all the living creatures; sthäpayäm äsa—He put;
lélayä—with ease.
TRANSLATION
While all living creatures looked on, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
put down the hill in its original place, just as it had stood before.
TEXT 29
taM ‘aemavaegAAiªaBa{RtaA ˜ajaAEk(s$aAe
yaTaA s$amaIyau: pair"r"mBaNAAid"iBa:
gAAepyaê s$aµaeh"mapaUjayanmaud"A
d"DyaºataAià"yauRyaujau: s$ad"AizASa:
taà prema-vegän nirbhåtä vrajaukaso
yathä saméyuù parirambhaëädibhiù
gopyaç ca sa-sneham apüjayan mudä
dadhy-akñatädbhir yuyujuù sad-äçiñaù
SYNONYMS
tam—to Him; prema—of their pure love; vegät—by the force;
nirbhåtäù—fulfilled; vraja-okasaù—the residents of Vraja; yathä—each
according to his position; saméyuù—came forward;
parirambhaëa-ädibhiù—with embracing and so forth; gopyaù—the cowherd
ladies; ca—and; sa-sneham—with great affection; apüjayan—showed their
respect; mudä—joyfully; dadhi—with yogurt; akñata—unbroken grains;
adbhiù—and water; yuyujuù—they presented; sat—excellent;
äçiñaù—benedictions.
TRANSLATION
All the residents of Våndävana were overwhelmed with ecstatic love, and
they came forward and greeted Çré Kåñëa according to their individual
relationships with Him—some embracing Him, others bowing down to Him,
and so forth. The cowherd women presented water mixed with yogurt and
unbroken barleycorns as a token of honor, and they showered auspicious
benedictions upon Him.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains that each of the residents of
Våndävana regarded Kåñëa in his own way—as an inferior, younger member of
the community; as an equal; or as a superior—and they dealt with Him
accordingly. Kåñëa's superiors offered auspicious benedictions, lovingly smelled
His head, kissed Him, rubbed His arms and fingers, and inquired with parental
affection as to whether He was tired or pained. Kåñëa's equals laughed or joked
with Him, and those who were younger fell at His feet, massaged His feet, and
so on.
The word ca in this verse indicates that the wives of the brähmaëas joined
with the cowherd ladies to offer auspicious items like yogurt and unbroken
grains. Lord Kåñëa received benedictions such as this: "May You subdue the
wicked, protect the decent people, give pleasure to Your parents and be
enriched with all wealth and opulence."
TEXT 30
yazAAed"A r"Aeih"NAI nand"Ae
r"Amaê bailanaAM var":
k{(SNAmaAilaËÿYa yauyaujaur,"
@AizASa: µaeh"k(Atar"A:
yaçodä rohiëé nando
rämaç ca balinäà varaù
kåñëam äliìgya yuyujur
äçiñaù sneha-kätaräù
SYNONYMS
yaçodä—mother Yaçodä; rohiëé—Rohiëé; nandaù—Nanda Mahäräja;
rämaù—Balaräma; ca—also; balinäm—of the strong; varaù—the greatest;
kåñëam—Kåñëa; äliìgya—embracing; yuyujuù—they all offered;
äçiñaù—benedictions; sneha—by their affection for Him; kätaräù—beside
themselves.
TRANSLATION
Mother Yaçodä, mother Rohiëé, Nanda Mahäräja and Balaräma, the greatest
of the strong, all embraced Kåñëa. Overwhelmed with affection, they offered
Him their blessings.
TEXT 31
id"iva de"vagANAA: is$aÜ"A:
s$aADyaA gAnDavaRcaAr"NAA:
tauí]"vaumauRmaucaustauí"A:
pauSpavaSaARiNA paAiTaRva
divi deva-gaëäù siddhäù
sädhyä gandharva-cäraëäù
tuñöuvur mumucus tuñöäù
puñpa-varñäëi pärthiva
SYNONYMS
divi—in the heavens; deva-gaëäù—the demigods; siddhäù—the Siddhas;
sädhyäù—the Sädhyas; gandharva-cäraëäù—the Gandharvas and Cäraëas;
tuñöuvuù—they recited the Lord's praises; mumucuù—they released;
tuñöäù—being satisfied; puñpa-varñäëi—downpours of flowers; pärthiva—O
King (Parékñit).
TRANSLATION
In the heavens, O King, all the demigods, including the Siddhas, Sädhyas,
Gandharvas and Cäraëas, sang the praises of Lord Kåñëa and showered down
flowers in great satisfaction.
PURPORT
The demigods in heaven were just as jubilant as the residents of
Våndävana, and thus a great universal festival took place.
TEXT 32
zAÊÿäu"näu"BayaAe naeäu"r,"
id"iva de"va‘acaAeid"taA:
jagAugARnDavaRpatayas$a,
taumbauç&‘amauKaA na{pa
çaìkha-dundubhayo nedur
divi deva-pracoditäù
jagur gandharva-patayas
tumburu-pramukhä nåpa
SYNONYMS
çaìkha—conchshells; dundubhayaù—and kettledrums; neduù—resounded;
divi—in the heavenly planets; deva-pracoditäù—played by the demigods;
jaguù—sang; gandharva-patayaù—the chiefs of the Gandharvas;
tumburu-pramukhäù—led by Tumburu; nåpa—my dear King.
TRANSLATION
My dear Parékñit, the demigods in heaven resoundingly played their
conchshells and kettledrums, and the best of the Gandharvas, led by Tumburu,
began to sing.
TEXT 33
tataAe'naur"lE(: pazAupaE: pair"i™ataAe
r"Ajana, svagAAeïM" s$abalaAe'˜ajaÜ"ir":
taTaAivaDaAnyasya k{(taAina gAAeipak(A
gAAyantya wRyaumauRid"taA ô$id"s$pa{zA:
tato 'nuraktaiù paçupaiù pariçrito
räjan sva-goñöhaà sa-balo 'vrajad dhariù
tathä-vidhäny asya kåtäni gopikä
gäyantya éyur muditä hådi-spåçaù
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; anuraktaiù—loving; paçu-paiù—by the cowherd boys;
pariçritaù—surrounded; räjan—O King; sva-goñöham—to the place where He
was tending His own cows; sa-balaù—together with Lord Balaräma;
avrajat—went off; hariù—Kåñëa; tathä-vidhäni—such as this (lifting of
Govardhana); asya—of Him; kåtäni—the activities; gopikäù—the cowherd
girls; gäyantyaù—singing; éyuù—they went; muditäù—happily; hådi-spåçaù—of
Him who touched them within their hearts.
TRANSLATION
Surrounded by His loving cowherd boyfriends and Lord Balaräma, Kåñëa
then went off to the place where He had been tending His cows. The cowherd
girls returned to their homes, singing joyfully about the lifting of Govardhana
Hill and other glorious deeds performed by Lord Kåñëa, who had so deeply
touched their hearts.
PURPORT
Before returning to their homes, the gopés shared intimate association with
their lover, Çré Kåñëa, by exchanging secret glances. Ordinarily they could not
publicly talk about Kåñëa, since they were chaste young girls in a religious
village, but now they took advantage of this wonderful exhibition by the Lord
and freely sang of His beautiful qualities. It is natural that a young man wants
to do something wonderful in the presence of a beautiful young girl. The gopés
were the most beautiful and pure-hearted young girls, and Çré Kåñëa performed
the most wonderful activities in their presence. Thus He entered deep within
their tender hearts, enlivening their eternal devotion to Him.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Tenth Canto, Twenty-fifth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Lord Kåñëa Lifts Govardhana Hill."
26. Wonderful Kåñëa
In this chapter Nanda Mahäräja describes Kåñëa's opulences to the cowherd
men, as Nanda had heard of them from Garga Muni.
The cowherd men, unaware of Lord Kåñëa's power, were amazed to see His
various extraordinary activities. The men approached Nanda Mahäräja and
told him that after seeing how Kåñëa, a boy only seven years old, had lifted a
mountain, and how He had previously killed the demoness Pütanä and
generated extreme attraction in the hearts of everyone in Våndävana, the men
had become doubtful and bewildered about how Çré Kåñëa could possibly have
taken birth in the unsuitable environment of a cowherd community. Nanda
replied by relating to them what Garga Muni had told him about Çré Kåñëa.
Garga Muni had said that in the previous three ages Nanda's boy had
manifested Himself in white, red and yellow forms, whereas now, in the
Dväpara age, He had assumed His darkish-blue form, kåñëa-rüpa. Because He
descended as the son of Vasudeva, one of His many names is Väsudeva, and He
has innumerable other names indicating His many qualities and activities.
Garga Muni had predicted that Kåñëa would prevent all sorts of
catastrophes in Gokula, spread unlimited auspiciousness, and increase the
ecstasy of the cowherd men and women. In a previous age He had provided
protection for the saintly brähmaëas when they were harassed by low-class
dacoits and there was no proper ruler in society. As the demons in the higher
planets can never defeat the demigods who have Lord Viñëu on their side, no
enemy can ever defeat those who love Kåñëa. In His affinity for His devotees
and in His opulence and power, Kåñëa is just like Lord Näräyaëa Himself.
Overjoyed and awestruck by Garga Muni's statements, the cowherd men
concluded that Kåñëa must be an empowered representative of the Supreme
Lord, Näräyaëa. Thus they worshiped Him and Nanda Mahäräja.
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
WvaMivaDaAina k(maARiNA
gAAepaA: k{(SNAsya vaIºya tae
@taã"IyaRivad": ‘aAecau:
s$amaByaetya s$auivaismataA:
çré-çuka uväca
evaà-vidhäni karmäëi
gopäù kåñëasya vékñya te
atad-vérya-vidaù procuù
samabhyetya su-vismitäù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam-vidhäni—like this;
karmäëi—activities; gopäù—the cowherd men; kåñëasya—of Lord Kåñëa;
vékñya—seeing; te—they; atat-vérya-vidaù—unable to understand His power;
procuù—they spoke; samabhyetya—approaching (Nanda Mahäräja);
su-vismitäù—very astonished.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: The cowherd men were astonished when they saw
Kåñëa's activities, such as lifting Govardhana Hill. Unable to understand His
transcendental potency, they approached Nanda Mahäräja and spoke as follows.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains this verse as follows: "During
Lord Kåñëa's pastime of lifting Çré Govardhana Hill, the cowherd men simply
enjoyed the spiritual bliss of the Lord's activities without analyzing them. But
afterwards, when they had returned to their homes, perplexity arose within
their hearts. Thus they thought, 'Now we have directly seen child Kåñëa lift
Govardhana Hill, and we remember how He killed Pütanä and other demons,
extinguished the forest fire, and so on. At the time, we thought that these
extraordinary acts occurred because of a benediction from the brähmaëas or
because of Nanda Mahäräja's great fortune, or that perhaps this boy had
achieved the mercy of Lord Näräyaëa and was thus empowered by Him.
" 'But all these presumptions are false, because an ordinary seven-year old
boy could never hold up the king of mountains for seven whole days. Kåñëa is
not a human being. He must be the Supreme Lord Himself.
" 'But on the other hand, child Kåñëa loves it when we coddle Him, and He
becomes morose when we—His uncles and well-wishers, simply worldly
cowherd men—do not give Him attention. He appears to become hungry and
thirsty, steals yogurt and milk, sometimes plays tricks, tells lies, chatters
childishly and tends the calves. If He is actually the Supreme Lord, why would
He do these things? Don't they indicate that He is an ordinary human child?
" 'We are totally unable to establish the truth of His identity. Therefore let
us go and inquire from the highly intelligent King of Vraja, Nanda Mahäräja,
and he shall free us from our doubts.' "
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, the cowherd men thus
made up their minds, and then they entered Nanda Mahäräja's great assembly
hall and questioned him as described in the following verse.
TEXT 2
baAlak(sya yade"taAina
k(maARNyatyaàu"taAina vaE
k(TamahR"tyas$aAE janma
ƒaAmyaeSvaAtmajaugAuips$atama,
bälakasya yad etäni
karmäëy aty-adbhutäni vai
katham arhaty asau janma
grämyeñv ätma-jugupsitam
SYNONYMS
bälakasya—of the boy; yat—because; etäni—these; karmäëi—activities;
ati-adbhutäni—most amazing; vai—certainly; katham—how; arhati—should
deserve; asau—He; janma—birth; grämyeñu—among worldly men; ätma—for
Himself; jugupsitam—contemptible.
TRANSLATION
[The cowherd men said:] Since this boy performs such extraordinary
activities, how could He warrant a birth among worldly men like us—a birth
that for Him would seem contemptible?
PURPORT
An ordinary living being cannot avoid unpleasant circumstances, but the
supreme controller can always make perfect arrangements for His pleasure.
TEXT 3
ya: s$aæah"AyanaAe baAla:
k(re"NAEke(na laIlayaA
k(TaM iba”aiÕ"ir"varM"
pauSk(rM" gAjar"Aix"va
yaù sapta-häyano bälaù
kareëaikena lélayä
kathaà bibhrad giri-varaà
puñkaraà gaja-räò iva
SYNONYMS
yaù—who; sapta-häyanaù—seven years of age; bälaù—a boy; kareëa—with a
hand; ekena—one; lélayä—playfully; katham—how; bibhrat—He held up;
giri-varam—the best of mountains, Govardhana; puñkaram—a lotus flower;
gaja-räö—a mighty elephant; iva—as.
TRANSLATION
How could this seven-year-old boy playfully hold up the great hill
Govardhana with one hand, just as a mighty elephant holds up a lotus flower?
TEXT 4
taAeke(naAmaIilataAºaeNA
paUtanaAyaA mah"AEjas$a:
paIta: stana: s$ah" ‘aANAE:
k(Alaenaeva vayastanaAe:
tokenämélitäkñeëa
pütanäyä mahaujasaù
pétaù stanaù saha präëaiù
käleneva vayas tanoù
SYNONYMS
tokena—by the young child; ä-mélita—almost closed; akñeëa—whose eyes;
pütanäyäù—of the witch Pütanä; mahä-ojasaù—whose power was very great;
pétaù—drunk; stanaù—the breast; saha—along with; präëaiù—her life air;
kälena—by the force of time; iva—as; vayaù—the life span; tanoù—of a
material body.
TRANSLATION
As a mere infant who had hardly yet opened His eyes, He drank the breast
milk of the powerful demoness Pütanä and then sucked out her very life air as
well, just as the force of time sucks out the youth of one's body.
PURPORT
The word vayaù in this verse indicates youth or life span in general. With
irresistible power, time takes away our life, and that time is actually Lord
Kåñëa Himself. Thus in the case of the powerful witch Pütanä, Lord Kåñëa
accelerated the time process and within an instant withdrew the duration of
her life. Here the cowherd men mean to say, "How could a mere infant who
could barely open His eyes so easily kill a very powerful demoness?"
TEXT 5
ih"nvataAe'Da: zAyaAnasya
maAsyasya car"NAAvaud"k,(
@naAe'pataiã"payaRstaM
ç&d"ta: ‘apad"Ah"tama,
hinvato 'dhaù çayänasya
mäsyasya caraëäv udak
ano 'patad viparyastaà
rudataù prapadähatam
SYNONYMS
hinvataù—moving; adhaù—beneath; çayänasya—of Him who was lying;
mäsyasya—the child only a few months old; caraëau—His two feet;
udak—upwards; anaù—the cart; apatat—fell; viparyastam—turned
upside-down; rudataù—of Him who was crying; prapada—by the tip of the
foot; ähatam—struck.
TRANSLATION
Once, when only three months old, little Kåñëa was crying and kicking up
His feet as He lay beneath a huge cart. Then the cart fell and turned
upside-down simply because it was struck by the tip of His toe.
TEXT 6
Wk(h"Ayana @As$aInaAe
ioe"yamaANAAe ivah"Ayas$aA
dE"tyaena yasta{NAAvataRma,
@h"na, k(NQ&ƒah"Ataur"ma,
eka-häyana äséno
hriyamäëo vihäyasä
daityena yas tåëävartam
ahan kaëöha-grahäturam
SYNONYMS
eka-häyanaù—one year old; äsénaù—sitting; hriyamäëaù—being taken away;
vihäyasä—in the sky; daityena—by the demon; yaù—who; tåëävartam—named
Tåëävarta; ahan—killed; kaëöha—his neck; graha—by being seized;
äturam—tormented.
TRANSLATION
At the age of one, while sitting peacefully He was taken up into the sky by
the demon Tåëävarta. But baby Kåñëa grabbed the demon's neck, causing him
great pain, and thus killed him.
PURPORT
The cowherd men, who loved Kåñëa as an ordinary child, were astonished
by all these activities. A newborn infant cannot ordinarily kill a powerful
witch, and one would hardly think that a one-year-old baby could kill a demon
who has kidnapped him and carried him up into the sky. But Kåñëa did all of
these wonderful things, and the cowherd men were enhancing their love for
Him by remembering and discussing His activities.
TEXT 7
¸(icaÜE"yaËÿvastaEnyae
maA‡aA baÜ" oäU"Kalae
gAcC$ªajauRnayaAemaRDyae
baAò"ByaAM taAvapaAtayata,
kvacid dhaiyaìgava-stainye
mäträ baddha udükhale
gacchann arjunayor madhye
bähubhyäà täv apätayat
SYNONYMS
kvacit—once; haiyaìgava—butter; stainye—engaged in stealing; mäträ—by
His mother; baddhaù—bound up; udükhale—to a large mortar;
gacchan—moving; arjunayoù—the twin arjuna trees; madhye—between;
bähubhyäm—by His hands; tau apätayat—He made them fall.
TRANSLATION
Once, His mother tied Him with ropes to a mortar because she had caught
Him stealing butter. Then, crawling on His hands, He dragged the mortar
between a pair of arjuna trees and pulled them down.
PURPORT
The two arjuna trees were old and thick, and they towered above little
Kåñëa's courtyard. Nevertheless, they were pulled down quite easily by the
naughty child.
TEXT 8
vanae s$aÂaAr"yana, vats$aAna,
s$ar"AmaAe baAlakE(va{Rta:
h"ntauk(AmaM bakM( d"AeByaA<
mauKataAe'ir"mapaAq%yata,
vane saïcärayan vatsän
sa-rämo bälakair våtaù
hantu-kämaà bakaà dorbhyäà
mukhato 'rim apäöayat
SYNONYMS
vane—in the forest; saïcärayan—grazing; vatsän—the calves;
sarämaù—together with Lord Balaräma; bälakaiù—by the cowherd boys;
våtaù—surrounded; hantu-kämam—desiring to kill; bakam—the demon Baka;
dorbhyäm—with His arms; mukhataù—from the mouth; arim—the enemy;
apäöayat—tore apart.
TRANSLATION
Another time, when Kåñëa was tending the calves in the forest together with
Balaräma and the cowherd boys, the demon Bakäsura came with the intention
of killing Kåñëa. But Kåñëa seized this inimical demon by the mouth and tore
him apart.
TEXT 9
vats$aeSau vats$aè&paeNA
‘aivazAntaM ijaGaAMs$ayaA
h"tvaA nyapaAtayaÔaena
k(ipatTaAina ca laIlayaA
vatseñu vatsa-rüpeëa
praviçantaà jighäàsayä
hatvä nyapätayat tena
kapitthäni ca lélayä
SYNONYMS
vatseñu—among the calves; vatsa-rüpeëa—appearing as if another calf;
praviçantam—who had entered; jighäàsayä—wanting to kill; hatvä—killing
him; nyapätayat—He made to fall; tena—by him; kapitthäni—the kapittha
fruits; ca—and; lélayä—as a sport.
TRANSLATION
Desiring to kill Kåñëa, the demon Vatsa disguised himself as a calf and
entered among Kåñëa's calves. But Kåñëa killed the demon and, using his body,
enjoyed the sport of knocking kapittha fruits down from the trees.
TEXT 10
h"tvaA r"As$aBadE"taeyaM
taß"nDaUMê balaAinvata:
ca‚e( taAlavanaM ºaemaM
pair"pa¸(P(laAinvatama,
hatvä räsabha-daiteyaà
tad-bandhüàç ca balänvitaù
cakre täla-vanaà kñemaà
paripakva-phalänvitam
SYNONYMS
hatvä—killing; räsabha—who appeared as a jackass; daiteyam—the descendant
of Diti; tat-bandhün—the demon's companions; ca—and;
bala-anvitaù—accompanied by Balaräma; cakre—He made; täla-vanam—the
Tälavana forest; kñemam—auspicious; paripakva—fully ripened; phala—with
fruits; anvitam—filled.
TRANSLATION
Together with Lord Balaräma, Kåñëa killed the jackass demon and all his
friends, thereby securing the safety of the Tälavana forest, which abounded
with fully ripened palm fruits.
PURPORT
Long, long ago, the powerful demons Hiraëyakaçipu and Hiraëyäkña were
born of the goddess Diti. Therefore demons are commonly called daiteyas or
daityas, meaning "descendants of Diti." Dhenukäsura, the ass demon, terrorized
the Täla forest with his friends, but Çré Kåñëa and Çré Balaräma killed them
just as modern governments kill terrorists who harass innocent people.
TEXT 11
‘alambaM GaAtaiyatvaAeƒaM
balaena balazAAilanaA
@maAecayaä," ˜ajapazAUna,
gAAepaAMêAr"Nyavai¶"ta:
pralambaà ghätayitvograà
balena bala-çälinä
amocayad vraja-paçün
gopäàç cäraëya-vahnitaù
SYNONYMS
pralambam—the demon named Pralamba; ghäyayitvä—arranging to be killed;
ugram—terrible; balena—by Lord Balaräma; bala-çälinä—who is very
powerful; amocayat—He liberated; vraja-paçün—the animals of Vraja;
gopän—the cowherd boys; ca—and; äraëya—of the forest; vahnitaù—from the
fire.
TRANSLATION
After arranging for the mighty Lord Balaräma to kill the terrible demon
Pralamba, Kåñëa saved Vraja's cowherd boys and their animals from a forest
fire.
TEXT 12
@AzAIivaSatamaAh"In‰M"
d"imatvaA ivamadM" oe"d"Ata,
‘as$a÷Aeã"Asya yamaunaAM
ca‚e('s$aAE inaivaRSaAed"k(Ama,
äçé-viñatamähéndraà
damitvä vimadaà hradät
prasahyodväsya yamunäà
cakre 'sau nirviñodakäm
SYNONYMS
äçé—of his fangs; viña-tama—having the most powerful poison; ahi—of the
snakes; indram—the chief; damitvä—subduing; vimadam—whose pride was
removed; hradät—from the lake; prasahya—by force; udväsya—sending him
away; yamunäm—the river Yamunä; cakre—made; asau—He; nirviña—free
from poison; udakäm—its water.
TRANSLATION
Kåñëa chastised the most poisonous serpent, Käliya, and after humbling him
He drove him forcibly from the lake of the Yamunä. In this way the Lord made
the water of that river free of the snake's powerful poison.
TEXT 13
äu"styajaêAnaur"AgAAe'ismana,
s$avaeRSaAM naAe ˜ajaAEk(s$aAma,
nand" tae tanayae'smaAs$au
tasyaApyaAEtpaiÔak(: k(Tama,
dustyajaç cänurägo 'smin
sarveñäà no vrajaukasäm
nanda te tanaye 'smäsu
tasyäpy autpattikaù katham
SYNONYMS
dustyajaù—impossible to give up; ca—and; anurägaù—loving affection;
asmin—for Him; sarveñäm—on the part of all; naù—us; vraja-okasäm—the
residents of Vraja; nanda—dear Nanda Mahäräja; te—your; tanaye—for the
son; asmäsu—toward us; tasya—on His part; api—also; autpattikaù—natural;
katham—how.
TRANSLATION
Dear Nanda, how is it that we and all the other residents of Vraja cannot
give up our constant affection for your son? And how is it that He is so
spontaneously attracted to us?
PURPORT
The very word kåñëa means "the all-attractive one." The residents of
Våndävana could not give up their constant love (anuräga) for Lord Kåñëa.
Their attitude toward Him was not particularly theistic, because they were
unsure whether He was God or not. But He attracted all their love precisely
because as God He is the all-attractive person, the supreme object of our love.
The cowherd men also asked, "How is it that young Kåñëa feels such
constant love for us?" In fact the Supreme Lord loves all living beings, who are
eternally His children. At the end of the Bhagavad-gétä, Lord Kåñëa
dramatically declares His affection for Arjuna and urges Arjuna to reciprocate
that love by surrendering to Him. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, in His prayers to
Lord Kåñëa, states, etädåçé tava kåpä bhagavan mamäpi durdaivam édåçam ihäjani
nänurägaù: "My Lord, You are so merciful toward Me, but I am so unfortunate
that love for You has not awakened within Me." (Çikñäñöaka 2) In this
statement Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu also uses the word anuräga. Our
misfortune is that we cannot reciprocate the anuräga, or loving affection, that
the Lord feels for us. Although we are infinitesimal and insignificant and the
Lord is infinitely attractive, somehow we do not give Him our love. We must
accept responsibility for this foolish decision, since to surrender to God or not
is the essential expression of our free will.
The Kåñëa consciousness movement provides an efficient, systematic
program to help conditioned souls revive their original, blissful consciousness,
which is love of God, Kåñëa consciousness. The intricacies of Kåñëa
consciousness are so wonderful that even Kåñëa's eternal associates, the
residents of Våndävana, are astonished by them, as shown by these verses.
TEXT 14
¸( s$aæah"AyanaAe baAla:
¸( mah"Ai‰"ivaDaAr"NAma,
tataAe naAe jaAyatae zAÆÿA
˜ajanaATa tavaAtmajae
kva sapta-häyano bälaù
kva mahädri-vidhäraëam
tato no jäyate çaìkä
vraja-nätha tavätmaje
SYNONYMS
kva—where, in comparison; sapta-häyanaù—seven years old; bälaù—this boy;
kva—where; mahä-adri—of the great mountain; vidhäraëam—the lifting;
tataù—thus; naù—for us; jäyate—arises; çaìkä—doubt; vraja-nätha—O
master of Vraja; tava—your; ätmaje—concerning the son.
TRANSLATION
On the one hand this boy is only seven years old, and on the other we see
that He has lifted the great hill Govardhana. Therefore, O King of Vraja, a
doubt about your son arises within us.
TEXT 15
™aInand" ovaAca
™aUyataAM mae vacaAe gAAepaA
vyaetau zAÆÿA ca vaAe'BaR$ke(
Wnamku(maAr"mauiÚ"zya
gAgAAeR mae yaäu"vaAca h"
çré-nanda uväca
çrüyatäà me vaco gopä
vyetu çaìkä ca vo 'rbhake
enam kumäram uddiçya
gargo me yad uväca ha
SYNONYMS
çré-nandaù uväca—Çré Nanda Mahäräja said; çrüyatäm—please hear; me—my;
vacaù—words; gopäù—my dear cowherd men; vyetu—let it go away;
çaìkä—the doubt; ca—and; vaù—your; arbhake—concerning the boy;
enam—this; kumäram—to the child; uddiçya—referring; gargaù—the sage
Garga; me—to me; yat—which; uväca—spoke; ha—in the past.
TRANSLATION
Nanda Mahäräja replied: O cowherd men, just hear my words and let all
your doubts concerning my son be gone. Some time ago Garga Muni spoke to
me as follows about this boy.
PURPORT
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé comments, "The words previously heard from
Gargäcärya awakened Nanda Mahäräja to the truth about Kåñëa, and thus, by
Nanda's constantly remembering His activities, all thoughts about their being
impossible ceased in him. Now he is instructing the cowherd men with these
same words."
TEXT 16
vaNAARñya: ik(laAsyaAs$ana,
gA{õ"taAe'nauyaugAM tanaU:
zAuflaAe r"l(staTaA paIta
wd"AnaI%M k{(SNAtaAM gAta:
varëäs trayaù kiläsyäsan
gåhëato 'nu-yugaà tanüù
çuklo raktas tathä péta
idänéà kåñëatäà gataù
SYNONYMS
varëäù trayaù—three colors; kila—indeed; asya—by your son Kåñëa;
äsan—were assumed; gåhëataù—accepting; anu-yugam tanüù—transcendental
bodies according to the different yugas; çuklaù-sometimes white;
raktaù—sometimes red; tathä—as well as; pétaù—sometimes yellow; idäném
kåñëatäm gataù—at the present moment He has assumed a blackish color.
TRANSLATION
[Garga Muni had said:] Your son Kåñëa appears as an incarnation in every
millennium. In the past He assumed three different colors-white, red and
yellow-and now He has appeared in a blackish color.
PURPORT
This and the next six verses (17 through 22) are taken from the eighth
chapter of this canto, in which Garga Muni instructs Nanda Mahäräja about
Nanda's son Kåñëa. The translations found herein for these verses are based on
those of His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda. In Chapter
Eight, where the verses originally appear, the reader will find extensive
purports by Çréla Prabhupäda.
TEXT 17
‘aAgAyaM vas$aude"vasya
¸(icaÀaAtastavaAtmaja:
vaAs$aude"va wita ™aImaAna,
@iBaÁaA: s$am‘acaºatae
prägayaà vasudevasya
kvacij jätas tavätmajaù
väsudeva iti çrémän
abhijïäù sampracakñate
SYNONYMS
präk—before; ayam—this child; vasudevasya—of Vasudeva;
kvacit—sometimes; jätaù—was born; tava—your; ätmajaù—Kåñëa, who has
taken birth as your child; väsudevaù—therefore He may be given the name
Väsudeva; iti—thus; çrémän—very beautiful; abhijïäù—those who are learned;
sampracakñate—also say that Kåñëa is Väsudeva.
TRANSLATION
For many reasons, this beautiful son of yours sometimes appeared previously
as the son of Vasudeva. Therefore, those who are learned sometimes call this
child Väsudeva.
TEXT 18
baó"ina s$ainta naAmaAina
è&paAiNA ca s$autasya tae
gAuNA k(maARnauè&paAiNA
taAnyahM" vaed" naAe janaA:
bahüni santi nämäni
rüpäëi ca sutasya te
guëa -karmänurüpäëi
täny ahaà veda no janäù
SYNONYMS
bahüni—various; santi—there are; nämäni—names; rüpäëi—forms; ca—also;
sutasya—of the son; te—your; guëa-karma-anurüpäëi—according to His
attributes and activities; täni—them; aham—I; veda—know; na u janäù—not
ordinary persons.
TRANSLATION
For this son of yours there are many forms and names according to His
transcendental qualities and activities. These are known to me, but people in
general do not understand them.
TEXT 19
WSa va: ™aeya @ADaAsyaä,"
gAAepagAAeku(lanand"na:
@naena s$avaRäu"gAARiNA
yaUyamaÃastair"SyaTa
eña vaù çreya ädhäsyad
gopa-gokula-nandanaù
anena sarva-durgäëi
yüyam aïjas tariñyatha
SYNONYMS
eñaù—this child; vaù—for all of you people; çreyaù ädhäsyat—will act
all-auspiciously; gopa-gokula-nandanaù—just like a cowherd boy born in a
family of cowherd men as the son of the estate of Gokula; anena—by Him;
sarva-durgäëi—all kinds of miserable conditions; yüyam—all of you;
aïjaù—easily; tariñyatha—will overcome.
TRANSLATION
To increase the transcendental bliss of the cowherd men of Gokula, this
child will always act auspiciously for you. And by His grace only, you will
surpass all difficulties.
TEXT 20
paur"Anaena ˜ajapatae
s$aADavaAe d"syaupaIix"taA:
@r"Ajake( r"ºyamaANAA
ijagyaudR"syaUna, s$amaeiDataA:
puränena vraja-pate
sädhavo dasyu-péòitäù
aräjake rakñyamäëä
jigyur dasyün samedhitäù
SYNONYMS
purä—formerly; anena—by Kåñëa; vraja-pate—O King of Vraja;
sädhavaù—those who were honest; dasyu-péòitäù—being disturbed by rogues
and thieves; aräjake—when there was an irregular government;
rakñyamäëäù—were protected; jigyuù—conquered; dasyün—the rogues and
thieves; samedhitäù—flourished.
TRANSLATION
O Nanda Mahäräja, as recorded in history, when there was an irregular,
incapable government, Indra having been dethroned, and when honest people
were being harassed and disturbed by thieves, this child appeared in order to
curb the rogues and to protect the people and enable them to flourish.
TEXT 21
ya Wtaismanmah"ABaAgAe
‘aIitaM ku(vaRinta maAnavaA:
naAr"yaAe'iBaBavantyaetaAna,
ivaSNAupaºaAinavaAs$aur"A:
ya etasmin mahä-bhäge
prétià kurvanti mänaväù
närayo 'bhibhavanty etän
viñëu-pakñän iväsuräù
SYNONYMS
ye—those persons who; etasmin—unto this child; mahä-bhäge—most
auspicious; prétim—affection; kurvanti—execute; mänaväù—such persons;
na—not; arayaù—their enemies; abhibhavanti—do overcome; etän—those
who are attached to Kåñëa; viñëu-pakñän—the demigods, who always have
Lord Viñëu on their side; iva—like; asuräù—the demons.
TRANSLATION
Demons cannot harm the demigods, who always have Lord Viñëu on their
side. Similarly, any person or group attached to all-auspicious Kåñëa cannot be
defeated by enemies
PURPORT
Çréla Prabhupäda has especially indicated in this connection that just as
Lord Kåñëa's associates could not be defeated by Kaàsa, so His modern-day
devotees will not be defeated by their demoniac opponents, nor will the Lord's
devotees be defeated by the internal enemies—the lusty, materialistic senses.
TEXT 22
tasmaAªand" ku(maAr"Ae'yaM
naAr"AyaNAs$amaAe gAuNAE:
i™ayaA k(LtyaARnauBaAvaena
tatk(maRs$au na ivasmaya:
tasmän nanda kumäro 'yaà
näräyaëa-samo guëaiù
çriyä kértyänubhävena
tat-karmasu na vismayaù
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; nanda—O Nanda Mahäräja; kumäraù—child; ayam—this;
näräyaëa-samaù—is as good as Näräyaëa; guëaiù—by His qualities; çriyä—by
His opulence; kértyä—especially by His name and fame; anubhävena—and by
His influence; tat—His; karmasu—concerning the activities; na—there is no;
vismayaù—surprise.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O Nanda Mahäräja, this child of yours is as good as Näräyaëa. In
His transcendental qualities, opulence, name, fame and influence, He is exactly
like Näräyaëa. Thus you should not be astonished hy His activities.
PURPORT
Nanda here reports to the cowherd men the concluding remarks of Garga
Muni, who spoke at the secret birth ceremony of Lord Kåñëa.
TEXT 23
wtyaÜ"A maAM s$amaAid"zya
gAgAeR ca svagA{hM" gAtae
manyae naAr"AyaNAsyaAMzAM
k{(SNAmaiflaí"k(Air"NAma,
ity addhä mäà samädiçya
garge ca sva-gåhaà gate
manye näräyaëasyäàçaà
kåñëam akliñöa-käriëam
SYNONYMS
iti—thus speaking; addhä—directly; mäm—me; samädiçya—advising;
garge—Gargäcärya; ca—and; sva-gåham—to his home; gate—going; manye—I
consider; näräyaëasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa;
aàçam—an empowered expansion; kåñëam—Kåñëa; akliñöa-käriëam—who
keeps us free from misery.
TRANSLATION
[Nanda Mahäräja continued:] After Garga Åñi spoke these words to me and
returned home, I began to consider that Kåñëa, who keeps us free from trouble,
is actually an expansion of Lord Näräyaëa.
TEXT 24
wita nand"vaca: ™autvaA
gAgARgAItaM taM ˜ajaAEk(s$a:
mauid"taA nand"maAnacauR:
k{(SNAM ca gAtaivasmayaA:
iti nanda-vacaù çrutvä
garga-gétaà taà vrajaukasaù
muditä nandam änarcuù
kåñëaà ca gata-vismayäù
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; nanda-vacaù—the words of Nanda Mahäräja; çrutvä—hearing;
garga-gétam—the statements of Garga Åñi; vraja-okasaù—the residents of
Vraja; muditäù—enlivened; nandam—Nanda Mahäräja; änarcuù—they
honored; kåñëam—Lord Kåñëa; ca—and; gata—gone; vismayäù—their
perplexity.
TRANSLATION
[Çukadeva Gosvämé continued:] Having heard Nanda Mahäräja relate the
statements of Garga Muni, the residents of Våndävana became enlivened. Their
perplexity was gone, and they worshiped Nanda and Lord Kåñëa with great
respect.
PURPORT
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé explains that in this verse the word änarcuù indicates
that the residents of Våndävana honored Nanda and Kåñëa with such offerings
as fragrances, garlands and garments brought from their homes. Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura adds that the residents of Våndävana honored
Nanda and Kåñëa with loving offerings of jewels and gold coins. Apparently,
Lord Kåñëa was playing in the forest when this conversation took place, so
when He returned home the residents of Våndävana encouraged Him by
decorating Him with beautiful yellow garments, necklaces, armlets, earrings
and crowns, and by shouting, "All glories, all glories to the jewel of
Våndävana!"
TEXT 25
de"vae vaSaRita yaÁaivaplavaç&SaA va†aAsmavaSaARinalaE:
s$aId"tpaAlapazAuiñyaAtmazAr"NAM ä{"î"Anauk(mpyautsmayanautpaAq"YaEk(k(re"NA zAElamabalaAe
laIlaAeicC$laIn‹aM yaTaA
iba”aÕ"Aeï"mapaAnmahe"n‰"mad"iBat‘aIyaAªa wn‰"Ae gAvaAma,
deve varñati yajïa-viplava-ruñä vajräsma-varñänilaiù
sédat-päla-paçu-striy ätma-çaraëaà dåñövänukampy utsmayan utpäöyaika-kareëa
çailam abalo lélocchiléndhraà yathä
bibhrad goñöham apän mahendra-mada-bhit préyän na indro gaväm
SYNONYMS
deve—when the demigod Indra; varñati—caused rain; yajïa—of his sacrifice;
viplava—due to the disturbances; ruñä—out of anger; vajra—with lightning
bolts; açma-varña—hail; anilaiù—and winds; sédat—suffering; päla—the
cowherds; paçu—animals; stri—and women; ätma—Himself; çaraëam—being
their only shelter; dåñövä—seeing; anukampé—very compassionate by nature;
utsmayan—smiling broadly; utpäöya—picking up; eka-kareëa—in one hand;
çailam—the hill, Govardhana; abalaù—a small child; lélä—in play;
ucchiléndhram—a mushroom; yathä—just as; bibhrat—He held; goñöham—the
cowherd community; apät—He protected; mahä-indra—of King Indra;
mada—of the false pride; bhit—the destroyer; préyät—may He be satisfied;
naù—with us; indraù—the Lord; gaväm—of the cows.
TRANSLATION
Indra became angry when his sacrifice was disrupted, and thus he caused
rain and hail to fall on Gokula, accompanied by lightning and powerful winds,
all of which brought great suffering to the cowherds, animals and women there.
When Lord Kåñëa, who is by nature always compassionate, saw the condition of
those who had only Him as their shelter, He smiled broadly and lifted
Govardhana Hill with one hand, just as a small child picks up a mushroom to
play with it. Holding up the hill, He protected the cowherd community. May
He, Govinda, the Lord of the cows and the destroyer of Indra's false pride, be
pleased with us.
PURPORT
The word indra means "lord" or "king." Thus in this verse Kåñëa is pointedly
called indro gaväm, "the Lord of the cows." In fact, He is the real Indra, the real
ruler, of everyone, and the demigods are merely His servants, representing His
supreme will.
It is apparent from this and the previous verses in this chapter that Lord
Kåñëa's lifting of Govardhana Hill made quite an impression on the simple
cowherd men of Våndävana, and they repeatedly remembered this feat.
Certainly anyone who soberly and objectively considers the activities of young
Kåñëa will surrender to Him and become His eternal devotee in loving
devotional service. That is the rational conclusion one should come to after
reading this chapter.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Tenth Canto, Twenty-sixth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Wonderful Kåñëa."
27. Lord Indra and Mother Surabhi Offer Prayers
This chapter describes how the Surabhi cow and Indra, having seen the
amazing power of Lord Kåñëa, performed a bathing ceremony for Him.
Ashamed of having attacked Våndävana with a violent storm, Indra
secretly came before Lord Kåñëa, offered obeisances and praised Him. Indra
stated that although Çré Kåñëa is never caught in the current of material
illusion, which is born of ignorance, He nevertheless accepts a humanlike body
and performs various activities to establish religious principles and chastise the
wicked. By this means He crushes the false prestige of those who presume
themselves great controllers. Indra went on to declare that Kåñëa is the father,
guru and Lord of all living entities, and that in the form of time He is the
agent of their punishment.
Satisfied with Indra's prayers, Çré Kåñëa told him that He had stopped the
indra-yajïa so that Indra, puffed up as he was with false pride, would remember
the Lord. Persons intoxicated by material opulence never see Him standing
before them with the rod of punishment in His hand. Therefore if Lord Kåñëa
desires the actual good fortune of some person, He brings him down from his
position of opulence.
Lord Kåñëa ordered Indra to return to his proper position in heaven and to
serve there without egotism. Indra, along with the cow Surabhi, then
performed a bathing ceremony for Kåñëa, using the water of the heavenly
Ganges and the milk of mother Surabhi. Indra and the cow took this
opportunity to bestow upon the Lord the name Govinda, and the demigods
showered flowers and recited various prayers.
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
gAAevaDaR"nae Da{tae zAElae
@As$aAr"A‰"iºatae ˜ajae
gAAelaAek(Ad"A˜ajatk{(SNAM
s$aur"iBa: zA‚( Wva ca
çré-çuka uväca
govardhane dhåte çaile
äsäräd rakñite vraje
go-lokäd ävrajat kåñëaà
surabhiù çakra eva ca
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; govardhane—Govardhana;
dhåte—having been held; çaile—the hill; äsärät—from the rainfall;
rakñite—having been protected; vraje—Vraja; go-lokät—from the planet of
the cows; ävrajat—came; kåñëam—to Kåñëa; surabhiù—mother Surabhi;
çakraù—Indra; eva—also; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: After Kåñëa had lifted Govardhana Hill and thus
protected the inhabitants of Vraja from the terrible rainfall, Surabhi, the
mother of the cows, came from her planet to see Kåñëa. She was accompanied
by Indra.
PURPORT
The word go-lokät here indicates the material planet called Goloka which is
filled with exceptional cows. Surabhi went joyfully to see Lord Kåñëa, but
Indra went fearfully. As indicated by this verse, Lord Kåñëa had to adopt
extraordinary measures to protect His Våndävana associates from Indra's
obnoxious and offensive attack. Certainly Indra was ashamed, and also
nervous about his future. Having acted improperly, he had fearfully gone to
seek the shelter of Lord Brahmä, who then ordered him to take along Surabhi
from the material Goloka planet and go to see Kåñëa.
TEXT 2
ivaival( opas$aËÿmya
˜aIx"Ita: k{(tahe"lana:
pas$pazAR paAd"yaAere"naM
ik(r"Iqe%naAkR(vacaRs$aA
vivikta upasaìgamya
vréòétaù kåta-helanaù
pasparça pädayor enaà
kiréöenärka-varcasä
SYNONYMS
vivikte—in a solitary place; upasaìgamya—approaching; vréòitaù—ashamed;
kåta-helanaù—having committed offense; pasparça—he touched;
pädayoù—upon His feet; enam—Him; kiréöena—with his helmet; arka—like
the sun; varcasä—the effulgence of which.
TRANSLATION
Indra was very ashamed of having offended the Lord. Approaching Him in a
solitary place, Indra fell down and lay his helmet, whose effulgence was as
brilliant as the sun, upon the Lord's lotus feet.
PURPORT
The specific "solitary place" where Indra approached Çré Kåñëa is mentioned
by the sage Çré Vaiçampäyana in the Hari-vaàça (Viñëu-parva 19.3): sa
dadarçopaviñöaà vai govardhana-çilä-tale. "He saw Him [Kåñëa] sitting at the
base of Govardhana Hill."
From the commentaries of the äcäryas we understand that Lord Kåñëa
wanted to provide a solitary meeting for Indra so that he would not be further
humiliated. Indra came to surrender and beg forgiveness, and the Lord allowed
him to do so privately.
TEXT 3
ä{"í"™autaAnauBaAvaAe'sya
k{(SNAsyaAimatataejas$a:
naí"i‡alaAeke(zAmad"
wd"maAh" k{(taAÃaila:
dåñöa-çrutänubhävo 'sya
kåñëasyämita-tejasaù
nañöa-tri-lokeça-mada
idam äha kåtäïjaliù
SYNONYMS
dåñöa—seen; çruta—heard; anubhävaù—the power; asya—of this;
kåñëasya—Lord Kåñëa; amita—immeasurable; tejasaù—whose potencies;
nañöa—destroyed; tri-loka—of the three worlds; éça—of being the lord;
madaù—his intoxication; idam—these words; äha—spoke;
kåta-aïjaliù—joining his palms in supplication.
TRANSLATION
Indra had now heard of and seen the transcendental power of omnipotent
Kåñëa, and his false pride in being the lord of the three worlds was thus
defeated. Holding his hands together in supplication, he addressed the Lord as
follows.
TEXT 4
wn‰" ovaAca
ivazAuÜ"s$aÔvaM tava DaAma zAAntaM
tapaAemayaM Dvastar"jastamas$k(ma,
maAyaAmayaAe'yaM gAuNAs$am‘avaAh"Ae
na ivaâtae tae ƒah"NAAnaubanDa:
indra uväca
viçuddha-sattvaà tava dhäma çäntaà
tapo-mayaà dhvasta-rajas-tamaskam
mäyä-mayo 'yaà guëa-sampraväho
na vidyate te grahaëänubandhaù
SYNONYMS
indraù uväca—Indra said; viçuddha-sattvam—manifesting transcendental
goodness; tava—Your; dhäma—form; çäntam—changeless; tapaù-mayam—full
of knowledge; dhvasta—destroyed; rajaù—the mode of passion;
tamaskam—and the mode of ignorance; mäyä-mayaù—based on illusion;
ayam—this; guëa—of the modes of material nature; sampravähaù—the great
flux; na vidyate—is not present; te—within You; agrahaëa-ignorance;
anubandhaù-which is due to.
TRANSLATION
King Indra said: Your transcendental form, a manifestation of pure
goodness, is undisturbed by change, shining with knowledge and devoid of
passion and ignorance. In You does not exist the mighty flow of the modes of
material nature, which is based on illusion and ignorance.
PURPORT
The great Bhägavatam commentator Çréla Çrédhara Svämé has masterfully
explained the Sanskrit elements of this profound verse.
The Sanskrit word dhäma has several meanings: a) dwelling place, house,
abode and so on; b) a favorite thing or person; delight; or pleasure; c) form or
appearance; d) power, strength, majesty, glory, splendor or light.
Concerning the first set of meanings, the Vedänta-sütra states that the
Absolute Truth is the source and resting place of all existence, and in the first
verse of the Bhägavatam that Absolute Truth is said to be Kåñëa. Although
Lord Kåñëa exists in His own dhäma, or abode, called Kåñëaloka, He Himself is
the abode of all existence, as Arjuna confirms in the Bhagavad-gétä, where he
addresses Kåñëa as paraà dhäma, "the supreme abode."
The very name Kåñëa indicates the all-attractive person, and thus Lord
Kåñëa, the source of all beauty and pleasure, is certainly "the favorite thing or
person; delight; and pleasure." Ultimately these terms can refer only to Kåñëa.
Dhäma also refers to form or appearance, and as Indra offered these prayers
he was in fact directly seeing the form of Kåñëa before him.
As clearly explained in the Vedic literature, Lord Kåñëa's power, strength,
majesty, splendor and effulgence are all contained within His transcendental
body and thus attest to the infinite glories of the Lord.
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé has brilliantly summarized all these meanings of the
word dhäma by giving the Sanskrit term svarüpa as a synonym. The word
svarüpa means "one's own form or shape" and also "one's own condition,
character or nature." Since Lord Kåñëa, being pure spirit, is nondifferent from
His body, there is absolutely no difference between the Lord and His visible
form. By contrast, in this material world we conditioned souls are all distinctly
different from our bodies, whether those bodies be male, female, black, white
or whatever. All of us are eternal souls, different from our temporary, flimsy
bodies.
When the word svarüpa is applied to us, it especially indicates our spiritual
form, because our "own form" is in fact our "own condition, character or
nature" eternally. Thus the liberated condition in which one's outward form is
one's deepest spiritual nature is called svarüpa. Primarily, however, this term
refers to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa. This is all indicated
in this verse by the words tava dhäma, as explained by Çrédhara Svämé.
Çrédhara Svämé has explained that here the word çäntam means "always in
the same form." Çäntam can also mean "undisturbed, free from passion, or
purified." According to Vedic philosophy, all change in this world is caused by
the influence of passion and ignorance. The passionate mode is creative, and
the ignorant mode is destructive, whereas the mode of goodness, sattva, is
serene and sustaining. In many ways this verse emphasizes that Lord Kåñëa is
free from the modes of nature. The words viçuddha-sattvam, çäntam,
dhvasta-rajas-tamaskam and guëa-sampraväho na vidyate te all indicate this.
Unlike Kåñëa, we change from one body to another because of our
involvement with the modes of nature; the various transformations of material
forms are impelled by the modes of nature, which are themselves set in motion
by the influence of time. Therefore one who is free from the material modes of
nature is changeless and eternally satisfied in blissful spiritual existence. Thus
the word çäntam indicates that the Lord is undisturbed by change, since He is
free from the material modes of nature.
According to this verse, the powerful flow of the material modes of
nature—namely passion, stupidity and mundane piety—are based on
agrahaëa, which Çréla Çrédhara Svämé has translated as "ignorance." Since the
Sanskrit root graù means "to take, accept, grasp or comprehend," grahaëa
means "grasp" exactly in the sense of "to grasp an idea or fact." Therefore
agrahaëa here means one's failure to understand one's spiritual position, and
this failure causes one to fall into the violent currents of material existence.
An additional meaning of the word agrahaëa is derived when it is divided
into the compound agra-haëa. Agra means "the first, top or best," and hana
means "killing." The best part of our existence is the pure soul, which is
eternal, in contradistinction to the temporary, material body and mind. Thus
one who chooses material existence over Kåñëa consciousness is in fact killing
the best part of himself, the soul, which in its pure state can enjoy Kåñëa
consciousness unlimitedly.
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé has translated tapo-mayam as "full of knowledge." The
word tapas, generally indicating "austerity," is derived from the Sanskrit verb
tap, whose meaning can be summarized as indicating the various functions of
the sun. Tap means "to burn, to shine, to heat and so on." The Supreme Lord is
eternally perfect, and therefore here tapo-mayam does not indicate that His
transcendental body is meant for austerities, since austerities are performed by
conditioned souls to purify themselves or to acquire a particular power. An
omnipotent, perfect being neither purifies Himself nor acquires power: He is
eternally pure and all-powerful. Therefore Çrédhara Svämé has intelligently
understood that in this case the word tapas refers to the illuminating function
of the sun and thus indicates that the Lord's self-effulgent body is omniscient.
Light is a common symbol of knowledge. The Lord's spiritual effulgence does
not merely illuminate physically, as in the case of a candle or light bulb; more
importantly, the Lord's body illuminates our consciousness with perfect
knowledge because the Lord's effulgence is itself perfect knowledge.
We offer our respectful obeisances at the lotus feet of Çréla Çrédhara Svämé
and thank him for his enlightening comments on this verse.
TEXT 5
ku(taAe nau taÜe"tava wRzA tatk{(taA
laAeBaAd"yaAe yae'bauDailangABaAvaA:
taTaAipa d"NxM" BagAvaAna, ibaBaitaR
DamaRsya gAuptyaE Kalainaƒah"Aya
kuto nu tad-dhetava éça tat-kåtä
lobhädayo ye 'budha-linga-bhäväù
tathäpi daëòaà bhagavän bibharti
dharmasya guptyai khala-nigrahäya
SYNONYMS
kutaù—how; nu—certainly; tat—of that (existence of the material body);
hetavaù—the causes; éça—O Lord; tat-kåtäù—produced by one's connection
with the material body; lobha-ädayaù—greed and so forth; ye—which;
abudha—of an ignorant person; linga-bhäväù—symptoms; tathä
api—nevertheless; daëòam—punishment; bhagavän—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; bibharti—wields; dharmasya—of the principles of
religion; guptyai—for the protection; khala—of wicked persons;
nigrahäya—for the chastisement.
TRANSLATION
How, then, could there exist in You the symptoms of an ignorant
person—such as greed, lust, anger and envy—which are produced by one's
previous involvement in material existence and which cause one to become
further entangled in material existence? And yet as the Supreme Lord You
impose punishment to protect religious principles and curb down the wicked.
PURPORT
This complex philosophical statement by Indra may be analyzed as follows:
In the first line of this verse, Indra refers to the main idea expressed at the end
of the previous verse—namely, that the great currents of material existence,
which are based on ignorance, cannot possibly exist within the Supreme Lord.
The words tad-dhetavaù and tat-kåtäù indicate that something causes the
modes of nature to manifest, and that they in turn become the cause of that
which caused them. In the second line of this verse, we find that it is material
feelings such as greed, lust, envy and anger that cause the modes of nature to
manifest and that are themselves caused by the modes of nature.
The explanation of this seeming paradox is as follows: When the
conditioned soul decides to associate with the material qualities, he becomes
contaminated by those qualities. As stated in the Gétä (13.22), käraëaà
guëa-saìgo 'sya sad-asad-yoni-janmasu. For example, in the presence of a
seductive woman, a man may give in to his lower instincts and try to enjoy sex
with her. By his deciding to associate with the lower qualities of nature, those
qualities manifest in him very powerfully. He is overwhelmed with lust and
driven to try again and again to satisfy his burning desire. Because his mind
has been infected by lust, all that he does, thinks and speaks will be influenced
by his strong attachment to sex. In other words, by choosing to associate with
the lusty qualities of nature, he has caused them to powerfully manifest within
himself, and eventually those lusty qualities themselves will cause him to
accept another material body suitable for affairs governed by those qualities.
The lower qualities, such as lust, greed, anger and envy, are
abudha-liìga-bhäväù, symptoms of ignorance. Indeed, as indicated by Çréla
Çrédhara Svämé in his commentary, the manifestation of the modes of nature is
synonymous with the manifestation of a particular material body. It is clearly
explained throughout the Vedic literature that the conditioned soul receives a
particular body, gives it up and then accepts another simply because of his
involvement with the modes of nature(käraëaà guëa-saìgo 'sya [Bg. 13.22]).
Thus to say that one is participating in the modes of nature is to say that one is
accepting particular types of bodies suitable for the particular material
qualities one is involved with.
An ignorant bystander might have simplistically interpreted Kåñëa's
pastime of lifting Govardhana Hill as follows: The residents of Våndävana
were obliged by Vedic principles to make certain offerings to the god of
heaven, Indra. Child Kåñëa, ignoring the position of Indra, usurped these
offerings and took them for His own pleasure. When Indra tried to punish
Kåñëa and His associates, the Lord frustrated Indra's attempt, humiliated him,
and exhausted his pride and resources.
But this superficial interpretation is refuted in this verse. Here Lord Indra
addresses Çré Kåñëa as bhagavän, indicating that He is not an ordinary child
but in fact God. Therefore Kåñëa's punishing Indra was part of His mission of
protecting religious principles and curbing down the envious; it was not a
display of material anger or of greed for the offerings meant for Indra. Çré
Kåñëa is pure spiritual existence, and His simple, sublime desire is to engage all
living beings in the perfect, blissful life of Kåñëa consciousness. Kåñëa's desire
to make us Kåñëa conscious is not egotistical, since ultimately Kåñëa is
everything and Kåñëa consciousness is objectively the best consciousness. Lord
Indra is really the humble servant of Kåñëa, a fact he is now beginning to
remember.
TEXT 6
ipataA gAuç&stvaM jagAtaAmaDaIzAAe
äu"r"tyaya: k(Ala opaAÔad"Nx":
ih"taAya caecC$AtanauiBa: s$amaIh"s$ae
maAnaM ivaDaunvana, jagAd"IzAmaAinanaAma,
pitä gurus tvaà jagatäm adhéço
duratyayaù käla upätta-daëòaù
hitäya cecchä-tanubhiù saméhase
mänaà vidhunvan jagad-éça-mäninäm
SYNONYMS
pitä—the father; guruù—the spiritual master; tvam—You; jagatäm—of the
entire universe; adhéçaù—the supreme controller;
duratyayaù—insurmountable; kälaù—time; upätta—wielding;
daëòaù—punishment; hitäya—for the benefit; ca—and; icchä—assumed by
Your own free will; tanubhiù—by Your transcendental forms; saméhase—You
endeavor; mänam—the false pride; vidhunvan—eradicating; jagat-éça—lords of
the universe; mäninäm—of those who presume themselves to be.
TRANSLATION
You are the father and spiritual master of this entire universe, and also its
supreme controller. You are insurmountable time, imposing punishment upon
the sinful for their own benefit. Indeed, in Your various incarnations, selected
by Your own free will, You act decisively to remove the false pride of those who
presume themselves masters of this world.
PURPORT
The word hitäya is significant here. Lord Kåñëa protects religion and
chastises the wicked for the benefit of the entire universe. Foolish and
faithless pseudopriests criticize God for punishing the living entities through
the actions of nature. But whether Lord Kåñëa punishes them indirectly
through nature or directly in His incarnations, as mentioned here, He has a
perfect right to do so because He is the father, spiritual master and supreme
ruler of the entire universe. Another way He curbs down the false attempts of
the conditioned souls to establish the kingdom of God without God is through
His feature as insurmountable time. It is said, "Spare the rod and spoil the
child." That is a fact, and it is actually the Lord's mercy that He takes the
trouble to rectify our misbehavior, although faithless persons criticize the
Lord's fatherly vigilance.
TEXT 7
yae maiã"DaAÁaA jagAd"IzAmaAinanas$a,
tvaAM vaIºya k(Alae'BayamaAzAu tanmad"ma,
ih"tvaAyaRmaAgA< ‘aBajantyapasmayaA
wRh"A KalaAnaAmaipa tae'nauzAAs$anama,
ye mad-vidhäjïä jagad-éça-mäninas
tväà vékñya käle 'bhayam äçu tan-madam
hitvärya-märgaà prabhajanty apasmayä
éhä khalänäm api te 'nuçäsanam
SYNONYMS
ye—those who; mat-vidha—like me; ajïäù—foolish persons; jagat-éça—as lords
of the universe; mäninaù—falsely identifying themselves; tväm—You;
vékñya—seeing; käle—at time (of fear); abhayam—fearless; äçu—quickly;
tat—their; madam—false pride; hitvä—abandoning; ärya—of devotees
progressing in spiritual life; märgam—the path; prabhajanti—they take to
fully; apa-smayäù—free of pride; éhä—the activity; khalänäm—of the wicked;
api—indeed; te—by You; anuçäsanam—the instruction.
TRANSLATION
Even fools like me, who proudly think themselves universal lords, quickly
give up their conceit and directly take to the path of the spiritually progressive
when they see You are fearless even in the face of time. Thus You punish the
mischievous only to instruct them.
PURPORT
History is filled with examples of the supreme authority breaking the
conceit of foolish men. Modern world leaders proudly fight one another,
placing the common people in unprecedented jeopardy. Similarly Indra, proud
of his apparently illustrious position, dared to threaten the lives of the
innocent residents of Våndävana with terrible weapons, until his arrogance
was curbed by the dynamic response of the Supreme Lord.
Nowadays, governments in the Western countries tend to be elected
democratically, and thus the mass of people become identified with the destiny
of their leaders. When the proud leaders engage in violence, the people who
elected them bear the brunt of such belligerent decisions. Thus the people in
the democratic nations of the world should elect Kåñëa conscious leaders, who
will establish an administration consonant with the laws of God. If they fail to
do so, their materialistic leaders, oblivious of the will of the Supreme Lord, will
undoubtedly be chastised by cataclysmic events, and the people who elected
such leaders, being responsible for their leaders' acts, will share in the
suffering.
It is ironic that in modern democracies not only do the leaders consider
themselves universal controllers, but the mass of people, considering the
leaders merely their representatives rather than the representatives of God,
also consider themselves, as a people, to be the controllers of their nation.
Thus the chastisement mentioned in this verse has become unprecedentedly
applicable to people in general in the modern world.
Modern man should not simply make himself a lesson of nature by falling
down from his proud position; rather he should submissively execute the will of
the all-attractive Personality of Godhead, the Absolute Truth, Çré Kåñëa, and
usher in a new era of sanity, tranquillity and widespread enlightenment.
TEXT 8
s$a tvaM mamaEìyaRmad"plautasya
k{(taAgAs$astae'ivaäu"Sa: ‘aBaAvama,
ºantauM ‘aBaAe'TaAhR"is$a maUX#caetas$aAe
maEvaM paunaBaURnmaitar"IzA mae's$ataI
sa tvaà mamaiçvarya-mada-plutasya
kåtägasas te 'viduñaù prabhävam
kñantuà prabho 'thärhasi müòha-cetaso
maivaà punar bhün matir éça me 'saté
SYNONYMS
saù—He; tvam—Yourself; mama—of me; aiçvarya—of rulership; mada—in
the intoxication; plutasya—who is submerged; kåta—having committed;
ägasaù—sinful offense; te—Your; aviduñaù—not knowing; prabhävam—the
transcendental influence; kñantum—to forgive; prabho—O master;
atha—therefore; arhasi—You should; müòha—foolish; cetasaù—whose
intelligence; mä—never; evam—thus; punaù—again; bhüt—may it be;
matiù—consciousness; éça—O Lord; me—my; asaté—impure.
TRANSLATION
Engrossed in pride over my ruling power, ignorant of Your majesty, I
offended You. O Lord, may You forgive me. My intelligence was bewildered,
but let my consciousness never again be so impure.
PURPORT
Although Lord Kåñëa protected the residents of Vraja by lifting
Govardhana Hill, He had not yet punished Indra himself, and Indra feared
that at any moment Çré Kåñëa might call the son of Vivasvän, Yamaräja, who
punishes impudent persons who defy the laws of God.
Indra was quite fearful and thus begged the Lord's forgiveness on the plea
that he could be purified only by Kåñëa's mercy—that he was too stubborn to
learn a good lesson through mere punishment.
In fact, despite Indra's humility in this case, his heart was not completely
purified. Later on in this canto we find that when Lord Kåñëa once took a
pärijäta flower from Indra's kingdom, poor Indra again reacted violently
against the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus, we should aspire to go back
to our eternal home in the kingdom of Kåñëa, and should not become
entangled in the imperfect life of the material gods.
TEXT 9
tavaAvataAr"Ae'yamaDaAeºajaeh"
BauvaAe Bar"ANAAmauç&BaAr"janmanaAma,
camaUpataInaAmaBavaAya de"va
BavaAya yauSma»ar"NAAnauvaitaRnaAma,
tavävatäro 'yam adhokñajeha
bhuvo bharäëäm uru-bhära-janmanäm
camü-paténäm abhaväya deva
bhaväya yuñmac-caraëänuvartinäm
SYNONYMS
tava—Your; avatäraù—descent; ayam—this; adhokñaja—O transcendental
Lord; iha—into this world; bhuvaù—of the earth; bharäëäm—who constitute a
great burden; uru-bhära—to many disturbances; janmanäm—who have given
rise; camü-paténäm—of military leaders; abhaväya—for the destruction;
deva—O Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhaväya—for the auspicious
benefit; yuñmat—Your; caraëa—lotus feet; anuvartinäm—of those who serve.
TRANSLATION
You descend into this world, O transcendent Lord, to destroy the warlords
who burden the earth and create many terrible disturbances. O Lord, you
simultaneously act for the welfare of those who faithfully serve Your lotus feet.
PURPORT
This verse utilizes an attractive poetic device. Lord Kåñëa's descent into the
world is said to be for the abhava, literally "nonexistence" or "destruction," of
the demoniac warlords, and simultaneously for the bhava, or "existence,
prosperity," of those who faithfully serve the Lord's lotus feet.
True existence, indicated here by the word bhava, is sac-cid-änanda, eternal
and full of bliss and knowledge. To an uninformed observer, it may appear that
Çré Kåñëa is simply rewarding His followers and punishing His enemies the way
any ordinary person might do. This specific doubt about the Lord is raised
extensively in the Sixth Canto in connection with Kåñëa's taking the side of
the faithful demigods against the faithless demons in a particular cosmic war.
In that canto the Vaiñëava authorities clearly explain that in fact Lord Kåñëa
is the father and Lord of all living beings and that all His activities are
therefore meant for the benefit of all existence. Lord Kåñëa does not really
cause the nonexistence of anyone; rather He curbs the foolish, destructive,
material ways of those who defy the laws of God. These laws are created to
ensure the prosperity, harmony and happiness of the entire creation, and their
violation is an unjustifiable disturbance.
Certainly Indra hoped that Lord Kåñëa would count him among the
devotees and not the demons, although considering Indra's actions one might
doubt where his loyalties actually lay. Indra was aware of this possible doubt
and thus, as we find in the next verse, he tried his best to surrender to the
Supreme Lord.
TEXT 10
namastauByaM BagAvatae
pauç&SaAya mah"Atmanae
vaAs$aude"vaAya k{(SNAAya
s$aAtvataAM patayae nama:
namas tubhyaà bhagavate
puruñäya mahätmane
väsudeväya kåñëäya
sätvatäà pataye namaù
SYNONYMS
namaù—obeisances; tubhyam—unto You; bhagavate—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; puruñäya—the Lord dwelling within the hearts of all;
mahä-ätmane—the great Soul; väsudeväya—to Him who dwells everywhere;
kåñëäya—Çré Kåñëa; sätvatäm—of the Yadu dynasty; pataye—to the master;
namaù—obeisances.
TRANSLATION
Obeisances unto You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the great Soul,
who are all-pervading and who reside in the hearts of all. My obeisances unto
You, Kåñëa, the chief of the Yadu dynasty.
TEXT 11
svacC$nd"AepaAÔade"h"Aya
ivazAuÜ"ÁaAnamaUtaRyae
s$avaRsmaE s$avaRbaIjaAya
s$avaRBaUtaAtmanae nama:
svacchandopätta-dehäya
viçuddha-jïäna-mürtaye
sarvasmai sarva-béjäya
sarva-bhütätmane namaù
SYNONYMS
sva—of His own (devotees); chanda—according to the desire; upätta—who
assumes; dehäya—His transcendental bodies; viçuddha—perfectly pure;
jïäna—knowledge; mürtaye—whose form; sarvasmai—to Him who is
everything; sarva-béjäya—who is the seed of all; sarva-bhüta—of all created
beings; ätmane—who is the indwelling Soul; namaù—obeisances.
TRANSLATION
Unto Him who assumes transcendental bodies according to the desires of
His devotees, unto Him whose form is itself pure consciousness, unto Him who
is everything, who is the seed of everything and who is the Soul of all creatures,
I offer my obeisances.
PURPORT
We could hardly construe from the first line of this verse that God is
somehow impersonal but assumes a personal material body. It is clearly said
here that the Lord assumes different forms according to
svacchanda—according to His own desire or according to the desires of His
devotees. An impersonal God could hardly reciprocate with the personal
desires of Its devotees, nor could an impersonal God Itself have desires, since
desire is characteristic of personality. Therefore, the Lord's manifesting
different forms in a personal way, responding to personal desires, indicates
that He is eternally a person and manifests His different transcendental bodies
as an expression of His own eternal nature.
The word viçuddha-jïäna-mürtaye is most significant. Mürti means the form
of the Deity, and it is specifically stated here that the Lord's form is itself
completely pure consciousness. Consciousness is the primary spiritual element,
distinct from any of the material elements, and even distinct from the subtle
or psychological material elements—mundane mind, intelligence and false
ego—which are simply a psychic covering over pure consciousness. Since the
Lord's form is made of pure consciousness, it can hardly be understood as a
material body like the mortal bags of flesh and bones we carry around in this
world.
In the last two lines of this verse, there is poetic emphasis on the word
sarva, "everything." The Lord is everything: He is the seed of everything and
He is the Soul of every creature. Therefore, let us join with Indra in offering
our obeisances to the Lord.
TEXT 12
mayaedM" BagAvana, gAAeï"-
naAzAAyaAs$aAr"vaAyauiBa:
caeií"taM ivah"tae yaÁae
maAinanaA taI˜amanyaunaA
mayedaà bhagavan goñöhanäçäyäsära-
väyubhiù
ceñöitaà vihate yajïe
mäninä tévra-manyunä
SYNONYMS
mayä—by me; idam—this; bhagavan—O Lord; goñöha—of Your cowherd
community; näçäya—for the destruction; äsära—by hard rain; väyubhiù—and
wind; ceñöitam—enacted; vihate—when it was disrupted; yajïe—my sacrifice;
mäninä—(by me) who was falsely proud; tévra—fierce; manyunä—whose
anger.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, when my sacrifice was disrupted I became fiercely angry
because of false pride. Thus I tried to destroy Your cowherd community with
severe rain and wind.
TEXT 13
tvayaezAAnaugA{h"ItaAe'isma
DvastastamBaAe va{TaAeâma:
wRìrM" gAuç&maAtmaAnaM
tvaAmahM" zAr"NAM gAta:
tvayeçänugåhéto 'smi
dhvasta-stambho våthodyamaù
éçvaraà gurum ätmänaà
tväm ahaà çaraëaà gataù
SYNONYMS
tvayä—by You; éça—O Lord; anugåhétaù—shown mercy; asmi—I am;
dhvasta—shattered; stambhaù—my false pride; våthä—fruitless; udyamaù—my
attempt; éçvaram—the Supreme Lord; gurum—the spiritual master;
ätmänam—the true Self; tväm—to You; aham—I; çaraëam—for shelter;
gataù—have come.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, You have shown mercy to me by shattering my false pride and
defeating my attempt [to punish Våndävana]. To You, the Supreme Lord,
spiritual master and Supreme Soul, I have now come for shelter.
TEXT 14
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
WvaM s$aÆÿLitaRta: k{(SNAAe
maGaAenaA BagAvaAnamauma,
maeGagAmBaIr"yaA vaAcaA
‘ah"s$aiªad"ma“avaIta,
çré-çuka uväca
evaà saìkértitaù kåñëo
maghonä bhagavän amum
megha-gambhérayä väcä
prahasann idam abravét
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—in this manner;
saìkértitaù—glorified; kåñëaù—Lord Kåñëa; maghonä—by Indra;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; amum—to him; megha—like
the clouds; gambhérayä—grave; väcä—with words; prahasan—smiling;
idam—the following; abravét—spoke.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Thus glorified by Indra, Lord Kåñëa, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, smiled and then spoke to him as follows in a voice
resonant like the clouds.
PURPORT
Although in this pastime Lord Kåñëa appeared to be a small boy, the words
megha-gambhérayä väcä indicate that He spoke to Indra with the deep,
resonant voice of the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 15
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
mayaA tae'k(Air" maGavana,
maKaBaËÿAe'naugA{õ"taA
mad"nausma{tayae inatyaM
maÔasyaen‰"i™ayaA Ba{zAma,
çré-bhagavän uväca
mayä te 'käri maghavan
makha-bhaìgo 'nugåhëatä
mad-anusmåtaye nityaà
mattasyendra-çriyä bhåçam
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; mayä—by Me;
te—unto you; akäri—has been done; maghavan—My dear Indra; makha—of
your sacrifice; bhaìgaù—the stopping; anugåhëatä—acting to show mercy to
you; mat-anusmåtaye—for the sake of remembrance of Me; nityam—constant;
mattasya—of one intoxicated; indra-çriyä—with the opulence of Indra;
bhåçam—greatly.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Indra, it was out of
mercy that I stopped the sacrifice meant for you. You were greatly intoxicated
by your opulence as King of heaven, and I wanted you to always remember Me.
PURPORT
According to Çrédhara Svämé, Indra and Lord Kåñëa here exchange a
heart-to-heart talk. Indra revealed his mind to the Lord, and now Lord Kåñëa
similarly reveals His own intention.
In Text 11 of this chapter, Indra emphatically declared that Lord Kåñëa is in
fact everything, and thus, according to Indra's own criteria, forgetting Lord
Kåñëa is clearly a state of insanity. When the Supreme Lord reminds us of His
supreme existence, He is not proudly advertising Himself like a mundane
politician or entertainer. The Lord is self-satisfied in His own infinite
existence and is trying, lovingly, to bring us back to our own perfect existence
as His eternal associates.
From God's point of view even the mighty King of heaven, Indra, is a mere
child—and a naughty child at that—and thus the Lord, being a caring father,
punished His child and brought him back to the sanity of Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 16
maAmaEìyaR™aImad"AnDaAe
d"Nx" paAiNAM na pazyaita
taM ”aMzAyaAima s$ampaà"YaAe
yasya caecC$Amyanauƒah"ma,
mäm aiçvarya-çré-madändho
daëòa päëià na paçyati
taà bhraàçayämi sampadbhyo
yasya cecchämy anugraham
SYNONYMS
mäm—Me; aiçvarya—of his power; çré—and opulence; mada—by the
intoxication; andhaù—rendered blind; daëòa—with the rod of punishment;
päëim—in My hand; na paçyati—one does not see; tam—him; bhraàçayämi—I
make fall; sampadbhyaù—from his material assets; yasya—for whom; ca—and;
icchämi—I desire; anugraham—benefit.
TRANSLATION
A man blinded by intoxication with his power and opulence cannot see Me
nearby with the rod of punishment in My hand. If I desire his real welfare, I
drag him down from his materially fortunate position.
PURPORT
One may argue, "God should desire everyone's real welfare; therefore why
should Lord Kåñëa state in this verse that He removes the intoxicating
opulence of one who is about to receive His mercy, rather than simply stating
that He will remove everyone's opulence and bless everyone?" On the other
hand, we may point out that irrevocable death occurs for everyone, and thus
Lord Kåñëa does take away everyone's opulence and everyone's false pride.
However, if we apply the Lord's statement to events within one's immediate
life, before death, we may refer to Kåñëa's statement in the Bhagavad-gétä
(4.11): ye yathä mäà prapadyante täàs tathaiva bhajämy aham. "As people
surrender to Me, I reward them accordingly." Lord Kåñëa desires everyone's
welfare, but when He says here yasya cecchämy anugraham, "for one whose
welfare I desire," it is understood that the Lord refers to those who by their
own activities and thoughts have manifested a desire to achieve spiritual
benefit. Lord Kåñëa wants everyone to be happy in Kåñëa consciousness, but
when He sees that a specific person also desires spiritual happiness, the Lord
especially desires it for that person. This is a natural act of reciprocation
consistent with the Lord's statement samo 'haà sarva-bhüteñu: "I am equal in
My attitude to all living beings." (Bg. 9.29)
TEXT 17
gAmyataAM zA‚( Ba‰M" va:
i‚(yataAM mae'nauzAAs$anama,
sTaIyataAM svaAiDak(Are"Sau
yaulE(vaR: stamBavaijaR#taE:
gamyatäà çakra bhadraà vaù
kriyatäà me 'nuçäsanam
sthéyatäà svädhikäreñu
yuktair vaù stambha-varjitaiù
SYNONYMS
gamyatäm—you may go; çakra—O Indra; bhadram—good fortune; vaù—unto
you; kriyatäm—you should execute; me—My; anuçäsanam—order;
sthéyatäm—you may remain; sva—in your own; adhikäreñu—responsibilities;
yuktaiù—soberly engaged; vaù—you; stambha—false pride; varjitaiù—devoid
of.
TRANSLATION
Indra, you may now go. Execute My order and remain in your appointed
position as King of heaven. But be sober, without false pride.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa here addresses Indra in the plural form (vaù) because this grave
instruction was meant to be a lesson for all the demigods.
TEXT 18
@TaAh" s$aur"iBa: k{(SNAma,
@iBavanâ manaisvanaI
svas$antaAnaEç&paAman‡ya
gAAepaè&ipaNAmaIìr"ma,
athäha surabhiù kåñëam
abhivandya manasviné
sva-santänair upämantrya
gopa-rüpiëam éçvaram
SYNONYMS
atha-then; äha-spoke; surabhiù-the mother of the cows, Surabhi; kåñëam—to
Kåñëa; abhivandya—offering respects; manasviné—peaceful in mind;
sva-santänaiù—together with her progeny, the cows; upämantrya—begging for
His attention; gopa-rüpiëam—appearing as a cowherd boy; éçvaram—the
Supreme Lord.
TRANSLATION
Mother Surabhi, along with her progeny, the cows, then offered her
obeisances to Lord Kåñëa. Respectfully requesting His attention, the gentle lady
addressed the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who was present before her as a
cowherd boy.
PURPORT
The statement here that the heavenly cow Surabhi approached Lord Kåñëa
along with her progeny (sva-santänaiù) is a reference to the transcendental
cows who play with Lord Kåñëa in Våndävana. Although Lord Kåñëa's cows are
transcendental, the heavenly cow Surabhi affectionately saw them, as indeed
Lord Kåñëa Himself did, as related to her. Since Lord Kåñëa was appearing in
the form of a cowherd boy, the whole situation was quite congenial, and
Surabhi took the opportunity to offer the following prayers.
TEXT 19
s$aur"iBaç&vaAca
k{(SNA k{(SNA mah"AyaAeigAna,
ivaìAtmana, ivaìs$amBava
BavataA laAek(naATaena
s$anaATaA vayamacyauta
surabhir uväca
kåñëa kåñëa mahä-yogin
viçvätman viçva-sambhava
bhavatä loka-näthena
sa-näthä vayam acyuta
SYNONYMS
surabhiù uväca—Surabhi said; kåñëa kåñëa—O Kåñëa, Kåñëa; mahä yogin—O
greatest of mystics; viçva-ätman—O Soul of the universe; viçva-sambhava—O
origin of the universe; bhavatä—by You; loka näthena—the master of the
world; sa-näthäù—having a master; vayam—we; acyuta—O infallible one.
TRANSLATION
Mother Surabhi said: O Kåñëa, Kåñëa, greatest of mystics! O Soul and origin
of the universe! You are the master of the world, and by Your grace, O
infallible Lord, we have You as our master.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura points out here that mother Surabhi
is feeling great ecstasy as she repeats the words "Kåñëa, Kåñëa." Kåñëa lifted
Govardhana Hill by His mystic power and thus protected the cows of
Våndävana, whereas her so-called master, Indra, had tried to kill them. Thus
Surabhi now clearly understands that it is not the demigods but rather the
Supreme God, Kåñëa Himself, who is her real master forever.
TEXT 20
tvaM na: par"makM( dE"vaM
tvaM na wn‰"Ae jagAtpatae
BavaAya Bava gAAeiva‘a
de"vaAnaAM yae ca s$aADava:
tvaà naù paramakaà daivaà
tvaà na indro jagat-pate
bhaväya bhava go-vipra
devänäà ye ca sädhavaù
SYNONYMS
tvam—You; naù—our; paramakam—supreme; daivam—worshipable Deity;
tvam—You; naù—our; indraù—Lord Indra; jagat-pate—O master of the
universe; bhaväya—for the welfare; bhava—please be; go—of the cows;
vipra—the brähmaëas; devänäm—and the demigods; ye—who; ca—and;
sädhavaù—saintly persons.
TRANSLATION
You are our worshipable Deity. Therefore, O Lord of the universe, for the
benefit of the cows, the brähmaëas, the demigods and all other saintly persons,
please become our Indra.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord is self-sufficient: He can do everything Himself. The
Lord appointed one of His innumerable children to the position of Indra, the
lord of the cosmic heaven. But Indra abused his authority, and now Surabhi
requests Lord Kåñëa, the Absolute Truth, to directly become her Lord, her
Indra. We should carefully perform our duties without false pride; thus we will
not become obsolete and embarrassed, as in the present case of King Indra,
who actually attacked Lord Kåñëa and His Våndävana devotees.
TEXT 21
wn‰M" nastvaAiBaSaeºyaAmaAe
“aöNAA caAeid"taA vayama,
@vataINAAeR'is$a ivaìAtmana,
BaUmaeBaARr"ApanauÔayae
indraà nas tväbhiñekñyämo
brahmaëä coditä vayam
avatérëo 'si viçvätman
bhümer bhäräpanuttaye
SYNONYMS
indram—as Indra; naù—our; tvä—to You; abhiñekñyämaù—we shall perform
the bathing ceremony of coronation; brahmaëä—by Lord Brahmä;
coditäù—ordered; vayam—we; avatérëaù asi—You have descended;
viçva-ätman—O Soul of the universe; bhümeù—of the earth; bhära—the
burden; apanuttaye—in order to alleviate.
TRANSLATION
As ordered by Lord Brahmä, we shall perform Your bathing ceremony to
coronate You as Indra. O Soul of the universe, You descend to this world to
relieve the burden of the earth.
PURPORT
Surabhi makes it quite clear in this verse that she has had enough of the
leadership of imperfect demigods like Purandara (Indra), and now she is
determined to directly serve the Supreme Lord. Since Brahmä has ordered her,
her attempt to coronate Lord Kåñëa as her personal Lord is authorized by
higher authority. Moreover, Lord Kåñëa Himself comes down to the earth to
relieve the burden of self-destructive, mundane administration, and thus it is
perfectly consistent with the Lord's own purpose that He become the Lord of
Surabhi. Since the Lord rules millions of universes, He can certainly take care
of mother Surabhi.
In fact, Surabhi wanted to bathe the Lord for her own purification, and she
earnestly makes her proposal to Viçvätmä, the Soul of the universe, Çré Kåñëa.
TEXTS 22-23
Za{wRzAuk( ovaAca
WvaM k{(SNAmaupaAman‡ya
s$aur"iBa: payas$aAtmana:
jalaEr"Ak(AzAgAËÿAyaA
Wer"Avatak(r"Aeä,"Da{taE:
wn‰": s$aur"iSaRiBa: s$aAkM(
caAeid"taAe de"vamaAta{iBa:
@Byais$aÂata d"AzAAh<"
gAAeivand" wita caAByaDaAta,
çåé-çuka uväca
evaà kåñëam upämantrya
surabhiù payasätmanaù
jalair äkäça-gaìgäyä
airävata-karoddhåtaiù
indraù surarñibhiù säkaà
codito deva-mätåbhiù
abhyasiïcata däçärhaà
govinda iti cäbhyadhät
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—thus; kåñëam—Lord
Kåñëa; upämantrya—requesting; surabhiù—mother Surabhi; payasä—with
milk; ätmanaù—her own; jalaiù—with the water; äkäça-gaìgäyäù—of the
Ganges flowing through the heavenly region (known as the Mandäkiné);
airävata—of Indra's carrier, the elephant Airävata; kara—by the trunk;
uddhåtaiù—carried; indraù—Lord Indra; sura—by the demigods; åñibhiù—and
the great sages; säkam—accompanied; coditaù—inspired; deva—of the
demigods; mätåbhiù—by the mothers (headed by Aditi); abhyasiïcata—he
bathed; däçärham—Lord Kåñëa, the descendant of King Daçärha; govindaù
iti—as Govinda; ca—and; abhyadhät-he named the Lord.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Having thus appealed to Lord Kåñëa, mother
Surabhi performed His bathing ceremony with her own milk, and Indra,
ordered by Aditi and other mothers of the demigods, anointed the Lord with
heavenly Gaìgä water from the trunk of Indra's elephant carrier, Airävata.
Thus, in the company of the demigods and great sages, Indra coronated Lord
Kåñëa, the descendant of Daçärha, and gave Him the name Govinda.
PURPORT
According to the äcäryas, because Indra was embarrassed by his blunder of
attacking Våndävana, he was reluctant to worship the Lord. Therefore the
heavenly mothers, such as Aditi, encouraged him to go ahead and do so.
Feeling authorized by the encouragement of demigods less offensive than he,
Indra then bathed the Lord. Indra discovered that the beautiful cowherd boy
named Kåñëa is indeed the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 24
ta‡aAgAtaAstaumbauç&naAr"d"Ad"yaAe
gAnDavaRivaâADar"is$aÜ"caAr"NAA:
jagAuyaRzAAe laAek(malaApahM" h"re":
s$aur"AËÿnaA: s$aªana{taumauRd"AinvataA:
taträgatäs tumburu-näradädayo
gandharva-vidyädhara-siddha-cäraëäù
jagur yaço loka-maläpahaà hareù
suräìganäù sannanåtur mudänvitäù
SYNONYMS
tatra—to that place; ägatäù—coming; tumburu—the Gandharva named
Tumburu; närada—Närada Muni; ädayaù—and other demigods;
gandharva-vidyädhara-siddha-cäraëäù—the Gandharvas, Vidyädharas, Siddhas
and Cäraëas; jaguù—sang; yaçaù—the glories; loka—of the entire world;
mala—the contamination; apaham—which eradicate; hareù—of Lord Hari;
sura—-of the demigods; aìganäù—the wives; sannanåtuù—danced together;
mudä anvitäù—filled with joy.
TRANSLATION
Tumburu, Närada and other Gandharvas, along with the Vidyädharas,
Siddhas and Cäraëas, came there to sing the glories of Lord Hari, which purify
the entire world. And the wives of the demigods, filled with joy, danced
together in the Lord's honor.
TEXT 25
taM tauí]"vaudeR"vainak(Ayake(tavaAe
÷vaAik(rM"êAàu"tapauSpava{ií"iBa:
laAek(A: par"AM inava{RitamaA«auvaMñyaAe
gAAvastad"A gAAmanayana, payaAeåu"taAma,
taà tuñöuvur deva-nikäya-ketavo
hy aväkiraàç cädbhuta-puñpa-våñöibhiù
lokäù paräà nirvåtim äpnuvaàs trayo
gävas tadä gäm anayan payo-drutäm
SYNONYMS
tam—Him; tuñöuvuù—praised; deva-nikäya—of all the demigods; ketavaù—the
most eminent; hi—indeed; aväkiran—they covered Him; ca—and;
adbhuta—amazing; puñpa—of flowers; våñöibhiù—with showers; lokäù—the
worlds; paräm—supreme; nirvåtim—satisfaction; äpnuvan—experienced;
trayaù—three; gävaù—the cows; tadä—then; gäm—the earth;
anayan—brought; payaù—with their milk; drutäm—to saturation.
TRANSLATION
The most eminent demigods chanted the praises of the Lord and scattered
wonderful showers of flowers all around Him. All three worlds felt supreme
satisfaction, and the cows drenched the surface of the earth with their milk.
PURPORT
The word ketavaù means, literally, "banners." The leading demigods are the
emblems, or banners, of the demigod race, and they took the lead in glorifying
the Lord and covering Him with an amazing shower of multicolored, fragrant
flowers.
TEXT 26
naAnaAr"s$aAEGaA: s$air"taAe
va{ºaA @As$anmaDau›avaA:
@k{(í"pacyaAESaDayaAe
igAr"yaAe'iba”anaunmaNAIna,
nänä-rasaughäù sarito
våkñä äsan madhu-sraväù
akåñöa-pacyauñadhayo
girayo 'bibhran un maëén
SYNONYMS
nänä—various; rasa—liquids; oghäù—flooding; saritaù—the rivers;
våkñäù—the trees; äsan—became; madhu—with sweet sap; sraväù—flowing;
akåñöa—even without cultivation; pacya—ripened; oñadhayaù—the plants;
girayaù—the mountains; abibhran—carried; ut—above the ground;
maëén—jewels.
TRANSLATION
Rivers flowed with various kinds of tasty liquids, trees exuded honey, edible
plants came to maturity without cultivation, and hills gave forth jewels formerly
hidden in their interiors.
TEXT 27
k{(SNAe'iBaiSal( WtaAina
s$avaARiNA ku(ç&nand"na
inavaE=r"ANyaBavaMstaAta
‚U(r"ANyaipa inas$agARta:
kåñëe 'bhiñikta etäni
sarväëi kuru-nandana
nirvairäëy abhavaàs täta
krüräëy api nisargataù
SYNONYMS
kåñëe—Lord Kåñëa; abhiñikte—having been bathed; etäni—these; sarväëi—all;
kuru-nandana—O beloved of the Kuru dynasty; nirvairäëi—free from enmity;
abhavan—became; täta—my dear Parékñit; krüräëi—vicious; api—although;
nisargataù—by nature.
TRANSLATION
O Parékñit, beloved of the Kuru dynasty, upon the ceremonial bathing of
Lord Kåñëa, all living creatures, even those cruel by nature, became entirely
free of enmity.
PURPORT
Those corrupted by a type of sophisticated cynicism may mock these
descriptions of a paradisiacal world situation effected simply by worshiping the
Supreme Lord. Unfortunately, modern man has created a hell on earth in his
cynical rejection of heaven on earth, which is actually possible through Kåñëa
consciousness. The situation described here, created simply by the auspicious
bathing ceremony of the Lord, is an authentic historical incident. Since
history repeats itself, there is hope that the Kåñëa consciousness movement
may again bring the world community to the brilliant reality of self-realized
existence.
TEXT 28
wita gAAegAAeku(lapaitaM
gAAeivand"maiBaiSacya s$a:
@nauÁaAtaAe yayaAE zA‚(Ae
va{taAe de"vaAid"iBaidR"vama,
iti go-gokula-patià
govindam abhiñicya saù
anujïäto yayau çakro
våto devädibhir divam
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; go—of the cows; go-kula—and of the community of cowherds;
patim—the master; govindam—Lord Kåñëa; abhiñicya—bathing; saù—he,
Indra; anujïätaù—given permission; yayau—went; çakraù—King Indra;
våtaù—surrounded; deva-ädibhiù—by the demigods and others; divam—to
heaven.
TRANSLATION
After he had ceremonially bathed Lord Govinda, who is the master of the
cows and the cowherd community, King Indra took the Lord's permission and,
surrounded by the demigods and other higher beings, returned to his heavenly
abode.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Tenth Canto, Twenty-seventh Chapter,
of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Lord Indra and Mother Surabhi Offer
Prayers."
28. Kåñëa Rescues Nanda Mahäräja from the Abode of
Varuëa
This chapter describes how Lord Kåñëa brought Nanda Mahäräja back from
the abode of Varuëa and how the cowherd men saw Vaikuëöha.
The king of the cowherds, Nanda Mahäräja, observed the prescribed fast on
the eleventh day of the lunar month and then considered how to break his fast
properly on the twelfth day. By circumstance only a few more minutes
remained, and so he decided to take his bath at the very end of the night,
although astrologically that was an inauspicious time. Thus he entered the
water of the Yamunä. A servant of Varuëa, the demigod of the ocean, noticed
Nanda Mahäräja entering the water at a time forbidden by scripture and took
him away to the demigod's abode. In the early morning the cowherd men
unsuccessfully searched for Nanda, but Lord Kåñëa immediately understood
the situation and went to see Varuëa. Varuëa worshiped Kåñëa with great and
variegated festivity. Afterwards he begged the Lord to forgive his servant for
having foolishly arrested the king of the cowherds.
Nanda was amazed to see the influence Çré Kåñëa exerted in the court of
Varuëadeva, and after returning home he described his experiences to his
friends and relatives. They all thought Kåñëa must be the Supreme Personality
of Godhead Himself and wanted to see His supreme abode. Thereupon the
omniscient Personality of Godhead arranged for them to bathe in the same
lake where Akrüra would have his vision of the Absolute Truth. There the
Lord revealed to them Brahmaloka, which is realized by great sages in their
mystic trance.
TEXT 1
™aIbaAd"r"AyaiNAç&vaAca
Wk(Ad"zyaAM inar"Ah"Ar":
s$amaByacyaR janaAdR"nama,
µaAtauM nand"stau k(AilanâAM
ã"Ad"zyaAM jalamaAivazAta,
çré-bädaräyaëir uväca
ekädaçyäà nirähäraù
samabhyarcya janärdanam
snätuà nandas tu kälindyäà
dvädaçyäà jalam äviçat
SYNONYMS
çré-bädaräyaëiù uväca—Çré Bädaräyaëi (Çukadeva Gosvämé) said;
ekädaçyäm—on Ekädaçé (the eleventh day of the lunar month);
nirähäraù—fasting; samabhyarcya—having worshiped; janärdanam—Lord
Janärdana, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; snätum—in order to bathe
(before breaking the fast at its prescribed completion); nandaù—Nanda
Mahäräja; tu—but; kälindyäm—in the river Yamunä; dvädaçyäm—on the
twelfth day; jalam—the water; äviçat—entered.
TRANSLATION
Çré Bädaräyaëi said: Having worshiped Lord Janärdana and fasted on the
Ekädaçé day, Nanda Mahäräja entered the water of the Kälindé on the Dvädaçé
to take his bath.
TEXT 2
taM gA{h"ItvaAnayaà{"tyaAe
vaç&NAsyaAs$aur"Ae'intak(ma,
@vaÁaAyaAs$aur"I%M vaelaAM
‘aivaí"maud"kM( inaizA
taà gåhétvänayad bhåtyo
varuëasyäsuro 'ntikam
avajïäyäsuréà veläà
praviñöam udakaà niçi
SYNONYMS
tam—him; gåhétvä—seizing; anayat—brought; bhåtyaù—a servant:
varuëasya-of Varuëa, the lord of the sea; asuraù—demon; antikam—to the
presence (of his master); avajïäya—who had disregarded; äsurém—the
inauspicious ; veläm—time; praviñöam—having entered ; udakam—the water;
niçi—during the night.
TRANSLATION
Because Nanda Mahäräja entered the water in the dark of night,
disregarding that the time was inauspicious, a demoniac servant of Varuëa
seized him and brought him to his master.
PURPORT
Nanda Mahäräja was intent on breaking his fast during the Dvädaçé day, of
which there remained only a few minutes. Thus he entered the water to bathe
at an inauspicious time, before the first dawn light.
The servant of Varuëa who arrested Nanda Mahäräja is stated here to be
an asura, or demon, for obvious reasons. First, the servant was foolishly
ignorant of Nanda Mahäräja's position as the pastime father of the Supreme
Absolute Truth. Also, Nanda Mahäräja's intention was to carry out the
injunctions of scripture; therefore Varuëa's servant should not have arrested
Nanda on the technical grounds that he bathed in the Yamunä at an
inauspicious time. Later in this chapter Varuëa himself will say, ajänatä
mämakena müòhena: "This was done by my ignorant servant, who is a fool."
This foolish servant did not understand the position of Kåñëa or Nanda
Mahäräja or devotional service to the Lord.
In conclusion, it is clear that Lord Kåñëa wanted to give His personal
audience to Varuëa and simultaneously accomplish other didactic purposes.
Thus this wonderful pastime will now unfold.
TEXT 3
cau‚u(zAustamapazyanta:
k{(SNA r"Amaeita gAAepak(A:
BagAvaAMstaäu"pa™autya
ipatarM" vaç&NAAô$tama,
tad"intakM( gAtaAe r"Ajana,
svaAnaAmaBayad"Ae ivaBau:
cukruçus tam apaçyantaù
kåñëa rämeti gopakäù
bhagaväàs tad upaçrutya
pitaraà varuëähåtam
tad-antikaà gato räjan
svänäm abhaya-do vibhuù
SYNONYMS
cukruçuù—they called out loudly; tam—him, Nanda; apaçyantaù—not seeing;
kåñëa—O Kåñëa; räma—O Räma; iti—thus; gopakäù—the cowherd men;
bhagavän—the Supreme Lord, Kåñëa; tat—that; upaçrutya—hearing;
pitaram—His father; varuëa—by Varuëa; ähåtam—taken away; tat—of
Varuëa; antikam—to the presence; gataù—went; räjan—my dear King
Parékñit; svänäm—of His own devotees; abhaya—of fearlessness; daù—the
giver; vibhuù—the almighty Lord.
TRANSLATION
O King, not seeing Nanda Mahäräja, the cowherd men loudly cried out, "O
Kåñëa! O Räma!" Lord Kåñëa heard their cries and understood that His father
had been captured by Varuëa. Therefore the almighty Lord, who makes His
devotees fearless, went to the court of Varuëadeva.
PURPORT
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains that when Nanda Mahäräja went
to bathe in the river, he was accompanied by several cowherd men. When
Nanda did not come out of the water, they began to cry out, and Lord Kåñëa
immediately came there. Understanding the situation, Çré Kåñëa entered the
water and went to the court of the demigod Varuëa, determined to free His
father and the other cowherd men from fear of a mere demigod.
TEXT 4
‘aAæaM vaIºya ô$SaIke(zAM
laAek(paAla: s$apayaRyaA
mah"tyaA paUjaiyatvaAh"
taÚ"zARnamah"Aets$ava:
präptaà vékñya håñékeçaà
loka-pälaù saparyayä
mahatyä püjayitväha
tad-darçana-mahotsavaù
SYNONYMS
präptam—arrived; vékñya—seeing; håñékeçam—Lord Kåñëa, the controller of
the senses; loka—of that planet (the watery regions); pälaù—the presiding
deity (Varuëa); saparyayä—with respectful offerings; mahatyä—elaborate;
püjayitvä—worshiping; äha—spoke; tat—of Lord Kåñëa; darçana—from the
sight; mahä—great; utsavaù—jubilant pleasure.
TRANSLATION
Seeing that the Lord, Håñékeça, had arrived, the demigod Varuëa worshiped
Him with elaborate offerings. Varuëa was in a state of great jubilation upon
seeing the Lord, and he spoke as follows.
TEXT 5
™aIvaç&NA ovaAca
@â mae inaBa{taAe de"h"Ae
'âEvaATaAeR'iDagAta: ‘aBaAe
tvatpaAd"BaAjaAe BagAvaªa,
@vaApau: paAr"maDvana:
çré-varuëa uväca
adya me nibhåto deho
'dyaivärtho 'dhigataù prabho
tvat-päda-bhäjo bhagavann
aväpuù päram adhvanaù
SYNONYMS
çré-varuëaù uväca—Çré Varuëa said; adya—today; me—by me; nibhåtaù—is
carried successfully; dehaù—my material body; adya—today; eva—indeed;
arthaù—the goal of life; adhigataù—is experienced; prabho—O Lord;
tvat—Your; päda—the lotus feet; bhäjaù—those who serve; bhagavan—O
Supreme Personality; aväpuù—have achieved; päram—the state of
transcendence; adhvanaù—of the path (of material existence) .
TRANSLATION
Çré Varuëa said: Now my body has fulfilled its function. Indeed, now the
goal of my life is achieved, O Lord. Those who accept Your lotus feet, O
Personality of Godhead, can transcend the path of material existence.
PURPORT
Varuëa ecstatically exclaims here that since he has now seen the infinitely
gorgeous body of Lord Kåñëa, the trouble of assuming a material body has now
been supremely justified. Indeed, the artha, the goal or real value of Varuëa's
life, has now been achieved. Because Lord Kåñëa's form is transcendental,
those who accept His lotus feet go beyond the boundary of material existence,
and thus only the spiritually unaware would presume that the Lord's lotus feet
are material.
TEXT 6
namastauByaM BagAvatae
“aöNAe par"maAtmanae
na ya‡a ™aUyatae maAyaA
laAek(s$a{ií"ivak(lpanaA
namas tubhyaà bhagavate
brahmaëe paramätmane
na yatra çrüyate mäyä
loka-såñöi-vikalpanä
SYNONYMS
namaù—obeisances; tubhyam—unto You; bhagavate—unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; brahmaëe—the Absolute Truth; parama-ätmane—the
Supreme Soul; na—not; yatra—in whom; çrüyate—is heard of; mäyä—the
illusory, material energy; loka—of this world; såñöi—the creation;
vikalpanä—which arranges.
TRANSLATION
My obeisances unto You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Absolute
Truth, the Supreme Soul, within whom there is no trace of the illusory energy,
which orchestrates the creation of this world.
PURPORT
The word çrüyate is significant here. Çruti, or Vedic literature, consists of
authorized statements made by the Lord Himself or His enlightened
representatives. Thus neither the Lord nor recognized spiritual authorities
would ever say that within the Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead,
there is the fault of illusion. Çréla Çrédhara Svämé points out that the word
brahmaëe here indicates the Lord is full in Himself, and that the term
paramätmane indicates He is the controller of all living entities.
Thus within the supreme being, complete in Himself and omnipotent, we
do not find any jurisdiction of the material, illusory energy.
TEXT 7
@jaAnataA maAmake(na
maUXe#naAk(AyaR"vaeid"naA
@AnaItaAe'yaM tava ipataA
taà"vaAna, ºantaumahR"ita
ajänatä mämakena
müòhenäkärya-vedinä
änéto 'yaà tava pitä
tad bhavän kñantum arhati
SYNONYMS
ajänatä—by one who was ignorant; mämakena—by my servant;
müòhena—foolish; akärya-vedinä—not knowing his proper duty; änétaù—was
brought; ayam—this person; tava—Your; pitä—father; tat—that;
bhavän—Your good self; kñantum arhati—should please forgive.
TRANSLATION
Your father, who is sitting here, was brought to me by a foolish, ignorant
servant of mine who did not understand his proper duty. Therefore, please
forgive us.
PURPORT
The word ayam, "this one here," clearly indicates that Kåñëa's father, Nanda
Mahäräja, was present as Varuëa was speaking. In fact, Viçvanätha Cakravarté
Öhäkura states that Varuëa had seated Çré Nanda on a jeweled throne and had
personally worshiped him out of respect.
Technically, Nanda Mahäräja was correct in entering the water just before
sunrise. The following explanation is given by Çréla Jéva Gosvämé in his
commentary on the first verse of this chapter: After an especially short
Ekädaçé, measuring only eighteen hours, about six hours of the lunar day in
which the fast had to be broken, namely the Dvädaçé, had already expired
before the dawn. Since at sunrise the proper time for breaking the fast would
have passed, Nanda Mahäräja decided to enter the water at an otherwise
inauspicious time.
Of course, Varuëa's servant should have been aware of these technical
details, which are meant for strict followers of the Vedic rituals. Above and
beyond that, Nanda Mahäräja was acting as the Supreme Lord's father and was
therefore a most sacred person, beyond the touch of insignificant cosmic
bureaucrats like the foolish servant of Varuëa.
TEXT 8
mamaApyanauƒahM" k{(SNA
k(tauRmahR"syazAeSaä{"k,(
gAAeivand" naIyataAmaeSa
ipataA tae ipata{vats$ala
mamäpy anugrahaà kåñëa
kartum arhasy açeña-dåk
govinda néyatäm eña
pitä te pitå-vatsala
SYNONYMS
mama—to me; api—even; anugraham—mercy; kåñëa—O Lord Kåñëa; kartum
arhasi—please do; açeña—of everything; dåk—O You who see; govinda—O
Govinda; néyatäm—may he be taken; eñaù—this; pitä—father; te—Your;
pitå-vatsala—O You who are most affectionate to Your parents.
TRANSLATION
O Kåñëa, O seer of everything, please give Your mercy even to me. O
Govinda, You are most affectionate to Your father. Please take him home.
TEXT 9
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
WvaM ‘as$aAid"ta: k{(SNAAe
BagAvaAnaIìre"ìr":
@Ad"AyaAgAAtsvaipatarM"
banDaUnaAM caAvah"nmaud"ma,
çré-çuka uväca
evaà prasäditaù kåñëo
bhagavän éçvareçvaraù
ädäyägät sva-pitaraà
bandhünäà cävahan mudam
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—thus;
prasäditaù—satisfied; kåñëaù—Lord Kåñëa; bhagavän—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; éçvara—of all controllers; éçvaraù—the supreme
controller; ädäya—taking; agät—went; sva-pitaram—His father;
bandhünäm—to His relatives; ca—and; ävahan—bringing; mudam—pleasure.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Thus satisfied by Lord Varuëa, Çré Kåñëa, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord of lords, took His father and returned
home, where their relatives were overjoyed to see them.
PURPORT
In this pastime, Lord Kåñëa gives a sublime demonstration of His position as
the Supreme Lord of all lords. Varuëa, the demigod of the seas, is most
powerful, yet he was happy to worship even Lord Kåñëa's father, what to speak
of Kåñëa Himself.
TEXT 10
nand"stvataIin‰"yaM ä{"î"A
laAek(paAlamah"Aed"yama,
k{(SNAe ca s$aªaitaM taeSaAM
ÁaAitaByaAe ivaismataAe'“avaIta,
nandas tv aténdriyaà dåñövä
loka-päla-mahodayam
kåñëe ca sannatià teñäà
jïätibhyo vismito 'bravét
SYNONYMS
nandaù—Nanda Mahäräja; tu—and; aténdriyam—not seen before;
dåñövä—seeing; loka-päla—of the controlling deity of the (ocean) planet,
Varuëa; mahä-udayam—the great opulence; kåñëe—unto Kåñëa; ca—and;
sannatim—the offering of obeisances; teñäm—by them (Varuëa and his
followers); jïätibhyaù—to his friends and relatives; vismitaù—amazed;
abravét—spoke.
TRANSLATION
Nanda Mahäräja had been astonished to see for the first time the great
opulence of Varuëa, the ruler of the ocean planet, and also to see how Varuëa
and his servants had offered such humble respect to Kåñëa. Nanda described all
this to his fellow cowherd men.
TEXT 11
tae caAEts$aufyaiDayaAe r"Ajana,
matvaA gAAepaAstamaIìr"ma,
@ipa na: svagAitaM s$aUºmaAma,
opaADaAsyad"DaIìr":
te cautsukya-dhiyo räjan
matvä gopäs tam éçvaram
api naù sva-gatià sükñmäm
upädhäsyad adhéçvaraù
SYNONYMS
te—they; ca—and; autsukya—full of eagerness; dhiyaù—their minds;
räjan—O King Parékñit; matvä—thinking; gopäù—the cowherd men;
tam—Him; éçvaram—the Supreme Lord; api—perhaps; naù—to us;
sva-gatim—His own abode; sükñmäm—transcendental; upädhäsyat—is going
to bestow; adhéçvaraù—the supreme controller.
TRANSLATION
[Hearing about Kåñëa's pastimes with Varuëa,] the cowherd men considered
that Kåñëa must be the Supreme Lord, and their minds, O King, were filled
with eagerness. They thought, "Will the Supreme Lord bestow upon us His
transcendental abode?"
PURPORT
The cowherd men were filled with excitement upon hearing how Kåñëa had
gone to the abode of Varuëa to rescue His father. Suddenly realizing that they
were in fact dealing with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they joyfully
conjectured among themselves about their auspicious destination after
finishing their present life.
TEXT 12
wita svaAnaAM s$a BagAvaAna,
ivaÁaAyaAiKalaä{"fsvayama,
s$aÆÿlpais$aÜ"yae taeSaAM
k{(payaEtad"icantayata,
iti svänäà sa bhagavän
vijïäyäkhila-dåk svayam
saìkalpa-siddhaye teñäà
kåpayaitad acintayat
SYNONYMS
iti—such; svänäm—of His personal devotees; saù—He; bhagavän—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; vijïäya—understanding; akhila-dåk—the
seer of everything; svayam—Himself; saìkalpa—of the imagined desire;
siddhaye—for the realization; teñäm—their; kåpayä—compassionately;
etat—this (as follows in the next verse); acintayat—thought.
TRANSLATION
Because He sees everything, Lord Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, automatically understood what the cowherd men were conjecturing.
Wanting to show His compassion to them by fulfilling their desires, the Lord
thought as follows.
TEXT 13
janaAe vaE laAek( Wtaismaªa,
@ivaâAk(Amak(maRiBa:
o»aAvacaAs$au gAitaSau
na vaed" svaAM gAitaM ”amana,
jano vai loka etasminn
avidyä-käma-karmabhiù
uccävacäsu gatiñu
na veda sväà gatià bhraman
SYNONYMS
janaù—people; vai—certainly; loke—in the world; etasmin—this;
avidyä—without knowledge; käma—because of desires; karmabhiù—by
activities; ucca—among superior; avacäsu—and inferior; gatiñu—destinations;
na veda—does not recognize; sväm—his own; gatim—destination;
bhraman—wandering.
TRANSLATION
[Lord Kåñëa thought:] Certainly people in this world are wandering among
higher and lower destinations, which they achieve through activities performed
according to their desires and without full knowledge. Thus people do not know
their real destination.
PURPORT
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has elaborately explained how this verse applies to the
eternally liberated residents of Çré Våndävana, the Lord's abode. One of the
fundamental philosophical principles of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the
distinction between two types of illusion, Yoga-mäyä and Mahä-mäyä, the
spiritual and material states of existence, respectively. Although Kåñëa is God,
the omnipotent, omniscient Supreme Being, His intimate associates in the
spiritual world love Him so much that they see Him as their beloved child,
friend, lover and so on. So that their ecstatic love can transcend the
boundaries of mere reverence, they forget that Kåñëa is the Supreme God of all
the universes, and thus their pure, intimate love expands unlimitedly. One
may consider their activities of treating Kåñëa as a helpless child, a handsome
boyfriend, or a playmate to be a manifestation of avidyä, ignorance of Lord
Kåñëa's position as God, but the residents of Våndävana are in fact ignoring
the secondary majesty of Kåñëa and focusing intensely on His infinite beauty,
which is the essence of His existence.
In fact, describing Lord Kåñëa as the supreme controller and God is almost
a type of political analysis, referring as it does to a hierarchy of power and
control. Such analysis of levels of power and hierarchies of rule is significant
in a context in which one entity is not fully surrendered, in love, to a higher
entity. In other words, control becomes visible, or is consciously felt as control,
when there is resistance to that control. To cite a simple example: A pious,
law-abiding citizen sees a policeman as a friend and well-wisher, whereas a
criminal sees him as a threatening symbol of punishment. Those who are
enthusiastic about government policies feel not that the government is
controlling them but rather that it is helping them.
Thus Lord Kåñëa is seen as a "controller," and hence as "the Supreme God,"
by those who are not fully enchanted by His beauty and pastimes. Those fully
in love with Lord Kåñëa focus on His sublime, attractive features and, because
of the nature of their relationship with Him, do not much notice His
controlling power.
A simple proof that the residents of Vraja have transcended lower states of
God consciousness rather than failed to attain them is the fact that
throughout the pastimes of the Lord they often "remember" that Kåñëa is God.
Usually they are astonished at this remembrance, having been fully absorbed
in seeing Kåñëa as their friend, lover and so on.
The word käma is conventionally used to indicate a material desire, or else
a spiritual desire so intense that it becomes somehow analogous to intense
material desires. Still, the fundamental distinction remains: material desire is
selfish and self-gratificatory; spiritual desire is free of selfishness, being wholly
for the pleasure of the other, the Lord. Thus the residents of Våndävana
executed their daily activities solely for the pleasure of their beloved Kåñëa.
It should be remembered that the entire purpose of Kåñëa's descent into this
world is to attract living beings back home, back to Godhead. Two things are
required for this: that His pastimes display the beauty of spiritual perfection,
and that they somehow seem relevant and hence interesting to the
conditioned souls of this world. The Bhägavatam often states that Lord Kåñëa
plays just like a youthful actor, and He undoubtedly engages His eternal
devotees in the dramatic presentation. Thus Lord Kåñëa here muses to Himself
that people in this world certainly do not know their ultimate destination, and
with an obvious touch of the facetious He also thinks in this way about His
own eternally liberated associates, who were playing in this world like ordinary
members of a cowherd village.
Apart from the double meaning obviously present in this verse when it is
applied to Kåñëa's liberated associates, Kåñëa here makes an entirely direct and
pointedly critical observation about ordinary people. When applied to
conditioned souls who are actually wandering throughout the universe, His
statement that people are acting out of ignorance and lust is not mitigated by
any deeper, spiritual meaning. People in general are simply ignorant, and they
do not seriously consider their ultimate destination. As usual, Lord Çré Kåñëa is
able to say many profound and complex things in a few simple words. How
fortunate we are that God is not a dry field of energy, a transcendent,
effulgent blob, or nothing at all—as various people would have it. In fact, He is
the most wonderful Personality of Godhead, full of absolute personal qualities,
and certainly whatever we can do, He can do better, as evidenced by His
brilliant way of speaking.
TEXT 14
wita s$aiÂantya BagAvaAna,
mah"Ak(Aç&iNAk(Ae h"ir":
d"zARyaAmaAs$a laAekM( svaM
gAAepaAnaAM tamas$a: par"ma,
iti saïcintya bhagavän
mahä-käruëiko hariù
darçayäm äsa lokaà svaà
gopänäà tamasaù param
SYNONYMS
iti—in these words; saïcintya—considering to Himself; bhagavän—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; mahä-käruëikaù—the most merciful;
hariù—Lord Hari; darçayäm äsa—showed; lokam—the planet, Vaikuëöha;
svam—His own; gopänäm—to the cowherd men; tamasaù—material darkness;
param—beyond.
TRANSLATION
Thus deeply considering the situation, the all-merciful Supreme Personality
of Godhead Hari revealed to the cowherd men His abode, which is beyond
material darkness.
PURPORT
It is clear from this verse that the Absolute Truth dwells in His own eternal
abode. Everyone of us tries to live as comfortably as possible, surrounding
ourselves with peace and beauty. How can we, in the name of "logic," begrudge
the Supreme Lord, our creator, the supremely beautiful and comfortable abode
known by people in general as the kingdom of God?
TEXT 15
s$atyaM ÁaAnamanantaM yaä,"
“aöjyaAeita: s$anaAtanama,
yaiÜ" pazyainta maunayaAe
gAuNAApaAyae s$amaAih"taA:
satyaà jïänam anantaà yad
brahma-jyotiù sanätanam
yad dhi paçyanti munayo
guëäpäye samähitäù
SYNONYMS
satyam—indestructible; jïänam—knowledge; anantam—unlimited;
yat—which; brahma—the absolute; jyotiù—effulgence; sanätanam—eternal;
yat—which; hi—indeed; paçyanti—see; munayaù—sages; guëa—the modes of
material nature; apäye—when they subside; samähitäù—absorbed in trance.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa revealed the indestructible spiritual effulgence, which is
unlimited, conscious and eternal. Sages see that spiritual existence in trance,
when their consciousness is free of the modes of material nature.
PURPORT
In Text 14 Lord Kåñëa revealed to the residents of Våndävana His own
abode, the spiritual planet of Kåñëaloka. This and innumerable other
Vaikuëöha planets float in an infinite ocean of spiritual light called the
brahmajyoti. That spiritual light is in fact the spiritual sky, which Kåñëa also,
quite naturally, revealed to the residents of Våndävana. For example, if we
want to show the moon to a child, we say, "Look up in the sky. See the moon
over there in the sky." Similarly, Lord Kåñëa revealed the vast spiritual sky to
the residents of Våndävana, but as emphasized in Text 14 and in the following
text, 16, the actual destination of the Lord's associates was His own spiritual
planet.
TEXT 16
tae tau “aöoe"d"°aItaA
ma¢aA: k{(SNAena caAeä,"Da{taA:
d"ä{"zAu“aRöNAAe laAekM(
ya‡aA‚U(r"Ae'DyagAAtpaur"A
te tu brahma-hradam nétä
magnäù kåñëena coddhåtäù
dadåçur brahmaëo lokaà
yaträkrüro 'dhyagät purä
SYNONYMS
te—they; tu—and; brahma-hradam—to the lake known as Brahma-hrada;
nétäù—brought; magnäù—submerged; kåñëena—by Kåñëa; ca—and;
uddhåtäù—lifted out; dadåçuù—they saw; brahmaëaù—of the Absolute Truth;
lokam—the transcendental planet; yatra—where; akrüraù—Akrüra;
adhyagät—saw; purä—previously.
TRANSLATION
The cowherd men were brought by Lord Kåñëa to the Brahma-hrada, made
to submerge in the water, and then lifted up. From the same vantage point that
Akrüra saw the spiritual world, the cowherd men saw the planet of the
Absolute Truth.
PURPORT
The unlimited extension of spiritual light, called the brahmajyoti in Text 15,
is compared to a lake called Brahma-hrada. Lord Kåñëa submerged the cowherd
men in that lake in the sense that He submerged them in the awareness of the
impersonal Brahman. But then, as indicated by the word uddhåtäù, He lifted
them up to a higher understanding, that of the Personality of Godhead in His
own planet. As clearly stated here, dadåçur brahmaëo lokam: They saw, just as
Akrüra did, the transcendental abode of the Absolute Truth.
The evolution of consciousness may be briefly summarized as follows: In
ordinary consciousness we perceive and are attracted to the variety of material
things. Rising to the first stage of spiritual consciousness, we transcend
material variety and focus instead on the undifferentiated One, which lies
behind and gives existence to the many. Finally, rising to Kåñëa consciousness,
we find that the absolute, spiritual One contains its own eternal variety. In
fact, since this world is a mere shadow of eternal existence, we would expect to
find spiritual variety within the One, and indeed we do find it in the sacred
text of Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
Astute readers may note that the pastime involving Akrüra takes place
later in the Bhägavatam, after the present affair with the cowherd men. The
reason Çukadeva Gosvämé says Akrüra saw Vaikuëöha purä, "previously," is
that all these incidents took place many years before the conversation between
Çukadeva Gosvämé and Mahäräja Parékñit.
TEXT 17
nand"Ad"yastau taM ä{"î"A
par"maAnand"inava{taA:
k{(SNAM ca ta‡a cC$nd"AeiBa:
staUyamaAnaM s$auivaismataA:
nandädayas tu taà dåñövä
paramänanda-nivåtäù
kåñëaà ca tatra cchandobhiù
stüyamänaà su-vismitäù
SYNONYMS
nanda-ädayaù—the cowherd men headed by Nanda Mahäräja; tu—and;
tam—that; dåñövä—seeing; parama—supreme; änanda—by ecstasy;
nivåtäù—overwhelmed with joy; kåñëam—Lord Kåñëa; ca—and; tatra—there;
chandobhiù—by the Vedic hymns; stüyamänam—being praised; su—very
much; vismitäù—surprised.
TRANSLATION
Nanda Mahäräja and the other cowherd men felt the greatest happiness
when they saw that transcendental abode. They were especially amazed to see
Kåñëa Himself there, surrounded by the personified Vedas, who were offering
Him prayers.
PURPORT
Although the residents of Våndävana considered themselves ordinary
persons, Lord Kåñëa wanted them to know of their extraordinary good fortune.
Thus, within a lake in the Yamunä River the Lord showed them His personal
abode. The cowherd men were amazed to see that the kingdom of God had
exactly the same spiritual atmosphere as their own earthly Våndävana and
that, just as in their Våndävana Lord Kåñëa was personally present, in their
unique vision He was present as the Lord of the spiritual world.
As Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura points out, these verses
emphasize that Lord Kåñëa did not merely show the cowherd men a sample
Vaikuëöha planet but that He specifically revealed His Kåñëaloka, the greatest
of eternal abodes and the natural home of the residents of Våndävana, who
loved Kåñëa more than anyone else did.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Tenth Canto, Twenty-eighth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Kåñëa Rescues Nanda Mahäräja from the
Abode of Varuëa."
29. Kåñëa and the Gopés Meet for the Räsa Dance
This chapter describes how Lord Çré Kåñëa, intending to enjoy the räsa
dance, engaged in arguments and counterarguments with the gopés. Then there
is a description of the beginning of the räsa dance and the Lord's pastime of
disappearing from the midst of the gopés.
Remembering the promise He had made to the gopés when He had stolen
their clothes, Lord Kåñëa employed His Yogamäyä potency and manifested
within Himself the desire to enjoy pastimes during an autumn night. Thus He
began to play His flute. When the gopés heard the flute's sound, the impulses of
Cupid were violently aroused within them, and they immediately abandoned
all their household duties and hastily went to Kåñëa. All the gopés had purely
spiritual bodies, but when some of the gopés' husbands and other family
members stopped the young girls from going, Lord Kåñëa arranged for them to
temporarily exhibit material bodies, which they then left at the sides of their
husbands. In this way they deceived their relatives and went off to meet Kåñëa.
When the gopés came before Lord Kåñëa, He asked, "Why have you come? It
is not good for you to travel to such a place in the dead of the night, for this
forest is full of violent creatures. Your husbands and children will soon come
searching after you to bring you home and engage you again in your household
duties. After all, the prime religious duty of a woman is to serve her husband
and children. For a respectable woman to consort with a paramour is totally
contemptible and sure to obstruct her progress to heaven. Moreover, one
develops pure love for Me not by physical proximity but by hearing topics
connected with Me, by viewing My Deity form in the temple, by meditating
upon Me and by faithfully chanting My glories. Therefore, all of you would do
best to return home."
The gopés were crestfallen to hear this, and after crying a little they replied,
with a bit of anger, "It is very unfair for You to reject young girls who have
abandoned everything in their lives and come to You with the exclusive desire
to serve You. By serving our husbands and children we receive only pain,
whereas by serving You, the dearmost Soul of all living beings, we will
perfectly fulfill the true religious duty of the self. What woman will not deviate
from her prescribed duties as soon as she hears Your flute song and sees Your
form, which enchants the three worlds? Just as the Supreme Lord Viñëu
protects the demigods, You destroy the unhappiness of the people of
Våndävana. Therefore You should immediately relieve the torment we have
felt because of separation from You." Wanting to please the gopés, Lord Kåñëa,
who is always satisfied in Himself, responded to their appeals by playing with
them in various pastimes. But when this show of attention made them a little
proud, He humbled them by suddenly disappearing from the arena of the räsa
dance.
TEXT 1
™aIbaAd"r"AyaiNAç&vaAca
BagAvaAnaipa taA r"Ata{wR:
zAAr"d"AetPu(éamaiéak(A:
vaIºya r"ntauM manaê‚e(
yaAegAmaAyaAmaupaAi™ata:
çré-bädaräyaëir uväca
bhagavän api tä rätåéù
çäradotphulla-mallikäù
vékñya rantuà manaç cakre
yoga-mäyäm upäçritaù
SYNONYMS
çré-bädaräyaëiù uväca—Çré Çukadeva, the son of Çréla Badaräyaëa Vedavyäsa,
said; bhagavän—Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; api—although;
täù—those; rätréù—nights; çärada—of autumn: utphulla-blossoming;
mallikäù—the jasmine flowers; vékñya—seeing: rantum-to enjoy love; manaù
cakre—He made up His mind; yogamäyäm—His spiritual potency that makes
the impossible possible; upäçritaù—resorting to.
TRANSLATION
Çré Bädaräyaëi said: Çré Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, full
in all opulences, yet upon seeing those autumn nights scented with blossoming
jasmine flowers, He turned His mind toward loving affairs. To fulfill His
purposes He employed His internal potency.
PURPORT
As we begin the famous narration of Lord Kåñëa's räsa dance, a dance of
love with beautiful young girls, questions will inevitably arise in the minds of
ordinary people regarding the propriety of God's romantic dancing with many
young girls in the middle of a full-moon autumn night. In his description of the
Lord's räsa dance in Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çréla
Prabhupäda painstakingly explains the spiritual purity of these transcendental
activities. Those advanced in the science of Kåñëa—the great teachers, or
äcäryas—leave no doubt that Lord Kåñëa is full and satisfied in Himself, free
of all material desire, which is, after all, a sense of incompleteness or lack.
Materialistic persons and impersonal philosophers stubbornly reject the
bona fide explanation of Çré Kåñëa's transcendental nature. There is no reason
to deny the beautiful reality of an absolute person able to perform absolute
romantic activities, of which our so-called romance is merely a shadow or
perverted reflection. The irrational insistence that material activities cannot
be a reflection of the perfect, spiritual activities performed by God reflects the
unimaginative emotional disposition of those who oppose the reality of Çré
Kåñëa. This psychological disposition of the nondevotees, which leads them to
fervently deny the very existence of the absolute person, unfortunately boils
down to what may be succinctly described as envy, since the overwhelming
majority of the impersonal critics eagerly pursue their own romantic affairs,
which they consider quite real and even "spiritual."
The actual supreme lover is Lord Kåñëa. The Vedänta-sütra begins by
declaring that the Absolute Truth is the source of everything, and even
Western philosophy was born in a somewhat awkward attempt at finding the
original One behind the apparent many of material existence. Conjugal love,
one of the most intense and demanding aspects of human existence, can
hardly have nothing at all to do with supreme reality.
In fact, the conjugal love experienced by human beings is a mere reflection
of spiritual reality, in which the same love exists in an absolute, pristine state.
Thus it is clearly stated here that when Kåñëa decided to enjoy the romantic
atmosphere of autumn, "He resorted to His spiritual potency" (yoga-mäyäm
upäçritaù). The spiritual nature of Lord Kåñëa's conjugal affairs is a major
theme in this section of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
A woman is attractive because of the sweet sound of her voice, her beauty
and gentleness, her enchanting fragrance and tenderness, and also because of
her cleverness and skill in music and dance. The most attractive ladies of all
are the young gopés of Våndävana, who are Lord Kåñëa's internal potency, and
this chapter tells how He enjoyed their brilliant feminine qualities—even
though, as Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has mentioned, Lord Kåñëa
was an eight-year-old boy when these events took place.
Ordinary people prefer God simply to be a witness of their romantic affairs.
When a boy desires a girl or a girl desires a boy, sometimes they pray to God for
their enjoyment. Such people are shocked and dismayed to find out that the
Lord can enjoy His own loving affairs with His own transcendental senses. In
truth, Çré Kåñëa is the original Cupid, and His exciting conjugal pastimes will
be described in this section of the Bhägavatam.
When Lord Kåñëa descends to the earth, His spiritual body seems to take
birth and grow as He displays His variegated pastimes. The Lord could hardly
allow His boyhood to pass without exhibiting the supreme loving affairs
between a young boy and young girls. Thus Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura
quotes Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé as follows: kaiçoraà saphalé-karoti kalayan kuïje
vihäraà hariù. "Lord Hari perfects His youth by arranging loving pastimes in
the groves of the Våndävana forest."
TEXT 2
tad"Aex"]r"Aja: k(ku(Ba: k(rE"mauRKaM
‘aAcyaA ivailampaªaç&NAena zAntamaE:
s$a caSaRNAInaAmaud"gAAcC]$caAe ma{jana,
i‘aya: i‘ayaAyaA wva d"IGaRd"zARna:
tadoòuräjaù kakubhaù karair mukhaà
präcyä vilimpann aruëena çantamaiù
sa carñaëénäm udagäc chuco måjan
priyaù priyäyä iva dérgha-darçanaù
SYNONYMS
tadä—at that time; uòu-räjaù—the moon, king of the stars; kakubhaù—of the
horizon; karaiù—with his "hands" (rays); mukham—the face;
präcyäù—eastern; vilimpan—smearing; aruëena—with reddish color;
çam-tamaiù—(his rays) which give great comfort; saù—he; carñaëénäm—of all
those who watched; udagät—rose; çucaù—the unhappiness; måjan—wiping
away; priyaù—a beloved husband; priyäyäù—of his beloved wife; iva—as;
dérgha—after a long time; darçanaù—being seen again.
TRANSLATION
The moon then rose, anointing the face of the eastern horizon with the
reddish hue of his comforting rays, and thus dispelling the pain of all who
watched him rise. The moon was like a beloved husband who returns after a
long absence and adorns the face of his beloved wife with red kuìkuma.
PURPORT
Young Kåñëa engaged His internal potency, and she immediately created an
exciting atmosphere for conjugal love.
TEXT 3
ä{"î"A ku(mauã"ntamaKaNx"maNx"laM
r"maAnanaABaM navaku(ÇÿmaAç&NAma,
vanaM ca tatk(AemalagAAeBaI r"iÃataM
jagAAE k(laM vaAmaä{"zAAM manaAeh"r"ma,
dåñövä kumudvantam akhaëòa-maëòalaà
ramänanäbhaà nava-kuìkumäruëam
vanaà ca tat-komala-gobhé raïjitaà
jagau kalaà väma-dåçäà manoharam
SYNONYMS
dåñövä—observing; kamut-vantam—causing the night-blooming kumuda
lotuses to open; akhaëòa—unbroken; maëòalam—the disk of whose face;
ramä—of the goddess of fortune; änana—(resembling) the face;
äbham—whose light; nava—new; kuìkuma—with vermilion powder;
aruëam—reddened; vanam—the forest; ca—and; tat—of that moon;
komala—gentle; gobhiù—by the rays; raïjitam—colored; jagau—He played
His flute; kalam—sweetly; väma-dåçäm—for the girls who had charming eyes;
manaù-haram—enchanting.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa saw the unbroken disk of the full moon glowing with the red
effulgence of newly applied vermilion, as if it were the face of the goddess of
fortune. He also saw the kumuda lotuses opening in response to the moon's
presence and the forest gently illumined by its rays. Thus the Lord began to
play sweetly on His flute, attracting the minds of the beautiful-eyed gopés.
PURPORT
The word jagau in this verse indicates that Lord Kåñëa played songs on His
flute, as confirmed in Text 40 by the words kä stry aìga te
kala-padäyata-veëu-gétä. The word ramä may indicate not only Lord Viñëu's
consort but also Çrématé Rädhäräëé, the original goddess of fortune. Lord Kåñëa
appeared in the dynasty of the moon-god, and the moon plays a prominent role
here in preparing for the Lord's entrance into the midst of the räsa dance.
TEXT 4
inazAmya gAItaAM tad"naËÿvaDaRnaM
˜ajaiñya: k{(SNAgA{h"ItamaAnas$aA:
@Ajagmaur"nyaAenyamalaiºataAeâmaA:
s$a ya‡a k(AntaAe javalaAelaku(Nx"laA:
niçamya gétäà tad anaìga-vardhanaà
vraja-striyaù kåñëa-gåhéta-mänasäù
äjagmur anyonyam alakñitodyamäù
sa yatra känto java-lola-kuëòaläù
SYNONYMS
niçamya—hearing; gétam—the music; tat—that; anaìga—Cupid;
vardhanam—which fortifies; vraja-striyaù—the young women of Vraja;
kåñëa—by Kåñëa; gåhéta—seized; mänasäù—whose minds; äjagmuù—they
went; anyonyam—to one another; alakñita—unnoticed; udyamäù—their going
forward; saù—He; yatra—where; käntaù—their boyfriend; java—because of
their haste; lola—swinging; kuëòaläù—whose earrings.
TRANSLATION
When the young women of Våndävana heard Kåñëa's flute song, which
arouses romantic feelings, their minds were captivated by the Lord. They went
to where their lover waited, each unknown to the others, moving so quickly
that their earrings swung back and forth.
PURPORT
Apparently each gopé went secretly, hoping to avoid advertising to her
rivals the fact that young Kåñëa was in the mood for romantic affairs. Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté poetically describes the situation as follows:
"Kåñëa instigated a terrible act of thievery in Våndävana when He played
on His flute. The song of His flute entered through the ears of the gopés, into
the inner treasure chamber of their hearts. That wonderful music stole all
their most valuable possessions—their sobriety, shyness, fear and
discrimination, along with their very minds—and in a split second this music
delivered all these goods to Kåñëa. Now each gopé went to beg the Lord to
return her personal property. Each beautiful young girl was thinking, 'I have to
capture that great thief,' and thus they went forward, each unknown to the
others."
TEXT 5
äu"h"ntyaAe'iBayayau: k(Aiêä,"
d"AehM" ih"tvaA s$amauts$auk(A:
payaAe'iDai™atya s$aMyaAvama,
@nauã"AsyaApar"A yayau:
duhantyo 'bhiyayuù käçcid
dohaà hitvä samutsukäù
payo 'dhiçritya saàyävam
anudväsyäparä yayuù
SYNONYMS
duhantyaù—in the middle of milking the cows; abhiyayuù—went away;
käçcit—some of them; doham—the milking; hitvä—abandoning;
samutsukäù—extremely eager; payaù—milk; adhiçritya—having placed on the
stove; saàyävam—cakes made of flour; anudväsya—without removing from
the oven; aparäù—others; yayuù—went.
TRANSLATION
Some of the gopés were milking cows when they heard Kåñëa's flute. They
stopped milking and went off to meet Him. Some left milk curdling on the
stove, and others left cakes burning in the oven.
PURPORT
The eagerness of these cowherd girls, so lovingly devoted to young Kåñëa, is
shown here.
TEXTS 6-7
pair"vaeSayantyastaiÜ"tvaA
paAyayantya: izAzAUna, paya:
zAu™aUSantya: pataIna, k(Aiêä,"
@´antyaAe'paAsya BaAejanama,
ilampantya: ‘ama{jantyaAe'nyaA
@Ãantya: k(Aê laAecanae
vyatyastavañABar"NAA:
k(Aiêtk{(SNAAintakM( yayau:
pariveñayantyas tad dhitvä
päyayantyaù çiçün payaù
çuçrüñantyaù patén käçcid
açnantyo 'päsya bhojanam
limpantyaù pramåjantyo 'nyä
aïjantyaù käçca locane
vyatyasta-vasträbharaëäù
käçcit kåñëäntikaà yayuù
SYNONYMS
pariveñayantyaù—getting dressed; tat—that; hitvä—putting aside;
päyayantyaù-making drink; çiçün-their children; payaù-milk;
çuçrüñantyaù—rendering personal service; patén—to their husbands;
käçcit—some of them; açnantyaù—eating; apäsya—leaving aside;
bhojanam—their meals; limpantyaù—applying cosmetics;
pramåjantyaù—cleansing themselves with oils; anyäù—others;
aïjantyaù—applying kajjala; käçca—some; locane—on their eyes;
vyatyasta—in disarray; vastra—their clothing; äbharaëäù—and ornaments;
käçcit—some of them; kåñëa-antikam—to the proximity of Lord Kåñëa;
yayuù—went.
TRANSLATION
Some of them were getting dressed, feeding milk to their infants or rendering
personal service to their husbands, but they all gave up these duties and went to
meet Kåñëa. Other gopés were taking their evening meals, washing themselves,
putting on cosmetics or applying kajjala to their eyes. But all the gopés stopped
these activities at once and, though their clothes and ornaments were in
complete disarray, rushed off to Kåñëa.
TEXT 8
taA vaAyaRmaANAA: paitaiBa:
ipata{iBa”aARta{banDauiBa:
gAAeivand"Apaô$taAtmaAnaAe
na nyavataRnta maAeih"taA:
tä väryamäëäù patibhiù
pitåbhir bhrätå-bandhubhiù
govindäpahåtätmäno
na nyavartanta mohitäù
SYNONYMS
täù—they; väryamäëäù—being checked; patibhiù—by their husbands;
pitåbhiù—by their fathers; bhrätå—brothers; bandhubhiù—and other relatives;
govinda—by Lord Kåñëa; apahåta—stolen away; ätmänaù—their very selves;
na nyavartanta—they did not turn back; mohitäù—enchanted.
TRANSLATION
Their husbands, fathers, brothers and other relatives tried to stop them, but
Kåñëa had already stolen their hearts. Enchanted by the sound of His flute,
they refused to turn back.
PURPORT
Some of the young gopés were married, and their husbands tried to stop
them. The unmarried girls had to deal with their fathers and brothers and
other relatives. None of these relatives would have ordinarily allowed even the
young girls' dead bodies to go alone into the forest at night, but Lord Kåñëa had
already engaged His internal potency, and thus the entire romantic episode
unfolded without interference.
TEXT 9
@ntagA{Rh"gAtaA: k(Aiêä,"
gAAepyaAe'labDaivainagARmaA:
k{(SNAM taà"AvanaAyaul(A
d"DyaumaI=#ilatalaAecanaA:
antar-gåha-gatäù käçcid
gopyo 'labdha-vinirgamäù
kåñëaà tad-bhävanä-yuktä
dadhyur mélita-locanäù
SYNONYMS
antaù-gåha—within their homes; gatäù—present; käçcit—some; gopyaù—gopés;
alabdha—not obtaining; vinirgamäù—any exit; kåñëam—upon Çré Kåñëa;
tat-bhävanä—with ecstatic love for Him; yuktäù—fully endowed;
dadhyuù—they meditated; mélita—closed; locanäù—their eyes .
TRANSLATION
Some of the gopés, however, could not manage to get out of their houses, and
instead they remained home with eyes closed, meditating upon Him in pure
love.
PURPORT
Throughout the Tenth Canto, Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura gives
elaborate poetic commentaries on Lord Kåñëa's pastimes. It is not always
possible to include these extensive descriptions, but we will quote in its
entirety his comments on this verse. It is our sincere recommendation to the
learned Vaiñëava community that a qualified devotee of the Lord present the
entire commentary of Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté on the Tenth Canto as a
separate book, which will undoubtedly be appreciated by devotees and
nondevotees alike. The äcärya's comments on this verse are as follows:
"In this context we will make our analysis according to the method
described in Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé's Ujjvala-nélamaëi. There are two categories
of gopés: the eternally perfect (the nitya-siddhas) and those who have become
perfect by practicing bhakti-yoga (the sädhana-siddhas). The sädhana-siddhas
are of two categories: those who belong to special groups and those who do not.
And there are also two classes of the gopés belonging to special groups: namely
the çruti-cärés, who come from the group of the personified Vedas, and the
åñi-cärés, who come from the group of sages who saw Lord Rämacandra in the
Daëòakäraëya forest.
"This same fourfold categorization of the gopés is given in the Padma
Puräëa:
gopyas tu çrutayo jïeyä
åñi-jä gopa-kanyakäù
deva-kanyäç ca räjendra
na mänuñyäù kathaïcana
'It is understood that some of the gopés are personified Vedic literatures, while
others are reborn sages, daughters of cowherds, or demigod maidens. But by no
means, my dear King, are any of them ordinary humans.' Here we are informed
that although the gopés appeared to be human cowherd girls, they actually were
not. Thus the contention that they are mortals is refuted.
"The daughters of cowherds, referred to here as gopa-kanyäs, must be
eternally perfect, since we never hear of them having executed any sädhana.
Their apparent sädhana of worshiping goddess Kätyäyané in the role of gopés
merely manifests their manner of playing like human beings, and the
Bhägavatam narrates the account of this worship only to show how they had
fully taken on the role of cowherd girls.
"That the gopa-kanyä gopés are actually nitya-siddhas, eternally perfect
devotees of the Lord, is established by a statement in Brahma-saàhitä
(5.37)—änanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhävitäbhiù—which proves that they are
the Lord's spiritual pleasure potency. Similarly, we have the words of the
Gautaméya-tantra, hlädiné yä mahä-çaktiù. Further corroboration of their
eternal perfection is that these gopés, being coeternal with Lord Kåñëa, their
lover, are mentioned along with Him in the eighteen-syllable mantra, the
ten-syllable mantra and others, and also that the worship of these mantras, and
also the çrutis that present them, have been in existence since beginningless
time."
The deva-kanyäs, daughters of the demigods, who are mentioned in the
verse beginning sambhavas tv amara-striyaù, are explained in Çré
Ujjvala-nélamaëi as partial expansions of the gopés who are eternally perfect.
That the çruti-cäré gopés, the personified Vedas, are sädhana-siddha is
understood from the following words of theirs quoted in the Båhad-vämana
Puräëa:
kandarpa-koöi-lävaëye
tvayi dåñöe manäàsi naù
käminé-bhävam äsädya
smara-kñubdhänya-saàçayäù
yathä tval-loka-väsinyaù
käma-tattvena gopikäù
bhajanti ramaëaà matvä
cikérñäjaninas tathä
'Since we have seen Your face, which possesses the beauty of millions of
Cupids, our minds have become lusty after You like those of young girls, and
we have forgotten all other allurements. We have developed the desire to act
toward You as do the gopés who dwell on Your transcendental planet and who
manifest the nature of Cupid by worshiping You with the idea that You are
their paramour.'
"The åñi-cäré gopés are also sädhana-siddha, as stated in Ujjvala-nélamaëi:
gopälopäsakäù pürvam apräptäbhéñöa-siddhayaù. Previously they were all
mahärñis living in the Daëòaka forest. We find evidence for this in the Padma
Puräëa, Uttara-khaëòa:
dåñövä rämaà harià tatra
bhoktum aicchan su-vigraham
te sarve strétvam äpannäù
samudbhütäç ca gokule
harià sampräpya kämena
tato muktä bhavärëavät
This verse says that upon seeing Lord Rämacandra, the sages in the Daëòaka
forest desired to enjoy Lord Hari (Kåñëa). In other words, the sight of Lord
Räma's beauty reminded them of Lord Hari, Gopäla, their personal object of
worship, and they then wanted to enjoy with Him. But out of embarrassment
they did not act on that desire, whereupon Lord Çré Räma, who is like a desire
tree, gave His mercy to them, even though they had not voiced their request.
Thus their desire was fulfilled, as stated by the words beginning te sarve. By
means of their lusty attraction they became freed from the ocean of material
existence, the cycle of birth and death, and coincidentally they got the
association of Hari in conjugal love.
"In the present verse of the Bhägavatam we understand that it was the gopés
who had children who were kept forcibly at home. This fact is clear from
verses yet to come: mätaraù pitaraù puträù (SB 10.29.20),
yat-paty-apatya-suhådäm anuvåttir aìga (SB 10.29.32) and
pati-sutänvaya-bhrätå-bändhavän (SB 10.31.16). In his comments on the Tenth
Canto, Çréla Kavi-karëapüra Gosvämé mentions this fact. Without trying to
repeat all his thoughts on this verse, we will give the gist of his purport:
" 'Upon seeing the personal form of Lord Çré Rämacandra, the sages who
were worshipers of Lord Gopäla immediately became elevated to the mature
platform of spontaneous devotion, automatically reaching the stages of firm
faith, attraction and attachment. But they had not yet completely freed
themselves of all material contamination; therefore Çré Yogamäyä-devi
arranged for them to take birth from the wombs of gopés and become cowherd
girls. By associating with the eternally perfect gopés, some of these new gopés
fully manifested pürva-raga loving attraction for Kåñëa as soon as they reached
puberty (This kind of attraction develops even before one meets the beloved.)
When these new gopés got the direct audience of Kåñëa and physically
associated with Him, all their remaining contamination became burned up,
and they achieved the advanced stages of prema, sneha and so on.
" 'Even though they were in the company of their cowherd husbands, by the
power of Yogamäyä the gopés remained unsullied by sexual contact with them;
rather, they were situated in purely spiritual bodies that Kåñëa enjoyed. On the
night they heard the sound of Kåñëa's flute, their husbands tried to stop them,
but by the merciful assistance of Yogamäyä the sädhana-siddha gopés were able
to go forth to their beloved, together with the nitya-siddha gopés.
" 'Other gopés, however, because of not getting the good fortune of
associating with the nitya-siddha gopés and other advanced gopés, had not
achieved the stage of prema, and so their contamination was not completely
burned away. They entered the company of their cowherd husbands and, after
sexual union with them, gave birth to children. But a short time later even
these gopés developed their pürva-raga by hankering intensely for the physical
association of Kåñëa—a hankering they acquired by associating with the
advanced gopés. Becoming worthy recipients of the mercy of the perfected
gopés, they assumed transcendental bodies fit to be enjoyed by Kåñëa, and
when Yogamäyä failed to help them overcome their husbands' attempts to keep
them from going out, they felt themselves cast into the worst calamity.
Viewing their husbands, brothers, fathers and other family members as
enemies, they came close to dying. Just as other women might remember their
mothers or other relatives at the time of death, these gopés remembered the
sole friend of their very life, Kåñëa, as stated in the present verse of the
Bhägavatam, beginning with the word antar.
" 'It is implied that those ladies were not able to exit because they were held
back by their husbands, who were standing before them with sticks in their
hands, scolding them. Although these gopés were perpetually absorbed in love
for Kåñëa, at that particular time they meditated upon Him and cried out
within: "Alas, alas, O only friend of our life! O ocean of the artistic skills of
Våndävana forest! Please let us become your girlfriends in some future life,
because at this time we cannot see Your lotuslike face with our eyes. So be it;
we shall look upon You with our minds." Each of them lamenting to herself in
this way, the gopés stood with their eyes shut and meditated deeply upon Him.'"
TEXTS 10-11
äu":s$ah"‘aeï"ivar"h"-
taI˜ataApaDautaAzAuBaA:
DyaAna‘aAæaAcyautaAëeSainava{
RtyaA ºaINAmaËÿlaA:
tamaeva par"maAtmaAnaM
jaAr"bauÜ"YaAipa s$aËÿtaA:
jaò"gAuRNAmayaM de"hM"
s$aâ: ‘aºaINAbanDanaA:
duùsaha-preñöha-virahatévra-
täpa-dhutäçubhäù
dhyäna-präptäcyutäçleñanirvåtyä
kñéëa-maìgaläù
tam eva paramätmänaà
jära-buddhyäpi saìgatäù
jahur guëa-mayaà dehaà
sadyaù prakñéëa-bandhanäù
SYNONYMS
duùsaha—intolerable; preñöha—from their beloved; viraha—from separation;
tévra—intense; täpa—by the burning pain; dhuta—removed; açubhäù—all
inauspicious things in their hearts; dhyäna—by meditation; präpta—obtained;
acyuta—of the infallible Lord Çré Kåñëa; äçleña—caused by the embrace;
nirvåtyä—by the joy; kñéëa—reduced to nil; maìgaläù—their auspicious
karmic reactions; tam—Him; eva—even though; parama-ätmänam—the
Supersoul; jära—a paramour; buddhyä—thinking Him to be;
api—nevertheless; saìgatäù—getting His direct association; jahuù—they gave
up; guëa-mayam—composed of the modes of material nature; deham—their
bodies; sadyaù—immediately; prakñéëa—thoroughly counteracted;
bandhanäù—all their bondage of karma.
TRANSLATION
For those gopés who could not go to see Kåñëa, intolerable separation from
their beloved caused an intense agony that burned away all impious karma. By
meditating upon Him they realized His embrace, and the ecstasy they then felt
exhausted their material piety. Although Lord Kåñëa is the Supreme Soul, these
girls simply thought of Him as their male lover and associated with Him in that
intimate mood. Thus their karmic bondage was nullified and they abandoned
their gross material bodies.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté comments upon this verse as follows: "Here
Çukadeva Gosvämé speaks in a peculiar way: he presents the intimate object
the gopés attained as if it were an external idea, thus keeping its true nature
secret from outsiders, while at the same time he reveals to the confidential
devotees well versed in the scientific conclusions of devotional service the
internal meaning that is his real purport. Thus to outsiders Çukadeva says that
Kåñëa gave the gopés liberation, but to the confidential hearers Çukadeva
reveals that when the gopés experienced separation from their beloved there
arose in them both immeasurable unhappiness and immeasurable happiness,
and that they gradually achieved their desired goal.
"Thus the verse can be understood as follows: Because of their intolerable
separation from their beloved, the gopés felt terrible agony, by which they
caused all inauspicious things to tremble. In other words, when people in
general hear of the gopés' extreme agony in separation from their beloved, they
abandon thousands of inauspicious things—things even as fearsome as the
subterranean fires of millions of universes or the powerful poison swallowed by
Lord Çiva. More specifically, those who hear of the gopés' love in separation
give up their terrible false ego and, thinking themselves defeated, are shaken.
When the gopés meditated on Lord Acyuta, He became manifest and
personally came to them, and they experienced great joy by embracing His
body, which was full of transcendental love for them. The gopés also
experienced great joy by exhibiting personal characteristics and a sense of
identification appropriate to such love. That joy made all their good fortune,
both material and spiritual, seem paltry by comparison.
"The implication is that when other persons see how happy the gopés
became upon embracing Kåñëa when He manifested Himself directly before
them, these other persons feel that thousands of so-called auspicious objects
are insignificant by comparison, including all the sense gratificatory pleasures
found in millions of universes and even the supersensory pleasure of spiritual
bliss (brahmänanda) . Thus hearing of the gopés' distress and the joy that arose,
respectively, out of their separation from the Supreme Lord and their union
with Him, anyone can get rid of all the reactions of his past activities, both
sinful and pious. Vaiñëavas certainly do not think that sinful and pious
reactions can be destroyed only by being lived out, since, after all, neither
separation from the Supreme Lord nor direct association with Him are in the
category of karma. This kind of elimination of karmic reactions occurs in the
stage of bhajana, for those who have come to the level of anartha-nivåtti.
"And thus the gopés thought of Kåñëa—the Paramätmä, or supreme worthy
object of all love—as their paramour. Even though such a concept is ordinarily
contemptible, the gopés realized Kåñëa in an even fuller sense than did
Rukmiëé and His other queens, who thought of Him most respectfully as their
husband. That thinking of the Lord as one's paramour is superior to thinking
of Him as one's husband is proved by the fact that unbridled pure love is
superior to domesticated love. This idea is borne out by the following words of
Çré Uddhava: yä dustyajaà sva-janam ärya-pathaà ca hitvä. 'These ladies of
Vraja abandoned their families and their advanced religious principles, even
though to do so is very difficult.' (SB 10.47.61)
"In His pastimes on earth Kåñëa often turns the most lowly things into the
most elevated. As Bhéñma stated, Kåñëa's pastime of acting as Arjuna's chariot
driver was even more elevated than the pastimes in which He acted as a
mighty King of kings: vijaya-ratha-kuöumba ätta-totre/ dhåta-haya-raçmini
tac-chriyeskñaëéye. 'I concentrate upon the chariot driver of Arjuna, who stood
with a whip in His right hand and a bridle rope in His left, and who was very
careful to protect Arjuna's chariot by all means.' (SB 1.9.39) Similarly, in the
Lord's appearance as Kåñëa we see that the normally inferior conjugal räsa
becomes better than the normally superior mood of çänta-rasa, as also the
attitude of loving a paramour becomes superior to the loving exchange
between legitimate spouses, and lowly guïjä necklaces, red oxide paste and
peacock feathers become better than the most excellent jeweled ornaments.
"But, it may be objected, it is not fitting for the Supreme Lord to sport with
women whose bodies have already been enjoyed by other men. This objection
is replied to by the words beginning jahuù. The word deham is used here in the
singular form to indicate unity of category, even though the gopés are many.
Some authorities say that by the power of Yogamäyä these gopés' bodies
disappeared in a way no one noticed, but other authorities say that the 'body'
referred to in this context is the inferior body, composed of the modes of
material nature. Thus by the prominence of the adjective guëa-mayam, it is
understood that before the gopés heard the sound of Kåñëa's flute their bodies
had been twofold, material and spiritual, and upon hearing the flute they gave
up the material bodies, which their husbands had enjoyed. We may analyze
this as follows:
"When devotees begin prosecuting devotional service in accordance with
the instructions of a bona fide spiritual master, they engage their ears and
other senses in pure devotion by hearing of the Lord, chanting His glories,
remembering Him, offering obeisances to Him, giving Him personal
attendance, and so forth. Thus the devotees make the Lord's transcendental
qualities the objects of their senses, as stated by the Lord Himself: nirguëo
mad-apäçrayaù. (SB 11.25.26) In this way the devotees' bodies transcend the
material modes. Yet sometimes the devotees may take as their sense objects
mundane sounds and so on, and that is material. Thus a devotee's body can
have two aspects, transcendental and material.
"According to one's level of devotional service, to that degree the
transcendental aspects of one's body become prominent and the material
aspects diminish. This transformation is described in the following verse from
the Bhägavatam (11.2.42):
bhaktiù pareçänubhavo viraktir
anyatra caiña trika eka-kälaù
prapadyamänasya yathäçnataù syus
tuñöiù puñöiù kñud-apäyo 'nu-ghäsam
'Devotion, direct experience of the Supreme Lord, and detachment from other
things—these three occur simultaneously for one who has taken shelter of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, in the same way that pleasure, nourishment
and relief from hunger come simultaneously and increasingly, with each bite,
for a person engaged in eating.' When one achieves totally pure love of God,
the material portions of the body disappear and the body becomes completely
spiritual. Nonetheless, so as not to disturb the false opinions of atheists and so
as to protect the confidentiality of devotional service, the Supreme Lord
usually has His illusory energy exhibit the demise of the gross body. An
example of this is the disappearance of the Yädavas during the Mauñala-lélä.
"Sometimes, however, to proclaim the excellence of bhakti-yoga, Kåñëa will
allow a devotee to go back to Godhead in his selfsame body, as in the case of
Dhruva Mahäräja. We can cite evidence for this point from the Twenty-fifth
Chapter of the Eleventh Canto, Text 32:
yeneme nirjitäù saumya
guëä jévena citta-jäù
bhakti-yogena man-niñöho
mad-bhäväya prapadyate
'A living entity who conquers the modes of material nature, which are
manifested from the mind, can dedicate himself to Me [Kåñëa] by the process
of devotional service and thus attain pure love for Me.' Here the Lord states
that the defeat and destruction of that which is composed of the modes of
material nature can be brought about only by the process of devotional service.
"Therefore, what we should understand from the present verse of the
Bhägavatam is that the gopés who could not go to see Kåñëa had their
inauspicious, material bodies removed or burned up, while their auspicious,
spiritual bodies, far from being destroyed, simply grew more prominent because
of the ecstasy the gopés felt by embracing Kåñëa in meditation. Thus their
bondage was completely destroyed: by the help of Yogamäyä they got free from
ignorance and also from the prohibitions of their husbands and other relatives.
"We should not make the mistake of explaining this falling away of the
gopés' bodies as being a result of their dying. As the Lord Himself states (SB
10.47.37),
yä mayä kréòatä rätryäà
vane 'smin vraja ästhitäù
alabdha-räsäù kalyäëyo
mäpur mad-vérya-cintayä
'Some of those all-auspcious gopés could not directly join Me in enjoying the
räsa dance on that night in this Våndävana forest, yet still they achieved My
association by remembering My transcendental pastimes.' By using the word
kalyäëyaù in this verse, the Lord implies, 'Even though these gopés wanted to
give up their bodies because of their husbands' prohibitions and the torment of
separation from Me, for them to die at the very beginning of the most
auspicious festival of the räsa dance would have been displeasing to Me and
thus inauspicious. So they did not die.'
"More evidence that the gopés who were prevented from going to see Kåñëa
did not physically die is provided by a statement of Çré Çukadeva's later in this
canto (10.47.38): tä ücur uddhavaà prétäs tat-sandeçägata-småtéù. 'Then they
[the gopés] replied to Uddhava, feeling satisfied because His message had
reminded them of Kåñëa.' Here we understand that the gopés speaking to
Uddhava were the ones who had not had the chance to participate directly in
the räsa dance because of being held captive in their homes. Thus the
conclusion is that they gave up their material bodies without dying. Parched by
the intense heat of separation, their material bodies gave up their materiality
and became purely spiritual, just like the bodies of such great devotees as
Dhruva Mahäräja. This is the meaning of the gopés' 'giving up their bodies.'
"The following analogy illustrates the statuses of the various gopés: By
observing seven or eight ripe mangoes on a tree, we can ascertain that all the
fruits on the tree are ripe. Then we can pick them all and bring them home,
where in due course the sun's rays and other agents will make them
fine—looking, fragrant and delicious—fit to be offered to the king for his
enjoyment. When the time comes for the king to take his meal, a
discriminating servant can choose those fruits ready to offer him. From the
appearance of the fruits the servant can tell which are ripe in the middle but
still raw on the outside and thus not yet fit for the king. By the application of a
special heating process, these remaining fruits will become ripe in two or three
days, and then they too will be ready to offer to the king.
"Similarly, among the muni-cäré gopés who took birth in Gokula, those who
completely gave up the materiality of their bodies and very early in life
achieved purely spiritual bodies were able to remain untouched by any other
man; thus Yogamäyä allowed them to join the nitya-siddha and other advanced
gopés when they went to meet Kåñëa. Other muni-cäré gopés still retained some
connection with the external material body, but even they, after being
parched by the heat of separation from Çré Kåñëa, gave up the materiality of
their bodies and assumed perfectly transcendental bodies, purified of all taint
of contact with other men. On the night of the räsa dance, Yogamäyä sent
some of these gopés out behind those who had already gone out; others, who
Yogamäyä saw still had a slight amount of contamination, she kept back to
further purify with the heat of separation, and then she sent them out on some
other night.
"After enjoying the pleasures of the räsa dance and other pastimes with
Kåñëa, the muni-cäré gopés who had participated went back to their homes
when the night was over, as did the nitya-siddha and other advanced gopés. But
now Yogamäyä protected these muni-cäré gopés from the material association of
their husbands; in other words, these gopés were devoid of any selfish
attachment for husband, children and so on. Since these gopés were thoroughly
immersed in the great ocean of love for Kåñëa, their breasts dried up so that
they could not feed their infants, and to their family members they appeared as
if haunted by ghosts. In conclusion, it is not unseemly that the gopés who were
previously in material association joined in the räsa dance.
"Some authorities, however, maintain that the gopés who were kept back in
their houses did not have children. According to them, whenever such words
as apatya ('children') are used in verses yet to come, these words refer to the
children of co-wives, to adopted children or to nephews and nieces."
TEXT 12
™aIpar"Iiºaäu"vaAca
k{(SNAM ivaäu": parM" k(AntaM
na tau “aötayaA maunae
gAuNA‘avaAh"Aepar"mas$a,
taAs$aAM gAuNAiDayaAM k(Tama,
çré-parékñid uväca
kåñëaà viduù paraà käntaà
na tu brahmatayä mune
guëa-pravähoparamas
täsäà guëa-dhiyäà katham
SYNONYMS
çré-parékñit uväca—Çré Parékñit said; kåñëam—Lord Kåñëa; viduù—they knew;
param—only; käntam—as their beloved; na—not; tu—but; brahmatayä—as
the Absolute Truth; mune—O sage, Çukadeva; guëa—of the three modes of
material nature; praväha—of the mighty current; uparamaù—the cessation;
täsäm—for them; guëa-dhiyäm—whose mentality was caught up in those
modes; katham—how.
TRANSLATION
Çré Parékñit Mahäräja said: O sage, the gopés knew Kåñëa only as their lover,
not as the Supreme Absolute Truth. So how could these girls, their minds
caught up in the waves of the modes of nature, free themselves from material
attachment?
PURPORT
King Parékñit was sitting in an assembly of great sages and other important
personalities, listening to the words of Çukadeva Gosvämé. According to Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté, as Çukadeva began speaking of the gopés' conjugal love
for Kåñëa, the King noticed the expressions on the faces of some of the more
materialistic persons present there and realized the doubt lurking in their
hearts. Therefore, although the King thoroughly knew the purport of
Çukadeva's words, he presented himself as experiencing personal doubt so that
he could eradicate the doubt of others. That is why he asked this question.
TEXT 13
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
olM( paur"staAde"taÔae
caEâ: is$aiÜM" yaTaA gAta:
iã"Saªaipa ô$SaIke(zAM
ik(mautaADaAeºajai‘ayaA:
çré-çuka uväca
uktaà purastäd etat te
caidyaù siddhià yathä gataù
dviñann api håñékeçaà
kim utädhokñaja-priyäù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; uktam—spoken;
purastät—previously; etat—this; te—to you; caidyaù—the King of Cedi,
Çiçupäla; siddhim—perfection; yathä—as; gataù—he attained; dviñan—hating;
api—even; håñékeçam—the Supreme Lord Håñékeça; kim uta—what to speak
then; adhokñaja—to the transcendental Lord, who lies beyond the purview of
ordinary senses; priyäù—of those devotees who are very dear.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: This point was explained to you previously. Since
even Çiçupäla, who hated Kåñëa, achieved perfection, then what to speak of the
Lord's dear devotees.
PURPORT
Although the spiritual nature of conditioned souls may be covered by
illusion, Lord Kåñëa's spiritual nature is omnipotent and is never covered by
any other power. In fact, all other powers are His energy and thus function
according to His will. The Brahma-saàhitä (5.44) states, såñöi
sthiti-pralaya-sädhana-çaktir ekä/ chäyeva yasya bhuvanäni bibharti durgä/
icchänurüpam api yasya ca ceñöate sä: "The mighty Durgä, who creates,
maintains and annihilates the material worlds, is the potency ot the Supreme
Lord, and she moves like His shadow, according to His desire." Thus because
the Lord's spiritual influence does not depend on whether someone
understands Him or not, the gopés' spontaneous love for Kåñëa guaranteed
their spiritual perfection.
The great Madhväcärya quotes the following relevant passages from the
Skanda Puräëa:
kåñëa-kämäs tadä gopyas
tyaktvä dehaà divaà gatäù
samyak kåñëaà para-brahma
jïätvä kälät paraà yayuù
"At that time the gopés, who desired Kåñëa, gave up their bodies and went to
the spiritual world. Because they properly understood Kåñëa to be the Supreme
Absolute Truth, they transcended the influence of time."
pürvaà ca jïäna-saàyuktäs
taträpi präyaças tathä
atas täsäà paraà brahma
gatir äsén na kämataù
"In their previous lives most of the gopés were already fully endowed with
transcendental knowledge. It is because of this knowledge, not their lust, that
they were able to attain the Supreme Brahman."
na tu jïänam åte mokño
nänyaù pantheti hi çrutiù
käma-yuktä tadä bhaktir
jïänaà cäto vimukti-gäù
"The Vedas declare that without spiritual knowledge there is no valid path to
liberation. Because these apparently lusty gopés possessed devotion and
knowledge, they achieved liberation."
ato mokñe 'pi täsäà ca
kämo bhaktyänuvartate
mukti-çabdodito caidyaprabhåtau
dveña-bhäginaù
"Thus even in their attainment of liberation, 'lust' followed as a manifestation
of their pure devotion. After all, what we call liberation was experienced even
by envious persons like Çiçupäla."
bhakti-märgé påthaì muktim
agäd viñëu-prasädataù
kämas tv açubha-kåc cäpi
bhaktyä viñëoù prasäda-kåt
"By the mercy of Lord Viñëu, one who follows the path of devotional service
gains liberation as a by-product, and such a person's lusty desire, which would
normally invoke misfortune, instead invokes the mercy of Viñëu when
exhibited in pure devotion."
dveñi-jéva-yutaà cäpi
bhaktaà viñëur vimocayet
aho 'ti-karuëä viñëoù
çiçupälasya mokñaëät
"Lord Viñëu will save even a devotee possessed of an envious life. Just see the
extreme mercy of the Lord, as shown by His granting liberation to Çiçupäla!"
Çiçupäla was Lord Kåñëa's cousin. He was mortified when the Lord stole the
gorgeous young Rukmiëé, whom Çiçupäla himself was hell-bent on marrying.
For various other reasons also, Çiçupäla was consumed with envy of Lord
Kåñëa, and finally he insanely offended Him in a great assembly called the
Räjasüya sacrifice. At that time Kåñëa nonchalantly cut off Çiçupäla's head and
gave him liberation. Everyone present saw the effulgent soul of Çiçupäla rise
out of his dead body and merge into the existence of the Lord. The Seventh
Canto explains that Çiçupäla was an incarnation of a gatekeeper in the
spiritual world cursed to take birth on the earth as a demon. Since even
Çiçupäla was liberated by the Lord, who took into consideration the whole
situation, then what to speak of the gopés, who loved Kåñëa more than
anything.
TEXT 14
na{NAAM ina:™aeyas$aATaARya
vyail(BaRgAvataAe na{pa
@vyayasyaA‘amaeyasya
inagAuRNAsya gAuNAAtmana:
nåëäà niùçreyasärthäya
vyaktir bhagavato nåpa
avyayasyäprameyasya
nirguëasya guëätmanaù
SYNONYMS
nåëäm—for humanity; niùçreyasa—of the highest benefit; arthäya—for the
purpose; vyaktiù—the personal appearance; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Lord;
nåpa—O King; avyayasya—of Him who is inexhaustible;
aprameyasya—immeasurable; nirguëasya—untouched by material qualities;
guëa-ätmanaù—the controller of the material modes.
TRANSLATION
O King, the Supreme Lord is inexhaustible and immeasurable, and He is
untouched by the material modes because He is their controller. His personal
appearance in this world is meant for bestowing the highest benefit on
humanity.
PURPORT
Since Lord Kåñëa descends to benefit mankind in general, why would He
neglect innocent young girls who loved Him more than anyone else did?
Although the Lord awards Himself to His pure devotees, He is avyaya,
inexhaustible, because He is aprameya, immeasurable. He is also nirguëa, free
of material qualities, and thus those who intimately associate with Him are on
the same spiritual platform. He is guëätmä, the controller or original
personality behind the modes of nature, and it is specifically for this reason
that He is free of them. In other words, because the modes of nature are His
energy, they cannot act upon Him.
TEXT 15
k(AmaM ‚(AeDaM BayaM µaeh"ma,
WefyaM s$aAEô$d"maeva ca
inatyaM h"r"AE ivad"DataAe
yaAinta tanmayataAM ih" tae
kämaà krodhaà bhayaà sneham
aikyaà sauhådam eva ca
nityaà harau vidadhato
yänti tan-mayatäà hi te
SYNONYMS
kämam—lust; krodham—anger; bhayam—fear; sneham—loving affection;
aikyam—unity; sauhådam—friendship; eva ca—also; nityam—always;
harau—for Lord Hari; vidadhataù—exhibiting; yänti—they achieve;
tat-mayatäm—absorption in Him; hi—indeed; te—such persons.
TRANSLATION
Persons who constantly direct their lust, anger, fear, protective affection,
feeling of impersonal oneness or friendship toward Lord Hari are sure to
become absorbed in thought of Him.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa is pure spiritual existence, and those who somehow or other
become attached to Him, absorbed in thoughts of Him, rise to the spiritual
platform. This is the absolute nature of the Lord's personal association.
With this verse Çukadeva Gosvämé answers King Parékñit's question about
the gopés. After all, Çukadeva has begun to narrate Kåñëa's most intimate
pastime, the räsa dance, and Parékñit is cooperating to remove the doubts of
others who are hearing or who in the future may hear this astonishing story.
Çréla Madhväcärya has quoted a statement from the Skanda Puräëa that
emphatically declares persons like the gopés to be liberated souls, beyond the
pale of material illusion:
bhaktyä hi nitya-kämitvaà
na tu muktià vinä bhavet
ataù kämitayä väpi
muktir bhaktimatäà harau
"Eternal conjugal attraction to Kåñëa, expressed in pure devotional service,
cannot develop in one who is not already liberated. Thus those who are
devoted to Lord Hari, even in conjugal attraction, are already liberated .
"Çréla Madhväcärya then quotes from the Padma Puräëa to clarify the
essential point that one cannot be liberated simply by lusting after Lord Kåñëa
but rather only by possessing conjugal attraction in pure devotional service:
sneha-bhaktäù sadä deväù
kämitsenäpsara-striyaù
käscit käscin na kämena
bhaktyä kevalayaiva tu
"The demigods are always affectionately devoted to the Lord, and the young
ladies of heaven called Apsaräs have lusty feelings toward Him, although some
of them have pure devotion for Him untainted by material lust. Only these
latter Apsaräs are ready for liberation, because without bona fide devotional
service one cannot possibly achieve liberation."
Thus devotional service is not yogyam, or appropriate, unless free from
material lust. One should not take cheaply the gopés' achievement of personal
association with Lord Kåñëa in a conjugal relationship. To show the gravity of
direct relationship with the Lord, Çréla Madhväcärya has quoted the following
verses from the Varäha Puräëa:
patitvena çriyopäsyo
brahmaëä me piteti ca
pitämahatayänyeñäà
tridaçänäà janärdanaù
"The goddess Lakñmé worships Lord Janärdana as her husband, Lord Brahmä
worships Him as his father, and the other demigods worship Him as their
grandfather."
prapitämaho me bhagavän
iti sarva-janasya tu
guruù çré-brahmaëo viñëuù
suräëäà ca guror guruù
"Thus people in general should think, 'The Supreme Lord is my
great-grandfather.' Lord Viñëu is the spiritual master of Brahmä and thus the
guru of the guru of the demigods."
gurur brahmäsya jagato
daivaà viñëuù sanätanaù
ity evopäsanaà käryaà
nänyathä tu kathaïcana
"Brahmä is the spiritual master of this universe, and Viñëu is the eternally
worshipable Deity. With this understanding, and not otherwise, one should
worship the Lord."
The above injunctions apply to sarva-jana, "all people in general." Thus one
should follow these injunctions until one achieves the exalted platform of
intimate relationship with the Supreme Lord. There is abundant evidence that
the gopés of Våndävana were highly elevated, liberated souls, and thus their
pastimes with Kåñëa are pure, spiritual affairs. Keeping this in mind, we can
truly understand this chapter of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam .
TEXT 16
na caEvaM ivasmaya: k(AyaAeR
BavataA BagAvatyajae
yaAegAeìre"ìre" k{(SNAe
yata Wtaiã"maucyatae
na caivaà vismayaù käryo
bhavatä bhagavaty aje
yogeçvareçvare kåñëe
yata etad vimucyate
SYNONYMS
na ca—nor; evam—like this; vismayaù—astonishment; käryaù—should be had;
bhavatä—by you; bhagavati—in regard to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; aje—who is unborn; yoga-éçvara—of the masters of yoga; éçvare-the
ultimate master; kåñëe—Lord Kåñëa; yataù—by whom; etat—this (world);
vimucyate—becomes liberated.
TRANSLATION
You should not be so astonished by Kåñëa, the unborn master of all masters
of mystic power, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. After all, it is the Lord
who liberates this world.
PURPORT
Parékñit Mahäräja should not have been so astonished that Lord Kåñëa's
so-called romantic affairs are in fact meant to liberate the entire universe.
After all, that is the Lord's purpose—to bring all conditioned souls back home,
back to Godhead, for an eternal life of bliss and knowledge. The Lord's
conjugal affairs with the gopés fit in very nicely with that program because we
who are actually lusty in material consciousness can be purified and liberated
by hearing of them.
In the First Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.5.33), Närada Muni states,
ämayo yaç ca bhütänäà
jäyate yena su-vrata
tad eva hy ämayaà dravyaà
na punäti cikitsitam
"O good soul, does not a thing applied therapeutically cure a disease that was
caused by that very same thing?" Thus Kåñëa's romantic affairs, being pure,
spiritual activities, will cure those who hear about them of the disease of
material lust.
TEXT 17
taA ä{"î"Aintak(maAyaAtaA
BagAvaAna, ˜ajayaAeiSata:
@vad"ã"d"taAM ™aeï"Ae
vaAca: paezAEivaRmaAeh"yana,
tä dåñöväntikam äyätä
bhagavän vraja-yoñitaù
avadad vadatäà çreñöho
väcaù peçair vimohayan
SYNONYMS
täù—them; dåñövä—seeing; antikam—nearby; äyätäù—arrived; bhagavän—the
Supreme Lord; vraja-yoñitaù—the girls of Vraja; avadat—He spoke;
vadatäm—of speakers; çreñöhaù—the best; väcaù—of language; peçaiù—with
decorations; vimohayan—bewildering.
TRANSLATION
Seeing that the girls of Vraja had arrived, Lord Kåñëa, the best of speakers,
greeted them with charming words that bewildered their minds.
PURPORT
Having established the spiritual nature of the gopés' love for Kåñëa,
Çukadeva Gosvämé proceeds with his narration.
TEXT 18
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
svaAgAtaM vaAe mah"ABaAgAA:
i‘ayaM ikM( k(r"vaAiNA va:
˜ajasyaAnaAmayaM k(i»aä,"
“aUtaAgAmanak(Ar"NAma,
çré-bhagavän uväca
svägataà vo mahä-bhägäù
priyaà kià karaväëi vaù
vrajasyänämayaà kaccid
brütägamana-käraëam
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
su-ägatam—welcome; vaù—to you; mahä-bhägäù—O most fortunate ladies;
priyam—pleasing; kim—what; karaväëi—may I do; vaù—for you; vrajasya—of
Vraja; anämayam—the well-being; kaccit—whether; brüta—please tell;
ägamana—for your coming; käraëam—the reason.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa said: O most fortunate ladies, welcome. What may I do to please
you? Is everything well in Vraja? Please tell Me the reason for your coming
here.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa knew perfectly well why the gopés had come. In fact, He had
called them with the romantic melodies of His flute. So Kåñëa was simply
teasing the gopés by asking them, "Why have you come here so quickly? Is
something wrong in town? Why have you come here, anyway? What do you
want?"
The gopés were Kåñëa's young lovers, and therefore these questions
certainly bewildered them, for they had responded to Kåñëa's call with the
simple mentality of enjoying conjugal love with Him.
TEXT 19
r"janyaeSaA GaAer"è&paA
GaAer"s$aÔvainaSaeivataA
‘aitayaAta ˜ajaM naeh"
sTaeyaM ñIiBa: s$aumaDyamaA:
rajany eñä ghora-rüpä
ghora-sattva-niñevitä
pratiyäta vrajaà neha
stheyaà strébhiù su-madhyamäù
SYNONYMS
rajané—night; eñä—this; ghora-rüpä—fearsome in appearance;
ghora-sattva—by fearsome creatures; niñevitä—populated; pratiyäta—please
return; vrajam—to the cowherd village of Vraja; na—not; iha—here;
stheyam—should stay; strébhiù—women; su-madhyamäù—O slender-waisted
girls.
TRANSLATION
This night is quite frightening, and frightening creatures are lurking about.
Return to Vraja, slender-waisted girls. This is not a proper place for women.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has written the following charming
commentary on this verse:
"[The gopés thought,] 'Alas, alas, even after shattering our family
responsibilities, our sobriety and our shame and enjoying us day after day, and
after now dragging us here by the sound of His flute, He is asking us why we
have come!'
"As the gopés cast sidelong glances at one another, the Lord said, 'If you try
to tell Me that you have come to get night-blooming flowers to use in the
worship of God, and that it is these flowers you are looking at with your
sidelong glances, I will have to reject your excuse as unacceptable, since
neither the time, place nor persons involved are appropriate.'
"This is the Lord's meaning in the verse beginning rajané. He might have
said, 'Even though there is abundant moonlight, this time of night is very
fearsome because many snakes, scorpions and other dangerous creatures too
small for you to see are lying beneath the creepers, roots and twigs. Therefore
this time is unsuitable for gathering flowers. And not only the time but also
this place is unsuitable for you to gather flowers, because at night terrible
creatures such as tigers are abroad here. Therefore you should go back to
Vraja.'
" 'But,' the gopés may object, 'let us just rest for a few minutes, and then we
will go.'
"Then the Lord might reply, 'Women shouldn't remain in this kind of
place.' In other words, 'Because of the time and place, it is wrong for persons
like yourselves to stay here even for a moment.'
"Furthermore, by the word su-madhyamäù, 'O slender-waisted ones,' the
Lord implied, 'You are beautiful young girls, and I am a beautiful young boy.
Because you are all very chaste and I am a brahmacäré, as confirmed by the
words kåñëo brahmacäré in the çruti [Gopäla-täpané Upaniñad], there should be
no fault in our being in the same place. Nonetheless, the mind can never be
trusted-neither yours nor My own.'
"The Lord's inner eagerness thus hinted at is obvious if we read His words
between the lines, as follows: 'If out of shyness you cannot tell Me the reason
you've come, then don't speak. I already know it anyway, so just listen as I tell
it to you.' Thus the Lord speaks the words beginning rajané . "
The following statement by Kåñëa is based on an alternative meaning of the
verse derived when the Sanskrit words are separated in a different way. The
alternative separation, according to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté, would be
rajané eñä aghora-rüpä aghora-sattva-niñevitä/ pratiyäta vrajaà na iha stheyaà
stribhiù su-madhyamäù. Through Çréla Viçvanätha's commentary Kåñëa now
explains the meaning of this division of words.
" 'The pervasive moonshine has made this night appear not at all fearsome,
and therefore this forest is populated by harmless creatures such as deer
(aghora-sattvaiù), or else by animals such as tigers that are harmless because of
Våndävana's naturally nonviolent atmosphere. Consequently this night should
not frighten you.' Or else Kåñëa may have meant, 'You should not be afraid of
your own husbands and other relatives because, the night being populated by
fearsome animals, they will not come near this place. Therefore please do not
go back to Vraja [na pratiyäta], but stay here in My company [iha stheyam].'
"The gopés may ask the Lord, 'How are You staying here?'
"The Lord answers, 'With women.'
"But are You satisfied to keep just any women in Your company?'
"The Lord replies to this with the word su-madhyamäù, meaning, 'Only
women who are young and beautiful, who have slender waists—namely
yourselves—should stay here with Me, and not others.' Thus we can appreciate
that Kåñëa's statements are full of considerate as well as neglectful sentiments."
Kåñëa's words are certainly brilliant, because according to the rules of
Sanskrit grammar they may be understood in either of two opposite ways. In
the first case, as translated above, Lord Kåñëa continues to tease the gopés by
telling them the night is dangerous and inauspicious and that they should go
home. But Kåñëa is simultaneously saying exactly the opposite—namely, that
there is absolutely no reason for the gopés to fear coming to the Lord, that the
night is quite auspicious and that the girls should under no circumstances go
back home. Thus Lord Kåñëa simultaneously teases and enchants the gopés
with His words.
TEXT 20
maAtar": ipatar": pau‡aA
”aAtar": patayaê va:
ivaicanvainta ÷pazyantaAe
maA k{(ÓM# banDaus$aADvas$ama,
mätaraù pitaraù puträ
bhrätaraù patayaç ca vaù
vicinvanti hy apaçyanto
mä kåòhvaà bandhu-sädhvasam
SYNONYMS
mätaraù—mothers; pitaraù—fathers; puträù—sons; bhrätaraù—brothers;
patayaù—husbands; ca—and; vaù—your; vincinvanti—are searching;
hi—certainly; apaçyantaù—not seeing; mä kåòhvam—do not create;
bandhu—for your family members; sädhvasam—anxiety.
TRANSLATION
Not finding you at home, your mothers, fathers, sons, brothers and husbands
are certainly searching for you. Don't cause anxiety for your family members.
TEXTS 21-22
ä{"íM" vanaM ku(s$auimataM
r"Ake(zAk(r"r"iÃatama,
yamaunaAinalalaIlaEjata,
taç&paéavazAAeiBatama,
taâAta maA icarM" gAAeïM"
zAu™aUSaDvaM pataIna, s$ataI:
‚(nd"inta vats$aA baAlaAê
taAna, paAyayata äu"÷ta
dåñöaà vanaà kusumitaà
räkeça-kara-raïjitam
yamunänila-lélaijat
taru-pallava-çobhitam
tad yäta mä ciraà goñöhaà
çuçrüñadhvaà patén satéù
krandanti vatsä bäläç ca
tän päyayata duhyata
SYNONYMS
dåñöam—seen; vanam—the forest; kusumitam—full of flowers; räkä-éça—of
the moon, the lord of the presiding goddess of the full-moon day; kara—by the
hand; raïjitam—made resplendent; yamunä—coming from the Yamunä River;
anila—by the wind; lélä—playfully; ejat—trembling; taru—of the trees;
pallava—with the leaves; çobhitam—beautified; tat—therefore; yäta—go back;
mä ciram—without delay; goñöham—to the cowherd village;
çuçrüñadhvam—you must serve; patén—your husbands; satéù—O chaste
women; krandanti—are crying; vatsäù—the calves; bäläù—the children;
ca—and; tän—them; päyayata—breast-feed; duhyata—feed with cow's milk.
TRANSLATION
Now you have seen this Våndävana forest, full of flowers and resplendent
with the light of the full moon. You have seen the beauty of the trees, with
their leaves trembling in the gentle breeze coming from the Yamunä. So now go
back to the cowherd village. Don't delay. O chaste ladies, serve your husbands
and give milk to your crying babies and calves.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura further explains Text 22 as follows:
"Lord Kåñëa says, 'Therefore don't wait a long time before going, but go
immediately.' The word satéù means that the gopés are loyal to their husbands;
therefore Kåñëa indicates that the gopés should serve their husbands so the
latter can accomplish their religious duties, and that the gopés should also be
considered worshipable because of their chastity. All this Kåñëa says to the
gopés who are married. And now to the unmarried girls He says, 'The calves are
crying, so see to it that they get milk.' To the muni-cäré gopés He says, 'Your
babies are crying, so feed them milk.' "
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura further reveals the hidden meaning
of these two verses as follows: "In Text 21 Kåñëa might have said, 'This
Våndävana is the very best of places, and moreover this is a full-moon night.
Furthermore, we have the Yamunä on all sides, and there are cool, gentle,
fragrant breezes blowing. These are all transcendental opulences that stimulate
loving exchanges, and since I am also here as the foremost ecstatic
opulence—the object of love—let us now test how much expertise you can
show in relishing rasas.'
"In Text 22 He means to say, 'Thus for a long time, for the entire duration
of this night, don't leave, but rather stay here and enjoy with Me. Don't go
serve your husbands and the gentle women—your mothers-in-law and so forth.
It would not be fitting for you to waste such beauty and youth, which are gifts
of the creator. Nor should you milk the cows or give milk to the calves and
babies. What do you, who are so full of ecstatic attraction for Me, have to do
with these affairs?' "
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura also explains that the gopés could not
really be sure exactly what Kåñëa was doing—whether He was merely joking,
inviting them to stay or instructing them to return home. Thus as Çré Kåñëa
spoke about the beauty of the forest, the gopés felt embarrassed and bewildered
and looked upward at the trees, and as He spoke about the Yamunä they
looked all around at the river. Their absolute purity and simplicity, along with
their absolute devotion to Lord Kåñëa in the conjugal mood, created the most
beautiful pastimes ever exhibited in this universe.
TEXT 23
@Ta vaA mad"iBaµaeh"Aä,"
BavatyaAe yain‡ataAzAyaA:
@AgAtaA ÷upapaªaM va:
‘aIyantae maiya jantava:
atha vä mad-abhisnehäd
bhavatyo yantritäçayäù
ägatä hy upapannaà vaù
préyante mayi jantavaù
SYNONYMS
atha vä—or else; mat-abhisnehät—because of love for Me; bhavatyaù—you;
yantrita—subjugated; açayäù—your hearts; ägatäù—have come; hi—indeed;
upapannam—fitting; vaù—on your part; préyante—have affection; mayi—for
Me; jantavaù—all living beings.
TRANSLATION
On the other hand, perhaps you have come here out of your great love for
Me, which has taken control of your hearts. This is of course quite
commendable on your part, since all living entities possess natural affection for
Me.
TEXT 24
BatauR: zAu™aUSaNAM ñINAAM
par"Ae DamaAeR ÷maAyayaA
taß"nDaUnaAM ca k(lyaANA:
‘ajaAnaAM caAnaupaAeSaNAma,
bhartuù çuçrüñaëaà stréëäà
paro dharmo hy amäyayä
tad-bandhünäà ca kalyäëaù
prajänäà cänupoñaëam
SYNONYMS
bhartuù—of one's husband; çuçrüñaëam—faithful service; stréëäm—for
women; paraù—the highest; dharmaù—religious duty; hi—indeed;
amäyayä—without duplicity; tat-bandhünäm—to the relatives of their
husbands; ca—and; kalyäëaù—doing good; prajänäm—of their offspring;
ca—and; anupoñaëam—the care.
TRANSLATION
The highest religious duty for a woman is to sincerely serve her husband,
behave well toward her husband's family and take good care of her children.
PURPORT
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé astutely points out here that the gopés real, eternal
husband is Lord Kåñëa, not their so-called husbands at home, who falsely
considered the gopés their property. Thus a strict interpretation of the word
amäyayä, "without illusion," reveals that the supreme religious duty for the
gopés is to serve Çré Kåñëa, their real lover.
TEXT 25
äu":zAIlaAe äu"BaRgAAe va{Ü"Ae
jax"Ae r"AegyaDanaAe'ipa vaA
paita: ñIiBanaR h"AtavyaAe
laAeke(ps$auiBar"paAtak(L
duùçélo durbhago våddho
jaòo rogy adhano 'pi vä
patiù strébhir na hätavyo
lokepsubhir apätaké
SYNONYMS
duùçélaù—of bad character; durbhagaù—unfortunate; våddhaù—old;
jaòaù—retarded; rogé—sickly; adhanaù—poor; api vä—even; patiù—the
husband; strébhiù—by women; na hätavyaù—should not be rejected; loka—a
good destination in the next life; épsubhiù—who desire; apätaké—(if he is) not
fallen.
TRANSLATION
Women who desire a good destination in the next life should never abandon
a husband who has not fallen from his religious standards, even if he is
obnoxious, unfortunate, old, unintelligent, sickly or poor.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté quotes a similar statement from småti-çästra:
patià tv apatitaà bhajet. "One should serve a master who is not fallen."
Sometimes the foolish argument is given that even if a husband falls down
from spiritual principles, his wife should continue to follow him since he is her
"guru." In fact, since Kåñëa consciousness cannot be subordinated to any other
religious principle, a guru who engages his follower in materialistic, sinful
activities loses his status as a guru. Çréla Prabhupäda stated that the system of
monarchy collapsed in Europe because the monarchs abused and exploited
their position. Similarly, in the Western world men have abused and exploited
women, and now there is a popular movement in which women reject the
authority of their husbands. Ideally, men should be staunch in spiritual life and
give pure, sincere guidance to the women under their care.
The gopés, of course, being on the highest platform of spiritual perfection,
were transcendental to all positive and negative religious considerations. In
other words, they were the eternal lovers of the Absolute Truth.
TEXT 26
@svagyaRmayazAsyaM ca
P(lgAu k{(cC)M$ BayaAvah"ma,
jaugAuips$ataM ca s$avaR‡a
÷AEpapatyaM ku(laiñya:
asvargyam ayaçasyaà ca
phalgu kåcchraà bhayävaham
jugupsitaà ca sarvatra
hy aupapatyaà kula-striyaù
SYNONYMS
asvargyam—not leading to heaven; ayaçasyam—unfavorable for a good
reputation; ca—and; phalgu—insignificant; kåcchram—difficult:
bhaya-ävaham-creating fear; jugupsitam—contemptible; ca—and: sarvatra-in
all cases; hi—indeed; aupapatyam—adulterous affairs; kula-striyaù—for a
woman coming from a respectable family.
TRANSLATION
For a woman from a respectable family, petty adulterous affairs are always
condemned. They bar her from heaven, ruin her reputation and bring her
difficulty and fear.
TEXT 27
™avaNAAÚ"zARnaAÜ"YaAnaAna,
maiya BaAvaAe'nauk(LtaRnaAta,
na taTaA s$aiªak(SaeRNA
‘aitayaAta tataAe gA{h"Ana,
çravaëäd darçanäd dhyänän
mayi bhävo 'nukértanät
na tathä sannikarñeëa
pratiyäta tato gåhän
SYNONYMS
çravaëät—by hearing (My glories); darçanät—by viewing (My Deity form in
the temple); dhyänät—by meditation; mayi—for Me; bhävaù—love;
anukértanät—by subsequent chanting; na—not; tathä—in the same way;
sannikarñeëa—by physical proximity; pratiyäta—please return;
tataù—therefore; gåhän—to your homes.
TRANSLATION
Transcendental love for Me arises by the devotional processes of hearing
about Me, seeing My Deity form, meditating on Me and faithfully chanting My
glories. The same result is not achieved by mere physical proximity. So please go
back to your homes.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa is certainly presenting formidable arguments.
TEXT 28
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
wita ivai‘ayamaAk(NyaR
gAAepyaAe gAAeivand"BaAiSatama,
ivaSaNNAA Ba¢as$aÆÿlpaAzA,
icantaAmaApauäuR"r"tyayaAma,
çré-çuka uväca
iti vipriyam äkarëya
gopyo govinda-bhäñitam
viñaëëä bhagna-saìkalpäç
cintäm äpur duratyayäm
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; vipriyam—unpleasant;
äkarëya—hearing; gopyaù—the gopés; govinda-bhäñitam—the words spoken by
Govinda; viñaëëäù—becoming morose; bhagna—thwarted; saìkalpäù—their
strong desires; cintäm—anxiety; äpuù—they experienced;
duratyayäm—insurmountable.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Hearing these unpleasant words spoken by
Govinda, the gopés became morose. Their great hopes were frustrated and they
felt insurmountable anxiety.
PURPORT
The gopés did not know what to do. They considered falling at Kåñëa's feet
and crying for His mercy, or perhaps remaining aloof and going back to their
homes. But they could do neither of these things and so felt great anxiety.
TEXT 29
k{(tvaA mauKaAnyava zAuca: ìs$anaena zAuSyaä,"
ibambaADar"AiNA car"NAena Bauva: ilaKantya:
@›aEç&paAÔamais$aiBa: ku(caku(ÇÿmaAina
tasTauma{Rjantya oç&äu":KaBar"A: sma taUSNAIma,
kåtvä mukhäny ava çucaù çvasanena çuñyad
bimbädharäëi caraëena bhuvaù likhantyaù
asrair upätta-masibhiù kuca-kuìkumäni
tasthur måjantya uru-duùkha-bharäù sma tüñëém
SYNONYMS
kåtvä—placing; mukhäni—their faces; ava—downward; çucaù—out of sorrow;
çvasanena—by sighing; çuñyat—drying up; bimba—(appearing like) red bimba
fruits; adharäëi—their lips; caraëena—with their toes; bhuvaù—the ground;
likhantyaù—scratching; asraiù—with their tears; upätta—which carried;
masibhiù—the kajjala from their eyes; kuca—on the breasts; kuìkumäni—the
vermilion powder; tasthuù—they stood still; måjantyaù—washing away;
uru—excessive; duùkha—of unhappiness; bharäù—feeling the burden;
sma—indeed; tüñëém—silently.
TRANSLATION
Their heads hanging down and their heavy, sorrowful breathing drying up
their reddened lips, the gopés scratched the ground with their toes. Tears flowed
from their eyes, carrying their kajjala and washing away the vermilion smeared
on their breasts. Thus they stood, silently bearing the burden of their
unhappiness.
PURPORT
The gopés felt, "If Kåñëa has not been conquered by our love, then our love
must not be genuine. And if we cannot properly love Kåñëa, what is the use of
our lives?" Their reddish lips were drying up because of the hot breathing that
arose from their unhappiness. When the hot sun dries ripe red bimba fruits,
dark spots appear on them and they grow soft. The beautiful lips of the gopés
similarly changed in appearance. They stood silently before Kåñëa, unable to
speak.
TEXT 30
‘aeïM" i‘ayaetar"imava ‘aitaBaASamaANAM
k{(SNAM tad"TaRivainavaitaRtas$avaRk(AmaA:
nae‡ae ivama{jya ç&id"taAepah"tae sma ik(iÂata,
s$aMr"mBagAÕ"d"igAr"Ae'“auvataAnaur"l(A:
preñöhaà priyetaram iva pratibhäñamäëaà
kåñëaà tad-artha-vinivartita-sarva-kämäù
netre vimåjya ruditopahate sma kiïcit
saàrambha-gadgada-giro 'bruvatänuraktäù
SYNONYMS
preñöham—their beloved; priya-itaram—just the opposite of a beloved; iva—as
if; pratibhäñamäëam—addressing them; kåñëam—Lord Kåñëa; tat-artha—for
His sake; vinivartita—desisted from; sarva—all; kämäù—their material desires;
netre—their eyes; vimåjya—wiping; rudita—their crying; upahate—having
stopped; sma—then; kiïcit—something; saàrambha—with agitation;
gadgada—choking up; giraù—their voices; abruvata—they spoke;
anuraktäù—firmly attached.
TRANSLATION
Although Kåñëa was their beloved, and although they had abandoned all
other objects of desire for His sake, He had been speaking to them unfavorably.
Nonetheless, they remained unflinching in their attachment to Him. Stopping
their crying, they wiped their eyes and began to speak, their voices stammering
with agitation.
PURPORT
The gopés now replied to Çré Kåñëa, their voices choking up with anger
caused by their intense love for Him and their unwillingness to give Him up.
They would not allow Him to reject them.
TEXT 31
™aIgAAepya Ocau:
maEvaM ivaBaAe'hR"ita BavaAna, gAid"tauM na{zAMs$aM
s$antyajya s$avaRivaSayaAMstava paAd"maUlama,
Bal(A Bajasva äu"r"vaƒah" maA tyajaAsmaAna,
de"vaAe yaTaAid"pauç&SaAe Bajatae maumauºaUna,
çré-gopya ücuù
maivaà vibho 'rhati bhavän gadituà nå-çaàsaà
santyajya sarva-viñayäàs tava päda-mülam
bhaktä bhajasva duravagraha mä tyajäsmän
devo yathädi-puruño bhajate mumukñün
SYNONYMS
çré-gopyaù ücuù—the beautiful gopés said; mä—not; evam—in this way;
vibho—O all-powerful one; arhati—should; bhavän—Your good self;
gaditum—speak; nå-çaàsam—cruelly; santyajya—renouncing completely;
sarva—all; viñayän—varieties of sense gratification; tava—Your;
päda-mülam—feet; bhaktäù—worshiping; bhajasva—please reciprocate with;
duravagraha—O stubborn one; mä tyaja—do not reject; asmän—us;
deväù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yathä—just as; ädi-puruñaù—the
primeval Lord, Näräyaëa; bhajate—reciprocates; mumukñün—with those who
desire liberation.
TRANSLATION
The beautiful gopés said: O all-powerful one, You should not speak in this
cruel way. Do not reject us, who have renounced all material enjoyment to
render devotional service to Your lotus feet. Reciprocate with us, O stubborn
one, just as the primeval Lord, Çré Näräyaëa, reciprocates with His devotees in
their endeavors for liberation.
TEXT 32
yatpatyapatyas$auô$d"Amanauva{iÔar"Ëÿ
ñINAAM svaDamaR wita DamaRivad"A tvayaAel(ma,
@stvaevamaetaäu"pade"zApade" tvayaIzAe
‘aeï"Ae BavaAMstanauBa{taAM ik(la banDaur"AtmaA
yat paty-apatya-suhådäm anuvåttir aìga
stréëäà sva-dharma iti dharma-vidä tvayoktam
astv evam etad upadeça-pade tvayéçe
preñöho bhaväàs tanu-bhåtäà kila bandhur ätmä
SYNONYMS
yat—which; pati—of husbands; apatya—children; suhådäm—and well-wishing
relatives and friends; anuvåttiù—the following; aìga—our dear Kåñëa;
stréëäm—of women; sva-dharmaù—the proper religious duty; iti—thus;
dharma-vidä—by the knower of religion; tvayä—You; uktam—spoken;
astu—let it be; evam—like that; etat—this; upadeça—of this instruction;
pade—to the real object; tvayi—You; éçe—O Lord; preñöhaù—the dearmost;
bhavän—You; tanu-bhåtäm—for all embodied living beings; kila—certainly;
bandhuù—the close relative; ätmä—the very Self.
TRANSLATION
Our dear Kåñëa, as an expert in religion You have advised us that the proper
religious duty for women is to faithfully serve their husbands, children and
other relatives. We agree that this principle is valid, but actually this service
should be rendered to You. After all, O Lord, You are the dearmost friend of all
embodied souls. You are their most intimate relative and indeed their very Self.
PURPORT
Çré Kåñëa is the Soul of all souls, their dearmost friend and well-wisher. As
stated in the Eleventh Canto of the Bhägavatam (11.5.41):
devarñi-bhütäpta-nåëäà pitèëäà
na kiìkaro näyam åëé ca räjan
sarvätmanä yaù çaraëaà çaraëyaà
gato mukundaà parihåtya kartam
"O King, one who has given up all material duties and has taken full shelter of
the lotus feet of Mukunda, who offers shelter to all, is not indebted to the
demigods, great sages, ordinary living beings, relatives, friends, mankind or
even one's forefathers who have passed away. Since all such classes of living
entities are part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, one who has surrendered to
the Lord's service has no need to serve such persons separately." Authority
descends from the author of all existence, the Supreme Lord. Natural figures of
authority such as husbands, mothers, government leaders and sages gain their
power and authority from the Supreme Lord and should thus represent the
Absolute Truth to those who follow them. If one wholeheartedly engages in
loving service to the original, Supreme Truth, one need not indirectly serve
the Absolute Truth through the above-mentioned secondary authorities.
Even a soul surrendered to God, however, continues to serve the spiritual
master, who is a direct, not an indirect, representative of the Supreme Lord. A
bona fide äcärya, or spiritual master, is the transparent medium leading the
disciple to the lotus feet of Kåñëa. All indirect authorities become obsolete
when one is directly in touch with the Absolute Truth. The gopés wanted to
explain this basic point to Kåñëa, and some of the bolder young girls among
them attempted to defeat Çré Kåñëa with His own statements, as exemplified in
this verse.
TEXT 33
ku(vaRinta ih" tvaiya r"itaM ku(zAlaA: sva @Atmana,
inatyai‘ayae paitas$autaAid"iBar"AitaR&dE": ik(ma,
taªa: ‘as$aId" par"maeìr" maA sma iC$nâA
@AzAAM Da{taAM tvaiya icar"Ad"r"ivand"nae‡a
kurvanti hi tvayi ratià kuçaläù sva ätman
nitya-priye pati-sutädibhir ärti-daiù kim
tan naù praséda parameçvara mä sma chindyä
äçäà dhåtäà tvayi ciräd aravinda-netra
SYNONYMS
kurvanti—they show; hi—indeed; tvayi—for You; ratim—attraction;
kuçaläù—expert persons; sve—for their own; ätman—Self; nitya—eternally;
priye—who is dear; pati—with our husbands; suta—children; ädibhiù—and
other relations; ärti-daiù—who only give trouble; kim—what; tat—therefore;
naù—to us; praséda—be merciful; parama-éçvara—O supreme controller; mä
sma chindyäù—please do not cut down; äçäm—our hopes; dhåtäm—sustained;
tvayi—for You; cirät—for a long time; aravinda-netra—O lotus-eyed one.
TRANSLATION
Expert transcendentalists always direct their affection toward You because
they recognize You as their true Self and eternal beloved. What use do we have
for these husbands, children and relatives of ours, who simply give us trouble?
Therefore, O supreme controller grant us Your mercy. O lotus-eyed one, please
do not cut down our long-cherished hope to have Your association.
TEXT 34
icaÔaM s$auKaena BavataApaô$taM gA{he"Sau
yaiªaivaRzAtyauta k(r"Avaipa gA{÷k{(tyae
paAd"AE padM" na calatastava paAd"maUlaAä,"
yaAma: k(TaM ˜ajamaTaAe k(r"vaAma ikM( vaA
cittaà sukhena bhavatäpahåtaà gåheñu
yan nirviçaty uta karäv api gåhya-kåtye
pädau padaà na calatas tava päda-müläd
yämaù kathaà vrajam atho karaväma kià vä
SYNONYMS
cittam—our minds; sukhena—easily; bhavatä—by You; apahåtam—were
stolen; gåheñu—in our households; yat—which; nirviçati—were absorbed;
uta—moreover; karau—our hands; api—as well; gåhya-kåtye—in household
work; pädau—our feet; padam—one step; na calataù—are not moving;
tava—Your; päda-mülät—away from the feet; yämaù—we shall go;
katham—how; vrajam—back to Vraja; atha u—and then; karaväma—we shall
do; kim—what; vä—furthermore.
TRANSLATION
Until today our minds were absorbed in household affairs, but You easily
stole both our minds and our hands away from our housework. Now our feet
won't move one step from Your lotus feet. How can we go back to Vraja? What
would we do there?
PURPORT
Çré Kåñëa had blown into His flute, and the intoxicating music that had
come out of its holes had stolen the minds of the young gopé girls. Now they
had come to see Kåñëa to demand back their stolen property, but they could
regain their minds only if Çré Kåñëa accepted them and engaged with them in
conjugal affairs.
Çré Kåñëa might have replied, "But My dear gopés, just go home for now. Let
Me consider the situation for a day or two, and then I will give you back your
minds." In reply to this possible argument, the gopés state, "Our feet refuse to
move even one step. So please give us back our minds and accept us, and then
we will go."
TEXT 35
is$aÂaAËÿ nastvad"Dar"Ama{tapaUr"ke(NA
h"As$aAvalaAek(k(lagAItajaô$cC$yaAi¢ama,
naAe caeã"yaM ivar"h"jaAgnyaupayaul(de"h"A
DyaAnaena yaAma pad"yaAe: pad"vaI%M s$aKae tae
siïcäìga nas tvad-adharämåta-pürakeëa
häsävaloka-kala-géta-ja-håc-chayägnim
no ced vayaà virahajägny-upayukta-dehä
dhyänena yäma padayoù padavéà sakhe te
SYNONYMS
siïca—please pour; aìga—our dear Kåñëa; naù—our; tvat—Your; adhara—of
the lips; amåta—of the nectar; pürakeëa—with the flood; häsa—smiling;
avaloka—by Your glances; kala—melodious; géta—and the song (of Your
flute); ja—generated; håt-çaya—situated within our hearts; agnim—the fire;
na u cet—if not; vayam—we; viraha—from separation; ja—born; agni—within
the fire; upayukta—placing; dehäù—our bodies; dhyänena—by meditation;
yäma—we shall go; padayoù—of the feet; padavém—to the place; sakhe—O
friend; te—Your.
TRANSLATION
Dear Kåñëa, please pour the nectar of Your lips upon the fire within our
hearts—a fire You ignited with Your smiling glances and the sweet song of
Your flute. If You do not, we will consign our bodies to the fire of separation
from You, O friend, and thus like yogés attain to the abode of Your lotus feet by
meditation.
TEXT 36
ya÷RmbaujaAºa tava paAd"talaM r"maAyaA
d"ÔaºaNAM ¸(icad"r"Nyajanai‘ayasya
@s$‘aAºma tat‘aBa{ita naAnyas$amaºamaÃa:
sTaAtauMstvayaAiBar"imataA bata paAr"yaAma:
yarhy ambujäkña tava päda-talaà ramäyä
datta-kñaëaà kvacid araëya-jana-priyasya
aspräkñma tat-prabhåti nänya-samakñam aïjaù
sthätuàs tvayäbhiramitä bata pärayämaù
SYNONYMS
yarhi—when; ambuja—like lotuses; akña—O You whose eyes; tava—Your;
päda—of the feet; talam—at the base; ramäyäù—for the goddess of fortune,
Çrématé Lakñmédevé; datta—affording; kñaëam—a festival; kvacit—sometimes;
araëya—who dwell in the forest; jana—the people; priyasya—who hold dear;
aspräkñma—we shall touch; tat-prabhåti—from that moment forward;
na—never; anya—of any other man; samakñam—in the presence;
aïjaù—directly; sthätum—to stand; tvayä—by You; abhiramitäù—filled with
joy; bata—certainly; pärayämaù—will we be able.
TRANSLATION
O lotus-eyed one, the goddess of fortune considers it a festive occasion
whenever she touches the soles of Your lotus feet. You are very dear to the
residents of the forest, and therefore we will also touch those lotus feet. From
that time on we will be unable even to stand in the presence of any other man,
for we will have been fully satisfied by You.
TEXT 37
™aIyaRtpad"Ambaujar"jaêk(mae taulasyaA
labDvaAipa vaºais$a padM" ik(la Ba{tyajauí"ma,
yasyaA: svavaIºaNA otaAnyas$aur"‘ayaAs$as$a,
taã"ã"yaM ca tava paAd"r"ja: ‘apaªaA:
çrér yat padämbuja-rajaç cakame tulasyä
labdhväpi vakñasi padaà kila bhåtya-juñöam
yasyäù sva-vékñaëa utänya-sura-prayäsas
tadvad vayaà ca tava päda-rajaù prapannäù
SYNONYMS
çréù—the goddess of fortune, wife of Lord Näräyaëa; yat—as; pada-ambuja—of
the lotus feet; rajaù—the dust; cakame—desired; tulasyä—together with
Tulasé-devé; labdhvä—having obtained; api—even; vakñasi—upon His chest;
padam—her position; kila—indeed; bhåtya—by servants; juñöam—served;
yasyäù—whose (Lakñmé's); sva—upon themselves; vékñaëe—for the sake of the
glance; uta—on the other hand; anya—of the other; sura—demigods;
prayäsaù—the endeavor; tadvat—in the same way; vayam—we; ca—also;
tava—Your; päda—of the feet; rajaù—the dust; prapannäù—have approached
for shelter.
TRANSLATION
Goddess Lakñmé, whose glance is sought after by the demigods with great
endeavor, has achieved the unique position of always remaining on the chest of
her Lord, Näräyaëa. Still, she desires the dust of His lotus feet, even though
she has to share that dust with Tulasé-devé and indeed with the Lord's many
other servants. Similarly, we have approached the dust of Your lotus feet for
shelter.
PURPORT
The gopés here point out that the dust of the Lord's feet is so ecstatic and
enlivening that the goddess of fortune wants to abandon her unique position
on His chest to share with many other devotees a position at His feet. Thus the
gopés urge Lord Kåñëa not to be guilty of a double standard. Since the Lord
gave the goddess of fortune a place on His chest and also allowed her to seek
the dust of His lotus feet, Kåñëa should certainly give the same opportunity to
His most loving devotees, the gopés. "After all" the gopés plead, "seeking the dust
of Your lotus feet is perfectly justified, and You should encourage us in this
endeavor and not try to send us away."
TEXT 38
taªa: ‘as$aId" va{ijanaAdR"na tae'in„amaUlaM
‘aAæaA ivas$a{jya vas$ataIstvaäu"paAs$anaAzAA:
tvats$aund"r"ismatainar"IºaNAtaI˜ak(Ama
taæaAtmanaAM pauç&SaBaUSaNA de"ih" d"Asyama,
tan naù praséda våjinärdana te 'nghri-mülaà
präptä visåjya vasatés tvad-upäsanäçäù
tvat-sundara-smita-nirékñaëa-tévra-käma
taptätmanäà puruña-bhüñaëa dehi däsyam
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; naù—to us; praséda—please show Your mercy; våjina—of all
distress; ardana—O vanquisher; te—Your; aìghri-mülam—feet; präptäù—we
have approached; visåjya—renouncing; vasatéù—our homes; tvat-upäsanä—the
worship of You; äçäù—hoping for; tvat—Your; sundara—beautiful;
smita—smiling; nirékñaëa—because of the glances; tévra—intense; käma—by
the lust; tapta—burned; ätmanäm—whose hearts; puruña—of all men;
bhüñaëa—O ornament; dehi—please grant; däsyam—servitude.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O vanquisher of all distress, please show us mercy. To approach
Your lotus feet we abandoned our families and homes, and we have no desire
other than to serve You. Our hearts are burning with intense desires generated
by Your beautiful smiling glances. O jewel among men, please make us Your
maidservants.
PURPORT
When Çré Kåñëa was born, the sage Garga predicted that He would manifest
all the opulences of the Supreme Lord Näräyaëa. The gopés now appeal to the
Lord to fulfill this prediction by being merciful and granting them direct
service, just as Lord Näräyaëa awards direct service to His loving devotees.
The gopés emphasize that they did not give up their families and homes with
the hope of securing a higher pleasure from Kåñëa. They are simply begging for
service, revealing their pure-hearted devotion. The gopés think, "If in the
course of Your pursuing Your happiness we somehow or other become happy
by seeing Your face, what is the harm in that?"
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté comments on the words puruña-bhüñaëa, "O
jewel among men." The Öhäkura states that the gopés meant to say, "O jewel of
all males, please decorate our golden bodies with the dark blue gems of Your
limbs."
TEXT 39
vaIºyaAlak(Ava{tamauKaM tava ku(Nd"la™aI
gANx"sTalaADar"s$auDaM h"is$ataAvalaAek(ma,
d"ÔaABayaM ca Baujad"Nx"yaugAM ivalaAefya
vaºa: i™ayaEk(r"maNAM ca BavaAma d"Asya:
vékñyälakävåta-mukhaà tava kuëdala-çré
gaëòa-sthalädhara-sudhaà hasitävalokam
dattäbhayaà ca bhuja-daëòa-yugaà vilokya
vakñaù çriyaika-ramaëaà ca bhaväma däsyaù
SYNONYMS
vékñya—seeing; alaka—by Your hair; ävåta—covered; mukham—face:
tava-Your; kuëòala—of Your earrings; çré—with the beauty;
gaëòa-sthala—having the cheeks; adhara—of Your lips; sudham—and the
nectar; hasita—smiling; avalokam—with glances; datta—bestowing;
abhayam—fearlessness; ca—and; bhuja-daëòa—of Your mighty arms;
yugam—the pair; vilokya—glancing upon; vakñaù—Your chest; çré—of the
goddess of fortune; eka—the only; ramaëam—source of pleasure; ca—and;
bhaväma—we must become; däsyaù—Your maidservants.
TRANSLATION
Seeing Your face encircled by curling locks of hair, Your cheeks beautified
by earrings, Your lips full of nectar, and Your smiling glance, and also seeing
Your two imposing arms, which take away our fear, and Your chest, which is
the only source of pleasure for the goddess of fortune, we must become Your
maidservants.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura envisions the gopés' dealings with
Kåñëa as follows:
"Kåñëa says, 'You want to become My servants; so do I have to buy you with
some payment, or are you giving yourselves freely?'
The gopés reply, " 'Since the beginning of our youthful womanhood You
have been purchasing us with a payment millions and millions of times more
than enough. That payment is Your gemlike smiling glance, which constitutes
a great treasure we have never heard about or seen anywhere else.'
" 'When You put Your golden turban on Your head, Your maidservant will
act as Your valet, pulling up the turban bit by bit until it is in just the right
position. And even while You shake a chastising finger at her, trying hard to
prohibit her, she will put her hand beneath Your turban and take the
opportunity to glance at Your face. Thus we, Your maidservants, will relish
with our eyes Your abundant sweetness.'
"Kåñëa says, 'Your husbands will not tolerate this behavior of ours. They will
complain bitterly to King Kaàsa, thus producing a fearful situation for Me and
for you as well.'
"The gopés say, 'But Kåñëa, Your two mighty arms make us fearless, just as
they did when You held up Govardhana Hill to protect us from the pride of
Mahendra. Those arms will certainly kill that beast Kaàsa.'
" 'But being a religious person, I cannot make others' wives My
maidservants. '
" 'O dear crest jewel of religious personalities, You may say that You refuse
to make the cowherds' wives Your maidservants, but by force You have already
taken Lakñmé, the wife of Näräyaëa, from Vaikuëöha and are carrying her
around on Your chest. Out of shame she has assumed the form of a golden line
on Your chest, and she takes her only pleasure there.
" 'Besides, within all the fourteen worlds and even above these worlds—in
Vaikuëöhaloka, beyond this universe—You never reject any beautiful woman,
no matter who she is or whom she belongs to. We know this quite well.' "
TEXT 40
k(A s$‡yaËÿ tae k(lapad"AyatavaeNAugAItas$
ammaAeih"taAyaRcair"taAªa calaeit‡alaAefyaAma,
‡aElaAefyas$aAEBagAimadM" ca inar"Iºya è&paM
yaÕ"Aeiã"jaåu"mama{gAA: paulak(Anyaiba”ana,
kä stry aìga te kala-padäyata-veëu-gétasammohitärya-
caritän na calet tri-lokyäm
trailokya-saubhagam idaà ca nirékñya rüpaà
yad go-dvija-druma-mågäù pulakäny abibhran
SYNONYMS
kä—which; stré—woman; aìga—dear Kåñëa; te—Your; kala—sweet-sounding;
pada—having stanzas; äyata—drawn-out; veëu—of Your flute; géta—by the
song; sammohitä—completely bewildered; ärya—of civilized people;
carität—from the proper behavior; na calet—does not deviate;
tri-lokyäm—within the three worlds; trai-lokya—of all the three worlds;
saubhagam—the cause of auspiciousness; idam—this; ca—and;
nirékñya—seeing; rüpam—the personal beauty; yat—because of which; go—the
cows; dvija—birds; druma—trees; mågäù—and deer; pulakäni—bodily hair
standing on end; abibhran—they bore.
TRANSLATION
Dear Kåñëa, what woman in all the three worlds wouldn't deviate from
religious behavior when bewildered by the sweet, drawn-out melody of Your
flute? Your beauty makes all three worlds auspicious. Indeed, even the cows,
birds, trees and deer manifest the ecstatic symptom of bodily hair standing on
end when they see Your beautiful form.
TEXT 41
vyalM( BavaAna, ˜ajaBayaAitaRh"r"Ae'iBajaAtaAe
de"vaAe yaTaAid"pauç&Sa: s$aur"laAek(gAAeæaA
taªaAe inaDaeih" k(r"paÆÿjamaAtaRbanDaAe
taæastanaeSau ca izAr":s$au ca ik(Æÿr"INAAma,
vyaktaà bhavän vraja-bhayärti-haro 'bhijäto
devo yathädi-puruñaù sura-loka-goptä
tan no nidhehi kara-paìkajam ärta-bandho
tapta-staneñu ca çiraùsu ca kiìkaréëäm
SYNONYMS
vyaktam—obviously; bhavän—You; vraja—of the people of Vraja; bhaya—of
the fear; ärti—and distress; haraù—as the remover; abhijätaù—have taken
birth; devaù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yathä—just as;
ädi-puruñaù—the primeval Lord; sura-loka—of the planets of the demigods;
goptä—the protector; tat—therefore; naù—of us; nidhehi—kindly place;
kara—Your hand; paìkajam—lotuslike; ärta—of the distressed; bandho—O
friend; tapta—burning; staneñu—on the breasts; ca—and; çiraùsu—on the
heads; ca—also; kiìkaréëäm—of Your maidservants.
TRANSLATION
Clearly You have taken birth in this world to relieve the fear and distress of
the people of Vraja, just as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the primeval
Lord, protects the domain of the demigods. Therefore, O friend of the
distressed, kindly place Your lotus hand on Your maidservants' heads and
burning breasts.
TEXT 42
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
wita ivaflaivataM taAs$aAM
™autvaA yaAegAeìre"ìr":
‘ah"sya s$ad"yaM gAAepaIr,"
@AtmaAr"AmaAe'pyar"Ir"mata,
çré-çuka uväca
iti viklavitaà täsäà
çrutvä yogeçvareçvaraù
prahasya sa-dayaà gopér
ätmärämo 'py aréramat
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—in these words; viklavitam—the
despondent expressions of; täsäm—of them; çrutvä—having heard;
yoga-éçvara-éçvaraù—the Lord of all lords of mystic power; prahasya—laughing;
sa-dayam—mercifully; gopéù—the gopés; ätma ärämaù—self-satisfied;
api—even though; aréramat—He satisfied.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Smiling upon hearing these despondent words from
the gopés, Lord Kåñëa, the supreme master of all masters of mystic yoga,
mercifully enjoyed with them, although He is self-satisfied.
TEXT 43
taAiBa: s$amaetaAiBaç&d"Ar"caeií"ta:
i‘ayaeºaNAAetPu(éamauKaIiBar"cyauta:
od"Ar"h"As$aiã"jaku(nd"d"IDaitar,"
vyar"AecataENAAÆÿ wvaAex"]iBava{Rta:
täbhiù sametäbhir udära-ceñöitaù
priyekñaëotphulla-mukhébhir acyutaù
udära-häsa-dvija-kunda-dédhatir
vyarocataiëäìka ivoòubhir våtaù
SYNONYMS
täbhiù—with them; sametäbhiù—who were all joined together;
udära—magnanimous; ceñöitaù—He whose activities; priya—affectionate;
ékñaëa—by His glances; utphulla—blossoming; mukhébhiù—whose faces;
acyutaù—the infallible Lord; udära—with broad; häsa—smiles; dvija—of His
teeth; kunda—(like) jasmine flowers; dédhatiù—showing the effulgence;
vyarocata—He appeared splendid; eëa-aìkaù—the moon, who bears marks
resembling a black deer; iva—like; uòubhiù—by stars; våtaù—surrounded.
TRANSLATION
Among the assembled gopés, the infallible Lord Kåñëa appeared just like the
moon surrounded by stars. He whose activities are so magnanimous made their
faces blossom with His affectionate glances, and His broad smiles revealed the
effulgence of His jasmine-bud-like teeth.
PURPORT
The word acyuta here indicates that Lord Kåñëa did not fail to give pleasure
to each and every gopé in the nocturnal assembly.
TEXT 44
opagAIyamaAna oÕ"Ayana,
vainataAzAtayaUTapa:
maAlaAM iba”aãE"jayantaI%M
vyacar"nmaNx"yana, vanama,
upagéyamäna udgäyan
vanitä-çata-yüthapaù
mäläà bibhrad vaijayantéà
vyacaran maëòayan vanam
SYNONYMS
upagéyamänaù—being sung about; udgäyan—singing loudly Himself;
vanitä—of women; çata—hundreds; yüthapaù—the commander; mäIäm—the
garland; bibhrat—wearing; vaijayantém—known as Vaijayanté (which consists
of flowers of five different colors); vyacaran—moving about;
maëòayan—beautifying; vanam—the forest.
TRANSLATION
As the gopés sang His praises, that leader of hundreds of women sang loudly
in reply. He moved among them, wearing His Vaijayanté garland, beautifying
the Våndävana forest.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, Lord Kåñëa sang many wonderful melodies
and meters, and the gopés accompanied Him, following His lead. Kåñëa's
singing on this occasion is described in the Çré Viñëu Puräëa:
kåñëaù çarac-candramasaà
kaumudéà kumudäkaram
jagau gopé-janas tv ekaà
kåñëa-näma punaù punaù
"Kåñëa sang the glories of the autumn moon, the moonshine and the
lotus-filled river, while the gopés simply sang His name repeatedly."
TEXTS 45-46
naâA: pauilanamaAivazya
gAAepaIiBaihR"mavaAlauk(ma,
jauíM" taÔar"laAnaind"
ku(maud"AmaAed"vaAyaunaA
baAò"‘as$aAr"pair"r"mBak(r"Alak(Aeç&
naIvaIstanaAlaBananamaRnaKaAƒapaAtaE:
ºvaelyaAvalaAek(h"is$ataE˜aRjas$aund"r"INAAma,
oÔamBayana, r"itapaitaM r"mayaAM cak(Ar"
nadyäù pulinam äviçya
gopébhir hima-välukam
juñöaà tat-taralänandi
kumudämoda-väyunä
bähu-prasära-parirambha-karälakoru
névé-stanälabhana-narma-nakhägra-pätaiù
kñvelyävaloka-hasitair vraja-sundaréëäm
uttambhayan rati-patià ramayäà cakära
SYNONYMS
nadyäù—of the river; pulinam—the bank; äviçya—entering upon;
gopébhiù—together with the gopés; hima—cool; välukam—by its sand;
juñöam—served; tat—of it; tarala—by the waves; änandi—made joyful;
kumuda—of the lotuses; ämoda—(carrying) the fragrance; väyunä—by the
wind; bähu—of His arms; prasära—with the throwing; parirambha—with
embraces; kara—of their hands; alaka—hair; üru—thighs; névé—belts;
stana—and breasts; älabhana—with the touching; narma—in sport;
nakha—of fingernails; agra-pätaiù—with the striking; kñvelyä—with playful
conversation; avaloka—glancing; hasitaiù—and laughter;
vraja-sundaréëäm—for the beautiful young girls of Vraja;
uttambhayan—inciting; rati-patim—Cupid; ramayäm cakära—He took
pleasure.
TRANSLATION
Çré Kåñëa went with the gopés to the bank of the Yamunä, where the sand
was cooling and the wind, enlivened by the river's waves, bore the fragrance of
lotuses. There Kåñëa threw His arms around the gopés and embraced them. He
aroused Cupid in the beautiful young ladies of Vraja by touching their hands,
hair, thighs, belts and breasts, by playfully scratching them with His fingernails,
and also by joking with them, glancing at them and laughing with them. In this
way the Lord enjoyed His pastimes.
TEXT 47
WvaM BagAvata: k{(SNAAla,
labDamaAnaA mah"Atmana:
@AtmaAnaM maeinare" ñINAAM
maAinanyaAe ÷iDakM( Bauiva
evaà bhagavataù kåñëäl
labdha-mänä mahätmanaù
ätmänaà menire stréëäà
mäninyo hy adhikaà bhuvi
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; bhagavataù—from the Personality of Godhead;
kåñëät—Lord Kåñëa; labdha—receiving; mänäù—special respect;
mahä-ätmanaù—from the Supreme Soul; ätmänam—themselves;
menire—they considered; stréëäm—among all women; mäninyaù—becoming
proud; hi—indeed; adhikam—the best; bhuvi—on the earth.
TRANSLATION
The gopés became proud of themselves for having received such special
attention from Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and each of them
thought herself the best woman on earth.
PURPORT
The gopés were proud because they had attained as their lover the greatest
of all personalities. So in a sense they were proud of Kåñëa. Also, the pride of
the gopés was a pretense created by Kåñëa's pastime potency in order to
intensify their love for Him through separation. In this connection, Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté quotes Bharata Muni's Näöyaçästra: na vinä
vipralambhena sambhogaù puñöim açnute. "Direct contact is not fully
appreciated until separation has been experienced."
TEXT 48
taAs$aAM tats$aAEBagAmadM"
vaIºya maAnaM ca ke(zAva:
‘azAmaAya ‘as$aAd"Aya
ta‡aEvaAntar"DaIyata
täsäà tat-saubhaga-madaà
vékñya mänaà ca keçavaù
praçamäya prasädäya
tatraiväntaradhéyata
SYNONYMS
täsäm—of them; tat—that; saubhaga—due to their good fortune;
madam—intoxicated state; vékñya—observing; mänam—the false pride;
ca—and; keçavaù—Lord Kåñëa; praçamäya—in order to diminish it;
prasädäya—to show them favor; tatra eva—right there; antaradhéyata—He
disappeared.
TRANSLATION
Lord Keçava, seeing the gopés too proud of their good fortune, wanted to
relieve them of this pride and show them further mercy. Thus He immediately
disappeared.
PURPORT
The word prasädäya here is significant. Lord Kåñëa was not going to neglect
the gopés; rather, He would increase the power of their loving affairs by
making another spectacular arrangement. After all, the gopés were basically
proud of Kåñëa. He also made this arrangement, as we shall see, to show special
favor to the beautiful young daughter of King Våñabhänu .
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A . C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Tenth Canto, Twenty-ninth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Kåñëa and the Gopés Meet for the Räsa
Dance."
30. The Gopés Search for Kåñëa
This chapter describes how the gopés, tormented through the long night by
separation from Kåñëa, wandered like madwomen from forest to forest in
search of Him.
When Çré Kåñëa suddenly disappeared from the arena of the räsa dance, the
gopés, their minds fully absorbed in thoughts of Him, began looking for Him in
the various forests. From all the moving and nonmoving creatures they asked
for news of Kåñëa's whereabouts. Finally they became so distraught that they
began imitating His pastimes.
Later, while wandering in a corner of the forest, the gopés saw Çré Kåñëa's
footprints, which appeared mixed with Çrématé Rädhäräëé's. Seeing these
footprints perturbed them greatly, and they declared that surely Çrématé
Rädhäräëé must have worshiped Kåñëa with unusual excellence, since She had
been privileged to associate with Him in seclusion. Further along the path the
gopés came to a place where they could no longer see Çrématé Rädhäräëé's
footprints; they then concluded that Kåñëa must have taken Rädhäräëé onto
His shoulders. In another place they noticed that Kåñëa's footprints were
showing only the toes, and thus the gopés concluded He had been picking
flowers with which to decorate His beloved. In yet another spot the gopés saw
signs that led them to imagine that Çré Kåñëa had been tying the locks of
Çrématé Rädhäräëé's hair. All these thoughts brought pain to the gopés' minds.
Because of the special attention She received from Kåñëa, Çré Rädhä began
to consider Herself the most fortunate of women. She told Him that She could
walk no further and that He would have to carry Her on His shoulders. But
just then Lord Kåñëa disappeared from Her sight. Çrématé Rädhäräëé,
extremely troubled, then began looking everywhere for Him, and when She
finally met Her gopé girlfriends She related to them what had happened. All
the gopés then went out to look for Kåñëa in the forest, going as far as the
moonlight reached. But in the end they were unsuccessful, so they went back
to the shore of the Yamunä and simply sang Kåñëa's glories in utter
helplessness.
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
@ntaihR"tae BagAvaita
s$ah"s$aEva ˜ajaAËÿnaA:
@tapyaMstamacaºaANAA:
k(ir"Nya wva yaUTapama,
çré-çuka uväca
antarhite bhagavati
sahasaiva vrajäìganäù
atapyaàs tam acakñäëäù
kariëya iva yüthapam
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; antarhite—when He disappeared;
bhagavati—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sahasä eva—quite suddenly;
vraja-aìganäù—the young ladies of Vraja; atapyan—felt great remorse;
tam—Him; acakñäëäù—not seeing; kariëyaù—female elephants; iva—just as;
yüthapam—their male leader.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: When Lord Kåñëa disappeared so suddenly, the
gopés felt great sorrow at losing sight of Him, like a group of female elephants
who have lost their mate.
TEXT 2
gAtyaAnaur"AgAismataiva”amaeiºataEr,"
manaAer"maAlaApaivah"Ar"iva”amaE:
@AiºaæaicaÔaA: ‘amad"A r"maApataes$a,
taAstaA ivacaeí"A jagA{"ò"stad"Aitmak(A:
gatyänuräga-smita-vibhramekñitair
mano-ramäläpa-vihära-vibhramaiù
äkñipta-cittäù pramadä ramä-pates
täs tä viceñöä jagåhus tad-ätmikäù
SYNONYMS
gatyä—by His movements; anuräga—affectionate; smita—smiles;
vibhrama—playful; ékñitaiù—and glances; manaù-rama—charming; äIäpa—by
His talking; vihära—playing; vibhramaiù—and other allurements;
äkñipta—overwhelmed; cittäù—whose hearts; pramadäù—the girls;
ramä-pateù—of the husband of Ramä, the goddess of fortune, or of the master
of beauty and opulence; täù täù—each of those; viceñöäù—wonderful activities;
jagåhuù—they enacted; tat-ätmikäù—absorbed in Him.
TRANSLATION
As the cowherd women remembered Lord Kåñëa, their hearts were
overwhelmed by His movements and loving smiles, His playful glances and
enchanting talks, and by the many other pastimes He would enjoy with them.
Thus absorbed in thoughts of Kåñëa, the Lord of Ramä, the gopés began acting
out His various transcendental pastimes.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura describes the following charming
exchange between Kåñëa and the gopés:
"Kåñëa said to a gopé, 'My dear land lily, are you going to offer your honey to
this very thirsty honeybee or not?'
"The gopé replied, 'My dear bee, the husband of the lilies is the sun, not the
bee, so why are You claiming that my honey belongs to You?'
"But My dear lily, the very nature of you lilies is that you don't give your
honey to your husband, the sun, but rather to your paramour, the bee.' The
gopé, defeated by the words of Kåñëa, laughed and then gave Him her lips as
honey to drink."
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté also describes the following conversation:
"Kåñëa said to a gopé, 'Ah, I can understand that as you approached this népa
tree standing here, you were bitten by an audacious snake. Its venom has
already reached your chest, but since you are a respectable maiden you haven't
asked Me to cure you. Still I've come, being merciful by nature. Now, while I
massage your body with My hands, I'll chant a mantra to counteract the
serpent's poison.'
"The gopé said, 'But, my dear snake charmer, no snake has bitten me. Go
massage the body of some girl who actually has suffered a snakebite.'
" 'Come now, My dear respectable girl, from your trembling voice I can tell
that you are experiencing a feverish reaction to poisoning. Knowing this, if I
don't take care of you I'll be guilty of killing an innocent woman. So let Me
treat you.'
"With this, Kåñëa applied His fingernails to the gopé's chest."
TEXT 3
gAitaismata‘aeºaNABaASaNAAid"Sau
i‘ayaA: i‘ayasya ‘aitaè&X#maUtaRya:
@s$aAvahM" itvatyabalaAstad"Aitmak(A
nyavaeid"Sau: k{(SNAivah"Ar"iva”amaA:
gati-smita-prekñaëa-bhäñaëädiñu
priyäù priyasya pratirüòha-mürtayaù
asäv ahaà tv ity abaläs tad-ätmikä
nyavediñuù kåñëa-vihära-vibhramäù
SYNONYMS
gati—in His movements; smita—smiling; prekñaëa—beholding;
bhäñaëä—talking; ädiñu—and so on; priyäù—the dear gopés; priyasya—of their
beloved; pratirüòha—fully absorbed; mürtayaù—their bodies; asau—He;
aham—I; tu—actually; iti—speaking thus; abaläù—the women;
tat-ätmikäù-identifying with Him; nyavediñuù—they announced;
kåñëa-vihära—caused by the pastimes of Kåñëa; vibhramäù—whose
intoxication.
TRANSLATION
Because the beloved gopés were absorbed in thoughts of their beloved Kåñëa,
their bodies imitated His way of moving and smiling, His way of beholding
them, His speech and His other distinctive features. Deeply immersed in
thinking of Him and maddened by remembering His pastimes, they declared to
one another, "I am Kåñëa!"
PURPORT
Spontaneously, the gopés began moving like Kåñëa: they smiled as He would
smile, glanced boldly as He would and spoke as He would. The gopés were
completely absorbed in the existence of Kåñëa and mad with love at their
sudden separation from Him, and thus their dedication to Him attained
absolute perfection.
TEXT 4
gAAyantya o»aEr"maumaeva s$aMh"taA
ivaicafyauç&nmaÔak(vaã"naAã"nama,
pa‘acC]$r"Ak(AzAvad"ntarM" baih"r,"
BaUtaeSau s$antaM pauç&SaM vanas$pataIna,
gäyantya uccair amum eva saàhatä
vicikyur unmattaka-vad vanäd vanam
papracchur äkäça-vad antaraà bahir
bhüteñu santaà puruñaà vanaspatén
SYNONYMS
gäyantyaù—singing; uccaiù—loudly; amum—about Him; eva—indeed;
saàhatäù—together in a group; vicikyuù—they searched; unmattaka-vat—like
madwomen; vanät vanam—from one area of the forest to another;
papracchuù—they inquired; äkäça-vat—like the sky; antaram—internally;
bahiù—and externally; bhüteñu—in all created beings; santam—present;
puruñam—the Supreme Person; vanaspatén—from the trees.
TRANSLATION
Singing loudly of Kåñëa, they searched for Him throughout the Våndävana
forest like a band of madwomen. They even asked the trees about Him, who as
the Supersoul is present inside and outside of all created things, just like the
sky.
PURPORT
Lost in the madness of love for Kåñëa, the gopés inquired about Him from
even the trees in Våndävana. Of course, there is no actual separation from
Lord Kåñëa, since He is the all-pervading Supersoul.
TEXT 5
ä{"í"Ae va: k(i»ad"ìtTa
plaºa nyaƒaAeDa naAe mana:
nand"s$aUnaugARtaAe ô$tvaA
‘aemah"As$aAvalaAek(naE:
dåñöo vaù kaccid açvattha
plakña nyagrodha no manaù
nanda-sünur gato håtvä
prema-häsävalokanaiù
SYNONYMS
dåñöaù—has been seen; vaù—by you; kaccit—whether; açvattha—O açvattha
(holy fig tree); plakña—O plakña (waved-leaf fig tree); nyagrodha—O
nyagrodha(banyan tree); naù—our; manaù—minds; nanda—of Mahäräja
Nanda; sünuù—the son; gataù—has gone away; håtvä—after stealing;
prema—loving; häsa—with His smiles; avalokanaiù—and glances.
TRANSLATION
[The gopés said:] O açvattha tree, O plakña, O nyagrodha, have you seen
Kåñëa? That son of Nanda Mahäräja has gone away after stealing our minds
with His loving smiles and glances.
TEXT 6
k(i»atku(r"bak(AzAAek(-
naAgApauªaAgAcampak(A:
r"AmaAnaujaAe maAinanaInaAma,
wtaAe d"paRh"r"ismata:
kaccit kurabakäçokanäga-
punnäga-campakäù
rämänujo mäninénäm
ito darpa-hara-smitaù
SYNONYMS
kaccit—whether; kurabaka-açoka-näga—punnäga-campakäù—O kurabaka
(red amaranth), açoka, näga, punnäga and campaka trees; räma—of Balaräma;
anujaù—the younger brother; mäninénäm—of women, who are proud by
nature; itaù—passing by here; darpa—the pride; hara—removing;
smitaù—whose smile.
TRANSLATION
O kurabaka tree, O açoka, O näga, punnäga and campaka, has Balaräma's
younger brother, whose smile removes the audacity of all proud women, passed
this way?
PURPORT
As soon as the gopés saw that a particular tree would not answer them, they
impatiently left it and rushed off to another to make further inquiries.
TEXT 7
k(i»aÔaulais$a k(lyaAiNA
gAAeivand"car"NAi‘ayae
s$ah" tvaAilaku(laEibaR”aä,"
ä{"í"stae'itai‘ayaAe'cyauta:
kaccit tulasi kalyäëi
govinda-caraëa-priye
saha tväli-kulair bibhrad
dåñöas te 'ti-priyo 'cyutaù
SYNONYMS
kaccit—whether; tulasi—O tulasé plant; kalyäëi—O kind one; govinda—of
Lord Kåñëa; caraëa—the feet; priye—you to whom are dear; saha—together
with; tvä—you; ali—of bees; kulaiù—swarms; bibhrat—carrying; dåñöaù—seen;
te—by you; ati-priyaù—very dear; acyutaù—Lord Acyuta.
TRANSLATION
O most kind tulasé, to whom the feet of Govinda are so dear, have you seen
that infallible one walk by, wearing you and encircled by swarms of bees?
PURPORT
The äcäryas explain here that the word caraëa is a term of respect, as in the
expression evaà vadanty äcärya-caraëäù. The bees humming around the
garland worn by Çré Govinda were attracted by the fragrance of the tulasé
maïjarés offered to Him. The gopés felt that the trees had not replied because
they were male, but that tulasé, being female, would sympathize with their
plight.
TEXT 8
maAlatyad"izAR va: k(i»ana,
maiéake( jaAitayaUiTake(
‘aIitaM vaAe janayana, yaAta:
k(r"s$pazAeRna maADava:
mälaty adarçi vaù kaccin
mallike jäti-yüthike
prétià vo janayan yätaù
kara-sparçena mädhavaù
SYNONYMS
mälati—O mälaté plant (a kind of white jasmine); adarçi—has been seen;
vaù—by you; kaccit—whether; mallike—O mallikä (a different kind of
jasmine); jäti—O jäti (another kind of white jasmine); yüthike—O yüthikä (yet
another jasmine); prétim—pleasure; vaù—for you; janayan—generating;
yätaù—has gone by; kara—of His hand; sparçena—by the touch;
mädhavaù—Kåñëa, the embodiment of the spring season.
TRANSLATION
O mälati, O mallikä, O jäti and yüthikä, has Mädhava gone by here, giving
you pleasure with the touch of His hand?
PURPORT
When even tulasé herself did not answer the gopés, they approached the
fragrant jasmine flowers. The gopés, seeing the jasmine vines humbly bowing
down, assumed that these plants must have seen Lord Kåñëa and were
therefore showing humility in their ecstasy.
TEXT 9
caUtai‘ayaAlapanas$aAs$anak(Aeivad"Ar"
jambvakR(ibalvabaku(laA•ak(d"mbanaIpaA:
yae'nyae par"ATaRBavak(A yamaunaAepakU(laA:
zAMs$antau k{(SNApad"vaI%M r"ih"taAtmanaAM na:
cüta-priyäla-panasäsana-kovidära
jambv-arka-bilva-bakulämra-kadamba-népäù
ye 'nye parärtha-bhavakä yamunopaküläù
çaàsantu kåñëa-padavéà rahitätmanäà naù
SYNONYMS
cüta—O mango creeper; priyäla—O priyäla tree (a kind of çäla tree);
panasa—O jackfruit tree; äsana—O äsana tree (a yellow çäla); kovidära—O
kovidära tree; jambu—O rose-apple tree; arka—O arka plant; bilva—O
bel-fruit tree; bakula—O mimosa tree; ämra—O mango tree; kadamba—O
kadamba tree; népäù—O népa (a smaller kind of kadamba); ye—who;
anye—others; para—of others; artha—for the sake; bhavakäù—whose
existence; yamunä-upaküläù—living near the bank of the river Yamunä;
çaàsantu—kindly tell; kåñëa-padavém—the path Kåñëa has taken; rahita—who
have been deprived; ätmanäm—of our minds; naù—to us.
TRANSLATION
O cüta, O priyäla, O panasa, äsana and kovidära, O jambu, O arka, O bilva,
bakula and ämra, O kadamba and népa and all you other plants and trees living
by the banks of the Yamunä who have dedicated your very existence to the
welfare of others, we gopés have lost our minds, so please tell us where Kåñëa
has gone.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, the cüta is a mango creeper, whereas the
ämra is a mango tree. He goes on to explain that the népa, though not a very
prominent tree, bears large flowers, and that the gopés' desperation to find
Kåñëa is clearly shown by the fact that they approached the insignificant arka
plant.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté gives the following information about
Våndävana's trees: "The népa is 'the dust kadamba,' and it has large flowers. The
kadamba proper has smaller flowers and a very pleasant fragrance. The
kovidära is a particular kind of kaïcanära [mountain ebony tree]. Even though
the arka plant is very insignificant, it always grows near Lord Gopéçvara [the
Çiva deity in Våndävana forest] because it is dear to him."
TEXT 10
ikM( tae k{(taM iºaita tapaAe bata ke(zAvaAx.~i„as$
pazAAeRts$avaAetpaulaik(taAËÿnahE"ivaRBaAis$a
@pyax.~i„as$amBava oç&‚(maiva‚(maAã"A
@Ah"Ae var"Ah"vapauSa: pair"r"mBaNAena
kià te kåtaà kñiti tapo bata keçaväìghrisparçotsavotpulakitäìga-
nahair vibhäsi
apy aìghri-sambhava urukrama-vikramäd vä
äho varäha-vapuñaù parirambhaëena
SYNONYMS
kim—what; te—by you; kåtam—performed; kñiti—O earth; tapaù—austerity;
bata—indeed; keçava—of Lord Kåñëa; aìghri—by the feet; sparça—on
account of being touched; utsava—due to the joyful experience;
utpulakita—standing on end in jubilation; aìga-ruhaiù—with your bodily
hairs (the grass and growing plants on your surface); vibhäsi—you appear
beautiful; api—perhaps; aìghri—by the feet (of Kåñëa present now on your
surface); sambhavaù—generated; urukrama—of Lord Vämanadeva, Lord
Kåñëa's dwarf incarnation, who covered the entire universe in three mighty
steps; vikramät—because of the stepping; vä—or; äha u—or else perhaps;
varäha—of Lord Kåñëa's incarnation as a boar; vapuñaù—by the body;
parirambhaëena—because of the embrace.
TRANSLATION
O mother earth, what austerity did you perform to attain the touch of Lord
Keçava's lotus feet, which has brought you such great joy that your bodily hairs
are standing on end? You appear very beautiful in this condition. Was it during
the Lord's current appearance that you acquired this ecstatic symptom, or was it
perhaps much earlier, when He stepped upon you in His form of the dwarf
Vämanadeva, or even earlier, when He embraced you in His form of the boar
Varähadeva?
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté explains the thoughts of the gopés as follows:
" 'Perhaps the trees and plants [mentioned in the previous verses] did not hear
our question because they were in trance, meditating on Lord Viñëu. Or
perhaps, since they will not tell us where Kåñëa has gone, they are hardhearted
even though they live in a holy place. Anyway, what is the use of unnecessarily
criticizing the residents of a holy place? We cannot tell if they really know
where Kåñëa has gone. So let us find someone who definitely knows where He
is.' Thus the gopés concluded that since Lord Kåñëa had to be somewhere on the
earth, the earth herself must know His whereabouts.
"Then the gopés thought, 'Since Kåñëa always walks on the earth, she is
never separated from Him and thus cannot understand how much His parents,
girlfriends and servants suffer in His absence. Let us ask her what austerities
she has performed to gain the great fortune of being constantly touched by the
feet of Lord Keçava.' "
TEXT 11
@pyaeNApatnyaupagAta: i‘ayayaeh" gAA‡aEs$a,
tanvanä{"zAAM s$aiKa s$auinava{RitamacyautaAe va:
k(AntaAËÿs$aËÿku(caku(Çÿmar"iÃataAyaA:
ku(nd"›aja: ku(lapataeir"h" vaAita gAnDa:
apy eëa-patny upagataù priyayeha gätrais
tanvan dåçäà sakhi su-nirvåtim acyuto vaù
käntäìga-saìga-kuca-kuìkuma-raïjitäyäù
kunda-srajaù kula-pater iha väti gandhaù
SYNONYMS
api—whether; eëa—of the deer; patni—O wife; upagataù—has been
encountered; priyayä—together with His beloved; iha—here; gätraiù—by His
bodily limbs; tanvan—producing; dåçäm—of the eyes; sakhi—O friend;
su-nirvåtim—great pleasure; acyutaù—the infallible Lord Kåñëa; vaù—your;
käntä—of His girlfriend; aìga-saìga—because of the physical contact;
kuca—on the breast; kuìkuma—by the vermilion powder;
raïjitäyäù—colored; kunda—of jasmine flowers; srajaù—of the garland;
kula—of the group (of gopés); pateù—of the master; iha—around here; väti—is
blowing; gandhaù—the fragrance.
TRANSLATION
O friend, wife of the deer, has Lord Acyuta been here with His beloved,
bringing great joy to your eyes? Indeed, blowing this way is the fragrance of His
garland of kunda flowers, which was smeared with the kuìkuma from the
breasts of His girlfriend when He embraced Her.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté provides the following charming commentary
on this verse:
"The gopés spoke to a doe, 'O friend, wife of the deer, from the bliss in your
clear eyes we can tell that Çré Kåñëa has expanded your joy with the beauty of
His limbs, His face and so forth. You are eager to realize the ecstasy of seeing
Kåñëa, and thus your eyes are following Him. In fact, He is never lost to you.'
"Then the gopés, seeing the doe continue to walk in her natural way,
exclaimed, 'Oh, are you telling us that you have seen Kåñëa? Look! As this deer
walks she constantly turns her head back to us; as if to say, "I will show Him to
you; just follow me and I will show you Kåñëa." In this merciless Våndävana,
she is the only merciful person.'
"As the gopés follow the doe they happen to lose sight of her, and they cry
out, 'Oh, why can't we see the deer who is showing us the way to Kåñëa?'
"One gopé suggests that Kåñëa must be somewhere in the vicinity and that
the deer, being afraid of Him, must have hidden herself to avoid the possible
mistake of revealing His presence. Conjecturing in this way, the gopés detect a
fragrance that has by chance blown their way, and they repeatedly declare
with great joy, 'Yes! Yes! This is it! By Kåñëa's physical contact with His
girlfriend, His jasmine garland was smeared with the kuìkuma powder on Her
breasts, and the fragrances of all these things are reaching us.' Thus the gopés
smelled the aroma of the two lovers' bodies, of Kåñëa's jasmine garland, and of
the cosmetic powder on the breasts of His lover."
TEXT 12
baAòM" i‘ayaAMs$a opaDaAya gA{h"ItapaáAe
r"AmaAnaujastaulais$ak(Ailaku(laEmaRd"AnDaE:
@nvaIyamaAna wh" vastar"va: ‘aNAAmaM
ikM( vaAiBanand"ita car"na, ‘aNAyaAvalaAekE(:
bähuà priyäàsa upadhäya gåhéta-padmo
rämänujas tulasikäli-kulair madändhaiù
anvéyamäna iha vas taravaù praëämaà
kià väbhinandati caran praëayävalokaiù
SYNONYMS
bähum—His arm; priyä—of His beloved; aàse—on the shoulder;
upadhäya—placing; gåhéta—holding; padmaù—a lotus; räma-anujaù—Kåñëa,
the younger brother of Balaräma; tulasikä—swarming around the tulasé
maïjarés (which are ornamenting His garland); ali-kulaiù—by the many bees;
mada—with intoxication; andhaiù—who are blind; anvéyamänaù—being
followed; iha—here; vaù—your; taravaù—O trees; praëämam—the bowing
down; kim vä—whether; abhinandati—has acknowledged; caran—while
walking by; praëaya—imbued with love; avalokaiù—with His glances.
TRANSLATION
O trees, we see that you are bowing down. When the younger brother of
Räma walked by here, followed by intoxicated bees swarming around the tulasé
maïjarés decorating His garland, did He acknowledge your obeisances with His
affectionate glances? He must have been resting His arm on the shoulder of His
beloved and carrying a lotus flower in His free hand.
PURPORT
The gopés saw that the trees, bent over with abundant fruits and flowers,
were offering obeisances to Lord Kåñëa. The gopés supposed Kåñëa must have
recently passed that way, since the trees were still bowing down. Because Çré
Kåñëa had left the gopés to go with His favorite consort, they were jealous and
thus imagined that He had become fatigued from His loving affairs and was
resting His left arm on the soft shoulder of His beloved. The gopés further
imagined that Kåñëa must have been carrying a blue lotus in His right hand to
drive away the bees eagerly trying to attack His beloved's face after smelling its
aroma. The scene was so beautiful, the gopés imagined, that the maddened bees
had left the tulasé garden to follow the two lovers.
TEXT 13
pa{cC$taemaA lataA baAó"na,
@pyaAiëí"A vanas$patae:
naUnaM tatk(r"jas$pa{í"A
iba”atyautpaulak(Anyah"Ae
påcchatemä latä bähün
apy äçliñöä vanaspateù
nünaà tat-karaja-spåñöä
bibhraty utpulakäny aho
SYNONYMS
påcchata—just ask; imäù—from these; latäù—creepers; bähün—the arms
(branches); api—even though; äçliñöäù—embracing; vanaspateù—of' the tree;
nünam—certainly; tat—of Him, Kåñëa; kara-ja—by the fingernails;
spåñöäù—touched; bibhrati—they are bearing; utpulakäni—joyful eruptions on
the skin; aho—just see.
TRANSLATION
Let us ask these creepers about Kåñëa. Even though they are embracing the
arms of their husband, this tree, they certainly must have been touched by
Kåñëa's fingernails, since out of joy they are manifesting eruptions on their
skin.
PURPORT
The gopés reasoned that the creepers would not show signs of rapture
merely by physical contact with their husband, a tree. Thus the gopés
concluded that although the creepers were embracing the strong limbs of their
husband, they must have been touched by Lord Kåñëa as He moved through
the forest.
TEXT 14
wtyaunmaÔavacaAe gAAepya:
k{(SNAAnvaeSaNAk(Atar"A:
laIlaA BagAvatastaAstaA
÷nauca‚u(stad"Aitmak(A:
ity unmatta-vaco gopyaù
kåñëänveñaëa-kätaräù
lélä bhagavatas täs tä
hy anucakrus tad-ätmikäù
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; unmatta—maddened; vacaù—speaking words; gopyaù—the gopés;
kåñëa-anveñaëa—by searching for Kåñëa; kätaräù—distraught; léläù—the
transcendental pastimes; bhagavataù—of Him, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; täù täù—each of them; hi—indeed; anucakruù—they acted out;
tat-ätmikäù—becoming absorbed in thought of Him.
TRANSLATION
Having spoken these words, the gopés, distraught from searching for Kåñëa,
began to act out His various pastimes, fully absorbed in thoughts of Him.
TEXT 15
k(syaAicatpaUtanaAyantyaA:
k{(SNAAyantyaipabatstanama,
taAek(iyatvaA ç&d"tyanyaA
pad"Ah"na, zAk(q%AyataIma,
kasyäcit pütanäyantyäù
kåñëäyanty apibat stanam
tokayitvä rudaty anyä
padähan çakaöäyatém
SYNONYMS
kasyäcit—of one of the gopés; pütanäyantyäù—who was acting like the witch
Pütanä; kåñëäyanté—another, who was acting like Kåñëa; apibat—drank;
stanam—from the breast; tokayitvä—acting like an infant; rudaté—crying;
anyä—another; padä—with her foot; ahan—struck; çakaöä-yatém—another,
who was imitating a cart.
TRANSLATION
One gopé imitated Pütanä, while another acted like infant Kåñëa and
pretended to suck her breast. Another gopé, crying in imitation of infant Kåñëa,
kicked a gopé who was taking the role of the cart demon, Çakaöäsura.
TEXT 16
dE"tyaAiyatvaA jah"Ar"AnyaAma,
Wk(Ae k{(SNAABaRBaAvanaAma,
ir"ËÿyaAmaAs$a k(Apyax.~„aI
k(SaRntaI GaAeSaina:svanaE:
daityäyitvä jahäränyäm
eko kåñëärbha-bhävanäm
riìgayäm äsa käpy aìghré
karñanté ghoña-niùsvanaiù
SYNONYMS
daityäyitvä—imitating a demon (namely Tåëävarta); jahära—carried away;
anyäm—another gopé; ekä—one gopé; kåñëa-arbha—of the infant Kåñëa;
bhävanäm—who was assuming the mood; riìgayäm äsa—crawled about; kä
api—one of them; aìghré—her two feet; karñanté—dragging; ghoña—of
tinkling bells; niùsvanaiù—with the sounding.
TRANSLATION
One gopé took the role of Tåëävarta and carried away another, who was
acting like infant Kåñëa, while yet another gopé crawled about, her ankle bells
tinkling as she pulled her feet.
PURPORT
The gopés started imitating all of Çré Kåñëa's pastimes, beginning from His
earliest activities as a baby.
TEXT 17
k{(SNAr"AmaAiyatae ãe" tau
gAAepaAyantyaê k(Aêna
vats$aAyataI%M h"inta caAnyaA
ta‡aEk(A tau bak(AyataIma,
kåñëa-rämäyite dve tu
gopäyantyaç ca käçcana
vatsäyatéà hanti cänyä
tatraikä tu bakäyatém
SYNONYMS
kåñëa-rämäyite—acting like Lord Kåñëa and Lord Balaräma; dve—two gopés;
tu—and; gopäyantyaù—acting like Their cowherd boyfriends; ca—and;
käçcana—some; vatsäyatém—who was imitating the calf demon, Vatsäsura;
hanti—killed; ca—and; anyä—another; tatra—there; ekä—one;
tu—moreover; bakäyatém—another, who was imitating the crane demon,
Bakäsura.
TRANSLATION
Two gopés acted like Räma and Kåñëa in the midst of several others, who
took the role of cowherd boys. One gopé enacted Kåñëa's killing of the demon
Vatsäsura, represented by another gopé, and a pair of gopés acted out the killing
of Bakäsura.
TEXT 18
@Aó"ya äU"r"gAA yaã"ta,
k{(SNAstamanauvataRtaIma,
vaeNAuM ¸(NAntaI%M ‚(Lx"ntaIma,
@nyaA: zAMs$ainta s$aAiDvaita
ähüya düra-gä yadvat
kåñëas tam anuvartatém
veëuà kvaëantéà kréòantém
anyäù çaàsanti sädhv iti
SYNONYMS
ähüya—calling; düra—who were far away; gäù—the cows; yadvat—just as;
kåñëaù—Kåñëa; tam—him; anuvartatém—one gopé who was imitating;
veëum—the flute; kvaëantém—vibrating; kréòantém—playing games;
anyäù—the other gopés; çaàsanti—praised; sädhu iti—"excellent!"
TRANSLATION
When one gopé perfectly imitated how Kåñëa would call the cows who had
wandered far away, how He would play His flute and how He would engage in
various sports, the others congratulated her with exclamations of "Well done!
Well done!"
TEXT 19
k(syaAiÂatsvaBaujaM nyasya
calantyaAh"Apar"A nanau
k{(SNAAe'hM" pazyata gAitaM
lailataAimaita tanmanaA:
kasyäïcit sva-bhujaà nyasya
calanty ähäparä nanu
kåñëo 'haà paçyata gatià
lalitäm iti tan-manäù
SYNONYMS
kasyäïcit—of one of them; sva-bhujam—her arm; nyasya—placing (on the
shoulder); calanté—walking about; äha—stated; aparä—another;
nanu—indeed; kåñëaù—Kåñëa; aham—I am; paçyata—just see; gatim—my
movements; lalitäm—graceful; iti—with these words; tat—in Him;
manäù—with her mind fully absorbed.
TRANSLATION
Another gopé, her mind fixed on Kåñëa, walked about with her arm resting
on the shoulder of a friend and declared, "I am Kåñëa! Just see how gracefully I
move!"
TEXT 20
maA BaEí" vaAtavaSaARByaAM
tat‡aANAM ivaih"taM maya
wtyauftvaEke(na h"staena
yatantyauiªad"Dae'mbar"ma,
mä bhaiñöa väta-varñäbhyäà
tat-träëaà vihitaà maya
ity uktvaikena hastena
yatanty unnidadhe 'mbaram
SYNONYMS
mä bhaiñöa—don't any of you fear; väta—the wind; varñäbhyäm—and rain;
tat—from that; träëam—your deliverance; vihitam—has been arranged;
mayä—by me; iti—thus; uktvä—speaking; ekena—with one; hastena—hand;
yatanté—endeavoring; unnidadhe—she lifted; ambaram—her upper garment.
TRANSLATION
"Don't be afraid of the wind and rain," said one gopé. "I will save you." And
with that she lifted her shawl above her head.
PURPORT
Here a gopé enacts Lord Kåñëa's pastime of lifting Govardhana Hill.
TEXT 21
@Aç&÷Ek(A pad"A‚(mya
izAr"syaAh"Apar"AM na{pa
äu"í"Ahe" gAcC$ jaAtaAe'hM"
KalaAnaA°anau d"Nx"k{(ta,
äruhyaikä padäkramya
çirasy ähäparäà nåpa
duñöähe gaccha jäto 'haà
khalänäm nanu daëòa-kåt
SYNONYMS
äruhya—rising up; ekä—one of the gopés; padä—with her foot;
äkramya—climbing above; çirasi—the head; äha—said; aparäm—to another;
nåpa—O King (Parékñit); duñöa—wicked; ahe—O snake; gaccha—go away;
jätaù—have taken birth; aham—I; khalänäm—on those who are envious;
nanu—indeed; daëòa—of punishment; kåt—as the imposer.
TRANSLATION
[Çukadeva Gosvämé continued:] O King, one gopé climbed on another's
shoulders and, putting her foot on the other's head, said, "Go away from here,
O wicked snake! You should know that I have taken birth in this world just to
punish the envious."
PURPORT
Here the gopés enact Kåñëa's chastisement of Käliya.
TEXT 22
ta‡aEk(AevaAca he" gAAepaA
d"AvaAi¢aM pazyataAelbaNAma,
caºaUMSyaAìipad"DvaM vaAe
ivaDaAsyae ºaemamaÃas$aA
tatraikoväca he gopä
dävägnià paçyatolbaëam
cakñüàñy äçv apidadhvaà vo
vidhäsye kñemam aïjasä
SYNONYMS
tatra—there; ekä—one of them; uväca—said; he gopäù—O cowherd boys;
däva-agnim—the forest fire; paçyata—see; ulbaëam—fierce: cakñüàñi-your
eyes; äçu—quickly; apidadhvam—just close; vaù—your; vidhäsye—I will
arrange; kñemam—protection; aïjasä—with ease.
TRANSLATION
Then another gopé spoke up: My dear cowherd boys, look at this raging
forest fire! Quickly close your eyes and I will easily protect you.
TEXT 23
baÜ"AnyayaA ›ajaA k(Aicata,
tanvaI ta‡a olaUKalae
ba©aAima BaANx"BaeÔaArM"
hE"yaËÿvamauSaM itvaita
BaItaA s$auä{"ifpaDaAyaAsyaM
Baejae BaIitaivax"mbanama,
baddhänyayä srajä käcit
tanvé tatra ulükhale
badhnämi bhäëòa-bhettäraà
haiyaìgava-muñaà tv iti
bhétä su-dåk pidhäyäsyaà
bheje bhéti-viòambanam
SYNONYMS
baddhä—tied up; anyayä—by another gopé; srajä—with a flower garland;
käcit—one gopé; tanvé—slender; tatra—there; ulükhale—to the grinding
mortar; badhnämi—I am binding; bhäëòa—of the storage pots; bhettäram—the
breaker; haiyam-gava—of the butter saved from the previous day's milk;
muñam—the stealer; tu—indeed; iti—thus speaking; bhétä—afraid;
su-dåk—with beautiful eyes; pidhäya—covering; äsyam—her face;
bheje—assumed; bhéti—of fear; viòambanam—the pretense.
TRANSLATION
One gopé tied up her slender companion with a flower garland and said,
"Now I will bind this boy who has broken the butter pots and stolen the
butter." The second gopé then covered her face and beautiful eyes, pretending
to be afraid.
TEXT 24
WvaM k{(SNAM pa{cC$maAnaA
˜Nd"AvanalataAstaè&na,
vyacaºata vanaAeÚe"zAe
pad"Aina par"maAtmana:
evaà kåñëaà påcchamänä
vrëdävana-latäs tarün
vyacakñata vanoddeçe
padäni paramätmanaù
SYNONYMS
evam—in this manner; kåñëam—about Kåñëa; påcchamänäù—inquiring;
våndävana—of the Våndävana forest; latäù—from the creepers; tarün—and
the trees; vyacakñata—they saw; vana—of the forest; uddeçe—in one spot;
padäni—the footprints; parama-ätmanaù—of the Supersoul .
TRANSLATION
While the gopés were thus imitating Kåñëa's pastimes and asking
Våndävana's creepers and trees where Kåñëa, the Supreme Soul, might be, they
happened to see His footprints in a corner of the forest.
TEXT 25
pad"Aina vyal(maetaAina
nand"s$aUnaAemaRh"Atmana:
laºyantae ih" DvajaAmBaAejava†
aAÇÿzAyavaAid"iBa:
padäni vyaktam etäni
nanda-sünor mahätmanaù
lakñyante hi dhvajämbhojavajräìkuça-
yavädibhiù
SYNONYMS
padäni—the footprints; vyaktam—clearly; etäni—these; nanda-sünoù——of
the son of Nanda Mahäräja; mahä-ätmanaù—the great soul; lakñyante—are
ascertained; hi—indeed; dhvaja—by the flag; ambhoja—lotus;
vajra—thunderbolt; aìkuça—elephant goad; yava-ädibhiù—barleycorn, etc.
TRANSLATION
[The gopés said:] The marks of a flag, lotus, thunderbolt, elephant goad,
barleycorn and so forth on these footprints clearly distinguish them as belonging
to that great soul, the son of Nanda Mahäräja.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, in his commentary on this verse,
gives the following scriptural information about the symbolic markings on the
lotus feet of Kåñëa:
"In the following verses the Skanda Puräëa states the particular places on
His feet where Kåñëa carries the mark of the flag and also other marks, and the
reasons for these marks:
dakñiëasya padäìguñöhamüle
cakraà bibharty ajaù
tatra bhakta-janasyäriñaò-
varga-cchedanäya saù
'At the base of the large toe on His right foot, the unborn Lord carries the
mark of a disc, which cuts down the six [mental] enemies of His devotees.'
madhyamäìguli-müle ca
dhatte kamalam acyutaù
dhyätå-citta-dvirephäëäà
lobhanäyäti-çobhanäm
'At the bottom of the middle toe of that same foot Lord Acyuta has a lotus
flower, which increases the greed for Him in the minds of the beelike devotees
who meditate on His feet.'
kaniñöha-mülato vajraà
bhakta-päpädri-bhedanam
pärñëi-madhye 'ìkuçaà bhakta
cittebha-vaça-käriëam
'At the base of His small toe is a thunderbolt, which smashes the mountains of
His devotees' reactions to past sins, and in the middle of His heel is the mark of
an elephant goad, which brings the elephants of His devotees' minds under
control.'
bhoga-sampan-mayaà dhatte
yavam aìguñöha-parvaëi
'The joint of His right large toe bears the mark of a barleycorn, representing all
kinds of enjoyable opulences.'
"The Skanda Puräëa also states,
vajraà vai dakñiëe pärçve
aìkuço vai tad-agrataù
'A thunderbolt is found on the right side of His right foot, and an elephant
goad below that.'
"The äcäryas of the Vaiñëava sampradäya explain that since the particular
feet under discussion are Lord Kåñëa's, we should know that the thunderbolt is
at the base of His small toe and the elephant goad below the thunderbolt. An
elephant goad on the heel belongs rather to Lord Näräyaëa and other
viñëu-tattva expansions.
"Thus the Skanda Puräëa describes six marks on Kåñëa's right foot—the
disc, flag, lotus, thunderbolt, elephant goad and barleycorn. And the
Vaiñëava-toñaëé mentions even more marks—a vertical line beginning at the
middle of His foot and continuing as far as the juncture between His big toe
and second toe; an umbrella below the disc; at the base of the middle of His
foot, a group of four svastikas in the four cardinal directions; at the four points
where each svastika meets the next, four rose apples; and in the middle of the
svastikas, an octagon. This makes eleven marks on Kåñëa's right foot."
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté describes the marks on Kåñëa's left foot as
follows: "At the base of the large toe is a conchshell with its mouth facing the
toe. At the base of the middle toe are two concentric circles, representing the
inner and outer sky. Below this mark is Cupid' s unstrung bow, at the base of
the bow is a triangle, and surrounding the triangle is a group of four waterpots.
At the base of the triangle is a half-moon with two more triangles touching its
points, and below the half-moon is a fish.
"All together, then, there are nineteen distinguishing marks on the soles of
Lord Kåñëa's lotus feet."
TEXT 26
taEstaE: padE"statpad"vaIma,
@invacC$ntyaAe'ƒataAe'balaA:
vaDvaA: padE": s$aupa{l(Aina
ivalaAefyaAtaAR: s$ama“auvana,
tais taiù padais tat-padavém
anvicchantyo 'grato'baläù
vadhväù padaiù su-påktäni
vilokyärtäù samabruvan
SYNONYMS
taiù taiù—by those various; padaiù—footprints; tat—His; padavém—path;
anvicchantyaù—tracing out; agrataù—forward; abaläù—the girls; vadhväù—of
His special consort; padaiù—with the footprints; supåktäni—thoroughly
intermingled; vilokya—noticing; ärtäù—distressed; samabruvan—they spoke.
TRANSLATION
The gopés began following Kåñëa's path, as shown by His many footprints,
but when they saw that these prints were thoroughly intermixed with those of
His dearmost consort, they became perturbed and spoke as follows.
TEXT 27
k(syaA: pad"Aina caEtaAina
yaAtaAyaA nand"s$aUnaunaA
@Ms$anyasta‘ak(Aeï"AyaA:
k(re"NAAe: k(ir"NAA yaTaA
kasyäù padäni caitäni
yätäyä nanda-sünunä
aàsa-nyasta-prakoñöhäyäù
kareëoù kariëä yathä
SYNONYMS
kasyäù—of one certain gopé; padäni—the footprints; ca—also; etäni—these;
yätäyäù—who was going; nanda-sünunä—together with the son of Nanda
Mahäräja; aàsa—upon whose shoulder; nyasta—placed; prakoñöhäyäù—His
forearm; kareëoù—of a she-elephant; kariëä—by the he-elephant; yathä—as.
TRANSLATION
[The gopés said:] Here we see the footprints of some gopé who must have
been walking along with the son of Nanda Mahäräja. He must have put His arm
on Her shoulder, just as an elephant rests His trunk on the shoulder of an
accompanying she-elephant.
TEXT 28
@nayaAr"AiDataAe naUnaM
BagAvaAna, h"ir"r"Iìr":
yaªaAe ivah"Aya gAAeivand":
‘aItaAe yaAmanaya‰"h":
anayärädhito nünaà
bhagavän harir éçvaraù
yan no vihäya govindaù
préto yäm anayad rahaù
SYNONYMS
anayä—by Her; ärädhitaù—perfectly worshiped; nünam—certainly;
bhagavan—the Personality of Godhead; hariù—Lord Kåñëa; éçvaraù—the
supreme controller; yat—inasmuch as; naù—us; vihäya—rejecting;
govindaù—Lord Govinda; prétaù—pleased; yäm—whom; anayat—led;
rahaù—to a secluded place.
TRANSLATION
Certainly this particular gopé has perfectly worshiped the all-powerful
Personality of Godhead, Govinda, since He was so pleased with Her that He
abandoned the rest of us and brought Her to a secluded place.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté explains that the word ärädhitaù refers to
Çrématé Rädhäräëé. He comments, "The sage Çukadeva Gosvämé has tried with
all endeavor to keep Her name hidden, but now it automatically shines forth
from the moon of his mouth. That he has spoken Her name is indeed Her
mercy, and thus the word ärädhitaù is like the rumbling of a kettledrum
sounded to announce Her great good fortune."
Although the gopés spoke as if jealous of Çrématé Rädhäräëé, they were
actually ecstatic to see that She had captured Çré Kåñëa.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté quotes the following detailed description of
Çrématé Rädhäräëé's footprints, as given by Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé in his Çré
Ujjvala-nélamaëi: "At the base of the large toe of Her left foot is the mark of a
barleycorn, below that mark is a disc, below the disc is an umbrella, and below
the umbrella is a bracelet. A vertical line extends from the middle of Her foot
to the juncture of Her large and second toes. At the base of the middle toe is a
lotus, below that is a flag with a banner, and below the flag is a creeper,
together with a flower. At the base of Her small toe is an elephant goad, and
upon Her heel is a half-moon. Thus there are eleven marks on Her left foot.
"At the base of the large toe of Her right foot is a conchshell, and below
that a spear. At the base of the small toe of Her right foot is a sacrificial altar,
below that an earring, and below the earring a spear. Along the base of the
second, third, fourth and small toes is the mark of a mountain, below which is
a chariot, and on the heel is a fish.
"Thus all together there are nineteen distinguishing marks on the soles of
Çrématé Rädhäräëé's lotus feet."
TEXT 29
DanyaA @h"Ae @maI @AlyaAe
gAAeivand"Ax.~„yabjare"NAva:
yaAna, “aöezAAE r"maA de"vaI
d"DaumaURDnyaRGanauÔayae
dhanyä aho amé älyo
govindäìghry-abja-reëavaù
yän brahmeçau ramä devé
dadhur mürdhny agha-nuttaye
SYNONYMS
dhanyäù—sanctified; aho—ah; amé—these; älyaù—O gopés; govinda—of
Govinda; aìghri-abja—of the lotuslike feet; reëavaù—the particles of dust;
yän—which; brahmä—Lord Brahmä; éçau—and Lord Çiva; ramä
devé—Ramädevé, the wife of Lord Viñëu; dadhuù—take; mürdhni—on their
heads; agha—of their sinful reactions; nuttaye—for the dispelling.
TRANSLATION
O girls! The dust of Govinda's lotus feet is so sacred that even Brahmä, Çiva
and the goddess Ramä take that dust upon their heads to dispel sinful reactions.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté, who quotes from çästra, each day
in the late afternoon, as Kåñëa returned from the cow pastures with His
cowherd boyfriends, great demigods like Brahmä and Çiva would come down
from heaven and take the dust of His feet.
Great personalities like the goddess Ramä (the wife of Viñëu), Çiva and
Brahmä are not at all sinful. But in the ecstasy of pure Kåñëa consciousness
they feel themselves fallen and impure. Thus, desiring to purify themselves,
they blissfully take the dust of the Lord's lotus feet on their heads.
TEXT 30
tasyaA @maUina na: ºaAeBaM
ku(vaRntyau»aE: pad"Aina yata,
yaEk(Apaô$tya gAAepaInaAma,
r"h"Ae Baunle('cyautaADar"ma,
na laºyantae pad"Anya‡a
tasyaA naUnaM ta{NAAÇÿrE":
iKaâts$aujaAtaAx.~i„atalaAma,
oiªanyae ‘aeyas$aI%M i‘aya:
tasyä amüni naù kñobhaà
kurvanty uccaiù padäni yat
yaikäpahåtya gopénäm
raho bhunkte 'cyutädharam
na lakñyante padäny atra
tasyä nünaà tåëäìkuraiù
khidyat-sujätäìghri-taläm
unninye preyaséà priyaù
SYNONYMS
tasyäù—of Her; amüni—these; naù—for us; kñobham—agitation;
kurvanti—create; uccaiù—exceedingly; padäni—the footprints; yat—because;
yä—who; ekä—alone; apahåtya—being taken aside; gopénäm—of all the gopés;
rahaù—in seclusion; bhuìkte—She enjoys; acyuta—of Kåñëa; adharam—the
lips; na lakñyante—are not seen; padäni—the feet; atra—here; tasyäù—Her;
nünam—certainly; tåëa—by the blades of grass; aìkuraiù—and the growing
sprouts; khidyat—being caused pain; sujäta—tender; aìghri—of whose feet;
taläm—the soles; unninye—He has lifted up; preyasém—His beloved;
priyaù—Her dear Kåñëa.
TRANSLATION
These footprints of that special gopé greatly disturb us. Of all the gopés, She
alone was taken away to a secluded place, where She is enjoying the lips of
Kåñëa. Look, we can't see Her footprints over here! It's obvious that the grass
and sprouts were hurting the tender soles of Her feet, and so the lover lifted up
His beloved.
TEXT 31
wmaAnyaiDak(ma¢aAina
pad"Aina vah"taAe vaDaUma,
gAAepya: pazyata k{(SNAsya
BaAr"A‚(Antasya k(Aimana:
@‡aAvar"AeipataA k(AntaA
pauSpahe"taAemaRh"AtmanaA
imäny adhika-magnäni
padäni vahato vadhüm
gopyaù paçyata kåñëasya
bhäräkräntasya käminaù
aträvaropitä käntä
puñpa-hetor mahätmanä
SYNONYMS
imäni—these; adhika—very much; magnäni—merged; padäni—footprints;
vahataù—of Him who was carrying; vadhüm—His consort; gopyaù—O gopés;
paçyata—just see; kåñëasya—of Kåñëa; bhära—by the weight;
äkräntasya—oppressed; käminaù—lusty; atra—in this place;
avaropitä—placed down; käntä—the girlfriend; puñpa—of (gathering) flowers;
hetoù—for the purpose; mahä-ätmanä—by the very intelligent.
TRANSLATION
Please observe, my dear gopés, how in this place lusty Kåñëa's footprints are
pressed more deeply into the ground. Carrying the weight of His beloved must
have been difficult for Him. And over here that intelligent boy must have put
Her down to gather some flowers.
PURPORT
The word vadhüm indicates that even though Çré Kåñëa was not officially
married to Rädhäräëé, He had in fact made Her His bride in the Våndävana
forest.
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, the gopés use the word
käminaù here to indicate the following thoughts: "We actually love Çré Kåñëa,
but still He has rejected us. Therefore His private dealings with Rädhäräëé
prove that this young prince of Vraja has carried Her away because of lust. If
He were interested in love, He would have accepted us instead of that cowherd
girl Rädhäräëé."
These thoughts reveal the mood of the gopés who are rivals of Çrématé
Rädhäräëé. Of course, the gopés who are Her direct allies were jubilant to see
Her good fortune.
TEXT 32
@‡a ‘as$aUnaAvacaya:
i‘ayaATaeR ‘aeyas$aA k{(ta:
‘apad"A‚(maNA Wtae
pazyataAs$ak(lae pade"
atra prasünävacayaù
priyärthe preyasä kåtaù
prapadäkramaëa ete
paçyatäsakale pade
SYNONYMS
atra—here; prasüna—of flowers; avacayaù—the gathering; priyä-arthe—for
the sake of His beloved; preyasä—by the beloved Kåñëa; kåtaù—done;
prapada—front of His feet; äkramaëe—with the pressing down; ete—these;
paçyata—just see; asakale—incomplete; pade—the pair of footprints.
TRANSLATION
Just see how in this place dear Kåñëa collected flowers for His beloved. Here
He has left the impression of only the front part of His feet because He was
standing on His toes to reach the flowers.
TEXT 33
ke(zA‘as$aADanaM tva‡a
k(AimanyaA: k(AimanaA k{(tama,
taAina caUx"yataA k(AntaAma,
opaivaí"imah" ‹auvama,
keça-prasädhanaà tv atra
käminyäù käminä kåtam
täni cüòayatä käntäm
upaviñöam iha dhruvam
SYNONYMS
keça—of Her hair; prasädhanam—the decorative arrangement;
tu—furthermore; atra—here; käminyäù—of the lusty girl; käminä—by the
lusty boy; kåtam—done; täni—with those (flowers); cüòayatä—by Him who
was making a crown; käntäm—His consort; upaviñöam—seated; iha—here;
dhruvam—certainly.
TRANSLATION
Certainly Kåñëa sat down here with His girlfriend to arrange Her hair. The
lusty boy must have made a crown for that lusty girl out of the flowers He had
collected.
PURPORT
The äcäryas explain that Çré Kåñëa wanted to decorate Rädhäräëé's hair
with the forest flowers He had collected. Therefore They sat down together
facing the same direction, with Rädhäräëé between Kåñëa's knees, and Kåñëa
proceeded to arrange Her hair with flowers and make a flower crown for Her,
coronating Her as the goddess of the forest. Thus the romantic young boy and
girl played and joked together in Våndävana.
TEXT 34
re"mae tayaA caAtmar"ta
@AtmaAr"AmaAe'pyaKaiNx"ta:
k(AimanaAM d"zARyandE"nyaM
ñINAAM caEva äu"r"AtmataAma,
reme tayä cätma-rata
ätmärämo 'py akhaëòitaù
käminäà darçayan dainyaà
stréëäà caiva durätmatäm
SYNONYMS
reme—He enjoyed; tayä—with Her; ca—and; ätma-rataù—He who takes
pleasure only within Himself; ätma-ärämaù—completely self-satisfied;
api—although; akhaëòitaù—never incomplete; käminäm—of ordinary lusty
men; darçayan—showing; dainyam—the degraded condition; stréëäm—of
ordinary women; ca eva—also; durätmatäm—the hardheartedness.
TRANSLATION
[Çukadeva Gosvämé continued:] Lord Kåñëa enjoyed with that gopé, although
He enjoys only within, being self-satisfied and complete in Himself. Thus by
contrast He showed the wretchedness of ordinary lusty men and hardhearted
women.
PURPORT
This verse directly refutes the superficial criticism materialistic people
sometimes direct against Lord Kåñëa's pastimes. The philosopher Aristotle
claimed that ordinary activities are unworthy of God, and with this idea in
mind some people declare that since the activities of Lord Kåñëa resemble
those of ordinary human beings, He cannot be the Absolute Truth .
But in this verse Çukadeva Gosvämé emphatically points out that Lord
Kåñëa acts on the liberated platform of spiritual self-satisfaction. This fact is
indicated here by the terms ätma-rata, ätmäräma and akhaëòita. It is
inconceivable to ordinary people that a handsome young boy and a beautiful
young girl enjoying romantic conjugal affairs in the forest moonlight can be
engaging in pure activity, free from egoistic desire and lust. Yet while Lord
Kåñëa is inconceivable to ordinary persons, those who love Him can easily
realize the absolute, pure nature of His activities.
One may argue that "beauty is in the eye of the beholder" and that
therefore the devotees of Kåñëa are only imagining the Lord's activities to be
pure. This argument ignores many significant facts. For one, the path of Kåñëa
consciousness, of developing love for Kåñëa, demands that a devotee strictly
follow four regulative principles: no illicit sex, no gambling, no intoxication
and no eating of meat, fish or eggs. When one is freed from material lust and
rises to the liberated platform, beyond material desire, one realizes the absolute
beauty of Lord Kåñëa. This process is not theoretical: it has been practiced and
completed by many thousands of great sages, who have left us their shining
example and their brilliant teachings concerning the path of Kåñëa
consciousness.
Certainly beauty is in the eye of the beholder. However, real beauty is
perceived by the soul's eye and not by the lusty eye of the material body.
Therefore the Vedic literature repeatedly stresses that only those freed from
material desire can see the beauty of Lord Kåñëa with the eye of the pure soul,
anointed with love of Godhead. It may finally be noted that upon realizing the
pastimes of Lord Kåñëa one becomes free of all tinges of sex desire, a state of
mind that can hardly result from meditating upon material sexual affairs.
One final note: The conjugal pastimes of Kåñëa perfectly round out His
qualification as the Supreme Absolute Truth. The Vedänta states that the
Absolute Truth is the source of everything, so certainly the Absolute cannot
lack any of the beautiful things of this world. It is only because romantic affairs
exist in a pure, spiritual form in the Absolute that they can manifest in a
perverted, material form in this world. Thus the apparent beauty of this world
is not to be absolutely rejected; rather, beauty should be accepted in its pure,
spiritual form.
Since the beginning of time men and women have been inspired to poetic
rapture by the art of romance. Unfortunately, romance in this world usually
leads to crushing disappointment, brought about by a change of heart or by
death. Thus although we may at first find romantic affairs beautiful and
enjoyable, they are eventually spoiled by the onslaught of material nature.
Still, it is unreasonable to totally reject the concept of romance. Rather, we
should accept conjugal attraction in its absolute, perfect, pure form, as it exists
within God, without a tinge of material lust or selfishness. That pure conjugal
attraction—the supreme beauty and pleasure of the Supreme Truth—is what
we are reading about here in the pages of Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXTS 35-36
wtyaevaM d"zARyantyastaAzA,
caeç&gAAeRpyaAe ivacaetas$a:
yaAM gAAepaImanayatk{(SNAAe
ivah"AyaAnyaA: iñyaAe vanae
s$aA ca maenae tad"AtmaAnaM
vair"ïM" s$avaRyaAeiSataAma,
ih"tvaA gAAepaI: k(AmayaAnaA
maAmas$aAE Bajatae i‘aya:
ity evaà darçayantyas täç
cerur gopyo vicetasaù
yäà gopém anayat kåñëo
vihäyänyäù striyo vane
sä ca mene tadätmänaà
variñöhaà sarva-yoñitäm
hitvä gopéù käma-yänä
mäm asau bhajate priyaù
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; evam—in this manner; darçayantyaù—showing; täù—they;
ceruù—wandered; gopyaù—the gopés; vicetasaù—completely bewildered;
yäm—which; gopém—gopé; anayat—He took; kåñëaù—Lord Kåñëa;
vihäya—abandoning; anyäù—the other; striyaù—women; vane—in the forest;
sä—She; ca—also; mene—thought; tadä—then; ätmänam—Herself;
variñöham—the best; sarva—of all; yoñitäm—women; hitvä—rejecting;
gopéù—the gopés; käma-yänäù—who are impelled by lusty desire; mäm—Me;
asau—He; bhajate—is accepting; priyaù—the beloved.
TRANSLATION
As the gopés wandered about, their minds completely bewildered, they
pointed out various signs of Kåñëa's pastimes. The particular gopé whom Kåñëa
had led into a secluded forest when He had abandoned all the other young girls
began to think Herself the best of women. "My beloved has rejected all the
other gopés," She thought, "even though they are driven by Cupid himself. He
has chosen to reciprocate with Me alone."
PURPORT
Previously all the gopés had become proud of their association with Kåñëa
and then suddenly lost His association. Only Rädhäräëé remained with Him.
Now She has also become proud of that association and will suffer a similar
fate. The Lord arranges all this to reveal the gopés' unparalleled devotion for
Him, a devotion whose intensity fully manifests in moments of separation.
TEXT 37
tataAe gAtvaA vanaAeÚe"zAM
ä{"æaA ke(zAvama“avaIta,
na paAr"yae'hM" cailatauM
naya maAM ya‡a tae mana:
tato gatvä vanoddeçaà
dåptä keçavam abravét
na päraye 'haà calituà
naya mäà yatra te manaù
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; gatvä—going; vana—of the forest; uddeçam—to one region;
dåptä—becoming proud; keçavam—to Kåñëa; abravét—She said; na
päraye—am not able; aham—I; calitum—to move; naya—bring; mäm—Me;
yatra—where; te—Your; manaù—mind.
TRANSLATION
As the two lovers passed through one part of the Våndävana forest, the
special gopé began feeling proud of Herself. She told Lord Keçava, "I cannot
walk any further. Please carry Me wherever You want to go."
TEXT 38
Wvamaul(: i‘ayaAmaAh"
s$k(nDa @Aç&÷taAimaita
tataêAntadR"Dae k{(SNA:
s$aA vaDaUr"nvatapyata
evam uktaù priyäm äha
skandha äruhyatäm iti
tataç cäntardadhe kåñëaù
sä vadhür anvatapyata
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; uktaù—addressed; priyäm—to His beloved; äha—He said;
skandhe—on My shoulder; äruhyatäm—please climb; iti—these words;
tataù—then; ca—and; antardadhe—He disappeared; kåñëaù—Lord Çré Kåñëa;
sä—She; vadhüù—His consort; anvatapyata—felt remorse.
TRANSLATION
Thus addressed, Lord Kåñëa replied, "Just climb on My shoulder." But as
soon as He said this, He disappeared. His beloved consort then immediately felt
great remorse.
PURPORT
Çrématé Rädhäräëé was exhibiting the pride of a beautiful girl who has
brought Her boyfriend under control. Thus She told Kåñëa, "Please carry Me
wherever You want to go. I can't walk anymore." Çré Kåñëa now disappears
from Her sight, intensifying Her ecstatic love more and more.
TEXT 39
h"A naATa r"maNA ‘aeï"
¸(Ais$a ¸(Ais$a mah"ABauja
d"AsyaAstae k{(paNAAyaA mae
s$aKae d"zARya s$aiªaiDama,
hä nätha ramaëa preñöha
kväsi kväsi mahä-bhuja
däsyäs te kåpaëäyä me
sakhe darçaya sannidhim
SYNONYMS
hä—O; nätha—master; ramaëa—lover; preñöha—dearmost; kva asi kva
asi—where are You, where are You; mahä-bhuja—O mighty-armed one;
däsyäù—to the maidservant; te—Your; kåpaëäyäù—wretched; me—Me;
sakhe—O friend; darçaya—please show; sannidhim—Your presence.
TRANSLATION
She cried out: O master! My lover! O dearmost, where are You? Where are
You? Please, O mighty-armed one, O friend, show Yourself to Me, Your poor
servant!
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura describes the following moving
exchange:
"Rädhä says, 'My Lord, I am being burned in the great fire of separation
from You, and My life air is about to leave My body. Even with the greatest
endeavor I cannot maintain My life. But You are the Lord of My life, and so
You can quickly save Me simply by glancing upon Me. Please do so
immediately. I beg You to save My life, not for My sake but rather for Yours.
After giving up all the other gopés, You've brought Me so far to a secluded place
in the forest just to enjoy special pleasure with Me. If I die You will not be able
to find conjugal happiness anywhere else. You will remember Me and thus
lament in Your sorrow.'
"Kåñëa replies, 'So let Me become unhappy. What does that matter to You?'
" 'But You are most dear to Me. I will feel Your unhappiness millions of
times more than You. Even if I've already died, I still will not be able to
tolerate the pain that even one spot on the nails of Your lotus feet may
experience. Indeed, to prevent such pain I am ready to throw My life away
millions and millions of times. So kindly show Yourself and drive away that
unhappiness.'
" 'But if Your life air is on the verge of leaving Your body, what can I do to
stop that?'
" 'Simply by the touch of Your arms, which are a medicinal herb with the
power to revive the dead, My body will return to its healthy, normal condition,
and My life air will automatically come back and remain in My body.'
" 'But You know the forest path Yourself without My help, so why did You
order Me, the king's son and a very young and gentle boy who is to be
respected? Why did You command, "Take Me wherever You wish"? Why do
You anger Me like this?'
"Rädhä cries out, 'Please show Yourself to Your wretched maidservant. Be
merciful to Me! Be merciful! When I ordered You, I was overcome by
sleepiness. I was so tired from playing with You. Therefore please excuse what
Your poor servant said. Please don't be angry. It was only because You treated
Me like such a close friend, though I am unworthy, that I spoke like that to
You.'
" 'All right, My love, I am very pleased with You, so please come to Me.'
" 'But I've been blinded by lamentation. I can't see where You are. Please tell
Me where You are.' "
TEXT 40
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
@invacC$ntyaAe BagAvataAe
maAgA< gAAepyaAe'ivaäU"ir"ta:
d"ä{"zAu: i‘ayaivaëeSaAna,
maAeih"taAM äu":iKataAM s$aKaIma,
çré-çuka uväca
anvicchantyo bhagavato
märgaà gopyo 'vidüritaù
dadåçuù priya-viçleñän
mohitäà duùkhitäà sakhém
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; anvicchantyaù—searching out;
bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; märgam—the path;
gopyaù—the gopés; avidüritaù—not far away; dadåçuù—saw; priya—from Her
beloved; viçleñät—because of the separation; mohitäm—bewildered;
duùkhitäm—unhappy; sakhém—their friend.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: While continuing to search out Kåñëa's path, the
gopés discovered their unhappy friend close by. She was bewildered by
separation from Her lover.
TEXT 41
tayaA k(iTatamaAk(NyaR
maAna‘aAiæaM ca maADavaAta,
@vamaAnaM ca d"AEr"AtmyaAä,"
ivasmayaM par"maM yayau:
tayä kathitam äkarëya
mäna-präptià ca mädhavät
avamänaà ca daurätmyäd
vismayaà paramaà yayuù
SYNONYMS
tayä—by Her; kathitam—what was related; äkarëya—hearing; mäna—of
respect; präptim—the receiving; ca—and; mädhavät—from Lord Kåñëa;
avamänam—the dishonor; ca—also; daurätmyät—because of Her impropriety;
vismayam—amazement; paramam—supreme; yayuù—they experienced.
TRANSLATION
She told them how Mädhava had given Her much respect, but how She then
suffered dishonor because of Her misbehavior. The gopés were extremely
amazed to hear this.
PURPORT
It was natural for Rädhäräëé to ask Kåñëa to carry Her, for this request was
consistent with the loving mood of Their relationship. Now, however, in great
humility She describes Her behavior as wicked. Hearing of these affairs, the
other gopés are astonished.
TEXT 42
tataAe'ivazAna, vanaM can‰"
jyaAetµaA yaAvaiã"BaAvyatae
tama: ‘aivaí"maAlaºya
tataAe inavava{tau: iñya:
tato 'viçan vanaà candra
jyotsnä yävad vibhävyate
tamaù praviñöam älakñya
tato nivavåtuù striyaù
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; aviçan—they entered; vanam—the forest; candra—of the moon;
jyotsnä—the light; yävat—as far; vibhävyate—as was visible; tamaù—darkness;
praviñöam—entered; älakñya—noticing; tataù—thereupon; nivavåtuù—they
desisted; striyaù—the women.
TRANSLATION
In search of Kåñëa, the gopés then entered the depths of the forest as far as
the light of the moon shone. But when they found themselves engulfed in
darkness, they decided to turn back.
PURPORT
The gopés entered a part of the forest so dense that even the light of the full
moon couldn't penetrate it. This scene is also described in the Viñëu Puräëa:
praviñöo gahanaà kåñëaù
padam atra na lakñyate
nivartadhvaà çaçäìkasya
naitad dédhiti-gocaraù
"One gopé said, 'Kåñëa has entered such a dark part of the forest that we cannot
possibly see His footprints. Therefore let us turn back from this area, which
even the light of the moon cannot reach.' "
TEXT 43
tanmanas$k(Astad"laApaAs$a,
taiã"caeí"Astad"Aitmak(A:
taÖ"NAAnaeva gAAyantyaAe
naAtmagAAr"AiNA s$asmaç&:
tan-manaskäs tad-aläpäs
tad-viceñöäs tad-ätmikäù
tad-guëän eva gäyantyo
nätmagäräëi sasmaruù
SYNONYMS
tat-manaskäù—their minds filled with thoughts of Him;
tat-äläpäù—conversing about Him; tat-viceñöäù—imitating His activities;
tat-ätmikäù—filled with His presence; tat-guëän—about His qualities;
eva—simply; gäyantyaù—singing; na—not; ätma—their own;
ägäräëi—homes; sasmaruù—remembered.
TRANSLATION
Their minds absorbed in thoughts of Him, they conversed about Him, acted
out His pastimes and felt themselves filled with His presence. They completely
forgot about their homes as they loudly sang the glories of Kåñëa's
transcendental qualities.
PURPORT
Actually there is no separation from Kåñëa for the pure devotees of the
Lord. Although apparently abandoned by Kåñëa, the gopés were actually tightly
connected to Him by the spiritual process of çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù [SB
7.5.23], hearing and chanting the glories of the Lord.
TEXT 44
pauna: pauilanamaAgAtya
k(AilanâA: k{(SNABaAvanaA:
s$amavaetaA jagAu: k{(SNAM
tad"AgAmanak(AiÉÿtaA:
punaù pulinam ägatya
kälindyäù kåñëa-bhävanäù
samavetä jaguù kåñëaà
tad-ägamana-käìkñitäù
SYNONYMS
punaù—again; pulinam—to the bank; ägatya—coming; kälindyäù—of the
river Yamunä; kåñëa-bhävanäù—meditating on Kåñëa; samavetäù—joined
together; jaguù—they sang; kåñëam—about Kåñëa; tat-ägamana—His arrival;
käìkñitäù—eagerly desired.
TRANSLATION
The gopés again came to the bank of the Kälindé. Meditating on Kåñëa and
eagerly hoping He would come, they sat down together to sing of Him.
PURPORT
As stated in the Kaöha Upaniñad (1.2.23), yam evaiña våëute tena labhyaù:
"The Supersoul can be realized by that person whom He chooses." Thus the
gopés fervently pray that Kåñëa come back to them.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A . C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Tenth Canto, Thirtieth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Gopés Search for Kåñëa."
31. The Gopés' Songs of Separation
This chapter relates how the gopés, overwhelmed by feelings of separation
from Kåñëa, sat down on the bank of the Yamunä and began praying for His
audience and singing His glories.
Because the gopés had dedicated their minds and very lives to Kåñëa, they
were beside themselves with the transcendental pain of separation. But their
crying, which appears like evidence of misery, actually shows their exalted
state of transcendental bliss. As it is said, yata dekha vaiñëaver vyavahära
duùkh/ niçcaya jäniha sei paramänanda sukh: "Whenever one sees a Vaiñëava
acting unhappy, one should know it for sure that he is actually experiencing
the highest spiritual bliss." Thus each of the gopés began addressing Lord Çré
Kåñëa according to her individual mode of ecstasy, and they all prayed for Him
for His mercy.
As the pastimes of Kåñëa spontaneously arose in the minds of the gopés,
they sang their song, which relieves the agony of those suffering from the
burning pain of separation from Kåñëa and which bestows supreme
auspiciousness. They sang, "O Lord, O lover, O cheater, when we remember
Your smile, Your loving glances and Your pastimes with Your boyhood friends,
we become extremely agitated. Remembering Your lotus face, adorned with
locks of blackish hair smeared with the dust of the cows, we become
irrevocably attached to You. And when we remember how You followed the
cows from forest to forest with Your tender feet, we feel great pain."
In their separation from Kåñëa the gopés considered a single moment an
entire age. Even when they had previously seen Him they had found the
blinking of their eyelids intolerable, for it blocked their vision of Him for a
fraction of a second.
The ecstatic sentiments for Lord Kåñëa that the gopés expressed may appear
like symptoms of lust, but in reality they are manifestations of their pure desire
to satisfy the Supreme Lord's spiritual senses. There is not even the slightest
trace of lust in these moods of the gopés.
TEXT 1
gAAepya Ocau:
jayaita tae'iDakM( janmanaA ˜aja:
™ayata wind"r"A zAìd"‡a ih"
d"iyata ä{"zyataAM id"ºau taAvak(As$a,
tvaiya Da{taAs$avastvaAM ivaicanvatae
gopya ücuù
jayati te 'dhikaà janmanä vrajaù
çrayata indirä çaçvad atra hi
dayita dåçyatäà dikñu tävakäs
tvayi dhåtäsavas tväà vicinvate
SYNONYMS
gopyaù ücuù—the gopés said; jayati—is glorious; te—Your;
adhikam—exceedingly; janmanä—by the birth; vrajaù—the land of Vraja;
çrayate—is residing; indirä—Lakñmé, the goddess of fortune;
çaçvat—perpetually; atra—here; hi—indeed; dayita—O beloved;
dåçyatäm—may (You) be seen; dikñu—in all directions; tävakäù—Your
(devotees); tvayi—for Your sake; dhåta—sustained; asavaù—their life airs;
tväm—for You; vicinvate—they are searching.
TRANSLATION
The gopés said: O beloved, Your birth in the land of Vraja has made it
exceedingly glorious, and thus Indirä, the goddess of fortune, always resides
here. It is only for Your sake that we, Your devoted servants, maintain our
lives. We have been searching everywhere for You, so please show Yourself to
us.
PURPORT
Those who are familiar with the art of chanting Sanskrit verses will be able
to appreciate the especially exquisite Sanskrit poetry of this chapter.
Specifically, the poetic meter of the verses is extraordinarily beautiful, and
also, for the most part, in each line the first and seventh syllables begin with
the same consonant, as do the second syllables of all four lines.
TEXT 2
zAr"äu"d"AzAyae s$aADaujaAtas$ata,-
s$ar"is$ajaAed"r"™aImauSaA ä{"zAA
s$aur"tanaATa tae'zAulk(d"Ais$ak(A
var"d" ina£ataAe naeh" ikM( vaDa:
çarad-udäçaye sädhu-jäta-satsarasijodara-
çré-muñä dåçä
surata-nätha te 'çulka-däsikä
vara-da nighnato neha kià vadhaù
SYNONYMS
çarat—of the autumn season; uda-äçaye—in the reservoir of water;
sädhu—excellently; jäta—grown; sat—fine; sarasi-ja—of the lotus flowers;
udara—in the middle; çré—the beauty; muñä—which excels; dåçä—with Your
glance; surata-nätha—O Lord of love; te—Your; açulka—acquired without
payment; däsikäù—maidservants; vara-da—O giver of benedictions;
nighnataù—for You who are killing; na—not; iha—in this world; kim—why;
vadhaù—murder.
TRANSLATION
O Lord of love, in beauty Your glance excels the whorl of the finest, most
perfectly formed lotus within the autumn pond. O bestower of benedictions,
You are killing the maidservants who have given themselves to You freely,
without any price. Isn't this murder?
PURPORT
In the autumn season, the whorl of the lotus has a special beauty, but that
unique loveliness is surpassed by the beauty of Kåñëa's glance.
TEXT 3
ivaSajalaApyayaAã"YaAlar"Aºas$aAä,"
vaSaRmaAç&taAãE"âutaAnalaAta,
va{SamayaAtmajaAiã"ìtaAe BayaAä,"
[%SaBa tae vayaM r"iºataA mauò":
viña-jaläpyayäd vyäla-räkñasäd
varña-märutäd vaidyutänalät
våña-mayätmajäd viçvato bhayäd
åñabha te vayaà rakñitä muhuù
SYNONYMS
viña—poisonous; jala—by the water (of the Yamunä, contaminated by Käliya);
apyayät—from destruction; vyäla—fearsome; räkñasät—from the demon
(Agha); varña—from rain (sent by Indra); märutät—and the wind-storm
(created by Tåëävarta); vaidyuta-analät—from the thunderbolt (of Indra);
våña—from the bull, Ariñöäsura; maya-ätmajät—from the son of Maya
(Vyomäsura); viçvataù—from all; bhayät—fear; åñabha—O greatest of
personalities; te—by You; vayam—we; rakñitäù—have been protected;
muhuù—repeatedly.
TRANSLATION
O greatest of personalities, You have repeatedly saved us from all kinds of
danger—from poisoned water, from the terrible man-eater Agha, from the great
rains, from the wind demon, from the fiery thunderbolt of Indra, from the bull
demon and from the son of Maya Dänava.
PURPORT
Here the gopés imply, "O Kåñëa, You saved us from so many terrible dangers,
so now that we are dying of separation from You, won't You save us again?"
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains that the gopés mention Ariñöa
and Vyoma because, although Kåñëa had not yet killed these demons, the fact
that He would kill them in the future was well known, having been predicted
by the sages Garga and Bhäguri at the time of the Lord's birth.
TEXT 4
na Kalau gAAepaIk(Anand"naAe BavaAna,
@iKalade"ih"naAmantar"Atmaä{"k,(
ivaKanas$aAiTaRtaAe ivaìgAuæayae
s$aKa ode"iyavaAna, s$aAtvataAM ku(lae
na khalu gopékä-nandano bhavän
akhila-dehinäm antarätma-dåk
vikhanasärthito viçva-guptaye
sakha udeyivän sätvatäà kule
SYNONYMS
na—not; khalu—indeed; gopikä—of the gopé, Yaçodä; nandanaù—the son;
bhavän—Your good self; akhila—of all; dehinäm—embodied living entities;
antaù-ätma—of the inner consciousness; dåk—the seer; vikhanasä—by Lord
Brahmä; arthitaù—prayed for; viçva—of the universe; guptaye—for the
protection; sakhe—O friend; udeyivän—You arose; sätvatäm—of the Sätvatas;
kule—in the dynasty.
TRANSLATION
You are not actually the son of the gopé Yaçodä, O friend, but rather the
indwelling witness in the hearts of all embodied souls. Because Lord Brahmä
prayed for You to come and protect the universe, You have now appeared in the
Sätvata dynasty.
PURPORT
The gopés here imply, "Since You have descended to protect the entire
universe, how can You neglect Your own devotees?"
TEXT 5
ivar"icataABayaM va{iSNADaUyaR tae
car"NAmaIyauSaAM s$aMs$a{taeBaRyaAta,
k(r"s$ar"Aeç&hM" k(Anta k(AmadM"
izAr"is$a Daeih" na: ™aIk(r"ƒah"ma,
viracitäbhayaà våñëi-dhürya te
caraëam éyuñäà saàsåter bhayät
kara-saroruhaà känta käma-daà
çirasi dhehi naù çré-kara-graham
SYNONYMS
viracita—created; abhayam—fearlessness; våñëi—of the Våñëi dynasty;
dhürya—O best; te—Your; caraëam—feet; éyuñäm—of those who approach;
saàsåteù—of material existence; bhayät—out of fear; kara—Your hand;
saraù-ruham—like a lotus flower; känta—O lover; käma—desires;
dam—fulfilling; çirasi—on the heads; dhehi—please place; naù—of us; çré—of
the goddess of fortune, Lakñmédevé; kara—the hand; graham—taking.
TRANSLATION
O best of the Våñëis, Your lotuslike hand, which holds the hand of the
goddess of fortune, grants fearlessness to those who approach Your feet out of
fear of material existence. O lover, please place that wish-fulfilling lotus hand
on our heads.
TEXT 6
˜ajajanaAitaRh"na, vaIr" yaAeiSataAM
inajajanasmayaDvaMs$anaismata
Baja s$aKae Bavaitk(Æÿr"I: sma naAe
jalaç&h"AnanaM caAç& d"zARya
vraja-janärti-han véra yoñitäà
nija-jana-smaya-dhvaàsana-smita
bhaja sakhe bhavat-kiìkaréù sma no
jalaruhänanaà cäru darçaya
SYNONYMS
vraja-jana—of the people of Vraja; ärti—of the suffering; han—O destroyer;
véra—O hero; yoñitäm—of women; nija—Your own; jana—of the people;
smaya—the pride; dhvaàsana—destroying; smita—whose smile; bhaja—please
accept; sakhe—O friend; bhavat—Your; kiìkaréù—maidservants;
sma—indeed; naù—us; jala-ruha—lotus; änanam—Your face; cäru—beautiful;
darçaya—please show.
TRANSLATION
O You who destroy the suffering of Vraja's people, O hero of all women,
Your smile shatters the false pride of Your devotees. Please, dear friend, accept
us as Your maidservants and show us Your beautiful lotus face.
TEXT 7
‘aNAtade"ih"naAM paApak(SaRNAM
ta{NAcar"AnaugAM ™aIinake(tanama,
P(iNAP(NAAipaRtaM tae pad"AmbaujaM
k{(NAu ku(caeSau na: k{(inDa ô$cC$yama,
praëata-dehinäà päpa-karñaëaà
tåëa-caränugaà çré-niketanam
phaëi-phaëärpitaà te padämbujaà
kåëu kuceñu naù kåndhi håc-chayam
SYNONYMS
praëata—who are surrendered to You; dehinäm—of the embodied living
beings; päpa—the sins; karñaëam—which remove; tåëa—grass; cara—who
graze (the cows); anugam—following; çré—of the goddess of fortune;
niketanam—the abode; phaëi—of the serpent (Käliya); phaëä—on the hoods;
arpitam—placed; te—Your; pada-ambujam—lotus feet; kåëu—please put;
kuceñu—on the breasts; naù—our; kåndhi—cut away; håt-çayam—the lust in
our hearts.
TRANSLATION
Your lotus feet destroy the past sins of all embodied souls who surrender to
them. Those feet follow after the cows in the pastures and are the eternal abode
of the goddess of fortune. Since You once put those feet on the hoods of the
great serpent Käliya, please place them upon our breasts and tear away the lust
in our hearts.
PURPORT
In their appeal, the gopés point out that Lord Kåñëa's lotus feet destroy the
sins of all surrendered conditioned souls. The Lord is so merciful that He even
goes out to herd the cows in the pasturing ground, and thus His lotus feet
follow them about in the grass. He has offered His lotus feet to the goddess of
fortune and has placed them upon the hoods of the serpent Käliya. Therefore,
considering all this, the Lord should place His lotus feet on the gopés' breasts
and satisfy their desire. That is the logic the gopés employ here.
TEXT 8
maDaur"yaA igAr"A valgAuvaAfyayaA
bauDamanaAeÁayaA pauSk(re"ºaNA
ivaiDak(r"Iir"maA vaIr" mau÷taIr,"
@Dar"s$aIDaunaApyaAyayasva na:
madhurayä girä valgu-väkyayä
budha-manojïayä puñkarekñaëa
vidhi-karér imä véra muhyatér
adhara-sédhunäpyäyayasva naù
SYNONYMS
madhurayä—sweet; girä—by Your voice; valgu—charming; väkyayä—by Your
words; budha—to the intelligent; mano-jïayä—attractive; puñkara—lotus;
ékñaëa—You whose eyes; vidhi-karéù—maidservants; imäù—these; véra—O
hero; muhyatéù—becoming bewildered; adhara—of Your lips; sédhunä—with
the nectar; äpyäyayasva—please restore to life; naù—us.
TRANSLATION
O lotus-eyed one, Your sweet voice and charming words, which attract the
minds of the intelligent, are bewildering us more and more. Our dear hero,
please revive Your maidservants with the nectar of Your lips.
TEXT 9
tava k(TaAma{taM taæajaIvanaM
k(ivaiBar"Iix"taM k(lmaSaApah"ma,
™avaNAmaËÿlaM ™aImad"AtataM
Bauiva gA{NAinta yae BaUir"d"A janaA:
tava kathämåtaà tapta-jévanaà
kavibhir éòitaà kalmañäpaham
çravaëa-maìgalaà çrémad ätataà
bhuvi gåëanti ye bhüri-dä janäù
SYNONYMS
tava—Your; kathä-amåtam—the nectar of words; tapta-jévanam—life for those
aggrieved in the material world; kavibhiù—by great thinkers;
éòitam—described; kalmaña-apaham—that which drives away sinful reactions;
çravaëa-maìgalam—giving spiritual benefit when heard; çåémat—filled with
spiritual power; ätatam—broadcast all over the world; bhuvi—in the material
world; gåëanti—chant and spread; ye—those who; bhüri-däù—most
beneficent; janäù—persons.
TRANSLATION
The nectar of Your words and the descriptions of Your activities are the life
and soul of those suffering in this material world. These narrations, transmitted
by learned sages, eradicate one's sinful reactions and bestow good fortune upon
whoever hears them. These narrations are broadcast all over the world and are
filled with spiritual power. Certainly those who spread the message of Godhead
are most munificent.
PURPORT
King Pratäparudra recited this verse to Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu during
Lord Jagannätha's Ratha-yäträ festival. While the Lord was resting in a garden,
King Pratäparudra humbly entered and began massaging His legs and lotus
feet. Then the King recited the Thirty-first Chapter of the Tenth Canto of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the songs of the gopés. The Caitanya-caritämåta relates
that when Lord Caitanya heard this verse, beginning tava kathämåtam, He
immediately arose in ecstatic love and embraced King Pratäparudra. The
incident is described in detail in the Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 14.4-18),
and in his edition Çréla Prabhupäda has given extensive commentary on it.
TEXT 10
‘ah"is$ataM i‘aya‘aemavaIºaNAM
ivah"r"NAM ca tae DyaAnamaËÿlama,
r"h"is$a s$aMivad"Ae yaA ô$id" s$pa{zA:
ku(h"k( naAe mana: ºaAeBayainta ih"
prahasitaà priya-prema-vékñaëaà
viharaëaà ca te dhyäna-maìgalam
rahasi saàvido yä hådi spåçaù
kuhaka no manaù kñobhayanti hi
SYNONYMS
prahasitam—the smiling; priya—affectionate; prema—with love;
vékñaëam—glances; viharaëam—intimate pastimes; ca—and; te—Your;
dhyäna—by meditation; maìgalam—auspicious; rahasi—in solitary places;
saàvidaù—conversations; yäù—which; hådi—the heart; spåçaù—touching;
kuhaka—O cheater; naù—our; manaù—minds; kñobhayanti—agitate;
hi—indeed.
TRANSLATION
Your smiles, Your sweet, loving glances, the intimate pastimes and
confidential talks we enjoyed with You—all these are auspicious to meditate
upon, and they touch our hearts. But at the same time, O deceiver, they very
much agitate our minds.
TEXT 11
calais$a yaä," ˜ajaA»aAr"yana, pazAUna,
nailanas$aund"rM" naATa tae pad"ma,
izAlata{NAAÇÿrE": s$aId"taIita na:
k(ilalataAM mana: k(Anta gAcC$ita
calasi yad vrajäc cärayan paçün
nalina-sundaraà nätha te padam
çila-tåëäìkuraiù sédatéti naù
kalilatäà manaù känta gacchati
SYNONYMS
calasi—You go; yat—when; vrajät—from the cowherd village;
cärayan—herding; paçün—the animals; nalina—than a lotus flower;
sundaram—more beautiful; nätha—O master; te—Your; padam—feet;
çila—by sharp edges of grain; tåëa—grass; aìkuraiù—and sprouting plants;
sédati—are experiencing pain; iti—thus thinking; naù—us;
kalilatäm—discomfort; manaù—our minds; känta—O lover; gacchati—feel.
TRANSLATION
Dear master, dear lover, when You leave the cowherd village to herd the
cows, our minds are disturbed with the thought that Your feet, more beautiful
than a lotus, will be pricked by the spiked husks of grain and the rough grass
and plants.
TEXT 12
id"napair"ºayae naIlaku(ntalaEr,"
vanaç&h"AnanaM iba”ad"Ava{tama,
Ganar"jasvalaM d"zARyanmauò"r,"
manais$a na: smarM" vaIr" yacC$is$a
dina-parikñaye néla-kuntalair
vanaruhänanaà bibhrad ävåtam
ghana-rajasvalaà darçayan muhur
manasi naù smaraà véra yacchasi
SYNONYMS
dina—of the day; parikñaye—at the finish; néla—dark blue; kuntalaiù—with
locks of hair; vana-ruha—lotus; änanam—face; bibhrat—exhibiting;
ävåtam—covered; ghana—thick; rajaù-valam—smeared with dust;
darçayan—showing; muhuù—repeatedly; manasi—in the minds; naù—our;
smaram—Cupid; véra—O hero; yacchasi—You are placing.
TRANSLATION
At the end of the day You repeatedly show us Your lotus face, covered with
dark blue locks of hair and thickly powdered with dust. Thus, O hero, You
arouse lusty desires in our minds.
TEXT 13
‘aNAtak(AmadM" paájaAicaRtaM
Dar"iNAmaNx"naM DyaeyamaApaid"
car"NApaÆÿjaM zAntamaM ca tae
r"maNA na: stanaeSvapaRyaAiDah"na,
praëata-käma-daà padmajärcitaà
dharaëi-maëòanaà dhyeyam äpadi
caraëa-paìkajaà çantamaà ca te
ramaëa naù staneñv arpayädhi-han
SYNONYMS
praëata—of those who bow down; käma—the desires; dam—fulfilling;
padma-ja—by Lord Brahmä; arcitam—worshiped; dharaëi—of the earth;
maëòanam—the ornament; dhyeyam—the proper object of meditation;
äpadi—in time of distress; caraëa-paìkajam—the lotus feet; çam-tamam-giving
the highest satisfaction; ca—and; te—Your; ramaëa—O lover; naù—our;
staneñu—on the breasts; arpaya—please place; adhi-han—O destroyer of
mental distress.
TRANSLATION
Your lotus feet, which are worshiped by Lord Brahmä, fulfill the desires of
all who bow down to them. They are the ornament of the earth, they give the
highest satisfaction, and in times of danger they are the appropriate object of
meditation. O lover, O destroyer of anxiety, please put those lotus feet upon our
breasts.
TEXT 14
s$aur"tavaDaRnaM zAAek(naAzAnaM
svair"tavaeNAunaA s$auï]" cauimbatama,
wtar"r"AgAivasmaAr"NAM na{NAAM
ivatar" vaIr" nastae'Dar"Ama{tama,
surata-vardhanaà çoka-näçanaà
svarita-veëunä suñöhu cumbitam
itara-räga-vismäraëaà nåëäà
vitara véra nas te 'dharämåtam
SYNONYMS
surata—conjugal happiness; vardhanam—which increases; çoka—grief;
näçanam—which destroys; svarita—vibrated; veëunä—by Your flute;
suñöhu—abundantly; cumbitam—kissed; itara—other; räga—attachments;
vismäraëam—causing to forget; nåëäm—men; vitara—please spread; véra—O
hero; naù—upon us; te—Your; adhara—of the lips; amåtam—the nectar.
TRANSLATION
O hero, kindly distribute to us the nectar of Your lips, which enhances
conjugal pleasure and vanquishes grief. That nectar is thoroughly relished by
Your vibrating flute and makes people forget any other attachment.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté' s charming commentary on this verse is in the
form of a dialogue between the gopés and Kåñëa:
"The gopés say, 'O Kåñëa, You exactly resemble Dhanvantari, the best of
physicians. So please give us some medicine, for we are suffering from the
disease of romantic desire for You. Don't hesitate to give us the medicinal
nectar of Your lips freely, without our paying a substantial price. Since You are
a great hero in giving charity, You should give it without any payment, even to
the most wretched persons. Consider that we are losing our life and that now
You can restore us to life by giving us that nectar. After all, You have already
given it to Your flute, which is simply a hollow bamboo stick.'
"Kåñëa says, 'But the diet of people in this world is the bad one of
attachment to wealth, followers, family and so forth. The particular medicine
you've requested should not be given to those who have such a bad diet.'
" 'But this medicine makes one forget all other attachments. So wonderful is
this herbal drug that it counteracts bad dietary habits. Please give that nectar
to us, O hero, since You are most charitable.' "
TEXT 15
@q%ita yaà"vaAnai¶" k(AnanaM
‡auiq% yaugAAyatae tvaAmapazyataAma,
ku(iq%laku(ntalaM ™aImauKaM ca tae
jax" od"IºataAM paºmak{(ä," ä{"zAAma,
aöati yad bhavän ahni känanaà
truöi yugäyate tväm apaçyatäm
kuöila-kuntalaà çré-mukhaà ca te
jaòa udékñatäà pakñma-kåd dåçäm
SYNONYMS
aöati—travel; yat—when; bhavän—You; ahni—during the daytime;
känanam—to the forest; truöi—about 1/1700 of a second; yugäyate—becomes
like an entire millennium; tväm—You; apaçyatäm—for those who do not see;
kuöila—curling; kuntalam—with locks of hair; çré—beautiful; mukham—face;
ca—and; te—Your; jaòaù—foolish; udékñatäm—for those who are eagerly
looking; pakñma—of lids; kåt—the creator; dåçäm—of the eyes.
TRANSLATION
When You go off to the forest during the day, a tiny fraction of a second
becomes like a millennium for us because we cannot see You. And even when
we can eagerly look upon Your beautiful face, so lovely with its adornment of
curly locks, our pleasure is hindered by our eyelids, which were fashioned by
the foolish creator.
TEXT 16
paitas$autaAnvaya”aAta{baAnDavaAna,
@itaivalaÎÿYa tae'ntyacyautaAgAtaA:
gAitaivad"stavaAeÕ"ItamaAeih"taA:
ik(tava yaAeiSata: k(styajaeiªaizA
pati-sutänvaya-bhrätå-bändhavän
ativilaìghya te 'nty acyutägatäù
gati-vidas tavodgéta-mohitäù
kitava yoñitaù kas tyajen niçi
SYNONYMS
pati—husbands; suta—children; anvaya—ancestors; bhrätå—brothers;
bändhavän—and other relatives; ativilaìghya—completely neglecting;
te—Your; anti—into the presence; acyuta—O infallible one; ägatäù—having
come; gati—of our movements; vidaù—who understand the purpose;
tava—Your; udgéta—by the loud song (of the flute); mohitäù—bewildered;
kitava—O cheater; yoñitaù—women; kaù—who; tyajet—would abandon;
niçi—in the night.
TRANSLATION
Dear Acyuta, You know very well why we have come here. Who but a
cheater like You would abandon young women who come to see Him in the
middle of the night, enchanted by the loud song of His flute? Just to see You,
we have completely rejected our husbands, children, ancestors, brothers and
other relatives.
TEXT 17
r"h"is$a s$aMivadM" ô$cC$yaAed"yaM
‘ah"is$ataAnanaM ‘aemavaIºaNAma,
ba{h"äu"r": i™ayaAe vaIºya DaAma tae
mauò"r"itas$pa{h"A mau÷tae mana:
rahasi saàvidaà håc-chayodayaà
prahasitänanaà prema-vékñaëam
båhad-uraù çriyo vékñya dhäma te
muhur ati-spåhä muhyate manaù
SYNONYMS
rahasi—in private; saàvidam—confidential discussions; håt-çaya—of lust in
the heart; udayam—the rise; prahasita—smiling; änanam—face;
prema—loving; vékñaëam—glances; båhat—broad; uraù—chest; çriyaù—of the
goddess of fortune; vékñya—seeing; dhäma—the abode; te—Your;
muhuù—repeatedly; ati—excessive; spåhä—hankering; muhyate—bewilders;
manaù—the mind.
TRANSLATION
Our minds are repeatedly bewildered as we think of the intimate
conversations we had with You in secret, feel the rise of lust in our hearts and
remember Your smiling face, Your loving glances and Your broad chest, the
resting place of the goddess of fortune. Thus we experience the most severe
hankering for You.
TEXT 18
˜ajavanaAEk(s$aAM vyail(r"Ëÿ tae
va{ijanah"n‡yalaM ivaìmaËÿlama,
tyaja manaAfca nastvats$pa{h"AtmanaAM
svajanaô$åu"jaAM yaiªaSaUd"nama,
vraja-vanaukasäà vyaktir aìga te
våjina-hantry alaà viçva-maìgalam
tyaja manäk ca nas tvat-spåhätmanäà
sva-jana-håd-rujäà yan niñüdanam
SYNONYMS
vraja-vana—in the forests of Vraja; okasäm—for those who dwell;
vyaktiù—the appearance; aìga—dear one; te—Your; våjina—of distress;
hantré—the agent of destruction; alam—extremely so;
viçva-maìgalam—all-auspicious; tyaja—please release; manäk—a little;
ca—and; naù—to us; tvat—for You; spåhä—with hankering; ätmanäm—whose
minds are filled; sva—Your own; jana—devotees; håt—in the hearts;
rujäm—of the disease; yat—which is; niñüdanam—that which counteracts.
TRANSLATION
O beloved, Your all-auspicious appearance vanquishes the distress of those
living in Vraja's forests. Our minds long for Your association. Please give to us
just a bit of that medicine, which counteracts the disease in Your devotees'
hearts.
PURPORT
According to the äcäryas, the gopés repeatedly entreat Lord Kåñëa to place
His lotus feet on their breasts. The gopés are not victims of material lust, but
rather they are absorbed in pure love of Godhead and thus want to serve Lord
Kåñëa's lotus feet by offering their beautiful breasts to Him. Materialistic
persons, who are victims of mundane sex desire, will not be able to understand
how these conjugal dealings take place on a pure, spiritual platform, and that is
the materialists' great misfortune.
TEXT 19
yaÔae s$aujaAtacar"NAAmbauç&hM" stanaeSau
BaItaA: zAnaE: i‘aya d"DaImaih" k(kR(zAeSau
taenaAq%vaImaq%is$a taã"YaTatae na ikM( isvata,
kU(paARid"iBa”aRmaita DaIBaRvad"AyauSaAM na:
yat te sujäta-caraëämburuhaà staneñu
bhétäù çanaiù priya dadhémahi karkaçeñu
tenäöavém aöasi tad vyathate na kià svit
kürpädibhir bhramati dhér bhavad-äyuñäà naù
SYNONYMS
yat—which; te—Your; su-jäta—very fine; caraëa-ambu-ruham—lotus feet;
staneñu—on the breasts; bhétäù—being afraid; çanaiù—gently; priya—O dear
one; dadhémahi—we place; karkaçeñu—rough; tena—with them; aöavém—the
forest; aöasi—You roam; tat—they; vyathate—are distressed; na—not; kim
svit—we wonder; kürpa-ädibhiù—by small stones and so on;
bhramati—flutters; dhéù—the mind; bhavat-äyuñäm—of those of whom Your
Lordship is the very life; naù—of us.
TRANSLATION
O dearly beloved! Your lotus feet are so soft that we place them gently on
our breasts, fearing that Your feet will be hurt. Our life rests only in You. Our
minds, therefore, are filled with anxiety that Your tender feet might be
wounded by pebbles as You roam about on the forest path.
PURPORT
The translation of this verse is from Çréla Prabhupäda's English rendering of
Caitanya-caritämåta (Ädi 4.173).
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Tenth Canto, Thirty-first Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Gopés' Songs of Separation."
32. The Reunion
This chapter describes how Çré Kåñëa manifested Himself in the midst of
the gopés, who had become extremely disturbed by their separation from Him.
After He consoled them, they expressed to Him their deep feelings of ecstasy.
The gopés having shown in various ways their great eagerness to see Kåñëa,
the attractor of Cupid, He appeared before them wearing silken yellow
garments and a beautiful flower garland. Some of the gopés, overwhelmed with
ecstasy at seeing Him, grasped His hands, others placed His arm on their
shoulders, and others accepted the remnants of betel nut He had chewed. Thus
they served Him.
One gopé, impelled by loving anger toward Kåñëa, bit her lip and looked
askance at Him. Because the gopés were so attached to Kåñëa, they were not
satiated even by continuously gazing at Him. One of them then placed Kåñëa
within her heart, closed her eyes and, embracing Him within herself again and
again, became absorbed in transcendental bliss, just like a yogé. In this way the
pain the gopés had felt because of separation from the Lord was dispelled.
Next Lord Kåñëa went to the bank of the Yamunä in the company of the
cowherd girls, His internal potencies. The gopés then made a seat for Kåñëa out
of their shawls, and after He had sat down they enjoyed with Him by gesturing
amorously. The gopés still felt hurt that Kåñëa had disappeared, so He
explained to them why He had done so. He further told them that He had
come under the exclusive control of their loving devotion and would ever
remain indebted to them.
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
wita gAAepya: ‘agAAyantya:
‘alapantyaê ica‡aDaA
ç&ç&äu": s$ausvarM" r"Ajana,
k{(SNAd"zARnalaAlas$aA:
çré-çuka uväca
iti gopyaù pragäyantyaù
pralapantyaç ca citradhä
ruruduù su-svaraà räjan
kåñëa-darçana-lälasäù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus, as related above;
gopyaù—the gopés; pragäyantyaù—singing forth; pralapantyaù—speaking
forth; ca—and; citradhä—in various charming ways; ruruduù—they cried;
su-svaram—loudly; räjan—O King; kåñëa-darçana—for the sight of Kåñëa;
lälasäù—hankering.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O King, having thus sung and spoken their hearts
out in various charming ways, the gopés began to weep loudly. They were very
eager to see Lord Kåñëa.
TEXT 2
taAs$aAmaAivar"BaUcC$AEir":
smayamaAnamauKaAmbauja:
paItaAmbar"Dar": ›agvaI
s$aAºaAnmanmaTamanmaTa:
täsäm ävirabhüc chauriù
smayamäna-mukhämbujaù
pétämbara-dharaù sragvé
säkñän manmatha-manmathaù
SYNONYMS
täsäm—before them; ävirabhüt—He appeared; çauriù—Lord Kåñëa;
smayamäna—smiling; mukha—His face; ambujaù—lotuslike; péta—yellow;
ambara—a garment; dharaù—wearing; srak-vé—wearing a flower garland;
säkñät—directly; man-matha—of Cupid (who bewilders the mind); man—of
the mind; mathaù—the bewilderer.
TRANSLATION
Then Lord Kåñëa, a smile on His lotus face, appeared before the gopés.
Wearing a garland and a yellow garment, He directly appeared as one who can
bewilder the mind of Cupid, who himself bewilders the minds of ordinary
people.
TEXT 3
taM ivalaAefyaAgAtaM ‘aeïM"
‘aItyautPu(éaä{"zAAe'balaA:
oÔasTauyauRgApats$avaARs$a,
tanva: ‘aANAimavaAgAtama,
taà vilokyägataà preñöhaà
préty-utphulla-dåço 'baläù
uttasthur yugapat sarväs
tanvaù präëam ivägatam
SYNONYMS
tam—Him; vilokya—seeing; ägatam—returned; preñöham—their dearmost;
préti—out of affection; utphulla—opening wide; dåçaù—their eyes;
abaläù—the girls; uttasthuù—they stood up; yugapat—all at once; sarväù—all
of them; tanvaù—of the body; präëam—the life air; iva—as;
ägatam—returned.
TRANSLATION
When the gopés saw that their dearmost Kåñëa had returned to them, they all
stood up at once, and out of their affection for Him their eyes bloomed wide. It
was as if the air of life had reentered their bodies.
TEXT 4
k(Aicatk(r"AmbaujaM zAAEre"r,"
jagA{he"'ÃailanaA maud"A
k(AicaÚ"DaAr" taß"Aò"ma,
@Ms$ae cand"naBaUiSatama,
käcit karämbujaà çaurer
jagåhe 'ïjalinä mudä
käcid dadhära tad-bähum
aàse candana-bhüñitam
SYNONYMS
käcit—one of them; kara-ambujam—the lotus hand; çaureù—of Lord Kåñëa;
jagåhe—seized; aïjalinä—in her folded palms; mudä—with joy;
käcit—another; dadhära—put; tat-bähum—His arm; aàse—on her shoulder;
candana—with sandalwood paste; bhüñitam—adorned.
TRANSLATION
One gopé joyfully took Kåñëa's hand between her folded palms, and another
placed His arm, anointed with sandalwood paste, on her shoulder.
TEXT 5
k(Aicad"ÃailanaAgA{õ"Ata,
tanvaI taAmbaUlacaivaRtama,
Wk(A tad"x.~i„ak(malaM
s$antaæaA stanayaAer"DaAta,
käcid aïjalinägåhëät
tanvé tämbüla-carvitam
ekä tad-aìghri-kamalaà
santaptä stanayor adhät
SYNONYMS
käcit—one; aïjalinä—with joined hands; agåhëät—took; tanvé—slender;
tämbüla—of betel nut; carvitam—His chewed remnants; ekä—one; tat—His;
aìghri—foot; kamalam—lotus; santaptä—burning; stanayoù—on her breasts;
adhät—placed.
TRANSLATION
A slender gopé respectfully took in her joined hands the betel nut He had
chewed, and another gopé, burning with desire, put His lotus feet on her
breasts.
TEXT 6
Wk(A ”auku(iq%maAbaDya
‘aemas$aMr"mBaivaù"laA
£antaIvaEºatk(q%AºaepaE:
s$and"í"d"zAnacC$d"A
ekä bhru-kuöim äbadhya
prema-saàrambha-vihvalä
ghnantévaikñat kaöäkñepaiù
sandañöa-daçana-cchadä
SYNONYMS
ekä—one more gopé; bhru-kuöim—her eyebrows; äbadhya—constricting;
prema—of her pure love; saàrambha—by the fury; vihvalä—beside herself;
ghnanté—injuring; iva—as if; aikñat—she looked; kaöa—of her sidelong
glances; äkñepaiù—with the insults; sandañöa—biting; daçana—of her teeth;
chadä—the covering (her lips).
TRANSLATION
One gopé, beside herself with loving anger, bit her lips and stared at Him
with frowning eyebrows, as if to wound Him with her harsh glances.
TEXT 7
@par"AinaimaSaä,"ä{"gByaAM
jauSaANAA tanmauKaAmbaujama,
@ApaItamaipa naAta{pyata,
s$antasta»ar"NAM yaTaA
aparänimiñad-dågbhyäà
juñäëä tan-mukhämbujam
äpétam api nätåpyat
santas tac-caraëaà yathä
SYNONYMS
aparä—yet another gopé; animiñat—unblinking; dågbhyäm—with eyes;
juñäëä—relishing; tat—His; mukha-ambujam—lotus face; äpétam—fully
tasted; api—although; na atåpyat—She did not become satiated;
santaù—mystic saints; tat-caraëam—His feet; yathä—as.
TRANSLATION
Another gopé looked with unblinking eyes upon His lotus face, but even
after deeply relishing its sweetness She did not feel satiated, just as mystic
saints are never satiated when meditating upon the Lord's feet.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains that the analogy given here
of saintly persons meditating upon the Lord's feet is only partially applicable,
since the ecstasy the gopés felt when Kåñëa came back was actually
unparalleled. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté also reveals that this particular gopé
is the most fortunate of all, Çrématé Rädhäräëé.
TEXT 8
taM k(Aicaªae‡ar"n‹aeNA
ô$id" k{(tvaA inamaIlya ca
paulak(AËÿYaupagAu÷Astae
yaAegAIvaAnand"s$amplautaA
taà käcin netra-randhreëa
hådi kåtvä nimélya ca
pulakäìgy upaguhyäste
yogévänanda-samplutä
SYNONYMS
tam—Him; käcit—one of them; netra—of her eyes; randhreëa—through the
aperture; hådi—in her heart; kåtvä—placing; nimélya—closing; ca—and;
pulaka-aìgé—the hair on her limbs standing on end; upaguhya—embracing;
äste—she remained; yogé—a yogé; iva—like; änanda—in ecstasy;
samplutä—drowned.
TRANSLATION
One gopé took the Lord through the aperture of her eyes and placed Him
within her heart. Then, with her eyes closed and her bodily hairs standing on
end, she continuously embraced Him within. Thus immersed in transcendental
ecstasy, she resembled a yogé meditating upon the Lord.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura states that the seven gopés mentioned
so far in this chapter are the first seven of the eight principal gopés, whose
status allowed them to immediately approach Çré Kåñëa upon His
reappearance. The äcärya quotes a verse from the Çré Vaiñëava-toñaëé that
gives the names of these seven as Candrävalé, Çyämalä, Çaibyä, Padmä, Çré
Rädhä, Lalitä and Viçäkhä. The eighth is understood to be Bhadrä. Çré
Vaiñëava-toñaëé itself quotes a verse from the Skanda Puräëa that declares
these eight gopés to be the principal among the three billion gopés. Detailed
information about the hierarchy of gopés is available in Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé's
Ujjvala-nélamaëi.
The Padma Puräëa confirms that Çré Rädhä is the foremost of the gopés:
yathä rädhä priyä viñëos
tasyäù kuëòaà priyaà tathä
sarva-gopéñu saivaikä
viñëor atyanta-vallabhä
"Just as Çrématé Rädhäräëé is most dear to Kåñëa, Her bathing pond is similarly
dear. Of all the gopés, She is the most beloved of the Lord."
The Båhad-gautaméya-tantra also names Çrématé Rädhäräëé as Kåñëa's
foremost consort:
devé kåñëa-mayé proktä
rädhikä para-devatä
sarva-lakñmé-mayé sarva
käntiù sammohiné parä
"The transcendental goddess Çrématé Rädhäräëé is the direct counterpart of
Lord Çré Kåñëa. She is the central figure for all the goddesses of fortune. She
possesses all attractiveness to attract the all-attractive Personality of Godhead.
She is the primeval internal potency of the Lord." (This translation is Çréla
Prabhupäda's English rendering of Caitanya-caritämåta, Ädi 4.83.)
Additional information about Çré Rädhä is given in the Åg-pariçiñöa (the
supplement to the Åg Veda): rädhayä mädhavo devo mädhavenaiva rädhikä/
vibhräjante janeñu. "Among all persons, it is Çré Rädhä in whose company Lord
Mädhava is especially glorious, as She is especially glorious in His."
TEXT 9
s$avaARstaA: ke(zAvaAlaAek(-
par"maAets$avainava{RtaA:
jaò"ivaRr"h"jaM taApaM
‘aAÁaM ‘aApya yaTaA janaA:
sarväs täù keçavälokaparamotsava-
nirvåtäù
jahur viraha-jaà täpaà
präjïaà präpya yathä janäù
SYNONYMS
sarväù—all; täù—those gopés; keçava—of Lord Kåñëa; äloka—by the sight;
parama—supreme; utsava—of festivity; nirvåtäù—feeling joy;; jahuù—they
gave up; viraha-jam—born of their separation; täpam—the distress;
präjïam—a spiritually enlightened person; präpya—achieving; yathä—as;
janäù—people in general.
TRANSLATION
All the gopés enjoyed the greatest festivity when they saw their beloved
Keçava again. They gave up the distress of separation, just as people in general
forget their misery when they gain the association of a spiritually enlightened
person.
TEXT 10
taAiBaivaRDaUtazAAek(AiBar,"
BagAvaAnacyautaAe va{ta:
vyar"AecataAiDakM( taAta
pauç&Sa: zAil(iBayaRTaA
täbhir vidhüta-çokäbhir
bhagavän acyuto våtaù
vyarocatädhikaà täta
puruñaù çaktibhir yathä
SYNONYMS
täbhiù—by these gopés; vidhüta—fully cleansed; çokäbhiù-of their distress;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; acyutaù—the infallible Lord;
våtaù—surrounded; vyarocata—appeared brilliant; adhikam—exceedingly;
täta—my dear (King Parékñit); puruñaù—the Supreme Soul; çaktibhiù—with
His transcendental potencies; yathä—as.
TRANSLATION
Encircled by the gopés, who were now relieved of all distress, Lord Acyuta,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, shone forth splendidly. My dear King,
Kåñëa thus appeared like the Supersoul encircled by His spiritual potencies.
PURPORT
The gopés are Lord Kåñëa's internal potency, and therefore when they were
relieved and happy again the Lord shone forth even more brilliantly than
before, and His transcendental bliss increased. Kåñëa loves the gopés with pure
transcendental love, and they love Him in the same pure way. The whole
affair, conducted on the transcendental platform, is inconceivable to those
bound in material existence.
TEXTS 11-12
taA: s$amaAd"Aya k(AilanâA
inaivaRzya pauilanaM ivaBau:
ivak(s$atku(nd"mand"Ar"
s$aur"ByainalaSaq%.pad"ma,
zAr"»an‰"AMzAus$and"Aeh"-
Dvastad"AeSaAtama: izAvama,
k{(SNAAyaA h"statar"laA
icatak(AemalavaAlauk(ma,
täù samädäya kälindyä
nirviçya pulinaà vibhuù
vikasat-kunda-mandära
surabhy-anila-ñaöpadam
çarac-candräàçu-sandohadhvasta-
doñä-tamaù çivam
kåñëäyä hasta-taralä
cita-komala-välukam
SYNONYMS
täù—those gopés; samädäya—taking; kälindyäù—of the Yamunä;
nirviçya—entering upon; pulinam—the bank; vibhuù—the almighty Supreme
Lord; vikasat—blooming; kunda-mandära—of kunda and mandära flowers;
surabhi—fragrant; anila—with the breeze; sat-padam—with bees;
çarat—autumnal; candra—of the moon; aàçu—of the rays; sandoha—by the
abundance; dhvasta—dispelled; doñä—of the night; tamaù—the darkness;
çivam—auspicious; kåñëäyäù—of the river Yamunä; hasta—like hands;
tarala—by her waves; äcita—collected; komala—soft; välukam—sand.
TRANSLATION
The almighty Lord then took the gopés with Him to the bank of the Kälindé,
who with the hands of her waves had scattered piles of soft sand upon the
shore. In that auspicious place the breeze, bearing the fragrance of blooming
kunda and mandära flowers, attracted many bees, and the abundant rays of the
autumn moon dispelled the darkness of night.
TEXT 13
taÚ"zARnaAø"Ad"ivaDaUtaô$åu"jaAe
manaAer"TaAntaM ™autayaAe yaTaA yayau:
svaEç&Ôar"IyaE: ku(caku(ÇÿmaAiÆÿtaEr,"
@caIk}(paªaAs$anamaAtmabanDavae
tad-darçanähläda-vidhüta-håd-rujo
manorathäntaà çrutayo yathä yayuù
svair uttaréyaiù kuca-kuìkumäìkitair
acékÿpann äsanam ätma-bandhave
SYNONYMS
tat—Him, Kåñëa; darçana—due to seeing; ähläda—by the ecstasy;
vidhüta—driven away; håt—in their hearts; rujaù—the pain; manaù-ratha—of
their desires; antam—the ultimate fulfillment; çrutayaù—the revealed
scriptures; yathä—as; yayuù—they attained; svaiù—with their own;
uttaréyaiù—covering garments; kuca—of their breasts; kuìkuma—with the
vermilion powder; aìkitaiù—smeared; acékÿpan—they arranged; äsanam—a
seat; ätma—of their souls; bandhave—for the dear friend.
TRANSLATION
Their heartache vanquished by the ecstasy of seeing Kåñëa, the gopés, like
the personified Vedas before them, felt their desires completely fulfilled. For
their dear friend Kåñëa they arranged a seat with their shawls which were
smeared with the kuìkuma powder from their breasts.
PURPORT
In the Eighty-seventh Chapter of this canto (Text 23), the çrutis, or
personified Vedas, pray as follows:
striya uragendra-bhoga-bhuja-daëòa-viñakta-dhiyo
vayam api te samäù samadåço 'ìghri-saroja-sudhäù
"These women fully absorbed their minds in meditation on Lord Kåñëa's
powerful arms, which are like the bodies of great serpents. We want to become
just like the gopés and render service to His lotus feet." The çrutis had seen
Kåñëa during His appearance in the previous day of Brahmä and had become
full of the most intense desire to associate with Him. Then in this kalpa they
became gopés. And since the Vedas are eternal in human society, the çrutis in
this kalpa also become full of desire for Kåñëa and in the next kalpa will also
become gopés. This information is given by Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté
Öhäkura.
TEXT 14
ta‡aAepaivaí"Ae BagAvaAna, s$a wRìr"Ae
yaAegAeìr"AntaôR$id" k(ilpataAs$ana:
cak(As$a gAAepaIpair"SaÕ"taAe'icaRtas$a,
‡aElaAefyalaºmyaek(padM" vapaudR"Data,
tatropaviñöo bhagavän sa éçvaro
yogeçvaräntar-hådi kalpitäsanaù
cakäsa gopé-pariñad-gato 'rcitas
trailokya-lakñmy-eka-padaà vapur dadhat
SYNONYMS
tatra—there; upaviñöaù—seated; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; saù—He; éçvaraù—the ultimate controller; yoga-éçvara—of the
masters of mystic meditation; antaù—within; hådi—the hearts;
kalpita—arranged; äsanaù—His seat; cakäsa—He appeared resplendent;
gopé-pariñat—in the assembly of the gopés; gataù—present; arcitaù—worshiped;
trai-lokya—of the three worlds; lakñmé—of the beauty and other opulences;
eka—the exclusive; padam—reservoir; vapuù—His transcendental, personal
form; dadhat—exhibiting.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for whom the great
masters of mystic meditation arrange a seat within their hearts, took His seat in
the assembly of gopés. His transcendental body, the exclusive abode of beauty
and opulence within the three worlds, shone brilliantly as the gopés worshiped
Him.
PURPORT
The masters of mystic meditation include Lord Çiva, Ananta Çeña and other
exalted personalities, all of whom keep the Lord seated within the lotus of
their hearts. This same Lord, conquered by the intense, selfless love of the
gopés, agreed to become their boyfriend and dance with them in Våndävana,
after sitting upon their fragrant shawls on the bank of the Yamunä River.
TEXT 15
s$aBaAjaiyatvaA tamanaËÿd"IpanaM
s$ah"As$alaIlaeºaNAiva”ama”auvaA
s$aMs$pazAR"naenaAÆÿk{(taAx.~i„ah"stayaAe:
s$aMstautya wRSatku(ipataA baBaAiSare"
sabhäjayitvä tam anaìga-dépanaà
sahäsa-lélekñaëa-vibhrama-bhruvä
saàsparçanenäìka-kåtäìghri-hastayoù
saàstutya éñat kupitä babhäñire
SYNONYMS
sabhäjayitvä—honoring; tam—Him; anaìga—of lusty desires; dépanam—the
inciter; sa-häsa—smiling; lélä—playful; ékñaëa—with glances;
vibhrama—sporting; bhruvä—with their eyebrows; saàsparçanena—with
touching; aìka—upon their laps; kåta—placed; aìghri—of His feet;
hastayoù—and hands; saàstutya—offering praise; éñat—somewhat;
kupitäù—angry; babhäñire—they spoke.
TRANSLATION
Çré Kåñëa had awakened romantic desires within the gopés, and they honored
Him by glancing at Him with playful smiles, gesturing amorously with their
eyebrows, and massaging His hands and feet as they held them in their laps.
Even while worshiping Him, however, they felt somewhat angry, and thus they
addressed Him as follows.
TEXT 16
™aIgAAepya Ocau:
BajataAe'nauBajantyaek(
Wk( Wtaiã"payaRyama,
naAeBayaAMê Bajantyaek(
WtaªaAe “aUih" s$aADau BaAe:
çré-gopya ücuù
bhajato 'nubhajanty eka
eka etad-viparyayam
nobhayäàç ca bhajanty eka
etan no brühi sädhu bhoù
SYNONYMS
çré-gopyaù ücuù—the gopés said; bhajataù—to those who respect them;
anu—reciprocally; bhajanti—show respect; eke—some; eke—some; etat—to
this; viparyayam—the contrary; na ubhayän—with neither; ca—and;
bhajanti—reciprocate; eke—some; etat—this; naù—to us; brühi—speak;
sädhu—properly; bhoù—O dear one.
TRANSLATION
The gopés said: Some people reciprocate the affection only of those who are
affectionate toward them, while others show affection even to those who are
indifferent or inimical. And yet others will not show affection toward anyone.
Dear Kåñëa, please properly explain this matter to us.
PURPORT
By this apparently polite question, the gopés want to expose Lord Kåñëa's
failure to properly reciprocate their love. They were very disturbed when Çré
Kåñëa left them in the forest, and they want to know why He caused them to
suffer in these loving affairs.
TEXT 17
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
imaTaAe Bajainta yae s$aKya:
svaATaE=k(AntaAeâmaA ih" tae
na ta‡a s$aAEô$dM" DamaR:
svaATaARTa< taiÜ" naAnyaTaA
çré-bhagavän uväca
mitho bhajanti ye sakhyaù
svärthaikäntodyamä hi te
na tatra sauhådaà dharmaù
svärthärthaà tad dhi nänyathä
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca——the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
mithaù—mutually; bhajanti—reciprocate; ye—who; sakhyaù—friends;
sva-artha—for their own sake; eka-anta—exclusively; udyamäù—whose
endeavor; hi—indeed; te—they; na—not; tatra—therein; sauhådam—true
friendship; dharmaù—true religiosity; sva-artha—of their own benefit;
artham—for the sake; tat—that; hi—indeed; na—not; anyathä—otherwise.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: So-called friends who show
affection for each other only to benefit themselves are actually selfish. They
have no true friendship, nor are they following the true principles of religion.
Indeed, if they did not expect benefit for themselves, they would not
reciprocate.
PURPORT
The Lord here reminds the gopés that in pure loving friendship there is no
sense of selfish interest but rather only love for one's friend.
TEXT 18
BajantyaBajataAe yae vaE
k(ç&NAA: ipatar"AE yaTaA
DamaAeR inar"pavaAd"Ae'‡a
s$aAEô$dM" ca s$aumaDyamaA:
bhajanty abhajato ye vai
karuëäù pitarau yathä
dharmo nirapavädo 'tra
sauhådaà ca su-madhyamäù
SYNONYMS
bhajanti—they devotedly serve; abhajataù—with those who do not reciprocate
with them; ye—those who; vai—indeed; karuëäù—merciful; pitarau—parents;
yathä—as; dharmaù—religious duty; nirapavädaù—faultless; atra—in this;
sauhådam—friendship; ca—and; su-madhyamäù—O slender-waisted ones.
TRANSLATION
My dear slender-waisted gopés, some people are genuinely merciful or, like
parents, naturally affectionate. Such persons, who devotedly serve even those
who fail to reciprocate with them, are following the true, faultless path of
religion, and they are true well-wishers.
TEXT 19
BajataAe'ipa na vaE ke(icaä,"
BajantyaBajata: ku(ta:
@AtmaAr"AmaA ÷Aæak(AmaA
@k{(taÁaA gAuç&åu"h":
bhajato 'pi na vai kecid
bhajanty abhajataù kutaù
ätmärämä hy äpta-kämä
akåta-jïä guru-druhaù
SYNONYMS
bhajataù—with those who are acting favorably; api—even; na—not;
vai—certainly; kecit—some; bhajanti—reciprocate; abhajataù—with those who
are not acting favorably; kutaù—what to speak of; ätma-ärämäù—the
self-satisfied; hi—indeed; äpta-kämäù—those who have already attained their
material desires; akåta-jïäù—those who are ungrateful; guru-druhaù—those
who are inimical to superiors.
TRANSLATION
Then there are those individuals who are spiritually self-satisfied, materially
fulfilled or by nature ungrateful or simply envious of superiors. Such persons
will not love even those who love them, what to speak of those who are
inimical.
PURPORT
Some people, being spiritually self-satisfied, do not reciprocate others'
affection because they want to avoid entanglement in mundane dealings.
Other persons do not reciprocate simply out of envy or arrogance. And still
others fail to reciprocate because they are materially satisfied and thus
uninterested in new material opportunities. Lord Kåñëa patiently explains all
these things to the gopés.
TEXT 20
naAhM" tau s$aKyaAe BajataAe'ipa jantaUna,
BajaAmyamaISaAmanauva{iÔava{Ôayae
yaTaADanaAe labDaDanae ivanaíe"
tai»antayaAnyaiªaBa{taAe na vaed"
nähaà tu sakhyo bhajato 'pi jantün
bhajämy améñäm anuvåtti-våttaye
yathädhano labdha-dhane vinañöe
tac-cintayänyan nibhåto na veda
SYNONYMS
na—do not; aham—I; tu—on the other hand; sakhyaù—O friends;
bhajataù—worshiping; api—even; jantün—with living beings;
bhajämi—reciprocate; améñäm—their; anuvåtti—propensity (for pure love);
våttaye—in order to impel; yathä—just as; adhanaù—a poor man;
labdha—having obtained; dhane—wealth; vinañöe—and it being lost; tat—of
that; cintayä—with anxious thought; anyat—anything else; nibhåtaù—filled;
na veda—does not know.
TRANSLATION
But the reason I do not immediately reciprocate the affection of living beings
even when they worship Me, O gopés, is that I want to intensify their loving
devotion. They then become like a poor man who has gained some wealth and
then lost it, and who thus becomes so anxious about it that he can think of
nothing else.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa states in Bhagavad-gétä, ye yathä mäà prapadyante täàs tathaiva
bhajämy aham: [Bg. 4.11] "As people approach Me, I reciprocate with them
accordingly." Yet even if the Lord is approached by someone with devotion, to
intensify the devotee's love the Lord may not immediately reciprocate fully. In
fact, the Lord is truly reciprocating. After all, a sincere devotee always prays to
the Lord, "Please help me to love You purely." Therefore the Lord's so-called
neglect is actually the fulfillment of the devotee's prayer. Lord Kåñëa
intensifies our love for Him by apparently separating Himself from us, and the
result is that we achieve what we really wanted and prayed for: intense love for
the Absolute Truth, Kåñëa. Thus Lord Kåñëa's apparent negligence is actually
His thoughtful reciprocation and the fulfillment of our deepest and purest
desire.
According to the äcäryas, as Lord Kåñëa began to speak this verse the gopés
looked at one another with squinting eyes, trying to hide the smiles breaking
out on their faces. Even as Lord Kåñëa was speaking, the gopés had begun to
realize that He was bringing them to the highest perfection of loving service.
TEXT 21
WvaM mad"TaAeRijJatalaAek(vaed"
svaAnaAimh" vaAe mayyanauva{Ôayae'balaA:
mayaApar"AeºaM BajataA itar"Aeih"taM
maAs$aUiyatauM maAhR"Ta tait‘ayaM i‘ayaA:
evaà mad-arthojjhita-loka-veda
svänäm hi vo mayy anuvåttaye 'baläù
mayäparokñaà bhajatä tirohitaà
mäsüyituà märhatha tat priyaà priyäù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; mat—My; artha—for the sake; ujjhita—having rejected;
loka—worldly opinion; veda—the opinion of the Vedas; svänäm—and
relatives; hi—indeed; vaù—of you; mayi—for Me; anuvåttaye—for the loving
propensity; abaläù—My dear girls; mayä—by Me; aparokñam—removed from
your sight; bhajatä—who is actually reciprocating; tirohitam-the disappearance;
mä—with Me; asüyitum—to be inimical; ma arhatha—you should not;
tat—therefore; priyam—with your beloved; priyäù—My dear beloveds.
TRANSLATION
My dear girls, understanding that simply for My sake you had rejected the
authority of worldly opinion, of the Vedas and of your relatives, I acted as I did
only to increase your attachment to Me. Even when I removed Myself from
your sight by suddenly disappearing, I never stopped loving you. Therefore, My
beloved gopés, please do not harbor any bad feelings toward Me, your beloved.
PURPORT
Here the Lord indicates that though the gopés were already perfect in their
love for Him, still, to inconceivably increase their perfection and show an
example for the world, He acted as He did.
TEXT 22
na paAr"yae'hM" inar"vaâs$aMyaujaAM
svas$aADauk{(tyaM ivabauDaAyauSaAipa va:
yaA maABajanäu"jaRr"gAeh"Za{"ÊÿlaA:
s$aMva{zcya taã": ‘aitayaAtau s$aADaunaA
na päraye 'haà niravadya-saàyujäà
sva-sädhu-kåtyaà vibudhäyuñäpi vaù
yä mäbhajan durjara-geha-çåìkhaläù
saàvåçcya tad vaù pratiyätu sädhunä
SYNONYMS
na—not; päraye—am able to make; aham—I; niravadya-saàyujäm—to those
who are completely free from deceit; sva-sädhu-kåtyam—proper compensation;
vibudha-äyuñä—with a lifetime as long as that of the demigods; api—although;
vaù—to you; yäù—who; mä—Me; abhajan—have worshiped;
durjara—difficult to overcome; geha-çåìkhaläù—the chains of household life;
saàvåçcya—cutting; tat—that; vaù—of you; pratiyätu—let it be returned;
sädhunä—by the good activity itself.
TRANSLATION
I am not able to repay My debt for your spotless service, even within a
lifetime of Brahmä. Your connection with Me is beyond reproach. You have
worshiped Me, cutting off all domestic ties, which are difficult to break.
Therefore please let your own glorious deeds be your compensation.
PURPORT
The translation and word meanings for this verse are taken from Çréla
Prabhupäda's English rendering of Çré Caitanya-caritämåta (Ädi 4.180).
In conclusion, the gopés became eternally glorious by their behavior in the
Lord's temporary absence, and the mutual love between them and the Lord was
wonderfully enhanced. This is the perfection of Kåñëa and His loving
devotees.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A . C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Tenth Canto, Thirty-second Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Reunion."
33. The Räsa Dance
This chapter describes Lord Çré Kåñëa's räsa dance, which He enjoyed with
His beloved girlfriends in the forests along the Yamunä River.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, is most expert in the
knowledge of transcendental moods. In the company of the gopés, who were
tightly bound to Him by the ropes of affection and totally dedicated to His
service, the Lord expanded Himself into numerous forms. The gopés became
intoxicated with their enthusiasm to enjoy the räsa dance, and thus they
began satisfying Kåñëa's senses by singing, dancing and gesturing amorously.
The sweet voices of the gopés filled all the directions.
Even after Lord Kåñëa manifested Himself in numerous forms, each gopé
thought He was standing next to her alone. Gradually the gopés became
fatigued from the continuous dancing and singing, and each of them placed
her arm on the shoulder of the Kåñëa standing beside her. Some gopés smelled
and kissed Kåñëa's arm, which bore the fragrance of the lotus and was anointed
with sandalwood paste. Others put Kåñëa's hand on their bodies, and yet others
gave Kåñëa pleasure by embracing Him lovingly.
Lord Kåñëa, being the Supreme Absolute Truth, is the only actual enjoyer
and object of enjoyment. Although He is one without a second, He expands
Himself into many forms to increase His personal pastimes. Therefore great
scholars say that Kåñëa's räsa-lélä is like a child's playing with His own
reflection. Çré Kåñëa is self-satisfied and fully endowed with inconceivable,
transcendental opulences. When He exhibits such pastimes as the räsa-lélä, all
living beings, from Brahmä down to the blades of grass, become merged in the
ocean of astonishment.
When Mahäräja Parékñit heard the narration of Kåñëa's conjugal pastimes
with the gopés, which superficially resemble the activities of lusty, wanton
persons, he expressed a doubt to the great devotee Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé.
Çukadeva dispelled this doubt by stating, "Since Çré Kåñëa is the absolute
enjoyer, such pastimes as these can never be contaminated by any fault. But if
anyone other than the Supreme Personality of Godhead tries to enjoy such
pastimes, he will suffer the same fate that someone other than Lord Rudra
would suffer if he attempted to drink an ocean of poison. Moreover, even one
who only thinks of imitating Lord Kåñëa's räsa-lélä will certainly suffer
misfortune."
The Supreme Absolute Truth, Çré Kåñëa, is present within the hearts of all
living entities as their indwelling witness. When out of His mercy He exhibits
His intimate pastimes to His devotees, these activities are never besmirched by
mundane imperfection. Any living being who hears of the spontaneous loving
attraction the gopés felt for Lord Kåñëa will have his desires for material sense
gratification destroyed at the root and will develop his natural propensity for
serving the Supreme Lord, the spiritual master, and the Lord's devotees.
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
wtTaM BagAvataAe gAAepya:
™autvaA vaAca: s$aupaezAlaA:
jaò"ivaRr"h"jaM taApaM
tad"ËÿAepaicataAizASa:
çré-çuka uväca
itthaà bhagavato gopyaù
çrutvä väcaù su-peçaläù
jahur viraha-jaà täpaà
tad-aìgopacitäçiñaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; ittham—thus; bhagavataù—of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; gopyaù—the cowherd girls;
çrutvä—hearing; väcaù—the words; su-peçaläù—most charming; jahuù—they
gave up; viraha-jam—born out of their feelings of separation; täpam—the
distress; tat—His; aìga—from (touching) the limbs; upacita—fulfilled;
äçiñaù—whose desires.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: When the cowherd girls heard the Supreme
Personality of Godhead speak these most charming words, they forgot their
distress caused by separation from Him. Touching His transcendental limbs,
they felt all their desires fulfilled.
TEXT 2
ta‡aAr"Bata gAAeivand"Ae
r"As$a‚(Lx"Amanau˜ataE:
ñIr"¥aEr"invata: ‘aItaEr,"
@nyaAenyaAbaÜ"baAò"iBa:
taträrabhata govindo
räsa-kréòäm anuvrataiù
stré-ratnair anvitaù prétair
anyonyäbaddha-bähubhiù
SYNONYMS
tatra—there; ärabhata—began; govindaù—Lord Kåñëa; räsa-kréòam—the
pastime of the räsa dance; anuvrataiù-by the faithful (gopés); stré—of women;
ratnaiù—the jewels; anvitaù—joined; prétaiù—who were satisfied;
anyonya—among one another; äbaddha—entwining; bähubhiù—their arms.
TRANSLATION
There on the Yamunä's banks Lord Govinda then began the pastime of the
räsa dance in the company of those jewels among women, the faithful gopés,
who joyfully linked their arms together.
TEXT 3
r"As$aAets$ava: s$am‘ava{ÔaAe
gAAepaImaNx"lamaiNx"ta:
yaAegAeìre"NA k{(SNAena
taAs$aAM maDyae ã"yaAeãR"yaAe:
‘aivaíe"na gA{h"ItaAnaAM
k(NQe& svainak(qM% iñya:
yaM manyaer"ªaBastaAvaä,"
ivamaAnazAtas$aÇÿlama,
id"vaAEk(s$aAM s$ad"Ar"ANAAma,
@AEts$aufyaApaô$taAtmanaAma,
räsotsavaù sampravåtto
gopé-maëòala-maëòitaù
yogeçvareëa kåñëena
täsäà madhye dvayor dvayoù
praviñöena gåhétänäà
kaëöhe sva-nikaöaà striyaù
yaà manyeran nabhas tävad
vimäna-çata-saìkulam
divaukasäà sa-däräëäm
autsukyäpahåtätmanäm
SYNONYMS
räsa—of the räsa dance; utsavaù—the festivity; sampravåttaù—commenced;
gopé-maëòala—by the circle of gopés; maëòitaù—decorated; yoga—of mystic
power; éçvareëa—by the supreme controller; kåñëena—Lord Kåñëa; täsäm—of
them; madhye—within the midst; dvayoù dvayoù—between each pair;
praviñöena—present; gåhéöänäm—who were held; kaëöhe—by the necks;
sva-nikaöam—next to themselves; striyaù—the women; yam—whom;
manyeran—considered; nabhaù—the sky; tävat—at that time; vimäna—of
airplanes; çata—with hundreds; saìkulam—crowded; diva—of the heavenly
planets; okasäm—belonging to the inhabitants; sa—accompanied;
däräëäm—by their wives; autsukya—by eagerness; apahåta—carried away;
ätmanäm—their minds.
TRANSLATION
The festive räsa dance commenced, with the gopés arrayed in a circle. Lord
Kåñëa expanded Himself and entered between each pair of gopés, and as that
master of mystic power placed His arms around their necks, each girl thought
He was standing next to her alone. The demigods and their wives were
overwhelmed with eagerness to witness the räsa dance, and they soon crowded
the sky with their hundreds of celestial airplanes.
PURPORT
Çréla Bilvamaìgala Öhäkura has written the following verse about the räsa
dance:
aìganäm aìganäm antarä mädhavo
mädhavaà mädhavaà cäntareëäìganäù
ittham äkalpite maëòale madhya-gaù
saïjagau veëunä devaké-nandanaù
"Lord Mädhava was situated between each pair of gopés, and a gopé was situated
between each pair of His manifestations. And Çré Kåñëa, the son of Devaké also
appeared in the middle of the circle, playing upon His flute and singing."
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura points out that the gopés, maddened
by love, were unable to understand that Çré Kåñëa had expanded Himself so He
could personally dance with each of them. Each gopé saw one manifestation of
Kåñëa. The demigods and their wives, however, could see all His different
manifestations as they watched the räsa dance from their airplanes, and thus
they were completely astonished.
TEXT 4
tataAe äu"näu"BayaAe naeäu"r,"
inapaetau: pauSpava{í"ya:
jagAugARnDavaRpataya:
s$añIk(AstaâzAAe'malama,
tato dundubhayo nedur
nipetuù puñpa-våñöayaù
jagur gandharva-patayaù
sa-strékäs tad-yaço 'malam
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; dundubhayaù—kettledrums; neduù—resounded; nipetuù—fell
down; puñpa—of flowers; våñöayaù—rain; jaguù—they sang;
gandharva-patayaù—the chief Gandharvas; sa-strékäù—along with their wives;
tat—of Him, Lord Kåñëa; yaçaù—the glories; amalam—spotless.
TRANSLATION
Kettledrums then resounded in the sky while flowers rained down and the
chief Gandharvas and their wives sang Lord Kåñëa's spotless glories.
PURPORT
As stated here, Lord Kåñëa's glory in dancing the räsa dance is pure
spiritual bliss. The demigods in heaven, in charge of maintaining propriety in
the universe, ecstatically accepted the räsa dance as the ultimate religious
affair, completely different from the perverted reflection of romance we find
in this mundane world.
TEXT 5
valayaAnaAM naUpaur"ANAAM
ik(iÆÿNAInaAM ca yaAeiSataAma,
s$ai‘ayaANAAmaBaUcC$bd"s$a,
taumaulaAe r"As$amaNx"lae
valayänäà nüpuräëäà
kiìkiëénäà ca yoñitäm
sa-priyäëäm abhüc chabdas
tumulo räsa-maëòale
SYNONYMS
valayänäm—of the armlets; nüpuräëäm—ankle bells; kiìkiëénäm—bells worn
around the waist; ca—and; yoñitäm—of the women; sa-priyäëäm—who were
with their beloved; abhüt—there was; çabdaù—a sound; tumulaù—tumultuous;
räsa-maëòale—in the circle of the räsa dance.
TRANSLATION
A tumultuous sound arose from the armlets, ankle bells and waist bells of
the gopés as they sported with their beloved Kåñëa in the circle of the räsa
dance.
TEXT 6
ta‡aAitazAuzAuBae taAiBar,"
BagAvaAnde"vak(Ls$auta:
maDyae maNAInaAM hE"maAnaAM
mah"Amar"k(taAe yaTaA
taträtiçuçubhe täbhir
bhagavän devaké-sutaù
madhye maëénäà haimänäà
mahä-marakato yathä
SYNONYMS
tatra—there; atiçuçubhe—appeared most brilliant; täbhiù—with them;
bhagavän—the Supreme Lord; devaké-sutaù—Kåñëa, the son of Devaké;
madhye—in the midst; maëénäm—of ornaments; haimänäm—golden;
mahä—great; marakataù—a sapphire; yathä—as.
TRANSLATION
In the midst of the dancing gopés, Lord Kåñëa appeared most brilliant, like an
exquisite sapphire in the midst of golden ornaments.
PURPORT
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura states that Devaké, besides being
the name of Vasudeva's wife, is also a name of mother Yaçodä, as stated in the
Ädi Puräëa: dve nämné nanda-bhäryäyä yaçodä devakéti ca. "The wife of Nanda
has two names—Yaçodä and Devaké."
TEXT 7
paAd"nyaAs$aEBauRjaivaDauitaiBa: s$aismataE”aURivalaAs$aEr,"
BajyanmaDyaEêlaku(capaqE%: ku(Nx"laEgARNx"laAelaE:
isvaânmauKya: k(var"r"s$anaAƒanTaya: k{(SNAvaDvaAe
gAAyantyastaM taix"ta wva taA maeGaca‚e( ivare"jau:
päda-nyäsair bhuja-vidhutibhiù sa-smitair bhrü-viläsair
bhajyan madhyaiç cala-kuca-paöaiù kuëòalair gaëòa-lolaiù
svidyan-mukhyaù kavara-rasanägranthayaù kåñëa-vadhvo
gäyantyas taà taòita iva tä megha-cakre virejuù
SYNONYMS
päda—of their feet; nyäsaiù—by the placement; bhuja—of their hands;
vidhutibhiù—by the gestures; sa-smitaiù—smiling; bhrü—of their eyebrows;
viläsaiù—by the playful movements; bhajyan—bending; madhyaiù—by their
middles; cala—moving; kuca—covering their breasts; paöaiù—by the cloths;
kuëòalaiù—by their earrings; gaëòa—on their cheeks; lolaiù—rolling;
svidyan—perspiring; mukhyaù—whose faces; kavara—the braids of their hair;
rasanä—and their belts; ägranthayaù—having tightly tied;
kåñëa-vadhvaù—the consorts of Lord Kåñëa; gäyantyaù—singing; tam—about
Him; taòitaù—bolts of lightning; iva—as if; täù—they; megha-cakre—in a
range of clouds; virejuù—shone.
TRANSLATION
As the gopés sang in praise of Kåñëa, their feet danced, their hands gestured,
and their eyebrows moved with playful smiles. With their braids and belts tied
tight, their waists bending, their faces perspiring, the garments on their breasts
moving this way and that, and their earrings swinging on their cheeks, Lord
Kåñëa's young consorts shone like streaks of lightning in a mass of clouds.
PURPORT
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé explains that according to the analogy of lightning
flashing in clouds, the perspiration on the lovely faces of the gopés resembled
drops of mist, and their singing resembled thunder. The word ägranthayaù may
also be read agranthayaù, meaning "loosened." This would indicate that
although the gopés began the dance with their hair and belts tightly drawn,
these gradually slackened and loosened.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté points out that the gopés were expert at
exhibiting mudräs (precise hand gestures that express feelings or convey
meanings associated with the theme of a performance). Thus sometimes Kåñëa
and the gopés would artistically move their interlocked arms together, and
sometimes they would separate arms and exhibit mudräs to act out the
meaning of the songs they were singing.
The word päda-nyäsaiù indicates that the gopés artistically and gracefully
placed the steps of their dancing feet in an enchanting way, and the words
sa-smitair bhrü-viläsair indicate that the romantic movements of their
eyebrows, smiling with love, were most charming to behold.
TEXT 8
o»aEjaRgAuna{RtyamaAnaA
r"l(k(NQ$YaAe r"itai‘ayaA:
k{(SNAAiBamazARmauid"taA
yaÕ"Itaenaed"maAva{tama,
uccair jagur nåtyamänä
rakta-kaëöhyo rati-priyäù
kåñëäbhimarça-muditä
yad-gétenedam ävåtam
SYNONYMS
uccaiù—loudly; jaguù—they sang; nåtyamänäù—while dancing;
rakta—colored; kaëöhyaù—their throats; rati—conjugal enjoyment;
priyäù—dedicated to; kåñëa-abhimarça—by the touch of Lord Kåñëa;
muditäù—joyful; yat—whose; gétena—by the singing; idam—this entire
universe; ävåtam—is pervaded.
TRANSLATION
Eager to enjoy conjugal love, their throats colored with various pigments, the
gopés sang loudly and danced. They were overjoyed by Kåñëa's touch, and they
sang songs that filled the entire universe.
PURPORT
According to an authoritative book on music called Saìgéta-sära, tävanta
eva rägäù süryävatyo jéva-jätayaù, teñu ñoòaça-sähasré purä gopé-kåtä varä:
"There are as many musical rägas as there are species of life. Among these
rägas are sixteen thousand principal ones, which were manifested by the gopés."
Thus the gopés created sixteen thousand different rägas, or musical modes, and
these have subsequently been disseminated throughout the world. The words
yad-gétenedam ävåtam also indicate that even today devotees throughout the
world sing the praises of Kåñëa, following the example of the gopés.
TEXT 9
k(Aicats$amaM mauku(nde"na
svar"jaAtaIr"imai™ataA:
oiªanyae paUijataA taena
‘aIyataA s$aADau s$aAiDvaita
tade"va ‹auvamauiªanyae
tasyaE maAnaM ca baù"d"Ata,
käcit samaà mukundena
svara-jätér amiçritäù
unninye püjitä tena
préyatä sädhu sädhv iti
tad eva dhruvam unninye
tasyai mänaà ca bahv adät
SYNONYMS
käcit—a certain gopé; samam—together; mukundena—with Lord Kåñëa;
svara-jätéù—pure musical tones; amiçritäù—not confused with the sounds
vibrated by Kåñëa; unninye—she raised; püjitä—honored; tena—by Him;
préyatä—who was pleased; sädhu sädhu iti—saying, "excellent, excellent"; tat
eva—that same (melody); dhruvam—with a particular metrical pattern;
unninye—vibrated (another gopé); tasyai—to her; mänam—special respect;
ca—and; bahu—much; adät—He gave .
TRANSLATION
One gopé, joining Lord Mukunda in His singing, sang pure melodious tones
that rose harmoniously above His. Kåñëa was pleased and showed great
appreciation for her performance, saying "Excellent! Excellent!" Then another
gopé repeated the same melody, but in a special metrical pattern, and Kåñëa
praised her also.
TEXT 10
k(Aica‰"As$apair"™aAntaA
paAìRsTasya gAd"ABa{ta:
jaƒaAh" baAò"naA s$k(nDaM
ëTaã"layamaiéak(A
käcid räsa-pariçräntä
pärçva-sthasya gadä-bhåtaù
jagräha bähunä skandhaà
çlathad-valaya-mallikä
SYNONYMS
käcit—a certain gopé; räsa—by the räsa dance; pariçräntä—fatigued;
pärçva—at Her side; sthasya—who was standing; gadä-bhåtaù—of Lord Kåñëa,
holding a baton; jagräha—took hold of; bähunä—with Her arm;
skandham—the shoulder; çlathat—loosening; valaya—Her bracelets;
mallikä—and the flowers (in Her hair).
TRANSLATION
When one gopé grew tired from the räsa dance, She turned to Kåñëa,
standing at Her side holding a baton, and grasped His shoulder with Her arm.
The dancing had loosened Her bracelets and the flowers in Her hair.
PURPORT
The previous verse states that Çré Kåñëa honored the gopés for their dancing
and singing, and in this verse we see how the gopés responded by dealing
intimately and confidently with Him. Here a tired gopé held on to Kåñëa's
shoulder with her arm, resting against Him.
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé explains that the word gadä in this verse indicates a
baton suitable for a dancing master. Lord Kåñëa brought this item of
paraphernalia to enhance His enjoyment of the räsa dance. Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté states that the gopé mentioned here is Çrématé Rädhäräëé, whereas
the two gopés mentioned in the previous verse are, in order, Viçäkhä and
Lalitä.
TEXT 11
ta‡aEk(AMs$agAtaM baAòM"
k{(SNAsyaAetpalas$aAEr"Bama,
cand"naAilaæamaA„aAya
ô$í"r"AemaA caucaumba h"
tatraikäàsa-gataà bähuà
kåñëasyotpala-saurabham
candanäliptam äghräya
håñöa-romä cucumba ha
SYNONYMS
tatra—there; ekä—one (gopé); aàsa—upon her shoulder; gatam—placed;
bähum—the arm; kåñëasya—of Lord Kåñëa; utpala—like a blue lotus;
saurabham—the fragrance of which; candana—with sandalwood pulp;
äliptam—smeared; äghräya—smelling; håñöa—standing on end; romä—her
bodily hairs; cucumba ha—she kissed.
TRANSLATION
Upon the shoulder of one gopé Kåñëa placed His arm, whose natural
blue-lotus fragrance was mixed with that of the sandalwood pulp anointing it.
As the gopé relished that fragrance, her bodily hair stood on end in jubilation,
and she kissed His arm.
TEXT 12
k(syaAiêªaAq"Yaivaiºaæa
ku(Nx"laitvaSamaiNx"tama,
gANxM" gANxe" s$and"DatyaA:
‘aAd"AÔaAmbaUlacaivaRtama,
kasyäçcin näöya-vikñipta
kuëòala-tviña-maëòitam
gaëòaà gaëòe sandadhatyäù
prädät tämbüla-carvitam
SYNONYMS
kasyäçcit—to a certain gopé; näöya—by the dancing; vikñipta—shaken;
kuëòala—whose earrings; tviña—with the glitter; maëòitam—adorned;
gaëòam—her cheek; gaëòe—next to His cheek; sandadhatyäù—who was
placing; prädät—He carefully gave; tämbüla—the betel nut; carvitam—chewed
.
TRANSLATION
Next to Kåñëa's cheek one gopé put her own, beautified by the effulgence of
her earrings, which glittered as she danced. Kåñëa then carefully gave her the
betel nut He was chewing.
TEXT 13
na{tyataI gAAyataI k(Aicata,
kU(jaªaUpaur"maeKalaA
paAìRsTaAcyautah"staAbjaM
™aAntaADaAtstanayaAe: izAvama,
nåtyaté gäyaté käcit
küjan nüpura-mekhalä
pärçva-sthäcyuta-hastäbjaà
çräntädhät stanayoù çivam
SYNONYMS
nåtyaté—dancing; gäyaté—singing; käcit—a certain gopé; küjan—murmuring;
nüpura—her ankle bells; mekhalä—and her belt; pärçva-stha—standing at her
side; acyuta—of Lord Kåñëa; hasta-abjam—the lotus hand; çräntä—feeling
tired; adhät—placed; stanayoù-upon her breasts; çivam—pleasing.
TRANSLATION
Another gopé became fatigued as she danced and sang, the bells on her ankles
and waist tinkling. So she placed upon her breasts the comforting lotus hand of
Lord Acyuta, who was standing by her side.
TEXT 14
gAAepyaAe labDvaAcyautaM k(AntaM
i™aya Wk(AntavaéaBama,
gA{h"Itak(NQ$YastaÚ"AeByaA<
gAAyantyastaimvajaioe"re"
gopyo labdhväcyutaà käntaà
çriya ekänta-vallabham
gåhéta-kaëöhyas tad-dorbhyäà
gäyantyas tam vijahrire
SYNONYMS
gopyaù—the gopés; labdhvä—having attained; acyutam—the infallible Lord;
käntam—as their lover; çriyaù—of the goddess of fortune; ekänta—the
exclusive; vallabham—lover; gåhéta—held; kaëöhyaù—their necks; tat—His;
dorbhyäm—by the arms; gäyantyaù—singing; tam—about Him; vijahrire—they
took pleasure.
TRANSLATION
Having attained as their intimate lover Lord Acyuta, the exclusive consort of
the goddess of fortune, the gopés enjoyed great pleasure. They sang His glories
as He held their necks with His arms.
TEXT 15
k(NAAeRtpalaAlak(ivaq%Æÿk(paAelaGamaRvaf‡
ai™ayaAe valayanaUpaur"GaAeSavaAâE:
gAAepya: s$amaM BagAvataA nana{tau: svake(zA-
›asta›ajaAe ”amar"gAAyak(r"As$agAAeï"YaAma,
karëotpalälaka-viöaìka-kapola-gharmacopyright
©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
862
vaktra-çriyo valaya-nüpura-ghoña-vädyaiù
gopyaù samaà bhagavatä nanåtuù sva-keçasrasta-
srajo bhramara-gäyaka-räsa-goñöhyäm
SYNONYMS
karëa—upon their ears; utpala—with the lotus flowers; alaka—by locks of
their hair; vitaìka—decorated; kapola—their cheeks; gharma—with
perspiration; vaktra—of their faces; çriyaù—the beauty; valaya—of their
armlets; nüpura—and ankle bells; ghoña—of the reverberation; vädyaiù—with
the musical sound; gopyaù—the gopés; samam—together; bhagavatä—with the
Personality of Godhead; nanåtuù—danced; sva—their own; keça—from the
hair; srasta—scattered; srajaù—the garlands; bhramara—the bees;
gäyaka—singers; räsa—of the räsa dance; goñöhyäm—in the assembly.
TRANSLATION
Enhancing the beauty of the gopés' faces were the lotus flowers behind their
ears, the locks of hair decorating their cheeks, and drops of perspiration. The
reverberation of their armlets and ankle bells made a loud musical sound, and
their chaplets scattered. Thus the gopés danced with the Supreme Lord in the
arena of the räsa dance as swarms of bees sang in accompaniment.
TEXT 16
WvaM pair"SvaËÿk(r"AiBamazARiµagDae
ºaNAAeÚ"AmaivalaAs$ah"As$aE:
re"mae r"maezAAe ˜ajas$aund"r"IiBar,"
yaTaABaRk(: sva‘aitaibambaiva”ama:
evaà pariñvaìga-karäbhimarçasnigdhekñaëoddäma-
viläsa-häsaiù
reme rameço vraja-sundarébhir
yathärbhakaù sva-pratibimba-vibhramaù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; pariñvaìga—with embracing; kara—by His hand;
abhimarça—with touching; snigdha—affectionate; ékñaëa—with glances;
uddäma—broad; viläsa—playful; häsaiù—with smiles; reme—He took pleasure;
ramä—of the goddess of fortune; éçaù—the master; vraja-sundarébhiù—with
the young women of the cowherd community; yathä—just as; arbhakaù—a
boy; sva—His own; pratibimba—with the reflection; vibhramaù—whose
playing.
TRANSLATION
In this way Lord Kåñëa, the original Lord Näräyaëa, master of the goddess
of fortune, took pleasure in the company of the young women of Vraja by
embracing them, caressing them and glancing lovingly at them as He smiled His
broad, playful smiles. It was just as if a child were playing with his own
reflection.
PURPORT
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura comments as follows on this verse:
"Lord Kåñëa alone is the Supreme Absolute Truth, and His potencies are
unlimited. All these potencies, taking personal forms, engage Lord Kåñëa in
His pastimes. Just as the opulent manifestation of His one supreme
transcendental potency manifests all the countless potencies of the Lord, so in
the räsa dance Kåñëa manifests Himself as many times as there are various
potencies represented by the gopés. Everything is Kåñëa, but by His desire His
spiritual energy Yogamäyä manifests the gopés. When His internal potency
Yogamäyä thus produces such pastimes for the enhancement of His
transcendental emotions, it is just like a young boy playing with His own
reflection. But since these pastimes are created by His spiritual potency, they
are eternal and self-manifesting."
TEXT 17
tad"Ëÿs$aËÿ‘amaud"Aku(laein‰"yaA:
ke(zAAnäu"kU(laM ku(capaiÄ%k(AM vaA
naAÃa: ‘aitavyaAeX#]malaM ˜ajaiñyaAe
iva›astamaAlaABar"NAA: ku(è&ã"h"
tad-aìga-saìga-pramudäkulendriyäù
keçän dukülaà kuca-paööikäà vä
näïjaù prativyoòhum alaà vraja-striyo
visrasta-mäläbharaëäù kurüdvaha
SYNONYMS
tat—with Him; aìga-saìga—from the bodily contact; pramudä—by the joy;
äkula—overflowing; indriyäù—whose senses; keçän—their hair;
dukülam—dresses; kuca-paööikäm—the garments covering their breasts;
vä—or; na—not; aïjaù—easily; prativyoòhum—to keep properly arranged;
alam—capable; vraja-striyaù—the women of Vraja; visrasta—scattered;
mälä—their flower garlands; äbharaëäù—and ornaments; kuru-udvaha—O
most eminent member of the Kuru dynasty.
TRANSLATION
Their senses overwhelmed by the joy of having His physical association, the
gopés could not prevent their hair, their dresses and the cloths covering their
breasts from becoming disheveled. Their garlands and ornaments scattered, O
hero of the Kuru dynasty.
TEXT 18
k{(SNAiva‚(Lix"taM vaIºya
maumauò": Kaecar"iñya:
k(AmaAidR"taA: zAzAAÆÿê
s$agANAAe ivaismataAe'Bavata,
kåñëa-vikréòitaà vékñya
mumuhuù khe-cara-striyaù
kämärditäù çaçäìkaç ca
sa-gaëo vismito 'bhavat
SYNONYMS
kåñëa-vikréòitam—the playing of' Kåñëa; vékñya—seeing; mumuhuù—-became
entranced; khe-cara—traveling in the sky; striyaù—the women
(demigoddesses); käma—by lusty desires; arditäù—agitated; çaçäìkaù—the
moon; ca—also; sa-gaëaù—with his followers, the stars; vismitaù—amazed;
abhavat—became.
TRANSLATION
The wives of the demigods, observing Kåñëa's playful activities from their
airplanes, were entranced and became agitated with lust. Indeed, even the moon
and his entourage, the stars, became astonished.
TEXT 19
k{(tvaA taAvantamaAtmaAnaM
yaAvataIgAAeRpayaAeiSata:
re"mae s$a BagAvaAMstaAiBar,"
@AtmaAr"AmaAe'ipa laIlayaA
kåtvä tävantam ätmänaà
yävatér gopa-yoñitaù
reme sa bhagaväàs täbhir
ätmärämo 'pi lélayä
SYNONYMS
kåtvä—making; tävantam—expanded that many times; ätmänam—Himself;
yävatéù—as many as; gopa-yoñitaù—cowherd women; reme—enjoyed; saù—He;
bhagavän—the Supreme Lord; täbhiù—with them;
ätma-ärämaù—self-satisfied; api—although; lélayä—as a pastime.
TRANSLATION
Expanding Himself us many times as there were cowherd women to associate
with, the Supreme Lord, though self-satisfied, playfully enjoyed their company.
PURPORT
As Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté points out, it has already been explained
that Lord Kåñëa is eternally free from all material desire, perfect on the
platform of spiritual self-satisfaction.
TEXT 20
taAs$aAM r"itaivah"Are"NA
™aAntaAnaAM vad"naAina s$a:
‘aAma{jatk(ç&NA: ‘aemNAA
zAntamaenaAËÿ paAiNAnaA
täsäà rati-vihäreëa
çräntänäà vadanäni saù
prämåjat karuëaù premëä
çantamenäìga päëinä
SYNONYMS
täsäm—of them, the gopés; rati—of conjugal love; vihäreëa—by the
enjoyment; çräntänäm—who were fatigued; vadanäni—the faces; saù—He;
prämåjat—wiped; karuëaù—merciful; premëä—lovingly; çantamena—most
comforting; aìga—my dear (King Parékñit); päëinä—with His hand.
TRANSLATION
Seeing that the gopés were fatigued from conjugal enjoyment, my dear King,
merciful Kåñëa lovingly wiped their faces with His comforting hand.
TEXT 21
gAAepya: s$Pu(r"tpaur"q%ku(Nx"laku(ntalaitvax".-
gANx"i™ayaA s$auiDatah"As$ainar"IºaNAena
maAnaM d"Datya [%SaBasya jagAu: k{(taAina
pauNyaAina tatk(r"ç&h"s$pazAR‘amaAed"A:
gopyaù sphurat-puraöa-kuëòala-kuntala-tviògaëòa-
çriyä sudhita-häsa-nirékñaëena
mänaà dadhatya åñabhasya jaguù kåtäni
puëyäni tat-kara-ruha-sparça-pramodäù
SYNONYMS
gopyaù—the gopés; sphurat—shining; puraöa—golden; kuëòala—of their
earrings; kuntala—and of the locks of their hair; tviö—of the effulgence;
gaëòa—of their cheeks; çriyä—by the beauty; sudhita—made nectarean;
häsa—smiling; nirékñaëena—by their glances; mänam—honor;
dadhatyaù—giving; åñabhasya—of their hero; jaguù—they sang; kåtäni—the
activities; puëyäni—auspicious; tat—His; kara-ruha—of the fingernails;
sparça—by the touch; pramodäù—greatly pleased.
TRANSLATION
The gopés honored their hero with smiling glances sweetened by the beauty
of their cheeks and the effulgence of their curly locks and glittering golden
earrings. Overjoyed from the touch of His fingernails, they chanted the glories
of His all-auspicious transcendental pastimes.
TEXT 22
taAiBayauRta: ™amamapaAeih"taumaËÿs$aËÿ-
Ga{í"›aja: s$a ku(caku(Çÿmar"iÃataAyaA:
gAnDavaRpaAilaiBar"nauåu"ta @AivazAã"A:
™aAntaAe gAjaIiBair"Bar"Aix"va iBaªas$aetau:
täbhir yutaù çramam apohitum aìga-saìgaghåñöa-
srajaù sa kuca-kuìkuma-raïjitäyäù
gandharva-pälibhir anudruta äviçad väù
çränto gajébhir ibha-räò iva bhinna-setuù
SYNONYMS
täbhiù—by them; yutaù—accompanied; çramam—fatigue; apohitum—to
dispel; aìga-saìga—by their conjugal association; ghåñöa—crushed;
srajaù—whose garland; saù—He; kuca—from their breasts; kuìkuma—of the
vermilion powder; raïjitäyäù—which was smeared by the color;
gandharva-pa—(who appeared like) leaders of the heavenly singers;
alibhiù—by bees; anudrutaù—swiftly followed; äviçat—He entered; väù—the
water; çräntaù—tired; gajébhiù—together with His female elephant consorts;
ibha-räö—a lordly elephant; iva—as; bhinna—having broken; setuù—the walls
of a paddy field.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa's garland had been crushed during His conjugal dalliance with
the gopés and colored vermilion by the kuìkuma powder on their breasts. To
dispel the fatigue of the gopés, Kåñëa entered the water of the Yamunä, followed
swiftly by bees who were singing like the best of the Gandharvas. He appeared
like a lordly elephant entering the water to relax in the company of his consorts.
Indeed, the Lord had transgressed all worldly and Vedic morality just as a
powerful elephant might break the dikes in a paddy field.
TEXT 23
s$aAe'mBasyalaM yauvaitaiBa: pair"iSacyamaAna:
‘aemNAeiºata: ‘ah"s$ataIiBair"tastataAe'Ëÿ
vaEmaAinakE(: ku(s$aumavaiSaRiBar"IâmaAnaAe
re"mae svayaM svar"itar"‡a gAjaen‰"laIla:
so 'mbhasy alaà yuvatibhiù pariñicyamänaù
premëekñitaù prahasatébhir itas tato 'ìga
vaimänikaiù kusuma-varñibhir édyamäno
reme svayaà sva-ratir atra gajendra-lélaù
SYNONYMS
saù—He; ambhasi—in the water; alam—very much; yuvatibhiù—by the girls;
pariñicyamänaù—being splashed; premëä—with love; ékñitaù—glanced upon;
prahasatébhiù—by them, who were laughing; itaù tataù—here and there;
aìga—my dear King; vaimänikaiù—by those traveling in their airplanes;
kusuma—flowers; varñibhiù—who were raining down; éòyamänaù—being
worshiped; reme—enjoyed; svayam—personally; sva-ratiù—satisfied within
Himself; atra—here; gaja-indra—of a king of the elephants; lélaù—whose
playing.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, in the water Kåñëa found Himself being splashed on all sides
by the laughing gopés, who looked at Him with love. As the demigods worshiped
Him by showering flowers from their airplanes, the self-satisfied Lord took
pleasure in playing like the king of the elephants.
TEXT 24
tataê k{(SNAAepavanae jalasTala
‘as$aUnagAnDaAinalajauí"id"l(qe%
cacaAr" Ba{"Ëÿ‘amad"AgANAAva{taAe
yaTaA mad"cyauä," iã"r"d": k(re"NAuiBa:
tataç ca kåñëopavane jala-sthala
prasüna-gandhänila-juñöa-dik-taöe
cacära bhåìga-pramadä-gaëävåto
yathä mada-cyud dviradaù kareëubhiù
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; ca—and; kåñëä—of the river Yamunä; upavane—in a small
forest; jala—of the water; sthala—and the land; prasüna—of flowers;
gandha—with the fragrance; anila—by the wind; juñöa—joined; dik-taöe—the
edges of the directions; cacära—He passed; bhåìga—of bees; pramadä—and
women; gaëa—by the groups; ävåtaù—surrounded; yathä—just as;
mada-cyut—exuding a secretion from its forehead because of excitement;
dviradaù—an elephant; kareëubhiù—with his she-elephants.
TRANSLATION
Then the Lord strolled through a small forest on the bank of the Yamunä.
This forest was filled to its limits with breezes carrying the fragrances of all the
flowers growing on the land and in the water. Followed by His entourage of
bees and beautiful women, Lord Kåñëa appeared like an intoxicated elephant
with his she-elephants.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté, it is implicit here that after
playing in the water Lord Kåñëa had His body massaged, and that He then
dressed Himself in His favorite clothing before resuming His pastimes with the
gopés.
TEXT 25
WvaM zAzAAÆÿAMzAuivar"AijataA inazAA:
s$a s$atyak(AmaAe'naur"taAbalaAgANA:
is$aSaeva @Atmanyavaç&Ü"s$aAEr"ta:
s$avaAR: zAr"tk(Avyak(TaAr"s$aA™ayaA:
evaà çaçäìkäàçu-viräjitä niçäù
sa satya-kämo 'nuratäbalä-gaëaù
siñeva ätmany avaruddha-saurataù
sarväù çarat-kävya-kathä-rasäçrayäù
SYNONYMS
evam—in this manner; çaçäìka—of the moon; aàçu—by the rays;
viräjitäù—made brilliant; niçäù—the nights; saù—He; satya-kämaù—whose
desires are always fulfilled; anurata—constantly attached to Him
abalä-gaëaù-His many girlfriends; siñeve—He utilized; ätmani—within
Himself; avaruddha—reserved; saurataù—conjugal feelings; sarväù—all (the
nights); çarat—of the autumn; kävya—poetic; kathä—of narrations; rasa—of
the transcendental moods; äçrayäù—the repositories.
TRANSLATION
Although the gopés were firmly attached to Lord Kåñëa, whose desires are
always fulfilled, the Lord was not internally affected by any mundane sex
desire. Still, to perform His pastimes the Lord took advantage of all those
moonlit autumn nights, which inspire poetic descriptions of transcendental
affairs.
PURPORT
It is difficult to translate into English the word rasa, which indicates the
spiritual bliss derived from one's loving relationship with Lord Kåñëa. That
bliss is experienced in the midst of spiritual pastimes with the Lord and His
devotees. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté explains that great Vaiñëava poets like
Vyäsa, Paräçara, Jayadeva, Léläçuka (Bilvamaìgala Öhäkura),
Govardhanäcärya and Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé have tried in their poetry to
describe the conjugal affairs of the Lord. These descriptions are never
complete, however, since the Lord's pastimes are unlimited; thus the attempt
to glorify such pastimes is still going on and will go on forever. Lord Kåñëa
arranged an extraordinary season of beautiful autumn nights to enhance His
loving affairs, and those autumn nights have inspired transcendental poets
since time immemorial.
TEXTS 26-27
™aIpar"Iiºaäu"vaAca
s$aMsTaApanaAya DamaRsya
‘azAmaAyaetar"sya ca
@vataINAAeR ih" BagAvaAna,
@MzAena jagAd"Iìr":
s$a k(TaM DamaRs$aetaUnaAM
val(A k(taARiBar"iºataA
‘ataIpamaAcar"ä," “aöna,
par"d"Ar"AiBamazARnama,
çré-parékñid uväca
saàsthäpanäya dharmasya
praçamäyetarasya ca
avatérëo hi bhagavän
aàçena jagad-éçvaraù
sa kathaà dharma-setünäà
vaktä kartäbhirakñitä
pratépam äcarad brahman
para-däräbhimarçanam
SYNONYMS
çré-parékñit uväca—Çré Parékñit Mahäräja said; saàsthäpanäya—for the
establishment; dharmasya—of religious principles; praçamäya—for the
subduing; itarasya—of the opposite; ca—and; avatérëaù—descended (upon
this earth); hi—indeed; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
aàçena—with His plenary expansion (Çré Balaräma); jagat—of the entire
universe; éçvaraù—the Lord; saù—He; katham—how; dharma-setünäm—of the
restrictive codes of moral behavior; vaktä—the original speaker; kartä—the
executor; abhirakñitä—the protector; pratépam—contrary; äcarat—behaved;
brahman—O brähmaëa, Çukadeva Gosvämé; para—of others; dära—the wives;
abhimarçanam—touching.
TRANSLATION
Parékñit Mahäräja said: O brähmaëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
the Lord of the universe, has descended to this earth along with His plenary
portion to destroy irreligion and reestablish religious principles. Indeed, He is
the original speaker, follower and guardian of moral laws. How, then, could He
have violated them by touching other men's wives?
PURPORT
As Çukadeva Gosvämé was speaking, King Parékñit noticed that some
persons seated in the assembly on the bank of the Ganges were harboring
doubt about the Lord's activities. These doubtful persons were karmés, jïänés
and others who were not devotees of the Lord. To clear up their doubts, King
Parékñit asks this question on their behalf.
TEXT 28
@Aæak(AmaAe yaäu"paita:
k{(tavaAna, vaE jaugAuips$atama,
ik(maiBa‘aAya Wtaªa:
zAMzAyaM iC$inDa s$au˜ata
äpta-kämo yadu-patiù
kåtavän vai jugupsitam
kim-abhipräya etan naù
çaàçayaà chindhi su-vrata
SYNONYMS
äpta-kämaù—self-satisfied; yadu-patiù—the master of the Yadu dynasty;
kåtavän—has performed; vai—certainly ; jugupsitam—that which is
contemptible; kim-abhipräyaù—with what intent; etat—this; naù—our;
çaàçayam—doubt; chindhi—please cut; su-vrata—O faithful upholder of vows
.
TRANSLATION
O faithful upholder of vows, please destroy our doubt by explaining to us
what purpose the self-satisfied Lord of the Yadus had in mind when He
behaved so contemptibly.
PURPORT
It is clear to the enlightened that these doubts will arise in the minds and
hearts of persons unfamiliar with the transcendental pastimes of the Lord.
Therefore since time immemorial great sages and enlightened kings like
Parékñit Mahäräja have openly raised these questions to provide the
authoritative answer for all posterity.
TEXT 29
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
DamaRvyaita‚(maAe ä{"í"
wRìr"ANAAM ca s$aAh"s$ama,
taejaIyas$aAM na d"AeSaAya
va¶e": s$avaRBaujaAe yaTaA
çré-çuka uväca
dharma-vyatikramo dåñöa
éçvaräëäà ca sähasam
tejéyasäà na doñäya
vahneù sarva-bhujo yathä
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; dharma-vyatikramaù—the
transgression of religious or moral principles; dåñöaù—seen; éçvaräëäm—of
powerful controllers; ca—even; sähasam—due to audacity; tejéyasäm—who are
spiritually potent; na—does not; doñäya—(lead) to any fault; vahneù—of fire;
sarva—everything; bhujaù—devouring; yathä-as.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: The status of powerful controllers is not harmed by
any apparently audacious transgression of morality we may see in them, for they
are just like fire, which devours everything fed into it and remains unpolluted.
PURPORT
Great, potent personalities are not ruined by an apparent transgression of
moral principles. Çrédhara Svämé mentions the examples of Brahmä Indra,
Soma, Viçvämitra and others. A fire devours all that is fed into it but the fire
does not change its nature. Similarly, a great personality does not fall from his
position by an irregularity in behavior. In the following verse, however,
Çukadeva Gosvämé makes it clear that if we try to imitate the great
personalities ruling the universe, the result will be catastrophic.
TEXT 30
naEtats$amaAcare"ÀaAtau
manas$aAipa ÷naIìr":
ivanazyatyaAcar"nmaAEX#YaAä,"
yaTaAç&‰"Ae'ibDajaM ivaSama,
naitat samäcarej jätu
manasäpi hy anéçvaraù
vinaçyaty äcaran mauòhyäd
yathärudro 'bdhi-jaà viñam
SYNONYMS
na—not; etat—this; samäcaret—should perform; jätu—ever; manasä-with the
mind; api—even; hi—certainly; anéçvaraù—one who is not a controller;
vinaçyati—he is destroyed; äcaran—acting; mauòhyät—out of foolishness;
yathä—as; arudraù—one who is not Lord Rudra; abdhijam-generated from the
ocean; viñam—poison.
TRANSLATION
One who is not a great controller should never imitate the behavior of ruling
personalities, even mentally. If out of foolishness an ordinary person does
imitate such behavior, he will simply destroy himself, just as a person who is
not Rudra would destroy himself if he tried to drink an ocean of poison.
PURPORT
Lord Çiva, or Rudra, once drank an ocean of poison, and the result was that
an attractive blue mark appeared on his neck. But if we were to drink even a
drop of such poison, we would die immediately. Just as we should not imitate
this pastime of Çiva's, we should not imitate Lord Kåñëa's activities with the
gopés. We should clearly understand that while Lord Kåñëa certainly descends
to demonstrate religious principles, He also descends to demonstrate that He is
God and we are not. That also must be demonstrated. The Lord enjoys with
His internal potency and thus attracts us to the spiritual platform. We should
not try to imitate Kåñëa, for we will suffer severely.
TEXT 31
wRìr"ANAAM vaca: s$atyaM
taTaEvaAcair"taM ¸(icata,
taeSaAM yatsvavacaAeyaulM(
bauiÜ"maAMstats$amaAcare"ta,
éçvaräëäà vacaù satyaà
tathaiväcaritaà kvacit
teñäà yat sva-vaco-yuktaà
buddhimäàs tat samäcaret
SYNONYMS
éçvaränäm—of the Lord's empowered servants; vacaù—the words;
satyam—true; tathä eva—also; äcaritam—what they do; kvacit—sometimes;
teñäm—of them; yat—which; sva-vacaù—with their own words; yuktam—in
agreement; buddhi-män—one who is intelligent; tat—that; samäcaret—should
perform.
TRANSLATION
The statements of the Lord's empowered servants are always true, and the
acts they perform are exemplary when consistent with those statements.
Therefore one who is intelligent should carry out their instructions.
PURPORT
The word éçvara is usually defined in Sanskrit dictionaries as "lord, master,
ruler," and also as "capable, potent to perform." Çréla Prabhupäda often
translated the word éçvara as "controller," which brilliantly synthesizes the two
fundamental concepts of éçvara, namely a master or ruler and a capable or
potent person. A master may be incompetent, but a controller is a master or
lord who in fact makes things happen. The parameçvara, the supreme éçvara,
the supreme controller, is of course God, Kåñëa, the cause of all causes.
Although people in general, especially in the Western countries, are not
aware of the fact, powerful personalities control our universe. The modern,
impersonal concept of the universe depicts an almost totally lifeless cosmos in
which the earth floats meaninglessly. Thus we are left with the dubious
"ultimate purpose" of preserving and reproducing our genetic code, which has
its own "ultimate purpose" of adding another link to the meaningless chain of
events by again reproducing itself.
In contrast to this sterile, meaningless world concocted by ignorant
materialists, the actual universe is full of life—personal life—and in fact full
of God, who pervades and supports all that exists. The essence of reality is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and His personal relationship with the
innumerable living beings, of whom we are samples. Some of the living beings
are trapped in the illusion of materialism, or identification with the material
body, while others are liberated, aware of their eternal, spiritual nature. A
third class comprises those progressing in self-realization from the materialistic
state of ignorance to the enlightened state of Kåñëa consciousness.
Reality is ultimately personal and divine, and therefore it is not surprising
that, as the Vedic literature reveals to us, our universe and other universes are
managed by great personalities, just as our city, state and country are managed
by empowered personalities. When we democratically award a particular
politician the right to govern, we vote for him because he has exhibited
something we call "leadership" or "ability." We think, "He'll get the job done."
In other words, it is only after an individual acquires the power to govern that
we vote for him; our vote does not make him a leader but rather recognizes a
power in him coming from some other source. Thus, as Lord Kåñëa explains at
the end of the Tenth Chapter of the Bhagavad-gétä, any living being exhibiting
an extraordinary power, ability or authority must have been empowered by the
Lord Himself or by the Lord's energy.
Those directly empowered by the Lord are devoted to Him, and thus their
power and influence spread goodness throughout the world, whereas those who
are empowered by the Lord's illusory potency are in an indirect relationship
with Kåñëa because they do not directly reflect His will. Of course, they do
reflect His will indirectly, since it is by Kåñëa's arrangement that the laws of
nature act upon ignorant living beings, gradually persuading them, through
their journey of many lifetimes, to surrender to the Supreme Lord. Thus as
politicians create wars, false hopes and innumerable passionate schemes for the
materialistic persons who follow them, the politicians are indirectly carrying
out the Lord's program of allowing the conditioned souls to experience the
bitter fruit of godlessness.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura has translated the word éçvaräëäm
as "those who have become powerful through knowledge and austerity." As one
understands the nature and will of God and makes the personal sacrifice
required to achieve excellence in spiritual life, one becomes empowered by the
Supreme Lord to represent His will, which one has intelligently recognized and
accepted.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead kindly descends to earth to show a
vivid example of religious behavior. As Lord Kåñëa states in the Bhagavad-gétä
(3.24), "If I did not execute standard duties, the whole world would be misled
and in fact destroyed." Thus the Lord showed, in His different incarnations,
how to act properly in this world. A good example is Lord Rämacandra, who
behaved wonderfully as the son of King Daçaratha.
But when Lord Kåñëa Himself descends, He also demonstrates the ultimate
religious principle, namely that the Supreme Lord is beyond all other living
beings and that no one can imitate His supreme position. This foremost of all
religious principles—that the Lord is unique, without equal or superior—was
clearly demonstrated in Lord Kåñëa's apparently immoral pastimes with the
gopés. No one can imitate these activities without incurring dire consequences,
as explained here by Çukadeva Gosvämé. One who thinks that Lord Kåñëa is
an ordinary living being subjected to lust, or who accepts His räsa dance as
admirable and tries to imitate it, will certainly be vanquished, as described in
Text 30 of this chapter.
Finally, a distinction must be made between the Lord and His empowered
servants. An empowered servant of the Lord, as in the case of Brahmä, may
experience a remnant of reactions to previous activities, according to the law
of karma. But the Lord is eternally free from any entanglement in the laws of
karma. He is on a unique platform.
TEXT 32
ku(zAlaAcair"taenaESaAma,
wh" svaATaAeR na ivaâtae
ivapayaRyaeNA vaAnaTaAeR
inar"h"ÆÿAir"NAAM ‘aBaAe
kuçaläcaritenaiñäm
iha svärtho na vidyate
viparyayeëa vänartho
nirahaìkäriëäà prabho
SYNONYMS
kuçala—pious; äcaritena—by activity; eñäm—for them; iha—in this world;
sva-arthaù—selfish benefit; na vidyate—does not accrue; viparyayeëa—by the
opposite; vä—or; anarthaù—undesirable reactions; nirahaìkäriëäm—who are
free from false ego; prabho—my dear sir.
TRANSLATION
My dear Prabhu, when these great persons who are free from false ego act
piously in this world, they have no selfish motives to fulfill, and even when
they act in apparent contradiction to the laws of piety, they are not subject to
sinful reactions.
TEXT 33
ik(mautaAiKalas$aÔvaAnaAM
itayaRx.~matyaRid"vaAEk(s$aAma,
wRizAtauêeizAtavyaAnaAM
ku(zAlaAku(zAlaAnvaya:
kim utäkhila-sattvänäà
tiryaì-martya-divaukasäm
éçituç ceçitavyänäà
kuçaläkuçalänvayaù
SYNONYMS
kim uta—what to speak then; akhila—of all; sattvänäm—created beings;
tiryak—animals; martya—humans; diva-okasäm—and inhabitants of heaven;
éçutuù—for the controller; ca—and; éçitavyänäm—of those who are controlled;
kuçala—with piety; akuçala—and impiety; anvayaù—causal connection.
TRANSLATION
How, then, could the Lord of all created beings—animals, men and
demigods—have any connection with the piety and impiety that affect His
subject creatures?
PURPORT
As explained in Text 32, even great personalities empowered by the Lord
are free from the laws of karma. Then what to speak of the Lord Himself. After
all, the law of karma is created by Him and is an expression of His omnipotent
will. Therefore His activities, which He performs out of His own pure
goodness, are never subject to criticism by ordinary living beings.
TEXT 34
yatpaAd"paÆÿjapar"AgAinaSaevata{æaA
yaAegA‘aBaAvaivaDautaAiKalak(maRbanDaA:
svaErM" car"inta maunayaAe'ipa na na÷maAnaAs$a,
tasyaecC$yaAÔavapauSa: ku(ta Wva banDa:
yat-päda-paìkaja-paräga-niñeva-tåptä
yoga-prabhäva-vidhutäkhila-karma-bandhäù
svairaà caranti munayo 'pi na nahyamänäs
tasyecchayätta-vapuñaù kuta eva bandhaù
SYNONYMS
yat—whose; päda-paìkaja—of the lotus feet; paräga—of the dust; niñeva—by
the service; tåptäù—satisfied; yoga-prabhäva—by the power of yoga;
vidhuta—washed away; akhila—all; karma—of fruitive activity;
bandhäù—whose bondage; svairam—freely; caranti—they act; munayaù—wise
sages; api—also; na—never; nahyamänäù—becoming bound up; tasya—of
Him; icchayä—by His desire; ätta—accepted; vapuñaù—transcendental bodies;
kutaù—where; eva—indeed; bandhaù—bondage.
TRANSLATION
Material activities never entangle the devotees of the Supreme Lord, who are
fully satisfied by serving the dust of His lotus feet. Nor do material activities
entangle those intelligent sages who have freed themselves from the bondage of
all fruitive reactions by the power of yoga. So how could there be any question
of bondage for the Lord Himself, who assumes His transcendental forms
according to His own sweet will?
TEXT 35
gAAepaInaAM tatpataInaAM ca
s$avaeRSaAmaeva de"ih"naAma,
yaAe'ntaêr"ita s$aAe'Dyaºa:
‚(Lx"naenaeh" de"h"BaAk,(
gopénäà tat-paténäà ca
sarveñäm eva dehinäm
yo 'ntaç carati so 'dhyakñaù
kréòaneneha deha-bhäk
SYNONYMS
gopénäm—of the gopés; tat-paténäm—of their husbands; ca—and; sarveñäm—of
all; eva—indeed; dehinäm—embodied living beings; yaù—who; antaù—within;
carati—lives; saù—He; adhyakñaù—the overseeing witness; kréòanena—for
sport; iha—in this world; deha—His form; bhäk—assuming.
TRANSLATION
He who lives as the overseeing witness within the gopés and their husbands,
and indeed within all embodied living beings, assumes forms in this world to
enjoy transcendental pastimes.
PURPORT
We certainly do not assume our bodies to enjoy transcendental pastimes, as
the Lord does. We eternal souls have accepted material bodies by force because
of our foolish attempt to enjoy this material world. The Lord's forms are all
eternal, spiritual existence and cannot be reasonably equated with our
temporary flesh.
Since Lord Kåñëa is the Supreme Lord dwelling within the gopés, their
so-called husbands and all other living beings, what possible sin could there be
on His part if He embraces some of the beings He Himself has created? What
fault could there be if the Lord goes with the gopés to a secret place, since He
already dwells within the most secret part of every living being, the core of the
heart?
TEXT 36
@nauƒah"Aya Bal(AnaAM
maAnauSaM de"h"maAisTata:
Bajatae taAä{"zAI: ‚(Lx"
yaA: ™autvaA tatpar"Ae Bavaeta,
anugrahäya bhaktänäà
mänuñaà deham ästhitaù
bhajate tädåçéù kréòa
yäù çrutvä tat-paro bhavet
SYNONYMS
anugrahäya—to show mercy; bhaktänäm—to His devotees;
mänuñam—humanlike; deham—a body; ästhitaù—assuming; bhajate—He
accepts; tädåçéù—such; kriòäù—pastimes; yäù—about which; çrutvä—hearing;
tat-paraù—dedicated to Him; bhavet—one becomes.
TRANSLATION
When the Lord assumes a humanlike body to show mercy to His devotees,
He engages in such pastimes as will attract those who hear about them to
become dedicated to Him.
PURPORT
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé explains in this connection that when Lord Kåñëa
descends to this world in His original two-handed form, out of kindness He
manifests that form in a way His devotees conditioned in human society can
perceive and understand. Thus here it is stated, mänuñaà deham ästhitaù: "He
assumes a humanlike body." Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura glorifies the
Lord's conjugal pastimes, stating that these romantic affairs have an
inconceivable spiritual potency to attract the polluted heart of conditioned
souls. It is an undeniable fact that any pure—or simple—hearted person who
hears narrations of the loving affairs of Kåñëa will be attracted to the lotus feet
of the Lord and gradually become His devotee .
TEXT 37
naAs$aUyana, Kalau k{(SNAAya
maAeih"taAstasya maAyayaA
manyamaAnaA: svapaAìRsTaAna,
svaAna, svaAnd"Ar"Ana, ˜ajaAEk(s$a:
näsüyan khalu kåñëäya
mohitäs tasya mäyayä
manyamänäù sva-pärçva-sthän
svän svän därän vrajaukasaù
SYNONYMS
na asüyan—were not jealous; khalu—even; kåñëäya—against Kåñëa;
mohitäù—bewildered; tasya—His; mäyayä—by the spiritual potency of
illusion; manyamänäù—thinking; sva-pärçva—at their own sides;
sthän—standing; svän svän—each their own; därän—wives; vraja-okasaù—the
cowherd men of Vraja.
TRANSLATION
The cowherd men, bewildered by Kåñëa's illusory potency, thought their
wives had remained home at their sides. Thus they did not harbor any jealous
feelings against Him.
PURPORT
Because the gopés loved Kåñëa exclusively, Yogamäyä protected their
relationship with the Lord at all times, even though they were married. Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté quotes from the Ujjvala-nélamaëi as follows:
mäyä-kalpita-tädåk-stré
çélanenänusüyubhiù
na jätu vraja-devénäà
patibhiù saha saìgamaù
"The gopés' jealous husbands consorted not with their wives but with doubles
manufactured by Mäyä. Thus these men never actually had any intimate
contact with the divine ladies of Vraja." The gopés are the internal energy of
the Lord and can never belong to any other living being. Kåñëa arranged their
apparent marriage to other men simply to create the excitement of
parakéya-rasa, the love between a married woman and her paramour. These
activities are absolutely pure because they are the Lord's pastimes, and saintly
persons since time immemorial have relished these supreme spiritual events.
TEXT 38
“aör"A‡a opaAva{Ôae
vaAs$aude"vaAnaumaAeid"taA:
@inacC$ntyaAe yayaugAAeRpya:
svagA{h"Ana, BagAvait‘ayaA:
brahma-rätra upävåtte
väsudevänumoditäù
anicchantyo yayur gopyaù
sva-gåhän bhagavat-priyäù
SYNONYMS
brahma-rätre—the nighttime of Brahmä; upävåtte—being completed;
väsudeva—by Lord Kåñëa; anumoditäù—advised; anicchantyaù—unwilling;
yayuù—went; gopyaù—the gopés; sva-gåhän—to their homes; bhagavat—of the
Supreme Lord; priyäù—the dear consorts.
TRANSLATION
After an entire night of Brahmä had passed, Lord Kåñëa advised the gopés to
return to their homes. Although they did not wish to do so, the Lord's beloved
consorts complied with His command.
PURPORT
In the Bhagavad-gétä (8.17) Lord Kåñëa explains, "By human calculation, a
thousand ages taken together is the duration of Brahmä's one day. And such
also is the duration of his night." Thus one thousand ages entered within a
single twelve-hour night when Lord Kåñëa performed His räsa dance. Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté compares this inconceivable impression of time to the
fact that many universes fit neatly within the forty-mile range of earthly
Våndävana. Or one may consider that mother Yaçodä could not encircle the
small abdomen of child Kåñëa with numerous ropes, and that at another time
He manifested many universes within His mouth. The transcendence of
spiritual reality above and beyond mundane physics is concisely explained in
Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé's Laghu-bhagavatämåta:
evaà prabhoù priyäëäà ca
dhämnaç ca samayasya ca
avicintya-prabhävatväd
atra kiïcin na durghaöam
"Nothing is impossible for the Lord, His dear devotees, His transcendental
abode or the time of His pastimes, for all these entities are inconceivably
powerful."
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté further explains that the word
väsudevänumoditäù indicates that Lord Kåñëa advised the gopés, "To assure the
success of these pastimes, you and I should keep them secret." The word
väsudeva, a name of Kåñëa, also indicates Lord Kåñëa's plenary expansion who
acts as the presiding Deity of consciousness. When the word väsudeva is
understood in this context, the word väsudevänumoditäù indicates that the
presiding Deity of consciousness, Väsudeva, manifested embarrassment and
fear of their elders within the gopés' hearts, and therefore it was only with great
reluctance that the young girls returned home.
TEXT 39
iva‚(Lix"taM ˜ajavaDaUiBair"dM" ca ivaSNAAe:
™aÜ"AinvataAe'nauZa{NAuyaAd"Ta vaNARyaeâ:
BailM( par"AM BagAvaita ‘aitalaBya k(AmaM
ô$‰"AegAmaAìpaih"naAetyaicare"NA DaIr":
vikréòitaà vraja-vadhübhir idaà ca viñëoù
çraddhänvito 'nuçåëuyäd atha varëayed yaù
bhaktià paräà bhagavati pratilabhya kämaà
håd-rogam äçv apahinoty acireëa dhéraù
SYNONYMS
vikréòitam—the sporting; vraja-vadhübhiù—with the young women of
Våndävana; idam—this; ca—and; viñëoù—by Lord Viñëu;
çraddhä-anvitaù—faithfully; anuçåëuyät—hears; atha—or;
varëayet—describes; yaù—who; bhaktim—devotional service;
paräm—transcendental; bhagavati—unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; pratilabhya—obtaining; kämam—material lust; håt—in the heart;
rogam—the disease; açu—quickly; apahinoti—he drives away;
acireëa—without delay; dhéraù—sober.
TRANSLATION
Anyone who faithfully hears or describes the Lord's playful affairs with the
young gopés of Våndävana will attain the Lord's pure devotional service. Thus
he will quickly become sober and conquer lust, the disease of the heart.
PURPORT
The extraordinary power of Lord Kåñëa's conjugal pastimes is clearly
revealed here. Qualitatively, the Lord's spiritual, loving pastimes are the
diametric opposite of material, lusty affairs, so much so that simply by hearing
about the Lord's pastimes a devotee conquers sex desire. By reading
pornographic literature or hearing about material romance, we certainly do
not conquer sex desire but rather increase our lust. But hearing or reading
about the Lord's conjugal affairs has exactly the opposite effect because they
are of the opposite nature, being purely spiritual. Therefore it is by the
causeless mercy of Lord Kåñëa that He exhibits His räsa-lélä within this world.
If we become attached to this narration, we will experience the bliss of
spiritual love and thus reject the perverted reflection of that love, which is
called lust. As nicely put by Lord Kåñëa in the Bhagavad-gétä (2.59), paraà
dåñövä nivartate: "Once having directly experienced the Supreme, one will not
return to material pleasures."
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Tenth Canto, Thirty-third Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Räsa Dance."
34. Nanda Mahäräja Saved and Çaìkhacüòa Slain
This chapter describes how Lord Çré Kåñëa saved His father Nanda from the
clutches of a serpent and delivered a Vidyädhara named Sudarçana from the
curse of the Äìgirasa sages.
One day Nanda Mahäräja and the other cowherd men placed their family
members on their bullock carts and went to the Ambikävana forest to worship
Lord Çiva. After bathing in the Sarasvaté River and worshiping Lord Sadäçiva,
a form of Lord Viñëu, they decided to spend the night in the forest. As they
slept, a hungry serpent came and began to swallow Nanda Mahäräja. Terrified,
Nanda cried out in distress, "O Kåñëa! O my son, please save this surrendered
soul!" The cowherd men immediately awoke and began beating the serpent
with wooden torches, but the serpent would not release Nanda. Then Lord
Kåñëa came and touched the serpent with His lotus foot. The serpent was
immediately freed from his reptilian body and appeared in his original form as
a demigod. He told them about his previous identity and described how he had
been cursed by a group of sages. Then he offered his homage at the lotus feet of
Çré Kåñëa and, on the Lord's order, returned to his own abode.
Later, during the Dola-pürëimä festival, Çré Kåñëa and Baladeva enjoyed
pastimes in the forest with the young women of Vraja. The girlfriends of
Baladeva and those of Kåñëa joined together and sang about Their
transcendental qualities. When the two Lords became absorbed in singing to
the point of apparent intoxication, a servant of Kuvera's named Çaìkhacüòa
boldly came forward and began abducting the gopés. The young girls called out,
"Kåñëa, please save us!" and He and Räma began to chase after Çaìkhacüòa.
"Don't be afraid!" Kåñëa called out to the gopés. In fear of the Lords,
Çaìkhacüòa left the gopés aside and ran for his life. Kåñëa chased after him,
swiftly approached him and with a blow of His fist removed Çaìkhacüòa's
jewel, together with his head. Then Kåñëa brought the jewel back and
presented it to Lord Baladeva.
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
Wk(d"A de"vayaA‡aAyaAM
gAAepaAlaA jaAtak(AEtauk(A:
@naAeiBar"nax"]âulE(:
‘ayayaustae'imbak(Avanama,
çré-çuka uväca
ekadä deva-yäträyäà
gopälä jäta-kautukäù
anobhir anaòud-yuktaiù
prayayus te 'mbikä-vanam
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; ekadä—once; deva—(to
worship) the demigod, Lord Çiva; yaträyäm—on a trip; gopäläù—the cowherd
men; jäta-kautukäù—eager; anobhiù—with wagons; anaòut—to oxen;
yuktaiù—yoked; prayayuù—went forth; te—they; ambikä-vanam—to the
Ambikä forest.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: One day the cowherd men, eager to take a trip to
worship Lord Çiva, traveled by bullock carts to the Ambikä forest.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, the word ekadä here indicates the
occasion of Çiva-rätri. He further mentions that Ambikävana is in Gujarat
province, near the city of Siddhapura. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura
adds that the departure of the cowherd men specifically took place on the
fourteenth lunar day of the dark fortnight of the month of Phälguna. Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté also quotes authorities who claim that Ambikävana lies
on the bank of the Sarasvaté River, northwest of Mathurä. Ambikävana is
notable because within it are deities of Çré Çiva and his wife, goddess Umä.
TEXT 2
ta‡a µaAtvaA s$ar"svatyaAM
de"vaM pazAupaitaM ivaBauma,
@AnacauRr"hR"NAEBaRftyaA
de"vaI%M ca NA{patae'imbak(Ama,
tatra snätvä sarasvatyäà
devaà paçu-patià vibhum
änarcur arhaëair bhaktyä
devéà ca ëåpate 'mbikäm
SYNONYMS
tatra—there; snätvä—bathing; sarasvatyäm—in the river Sarasvaté;
devam—the demigod; paçu-patim—Lord Çiva; vibhum—the powerful;
änarcuù—they worshiped; arhaëaiù—with paraphernalia; bhaktyä—devotedly;
devém—the goddess; ca—and; nå-pate—O King; ambikäm—Ambikä.
TRANSLATION
O King, after arriving there, they bathed in the Sarasvaté and then devotedly
worshiped with various paraphernalia the powerful Lord Paçupati and his
consort, goddess Ambikä.
TEXT 3
gAAvaAe ih"r"NyaM vaAs$aAMis$a
maDau maDvaªamaAä{"taA:
“aAöNAeByaAe d"äu": s$avaeR
de"vaAe na: ‘aIyataAimaita
gävo hiraëyaà väsäàsi
madhu madhv-annam ädåtäù
brähmaëebhyo daduù sarve
devo naù préyatäm iti
SYNONYMS
gävaù—cows; hiraëyam—gold; väsäàsi—clothing; madhu—sweet-tasting;
madhu—mixed with honey; annam—grains; ädåtäù—respectfully;
brähmaëebhyaù—to the brähmaëas; daduù—they gave; sarve—all of them;
devaù—the lord; naù—with us; préyatäm—may be pleased; iti—thus praying.
TRANSLATION
The cowherd men gave the brähmaëas gifts of cows, gold, clothing and
cooked grains mixed with honey. Then the cowherds prayed, "May the lord be
pleased with us."
TEXT 4
OSau: s$ar"svataItaIre"
jalaM ‘aAzya yata˜ataA:
r"janaI%M taAM mah"ABaAgAA
nand"s$aunand"k(Ad"ya:
üñuù sarasvaté-tére
jalaà präçya yata-vratäù
rajanéà täà mahä-bhägä
nanda-sunandakädayaù
SYNONYMS
üñuù—they stayed; sarasvaté-tére—on the bank of the Sarasvaté; jalam—water;
präçya—subsisting on; yata-vratäù—taking strict vows; rajaném—the night;
täm—that; mahä-bhägäù—the greatly fortunate ones;
nanda-sunandaka-ädayaù—Nanda, Sunanda and the others.
TRANSLATION
Nanda, Sunanda and the other greatly fortunate cowherds spent that night
on the bank of the Sarasvaté, strictly observing their vows. They fasted, taking
only water.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté explains that Sunanda is the younger brother
of Nanda Mahäräja.
TEXT 5
k(iênmah"Anaih"staismana,
ivaipanae'itabauBauiºata:
yaä{"cC$yaAgAtaAe nandM"
zAyaAnamaur"gAAe'ƒas$aIta,
kaçcin mahän ahis tasmin
vipine 'ti-bubhukñitaù
yadåcchayägato nandaà
çayänam ura-go 'grasét
SYNONYMS
kaçcit—a certain; mahän—great; ahiù—snake; tasmin—in that; vipine—area
of the forest; ati-bubhukñitaù—extremely hungry; yadåcchayä—by chance;
ägataù—came there; nandam—Nanda Mahäräja; çayänam—who was lying
asleep; ura-gaù—moving on his belly; agrasét—swallowed.
TRANSLATION
During the night a huge and extremely hungry snake appeared in that
thicket. Slithering on his belly up to the sleeping Nanda Mahäräja, the snake
began swallowing him.
TEXT 6
s$a cau‚(AezAAih"naA ƒasta:
k{(SNA k{(SNA mah"Anayama,
s$apaAeR maAM ƒas$atae taAta
‘apaªaM pair"maAecaya
sa cukroçähinä grastaù
kåñëa kåñëa mahän ayam
sarpo mäà grasate täta
prapannaà parimocaya
SYNONYMS
saù—he, Nanda Mahäräja; cukroça—shouted; ahinä—by the snake;
grastaù—seized; kåñëa kåñëa—O Kåñëa, Kåñëa; mahän—large; ayam—this;
sarpaù—serpent; mäm—me; grasate—is swallowing; täta—my dear boy;
prapannam—who is surrendered; parimocaya—please deliver.
TRANSLATION
In the clutches of the snake, Nanda Mahäräja cried out, "Kåñëa, Kåñëa, my
dear boy! This huge serpent is swallowing me! Please save me, who am
surrendered to You!"
TEXT 7
tasya caA‚(ind"taM ™autvaA
gAAepaAlaA: s$ah"s$aAeitTataA:
ƒastaM ca ä{"î"A iva”aAntaA:
s$apa< ivavyaDauç&lmaukE(:
tasya cäkranditaà çrutvä
gopäläù sahasotthitäù
grastaà ca dåñövä vibhräntäù
sarpaà vivyadhur ulmukaiù
SYNONYMS
tasya—his; ca—and; äkranditam—the crying out; çrutvä—hearing;
gopäläù—the cowherds; sahasä—suddenly; utthitäù—rising up;
grastam—seized; ca—and; dåñövä—seeing; vibhräntäù—disturbed;
sarpam—the snake; vivyadhuù—they beat; ulmukaiù—with flaming torches.
TRANSLATION
When the cowherd men heard the cries of Nanda, they immediately rose up
and saw that he was being swallowed. Distraught, they beat the serpent with
blazing torches.
TEXT 8
@laAtaEdR"÷maAnaAe'ipa
naAmauÂaÔamaur"Ëÿma:
tamas$pa{zAtpad"AByaetya
BagAvaAna, s$aAtvataAM paita:
alätair dahyamäno 'pi
nämuïcat tam uraìgamaù
tam aspåçat padäbhyetya
bhagavän sätvatäà patiù
SYNONYMS
alätaiù—by the firebrands; dahyamänaù—being burned; api—although; na
amuïcat—did not release; tam—him; uraìgamaù—the snake; tam—that
snake; aspåçat—touched; padä—with His foot; abhyetya—coming;
bhagavän—the Supreme Lord; sätvatäm—of the devotees; patiù—the master.
TRANSLATION
But even though the firebrands were burning him, the serpent would not
release Nanda Mahäräja. Then the Supreme Lord Kåñëa, master of His
devotees, came to the spot and touched the snake with His foot.
TEXT 9
s$a vaE BagAvata: ™aImata,
paAd"s$pazARh"taAzAuBa:
Baejae s$apaRvapauihR"tvaA
è&paM ivaâADar"AicaRtama,
sa vai bhagavataù çrémat
päda-sparça-hatäçubhaù
bheje sarpa-vapur hitvä
rüpaà vidyädharärcitam
SYNONYMS
saù—he; vai—indeed; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
çré-mat—divine; päda—of the foot; sparça—by the touch; hata—destroyed;
açubhaù—all inauspiciousness; bheje—assumed; sarpa-vapuù—his snake body;
hitvä—giving up; rüpam—a form; vidyädhara—by the Vidyädharas;
arcitam—worshiped.
TRANSLATION
The snake had all his sinful reactions destroyed by the touch of the Supreme
Lord's divine foot, and thus he gave up his serpent body and appeared in the
form of a worshipable Vidyädhara.
PURPORT
The words rüpaà vidyädharärcitam indicate that the erstwhile snake
appeared in a beautiful form worshipable among the demigods called
Vidyädharas. In other words, he appeared as the leader of the Vidyädharas.
TEXT 10
tamapa{cC$ä," Da{SaIke(zA:
‘aNAtaM s$amavaisTatama,
d"IpyamaAnaena vapauSaA
pauç&SaM he"mamaAilanama,
tam apåcchad dhåñékeçaù
praëataà samavasthitam
dépyamänena vapuñä
puruñaà hema-mälinam
SYNONYMS
tam—from him; apåcchat—inquired; håñékeçaù—the Supreme Lord Håñékeça;
praëatam—who was offering obeisances; samavasthitam—standing before
Him; dépyamänena—brilliantly shining; vapuñä—with his body; puruñam—the
personality; hema—golden; mälinam—wearing necklaces.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord Håñékeça then questioned this personality, who was
standing before Him with his head bowed, his brilliantly effulgent body
bedecked with golden necklaces.
PURPORT
The demigod was about to speak, and Lord Kåñëa wanted to focus
everyone's attention on his words. Therefore He personally inquired from the
worshipable Vidyädhara, who was standing before Him with his head bowed.
TEXT 11
k(Ae BavaAna, par"yaA laºmyaA
r"Aecatae'àu"tad"zARna:
k(TaM jaugAuips$ataAmaetaAM
gAitaM vaA ‘aAipataAe'vazA:
ko bhavän parayä lakñmyä
rocate 'dbhuta-darçanaù
kathaà jugupsitäm etäà
gatià vä präpito 'vaçaù
SYNONYMS
kaù—who; bhavän—your good self; parayä—with great; lakñmyä—beauty;
rocate—shine; adbhuta—wonderful; darçanaù—to see; katham—why;
yugupsitäm—terrible; etäm—this; gatim—destination; vä—and;
präpitaù—made to assume; avaçaù—beyond your control.
TRANSLATION
[Lord Kåñëa said:] My dear sir, you appear so wonderful, glowing with such
great beauty. Who are you? And who forced you to assume this terrible body of
a snake?
TEXTS 12-13
s$apaR ovaAca
@hM" ivaâADar": k(iêta,
s$aud"zARna wita ™auta:
i™ayaA svaè&pas$ampaÔyaA
ivamaAnaenaAcar"ind"zA:
[%SaIna, ivaè&paAiËÿr"s$a:
‘aAh"s$aM è&pad"ipaRta:
taEir"maAM ‘aAipataAe yaAeinaM
‘alabDaE: svaena paApmanaA
sarpa uväca
ahaà vidyädharaù kaçcit
sudarçana iti çrutaù
çriyä svarüpa-sampattyä
vimänenäcaran diçaù
åñén virüpäìgirasaù
prähasaà rüpa-darpitaù
tair imäà präpito yonià
pralabdhaiù svena päpmanä
SYNONYMS
sarpaù uväca—the serpent said; aham—I; vidyädharaù—a Vidyädhara;
kaçcit—certain; sudarçanaù—Sudarçana; iti—thus; çrutaù—well known;
çriyä—with opulence; svarüpa—of my personal form; sampattyä—with the
asset; vimänena—in my airplane; äcaran—wandering; diçaù—the directions;
åñén—sages; virüpa—deformed; äìgirasaù—of the disciplic succession of
Äìgirä Muni; prähasam—I ridiculed; rüpa—because of beauty;
darpitaù—overly conceited; taiù—by them; imäm—this; präpitaù—made to
assume; yonim—the birth; pralabdhaiù—who were laughed at; svena—because
of my own; päpmanä—sinful action.
TRANSLATION
The serpent replied: I am the well-known Vidyädhara named Sudarçana. I
was very opulent and beautiful, and I used to wander freely in all directions in
my airplane. Once I saw some homely sages of the lineage of Aìgirä Muni.
Proud of my beauty, I ridiculed them, and because of my sin they made me
assume this lowly form.
TEXT 14
zAApaAe mae'nauƒah"AyaEva
k{(tastaE: k(ç&NAAtmaiBa:
yad"hM" laAek(gAuç&NAA
pad"A s$pa{í"Ae h"taAzAuBa:
çäpo me 'nugrahäyaiva
kåtas taiù karuëätmabhiù
yad ahaà loka-guruëä
padä spåñöo hatäçubhaù
SYNONYMS
çäpaù—the curse; me—my; anugrahäya—for the benediction; eva—certainly;
kåtaù—created; taiù—by them; karuëa-ätmabhiù—who are merciful by nature;
yat—since; aham—I; loka—of all the worlds; guruëä—by the spiritual master;
padä—with His foot; spåñöaù—touched; hata—destroyed; açubhaù—all
inauspiciousness.
TRANSLATION
It was actually for my benefit that those merciful sages cursed me, since now
I have been touched by the foot of the supreme spiritual master of all the worlds
and have thus been relieved of all inauspiciousness.
TEXT 15
taM tvaAhM" BavaBaItaAnaAM
‘apaªaAnaAM BayaApah"ma,
@Apa{cCe$ zAApainamauRl(:
paAd"s$pazAARd"maIvah"na,
taà tvähaà bhava-bhétänäà
prapannänäà bhayäpaham
äpåcche çäpa-nirmuktaù
päda-sparçäd améva-han
SYNONYMS
tam—that same person; tvä—You; aham—I; bhava—of material existence;
bhétänäm—for those who are afraid; prapannänäm—who are surrendered;
bhaya—of fear; apaham—the remover; äpåcche—I request permission;
çäpa—from the curse; nirmuktaù—freed; päda-sparçät—by the touch of Your
foot; améva—of all distress; han—O destroyer.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, You destroy all fear for those who, fearing this material world,
take shelter of You. By the touch of Your feet I am now freed from the curse of
the sages. O destroyer of distress, please let me return to my planet.
PURPORT
According to the äcäryas, the word äpåcche indicates that Sudarçana
humbly requested the Lord for permission to return to his abode, where he
might take up his duties again, certainly in a chastened state of mind.
TEXT 16
‘apaªaAe'isma mah"AyaAeigAna,
mah"Apauç&Sa s$atpatae
@naujaAnaIih" maAM de"va
s$avaRlaAeke(ìre"ìr"
prapanno 'smi mahä-yogin
mahä-puruña sat-pate
anujänéhi mäà deva
sarva-lokeçvareçvara
SYNONYMS
prapannaù—surrendered; asmi—I am; mahä-yogin—O greatest of all
possessors of mystic power; mahä-puruña—O greatest of all personalities;
sat-pate—O master of the devotees; anujänéhi—please order; mäm—me;
deva—O God; sarva—of all; loka—of the worlds; éçvara—of the controllers;
éçvara—O supreme controller.
TRANSLATION
O master of mystic power, O great personality, O Lord of the devotees, I
surrender to You. Please command me as You will, O supreme God, Lord of all
lords of the universe.
TEXT 17
“aöd"Nx"Aiã"maul(Ae'hM"
s$aâstae'cyauta d"zARnaAta,
yaªaAma gA{õ"ªaiKalaAna,
™aAeta|naAtmaAnamaeva ca
s$aâ: paunaAita ikM( BaUyas$a,
tasya s$pa{í": pad"A ih" tae
brahma-daëòäd vimukto 'haà
sadyas te 'cyuta darçanät
yan-näma gåhëann akhilän
çrotèn ätmänam eva ca
sadyaù punäti kià bhüyas
tasya spåñöaù padä hi te
SYNONYMS
brahma—of the brähmaëas; daëòät—from the punishment; vimuktaù—freed;
aham—I am; sadyaù—immediately; te—You; acyuta—O infallible Lord;
darçanät—by seeing; yat—whose; näma—name; gåhëan—chanting;
akhilän—all; çrotèn—hearers; ätmänam—oneself; eva—indeed; ca—also;
sadyaù—immediately; punäti—purifies; kim bhüyaù—what more, then;
tasya—His; spåñöaù—touched; padä—by the foot; hi—indeed; te—Your.
TRANSLATION
O infallible one, I was immediately freed from the brähmaëas' punishment
simply by seeing You. Anyone who chants Your name purifies all who hear his
chanting, as well as himself. How much more beneficial, then, is the touch of
Your lotus feet?
TEXT 18
wtyanauÁaApya d"AzAAh<"
pair"‚(myaAiBavanâ ca
s$aud"zARnaAe id"vaM yaAta:
k{(cC)$Aªand"ê maAeicata:
ity anujïäpya däçärhaà
parikramyäbhivandya ca
sudarçano divaà yätaù
kåcchrän nandaç ca mocitaù
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; anujïäpya—taking permission; däçärham—from Lord Kåñëa;
parikramya—circumambulating; abhivandya—offering obeisances; ca—and;
sudarçanaù—Sudarçana; divam—to heaven; yätaù—went; kåcchrät—from his
difficulty; nandaù—Nanda Mahäräja; ca—also; mocitaù—was delivered.
TRANSLATION
Thus receiving the permission of Lord Kåñëa, the demigod Sudarçana
circumambulated Him, bowed down to offer Him homage and then returned to
his heavenly planet. Nanda Mahäräja was thus delivered from peril.
TEXT 19
inazAAmya k{(SNAsya tad"AtmavaEBavaM
˜ajaAEk(s$aAe ivaismatacaetas$astata:
s$amaApya taismaiªayamaM pauna˜aRjaM
NA{paAyayaustatk(Tayanta @Aä{"taA:
niçämya kåñëasya tad ätma-vaibhavaà
vrajaukaso vismita-cetasas tataù
samäpya tasmin niyamaà punar vrajaà
ëåpäyayus tat kathayanta ädåtäù
SYNONYMS
niçämya—seeing; kåñëasya—of Lord Kåñëa; tat—that; ätma—personal;
vaibhavam—opulent display of power; vraja-okasaù—the inhabitants of Vraja;
vismita—amazed; cetasaù—in their minds; tataù—then; samäpya—finishing;
tasmin—at that place; niyamam—their vow; punaù—again; vrajam—to the
cowherd village; nåpa—O King; äyayuù—they returned; tat—that display;
kathayantaù—describing; ädåtäù—with reverence.
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants of Vraja were astonished to see the mighty power of Çré
Kåñëa. Dear King, they then completed their worship of Lord Çiva and returned
to Vraja, along the way respectfully describing Kåñëa's powerful acts.
TEXT 20
k(d"Aicad"Ta gAAeivand"Ae
r"AmaêAàu"taiva‚(ma:
ivajaoe"tauvaR"nae r"A‡yaAM
maDyagAAE ˜ajayaAeiSataAma,
kadäcid atha govindo
rämaç cädbhuta-vikramaù
vijahratur vane rätryäà
madhya-gau vraja-yoñitäm
SYNONYMS
kadäcit—on one occasion; atha—then; govindaù—Lord Kåñëa; rämaù—Lord
Balaräma; ca—and; adbhuta—wonderful; vikramaù—whose deeds;
vijahratuù—the two of Them played; vane—in the forest; rätryäm—at night;
madhya-gau—in the midst; vraja-yoñitäm—of the women of the cowherd
community.
TRANSLATION
Once Lord Govinda and Lord Räma, the performers of wonderful feats, were
playing in the forest at night with the young girls of Vraja.
PURPORT
This verse introduces a new pastime. According to the äcäryas, the occasion
mentioned here is the Holikä-pürëimä, a day also known as Gaura-pürëimä.
TEXT 21
opagAIyamaAnaAE lailataM
ñIjanaEbaRÜ"s$aAEô$dE":
svalax.~k{(taAnauilaæaAËÿAE
›aigvanaAE ivar"jaAe'mbar"AE
upagéyamänau lalitaà
stré-janair baddha-sauhådaiù
sv-alaìkåtänuliptäìgau
sragvinau virajo-'mbarau
SYNONYMS
upagéyamänau—Their glories being sung; lalitam—charmingly; stré-janaiù—by
the womenfolk; baddha—bound; sauhådaiù—in affection for Them;
su-alaìkåta—finely decorated; anulipta—and anointed with (sandalwood
pulp); aìgau—whose limbs; srak-vinau—wearing flower garlands;
virajaù—spotless; ambarau—whose garments.
TRANSLATION
Kåñëa and Balaräma wore flower garlands and spotless garments, and Their
limbs were beautifully decorated and anointed. The women sang Their glories
in a charming way, bound to Them by affection.
TEXT 22
inazAAmauKaM maAnayantaAva,
oid"taAex"]pataAr"k(ma,
maiéak(AgAnDamaÔaAilajauíM"
ku(maud"vaAyaunaA
niçä-mukhaà mänayantäv
uditoòupa-tärakam
mallikä-gandha-mattälijuñöaà
kumuda-väyunä
SYNONYMS
niçä-mukham—the beginning of night; mänayantau—the two of Them
honoring; udita—having risen; uòupa—the moon; tärakam—and stars;
mallikä—of the jasmine flowers; gandha—by the fragrance;
matta—intoxicated; ali—by the bees; juñöam—liked; kumuda—from the
lotuses; väyunä—with the breeze.
TRANSLATION
The two Lords praised the nightfall, signaled by the rising of the moon and
the appearance of stars, a lotus-scented breeze and bees intoxicated by the
fragrance of jasmine flowers.
TEXT 23
jagAtau: s$avaRBaUtaAnaAM
mana:™avaNAmaËÿlama,
taAE k(lpayantaAE yaugApata,
svar"maNx"lamaUicCR$tama,
jagatuù sarva-bhütänäà
manaù-çravaëa-maìgalam
tau kalpayantau yugapat
svara-maëòala-mürcchitam
SYNONYMS
jagatuù—They sang; sarva-bhütänäm—of all living beings; manaù—for the
mind; çravaëa—and ears; maìgalam—happiness; tau—the two of Them;
kalpayantau—producing; yugapat—simultaneously; svara—of musical tones;
maëòala—by the entire scale; mürcchitam—augmented.
TRANSLATION
Kåñëa and Balaräma sang, producing the entire range of musical sounds
simultaneously. Their singing brought happiness to the ears and minds of all
living beings.
TEXT 24
gAAepyastaÕ"ItamaAk(NyaR
maUicCR$taA naAivad"ªa{pa
›aMs$aä,"äu"kU(lamaAtmaAnaM
›astake(zA›ajaM tata:
gopyas tad-gétam äkarëya
mürcchitä nävidan nåpa
sraàsad-dukülam ätmänaà
srasta-keça-srajaà tataù
SYNONYMS
gopyaù—the gopés; tat—of Them; gétam—the singing; äkarëya—hearing;
mürcchitäù—stunned; na avidan—were not aware of; nåpa—my dear King;
sraàsat—slipping; dukülam—the fine cloth of their garments;
ätmänam—themselves; srasta—disheveled; keça—their hair; srajam-the
garlands; tataù—(slipping) from that.
TRANSLATION
The gopés became stunned when they heard that song. Forgetting
themselves, O King, they did not notice that their fine garments were becoming
loose and their hair and garlands disheveled.
TEXT 25
WvaM iva‚(Lx"taAe: svaErM"
gAAyataAe: s$am‘amaÔavata,
zAÊÿcaUx" wita KyaAtaAe
Danad"Anaucar"Ae'ByagAAta,
evaà vikréòatoù svairaà
gäyatoù sampramatta-vat
çaìkhacüòa iti khyäto
dhanadänucaro 'bhyagät
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; vikréòatoù—as the two of Them were playing; svairam—as They
desired; gäyatoù—singing; sampramatta—to the point of intoxication; vat—as
if; çaìkhacüòaù—Çaìkhacüòa; iti—thus; khyätaù—named; dhana-da—of the
treasurer of the demigods, Lord Kuvera; anucaraù—a servant;
abhyagät—arrived.
TRANSLATION
While Lord Kåñëa and Lord Balaräma thus played according to Their own
sweet will and sang to the point of apparent intoxication, a servant of Kuvera
named Çaìkhacüòa came upon the scene.
TEXT 26
tayaAeinaRr"IºataAe r"AjaMs$a,
taªaATaM ‘amad"Ajanama,
‚(AezAntaM k(AlayaAmaAs$a
id"zyaud"IcyaAmazAiÆÿta:
tayor nirékñato räjaàs
tan-näthaà pramadä-janam
kroçantaà kälayäm äsa
diçy udécyäm açaìkitaù
SYNONYMS
tayoù—the two of Them; nirékñatoù—as They looked on; räjan—O King;
tat-nätham—having Them as their Lords; pramadä-janam—the assemblage of
women; kroçantam—crying out; kälayäm äsa—he drove; diçi—in the
direction; udécyäm—northern; açaìkitaù—without fear.
TRANSLATION
O King, even as the two Lords looked on, Çaìkhacüòa brazenly began
driving the women off toward the north. The women, who had accepted Kåñëa
and Balaräma as their Lords, began to cry out to Them.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté, the demon Çaìkhacüòa shook a
large stick at the beautiful young girls, thus frightening them and driving them
toward the north. He did not actually touch them, as is corroborated by the
following verse.
TEXT 27
‚(AezAntaM k{(SNA r"Amaeita
ivalaAefya svapair"ƒah"ma,
yaTaA gAA d"syaunaA ƒastaA
”aAtar"AvanvaDaAvataAma,
kroçantaà kåñëa rämeti
vilokya sva-parigraham
yathä gä dasyunä grastä
bhrätaräv anvadhävatäm
SYNONYMS
kroçantam—crying out; kåñëa räma iti—"Kåñëa! Räma!"; vilokya—seeing;
sva-parigraham—Their devotees; yathä—just as; gäù—cows; dasyunä—by a
thief; grastäù—seized; bhrätarau—the two brothers; anvadhävatäm—ran after.
TRANSLATION
Hearing Their devotees crying out "Kåñëa! Räma!" and seeing that they
were just like cows being stolen by a thief, Kåñëa and Balaräma began to run
after the demon.
TEXT 28
maA BaEíe"tyaBayaAr"AvaAE
zAAlah"staAE tar"isvanaAE
@As$aed"taustaM tar"s$aA
tvair"taM gAu÷k(ADamama,
mä bhaiñöety abhayärävau
çäla-hastau tarasvinau
äsedatus taà tarasä
tvaritaà guhyakädhamam
SYNONYMS
mä bhaiñöa—do not fear; iti—thus calling; abhaya—giving fearlessness;
ärävau—whose words; çäla—stones; hastau—in Their hands;
tarasvinau—moving quickly; äsedatuù—They approached; tam—that demon;
tarasä—with haste; tvaritam—who was moving swiftly; guhyaka—of Yakñas;
adhamam—the worst.
TRANSLATION
The Lords called out in reply, "Do not fear! "Then They picked up logs of
the çala tree and quickly pursued that lowest of Guhyakas, who swiftly ran
away.
TEXT 29
s$a vaIºya taAvanau‘aAæaAE
k(Alama{tyaU wvaAeiã"jana,
ivaSa{jya ñIjanaM maUX#:
‘aA‰"vaÀaIivataecC$yaA
sa vékñya täv anupräptau
käla-måtyü ivodvijan
viñåjya stré-janaà müòhaù
prädravaj jévitecchayä
SYNONYMS
saù—he, Çaìkhacüòa; vékñya—seeing; tau—the two;
anupräptau—approached; käla-måtyü—Time and Death; iva—as;
udvijan—becoming anxious; visåjya—leaving aside; stré-janam—the women;
müòhaù—confused; prädravat—ran away; jévita—his life; icchayä—with the
desire of preserving.
TRANSLATION
When Çaìkhacüòa saw the two of Them coming toward him like the
personified forces of Time and Death, he was filled with anxiety. Confused, he
abandoned the women and fled for his life.
TEXT 30
tamanvaDaAvaÕ"Aeivand"Ae
ya‡a ya‡a s$a DaAvaita
ijah"ISauRstaicC$r"Aer"¥aM
tasTaAE r"ºana, iñyaAe bala:
tam anvadhävad govindo
yatra yatra sa dhävati
jihérñus tac-chiro-ratnaà
tasthau rakñan striyo balaù
SYNONYMS
tam—after him; anvadhävat—ran; govindaù—Lord Kåñëa; yatra
yatra—wherever; saù—he; dhävati—was running; jihérñuù—desiring to take
away; tat—his; çiraù—upon the head; ratnam—the jewel; tasthau—stood;
rakñan—protecting; striyaù—the women; balaù—Lord Balaräma.
TRANSLATION
Lord Govinda chased the demon wherever he ran, eager to take his crest
jewel. Meanwhile Lord Balaräma stayed with the women to protect them.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté explains that the women were fatigued from
being driven away, and thus Lord Balaräma protected them and consoled them
as they rested. Meanwhile Lord Kåñëa went after the demon.
TEXT 31
@ivaäU"r" wvaAByaetya
izAr"stasya äu"r"Atmana:
jah"Ar" mauií"naEvaAËÿ
s$ah"caUx"maiNAM ivaBau:
avidüra iväbhyetya
çiras tasya durätmanaù
jahära muñöinaiväìga
saha-cüòa-maëià vibhuù
SYNONYMS
avidüre—nearby; iva—as if; abhyetya—coming toward; çiraù—the head;
tasya—of him; durätmanaù—the wicked one; jahära—took away;
muñöinä—with His fist; eva—simply; aìga—my dear King; saha—together
with; cüòa-maëim—the jewel upon his head; vibhuù—the almighty Lord.
TRANSLATION
The mighty Lord overtook Çaìkhacüòa from a great distance as if from
nearby, my dear King, and then with His fist the Lord removed the wicked
demon's head, together with his crest jewel.
TEXT 32
zAÊÿcaUxM" inah"tyaEvaM
maiNAmaAd"Aya BaAsvar"ma,
@ƒajaAyaAd"d"At‘aItyaA
pazyantaInaAM ca yaAeiSataAma,
çaìkhacüòaà nihatyaivaà
maëim ädäya bhäsvaram
agrajäyädadät prétyä
paçyanténäà ca yoñitäm
SYNONYMS
çaìkhacüòam—the demon Çaìkhacüòa; nihatya—killing; evam—in this
manner; maëim—the jewel; ädäya—taking; bhäsvaram—brilliant;
agra-jäya—to His elder brother (Lord Balaräma); adadät—gave; prétyä—with
satisfaction; paçyanténäm—as they were watching; ca—and; yoñitäm—the
women.
TRANSLATION
Having thus killed the demon Çaìkhacüòa and taken away his shining jewel,
Lord Kåñëa gave it to His elder brother with great satisfaction as the gopés
watched.
PURPORT
Various gopés perhaps thought that Govinda would give one of them the
valuable jewel. To prevent rivalry among them, Çré Kåñëa happily gave the
jewel to His older brother, Balaräma.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Tenth Canto, Thirty-fourth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Nanda Mahäräja Saved and Çaìkhacüòa
Slain."
35. The Gopés Sing of Kåñëa as He Wanders in the Forest
This chapter contains the songs the gopés sing to express their feelings of
separation from Kåñëa when He goes to the forest during the day.
As the gopés' mood of separation from Çré Kåñëa becomes ever more intense,
His names, forms, qualities and pastimes begin spontaneously manifesting in
their hearts. Thus they join together and sing as follows: "The beauty of Kåñëa
attracts the minds of all. When He stands in His threefold-bending way and
plays upon His flute, the Siddhas' wives, flying in the sky with their husbands,
become attracted to Him and forget external reality. The bulls, cows and other
animals in the pasture become stunned in ecstasy, and they stand so still, with
the grass unchewed between their teeth, that they appear like figures in a
drawing. Indeed, even the unconscious rivers stop flowing.
"Just see! When Kåñëa dresses Himself in forest array and calls the cows'
names by blowing on His flute, even the trees and creepers become so ecstatic
out of love that their limbs display eruptions and their sap pours down like a
torrent of tears. The sound of Kåñëa's flute causes the cranes, swans and other
birds in the lakes to close their eyes in deep meditation, the clouds in the sky
to gently rumble, imitating the flute's vibration, and even such great
authorities in the science of music as Indra, Siva and Brahmä to become
astonished. And just as we gopés are anxious to offer everything we have to
Kåñëa, so the wives of the black deer follow Him about, imitating us.
"When Kåñëa is returning to Vraja, He constantly plays His flute while His
young companions chant His glories, and Brahmä and other chief demigods
come to worship His lotus feet."
Thus the gopés, feeling intense separation from Kåñëa, sing of His pastimes.
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
gAAepya: k{(SNAe vanaM yaAtae
tamanauåu"tacaetas$a:
k{(SNAlaIlaA: ‘agAAyantyaAe
inanyauäuR":Kaena vaAs$ar"Ana,
çré-çuka uväca
gopyaù kåñëe vanaà yäte
tam anudruta-cetasaù
kåñëa-léläù pragäyantyo
ninyur duùkhena väsarän
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; gopyaù—the gopés; kåñëe—Lord
Kåñëa; vanam—to the forest; yäte—having gone; tam—after Him;
anudruta—chasing; cetasaù—whose minds; kåñëa-léläù—the transcendental
pastimes of Kåñëa; pragäyantyaù—singing loudly; ninyuù—they passed;
duùkhena—unhappily; väsarän—the days.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Whenever Kåñëa went to the forest, the minds of
the gopés would run after Him, and thus the young girls sadly spent their days
singing of His pastimes.
PURPORT
Although the gopés enjoyed direct association with Kåñëa at night in the
räsa dance, during the day He went about His normal duties, tending His cows
in the forest. At that time the minds of the gopés would run after Him, but the
young girls had to stay back in the village and do their own duties. Thus
feeling the pain of separation, they would sing about Çré Kåñëa's
transcendental pastimes.
TEXTS 2-3
™aIgAAepya Ocau:
vaAmabaAò"k{(tavaAmak(paAelaAe
vailgAta”aur"Dar"AipaRtavaeNAuma,
k(AemalaAÌÿilaiBar"Ai™atamaAgA<
gAAepya wRr"yaita ya‡a mauku(nd":
vyaAemayaAnavainataA: s$ah" is$aÜE"r,"
ivaismataAstaäu"paDaAyaR s$alaÀaA:
k(AmamaAgARNAs$amaipaRtaicaÔaA:
k(zmalaM yayaur"pasma{tanaIvya:
çré-gopya ücuù
väma-bähu-kåta-väma-kapolo
valgita-bhrur adharärpita-veëum
komaläìgulibhir äçrita-märgaà
gopya érayati yatra mukundaù
vyoma-yäna-vanitäù saha siddhair
vismitäs tad upadhärya sa-lajjäù
käma-märgaëa-samarpita-cittäù
kaçmalaà yayur apasmåta-névyaù
SYNONYMS
çré-gopyaù ücuù—the gopés said; väma—left; bähu—on His arm; kåta—putting;
väma—left; kapolaù—His cheek; valgita—moving; bhruù—His eyebrows;
adhara—upon His lips; arpita—placed; veëum—His flute; komala—tender;
aìgulibhiù—with His fingers; äçrita-märgam—its holes stopped; gopyaù—O
gopés; érayati—vibrates; yatra—where; mukundaù—Lord Kåñëa; vyoma—in
the sky; yäna—traveling; vanitäù—the ladies; saha—together with;
siddhaiù—the Siddha demigods; vismitäù—amazed; tat—to that;
upadhärya—listening; sa—with; lajjäù—embarrassment; käma—of lust;
märgaëa—to the pursuit; samarpita—offered; cittäù—their minds;
kaçmalam—distress; yayuù—they experienced; apasmåta—forgetting;
névyaù—the belts of their dresses.
TRANSLATION
The gopés said: When Mukunda vibrates the flute He has placed to His lips,
stopping its holes with His tender fingers, He rests His left cheek on His left
arm and makes His eyebrows dance. At that time the demigoddesses traveling in
the sky with their husbands, the Siddhas, become amazed. As those ladies
listen, they are embarrassed to find their minds yielding to the pursuit of lusty
desires, and in their distress they are unaware that the belts of their garments
are loosening.
PURPORT
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé states that this chapter consists of a collection of
statements the gopés made at various times as they stood in small groups here
and there in Våndävana.
TEXTS 4-5
h"nta ica‡amabalaA: Za{NAutaedM"
h"Ar"h"As$a or"is$a isTar"ivaâuta,
nand"s$aUnaur"yamaAtaRjanaAnaAM
namaRd"Ae yaihR" kU(ijatavaeNAu:
va{nd"zAAe ˜ajava{SaA ma{gAgAAvaAe
vaeNAuvaAâô$tacaetas$a @Ar"Ata,
d"ntad"í"k(valaA Da{tak(NAAR
inai‰"taA ilaiKataica‡aimavaAs$ana,
hanta citram abaläù çåëutedaà
hära-häsa urasi sthira-vidyut
nanda-sünur ayam ärta-janänäà
narma-do yarhi küjita-veëuù
våndaço vraja-våñä måga-gävo
veëu-vädya-håta-cetasa ärät
danta-dañöa-kavalä dhåta-karëä
nidritä likhita-citram iväsan
SYNONYMS
hanta—ah; citram—wonder; abaläù—O girls; çåëuta—hear; idam—this;
hära—(brilliant) like a necklace; häsaù—whose smile; urasi—upon the chest;
sthira—motionless; vidyut—lightning; nanda-sünuù—son of Nanda Mahäräja;
ayam—this; ärta—troubled; janänäm—for persons; narma—of joy; daù—the
giver; yarhi—when; küjita—has vibrated; veëuù—His flute; vrëdaçaù—in
groups; vraja—kept in the pasture; våñäù—the bulls; måga—the deer;
gävaù—and the cows; veëu—of the flute; vädya—by the playing; håta—stolen
away; cetasaù—their minds; ärät—at a distance; danta—by their teeth;
dañöa—bit; kavaläù—whose mouthfuls; dhåta—holding up; karëäù—their ears;
nidritäù—asleep; likhita—drawn; citram—an illustration; iva—as if;
äsan—they were.
TRANSLATION
O girls! This son of Nanda, who gives joy to the distressed, bears steady
lightning on His chest and has a smile like a jeweled necklace. Now please hear
something wonderful. When He vibrates His flute, Vraja's bulls, deer and cows,
standing in groups at a great distance, are all captivated by the sound, and they
stop chewing the food in their mouths and cock their ears. Stunned, they appear
as if asleep, or like figures in a painting.
PURPORT
The word sthira-vidyut, "steady lightning," refers to the goddess of fortune,
who resides on the chest of the Supreme Lord. When the animals of
Våndävana hear the sound of the flute, they become stunned in ecstasy, and
thus they stop chewing their food and cannot swallow it. The gopés, in
separation from Kåñëa, marvel at the extraordinary effect of the Lord's
flute-playing.
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé gives the following explanation of the compound word
hära-häsa, which compares Lord Kåñëa's smile to a necklace: "The word can
mean 'He whose smile is brilliantly clear like a jeweled necklace' or 'He whose
smile is reflected from His jeweled necklaces,' because while Kåñëa plays the
flute He bends His head down and smiles. The word can also mean 'He whose
smile, like a jeweled necklace, casts its effulgence upon His chest' or 'He whose
necklaces shine brilliantly, just like a smile.' "
TEXTS 6-7
baihR"NAstabak(DaAtaupalaAzAEr,"
baÜ"maéapair"bahR"ivax"mba:
k(ihR"icats$abala @Aila s$a gAAepaEr,"
gAA: s$amaAù"yaita ya‡a mauku(nd":
taihR" Ba¢agAtaya: s$air"taAe vaE
tatpad"Ambaujar"jaAe'inalanaItama,
s$pa{h"yataIvaRyaimavaAbaò"pauNyaA:
‘aemavaeipataBaujaA: istaimataApa:
barhiëa-stabaka-dhätu-paläçair
baddha-malla-paribarha-viòambaù
karhicit sa-bala äli sa gopair
gäù samähvayati yatra mukundaù
tarhi bhagna-gatayaù sarito vai
tat-padämbuja-rajo 'nila-nétam
spåhayatér vayam iväbahu-puëyäù
prema-vepita-bhujäù stimitäpaù
SYNONYMS
barhiëa—of peacocks; stabaka—with the tail feathers; dhätu—with colored
minerals; paläçaiù—and with leaves; baddha—arranged; malla—of a wrestler;
paribarha—the apparel; viòambaù—imitating; karhicit—sometimes;
sa-balaù—with Balaräma; äli—my dear gopé; saù—He; gopaiù—with the
cowherd boys; gäù—the cows; samähvayati—calls; yatra—when;
mukundaù—Lord Mukunda; tarhi—then; bhagna—broken; gatayaù—their
movement; saritaù—the rivers; vai—indeed; tat—His; pada-ambuja—of the
lotus feet; rajaù—the dust; anila—by the wind; nétam—brought;
spåhayatéù—hankering for; vayam—ourselves; iva—just like; abahu—slight;
puëyäù—the piety to whose credit; prema—due to love of God;
vepita—trembling; bhujäù—whose arms (waves); stimita—stopped;
äpaù—whose water.
TRANSLATION
My dear gopé, sometimes Mukunda imitates the appearance of a wrestler by
decorating Himself with leaves, peacock feathers and colored minerals. Then, in
the company of Balaräma and the cowherd boys, He plays His flute to call the
cows. At that time the rivers stop flowing, their water stunned by the ecstasy
they feel as they eagerly wait for the wind to bring them the dust of His lotus
feet. But like us, the rivers are not very pious, and thus they merely wait with
their arms trembling out of love.
PURPORT
The gopés state here that the sound of Kåñëa's flute causes even inanimate
objects like rivers to become conscious and then stunned in ecstasy. Just as the
gopés could not always be in Kåñëa's physical association, the rivers could not
come to the Lord's lotus feet. Although they desired the Lord, their movement
was checked by ecstasy, and their "arms," their waves, trembled with love of
Godhead.
TEXTS 8-11
@naucarE": s$amanauvaiNARtavaIyaR
@Aid"paUç&Sa wvaAcalaBaUita:
vanacar"Ae igAir"taqe%Sau car"ntaIr,"
vaeNAunaAù"yaita gAA: s$a yad"A ih"
vanalataAstar"va @Atmaina ivaSNAuM
vyaÃayantya wva pauSpaP(laAX#YaA:
‘aNAtaBaAr"ivaq%paA maDauDaAr"A:
‘aemaô$í"tanavaAe vava{Sau: sma
d"zARnaIyaitalak(Ae vanamaAlaAid"
vyagAnDataulas$aImaDaumaÔaE:
@ilaku(laEr"laGau gAItaAmaBaIí"ma,
@Ai‰"yana, yaihR" s$ainDatavaeNAu:
s$ar"is$a s$aAr"s$ahM"s$aivah"ËÿAzA,
caAç&gAItaAô$tacaetas$a Wtya
h"ir"maupaAs$ata tae yataicaÔaA
h"nta maIilataä{"zAAe Da{tamaAEnaA:
anucaraiù samanuvarëita-vérya
ädi-püruña iväcala-bhütiù
vana-caro giri-taöeñu carantér
veëunähvayati gäù sa yadä hi
vana-latäs tarava ätmani viñëuà
vyaïjayantya iva puñpa-phaläòhyäù
praëata-bhära-viöapä madhu-dhäräù
prema-håñöa-tanavo vavåñuù sma
darçanéya-tilako vana-mäläcopyright
©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
932
divya-gandha-tulasé-madhu-mattaiù
ali-kulair alaghu gétäm abhéñöam
ädriyan yarhi sandhita-veëuù
sarasi särasa-haàsa-vihaìgäç
cäru-gétä-håta-cetasa etya
harim upäsata te yata-cittä
hanta mélita-dåço dhåta-maunäù
SYNONYMS
anucaraiù—by His companions; samanuvarëita—being elaborately described;
véryaù—whose prowess; ädi-püruñaù—the original Personality of Godhead;
iva—as if; acala—unchanging; bhütiù—whose opulences; vana—in the forest;
caraù—moving about; giri—of the mountains; taöesu—on the sides;
carantéù—who are grazing; veëunä—with His flute; ähvayati—calls; gäù—the
cows; saù—He; yadä—when; hi—indeed; vana-latäù—the forest creepers;
taravaù—and the trees; ätmani—within themselves; viñëum—the Supreme
Lord, Viñëu; vyaïjayantyaù—revealing; iva—as if; puñpa—with flowers;
phala—and fruits; äòhyäù—richly endowed; praëata—bowed down;
bhära—because of the weight; viöapäù—whose branches; madhu—of sweet sap;
dhäräù—torrents; prema—out of ecstatic love; håñöa—hairs standing on end;
tanavaù—on whose bodies (trunks); vavåñuù sma—they have rained down;
darçanéya—of persons who are attractive to see; tilakaù—the most excellent;
vana-mälä—upon His garland made of forest flowers; divya—divine;
gandha—whose fragrance; tulasé—of the tulasé flowers; madhu—by the
honeylike sweetness; mattaiù—intoxicated; ali—of bees; kulaiù—by the
swarms; alaghu—strong; gétam—the singing; abhéñöam-desirable;
ädriyan—thankfully acknowledging; yarhi—when; sandhita—placed;
veëuù—His flute; sarasi—in the lake; särasa—the cranes; haàsa—swans;
vihaìgäù—and other birds; cäru—charming; géta—by the song (of His flute);
håta—taken away; cetasaù—whose minds; etya—coming forward; harim—Lord
Kåñëa; upäsata—worship; te—they; yata—under control; cittäù—whose
minds; hanta—ah; mélita—closed; dåçaù—their eyes; dhåta—maintaining;
maunäù—silence.
TRANSLATION
Kåñëa moves about the forest in the company of His friends, who vividly
chant the glories of His magnificent deeds. He thus appears just like the
Supreme Personality of Godhead exhibiting His inexhaustible opulences. When
the cows wander onto the mountainsides and Kåñëa calls out to them with the
sound of His flute, the trees and creepers in the forest respond by becoming so
luxuriant with fruits and flowers that they seem to be manifesting Lord Viñëu
within their hearts. As their branches bend low with the weight, the filaments
on their trunks and vines stand erect out of the ecstasy of love of God, and both
the trees and the creepers pour down a rain of sweet sap.
Maddened by the divine, honeylike aroma of the tulasé flowers on the
garland Kåñëa wears, swarms of bees sing loudly for Him, and that most
beautiful of all persons thankfully acknowledges and acclaims their song by
taking His flute to His lips and playing it. The charming flute song then steals
away the minds of the cranes, swans and other lake-dwelling birds. Indeed they
approach Kåñëa, close their eyes and, maintaining strict silence, worship Him
by fixing their consciousness upon Him in deep meditation.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has made several illuminating
comments on these verses. He gives the analogy that just as when householder
Vaiñëavas hear a saìkértana party approaching they become ecstatic and offer
obeisances, so the trees and creepers in Våndävana became ecstatic when they
heard Kåñëa's flute and bowed low with their branches and vines. The word
darçanéya-tilaka in Text 10 indicates not only that the Lord is "the most
excellent (to see)," but also that He decorated Himself with attractive reddish
tilaka taken from the mineral rich earth of Våndävana forest.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté also points out that tulasé, although exalted in
many ways, is not normally considered an especially fragrant plant. However,
early in the morning tulasé emits a transcendental fragrance that ordinary
people cannot perceive but that transcendental personalities fully appreciate.
The bees who are privileged to swarm about the flower garlands worn by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead certainly appreciate this fragrance, and Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté quotes from the Bhägavatam (3.15.19) to the effect that
the most fragrant plants in Vaikuëöha also appreciate the special qualifications
of Tulasé-devé.
The word sandhita-veëuù in Text 10 indicates that Lord Kåñëa placed His
flute firmly upon His lips. And the melody emanating from that flute is
certainly the most enchanting of sounds, as the gopés describe in this chapter.
TEXTS 12-13
s$ah"bala: ›agAvataMs$aivalaAs$a:
s$aAnauSau iºaitaBa{taAe ˜ajade"vya:
h"SaRyana, yaihR" vaeNAur"vaeNA
jaAtah"SaR opar"mBaita ivaìma,
mah"d"ita‚(maNAzAiÆÿtacaetaA
mand"mand"manaugAjaRita maeGa:
s$auô$d"maByavaSaRts$aumanaAeiBazA,
C$AyayaA ca ivad"Dat‘atapa‡ama,
saha-balaù srag-avataàsa-viläsaù
sänuñu kñiti-bhåto vraja-devyaù
harñayan yarhi veëu-raveëa
jäta-harña uparambhati viçvam
mahad-atikramaëa-çaìkita-cetä
manda-mandam anugarjati meghaù
suhådam abhyavarñat sumanobhiç
chäyayä ca vidadhat pratapatram
SYNONYMS
saha-balaù—together with Balaräma; srak—a flower garland; avataàsa—as
the ornament on His head; viläsaù—playfully wearing; sänuñu—on the sides;
kñiti-bhåtaù—of a mountain; vraja-devyaù—O goddesses of Våndävana (gopés);
harñayan—creating joy; yarhi—when; veëu—of His flute; raveëa—by the
resounding vibration; jäta-harñaù—becoming joyful; uparambhati—causes to
relish; viçvam—the entire world; mahat—against a great personality;
atikramaëa—of a transgression; çaìkita—fearful; cetäù—in his mind;
manda-mandam—very gently; anugarjati—thunders in response; meghaù—the
cloud; suhådam—upon his friend; abhyavarñat—has rained down;
sumanobhiù—with flowers; chäyayä—with his shade; ca—and;
vidadhat—providing; pratapatram—an umbrella as protection from the sun.
TRANSLATION
O goddesses of Vraja, when Kåñëa is enjoying Himself with Balaräma on the
mountain slopes, playfully wearing a flower garland on the top of His head, He
engladdens all with the resonant vibrations of His flute. Thus He delights the
entire world. At that time the nearby cloud, afraid of offending a great
personality, thunders very gently in accompaniment. The cloud showers flowers
onto his dear friend Kåñëa and shades Him from the sun like an umbrella.
TEXTS 14-15
ivaivaDagAAepacar"NAeSau ivad"gDaAe
vaeNAuvaAâ oç&DaA inajaizAºaA:
tava s$auta: s$aita yad"ADar"ibambae
d"ÔavaeNAur"nayatsvar"jaAtaI:
s$avanazAstaäu"paDaAyaR s$aure"zAA:
zA‚(zAvaRpar"maeiï"paur"AegAA:
k(vaya @Anatak(nDar"icaÔaA:
k(zmalaM yayaur"inaiêtataÔvaA:
vividha-gopa-caraëeñu vidagdho
veëu-vädya urudhä nija-çikñäù
tava sutaù sati yadädhara-bimbe
datta-veëur anayat svara-jätéù
savanaças tad upadhärya sureçäù
çakra-çarva-parameñöhi-purogäù
kavaya änata-kandhara-cittäù
kaçmalaà yayur aniçcita-tattväù
SYNONYMS
vividha—various; gopa—of cowherds; caraëeñu—in the activities;
vidagdhaù—expert; veëu—of the flute; vädye—in the matter of playing;
urudhä—manifold; nija—of His own production; çikñäù—whose teachings;
tava—your; sutaù—son; sati—O pious lady (Yaçodä); yadä—when;
adhara—upon His lips; bimbe—which are like red bimba fruits; datta—placing;
veëuù—His flute; anayat—He brought forth; svara—of musical sound;
jätéù—the harmonic tones; savanaçaù—with a variety of low, high and middle
pitches; tat—that; upadhärya—hearing; sura-éçäù—the principal demigods;
çakra—Indra; çarva—Çiva; parameñöhi—and Brahmä; puraù-gäù—headed by;
kavayaù—learned scholars; änata—bowed; kandhara—their necks;
cittäù—and minds; kaçmalam yayuù—they became bewildered;
aniçcita—unable to ascertain; tattväù—its essence.
TRANSLATION
O pious mother Yaçodä, your son, who is expert in all the arts of herding
cows, has invented many new styles of flute-playing. When He takes His flute
to His bimba-red lips and sends forth the tones of the harmonic scale in
variegated melodies, Brahmä, Çiva, Indra and other chief demigods become
confused upon hearing the sound. Although they are the most learned
authorities, they cannot ascertain the essence of that music, and thus they bow
down their heads and hearts.
PURPORT
The words tava sutaù sati, "your son, O chaste lady," clearly indicate that at
this point mother Yaçodä is among the young gopés as they earnestly describe
Lord Kåñëa's glories. According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté, among the
demigods led by Çakra (Lord Indra) were Upendra, Agni and Yamaräja, among
those led by Çarva (Lord Çiva) were Kätyäyané, Skanda and Gaëeça, and
among those led by Parameñöhé (Lord Brahmä) were the four Kumäras and
Närada. Thus the best collective intelligence in the universe could not
definitively analyze the enchanting musical arrangements of the Supreme
Lord.
TEXTS 16-17
inajapad"Abjad"laEDvaRjava†a
naIr"jaAÇÿzAivaica‡alalaAmaE:
˜ajaBauva: zAmayana, Kaur"taAedM"
vaSmaRDauyaRgAitar"Iix"tavaeNAu:
˜ajaita taena vayaM s$aivalaAs$a
vaIºaNAAipaRtamanaAeBavavaegAA:
ku(jagAitaM gAimataA na ivad"Ama:
k(zmalaena k(varM" vas$anaM vaA
nija-padäbja-dalair dhvaja-vajra
nérajäìkuça-vicitra-lalämaiù
vraja-bhuvaù çamayan khura-todaà
varñma-dhurya-gatir éòita-veëuù
vrajati tena vayaà sa-viläsa
vékñaëärpita-manobhava-vegäù
kuja-gatià gamitä na vidämaù
kaçmalena kavaraà vasanaà vä
SYNONYMS
nija—His own; pada-abja—of the lotus feet; dalaiù—like flower petals;
dhvaja—of a flag; vajra—thunderbolt; néraja—lotus; aìkuça—and elephant
goad; vicitra—variegated; lalämaiù—by the markings; vraja—of Vraja;
bhuvaù—of the ground; çamayan—relieving; khura—from the hooves (of the
cows); todam—the pain; varñma—with His body; dhurya—like an elephant's;
gatiù—whose movement; éòita—extolled; veëuù—whose flute; vrajati—He
walks; tena—by that; vayam—we; saviläsa—playful; vékñaëa—with His
glances; arpita—bestowed; manaù-bhava—of lust; vegäù—whose agitation;
kuja—like that of trees; gatim—whose movement (i.e., complete lack of
movement); gamitäù—attaining; na vidämaù—we do not recognize;
kaçmaleëa—because of our bewilderment; kavaram—the braids of our hair;
vasanam—our dress; vä—or.
TRANSLATION
As Kåñëa strolls through Vraja with His lotus-petal-like feet, marking the
ground with the distinctive emblems of flag, thunderbolt, lotus and elephant
goad, He relieves the distress the ground feels from the cows' hooves. As He
plays His renowned flute, His body moves with the grace of an elephant. Thus
we gopés, who become agitated by Cupid when Kåñëa playfully glances at us,
stand as still as trees, unaware that our hair and garments are slackening.
PURPORT
Here mother Yaçodä is no longer in the company of the gopés, who are
confidentially describing their conjugal attraction to Çré Kåñëa. It is clear from
the comments of Jéva Gosvämé and other äcäryas that the statements in this
chapter were made at various times and places. This is natural, since the gopés
were always absorbed in thoughts of Çré Kåñëa, day and night.
TEXTS 18-19
maiNADar": ¸(icad"AgANAyana, gAA
maAlayaA d"iyatagAnDataulasyaA:
‘aNAiyanaAe'naucar"sya k(d"AMs$ae
‘aiºapana, BaujamagAAyata ya‡a
¸(iNAtavaeNAur"vavaiÂataicaÔaA:
k{(SNAmanvas$ata k{(SNAgA{ih"Nya:
gAuNAgANAANARmanaugAtya h"ir"NyaAe
gAAeipak(A wva ivamaul(gA{h"AzAA:
maëi-dharaù kvacid ägaëayan gä
mälayä dayita-gandha-tulasyäù
praëayino 'nucarasya kadäàse
prakñipan bhujam agäyata yatra
kvaëita-veëu-rava-vaïcita-cittäù
kåñëam anvasata kåñëa-gåhiëyaù
guëa-gaëärëam anugatya hariëyo
gopikä iva vimukta-gåhäçäù
SYNONYMS
maëi—(a string of) gems; dharaù—holding; kvacit—somewhere;
ägaëayan—counting; gäù—the cows; mälayä—with a flower garland;
dayita—of His beloved; gandha—having the fragrance; tulasyäù—the tulasé
flowers upon which; praëayinaù—loving; anucarasya—of a companion;
kadä—at some time; aàse—on the shoulder; prakñipan—throwing;
bhujam—His arm; agäyata—He sang; yatra—when; kvaëita—vibrated;
veëu—of His flute; rava—by the sound; vaïcita—stolen; cittäù—their hearts;
kåñëam—Kåñëa; anvasata—they sat down beside; kåñëa—of the black deer;
gåhiëyaù—the wives; guëa-gaëa—of all transcendental qualities; arëam—the
ocean; anugatya—approaching; hariëyaù—the does; gopikäù—the gopés;
iva—just like; vimukta—having given up; gåha—for home and family;
äçäù—their hopes.
TRANSLATION
Now Kåñëa is standing somewhere counting His cows on a string of gems.
He wears a garland of tulasé flowers that bear the fragrance of His beloved, and
He has thrown His arm over the shoulder of an affectionate cowherd boyfriend.
As Kåñëa plays His flute and sings, the music attracts the black deer's wives,
who approach that ocean of transcendental qualities and sit down beside Him.
Just like us cowherd girls, they have given up all hope for happiness in family
life.
PURPORT
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé explains that in the afternoon Çré Kåñëa dressed Himself
in new clothing and then went out to call the cows home. Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté gives the following information about the transcendental cows of
Våndävana: "For each of the four colors of cows—white, red, black and
yellow—there are twenty-five subdivisions, making a total of one hundred
colors. And such qualities as being colored like sandalwood-pulp tilaka
[speckled] or having a head shaped like a mådaìga drum create eight further
groups. To count these 108 groups of cows, distinguished by color and form,
Kåñëa is using a string of 108 jewel-beads....
"Thus when Kåñëa calls out 'Hey Dhavalé [the name of a white cow],' a
whole group of white cows come forward, and when He calls 'Haàsé, Candané,
Gaìgä, Muktä 'and so on, the twenty-four other groups of white cows come.
The reddish cows are called Aruëé, Kuìkuma, Sarasvaté, etc., the blackish ones
Çyämalä, Dhümalä, Yamunä, etc., and the yellowish ones Pétä, Piìgalä,
Haritälikä, etc. Those in the group with tilaka marks on their foreheads are
called Citritä, Citra-tilakä, Dérgha-tilakä and Tiryak-tilakä, and there are
groups known as Mådaìga-mukhé [mådaìga-head], Siàha-mukhé [lion-head]
and so on.
"Thus being called by name, the cows are coming forward, and Kåñëa,
thinking that when it is time to bring them back from the forest none should
be forgotten, is counting them on His jewel-beads."
TEXTS 20-21
ku(nd"d"Amak{(tak(AEtauk(vaeSaAe
gAAepagAAeDanava{taAe yamaunaAyaAma,
nand"s$aUnaur"naGae tava vats$aAe
namaRd": ‘aNAiyaNAAM ivajah"Ar"
mand"vaAyauç&pavaAtyanakU(laM
maAnayanmalayajas$pazAeRna
vaind"nastamaupade"vagANAA yae
vaAâgAItabailaiBa: pair"va˜au:
kunda-däma-kåta-kautuka-veño
gopa-godhana-våto yamunäyäm
nanda-sünur anaghe tava vatso
narma-daù praëayiëäà vijahära
manda-väyur upaväty anukülaà
mänayan malayaja-sparçena
vandinas tam upadeva-gaëä ye
vädya-géta-balibhiù parivavruù
SYNONYMS
kunda—of jasmine flowers; däma—with a garland; kåta—made;
kautuka—playful; veñaù—His array; gopa—by the cowherd boys;
godhana—and the cows; våtaù—surrounded; yamunäyäm—along the Yamunä;
nanda-sünuù—the son of Nanda Mahäräja; anaghe—O sinless lady;
tava—your; vatsaù—darling child; narma-daù—amusing; praëayiëäm—His
dear companions; vijahära—He has played; manda—gentle; väyuù—the wind;
upaväti—blows; anukülam—favorably; mänayan—showing honor;
malaya-ja—of (the fragrance of) sandalwood; sparçena—the touch;
vandinaù—those who offer praise; tam—Him; upadeva—of the minor
demigods; gaëäù—members of the various categories; ye—who; vädya—with
instrumental music; géta—singing; balibhiù—and presentation of gifts;
parivavruù—they have encircled.
TRANSLATION
O sinless Yaçodä, your darling child, the son of Mahäräja Nanda, has
festively enhanced His attire with a jasmine garland, and He is now playing
along the Yamunä in the company of the cows and cowherd boys, amusing His
dear companions. The gentle breeze honors Him with its soothing fragrance of
sandalwood, while the various Upadevas, standing on all sides like panegyrists,
offer their music, singing and gifts of tribute.
PURPORT
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé explains that the gopés are again in the courtyard of
mother Yaçodä, the queen of Vraja. They are trying to encourage her by
describing Kåñëa's return to Våndävana after He has spent the day herding
cows and playing.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté comments that the Upadevas, the minor
demigods mentioned here, include the Gandharvas, who are famous for their
celestial music and dancing.
TEXTS 22-23
vats$alaAe ˜ajagAvaAM yad"gA‹aAe
vanâmaAnacar"NA: paiTa va{ÜE":
k{(tµagAAeDanamaupaAe÷ id"naAntae
gAItavaeNAur"naugAeix"tak(LitaR:
ots$avaM ™amaç&caAipa ä{"zAInaAma,
oªayana, Kaur"r"jazC]$ir"ta›ak,(
id"ts$ayaEita s$auô$d"Ais$aSa WSa
de"vak(LjaQ&r"BaUç&x"]r"Aja:
vatsalo vraja-gaväà yad aga-dhro
vandyamäna-caraëaù pathi våddhaiù
kåtsna-go-dhanam upohya dinänte
géta-veëur anugeòita-kértiù
utsavaà çrama-rucäpi dåçénäm
unnayan khura-rajaç-churita-srak
ditsayaiti suhåd-äsiña eña
devaké-jaöhara-bhür uòu-räjaù
SYNONYMS
vatsalaù—affectionate; vraja-gaväm—to the cows of Vraja; yat—because;
aga—of the mountain; dhraù—the lifter; vandyamäna—being worshiped;
caraëaù—His feet; pathi—along the path; våddhaiù—by the exalted demigods;
kåtsna—entire; go-dhanam—the herd of cows; upohya—collecting; dina—of
the day; ante—at the end; gétä-veëuù—playing His flute; anuga—by His
companions; éòita—praised; kértiù—His glories; utsavam—a festival;
çrama—of fatigue; rucä—by His coloring; api—even; dåçénäm—for the eyes;
unnayan—raising; khura—from the hooves (of the cows); rajaù—with the
dust; churita—powdered; srak—His garland; ditsayä—with the desire; eti—He
is coming; suhåt—to His friends; äçiñaù—their desires; eñaù—this; devaké—of
mother Yaçodä; jaöhara—from the womb; bhüù—born; uòu-räjaù—moon.
TRANSLATION
Out of great affection for the cows of Vraja, Kåñëa became the lifter of
Govardhana Hill. At the end of the day, having rounded up all His own cows,
He plays a song on His flute, while exalted demigods standing along the path
worship His lotus feet and the cowherd boys accompanying Him chant His
glories. His garland is powdered by the dust raised by the cows' hooves, and His
beauty, enhanced by His fatigue, creates an ecstatic festival for everyone's eyes.
Eager to fulfill His friends' desires, Kåñëa is the moon arisen from the womb of
mother Yaçodä.
PURPORT
According to the äcäryas, at this point the gopés climbed into the
watchtowers of Våndävana's houses so they could see Kåñëa as soon as possible
when He returned home. Mother Yaçodä was very anxious for her son to come
back, and therefore she had the tallest of the beautiful young gopés climb up to
see when He would arrive. It is implied here that Kåñëa was somewhat delayed
on the way home because His lotus feet were being worshiped by great
demigods along the path.
TEXTS 24-25
mad"ivaGaUiNARtalaAecana wRSata,
maAnad": svas$auô$d"AM vanamaAlaI
bad"r"paANx"]vad"naAe ma{äu"gANxM"
maNx"yana, k(nak(ku(Nx"lalaºmyaA
yaäu"paitaiãR"r"d"r"Ajaivah"Ar"Ae
yaAimanaIpaitair"vaESa id"naAntae
mauid"tavaf‡a opayaAita äu"r"ntaM
maAecayana, ˜ajagAvaAM id"nataApama,
mada-vighürëita-locana éñat
mäna-daù sva-suhådäà vana-mälé
badara-päëòu-vadano mådu-gaëòaà
maëòayan kanaka-kuëòala-lakñmyä
yadu-patir dvirada-räja-vihäro
yäminé-patir ivaiña dinänte
mudita-vaktra upayäti durantaà
mocayan vraja-gaväà dina-täpam
SYNONYMS
mada—by intoxication; vighürëita—rolling; locanaù—His eyes; éñat—slightly;
mäna-daù—showing honor; sva-suhådäm—to His well-wishing friends;
vana-mälé—wearing a garland of forest flowers; badara—like a badara fruit;
päëòu—whitish; vadanaù—His face; mådu—soft; gaëòam—His cheeks;
maëòayan—ornamenting; kanaka—golden; kuëòala—of His earrings;
lakñmyä—with the beauty; yadu-patiù—the Lord of the Yadu dynasty;
dvirada-räja—like a kingly elephant; vihäraù—His sporting; yäminé-patiù—the
lord of the night (the moon); iva—like; eñaù—He; dina-ante—at the end of
the day; mudita—joyful; vaktraù—His face; upayäti—is coming;
durantam—insurmountable; mocayan—driving away; vraja—of Vraja;
gaväm—of the cows, or of those who are to be shown mercy; dina—of the
daytime; täpam—the painful heat.
TRANSLATION
As Kåñëa respectfully greets His well-wishing friends, His eyes roll slightly
as if from intoxication. He wears a flower garland, and the beauty of His soft
cheeks is accentuated by the brilliance of His golden earrings and the whiteness
of His face, which has the color of a badara berry. With His cheerful face
resembling the moon, lord of the night, the Lord of the Yadus moves with the
grace of a regal elephant. Thus He returns in the evening, delivering the cows
of Vraja from the heat of the day.
PURPORT
The word gaväm is constructed from the Sanskrit word go, which means
"cow" or "senses." Thus Çré Kåñëa, by coming back to the village of Vraja,
relieved the inhabitants of Våndävana from the distress their eyes and other
senses felt during the day because of being separated from direct contact with
Him.
TEXT 26
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
WvaM ˜ajaiñyaAe r"Ajana,
k{(SNAlaIlaAnaugAAyataI:
re"imare"'h":s$au tai»aÔaAs$a,
tanmanas$k(A mah"Aed"yaA:
çré-çuka uväca
evaà vraja-striyo räjan
kåñëa-lélänugäyatéù
remire 'haùsu tac-cittäs
tan-manaskä mahodayäù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—thus; vraja-striyaù—the
women of Vraja; räjan—O King; kåñëa-lélä—about the pastimes of Kåñëa;
anugäyatéù—continuously chanting; remire—they enjoyed; ahaùsu—during
the days; tat-cittäù—their hearts absorbed in Him; tat-manaskäù—their minds
absorbed in Him; mahä—great; udayäù—experiencing a festivity.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O King, thus during the daytime the women of
Våndävana took pleasure in continuously singing about the pastimes of Kåñëa,
and those ladies' minds and hearts, absorbed in Him, were filled with great
festivity.
PURPORT
This verse definitely confirms that the so-called pain of the heartbroken
gopés is actually great spiritual bliss. On the material platform, pain is
pain—period. But on the spiritual platform, so-called pain is simply a different
variety of spiritual ecstasy. In the Western countries, people take pleasure in
mixing different flavors of ice cream to produce wonderful combinations of
flavor. Similarly, on the spiritual platform Çré Kåñëa and His devotees expertly
mix the flavors of spiritual bliss, and thus every day was a treat for the gopés.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Tenth Canto, Thirty-fifth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Gopés Sing of Kåñëa as He Wanders in
the Forest."
36. The Slaying of Ariñöä, the Bull Demon
This chapter describes how Kåñëa killed Ariñöäsura and how Kaàsa reacted
when he learned from Närada that Kåñëa and Balaräma were the sons of
Vasudeva.
The demon Ariñöa wanted to kill Kåñëa and Balaräma, and thus he assumed
the form of a huge bull with sharp horns. Everyone in Kåñëa's cowherd village
became terrified when Ariñöäsura approached it, but the Lord pacified them,
and when the bull demon charged Him He seized him by the horns and threw
him about six yards. Though weakened, Ariñöa still wanted to attack Kåñëa.
Thus, dripping with sweat, he charged the Lord once again. This time Kåñëa
grabbed his horns, threw him to the ground and thrashed him like a pile of wet
clothing. The demon vomited blood and gave up his life. Then Kåñëa and
Räma, while being honored by the demigods and cowherd boys, returned to the
village.
A short time later Närada Muni, the great sage among the demigods, came
to see King Kaàsa. He informed the King that Kåñëa and Balaräma were not
Nanda's sons but rather Vasudeva's. It was out of fear of Kaàsa that Vasudeva
had put the two boys under Nanda's care. Furthermore, said Närada, Kaàsa
would meet his death at Their hands.
Kaàsa shook with fear and anger when he heard all this, and in great
agitation he began thinking of how to destroy Kåñëa and Balaräma. He called
for the demons Cäëüra and Muñöika and instructed them to kill the two
brothers in a wrestling match. Then he spoke to Akrüra, who was expert at
executing his duties. Taking Akrüra by the hand, Kaàsa persuaded him to go
to Vraja to bring the two boys to Mathurä. Akrüra agreed to carry out Kaàsa's
order and then returned home.
TEXT 1
™aI baAd"r"AyaiNAç&vaAca
@Ta ta÷ARgAtaAe gAAeï"ma,
@ir"í"Ae va{SaBaAs$aur":
mah"Immah"Ak(ku(tk(Aya:
k(mpayana, Kaur"ivaºataAma,
çré bädaräyaëir uväca
atha tarhy ägato goñöham
ariñöo våñabhäsuraù
mahém mahä-kakut-käyaù
kampayan khura-vikñatäm
SYNONYMS
çré bädaräyaëiù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; atha—next; tarhi—then;
ägataù—came; goñöham—to the cowherd village; ariñöaù—named Ariñöa;
våñabha-asuraù—the bull demon; mahém—the earth; mahä—great;
kakut—having a hump; käyaù—whose body; kampayan—making tremble;
khura—by his hooves; vikñatäm—torn.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Goswämé said: The demon Ariñöa then came to the cowherd
village. Appearing in the form of a bull with a large hump, he made the earth
tremble as he tore it apart with his hooves.
PURPORT
According to the Çré Viñëu Puräëa, Ariñöäsura entered Kåñëa's village at
twilight, as the Lord prepared to dance with the gopés:
prodoñärdhe kadäcit tu
räsäsakte janärdane
träsayan sa-mado goñöham
ariñöaù sampägataù
"Once, midway through the period of dusk, when Lord Janärdana was eager to
perform the räsa dance, Ariñöäsura madly entered the cowherd village,
terrifying everyone."
TEXT 2
r"mBamaANA: Kar"tarM"
pad"A ca ivailaKanmah"Ima,
oâmya paucCM$ va‘aAiNA
ivaSaANAAƒaeNA caAeÜ"r"na,
ik(iÂaitk(iÂacC$k{(nmauÂana,
maU‡ayana, stabDalaAecana:
rambhamäëaù kharataraà
padä ca vilikhan mahém
udyamya pucchaà vapräëi
viñäëägreëa coddharan
kiïcit kiïcic chakån muïcan
mütrayan stabdha-locanaù
SYNONYMS
rambhamäëaù—bellowing; khara-taram—most harshly; padä—with his
hooves; ca—and; vilikhan—scraping; mahém—the ground; udyamya—raising
upward; puccham—his tail; vapräëi—the embankments; viñäëa—of his horns;
agreëa—with the tips; ca—and; uddharan—lifting and tearing up; kiïcit
kiïcit—a little; çakåt—stool; muïcan—releasing; mütrayan—urinating;
stabdha—glaring; locanaù—his eyes.
TRANSLATION
Ariñöäsura bellowed very harshly and pawed the ground. With his tail raised
and his eyes glaring, he began to tear up the embankments with the tips of his
horns, every now and then passing a little stool and urine.
TEXTS 3-4
yasya inaoe"ARid"taenaAËÿ
inaï]"re"NA gAvaAM na{NAAma,
patantyak(AlataAe gABaAR:
›avainta sma Bayaena vaE
inaivaRzAinta GanaA yasya
k(ku(âcalazAÆÿyaA
taM taIºNAZa{"Ëÿmauã"Iºya
gAAepyaAe gAAepaAê ta‡as$au:
yasya nirhräditenäìga
niñöhureëa gaväà nåëäm
patanty akälato garbhäù
sravanti sma bhayena vai
nirviçanti ghanä yasya
kakudy acala-çaìkayä
taà tékñëa-çåìgam udvékñya
gopyo gopäç ca tatrasuù
SYNONYMS
yasya—whose; nirhräditena—by the reverberating sound; aìga—my dear King
(Parékñit); niñöhureëa—rough; gaväm—of cows; nåëäm—of humans;
patanti—fall; akälataù—untimely; garbhäù—the embryos; sravanti sma—are
miscarried; bhayena—out of fear; vai—indeed; nirviçanti—enter;
ghanäù—clouds; yasya—whose; kakudi—onto the hump; acala—as a
mountain; çaìkayä—by the mistaken identification; tam—him; tékñëa—sharp;
çåìgam—whose horns; udvékñya—seeing; gopyaù—the cowherd women;
gopäù—the cowherd men; ca—and; tatrasuù—became frightened.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, clouds hovered about sharp-horned Ariñöäsura's hump,
mistaking it for a mountain, and when the cowherd men and ladies caught sight
of the demon, they were struck with terror. Indeed, the strident reverberation
of his roar so frightened the pregnant cows and women that they lost their
fetuses in miscarriages.
PURPORT
The Vedic literature categorizes miscarriages as follows: ä-caturthäd bhavet
srävaù pätaù païcama-ñañöhayoù/ ata ürdhvaà prasütiù syät. "Up to the fourth
month a premature delivery is called sräva, in the fifth and sixth months it is
called päta, and after this it is considered a birth (prasüti)."
TEXT 5
pazAvaAe äu"åu"vauBaI=taA
r"Ajana, s$antyajya gAAeku(lama,
k{(SNA k{(SNAeita tae s$avaeR
gAAeivandM" zAr"NAM yayau:
paçavo dudruvur bhétä
räjan santyajya go-kulam
kåñëa kåñëeti te sarve
govindaà çaraëaà yayuù
SYNONYMS
paçavaù—the domestic animals; dudruvuù—ran away; bhétäù—afraid;
räjan—O King; santyajya—abandoning; go-kulam—the dairy pasture; kåñëa
kåñëa iti—"Kåñëa, Kåñëa"; te—they (the inhabitants of Våndävana); sarve—all;
govindam—to Lord Govinda; çaraëam—for shelter; yayuù—went.
TRANSLATION
The domestic animals fled the pasture in fear, O King, and all the
inhabitants rushed to Lord Govinda for shelter, crying, "Kåñëa, Kåñëa!"
TEXT 6
BagAvaAnaipa taã"Iºya
gAAeku(laM Bayaivaåu"tama,
maA BaEíe"ita igAr"AìAsya
va{SaAs$aur"maupaAù"yata,
bhagavän api tad vékñya
go-kulaà bhaya-vidrutam
mä bhaiñöeti giräçväsya
våñäsuram upähvayat
SYNONYMS
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; api—indeed; tat—that;
vékñya—seeing; go-kulam—the cowherd community; bhaya—out of fear;
vidrutam—made to flee, or distraught; mä bhaiñöa—"don't be afraid"; iti—thus;
girä—with words; äçväsya—pacifying; våña-asuram—to the bull demon;
upähvayat—He called out.
TRANSLATION
When the Supreme Lord saw the cowherd community distraught and fleeing
in fear, He calmed them, saying, "Don't be afraid." Then He called out to the
bull demon as follows.
TEXT 7
gAAepaAlaE: pazAuiBamaRnd"
‡aAis$ataE: ik(mas$aÔama
maiya zAAstair" äu"í"AnaAM
tvaiã"DaAnaAM äu"r"AtmanaAma,
gopälaiù paçubhir manda
träsitaiù kim asattama
mayi çästari duñöänäà
tvad-vidhänäà durätmanäm
SYNONYMS
gopälaiù—with the cowherds; paçubhiù—and with their animals; manda—O
fool; träsitaiù—who are frightened; kim—what purpose; asattama—O most
wicked one; mayi—when I (am present); çästari—as the punisher;
duñöänäm—of the contaminated; tvat-vidhänäm—like you;
durätmanäm—miscreants.
TRANSLATION
You fool! What do you think you're doing, you wicked rascal, frightening
the cowherd community and their animals when I am here just to punish
corrupt miscreants like you!
TEXT 8
wtyaAs$P(AetyaAcyautaAe'ir"íM"
talazAbde"na k(Aepayana,
s$aKyaurM"s$ae BaujaABaAegAM
‘as$aAyaARvaisTataAe h"ir":
ity äsphotyäcyuto 'riñöaà
tala-çabdena kopayan
sakhyur aàse bhujäbhogaà
prasäryävasthito hariù
SYNONYMS
iti—speaking thus; äsphotya—slapping His arms; acyutaù—the infallible Lord;
ariñöam—Ariñöäsura; tala—from His palms; çabdena—with the sound;
kopayan—angering; sakhyuù—of a friend; aàse—over the shoulder;
bhuja—His arm; äbhogam—(which is like) a serpent's body;
prasärya—throwing; avasthitaù—was standing; hariù—Lord Hari.
TRANSLATION
Having spoken these words, the infallible Lord Hari slapped His arms with
His palms, further angering Ariñöa with the loud sound. The Lord then casually
threw His mighty, serpentine arm over the shoulder of a friend and stood facing
the demon.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa showed His contempt for the ignorant demon.
TEXT 9
s$aAe'pyaevaM k(AeipataAe'ir"í":
Kaure"NAAvainamauiéaKana,
oâtpaucC$”amanmaeGa:
‚u(Ü": k{(SNAmaupaA‰"vata,
so 'py evaà kopito 'riñöaù
khureëävanim ullikhan
udyat-puccha-bhraman-meghaù
kruddhaù kåñëam upädravat
SYNONYMS
saù—he; api—indeed; evam—in this way; kopitaù—angered; ariñöaù—Ariñöa;
khureëa—with his hoof; avanim—the earth; ullikhan—scratching;
udyat—raised; puccha—within his tail; bhraman—wandering;
meghaù—clouds; kruddhaù—furious; kåñëam—toward Lord Kåñëa;
upädravat—he charged.
TRANSLATION
Thus provoked, Ariñöa pawed the ground with one of his hooves and then,
with the clouds hovering around his upraised tail, furiously charged Kåñëa.
TEXT 10
@ƒanyastaivaSaANAAƒa:
stabDaAs$a{glaAecanaAe'cyautama,
k(q%AiºapyaA‰"vaÔaUNARma,
wn‰"maul(Ae'zAinayaRTaA
agra-nyasta-viñäëägraù
stabdhäsåg-locano 'cyutam
kaöäkñipyädravat türëam
indra-mukto 'çanir yathä
SYNONYMS
agra—forward; nyasta—pointing; viñäëa—of his horns; agraù—the front;
stabdha—glaring; asåk—bloody; locanaù—his eyes; acyutam—at Lord Kåñëa;
kaöa-äkñipya—looking sideways; adravat—he ran; türëam—at full speed;
indra-muktaù—released by King Indra; açaniù—a thunderbolt; yathä—like.
TRANSLATION
Pointing the tips of his horns straight ahead and glaring menacingly at Lord
Kåñëa from the corners of his bloodshot eyes, Ariñöa rushed toward Him at full
speed, like a thunderbolt hurled by Indra.
TEXT 11
gA{h"ItvaA Za{"ËÿyaAestaM vaA
@í"Ad"zA pad"Aina s$a:
‘atyapaAevaAh" BagAvaAna,
gAja: ‘aitagAjaM yaTaA
gåhétvä çåìgayos taà vä
añöädaça padäni saù
pratyapoväha bhagavän
gajaù prati-gajaà yathä
SYNONYMS
gåhétvä—seizing; çåìgayoù—by the horns; tam—him; vai—indeed;
añöädaça-eighteen; padäni—steps; saù—He; pratyapoväha—threw back;
bhagavän—the Supreme Lord; gajaù—an elephant; prati-gajam—a rival
elephant; yathä—like.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord Kåñëa seized Ariñöäsura by the horns and threw him back
eighteen steps, just as an elephant might do when fighting a rival elephant.
TEXT 12
s$aAe'paivaÜ"Ae BagAvataA
paunaç&tTaAya s$atvar"ma,
@Apataitsvaªas$avaARËÿAe
ina:ìs$ana, ‚(AeDamaUicCR$ta:
so 'paviddho bhagavatä
punar utthäya satvaram
äpatat svinna-sarväìgo
niùçvasan krodha-mürcchitaù
SYNONYMS
saù—he; apaviddhaù—thrown back; bhagavatä—by the Lord; punaù—again;
utthäya—rising; satvaram—quickly; äpatat—attacked; svinna—sweating;
sarva—all; aìgaù—his limbs; niùçvasan—breathing hard; krodha—by anger;
mürcchitaù—stupefied.
TRANSLATION
Thus repulsed by the Supreme Lord, the bull demon got up and, breathing
hard and sweating all over his body, again charged Him in a mindless rage.
TEXT 13
tamaApatantaM s$a inagA{÷ Za{"ËÿyaAe:
pad"A s$amaA‚(mya inapaAtya BaUtalae
inaSpaIx"yaAmaAs$a yaTaA‰R"mambarM"
k{(tvaA ivaSaANAena jaGaAna s$aAe'patata,
tam äpatantaà sa nigåhya çåìgayoù
padä samäkramya nipätya bhü-tale
niñpéòayäm äsa yathärdram ambaraà
kåtvä viñäëena jaghäna so 'patat
SYNONYMS
tam—him; äpatantam—attacking; saù—He; nigåhya—seizing; çåìgayoù—by
the horns; padä—with His foot; samäkramya—treading; nipätya—making him
fall; bhü-tale—onto the ground; niñpéòayäm äsa—He beat him; yathä—like;
ardram—wet; ambaram—a garment; kåtvä—making; viñäëena—with his horn;
jaghäna—struck; saù—he; apatat—fell.
TRANSLATION
As Ariñöa attacked, Lord Kåñëa seized him by the horns and knocked him to
the ground with His foot. The Lord then thrashed him as if he were a wet
cloth, and finally He yanked out one of the demon's horns and struck him with
it until he lay prostrate.
TEXT 14
@s$a{gvamanmaU‡azAk{(ts$amauts$a{jana,
iºapaMê paAd"AnanavaisTataeºaNA:
jagAAma k{(cC)M$ ina[R%taer"Ta ºayaM
pauSpaE: ik(r"ntaAe h"ir"maIix"re" s$aur"A:
asåg vaman mütra-çakåt samutsåjan
kñipaàç ca pädän anavasthitekñaëaù
jagäma kåcchraà niråter atha kñayaà
puñpaiù kiranto harim éòire suräù
SYNONYMS
asåk—blood; vaman—vomiting; mütra—urine; çakåt—and feces;
samutsåjan—profusely excreting; kñipan—throwing about; ca—and;
pädän—his legs; anavasthita—unsteady; ékñaëaù—his eyes; jagäma—he went;
kåcchram—with pain; niråteù—of Death; atha—then; kñayam—to the abode;
puñpaiù—flowers; kirantaù—scattering; harim—upon Lord Kåñëa;
édire—worshiped; suraù—the demigods.
TRANSLATION
Vomiting blood and profusely excreting stool and urine, kicking his legs and
rolling his eyes about, Ariñöäsura thus went painfully to the abode of Death.
The demigods honored Lord Kåñëa by scattering flowers upon Him.
TEXT 15
WvaM ku(ku(iánaM h"tvaA
staUyamaAna: iã"jaAitaiBa:
ivavaezA gAAeïM" s$abalaAe
gAAepaInaAM nayanaAets$ava:
evaà kukudminaà hatvä
stüyamänaù dvijätibhiù
viveça goñöhaà sa-balo
gopénäà nayanotsavaù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; kukudminam—the humped (bull demon); hatvä—killing;
stüyamänaù—being praised; dvijätibhiù—by the brähmaëas; viveça—He
entered; goñöham—the cowherd village; sa-balaù—together with Lord
Balaräma; gopénäm—of the gopés; nayana—for the eyes; utsavaù—who is a
festival.
TRANSLATION
Having thus killed the bull demon Ariñöa, He who is a festival for the gopés'
eyes entered the cowherd village with Balaräma.
PURPORT
This verse exemplifies the sublime contrast of spiritual qualities within Çré
Kåñëa. In one four-line verse we simultaneously learn that Lord Kåñëa killed a
powerful and wicked demon and that His boyish beauty gave festive pleasure
to His young girlfriends. Lord Kåñëa is as hard as a thunderbolt or as soft as a
rose, depending on our attitude toward Him. The demon Ariñöa wanted to kill
Kåñëa and all His friends, so the Lord beat him into a wet rag and killed him.
The gopés, however, loved Kåñëa, and thus the Lord boyishly reciprocated their
conjugal feelings.
TEXT 16
@ir"íe" inah"tae dE"tyae
k{(SNAenaAàu"tak(maRNAA
kM(s$aAyaATaAh" BagAvaAna,
naAr"d"Ae de"vad"zARna:
ariñöe nihate daitye
kåñëenädbhuta-karmaëä
kaàsäyäthäha bhagavän
närado deva-darçanaù
SYNONYMS
ariñöe—Ariñöa; nihate—having been killed; daitye—the demon; kåñëena—by
Kåñëa; adbhuta-karmaëä—whose activities are wonderful; kaàsäya—to
Kaàsa; atha—then; äha—spoke; bhagavän—the powerful sage;
näradaù—Närada; deva-darçanaù—whose vision is godly.
TRANSLATION
After Ariñöäsura had been killed by Kåñëa, who acts wonderfully, Närada
Muni went to speak to King Kaàsa. That powerful sage of godly vision
addressed the King as follows.
PURPORT
The term deva-darçana can be understood in many ways, all of which are
consistent with the context and purport of this narration. Deva means "God,"
and darçanaù means "seeing" or "an audience with a great personality." Thus
deva-darçana, a name for Närada Muni, indicates that Närada has attained the
perfection of seeing God, that getting Närada's audience is as good as getting
God's (since Närada is a pure representative of the Lord), and also that
Närada's audience is as good as that of the demigods, who are also known as
devas. That there are all these meanings of the term deva-darçanaù reveals
something of the richness of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam's language.
From the Puräëas, Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has quoted twenty
verses describing a joking conversation between Rädhä and Kåñëa that took
place after Kåñëa had killed the demon Ariñöa. This conversation, so kindly
quoted by the äcärya, describes the origin of Rädhä-kuëòa and Çyäma-kuëòa,
Rädhä's and Kåñëa's bathing ponds. The verses are as follows:
mäsmän spåçädya våñabhärdana hanta mugdhä
ghoro 'suro 'yam ayi kåñëa tad apy ayaà gauù
våtro yathä dvija ihästy ayi niñkåtiù kià
çudhyed bhaväàs tri-bhuvana-sthita-tértha-kåcchrät
"The innocent young gopés said, 'Ah, Kåñëa, don't touch us now, O killer of a
bull! Alas, even though Ariñöa was a terrible demon, still he was a male cow, so
You will have to undergo atonement, just as Lord Indra did after killing
Våträsura. But how can You purify Yourself without going to the trouble of
visiting every single holy place in the three worlds?' "
kià paryaöämi bhuvanäny adhunaiva sarvä
änéya tértha-vitatéù karaväëi täsu
snänaà vilokayata tävad idaà mukundaù
procyaiva tatra kåtavän bata pärñëi-ghätam
"[Kåñëa replied,] 'Why should I have to wander throughout the entire universe?
I will at once bring all the countless pilgrimage places here and take My bath
in them. Just watch!' With this, Lord Mukunda struck His heel on the ground."
pätälato jalam idaà kila bhogavatyä
äyätam atra nikhilä api tértha-saìghäù
ägacchateti bhagavad-vacasä ta etya
tatraiva rejur atha kåñëa uväca gopéù
"[Then He said,] 'This is the water of the Bhogavaté River, coming from the
Pätäla region. And now, O holy places, all of you please come here!' When the
Supreme Lord had spoken these words, all the holy places went there and
appeared before Him. Kåñëa then addressed the gopés as follows."
térthäni paçyata harer vacasä tavaivaà
naiva pratéma iti tä atha tértha-varyäù
procuù kåtäïjali-puöä lavaëäbdhir asmi
kñéräbdhir asmi çåëutämara-dérghikäsmi
" 'See all the holy places!'
"But the gopés replied, 'We don't see them as You describe.'
"Then those best of holy places, joining their palms in supplication, spoke
up:
" 'I am the salt ocean.'
" 'I am the ocean of milk.'
" 'I am the Amara-dérghikä.' "
çoëo 'pi sindhur aham asmi bhavämi tämraparëé
ca puñkaram ahaà ca sarasvaté ca
godävaré ravi-sutä sarayuù prayägo
reväsmi paçyata jalaà kuruta pratétim
" 'I am the river Çoëa.'
" 'I am the Sindhu.'
" 'I am the Tämraparëé.'
" 'I am the holy place Puñkara.'
" 'I am the river Sarasvaté.'
" 'And we are the Godävaré, Yamunä and Revä rivers and the confluence of
rivers at Prayäga. Just see our waters!' "
snätvä tato harir ati-prajagalbha eva
çuddhaù saro 'py akaravaà sthita-sarva-tértham
yuñmäbhir ätma-januñéha kåto na dharmaù
ko 'pi kñitäv atha sakhér nijagäda rädhä
"After purifying Himself by bathing, Lord Hari became quite arrogant and
said, 'I have produced a pond containing all the various holy places, whereas
you gopés must never have executed any religious duties on this earth for the
pleasure of Lord Brahmä.' Then Çrématé Rädhäräëé addressed Her girlfriends as
follows."
käryaà mayäpy ati-manohara-kuëòam ekaà
tasmäd yatadhvam iti tad-vacanena täbhiù
çré-kåñëa-kuëòa-taöa-paçcima-diçya-mando
gartaù kåto våñabha-daitya-khurair vyaloki
" 'I must create an even more beautiful pond. So go to work!' Having heard
these words, the gopés saw that Ariñöäsura's hooves had dug a shallow ditch just
west of Çré Kåñëa's pond."
taträrdra-mån-mådula-gola-tatéù prati-svahastoddhåtä
anati-düra-gatä vidhäya
divyaà saraù prakaöitaà ghaöikä-dvayena
täbhir vilokya sarasaà smarate sma kåñëaù
"At that nearby spot, all the gopés began digging up lumps of soft mud with
their hands, and in this way a divine pond manifested in the short span of an
hour. Kåñëa was astonished to see the lake they produced."
proce ca tértha-salilaiù paripürayaitan
mat-kuëòataù sarasijäkñi sahälibhis tvam
rädhä tadä na na na neti jagäda yasmät
tvat-kuëòa-néram uru-go-vadha-pätakäktam
"He said, 'Go ahead, lotus-eyed one. You and Your companions should fill
this pond with water from Mine.'
"But Rädhä replied, 'No, no, no, no! This is impossible, since the water of
Your pond is contaminated by Your terrible sin of killing a cow.' "
ähåtya puëya-salilaà çata-koöi-kumbhaiù
sakhy-arbudena saha mänasa-jähnavétaù
etat saraù sva-madhunä paripürayämi
tenaiva kértim atuläà tanaväni loke
" 'I will have My countless gopé companions bring the pure water of the
Mänasa-gaìgä here in billions of pots. In this way I will fill this lake with My
own water and thus make its renown unequaled in the entire world.' "
kåñëeìgitena sahasaitya samasta-térthasakhyas
tadéya-saraso dhåta-divya-mürtiù
tuñöäva tatra våñabhänu-sutäà praëamya
bhaktyä kåtäïjali-puöaù sravad-asra-dhäraù
"Lord Kåñëa then gestured to a heavenly personality who was an intimate
associate of all the holy places. Suddenly that person rose up out of Kåñëa's
pond and bowed down to the daughter of Çré Våñabhänu [Rädhäräëé]. Then,
with palms joined and tears pouring from his eyes, he began praying to Her in
devotion."
devi tvadéya-mahimänam avaiti sarva
çästrärtha-vin na ca vidhir na haro na lakñméù
kintv eka eva puruñärtha-çiromaëis tvatprasveda-
märjana-paraù svayam eva kåñëaù
" 'O goddess, even Lord Brahmä himself, the knower of all scriptures,
cannot understand Your glories, nor can Lord Çiva or Lakñmé. Only Kåñëa, the
supreme goal of all human endeavor, can understand them, and thus He feels
obliged to personally make sure that You can wash away Your perspiration
when You are fatigued.' "
yaç cäru-yävaka-rasena bhavat-padäbjam
ärajya nüpuram aho nidadhäti nityam
präpya tvadéya-nayanäbja-taöa-prasädaà
svaà manyate parama-dhanyatamaà prahåñyan
tasyäjïayaiva sahasä vayam äjagäma
tat-pärñëi-ghäöa-kåta-kuëòa-vare vasämaù
tvaà cet prasédasi karoñi kåpä-kaöäkñaà
tarhy eva tarña-viöapé phalito bhaven naù
" 'He is always anointing Your lotus feet with nectarean cäru and yävaka
and decorating them with ankle bells, and He rejoices and feels most fortunate
simply by satisfying the tips of the toes of Your lotus feet. On His order we
have immediately come here to live in this most excellent pond, which He
created by one stroke of His heel. But only if You now feel satisfied with us
and bestow upon us Your merciful glance will the tree of our desire bear fruit.' "
çrutvä stutià nikhila-tértha-gaëasya tuñöä
präha sma tarñam ayi vedayateti rädhä
yäma tvadéya-saraséà sa-phalä bhaväma
ity eva no vara iti prakaöaà tadocuù
"Hearing this prayer spoken by the representative of the full assembly of
holy places, Çré Rädhä was pleased and said, 'So, kindly tell Me your desire.'
"They then told Her plainly, 'Our lives would be successful if we could come
to Your pond. That is the benediction we desire.' "
ägacchateti våñabhänu-sutä smitäsyä
proväca känta-vadanäbja-dhåtäkñi-koëä
sakhyo 'pi tatra kåta-sammatayaù sukhäbdhau
magnä virejur akhilä sthira-jaìgamäç ca
"Glancing at Her beloved from the corners of Her eyes, the daughter of
Våñabhänu replied with a smile, 'Please come.' Her gopé companions all agreed
with Her decision and became immersed in the ocean of happiness. Indeed, the
beauty of all creatures, both mobile and stationary, was enhanced."
präpya prasädam atha te våñabhänujäyäù
çré-kåñëa-kuëòa-gata-tértha-varäù prasahya
bhittveva bhittim ati-vegata eva rädhäkuëòaà
vyadhuù sva-salilaiù paripürëam eva
"Thus gaining the grace of Çrématé Rädhäräëé, the holy rivers and lakes in
Çré Kåñëa-kuëòa forcibly broke through its boundary walls and swiftly filled
Rädhä-kuëòa with their waters."
proce hariù priyatame tava kuëòam etan
mat-kuëòato 'pi mahimädhikam astu loke
atraiva me salila-kelir ihaiva nityaà
snänaà yathä tvam asi tadvad idaà saro me
"Lord Hari then said, 'My dear Rädhä, may this pond of Yours become even
more world-renowned than Mine. I will always come here to bathe and to
enjoy My water pastimes. Indeed, this lake is as dear to Me as You are.' "
rädhäbravéd aham api sva-sakhébhir etya
snäsyämy ariñöa-çata-mardanam astu tasya
yo 'riñöa-mardana-sarasy uru-bhaktir atra
snäyäd vasen mama sa eva mahä-priyo 'stu
"Rädhä replied, 'I will come to bathe in Your pond as well, even though You
may kill hundreds of Ariñöa demons here. In the future, anyone who has
intense devotion for this lake, which is on the spot where You chastised
Ariñöäsura, and who bathes or resides here is sure to become very dear to Me.' "
räsotsavaà prakurute sma ca tatra rätrau
kåñëämbudaù kåta-mahä-rasa-harña-varñaù
çré-rädhikä-pravara-vidyud alaìkåta-çrés
trailokya-madhya-vitaté-kåta-divya-kértiù
"That night Lord Kåñëa initiated a räsa dance at Rädhä-kuëòa, generating a
torrent of the greatest mood of splendorous pleasure. Çré Kåñëa resembled a
cloud, and Çrématé Rädhäräëé a brilliant flash of lightning filling the sky with
abundant beauty. In this way Their divine glories permeated the expanses of
the three worlds."
As a final note, it should be mentioned that Närada Muni, being a great
sage, understood that the killing of Ariñöa more or less concluded the pastimes
of Kåñëa in Våndävana. Therefore Närada, anxious to facilitate the transferal
of Kåñëa's pastimes to Mathurä, approached Kaàsa and addressed him as
follows.
TEXT 17
yazAAed"AyaA: s$autaAM k(nyaAM
de"vafyaA: k{(SNAmaeva ca
r"AmaM ca r"Aeih"NAIpau‡aM
vas$aude"vaena ibaByataA
nyastaAE svaima‡ae nande" vaE
yaAByaAM tae pauç&SaA h"taA:
yaçodäyäù sutäà kanyäà
devakyäù kåñëam eva ca
rämaà ca rohiëé-putraà
vasudevena bibhyatä
nyastau sva-mitre nande vai
yäbhyäà te puruñä hatäù
SYNONYMS
yaçodäyäù—of Yaçodä; sutäm—the daughter; kanyäm—the female child;
devakyäù—of Devaké; kåñëam—Kåñëa; eva ca—also; rämam—Balaräma;
ca—and; rohiëé-putram—the son of Rohiëé; vasudevena—by Vasudeva;
bibhyatä—who was afraid; nyastau—placed; sva-mitre—with his friend;
nande—Nanda Mahäräja; vai—indeed; yäbhyäm—by which two; te—your;
puruñäù—men; hatäù—have been killed.
TRANSLATION
[Närada told Kaàsa:] Yaçodä's child was actually a daughter, and Kåñëa is
the son of Devaké. Also, Räma is the son of Rohiëé. Out of fear, Vasudeva
entrusted Kåñëa and Balaräma to his friend Nanda Mahäräja, and it is these two
boys who have killed your men.
PURPORT
Kaàsa had been led to believe that Kåñëa was the son of Yaçodä and that
Devaké's eighth child had been a daughter. The identity of Devaké's eighth
child was extremely important to Kaàsa because a prophecy had foretold that
her eighth child would kill him. Here Närada informs the King that the eighth
child of Devaké was the formidable Kåñëa, thus implying that the prophecy
should be taken very seriously. Having received this information, Kaàsa
obviously will now do everything in his power to kill Kåñëa and Balaräma.
TEXT 18
inazAmya taà"Aejapaita:
k(AepaAt‘acailataein‰"ya:
inazAAtamais$amaAd"Ôa
vas$aude"vaijaGaAMs$ayaA
niçamya tad bhoja-patiù
kopät pracalitendriyaù
niçätam asim ädatta
vasudeva-jighäàsayä
SYNONYMS
niçamya—hearing; tat—that; bhoja-patiù—the lord of the Bhoja dynasty
(Kaàsa); kopät—out of anger; pracalita—disturbed; indriyaù—his senses;
niçätam—sharp; asim—a sword; ädatta—took up; vasudeva-jighäàsayä—with
the desire to kill Vasudeva.
TRANSLATION
Upon hearing this, the master of the Bhojas became furious and lost control
of his senses. He picked up a sharp sword to kill Vasudeva.
TEXT 19
inavaAir"taAe naAr"de"na
tats$autaAE ma{tyaumaAtmana:
ÁaAtvaA laAeh"mayaE: paAzAEr,"
babanDa s$ah" BaAyaRyaA
nivärito näradena
tat-sutau måtyum ätmanaù
jïätvä loha-mayaiù päçair
babandha saha bhäryayä
SYNONYMS
niväritaù—checked; näradena—by Närada; tat-sutau—his two sons;
måtyum—death; ätmanaù—his own; jïätvä—understanding;
loha-mayaiù—made of iron; päçaiù—with shackles; babandha—he bound up
(Vasudeva); saha—together with; bhäryayä—his wife.
TRANSLATION
But Närada restrained Kaàsa by reminding him that it was the two sons of
Vasudeva who would cause his death. Kaàsa then had Vasudeva and his wife
shackled in iron chains.
PURPORT
Kaàsa realized that there was no use in killing Vasudeva, since it was
Vasudeva's sons, Kåñëa and Balaräma, who were to kill him. According to the
äcäryas, Närada also advised Kaàsa that if he killed Vasudeva the two young
boys might flee and that it was therefore better not to kill him. Rather, Närada
recommended, Kaàsa should bring Kåñëa and Balaräma to Kaàsa's capital
city, Mathurä.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté points out that Närada did not act inimically
toward the great devotees Vasudeva and Devaké when he revealed this
information to Kaàsa. In fact, as explained in the Eleventh Canto, Vasudeva
was grateful to Närada because he was arranging for Kaàsa's death at Kåñëa's
hands, and further arranging for Kåñëa to come and live in Mathurä, where
His loving father could associate with Him.
TEXT 20
‘aitayaAtae tau de"vaSaAE=
kM(s$a @ABaASya ke(izAnama,
‘aeSayaAmaAs$a h"nyaetaAM
BavataA r"Amake(zAvaAE
pratiyäte tu devarñau
kaàsa äbhäñya keçinam
preñayäm äsa hanyetäà
bhavatä räma-keçavau
SYNONYMS
pratiyäte—having left; tu—then; deva-åñau—the sage among the demigods;
kaàsaù—King Kaàsa; äbhäñya—addressing; keçinam—the demon Keçé;
preñayäm äsa—he sent him; hanyetäm—the two should be killed; bhavatä—by
you; räma-keçavau—Balaräma and Kåñëa.
TRANSLATION
After Närada left, King Kaàsa summoned Keçé and ordered him, "Go kill
Räma and Kåñëa."
PURPORT
Before having Kåñëa and Balaräma brought to Mathurä, Kaàsa tried
sending one more demon to Våndävana.
TEXT 21
tataAe mauií"k(caANAUr"
zAlataAezAlak(Aid"k(Ana,
@maAtyaAna, h"istapaAMêEva
s$amaAó"yaAh" BaAejar"Aq%.
tato muñöika-cäëüra
çala-toçalakädikän
amätyän hastipäàç caiva
samähüyäha bhoja-räö
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; muñöika-cäëüra-çala-toçalaka-ädikän—Muñöika, Cäëüra, Çala,
Toçala and others; amätyän—his ministers; hasti-pän—his elephant-keepers;
ca eva—also; samähüya—calling together; äha—spoke; bhoja-räö—the King of
the Bhojas.
TRANSLATION
The King of the Bhojas next called for his ministers, headed by Muñöika,
Cäëüra, Çala and Toçala, and also for his elephant-keepers. The King addressed
them as follows.
TEXTS 22-23
BaAe BaAe inazAmyataAmaetaä,"
vaIr"caANAUr"mauií"k(AE
nand"˜ajae ik(laAs$aAtae
s$autaAvaAnak(äu"näu"Bae:
r"Amak{(SNAAE tataAe ma÷M
ma{tyau: ik(la inad"izARta:
Bavaà"YaAimah" s$am‘aAæaAE
h"nyaetaAM maéalaIlayaA
bho bho niçamyatäm etad
véra-cäëüra-muñöikau
nanda-vraje kiläsäte
sutäv änakadundubheù
räma-kåñëau tato mahyaà
måtyuù kila nidarçitaù
bhavadbhyäm iha sampräptau
hanyetäà malla-lélayä
SYNONYMS
bhoù bhoù—my dear (advisers); niçamyatäm—please listen; etat—to this;
véra—O heroes; cäëüra-muñöikau—Cäëüra and Muñöika; nanda-vraje—in the
cowherd village of Nanda; kila—indeed; äsäte—are living; sutau—the two
sons; änakadundubheù—of Vasudeva; räma-kåñëau—Räma and Kåñëa;
tataù—from Them; mahyam—my; måtyuù—death; kila—indeed;
nidarçitaù—has been indicated; bhavadbhyäm—by you two; iha—here;
sampräptau—brought; hanyetäm—They should be killed; malla—of wrestling;
lélayä—on the pretext of the sport.
TRANSLATION
My dear heroic Cäëüra and Muñöika, please hear this. Räma and Kåñëa, the
sons of Änakadundubhi [Vasudeva], are living in Nanda's cowherd village. It
has been predicted that these two boys will be the cause of my death. When
They are brought here, kill Them on the pretext of engaging Them in a
wrestling match.
TEXT 24
maÂaA: i‚(yantaAM ivaivaDaA
maéar"Ëÿpair"i™ataA:
paAEr"A jaAnapad"A: s$avaeR
pazyantau svaEr"s$aMyaugAma,
maïcäù kriyantäà vividhä
malla-raìga-pariçritäù
paurä jänapadäù sarve
paçyantu svaira-saàyugam
SYNONYMS
mancäù—stages; kriyantäm—should be built; vividhäù—various;
malla-raìga—a wrestling ring; pariçritäù—surrounding; pauräù—the residents
of the city; jänapadäù—and the residents of the outlying districts; sarve—all;
paçyantu—should see; svaira—voluntarily participated in; saàyugam—the
competition.
TRANSLATION
Erect a wrestling ring with many surrounding viewing stands, and bring all
the residents of the city and the outlying districts to see the open competition.
PURPORT
The word maïcäù refers to platforms constructed with large pillars. Kaàsa
wanted a festive atmosphere so that Kåñëa and Balaräma would not be afraid
to come.
TEXT 25
mah"AmaA‡a tvayaA Ba‰"
r"Ëÿã"AyauRpanaIyataAma,
iã"pa: ku(valayaApaIx"Ae
jaih" taena mamaAih"taAE
mahämätra tvayä bhadra
raìga-dväry upanéyatäm
dvipaù kuvalayäpéòo
jahi tena mamähitau
SYNONYMS
mahä-mätra—O elephant-keeper; tvayä—by you; bhadra—my good man;
raìga—of the arena; dväri—to the doorway; upanéyatäm—should be brought;
dvipaù—the elephant; kuvalayäpéòaù—named Kuvalayäpéòa; jahi—destroy;
tena—with that (elephant); mama—my; ahitau—enemies.
TRANSLATION
You, elephant-keeper, my good man, should position the elephant
Kuvalayäpéòa at the entrance to the wrestling arena and have him kill my two
enemies.
TEXT 26
@Ar"ByataAM DanauyaARgAzA,
cataudR"zyaAM yaTaAivaiDa
ivazAs$antau pazAUnmaeDyaAna,
BaUtar"AjaAya maIX#]Sae
ärabhyatäà dhanur-yägaç
caturdaçyäà yathä-vidhi
viçasantu paçün medhyän
bhüta-räjäya méòhuñe
SYNONYMS
ärabhyatäm—should be commenced; dhanuù-yägaù—the bow sacrifice;
caturdaçyäm—on the fourteenth day of the month; yathä-vidhi—in
accordance with Vedic injunctions; viçasantu—offer in sacrifice;
paçün—animals; medhyän—which are fit to be offered; bhüta-räjäya—to Lord
Çiva, the lord of ghostly spirits; méòhuñe—the giver of benedictions.
TRANSLATION
Commence the bow sacrifice on the Caturdaçé day in accordance with the
relevant Vedic injunctions. In ritual slaughter offer the appropriate kinds of
animals to the magnanimous Lord Çiva.
TEXT 27
wtyaAÁaApyaATaRtan‡aÁa
@Aó"ya yaäu"pauËÿvama,
gA{h"ItvaA paAiNAnaA paAiNAM
tataAe'‚U(r"mauvaAca h"
ity äjïäpyärtha-tantra-jïa
ähüya yadu-puìgavam
gåhétvä päëinä päëià
tato 'krüram uväca ha
SYNONYMS
iti—with these words; äjïäpya—ordering; artha—of personal interest and
advantage; tantra—of the doctrine; jïaù—the knower; ähüya—calling for;
yadu-puìgavam—the most eminent of the Yadus; gåhétvä—taking;
päëinä—with his own hand; päëim—his hand; tataù—then; akrüram—to
Akrüra; uväca ha—he said.
TRANSLATION
Having thus commanded his ministers, Kaàsa next called for Akrüra, the
most eminent of the Yadus. Kaàsa knew the art of securing personal advantage,
and thus he took Akrüra's hand in his own and spoke to him as follows.
TEXT 28
BaAe BaAe d"Anapatae ma÷M
i‚(yataAM maE‡amaAä{"ta:
naAnyastvaÔaAe ih"tatamaAe
ivaâtae BaAejava{iSNASau
bho bho däna-pate mahyaà
kriyatäà maitram ädåtaù
nänyas tvatto hitatamo
vidyate bhoja-våñëiñu
SYNONYMS
bhoù bhoù—my dear; däna—of charity; pate—master; mahyam—for me;
kriyatäm—please do; maitram—a friendly favor; ädåtaù—out of respect;
na—none; anyaù—other; tvattaù—than yourself; hita-tamaù—who acts most
favorably; vidyate—exists; bhoja-våñëiñu—among the Bhojas and Våñëis.
TRANSLATION
My dear Akrüra, most charitable one, please do me a friendly favor out of
respect. Among the Bhojas and Våñëis, there is no one else as kind to us as you.
TEXT 29
@tastvaAmaAi™ata: s$aAEmya
k(AyaRgAAEr"vas$aADanama,
yaTaen‰"Ae ivaSNAumaAi™atya
svaATaRmaDyagAmaiã"Bau:
atas tväm äçritaù saumya
kärya-gaurava-sädhanam
yathendro viñëum äçritya
svärtham adhyagamad vibhuù
SYNONYMS
ataù—therefore; tväm—on you; äçritaù—(I am) depending; saumya—O gentle
one; kärya—prescribed duties; gaurava—soberly; sädhanam—who executes;
yathä—as similarly; indraù—Indra; viñëum—Lord Viñëu; äçritya—taking
shelter of; sva-artham—his goals; adhyagamat—achieved; vibhuù—the
powerful King of heaven.
TRANSLATION
Gentle Akrüra, you always carry out your duties soberly, and therefore I am
depending on you, just as powerful Indra took shelter of Lord Viñëu to achieve
his goals.
TEXT 30
gAcC$ nand"˜ajaM ta‡a
s$autaAvaAnak(äu"näu"Bae:
@As$aAtae taAivah"Anaena
r"TaenaAnaya maA icar"ma,
gaccha nanda-vrajaà tatra
sutäv änakadundubheù
äsäte täv ihänena
rathenänaya mä ciram
SYNONYMS
gaccha—go; nanda-vrajam—to the cowherd village of Nanda; tatra—there;
sutau—the two sons; änakadundubheù—of Vasudeva; äsäte—are living;
tau—Them; iha—here; anena—by this; rathena—chariot; änaya—bring; mä
ciram—without delay.
TRANSLATION
Please go to Nanda's village, where the two sons of Änakadundubhi are
living, and without delay bring Them here on this chariot.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté gives the following interesting note: "When
King Kaàsa said 'with this chariot,' he pointed with his index finger to a
brand-new, attractive chariot. Kaàsa thought that since Akrüra was innocent
by nature, when he saw this fine, new vehicle he would naturally want to drive
it and quickly bring the two boys back. But the actual reason Akrüra went on a
new chariot was that it would have been clearly inappropriate for the Supreme
Personality of Godhead to mount a chariot that had already been enjoyed by
the wicked Kaàsa."
TEXT 31
inas$a{í": ik(la mae ma{tyaur,"
de"vaEvaE=ku(NQ&s$aM™ayaE:
taAvaAnaya s$amaM gAAepaEr,"
nand"AâE: s$aAByaupaAyanaE:
nisåñöaù kila me måtyur
devair vaikuëöha-saàçrayaiù
täv änaya samaà gopair
nandädyaiù säbhyupäyanaiù
SYNONYMS
nisåñöaù—sent; kila—indeed; me—my; måtyuù—death; devaiù—by the
demigods; vaikuëöha—of Lord Viñëu; saàçrayaiù—who take shelter; tau—the
two of Them; änaya—bring; samam—together with; gopaiù—the cowherd
men; nanda-ädyaiù—headed by Nanda; sa—with; abhyupäyanaiù—gifts.
TRANSLATION
The demigods, who are under the protection of Viñëu, have sent these two
boys as my death. Bring Them here, and also have Nanda and the other
cowherd men come with gifts of tribute.
TEXT 32
GaAtaiyaSya wh"AnaItaAE
k(Alak(lpaena h"istanaA
yaid" maul(AE tataAe maéaEr,"
GaAtayae vaEâutaAepamaE:
ghätayiñya ihänétau
käla-kalpena hastinä
yadi muktau tato mallair
ghätaye vaidyutopamaiù
SYNONYMS
ghätayiñye—I shall have Them killed; iha—here; änétau—brought;
käla-kalpena—like death itself; hastinä—by the elephant; yadi—if;
muktau—They go free; tataù—then; mallaiù—by wrestlers; ghätaye—I will
have killed; vaidyuta—lightning; upamaiù—just like.
TRANSLATION
After you bring Kåñëa and Balaräma, I will have Them killed by my
elephant, who is as powerful as death itself. And if by chance They escape from
him, I will have Them killed by my wrestlers, who are as strong as lightning.
TEXT 33
tayaAeinaRh"tayaAestaæaAna,
vas$aude"vapaur"AegAmaAna,
taß"nDaUiªah"inaSyaAima
va{iSNABaAejad"zAAhR"k(Ana,
tayor nihatayos taptän
vasudeva-purogamän
tad-bandhün nihaniñyämi
våñëi-bhoja-daçärhakän
SYNONYMS
tayoù—the two of Them; nihatayoù—when They are killed;
taptän—tormented; vasudeva-purogamän—led by Vasudeva;
tad-bandhün—Their relatives; nihaniñyämi—I will kill;
våñëi-bhoja-daçärhakän—the Våñëis, Bhojas and Daçärhas.
TRANSLATION
When these two have been killed, I will kill Vasudeva and all Their
lamenting relatives—the Våñëis, Bhojas and Daçärhas.
PURPORT
Even today there are wicked political leaders throughout the world who
make such plans and even carry them out.
TEXT 34
oƒas$aenaM ca ipatarM"
sTaivarM" r"Ajyak(AmaukM(
taä,"”aAtarM" de"vakM( ca
yae caAnyae ivaiã"SaAe mama
ugrasenaà ca pitaraà
sthaviraà räjya-kämukaà
tad-bhrätaraà devakaà ca
ye cänye vidviño mama
SYNONYMS
ugrasenam—King Ugrasena; ca—and; pitaram—my father; sthaviram—old;
räjya—for the kingdom; kämukam—greedy; tat-bhrätaram—his brother;
devakam—Devaka; ca—also; ye—who; ca—and; anye—others;
vidviñaù—enemies; mama—my.
TRANSLATION
I will also kill my old father, Ugrasena, who is greedy for my kingdom, and I
will kill his brother Devaka and all my other enemies as well.
TEXT 35
tataêESaA mah"I ima‡a
Baiva‡aI naí"k(Nq%k(A
tataç caiñä mahé mitra
bhavitré nañöa-kaëöakä
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; ca—and; eñä—this; mahé—earth; mitra—O friend; bhavitré—will
be; nañöa—destroyed; kaëöakä—her thorns.
TRANSLATION
Then, my friend, this earth will be free of thorns.
TEXT 36
jar"As$anDaAe mama gAuç&r,"
iã"ivad"Ae d"iyata: s$aKaA
zAmbar"Ae nar"k(Ae baANAAe
mayyaeva k{(tas$aAEô$d"A:
taEr"hM" s$aur"paºaIyaAna,
h"tvaA BaAeºyae mah"I%M na{paAna,
jaräsandho mama gurur
dvivido dayitaù sakhä
çambaro narako bäëo
mayy eva kåta-sauhådäù
tair ahaà sura-pakñéyän
hatvä bhokñye mahéà nåpän
SYNONYMS
jaräsandhaù—Jaräsandha; mama—my; guruù—elder (father-in-law);
dvividaù—Dvivida; dayitaù—my dear; sakhä—friend; çambaraù—Çambara;
narakaù—Naraka; bäëaù—Bäëa; mayi—for me; eva—indeed;
kåta-sauhådäù—who have strong friendship; taiù—with them; aham—1;
sura—of the demigods; pakñéyän—those who are allies; hatvä—killing;
bhokñye—will enjoy; mahém—the earth; nåpän—the kings.
TRANSLATION
My elder relative Jaräsandha and my dear friend Dvivida are solid
well-wishers of mine, as are Çambara, Naraka and Bäëa. I will use them all to
kill off those kings who are allied with the demigods, and then I will rule the
earth.
TEXT 37
WtajÁaAtvaAnaya iºa‘aM
r"Amak{(SNAAivah"ABaRk(AE
DanaumaRKainar"IºaATa<
‰"í]M" yaäu"paur"i™ayama,
etaj jïätvänaya kñipraà
räma-kåñëäv ihärbhakau
dhanur-makha-nirékñärthaà
drañöuà yadu-pura-çriyam
SYNONYMS
etat—this; jïätvä—knowing; änaya—bring; kñipram—quickly;
räma-kåñëau—Räma and Kåñëa; iha-here; arbhakau—the young boys;
dhanuù-makha-the bow sacrifice; nirékñä-artham—in order to witness;
drañöum—to see; yadu-pura—of the capital city of the Yadu dynasty;
çriyam—the opulence.
TRANSLATION
Now that you understand my intentions, please go at once and bring Kåñëa
and Balaräma to watch the bow sacrifice and see the opulence of the Yadus'
capital.
TEXT 38
™aI@‚U(r" ovaAca
r"AjanmanaIiSataM s$a‹yak,(
tava svaAvaâmaAjaRnama,
is$aÜ"Yais$aÜ"YaAe: s$amaM ku(yaARä,"
dE"vaM ih" P(las$aADanama,
çré-akrüra uväca
räjan manéñitaà sadhryak
tava svävadya-märjanam
siddhy-asiddhyoù samaà kuryäd
daivaà hi phala-sädhanam
SYNONYMS
çré-akrüraù uväca—Çré Akrüra said; räjan—O King; manéñitam—the thinking;
sadhryak—perfect; tava—your; sva—your own; avadya—misfortune;
märjanam—which will wash away; siddhi-asiddhyoù—in both success and
failure; samam—equal; kuryät—one should act; daivam—destiny; hi—after all;
phala—the fruit, result; sädhanam—the cause of achieving.
TRANSLATION
Çré Akrüra said: O King, you have expertly devised a process to free yourself
of misfortune. Still, one should be equal in success and failure, since it is
certainly destiny that produces the results of one's work.
TEXT 39
manaAer"TaAna, k(r"Aetyau»aEr,"
janaAe dE"vah"taAnaipa
yaujyatae h"SaRzAAek(AByaAM
taTaApyaAÁaAM k(r"Aeima tae
manorathän karoty uccair
jano daiva-hatän api
yujyate harña-çokäbhyäà
tathäpy äjïäà karomi te
SYNONYMS
manaù-rathän—his desires; karoti—carries out; uccaiù—fervently; janaù-the
average person; daiva—by Providence; hatän—thwarted; api-even though;
yujyate—he is confronted; harña-çokäbhyäm—by happiness and distress; tathä
api—nonetheless; äjïäm—order; karomi—I will do; te—your.
TRANSLATION
An ordinary person is determined lo act on his desires even when fate
prevents their fulfillment. Therefore he encounters both happiness and distress.
Yet even though such is the case, I will execute your order.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté explains that although what Akrüra said was
courteous and encouraging, his hidden meaning was far different. What he
really meant was this: "Your plan is not fit to execute, yet I will carry it out
since you are the King and I am your subject, and in any case, you are about to
die."
TEXT 40
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
WvamaAid"zya caA‚U(rM"
main‡aNAê ivaSa{jya s$a:
‘aivavaezA gA{hM" kM(s$as$a,
taTaA‚U(r": svamaAlayama,
çré-çuka uväca
evam ädiçya cäkrüraà
mantriëaç ca viñåjya saù
praviveça gåhaà kaàsas
tathäkrüraù svam älayam
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—thus; ädiçya—instructing;
ca—and; akrüram—Akrüra; mantriëaù—his ministers; ca—and;
visåjya—dismissing; saù—he; praviveça—entered; gåham—his quarters;
kaàsaù—Kaàsa; tathä—also; akrüraù—Akrüra; svam—his own;
älayam—residence.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Having thus instructed Akrüra, King Kaàsa
dismissed his ministers and retired to his quarters, and Akrüra returned home.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Tenth Canto, Thirty-sixth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Slaying of Ariñöä, the Bull Demon."
37. The Killing of the Demons Keçi and Vyoma
This chapter describes the killing of the horse demon, Keçé; Närada's
glorification of Lord Kåñëa's future pastimes; and Kåñëa's killing of Vyomäsura.
On Kaàsa's order the Keçi demon assumed the form of a huge horse and
went to Vraja. As he approached, his loud neighing terrified all the
inhabitants, and they began looking for Çré Kåñëa. When He saw the demon,
Kåñëa came forward and challenged him to come near. Keçé charged Kåñëa and
tried to strike Him with his front legs, but the Lord seized them, whirled the
demon around several times, and then threw him a distance of one hundred
bow-lengths. Keçé remained unconscious for some time. When the demon
regained consciousness, he furiously charged Kåñëa again, his mouth agape.
The Lord then thrust His left arm into the horse demon's mouth, and as Keçé
tried to bite the arm, it felt like a red-hot iron rod. Kåñëa's arm expanded more
and more, finally choking the demon, and in extreme agony Keçé gave up his
life. Lord Kåñëa then removed His arm. He stood calmly, showing no pride at
having killed the demon, as the demigods showered down flowers from the sky
and glorified the Lord with prayers.
Soon thereafter Närada Muni, the great sage among the demigods,
approached Kåñëa and prayed to Him in various ways, glorifying the Lord's
future pastimes. Then Närada paid his obeisances and departed.
One day, while tending the cows, Kåñëa, Balaräma and the cowherd boys
became engrossed in playing hide-and-go-seek. Some of the boys took the role
of sheep, some the role of thieves, and others shepherds. The shepherds would
search for the sheep when the thieves stole them. Taking advantage of this
game, a demon named Vyoma, sent by Kaàsa, dressed himself like a cowherd
boy and joined the band of "thieves." He abducted a few cowherd boys at a
time and threw them into a mountain cave, keeping them there by blocking
the entrance with a boulder. Gradually Vyomäsura abducted all but four or
five cowherd boys. When Kåñëa saw what the demon was doing, He ran after
him, grabbed him and killed him just as one would kill a sacrificial animal.
TEXTS 1-2
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
ke(zAI tau kM(s$a‘aih"ta: KaurE"maRh"I%M
mah"Ah"yaAe inajaRr"yanmanaAejava:
s$aq%AvaDaUtaA”aivamaAnas$aÇÿlaM
ku(vaRªaBaAe he"iSataBaIiSataAiKala:
taM ‡aAs$ayantaM BagAvaAna, svagAAeku(laM
taÜe"iSataEvaARlaivaGaUiNARtaAmbaud"ma,
@AtmaAnamaAjaAE ma{gAyantamaƒaNAIr,"
opaAù"yats$a vyanad"nma{gAen‰"va
çré-çuka uväca
keçé tu kaàsa-prahitaù khurair mahéà
mahä-hayo nirjarayan mano-javaù
saöävadhütäbhra-vimäna-saìkulaà
kurvan nabho heñita-bhéñitäkhilaù
taà träsayantaà bhagavän sva-gokulaà
tad-dheñitair väla-vighürëitämbudam
ätmänam äjau mågayantam agra-ëér
upähvayat sa vyanadan mågendra-vat
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; keçé—the demon named Keçé;
tu—and then; kaàsa-prahitaù—sent by Kaàsa; khuraiù—with his hooves;
mahém—the earth; mahä-hayaù—a huge horse; nirjarayan—ripping apart;
manaù—like that of the mind; javaù—whose speed; saöä-by the hairs of his
mane; avadhüta—scattered; abhra—with the clouds; vimäna—and the
airplanes (of the demigods); saìkulam—crowded; kurvan—making;
nabhaù—the sky; heñita—by his neighing; bhéñita—frightened;
akhilaù—everyone; tam—him; träsayantam—terrifying; bhagavän—the
Supreme Lord; sva-gokulam—His cowherd village; tat-heñitaiù—by that
neighing; väla—by the hairs of his tail; vighürëita—shaken; ambudam—the
clouds; ätmänam—Himself; äjau—for a fight; mågayantam—searching after;
agra-néù—coming forward; upähvayat—called out; saù—he, Keçé;
vyanadan—roared; mågendra-vat—like a lion.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: The demon Keçé, sent by Kaàsa, appeared in Vraja
as a great horse. Running with the speed of the mind, he tore up the earth with
his hooves. The hairs of his mane scattered the clouds and the demigods'
airplanes throughout the sky, and he terrified everyone present with his loud
neighing.
When the Supreme Personality of Godhead saw how the demon was
frightening His village of Gokula by neighing terribly and shaking the clouds
with his tail, the Lord came forward to meet him. Keçé was searching for Kåñëa
to fight, so when the Lord stood before him and challenged him to approach, the
horse responded by roaring like a lion.
TEXT 3
s$a taM inazAAmyaAiBamauKaAe maKaena KaM
ipabaiªavaABya‰"vad"tyamaSaRNA:
jaGaAna paà"YaAmar"ivand"laAecanaM
äu"r"As$ad"êNx"javaAe äu"r"tyaya
sa taà niçämyäbhimukho makhena khaà
pibann iväbhyadravad aty-amarñaëaù
jaghäna padbhyäm aravinda-locanaà
duräsadaç caëòa-javo duratyayaù
SYNONYMS
saù—he, Keçé; tam—Him, Kåñëa; niçämya—seeing; abhimukhaù—in front of
himself; mukhena—with his mouth; kham—the sky; piban—drinking up;
iva—as if; abhyadravat—ran forward; ati-amarñaëaù—very angry;
jaghäna—he attacked; padbhyäm—with his two legs; aravinda-locanam—the
lotus-eyed Lord; duräsadaù—unapproachable; caëòa—fierce; javaù—whose
speed; duratyayaù—unconquerable.
TRANSLATION
Seeing the Lord standing before him, Keçé ran toward Him in extreme rage,
his mouth gaping as if to swallow up the sky. Rushing with furious speed, the
unconquerable and unapproachable horse demon tried to strike the lotus-eyed
Lord with his two front legs.
TEXT 4
taã"ÂaiyatvaA tamaDaAeºajaAe ç&SaA
‘agA{÷ d"AeByaA< pair"ivaDya paAd"yaAe:
s$aAvaÁamauts$a{jya Danau:zAtaAntare"
yaTaAer"gAM taAºyaRs$autaAe vyavaisTata:
tad vaïcayitvä tam adhokñajo ruñä
pragåhya dorbhyäà parividhya pädayoù
sävajïam utsåjya dhanuù-çatäntare
yathoragaà tärkñya-suto vyavasthitaù
SYNONYMS
tat—that; vaïcayitvä—avoiding; tam—him; adhokñajaù—the transcendental
Lord; ruñä—angrily; pragåhya—seizing; dorbhyäm—with His arms;
parividhya—whirling around; pädayoù—by the legs;
sa-avajïam—contemptuously; utsåjya—discarding; dhanuù—of bow-lengths;
çata-one hundred; antare—to the distance; yathä—as; uragam—a snake;
tärkñya—of Kardama Muni; sutaù—the son (Garuòa); vyavasthitaù—standing.
TRANSLATION
But the transcendental Lord dodged Keçé's blow and then with His arms
angrily seized the demon by the legs, whirled him around in the air and
contemptuously threw him the distance of one hundred bow-lengths, just as
Garuòa might throw a snake. Lord Kåñëa then stood there.
TEXT 5
s$a: labDas$aMÁa: paunaç&itTataAe ç&SaA
vyaAd"Aya ke(zAI tar"s$aApataÜ"ir"ma,
s$aAe'pyasya vaf‡ae BaujamauÔarM" smayana,
‘avaezAyaAmaAs$a yaTaAer"gAM ibalae
saù labdha-saàjïaù punar utthito ruñä
vyädäya keçé tarasäpatad dharim
so 'py asya vaktre bhujam uttaraà smayan
praveçayäm äsa yathoragaà bile
SYNONYMS
saù—he, Keçé; labdha—regaining; saàjïaù—consciousness; punaù—again;
utthitaù—rose up; ruñä—in anger; vyädäya—opening (his mouth) wide;
keçé—Keçé; tarasä—rapidly; apatat—ran; harim—toward Kåñëa; saù—He,
Lord Kåñëa; api—and; asya—his; vaktre—in the mouth; bhujam—His arm;
uttaram—left; smayan—smiled; praveçayäm äsa—placed within; yathä—as;
uragam—a snake; bile—(enters)within a hole.
TRANSLATION
Upon regaining consciousness Keçé angrily got up, opened his mouth wide
and again rushed to attack Lord Kåñëa. But the Lord just smiled and thrust His
left arm into the horse's mouth as easily as one would make a snake enter a hole
in the ground.
TEXT 6
d"ntaA inapaetauBaRgAvaàu"jas$pa{zAs$a,
tae ke(izAnastaæamayas$pa{zAAe yaTaA
baAò"ê taÚe"h"gAtaAe mah"AtmanaAe
yaTaAmaya: s$aMvava{Dae opaeiºata:
dantä nipetur bhagavad-bhuja-spåças
te keçinas tapta-maya-spåço yathä
bähuç ca tad-deha-gato mahätmano
yathämayaù saàvavådhe upekñitaù
SYNONYMS
dantäù—the teeth; nipetuù—fell out; bhagavat—of the Supreme Lord;
bhuja—the arm; spåçaù—touching; te—they; keçinaù—of Keçé;
tapta-maya—red-hot (iron); spåçaù—touching; yathä—as; bähuù—the arm;
ca—and; tat—his, Keçé's; deha—body; gataù—having entered;
mahä-ätmanaù—of the Supreme Soul; yathä—like; ämayaù—a diseased
condition (particularly, distension of the stomach); saàvavådhe—increased
greatly in size; upekñitaù—neglected.
TRANSLATION
Keçé's teeth immediately fell out when they touched the Supreme Lord's
arm, which to the demon felt as hot as molten iron. Within Keçé's body the
Supreme Personality's arm then expanded greatly, like a diseased stomach
swelling because of neglect.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté points out that although Lord Kåñëa's arm is
more tender and cooling than a blue lotus, to Keçé it felt extremely hot as if
made of lightning bolts.
TEXT 7
s$amaeDamaAnaena s$a k{(SNAbaAò"naA
inaç&Ü"vaAyauêr"NAAMê ivaiºapana,
‘aisvaªagAA‡a: pair"va{ÔalaAecana:
papaAta laNxM" ivas$a{jana, iºataAE vyas$au:
samedhamänena sa kåñëa-bähunä
niruddha-väyuç caraëäàç ca vikñipan
prasvinna-gätraù parivåtta-locanaù
papäta laëòaà visåjan kñitau vyasuù
SYNONYMS
samedhamänena—expanding; saù—he; kåñëa-bähunä—by Lord Kåñëa's arm;
niruddha—stopped; väyuù—his breathing; caraëän—his legs; ca—and;
vikñipan—throwing about; prasvinna—perspiring; gätraù—his body;
parivåtta—rolling; locanaù—his eyes; papäta—he fell down; laëòam—feces;
visåjan—excreting; kñitau—onto the ground; vyasuù—lifeless.
TRANSLATION
As Lord Kåñëa's expanding arm completely blocked Keçé's breathing, his legs
kicked convulsively, his body became covered with sweat, and his eyes rolled
around. The demon then passed stool and fell on the ground, dead.
TEXT 8
taÚe"h"ta: k(kR(iq%k(AP(laAepamaAä,"
vyas$aAer"paAk{(Sya BaujaM mah"ABauja:
@ivaismataAe'ya¥ah"taAir"k(: s$aurE":
‘as$aUnavaSaE=vaRSaRià"r"Iix"ta:
tad-dehataù karkaöikä-phalopamäd
vyasor apäkåñya bhujaà mahä-bhujaù
avismito 'yatna-hatärikaù suraiù
prasüna-varñair varñadbhir éòitaù
SYNONYMS
tat-dehataù—from Keçé's body; karkaöikä-phala—a karkaöikä fruit;
upamät—which resembled; vyasoù—from which the vital airs had departed;
apäkåñya—withdrawing; bhujam—His arm; mahä-bhujaù—the mighty-armed
Lord; avismitaù—without undue pride; ayatna—without effort; hata—having
killed; arikaù—His enemy; suraiù—by the demigods; prasüna—of flowers;
varñaiù—with downpours; varñadbhiù—who were raining upon Him;
éòitaù—worshiped.
TRANSLATION
The mighty-armed Kåñëa withdrew His arm from Keçé's body, which now
appeared like a long karkaöikä fruit. Without the least display of pride at having
so effortlessly killed His enemy, the Lord accepted the demigods' worship in the
form of flowers rained down from above.
TEXT 9
de"vaiSaRç&pas$aËÿmya
BaAgAvata‘avar"Ae na{pa
k{(SNAmaiflaí"k(maARNAM
r"h"syaetad"BaASata
devarñir upasaìgamya
bhägavata-pravaro nåpa
kåñëam akliñöa-karmäëaà
rahasy etad abhäñata
SYNONYMS
deva-åñiù—the sage among the demigods (Närada Muni);
upasaìgamya—approaching; bhägavata—of devotees of the Lord;
pravaraù—the most exalted; nåpa—O King (Parékñit); kåñëam—Lord Kåñëa;
akliñöa—without trouble; karmäëam—whose activities; rahasi—in privacy;
etat—this; abhäñata—said.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, thereafter Lord Kåñëa was approached in a solitary place by
the great sage among the demigods, Närada Muni. That most exalted devotee
spoke as follows to the Lord, who effortlessly performs His pastimes.
PURPORT
After speaking with Kaàsa, Närada went to see Lord Kåñëa. The Lord's
Våndävana pastimes were nearly completed, and Närada wanted to see those
He would enact in Mathurä.
TEXTS 10-11
k{(SNA k{(SNAA‘amaeyaAtmana,
yaAegAezA jagAd"Iìr"
vaAs$aude"vaAiKalaAvaAs$a
s$aAtvataAM ‘avar" ‘aBaAe
tvamaAtmaA s$avaRBaUtaAnaAma,
Wk(Ae jyaAeitair"vaEDas$aAma,
gAUX#Ae gAuh"AzAya: s$aAºaI
mah"Apauç&Sa wRìr":
kåñëa kåñëäprameyätman
yogeça jagad-éçvara
väsudeväkhiläväsa
sätvatäà pravara prabho
tvam ätmä sarva-bhütänäm
eko jyotir ivaidhasäm
güòho guhä-çayaù säkñé
mahä-puruña éçvaraù
SYNONYMS
kåñëa kåñëa—O Kåñëa, Kåñëa; aprameya-ätman—O immeasurable one;
yoga-éça—O source of all mystic power; jagat-éçvara—O Lord of the universe;
väsudeva—O son of Vasudeva; akhila-äväsa—O shelter of all beings;
sätvatäm—of the Yadu dynasty; pravara—O You who are the best; prabho—O
master; tvam—You; ätmä—the Supreme Soul; sarva—of all;
bhütänäm—created beings; ekaù—alone; jyotiù—fire; iva—like; edhasäm—in
kindling wood; güòhaù—hidden; guhä—within the cave of the heart;
çayaù—sitting; säkñé—the witness; mahä-puruñaù—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; éçvaraù—the supreme controller.
TRANSLATION
[Närada Muni said:] O Kåñëa, Kåñëa, unlimited Lord, source of all mystic
power, Lord of the universe! O Väsudeva, shelter of all beings and best of the
Yadus ! O master, You are the Supreme Soul of all created beings, sitting
unseen within the cave of the heart like the fire dormant within kindling wood.
You are the witness within everyone, the Supreme Personality and the ultimate
controlling Deity.
TEXT 12
@AtmanaAtmaA™aya: paUva<
maAyayaA s$as$a{jae gAuNAAna,
taEir"dM" s$atyas$aÆÿlpa:
s$a{jasyatsyavas$aIìr":
ätmanätmäçrayaù pürvaà
mäyayä sasåje guëän
tair idaà satya-saìkalpaù
såjasy atsy avaséçvaraù
SYNONYMS
ätmanä—by Your personal potency; ätma—of the spirit soul; äçrayaù—the
shelter; pürvam—first; mäyayä—by Your creative energy; sasåje—You
produced; guëän—the basic modes of material nature; taiù—through these;
idam—this (universe); satya—always realized in fact; saìkalpaù—whose
desires; såjasi—You create; atsi—withdraw; avasi—and maintain; éçvaraù—the
controller.
TRANSLATION
You are the shelter of all souls, and being the supreme controller, You fulfill
Your desires simply by Your will. By Your personal creative potency You
manifested in the beginning the primal modes of material nature, and through
their agency You create, maintain and then destroy this universe.
TEXT 13
s$a tvaM BaUDar"BaUtaAnaAM
dE"tya‘amaTar"ºas$aAma,
@vataINAAeR ivanaAzAAya
s$aADaunaAM r"ºaNAAya ca
sa tvaà bhüdhara-bhütänäà
daitya-pramatha-rakñasäm
avatérëo vinäçäya
sädhunäà rakñaëäya ca
SYNONYMS
saù—He; tvam—Yourself; bhü-dhara—as kings; bhütänäm—who are
appearing; daitya-pramatha-rakñasäm—of various kinds of demons;
avatérëaù—You have descended; vinäçäya—for the destruction; sädhünäm—of
saintly persons; rakñaëäya—for the protection; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
You, that very same creator, have now descended on the earth to annihilate
the Daitya, Pramatha and Räkñasa demons who are posing as kings, and also to
protect the godly.
TEXT 14
id"í"YaA tae inah"taAe dE"tyaAe
laIlayaAyaM h"yaAk{(ita:
yasya he"iSatas$an‡astaAs$a,
tyajantyainaimaSaA id"vama,
diñöyä te nihato daityo
lélayäyaà hayäkåtiù
yasya heñita-santrastäs
tyajanty animiñä divam
SYNONYMS
diñöyä—by (our) good fortune; te—by You; nihataù—killed; daityaù—demon;
lélayä—as a game; ayam—this; haya-äkåtiù—having the form of a horse;
yasya—whose; heñita—by the neighing; santrastäù—terrified;
tyajanti—abandon; animiñäù—the demigods; divam—heaven.
TRANSLATION
The horse demon was so terrifying that his neighing frightened the demigods
into leaving their heavenly kingdom. But by our good fortune You have enjoyed
the sport of killing him.
TEXTS 15-20
caANAUrM" mauií"kM( caEva
maéaAnanyaAMê h"istanama,
kM(s$aM ca inah"taM ‰"ºyae
par"ìAe'h"ina tae ivaBaAe
tasyaAnau zAÊÿyavanamaur"
ANAAM nar"k(sya ca
paAir"jaAtaApah"r"NAma,
wn‰"sya ca par"Ajayama,
oã"AhM" vaIr"k(nyaAnaAM
vaIyaRzAulk(Aid"laºaNAma,
na{gAsya maAeºaNAM zAApaAä,"
ã"Ar"k(AyaAM jagAtpatae
syamantak(sya ca maNAer,"
@Ad"AnaM s$ah" BaAyaRyaA
ma{tapau‡a‘ad"AnaM ca
“aAöNAsya svaDaAmata:
paAENx")k(sya vaDaM paêAta,
k(AizApauyaARê d"Ipanama,
d"ntava‚(sya inaDanaM
caEâsya ca mah"A‚(taAE
yaAina caAnyaAina vaIyaARiNA
ã"Ar"k(AmaAvas$ana, BavaAna,
k(taAR ‰"ºyaAmyahM" taAina
gAeyaAina k(ivaiBaBauRiva
cäëüraà muñöikaà caiva
mallän anyäàç ca hastinam
kaàsaà ca nihataà drakñye
paraçvo 'hani te vibho
tasyänu çaìkha-yavanamuräëäà
narakasya ca
pärijätäpaharaëam
indrasya ca paräjayam
udvähaà véra-kanyänäà
vérya-çulkädi-lakñaëam
någasya mokñaëaà çäpäd
dvärakäyäà jagat-pate
syamantakasya ca maëer
ädänaà saha bhäryayä
måta-putra-pradänaà ca
brähmaëasya sva-dhämataù
pauëòrakasya vadhaà paçcät
käçi-puryäç ca dépanam
dantavakrasya nidhanaà
caidyasya ca mahä-kratau
yäni cänyäni véryäëi
dvärakäm ävasan bhavän
kartä drakñyämy ahaà täni
geyäni kavibhir bhuvi
SYNONYMS
cäëüram—Cäëüra; muñöikam—Muñöika; ca—and; eva—also; mallän—the
wrestlers; anyän—others; ca—and; hastinam—the elephant (Kuvalayäpéòa);
kaàsam—King Kaàsa; ca—and; nihatam—killed; drakñye—I will see;
para-çvaù—the day after tomorrow; ahani—on that day; te—by You; vibho—O
almighty Lord; tasya anu—after that; çaìkha-yavana-muräëäm—of the
demons Çaìkha (Païcajana), Kälayavana and Mura; narakasya—of
Narakäsura; ca—as well; pärijäta—of the heavenly pärijäta flower;
apaharaëam—the stealing; indrasya—of Lord Indra; ca—and; paräjayam—the
defeat; udväham—the marriage; véra—of heroic kings; kanyänäm—of the
daughters; vérya—by Your valor; çulka—as the payment for the brides;
ädi—and so forth; lakñaëam—characterized; någasya—of King Någa;
mokñaëam—the deliverance; çäpät—from his curse; dvärakäyäm—in the city
of Dvärakä; jagat-pate—O master of the universe; syamantakasya—named
Syamantaka; ca—and; maëeù—of the jewel; ädänam—the taking;
saha—together with; bhäryayä—a wife (Jämbavaté); måta—dead; putra—of
the son; pradänam—the presenting; ca—and; brähmaëasya—of a brähmaëa;
sva-dhämataù—from Your own domain (i.e., from the abode of Death);
pauëòrakasya—of Pauëòraka; vadham—the killing; paçcät—after;
käçi-puryäù—of the city of Käçé (Benares); ca—and; dépanam—the burning;
dantavakrasya—of Dantavakra; nidhanam—the demise; caidyasya—of Caidya
(Çiçupäla); ca—and; mahä-kratau—during the great sacrificial performance
(the Räjasüya-yajïa of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira); yäni—which; ca—and;
anyäni—other; véryäëi—great feats; dvärakäm—in Dvärakä;
ävasan—dwelling; bhavän—You; kartä—are going to perform;
drakñyämi—will see; aham—I; täni—them; geyäni—to be sung about;
kavibhiù—by poets; bhuvi—on this earth.
TRANSLATION
In just two days, O almighty Lord, I will see the deaths of Cäëüra, Muñöika
and other wrestlers, along with those of the elephant Kuvalayäpéòa and King
Kaàsa—all by Your hand. Then I will see You kill Kälayavana, Mura, Naraka
and the conch demon, and I will also see You steal the pärijäta flower and
defeat Indra. I will then see You marry many daughters of heroic kings after
paying for them with Your valor. Then, O Lord of the universe, in Dvärakä
You will deliver King Någa from a curse and take for Yourself the Syamantaka
jewel, together with another wife. You will bring back a brähmaëa's dead son
from the abode of Your servant Yamaräja, and thereafter You will kill
Pauëòraka, burn down the city of Käçé and annihilate Dantavakra and the King
of Cedi during the great Räjasüya sacrifice. I shall see all these heroic pastimes,
along with many others You will perform during Your residence in Dvärakä.
These pastimes are glorified on this earth in the songs of transcendental poets.
TEXT 21
@Ta tae k(Alaè&pasya
ºapaiyaSNAAer"mauSya vaE
@ºaAEih"NAInaAM inaDanaM
‰"ºyaAmyajauRnas$aAr"Tae:
atha te käla-rüpasya
kñapayiñëor amuñya vai
akñauhiëénäà nidhanaà
drakñyämy arjuna-säratheù
SYNONYMS
atha—then; te—by You; käla-rüpasya—who are assuming the form of time;
kñapayiñëoù—who is intending to effect the destruction; amuñya—of (the
burden of) this world; vai—indeed; akñauhiëénäm—of entire armies;
nidhanam—the destruction; drakñyämi—I will see; arjuna säratheù—by the
chariot driver of Arjuna.
TRANSLATION
Subsequently I will see You appear as time personified, serving as Arjuna's
chariot driver and destroying entire armies of soldiers to rid the earth of her
burden.
TEXT 22
ivazAuÜ"ivaÁaAnaGanaM svas$aMsTayaA
s$amaAæas$avaARTaRmamaAeGavaAiHC$tama,
svataejas$aA inatyainava{ÔamaAyaAgAuNA‘
avaAhM" BagAvantamaImaih"
viçuddha-vijïäna-ghanaà sva-saàsthayä
samäpta-sarvärtham amogha-väïchitam
sva-tejasä nitya-nivåtta-mäyäguëa-
pravähaà bhagavantam émahi
SYNONYMS
viçuddha—perfectly pure; vijïäna—spiritual awareness; ghanam—full of;
sva-saàsthayä—in His original identity; samäpta—already fulfilled; sarva—in
all; artham—purposes; amogha—never frustrated; väïchitam—whose desires;
sva-tejasä—by His own potency; nitya—eternally; nivåtta—desisting;
mäyä—of the illusory, material energy; guëa—of the manifest modes;
praväham—from the flowing interaction; bhagavantam—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; émahi—let us approach.
TRANSLATION
Let us approach You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for shelter. You
are full of perfectly pure spiritual awareness and are always situated in Your
original identity. Since Your will is never thwarted, You have already achieved
all possible desirable things, and by the power of Your spiritual energy You
remain eternally aloof from the flow of the qualities of illusion.
TEXT 23
tvaAmaIìrM" svaA™ayamaAtmamaAyayaA
ivainaimaRtaAzAeSaivazAeSak(lpanama,
‚(Lx"ATaRmaâAÔamanauSyaivaƒahM"
nataAe'isma Dauya< yaäu"va{iSNAs$aAtvataAma,
tväm éçvaraà sväçrayam ätma-mäyayä
vinirmitäçeña-viçeña-kalpanam
kréòärtham adyätta-manuñya-vigrahaà
nato 'smi dhuryaà yadu-våñëi-sätvatäm
SYNONYMS
tväm—to You; éçvaram—the supreme controller; sva-äçrayam—self-contained;
ätma—Your own; mäyayä—by the creative potency; vinirmita—constructed;
açeña—unlimited; viçeña—particular; kalpanam—arrangements; kréòa—of
playing; artham—for the sake; adya—now; ätta—taken on; manuñya—among
humans; vigraham—battle; nataù—bowed down; asmi—I am; dhuryam—to the
greatest; yadu-våñëi-sätvatäm—of the Yadu, Våñëi and Sätvata dynasties.
TRANSLATION
I bow down to You, the supreme controller, who are dependent only on
Yourself. By Your potency You have constructed the unlimited particular
arrangements of this universe. Now you have appeared as the greatest hero
among the Yadus, Våñëis and Sätvatas and have chosen to participate in human
warfare.
TEXT 24
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
WvaM yaäu"paitaM k{(SNAM
BaAgAvata‘avar"Ae mauina:
‘aiNApatyaAByanauÁaAtaAe
yayaAE taÚ"zARnaAets$ava:
çré-çuka uväca
evaà yadu-patià kåñëaà
bhägavata-pravaro muniù
praëipatyäbhyanujïäto
yayau tad-darçanotsavaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—thus; yadu-patim—to the
chief of the Yadus; kåñëam—Lord Kåñëa; bhägavata—of devotees;
pravaraù—most eminent; muniù—the sage Närada; praëipatya—respectfully
bowing down; abhyanujïätaù—given leave; yayau—went; tat—Him, Kåñëa;
darçana—by having seen; utsavaù—experiencing great joy.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Having thus addressed Lord Kåñëa, the chief of the
Yadu dynasty, Närada bowed down and offered Him obeisances. Then that
great sage and most eminent devotee took his leave from the Lord and went
away, feeling great joy at having directly seen Him.
TEXT 25
BagAvaAnaipa gAAeivand"Ae
h"tvaA ke(izAnamaAh"vae
pazAUnapaAlayatpaAlaE:
‘aItaE˜aRjas$auKaAvah":
bhagavän api govindo
hatvä keçinam ähave
paçün apälayat pälaiù
prétair vraja-sukhävahaù
SYNONYMS
bhagavän—the Supreme Lord; api—and; govindaù—Govinda; hatvä—having
killed; keçinam—the demon Keçé; ähave—in battle; paçün—the animals;
apälayat—He tended; pälaiù—together with the cowherd boys; prétaiù—who
were pleased; vraja—to the inhabitants of Våndävana; sukha—happiness;
ävahaù—bringing.
TRANSLATION
After killing the demon Keçé in battle, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
continued to tend the cows and other animals in the company of His joyful
cowherd boyfriends. Thus He brought happiness to all the residents of
Våndävana.
TEXT 26
Wk(d"A tae pazAUna, paAlaAz,
caAr"yantaAe'i‰"s$aAnauSau
ca‚u(inaRlaAyana‚(Lx"AzA,
caAer"paAlaApade"zAta:
ekadä te paçün päläç'
cärayanto 'dri-sänuñu
cakrur niläyana-kréòäç
cora-päläpadeçataù
SYNONYMS
ekadä—one day; te—they; paçün—the animals; päläù—the cowherd boys;
cärayantaù—grazing; adri—of a mountain; sänuñu—on the sides;
cakruù—they enacted; niläyana—of "stealing and hiding"; kréòäù—games;
cora—of thieves; päla—and protectors; apadeçataù—playing the roles.
TRANSLATION
One day the cowherd boys, while grazing their animals on the mountain
slopes, played the game of stealing and hiding, acting out the roles of rival
thieves and herders.
TEXT 27
ta‡aAs$ana, k(itaica»aAer"A:
paAlaAê k(itaicaªa{pa
maeSaAiyataAê ta‡aEke(
ivajaoeú"r"ku(taAeBayaA:
taträsan katicic coräù
päläç ca katicin nåpa
meñäyitäç ca tatraike
vijahrur akuto-bhayäù
SYNONYMS
tatra—in that; äsan—were; katicit—some; coräù—thieves; päläù—herders;
ca—and; katicit—some; nåpa—O King (Parékñit); meñäyitäù—acting as the
sheep; ca—and; tatra—therein; eke—some of them; vijahruù—they played;
akutaù-bhayäù—without any fear.
TRANSLATION
In that game, O King, some acted as thieves, others as shepherds and others
as sheep. They played their game happily, without fear of danger.
TEXT 28
mayapau‡aAe mah"AmaAyaAe
vyaAemaAe gAAepaAlavaeSaDa{k,(
maeSaAiyataAnapaAevaAh"
‘aAyaêAer"AiyataAe baó"na,
maya-putro mahä-mäyo
vyomo gopäla-veña-dhåk
meñäyitän apoväha
präyaç coräyito bahün
SYNONYMS
maya-putraù—a son of the demon Maya; mahä mäyaù—a powerful magician;
vyomaù—named Vyoma; gopäla—of a cowherd boy; veña—the disguise;
dhåk—assuming; meñäyitän—those who were acting as sheep; apoväha—he
took away; präyaù—almost all; coräyitaù—pretending to be playing as a thief;
bahün—many.
TRANSLATION
A powerful magician named Vyoma, son of the demon Maya, then appeared
on the scene in the guise of a cowherd boy. Pretending to join the game as a
thief, he proceeded to steal most of the cowherd boys who were acting as sheep.
TEXT 29
igAir"d"yaA< ivainaiºapya
naItaM naItaM mah"As$aur":
izAlayaA ipad"Dae ã"ArM"
catau:paÂaAvazAeiSataA:
giri-daryäà vinikñipya
nétaà nétaà mahäsuraù
çilayä pidadhe dväraà
catuù-païcävaçeñitäù
SYNONYMS
giri—of a mountain; daryäm—in a cave; vinikñipya—throwing; nétam
nétam—gradually bringing them; mahä-asuraù—the great demon; çilayä—with
a stone; pidadhe—he blocked; dväram—the entrance; catuù-païca—four or
five; avaçeñitäù—remained.
TRANSLATION
Gradually the great demon abducted more and more of the cowherd boys and
cast them into a mountain cave, which he sealed shut with a boulder. Finally
only four or five boys acting as sheep remained in the game.
TEXT 30
tasya tatk(maR ivaÁaAya
k{(SNA: zAr"NAd": s$ataAma,
gAAepaAªayantaM jaƒaAh"
va{kM( h"ir"ir"vaAEjas$aA
tasya tat karma vijïäya
kåñëaù çaraëa-daù satäm
gopän nayantaà jagräha
våkaà harir ivaujasä
SYNONYMS
tasya—of him, Vyomäsura; tat—that; karma—activity; vijïäya—fully
understanding; kåñëaù—Lord Kåñëa; çaraëa—of shelter; daù—the giver;
satäm—to saintly devotees; gopän—cowherd boys; nayantam—who was
leading; jagräha—He seized; våkam—a wolf; hariù—a lion: iva-just as;
ojasä—forcefully.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa, who shelters all saintly devotees, understood perfectly well what
Vyomäsura was doing. Just as a lion grabs a wolf, Kåñëa forcefully seized the
demon as he was taking away more cowherd boys.
TEXT 31
s$a inajaM è&pamaAsTaAya
igAr"In‰"s$aä{"zAM balaI
wcC$na, ivamaAelu(maAtmaAnaM
naAzA¡(AeØ"h"NAAtaur":
sa nijaà rüpam ästhäya
giréndra-sadåçaà balé
icchan vimoktum ätmänaà
näçaknod grahaëäturaù
SYNONYMS
saù—he, the demon; nijam—his original; rüpam—form; ästhäya-assuming;
giri-indra—a kingly mountain; sadåçam—just like; balé—powerful;
icchan—wanting; vimoktum—to free; ätmänam—himself; na açaknot—he was
not able; grahaëa—by being forcibly held; äturaù—debilitated.
TRANSLATION
The demon changed into his original form, as big and powerful as a great
mountain. But try as he might to free himself, he could not do so, having lost
his strength from being held in the Lord's tight grip.
TEXT 32
taM inagA{÷AcyautaAe d"AeByaA<
paAtaiyatvaA mah"Italae
pazyataAM id"iva de"vaAnaAM
pazAumaAr"mamaAr"yata,
taà nigåhyäcyuto dorbhyäà
pätayitvä mahé-tale
paçyatäà divi devänäà
paçu-märam amärayat
SYNONYMS
tam—him; nigåhya—holding fast; acyutaù—Lord Kåñëa; dorbhyäm—with His
arms; pätayitvä—making him fall; mahé-tale—onto the ground;
paçyatäm—while they were watching; divi—in the heavenly planets;
devänäm—the demigods; paçu-märam—as a sacrificial animal is slaughtered;
amärayat—He killed him.
TRANSLATION
Lord Acyuta clutched Vyomäsura between His arms and threw him to the
ground. Then, while the demigods in heaven looked on, Kåñëa killed him in the
same way that one kills a sacrificial animal.
PURPORT
The äcäryas inform us that sacrificial animals were killed by means of
strangulation.
TEXT 33
gAuh"AipaDaAnaM inaiBaRâ
gAAepaAiªa:s$aAyaR k{(cC)$ta:
staUyamaAna: s$aurE"gAAeR$paE:
‘aivavaezA svagAAeku(lama,
guhä-pidhänaà nirbhidya
gopän niùsärya kåcchrataù
stüyamänaù surair gopaiù
praviveça sva-gokulam
SYNONYMS
guhä—of the cave; pidhänam—the blockage; nirbhidya—breaking; gopän—the
cowherd boys; niùsärya—leading out; kåcchrataù—from the dangerous place;
stüyamänaù—being praised; suraiù—by the demigods; gopaiù—and by the
cowherd boys; praviveça—he entered; sva—His own; gokulam—cowherd
village.
TRANSLATION
Kåñëa then smashed the boulder blocking the cave's entrance and led the
trapped cowherd boys to safety. Thereafter, as the demigods and cowherd boys
sang His glories, He returned to His cowherd village, Gokula.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Tenth Canto, Thirty-seventh Chapter,
of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Killing of the Demons Keçé and
Vyoma."
38. Akrüra's Arrival in Våndävana
This chapter describes Akrüra's trip from Mathurä to Våndävana, his
meditation on Kåñëa and Balaräma along the way and the honor the two Lords
showed Akrüra upon his arrival.
Early in the morning on the day after Kaàsa had ordered him to bring
Kåñëa and Balaräma to Mathurä, Akrüra prepared his chariot and set off for
Gokula. As he traveled, he thought as follows: "I am about to attain the great
good fortune of seeing Çré Kåñëa's lotus feet, which are worshiped by Brahmä,
Rudra and the other demigods. Although Kaàsa is an enemy of the Supreme
Lord and His devotees, still, it is by Kaàsa's grace that I will get this great boon
of seeing the Lord. When I first catch sight of His lotus feet, all my sinful
reactions will be destroyed at once. I will descend from my chariot and fall at
the feet of Kåñëa and Balaräma, and even though I have been sent by Kaàsa,
the omniscient Çré Kåñëa will certainly harbor no animosity toward me." As
Akrüra thus thought to himself, he arrived in Gokula at sunset. Alighting from
his chariot in the cowherd pasture, he began rolling about in the dust in great
ecstasy.
Then Akrüra continued on to Vraja. When he saw Kåñëa and Balaräma he
fell at Their lotus feet, and both the Lords embraced him. Afterward They
brought him to Their residence, inquired from him about the comfort of his
trip and honored him in various ways-offering him water for washing his feet,
arghya, a seat and so forth. They relieved him of his fatigue by massaging his
feet and served him a delicious banquet. Mahäräja Nanda also honored Akrüra
with many sweet words.
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
@‚U(r"Ae'ipa ca taAM r"Ai‡aM
maDaupauyaA< mah"Amaita:
oiSatvaA r"TamaAsTaAya
‘ayayaAE nand"gAAeku(lama,
çré-çuka uväca
akrüro 'pi ca täà rätrià
madhu-puryäà mahä-matiù
uñitvä ratham ästhäya
prayayau nanda-gokulam
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; akrüraù—Akrüra; api ca—and;
täm—that; rätrim—night; madhu-puryäm—in the city of Mathurä;
mahä-matiù—high-minded; uñitvä—remaining; ratham—his chariot;
ästhäya—mounting; prayayau—he set off; nanda-gokulam—for the cowherd
village of Nanda Mahäräja.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: After passing the night in the city of Mathurä, the
high-minded Akrüra mounted his chariot and set off for the cowherd village of
Nanda Mahäräja.
PURPORT
King Kaàsa ordered Akrüra to go to Våndävana on the Ekädaçé of the dark
fortnight of the Vedic month of Phälguna. After spending the night in
Mathurä, Akrüra left early the next day. That morning Närada offered his
prayers to Kåñëa in Våndävana, and in the afternoon the demon Vyoma was
killed there. At dusk Akrüra entered the Lord's village.
TEXT 2
gAcC$na, paiTa mah"ABaAgAAe
BagAvatyambaujaeºaNAe
BailM( par"AmaupagAta
Wvamaetad"icantayata,
gacchan pathi mahä-bhägo
bhagavaty ambujekñaëe
bhaktià paräm upagata
evam etad acintayat
SYNONYMS
gacchan—traveling; pathi—along the road; mahä-bhägaù—the greatly
fortunate; bhagavati—for the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
ambuja-ékñaëe—the lotus-eyed Lord; bhaktim—devotion; paräm—exceptional;
upagataù—he experienced; evam—thus; etat—this (as follows); acintayat—he
thought.
TRANSLATION
As he traveled on the road, the great soul Akrüra felt tremendous devotion
for the lotus-eyed Personality of Godhead, and thus he began to consider as
follows.
TEXT 3
ikM( mayaAcair"taM Ba‰M"
ikM( taæaM par"maM tapa:
ikM( vaATaApyahR"tae d"ÔaM
yaÛ"ºyaAmyaâ ke(zAvama,
kià mayäcaritaà bhadraà
kià taptaà paramaà tapaù
kià väthäpy arhate dattaà
yad drakñyämy adya keçavam
SYNONYMS
kim—what; mayä—by me; äcaritam—has been performed; bhadram—good
works; kim—what; taptam—suffered; paramam—severe; tapaù—austerity;
kim—what; vä—or else; atha api—otherwise; arhate—worship performed;
dattam—charity given; yat—by which; drakñyämi—I am going to see;
adya—today; keçavam—Lord Kåñëa.
TRANSLATION
[Çré Akrüra thought:] What pious deeds have I done, what severe austerities
undergone, what worship performed or charity given so that today I will see
Lord Keçava?
TEXT 4
mamaEtaä," äu"laRBaM manya
oÔama:ëAek(d"zARnama,
ivaSayaAtmanaAe yaTaA “aök(
LtaRnaM zAU#‰"janmana:
mamaitad durlabhaà manya
uttamaù-çloka-darçanam
viñayätmano yathä brahmakértanaà
çüdra-janmanaù
SYNONYMS
mama—my; etat—this; durlabham—difficult to achieve; manye—I consider;
uttamaù-çloka—of the Supreme Lord, who is praised in the best poetry;
darçanam—the audience; viñaya-ätmanaù—for one who is absorbed in sense
gratification; yathä—just as; brahma—of the Vedas; kértanam—chanting;
çüdra—as a low-class man; janmanaù—by one who has taken his birth.
TRANSLATION
Since I am a materialistic person absorbed simply in sense gratification, I
think it is as difficult for me to have gotten this opportunity to see Lord
Uttamaùçloka as it would be for one born a çüdra to be allowed to recite the
Vedic mantras.
TEXT 5
maEvaM mamaADamasyaAipa
syaAde"vaAcyautad"zARnama,
ioe"yamaANA: k(lanaâA
¸(icaÔar"ita k(êna
maivaà mamädhamasyäpi
syäd eväcyuta-darçanam
hriyamäëaù kala-nadyä
kvacit tarati kaçcana
SYNONYMS
mä evam—I should not think like this; mama—for me; adhamasya—who am
most fallen; api—even; syät—it may come about; eva—certainly; acyuta—of
the infallible Lord; darçanam—the sight; hriyamäëaù—being pulled along;
käla—of time; nadyä—by the river; kvacit—sometimes; tarati—crosses to the
shore; kaçcana—someone.
TRANSLATION
But enough of such thoughts! After all, even a fallen soul like me can have
the chance to behold the infallible Supreme Lord, for one of the conditioned
souls being swept along in the river of time may sometimes reach the shore.
TEXT 6
mamaAâAmaËÿlaM naíM"
P(lavaAMêEva mae Bava:
yaªamasyae BagAvataAe
yaAeigADyaeyaAin„apaÆÿjama,
mamädyämaìgalaà nañöaà
phalaväàç caiva me bhavaù
yan namasye bhagavato
yogi-dhyeyänghri-paìkajam
SYNONYMS
mama—my; adya—today; amaìgalam—inauspicious sinful reactions;
nañöam—eradicated; phala-vän—fruitful; ca—and; eva—indeed; me—my;
bhavaù—birth; yat—since; namasye—I am going to offer obeisances;
bhagavataù—of the Supreme Lord; yogi-dhyeya—meditated upon by yogés;
aìghri—to the feet; paìkajam—lotuslike.
TRANSLATION
Today all my sinful reactions have been eradicated and my birth has become
worthwhile, since I will offer my obeisances to the Supreme Lord's lotus feet,
which mystic yogés meditate upon.
TEXT 7
kM(s$aAe bataAâAk{(ta mae'tyanauƒahM"
‰"ºyae'x.~i„apaáM ‘aih"taAe'maunaA h"re":
k{(taAvataAr"sya äu"r"tyayaM tama:
paUvaeR'tar"na, yaªaKamaNx"laitvaSaA
kaàso batädyäkåta me 'ty-anugrahaà
drakñye 'ìghri-padmaà prahito 'munä hareù
kåtävatärasya duratyayaà tamaù
pürve 'taran yan-nakha-maëòala-tviñä
SYNONYMS
kaàsaù—King Kaàsa; bata—indeed; adya—today; akåta—has done;
me—toward me; ati-anugraham—an act of extreme kindness; drakñye—I will
see; aìghri-padmam—the lotus feet; prahitaù—sent; amunä—by him;
hareù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kåta—who has enacted;
avatärasya—His descent to this world; duratyayam—insurmountable;
tamaù—the darkness of material existence; pürve—persons in the past;
ataran—transcended; yat—whose; nakha-maëòala—of the orb of the toenails;
tviñä—by the effulgence.
TRANSLATION
Indeed, today King Kaàsa has shown me extreme mercy by sending me to
see the lotus feet of Lord Hari, who has now appeared in this world. Simply by
the effulgence of His toenails, many souls in the past have transcended the
insurmountable darkness of material existence and achieved liberation.
PURPORT
Akrüra noted how ironic it was that the envious, demoniac Kaàsa had
given him an extraordinary blessing by sending him to see the Supreme Lord
Kåñëa.
TEXT 8
yad"icaRtaM “aöBavaAid"iBa: s$aurE":
i™ayaA ca de"vyaA mauinaiBa: s$as$aAtvataE:
gAAecaAr"NAAyaAnaucarE"êr"ã"nae
yaÕ"Aeipak(AnaAM ku(caku(ÇÿmaAiÆÿtama,
yad arcitaà brahma-bhavädibhiù suraiù
çriyä ca devyä munibhiù sa-sätvataiù
go-cäraëäyänucaraiç carad vane
yad gopikänäà kuca-kuìkumäìkitam
SYNONYMS
yat—which (lotus feet); arcitam—worshiped; brahma-bhava—by Brahmä and
Çiva; ädibhiù—and other; suraiù—demigods; çriyä—by Çré; ca—also;
devyä—the goddess of fortune; munibhiù—by the sages; sa-sätvataiù—along
with the devotees; go—the cows; cäraëäya—for tending; anucaraiù—together
with His companions; carat—moving about; vane—in the forest; yat—which;
gopikänäm—of the cowherd girls; kuca—from the breasts; kuìkuma—by the
red kuìkuma powder; aìkitam—marked.
TRANSLATION
Those lotus feet are worshiped by Brahmä, Çiva and all the other demigods,
by the goddess of fortune, and also by the great sages and Vaiñëavas. Upon
those lotus feet the Lord walks about the forest while herding the cows with
His companions, and those feet are smeared with the kuìkuma from the gopés'
breasts.
TEXT 9
‰"ºyaAima naUnaM s$auk(paAelanaAis$akM(
ismataAvalaAek(Aç&NAk(ÃalaAecanama,
mauKaM mauku(nd"sya gAux"Alak(Ava{taM
‘ad"iºaNAM mae ‘acar"inta vaE ma{gAA:
drakñyämi nünaà su-kapola-näsikaà
smitävalokäruëa-kaïja-locanam
mukhaà mukundasya guòälakävåtaà
pradakñiëaà me pracaranti vai mågäù
SYNONYMS
drakñyämi—I am going to see; nünam—for certain; su—beautiful;
kapola—whose cheeks; näsikam—and nose; smita—smiling; avaloka—with
glances; aruëa—reddish; kaïja—lotuslike; locanam—the eyes; mukham—the
face; mukundasya—of Lord Kåñëa; guòa—twisting; alaka—with hair;
ävåtam—framed; pradakñiëam—clockwise circumambulation; me—of me;
pracaranti—are performing; vai—indeed; mågäù—the deer.
TRANSLATION
Surely I shall see the face of Lord Mukunda, since the deer are now walking
past me on my right. That face, framed by His curly hair, is beautified by His
attractive cheeks and nose, His smiling glances and His reddish lotus eyes.
PURPORT
Akrüra saw an auspicious omen—the passing of the deer on his right—and
thus felt sure he would see the Supreme Lord Kåñëa.
TEXT 10
@pyaâ ivaSNAAemaRnaujatvamaIyauSaAe
BaAr"AvataAr"Aya BauvaAe inajaecC$yaA
laAvaNyaDaA°aAe BaivataAepalamBanaM
ma÷M na na syaAtP(lamaÃas$aA ä{"zA:
apy adya viñëor manujatvam éyuño
bhärävatäräya bhuvo nijecchayä
lävaëya-dhämno bhavitopalambhanaà
mahyaà na na syät phalam aïjasä dåçaù
SYNONYMS
api—furthermore; adya—today; viñëoù—of the Supreme Lord Viñëu;
manujatvam—the form of a human being; éyuñaù—who has assumed;
bhära—the burden; avatäräya—for diminishing; bhuvaù—of the earth;
nija—by His own; icchayä—desire; lävaëya—of beauty; dhämnaù—of the
abode; bhavitä—there will be; upalambhanam—the perceiving; mahyam—for
me; na—it is not the case; na syät—that it will not happen; phalam—the fruit;
aïjasä—directly; dåçaù—of sight.
TRANSLATION
I am going to see the Supreme Lord Viñëu, the reservoir of all beauty, who
by His own sweet will has now assumed a humanlike form to relieve the earth
of her burden. Thus there is no denying that my eyes will achieve the
perfection of their existence.
TEXT 11
ya wRiºataAhM"r"ih"taAe'pyas$ats$ataAe:
svataejas$aApaAstatamaAeiBad"A”ama:
svamaAyayaAtmana, r"icataEstad"IºayaA
‘aANAAºaDaIiBa: s$ad"naeSvaBaIyatae
ya ékñitähaà-rahito 'py asat-satoù
sva-tejasäpästa-tamo-bhidä-bhramaù
sva-mäyayätman racitais tad-ékñayä
präëäkña-dhébhiù sadaneñv abhéyate
SYNONYMS
yaù—who; ékñitä—the witness; aham—false ego; rahitaù—devoid of;
api—nevertheless; asat-satoù—of material products and causes; sva-tejasä—by
His personal potency; apästa—having dispelled; tamaù—the darkness of
ignorance; bhidä—the idea of being separate; bhramaù—and bewilderment;
sva-mäyayä—by His material creative energy; ätman—within Himself;
racitaiù—by those who are produced (the living entities); tat-ékñayä—by His
glancing upon that Mäyä; präëa—by the vital airs; akña—the senses;
dhébhiù—and intelligence; sadaneñu—within the bodies of the living beings;
abhéyate—His presence is surmised.
TRANSLATION
He is the witness of material cause and effect, yet He is always free from
false identification with them. By His internal potency He dispels the darkness
of separation and confusion. The individual souls in this world, who are
manifested here when He glances upon His material creative energy, indirectly
perceive Him in the activities of their life airs, senses and intelligence.
PURPORT
In this verse Akrüra establishes the all-powerful position of the Supreme
Lord, whom he is about to see in Våndävana. The false concept of separation
from the Lord is described in the Eleventh Canto of the Bhägavatam (11.2.37):
bhayaà dvitéyäbhiniveçataù syäd éçäd apetasya viparyayo 'småtiù. Although all
existence emanates from the Absolute Truth, Kåñëa, we imagine a "second
thing," this material world, to be entirely separate from the Lord's existence.
With this mentality, we try to exploit that "second thing" for our sense
gratification. Thus the psychological underpinning of material life is the
illusion that this world is somehow separate from God and therefore meant for
our enjoyment.
It is ironic that the impersonal philosophers, in their radical renunciation
of this world, claim it to be utterly false and totally separate from the Absolute.
Unfortunately, this artificial attempt to divest this world of its divine nature,
or, in other words, its relation to God, does not lead people to utterly reject it
but rather to try to enjoy it. While it is true that this world is temporary and
thus in one sense illusory, the mechanism of illusion is a spiritual potency of
the Supreme Lord. Realizing this, we should immediately desist from any
attempt to exploit this world; rather, we should recognize it as God's energy.
We will actually give up our material desires only when we understand that
this world belongs to God and is therefore not meant for our selfish
gratification.
The word abhéyate here refers to a process of surmising the presence of the
Lord through meditative introspection. This process is also described in the
Second Canto of the Bhägavatam (2.2.35),
bhagavän sarva-bhüteñu
lakñitaù svätmanä hariù
dåçyair buddhy-ädibhir drañöä
lakñaëair anumäpakaiù
"The Personality of Godhead, Lord Çré Kåñëa, is in every living being along
with the individual soul. And this fact is perceived and hypothesized in our
acts of seeing and taking help from the intelligence."
Akrüra states that the Lord is free of the egoistic pride afflicting ordinary,
embodied souls. Yet the Lord appears to be embodied like everyone else, and
therefore someone might object to the statement that He is free of egoism.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté comments on this puzzle as follows: "How can we
distinguish between being free of false ego and being afflicted by it? 'If a living
entity is situated in a body,' [argues the objector,] 'he will encounter the
unhappiness and confusion that occur within it, just as a person living in a
house, whether he be attached to it or not, cannot avoid experiencing the
darkness, warmth and cold that occur within it.' This objection is answered as
follows: By His internal potency the Lord dispels the darkness of ignorance
along with the separateness and bewilderment it produces."
TEXT 12
yasyaAiKalaAmaIvah"iBa: s$aumaËÿlaE:
vaAcaAe ivaima™aA gAuNAk(maRjanmaiBa:
‘aANAinta zAumBainta paunainta vaE jagAta,
yaAstaiã"r"l(A: zAvazAAeBanaA mataA:
yasyäkhiläméva-habhiù su-maìgalaiù
väco vimiçrä guëa-karma-janmabhiù
präëanti çumbhanti punanti vai jagat
yäs tad-viraktäù çava-çobhanä matäù
SYNONYMS
yasya—of whom; akhila—all; améva—sins; habhiù—which destroy;
su-maìgalaiù—most auspicious; väcaù—words; vimiçräù—joined; guëa—with
the qualities; karma—activities; janmabhiù—and incarnations; präëanti—they
give life; çumbhanti—make beautiful; punanti—and purify; vai—indeed;
jagat—the entire universe; yäù—which (words); tat—of these;
viraktäù—devoid; çava—of a corpse; çobhanäù—(like) the decorating;
matäù—considered.
TRANSLATION
All sins are destroyed and all good fortune is created by the Supreme Lord's
qualities, activities and appearances, and words that describe these three things
animate, beautify and purify the world. On the other hand, words bereft of His
glories are like the decorations on a corpse.
PURPORT
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé brings up the following possible objection: How can
one who is devoid of ordinary ego, who is fully self-satisfied, engage in
pastimes? The answer is given here. Lord Kåñëa acts on the pure, spiritual
platform for the pleasure of His loving devotees, not for any kind of mundane
gratification.
TEXT 13
s$a caAvataINAR: ik(la s$atvataAnvayae
svas$aetaupaAlaAmar"vayaRzAmaRk{(ta,
yazAAe ivatanvana, ˜aja @Asta wRìr"Ae
gAAyainta de"vaA yad"zAeSamaËÿlama,
sa cävatérëaù kila satvatänvaye
sva-setu-pälämara-varya-çarma-kåt
yaço vitanvan vraja ästa éçvaro
gäyanti devä yad açeña-maìgalam
SYNONYMS
saù—He; ca—and; avatérëaù—having descended; kila—indeed; sätvata—of
the Sätvatas; anvaye—in the dynasty; sva—His own; setu—codes of religion;
päla—who maintain; amara-varya—of the chief demigods; çarma—delight;
kåt—creating; yaçaù—His fame; vitanvan—spreading; vraje—in Vraja;
äste—is present; éçvaraù—the Supreme Lord; gäyanti—sing; deväù—the
demigods; yat—of which (fame); açeña-maìgalam—all-auspicious.
TRANSLATION
That same Supreme Lord has descended into the dynasty of the Sätvatas to
delight the exalted demigods, who maintain the principles of religion He has
created. Residing in Våndävana, He spreads His fame, which the demigods
glorify in song and which brings auspiciousness to all.
TEXT 14
taM tvaâ naUnaM mah"taAM gAitaM gAuçM&
‡aElaAefyak(AntaM ä{"izAmanmah"Aets$avama,
è&paM d"DaAnaM i™aya wRips$ataAs$padM"
‰"ºyae mamaAs$aªauSas$a: s$aud"zARnaA:
taà tv adya nünaà mahatäà gatià guruà
trailokya-käntaà dåçiman-mahotsavam
rüpaà dadhänaà çriya épsitäspadaà
drakñye mamäsann uñasaù su-darçanäù
SYNONYMS
tam—Him; tu—yet; adya—today; nünam—certainly; mahatäm—of great
souls; gatim—the destination; gurum—and the spiritual master; trai-lokya—of
all the three worlds; käntam—the real beauty; dåçi-mat—for all who have eyes;
mahä-utsavam—a great festivity; rüpam—His personal form;
dadhänam—exhibiting; çriyaù—of the goddess of fortune; épsita—the desired;
äspadam—place of shelter; drakñye—I shall see; mama—my; äsan—have
become; uñasaù—the dawns; su-darçanäù—auspicious to see.
TRANSLATION
Today I shall certainly see Him, the goal and spiritual master of the great
souls. Seeing Him brings jubilation to all who have eyes, for He is the true
beauty of the universe. Indeed, His personal form is the shelter desired by the
goddess of fortune. Now all the dawns of my life have become auspicious.
TEXT 15
@TaAvaè&X#: s$apad"IzAyaAe r"TaAta,
‘aDaAnapauMs$aAeêr"NAM svalabDayae
iDayaA Da{taM yaAeigAiBar"pyahM" ‹auvaM
namasya @AByaAM ca s$aKaIna, vanaAEk(s$a:
athävarüòhaù sapadéçayo rathät
pradhäna-puàsoç caraëaà sva-labdhaye
dhiyä dhåtaà yogibhir apy ahaà dhruvaà
namasya äbhyäà ca sakhén vanaukasaù
SYNONYMS
atha—then; avarüòhaù—getting down; sapadi—at once; éçayoù—of the two
Lords; rathät—from my chariot; pradhäna-puàsoù—of the Supreme
Personalities; caraëam—to the feet; sva-labdhaye—for the sake of
self-realization; dhiyä—with their intelligence; dhåtam—held on to;
yogibhiù—by mystic yogés; api—even; aham—I; dhruvam—surely;
namasye—will bow down; äbhyäm—with Them; ca—also; sakhén—to the
friends; vana-okasaù—to the residents of the forest.
TRANSLATION
Then I will at once alight from my chariot and bow down to the lotus feet of
Kåñëa and Balaräma, the Supreme Personalities of Godhead. Theirs are the
same feet that great mystic yogés striving for self-realization bear within their
minds. I will also offer my obeisances to the Lords' cowherd boyfriends and to
all the other residents of Våndävana.
TEXT 16
@pyax.~i„amaUlae paitatasya mae ivaBau:
izAr"syaDaAsyaiªajah"stapaÆÿjama,
d"ÔaABayaM k(AlaBaujaAËÿrM"h"s$aA
‘aAeãe"ijataAnaAM zAr"NAEiSaNAAM NA{naAma,
apy aìghri-müle patitasya me vibhuù
çirasy adhäsyan nija-hasta-paìkajam
dattäbhayaà käla-bhujäìga-raàhasä
prodvejitänäà çaraëaiñiëäà ëånäm
SYNONYMS
api—furthermore; aìghri—of His feet; müle—at the base; patitasya——who
have fallen; me—of me; vibhuù—the almighty Lord; çirasi—upon the head;
adhäsyat—will place; nija—His own; hasta—hand; paìkajam-lotuslike;
datta—which grants; abhayam—fearlessness; käla—time; bhuja-aìga—of the
serpent; raàhasä—by the swift force; prodvejitänäm—who are greatly
disturbed; çaraëa—shelter; eñiëäm—searching for; nåëäm—to persons.
TRANSLATION
And when I have fallen at His feet, the almighty Lord will place His lotus
hand upon my head. For those who seek shelter in Him because they are greatly
disturbed by the powerful serpent of time, that hand removes all fear.
TEXT 17
s$amahR"NAM ya‡a inaDaAya k(AEizAk(s$a,
taTaA bailaêApa jagAt‡ayaen‰"taAma,
yaã"A ivah"Are" ˜ajayaAeiSataAM ™amaM
s$pazAeRna s$aAEgAinDak(gAnDyapaAnaud"ta,
samarhaëaà yatra nidhäya kauçikas
tathä baliç cäpa jagat-trayendratäm
yad vä vihäre vraja-yoñitäà çramaà
sparçena saugandhika-gandhy apänudat
SYNONYMS
samarhaëam—the respectful offering; yatra—into which; nidhäya—by
placing; kauçikaù—Purandara; tathä—as well as; baliù—Bali Mahäräja;
ca—also; äpa—attained; jagat—of the worlds; traya—three;
indratäm—rulership (as Indra, the King of heaven); yat—which (lotus hand of
the Lord); vä—and; vihäre—during the pastimes (of the räsa dance);
vraja-yoñitäm—of the ladies of Vraja; çramam—the fatigue; sparçena—by their
contact; saugandhika—like an aromatic flower; gandhi—fragrant;
apänudat—wiped away.
TRANSLATION
By offering charity to that lotus hand, Purandara and Bali earned the status
of Indra, King of heaven, and during the pleasure pastimes of the räsa dance,
when the Lord wiped away the gopés' perspiration and removed their fatigue,
the touch of their faces made that hand as fragrant as a sweet flower.
PURPORT
The Puräëas call the lotus found in the Mänasa-sarovara Lake a
saugandhika. Lord Kåñëa's lotus hand acquired the fragrance of this flower by
coming in contact with the beautiful faces of the gopés. This specific incident,
which occurred during the räsa-lélä, is described in the Thirty-third Chapter of
the Tenth Canto.
TEXT 18
na mayyaupaESyatyair"bauiÜ"macyauta:
kM(s$asya äU"ta: ‘aih"taAe'ipa ivaìä{"k,(
yaAe'ntabaRih"êetas$a Wtad"Iih"taM
ºae‡aÁa wRºatyamalaena caºauSaA
na mayy upaiñyaty ari-buddhim acyutaù
kaàsasya dütaù prahito 'pi viçva-dåk
yo 'ntar bahiç cetasa etad éhitaà
kñetra-jïa ékñaty amalena cakñuñä
SYNONYMS
na—not; mayi—toward me; upaiñyati—will He develop; ari—of being an
enemy; buddhim—the attitude; acyutaù—the infallible Lord; kaàsasya—of
Kaàsa; dütaù—a messenger; prahitaù—sent; api—although; viçva—of
everything; dåk—the witness; yaù—who; antaù—inside; bahiù—and outside;
cetasaù—of the heart; etat—this; éhitam—whatever is done; kñetra—of the
field (of the material body); jïaù—the knower; ékñati—He sees;
amalena—with perfect; cakñuñä—vision.
TRANSLATION
The infallible Lord will not consider me an enemy,, even though Kaàsa has
sent me here as his messenger. After all, the omniscient Lord is the actual
knower of the field of this material body, and with His perfect vision He
witnesses, both externally and internally, all the endeavors of the conditioned
soul's heart.
PURPORT
Being omniscient, Lord Kåñëa knew that Akrüra was only externally a
friend of Kaàsa. Internally he was an eternal devotee of Lord Kåñëa.
TEXT 19
@pyax.~i„amaUlae'vaih"taM k{(taAÃailaM
maAmaIiºataA s$aismatamaA‰R"yaA ä{"zAA
s$apaâpaDvastas$amastaik(ilbaSaAe
vaAeX#A maudM" vaItaivazAÆÿ OijaRtaAma,
apy aìghri-müle 'vahitaà kåtäïjalià
mäm ékñitä sa-smitam ärdrayä dåçä
sapady apadhvasta-samasta-kilbiño
voòhä mudaà véta-viçaìka ürjitäm
SYNONYMS
api—and; aìghri—of His feet; müle—at the base; avahitam—fixed;
kåta-aïjalim—with joined palms; mäm—me; ékñitä—will look upon;
sasmitam—smiling; ärdrayä—with an affectionate; dåçä—glance;
sapadi—immediately; apadhvasta—eradicated; samasta—all;
kilbiñaù—contamination; voòhä—I will achieve; mudam—happiness;
véta—freed; viçaìkaù-from doubt; ürjitäm—intense.
TRANSLATION
Thus He will cast His smiling, affectionate glance upon me as I remain fixed
with joined palms, fallen in obeisances at His feet. Then all my contamination
will at once be dispelled, and I will give up all doubts and feel the most intense
bliss.
TEXT 20
s$auô$ÔamaM ÁaAitamananyadE"vataM
d"AeByaA< ba{h"à"YaAM pair"r"psyatae'Ta maAma,
@AtmaA ih" taITaI=#i‚(yatae tadE"va mae
banDaê k(maARtmak( ocC.$vais$atyata:
suhåttamaà jïätim ananya-daivataà
dorbhyäà båhadbhyäà parirapsyate 'tha mäm
ätmä hi térthé-kriyate tadaiva me
bandhaç ca karmätmaka ucchvasity ataù
SYNONYMS
suhåt-tamam—the best of friends; jïätim—a family member;
ananya—exclusive; daivatam—(having Him) as my object of worship;
dorbhyäm—with His two arms; båhadbhyäm—large; parirapsyate—He will
embrace; atha—thereupon; mäm—me; ätmä—the body; hi—indeed;
térthé—sanctified; kriyate—will become; tadä eva—exactly then; me—my;
bandhaù—the bondage; ca—and; karma-ätmakaù—due to fruitive activity;
ucchvasiti—will become slackened; ataù—as a result of this.
TRANSLATION
Recognizing me as an intimate friend and relative, Kåñëa will embrace me
with His mighty arms, instantly sanctifying my body and diminishing to nil all
my material bondage, which is due to fruitive activities.
TEXT 21
labDvaAËÿs$aËÿm‘aNAtamk{(taAÃailaM
maAM vaºyatae'‚U(r" tataetyauç&™avaA:
tad"A vayaM janmaBa{taAe mah"Iyas$aA
naEvaAä{"taAe yaAe iDagAmauSya janma tata,
labdhväìga-saìgam praëatam kåtäïjalià
mäà vakñyate 'krüra tatety uruçraväù
tadä vayaà janma-bhåto mahéyasä
naivädåto yo dhig amuñya janma tat
SYNONYMS
labdhvä—having achieved; aìga-saìgam—physical contact; praëatam—who
am standing with head bowed; kåta-aïjalim—with palms joined together in
supplication; mäm—to me; vakñyate—He will speak; akrüra—O Akrüra;
tata—My dear relative; iti—in such words; uruçraväù—Lord Kåñëa, whose
fame is vast; tadä—then; vayam—we; janma-bhåtaù—our birth becoming
successful; mahéyasä—by the greatest of all persons; na—not; eva—indeed;
ädåtaù—honored; yaù—who; dhik—to be pitied; amuñya—his; janma—birth;
tat—that.
TRANSLATION
Having been embraced by the all-famous Lord Kåñëa, I will humbly stand
before Him with bowed head and joined palms, and He will address me, "My
dear Akrüra." At that very moment my life's purpose will be fulfilled. Indeed,
the life of anyone whom the Supreme Personality fails to recognize is simply
pitiable.
TEXT 22
na tasya k(iêÚ"iyata: s$auô$ÔamaAe
na caAi‘ayaAe ãe"Sya opaeºya Wva vaA
taTaAipa Bal(Ana, Bajatae yaTaA taTaA
s$aur"åu"maAe yaã"äu"paAi™ataAe'TaRd":
na tasya kaçcid dayitaù suhåttamo
na cäpriyo dveñya upekñya eva vä
tathäpi bhaktän bhajate yathä tathä
sura-drumo yadvad upäçrito 'rtha-daù
SYNONYMS
na tasya—He does not have; kaçcit—any; dayitaù—favorite; suhåttamaù—best
friend; na ca—nor; apriyaù—unfavored; dveñyaù—hated: upekñyaù-neglected;
eva—indeed; vä—or; tathä api—still; bhaktän—with His devotees;
bhajate—He reciprocates; yathä—as they are; tathä—accordingly;
sura-drumaù—a heavenly desire tree; yadvat—just as; upäçritaù—taken shelter
of; artha—desired benefits; daù—giving.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord has no favorite and no dearmost friend, nor does He
consider anyone undesirable, despicable or fit to be neglected. All the same, He
lovingly reciprocates with His devotees in whatever manner they worship Him,
just as the trees of heaven fulfill the desires of whoever approaches them.
PURPORT
The Lord says something similar in the Bhagavad-gétä (9.29):
samo 'haà sarva-bhüteñu
na me dveñyo 'sti na priyaù
ye bhajanti tu mäà bhaktyä
mayi te teñu cäpy aham
"I envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But whoever
renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend and is in Me, and I am also a
friend to him."
Similarly, Lord Caitanya was as hard as a thunderbolt for those who envied
Him, and as soft as a rose for those who understood His divine mission.
TEXT 23
ikM( caAƒajaAe maAvanataM yaäU"Ôama:
smayana, pair"Svajya gA{h"ItamaÃalaAE
gA{hM" ‘avaeSyaAæas$amastas$atk{(taM
s$am‘aºyatae kM(s$ak{(taM svabanDauSau
kià cägrajo mävanataà yadüttamaù
smayan pariñvajya gåhétam aïjalau
gåhaà praveñyäpta-samasta-satkåtaà
samprakñyate kaàsa-kåtaà sva-bandhuñu
SYNONYMS
kim ca—furthermore; agra-jaù—His elder brother (Lord Balaräma); mä—me;
avanatam—who am standing with head bowed; yadu-uttamaù—the most
exalted of the Yadus; smayan—smiling; pariñvajya—embracing;
gåhétam—taken hold of; aïjalau—by my joined palms; gåham—His house;
praveñya—bringing into; äpta—who will have received; samasta—all;
sat-kåtam—signs of respect; samprakñyate—He will inquire; kaàsa-by Kaàsa;
kåtam—what has been done; sva-bandhuñu—to His family members.
TRANSLATION
And then Lord Kåñëa's elder brother, the foremost of the Yadus, will grasp
my joined hands while I am still standing with my head bowed, and after
embracing me He will take me to His house. There He will honor me with all
items of ritual welcome and inquire from me about how Kaàsa has been
treating His family members.
TEXT 24
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
wita s$aiÂantayana, k{(SNAM
ìP(lk(tanayaAe'Dvaina
r"Taena gAAeku(laM ‘aAæa:
s$aUyaRêAstaigAir$M na{pa
çré-çuka uväca
iti saïcintayan kåñëaà
çvaphalka-tanayo 'dhvani
rathena gokulaà präptaù
süryaç cästa-girià nåpa
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti-thus; saïcintayan-thinking
deeply; kåñëam—about Lord Kåñëa; çvaphalka-tanayaù-Akrüra, the son of
Çvaphalka; adhvani—on the road; rathena—by his chariot; gokulam—the
village of Gokula; präptaù—reached; süryaù—the sun; ca—and;
asta-girim—the mountain behind which the sun sets; nåpa—O King (Parékñit).
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: My dear King, while the son of Çvaphalka,
traveling on the road, thus meditated deeply on Çré Kåñëa, he reached Gokula as
the sun was beginning to set.
PURPORT
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé comments that although Akrüra did not even notice
the road, being deeply absorbed in meditation on Lord Kåñëa, he still reached
Gokula on his chariot.
TEXT 25
pad"Aina tasyaAiKalalaAek(paAlaik(
r"Iq%jauí"AmalapaAd"re"NAAe:
d"d"zAR gAAeïe" iºaitak(AEtauk(Aina
ivalaiºataAnyabjayavaAÇÿzAAâE:
padäni tasyäkhila-loka-pälakiréöa-
juñöämala-päda-reëoù
dadarça goñöhe kñiti-kautukäni
vilakñitäny abja-yaväìkuçädyaiù
SYNONYMS
padäni—the footprints; tasya—of Him; akhila—all; loka—of the planets;
päla—by the superintendents; kiréöa—upon their crowns; juñöa—placed;
amala—pure; päda—of His feet; reëoù—the dust; dadarça—he (Akrüra) saw;
goñöhe—in the cow pasture; kñiti—the earth; kautakäni—wonderfully
decorating; vilakñitäni—distinguishable; abja—by the lotus; yava—barleycorn;
aìkuça—elephant goad; ädyaiù—and so on.
TRANSLATION
In the cowherd pasture Akrüra saw the footprints of those feet whose pure
dust the rulers of all the planets in the universe hold on their crowns. Those
footprints of the Lord, distinguished by such marks as the lotus, barleycorn and
elephant goad, made the ground wonderfully beautiful.
TEXT 26
taÚ"zARnaAø"Ad"ivava{Ü"s$am”ama:
‘aemNAAeDvaRr"AemaA™auk(laAku(laeºaNA:
r"TaAd"vas$k(nâ s$a taeSvacaeí"ta
‘aBaAer"maUnyax.~i„ar"jaAMsyah"Ae wita
tad-darçanähläda-vivåddha-sambhramaù
premëordhva-romäçru-kaläkulekñaëaù
rathäd avaskandya sa teñv aceñöata
prabhor amüny aìghri-rajäàsy aho iti
SYNONYMS
tat—of Lord Kåñëa's footprints; darçana—from the sight; ähläda—by the
ecstasy; vivåddha—greatly increased; sambhramaù—whose agitation;
premëä—out of pure love; ürdhva—standing erect; roma—whose bodily hairs;
açru-kalä—with teardrops; äkula—filled; ékñaëaù—whose eyes; rathät—from
the chariot; avaskandya—getting down; saù—he, Akrüra; teñu—among those
(footprints); aceñöata—rolled about; prabhoù—of my master; amüni—these;
aìghri—from the feet; rajäàsi—particles of dust; aho—ah; iti—with these
words.
TRANSLATION
Increasingly agitated by ecstasy at seeing the Lord's footprints, his bodily
hairs standing on end because of his pure love, and his eyes filled with tears,
Akrüra jumped down from his chariot and began rolling about among those
footprints, exclaiming, "Ah, this is the dust from my master's feet!"
TEXT 27
de"hM"Ba{taAimayaAnaTaAeR
ih"tvaA d"mBaM iBayaM zAucama,
s$ande"zAAâAe h"re"ilaRËÿd"
zARna™avaNAAid"iBa:
dehaà-bhåtäm iyän artho
hitvä dambhaà bhiyaà çucam
sandeçäd yo harer liìgadarçana-
çravaëädibhiù
SYNONYMS
deham-bhåtäm—of embodied beings; iyän—this much; arthaù—the goal of life;
hitvä—giving up; dambham—pride; bhiyam—fear; çucam—and sorrow;
sandeçät—beginning from his being ordered (by Kaàsa); yaù—which;
hareù—of Lord Kåñëa; liìga—the signs; darçana—with the seeing;
çravaëa—hearing about; ädibhiù—and so on.
TRANSLATION
The very goal of life for all embodied beings is this ecstasy, which Akrüra
experienced when, upon receiving Kaàsa's order, he put aside all pride, fear
and lamentation and absorbed himself in seeing, hearing and describing the
things that reminded him of Lord Kåñëa.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté explains that Akrüra gave up fear by openly
showing his love and reverence for Kåñëa, even though he or his family might
have been punished by the angry Kaàsa. Akrüra gave up his pride in being an
aristocratic member of society and worshiped the cowherd residents of the
simple village of Våndävana. And he gave up lamenting for his house, wife and
family, which were in danger from King Kaàsa. Giving up all these things, he
rolled in the dust of the lotus feet of God.
TEXTS 28-33
d"d"zAR k{(SNAM r"AmaM ca
˜ajae gAAed"Aeh"naM gAtaAE
paItanaIlaAmbar"Dar"AE
zAr"d"mbaur"he"ºaNAAE
ik(zAAer"AE zyaAmalaìetaAE
™aIinake(taAE ba{h"àu"jaAE
s$aumauKaAE s$aund"r"var"AE
balaiã"r"d"iva‚(maAE
Dvajava†aAÇÿzAAmBaAejaEzA,
icai¶"taEr"x.~i„aiBa˜aRjama,
zAAeBayantaAE mah"AtmaAnaAE
s$aAnau‚(AezAismataeºaNAAE
od"Ar"ç&icar"‚(Lx"AE
›aigvaNAAE vanamaAilanaAE
pauNyagAnDaAnauilaæaAËÿAE
µaAtaAE ivar"javaAs$as$aAE
‘aDaAnapauç&SaAvaAâAE
jagAÜe"taU jagAtpataI
@vataINAAE= jagAtyaTaeR
svaAMzAena balake(zAvaAE
id"zAAe ivaitaimar"A r"Ajana,
ku(vaARNAAE ‘aBayaA svayaA
yaTaA maAr"k(ta: zAElaAe
r"AEpyaê k(nak(AicataAE
dadarça kåñëaà rämaà ca
vraje go-dohanaà gatau
péta-nélämbara-dharau
çarad-amburahekñaëau
kiçorau çyämala-çvetau
çré-niketau båhad-bhujau
su-mukhau sundara-varau
bala-dvirada-vikramau
dhvaja-vajräìkuçämbhojaiç
cihnitair aìghribhir vrajam
çobhayantau mahätmänau
sänukroça-smitekñaëau
udära-rucira-kréòau
sragviëau vana-mälinau
puëya-gandhänuliptäìgau
snätau viraja-väsasau
pradhäna-puruñäv ädyau
jagad-dhetü jagat-paté
avatérëau jagaty-arthe
sväàçena bala-keçavau
diço vitimirä räjan
kurväëau prabhayä svayä
yathä märakataù çailo
raupyaç ca kanakäcitau
SYNONYMS
dadarça—he saw; kåñëam rämam ca—Lord Kåñëa and Lord Balaräma;
vraje—in the village of Vraja; go—the cows; dohanam—to the place of
milking; gatau—gone; péta-néla—yellow and blue; ambara—clothes;
dharau—wearing; çarat—of the autumn season; amburuha—like lotuses;
ékñaëau—whose eyes; kiçorau—the two youths; çyämala-çvetau—dark-blue
and white; çré-niketau—the shelters of the goddess of fortune; båhat—mighty;
bhujau—whose arms; su-mukhau—with attractive faces; sundara-varau—the
most beautiful; bala—young; dvirada—like an elephant; vikramau—whose
walking; dhvaja—by the flag; vajra—lightning bolt; aìkuça—elephant goad;
ambhojaiù—and lotus; cihnitaiù—marked; aìghribhiù—with Their feet;
vrajam—the cow pasture; çobhayantau—beautifying; mahä-ätmänau—great
souls; sa-anukroça—compassionate; smita—and smiling; ékñaëau—whose
glances; udära—magnanimous; rucira—and attractive; kréòau—whose
pastimes; srak-vinau—wearing jeweled necklaces; vana-mälinau—and wearing
flower garlands; puëya—auspicious; gandha—with fragrant substances;
anulipta—anointed; aìgau—whose limbs; snätau—freshly bathed;
viraja—spotless; väsasau—whose garments; pradhäna—the most exalted;
puruñau—two persons; ädyau—primeval; jagat-dhetü—the causes of the
universe; jagat-paté—the masters of the universe; avatérëau—having
descended; jagati-arthe—for the benefit of the universe; sva-aàçena—in Their
distinct forms; bala-keçavau—Balaräma and Keçava; diçaù—all the directions;
vitimiräù—free from darkness; räjan—O King; kurväëau—making;
prabhayä—with the effulgence; svayä—Their own; yathä—as;
märakataù—made of emerald; çailaù—a mountain; raupyaù—one made of
silver; ca—and; kanaka—with gold; acitau—both decorated.
TRANSLATION
Akrüra then saw Kåñëa and Balaräma in the village of Vraja, going to milk
the cows. Kåñëa wore yellow garments, Balaräma blue, and Their eyes
resembled autumnal lotuses. One of those two mighty-armed youths, the
shelters of the goddess of fortune, had a dark-blue complexion, and the other's
was white. With Their fine-featured faces They were the most beautiful of all
persons. As They walked with the gait of young elephants, glancing about with
compassionate smiles, Those two exalted personalities beautified the cow
pasture with the impressions of Their feet, which bore the marks of the flag,
lightning bolt, elephant goad and lotus. The two Lords, whose pastimes are most
magnanimous and attractive, were ornamented with jeweled necklaces and
flower garlands, anointed with auspicious, fragrant substances, freshly bathed,
and dressed in spotless raiment. They were the primeval Supreme Personalities,
the masters and original causes of the universes, who had for the welfare of the
earth now descended in Their distinct forms of Keçava and Balaräma. O King
Parékñit, They resembled two gold-bedecked mountains, one of emerald and the
other of silver, as with Their effulgence They dispelled the sky's darkness in all
directions.
TEXT 34
r"TaAÔaUNARmavaplautya
s$aAe'‚U(r": µaeh"ivaù"la:
papaAta car"NAAepaAntae
d"Nx"va‰"Amak{(SNAyaAe:
rathät türëam avaplutya
so 'krüraù sneha-vihvalaù
papäta caraëopänte
daëòa-vad räma-kåñëayoù
SYNONYMS
rathät—from his chariot; türëam—quickly; avaplutya—climbing down;
saù—he; akrüraù—Akrüra; sneha—by affection; vihvalaù—overcome;
papäta—fell; caraëa-upänte—next to the feet; daëòa-vat—flat like a rod;
räma-kåñëayoù—of Balaräma and Kåñëa.
TRANSLATION
Akrüra, overwhelmed with affection, quickly jumped down from his chariot
and fell at the feet of Kåñëa and Balaräma like a rod.
TEXT 35
BagAvaÚ"zARnaAø"Ad"-
baASpapayaARku(laeºaNA:
paulak(icataAËÿ @AEtk(NQ$YaAta,
svaAKyaAnae naAzAk(ªa{pa
bhagavad-darçanählädacopyright
©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1058
bäñpa-paryäkulekñaëaù
pulakacitäìga autkaëöhyät
sväkhyäne näçakan nåpa
SYNONYMS
bhagavat—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; darçana—because of seeing;
ähläda—due to the joy; bäñpa—with tears; paryäkula—overflowing;
ékñaëaù—whose eyes; pulaka—with eruptions; äcita—marked; aìgaù-whose
limbs; autkaëöhyät—from eagerness; sva-äkhyäne—to announce himself; na
açakat—he was not able; nåpa—O King.
TRANSLATION
The joy of seeing the Supreme Lord flooded Akrüra's eyes with tears and
decorated his limbs with eruptions of ecstasy. He felt such eagerness that he
could not speak to present himself, O King.
TEXT 36
BagAvaAMstamaiBa‘aetya
r"TaAËÿAiÆÿtapaAiNAnaA
pair"re"Bae'ByaupaAk{(Sya
‘aIta: ‘aNAtavats$ala:
bhagaväàs tam abhipretya
rathäìgäìkita-päëinä
parirebhe 'bhyupäkåñya
prétaù praëata-vatsalaù
SYNONYMS
bhagavän—the Supreme Lord; tam—him, Akrüra; abhipretya—recognizing;
ratha-aìga—with a chariot wheel; aìkita—marked; päëinä—by His hand;
parirebhe—He embraced; abhyupäkåñya—pulling near; prétaù—pleased;
praëata—to those who are surrendered; vatsalaù—who is benignly disposed.
TRANSLATION
Recognizing Akrüra, Lord Kåñëa drew him close with His hand, which bears
the sign of the chariot wheel, and then embraced him. Kåñëa felt pleased, for
He is always benignly disposed toward His surrendered devotees.
PURPORT
According to the äcäryas, by extending His hand marked with the chariot
wheel, or cakra, Lord Kåñëa indicated His ability to kill Kaàsa.
TEXTS 37-38
s$aÆÿSaRNAê ‘aNAtama,
opagAu÷ mah"AmanaA:
gA{h"ItvaA paAiNAnaA paANAI
@nayats$aAnaujaAe gA{h"ma,
pa{"î"ATa svaAgAtaM tasmaE
inavaeâ ca var"As$anama,
‘aºaAlya ivaiDavatpaAd"AE
maDaupak(ARhR"NAmaAh"r"ta,
saìkarñaëaç ca praëatam
upaguhya mahä-manäù
gåhétvä päëinä päëé
anayat sänujo gåham
påñövätha sv-ägataà tasmai
nivedya ca varäsanam
prakñälya vidhi-vat pädau
madhu-parkärhaëam äharat
SYNONYMS
saìkarñaëaù—Lord Balaräma; ca—and; praëatam—who was standing with his
head bowed; upaguhya—embracing; mahä-manäù—magnanimous;
gåhétvä—taking hold of; päëinä—with His hand; päëé—his two hands;
anayat—He took; sa-anujaù—with His younger brother (Lord Kåñëa);
gåham—to His residence; påñövä—inquiring; atha—then; su-ägatam—about
the comfort of his trip; tasmai—to him; nivedya—offering; ca—and;
vara—excellent; äsanam—a seat; prakñälya—washing; vidhi-vat—in
accordance with scriptural injunctions; pädau—his feet; madhu-parka—honey
mixed with milk; arhaëam—as a respectful offering; äharat—He brought.
TRANSLATION
As Akrüra stood with his head bowed, Lord Saìkarñaëa [Balaräma] grasped
his joined hands, and then Balaräma took him to His house in the company of
Lord Kåñëa. After inquiring from Akrüra whether his trip had been
comfortable, Balaräma offered him a first-class seat, bathed his feet in
accordance with the injunctions of scripture and respectfully served him milk
with honey.
TEXT 39
inavaeâ gAAM caAitaTayae
s$aMvaA÷ ™aAntamaAx"+ta:
@ªaM baò"gAuNAM maeDyaM
™aÜ"yaAepaAh"r"iã"Bau:
nivedya gäà cätithaye
saàvähya çräntam äòåtaù
annaà bahu-guëaà medhyaà
çraddhayopäharad vibhuù
SYNONYMS
nivedya—presenting in charity; gäm—a cow; ca—and; atithaye—to the guest;
saàvähya—massaging; çräntam—who was tired; adåtaù—with great respect;
annam—cooked food; bahu-guëam—of various tastes; medhyam—suitable for
offering; çraddhayä—faithfully; upäharat—offered; vibhuù—the almighty
Lord.
TRANSLATION
The almighty Lord Balaräma presented Akrüra with the gift of a cow,
massaged his feet to relieve him of fatigue and then with great respect and faith
fed him suitably prepared food of various fine tastes.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté, Akrüra went to Kåñëa's and
Balaräma's house on the twelfth lunar day, on which one should not break a
fast at night. However, Akrüra dispensed with this formality because he was
eager to receive food in the Lord's house.
TEXT 40
tasmaE Baul(vatae ‘aItyaA
r"Ama: par"maDamaRivata,
maKavaAs$aEgARnDamaAlyaE:
par"AM ‘aIitaM vyaDaAtpauna:
tasmai bhuktavate prétyä
rämaù parama-dharma-vit
makha-väsair gandha-mälyaiù
paräà prétià vyadhät punaù
SYNONYMS
tasmai—to him; bhuktavate—who had finished eating; prétyä—affectionately;
rämaù—Lord Balaräma; parama—the supreme; dharma-vit—knower of
religious principles; mukha-väsaiù—with aromatic herbs for sweetening the
mouth; gandha—with perfume; mälyaiù—and flower garlands; paräm—the
highest; prétim—satisfaction; vyadhät—arranged; punaù—further.
TRANSLATION
When Akrüra had eaten to his satisfaction,, Lord Balaräma, the supreme
knower of religious duties, offered him aromatic herbs for sweetening his
mouth, along with fragrances and flower garlands. Thus Akrüra once again
enjoyed the highest pleasure.
TEXT 41
pa‘acC$ s$atk{(taM nand":
k(TaM sTa inar"nauƒahe"
kM(s$ae jaIvaita d"AzAAhR"
s$aAEnapaAlaA wvaAvaya:
papraccha sat-kåtaà nandaù
kathaà stha niranugrahe
kaàse jévati däçärha
sauna-pälä ivävayaù
SYNONYMS
papraccha—asked; sat-kåtam—who had been honored; nandaù—Nanda
Mahäräja; katham—how; stha—you are living; niranugrahe—the merciless;
kaàse—Kaàsa; jévati—while he is alive; däçärha—O descendant of Daçärha;
sauna—an animal slaughterer; päläù—whose keeper; iva—just like;
avayaù—sheep.
TRANSLATION
Nanda Mahäräja asked Akrüra: O descendant of Daçärha, how are all of you
maintaining yourselves while that merciless Kaàsa remains alive? You are just
like sheep under the care of a butcher.
TEXT 42
yaAe'vaDaItsvasvas$austaAek(Ana,
‚(AezAntyaA @s$auta{pKala:
ikM( nau isvaÔat‘ajaAnaAM va:
ku(zAlaM ivama{zAAmahe"
yo 'vadhét sva-svasus tokän
kroçantyä asu-tåp khalaù
kià nu svit tat-prajänäà vaù
kuçalaà vimåçämahe
SYNONYMS
yaù—who; avadhét—killed; sva—of his own; svasuù—sister; tokän—the babies;
kroçantyäù—who was crying; asu-tåp—self-indulgent; khalaù—cruel; kim
nu—what then; svit—indeed; tat—his; prajänäm—of the subjects; vaù—you;
kuçalam—well-being; vimåçämahe—we should conjecture.
TRANSLATION
That cruel, self-serving Kaàsa murdered the infants of his own sister in her
presence, even as she cried in anguish. So why should we even ask about the
well-being of you, his subjects?
TEXT 43
wtTaM s$aUna{tayaA vaAcaA
nande"na s$aus$aBaAijata:
@‚U(r": pair"pa{íe"na
jah"AvaDvapair"™amama,
itthaà sünåtayä väcä
nandena su-sabhäjitaù
akrüraù paripåñöena
jahäv adhva-pariçramam
SYNONYMS
ittham—thus; sü-nåtayä—very true and pleasing; väcä—with words;
nandena—by Nanda Mahäräja; su—well; sabhäjitaù—honored;
akrüraù—Akrüra; paripåñöena—by the inquiry; jahau—put aside; adhva—of
the road; pariçramam—his fatigue.
TRANSLATION
Honored by Nanda Mahäräja with these true and pleasing words of inquiry,
Akrüra forgot the fatigue of his journey.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Tenth Canto, Thirty eighth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Akrüra's Arrival in Våndävana."
39. Akrüra's Vision
This chapter describes how Akrüra informed Lord Kåñëa and Lord
Balaräma of Kaàsa's plans and his activities in Mathurä; what the gopés cried
out in distress when Kåñëa left for Mathurä; and also the vision of Lord Viñëu's
abode that Akrüra saw within the water of the Yamunä.
When Kåñëa and Balaräma offered Akrüra great respect and comfortably
seated him on a couch, he felt that all the desires he had reflected on while
traveling to Våndävana were now fulfilled. After the evening meal, Kåñëa
asked Akrüra whether his trip had been peaceful and whether he was well.
The Lord also inquired about how Kaàsa was behaving toward their family
members, and finally He asked why Akrüra had come.
Akrüra described how Kaàsa had been persecuting the Yädavas, what
Närada had told Kaàsa and how Kaàsa had been treating Vasudeva cruelly.
Akrüra also spoke of Kaàsa's desire to bring Kåñëa and Balaräma to Mathurä
to kill Them on the pretext of Their seeing the bow sacrifice and engaging in a
wrestling match. Kåñëa and Balaräma laughed out loud when They heard this.
They went to Their father, Nanda, and informed him of Kaàsa's orders.
Nanda then issued an order to all the residents of Vraja that they should
collect various offerings for the King and prepare to go to Mathurä.
The young gopés were extremely upset to hear that Kåñëa and Balaräma
would be going to Mathurä. They lost all external awareness and began to
remember Kåñëa's pastimes. Condemning the creator for separating them from
Him, they began to lament. They said that Akrüra did not deserve his name (a,
"not"; krüra, "cruel"), since he was so cruel to be taking away their dearmost
Kåñëa. "It must be that fate is against us," they lamented, "because otherwise
the elders of Vraja would have forbidden Kåñëa to leave. So let us forget our
shyness and try to stop Lord Mädhava from going." With these words the
young cowherd girls began to chant Kåñëa's names and cry.
But even as they wept, Akrüra began taking Kåñëa and Balaräma to
Mathurä in his chariot. The cowherd men of Gokula followed behind on their
wagons, and the young gopés also walked behind for some distance, but then
they became placated by Kåñëa's glances and gestures and pacified by a message
from Him that said "I will return." With their minds completely absorbed in
Kåñëa, the cowherd girls stood as still as figures in a painting until they could
no longer see the chariot's flag or the dust cloud being raised on the road.
Then, chanting Kåñëa's glories all the while, they despondently returned to
their homes.
Akrüra halted the chariot at the bank of the Yamunä so Kåñëa and
Balaräma could perform a ritual of purification and drink some water. After
the two Lords had gotten back into the chariot, Akrüra took Their permission
to bathe in the Yamunä. As he recited Vedic mantras, he was startled to see
the two Lords standing in the water. Akrüra came out of the river and
returned to the chariot-where he saw the Lords still sitting. Then he returned
to the water to find out if the two figures he had seen there were real or not.
What Akrüra saw in the water was four-armed Lord Väsudeva. His
complexion was dark blue like a fresh raincloud, He wore yellow garments and
He lay on the lap of thousand-hooded Ananta Çeña. Lord Väsudeva was
receiving the prayers of perfected beings, celestial serpents and demons, and
He was encircled by His personal attendants. Serving Him were His many
potencies, such as Çré, Puñöi and Ilä, while Brahmä and other demigods sang
His praises. Akrüra rejoiced at this vision and, joining his palms in
supplication, began to pray to the Supreme Lord in a voice choked with
emotion.
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
s$auKaAepaivaí": payaRÆeÿ
r"mak{(SNAAeç&maAinata:
laeBae manaAer"TaAna, s$avaARna,
paiTa yaAna, s$a cak(Ar" h"
çré-çuka uväca
sukhopaviñöaù paryaìke
rama-kåñëoru-mänitaù
lebhe manorathän sarvän
pathi yän sa cakära ha
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; sukha—comfortably;
upaviñöaù-seated; paryaìke—on a couch; räma-kåñëa—by Lord Balaräma and
Lord Kåñëa; uru—very much; mänitaù—honored; lebhe—he attained;
manaù-rathän—his desires; sarvän—all; pathi—on the road; yän—which;
saù—he; cakära ha—had manifested.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Having been honored so much by Lord Balaräma
and Lord Kåñëa, Akrüra, seated comfortably on a couch, felt that all the desires
he had contemplated on the road were now fulfilled.
TEXT 2
ik(malaByaM BagAvaita
‘as$aªae ™aIinake(tanae
taTaAipa tatpar"A r"Ajana,
na ih" vaAHC$inta ik(Âana
kim alabhyaà bhagavati
prasanne çré-niketane
tathäpi tat-parä räjan
na hi väïchanti kiïcana
SYNONYMS
kim—what; alabhyam—is unattainable; bhagavati—the Supreme Lord;
prasanne—being satisfied; çré—of the goddess of fortune; niketane—the
resting place; tathä api—nevertheless; tat-paräù—those who are devoted to
Him; räjan—O King (Parékñit); na—do not, hi-indeed; väïchanti—desire;
kiïcana—anything.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, what is unattainable for one who has satisfied the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the shelter of the goddess of fortune? Even so, those
who are dedicated to His devotional service never want anything from Him.
TEXT 3
s$aAyantanaAzAnaM k{(tvaA
BagAvaAnde"vak(Ls$auta:
s$auô$ts$au va{ÔaM kM(s$asya
pa‘acC$Anyai»ak(LiSaRtama,
säyantanäçanaà kåtvä
bhagavän devaké-sutaù
suhåtsu våttaà kaàsasya
papracchänyac cikérñitam
SYNONYMS
säyantana—of the evening; açanam—the dining; kåtvä—having done;
bhagavän—the Supreme Lord; devaké-sutaù—the son of Devaké;
suhåtsu—toward His well-wishing relatives and friends; våttam—about the
behavior; kaàsasya—of Kaàsa; papraccha—He inquired; anyat—other;
cikérñitam—intentions.
TRANSLATION
After the evening meal, Lord Kåñëa, the son of Devaké, asked Akrüra how
Kaàsa was treating their dear relatives and friends and what the King was
planning to do.
TEXT 4
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
taAta s$aAEmyaAgAta: k(i»ata,
svaAgAtaM Ba‰"mastau va:
@ipa svaÁaAitabanDaUnaAma,
@namaIvamanaAmayama,
çré-bhagavän uväca
täta saumyägataù kaccit
sv-ägataà bhadram astu vaù
api sva-jïäti-bandhünäm
anamévam anämayam
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; täta—O uncle;
saumya—O gentle one; ägataù—arrived; kaccit—whether;
su-ägatam—welcome; bhadram—all good; astu—may there be; vaù—for you;
api—whether; sva—for your well-wishing friends; jïäti—intimate relatives;
bandhünäm—and other family members; anamévam—freedom from
unhappiness; anämayarn—freedom from disease.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord said: My dear, gentle Uncle Akrüra, was your trip here
comfortable? May all good fortune be yours. Are our well-wishing friends and
our relatives, both close and distant, happy and in good health?
TEXT 5
ikM( nau na: ku(zAlaM pa{cCe$
WDamaAnae ku(laAmayae
kM(s$ae maAtaulanaA°aAËÿ
svaAnaAM nastat‘ajaAs$au ca
kià nu naù kuçalaà påcche
edhamäne kulämaye
kaàse mätula-nämnäìga
svänäà nas tat-prajäsu ca
SYNONYMS
kim—what; nu—rather; naù—our; kuçalam—about the well-being; påcche—I
should inquire; edhamäne—when he is prospering; kula—of our family;
ämaye—the disease; kaàse—King Kaàsa; mätula-nämnä—by the name
"maternal uncle"; aìga—my dear; svänäm—of the relatives; naù—our;
tat—his; prajäsu—of the citizens; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
But, my dear Akrüra, as long as King Kaàsa—that disease of our family
who goes by the name "maternal uncle"—is still prospering, why should I even
bother to ask about the well-being of our family members and his other
subjects?
TEXT 6
@h"Ae @smad"BaUàU"ir"
ipa‡aAeva{RijanamaAyaRyaAe:
yaÜe"taAe: pau‡amar"NAM
yaÜe"taAebaRnDanaM tayaAe:
aho asmad abhüd bhüri
pitror våjinam äryayoù
yad-dhetoù putra-maraëaà
yad-dhetor bandhanaà tayoù
SYNONYMS
aho—ah; asmat—because of Me; abhüt—there was; bhüri—great; pitroù—for
My parents; våjinam—suffering; äryayoù—for the offenseless ones;
yat-hetoù—because of whom; putra—of their sons; maraëam—the death;
yat-hetoù—because of whom; bandhanam—bondage; tayoù—their.
TRANSLATION
Just see how much suffering I have caused My offenseless parents ! Because
of Me their sons were killed and they themselves imprisoned.
PURPORT
Because Kaàsa had heard a prophecy that the eighth son of Devaké would
kill him, he tried to kill all her children. For the same reason, he imprisoned
her and her husband, Vasudeva.
TEXT 7
id"í"YaAâ d"zARnaM svaAnaAM
ma÷M va: s$aAEmya k(AiÉÿtama,
s$aÃaAtaM vaNyaRtaAM taAta
tavaAgAmanak(Ar"NAma,
diñöyädya darçanaà svänäà
mahyaà vaù saumya käìkñitam
saïjätaà varëyatäà täta
tavägamana-käraëam
SYNONYMS
diñöyä—by good fortune; adya—today; darçanam—the sight; svänäm—of My
close relative; mahyam—for Me; vaù—yourself; saumya—O gentle one;
käìkñitam—desired; saïjätam—has come about; varëyatäm—please explain;
täta—O uncle; tava—your; ägamana—for the coming; käraëam—the reason.
TRANSLATION
By good fortune We have today fulfilled Our desire to see you, Our dear
relative. O gentle uncle, please tell Us why you have come.
TEXT 8
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
pa{í"Ae BagAvataA s$ava<
vaNARyaAmaAs$a maADava:
vaEr"AnaubanDaM yaäu"Sau
vas$aude"vavaDaAeâmama,
çré-çuka uväca
påñöo bhagavatä sarvaà
varëayäm äsa mädhavaù
vairänubandhaà yaduñu
vasudeva-vadhodyamam
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; påñöaù—requested; bhagavatä—by
the Supreme Lord; sarvam—everything; varëayäm äsa—described;
mädhavaù—Akrüra, descendant of Madhu; vaira-anubandham—the inimical
attitude; yaduñu—toward the Yadus; vasudeva—Vasudeva; vadha—to murder;
udyamam—the attempt.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: In response to the Supreme Lord's request, Akrüra,
the descendant of Madhu, described the whole situation, including King
Kaàsa's enmity toward the Yadus and his attempt to murder Vasudeva.
TEXT 9
yats$ande"zAAe yad"Ta< vaA
äU"ta: s$am‘aeiSata: svayama,
yaäu"lM( naAr"de"naAsya
svajanmaAnak(äu"näu"Bae:
yat-sandeço yad-arthaà vä
dütaù sampreñitaù svayam
yad uktaà näradenäsya
sva-janmänakadundubheù
SYNONYMS
yat—having which; sandeçaù—message; yat—which; artham—purpose;
vä—and; dütaù—as a messenger; sampreñitaù—sent; svayam—himself
(Akrüra); yat—what; uktam—was spoken; näradena—by Närada; asya—to
him (Kaàsa); sva—His (Kåñëa's); janma—birth; änakadundubheù—from
Vasudeva.
TRANSLATION
Akrüra relayed the message he had been sent to deliver. He also described
Kaàsa's real intentions and how Närada had informed Kaàsa that Kåñëa had
been born as the son of Vasudeva.
TEXT 10
™autvaA‚U(r"vaca: k{(SNAAe
balaê par"vaIr"h"A
‘ah"sya nandM" ipatarM"
r"AÁaA id"íM" ivajaÁatau:
çrutväkrüra-vacaù kåñëo
balaç ca para-véra-hä
prahasya nandaà pitaraà
räjïä diñöaà vijajïatuù
SYNONYMS
çrutvä—hearing; akrüra-vacaù—Akrüra's words; kåñëaù—Lord Kåñëa;
balaù—Lord Balaräma; ca—and; para-véra—of opposing heroes; hä—the
destroyer; prahasya—laughing; nandam—to Nanda Mahäräja; pitaram—Their
father; räjïä—by the King; diñöam—the order given; vijajïatuù—They
informed.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa and Lord Balaräma, the vanquisher of heroic opponents, laughed
when They heard Akrüra's words. The Lords then informed Their father,
Nanda Mahäräja, of King Kaàsa's orders.
TEXTS 11-12
gAAepaAna, s$amaAid"zAts$aAe'ipa
gA{÷taAM s$avaRgAAer"s$a:
opaAyanaAina gA{õ"IDvaM
yaujyantaAM zAk(q%Aina ca
yaAsyaAma: ìAe maDaupaur"I%M
d"AsyaAmaAe na{patae r"s$aAna,
‰"ºyaAma: s$aumah"tpavaR
yaAinta jaAnapad"A: ik(la
WvamaAGaAeSayatºa‡aA
nand"gAAepa: svagAAeku(lae
gopän samädiçat so 'pi
gåhyatäà sarva-go-rasaù
upäyanäni gåhëédhvaà
yujyantäà çakaöäni ca
yäsyämaù çvo madhu-puréà
däsyämo nåpate rasän
drakñyämaù su-mahat parva
yänti jänapadäù kila
evam äghoñayat kñaträ
nanda-gopaù sva-gokule
SYNONYMS
gopän—the cowherd men; samädiçät-ordered; saù—he (Nanda Mahäräja);
api—also; gåhyatäm—have collected; sarva—all; go-rasaù—the milk products;
upäyanäni—excellent gifts; gåhëédhvam—take; yujyantäm—yoke;
çakaöäni—the wagons; ca—and; yäsyämaù—we shall go; çvaù—tomorrow;
madhu-purém—to Mathurä; däsyämaù—we shall give; nåpateù—to the King;
rasän—our milk products; drakñyämaù—we shall see; su-mahat—a very great;
parva—festival; yänti—are going; jänapadäù—the residents of all the outlying
districts; kila—indeed; evam—thus; äghoñayat—he had announced; kñaträ—by
the village constable; nanda-gopaù—Nanda Mahäräja; sva-gokule—to the
people of his Gokula.
TRANSLATION
Nanda Mahäräja then issued orders to the cowherd men by having the
village constable make the following announcement throughout Nanda's domain
of Vraja: "Go collect all the available milk products. Bring valuable gifts and
yoke your wagons. Tomorrow we shall go to Mathurä, present our milk
products to the King and see a very great festival. The residents of all the
outlying districts are also going."
PURPORT
Nanda wanted to bring ghee and other milk products as taxes for the King.
TEXT 13
gAAepyastaAstaäu"pa™autya
baBaUvauvyaRiTataA Ba{zAma,
r"Amak{(SNAAE paur"I%M naetauma,
@‚U(rM" ˜ajamaAgAtama,
gopyas täs tad upaçrutya
babhüvur vyathitä bhåçam
räma-kåñëau puréà netum
akrüraà vrajam ägatam
SYNONYMS
gopyaù—the cowherd girls; täù—they; tat—then; upaçrutya—hearing;
babhüvuù—became; vyathitäù—distressed; bhåçam—extremely;
räma-kåñëau—Balaräma and Kåñëa; purém—to the city; netum—to take;
akrüram—Akrüra; vrajam—to Våndävana; ägatam—come.
TRANSLATION
When the young gopés heard that Akrüra had come to Vraja to take Kåñëa
and Balaräma to the city, they became extremely distressed.
TEXT 14
k(AiêÔatk{(taô$ÔaApa
ìAs$amlaAnamauKai™aya:
›aMs$aä,"äu"kU(lavalaya
ke(zAƒanTyaê k(Aêna
käçcit tat-kåta-håt-täpa
çväsa-mläna-mukha-çriyaù
sraàsad-duküla-valaya
keça-granthyaç ca käçcana
SYNONYMS
käçcit—some of them; tat—by that (hearing); kåta—created; håt—in their
hearts; täpa—from the torment; çväsa—by the sighing; mläna—made pale;
mukha—of their faces; çriyaù—the luster; sraàsat—loosening; duküla—their
dresses; valaya—bracelets; keça—in their hair; granthyaù—the knots; ca—and;
käçcana—others.
TRANSLATION
Some gopés felt so pained at heart that their faces turned pale from their
heavy breathing. Others were so anguished that their dresses, bracelets and
braids became loose.
TEXT 15
@nyaAê tad"nauDyaAna
inava{ÔaAzAeSava{Ôaya:
naAByajaAnaiªamaM laAek(ma,
@AtmalaAekM( gAtaA wva
anyäç ca tad-anudhyäna
nivåttäçeña-våttayaù
näbhyajänann imaà lokam
ätma-lokaà gatä iva
SYNONYMS
anyäù—others; ca—and; tat—on Him; anudhyäna—by fixed meditation;
nivåtta—ceased; açeña—all; våttayaù—their sensory functions; na
abhyajänan—they were unaware; imam—of this; lokam—world; ätma—of
self-realization; lokam—the realm; gatäù—those who have attained; iva—just
as.
TRANSLATION
Other gopés entirely stopped their sensory activities and became fixed in
meditation on Kåñëa. They lost all awareness of the external world, just like
those who attain the platform of self-realization.
PURPORT
The gopés were in fact already on the platform of self-realization. The
Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 20.108) states, jévera svarüpa haya kåñëera
nitya-däsa: "The self, or individual soul, is an eternal servant of Kåñëa." Thus
because they were rendering the most intense loving service to the Lord, the
gopés were situated at the highest stage of self-realization.
TEXT 16
smar"ntyaêApar"A: zAAEre"r,"
@naur"AgAismataeir"taA:
ô$id"s$pa{zAiê‡apad"A
igAr": s$ammaumauò": iñya:
smarantyaç cäparäù çaurer
anuräga-smiteritäù
hådi-spåçaç citra-padä
giraù sammumuhuù striyaù
SYNONYMS
smarantyaù—remembering; ca—and; aparäù—others; çaureù—of Kåñëa;
anuräga—affectionate; smita—by His smile; éritäù—sent; hådi—the heart;
spåçaù—touching; citra—wonderful; padäù—with phrases; giraù—the speech;
sammumuhuù—fainted; striyaù—women.
TRANSLATION
And still other young women fainted simply by remembering the words of
Lord Çauri [Kåñëa]. These words, decorated with wonderful phrases and
expressed with affectionate smiles, would deeply touch the young girls' hearts.
TEXTS 17-18
gAitaM s$aulailataAM caeí"AM
iµagDah"As$aAvalaAek(nama,
zAAek(Apah"Aina namaARiNA
‘aAeÚ"Amacair"taAina ca
icantayantyaAe mauku(nd"sya
BaItaA ivar"h"k(Atar"A:
s$amaetaA: s$aÎÿzA: ‘aAecaur,"
@™aumauKyaAe'cyautaAzAyaA:
gatià su-lalitäà ceñöäà
snigdha-häsävalokanam
çokäpahäni narmäëi
proddäma-caritäni ca
cintayantyo mukundasya
bhétä viraha-kätaräù
sametäù saìghaçaù procur
açru-mukhyo 'cyutäçayäù
SYNONYMS
gatim—the movements; su-lalitäm—very charming; ceñöäm—the activities;
snigdha—affectionate; häsa—smiling; avalokanam—the glances;
çoka—unhappiness; apahäni—which remove; narmäëi—the joking words;
proddäma—mighty; caritäni—the deeds; ca—and; cintayantyaù—thinking
about; mukundasya—of Lord Kåñëa; bhétaù—afraid; viraha—because of
separation; kätaräù—greatly distressed; sametäù—joining together;
saìghaçaù—in groups; procuù—they spoke; açru—with tears; mukhyaù—their
faces; acyuta-äçayäù—their minds absorbed in Lord Acyuta.
TRANSLATION
The gopés were frightened at the prospect of even the briefest separation
from Lord Mukunda, so now, as they remembered His graceful gait, His
pastimes, His affectionate, smiling glances, His heroic deeds and His joking
words, which would relieve their distress, they were beside themselves with
anxiety at the thought of the great separation about to come. They gathered in
groups and spoke to one another, their faces covered with tears and their minds
fully absorbed in Acyuta.
TEXT 19
™aIgAAepya Ocau:
@h"Ae ivaDaAtastava na ¸(icaÚ"yaA
s$aMyaAejya maE‡yaA ‘aNAyaena de"ih"na:
taAMêAk{(taATaARna, ivayaunaÉÿYapaATaRkM(
iva‚(Lix"taM tae'BaRk(caeií"taM yaTaA
çré-gopya ücuù
aho vidhätas tava na kvacid dayä
saàyojya maitryä praëayena dehinaù
täàç cäkåtärthän viyunaìkñy apärthakaà
vikréòitaà te 'rbhaka-ceñöitaà yathä
SYNONYMS
çré-gopyaù ücuù—the gopés said; aho—O; vidhätaù—Providence; tava—your;
na—there is not; kvacit—anywhere; dayä—mercy; saàyojya—bringing
together; maitryä—with friendship; praëayena—and with love;
dehinaù—embodied living beings; tän—them; ca—and; akåta—unfulfilled;
arthän—their aims; viyunaìkñi—you separate; apärthakam—uselessly;
vikréòitam—play; te—your; arbhaka—of a child; ceñöitam—the activity;
yathä—as.
TRANSLATION
The gopés said: O Providence, you have no mercy! You bring embodied
creatures together in friendship and love and then senselessly separate them
before they fulfill their desires. This whimsical play of yours is like a child's
game.
TEXT 20
yastvaM ‘ad"zyaARis$ataku(ntalaAva{taM
mauku(nd"vaf‡aM s$auk(paAelamauªas$ama,
zAAek(ApanaAed"ismatalaezAs$aund"rM"
k(r"AeiSa paAr"Aeºyamas$aADau tae k{(tama,
yas tvaà pradarçyäsita-kuntalävåtaà
mukunda-vaktraà su-kapolam un-nasam
çokäpanoda-smita-leça-sundaraà
karoñi pärokñyam asädhu te kåtam
SYNONYMS
yaù—who; tvam—you; pradarçya—showing; asita—black; kuntala—by locks;
ävåtam—framed; mukunda—of Kåñëa; vaktram—the face; su-kapolam—with
fine cheeks; ut-nasam—and raised nose; çoka—misery; apanoda—eradicating;
smita—with His smile; leça—slight; sundaram—beautiful; karoñi—you make;
pärokñyam—invisible; asädhu—not good; te—by you; kåtam—done.
TRANSLATION
Having shown us Mukunda's face, framed by dark locks and beautified by
His fine cheeks, raised nose and gentle smiles, which eradicate all misery, you
are now making that face invisible. This behavior of yours is not at all good.
TEXT 21
‚U(r"stvama‚U(r"s$amaAKyayaA sma nazA,
caºauihR" d"ÔaM h"r"s$ae bataAÁavata,
yaenaEk(de"zAe'iKalas$agARs$aAEï"vaM
tvad"Iyama‰"Aºma vayaM maDauiã"Sa:
krüras tvam akrüra-samäkhyayä sma naç
cakñur hi dattaà harase batäjïa-vat
yenaika-deçe 'khila-sarga-sauñöhavaà
tvadéyam adräkñma vayaà madhu-dviñaù
SYNONYMS
krüraù—cruel; tvam—you (are); akrüra-samäkhyayä—by the name Akrüra
(which means "not cruel"); sma—certainly; naù—our; cakñuù—eyes;
hi—indeed; dattam—given; harase—you are taking; bata—alas; ajïa—a fool;
vat—just like; yena—with which (eyes); eka—in one; deçe—place; akhila—of
all; sarga—the creation; sauñöhavam—the perfection; tvadéyam—your;
adräkñma—have seen; vayam—we; madhudviñaù—of Lord Kåñëa, enemy of
the demon Madhu.
TRANSLATION
O Providence, though you come here with the name Akrüra, you are indeed
cruel, for like a fool you are taking away what you once gave us—those eyes
with which we have seen, even in one feature of Lord Madhudviña's form, the
perfection of your entire creation.
PURPORT
The gopés did not care to see anything but Kåñëa; therefore if Kåñëa left
Våndävana, their eyes would have no function. Thus Kåñëa's departure was
blinding these poor girls, and in their distress they berated Akrüra, whose
name means "not cruel," as cruel indeed.
TEXT 22
na nand"s$aUnau: ºaNABaËÿs$aAEô$d":
s$amaIºatae na: svak{(taAtaur"A bata
ivah"Aya gAeh"Ana, svajanaAna, s$autaAna, pataI%Ms$a,
taÚ"AsyamaÜ"AepagAtaA navai‘aya:
na nanda-sünuù kñaëa-bhaìga-sauhådaù
samékñate naù sva-kåtäturä bata
vihäya gehän sva-janän sutän patéàs
tad-däsyam addhopagatä nava-priyaù
SYNONYMS
na—does not; nanda-sünuù—the son of Nanda Mahäräja; kñaëa—in a
moment; bhaìga—the breaking; sauhådaù—of whose friendship;
samékñate—look upon; naù—us; sva—by Him; kåta—made; äturäù—under His
control; bata—alas; vihäya—giving up; gehän—our homes;
sva-janän—relatives; sutän—children; patén—husbands; tat—to Him;
däsyam—servitude; addhä—directly; upagatäù—who have taken up;
nava—ever new; priyaù—whose lovers.
TRANSLATION
Alas, Nanda's son, who breaks loving friendships in a second, will not even
look directly at us. Forcibly brought under His control, we abandoned our
homes, relatives, children and husbands just to serve Him, but He is always
looking for new lovers.
TEXT 23
s$auKaM ‘aBaAtaA r"janaIyamaAizASa:
s$atyaA baBaUvau: paur"yaAeiSataAM ‹auvama,
yaA: s$aM‘aivaí"sya mauKaM ˜ajas$patae:
paAsyantyapaAËÿAetk(ilataismataAs$avama,
sukhaà prabhätä rajanéyam äçiñaù
satyä babhüvuù pura-yoñitäà dhruvam
yäù saàpraviñöasya mukhaà vrajas-pateù
päsyanty apäìgotkalita-smitäsavam
SYNONYMS
sukham—happy; prabhätä—its dawn; rajané—the night; iyam—this;
äçiñaù—the hopes; satyäù—true; babhüvuù—have become; pura—of the city;
yoñitäm—of the women; dhruvam—certainly; yäù—who; saàpraviñöasya—of
Him who has entered (Mathurä); mukham—the face; vrajaù-pateù—of the
master of Vraja; päsyanti—they will drink; apäìga—upon the corners of His
eyes; utkalita—expanded; smita—a smile; äsavam—nectar.
TRANSLATION
The dawn following this night will certainly be auspicious for the women of
Mathurä. All their hopes will now be fulfilled, for as the Lord of Vraja enters
their city, they will be able to drink from His face the nectar of the smile
emanating from the corners of His eyes.
TEXT 24
taAs$aAM mauku(nd"Ae maDaumaÃauBaAiSataEr,"
gA{h"ItaicaÔa: par"vaAnmanasvyaipa
k(TaM paunanaR: ‘aitayaAsyatae'balaA
ƒaAmyaA: s$alaÀaismataiva”amaE”aRmana,
täsäà mukundo madhu-maïju-bhäñitair
gåhéta-cittaù para-vän manasvy api
kathaà punar naù pratiyäsyate 'balä
grämyäù salajja-smita-vibhramair bhraman
SYNONYMS
täsäm—their; mukundaù—Kåñëa; madhu—like honey; maïju—sweet;
bhäñitaiù—by the words; gåhéta—seized; cittaù—whose mind;
paravän—subservient; manasvé—intelligent; api—although; katham—how;
punaù—again; naù—to us; pratiyäsyate—will He return; abaläù—O girls;
grämyäù—who are rustic; sa-lajja—shyly; smita—smiling; vibhramaiù—by
their enchantments; bhraman—becoming bewildered.
TRANSLATION
O gopés, although our Mukunda is intelligent and very obedient to His
parents, once He has fallen under the spell of the honey—sweet words of the
women of Mathurä and been enchanted by their alluring, shy smiles, how will
He ever return to us unsophisticated village girls?
TEXT 25
@â ‹auvaM ta‡a ä{"zAAe BaivaSyatae
d"AzAAhR"BaAejaAnDak(va{iSNAs$aAtvataAma,
mah"Aets$ava: ™aIr"maNAM gAuNAAs$padM"
‰"ºyainta yae caADvaina de"vak(Ls$autama,
adya dhruvaà tatra dåço bhaviñyate
däçärha-bhojändhaka-våñëi-sätvatäm
mahotsavaù çré-ramaëaà guëäspadaà
drakñyanti ye cädhvani devaké-sutam
SYNONYMS
adya—today; dhruvam—certainly; tatra—there; dåçaù—for the eyes;
bhaviñyate—there will be; däçärha-bhoja-andhaka-våñëi-sätvatäm—of the
members of the Däçärha, Bhoja, Andhaka, Våñëi and Sätvata clans;
mahä-utsavaù—a great festivity; çré—of the goddess of fortune; ramaëam—the
darling; guëa—of all transcendental qualities; äspadam—the reservoir;
drakñyanti—they will see; ye—those who; ca—also; adhvani—on the road;
devaké-sutam—Kåñëa, the son of Devaké.
TRANSLATION
When the Däçärhas, Bhojas, Andhakas, Våñëis and Sätvatas see the son of
Devaké in Mathurä, they will certainly enjoy a great festival for their eyes, as
will all those who see Him traveling along the road to the city. After all, He is
the darling of the goddess of fortune and the reservoir of all transcendental
qualities.
TEXT 26
maEtaiã"DasyaAk(ç&NAsya naAma BaUä,"
@‚U(r" wtyaetad"taIva d"Aç&NA:
yaAe's$aAvanaAìAsya s$auäu":iKatamjanaM
i‘ayaAit‘ayaM naeSyaita paAr"maDvana:
maitad-vidhasyäkaruëasya näma bhüd
akrüra ity etad atéva däruëaù
yo 'säv anäçväsya su-duùkhitam janaà
priyät priyaà neñyati päram adhvanaù
SYNONYMS
mä—should not; etat-vidhasya—of such; akaruëasya—an unkind person;
näma—the name; bhüt—be; akrüraù iti—"Akrüra"; etat—this;
atéva—extremely; däruëaù—cruel; yaù—who; asau—he; anäçväsya—not
consoling; su-duùkhitam—who are very miserable; janam—people;
priyät—than the most dear; priyam—dear (Kåñëa); neñyati—will take; päram
adhvanaù—beyond our sight.
TRANSLATION
He who is doing this merciless deed should not be called Akrüra. He is so
extremely cruel that without even trying to console the sorrowful residents of
Vraja, he is taking away Kåñëa, who is more dear to us than life itself.
TEXT 27
@naA‰R"DaIre"Sa s$amaAisTataAe r"TaM
tamanvamaI ca tvar"yainta äu"maRd"A:
gAAepaA @naAeiBa: sTaivarE"ç&paeiºataM
dE"vaM ca naAe'â ‘aitakU(lamaIh"tae
anärdra-dhér eña samästhito rathaà
tam anv amé ca tvarayanti durmadäù
gopä anobhiù sthavirair upekñitaà
daivaà ca no 'dya pratikülam éhate
SYNONYMS
anärdra-dhéù—hard-hearted; eñaù—this (Kåñëa); samästhitaù—having
mounted; ratham—the chariot; tam—Him; anu—following; amé—these;
ca—and; tvarayanti—hurry; durmadäù—befooled; gopäù—cowherds;
anobhiù—in their bullock carts; sthaviraiù—by the elders;
upekñitam—disregarded; daivam—fate; ca—and; naù—with us; adya—today;
pratikülam—unfavorably; éhate—is acting.
TRANSLATION
Hard-hearted Kåñëa has already mounted the chariot, and now the foolish
cowherds are hurrying after Him in their bullock carts. Even the elders are
saying nothing to stop Him. Today fate is working against us.
PURPORT
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé reveals what the gopés thought: "These foolish cowherd
men and elders are not even trying to stop Kåñëa. Don't they realize they are
committing suicide? They are helping Kåñëa go to Mathurä, but they will have
to come back to Våndävana and will certainly die in His absence. The whole
world has become nonsensical."
TEXT 28
inavaAr"yaAma: s$amaupaetya maADavaM
ikM( naAe'k(ir"Syana, ku(lava{Ü"baAnDavaA:
mauku(nd"s$aËÿAiªaimaSaADaRäu"styajaAä,"
dE"vaena ivaDvaMis$atad"Inacaetas$aAma,
nivärayämaù samupetya mädhavaà
kià no 'kariñyan kula-våddha-bändhaväù
mukunda-saìgän nimiñärdha-dustyajäd
daivena vidhvaàsita-déna-cetasäm
SYNONYMS
nivärayämaù—let us stop; samupetya—going up to Him; mädhavam—Kåñëa;
kim—what; naù—to us; akariñyan—will do; kula—of the family; våddha—the
elders; bändhaväù—and our relatives; mukunda-saìgät—from the association
of Lord Mukunda; nimiña—of the wink of an eye; ardha—for one half;
dustyajät—which is impossible to give up; daivena—by fate;
vidhvaàsita—separated; déna—wretched; cetasäm—whose hearts.
TRANSLATION
Let us directly approach Mädhava and stop Him from going. What can our
family elders and other relatives do to us? Now that fate is separating us from
Mukunda, our hearts are already wretched, for we cannot bear to give up His
association even for a fraction of a second.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté describes what the gopés thought: "Let us go
right up to Kåñëa and pull at His clothes and hands and insist that He get
down from His chariot and stay here with us. We will tell Him, 'Don't bring
upon Yourself the sinful reaction for murdering so many women!' "
"But if we do that," said other gopés, "our relatives and the village elders will
discover our secret love for Kåñëa and abandon us."
"But what can they do to us?"
"Yes, our lives are already wretched now that Kåñëa is leaving. We have
nothing to lose."
"That's right. We will remain in the Våndävana forest just like presiding
goddesses, and then we can fulfill our true desire—to stay with Kåñëa in the
forest."
"Yes, and even if the elders and our relatives punish us by beating us or
locking us up, we can still live happily with the knowledge that Kåñëa is
residing in our village. Some of our girlfriends who are not imprisoned will
cleverly find a way to bring us the remnants of Kåñëa's food, and then we can
remain alive. But if Kåñëa is not stopped, we will certainly die."
TEXT 29
yasyaAnaur"AgAlailataismatavalgAuman‡a
laIlaAvalaAek(pair"r"mBaNAr"As$agAAeï"Ama,
naItaA: sma na: ºaNAimava ºaNAd"A ivanaA taM
gAAepya: k(TaM nvaitatare"ma tamaAe äu"r"ntama,
yasyänuräga-lalita-smita-valgu-mantra
lélävaloka-parirambhaëa-räsa-goñöhäm
nétäù sma naù kñaëam iva kñaëadä vinä taà
gopyaù kathaà nv atitarema tamo durantam
SYNONYMS
yasya—whose; anuräga—with loving affection; lalita—charming;
smita—(where there were) smiles; valgu—attractive; mantra—intimate
discussions; lélä—playful; avaloka—glances; parirambhaëa—and embraces;
räsa—of the räsa dance; goñöhäm—to the assembly; nétäù sma—who were
brought; naù—for us; kñaëam—a moment; iva—like; kñaëadäù-the nights;
vinä—without; tam—Him; gopyaù—O gopés; katham—how; nu—indeed;
atitarema—will we cross over; tamaù—the darkness;
durantam—insurmountable.
TRANSLATION
When He brought us to the assembly of the räsa dance, where we enjoyed
His affectionate and charming smiles, His delightful secret talks, His playful
glances and His embraces, we passed many nights as if they were a single
moment. O gopés, how can we possibly cross over the insurmountable darkness
of His absence?
PURPORT
For the gopés, a long time in Kåñëa's association passed like a moment, and a
single moment in His absence seemed like a very long time.
TEXT 30
yaAe'¶": ºayae ˜ajamanantas$aKa: par"ItaAe
gAAepaEivaRzAna, Kaur"r"jazC]$ir"taAlak(›ak,(
vaeNAuM ¸(NAna, ismatak(taAºainar"IºaNAena
icaÔaM iºaNAAetyamauma{tae nau k(TaM Bavaema
yo 'hnaù kñaye vrajam ananta-sakhaù paréto
gopair viçan khura-rajaç-churitälaka-srak
veëuà kvaëan smita-katäkña-nirékñaëena
cittaà kñiëoty amum åte nu kathaà bhavema
SYNONYMS
yaù—who; ahnaù—of the day; kñaye—at the demise; vrajam—the village of
Vraja; ananta—of Ananta, Lord Balaräma; sakhaù—the friend Kåñëa;
parétaù—accompanied on all sides; gopaiù—by the cowherd boys;
viçan-entering; khura—of the hoofprints (of the cows); rajaù—with the dust;
churita—smeared; alaka—the locks of His hair; srak—and His garlands;
veëum—His flute; kvaëan—playing; smita—smiling; kaöa-akña—from the
corners of His eyes; nirékñaëena—with glances; cittam—our minds;
kñiëoti—He destroys; amum—Him; åte-without; nu—indeed; katham—how;
bhavema—we can exist.
TRANSLATION
How can we exist without Ananta's friend Kåñëa, who in the evening would
return to Vraja in the company of the cowherd boys, His hair and garland
powdered with the dust raised by the cows' hooves? As He played His flute, He
would captivate our minds with His smiling sidelong glances.
TEXT 31
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
WvaM “auvaANAA ivar"h"Ataur"A Ba{zAM
˜ajaiñya: k{(SNAivaSal(maAnas$aA:
ivas$a{jya laÀaAM ç&ç&äu": sma s$ausvarM"
gAAeivand" d"AmaAed"r" maADavaeita
çré-çuka uväca
evaà bruväëä virahäturä bhåçaà
vraja-striyaù kåñëa-viñakta-mänasäù
visåjya lajjäà ruruduù sma su-svaraà
govinda dämodara mädhaveti
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—thus; bruväëäù—speaking;
viraha—by feelings of separation; äturäù—distraught; bhåçam—thoroughly;
vraja-striyaù—the ladies of Vraja; kåñëa—to Kåñëa; viñakta—attached;
mänasäù—their minds; visåjya—abandoning; lajjäm—shame; ruruduù
sma—they cried; su-svaram—loudly; govinda dämodara mädhava iti—O
Govinda, O Dämodara, O Mädhava.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: After speaking these words, the ladies of Vraja,
who were so attached to Kåñëa, felt extremely agitated by their imminent
separation from Him. They forgot all shame and loudly cried out, "O Govinda!
O Dämodara! O Mädhava!"
PURPORT
For a long time the gopés had carefully hidden their conjugal love for Kåñëa.
But now that Kåñëa was leaving, the gopés were so distressed that they could no
longer hide their feelings.
TEXT 32
ñINAAmaevaM ç&d"ntaInaAma,
oid"tae s$aivatayaRTa
@‚U(r"êAed"yaAmaAs$a
k{(tamaE‡aAid"k(Ae r"Tama,
stréëäm evaà rudanténäm
udite savitary atha
akrüraç codayäm äsa
kåta-maiträdiko ratham
SYNONYMS
stréëäm—the women; evam—in this manner; rudanténäm—while they were
crying; udite—rising; savitari—the sun; atha—then; akrüraù—Akrüra;
codayäm äsa—started; kåta—having performed; maitra-ädikaù—his morning
worship and other regular duties; ratham—the chariot.
TRANSLATION
But even as the gopés cried out in this way, Akrüra, having at sunrise
performed His morning worship and other duties, began to drive the chariot.
PURPORT
According to some Vaiñëava authorities, Akrüra offended the gopés by not
consoling them when he took Kåñëa to Mathurä, and because of this offense
Akrüra was later forced to leave Dvärakä and be separated from Kåñëa during
the episode of the Syamantaka jewel. At that time Akrüra had to take up an
ignoble residence in Väräëasé.
Apparently, mother Yaçodä and the other residents of Våndävana were not
crying like the gopés, for they sincerely believed Kåñëa would be coming back
within a few days.
TEXT 33
gAAepaAstamanvas$aÀanta
nand"AâA: zAk(qE%stata:
@Ad"AyaAepaAyanaM BaUir"
ku(mBaAna, gAAer"s$as$amBa{taAna,
gopäs tam anvasajjanta
nandädyäù çakaöais tataù
ädäyopäyanaà bhüri
kumbhän go-rasa-sambhåtän
SYNONYMS
gopäù—the cowherd men; tam—Him; anvasajjanta—followed;
nanda-ädyäù—headed by Nanda; çakaöaiù—in their wagons; tataù—then;
ädäya—having taken; upäyanam—offerings; bhüri—abundant;
kumbhän—clay pots; go-rasa—with milk products; sambhåtän—filled.
TRANSLATION
Led by Nanda Mahäräja, the cowherd men followed behind Lord Kåñëa in
their wagons. The men brought along many offerings for the King, including
clay pots filled with ghee and other milk products.
TEXT 34
gAAepyaê d"iyataM k{(SNAma,
@nau˜ajyaAnaur"iÃataA:
‘atyaAde"zAM BagAvata:
k(AÉÿntyaêAvataisTare"
gopyaç ca dayitaà kåñëam
anuvrajyänuraïjitäù
pratyädeçaà bhagavataù
käìkñantyaç cävatasthire
SYNONYMS
gopyaù—the gopés; ca—and; dayitam—their beloved; kåñëam—Kåñëa;
anuvrajya—following; anuraïjitäù—pleased; pratyädeçam—some instruction
in reply; bhagavataù—from the Lord; käìkñantyaù—hoping for; ca—and;
avatasthire—they stood.
TRANSLATION
[With His glances] Lord Kåñëa somewhat pacified the gopés, and they also
followed behind for some time. Then, hoping He would give them some
instruction, they stood still.
TEXT 35
taAstaTaA tapyataIvaI=ºya
sva‘asTaANAe yaäU"Ôama:
s$aAntvayaAmas$a s$a‘aemaEr,"
@AyaAsya wita d"AEtyakE(:
täs tathä tapyatér vékñya
sva-prasthäëe yadüttamaù
säntvayäm asa sa-premair
äyäsya iti dautyakaiù
SYNONYMS
täù—them (the gopés); tathä—thus; tapyatéù—lamenting; vékñya—seeing;
sva-prasthäne—as He was leaving; yadu-uttamaù—the greatest of the Yadus;
säntvayäm äsa—He consoled them; sa-premaiù—full of love; äyäsye iti—"I will
return"; dautyakaiù—with words sent through a messenger.
TRANSLATION
As He departed, that best of the Yadus saw how the gopés, were lamenting,
and thus He consoled them by sending a messenger with this loving promise: "I
will return."
TEXT 36
yaAvad"Alaºyatae ke(taur,"
yaAva‰e"NAU r"Tasya ca
@nau‘asTaAipataAtmaAnaAe
laeKyaAnaIvaAepalaiºataA:
yävad älakñyate ketur
yävad reëü rathasya ca
anuprasthäpitätmäno
lekhyänévopalakñitäù
SYNONYMS
yävat—as long as; älakñyate—was visible; ketuù—the flag; yävat—as long as;
reëuù—the dust; rathasya—of the chariot; ca—and; anuprasthäpita—sending
after; ätmänaù—their minds; lekhyäni—painted figures; iva—like;
upalakñitäù—they appeared.
TRANSLATION
Sending their minds after Kåñëa, the gopés stood as motionless as figures in a
painting. They remained there as long as the flag atop the chariot was visible,
and even until they could no longer see the dust raised by the chariot wheels.
TEXT 37
taA inar"AzAA inavava{taur,"
gAAeivand"ivainavataR"nae
ivazAAek(A @h"naI inanyaur,"
gAAyantya: i‘ayacaeií"tama,
tä niräçä nivavåtur
govinda-vinivartane
viçokä ahané ninyur
gäyantyaù priya-ceñöitam
SYNONYMS
täù—they; niräçäù—without hope; nivavåtuù—turned back;
govinda-vinivartane—of Govinda's returning; viçokäù—extremely sorrowful;
ahané—the days and nights; ninyuù—they spent; gäyantyaù—chanting;
priya—of their beloved; ceñöitam—about the activities.
TRANSLATION
The gopés then turned back, without hope that Govinda would ever return
to them. Full of sorrow, they began to spend their days and nights chanting
about the pastimes of their beloved.
TEXT 38
BagAvaAnaipa s$am‘aAæaAe
r"AmaA‚U(r"yautaAe na{pa
r"Taena vaAyauvaegAena
k(Ailand"ImaGanaAizAnaIma,
bhagavän api sampräpto
rämäkrüra-yuto nåpa
rathena väyu-vegena
kälindém agha-näçiném
SYNONYMS
bhagavän—the Supreme Lord; api—and; sampräptaù—arrived;
räma-akrüra-yutaù—together with Balaräma and Akrüra; nåpa—O King
(Parékñit); rathena—by the chariot; väyu—like the wind; vegena—swift;
kälindém—at the river Kälindé (Yamunä); agha—sins; näçiném—which
destroys.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, the Supreme Lord Kåñëa, traveling as swiftly as the wind in
that chariot with Lord Balaräma and Akrüra, arrived at the river Kälindé,
which destroys all sins.
PURPORT
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé comments that Lord Kåñëa secretly lamented His
separation from the gopés. These transcendental feelings of the Lord are part of
His supreme pleasure potency.
TEXT 39
ta‡aAepas$pa{zya paAnaIyaM
paItvaA ma{íM" maiNA‘aBama,
va{ºaSaNx"maupa˜ajya
s$ar"AmaAe r"TamaAivazAta,
tatropaspåçya pänéyaà
pétvä måñöaà maëi-prabham
våkña-ñaëòam upavrajya
sa-rämo ratham äviçat
SYNONYMS
tatra—there; upaspåçya—touching the water; pänéyam—in His hand;
pétvä—drinking; måñöam—sweet; maëi—like jewels; prabham—effulgent;
våkña—of trees; ñaëòam—a grove; upavrajya—moving up to; sa-rämaù—with
Balaräma; ratham—the chariot; äviçat—He mounted.
TRANSLATION
The river's sweet water was more effulgent than brilliant jewels. After Lord
Kåñëa had touched it for purification, He drank some from His hand. Then He
had the chariot moved near a grove of trees and climbed back on, along with
Balaräma.
TEXT 40
@‚U(r"staAvaupaAman‡ya
inavaezya ca r"TaAepair"
k(AilanâA oe"d"maAgAtya
µaAnaM ivaiDavad"Acar"ta,
akrüras täv upämantrya
niveçya ca rathopari
kälindyä hradam ägatya
snänaà vidhi-vad äcarat
SYNONYMS
akrüraù—Akrüra; tau—from the two of Them; upämantrya—taking
permission; niveçya—having Them sit down; ca—and; ratha-upari—on the
chariot; kälindyäù—of the Yamunä; hradam—to a pond; ägatya—going;
snänam—his bath; vidhi-vat—in accordance with scriptural injunction;
äcarat—he performed.
TRANSLATION
Akrüra asked the two Lords to take Their seats on the chariot. Then, taking
Their permission, he went to a pool in the Yamunä and took his bath as
enjoined in the scriptures.
TEXT 41
inamajjya taismana, s$ailalae
japana, “aö s$anaAtanama,
taAvaeva d"ä{"zAe'‚U(r"Ae
r"Amak{(SNAAE s$amainvataAE
nimajjya tasmin salile
japan brahma sanätanam
täv eva dadåçe 'krüro
räma-kåñëau samanvitau
SYNONYMS
nimajjya—immersing himself; tasmin—in that; salile—water; japan—reciting;
brahma—Vedic mantras; sanätanam—eternal; tau—Them; eva—indeed;
dadåçe—saw; akrüraù—Akrüra; räma-kåñëau—Balaräma and Kåñëa;
samanvitau—together.
TRANSLATION
While immersing himself in the water and reciting eternal mantras from the
Vedas, Akrüra suddenly saw Balaräma and Kåñëa before him.
TEXTS 42-43
taAE r"TasTaAE k(Taimah"
s$autaAvaAnak(äu"näu"Bae:
taihR" isvatsyand"nae na sta
wtyaunmajjya vyacaí" s$a:
ta‡aAipa ca yaTaApaUvaRma,
@As$aInaAE paunare"va s$a:
nyamaÀaÚ"zARnaM yanmae
ma{SaA ikM( s$ailalae tayaAe:
tau ratha-sthau katham iha
sutäv änakadundubheù
tarhi svit syandane na sta
ity unmajjya vyacañöa saù
taträpi ca yathä-pürvam
äsénau punar eva saù
nyamajjad darçanaà yan me
måñä kià salile tayoù
SYNONYMS
tau—They; ratha-sthau—present on the chariot; katham—how; iha—here;
sutau—the two sons; änakadundubheù—of Vasudeva; tarhi—then;
svit—whether; syandane—on the chariot; na staù—They are not there;
iti—thinking this; unmajjya—rising from the water; vyacañöa—saw; saù—he;
tatra api—in the same place; ca—and; yathä—as; pürvam—previously;
äsénau—sitting; punaù—again; eva—indeed; saù—he; nyamajjat—entered the
water; darçanam—the vision; yat—if; me—my; måñä—false; kim—perhaps;
salile—in the water; tayoù—of Them.
TRANSLATION
Akrüra thought, "How can the two sons of Änakadundubhi, who are sitting
in the chariot, be standing here in the water? They must have left the chariot."
But when he came out of the river, there They were on the chariot, just as
before. Asking himself "Was the vision I had of Them in the water an
illusion?" Akrüra reentered the pool.
TEXTS 44-45
BaUyasta‡aAipa s$aAe'‰"AºaIta,
staUyamaAnamah"Iìr"ma,
is$aÜ"caAr"NAgAnDavaE=r,"
@s$aurE"naRtak(nDarE":
s$ah"›aizAr"s$aM de"vaM
s$ah"›aP(NAmaAEilanama,
naIlaAmbarM" ivas$aìetaM
Za{"ËEÿ: ìetaimava isTatama,
bhüyas taträpi so 'dräkñét
stüyamänam ahéçvaram
siddha-cäraëa-gandharvair
asurair nata-kandharaiù
sahasra-çirasaà devaà
sahasra-phaëa-maulinam
nélämbaraà visa-çvetaà
çåìgaiù çvetam iva sthitam
SYNONYMS
bhüyaù—again; tatra api—in that same place; saù—he; adräkñét—saw;
stüyamänam—being praised; ahi-éçvaram—the Lord of serpents (Ananta Çeña,
the plenary expansion of Lord Balaräma who serves as the bed of Viñëu);
siddha-cäraëa-gandharvaiù—by Siddhas, Cäraëas and Gandharvas;
asuraiù—and by demons; nata—bowed; kandharaiù—whose necks;
sahasra—thousands; çirasam—having heads; devam—the Supreme Lord;
sahasra—thousands; phaëa—having hoods; maulinam—and helmets;
néla—blue; ambaram—whose clothing; visa—like the filaments of a lotus stem;
çvetam—white; çåìgaiù—with its peaks; çvetam—Kailäsa Mountain; iva—as if;
sthitam—situated.
TRANSLATION
There Akrüra now saw Ananta Çeña, the Lord of the serpents, receiving
praise from Siddhas, Cäraëas, Gandharvas and demons, who all had their heads
bowed. The Personality of Godhead whom Akrüra saw had thousands of heads,
thousands of hoods and thousands of helmets. His blue garment and His fair
complexion, as white as the filaments of a lotus stem, made Him appear like
white Kailäsa Mountain with its many peaks.
TEXTS 46-48
tasyaAets$aËeÿ GanasyaAmaM
paItak(AEzAeyavaAs$as$ama,
pauç&SaM catauBauRjaM zAAntama,
paápa‡aAç&NAeºaNAma,
caAç&‘as$aªavad"naM
caAç&h"As$ainar"IºaNAma,
s$au”aUªas$aM caç&k(NA<
s$auk(paAelaAç&NAADar"ma,
‘alambapaIvar"BaujaM
tauËÿAMs$aAer":sTalai™ayama,
k(mbauk(NQM& ina°anaAiBaM
vailamatpaéavaAed"r"ma,
tasyotsaìge ghana-syämaà
péta-kauçeya-väsasam
puruñaà catur-bhujaà çäntam
padma-paträruëekñaëam
cäru-prasanna-vadanaà
cäru-häsa-nirékñaëam
su-bhrünnasaà caru-karëaà
su-kapoläruëädharam
pralamba-pévara-bhujaà
tuìgäàsoraù-sthala-çriyam
kambu-kaëöhaà nimna-näbhià
valimat-pallavodaram
SYNONYMS
tasya—of Him (Ananta Çeña); utsaìge—on the lap; ghana—like a rain cloud;
çyämam—dark blue; péta—yellow; kauçeya—silk; väsasam—whose garment;
puruñam—the Supreme Lord; catuù-bhujam—with four arms;
çäntam—peaceful; padma—of a lotus; patra—like the leaves; aruëa—reddish;
ékñaëam—whose eyes; cäru—attractive; prasanna—cheerful;
vadanam—whose face; cäru—attractive; häsa—smiling; nirékñaëam-whose
glance; su—beautiful; bhrü—whose eyebrows; ut—raised; nasam—whose nose;
cäru—attractive; karëam—whose ears; su—beautiful; kapola—whose cheeks;
aruëa—reddish; adharam—whose lips; pralamba—extended; pévara—stout;
bhujam—whose arms; tuìga—raised; aàsa—by His shoulders;
uraù-sthala—and chest; çriyam—beautified; kambu—like a conchshell;
kaëöham—whose throat; nimna—low; näbhim—whose navel; vali—lines;
mat—having; pallava—like a leaf; udaram—whose abdomen.
TRANSLATION
Akrüra then saw the Supreme Personality of Godhead lying peacefully on
the lap of Lord Ananta Çeña. The complexion of that Supreme Person was like a
dark-blue cloud. He wore yellow garments and had four arms and reddish
lotus-petal eyes. His face looked attractive and cheerful with its smiling,
endearing glance and lovely eyebrows, its raised nose and finely formed ears,
and its beautiful cheeks and reddish lips. The Lord's broad shoulders and
expansive chest were beautiful, and His arms long and stout. His neck
resembled a conchshell, His navel was deep, and His abdomen bore lines like
those on a banyan leaf
TEXTS 49-50
ba{h"tk(itatata™aAeiNA
k(r"BaAeç&ã"yaAinvatama,
caAç&jaAnauyaugAM caAç&
jaÎÿAyaugAlas$aMyautama,
tauËÿgAulP(Aç&NAnaKa
˜aAtad"IiDaitaiBava{Rtama,
navaAÌÿlyaÌÿï"d"laEr,"
ivalas$atpaAd"paÆÿjama,
båhat-kati-tata-çroëi
karabhoru-dvayänvitam
cäru-jänu-yugaà cäru
jaìghä-yugala-saàyutam
tuìga-gulphäruëa-nakha
vräta-dédhitibhir våtam
naväìguly-aìguñöha-dalair
vilasat-päda-paìkajam
SYNONYMS
båhat—large; kaöi-taöa—whose loins; çroëi—and hips; karabha—like an
elephant's trunk; üru—of thighs; dvaya—a pair; anvitam—having;
cäru—attractive; jänu-yugam—whose two knees; cäru—attractive; jaìghä—of
shanks; yugala—a pair; saàyutam—having; tuìga—high; gulpha—whose
ankles; aruëa—reddish; nakha-vräta—from whose toenails; dédhitibhiù—with
effulgent rays; våtam—surrounded; nava—soft; aìguli-aìguñöha—the two big
toes and other toes; dalaiù—like flower petals; vilasat—glowing;
päda-paìkajam—whose lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
He had large loins and hips, thighs like an elephant's trunk, and shapely
knees and shanks. His raised ankles reflected the brilliant effulgence emanating
from the nails on His petallike toes, which beautified His lotus feet.
TEXTS 51-52
s$aumah"AhR"maiNA˜aAta
ik(r"Iq%k(q%k(AËÿdE":
k(iq%s$aU‡a“aös$aU‡a
h"Ar"naUpaur"ku(Nx"laE:
”aAjamaAnaM paák(rM"
zAÊÿca‚(gAd"ADar"ma,
™aIvats$avaºas$aM ”aAjata,
k(AEstauBaM vanamaAilanama,
su-mahärha-maëi-vräta
kiréöa-kaöakäìgadaiù
kaöi-sütra-brahma-sütra
hära-nüpura-kuëòalaiù
bhräjamänaà padma-karaà
çaìkha-cakra-gadä-dharam
çrévatsa-vakñasaà bhräjat
kaustubhaà vana-mälinam
SYNONYMS
su-mahä—greatly; arha—precious; maëi-vräta—having many gems;
kiréöa—with helmets; kaöaka—bracelets; aìgadaiù—and armlets;
kaöi-sütra—with belt; brahma-sütra—sacred thread; hära—necklaces;
nüpura—ankle bells; kuëòalaiù—and earrings; bhräjamänam—effulgent;
padma—carrying a lotus; karam—whose hand; çaìkha—a conchshell;
cakra—discus; gadä—and club; dharam—holding; çrévatsa—carrying the mark
known as Çrévatsa; vakñasam—whose chest; bhräjat—brilliant;
kaustubham—with the Kaustubha gem; vana-mälinam—with a flower garland.
TRANSLATION
Adorned with a helmet, bracelets and armlets, which were all bedecked with
many priceless jewels, and also with a belt, a sacred thread, necklaces, ankle
bells and earrings, the Lord shone with dazzling effulgence. In one hand He
held a lotus flower, in the others a conchshell, discus and club. Gracing His
chest were the Çrévatsa mark, the brilliant Kaustubha gem and a flower garland.
TEXTS 53-55
s$aunand"nand"‘amauKaE:
paSaR&dE": s$anak(Aid"iBa:
s$aure"zAE“aRöç&‰"AâEr,"
navaiBaê iã"jaAeÔamaE:
‘aoe"Ad"naAr"d"vas$au
‘amauKaEBaARgAvataAeÔamaE:
staUyamaAnaM pa{TagBaAvaEr,"
vacaAeiBar"malaAtmaiBa:
i™ayaA pauí"YaA igAr"A k(AntyaA
k(LtyaAR tauí"YaelayaAejaRyaA
ivaâyaAivaâyaA zAftyaA
maAyayaA ca inaSaeivatama,
sunanda-nanda-pramukhaiù
parñadaiù sanakädibhiù
sureçair brahma-rudrädyair
navabhiç ca dvijottamaiù
prahräda-närada-vasu
pramukhair bhägavatottamaiù
stüyamänaà påthag-bhävair
vacobhir amalätmabhiù
çriyä puñöyä girä käntyä
kértyä tuñöyelayorjayä
vidyayävidyayä çaktyä
mäyayä ca niñevitam
SYNONYMS
sunanda-nanda-pramukhaiù—headed by Sunanda and Nanda; parñadaiù—by
His personal attendants; sanaka-ädibhiù—by Sanaka Kumära and his brothers;
sura-éçaiù—by the chief demigods; brahma-rudra-ädyaiù—headed by Brahmä
and Rudra; navabhiù—nine; ca—and; dvija-uttamaiù—by the chief brähmaëas
(headed by Maréci); prahräda-närada-vasu-pramukhaiù—headed by Prahläda,
Närada and Uparicara Vasu; bhägavata-uttamaiù—by the most exalted
devotees; stüyamänam—being praised; påthak-bhävaiù—by each in a different
loving attitude; vacobhiù—with words; amala-ätmabhiù—sanctified; çréyä
puñöyä gérä käntyä kértyä tuñöyä ilayä ürjayä—by His internal potencies Çré,
Puñöi, Gér, Känti, Kérti, Tuñöi, Ilä and Ürjä; vidyayä avidyayä—by His potencies
of knowledge and ignorance; çaktyä—by His internal pleasure potency;
mäyayä—by His material creative potency; ca—and; niñevitam—being served.
TRANSLATION
Encircling the Lord and worshiping Him were Nanda, Sunanda and His
other personal attendants; Sanaka and the other Kumäras; Brahmä, Rudra and
other chief demigods; the nine chief brähmaëas; and the best of the saintly
devotees, headed by Prahläda, Närada and Uparicara Vasu. Each of these great
personalities was worshiping the Lord by chanting sanctified words of praise in
his own unique mood. Also in attendance were the Lord's principal internal
potencies—Çré, Puñöi, Gér, Känti, Kérti, Tuñöi, Ilä and Ürjä—as were His
material potencies Vidyä, Avidyä and Mäyä, and His internal pleasure potency,
Çakti.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté explains the Lord's potencies mentioned in
these verses: "Çré is the potency of wealth; Puñöi that of strength; Gér,
knowledge; Känti, beauty; Kérti, fame; and Tuñöi, renunciation. These are the
Lord's six opulences. Ilä is His bhü-çakti, also known as sandhiné, the internal
potency of whom the element earth is an expansion. Ürjä is His internal
potency for performing pastimes; she expands as the tulasé plant in this world.
Vidyä and Avidyä [knowledge and ignorance] are external potencies who
cause the living entities' liberation and bondage, respectively. Çakti is His
internal pleasure potency, hlädiné, and Mäyä is an internal potency who is the
basis of Vidyä and Avidyä. The word ca implies the presence of the Lord's
marginal energy, the jéva-çakti, who is subordinate to Mäyä. Lord Viñëu was
being served by all these personified potencies."
TEXTS 56-57
ivalaAefya s$auBa{zAM ‘aItaAe
BaftyaA par"mayaA yauta:
ô$SyaÔanaUç&h"Ae BaAvapair"
iflaªaAtmalaAecana:
igAr"A gAÕ"d"yaAstaAESaIta,
s$aÔvamaAlambya s$aAtvata:
‘aNAmya maU©aARvaih"ta:
k{(taAÃailapauq%: zAnaE:
vilokya su-bhåçaà préto
bhaktyä paramayä yutaù
håñyat-tanüruho bhävapariklinnätma-
locanaù
girä gadgadayästauñét
sattvam älambya sätvataù
praëamya mürdhnävahitaù
kåtäïjali-puöaù çanaiù
SYNONYMS
vilokya—(Akrüra) seeing; su-bhåçam—greatly; prétaù—pleased; bhaktyä—with
devotion; paramayä—supreme; yutaù—enthused; håñyat—standing on end;
tanü-ruhaù—the hairs of his body; bhäva—out of loving ecstasy;
pariklinna—wet; ätma—his body; locanaù—and eyes; girä—with words;
gadgadayä—choking; astauñét—He offered homage; sattvam—soberness;
älambya—taking hold of; sätvataù—the great devotee; praëamya—bowing
down; mürdhnä—with his head; avahitaù—attentively;
kåta-aïjali-puöaù—joining his palms in supplication; çanaiù—slowly.
TRANSLATION
As the great devotee Akrüra beheld all this, he became extremely pleased
and felt enthused with transcendental devotion. His intense ecstasy caused His
bodily hairs to stand on end and tears to flow from his eyes, drenching his
entire body. Somehow managing to steady himself, Akrüra bowed his head to
the ground. Then he joined his palms in supplication and, in a voice choked
with emotion, very slowly and attentively began to pray.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Tenth Canto, Thirty-ninth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Akrüra's Vision."
40. The Prayers of Akrüra
This chapter relates Akrüra's prayers to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
Akrüra prayed, "Brahmä, who created this visible world, emanated from the
lotus navel of the Supreme Lord. The five elements of physical nature, the five
corresponding objects of perception, the ten senses, the ego, the total nature,
the primeval creator and the demigods all originate from His bodily limbs. He
cannot be known by sensory knowledge, and thus even Brahmä and the other
demigods are ignorant of His real identity.
"Different classes of people worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead in
different ways. Fruitive workers worship Him by performing Vedic sacrifices,
philosophers by renouncing material work and pursuing spiritual knowledge,
yogés by meditating, Çaivites by worshiping Lord Çiva, Vaiñëavas by following
the injunctions of such scriptures as the Païcarätra, and other saintly persons
by worshiping Him as the original form of the self, of the material substance
and of the controlling demigods. Just as rivers flow from various directions into
the ocean, the worship of those who dedicate themselves to these various
entities finds its ultimate purpose within the Supreme Lord Viñëu.
"The form of the total universe, the Viräö-rüpa, is imagined to be the form
of Lord Viñëu. Like aquatics moving about in water or like tiny insects
burrowing in an udumbara fruit, all living beings move about within the Lord.
These living beings, bewildered by His Mäyä, wander along the path of
material work, falsely identifying with body, home and so forth. Under the
sway of illusion, a foolish person may overlook a reservoir of water covered by
grass and leaves and instead run after a mirage. Similarly, living beings caught
in the grip of ignorance abandon Lord Viñëu and become attached to their
bodies, homes and so on. Such faithful servants of their senses cannot take
shelter of the Supreme Lord's lotus feet. Only if, by His mercy, they get the
association of saintly devotees will their material entanglement end. Only
then can they develop Kåñëa consciousness by serving the Lord's pure
devotees."
TEXT 1
™aI@‚U(r" ovaAca
nataAe'smyahM" tvaAiKalahe"tauhe"tauM
naAr"AyaNAM paUç&SamaAâmavyayama,
yaªaAiBajaAtaAd"r"ivand"k(AeSaAä,"
“aöAivar"As$aIâta WSa laAek(:
çré-akrüra uväca
nato 'smy ahaà tväkhila-hetu-hetuà
näräyaëaà püruñam ädyam avyayam
yan-näbhi-jätäd aravinda-koñäd
brahmäviräséd yata eña lokaù
SYNONYMS
çré-akrüraù uväca—Çré Akrüra said; nataù—bowed down; asmi—am; aham—I;
tvä—to You; akhila—of all; hetu—causes; hetum—the cause;
näräyaëam—Lord Näräyaëa; püruñam—the Supreme Person;
ädyam—original; avyayam—inexhaustible; yat—from whose; näbhi—navel;
jätät—which was generated; aravinda—of a lotus plant; koñät—from the
whorl; brahmä—Brahmä; aviräsét—appeared; yataù—from whom; eñaù—this;
lokaù—world.
TRANSLATION
Çré Akrüra said: I bow down to You, the cause of all causes, the original and
inexhaustible Supreme Person, Näräyaëa. From the whorl of the lotus born
from Your navel, Brahmä appeared, and by his agency this universe has come
into being.
TEXT 2
BaUstaAeyamai¢a: pavanaM KamaAid"r,"
mah"AnajaAid"maRna win‰"yaAiNA
s$avaeRin‰"yaATaAR ivabauDaAê s$avaeR
yae he"tavastae jagAtaAe'ËÿBaUtaA:
bhüs toyam agniù pavanaà kham ädir
mahän ajädir mana indriyäëi
sarvendriyärthä vibudhäç ca sarve
ye hetavas te jagato 'ìga-bhütäù
SYNONYMS
bhüù—earth; toyam—water; agniù—fire; pavanam—air; kham—ether;
ädiù—and its source, false ego; mahän—the mahat-tattva; ajä—the total
material nature; ädiù—her source, the Supreme Lord; manaù—the mind;
indriyäëi—the senses; sarva-indriya—of all the senses; arthäù—the objects;
vibudhäù—the demigods; ca—and; sarve—all; ye—which; hetavaù—causes;
te—Your; jagataù—of the universe; aìga—from the body; bhütäù—generated.
TRANSLATION
Earth; water; fire; air; ether and its source, false ego; the mahat-tattva, the
total material nature and her source, the Supreme Lord's puruña expansion; the
mind; the senses; the sense objects; and the senses' presiding deities—all these
causes of the cosmic manifestation are born from Your transcendental body.
TEXT 3
naEtae svaè&paM ivaäu"r"Atmanastae
÷jaAd"yaAe'naAtmatayaA gA{h"Ita:
@jaAe'naubaÜ": s$a gAuNAEr"jaAyaA
gAuNAAtparM" vaed" na tae svaè&pama,
naite svarüpaà vidur ätmanas te
hy ajädayo 'nätmatayä gåhétaù
ajo 'nubaddhaù sa guëair ajäyä
guëät paraà veda na te svarüpam
SYNONYMS
na—do not; ete—these (elements of creation); svarüpam—the true identity;
viduù—know; ätmanaù—of the Supreme Soul; te—You; hi—indeed;
ajä-ädayaù—headed by the total material nature; anätmatayä—by the status of
being nonliving matter; gåhétäù—seized; ajaù—Lord Brahmä;
anubaddhaù—bound up; saù—he; guëaiù—by the modes; ajäyäù—of material
nature; guëät—to these modes; param—transcendental; veda na—he does not
know; te—Your; svarüpam—true form.
TRANSLATION
The total material nature and these other elements of creation certainly
cannot know You as You are, for they are manifested in the realm of dull
matter. Since You are beyond the modes of nature, even Lord Brahma, who is
bound up in these modes, does not know Your true identity.
PURPORT
God is transcendental to material nature. Unless we also transcend the
limited consciousness of material existence, we cannot know Him. Even the
greatest living entity in the universe, Brahmä, cannot understand the Supreme
unless he comes to the platform of pure Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 4
tvaAM yaAeigAnaAe yajantyaÜ"A
mah"Apauç&SamaIìr"ma,
s$aADyaAtmaM s$aAiDaBaUtaM ca
s$aAiDadE"vaM ca s$aADava:
tväà yogino yajanty addhä
mahä-puruñam éçvaram
sädhyätmaà sädhibhütaà ca
sädhidaivaà ca sädhavaù
SYNONYMS
tvam—for You; yoginaù—yogés; yajanti—perform sacrifice; addhä—certainly;
mahä-puruñam—for the Supreme Personality; éçvaram—the Godhead;
sa-adhyätmam—(the witness of) the living entities; sa-adhibhutam—of the
material elements; ca—and; sa-adhidaivam—of the controlling demigods;
ca—and; sädhavaù—purified persons.
TRANSLATION
Pure yogés worship You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by conceiving
of You in the threefold form comprising the living entities, the material
elements that constitute the living entities' bodies, and the controlling deities of
those elements.
TEXT 5
‡ayyaA ca ivaâyaA ke(icata,
tvaAM vaE vaEtaAinak(A iã"jaA:
yajantae ivatataEyaR"ÁaEr,"
naAnaAè&paAmar"AKyayaA
trayyä ca vidyayä kecit
tväà vai vaitänikä dvijäù
yajante vitatair yajïair
nänä-rüpämaräkhyayä
SYNONYMS
trayyä—of the three Vedas; ca—and; vidyayä—by the mantras; kecit—some;
tväm—You; vai—indeed; vaitänikäù—who respect the regulations of the three
sacred fires; dvijäù—brähmaëas; yajante—worship; vitataiù—elaborate;
yajïaiù—with ritual sacrifices; nänä—various; rüpa—having forms;
amara—of demigods; äkhyayä—by the designations.
TRANSLATION
Brähmaëas who follow the regulations concerning the three sacred fires
worship You by chanting mantras from the three Vedas and performing
elaborate fire sacrifices for the various demigods, who have many forms and
names.
PURPORT
Akrüra has now described how those who follow the paths of Säìkhya, yoga
and the three Vedas worship the Supreme Lord in different ways. In the
various places where the Vedas appear to recommend that one worship Indra,
Varuëa and other demigods, these demigods are stated to be supreme. But at
the same time the Vedas state that there is one supreme controller, the
Absolute Truth. That is Çré Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead, who expands
His potency through material creation into the forms of the demigods. Thus
worship of the demigods goes to Him through the indirect method of
karma-käëòa, or fruitive religious rituals. Ultimately, however, one who wants
to achieve eternal perfection should worship the Lord directly, in full Kåñëa
consciousness.
TEXT 6
Wke( tvaAiKalak(maARiNA
s$aªyasyaAepazAmaM gAtaA:
ÁaAinanaAe ÁaAnayaÁaena
yajainta ÁaAnaivaƒah"ma,
eke tväkhila-karmäëi
sannyasyopaçamaà gatäù
jïänino jïäna-yajïena
yajanti jïäna-vigraham
SYNONYMS
eke—some; tvä—to You; akhila—all; karmäëi—activities;
sannyasya—resigning; upaçamam—peace; gatäù—attaining;
jïäninaù—pursuers of knowledge; jïäna-yajïena—by the sacrifice of
cultivating knowledge; yajanti—they worship; jïäna-vigraham—the
embodiment of knowledge.
TRANSLATION
In pursuit of spiritual knowledge, some persons renounce all material
activities and, having thus become peaceful, perform the sacrifice of philosophic
investigation to worship You, the original form of all knowledge.
PURPORT
Modern philosophers pursue knowledge without bothering to worship the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and thus they naturally end up with meager,
if not trivial, results.
TEXT 7
@nyae ca s$aMs$k{(taAtmaAnaAe
ivaiDanaAiBaih"taena tae
yajainta tvanmayaAstvaAM vaE
baò"maUtyaeRk(maUitaRk(ma,
anye ca saàskåtätmäno
vidhinäbhihitena te
yajanti tvan-mayäs tväà vai
bahu-mürty-eka-mürtikam
SYNONYMS
anye—others; ca—and; saàskåta—purified; ätmänaù—whose intelligence;
vidhinä—by the injunctions (of such scriptures as the Païcarätra);
abhihitena—presented; te—by You; yajanti—worship; tvat-mayäù—filled with
thought of You; tväm—You; vai—indeed; bahu-mürti—having many forms;
eka-mürtikam—having one form.
TRANSLATION
And yet others—those whose intelligence is pure—follow the injunctions of
Vaiñëava scriptures promulgated by You. Absorbing their minds in thought of
You, they worship You as the one Supreme Lord manifesting in multiple forms.
PURPORT
The word saàskåtätmänaù, "they whose intelligence is pure," is significant
here. It implies that the worshipers mentioned before have not completely
purified their intelligence of material contamination and thus worship the
Lord indirectly. Those who are purified, however, directly worship the Lord,
either as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Kåñëa, or as one of His
various plenary forms, such as Väsudeva, Saìkarñaëa, Pradyumna or
Aniruddha, as indicated here.
TEXT 8
tvaAmaevaAnyae izAvaAele(na
maAgAeRNA izAvaè&ipaNAma,
baù"AcaAyaRivaBaede"na
BagAvantanauRpaAs$atae
tväm evänye çivoktena
märgeëa çiva-rüpiëam
bahv-äcärya-vibhedena
bhagavantarn upäsate
SYNONYMS
tväm—You; eva—also; anye—others; çiva—by Lord Çiva; uktena—spoken;
märgeëa—by the path; çiva-rüpiëam—in the form of Lord Çiva;
bahu-äcärya—of many teachers; vibhedena—following the different
presentations; bhagavantam—the Supreme Lord; upäsate—they worship.
TRANSLATION
There are still others, who worship You, the Supreme Lord, in the form of
Lord Çiva. They follow the path described by him and interpreted in various
ways by many teachers.
PURPORT
The words tväm eva, "You also," indicate that the path of worshiping Lord
Çiva is indirect and therefore inferior. Akrüra himself is following the superior
method by directly worshiping Kåñëa, or Viñëu, with his prayers.
TEXT 9
s$avaR Wva yajainta tvaAM
s$avaR$de"vamayaeìr"ma,
yae'pyanyade"vataABal(A
yaâpyanyaiDaya: ‘aBaAe
sarva eva yajanti tväà
sarva-deva-mayeçvaram
ye 'py anya-devatä-bhaktä
yady apy anya-dhiyaù prabho
SYNONYMS
sarve—all; eva—indeed; yajanti—worship; tvam—You; sarva-deva—all the
demigods; maya—O You who comprise; éçvaram—the Supreme Lord;
ye—they; api—even; anya—of other; devatä—deities; bhaktäù—devotees; yadi
api—although; anya—turned elsewhere; dhiyaù—their attention; prabho—O
master.
TRANSLATION
But all these people, my Lord, even those who have turned their attention
away from You and are worshiping other deities, are actually worshiping You
alone, O embodiment of all the demigods.
PURPORT
The idea here is that even those who worship the demigods are indirectly
worshiping the Supreme Lord Viñëu. The understanding of such worshipers,
however, is imperfect.
TEXT 10
yaTaAi‰"‘aBavaA naâ:
pajaRnyaApaUir"taA: ‘aBaAe
ivazAinta s$avaRta: is$anDauM
taã"ÔvaAM gAtayaAe'ntata:
yathädri-prabhavä nadyaù
parjanyäpüritäù prabho
viçanti sarvataù sindhuà
tadvat tväà gatayo 'ntataù
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; adri—from the mountains; prabhaväù—born; nadyaù—rivers;
parjanya—by the rain; äpüritäù—filled; prabho—O master; viçanti—enter;
sarvataù—from all sides; sindhum—the ocean; tadvat—similarly; tväm—You;
gatayaù—these paths; antataù—finally.
TRANSLATION
As rivers born from the mountains and filled by the rain flow from all sides
into the sea, so do all these paths in the end reach You, O master.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa Himself speaks on this issue of worship in the Bhagavad-gétä
(9.23-25):
ye 'py anya-devatä-bhaktä
yajante çraddhayänvitäù
te 'pi mäm eva kaunteya
yayanty avidhi-pürvakam
ahaà hi sarva-yajïänäà
bhoktä ca prabhur eva ca
na tu mäm abhijänanti
tattvenätaç cyavanti te
yänti deva-vratä devän
pitèn yänti pitå-vratäù
bhütäni yänti bhütejyä
yänti mad-yäjino 'pi mäm
[Bg. 9.25]
"Those who are devotees of other gods and who worship them with faith
actually worship only Me, O son of Kunté, but they do so in a wrong way. I am
the only enjoyer and master of all sacrifices. Therefore, those who do not
recognize My true transcendental nature fall down. Those who worship the
demigods will take birth among the demigods; those who worship the ancestors
go to the ancestors; those who worship ghosts and spirits will take birth among
such beings; and those who worship Me will live with Me."
TEXT 11
s$aÔvaM r"jastama wita
Bavata: ‘ak{(taegAuRNAA:
taeSau ih" ‘aAk{(taA: ‘aAetaA
@A“aösTaAvar"Ad"ya:
sattvaà rajas tama iti
bhavataù prakåter guëäù
teñu hi präkåtäù protä
ä-brahma-sthävarädayaù
SYNONYMS
sattvam—goodness; rajaù—passion; tamaù—ignorance; iti—thus known;
bhavataù—Your; prakåteù—of the material nature; guëäù—the qualities;
teñu—to them; hi—certainly; präkåtäù—the conditioned living entities;
protäù—woven; ä-brahma—up to Lord Brahmä; sthävara-ädayaù—starting
with the nonmoving creatures.
TRANSLATION
Goodness, passion and ignorance, the qualities of Your material nature,
entangle all conditioned living beings, from Brahmä down to the nonmoving
creatures.
TEXT 12
tauByaM namastae tvaivaSal(ä{"í"yae
s$avaARtmanae s$avaRiDayaAM ca s$aAiºaNAe
gAuNA‘avaAh"Ae'yamaivaâyaA k{(ta:
‘avataRtae de"vana{itayaRgAAtmas$au
tubhyaà namas te tv aviñakta-dåñöaye
sarvätmane sarva-dhiyäà ca säkñiëe
guëa-praväho 'yam avidyayä kåtaù
pravartate deva-nå-tiryag-ätmasu
SYNONYMS
tubhyam—to You; namaù—obeisances; te—Your; tu—and; aviñakta—aloof;
dåñöaye—whose vision; sarva-ätmane—to the Soul of all; sarva—of everyone;
dhiyäm—of the consciousness; ca—and; säkñiëe—to the witness; guëa—of the
material modes; pravähaù—the flow; ayam—this; avidyayä—by the force of
ignorance; kåtaù—created; pravartate—goes on; deva—as demigods;
nå—humans; tiryak—and animals; ätmasu—among those who assume the
identities.
TRANSLATION
I offer My obeisances to You, who as the Supreme Soul of all beings witness
everyone's consciousness with unbiased vision. The current of Your material
modes, produced by the force of ignorance, flows strongly among the living
beings who assume identities as demigods, humans and animals.
TEXTS 13-14
@i¢amauRKaM tae'vainar"x.~i„ar"IºaNAM
s$aUyaAeR naBaAe naAiBar"TaAe id"zA: ™auita:
âAE: kM( s$aure"n‰"Astava baAh"vaAe'NARvaA:
ku(iºamaRç&t‘aANAbalaM ‘ak(ilpatama,
r"AemaAiNA va{ºaAESaDaya: izAr"Aeç&h"A
maeGaA: par"syaAisTanaKaAina tae'‰"ya:
inamaeSaNAM r"A‡yah"naI ‘ajaApaitar,"
maeX#)stau va{ií"stava vaIyaRimaSyatae
agnir mukhaà te 'vanir aìghrir ékñaëaà
süryo nabho näbhir atho diçaù çrutiù
dyauù kaà surendräs tava bähavo 'rëaväù
kukñir marut präëa-balaà prakalpitam
romäëi våkñauñadhayaù çiroruhä
meghäù parasyästhi-nakhäni te 'drayaù
nimeñaëaà rätry-ahané prajäpatir
meòhras tu våñöis tava véryam iñyate
SYNONYMS
agniù—fire; mukham—face; te—Your; avaniù—the earth; aìghriù—feet;
ikñaëam—eye; süryaù—the sun; nabhaù—the sky; näbhiù—navel; atha u—and
also; diçaù—the directions; çrutiù—sense of hearing; dyauù—heaven;
kam—head; sura-indräù—the chief demigods; tava—Your; bähavaù—arms;
arëaväù—the oceans; kukñiù—abdomen; marut—the wind; präëa—vital air;
balam—and physical strength; prakalpitam—conceived; romäëi—bodily hairs;
våkña—the trees; oñadhayaù—the plants; çiraù-ruhäù—the hair on Your head;
meghäù—the clouds; parasya—of the Supreme; asthi—bones; nakhäni—and
nails; te—of You; adrayaù—the mountains; nimeñaëam—the blinking of Your
eyes; rätri-ahané—day and night; prajäpatiù—the progenitor of mankind;
meòhraù—genitals; tu—and; våñöiù—the rain; tava—Your; véryam—semen;
iñyate—is considered.
TRANSLATION
Fire is said to be Your face, the earth Your feet, the sun Your eye, and the
sky Your navel. The directions are Your sense of hearing, the chief demigods
Your arms, and the oceans Your abdomen. Heaven is thought to be Your head,
and the wind Your vital air and physical strength. The trees and plants are the
hairs on Your body, the clouds the hair on Your head, and the mountains the
bones and nails of You, the Supreme. The passage of day and night is the
blinking of Your eyes, the progenitor of mankind Your genitals, and the rain
Your semen.
TEXT 15
tvayyavyayaAtmana, pauç&Sae ‘ak(ilpataA
laAek(A: s$apaAlaA baò"jaIvas$aÇÿlaA:
yaTaA jalae s$aiÃah"tae jalaAEk(s$aAe
'pyauäu"mbare" vaA mazAk(A manaAemayae
tvayy avyayätman puruñe prakalpitä
lokäù sa-pälä bahu-jéva-saìkuläù
yathä jale saïjihate jalaukaso
'py udumbare vä maçakä mano-maye
SYNONYMS
tvayi—within You; avyaya-ätman—their inexhaustible one; puruñe—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; prakalpitäù—created; lokäù—the worlds;
sa-päläù—together with their protecting demigods; bahu—with many;
jéva—living beings; saìkuläù—crowded; yathä—just as; jale—in water;
saïjihate—move about; jala-okasaù—aquatic animals; api—indeed;
udumbare—in an udumbara fruit (a kind of fig); vä—or; maçakäù—small
biting insects; manaù—the mind (and other senses); maye—(in You) who
comprise.
TRANSLATION
All the worlds, with their presiding demigods and teeming populations,
originate in You, the inexhaustible Supreme Personality of Godhead. These
worlds travel within You, the basis of the mind and senses, just as aquatics
swim in the sea or tiny insects burrow within an udumbara fruit.
TEXT 16
yaAina yaAnaIh" è&paAiNA
‚(Lx"naATa< ibaBaiSaR ih"
taEr"Ama{í"zAucaAe laAek(A
maud"A gAAyainta tae yazA:
yäni yänéha rüpäëi
kréòanärthaà bibharñi hi
tair ämåñöa-çuco lokä
mudä gäyanti te yaçaù
SYNONYMS
yäni yäni—which various; iha—in this material world; rüpäëi—forms;
kréòana—of play; artham—for the sake; bibharñi—You manifest; hi—indeed;
taiù—by them; ämåñöa—cleansed; çucaù—of their unhappiness;
lokäù—people; mudä—joyfully; gäyanti—sing; te—Your; yaçaù—glories.
TRANSLATION
To enjoy Your pastimes You manifest Yourself in various forms in this
material world, and these incarnations cleanse away all the unhappiness of those
who joyfully chant Your glories.
TEXTS 17-18
nama: k(Ar"NAmatsyaAya
‘alayaAibDacar"Aya ca
h"yazAISNAeR namastauByaM
maDaukE(q%Bama{tyavae
@kU(paAr"Aya ba{h"tae
namaAe mand"r"DaAir"NAe
iºatyauÜ"Ar"ivah"Ar"Aya
nama: zAUk(r"maUtaRyae
namaù käraëa-matsyäya
pralayäbdhi-caräya ca
hayaçérñëe namas tubhyaà
madhu-kaiöabha-måtyave
aküpäräya båhate
namo mandara-dhäriëe
kñity-uddhära-vihäräya
namaù çükara-mürtaye
SYNONYMS
namaù—obeisances; käraëa—who is the original cause of creation;
matsyäya—to the Supreme Lord's appearance as a fish; pralaya—of
annihilation; abdhi—in the ocean; caräya—who moved about; ca—and;
haya-çérñëe—to the incarnation who appeared with the head of a horse;
namaù—obeisances; tubhyam—to You; madhu-kaiöabha—of the demons
Madhu and Kaiöabha; måtyave—to the killer; aküpäräya—to the tortoise;
båhate—huge; namaù—obeisances; mandara—of Mandara Mountain;
dhäriëe—to the holder; kñiti—of the earth; uddhära—the lifting up;
vihäräya—whose pleasure; namaù—obeisances; çükara—of a boar;
mürtaye—to the form.
TRANSLATION
I offer my obeisances to You, the cause of the creation, Lord Matsya, who
swam about in the ocean of dissolution, to Lord Hayagréva, the killer of Madhu
and Kaiöabha, to the immense tortoise [Lord Kürma], who supported Mandara
Mountain, and to the boar incarnation [Lord Varäha], who enjoyed lifting the
earth.
PURPORT
The Viçva-koça dictionary states that the word aküpäräya indicates the king
of tortoises.
TEXT 19
namastae'àu"tais$aMh"Aya
s$aADaulaAek(BayaApah"
vaAmanaAya namastauByaM
‚(Antai‡aBauvanaAya ca
namas te 'dbhuta-siàhäya
sädhu-loka-bhayäpaha
vämanäya namas tubhyaà
kränta-tribhuvanäya ca
SYNONYMS
namaù—obeisances; te—to You; adbhuta—amazing; siàhäya—to the lion;
sadhu-loka—of all saintly devotees; bhaya—of the fear; apaha—O remover;
vämanäya—to the dwarf; namaù—obeisances; tubhyam—to You; kränta—who
stepped over; tri-bhuvanäya—the three planetary systems of the universe;
ca—and.
TRANSLATION
Obeisances to You, the amazing lion [Lord Nåsiàha], who remove Your
saintly devotees' fear, and to the dwarf Vämana, who stepped over the three
worlds.
TEXT 20
namaAe Ba{gAuNAAM patayae
ä{"æaºa‡avanaicC$de"
namastae r"GauvayaARya
r"AvaNAAntak(r"Aya ca
namo bhåguëäà pataye
dåpta-kñatra-vana-cchide
namas te raghu-varyäya
rävaëänta-karäya ca
SYNONYMS
namaù—obeisances; bhågüëäm—of the descendants of Bhågu; pataye—to the
chief (Lord Paraçuräma); dåpta—conceited; kñatra—of the members of the
royal order; vana—the forest; chide—who cut down; namaù—obeisances;
te—to You; raghu-varyäya—the best of the descendants of Raghu; rävaëa—of
Rävaëa; anta-karäya—who put an end; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
Obeisances to You, Lord of the Bhågus, who cut down the forest of the
conceited royal order, and to Lord Räma, the best of the Raghu dynasty, who
put an end to the demon Rävaëa.
TEXT 21
namastae vaAs$aude"vaAya
nama: s$aÆÿSaRNAAya ca
‘aâu°aAyainaç&Ü"Aya
s$aAtvataAM patayae nama:
namas te väsudeväya
namaù saìkarñaëäya ca
pradyumnäyaniruddhäya
sätvatäà pataye namaù
SYNONYMS
namaù—obeisances; te—unto You; väsudeväya—Lord Çré Vasudeva;
namaù—obeisances; saìkarñaëäya—to Lord Saìkarñaëa; ca—and;
pradyumnäya—to Lord Pradyumna; aniruddhäya—and to Lord Aniruddha;
sätvatäm—of the Yädavas; pataye—to the chief; namaù—obeisances.
TRANSLATION
Obeisances to You, Lord of the Sätvatas, and to Your forms of Väsudeva,
Saìkarñaëa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha.
TEXT 22
namaAe bauÜ"Aya zAuÜ"Aya
dE"tyad"AnavamaAeih"nae
mlaecC$‘aAyaºa‡ah"n‡ae
namastae k(ilk(è&ipaNAe
namo buddhäya çuddhäya
daitya-dänava-mohine
mleccha-präya-kñatra-hantre
namas te kalki-rüpiëe
SYNONYMS
namaù—obeisances; buddhäya—to Lord Buddha; çuddhäya—the pure;
daitya-dänava—of the demoniac descendants of Diti and Dänu; mohine—to
the bewilderer; mleccha—of the outcaste meat-eaters; präya—resembling;
kñatra—kings; hantre—to the killer; namaù—obeisances; te—to You;
kalki-rüpiëe—in the form of Kalki.
TRANSLATION
Obeisances to Your form as the faultless Lord Buddha, who will bewilder the
Daityas and Dänavas, and to Lord Kalki, the annihilator of the meat-eaters
posing as kings.
TEXT 23
BagAvana, jaIvalaAek(Ae'yaM
maAeih"tastava maAyayaA
@hM" mamaetyas$aØ"Ah"Ae
”aAmyatae k(maRvatmaRs$au
bhagavan jéva-loko 'yaà
mohitas tava mäyayä
ahaà mamety asad-gräho
bhrämyate karma-vartmasu
SYNONYMS
bhagavan—O Supreme Lord; jéva—of living entities; lokaù—the world;
ayam—this; mohitaù—bewildered; tava—Your; mäyayä—by the illusory
energy; aham mama iti—based on the conceptions of "I" and "my"; asat—false;
grähaù—whose conception; bhrämyate—is made to wander; karma—of
fruitive work; vartmasu—along the paths.
TRANSLATION
O Supreme Lord, the living entities in this world are bewildered by Your
illusory energy. Becoming involved in the false concepts of "I" and "my," they
are forced to wander along the paths of fruitive work.
TEXT 24
@hM" caAtmaAtmajaAgAAr"-
d"Ar"ATaRsvajanaAid"Sau
”amaAima sva«ak(lpaeSau
maUX#: s$atyaiDayaA ivaBaAe
ahaà cätmätmajägäradärärtha-
svajanädiñu
bhramämi svapna-kalpeñu
müòhaù satya-dhiyä vibho
SYNONYMS
aham—I; ca—also; ätma—concerning my body; ätma-ja—children;
agära—home; dära—wife; artha—wealth; sva-jana—followers; ädiñu—and so
on; bhramämi—am deluded; svapna—a dream; kalpeñu—who are just like;
müòhaù—foolish; satya—that they are real; dhiyä—with the idea; vibho—O
almighty Lord.
TRANSLATION
I too am deluded in this way, O almighty Lord, foolishly thinking my body,
children, home, wife, money and followers to be real, though they are actually
as unreal as a dream.
TEXT 25
@inatyaAnaAtmaäu":KaeSau
ivapayaRyamaita÷Rh"ma,
ã"nã"Ar"AmastamaAeivaí"Ae
na jaAnae tvaAtmana: i‘ayama,
anityänätma-duùkheñu
viparyaya-matir hy aham
dvandvärämas tamo-viñöo
na jäne tvätmanaù priyam
SYNONYMS
anitya—not eternal; anätma—not the real self; duùkheñu—in the sources of
misery; viparyaya—backwards; matiù—whose mentality; hi—indeed; aham—I;
dvandva—in duality; ärämaù—taking pleasure; tamaù—in ignorance;
viñöaù—absorbed; na jäne—I fail to recognize; tvä—You; ätmanaù—of myself;
priyam—the dearmost.
TRANSLATION
Thus mistaking the temporary for the eternal, my body for my self, and
sources of misery for sources of happiness, I have tried to take pleasure in
material dualities. Covered in this way by ignorance, I could not recognize You
as the real object of my love.
TEXT 26
yaTaAbauDaAe jalaM ih"tvaA
‘aitacC$ªaM taäu"à"vaE:
@Byaeita ma{gAta{SNAAM vaE
taã"ÔvaAhM" par"Ax.~mauKa:
yathäbudho jalaà hitvä
praticchannaà tad-udbhavaiù
abhyeti måga-tåñëäà vai
tadvat tvähaà paräì-mukhaù
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; abudhaù—someone who is unintelligent; jalam—water;
hitvä—overlooking; praticchannam—covered; tat-udbhavaiù—by the plants
growing in it; abhyeti—approaches; måga-tåñëäm—a mirage; vai—indeed;
tadvat—in that same way; tvä—You; aham—I; paräk-mukhaù—turned away.
TRANSLATION
Just as a fool overlooks a body of water covered by the vegetation growing in
it and chases a mirage, so I have turned away from You.
TEXT 27
naAets$ahe"'hM" k{(paNADaI:
k(Amak(maRh"taM mana:
r"Aeä,"DauM ‘amaAiTaiBaêAºaEr,"
ioe"yamaANAimatastata:
notsahe 'haà kåpaëa-dhéù
käma-karma-hataà manaù
roddhuà pramäthibhiç cäkñair
hriyamäëam itas tataù
SYNONYMS
na utsahe—am not able to find the strength; aham—I; kåpaëa—crippled;
dhéù—whose intelligence; käma—by material desires; karma—and material
activities; hatam—disturbed; manaù—my mind; roddhum—to keep in check;
pramäthibhiù—which are very powerful and willful; ca—and; akñaiù—by the
senses; hriyamäëam—being dragged; itaù tataù—here and there.
TRANSLATION
My intelligence is so crippled that I cannot find the strength to curb my
mind, which is disturbed by material desires and activities and constantly
dragged here and there by my obstinate senses.
TEXT 28
s$aAe'hM" tavaAx.~„yaupagAtaAe'smyas$ataAM äu"r"ApaM
ta»aApyahM" Bavad"nauƒah" wRzA manyae
pauMs$aAe BavaeâihR" s$aMs$ar"NAApavagARs$a,
tvayyabjanaABa s$aäu"paAs$anayaA maita: syaAta,
so 'haà taväìghry-upagato 'smy asatäà duräpaà
tac cäpy ahaà bhavad-anugraha éça manye
puàso bhaved yarhi saàsaraëäpavargas
tvayy abja-näbha sad-upäsanayä matiù syät
SYNONYMS
saù—being such; aham—I; tava—Your; aìghri—feet; upagataù asmi—am
approaching; asatäm—for those who are impure; duräpam—impossible to
attain; tat—that; ca—and; api—also; aham—I; bhavat—Your;
anugrahaù—mercy; éça—O Lord; manye—think; puàsaù—of a person;
bhavet—occurs; yarhi—when; saàsaraëa—of his rotation in the cycle of
material existence; apavargaù—the cessation; tvayi—of You; abja—like a lotus;
näbha—O You whose navel; sat—of pure devotees; upäsanayä—by worship;
matiù—consciousness; syät—develops.
TRANSLATION
Being thus fallen, I am approaching Your feet for shelter, O Lord, because
although the impure can never attain Your feet, I think it is nevertheless
possible by Your mercy. Only when one's material life has ceased, O
lotus-naveled Lord, can one develop consciousness of You by serving Your pure
devotees.
TEXT 29
namaAe ivaÁaAnamaA‡aAya
s$avaR‘atyayahe"tavae
pauç&SaezA‘aDaAnaAya
“aöNAe'nantazAl(yae
namo vijïäna-mäträya
sarva-pratyaya-hetave
puruñeça-pradhänäya
brahmaëe 'nanta-çaktaye
SYNONYMS
namaù—obeisances; vijïäna—of pure knowledge; mäträya—to the
embodiment; sarva—of all; pratyaya—forms of knowledge; hetave—to the
source; puruña—of a person; éça—the controlling forces; pradhänäya—to Him
who predominates; brahmaëe—to the Supreme Absolute Truth;
ananta—unlimited; çaktaye—whose potencies.
TRANSLATION
Obeisances to the Supreme Absolute Truth, the possessor of unlimited
energies. He is the embodiment of pure, transcendental knowledge, the source
of all kinds of awareness, and the predominator of the forces of nature that rule
over the living being.
TEXT 30
namastae vaAs$aude"vaAya
s$avaRBaUtaºayaAya ca
ô$SaIke(zA namastauByaM
‘apaªaM paAih" maAM ‘aBaAe
namas te väsudeväya
sarva-bhüta-kñayäya ca
håñékeça namas tubhyaà
prapannaà pähi mäà prabho
SYNONYMS
namaù—obeisances; te—to You; väsudeväya—the son of Vasudeva; sarva—of
all; bhüta—living beings; kñayäya—the residence; ca—and; håñéka-éça—O
Lord of the mind and senses; namaù—obeisances; tubhyam—to You;
prapannam—who am surrendered; pähi—please protect; mäm—me;
prabho—O master.
TRANSLATION
O son of Vasudeva, obeisances to You, within whom all living beings reside.
O Lord of the mind and senses, again I offer You my obeisances. O master,
please protect me, who am surrendered unto You.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Tenth Canto, Fortieth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Prayers of Akrüra."
41. Kåñëa and Balaräma Enter Mathurä
This chapter describes how Lord Kåñëa entered the city of Mathurä, killed a
washerman and bestowed benedictions upon a weaver and a garland-maker
named Sudämä.
After showing His Viñëu form to Akrüra in the waters of the Yamunä and
receiving Akrüra's prayers, Lord Kåñëa withdrew that vision just as an actor
winds up his performance. Akrüra emerged from the water and in great
amazement approached the Lord, who asked him whether he had seen
something wonderful while bathing. Akrüra replied, "Whatever wonderful
things there are in the realms of water, earth or sky, all have their existence
within You. Thus when one has seen You, nothing remains unseen." Akrüra
then began driving the chariot again.
Kåñëa, Balaräma and Akrüra reached Mathurä late in the afternoon. After
meeting up with Nanda Mahäräja and the other cowherds, who had gone on
ahead, Kåñëa asked Akrüra to return home, promising to visit him there after
He had killed Kaàsa. Akrüra unhappily bid the Lord goodbye, went to King
Kaàsa to inform him that Kåñëa and Balaräma had come, and went home.
Kåñëa and Balaräma took the cowherd boys with Them to see the
splendorous city. As they all entered Mathurä, the women of the city eagerly
came out of their houses to see Kåñëa. They had often heard about Him and
had long since developed a deep attraction for Him. But now that they were
actually seeing Him, they were overwhelmed with happiness, and all their
distress due to His absence was eradicated.
Kåñëa and Balaräma then came upon Kaàsa's wicked washerman. Kåñëa
asked him for some of the first-class garments he was carrying, but he refused
and even chastised the two Lords. At this Kåñëa became very angry and
beheaded the man with His fingertips. The washerman's assistants, seeing his
untimely end, dropped their bundles of clothes on the spot and ran off in all
directions. Kåñëa and Balaräma then took some of the garments They
especially fancied.
Next a weaver approached the two Lords and arrayed Them suitably, for
which service he received from Kåñëa opulence in this life and liberation in
the next. Kåñëa and Balaräma then went to the house of the garland-maker
Sudämä. Sudämä offered Them his full obeisances, worshiped Them by
bathing Their feet and offering Them such items as arghya and sandalwood
paste, and chanted prayers in Their honor. Then he adorned Them with
garlands of fragrant flowers. Pleased, the Lords offered him whatever
benedictions he wished, and then They moved on.
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
stauvatastasya BagAvaAna,
d"zARiyatvaA jalae vapau:
BaUya: s$amaAh"r"tk{(SNAAe
naq%Ae naAq"YaimavaAtmana:
çré-çuka uväca
stuvatas tasya bhagavän
darçayitvä jale vapuù
bhüyaù samäharat kåñëo
naöo näöyam ivätmanaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; stuvataù—while praying; tasya—he,
Akrüra; bhagavän—the Supreme Lord; darçayitvä—having shown; jale-in the
water; vapuù—His personal form; bhüyaù—again; samäharat—withdrew;
kåñëaù—Çré Kåñëa; naöaù—an actor; näöyam—the performance; iva—as;
ätmanaù—his own.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: While Akrüra was still offering prayers, the
Supreme Lord Kåñëa withdrew His form that He had revealed in the water, just
as an actor winds up his performance.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa withdrew from Akrüra's sight the Viñëu form along with the
vision of the spiritual sky and its eternal inhabitants.
TEXT 2
s$aAe'ipa caAntaihR"taM vaIºya
jalaAäu"nmajya s$atvar":
k{(tvaA caAvazyakM( s$ava<
ivaismataAe r"TamaAgAmata,
so 'pi cäntarhitaà vékñya
jaläd unmajya satvaraù
kåtvä cävaçyakaà sarvaà
vismito ratham ägamat
SYNONYMS
saù—he, Akrüra; api—indeed; ca—and; antarhitam—disappeared;
vékñya—seeing; jalät—from the water; unmajya—emerging; satvaraù—quickly;
kåtvä—performing; ca—and; ävaçyakam—his prescribed duties; sarvam—all;
vismitaù—surprised; ratham—to the chariot; ägamat—went.
TRANSLATION
When Akrüra saw the vision disappear, he came out of the water and
quickly finished his various ritual duties. He then returned to the chariot,
astonished.
TEXT 3
tamapa{cC$ä," Da{SaIke(zA:
ikM( tae ä{"í"imavaAàu"tama,
BaUmaAE ivayaita taAeyae vaA
taTaA tvaAM laºayaAmahe"
tam apåcchad dhåñékeçaù
kià te dåñöam ivädbhutam
bhümau viyati toye vä
tathä tväà lakñayämahe
SYNONYMS
tam—of him; apåcchat—asked; håñékçaù—Lord Kåñëa; kim—whether; te—by
you; dåñöam—seen; iva—indeed; adbhutam—something exceptional;
bhümau—on the earth; viyati—in the sky; toye—in the water; va—or;
tathä—so; tväm—you; lakñayämahe—We surmise.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa asked Akrüra: Have you seen something wonderful on the earth,
in the sky or in the water? From your appearance, We think you have.
TEXT 4
™aI@‚U(r" ovaAca
@àu"taAnaIh" yaAvainta
BaUmaAE ivayaita vaA jalae
tvaiya ivaìAtmake( taAina
ikM( mae'ä{"íM" ivapazyata:
çré-akrüra uväca
adbhutänéha yävanti
bhümau viyati vä jale
tvayi viçvätmake täni
kià me 'dåñöaà vipaçyataù
SYNONYMS
çré-akrüraù uväca—Çré Akrüra said; adbhutäni—wonderful things; iha—in this
world; yävanti—whatever; bhümau—on the earth; viyati—in the sky; vä—or;
jale—in the water; tvayi—in You; viçva-ätmake—who comprise everything;
täni—they; kim—what; me—by me; adåñöam—not seen; vipaçyataù—seeing
(You).
TRANSLATION
Çré Akrüra said: Whatever wonderful things the earth, sky or water contain,
all exist in You. Since You encompass everything, when I am seeing You, what
have I not seen?
TEXT 5
ya‡aAàu"taAina s$avaARiNA
BaUmaAE ivayaita vaA jalae
taM tvaAnaupazyataAe “aöna,
ikM( mae ä{"í"imah"Aàu"tama,
yaträdbhutäni sarväëi
bhümau viyati vä jale
taà tvänupaçyato brahman
kià me dåñöam ihädbhutam
SYNONYMS
yatra—in whom; adbhutäni—amazing things; sarväëi—all; bhümau—on the
earth; viyati—in the sky; vä—or; jale—in the water; tam—that person;
tvä—You; anupaçyataù—seeing; brahman—O Supreme Absolute Truth;
kim—what; me—by me; dåñöam—seen; iha—in this world;
adbhutam—amazing.
TRANSLATION
And now that I am seeing You, O Supreme Absolute Truth, in whom reside
all amazing things on the earth, in the sky and in the water, what amazing
things could I see in this world?
PURPORT
Akrüra has now realized that Lord Kåñëa is not merely his nephew.
TEXT 6
wtyauftvaA caAed"yaAmaAs$a
syand"naM gAAind"naIs$auta:
maTaur"Amanaya‰"AmaM
k{(SNAM caEva id"naAtyayae
ity uktvä codayäm äsa
syandanaà gändiné-sutaù
mathuräm anayad rämaà
kåñëaà caiva dinätyaye
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; uktvä—saying; codayäm äsa—drove forward; syandanam—the
chariot; gändiné-sutaù—the son of Gändiné, Akrüra; mathuräm—to Mathurä;
anayat—he brought; rämam—Lord Balaräma; kåñëam—Lord Kåñëa; ca—and;
eva—also; dina—of the day; atyaye—at the end.
TRANSLATION
With these words, Akrüra, the son of Gändiné, began driving the chariot
onward. At the end of the day he arrived in Mathurä with Lord Balaräma and
Lord Kåñëa.
TEXT 7
maAgAeR ƒaAmajanaA r"AjaMs$a,
ta‡a ta‡aAepas$aËÿtaA:
vas$aude"vas$autaAE vaIºya
‘aItaA ä{"iíM" na caAd"äu":
märge gräma-janä räjaàs
tatra tatropasaìgatäù
vasudeva-sutau vékñya
prétä dåñöià na cädaduù
SYNONYMS
märge—on the road; gräma—of the villages; janäù—the people; räjan—O
King (Parékñit); tatra tatra—here and there; upasaìgatäù—approaching;
vasudeva-sutau—at the two sons of Vasudeva; vékñya—looking;
prétäù—pleased; dåñöim—their vision; na—not; ca—and; ädaduù—could take
back.
TRANSLATION
Wherever they passed along the road, O King, the village people came
forward and looked upon the two sons of Vasudeva with great pleasure. In fact,
the villagers could not withdraw their eyes from Them.
TEXT 8
taAvaä," ˜ajaAEk(s$asta‡a
nand"gAAepaAd"yaAe'ƒata:
paur"AepavanamaAs$aAâ
‘ataIºantaAe'vataisTare"
tävad vrajaukasas tatra
nanda-gopädayo 'grataù
puropavanam äsädya
pratékñanto 'vatasthire
SYNONYMS
tävat—by then; vraja-okasaù—the inhabitants of Vraja; tatra—there;
nanda-gopa-ädayaù-headed by Nanda, the king of the cowherds;
agrataù—before; pura—of the city; upavanam—a garden; äsädya—coming
upon; pratékñantaù—waiting; avatasthire—they stayed there.
TRANSLATION
Nanda Mahäräja and the other residents of Våndävana, having reached
Mathurä ahead of the chariot, had stopped at a garden on the outskirts of the
city to wait for Kåñëa and Balaräma.
PURPORT
Nanda and the others reached Mathurä first because the chariot carrying
Kåñëa and Balaräma was delayed by Akrüra's bathing.
TEXT 9
taAna, s$amaetyaAh" BagAvaAna,
@‚U(rM" jagAd"Iìr":
gA{h"ItvaA paAiNAnaA paAiNAM
‘ai™ataM ‘ah"s$aiªava
tän sametyäha bhagavän
akrüraà jagad-éçvaraù
gåhétvä päëinä päëià
praçritaà prahasann iva
SYNONYMS
tän—with them; sametya—meeting; äha—said; bhagavän—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; akrüram—to Akrüra; jagat-éçvaraù—the Lord of the
universe; gåhétvä—taking; päëinä—with His hand; päëim—his hand;
praçritam—who was humble; prahasan—smiling; iva—indeed.
TRANSLATION
After joining Nanda and the others, the Supreme Lord Kåñëa, the controller
of the universe, took humble Akrüra's hand in His own and, smiling, spoke as
follows.
TEXT 10
BavaAna, ‘aivazAtaAmaƒae
s$ah"yaAna: paur"I%M gA{h"ma,
vayaM itvah"AvamaucyaATa
tataAe ‰"ºyaAmahe" paur"Ima,
bhavän praviçatäm agre
saha-yänaù puréà gåham
vayaà tv ihävamucyätha
tato drakñyämahe purém
SYNONYMS
bhavän—you; praviçatäm—should enter; agre—ahead; saha—together with;
yänaù—the vehicle; purém—the city; gåham—and your home; vayam—we;
tu—on the other hand; iha—here; avamucya—getting down; atha—then;
tataù—afterwards; drakñyämahe—will see; purém—the city.
TRANSLATION
[Lord Kåñëa said:] Take the chariot and enter the city ahead of us. Then go
home. After resting here a while, we will go to see the city.
TEXT 11
™aI@‚U(r" ovaAca
naAhM" Bavaà"YaAM r"ih"ta:
‘avaeºyae maTaur"AM ‘aBaAe
tyaluM( naAhR"is$a maAM naATa
BalM( tae Bal(vats$ala
çré-akrüra uväca
nähaà bhavadbhyäà rahitaù
pravekñye mathuräà prabho
tyaktuà närhasi mäà nätha
bhaktaà te bhakta-vatsala
SYNONYMS
çré-akrüraù uväca—Çré Akrüra said; na—cannot; aham—I; bhavadbhyäm—of
the two of You; rahitaù—deprived; pravekñye—enter; mathuräm—Mathurä;
prabho—O master; tyaktum—abandon; na arhasi—You should not; mäm—me;
nätha—O Lord; bhaktam—devotee; te—Your; bhakta-vatsala—O You who
have parental affection for Your devotees.
TRANSLATION
Çré Akrüra said: O master, without the two of You I shall not enter
Mathurä. I am Your devotee, O Lord, so it is not fair for You to abandon me,
since You are always affectionate to Your devotees.
TEXT 12
@AgAcC$ yaAma gAeh"Aªa:
s$anaATaAna, ku(vaRDaAeºaja
s$ah"Aƒaja: s$agAAepaAlaE:
s$auô$ià"ê s$auô$Ôama
ägaccha yäma gehän naù
sa-näthän kurv adhokñaja
sahägrajaù sa-gopälaiù
suhådbhiç ca suhåttama
SYNONYMS
ägaccha—please come; yäma—let us go; gehän—to the house; naù—our;
sa—having; näthän—a master; kuru—please make it; adhokñaja—O
transcendental Lord; saha—with; agra-jaù—Your elder brother;
sa-gopälaiù—with the cowherd men; suhådbhiù—with Your friends; ca—and;
suhåt-tama—O supreme well-wisher.
TRANSLATION
Come, let us go to my house with Your elder brother, the cowherd men and
Your companions. O best of friends, O transcendental Lord, in this way please
grace my house with its master.
TEXT 13
paunaIih" paAd"r"jas$aA
gA{h"AªaAe gA{h"maeiDanaAma,
yacC$AEcaenaAnauta{pyainta
ipatar": s$aA¢aya: s$aur"A:
punéhi päda-rajasä
gåhän no gåha-medhinäm
yac-chaucenänutåpyanti
pitaraù sägnayaù suräù
SYNONYMS
punéhi—please purify; päda—of Your feet; rajasä—with the dust; gåhän—the
home; naù—of us; gåha-medhinäm—who are attached to household ritual
duties; yat—by which; çaucena—purification; anutåpyanti—will become
satisfied; pitaraù—my forefathers; sa—together with; agnayaù—the sacrificial
fires; suräù—and the demigods.
TRANSLATION
I am simply an ordinary householder attached to ritual sacrifices, so please
purify my home with the dust of Your lotus feet. By that act of purification, my
forefathers, the sacrificial fires and the demigods will all become satisfied.
TEXT 14
@vainajyaAx.~i„ayaugAlama,
@As$aItëAefyaAe bailamaRh"Ana,
WeìyaRmataulaM laeBae
gAitaM caEk(AintanaAM tau yaA
avanijyäìghri-yugalam
äsét çlokyo balir mahän
aiçvaryam atulaà lebhe
gatià caikäntinäà tu yä
SYNONYMS
avanijya—bathing; aìghri-yugalam—the two feet; äsét—became;
çlokyaù—glorious; baliù—King Bali; mahän—the great; aiçvaryam—power;
atulam—unequaled; lebhe—he achieved; gatém—the destination; ca—and;
ekäntinäm—of the unalloyed devotees of the Lord; tu—indeed; yä—which.
TRANSLATION
By bathing Your feet, the exalted Bali Mahäräja attained not only glorious
fame and unequaled power but also the final destination of pure devotees.
TEXT 15
@Apastae'x.~„yavanaejanyas$a,
‡aI&$*éaAek(Ana, zAucayaAe'paunana,
izAr"s$aADaÔa yaA: zAvaR:
svayaARtaA: s$agAr"AtmajaA:
äpas te 'ìghry-avanejanyas
tréû lokän çucayo 'punan
çirasädhatta yäù çarvaù
svar yätäù sagarätmajäù
SYNONYMS
äpaù—the water (namely, the river Ganges); te—Your; aìghri—of the feet;
avanejanyaù—coming from the bathing; trén—the three; lokän—worlds;
çucayaù—being purely spiritual; apunan—has purified; çirasä—on his head;
ädhatta—has taken; yäù—which; çarvaù—Lord Siva; svaù—to heaven;
yätäù—went; sagara-ätmajäù—the sons of King Sagara.
TRANSLATION
The water of the river Ganges has purified the three worlds, having become
transcendental by bathing Your feet. Lord Çiva accepted that water on his head,
and by that water's grace the sons of King Sagara attained to heaven.
TEXT 16
de"vade"va jagAªaATa
pauNya™avaNAk(LtaRna
yaäU"ÔamaAeÔama:ëAek(
naAr"AyaNA namaAe'stau tae
deva-deva jagan-nätha
puëya-çravaëa-kértana
yadüttamottamaù-çloka
näräyaëa namo 'stu te
SYNONYMS
deva-deva—O Lord of lords; jagat-nätha—O master of the universe;
puëya—pious; çravaëa—hearing; kértana—and chanting (about whom);
yadu-uttama—O best of the Yadus; uttamaù-çloka—O You who are glorified in
excellent verses; näräyaëa—O Supreme Lord Näräyaëa; namaù—obeisances;
astu—let there be; te—unto You.
TRANSLATION
O Lord of lords, master of the universe, O You whose glories it is most pious
to hear and chant! O best of the Yadus, O You whose fame is recounted in
excellent poetry ! O Supreme Lord Näräyaëa, I offer You my obeisances.
TEXT 17
™aIBagAvanauvaAca
@AyaAsyae BavataAe gAeh"ma,
@h"mayaRs$amainvata:
yaäu"ca‚(åu"hM" h"tvaA
ivatair"Syae s$auô$it‘ayama,
çré-bhagavan uväca
äyäsye bhavato geham
aham arya-samanvitaù
yadu-cakra-druhaà hatvä
vitariñye suhåt-priyam
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Lord said; äyäsye—will come; bhavataù—to
your; geham—house; aham—I; ärya—by My elder (brother, Balaräma);
samanvitaù—accompanied; yadu-cakra—of the circle of Yadus; druham—the
enemy (Kaàsa); hatvä—killing; vitariñye—I will grant; suhåt—to My
well-wishers; priyam—satisfaction.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord said: I will come to Your house with My elder brother,
but first I must satisfy My friends and well-wishers by killing the enemy of the
Yadu clan.
PURPORT
Akrüra glorified Kåñëa in Text 16 as yadüttama, "the best of the Yadus." Çré
Kåñëa here confirms this by saying, in effect, "Since I am the best of the Yadus,
I must kill the enemy of the Yadus, Kaàsa, and then I will come to your house."
TEXT 18
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
Wvamaul(Ae BagAvataA
s$aAe'‚U(r"Ae ivamanaA wva
paur"I%M ‘aivaí": kM(s$aAya
k(maAR"vaeâ gA{hM" yayaAE
çré-çuka uväca
evam ukto bhagavatä
so 'krüro vimanä iva
puréà praviñöaù kaàsäya
karmävedya gåhaà yayau
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—thus; uktaù—addressed;
bhagavatä—by the Lord; saù—he; akrüraù—Akrüra; vimanäù—disheartened;
iva—somewhat; purém—the city; praviñöaù—entering; kaàsäya—to Kaàsa;
karma—about his activities; ävedya—informing; gåham—to his home;
yayau—went.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Thus addressed by the Lord, Akrüra entered the
city with a heavy heart. He informed King Kaàsa of the success of his mission
and then went home.
TEXT 19
@TaApar"A¶e" BagAvaAna,
k{(SNA: s$aÆÿSaRNAAinvata:
maTaur"AM ‘aAivazAÕ"AepaEr,"
id"ä{"ºau: pair"vaAir"ta:
athäparähne bhagavän
kåñëaù saìkarñaëänvitaù
mathuräà präviçad gopair
didåkñuù pariväritaù
SYNONYMS
atha—then; apara-ahne—in the afternoon; bhagavän—the Supreme Lord;
kåñëaù—Kåñëa; saìkarñaëa-anvitaù—together with Lord Balaräma;
mathuräm—Mathurä; präviçat—entered; gopaiù—by the cowherd boys;
didåkñuù—wanting to see; pariväritaù—joined.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa desired to see Mathurä, so toward evening He took Lord
Balaräma and the cowherd boys with Him and entered the city.
TEXTS 20-23
d"d"zAR taAM s$P(Aiq%k(tauNgAgAAepaur"-
ã"Ar"AM ba{h"Üe"mak(paAq%taAer"NAAma,
taA•aAr"k(Aeï"AM pair"KaAäu"r"As$ad"Ama,
oâAnar"myaAepavanaAepazAAeiBataAma,
s$aAEvaNARZa{"ËÿAq%k(h"myaRinaSku(qE%:
™aeNAIs$aBaAiBaBaRvanaEç&pas$k{(taAma,
vaEäU"yaRva†aAmalanaIlaivaåu"maEr,"
aul(Ah"ir"ià"vaRlaBaISau vaeid"Sa
jauíe"Sau jaAlaAmauKar"n‹aku(iÄ%maeSva,
@Aivaí"paAr"AvatabaihR"naAid"taAma,
s$aMis$al(r"TyaApaNAmaAgARcatvar"AM
‘ak(LNARmaAlyaAÇÿr"laAjataNx"]laAma,
@ApaUNARku(mBaEdR"iDacand"naAeiºataE:
‘as$aUnad"IpaAvailaiBa: s$apaéavaE:
s$ava{nd"r"mBaA‚(maukE(: s$ake(tauiBa:
svalax.~k{(taã"Ar"gA{h"AM s$apaiÄ%kE(:
dadarça täà sphäöika-tuëga-gopuradväräà
båhad-dhema-kapäöa-toraëäm
tämrära-koñöhäà parikhä-duräsadäm
udyäna-ramyopavanopaçobhitäm
sauvarëa-çåìgäöaka-harmya-niñkuöaiù
çreëé-sabhäbhir bhavanair upaskåtäm
vaidürya-vajrämala-néla-vidrumair
muktä-haridbhir valabhéñu vediñu
juñöeñu jälämukha-randhra-kuööimeñv
äviñöa-pärävata-barhi-näditäm
saàsikta-rathyäpaëa-märga-catvaräà
prakérëa-mälyäìkura-läja-taëòuläm
äpürëa-kumbhair dadhi-candanokñitaiù
prasüna-dépävalibhiù sa-pallavaiù
sa-vånda-rambhä-kramukaiù sa-ketubhiù
sv-alaìkåta-dvära-gåhäà sa-paööikaiù
SYNONYMS
dadarça—He saw; tam—that (city); sphäöika—of crystal; tuìga—high;
gopura—whose main gates; dväräm—and household gates; båhat—immense;
hema—gold; kapäöa—whose doors; toraëäm—and ornamental arches;
tämra—of copper; ära—and brass; koñöhäm—whose storehouses;
parikhä—with its canals; duräsadäm—inviolable; udyäna—with public
gardens; ramya—attractive; upavana—and parks; upaçobhitam—beautified;
sauvarëa—gold; çåìgäöaka—with crossways; harmya—mansions;
niñkuöaiù—and pleasure gardens; çreëé—of guilds; sabhäbhiù—with the
assembly halls; bhavanaiù—and with houses; upaskåtäm—ornamented;
vaidürya—with vaidürya gems; vajra—diamonds; amala—crystal quartz;
néla—sapphires; vidrumaiù—and coral; muktä—with pearls; haridbhiù—and
emeralds; valabhéñu—on the wood panels decorating the rafters in front of the
houses; vediñu—on columned balconies; juñöeñu—bedecked; jäla-ämukha—of
lattice windows; randhra—in the openings; kuööimeñu—and on gem-studded
floors; äviñöa—sitting; pärävata—with the pet doves; barhi—and the peacocks;
näditäm—resounding; saàsikta—sprinkled with water; rathyä-with royal
avenues; äpaëa—commercial streets; märga—other roads; catvaräm—and
courtyards; prakérëa—scattered; mälya—with flower garlands; aìkura—new
sprouts; läja—parched grains; taëòuläm—and rice; äpürëa—full;
kumbhaiù—with pots; dadhi—with yogurt; candana—and sandalwood paste;
ukñitaiù—smeared; prasüna—with flower petals; dépa-ävalibhiù—and rows of
lamps; sa-pallavaiù—with leaves; sa-vånda—with bunches of flowers;
rambhä—with trunks of banana trees; kramukaiù—and trunks of betel-nut
trees; sa-ketubhiù—with flags; su-alaìkåta—nicely decorated; dvära—with
doors; gåhäm—whose houses; sa-paööikaiù—with ribbons.
TRANSLATION
The Lord saw Mathurä, with its tall gates and household entrances made of
crystal, its immense archways and main doors of gold, its granaries and other
storehouses of copper and brass, and its impregnable moats. Beautifying the city
were pleasant gardens and parks. The main intersections were fashioned of gold,
and there were mansions with private pleasure gardens, along with guildhalls
and many other buildings. Mathurä resounded with the calls of peacocks and
pet turtledoves, who sat in the small openings of the lattice windows and on the
gem-studded floors, and also on the columned balconies and on the ornate
rafters in front of the houses. These balconies and rafters were adorned with
vaidürya stones, diamonds, crystal quartz, sapphires, coral, pearls and emeralds.
All the royal avenues and commercial streets were sprinkled with water, as
were the side roads and courtyards, and flower garlands, newly grown sprouts,
parched grains and rice had been scattered about everywhere. Gracing the
houses' doorways were elaborately decorated pots filled with water, which were
bedecked with mango leaves, smeared with yogurt and sandalwood paste, and
encircled by flower petals and ribbons. Near the pots were flags, rows of lamps,
bunches of flowers and the trunks of banana and betel-nut trees.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura gives this description of the
elaborately decorated pots: "On either side of each doorway, above the
scattered rice, is a pot. Encircling each pot are flower petals, on its neck are
ribbons and in its mouth are leaves of mango and other trees. Above each pot,
on a gold plate, are rows of lamps. A trunk of a banana tree stands on either
side of each pot, and a betel-nut tree trunk stands in front and also behind.
Flags lean against the pots."
TEXT 24
taAM s$am‘aivaí"AE vas$aude"vanand"naAE
va{taAE vayasyaEnaRr"de"vavatmaRnaA
‰"í]M" s$amaIyaustvair"taA: paur"iñyaAe
h"myaARiNA caEvaAç&ç&ò"na{RpaAets$auk(A:
täà sampraviñöau vasudeva-nandanau
våtau vayasyair naradeva-vartmanä
drañöuà saméyus tvaritäù pura-striyo
harmyäëi caiväruruhur nåpotsukäù
SYNONYMS
täm—that (Mathurä); sampraviñöau—entering; vasudeva—of Vasudeva;
nandanau—the two sons; våtau—surrounded; vayasyaiù—by Their young
friends; nara-deva—of the King; vartmanä—by the road; drañöum—to see;
saméyuù—came forward together; tvaritäù—hurriedly; pura—of the city;
striyaù—the women; harmyäëi—their houses; ca—and; eva—also;
äruruhuù—they climbed on top of; nåpa—O King (Parékñit); utsukäù—eager.
TRANSLATION
The women of Mathurä hurriedly assembled and went forth to see the two
sons of Vasudeva as They entered the city on the King's road, surrounded by
Their cowherd boyfriends. Some of the women, my dear King, eagerly climbed
to the roofs of their houses to see Them.
TEXT 25
k(Aiêiã"payaRgDa{tavañBaUSaNAA
ivasma{tya caEkM( yaugAlaeSvaTaApar"A:
k{(taEk(pa‡a™avanaEk(naUpaur"A
naAx.~ftvaA iã"taIyaM tvapar"Aê laAecanama,
käçcid viparyag-dhåta-vastra-bhüñaëä
vismåtya caikaà yugaleñv athäparäù
kåtaika-patra-çravanaika-nüpurä
näìktvä dvitéyaà tv aparäç ca locanam
SYNONYMS
kaçcit—some of them; viparyak—backwards; dhåta—putting on; vastra—their
clothes; bhüñaëaù—and ornaments; vismåtya—forgetting; ca—and;
ekam—one; yugaleñu—of the pairs; atha—and; aparäù—others; kåta—placing;
eka—only one; patra—earring; çravaëa—on their ears; eka—or one;
nüpuräù—set of ankle bells; na aìktvä—not anointing; dvitéyam—the second;
tu—but; aparäù—other ladies; ca—and; locanam—an eye.
TRANSLATION
Some of the ladies put their clothes and ornaments on backwards, others
forgot one of their earrings or ankle bells, and others applied makeup to one eye
but not the other.
PURPORT
The ladies were very eager to see Kåñëa, and in their haste and excitement
they forgot themselves.
TEXT 26
@´antya Wk(Astad"paAsya s$aAets$avaA
@ByajyamaAnaA @k{(taAepamaÀanaA:
svapantya otTaAya inazAmya ina:svanaM
‘apaAyayantyaAe'BaRmapaAe÷ maAtar":
açnantya ekäs tad apäsya sotsavä
abhyajyamänä akåtopamajjanäù
svapantya utthäya niçamya niùsvanaà
prapäyayantyo 'rbham apohya mätaraù
SYNONYMS
açnantyaù—taking meals; ekaù—some; tat—that; apäsya—abandoning;
sa-utsavaù—joyfully; abhyajyamänäù—being massaged; akåta—not finishing;
upamajjanäù—their bathing; svapantyaù—sleeping; utthäya—getting up;
niçamya—having heard; niùsvanam—the loud sounds; prapäyayantyaù—giving
milk; arbham—to an infant; apohya—put aside; mätaraù—mothers.
TRANSLATION
Those who were taking their meals abandoned them, others went out
without finishing their baths or massages, women who were sleeping at once
rose when they heard the commotion, and mothers breast-feeding their infants
simply put them aside.
TEXT 27
manaAMis$a taAs$aAmar"ivand"laAecana:
‘agAlBalaIlaAh"is$ataAvalaAekE(:
jah"Ar" maÔaiã"r"de"n‰"iva‚(maAe
ä{"zAAM d"d"cC)$Ir"maNAAtmanaAets$avama,
manäàsi täsäm aravinda-locanaù
pragalbha-lélä-hasitävalokaiù
jahära matta-dviradendra-vikramo
dåçäà dadac chré-ramaëätmanotsavam
SYNONYMS
manäàsi—the minds; täsäm—their; aravinda—like lotuses; locanaù—He
whose eyes; pragalbha—bold; lélä—with His pastimes; hasita-smiling;
avalokaiù—with His glances; jahära—He took away; matta—in rut;
dvirada-indra—(like) a lordly elephant; vikramaù—whose gait; dåçäm—to
their eyes; dadat—affording; çré—of the goddess of fortune; ramaëa—which is
the source of pleasure; ätmanä—with His body; utsavam—a festival.
TRANSLATION
The lotus-eyed Lord, smiling as He recalled His bold pastimes, captivated
those ladies' minds with His glances. He walked with the gait of a lordly
elephant in rut, creating a festival for their eyes with His transcendental body,
which is the source of pleasure for the divine goddess of fortune.
TEXT 28
ä{"î"A mauò": ™autamanauåu"tacaetas$astaM 
tat‘aeºaNAAeitsmatas$auDaAeºaNAlabDamaAnaA:
@Anand"maUitaRmaupagAu÷ ä{"zAAtmalabDaM
ô$SyaÔvacaAe jaò"r"nantamair"nd"maAiDama,
dåñövä muhuù çrutam anudruta-cetasas taà
tat-prekñaëotsmita-sudhokñaëa-labdha-mänäù
änanda-mürtim upaguhya dåçätma-labdhaà
håñyat-tvaco jahur anantam arindamädhim
SYNONYMS
dåñövä—seeing; muhuù—repeatedly; çrutam—heard about; anudruta—melted;
cetasaù—whose hearts; tam—Him; tat—His; prekñaëa—of the glances;
ut-smita—and the broad smiles; sudhä—by the nectar; ukñaëa—from the
sprinkling; labdha—receiving; mänäù—honor; änanda—of ecstasy;
mürtim—the personal form; upaguhya—embracing; dåçä—through their eyes;
ätma—within themselves; labdham—gained; håñyat—erupting; tvacaù—their
skin; jahuù—they gave up; anantam—unlimited; arim-dama—O subduer of
enemies (Parékñit); ädhim—mental distress.
TRANSLATION
The ladies of Mathurä had repeatedly heard about Kåñëa, and thus as soon as
they saw Him their hearts melted. They felt honored that He was sprinkling
upon them the nectar of His glances and broad smiles. Taking Him into their
hearts through their eyes, they embraced Him, the embodiment of all ecstasy,
and as their bodily hairs stood on end, O subduer of enemies, they forgot the
unlimited distress caused by His absence.
TEXT 29
‘aAs$aAd"izAKar"Aè&X#A:
‘aItyautPu(éamauKaAmbaujaA:
@ByavaSaRna, s$aAEmanasyaE:
‘amad"A balake(zAvaAE
präsäda-çikharärüòhäù
préty-utphulla-mukhämbujäù
abhyavarñan saumanasyaiù
pramadä bala-keçavau
SYNONYMS
präsäda—of the mansions; çikhara—to the roofs; ärüòhäù—having climbed;
préti—with affection; utphulla—blooming; mukha—their faces;
ambujäù—which were like lotuses; abhyavarñan—they showered;
saumanasyaiù—with flowers; pramadäù—the attractive women;
bala-keçavau—Balaräma and Kåñëa.
TRANSLATION
Their lotus faces blooming with affection, the ladies who had climbed to the
roofs of the mansions rained down showers of flowers upon Lord Balaräma and
Lord Kåñëa.
TEXT 30
d"DyaºataE: s$aAed"paA‡aE:
›aggAnDaEr"ByaupaAyanaE:
taAvaAnacauR: ‘amauid"taAs$a,
ta‡a ta‡a iã"jaAtaya:
dadhy-akñataiù soda-pätraiù
srag-gandhair abhyupäyanaiù
täv änarcuù pramuditäs
tatra tatra dvijätayaù
SYNONYMS
dadhi—with yogurt; akñataiù—unbroken barleycorns; sa—and;
uda-pätraiù-with pots filled with water; srak—with garlands; gandhaiù—and
fragrant substances; abhyupäyanaiù—and also with other items of worship;
tau—the two of Them; änarcuù—worshiped; pramuditäù—joyful; tatra
tatra—in various places; dvi-jätayaù—brähmaëas.
TRANSLATION
Brähmaëas standing along the way honored the two Lords with
presentations of yogurt, unbroken barleycorns, pots full of water, garlands,
fragrant substances such as sandalwood paste, and other items of worship.
TEXT 31
Ocau: paAEr"A @h"Ae gAAepyas$a,
tapa: ik(macar"nmah"ta,
yaA ÷etaAvanaupazyainta
nar"laAek(mah"Aets$avaAE
ücuù paurä aho gopyas
tapaù kim acaran mahat
yä hy etäv anupaçyanti
nara-loka-mahotsavau
SYNONYMS
ücuù—said; pauräù—the women of the city; aho—ah; gopyaù—the cowherd
girls (of Våndävana); tapaù—austerity; kim—what; acaran—have executed;
mahat—great; yäù—who; hi—indeed; etau—these two;
anupaçyanti—constantly see; nara-loka—for human society;
mahä-utsavau—who are the greatest source of pleasure.
TRANSLATION
The women of Mathurä exclaimed: Oh, what severe austerities the gopés
must have performed to be able to regularly see Kåñëa and Balaräma, who are
the greatest source of pleasure for all mankind!
TEXT 32
r"jakM( k(iÂad"AyaAntaM
r"Ëÿk(ArM" gAd"Aƒaja:
ä{"î"AyaAcata vaAs$aAMis$a
DaAEtaAnyatyauÔamaAina ca
rajakaà kaïcid äyäntaà
raìga-käraà gadägrajaù
dåñöväyäcata väsäàsi
dhautäny aty-uttamäni ca
SYNONYMS
rajakam—washerman; kaïcit—a certain; äyäntam—approaching;
raìga-käram—engaged in dyeing; gada-agrajaù—Lord Çré Kåñëa, the elder
brother of Gada; dåñövä—seeing; ayäcata—requested; väsäàsi—garments;
dhautäni—cleaned; ati-uttamäni—first class; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
Seeing a washerman approaching who had been dyeing some clothes, Kåñëa
asked him for the finest laundered garments he had.
TEXT 33
de"÷AvayaAe: s$amauicataAnya,
@Ëÿ vaAs$aAMis$a caAhR"taAe:
BaivaSyaita parM" ™aeyaAe
d"Ataustae naA‡a s$aMzAya:
dehy ävayoù samucitäny
aìga väsäàsi cärhatoù
bhaviñyati paraà çreyo
dätus te nätra saàçayaù
SYNONYMS
dehi—please give; ävayoù—to Us two; samucitäni—suitable; aìga—My dear;
väsäàsi—clothes; ca—and; arhatoù—to the two who are deserving;
bhaviñyati—there will be; param—supreme; çreyaù—benefit; dätuù—for the
giver; te—you; na—there is not; atra—in this matter; saàçayaù—doubt.
TRANSLATION
[Lord Kåñëa said:] Please give suitable garments to the two of Us, who
certainly deserve them. If you grant this charity, you will undoubtedly receive
the greatest benefit.
TEXT 34
s$a yaAicataAe BagAvataA
pair"paUNAeRna s$avaRta:
s$aAºaepaM ç&iSata: ‘aAh"
Ba{tyaAe r"AÁa: s$auäu"maRd":
sa yäcito bhagavatä
paripürëena sarvataù
säkñepaà ruñitaù präha
bhåtyo räjïaù su-durmadaù
SYNONYMS
saù—he; yäcitaù—requested; bhagavatä—by the Supreme Lord;
paripürëena—who is absolutely complete; sarvataù—in all respects;
sa-äkñepam—insultingly; ruñitaù—angered; präha—he spoke; bhåtyaù—the
servant; räjïaù—of the King; su—very much; durmadaù—falsely proud.
TRANSLATION
Thus requested by the Supreme Lord, who is perfectly complete in all
respects, that arrogant servant of the King became angry and replied insultingly.
TEXT 35
wRä{"zAAnyaeva vaAs$aAMs$aI
inatyaM igAir"vanaecar":
pair"DaÔa ik(mauä,"va{ÔaA
r"Aja‰"vyaANyaBaIps$aTa
édåçäny eva väsäàsé
nityaà giri-vane-caraù
paridhatta kim udvåttä
räja-dravyäëy abhépsatha
SYNONYMS
édåçäni—of this sort; eva—indeed; väsäàsi—garments; nityam—always;
giri—on the mountains; vane—and in the forests; caräù—those who travel;
paridhatta—would put on; kim—whether; udvåttäù—impudent; räja—the
King's; dravyäëi—things; abhépsatha—You want.
TRANSLATION
[The washerman said:] You impudent boys! You're accustomed to roaming
the mountains and forests, and yet You would dare put on such clothes as these!
These are the King's possessions You're asking for!
TEXT 36
yaAtaAzAu baAilazAA maEvaM
‘aATya< yaid" ijajaIvaISaA
ba©ainta £ainta laumpainta
ä{"æaM r"Ajaku(laAina vaE
yätäçu bäliçä maivaà
prärthyaà yadi jijévéñä
badhnanti ghnanti lumpanti
dåptaà räja-kuläni vai
SYNONYMS
yäta—go; äçu—quickly; bäliçaù—fools; mä—do not; evam—like this;
prärthyam—beg; yadi—if; jijéviñä—You have the desire to live;
badhnanti—they tie up; ghnanti—kill; lumpanti—and loot (his house);
dåptam—one who is bold; räja-kuläni—the King's men; vai—indeed.
TRANSLATION
Fools, get out of here quickly! Don't beg like this if You want to stay alive.
When someone is too bold, the King's men arrest him and kill him and take all
his property.
TEXT 37
WvaM ivak(tTamaAnasya
ku(ipataAe de"vak(Ls$auta:
r"jak(sya k(r"AƒaeNA
izAr": k(AyaAd"paAtayata,
evaà vikatthamänasya
kupito devaké-sutaù
rajakasya karägreëa
çiraù käyäd apätayat
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; vikatthamänasya—who was brazenly speaking; kupitaù—angered;
devaké-sutaù—Kåñëa, the son of Devaké; rajakasya—of the washerman;
kara—of one hand; agreëa—with the front; çiraù—the head; käyät—from his
body; apätayat—made fall.
TRANSLATION
As the washerman thus spoke brazenly, the son of Devaké became angry, and
then merely with His fingertips He separated the man's head from his body.
TEXT 38
tasyaAnaujaIivana: s$avaeR
vaAs$a:k(AezAAna, ivas$a{jya vaE
äu"åu"vau: s$avaRtaAe maAgA<
vaAs$aAMis$a jagA{he"'cyauta:
tasyänujévinaù sarve
väsaù-koçän visåjya vai
dudruvuù sarvato märgaà
väsäàsi jagåhe 'cyutaù
SYNONYMS
tasya—his; anujévinaù—employees; sarve—all; väsaù—of clothes; koçän—the
bundles; visåjya—leaving behind; vai—indeed; dadruvuù—they fled;
sarvataù—in all directions; märgam—down the road; väsäàsi—garments;
jagåhe—took; acyutaù—Lord Kåñëa.
TRANSLATION
The washerman's assistants all dropped their bundles of clothes and fled
down the road, scattering in all directions. Lord Kåñëa then took the clothes.
TEXT 39
vais$atvaAtmai‘ayae vañe
k{(SNA: s$aÆÿSaRNAstaTaA
zAeSaANyaAd"Ôa gAAepaeByaAe
ivas$a{jya Bauiva k(Ainaicata,
vasitvätma-priye vastre
kåñëaù saìkarñaëas tathä
çeñäëy ädatta gopebhyo
visåjya bhuvi känicit
SYNONYMS
vasitvä—dressing Himself; ätma-priye—which He liked; vastre—in a pair of
garments; kåñëaù—Kåñëa; saìkarñaëaù—Balaräma; tathä—also; çeñäëi—the
rest; ädatta—He gave; gopebhyaù—to the cowherd boys; visåjya—throwing
away; bhuvi—on the ground; känicit—several.
TRANSLATION
Kåñëa and Balaräma put on pairs of garments that especially pleased Them,
and then Kåñëa distributed the remaining clothes among the cowherd boys,
leaving some scattered on the ground.
TEXT 40
tatastau vaAyak(: ‘aItas$a,
tayaAevaeRSamak(lpayata,
ivaica‡avaNAE=êElaeyaEr,"
@Ak(lpaEr"nauè&pata:
tatas tu väyakaù prétas
tayor veñam akalpayat
vicitra-varëaiç caileyair
äkalpair anurüpataù
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; tu—moreover; väyakaù—a weaver; prétaù—affectionate;
tayoù—for the two of Them; veñam—dress; akalpayat—arranged;
vicitra—various; varëaiù—with colors; caileyaiù—made of cloth;
äkalpaiù—with ornaments; anurüpataù—suitably.
TRANSLATION
Thereupon a weaver came forward and, feeling affection for the Lords,
nicely adorned Their attire with cloth ornaments of various colors.
PURPORT
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé explains that the weaver adorned the Lords with cloth
armlets and earrings that looked just like jewels. The word anurüpataù
indicates that the colors matched nicely.
TEXT 41
naAnaAlaºaNAvaeSaAByaAM
k{(SNAr"AmaAE ivare"jatau:
svalax.~k{(taAE baAlagAjaAE
pavaRNAIva is$ataetar"AE
nänä-lakñaëa-veñäbhyäà
kåñëa-rämau virejatuù
sv-alaìkåtau bäla-gajau
parvaëéva sitetarau
SYNONYMS
nänä—various; lakñaëa—having fine qualities; veñäbhyäm—with Their
individual clothes; kåñëa-rämau—Kåñëa and Balaräma; virejatuù—appeared
resplendent; su-alaìkåtau—nicely decorated; bäla—young; gajau—elephants;
parvaëi—during a festival; iva—as if; sita—white; itarau—and the opposite
(black).
TRANSLATION
Kåñëa and Balaräma looked resplendent, each in His own unique,
wonderfully ornamented outfit. They resembled a pair of young elephants, one
white and the other black, decorated for a festive occasion.
TEXT 42
tasya ‘as$aªaAe BagAvaAna,
‘aAd"Ats$aAè&pyamaAtmana:
i™ayaM ca par"maAM laAeke(
balaEìyaRsma{taIin‰"yama,
tasya prasanno bhagavän
prädät särüpyam ätmanaù
çriyaà ca paramäà loke
balaiçvarya-småténdriyam
SYNONYMS
tasya—with him; prasannaù—satisfied; bhagavän—the Supreme Lord;
prädät—granted; särüpyam—the liberation of having the same form;
ätmanaù—as Himself; çriyam—opulence; ca—and; paramäm—supreme;
loke—in this world; bala—physical strength; aiçvarya—influence;
småti—strength of memory; indriyam—dexterity of the senses.
TRANSLATION
Pleased with the weaver, the Supreme Lord Kåñëa blessed him that after
death he would achieve the liberation of attaining a form like the Lord's, and
that while in this world he would enjoy supreme opulence, physical strength,
influence, memory and sensory vigor.
TEXT 43
tata: s$aud"A°aAe BavanaM
maAlaAk(Ar"sya jagmatau:
taAE ä{"î"A s$a s$amautTaAya
nanaAma izAr"s$aA Bauiva
tataù sudämno bhavanaà
mälä-kärasya jagmatuù
tau dåñövä sa samutthäya
nanäma çirasä bhuvi
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; sudämnaù—of Sudämä; bhavanam—to the home;
mälä-kärasya—of the garland-maker; jagmatuù—the two of Them went;
tau—Them; dåñövä—seeing; saù—he; samutthäya—standing up;
nanäma—bowed down; çirasä—with his head; bhuvi—on the ground.
TRANSLATION
The two Lords then went to the house of the garland-maker Sudämä. When
Sudämä saw Them he at once stood up and then bowed down, placing his head
on the ground.
TEXT 44
tayaAer"As$anamaAnaIya
paAâM caAGyaARhR"NAAid"iBa:
paUjaAM s$aAnaugAyaAeê‚e(
›al(AmbaUlaAnaulaepanaE:
tayor äsanam änéya
pädyaà cärghyärhaëädibhiù
püjäà sänugayoç cakre
srak-tämbülänulepanaiù
SYNONYMS
tayoù—for Them; äsanam—seats; änéya—bringing; pädyam—water to wash
the feet; ca—and; arghya—with water to wash the hands; arhaëa—presents;
ädibhiù—and so on; püjäm—worship; sa-anugayoù—of the two, together with
Their companions; cakre—he performed; srak—with garlands;
tämbüla—betel-nut preparation (pän); anulepanaiù—and sandalwood paste.
TRANSLATION
After offering Them seats and bathing Their feet, Sudämä worshiped Them
and Their companions with arghya, garlands, pän, sandalwood paste and other
presentations.
TEXT 45
‘aAh" na: s$aATaRkM( janma
paAivataM ca ku(laM ‘aBaAe
ipata{de"vaSaRyaAe ma÷M
tauí"A ÷AgAmanaena vaAma,
präha naù särthakaà janma
pävitaà ca kulaà prabho
pitå-devarñayo mahyaà
tuñöä hy ägamanena väm
SYNONYMS
präha—he said; naù—our; sa-arthakam—worthwhile; janma—the birth;
pävitam—purified; ca—and; kulam—the family; prabho—O Lord; pitå—my
forefathers; deva—the demigods; åñayaù—and the great sages; mahyam—with
me; tuñöäù—are satisfied; hi—indeed; ägamanena—by the arrival; väm—of
You two.
TRANSLATION
[Sudämä said:] O Lord, my birth is now sanctified and my family free of
contamination. Now that You both have come here, my forefathers, the
demigods and the great sages are certainly all satisfied with me.
TEXT 46
BavantaAE ik(la ivaìsya
jagAta: k(Ar"NAM par"ma,
@vataINAARivah"AMzAena
ºaemaAya ca BavaAya ca
bhavantau kila viçvasya
jagataù käraëaà param
avatérëäv ihäàçena
kñemäya ca bhaväya ca
SYNONYMS
bhavantau—You two; kila—indeed; viçvasya—of the entire;
jagataù—universe; käraëam—the cause; param—ultimate; avatérëau—having
descended; iha—here; aàçena—with Your plenary portions; kñemäya—for the
benefit; ca—and; bhaväya—for the prosperity; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
You two Lords are the ultimate cause of this entire universe. To bestow
sustenance and prosperity upon this realm, You have descended with Your
plenary expansions.
TEXT 47
na ih" vaAM ivaSamaA ä{"ií":
s$auô$d"AejaRgAd"AtmanaAe:
s$amayaAe: s$avaRBaUtaeSau
BajantaM BajataAer"ipa
na hi väà viñamä dåñöiù
suhådor jagad-ätmanoù
samayoù sarva-bhüteñu
bhajantaà bhajator api
SYNONYMS
na—there is not; hi—indeed; väm—on Your part; viñamä—biased;
dåñöiù—vision; suhådoù—who are well-wishing friends; jagat—of the universe;
ätmanoù—the Soul; samayoù—equal; sarva—to all; bhüteñu—living beings;
bhajantam—those who worship You; bhajatoù—reciprocating with; api—even.
TRANSLATION
Because You are the well-wishing friends and Supreme Soul of the whole
universe, You regard all with unbiased vision. Therefore, although You
reciprocate Your devotees' loving worship, You always remain equally disposed
toward all living beings.
TEXT 48
taAvaÁaApayataM Ba{tyaM
ik(mahM" k(r"vaAiNA vaAma,
pauMs$aAe'tyanauƒah"Ae ÷eSa
Bavaià"yaRiªayaujyatae
täv ajïäpayataà bhåtyaà
kim ahaà karaväëi väm
puàso 'ty-anugraho hy eña
bhavadbhir yan niyujyate
SYNONYMS
tau—They; äjïäpayatam—should please order; bhåtyam—Their servant;
kim—what; aham—I; karaväëi—should do; väm—for You; puàsaù—for any
person; ati—extreme; anugrahaù—mercy; hi—indeed; eñaù—this;
bhavadbhiù—by You; yat—in which; niyujyate—he is engaged.
TRANSLATION
Please order me, Your servant, to do whatever You wish. To be engaged by
You in some service is certainly a great blessing for anyone.
TEXT 49
wtyaiBa‘aetya r"Ajaen‰"
s$aud"AmaA ‘aItamaAnas$a:
zAstaE: s$augAnDaE: ku(s$aumaEr,"
maAlaA ivar"icataA d"d"AE
ity abhipretya räjendra
sudämä préta-mänasaù
çastaiù su-gandhaiù kusumair
mälä viracitä dadau
SYNONYMS
iti—thus speaking; abhipretya—understanding Their intention; räja-indra—O
best of kings (Parékñit); sudämä—Sudämä; préta-mänasaù—pleased at heart;
çastaiù—fresh; su-gandhaiù—and fragrant; kusumaiù—with flowers;
malaù—garlands; viracitäù—made; dadau—he gave.
TRANSLATION
[Çukadeva Gosvämé continued:] O best of kings, having spoken these words,
Sudämä could understand what Kåñëa and Balaräma wanted. Thus with great
pleasure he presented Them with garlands of fresh, fragrant flowers.
TEXT 50
taAiBa: svalax.~k{(taAE ‘aItaAE
k{(SNAr"AmaAE s$ah"AnaugAAE
‘aNAtaAya ‘apaªaAya
d"d"tauvaRr"d"AE var"Ana,
täbhiù sv-alaìkåtau prétau
kåñëa-rämau sahänugau
praëatäya prapannäya
dadatur vara-dau varän
SYNONYMS
täbhiù—with those (garlands); su-alaìkåtau—beautifully ornamented;
prétau—satisfied; kåñëa-rämau—Kåñëa and Balaräma; saha—along with;
anugau—Their companions; praëatäya—who was bowing down;
prapannäya—to the surrendered (Sudämä); dadatuù—They gave;
varadau—the two givers of benedictions; varän—a choice of benedictions.
TRANSLATION
Beautifully adorned with these garlands, Kåñëa and Balaräma were delighted,
and so were Their companions. The two Lords then offered the surrendered
Sudämä, who was bowing down before Them, whatever benedictions he desired.
TEXT 51
s$aAe'ipa va˜ae'calaAM BailM(
taismaªaevaAiKalaAtmaina
taà"le(Sau ca s$aAEh"Ad<"
BaUtaeSau ca d"yaAM par"Ama,
so 'pi vavre 'caläà bhaktià
tasminn eväkhilätmani
tad-bhakteñu ca sauhärdaà
bhüteñu ca dayäà paräm
SYNONYMS
saù—he; api—and; vavre—chose; acaläm—unshakable; bhaktim—devotion;
tasmin—to Him; eva—alone; akhila—of everything; ätmani—the Supreme
Soul; tat—toward His; bhakteñu—devotees; ca—and; sauhärdam—friendship;
bhüteñu—toward living beings in general; ca—and; dayäm—mercy;
paräm—transcendental.
TRANSLATION
Sudämä chose unshakable devotion for Kåñëa, the Supreme Soul of all
existence; friendship with His devotees; and transcendental compassion for all
living beings.
TEXT 52
wita tasmaE varM" d"ÔvaA
i™ayaM caAnvayavaiDaRnaIma,
balamaAyauyaRzA: k(AintaM
inajaRgAAma s$ah"Aƒaja:
iti tasmai varaà dattvä
çriyaà cänvaya-vardhiném
balam äyur yaçaù käntià
nirjagäma sahägrajaù
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; tasmai—to him; varam—the benediction; dattvä—giving;
çriyam—opulence; ca—and; anvaya—his family; vardhiném—expanding;
balam—strength; äyuù—long life; yaçaù—fame; käntim—beauty;
nirjagäma—He left; saha—together with; agra-jaù—His elder brother, Lord
Balaräma.
TRANSLATION
Not only did Lord Kåñëa grant Sudämä these benedictions, but He also
awarded him strength, long life, fame, beauty and ever-increasing prosperity for
his family. Then Kåñëa and His elder brother took Their leave.
PURPORT
We can see a clear difference between Lord Kåñëa's dealings with the nasty
washerman and His dealings with the devoted florist Sudämä. The Lord is as
hard as a thunderbolt for those who defy Him and as soft as a rose for those
who surrender to Him. Therefore we should all sincerely surrender to Lord
Kåñëa, since that is clearly in our self-interest.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Tenth Canto, Forty-first Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Kåñëa and Balaräma Enter Mathurä."
42. The Breaking of the Sacrificial Bow
This chapter describes the benediction Trivakrä received, the breaking of
the sacrificial bow, the destruction of Kaàsa's soldiers, the inauspicious omens
Kaàsa saw and the festivities at the wrestling arena.
After leaving Sudämä's house, Lord Kåñëa came upon Trivakrä, a young
hunchbacked maidservant of Kaàsa's who was carrying a tray of fine
ointments. The Lord asked her who she was and requested some ointment
from her. Entranced by His beauty and joking words, Trivakrä gave both Kåñëa
and Balaräma a good deal of ointment. In return, Kåñëa stepped on her toes
with His lotus feet, took hold of her chin and lifted, thus straightening her
spine. The now beautiful and charming Trivakrä then grabbed the edge of
Kåñëa's upper cloth and asked Him to come to her house. Kåñëa replied that
after He had taken care of some business He would certainly come and relieve
her mental torment. Then the two Lords continued Their sightseeing tour of
Mathurä.
As Kåñëa and Balaräma walked along the King's road, the merchants
worshiped Them with various offerings. Kåñëa asked where the bow sacrifice
was to take place, and when He arrived at the arena He saw the wonderful
bow, which resembled Lord Indra's. Despite the guards' protests, Kåñëa forcibly
picked up the bow, easily strung it and in an instant broke it in half, producing
an ear-splitting sound that filled the heavens and struck terror in the heart of
Kaàsa. The many guards attacked Kåñëa, crying out "Seize Him! Kill Him!"
But Kåñëa and Balaräma simply picked up the two halves of the bow and beat
the guards to death. Next the Lords annihilated a company of soldiers sent by
Kaàsa, and then They left the arena and continued Their tour.
When the people of the city saw the amazing prowess and beauty of Kåñëa
and Balaräma, they thought They must be two chief demigods. Indeed, as the
residents of Mathurä gazed upon the Lords, they enjoyed all the blessings the
gopés had predicted.
At sunset Kåñëa and Balaräma returned to the cowherds' camp for Their
evening meal. They then passed the night resting comfortably. But King
Kaàsa was not so fortunate. When he heard how Kåñëa and Balaräma had
easily broken the mighty bow and destroyed his soldiers, he spent the night in
great anxiety. Both while awake and while dreaming he saw many ill omens
portending his imminent death, and his fear ruined any chance for rest.
At dawn the wrestling festival began. Crowds of people from the city and
outlying districts entered the arena and took their seats in the lavishly
decorated galleries. Kaàsa, his heart trembling, sat down on the royal dais and
invited Nanda Mahäräja and the other cowherd men to come sit in their
places, and they did so after offering him their gifts. The musical overture then
began as the sounds of the wrestlers slapping their arms resounded.
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
@Ta ˜ajana, r"AjapaTaena maADava:
iñyaM gA{h"ItaAËÿivalaepaBaAjanaAma,
ivalaAefya ku(bjaAM yauvataI%M var"AnanaAM
pa‘acC$ yaAntaI%M ‘ah"s$ana, r"s$a‘ad":
çré-çuka uväca
atha vrajan räja-pathena mädhavaù
striyaà gåhétäìga-vilepa-bhäjanäm
vilokya kubjäà yuvatéà varänanäà
papraccha yäntéà prahasan rasa-pradaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; atha—then; vrajan—walking;
räja-pathena—along the King's road; mädhavaù—Kåñëa; striyam—a woman;
gåhéta—holding; aìga—for the body; vilepa—with ointments; bhäjanäm—a
tray; vilokya—seeing; kubjäm—hunchbacked; yuvatém—young;
vara-änanäm—with an attractive face; papraccha—He inquired;
yäntém—going; prahasan—smiling; rasa—of the pleasure of love; pradaù—the
bestower.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: As He walked down the King's road, Lord Mädhava
then saw a young hunchback woman with an attractive face, who carried a tray
of fragrant ointments as she walked along. The bestower of the ecstasy of love
smiled and inquired from her as follows.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, the young
hunchbacked girl was actually a partial expansion of the Lord's wife
Satyabhämä. Satyabhämä is the Lord's internal energy known as Bhü-çakti,
and this expansion of hers, known as Påthivé, represents the earth, which was
bent down by the great burden of countless wicked rulers. Lord Kåñëa
descended to remove these wicked rulers, and thus His pastime of
straightening out the hunchback Trivakrä, as explained in these verses,
represents His rectifying the burdened condition of the earth. At the same
time, the Lord awarded Trivakrä a conjugal relationship with Himself.
In addition to the given meaning, the word rasa-pradaù indicates that the
Lord amused His cowherd boyfriends by His dealings with the young
hunchback.
TEXT 2
k(A tvaM var"AevaeRtaäu" h"AnaulaepanaM
k(syaAËÿnae vaA k(Tayasva s$aADau na:
de"÷AvayaAer"ËÿivalaepamauÔamaM
™aeyastatastae na icar"Aà"ivaSyaita
kä tvaà varorv etad u hänulepanaà
kasyäìgane vä kathayasva sädhu naù
dehy ävayor aìga-vilepam uttamaà
çreyas tatas te na ciräd bhaviñyati
SYNONYMS
kä—who; tvam—you; vara-üru—O beautiful-thighed one; etat—this; u
ha—ah, indeed; anulepanam—ointment; kasya—for whom; aìgane—My dear
woman; vä—or; kathayasva—please tell; sädhu—honestly; naù—Us;
dehi—please give; ävayoù—to Us two; aìga-vilepam—body ointment;
uttamam—excellent; çreyaù—benefit; tataù—thereafter; te—your; na
cirät—soon; bhaviñyati—will be.
TRANSLATION
[Lord Kåñëa said:] Who are you, O beautiful-thighed one? Ah, ointment!
Who is it for, my dear lady? Please tell Us truthfully. Give Us both some of
your finest ointment and you will soon gain a great boon.
PURPORT
The Lord jokingly addressed the lady as varoru, "O beautiful-thighed one."
His joke was not malicious, since He was actually about to make her beautiful.
TEXT 3
s$aEr"n‹yauvaAca
d"AsyasmyahM" s$aund"r" kM(s$as$ammataA
i‡ava‚(naAmaA ÷naulaepak(maRiNA
maà"AivataM BaAejapataer"itai‘ayaM
ivanaA yauvaAM k(Ae'nyatamastad"hR"ita
sairandhry uväca
däsy asmy ahaà sundara kaàsa-sammatä
trivakra-nämä hy anulepa-karmaëi
mad-bhävitaà bhoja-pater ati-priyaà
vinä yuväà ko 'nyatamas tad arhati
SYNONYMS
sairandhré uväca—the maidservant said; däsé—a servant; asmi—am; aham—I;
sundara—O handsome one; kaàsa—by Kaàsa; sammatä—respected;
trivakra-nämä—known as Trivakrä ("bent in three places"); hi—indeed;
anulepa—with ointments; karmaëi—for my work; mat—by me;
bhävitam—prepared; bhoja-pateù—to the chief of the Bhojas; ati-priyam—very
dear; vinä—except for; yuväm—You two; kaù—who; anyatamaù—else;
tat—that; arhati—deserves.
TRANSLATION
The maidservant replied: O handsome one, I am a servant of King Kaàsa,
who highly regards me for the ointments I make. My name is Trivakrä. Who
else but You two deserve my ointments, which the lord of the Bhojas likes so
much?
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté explains that Trivakrä, who is also known as
Kubjä, used the singular address sundara, "O handsome one," to hint that she
felt conjugal desire for Kåñëa alone, and she used the dual form yuväm, "for
both of You," to try to hide her conjugal sentiment. The hunchback's name,
Trivakrä, indicates that her body was bent at the neck, chest and waist.
TEXT 4
è&papaezAlamaADauyaR
h"is$ataAlaApavaIiºataE:
DaiSaRtaAtmaA d"d"AE s$aAn‰"ma,
oBayaAer"naulaepanama,
rüpa-peçala-mädhurya
hasitäläpa-vékñitaiù
dharñitätmä dadau sändram
ubhayor anulepanam
SYNONYMS
rüpa—by His beauty; peçala—charm; mädhurya—sweetness; hasita—smiles;
äläpa—talking; vékñitaiù—and glances; dharñita—overwhelmed; ätmä—her
mind; dadau—she gave; sändram—plentiful; ubhayoù—to both of Them;
anulepanam—ointment.
TRANSLATION
Her mind overwhelmed by Kåñëa's beauty, charm, sweetness, smiles, words
and glances, Trivakrä gave both Kåñëa and Balaräma generous amounts of
ointment.
PURPORT
This incident is also described in the Viñëu Puräëa (5.20.7):
çrutvä tam äha sä kåñëaà
gåhyatäm iti sädaram
anulepanaà pradadau
gätra-yogyam athobhayoù
"Hearing this, she respectfully replied to Lord Kåñëa, 'Please take it,' and gave
both of Them ointment suitable for applying to Their bodies."
TEXT 5
tatastaAvaËÿr"AgAeNA
svavaNAeRtar"zAAeiBanaA
s$am‘aAæapar"BaAgAena
zAuzAuBaAtae'naur"iÃataAE
tatas täv aìga-rägeëa
sva-varëetara-çobhinä
sampräpta-para-bhägena
çuçubhäte 'nuraïjitau
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; tau—They; aìga—of Their bodies; rägeëa—with the coloring
cosmetics; sva—Their own; varëa—with colors; itara—other than;
çobhinä—adorning; sampräpta—which exhibited; para—the highest;
bhagena—excellence; çuçubhäte—They appeared beautiful;
anuraïjitau—anointed.
TRANSLATION
Anointed with these most excellent cosmetics, which adorned Them with
hues that contrasted with Their complexions, the two Lords appeared extremely
beautiful.
PURPORT
The äcäryas suggest that Kåñëa spread yellow ointment upon His body, and
Balaräma blue ointment upon His.
TEXT 6
‘as$aªaAe BagAvaAna, ku(bjaAM
i‡ava‚(AM ç&icar"AnanaAma,
[%jvaI%M k(tau< manaê‚e(
d"zARyand"zAR"nae P(lama,
prasanno bhagavän kubjäà
trivakräà ruciränanäm
åjvéà kartuà manaç cakre
darçayan darçane phalam
SYNONYMS
prasannaù—satisfied; bhagavän—the Supreme Lord; kubjäm—the hunchback;
trivakrä—Trivakrä; rucira—attractive; änanäm—whose face; åjvém—straight;
kartum—to make; manaù cakre—He decided; darçayan—showing;
darçane—of seeing Him; phalam—the result.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa was pleased with Trivakrä, so He decided to straighten that
hunchbacked girl with the lovely face just to demonstrate the result of seeing
Him.
TEXT 7
paà"YaAmaA‚(mya ‘apade"
‰"YaÌÿlyauÔaAnapaAiNAnaA
‘agA{÷ icabauke('DyaAtmama,
od"naInamad"cyauta:
padbhyäm äkramya prapade
dry-aìguly-uttäna-päëinä
pragåhya cibuke 'dhyätmam
udanénamad acyutaù
SYNONYMS
padbhyäm—with both His feet; äkramya—pressing down; prapade—on her
toes; dvi—having two; aìguli—fingers; uttäna—pointing upwards;
päëinä—with His hands; pragåhya—taking hold of; cibuke—her chin;
adhyätmam—her body; udanénamat—He raised; acyutaù—Lord Kåñëa.
TRANSLATION
Pressing down on her toes with both His feet, Lord Acyuta placed one
upward-pointing finger of each hand under her chin and straightened up her
body.
TEXT 8
s$aA tad"jauRs$amaAnaAËÿL
ba{h"cC)$AeiNApayaAeDar"A
mauku(nd"s$pazARnaAts$aâAe
baBaUva ‘amad"AeÔamaA
sä tadarju-samänäìgé
båhac-chroëi-payodharä
mukunda-sparçanät sadyo
babhüva pramadottamä
SYNONYMS
sä—she; tadä—then; åju—straight; samäna—even; aìgé—her limbs;
båhat—large; çroëi—her hips; payaù-dharä—and breasts;
mukunda-sparçanät—by the touch of Lord Mukunda; sadyaù—suddenly;
babhüva—became; pramadä—a woman; uttamä—most perfect.
TRANSLATION
Simply by Lord Mukunda's touch, Trivakrä was suddenly transformed into
an exquisitely beautiful woman with straight, evenly proportioned limbs and
large hips and breasts.
TEXT 9
tataAe è&pagAuNAAEd"AyaRs$
ampaªaA ‘aAh" ke(zAvama,
oÔar"IyaAntamak{(Sya
smayantaI jaAtaô$cC$yaA
tato rüpa-guëaudäryasampannä
präha keçavam
uttaréyäntam akåñya
smayanté jäta-håc-chayä
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; rüpa—with beauty; guëa—good character; audärya—and
generosity; sampannä—endowed; präha—she addressed; keçavam—Lord
Kåñëa; uttaréya—of His upper garment; antam—the end; äkåñya—pulling;
smayanté—smiling; jäta—having developed; håt-çayä—lusty feelings.
TRANSLATION
Now endowed with beauty, character and generosity Trivakrä began to feel
lusty desires for Lord Keçava. Taking hold of the end of His upper cloth, she
smiled and addressed Him as follows.
TEXT 10
Wih" vaIr" gA{hM" yaAmaAe
na tvaAM tyalu(imah"Aets$ahe"
tvayaAenmaiTataicaÔaAyaA:
‘as$aId" pauç&SaSaRBa
ehi véra gåhaà yämo
na tväà tyaktum ihotsahe
tvayonmathita-cittäyäù
praséda puruñarñabha
SYNONYMS
ehi—come; véra—O hero; gåham—to my house; yämaù—let us go; na—not;
tväm—You; tyaktum—to leave; iha—here; utsahe—I can bear; tvayä—by You;
unmathita—agitated; cittäyäù—on her whose mind; praséda—please have
mercy; puruña-åñabha—O best of men.
TRANSLATION
[Trivakrä said:] Come, O hero, let us go to my house. I cannot bear to leave
You here. O best of males, please take pity on me, since You have agitated my
mind.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté supplies the following conversation:
Kåñëa: Is it for the purpose of dining that you're inviting Me to your house?
Trivakrä: I simply can't leave You here.
Kåñëa: But people here on the King's road will misconstrue what you're
saying and laugh. Therefore please don't speak like this.
Trivakrä: I can't help being agitated. You made the mistake of touching me.
It's not my fault.
TEXT 11
WvaM iñyaA yaAcyamaAna:
k{(SNAAe r"Amasya pazyata:
mauKaM vaIºyaAnau gAAepaAnaAM
‘ah"s$aMstaAmauvaAca h"
evaà striyä yäcyamänaù
kåñëo rämasya paçyataù
mukhaà vékñyänu gopänäà
prahasaàs täm uväca ha
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; striyä—by the woman; yäcya nänaù—being begged;
kåñëaù—Lord Kåñëa; rämasya—of Balaräma; paçyataù—who was looking on;
mukham—at the face; vékñya—glancing; anu—then; gopänäm—of the
cowherd boys; prahasan—laughing; täm—to her; uväca ha—He said.
TRANSLATION
Thus entreated by the woman, Lord Kåñëa first glanced at the face of
Balaräma, who was watching the incident, and then at the faces of the cowherd
boys. Then with a laugh Kåñëa replied to her as follows.
TEXT 12
WSyaAima tae gA{hM" s$au”au
pauMs$aAmaAiDaivak(zARnama,
s$aAiDataATaAeR'gA{h"ANAAM na:
paAnTaAnaAM tvaM par"AyaNAma,
eñyämi te gåhaà su-bhru
puàsäm ädhi-vikarçanam
sädhitärtho 'gåhäëäà naù
pänthänäà tvaà paräyaëam
SYNONYMS
eñyämi—I will go; te—your; gåham—to the house; su-bhru—O you who have
beautiful eyebrows; puàsäm—of men; ädhi—the mental distress;
vikarçanam—which eradicates; sädhita—having accomplished; arthaù—My
purpose; agåhäëäm—who have no home; naù—for Us; pänthänäm—who are
traveling on the road; tvam—you; para—the best; ayanam—shelter.
TRANSLATION
[Lord Kåñëa said:] O lady with beautiful eyebrows, as soon as I fulfill My
purpose I will certainly visit your house, where men can relieve their anxiety.
Indeed, you are the best refuge for Us homeless travelers.
PURPORT
By the word agåhäëäm, Çré Kåñëa indicated not only that He had no fixed
residence but also that He was not yet married.
TEXT 13
ivas$a{jya maADvyaA vaANyaA taAma,
˜ajanmaAgAeR vaiNAfpaTaE:
naAnaAepaAyanataAmbaUlacopyright
©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1209
›aggAnDaE: s$aAƒajaAe'icaRta:
visåjya mädhvyä väëyä täm
vrajan märge vaëik-pathaiù
nänopäyana-tämbülasrag-
gandhaiù sägrajo 'rcitaù
SYNONYMS
visåjya—leaving; mädhvyä—sweet; väëyä—with words; täm—her;
vrajan—walking; märge—along the road; vaëik-pathaiù—by the merchants;
nänä—with various; upäyana—respectful offerings; tämbüla—betel nut;
srak—garlands; gandhaiù—and fragrant substances; sa—together with;
agra-jaù—His elder brother; arcitaù—worshiped.
TRANSLATION
Leaving her with these sweet words, Lord Kåñëa walked further down the
road. The merchants along the way worshiped Him and His elder brother by
presenting Them with various respectful offerings, including pän, garlands and
fragrant substances.
TEXT 14
taÚ"zARnasmar"ºaAeBaAä,"
@AtmaAnaM naAivad"na, iñya:
iva›astavaAs$a:k(var"
valayaA laeKyamaUtaRya:
tad-darçana-smara-kñobhäd
ätmänaà nävidan striyaù
visrasta-väsaù-kavara
valayä lekhya-mürtayaù
SYNONYMS
tat—Him; darçana—because of seeing; smara—due to the effects of Cupid;
kñobhät—by their agitation; ätmänam—themselves; na avidan—could not
recognize; striyaù—the women; visrasta—disheveled; väsaù—their clothes;
kavara—the locks of their hair; valayäù—and their bangles; lekhya—(as if)
drawn in a picture; mürtayaù—their forms.
TRANSLATION
The sight of Kåñëa aroused Cupid in the hearts of the city women. Thus
agitated, they forgot themselves. Their clothes, braids and bangles became
disheveled, and they stood as still as figures in a painting.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté states that since the women of Mathurä
immediately experienced symptoms of conjugal attraction when they saw
Kåñëa, they were the most advanced devotees in the city. The ten effects of
Cupid are described as follows: cakñü-rägaù prathamaà cittäsaìgas tato 'tha
saìkalpaù nidrä-cchedas tanutä viñaya-nivåttis trapä-nasaù/ unmädo mürcchä
måtir ity etäù smara-daçä daçaiva syuù. "First comes attraction expressed
through the eyes, then intense attachment in the mind, then determination,
loss of sleep, becoming emaciated, disinterest in external things, shamelessness,
madness, becoming stunned and death. These are the ten stages of Cupid's
effects."
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté also points out that devotees who possess pure
love of Godhead generally do not exhibit the symptom of death, since this is
inauspicious in relation to Kåñëa. They do, however, manifest the other nine
symptoms, culminating in becoming stunned in ecstasy.
TEXT 15
tata: paAEr"Ana, pa{cC$maAnaAe
DanauSa: sTaAnamacyauta:
taismana, ‘aivaí"Ae d"ä{"zAe
DanaurE"n‰"imavaAàu"tama,
tataù paurän påcchamäno
dhanuñaù sthänam acyutaù
tasmin praviñöo dadåçe
dhanur aindram ivädbhutam
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; paurän—from the city residents; påcchamänaù—inquiring about;
dhanuñaù—of the bow; sthänam—the place; acyutaù—the infallible Supreme
Lord; tasmin—there; praviñöaù—entering; dadåçe—He saw; dhanuù—the bow;
aindram—that of Lord Indra; iva—like; adbhutam—amazing.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa then asked the local people where the arena was in which the
bow sacrifice would take place. When He went there He saw the amazing bow,
which resembled Lord Indra's.
TEXT 16
pauç&SaEbaRò"iBagAuRæama,
@icaRtaM par"maiÜR"mata,
vaAyaRmaANAAe na{iBa: k{(SNA:
‘as$a÷ Danaur"Ad"de"
puruñair bahubhir guptam
arcitaà paramarddhimat
väryamäëo nåbhiù kåñëaù
prasahya dhanur ädade
SYNONYMS
puruñaiù—by men; bahubhiù—many; guptam—guarded; arcitam—being
worshiped; parama—supreme; åddhi—opulence; mat—possessing;
väryamäëaù—warded off; nåbhiù—by the guards; kåñëaù—Lord Kåñëa;
prasahya—by force; dhanuù—the bow; ädade—picked up.
TRANSLATION
That most opulent bow was guarded by a large company of men, who were
respectfully worshiping it. Kåñëa pushed His way forward and, despite the
guards' attempts to stop Him, picked it up.
TEXT 17
k(re"NA vaAmaena s$alaIlamauä,"Da{taM
s$ajyaM ca k{(tvaA inaimaSaeNA pazyataAma,
na{NAAM ivak{(Sya ‘abaBaÃa maDyataAe
yaTaeºaud"NxM" mad"k(yauRç&‚(ma:
kareëa vämena sa-lélam uddhåtaà
sajyaà ca kåtvä nimiñeëa paçyatäm
nåëäà vikåñya prababhaïja madhyato
yathekñu-daëòaà mada-kary urukramaù
SYNONYMS
kareëa—with His hand; vämena—left; sa-lélam—playfully; uddhåtam—lifted;
sajyam—the stringing; ca—and; kåtvä—doing; nimiñeëa—in the wink of an
eye; paçyatäm—as they watched; nåëäm—the guards; vikåñya—pulling it taut;
prababhaïja—He broke it; madhyataù—in the middle; yathä—as; ikñu—of
sugarcane; daëòam—a stick; mada-karé—an excited elephant;
urukramaù—Lord Kåñëa.
TRANSLATION
Easily lifting the bow with His left hand, Lord Urukrama strung it in a
fraction of a second as the King's guards looked on. He then powerfully pulled
the string and snapped the bow in half, just as an excited elephant might break a
stalk of sugar cane.
TEXT 18
DanauSaAe BajyamaAnasya
zAbd": KaM r"Aed"s$aI id"zA:
paUr"yaAmaAs$a yaM ™autvaA
kM(s$añAs$amaupaAgAmata,
dhanuño bhajyamänasya
çabdaù khaà rodasé diçaù
pürayäm äsa yaà çrutvä
kaàsas träsam upägamat
SYNONYMS
dhanuñaù—of the bow; bhajyamänasya—which was breaking; çabdaù—the
sound; kham—the earth; rodasé—the sky; diçaù—and all the directions;
pürayäm äsa—filled; yam—which; çrutvä—hearing; kaàsaù—King Kaàsa;
träsam—fear; upägamat—experienced.
TRANSLATION
The sound of the bow's breaking filled the earth and sky in all directions.
Upon hearing it, Kaàsa was struck with terror.
TEXT 19
ta‰"iºaNA: s$aAnaucarM"
ku(ipataA @AtataAiyana:
gA{h"Itauk(AmaA @Ava˜aur,"
gA{÷taAM vaDyataAimaita
tad-rakñiëaù sänucaraà
kupitä ätatäyinaù
gåhétu-kämä ävavrur
gåhyatäà vadhyatäm iti
SYNONYMS
tat—its; rakñiëaù—guards; sa—along with; anucaram—His companions;
kupitäù—angered; ätatäyinaù—holding weapons; gåhétu—to catch;
kämäù—wanting; ävavruù—surrounded; gåhyatäm—seize Him;
vadhyatäm—kill Him; iti—thus saying.
TRANSLATION
The enraged guards then took up their weapons and, wanting to seize Kåñëa
and His companions, surrounded them and shouted, "Grab Him! Kill Him!"
TEXT 20
@Ta taAnäu"r"iBa‘aAyaAna,
ivalaAefya balake(zAvaAE
‚u(Ü"AE Danvana @Ad"Aya
zAk(lae taAMê ja£atau:
atha tän durabhipräyän
vilokya bala-keçavau
kruddhau dhanvana ädäya
çakale täàç ca jaghnatuù
SYNONYMS
atha—thereupon; tän—them; durabhipräyän—with evil intent;
vilokya—seeing; bala-keçavau—Balaräma and Kåñëa; kruddhau—angry;
dhanvanaù—of the bow; ädäya—taking; çakale—the two broken pieces;
tän—them; ca—and; jaghnatuù—struck.
TRANSLATION
Seeing the guards coming upon Them with evil intent, Balaräma and Keçava
took up the two halves of the bow and began striking them down.
TEXT 21
balaM ca kM(s$a‘aih"taM
h"tvaA zAAlaAmauKaAÔata:
inaS‚(mya caer"tauôR$í"AE
inar"Iºya paur"s$ampad":
balaà ca kaàsa-prahitaà
hatvä çälä-mukhät tataù
niñkramya ceratur håñöau
nirékñya pura-sampadaù
SYNONYMS
balam—an armed force; ca—and; kaàsa-prahitam—sent by Kaàsa;
hatvä—having killed; çälä—of the sacrificial arena; mukhät—by the gate;
tataù—then; niñkramya—exciting; ceratuù—the two of Them walked along;
håñöau—happy; nirékñya—observing; pura—of the city; sampadaù—the riches.
TRANSLATION
After also killing a contingent of soldiers sent by Kaàsa, Kåñëa and
Balaräma left the sacrificial arena by its main gate and continued Their walk
about the city, happily looking at the opulent sights.
TEXT 22
tayaAestad"àu"taM vaIya<
inazAAmya paur"vaAis$ana:
taeja: ‘aAgAlByaM è&paM ca
maeinare" ivabauDaAeÔamaAE
tayos tad adbhutaà véryaà
niçämya pura-väsinaù
tejaù prägalbhyaà rüpaà ca
menire vibudhottamau
SYNONYMS
tayoù—of Them; tat—that; adbhutam—amazing; véryam—heroic deed;
niçämya—seeing; pura-väsinaù—the residents of the city; tejaù—Their
strength; prägalbhyam—boldness; rüpam—beauty; ca—and; menire—they
considered; vibudha—of demigods; uttamau—two of the best.
TRANSLATION
Having witnessed the amazing deed Kåñëa and Balaräma had performed, and
seeing Their strength, boldness and beauty, the people of the city thought They
must be two prominent demigods.
TEXT 23
tayaAeivaRcar"taAe: svaEr"ma,
@Aid"tyaAe'stamaupaeiyavaAna,
k{(SNAr"AmaAE va{taAE gAAepaE:
paur"AcC$k(q%maIyatau:
tayor vicaratoù svairam
ädityo 'stam upeyivän
kåñëa-rämau våtau gopaiù
puräc chakaöam éyatuù
SYNONYMS
tayoù—as They; vicaratoù—moved about; svairam—at Their will;
ädityaù—the sun; astam—its setting; upeyivän—approached;
kåñëa-rämau—Kåñëa and Balaräma; våtau—accompanied; gopaiù—by the
cowherd boys; purät—from the city; çakaöam—to the place where the wagons
had been unharnessed; éyatuù—went.
TRANSLATION
As They strolled about at will, the sun began to set, so They left the city
with the cowherd boys and returned to the cowherds' wagon encampment.
TEXT 24
gAAepyaAe mauku(nd"ivagAmae ivar"h"Ataur"A yaA
@AzAAs$ataAizASa [%taA maDaupauyaRBaUvana,
s$ampazyataAM pauç&SaBaUSaNAgAA‡alaºmaI%M
ih"tvaetar"Aªau Bajataêk(mae'yanaM ™aI:
gopyo mukunda-vigame virahäturä yä
äçäsatäçiña åtä madhu-pury abhüvan
sampaçyatäà puruña-bhüñaëa-gätra-lakñméà
hitvetarän nu bhajataç cakame 'yanaà çréù
SYNONYMS
gopyaù—the gopés; mukunda-vigame—when Lord Mukunda was departing;
viraha—by feelings of separation; äturäù—tormented; yäù—which;
äçäsata—they had spoken; äçiñaù—the benedictions; åtäù—true;
madhu-puri—in Mathurä; abhüvan—have become; sampaçyatäm—for those
who are fully seeing; puruña—of men; bhüñaëa—of the ornament; gätra—of
His body; lakñmém—the beauty; hitvä—abandoning; itarän—others;
nu—indeed; bhajataù—who were worshiping her; cakame—hankered for;
ayanam—shelter; çréù—the goddess of fortune.
TRANSLATION
At the time of Mukunda's [Kåñëa's] departure from Våndävana, the gopés
had foretold that the residents of Mathurä would enjoy many benedictions, and
now the gopés' predictions were coming true, for those residents were gazing
upon the beauty of Kåñëa, the jewel among men. Indeed, the goddess of fortune
desired the shelter of that beauty so much that she abandoned many other men,
although they worshiped her.
TEXT 25
@vainal(Ax.~i„ayaugAlaAE
BauftvaA ºaIr"Aepas$aecanama,
OSataustaAM s$auKaM r"Ai‡aM
ÁaAtvaA kM(s$aicak(LiSaRtama,
avaniktäìghri-yugalau
bhuktvä kñéropasecanam
üñatus täà sukhaà rätrià
jïätvä kaàsa-cikérñitam
SYNONYMS
avanikta—bathed; aìghri-yugalau—the two feet of each of Them;
bhuktvä—eating; kñéra-upasecanam—boiled rice sprinkled with milk;
üñatuù—They stayed there; täm—for that; sukham—comfortably;
rätrim—night; jïätvä—knowing; kaàsa-cikérñitam—what Kaàsa intended to
do.
TRANSLATION
After Kåñëa's and Balaräma's feet were bathed, the two Lords ate rice with
milk. Then, although knowing what Kaàsa intended to do, They spent the
night there comfortably.
TEXTS 26-27
kM(s$astau DanauSaAe BaËMÿ
r"iºaNAAM svabalasya ca
vaDaM inazAmya gAAeivand"-
r"Amaiva‚(Lix"taM par"ma,
d"IGaR‘ajaAgAr"Ae BaItaAe
äu"inaRimaÔaAina äu"maRita:
baó"nyacaí"AeBayaTaA
ma{tyaAed"AE=tyak(r"AiNA ca
kaàsas tu dhanuño bhaìgaà
rakñiëäà sva-balasya ca
vadhaà niçamya govindaräma-
vikréòitaà param
dérgha-prajägaro bhéto
durnimittäni durmatiù
bahüny acañöobhayathä
måtyor dautya-karäëi ca
SYNONYMS
kaàsaù—King Kaàsa; tu—but; dhanuñaù—of the bow; bhaìgam—the
breaking; rakñiëäm—of the guards; sva—his; balasya—of the army; ca—and;
vadham—the killing; niçamya—hearing of; govinda-räma—of Kåñëa and
Balaräma; vikréòitam—the playing; param—merely; dérgha—for a long time;
prajägaraù—remaining awake; bhétaù—afraid; durnimittäni—bad omens;
durmatiù—the wicked-minded; bahüni—many; acañöa—saw; ubhayathä—in
both states (sleep and wakefulness); måtyoù—of death; dautya-karäëi—the
messengers; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
Wicked King Kaàsa, on the other hand, was terrified, having heard how
Kåñëa and Balaräma had broken the bow and killed his guards and soldiers, all
simply as a game. He remained awake for a long time, and both while awake and
while dreaming he saw many bad omens, messengers of death.
TEXTS 28-31
@d"zARnaM svaizAr"s$a:
‘aitaè&pae ca s$atyaipa
@s$atyaipa iã"taIyae ca
ãE"è&pyaM jyaAeitaSaAM taTaA
iC$‰"‘ataIitazC$AyaAyaAM
‘aANAGaAeSaAnaupa™auita:
svaNAR‘ataIitava{RºaeSau
svapad"AnaAmad"zARnama,
sva«ae ‘aetapair"SvaËÿ:
Kar"yaAnaM ivaSaAd"nama,
yaAyaAªalad"maAlyaek(s$a,
taElaAByal(Ae id"gAmbar":
@nyaAina caetTaMBaUtaAina
sva«ajaAgAir"taAina ca
pazyanmar"NAs$an‡astaAe
ina‰"AM laeBae na icantayaA
adarçanaà sva-çirasaù
pratirüpe ca saty api
asaty api dvitéye ca
dvai-rüpyaà jyotiñäà tathä
chidra-pratétiç chäyäyäà
präëa-ghoñänupaçrutiù
svarëa-pratétir våkñeñu
sva-padänäm adarçanam
svapne preta-pariñvaìgaù
khara-yänaà viñädanam
yäyän nalada-mäly ekas
tailäbhyakto dig-ambaraù
anyäni cetthaà-bhütäni
svapna-jägaritäni ca
paçyan maraëa-santrasto
nidräà lebhe na cintayä
SYNONYMS
adarçanam—the invisibility; sva—of his own; çirasaù—head; pratirüpe—his
reflection; ca—and; sati—being present; api—even; asati—there not being;
api—even; dvitéye—a cause for duplication; ca—and; dvai-rüpyam—double
image; jyotiñäm—of the heavenly bodies; tathä—also; chidra—of a hole;
pratétiù—the seeing; chäyäyäm—in his shadow; präëa—of his life air;
ghoña—of the reverberation; anupaçrutiù—the failure to hear; svarëa—of a
golden color; pratétiù—the perception; våkñeñu—on trees; sva—his own;
padänäm—footprints; adarçanam—not seeing; svapne—while asleep;
preta—by ghostly spirits; pariñvaìgaù—being embraced; khara—upon a
donkey; yänam—traveling; viña—poison; adanam—swallowing; yäyät—was
going about; nalada—of spikenards, rose-purple flowers native to India;
mälé—wearing a garland; ekaù—someone; taila—with oil;
abhyaktaù—smeared; dik-ambaraù—naked; anyäni—other (omens); ca—and;
ittham-bhütäni—like these; svapna—while asleep; jägaritäni—while awake;
ca—also; paçyan—seeing; maraëa—of death; santrastaù—terrified;
nidräm—sleep; lebhe—he could achieve; na—not; cintayä—because of his
anxiety.
TRANSLATION
When he looked at his reflection he could not see his head; for no reason the
moon and stars appeared double; he saw a hole in his shadow; he could not hear
the sound of his life air; trees seemed covered with a golden hue; and he could
not see his footprints. He dreamt that he was being embraced by ghosts, riding a
donkey and drinking poison, and also that a naked man smeared with oil was
passing by wearing a garland of nalada flowers. Seeing these and other such
omens both while dreaming and while awake, Kaàsa was terrified by the
prospect of death, and out of anxiety he could not sleep.
TEXT 32
vyauí"AyaAM inaizA k(AEr"vya
s$aUyaeR caAà"Ya: s$amauitTatae
k(Ar"yaAmaAs$a vaE kM(s$aAe
maéa‚(Lx"Amah"Aets$avama,
vyuñöäyäà niçi kauravya
sürye cädbhyaù samutthite
kärayäm äsa vai kaàso
malla-kréòä-mahotsavam
SYNONYMS
vyuñöäyäm—having passed; niçi—the night; kauravya—O descendant of Kuru
(Parékñit); sürye—the sun; ca—and; adbhyaù—from the water;
samutthite—rising; kärayäm äsa—had carried out; vai—indeed;
kaàsaù—Kaàsa; malla—of wrestlers; kréòä—of the sport; mahä-utsavam—the
great festival.
TRANSLATION
When the night had finally passed and the sun rose up again from the water,
Kaàsa set about arranging for the grand wrestling festival.
TEXT 33
@AnacauR: pauç&SaA r"ËMÿ
taUyaRBaeyaRê jai£are"
maÂaAêAlax.~k{(taA: ›aigBa:
pataAk(AcaElataAer"NAE:
änarcuù puruñä raìgaà
türya-bheryaç ca jaghnire
maïcäç cälaìkåtäù sragbhiù
patäkä-caila-toraëaiù
SYNONYMS
änarcuù—worshiped; puruñäù—the King's men; raìgam—the arena;
türya—musical instruments; bheryaù—drums; ca—and; jaghnire—they
vibrated; maïcäù—the viewing platforms; ca—and; alaìkåtäù—were
decorated; sragbhiù—with garlands; patäkä—with flags; caila—cloth ribbons;
toraëaiù—and gateways.
TRANSLATION
The King's men performed the ritual worship of the wrestling arena,
sounded their drums and other instruments and decorated the viewing galleries
with garlands, flags, ribbons and arches.
TEXT 34
taeSau paAEr"A jaAnapad"A
“aöºa‡apaur"AegAmaA:
yaTaAepajaAeSaM ivaivazAU
r"AjaAnaê k{(taAs$anaA:
teñu paurä jänapadä
brahma-kñatra-purogamäù
yathopajoñaà viviçü
räjänaç ca kåtäsanäù
SYNONYMS
teñu—upon these (platforms); pauräù—the city-dwellers; jänapadäù—and the
people of the suburbs; brahma—by the brähmaëas; kñatra—and the kñatriyas;
puraù-gamäù—headed; yathä-upajoñam—as suited their comfort;
viviçuù—came and sat; räjänaù—the kings; ca—also; kåta—given;
asanäù—special seats.
TRANSLATION
The city-dwellers and residents of the outlying districts, led by brähmaëas
and kñatriyas, came and sat down comfortably in the galleries. The royal guests
received special seats.
TEXT 35
kM(s$a: pair"va{taAe'maAtyaE
r"AjamaÂa opaAivazAta,
maNx"laeìr"maDyasTaAe
ô$d"yaena ivaäU"yataA
kaàsaù parivåto 'mätyai
räja-maïca upäviçat
maëòaleçvara-madhya-stho
hådayena vidüyatä
SYNONYMS
kaàsaù—Kaàsa; parivåtaù—surrounded; amätyaiù—by his ministers;
räja-maïce—on the King's platform; upäviçati—sat; maëòala-éçvara—of
secondary rulers of various regions; madhya—in the midst; sthaù—situated;
hådayena—with his heart; vidüyatä—trembling.
TRANSLATION
Surrounded by his ministers, Kaàsa took his seat on the imperial dais. But
even as he sat amidst his various provincial rulers, his heart trembled.
TEXT 36
vaAâmaAnaes$au taUyaeRSau
maéataAlaAeÔare"Sau ca
maéaA: svalax.~k{(taA: ä{"æaA:
s$aAepaADyaAyaA: s$amaAs$ata
vädyamänesu türyeñu
malla-tälottareñu ca
malläù sv-alaìkåtäù dåptäù
sopädhyäyäù samäsata
SYNONYMS
vädyamäneñu—as they were being played; türyeñu—the musical instruments;
malla—suitable for wrestling; täla—with meters; uttareñu—prominent;
ca—and; malläù—the wrestlers; su-alaìkåtäù—well ornamented;
dåptäù—proud; sa-upädhyäyäù—together with their instructors;
samäsata—came and sat down.
TRANSLATION
While the musical instruments loudly played in the rhythmic meters
appropriate for wrestling matches, the lavishly ornamented wrestlers proudly
entered the arena with their coaches and sat down.
TEXT 37
caANAUr"Ae mauií"k(: kU(ta:
zAlastaAezAla Wva ca
ta @As$aeäu"ç&pasTaAnaM
valgAuvaAâ‘ah"iSaRtaA:
cäëüro muñöikaù kütaù
çalas toçala eva ca
ta äsedur upasthänaà
valgu-vädya-praharñitäù
SYNONYMS
cäëüraù muñöikaù küöaù—the wrestlers Cäëüra, Muñöika and Küöa; çalaù
toçalaù—Çala and Toçala; eva ca—also; te—they; äseduù—sat down;
upasthänam—on the mat of the wrestling ring; valgu—pleasing; vädya—by the
music; praharñitäù—enthused.
TRANSLATION
Enthused by the pleasing music, Canura, Muñöika, Küöa, Çala and Toçala sat
down on the wrestling mat.
TEXT 38
nand"gAAepaAd"yaAe gAAepaA
BaAejar"Ajas$amaAò"taA:
inavaeid"taAepaAyanaAsta
Wk(ismanmaÂa @AivazAna,
nanda-gopädayo gopä
bhoja-räja-samähutäù
niveditopäyanäs ta
ekasmin maïca äviçan
SYNONYMS
nanda-gopa-ädayaù—headed by Nanda Gopa; gopäù—the cowherds;
bhoja-räja—by Kaàsa, King of the Bhojas; samähutäù—called forward;
nivedita—presenting; upäyanäù—their offerings; te—they; ekasmin—in one;
maïce—viewing gallery; äviçan—sat down.
TRANSLATION
Nanda Mahäräja and the other cowherds, summoned by the King of the
Bhojas, presented him with their offerings and then took their seats in one of
the galleries.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté, the word samähutäù indicates
that King Kaàsa respectfully called the leaders of Vraja forward so that they
could make their offerings to the central government. According to the
äcärya, Kaàsa assured Nanda as follows: "My dear King of Vraja, you are the
most important of my village rulers. Yet even though you have come to
Mathurä from your cowherd village, you have not come to visit me. Is that
because you are frightened? Don't think that your two sons are bad because
They broke the bow. I invited Them here because I heard They were extremely
powerful, and I've arranged this wrestling match as a test of Their strength. So
please come forward without hesitation. Don't be afraid."
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté further states that Nanda Mahäräja noticed his
two sons were not present. Apparently, out of disrespect for King Kaàsa's
order, They had taken the morning off and gone elsewhere.
Thus Kaàsa delegated some cowherd men to go look for Them and advise
Them to behave properly and come back to the wrestling arena. The äcärya
also states that the reason Nanda and the other cowherd men sat in the
galleries was that they could not find any sitting places on the royal dais.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Tenth Canto, Forty-second Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Breaking of the Sacrificial Bow."
43. Kåñëa Kills the Elephant Kuvalayäpéòa
This chapter tells how Lord Kåñëa killed the lordly elephant Kuvalayäpéòa,
how Kåñëa and Balaräma entered the wrestling arena and what Kåñëa said to
the wrestler Cäëüra.
After finishing Their early-morning rituals, Kåñëa and Balaräma heard
kettledrums heralding the start of the wrestling match, and They went to see
the festivities. At the gate of the wrestling arena They encountered an
elephant named Kuvalayäpéòa, who attacked Kåñëa at the urging of his keeper.
The mighty elephant grabbed at Kåñëa with his trunk, but the Lord struck
back and then disappeared from the beast's sight among his legs. Enraged at
not being able to see Kåñëa, Kuvalayäpéòa sought Him out with his sense of
smell and seized Him. But the Lord pulled loose. In this way Kåñëa teased and
tormented Kuvalayäpéòa, finally yanking out one of his tusks and beating him
and his keepers to death.
Sprinkled with the elephant's blood and carrying one of his tusks on His
shoulder as a weapon, Lord Kåñëa appeared unprecedentedly beautiful as He
entered the wrestling arena. There the various classes of people saw Him in
different ways, according to their specific relationship with Him.
When King Kaàsa heard how Kåñëa and Balaräma had killed
Kuvalayäpéòa, he realized They were invincible and became filled with
anxiety. The members of the audience, on the other hand, became joyful as
they reminded one another about the Lords' amazing pastimes. The people
declared that Kåñëa and Balaräma must be two expansions of the Supreme
Lord Näräyaëa who had descended into the house of Vasudeva.
Cäëüra then stepped forward and challenged Kåñëa and Balaräma to
wrestle, saying King Kaàsa wished to see such a match. Kåñëa replied,
"Although We are merely nomadic forest folk, We are nonetheless subjects of
the King; thus We will not hesitate to please him with an exhibition of
wrestling." As soon as Cäëüra heard this, he suggested that Kåñëa should
wrestle him and that Balaräma should wrestle Muñöika.
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
@Ta k{(SNAê r"Amaê
k{(tazAAEcaAE par"ntapa
maéaäu"näu"iBainaGaAeRSaM
™autvaA ‰"í]"maupaeyatau:
çré-çuka uväca
atha kåñëaç ca rämaç ca
kåta-çaucau parantapa
malla-dundubhi-nirghoñaà
çrutvä drañöum upeyatuù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; atha—next; kåñëaù—Kåñëa;
ca—and; rämaù—Balaräma; ca—also; kåta—having carried out;
çaucau—purification; param-tapa—O chastiser of enemies; malla—of the
wrestling match; dundubhi—of the kettledrums; nirghoñam—the resounding
vibration; çrutvä—hearing; drañöum—to see; upeyataù—They approached.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O chastiser of enemies, Kåñëa and Balaräma, having
executed all necessary purification, then heard the kettledrums resounding at
the wrestling arena, and They went there to see what was happening.
PURPORT
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé explains the words kåta-çaucau, "having executed all
necessary purification," as follows: "Two days previously, Kåñëa and Balaräma
had executed Their purification, Their relief from offense, [by performing
heroic deeds. The Lords reasoned: 'Even after We have made Our power
known by breaking the bow and by performing other feats, Our parents have
still not secured freedom. Kaàsa is again trying to kill them. Therefore,
although he is Our maternal uncle, it will not be wrong for Us to kill him.'
They assured Their offenselessness by this reasoning."
TEXT 2
r"Ëÿã"ArM" s$amaAs$aAâ
taismaªaAgAmavaisTatama,
@pazyatku(valayaApaIxM"
k{(SNAAe'mbaï"‘acaAeid"tama,
raìga-dväraà samäsädya
tasmin nägam avasthitam
apaçyat kuvalayäpéòaà
kåñëo 'mbañöha-pracoditam
SYNONYMS
raìga—of the arena; dväram—the gate; samäsädya—reaching; tasmin—in
that place; nägam—an elephant; avasthitam—standing; apaçyat—He saw;
kuvalayäpéòam—named Kuvalayäpéòa; kåñëaù—Lord Kåñëa; ambañöha—by his
keeper; pracoditam—urged on.
TRANSLATION
When Lord Kåñëa reached the entrance to the arena, He saw the elephant
Kuvalayäpéòa blocking His way at the urging of his keeper.
PURPORT
The elephant-keeper revealed his malicious intent by blocking Lord Kåñëa's
entrance into the arena.
TEXT 3
baä,"DvaA pair"k(rM" zAAEir":
s$amau÷ ku(iq%laAlak(Ana,
ovaAca h"istapaM vaAcaA
maeGanaAd"gABaIr"yaA
baddhvä parikaraà çauriù
samuhya kuöilälakän
uväca hastipaà väcä
megha-näda-gabhérayä
SYNONYMS
baddhvä—binding; parikaram—His clothes; çauriù—Lord Kåñëa;
samuhya-tying together; kuöila—curled; alakän—the locks of His hair;
uväca—He spoke; hasti-pam—to the elephant-keeper; väcä—with words;
megha—of a cloud; näda—like the sound; gabhérayä—grave.
TRANSLATION
Securely binding up His clothes and tying back His curly locks, Lord Kåñëa
addressed the elephant-keeper with words as grave as the rumbling of a cloud.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa was obviously preparing for a fight. According to Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, the Lord put aside His jacket, tightened His
belt and tied back His hair.
TEXT 4
@mbaï"Ambaï" maAgA< naAE
de"÷pa‚(ma maA icar"ma,
naAe caets$aku(ÃarM" tvaAâ
nayaAima yamas$aAd"nama,
ambañöhämbañöha märgaà nau
dehy apakrama mä ciram
no cet sa-kuïjaraà tvädya
nayämi yama-sädanam
SYNONYMS
ambañöha ambañöha—O elephant-keeper, elephant-keeper; märgam—way;
nau—to Us; dehi—give; apakrama—move aside; ma ciram—without delay; na
u cet—if not; sa-kuïjaram—together with your elephant; tva—you;
adya—today; nayämi—I will send; yama—of the lord of death; sädanam—to
the abode.
TRANSLATION
[Lord Kåñëa said:] O driver, driver, move aside at once and let Us pass! If
you don't, this very day I will send both you and your elephant to the abode of
Yamaräja!
TEXT 5
WvaM inaBaRits$aRtaAe'mbaï":
ku(ipata: k(AeipataM gAjama,
caAed"yaAmaAs$a k{(SNAAya
k(AlaAntak(yamaAepamama,
evaà nirbhartsito 'mbañöhaù
kupitaù kopitaà gajam
codayäm äsa kåñëäya
käläntaka-yamopamam
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; nirbhartsitaù—threatened; ambañöhaù—the elephant-keeper;
kupitaù—angered; kopitam—the enraged; gajam—elephant; codayäm äsa—he
goaded; kåñëäya—toward Kåñëa; käla—time; antaka—death; yama—and
Yamaräja; upamam—comparable to.
TRANSLATION
Thus threatened, the elephant-keeper became angry. He goaded his furious
elephant, who appeared equal to time, death and Yamaräja, into attacking Lord
Kåñëa.
TEXT 6
k(r"In‰"stamaiBaåu"tya
k(re"NA tar"s$aAƒah"Ita,
k(r"Aiã"gAilata: s$aAe'mauM
inah"tyaAx.~i„aSvalaIyata
karéndras tam abhidrutya
kareëa tarasägrahét
karäd vigalitaù so 'muà
nihatyäìghriñv aléyata
SYNONYMS
kari—of elephants; indraù—the lord; tam—Him; abhidrutya—running
toward; kareëa—with his trunk; tarasä—violently; agrahét—seized;
karät—from the trunk; vigalitaù—slipping away; saù—He, Kåñëa;
amum—him, Kuvalayäpéòa; nihatya—striking; aìghriñu—among his legs;
aléyata—He disappeared.
TRANSLATION
The lord of the elephants charged Kåñëa and violently seized Him with his
trunk. But Kåñëa slipped away, struck him a blow and disappeared from his
view among his legs.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa struck the elephant with His fist and then disappeared among
his legs.
TEXT 7
s$ax.~‚u(Ü"stamacaºaANAAe
„aANAä{"ií": s$a ke(zAvama,
par"Ama{zAtpauSk(re"NA
s$a ‘as$a÷ ivainagARta:
saìkruddhas tam acakñäëo
ghräëa-dåñöiù sa keçavam
parämåçat puñkareëa
sa prasahya vinirgataù
SYNONYMS
saìkruddhaù—infuriated; tam—Him; acakñäëaù—not seeing; ghräëa—by his
sense of smell; dåñöiù—whose vision; saù—he, the elephant; keçavam—Lord
Keçava; parämåçat—took hold of; puñkareëa—with the end of his trunk;
saù—He, Kåñëa; prasahya—by force; vinirgataù—came free.
TRANSLATION
Infuriated at being unable to see Lord Keçava, the elephant sought Him out
with his sense of smell. Once again Kuvalayäpéòa seized the Lord with the end
of his trunk, only to have the Lord forcefully free Himself.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa allowed the elephant to seize Him so that the beast would be
encouraged to keep fighting. Once Kuvalayäpéòa had thus become proud, Lord
Kåñëa again thwarted him with His superior potency.
TEXT 8
paucCe$ ‘agA{÷AitabalaM
DanauSa: paÂaivaMzAitama,
ivacak(SaR yaTaA naAgAM
s$aupaNAR wva laIlayaA
pucche pragåhyäti-balaà
dhanuñaù païca-viàçatim
vicakarña yathä nägaà
suparëa iva lélayä
SYNONYMS
pucche—by his tail; pragåhya—grabbing him; ati-balam—the extremely
powerful (elephant); dhanuñaù—bow-lengths; païca-viàçatim—twenty-five;
vicakarña—He dragged; yathä—as; nägam—a snake; suparëaù—Garuòa;
iva—as; lélayä—playfully.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa then grabbed the powerful Kuvalayäpéòa by the tail and playfully
dragged him twenty-five bow-lengths as easily as Garuòa might drag a snake.
TEXT 9
s$a payaARvataRmaAnaena
s$avyad"iºaNAtaAe'cyauta:
ba”aAma ”aAmyamaANAena
gAAevats$aenaeva baAlak(:
sa paryävartamänena
savya-dakñiëato 'cyutaù
babhräma bhrämyamäëena
go-vatseneva bälakaù
SYNONYMS
saù—He; paryävartamänena—with him (the elephant) who was being moved
around; savya-dakñiëataù—to the left and then the right; acyutaù—Lord
Kåñëa; babhräma—moved also; bhrämyamäëena—together with him who was
being moved; go-vatsena—with a calf; iva—just as; bälakaù—a young boy.
TRANSLATION
As Lord Acyuta held on to the elephant's tail, the animal tried to twist away
to the left and to the right, making the Lord swerve in the opposite direction, as
a young boy would swerve when pulling a calf by the tail.
TEXT 10
tataAe'iBamaKamaByaetya
paAiNAnaAh"tya vaAr"NAma,
‘aA‰"vana, paAtayaAmaAs$a
s$pa{zyamaAna: pade" pade"
tato 'bhimakham abhyetya
päëinähatya väraëam
prädravan pätayäm äsa
spåçyamänaù pade pade
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; abhimukham—face to face; abhyetya—coming; päëinä—with His
hand; ähatya—slapping; väraëam—the elephant; prädravan—running away;
pätayäm äsa—He made him fall; spåçyamänaù—being touched; pade
pade—with each step.
TRANSLATION
Kåñëa then came face to face with the elephant and slapped him and ran
away. Kuvalayäpéòa pursued the Lord, managing to touch Him again and again
with each step, but Kåñëa outmaneuvered the elephant and made him trip and
fall.
TEXT 11
s$a DaAvana, k{(wRd"yaA BaUmaAE
paitatvaA s$ah"s$aAeitTata:
tammatvaA paitataM ‚u(Ü"Ae
d"ntaAByaAM s$aAe'h"naitºaitama,
sa dhävan kåédayä bhümau
patitvä sahasotthitaù
tam matvä patitaà kruddho
dantäbhyäà so 'hanat kñitim
SYNONYMS
saù—He; dhävan—running; kréòayä—playfully; bhümau—on the ground;
patitvä—falling; sahasä—suddenly; utthitaù—getting up; tam—Him;
matvä—thinking; patitam—fallen; kruddhaù—angry; dantäbhyäm—with his
tusks; saù—he, Kuvalayäpéòa; ahanat—struck; kñitim—the earth.
TRANSLATION
As Kåñëa dodged about, He playfully fell on the ground and quickly got up
again. The raging elephant, thinking Kåñëa was down, tried to gore Him with
his tusks but struck the earth instead.
TEXT 12
svaiva‚(mae ‘aitah"tae
ku(Ãare"n‰"Ae'tyamaiSaRta:
caAeâmaAnaAe mah"AmaA‡aE:
k{(SNAmaBya‰"vaåu"SaA
sva-vikrame pratihate
kuïjarendro 'ty-amarñitaù
codyamäno mahämätraiù
kåñëam abhyadravad ruñä
SYNONYMS
sva—his; vikrame—prowess; pratihate—being thwarted; kuïjara-indraù—the
lord of elephants; ati—extreme; amarñitaù—with frustrated anger;
codyamänaù—urged on; mahämätraiù—by the elephant-keepers; kåñëam—at
Kåñëa; abhyadravat—he charged; ruñä—furiously.
TRANSLATION
His prowess foiled, the lordly elephant Kuvalayäpéòa went into a frenzied
rage out of frustration. But the elephant-keepers goaded him on, and he
furiously charged Kåñëa once again.
TEXT 13
tamaApatantamaAs$aAâ
BagAvaAnmaDaus$aUd"na:
inagA{÷ paAiNAnaA h"staM
paAtayaAmaAs$a BaUtalae
tam äpatantam äsädya
bhagavän madhusüdanaù
nigåhya päëinä hastaà
pätayäm äsa bhü-tale
SYNONYMS
tam—him; äpatantam—attacking; äsädya—confronting; bhagavän—the
Supreme Lord; madhu-südanaù—the killer of the demon Madhu;
nigåhya—firmly seizing; päëinä—with His hand; hastam—his trunk; pätayäm
äsa—He made him fall; bhü-tale—onto the ground.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord, killer of the demon Madhu, confronted the elephant as
he attacked. Seizing his trunk with one hand, Kåñëa threw him to the ground.
TEXT 14
paitatasya pad"A‚(mya
ma{gAen‰" wva laIlayaA
d"ntamautpaAq"Ya taenaeBaM
h"istapaAMêAh"naÜ"ir":
patitasya padäkramya
mågendra iva lélayä
dantam utpäöya tenebhaà
hastipäàç cähanad dhariù
SYNONYMS
patitasya—of the fallen (elephant); padä—with His foot; äkramya—climbing
upon him; mågendraù—a lion; iva—as if; lélayä—with ease; dantam—one of
his tusks; utpäöya—pulling out; tena—with it; ibham—the elephant;
hasti-pän—the elephant-keepers; ca—also; ahanat—killed; hariù—Lord Kåñëa.
TRANSLATION
Lord Hari then climbed onto the elephant with the ease of a mighty lion,
pulled out a tusk, and with it killed the beast and his keepers.
TEXT 15
ma{takM( iã"pamauts$a{jya
d"ntapaAiNA: s$amaAivazAta,
@Ms$anyastaivaSaANAAe's$a{x.~-
mad"ibanäu"iBar"iÆÿta:
ivaè&X#svaed"k(iNAk(A
vad"naAmbauç&h"Ae baBaAE
måtakaà dvipam utsåjya
danta-päëiù samäviçat
aàsa-nyasta-viñäëo 'såìmada-
bindubhir aìkitaù
virüòha-sveda-kaëikä
vadanämburuho babhau
SYNONYMS
måtakam—dead; dvipam—the elephant; utsåjya—discarding; danta—his tusk;
päëiù—in His hand; samäviçat—He entered (the arena); aàsa—upon His
shoulder; nyasta—placing; viñäëaù—the tusk; asåk—of blood; mada—and the
elephant's sweat; bindubhiù—with drops; aìkitaù—sprinkled;
virüòha—exuding; sveda—of (His own) perspiration; kaëikä—with fine drops;
vadana—His face; ambu-ruhaù—lotuslike; babhau—shone.
TRANSLATION
Leaving the dead elephant aside, Lord Kåñëa held on to the tusk and entered
the wrestling arena. With the tusk resting on His shoulder, drops of the
elephant's blood and sweat sprinkled all over Him, and His lotus face covered
with fine drops of His own perspiration, the Lord shone with great beauty.
TEXT 16
va{taAE gAAepaE: k(itapayaEr,"
balade"vajanaAdR"naAE
r"ËMÿ ivaivazAtaU r"Ajana,
gAjad"ntavar"AyauDaAE
våtau gopaiù katipayair
baladeva-janärdanau
raìgaà viviçatü räjan
gaja-danta-varäyudhau
SYNONYMS
våtau—surrounded; gopaiù—by cowherd boys; katipayaiù—several;
baladeva-janärdanau—Balaräma and Kåñëa; raìgam—the arena;
viviçatuù—entered; räjan—O King (Parékñit); gaja-danta—the elephant's
tusks; vara—chosen; äyudhau—whose weapons.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, Lord Baladeva and Lord Janärdana, each carrying one of the
elephant's tusks as His chosen weapon, entered the arena with several cowherd
boys.
TEXT 17
maéaAnaAmazAinana{RNAAM nar"var": ñINAAM smar"Ae maUitaRmaAna,
gAAepaAnaAM svajanaAe's$ataAM iºaitaBaujaAM zAAstaA svaipa‡aAe: izAzAu:
ma{tyauBaAeRjapataeivaRr"Ax"ivaäu"SaAM taÔvaM parM" yaAeigAnaAM
va{SNAInaAM par"de"vataeita ivaid"taAe r"ËMÿ gAta: s$aAƒaja:
mallänäm açanir nåëäà nara-varaù stréëäà smaro mürtimän
gopänäà sva-jano 'satäà kñiti-bhujäà çästä sva-pitroù çiçuù
måtyur bhoja-pater viräò aviduñäà tattvaà paraà yoginäà
våñëénäà para-devateti vidito raìgaà gataù sägrajaù
SYNONYMS
mallänäm—for the wrestlers; açaniù—lightning; nåëäm—for the males;
nara-varaù—the best of men; stréëäm—for the women; smaraù—Cupid;
mürti-män—incarnate; gopänäm—for the cowherds; sva-janaù—their relative;
asatäm—impious; kñiti-bhujäm—for the kings; çästä—a punisher;
sva-pitroù—for His parents; çiçuù—a child; måtyuù—death; bhoja-pateù—for
the King of the Bhojas, Kaàsa; viräö—the totality of the material universe;
aviduñäm—for the unintelligent; tattvam—the Truth; param—Supreme;
yoginäm—for the yogés; våñëénäm—for the members of the Våñëi dynasty;
para-devatä—their most worshipable Deity; iti—in these ways;
viditaù—understood; raìgam—the arena; gataù—He entered; sa—along with;
agra-jaù—His elder brother.
TRANSLATION
The various groups of people in the arena regarded Kåñëa in different ways
when He entered it with His elder brother. The wrestlers saw Kåñëa as a
lightning bolt, the men of Mathurä as the best of males, the women as Cupid in
person, the cowherd men as their relative, the impious rulers as a chastiser, His
parents as their child, the King of the Bhojas as death, the unintelligent as the
Supreme Lord's universal form, the yogés as the Absolute Truth and the Våñëis
as their supreme worshipable Deity.
PURPORT
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé quotes the following verse, which explains the ten
attitudes toward Kåñëa described here:
raudro 'dbhutaç ca çåìgäro
häsyaà véro dayä tathä
bhayänakaç ca bébhatsaù
çäntaù sa-prema-bhaktikaù
"[There are ten different moods:] fury [perceived by the wrestlers], wonder [by
the men], conjugal attraction [the women], laughter [the cowherds], chivalry
[the kings], mercy [His parents], terror [Kaàsa], ghastliness [the unintelligent],
peaceful neutrality [the yogés] and loving devotion [the Våñëis]."
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté points out that people like the wrestlers,
Kaàsa and the impious rulers perceive Kåñëa as dangerous, angry or
threatening because they fail to understand the actual position of the
Personality of Godhead. Actually, Lord Kåñëa is everyone's friend and
well-wisher, but because we rebel against Him, He chastises us, and thus we
may perceive Him as threatening. Kåñëa, or God, is actually merciful, and
when He punishes us, that is also His mercy.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura quotes the following Vedic
statement: raso vai saù rasaà hy eväyaà labdhvänandé bhavati. "He Himself is
rasa, the taste or mellow of a particular relationship. And certainly one who
achieves this rasa becomes änandé, filled with bliss." (Taittiréya Upaniñad 2.7.1)
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté quotes a further verse to explain the word
rasa:
vyatétya bhävanä-vartma
yaç camatkära-bhära-bhüù
hådi sattvojjvale bäòhaà
svadate sa raso mataù
"That which is beyond imagination, heavy with wonder and relished in the
heart shining with goodness—such is known as rasa."
As Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé elaborately explains in his Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu,
there are five main rasas—neutrality, servitude, friendship, parental love and
conjugal love—and seven secondary rasas—amazement, humor, chivalry,
compassion, fury, fear and dread. Thus altogether there are twelve rasas, and
the supreme object of them all is Çré Kåñëa Himself. In other words, our love
and affection are actually meant for Çré Kåñëa. Unfortunately, out of
ignorance we stubbornly try to squeeze happiness and love out of material
relationships, which are not directly connected to Kåñëa, and thus life becomes
a constant frustration. The solution is simple: surrender to Kåñëa, love Kåñëa,
love Kåñëa's devotees and be happy forever.
TEXT 18
h"taM ku(valayaApaIxM"
ä{"î"A taAvaipa äu"jaRyaAE
kM(s$aAe manasyaipa tad"A
Ba{zAmauiã"ivajae na{pa
hataà kuvalayäpéòaà
dåñövä täv api durjayau
kaàso manasy api tadä
bhåçam udvivije nåpa
SYNONYMS
hatam—killed; kuvalayäpéòam—the elephant Kuvalayäpéòa; dåñövä—seeing;
tau—the two of Them, Kåñëa and Balaräma; api—and; durjayau—invincible;
kaàsaù—King Kaàsa; manasi—in his mind; api—indeed; tadä—then;
bhåçam—exceedingly; udvivije—became anxious; nåpa—O King (Parékñit).
TRANSLATION
When Kaàsa saw that Kuvalayäpéòa was dead and the two brothers were
invincible, he was overwhelmed with anxiety, O King.
TEXT 19
taAE re"jataU r"ËÿgAtaAE mah"ABaujaAE
ivaica‡avaeSaABar"NA›agAmbar"AE
yaTaA naq%AvauÔamavaeSaDaAir"NAAE
mana: iºapantaAE ‘aBayaA inar"IºataAma,
tau rejatü raìga-gatau mahä-bhujau
vicitra-veñäbharaëa-srag-ambarau
yathä naöäv uttama-veña-dhäriëau
manaù kñipantau prabhayä nirékñatäm
SYNONYMS
tau—the two of Them; rejatuù—shone; raìga-gatau—present in the arena;
mahä-bhujau—the mighty-armed Lords; vicitra—variegated; veña—whose style
of dress; äbharaëa—ornaments; srak—garlands; ambarau—and garments;
yathä—like; naöau—two actors; uttama—excellent; veña—costumes;
dhäriëau—wearing; manaù—the minds; kñipantau—striking; prabhayä—with
Their effulgences; nirékñatäm—of those who looked on.
TRANSLATION
Arrayed with variegated ornaments, garlands and garments, just like a pair of
excellently costumed actors, the two mighty-armed Lords shone splendidly in
the arena. Indeed, They overpowered the minds of all onlookers with Their
effulgences.
TEXT 20
inar"Iºya taAvauÔamapaUç&SaAE janaA
maÂaisTataA naAgAr"r"Aí)"k(A na{pa
‘ah"SaR"vaegAAetk(ilataeºaNAAnanaA:
papaunaR ta{æaA nayanaEstad"Ananama,
nirékñya täv uttama-püruñau janä
maïca-sthitä nägara-räñörakä nåpa
praharña-vegotkalitekñaëänanäù
papur na tåptä nayanais tad-änanam
SYNONYMS
nirékñya—seeing; tau—both of Them; uttama-püruñau—the Supreme
Personalities; janäù—the people; maïca—in the viewing galleries;
sthitäù—sitting; nägara—the city-dwellers; räñörakäù—and the people from
outlying districts; nåpa—O King; praharña—of their joy; vega—by the force;
utkalita—made to expand widely; ékñaëa—their eyes; änanäù—and faces;
papuù—they drank; na—not; tåptäù—satiated; nayanaiù—with their eyes;
tat—of Them; änanam—the faces.
TRANSLATION
O King, as the citizens of the city and the people from outlying districts
gazed upon those two Supreme Personalities from their seats in the galleries, the
force of the people's happiness caused their eyes to open wide and their faces to
blossom. They drank in the vision of the Lords' faces without becoming
satiated.
TEXTS 21-22
ipabanta wva caºauByaA<
ilah"nta wva ijaù"yaA
ija„anta wva naAs$aAByaAM
iëSyanta wva baAò"iBa:
Ocau: par"s$parM" tae vaE
yaTaAä{"íM" yaTaA™autama,
taåU"pagAuNAmaADauyaR-
‘aAgAlByasmaAir"taA wva
pibanta iva cakñurbhyäà
lihanta iva jihvayä
jighranta iva näsäbhyäà
çliñyanta iva bähubhiù
ücuù parasparaà te vai
yathä-dåñöaà yathä-çrutam
tad-rüpa-guëa-mädhuryaprägalbhya-
smäritä iva
SYNONYMS
pibantaù—drinking; iva—as if; cakñurbhyäm—with their eyes;
lihantaù—licking; iva—as if; jihvayä—with their tongues;
jighrantaù—smelling; iva—as if; näsäbhyäm—with their nostrils;
sliñyantaù—embracing; iva—as if; bähubhiù—with their arms; ücuù—they
spoke; parasparam—among one another; te—they; vai—indeed; yathä—just
as; dåñöam—they had seen; yathä—just as; çrutam—they had heard;
tat—Their; rüpa—of the beauty; guëa—qualities; mädhurya—charm;
prägalbhya—and bravery; smäritäù—reminded; iva—as if.
TRANSLATION
The people seemed to be drinking Kåñëa and Balaräma with their eyes,
licking Them with their tongues, smelling Them with their nostrils and
embracing Them with their arms. Reminded of the Lords' beauty, character,
charm and bravery, the members of the audience began describing these
features to one another according to what they had seen and heard.
PURPORT
Naturally, those who assembled in Mathurä for the wrestling festival had
heard the latest news of Kåñëa's and Balaräma's adventures in the city—how
the Lords had broken the sacrificial bow, defeated the police and killed the
elephant Kuvalayäpéòa. And now that the people were seeing Kåñëa and
Balaräma enter the arena, their greatest expectations were confirmed. Kåñëa is
the embodiment of all beauty, fame and opulence, and therefore those
assembled in the wrestling arena became fully satisfied by glorifying what they
had heard of Him and were now seeing.
TEXT 23
WtaAE BagAvata: s$aAºaAä,"
Dare"naARr"AyaNAsya ih"
@vataINAARivah"AMzAena
vas$aude"vasya vaezmaina
etau bhagavataù säkñäd
dharer näräyaëasya hi
avatérëäv ihäàçena
vasudevasya veçmani
SYNONYMS
etau—these two; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Lord; säkñät-directly; hareù—of
Lord Hari; näräyaëasya—Näräyaëa; hi—certainly; avatérëau—have
descended; iha—to this world; aàçena—as expansions; vasudevasya—of
Vasudeva; veçmani—in the home.
TRANSLATION
[The people said:] These two boys are certainly expansions of the Supreme
Lord Näräyaëa who have descended to this world in the home of Vasudeva.
TEXT 24
WSa vaE ik(la de"vafyaAM
jaAtaAe naItaê gAAeku(lama,
k(AlamaetaM vas$ana, gAUX#Ae
vava{Dae nand"vaezmaina
eña vai kila devakyäà
jäto nétaç ca gokulam
kälam etaà vasan güòho
vavådhe nanda-veçmani
SYNONYMS
eñaù—this (Kåñëa); vai—certainly; kila—indeed; devakyäm—from the womb
of Devaki; jätaù—born; nétaù—brought; ca—and; gokulam—to Gokula;
kälam—time; etam—this much; vasan—living; güòhaù—hidden; vavådhe—He
grew up; nanda-veçmani—in the house of Nanda Mahäräja.
TRANSLATION
This one [Kåñëa] took birth from mother Devaké and was brought to
Gokula, where He has remained concealed all this time, growing up in the
house of King Nanda.
TEXT 25
paUtanaAnaena naItaAntaM
ca‚(vaAtaê d"Anava:
@jauRnaAE gAu÷k(: ke(zAI
Daenauk(Ae'nyae ca taiã"DaA:
pütanänena nétäntaà
cakravätaç ca dänavaù
arjunau guhyakaù keçé
dhenuko 'nye ca tad-vidhäù
SYNONYMS
pütanä—the witch Pütanä; anena—by Him; nétä—brought; antam—to her
end; cakravätaù—whirlwind; ca—and; dänavaù—the demon; arjunau—the
twin Arjuna trees; guhyakaù—the demon Çaìkhacüòa; keçé—the horse demon,
Keçé; dhenukaù—the jackass demon, Dhenuka; anye—others; ca—and;
tat-vidhäù—like them.
TRANSLATION
He made Pütanä and the whirlwind demon meet with death, pulled down
the twin Arjuna trees and killed Çaìkhacüòa, Keçé, Dhenuka and similar
demons.
TEXTS 26-27
gAAva: s$apaAlaA Wtaena
d"AvaA¢ae: pair"maAeicataA:
k(AilayaAe d"imata: s$apaR
wn‰"ê ivamad": k{(ta:
s$aæaAh"maek(h"staena
Da{taAe'i‰"‘avar"Ae'maunaA
vaSaRvaAtaAzAinaByaê
pair"‡aAtaM ca gAAeku(lama,
gävaù sa-pälä etena
dävägneù parimocitäù
käliyo damitaù sarpa
indraç ca vimadaù kåtaù
saptäham eka-hastena
dhåto 'dri-pravaro 'munä
varña-vätäçanibhyaç ca
pariträtaà ca gokulam
SYNONYMS
gävaù—the cows; sa—together with; päläù—their tenders; etena—by Him;
däva-agneù—from the forest fire; parimocitäù—saved; käliyaù—Käliya;
damitaù—subdued; sarpaù—the serpent; indraù—Indra; ca—and;
vimadaù—prideless; kåtaù—made; sapta-aham—for seven days;
eka-hastena—with one hand; dhåtaù—held; adri—of mountains;
pravaraù—the most eminent; amunä—by Him; varña—from rain; väta—wind;
açanibhyaù—and hail; ca—also; pariträtam—delivered; ca—and;
gokulam—the residents of Gokula.
TRANSLATION
He saved the cows and the cowherds from a forest fire and subdued the
serpent Käliya. He removed Lord Indra's false pride by holding up the best of
mountains with one hand for an entire week, thus protecting the inhabitants of
Gokula from rain, wind and hail.
TEXT 28
gAAepyaAe'sya inatyamauid"tah"
is$ata‘aeºaNAM mauKama,
pazyantyaAe ivaivaDaAMstaApaAMs$a,
tar"inta smaA™amaM maud"A
gopyo 'sya nitya-muditahasita-
prekñaëaà mukham
paçyantyo vividhäàs täpäàs
taranti smäçramaà mudä
SYNONYMS
gopyaù—the young gopés; asya—His; nitya—always; mudita—cheerful;
hasita—smiling; prekñaëam—whose glance; mukham—the face;
paçyantyaù—seeing; vividhän—of various kinds; täpän—distress; taranti
sma—transcended; açramam—free from fatigue; mudä—happily.
TRANSLATION
The gopés overcame all kinds of distress and experienced great happiness by
seeing His face, which is always cheerful with smiling glances and ever free of
fatigue.
TEXT 29
vad"ntyanaena vaMzAAe'yaM
yad"Ae: s$aubaò"iva™auta:
i™ayaM yazAAe mah"tvaM ca
lapsyatae pair"r"iºata:
vadanty anena vaàço 'yaà
yadoù su-bahu-viçrutaù
çriyaà yaço mahatvaà ca
lapsyate parirakñitaù
SYNONYMS
vadanti—they say; anena—by Him; vaàçaù—the dynasty; ayam—this;
yadoù—descending from King Yadu; su-bahu—very much; viçrutaù—famous;
çriyam—riches; yaçaù—glory; mahatvam—power; ca—and; lapsyate—it will
achieve; parirakñitaù—protected on all sides.
TRANSLATION
It is said that under His full protection the Yadu dynasty will become
extremely famous and attain wealth, glory and power.
TEXT 30
@yaM caAsyaAƒaja: ™aImaAna,
r"Ama: k(malalaAecana:
‘alambaAe inah"taAe yaena
vats$ak(Ae yae bak(Ad"ya:
ayaà cäsyägrajaù çrémän
rämaù kamala-locanaù
pralambo nihato yena
vatsako ye bakädayaù
SYNONYMS
ayam—this; ca—and; asya—His; agra-jaù—elder brother; çré-man—the
possessor of all opulences; rämaù—Lord Balaräma; kamala-locanaù—the
lotus-eyed; pralambaù—the demon Pralamba; nihataù—killed; yena—by
whom; vatsakaù—Vatsäsura; ye—who; baka—Bakäsura; ädayaù—and others.
TRANSLATION
This lotus-eyed elder brother of His, Lord Balaräma, is the proprietor of all
transcendental opulences. He has killed Pralamba, Vatsaka, Baka and other
demons.
PURPORT
In fact two of the demons mentioned here were killed by Kåñëa, not
Balaräma. The reason for the mistake is that as news of Kåñëa's exploits spread
among ordinary people, the facts became somewhat muddled. The same
tendency can be observed in modern newspapers.
TEXT 31
janaeSvaevaM “auvaANAeSau
taUyaeRSau inanad"ts$au ca
k{(SNAr"AmaAE s$amaABaASya
caANAUr"Ae vaAfyama“avaIta,
janeñv evaà bruväëeñu
türyeñu ninadatsu ca
kåñëa-rämau samäbhäñya
cäëüro väkyam abravét
SYNONYMS
janeñu—as the people; evam—thus; bruväëeñu—were speaking; türyeñu—as the
musical instruments; ninadatsu—were resounding; ca—and;
kåñëa-rämau—Kåñëa and Balaräma; samäbhäñya—addressing; cänüraù—the
demonic wrestler Cäëüra; väkyam—words; abravét—said.
TRANSLATION
While the people talked in this way and the musical instruments resounded,
the wrestler Cäëüra addressed Kåñëa and Balaräma with the following words.
PURPORT
Cäëüra could not tolerate that the audience was praising Kåñëa so highly.
Therefore he had to say something to the two brothers.
TEXT 32
he" nand"s$aUnaAe he" r"Ama
BavantaAE vaIr"s$ammataAE
inayauÜ"ku(zAlaAE ™autvaA
r"AÁaAó"taAE id"ä{"ºauNAA
he nanda-süno he räma
bhavantau véra-sammatau
niyuddha-kuçalau çrutvä
räjïähütau didåkñuëä
SYNONYMS
he nanda-süno—O son of Nanda; he räma—O Räma; bhavantau—You two;
véra—by heroes; sammatau—are well respected; niyuddha—in wrestling;
kuçalau—skillful; çrutvä—hearing; räjïä—by the King; ähütau—called for;
didåkñuëä—who wanted to see.
TRANSLATION
[Cäëüra said:] O son of Nanda, O Räma, You two are well respected by
courageous men and are both skillful at wrestling. Having heard of Your
prowess, the King has called You here, wanting to see for himself.
TEXT 33
i‘ayaM r"AÁa: ‘aku(vaRtya:
™aeyaAe ivand"inta vaE ‘ajaA:
manas$aA k(maRNAA vaAcaA
ivapar"ItamataAe'nyaTaA
priyaà räjïaù prakurvatyaù
çreyo vindanti vai prajäù
manasä karmaëä väcä
viparétam ato 'nyathä
SYNONYMS
priyam—the pleasure; räjïaù—of the King; prakurvatyaù—executing;
çreyaù—good fortune; vindanti—acquire; vai—indeed; prajäù—citizens;
manasä—with their minds; karmaëä—with their deeds; väcä—with their
words; viparétam—opposite; ataù—to this; anyathä—otherwise.
TRANSLATION
Subjects of the King who try to please him with their thoughts, acts and
words are sure to achieve good fortune, but those who fail to do so will suffer
the opposite fate.
TEXT 34
inatyaM ‘amauid"taA gAAepaA
vats$apaAlaA yaTaAs$Pu(q%ma,
vanaeSau maéayauÜe"na
‚(Lx"ntaêAr"yainta gAA:
nityaà pramuditä gopä
vatsa-pälä yathä-sphuöam
vaneñu malla-yuddhena
kréòantaç cärayanti gäù
SYNONYMS
nityam—always; pramuditäù—very happy; gopäù—cowherds;
vatsapäläù—tending the calves; yathä-sphuöam—obviously; vaneñu—in the
various forests; malla-yuddhena—with wrestling; kréòantaù—playing;
cärayanti—they graze; gäù—the cows.
TRANSLATION
It is well known that cowherd boys are always joyful as they tend their
calves, and that the boys playfully wrestle with each other while grazing their
animals in the various forests.
PURPORT
Here Cäëüra explains how the two brothers came to be expert at wrestling.
TEXT 35
tasmaA‰"AÁa: i‘ayaM yaUyaM
vayaM ca k(r"vaAma he"
BaUtaAina na: ‘as$aId"inta
s$avaRBaUtamayaAe na{pa:
tasmäd räjïaù priyaà yüyaà
vayaà ca karaväma he
bhütäni naù prasédanti
sarva-bhüta-mayo nåpaù
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; räjïaù—the King's; priyam—pleasure; yüyam—You two;
vayam—we; ca—also; karaväma he—let us do; bhütäni—all living beings;
naù—with us; prasédanti—will be satisfied; sarva-bhüta—all beings;
mayaù—comprising; nåpaù—the king.
TRANSLATION
Therefore let's do what the King wants. Everyone will be pleased with us,
for the king embodies all living beings.
TEXT 36
taiªazAmyaA“avaItk{(SNAAe
de"zAk(AlaAeicataM vaca:
inayauÜ"maAtmanaAe'BaIíM"
manyamaAnaAe'iBananâ ca
tan niçamyäbravét kåñëo
deça-kälocitaà vacaù
niyuddham ätmano 'bhéñöaà
manyamäno 'bhinandya ca
SYNONYMS
tat—that; niçamya—hearing; abravét—spoke; kåñëaù—Lord Kåñëa; deça—for
the place; käla—and time; ucitam—appropriate; vacaù—words;
niyuddham—wrestling; ätmanaù—to Himself; abhéñöam—desirable;
manyamänaù—considering; abhinandya—welcoming; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
Hearing this, Lord Kåñëa, who liked to wrestle and welcomed the challenge,
replied with words appropriate to the time and place.
TEXT 37
‘ajaA BaAejapataer"sya
vayaM caAipa vanaecar"A:
k(r"vaAma i‘ayaM inatyaM
taªa: par"manauƒah":
prajä bhoja-pater asya
vayaà cäpi vane-caräù
karaväma priyaà nityaà
tan naù param anugrahaù
SYNONYMS
prajäù—subjects; bhoja-pateù—of the King of the Bhojas; asya—of him;
vayam—We; ca—also; api—even though; vane-caräù—wandering in the
forest; karaväma—We must execute; priyam—his pleasure; nityam—always;
tat—that; naù—for Us; param—the greatest; anugrahaù—benefit.
TRANSLATION
[Lord Kåñëa said:] Although forest-dwellers, We are also subjects of the
Bhoja king. We must gratify his desires, for such behavior will confer upon Us
the greatest benefit.
TEXT 38
baAlaA vayaM taulyabalaE:
‚(Lix"SyaAmaAe yaTaAeicatama,
BavaeiªayauÜM" maADamaR:
s$pa{zAenmaéas$aBaAs$ad":
bälä vayaà tulya-balaiù
kréòiñyämo yathocitam
bhaven niyuddhaà mädharmaù
spåçen malla-sabhä-sadaù
SYNONYMS
bäläù—young boys; vayam—We; tulya—equal; balaiù—with those whose
strength; kréòiñyämaù—We will play; yathä ucitam—in a fitting manner;
bhavet—should occur; niyuddham—the wrestling match; mä—not;
adharmaù—irreligion; spåçet—should touch; malla-sabhä—of the assembly in
the wrestling arena; sadaù—the members.
TRANSLATION
We are just young boys and should play with those of equal strength. The
wrestling match must go on properly so that irreligion does not taint the
respectable members of the audience.
TEXT 39
caANAUr" ovaAca
na baAlaAe na ik(zAAer"stvaM
balaê bailanaAM var":
laIlayaeBaAe h"taAe yaena
s$ah"›aiã"pas$aÔvaBa{ta,
cäëüra uväca
na bälo na kiçoras tvaà
balaç ca balinäà varaù
lélayebho hato yena
sahasra-dvipa-sattva-bhåt
SYNONYMS
cäëüraù uväca—Cäëüra said; na—not; bälaù—a boy; na—not; kiçoraù—a
youth; tvam—You; balaù—Balaräma; ca—and; balinäm—of the strong;
varaù—the best; lélayä—as play; ibhaù—the elephant; hataù—killed; yena—by
whom; sahasra—of one thousand; dvipa—elephants; sattva—of the strength;
bhåt—the bearer.
TRANSLATION
Cäëüra said: You aren't really a child or even a young man, and neither is
Balaräma, the strongest of the strong. After all, You playfully killed an elephant
who had the strength of a thousand other elephants.
TEXT 40
tasmaAà"vaà"YaAM bailaiBar,"
yaAeÜ"vyaM naAnayaAe'‡a vaE
maiya iva‚(ma vaASNAeRya
balaena s$ah" mauií"k(:
tasmäd bhavadbhyäà balibhir
yoddhavyaà nänayo 'tra vai
mayi vikrama värñëeya
balena saha muñöikaù
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; bhavadbhyäm—You two; balibhiù—with those who are
strong; yoddhavyam—should fight; na—there is not; anayaù—injustice;
atra—in this; vai—certainly; mayi—to me; vikrama—(show) Your prowess;
värñëeya—O descendant of Våñëi; balena saha—with Balaräma;
muñöikaù—Muñöika (should fight).
TRANSLATION
Therefore You two should fight powerful wrestlers. There's certainly
nothing unfair about that. You, O descendant of Våñëi, can show Your prowess
against me, and Balaräma can fight with Muñöika.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Tenth Canto, Forty-third Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Kåñëa Kills the Elephant Kuvalayäpéòa."
44. The Killing of Kaàsa
This chapter tells how Kåñëa and Balaräma killed the wrestlers, how Kåñëa
killed Kaàsa and consoled Kaàsa's wives, and how the two Lords were
reunited with Their mother and father.
Deciding to wrestle, Lord Kåñëa faced off against Cäëüra, and Lord
Baladeva took on Muñöika. Battling arm to arm, head to head, knee to knee
and chest to chest, the opponents attacked each other so fiercely that they
appeared to be harming even their own bodies. The ladies in the arena, seeing
the violent battle, began to condemn the King and all the members of the
assembly: "A respectable audience should never have allowed a wrestling
match between such huge wrestlers, whose limbs are as tough as lightning
bolts, and such tender young boys, who are just entering youth. An intelligent
person should never enter an assembly if he sees injustice being done there."
Because Vasudeva and Devaké did not fully understand the power of Kåñëa
and Balaräma, they became extremely unhappy when they heard the women of
the audience speak these words.
Çré Kåñëa then grabbed Cäëüra's arms, whirled him around several times
and threw him to the ground, killing him. Muñöika met a similar fate: after
being struck powerfully by Lord Baladeva's palm, he began vomiting blood and
then fell down dead. Thereupon the wrestlers named Küöa, Çala and Toçala
came forward, but Kåñëa and Balaräma easily killed them with the blows of
Their fists and feet. The remaining wrestlers, fearing for their lives, all fled.
Except for Kaàsa, everyone present cheered Kåñëa and Balaräma. The
King, in a rage, stopped the festive music and ordered that Vasudeva, Nanda,
Ugrasena and all the cowherds be severely punished and that Kåñëa and
Balaräma be driven from the assembly. Kåñëa became furious when He heard
Kaàsa speak this way, and He instantly leapt onto the lofty royal dais. He
grabbed Kaàsa by the hair, hurled him down onto the floor of the wrestling
ring and threw Himself on top of him. In this way, Kaàsa met his death.
Because out of fear Kaàsa had always thought of Kåñëa, after his death he
gained the liberation of having a form like the Lord's.
Kaàsa's eight brothers then attacked Kåñëa, but Balaräma easily killed each
of them with His club, just as a lion kills defenseless animals. Kettledrums
resounded in the sky as the joyful demigods rained down flowers and chanted
the glories of Lord Kåñëa and Lord Balaräma.
The wives of Kaàsa, grieving for their husband, lamented that he had died
because of his violence toward other living beings and his lack of respect for
Kåñëa, the Supreme Soul, who creates, maintains and destroys the entire
universe. The Lord consoled the widows, had the funeral rites performed for
Kaàsa and his brothers and then released His mother and father from
bondage. Kåñëa offered obeisances at His parents' feet, but they, now
understanding Him to be the Supreme Personality of Godhead, did not
embrace Him.
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
WvaM caicaRtas$aÆÿlpaAe
BagAvaAnmaDaus$aUd"na:
@As$as$aAd"ATa caNAUrM"
mauSq%.itakM( r"Aeih"NAIs$auta:
çré-çuka uväca
evaà carcita-saìkalpo
bhagavän madhusüdanaù
äsasädätha caëüraà
muñötikaà rohiëé-sutaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—thus; carcita-fixing;
saìkalpaù—His determination; bhagavän—the Supreme Lord;
madhusüdanaù-Kåñëa; äsasäda—confronted; atha—then; cäëüram—Cäëüra;
muñöikam—Muñöika; rohiëé-sutaù—the son of Rohiëé, Lord Balaräma.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Thus addressed, Lord Kåñëa made up His mind to
accept the challenge. He paired off with Cäëüra, and Lord Balaräma with
Muñöika.
TEXT 2
h"staAByaAM h"stayaAebaRä,"DvaA
paà"YaAmaeva ca paAd"yaAe:
ivacak(SaRtaur"nyaAenyaM
‘as$a÷ ivaijagAISayaA
hastäbhyäà hastayor baddhvä
padbhyäm eva ca pädayoù
vicakarñatur anyonyaà
prasahya vijigéñayä
SYNONYMS
hastäbhyäm—with their hands; hastayoù—by the hands; baddhvä—seizing;
padbhyäm—with their legs; eva ca—also; pädayoù—by the legs;
vicakarñatuù—they (Kåñëa paired with Cäëüra, and Balaräma with Muñöika)
dragged; anyonyam—each other; prasahya—with force; vijigéñayä—with desire
for victory.
TRANSLATION
Seizing each other's hands and locking legs with each other, the opponents
struggled powerfully, eager for victory.
TEXT 3
@r"¥aI ãe" @r"i¥aByaAM
jaAnauByaAM caEva jaAnaunaI
izAr": zAISNAAeRr"s$aAer"staAva,
@nyaAenyamaiBaja£atau:
aratné dve aratnibhyäà
jänubhyäà caiva jänuné
çiraù çérñëorasoras täv
anyonyam abhijaghnatuù
SYNONYMS
aratné—against the opponent's fists; dve—two; aratnibhyäm—their fists;
jänubhyäm—their knees; ca eva—also; jänuné—against the opponent's knees;
çiraù—head; çérñëä—with head; urasä—with chest; uraù—chest; tau—they in
pairs; anyonyam—each other; abhijaghnatuù—struck.
TRANSLATION
They each struck fists against fists, knees against knees, head against head
and chest against chest.
PURPORT
The word aratni in this verse may indicate the elbow as well as the fist.
Thus blows were perhaps also struck with the elbow, a technique seen today in
various martial arts.
TEXT 4
pair"”aAmaNAivaºaepapair"
r"mBaAvapaAtanaE:
ots$apaRNAApas$apaRNAEzA,
caAnyaAenyaM ‘atyaç&nDataAma,
paribhrämaëa-vikñepa
parirambhävapätanaiù
utsarpaëäpasarpaëaiç
cänyonyaà pratyarundhatäm
SYNONYMS
paribhrämaëa—with wheeling the other about; vikñepa—shoving;
parirambha—crushing; avapätanaiù—and throwing down;
utsarpaëa—releasing and running in front; apasarpaëaiù—going behind;
ca—and; anyonyam—each other; pratyarundhatäm—they resisted.
TRANSLATION
Each fighter contended with his opponent by dragging him about in circles,
shoving and crushing him, throwing him down and running before and behind
him.
PURPORT
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé explains that the word parirambha indicates crushing
one's opponent with one's arms.
TEXT 5
otTaApanaEç&ªayanaEzA,
caAlanaE: sTaApanaEr"ipa
par"s$parM" ijagAISantaAva,
@paca‚(taur"Atmana:
utthäpanair unnayanaiç
cälanaiù sthäpanair api
parasparaà jigéñantäv
apacakratur ätmanaù
SYNONYMS
utthäpanaiù—with lifting up; unnayanaiù—carrying; cälanaiù—pushing away;
sthäpanaiù—holding stationary; api—also; parasparam—each other;
jigéñantau—wanting victory; apacakratuù—they harmed; ätmanaù—(even)
themselves.
TRANSLATION
Forcefully lifting and carrying each other, pushing each other away and
holding each other down, the fighters hurt even their own bodies in their great
eagerness for victory.
PURPORT
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé explains that although Kåñëa and Balaräma did not, of
course, harm Themselves, it appeared that way to Cäëüra, Muñöika and others
of mundane vision. In other words, the Lords were fully absorbed in the
pastime of being wrestlers.
TEXT 6
taß"laAbalavaâuÜM"
s$amaetaA: s$avaRyaAeiSata:
Ocau: par"s$parM" r"Ajana,
s$aAnauk(mpaA vaè&TazA:
tad baläbalavad yuddhaà
sametäù sarva-yoñitaù
ücuù parasparaà räjan
sänukampä varüthaçaù
SYNONYMS
tat—that; bala-abala—the strong and the weak; vat—involving;
yuddham—fight; sametäù—assembled; sarva—all; yoñitaù—the women;
ücuù—said; parasparam—to one another; räjan—O King (Parékñit);
sa-anukampäù—feeling compassion; varüthaçaù—in groups.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, all the women present, considering the match an unfair fight
between the strong and the weak, felt extreme anxiety due to compassion. They
assembled in groups around the arena and spoke to one another as follows.
TEXT 7
mah"AnayaM bataADamaR
WSaAM r"Ajas$aBaAs$ad"Ama,
yae balaAbalavaâuÜM"
r"AÁaAe'invacC$inta pazyata:
mahän ayaà batädharma
eñäà räja-sabhä-sadäm
ye baläbalavad yuddhaà
räjïo 'nvicchanti paçyataù
SYNONYMS
mahän—great; ayam—this; bata—alas; adharmaù—act of irreligion; eñäm—on
the part of these; räja-sabhä—in the King's assembly; sadäm—persons present;
ye—who; bala-abala-vat—between strong and weak; yuddham—a fight;
räjïaù—while the King; anvicchanti—they also desire; paçyataù—is watching.
TRANSLATION
[The women said:] Alas, what a greatly irreligious act the members of this
royal assembly are committing! As the King watches this fight between the
strong and the weak, they also want to see it.
PURPORT
The idea the ladies are expressing is that even if the King somehow wanted
to see such an unfair match, why should the respectable members of the
assembly also desire to see it? These feelings are natural. Even nowadays, if in a
public place we find a violent fight going on between a very strong, large
person and a weaker, smaller person, we are aroused to indignation.
Compassionate women are especially offended and enraged by such unfair
violence.
TEXT 8
¸( va†as$aAr"s$avaARËÿAE
maéaAE zAElaen‰"s$aiªaBaAE
¸( caAitas$auku(maAr"AËÿAE
ik(zAAer"AE naAæayaAEvanaAE
kva vajra-sära-sarväìgau
mallau çailendra-sannibhau
kva cäti-sukumäräìgau
kiçorau näpta-yauvanau
SYNONYMS
kva—where, on the one hand; vajra—of lightning; sära—with the strength;
sarva—all; aìgau—whose limbs; mallau—two wrestlers; çaila—mountains;
indra—like the chief; sannibhau—whose appearance; kva—where; ca—and,
on the other hand; ati—very; su-kumära—tender; aìgau—whose limbs;
kiçorau—two youths; na äpta—not having yet attained; yauvanau—Their
maturity.
TRANSLATION
What comparison can there be between these two professional wrestlers,
with limbs as strong as lightning bolts and bodies resembling mighty mountains,
and these two young, immature boys with exceedingly tender limbs?
TEXT 9
DamaRvyaita‚(maAe ÷sya
s$amaAjasya ‹auvaM Bavaeta,
ya‡aADamaR: s$amauiÔaïe"na,
na sTaeyaM ta‡a k(ihR"icata,
dharma-vyatikramo hy asya
samäjasya dhruvaà bhavet
yaträdharmaù samuttiñöhen
na stheyaà tatra karhicit
SYNONYMS
dharma—of religious principles; vyatikramaù—transgression; hi—indeed;
asya—by this; samäjasya—company; dhruvam—certainly; bhavet—must be;
yatra—wherein; adharmaù—irreligion; samuttiñöhet—has fully arisen; na
stheyam—one should not remain; tatra—there; karhicit—for any duration of
time at all.
TRANSLATION
Religious principles have certainly been violated in this assembly. One
should not remain for even a moment in a place where irreligion is flourishing.
TEXT 10
na s$aBaAM ‘aivazAet‘aAÁa:
s$aByad"AeSaAnanausmar"na,
@“auvana, iva“auvaªaÁaAe
nar": ik(ilbaSama´autae
na sabhäà praviçet präjïaù
sabhya-doñän anusmaran
abruvan vibruvann ajïo
naraù kilbiñam açnute
SYNONYMS
na—not; sabhäm—an assembly; praviçet—should enter; präjïaù—the wise
person; sabhya—of the assembly members; doñän—sinful discrepancies;
anusmaran—keeping in mind; abruvan—not speaking; vibruvan—speaking
wrongly; ajïaù—ignorant (or pretending to be so); naraù—a man;
kilbiñam—sin; açnute—incurs.
TRANSLATION
A wise person should not enter an assembly if he knows the participants
there are committing acts of impropriety. And if, having entered such an
assembly, he fails to speak the truth, speaks falsely or pleads ignorance, he will
certainly incur sin.
TEXT 11
valgAta: zA‡aumaiBata:
k{(SNAsya vad"naAmbaujama,
vaIºyataAM ™amavaAyauRæaM
paák(AezAimavaAmbauiBa:
valgataù çatrum abhitaù
kåñëasya vadanämbujam
vékñyatäà çrama-väry-uptaà
padma-koçam ivämbubhiù
SYNONYMS
valgataù—leaping; çatrum—of His enemy; abhitaù—on all sides; kåñëasya—of
Kåñëa; vadana—the face; ambujam—lotuslike; vékñyatäm—you should see;
çrama—of fatigue; väri—with the moisture; uptam—covered; padma—of a
lotus flower; koçam—the whorl; iva—like; ambubhiù—with droplets of water.
TRANSLATION
Just see the lotus face of Kåñëa as He darts around His foe! That face,
covered with drops of perspiration brought on by the strenuous fight, resembles
a lotus covered with dew.
TEXT 12
ikM( na pazyata r"Amasya
mauKamaAtaA•alaAecanama,
mauií"kM( ‘aita s$aAmaSa<
h"As$as$aMr"mBazAAeiBatama,
kià na paçyata rämasya
mukham ätämra-locanam
muñöikaà prati sämarñaà
häsa-saàrambha-çobhitam
SYNONYMS
kim—why; na paçyata—do you not see; rämasya—of Lord Balaräma;
mukham—the face; ätämra—like copper; locanam—with eyes;
muñöikam—Muñöika; prati—toward; sa-amarñam—with anger; häsa—by His
laughter; saàrambha—and His absorption; çobhitam—beautified.
TRANSLATION
Don't you see the face of Lord Balaräma, with its eyes copper-red from His
anger toward Muñöika and its beauty enhanced by His laughter and His
absorption in the fight?
TEXT 13
pauNyaA bata ˜ajaBauvaAe yad"yaM na{ilaËÿ
gAUX#: paur"ANApauç&SaAe vanaica‡amaAlya:
gAA: paAlayana, s$ah"bala: ¸(NAyaMê vaeNAuM
iva‚(Ld"yaAÂaita igAir"‡ar"maAicaRtaAx.~i„a:
puëyä bata vraja-bhuvo yad ayaà nå-liìga
güòhaù puräëa-puruño vana-citra-mälyaù
gäù pälayan saha-balaù kvaëayaàç ca veëuà
vikrédayäïcati giritra-ramärcitäìghriù
SYNONYMS
puëyäù—pious; bata—indeed; vraja-bhuvaù—the various regions of the land
of Vraja; yat—in which; ayam—this; nå—human; liìga—by characteristics;
güòhaù—disguised; puräëa-puruñaù—the primeval Personality of Godhead;
vana—composed of flowers and other items of the forest; citra—of wonderful
variety; mälyaù—whose garlands; gäù—the cows; pälayan—herding;
saha—together with; balaù—Lord Balaräma; kvaëayan—vibrating; ca—and;
veëum—His flute; vikréòayä—with various pastimes; aïcati—He moves about;
giritra—by Lord Çiva; ramä—and the goddess of fortune; arcita—worshiped;
aìghriù—His feet.
TRANSLATION
How pious are the tracts of land in Vraja, for there the primeval Personality
of Godhead, disguising Himself with human traits, wanders about, enacting His
many pastimes! Adorned with wonderfully variegated forest garlands, He whose
feet are worshiped by Lord Çiva and goddess Ramä vibrates His flute as He
tends the cows in the company of Balaräma.
PURPORT
In this verse the devoted ladies in the audience point out the difference
between Mathurä and Våndävana. They want to indicate that in Våndävana
Kåñëa simply enjoys with His girlfriends and boyfriends, whereas here in
Mathurä the Lord is subjected to harassment by the bullying tactics of
professional wrestlers. Thus the ladies are condemning the city of Mathurä
because of their pain at seeing Kåñëa in what they consider an unfair wrestling
match. Of course, Mathurä is also one of the Lord's eternal abodes, but here
the women in the assembly express their love in a critical mood.
TEXT 14
gAAepyastapa: ik(macar"na, yad"mauSya è&paM
laAvaNyas$aAr"mas$amaAeDvaRmananyais$aÜ"ma,
ä{"igBa: ipabantyanaus$avaAiBanavaM äu"r"Apama,
Wk(AntaDaAma yazAs$a: ™aIya Weìr"sya
gopyas tapaù kim acaran yad amuñya rüpaà
lävaëya-säram asamordhvam ananya-siddham
dågbhiù pibanty anusaväbhinavaà duräpam
ekänta-dhäma yaçasaù çréya aiçvarasya
SYNONYMS
gopyaù—the gopés; tapaù-austerities; kim—what; acaran—performed;
yat—from which; amuñya—of such a one (Lord Kåñëa); rüpam—the form;
lävaëya-säram—the essence of loveliness; asama-ürdhvam—not paralleled or
surpassed; ananya-siddham—not perfected by any other ornament
(self-perfect); dågbhiù—by the eyes; pibanti—they drink;
anusava-abhinavam—constantly new; duräpam—difficult to obtain;
ekänta-dhäma—the only abode; yaçasaù—of fame; çriyaù—of beauty;
aiçvarasya—of opulence.
TRANSLATION
What austerities must the gopés have performed! With their eyes they always
drink the nectar of Lord Kåñëa's form, which is the essence of loveliness and is
not to be equaled or surpassed. That loveliness is the only abode of beauty, fame
and opulence. It is self-perfect, ever fresh and extremely rare.
PURPORT
The word meanings and translation for this verse are from Çréla
Prabhupäda's Caitanya-caritämåta (Ädi 4.156).
TEXT 15
yaA d"Aeh"nae'vah"nanae maTanaAepalaepa
‘aeÊeÿÊÿnaABaRç&id"taAeºaNAmaAjaRnaAd"AE
gAAyainta caEnamanaur"l(iDayaAe'™auk(NQ$YaAe
DanyaA ˜ajaiñya oç&‚(maicaÔayaAnaA:
yä dohane 'vahanane mathanopalepa
preìkheìkhanärbha-ruditokñaëa-märjanädau
gäyanti cainam anurakta-dhiyo 'çru-kaëöhyo
dhanyä vraja-striya urukrama-citta-yänäù
SYNONYMS
yaù—who (the gopés); dohane—while milking; avahanane—threshing;
mathana—churning; upalepa—smearing; preìkha—on swings;
iìkhana—swinging; arbha-rudita—(taking care of) crying babies;
ukñaëa—sprinkling; märjana—cleaning; ädau—and so on; gäyanti—they sing;
ca—and; enam—about Him; anurakta—very much attached; dhiyaù—whose
minds; açru—with tears; kaëöhyaù—whose throats; dhanyäù-fortunate;
vraja-striyaù—the ladies of Vraja; urukrama—of Lord Kåñëa; citta—by
consciousness; yänäù—whose acquisition of all desired objects.
TRANSLATION
The ladies of Vraja are the most fortunate of women because, with their
minds fully attached to Kåñëa and their throats always choked up with tears,
they constantly sing about Him while milking the cows, winnowing grain,
churning butter, gathering cow dung for fuel, riding on swings, taking care of
their crying babies, sprinkling the ground with water, cleaning their houses, and
so on. By their exalted Kåñëa consciousness they automatically acquire all
desirable things.
TEXT 16
‘aAta˜aRjaAä," ˜ajata @AivazAtaê s$aAyaM
gAAeiBa: s$amaM ¸(NAyataAe'sya inazAmya vaeNAuma,
inagARmya taUNARmabalaA: paiTa BaUir"pauNyaA:
pazyainta s$aismatamauKaM s$ad"yaAvalaAek(ma,
prätar vrajäd vrajata äviçataç ca säyaà
gobhiù samaà kvaëayato 'sya niçamya veëum
nirgamya türëam abaläù pathi bhüri-puëyäù
paçyanti sa-smita-mukhaà sa-dayävalokam
SYNONYMS
prätaù—in the early morning; vrajät—from Vraja; vrajataù—of Him who is
going; äviçataù—entering; ca—and; säyam—in the evening; gobhiù
samam—together with the cows; kvaëayataù—who is playing; asya—His;
niçamya—hearing; veëum—the flute; nirgamya—coming out;
türëam—quickly; abaläù—the women; pathi—on the road; bhüri—extremely;
puëyäù—pious; paçyanti—they see; sa—with; smita—smiling; mukham—face;
sa-daya—merciful; avalokam—with glances.
TRANSLATION
When the gopés hear Kåñëa playing His flute as He leaves Vraja in the
morning with His cows or returns with them at sunset, the young girls quickly
come out of their houses to see Him. They must have performed many pious
activities to be able to see Him as He walks on the road, His smiling face
mercifully glancing upon them.
TEXT 17
WvaM ‘aBaASamaANAAs$au
ñISau yaAegAeìr"Ae h"ir":
zA‡auM h"ntauM manaê‚e(
BagAvaAna, Bar"taSaRBa
evaà prabhäñamäëäsu
stréñu yogeçvaro hariù
çatruà hantuà manaç cakre
bhagavän bharatarñabha
SYNONYMS
evam—in this manner; prabhäñamäëäsu—while they were speaking;
stréñu—the women; yoga-éçvaraù—the master of all mystic power; hariù—Lord
Kåñëa; çatrum—His enemy; hantum—to kill; manaù cakre—made up His
mind; bhagavän—the Supreme Lord; bharata-åñabha—O hero of the Bhäratas.
TRANSLATION
[Çukadeva Gosvämé continued:] As the women spoke thus, O hero of the
Bhäratas, Lord Kåñëa, the master of all mystic power, made up His mind to kill
His opponent.
TEXT 18
s$aBayaA: ñIigAr": ™autvaA
pau‡aµaeh"zAucaAtaur"AE
ipatar"AvanvatapyaetaAM
pau‡ayaAer"bauDaAE balama,
sa-bhayäù stré-giraù çrutvä
putra-sneha-çucäturau
pitaräv anvatapyetäà
putrayor abudhau balam
SYNONYMS
sa-bhayäù—fearful; stré—of the women; giraù—the words; çrutvä—hearing;
putra—for their sons; sneha—by their affection; çuca—with sorrow;
äturau—overwhelmed; pitarau—Their parents (Devaké and Vasudeva);
anvatapyetäm—felt remorse; putrayoù—of their two sons; abudhau—not
knowing; balam—the strength.
TRANSLATION
Out of affection for the two Lords, Their parents [Devaké and Vasudeva]
became overwhelmed with sorrow when they heard the women's fearful
statements. They grieved, not knowing their sons' strength.
PURPORT
Naturally, Kåñëa's parents would lament in this situation, thinking "Why
didn't we keep our sons at home? Why did we allow Them to participate in this
corrupt exhibition?"
TEXT 19
taEstaEinaRyauÜ"ivaiDaiBar,"
ivaivaDaEr"cyautaetar"AE
yauyauDaAtae yaTaAnyaAenyaM
taTaEva balamauií"k(AE
tais tair niyuddha-vidhibhir
vividhair acyutetarau
yuyudhäte yathänyonyaà
tathaiva bala-muñöikau
SYNONYMS
taiù taiù—with all these; niyuddha—of wrestling; vidhibhiù—techniques;
vividhaiù—various; acyuta-itarau—Lord Acyuta and His opponent;
yuyudhäte—fought; yathä—as; anyonyam—with each other; tathä eva—just so;
bala-muñöikau—Lord Balaräma and Muñöika.
TRANSLATION
Lord Balaräma and Muñöika, expertly displaying numerous wrestling
techniques, battled each other in the same way that Lord Kåñëa and His
opponent did.
TEXT 20
BagAvaÕ"A‡ainaSpaAtaEr,"
va†anaISpaeSainaï]"rE":
caANAUr"Ae BajyamaAnaAËÿAe
mauò"glaARinamavaApa h"
bhagavad-gätra-niñpätair
vajra-néñpeña-niñöhuraiù
cäëüro bhajyamänäìgo
muhur glänim aväpa ha
SYNONYMS
bhagavat—of the Supreme Lord; gätra—by the limbs; niñpätaiù—due to the
blows; vajra—of lightning; niñpeña—like a crushing stroke; niñöhuraiù—hard;
cäëüraù—Cäëüra; bhajyamäna—being broken; aìgaù—his entire body;
muhuù—more and more; glänim—pain and fatigue; aväpa ha—felt.
TRANSLATION
The harsh blows from the Supreme Lord's limbs fell like crushing lightning
bolts upon Cäëüra, breaking every part of his body and causing him more and
more pain and fatigue.
PURPORT
Cäëüra's elbows, arms, knees and other limbs were all weakening.
TEXT 21
s$a zyaenavaegA otpatya
mauí"Ik{(tya k(r"AvauBaAE
BagAvantaM vaAs$aude"vaM
‚u(Ü"Ae vaºasyabaAData
sa çyena-vega utpatya
muñöé-kåtya karäv ubhau
bhagavantaà väsudevaà
kruddho vakñasy abädhata
SYNONYMS
saù—he, Cäëüra; çyena—of a hawk; vegaù—with the speed; utpatya—falling
upon Him; muñöé—into fists; kåtya—making; karau—his hands; ubhau—both;
bhagavantam—the Supreme Lord; väsudevam—Kåñëa; kruddhaù—angry;
vakñasi—upon His chest; abädhata—struck.
TRANSLATION
Furious, Cäëüra attacked Lord Väsudeva with the speed of a hawk and
struck His chest with both fists.
PURPORT
It appears that Cäëüra, realizing he was being defeated, became furious and
made a final attempt to defeat Lord Kåñëa. The demon certainly had the spirit
of a good fighter, but if he hoped for victory, he was certainly in the wrong
place at the wrong time with the wrong person.
TEXTS 22-23
naAcalaÔat‘ah"Are"NA
maAlaAh"ta wva iã"pa:
baAù"AeinaRgA{÷ caANAUrM"
baò"zAAe ”aAmayana, h"ir":
BaUpa{ïe" paAeTayaAmaAs$a
tar"s$aA ºaINA jaIivatama,
iva›astaAk(lpake(zA›agA,
wn‰"Dvaja wvaApatata,
näcalat tat-prahäreëa
mälähata iva dvipaù
bähvor nigåhya cäëüraà
bahuço bhrämayan hariù
bhü-påñöhe pothayäm äsa
tarasä kñéëa jévitam
visrastäkalpa-keça-srag
indra-dhvaja iväpatat
SYNONYMS
na acalat—He (Lord Kåñëa) did not move; tat-prahäreëa—because of his
blows; mälä—with a garland; ähata—struck; iva—as; dvipaù—an elephant;
bähvoù—by the two arms; nigåhya—seizing; cäëüram—Cäëüra;
bahuçaù—several times; bhrämayan—whirling him around; hariù—Lord
Kåñëa; bhü—of the earth; påñöhe—onto the surface; pothayäm äsa—hurled;
tarasä—forcefully; kñéëa—becoming lost; jévitam—his life; visrasta—scattered;
äkalpa—his clothing; keça—hair; srak—and flower garland; indra-dhvajaù—a
tall festival column; iva—as if; apatat—he fell.
TRANSLATION
No more shaken by the demon's mighty blows than an elephant struck with
a flower garland, Lord Kåñëa grabbed Cäëüra by his arms, swung him around
several times and hurled him onto the ground with great force. His clothes, hair
and garland scattering, the wrestler fell down dead, like a huge festival column
collapsing.
PURPORT
Çréla Çrédhara Svämé explains the words indra-dhvaja as follows: "In Bengal,
on the occasion of a certain festival, people erect a tall column in the form of a
man and decorate it with flags, banners, etc. He [Cäëüra] fell just as such a
pole might fall."
TEXTS 24-25
taTaEva mauií"k(: paUva<
svamauí"YaAiBah"taena vaE
balaBa‰e"NA bailanaA
talaenaAiBah"taAe Ba{zAma,
‘avaeipata: s$a ç&iDar"ma,
oã"manmauKataAe'idR"ta:
vyas$au: papaAtaAevyauRpasTae
vaAtaAh"ta wvaAx.~i„apa:
tathaiva muñöikaù pürvaà
sva-muñöyäbhihatena vai
balabhadreëa balinä
talenäbhihato bhåçam
pravepitaù sa rudhiram
udvaman mukhato 'rditaù
vyasuù papätorvy-upasthe
vätähata iväìghripaù
SYNONYMS
tathä—also; eva—similarly; muñöikaù—Muñöika; pürvam—previously;
sva-muñöyä—with his fist; abhihatena—who had been struck; vai—indeed;
balabhadreëa—by Lord Balaräma; balinä—the powerful; talena—with His
palm; abhihataù—struck; bhåçam—violently; pravepitaù—trembling; saù—he,
Muñöika; rudhiram—blood; udvaman—vomiting; mukhataù—from his mouth;
arditaù—tormented; vyasuù—lifeless; papäta—he fell; urvé—of the earth;
upasthe—onto the lap; väta—by the wind; ähataù—struck down; iva—like;
aìghripaù—a tree.
TRANSLATION
Similarly, Muñöika struck Lord Balabhadra with his fist and was slain.
Receiving a violent blow from the mighty Lord's palm, the demon trembled all
over in great pain, vomited blood and then fell lifeless onto the ground, like a
tree blown down by the wind.
TEXT 26
tata: kU(q%manau‘aAæaM
r"Ama: ‘ah"r"taAM var":
@vaDaIéaIlayaA r"Ajana,
s$aAvaÁaM vaAmamauií"naA
tataù küöam anupräptaà
rämaù praharatäà varaù
avadhél lélayä räjan
sävajïaà väma-muñöinä
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; küöam—the demonic wrestler Küöa; anupräptam—appearing on
the scene; rämaù—Lord Balaräma; praharatäm—of fighters; varaù—the best;
avadhét—killed; lélayä—playfully; räjan—O King, Parékñit;
sa-avajïam—neglectfully; väma—left; muñöinä—with His fist.
TRANSLATION
Confronted next by the wrestler Küöa, Lord Balaräma, the best of fighters,
playfully and nonchalantly killed him with His left fist, O King.
TEXT 27
ta÷eRva ih" zAla: k{(SNA-
‘apad"Ah"tazAISaRk(:
iã"DaA ivad"INARstaAezAlak(
oBaAvaipa inapaetatau:
tarhy eva hi çalaù kåñëaprapadähata-
çérñakaù
dvidhä vidérëas toçalaka
ubhäv api nipetatuù
SYNONYMS
tarhi eva—and then; hi—indeed; çalaù—the wrestler Çala; kåñëa—of Lord
Kåñëa; prapada—by the toes; ähata—struck; çérñakaù—his head; dvidhä—in
two; vidérnaù—torn; toçalaka—Toçala; ubhau api—both of them;
nipetatuù—fell down.
TRANSLATION
Then Kåñëa struck the wrestler Çala in the head with His toes and tore him
in half. The Lord dealt with Toçala in the same way, and both wrestlers fell
down dead.
TEXT 28
caANAUre" mauií"ke( kU(qe%
zAlae taAezAlake( h"tae
zAeSaA: ‘aäu"åu"vaumaRéaA:
s$avaeR ‘aANApar"Ips$ava:
cäëüre muñöike küöe
çale toçalake hate
çeñäù pradudruvur malläù
sarve präëa-parépsavaù
SYNONYMS
cäëüre muñöike küöe—Cäëüra, Muñöika and Küöa; çale toçalake—Çala and
Toçala; hate—being killed; çeñäù—those remaining; pradudruvuù—ran away;
malläù—wrestlers; sarve—all; präëa—their lives; parépsavaù—hoping to save.
TRANSLATION
Cäëüra, Muñöika, Küöa, Çala and Toçala having been killed, the remaining
wrestlers all fled for their lives.
TEXT 29
gAAepaAna, vayasyaAnaAk{(Sya
taE: s$aMs$a{jya ivajaoe"tau:
vaAâmaAnaeSau taUyaeRSau
valgAntaAE ç&tanaUpaur"AE
gopän vayasyän äkåñya
taiù saàsåjya vijahratuù
vädyamäneñu türyeñu
valgantau ruta-nüpurau
SYNONYMS
gopän—the cowherd boys; vayasyän—Their young friends; äkåñya—gathering
together; taiù—with them; saàsåjya—joining up; vijahratuù—They sported;
vädyamäneñu—while they played; türyeñu—the musical instruments;
valgantau—the two of Them dancing about; ruta—resounding;
nüpurau—Their ankle bells.
TRANSLATION
Kåñëa and Balaräma then called Their young cowherd boyfriends to join
Them, and in their company the Lords danced about and sported, Their ankle
bells resounding as musical instruments played.
PURPORT
Nowadays we see that in championship boxing matches, as soon as there is a
victory, all the friends and relatives of the victorious boxer rush into the ring
to congratulate him, and often the champion will dance about in great
happiness. Exactly in this mood, Kåñëa and Balaräma danced about,
celebrating Their victory with Their friends and relatives.
TEXT 30
janaA: ‘ajaô$Sau: s$avaeR
k(maRNAA r"Amak{(SNAyaAe:
[%tae kM(s$aM iva‘amauKyaA:
s$aADava: s$aADau s$aAiDvaita
janäù prajahåñuù sarve
karmaëä räma-kåñëayoù
åte kaàsaà vipra-mukhyäù
sädhavaù sädhu sädhv iti
SYNONYMS
janäù—the people; prajahåñuù—rejoiced; sarve—all; karmaëä—at the deed;
räma-kåñëayoù—of Balaräma and Kåñëa; åte—except; kaàsam—Kaàsa;
vipra—of the brähmaëas; mukhyäù—the best; sädhavaù—the saintly persons;
sädhu sädhu iti—(exclaimed) "Excellent! Excellent!"
TRANSLATION
Everyone except Kaàsa rejoiced at the wonderful feat Kåñëa and Balaräma
had performed. The exalted brähmaëas and great saints exclaimed, "Excellent!
Excellent!"
PURPORT
It is understood that as the best of the brähmaëas and saints were
exclaiming "Excellent! Excellent!" the worst of the brähmaëas, namely Kaàsa's
priests, were seriously grieving.
TEXT 31
h"taeSau maéavayaeRSau
ivaåu"taeSau ca BaAejar"Aq%.
nyavaAr"yatsvataUyaARiNA
vaAfyaM caed"mauvaAca h"
hateñu malla-varyeñu
vidruteñu ca bhoja-räö
nyavärayat sva-türyäëi
väkyaà cedam uväca ha
SYNONYMS
hateñu—being killed; malla-varyeñu—the best wrestlers; vidruteñu—having run
away; ca—and; bhoja-räö—the Bhoja king, Kaàsa; nyavärayat—stopped;
sva—his own; türyäëi—musical instruments; väkyam—words; ca—and;
idam—these; uväca ha—spoke.
TRANSLATION
The Bhoja king, seeing that his best wrestlers had all been killed or had fled,
stopped the musical performance originally meant for his pleasure and spoke the
following words.
TEXT 32
ina:s$aAr"yata äu"va{RÔaAE
vas$aude"vaAtmajaAE paur"Ata,
DanaM h"r"ta gAAepaAnaAM
nandM" ba©aIta äu"maRitama,
niùsärayata durvåttau
vasudevätmajau purät
dhanaà harata gopänäà
nandaà badhnéta durmatim
SYNONYMS
niùsärayata—expel; durvåttau—who behave wickedly; vasudeva-ätmajau—the
two sons of Vasudeva; purät—from the city; dhanam—the wealth;
harata—take away; gopänäm—of the cowherds; nandam—Nanda Mahäräja;
badhnéta—tie up; durmatim—the fool, whose heart is crooked.
TRANSLATION
[Kaàsa said:] Drive the two wicked sons of Vasudeva out of the city!
Confiscate the cowherds' property and arrest that fool Nanda!
TEXT 33
vas$aude"vastau äu"maeRDaA
h"nyataAmaAìs$aÔama:
oƒas$aena: ipataA caAipa
s$aAnaugA: par"paºagA:
vasudevas tu durmedhä
hanyatäm äçv asattamaù
ugrasenaù pitä cäpi
sänugaù para-pakña-gaù
SYNONYMS
vasudevaù—Vasudeva; tu—and furthermore; durmedhä—the foolish-minded;
hanyatäm—should be killed; äçu—immediately; asat-tamaù—the worst of the
impure; ugrasenaù—Ugrasena; pitä—my father; ca api—also; sa—together
with; anugaù—his followers; para—of the enemy; pakña-gaù—taking the side.
TRANSLATION
Kill that most evil fool Vasudeva! And also kill my father, Ugrasena, along
with his followers, who have all sided with our enemies!
TEXT 34
WvaM ivak(tTamaAnae vaE
kM(s$ae ‘aku(ipataAe'vyaya:
laiGa°aAetpatya tar"s$aA
maÂamauÔauËÿmaAç&h"ta,
evaà vikatthamäne vai
kaàse prakupito 'vyayaù
laghimnotpatya tarasä
maïcam uttuìgam äruhat
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; vikatthamäne—exclaiming with audacity; vai—indeed;
kaàse—Kaàsa; prakupitaù—becoming extremely angry; avyayaù—the
infallible Lord; laghimnä—with ease; utpatya—jumping up; tarasä—swiftly;
maïcam—the royal platform; uttuìgam—tall; äruhat—climbed onto.
TRANSLATION
As Kaàsa thus raved so audaciously, the infallible Lord Kåñëa, intensely
angry, quickly and easily jumped up onto the high royal dais.
TEXT 35
tamaAivazAntamaAlaAefya
ma{tyaumaAtmana @As$anaAta,
manasvaI s$ah"s$aAetTaAya
jagA{he" s$aAe'is$acamaRNAI
tam äviçantam älokya
måtyum ätmana äsanät
manasvé sahasotthäya
jagåhe so 'si-carmaëé
SYNONYMS
tam—Him, Kåñëa; äviçantam—entering (into his private sitting area);
älokya—seeing; måtyum—death; ätmanaù—his own; äsanät—from his seat;
manasvé—the intelligent; sahasä—immediately; utthäya—standing up;
jagåhe—took up; saù—he; asi—his sword; carmaëé—and his shield.
TRANSLATION
Seeing Lord Kåñëa approaching like death personified, the quick-witted
Kaàsa instantly rose from his seat and took up his sword and shield.
TEXT 36
taM KaË"paAiNAM ivacar"ntamaAzAu
zyaenaM yaTaA d"iºaNAs$avyamambare"
s$amaƒah"Iä," äu"ivaRSah"AeƒataejaA
yaTaAer"gAM taAºyaRs$auta: ‘as$a÷
taà khaòga-päëià vicarantam äçu
çyenaà yathä dakñiëa-savyam ambare
samagrahéd durviñahogra-tejä
yathoragaà tärkñya-sutaù prasahya
SYNONYMS
tam—him, Kaàsa; khaòga—with sword; päëim—in his hand;
vicarantam—moving about; äçu—quickly; çyenam—a hawk; yathä—like;
dakñiëa-savyam—right and left; ambare—in the sky; samagrahét—seized;
durviñaha—irresistible; ugra—and fearsome; tejäù——whose strength;
yathä—as; uragam—a snake; tärkñya-sutaù—the son of Tärkñya, Garuòa;
prasahya—by force.
TRANSLATION
Sword in hand, Kaàsa moved quickly from side to side like a hawk in the
sky. But Lord Kåñëa, whose fearsome strength is irresistible, powerfully seized
the demon just as the son of Tärkñya might capture a snake.
TEXT 37
‘agA{÷ ke(zAeSau calaitk(r"ItaM
inapaAtya r"ËÿAepair" tauËÿmaÂaAta,
tasyaAepair"í"AtsvayamabjanaABa:
papaAta ivaìA™aya @Atmatan‡a:
pragåhya keçeñu calat-kirétaà
nipätya raìgopari tuìga-maïcät
tasyopariñöät svayam abja-näbhaù
papäta viçväçraya ätma-tantraù
SYNONYMS
pragåhya—grabbing; keçeñu—by the hair; calat—knocking off; kiréöam—whose
crown; nipätya—throwing down; raìga-upari—onto the surface of the
wrestling ring; tuìga—high; maïcät—from the platform; tasya—of him;
upariñöät—on top; svayam—Himself; abja-näbhaù—the lotus-naveled Supreme
Lord; papäta—threw; viçva—of the entire universe; äçrayaù—the support;
ätma-tantraù—independent.
TRANSLATION
Grabbing Kaàsa by the hair and knocking off his crown, the lotus-naveled
Lord threw him off the elevated dais onto the wrestling mat. Then the
independent Lord, the support of the entire universe, threw Himself upon the
King.
PURPORT
In Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çréla Prabhupäda describes
the death of Kaàsa as follows: "Kåñëa at once straddled his chest and began to
strike him over and over again. Simply from the strokes of His fist, Kaàsa lost
his vital force."
TEXT 38
taM s$ampare"taM ivacak(SaR BaUmaAE
h"ir"yaRTaeBaM jagAtaAe ivapazyata:
h"A he"ita zAbd": s$aumah"AMstad"ABaUä,"
od"Iir"ta: s$avaRjanaEnaR&#re"n‰"
taà samparetaà vicakarña bhümau
harir yathebhaà jagato vipaçyataù
hä heti çabdaù su-mahäàs tadäbhüd
udéritaù sarva-janair narendra
SYNONYMS
tam—him; samparetam—dead; vicakarña—dragged; bhümau—along the
ground; hariù—a lion; yathä—as; ibham—an elephant; jagataù—all the people;
vipaçyataù—as they looked on; hä hä iti—"Oh, oh!"; çabdaù—the sound;
su-mahän—mighty; tadä—then; abhüt—arose; udéritaù—spoken;
sarva-janaiù—by all the people; nara-indra—O ruler of men (King Parékñit).
TRANSLATION
As a lion drags a dead elephant, the Lord then dragged Kaàsa's dead body
along the ground in full view of everyone present. O King, all the people in the
arena tumultuously cried out, "Oh! Oh!"
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté explains that many people in the audience
thought Kaàsa had simply been knocked unconscious when thrown from the
lofty dais. Therefore Lord Kåñëa dragged his corpse so everyone would realize
that the evil King was indeed dead. Thus the exclamation hä hä indicates how
surprised the people were that the King was suddenly dead and gone.
The audience's astonishment is also mentioned in the Viñëu Puräëa:
tato hähä-kåtaà sarvam
äsét tad-raìga-maëòalam
avajïayä hataà dåñövä
kåñëena mathureçvaram
"Then the entire arena became filled with cries of astonishment as the people
saw that the master of Mathurä had been contemptuously killed by Kåñëa."
TEXT 39
s$a inatyad"Aeiã"¢aiDayaA tamaIìrM"
ipabaªad"na, vaA ivacar"na, svapana, ìs$ana,
d"d"zAR ca‚(AyauDamaƒataAe yatas$a,
tade"va è&paM äu"r"vaApamaApa
sa nityadodvigna-dhiyä tam éçvaraà
pibann adan vä vicaran svapan çvasan
dadarça cakräyudham agrato yatas
tad eva rüpaà duraväpam äpa
SYNONYMS
saù—he, Kaàsa; nityadä—constantly; udvigna—anxious; dhiyä—with mind;
tam—Him; éçvaram—the Supreme Lord; piban—while drinking;
adan—eating; vä—or; vicaran—walking; svapan—sleeping;
çvasan—breathing; dadarça—saw; cakra—the disc weapon; äyudham—in His
hand; agrataù—before himself; yataù—because; tat—that; eva—same;
rüpam—personal form; duraväpam—very difficult to achieve; äpa—he
achieved.
TRANSLATION
Kaàsa had always been disturbed by the thought that the Supreme Lord was
to kill him. Therefore when drinking, eating, moving about, sleeping or simply
breathing, the King had always seen the Lord before him with the disc weapon
in His hand. Thus Kaàsa achieved the rare boon of attaining a form like the
Lord's.
PURPORT
Although born out of fear, Kaàsa's constant meditation on the Supreme
Lord eradicated all his offenses, and therefore the demon was liberated upon
his death at the Lord's hands.
TEXT 40
tasyaAnaujaA ”aAtar"Ae'í"AE
k(ÆÿnyaƒaAeDak(Ad"ya:
@ByaDaAvaªaita‚u(Ü"A
”aAtauinaR"vaeRzAk(Air"NA:
tasyänujä bhrätaro 'ñöau
kaìka-nyagrodhakädayaù
abhyadhävann ati-kruddhä
bhrätur nirveça-käriëaù
SYNONYMS
tasya—of him, Kaàsa; anujäù—younger; bhrätaraù—the brothers;
añöau—eight; kaìka-nyagrodhaka-ädayaù—Kaìka, Nyagrodhaka and the
others; abhyadhävan—ran forward to attack; ati-kruddhäù—infuriated;
bhrätuù—to their brother; nirveça—repayment of the debt; käriëaù—doing.
TRANSLATION
Kaàsa's eight younger brothers, led by Kaìka and Nyagrodhaka, then
attacked the Lords in a rage, seeking to avenge their brother's death.
TEXT 41
taTaAitar"Bas$aAMstaAMstau
s$aMyaÔaAna, r"Aeih"NAIs$auta:
@h"na, pair"Gamauâmya
pazAUinava ma{gAAiDapa:
tathäti-rabhasäàs täàs tu
saàyattän rohiëé-sutaù
ahan parigham udyamya
paçün iva mågädhipaù
SYNONYMS
tathä—in this manner; ati-rabhasän—running very swiftly; tän—they;
tu—and; saàyattän—ready to strike; rohiëé-sutaù—the son of Rohiëé, Lord
Balaräma; ahan—beat down; parigham—His club; udyamya—wielding;
paçün—animals; iva—as; måga-adhipaù—the lion, king of animals.
TRANSLATION
As they ran swiftly toward the two Lords, ready to strike, the son of Rohiëé
slew them with His club just as a lion easily kills other animals.
TEXT 42
naeäu"äuR"näu"BayaAe vyaAei°a
“aöezAAâA ivaBaUtaya:
pauSpaE: ik(r"ntastaM ‘aItaA:
zAzAMs$aunaRna{tau: iñya:
nedur dundubhayo vyomni
brahmeçädyä vibhütayaù
puñpaiù kirantas taà prétäù
çaçaàsur nanåtuù striyaù
SYNONYMS
neduù—resounded; dundubhayaù—kettledrums; vyomni—in the sky;
brahma-éça-ädyäù—Brahmä, Çiva and other demigods; vibhütayaù—His
expansions; puñpaiù—flowers; kirantaù—scattering down; tam—upon Him;
prétäù—pleased; çaçaàsuù—they chanted His praises; nanåtuù—danced;
striyaù—their wives.
TRANSLATION
Kettledrums resounded in the sky as Brahmä, Çiva and other demigods, the
Lord's expansions, rained down flowers upon Him with pleasure. They chanted
His praises, and their wives danced.
TEXT 43
taeSaAM iñyaAe mah"Ar"Aja
s$auô$nmar"NAäu":iKataA:
ta‡aABaIyauivaRina£antya:
zAISaARNya™auivalaAecanaA:
teñäà striyo mahä-räja
suhån-maraëa-duùkhitäù
taträbhéyur vinighnantyaù
çérñäëy açru-vilocanäù
SYNONYMS
teñäm—of them (Kaàsa and his brothers); striyaù—the wives; mahäräja—O
King (Parékñit); suhåt—of their well-wishers (their husbands);
maraëa—because of the death; duùkhitäù—sorrowful; tatra—that place;
abhéyuù—approached; vinighnantyaù—beating; çérñäëi—their heads;
açru—with tears; vilocanäù—their eyes.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, the wives of Kaàsa and his brothers, aggrieved by the death
of their well-wishing husbands, came forward with tearful eyes, beating their
heads.
TEXT 44
zAyaAnaAna, vaIr"zAyaAyaAM
pataInaAilaËÿYa zAAecataI:
ivalaepau: s$ausvarM" naAyaAeR
ivas$a{jantyaAe mauò": zAuca:
çayänän véra-çayäyäà
patén äliìgya çocatéù
vilepuù su-svaraà näryo
visåjantyo muhuù çucaù
SYNONYMS
çayänän—lying; véra—of a hero; çayäyäm—upon the bed (the ground);
patén—their husbands; äliìgya—embracing; çocatéù—feeling sorrow;
vilepuù—lamented; su-svaram—loudly; näryaù—the women;
visåjantyaù—shedding; muhuù—repeatedly; çucaù—tears.
TRANSLATION
Embracing their husbands, who lay on a hero's final bed, the sorrowful
women loudly lamented while shedding constant tears.
TEXT 45
h"A naATa i‘aya DamaRÁa
k(ç&NAAnaATavats$ala
tvayaA h"taena inah"taA
vayaM tae s$agA{h"‘ajaA:
hä nätha priya dharma-jïa
karuëänätha-vatsala
tvayä hatena nihatä
vayaà te sa-gåha-prajäù
SYNONYMS
ha—alas; nätha—O master; priya—O dear one; dharma-jïa—O knower of
religious principles; karuëa—O kind one; anätha—to those who have no
protector; vatsala—O you who are compassionate; tvayä—by you;
hatena—being killed; nihatäù—are killed; vayam—we; te—your; sa—together
with; gåha—the home; prajäù—and offspring.
TRANSLATION
[The women cried out:] Alas, O master, O dear one, O knower of religious
principles! O kind and compassionate protector of the shelterless! By your being
slain we have also been slain, together with your household and offspring.
TEXT 46
tvayaA ivar"ih"taA patyaA
paur"IyaM pauç&SaSaRBa
na zAAeBatae vayaimava
inava{ÔaAets$avamaËÿlaA
tvayä virahitä patyä
puréyaà puruñarñabha
na çobhate vayam iva
nivåttotsava-maìgalä
SYNONYMS
tvayä—of you; virahitä—bereft; patyä—the master; puré—the city; iyam—this;
puruña—of men; åñabha—O most heroic one; na çobhate—does not appear
beautiful; vayam—us; iva—just like; nivåtta—ceased; utsava—festivity;
maìgalä—and auspiciousness.
TRANSLATION
O great hero among men, bereft of you, its master, this city has lost its
beauty, just as we have, and all festivity and good fortune within it have come
to an end.
TEXT 47
@naAgAs$aAM tvaM BaUtaAnaAM
k{(tavaAn‰"Aeh"maulbaNAma,
taenaemaAM BaAe d"zAAM naItaAe
BaUta‹aufk(Ae laBaeta zAma,
anägasäà tvaà bhütänäà
kåtavän droham ulbaëam
tenemäà bho daçäà néto
bhüta-dhruk ko labheta çam
SYNONYMS
anägasäm—sinless; tvam—you; bhütänäm—against creatures; kåtavän—have
committed; droham—violence; ulbaëam—terrible; tena—by that; imäm—to
this; bho—O dear one; daçäm—condition; nétaù—brought; bhüta—to living
beings; dhruk—causing harm; kaù—who; labheta—can achieve;
çam—happiness.
TRANSLATION
O dear one, you have been brought to this state because of the terrible
violence you committed against innocent creatures. How can one who harms
others attain happiness?
PURPORT
Having expressed their sentimental grief, the ladies now speak practical
wisdom. They are beginning to see things realistically because their minds
were purified by the agony of the recent events and by the association of Lord
Kåñëa.
TEXT 48
s$avaeRSaAimah" BaUtaAnaAma,
WSa ih" ‘aBavaApyaya:
gAAeæaA ca tad"vaDyaAyaI
na ¸(icats$auKamaeDatae
sarveñäm iha bhütänäm
eña hi prabhaväpyayaù
goptä ca tad-avadhyäyé
na kvacit sukham edhate
SYNONYMS
sarveñäm—of all; iha—in this world; bhütänäm—living beings; eñaù—this (Çré
Kåñëa); hi—certainly; prabhava—the origin; apyayaù—and disappearance;
goptä—the maintainer; ca—and; tat—of Him; avadhyäyé—one who is
neglectful; na kvacit—never; sukham—happily; edhate—prospers.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa causes the appearance and disappearance of all beings in this
world, and He is their maintainer as well. One who disrespects Him can never
prosper happily.
TEXT 49
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
r"AjayaAeiSata @AìAsya
BagAvaA*éaAek(BaAvana:
yaAmaAò"laAE=#ik(k(LM s$aMsTaAM
h"taAnaAM s$amak(Ar"yata,
çré-çuka uväca
räja-yoñita äçväsya
bhagaväû loka-bhävanaù
yäm ähur laukikéà saàsthäà
hatänäà samakärayat
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; räja—of the King (and his
brothers); yoñitaù—the wives; äçväsya—consoling; bhagavän—the Supreme
Lord; loka—of all the worlds; bhävanaù—the sustainer; yäm—which;
ähuù—they (Vedic authorities) enjoin; laukikém saàsthäm—funeral rites;
hatänäm—for the deceased; samakärayat—-He arranged to be performed.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: After consoling the royal ladies, Lord Kåñëa,
sustainer of all the worlds, arranged for the prescribed funeral rites to be
performed.
TEXT 50
maAtarM" ipatarM" caEva
maAecaiyatvaATa banDanaAta,
k{(SNAr"AmaAE vavand"Atae
izAr"s$aA s$pa{zya paAd"yaAe:
mätaraà pitaraà caiva
mocayitvätha bandhanät
kåñëa-rämau vavandäte
çirasä spåçya pädayoù
SYNONYMS
mätaram—Their mother; pitaram—father; ca—and; eva—also;
mocayitvä—releasing; atha—then; bandhanät—from their fetters;
kåñëa-rämau—Kåñëa and Balaräma; vavandäte—paid obeisances; çirasä—with
Their heads; spåçya—touching; pädayoù—their feet.
TRANSLATION
Then Kåñëa and Balaräma released Their mother and father from bondage
and offered obeisances to them, touching their feet with Their heads.
TEXT 51
de"vak(L vas$aude"vaê
ivaÁaAya jagAd"Iìr"AE
k{(tas$aMvand"naAE pau‡aAE
s$asvajaAtae na zAiÆÿtaAE
devaké vasudevaç ca
vijïäya jagad-éçvarau
kåta-saàvandanau putrau
sasvajäte na çaìkitau
SYNONYMS
devaké—Devaké; vasudevaù—Vasudeva; ca—and; vijïäya—recognizing;
jagat—of the universe; éçvarau—as the two Lords; kåta—paying;
saàvandanau—full respects (by standing with joined palms); putrau-their two
sons; sasvajäte na—they did not embrace; çaìkitau—apprehensive.
TRANSLATION
Devaké and Vasudeva, now knowing Kåñëa and Balaräma to be the Lords of
the universe, simply stood with joined palms. Being apprehensive, they did not
embrace their sons.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Tenth Canto, Forty-fourth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Killing of Kaàsa."