Çrémad-Bhägavatam Canto 12: "The Age of Deterioration"
1. The Degraded Dynasties of Kali-yuga
The Twelfth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam begins with Çréla Çukadeva
Gosvämé predicting the kings of the earth who will appear in the future during
the age of Kali. Then he gives a description of the numerous faults of the age,
after which the presiding goddess of the earth sarcastically berates the foolish
members of the kingly order who perpetually try to conquer her. Next
Çukadeva Gosvämé explains the four varieties of material annihilation, and
then he gives his final advice to Mahäräja Parékñit. Thereafter King Parékñit is
bitten by the snake-bird Takñaka and leaves this world. Süta Gosvämé
concludes his narration of Çrémad-Bhägavatam to the sages at Naimiñäraëya
forest by enumerating the teachers of the various branches of the Vedas and
Puräëas, relating the pious history of Märkaëòeya Åñi, glorifying the Supreme
Lord in His universal form and in His expansion as the sun-god, summarizing
the topics discussed in this literature, and offering final benedictions and
prayers.
The first chapter of this canto briefly describes the future kings of the
dynasty of Magadha and how they become degraded because of the influence
of the age of Kali. There were twenty kings who ruled in the family of Püru, in
the dynasty of the sun-god, counting from Uparicara Vasu to Puraïjaya. After
Puraïjaya, the lineage of this dynasty will become corrupted. Following
Puraïjaya there will be five kings known as the Pradyotanas, who are then
followed by the Çiçunägas, the Mauryas, the Çuìgas, the Käëvas, thirty kings of
the Andhra nation, seven Äbhéras, ten Gardabhés, sixteen Kaìkas, eight
Yavanas, fourteen Turuñkas, ten Guruëòas, eleven Maulas, five Kilakilä
monarchs and thirteen Bählikas. After this, different regions will be ruled over
at the same time by seven Andhra kings, seven Kauçalas, the kings of Vidüra,
and the Niñadhas. Then the power of rulership in the countries of Magadha
and so forth will fall to kings who are no better than çüdras and mlecchas and
are totally absorbed in irreligion.
TEXTS 1-2
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
yaAe'ntya: paur"ÃayaAe naAma
BaivaSyaAe baAr"h"‰"Ta:
tasyaAmaAtyastau zAunak(Ae
h"tvaA svaAimanamaAtmajama,
‘aâAetas$aMÁaM r"AjaAnaM
k(taAR yatpaAlak(: s$auta:
ivazAAKayaUpastatpau‡aAe
BaivataA r"Ajak(stata:
çré-çuka uväca
yo 'ntyaù puraïjayo näma
bhaviñyo bärahadrathaù
tasyämätyas tu çunako
hatvä sväminam ätma-jam
pradyota-saàjïaà räjänaà
kartä yat-pälakaù sutaù
viçäkhayüpas tat-putro
bhavitä räjakas tataù
SYNONYMS
çré çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; yaù—who; antyaù—the final
member (of the lineage described in the Ninth Canto);
puraïjayaù—Puraïjaya (Ripuïjaya); näma—named; bhaviñyaù—will live in
the future; bärahadrathaù—the descendant of Båhadratha; tasya—his;
amätyaù—minister; tu—but; çunakaù—Çunaka; hatvä—killing;
sväminam—his master; ätma-jam—his own son; pradyota-saàjïam—named
Pradyota; räjänam—the king; kartä—will make; yat—whose; pälakaù—named
Pälaka; sutaù—the son; viçäkhayüpaù—Viçäkhayüpa; tat-putraù—the son of
Pälaka; bhavitä—will be; räjakaù—Räjaka; tataù—then (coming as the son of
Viçäkhayüpa).
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: The last king mentioned in our previous
enumeration of the future rulers of the Mägadha dynasty was Puraïjaya, who
will take birth as the descendant of Båhadratha. Puraïjaya's minister Çunaka
will assassinate the king and install his own son, Pradyota, on the throne. The
son of Pradyota will be Pälaka, his son will be Viçäkhayüpa, and his son will be
Räjaka.
PURPORT
The vicious political intrigue described here is symptomatic of the age of
Kali. In the Ninth Canto of this work, Çukadeva Gosvämé describes how the
great rulers of men descended from two royal dynasties, that of the sun and
that of the moon. The Ninth Canto's description of Lord Rämacandra, a most
famous incarnation of God, occurs in this genealogical narration, and at the
end of the Ninth Canto Çukadeva describes the forefathers of Lord Kåñëa and
Lord Balaräma. Finally, the appearance of Lord Kåñëa and that of Lord
Balaräma are mentioned within the context of the narration of the moon
dynasty.
The Tenth Canto is devoted exclusively to a description of Lord Kåñëa's
childhood pastimes in Våndävana, His teenage activities in Mathurä and His
adult activities in Dvärakä. The famous epic Mahäbhärata also describes the
events of this period, focusing upon the five Päëòava brothers and their
activities in relation with Lord Kåñëa and other leading historical figures, such
as Bhéñma, Dhåtaräñöra, Droëäcärya and Vidura. Within the Mahäbhärata is
Bhagavad-gétä, in which Lord Kåñëa is declared to be the Absolute Truth, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Çrémad-Bhägavatam, of which we are
presently translating the twelfth and final canto, is considered a more
advanced literature than the Mahäbhärata because throughout the entire work
Lord Çré Kåñëa, the Absolute Truth and supreme source of all existence, is
directly, centrally and irrefutably revealed. In fact, the First Canto of the
Bhägavatam describes how Çré Vyäsadeva composed this great work because he
was dissatisfied with his rather sporadic glorification of Lord Kåñëa in the
Mahäbhärata.
Although Çrémad-Bhägavatam narrates the histories of many royal dynasties
and the lives of innumerable kings, not until the description of the present
age, the age of Kali, do we find a minister assassinating his own king and
installing his son on the throne. This incident resembles Dhåtaräñöra's attempt
to assassinate the Päëòavas and crown his son Duryodhana king. As the
Mahäbhärata describes, Lord Kåñëa thwarted this attempt, but with the
departure of the Lord for the spiritual sky, the age of Kali became fully
manifested, ushering in political assassination within one's own house as a
standard technique.
TEXT 3
naind"vaDaRnastatpau‡a:
paÂa ‘aâAetanaA wmae
@í"i‡aMzAAeÔar"zAtaM
BaAeºyainta pa{iTavaI%M na{paA:
nandivardhanas tat-putraù
païca pradyotanä ime
añöa-triàçottara-çataà
bhokñyanti påthivéà nåpäù
SYNONYMS
nandivardhanaù—Nandivardhana; tat-putraù—his son; païca—five;
pradyotanäù—Pradyotanas; ime—these; añöa-triàça—thirty-eight;
uttara—increased by; çatam—one hundred; bhokñyanti—they will enjoy;
påthivém—the earth; nåpäù—these kings.
TRANSLATION
The son of Räjaka will be Nandivardhana, and thus in the Pradyotana
dynasty there will be five kings, who will enjoy the earth for 138 years.
TEXT 4
izAzAunaAgAstataAe BaAvya:
k(Ak(vaNARstau tats$auta:
ºaemaDamaAR tasya s$auta:
ºae‡aÁa: ºaemaDamaRja:
çiçunägas tato bhävyaù
käkavarëas tu tat-sutaù
kñemadharmä tasya sutaù
kñetrajïaù kñemadharma-jaù
SYNONYMS
çiçunägaù—Çiçunäga; tataù—then; bhävyaù—will take birth;
käkavarëaù—Käkavarëa; tu—and; tat-sutaù—his son;
kñemadharmä—Kñemadharmä; tasya—of Käkavarëa; sutaù—the son;
kñetrajïaù—Kñetrajïa; kñemadharma-jaù—born to Kñemadharmä.
TRANSLATION
Nandivardhana will have a son named Çiçunäga, and his son will be known
as Käkavarëa. The son of Käkavarëa will be Kñemadharmä, and the son of
Kñemadharmä will be Kñetrajïa.
TEXT 5
ivaiDas$aAr": s$autastasyaAjaAtazA‡
auBaRivaSyaita
d"BaRk(stats$autaAe BaAvaI
d"BaRk(syaAjaya: sma{ta:
vidhisäraù sutas tasyäjätaçatrur
bhaviñyati
darbhakas tat-suto bhävé
darbhakasyäjayaù småtaù
SYNONYMS
vidhisäraù—Vidhisära; sutaù—the son; tasya—of Kñetrajïa;
ajätaçatruù—Ajätaçatru; bhaviñyati—will be; darbhakaù—Darbhaka;
tat-sutaù—the son of Ajätaçatru; bhävé—will take birth; darbhakasya—of
Darbhaka; ajayaù—Ajaya; småtaù—is remembered.
TRANSLATION
The son of Kñetrajïa will be Vidhisära, and his son will be Ajätaçatru.
Ajätaçatru will have a son named Darbhaka, and his son will be Ajaya.
TEXTS 6-8
naind"vaDaRna @AjaeyaAe
mah"Anaind": s$autastata:
izAzAunaAgAA d"zAEvaEtae
s$aí"YauÔar"zAta‡ayama,
s$amaA BaAeºyainta pa{iTavaI%M
ku(ç&™aeï" k(laAE na{paA:
mah"Anaind"s$autaAe r"Ajana,
zAU#‰"AgABaAeRà"vaAe balaI
mah"Apaápaita: k(iêna,
nand": ºa‡aivanaAzAk{(ta,
tataAe na{paA BaivaSyainta
zAU#‰"‘aAyaAstvaDaAimaRk(A:
nandivardhana äjeyo
mahänandiù sutas tataù
çiçunägä daçaivaite
sañöy-uttara-çata-trayam
samä bhokñyanti påthivéà
kuru-çreñöha kalau nåpäù
mahänandi-suto räjan
çüdrä-garbhodbhavo balé
mahäpadma-patiù kaçcin
nandaù kñatra-vinäça-kåt
tato nåpä bhaviñyanti
çüdra-präyäs tv adhärmikäù
SYNONYMS
nandivardhanaù—Nandivardhana; äjeyaù—the son of Ajaya;
mahä-nandiù—Mahänandi; sutaù—the son; tataù—then (following
Nandivardhana); çiçunägäù—the Çiçunägas; daça—ten; eva—indeed;
ete—these; sañöi—sixty; uttara—increased by; çata-trayam—three hundred;
samäù—years; bhokñyanti—they will rule; påthivém—the earth;
kuruçreñöha—O best of the Kurus; kalau—in this age of Kali; nåpäù—the
kings; mahänandi-sutaù—the son of Mahänandi; räjan—O King Parékñit;
çüdrä-garbha—in the womb of a çüdra woman; udbhavaù—taking birth;
balé—powerful; mahä-padma—of an army, or wealth, measured in the millions;
patiù—the master; kaçcit—a certain; nandaù—Nanda; kñatra—of the royal
class; vinäça-kåt—the destroyer; tataù—then; nåpäù—the kings;
bhaviñyanti—will become; çüdra-präyäù—no better than çüdras; tu—and;
adhärmikäù—irreligious.
TRANSLATION
Ajaya will father a second Nandivardhana, whose son will be Mahänandi. O
best of the Kurus, these ten kings of the Çiçunäga dynasty will rule the earth
for a total of 360 years during the age of Kali. My dear Parékñit, King
Mahänandi will father a very powerful son in the womb of a çüdra woman. He
will be known as Nanda and will be the master of millions of soldiers and
fabulous wealth. He will wreak havoc among the kñatriyas, and from that time
onward virtually all kings will be irreligious çüdras.
PURPORT
Here is a description of how authentic political authority degenerated and
disintegrated throughout the world. There is a Supreme Godhead, and there
are saintly, powerful men who have taken the role of government leaders and
represented that Godhead on earth. With the advent of the age of Kali,
however, this transcendental system of government collapsed, and
unauthorized, uncivilized men gradually took the reins of power.
TEXT 9
s$a Wk(cC$‡aAM pa{iTavaIma,
@nauéaiÎÿtazAAs$ana:
zAAis$aSyaita mah"ApaáAe
iã"taIya wva BaAgARva:
sa eka-cchaträà påthivém
anullaìghita-çäsanaù
çäsiñyati mahäpadmo
dvitéya iva bhärgavaù
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Nanda); eka-chaträm—under a single leadership; påthivém—the
entire earth; anullaìghita—undefied; çäsanaù—his rulership; çäsiñyati—he
will have sovereignty over; mahäpadmaù—the lord of Mahäpadma; dvitéyaù—a
second; iva-as if; bhärgavaù—Paraçuräma.
TRANSLATION
That lord of Mahäpadma, King Nanda, will rule over the entire earth just
like a second Paraçuräma, and no one will challenge his authority.
PURPORT
In the eighth verse of this chapter it was mentioned that King Nanda would
destroy the remnants of the kñatriya order. Therefore he is here compared to
Lord Paraçuräma, who annihilated the kñatriya class twenty-one times in a
previous age.
TEXT 10
tasya caAí"AE BaivaSyainta
s$aumaAlya‘amauKaA: s$autaA:
ya wmaAM BaAeºyainta mah"I%M
r"AjaAnaê zAtaM s$amaA:
tasya cäñöau bhaviñyanti
sumälya-pramukhäù sutäù
ya imäà bhokñyanti mahéà
räjänaç ca çataà samäù
SYNONYMS
tasya—of him (Nanda); ca—and; añöau—eight; bhaviñyanti—will take birth;
sumälya-pramukhäù—headed by Sumälya; sutäù—sons; ye—who; imäm—this;
bhokñyanti—will enjoy; mahém—the earth; räjänaù—kings; ca—and;
çatam—one hundred; samäù—years.
TRANSLATION
He will have eight sons, headed by Sumälya, who will control the earth as
powerful kings for one hundred years.
TEXT 11
nava nand"Ainã"ja: k(iêta,
‘apaªaAnauÜ"ir"Syaita
taeSaAM @BaAvae jagAtaI%M
maAEyaAR BaAeºyainta vaE k(laAE
nava nandän dvijaù kaçcit
prapannän uddhariñyati
teñäà abhäve jagatéà
mauryä bhokñyanti vai kalau
SYNONYMS
nava—nine; nandän—the Nandas (King Nanda and his eight sons);
dvijaù—brähmaëa; kaçcit—a certain; prapannän—trusting; uddhariñyati—will
uproot; teñäm—of them; abhäve—in the absence; jagatém—the earth;
mauryäù—the Maurya dynasty; bhokñyanti—will rule over; vai—indeed;
kalau—in this age, Kali-yuga.
TRANSLATION
A certain brähmaëa [Cäëakya] will betray the trust of King Nanda and his
eight sons and will destroy their dynasty. In their absence the Mauryas will rule
the world as the age of Kali continues.
PURPORT
Çrédhara Svämé and Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura both confirm that the
brähmaëa mentioned here is Cäëakya, also known as Kauöilya or Vätsyäyana.
The great historical narration Çrémad-Bhägavatam, which began with the
events prior to the cosmic manifestation, now reaches into the realm of
modern recorded history. Modern historians recognize both the Maurya
dynasty and Candragupta, the king mentioned in the following verse.
TEXT 12
s$a Wva can‰"gAuæaM vaE
iã"jaAe r"Ajyae'iBaSaeºyaita
tats$autaAe vaAir"s$aAr"stau
tataêAzAAek(vaDaRna:
sa eva candraguptaà vai
dvijo räjye 'bhiñekñyati
tat-suto värisäras tu
tataç cäçokavardhanaù
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Cäëakya); eva—indeed; candraguptam—Prince Candragupta;
vai—indeed; dvijaù—the brähmaëa; räjye—in the role of king;
abhiñekñyati—will install; tat—of Candragupta; sutaù—the son;
värisäraù—Värisära; tu—and; tataù—following Värisära; ca—and;
açokavardhanaù—Açokavardhana.
TRANSLATION
This brähmaëa will enthrone Candragupta, whose son will be named
Värisära. The son of Värisära will be Açokavardhana.
TEXT 13
s$auyazAA BaivataA tasya
s$aËÿta: s$auyazA:s$auta:
zAAilazAUk(statastasya
s$aAemazAmaAR BaivaSyaita
zAtaDanvaA tatastasya
BaivataA taä,"ba{h"‰"Ta:
suyaçä bhavitä tasya
saìgataù suyaçaù-sutaù
çäliçükas tatas tasya
somaçarmä bhaviñyati
çatadhanvä tatas tasya
bhavitä tad-båhadrathaù
SYNONYMS
suyaçäù—Suyaçä; bhavitä—will be born; tasya—of him (Açokavardhana);
saìgataù—Saìgata; suyaçaù-sutaù—the son of Suyaçä; çäliçükaù—Çäliçüka;
tataù—next; tasya—of him (Çäliçüka); somaçarmä—Somaçarmä;
bhaviñyati—will be; çatadhanvä—Çatadhanvä; tataù—next; tasya—of him
(Somaçarmä); bhavitä—will be; tat—of him (Çatadhanvä);
båhadrathaù—Båhadratha.
TRANSLATION
Açokavardhana will be followed by Suyaçä, whose son will be Saìgata. His
son will be Çäliçüka, Çäliçüka's son will be Somaçarmä, and Somaçarmä's son
will be Çatadhanvä. His son will be known as Brhadratha.
TEXT 14
maAEyaAR ÷etae d"zA na{paA:
s$aæai‡aMzAcC$taAeÔar"ma,
s$amaA BaAeºyainta pa{iTavaI%M
k(laAE ku(ç&ku(laAeã"h"
mauryä hy ete daça nåpäù
sapta-triàçac-chatottaram
samä bhokñyanti påthivéà
kalau kuru-kulodvaha
SYNONYMS
mauryäù—the Mauryas; hi—indeed; ete—these; daça—ten; nåpäù—kings;
sapta-triàçat—thirty-seven; çata—one hundred; uttaram—more than;
samäù—years; bhokñyanti—they will rule; påthivém—the earth; kalau—in
Kali-yuga; kuru-kula—of the Kuru dynasty; udvaha—O most eminent hero.
TRANSLATION
O best of the Kurus, these ten Maurya kings will rule the earth for 137 years
of the Kali-yuga.
PURPORT
Although nine kings are mentioned by name, Daçaratha appeared after
Sujyeñöha, before the rule of Saìgata, and thus there are ten Maurya kings.
TEXTS 15-17
@i¢aima‡astatastasmaAta,
s$aujyaeï"Ae BaivataA tata:
vas$auima‡aAe Ba‰"k(ê
pauiland"Ae BaivataA s$auta:
tataAe GaAeSa: s$autastasmaAä,"
va†aima‡aAe BaivaSyaita
tataAe BaAgAvatastasmaAä,"
de"vaBaUita: ku(è&ã"h"
zAuËÿA d"zAEtae BaAeºyainta
BaUimaM vaSaRzAtaAiDak(ma,
tata: k(ANvaAinayaM BaUimar,"
yaAsyatyalpagAuNAAªa{pa
agnimitras tatas tasmät
sujyeñöho bhavitä tataù
vasumitro bhadrakaç ca
pulindo bhavitä sutaù
tato ghoñaù sutas tasmäd
vajramitro bhaviñyati
tato bhägavatas tasmäd
devabhütiù kurüdvaha
çuìgä daçaite bhokñyanti
bhümià varña-çatädhikam
tataù käëvän iyaà bhümir
yäsyaty alpa-guëän nåpa
SYNONYMS
agnimitraù—Agnimitra; tataù—from Puñpamitra, the general who will murder
Båhadratha; tasmät—from him (Agnimitra); sujyeñöhaù—Sujyeñöha;
bhavitä—will be; tataù—from him; vasumitraù—Vasumitra;
bhadrakaù—Bhadraka; ca—and; pulindaù—Pulinda; bhavitä—will be;
sutaù—the son; tataù—from him (Pulinda); ghoñaù—Ghoña; sutaù—the son;
tasmät—from him; vajramitraù—Vajramitra; bhaviñyati—will be; tataù—from
him; bhägavataù—Bhägavata; tasmät—from him; devabhüti—Devabhüti;
kuru-udvaha—O most eminent of the Kurus; çuìgäù—the Çuìgas; daça—ten;
ete—these; bhokñyanti—will enjoy; bhümim—the earth; varña—years;
çata—one hundred; adhikam—more than; tataù—then; käëvän—the Käëva
dynasty; iyam—this; bhümiù—the earth; yäsyati—will come under the domain;
alpa-guëän—of few good qualities; nåpa—O King Parékñit.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Parékñit, Agnimitra will follow as king, and then Sujyeñöha.
Sujyeñöha will be followed by Vasumitra, Bhadraka, and the son of Bhadraka,
Pulinda. Then the son of Pulinda, named Ghoña, will rule, followed by
Vajramitra, Bhägavata and Devabhüti. In this way, O most eminent of the
Kuru heroes, ten Çuìga kings will rule over the earth for more than one
hundred years. Then the earth will come under the subjugation of the kings of
the Käëva dynasty, who will manifest very few good qualities.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, the Çuìga dynasty began when General
Puñpamitra killed his king, Båhadratha, and assumed power. After Puñpamitra
came Agnimitra and the rest of the Çuìga dynasty, which lasted for 112 years.
TEXT 18
zAuËMÿ h"tvaA de"vaBaUitaM
k(ANvaAe'maAtyastau k(Aimanama,
svayaM k(ir"Syatae r"AjyaM
vas$aude"vaAe mah"Amaita:
çuìgaà hatvä devabhütià
käëvo 'mätyas tu käminam
svayaà kariñyate räjyaà
vasudevo mahä-matiù
SYNONYMS
çuìgam—the Çuìga king; hatvä—killing; devabhütim—Devabhüti;
käëvaù—the member of the Käëva family; amätyaù—his minister; tu—but;
käminam—lusty; svayam—himself; kariñyate—will execute; räjyam—the
rulership; vasudevaù—named Vasudeva; mahä-matiù—very intelligent.
TRANSLATION
Vasudeva, an intelligent minister coming from the Käëva family, will kill the
last of the Çuìga kings, a lusty debauchee named Devabhüti, and assume
rulership himself.
PURPORT
Apparently, because King Devabhüti was lusty after the wives of other men,
his minister killed him, assuming leadership and thus beginning the Käëva
dynasty.
TEXT 19
tasya pau‡astau BaUima‡as$a,
tasya naAr"AyaNA: s$auta:
k(ANvaAyanaA wmae BaUimaM
catvaAir$MzA»a paÂa ca
zAtaAina ‡aIiNA BaAeºyainta
vaSaARNAAM ca k(laAE yaugAe
tasya putras tu bhümitras
tasya näräyaëaù sutaù
käëväyanä ime bhümià
catväriàçac ca païca ca
çatäni tréëi bhokñyanti
varñäëäà ca kalau yuge
SYNONYMS
tasya—of him (Vasudeva); putraù—the son; tu—and; bhümitraù—Bhümitra;
tasya—his; näräyaëaù—Näräyaëa; sutaù—the son; käëva-ayanäù—kings of
the Käëva dynasty; ime—these; bhümim—the earth; catväriàçat—forty;
ca—and; païca—five; ca—and; çatäni—hundreds; tréëi—three;
bhokñyanti—they will rule; varñäëäm—years; ca—and; kalau yuge—in the
Kali-yuga.
TRANSLATION
The son of Vasudeva will be Bhümitra, and his son will be Näräyaëa. These
kings of the Käëva dynasty will rule the earth for 345 more years of the
Kali-yuga.
TEXT 20
h"tvaA k(ANvaM s$auzAmaARNAM
taà{"tyaAe va{SalaAe balaI
gAAM BaAeºyatyan‹ajaAtaIya:
k(iÂatk(Alamas$aÔama:
hatvä käëvaà suçarmäëaà
tad-bhåtyo våñalo balé
gäà bhokñyaty andhra-jätéyaù
kaïcit kälam asattamaù
SYNONYMS
hatvä—killing; käëvam—the Käëva king; suçarmäëam—named Suçarmä;
tat-bhåtyaù—his own servant; våñalaù—a low-class çüdra; balé—named Balé;
gäm—the earth; bhokñyati—will rule; andhra-jätéyaù—of the Andhra race;
kaïcit—for some; kälam—time; asattamaù—most degraded.
TRANSLATION
The last of the Käëvas, Suçarmä, will be murdered by his own servant, Balé
a low-class çüdra of the Andhra race. This most degraded Mahäräja Balé will
have control over the earth for some time.
PURPORT
Here is a further description of how uncultured men infiltrated government
administration. The so-called king named Balé is described as asattama, a most
impious, uncultured man.
TEXTS 21-26
k{(SNAnaAmaATa taä,"”aAtaA
BaivataA pa{iTavaIpaita:
™aIzAAntak(NARstatpau‡a:
paAENARmaAs$astau tats$auta:
lambaAed"r"stau tatpau‡as$a,
tasmaAi»aibalak(Ae na{pa:
maeGasvaAitaiêibalak(Aä,"
@q%maAnastau tasya ca
@inaí"k(maAR h"Alaeyas$a,
talak(stasya caAtmaja:
paur"ISaBaIç&statpau‡as$a,
tataAe r"AjaA s$aunand"na:
cak(Aer"Ae bah"vaAe ya‡a
izAvasvaAitar"ir"nd"ma:
tasyaAipa gAAemataI pau‡a:
paur"ImaAna, BaivataA tata:
maed"izAr"A: izAvas$k(nd"Ae
yaÁa™aIstats$autastata:
ivajayastats$autaAe BaAvyazA,
can‰"ivaÁa: s$alaAemaiDa:
Wtae i‡aMzAªa{patayazA,
catvaAyaRbd"zAtaAina ca
Saq%.paÂaAzA»a pa{iTavaI%M
BaAeºyainta ku(ç&nand"na
kåñëa-nämätha tad-bhrätä
bhavitä påthivé-patiù
çré-çäntakarëas tat-putraù
paurëamäsas tu tat-sutaù
lambodaras tu tat-putras
tasmäc cibilako nåpaù
meghasvätiç cibilakäd
aöamänas tu tasya ca
aniñöakarmä häleyas
talakas tasya cätma-jaù
puréñabhérus tat-putras
tato räjä sunandanaù
cakoro bahavo yatra
çivasvätir arin-damaù
tasyäpi gomaté putraù
purémän bhavitä tataù
medaçiräù çivaskando
yajïaçrés tat-sutas tataù
vijayas tat-suto bhävyaç
candravijïaù sa-lomadhiù
ete triàçan nåpatayaç
catväry abda-çatäni ca
ñaö-païcäçac ca påthivéà
bhokñyanti kuru-nandana
SYNONYMS
kåñëa-näma—named Kåñëa; atha—then; tat—of him (Balé); bhrätä—the
brother; bhavitä—will become; påthivé-patiù—the master of the earth;
çré-çäntakarëaù—Çré Çäntakarëa; tat—of Kåñëa; putraù—the son;
paurëamäsaù—Paurëamäsa; tu—and; tat-sutaù—his son;
lambodaraù—Lambodara; tu—and; tat-putraù—his son; tasmät—from him
(Lambodara); cibilakaù—Cibilaka; nåpaù—the king;
meghasvätiù—Meghasväti; cibilakät—from Cibilaka; aöamänaù—Aöamäna;
tu—and; tasya—of him (Meghasväti); ca—and; aniñöakarmä—Aniñöakarmä;
häleyaù—Häleya; talakaù—Talaka; tasya—of him (Häleya); ca—and;
ätma-jaù—the son; puréñabhéruù—Puréñabhéru; tat—of Talaka; putraù—the
son; tataù—then; räjä—the king; sunandanaù—Sunandana;
cakoraù—Cakora; bahavaù—the Bahus; yatra—among whom;
çivasvätiù—Çivasväti; arimdamaù—the subduer of enemies; tasya—of him;
api—also; gomaté—Gomaté; putraù—the son; purémän—Purémän;
bhavitä—will be; tataù—from him (Gomaté); medaçiräù—Medaçirä;
çivaskandaù—Çivaskanda; yajïaçréù—Yajïaçré; tat—of Çivaskanda; sutaù—the
son; tataù—then; vijayaù—Vijaya; tat-sutaù—his son; bhävyaù—will be;
candravijïaù—Candravijïa; sa-lomadhiù—along with Lomadhi; ete—these;
triàçat—thirty; nå-patayaù—kings; catväri—four; abda-çatäni—centuries;
ca—and; ñaö-païcäsat—fifty-six; ca—and; påthivém—the world;
bhokñyanti—will rule; kuru-nandana—O favorite son of the Kurus.
TRANSLATION
The brother of Balé, named Kåñëa, will become the next ruler of the earth.
His son will be Çäntakarëa, and his son will be Paurëamäsa. The son of
Paurëamäsa will be Lambodara, who will father Mahäräja Cibilaka. From
Cibilaka will come Meghasväti, whose son will be Aöamäna. The son of
Aöamäna will be Aniñöakarmä. His son will be Häleya, and his son will be
Talaka. The son of Talaka will be Puréñabhéru, and following him Sunandana
will become king. Sunandana will be followed by Cakora and the eight Bahus,
among whom Çivasväti will be a great subduer of enemies. The son of Çivasväti
will be Gomaté. His son will be Purémän, whose son will be Medaçirä. His son
will be Çivaskanda, and his son will be Yajïaçré. The son of Yajïaçré will be
Vijaya, who will have two sons, Candravijïa and Lomadhi. These thirty kings
will enjoy sovereignty over the earth for a total of 456 years, O favorite son of
the Kurus.
TEXT 27
s$aæaABaIr"A @AvaBa{tyaA
d"zA gAdR"iBanaAe na{paA:
k(ÆÿA: SaAex"zA BaUpaAlaA
BaivaSyantyaitalaAelaupaA:
saptäbhérä ävabhåtyä
daça gardabhino nåpäù
kaìkäù ñoòaça bhü-pälä
bhaviñyanty ati-lolupäù
SYNONYMS
sapta—seven; äbhéräù—Äbhéras; ävabhåtyäù—of the city of Avabhåti;
daça—ten; gardabhinaù—Gardabhés; nåpäù—kings; kaìkäù—Kaìkas;
ñoòaça—sixteen; bhü-päläù—rulers of the earth; bhaviñyanti—will be;
ati-lolupäù—very greedy.
TRANSLATION
Then will follow seven kings of the Äbhéra race from the ciq of Avabhåti,
and then ten Gardabhés. After them, sixteen kings of the Kaìkas will rule and
will be known for their excessive greed.
TEXT 28
tataAe'í"AE yavanaA BaAvyaAzA,
cataudR"zA tauç&Sk(k(A:
BaUyaAe d"zA gAuç&Nx"Aê
maAElaA Wk(Ad"zAEva tau
tato 'ñöau yavanä bhävyäç
caturdaça turuñkakäù
bhüyo daça guruëòäç ca
maulä ekädaçaiva tu
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; añöau—eight; yavanäù—Yavanas; bhävyäù—will be;
catuù-daça—fourteen; turuñkakäù—Turuñkas; bhüyaù—furthermore;
daça—ten; guruëòäù—Guruëòas; ca—and; mauläù—Maulas;
ekädaça—eleven; eva—indeed; tu—and.
TRANSLATION
Eight Yavanas will then take power, followed by fourteen Turuñkas, ten
Guruëòas and eleven kings of the Maula dynasty.
TEXTS 29-31
Wtae BaAeºyainta pa{iTavaI%M
d"zA vaSaRzAtaAina ca
navaAiDak(AM ca navaitaM
maAElaA Wk(Ad"zA iºaitama,
BaAeºyantyabd"zAtaAnyaËÿ
‡aIiNA taE: s$aMisTatae tata:
ik(laik(laAyaAM na{patayaAe
BaUtanand"Ae'Ta vaiËÿir":
izAzAunaind"ê taä,"”aAtaA
yazAAenaind": ‘avaIr"k(:
wtyaetae vaE vaSaRzAtaM
BaivaSyantyaiDak(Aina Saq%.
ete bhokñyanti påthivéà
daça varña-çatäni ca
navädhikäà ca navatià
maulä ekädaça kñitim
bhokñyanty abda-çatäny aìga
tréëi taiù saàsthite tataù
kilakiläyäà nåpatayo
bhütanando 'tha vaìgiriù
çiçunandiç ca tad-bhrätä
yaçonandiù pravérakaù
ity ete vai varña-çataà
bhaviñyanty adhikäni ñaö
SYNONYMS
ete—these; bhokñyanti—will rule; påthivém—the earth; daça—ten;
varña-çatäni—centuries; ca—and; nava-adhikäm—plus nine; ca—and;
navatim—ninety; mauläù—the Maulas; ekädaça—eleven; kñitim—the world;
bhokñyanti—will rule; abda-çatäni—centuries; aìga—my dear Parékñit;
tréëi—three; taiù—they; saàsthite—when they are all dead; tataù—then;
kilakiläyäm—in the city Kilakilä; nå-patayaù—kings;
bhütanandaù—Bhütananda; atha—and then; vaìgiriù—Vaìgiri;
çiçunandiù—Çiçunandi; ca—and; tat—his; bhrätä—brother;
yaçonandiù—Yaçonandi; pravérakaù—Pravéraka; iti—thus; ete—these;
vai—indeed; varña-çatam—one hundred years; bhaviñyanti—will be;
adhikäni—plus; ñaö—six.
TRANSLATION
These Äbhéras, Gardabhés and Kaìkas will enjoy the earth for 1,099 years,
and the Maulas will rule for 300 years. When all of them have died off there
will appear in the city of Kilakilä a dynasty of kings consisting of Bhütananda,
Vaìgiri, Çiçunandi, Çiçunandi's brother Yaçonandi, and Pravéraka. These kings
of Kilakilä will hold sway for a total of 106 years.
TEXTS 32-33
taeSaAM ‡ayaAed"zA s$autaA
BaivataAr"ê baAiø"k(A:
pauSpaima‡aAe'Ta r"AjanyaAe
äu"imaR‡aAe'sya taTaEva ca
Wk(k(AlaA wmae BaUpaA:
s$aæaAn‹aA: s$aæa k(AEzAlaA:
ivaäU"r"patayaAe BaAvyaA
inaSaDaAstata Wva ih"
teñäà trayodaça sutä
bhavitäraç ca bählikäù
puñpamitro 'tha räjanyo
durmitro 'sya tathaiva ca
eka-kälä ime bhü-päù
saptändhräù sapta kauçaläù
vidüra-patayo bhävyä
niñadhäs tata eva hi
SYNONYMS
teñäm—of them (Bhütananda and the other kings of the Kilakilä dynasty);
trayodaça—thirteen; sutäù—sons; bhavitäraù—will be; ca—and;
bählikäù—called the Bählikas; puñpamitraù—Puñpamitra; atha—then;
räjanyaù—the king; durmitraù—Durmitra; asya—his (son); tathä—also;
eva—indeed; ca—and; eka-käläù—ruling at the same time; ime—these;
bhü-päù—kings; sapta—seven; andhräù—Andhras; sapta—seven;
kauçaläù—kings of Kauçala-deça; vidüra-patayaù—rulers of Vidüra;
bhävyäù—will be; niñadhäù—Niñadhas; tataù—then (after the Bählikas); eva
hi—indeed.
TRANSLATION
The Kilakiläs will be followed by their thirteen sons, the Bählikas, and after
them King Puñpamitra, his son Durmitra, seven Andhras, seven Kauçalas and
also kings of the Vidüra and Niñadha provinces will separately rule in different
parts of the world.
TEXT 34
maAgADaAnaAM tau BaivataA
ivaìs$PU(ijaR: paur"Ãaya:
k(ir"Syatyapar"Ae vaNAARna,
pauiland"yaäu"ma‰"k(Ana,
mägadhänäà tu bhavitä
viçvasphürjiù puraïjayaù
kariñyaty aparo varëän
pulinda-yadu-madrakän
SYNONYMS
mägadhänäm—of the Magadha province; tu—and; bhavitä—there will be;
viçvasphürjiù—Viçvasphürji; puraïjayaù—King Puraïjaya; kariñyati—he will
make; aparaù—being the replica of; varëän—all the civilized classes of men;
pulinda-yadu-madrakän—into outcastes such as the Pulindas, Yadus and
Madrakas.
TRANSLATION
There will then appear a king of the Mägadhas named Viçvasphürji, who will
be like another Puraïjaya. He will turn all the civilized classes into low-class,
uncivilized men in the same category as the Pulindas, Yadus and Madrakas.
TEXT 35
‘ajaAêA“aöBaUiyaï"A:
sTaApaiyaSyaita äu"maRita:
vaIyaRvaAna, ºa‡amauts$aAâ
paávatyaAM s$a vaE pauir"
@naugAËÿmaA‘ayaAgAM
gAuæaAM BaAeºyaita maeid"naIma,
prajäç cäbrahma-bhüyiñöhäù
sthäpayiñyati durmatiù
véryavän kñatram utsädya
padmavatyäà sa vai puri
anu-gaìgam ä-prayägaà
guptäà bhokñyati mediném
SYNONYMS
prajäù—the citizens; ca—and; abrahma—unbrahminical;
bhüyiñöhäù—predominantly; sthäpayiñyati—he will make; durmatiù—the
unintelligent (Viçvasphürji); vérya-van—powerful; kñatram—the kñatriya class;
utsädya—destroying; padmavatyäm—in Padmavaté; saù—he; vai—indeed;
puri—in the city; anu-gaìgam—from Gaìgädvärä (Hardwar); ä-prayägam—to
Prayäga; guptäm—protected; bhokñyati—he will rule; mediném—the earth.
TRANSLATION
Foolish King Viçvasphürji will maintain all the citizens in ungodliness and
will use his power to completely disrupt the kñatriya order. From his capital of
Padmavaté he will rule that part of the earth extending from the source of the
Gaìgä to Prayäga.
TEXT 36
s$aAEr"Aí)"AvantyaABaIr"Aê
zAUr"A @bauRd"maAlavaA:
˜aAtyaA iã"jaA BaivaSyainta
zAU#‰"‘aAyaA janaAiDapaA:
sauräñörävanty-äbhéräç ca
çürä arbuda-mälaväù
vrätyä dvijä bhaviñyanti
çüdra-präyä janädhipäù
SYNONYMS
çauräñöra—residing in Çauräñöra; avanté—in Avanté; äbhéräù—and in Äbhéra;
ca—and; çüräù—residing in the Çüra province; arbuda-mälaväù—residing in
Arbuda and Mälava; vrätyäù—deviated from all purificatory rituals;
dvijäù—the brähmaëas; bhaviñyanti—will become; çüdra-präyäù—no better
than çüdras; jana-adhipäù—the kings.
TRANSLATION
At that time the brähmaëas of such provinces as Çauräñöra, Avanté, Äbhéra,
Çüra, Arbuda and Mälava will forget all their regulative principles, and the
members of the royal order in these places will become no better than çüdras.
TEXT 37
is$anDaAestaqM% can‰"BaAgAAM
k(AEntaI%M k(AzmaIr"maNx"lama,
BaAeºyainta zAU#‰"A ˜aAtyaAâA
mlaecC$AêA“aövacaRs$a:
sindhos taöaà candrabhägäà
kauntéà käçméra-maëòalam
bhokñyanti çüdrä vrätyädyä
mlecchäç cäbrahma-varcasaù
SYNONYMS
sindhoù—of the River Sindhu; taöam—the land on the shore;
candrabhägäm—Candrabhägä; kauntém—Kaunté; käçméra-maëòalam—the
region of Käçméra; bhokñyanti—will rule; çüdräù—çüdras;
vrätya-ädyäù—brähmaëas who have fallen from the brahminical standard, and
other disqualified men; mlecchäù—meat-eaters; ca—and;
abrahma-varcasaù—lacking spiritual potency.
TRANSLATION
The land along the Sindhu River, as well as the districts of Candrabhägä,
Kaunté and Käçméra, will be ruled by çüdras, fallen brähmaëas and meat-eaters.
Having given up the path of Vedic civilization, they will have lost all spiritual
strength.
TEXT 38
taulyak(AlaA wmae r"Ajana,
mlaecC$‘aAyaAê BaUBa{ta:
Wtae'DamaARna{tapar"A:
P(lgAud"AstaI˜amanyava:
tulya-kälä ime räjan
mleccha-präyäç ca bhü-bhåtaù
ete 'dharmänåta-paräù
phalgu-däs tévra-manyavaù
SYNONYMS
tulya-käläù—ruling at the same time; ime—these; räjan—O King Parékñit;
mleccha-präyäù—mostly outcastes; ca—and; bhü-bhåtaù—kings; ete—these;
adharma—to irreligion; anåta—and untruthfulness; paräù—dedicated;
phalgu-däù—giving little benefit to their subjects; tévra—fierce;
manyavaù—their anger.
TRANSLATION
There will be many such uncivilized kings ruling at the same time, O King
Parékñit, and they will all be uncharitable, possessed of fierce tempers, and great
devotees of irreligion and falsity.
TEXTS 39-40
ñIbaAlagAAeiã"ja£aAê
par"d"Ar"DanaAä{"taA:
oid"taAstaimata‘aAyaA
@lpas$aÔvaAlpak(AyauSa:
@s$aMs$k{(taA: i‚(yaAh"InaA
r"jas$aA tamas$aAva{taA:
‘ajaAstae BaºaiyaSyainta
mlaecC$A r"Ajanyaè&ipaNA:
stré-bäla-go-dvija-ghnäç ca
para-dära-dhanädåtäù
uditästa-mita-präyä
alpa-sattvälpakäyuñaù
asaàskåtäù kriyä-hénä
rajasä tamasävåtäù
prajäs te bhakñayiñyanti
mlecchä räjanya-rüpiëaù
SYNONYMS
stré—of women; bäla—children; go—cows; dvija—and brähmaëas; ghnäù—the
murderers; ca—and; para—of other men; dära—the wives; dhana—and
money; ädåtäù—showing interest in; udita-asta-mita—switching their moods
from elated to depressed and then to moderate; präyäù—for the most part;
alpa-sattva—having little strength; alpaka-äyuñaù—and short life spans;
asaàskåtäù—not purified by Vedic rituals; kriyä-hénäù—devoid of regulative
principles; rajasä—by the mode of passion; tamasä—and by the mode of
ignorance; ävåtäù—covered over; prajäù—the citizens; te—they;
bhakñayiñyanti—will virtually devour; mlecchäù—outcastes;
räjanya-rüpiëaù—appearing as kings.
TRANSLATION
These barbarians in the guise of kings will devour the citizenry, murdering
innocent women, children, cows and brähmaëas and coveting the wives and
property of other men. They will be erratic in their moods, have little strength
of character and be very short-lived. Indeed, not purified by any Vedic rituals
and lacking in the practice of regulative principles, they will be completely
covered by the modes of passion and ignorance.
PURPORT
These verses give a concise, accurate description of the fallen leaders of this
age.
TEXT 41
taªaATaAstae janapad"As$a,
tacC$IlaAcaAr"vaAid"na:
@nyaAenyataAe r"AjaiBaê
ºayaM yaAsyainta paIix"taA:
tan-näthäs te janapadäs
tac-chéläcära-vädinaù
anyonyato räjabhiç ca
kñayaà yäsyanti péòitäù
SYNONYMS
tat-näthäù—the subjects having these kings as rulers; te—they;
jana-padäù—the residents of the cities; tat—of these kings; çéla—(imitating)
the character; äcära—behavior; vädinaù—and speech; anyonyataù—one
another; räjabhiù—by the kings; ca—and; kñayam yäsyanti—they will become
ruined; péòitäù—tormented.
TRANSLATION
The citizens governed by these low-class kings will imitate the character,
behavior and speech of their rulers. Harassed by their leaders and by each
other, they will all suffer ruination.
PURPORT
At the end of the Ninth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, it is stated that
Ripuïjaya, or Puraïjaya, the first king mentioned in this chapter, ended his
rule about one thousand years after the time of Lord Kåñëa. Since Lord Kåñëa
appeared approximately five thousand years ago, Puraïjaya must have
appeared about four thousand years ago. That would mean that Viçvasphürji,
the last king mentioned, would have appeared approximately in the twelfth
century of the Christian era.
Modern Western scholars have made the false accusation that Indian
religious literature has no sense of chronological history. But the elaborate
historical chronology described in this chapter certainly refutes that naive
assessment.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Twelfth Canto, First Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Degraded Dynasties of Kali-yuga."
2. The Symptoms of Kali-yuga
This chapter relates that, when the bad qualities of the age of Kali will
increase to an intolerable level, the Supreme Personality of Godhead will
descend as Kalki to destroy those who are fixed in irreligion. After that, a new
Satya-yuga will begin.
As the age of Kali progresses, all good qualities of men diminish and all
impure qualities increase. Atheistic systems of so-called religion become
predominant, replacing the codes of Vedic law. The kings become just like
highway bandits, the people in general become dedicated to low occupations,
and all the social classes become just like çüdras. All cows become like goats, all
spiritual hermitages become like materialistic homes, and family ties extend no
further than the immediate relationship of marriage.
When the age of Kali has almost ended, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead will incarnate. He will appear in the village Çambhala, in the home
of the exalted brähmaëa Viñëuyaçä, and will take the name Kalki. He will
mount His horse Devadatta and, taking His sword in hand, will roam about the
earth killing millions of bandits in the guise of kings. Then the signs of the
next Satya-yuga will begin to appear. When the moon, sun and the planet
Båhaspati enter simultaneously into one constellation and conjoin in the lunar
mansion Puñyä, Satya-yuga will begin. In the order of Satya, Tretä, Dväpara
and Kali, the cycle of four ages rotates in the society of living entities in this
universe.
The chapter ends with a brief description of the future dynasties of the sun
and moon coming from Vaivasvata Manu in the next Satya-yuga. Even now
two saintly kñatriyas are living who at the end of this Kali-yuga will reinitiate
the pious dynasties of the sun-god, Vivasvän, and the moon-god, Candra. One
of these kings is Deväpi, a brother of Mahäräja Çantanu, and the other is
Maru, a descendant of Ikñväku. They are biding their time incognito in a
village named Kaläpa.
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
tataêAnauid"naM DamaR:
s$atyaM zAAEcaM ºamaA d"yaA
k(Alaena bailanaA r"Ajana,
naÉÿYatyaAyaubaRlaM sma{ita:
çré-çuka uväca
tataç cänu-dinaà dharmaù
satyaà çaucaà kñamä dayä
kälena balinä räjan
naìkñyaty äyur balaà småtiù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; tataù—then; ca—and;
anudinam—day after day; dharmaù—religion; satyam—truth;
çaucam—cleanliness; kñamä—tolerance; dayä—mercy; kälena—by the force
of time; balinä—strong; räjan—O King Parékñit; naìkñyati—will become
ruined; äyuù—duration of life; balam—strength; småtiù—memory.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Then, O King, religion, truthfulness, cleanliness,
tolerance, mercy, duration of life, physical strength and memory will all
diminish day by day because of the powerful influence of the age of Kali.
PURPORT
During the present age, Kali-yuga, practically all desirable qualities will
gradually diminish, as described in this verse. For example, dharma, which
indicates a respect for higher authority that leads one to obey religious
principles, will diminish.
In the Western world, theologians have been unable to scientifically
present the laws of God or, indeed, God Himself, and thus in Western
intellectual history a rigid dichotomy has arisen between theology and science.
In an attempt to resolve this conflict, some theologians have agreed to modify
their doctrines so that they conform not only to proven scientific facts but
even to pseudoscientific speculations and hypotheses, which, though
unproven, are hypocritically included within the realm of "science." On the
other hand, some fanatical theologians disregard the scientific method
altogether and insist on the veracity of their antiquated, sectarian dogmas.
Thus bereft of systematic Vedic theology, material science has moved into
the destructive realm of gross materialism, while speculative Western
philosophy has drifted into the superficiality of relativistic ethics and
inconclusive linguistic analysis. With so many of the best Western minds
dedicated to materialistic analysis, naturally much of Western religious life,
separated from the intellectual mainstream, is dominated by irrational
fanaticism and unauthorized mystic and mystery cults. People have become so
ignorant of the science of God that they often lump the Kåñëa consciousness
movement in with this odd assortment of fanciful attempts at theology and
religion. Thus dharma, or true religion, which is strict and conscious obedience
to God's law, is diminishing.
Satyam, truthfulness, is also diminishing, simply because people do not
know what the truth is. Without knowing the Absolute Truth, one cannot
clearly understand the real significance or purpose of life merely by amassing
huge quantities of relative or hypothetical truths.
Kñamä, tolerance or forgiveness, is diminishing as well, because there is no
practical method by which people can purify themselves and thus become free
of envy. Unless one is purified by chanting the holy names of the Lord in an
authorized program of spiritual improvement, the mind will be overwhelmed
by anger, envy and all sorts of small-mindedness. Thus dayä, mercy, is also
decreasing. All living beings are eternally connected by their common
participation in the divine existence of God. When this existential oneness is
obscured through atheism and agnosticism, people are not inclined to be
merciful to one another; they cannot recognize their self-interest in promoting
the welfare of other living beings. In fact, people are no longer even merciful
to themselves: they systematically destroy themselves through liquor, drugs,
tobacco, meat-eating, sexual promiscuity and whatever other cheap
gratificatory processes are available to them.
Because of all these self-destructive practices and the powerful influence of
time, the average life span (äyur) is decreasing. Modern scientists, seeking to
gain credibility among the mass of people, often publish statistics supposedly
showing that science has increased the average duration of life. But these
statistics do not take into account the number of people killed through the
cruel practice of abortion. When we figure aborted children into the life
expectancy of the total population, we find that the average duration of life
has not at all increased in the age of Kali but is rather decreasing drastically.
Balam, bodily strength, is also decreasing. The Vedic literature states that
five thousand years ago, in the previous age, human beings—and even animals
and plants—were larger and stronger. With the progress of the age of Kali,
physical stature and strength will gradually diminish.
Certainly småti, memory, is weakening. In former ages human beings
possessed superior memory, and they also did not encumber themselves with a
terrible bureaucratic and technical society, as we have done. Thus essential
information and abiding wisdom were preserved without recourse to writing.
Of course, in the age of Kali things are dramatically different.
TEXT 2
ivaÔamaeva k(laAE na|NAAM
janmaAcaAr"gAuNAAed"ya:
DamaRnyaAyavyavasTaAyaAM
k(Ar"NAM balamaeva ih"
vittam eva kalau nèëäà
janmäcära-guëodayaù
dharma-nyäya-vyavasthäyäà
käraëaà balam eva hi
SYNONYMS
vittam—wealth; eva—alone; kalau—in the age of Kali; nèëäm—among men;
janma—of good birth; äcära—good behavior; guëa—and good qualities;
udayaù—the cause of manifestation; dharma—of religious duty; nyäya—and
reason; vyavasthäyäm—in the establishment; käraëam—the cause;
balam—strength; eva—only; hi—indeed.
TRANSLATION
In Kali-yuga, wealth alone will be considered the sign of a man's good birth,
proper behavior and fine qualities. And law and justice will be applied only on
the basis of one's power.
PURPORT
In the age of Kali, a man is considered high class, middle class or low class
merely according to his financial status, regardless of his knowledge, culture
and behavior. In this age there are many great industrial and commercial cities
with luxurious neighborhoods reserved for the wealthy. On beautiful
tree-lined roads, within apparently aristocratic homes, it is not unusual to find
many perverted, dishonest and sinful activities taking place. According to
Vedic criteria, a man is considered high class if his behavior is enlightened,
and his behavior is considered enlightened if his activities are dedicated to
promoting the happiness of all creatures. Every living being is originally happy,
because in all living bodies there is an eternal spiritual spark that partakes of
the divine conscious nature of God. When our original spiritual awareness is
revived, we become naturally blissful and satisfied in knowledge and peace. An
enlightened, or educated, man should endeavor to revive his own spiritual
understanding, and he should help others experience the same sublime
consciousness.
The great Western philosopher Socrates stated that if a man is enlightened
he will automatically act virtuously, and Çréla Prabhupäda confirmed this fact.
But in the Kali-yuga this obvious truth is disregarded, and the search for
knowledge and virtue has been replaced by a vicious, animalistic competition
for money. Those who prevail become the "top dogs" of modern society, and
their consumer power grants them a reputation as most respectable,
aristocratic and well educated.
This verse also states that in the age of Kali brute strength (balam eva) will
determine law and "justice." We should keep in mind that in the progressive,
Vedic culture, there was no artificial dichotomy between the spiritual and the
public realms. All civilized people took it for granted that God is everywhere
and that His laws are binding upon all creatures. The Sanskrit word dharma,
therefore, indicates one's social, or public, obligation as well as one's religious
duty. Thus responsibly caring for one's family is dharma, and engaging in the
loving service of God is also dharma. This verse indicates, however, that in the
age of Kali the principle of "might makes right" will hold sway.
In the first chapter of this canto we observed how this principle infiltrated
India's past. Similarly, as the Western world achieved political, economic and
technological hegemony over Asian lands, bogus propaganda was disseminated
to the effect that Indian, and in general all non-Western, religion, theology
and philosophy are somehow primitive and unscientific—mere mythology and
superstition. Fortunately this arrogant, irrational view is now dissipating, and
people all over the world are beginning to appreciate the staggering wealth of
spiritual philosophy and science available in the Sanskrit literature of India. In
other words, many intelligent people no longer consider traditional Western
religion or empirical science, which has virtually superseded religion as the
official Western dogma, necessarily authoritative merely because the West has
politically and economically subdued other geographic and ethnic
configurations of humanity. Thus there is now hope that spiritual issues can be
contested and resolved on a philosophical level and not merely by a crude test
of arms.
Next this verse points out that the rule of law will be applied unequally to
the powerful and the powerless. Already in many nations justice is available
only to those who can pay and fight for it. In a civilized state, every man,
woman and child must have equal and rapid access to a fair system of laws. In
modern times we sometimes refer to this as human rights. Certainly human
rights are one of the more obvious casualties of the age of Kali.
TEXT 3
d"Ampatyae'iBaç&icaheR"taur,"
maAyaEva vyaAvah"Air"ke(
ñItvae pauMstvae ca ih" r"itar,"
iva‘atvae s$aU‡amaeva ih"
dämpatye 'bhirucir hetur
mäyaiva vyävahärike
strétve puàstve ca hi ratir
vipratve sütram eva hi
SYNONYMS
däm-patye—in the relationship of husband and wife; abhiruciù—superficial
attraction; hetuù—the reason; mäyä—deceit; eva—indeed; vyävahärike—in
business; strétve—in being a woman; puàstve—in being a man; ca—and;
hi—indeed; ratiù—sex; vipratve—in being a brähmaëa; sütram—the sacred
thread; eva—only; hi—indeed.
TRANSLATION
Men and women will live together merely because of superficial attraction,
and success in business will depend on deceit. Womanliness and manliness will
be judged according to one's expertise in sex, and a man will be known as a
brähmaëa just by his wearing a thread.
PURPORT
Just as human life as a whole has a great and serious purpose—namely
spiritual liberation—fundamental human institutions such as marriage and
child-rearing should also be dedicated to that great objective. Unfortunately,
in the present age the satisfaction of the sex impulse has become the
overriding, if not the exclusive, reason for marriage.
The sexual impulse, which induces the male and female of almost every
species to combine physically, and in higher species also emotionally, is
ultimately not a natural urge, because it is based on the unnatural
identification of the self with the body. Life itself is a spiritual phenomenon. It
is the soul that lives and gives apparent life to the biological machine called
the body. Consciousness is the soul's manifest energy, and thus consciousness,
awareness itself, is originally an entirely spiritual event. When life, or
consciousness, is confined within a biological machine and falsely mistakes
itself to be that machine, material existence occurs and sex desire arises.
God intends human life to be an opportunity for us to rectify this illusory
mode of existence and return to the vast satisfaction of pure, godly existence.
But because our identification with the material body is a long historical affair,
it is difficult for most people to immediately break free from the demands of
the materially molded mind. Therefore the Vedic scriptures prescribe sacred
marriage, in which a so-called man and a so-called woman may combine in a
regulated, spiritual marriage sheltered by overarching religious injunctions. In
this way the candidate for self-realization who has selected family life can
derive adequate satisfaction for his senses and simultaneously please the Lord
within his heart by obeying religious injunctions. The Lord then purifies him
of material desire.
In Kali-yuga this deep understanding has been almost lost, and, as stated in
this verse, men and women combine like animals, solely on the basis of mutual
attraction to bodies made of flesh, bone, membrane, blood and so on. In other
words, in our modern, godless society the weak, superficial intelligence of
humanity rarely penetrates beyond the gross physical covering of the eternal
soul, and thus family life has in most cases lost its highest purpose and value.
A corollary point established in this verse is that in the age of Kali a woman
is considered "a good woman" if she is sexually attractive and, indeed, sexually
efficient. Similarly, a sexually attractive man is "a good man." The best
example of this superficiality is the incredible attention twentieth-century
people give to materialistic movie stars, music stars and other prominent
figures in the entertainment industry. In fact, pursuing sexual experiences
with various types of bodies is similar to drinking old wine from new bottles.
But few people in the Kali-yuga can understand this.
Finally, this verse states that in the age of Kali a man will become known as
a priest, or brähmaëa, merely by wearing ceremonial dress. In India, brähmaëas
wear a sacred thread, and in other parts of world members of the priestly class
have other ornaments and symbols. But in the age of Kali the symbols alone
will suffice to establish a person as a religious leader, despite his ignorance of
God.
TEXT 4
ilaËÿmaevaA™amaKyaAtaAva,
@nyaAenyaApaiÔak(Ar"NAma,
@va{ÔyaA nyaAyad"AEbaRlyaM
paAiNx"tyae caApalaM vaca:
liìgam eväçrama-khyätäv
anyonyäpatti-käraëam
avåttyä nyäya-daurbalyaà
päëòitye cäpalaà vacaù
SYNONYMS
liìgam—the external symbol; eva—merely; äçrama-khyätau—in knowing a
person's spiritual order; anyonya—mutual; äpatti—of exchange; käraëam—the
cause; avåttyä—by lack of livelihood; nyäya—in credibility; daurbalyam—the
weakness; päëòitye—in scholarship; cäpalam—tricky; vacaù—words.
TRANSLATION
A person's spiritual position will be ascertained merely according to external
symbols, and on that same basis people will change from one spiritual order to
the next. A person's propriety will be seriously questioned if he does not earn a
good living. And one who is very clever at juggling words will be considered a
learned scholar.
PURPORT
The previous verse stated that in the age of Kali the priestly class will be
recognized by external symbols alone, and this verse extends the same
principle to the other orders of society, namely the political or military class,
the business or productive class, and finally the laborer or artisan class.
Modern sociologists have demonstrated that in those societies chiefly
governed by the Protestant ethic, poverty is considered a sign of indolence,
dirtiness, stupidity, immorality and worthlessness. In a God-conscious society,
however, many persons voluntarily decide to dedicate their lives not to
material acquisition but rather to the pursuit of knowledge and spirituality.
Thus a preference for the simple and the austere may indicate intelligence,
self-control and sensitivity to the higher purpose of life. Of course, in itself
poverty does not establish these virtues, but it may sometimes be the result of
them. In the Kali-yuga, however, this possibility is often forgotten.
Intellectuality is another casualty of the bewildering age of Kali. Modern
so-called philosophers and scientists have created a technical, esoteric
terminology for each branch of learning, and when they give lectures people
consider them learned simply because of their ability to speak that which no
one else can understand. In Western culture, the Greek Sophists were among
the first to systematically argue for rhetoric and "efficiency" above wisdom and
purity, and sophistry certainly flourishes in the twentieth century. Modern
universities have very little wisdom, though they do possess a virtual infinity of
technical data. Although many modern thinkers are fundamentally ignorant
of the higher, spiritual reality, they are, so to speak, "good talkers," and most
people simply don't notice their ignorance.
TEXT 5
@naAX#YataEvaAs$aADautvae
s$aADautvae d"mBa Wva tau
svaIk(Ar" Wva caAeã"Ahe"
µaAnamaeva ‘as$aADanama,
anäòhyataiväsädhutve
sädhutve dambha eva tu
svékära eva codvähe
snänam eva prasädhanam
SYNONYMS
anäòhyatä—poverty; eva—simply; asädhutve—in one's being unholy;
sädhutve—in virtue, or success; dambhaù—hypocrisy; eva—alone; tu—and;
své-käraù—verbal acceptance; eva—alone; ca—and; udvähe—in marriage;
snänam—bathing with water; eva—alone; prasädhanam—cleaning and
decorating of the body.
TRANSLATION
A person will be judged unholy if he does not have money, and hypocrisy
will be accepted as virtue. Marriage will be arranged simply by verbal
agreement, and a person will think he is fit to appear in public if he has merely
taken a bath.
PURPORT
The word dambha indicates a self-righteous hypocrite—someone not so
much concerned with being saintly as with appearing saintly. In the age of Kali
there is a rather large number of self-righteous, hypocritical religious fanatics
claiming to have the only way, the only truth and the only light. In many
Muslim countries this mentality has resulted in brutal repression of religious
freedom and thus destroyed the opportunity for enlightened spiritual dialectic.
Fortunately, in much of the Western world there is a system of free religious
expression. Even in the West, however, self-righteous hypocrites consider
sincere and saintly followers of other disciplines to be heathens and devils.
Western religious fanatics are usually addicted to many bad habits, such as
smoking, drinking, sex, gambling and animal slaughter. Although the followers
of the Kåñëa consciousness movement strictly avoid illicit sex, intoxication,
gambling and animal-killing, and although they dedicate their lives to the
constant glorification of God, self-righteous hypocrites claim that such strict
austerity and devotion to God are "tricks of the devil." Thus the sinful are
promoted as religious, and the saintly are decried as demonic. This pathetic
incapacity to grasp the most rudimentary criteria of spirituality is a prominent
symptom of Kali-yuga.
In this age, the institution of marriage will degenerate. Indeed, already a
marriage certificate is sometimes cynically rejected as "a mere piece of paper."
Forgetting the spiritual purpose of marriage and misunderstanding sex to be
the goal of family life, lusty men and women directly engage in sexual affairs
without the troublesome formalities and responsibilities of a legal relationship.
Such foolish people argue that "sex is natural." But if sex is natural, pregnancy
and childbirth are equally natural. And for the child it is certainly natural to
be raised by a loving father and mother and in fact to have the same father
and mother throughout his life. Psychological studies confirm that a child
needs to be cared for by both his father and his mother, and thus it is obviously
natural for sex to be accompanied by a permanent marriage arrangement.
Hypocritical people justify unrestricted sex by saying "it is natural" but to avoid
the natural consequence of sex-pregnancy—they use contraceptives, which
certainly do not grow on trees. Indeed, contraceptives are not at all natural.
Thus hypocrisy and foolishness abound in the age of Kali.
The verse concludes by saying that people will neglect to ornament their
bodies properly in the present age. A human being should decorate his body
with various religious ornaments. Vaiñëavas mark their bodies with tilaka
blessed with the holy name of God. But in the age of Kali, religious and even
material formalities are thoughtlessly discarded.
TEXT 6
äU"re" vaAyaRyanaM taITa<
laAvaNyaM ke(zADaAr"NAma,
od"rM"Bar"taA svaATaR:
s$atyatvae DaAí"YaRmaeva ih"
d"AºyaM ku(q%]mbaBar"NAM
yazAAe'TaeR DamaRs$aevanama,
düre väry-ayanaà térthaà
lävaëyaà keça-dhäraëam
udaraà-bharatä svärthaù
satyatve dhärñöyam eva hi
däkñyaà kuöumba-bharaëaà
yaço 'rthe dharma-sevanam
SYNONYMS
düre—situated far away; väri—of water; ayanam—a reservoir; tértham—holy
place; lävaëyam—beauty; keça—hair; dhäraëam—carrying;
udaram-bharatä—filling the belly; sva-arthaù—the goal of life; satyatve—in
so-called truth; dhärñöyam—audacity; eva—simply; hi—indeed;
däkñyam—expertise; kuöumba-bharaëam—maintaining a family; yaçaù—fame;
arthe—for the sake of; dharma-sevanam—observance of religious principles.
TRANSLATION
A sacred place will be taken to consist of no more than a reservoir of water
located at a distance, and beauty will be thought to depend on one's hairstyle.
Filling the belly will become the goal of life, and one who is audacious will be
accepted as truthful. He who can maintain a family will be regarded as an
expert man, and the principles of religion will be observed only for the sake of
reputation.
PURPORT
In India there are many sacred places through which holy rivers flow.
Foolish persons eagerly seek redemption from their sins by bathing in these
rivers but do not take instruction from learned devotees of the Lord who reside
in such places. One should go to a holy place seeking spiritual enlightenment
and not just for ritualistic bathing.
In this age, people tirelessly arrange their hair in different styles, trying to
enhance their facial beauty and sexuality. They do not know that actual
beauty comes from within the heart, from the soul, and that only a person who
is pure is truly attractive. As the difficulties of this age increase, filling one's
belly will be the mark of success, and one who can maintain his own family
will be considered brilliant in economic affairs. Religion will be practiced, if at
all, only for the sake of reputation and without any essential understanding of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 7
WvaM ‘ajaAiBaäuR"í"AiBar,"
@Ak(LNAeR iºaitamaNx"lae
“aöivaq%.ºa‡azAU#‰"ANAAM
yaAe balaI BaivataA na{pa:
evaà prajäbhir duñöäbhir
äkérëe kñiti-maëòale
brahma-viö-kñatra-çüdräëäà
yo balé bhavitä nåpaù
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; prajäbhiù—with populace; duñöäbhiù—corrupted;
äkérëe—being crowded; kñiti-maëòale—the earth globe; brahma—among the
brähmaëas; viö—vaiçyas; kñatra—kñatriyas; çüdräëäm—and çüdras;
yaù—whoever; balé—the strongest; bhavitä—he will become; nåpaù—the king.
TRANSLATION
As the earth thus becomes crowded with a corrupt population, whoever
among any of the social classes shows himself to be the strongest will gain
political power.
TEXT 8
‘ajaA ih" laubDaE r"AjanyaEr,"
inaGa{RNAEdR"syauDamaRiBa:
@AicC$ªad"Ar"‰"ivaNAA
yaAsyainta igAir"k(Ananama,
prajä hi lubdhai räjanyair
nirghåëair dasyu-dharmabhiù
äcchinna-dära-draviëä
yäsyanti giri-känanam
SYNONYMS
prajäù—the citizens; hi—indeed; lubdhaiù—avaricious; räjanyaiù—by the
royal order; nirghåëaiù—merciless; dasyu—of ordinary thieves;
dharmabhiù—acting according to the nature; äcchinna—taken away;
dära—their wives; draviëäù—and property; yäsyanti—they will go; giri—to
the mountains; känanam—and forests.
TRANSLATION
Losing their wives and properties to such avaricious and merciless rulers,
who will behave no better than ordinary thieves, the citizens will flee to the
mountains and forests.
TEXT 9
zAAk(maUlaAimaSaºaAE‰"-
P(lapauSpaAií"BaAejanaA:
@naAva{í"YaA ivanaÉÿYainta
äu"iBaRºak(r"paIix"taA:
çäka-mülämiña-kñaudraphala-
puñpäñöi-bhojanäù
anävåñöyä vinaìkñyanti
durbhikña-kara-péòitäù
SYNONYMS
çäka—leaves; müla—roots; ämiña—meat; kñaudra—wild honey; phala—fruits;
puñpa—flowers; añöi—and seeds; bhojanäù—eating; anävåñöyä—because of
drought; vinaìkñyanti—they will become ruined; durbhikña—by famine;
kara—and taxation; péòitäù—tormented.
TRANSLATION
Harassed by famine and excessive taxes, people will resort to eating leaves,
roots, flesh, wild honey, fruits, flowers and seeds. Struck by drought, they will
become completely ruined.
PURPORT
Çrémad-Bhägavatam authoritatively describes the future of our planet. Just
as a leaf disconnected from a plant or tree dries up, withers and disintegrates,
when human society is disconnected from the Supreme Lord it withers up and
disintegrates in violence and chaos. Despite our computers and rockets, if the
Supreme Lord does not send rain we shall all starve.
TEXT 10
zAItavaAtaAtapa‘aAva{x".-
ih"maEr"nyaAenyata: ‘ajaA:
ºauÔa{Ñ"YaAM vyaAiDaiBaêEva
s$antapsyantae ca icantayaA
çéta-vätätapa-prävåòhimair
anyonyataù prajäù
kñut-tåòbhyäà vyädhibhiç caiva
santapsyante ca cintayä
SYNONYMS
çéta—by cold; väta—wind; ätapa—the heat of the sun; prävåt—torrential rain;
himaiù—and snow; anyonyataù—by quarrel; prajäù—the citizens; kñut—by
hunger; tåòbhyäm—and thirst; vyädhibhiù—by diseases; ca—also; eva—indeed;
santapsyante—they will suffer great distress; ca—and; cintayä—by anxiety.
TRANSLATION
The citizens will suffer greatly from cold, wind, heat, rain and snow. They
will be further tormented by quarrels, hunger, thirst, disease and severe
anxiety.
TEXT 11
i‡aMzAiãM"zAita vaSaARiNA
par"maAyau: k(laAE na{NAAma,
triàçad viàçati varñäëi
paramäyuù kalau nåëäm
SYNONYMS
triàçat—thirty; viàçati—plus twenty; varñäëi—years; parama-äyuù—the
maximum duration of life; kalau—in Kali-yuga; nåëäm—of men.
TRANSLATION
The maximum duration of life for human beings in Kali-yuga will become
fifty years.
TEXTS 12-16
ºaIyamaANAeSau de"he"Sau
de"ih"naAM k(ilad"AeSata:
vaNAAR™amavataAM DamaeR
naíe" vaed"paTae na{NAAma,
paASaNx"‘acaure" DamaeR
d"syau‘aAyaeSau r"Ajas$au
caAEyaARna{tava{TaAihM"s$aAnaAnaAva{
iÔaSau vaE na{Sau
zAU#‰"‘aAyaeSau vaNAeRSau
cC$AgA‘aAyaAs$au DaenauSau
gA{h"‘aAyaeSvaA™amaeSau
yaAEna‘aAyaeSau banDauSau
@NAu‘aAyaAsvaAeSaDaISau
zAmaI‘aAyaeSau sTaAµauSau
ivaâut‘aAyaeSau maeGaeSau
zAUnya‘aAyaeSau s$aás$au
wtTaM k(laAE gAta‘aAyae
janaeSau Kar"DaimaRSau
DamaR‡aANAAya s$aÔvaena
BagAvaAnavatair"Syaita
kñéyamäëeñu deheñu
dehinäà kali-doñataù
varëäçramavatäà dharme
nañöe veda-pathe nåëäm
päñaëòa-pracure dharme
dasyu-präyeñu räjasu
cauryänåta-våthä-hiàsänänä-
våttiñu vai nåñu
çüdra-präyeñu varëeñu
cchäga-präyäsu dhenuñu
gåha-präyeñv äçrameñu
yauna-präyeñu bandhuñu
aëu-präyäsv oñadhéñu
çamé-präyeñu sthäsnuñu
vidyut-präyeñu megheñu
çünya-präyeñu sadmasu
itthaà kalau gata-präye
janeñu khara-dharmiñu
dharma-träëäya sattvena
bhagavän avatariñyati
SYNONYMS
kñéyamäëeñu—having become smaller; deheñu—the bodies; dehinäm—of all
living entities; kali-doñataù—by the contamination of the age of Kali;
varëa-äçrama-vatäm—of the members of varëäçrama society; dharme—when
their religious principles; nañöe—have been destroyed; veda-pathe—the path of
the Vedas; nåëäm—for all men; päñaëòa-pracure—mostly atheism;
dharme—religion; dasyu-präyeñu—mostly thieves; räjasu—the kings;
caurya—banditry; anåta—lying; våthä-hiàsä—useless slaughter;
nänä—various; våttiñu—their occupations; vai—indeed; nåñu—when men;
çüdra-präyeñu—mostly low-class çüdras; varëeñu—the so-called social orders;
chäga-präyäsu—no better than goats; dhenuñu—the cows; gåha-präyeñu—just
like materialistic homes; äçrameñu—the spiritual hermitages;
yauna-präyeñu—extending no further than marriage; bandhuñu—family ties;
aëu-präyäsu—mostly very small; oñadhéñu—plants and herbs;
çamé-präyeñu—just like çamé trees; sthäsnuñu—all the trees;
vidyut-präyeñu—always manifesting lightning; megheñu—the clouds;
çünya-präyeñu—devoid of religious life; sadmasu—the homes; ittham—thus;
kalau—when the age of Kali; gata-präye—is almost finished; janeñu—the
people; khara-dharmiñu—when they have assumed the characteristics of asses;
dharma-träëäya—for the deliverance of religion; sattvena—in the pure mode
of goodness; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
avatariñyati—will descend.
TRANSLATION
By the time the age of Kali ends, the bodies of all creatures will be greatly
reduced in size, and the religious principles of followers of varëäçrama will be
ruined. The path of the Vedas will be completely forgotten in human society,
and so-called religion will be mostly atheistic. The kings will mostly be thieves,
the occupations of men will be stealing, lying and needless violence, and all the
social classes will be reduced to the lowest level of çüdras. Cows will be like
goats, spiritual hermitages will be no different from mundane houses, and family
ties will extend no further than the immediate bonds of marriage. Most plants
and herbs will be tiny, and all trees will appear like dwarf çamé trees. Clouds
will be full of lightning, homes will be devoid of piety, and all human beings will
have become like asses. At that time, the Supreme Personality of Godhead will
appear on the earth. Acting with the power of pure spiritual goodness, He will
rescue eternal religion.
PURPORT
Significantly, these verses point out that most so-called religions in this age
will be atheistic (päsaëòa-pracure dharme). In confirmation of the
Bhägavatam's prediction, the United States Supreme Court has recently ruled
that to be considered a religion a system of belief need not recognize a supreme
being. Also, many atheistic, voidistic belief systems, often imported from the
Orient, have attracted the attention of modern atheistic scientists, who
expound on the similarities between Eastern and Western voidism in
fashionable, esoteric books.
These verses vividly describe many unsavory symptoms of the age of Kali.
Ultimately, at the end of this age, Lord Kåñëa will descend as Kalki and
remove the thoroughly demonic persons from the face of the earth.
TEXT 17
car"Acar"gAur"AeivaRSNAAer,"
wRìr"syaAiKalaAtmana:
DamaR‡aANAAya s$aADaUnaAM
janma k(maARpanauÔayae
caräcara-guror viñëor
éçvarasyäkhilätmanaù
dharma-träëäya sädhünäà
janma karmäpanuttaye
SYNONYMS
cara-acara—of all moving and nonmoving living beings; guroù—of the
spiritual master; viñëoù—the Supreme Lord, Viñëu; éçvarasya—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; akhila—of all; ätmanaù—of the Supreme Soul;
dharma-träëäya—for the protection of religion; sädhünäm—of saintly men;
janma—the birth; karma—of their fruitive activities; apanuttaye—for the
cessation.
TRANSLATION
Lord Viñëu—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the spiritual master of
all moving and nonmoving living beings, and the Supreme Soul of all—takes
birth to protect the principles of religion and to relieve His saintly devotees
from the reactions of material work.
TEXT 18
zAmBalaƒaAmamauKyasya
“aAöNAsya mah"Atmana:
Bavanae ivaSNAuyazAs$a:
k(ilk(: ‘aAäu"BaRivaSyaita
çambhala-gräma-mukhyasya
brähmaëasya mahätmanaù
bhavane viñëuyaçasaù
kalkiù prädurbhaviñyati
SYNONYMS
çambhala-gräma—in the village Çambhala; mukhyasya—of the chief citizen;
brähmaëasya—of the brähmaëa; mahä-ätmanaù—the great soul; bhavane—in
the home; viñëuyaçasaù—of Viñëuyaçä; kalkiù—Lord Kalki;
prädurbhaviñyati—will appear.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kalki will appear in the home of the most eminent brähmaëa of
Çambhala village, the great soul Viñëuyaçä.
TEXTS 19-20
@ìmaAzAugAmaAç&÷
de"vad"ÔaM jagAtpaita:
@is$anaAs$aADaud"manama,
@íE"ìyaRgAuNAAinvata:
ivacar"ªaAzAunaA ºaAENyaAM
h"yaenaA‘aitamaâuita:
na{pailaËÿcC$d"Ae d"syaUna,
k(Aeiq%zAAe inah"inaSyaita
açvam äçu-gam äruhya
devadattaà jagat-patiù
asinäsädhu-damanam
añöaiçvarya-guëänvitaù
vicarann äçunä kñauëyäà
hayenäpratima-dyutiù
nåpa-liìga-cchado dasyün
koöiço nihaniñyati
SYNONYMS
açvam—His horse; äçu-gam—swift-traveling; äruhya—mounting;
devadattam—named Devadatta; jagat-patiù—the Lord of the universe;
asinä—with His sword; asädhu-damanam—(the horse who) subdues the
unholy; añöa—with eight; aiçvarya—mystic opulences; guëa—and
transcendental qualities of the Personality of Godhead; anvitaù—endowed;
vicaran—traveling about; äçunä—swift; kñauëyäm—upon the earth;
hayena—by His horse; apratima—unrivaled; dyutiù—whose effulgence;
nåpa-liìga—with the dress of kings; chadaù—disguising themselves;
dasyün—thieves; koöiçaù—by the millions; nihaniñyati—He will slaughter.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kalki, the Lord of the universe, will mount His swift horse Devadatta
and, sword in hand, travel over the earth exhibiting His eight mystic opulences
and eight special qualities of Godhead. Displaying His unequaled effulgence and
riding with great speed, He will kill by the millions those thieves who have
dared dress as kings.
PURPORT
These verses describe the thrilling pastimes of Lord Kalki. Anyone would be
attracted by the sight of a powerful, beautiful man riding on a wonderful horse
at lightning speed, chastising and devastating cruel, demonic people with the
sword in His hand.
Of course, fanatical materialists may argue that this picture of Lord Kalki is
a mere anthropomorphic creation of the human mind—a mythological deity
created by people who need to believe in some superior being. But this
argument is not logical, nor does it prove anything. It is merely the opinion of
certain people. We need water, but that does not mean man creates water. We
also need food, oxygen and many other things that we do not create. Since our
general experience is that our needs correspond to available objects existing in
the external world, that we appear to need a Supreme Lord would tend to
indicate that in fact there is a Supreme Lord. In other words, nature endows us
with a sense of need for things that actually exist and that are in fact necessary
for our well-being. Similarly, we experience a need for God because we are in
fact part of God and cannot live without Him. At the end of Kali-yuga this
same God will appear as the mighty Kalki avatära and beat the pollution out of
the demons.
TEXT 21
@Ta taeSaAM BaivaSyainta
manaAMis$a ivazAd"Aina vaE
vaAs$aude"vaAËÿr"AgAAitapauNyagAnDaAinalas$
pa{zAAma,
paAEr"jaAnapad"AnaAM vaE
h"taeSvaiKalad"syauSau
atha teñäà bhaviñyanti
manäàsi viçadäni vai
väsudeväìga-rägätipuëya-
gandhänila-spåçäm
paura-jänapadänäà vai
hateñv akhila-dasyuñu
SYNONYMS
atha—then; teñäm—of them; bhaviñyanti—will become; manäàsi—the minds;
viçadäni—clear; vai—indeed; väsudeva—of Lord Väsudeva; aìga—of the body;
räga—from the cosmetic decorations; ati-puëya—most sacred;
gandha—having the fragrance; anila—by the wind; spåçäm—of those who
have been touched; paura—of the city-dwellers; jana-padänäm—and the
residents of the smaller towns and villages; vai—indeed; hateñu—when they
have been killed; akhila—all; dasyuñu—the rascal kings.
TRANSLATION
After all the impostor kings have been killed, the residents of the cities and
towns will feel the breezes carrying the most sacred fragrance of the sandalwood
paste and other decorations of Lord Väsudeva, and their minds will thereby
become transcendentally pure.
PURPORT
Nothing can surpass the sublime experience of being dramatically rescued
by a great hero who happens to be the Supreme Lord. The death of the demons
at the end of Kali-yuga is accompanied by fragrant spiritual breezes, and thus
the atmosphere becomes most enchanting.
TEXT 22
taeSaAM ‘ajaAivas$agARê
sTaivaï": s$amBaivaSyaita
vaAs$aude"vae BagAvaita
s$aÔvamaUtaAE= ô$id" isTatae
teñäà prajä-visargaç ca
sthaviñöhaù sambhaviñyati
väsudeve bhagavati
sattva-mürtau hådi sthite
SYNONYMS
teñäm—of them; prajä—of progeny; visargaù—the creation; ca—and;
sthaviñöhaù—abundant; sambhaviñyati—will be; väsudeve—Lord Väsudeva;
bhagavati—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sattva-mürtau—in His
transcendental form of pure goodness; hådi—in their hearts; sthite—when He
is situated.
TRANSLATION
When Lord Väsudeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, appears in their
hearts in His transcendental form of goodness, the remaining citizens will
abundantly repopulate the earth.
TEXT 23
yad"AvataINAAeR BagAvaAna,
k(ilk(DaRmaRpaitahR"ir":
k{(taM BaivaSyaita tad"A
‘ajaAs$aUitaê s$aAiÔvak(L
yadävatérëo bhagavän
kalkir dharma-patir hariù
kåtaà bhaviñyati tadä
prajä-sütiç ca sättviké
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; avatérëaù—incarnates; bhagavän—the Supreme Lord;
kalkiù—Kalki; dharma-patiù—the master of religion; hariù—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; kåtam—Satya-yuga; bhaviñyati—will begin;
tadä—then; prajä-sütiù—the creation of progeny; ca—and; sättviké—in the
mode of goodness.
TRANSLATION
When the Supreme Lord has appeared on earth as Kalki, the maintainer of
religion, Satya-yuga will begin, and human society will bring forth progeny in
the mode of goodness.
TEXT 24
yad"A can‰"ê s$aUyaRê
taTaA itaSyaba{h"s$pataI
Wk(r"AzAAE s$amaeSyainta
BaivaSyaita tad"A k{(tama,
yadä candraç ca süryaç ca
tathä tiñya-båhaspaté
eka-räçau sameñyanti
bhaviñyati tadä kåtam
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; candraù—the moon; ca—and; süryaù—the sun; ca—and;
tathä—also; tiñya—the asterism Tiñyä (more commonly known as Puñyä,
extending from 3° 20´ to 16° 40´ Cancer); båhaspaté—and the planet Jupiter;
eka-räçau—in the same constellation (Cancer); sameñyanti—will enter
simultaneously; bhaviñyati—will be; tadä—then; kåtam—Satya-yuga.
TRANSLATION
When the moon, the sun and Båhaspaté are together in the constellation
Karkaöa, and all three enter simultaneously into the lunar mansion Puñyä—at
that exact moment the age of Satya, or Kåta, will begin.
TEXT 25
yae'taItaA vataRmaAnaA yae
BaivaSyainta ca paAiTaRvaA:
tae ta oÚe"zAta: ‘aAel(A
vaMzAIyaA: s$aAemas$aUyaRyaAe:
ye 'tétä vartamänä ye
bhaviñyanti ca pärthiväù
te ta uddeçataù proktä
vaàçéyäù soma-süryayoù
SYNONYMS
ye—those who; atétäù—past; vartamänäù—present; ye—who;
bhaviñyanti—will be in the future; ca—and; pärthiväù—kings of the earth; te
te—all of them; uddeçataù—by brief mention; proktäù—described;
vaàçéyäù—the members of the dynasties; soma-süryayoù—of the sun-god and
the moon-god.
TRANSLATION
Thus I have described all the kings—past, present and future—who belong
to the dynasties of the sun and the moon.
TEXT 26
@Ar"Bya BavataAe janma
yaAvaªand"AiBaSaecanama,
Wtaã"SaRs$ah"›aM tau
zAtaM paÂad"zAAeÔar"ma,
ärabhya bhavato janma
yävan nandäbhiñecanam
etad varña-sahasraà tu
çataà païcadaçottaram
SYNONYMS
ärabhya—beginning from; bhavataù—of your good self (Parékñit); janma—the
birth; yävat—up until; nanda—of King Nanda, the son of Mahänandi;
abhiñecanam—the coronation; etat—this; varña—years; sahasram—one
thousand; tu—and; çatam—one hundred; païca-daça-uttaram—plus fifty.
TRANSLATION
From your birth up to the coronation of King Nanda, 1,150 years will pass.
PURPORT
Although Çukadeva Gosvämé previously described approximately fifteen
hundred years of royal dynasties, it is understood that some overlapping
occurred between kings. Therefore the present chronological calculation
should be taken as authoritative.
TEXTS 27-28
s$aæaSaI=NAAM tau yaAE paUvaAE=
ä{"zyaetae oid"taAE id"iva
tayaAestau maDyae naºa‡aM
ä{"zyatae yats$amaM inaizA
taenaEva [%SayaAe yaul(As$a,
itaï"ntyabd"zAtaM na{NAAma,
tae tvad"Iyae iã"jaA: k(Ala
@DaunaA caAi™ataA maGaA:
saptarñéëäà tu yau pürvau
dåçyete uditau divi
tayos tu madhye nakñatraà
dåçyate yat samaà niçi
tenaiva åñayo yuktäs
tiñöhanty abda-çataà nåëäm
te tvadéye dvijäù käla
adhunä cäçritä maghäù
SYNONYMS
sapta-åñéëäm—of the constellation of the seven sages (the constellation known
to Westerners as Ursa Major); tu—and; yau—which two stars; pürvau—first;
dåçyete—are seen; uditau—risen; divi—in the sky; tayoù—of the two (named
Pulaha and Kratu); tu—and; madhye—between; nakñatram—the lunar
mansion; dåçyate—is seen; yat—which; samam—on the same line of celestial
longitude, as their midpoint; niçi—in the night sky; tena—with that lunar
mansion; eva—indeed; åñayaù—the seven sages; yuktäù—are connected;
tiñöhanti—they remain; abda-çatam—one hundred years; nåëäm—of human
beings; te—these seven sages; tvadéye—in your; dvijäù—the elevated
brähmaëas; käle—in the time; adhunä—now; ca—and; äçritäù—are situated;
maghäù—in the asterism Maghä.
TRANSLATION
Of the seven stars forming the constellation of the seven sages, Pulaha and
Kratu are the first to rise in the night sky. If a line running north and south
were drawn through their midpoint, whichever of the lunar mansions this line
passes through is said to be the ruling asterism of the constellation for that time.
The Seven Sages will remain connected with that particular lunar mansion for
one hundred human years. Currently, during your lifetime, they are situated in
the nakñatra called Maghä.
TEXT 29
ivaSNAAeBaRgAvataAe BaAnau:
k{(SNAAKyaAe's$aAE id"vaM gAta:
tad"AivazAtk(ilalaAeRkM(
paApae ya‰"matae jana:
viñëor bhagavato bhänuù
kåñëäkhyo 'sau divaà gataù
tadäviçat kalir lokaà
päpe yad ramate janaù
SYNONYMS
viñëoù—of Viñëu; bhagavataù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
bhänuù—the sun; kåñëa-äkhyaù—known as Kåñëa; asau—He; divam—to the
spiritual sky; gataù—having returned; tadä—then; aviçat—entered; kaliù—the
age of Kali; lokam—this world; päpe—in sin; yat—in which age; ramate—take
pleasure; janaù—the people.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord, Viñëu, is brilliant like the sun and is known as Kåñëa.
When He returned to the spiritual sky, Kali entered this world, and people then
began to take pleasure in sinful activities.
TEXT 30
yaAvats$a paAd"paáAByaAM
s$pa{zAnaAstae r"maApaita:
taAvatk(ilavaE= pa{iTavaI%M
par"A‚(ntauM na caAzAk(ta,
yävat sa päda-padmäbhyäà
spåçan äste ramä-patiù
tävat kalir vai påthivéà
paräkrantuà na cäçakat
SYNONYMS
yävat—as long as; saù—He, Lord Çré Kåñëa; päda-padmäbhyäm—with His
lotus feet; spåçan—touching; äste—remained; ramä-patiù—the husband of the
goddess of fortune; tävat—for that long; kaliù—the age of Kali; vai—indeed;
påthivém—the earth; paräkrantum—to overcome; na—not; ca—and;
açakat—was able.
TRANSLATION
As long us Lord Çré Kåñëa, the husband of the goddess of fortune, touched
the earth with His lotus feet, Kali was powerless to subdue this planet.
PURPORT
Although even during the time of Lord Kåñëa's presence on earth Kali had
entered the earth to a slight extent through the impious activities of
Duryodhana and his allies, Lord Kåñëa consistently suppressed Kali's influence.
Kali could not flourish until Lord Kåñëa had left the earth.
TEXT 31
yad"A de"vaSaRya: s$aæa
maGaAs$au ivacar"inta ih"
tad"A ‘ava{Ôastau k(ilar,"
ã"Ad"zAAbd"zAtaAtmak(:
yadä devarñayaù sapta
maghäsu vicaranti hi
tadä pravåttas tu kalir
dvädaçäbda-çatätmakaù
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; deva-åñayaù sapta—the seven sages among the demigods;
maghäsu—in the lunar mansion Maghä; vicaranti—are traveling; hi—indeed;
tadä—then; pravåttaù—begins; tu—and; kaliù—the age of Kali;
dvädaça—twelve; abda-çata—centuries [These twelve hundred years of the
demigods equal 432,000 earth years]; ätmakaù—consisting of.
TRANSLATION
When the constellation of the seven sages is passing through the lunar
mansion Maghä, the age of Kali begins. It comprises twelve hundred years of
the demigods.
TEXT 32
yad"A maGaAByaAe yaAsyainta
paUvaARSaAX#AM mah"SaRya:
tad"A nand"At‘aBa{tyaeSa
k(ilava{RiÜM" gAimaSyaita
yadä maghäbhyo yäsyanti
pürväñäòhäà maharñayaù
tadä nandät prabhåty eña
kalir våddhià gamiñyati
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; maghäbhyaù—from Maghä; yäsyanti—they will go;
pürva-äñäòhäm—to the next lunar mansion, Pürväñäòhä; mahä-åñayaù—the
seven great sages; tadä—then; nandät—beginning from Nanda; prabhåti—and
his descendants; eñaù—this; kaliù—age of Kali; våddhim—maturity;
gamiñyati—will attain.
TRANSLATION
When the great sages of the Saptarñi constellation pass from Maghä to
Pürväsäòhä, Kali will have his full strength, beginning from King Nanda and
his dynasty.
TEXT 33
yaismana, k{(SNAAe id"vaM yaAtas$a,
taismaªaeva tad"Ah"ina
‘aitapaªaM k(ilayaugAma,
wita ‘aAò": paur"Aivad":
yasmin kåñëo divaà yätas
tasminn eva tadähani
pratipannaà kali-yugam
iti prähuù purä-vidaù
SYNONYMS
yasmin—on which; kåñëaù—Lord Çré Kåñëa; divam—to the spiritual world;
yätaù—gone; tasmin—on that; eva—same; tadä—then; ahani—day;
pratipannam—obtained; kali-yugam—the age of Kali; iti—thus; prähuù—they
say; purä—of the past; vidaù—the experts.
TRANSLATION
Those who scientifically understand the past declare that on the very day
that Lord Çré Kåñëa departed for the spiritual world, the influence of the age of
Kali began.
PURPORT
Although technically Kali-yuga was to begin during the time of Lord
Kåñëa's presence on earth, this fallen age had to wait meekly for the departure
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 34
id"vyaAbd"AnaAM s$ah"›aAntae
catauTaeR tau pauna: k{(tama,
BaivaSyaita tad"A na|NAAM
mana @Atma‘ak(AzAk(ma,
divyäbdänäà sahasränte
caturthe tu punaù kåtam
bhaviñyati tadä nèëäà
mana ätma-prakäçakam
SYNONYMS
divya—of the demigods; abdänäm—years; sahasra—of one thousand; ante—at
the end; caturthe—in the fourth age, Kali; tu—and; punaù—again; kåtam—the
Satya-yuga; bhaviñyati—will be; tadä—then; nèëäm—of men; manaù—the
minds; ätma-prakäçakam—self-luminous.
TRANSLATION
After the one thousand celestial years of Kali-yuga, the Satya-yuga will
manifest again. At that time the minds of all men will become self-effulgent.
TEXT 35
wtyaeSa maAnavaAe vaMzAAe
yaTaA s$aÊÿYaAyatae Bauiva
taTaA ivaq%.zAU#‰"iva‘aANAAM
taAstaA ÁaeyaA yaugAe yaugAe
ity eña mänavo vaàço
yathä saìkhyäyate bhuvi
tathä viö-çüdra-vipräëäà
täs tä jïeyä yuge yuge
SYNONYMS
iti—thus (in the cantos of this Çrémad-Bhägavatam); eñaù—this;
mänavaù—descending from Vaivasvata Manu; vaàçaù—the dynasty;
yathä—as; saìkhyäyate—it is enumerated; bhuvi—upon the earth; tathä—in
the same way; viö—of the vaiçyas; çüdra—çüdras; vipräëäm—and brähmaëas;
täù täù—the situations of each; jïeyäù—are to be understood; yuge yuge—in
each age.
TRANSLATION
Thus I have described the royal dynasty of Manu, as it is known on this
earth. One can similarly study the history of the vaiçyas, çüdras and brähmaëas
living in the various ages.
PURPORT
Just as the dynasty of kings includes exalted and insignificant, virtuous and
wicked monarchs, varieties of human character are found in the intellectual,
commercial and laboring orders of society.
TEXT 36
WtaeSaAM naAmailaËÿAnaAM
pauç&SaANAAM mah"AtmanaAma,
k(TaAmaA‡aAvaizAí"AnaAM
k(LitaR&#re"va isTataA Bauiva
eteñäà näma-liìgänäà
puruñäëäà mahätmanäm
kathä-mäträvaçiñöänäà
kértir eva sthitä bhuvi
SYNONYMS
eteñäm—of these; näma—their names; liìgänäm—which are the only means of
remembering them; puruñäëäm—of the personalities; mahä-ätmanäm—who
were great souls; kathä—the stories; mätra—merely; avaçiñöänäm—whose
remaining portion; kértiù—the glories; eva—only; sthitä—are present;
bhuvi—on the earth.
TRANSLATION
These personalities, who were great souls, are now known only by their
names. They exist only in accounts from the past, and only their fame remains
on the earth.
PURPORT
Although one may consider oneself to be a great, powerful leader, he will
ultimately end up as a name in a long list of names. In other words, it is useless
to be attached to power and position in the material world.
TEXT 37
de"vaAipa: zAAntanaAe”aARtaA
maç&êeºvaAku(vaMzAja:
k(laApaƒaAma @As$aAtae
mah"AyaAegAbalaAinvataAE
deväpiù çäntanor bhrätä
maruç cekñväku-vaàça-jaù
kaläpa-gräma äsäte
mahä-yoga-balänvitau
SYNONYMS
deväpiù—Deväpi; çäntanoù—of Mahäräja Çäntanu; bhrätä—the brother;
maruù—Maru; ca—and; ikñväku-vaàça-jaù—born in the dynasty of Ikñväku;
kaläpa-gräme—in the village Kaläpa; äsäte—the two of them are living;
mahä—great; yoga-bala—with mystic power; anvitau—endowed.
TRANSLATION
Deväpi, the brother of Mahäräja Çäntanu, and Maru, the descendant of
Ikñväku, both possess great mystic strength and are living even now in the
village of Kaläpa.
TEXT 38
taAivahE"tya k(laer"ntae
vaAs$aude"vaAnauizAiºataAE
vaNAAR™amayautaM Dama<
paUvaRvat‘aTaiyaSyata:
täv ihaitya kaler ante
väsudevänuçikñitau
varëäçrama-yutaà dharmaà
pürva-vat prathayiñyataù
SYNONYMS
tau—they (Maru and Deväpi); iha—to human society; etya—returning;
kaleù—of the age of Kali; ante—at the end; väsudeva—by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Väsudeva; anuçikñitau—instructed;
varëa-äçrama—the divine system of occupational and spiritual orders of
society; yutam—comprising; dharmam—the code of eternal religion;
pürva-vat—just as previously; prathayiñyataù—they will promulgate.
TRANSLATION
At the end of the age of Kali, these two kings, having received instruction
directly from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Väsudeva, will return to
human society and reestablish the eternal religion of man, characterized by the
divisions of varëa and äçrama, just as it was before.
PURPORT
According to this and the previous verse, the two great kings who will
reestablish human culture after the end of Kali-yuga have already descended to
the earth, where they are patiently waiting to render their devotional service
to Lord Viñëu.
TEXT 39
k{(taM ‡aetaA ã"AparM" ca
k(ilaêeita catauyauRgAma,
@naena ‚(mayaAegAena
Bauiva ‘aAiNASau vataRtae
kåtaà tretä dväparaà ca
kaliç ceti catur-yugam
anena krama-yogena
bhuvi präëiñu vartate
SYNONYMS
kåtam—Satya-yuga; tretä—Tretä-yuga; dväparam—Dväpara-yuga; ca—and;
kaliù—Kali-yuga; ca—and; iti—thus; catuù-yugam—the cycle of four ages;
anena—by this; krama—sequential; yogena—pattern; bhuvi—in this world;
präëiñu—among living beings; vartate—goes on continuously.
TRANSLATION
The cycle of four ages—Satya, Tretä, Dväpara and Kali—continues
perpetually among living beings on this earth, repeating the same general
sequence of events.
TEXT 40
r"Ajaªaetae mayaA ‘aAel(A
nar"de"vaAstaTaApare"
BaUmaAE mamatvaM k{(tvaAntae
ih"tvaemaAM inaDanaM gAtaA:
räjann ete mayä proktä
nara-deväs tathäpare
bhümau mamatvaà kåtvänte
hitvemäà nidhanaà gatäù
SYNONYMS
räjan—O King Parékñit; ete—these; mayä—by me; proktäù—described;
nara-deväù—kings; tathä—and; apare—other human beings; bhümau—upon
the earth; mamatvam—possessiveness; kåtvä—exerting; ante—in the end;
hitvä—giving up; imäm—this world; nidhanam—destruction; gatäù—met.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Parékñit, all these kings I have described, as well as all other
human beings, come to this earth and stake their claims, but ultimately they all
must give up this world and meet their destruction.
TEXT 41
k{(imaivaÑ"smas$aMÁaAntae
r"AjanaA°aAe'ipa yasya ca
BaUta‹aul(tk{(tae svaATa<
ikM( vaed" inar"yaAe yata:
kåmi-viò-bhasma-saàjïänte
räja-nämno 'pi yasya ca
bhüta-dhruk tat-kåte svärthaà
kià veda nirayo yataù
SYNONYMS
kåmi—of worms; viö—stool; bhasma—and ashes; saàjïä—the designation;
ante—in the end; räja-nämnaù—going by the name "king"; api—even though;
yasya—of which (body); ca—and; bhüta—of living beings; dhruk—an enemy;
tat-kåte—for the sake of that body; sva-artham—his own best interest;
kim—what; veda—does he know; nirayaù—punishment in hell;
yataù—because of which.
TRANSLATION
Even though a person's body may now have the designation "king," in the
end its name will be "worms," "stool" or "ashes." What can a person who
injures other living beings for the sake of his body know about his own
self-interest, since his activities are simply leading him to hell?
PURPORT
After death, the body may be buried and eaten by worms, or it may be
thrown in the street or forest to be eaten by animals who will pass out its
remnants as stool, or it may be burned and converted into ashes. Therefore
one should not pave his way to hell by using his temporary body to injure the
bodies of other living beings. In this verse the word bhüta includes nonhuman
life forms, who are also creatures of God. One should give up all envious
violence and learn to see God in everything by the process of Kåñëa
consciousness.
TEXT 42
k(TaM s$aeyamaKaNx"A BaU:
paUvaE="maeR pauç&SaEDa{RtaA
matpau‡asya ca paAE‡asya
matpaUvaAR vaMzAjasya vaA
kathaà seyam akhaëòä bhüù
pürvair me puruñair dhåtä
mat-putrasya ca pautrasya
mat-pürvä vaàça-jasya vä
SYNONYMS
katham—how; sä iyam—this same; akhaëòä—unbounded; bhüù—earth;
pürvaiù—by the predecessors; me—my; puruñaiù—by the personalities;
dhåtä—held in control; mat-putrasya—of my son; ca—and; pautrasya—of the
grandson; mat-pürvä—now under my sway; vaàça-jasya—of the descendant;
vä—or.
TRANSLATION
[The materialistic king thinks:] "This unbounded earth was held by my
predecessors and is now under my sovereignty. How can I arrange for it to
remain in the hands of my sons, grandsons and other descendants?"
PURPORT
This is an example of foolish possessiveness.
TEXT 43
taejaAe'baªamayaM k(AyaM
gA{h"ItvaAtmatayaAbauDaA:
mah"I%M mamatayaA caAeBaAE
ih"tvaAntae'd"zARnaM gAtaA:
tejo-'b-anna-mayaà käyaà
gåhétvätmatayäbudhäù
mahéà mamatayä cobhau
hitvänte 'darçanaà gatäù
SYNONYMS
tejaù—fire; ap—water; anna—and earth; mayam—composed of; käyam—this
body; gåhétvä—accepting; ätmatayä—with the sense of "I"; abudhäù—the
unintelligent; mahém—this earth; mamatayä—with the sense of "my";
ca—and; ubhau—both; hitvä—giving up; ante—ultimately;
adarçanam—disappearance; gatäù—they have obtained.
TRANSLATION
Although the foolish accept the body made of earth, water and fire as "me"
and this earth as "mine," in every case they have ultimately abandoned both
their body and the earth and passed away into oblivion.
PURPORT
Although the soul is eternal, our so-called family tradition and earthly fame
will certainly pass into oblivion.
TEXT 44
yae yae BaUpatayaAe r"Ajana,
BauÃatae BauvamaAejas$aA
k(Alaena tae k{(taA: s$avaeR
k(TaAmaA‡aA: k(TaAs$au ca
ye ye bhü-patayo räjan
bhuïjate bhuvam ojasä
kälena te kåtäù sarve
kathä-mäträù kathäsu ca
SYNONYMS
ye ye—whatever; bhü-patayaù—kings; räjan—O King Parékñit;
bhuïjate—enjoy; bhuvam—the world; ojasä—with their power; kälena—by
the force of time; te—they; kåtäù—have been made; sarve—all;
kathä-mäträù—mere accounts; kathäsu—in various histories; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Parékñit, all these kings who tried to enjoy the earth by their
strength were reduced by the force of time to nothing more than historical
accounts.
PURPORT
The word räjan, "O King," is significant in this verse. Parékñit Mahäräja was
preparing to give up his body and go back home, back to Godhead, and
Çukadeva Gosvämé, his most merciful spiritual master, devastated any possible
attachment that he might have to the position of king by showing the ultimate
insignificance of such a position. By the causeless mercy of the spiritual master
one is prepared to go back home, back to Godhead. The spiritual master
teaches one to relax one's strong grip on material illusion and leave the
kingdom of mäyä behind. Although Çukadeva Gosvämé speaks very bluntly
within this chapter about the so-called glory of the material world, he is
exhibiting the causeless mercy of the spiritual master, who takes his
surrendered disciple back to the kingdom of Godhead, Vaikuëöha.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Twelfth Canto, Second Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Symptoms of Kali-yuga."
3. The Bhümi-gétä
This chapter describes how the earth took note of the foolishness of the
many kings bent on conquering her. It also describes how even though the age
of Kali is full of faults, the glorification of the name of Lord Hari destroys them
all.
Great kings, who are actually just playthings of death, desire to subdue their
six internal enemies-the five senses and the mind-and afterward they imagine
they will go on to conquer the earth and all its oceans. Seeing their false hopes,
the earth simply laughs, for eventually they all must leave this planet and go
elsewhere, as have all the great kings and monarchs of the past. Moreover,
after usurping the earth or some part of it-which is actually unconquerable and
must in every case be given up-fathers, sons, brothers, friends and relatives
quarrel over it.
Thus the study of history naturally leads to the conclusion that all worldly
achievements are temporary, and this conclusion should give rise to a sense of
renunciation. Ultimately, the highest goal of life for any living entity is pure
devotion to Lord Kåñëa, which annihilates all inauspiciousness. In the age of
Satya, religion was complete, still possessing its four legs of truth, mercy,
austerity and charity. With the coming of each succeeding age, starting with
Tretä, these religious qualities each diminish by one quarter. In Kali-yuga the
legs of religion retain only one fourth of their power, and even that will be lost
with the progress of the age. The mode of goodness is predominant during
Satya-yuga, and the mode of passion is predominant during the Tretä-yuga.
The mixed modes of passion and ignorance are predominant during
Dväpara-yuga, and in the age of Kali the mode of ignorance is predominant.
Atheism, the smallness and inferiority of all things, and devotion to the
genitals and belly are very much evident in the age of Kali. Living entities
contaminated by the influence of Kali do not worship the Supreme Lord, Çré
Hari, even though they can be freed from all bondage and easily achieve the
supreme destination simply by chanting the glories of His name and taking
shelter of Him. But if somehow or other the Supreme Personality of Godhead
becomes manifest within the hearts of the conditioned souls in Kali-yuga, then
all faults of place, time and personality inherent in the age will be destroyed.
Kali-yuga is an ocean of faults, but it possesses one great quality: simply by the
chanting of the name of Kåñëa, one can be delivered from material association
and attain the Absolute Truth. All that was accomplished in the age of Satya
by meditation, in the age of Tretä by sacrificial performances and in the age of
Dväpara by temple worship is easily gained during the Kali-yuga by the simple
process of hari-kértana.
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
ä{"î"Atmaina jayae vyaƒaAna,
na{paAna, h"s$aita BaUir"yama,
@h"Ae maA ivaijagAISainta
ma{tyaAe: ‚(Lx"nak(A na{paA:
çré-çuka uväca
dåñövätmani jaye vyagrän
nåpän hasati bhür iyam
aho mä vijigéñanti
måtyoù kréòanakä nåpäù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; dåñövä—observing; ätmani—of
herself; jaye—in conquest; vyagrän—busily engaged; nåpän—the kings;
hasati—she laughs; bhüù—the earth; iyam—this; aho—ah; mä—me;
vijigéñanti—they are desiring to conquer; måtyoù—of death;
kréòanakäù—playthings; nåpäù—the kings.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Seeing the kings of this earth busy trying to
conquer her, the earth herself laughed. She said: "Just see how these kings, who
are actually playthings in the hands of death, are desiring to conquer me.
TEXT 2
k(Ama WSa nare"n‰"ANAAM
maAeGa: syaAiã"äu"SaAmaipa
yaena Pe(naAepamae ipaNxe"
yae'itaiva™aimBataA na{paA:
käma eña narendräëäà
moghaù syäd viduñäm api
yena phenopame piëòe
ye 'ti-viçrambhitä nåpäù
SYNONYMS
kämaù—lust; eñaù—this; nara-indräëäm—of the rulers of men; moghaù—the
failure; syät—becomes; viduñäm—who are wise; api—even; yena—by which
(lust); phena-upame—comparable to ephemeral bubbles; piëòe—in this lump;
ye—who; ati-viçrambhitäù—perfectly trusting; nåpaù—the kings.
TRANSLATION
"Great rulers of men, even those who are learned, meet frustration and
failure because of material lust. Driven by lust, these kings place great hope and
faith in the dead lump of flesh called the body, even though the material frame
is as fleeting as bubbles of foam on water.
TEXTS 3-4
paUva< inaijaRtya SaÒ"gA<
jaeSyaAmaAe r"Ajamain‡aNA:
tata: s$aicavapaAEr"Aæak(
r"In‰"Anasya k(Nq%k(Ana,
WvaM ‚(maeNA jaeSyaAma:
pa{TvaI%M s$aAgAr"maeKalaAma,
wtyaAzAAbaÜ"ô$d"yaA
na pazyantyaintake('ntak(ma,
pürvaà nirjitya ñaò-vargaà
jeñyämo räja-mantriëaù
tataù saciva-pauräptakaréndrän
asya kaëöakän
evaà krameëa jeñyämaù
påthvéà sägara-mekhaläm
ity äçä-baddha-hådayä
na paçyanty antike 'ntakam
SYNONYMS
pürvam—first of all; nirjitya—conquering; ñaö-vargam—the five senses and the
mind; jeñyämaù—we will conquer; räja-mantriëaù—the royal ministers;
tataù—then; saciva—the personal secretaries; paura—the citizens of the
capital; äpta—the friends; kari-indrän—the elephant keepers; asya—ridding
ourselves of; kaëöakän—the thorns; evam—in this way; krameëa—gradually;
jeñyämaù—we shall conquer; påthvém—the earth; sägara—the ocean;
mekhaläm—whose girdle; iti—thus thinking; äçä—by hopes; baddha—bound
up; hådayäù—their hearts; na paçyanti—they do not see; antike—nearby;
antakam—their own end.
TRANSLATION
"Kings and politicians imagine: 'First I will conquer my senses and mind;
then I will subdue my chief ministers and rid myself of the thorn-pricks of my
advisors, citizens, friends and relatives, as well as the keepers of my elephants.
In this way I will gradually conquer the entire earth.' Because the hearts of
these leaders are bound by great expectations, they fail to see death waiting
nearby.
PURPORT
To satisfy their greed for power, determined politicians, dictators and
military leaders undergo severe austerities and sacrifice, with much
self-discipline. Then they lead their great nations in a struggle to control the
sea, land, air and space. Although the politicians and their followers will soon
be dead—since birth and death are all inevitable in this world—they persist in
their frenetic struggle for ephemeral glory.
TEXT 5
s$amau"‰"Avar"NAAM ijatvaA
maAM ivazAntyaibDamaAejas$aA
ik(yad"AtmajayasyaEtana,
mauil(r"Atmajayae P(lama,
samudrävaraëäà jitvä
mäà viçanty abdhim ojasä
kiyad ätma-jayasyaitan
muktir ätma-jaye phalam
SYNONYMS
samudra-ävaraëäm—bounded by the ocean; jitvä—having conquered;
mäm—me; viçanti—they enter; abdhim—the ocean; ojasä—by their strength;
kiyat—how much; ätma-jayasya—of victory over the self; etat—this;
muktiù—liberation; ätma-jaye—of victory over the self; phalam—the fruit.
TRANSLATION
"After conquering all the land on my surface, these proud kings forcibly
enter the ocean to conquer the sea itself. What is the use of their self-control,
which is aimed at political exploitation? The actual goal of self-control is
spiritual liberation."
TEXT 6
yaAM ivas$a{jyaEva manavas$a,
tats$autaAê ku(è&ã"h"
gAtaA yaTaAgAtaM yauÜe"
taAM maAM jaeSyantyabauÜ"ya:
yäà visåjyaiva manavas
tat-sutäç ca kurüdvaha
gatä yathägataà yuddhe
täà mäà jeñyanty abuddhayaù
SYNONYMS
yäm—whom; visåjya—giving up; eva—indeed; manavaù—human beings;
tat-sutäù—their sons; ca—also; kuru-udvaha—O best of the Kurus;
gatäù—gone away; yathä-ägatam—just as they had originally come;
yuddhe—in battle; täm—that; mäm—me, the earth; jeñyanti—they try to
conquer; abuddhayaù—unintelligent.
TRANSLATION
O best of the Kurus, the earth continued as follows: "Although in the past
great men and their descendants have left me, departing from this world in the
same helpless way they came into it, even today foolish men are trying to
conquer me.
TEXT 7
matk{(tae ipata{pau‡aANAAM
”aAta{NAAM caAipa ivaƒah":
jaAyatae ÷s$ataAM r"Ajyae
mamataAbaÜ"caetas$aAma,
mat-kåte pitå-puträëäà
bhrätåëäà cäpi vigrahaù
jäyate hy asatäà räjye
mamatä-baddha-cetasäm
SYNONYMS
mat-kåte—for the sake of me; pitå-puträëäm—between fathers and sons;
bhrätåëäm—among brothers; ca—and; api—also; vigrahaù—conflict;
jäyate—arises; hi—indeed; asatäm—among the materialistic; räjye—for
political rule; mamatä—by the sense of possession; baddha—bound up;
cetasäm—whose hearts.
TRANSLATION
"For the sake of conquering me, materialistic persons fight one another.
Fathers oppose their sons, and brothers fight one another, because their hearts
are bound to possessing political power.
TEXT 8
mamaEvaeyaM mah"I k{(tµaA
na tae maUXe#ita vaAid"na:
s$paDaRmaAnaA imaTaAe £ainta
i•ayantae matk{(tae na{paA:
mamaiveyaà mahé kåtsnä
na te müòheti vädinaù
spardhamänä mitho ghnanti
mriyante mat-kåte nåpäù
SYNONYMS
mama—mine; eva—indeed; iyam—this; mahé—land; kåtsnä—entire; na—not;
te—yours; müòha—you fool; iti vädinaù—thus speaking;
spardhamänäù—quarreling; mithaù—each other; ghnanti—they kill;
mriyante—they are killed; mat-kåte—for my sake; nåpäù—kings.
TRANSLATION
"Political leaders challenge one another: 'All this land is mine! It's not
yours, you fool!' Thus they attack one another and die.
PURPORT
This verse describes with brilliant clarity the mundane political mentality
that provokes innumerable conflicts in the world. For example, as we prepare
this translation of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, British and Argentine military forces
are bitterly fighting over the tiny Falkland Islands.
The fact is that the Supreme Lord is the proprietor of all land. Of course,
even in a God-conscious world political boundaries exist. But in such a
God-conscious atmosphere political tensions are greatly eased, and people of
all lands welcome each other and respect each other's right to live in peace.
TEXTS 9-13
pa{Tau: pauè&r"vaA gAAiDar,"
naò"SaAe Bar"taAe'jauRna:
maAnDaAtaA s$agAr"Ae r"Ama:
KaÅ%AËÿAe DaunDauh"A r"Gau:
ta{NAibanäu"yaRyaAitaê
zAyaARita: zAntanaugARya:
BagAIr"Ta: ku(valayaAì:
k(ku(tsTaAe naESaDaAe na{gA:
ih"r"Nyak(izApauva{R‡aAe
r"AvaNAAe laAek(r"AvaNA:
namauica: zAmbar"Ae BaAEmaAe
ih"r"NyaAºaAe'Ta taAr"k(:
@nyae ca bah"vaAe dE"tyaA
r"AjaAnaAe yae mahe"ìr"A:
s$avaeR s$avaRivad": zAUr"A:
s$avaeR s$avaRijataAe'ijataA:
mamataAM mayyavataRnta
k{(tvaAe»aEmaRtyaRDaimaRNA:
k(TaAvazAeSaA: k(Alaena
÷k{(taATaAR: k{(taA ivaBaAe
påthuù purüravä gädhir
nahuño bharato 'rjunaù
mändhätä sagaro rämaù
khaöväìgo dhundhuhä raghuù
tåëabindur yayätiç ca
çaryätiù çantanur gayaù
bhagérathaù kuvalayäçvaù
kakutstho naiñadho någaù
hiraëyakaçipur våtro
rävaëo loka-rävaëaù
namuciù çambaro bhaumo
hiraëyäkño 'tha tärakaù
anye ca bahavo daityä
räjäno ye maheçvaräù
sarve sarva-vidaù çüräù
sarve sarva-jito 'jitäù
mamatäà mayy avartanta
kåtvoccair martya-dharmiëaù
kathävaçeñäù kälena
hy akåtärthäù kåtä vibho
SYNONYMS
påthuù purüraväù gädhiù—Mahäräjas Påthu, Purüravä and Gädhi; nahuñaù
bharataù arjunaù—Nahuña, Bharata and Kärtavérya Arjuna; mändhätä sagaraù
rämaù—Mändhätä, Sagara and Räma; khaöväìgaù dhundhuhä
raghuù—Khaöväìga, Dhundhuhä and Raghu; tåëabinduù yayätiù
ca—Tåëabindu and Yayäti; çaryätiù çantanuù gayaù—Çaryäti, Çantanu and
Gaya; bhagérathaù kuvalayäçvaù—Bhagératha and Kuvalayäçva; kakutsthaù
naiñadhaù någaù—Kakutstha, Naiñadha and Någa; hiraëyakaçipuù
våtraù—Hiraëyakaçipu and Våträsura; rävaëaù—Rävaëa; loka-rävaëaù—who
made the whole world cry; namuciù çambaraù bhaumaù—Namuci, Çambara
and Bhauma; hiraëyäkñaù—Hiraëyäkña; atha—and; tärakaù—Täraka;
anye—others; ca—as well; bahavaù—many; daityäù—demons; räjänaù—kings;
ye—who; mahä-éçvaräù—great controllers; sarve—all of them;
sarva-vidaù—all-knowing; çüräù—heroes; sarve—all;
sarva-jitaù—all-conquering; ajitäù—unconquerable;
mamatäm—possessiveness; mayi—for me; avartanta—they lived;
kåtvä—expressing; uccaiù—to a great degree; martya-dharmiëaù—subject to
the laws of birth and death; kathä-avaçeñäù—remaining merely as historical
narrations; kälena—by the force of time; hi—indeed;
akåta-arthäù—incomplete in perfecting their desires; kåtäù—they have been
made; vibho—O Lord.
TRANSLATION
"Such kings as Påthu, Purüravä, Gädhi, Nahuña, Bharata, Kärtavérya
Arjuna, Mändhätä, Sagara, Räma, Khaöväìga, Dhundhuhä, Raghu, Tåëabindu,
Yayäti, Çaryäti, Çantanu, Gaya, Bhagératha, Kuvalayäçva, Kakutstha, Naiñadha,
Någa, Hiraëyakaçipu, Våtra, Rävaëa, who made the whole world lament,
Namuci, Çambara, Bhauma, Hiraëyäkña and Täraka, as well as many other
demons and kings who possessed great powers of control over others, were all
full of knowledge, heroic, all-conquering and unconquerable. Nevertheless, O
almighty Lord, although they lived their lives intensely trying to possess me,
these kings were subject to the passage of time, which reduced them all to mere
historical accounts. None of them could permanently establish their rule."
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, and as confirmed by Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura, the King Räma mentioned here is not the incarnation of
Godhead Rämacandra. Påthu Mahäräja is understood to be an incarnation of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead who completely exhibited the
characteristics of an earthly king, claiming proprietorship over the entire
earth. A saintly king like Påthu Mahäräja, however, controls the earth on
behalf of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whereas a demon such as
Hiraëyakaçipu or Rävaëa tries to exploit the earth for his personal sense
gratification. Nevertheless, both saintly kings and demons must leave the
earth. In this way their political supremacy is ultimately neutralized by the
force of time.
Modern political leaders cannot even temporarily control the entire earth,
nor are their opulences and intelligence unlimited. Possessing hopelessly
fragmented power, enjoying a miniscule life span, and lacking deep existential
intelligence, modern leaders inevitably are symbols of frustration and
misdirected ambition.
TEXT 14
k(TaA wmaAstae k(iTataA mah"Iyas$aAM
ivataAya laAeke(Sau yazA: pare"yauSaAma,
ivaÁaAnavaEr"AgyaivavaºayaA ivaBaAe
vacaAeivaBaUtaInaR tau paAr"maATyaRma,
kathä imäs te kathitä mahéyasäà
vitäya lokeñu yaçaù pareyuñäm
vijïäna-vairägya-vivakñayä vibho
vaco-vibhütér na tu päramärthyam
SYNONYMS
kathäù—the narrations; imäù—these; te—unto you; kathitäù—have been
spoken; mahéyasäm—of great kings; vitäya—spreading; lokeñu—throughout all
the worlds; yaçaù—their fame; pareyuñäm—who have departed;
vijïäna—transcendental knowledge; vairägya—and renunciation;
vivakñayä—with the desire for teaching; vibho—O mighty Parékñit; vacaù—of
words; vibhütéù—the decoration; na—not; tu—but; pärama-arthyam—of the
most essential purport.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O mighty Parékñit, I have related to you the
narrations of all these great kings, who spread their fame throughout the world
and then departed. My real purpose was to teach transcendental knowledge and
renunciation. Stories of kings lend power and opulence to these narrations but
do not in themselves constitute the ultimate aspect of knowledge.
PURPORT
Since all the narrations of Çrémad-Bhägavatam bring the reader to the
perfection of transcendental knowledge, they all give supreme spiritual lessons
though apparently dealing with kings or other mundane subject matter. In
relation with Kåñëa, all ordinary topics become transcendental narrations,
with the power to bring the reader to the perfection of life.
TEXT 15
yastaUÔama:ëAek(gAuNAAnauvaAd":
s$aËÿLyatae'BaIºNAmamaËÿla£a:
tamaeva inatyaM Za{NAuyaAd"BaIºNAM
k{(SNAe'malaAM Bail(maBaIps$amaAna:
yas tüttamaù-çloka-guëänuvädaù
saìgéyate 'bhékñëam amaìgala-ghnaù
tam eva nityaà çåëuyäd abhékñëaà
kåñëe 'maläà bhaktim abhépsamänaù
SYNONYMS
yaù—which; tu—on the other hand; uttamaù-çloka—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is praised in transcendental verses; guëa—of the
qualities; anuvädaù—the recounting; saìgéyate—is sung; abhékñëam—always;
amaìgala-ghnaù—which destroys everything inauspicious; tam—that;
eva—indeed; nityam—regularly; çåëuyät—one should hear;
abhékñnam—constantly; kåñëe—unto Lord Kåñëa; amaläm—untainted;
bhaktim—devotional service; abhépsamänaù—he who desires.
TRANSLATION
The person who desires pure devotional service to Lord Kåñëa should hear
the narrations of Lord Uttamaùçloka's glorious qualities, the constant chanting
of which destroys everything inauspicious. The devotee should engage in such
listening in regular daily assemblies and should also continue his hearing
throughout the day.
PURPORT
Since any topic related to Lord Kåñëa is auspicious and transcendental, the
direct narration of Lord Kåñëa's own activities, political and nonpolitical, is
certainly the supreme subject matter for hearing. The word nityam here
indicates regulated cultivation of the topics of Lord Kåñëa, and abhékñëam
indicates constant remembrance of such regulated spiritual experiences.
TEXT 16
™aIr"AjaAevaAca
ke(naAepaAyaena BagAvana,
k(laed"AeRSaAna, k(laAE janaA:
ivaDaimaSyantyaupaicataAMs$a,
tanmae “aUih" yaTaA maunae
çré-räjoväca
kenopäyena bhagavan
kaler doñän kalau janäù
vidhamiñyanty upacitäàs
tan me brühi yathä mune
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—King Parékñit said; kena—by what; upäyena—means;
bhagavan—my dear lord; kaleù—of the age of Kali; doñän—the faults;
kalau—living in Kali-yuga; janäù—people; vidhamiñyanti—will eradicate;
upacitän—accumulated; tat—that; me—to me; brühi—please explain;
yathä—fittingly; mune—O sage.
TRANSLATION
King Parékñit said: My lord, how can persons living in the age of Kali rid
themselves of the cumulative contamination of this age? O great sages please
explain this to me.
PURPORT
King Parékñit was a compassionate, saintly ruler. Thus, after hearing of the
abominable qualities of the age of Kali, he naturally inquired as to how those
born in this age can free themselves of its inherent contamination.
TEXT 17
yaugAAina yaugADamaA<ê
maAnaM ‘alayak(lpayaAe:
k(Alasyaeìr"è&pasya
gAitaM ivaSNAAemaRh"Atmana:
yugäni yuga-dharmäàç ca
mänaà pralaya-kalpayoù
kälasyeçvara-rüpasya
gatià viñëor mahätmanaù
SYNONYMS
yugäni—the ages of the universal history; yuga-dharmän—the special qualities
of each age; ca—and; mänam—the measurement; pralaya—of annihilation;
kalpayoù—and of universal maintenance; kälasya—of time;
éçvara-rüpasya—the representation of the Personality of Godhead; gatim—the
movement; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu; mahä-ätmanaù—the Supreme Soul.
TRANSLATION
Please explain the different ages of universal history, the special qualities of
each age, the duration of cosmic maintenance and destruction, and the
movement of time, which is the direct representation of the Supreme Soul, the
Personality of Godhead, Lord Viñëu.
TEXT 18
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
k{(tae ‘avataRtae DamaRzA,
catauSpaAÔaÀanaEDa{Rta:
s$atyaM d"yaA tapaAe d"Anama,
wita paAd"A ivaBaAena{Rpa
çré-çuka uväca
kåte pravartate dharmaç
catuñ-pät taj-janair dhåtaù
satyaà dayä tapo dänam
iti pädä vibhor nåpa
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; kåte—in the Satya-yuga, the age
of truth; pravartate—exists; dharmaù—religion; catuù-pät—with four legs;
tat—of that age; janaiù—by the people; dhåtaù—maintained; satyam—truth;
dayä—mercy; tapaù—austerity; dänam—charity; iti—thus; pädäù—the legs;
vibhoù—of mighty religion; nåpa—O King.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: My dear King, in the beginning, during Satya-yuga,
the age of truth, religion is present with all four of its legs intact and is carefully
maintained by the people of that age. These four legs of powerful religion are
truthfulness, mercy, austerity and charity.
PURPORT
Just as there are four seasons, there are four ages of the earth, each lasting
hundreds of thousands of years. The first of these is Satya-yuga, when such
good qualities as charity are prominent.
Actual charity, here referred to as dänam, is to award fearlessness and
freedom to others, not to give them some material means of temporary pleasure
or relief. Any material "charitable" arrangement will inevitably be crushed by
the onward march of time. Thus only realization of one's eternal existence
beyond the reach of time can make one fearless, and only freedom from
material desire constitutes real freedom, for it enables one to escape the
bondage of the laws of nature. Therefore real charity is to help people revive
their eternal, spiritual consciousness.
Religion is here referred to as vibhu, "the mighty," because universal
religious principles are not different from the Supreme Lord Himself and
ultimately lead one to His kingdom. The qualities mentioned
here—truthfulness, mercy, austerity and charity—are universal, nonsectarian
aspects of pious life.
In the First Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the fourth leg of religion is listed
as cleanliness. According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, this is an
alternative definition of the word dänam in the present context.
TEXT 19
s$antauí"A: k(ç&NAA maE‡aA:
zAAntaA d"AntaAistaitaºava:
@AtmaAr"AmaA: s$amaä{"zA:
‘aAyazA: ™amaNAA janaA:
santuñöäù karuëä maiträù
çäntä däntäs titikñavaù
ätmärämäù sama-dåçaù
präyaçaù çramaëä janäù
SYNONYMS
santuñöäù—self-satisfied; karuëäù—merciful; maiträù—friendly;
çäntäù—pacified; däntäù—self-controlled; titikñavaù—tolerant;
ätma-ärämäù—enthused from within; sama-dåçaù—possessed of equal vision;
präyaçaù—for the most part; çramaëäù—endeavoring diligently (for
self-realization); janäù—the people.
TRANSLATION
The people of Satya-yuga are for the most part self-satisfied, merciful,
friendly to all, peaceful, sober and tolerant. They take their pleasure from
within, see all things equally and always endeavor diligently for spiritual
perfection.
PURPORT
Sama-darçana, equal vision, is based on the perception of the Supreme
Spirit behind all material variety and within all living entities.
TEXT 20
‡aetaAyaAM DamaRpaAd"AnaAM
tauyaA<zAAe h"Iyatae zAnaE:
@DamaRpaAdE"r"na{taihM"
SaAs$antaAeSaivaƒahE":
tretäyäà dharma-pädänäà
turyäàço héyate çanaiù
adharma-pädair anåtahiàñäsantoña-
vigrahaiù
SYNONYMS
tretäyäm—in the second age; dharma-pädänäm—of the legs of religion;
turya—one fourth; aàçaù—part; héyate—is lost; çanaiù—gradually;
adharma-pädaiù—by the legs of irreligion; anåta—by falsity; hiàsä—violence;
asantoña—dissatisfaction; vigrahaiù—and quarrel.
TRANSLATION
In Tretä-yuga each leg of religion is gradually reduced by one quarter by the
influence of the four pillars of irreligion—lying, violence, dissatisfaction and
quarrel.
PURPORT
By falsity truth is diminished, by violence mercy is diminished, by
dissatisfaction austerity is diminished, and by quarrel charity and cleanliness
are diminished.
TEXT 21
tad"A i‚(yaAtapaAeinaï"A
naAitaihM"›aA na lampaq%A:
‡aEvaigARk(AñyaIva{Ü"A
vaNAAR “aöAeÔar"A na{pa
tadä kriyä-tapo-niñöhä
näti-hiàsrä na lampaöäù
trai-vargikäs trayé-våddhä
varëä brahmottarä nåpa
SYNONYMS
tadä—then (in the Tretä age); kriyä—to ritualistic ceremonies; tapaù—and to
penances; niñöhäù—devoted; na ati-hiàsräù—not excessively violent; na
lampaöäù—not wantonly desiring sense gratification; trai-vargikäù—interested
in the three principles of religiosity, economic development and sense
gratification; trayé—by the three Vedas; våddhäù—made prosperous;
varëäù—the four classes of society; brahma-uttaräù—mostly brähmaëas;
nåpa—O King.
TRANSLATION
In the Tretä age people are devoted to ritual performances and severe
austerities. They are not excessively violent or very lusty after sensual pleasure.
Their interest lies primarily in religiosity, economic development and regulated
sense gratification, and they achieve prosperity by following the prescriptions of
the three Vedas. Although in this age society evolves into four separate classes,
O King, most people are brähmaëas.
TEXT 22
tapa:s$atyad"yaAd"AnaeSva,
@Da< oe"svaita ã"Apare"
ihM"s$aAtauí"Yana{taãe"SaEr,"
DamaRsyaADamaRlaºaNAE:
tapaù-satya-dayä-däneñv
ardhaà hrasvati dväpare
hiàsätuñöy-anåta-dveñair
dharmasyädharma-lakñaëaiù
SYNONYMS
tapaù—of austerity; satya—truth; dayä—mercy; däneñu—and charity;
ardham—one half; hrasvati—diminishes; dväpare—in the age of Dväpara;
hiàsä—by violence; atuñöi—dissatisfaction; anåta—untruth; dveñaiù—and
hatred; dharmasya—of religion; adharma-lakñaëaiù—by the qualities of
irreligion.
TRANSLATION
In Dväpara-yuga the religious qualities of austerity, truth, mercy and charity
are reduced to one half by their irreligious counterparts—dissatisfaction,
untruth, violence and enmity.
TEXT 23
yazAisvanaAe mah"AzAIlaA:
svaADyaAyaADyayanae r"taA:
@ADyaA: ku(q%]imbanaAe ô$í"A
vaNAAR: ºa‡aiã"jaAeÔar"A:
yaçasvino mahä-çéläù
svädhyäyädhyayane ratäù
ädhyäù kuöumbino håñöä
varëäù kñatra-dvijottaräù
SYNONYMS
yaçasvinaù—eager for glory; mahä-çéläù—noble; svädhyäya-adhyayane—in
study of the Vedic literature; ratäù—absorbed; äòhyäù—endowed with
opulence; kuöumbinaù—having large families; håñöäù—joyful; varëäù—the
four classes of society; kñatra-dvija-uttaräù—represented mostly by the
kñatriyas and brähmaëas.
TRANSLATION
In the Dväpara age people are interested in glory and are very noble. They
devote themselves to the study of the Vedas, possess great opulence, support
large families and enjoy life with vigor. Of the four classes, the kñatriyas and
brähmaëas are most numerous.
TEXT 24
k(laAE tau DamaRpaAd"AnaAM
tauyaA<zAAe'DamaR$he"tauiBa:
WDamaAnaE: ºaIyamaANAAe
÷ntae s$aAe'ipa ivanaÉÿYaita
kalau tu dharma-pädänäà
turyäàço 'dharma-hetubhiù
edhamänaiù kñéyamäëo
hy ante so 'pi vinaìkñyati
SYNONYMS
kalau—in the age of Kali; tu—and; dharma-pädänäm—of the legs of religion;
turya-aàçaù—one fourth; adharma—of irreligion; hetubhiù—by the principles;
edhamänaiù—which are increasing; kñéyamäëaù—decreasing; hi—indeed;
ante—in the end; saù—that one quarter; api—also; vinaìkñyati—will be
destroyed.
TRANSLATION
In the age of Kali only one fourth of the religious principles remains. That
last remnant will continuously be decreased by the ever-increasing principles of
irreligion and will finally be destroyed.
TEXT 25
taismanlaubDaA äu"r"AcaAr"A
inadR"yaA: zAuSk(vaEir"NA:
äu"BaRgAA BaUir"taSaARê
zAU#‰"d"As$aAeÔar"A: ‘ajaA:
tasmin lubdhä duräcärä
nirdayäù çuñka-vairiëaù
durbhagä bhüri-tarñäç ca
çüdra-däsottaräù prajäù
SYNONYMS
tasmin—in that age; lubdhäù—greedy; duräcäräù—ill-behaved;
nirdayäù—merciless; çuñka-vairiëaù—prone to useless quarrel;
durbhagäù—unfortunate; bhüri-tarñäù—obsessed by many kinds of hankering;
ca—and; çüdra-däsa-uttaräù—predominantly low-class laborers and
barbarians; prajäù—the people.
TRANSLATION
In the Kali age people tend to be greedy, ill-behaved and merciless, and they
fight one another without good reason. Unfortunate and obsessed with material
desires, the people of Kali-yuga are almost all çüdras and barbarians.
PURPORT
In this age, we can already observe that most people are laborers, clerks,
fishermen, artisans or other kinds of workers within the çüdra category.
Enlightened devotees of God and noble political leaders are extremely scarce,
and even independent businessmen and farmers are a vanishing breed as huge
business conglomerates increasingly convert them into subservient employees.
Vast regions of the earth are already populated by barbarians and
semibarbarous peoples, making the entire situation dangerous and bleak. The
Kåñëa consciousness movement is empowered to rectify the current dismal
state of affairs. It is the only hope for the ghastly age called Kali-yuga.
TEXT 26
s$aÔvaM r"jastama wita
ä{"zyantae pauç&Sae gAuNAA:
k(Alas$aÂaAeid"taAstae vaE
pair"vataRnta @Atmaina
sattvaà rajas tama iti
dåçyante puruñe guëäù
käla-saïcoditäs te vai
parivartanta ätmani
SYNONYMS
sattvam—goodness; rajaù—passion; tamaù—ignorance; iti—thus;
dåçyante—are seen; puruñe—in a person; guëäù—the modes of material
nature; käla-saïcoditäù—impelled by time; te—they; vai—indeed;
parivartante—undergo permutation; ätmani—within the mind.
TRANSLATION
The material modes—goodness, passion and ignorance—whose permutations
are observed within a person's mind, are set into motion by the power of time.
PURPORT
The four ages described in these verses are manifestations of various modes
of material nature. The age of truth, Satya-yuga, manifests the predominance
of material goodness, and Kali-yuga manifests the predominance of ignorance.
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, within each age the other
three ages occasionally manifest as sub-ages. Thus even within Satya-yuga a
demon in the mode of ignorance may appear, and within the age of Kali the
highest religious principles may flourish for some time. As described in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the three modes of nature are present everywhere and in
everything, but the predominant mode, or combination of modes, determines
the general character of any material phenomenon. In each age, therefore, the
three modes are present in varying proportions. The particular age represented
by goodness (Satya), passion (Tretä), passion and ignorance (Dväpara) or
ignorance (Kali) exists within each of the other ages as a subfactor.
TEXT 27
‘aBavainta yad"A s$aÔvae
manaAebauÜ"Iin‰"yaAiNA ca
tad"A k{(tayaugAM ivaâAja,
ÁaAnae tapais$a yaåu"ica:
prabhavanti yadä sattve
mano-buddhéndriyäëi ca
tadä kåta-yugaà vidyäj
jïäne tapasi yad ruciù
SYNONYMS
prabhavanti—they are predominantly manifest; yadä—when; sattve—in the
mode of goodness; manaù—the mind; buddhi—intelligence; indriyäëi—senses;
ca—and; tadä—then; kåta-yugam—the age of Kåta; vidyät—should be
understood; jïäne—in knowledge; tapasi—and austerity; yat—when;
ruciù—pleasure.
TRANSLATION
When the mind, intelligence and senses are solidly fixed in the mode of
goodness, that time should be understood as Satya-yuga, the age of truth. People
then take pleasure in knowledge and austerity.
PURPORT
The word kåta means "performed" or "executed." Thus in the age of truth all
religious duties are duly performed, and people take great pleasure in spiritual
knowledge and austerity. Even in the Kali-yuga, those who are situated in the
mode of goodness take pleasure in the cultivation of spiritual knowledge and
the regulated performance of austerity. This sublime state of existence is
possible for one who has conquered sex desire.
TEXT 28
yad"A k(maRs$au k(AmyaeSau
Bail(yaRzAis$a de"ih"naAma,
tad"A ‡aetaA r"jaAeva{iÔar,"
wita jaAnaIih" bauiÜ"mana,
yadä karmasu kämyeñu
bhaktir yaçasi dehinäm
tadä tretä rajo-våttir
iti jänéhi buddhiman
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; karmasu—in duties; kämyeñu—based on selfish desire;
bhaktiù—devotion; yaçasi—in honor; dehinäm—of the embodied souls;
tadä—then; tretä—the age of Tretä; rajaù-våttiù—predominated by activities
in the mode of passion; iti—thus; jänéhi—you should understand;
buddhi-man—O intelligent King Parékñit.
TRANSLATION
O most intelligent one, when the conditioned souls are devoted to their
duties but have ulterior motives and seek personal prestige, you should
understand such a situation to be the age of Tretä, in which the functions of
passion are prominent.
TEXT 29
yad"A laAeBastvas$antaAeSaAe
maAnaAe d"mBaAe'Ta mats$ar":
k(maRNAAM caAipa k(AmyaAnaAM
ã"AparM" ta‰"jastama:
yadä lobhas tv asantoño
mäno dambho 'tha matsaraù
karmaëäà cäpi kämyänäà
dväparaà tad rajas-tamaù
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; lobhaù—greed; tu—indeed; asantoñaù—dissatisfaction;
mänaù—false pride; dambhaù—hypocrisy; atha—and; matsaraù—envy;
karmaëäm—of activities; ca—and; api—also; kämyänäm—selfish;
dväparam—the age of Dväpara; tat—that; rajaù-tamaù—predominated by a
mixture of the modes of passion and ignorance.
TRANSLATION
When greed, dissatisfaction, false pride, hypocrisy and envy become
prominent, along with attraction for selfish activities, such a time is the age of
Dväpara, dominated by the mixed modes of passion and ignorance.
TEXT 30
yad"A maAyaAna{taM tan‰"A
ina‰"A ihM"s$aA ivaSaAd"nama,
zAAek(maAeh"AE BayaM dE"nyaM
s$a k(ilastaAmas$a: sma{ta:
yadä mäyänåtaà tandrä
nidrä hiàsä viñädanam
çoka-mohau bhayaà dainyaà
sa kalis tämasaù småtaù
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; mäyä—deceit; anåtam—false speech; tandrä—sloth;
nidrä—sleep and intoxication; hiàsä—violence; viñädanam—depression;
çoka—lamentation; mohau—and delusion; bhayam—fear; dainyam—poverty;
saù—that; kaliù—the age of Kali; tämasaù—in the mode of ignorance;
småtaù—is considered.
TRANSLATION
When there is a predominance of cheating, lying, sloth, sleepiness, violence,
depression, lamentation, bewilderment, fear and poverty, that age is Kali, the
age of the mode of ignorance.
PURPORT
In Kali-yuga, people are almost exclusively devoted to gross materialism,
with hardly any affinity for self-realization.
TEXT 31
tasmaAtºau"‰"ä{"zAAe matyaAR:
ºau"‰"BaAgyaA mah"AzAnaA:
k(AimanaAe ivaÔah"InaAê
svaEir"Nyaê iñyaAe's$ataI:
tasmät kñudra-dåço martyäù
kñudra-bhägyä mahäçanäù
kämino vitta-hénäç ca
svairiëyaç ca striyo 'satéù
SYNONYMS
tasmät—due to these qualities of the age of Kali; kñudra-dåçaù—shortsighted;
martyäù—human beings; kñudra-bhägyäù—unfortunate;
mahä-açanäù—excessive in their eating habits; käminaù—full of lust;
vitta-hénäù—lacking wealth; ca—and; svairiëyaù—independent in their social
dealings; ca—and; striyaù—the women; asatéù—unchaste.
TRANSLATION
Because of the bad qualities of the age of Kali, human beings will become
shortsighted, unfortunate, gluttonous, lustful and poverty-stricken. The
women, becoming unchaste, will freely wander from one man to the next.
PURPORT
In the age of Kali certain pseudointellectuals, seeking individual freedom,
support sexual promiscuity. In fact, identification of the self with the body and
the pursuit of "individual freedom" in the body rather than in the soul are signs
of the most dismal ignorance and slavery to lust. When women are unchaste,
many children are born out of wedlock as products of lust. These children grow
up in psychologically unfavorable circumstances, and a neurotic, ignorant
society arises. Symptoms of this are already manifest throughout the world.
TEXT 32
d"syaUtk{(í"A janapad"A
vaed"A: paASaNx"äU"iSataA:
r"AjaAnaê ‘ajaABaºaA:
izA´aAed"r"par"A iã"jaA:
dasyütkåñöä janapadä
vedäù päñaëòa-düñitäù
räjänaç ca prajä-bhakñäù
çiçnodara-parä dvijäù
SYNONYMS
dasyu-utkåñöäù—predominated by thieves; jana-padäù—the populated places;
vedäù—the Vedic scriptures; päñaëòa—by atheists; düñitäù—contaminated;
räjänaù—the political leaders; ca—and; prajä-bhakñäù—consuming the
populace; çiçna-udara—to the genitals and belly; paräù—dedicated;
dvijäù—the brähmaëas.
TRANSLATION
Cities will be dominated by thieves, the Vedas will be contaminated by
speculative interpretations of atheists, political leaders will virtually consume
the citizens, and the so-called priests and intellectuals will be devotees of their
bellies and genitals.
PURPORT
Many large cities are unsafe at night. For example, it is understood that no
sane person will walk in New York's Central Park at night because he knows
he will almost certainly be mugged. Apart from ordinary thieves, who abound
in this age, large cities are filled with cutthroat businessmen, who
enthusiastically convince people to purchase and consume useless or even
harmful products. It has been well documented that beef, tobacco, liquor and
many other modern products destroy one's physical health, what to speak of
mental health, and yet modern capitalists do not hesitate to use every
psychological trick in the book to convince people to consume these things.
Modern cities are full of mental and atmospheric pollution, and even ordinary
citizens are finding them unbearable.
This verse also points out that the teachings of the Vedic scriptures will be
distorted in this age. Great universities teach courses on Hinduism in which
Indian religion, despite limitless evidence to the contrary, is described as
polytheistic and leading to an impersonal salvation. In fact, all Vedic literature
is a unified whole, as stated by Lord Kåñëa Himself in Bhagavad-gétä (15.15):
vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva vedyaù "By all the Vedas I [Kåñëa] am to be known."
All Vedic literature is meant for enlightening us about the Supreme Personal
Absolute Truth—Viñëu, or Kåñëa. Although known by many names and
appearing in many forms, God is a single absolute entity, and He is a person.
But this true Vedic understanding is hidden in the Kali-yuga.
In this verse Çukadeva astutely observes that "political leaders will virtually
consume the citizens, and the so-called priests and intellectuals will be
devotees of their bellies and genitals." How sadly true this statement is.
TEXT 33
@˜ataA baq%vaAe'zAAEcaA
iBaºavaê ku(q%]imbana:
tapaisvanaAe ƒaAmavaAs$aA
nyaAis$anaAe'tyaTaRlaAelaupaA:
avratä baöavo 'çaucä
bhikñavaç ca kuöumbinaù
tapasvino gräma-väsä
nyäsino 'tyartha-lolupäù
SYNONYMS
avratäù—failing to execute their vows; baöavaù—the brahmacärés;
açaucäù—unclean; bhikñavaù—prone to begging; ca—and; kuöumbinaù—the
householders; tapasvinaù—those who have gone to the forest for austerities;
gräma-väsäù—village residents; nyäsinaù—the sannyäsés;
atyartha-lolupäù—excessively greedy for wealth.
TRANSLATION
The brahmacärés will fail to execute their vows and become generally
unclean, the householders will become beggars, the vänaprasthas will live in the
villages, and the sannyäsés will become greedy for wealth.
PURPORT
Brahmacarya, celibate student life, is practically nonexistent in the age of
Kali. In America, many boys' schools have become coeducational because
young men frankly refuse to live without the constant companionship of lusty
young girls. Also, we have personally observed throughout the Western world
that student residences are among the dirtiest places on earth, as predicted
here by the word açaucäù.
Concerning householder beggars, when devotees of the Lord go door to
door distributing transcendental literature and requesting donations for the
propagation of God's glories, irritated householders commonly reply, "Someone
should give me a donation." Householders in Kali-yuga are not charitable.
Instead, because of their miserly mentality, they become irritated when
spiritual mendicants approach them.
In Vedic culture, at the age of fifty, couples retire to sacred places for
austere life and spiritual perfection. In countries like America, however,
retirement cities have been constructed wherein elderly people can make fools
of themselves by wasting the last years of their lives playing golf, ping-pong
and shuffleboard and by engaging in pathetic attempts at love affairs even
while their bodies are horribly rotting and their minds are growing senile. This
shameless abuse of the venerable last years of life denotes a stubborn
unwillingness to acknowledge the actual purpose of human life and is certainly
an offense against God.
The words nyäsino 'tyartha-lolupäù indicate that charismatic religious
leaders, and even those who are not charismatic, will proclaim themselves
prophets, saints and incarnations to cheat the innocent public and fatten their
bank accounts. Therefore the International Society for Krishna Consciousness
is working arduously to establish bona fide celibate student life, religious
householder life, dignified and progressive retirement, and genuine spiritual
leadership for the entire world. Today, May 9, 1982, in the sensual city of Rio
de Janeiro, Brazil, we have awarded sannyäsa, the renounced order of life, to
three young men, two Brazilians and one American, with the sincere hope that
they will faithfully execute the rigid vows of renounced life and provide
authentic spiritual leadership in South America.
TEXT 34
oe"svak(AyaA mah"Ah"Ar"A
BaUyaRpatyaA gAtaioe"ya:
zAìtk(q%]k(BaAiSaNyazA,
caAEyaRmaAyaAeç&s$aAh"s$aA:
hrasva-käyä mahähärä
bhüry-apatyä gata-hriyaù
çaçvat kaöuka-bhäñiëyaç
caurya-mäyoru-sähasäù
SYNONYMS
hrasva-käyäù—having dwarfed bodies; mahä-ähäräù—eating too much;
bhüri-apatyäù—having many children; gata-hriyaù—losing their shyness;
çaçvat—constantly; kaöuka—harshly; bhäñiëyaù—speaking;
caurya—exhibiting the tendencies of thievery; mäyä—deceit;
uru-sähasäù—and great audacity.
TRANSLATION
Women will become much smaller in size, and they will eat too much, have
more children than they can properly take care of, and lose all shyness. They
will always speak harshly and will exhibit qualities of thievery, deceit and
unrestrained audacity.
TEXT 35
paNAiyaSyainta vaE ºau"‰"A:
ik(r"Aq%A: kU(q%k(Air"NA:
@naApaâipa maMsyantae
vaAtaA< s$aADau jaugAuips$ataAma,
paëayiñyanti vai kñudräù
kiräöäù küöa-käriëaù
anäpady api maàsyante
värtäà sädhu jugupsitäm
SYNONYMS
paëayiñyanti—will engage in commerce; vai—indeed; kñudräù—petty;
kiräöäù—the merchants; küöa-käriëaù—indulging in cheating; anäpadi—when
there is no emergency; api—even; maàsyante—people will consider;
värtäm—an occupation; sädhu—good; jugupsitäm—which is actually
contemptible.
TRANSLATION
Businessmen will engage in petty commerce and earn their money by
cheating. Even when there is no emergency, people will consider any degraded
occupation quite acceptable.
PURPORT
Although other occupations are available, people do not hesitate to work in
coal mines, slaughterhouses, steel mills, deserts, floating oil rigs, submarines
and other equally abominable situations. As also mentioned here, businessmen
will consider cheating and lying to be a perfectly respectable way to do
business. These are all symptoms of the age of Kali.
TEXT 36
paitaM tyaºyainta ina‰R"vyaM
Ba{tyaA @pyaiKalaAeÔamama,
Ba{tyaM ivapaªaM pataya:
k(AElaM gAAêApayaisvanaI:
patià tyakñyanti nirdravyaà
bhåtyä apy akhilottamam
bhåtyaà vipannaà patayaù
kaulaà gäç cäpayasvinéù
SYNONYMS
patim—a master; tyakñyanti—they will abandon; nirdravyam—lacking
property; bhåtyäù—servants; api—even; akhila-uttamam—most excellent in
personal qualities; bhåtyam—a servant; vipannam—incapacitated;
patayaù—masters; kaulam—belonging to the family for generations;
gäù—cows; ca—and; apayasvinéù—which have stopped giving milk.
TRANSLATION
Servants will abandon a master who has lost his wealth, even if that master
is a saintly person of exemplary character. Masters will abandon an
incapacitated servant, even if that servant has been in the family for
generations. Cows will be abandoned or killed when they stop giving milk.
PURPORT
In India, the cow is considered sacred not because Indian people are
primitive worshipers of mythological totems but because Hindus intelligently
understand that the cow is a mother. As children, nearly all of us were
nourished with cow's milk, and therefore the cow is one of our mothers.
Certainly one's mother is sacred, and therefore we should not kill the sacred
cow.
TEXT 37
ipata{”aAta{s$auô$jÁaAtaIna,
ih"tvaA s$aAEr"tas$aAEô$d"A:
nanaAnä{"zyaAlas$aMvaAd"A
d"InaA: ñENAA: k(laAE nar"A:
pitå-bhrätå-suhåj-jïätén
hitvä saurata-sauhådäù
nanändå-çyäla-saàvädä
dénäù straiëäù kalau naräù
SYNONYMS
pitå—their fathers; bhrätå—brothers; suhåt—well-wishing friends; jïätén—and
immediate relatives; hitvä—giving up; saurata—based on sexual relationships;
sauhådäù—their conception of friendship; nanändå—with their wives' sisters;
çyäla—and wives' brothers; saàvädäù—associating regularly;
dénäù—wretched; straiëäù—effeminate; kalau—in Kali-yuga; naräù—the
men.
TRANSLATION
In Kali-yuga men will be wretched and controlled by women. They will
reject their fathers, brothers, other relatives and friends and will instead
associate with the sisters and brothers of their wives. Thus their conception of
friendship will be based exclusively on sexual ties.
TEXT 38
zAU#‰"A: ‘aitaƒah"ISyainta
tapaAevaeSaAepajaIivana:
Dama< vaºyantyaDamaRÁaA
@iDaç&÷AeÔamaAs$anama,
çüdräù pratigrahéñyanti
tapo-veñopajévinaù
dharmaà vakñyanty adharma-jïä
adhiruhyottamäsanam
SYNONYMS
çüdräù—lowly, common workers; pratigrahéñyanti—will accept religious
charity; tapaù—by shows of austerity; veña—and by dressing as mendicants;
upajévinaù—earning their living; dharmam—the principles of religion;
vakñyanti—will speak about; adharma-jïäù—those who know nothing about
religion; adhiruhya—mounting; uttama-äsanam—a high seat.
TRANSLATION
Uncultured men will accept charity on behalf of the Lord and will earn their
livelihood by making a show of austerity and wearing a mendicant's dress.
Those who know nothing about religion will mount a high seat and presume to
speak on religious principles.
PURPORT
The epidemic of bogus gurus, swamis, priests and so forth is explicitly
described here.
TEXTS 39-40
inatyaM oiã"¢amanas$aAe
äu"iBaRºak(r"k(izARtaA:
inar"ªae BaUtalae r"Ajana,
@naAva{ií"BayaAtaur"A:
vaAs$aAe'ªapaAnazAyana-
vyavaAyaµaAnaBaUSaNAE:
h"InaA: ipazAAcas$and"zAAR
BaivaSyainta k(laAE ‘ajaA:
nityaà udvigna-manaso
durbhikña-kara-karçitäù
niranne bhü-tale räjan
anävåñöi-bhayäturäù
väso-'nna-päna-çayanavyaväya-
snäna-bhüñaëaiù
hénäù piçäca-sandarçä
bhaviñyanti kalau prajäù
SYNONYMS
nityam—constantly; udvigna—agitated; manasaù—their minds; durbhikña-by
famine; kara—and taxes; karçitaù—emaciated; niranne—when there is no
food to be found; bhü-tale—upon the surface of the earth; räjan—O King
Parékñit; anävåñöi—of drought; bhaya—because of fear; äturäù—anxious;
väsaù—clothing; anna—food; päna—drink; çayana—rest; vyaväya—sex;
snäna—bathing; bhüñaëaiù—and personal ornaments; hénäù—lacking;
piçäca-sandarçäù—appearing just like ghostly demons; bhaviñyanti—they will
become; kalau—in the age of Kali; prajäù—the people.
TRANSLATION
In the age of Kali, people's minds will always be agitated. They will become
emaciated by famine and taxation, my dear King, and will always be disturbed
by fear of drought. They will lack adequate clothing, food and drink, will be
unable to properly rest, have sex or bathe themselves, and will have no
ornaments to decorate their bodies. In fact, the people of Kali-yuga will
gradually come to appear like ghostly, haunted creatures.
PURPORT
The symptoms described here are already prevalent in many countries of
the world and will gradually spread to other places engulfed by impiety and
materialism.
TEXT 41
k(laAE k(Aik(iNAke('pyaTaeR
ivagA{÷ tyal(s$aAEô$d"A:
tyaºyainta ca i‘ayaAna, ‘aANAAna,
h"inaSyainta svak(Anaipa
kalau käkiëike 'py arthe
vigåhya tyakta-sauhådäù
tyakñyanti ca priyän präëän
haniñyanti svakän api
SYNONYMS
kalau—in the age of Kali; käkiëike—of a small coin; api—even; arthe—for the
sake; vigåhya—developing enmity; tyakta—abandoning; sauhådäù—friendly
relations; tyakñyanti—they will reject; ca—and; priyän—dear; präëän—their
own lives; haniñyanti—they will kill; svakän—their own relatives; api—even.
TRANSLATION
In Kali-yuga men will develop hatred for each other even over a few coins.
Giving up all friendly relations, they will be ready to lose their own lives and
kill even their own relatives.
TEXT 42
na r"iºaSyainta manaujaA:
sTaivar"AE ipatar"Avaipa
pau‡aAna, BaAyaA< ca ku(lajaAM
ºau"‰"A: izA´aAed"rM"Bar"A:
na rakñiñyanti manujäù
sthavirau pitaräv api
puträn bhäryäà ca kula-jäà
kñudräù çiçnodaraà-bharäù
SYNONYMS
na rakñiñyanti—they will not protect; manujäù—men; sthavirau—elderly;
pitarau—parents; api—even; puträn—children; bhäryäm—wife; ca—also;
kula-jäm—born of a proper family; kñudräù—petty; çiçna-udaram—their
genitals and belly; bharäù—simply maintaining.
TRANSLATION
Men will no longer protect their elderly parents, their children or their
respectable wives. Thoroughly degraded, they will care only to satisfy their own
bellies and genitals.
PURPORT
In this age many people are already sending their elderly parents away to
lonely, and often bizarre, old-age homes, although the elderly parents spent
their entire lives serving their children.
Young children are also tormented in many ways in this age. Suicide among
children has increased dramatically in recent years because they are being
born not to loving, religious parents but to degraded, selfish men and women.
In fact, children are often born because a birth-control pill, a prophylactic or
some other contraceptive device malfunctioned. Under such conditions, it is
very difficult nowadays for parents to morally guide their children. Generally
ignorant of spiritual science, parents cannot lead their children on the path of
liberation and thus fail to fulfill their primary responsibility in family life.
As predicted in this verse, adultery has become common, and people in
general are extremely concerned with eating and sex, which they consider far
more important than knowing the Absolute Truth.
TEXT 43
k(laAE na r"Ajana, jagAtaAM parM" gAuçM&
i‡alaAek(naATaAnatapaAd"paÆÿjama,
‘aAyaeNA matyaAR BagAvantamacyautaM
yaºyainta paASaNx"ivaiBaªacaetas$a:
kalau na räjan jagatäà paraà guruà
tri-loka-näthänata-päda-paìkajam
präyeëa martyä bhagavantam acyutaà
yakñyanti päñaëòa-vibhinna-cetasaù
SYNONYMS
kalau—in the age of Kali; na—not; räjan—O King; jagatäm—of the universe;
param—the supreme; gurum—spiritual master; tri-loka—of the three worlds;
nätha—by the various masters; änata—bowed down to;
päda-paìkajam—whose lotus feet; präyeëa—for the most part;
martyäù—human beings; bhagavantam—the Personality of Godhead;
acyutam—Lord Acyuta; yakñyanti—they will offer sacrifice; päñaëòa—by
atheism; vibhinna—diverted; cetasaù—their intelligence.
TRANSLATION
O King, in the age of Kali people's intelligence will be diverted by atheism,
and they will almost never offer sacrifice to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is the supreme spiritual master of the universe. Although the
great personalities who control the three worlds all bow down to the lotus feet
of the Supreme Lord, the petty and miserable human beings of this age will not
do so.
PURPORT
The impulse to find the Absolute Truth, the source of all existence, has
motivated philosophers, theologians and other intellectuals of various
persuasions since time immemorial, and continues to do so today. However,
soberly analyzing the ever-increasing plurality of so-called philosophies,
religions, paths, ways of life and so on, we find that in almost all cases the
ultimate objective is something impersonal or formless. But this idea of an
impersonal or formless Absolute Truth has serious logical flaws. According to
ordinary rules of logic, a particular effect should directly or indirectly embody
the attributes, or nature, of its own cause. Thus that which has no personality
or activity could hardly be the source of all personality and all activity.
Our irrepressible proclivity to philosophize about the ultimate truth often
expresses itself through philosophical, scientific and mystical attempts to
discover that from which everything emanates. This material world, which is a
seemingly limitless network of interactive causes and effects, is certainly not
the Absolute Truth, since scientific observation of material elements indicates
that the stuff of this world, material energy, is endlessly transformed into
different states and shapes. Therefore, one particular instance of material
reality cannot be the ultimate source of all other things.
We may speculate that matter in some shape or other has always existed.
This theory, however, is no longer attractive to modern cosmologists, such as
those at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. And even if we do posit
that matter has always existed, we still must explain the source of
consciousness if we want to satisfy our philosophical impulse toward
discovering the Absolute Truth. Although modern empirical fanatics state
that nothing is real except matter, everyone commonly experiences that
consciousness is not the same kind of substance as a stone, a pencil or water.
Awareness itself, in contradistinction to the objects of awareness, is not a
physical entity but rather a process of perception and understanding. While
there is ample evidence of a systematic interdependent relationship between
matter and consciousness, there is no rigid empirical evidence whatsoever that
matter is the cause of consciousness. Thus the theory that the material world
has always existed and is therefore the ultimate truth does not scientifically or
even intuitively explain the source of consciousness, which is the most
fundamentally real aspect of our existence.
Furthermore, as demonstrated by Dr. Richard Thompson of the State
University of New York at Binghamton and confirmed by several Nobel
laureates in physics who have praised his work, the laws of nature governing
the transformation of matter simply do not contain sufficiently complex
information to account for the inconceivable complexity of events taking
place within our own bodies and those of other life forms. In other words, not
only do the material laws of nature fail to account for the existence of
consciousness, but they cannot explain even the interaction of material
elements at complex organic levels. Even Socrates, the first great Western
philosopher, was disgusted with the attempt to establish ultimate causality in
terms of mechanistic principles.
The heat and luminosity of the sun's rays demonstrate to the satisfaction of
any rational man that the sun, the source of the rays, is certainly not a dark,
cold globe but rather a reservoir of almost unlimited heat and light. Similarly,
the innumerable instances of personality and personal consciousness within
creation are more than adequate to demonstrate the existence, somewhere, of
an unlimited reservoir of consciousness and personal behavior. In his dialogue
Philebus, the Greek philosopher Plato argued that just as the material elements
in our body are derived from a vast reservoir of material elements existing
within the universe, our rational intelligence is also derived from a great
cosmic intelligence existing within the universe, and this supreme intelligence
is God, the creator. Unfortunately, in Kali-yuga many leading thinkers cannot
understand this and instead deny that the Absolute Truth, the source of our
personal consciousness, has consciousness and personality. This is as
reasonable as saying that the sun is cold and dark.
In Kali-yuga, many people present cheap, stereotyped arguments, such as "If
God had a body or personality, He would be limited." In this inadequate
attempt at logic, a qualified term is falsely presented in a universal sense. What
really should be said is, "If God had a material body or a material personality
like those we have experienced, He would be limited." But we leave out the
qualifying adjective material and make a pseudouniversal assertion, as if we
understood the full range, within total reality, of bodies and personality.
Bhagavad-gétä, Çrémad-Bhägavatam and other Vedic literatures teach that
the transcendental form and personality of the Absolute Truth are unlimited.
Clearly, to be truly infinite God must be not only quantitatively but also
qualitatively infinite. Unfortunately, in our mechanistic, industrial age we
tend to define infinity only in its quantitative sense, and thus we fail to notice
that an infinity of personal qualities is a necessary aspect of infinity. In other
words, God must have infinite beauty, infinite wealth, infinite intelligence,
infinite humor, infinite kindness, infinite anger and so on. Infinite is an
absolute, and if anything we observe in this world is not contained, somehow
or other, within our conception of the Absolute, then that conception is of
something limited and not of the Absolute at all.
Only in Kali-yuga are there philosophers foolish enough to proudly define
the most absolute of all terms—God—in materialistic, relative ways and then
declare themselves enlightened thinkers. No matter how big our brain may be,
we should have the common sense to place it at the feet of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 44
yaªaAmaDaeyaM i•ayamaANA @Ataur":
patana, sKalana, vaA ivavazAAe gA{NAna, paumaAna,
ivamaul(k(maARgARla oÔamaAM gAitaM
‘aA«aAeita yaºyainta na taM k(laAE janaA:
yan-nämadheyaà mriyamäëa äturaù
patan skhalan vä vivaço gåëan pumän
vimukta-karmärgala uttamäà gatià
präpnoti yakñyanti na taà kalau janäù
SYNONYMS
yat—whose; nämadheyam—name; mriyamäëaù—a person who is dying;
äturaù—distressed; patan—collapsing; skhalan—voice faltering; vä—or;
vivaçaù—helplessly; gåëan—chanting; pumän—a person; vimukta—freed;
karma—of fruitive work; argalaù—from the chains; uttamäm—the topmost;
gatim—destination; präpnoti—achieves; yakñyanti na—they do not worship;
tam—Him, the Personality of Godhead; kalau—in the age of Kali;
janäù—people.
TRANSLATION
Terrified, about to die, a man collapses on his bed. Although his voice is
faltering and he is hardly conscious of what he is saying, if he utters the holy
name of the Supreme Lord he can be freed from the reaction of his fruitive
work and achieve the supreme destination. But still people in the age of Kali
will not worship the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
You can lead a horse to water, but you cannot make him drink.
TEXT 45
pauMs$aAM k(ilak{(taAnd"AeSaAna,
‰"vyade"zAAtmas$amBavaAna,
s$avaARna, h"r"ita icaÔasTaAe
BagAvaAna, pauç&SaAeÔama:
puàsäà kali-kåtän doñän
dravya-deçätma-sambhavän
sarvän harati citta-stho
bhagavän puruñottamaù
SYNONYMS
puàsäm—of men; kali-kåtän—created by the influence of Kali; doñän—the
faults; dravya—objects; deça—space; ätma—and personal nature;
sambhavän—based upon; sarvän—all; harati—steals away;
citta-sthaù—situated within the heart; bhagavän—the almighty Lord;
puruña-uttamaù—the Supreme Person.
TRANSLATION
In the Kali-yuga, objects, places and even individual personalities are all
polluted. The almighty Personality of Godhead, however, can remove all such
contamination from the life of one who fixes the Lord within his mind.
TEXT 46
™auta: s$aÆÿLitaRtaAe DyaAta:
paUijataêAä{"taAe'ipa vaA
na{NAAM DaunaAeita BagAvaAna,
ô$tsTaAe janmaAyautaAzAuBama,
çrutaù saìkértito dhyätaù
püjitaç cädåto 'pi vä
nåëäà dhunoti bhagavän
håt-stho janmäyutäçubham
SYNONYMS
çrutaù—heard; saìkértitaù—glorified; dhyätaù—meditated upon;
püjitaù—worshiped; ca—and; ädåtaù—venerated; api—even; vä—or;
nåëäm—of men; dhunoti—cleanses away; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; håt-sthaù—seated within their hearts; janma-ayuta—of thousands
of births; açubham—the inauspicious contamination.
TRANSLATION
If a person hears about, glorifies, meditates upon, worships or simply offers
great respect to the Supreme Lord, who is situated within the heart, the Lord
will remove from his mind the contamination accumulated during many
thousands of lifetimes.
TEXT 47
yaTaA he"i°a isTataAe vai¶"r,"
äu"vaRNA< h"inta DaAtaujama,
WvamaAtmagAtaAe ivaSNAur,"
yaAeigAnaAmazAuBaAzAyama,
yathä hemni sthito vahnir
durvarëaà hanti dhätu-jam
evam ätma-gato viñëur
yoginäm açubhäçayam
SYNONYMS
yathä—just as; hemni—in gold; sthitaù—situated; vahniù—fire;
durvarëam—the discoloration; hanti—destroys; dhätu-jam—due to the taint of
other metals; evam—in the same way; ätma-gataù—having entered the soul;
viñëuù—Lord Viñëu; yoginäm—of the yogés; açubha-äçayam—the dirty mind.
TRANSLATION
Just as fire applied to gold removes any discoloration caused by traces of
other metals, Lord Viñëu within the heart purifies the minds of the yogés.
PURPORT
Although one may practice the mystic yoga system, his actual spiritual
advancement is due to the mercy of the Supreme Lord within the heart; it is
not directly the result of his austerity and meditation. If one becomes foolishly
proud in the name of yoga, his spiritual position becomes ridiculous.
TEXT 48
ivaâAtapa:‘aANAinar"AeDamaE‡aItaITaARiBaSaek(
˜atad"AnajapyaE:
naAtyantazAuiÜM" laBatae'ntar"AtmaA
yaTaA ô$id"sTae BagAvatyanantae
vidyä-tapaù-präëa-nirodha-maitrétérthäbhiñeka-
vrata-däna-japyaiù
nätyanta-çuddhià labhate 'ntarätmä
yathä hådi-sthe bhagavaty anante
SYNONYMS
vidyä—by worship of demigods; tapaù—austerities; präëa-nirodha—exercise of
breath control; maitré—compassion; tértha-abhiñeka—bathing in holy places;
vrata—strict vows; däna—charity; japyaiù—and chanting of various mantras;
na—not; atyanta—complete; çuddhim—purification; labhate—can achieve;
antaù-ätmä—the mind; yathä—as; hådi-sthe—when He is present within the
heart; bhagavati—the Personality of Godhead; anante—the unlimited Lord.
TRANSLATION
By one's engaging in the processes of demigod worship, austerities, breath
control, compassion, bathing in holy places, strict vows, charity and chanting of
various mantras, one's mind cannot attain the same absolute purification as that
achieved when the unlimited Personality of Godhead appears within one's
heart.
TEXT 49
tasmaAts$avaARtmanaA r"Ajana,
ô$id"sTaM ku(ç& ke(zAvama,
i•ayamaANAAe ÷vaih"tas$a,
tataAe yaAis$a par"AM gAitama,
tasmät sarvätmanä räjan
hådi-sthaà kuru keçavam
mriyamäëo hy avahitas
tato yäsi paräà gatim
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; sarva-ätmanä—with all endeavor; räjan—O King;
hådi-stham—within your heart; kuru—make; keçavam—Lord Keçava;
mriyamäëaù—dying; hi—indeed; avahitaù—concentrated; tataù—then;
yäsi—you will go; param—to the supreme; gatim—destination.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O King, endeavor with all your might to fix the Supreme Lord
Keçava within your heart. Maintain this concentration upon the Lord, and at
the time of death you will certainly attain the supreme destination.
PURPORT
Although the Supreme Lord is always in the heart of every living being, the
words hådi-sthaà kuru keçavam indicate that one should endeavor to realize
the Lord's presence there and maintain this awareness at every moment.
Parékñit Mahäräja is about to give up this world and is receiving final
instructions from his spiritual master, Çukadeva Gosvämé. In the context of
the King's imminent departure, this verse has special significance.
TEXT 50
i•ayamaANAEr"iBaDyaeyaAe
BagAvaAna, par"maeìr":
@AtmaBaAvaM nayatyaËÿ
s$avaARtmaA s$avaRs$aM™aya:
mriyamäëair abhidhyeyo
bhagavän parameçvaraù
ätma-bhävaà nayaty aìga
sarvätmä sarva-saàçrayaù
SYNONYMS
mriyamäëaiù—by those who are dying; abhidhyeyaù—meditated upon;
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; parama-éçvaraù—the Supreme Lord;
ätma-bhävam—their own true identity; nayati—leads them to; aìga—my dear
King; sarva-ätmä—the Supreme Soul; sarva-saàçrayaù—the shelter of all
beings.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, the Personality of Godhead is the ultimate controller. He is
the Supreme Soul and the supreme shelter of all beings. When meditated upon
by those about to die, He reveals to them their own eternal spiritual identity.
TEXT 51
k(laed"AeRSainaDae r"Ajaªa,
@ista ÷ek(Ae mah"Ana, gAuNA:
k(LtaRnaAde"va k{(SNAsya
maul(s$aËÿ: parM" ˜ajaeta,
kaler doña-nidhe räjann
asti hy eko mahän guëaù
kértanäd eva kåñëasya
mukta-saìgaù paraà vrajet
SYNONYMS
kaleù—of the age of Kali; doña-nidheù—in the ocean of faults; räjan—O King;
asti—there is; hi—certainly; ekaù—one; mahän—very great; guëaù—good
quality; kértanät—by chanting; eva—certainly; kåñëasya—of the holy name of
Kåñëa; mukta-saìgaù—liberated from material bondage; param—to the
transcendental spiritual kingdom; vrajet—one can go.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, although Kali-yuga is an ocean of faults, there is still one
good quality about this age: Simply by chanting the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra,
one can become free from material bondage and be promoted to the
transcendental kingdom.
PURPORT
After mentioning the innumerable faults of this age of Kali, Çukadeva
Gosvämé now mentions its one brilliant aspect. Just as one powerful king can
kill innumerable thieves, one brilliant spiritual quality can destroy all the
contamination of this age. It is impossible to overestimate the importance of
chanting Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare
Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare, especially in this fallen age.
TEXT 52
k{(tae yaÜ"YaAyataAe ivaSNAuM
‡aetaAyaAM yajataAe maKaE:
ã"Apare" pair"cayaARyaAM
k(laAE taÜ"ir"k(LtaRnaAta,
kåte yad dhyäyato viñëuà
tretäyäà yajato makhaiù
dväpare paricaryäyäà
kalau tad dhari-kértanät
SYNONYMS
kåte—in the Satya-yuga; yat—which; dhyäyataù—from meditation;
viñëum—on Lord Viñëu; tretäyäm—in the Tretä-yuga; yajataù—from
worshiping; makhaiù—by performing sacrifices; dväpare—in the age of
Dväpara; paricaryäyäm—by worshiping the lotus feet of Kåñëa; kalau—in the
age of Kali; tat—that same result (can be achieved); hari-kértanät—simply by
chanting the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra.
TRANSLATION
Whatever result was obtained in Satya-yuga by meditating on Viñëu, in
Tretä-yuga by performing sacrifices, and in Dväpara-yuga by serving the Lord's
lotus feet can be obtained in Kali-yuga simply by chanting the Hare Kåñëa
mahä-mantra.
PURPORT
A similar verse is found in the Viñëu Puräëa (6.2.17), and also in the Padma
Puräëa (Uttara-khaëòa 72.25) and the Båhan-näradéya Puräëa (38.97):
dhyäyan kåte yajan yajïais
tretäyäà dväpare 'rcayan
yad äpnoti tad äpnoti
kalau saìkértya keçavam
"Whatever is achieved by meditation in Satya-yuga, by the performance of
sacrifice in Tretä-yuga, and by the worship of Lord Kåñëa's lotus feet in
Dväpara-yuga is obtained in the age of Kali simply by glorifying the name of
Lord Keçava."
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has further quoted from the Brahma-vaivarta Puräëa
concerning the degraded condition of people in Kali-yuga:
ataù kalau tapo-yogavidyä-
yajïädikäù kriyäù
säìgä bhavanti na kåtäù
kuçalair api dehibhiù
"Thus in the age of Kali the practices of austerity, yoga meditation, Deity
worship, sacrifice and so on, along with their various subsidiary functions, are
not properly carried out, even by the most expert embodied souls.
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has also cited the Cäturmäsya-mähätmya of the Skanda
Puräëa concerning the necessity of chanting Hare Kåñëa in this age:
tathä caivottamaà loke
tapaù çré-hari-kértanam
kalau yuge viçeñeëa
viñëu-prétyai samäcaret
"In this way the most perfect penance to be executed in this world is the
chanting of the name of Lord Çré Hari. Especially in the age of Kali, one can
satisfy the Supreme Lord Viñëu by performing saìkértana.''
In conclusion, massive propaganda should be made all over the world to
induce people to chant the Hare Kåñëa mantra, by which human society can be
rescued from the dangerous ocean of the age of Kali.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Twelfth Canto, Third Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Bhümi-gétä."
4. The Four Categories of Universal Annihilation
This chapter discusses the four kinds of annihilation (constant, occasional,
material and final) and the chanting of the holy name of Lord Hari, which is
the only means of stopping the cycle of material life.
One thousand cycles of four ages constitute one day of Brahmä, and each
day of Brahmä, called a kalpa, contains within it the lifetimes of fourteen
Manus. The duration of Brahmä's night is the same as that of his day. During
his night Brahmä sleeps, and the three planetary systems meet destruction; this
is the naimittika, or occasional, annihilation. When Brahmä's life span of one
hundred years is finished, there occurs the präkåtika, or total material,
annihilation. At that time the seven elements of material nature, beginning
with the mahat, and the entire universal egg composed of them are destroyed.
When a person achieves knowledge of the Absolute, he understands factual
reality. He perceives the entire created universe as separate from the Absolute
and therefore unreal. That is called the ätyantika, or final, annihilation
(liberation). At every moment time invisibly transforms the bodies of all
created beings and all other manifestations of matter. This process of
transformation causes the living entity to undergo the constant annihilation
of birth and death. Those possessed of subtle vision state that all creatures,
including Brahmä himself, are always subject to generation and annihilation.
Material life means subjugation to birth and death, or generation and
annihilation. The only boat suitable for crossing the ocean of material
existence, which is otherwise impossible to cross, is the boat of submissive
hearing of the nectarean pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
k(Alastae par"maANvaAid"r,"
iã"par"ADaARvaiDana{Rpa
k(iTataAe yaugAmaAnaM ca
Za{NAu k(lpalayaAvaipa
çré-çuka uväca
kälas te paramäëv-ädir
dvi-parärdhävadhir nåpa
kathito yuga-mänaà ca
çåëu kalpa-layäv api
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; kälaù—time; te—to you;
parama-aëu—(the smallest fraction of time measured in terms of) the
indivisible atom; ädiù—beginning with; dvi-para-ardha—the two halves of
Brahmä's total life span; avadhiù—culminating in; nåpa—O King Parékñit;
kathitaù—has been described; yuga-mänam—the duration of the millennia;
ca—and; çåëu—now hear; kalpa—Brahmä's day; layau—annihilation;
api—also.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: My dear King, I have already described to you the
measurements of time, beginning from the smallest fraction measured by the
movement of a single atom up to the total life span of Lord Brahmä. I have also
discussed the measurement of the different millennia of universal history. Now
hear about the time of Brahmä's day and the process of annihilation.
TEXT 2
catauyauRgAs$ah"›aM tau
“aöNAAe id"namaucyatae
s$a k(lpaAe ya‡a manavazA,
cataudR"zA ivazAAmpatae
catur-yuga-sahasraà tu
brahmaëo dinam ucyate
sa kalpo yatra manavaç
caturdaça viçäm-pate
SYNONYMS
catuù-yuga—four ages; sahasram—one thousand; tu—indeed; brahmaëaù—of
Lord Brahmä; dinam—the day; ucyate—is said; saù—that; kalpaù—a kalpa;
yatra-in which; manavaù—original progenitors of mankind;
caturdaça—fourteen; viçäm-pate—O King.
TRANSLATION
One thousand cycles of four ages constitute a single day of Brahmä, known
as a kalpa. In that period, O King, fourteen Manus come and go.
TEXT 3
tad"ntae ‘alayastaAvaAna,
“aAöI r"Ai‡aç&d"Aô$taA
‡ayaAe laAek(A wmae ta‡a
k(lpantae ‘alayaAya ih"
tad-ante pralayas tävän
brähmé rätrir udähåtä
trayo lokä ime tatra
kalpante pralayäya hi
SYNONYMS
tat-ante—after those (thousand cycles of ages); pralayaù—the annihilation;
tävän—of the same duration; brähmé—of Brahmä; rätriù—the nighttime;
udähåtä—is described; trayaù—the three; lokäù—worlds; ime—these;
tatra—at that time; kalpante—are prone; pralayäya—to annihilation;
hi—indeed.
TRANSLATION
After one day of Brahmä, annihilation occurs during his night, which is of
the same duration. At that time all the three planetary systems are subject to
destruction.
TEXT 4
WSa naEimaiÔak(: ‘aAel(:
‘alayaAe ya‡a ivaìs$a{k,(
zAetae'nantaAs$anaAe ivaìma,
@Atmas$aAtk{(tya caAtmaBaU:
eña naimittikaù proktaù
pralayo yatra viçva-såk
çete 'nantäsano viçvam
ätmasät-kåtya cätma-bhüù
SYNONYMS
eñaù—this; naimittikaù—occasional; proktaù—is said; pralayaù—annihilation;
yatra—in which; viçva-såk—the creator of the universe, the Supreme Lord,
Näräyaëa; çete—lies down; ananta-äsanaù—upon the snake-bed of Ananta
Çeña; viçvam—the universe; ätma-sät-kåtya—absorbing within Himself;
ca—also; ätma-bhüù—Lord Brahmä.
TRANSLATION
This is called the naimittika, or occasional, annihilation, during which the
original creator, Lord Näräyaëa, lies down upon the bed of Ananta Çeña and
absorbs the entire universe within Himself while Lord Brahmä sleeps.
TEXT 5
iã"par"ADaeR tvaita‚(Antae
“aöNA: par"maeiï"na:
tad"A ‘ak{(taya: s$aæa
k(lpantae ‘alayaAya vaE
dvi-parärdhe tv atikränte
brahmaëaù parameñöhinaù
tadä prakåtayaù sapta
kalpante pralayäya vai
SYNONYMS
dvi-parärdhe—two parärdhas; tu-and; atikränte—when they have become
completed; brahmaëaù—of Lord Brahmä; parame-sthinaù—the most highly
situated living entity; tadä—then; prakåtayaù—the elements of nature;
sapta—seven; kalpante—are subject; pralayäya—to destruction; vai—indeed.
TRANSLATION
When the two halves of the lifetime of Lord Brahmä, the most elevated
created being, are complete, the seven basic elements of creation are
annihilated.
TEXT 6
WSa ‘aAk{(itak(Ae r"Ajana,
‘alayaAe ya‡a laIyatae
@Nx"k(AeSastau s$aÎÿAtaAe
ivaGaAq% opas$aAid"tae
eña präkåtiko räjan
pralayo yatra léyate
aëòa-koñas tu saìghäto
vighäöa upasädite
SYNONYMS
eñaù—this; präkåtikaù—of the elements of material nature; räjan—O King
Parékñit; pralayaù—the annihilation; yatra—in which; léyate—is dissolved;
aëòa-koñaù—the egg of the universe; tu—and; saìghäöaù—the amalgamation;
vighäte—the cause of its disruption; upasädite—being encountered.
TRANSLATION
O King, upon the annihilation of the material elements, the universal egg,
comprising the elemental amalgamation of creation, is confronted with
destruction.
PURPORT
It is significant that Çukadeva Gosvämé, the spiritual master of King
Parékñit, is broadly discussing cosmic annihilation just before the death of his
disciple. By attentively hearing the story of universal destruction, one can
easily understand one's personal departure from this temporary world to be an
insignificant incident within the gigantic scope of the total material
manifestation. By his deep and relevant discussions of the creation of God,
Çukadeva Gosvämé, as an ideal spiritual master, is preparing his disciple for the
moment of death.
TEXT 7
pajaRnya: zAtavaSaARiNA
BaUmaAE r"Ajaªa vaSaRita
tad"A inar"ªae ÷nyaAenyaM
BaºyamaANAA: ºauDaAidR"taA:
ºayaM yaAsyainta zAnakE(:
k(AlaenaAepaåu"taA: ‘ajaA:
parjanyaù çata-varñäëi
bhümau räjan na varñati
tadä niranne hy anyonyaà
bhakñyamäëäù kñudhärditäù
kñayaà yäsyanti çanakaiù
kälenopadrutäù prajäù
SYNONYMS
parjanyaù—the clouds; çata-varñäëi—for one hundred years; bhümau—upon
the earth; räjan—my dear King; na varñati—will not give rain; tadä—then;
niranne—with the coming of famine; hi—indeed; anyonyam—one another;
bhakñyamäëäù—eating; kñudhä—by hunger; arditäù—distressed; kñayam—to
destruction; yäsyanti—they go; çanakaiù—gradually; kälena—by the force of
time; upadrutäù—confounded; prajäù—the people.
TRANSLATION
As annihilation approaches, O King, there will be no rain upon the earth for
one hundred years. Drought will lead to famine, and the starving populace will
literally consume one another. The inhabitants of the earth, bewildered by the
force of time, will gradually be destroyed.
TEXT 8
s$aAmau"‰M" dE"ih"kM( BaAEmaM
r"s$aM s$aAMvataRk(Ae r"iva:
r"izmaiBa: ipabatae GaAerE":
s$ava< naEva ivamauÂaita
sämudraà daihikaà bhaumaà
rasaà säàvartako raviù
raçmibhiù pibate ghoraiù
sarvaà naiva vimuïcati
SYNONYMS
sämudram—of the ocean; daihikam—of living bodies; bhaumam—of the earth;
rasam—the juice; säàvartakaù—annihilating; raviù—the sun;
raçmibhiù—with its rays; pibate—drinks up; ghoraiù—which are terrible;
sarvam—all; na—nothing; eva—even; vimuïcati—gives.
TRANSLATION
The sun in its annihilating form will drink up with its terrible rays all the
water of the ocean, of living bodies and of the earth itself. But the devastating
sun will not give any rain in return.
TEXT 9
tata: s$aMvataRk(Ae vai¶":
s$aÆÿSaRNAmauKaAeitTata:
d"h"tyainalavaegAAetTa:
zAUnyaAna, BaUivavar"AnaTa
tataù saàvartako vahniù
saìkarñaëa-mukhotthitaù
dahaty anila-vegotthaù
çünyän bhü-vivarän atha
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; saàvartakaù—of destruction; vahniù—the fire; saìkarñaëa—of
the Supreme Lord, Saìkarñaëa; mukha—from the mouth; utthitaù—arisen;
dahati—burns; anila-vega—by the force of the wind; utthaù—raised;
çünyän—empty; bhü—of the planets; vivarän—the crevices; atha—after that.
TRANSLATION
Next the great fire of annihilation will flare up from the mouth of Lord
Saìkarñaëa. Carried by the mighty force of the wind, this fire will burn
throughout the universe, scorching the lifeless cosmic shell.
TEXT 10
opayaRDa: s$amantaA»a
izAKaAiBavaRi¶"s$aUyaRyaAe:
d"÷maAnaM ivaBaAtyaNxM"
d"gDagAAemayaipaNx"vata,
upary adhaù samantäc ca
çikhäbhir vahni-süryayoù
dahyamänaà vibhäty aëòaà
dagdha-gomaya-piëòa-vat
SYNONYMS
upari—above; adhaù—and below; samantät—in all directions; ca—and;
çikhäbhiù—with the flames; vahni—of the fire; süryayoù—and of the sun;
dahyamänam—being burned; vibhäti—glows; aëòam—the egg of the universe;
dagdha—burned; go-maya—of cow dung; piëòa-vat—like a ball.
TRANSLATION
Burned from all sides—from above by the blazing sun and from below by the
fire of Lord Saìkarñaëa—the universal sphere will glow like a burning ball of
cow dung.
TEXT 11
tata: ‘acaNx"pavanaAe
vaSaARNAAmaiDakM( zAtama,
par": s$aAMvataRk(Ae vaAita
DaU•aM KaM r"jas$aAva{tama,
tataù pracaëòa-pavano
varñäëäm adhikaà çatam
paraù säàvartako väti
dhümraà khaà rajasävåtam
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; pracaëòa—terrible; pavanaù—a wind; varñäëäm—of years;
adhikam—more than; çatam—one hundred; paraù—great;
sämvartakaù—causing annihilation; väti—blows; dhümram—gray; kham—the
sky; rajasä—with dust; ävåtam—covered.
TRANSLATION
A great and terrible wind of destruction will begin to blow for more than one
hundred years, and the sky, covered with dust, will turn gray.
TEXT 12
tataAe maeGaku(laAnyaËÿ
ica‡a vaNAARnyanaek(zA:
zAtaM vaSaARiNA vaSaRinta
nad"inta r"Bas$asvanaE:
tato megha-kuläny aìga
citra varëäny anekaçaù
çataà varñäëi varñanti
nadanti rabhasa-svanaiù
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; megha-kuläni—the clouds; aìga—my dear King;
citra-varëäni—of various colors; anekaçaù—numerous; çatam—one hundred;
varñäëi—years; varñanti—they pour down rain; nadanti—they thunder;
rabhasa-svanaiù—with tremendous sounds.
TRANSLATION
After that, O King, groups of multicolored clouds will gather, roaring
terribly with thunder, and will pour down floods of rain for one hundred years.
TEXT 13
tata Wk(Aed"kM( ivaìM
“aöANx"ivavar"Antar"ma,
tata ekodakaà viçvaà
brahmäëòa-vivaräntaram
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; eka-udakam—a single body of water; viçvam—the universe;
brahma-aëòa—of the egg of creation; vivara-antaram—within.
TRANSLATION
At that time, the shell of the universe will fill up with water, forming a
single cosmic ocean.
TEXT 14
tad"A BaUmaegARnDagAuNAM
ƒas$antyaApa od"plavae
ƒastagAnDaA tau pa{iTavaI
‘alayatvaAya k(lpatae
tadä bhümer gandha-guëaà
grasanty äpa uda-plave
grasta-gandhä tu påthivé
pralayatväya kalpate
SYNONYMS
tadä—then; bhümeù—of the earth; gandha-guëam—the perceptible quality of
fragrance; grasanti—takes away; äpaù—the water; uda-plave—during the
flooding; grasta-gandhä—deprived of its fragrance; tu—and; påthivé—the
element earth; pralayatväya kalpate—becomes unmanifest.
TRANSLATION
As the entire universe is flooded, the water will rob the earth of its unique
quality of fragrance, and the element earth, deprived of its distinguishing
quality, will be dissolved.
PURPORT
As clearly explained throughout Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the first element, sky,
possesses the unique quality of sound. As creation expands, the second
element, air, comes into being, and it possesses sound and touch. The third
element, fire, possesses sound, touch and form, and the fourth element, water,
possesses sound, touch, form and flavor. The earth possesses sound, touch,
form, flavor and aroma. As each element loses its unique distinguishing
quality, it naturally becomes indistinguishable from the more subtle elements
and is thus effectively dissolved as a unique entity.
TEXTS 15-19
@paAM r"s$amaTaAe taejas$a,
taA laIyantae'Ta naIr"s$aA:
ƒas$atae taejas$aAe è&paM
vaAyausta‰"ih"taM tad"A
laIyatae caAinalae taejaAe
vaAyaAe: KaM ƒas$atae gAuNAma,
s$a vaE ivazAita KaM r"AjaMs$a,
tataê naBas$aAe gAuNAma,
zAbdM" ƒas$aita BaUtaAid"r,"
naBastamanau laIyatae
taEjas$aêein‰"yaANyaËÿ
de"vaAna, vaEk(Air"k(Ae gAuNAE:
mah"Ana, ƒas$atyah"ÆÿArM"
gAuNAA: s$aÔvaAd"yaê tama,
ƒas$atae'vyaAk{(taM r"Ajana,
gAuNAAna, k(Alaena caAeid"tama,
na tasya k(AlaAvayavaE:
pair"NAAmaAd"yaAe gAuNAA:
@naAânantamavyalM(
inatyaM k(Ar"NAmavyayama,
apäà rasam atho tejas
tä léyante 'tha nérasäù
grasate tejaso rüpaà
väyus tad-rahitaà tadä
léyate cänile tejo
väyoù khaà grasate guëam
sa vai viçati khaà räjaàs
tataç ca nabhaso guëam
çabdaà grasati bhütädir
nabhas tam anu léyate
taijasaç cendriyäëy aìga
devän vaikäriko guëaiù
mahän grasaty ahaìkäraà
guëäù sattvädayaç ca tam
grasate 'vyäkåtaà räjan
guëän kälena coditam
na tasya kälävayavaiù
pariëämädayo guëäù
anädy anantam avyaktaà
nityaà käraëam avyayam
SYNONYMS
apäm—of water; rasam—the taste; atha—then; tejaù—fire; täù—that water;
léyante—dissolves; atha—after this; nérasäù—deprived of its quality of taste;
grasate—takes away; tejasaù—of fire; rüpam-the form; väyuù—the air;
tat-rahitam—deprived of that form; tadä—then; léyate—merges; ca—and;
anile—in wind; tejaù—fire; väyoù—of the air; kham—the ether; grasati—takes
away; guëam—the perceptible quality (touch); saù—that air; vai—indeed;
viçati—enters; kham—the ether; räjan—O King Parékñit; tataù—thereupon;
ca—and; nabhasaù—of the ether; guëam—the quality; çabdam—sound;
grasate—takes away; bhüta-ädiù—the element of false ego in the mode of
ignorance; nabhaù—the ether; tam—into that false ego; anu—subsequently;
léyate—merges; taijasaù—false ego in the mode of passion; ca—and;
indriyäëi—the senses; aìga—my dear King; devän—the demigods;
vaikärikaù—false ego in the mode of goodness; guëaiù—along with the
manifest functions (of false ego); mahän—the mahat-tattva; grasati-seizes;
ahaìkäram—false ego; guëäù—the basic modes of nature;
sattva-ädayaù—goodness, passion and ignorance; ca—and; tam—that mahat;
grasate-seizes; avyäkåtam—the unmanifest original form of nature; räjan—O
King; guëän—the three modes; kälena—by time; coditam—impelled;
na—there are not; tasya—of that unmanifest nature; käla—of time;
avayavaiù—by the segments; pariëäma-ädayaù—transformation and the other
changes of visible matter (creation, growth and so on); guëäù—such qualities;
anädi—without beginning; anantam—without end; avyaktam—unmanifest;
nityam—eternal; käraëam—the cause; avyayam—infallible.
TRANSLATION
The element fire then seizes the taste from the element water, which,
deprived of its unique quality, taste, merges into fire. Air seizes the form
inherent in fire, and then fire, deprived of form, merges into air. The element
ether seizes the quality of air, namely touch, and that air enters into ether.
Then, O King, false ego in ignorance seizes sound, the quality of ether, after
which ether merges into false ego. False ego in the mode of passion takes hold of
the senses, and false ego in the mode of goodness absorbs the demigods. Then
the total mahat-tattva seizes false ego along with its various functions, and that
mahat is seized by the three basic modes of nature—goodness, passion and
ignorance. My dear King Parékñit, these modes are further overtaken by the
original unmanifest form of nature, impelled by time. That unmanifest nature is
not subject to the six kinds of transformation caused by the influence of time.
Rather, it has no beginning and no end. It is the unmanifest, eternal and
infallible cause of creation.
TEXTS 20-21
na ya‡a vaAcaAe na manaAe na s$aÔvaM
tamaAe r"jaAe vaA mah"d"Ad"yaAe'maI
na ‘aANAbauÜ"Iin‰"yade"vataA vaA
na s$aiªavaezA: Kalau laAek(k(lpa:
na sva«ajaAƒaªa ca tats$auSauæaM
na KaM jalaM BaUr"inalaAe'i¢ar"kR(:
s$aMs$auæavacC^$nyavad"‘atafya<
tanmaUlaBaUtaM pad"maAmanainta
na yatra väco na mano na sattvaà
tamo rajo vä mahad-ädayo 'mé
na präëa-buddhéndriya-devatä vä
na sanniveçaù khalu loka-kalpaù
na svapna-jägran na ca tat suñuptaà
na khaà jalaà bhür anilo 'gnir arkaù
saàsupta-vac chünya-vad apratarkyaà
tan müla-bhütaà padam ämananti
SYNONYMS
na—not; yatra—wherein; väcaù—speech; na—not; manaù—the mind;
na—not; sattvam—the mode of goodness; tamaù—the mode of ignorance;
rajaù—the mode of passion; vä—or; mahat—the mahat-tattva; ädayaù-and so
on; amé—these elements; na—not; präëa—the vital air; buddhi—intelligence;
indriya—the senses; devatäù—and the controlling demigods; vä—or; na—not;
sanniveçaù—the particular construction; khalu—indeed; loka-kalpaù—of the
arrangement of the planetary systems; na—not; svapna—sleep; jägrat—waking
condition; na—not; ca—and; tat—that; suñuptam—deep sleep; na—not;
kham—ether; jalam—water; bhüù—earth; anilaù—air; agniù—fire;
arkaù—the sun; saàsupta-vat—like one who is fast asleep; çünya-vat—like a
void; apratarkyam—inaccessible to logic; tat—that pradhäna;
müla-bhütam-serving as the basis; padam—the substance; ämananti—great
authorities say.
TRANSLATION
In the unmanifest stage of material nature, called pradhäna, there is no
expression of words, no mind and no manifestation of the subtle elements
beginning from the mahat, nor are there the modes of goodness, passion and
ignorance. There is no life air or intelligence, nor any senses or demigods.
There is no definite arrangement of planetary systems, nor are there present the
different stages of consciousness—sleep, wakefulness and deep sleep. There is
no ether, water, earth, air, fire or sun. The situation is just like that of
complete sleep, or of voidness. Indeed, it is indescribable. Authorities in
spiritual science explain, however, that since pradhäna is the original substance,
it is the actual basis of material creation.
TEXT 22
laya: ‘aAk{(itak(Ae ÷eSa
pauç&SaAvyal(yaAeyaRd"A
zAl(ya: s$am‘alaIyantae
ivavazAA: k(Alaivaåu"taA:
layaù präkåtiko hy eña
puruñävyaktayor yadä
çaktayaù sampraléyante
vivaçäù käla-vidrutäù
SYNONYMS
layaù—the annihilation; präkåtikaù—of the material elements; hi—indeed;
eñaù—this; puruña—of the Supreme Lord; avyaktayoù—and of His material
nature in its unmanifest form; yadä—when; çaktayaù—the energies;
sampraléyante—merge totally; vivaçäù—helpless; käla—by time;
vidrutäù—disarrayed.
TRANSLATION
This is the annihilation called präkåtika, during which the energies belonging
to the Supreme Person and His unmanifest material nature, disassembled by the
force of time, are deprived of their potencies and merge together totally.
TEXT 23
bauÜ"Iin‰"yaATaRè&paeNA
ÁaAnaM BaAita tad"A™ayama,
ä{"zyatvaAvyaitare"k(AByaAma,
@Aântavad"vastau yata,
buddhéndriyärtha-rüpeëa
jïänaà bhäti tad-äçrayam
dåçyatvävyatirekäbhyäm
ädy-antavad avastu yat
SYNONYMS
buddhi—of intelligence; indriya—the senses; artha—and the objects of
perception; rüpeëa—in the form; jïänam—the Absolute Truth;
bhäti—manifests; tat—of these elements; äçrayam—the basis;
dåçyatva—because of being perceived; avyatirekäbhyäm—and because of being
nondifferent from its own cause; ädi-anta-vat—which has a beginning and an
end; avastu—is insubstantial; yat—whatever.
TRANSLATION
It is the Absolute Truth alone who manifests in the forms of intelligence,
the senses and the objects of sense perception, and who is their ultimate basis.
Whatever has a beginning and an end is insubstantial because of being an object
perceived by limited senses and because of being nondifferent from its own
cause.
PURPORT
The word dåçyatva indicates that all subtle and gross material
manifestations are made visible by the potency of the Supreme Lord and again
become invisible, or unmanifest, at the time of annihilation. They are
therefore in essence not separate from the source of their expansion and
withdrawal.
TEXT 24
d"Ipaêºauê è&paM ca
jyaAeitaSaAe na pa{TagBavaeta,
WvaM DaI: KaAina maA‡aAê
na syaur"nyatamaAä{"taAta,
dépaç cakñuç ca rüpaà ca
jyotiño na påthag bhavet
evaà dhéù khäni mäträç ca
na syur anyatamäd åtät
SYNONYMS
dépaù—a lamp; cakñuù—a perceiving eye; ca—and; rüpam—a perceived form;
ca—and; jyotiñaù—from the original element fire; na—not; påthak—distinct;
bhavet—are; evam—in the same way; dhéù—intelligence; khäni—the senses;
mäträù—the perceptions; ca—and; na syuù—they are not; anyatamät—which
is itself completely distinct; åtät—from the reality.
TRANSLATION
A lamp, the eye that views by the light of that lamp, and the visible form
that is viewed are all basically nondifferent from the element fire. In the same
way, intelligence, the senses and sense perceptions have no existence separate
from the supreme reality, although that Absolute Truth remains totally distinct
from them.
TEXT 25
bauÜe"jaARgAr"NAM sva«a:
s$auSauiæair"ita caAecyatae
maAyaAmaA‡aimadM" r"Ajana,
naAnaAtvaM ‘atyagAAtmaina
buddher jägaraëaà svapnaù
suñuptir iti cocyate
mäyä-mätram idaà räjan
nänätvaà pratyag-ätmani
SYNONYMS
buddheù—of intelligence; jägaraëam—waking consciousness; svapnaù—sleep;
suñuptiù—deep sleep; iti—thus; ca—and; ucyate—are called;
mäyä-mätram—merely illusion; idam—this; räjan—O King; nänätvam—the
duality; pratyak-ätmani—experienced by the pure soul.
TRANSLATION
The three states of intelligence are called waking consciousness, sleep and
deep sleep. But, my dear King, the variegated experiences created for the pure
living entity by these different states are nothing more than illusion.
PURPORT
Pure Kåñëa consciousness exists beyond the various stages of material
awareness. Just as darkness vanishes in the presence of light, so illusory
material intelligence, which is experienced as normal perception, dreaming
and deep sleep, completely vanishes in the brilliant presence of pure Kåñëa
consciousness, the constitutional condition of every living entity.
TEXT 26
yaTaA jalaDar"A vyaAei°a
Bavainta na Bavainta ca
“aöNAIdM" taTaA ivaìma,
@vayavyaud"yaApyayaAta,
yathä jala-dharä vyomni
bhavanti na bhavanti ca
brahmaëédaà tathä viçvam
avayavy udayäpyayät
SYNONYMS
yathä—just as; jala-dharäù—the clouds; vyomni—in the sky; bhavanti—are; na
bhavanti—are not; ca—and; brahmaëi—within the Absolute Truth;
idam—this; tathä—similarly; viçvam—universe; avayavi—having parts;
udaya—because of generation; apyayät—and dissolution.
TRANSLATION
Just as clouds in the sky come into being and are then dispersed by the
amalgamation and dissolution of their constituent elements, this material
universe is created and destroyed within the Absolute Truth by the
amalgamation and dissolution of its elemental, constituent parts.
TEXT 27
s$atyaM ÷vayava: ‘aAel(:
s$avaARvayaivanaAimah"
ivanaATaeRna ‘ataIyaer"na,
paq%syaevaAËÿ tantava:
satyaà hy avayavaù proktaù
sarvävayavinäm iha
vinärthena pratéyeran
paöasyeväìga tantavaù
SYNONYMS
satyam—real; hi—because; avayavaù—the ingredient cause; proktaù—is said
to be; sarva-avayavinäm—of all constituted entities; iha—in this created
world; vinä—apart from; arthena—their manifest product; pratéyeran—they
can be perceived; paöasya—of a cloth; iva—as; aìga—my dear King;
tantavaù—the threads.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, it is stated [in the Vedänta-sütra] that the ingredient cause
that constitutes any manifested product in this universe can be perceived as a
separate reality, just as the threads that make up a cloth can be perceived
separately from their product.
TEXT 28
yats$aAmaAnyaivazAeSaAByaAma,
opalaByaeta s$a ”ama:
@nyaAenyaApaA™ayaAts$avaRma,
@Aântavad"vastau yata,
yat sämänya-viçeñäbhyäm
upalabhyeta sa bhramaù
anyonyäpäçrayät sarvam
ädy-antavad avastu yat
SYNONYMS
yat—whatever; sämänya—in terms of general cause; viçeñäbhyäm—and
specific product; upalabhyeta—is experienced; saù—that; bhramaù—is illusion;
anyonya—mutual; apäçrayät—because of dependence; sarvam—everything;
ädi-anta-vat—subject to beginning and end; avastu—unreal; yat—which.
TRANSLATION
Anything experienced in terms of general cause and specific effect must be
an illusion, because such causes and effects exist only relative to each other.
Indeed, whatever has a beginning and an end is unreal.
PURPORT
The nature of a material cause cannot be perceived without perception of
the effect. For example, the burning nature of fire cannot be perceived
without observing the effect of fire, such as a burning object or ashes.
Similarly, the saturating quality of water cannot be understood without
observing the effect, a saturated cloth or paper. The organizational power of a
man cannot be understood without observing the effect of his dynamic work,
namely a solid institution. In this way, not only do effects depend upon their
causes, but the perception of the cause also depends upon observation of the
effect. Thus both are defined relatively and have a beginning and an end. The
conclusion is that all such material causes and effects are essentially temporary
and relative, and consequently illusory.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, although the cause of all causes, has
no beginning or end. Therefore He is neither material nor illusory. Lord
Kåñëa's opulences and potencies are absolute reality, beyond the
interdependence of material cause and effect.
TEXT 29
ivak(Ar": KyaAyamaAnaAe'ipa
‘atyagAAtmaAnamantar"A
na inaè&pyaAe'styaNAur"ipa
syaA»aei»ats$ama @Atmavata,
vikäraù khyäyamäno 'pi
pratyag-ätmänam antarä
na nirüpyo 'sty aëur api
syäc cec cit-sama ätma-vat
SYNONYMS
vikäraù—the transformation of created existence; khyäyamänaù—appearing;
api—although; pratyak-ätmänam—the Supreme Soul; antarä—without;
na—not; nirüpyaù—conceivable; asti—is; aëuù—a single atom; api—even;
syät—it is so; cet—if; cit-samaù—equally spirit; ätma-vat—remaining as it is,
without change.
TRANSLATION
Although perceived, the transformation of even a single atom of material
nature has no ultimate definition without reference to the Supreme Soul. To be
accepted as factually existing, something must possess the same quality as pure
spirit—eternal, unchanging existence.
PURPORT
A mirage of water appearing in the desert is actually a manifestation of
light; the false appearance of water is a specific transformation of light. That
which falsely appears as independent material nature is similarly a
transformation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Material nature is the
external potency of the Lord.
TEXT 30
na ih" s$atyasya naAnaAtvama,
@ivaã"Ana, yaid" manyatae
naAnaAtvaM iC$‰"yaAeyaRã"ja,
jyaAeitaSaAevaARtayaAeir"va
na hi satyasya nänätvam
avidvän yadi manyate
nänätvaà chidrayor yadvaj
jyotiñor vätayor iva
SYNONYMS
na—there is no; hi—indeed; satyasya—of the Absolute Truth;
nänätvam—duality; avidvän—a person not in true knowledge; yadi—if;
manyate—he thinks; nänätvam—the duality; chidrayoù—of the two skies;
yadvat—just as; jyotiñoù—of the two celestial lights; vätayoù—of the two
winds; iva—as.
TRANSLATION
There is no material duality in the Absolute Truth. The duality perceived by
an ignorant person is like the difference between the sky contained in an empty
pot and the sky outside the pot, or the difference between the reflection of the
sun in water and the sun itself in the sky, or the difference between the vital
air within one living body and that within another body.
TEXT 31
yaTaA ih"r"NyaM baò"DaA s$amaIyatae
na{iBa: i‚(yaAiBavyaRvah"Ar"vatmaRs$au
WvaM vacaAeiBaBaRgAvaAnaDaAeºajaAe
vyaAKyaAyatae laAEik(k(vaEid"kE(jaR$naE:
yathä hiraëyaà bahudhä saméyate
nåbhiù kriyäbhir vyavahära-vartmasu
evaà vacobhir bhagavän adhokñajo
vyäkhyäyate laukika-vaidikair janaiù
SYNONYMS
yathä—just as; hiraëyam—gold; bahudhä—in many forms; saméyate—appears;
nåbhiù—to men; kriyäbhiù—in terms of different functions;
vyavahära-vartmasu—in ordinary usage; evam—similarly; vacobhiù—in
varying terms; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; adhokñajaù—the
transcendental Lord, who is inconceivable to material senses; vyäkhyäyate—is
described; laukika—mundane; vaidikaiù—and Vedic; janaiù—by men.
TRANSLATION
According to their different purposes, men utilize gold in various ways, and
gold is therefore perceived in various forms. In the same way, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is inaccessible to material senses, is described in
various terms, both ordinary and Vedic, by different types of men.
PURPORT
All those who are not pure devotees of the Supreme Lord are basically
trying to exploit the Lord and His energies. According to their strategy of
exploitation, they conceive of and describe the Absolute Truth in various
ways. In Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam the Absolute Truth presents
Himself as He actually is for the benefit of sincere people who do not foolishly
try to conceptually manipulate the Supreme Godhead.
TEXT 32
yaTaA GanaAe'kR(‘aBavaAe'kR(d"izARtaAe
÷k(A<zABaUtasya ca caºauSastama:
WvaM tvahM" “aögAuNAstad"IiºataAe
“aöAMzAk(syaAtmana @AtmabanDana:
yathä ghano 'rka-prabhavo 'rka-darçito
hy arkäàça-bhütasya ca cakñuñas tamaù
evaà tv ahaà brahma-guëas tad-ékñito
brahmäàçakasyätmana ätma-bandhanaù
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; ghanaù—a cloud; arka—of the sun; prabhavaù—the product;
arka—by the sun; darçitaù—made visible; hi—indeed; arka—of the sun;
aàça-bhütasya—which is the partial expansion; ca—and; cakñuñaù—of the
eye; tamaù—darkness; evam—in the same way; tu—indeed; aham—false ego;
brahma-guëaù—a quality of the Absolute Truth; tat-ékñitaù—visible through
the agency of that Absolute Truth; brahma-aàçakasya—of the partial
expansion of the Absolute Truth; ätmanaù—of the jéva soul;
ätma-bandhanaù—serving to obstruct perception of the Supreme Soul.
TRANSLATION
Although a cloud is a product of the sun and is also made visible by the sun,
it nevertheless creates darkness for the viewing eye, which is another partial
expansion of the sun. Similarly, material false ego, a particular product of the
Absolute Truth made visible by the Absolute Truth, obstructs the individual
soul, another partial expansion of the Absolute Truth, from realizing the
Absolute Truth.
TEXT 33
GanaAe yad"AkR(‘aBavaAe ivad"IyaRtae
caºau: svaè&paM r"ivamaIºatae tad"A
yad"A ÷h"ÆÿAr" opaAiDar"AtmanaAe
ijaÁaAs$ayaA nazyaita ta÷Rnausmare"ta,
ghano yadärka-prabhavo vidéryate
cakñuù svarüpaà ravim ékñate tadä
yadä hy ahaìkära upädhir ätmano
jijïäsayä naçyati tarhy anusmaret
SYNONYMS
ghanaù—the cloud; yadä—when; arka-prabhavaù—the product of the sun;
vidéryate—is torn apart; cakñuù—the eye; svarüpam—in its real form;
ravim—the sun; ékñate—sees; tadä—then; yadä—when; hi—indeed also;
ahaìkäraù—false ego; upädhiù—the superficial covering; ätmanaù—of the
spirit soul; jijïäsayä—by spiritual inquiry; naçyati—is destroyed; tarhi—at that
time; anusmaret—one gains his proper remembrance.
TRANSLATION
When the cloud originally produced from the sun is torn apart, the eye can
see the actual form of the sun. Similarly, when the spirit soul destroys his
material covering of false ego by inquiring into the transcendental science, he
regains his original spiritual awareness.
PURPORT
Just as the sun can burn away the clouds that prevent one from seeing it,
the Supreme Lord (and He alone) can remove the false ego that prevents one
from seeing Him. There are some creatures, however, like owls, who are averse
to seeing the sun. In the same way, those who are not interested in spiritual
knowledge will never receive the privilege of seeing God.
TEXT 34
yadE"vamaetaena ivavaek(he"itanaA
maAyaAmayaAh"Æÿr"NAAtmabanDanama,
iC$ÔvaAcyautaAtmaAnauBavaAe'vaitaï"tae
tamaAò"r"Atyaintak(maËÿ s$amplavama,
yadaivam etena viveka-hetinä
mäyä-mayähaìkaraëätma-bandhanam
chittväcyutätmänubhavo 'vatiñöhate
tam ähur ätyantikam aìga samplavam
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; evam—in this way; etena—by this; viveka—of discrimination;
hetinä—sword; mäyä-maya—illusory; ahaìkaraëa—false ego; ätma-of the soul;
bandhanam—the cause of bondage; chittvä—cutting off; acyuta—of the
infallible; ätma—Supreme Soul; anubhavaù—realization;
avatiñöhate—develops firmly; tam—that; ähuù—they call;
ätyantikam—ultimate; aìga—my dear King; samplavam—annihilation.
TRANSLATION
My dear Parékñit, when the illusory false ego that binds the soul has been cut
off with the sword of discriminating knowledge and one has developed
realization of Lord Acyuta, the Supreme Soul, this is called the ätyantika, or
ultimate, annihilation of material existence.
TEXT 35
inatyad"A s$avaRBaUtaAnaAM
“aöAd"InaAM par"ntapa
otpaiÔa‘alayaAvaeke(
s$aUºmaÁaA: s$am‘acaºatae
nityadä sarva-bhütänäà
brahmädénäà parantapa
utpatti-pralayäv eke
sükñma-jïäù sampracakñate
SYNONYMS
nityadä—constantly; sarva-bhütänäm—of all created beings;
brahma-ädénäm—beginning with Lord Brahmä; param-tapa—O subduer of the
enemies; utpatti—creation; pralayau—and annihilation; eke—some;
sükñma-jïäù—expert knowers of subtle things; sampracakñate—declare.
TRANSLATION
Experts in the subtle workings of nature, O subduer of the enemy, have
declared that there are continuous processes of creation and annihilation that all
created beings, beginning with Brahmä, constantly undergo.
TEXT 36
k(Ala›aAetaAejavaenaAzAu
ioe"yamaANAsya inatyad"A
pair"NAAimanaAM @vasTaAstaA
janma‘alayahe"tava:
käla-sroto-javenäçu
hriyamäëasya nityadä
pariëäminäà avasthäs tä
janma-pralaya-hetavaù
SYNONYMS
käla—of time; srotaù—of the mighty current; javena—by the force;
äçu—rapidly; hriyamäëasya—of that which is being taken away;
nityadä—constantly; pariëäminäm—of things subject to transformation;
avasthäù—the various conditions; täù—they; janma—of birth; pralaya—and
annihilation; hetavaù—the causes.
TRANSLATION
All material entities undergo transformation and are constantly and swiftly
eroded by the mighty currents of time. The various stages of existence that
material things exhibit are the perpetual causes of their generation and
annihilation.
TEXT 37
@naAântavataAnaena
k(Alaenaeìr"maUitaRnaA
@vasTaA naEva ä{"zyantae
ivayaita jyaAeitaSaAM wva
anädy-antavatänena
käleneçvara-mürtinä
avasthä naiva dåçyante
viyati jyotiñäà iva
SYNONYMS
anädi-anta-vatä—without beginning or end; anena—by this; kälena—time;
éçvara—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mürtinä—the representation;
avasthäù—the different stages; na—not; eva—indeed; dåçyante—are seen;
viyati—in outer space; jyotiñäm—of the moving planets; iva—just as.
TRANSLATION
These stages of existence created by beginningless and endless time, the
impersonal representative of the Supreme Lord, are not visible, just as the
infinitesimal momentary changes of position of the planets in the sky cannot be
directly seen.
PURPORT
Although everyone knows that the sun is constantly moving in the sky, one
cannot normally see the sun moving. Similarly, no one can directly perceive
his hair or nails growing, although with the passing of time we perceive the
fact of growth. Time, the potency of the Lord, is very subtle and powerful and
is an insurmountable barrier to fools who are trying to exploit the material
creation.
TEXT 38
inatyaAe naEimaiÔak(êEva
taTaA ‘aAk{(itak(Ae laya:
@Atyaintak(ê k(iTata:
k(Alasya gAitar"Iä{"zAI
nityo naimittikaç caiva
tathä präkåtiko layaù
ätyantikaç ca kathitaù
kälasya gatir édåçé
SYNONYMS
nityaù—continuous; naimittikaù—occasional; ca—and; eva—indeed;
tathä—also; präkåtikaù—natural; layaù—annihilation; ätyantikaù—final;
ca—and; kathitaù—are described; kälasya—of time; gatiù—the progress;
édåçé—like this.
TRANSLATION
In this way the progress of time is described in terms of the four kinds of
annihilation—continuous, occasional, elemental and final.
TEXT 39
WtaA: ku(ç&™aeï" jagAiã"DaAtaur,"
naAr"AyaNAsyaAiKalas$aÔvaDaA°a:
laIlaAk(TaAstae k(iTataA: s$amaAs$ata:
k(Ats$nyaeRna naAjaAe'pyaiBaDaAtaumaIzA:
etäù kuru-çreñöha jagad-vidhätur
näräyaëasyäkhila-sattva-dhämnaù
lélä-kathäs te kathitäù samäsataù
kärtsnyena näjo 'py abhidhätum éçaù
SYNONYMS
etäù—these; kuru-çreñöha—O best of the Kurus; jagat-vidhätuù—of the creator
of the universe; näräyaëasya—of Lord Näräyaëa; akhila-sattva-dhämnaù—the
reservoir of all existences; lélä-kathäù—the pastime narrations; te—to you;
kathitäù—have been related; samäsataù—in summary; kärtsnyena—entirely;
na—not; ajaù—unborn Brahmä; api—even; abhidhätum—to enumerate;
éçaù—is capable.
TRANSLATION
O best of the Kurus, I have related to you these narrations of the pastimes of
Lord Näräyaëa, the creator of this world and the ultimate reservoir of all
existence, presenting them to you only in brief summary. Even Lord Brahmä
himself would be incapable of describing them entirely.
TEXT 40
s$aMs$aAr"is$anDaumaitaäu"star"mauiÔataISaAeRr,"
naAnya: plavaAe BagAvata: pauç&SaAeÔamasya
laIlaAk(TaAr"s$ainaSaevaNAmantare"NA
pauMs$aAe Bavaeiã"ivaDaäu":Kad"vaAidR"tasya
saàsära-sindhum ati-dustaram uttitérñor
nänyaù plavo bhagavataù puruñottamasya
lélä-kathä-rasa-niñevaëam antareëa
puàso bhaved vividha-duùkha-davärditasya
SYNONYMS
saàsära—of material existence; sindhum—the ocean;
ati-dustaram—impossible to cross; uttitérñoù—for one who desires to cross;
na—there is not; anyaù—any other; plavaù—boat; bhagavataù—of the
Personality of Godhead; puruña-uttamasya—the Supreme Lord; lélä-kathä—of
the narrations of the pastimes; rasa—to the transcendental taste;
niñevaëam—the rendering of service; antareëa—apart from; puàsaù—for a
person; bhavet—there can be; vividha—various; duùkha—of material miseries;
dava—by the fire; arditasya—who is distressed.
TRANSLATION
For a person who is suffering in the fire of countless miseries and who
desires to cross the insurmountable ocean of material existence, there is no
suitable boat except that of cultivating devotion to the transcendental taste for
the narrations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead's pastimes.
PURPORT
Although it is not possible to completely describe the pastimes of the Lord,
even a partial appreciation can save one from the unbearable miseries of
material existence. The fever of material existence can be removed only by the
medicine of the holy name and pastimes of the Supreme Lord, which are
perfectly narrated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 41
paur"ANAs$aMih"taAmaetaAma,
[%iSanaARr"AyaNAAe'vyaya:
naAr"d"Aya paur"A ‘aAh"
k{(SNAãE"paAyanaAya s$a:
puräëa-saàhitäm etäm
åñir näräyaëo 'vyayaù
näradäya purä präha
kåñëa-dvaipäyanäya saù
SYNONYMS
puräëa—of all the Puräëas; saàhitäm-the essential compendium; etäm—this;
åñiù—the great sage; näräyaëaù—Lord Nara-Näräyaëa; avyayaù—the
infallible; näradäya—to Närada Muni; purä—previously; präha—spoke;
kåñëa-dvaipäyanäya—to Kåñëa Dvaipäyana Vedavyäsa; saù—he, Närada.
TRANSLATION
Long ago this essential anthology of all the Puräëas was spoken by the
infallible Lord Nara-Näräyaëa Åñi to Närada, who then repeated it to Kåñëa
Dvaipäyana Vedavyäsa.
TEXT 42
s$a vaE ma÷M mah"Ar"Aja
BagAvaAna, baAd"r"AyaNA:
wmaAM BaAgAvataI%M ‘aIta:
s$aMih"taAM vaed"s$aimmataAma,
sa vai mahyaà mahä-räja
bhagavän bädaräyaëaù
imäà bhägavatéà prétaù
saàhitäà veda-sammitäm
SYNONYMS
saù—he; vai—indeed; mahyam—to me, Çukadeva Gosvämé; mahäräja—O
King Parékñit; bhagavän—the powerful incarnation of the Supreme Lord;
bädaräyaëaù—Çréla Vyäsadeva; imäm—this; bhägavatém—Bhägavata scripture;
prétaù—being satisfied; saàhitäm—the anthology; veda-sammitäm—equal in
status to the four Vedas.
TRANSLATION
My dear Mahäräja Parékñit, that great personality Çréla Vyäsadeva taught me
this same scripture, Çrémad-Bhägavatam, which is equal in stature to the four
Vedas.
TEXT 43
wmaAM vaºyatyas$aAE s$aUta
[%iSaByaAe naEimaSaAlayae
d"IGaRs$a‡ae ku(ç&™aeï"
s$ampa{í": zAAEnak(Aid"iBa:
imäà vakñyaty asau süta
åñibhyo naimiñälaye
dérgha-satre kuru-çreñöha
sampåñöaù çaunakädibhiù
SYNONYMS
imam—this; vakñyati—will speak; asau—present before us; sütaù—Süta
Gosvämé; åñibhyaù—to the sages; naimiña-älaye—in the forest of Naimiña;
dérgha-satre—at the lengthy sacrificial performance; kuru-çreñöha—O best of
the Kurus; sampåñöaù—questioned; çaunaka-ädibhiù—by the assembly led by
Çaunaka.
TRANSLATION
O best of the Kurus, the same Süta Gosvämé who is sitting before us will
speak this Bhägavatam to the sages assembled in the great sacrifice at
Naimiñäraëya. This he will do when questioned by the members of the
assembly, headed by Çaunaka.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Twelfth Canto, Fourth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Four Categories of Universal
Annihilation."
4. Çukadeva Gosvämé's Final Instructions to Mahäräja
Parékñit
This chapter explains how King Parékñit's fear of death from the snakebird
Takñaka was averted by Çukadeva Gosvämé's brief instructions on the Absolute
Truth.
Having in the last chapter described the four processes of annihilation that
act in this material world, Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé now reminds Parékñit
Mahäräja how he had previously, in the Third Canto, discussed the
measurement of time and of the various millennia of universal history. During
a single day of Lord Brahmä, constituting one thousand cycles of four ages,
fourteen different Manus rule and die. Thus death is unavoidable for every
embodied being, but the soul itself never dies, being entirely distinct from the
material body. Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé then states that in Çrémad-Bhägavatam
he has repeatedly chanted the glories of the Supreme Soul, Lord Çré Hari, from
whose satisfaction Brahmä takes birth and from whose anger Rudra is born.
The idea "I will die" is simply the mentality of animals, because the soul does
not undergo the bodily phases of previous nonexistence, birth, existence and
death. When the body's subtle mental covering is destroyed by transcendental
knowledge, the soul within the body again exhibits his original identity. Just as
the temporal existence of a lamp comes about by the combination of oil, the
vessel, the wick and the fire, the material body comes about by the
amalgamation of the three modes of nature. The material body appears at birth
and displays life for some time. Finally, the combination of material modes
dissolves, and the body undergoes death, a phenomenon similar to the
extinguishing of a lamp. Çukadeva addresses the king, saying, "You should fix
yourself in meditation upon Lord Väsudeva, and thus the bite of the
snake-bird will not affect you."
TEXT 1
™aIzAuk( ovaAca
@‡aAnauvaNyaRtae'BaIºNAM
ivaìAtmaA BagAvaAna, h"ir":
yasya ‘as$aAd"jaAe “aöA
ç&‰": ‚(AeDas$amauà"va:
çré-çuka uväca
atränuvarëyate 'bhékñëaà
viçvätmä bhagavän hariù
yasya prasäda-jo brahmä
rudraù krodha-samudbhavaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; atra—in this
Çrémad-Bhägavatam; anuvarëyate—is elaborately described;
abhékñëam—repeatedly; viçva-ätmä—the soul of the entire universe;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hariù—Lord Hari; yasya—of
whom; prasäda—from the satisfaction; jaù—born; brahmä—Lord Brahmä;
rudraù—Lord Çiva; krodha—from the anger; samudbhavaù—whose birth.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: This Çrémad-Bhägavatam has elaborately described
in various narrations the Supreme Soul of all that be—the Personality of
Godhead, Hari—from whose satisfaction Brahmä is born and from whose anger
Rudra takes birth.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has given a very elaborate summary of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam in his commentary on this verse. The essence of the great
äcärya's statement is that unconditional loving surrender to the Supreme
Lord, Kåñëa, as described by Çukadeva Gosvämé, is the highest perfection of
life. The exclusive purpose of Çrémad-Bhägavatam is to convince the
conditioned soul to execute such surrender to the Lord and go back home,
back to Godhead.
TEXT 2
tvaM tau r"Ajanmair"Syaeita
pazAubauiÜ"imamaAM jaih"
na jaAta: ‘aAgABaUtaAe'â
de"h"vaÔvaM na naÉÿYais$a
tvaà tu räjan mariñyeti
paçu-buddhim imäà jahi
na jätaù präg abhüto 'dya
deha-vat tvaà na naìkñyasi
SYNONYMS
tvam—you; tu—but; räjan—O King; mariñye—I am about to die; iti—thus
thinking; paçu-buddhim—animalistic mentality; imäm—this; jahi—give up;
na—not; jätaù—born; präk—previously; abhütaù—nonexistent; adya—today;
deha-vat—like the body; tvam—you; na naìkñyasi—will not be destroyed.
TRANSLATION
O King, give up the animalistic mentality of thinking, "I am going lo die."
Unlike the body, you have not taken birth. There was not a time in the past
when you did not exist, and you are not about to be destroyed.
PURPORT
At the end of the First Canto (1.19.15) King Parékñit stated:
taà mopajätaà pratiyantu viprä
gaìgä ca devé dhåta-cittam éçe
dvijopasåñöaù kuhakas takñako vä
daçatv alaà gäyata viñëu-gäthäù
"O brähmaëas, just accept me as a completely surrendered soul, and let mother
Ganges, the representative of the Lord, also accept me in that way, for I have
already taken the lotus feet of the Lord into my heart. Let the snake-bird—or
whatever magical thing the brähmaëa created—bite me at once. I only desire
that you all continue singing the deeds of Lord Viñëu."
Even before hearing Çrémad-Bhägavatam, King Parékñit was a
mahä-bhägavata, a great and pure devotee of Lord Kåñëa. There was actually
no animalistic fear of death within the King, but for our sake Çukadeva
Gosvämé is speaking very strongly to his disciple, just as Lord Kåñëa speaks
strongly to Arjuna in Bhagavad-gétä.
TEXT 3
na BaivaSyais$a BaUtvaA tvaM
pau‡apaAE‡aAid"è&pavaAna,
baIjaAÇÿr"vaÚe"h"Ade"r,"
vyaitair"l(Ae yaTaAnala:
na bhaviñyasi bhütvä tvaà
putra-pauträdi-rüpavän
béjäìkura-vad dehäder
vyatirikto yathänalaù
SYNONYMS
na bhaviñyasi—you will not come into being; bhütvä—becoming; tvam—you;
putra—of children; pautra—grandchildren; ädi—and so on;
rüpa-vän—assuming the forms; béja—the seed; aìkura—and the sprout;
vat—like; deha-ädeù—from the material body and its paraphernalia;
vyatiriktaù—distinct; yathä—as; analaù—the fire (from the wood).
TRANSLATION
You will not take birth again in the form of your sons and grandsons, like a
sprout taking birth from a seed and then generating a new seed. Rather, you are
entirely distinct from the material body and its paraphernalia, in the same way
that fire is distinct from its fuel.
PURPORT
Sometimes one dreams of being reborn as the son of one's son, in the hope
of perpetually remaining in the same material family. As stated in the
çruti-mantra, pitä putreëa pitåmän yoni-yonau: "A father has a father in his son,
because he may take birth as his own grandson." The purpose of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is spiritual liberation and not the foolish prolonging of the
illusion of bodily identification. That is clearly stated in this verse.
TEXT 4
sva«ae yaTaA izAr"zCe$dM"
paÂatvaAâAtmana: svayama,
yasmaAtpazyaita de"h"sya
tata @AtmaA ÷jaAe'mar":
svapne yathä çiraç-chedaà
païcatvädy ätmanaù svayam
yasmät paçyati dehasya
tata ätmä hy ajo 'maraù
SYNONYMS
svapne—in a dream; yathä—as; çiraù—of one's head; chedam—the cutting off;
païcatva-ädi—the condition of being composed of the five material elements,
and other material conditions; ätmanaù—one's own; svayam—oneself;
yasmät—because; paçyati—one sees; dehasya—of the body; tataù—therefore;
ätmä—the soul; hi—certainly; ajaù—unborn; amaraù—immortal.
TRANSLATION
In a dream one can see his own head being cut off and thus understand that
his actual self is standing apart from the dream experience. Similarly, while
awake one can see that his body is a product of the five material elements.
Therefore it is to be understood that the actual self, the soul, is distinct from
the body it observes and is unborn and immortal.
TEXT 5
Gaqe% iBaªae Gaq%Ak(AzA
@Ak(AzA: syaAâTaA paur"A
WvaM de"he" ma{tae jaIvaAe
“aö s$ampaâtae pauna:
ghaöe bhinne ghaöäkäça
äkäçaù syäd yathä purä
evaà dehe måte jévo
brahma sampadyate punaù
SYNONYMS
ghaöe—a pot; bhinne—when it is broken; ghäöa-äkäçaù—the sky within the
pot; äkäçaù—sky; syät—remains; yathä—as; purä—previously;
evam—similarly; dehe—the body; måte—when it is given up, in the liberated
condition; jévaù—the individual soul; brahma—his spiritual status;
sampadyate—attains; punaù—once again.
TRANSLATION
When a pot is broken, the portion of sky within the pot remains as the
element sky, just as before. In the same way, when the gross and subtle bodies
die, the living entity within resumes his spiritual identity.
TEXT 6
mana: s$a{jaita vaE de"h"Ana,
gAuNAAna, k(maARiNA caAtmana:
tanmana: s$a{jatae maAyaA
tataAe jaIvasya s$aMs$a{ita:
manaù såjati vai dehän
guëän karmäëi cätmanaù
tan manaù såjate mäyä
tato jévasya saàsåtiù
SYNONYMS
manaù—the mind; såjati—produces; vai—indeed; dehän—the material bodies;
guëän—the qualities; karmäëi—the activities; ca—and; ätmanaù—of the soul;
tat—that; manaù—mind; såjate—produces; mäyä—the illusory potency of the
Supreme Lord; tataù—thus; jévasya—of the individual living being;
saàsåtiù—the material existence.
TRANSLATION
The material bodies, qualities and activities of the spirit soul are created by
the material mind. That mind is itself created by the illusory potency of the
Supreme Lord, and thus the soul assumes material existence.
TEXT 7
µaeh"AiDaï"AnavatyaRi¢as$
aMyaAegAAe yaAvad"Iyatae
taAvaÚ"Ipasya d"Ipatvama,
WvaM de"h"k{(taAe Bava:
r"ja:s$aÔvatamaAeva{ÔyaA
jaAyatae'Ta ivanazyaita
snehädhiñöhäna-varty-agnisaàyogo
yävad éyate
tävad dépasya dépatvam
evaà deha-kåto bhavaù
rajaù-sattva-tamo-våttyä
jäyate 'tha vinaçyati
SYNONYMS
sneha—of the oil; adhiñöhäna—the vessel; varti—the wick; agni—and the fire;
saàyogaù—the combination; yävat—to which extent; éyate—is seen; tävat—to
that extent; dépasya—of the lamp; dépatvam—the status of functioning as a
lamp; evam—similarly; deha-kåtaù—due to the material body;
bhavaù—material existence; rajaù-sattva-tamaù—of the modes of passion,
goodness and ignorance; våttyä—by the action; jäyate—arises; atha—and;
vinaçyati—is destroyed.
TRANSLATION
A lamp functions as such only by the combination of its fuel, vessel, wick
and fire. Similarly, material life, based on the soul's identification with the
body, is developed and destroyed by the workings of material goodness, passion
and ignorance, which are the constituent elements of the body.
TEXT 8
na ta‡aAtmaA svayaMjyaAeitar,"
yaAe vyal(Avyal(yaAe: par":
@Ak(AzA wva caADaAr"Ae
‹auvaAe'nantaAepamastata:
na taträtmä svayaà-jyotir
yo vyaktävyaktayoù paraù
äkäça iva cädhäro
dhruvo 'nantopamas tataù
SYNONYMS
na—not; tatra—there; ätmä—the soul; svayam-jyotiù—self-luminous;
yaù—who; vyakta-avyaktayoù—from the manifest and the unmanifest (the
gross and subtle bodies); paraù—different; äkäçaù—the sky; iva—as; ca—and;
ädhäraù—the basis; dhruvaù—fixed; ananta—without end; upamaù—or
comparison; tataù—thus.
TRANSLATION
The soul within the body is self-luminous and is separate from the visible
gross body and invisible subtle body. It remains as the fixed basis of changing
bodily existence, just as the ethereal sky is the unchanging background of
material transformation. Therefore the soul is endless and without material
comparison.
TEXT 9
WvamaAtmaAnamaAtmasTama,
@AtmanaEvaAma{zA ‘aBaAe
bauÜ"YaAnaumaAnagAiBaRNyaA
vaAs$aude"vaAnauicantayaA
evam ätmänam ätma-stham
ätmanaivämåça prabho
buddhyänumäna-garbhiëyä
väsudevänucintayä
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; ätmänam—your true self; ätma-stham—situated within the
bodily covering; ätmanä—with your mind; eva—indeed; ämåça—consider
carefully; prabho—O master of the self (King Parékñit); buddhyä—with
intelligence; anumäna-garbhiëyä—conceived by logic;
väsudeva-anucintayä—with meditation upon Lord Väsudeva.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, by constantly meditating upon the Supreme Lord, Väsudeva,
and by applying clear and logical intelligence, you should carefully consider your
true self and how it is situated within the material body.
TEXT 10
caAeid"taAe iva‘avaAfyaena
na tvaAM Daºyaita taºak(:
ma{tyavaAe naAepaDaºyainta
ma{tyaUnaAM ma{tyaumaIìr"ma,
codito vipra-väkyena
na tväà dhakñyati takñakaù
måtyavo nopadhakñyanti
måtyünäà måtyum éçvaram
SYNONYMS
coditaù—sent; vipra-väkyena—by the words of the brähmaëa; na—not;
tväm—you; dhakñyati—will burn; takñakaù—the snake-bird Takñaka;
måtyavaù—the agents of death personified; na upadhakñyanti—cannot burn;
måtyünäm—of these causes of death; måtyum—the very death; éçvaram—the
master of the self.
TRANSLATION
The snake-bird Takñaka, sent by the curse of the brähmaëa, will not burn
your true self. The agents of death will never burn such a master of the self as
you, for you have already conquered all dangers on your path back to Godhead.
PURPORT
Real death is the covering of one's eternal Kåñëa consciousness. For the
soul, material illusion is just like death, but Parékñit Mahäräja had already
destroyed all those dangers that threaten one's spiritual life, such as lust, envy
and fear. Çukadeva Gosvämé here congratulates the great saintly king, who, as
a pure devotee of Lord Kåñëa homeward bound to the spiritual sky, was far
beyond the reach of death.
TEXTS 11-12
@hM" “aö parM" DaAma
“aöAhM" par"maM pad"ma,
WvaM s$amaIºya caAtmaAnama,
@AtmanyaADaAya inaSk(lae
d"zAntaM taºakM( paAde"
laeilah"AnaM ivaSaAnanaE:
na ‰"ºyais$a zAr"IrM" ca
ivaìM ca pa{TagAAtmana:
ahaà brahma paraà dhäma
brahmähaà paramaà padam
evaà samékñya cätmänam
ätmany ädhäya niñkale
daçantaà takñakaà päde
lelihänaà viñänanaiù
na drakñyasi çaréraà ca
viçvaà ca påthag ätmanaù
SYNONYMS
aham—I; brahma—the Absolute Truth; param—supreme; dhäma—the abode;
brahma—the Absolute Truth; aham—I; paramam—the supreme;
padam—destination; evam—thus; samékñya—considering; ca—and;
ätmänam—yourself; ätmani—in the Supreme Self; ädhäya—placing;
niñkale—which is free from material designation; daçantam—biting;
takñakam—Takñaka; päde—upon your foot; lelihänam—the snake, licking his
lips; viña-änanaiù—with his mouth full of poison; na drakñyasi—you will not
even notice; çaréram—your body; ca—and; viçvam—the entire material world;
ca—and; påthak—separate; ätmanaù—from the self.
TRANSLATION
You should consider, "I am nondifferent from the Absolute Truth, the
supreme abode, and that Absolute Truth, the supreme destination, is
nondifferent from me." Thus resigning yourself to the Supreme Soul, who is
free from all material misidentifications, you will not even notice the snake-bird
Takñaka when he approaches with his poison-filled fangs and bites your foot.
Nor will you see your dying body or the material world around you, because
you will have realized yourself to be separate from them.
TEXT 13
WtaÔae k(iTataM taAta
yad"AtmaA pa{í"vaAªa{pa
h"re"ivaRìAtmanaêeí"AM
ikM( BaUya: ™aAetauimacC$is$a
etat te kathitaà täta
yad ätmä påñöavän nåpa
harer viçvätmanaç ceñöäà
kià bhüyaù çrotum icchasi
SYNONYMS
etat—this; te—to you; kathitam—narrated; täta—my dear Parékñit;
yat—which; ätmä—you; påñöavän—inquired; nåpa—O King; hareù-of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; viçva-ätmanaù—of the Soul of the universe;
ceñöäm—the pastimes; kim—what; bhüyaù—further; çrotum—to hear;
icchasi—do you wish.
TRANSLATION
Beloved King Parékñit, I have narrated to you the topics you originally
inquired about—the pastimes of Lord Hari, the Supreme Soul of the universe.
Now, what more do you wish to hear?
PURPORT
In his commentary on this text, Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has elaborately
demonstrated, by citing many Bhägavatam verses, the exalted devotional
position of King Parékñit, who was fully determined to fix his mind upon Lord
Kåñëa and go back home, back to Godhead.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Twelfth Canto, Fifth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Çukadeva Gosvämé's Final Instructions to
Mahäräja Parékñit."
6. Mahäräja Parékñit Passes Away
This chapter describes Mahäräja Parékñit's attainment of liberation,
Mahäräja Janamejaya's performance of sacrifice for killing all snakes, the
origin of the Vedas, and Çréla Vedavyäsa's dividing of the Vedic literature.
After hearing the words of Çré Çukadeva, Mahäräja Parékñit stated that by
having listened to the Bhägavatam, which is the compendium of the Puräëas
and which is full of the nectarean pastimes of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Lord Uttamaùçloka, Parékñit had attained the transcendental
position of fearlessness and oneness with the Supreme. His ignorance had been
dispelled, and by the mercy of Çré Çukadeva he had gained sight of the
supremely auspicious personal form of God, namely the Personality of
Godhead, Çré Hari. As a result, he had cast aside all fear of death. Çré Parékñit
Mahäräja then begged Çukadeva Gosvämé to permit him to fix his heart upon
the lotus feet of Lord Hari and give up his life. Granting this permission, Çré
Çukadeva rose and departed. Subsequently Mahäräja Parékñit, free of all
doubts, sat down in yogic posture and merged himself in meditation upon the
Supersoul. Then the snake-bird Takñaka, arriving in the disguise of a
brähmaëa, bit him, and the body of the saintly king immediately burned to
ashes.
Janamejaya, the son of Parékñit, became very angry when he received news
of his father's death, and he began a sacrificial performance for the purpose of
destroying all the snakes. Even though Takñaka received protection from
Indra, he nevertheless became attracted by the mantras and was about to fall
into the fire. Seeing this, Båhaspati, the son of Aìgirä Åñi, came and advised
Mahäräja Janamejaya that Takñaka could not be killed because he had drunk
the nectar of the demigods. Furthermore, Aìgirä said that all living entities
must enjoy the fruits of their past activities. Therefore the king should give up
this sacrifice. Janamejaya was thus convinced by the words of Båhaspati and
stopped his sacrifice.
Thereafter Süta Gosvämé, in response to questions from Çré Çaunaka,
described the divisions of the Vedas. From the heart of the topmost demigod,
Brahmä, came the subtle transcendental vibration, and from this subtle sound
vibration arose the syllable oà, greatly potent and self-luminous. Using this
oàkära, Lord Brahmä created the original Vedas and taught them to his sons,
Maréci and others, who were all saintly leaders of the brähmaëa community.
This body of Vedic knowledge was handed down through the disciplic
succession of spiritual masters until the end of Dväpara-yuga, when Lord
Vyäsadeva divided it into four parts and instructed various schools of sages in
these four saàhitäs. When the sage Yäjïavalkya was rejected by his spiritual
master, he had to give up all the Vedic mantras he had received from him. To
obtain new mantras of the Yajur Veda, Yäjïavalkya worshiped the Supreme
Lord in the form of the sun-god. Çré Süryadeva subsequently fulfilled his
prayer.
TEXT 1
s$aUta ovaAca
WtaiªazAmya mauinanaAiBaih"taM par"Iiºaä,"
vyaAs$aAtmajaena inaiKalaAtmaä{"zAA s$amaena
tatpaAd"maUlamaupas$a{tya nataena maU©aAR
baÜ"AÃailastaimad"maAh" s$a ivaSNAur"Ata:
süta uväca
etan niçamya muninäbhihitaà parékñid
vyäsätmajena nikhilätma-dåçä samena
tat-päda-mülam upasåtya natena mürdhnä
baddhäïjalis tam idam äha sa viñëurätaù
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; etat—this; niçamya—hearing; muninä—by
the sage (Çukadeva); abhihitam—narrated; parékñit—Mahäräja Parékñit;
vyäsa-ätma-jena—by the son of Vyäsadeva; nikhila—of all living beings;
ätma—the Supreme Lord; dåçä—who sees; samena—who is perfectly
equipoised; tat—of him (Çukadeva); päda-mülam—to the lotus feet;
upasåtya—going up; natena—bowed down; mürdhnä—with his head;
baddha-aïjaliù—his arms folded in supplication; tam—to him; idam—this;
äha—said; saù—he; viñëu-rätaù—Parékñit, who while still in the womb had
been protected by Lord Kåñëa Himself.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: After hearing all that was narrated to him by the
self-realized and equipoised Çukadeva, the son of Vyäsadeva, Mahäräja Parékñit
humbly approached his lotus feet. Bowing his head down upon the sage's feet,
the King, who had lived his entire life under the protection of Lord Viñëu,
folded his hands in supplication and spoke as follows.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, some of the sages
present while Çukadeva was instructing King Parékñit were impersonalist
philosophers. Thus the word samena indicates that in the previous chapter
Çukadeva Gosvämé had spoken the philosophy of self-realization in a way
pleasing to such intellectual yogés.
TEXT 2
r"AjaAevaAca
is$aÜ"Ae'smyanaugA{h"ItaAe'isma
BavataA k(ç&NAAtmanaA
™aAivataAe ya»a mae s$aAºaAä,"
@naAid"inaDanaAe h"ir":
räjoväca
siddho 'smy anugåhéto 'smi
bhavatä karuëätmanä
çrävito yac ca me säkñäd
anädi-nidhano hariù
SYNONYMS
räjä uväca—King Parékñit said; siddhaù—fully successful; asmi—I am;
anugåhétaù—shown great mercy; asmi—I am; bhavatä—by your good self;
karuëä-ätmanä—who are full of mercy; çrävitaù—has been described aurally;
yat—because; ca—and; me—to me; säkñät—directly; anädi—who has no
beginning; nidhanaù—or end; hariù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Parékñit said: I have now achieved the purpose of my life, because
a great and merciful soul like you has shown such kindness to me. You have
personally spoken to me this narration of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Hari, who is without beginning or end.
TEXT 3
naAtyaàu"tamahM" manyae
mah"taAmacyautaAtmanaAma,
@ÁaeSau taApataæaeSau
BaUtaeSau yad"nauƒah":
näty-adbhutam ahaà manye
mahatäm acyutätmanäm
ajïeñu täpa-tapteñu
bhüteñu yad anugrahaù
SYNONYMS
na—not; ati-adbhutam—very surprising; aham—I; manye—think;
mahatäm—for the great souls; acyuta-ätmanäm—whose minds are always
absorbed in Lord Kåñëa; ajïeñu—upon the ignorant; täpa—by the distresses of
material life; tapteñu—tormented; bhüteñu—upon the conditioned souls;
yat—which; anugrahaù—mercy.
TRANSLATION
I do not consider it at all amazing that great souls such as yourself, whose
minds are always absorbed in the infallible Personality of Godhead, show mercy
to the foolish conditioned souls, tormented as we are by the problems of
material life.
TEXT 4
paur"ANAs$aMih"taAmaetaAma,
@™aAESma BavataAe vayama,
yasyaAM KalaUÔama:ëAek(Ae
BagAvaAnanavaNyaRtae
puräëa-saàhitäm etäm
açrauñma bhavato vayam
yasyäà khalüttamaù-çloko
bhagavän anavarëyate
SYNONYMS
puräëa-saàhitäm—essential summary of all the Puräëas; etäm-this;
açrauñma—have heard; bhavataù—from you; vayam—we; yasyäm—in which;
khalu—indeed; uttamaù-çlokaù—who is always described in choice poetry;
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; anuvarëyate—is fittingly described.
TRANSLATION
I have heard from you this Çrémad-Bhägavatam, which is the perfect
summary of all the Puräëas and which perfectly describes the Supreme Lord,
Uttamaùçloka.
TEXT 5
BagAvaMstaºak(Aid"ByaAe
ma{tyauByaAe na ibaBaemyah"ma,
‘aivaí"Ae “aö inavaARNAma,
@BayaM d"izARtaM tvayaA
bhagavaàs takñakädibhyo
måtyubhyo na bibhemy aham
praviñöo brahma nirväëam
abhayaà darçitaà tvayä
SYNONYMS
bhagavan—my lord; takñaka—from the snake-bird Takñaka; ädibhyaù—or
other living entities; måtyubhyaù—from repeated deaths; na bibhemi—do not
fear; aham—I; praviñöaù—having entered; brahma—the Absolute Truth;
nirväëam—exclusive of everything material; abhayam—fearlessness;
darçitam—shown; tvayä—by you.
TRANSLATION
My lord, I now have no fear of Takñaka or any other living being, or even of
repeated deaths, because I have absorbed myself in that purely spiritual
Absolute Truth, which you have revealed and which destroys all fear.
TEXT 6
@naujaAnaIih" maAM “aöna,
vaAcaM yacC$AmyaDaAeºajae
maul(k(AmaAzAyaM caeta:
‘avaezya ivas$a{jaAmyas$aUna,
anujänéhi mäà brahman
väcaà yacchämy adhokñaje
mukta-kämäçayaà cetaù
praveçya visåjämy asün
SYNONYMS
anujänéhi—please give your permission; mäm—to me; brahman—O great
brähmaëa; väcam—my speech (and all other sensory functions); yacchämi—I
shall place; adhokñaje—within the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
mukta—having given up; käma-äçayam—all lusty desires; cetaù—my mind;
praveçya—absorbing; visåjämi—I shall give up; asün—my life air.
TRANSLATION
O brähmaëa, please give me permission to resign my speech and the
functions of all my senses unto Lord Adhokñaja. Allow me to absorb my mind,
purified of lusty desires, within Him and to thus give up my life.
PURPORT
Çukadeva Gosvämé asked King Parékñit, "What more do you wish to hear?"
Now the King replies that he has perfectly understood the message of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam and that he is ready, without further discussion, to go back
home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 7
@ÁaAnaM ca inar"staM mae
ÁaAnaivaÁaAnainaï"yaA
BavataA d"izARtaM ºaemaM
parM" BagAvata: pad"ma,
ajïänaà ca nirastaà me
jïäna-vijïäna-niñöhayä
bhavatä darçitaà kñemaà
paraà bhagavataù padam
SYNONYMS
ajïänam—ignorance; ca—also; nirastam—eradicated; me—my; jïäna—in
knowledge of the Supreme Lord; vijïäna—and direct realization of His
opulence and sweetness; niñöhayä—by becoming fixed; bhavatä—by you;
darçitam—has been shown; kñemam—all-auspicious; param—supreme;
bhagavataù—of the Lord; padam—the Personality.
TRANSLATION
You have revealed to me that which is most auspicious, the supreme personal
feature of the Lord. I am now fixed in knowledge and self-realization, and my
ignorance has been eradicated.
TEXT 8
s$aUta ovaAca
wtyaul(stamanauÁaApya
BagAvaAna, baAd"r"AyaiNA:
jagAAma iBaºauiBa: s$aAkM(
nar"de"vaena paUijata:
süta uväca
ity uktas tam anujïäpya
bhagavän bädaräyaëiù
jagäma bhikñubhiù säkaà
nara-devena püjitaù
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Çré Süta Gosvämé said; iti—thus; uktaù—spoken to; tam—him;
anujïäpya—giving permission; bhagavän—the powerful saint;
bädaräyaëiù—Çukadeva, the son of Bädaräyaëa Vedavyäsa; jagäma—went
away; bhikñubhiù—the renounced sages; säkam—along with; nara-devena—by
the King; püjitaù—worshiped.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: Thus requested, the saintly son of Çréla Vyäsadeva gave
his permission to King Parékñit. Then, after being worshiped by the King and all
the sages present, Çukadeva departed from that place.
TEXTS 9-10
par"Iiºad"ipa r"AjaiSaRr,"
@AtmanyaAtmaAnamaAtmanaA
s$amaADaAya parM" d"DyaAva,
@s$pand"As$auyaRTaA taç&:
‘aAfkU(lae baihR"SyaAs$aInaAe
gAËÿAkU(la od"x.~mauKa:
“aöBaUtaAe mah"AyaAegAI
ina:s$aËÿizC$ªas$aMzAya:
parékñid api räjarñir
ätmany ätmänam ätmanä
samädhäya paraà dadhyäv
aspandäsur yathä taruù
präk-küle barhiñy äséno
gaìgä-küla udaì-mukhaù
brahma-bhüto mahä-yogé
niùsaìgaç chinna-saàçayaù
SYNONYMS
parékñit—Mahäräja Parékñit; api—furthermore; räja-åñiù—the great saintly
King; ätmani—within his own spiritual identity; ätmänam—his mind;
ätmanä—by his intelligence; samädhäya—placing; param—upon the Supreme;
dadhyau—he meditated; aspanda—motionless; asuù—his living air;
yathä—just as; taruù—a tree; präk-küle—with the tips of its stalks facing east;
barhiñi—upon darbha grass; äsénaù—sitting; gaìgä-küle—on the bank of the
Gaìgä; udak-mukhaù—facing north; brahma-bhütaù—in perfect realization of
his true identity; mahä-yogé—the exalted mystic; niùsaìgaù—free of all
material attachment; chinna—broken off; saàçayaù—all doubts.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Parékñit then sat down on the bank of the Ganges, upon a seat
made of darbha grass with the tips of its stalks facing east, and turned himself
toward the north. Having attained the perfection of yoga, he experienced full
self-realization and was free of material attachment and doubt. The saintly King
settled his mind within his spiritual self by pure intelligence and proceeded to
meditate upon the Supreme Absolute Truth. His life air ceased to move, and he
became as stationary as a tree.
TEXT 11
taºak(: ‘aih"taAe iva‘aA:
‚u(Üe"na iã"jas$aUnaunaA
h"ntauk(AmaAe na{paM gAcC$na,
d"d"zAR paiTa k(zyapama,
takñakaù prahito vipräù
kruddhena dvija-sünunä
hantu-kämo nåpaà gacchan
dadarça pathi kaçyapam
SYNONYMS
takñakaù—the snake-bird Takñaka; prahitaù—sent; vipräù—O learned
brähmaëas; kruddhena—who had been angered; dvija—of the sage Saméka;
sünunä—by the son; hantu-kämaù—desirous of killing; nåpam—the King;
gacchan—while going; dadarça—he saw; pathi—upon the road;
kaçyapam—Kaçyapa Muni.
TRANSLATION
O learned brähmaëas, the snake-bird Takñaka, who had been sent by the
angry son of a brähmaëa, was going toward the King to kill him when he saw
Kaçyapa Muni on the path.
TEXT 12
taM tapaRiyatvaA ‰"ivaNAEr,"
inavatyaR ivaSah"Air"NAma,
iã"jaè&pa‘aitacC$ªa:
k(Amaè&paAe'd"zAªa{pama,
taà tarpayitvä draviëair
nivartya viña-häriëam
dvija-rüpa-praticchannaù
käma-rüpo 'daçan nåpam
SYNONYMS
tam—him (Kaçyapa); tarpayitvä—gratifying; draviëaiù—with valuable
offerings; nivartya—stopping; viña-häriëam—an expert in counteracting
poison; dvija-rüpa—in the form of a brähmaëa; praticchannaù—disguising
himself; käma-rüpaù—Takñaka, who could assume any form he wished;
adaçat—bit; nåpam—King Parékñit.
TRANSLATION
Takñaka flattered Kaçyapa by presenting him with valuable offerings and
thereby stopped the sage, who was expert in counteracting poison, from
protecting Mahäräja Parékñit. Then the snakebird, who could assume any form
he wished, disguised himself as a brähmaëa, approached the King and bit him.
PURPORT
Kaçyapa could counteract the poison of Takñaka and demonstrated this
power by bringing a palm tree back to life after Takñaka had burned it to ashes
by biting it with his fangs. According to the arrangement of destiny, Kaçyapa
was diverted by Takñaka, and the inevitable took place.
TEXT 13
“aöBaUtasya r"AjaSaeRr,"
de"h"Ae'ih"gAr"laAi¢anaA
baBaUva Basmas$aAts$aâ:
pazyataAM s$avaR$de"ih"naAma,
brahma-bhütasya räjarñer
deho 'hi-garalägninä
babhüva bhasmasät sadyaù
paçyatäà sarva-dehinäm
SYNONYMS
brahma-bhütasya—of the fully self-realized; räja-åñeù—the saint among kings;
dehaù—the body; ahi—of the snake; garala—from the poison; agninä—by the
fire; babhüva—turned; bhasma-sät—to ashes; sadyaù—immediately;
paçyatäm—while they were watching; sarva-dehinäm—all embodied living
beings.
TRANSLATION
While living beings all over the universe looked on, the body of the great
self-realized saint among kings was immediately burned to ashes by the fire of
the snake's poison.
TEXT 14
h"Ah"Ak(Ar"Ae mah"AnaAs$aIä,"
Bauiva Kae id"ºau s$avaRta:
ivaismataA ÷Bavana, s$avaeR
de"vaAs$aur"nar"Ad"ya:
hähä-käro mahän äséd
bhuvi khe dikñu sarvataù
vismitä hy abhavan sarve
deväsura-narädayaù
SYNONYMS
hähä-käraù—a cry of lamentation; mahän—great; äsét—there was; bhuvi—on
the earth; khe—in the sky; dikñu—in the directions; sarvataù—all about;
vismitäù—amazed; hi—indeed; abhavan—they became; sarve—all; deva—the
demigods; asura—demons; nara—human beings; ädayaù—and other creatures.
TRANSLATION
There arose a terrible cry of lamentation in all directions on the earth and in
the heavens, and all the demigods, demons, human beings and other creatures
were astonished.
TEXT 15
de"vaäu"näu"BayaAe naeäu"r,"
gAnDavaARps$ar"s$aAe jagAu:
vava{Sau: pauSpavaSaARiNA
ivabauDaA: s$aADauvaAid"na:
deva-dundubhayo nedur
gandharväpsaraso jaguù
vavåñuù puñpa-varñäëi
vibudhäù sädhu-vädinaù
SYNONYMS
deva—of the demigods; dundubhayaù—the kettledrums; neduù—resounded;
gandharva-apsarasaù—the Gandharvas and Apsaräs; jaguù—sang;
vavåñuù—they showered down; puñpa-varñäëi—rains of flowers; vibudhäù—the
demigods; sädhu-vädinaù—speaking praise.
TRANSLATION
Kettledrums sounded in the regions of the demigods, and the celestial
Gandharvas and Apsaräs sang. The demigods showered flowers and spoke words
of praise.
PURPORT
Although lamenting at first, all learned persons, including the demigods,
soon realized that a great soul had gone back home, back to Godhead. This was
certainly a cause for celebration.
TEXT 16
janmaejaya: svaipatarM"
™autvaA taºak(Baiºatama,
yaTaAjauh"Ava s$an‚u(Ü"Ae
naAgAAna, s$a‡ae s$ah" iã"jaE:
janmejayaù sva-pitaraà
çrutvä takñaka-bhakñitam
yathäjuhäva sankruddho
nägän satre saha dvijaiù
SYNONYMS
janmejayaù—King Janamejaya, the son of Parékñit; sva-pitaram—his own
father; çrutvä—hearing; takñaka—by Takñaka, the snake-bird;
bhakñitam—bitten; yathä—properly; äjuhäva—offered as oblations;
saìkruddhaù—extremely angry; nägän—the snakes; satre—in a great sacrifice;
saha—along with; dvijaiù—brähmaëas.
TRANSLATION
Hearing that his father had been fatally bitten by the snakebird, Mahäräja
Janamejaya became extremely angry and had brähmaëas perform a mighty
sacrifice in which he offered all the snakes in the world into the sacrificial fire.
TEXT 17
s$apaRs$a‡ae s$aimaÜ"A¢aAE
d"÷maAnaAnmah"Aer"gAAna,
ä{"îe"n‰M" Bayas$aMiva¢as$a,
taºak(: zAr"NAM yayaAE
sarpa-satre samiddhägnau
dahyamänän mahoragän
dåñövendraà bhaya-saàvignas
takñakaù çaraëaà yayau
SYNONYMS
sarpa-satre—in the snake sacrifice; samiddha—blazing; agnau—in the fire;
dahyamänän—being burned; mahä-uragän—the great serpents;
dåñövä—seeing; indram—to Indra; bhaya—with fear; saàvignaù—very
disturbed; takñakaù—Takñaka; çaraëam—for shelter; yayau—went.
TRANSLATION
When Takñaka saw even the most powerful serpents being burned in the
blazing fire of that snake sacrifice, he was overwhelmed with fear and
approached Lord Indra for shelter.
TEXT 18
@pazyaMstaºakM( ta‡a
r"AjaA paAr"IiºataAe iã"jaAna,
ovaAca taºak(: k(smaAna,
na d"÷etaAer"gAADama:
apaçyaàs takñakaà tatra
räjä pärékñito dvijän
uväca takñakaù kasmän
na dahyetoragädhamaù
SYNONYMS
apaçyan—not seeing; takñakam—Takñaka; tatra—there; räjä—the King;
pärékñitaù—Janamejaya; dvijän—to the brähmaëas; uväca—said;
takñakaù—Takñaka; kasmät—why; na dahyeta—has not been burned;
uraga—of all the serpents; adhamaù—the lowest.
TRANSLATION
When King Janamejaya did not see Takñaka entering his sacrificial fire, he
said to the brähmaëas: Why is not Takñaka, the lowest of all serpents, burning
in this fire?
TEXT 19
taM gAAepaAyaita r"Ajaen‰"
zA‚(: zAr"NAmaAgAtama,
taena s$aMstaimBata: s$apaRs$a,
tasmaAªaA¢aAE patatyas$aAE
taà gopäyati räjendra
çakraù çaraëam ägatam
tena saàstambhitaù sarpas
tasmän nägnau pataty asau
SYNONYMS
tam—him (Takñaka); gopäyati—is hiding; räja-indra—O best of kings;
çakraù—Lord Indra; çaraëam—for shelter; ägatam—who has approached;
tena—by that Indra; saàstambhitaù—kept; sarpaù—the snake; tasmät—thus;
na—not; agnau—into the fire; patati—does fall; asau—he.
TRANSLATION
The brähmaëas replied: O best of kings, the snake Takñaka has not fallen
into the fire because he is being protected by Indra, whom he has approached
for shelter. Indra is holding him back from the fire.
TEXT 20
paAr"Iiºata wita ™autvaA
‘aAh"itvaRja od"Ar"DaI:
s$ahe"n‰"staºak(Ae iva‘aA
naA¢aAE ik(imaita paAtyatae
pärékñita iti çrutvä
prähartvija udära-dhéù
sahendras takñako viprä
nägnau kim iti pätyate
SYNONYMS
pärékñitaù—King Janamejaya; iti—these words; çrutvä—hearing;
präha—replied; åtvijaù—to the priests; udära—broad; dhéù—whose
intelligence; saha—along with; indraù—Indra; takñakaù—Takñaka; vipräù—O
brähmaëas; na—not; agnau—into the fire; kim—why; iti—indeed; pätyate—is
made to fall.
TRANSLATION
The intelligent King Janamejaya, hearing these words, replied to the priests:
Then, my dear brähmaëas, why not make Takñaka fall into the fire, along with
his protector, Indra?
TEXT 21
tacC_$tvaAjauò"vauivaR‘aA:
s$ahe"n‰M" taºakM( maKae
taºak(AzAu patasvaeh"
s$ahe"n‰e"NA maç&tvataA
tac chrutväjuhuvur vipräù
sahendraà takñakaà makhe
takñakäçu patasveha
sahendreëa marutvatä
SYNONYMS
tat—that; çrutvä—hearing; äjuhuvuù—they performed the ritual of offering
oblation; vipräù—the brähmaëa priests; saha—along with; indram—King
Indra; takñakam—the snake-bird Takñaka; makhe—into the sacrificial fire;
takñaka—O Takñaka; äçu—quickly; patasva—you should fall; iha—here; saha
indreëa—together with Indra; marut-vatä—who is accompanied by all the
demigods.
TRANSLATION
Hearing this, the priests then chanted this mantra for offering Takñaka
together with Indra as an oblation into the sacrificial fire: O Takñaka, fall
immediately into this fire, together with Indra and his entire host of demigods!
TEXT 22
wita “aöAeid"taAºaepaE:
sTaAnaAid"n‰": ‘acaAilata:
baBaUva s$am”aAntamaita:
s$aivamaAna: s$ataºak(:
iti brahmoditäkñepaiù
sthänäd indraù pracälitaù
babhüva sambhränta-matiù
sa-vimänaù sa-takñakaù
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; brahma—by the brähmaëas; udita—spoken; äkñepaiù—by the
insulting words; sthänät—from his place; indraù—Lord Indra;
pracälitaù—thrown; babhüva—became; sambhränta—disturbed; matiù—in his
mind; sa-vimänaù—along with his heavenly airplane; sa-takñakaù—along with
Takñaka.
TRANSLATION
When Lord Indra, along with his airplane and Takñaka, was suddenly
thrown from his position by these insulting words of the brähmaëas, he became
very disturbed.
TEXT 23
taM patantaM ivamaAnaena
s$ah"taºak(mambar"Ata,
ivalaAefyaAiËÿr"s$a: ‘aAh"
r"AjaAnaM taM ba{h"s$paita:
taà patantaà vimänena
saha-takñakam ambarät
vilokyäìgirasaù präha
räjänaà taà båhaspatiù
SYNONYMS
tam—him; patantam—falling; vimänena—in his airplane;
saha-takñakam—with Takñaka; ambarät—from the sky; vilokya—observing;
äìgirasaù—the son of Aìgirä; präha—spoke; räjänam—to the King
(Janamejaya); tam—to him; båhaspatiù—Båhaspati.
TRANSLATION
Båhaspati, the son of Aìgirä Muni, seeing Indra falling from the sky in his
airplane along with Takñaka, approached King Janamejaya and spoke to him as
follows.
TEXT 24
naESa tvayaA manauSyaen‰"
vaDamahR"ita s$apaRr"Aq%.
@naena paItamama{tama,
@Ta vaA @jar"Amar":
naiña tvayä manuñyendra
vadham arhati sarpa-räö
anena pétam amåtam
atha vä ajarämaraù
SYNONYMS
na—not; eñaù—this snake-bird; tvayä—by you; manuñya-indra—O great ruler
of men; vadham—murder; arhati—deserves; sarpa-räö—the king of snakes;
anena—by him; pétam—has been drunk; amåtam—the nectar of the demigods;
atha—therefore; vai—certainly; ajara—free from the effects of old age;
amaraù—virtually immortal.
TRANSLATION
O King among men, it is not fitting that this king of snakes meet death at
your hands, for he has drunk the nectar of the immortal demigods.
Consequently he is not subject to the ordinary symptoms of old age and death.
TEXT 25
jaIivataM mar"NAM jantaAer,"
gAita: svaenaEva k(maRNAA
r"AjaMstataAe'nyaAe naAstyasya
‘ad"AtaA s$auKaäu":KayaAe:
jévitaà maraëaà jantor
gatiù svenaiva karmaëä
räjaàs tato 'nyo nästy asya
pradätä sukha-duùkhayoù
SYNONYMS
jévitam—the living; maraëam—the dying; jantoù—of a living being;
gatiù—the destination in his next life; svena—by his own; eva—only;
karmaëä—work; räjan—O King; tataù—than that; anyaù—another; na
asti—there is not; asya—for him; pradätä—bestower; sukha-duùkhayoù—of
happiness and distress.
TRANSLATION
The life and death of an embodied soul and his destination in the next life
are all caused by himself through his own activity. Therefore, O King, no other
agent is actually responsible for creating one's happiness and distress.
PURPORT
Although King Parékñit apparently died by the bite of Takñaka, it was Lord
Kåñëa Himself who brought the King back to the kingdom of God. Båhaspati
wanted young King Janamejaya to see things from the spiritual point of view.
TEXT 26
s$apaRcaAEr"Ai¢aivaâuà"Ya:
ºauÔa{ã"YaADyaAid"iBana{Rpa
paÂatvama{cC$tae jantaur,"
BauÈÿ @Ar"bDak(maR tata,
sarpa-caurägni-vidyudbhyaù
kñut-tåd-vyädhy-ädibhir nåpa
païcatvam åcchate jantur
bhuìkta ärabdha-karma tat
SYNONYMS
sarpa—from snakes; caura—thieves; agni—fire; vidyudbhyaù—and lightning;
kñut—from hunger; tåö—thirst; vyädhi—disease; ädibhiù—and other agents;
nåpa—O King; païcatvam—death; åcchate—obtains; jantuù—the conditioned
living entity; bhuìkte—he enjoys; ärabdha—already created by his past work;
karma—the fruitive reaction; tat—that.
TRANSLATION
When a conditioned soul is killed by snakes, thieves, fire, lightning, hunger,
disease or anything else, he is experiencing the reaction to his own past work.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, King Parékñit obviously
was not suffering the reaction of past karma. As a great devotee he was
personally brought back home, back to Godhead, by the Lord.
TEXT 27
tasmaAts$a‡aimadM" r"Ajana,
s$aMsTaIyaetaAiBacaAir"k(ma,
s$apaAR @naAgAs$aAe d"gDaA
janaEidR"íM" ih" Baujyatae
tasmät satram idaà räjan
saàsthéyetäbhicärikam
sarpä anägaso dagdhä
janair diñöaà hi bhujyate
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; satram—sacrifice; idam—this; räjan—O King;
saàsthéyeta—should be stopped; äbhicärikam—done with intent to harm;
sarpäù—the serpents; anägasaù—innocent; dagdhäù—burned; janaiù—by
persons; diñöam—fate; hi—indeed; bhujyate—is suffered.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, my dear King, please stop this sacrificial performance, which was
initiated with the intent of doing harm to others. Many innocent snakes have
already been burned to death. Indeed, all persons must suffer the unforeseen
consequences of their past activities.
PURPORT
Båhaspati here admits that although the snakes appeared to be innocent, by
the Lord's arrangement they were also being punished for previous vicious
activities.
TEXT 28
s$aUta ovaAca
wtyaul(: s$a taTaetyaAh"
mah"SaeRmaARnayana, vaca:
s$apaRs$a‡aAäu"par"ta:
paUjayaAmaAs$a vaAfpaitama,
süta uväca
ity uktaù sa tathety äha
maharñer mänayan vacaù
sarpa-saträd uparataù
püjayäm äsa väk-patim
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; iti—thus; uktaù—addressed; saù—he
(Janamejaya); tathä iti—so be it; äha—he said; mahä-åñeù—of the great sage;
mänayan—honoring; vacaù—the words; sarpa-saträt—from the snake
sacrifice; uparataù—ceasing; püjayäm äsa—he worshiped;
väk-patim—Båhaspati, the master of eloquence.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé continued: Advised in this manner, Mahäräja Janamejaya
replied, "So be it." Honoring the words of the great sage, he desisted from
performing the snake sacrifice and worshiped Båhaspati, the most eloquent of
sages.
TEXT 29
s$aESaA ivaSNAAemaRh"AmaAyaAbaADyayaAla
ºaNAA yayaA
mau÷ntyasyaEvaAtmaBaUtaA
BaUtaeSau gAuNAva{iÔaiBa:
saiñä viñëor mahä-mäyäbädhyayälakñaëä
yayä
muhyanty asyaivätma-bhütä
bhüteñu guëa-våttibhiù
SYNONYMS
sä eñä—this very; viñëoù—of the Supreme Lord, Viñëu; mahä-mäyä—the
illusory material energy; abädhyayä—by her who cannot be checked;
alakñaëä—indiscernible; yayä—by whom; muhyanti—become bewildered;
asya—of the Lord; eva—indeed; ätma-bhütäù—the part-and-parcel spirit
souls; bhüteñu—within their material bodies; guëa—of the modes of nature;
våttibhiù—by the functions.
TRANSLATION
This is indeed the Supreme Lord Viñëu's illusory energy, which is
unstoppable and difficult to perceive. Although the individual spirit souls are
part and parcel of the Lord, through the influence of this illusory energy they
are bewildered by their identification with various material bodies.
PURPORT
The illusory energy of Lord Viñëu is so powerful that even the illustrious
son of King Parékñit was temporarily misdirected. Because he was a devotee of
Lord Kåñëa, however, his bewilderment was quickly rectified. On the other
hand, an ordinary, materialistic person without the special protection of the
Lord plummets to the depths of material ignorance. Factually, materialistic
persons are not interested in the protection of Lord Viñëu. Therefore their
complete ruination is inevitable.
TEXTS 30-31
na ya‡a d"mBaItyaBayaA ivar"AijataA
maAyaAtmavaAde"'s$ak{(d"AtmavaAid"iBa:
na yaiã"vaAd"Ae ivaivaDastad"A™ayaAe
manaê s$aÆÿlpaivak(lpava{iÔa yata,
na ya‡a s$a{jyaM s$a{jataAeBayaAe: parM"
™aeyaê jaIvaiñiBar"invatastvah"ma,
tade"taäu"ts$aAid"tabaADyabaADakM(
inaiSaDya caAemaI=na, ivar"maeta tanmauina:
na yatra dambhéty abhayä viräjitä
mäyätma-väde 'sakåd ätma-vädibhiù
na yad vivädo vividhas tad-äçrayo
manaç ca saìkalpa-vikalpa-våtti yat
na yatra såjyaà såjatobhayoù paraà
çreyaç ca jévas tribhir anvitas tv aham
tad etad utsädita-bädhya-bädhakaà
niñidhya cormén virameta tan muniù
SYNONYMS
na—not; yatra—in which; dambhé—he is a hypocrite; iti—thinking thus;
abhayä—fearless; viräjitä—visible; mäyä—the illusory energy;
ätma-väde—when spiritual inquiry is being conducted; asakåt—constantly;
ätma-vädibhiù—by those who describe spiritual science; na—not; yat—in
which; vivädaù—materialistic argument; vividhaù—taking many different
forms; tat-äçrayaù—founded upon that illusory energy; manaù—the mind;
ca—and; saìkalpa—decision; vikalpa—and doubt; våtti—whose functions;
yat—in which; na—not; yatra—in which; såjyam—the created products of the
material world; såjatä—along with their causes; ubhayoù—by both;
param—achieved; çreyaù—the benefits; ca—and; jévaù—the living entity;
tribhiù—with the three (modes of nature); anvitaù—joined; tu—indeed;
aham—(conditioned by) false ego; tat etat—that indeed; utsädita—excluding;
bädhya—the obstructed (conditioned living beings); bädhakam—and the
obstructing (modes of material nature); niñidhya—warding off; ca—and;
ürmén—the waves (of false ego and so on); virameta—should take special
pleasure; tat—in that; muniù—a sage.
TRANSLATION
But there exists a supreme reality, in which the illusory energy cannot
fearlessly dominate, thinking, "I can control this person because he is
deceitful." In that highest reality there are no illusory argumentative
philosophies. Rather, there the true students of spiritual science constantly
engage in authorized spiritual investigation. In that supreme reality there is no
manifestation of the material mind, which functions in terms of alternating
decision and doubt. Created material products, their subtle causes and the goals
of enjoyment attained by their utilization do not exist there. Furthermore, in
that supreme reality there is no conditioned spirit, covered by false ego and the
three modes of nature. That reality excludes everything limited or limiting. One
who is wise should therefore stop the waves of material life and enjoy within
that Supreme Truth.
PURPORT
The illusory energy of the Lord, Mäyä, can freely exert her influence over
those who are hypocritical, deceitful and disobedient to the laws of God. Since
the Personality of Godhead is free of all material qualities, Mäyä herself
becomes fearful in His presence. As stated by Lord Brahmä (vilajjamänayä
yasya sthätum ékña-pate 'muyä): "Mäyä herself is ashamed to stand face to face
with the Supreme Lord."
In the supreme spiritual reality, useless academic wrangling is completely
absent. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (6.4.31),
yac-chaktayo vadatäà vädinäà vai
viväda-saàväda-bhuvo bhavanti
kurvanti caiñäà mahur ätma-mohaà
tasmai namo 'nanta-guëäya bhümne
"Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the all-pervading Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who possesses unlimited transcendental qualities.
Acting from within the cores of the hearts of all philosophers, who propagate
various views, He causes them to forget their own souls while sometimes
agreeing and sometimes disagreeing among themselves. Thus He creates within
this material world a situation in which they are unable to come to a
conclusion. I offer my obeisances unto Him."
TEXT 32
parM" padM" vaESNAvamaAmanainta taä,"
yaªaeita naetaItyataäu"its$as$a{ºava:
ivas$a{jya d"AEr"Atmyamananyas$aAEô$d"A
ô$d"AepagAu÷Avais$ataM s$amaAih"taE:
paraà padaà vaiñëavam ämananti tad
yan neti netéty atad-utsisåkñavaù
visåjya daurätmyam ananya-sauhådä
hådopaguhyävasitaà samähitaiù
SYNONYMS
param—the supreme; padam—situation; vaiñëavam—of Lord Viñëu;
ämananti—they designate; tat—that; yat—which; na iti na iti—"not this, not
this"; iti—thus analyzing; atat—everything extraneous; utsisåkñavaù—those
who are desirous of giving up; visåjya—rejecting; daurätmyam—petty
materialism; ananya—placing nowhere else; sauhådäù—their affection;
hådä—within their hearts; upaguhya—embracing Him; avasitam—who is
captured; samähitaiù—by those who meditate upon Him in trance.
TRANSLATION
Those who desire to give up all that is not essentially real move
systematically, by negative discrimination of the extraneous, to the supreme
position of Lord Viñëu. Giving up petty materialism, they offer their love
exclusively to the Absolute Truth within their hearts and embrace that highest
truth in fixed meditation.
PURPORT
The words yan neti netéty atad-utsisåkñavaù indicate the process of negative
discrimination, by which one engaged in the search for essential and absolute
truth systematically rejects all that is superfluous, superficial and relative.
Throughout the world people have gradually rejected the ultimate validity of
political, social and even religious truths, but because they lack Kåñëa
consciousness they remain bewildered and cynical. However, as clearly stated
here, paraà padaà vaiñëavam ämananti tat. Those who actually desire perfect
knowledge must not only reject the nonessential but must also ultimately
understand the essential spiritual reality called paraà padaà vaiñëavam: the
supreme destination, the abode of Lord Viñëu. Padam indicates both the status
and the abode of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, which can be
understood only by those who give up petty materialism and adopt the position
of ananya-sauhådam, exclusive love for the Lord. Such exclusive love is not
narrow-minded or sectarian, because all living entities, being within the Lord,
are automatically served when one directly serves the supreme entity. This
process of rendering the highest service to the Lord and to all living entities
constitutes the science of Kåñëa consciousness, which is taught throughout
Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 33
ta Wtad"iDagAcC$inta
ivaSNAAeyaRtpar"maM pad"ma,
@hM" mamaeita d"AEjaRnyaM
na yaeSaAM de"h"gAeh"jama,
ta etad adhigacchanti
viñëor yat paramaà padam
ahaà mameti daurjanyaà
na yeñäà deha-geha-jam
SYNONYMS
te—they; etat—this; adhigacchanti—come to know; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu;
yat—which; paramam—the supreme; padam—personal situation; aham—I;
mama—my; iti—thus; daurjanyam—the depravity; na—is not; yeñäm—for
whom; deha—the body; geha—and home; jam—based upon.
TRANSLATION
Such devotees come to understand the supreme transcendental situation of
the Personality of Godhead, Lord Viñëu, because they are no longer polluted by
the concepts of "I" and "my," which are based on body and home.
TEXT 34
@itavaAd"AMistaitaºaeta
naAvamanyaeta k(Âana
na caemaM de"h"maAi™atya
vaErM" ku(vaI=ta ke(naicata,
ativädäàs titikñeta
nävamanyeta kaïcana
na cemaà deham äçritya
vairaà kurvéta kenacit
SYNONYMS
ati-vädän—insulting words; titikñeta—one should tolerate; na—never;
avamanyeta—one should disrespect; kaïcana—anyone; na ca—nor;
imam—this; deham—material body; äçritya—identifying with;
vairam—enmity; kurvéta—one should have; kenacit—with anyone.
TRANSLATION
One should tolerate all insults and never fail to show proper respect to any
person. Avoiding identification with the material body, one should not create
enmity with anyone.
TEXT 35
namaAe BagAvatae tasmaE
k{(SNAAyaAku(NQ&maeDas$ae
yatpaAd"Ambauç&h"DyaAnaAta,
s$aMih"taAmaDyagAAimamaAma,
namo bhagavate tasmai
kåñëäyäkuëöha-medhase
yat-pädämburuha-dhyänät
saàhitäm adhyagäm imäm
SYNONYMS
namaù—obeisances; bhagavate—to the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
tasmai—to Him; kåñëäya—Lord Çré Kåñëa; akuëöha-medhase—whose power is
never impeded; yat—whose; päda-ambu-ruha—upon the lotus feet;
dhyänät—by meditation; saàhitäm—the scripture; adhyagäm—I have
assimilated; imäm—this.
TRANSLATION
I offer my obeisances to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the invincible
Lord Çré Kåñëa. Simply by meditating upon His lotus feet I have been able to
study and appreciate this great literature.
TEXT 36
™aIzAAEnak( ovaAca
paElaAid"iBavyaARs$aizASyaEr,"
vaed"AcaAyaE=maRh"AtmaiBa:
vaed"Aê k(iTataA vyastaA
Wtats$aAEmyaAiBaDaeih" na:
çré-çaunaka uväca
pailädibhir vyäsa-çiñyair
vedäcäryair mahätmabhiù
vedäç ca kathitä vyastä
etat saumyäbhidhehi naù
SYNONYMS
çré-çaunakaù uväca—Çré Çaunaka Åñi said; paila-ädibhiù—by Paila and others;
vyäsa-çiñyaiù—the disciples of Çréla Vyäsadeva; veda-äcäryaiù—the standard
authorities of the Vedas; mahä-ätmabhiù—whose intelligence was very great;
vedäù—the Vedas; ca—and; kathitäù—spoken; vyastäù—divided; etat—this;
saumya—O gentle Süta; abhidhehi—please narrate; naù—to us.
TRANSLATION
Çaunaka Åñi said: O gentle Süta, please narrate to us how Paila and the
other greatly intelligent disciples of Çréla Vyäsadeva, who are known as the
standard authorities of Vedic wisdom, spoke and edited the Vedas.
TEXT 37
s$aUta ovaAca
s$amaAih"taAtmanaAe “aöna,
“aöNA: par"maeiï"na:
ô$âAk(AzAAd"BaUªaAd"Ae
va{iÔar"AeDaAiã"BaAvyatae
süta uväca
samähitätmano brahman
brahmaëaù parameñöhinaù
hådy äkäçäd abhün nädo
våtti-rodhäd vibhävyate
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; samähita-ätmanaù—whose mind was
perfectly fixed; brahman—O brähmaëa (Çaunaka); brahmaëaù—of Lord
Brahmä; parame-sthinaù—the most elevated of living beings; hådi—within the
heart; äkäçät—from out of the sky; abhüt—arose; nädaù—the transcendental
subtle sound; våtti-rodhät—by stopping the functioning (of the ears);
vibhävyate—is perceived.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: O brähmaëa, first the subtle vibration of transcendental
sound appeared from the sky of the heart of the most elevated Lord Brahmä,
whose mind was perfectly fixed in spiritual realization. One can perceive this
subtle vibration when one stops all external hearing.
PURPORT
Because Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the supreme Vedic literature, the sages
headed by Çaunaka desired to trace out its source.
TEXT 38
yaäu"paAs$anayaA “aöna,
yaAeigAnaAe malamaAtmana:
‰"vyai‚(yaAk(Ar"k(AKyaM
DaUtvaA yaAntyapaunaBaRvama,
yad-upäsanayä brahman
yogino malam ätmanaù
dravya-kriyä-kärakäkhyaà
dhütvä yänty apunar-bhavam
SYNONYMS
yat—of which (subtle form of the Vedas); upäsanayä—by the worship;
brahman—O brähmaëa; yoginaù—mystic sages; malam—the contamination;
ätmanaù—of the heart; dravya—substance; kriyä—activity; käraka—and
performer; äkhyam—designated as such; dhütvä—cleansing away; yänti—they
achieve; apunaù-bhavam—freedom from rebirth.
TRANSLATION
By worship of this subtle form of the Vedas, O brähmaëa, mystic sages
cleanse their hearts of all contamination caused by impurity of substance,
activity and doer, and thus they attain freedom from repeated birth and death.
TEXT 39
tataAe'BaUit‡ava{d"Ae"Mk(Ar"Ae
yaAe'vyal(‘aBava: svar"Aq%.
yaÔaiéaËMÿ BagAvataAe
“aöNA: par"maAtmana:
tato 'bhüt tri-våd oàkäro
yo 'vyakta-prabhavaù sva-räö
yat tal liìgaà bhagavato
brahmaëaù paramätmanaù
SYNONYMS
tataù—from that; abhüt—came into being; tri-våt—threefold; oàkäraù—the
syllable oà; yaù-which; avyakta—not apparent; prabhavaù—its influence;
sva-räö—self-manifesting; yat—which; tat—that; liìgam—the representation;
bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; brahmaëaù—of the
Absolute Truth in His impersonal aspect; parama-ätmanaù—and of the
Supersoul.
TRANSLATION
From that transcendental subtle vibration arose the oàkära composed of
three sounds. The oàkära has unseen potencies and manifests automatically
within a purified heart. It is the representation of the Absolute Truth in all
three of His phases—the Supreme Personality, the Supreme Soul and the
supreme impersonal truth.
TEXTS 40-41
Za{NAAeita ya wmaM s$P(AeqM%
s$auæa™aAe‡ae ca zAUnyaä{"k,(
yaena vaAgvyajyatae yasya
vyail(r"Ak(AzA @Atmana:
svaDaA°aAe “aAöNA: s$aAºaAä,"
vaAcak(: par"maAtmana:
s$a s$avaRman‡aAepainaSaä,"
vaed"baIjaM s$anaAtanama,
çåëoti ya imaà sphoöaà
supta-çrotre ca çünya-dåk
yena väg vyajyate yasya
vyaktir äkäça ätmanaù
sva-dhämno brähmaëaù säkñäd
väcakaù paramätmanaù
sa sarva-mantropaniñad
veda-béjaà sanätanam
SYNONYMS
çåëoti—hears; yaù—who; imam—this; sphoöam—unmanifest and eternal
subtle sound; supta-çrotre—when the sense of hearing is asleep; ca—and;
çünya-dåk—devoid of material sight and other sensory functions; yena—by
which; väk—the expanse of Vedic sound; vyajyate—is elaborated; yasya—of
which; vyaktiù—the manifestation; äkäçe—in the sky (of the heart);
ätmanaù—from the soul; sva-dhämnaù—who is His own origin;
brahmaëaù—of the Absolute Truth; säkñät—directly; väcakaù—the
designating term; parama-ätmanaù—of the Supersoul; saù—that; sarva—of
all; mantra—Vedic hymns; upaniñat—the secret; veda—of the Vedas;
béjam—the seed; sanätanam—eternal.
TRANSLATION
This oàkära, ultimately nonmaterial and imperceptible, is heard by the
Supersoul without His possessing material ears or any other material senses.
The entire expanse of Vedic sound is elaborated from oàkära, which appears
from the soul, within the sky of the heart. It is the direct designation of the
self-originating Absolute Truth, the Supersoul, and is the secret essence and
eternal seed of all Vedic hymns.
PURPORT
The senses of a sleeping person do not function until he has awakened.
Therefore, when a sleeping person is awakened by a noise, one may ask, "Who
heard the noise?" The words supta-çrotre in this verse indicate that the
Supreme Lord within the heart hears the sound and awakens the sleeping
living entities. The Lord's sensory activities always function on a superior
level. Ultimately, all sounds vibrate within the sky, and in the internal region
of the heart there is a type of sky meant for the vibration of Vedic sounds. The
seed, or source, of all Vedic sounds is the oàkära. This is confirmed by the
Vedic statement oà ity etad brahmaëo nediñöham näma. The full elaboration of
the Vedic seed sound is Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the greatest Vedic literature.
TEXT 42
tasya ÷As$aMñyaAe vaNAAR
@k(Ar"AâA Ba{gAUã"h"
DaAyaRntae yaEñyaAe BaAvaA
gAuNAnaAmaATaRva{Ôaya:
tasya hy äsaàs trayo varëä
a-kärädyä bhågüdvaha
dhäryante yais trayo bhävä
guëa-nämärtha-våttayaù
SYNONYMS
tasya—of that oàkära; hi-indeed; äsan—came into being; trayaù—three;
varëäù—sounds of the alphabet; a-kära-ädyäù—beginning with the letter a;
bhågu-udvaha-O most eminent of the descendants of Bhågu; dhäryante—are
sustained; yaiù—by which three sounds; trayaù—the threefold; bhäväù—states
of existence; guëa—the qualities of nature; näma—names; artha—goals;
våttayaù—and states of consciousness.
TRANSLATION
Oàkära exhibited the three original sounds of the alphabet—A, U and M.
These three, O most eminent descendant of Bhågu, sustain all the different
threefold aspects of material existence, including the three modes of nature, the
names of the Åg, Yajur and Säma Vedas, the goals known as the Bhür, Bhuvar
and Svar planetary systems, and the three functional platforms called waking
consciousness, sleep and deep sleep.
TEXT 43
tataAe'ºar"s$amaA°aAyama,
@s$a{jaà"gAvaAnaja:
@ntasTaAeSmasvar"s$pazARoe"
svad"IGaARid"laºaNAma,
tato 'kñara-samämnäyam
asåjad bhagavän ajaù
antasthoñma-svara-sparçahrasva-
dérghädi-lakñaëam
SYNONYMS
tataù—from that oàkära; akñara-of the different sounds; samämnäyam—the
total collection; asåjat—created; bhagavän—the powerful demigod;
ajaù—unborn Brahmä; anta-stha—as the semivowels; uñma—sibilants;
svara—vowels; sparça—and consonant stops; hrasva-dérgha—in short and long
forms; ädi—and so on; lakñaëam—characterized.
TRANSLATION
From that oàkära Lord Brahmä created all the sounds of the alphabet—the
vowels, consonants, semivowels, sibilants and others—distinguished by such
features as long and short measure.
TEXT 44
taenaAs$aAE cataur"Ae vaed"AMzA,
catauiBaRvaRd"naEivaRBau:
s$avyaAô$itak(Ana, s$aAe"Mk(Ar"AMzA,
caAtauh"AeR‡aivavaºayaA
tenäsau caturo vedäàç
caturbhir vadanair vibhuù
sa-vyähåtikän soàkäräàç
cätur-hotra-vivakñayä
SYNONYMS
tena—with that body of sounds; asau—he; caturaù—the four; vedän—Vedas;
caturbhiù—from his four; vadanaiù—faces; vibhuù—the all-powerful;
sa-vyähåtikän—along with the vyähåtis (the invocations of the names of the
seven planetary systems: bhüù, bhuvaù, svaù, mahaù, janaù, tapaù and satya);
sa-oàkärän—along with the seed, oà; cätuù-hotra-the four aspects of ritual
sacrifice performed by the priests of each of the four Vedas; vivakñayä—with
the desire of describing.
TRANSLATION
All-powerful Brahmä made use of this collection of sounds to produce from
his four faces the four Vedas, which appeared together with the sacred oàkära
and the seven vyähåti invocations. His intention was to propagate the process of
Vedic sacrifice according to the different functions performed by the priests of
each of the four Vedas.
TEXT 45
pau‡aAnaDyaApayaÔaAMstau
“aöSaI=na, “aök(Aeivad"Ana,
tae tau DamaAeRpade"í"Ar":
svapau‡aeBya: s$amaAid"zAna,
puträn adhyäpayat täàs tu
brahmarñén brahma-kovidän
te tu dharmopadeñöäraù
sva-putrebhyaù samädiçan
SYNONYMS
puträn—to his sons; adhyäpayat—he taught; tän—those Vedas; tu—and;
brahma-åñén—to the great sages among the brähmaëas; brahma—in the art of
Vedic recitation; kovidän—who were very expert; te—they; tu—moreover;
dharma—in religious rituals; upadeñöäraù—instructors; sva-putrebhyaù—to
their own sons; samädiçan—imparted.
TRANSLATION
Brahmä taught these Vedas to his sons, who were great sages among the
brähmaëas and experts in the art of Vedic recitation. They in turn took the role
of äcäryas and imparted the Vedas to their own sons.
TEXT 46
tae par"mpar"yaA ‘aAæaAs$a,
taÔaicC$SyaEDa{Rta˜ataE:
catauyauRgAeSvaTa vyastaA
ã"Apar"Ad"AE mah"iSaRiBa:
te paramparayä präptäs
tat-tac-chiñyair dhåta-vrataiù
catur-yugeñv atha vyastä
dväparädau maharñibhiù
SYNONYMS
te—these Vedas; paramparayä—by continuous disciplic succession;
präptäù—received; tat-tat—of each succeeding generation; çiñyaiù—by the
disciples; dhåta-vrataiù—who were firm in their vows;
catuù-yugeñu—throughout the four ages; atha—then; vyastäù—were divided;
dväpara-ädau—at the end of the Dväpara millennium; mahä-åñibhiù—by great
authorities.
TRANSLATION
In this way, throughout the cycles of four ages, generation after generation
of disciples—all firmly fixed in their spiritual vows—have received these Vedas
by disciplic succession. At the end of each Dväpara-yuga the Vedas are edited
into separate divisions by eminent sages.
TEXT 47
ºaINAAyauSa: ºaINAs$aÔvaAna,
äu"maeRDaAna, vaIºya k(Alata:
vaed"Ana, “aöSaRyaAe vyasyana,
ô$id"sTaAcyautacaAeid"taA:
kñéëäyuñaù kñéëa-sattvän
durmedhän vékñya kälataù
vedän brahmarñayo vyasyan
hådi-sthäcyuta-coditäù
SYNONYMS
kñéëa-äyuñaù—their life span diminished; kñéëa-sattvän—their strength
diminished; durmedhän—of less intelligence; vékñya—observing; kälataù—by
the effect of time; vedän—the Vedas; brahma-åñayaù—the chief sages;
vyasyan—divided up; hådi-stha—sitting within their hearts; acyuta—by the
infallible Personality of Godhead; coditäù—inspired.
TRANSLATION
Observing that people in general were diminished in their life span, strength
and intelligence by the influence of time, great sages took inspiration from the
Personality of Godhead sitting within their hearts and systematically divided
the Vedas.
TEXTS 48-49
@ismaªapyantare" “aöna,
BagAvaAnlaAek(BaAvana:
“aöezAAâElaAeRk(paAlaEr,"
yaAicataAe DamaRgAuæayae
par"AzAr"Ats$atyavatyaAma,
@MzAAMzAk(layaA ivaBau:
@vataINAAeR mah"ABaAgA
vaedM" ca‚e( catauivaRDama,
asminn apy antare brahman
bhagavän loka-bhävanaù
brahmeçädyair loka-pälair
yäcito dharma-guptaye
paräçarät satyavatyäm
aàçäàça-kalayä vibhuù
avatérëo mahä-bhäga
vedaà cakre catur-vidham
SYNONYMS
asmin—in this; api—also; antare—rule of Manu; brahman—O brähmaëa
(Çaunaka); bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; loka—of the
universe; bhävanaù—the protector; brahma—by Brahmä; éça—Çiva;
ädyaiù—and the others; loka-pälaiù—the rulers of the various planets;
yäcitaù—requested; dharma-guptaye—for the protection of the principles of
religion; paräçarät—by Paräçara Muni; satyavatyäm—in the womb of
Satyavaté; aàça—of His plenary expansion (Saìkarñaëa); aàça—of the
expansion (Viñëu); kalayä—as the partial expansion; vibhuù—the Lord;
avatérëaù—descended; mahä-bhäga—O most fortunate one; vedam—the Veda;
cakre-he made; catuù-vidham—in four parts.
TRANSLATION
O brähmaëa, in the present age of Vaivasvata Manu, the leaders of the
universe, led by Brahmä and Çiva, requested the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the protector of all the worlds, to save the principles of religion. O
most fortunate Çaunaka, the almighty Lord, exhibiting a divine spark of a
portion of His plenary portion, then appeared in the womb of Satyavaté as the
son of Paräçara. In this form, named Kåñëa Dvaipäyana Vyäsa, he divided the
one Veda into four.
TEXT 50
[%gATavaRyajau:s$aA°aAM
r"AzAIç&ä,"Da{tya vagARzA:
cata›a: s$aMih"taAê‚e(
man‡aEmaRiNAgANAA wva
åg-atharva-yajuù-sämnäà
räçér uddhåtya vargaçaù
catasraù saàhitäç cakre
mantrair maëi-gaëä iva
SYNONYMS
åk-atharva-yajuù-sämnäm—of the Åg, Atharva, Yajur and Säma Vedas;
räçéù—the accumulation (of mantras); uddhåtya—separating out; vargaçaù—in
specific categories; catasraù—four; saàhitäù—collections; cakre—he made;
mantraiù—with the mantras; maëi-gaëäù—gems; iva—just as.
TRANSLATION
Çréla Vyäsadeva separated the mantras of the Åg, Atharva, Yajur and Säma
Vedas into four divisions, just as one sorts out a mixed collection of jewels into
piles. Thus he composed four distinct Vedic literatures.
PURPORT
When Lord Brahmä first spoke the four Vedas with his four mouths, the
mantras were mixed together like an unsorted collection of various types of
jewels. Çréla Vyäsadeva sorted the Vedic mantras into four divisions (saàhitäs),
which thus became the recognizable Åg, Atharva, Yajur and Säma Vedas.
TEXT 51
taAs$aAM s$a cataur": izASyaAna,
opaAó"ya mah"Amaita:
WkE(k(AM s$aMih"taAM “aöªa,
WkE(k(smaE d"d"AE ivaBau:
täsäà sa caturaù çiñyän
upähüya mahä-matiù
ekaikäà saàhitäà brahmann
ekaikasmai dadau vibhuù
SYNONYMS
täsäm—of those four collections; saù—he; caturaù—four; çiñyän—disciples;
upähüya—calling near; mahä-matiù—the powerfully intelligent sage;
eka-ekäm—one by one; saàhitäm—a collection; brahman—O brähmaëa;
eka-ekasmai—to each of them; dadau—he gave; vibhuù—the powerful
Vyäsadeva.
TRANSLATION
The most powerful and intelligent Vyäsadeva called four of his disciples, O
brähmaëa, and entrusted to each of them one of these four saàhitäs.
TEXTS 52-53
paElaAya s$aMih"taAmaAâAM
baùü"caAKyaAM ovaAca h"
vaEzAmpaAyanas$aMÁaAya
inagAd"AKyaM yajaugARNAma,
s$aA°aAM jaEimanayae ‘aAh"
taTaA C$nd"AegAs$aMih"taAma,
@TavaARiËÿr"s$aI%M naAma
svaizASyaAya s$aumantavae
pailäya saàhitäm ädyäà
bahvåcäkhyäà uväca ha
vaiçampäyana-saàjïäya
nigadäkhyaà yajur-gaëam
sämnäà jaiminaye präha
tathä chandoga-saàhitäm
atharväìgiraséà näma
sva-çiñyäya sumantave
SYNONYMS
pailäya—to Paila; saàhitäm—the collection; ädyäm—first (of the Åg Veda);
bahu-åca-äkhyam—called Bahvåca; uväca-he spoke; ha—indeed;
vaiçampäyana-saàjïäya—to the sage named Vaiçampäyana;
nigada-äkhyam—known as Nigada; yajuù-gaëam-the collection of Yajur
mantras; sämnäm—the mantras of the Säma Veda; jaiminaye—to Jaimini;
präha—he spoke; tathä—and; chandoga-saàhitäm—the saàhitä named
Chandoga; atharva-aìgirasém-the Veda ascribed to the sages Atharva and
Aìgirä; näma—indeed; sva-çiñyäya—to his disciple; sumantave—Sumantu.
TRANSLATION
Çréla Vyäsadeva taught the first saàhitä, the Åg Veda, to Paila and gave this
collection the name Bahvåca. To the sage Vaiçampäyana he spoke the collection
of Yajur mantras named Nigada. He taught the Säma Veda mantras, designated
as the Chandoga-saàhitä, to Jaimini, and he spoke the Atharva Veda to his dear
disciple Sumantu.
TEXTS 54-56
paEla: svas$aMih"taAmaUcae
wn‰"‘aimatayae mauina:
baASk(laAya ca s$aAe'pyaAh"
izASyaeBya: s$aMih"taAM svak(Ama,
catauDaAR vyasya baAeDyaAya
yaAÁavalfyaAya BaAgARva
par"AzAr"AyaAi¢aima‡a
wn‰"‘aimaitar"AtmavaAna,
@DyaApayats$aMih"taAM svaAM
maANx"^ke(yama{iSaM k(ivama,
tasya izASyaAe de"vaima‡a:
s$aAEBayaARid"Bya OicavaAna,
pailaù sva-saàhitäm üce
indrapramitaye muniù
bäñkaläya ca so 'py äha
çiñyebhyaù saàhitäà svakäm
caturdhä vyasya bodhyäya
yäjïavalkyäya bhärgava
paräçaräyägnimitra
indrapramitir ätmavän
adhyäpayat saàhitäà sväà
mäëòükeyam åñià kavim
tasya çiñyo devamitraù
saubhary-ädibhya ücivän
SYNONYMS
pailaù—Paila; sva-saàhitäm—his own collection; üce—spoke;
indrapramitaye—to Indrapramiti; muniù—the sage; bäñkaläya—to Bäñkala;
ca-and; saù—he (Bäñkala); api—moreover; äha—spoke; çiñyebhyaù—to his
disciples; saàhitäm—the collection; svakäm—his own; caturdhä—in four
parts; vyasya—dividing; bodhyäya—to Bodhya; yäjïavalkyäya—to
Yäjïavalkya; bhärgava—O descendant of Bhågu (Çaunaka); paräçaräya—to
Paräçara; agnimitre—to Agnimitra; indrapramitiù—Indrapramiti;
ätma-vän—the self-controlled; adhyäpayat—taught; saàhitäm—the collection;
sväm—his; mäëòükeyam—to Mäëòükeya; åñim—the sage; kavim—scholarly;
tasya—of him (Maëòükeya); çiñyaù—the disciple; devamitraù—Devamitra;
saubhari-ädibhyaù—to Saubhari and others; ücivän—spoke.
TRANSLATION
After dividing his saàhitä into two parts, the wise Paila spoke it to
Indrapramiti and Bäñkala. Bäñkala further divided his collection into four parts,
O Bhärgava, and instructed them to his disciples Bodhya, Yäjïavalkya, Paräçara
and Agnimitra. Indrapramiti, the self-controlled sage, taught his saàhitä to the
learned mystic Mäëòükeya, whose disciple Devamitra later passed down the
divisions of the Åg Veda to Saubhari and others.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, Mäëòükeya was the son of
Indrapramiti, from whom he received Vedic knowledge.
TEXT 57
zAAk(lyastats$auta: svaAM tau
paÂaDaA vyasya s$aMih"taAma,
vaAtsyamauÕ"lazAAlaIyagAAeKalyaizAizAre"
SvaDaAta,
çäkalyas tat-sutaù sväà tu
païcadhä vyasya saàhitäm
vätsya-mudgala-çäléyagokhalya-
çiçireñv adhät
SYNONYMS
çäkalyaù—Çäkalya; tat-sutaù—the son of Mäëòükeya; sväm—his own;
tu—and; païcadhä—in five parts; vyasya—dividing; saàhitäm—the
collection; vätsya-mudgala-çäléya—to Vätsya, Mudgala and Çäléya;
gokhalya-çiçireñu—and to Gokhalya and Çiçira; adhät—gave.
TRANSLATION
The son of Mäëòükeya, named Çäkalya, divided his own collection into five,
entrusting one subdivision each to Vätsya, Mudgala, Çäléya, Gokhalya and
Çiçira.
TEXT 58
jaAtaUk(NyaRê taicC$Sya:
s$ainaç&l(AM svas$aMih"taAma,
balaAk(paElajaAbaAlaivar"
jaeByaAe d"d"AE mauina:
jätükarëyaç ca tac-chiñyaù
sa-niruktäà sva-saàhitäm
baläka-paila-jäbälavirajebhyo
dadau muniù
SYNONYMS
jätükarëyaù—Jätükarëya; ca—and; tat-çiñyaù—the disciple of Çäkalya;
sa-niruktäm—along with a glossary explaining obscure terms;
sva-saàhitäm—the collection he received; baläka-paila-jäbäla-virajebhyaù—to
Baläka, Paila, Jäbäla and Viraja; dadau—passed down; muniù—the sage.
TRANSLATION
The sage Jätükarëya was also a disciple of Çäkalya, and after dividing the
saàhitä he received from Çäkalya into three parts, he added a fourth section, a
Vedic glossary. He taught one of these parts to each of four disciples—Baläka,
the second Paila, Jäbäla and Viraja.
TEXT 59
baASk(ila: ‘aitazAAKaAByaAe
vaAlaiKalyaAKyas$aMih"taAma,
ca‚e( vaAlaAyainaBaRjya:
k(AzAAr"êEva taAM d"Dau:
bäñkaliù prati-çäkhäbhyo
välakhilyäkhya-saàhitäm
cakre väläyanir bhajyaù
käçäraç caiva täà dadhuù
SYNONYMS
bäñkaliù—Bäñkali, the son of Bäñkala; prati-çäkhäbhyaù—from all the different
branches; välakhilya-äkhya—entitled Välakhilya; saàhitäm-the collection;
cakre—he made; väläyaniù—Väläyani; bhajyaù—Bhajya; käçäraù—Käçära;
ca—and; eva—indeed; täm—that; dadhuù—they accepted.
TRANSLATION
Bäñkali assembled the Välakhilya-saàhitä, a collection from all the branches
of the Åg Veda. This collection was received by Väläyani, Bhajya and Käçära.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, Väläyani, Bhajya and Käçära belonged
to the Daitya community.
TEXT 60
baùü"caA: s$aMih"taA ÷etaA
WiBa“aRöiSaRiBaDa{RtaA:
™autvaEtacC$nd"s$aAM vyaAs$aM
s$avaRpaApaE: ‘amaucyatae
bahvåcäù saàhitä hy etä
ebhir brahmarñibhir dhåtäù
çrutvaitac-chandasäà vyäsaà
sarva-päpaiù pramucyate
SYNONYMS
bahu-åcäù—of the Åg Veda; saàhitäù-the collections; hi—indeed; etäù—these;
ebhiù—by these; brahma-åñibhiù—saintly brähmaëas; dhåtäù—maintained
through disciplic succession; çrutvä—hearing; etat—their; chandasäm—of the
sacred verses; vyäsam—the process of division; sarva-päpaiù—from all sins;
pramucyate—one becomes delivered.
TRANSLATION
Thus these various saàhitäs of the Åg Veda were maintained through
disciplic succession by these saintly brähmaëas. Simply by hearing of this
distribution of the Vedic hymns, one will be freed from all sins.
TEXT 61
vaEzAmpaAyanaizASyaA vaE
car"k(ADvayaRvaAe'Bavana,
ya»aeç&“aRöh"tyaAMh":
ºapaNAM svagAur"Ae˜aRtama,
vaiçampäyana-çiñyä vai
carakädhvaryavo 'bhavan
yac cerur brahma-hatyäàhaù
kñapaëaà sva-guror vratam
SYNONYMS
vaiçampäyana-çiñyäù—the disciples of Vaiçampäyana; vai—indeed;
caraka—named the Carakas; adhvaryavaù—authorities of the Atharva Veda;
abhavan—became; yat—because; ceruù—they executed; brahma-hatyä—due
to the killing of a brähmaëa; aàhaù—of the sin; kñapaëam—the expiration;
sva-guroù—for their own guru; vratam—the vow.
TRANSLATION
The disciples of Vaiçampäyana became authorities in the Atharva Veda.
They were known as the Carakas because they executed strict vows to free
their guru from his sin of killing a brähmaëa.
TEXT 62
yaAÁavalfyaê taicC$Sya
@Ah"Ah"Ae BagAvana, ik(yata,
cair"taenaAlpas$aAr"ANAAM
cair"Syae'hM" s$auäu"êr"ma,
yäjïavalkyaç ca tac-chiñya
ähäho bhagavan kiyat
caritenälpa-säräëäà
cariñye 'haà su-duçcaram
SYNONYMS
yäjïavalkyaù—Yäjïavalkya; ca—and; tat-çiñyaù—the disciple of
Vaiçampäyana; äha—said; aho—just see; bhagavan—O master; kiyat—how
much value; caritena—with the endeavor; alpa-säräëäm—of these weak
fellows; cariñye—shall execute; aham—I; su-duçcaram—that which is very
difficult to perform.
TRANSLATION
Once Yäjïavalkya, one of the disciples of Vaiçampäyana, said: O master,
how much benefit will be derived from the feeble endeavors of these weak
disciples of yours? I will personally perform some outstanding penance.
TEXT 63
wtyaul(Ae gAuç&r"pyaAh"
ku(ipataAe yaA÷laM tvayaA
iva‘aAvaman‡aA izASyaeNA
mad"DaItaM tyajaAiìita
ity ukto gurur apy äha
kupito yähy alaà tvayä
viprävamanträ çiñyeëa
mad-adhétaà tyajäçv iti
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; uktaù—addressed; guruù—his spiritual master; api—indeed;
äha—said; kupitaù—angry; yähi—go away; alam—enough; tvayä—with you;
vipra-avamanträ—the insulter of brähmaëas; çiñyeëa—such a disciple;
mat-adhétam—what has been taught by me; tyaja—give up; äçu—immediately;
iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
Addressed thus, the spiritual master Vaiçampäyana became angry and said:
Go away from here! Enough of you, O disciple who insults brähmaëas!
Furthermore, you must immediately give back everything I have taught you.
PURPORT
Çré Vaiçampäyana was angry because one of his disciples, Yäjïavalkya, was
insulting the other disciples, who were, after all, qualified brähmaëas. Just as a
father is disturbed when one son mistreats the father's other children, the
spiritual master is very displeased if a proud disciple insults or mistreats the
guru's other disciples.
TEXTS 64-65
de"var"Atas$auta: s$aAe'ipa
C$idR"tvaA yajauSaAM gANAma,
tataAe gAtaAe'Ta maunayaAe
d"ä{"zAustaAna, yajaugARNAAna,
yajaUMiSa itaiÔar"A BaUtvaA
taéaAelaupatayaAd"äu":
taEiÔar"IyaA wita yajau:-
zAAKaA @As$ana, s$aupaezAlaA:
devaräta-sutaù so 'pi
charditvä yajuñäà gaëam
tato gato 'tha munayo
dadåçus tän yajur-gaëän
yajüàñi tittirä bhütvä
tal-lolupatayädaduù
taittiréyä iti yajuùçäkhä
äsan su-peçaläù
SYNONYMS
devaräta-sutaù—the son of Devaräta (Yäjïavalkya); saù—he; api—indeed;
charditvä—vomiting; yajuñäm—of the Yajur Veda; gaëam—the collected
mantras; tataù—from there; gataù—having gone; atha—then; munayaù—the
sages; dadåçuù—saw; tän—those; yajuù-gaëän—yajur-mantras; yajüàsi-these
yajurs; tittiräù-partridges; bhütvä—becoming; tat—for those mantras;
lolupatayä—with greedy desire; ädaduù—picked them up; taittiréyäù—known
as Taittiréya; iti-thus; yajuù-çäkhäù—branches of the Yajur Veda; äsan—came
into being; su-peçaläù—most beautiful.
TRANSLATION
Yäjïavalkya, the son of Devaräta, then vomited the mantras of the Yajur
Veda and went away from there. The assembled disciples, looking greedily upon
these yajur hymns, assumed the form of partridges and picked them all up.
These divisions of the Yajur Veda therefore became known as the most
beautiful Taittiréya-saàhitä, the hymns collected by partridges [tittiräù].
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, it is improper for a brähmaëa to collect
what has been vomited, and so the powerful brähmaëa disciples of
Vaiçampäyana assumed the form of tittiras, partridges, and collected the
valuable mantras.
TEXT 66
yaAÁavalfyastataAe “aöMzA,
C$nd"AMsyaiDa gAvaeSayana,
gAur"Aer"ivaâmaAnaAina
s$aUpatasTae'kR(maIìr"ma,
yäjïavalkyas tato brahmaàç
chandäàsy adhi gaveñayan
guror avidyamänäni
süpatasthe 'rkam éçvaram
SYNONYMS
yäjïavalkyaù—Yäjïavalkya; tataù—thereafter; brahman—O brähmaëa;
chandäàsi—mantras; adhi—additional; gaveñayan—seeking out; guroù—to his
spiritual master; avidyamänäni—not known; su-upatasthe—he carefully
worshiped; arkam—the sun; éçvaram—the powerful controller.
TRANSLATION
My dear brähmaëa Çaunaka, Yäjïavalkya then desired to find out new
yajur-mantras unknown to even his spiritual master. With this in mind he
offered attentive worship to the powerful lord of the sun.
TEXT 67
™aIyaAÁavalfya ovaAca
V namaAe BagAvatae @Aid"tyaAyaAiKalajagAtaAmaAtmasvaè&paeNA k(Alasvaè&
paeNA catauivaRDaBaUtainak(AyaAnaAM “aöAid"stambapayaRntaAnaAmantaôR$d"yaeSau baih"r"ipa
caAk(AzA wvaAepaAiDanaAvyavaDaIyamaAnaAe BavaAnaek(
Wva ºaNAlavainamaeSaAvayavaAepaicatas$aMvats$ar"gANAenaApaAmaAd"Anaivas$
agAARByaAimamaAM laAek(yaA‡aAmanauvah"ita //
çré-yäjïavalkya uväca
oà namo bhagavate ädityäyäkhila-jagatäm ätma-svarüpeëa kälasvarüpeëa
catur-vidha-bhüta-nikäyänäà brahmädi-stamba-paryantänäm
antar-hådayeñu bahir api cäkäça ivopädhinävyavadhéyamäno bhavän eka
eva kñaëa-lava-nimeñävayavopacita-saàvatsara-gaëenäpäm ädänavisargäbhyäm
imäà loka-yäträm anuvahati.
SYNONYMS
çré-yäjïavalkyaù uväca—Çré Yäjïavalkya said; oà namaù—I offer my
respectful obeisances; bhagavate—to the Personality of Godhead;
ädityäya—appearing as the sun-god; akhila-jagatäm—of all the planetary
systems; ätma-svarüpeëa—in the form of the Supersoul; käla-svarüpeëa—in
the form of time; catuù-vidha—of four kinds; bhüta-nikäyänäm-of all the living
beings; brahma-ädi—beginning from Lord Brahmä; stamba-paryantänäm—and
extending down to the blades of grass; antaù-hådayeñu—within the recesses of
their hearts; bahiù—externally; api—also; ca—and; äkäçaù iva—in the same
way as the sky; upädhinä—by material designations; avyavadhéyamänaù—not
being covered; bhavän—yourself; ekaù—alone; eva—indeed;
kñaëa-lava-nimeña—the kñaëa, lava and nimeña (the smallest fractions of
time); avayava—by these fragments; upacita—collected together;
saàvatsara-gaëena—by the years; apäm—of the water; ädäna—by taking
away; visargäbhyäm—and giving; imäm—this; loka—of the universe;
yäträm—the maintenance; anuvahati—carries out.
TRANSLATION
Çré Yäjïavalkya said: I offer my respectful obeisances to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead appearing as the sun. You are present as the controller
of the four kinds of living entities, beginning from Brahmä and extending down
to the blades of grass. Just as the sky is present both inside and outside every
living being, you exist both within the hearts of all as the Supersoul and
externally in the form of time. Just as the sky cannot be covered by the clouds
present within it, you are never covered by any false material designation. By
the flow of years, which are made up of the tiny fragments of time called
kñaëas, lavas and nimeñas, you alone maintain this world, drying up the waters
and giving them back as rain.
PURPORT
This prayer is not offered to the sun-god as an independent or autonomous
entity but rather to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, represented by His
powerful expansion the solar deity.
TEXT 68
yaäu" h" vaAva ivabauDaSaRBa s$aivatar"d"stapatyanaus$avanamah"r,"
@h"r"A°aAyaivaiDanaAepaitaï"maAnaAnaAmaiKalaäu"ir"tava{ijana265
baIjaAvaBajaRna BagAvata: s$amaiBaDaImaih" tapana maNx"lama,
yad u ha väva vibudharñabha savitar adas tapaty anusavanam ahar
ahar ämnäya-vidhinopatiñöhamänänäm akhila-durita-våjinabéjävabharjana
bhagavataù samabhidhémahi tapana maëòalam.
SYNONYMS
yat—which; u ha väva—indeed; vibudha-åñabha—O chief of the demigods;
savitaù—O lord of the sun; adaù—that; tapati—is glowing; anusavanam—at
each of the junctures of the day (sunrise, noon and sunset); ahaù ahaù—each
day; ämnäya-vidhinä—by the Vedic path, as passed down through disciplic
succession; upatiñöhamänänäm—of those who are engaged in offering prayer;
akhila-durita—all sinful activities; våjina—the consequent suffering; béja—and
the original seed of such; avabharjana—O you who burn; bhagavataù—of the
mighty controller; samabhidhémahi—I meditate with full attention; tapana—O
glowing one; maëòalam—upon the sphere.
TRANSLATION
O glowing one, O powerful lord of the sun, you are the chief of all the
demigods. I meditate with careful attention on your fiery globe, because for
those who offer prayers to you three times daily according to the Vedic method
passed down through authorized disciplic succession, you burn away all sinful
activities, all consequent suffering and even the original seed of desire.
TEXT 69
ya wh" vaAva isTar"car"inak(r"ANAAM inajainake(tanaAnaAM manawin‰"yaAs$augANAAnanaAtmana:
svayamaAtmaAntayaARmaI ‘acaAed"yaita //
ya iha väva sthira-cara-nikaräëäà nija-niketanänäà mana-indriyäsugaëän
anätmanaù svayam ätmäntar-yämé pracodayati.
SYNONYMS
yaù—who; iha—in this world; väva—indeed; sthira-cara-nikaräëäm—of all
the nonmoving and moving living beings; nija-niketanänäm—who depend on
your shelter; manaù-indriya-asu-gaëän—the mind, senses and vital air;
anätmanaù—which are nonliving matter; svayam—yourself; ätma—in their
hearts; antaù-yämé—the indwelling lord; pracodayati—inspires to activity.
TRANSLATION
You are personally present as the indwelling lord in the hearts of all moving
and nonmoving beings, who depend completely on your shelter. Indeed, you
animate their material minds, senses and vital airs to act.
TEXT 70
ya WvaemaM laAek(maitak(r"Alavad"naAnDak(Ar"s$aMÁaAjagAr"ƒah"-
igAilataM ma{tak(imava ivacaetanamavalaAefyaAnauk(mpayaA par"mak(Aç&iNAk(
wRºayaEvaAetTaApyaAh"r"h"r"naus$avanaM ™aeyais$a svaDamaARKyaAtmaAvasTanae
‘avataRyaita //
ya evemaà lokam ati-karäla-vadanändhakära-saàjïäjagara-grahagilitaà
måtakam iva vicetanam avalokyänukampayä parama-käruëika
ékñayaivotthäpyähar ahar anusavanaà çreyasi sva-dharmäkhyätmävasthane
pravartayati.
SYNONYMS
yaù—who; eva—alone; imam—this; lokam—world; ati-karäla—very fearful;
vadana—the mouth of which; andhakära-saàjïa—known as darkness;
ajagara—by the python; graha—seized; gilitam—and swallowed;
måtakam—dead; iva—as if; vicetanam—unconscious; avalokya—by glancing;
anukampayä—mercifully; parama-käruëikaù—supremely magnanimous;
ékñayä—by casting his glance; eva—indeed; utthäpya—raising them up; ahaù
ahaù—day after day; anu-savanam—at the three sacred junctures of the day;
çreyasi—in the ultimate benefit; sva-dharma-äkhya—known as the soul's
proper duty; ätma-avasthäne—in the inclination toward spiritual life;
pravartayati—engages.
TRANSLATION
The world has been seized and swallowed by the python of darkness in its
horrible mouth and has become unconscious, as if dead. But mercifully glancing
upon the sleeping people of the world, you raise them up with the gift of sight.
Thus you are most magnanimous. At the three sacred junctures of each day,
you engage the pious in the path of ultimate good, inducing them to perform
religious duties that situate them in their spiritual position.
PURPORT
According to Vedic culture, the three higher classes of society (the
intellectual, political and mercantile sections) are formally connected with the
spiritual master by initiation and receive the Gäyatré mantra. This purifying
mantra is chanted three times daily—at sunrise, noon and sunset. Auspicious
moments for the performance of spiritual duties are calculated according to
the sun's path in the sky, and this systematic scheduling of spiritual duties is
here attributed to the sun as the representative of God.
TEXT 71
@vainapaitair"vaAs$aADaUnaAM Bayamaud"Ir"yaªaq%ita pair"ta @AzAApaAlaEs$a,
ta‡a ta‡a k(malak(AezAAÃailaiBaç&paô$taAhR"NA: //
avani-patir iväsädhünäà bhayam udérayann aöati parita äçä-pälais
tatra tatra kamala-koçäïjalibhir upahåtärhaëaù.
SYNONYMS
avani-patiù—a king; iva—as; asädhünäm—of the unholy; bhayam—fear;
udérayan—creating; aöati—travels about; paritaù—all around; äçä-pälaiù-by
the controlling deities of the directions; tatra tatra—here and there;
kamala-koça—holding lotus flowers; aïjalibhiù—with folded palms;
upahåta—offered; arhaëaù—honorable presentations.
TRANSLATION
Just like an earthly king, you travel about everywhere spreading fear among
the unholy as the powerful deities of the directions offer you in their folded
palms lotus flowers and other respectful presentations.
TEXT 72
@Ta h" BagAvaMstava car"NAnailanayaugAlaM
i‡aBauvanagAuç&iBar"iBavaind"tamah"mayaAtayaAmayajauSk(Ama opas$ar"AmaIita //
atha ha bhagavaàs tava caraëa-nalina-yugalaà tri-bhuvana-gurubhir
abhivanditam aham ayäta-yäma-yajuñ-käma upasaräméti.
SYNONYMS
atha—thus; ha—indeed; bhagavan—O lord; tava—your;
caraëa-nalina-yugalam—two lotus feet; tri-bhuvana—of the three worlds;
gurubhiù—by the spiritual masters; abhivanditam—honored; aham—I;
ayäta-yäma—unknown to anyone else; yajuù-kämaù—desiring to have the
yajur-mantras; upasarämi-am approaching with worship; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, my lord, I am prayerfully approaching your lotus feet, which are
honored by the spiritual masters of the three worlds, because I hope to receive
from you mantras of the Yajur Veda unknown to anyone else.
TEXT 73
s$aUta ovaAca
WvaM stauta: s$a BagAvaAna,
vaAijaè&paDar"Ae r"iva:
yajaUMSyayaAtayaAmaAina
maunayae'd"At‘as$aAid"ta:
süta uväca
evaà stutaù sa bhagavän
väji-rüpa-dharo raviù
yajüàñy ayäta-yämäni
munaye 'dät prasäditaù
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; evam—in this way; stutaù—offered
glorification; saù—he; bhagavän—the powerful demigod; väji-rüpa—the form
of a horse; dharaù—assuming; raviù—the sun-god; yajüàñi—yayur-mantras;
ayäta-yämäni-never learned by any other mortal; munaye—to the sage;
adät—presented; prasäditaù—being satisfied.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: Satisfied by such glorification, the powerful sun-god
assumed the form of a horse and presented to the sage Yäjïavalkya
yajur-mantras previously unknown in human society.
TEXT 74
yajauiBaRr"k(r"AecC$AKaA
d"zA paÂa zAtaEivaRBau:
jagA{"ò"vaARjas$anyastaA:
k(ANvamaADyaind"naAd"ya:
yajurbhir akaroc chäkhä
daça païca çatair vibhuù
jagåhur väjasanyas täù
käëva-mädhyandinädayaù
SYNONYMS
yajurbhiù—with the yajur-mantras; akarot-he made; çäkhäù—branches;
daça—ten; païca—plus five; çataiù—with the hundreds; vibhuù—the
powerful; jagåhuù—they accepted; väja-sanyaù—produced from the hairs of
the horse's mane and thus known as Väjasaneyé; täù-them;
käëva-mädhyandina-ädayaù—the disciples of Käëva and Mädhyandina, and
other åñis.
TRANSLATION
From these countless hundreds of mantras of the Yajur Veda, the powerful
sage compiled fifteen new branches of Vedic literature. These became known as
the Väjasaneyi-saàhitä because they were produced from the hairs of the
horse's mane, and they were accepted in disciplic succession by the followers of
Käëva, Mädhyandina and other åñis.
TEXT 75
jaEimanae: s$amagAsyaAs$aIta,
s$aumantaustanayaAe mauina:
s$autvaAMstau tats$autastaAByaAma,
WkE(k(AM ‘aAh" s$aMih"taAma,
jaimineù sama-gasyäsét
sumantus tanayo muniù
sutväàs tu tat-sutas täbhyäm
ekaikäà präha saàhitäm
SYNONYMS
jaimineù—of Jaimini; sama-gasya—the singer of the Säma Veda; äsét—there
was; sumantuù—Sumantu; tanayaù—the son; muniù—the sage (Jaimini);
sutvän—Sutvän; tu—and; tat-sutaù—the son of Sumantu; täbhyäm—to each
of them; eka-ekäm—one of each of the two parts; präha—he spoke;
saàhitäm—collection.
TRANSLATION
Jaimini Åñi, the authority of the Säma Veda, had a son named Sumantu, and
the son of Sumantu was Sutvän. The sage Jaimini spoke to each of them a
different part of the Säma-veda-saàhitä.
TEXTS 76-77
s$auk(maAR caAipa taicC$Sya:
s$aAmavaed"tar"AemaRh"Ana,
s$ah"›as$aMih"taABaedM"
ca‚e( s$aA°aAM tataAe iã"ja
ih"r"NyanaABa: k(AEzAlya:
paAESyaiÃaê s$auk(maRNA:
izASyaAE jagA{h"tauêAnya
@AvantyaAe “aöivaÔama:
sukarmä cäpi tac-chiñyaù
säma-veda-taror mahän
sahasra-saàhitä-bhedaà
cakre sämnäà tato dvija
hiraëyanäbhaù kauçalyaù
pauñyaïjiç ca sukarmaëaù
çiñyau jagåhatuç cänya
ävantyo brahma-vittamaù
SYNONYMS
sukarmä—Sukarmä; ca—and; api—indeed; tat-çiñyaù—the disciple of Jaimini;
säma-veda-taroù—of the tree of the Säma Veda; mahän—the great thinker;
sahasra-saàhitä—of one thousand collections; bhedam—a division; cakre—he
made; sämnäm—of the säma-mantras; tataù-and then; dvija—O brähmaëa
(Çaunaka); hiraëyanäbhaù kauçalyaù—Hiraëyanäbha, the son of Kuçala;
pauñyaïjiù—Pauñyaïji; ca—and; sukarmaëaù—of Sukarmä; çiñyau—the two
disciples; jagåhatuù—took; ca—and; anyaù—another; ävantyaù—Ävantya;
brahma-vit-tamaù—most perfectly realized in knowledge of the Absolute
Truth.
TRANSLATION
Sukarmä, another disciple of Jaimini, was a great scholar. He divided the
mighty tree of the Säma Veda into one thousand saàhitäs. Then, O brähmaëa,
three disciples of Sukarmä-Hiraëyanäbha, the son of Kuçala; Pausyaïji; and
Ävantya, who was very advanced in spiritual realization—took charge of the
säma-mantras.
TEXT 78
od"IcyaA: s$aAmagAA: izASyaA
@As$ana, paÂazAtaAina vaE
paAESyaHjyaAvantyayaAeêAipa
taAMê ‘aAcyaAna, ‘acaºatae
udécyäù säma-gäù çiñyä
äsan païca-çatäni vai
pauñyaïjy-ävantyayoç cäpi
täàç ca präcyän pracakñate
SYNONYMS
udécyäù—belonging to the north; säma-gäù—the singer of the Säma Veda;
çiñyäù—the disciples; äsan—there were; païca-çatäni—five hundred;
vai—indeed; pauñyaïji-ävantyayoù—of Pauñyaïji and Ävantya; ca—and;
api—indeed; tän—they; ca—also; präcyän—easterners; pracakñate—are
called.
TRANSLATION
The five hundred disciples of Pauñyaïji and Ävantya became known as the
northern singers of the Säma Veda, and in later times some of them also became
known as eastern singers.
TEXT 79
laAEgAAiºamaARËÿila: ku(lya:
ku(zAId": ku(iºare"va ca
paAESyaiÃais$aSyaA jagA{"ò":
s$aMih"taAstae zAtaM zAtama,
laugäkñir mäìgaliù kulyaù
kuçédaù kukñir eva ca
pauñyaïji-siñyä jagåhuù
saàhitäs te çataà çatam
SYNONYMS
laugäkñiù mäìgaliù kulyaù—Laugäkñi, Mäìgali and Kulya; kuçédaù
kukñiù—Kuçéda and Kukñi; eva—indeed; ca—also; pauñyaïji-çiñyäù—disciples
of Pauñyaïji; jagåhuù—they took; saàhitäù—collections; te—they; çatam
çatam—each one hundred.
TRANSLATION
Five other disciples of Pauñyaïji, namely Laugäkñi, Mäìgali, Kulya, Kuçéda
and Kukñi, each received one hundred saàhitäs.
TEXT 80
k{(taAe ih"r"NyanaABasya
catauiva<zAita s$aMih"taA:
izASya Ocae svaizASyaeBya:
zAeSaA @Avantya @AtmavaAna,
kåto hiraëyanäbhasya
catur-viàçati saàhitäù
çiñya üce sva-çiñyebhyaù
çeñä ävantya ätmavän
SYNONYMS
kåtaù—Kåta; hiraëyanäbhasya—of Hiraëyanäbha; catuù-viàçati—twenty-four;
saàhitäù—collections; çiñyaù—the disciple; üce—spoke; sva-çiñyebhyaù—to his
own disciples; çeñäù—the remaining (collections); ävantyaù—Ävantya;
ätma-vän—the self-controlled.
TRANSLATION
Kåta, the disciple of Hiraëyanäbha, spoke twenty four saàhitäs to his own
disciples, and the remaining collections were passed down by the self-realized
sage Ävantya.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Twelfth Canto, Sixth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Mahäräja Parékñit Passes Away."
7. The Puräëic Literatures
In this chapter Çré Süta Gosvämé describes the expansion of the branches of
the Atharva Veda, enumerates the compilers of the Puräëas and explains the
characteristics of a Puräëa. He then lists the eighteen major Puräëas and
finishes his account by stating that any person who hears about these matters
from someone in a proper disciplic succession will acquire spiritual potency.
TEXT 1
s$aUta ovaAca
@TavaRivats$aumantauê
izASyamaDyaApayatsvak(Ama,
s$aMih"taAM s$aAe'ipa paTyaAya
vaed"d"zAARya caAel(vaAna,
süta uväca
atharva-vit sumantuç ca
çiñyam adhyäpayat svakäm
saàhitäà so 'pi pathyäya
vedadarçäya coktavän
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; atharva-vit—the expert knower of the
Atharva Veda; sumantuù—Sumantu; ca—and; çiñyam—to his disciple;
adhyäpayat—instructed; svakäm—his own; saàhitäm—collection; saù—he,
the disciple of Sumantu; api—also; pathyäya—to Pathya; vedadarçäya—to
Vedadarça; ca—and; uktavän—spoke.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: Sumantu Åñi, the authority on the Atharva Veda, taught
his saàhitä to his disciple Kabandha, who in turn spoke it to Pathya and
Vedadarça.
PURPORT
As confirmed in the Viñëu Puräëa:
atharva-vedaà sa muniù
sumantur amita-dyutiù
çiñyam adhyäpayäm äsa
kabandhaà so 'pi ca dvidhä
kåtvä tu vedadarçäya
tathä pathyäya dattavän
"That sage Sumantu, whose brilliance was immeasurable, taught the Atharva
Veda to his disciple Kabandha. Kabandha in turn divided it into two parts and
passed them down to Vedadarça and Pathya."
TEXT 2
zAAEflaAyaina“aRöbailar,"
maAed"AeSa: ipappalaAyaina:
vaed"d"zARsya izASyaAstae
paTyaizASyaAnaTaAe Za{NAu
ku(maud": zAunak(Ae “aöna,
jaAjailaêApyaTavaRivata,
çaukläyanir brahmabalir
modoñaù pippaläyaniù
vedadarçasya çiñyäs te
pathya-çiñyän atho çåëu
kumudaù çunako brahman
jäjaliç cäpy atharva-vit
SYNONYMS
çaukläyaniù brahmabaliù—Çaukläyani and Brahmabali; modoñaù
pippaläyaniù—Modoña and Pippaläyani; vedadarçasya—of Vedadarça;
çiñyäù—the disciples; te—they; pathya-çiñyän—the disciples of Pathya;
atho—furthermore; çåëu—please hear; kumudaù çunakaù—Kumuda and
Çunaka; brahman—O brähmaëa, Çaunaka; jäjaliù—Jäjali; ca—and; api—also;
atharva-vit—full in knowledge of the Atharva Veda.
TRANSLATION
Çaukläyani, Brahmabali, Modoña and Pippaläyani were disciples of
Vedadarça. Hear from me also the names of the disciples of Pathya. My dear
brähmaëa, they are Kumuda, Çunaka and Jäjali, all of whom knew the Atharva
Veda very well.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Çrédhara Svämé, Vedadarça divided his edition of the
Atharva Veda into four parts and instructed them to his four disciples. Pathya
divided his edition into three parts and instructed it to the three disciples
mentioned here.
TEXT 3
ba”au: izASyaAe'TaAingAr"s$a:
s$aEnDavaAyana Wva ca
@DaIyaetaAM s$aMih"tae ãe"
s$aAvaNAARâAstaTaApare"
babhruù çiñyo 'thängirasaù
saindhaväyana eva ca
adhéyetäà saàhite dve
sävarëädyäs tathäpare
SYNONYMS
babhruù—Babhru; çiñyaù—the disciple; atha—then; aìgirasaù—of Çunaka
(also known as Aìgirä); saindhaväyanaù—Saindhaväyana; eva—indeed;
ca—also; adhéyetäm—they learned; saàhite—collections; dve—two;
sävarëa—Sävarëa; ädyäù—headed by; tathä—similarly; apare—other
disciples.
TRANSLATION
Babhru and Saindhaväyana, disciples of Çunaka, studied the two divisions of
their spiritual master's compilation of the Atharva Veda. Saindhaväyana's
disciple Sävarëa and disciples of other great sages also studied this edition of the
Atharva Veda.
TEXT 4
naºa‡ak(lpa: zAAintaê
k(zyapaAiËÿr"s$aAd"ya:
Wtae @ATavaRNAAcaAyaAR:
Za{NAu paAEr"AiNAk(Anmaunae
nakñatrakalpaù çäntiç ca
kaçyapäìgirasädayaù
ete ätharvaëäcäryäù
çåëu pauräëikän mune
SYNONYMS
nakñatrakalpaù—Nakñatrakalpa; çäntiù—Çäntikalpa; ca—also;
kaçyapa-äìgirasa-ädayaù—Kaçyapa, Äìgirasa and others; ete—these;
ätharvaëa-äcäryäù—spiritual masters of the Atharva Veda; çåëu—now hear;
pauräëikän—the authorities of the Puräëas; mune-O sage, Çaunaka.
TRANSLATION
Nakñatrakalpa, Çäntikalpa, Kaçyapa, Äìgirasa and others were also among
the äcäryas of the Atharva Veda. Now, O sage, listen as I name the authorities
on Puräëic literature.
TEXT 5
‡ayyaAç&iNA: k(zyapaê
s$aAvaiNARr"k{(ta˜ana:
vaEzAmpaAyanah"Ar"ItaAE
SaÒE" paAEr"AiNAk(A wmae
trayyäruëiù kaçyapaç ca
sävarëir akåtavranaù
vaiçampäyana-härétau
ñaò vai pauräëikä ime
SYNONYMS
trayyäruëiù kaçyapaù ca—Trayyäruëi and Kaçyapa; sävarëiù
akåta-vraëaù—Sävarëi and Akåtavraëa;
vaiçampäyana-härétau—Vaiçampäyana and Häréta; ñaö—six; vai—indeed;
pauräëikäù—spiritual masters of the Puräëas; ime-these.
TRANSLATION
Trayyäruëi, Kaçyapa, Sävarëi, Akåtavrana, Vaiçampäyana and Häréta are
the six masters of the Puräëas.
TEXT 6
@DaIyanta vyaAs$aizASyaAta,
s$aMih"taAM maitpataumauRKaAta,
WkE(k(Amah"maetaeSaAM
izASya: s$avaAR: s$amaDyagAAma,
adhéyanta vyäsa-çiñyät
saàhitäà mat-pitur mukhät
ekaikäm aham eteñäà
çiñyaù sarväù samadhyagäm
SYNONYMS
adhéyanta—they have learned; vyäsa-çiñyät—from the disciple of Vyäsadeva
(Romaharñaëa); saàhitäm—the collection of the Puräëas; mat-pituù-of my
father; mukhät—from the mouth; eka-ekäm—each learning one portion;
aham—I; eteñäm—of these; çiñyaù—the disciple; sarväù—all the collections;
samadhyagäm—I have thoroughly learned.
TRANSLATION
Each of them studied one of the six anthologies of the Puräëas from my
father, Romahärñaëa, who was a disciple of Çréla Vyäsadeva. I became the
disciple of these six authorities and thoroughly learned all their presentations of
Puranic wisdom.
TEXT 7
k(zyapaAe'hM" ca s$aAvaNAI=
r"AmaizASyaAe'k{(ta˜ana:
@DaImaih" vyaAs$aizASyaAca,
catvaAr"Ae maUlas$aMih"taA:
kaçyapo 'haà ca sävarëé
räma-çiñyo 'kåtavranaù
adhémahi vyäsa-çiñyäc
catväro müla-saàhitäù
SYNONYMS
kaçyapaù—Kaçyapa; aham—I; ca—and; sävarëiù—Sävarëi; räma-çiñyaù—a
disciple of Räma; akåtvraëaù—namely Akåtavraëa; adhémahi—we have
assimilated; vyäsa-çiñyät—from the disciple of Vyäsa (Romaharñaëa);
catväraù—four; müla-saàhitäù—basic collections.
TRANSLATION
Romaharñaëa, a disciple of Vedavyäsa, divided the Puräëas into four basic
compilations. The sage Kaçyapa and I, along with Sävarëi and Akåtavraëa, a
disciple of Räma, learned these four divisions.
TEXT 8
paur"ANAlaºaNAM “aöna,
“aöiSaRiBainaRè&ipatama,
Za{NAuSva bauiÜ"maAi™atya
vaed"zAAñAnaus$aAr"ta:
puräëa-lakñaëaà brahman
brahmarñibhir nirüpitam
çåëuñva buddhim äçritya
veda-çästränusärataù
SYNONYMS
puräëa-lakñaëam—the characteristics of a Puräëa; brahman-O brähmaëa,
Çaunaka; brahma-åñibhiù—by great learned brähmaëas;
nirüpitam—ascertained; çåëuñva—please hear; buddhim—intelligence;
äçritya-resorting to; veda-çästra—the Vedic scriptures; anusärataù—in
accordance with.
TRANSLATION
O Çaunaka, please hear with attention the characteristics of a Puräëa, which
have been defined by the most eminent learned brähmaëas in accordance with
Vedic literature.
TEXTS 9-10
s$agAAeR'syaATa ivas$agARê
va{iÔar"ºaAntar"AiNA ca
vaMzAAe vaMzAAnaucar"ItaM
s$aMsTaA he"taur"paA™aya:
d"zAiBalaRºaNAEyauRlM(
paur"ANAM taiã"d"Ae ivaäu":
ke(icatpaÂaivaDaM “aöna,
mah"d"lpavyavasTayaA
sargo 'syätha visargaç ca
våtti-rakñäntaräëi ca
vaàço vaàçänucarétaà
saàsthä hetur apäçrayaù
daçabhir lakñaëair yuktaà
puräëaà tad-vido viduù
kecit païca-vidhaà brahman
mahad-alpa-vyavasthayä
SYNONYMS
sargaù—the creation; asya—of this universe; atha—then; visargaù—the
secondary creation; ca—and; våtti—maintenance; rakñä—protection by
sustenance; antaräëi—the reigns of the Manus; ca—and; vaàçaù—the
dynasties of great kings; vaàça-anucaritam—the narrations of their activities;
saàsthä—the annihilation; hetuù—the motivation (for the living entities'
involvement in material activities); apäçrayaù—the supreme shelter;
daçabhiù—with the ten; lakñaëaiù—characteristics; yuktam—endowed;
puräëam—a Puräëa; tat-of this matter; vidaù—those who know; viduù—they
know; kecit—some authorities; païca-vidham—fivefold; brahman—O
brähmaëa; mahat—of great; alpa—and lesser; vyavasthayä—according to the
distinction.
TRANSLATION
O brähmaëa, authorities on the matter understand a Puräëa to contain ten
characteristic topics: the creation of this universe, the subsequent creation of
worlds and beings, the maintenance of all living beings, their sustenance, the
rule of various Manus, the dynasties of great kings, the activities of such kings,
annihilation, motivation and the supreme shelter. Other scholars state that the
great Puräëas deal with these ten topics, while lesser Puräëas may deal with
five.
PURPORT
The ten subjects of a great Puräëa are also described in the Second Canto
of Çrémad-Bhägavatam (2.10.1):
çré-çuka uväca
atra sargo visargaç ca
sthänaà poñaëam ütayaù
manvantareçänukathä
nirodho muktir äçrayaù
"Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam there are ten divisions
of statements regarding the following: the creation of the universe,
subcreation, planetary systems, protection by the Lord, the creative impetus,
the change of Manus, the science of God, returning home (back to Godhead),
liberation and the summum bonum."
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, Puräëas such as Çrémad-Bhägavatam deal
with these ten topics, whereas lesser Puräëas deal with only five. As stated in
Vedic literature:
sargaç ca pratisargaç ca
vaàço manvantaräëi ca
vaàçänucaritaà ceti
puräëaà païca-lakñaëam
"Creation, secondary creation, the dynasties of kings, the reigns of Manus and
the activities of various dynasties are the five characteristics of a Puräëa."
Puräëas covering five categories of knowledge are understood to be secondary
Puräëic literature.
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has explained that the ten principal topics of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam are found within each of the twelve cantos. One should
not try to assign each of the ten topics to a particular canto. Nor should the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam be artificially interpreted to show that it deals with the
topics successively. The simple fact is that all aspects of knowledge important
to human beings, summarized in the ten categories mentioned above, are
described with various degrees of emphasis and analysis throughout the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 11
@vyaAk{(tagAuNAºaAeBaAna,
mah"taiñva{taAe'h"ma:
BaUtas$aUºmaein‰"yaATaARnaAM
s$amBava: s$agAR ocyatae
avyäkåta-guëa-kñobhän
mahatas tri-våto 'hamaù
bhüta-sükñmendriyärthänäà
sambhavaù sarga ucyate
SYNONYMS
avyäkåta—of the unmanifest stage of nature; guëa-kñobhät—by the agitation
of the modes; mahataù—from the basic mahat-tattva; tri-våtaù-threefold;
ahamaù—from the false ego; bhüta-sükñma—of the subtle forms of perception;
indriya—of the senses; arthänäm—and the objects of sense perception;
sambhavaù—the generation; sargaù—creation; ucyate—is called.
TRANSLATION
From the agitation of the original modes within the unmanifest material
nature, the mahat-tattva arises. From the mahat-tattva comes the element false
ego, which divides into three aspects. This threefold false ego further manifests
as the subtle forms of perception, as the senses and as the gross sense objects.
The generation of all these is called creation.
TEXT 12
pauç&SaAnaugA{h"ItaAnaAma,
WtaeSaAM vaAs$anaAmaya:
ivas$agAAeR'yaM s$amaAh"Ar"Ae
baIjaAß"IjaM car"Acar"ma,
puruñänugåhétänäm
eteñäà väsanä-mayaù
visargo 'yaà samähäro
béjäd béjaà caräcaram
SYNONYMS
puruña—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His pastime role of
creation; anugåhétänäm—which have received the mercy; eteñäm—of these
elements; väsanä-mayaù—consisting predominantly of the remnants of past
desires of the living entities; visargaù—the secondary creation; ayam—this;
samähäraù—manifest amalgamation; béjät—from a seed; béjam—another seed;
cara—moving beings; acaram—and nonmoving beings.
TRANSLATION
The secondary creation, which exists by the mercy of the Lord, is the
manifest amalgamation of the desires of the living entities. Just as a seed
produces additional seeds, activities that promote material desires in the
performer produce moving and nonmoving life forms.
PURPORT
Just as a seed grows into a tree that produces thousands of new seeds,
material desire develops into fruitive activity that stimulates thousands of new
desires within the heart of the conditioned soul. The word puruñänugåhétänäm
indicates that by the mercy of the Supreme Lord one is allowed to desire and
act in this world.
TEXT 13
va{iÔaBaURtaAina BaUtaAnaAM
car"ANAAmacar"AiNA ca
k{(taA svaena na{NAAM ta‡a
k(AmaA»aAed"nayaAipa vaA
våttir bhütäni bhütänäà
caräëäm acaräëi ca
kåtä svena nåëäà tatra
kämäc codanayäpi vä
SYNONYMS
våttiù—the sustenance; bhütäni—living beings; bhütänäm—of living beings;
caräëäm—of those that move; acaräëi—those that do not move; ca—and;
kåtä—executed; svena—by one's own conditioned nature; nåëäm—for human
beings; tatra—therein; kämät—out of lust; codanayä—in pursuit of Vedic
injunction; api—indeed; vä—or.
TRANSLATION
Våtti means the process of sustenance, by which the moving beings live upon
the nonmoving. For a human, våtti specifically means acting for one's livelihood
in a manner suited to his personal nature. Such action may be carried out either
in pursuit of selfish desire or in accordance with the law of God.
TEXT 14
r"ºaAcyautaAvataAre"h"A
ivaìsyaAnau yaugAe yaugAe
itayaRx.~matyaRiSaR$de"vaeSau
h"nyantae yaEñyaIiã"Sa:
rakñäcyutävatärehä
viçvasyänu yuge yuge
tiryaì-martyarñi-deveñu
hanyante yais trayé-dviñaù
SYNONYMS
rakñä—protection; acyuta-avatära—of the incarnations of Lord Acyuta;
éhä—the activities; viçvasya—of this universe; anu yuge yuge—in each age;
tiryak—among the animals; martya—human beings; åñi—sages; deveñu—and
demigods; hanyante—are killed; yaiù—by which incarnations;
trayé-dviñaù—the Daityas, who are enemies of Vedic culture.
TRANSLATION
In each age, the infallible Lord appears in this world among the animals,
human beings, sages and demigods. By His activities in these incarnations He
protects the universe and kills the enemies of Vedic culture.
PURPORT
The protective activities of the Lord, indicated by the word rakñä,
constitute one of the ten fundamental topics of a Mahä-Puräëa, or a great
Puräëic literature.
TEXT 15
manvantarM" manaudeR"vaA
manaupau‡aA: s$aure"ìr"A:
SaRyaAe"M'zAAvataAr"Aê
h"re": SaiÒ"Damaucyatae
manvantaraà manur devä
manu-puträù sureçvaräù
rñayo 'àçävatäräç ca
hareù ñaò-vidham ucyate
SYNONYMS
manu-antaram—the reign of each Manu; manuù—the Manu; deväù—the
demigods; manu-puträù—the sons of Manu; sura-éçvaräù—the different Indras;
åñayaù—the chief sages; aàça-avatäräù—the incarnations of portions of the
Supreme Lord; ca—and; hareù—of Lord Hari; ñaö-vidham—sixfold; ucyate—is
said.
TRANSLATION
In each reign of Manu, six types of personalities appear as manifestations of
Lord Hari: the ruling Manu, the chief demigods, the sons of Manu, Indra, the
great sages and the partial incarnations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 16
r"AÁaAM “aö‘as$aUtaAnaAM
vaMzAñEk(Ailak(Ae'nvaya:
vaMzAAnaucair"taM taeSaAma,
va{ÔaM vaMzADar"As$ca yae
räjïäà brahma-prasütänäà
vaàças trai-käliko 'nvayaù
vaàçänucaritaà teñäm
våttaà vaàça-dharäs ca ye
SYNONYMS
räjïäm—of the kings; brahma-prasütänäm—born originally from Brahmä;
vaàçaù—dynasty; trai-kälikaù—extending into the three phases of time (past,
present and future); anvayaù—the series; vaàça-anucaritam—histories of the
dynasties; teñäm—of these dynasties; våttam—the activities; vaàça
dharäù—the prominent members of the dynasties; ca—and; ye—which.
TRANSLATION
Dynasties are lines of kings originating with Lord Brahmä and extending
continuously through past, present and future. The accounts of such dynasties,
especially of their most prominent members, constitute the subject of dynastic
history.
TEXT 17
naEimaiÔak(: ‘aAk{(itak(Ae
inatya @Atyaintak(Ae laya:
s$aMsTaeita k(ivaiBa: ‘aAel(zA,
catauDaARsya svaBaAvata:
naimittikaù präkåtiko
nitya ätyantiko layaù
saàstheti kavibhiù proktaç
caturdhäsya svabhävataù
SYNONYMS
naimittikaù—occasional; präkåtikaù—elemental; nityaù—continuous;
ätyantikaù—ultimate; layaù—annihilation; saàsthä—the dissolution;
iti—thus; kavibhiù—by learned scholars; proktaù—described; caturdhä—in
four aspects; asya—of this universe; svabhävataù—by the inherent energy of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
There are four types of cosmic annihilation—occasional, elemental,
continuous and ultimate—all of which are effected by the inherent potency of
the Supreme Lord. Learned scholars have designated this topic dissolution.
TEXT 18
he"taujaI=vaAe'sya s$agAAR$de"r,"
@ivaâAk(maRk(Ar"k(:
yaM caAnauzAAiyanaM ‘aAò"r,"
@vyaAk{(tamautaApare"
hetur jévo 'sya sargäder
avidyä-karma-kärakaù
yaà cänuçäyinaà prähur
avyäkåtam utäpare
SYNONYMS
hetuù—the cause; jévaù—the living being; asya—of this universe;
sarga-ädeù—of the creation, maintenance and destruction; avidyä—out of
ignorance; karma-kärakaù—the performer of material activities; yam—whom;
ca—and; anuçäyinam—the underlying personality; prähuù—they call;
avyäkåtam—the unmanifest; uta—indeed; apare—others.
TRANSLATION
Out of ignorance the living being performs material activities and thereby
becomes in one sense the cause of the creation, maintenance and destruction of
the universe. Some authorities call the living being the personality underlying
the material creation, while others say he is the unmanifest self.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord Himself creates, maintains and annihilates the cosmos.
However, such activities are performed in response to the desires of
conditioned souls, who are described herein as hetu, or the cause of cosmic
activity. The Lord creates this world to facilitate the conditioned soul's
attempt to exploit nature and ultimately to facilitate his self-realization.
Since conditioned souls cannot perceive their own constitutional identity,
they are described here as avyäkåtam, or unmanifest. In other words, the living
entity cannot perceive his real form unless he is completely Kåñëa conscious.
TEXT 19
vyaitare"k(AnvayaAe yasya
jaAƒatsva«as$auSauiæaSau
maAyaAmayaeSau taä," “aö
jaIvava{iÔaSvapaA™aya:
vyatirekänvayo yasya
jägrat-svapna-suñuptiñu
mäyä-mayeñu tad brahma
jéva-våttiñv apäçrayaù
SYNONYMS
vyatireka—the presence as separate; anvayaù—and as conjoint; yasya—of
which; jägrat—within waking consciousness; svapna—sleep; suñuptiñu—and
deep sleep; mäyä-mayeñu—within the products of the illusory energy;
tat—that; brahma—the Absolute Truth; jéva-våttiñu—within the functions of
the living entities; apäçrayaù—the unique shelter.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Absolute Truth is present throughout all the stages of
awareness—waking consciousness, sleep and deep sleep—throughout all the
phenomena manifested by the illusory energy, and within the functions of all
living entities, and He also exists separate from all these. Thus situated in His
own transcendence, He is the ultimate and unique shelter.
TEXT 20
pad"ATaeRSau yaTaA ‰"vyaM
s$anmaA‡aM è&panaAmas$au
baIjaAid"paÂataAntaAs$au
÷vasTaAs$au yautaAyautama,
padärtheñu yathä dravyaà
san-mätraà rüpa-nämasu
béjädi-païcatäntäsu
hy avasthäsu yutäyutam
SYNONYMS
pada-artheñu—within material objects; yathä—just as; dravyam—the basic
substance; sat-mätram—the sheer existence of things; rüpa-nämasu—among
their forms and names; béja-ädi—beginning from the seed (i.e., from the time
of conception); païcatä-antäsu—ending with death; hi—indeed;
avasthäsu—throughout the various phases of bodily existence;
yuta-ayutam—both conjoined and separate.
TRANSLATION
Although a material object may assume various forms and names, its
essential ingredient is always present as the basis of its existence. Similarly,
both conjointly and separately, the Supreme Absolute Truth is always present
with the created material body throughout its phases of existence, beginning
with conception and ending with death.
PURPORT
Moist clay can be molded into various shapes and named "waterpot,"
"flowerpot" or "storage pot." Despite the various names and forms, the essential
ingredient, earth, is constantly present. Similarly, the Supreme Lord is present
throughout a material body's stages of bodily existence. The Lord is identical
with material nature, being its ultimate generating source. At the same time,
the unique Supreme Being exists separately, aloof in His own abode.
TEXT 21
ivar"maeta yad"A icaÔaM
ih"tvaA va{iÔa‡ayaM svayama,
yaAegAelaR vaA tad"AtmaAnaM
vaede"h"AyaA inavataRtae
virameta yadä cittaà
hitvä våtti-trayaà svayam
yogerla vä tadätmänaà
vedehäyä nivartate
SYNONYMS
virameta—desists; yadä—when; cittam—the mind; hitvä—giving up;
våtti-trayam—the functions of material life in the three phases of waking, sleep
and deep sleep; svayam—automatically; yogena—by regulated spiritual
practice; vä—or; tadä—then; ätmänam—the Supreme Soul; veda—he knows;
éhäyäù—from material endeavor; nivartate—he ceases.
TRANSLATION
Either automatically or because of one's regulated spiritual practice, one's
mind may stop functioning on the material platform of waking consciousness,
sleep and deep sleep. Then one understands the Supreme Soul and withdraws
from material endeavor.
PURPORT
As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (3.25.33), jarayaty äçu yä koçaà nigérëam
analo yathä: "Bhakti, devotional service, dissolves the subtle body of the living
entity without separate endeavor, just as fire in the stomach digests all that we
eat." The subtle material body is inclined to exploit nature through sex, greed,
false pride and madness. Loving service to the Lord, however, dissolves the
stubborn false ego and lifts one to pure blissful consciousness, Kåñëa
consciousness, the sublime perfection of existence.
TEXT 22
WvaM laºaNAlaºyaAiNA
paur"ANAAina paur"Aivad":
maunayaAe'í"Ad"zA ‘aAò":
ºauéak(Aina mah"Ainta ca
evaà lakñaëa-lakñyäëi
puräëäni purä-vidaù
munayo 'ñöädaça prähuù
kñullakäni mahänti ca
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; lakñaëa-lakñyäëi—symptomized by their characteristics;
puräëäni—the Puräëas; purä-vidaù-those who are expert in such ancient
histories; munayaù—the sages; añöädaça—eighteen; prähuù—say;
kñullakäni—minor; mahänti—great; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
Sages expert in ancient histories have declared that the Puräëas, according to
their various characteristics, can be divided into eighteen major Puräëas and
eighteen secondary Puräëas.
TEXTS 23-24
“aAöM paAáM vaESNAvaM ca
zAEvaM laEËMÿ s$agAAç&xM"
naAr"d"IyaM BaAgAvatama,
@A¢aeyaM s$k(And"s$aMiÁatama,
BaivaSyaM “aövaEvata<
maAkR(Nxe"yaM s$avaAmanama,
vaAr"AhM" maAtsyaM k(AEma< ca
“aöANx"AKyaimaita i‡aSaq%.
brähmaà pädmaà vaiñëavaà ca
çaivaà laiìgaà sa-gäruòaà
näradéyaà bhägavatam
ägneyaà skända-saàjïitam
bhaviñyaà brahma-vaivartaà
märkaëòeyaà sa-vämanam
värähaà mätsyaà kaurmaà ca
brahmäëòäkhyam iti tri-ñaö
SYNONYMS
brähmam—the Brahmä Puräëa; pädmam—the Padma Puräëa;
vaiñëavam—the Viñëu Puräëa; ca—and; çaivam—the Çiva Puräëa;
laiìgam—the Liìga Puräëa; sa-gäruòam-along with the Garuòa Puräëa;
näradéyam—the Närada Puräëa; bhägavatam-the Bhägavata Puräëa;
ägneyam—the Agni Puräëa; skända-the Skanda Puräëa; saàjïitam-known as;
bhaviñyam—the Bhaviñya Puräëa; brahma-vaivartam-the Brahma-vaivarta
Puräëa; märkaëòeyam—the Märkaëòeya Puräëa; sa-vämanam—together with
the Vämana Puräëa; väräham—the Varäha Puräëa; mätsyam—the Matsya
Puräëa; kaurmam—the Kürma Puräëa; ca—and; brahmäëòa-äkhyam—known
as the Brahmäëòa Puräëa; iti-thus; tri-ñaö—three times six.
TRANSLATION
The eighteen major Puräëas are the Brahmä, Padma, Viñëu, Çiva, Liìga,
Garuòa, Närada, Bhägavata, Agni, Skanda, Bhaviñya, Brahma-vaivarta,
Märkaëòeya, Vämana, Varäha, Matsya, Kürma and Brahmäëòa Puräëas.
PURPORT
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has quoted from the Varäha Puräëa, Çiva Puräëa and
Matsya Puräëa in confirmation of the above two verses.
TEXT 25
“aöiªadM" s$amaAKyaAtaM
zAAKaA‘aNAyanaM maunae:
izASyaizASya‘aizASyaANAAM
“aötaejaAeivavaDaRnama,
brahmann idaà samäkhyätaà
çäkhä-praëayanaà muneù
çiñya-çiñya-praçiñyäëäà
brahma-tejo-vivardhanam
SYNONYMS
brahman—O brähmaëa; idam—this; samäkhyätam—thoroughly described;
çäkhä-praëayanam—the expansion of the branches; muneù—of the sage (Çréla
Vyäsadeva); çiñya—of the disciples; çiñya-praçiñyäëäm—and the subsequent
disciples of his disciples; brahma-tejaù—spiritual potency;
vivardhanam—which increases.
TRANSLATION
I have thoroughly described to you, O brähmaëa, the expansion of the
branches of the Vedas by the great sage Vyäsadeva, his disciples and the
disciples of his disciples. One who listens to this narration will increase in
spiritual strength.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Twelfth Canto, Seventh Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Puräëic Literatures."
8. Märkaëòeya's Prayers to Nara-Näräyaëa Åñi
This chapter describes how Märkaëòeya Åñi performed austerities, defeated
by his potency Cupid and all his associates, and offered prayers to Lord Çré
Hari in His forms of Nara and Näräyaëa.
Çré Çaunaka was confused about the extraordinarily long life span of Çré
Märkaëòeya, who had taken birth in Çaunaka's own dynasty yet who had
moved about alone in the ocean of devastation millions of years previously and
seen a wonderful young child lying upon a banyan leaf. It seemed to Çaunaka
that Märkaëòeya had lived through two days of Brahmä, and he asked Çré Süta
Gosvämé to explain this.
Suta Gosvämé replied that the sage Märkaëòeya, after receiving the
purificatory ritual of brahminical initiation from his father, had fixed himself
in the vow of lifelong celibacy. He then worshiped the Supreme Lord Hari for
six lifetimes of Manu. In the seventh manvantara, Lord Indra sent Kämadeva
(Cupid) and his associates to interrupt the sage's austerities. But Märkaëòeya
Åñi defeated them by the potency generated from his penance.
Then, to show mercy to Märkaëòeya, Lord Çré Hari appeared before him in
the form of Nara-Näräyaëa. Çré Märkaëòeya prostrated himself in obeisance
and then worshiped the Lords by offering Them comfortable seats, water for
washing Their feet, and other respectful presentations. He then prayed, "O
Almighty Lord, You bring to life the vital air of all creatures, and You also
protect the three worlds, vanquish distress and award liberation. You never
allow those who have taken shelter of You to be defeated by any kind of
misery. Attaining Your lotus feet is the only auspicious goal for the
conditioned souls, and service to You fulfills all their desires. Your pastimes,
enacted in the mode of pure goodness, can award everyone salvation from
material life. Therefore those who are intelligent worship Your personal form
of pure goodness named Çré Näräyaëa, along with Nara, who represents Your
unalloyed devotee.
"The living entity bewildered by illusion can directly understand You if he
receives the knowledge presented in the Vedas and promulgated by You, the
spiritual master of the entire universe. Even great thinkers like Brahmä are
simply bewildered when they try to understand Your identity by struggling on
the path of säìkhya-yoga. You Yourself manifest the proponents of Säìkhya
and other philosophies, and thus Your true personal identity remains hidden
beneath the designative covering of the jéva soul. I offer my homage to You,
the Mahäpuruña."
TEXT 1
™aIzAAEnak( ovaAca
s$aUta jaIva icarM" s$aADaAe
vad" naAe vad"taAM var"
tamasyapaAre" ”amataAM
na|NAAM tvaM paAr"d"zARna:
çré-çaunaka uväca
süta jéva ciraà sädho
vada no vadatäà vara
tamasy apäre bhramatäà
nèëäà tvaà pära-darçanaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çaunakaù uväca—Çré Çaunaka said; süta—O Süta Gosvämé; jéva—may you
live; ciram—for a long time; sädho—O saint; vada—please speak; naù—to us;
vadatäm—of speakers; vara—O you who are the best; tamasi—in darkness;
apäre—unbounded; bhramatäm—who are wandering; nèëäm—for men;
tvam—you; pära-darçanaù—the seer of the opposite shore.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çaunaka said: O Süta, may you live a long life! O saintly one, best of
speakers, please continue speaking to us. Indeed, only you can show men the
path out of the ignorance in which they are wandering.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, the sages saw that Süta Gosvämé was
about to end his narration of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, and thus they urged him to
first tell the story of Märkaëòeya Åñi.
TEXTS 2-5
@Aò"iêr"AyauSama{iSaM
ma{k(Nx"]tanayaM janaA:
ya: k(lpaAntae ÷uvaRir"taAe
yaena ƒastaimadM" jagAta,
s$a vaA @smatku(laAetpaªa:
k(lpae'ismana, BaAgARvaSaRBa:
naEvaADaunaAipa BaUtaAnaAM
s$amplava: k(Ae'ipa jaAyatae
Wk( WvaANAR"vae ”aAmyana,
d"d"zAR pauç&SaM ik(la
vaq%pa‡apauqe% taAekM(
zAyaAnaM tvaek(maàu"tama,
WSa na: s$aMzAyaAe BaUyaAna,
s$aUta k(AEtaUh"laM yata:
taM naizC$inDa mah"AyaAeigAna,
paur"ANAeSvaipa s$ammata:
ähuç ciräyuñam åñià
måkaëòu-tanayaà janäù
yaù kalpänte hy urvarito
yena grastam idaà jagat
sa vä asmat-kulotpannaù
kalpe 'smin bhärgavarñabhaù
naivädhunäpi bhütänäà
samplavaù ko 'pi jäyate
eka evärëave bhrämyan
dadarça puruñaà kila
vaöa-patra-puöe tokaà
çayänaà tv ekam adbhutam
eña naù saàçayo bhüyän
süta kautühalaà yataù
taà naç chindhi mahä-yogin
puräëeñv api sammataù
SYNONYMS
ähuù—they say; cira-äyuñam—having an extraordinarily long life span;
åñim—the sage; måkaëòu-tanayam—the son of Måkaëòu; janäù—people;
yaù—who; kalpa-ante—at the end of the day of Lord Brahmä; hi—indeed;
urvaritaù—remaining alone; yena—by which (annihilation); grastam—seized;
idam—this; jagat—entire universe; saù—he, Märkaëòeya; vai—indeed;
asmat-kula—in my own family; utpannaù—born; kalpe—in the day of Brahmä;
asmin—this; bhärgava-åñabhaù—the most eminent descendant of Bhågu Muni;
na—not; eva—certainly; adhunä—in our age; api—even; bhütänäm—of all
creation; samplavaù—annihilation by flood; kaù—any; api—at all; jäyate—has
arisen; ekaù—alone; eta—indeed; arëave—in the great ocean;
bhrämyan—wandering; dadarça—he saw; puruñam—a personality; kila—it is
said; vaöa-patra—of a banyan leaf; puöe—within the fold; tokam—an infant
hoy; çayänam—lying; tu—but; ekam—one; adbhutam—wonderful; eñaù—this;
naù—our; saàçayaù—doubt; bhüyän—great; süta—O Süta Gosvämé;
kautühalam—curiosity; yataù—due to which; tam—that; naù—for us;
chindhi—please cut; mahä-yogin—O great yogé; puräneñu—of the Puräëas;
api-indeed; sammataù—universally accepted (as the expert knower).
TRANSLATION
Authorities say that Märkaëòeya Åñi, the son of Måkaëòu. was an
exceptionally long-lived sage who was the only survivor at the end of Brahmä's
day, when the entire universe was merged in the flood of annihilation. But this
same Märkaëòeya Åñi, the foremost descendant of Bhågu, took birth in my own
family during the current day of Brahmä, and we have not yet seen any total
annihilation in this day of Brahmä. Also, it is well known that Märkaëòeya
while wandering helplessly in the great ocean of annihilation, saw in those
fearful waters a wonderful personality—an infant boy lying alone within the
fold of a banyan leaf. O Süta, I am most bewildered and curious about this great
sage, Märkaëòeya Åñi. O great yogé, you are universally accepted as the
authority on all the Puräëas. Therefore kindly dispel my confusion.
PURPORT
Lord Brahmä's day, consisting of his 12 hours, lasts 4 billion 320 million
years, and his night is of the same duration. Apparently Märkaëòeya lived
throughout one such day and night and in the following day of Brahmä
continued living as the same Märkaëòeya. It seems that when annihilation
occurred during Brahmä's night, the sage wandered throughout the fearful
waters of destruction and saw within those waters an extraordinary personality
lying on a banyan leaf. All of these mysteries concerning. Märkaëòeya will be
clarified by Süta Gosvämé at the request of the great sages.
TEXT 6
s$aUta ovaAca
‘a´astvayaA mah"SaeR'yaM
k{(taAe laAek(”amaApah":
naAr"AyaNAk(TaA ya‡a
gAItaA k(ilamalaApah"A
süta uväca
praçnas tvayä maharñe 'yaà
kåto loka-bhramäpahaù
näräyaëa-kathä yatra
gétä kali-maläpahä
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; praçnaù—question; tvayä—by you;
mahä-åñe—O great sage, Çaunaka; ayam—this; kåtaù—made; loka—of the
entire world; bhrama—the delusion; apahaù—which takes away;
näräyaëa-kathä—discussion of the Supreme Lord, Näräyaëa; yatra—in which;
gétä—is sung; kali-mala—the contamination of the present age of Kali;
apahä—removing.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: O great sage Çaunaka, your very question will help
remove everyone's illusion, for it leads to the topics of Lord Näräyaëa, which
cleanse away the contamination of this Kali age.
TEXTS 7-11
‘aAæaiã"jaAitas$aMs$k(Ar"Ae
maAkR(Nxe"ya: ipatau: ‚(maAta,
C$nd"AMsyaDaItya DamaeRNA
tapa:svaADyaAyas$aMyauta:
ba{h"ä,"˜ataDar": zAAntaAe
jaiq%laAe valk(laAmbar":
iba”atk(maNx"lauM d"Nx"ma,
opavaItaM s$amaeKalama,
k{(SNAAijanaM s$aAºas$aU‡aM
ku(zAAMê inayamaÜR"yae
@gnyakR(gAuç&iva‘aAtmasva,
@caRyana, s$anDyayaAehR"ir"ma,
s$aAyaM ‘aAta: s$a gAur"vae
BaEºyamaAô$tya vaAgyata:
bauBaujae gAuvaRnauÁaAta:
s$ak{(ªaAe caeäu"paAeiSata:
WvaM tapa:svaADyaAyapar"Ae
vaSaARNAAmayautaAyautama,
@Ar"ADayana, ô$SaIke(zAM
ijagyae ma{tyauM s$auäu"jaRyama,
präpta-dvijäti-saàskäro
märkaëòeyaù pituù kramät
chandäàsy adhétya dharmeëa
tapaù-svädhyäya-saàyutaù
båhad-vrata-dharaù çänto
jaöilo valkalämbaraù
bibhrat kamaëòaluà daëòam
upavétaà sa-mekhalam
kåñëäjinaà säkña-sütraà
kuçäàç ca niyamarddhaye
agny-arka-guru-viprätmasv
arcayan sandhyayor harim
säyaà prätaù sa gurave
bhaikñyam ähåtya väg-yataù
bubhuje gurv-anujïätaù
sakån no ced upoñitaù
evaà tapaù-svädhyäya-paro
varñäëäm ayutäyutam
ärädhayan håñékeçaà
jigye måtyuà su-durjayam
SYNONYMS
präpta—having received; dvi-jäti—of second birth; saàskäraù—the
purificatory rituals; märkaëòeyaù—Märkaëòeya; pituù—from his father;
kramät—bv proper sequence; chandäàsi—the Vedic hymns;
adhétya—studying; dharmeëa—along with regulative principles; tapaù—in
austerities; svädhyäya—and study; saàyutaù—full; båhat-vrata—the great vow
of lifelong celibacy; dharaù—maintaining; çäntaù—peaceful; jaöilaù—with
matted hair; valkala-ambaraù—wearing bark as his clothing;
bibhrat—carrying; kamaëòalum—a waterpot; daëòam—a mendicant's staff;
upavétam—the sacred thread; sa-mekhalam—along with the ritual belt of a
brahmacäré; kåñëa-ajinam—the skin of a black deer; sa-akña-sütram—and
prayer beads made of lotus seeds; kuçän—kuça grass; ca—also;
niyama-åddhaye—to facilitate his spiritual progress; agni—in the form of fire;
arka—the sun; guru—the spiritual master; vipra—the brähmaëas;
ätmasu—and the Supersoul; arcayan—worshiping; sandhyayoù—at the
beginning and the end of the day; harim—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; säyam—in the evening; prätaù—in the early morning; saù—he;
gurave—unto his spiritual master; bhaikñyam—alms obtained by begging;
ähåtya—bringing; väk-yataù—with controlled speech; bubhuje—he partook;
guru-anujïätaù—invited by his spiritual master; sakåt—once; na—not
(invited); u—indeed; cet—if; upoñitaù—fasting; evam—in this way;
tapaù-svädhyäya-paraù—dedicated to austerities and studies of the Vedic
literature; varñäëäm—years; ayuta-ayutam—ten thousand times ten thousand;
ärädhayan—worshiping; håñéka-éçam—the supreme master of the senses, Lord
Viñëu; jigye—he conquered; måtyum—death; su-durjayam—impossible to
conquer.
TRANSLATION
After being purified by his father's performance of the prescribed rituals
leading to Märkaëòeya's brahminical initiation, Märkaëòeya studied the Vedic
hymns and strictly observed the regulative principles. He became advanced in
austerity and Vedic knowledge and remained a lifelong celibate. Appearing most
peaceful with his matted hair and his clothing made of bark, he furthered his
spiritual progress by carrying the mendicant's waterpot, staff, sacred thread,
brahmacäré belt, black deerskin, lotus-seed prayer beads and bundles of kuça
grass. At the sacred junctures of the day he regularly worshiped the Supreme
Personality of Godhead in five forms—the sacrificial fire, the sun, his spiritual
master, the brähmaëas and the Supersoul within his heart. Morning and
evening he would go out begging, and upon returning he would present all the
food he had collected to his spiritual master. Only when his spiritual master
invited him would he silently take his one meal of the day; otherwise he would
fast. Thus devoted to austerity and Vedic study, Märkaëòeya Åñi worshiped the
supreme master of the senses, the Personality of Godhead, for countless millions
of years, and in this way he conquered unconquerable death.
TEXT 12
“aöA Ba{gAuBaRvaAe d"ºaAe
“aöpau‡aAê yae'pare"
na{de"vaipata{BaUtaAina
taenaAs$aªaitaivaismataA:
brahmä bhågur bhavo dakño
brahma-puträç ca ye 'pare
nå-deva-pitå-bhütäni
tenäsann ati-vismitäù
SYNONYMS
brahmä—Lord Brahmä; bhåguù—Bhågu Muni; bhavaù—Lord Çiva;
dakñaù—Prajäpati Dakña; brahma-puträù—the great sons of Brahmä; ca—and;
ye—who; apare—others; nå—human beings; deva—demigods;
pitå—forefathers; bhütäni—and ghostly spirits; tena—with that (conquest of
death); äsan—they all became; ati-vismitäù—extremely amazed.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä, Bhågu Muni, Lord Çiva, Prajäpati Dakña, the great sons of
Brahmä, and many others among the human beings, demigods, forefathers and
ghostly spirits—all were astonished by the achievement of Märkaëòeya Åñi.
TEXT 13
wtTaM ba{h"ä,"˜ataDar"s$a,
tapa:svaADyaAyas$aMyamaE:
d"DyaAvaDaAeºajaM yaAegAI
DvastaflaezAAntar"AtmanaA
itthaà båhad-vrata-dharas
tapaù-svädhyäya-saàyamaiù
dadhyäv adhokñajaà yogé
dhvasta-kleçäntarätmanä
SYNONYMS
ittham—in this manner; båhat-vrata-dharaù—maintaining the vow of celibacy,
brahmacarya; tapaù-svädhyäya-saàyamaiù-by his austerities, studies of the
Vedas and regulative principles; dadhyau—he meditated; adhokñajam—upon
the transcendental Lord; yogé—the yogé; dhvasta—destroyed; kleça—all
troubles; antaù-ätmana—with his introspective mind.
TRANSLATION
In this way the devotional mystic Märkaëòeya maintained rigid celibacy
through penance, study of the Vedas and self-discipline. With his mind thus
free of all disturbances, he turned it inward and meditated on the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who lies beyond the material senses.
TEXT 14
tasyaEvaM yauÃataiêÔaM
mah"AyaAegAena yaAeigAna:
vyataIyaAya mah"Ana, k(AlaAe
manvantar"Sax"Atmak(:
tasyaivaà yuïjataç cittaà
mahä-yogena yoginaù
vyatéyäya mahän kälo
manvantara-ñaò-ätmakaù
SYNONYMS
tasya—he; evam—thus; yuïjataù—while fixing; cittam—his mind;
mahä-yogena—by powerful practice of yoga; yoginaù—the mystic sage;
vyatéyäya—passed by; mahän—a great; kälaù—period of time;
manu-antara—lifetimes of Manu; ñaö—six; ätmakaù—consisting of.
TRANSLATION
While the mystic sage thus concentrated his mind by powerful yoga practice,
the tremendous period of six lifetimes of Manu passed by.
TEXT 15
Wtatpaur"nd"r"Ae ÁaAtvaA
s$aæamae'ismana, ik(laAntare"
tapaAeivazAiÆÿtaAe “aöªa,
@Are"Bae taiã"GaAtanama,
etat purandaro jïätvä
saptame 'smin kiläntare
tapo-viçaìkito brahmann
ärebhe tad-vighätanam
SYNONYMS
etat—this; purandaraù—Lord Indra; jïätvä—learning; saptame—in the
seventh; asmin—this; kila—indeed; antare—reign of Manu; tapaù—of the
austerities; viçaìkitaù—becoming fearful; brahman—O brähmaëa Çaunaka;
ärebhe—he set into motion; tat—of that austeritv; vighäöanam—obstruction.
TRANSLATION
O brähmaëa, during the seventh reign of Manu, the current age, Lord Indra
came to know of Märkaëòeya's austerities and became fearful of his growing
mystic potency. Thus he tried to impede the sage's penance.
TEXT 16
gAnDavaARps$ar"s$a: k(AmaM
vas$antamalayaAinalaAE
maunayae ‘aeSayaAmaAs$a
r"jastaAek(mad"AE taTaA
gandharväpsarasaù kämaà
vasanta-malayänilau
munaye preñayäm äsa
rajas-toka-madau tathä
SYNONYMS
gandharva-apsarasaù—the celestial singers and dancing girls; kämam—Cupid;
vasanta—the spring season; malaya-anilau—and the refreshing breeze from
the Malaya Hills; munaye—to the sage; preñayäm äsa—he sent;
rajaù-toka—the child of passion, greed; madau—and intoxication; tathä—also.
TRANSLATION
To ruin the sage's spiritual practice, Lord Indra sent Cupid, beautiful
celestial singers, dancing girls, the season of spring and the sandalwood-scented
breeze from the Malaya Hills, along with greed and intoxication personified.
TEXT 17
tae vaE tad"A™amaM jagmaur,"
ih"maA‰e": paAìR oÔare"
pauSpaBa‰"A nad"I ya‡a
ica‡aAKyaA ca izAlaA ivaBaAe
te vai tad-äçramaà jagmur
himädreù pärçva uttare
puñpabhadrä nadé yatra
citräkhyä ca çilä vibho
SYNONYMS
te—they; vai—indeed; tat—of Märkaëòeya Åñi; äçramam—to the hermitage;
jagmuù—went; hima-adreù—of the Himälaya Mountains; pärçve—to the side;
uttare—on the north; puñpabhadrä nadé—the Puñpabhadrä River;
yatra—where; citrä-äkhyä—named Citrä; ca—and; çilä—the peak; vibho—O
powerful Çaunaka.
TRANSLATION
O most powerful Çaunaka, they went to Märkaëòeya's hermitage, on the
northern side of the Himälaya Mountains where the Puñpabhadrä River passes
by the famous peak Citrä.
TEXTS 18-20
tad"A™amapadM" pauNyaM
pauNyaåu"malataAiÂatama,
pauNyaiã"jaku(laAk(L[%naM
pauNyaAmalajalaAzAyama,
maÔa”amar"s$aËÿLtaM
maÔak(Aeik(lakU(ijatama,
maÔabaihR"naq%Aq%AepaM
maÔaiã"jaku(laAku(lama,
vaAyau: ‘aivaí" @Ad"Aya
ih"mainaJaRr"zAIk(r"Ana,
s$aumanaAeiBa: pair"Sval(Ae
vavaAvauÔamBayana, smar"ma,
tad-äçrama-padaà puëyaà
puëya-druma-latäïcitam
puëya-dvija-kuläkéånaà
puëyämala-jaläçayam
matta-bhramara-saìgétaà
matta-kokila-küjitam
matta-barhi-naöäöopaà
matta-dvija-kuläkulam
väyuù praviñöa ädäya
hima-nirjhara-çékarän
sumanobhiù pariñvakto
vaväv uttambhayan smaram
SYNONYMS
tat—his; äçrama-padam—place of hermitage; puëyam—pious; puëya—pious;
druma—with trees; latä—and creepers; aïcitam—specially marked;
puëya—pious; dvija—of brähmaëa sages; kula—with the groups;
äkérëam—brimming; puëya—pious; amala—spotless; jala-äçayam—having
reservoirs of water; matta—maddened; bhramara—of bees; saìgétam—with
singing; matta—maddened; kokila—of cuckoos; küjitam—with cooing;
matta—maddened; barhi—of peacocks; naöa-äöopam—with the frenzy of
dancing; matta—maddened; dvija—of birds; kula—with the families;
äkulam—filled; väyuù—the wind of the Malaya Hills; praviñöaù—entering;
ädäya—taking up; hima—chilling; nirjhara—of the waterfalls; çékarän—the
drops of mist; sumanobhiù—by the flowers; pariñvaktaù—being embraced;
vavau—blew; uttambhayan—evoking; smaram—Cupid.
TRANSLATION
Groves of pious trees decorated the holy äçrama of Märkaëòeya Åñi, and
many saintly brähmaëas lived there, enjoying the abundant pure, sacred ponds.
The äçrama resounded with the buzzing of intoxicated bees and the cooing of
excited cuckoos, while jubilant peacocks danced about. Indeed, many families of
maddened birds crowded that hermitage. The springtime breeze sent by Lord
Indra entered there, carrying cooling drops of spray from nearby waterfalls.
Fragrant from the embrace of forest flowers, that breeze entered the hermitage
and began evoking the lusty spirit of Cupid.
TEXT 21
oâ»an‰"inazAAvaf‡a:
‘avaAlastabak(AilaiBa:
gAAepaåu"malataAjaAlaEs$a,
ta‡aAs$aItku(s$aumaAk(r":
udyac-candra-niçä-vaktraù
praväla-stabakälibhiù
gopa-druma-latä-jälais
taträsét kusumäkaraù
SYNONYMS
udyat—rising; candra—with the moon; niçä—nighttime; vaktraù—whose face;
praväla—of new sprouts; stabaka—and blossoms; älibhiù—with rows;
gopa—being hidden; druma—of the trees; latä—and creepers; jälaiù—along
with the multitude; tatra—there; äsét—appeared; kusuma-äkaraù—the spring
season.
TRANSLATION
Springtime then appeared in Märkaëòeya's äçrama. Indeed, the evening sky,
glowing with the light of the rising moon, became the very face of spring, and
sprouts and fresh blossoms virtually covered the multitude of trees and creepers.
TEXT 22
@nvaIyamaAnaAe gAnDavaE=r,"
gAItavaAid"‡ayaUTakE(:
@ä{"zyataAÔacaApaeSau:
sva:ñIyaUTapaita: smar":
anvéyamäno gandharvair
géta-väditra-yüthakaiù
adåçyatätta-cäpeñuù
svaù-stré-yütha-patiù smaraù
SYNONYMS
anvéyamänaù—being followed; gandharvaiù—by Gandharvas; géta—of singers;
väditra—and players of musical instruments; yüthakaiù—by companies;
adåçyata—was seen; ätta—holding up; cäpa-iñuù—his bow and arrows;
svaù-stré-yütha—of hoardes of heavenly women; patiù—the master;
smaraù—Cupid.
TRANSLATION
Cupid, the master of many heavenly women, then came there holding his
bow and arrows. He was followed by groups of Gandharvas playing musical
instruments and singing.
TEXT 23
ò"tvaAi¢aM s$amaupaAs$aInaM
d"ä{"zAu: zA‚(ik(Æÿr"A:
maIilataAºaM äu"r"ADaSa<
maUitaRmantaimavaAnalama,
hutvägnià samupäsénaà
dadåçuù çakra-kiìkaräù
mélitäkñaà durädharñaà
mürtimantam ivänalam
SYNONYMS
hutvä—having offered oblations; agnim—to the sacrificial fire;
samupäsénam—sitting in yogic meditation; dadåçuù—they saw; çakra—of
Indra; kiìkaräù—the servants; mélita—closed; akñam—his eyes;
durädharñam—invincible; mürti-mantam—personified; iva—as if;
analam—fire.
TRANSLATION
These servants of Indra found the sage sitting in meditation, having just
offered his prescribed oblations into the sacrificial fire. His eyes closed in
trance, he seemed invincible, like fire personified.
TEXT 24
nana{taustasya paur"ta:
iñyaAe'TaAe gAAyak(A jagAu:
ma{d"ËÿvaINAApaNAvaEr,"
vaAâM ca‚u(maRnaAer"mama,
nanåtus tasya purataù
striyo 'tho gäyakä jaguù
mådaìga-véëä-paëavair
vädyaà cakrur mano-ramam
SYNONYMS
nanåtuù—danced; tasya—of him; purataù—in front; striyaù—women; atha
u—and furthermore; gäyakäù—singers; jaguù—sang; mådaìga—with drums;
véëä—stringed instruments; paëavaiù—and cymbals; vädyam—instrumental
music; cakruù—they made; manaù-ramam—charming.
TRANSLATION
The women danced before the sage, and the celestial singers sang to the
charming accompaniment of drums, cymbals and véëäs.
TEXT 25
s$and"Dae'ñM svaDanauiSa
k(Ama: paÂamauKaM tad"A
maDaumaRnaAe r"jastaAek(
wn‰"Ba{tyaA vyak(mpayana,
sandadhe 'straà sva-dhanuñi
kämaù païca-mukhaà tadä
madhur mano rajas-toka
indra-bhåtyä vyakampayan
SYNONYMS
sandadhe—he fixed; astram—the weapon; sva-dhanuñi—upon his bow;
kämaù—Cupid; païca-mukham—having five heads (sight, sound, smell, touch
and taste); tadä—then; madhuù—spring; manaù—the mind of the sage;
rajaù-tokaù—the child of passion, greed; indra-bhåtyäù—the servants of Indra;
vyakampayan—attempted to agitate.
TRANSLATION
While the son of passion [greed personified], spring and the other servants of
Indra all tried to agitate Märkaëòeya's mind, Cupid drew his five-headed arrow
and fixed it upon his bow.
TEXTS 26-27
‚(Lx"ntyaA: pauiÃak(sTalyaA:
k(näu"kE(: stanagAAEr"vaAta,
Ba{zAmauiã"¢amaDyaAyaA:
ke(zAiva›aMis$ata›aja:
wtastataAe ”amaä,"ä{"íe"zA,
calantyaA @nau k(näu"k(ma,
vaAyaujaRh"Ar" taã"As$a:
s$aUºmaM ‡auiq%tamaeKalama,
kréòantyäù puïjikasthalyäù
kandukaiù stana-gauravät
bhåçam udvigna-madhyäyäù
keça-visraàsita-srajaù
itas tato bhramad-dåñöeç
calantyä anu kandukam
väyur jahära tad-väsaù
sükñmaà truöita-mekhalam
SYNONYMS
krédantyäù—who was playing; puïjikasthalyäù—of the Apsarä named
Puïjikasthalé; kandukaiù—with a number of balls; stana—of her breasts;
gauravät—because of the great weight; bhåçam—very much;
udvigna—overburdened; madhyäyäù—whose waist; keça—from her hair;
visraàsita—falling; srajaù—the flower garland; itaù tataù—here and there;
bhramat—wandering; dåñöeù—whose eyes; calantyäù—who was running about;
anu kandukam—after her ball; väyuù—the wind; jahära—stole away;
tat-väsaù—her garment; sükñmam—fine; truöita—loosened; mekhalam—the
belt.
TRANSLATION
The Apsarä Puïjikasthalé made a show of playing with a number of toy balls.
Her waist seemed weighed down by her heavy breasts, and the wreath of
flowers in her hair became disheveled. As she ran about after the balls, glancing
here and there, the belt of her thin garment loosened, and suddenly the wind
blew her clothes away.
TEXT 28
ivas$as$ajaR tad"A baANAM
matvaA taM svaijataM smar":
s$ava< ta‡aABavanmaAeGama,
@naIzAsya yaTaAeâma
visasarja tadä bäëaà
matvä taà sva-jitaà smaraù
sarvaà taträbhavan mogham
anéçasya yathodyamaù
SYNONYMS
visasarja—shot; tadä—then; bäëam—the arrow; matvä—thinking; tam—him;
sva—by himself; jitam—conquered; smaraù—Cupid; sarvam—all this;
tatra—directed at the sage; abhavat—became; mogham—futile; anéçasya—of
an atheist disbeliever; yathä—just as; udyamaù—the endeavors.
TRANSLATION
Cupid, thinking he had conquered the sage, then shot his arrow. But all
these attempts to seduce Märkaëòeya proved futile, just like the useless
endeavors of an atheist.
TEXT 29
ta wtTamapaku(vaRntaAe
maunaestaÔaejas$aA maunae
d"÷maAnaA inavava{tau:
‘abaAeDyaAih"imavaABaRk(A:
ta ittham apakurvanto
munes tat-tejasä mune
dahyamänä nivavåtuù
prabodhyähim ivärbhakäù
SYNONYMS
te—they; ittham—in this way; apakurvantaù—trying to do harm; muneù—to
the sage; tat—his; tejasä—by the potency; mune—O sage (Çaunaka);
dahyamänäù—feeling burned; nivavåtuù—they desisted; prabodhya—having
awakened; ahim—a snake; iva—as if; arbhakäù—children.
TRANSLATION
O learned Çaunaka, while Cupid and his followers tried to harm the sage,
they felt themselves being burned alive by his potency. Thus they stopped their
mischief, just like children who have aroused a sleeping snake.
TEXT 30
wtaIn‰"AnaucarE"“aRöna,
DaiSaRtaAe'ipa mah"Amauina:
yaªaAgAAd"h"maAe BaAvaM
na tai»a‡aM mah"ts$au ih"
iténdränucarair brahman
dharñito 'pi mahä-muniù
yan nägäd ahamo bhävaà
na tac citraà mahatsu hi
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; indra-anucaraiù—by the followers of Indra; brahman—O brähmaëa;
dharñitaù—impudently attacked; api—although; mahä-muniù—the elevated
sage; yat—that; na agät—he did not succumb; ahamaù—of false ego;
bhävam—to the transformation; na—not; tat—that; citram—surprising;
mahatsu—for great souls; hi—indeed.
TRANSLATION
O brähmaëa, the followers of Lord Indra had impudently attacked the
saintly Märkaëòeya, yet he did not succumb to any influence of false ego. For
great souls such tolerance is not at all surprising.
TEXT 31
ä{"î"A inastaejas$aM k(AmaM
s$agANAM BagAvaAna, svar"Aq%.
™autvaAnauBaAvaM “aöSaeRr,"
ivasmayaM s$amagAAtpar"ma,
dåñövä nistejasaà kämaà
sa-gaëaà bhagavän svaräö
çrutvänubhävaà brahmarñer
vismayaà samagät param
SYNONYMS
dåñövä—seeing; nistejasam—deprived of his power; kämam—Cupid;
sa-gaëam—along with his associates; bhagavän—the powerful lord;
sva-räö—King Indra; çrutvä—and hearing; anubhävam—the influence;
brahma-åñeù—of the sage among the brähmaëas; vismayam—astonishment;
samagät—he attained; param—great.
TRANSLATION
The mighty King Indra was most astonished when he heard of the mystic
prowess of the exalted sage Märkaëòeya and saw how Cupid and his associates
had become powerless in his presence.
TEXT 32
tasyaEvaM yauÃataiêÔaM
tapa:svaADyaAyas$aMyamaE:
@nauƒah"AyaAivar"As$aIna,
nar"naAr"AyaNAAe h"ir":
tasyaivaà yuïjataç cittaà
tapaù-svädhyäya-saàyamaiù
anugrahäyäviräsén
nara-näräyaëo hariù
SYNONYMS
tasya—while he, Märkaëòeya; evam—in this way; yuïjataù—was fixing;
cittam—his mind; tapaù—by austerity; svädhyäya—study of the Vedas;
saàyamaiù—and regulative principles; anugrahäya—for showing mercy;
äviräsét—made Himself manifest; nara-näräyaëaù—exhibiting the forms of
Nara and Näräyaëa; hariù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Desiring to bestow His mercy upon the saintly Märkaëòeya, who had
perfectly fixed his mind in self-realization through penance, Vedic study and
observance of regulative principles, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
personally appeared before the sage in the forms of Nara and Näräyaëa.
TEXTS 33-34
taAE zAuflak{(SNAAE navak(ÃalaAecanaAE
catauBauRjaAE r"AEr"vavalk(laAmbar"AE
paiva‡apaANAI opavaItakM( i‡ava{ta,
k(maNx"lauM d"Nx"ma{jauM ca vaENAvama,
paáAºamaAlaAmauta jantaumaAjaRnaM
vaedM" ca s$aAºaAÔapa Wva è&ipaNAAE
tapaÔaix"ã"NARipazAËÿr"AeicaSaA
‘aAMzAU d"DaAnaAE ivabauDaSaRBaAicaRtaAE
tau çukla-kåñëau nava-kaïja-locanau
catur-bhujau raurava-valkalämbarau
pavitra-päëé upavétakaà tri-våt
kamaëòaluà daëòam åjuà ca vaiëavam
padmäkña-mäläm uta jantu-märjanaà
vedaà ca säkñät tapa eva rüpiëau
tapat-taòid-varëa-piçaìga-rociñä
präàçü dadhänau vibudharñabhärcitau
SYNONYMS
tau—the two of Them; çukla-kåñëau—one white and the other black;
nava-kaïja—like blooming lotus flowers; locanau—Their eyes;
catuù-bhujau—having four arms; raurava—black deerskin; valkala—and bark;
ambarau—as Their clothing; pavitra—most purifying; päëé—Their hands;
upavétakam—sacred thread; tri-våt—threefold; kamaëòalum—waterpot;
daëòam—staff; åjum—straight; ca—and; vaiëavam—made of bamboo;
padma-akña—of lotus seeds; mäläm—prayer beads; uta—and;
jantu-märjanam—which purifies all living beings; vedam—the Vedas
(represented by bundles of darbha grass); ca—and; säkñät—directly;
tapaù—austerity; eva—indeed; rüpiëau—personified; tapat—blazing;
taòit—lightning; varëa—the color; piçaìga—yellowish; rociñä—with Their
effulgence; präàçu—very tall; dadhänau—bearing; vibudha-åñabha—by the
chief of the demigods; arcitau—worshiped.
TRANSLATION
One of Them was of a whitish complexion, the other blackish, and They
both had four arms. Their eyes resembled the petals of blooming lotuses, and
They wore garments of black deerskin and bark, along with the three-stranded
sacred thread. In Their hands, which were most purifying, They carried the
mendicant's waterpot, straight bamboo staff and lotus-seed prayer beads, as well
as the all-purifying Vedas in the symbolic form of bundles of darbha grass.
Their bearing was tall and Their yellow effulgence the color of radiant
lightning. Appearing as austerity personified, They were being worshiped by the
foremost demigods.
TEXT 35
tae vaE BagAvataAe è&pae
nar"naAr"AyaNAAva{SaI
ä{"î"AetTaAyaAd"re"NAAe»aEr,"
nanaAmaAËeÿna d"Nx"vata,
te vai bhagavato rüpe
nara-näräyaëäv åñé
dåñövotthäyädareëoccair
nanämäìgena daëòa-vat
SYNONYMS
te—They; vai—indeed; bhagavataù—of the Personality of Godhead; rüpe—the
personal manifestations; nara-näräyaëau—Nara and Näräyaëa; åñé—the two
sages; dåñövä—seeing; utthäya—standing up; ädareëa—with respect;
uccaiù—great; nanäma—bowed down; aìgena—with his entire body;
daëòa-vat—just like a stick.
TRANSLATION
These two sages, Nara and Näräyaëa, were the direct personal forms of the
Supreme Lord. When Märkaëòeya Åñi saw Them, he immediately stood up and
then with great respect offered Them obeisances by falling down flat on the
ground like a stick.
TEXT 36
s$a tats$and"zARnaAnand"-
inava{RtaAtmaein‰"yaAzAya:
ô$í"r"AemaA™aupaUNAARºaAe
na s$aehe" taAvaud"Iiºatauma,
sa tat-sandarçanänanda-
nirvåtätmendriyäçayaù
håñöa-romäçru-pürëäkño
na sehe täv udékñitum
SYNONYMS
saù—he, Märkaëòeya; tat—of Them; sandarçana—because of seeing;
änanda—by the ecstasy; nirvåta—pleased; ätma—whose body; indriya—senses;
äçayaù—and mind; håñöa—standing on end; romä—his bodily hairs;
açru—with tears; pürëa—filled; akñaù—his eyes; na sehe—he was unable;
tau—upon them; udékñitum—to glance.
TRANSLATION
The ecstasy of seeing Them completely satisfied Märkaëòeya's body, mind
and senses and caused the hairs on his body to stand on end and his eyes to fill
with tears. Overwhelmed, Märkaëòeya found it difficult to look at Them.
TEXT 37
otTaAya ‘aAÃaila: ‘aù"
@AEts$aufyaAd"AiëSaiªava
namaAe nama wtaIzAAnaAE
baBaAzAe gAÕ"d"Aºar"ma,
utthäya präïjaliù prahva
autsukyäd äçliñann iva
namo nama itéçänau
babhäçe gadgadäkñaram
SYNONYMS
utthäya—standing up; präïjaliù—with folded hands; prahvaù—humble;
autsukyät—out of eagerness; äçliñan—embracing; iva—as if;
namaù—obeisances; namaù—obeisances; iti—thus; éçänau—to the two Lords;
babhäñe—he spoke; gadgada—choking with ecstasy; akñaram—the syllables.
TRANSLATION
Standing with his hands folded in supplication and his head bowed in
humility, Märkaëòeya felt such eagerness that he imagined he was embracing
the two Lords. In a voice choked with ecstasy, he repeatedly said, "I offer You
my humble obeisances."
TEXT 38
tayaAer"As$anamaAd"Aya
paAd"yaAer"vainajya ca
@hR"NAenaAnaulaepaena
DaUpamaAlyaEr"paUjayata,
tayor äsanam ädäya
pädayor avanijya ca
arhaëenänulepena
dhüpa-mälyair apüjayat
SYNONYMS
tayoù—to Them; äsanam—sitting places; ädäya—offering; pädayoù—Their
feet; avanijya—hathing; ca—and; arhaëena—with suitable respectful
offerings; anulepena—by anointing Them with sandalwood pulp and other
fragrant substances; dhüpa—with incense; mälyaiù—and flower garlands;
apüjayat—he worshiped.
TRANSLATION
He gave Them sitting places and washed Their feet, and then he worshiped
Them with presentations of arghya, sandalwood pulp, fragrant oils, incense and
flower garlands.
TEXT 39
s$auKamaAs$anamaAs$aInaAE
‘as$aAd"AiBamauKaAE maunaI
paunar"Anamya paAd"AByaAM
gAir"ï"Aivad"ma“avaIta,
sukham äsanam äsénau
prasädäbhimukhau muné
punar änamya pädäbhyäà
gariñöhäv idam abravét
SYNONYMS
sukham—comfortably; äsanam—on sitting places; äsénau—seated;
prasäda—mercy; abhimukhau—ready to give; muné—to the Lord's incarnation
as the two sages; punaù—again; änamya—bowing down; pädäbhyäm—at Their
feet; gariñöhau—to the supremely worshipable; idam—this; abravét—he spoke.
TRANSLATION
Märkaëòeya Åñi once again bowed down at the lotus feet of those two most
worshipable sages, who were sitting at ease, ready to bestow all mercy upon
him. He when addressed Them as follows.
TEXT 40
™aImaAkR(Nxe"ya ovaAca
ikM( vaNARyae tava ivaBaAe yaäu"d"Iir"taAe's$au:
s$aMs$pand"tae tamanau vaAx.~manawin‰"yaAiNA
s$pand"inta vaE tanauBa{taAmajazAvaRyaAeê
svasyaApyaTaAipa BajataAmais$a BaAvabanDau:
çré-märkaëòeya uväca
kià varëaye tava vibho yad-udérito 'suù
saàspandate tam anu väì-mana-indriyäëi
spandanti vai tanu-bhåtäm aja-çarvayoç ca
svasyäpy athäpi bhajatäm asi bhäva-bandhuù
SYNONYMS
çré-märkaëòeyaù uväca—Çré Märkaëòeya said; kim—what; varëaye—shall I
describe; tava—about You; vibho—O Almighty Lord; yat—by whom;
udéritaù—moved; asuù—the vital air; saàspandate—comes to life; tam
anu—following it; väk—the power of speech; manaù—the mind;
indriyäëi—and the senses; spandanti—begin to act; vai—indeed;
tanu-bhåtäm—of all embodied living beings; aja-çarvayoù—of Lord Brahmä
and Lord Çiva; ca—as well; svasya—of myself; api—also; atha
api—nevertheless; bhajatäm—for those who are worshiping; asi—You become;
bhäva-bandhuù—the intimate loving friend.
TRANSLATION
Çré Märkaëòeya said: O Almighty Lord, how can I possibly describe You?
You awaken the vital air, which then impels the mind, senses and power of
speech to act. This is true for all ordinary conditioned souls and even for great
demigods like Brahmä and Çiva. So it is certainly true for me. Nevertheless,
You become the intimate friend of those who worship You.
TEXT 41
maUtaI= wmae BagAvataAe BagAvaMiñlaAefyaA:
ºaemaAya taApaivar"maAya ca ma{tyauijatyaE
naAnaA ibaBaSyaRivataumanyatanaUyaRTaedM"
s$a{"î"A paunaƒaRs$ais$a s$avaRimavaAeNARnaAiBa:
mürté ime bhagavato bhagavaàs tri-lokyäù
kñemäya täpa-viramäya ca måtyu-jityai
nänä bibharñy avitum anya-tanür yathedaà
såñövä punar grasasi sarvam ivorëanäbhiù
SYNONYMS
mürté—the two personal forms; ime—these; bhagavataù—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; bhagavan—O Lord; tri-lokyäù—of all the three
worlds; kñemäya—for the ultimate benefit; täpa—of material misery;
viramäya—for the cessation; ca—and; måtyu—of death; jityai—for the
conquest; nänä—various; bibharñi—You manifest; avitum—for the purpose of
protecting; anya—other; tanüù—transcendental bodies; yathä—just as;
idam—this universe; såñövä—having created; punaù—once again;
grasasi—You swallow up; sarvam—entirely; iva—just like; ürëa-näbhiù—a
spider.
TRANSLATION
O Supreme Personality of Godhead, these two personal forms of Yours have
appeared to bestow the ultimate benefit for the three worlds—the cessation of
material misery and the conquest of death. My Lord, although You create this
universe and then assume many transcendental forms to protect it, You also
swallow it up, just like a spider who spins and later withdraws its web.
TEXT 42
tasyaAivatau: isTar"care"izAtaur"x.~i„amaUlaM
yatsTaM na k(maRgAuNAk(Alar"ja: s$pa{zAinta
yaãE" stauvainta inanamainta yajantyaBaIºNAM
DyaAyainta vaed"ô$d"yaA maunayastad"AptyaE
tasyävituù sthira-careçitur aìghri-mülaà
yat-sthaà na karma-guëa-käla-rajaù spåçanti
yad vai stuvanti ninamanti yajanty abhékñëaà
dhyäyanti veda-hådayä munayas tad-äptyai
SYNONYMS
tasya—of Him; avituù—the protector; sthira-cara—of the stationary and
moving living beings; éçituù—the supreme controller; aìghri-mülam—the soles
of His lotus feet; yat-stham—one who is situated at which; na—do not;
karma-guëa-käla—of material work, material qualities and time; rajaù—the
contamination; spåçanti—touch; yat—whom; vai—indeed; stuvanti—praise;
ninamanti—how down to; yajanti—worship; abhékñëam—at every moment;
dhyäyanti—meditate upon; veda-hådayäù—who have assimilated the essence of
the Vedas; munayaù—sages; tat-äptyai—for the purpose of achieving Him.
TRANSLATION
Because You are the protector and the supreme controller of all moving and
nonmoving beings, anyone who takes shelter of Your lotus feet can never be
touched by the contamination of material work, material qualities or time.
Great sages who have assimilated the essential meaning of the Vedañ offer their
prayers to You. To gain Your association, they bow down to You at every
opportunity and constantly worship You and meditate upon You.
TEXT 43
naAnyaM tavaAx.~„yaupanayaAd"pavagARmaUtaeR:
ºaemaM janasya pair"taAeiBaya wRzA ivaá:
“aöA ibaBaetyalamataAe iã"par"ADaRiDaSNya:
k(Alasya tae ik(mauta tatk{(taBaAEitak(AnaAma,
nänyaà taväìghry-upanayäd apavarga-mürteù
kñemaà janasya parito-bhiya éça vidmaù
brahmä bibhety alam ato dvi-parärdha-dhiñëyaù
kälasya te kim uta tat-kåta-bhautikänäm
SYNONYMS
na anyam—no other; tava—Your; aìghri—of the lotus feet; upanayät—than
the attainment; apavarga-mürteù—who are liberation personified;
kñemam—benefit; janasya—for the person; paritaù—on all sides; bhiyaù—who
is fearful; éça—O Lord; vidmaù—do we know; brahmä—Lord Brahmä;
bibheti—is afraid; alam—very much; ataù—on account of this;
dvi-parärdha—the entire duration of the universe; dhiñëyaù—the period of
whose reign; kälasya—because of time; te—Your feature; kim uta—then what
to speak; tat-kåta—created by him, Brahmä; bhautikänäm—of the mundane
creatures.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, even Lord Brahmä, who enjoys his exalted position for the
entire duration of the universe, fears the passage of time. Then what to speak of
those whom Brahmä creates, the conditioned souls. They encounter fearful
dangers at every step of their lives. I do not know of any relief from this fear
except shelter at Your lotus feet, which are the very form of liberation.
TEXT 44
taãE" BajaAmya{taiDayastava paAd"maUlaM
ih"tvaed"maAtmacC$id" caAtmagAur"Ae: par"sya
de"h"AâpaATaRmas$ad"ntyamaiBaÁamaA‡aM
ivande"ta tae taihR" s$avaRmanaIiSataATaRma,
tad vai bhajämy åta-dhiyas tava päda-mülaà
hitvedam ätma-cchadi cätma-guroù parasya
dehädy apärtham asad antyam abhijïa-mätraà
vindeta te tarhi sarva-manéñitärtham
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; vai—indeed; bhajämi—I worship; åta-dhiyaù—of Him whose
intelligence always perceives the truth; tava—of You; päda-mülam—the soles
of the lotus feet; hitvä—giving up; idam—this; ätma-chadi—covering of the
self; ca—and; ätma-guroù—of the master of the soul; parasya—who is the
Supreme Truth; deha-ädi—the material body and other false designations;
apärtham—useless; asat—insubstantial; antyam—temporary;
abhijïa-mätram—only imagined to have a separate existence; vindeta—one
obtains; te—from You; tarhi—then; sarva—all; manéñita—desired;
artham—objects.
TRANSLATION
Therefore I worship Your lotus feet, having renounced my identification
with the material body and everything else that covers my true self. These
useless, insubstantial and temporary coverings are merely presumed to be
separate from You, whose intelligence encompasses all truth. By attaining
You—the Supreme Godhead and the master of the soul—one attains
everything desirable.
PURPORT
One who falsely identifies himself as the material body or mind
automatically feels entitled to exploit the material world. But when we realize
our eternal spiritual nature and Lord Kåñëa's supreme proprietorship over all
that be, we renounce our false enjoying propensity by the strength of spiritual
knowledge.
TEXT 45
s$aÔvaM r"jastama wtaIzA tavaAtmabanDaAe
maAyaAmayaA: isTaitalayaAed"yahe"tavaAe'sya
laIlaA Da{taA yad"ipa s$aÔvamayaI ‘azAAntyaE
naAnyae na{NAAM vyas$anamaAeh"iBayaê yaAByaAma,
sattvaà rajas tama itéça tavätma-bandho
mäyä-mayäù sthiti-layodaya-hetavo 'sya
lélä dhåtä yad api sattva-mayé praçäntyai
nänye nåëäà vyasana-moha-bhiyaç ca yäbhyäm
SYNONYMS
sattvam—goodness; rajaù—passion; tamaù—ignorance; iti—the modes of
nature thus termed; éça—O Lord; tava—Your; ätma-bandho—O supreme
friend of the soul; mäyä-mayäù—produced from Your personal energy;
sthiti-laya-udaya—of maintenance, destruction and creation; hetavaù—the
causes; asya—of this universe; léläù—as pastimes; dhåtäù—assumed; yat
api—although; sattva-mayé—that which is in the mode of goodness;
praçäntyai—for liberation; na—not; anye—the other two; nåëäm—for
persons; vyasana—danger; moha—bewilderment; bhiyaù—and fear; ca—also;
yäbhyäm—from which.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, O supreme friend of the conditioned soul, although for the
creation, maintenance and annihilation of this world You accept the modes of
goodness, passion and ignorance, which constitute Your illusory potency, You
specifically employ the mode of goodness to liberate the conditioned souls. The
other two modes simply bring them suffering, illusion and fear.
PURPORT
The words lélä dhåtäù indicate that the creative activities of Lord Brahmä,
the destructive activities of Lord Çiva and the sustaining functions of Lord
Viñëu are all pastimes of the Absolute Truth, Lord Kåñëa. But ultimately only
Lord Viñëu can award liberation from the clutches of material illusion, as
indicated by the words sattva-mayé praçäntyai.
Our passionate and ignorant activities cause great suffering, illusion and
fear for us and others; therefore they should be given up. One should become
firmly situated in the mode of goodness and live peacefully on the spiritual
platform. The essence of goodness is to renounce selfish interest in all one's
activities and thus dedicate one's entire being to the Supreme Being, Lord
Kåñëa, who is the source of our existence.
TEXT 46
tasmaAÔavaeh" BagAvaªaTa taAvak(AnaAM
zAuflaAM tanauM svad"iyataAM ku(zAlaA Bajainta
yats$aAtvataA: pauç&Saè&pamauzAinta s$aÔvaM
laAek(Ae yataAe'BayamautaAtmas$auKaM na caAnyata,
tasmät taveha bhagavann atha tävakänäà
çukläà tanuà sva-dayitäà kuçalä bhajanti
yat sätvatäù puruña-rüpam uçanti sattvaà
loko yato 'bhayam utätma-sukhaà na cänyat
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; tava—Your; iha—in this world; bhagavan—O Supreme
Lord; atha—and; tävakänäm—of Your devotees; çukläm—transcendental;
tanum—the personal form; sva-dayitäm—most dear to them; kuçaläù—those
who are expert in spiritual knowledge; bhajanti—worship; yat—because;
sätvatäù—the great devotees; puruña—of the original Personality of Godhead;
rüpam—the form; uçanti—consider; sattvam—the mode of goodness;
lokaù—the spiritual world; yataù—from which; abhayam—fearlessness;
uta—and; ätma-sukham—the happiness of the soul; na—not; ca—and;
anyat—any other.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, because fearlessness, spiritual happiness and the kingdom of God are
all achieved through the mode of pure goodness, Your devotees consider this
mode, but never passion and ignorance, to be a direct manifestation of You, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Intelligent persons thus worship Your beloved
transcendental form, composed of pure goodness, along with the spiritual forms
of Your pure devotees.
PURPORT
Intelligent persons do not worship the demigods, who represent the modes
of passion and ignorance. Lord Brahmä represents passion, Lord Çiva
represents ignorance, and demigods such as Indra also represent the modes of
material nature. But Lord Viñëu, or Näräyaëa, represents pure spiritual
goodness, which brings one realization of the spiritual world, freedom from
fear, and spiritual bliss. Such benefits can never be derived from impure,
material goodness, for it is always mixed with the modes of passion and
ignorance. As clearly indicated in this verse, the transcendental form of God is
fully constituted of eternal spiritual goodness and thus has no tinge of the
material mode of goodness, passion or ignorance.
TEXT 47
tasmaE namaAe BagAvatae pauç&SaAya BaU°ae
ivaìAya ivaìgAur"vae par"dE"vataAya
naAr"AyaNAAya [%Sayae ca nar"AeÔamaAya
hM"s$aAya s$aMyataigAre" inagAmaeìr"Aya
tasmai namo bhagavate puruñäya bhümne
viçväya viçva-gurave para-daivatäya
näräyaëäya åñaye ca narottamäya
haàsäya saàyata-gire nigameçvaräya
SYNONYMS
tasmai—to Him; namaù—my obeisances; bhagavate—to the Godhead;
puruñäya—the Supreme Person; bhümne—the all-pervading one; viçväya—the
all-inclusive manifestation of the universe; viçva-gurave—the spiritual master
of the universe; para-daivatäya—the supremely worshipable Deity;
näräyaëäya—to Lord Näräyaëa; åñaye—the sage; ca—and; nara-uttamäya—to
the best of human beings; haàsäya—situated in perfect purity;
saàyata-gire—who has controlled his speech; nigama-éçvaräya—the master of
the Vedic scriptures.
TRANSLATION
I offer my humble obeisances to Him, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
He is the all-pervading and all-inclusive form of the universe, as well as its
spiritual master. I bow down to Lord Näräyaëa, the supremely worshipable
Deity appearing as a sage, and also to the saintly Nara, the best of human
beings, who is fixed in perfect goodness, fully in control of his speech, and the
propagator of the Vedic literatures.
TEXT 48
yaM vaE na vaed" ivataTaAºapaTaE”aRmaÜ"I:
s$antaM svake(Svas$auSau ô$âipa ä{"fpaTaeSau
tanmaAyayaAva{tamaita: s$a o Wva s$aAºaAä,"
@AâstavaAiKalagAur"Aeç&pas$aAâ vaed"ma,
yaà vai na veda vitathäkña-pathair bhramad-dhéù
santaà svakeñv asuñu hådy api dåk-patheñu
tan-mäyayävåta-matiù sa u eva säkñäd
ädyas taväkhila-guror upasädya vedam
SYNONYMS
yam—whom; vai—indeed; na veda—does not recognize; vitatha—deceptive;
akña-pathaiù—by methods of empirical perception; bhramat—becoming
diverted; dhéù—whose intelligence; santam—present; svakeñu—within one's
own; asuñu—senses; hådi—within the heart; api—even; dåk-patheñu—among
perceived objects of the external world; tat-mäyayä—by His illusory potency;
ävåta—covered over; matiù—his understanding; saù—he; u—even;
eva—indeed; säkñät—directly; ädyaù—originally (in ignorance); tava—of
You; akhila-guroù—the spiritual master of all living beings;
upasädya—obtaining; vedam—the knowledge of the Vedas.
TRANSLATION
A materialist, his intelligence perverted by the action of his deceptive senses,
cannot recognize You at all, although You are always present within his own
senses and heart and also among the objects of his perception. Yet even though
one's understanding has been covered by Your illusory potency, if one obtains
Vedic knowledge from You, the supreme spiritual master of all, he can directly
understand You.
TEXT 49
yaÚ"zARnaM inagAma @Atmar"h":‘ak(AzAM
mau÷inta ya‡a k(vayaAe'japar"A yatanta:
taM s$avaRvaAd"ivaSaya‘aitaè&pazAIlaM
vande" mah"Apauç&SamaAtmainagAUX#baAeDama,
yad-darçanaà nigama ätma-rahaù-prakäçaà
muhyanti yatra kavayo 'ja-parä yatantaù
taà sarva-väda-viñaya-pratirüpa-çélaà
vande mahä-puruñam ätma-nigüòha-bodham
SYNONYMS
yat—of whom; darçanam—the vision; nigame—in the Vedas; ätma—of the
Supreme Soul; rahaù—the mystery; prakäçam—which reveals;
muhyanti—become bewildered; yatra—about which; kavayaù—great learned
authorities; aja-paräù—headed by Brahmä; yatantaù—endeavoring; tam—to
Him; sarva-väda—of all different philosophies; viñaya—the subject matter;
pratirüpa—adjusting itself as suitable; çélam—whose personal nature; vande—I
offer my homage; mahä-puruñam—to the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
ätma—from the spirit soul; nigüòha—hidden; bodham—understanding.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, the Vedic literatures alone reveal confidential knowledge of
Your supreme personality, and thus even such great scholars as Lord Brahmä
himself are bewildered in their attempt to understand You through empirical
methods. Each philosopher understands You according to his particular
speculative conclusions. I worship that Supreme Person, knowledge of whom is
hidden by the bodily designations covering the conditioned soul's spiritual
identity.
PURPORT
Even great demigods like Brahmä are bewildered in their speculative
attempts to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Each
philosopher is covered by a unique combination of the modes of nature and
thus describes the Supreme Truth according to his own material conditioning.
Therefore even strenuous empirical endeavor will never bring one to the
conclusion of all knowledge. The highest knowledge is Kåñëa, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and one can understand Him only by fully
surrendering to Him and serving Him with love. This is why Märkaëòeya Åñi
states here, vande mahä-puruñam: "I simply worship that Supreme Personality."
Those who try to worship God but at the same time continue speculating or
acting fruitively will attain only mixed and bewildering results. To be pure a
devotee must give up all fruitive activity and mental speculation; in that way
his loving service to the Lord will yield perfect knowledge of the Supreme.
Only this perfection can satisfy the eternal soul.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Twelfth Canto, Eighth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Märkaëòeya's Prayers to Nara-Näräyaëa Åñi."
9. Märkaëòeya Åñi Sees the Illusory Potency of the Lord
This chapter describes Märkaëòeya Åñi's vision of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead's illusory energy.
Satisfied by the prayers Çré Märkaëòeya had offered, the Supreme Lord told
him to ask for a benediction, and the sage said he wanted to see the Lord's
illusory energy. The Supreme Lord Çré Hari, present before Märkaëòeya in the
form of Nara-Näräyaëa, replied, "So be it," and then left for Badarikäçrama.
One day, as Çré Märkaëòeya was offering his evening prayers, the water of
devastation suddenly flooded the three worlds. With great difficulty
Märkaëòeya moved about all alone in this water for a long time, until he came
upon a banyan tree. Lying upon a leaf of that tree was an infant boy glowing
with a charming effulgence. As Märkaëòeya moved toward the leaf, he was
pulled by the boy's inhalation and, just like a mosquito, drawn within His body.
Inside the boy's body, Märkaëòeya was amazed to see the entire universe
just as it had been before the annihilation. After a moment the sage was
carried out by the force of the child's exhalation and hurled back into the
ocean of annihilation. Then, seeing that the child on the leaf was actually Çré
Hari, the transcendental Lord situated within his own heart, Çré Märkaëòeya
tried to embrace Him. But at that moment Lord Hari, the master of all mystic
power, disappeared. Then the waters of annihilation disappeared as well, and
Çré Märkaëòeya found himself in his own äçrama, just as before.
TEXT 1
s$aUta ovaAca
s$aMstautaAe BagAvaAinatTaM
maAkR(Nxe"yaena DaImataA
naAr"AyaNAAe nar"s$aKa:
‘aIta @Ah" Ba{gAUã"h"ma,
süta uväca
saàstuto bhagavän itthaà
märkaëòeyena dhématä
näräyaëo nara-sakhaù
préta äha bhågüdvaham
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; saàstutaù—properly glorified;
bhagavän—the Supreme Lord; ittham—in this way; märkaëòeyena—by
Märkaëòeya; dhé-matä—the intelligent sage; näräyaëaù—Lord Näräyaëa;
nara-sakhaù—the friend of Nara; prétaù—satisfied; äha—spoke;
bhågu-udvaham—to the most eminent descendant of Bhågu.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: The Supreme Lord Näräyaëa, the friend of Nara, was
satisfied by the proper glorification offered by the intelligent sage Märkaëòeya.
Thus the Lord addressed that excellent descendant of Bhågu.
TEXT 2
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
BaAe BaAe “aöiSaRvayaAeR'is$a
is$aÜ" @Atmas$amaAiDanaA
maiya BaftyaAnapaAiyanyaA
tapa:svaADyaAyas$aMyamaE:
çré-bhagavän uväca
bho bho brahmarñi-varyo 'si
siddha ätma-samädhinä
mayi bhaktyänapäyinyä
tapaù-svädhyäya-saàyamaiù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; bhoù
bhoù—dear sage; brahma-åñi—of all learned brähmaëas; varyaù—the best;
asi—you are; siddhaù—perfect; ätma-samädhinä—by fixed meditation upon
the Self; mayi—directed toward Me; bhaktyä—by devotional service;
anapäyinyä—undeviating; tapaù—by austerities; svädhyäya—study of the
Vedas; saàyamaiù—and regulative principles.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Märkaëòeya, you are
indeed the best of all learned brähmaëas. You have perfected your life by
practicing fixed meditation upon the Supreme Soul, as well as by focusing upon
Me your undeviating devotional service, your austerities, your study of the
Vedas and your strict adherence to regulative principles.
TEXT 3
vayaM tae pair"tauí"A: sma
tvaä,"ba{h"ä,"˜atacayaRyaA
varM" ‘ataIcC$ Ba‰M" tae
var"d"Ae'isma tvad"Iips$atama,
vayaà te parituñöäù sma
tvad-båhad-vrata-caryayä
varaà pratéccha bhadraà te
vara-do 'smi tvad-épsitam
SYNONYMS
vayam—We; te—with you; parituñöäù—perfectly satisfied; sma—have become;
tvat—your; båhat-vrata—of the vow of lifelong celibacy; caryayä—by
performance; varam—a benediction; pratéccha—please choose; bhadram—all
good; te—unto you; vara-daù—the giver of benedictions; asmi—I am;
tvat-épsitam—desired by you.
TRANSLATION
We are perfectly satisfied with your practice of lifelong celibacy. Please
choose whatever benediction you desire, since I can grant your wish. May you
enjoy all good fortune.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains that the Lord used the plural
form in the beginning of this verse—"We are satisfied"—because He was
referring to Himself along with Çiva and Umä, who will later be glorified by
Märkaëòeya. The Lord then used the singular—"I am the bestower of
benedictions"—because ultimately only Lord Näräyaëa (Kåñëa) can award the
highest perfection of life, eternal Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 4
™aI[%iSaç&vaAca
ijataM tae de"vade"vaezA
‘apaªaAitaRh"r"Acyauta
vare"NAEtaAvataAlaM naAe
yaà"vaAna, s$amaä{"zyata
çré-åñir uväca
jitaà te deva-deveça
prapannärti-haräcyuta
vareëaitävatälaà no
yad bhavän samadåçyata
SYNONYMS
çré-åñiù uväca—the sage said; jitam—are victorious; te—You; deva-deva-éça—O
Lord of lords; prapanna—of one who is surrendered; ärti-hara—O remover of
all distress; acyuta—O infallible one; vareëa—with the benediction;
etävatä—this much; alam—enough; naù—by us; yat—that; bhavän—Your
good self; samadåçyata—has been seen.
TRANSLATION
The sage said: O Lord of lords, all glories to You! O Lord Acyuta, You
remove all distress for the devotees who surrender unto You. That you have
allowed me to see You is all the benediction I want.
TEXT 5
gA{h"ItvaAjaAd"yaAe yasya
™aImatpaAd"Abjad"zARnama,
manas$aA yaAegApa¸e(na
s$a BavaAnmae'iºagAAecar":
gåhétväjädayo yasya
çrémat-pädäbja-darçanam
manasä yoga-pakvena
sa bhavän me 'kñi-gocaraù
SYNONYMS
gåhétvä—receiving; aja-ädayaù—(became) Brahmä and others; yasya—whose;
çrémat—all-opulent; päda-abja—of the lotus feet; darçanam—the sight;
manasä—by the mind; yoga-pakvena—matured in yoga practice; saù—He;
bhavän—Yourself; me—my; akñi—to the eyes; go-caraù—perceptible.
TRANSLATION
Such demigods as Lord Brahmä achieved their exalted positions simply by
seeing Your beautiful lotus feet after their minds had become mature in yoga
practice. And now, my Lord, You have personally appeared before me.
PURPORT
Märkaëòeya Åñi points out that exalted demigods like Lord Brahmä
achieved their positions simply by glimpsing the Lord's lotus feet, and yet
Märkaëòeya Åñi was now able to see Lord Kåñëa's entire body. Thus he could
not even imagine the extent of his good fortune.
TEXT 6
@TaApyambaujapa‡aAºa
pauNyaëAek(izAKaAmaNAe
‰"ºyae maAyaAM yayaA laAek(:
s$apaAlaAe vaed" s$aià"d"Ama,
athäpy ambuja-paträkña
puëya-çloka-çikhämaëe
drakñye mäyäà yayä lokaù
sa-pälo veda sad-bhidäm
SYNONYMS
atha api—nonetheless; ambuja-patra—like the petals of a lotus; akña—O You
whose eyes; puëya-çloka—of famous personalities; çikhämaëe—O crest jewel;
drakñye—I desire to see; mäyäm—the illusory energy; yayä—by which;
lokaù—the entire world; sa-pälaù—along with its ruling demigods;
veda—considers; sat—of the absolute reality; bhidäm—material
differentiation.
TRANSLATION
O lotus-eyed Lord, O crest jewel of renowned personalities, although I am
satisfied simply by seeing You, I do wish to see Your illusory potency, by whose
influence the entire world, together with its ruling demigods, considers reality
to be materially variegated.
PURPORT
A conditioned soul sees the material world to be constituted of
independent, separate entities. Actually, all things are united, being potencies
of the Supreme Lord. Märkaëòeya Åñi is curious to witness the exact process
by which mäyä, the Lord's bewildering potency, casts living beings into
illusion.
TEXT 7
s$aUta ovaAca
wtaIix"taAe'icaRta: k(Amama,
[%iSaNAA BagAvaAnmaunae
taTaeita s$a smayana, ‘aAgAAä,"
bad"yaAR™amamaIìr":
süta uväca
itéòito 'rcitaù kämam
åñiëä bhagavän mune
tatheti sa smayan prägäd
badary-äçramam éçvaraù
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; iti—in these words; éòitaù—glorified;
arcitaù—worshiped; kämam—satisfactorily; åñiëä—by the sage Märkaëòeya;
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; mune—O wise Çaunaka; tathä iti—"so
be it"; saù—He; smayan—smiling; prägät—departed; badaré-äçramam—for the
hermitage Badarikäçrama; éçvaraù—the Supreme Lord.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: O wise Çaunaka, thus satisfied by Märkaëòeya's praise
and worship, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, smiling, replied, "So be it,"
and then departed for His hermitage at Badarikäçrama.
PURPORT
The words bhagavän and éçvara in this verse refer to the Supreme Lord in
His incarnation as the twin sages Nara and Näräyaëa. According to Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, the Supreme Lord smiled ruefully, because
He prefers that His pure devotees stay away from His illusory energy. Curiosity
to see the illusory energy of the Lord sometimes develops into sinful material
desire. Nonetheless, to please His devotee Märkaëòeya, the Lord granted his
request, just as a father who cannot convince his son to give up pursuing a
harmful desire may let him experience some painful reaction so that he will
then voluntarily desist. Thus, understanding what would soon happen to
Märkaëòeya, the Lord smiled as He prepared to display the illusory potency to
him.
TEXTS 8-9
tamaeva icantayaªaTaRma,
[%iSa: svaA™ama Wva s$a:
vas$aªagnyakR(s$aAemaAmbau-
BaUvaAyauivayad"Atmas$au
DyaAyana, s$avaR‡a ca h"ir$M
BaAva‰"vyaEr"paUjayata,
¸(icatpaUjaAM ivas$asmaAr"
‘aema‘as$ar"s$amplauta:
tam eva cintayann artham
åñiù sväçrama eva saù
vasann agny-arka-somämbubhü-
väyu-viyad-ätmasu
dhyäyan sarvatra ca harià
bhäva-dravyair apüjayat
kvacit püjäà visasmära
prema-prasara-samplutaù
SYNONYMS
tam—that; eva—indeed; cintayan—thinking of; artham—the goal; åñiù—the
sage Märkaëòeya; sva-äçrame—at his own hermitage; eva—indeed; saù—he;
vasan—remaining; agni—in the fire; arka—the sun; soma—the moon;
ambu—the water; bhü—the earth; väyu—the wind; viyat—the lightning;
ätmasu—and in his own heart; dhyäyan—meditating; sarvatra—in all
circumstances; ca—and; harim—upon Lord Hari; bhäva-dravyaiù—with
paraphernalia conceived in his mind; apüjayat—he offered worship;
kvacit—sometimes; püjäm—the worship; visasmära—he forgot; prema—of
pure love of God; prasara—in the flood; samplutaù—being drowned.
TRANSLATION
Thinking always of his desire to see the Lord's illusory energy, the sage
remained in his äçrama, meditating constantly upon the Lord within fire, the
sun, the moon, water, the earth, air, lightning and his own heart and
worshiping Him with paraphernalia conceived in his mind. But sometimes,
overwhelmed by waves of love for the Lord, Märkaëòeya would forget to
perform his regular worship.
PURPORT
It is apparent from these verses that Märkaëòeya Åñi was a great devotee of
Lord Kåñëa; therefore he wanted to see the illusory energy of the Lord not to
fulfill some material ambition but to learn how His potency is working.
TEXT 10
tasyaEk(d"A Ba{gAu™aeï"
pauSpaBa‰"Ataqe% maunae:
opaAs$aInasya s$anDyaAyaAM
“aöna, vaAyaur"BaUnmah"Ana,
tasyaikadä bhågu-çreñöha
puñpabhadrä-taöe muneù
upäsénasya sandhyäyäà
brahman väyur abhün mahän
SYNONYMS
tasya—while he; ekadä—one day; bhågu-çreñöha—O best of the descendants of
Bhågu; puñpabhadrä-taöe—on the bank of the river Puñpabhadrä; muneù—the
sage; upäsénasya—was performing worship; sandhyäyäm—at the juncture of
the day; brahman—O brähmaëa; väyuù—a wind; abhüt—arose; mahän—great.
TRANSLATION
O brähmaëa Çaunaka, best of the Bhågus, one day while Märkaëòeya was
performing his evening worship on the bank of the Puñpabhadrä, a great wind
suddenly arose.
TEXT 11
taM caNx"zAbdM" s$amaud"Ir"yantaM
balaAh"k(A @nvaBavana, k(r"AlaA:
@ºasTaivaï"A maumaucaustaix"ià":
svananta o»aEr"iBa vaSaRDaAr"A:
taà caëòa-çabdaà samudérayantaà
balähakä anv abhavan karäläù
akña-sthaviñöhä mumucus taòidbhiù
svananta uccair abhi varña-dhäräù
SYNONYMS
tam—that wind; caëòa-çabdam—a terrible sound; samudérayantam—which
was creating; balähakäù—clouds; anu—following it; abhavan—appeared;
karäläù—fearful; akña—like wagon wheels; sthaviñöhäù—solid;
mumucuù—they released; taòidbhiù—along with lightning;
svanantaù—resounding; uccaiù—greatly; abhi—in all directions; varña—of
rain; dhäräù—torrents.
TRANSLATION
That wind created a terrible sound and brought in its wake fearsome clouds
that were accompanied by lightning and roaring thunder and that poured down
on all sides torrents of rain as heavy as wagon wheels.
TEXT 12
tataAe vyaä{"zyanta catau: s$amau"‰"A:
s$amantata: ºmaAtalamaAƒas$anta:
s$amaIr"vaegAAeimaRiBaç&ƒana‚(-
mah"ABayaAvataRgABaIr"GaAeSaA:
tato vyadåçyanta catuù samudräù
samantataù kñmä-talam ägrasantaù
saméra-vegormibhir ugra-nakramahä-
bhayävarta-gabhéra-ghoñäù
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; vyadåçyanta—appeared; catuù samudraù—the four oceans;
samantataù—on all sides; kñmä-talam—the surface of the earth;
ägrasantaù—swallowing up; saméra—of the wind; vega—impelled by the force;
ürmibhiù—with their waves; ugra—terrible; nakra—with sea monsters;
mahä-bhaya—very fearful; ävarta—with whirlpools; gabhéra—grave;
ghoñäù—with sounds.
TRANSLATION
Then the four great oceans appeared on all sides, swallowing up the surface
of the earth with their wind-tossed waves. In these oceans were terrible sea
monsters, fearful whirlpools and ominous rumblings.
TEXT 13
@ntabaRih"êAià"r"itaâuiBa: KarE":
zAtaoe"d"AiBaç&pataAipataM jagAta,
catauivaRDaM vaIºya s$ah"AtmanaA mauinar,"
jalaAplautaAM ºmaAM ivamanaA: s$ama‡as$ata,
antar bahiç cädbhir ati-dyubhiù kharaiù
çatahradäbhir upatäpitaà jagat
catur-vidhaà vékñya sahätmanä munir
jaläplutäà kñmäà vimanäù samatrasat
SYNONYMS
antaù—internally; bahiù—externally; ca—and; adbhiù—by the water;
ati-dyubhiù—rising higher than the sky; kharaiù—by the fierce (winds);
çata-hradäbhiù—by lightning bolts; upatäpitam—greatly distressed; jagat—all
the inhabitants of the universe; catuù-vidham—of four varieties (those who
have taken birth from embryos, from eggs, from seeds and from perspiration);
vékñya—seeing; saha—along with; ätmanä—himself; muniù—the sage;
jala—by the water; äplutäm—flooded; kñmäm—the earth;
vimanäù—perplexed; samatrasat—he became fearful.
TRANSLATION
The sage saw all the inhabitants of the universe, including himself,
tormented within and without by the harsh winds, the bolts of lightning, and
the great waves rising beyond the sky. As the whole earth flooded, he grew
perplexed and fearful.
PURPORT
Here the word catur-vidham refers to the four sources of birth for
conditioned souls: embryos, eggs, seeds and perspiration.
TEXT 14
tasyaEvamauã"Iºata OimaRBaISaNA:
‘aBaÃanaAGaUiNARtavaAmaRh"ANARva:
@ApaUyaRmaANAAe var"Saià"r"mbaudE":
ºmaAmapyaDaAä," ã"IpavaSaARi‰"iBa: s$amama,
tasyaivam udvékñata ürmi-bhéñaëaù
prabhaïjanäghürëita-vär mahärëavaù
äpüryamäëo varañadbhir ambudaiù
kñmäm apyadhäd dvépa-varñädribhiù samam
SYNONYMS
tasya—while he; evam—in this way; udvékñataù—was looking on; ürmi—with
its waves; bhéñaëaù—frightening; prabhaïjana—by hurricane winds;
äghürëita—swirled around; väù—its water; mahä-arëavaù—the great ocean;
äpüryamänaù—becoming filled; varañadbhiù—with rain; ambu-daiù—by the
clouds; kñmäm—the earth; apyadhät—covered over; dvépa—with its islands;
varña—continents; adribhiù—and mountains; samam—together.
TRANSLATION
Even as Märkaëòeya looked on, the rain pouring down from the clouds filled
the ocean more and more until that great sea, its waters violently whipped into
terrifying waves by hurricanes, covered up all the earth's islands, mountains
and continents.
TEXT 15
s$aºmaAntair"ºaM s$aid"vaM s$aBaAgANAM
‡aElaAefyamaAs$aIts$ah" id"igBar"Aplautama,
s$a Wk( WvaAevaRir"taAe mah"Amauinar,"
ba”aAma ivaiºapya jaq%A jax"AnDavata,
sa-kñmäntarikñaà sa-divaà sa-bhä-gaëaà
trai-lokyam äsét saha digbhir äplutam
sa eka evorvarito mahä-munir
babhräma vikñipya jaöä jaòändha-vat
SYNONYMS
sa—along with; kñmä—the earth; antarikñam—and outer space;
sa-divam—along with the heavenly planets; sa-bhä-gaëam—along with all the
celestial bodies; trai-lokyam—the three worlds; äsét—became; saha—along
with; digbhiù—all the directions; äplutam—flooded; saù—he; ekaù—alone;
eva—indeed; urvaritaù—remaining; mahä-muniù—the great sage;
babhräma—wandered about; vikñipya—scattering; jaöäù—his matted locks;
jaòa—a dumb person; andha—a blind person; vat—like.
TRANSLATION
The water inundated the earth, outer space, heaven and the celestial region.
Indeed, the entire expanse of the universe was flooded in all directions, and out
of all its inhabitants only Märkaëòeya remained. His matted hair scattered, the
great sage wandered about alone in the water as if dumb and blind.
TEXT 16
ºauÔa{q%.par"ItaAe mak(rE"istaimaiËÿlaEr,"
opaåu"taAe vaIicanaBasvataAh"ta:
tamasyapaAre" paitataAe ”amaind"zAAe
na vaed" KaM gAAM ca pair"™amaeiSata:
kñut-tåö-paréto makarais timiìgilair
upadruto véci-nabhasvatähataù
tamasy apäre patito bhraman diço
na veda khaà gäà ca pariçrameñitaù
SYNONYMS
kñut—by hunger; tåö—and thirst; parétaù—enveloped; makaraiù—by the
makaras, a species of monster crocodile; timiìgilaiù—and by the timiìgila, a
variety of huge fish that eats whales; upadrutaù—harassed; véci—by the waves;
nabhasvatä—and the wind; ähataù—tormented; tamasi—in the darkness;
apäre—which was unlimited; patitaù—having fallen; bhraman—wandering;
diçaù—the directions; na veda—did not recognize; kham—the sky; gäm—the
earth; ca—and; pariçrama-iñitaù—overcome by exhaustion.
TRANSLATION
Tormented by hunger and thirst, attacked by monstrous makaras and
timiìgila fish and battered by the wind and waves, he moved aimlessly through
the infinite darkness into which he had fallen. As he grew increasingly
exhausted, he lost all sense of direction and could not tell the sky from the
earth.
TEXTS 17-18
‚(icanma¢aAe mah"AvataeR
tar"laEstaAix"ta: ¸(icata,
yaAd"AeiBaBaRºyatae ¸(Aipa
svayamanyaAenyaGaAitaiBa:
¸(icacC$AekM( ¸(icanmaAehM"
¸(icaä," äu":KaM s$auKaM Bayama,
¸(icanma{tyaumavaA«aAeita
vyaADyaAid"iBaç&taAidR"ta:
kracin magno mahävarte
taralais täòitaù kvacit
yädobhir bhakñyate kväpi
svayam anyonya-ghätibhiù
kvacic chokaà kvacin mohaà
kvacid duùkhaà sukhaà bhayam
kvacin måtyum aväpnoti
vyädhy-ädibhir utärditaù
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; magnaù—drowning; mahä-ävarte—in a great whirlpool;
taralaiù—by the waves; täòitaù—beaten; kvacit—sometimes; yädobhiù—by the
aquatic monsters; bhakñyate—he was threatened with being eaten; kva
api—sometimes; svayam—himself; anyonya—each other;
ghätibhiù—attacking; kvacit—sometimes; çokam—depression;
kvacit—sometimes; moham—bewilderment; kvacit—sometimes;
duùkham—misery; sukham—happiness; bhayam—fear; kvacit—sometimes;
måtyum—death; aväpnoti—he experienced; vyädhi—by disease; ädibhiù—and
other pains; uta—also; arditaù—distressed.
TRANSLATION
At times he was engulfed by the great whirlpools, sometimes he was beaten
by the mighty waves, and at other times the aquatic monsters threatened to
devour him as they attacked one another. Sometimes he felt lamentation,
bewilderment, misery, happiness or fear, and at other times he experienced such
terrible illness and pain that he felt himself dying.
TEXT 19
@yautaAyatavaSaARNAAM
s$ah"›aAiNA zAtaAina ca
vyataIyau”aRmatastaismana,
ivaSNAumaAyaAva{taAtmana:
ayutäyata-varñäëäà
sahasräëi çatäni ca
vyatéyur bhramatas tasmin
viñëu-mäyävåtätmanaù
SYNONYMS
ayuta—tens of thousands; ayuta—by tens of thousands; varñäëäm—of years;
sahasräëi—thousands; çatäni—hundreds; ca—and; vyatéyuù—passed by;
bhramataù—as he wandered; tasmin—in that; viñëu-mäyä—by the illusory
energy of Lord Viñëu; ävåta—covered; ätmanaù—his mind.
TRANSLATION
Countless millions of years passed as Märkaëòeya wandered about in that
deluge, his mind bewildered by the illusory energy of Lord Viñëu, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 20
s$a k(d"Aicaä," ”amaMstaismana,
pa{iTavyaA: k(ku(id" iã"ja:
nyaAƒaAeDapaAetaM d"ä{"zAe
P(lapaéavazAAeiBatama,
sa kadäcid bhramaàs tasmin
påthivyäù kakudi dvijaù
nyägrodha-potaà dadåçe
phala-pallava-çobhitam
SYNONYMS
saù—he; kadäcit—on one occasion; bhraman—while wandering; tasmin—in
that water; påthivyäù—of earth; kakudi—upon a raised place; dvijaù—the
brähmaëa; nyägrodha-potam—a young banyan tree; dadåçe—saw; phala—with
fruits; pallava—and blossoms; çobhitam—decorated.
TRANSLATION
Once, while wandering in the water, the brähmaëa Märkaëòeya discovered a
small island, upon which stood a young banyan tree bearing blossoms and fruits.
TEXT 21
‘aAgAuÔar"syaAM zAAKaAyaAM
tasyaAipa d"ä{"zAe izAzAuma,
zAyaAnaM paNARpauq%ke(
ƒas$antaM ‘aBayaA tama:
präg-uttarasyäà çäkhäyäà
tasyäpi dadåçe çiçum
çayänaà parëa-puöake
grasantaà prabhayä tamaù
SYNONYMS
präk-uttarasyäm—toward the northeast; çäkhäyäm—upon a branch; tasya—of
that tree; api—indeed; dadåçe—he saw; çiçum—an infant boy;
çayänam—lying; parëa-puöake—within the concavity of a leaf;
grasantam—swallowing; prabhayä—with His effulgence; tamaù—the darkness.
TRANSLATION
Upon a branch of the northeast portion of that tree he saw an infant boy
lying within a leaf. The child's effulgence was swallowing up the darkness.
TEXTS 22-25
mah"Amar"k(tazyaAmaM
™aImaã"d"napaÆÿjama,
k(mbauƒaIvaM mah"Aer"s$kM(
s$aunas$aM s$aund"r"”auvama,
ìAs$aEjad"lak(ABaAtaM
k(mbau™aIk(NARd"Aix"mama,
ivaåu"maADar"BaAs$aeSaca,-
C$AeNAAiyatas$auDaAismatama,
paágABaARç&NAApaAËMÿ
ô$âh"As$aAvalaAek(nama,
ìAs$aEjaã"ilas$aMiva¢aina°
anaAiBad"laAed"r"ma,
caAvaRÌÿilaByaAM paAiNAByaAma,
oªaIya car"NAAmbaujama,
mauKae inaDaAya iva‘aen‰"Ae
DayantaM vaIºya ivaismata:
mahä-marakata-çyämaà
çrémad-vadana-paìkajam
kambu-grévaà mahoraskaà
su-nasaà sundara-bhruvam
çväsaijad-alakäbhätaà
kambu-çré-karëa-däòimam
vidrumädhara-bhäseñac369
choëäyita-sudhä-smitam
padma-garbhäruëäpäìgaà
hådya-häsävalokanam
çväsaijad-vali-saàvignanimna-
näbhi-dalodaram
cärv-aìgulibhyäà päëibhyäm
unnéya caraëämbujam
mukhe nidhäya viprendro
dhayantaà vékñya vismitaù
SYNONYMS
mahä-marakata—like a great emerald; çyämam—dark blue; çrémat—beautiful;
vadana-paìkajam—whose lotus face; kambu—like a conchshell;
grévam—whose throat; mahä—broad; uraskam—whose chest;
su-nasam—having a beautiful nose; sundara-bhruvam—having beautiful
eyebrows; çväsa—by His breath; ejat—trembling; alaka—with the hair;
äbhätam—splendid; kambu—like a conchshell; çré—beautiful; karëa—His
ears; däòimam—resembling pomegranate flowers; vidruma—like coral;
adhara—of His lips; bhäsä—by the effulgence; éñat—slightly;
çoëäyita—reddened; sudhä—nectarean; smitam—His smile;
padma-garbha—like the whorl of a lotus; aruëa—reddish; apäìgam—the
corners of His eyes; hådya—charming; häsa—with a smile; avalokanam—His
countenance; çväsa—by His breath; ejat—made to move; vali—by the lines;
saàvigna—contorted; nimna—deep; näbhi—with His navel; dala—like a leaf;
udaram—whose abdomen; cäru—attractive; aìgulibhyäm—having fingers;
päëibhyäm—by His two hands; unnéya—picking up; caraëa-ambujam—His
lotus foot; mukhe—in His mouth; nidhäya—placing; vipra-indraù—the best of
brähmaëas, Märkaëòeya; dhayantam—drinking; vékñya—seeing; vismitaù—was
amazed.
TRANSLATION
The infant's dark-blue complexion was the color of a flawless emerald, His
lotus face shone with a wealth of beauty, and His throat bore marks like the
lines on a conchshell. He had a broad chest, a finely shaped nose, beautiful
eyebrows, and lovely ears that resembled pomegranate flowers and that had
inner folds like a conchshell's spirals. The corners of His eyes were reddish like
the whorl of a lotus, and the effulgence of His coral-like lips slightly reddened
the nectarean, enchanting smile on His face. As He breathed, His splendid hair
trembled and His deep navel became distorted by the moving folds of skin on
His abdomen, which resembled a banyan leaf. The exalted brähmaëa watched
with amazement as the infant took hold of one of His lotus feet with His
graceful fingers, placed a toe within His mouth and began to suck.
PURPORT
The young child was the Supreme Personality of Godhead. According to
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, Lord Kåñëa wondered, "So many
devotees are hankering for the nectar of My lotus feet. Therefore let Me
personally experience that nectar." Thus the Lord, playing like an ordinary
baby, began to suck on His toes.
TEXT 26
taÚ"zARnaAã"Itapair"™amaAe maud"A
‘aAetPu(éaô$tpaAElmaivalaAecanaAmbauja:
‘aô$í"r"AemaAàu"taBaAvazAiÆÿta:
‘aí]M" paur"staM ‘as$as$aAr" baAlak(ma,
tad-darçanäd véta-pariçramo mudä
protphulla-håt-paulma-vilocanämbujaù
prahåñöa-romädbhuta-bhäva-çaìkitaù
prañöuà puras taà prasasära bälakam
SYNONYMS
tat-darçanät—by seeing the child; véta—dispelled; pariçramaù—his weariness;
mudä—out of pleasure; protphulla—expanded wide; håt-padma—the lotus of
his heart; vilocana-ambujaù—and his lotus eyes; prahåñöa—standing on end;
romä—the hairs on his body; adbhuta-bhäva—about the identity of this
wonderful form; çaìkitaù—confused; prañöum—in order to inquire; puraù—in
front; tam—of Him; prasasära—he approached; bälakam—the child.
TRANSLATION
As Märkaëòeya beheld the child, all his weariness vanished. Indeed, so great
was his pleasure that the lotus of his heart, along with his lotus eyes, fully
blossomed and the hairs on his body stood on end. Confused as to the identity
of the wonderful infant, the sage approached Him.
PURPORT
Märkaëòeya wanted to ask the child about His identity and therefore
approached Him.
TEXT 27
taAvaicC$zAAevaE= ìis$ataena BaAgARva:
s$aAe'nta: zAr"IrM" mazAk(Ae yaTaAivazAta,
ta‡aApyad"Ae nyastamacaí" k{(tµazAAe
yaTaA paur"Amau÷d"taIva ivaismata:
tävac chiçor vai çvasitena bhärgavaù
so 'ntaù çaréraà maçako yathäviçat
taträpy ado nyastam acañöa kåtsnaço
yathä purämuhyad atéva vismitaù
SYNONYMS
tävat—at that very moment; çiçoù—of the infant; vai—indeed;
çvasitena—with the breathing; bhärgavaù—the descendant of Bhågu; saù—he;
antaù çaréram—within the body; maçakaù—a mosquito; yathä—just like;
aviçat—entered; tatra—therein; api—indeed; adaù—this universe;
nyastam—placed; acañöa—he saw; kåtsnaçaù—entire; yathä—as;
purä—previously; amuhyat—he became bewildered; atéva—extremely;
vismitaù—surprised.
TRANSLATION
Just then the child inhaled, drawing Märkaëòeya within His body like a
mosquito. There the sage found the entire universe arrayed as it had been
before its dissolution. Seeing this, Märkaëòeya was most astonished and
perplexed.
TEXTS 28-29
KaM r"Aed"s$aI BaAgANAAnai‰"s$aAgAr"Ana,
ã"IpaAna, s$avaSaARna, k(ku(Ba: s$aur"As$aur"Ana,
vanaAina de"zAAna, s$air"ta: paur"Ak(r"Ana,
Kaeq%Ana, ˜ajaAnaA™amavaNARva{Ôaya:
mah"Ainta BaUtaAnyaTa BaAEitak(Anyas$aAE
k(AlaM ca naAnaAyaugAk(lpak(lpanama,
yaitk(iÂad"nyaã"Yavah"Ar"k(Ar"NAM
d"d"zAR ivaìM s$aid"vaAvaBaAis$atama,
khaà rodasé bhä-gaëän adri-sägarän
dvépän sa-varñän kakubhaù suräsurän
vanäni deçän saritaù puräkarän
kheöän vrajän äçrama-varëa-våttayaù
mahänti bhütäny atha bhautikäny asau
kälaà ca nänä-yuga-kalpa-kalpanam
yat kiïcid anyad vyavahära-käraëaà
dadarça viçvaà sad ivävabhäsitam
SYNONYMS
kham—the sky; rodasé—the heavens and earth; bhä-gaëän—all the stars;
adri—the mountains; sägarän—and oceans; dvépän—the great islands;
sa-varñän—along with the continents; kakubhaù—the directions;
sura-asurän—the saintly devotees and the demons; vanäni—the forests;
deçän—the various countries; saritaù—the rivers; pura—the cities;
äkarän—and the mines; kheöän—the agricultural villages; vrajän—the cow
pastures; äçrama-varëa—of the various spiritual and occupational divisions of
society; våttayaù—the engagements; mahänti bhütäni—the basic elements of
nature; atha—and; bhautikäni—all their gross manifestations; asau—he;
kälam—time; ca—also; nänä-yuga-kalpa—of the different millennia and the
days of Brahmä; kalpanam—the regulating agent; yat kiïcit—whatever;
anyat—other; vyavahära-käraëam—object intended for use in material life;
dadarça—he saw; viçvam—the universe; sat—real; iva—as if;
avabhäsitam—manifest.
TRANSLATION
The sage saw the entire universe: the sky, heavens and earth, the stars,
mountains, oceans, great islands and continents, the expanses in every
direction, the saintly and demoniac living beings, the forests, countries, rivers,
cities and mines, the agricultural villages and cow pastures, and the occupational
and spiritual activities of the various social divisions. He also saw the basic
elements of creation along with all their by-products, as well as time itself,
which regulates the progression of countless ages within the days of Brahmä. In
addition, he saw everything else created for use in material life. All this he saw
manifested before him as if it were real.
TEXT 30
ih"maAlayaM pauSpavah"AM ca taAM nad"I%M
inajaA™amaM ya‡a [%SaI @pazyata
ivaìM ivapazyaHC.$vais$ataAicC$zAAevaE=
baih"inaRr"staAe nyapataéayaAbDaAE
himälayaà puñpavahäà ca täà nadéà
nijäçramaà yatra åñé apaçyata
viçvaà vipaçyaï chvasitäc chiçor vai
bahir nirasto nyapatal layäbdhau
SYNONYMS
himälayam—the Himälaya Mountains; puñpa-vahäm—Puñpabhadrä; ca—and;
täm—that; nadém—river; nija-äçramam—his own hermitage; yatra—where;
åñé—the two sages, Nara-Näräyaëa; apaçyata—he saw; viçvam—the universe;
vipaçyan—while observing; çvasität—by the breath; çiçoù—of the infant;
vai—indeed; bahiù—outside; nirastaù-expelled; nyapatat—he fell;
laya-abdhau—into the ocean of dissolution.
TRANSLATION
He saw before him the Himälaya Mountains, the Puñpabhadrä River, and his
own hermitage, where he had had the audience of the sages Nara-Näräyaëa.
Then, as Märkaëòeya beheld the entire universe, the infant exhaled, expelling
the sage from His body and casting him back into the ocean of dissolution.
TEXTS 31-32
taismana, pa{iTavyaA: k(ku(id" ‘aè&XM#
vaqM% ca tatpaNARpauqe% zAyaAnama,
taAekM( ca tat‘aemas$auDaAismataena
inar"IiºataAe'paAËÿinar"IºaNAena
@Ta taM baAlakM( vaIºya
nae‡aAByaAM iDaiï"taM ô$id"
@ByayaAd"itas$ax.~iflaí":
pair"Svalu(maDaAeºajama,
tasmin påthivyäù kakudi prarüòhaà
vaöaà ca tat-parëa-puöe çayänam
tokaà ca tat-prema-sudhä-smitena
nirékñito 'päìga-nirékñaëena
atha taà bälakaà vékñya
neträbhyäà dhiñöhitaà hådi
abhyayäd ati-saìkliñöaù
pariñvaktum adhokñajam
SYNONYMS
tasmin—in that water; påthivyäù—of land; kakudi—on the raised place;
prarüòham—growing up; vaöam—the banyan tree; ca—and; tat—of it;
parëa-puöe—within the slight depression of the leaf; çayänam—lying;
tokam—the child; ca—and; tat—for himself; prema—of love; sudhä—like
nectar; smitena—with a smile; nirékñitaù—being looked upon; apäìga—of the
corner of His eyes; nirékñaëena—by the glance; atha—then; tam—that;
bälakam—infant; vékñya—looking upon; neträbhyäm—by his eyes;
dhiñöhitam—placed; hådi—within his heart; abhyayät—ran forward;
ati-saìkliñöaù—greatly agitated; pariñvaktum—to embrace; adhokñajam—the
transcendental Supreme Lord.
TRANSLATION
In that vast sea he again saw the banyan tree growing on the tiny island and
the infant boy lying within the leaf. The child glanced at him from the corner of
His eyes with a smile imbued with the nectar of love, and Märkaëòeya took
Him into his heart through his eyes. Greatly agitated, the sage ran to embrace
the transcendental Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 33
taAvats$a BagAvaAna, s$aAºaAä,"
yaAegAADaIzAAe gAuh"AzAya:
@ntadR"Da [%Sae: s$aâAe
yaTaeh"AnaIzAinaimaRtaA
tävat sa bhagavän säkñäd
yogädhéço guhä-çayaù
antardadha åñeù sadyo
yathehänéça-nirmitä
SYNONYMS
tävat—just then; saù—He; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead;
säkñät—directly; yoga-adhéçaù—the supreme master of yoga; guhä-çayaù—who
is hidden within the heart of all living beings; antardadhe—disappeared;
åñeù—in front of the sage; sadyaù—suddenly; yathä—in the same way as;
éhä—the object of endeavor; anéça—by an incompetent person;
nirmitä—created.
TRANSLATION
At that moment the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the original
master of all mysticism and who is hidden within everyone's heart, became
invisible to the sage, just as the achievements of an incompetent person can
suddenly vanish.
TEXT 34
tamanvaTa vaq%Ae “aöna,
s$ailalaM laAek(s$amplava:
itar"AeDaAiya ºaNAAd"sya
svaA™amae paUvaRvaitsTata:
tam anv atha vaöo brahman
salilaà loka-samplavaù
tirodhäyi kñaëäd asya
sväçrame pürva-vat sthitaù
SYNONYMS
tam—Him; anu—following; atha—then; vaöaù—the banyan tree;
brahman—O brähmaëa, Çaunaka; salilam—the water; loka-samplavaù—the
annihilation of the universe; tirodhäyi—they disappeared;
kñaëät—immediately; asya—in front of him; sva-äçrame—in his own
hermitage; pürva-vat—as previously; sthitaù—he was present.
TRANSLATION
After the Lord disappeared, O brähmaëa, the banyan tree, the great water
and the dissolution of the universe all vanished as well, and in an instant
Märkaëòeya found himself back in his own hermitage, just as before.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Twelfth Canto, Ninth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Märkaëòeya Åñi Sees the Illusory Potency of the
Lord."
10. Lord Çiva and Umä Glorify Märkaëòeya Åñi
In this chapter Çré Süta Gosvämé describes how Märkaëòeya Åñi received
benedictions from Lord Çiva.
Once, as Lord Çiva was traveling in the sky with his wife, Pärvaté, he came
across Çré Märkaëòeya merged in meditative trance. At the request of Parvaté,
Lord Çiva presented himself before the sage to grant him the result of his
austerities. Coming out of his trance, Çré Märkaëòeya saw Lord Çiva, the
spiritual master of the three worlds, together with Parvaté, and he worshiped
them by offering them obeisances, words of greeting and a sitting place.
Then Lord Çiva praised the saintly devotees of the Personality of Godhead
and requested Çré Märkaëòeya to choose whatever benediction he desired.
Märkaëòeya begged for unflinching devotion to the Supreme Lord Çré Hari, to
the devotees of the Supreme Lord and to Lord Çiva himself. Satisfied with
Märkaëòeya's devotion, Lord Çiva awarded him the boons of renown, freedom
from old age and death until the time of universal dissolution, knowledge of all
three phases of time, renunciation, realized knowledge and the position of a
teacher of the Puräëas.
Those who chant and hear the story of Märkaëòeya Åñi will attain
liberation from material life, which is based on the accumulated desires
generated from fruitive work.
TEXT 1
s$aUta ovaAca
s$a WvamanauBaUyaedM"
naAr"AyaNAivainaimaRtama,
vaEBavaM yaAegAmaAyaAyaAs$a,
tamaeva zAr"NAM yayaAE
süta uväca
sa evam anubhüyedaà
näräyaëa-vinirmitam
vaibhavaà yoga-mäyäyäs
tam eva çaraëaà yayau
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; saù—he, Märkaëòeya; evam—in this way;
anubhüya—experiencing; idam—this; näräyaëa-vinirmitam—manufactured by
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa; vaibhavam—the opulent
exhibition; yoga-mäyäyäù—of His internal mystic energy; tam—to Him;
eva—indeed; çaraëam—for shelter; yayau—he went.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: The Supreme Lord Näräyaëa had arranged this opulent
display of His bewildering potency. Märkaëòeya Åñi, having experienced it,
took shelter of the Lord.
TEXT 2
™aImaAkR(Nxe"ya ovaAca
‘apaªaAe'smyax.~i„amaUlaM tae
‘apaªaABayadM" h"re"
yanmaAyayaAipa ivabauDaA
mau÷inta ÁaAnak(AzAyaA
çré-märkaëòeya uväca
prapanno 'smy aìghri-mülaà te
prapannäbhaya-daà hare
yan-mäyayäpi vibudhä
muhyanti jïäna-käçayä
SYNONYMS
çré-märkaëòeyaù uväca—Çré Märkaëòeya said; prapannaù—surrendered;
asmi—I am; aìghri-mülam—to the soles of the lotus feet; te—Your;
prapanna—of those who surrender; abhaya-dam—the giver of fearlessness;
hare—O Lord Hari; yat-mäyayä—by whose illusory potency; api—even;
vibudhäù—intelligent demigods; muhyanti—become bewildered;
jïäna-käçayä—which falsely appears as knowledge.
TRANSLATION
Çré Märkaëòeya said: O Lord Hari, I take shelter of the soles of Your lotus
feet, which bestow fearlessness upon all who surrender to them. Even the great
demigods are bewildered by Your illusory energy, which appears to them in the
guise of knowledge.
PURPORT
Conditioned souls are attracted to material sense gratification, and thus
they meticulously study the workings of nature. Although they appear to be
advancing in scientific knowledge, they become increasingly entangled in
their false identification with the material body and therefore increasingly
merge into ignorance.
TEXT 3
s$aUta ovaAca
tamaevaM inaBa{taAtmaAnaM
va{SaeNA id"iva payaRq%na,
ç&‰"ANyaA BagAvaAna, ç&‰"Ae
d"d"zAR svagANAEva{Rta:
süta uväca
tam evaà nibhåtätmänaà
våñeëa divi paryaöan
rudräëyä bhagavän rudro
dadarça sva-gaëair våtaù
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; tam—him, Märkaëòeya Åñi; evam—thus;
nibhåta-ätmänam—his mind completely absorbed in trance; våñeëa—on his
bull; divi—in the sky; paryaöan—traveling; rudräëyä—accompanied by his
consort, Rudräëé (Umä); bhagavän—the powerful lord; rudraù—Çiva;
dadarça—saw; sva-gaëaiù—by his entourage; våtaù—surrounded.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: Lord Rudra, traveling in the sky on his bull and
accompanied by his consort, Rudräëé, as well as his personal associates,
observed Märkaëòeya in trance.
TEXT 4
@TaAemaA tama{iSaM vaIºya
igAir"zAM s$amaBaASata
pazyaemaM BagAvana, iva‘aM
inaBa{taAtmaein‰"yaAzAyama,
athomä tam åñià vékñya
giriçaà samabhäñata
paçyemaà bhagavan vipraà
nibhåtätmendriyäçayam
SYNONYMS
atha—then; umä—Umä; tam—that; åñim—sage; vékñya—seeing; giriçam—to
Lord Çiva; samabhäñata—spoke; paçya—just see; imam—this; bhagavan—my
lord; vipram—learned brähmaëa; nibhåta—motionless;
ätma-indriya-äçayam—his body, senses and mind.
TRANSLATION
Goddess Umä, seeing the sage, addressed Lord Giriça: My lord, just see this
learned brähmaëa, his body, mind and senses motionless in trance.
TEXT 5
inaBa{taAed"JaSa˜aAtaAe
vaAtaApaAyae yaTaANARva:
ku(vaRsya tapas$a: s$aAºaAta,
s$aMis$aiÜM" is$aiÜ"d"Ae BavaAna,
nibhåtoda-jhaña-vräto
vätäpäye yathärëavaù
kurv asya tapasaù säkñät
saàsiddhià siddhi-do bhavän
SYNONYMS
nibhåta—stationary; uda—water; jhaña-vrätaù—and schools of fish; väta—of
the wind; apäye—upon the ceasing; yathä—just as; arëavaù—the ocean;
kuru—please make; asya—his; tapasaù—of the austerities; säkñät—manifest;
saàsiddhim—perfection; siddhi-daù—the bestower of perfection;
bhavän—you.
TRANSLATION
He is as calm as the waters of the ocean when the wind has ceased and the
fish remain still. Therefore, my lord, since you bestow perfection on the
performers of austerity, please award this sage the perfection that is obviously
due him.
TEXT 6
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
naEvaecC$tyaAizASa: ¸(Aipa
“aöiSaRmaAeRºamapyauta
BailM( par"AM BagAvaita
labDavaAna, pauç&Sae'vyayae
çré-bhagavän uväca
naivecchaty äçiñaù kväpi
brahmarñir mokñam apy uta
bhaktià paräà bhagavati
labdhavän puruñe 'vyaye
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the powerful lord said; na—not; eva—indeed;
icchati—desires; äçiñaù—benedictions; kva api—in any realm;
brahma-åñiù—the saintly brähmaëa; mokñam—liberation; api uta—even;
bhaktim—devotional service; paräm—transcendental; bhagavati—for the
Supreme Lord; labdhavän—he has achieved; puruñe—for the Personality of
Godhead; avyaye—who is inexhaustible.
TRANSLATION
Lord Çiva replied: Surely this saintly brähmaëa does not desire any
benediction, not even liberation itself, for he has attained pure devotional
service unto the inexhaustible Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
The words naivecchaty äçiñaù kväpi indicate that Märkaëòeya Åñi was
uninterested in any reward available on any planet within the universe. Nor
did he want liberation, for he had achieved the Supreme Lord Himself.
TEXT 7
@TaAipa s$aMvaid"SyaAmaAe
BavaAnyaetaena s$aADaunaA
@yaM ih" par"maAe laABaAe
na{NAAM s$aADaus$amaAgAma:
athäpi saàvadiñyämo
bhaväny etena sädhunä
ayaà hi paramo läbho
nåëäà sädhu-samägamaù
SYNONYMS
atha api—nevertheless; saàvadiñyämaù—we shall converse; bhaväni—my dear
Bhaväné; etena—with this; sädhunä—pure devotee; ayam—this; hi—indeed;
paramaù—the best; läbhaù—gain; nåëäm—for men; sädhu-samägamaù—the
association of saintly devotees.
TRANSLATION
Still, my dear Bhaväné, let us talk with this saintly personality. After all,
association with saintly devotees is man's highest achievement.
TEXT 8
s$aUta ovaAca
wtyauftvaA tamaupaeyaAya
BagAvaAna, s$a s$ataAM gAita:
wRzAAna: s$avaRivaâAnaAma,
wRìr": s$avaR$de"ih"naAma,
süta uväca
ity uktvä tam upeyäya
bhagavän sa satäà gatiù
éçänaù sarva-vidyänäm
éçvaraù sarva-dehinäm
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; iti—thus; uktvä—having said; tam—to the
sage; upeyäya—going; bhagavän—the exalted demigod; saù—he; satäm—of the
pure souls; gatiù—the shelter; éçänaù—the master; sarva-vidyänäm—of all
branches of knowledge; éçvaraù—the controller; sarva-dehinäm—of all
embodied living beings.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: Having spoken thus, Lord Çaìkara—the shelter of pure
souls, master of all spiritual sciences and controller of all embodied living
beings—approached the sage.
TEXT 9
tayaAer"AgAmanaM s$aAºaAä,"
wRzAyaAejaRgAd"AtmanaAe:
na vaed" ç&Ü"DaIva{iÔar,"
@AtmaAnaM ivaìmaeva ca
tayor ägamanaà säkñäd
éçayor jagad-ätmanoù
na veda ruddha-dhé-våttir
ätmänaà viçvam eva ca
SYNONYMS
tayoù—of the two of them; ägamanam—the arrival; säkñät—in person;
éçayoù—of the powerful personalities; jagat-ätmanoù—the controllers of the
universe; na veda—he did not notice; ruddha—checked; dhé-våttiù—the
functioning of his mind; ätmänam—himself; viçvam—the external universe;
eva—indeed; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
Because Märkaëòeya's material mind had stopped functioning, the sage
failed to notice that Lord Çiva and his wife, the controllers of the universe, had
personally come to see him. Märkaëòeya was so absorbed in meditation that he
was unaware of either himself or the external world.
TEXT 10
BagAvaAMstad"iBaÁaAya
igAir"zAAe yaAegAmaAyayaA
@AivazAÔaÖ"h"Ak(AzAM
vaAyauizC$‰"imavaeìr":
bhagaväàs tad abhijïäya
giriço yoga-mäyayä
äviçat tad-guhäkäçaà
väyuç chidram iveçvaraù
SYNONYMS
bhagavän—the great personality; tat—that; abhijïäya—understanding;
giriçaù—Lord Giriça; yoga-mäyayä—by his mystic power; äviçat—entered;
tat—of Märkaëòeya; guhä-äkäçam—the hidden sky of the heart; väyuù—the
air; chidram—a hole; iva—as if; éçvaraù—the lord.
TRANSLATION
Understanding the situation very well, the powerful Lord Çiva employed his
mystic power to enter within the sky of Märkaëòeya's heart, just as the wind
passes through an opening.
TEXTS 11-13
@Atmanyaipa izAvaM ‘aAæaM
taix"itpaËÿjaq%ADar"ma,
‡yaºaM d"zABaujaM ‘aAMzAuma,
oântaimava BaAs$k(r"ma,
vyaA„acamaARmbarM" zAUla-
Danauir"Svais$acamaRiBa:
@ºamaAlaAx"maç&k(-
k(paAlaM par"zAuM s$ah"
iba”aANAM s$ah"s$aA BaAtaM
ivacaºya ô$id" ivaismata:
ik(imadM" ku(ta Wvaeita
s$amaADaeivaRr"taAe mauina:
ätmany api çivaà präptaà
taòit-piìga-jaöä-dharam
try-akñaà daça-bhujaà präàçum
udyantam iva bhäskaram
vyäghra-carmämbaraà çüladhanur-
iñv-asi-carmabhiù
akña-mälä-òamarukakapälaà
paraçuà saha
bibhräëaà sahasä bhätaà
vicakñya hådi vismitaù
kim idaà kuta eveti
samädher virato muniù
SYNONYMS
ätmani—within himself; api—also; çivam—Lord Çiva; präptam—arrived;
taòit—like lightning; piìga—yellowish; jaöä—locks of hair; dharam—carrying;
tri-akñam—with three eyes; daça-bhujam—and ten arms; präàçum—very tall;
udyantam—rising; iva—as; bhäskaram—the sun; vyäghra—of a tiger;
carma—the fur; ambaram—as his garment; çüla—with his trident;
dhanaù—bow; iñu—arrows; asi—sword; carmabhiù—and shield;
akña-mälä—his prayer beads; òamaruka—small drum; kapälam—and skull;
paraçum—ax; saha—together with; bibhräëam—exhibiting; sahasä—suddenly;
bhätam—manifest; vicakñya—seeing; hådi—in his heart; vismitaù—surprised;
kim—what; idam—this; kutaù—from where; eva—indeed; iti—thus;
samädheù—from his trance; virataù—desisted; muniù—the sage.
TRANSLATION
Çré Märkaëòeya saw Lord Çiva suddenly appear within his heart. Lord Çiva's
golden hair resembled lightning, and he had three eyes, ten arms and a tall body
that shone like the rising sun. He wore a tiger skin, and he carried a trident, a
bow, arrows, a sword and a shield, along with prayer beads, a òamaru drum, a
skull and an ax. Astonished, the sage came out of his trance and thought, "Who
is this, and where has he come from?"
TEXT 14
nae‡ae onmaIlya d"ä{"zAe
s$agANAM s$aAemayaAgAtama,
ç&‰M" i‡alaAekE(k(gAuçM&
nanaAma izAr"s$aA mauina:
netre unmélya dadåçe
sa-gaëaà somayägatam
rudraà tri-lokaika-guruà
nanäma çirasä muniù
SYNONYMS
netre—his eyes; unmélya—opening; dadåçe—he saw; sa-gaëam—with his
associates; sa-umayä—and with Umä; ägatam—having arrived; rudram—Lord
Rudra; tri-loka—of the three worlds; eka-gurum—the one spiritual master;
nanäma—he offered his obeisances; çirasä—with his head; muniù—the sage.
TRANSLATION
Opening his eyes, the sage saw Lord Rudra, the spiritual master of the three
worlds, together with Umä and Rudra's followers. Märkaëòeya then offered his
respectful obeisances by bowing his head.
PURPORT
When Märkaëòeya Åñi saw Lord Çiva and Umä within his heart, he
immediately became aware of them and thus also of his own individual self.
During his trance, on the other hand, he had simply been absorbed in
awareness of the Supreme Lord and had thus forgotten himself as the
conscious perceiver.
TEXT 15
tasmaE s$apayaA< vyad"DaAta,
s$agANAAya s$ah"AemayaA
svaAgAtaAs$anapaAâAGyaRgAnDa›
agDaUpad"IpakE(:
tasmai saparyäà vyadadhät
sa-gaëäya sahomayä
svägatäsana-pädyärghyagandha-
srag-dhüpa-dépakaiù
SYNONYMS
tasmai—to him; saparyäm—worship; vyadadhät—he offered;
sa-gaëäya—together with his associates; saha umayä—together with Umä;
su-ägata—by words of greeting; äsana—offering of sitting places;
pädya—water for bathing the feet; arghya—fragrant drinking water;
gandha—perfumed oil; srak—garlands; dhüpa—incense; dépakaiù—and lamps.
TRANSLATION
Märkaëòeya worshiped Lord Çiva, along with Umä and Çiva's associates, by
offering them words of welcome, sitting places, water for washing their feet,
scented drinking water, fragrant oils, flower garlands and ärati lamps.
TEXT 16
@Ah" tvaAtmaAnauBaAvaena
paUNARk(Amasya tae ivaBaAe
k(r"vaAma ik(maIzAAna
yaenaedM" inava{RtaM jagAta,
äha tv ätmänubhävena
pürëa-kämasya te vibho
karaväma kim éçäna
yenedaà nirvåtaà jagat
SYNONYMS
äha—Märkaëòeya said; tu—indeed; ätma-anubhävena—by your own
experience of ecstasy; pürëa-kämasya—who is satisfied in all respects; te—for
you; vibho—O mighty one; karaväma—I can do; kim—what; éçäna—O lord;
yena—by whom; idam—this; nirvåtam—is made peaceful; jagat—the entire
world.
TRANSLATION
Märkaëòeya said: O mighty lord, what can I possibly do for you, who are
fully satisfied by your own ecstasy? Indeed, by your mercy you satisfy this
entire world.
TEXT 17
nama: izAvaAya zAAntaAya
s$aÔvaAya ‘ama{x"Aya ca
r"jaAejauSae'Ta GaAer"Aya
namastauByaM tamaAejauSae
namaù çiväya çäntäya
sattväya pramåòäya ca
rajo-juñe 'tha ghoräya
namas tubhyaà tamo-juñe
SYNONYMS
namaù—obeisances; çiväya—to the all-auspicious; çäntäya—peaceful;
sattväya—the personification of material goodness; pramåòäya—the giver of
pleasure; ca—and; rajaù-juñe—to him who is in contact with the mode of
passion; atha—also; ghoräya—terrible; namaù—obeisances; tubhyam—to you;
tamaù-juñe—who associates with the mode of ignorance.
TRANSLATION
Again and again I offer my obeisances unto you, O all-auspicious
transcendental personality. As the lord of goodness you give pleasure, in contact
with the mode of passion you appear most fearful, and you also associate with
the mode of ignorance.
TEXT 18
s$aUta ovaAca
WvaM stauta: s$a BagAvaAna,
@Aid"de"va: s$ataAM gAita:
pair"tauí": ‘as$aªaAtmaA
‘ah"s$aMstamaBaASata
süta uväca
evaà stutaù sa bhagavän
ädi-devaù satäà gatiù
parituñöaù prasannätmä
prahasaàs tam abhäñata
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; evam—in these words; stutaù—praised;
saù—he; bhagavän—the powerful Lord Çiva; ädi-devaù—the foremost of
demigods; satäm—of the saintly devotees; gatiù—the shelter;
parituñöaù—perfectly satisfied; prasanna-ätmä—happy in his mind;
prahasan—smiling; tam—to Märkaëòeya; abhäñata—spoke.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: Lord Çiva, the foremost demigod and the shelter of the
saintly devotees, was satisfied by Märkaëòeya's praise. Pleased, he smiled and
addressed the sage.
TEXT 19
™aIBagAvaAnauvaAca
varM" va{NAISva na: k(AmaM
var"de"zAA vayaM ‡aya:
@maAeGaM d"zARnaM yaeSaAM
matyaAeR yaiã"nd"tae'ma{tama,
çré-bhagavän uväca
varaà våëéñva naù kämaà
vara-deçä vayaà trayaù
amoghaà darçanaà yeñäà
martyo yad vindate 'måtam
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—Lord Çiva said; varam—a benediction; våëéñva—please
choose; naù—from us; kämam—as desired; vara-da—of all givers of
benedictions; éçäù—the controlling lords; vayam—we; trayaù—three (Brahma,
Viñëu and Maheçvara); amogham—never in vain; darçanam—the seeing;
yeñäm—of whom; martyaù—a mortal being; yat—by which; vindate—achieves;
amåtam—immortality.
TRANSLATION
Lord Çiva said: Please ask me for some benediction, since among all givers of
benedictions, we three—Brahmä, Viñëu and I—are the best. Seeing us never
goes in vain, because simply by seeing us a mortal achieves immortality.
TEXTS 20-21
“aAöNAA: s$aADava: zAAntaA
ina:s$aËÿA BaUtavats$alaA:
Wk(AntaBal(A @smaAs$au
inavaE=r"A: s$amad"izARna:
s$alaAek(A laAek(paAlaAstaAna,
vand"ntyacaRntyaupaAs$atae
@hM" ca BagAvaAna, “aöA
svayaM ca h"ir"r"Iìr":
brähmaëäù sädhavaù çäntä
niùsaìgä bhüta-vatsaläù
ekänta-bhaktä asmäsu
nirvairäù sama-darçinaù
sa-lokä loka-päläs tän
vandanty arcanty upäsate
ahaà ca bhagavän brahmä
svayaà ca harir éçvaraù
SYNONYMS
brähmaëäù—brähmaëas; sädhavaù—saintly in behavior; çäntäù—peaceful and
free of envy and other bad qualities; niùsaìgäù—free of material association;
bhüta-vatsaläù—compassionate to all living beings;
eka-anta-bhaktäù—unalloyed devotees; asmäsu—of ourselves (Brahmä, Lord
Çré Hari and Çiva); nirvairäù—never hateful; sama-darçinaù—seeing equally;
sa-lokäù—with the inhabitants of all the worlds; loka-päläù—the rulers of the
various planets; tän—those brähmaëas; vandanti—glorify; arcanti—worship;
upäsate—assist; aham—I; ca—also; bhagavän—the great lord;
brahmä—Brahmä; svayam—Himself; ca—also; hariù—Lord Hari; éçvaraù—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants and ruling demigods of all planets, along with Lord Brahmä,
the Supreme Lord Hari and I, glorify, worship and assist those brähmaëas who
are saintly, always peaceful, free of material attachment, compassionate to all
living beings, purely devoted to us, devoid of hatred and endowed with equal
vision.
TEXT 22
na tae mayyacyautae'jae ca
iBad"AmaNvaipa caºatae
naAtmanaê janasyaAipa
taâuSmaAna, vayamaImaih"
na te mayy acyute 'je ca
bhidäm aëv api cakñate
nätmanaç ca janasyäpi
tad yuñmän vayam émahi
SYNONYMS
na—do not; te—they; mayi—in me; acyute—in Lord Viñëu; aje—in Lord
Brahmä; ca—and; bhidäm—difference; aëu—slight; api—even; cakñate—see;
na—not; ätmanaù—of themselves; ca—and; janasya—of other people;
api—also; tat—therefore; yuñmän—yourselves; vayam—we; émahi—worship.
TRANSLATION
These devotees do not differentiate between Lord Viñëu, Lord Brahmä and
me, nor do they differentiate between themselves and other living beings.
Therefore, because you are this kind of saintly devotee, we worship you.
PURPORT
Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva are, respectively, manifestations of the creating
and annihilating potencies of the Personality of Godhead, Viñëu. Thus unity
exists among these three ruling deities of the material world. One should not,
on the basis of the modes of nature, find material duality within the ruling
potency of the Supreme Lord, although that potency is manifested in three
divisions as Brahmä, Viñëu and Çiva.
TEXT 23
na ÷mmayaAina taITaARina
na de"vaAêetanaAeijJataA:
tae paunantyauç&k(Alaena
yaUyaM d"zARnamaA‡ata:
na hy am-mayäni térthäni
na deväç cetanojjhitäù
te punanty uru-kälena
yüyaà darçana-mätrataù
SYNONYMS
na—not; hi—indeed; ap-mayäni—consisting of sacred water; térthäni—holy
places; na—not; deväù—deity forms of demigods; cetana-ujjhitäù—devoid of
life; te—they; punanti—purify; uru-kälena—after a long time;
yüyam—yourselves; darçana-mätrataù—simply by being seen.
TRANSLATION
Mere bodies of water do not constitute holy places, nor are lifeless statues of
the demigods actual worshipable deities. Because external vision fails to
appreciate the higher essence of the holy rivers and the demigods, these purify
only after a considerable time. But devotees like you purify immediately, just by
being seen.
TEXT 24
“aAöNAeByaAe namasyaAmaAe
yae'smaåU"paM ‡ayaImayama,
iba”atyaAtmas$amaADaAnatapa:
svaADyaAyas$aMyamaE:
brähmaëebhyo namasyämo
ye 'smad-rüpaà trayé-mayam
bibhraty ätma-samädhänatapaù-
svädhyäya-saàyamaiù
SYNONYMS
brähmaëebhyaù—to the brähmaëas; namasyämaù—we offer our respects;
ye—who; asmat-rüpam—the form of ourselves (Çiva, Brahmä and Viñëu);
trayé-mayam—represented by the three Vedas; bibhrati—carry;
ätma-samädhäna—by meditative trance focused on the Self; tapaù—by
austerities; svädhyäya—by study; saàyamaiù—and by following regulative
principles.
TRANSLATION
By meditating upon the Supreme Soul, performing austerities, engaging in
Vedic study and following regulative principles, the brähmaëas sustain within
themselves the three Vedas, which are nondifferent from Lord Viñëu, Lord
Brahmä and me. Therefore I offer my obeisances unto the brähmaëas.
PURPORT
A pure devotee of the Supreme Lord is considered the most elevated of
brähmaëas, since all spiritual endeavor culminates in the loving service of
God.
TEXT 25
™avaNAAÚ"zARnaAã"Aipa
mah"ApaAtaik(naAe'ipa va:
zAuDyaer"ªantyajaAêAipa
ik(mau s$amBaASaNAAid"iBa:
çravaëäd darçanäd väpi
mahä-pätakino 'pi vaù
çudhyerann antya-jäç cäpi
kim u sambhäñaëädibhiù
SYNONYMS
çravaëät—by hearing about; darçanät—by seeing; vä—or; api—also;
mahä-pätakinaù—those who commit the worst kinds of sins; api—even;
vaù—you; çudhyeran—they become purified; antya-jäù—outcastes; ca—and;
api—even; kim u—what to speak of; sambhäñaëa-ädibhiù—by directly
speaking with, and so on.
TRANSLATION
Even the worst sinners and social outcastes are purified just by hearing about
or seeing personalities like you. Imagine, then, how purified they become by
directly speaking with you.
TEXT 26
s$aUta ovaAca
wita can‰"lalaAmasya
DamaRgA÷Aepaba{Mih"tama,
vacaAe'ma{taAyanama{iSar,"
naAta{pyatk(NARyaAe: ipabana,
süta uväca
iti candra-lalämasya
dharma-gahyopabåàhitam
vaco 'måtäyanam åñir
nätåpyat karëayoù piban
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; iti—thus; candra-lalämasya—of Lord Çiva,
who is decorated with the moon; dharma-guhya—with the secret essence of
religion; upabåàhitam—filled; vacaù—the words; amåta-ayanam—the
reservoir of nectar; åñiù—the sage; na atåpyat—did not feel satiated;
karëayoù—with his ears; piban—drinking.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: Drinking with his ears Lord Çiva's nectarean words, full
of the confidential essence of religion, Märkaëòeya Åñi could not be satiated.
PURPORT
Märkaëòeya Åñi was not eager to hear himself praised by Lord Çiva, but he
appreciated Lord Çiva's deep realization of religious principles and therefore
desired to hear more.
TEXT 27
s$a icarM" maAyayaA ivaSNAAer,"
”aAimata: k(izARtaAe Ba{zAma,
izAvavaAgAma{taDvastaflaezApauÃastama“
avaIta,
sa ciraà mäyayä viñëor
bhrämitaù karçito bhåçam
çiva-väg-amåta-dhvastakleça-
puïjas tam abravét
SYNONYMS
saù—he; ciram—for a long time; mäyayä—by the illusory energy; viñëoù—of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu; bhrämitaù—made to wander;
karçitaù—exhausted; bhåçam—extremely; çiva—of Lord Çiva; väk-amåta—by
the words of nectar; dhvasta—destroyed; kleça-puïjaù—his heaps of suffering;
tam—to him; abravét—spoke.
TRANSLATION
Märkaëòeya, having been forced by Lord Viñëu's illusory energy to wander
about for a long time in the water of dissolution, had become extremely
exhausted. But Lord Çiva's words of nectar vanquished his accumulated
suffering. Thus he addressed Lord Çiva.
PURPORT
Märkaëòeya Åñi had desired to see Lord Viñëu's illusory energy and had
suffered extensive miseries. But now, in the person of Çiva, Lord Viñëu again
appeared before the sage and relieved all his suffering by imparting blissful
spiritual instructions.
TEXT 28
™aImaAkR(Nxe"ya ovaAca
@h"Ae wRìr"laIlaeyaM
äu"ivaRBaAvyaA zAr"Iir"NAAma,
yaªamantaIizAtavyaAina
stauvainta jagAd"Iìr"A:
çré-märkaëòeya uväca
aho éçvara-léleyaà
durvibhävyä çarériëäm
yan namantéçitavyäni
stuvanti jagad-éçvaräù
SYNONYMS
çré-märkaëòeyaù uväca—Çré Märkaëòeya said; aho—ah; éçvara—of the great
lords; lélä—the pastime; iyam—this; durvibhävyä—inconceivable;
çarériëäm—for embodied souls; yat—since; namanti—they offer obeisances;
éçitavyäni—to those who are controlled by them; stuvanti—they praise;
jagat-éçvaräù—the rulers of the universe.
TRANSLATION
Çré Märkaëòeya said: It is indeed most difficult for embodied souls to
understand the pastimes of the universal controllers, for such lords bow down
to and offer praise to the very living beings they rule.
PURPORT
In the material world, conditioned souls strive to lord it over one another.
Therefore they cannot understand the pastimes of the actual lords of the
universe. Such bona fide lords have a wonderfully magnanimous mentality and
thus sometimes bow down to the most qualified and saintly among their own
subjects.
TEXT 29
Dama< ƒaAh"iyatauM ‘aAya:
‘aval(Ar"ê de"ih"naAma,
@Acar"ntyanaumaAed"ntae
i‚(yamaANAM stauvainta ca
dharmaà grähayituà präyaù
pravaktäraç ca dehinäm
äcaranty anumodante
kriyamäëaà stuvanti ca
SYNONYMS
dharmam—religion; grähayitum—to cause the acceptance of; präyaù—for the
most part; pravaktäraù—the authorized speakers; ca—and; dehinäm—for
ordinary embodied souls; äcaranti—they act; anumodante—they encourage;
kriyamäëam—one who is executing; stuvanti—they praise; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
Generally it is to induce embodied souls to accept religious principles that
the authorized teachers of religion exhibit ideal behavior while encouraging and
praising the proper behavior of others.
TEXT 30
naEtaAvataA BagAvata:
svamaAyaAmayava{iÔaiBa:
na äu"SyaetaAnauBaAvastaEr,"
maAiyana: ku(h"kM( yaTaA
naitävatä bhagavataù
sva-mäyä-maya-våttibhiù
na duñyetänubhävas tair
mäyinaù kuhakaà yathä
SYNONYMS
na—not; etävatä—by such (a show of humility); bhagavataù—of the
Personality of Godhead; sva-mäyä—of His own illusory energy;
maya—consisting of; våttibhiù—by the activities; na duñyeta—is not spoiled;
anubhävaù—the power; taiù—by them; mäyinaù—of a magician;
kuhakam—the tricks; yathä—just as.
TRANSLATION
This apparent humility is simply a show of mercy. Such behavior of the
Supreme Lord and His personal associates, which the Lord effects by His own
bewildering potency, does not spoil His power any more than a magician's
powers are diminished by his exhibition of tricks.
TEXTS 31-32
s$a{"îe"dM" manas$aA ivaìma,
@AtmanaAnau‘aivazya ya:
gAuNAE: ku(vaRià"r"ABaAita
k(taeRva sva«aä{"gyaTaA
tasmaE namaAe BagAvatae
i‡agAuNAAya gAuNAAtmanae
ke(valaAyaAiã"taIyaAya
gAur"vae “aömaUtaRyae
såñövedaà manasä viçvam
ätmanänupraviçya yaù
guëaiù kurvadbhir äbhäti
karteva svapna-dåg yathä
tasmai namo bhagavate
tri-guëäya guëätmane
kevaläyädvitéyäya
gurave brahma-mürtaye
SYNONYMS
såñövä—creating; idam—this; manasä—by His mind, simply by His desire;
viçvam—the universe; ätmanä—as the Supersoul; anupraviçya—subsequently
entering; yaù—who; guëaiù—by the modes of nature; kurvadbhiù—which are
acting; äbhäti—appears; kartä iva—as if the doer; svapna-dåk—a person who is
seeing a dream; yathä—as; tasmai—unto Him; namaù—obeisances;
bhagavate—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tri-guëäya—who
possesses the three modes of nature; guëa-ätmane—who is the ultimate
controller of the modes of nature; kevaläya—to the pure; advitéyäya—who has
no equal; gurave—the supreme spiritual master; brahma-mürtaye—the
personal form of the Absolute Truth.
TRANSLATION
I offer my obeisances to that Supreme Personality of Godhead, who has
created this entire universe simply by His desire and then entered into it as the
Supersoul. By making the modes of nature act, He seems to be the direct
creator of this world, just as a dreamer seems to be acting within his dream. He
is the owner and ultimate controller of the three modes of nature, yet He
remains alone and pure, without any equal. He is the supreme spiritual master
of all, the original personal form of the Absolute Truth.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord releases His material potencies, and by their interaction
creation takes place. The Lord remains aloof, as the supreme transcendental
entity. Still, because the entire creation unfolds according to His design and
will, His controlling hand is perceived within all things. People thus imagine
that God is the direct builder of this world, although He remains aloof,
creating through the manipulation of His multifarious potencies.
TEXT 33
kM( va{NAe nau parM" BaUmana,
varM" tvaã"r"d"zARnaAta,
yaÚ"zARnaAtpaUNARk(Ama:
s$atyak(Ama: paumaAna, Bavaeta,
kaà våëe nu paraà bhüman
varaà tvad vara-darçanät
yad-darçanät pürëa-kämaù
satya-kämaù pumän bhavet
SYNONYMS
kam—what; våëe—shall I choose; nu—indeed; param—other; bhüman—O
all-pervading lord; varam—benediction; tvat—from you; vara-darçanät—the
sight of whom is itself the highest benediction; yat—of whom; darçanät—from
the seeing; pürëa-kämaù—full in all desires; satya-kämaù—able to achieve
anything desired; pumän—a person; bhavet—becomes.
TRANSLATION
O all-pervading lord, since I have received the benediction of seeing you,
what other benediction can I ask for? Simply by seeing you, a person fulfills all
his desires and can achieve anything imaginable.
TEXT 34
var"maekM( va{NAe'TaAipa
paUNAARtk(AmaAiBavaSaRNAAta,
BagAvatyacyautaAM BailM(
tatpare"Sau taTaA tvaiya
varam ekaà våëe 'thäpi
pürëät kämäbhivarñaëät
bhagavaty acyutäà bhaktià
tat-pareñu tathä tvayi
SYNONYMS
varam—benediction; ekam—one; våëe—I request; atha api—nevertheless;
pürëät—from him who is completely full; käma-abhivarñaëät—who showers
down the fulfillment of desires; bhagavati—for the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; acyutäm—infallible; bhaktim—devotional service; tat-pareñu—for
those who are dedicated to Him; tathä—and also; tvayi—for yourself.
TRANSLATION
But I do request one benediction from you, who are full of all perfection and
able to shower down the fulfillment of all desires. I ask to have unfailing
devotion for the Supreme Personality of Godhead and for His dedicated
devotees, especially you.
PURPORT
The words tat-pareñu tathä tvayi clearly indicate that Lord Çiva is a devotee
of the Supreme Lord, not the Supreme Lord Himself. Because the
representative of God is offered the same protocol as God Himself,
Märkaëòeya Åñi addressed Lord Çiva as "lord" in previous verses. But now it is
clearly revealed that, as stated throughout Vedic literature, Lord Çiva is an
eternal servant of God and not God Himself.
Desire manifests itself within the mind and heart according to the subtle
laws governing consciousness. Pure desire to engage in the loving service of
the Lord brings one to the most exalted platform of consciousness, and such a
perfect understanding of life is available only by the special mercy of the Lord's
devotees.
TEXT 35
s$aUta ovaAca
wtyaicaRtaAe'iBaí]"taê
mauinanaA s$aUl(yaA igAr"A
tamaAh" BagAvaAHC$vaR:
zAvaRyaA caAiBanaind"ta:
süta uväca
ity arcito 'bhiñöutaç ca
muninä süktayä girä
tam äha bhagaväï charvaù
çarvayä cäbhinanditaù
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; iti—in these words; arcitaù—worshiped;
abhiñöutaù—glorified; ca—and; muninä—by the sage; su-uktayä—well-spoken;
girä—with words; tam—to him; äha—spoke; bhagavän çarvaù—Lord Çiva;
çarvayä—by his consort, Çarvä; ca—and; abhinanditaù—encouraged.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: Thus worshiped and glorified by the eloquent statements
of the sage Märkaëòeya, Lord Çarva [Çiva], encouraged by his consort, replied
to him as follows.
TEXT 36
k(AmaAe mah"SaeR s$avaAeR'yaM
Bail(maAMstvamaDaAeºajae
@Ak(lpaAntaAâzA: pauNyama,
@jar"Amar"taA taTaA
kämo maharñe sarvo 'yaà
bhaktimäàs tvam adhokñaje
ä-kalpäntäd yaçaù puëyam
ajarämaratä tathä
SYNONYMS
kämaù—desire; mahä-åñe—O great sage; sarvaù—all; ayam—this;
bhakti-män—full of devotion; tvam—you; adhokñaje—for the transcendental
Personality of Godhead; ä—kalpa-antät-up until the end of the day of Brahmä;
yaçaù—fame; puëyam—pious; ajara-amaratä—freedom from old age and
death; tathä—also.
TRANSLATION
O great sage, because you are devoted to Lord Adhokñaja, all your desires
will be fulfilled. Until the very end of this creation cycle, you will enjoy pious
fame and freedom from old age and death.
TEXT 37
ÁaAnaM ‡aEk(AilakM( “aöna,
ivaÁaAnaM ca ivar"il(mata,
“aövacaRisvanaAe BaUyaAta,
paur"ANAAcaAyaRtaAstau tae
jïänaà trai-kälikaà brahman
vijïänaà ca viraktimat
brahma-varcasvino bhüyät
puräëäcäryatästu te
SYNONYMS
jïänam—knowledge; trai-kälikam—of all three phases of time (past, present
and future); brahman—O brähmaëa; vijïänam—transcendental realization;
ca—also; virakti-mat—including renunciation; brahma-varcasvinaù—of him
who is endowed with brahminical potency; bhüyät—let there be;
puräëa-äcäryatä—the status of being a teacher of the Puräëas; astu-may there
be; te—of you.
TRANSLATION
O brähmaëa, may you have perfect knowledge of past, present and future,
along with transcendental realization of the Supreme, enriched by renunciation.
You have the brilliance of an ideal brähmaëa, and thus may you achieve the
post of spiritual master of the Puräëas.
TEXT 38
s$aUta ovaAca
WvaM var"Ana, s$a maunayae
d"ÔvaAgAAÔr,"yaºa wRìr":
de"vyaE tatk(maR k(Tayaªa,
@nauBaUtaM paur"AmaunaA
süta uväca
evaà varän sa munaye
dattvägät try-akña éçvaraù
devyai tat-karma kathayann
anubhütaà purämunä
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; evam—in this way; varän—benedictions;
saù—he; munaye—to the sage; dattvä—giving; agät—went; tri-akñaù—he who
has three eyes; éçvaraù—Lord Çiva; devyai—to goddess Pärvaté; tat-karma—the
activities of Märkaëòeya; kathayan—recounting; anubhütam—what was
experienced; purä—before; amunä—by him, Märkaëòeya.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: Having thus granted Märkaëòeya Åñi benedictions, Lord
Çiva went on his way, continuing to describe to goddess Devé the
accomplishments of the sage and the direct exhibition of the Lord's illusory
power that he had experienced.
TEXT 39
s$aAe'pyavaAæamah"AyaAegAmaih"
maA BaAgARvaAeÔama:
ivacar"tyaDaunaApyaÜ"A
h"r"Avaek(AntataAM gAta:
so 'py aväpta-mahä-yogamahimä
bhärgavottamaù
vicaraty adhunäpy addhä
haräv ekäntatäà gataù
SYNONYMS
saù—he, Märkaëòeya; api—indeed; aväpta—having achieved; mahä-yoga—of
the topmost perfection of yoga; mahimä—the glories; bhärgava-uttamaù—the
best descendant of Bhågu; vicarati—is traveling about; adhunä api—even
today; addhä—directly; harau—for Lord Hari; eka-antatäm—the platform of
exclusive devotion; gataù—having attained.
TRANSLATION
Märkaëòeya Åñi, the best of the descendants of Bhågu, is glorious because of
his achievement of perfection in mystic yoga. Even today he travels about this
world, fully absorbed in unalloyed devotion for the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
TEXT 40
@nauvaiNARtamaetaÔae
maAkR(Nxe"yasya DaImata:
@nauBaUtaM BagAvataAe
maAyaAvaEBavamaàu"tama,
anuvarëitam etat te
märkaëòeyasya dhémataù
anubhütaà bhagavato
mäyä-vaibhavam adbhutam
SYNONYMS
anuvarëitam—described; etat—this; te—to you; märkaëòeyasya—by
Märkaëòeya; dhé-mataù—the intelligent; anubhütam—experienced;
bhagavataù—of the Personality of Godhead; mäyä-vaibhavam—the opulence
of the illusory energy; adbhutam—amazing.
TRANSLATION
I have thus narrated to you the activities of the highly intelligent sage
Märkaëòeya, especially how he experienced the amazing power of the Supreme
Lord's illusory energy.
TEXT 41
Wtatke(icad"ivaã"AMs$aAe
maAyaAs$aMs$a{itar"Atmana:
@naAâAvaitaRtaM na|NAAM
k(Ad"AicatkM( ‘acaºatae
etat kecid avidväàso
mäyä-saàsåtir ätmanaù
anädy-ävartitaà nèëäà
kädäcitkaà pracakñate
SYNONYMS
etat—this; kecit—some persons; avidväàsaù—who are not learned;
mäyä-saàsåtiù—the illusory creation; ätmanaù—of the Supreme Soul;
anädi—from time immemorial; ävartitam—repeating; nèëäm—of conditioned
living beings; kädäcitkam—unprecedented; pracakñate—they say.
TRANSLATION
Although this event was unique and unprecedented, some unintelligent
persons compare it to the cycle of illusory material existence the Supreme Lord
has created for the conditioned souls—an endless cycle that has been
continuing since time immemorial.
PURPORT
Märkaëòeya's being drawn into the Lord's body by His inhalation and
expelled again by His exhalation should not be considered a symbolic
description of the perennial cycles of material creation and annihilation. This
portion of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam describes a real, historical event
experienced by a great devotee of the Lord, and those trying to relegate this
story to mere symbolic allegory are here declared to be unintelligent fools.
TEXT 42
ya Wvamaetaà{"gAuvayaR vaiNARtaM
r"TaAËÿpaANAer"nauBaAvaBaAivatama,
s$aM™aAvayaets$aMZa{NAuyaAäu" taAvauBaAE
tayaAenaR k(maARzAyas$aMs$a{itaBaR"vaeta,
ya evam etad bhågu-varya varëitaà
rathäìga-päëer anubhäva-bhävitam
saàçrävayet saàçåëuyäd u täv ubhau
tayor na karmäçaya-saàsåtir bhavet
SYNONYMS
yaù—who; evam—thus; etat—this; bhågu-varya—O best of the descendants of
Bhågu (Çaunaka); varëitam—described; ratha-aìga-päëeù—of Lord Çré Hari,
who carries a chariot wheel in His hand; anubhäva—with the potency;
bhävitam—infused; saàçrävayet—causes anyone to hear; saàçåëuyät—himself
hears; u—or; tau—they; ubhau—both; tayoù—of them; na—not;
karma-äçaya—based on the mentality of fruitive work; saàsåtiù—the cycle of
material life; bhavet—there is.
TRANSLATION
O best of the Bhågus, this account concerning Märkaëòeya Åñi conveys the
transcendental potency of the Supreme Lord. Anyone who properly narrates or
hears it will never again undergo material existence, which is based on the
desire to perform fruitive activities.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Twelfth Canto, Tenth Chapter of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Lord Çiva and Umä Glorify Märkaëòeya Åñi."
11. Summary Description of the Mahäpuruña
In the context of worship, this chapter describes the Mahäpuruña and the
various expansions of the sun in each month. Çré Süta first tells Çaunaka Åñi
about the material objects through which one can understand the major limbs,
the secondary limbs, the weapons and the garments of Lord Çré Hari. Then he
outlines the process of practical service by which a mortal soul can attain
immortality. When Çaunaka shows further interest in learning about the
expansion of Lord Hari in the form of the sungod, Süta replies that Lord Çré
Hari-the indwelling controller of the universe and its original
creator-manifests Himself in the form of the demigod of the sun. Sages
describe this sun-god in many features according to his different material
designations. To sustain the world, the Personality of Godhead manifests His
potency of time as the sun and travels throughout the twelve months,
beginning with Caitra, along with twelve sets of personal associates. One who
remembers the opulences of the Personality of Godhead Çré Hari in His form
as the sun will become free of his sinful reactions.
TEXT 1
™aIzAAEnak( ovaAca
@TaemamaTa< pa{cC$AmaAe
BavantaM baò"ivaÔamama,
s$amastatan‡ar"AÜ"Antae
BavaAna, BaAgAvata taÔvaivata,
çré-çaunaka uväca
athemam arthaà påcchämo
bhavantaà bahu-vittamam
samasta-tantra-räddhänte
bhavän bhägavata tattva-vit
SYNONYMS
çré-çaunakaù uväca—Çré Çaunaka said; atha—now; imam—this;
artham—matter; påcchämaù—we are inquiring about; bhavantam—from you;
bahu-vit-tamam—the possessor of the broadest knowledge; samasta—of all;
tantra—the scriptures prescribing practical methods of worship;
räddha-ante—in the definitive conclusions; bhavän—you; bhagavata—O great
devotee of the Supreme Lord; tattva-vit—the knower of the essential facts.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çaunaka said: O Süta, you are the best of learned men and a great
devotee of the Supreme Lord. Therefore we now inquire from you about the
definitive conclusion of all tantra scriptures.
TEXTS 2-3
taAin‡ak(A: pair"cayaARyaAM
ke(valasya i™aya: patae:
@ËÿAepaAËÿAyauDaAk(lpaM
k(lpayainta yaTaA ca yaE:
taªaAe vaNARya Ba‰M" tae
i‚(yaAyaAegAM bauBauts$ataAma,
yaena i‚(yaAnaEpauNAena
matyaAeR yaAyaAd"matyaRtaAma,
täntrikäù paricaryäyäà
kevalasya çriyaù pateù
aìgopäìgäyudhäkalpaà
kalpayanti yathä ca yaiù
tan no varëaya bhadraà te
kriyä-yogaà bubhutsatäm
yena kriyä-naipuëena
martyo yäyäd amartyatäm
SYNONYMS
täntrikäù—the followers of the methods of the tantric literatures;
paricaryäyäm—in regulated worship; kevalasya—who is pure spirit; çréyaù-of
the goddess of fortune; pateù—of the master; aìga—His limbs, such as His
feet; upäìga—His secondary limbs, such as associates like Garuòa;
äyudha—His weapons, such as the Sudarçana disc; äkalpam—and His
ornaments, such as the Kaustubha gem; kalpayanti—they conceive of;
yathä—how; ca—and; yaiù—by which (material representations); tat—that;
naù—to us; varëaya—please describe; bhadram—all-auspiciousness; te—unto
you; kriyä-yogam—the practical method of cultivation; bubhutsatäm—who are
eager to learn; yena—by which; kriyä—in the systematic practice;
naipuëena—expertise; martyaù—a mortal being; yäyät—may attain;
amartyatäm—immortality.
TRANSLATION
All good fortune to you! Please explain to us, who are very eager to learn,
the process of kriyä-yoga practiced through regulated worship of the
transcendental Lord, the husband of the goddess of fortune. Please also explain
how the Lord's devotees conceive of His limbs, associates, weapons and
ornaments in terms of particular material representations. By expertly
worshiping the Supreme Lord, a mortal can attain immortality.
TEXT 4
s$aUta ovaAca
namas$k{(tya gAuè&na, vaºyae
ivaBaUtaIvaE=SNAvaIr"ipa
yaA: ‘aAel(A vaed"tan‡aAByaAma,
@AcaAyaE=: paájaAid"iBa:
süta uväca
namaskåtya gurün vakñye
vibhütér vaiñëavér api
yäù proktä veda-tanträbhyäm
äcäryaiù padmajädibhiù
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; namaskåtya—offering obeisances; gurün—to
the spiritual masters; vakñye—I shall speak; vibhütéù—the opulences;
vaiñëavéù—belonging to Lord Viñëu; api—indeed; yäù—which; proktäù—are
described; veda-tanträbhyäm—by the Vedas and the tantras; äcäryaiù-by
standard authorities; padmaja-ädibhiù—beginning with Lord Brahmä.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: Offering obeisances to my spiritual masters, I shall
repeat to you the description of the opulences of Lord Viñëu given in the Vedas
and tantras by great authorities, beginning from lotus-born Brahmä.
TEXT 5
maAyaAâEnaRvaiBastaÔvaE:
s$a ivak(Ar"mayaAe ivar"Aq%.
inaimaRtaAe ä{"zyatae ya‡a
s$aicatke( Bauvana‡ayama,
mäyädyair navabhis tattvaiù
sa vikära-mayo viräö
nirmito dåçyate yatra
sa-citke bhuvana-trayam
SYNONYMS
mäyä-ädyaiù—beginning with the unmanifest stage of nature; navabhiù—with
the nine; tattvaiù—elements; saù—that; vikära-mayaù—also comprising the
transformations (of the eleven senses and the five gross elements); viräö—the
universal form of the Lord; nirmitaù—constructed; dåçyate—are seen;
yatra—in which; sa-citke—being conscious; bhuvana-trayam—the three
planetary systems.
TRANSLATION
The universal form [viräö] of the Personality of Godhead includes the nine
basic elements of creation, starting with the unmanifest nature, and their
subsequent transformations. Once this universal form is instilled with
consciousness, the three planetary systems become visible within it.
PURPORT
The nine basic elements of creation are prakåti, sütra, mahat-tattva, false
ego, and the five subtle perceptions. The transformations are the eleven senses
and the five gross material elements.
TEXTS 6-8
WtaãE" paAEç&SaM è&paM
BaU: paAd"AE âAE: izAr"Ae naBa:
naAiBa: s$aUyaAeR'iºaNAI naAs$ae
vaAyau: k(NAAE= id"zA: ‘aBaAe:
‘ajaApaita: ‘ajananama,
@paAnaAe ma{tyaur"IizAtau:
taß"Ah"vaAe laAek(paAlaA
manaên‰"Ae ”auvaAE yama:
laÀaAeÔar"Ae'Dar"Ae laAeBaAe
d"ntaA jyaAetµaA smayaAe ”ama:
r"AemaAiNA BaUç&h"A BaU°aAe
maeGaA: pauç&SamaUDaRjaA:
etad vai pauruñaà rüpaà
bhüù pädau dyauù çiro nabhaù
näbhiù süryo 'kñiëé näse
väyuù karëau diçaù prabhoù
prajäpatiù prajananam
apäno måtyur éçituù
tad-bähavo loka-pälä
manaç candro bhruvau yamaù
lajjottaro 'dharo lobho
dantä jyotsnä smayo bhramaù
romäëi bhüruhä bhümno
meghäù puruña-mürdhajäù
SYNONYMS
etat—this; vai—indeed; pauruñam—of the Viräö-puruña; rüpam—the form;
bhüù—the earth; pädau—His feet; dyauù—heaven; çiraù—His head;
nabhaù—the sky; näbhiù—His navel; süryaù—the sun; akñiëé—His eyes;
näse—His nostrils; väyuù—the air; karëau—His ears; diçaù—the directions;
prabhoù—of the Supreme Lord; prajä-patiù—the demigod of procreation;
prajananam—His genital; apänaù—His anus; måtyuù—death; éçituù—of the
absolute controller; tat-bähavaù—His many arms; loka-päläù—the presiding
demigods of the various planets; manaù—His mind; candraù—the moon;
bhruvau—His eyebrows; yamaù—the god of death; lajjä—shame; uttaraù—His
upper lip; adharaù—His lower lip; lobhaù—greed; dantäù—His teeth;
jyotsnä—the light of the moon; smayaù—His smile; bhramaù—delusion;
romäëi—the hairs of the body; bhü-ruhäù—the trees; bhümnaù—of the
almighty Lord; meghäù—the clouds; puruña—of the Viräö-puruña;
mürdha-jäù—the hairs upon the head.
TRANSLATION
This is the representation of the Supreme Lord as the universal person, in
which the earth is His feet, the sky His navel, the sun His eyes, the wind His
nostrils, the demigod of procreation His genitals, death His anus and the moon
His mind. The heavenly planets are His head, the directions His ears, and the
demigods protecting the various planets His many arms. The god of death is His
eyebrows, shame His lower lip, greed His upper lip, delusion His smile, and
moonshine His teeth, while the trees are the almighty Puruña's bodily hairs,
and the clouds the hair on His head.
PURPORT
Various aspects of material creation, such as the earth, the sun and the
trees, are sustained by various limbs of the universal body of the Lord. Thus
they are considered nondifferent from Him, as described in this verse, which is
meant for meditation.
TEXT 9
yaAvaAnayaM vaE pauç&SaAe
yaAvatyaA s$aMsTayaA imata:
taAvaAnas$aAvaipa mah"Apauç&
SaAe laAek(s$aMsTayaA
yävän ayaà vai puruño
yävatyä saàsthayä mitaù
tävän asäv api mahäpuruño
loka-saàsthayä
SYNONYMS
yävän—to which extent; ayam—this; vai—indeed; puruñaù—ordinary
individual person; yävatyä—extending to which dimensions; saàsthayä—by
the position of his limbs; mitaù—measured; tävän—to that extent; asau—He;
api—also; mahä-puruñaù—the transcendental personality;
loka-saàsthayä—according to the positions of the planetary systems.
TRANSLATION
Just as one can determine the dimensions of an ordinary person of this world
by measuring his various limbs, one can determine the dimensions of the
Mahäpuruña by measuring the arrangement of the planetary systems within His
universal form.
TEXT 10
k(AEstauBavyapade"zAena
svaAtmajyaAeitaibaRBatyaRja:
tat‘aBaA vyaAipanaI s$aAºaAta,
™aIvats$amaur"s$aA ivaBau:
kaustubha-vyapadeçena
svätma-jyotir bibharty ajaù
tat-prabhä vyäpiné säkñät
çrévatsam urasä vibhuù
SYNONYMS
kaustubha-vyapadeçena—represented by the Kaustubha gem; sva-ätma—of the
pure jéva soul; jyotiù—the spiritual light; bibharti—carries; ajaù—the unborn
Lord; tat-prabhä—the effulgence of this (Kaustubha); vyäpiné—expansive;
säkñät—directly; çrévatsam—of the Çrévatsa mark; urasä—upon His chest;
vibhuù—the almighty.
TRANSLATION
Upon His chest the almighty, unborn Personality of Godhead bears the
Kaustubha gem, which represents the pure spirit soul, along with the Çrévatsa
mark, which is the direct manifestation of this gem's expansive effulgence.
TEXTS 11-12
svamaAyaAM vanamaAlaAKyaAM
naAnaAgAuNAmayaI%M d"Data,
vaAs$azC$nd"AemayaM paItaM
“aös$aU‡aM i‡ava{tsvar"ma,
ibaBaitaR s$aAÊÿYaM yaAegAM ca
de"vaAe mak(r"ku(Nx"lae
maAEilaM padM" paAr"maeï"YaM
s$avaRlaAek(ABayaÆÿr"ma,
sva-mäyäà vana-mäläkhyäà
nänä-guëa-mayéà dadhat
väsaç chando-mayaà pétaà
brahma-sütraà tri-våt svaram
bibharti säìkhyaà yogaà ca
devo makara-kuëòale
maulià padaà pärameñöhyaà
sarva-lokäbhayaì-karam
SYNONYMS
sva-mäyäm—His own material energy; vana-mälä-äkhyäm—represented as His
flower garland; nänä-guëa—various combinations of the modes of nature;
mayém—composed of; dadhat—wearing; väsaù—His garment;
chandaù-mayam—consisting of the Vedic meters; pétam—yellow;
brahma-sütram—His sacred thread; tri-våt—threefold; svaram—the sacred
sound oàkära; bibharti-He carries; säìkhyam—the process of Säìkhya;
yogam—the process of yoga; ca—and; devaù—the Lord; makara-kuëòale—His
shark-shaped earrings; maulim—His crown; padam—the position;
pärameñöhyam—supreme (of Lord Brahmä); sarva-loka—to all the worlds;
abhayam—fearlessness; karam—which gives.
TRANSLATION
His flower garland is His material energy, comprising various combinations
of the modes of nature. His yellow garment is the Vedic meters, and His sacred
thread the syllable oà composed of three sounds. In the form of His two
shark-shaped earrings, the Lord carries the processes of Säìkhya and yoga, and
His crown, bestowing fearlessness on the inhabitants of all the worlds, is the
supreme position of Brahmaloka.
TEXT 13
@vyaAk{(tamanantaAKyama,
@As$anaM yad"iDaiï"ta:
DamaRÁaAnaAid"iBayauRlM(
s$aÔvaM paáimah"Aecyatae
avyäkåtam anantäkhyam
äsanaà yad-adhiñöhitaù
dharma-jïänädibhir yuktaà
sattvaà padmam ihocyate
SYNONYMS
avyäkåtam—the unmanifest phase of material creation;
ananta-äkhyam—known as Lord Ananta; äsanam—His personal seat;
yat-adhiñöhitaù—upon which He is sitting; dharma-jïäna-ädibhiù—together
with religion, knowledge and so on; yuktam—conjoined; sattvam—in the
mode of goodness; padmam—His lotus; iha—thereupon; ucyate—is said.
TRANSLATION
Ananta, the Lord's sitting place, is the unmanifest phase of material nature,
and the Lord's lotus throne is the mode of goodness, endowed with religion and
knowledge.
TEXTS 14-15
@Aeja:s$ah"AebalayautaM
mauKyataÔvaM gAd"AM d"Data,
@paAM taÔvaM d"r"varM"
taejastaÔvaM s$aud"zARnama,
naBaAeinaBaM naBastaÔvama,
@is$aM camaR tamaAemayama,
k(Alaè&paM Danau: zAAË<ÿ
taTaA k(maRmayaeSauiDama,
ojaù-saho-bala-yutaà
mukhya-tattvaà gadäà dadhat
apäà tattvaà dara-varaà
tejas-tattvaà sudarçanam
nabho-nibhaà nabhas-tattvam
asià carma tamo-mayam
käla-rüpaà dhanuù çärìgaà
tathä karma-mayeñudhim
SYNONYMS
ojaù-sahaù-bala—with the power of the senses, the power of the mind and the
power of the body; yutam—conjoined; mukhya-tattvam—the principle
element, air, which is the vital force within the material body; gadäm—His
club; dadhat—carrying; apäm—of water; tattvam—the element; dara—His
conchshell; varam—excellent; tejaù-tattvam—the element fire;
sudarçanam—His Sudarçana disc; nabhaù-nibham—just like the sky;
nabhaù-tattvam—the element ether; asim—His sword; carma—His shield;
tamaù-mayam—composed of the mode of ignorance; käla-rüpam—appearing
as time; dhanuù—His bow; çärìgam—named Çärìga; tathä—and;
karma-maya—representing the active senses; iñu-dhim—the quiver holding
His arrows.
TRANSLATION
The club the Lord carries is the chief element, präëa, incorporating the
potencies of sensory, mental and physical strength. His excellent conchshell is
the element water, His Sudarçana disc the element fire, and His sword, pure as
the sky, the element ether. His shield embodies the mode of ignorance, His
bow, named Çärìga, time, and His arrow-filled quiver the working sensory
organs.
TEXT 16
win‰"yaAiNA zAr"AnaAò"r,"
@AkU(taIr"sya syand"nama,
tanmaA‡aANyasyaAiBavyailM(
mau"‰"yaATaRi‚(yaAtmataAma,
indriyäëi çarän ähur
äkütér asya syandanam
tan-mäträëy asyäbhivyaktià
mudrayärtha-kriyätmatäm
SYNONYMS
indriyäëi—the senses; çarän—His arrows; ähuù—they say; äkütéù—(the mind
with its) active functions; asya—of Him; syandanam—the chariot;
tat-mäträëi—the objects of perception; asya—His; abhivyaktim—external
appearance; mudrayä—by the gestures of His hands (symbolizing the giving of
benedictions, the offering of fearlessness, and so on);
artha-kriyä-ätmatäm—the essence of purposeful activity.
TRANSLATION
His arrows are said to be the senses, and His chariot is the active, forceful
mind. His external appearance is the subtle objects of perception, and the
gestures of His hands are the essence of all purposeful activity.
PURPORT
All activity is ultimately aimed at the supreme perfection of life, and this
perfection is awarded by the merciful hands of the Lord. The gestures of the
Lord remove all fear from the heart of a devotee and elevate him to the Lord's
own association in the spiritual sky.
TEXT 17
maNx"laM de"vayajanaM
d"IºaA s$aMs$k(Ar" @Atmana:
pair"cayaAR BagAvata
@AtmanaAe äu"ir"taºaya:
maëòalaà deva-yajanaà
dékñä saàskära ätmanaù
paricaryä bhagavata
ätmano durita-kñayaù
SYNONYMS
maëòalam—the sun globe; deva-yajanam—the place where the Supreme Lord
is worshiped; dékñä—spiritual initiation; saàskäraù—the process of
purification; ätmanaù—for the spirit soul; paricaryä—devotional service;
bhagavataù—of the Personality of Godhead; ätmanaù—for the jéva soul;
durita—of sinful reactions; kñayaù—the destruction.
TRANSLATION
The sun globe is the place where the Supreme Lord is worshiped, spiritual
initiation is the means of purification for the spirit soul, and rendering
devotional service to the Personality of Godhead is the process for eradicating
all one's sinful reactions.
PURPORT
One should meditate on the fiery sun globe as a place where God is
worshiped. Lord Kåñëa is the reservoir of all effulgence, and thus it is fitting
that He be properly worshiped on the glowing sun.
TEXT 18
BagAvaAna, BagAzAbd"ATa<
laIlaAk(malamauã"h"na,
Dama< yazAê BagAvaAMzA,
caAmar"vyajanae'Bajata,
bhagavän bhaga-çabdärthaà
lélä-kamalam udvahan
dharmaà yaçaç ca bhagaväàç
cämara-vyajane 'bhajat
SYNONYMS
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; bhaga-çabda—of the word bhaga;
artham-the meaning (namely, "opulence"); lélä-kamalam—His pastime lotus;
udvahan—carrying; dharmam—religion; yaçaù—fame; ca—and;
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; cämara-vyajane—the pair of yak-tail
fans; abhajat—has accepted.
TRANSLATION
Playfully carrying a lotus, which represents the various opulences designated
by the word bhaga, the Supreme Lord accepts service from a pair of cämara
fans, which are religion and fame.
TEXT 19
@Atapa‡aM tau vaEku(NQM&
iã"jaA DaAmaAku(taAeBayama,
i‡ava{ãe"d": s$aupaNAARKyaAe
yaÁaM vah"ita paUç&Sama,
ätapatraà tu vaikuëöhaà
dvijä dhämäkuto-bhayam
tri-våd vedaù suparëäkhyo
yajïaà vahati püruñam
SYNONYMS
ätapatram—His umbrella; tu—and; vaikuëöham—His spiritual abode,
Vaikuëöha; dvijäù—O brähmaëas; dhäma—His personal abode, the spiritual
world; akutaù-bhayam—free from fear; tri-våt—threefold; vedaù—the Veda;
suparëa-äkhyaù-named Suparëa, or Garuòa; yajïam—sacrifice personified;
vahati—carried; püruñam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
O brähmaëas, the Lord's umbrella is His spiritual abode, Vaikuëöha, where
there is no fear, and Garuòa, who carries the Lord of sacrifice, is the threefold
Veda.
TEXT 20
@napaAiyanaI BagAvataI
Za{wR: s$aAºaAd"AtmanaAe h"re":
ivaSvaºaenastan‡amaUitaRr,"
ivaid"ta: paASaRd"AiDapa:
nand"Ad"yaAe'í"AE ã"A:sTaAê
tae'iNAmaAâA h"re"gAuRNAA:
anapäyiné bhagavaté
çåéù säkñäd ätmano hareù
viñvakñenas tantra-mürtir
viditaù pärñadädhipaù
nandädayo 'ñöau dväù-sthäç ca
te 'ëimädyä harer guëäù
SYNONYMS
anapäyiné—inseparable; bhagavaté—the goddess of fortune; çréù—Çré;
säkñät—directly; ätmanaù—of the internal nature; hareù—of Lord Hari;
viñvaksenaù—Viñvaksena; tantra-mürtiù—as the personification of the tantra
scriptures; viditaù—is known; pärñada-adhipaù—the chief of His personal
associates; nanda-ädayaù—Nanda and the others; añöau—the eight;
dväù-sthäù—doorkeepers; ca—and; te—they; aëimä-ädyäù—aëimä and the
other mystic perfections; hareù—of the Supreme Lord; guëäù—the qualities.
TRANSLATION
The goddess of fortune, Çré, who never leaves the Lord's side, appears with
Him in this world as the representation of His internal potency. Viñvaksena,
the chief among His personal associates, is known to be the personification of
the Païcarätra and other tantras. And the Lord's eight doorkeepers, headed by
Nanda, are His mystic perfections, beginning with aëimä.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, the goddess of fortune is the original
source of all material opulence. Material nature is directly controlled by the
Lord's inferior energy, Mahä-mäyä, whereas the goddess of fortune is His
internal, superior energy. Still, the opulence of the Lord's inferior nature has
its source in the supreme spiritual opulence of the goddess of fortune. As stated
in Çré Hayaçérña Païcarätra:
paramätmä harir devas
tac-chaktiù çrér ihoditä
çrér devé prakåtiù proktä
keçavaù puruñaù småtaù
na viñëunä vinä devé
na hariù padmajäà vinä
"The Supreme Soul is Lord Hari, and His potency is known in this world as Çré.
Goddess Çré is known as prakåti, and the Supreme Lord Keçava is known as the
puruña. The divine goddess is never present without Him, nor does He ever
appear without her."
Also, Çré Viñëu Puräëa (1.8.15) states:
nityaiva sä jagan-mätä
viñëoù çrér anapäyiné
yathä sarva-gato viñëus
tathaiveyaà dvijottamäù
"She is the eternal mother of the universe, the goddess of fortune of Lord
Viñëu, and she is never separated from Him. In the same way that Lord Viñëu
is present everywhere, so is she, O best of brähmaëas."
Also in Viñëu Puräëa (1.9.140):
evaà yathä jagat-svämé
deva-devo janärdanaù
avatäraà karoty eva
tathä çrés tat-sahäyiné
"Thus, in the same way that the Lord of the universe, the God of gods,
Janärdana, descends to this world, so His consort, the goddess of fortune, does
also."
The pure spiritual status of the goddess of fortune is described in the
Skanda Puräëa:
aparaà tv akñaraà yä sä
prakåtir jaòa-rüpikä
çréù parä prakåtiù proktä
cetanä viñëu-saàçrayä
taà akñaraà paraà prähuù
parataù param akñaram
harir eväkhila-guëo 'py
akñara-trayam éritam
"The inferior infallible entity is that nature who manifests as the material
world. The goddess of fortune, on the other hand, is known as the superior
nature. She is pure consciousness and is under the direct shelter of Lord Viñëu.
While she is said to be the superior infallible entity, that infallible entity who
is greater than the greatest is Lord Hari Himself, the original possessor of all
transcendental qualities. In this way, three distinct infallible entities are
described."
Thus, although the inferior energy of the Lord is infallible in her function,
her power to manifest temporary illusory opulences exists by the grace of the
internal energy, the goddess of fortune, who is the personal consort of the
Supreme Lord.
The Padma Puräëa (256.9-21) lists eighteen doorkeepers of the Lord:
Nanda, Sunanda, Jaya, Vijaya, Caëòa, Pracaëòa, Bhadra, Subhadra, Dhätä,
Vidhätä, Kumuda, Kumudäkña, Pundarékña, Vämana, Çaìkukarëa, Sarvanetra,
Sumukha and Supratiñöhita.
TEXT 21
vaAs$aude"va: s$aÆÿSaRNA:
‘aâu°a: pauç&Sa: svayama,
@inaç&Ü" wita “aöna,
maUitaRvyaUh"Ae'iBaDaIyatae
väsudevaù saìkarñaëaù
pradyumnaù puruñaù svayam
aniruddha iti brahman
mürti-vyüho 'bhidhéyate
SYNONYMS
väsudevaù saìkarñaëaù pradyumnaù—Väsudeva, Saìkarñaëa and Pradyumna;
puruñaù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; svayam—Himself;
aniruddhaù—Aniruddha; iti—thus; brahman—O brähmaëa, Çaunaka;
mürti-vyühaù—the expansion of personal forms; abhidhéyate—is designated.
TRANSLATION
Väsudeva, Saìkarñaëa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha are the names of the
direct personal expansions of the Supreme Godhead, O brähmaëa Çaunaka.
TEXT 22
s$a ivaìstaEjas$a: ‘aAÁas$a,
taur"Iya wita va{iÔaiBa:
@TaeRin‰"yaAzAyaÁaAnaEr,"
BagAvaAna, pair"BaAvyatae
sa viçvas taijasaù präjïas
turéya iti våttibhiù
arthendriyäçaya-jïänair
bhagavän paribhävyate
SYNONYMS
saù—He; viçvaù taijasaù präjïaù—the manifestations of waking consciousness,
sleep and deep sleep; turéyaù—the fourth, transcendental stage; iti—thus
termed; våttibhiù—by the functions; artha—by the external objects of
perception; indriya—the mind; äçaya—covered consciousness; jïänaiù—and
spiritual knowledge; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; paribhävyate—is
conceived of.
TRANSLATION
One can conceive of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in terms of
awakened consciousness, sleep and deep sleep—which function respectively
through external objects, the mind and material intelligence—and also in terms
of the fourth, transcendental level of consciousness, which is characterized by
pure knowledge.
TEXT 23
@ËÿAepaAËÿAyauDaAk(lpaEr,"
BagAvaAMsta»atauí"yama,
ibaBaitaR sma cataumaURitaRr,"
BagAvaAna, h"ir"r"Iìr":
aìgopäìgäyudhäkalpair
bhagaväàs tac catuñöayam
bibharti sma catur-mürtir
bhagavän harir éçvaraù
SYNONYMS
aìga—with His major limbs; upäìga—minor limbs; äyudha—weapons;
äkalpaiù—and ornaments; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; tat
catuñöayam—these four manifestations (of viçva, taijasa, präjïa and turéya);
bibharti—maintains; sma—indeed; catuù-mürtiù—in His four personal
features (Väsudeva, Saìkarñaëa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha); bhagavän—the
Lord; hariù—Hari; éçvaraù—the supreme controller.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Hari, thus appears in four
personal expansions, each exhibiting major limbs, minor limbs, weapons and
ornaments. Through these distinct features, the Lord maintains the four phases
of existence.
PURPORT
The Lord's spiritual body, weapons, ornaments and associates are all pure
transcendental existence, identical with Him.
TEXT 24
iã"ja[%SaBa s$a WSa “aöyaAeina: svayaMä{"k,(
svamaih"mapair"paUNAAeR maAyayaA ca svayaEtata,
s$a{jaita h"r"ita paAtaItyaAKyayaAnaAva{taAºaAe
ivava{ta wva inaç&l(statparE"r"AtmalaBya:
dvija-åñabha sa eña brahma-yoniù svayaà-dåk
sva-mahima-paripürëo mäyayä ca svayaitat
såjati harati pätéty äkhyayänävåtäkño
vivåta iva niruktas tat-parair ätma-labhyaù
SYNONYMS
dvija-åñabha—O best of the brähmaëas; saù eñaù—He alone;
brahma-yoniù—the source of the Vedas; svayam-dåk—who is self-illuminating;
sva-mahima—in His own glory; paripürëaù—perfectly complete; mäyayä—by
the material energy; ca—and; svayä—His own; etat—this universe; såjati—He
creates; harati—He withdraws; päti—He maintains; iti äkhyayä—conceived of
as such; anävåta—uncovered; akñaù—His transcendental awareness;
vivåtaù—materially divided; iva—as if; niruktaù—described; tat-paraiù—by
those who are devoted to Him; ätma—as their very Soul; labhyaù—realizable.
TRANSLATION
O best of brähmaëas, He alone is the self-luminous, original source of the
Vedas, perfect and complete in His own glory. By His material energy He
creates, destroys and maintains this entire universe. Because He is the
performer of various material functions, He is sometimes described as materially
divided, yet He always remains transcendentally situated in pure knowledge.
Those who are dedicated to Him in devotion can realize Him to be their true
Soul.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura recommends that we become humble
by practicing the following meditation: "The earth, which is always visible to
me, is the expansion of the lotus feet of my Lord, who is always to be meditated
upon. All moving and nonmoving living beings have taken shelter of the earth
and are thus sheltered at the lotus feet of my Lord. For this reason I should
respect every living being and not envy anyone. In fact, all living entities
constitute the Kaustubha gem on My Lord's chest. Therefore I should never
envy or deride any living entity." By practicing this meditation one can
achieve success in life.
TEXT 25
™aIk{(SNA k{(SNAs$aKa va{SNya{SaBaAvaina‹augA,-
r"AjanyavaMzAd"h"naAnapavagARvaIyaR
gAAeivand" gAAepavainataA˜ajaBa{tyagAIta
taITaR™ava: ™avaNAmaËÿla paAih" Ba{tyaAna,
çré-kåñëa kåñëa-sakha våñëy-åñabhävani-dhrugräjanya-
vaàça-dahanänapavarga-vérya
govinda gopa-vanitä-vraja-bhåtya-géta
tértha-çravaù çravaëa-maìgala pähi bhåtyän
SYNONYMS
çré-kåñëa—O Çré Kåñëa; kåñëa-sakha—O friend of Arjuna; våñëi—of the
descendants of Våñëi; åñabha—O chief; avani—on the earth;
dhruk—rebellious; räjanya-vaàça—of the dynasties of kings; dahana—O
annihilator; anapavarga—without deterioration; vérya—whose prowess;
govinda—O proprietor of Goloka-dhäma; gopa—of the cowherd men;
vanitä—and the cowherd women; vraja—by the multitude; bhåtya—and by
their servants; géta—sung; tértha—pious, as the most holy place of pilgrimage;
çravaù—whose glories; çravaëa—just to hear about whom;
maìgala—auspicious; pähi—please protect; bhåtyän—Your servants.
TRANSLATION
O Kåñëa, O friend of Arjuna, O chief among the descendants of Våñëi, You
are the destroyer of those political parties that are disturbing elements on this
earth. Your prowess never deteriorates. You are the proprietor of the
transcendental abode, and Your most sacred glories, which are sung by
Våndävana's cowherd men and women and their servants, bestow all
auspiciousness just by being heard. O Lord, please protect Your devotees.
TEXT 26
ya wdM" k(lya otTaAya
mah"Apauç&SalaºaNAma,
tai»aÔa: ‘ayataAe japtvaA
“aö vaed" gAuh"AzAyama,
ya idaà kalya utthäya
mahä-puruña-lakñaëam
tac-cittaù prayato japtvä
brahma veda guhäçayam
SYNONYMS
yaù—anyone who; idam—this; kalye—at dawn; utthäya—rising;
mahä-puruña-lakñaëam—the characteristics of the Supreme Personality in His
universal form; tat-cittaù—with mind absorbed in Him; prayataù—purified;
japtvä—chanting to oneself; brahma—the Absolute Truth; veda—he comes to
know; guhä-çayam—situated within the heart.
TRANSLATION
Anyone who rises early in the morning and, with a purified mind fixed upon
the Mahäpuruña, quietly chants this description of His characteristics will
realize Him as the Supreme Absolute Truth residing within the heart.
TEXTS 27-28
™aIzAAEnak( ovaAca
zAuk(Ae yad"Ah" BagAvaAna,
ivaSNAur"AtaAya Za{Nvatae
s$aAEr"Ae gANAAe maAis$a maAis$a
naAnaA vas$aita s$aæak(:
taeSaAM naAmaAina k(maARiNA
inayaul(AnaAmaDaIìrE":
“aUih" na: ™aÚ"DaAnaAnaAM
vyaUhM" s$aUyaARtmanaAe h"re":
çré-çaunaka uväca
çuko yad äha bhagavän
viñëu-rätäya çåëvate
sauro gaëo mäsi mäsi
nänä vasati saptakaù
teñäà nämäni karmäëi
niyuktänäm adhéçvaraiù
brühi naù çraddadhänänäà
vyühaà süryätmano hareù
SYNONYMS
çré-çaunakaù uväca—Çré Çaunaka said; çukaù—Çukadeva Gosvämé;
yat—which; äha—described; bhagavän—the great sage; viñëu-rätäya—to King
Parékñit; çåëvate—who was listening; sauraù—of the sun-god; gaëaù—the
associates; mäsi mäsi—in each month; nänä—various; vasati—who reside;
saptakaù—the group of seven; teñäm—of them; nämäni—the names;
karmäëi—the activities; niyuktänäm—who are engaged; adhéçvaraiù—by the
various features of the sun-god, who are their controllers; brühi—please speak;
naù—to us; çraddadhänänäm—who are faithful; vyüham—the personal
expansions; sürya-ätmanaù—in His personal expansion as the sun-god;
hareù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Hari.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çaunaka said: Please describe to us, who have great faith in your words,
the different sets of seven personal features and associates the sun-god exhibits
during each month, along with their names and activities. The associates of the
sun-god, who serve their lord, are personal expansions of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead Hari in His feature as the presiding deity of the sun.
PURPORT
After hearing an account of the exalted conversation between Çukadeva
Gosvämé and Mahäräja Parékñit, Çaunaka now inquires about the sun as the
expansion of the Supreme Lord. Although the sun is the king of all planets, Çré
Çaunaka is specifically interested in this effulgent globe as the expansion of Çré
Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The personalities related with the sun are of seven categories. In the course
of the sun's orbit there are twelve months, and in each month a different
sun-god and a different set of his six associates preside. In each of the twelve
months beginning from Vaiçäkha there are different names for the sun-god
himself, the sage, the Yakña, the Gandharva, the Apsarä, the Räkñasa and the
Näga, making a total of seven categories.
TEXT 29
s$aUta ovaAca
@naAâivaâyaA ivaSNAAer,"
@Atmana: s$avaR$de"ih"naAma,
inaimaRtaAe laAek(tan‡aAe'yaM
laAeke(Sau pair"vataRtae
süta uväca
anädy-avidyayä viñëor
ätmanaù sarva-dehinäm
nirmito loka-tantro 'yaà
lokeñu parivartate
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; anädi—beginningless; avidyayä—by the
illusory energy; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu; ätmanaù—who is the Supreme Soul;
sarva-dehinäm—of all embodied living beings; nirmitaù—produced;
loka-tantraù—the regulator of the planets; ayam—this; lokeñu—among the
planets; parivartate—travels.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: The sun travels among all the planets and thus regulates
their movements. It has been created by Lord Viñëu, the Supreme Soul of all
embodied beings, through His beginningless material energy.
TEXT 30
Wk( Wva ih" laAek(AnaAM
s$aUyaR @AtmaAid"k{(Ü"ir":
s$avaR"vaed"i‚(yaAmaUlama,
[%iSaiBabaRò"DaAeid"ta:
eka eva hi lokänäà
sürya ätmädi-kåd dhariù
sarva-veda-kriyä-mülam
åñibhir bahudhoditaù
SYNONYMS
ekaù—one; eva—only; hi—indeed; lokänäm—of the worlds; süryaù—the sun;
ätmä—their soul; ädi-kåt—the original creator; hariù—the Personality of
Godhead, Hari; sarva-veda—in all the Vedas; kriyä-of the ritualistic activities;
mülam—the basis; åñibhiù—by the sages; bahudhä—variously;
uditaù—designated.
TRANSLATION
The sun-god, being nondifferent from Lord Hari, is the one soul of all the
worlds and their original creator. He is the source of all the ritualistic activities
prescribed in the Vedas and has been given many names by the Vedic sages.
TEXT 31
k(AlaAe de"zA: i‚(yaA k(taAR
k(r"NAM k(AyaRmaAgAma:
‰"vyaM P(laimaita “aöna,
navaDaAel(Ae'jayaA h"ir":
kälo deçaù kriyä kartä
karaëaà käryam ägamaù
dravyaà phalam iti brahman
navadhokto 'jayä hariù
SYNONYMS
kälaù—time; deçaù—place; kriyä—endeavor; kartä—performer;
karaëam—instrument; käryam—specific ritual; ägamaù—scripture;
dravyam—paraphernalia; phalam—result; iti—thus; brahman—O brähmaëa,
Çaunaka; navadhä—in nine phases; uktaù—described; ajayä—in terms of the
material energy; hariù—Lord Hari.
TRANSLATION
Being the source of the material energy, the Personality of Godhead Lord
Hari in His expansion as the sun-god is described in nine aspects, O Çaunaka:
the time, the place, the endeavor, the performer, the instrument, the specific
ritual, the scripture, the paraphernalia of worship and the result to be achieved.
TEXT 32
maDvaAid"Sau ã"Ad"zAs$au
BagAvaAna, k(Alaè&paDa{k,(
laAek(tan‡aAya car"ita
pa{Tagã"Ad"zAiBagARNAE:
madhv-ädiñu dvädaçasu
bhagavän käla-rüpa-dhåk
loka-tanträya carati
påthag dvädaçabhir gaëaiù
SYNONYMS
madhu-ädiñu—beginning with Madhu; dvädaçasu—in the twelve (months);
bhagavän—the Supreme Lord; käla-rüpa—the form of time; dhåk—assuming;
loka-tanträya—to regulate planetary motion; carati—travels;
påthak—separately; dvädaçabhiù—with twelve; gaëaiù—sets of associates.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, manifesting His potency of time as
the sun-god, travels about in each of the twelve months, beginning with Madhu,
to regulate planetary motion within the universe. Traveling with the sun-god in
each of the twelve months is a different set of six associates.
TEXT 33
DaAtaA k{(tasTalaI he"itar,"
vaAs$auk(L r"Tak{(nmaunae
paulastyastaumbauç&ir"ita
maDaumaAs$aM nayantyamaI
dhätä kåtasthalé hetir
väsuké rathakån mune
pulastyas tumburur iti
madhu-mäsaà nayanty amé
SYNONYMS
dhätä kåtasthalé hetiù—Dhätä, Kåtasthalé and Heti; väsukiù rathakåt—Väsuki
and Rathakåt; mune—O sage; pulastyaù tumburuù—Pulastya and Tumburu;
iti—thus; madhu-mäsam—the month of Madhu (Caitra, at the time of the
spring equinox); nayanti—lead forth; amé—these.
TRANSLATION
My dear sage, Dhätä as the sun-god, Kåtasthalé as the Apsarä, Heti as the
Räkñasa, Väsuki as the Näga, Rathakåt as the Yakña, Pulastya as the sage and
Tumburu as the Gandharva rule the month of Madhu.
TEXT 34
@yaRmaA paulah"Ae'TaAEjaA:
‘ahe"ita: pauiÃak(sTalaI
naAr"d": k(cC$naIr"ê
nayantyaetae sma maADavama,
aryamä pulaho 'thaujäù
prahetiù puïjikasthalé
näradaù kacchanéraç ca
nayanty ete sma mädhavam
SYNONYMS
aryamä pulahaù athaujäù—Aryamä, Pulaha and Athaujä; prahetiù
puïjikasthalé—Praheti and Puïjikasthalé; näradaù kacchanéraù—Närada and
Kacchanéra; ca—also; nayanti—rule; ete—these; sma—indeed;
mädhavam—the month of Mädhava (Vaiçäkha).
TRANSLATION
Aryamä as the sun-god, Pulaha as the sage, Athaujä as the Yakña, Praheti as
the Räkñasa, Puïjikasthalé as the Apsarä, Närada as the Gandharva and
Kacchanéra as the Näga rule the month of Mädhava.
TEXT 35
ima‡aAe'i‡a: paAEç&SaeyaAe'Ta
taºak(Ae maenak(A h"h"A:
r"Tasvana wita ÷etae
zAu‚(maAs$aM nayantyamaI
mitro 'triù pauruñeyo 'tha
takñako menakä hahäù
rathasvana iti hy ete
çukra-mäsaà nayanty amé
SYNONYMS
mitraù atriù pauruñeyaù—Mitra, Atri and Pauruñeya; atha—as well; takñakaù
menakä hahäù—Takñaka, Menakä and Hähä; rathasvanaù—Rathasvana;
iti—thus; hi—indeed; ete—these; çukra-mäsam—the month of Çukra
(Jyaiñöha); nayanti—rule; amé—these.
TRANSLATION
Mitra as the sun-god, Atri as the sage, Pauruñeya as the Räkñasa, Takñaka as
the Näga, Menakä as the Apsarä, Hähä as the Gandharva and Rathasvana as
the Yakña rule the month of Çukra.
TEXT 36
vais$aï"Ae vaç&NAAe r"mBaA
s$ah"janyastaTaA ò"ó":
zAu‚(iê‡asvanaêEva
zAuicamaAs$aM nayantyamaI
vasiñöho varuëo rambhä
sahajanyas tathä huhüù
çukraç citrasvanaç caiva
çuci-mäsaà nayanty amé
SYNONYMS
vasiñöhaù varuëaù rambhä—Vasiñöha, Varuëa and Rambhä;
sahajanyaù—Sahajanya; tathä—also; huhüù—Hühü; çukraù
citrasvanaù—Çukra and Citrasvana; ca eva—as well; çuci-mäsam—the month
of Çuci (Äñäòha); nayanti—rule; amé—these.
TRANSLATION
Vasiñöha as the sage, Varuëa as the sun-god, Rambhä as the Apsarä,
Sahajanya as the Räkñasa, Hühü as the Gandharva, Çukra as the Näga and
Citrasvana as the Yakña rule the month of Çuci.
TEXT 37
wn‰"Ae ivaìAvas$au: ™aAetaA
WlaApa‡astaTaAiËÿr"A:
‘amlaAecaA r"Aºas$aAe vayaAeR
naBaAemaAs$aM nayantyamaI
indro viçvävasuù çrotä
eläpatras tathäìgiräù
pramlocä räkñaso varyo
nabho-mäsaà nayanty amé
SYNONYMS
indraù viçvävasuù çrotäù—Indra, Viçvävasu and Çrotä; eläpatraù—Eläpatra;
tathä—and; aìgiräù—Aìgirä; pramlocä—Pramlocä; räkñasaù varyaù—the
Räkñasa named Varya; nabhaù-mäsam—the month of Nabhas (Çrävaëa);
nayanti—rule; amé—these.
TRANSLATION
Indra as the sun-god, Viçvävasu as the Gandharva, Çrotä as the Yakña,
Eläpatra as the Näga, Aìgirä as the sage, Pramlocä as the Apsarä and Varya as
the Räkñasa rule the month of Nabhas.
TEXT 38
ivavasvaAnauƒas$aenaê
vyaA„a @As$aAr"NAAe Ba{gAu:
@naumlaAecaA zAÊÿpaAlaAe
naBasyaAKyaM nayantyamaI
vivasvän ugrasenaç ca
vyäghra äsäraëo bhåguù
anumlocä çaìkhapälo
nabhasyäkhyaà nayanty amé
SYNONYMS
vivasvän ugrasenaù—Vivasvän and Ugrasena; ca—also; vyäghraù äsäraëaù
bhåguù—Vyäghra, Äsäraëa and Bhågu; anumlocä çaìkhapälaù—Anumlocä
and Çaìkhapäla; nabhasya-äkhyam—the month named Nabhasya (Bhädra);
nayanti—rule; amé—these.
TRANSLATION
Vivasvän as the sun-god, Ugrasena as the Gandharva, Vyäghra as the
Räkñasa, Äsäraëa as the Yakña, Bhågu as the sage, Anumlocä as the Apsarä and
Çaìkhapäla as the Näga rule the month of Nabhasya.
TEXT 39
paUSaA DanaÃayaAe vaAta:
s$auSaeNA: s$auç&icastaTaA
Ga{taAcaI gAAEtamaêeita
tapaAemaAs$aM nayantyamaI
püñä dhanaïjayo vätaù
suñeëaù surucis tathä
ghåtäcé gautamaç ceti
tapo-mäsaà nayanty amé
SYNONYMS
püñä dhanaïjayaù vätaù—Püñä, Dhanaïjaya and Väta; suñeëaù
suruciù—Suñeëa and Suruci; tathä—also; ghåtäcé gautamaù—Ghåtäcé and
Gautama; ca—as well; iti—thus; tapaù-mäsam—the month of Tapas (Mägha);
nayanti—rule; amé—these.
TRANSLATION
Püñä as the sun-god, Dhanaïjaya as the Näga, Väta as the Räkñasa, Suñeëa
as the Gandharva, Suruci as the Yakña, Ghåtäcé as the Apsarä and Gautama as
the sage rule the month of Tapas.
TEXT 40
[%tauvaRcaAR Bar"ã"Aja:
pajaRnya: s$aenaijaÔaTaA
ivaì Wer"AvataêEva
tapasyaAKyaM nayantyamaI
åtur varcä bharadväjaù
parjanyaù senajit tathä
viçva airävataç caiva
tapasyäkhyaà nayanty amé
SYNONYMS
åtuù varcä bharadväjaù—Åtu, Varcä and Bharadväja; parjanyaù
senajit—Parjanya and Senajit; tathä—also; viçvaù airävataù—Viçva and
Airävata; ca eva—also; tapasya-äkhyam—the month known as Tapasya
(Phälguna); nayanti—rule; amé—these.
TRANSLATION
Åtu as the Yakña, Varcä as the Räkñasa, Bharadväja as the sage, Parjanya as
the sun-god, Senajit as the Apsarä, Viçva as the Gandharva and Airävata as the
Näga rule the month known as Tapasya.
TEXT 41
@TaAMzAu: k(zyapastaAºyaR
[%tas$aenastaTaAevaRzAI
ivaâucC$‡aumaRh"AzAÊÿ:
s$ah"AemaAs$aM nayantyamaI
athäàçuù kaçyapas tärkñya
åtasenas tathorvaçé
vidyucchatrur mahäçaìkhaù
saho-mäsaà nayanty amé
SYNONYMS
atha—then; aàçuù kaçyapaù tärkñyaù—Aàçu, Kaçyapa and Tärkñya;
åtasenaù—Åtasena; tathä—and; urvaçé—Urvaçé; vidyucchatruù
mahäçaìkhaù—Vidyucchatru and Mahäçaìkha; sahaù-mäsam—the month of
Sahas (Märgaçérña); nayanti—rule; amé—these.
TRANSLATION
Aàçu as the sun-god, Kaçyapa as the sage, Tärkñya as the Yakña, Åtasena as
the Gandharva, Urvaçé as the Apsarä, Vidyucchatru as the Räkñasa and
Mahäçaìkha as the Näga rule the month of Sahas.
TEXT 42
BagA: s$PU(jaAeR'ir"í"naeimar,"
ONAR @Ayauê paÂama:
k(k(AeRq%k(: paUvaRicaiÔa:
pauSyamaAs$aM nayantyamaI
bhagaù sphürjo 'riñöanemir
ürëa äyuç ca païcamaù
karkoöakaù pürvacittiù
puñya-mäsaà nayanty amé
SYNONYMS
bhagaù sphürjaù ariñöanemiù—Bhaga, Sphürja and Ariñöanemi; ürëaù—Ürëa;
äyuù—Äyur; ca—and; païcamaù—the fifth associate; karkoöakaù
pürvacittiù—Karkoöaka and Pürvacitti; puñya-mäasam—the month of Puñya;
nayanti—rule; amé—these.
TRANSLATION
Bhaga as the sun-god, Sphürja as the Räkñasa, Ariñöanemi as the Gandharva,
Ürëa as the Yakña, Äyur as the sage, Karkoöaka as the Näga and Pürvacitti as
the Apsarä rule the month of Puñya.
TEXT 43
tvaí"A [%caIk(tanaya:
k(mbalaê italaAeÔamaA
“aöApaetaAe'Ta s$ataijaä,"
Da{tar"Aí)" wSamBar"A:
tvañöä åcéka-tanayaù
kambalaç ca tilottamä
brahmäpeto 'tha satajid
dhåtaräñöra iñam-bharäù
SYNONYMS
tvañöä—Tvañöä; åcéka-tanayaù—the son of Åcéka (Jamadagni);
kambalaù—Kambala; ca—and; tilottamä—Tilottamä;
brahmäpetaù—Brahmäpeta; atha—and; çatajit—Çatajit;
dhåtaräñöraù—Dhåtaräñöra; iñam-bharäù—the maintainers of the month Iña
(Äçvina).
TRANSLATION
Tvañöä as the sun-god; Jamadagni, the son of Åcéka, as the sage; Kambaläçva
as the Näga; Tilottamä as the Apsarä; Brahmäpeta as the Räkñasa; Çatajit as the
Yakña; and Dhåtaräñöra as the Gandharva maintain the month of Iña.
TEXT 44
ivaSNAur"ìtar"Ae r"mBaA
s$aUyaRvacaARê s$atyaijata,
ivaìAima‡aAe maKaApaeta
OjaRmaAs$aM nayantyamaI
viñëur açvataro rambhä
süryavarcäç ca satyajit
viçvämitro makhäpeta
ürja-mäsaà nayanty amé
SYNONYMS
viñëuù açvataraù rambhä—Viñëu, Açvatara and Rambhä;
süryavarcäù—Süryavarcä; ca—and; satyajit—Satyajit; viçvämétraù
makhäpetaù—Viçvämitra and Makhäpeta; ürja-mäsam—the month of Ürja
(Kärttika); nayanti—rule; amé—these.
TRANSLATION
Viñëu as the sun-god, Açvatara as the Näga, Rambhä as the Apsarä,
Süryavarcä as the Gandharva, Satyajit as the Yakña, Viçvämitra as the sage and
Makhäpeta as the Räkñasa rule the month of Ürja.
PURPORT
All these sun-gods and their associates are mentioned in divisions in the
Kürma Puräëa, as follows:
dhätäryamä ca mitraç ca
varuëaç cendra eva ca
vivasvän atha püñä ca
parjanyaç cäàçur eva ca
bhagas tvañöä ca viñëuç ca
ädityä dvädaça småtäù
pulastyaù pulahaç cätrir
vasiñöo 'thäìgirä bhåguù
gautamo 'tha bharadväjaù
kaçyapaù kratur eva ca
jamadagniù kauçikaç ca
munayo brahma-vädinäù
rathakåc cäpy athojäç ca
grämaëéù surucis tathä
ratha-citrasvanaù çrotä
aruëaù senajit tathä
tärkñya ariñöanemiç ca
åtajit satyajit tathä
atha hetiù prahetiç ca
pauruñeyo vadhas tathä
varyo vyäghras tathäpaç ca
väyur vidyud diväkaraù
brahmäpetaç ca vipendrä
yajïäpetaç ca räkñakäù
väsukiù kacchanéraç ca
takñakaù çukra eva ca
eläpatraù çaìkhapälas
tathairävata-saàjïitaù
dhanaïjayo mahäpadmas
tathä karkoöako dvijäù
kambalo 'çvataraç caiva
vahanty enaà yathä-kramam
tumburur närado hähä
hühür viçvävasus tathä
ugraseno vasurucir
viçvavasur athäparaù
citrasenas tathorëäyur
dhåöaräñöro dvijottamäù
süryavarcä dvädaçaite
gandharvä gäyatäà varäù
kåtasthaly apsaro-varyä
tathänyä puïjikasthalé
menakä sahajanyä ca
pramlocä ca dvijottamäù
anumlocä ghåtäcé ca
viçväcé corvaçé tathä
anyä ca pürvacittiù syäd
anyä caiva tilottamä
rambhä ceti dvija-çreñöhäs
tathaiväpsarasaù småtäù
TEXT 45
WtaA BagAvataAe ivaSNAAer,"
@Aid"tyasya ivaBaUtaya:
smar"taAM s$anDyayaAena|RNAAM
h"r"ntyaMh"Ae id"nae id"nae
etä bhagavato viñëor
ädityasya vibhütayaù
smaratäà sandhyayor nèëäà
haranty aàho dine dine
SYNONYMS
etäù—these; bhagavataù—of the Personality of Godhead; viñëoù—Lord Viñëu;
ädityasya—of the sun-god; vibhütayaù—the opulences; smaratäm—for those
who remember; sandhyayoù—at the junctures of the day; nèëäm—for such
men; haranti—they take away; aàhaù—sinful reactions; dine dine—day after
day.
TRANSLATION
All these personalities are the opulent expansions of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, in the form of the sun-god. These deities take
away all the sinful reactions of those who remember them each day at dawn and
sunset.
TEXT 46
ã"Ad"zAsvaipa maAs$aeSau
de"vaAe's$aAE SaiÑ"r"sya vaE
car"na, s$amantaAÔanautae
par"‡aeh" ca s$anmaitama,
dvädaçasv api mäseñu
devo 'sau ñaòbhir asya vai
caran samantät tanute
paratreha ca san-matim
SYNONYMS
dvädaçasu—in each of the twelve; api—indeed; mäseñu—months; devaù—the
lord; asau—this; ñaòbhiù—with his six types of associates; asya—for the
population of this universe; vai—certainly; caran—traveling; samantät—in all
directions; tanute—spreads; paratra—in the next life; iha—in this life;
ca—and; sat-matim—pure consciousness.
TRANSLATION
Thus, throughout the twelve months, the lord of the sun travels in all
directions with his six types of associates, disseminating among the inhabitants
of this universe purity of consciousness for both this life and the next.
TEXTS 47-48
s$aAmagyaRjauiBaRstaiéaËEÿr,"
[%Saya: s$aMstauvantyamauma,
gAnDavaARstaM ‘agAAyainta
na{tyantyaps$ar"s$aAe'ƒata:
oªa÷inta r"TaM naAgAA
ƒaAmaNyaAe r"TayaAejak(A:
caAed"yainta r"TaM pa{ïe"
naE[R%taA balazAAilana:
sämarg-yajurbhis tal-liìgair
åñayaù saàstuvanty amum
gandharväs taà pragäyanti
nåtyanty apsaraso 'grataù
unnahyanti rathaà nägä
grämaëyo ratha-yojakäù
codayanti rathaà påñöhe
nairåtä bala-çälinaù
SYNONYMS
säma-åk-yajurbhiù—with the hymns of the Säma, Åg and Yajur Vedas;
tat-liìgaiù—which reveal the sun; åñayaù—the sages; saàstuvanti—glorify;
amum—him; gandharväù—the Gandharvas; tam—about him;
pragäyanti—sing loudly; nåtyanti—dance; apsarasaù—the Apsaräs;
agrataù—in front; unnahyanti—bind up; ratham—the chariot; nägäù—the
Nägas; grämaëyaù—the Yakñas; ratha-yojakäù—those who harness the horses
to the chariot; codayanti—drive; ratham—the chariot; påñöhe—from the rear;
nairåtäù—the Räkñasas; bala-çälinaù—strong.
TRANSLATION
While the sages glorify the sun-god with the hymns of the Säma, Åg and
Yajur Vedas, which reveal his identity, the Gandharvas also sing his praises and
the Apsaräs dance before his chariot. The Nägas arrange the chariot ropes and
the Yakñas harness the horses to the chariot, while the powerful Räkñasas push
from behind.
TEXT 49
vaAlaiKalyaA: s$ah"›aAiNA
Saií"“aRöSaRyaAe'malaA:
paur"taAe'iBamauKaM yaAinta
stauvainta stauitaiBaivaRBauma,
välakhilyäù sahasräëi
ñañöir brahmarñayo 'maläù
purato 'bhimukhaà yänti
stuvanti stutibhir vibhum
SYNONYMS
välakhilyäù—the Välakhilyas; sahasräëi—thousands; ñañöiù—sixty;
brahma-åñayaù—great sages among the brähmaëas; amaläù—pure;
purataù—in front; abhimukham—facing the chariot; yänti—they go;
stuvanti—they offer praise; stutibhiù—with Vedic prayers; vibhum—to the
almighty lord.
TRANSLATION
Facing the chariot, the sixty thousand brähmaëa sages known as Välakhilyas
travel in front and offer prayers to the almighty sun-god with Vedic mantras.
TEXT 50
WvaM ÷naAid"inaDanaAe
BagAvaAna, h"ir"r"Iìr":
k(lpae k(lpae svamaAtmaAnaM
vyaU÷ laAek(Anavatyaja:
evaà hy anädi-nidhano
bhagavän harir éçvaraù
kalpe kalpe svam ätmänaà
vyühya lokän avaty ajaù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; hi—indeed; anädi—without beginning; nidhanaù—or end;
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; hariù—Lord Hari; éçvaraù—the
supreme controller; kalpe kalpe—in each day of Brahmä; svam
ätmänam—Himself; vyühya—expanding into various forms; lokän—the
worlds; avati—protects; ajaù—the unborn Lord.
TRANSLATION
For the protection of all the worlds, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Hari, who is unborn and without beginning or end, thus expands Himself
during each day of Brahmä into these specific categories of His personal
representations.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Twelfth Canto, Eleventh Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Summary Description of the Mahäpuruña."
12. The Topics of Çrémad-Bhägavatam Summarized
In this chapter, Çré Süta Gosvämé summarizes the subjects discussed in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
The Supreme Lord, Çré Hari, personally removes all the distress of a person
who hears about His glories. Whatever words glorify the innumerable
transcendental qualities of the Personality of Godhead are truthful, auspicious
and conducive to piety, whereas all other words are impure. Discussions of
topics concerning the Supreme Lord bestow ecstasy, which remains constantly
new, but persons who are like crows become absorbed in unessential topics,
those unrelated to the Personality of Godhead.
By chanting and hearing the countless names of Lord Çré Hari, which
describe His glorious qualities, all human beings can be relieved of their sins.
Neither knowledge devoid of devotion for Lord Viñëu nor fruitive work not
offered to Him have any real beauty. By constant remembrance of Lord Kåñëa,
on the other hand, all one's inauspicious desires are destroyed, one's mind is
purified, and one attains devotion for Lord Çré Hari along with knowledge
filled with realization and detachment.
Süta Gosvämé then states that previously, in the assembly of Mahäräja
Parékñit, he heard from the mouth of Çré Çukadeva the glories of Çré Kåñëa,
which annihilate all sinful reactions, and that now he has related these glories
to the sages at Naimiñäraëya. By hearing Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the spirit soul is
purified and obtains salvation from all sins and all kinds of fear. Through the
study of this scripture, one achieves the same result as that achieved by one
who studies all the Vedas, and one also achieves the fulfillment of all desires.
By studying with a controlled mind this essential compilation of all the
Puräëas, one will reach the supreme abode of the Personality of Godhead.
Every verse of this scripture. Çrémad-Bhägavatam, contains the narrations of
Lord Çré Hari, who has innumerable personal forms.
Finally, Çré Süta offers obeisances to the unborn and unlimited Supreme
Soul, Çré Kåñëa, as well as to Çré Çukadeva, the son of Vyäsa, who is capable of
destroying the sins of all living beings.
TEXT 1
s$aUta ovaAca
namaAe DamaARya mah"tae
nama: k{(SNAAya vaeDas$ae
“aöNAeByaAe namas$k{(tya
DamaARna, vaºyae s$anaAtanaAna,
süta uväca
namo dharmäya mahate
namaù kåñëäya vedhase
brahmaëebhyo namaskåtya
dharmän vakñye sanätanän
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; namaù—obeisances; dharmäya—to the
principle of religion; mahate—greatest; namaù—obeisances; kåñëäya—to Lord
Kåñëa; vedhase—the creator; brahmaëebhyaù—to the brähmaëas;
namaskåtya—offering my obeisances; dharmän—the principles of religion;
vakñye—I shall speak; sanätanän—eternal.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: Offering my obeisances to the supreme religious
principle, devotional service; to Lord Kåñëa, the supreme creator; and to all the
brähmaëas, I shall now describe the eternal principles of religion.
PURPORT
In this Twelfth Chapter of the Twelfth Canto, Süta Gosvämé will
summarize all the topics of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, beginning from the First
Canto.
TEXT 2
Wtaã": k(iTataM iva‘aA
ivaSNAAeêir"tamaàu"tama,
Bavaià"yaRd"hM" pa{í"Ae
nar"ANAAM pauç&SaAeicatama,
etad vaù kathitaà viprä
viñëoç caritam adbhutam
bhavadbhir yad ahaà påñöo
naräëäà puruñocitam
SYNONYMS
etat—these; vaù—to you; kathitam—narrated; vipräù—O sages; viñëoù—of
Lord Viñëu; caritam—the pastimes; adbhutam—wonderful; bhavadbhiù—by
your good selves; yat—which; aham—I; påñöaù—was asked about;
naräëäm—among men; puruña—for an actual human being; ucitam—suitable.
TRANSLATION
O great sages, I have narrated to you the wonderful pastimes of Lord Viñëu,
as you inquired about them from me. Hearing such narrations is the suitable
engagement for a person who is actually a human being.
PURPORT
The words naräëäà puruñocitam indicate that men and women who
actually come to the standard of human life hear and chant the glories of the
Supreme Lord, whereas uncivilized persons may not be interested in the
science of God.
TEXT 3
@‡a s$aÆÿLitaRta: s$aAºaAta,
s$avaRpaApah"r"Ae h"ir":
naAr"AyaNAAe ô$SaIke(zAAe
BagAvaAna, s$aAtvataAmpaita:
atra saìkértitaù säkñät
sarva-päpa-haro hariù
näräyaëo håñékeço
bhagavän sätvatäm patiù
SYNONYMS
atra—here, in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam; saìkértitaù—is fully glorified;
säkñät—directly; sarva-päpa—of all sins; haraù—the remover; hariù—the
Personality of Godhead, Lord Hari; näräyaëaù—Näräyaëa;
håñékeçaù—Håñékeça, the Lord of the senses; bhagavän—the Supreme
Personality; sätvatäm—of the Yadus; patiù—the master.
TRANSLATION
This literature fully glorifies the Supreme Personality of Godhead Hari, who
removes all His devotees' sinful reactions. The Lord is glorified as Näräyaëa,
Håñékeça and the Lord of the Sätvatas.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa's many holy names indicate His extraordinary transcendental
qualities. The name Hari indicates that the Lord removes all sins from the
heart of His devotee. Näräyaëa indicates that the Lord sustains the existence
of all other beings. Håñékeça indicates that Lord Kåñëa is the ultimate
controller of the senses of all living beings. The word bhagavän indicates that
Lord Kåñëa is the all-attractive Supreme Being. And the words sätvatäà patiù
indicate that the Lord is naturally the master of saintly and religious people,
especially the members of the exalted Yadu family.
TEXT 4
@‡a “aö parM" gAu÷M
jagAta: ‘aBavaApyayama,
ÁaAnaM ca taäu"paAKyaAnaM
‘aAelM( ivaÁaAnas$aMyautama,
atra brahma paraà guhyaà
jagataù prabhaväpyayam
jïänaà ca tad-upäkhyänaà
proktaà vijïäna-saàyutam
SYNONYMS
atra—here; brahma—the Absolute Truth; param—supreme;
guhyam—confidential; jagataù—of this universe; prabhava—the creation;
apyayam—and annihilation; jïänam—knowledge; ca—and;
tat-upäkhyänam—the means of cultivating it; proktam—are spoken;
vijïäna—transcendental realization; saàyutam—including.
TRANSLATION
This literature describes the mystery of the Supreme Absolute Truth, the
source of the creation and annihilation of this universe. Also presented are
divine knowledge of Him together with the process of its cultivation, and the
transcendental realization one achieves.
TEXT 5
Bail(yaAegA: s$amaAKyaAtaAe
vaEr"AgyaM ca tad"A™ayama,
paAr"IiºatamaupaAKyaAnaM
naAr"d"AKyaAnamaeva ca
bhakti-yogaù samäkhyäto
vairägyaà ca tad-äçrayam
pärékñitam upäkhyänaà
näradäkhyänam eva ca
SYNONYMS
bhakti-yogaù—the process of devotional service; samäkhyätaù—is thoroughly
enunciated; vairägyam—renunciation; ca—and; tat-äçrayam—which is
subsidiary to it; pärékñitam—of Mahäräja Parékñit; upäkhyänam—the history;
närada—of Närada; äkhyänam—the history; eva—indeed; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
The following topics are also narrated: the process of devotional service
together with its subsidiary feature of renunciation, and the histories of
Mahäräja Parékñit and the sage Närada.
TEXT 6
‘aAyaAepavaezAAe r"AjaSaeRr,"
iva‘azAApaAtpar"Iiºata:
zAuk(sya “aöSaRBasya
s$aMvaAd"ê par"Iiºata:
präyopaveço räjarñer
vipra-çäpät parékñitaù
çukasya brahmarñabhasya
saàvädaç ca parékñitaù
SYNONYMS
präya-upaveçaù—the fast until death; räja-åñeù—of the sage among kings;
vipra-çäpät—because of the curse of the brähmaëa's son; parékñitaù—of King
Parékñit; çukasya—of Çukadeva; brahma-åñabhasya—the best of brähmaëas;
saàvädaù—the conversation; ca—and; parékñitaù—with Parékñit.
TRANSLATION
Also described are saintly King Parékñit's sitting down to fast until death in
response to the curse of a brähmaëa's son, and the conversations between
Parékñit and Çukadeva Gosvämé, who is the best of all brähmaëas.
TEXT 7
yaAegADaAr"NAyaAet‚(Ainta:
s$aMvaAd"Ae naAr"d"AjayaAe:
@vataAr"AnaugAItaM ca
s$agAR: ‘aADaAinak(Ae'ƒata:
yoga-dhäraëayotkräntiù
saàvädo näradäjayoù
avatäränugétaà ca
sargaù prädhäniko 'grataù
SYNONYMS
yoga-dhäraëayä—by fixed meditation in yoga; utkräntiù—the attainment of
liberation at the time of passing away; saàvädaù—the conversation;
närada-ajayoù—between Närada and Brahmä; avatära-anugétam—the listing
of the incarnations of the Supreme Lord; ca—and; sargaù—the process of
creation; prädhänikaù—from the unmanifest material nature; agrataù—in
progressive order.
TRANSLATION
The Bhägavatam explains how one can attain liberation at the time of death
by practicing fixed meditation in yoga. It also contains a discussion between
Närada and Brahmä, an enumeration of the incarnations of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and a description of how the universe was created in
progressive sequence, beginning from the unmanifest stage of material nature.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains that it would be difficult to
give a complete list of the numerous accounts and topics contained in the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Therefore it is understood that Süta Gosvämé is merely
summarizing the topics. We should not consider the topics he fails to mention
here less important or superfluous, since every letter and word of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is absolute, Kåñëa conscious sound vibration.
TEXT 8
ivaäu"r"AeÜ"vas$aMvaAd":
ºaÔa{maE‡aeyayaAestata:
paur"ANAs$aMih"taA‘a´aAe
mah"Apauç&Sas$aMisTaita:
viduroddhava-saàvädaù
kñattå-maitreyayos tataù
puräëa-saàhitä-praçno
mahä-puruña-saàsthitiù
SYNONYMS
vidura-uddhava—between Vidura and Uddhava; saàvädaù—the discussion;
kñattå-maitreyayoù—between Vidura and Maitreya; tataù—then;
puräëa-saàhitä—concerning this Puräëic compilation; praçnaù—inquiries;
mahä-puruña—within the Supreme Personality of Godhead; saàsthitiù—the
winding up of creation.
TRANSLATION
This scripture also relates the discussions Vidura had with Uddhava and
with Maitreya, inquiries about the subject matter of this Puräëa, and the
winding up of creation within the body of the Supreme Lord at the time of
annihilation.
TEXT 9
tata: ‘aAk{(itak(: s$agAR:
s$aæa vaEk{(itak(Aê yae
tataAe “aöANx"s$amBaUitar,"
vaEr"Aja: pauç&SaAe yata:
tataù präkåtikaù sargaù
sapta vaikåtikäç ca ye
tato brahmäëòa-sambhütir
vairäjaù puruño yataù
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; präkåtikaù—from material nature; sargaù—the creation;
sapta—the seven; vaikåtikäù—stages of creation derived by transformation;
ca—and; ye—which; tataù—then; brahma-aëòa—of the universal egg;
sambhütiù—the construction; vairäjaù puruñaù—the universal form of the
Lord; yataù—from which.
TRANSLATION
The creation effected by the agitation of the modes of material nature, the
seven stages of evolution by elemental transformation, and the construction of
the universal egg, from which arises the universal form of the Supreme
Lord—all these are thoroughly described.
TEXT 10
k(Alasya sTaUlas$aUºmasya
gAita: paás$amauà"va:
Bauva oÜ"r"NAe'mBaAeDaer,"
ih"r"NyaAºavaDaAe yaTaA
kälasya sthüla-sükñmasya
gatiù padma-samudbhavaù
bhuva uddharaëe 'mbhodher
hiraëyäkña-vadho yathä
SYNONYMS
kälasya—of time; sthüla-sükñmasya—gross and subtle; gatiù—the movement;
padma—of the lotus; samudbhavaù—the generation; bhuvaù—of the earth;
uddharaëe—in connection with the deliverance; ambhodheù—from the ocean;
hiraëyäkña-vadhaù—the killing of the demon Hiraëyäkña; yathä—as it
occurred.
TRANSLATION
Other topics include the subtle and gross movements of time, the generation
of the lotus from the navel of Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, and the killing of the
demon Hiraëyäkña when the earth was delivered from the Garbhodaka Ocean.
TEXT 11
ODvaRitayaRgAvaAfs$agAAeR
ç&‰"s$agARstaTaEva ca
@DaRnaAr"Iìr"syaATa
yata: svaAyamBauvaAe manau:
ürdhva-tiryag-aväk-sargo
rudra-sargas tathaiva ca
ardha-näréçvarasyätha
yataù sväyambhuvo manuù
SYNONYMS
ürdhva—of the higher species, the demigods; tiryak—of the animals;
aväk—and of lower species; sargaù—the creation; rudra—of Lord Çiva;
sargaù—the creation; tathä—and; eva—indeed; ca—also; ardha-näré—as a
half man, half woman; éçvarasya—of the lord; atha—then; yataù—from whom;
sväyambhuvaù manuù—Sväyambhuva Manu.
TRANSLATION
The Bhägavatam also describes the creation of demigods, animals and
demoniac species of life; the birth of Lord Rudra; and the appearance of
Sväyambhuva Manu from the half-man, half-woman Éçvara.
TEXT 12
zAtaè&paA ca yaA ñINAAma,
@AâA ‘ak{(itaç&ÔamaA
s$antaAnaAe DamaRpa¥aInaAM
k(dR"masya ‘ajaApatae:
çatarüpä ca yä stréëäm
ädyä prakåtir uttamä
santäno dharma-patnénäà
kardamasya prajäpateù
SYNONYMS
çatarüpä—Çatarüpä; ca—and; yä—who; stréëäm—of women; ädyä—the first;
prakåtiù—the consort; uttamä—best; santänaù—the progeny;
dharma-patnénäm—of the pious wives; kardamasya—of the sage Kardama;
prajäpateù—the progenitor.
TRANSLATION
Also related are the appearance of the first woman, Çatarüpä, who was the
excellent consort of Manu, and the offspring of the pious wives of Prajäpati
Kardama.
TEXT 13
@vataAr"Ae BagAvata:
k(ipalasya mah"Atmana:
de"vaó"tyaAê s$aMvaAd":
k(ipalaena ca DaImataA
avatäro bhagavataù
kapilasya mahätmanaù
devahütyäç ca saàvädaù
kapilena ca dhématä
SYNONYMS
avatäraù—the descent; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
kapilasya—Lord Kapila; mahä-ätmanaù—the Supreme Soul; devahütyäù—of
Devahüti; ca—and; saàvädaù—the conversation; kapilena—with Lord Kapila;
ca—and; dhé-matä—the intelligent.
TRANSLATION
The Bhägavatam describes the incarnation of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead as the exalted sage Kapila and records the conversation between that
greatly learned soul and His mother, Devahüti.
TEXTS 14-15
nava“aös$amautpaiÔar,"
d"ºayaÁaivanaAzAnama,
‹auvasya cair"taM paêAta,
pa{TaAe: ‘aAcaInabaihR"Sa:
naAr"d"sya ca s$aMvaAd"s$a,
tata: ‘aEya˜ataM iã"jaA:
naABaestataAe'naucair"tama,
[%SaBasya Bar"tasya ca
nava-brahma-samutpattir
dakña-yajïa-vinäçanam
dhruvasya caritaà paçcät
påthoù präcénabarhiñaù
näradasya ca saàvädas
tataù praiyavrataà dvijäù
näbhes tato 'nucaritam
åñabhasya bharatasya ca
SYNONYMS
nava-brahma—of the nine brähmaëas (the sons of Lord Brahmä, headed by
Maréci); samutpattiù—the descendants; dakña-yajïa—of the sacrifice
performed by Dakña; vinäçanam—the destruction; dhruvasya—of Dhruva
Mahäräja; caritam—the history; paçcät—then; påthoù—of King Påthu;
präcénabarhiñaù—of Präcénabarhi; näradasya—with Närada Muni; ca—and;
saàvädaù—his conversation; tataù—then; praiyavratam—the story of
Mahäräja Priyavrata; dvijäù—O brähmaëas; näbheù—of Näbhi; tataù—then;
anucaritam—the life story; åñabhasya—of Lord Åñabha; bharatasya—of
Bharata Mahäräja; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
Also described are the progeny of the nine great brähmaëas, the destruction
of Dakña's sacrifice, and the history of Dhruva Mahäräja, followed by the
histories of King Påthu and King Präcénabarhi, the discussion between
Präcénabarhi and Närada, and the life of Mahäräja Priyavrata. Then, O
brähmaëas, the Bhägavatam tells of the character and activities of King Näbhi,
Lord Åñabha and King Bharata.
TEXT 16
ã"IpavaSaRs$amau"‰"ANAAM
igAir"naâupavaNARnama,
jyaAeitaê‚(sya s$aMsTaAnaM
paAtaAlanar"k(isTaita:
dvépa-varña-samudräëäà
giri-nady-upavarëanam
jyotiç-cakrasya saàsthänaà
pätäla-naraka-sthitiù
SYNONYMS
dvépa-varña-samudräëäm—of the continents, great islands and oceans;
giri-nadé—of the mountains and rivers; upavarëanam—the detailed
description; jyotiù-cakrasya—of the celestial sphere; saàsthänam—the
arrangement; pätäla—of the subterranean regions; naraka—and of hell;
sthitiù—the situation.
TRANSLATION
The Bhägavatam gives an elaborate description of the earth's continents,
regions, oceans, mountains and rivers. Also described are the arrangement of
the celestial sphere and the conditions found in the subterranean regions and in
hell.
TEXT 17
d"ºajanma ‘acaetaAeByas$a,
tatpau‡aINAAM ca s$antaita:
yataAe de"vaAs$aur"nar"As$a,
itayaRx.~nagAKagAAd"ya:
dakña-janma pracetobhyas
tat-putréëäà ca santatiù
yato deväsura-naräs
tiryaì-naga-khagädayaù
SYNONYMS
dakña-janma—the birth of Dakña; pracetobhyaù—from the Pracetäs;
tat-putréëäm—of his daughters; ca—and; santatiù—the progeny; yataù—from
which; deva-asura-naräù—the demigods, demons and human beings;
tiryak-naga-khaga-ädayaù—the animals, serpents, birds and other species.
TRANSLATION
The rebirth of Prajäpati Dakña as the son of the Pracetäs, and the progeny of
Dakña's daughters, who initiated the races of demigods, demons, human beings,
animals, serpents, birds and so on—all this is described.
TEXT 18
tvaAí)"sya janmainaDanaM
pau‡ayaAeê id"taeiãR"jaA:
dE"tyaeìr"sya cair"taM
‘aoe"Ad"sya mah"Atmana:
tväñörasya janma-nidhanaà
putrayoç ca diter dvijäù
daityeçvarasya caritaà
prahrädasya mahätmanaù
SYNONYMS
tväñörasya—of the son of Tvañöä (Våtra); janma-nidhanam—the birth and
death; putrayoù—of the two sons, Hiraëyäkña and Hiraëyakaçipu; ca—and;
diteù—of Diti; dvijäù—O brähmaëas; daitya-éçvarasya—of the greatest of the
Daityas; caritam—the history; prahrädasya—of Prahläda; mahä-ätmanaù—the
great soul.
TRANSLATION
O brähmaëas, also recounted are the births and deaths of Våträsura and of
Diti's sons Hiraëyäkña and Hiraëyakaçipu, as well as the history of the greatest
of Diti's descendants, the exalted soul Prahläda.
TEXT 19
manvantar"Anauk(TanaM
gAjaen‰"sya ivamaAeºaNAma,
manvantar"AvataAr"Aê
ivaSNAAehR"yaizAr"Ad"ya:
manv-antaränukathanaà
gajendrasya vimokñaëam
manv-antarävatäräç ca
viñëor hayaçirädayaù
SYNONYMS
manu-antara—of reigns of the various Manus; anukathanam—the detailed
description; gaya-indrasya—of the king of the elephants; vimokñaëam—the
liberation; manu-antara-avatäräù—the particular incarnations of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead in each manv-antara; ca-and; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu;
hayaçirä-ädayaù—such as Lord Hayaçérñä.
TRANSLATION
The reign of each Manu, the liberation of Gajendra, and the special
incarnations of Lord Viñëu in each manv-antara, such as Lord Hayaçérñä, are
described as well.
TEXT 20
k(AEma< maAtsyaM naAr"is$aMhM"
vaAmanaM ca jagAtpatae:
ºaIr"Aed"maTanaM taã"ä,"
@ma{taATaeR id"vaAEk(s$aAma,
kaurmaà mätsyaà närasiàhaà
vämanaà ca jagat-pateù
kñéroda-mathanaà tadvad
amåtärthe divaukasäm
SYNONYMS
kaurmam—the incarnation as a tortoise; mätsyam—as a fish; närasiàham—as
a man-lion; vämanam—as a dwarf; ca—and; jagat-pateù—of the Lord of the
universe; kñéra-uda—of the ocean of milk; mathanam—the churning;
tadvat—thus; amåta-arthe—for the sake of nectar; diva-okasäm—on the part
of the inhabitants of heaven.
TRANSLATION
The Bhägavatam also tells of the appearances of the Lord of the universe as
Kürma, Matsya, Narasiàha and Vämana, and of the demigods' churning of the
milk ocean to obtain nectar.
TEXT 21
de"vaAs$aur"mah"AyauÜM"
r"AjavaMzAAnauk(LtaRnama,
wºvaAku(janma taãM"zA:
s$auâu°asya mah"Atmana:
deväsura-mahä-yuddhaà
räja-vaàçänukértanam
ikñväku-janma tad-vaàçaù
sudyumnasya mahätmanaù
SYNONYMS
deva-asura—of the demigods and demons; mahä-yuddham—the great war;
räja-vaàça—of the dynasties of kings; anukértanam—the reciting in sequence;
ikñväku-janma—the birth of Ikñväku; tat-vaàçaù—his dynasty;
sudyamnasya—(and the dynasty) of Sudyumna; mahä-ätmanaù—the great
soul.
TRANSLATION
An account of the great battle fought between the demigods and the demons,
a systematic description of the dynasties of various kings, and narrations
concerning Ikñväku's birth, his dynasty and the dynasty of the pious
Sudyumna—all are presented within this literature.
TEXT 22
wlaAepaAKyaAnama‡aAelM(
taAr"AepaAKyaAnamaeva ca
s$aUyaRvaMzAAnauk(TanaM
zAzAAd"AâA na{gAAd"ya:
ilopäkhyänam atroktaà
täropäkhyänam eva ca
sürya-vaàçänukathanaà
çaçädädyä någädayaù
SYNONYMS
ilä-upäkhyänam—the history of Ilä; acra—herein; uktam—is spoken;
tärä-upäkhyänam—the history of Tärä; eva—indeed; ca—also;
sürya-vaàça—of the dynasty of the sun-god; anukathanam—the narration;
çaçäda-ädyäù—Çaçäda and others; någa-ädayaù—Någa and others.
TRANSLATION
Also related are the histories of Ilä and Tärä, and the description of the
descendants of the sun-god, including such kings as Çaçäda and Någa.
TEXT 23
s$aAEk(nyaM caATa zAyaARtae:
k(ku(tsTasya ca DaImata:
KaÅ%AËÿsya ca maAnDaAtau:
s$aAEBare": s$agAr"sya ca
saukanyaà cätha çaryäteù
kakutsthasya ca dhémataù
khaöväìgasya ca mändhätuù
saubhareù sagarasya ca
SYNONYMS
saukanyam—the story of Sukanyä; ca—and; atha—then; çaryäteù—that of
Çaryäti; kakutsthasya—of Kakutstha; ca—and; dhé-mataù—who was an
intelligent king; khaöväìgasya—of Khaöväìga; ca—and; mändhätuù—of
Mändhätä; saubhareù—of Saubhari; sagarasya—of Sagara; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
The histories of Sukanyä, Çaryäti, the intelligent Kakutstha, Khaöväìga,
Mändhätä, Saubhari and Sagara are narrated.
TEXT 24
r"Amasya k(AezAlaen‰"sya
cair"taM ik(ilbaSaApah"ma,
inamaer"Ëÿpair"tyaAgAAe
janak(AnaAM ca s$amBava:
rämasya koçalendrasya
caritaà kilbiñäpaham
nimer aìga-parityägo
janakänäà ca sambhavaù
SYNONYMS
rämasya—of Lord Rämacandra; koçala-indrasya—the King of Koçala;
caritam—the pastimes; kilbiña-apaham—which drive away all sins; nimeù—of
King Nimi; aìga-parityägaù—the giving up of his body; janakänäm—of the
descendants of Janaka; ca—and; sambhavaù—the appearance.
TRANSLATION
The Bhägavatam narrates the sanctifying pastimes of Lord Rämacandra, the
King of Kosala, and also explains how King Nimi abandoned his material body.
The appearance of the descendants of King Janaka is also mentioned.
TEXTS 25-26
r"Amasya BaAgAR"vaen‰"sya
ina:ºata{wRk(r"NAM Bauva:
Welasya s$aAemavaMzAsya
yayaAtaenaRò"Sasya ca
d"AESmantaeBaRr"tasyaAipa
zAAntanaAestats$autasya ca
yayaAtaejyaeRï"pau‡asya
yad"Aeva<zAAe'nauk(LitaRta:
rämasya bhärgavendrasya
niùkñatåé-karaëaà bhuvaù
ailasya soma-vaàçasya
yayäter nahuñasya ca
dauñmanter bharatasyäpi
çäntanos tat-sutasya ca
yayäter jyeñöha-putrasya
yador vaàço 'nukértitaù
SYNONYMS
rämasya—by Lord Paraçuräma; bhärgava-indrasya—the greatest of the
descendants of Bhågu Muni; niùkñatré-karaëam—the elimination of all the
kñatriyas; bhuvaù—of the earth; ailasya—of Mahäräja Aila;
soma-vaàçasya—of the dynasty of the moon-god; yayäteù—of Yayäti;
nahuñasya—of Nahuña; ca—and; dauñmanteù—of the son of Duñmanta;
bharatasya—Bharata; api—also; çäntanoù—of King Çäntanu; tat—his;
sutasya—of the son, Bhéñma; ca—and; yayäteù—of Yayäti;
jyeñöha-putrasya—of the eldest son; yadoù—Yadu; vaàçaù—the dynasty;
anu-kértitaù—is glorified.
TRANSLATION
The Çrémad-Bhägavatam describes how Lord Paraçuräma, the greatest
descendant of Bhågu, annihilated all the kñatriyas on the face of the earth. It
further recounts the lives of glorious kings who appeared in the dynasty of the
moon-god-kings such as Aila, Yayäti, Nahuña, Duñmanta's son Bharata,
Çäntanu and Çäntanu's son Bhéñma. Also described is the great dynasty founded
by King Yadu, the eldest son of Yayäti.
TEXT 27
ya‡aAvataI[%NAAe BagAvaAna,
k{(SNAAKyaAe jagAd"Iìr":
vas$aude"vagA{he" janma
tataAe va{iÜ"ê gAAeku(lae
yaträvatéåëo bhagavän
kåñëäkhyo jagad-éçvaraù
vasudeva-gåhe janma
tato våddhiç ca gokule
SYNONYMS
yatra—in which dynasty; avatérëaù—descended; bhagavän—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; kåñëa-äkhyaù—known as Kåñëa; jagat-éçvaraù—the
Lord of the universe; vasudeva-gåhe—in the home of Vasudeva; janma—His
birth; tataù—subsequently; våddhiù—His growing up; ca—and; gokule—in
Gokula.
TRANSLATION
How Çré Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead and Lord of the
universe, descended into this Yadu dynasty, how He took birth in the home of
Vasudeva, and how He then grew up in Gokula—all this is described in detail.
TEXTS 28-29
tasya k(maARNyapaAr"AiNA
k(LitaRtaAnyas$aur"iã"Sa:
paUtanaAs$aupaya:paAnaM
zAk(q%Ae»aAq%naM izAzAAe:
ta{NAAvataRsya inaSpaeSas$a,
taTaEva bak(vats$ayaAe:
@GaAs$aur"vaDaAe DaA‡aA
vats$apaAlaAvagAUh"nama,
tasya karmäëy apäräëi
kértitäny asura-dviñaù
pütanäsu-payaù-pänaà
çakaöoccäöanaà çiçoù
tåëävartasya niñpeñas
tathaiva baka-vatsayoù
aghäsura-vadho dhäträ
vatsa-pälävagühanam
SYNONYMS
tasya—His; karmäëé—activities; apäräëi—innumerable; kértitäni—are
glorified; asura-dviñaù—of the enemy of the demons; pütanä—of the witch
Pütanä; asu—along with her life air; payaù—of the milk; pänam—the
drinking; çakata—of the cart; uccäöanam—the breaking; çiçoù—by the child;
tåëävartasya—of Tåëävarta; niñpeñaù—the trampling; tathä—and;
eva—indeed; baka-vatsayoù—of the demons named Baka and Vatsa;
agha-asura—of the demon Agha; vadhaù—the killing; dhäträ—by Lord
Brahmä; vatsa-päla—of the calves and cowherd boys; avagühanam—the hiding
away.
TRANSLATION
Also glorified are the innumerable pastimes of Çré Kåñëa, the enemy of the
demons, including His childhood pastimes of sucking out Pütanä's life air along
with her breast-milk, breaking the cart, trampling down Tåëävarta, killing
Bakäsura, Vatsäsura and Aghäsura, and the pastimes He enacted when Lord
Brahmä hid His calves and cowherd boyfriends in a cave.
TEXT 30
Daenauk(sya s$ah"”aAtau:
‘alambasya ca s$aÉÿya:
gAAepaAnaAM ca pair"‡aANAM
d"AvaA¢ae: pair"s$apaRta:
dhenukasya saha-bhrätuù
pralambasya ca saìkñayaù
gopänäà ca pariträëaà
dävägneù parisarpataù
SYNONYMS
dhenukasya—of Dhenuka; saha-bhrätuù—along with his companions;
pralambasya—of Pralamba; ca—and; saìkñayaù—the destruction;
gopänäm—of the cowherd boys; ca—and; pariträëam—the saving;
däva-agneù—from the forest fire; parisarpataù—which was encircling.
TRANSLATION
The Çrémad-Bhägavatam tells how Lord Kåñëa and Lord Balaräma killed the
demon Dhenukäsura and his companions, how Lord Balaräma destroyed
Pralambäsura, and also how Kåñëa saved the cowherd boys from a raging forest
fire that had encircled them.
TEXTS 31-33
d"manaM k(AilayasyaAhe"r,"
mah"Ahe"naRnd"maAeºaNAma,
˜atacayaAR tau k(nyaAnaAM
ya‡a tauí"Ae'cyautaAe ˜ataE:
‘as$aAd"Ae yaÁapa¥aIByaAe
iva‘aANAAM caAnautaApanama,
gAAevaDaRnaAeÜ"Ar"NAM ca
zA‚(sya s$aur"Baer"Ta
yaÁaiBaSaek(: k{(SNAsya
ñIiBa: ‚(Lx"A ca r"Ai‡aSau
zAÊÿcaUx"sya äu"bauRÜe"r,"
vaDaAe'ir"í"sya ke(izAna:
damanaà käliyasyäher
mahäher nanda-mokñaëam
vrata-caryä tu kanyänäà
yatra tuñöo 'cyuto vrataiù
prasädo yajïa-patnébhyo
vipräëäà cänutäpanam
govardhanoddhäraëaà ca
çakrasya surabher atha
yajïabhiñekaù kåñëasya
strébhiù kréòä ca rätriñu
çaìkhacüòasya durbuddher
vadho 'riñöasya keçinaù
SYNONYMS
damanam—the subduing; käliyasya—of Käliya; aheù—the snake;
mahä-aheù—from the great serpent; nanda-mokñaëam—the rescue of
Mahäräja Nanda; vrata-caryä—the execution of austere vows; tu—and;
kanyänäm—of the gopés; yatra—by which; tuñöaù—became satisfied;
acyutaù—Lord Kåñëa; vrataiù—with their vows; prasädaù—the mercy;
yajïa-patnébhyaù—to the wives of the brähmaëas performing Vedic sacrifices;
vipräëäm—of the brähmaëa husbands; ca—and; anutäpanam—the experience
of remorse; govardhana-uddhäraëam—the lifting of Govardhana Hill;
ca—and; çakrasya—by Indra; surabheù—along with the Surabhi cow;
atha—then; yajïa-abhiñekaù—the worship and ritual bathing; kåñëasya—of
Lord Kåñëa; strébhiù—together with the women; kréòä—the sporting; ca—and;
rätriñu—in the nights; çaìkhacüòasya—of the demon Çaìkhacüòa;
durbuddheù—who was foolish; vadhaù—the killing; ariñöasya—of Ariñöa;
keçinaù—of Keçé.
TRANSLATION
The chastisement of the serpent Käliya; the rescue of Nanda Mahäräja from
a great snake; the severe vows performed by the young gopés, who thus satisfied
Lord Kåñëa; the mercy He showed the wives of the Vedic brähmaëas, who felt
remorse; the lifting of Govardhana Hill followed by the worship and bathing
ceremony performed by Indra and the Surabhi cow; Lord Kåñëa's nocturnal
pastimes with the cowherd girls; and the killing of the foolish demons
Çaìkhacüòa, Ariñöa and Keçé—all these pastimes are elaborately recounted.
TEXT 34
@‚U(r"AgAmanaM paêAta,
‘asTaAnaM r"Amak{(SNAyaAe:
˜ajañINAAM ivalaApaê
maTaur"AlaAek(naM tata:
akrürägamanaà paçcät
prasthänaà räma-kåñëayoù
vraja-stréëäà viläpaç ca
mathurälokanaà tataù
SYNONYMS
akrüra—of Akrüra; ägamanam—the coming; paçcät—after that;
prasthänam—the departure; räma-kåñëayoù—of Lord Balaräma and Lord
Kåñëa; vraja-stréëäm—of the women of Våndävana; viläpaù—the lamentation;
ca—and; mathurä-älokanam—the seeing of Mathurä; tataù—then.
TRANSLATION
The Bhägavatam describes the arrival of Akrüra, the subsequent departure
of Kåñëa and Balaräma, the lamentation of the gopés and the touring of
Mathurä.
TEXT 35
gAjamauií"k(caANAUr"-
kM(s$aAd"InaAM taTaA vaDa:
ma{tasyaAnayanaM s$aUnaAe:
pauna: s$aAnd"IpanaegAuRr"Ae:
gaja-muñöika-cäëürakaàsädénäà
tathä vadhaù
måtasyänayanaà sünoù
punaù sändépaner guroù
SYNONYMS
gaja—of the elephant Kuvalayäpéòa; muñöika-cäëüra—of the wrestlers Muñöika
and Cäëüra; kaàsa—of Kaàsa; ädénäm—and of others; tathä—also;
vadhaù—the killing; måtasya—who had died; änayanam—the bringing back;
sünoù—of the son; punaù—again; sändépaneù—of Sändépani; guroù—their
spiritual master.
TRANSLATION
Also narrated are how Kåñëa and Balaräma killed the elephant Kuvalayäpéòa,
the wrestlers Muñöika and Cäëüra, and Kaàsa and other demons, as well as
how Kåñëa brought back the dead son of His spiritual master, Sändépani Muni.
TEXT 36
maTaur"AyaAM inavas$ataA
yaäu"ca‚(sya yait‘ayama,
k{(tamauÜ"var"AmaAByaAM
yautaena h"ir"NAA iã"jaA:
mathuräyäà nivasatä
yadu-cakrasya yat priyam
kåtam uddhava-rämäbhyäà
yutena hariëä dvijäù
SYNONYMS
mathuräyäm—in Mathurä; nivasatä—by Him who was residing;
yadu-cakrasya—for the circle of Yadus; yat—which; priyam—gratifying;
kåtam—was done; uddhava-rämäbhyäm—with Uddhava and Balaräma;
yutena—joined; hariëä—by Lord Hari; dvijäù—O brähmaëas.
TRANSLATION
Then, O brähmaëas, this scripture recounts how Lord Hari, while residing
in Mathurä in the company of Uddhava and Balaräma, performed pastimes for
the satisfaction of the Yadu dynasty.
TEXT 37
jar"As$anDas$amaAnaItas$
aEnyasya baò"zAAe vaDa:
GaAtanaM yavanaen‰"sya
ku(zAsTalyaA inavaezAnama,
jaräsandha-samänétasainyasya
bahuço vadhaù
ghätanaà yavanendrasya
kuçasthalyä niveçanam
SYNONYMS
jaräsandha—bv King Jaräsandha; samänéta—assembled; sainyasya—of the
army; bahuçaù—many times; vadhaù—the annihilation; ghätanam—the
killing; yavana-indrasya—of the king of the barbarians; kuçasthalyäù—of
Dvärakä; niveçanam—the founding.
TRANSLATION
Also described are the annihilation of each of the many armies brought by
Jaräsandha, the killing of the barbarian king Kälayavana and the establishment
of Dvärakä City.
TEXT 38
@Ad"AnaM paAir"jaAtasya
s$auDamaARyaA: s$aur"AlayaAta,
ç&ifmaNyaA h"r"NAM yauÜe"
‘amaTya iã"SataAe h"re":
ädänaà pärijätasya
sudharmäyäù surälayät
rukmiëyä haraëaà yuddhe
pramathya dviñato hareù
SYNONYMS
ädänam—the receiving; pärijätasya—of the pärijäta tree; sudharmäyäù—of the
Sudharmä assembly hall; sura-älayät—from the abode of the demigods;
rukmiëyäù—of Rukmiëé; haraëam—the kidnapping; yuddhe—in battle;
pramathya—defeating; dviñataù—His rivals; hareù—by Lord Hari.
TRANSLATION
This work also describes how Lord Kåñëa brought from heaven the pärijäta
tree and the Sudharmä assembly hall, and how He kidnapped Rukmiëé by
defeating all His rivals in battle.
TEXT 39
h"r"sya ja{mBaNAM yauÜe"
baANAsya Baujak{(ntanama,
‘aAgjyaAeitaSapaitaM h"tvaA
k(nyaAnaAM h"r"NAM ca yata,
harasya jåmbhaëaà yuddhe
bäëasya bhuja-kåntanam
prägjyotiña-patià hatvä
kanyänäà haraëaà ca yat
SYNONYMS
harasya—of Lord Çiva; jåmbhaëam—the forced yawning; yuddhe—in battle;
bäëasya—of Bäëa; bhuja—of the arms; kåntanam—the cutting,;
prägjyotiña-patim—the master of the city Prägjyotiña; hatvä—killing;
kanyänäm—of the unmarried virgins; haraëam—the removal; ca—and;
yat—which.
TRANSLATION
Also narrated are how Lord Kåñëa, in the battle with Bäëäsura, defeated
Lord Çiva by making him yawn, how the Lord cut off Bäëäsura's arms, and how
He killed the master of Prägjyotiñapura and then rescued the young princesses
held captive in that city.
TEXTS 40-41
caEâpaAENx")k(zAAlvaAnaAM
d"ntava‚(sya äu"maRtae:
zAmbar"Ae iã"ivad": paIQ&Ae
maur": paÂajanaAd"ya:
maAh"AtmyaM ca vaDastaeSaAM
vaAr"ANAsyaAê d"Ah"nama,
BaAr"Avatar"NAM BaUmaer,"
inaimaÔaIk{(tya paANx"vaAna,
caidya-pauëòraka-çälvänäà
dantavakrasya durmateù
çambaro dvividaù péöho
muraù païcajanädayaù
mähätmyaà ca vadhas teñäà
väräëasyäç ca dähanam
bhärävataraëaà bhümer
nimitté-kåtya päëòavän
SYNONYMS
caidya—of the King of Cedi, Çiçupäla; pauëòraka—of Pauëòraka;
çälvänäm—and of Çälva; dantavakrasya—of Dantavakra; durmateù—the
foolish; çambaraù dvividaù péöhaù—the demons Çambara, Dvivida and Péöha;
muraù païcajana-ädayaù—Mura, Païcajana and others; mähätmyam—the
prowess; ca—and; vadhaù—the death; teñäm—of these; väräëasyäù—of the
holy city of Benares; ca—and; dähanam—the burning; bhära—of the burden;
avataraëam—the reduction; bhümeù—of the earth; nimitté-kåtya—making the
apparent cause; päëòavän—the sons of Päëòu.
TRANSLATION
There are descriptions of the powers and the deaths of the King of Cedi,
Pauëòraka, Çälva, the foolish Dantavakra, Çambara, Dvivida, Péöha, Mura,
Païcajana and other demons, along with a description of how Väräëasé was
burned to the ground. The Bhägavatam also recounts how Lord Kåñëa relieved
the earth's burden by engaging the Päëòavas in the Battle of Kurukñetra.
TEXTS 42-43
iva‘azAApaApade"zAena
s$aMh"Ar": svaku(lasya ca
oÜ"vasya ca s$aMvaAd"Ae
vas$aude"vasya caAàu"ta:
ya‡aAtmaivaâA ÷iKalaA
‘aAel(A DamaRivainaNARya:
tataAe matyaRpair"tyaAgA
@AtmayaAegAAnauBaAvata:
vipra-çäpäpadeçena
saàhäraù sva-kulasya ca
uddhavasya ca saàvädo
vasudevasya cädbhutaù
yaträtma-vidyä hy akhilä
proktä dharma-vinirëayaù
tato martya-parityäga
ätma-yogänubhävataù
SYNONYMS
vipra-çäpa—of the curse by the brähmaëas; apadeçena—on the pretext;
saàhäraù—the withdrawal; sva-kulasya—of His own family; ca—and;
uddhavasya—with Uddhava; ca—and; saàvädaù—the discussion;
vasudevasya-of Vasudeva (with Närada); ca—and; adbhutaù—wonderful;
yatra—in which; ätma-vidyä—the science of the self; hi—indeed;
akhilä—completely; proktä—was spoken; dharma-vinirëayaù—the
ascertainment of the principles of religion; tataù—then; martya—of the
mortal world; parityägaù—the giving up; ätma-yoga—of His personal mystic
power; anubhävataù—on the strength.
TRANSLATION
How the Lord withdrew His own dynasty on the pretext of the brähmaëas'
curse; Vasudeva's conversation with Närada; the extraordinary conversation
between Uddhava and Kåñëa, which reveals the science of the self in complete
detail and elucidates the religious principles of human society; and then how
Lord Kåñëa gave up this mortal world by His own mystic power—the
Bhägavatam narrates all these events.
TEXT 44
yaugAlaºaNAva{iÔaê
k(laAE na|NAAmaupaplava:
catauivaRDaê ‘alaya
otpaiÔaiñivaDaA taTaA
yuga-lakñaëa-våttiç ca
kalau nèëäm upaplavaù
catur-vidhaç ca pralaya
utpattis tri-vidhä tathä
SYNONYMS
yuga—of the different ages; lakñaëa—the characteristics; våttiù—and the
corresponding activities; ca—also; kalau—in the present age of Kali;
nèëäm—of men; upaplavaù—the total disturbance; catuù-vidhaù—fourfold;
ca—and; pralayaù—the process of annihilation; utpattiù—creation;
tri-vidhä—of three kinds; tathä—and.
TRANSLATION
This work also describes people's characteristics and behavior in the
different ages, the chaos men experience in the age of Kali, the four kinds of
annihilation and the three kinds of creation.
TEXT 45
de"h"tyaAgAê r"AjaSaeRr,"
ivaSNAur"Atasya DaImata:
zAAKaA‘aNAyanama{Saer,"
maAkR(Nxe"yasya s$atk(TaA
mah"Apauç&SaivanyaAs$a:
s$aUyaRsya jagAd"Atmana:
deha-tyägaç ca räjarñer
viñëu-rätasya dhémataù
çäkhä-praëayanam åñer
märkaëòeyasya sat-kathä
mahä-puruña-vinyäsaù
süryasya jagad-ätmanaù
SYNONYMS
deha-tyägaù—the relinquishing of his body; ca—and; räja-åñeù—by the saintly
king; viñëu-rätasya—Parékñit; dhé-mataù—the intelligent; çäkhä—of the
branches of the Vedas; praëayanam—the dissemination; åñeù—from the great
sage Vyäsadeva; märkaëòeyasya—of Märkaëòeya Åñi; sat-kathä—the pious
narration; mahä-puruña—of the universal form of the Lord; vinyäsaù—the
detailed arrangement; süryasya—of the sun; jagat-ätmanaù—who is the soul of
the universe.
TRANSLATION
There are also an account of the passing away of the wise and saintly King
Viñëuräta [Parékñit], an explanation of how Çréla Vyäsadeva disseminated the
branches of the Vedas, a pious narration concerning Märkaëòeya Åñi, and a
description of the detailed arrangement of the Lord's universal form and His
form as the sun, the soul of the universe.
TEXT 46
wita caAelM( iã"ja™aeï"A
yatpa{í"Ae'h"imah"Aisma va:
laIlaAvataAr"k(maARiNA
k(LitaRtaAnaIh" s$avaRzA:
iti coktaà dvija-çreñöhä
yat påñöo 'ham ihäsmi vaù
lélävatära-karmäëi
kértitänéha sarvaçaù
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; ca—and; uktam—spoken; dvija-çreñöhäù—O best of the brähmaëas;
yat—what; påñöaù—inquired; aham—I; iha—here; asmi—have been; vaù—by
you; lélä-avatära—of the divine descents of the Supreme Lord for His own
enjoyment; karmäëi—the activities; kértitäni—have been glorified; iha—in
this scripture; sarvaçaù—completely.
TRANSLATION
Thus, O best of the brähmaëas, I have explained herein what you have
inquired from me. This literature has glorified in full detail the activities of the
Lord's pastime incarnations.
TEXT 47
paitata: sKailataêAtaR:
ºauÔvaA vaA ivavazAAe gA{NAna,
h"r"yae nama wtyau»aEr,"
maucyatae s$avaRpaAtak(Ata,
patitaù skhalitaç cärtaù
kñuttvä vä vivaço gåëan
haraye nama ity uccair
mucyate sarva-pätakät
SYNONYMS
patitaù—falling; skhalitaù—tripping; ca—and; ärtaù—feeling pain;
kñuttvä—sneezing; vä—or; vivaçaù—involuntarily; gåëan—chanting; haraye
namaù—"obeisances to Lord Hari"; iti—thus; uccaiù—loudly; mucyate—one is
freed; sarva-pätakät—from all sinful reactions.
TRANSLATION
If when falling, slipping, feeling pain or sneezing one involuntarily cries out
in a loud voice, "Obeisances to Lord Hari!" one will be automatically freed from
all his sinful reactions.
PURPORT
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura explains that Lord Çré Caitanya is
always loudly chanting the song haraye namaù kåñëa in the courtyard of
Çréväsa Öhäkura and that this same Lord Caitanya will free us from our
materialistic enjoying propensity if we also loudly chant the glories of the
Supreme Lord Hari.
TEXT 48
s$aÆÿLtyaRmaAnaAe BagAvaAnananta:
™autaAnauBaAvaAe vyas$anaM ih" pauMs$aAma,
‘aivazya icaÔaM ivaDaunaAetyazAeSaM
yaTaA tamaAe'k(AeR'”aimavaAitavaAta:
saìkértyamäno bhagavän anantaù
çrutänubhävo vyasanaà hi puàsäm
praviçya cittaà vidhunoty açeñaà
yathä tamo 'rko 'bhram iväti-vätaù
SYNONYMS
saìkértyamänaù—being properly chanted about; bhagavän—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; anantaù—the unlimited; çruta—being heard about;
anubhävaù—His potency; vyasanam—the misery; hi—indeed; puàsäm—of
persons; praviçya—enter; cittam—the heart; vidhunoti—cleans away;
açeñam—entirely; yathä—just as; tamaù—darkness; arkaù—the sun;
abhram—clouds; iva—as; ati-vätaù—a strong wind.
TRANSLATION
When people properly glorify the Supreme Personality of Godhead or simply
hear about His power, the Lord personally enters their hearts and cleanses away
every trace of misfortune, just as the sun removes the darkness or as a powerful
wind drives away the clouds.
PURPORT
One may not be satisfied by the example of the sun removing the darkness,
since sometimes the darkness in a cave is not removed by the sun. Therefore
the example is given of a strong wind that drives away a cover of clouds. It is
thus emphatically stated here that the Supreme Lord will remove from the
heart of His devotee the darkness of material illusion.
TEXT 49
ma{SaA igAr"staA ÷s$ataIr"s$atk(TaA
na k(Tyatae yaà"gAvaAnaDaAeºaja:
tade"va s$atyaM taäu" hE"va maËÿlaM
tade"va pauNyaM BagAvaÖ"NAAed"yama,
måñä giras tä hy asatér asat-kathä
na kathyate yad bhagavän adhokñajaù
tad eva satyaà tad u haiva maìgalaà
tad eva puëyaà bhagavad-guëodayam
SYNONYMS
måñäù—false; giraù—words; täù—they; hi—indeed; asatéù—untrue;
asat-kathäù—useless discussions of that which is not eternal; na kathyate—is
not discussed; yat—wherein; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead;
adhokñajaù—the transcendental Lord; tat—that; eva—alone; satyam—true;
tat—that; u ha—indeed; eva—alone; maìgalam—auspicious; tat—that;
eva—alone; puëyam—pious; bhagavat-guëa—the qualities of the Supreme
Personality; udayam—which manifests.
TRANSLATION
Words that do not describe the transcendental Personality of Godhead but
instead deal with temporary matters are simply false and useless. Only those
words that manifest the transcendental qualities of the Supreme Lord are
actually truthful, auspicious and pious.
PURPORT
Sooner or later, all material literature and discussion must fail the test of
time. On the other hand, the transcendental descriptions of the Supreme Lord
can free us from the bondage of illusion and restore us to our eternal status as
loving servants of the Lord. Although men who are like animals may criticize
the glorification of the Absolute Truth, those who are civilized should go on
vigorously propagating the transcendental glories of the Lord.
TEXT 50
tade"va r"myaM ç&icarM" navaM navaM
tade"va zAìnmanas$aAe mah"Aets$avama,
tade"va zAAek(ANARvazAAeSaNAM na{NAAM
yaäu"Ôama:ëAek(yazAAe'naugAIyatae
tad eva ramyaà ruciraà navaà navaà
tad eva çaçvan manaso mahotsavam
tad eva çokärëava-çoñaëaà nåëäà
yad uttamaùçloka-yaço 'nugéyate
SYNONYMS
tat—that; eva—indeed; ramyam—attractive; ruciram—palatable; navam
navam—newer and newer; tat—that; eva—indeed; çaçvat—constantly;
manasaù—for the mind; mahä-utsavam—a great festival; tat—that;
eva—indeed; çoka-arëava—the ocean of misery; çoñaëam—that which dries;
nèëäm—for all persons; yat—in which; uttamaùçloka—of the all-famous
Supreme Personality of Godhead; yaçaù—the glories; anugéyate—are sung.
TRANSLATION
Those words describing the glories of the all-famous Personality of Godhead
are attractive, relishable and ever fresh. Indeed, such words are a perpetual
festival for the mind, and they dry up the ocean of misery.
TEXT 51
na yaã"caiê‡apadM" h"re"yaRzAAe
jagAtpaiva‡aM ‘agA{NAIta k(ihR"icata,
taä," DvaAÉÿtaI[%TaM na tau hM"s$as$aeivataM
ya‡aAcyautasta‡a ih" s$aADavaAe'malaA:
na yad vacaç citra-padaà harer yaço
jagat-pavitraà pragåëéta karhicit
tad dhväìkña-téåthaà na tu haàsa-sevitaà
yaträcyutas tatra hi sädhavo 'maläù
SYNONYMS
na—not; yat—which; vacaù—vocabulary; citra-padam—decorative words;
hareù—of the Lord; yaçaù—the glories; jagat—the universe;
pavitram—sanctifying; pragåëéta—describe; karhicit—ever; tat—that;
dhväìkña—of the crows; tértham—a place of pilgrimage; na—not; tu—on the
other hand; haàsa—by saintly persons situated in knowledge;
sevitam—served; yatra—in which; acyutaù—Lord Acyuta (is described);
tatra—there; hi—alone; sädhavaù—the saints; amaläù—who are pure.
TRANSLATION
Those words that do not describe the glories of the Lord, who alone can
sanctify the atmosphere of the whole universe, are considered to be like unto a
place of pilgrimage for crows, and are never resorted to by those situated in
transcendental knowledge. The pure and saintly devotees take interest only in
topics glorifying the infallible Supreme Lord.
TEXT 52
taã"Aigvas$agAAeR janataAGas$amplavaAe
yaismana, ‘aitaëAek(mabaÜ"vatyaipa
naAmaAnyanantasya yazAAe'iÆÿtaAina yata,
Za{Nvainta gAAyainta gA{NAinta s$aADava:
tad väg-visargo janatägha-samplavo
yasmin prati-çlokam abaddhavaty api
nämäny anantasya yaço 'ìkitäni yat
çåëvanti gäyanti gåëanti sädhavaù
SYNONYMS
tat—that; väk—vocabulary; visargaù—creation; janatä—of the people in
general; agha—of the sins; samplavaù—a revolution; yasmin—in which;
prati-çlokam—each and every stanza; abaddhavati—is irregularly composed;
api—although; nämäni—the transcendental names, etc; anantasya—of the
unlimited Lord; yaçaù—the glories; aìkitäni—depicted; yat—which;
çåëvanti—do hear; gäyanti—do sing; gåëanti—do accept; sädhavaù—the
purified men who are honest.
TRANSLATION
On the other hand, that literature which is full of descriptions of the
transcendental glories of the name, fame, forms, pastimes and so on of the
unlimited Supreme Lord is a different creation, full of transcendental words
directed toward bringing about a revolution in the impious lives of this world's
misdirected civilization. Such transcendental literatures, even though
imperfectly composed, are heard, sung and accepted by purified men who are
thoroughly honest.
TEXT 53
naESk(myaRmapyacyautaBaAvavaijaRtaM
na zAAeBatae ÁaAnamalaM inar"Ãanama,
ku(ta: pauna: zAìd"Ba‰"maIìre"
na ÷ipaRtaM k(maR yad"pyanauÔamama,
naiñkarmyam apy acyuta-bhäva-varjitaà
na çobhate jïänam alaà niraïjanam
kutaù punaù çaçvad abhadram éçvare
na hy arpitaà karma yad apy anuttamam
SYNONYMS
naiñkarmyam—self-realization, being freed from the reactions of fruitive work;
api—although; acyuta—of the infallible Lord; bhäva—conception;
varjitam—devoid of; na—does not; çobhate—look well; jïänam-transcendental
knowledge; alam—actually; niraïjanam—free from designations;
kutaù—where is; punaù—again; çaçvat—always; abhadram—uncongenial;
éçvare—unto the Lord; na—not; hi—indeed; arpitam—offered;
karma—fruitive work; yat—which is; api—even; anuttamam—unsurpassed.
TRANSLATION
Knowledge of self-realization, even though free from all material affinity,
does not look well if devoid of a conception of the Infallible [God]. What, then,
is the use of even the most properly performed fruitive activities, which are
naturally painful from the very beginning and transient by nature, if they are
not utilized for the devotional service of the Lord?
PURPORT
This and the previous two verses are found in a slightly different form in
the First Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.5.10-12). The translations are based
on Çréla Prabhupäda's.
TEXT 54
yazA:i™ayaAmaeva pair"™ama: par"Ae
vaNAAR™amaAcaAr"tapa:™autaAid"Sau
@ivasma{ita: ™aIDar"paAd"paáyaAer,"
gAuNAAnauvaAd"™avaNAAd"r"Aid"iBa:
yaçaù-çriyäm eva pariçramaù paro
varëäçramäcära-tapaù-çrutädiñu
avismåtiù çrédhara-päda-padmayor
guëänuväda-çravaëädarädibhiù
SYNONYMS
yaçaù—in fame; çréyäm—and opulence; eva—only; pariçramaù—the labor;
paraù—great; varëa-äçrama-äcära—by one's execution of duties in the
varëäçrama system; tapaù—austerities; çruta—hearing of sacred scripture;
ädiñu—and so on; avismåtiù—remembrance; çrédhara—of the maintainer of
the goddess of fortune; päda-padmayoù—of the lotus feet; guëa-anuväda—of
the chanting of the qualities; çravaëa—by hearing; ädara—respecting;
ädibhiù—and so on.
TRANSLATION
The great endeavor one undergoes in executing the ordinary social and
religious duties of the varëäçrama system, in performing austerities, and in
hearing from the Vedas culminates only in the achievement of mundane fame
and opulence. But by respecting and attentively hearing the recitation of the
transcendental qualities of the Supreme Lord, the husband of the goddess of
fortune, one can remember His lotus feet.
TEXT 55
@ivasma{ita: k{(SNApad"Ar"ivand"yaAe:
iºaNAAetyaBa‰"AiNA ca zAM tanaAeita
s$aÔvasya zAuiÜM" par"maAtmaBailM(
ÁaAnaM ca ivaÁaAnaivar"AgAyaul(ma,
avismåtiù kåñëa-padäravindayoù
kñiëoty abhadräëi ca çaà tanoti
sattvasya çuddhià paramätma-bhaktià
jïänaà ca vijïäna-viräga-yuktam
SYNONYMS
avismåtiù—remembrance; kåñëa-pada-aravindayoù—of Lord Kåñëa's lotus feet;
kñiëoti—destroys; abhadräëi—everything inauspicious; ca—and; çam—good
fortune; tanoti—expands; sattvasya—of the heart; çuddhim—the purification;
parama-ätma—for the Supreme Soul; bhaktim—devotion;
jïänam—knowledge; ca—and; vijïäna—with direct realization; viräga—and
detachment; yuktam—endowed.
TRANSLATION
Remembrance of Lord Kåñëa's lotus feet destroys everything inauspicious
and awards the greatest good fortune. It purifies the heart and bestows devotion
for the Supreme Soul, along with knowledge enriched with realization and
renunciation.
TEXT 56
yaUyaM iã"jaAƒyaA bata BaUir"BaAgAA
yacC$ìd"AtmanyaiKalaAtmaBaUtama,
naAr"AyaNAM de"vamade"vamaIzAma,
@ja›aBaAvaA BajataAivavaezya
yüyaà dvijägryä bata bhüri-bhägä
yac chaçvad ätmany akhilätma-bhütam
näräyaëaà devam adevam éçam
ajasra-bhävä bhajatäviveçya
SYNONYMS
yüyam—all of you; dvija-agryäù—O most eminent of brähmaëas;
bata—indeed; bhüri-bhägäù—extremely fortunate; yat—because;
çaçvat—constantly; ätmani—in your hearts; akhila—of all;
ätma-bhütam—who is the ultimate Soul; näräyaëam—Lord Näräyaëa;
devam—the Personality of Godhead; adevam—beyond whom there is no other
god; éçam—the supreme controller; ajasra—without interruption;
bhäväù—having love; bhajata—you should worship; äviveçya—placing Him.
TRANSLATION
O most eminent of brähmaëas, you are all indeed extremely fortunate, since
you have already placed within your hearts Lord Çré Näräyaëa—the Personality
of Godhead, the supreme controller and the ultimate Soul of all
existence—beyond whom there is no other god. You have undeviating love for
Him, and thus I request you to worship Him.
TEXT 57
@hM" ca s$aMsmaAir"ta @AtmataÔvaM
™autaM paur"A mae par"maiSaRvaf‡aAta,
‘aAyaAepavaezAe na{patae: par"Iiºata:
s$ad"sya{SaINAAM mah"taAM ca Za{NvataAma,
ahaà ca saàsmärita ätma-tattvaà
çrutaà purä me paramarñi-vakträt
präyopaveçe nåpateù parékñitaù
sadasy åñéëäà mahatäà ca çåëvatäm
SYNONYMS
aham—I; ca—also; saàsmäritaù—have been made to remember;
ätma-tattvam—the science of the Supersoul; çrutam—heard; purä—previously;
me—by me; parama-åñi—of the greatest of sages, Çukadeva; vakträt—from the
mouth; präya-upaveçe—during the fast to death; nåpateù—of the king;
parékñitaù—Parékñit; sadasi—in the assembly; åñéëäm—of sages;
mahatäm—great; ca—and; çåëvatäm—while they were listening.
TRANSLATION
I also have now been fully reminded of the science of God, which I
previously heard from the mouth of the great sage Çukadeva Gosvämé. I was
present in the assembly of great sages who heard him speak to King Parékñit as
the monarch sat fasting until death.
TEXT 58
Wtaã": k(iTataM iva‘aA:
k(TanaIyaAeç&k(maRNA:
maAh"AtmyaM vaAs$aude"vasya
s$avaARzAuBaivanaAzAnama,
etad vaù kathitaà vipräù
kathanéyoru-karmaëaù
mähätmyaà väsudevasya
sarväçubha-vinäçanam
SYNONYMS
etat—this; vaù—to you; kathitam—narrated; vipräù—O brähmaëas;
kathanéya—of Him who is most worthy of being described;
uru-karmaëaù—and whose activities are very great; mähätmyam—the glories;
väsudevasya—of Lord Väsudeva; sarva-açubha—all inauspiciousness;
vinäçanam—which completely destroys.
TRANSLATION
O brähmaëas, I have thus described to you the glories of the Supreme Lord
Väsudeva, whose extraordinary activities are most worthy of glorification. This
narration destroys all that is inauspicious.
TEXT 59
ya Wtat™aAvayaeiªatyaM
yaAmaºaNAmananyaDaI:
ëAek(maekM( tad"Da< vaA
paAdM" paAd"ADaRmaeva vaA
™aÜ"AvaAna, yaAe'nauZa{NAuyaAta,
paunaAtyaAtmaAnamaeva s$a:
ya etat çrävayen nityaà
yäma-kñaëam ananya-dhéù
çlokam ekaà tad-ardhaà vä
pädaà pädärdham eva vä
çraddhävän yo 'nuçåëuyät
punäty ätmänam eva saù
SYNONYMS
yaù—who; etat—this; çrävayet—makes others hear; nityam—always;
yäma-kñaëam—every hour and every minute; ananya-dhéù—with undeviated
attention; çlokam—verse; ekam—one; tat-ardham—half of that; vä—or;
pädam—a single line; päda-ardham—half a line; eva—indeed; vä—or;
çraddhä-vän—with faith; yaù—who; anuçåëuyät—hears from the proper
source; punäti—purifies; ätmänam—his very self; eva—indeed; saù—he.
TRANSLATION
One who with undeviating attention constantly recites this literature at
every moment of every hour, as well as one who faithfully hears even one verse
or half a verse or a single line or even half a line, certainly purifies his very self.
TEXT 60
ã"Ad"zyaAmaek(Ad"zyaAM vaA
Za{NvaªaAyauSyavaAna, Bavaeta,
paQ&tyana´ana, ‘ayata:
paUtaAe Bavaita paAtak(Ata,
dvädaçyäm ekädaçyäà vä
çåëvann äyuñyavän bhavet
paöhaty anaçnan prayataù
püto bhavati pätakät
SYNONYMS
dvädaçyäm—on the twelfth day of either fortnight of the month;
ekädaçyäm-on the auspicious eleventh day; vä—or; çåëvan—hearing;
äyuñya-vän-possessed of long life; bhavet—one becomes; paöhati—if one recites;
anaçnan—while refraining from eating; prayataù—with careful attention;
pütaù—purified; bhavati—one becomes; pätakät—from sinful reactions.
TRANSLATION
One who hears this Bhägavatam on the Ekädaçé or Dvädaçé day is assured of
long life, and one who recites it with careful attention while fasting is purified
of all sinful reactions.
TEXT 61
pauSk(re" maTaur"yaAM ca
ã"Ar"vatyaAM yataAtmavaAna,
opaAeSya s$aMih"taAmaetaAM
paiQ&tvaA maucyatae BayaAta,
puñkare mathurayäà ca
dväravatyäà yatätmavän
upoñya saàhitäm etäà
paöhitvä mucyate bhayät
SYNONYMS
puñkare—at the holy place Puñkara; mathuräyäm—at Mathurä; ca—and;
dväravatyäm—at Dvärakä; yata-ätma-vän—self-controlled; upoñya—fasting;
saàhitäm—literature; etäm—this; paöhitvä—reciting; mucyate—one becomes
freed; bhayät—from fear.
TRANSLATION
One who controls his mind, fasts at the holy places Puñkara, Mathurä or
Dvärakä, and studies this scripture will be freed from all fear.
TEXT 62
de"vataA maunaya: is$aÜ"A:
ipatar"Ae manavaAe na{paA:
yacC$inta k(AmaAna, gA{NAta:
Za{NvataAe yasya k(LtaRnaAta,
devatä munayaù siddhäù
pitaro manavo nåpäù
yacchanti kämän gåëataù
çåëvato yasya kértanät
SYNONYMS
devatäù—the demigods; munayaù—the sages; siddhäù—the perfected yogés;
pitaraù—the forefathers; manavaù—the progenitors of mankind; nåpaù—the
kings of the earth; yacchanti—bestow; kämän—desires; gåëataù—to one who is
chanting; çåëvataù—or who is hearing; yasya—of which; kértanät—because of
the glorification.
TRANSLATION
Upon the person who glorifies this Puräëa by chanting or hearing it, the
demigods, sages, Siddhas, Pitäs, Manus and kings of the earth bestow all
desirable things.
TEXT 63
[%caAe yajaUMiSa s$aAmaAina
iã"jaAe'DaItyaAnauivand"tae
maDauku(lyaA Ga{taku(lyaA:
paya:ku(lyaAê tatP(lama,
åco yajüàñi sämäni
dvijo 'dhétyänuvindate
madhu-kulyä ghåta-kulyäù
payaù-kulyäç ca tat phalam
SYNONYMS
åcaù—the mantras of the Åg Veda; yajüàñi—those of the Yajur Veda;
sämäni—and those of the Säma Veda; dvijaù—a brähmaëa; adhétya—studying;
anuvindate—obtains; madhu-kulyäù—rivers of honey; ghåta-kulyäù—rivers of
ghee; payaù-kulyäù—rivers of milk; ca—and; tat—that; phalam—fruit.
TRANSLATION
By studying this Bhägavatam, a brähmaëa can enjoy the same rivers of
honey, ghee and milk he enjoys by studying the hymns of the Åg, Yajur and
Säma Vedas.
TEXT 64
paur"ANAs$aMih"taAmaetaAma,
@DaItya ‘ayataAe iã"ja:
‘aAelM( BagAvataA yaÔau
tatpadM" par"maM ˜ajaeta,
puräëa-saàhitäm etäm
adhétya prayato dvijaù
proktaà bhagavatä yat tu
tat padaà paramaà vrajet
SYNONYMS
puräëa-saàhitäm—essential compilation of all the Puräëas; etäm-this;
adhétya—studying; prayataù—carefully; dvijaù—a brähmaëa;
proktam—described; bhagavatä—by the Personality of Godhead; yat—which;
tu—indeed; tat—that; padam—position; paramam—supreme; vrajet—he
attains.
TRANSLATION
A brähmaëa who diligently reads this essential compilation of all the
Puräëas will go to the supreme destination, which the Supreme Lord Himself
has herein described.
TEXT 65
iva‘aAe'DaItyaA«auyaAt‘aÁaAM
r"AjanyaAed"iDamaeKalaAma,
vaEzyaAe inaiDapaitatvaM ca
zAU#‰": zAuDyaeta paAtak(Ata,
vipro 'dhétyäpnuyät prajïäà
räjanyodadhi-mekhaläm
vaiçyo nidhi-patitvaà ca
çüdraù çudhyeta pätakät
SYNONYMS
vipraù—a brähmaëa; adhétya—studying; äpnuyät—achieves;
prajïäm—intelligence in devotional service; räjanya—a king;
udadhi-mekhaläm—(the earth) bounded by the seas; vaiçyaù—a businessman;
nidhi—of treasures; patitvam—lordship; ca—and; çüdraù—a worker;
çudhyeta—becomes purified; pätakät—from sinful reactions.
TRANSLATION
A brähmaëa who studies the Çrémad-Bhägavatam achieves firm intelligence
in devotional service, a king who studies it gains sovereignty over the earth, a
vaiçya acquires great treasure and a çüdra is freed from sinful reactions.
TEXT 66
k(ilamalas$aMh"itak(AlanaAe'iKalaezAAe
h"ir"ir"tar"‡a na gAIyatae ÷BaIºNAma,
wh" tau paunaBaRgAvaAnazAeSamaUitaR:
pair"paiQ&taAe'naupadM" k(TaA‘as$aËEÿ:
kali-mala-saàhati-kälano 'khileço
harir itaratra na géyate hy abhékñëam
iha tu punar bhagavän açeña-mürtiù
paripaöhito 'nu-padaà kathä-prasaìgaiù
SYNONYMS
kali—of the age of quarrel; mala-saàhati—of all the contamination;
kälanaù—the annihilator; akhila-éçaù—the supreme controller of all beings;
hariù—Lord Hari; itaratra—elsewhere; na géyate—is not described;
hi—indeed; abhékñëam—constantly; iha—here; tu—however; punaù—on the
other hand; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; açeña-mürtiù—who
expands in unlimited personal forms; paripaöhitaù—is openly described in
narration; anu-padam—in each and every verse; kathä-prasaìgaiù—on the
pretext of stories.
TRANSLATION
Lord Hari, the supreme controller of all beings, annihilates the accumulated
sins of the Kali age, yet other literatures do not constantly glorify Him. But
that Supreme Personality of Godhead, appearing in His innumerable personal
expansions, is abundantly and constantly described throughout the various
narrations of this Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 67
tamah"majamanantamaAtmataÔvaM
jagAäu"d"yaisTaitas$aMyamaAtmazAil(ma,
âupaitaiBar"jazA‚(zAÆÿr"AâEr,"
äu"r"vais$atastavamacyautaM nataAe'isma
tam aham ajam anantam ätma-tattvaà
jagad-udaya-sthiti-saàyamätma-çaktim
dyu-patibhir aja-çakra-çaìkarädyair
duravasita-stavam acyutaà nato 'smi
SYNONYMS
tam—to Him; aham—I; ajam—to the unborn; anantam—the unlimited;
ätma-tattvam—the original Supersoul; jagat—of the material universe;
udaya—the creation; sthiti—maintenance; saàyama—and destruction;
ätma-çaktim—by whose personal energies; dyu-patibhiù—by the masters of
heaven; aja-çakra-çaìkara-ädyaiù—headed by Brahmä, Indra and Çiva;
duravasita—incomprehensible; stavam—whose praises; acyutam—to the
infallible Supreme Lord; nataù—bowed down; asmi—I am.
TRANSLATION
I bow down to that unborn and infinite Supreme Soul, whose personal
energies effect the creation, maintenance and destruction of the material
universe. Even Brahmä, Indra, Çaìkara and the other lords of the heavenly
planets cannot fathom the glories of that infallible Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 68
opaicatanavazAil(iBa: sva @Atmanya,
opar"icataisTar"jaËÿmaAlayaAya
BagAvata opalaibDamaA‡aDa°ae
s$aur"[%SaBaAya nama: s$anaAtanaAya
upacita-nava-çaktibhiù sva ätmany
uparacita-sthira-jaìgamälayäya
bhagavata upalabdhi-mätra-dhamne
sura-åñabhäya namaù sanätanäya
SYNONYMS
upacita—fully developed; nava-çaktibhiù—by His nine energies (prakåti,
puruña, mahat, false ego and the five subtle forms of perception); sve
ätmani—within Himself; uparacita—arranged in proximity; sthira
jaìgama—of both the nonmoving and the moving living beings; älayäya—the
abode; bhagavate—to the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
upalabhdhi-mätra—pure consciousness; dhämne—whose manifestation;
sura—of deities; åñabhäya—the chief; namaù—my obeisances; sanätanäya—to
the eternal Lord.
TRANSLATION
I offer my obeisances to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the
eternal Lord and the leader of all other deities, who by evolving His nine
material energies has arranged within Himself the abode of all moving and
nonmoving creatures, and who is always situated in pure, transcendental
consciousness.
TEXT 69
svas$auKainaBa{tacaetaAstaã"Yaud"staAnyaBaAvaAe
'pyaijataç&icar"laIlaAk{(í"s$aAr"stad"Iyama,
vyatanauta k{(payaA yastaÔvad"IpaM paur"ANAM
tamaiKalava{ijana£aM vyaAs$as$aUnauM nataAe'isma
sva-sukha-nibhåta-cetäs tad-vyudastänya-bhävo
'py ajita-rucira-léläkåñöa-säras tadéyam
vyatanuta kåpayä yas tattva-dépaà puräëaà
tam akhila-våjina-ghnaà vyäsa-sünuà nato 'smi
SYNONYMS
sva-sukha—in the happiness of the self; nibhåta—solitary; cetäù—whose
consciousness; tat—because of that; vyudasta—given up; anya-bhävaù—any
other type of consciousness; api—although; ajita—of Çré Kåñëa, the
unconquerable Lord; rucira—pleasing; lélä—by the pastimes;
äkåñöa—attracted; säraù—whose heart; tadéyam—consisting of the activities
of the Lord; vyatanuta—spread, manifested; kåpayä—mercifully; yaù—who;
tattva-dépam—the bright light of the Absolute Truth; puräëam—the Puräëa
(Çrémad-Bhägavatam); tam—unto Him; akhila-våjina-ghnam—defeating
everything inauspicious; vyäsa-sünum—son of Vyäsadeva; nataù asmi—I offer
my obeisances.
TRANSLATION
Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto my spiritual master, the son of
Vyäsadeva, Çukadeva Gosvämé. It is he who defeats all inauspicious things
within this universe. Although in the beginning he was absorbed in the
happiness of Brahman realization and was living in a secluded place, giving up
all other types of consciousness, he became attracted by the pleasing, most
melodious pastimes of Lord Çré Kåñëa. He therefore mercifully spoke this
supreme Puräëa, Çrémad-Bhägavatam, which is the bright light of the Absolute
Truth and which describes the activities of the Lord.
PURPORT
Without offering respectful obeisances to Çukadeva Gosvämé and other
great äcäryas in his line, one cannot possibly gain the privilege of entering into
the deep transcendental meaning of Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Twelfth Canto, Twelfth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Topics of Çrémad-Bhägavatam
Summarized."
13. The Glories of Çrémad-Bhägavatam
In this final chapter Çré Süta Gosvämé describes the length of each of the
Puräëas, along with the subject matter of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, its purpose, how
to give it as a gift, the glories of such gift-giving and the glories of chanting
and hearing it.
The total corpus of the Puräëas includes four hundred thousand verses,
eighteen thousand of which constitute Çrémad-Bhägavatam. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa, instructed Brahmä in this
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, whose narrations produce detachment from matter and
which contains the essence of all the Vedänta. One who gives the
Çrémad-Bhägavata Puräëa as a gift will attain the highest destination. Among
all the Puräëas, Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the best, and it is the most dear thing to
the Vaiñëavas. It reveals that spotless, supreme knowledge accessible to the
paramahaàsas, and it also reveals the process by which one can become free
from the reactions of material work-a process enriched with knowledge,
renunciation and devotion.
Having thus glorified the Bhägavatam, Süta Gosvämé meditates upon Lord
Çré Näräyaëa as the original Absolute Truth, who is perfectly pure, free from
all contamination, devoid of sorrow and immortal. Then he offers obeisances
to the greatest yogé, Çré Çukadeva, who is nondifferent from the Absolute
Truth. Finally, praying with true devotion, Süta Gosvämé offers respects to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Çré Hari, who takes away all misery.
TEXT 1
s$aUta ovaAca
yaM “aöA vaç&NAen‰"ç&‰"maç&ta: staunvainta id"vyaE: stavaEr,"
vaedE": s$aAËÿpad"‚(maAepainaSadE"gAARyainta yaM s$aAmagAA:
DyaAnaAvaisTatataÕ"taena manas$aA pazyainta yaM yaAeigAnaAe
yasyaAntaM na ivaäu": s$aur"As$aur"gANAA de"vaAya tasmaE nama:
süta uväca
yaà brahmä varuëendra-rudra-marutaù stunvanti divyaiù stavair
vedaiù säìga-pada-kramopaniñadair gäyanti yaà säma-gäù
dhyänävasthita-tad-gatena manasä paçyanti yaà yogino
yasyäntaà na viduù suräsura-gaëä deväya tasmai namaù
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; yam—whom; brahmä—Lord Brahmä;
varuëa-indra-rudra-marutaù—as well as Varuëa, Indra, Rudra and the Maruts;
stunvanti—praise; divyaiù—with transcendental; stavaiù—prayers;
vedaiù—with the Vedas; sa—along with; aìga—the corollary branches;
pada-krama—the special sequential arrangement of mantras;
upaniñadaiù—and the Upaniñads; gäyanti-they sing about; yam—whom;
säma-gäù—the singers of the Säma Veda; dhyäna—in meditative trance;
avasthita—situated; tat-gatena—which is fixed upon Him; manasä—within
the mind; paçyanti—they see; yam—whom; yoginaù—the mystic yogés;
yasya—whose; antam—end; na viduù—they do not know;
sura-asura-gaëäù—all the demigods and demons; deväya—to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; tasmai—to Him; namaù—obeisances.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: Unto that personality whom Brahmä, Varuëa, Indra,
Rudra and the Maruts praise by chanting transcendental hymns and reciting the
Vedas with all their corollaries, pada-kramas and Upaniñads, to whom the
chanters of the Säma Veda always sing, whom the perfected yogés see within
their minds after fixing themselves in trance and absorbing themselves within
Him, and whose limit can never be found by any demigod or demon—unto that
Supreme Personality of Godhead I offer my humble obeisances.
TEXT 2
pa{ïe" ”aAmyad"mand"mand"r"igAir"ƒaAvaAƒak(Nx"^yanaAna,
ina‰"AlaAe: k(maQ&Ak{(taeBaRgAvata: ìAs$aAinalaA: paAntau va:
yats$aMs$k(Ar"k(laAnauvataRnavazAAãe"laAinaBaenaAmBas$aAM
yaAtaAyaAtamatain‰"taM jalainaDaenaARâAipa iva™aAmyaita
påñöhe bhrämyad amanda-mandara-giri-grävägra-kaëòüyanän
nidräloù kamaöhäkåter bhagavataù çväsäniläù päntu vaù
yat-saàskära-kalänuvartana-vaçäd velä-nibhenämbhasäà
yätäyätam atandritaà jala-nidher nädyäpi viçrämyati
SYNONYMS
påñöhe—upon His back; bhrämyat—rotating; amanda—most heavy;
mandara-giri—of Mandara Mountain; gräva-agra—by the edges of the stones;
kaëòüyanät—by the scratching; nidräloù—who became sleepy;
kamaöha-äkåteù—in the form of a tortoise; bhagavataù—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; çväsa—coming from the breathing; aniläù—the
winds; päntu—may they protect; vaù—all of you; yat—of which; saàskära—of
the remnants; kalä—the traces; anuvartana-vaçät—as the effect of following;
velä-nibhena—by that which resembles the flow; ambhasäm—of the water;
yäta-äyätam—the coming and going; atandritam—ceaseless; jala-nidheù—of
the ocean; na—does not; adya api—even today; viçrämyati—stop.
TRANSLATION
When the Supreme Personality of Godhead appeared as Lord Kürma, a
tortoise, His back was scratched by the sharp-edged stones lying on massive,
whirling Mount Mandara, and this scratching made the Lord sleepy. May you
all be protected by the winds caused by the Lord's breathing in this sleepy
condition. Ever since that time, even up to the present day, the ocean tides have
imitated the Lord's inhalation and exhalation by piously coming in and going
out.
PURPORT
At times we alleviate an itching sensation by blowing upon it. Similarly,
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura explains, the breathing of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead can alleviate the itching sensation within the
minds of mental speculators, as well as the itching of the material senses of
conditioned souls engaged in sense gratification. Thus by meditating on the
windy breath of Lord Kürma—the tortoise incarnation—all categories of
conditioned souls can be relieved of the deficiencies of material existence and
come to the liberated, spiritual platform. One must simply allow the pastimes
of Lord Kürma to blow within one's heart like a favorable breeze; then one will
surely find spiritual peace.
TEXT 3
paur"ANAs$aÊÿYaAs$amBaUitama,
@sya vaAcya‘ayaAejanae
d"AnaM d"Anasya maAh"AtmyaM
paAQ&Ade"ê inabaAeData
puräëa-saìkhyä-sambhütim
asya väcya-prayojane
dänaà dänasya mähätmyaà
päöhädeç ca nibodhata
SYNONYMS
puräëa—of the Puräëas; saìkhyä-of the counting (of verses); sambhütim—the
summation; asya—of this Bhägavatam; väcya-the subject matter;
prayojane—and the purpose; dänam—the method of giving as a gift;
dänasya—of such gift-giving; mähätmyam—the glories; päöha-ädeù—of
teaching and so on; ca—and; nibodhata—please hear.
TRANSLATION
Now please hear a summation of the verse length of each of the Puräëas.
Then hear of the prime subject and purpose of this Bhägavata Puräëa, the
proper method of giving it as a gift, the glories of such gift-giving, and finally
the glories of hearing and chanting this literature.
PURPORT
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the best of all Puräëas. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté
Öhäkura explains that the other Puräëas will now be mentioned just as the
assistants of a king are mentioned in connection with his glorification.
TEXTS 4-9
“aAöM d"zA s$ah"›aAiNA
paAáM paÂaAenaSaií" ca
™aIvaESNAvaM ‡ayaAeivaMzAca,
catauiva<zAita zAEvak(ma,
d"zAAí"AE ™aIBaAgAvataM
naAr"dM" paÂaivaMzAita
maAkR(NxM" nava vaA¶M" ca
d"zApaÂa catau:zAtama,
cataudR"zA BaivaSyaM syaAta,
taTaA paÂazAtaAina ca
d"zAAí"AE “aövaEvata<
laEËÿmaek(Ad"zAEva tau
catauiva<zAita vaAr"Ah"ma,
Wk(AzAIitas$ah"›ak(ma,
s$k(AndM" zAtaM taTaA caEkM(
vaAmanaM d"zA k(LitaRtama,
k(AEma< s$aæad"zAAKyaAtaM
maAtsyaM taÔau cataudR"zA
Wk(AenaivaMzAts$aAEpaNA<
“aöANxM" ã"Ad"zAEva tau
WvaM paur"ANAs$and"Aeh"zA,
cataulaRºa od"Aô$ta:
ta‡aAí"d"zAs$aAh"›aM
™aIBaAgAvataM wSyatae
brähmaà daça sahasräëi
pädmaà païcona-ñañöi ca
çré-vaiñëavaà trayo-viàçac
catur-viàçati çaivakam
daçäñöau çré-bhägavataà
näradaà païca-viàçati
märkaëòaà nava vähnaà ca
daça-païca catuù-çatam
catur-daça bhaviñyaà syät
tathä païca-çatäni ca
daçäñöau brahma-vaivartaà
laiìgam ekädaçaiva tu
catur-viàçati väräham
ekäçéti-sahasrakam
skändaà çataà tathä caikaà
vämanaà daça kértitam
kaurmaà sapta-daçäkhyätaà
mätsyaà tat tu catur-daça
ekona-viàçat sauparëaà
brahmäëòaà dvädaçaiva tu
evaà puräëa-sandohaç
catur-lakña udähåtaù
taträñöadaça-sähasraà
çré-bhägavataà iñyate
SYNONYMS
brähmam—the Brahmä Puräëa; daça—ten; sahasräëi—thousands;
pädmam—the Padma Puräëa; païca-üna-ñañöi—five less than sixty; ca—and;
çré-vaiñëavam—the Viñëu Puräëa; trayaù-viàçat—twenty-three;
catuù-viàçati—twenty-four; çaivakam—the Çiva Puräëa;
daça-añöau—eighteen; çré-bhägavatam—Çrémad-Bhägavatam; näradam—the
Närada Puräëa; païca-viàçati—twenty-five; märkaëòam—the Märkaëòeya
Puräëa; nava—nine; vähnam—the Agni Puräëa; ca—and;
daça-païca-catuù-çatam—fifteen thousand four hundred;
catuù-daça—fourteen; bhaviñyam—the Bhaviñya Puräëa; syät—consists of;
tathä—plus; païca-çatäni—five hundred (verses); ca—and;
daça-añöau—eighteen; brahma-vaivartam—the Brahma-vaivarta Puräëa;
laiìgam—the Liìga Puräëa; ekädaça—eleven; eva—indeed; tu—and;
catuù-viàçati—twenty-four; väräham—the Varäha Puräëa;
ekäçéti-sahasrakam—eighty-one thousand; skändam—the Skanda Puräëa;
çatam—hundred; tathä—plus; ca—and; ekam—one; vämanam—the Vämana
Puräëa; daça—ten; kértitam—is described; kaurmam—the Kürma Puräëa;
sapta-daça—seventeen; äkhyätam—is said; mätsyam—the Matsya Puräëa;
tat—that; tu—and; catuù-daça—fourteen; eka-üna-viàçat—nineteen;
sauparëam—the Garuòa Puräëa; brahmäëòam—the Brahmäëòa Puräëa;
dvädaça—twelve; eva—indeed; tu—and; evam—in this way; Puräëa—of the
Puräëas; sandohaù—the sum; catuù-lakñaù—four hundred thousand;
udähåtaù—is described; tatra—therein; añöa-daça-sähasram—eighteen
thousand; çré-bhägavatam—Çrémad-Bhägavatam; iñyate—is said.
TRANSLATION
The Brahmä Puräëa consists of ten thousand verses, the Padma Puräëa of
fifty-five thousand, Çré Viñëu Puräëa of twenty-three thousand, the Çiva
Puräëa of twenty-four thousand and Çrémad-Bhägavatam of eighteen thousand.
The Närada Puräëa has twenty-five thousand verses, the Märkaëòeya Puräëa
nine thousand, the Agni Puräëa fifteen thousand four hundred, the Bhaviñya
Puräëa fourteen thousand five hundred, the Brahma-vaivarta Puräëa eighteen
thousand and the Liìga Puräëa eleven thousand. The Varäha Puräëa contains
twenty-four thousand verses, the Skanda Puräëa eighty-one thousand one
hundred, the Vämana Puräëa ten thousand, the Kürma Puräëa seventeen
thousand, the Matsya Puräëa fourteen thousand, the Garuòa Puräëa nineteen
thousand and the Brahmäëòa Puräëa twelve thousand. Thus the total number
of verses in all the Puräëas is four hundred thousand. Eighteen thousand of
these, once again, belong to the beautiful Bhägavatam.
PURPORT
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has quoted from the Matsya Puräëa as follows:
añöädaça puräëäni
kåtvä satyavaté-sutaù
bhäratäkhyänam akhilaà
cakre tad-upabåàhitam
lakñaëaikena tat proktaà
vedärtha-paribåàhitam
välmékinäpi yat proktaà
rämopakhyänam uttamam
brahmaëäbhihitaà tac ca
çata-koöi-pravistarät
ähåtya näradenaiva
välmékäya punaù punaù
välmékinä ca lokeñu
dharma-kämärtha-sädhanam
evaà sa-pädäù païcaite
lakñäs teñu prakéåtitäù
"After compiling the eighteen Puräëas, Vyäsadeva, the son of Satyavaté,
composed the entire Mahäbhärata, which contains the essence of all the
Puräëas. It consists of over one hundred thousand verses and is filled with all
the ideas of the Vedas. There is also the account of the pastimes of Lord
Rämacandra, spoken by Välméki—an account originally related by Lord
Brahmä in one billion verses. That Rämäyaëa was later summarized by Närada
and related to Välméki, who further presented it to mankind so that human
beings could attain the goals of religiosity, sense gratification and economic
development. The total number of verses in all the Puräëas and itihäsas
(histories) is thus known in human society to amount to 525,000."
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura points out that in the First Canto,
Third Chapter, of this work, after Süta Gosvämé lists the incarnations of
Godhead, he adds the special phrase kåñëas tu bhagavän svayam: [SB 1.3.28]
"But Kåñëa is the original Personality of Godhead." Similarly, after mentioning
all of the Puräëas, Çré Suta Gosvämé again mentions the Çrémad-Bhägavatam to
emphasize that it is the chief of all Puräëic literatures.
TEXT 10
wdM" BagAvataA paUva<
“aöNAe naAiBapaÆÿjae
isTataAya BavaBaItaAya
k(Aç&NyaAts$am‘ak(AizAtama,
idaà bhagavatä pürvaà
brahmaëe näbhi-paìkaje
sthitäya bhava-bhétäya
käruëyät samprakäçitam
SYNONYMS
idam—this; bhagavatä—by the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
pürvam—first; brahmaëe—to Brahmä; näbhi-paìkaje—upon the lotus growing
from the navel; sthitäya—who was situated; bhava—of material existence;
bhétäya—who was fearful; käruëyät—out of mercy; samprakäçitam—was fully
revealed.
TRANSLATION
It was to Lord Brahmä that the Supreme Personality of Godhead first
revealed the Çrémad-Bhägavatam in full. At the time, Brahmä, frightened by
material existence, was sitting on the lotus flower that had grown from the
Lord's navel.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa enlightened Brahmä with the knowledge of Çrémad-Bhägavatam
before the creation of this universe, as indicated here by the word pürvam.
Also, the first verse of the Bhägavatam states, tene brahma hådä ya ädi-kavaye:
[SB 1.1.1] "Lord Kåñëa expanded perfect knowledge into the heart of Lord
Brahmä." Because conditioned souls can experience only temporary objects,
which are created, maintained and destroyed, they cannot readily understand
that Çrémad-Bhägavatam is an eternal, transcendental literature nondifferent
from the Absolute Truth.
As stated in the Muëòaka Upaniñad (1.1.1):
brahmä devänäà prathamaù sambabhüva
viçvasya kartä bhuvanasya goptä
sa brahma-vidyäà sarva-vidyä-pratiñöhäm
atharväya jyeñöha-puträya präha
"Among all the demigods, Brahmä was the first to take birth. He is the creator
of this universe and also its protector. To his eldest son, Atharvä, He
instructed the spiritual science of the self, which is the basis of all other
branches of knowledge." Despite his exalted position, however, Brahmä still
fears the influence of the Lord's illusory potency. Thus this energy seems
virtually insurmountable. But Lord Caitanya is so kind that during His
missionary activities in eastern and southern India, He freely distributed Kåñëa
consciousness to everyone, urging them to become teachers of Bhagavad-gétä.
Lord Caitanya, who is Kåñëa Himself, encouraged the people by saying, "By My
order just become a teacher of Lord Kåñëa's message and save this country. I
assure you that the waves of mäyä will never stop your progress." (Cc. Madhya
7.128)
If we give up all sinful activities and engage constantly in the saìkértana
movement of Caitanya Mahäprabhu, victory is assured in our personal lives
and also in our missionary efforts.
TEXTS 11-12
@Aid"maDyaAvas$aAnaeSau
vaEr"AgyaAKyaAnas$aMyautama,
h"ir"laIlaAk(TaA˜aAtaAma{
taAnaind"tas$ats$aur"ma,
s$avaR"vaed"Antas$aArM" yaä,"
“aöAtmaEk(tvalaºaNAma,
vastvaiã"taIyaM taiªaïM"
kE(valyaEk(‘ayaAejanama,
ädi-madhyävasäneñu
vairägyäkhyäna-saàyutam
hari-lélä-kathä-vrätämåtänandita-
sat-suram
sarva-vedänta-säraà yad
brahmätmaikatva-lakñaëam
vastv advitéyaà tan-niñöhaà
kaivalyaika-prayojanam
SYNONYMS
ädi—in the beginning; madhya—the middle; avasäneñu—and the end;
vairägya—concerning renunciation of material things; äkhyäna—with
narrations; saàyutam—full; hari-lélä—of the pastimes of Lord Hari;
kathä-vräta—of the many discussions; amåta—by the nectar; änandita—in
which are made ecstatic; sat-suram—the saintly devotees and demigods;
sarva-vedänta—of all the Vedänta; säram-the essence; yat—which;
brahma—the Absolute Truth; ätma-ekatva—in terms of nondifference from
the spirit soul; lakñaëam—characterized; vastu—the reality; advitéyam—one
without a second; tat-niñöham—having that as its prime subject matter;
kaivalya—exclusive devotional service; eka—the only; prayojanam—ultimate
goal.
TRANSLATION
From beginning to end, the Çrémad-Bhägavatam is full of narrations that
encourage renunciation of material life, as well as nectarean accounts of Lord
Hari's transcendental pastimes, which give ecstasy to the saintly devotees and
demigods. This Bhägavatam is the essence of all Vedänta philosophy because its
subject matter is the Absolute Truth, which, while nondifferent from the spirit
soul, is the ultimate reality, one without a second. The goal of this literature is
exclusive devotional service unto that Supreme Truth.
PURPORT
Vairägya, renunciation, means giving up everything that has no relation
with the Absolute Truth. Saintly devotees and demigods are enthused by the
nectar of the Lord's spiritual pastimes, which are the essence of all Vedic
knowledge. Vedic knowledge elaborately negates the ultimate reality of
material things by emphasizing their temporary, fleeting existence. The
ultimate goal is vastu, the factual substance, which is advitéyam, one without a
second. That unique Absolute Truth is a transcendental person far beyond the
mundane categories and characteristics of personality found in our pale
material world. Thus the ultimate goal of Çrémad-Bhägavatam is to train the
sincere reader in love of Godhead. Lord Kåñëa is supremely lovable because of
His eternal, transcendental qualities. The beauty of this world is a dim
reflection of the unlimited beauty of the Lord. Without compromise,
Çrémad-Bhägavatam persistently declares the glories of the Absolute Truth and
is therefore the supreme spiritual literature, awarding a full taste of the nectar
of love of Kåñëa in full Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 13
‘aAEï"paâAM paAENARmaAsyaAM
he"mais$aMh"s$amainvatama,
d"d"Aita yaAe BaAgAvataM
s$a yaAita par"maAM gAitama,
prauñöhapadyäà paurëamäsyäà
hema-siàha-samanvitam
dadäti yo bhägavataà
sa yäti paramäà gatim
SYNONYMS
prauñöhapadyäm—in the month of Bhädra; paurëamäsyäm—on the full-moon
day; hema-siàha—upon a golden throne; samanvitam—seated; dadäti—gives
as a gift; yaù—who; bhägavatam—Çrémad-Bhägavatam; saù—he; yäti—goes;
paramäm—to the supreme; gatim—destination.
TRANSLATION
If on the full moon day of the month of Bhädra one places
Çrémad-Bhägavatam on a golden throne and gives it as a gift, he will attain the
supreme transcendental destination.
PURPORT
One should place Çrémad-Bhägavatam on a golden throne because it is the
king of all literature. On the full-moon day of the month of Bhädra, the sun,
which is compared to this king of literatures, is present in the constellation
Leo and looks as if raised up on a royal throne. (According to astrology, the
sun is said to be exalted in the sign of Leo). Thus one may unreservedly
worship Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the supreme divine scripture.
TEXT 14
r"Ajantae taAvad"nyaAina
paur"ANAAina s$ataAM gANAe
yaAvaà"AgAvataM naEva
™aUyatae'ma{tas$aAgAr"ma,
räjante tävad anyäni
puräëäni satäà gaëe
yävad bhägavataà naiva
çrüyate 'måta-sägaram
SYNONYMS
räjante—they shine forth; tävat—that long; anyäni—the other;
puräëäni—Puräëas; satäm—of saintly persons; gaëe—in the assembly;
yävat—as long as; bhägavatam—Çrémad-Bhägavatam; na—not; eva—indeed;
çrüyate—is heard; amåta-sägaram—the great ocean of nectar.
TRANSLATION
All other Puranic scriptures shine forth in the assembly of saintly devotees
only as long as that great ocean of nectar, Çrémad-Bhägavatam, is not heard.
PURPORT
Other Vedic literatures and other scriptures of the world remain prominent
until the Çrémad-Bhägavatam is duly heard and understood.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the ocean of nectar and the supreme literature. By
faithful hearing, recitation and distribution of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the world
will be sanctified and other, inferior literatures will fade to minor status.
TEXT 15
s$avaR"vaed"Antas$aArM" ih"
™aIBaAgAvataimaSyatae
ta‰"s$aAma{tata{æasya
naAnya‡a syaA‰"ita: ¸(icata,
sarva-vedänta-säraà hi
çré-bhägavatam iñyate
tad-rasämåta-tåptasya
nänyatra syäd ratiù kvacit
SYNONYMS
sarva-vedänta—of all Vedänta philosophy; säram—the essence; hi—indeed;
çré-bhägavatam—Çrémad-Bhägavatam; iñyate—is said to be; tat—of it;
rasa-amåta—by the nectarean taste; tåptasya—for one who is satisfied;
na—not; anyatra—elsewhere; syät—there is; ratiù—attraction; kvacit—ever.
TRANSLATION
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is declared to be the essence of all Vedänta philosophy.
One who has felt satisfaction from its nectarean mellow will never be attracted
to any other literature.
TEXT 16
ina°agAAnaAM yaTaA gAËÿA
de"vaAnaAmacyautaAe yaTaA
vaESNAvaAnaAM yaTaA zAmBau:
paur"ANAAnaAimad"mtaTaA
nimna-gänäà yathä gaìgä
devänäm acyuto yathä
vaiñëavänäà yathä çambhuù
puräëänäm idam tathä
SYNONYMS
nimna-gänäm—of rivers flowing down to the sea; yathä—as; gaìgä—the
Ganges; devänäm—of all deities; acyutaù—the infallible Supreme Personality
of Godhead; yathä—as; vaiñëavänäm—of devotees of Lord Viñëu; yathä—as;
çambhuù—Çiva; puräëänäm—of Puräëas; idam-this; tathä—similarly.
TRANSLATION
Just as the Gaìgä is the greatest of all rivers, Lord Acyuta the supreme
among deities and Lord Çambhu [Çiva] the greatest of Vaiñëavas, so
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the greatest of all Puräëas.
TEXT 17
ºae‡aANAAM caEva s$avaeRSaAM
yaTaA k(AzAI ÷nauÔamaA
taTaA paur"ANA˜aAtaAnaAM
™aImaà"AgAvataM iã"jaA:
kñeträëäà caiva sarveñäà
yathä käçé hy anuttamä
tathä puräëa-vrätänäà
çrémad-bhägavataà dvijäù
SYNONYMS
kñeträëäm—of holy places; ca—and; eva—indeed; sarveñäm—of all; yathä—as;
käçé—Benares; hi—indeed; anuttamä—unexcelled; tathä—thus;
puräëa-vrätänäm—of all the Puräëas; çrémat-bhägavatam-Çrémad-Bhägavatam;
dvijäù—O brähmaëas.
TRANSLATION
O brähmaëas, in the same way that the city of Käçé is unexcelled among holy
places, Çrémad-Bhägavatam is supreme among all the Puräëas.
TEXT 18
™aImaà"AgAvataM paur"ANAmamalaM yaãE"SNAvaAnaAM i‘ayaM
yaismana, paAr"mahM"syamaek(mamalaM ÁaAnaM parM" gAIyatae
ta‡a ÁaAnaivar"AgABail(s$aih"taM naESk(myaRmaAivas$k{(taM
tacC+$Nvana, s$aupaQ&na, ivacaAr"NApar"Ae BaftyaA ivamaucyaeªar":
çrémad-bhägavataà puräëam amalaà yad vaiñëavänäà priyaà
yasmin päramahaàsyam ekam amalaà jïänaà paraà géyate
tatra jïäna-viräga-bhakti-sahitaà naiñkarmyam äviskåtaà
tac chåëvan su-paöhan vicäraëa-paro bhaktyä vimucyen naraù
SYNONYMS
çrémat-bhägavatam—Çrémad-Bhägavatam; puräëam—the Puräëa;
amalam-perfectly pure; yat—which; vaiñëavänäm—to the Vaiñëavas;
priyam—most dear; yasmin—in which; päramahaàsyam—attainable by the
topmost devotees; ekam—exclusive; amalam—perfectly pure;
jïänam—knowledge; param—supreme; géyate—is sung; tatra—there;
jïäna-viräga-bhakti-sahitam—together with knowledge, renunciation and
devotion; naiñkarmyam—freedom from all material work; äviñkåtam—is
revealed; tat—that; çåëvan—hearing; su-paöhan—properly chanting;
vicäraëa-paraù—who is serious about understanding; bhaktyä—with devotion;
vimucyet—becomes totally liberated; naraù—a person.
TRANSLATION
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the spotless Puräëa. It is most dear to the Vaiñëavas
because it describes the pure and supreme knowledge of the paramahaàsas.
This Bhägavatam reveals the means for becoming free from all material work,
together with the processes of transcendental knowledge, renunciation and
devotion. Anyone who seriously tries to understand Çrémad-Bhägavatam, who
properly hears and chants it with devotion, becomes completely liberated.
PURPORT
Because Çrémad-Bhägavatam is completely free of contamination by the
modes of nature, it is endowed with extraordinary spiritual beauty and is
therefore dear to the pure devotees of the Lord. The word päramahaàsyam
indicates that even completely liberated souls are eager to hear and narrate
Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Those who are trying to be liberated should faithfully
serve this literature by hearing and reciting it with faith and devotion.
TEXT 19
k(smaE yaena ivaBaAis$ataAe'yamataulaAe ÁaAna‘ad"Ipa: paur"A
taåU"paeNA ca naAr"d"Aya maunayae k{(SNAAya taåU"ipaNAA
yaAegAIn‰"Aya tad"AtmanaATa BagAva‰"AtaAya k(Aç&Nyatas$a,
tacC]$ÜM" ivamalaM ivazAAek(mama{taM s$atyaM parM" DaImaih"
kasmai yena vibhäsito 'yam atulo jïäna-pradépaù purä
tad-rüpeëa ca näradäya munaye kåñëäya tad-rüpiëä
yogéndräya tad-ätmanätha bhagavad-rätäya käruëyatas
tac chuddhaà vimalaà viçokam amåtaà satyaà paraà dhémahi
SYNONYMS
kasmai—unto Brahmä; yena—by whom; vibhäsitaù—thoroughly revealed;
ayam—this; atulaù—incomparable; jïäna—of transcendental knowledge;
pradépaù—the torchlight; purä—long ago; tat-rüpeëa—in the form of Brahmä;
ca—and; näradäya—to Närada; munaye—the great sage; kåñëäya—to
Kåñëa-dvaipäyana Vyäsa; tat-rüpiëä—in the form of Närada; yogi-indräya—to
the best of yogés, Çukadeva; tat-ätmanä—as Närada; atha—then;
bhagavat-rätäya—to Parékñit Mahäräja; käruëyataù—out of mercy; tat—that;
çuddham—pure; vimalam—uncontaminated; viçokam—free from misery;
amåtam—immortal; satyam—upon the truth; param—supreme; dhémahi—I
meditate.
TRANSLATION
I meditate upon that pure and spotless Supreme Absolute Truth, who is free
from suffering and death and who in the beginning personally revealed this
incomparable torchlight of knowledge to Brahmä. Brahmä then spoke it to the
sage Närada, who narrated it to Kåñëa-dvaipäyana Vyäsa. Çréla Vyäsa revealed
this Bhägavatam to the greatest of sages, Çukadeva Gosvämé, and Çukadeva
mercifully spoke it to Mahäräja Parékñit.
PURPORT
The first verse of Çrémad-Bhägavatam states, satyaà paraà dhémahi [SB
1.1.1]—"I meditate upon the Supreme Truth"—and now at the conclusion of
this magnificent transcendental literature, the same auspicious sounds are
vibrated. The words tad-rüpeëa, tad-rüpiëä and tad-ätmanä in this verse clearly
indicate that Lord Kåñëa Himself originally spoke Çrémad-Bhägavatam to
Brahmä and then continued to speak this literature through the agency of
Närada Muni, Dvaipäyana Vyäsa, Çukadeva Gosvämé and other great sages. In
other words, whenever saintly devotees vibrate Çrémad-Bhägavatam, it is to be
understood that Lord Kåñëa Himself is speaking the Absolute Truth through
the agency of His pure representatives. Anyone who submissively hears this
literature from the Lord's bona fide devotees transcends his conditioned state
and becomes qualified to meditate upon the Absolute Truth and serve Him.
TEXT 20
namastasmaE BagAvatae
vaAs$aude"vaAya s$aAiºaNAe
ya wd"mk{(payaA k(smaE
vyaAcacaºae maumauºavae
namas tasmai bhagavate
väsudeväya säkñiëe
ya idam kåpayä kasmai
vyäcacakñe mumukñave
SYNONYMS
namaù—obeisances; tasmai—to Him; bhagavate—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; väsudeväya—Lord Väsudeva; säkñiëe—the supreme witness;
yaù—who; idam—this; kåpayä—out of mercy; kasmai—to Brahmä;
vyäcacakñe—explained; mumukñave—who was desiring liberation.
TRANSLATION
We offer our obeisances to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord
Väsudeva, the all-pervading witness, who mercifully explained this science to
Brahmä when he anxiously desired salvation.
TEXT 21
yaAegAIn‰"Aya namastasmaE
zAuk(Aya “aöè&ipaNAe
s$aMs$aAr"s$apaRd"íM" yaAe
ivaSNAur"AtamamaUmaucata,
yogéndräya namas tasmai
çukäya brahma-rüpiëe
saàsära-sarpa-dañöaà yo
viñëu-rätam amümucat
SYNONYMS
yogi-indräya—to the king of mystics; namaù—obeisances; tasmai—to him;
çukaya—Çukadeva Gosvämé; brahma-rüpiëe—who is a personal manifestation
of the Absolute Truth; saàsära-sarpa—by the snake of material existence;
dañöam—bitten; yaù—who; viñëu-rätam—Parékñit Mahäräja;
amümucat—freed.
TRANSLATION
I offer my humble obeisances to Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé, the best of mystic
sages and a personal manifestation of the Absolute Truth. He saved Mahäräja
Parékñit, who was bitten by the snake of material existence.
PURPORT
Süta Gosvämé now offers obeisances to his own spiritual master Çukadeva
Gosvämé. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura clarifies that just as Arjuna
was placed into material confusion so that Bhagavad-gétä might be spoken, so
King Parékñit, a pure, liberated devotee of the Lord, was cursed to die so that
Çrémad-Bhägavatam might be spoken. Actually, King Parékñit is viñëu-räta,
eternally under the protection of the Lord. Çukadeva Gosvämé liberated the
king from his so-called illusion to exhibit the merciful nature of a pure devotee
and the enlightening effect of his association.
TEXT 22
Bavae Bavae yaTaA Bail(:
paAd"yaAestava jaAyatae
taTaA ku(ç&Sva de"vaezA
naATastvaM naAe yata: ‘aBaAe
bhave bhave yathä bhaktiù
pädayos tava jäyate
tathä kuruñva deveça
näthas tvaà no yataù prabho
SYNONYMS
bhave bhave—in life after life; yathä—so that; bhaktiù—devotional service;
pädayoù—at the lotus feet; tava—of You; jäyate—arises; tathä-so;
kuruñva—please do; deva-éça—O Lord of lords; näthaù—the master;
tvam—You; naù—our; yataù—because; prabho—O Lord.
TRANSLATION
O Lord of lords, O master, please grant us pure devotional service at Your
lotus feet, life after life.
TEXT 23
naAmas$aÆÿLtaRnaM yasya
s$avaRpaApa ‘aNAAzAnama,
‘aNAAmaAe äu":KazAmanas$a,
taM namaAima h"ir$M par"ma,
näma-saìkértanaà yasya
sarva-päpa praëäçanam
praëämo duùkha-çamanas
taà namämi harià param
SYNONYMS
näma-saìkértanam—the congregational chanting of the holy name; yasya—of
whom; sarva-päpa—all sins; praëäçanam—which destroys; praëämaù—the
bowing down; duùkha—misery; çamanaù—which subdues; tam—to Him;
namämi—I offer my obeisances; harim—to Lord Hari; param—the Supreme.
TRANSLATION
I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Lord, Hari, the
congregational chanting of whose holy names destroys all sinful reactions, and
the offering of obeisances unto whom relieves all material suffering.
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda to the Twelfth Canto, Thirteenth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Glories of Çrémad-Bhägavatam."
The Twelfth Canto was completed at Gainesville, Florida, on Sunday, July 18,
1982.
END OF THE TWELFTH CANTO