"Srimad Bhagavatam – First Canto"
by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE:
This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of this book, and is NOT FOR
RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended for personal non-commercial use only,
under the "fair use" guidelines established by international copyright laws. You
may use this electronic file to evaluate the printed version of this book, for your
own private use, or for short excerpts used in academic works, research, student
papers, presentations, and the like. You can distribute this evaluation copy to
others over the Internet, so long as you keep this copyright information intact and
do not add or subtract anything to this file and its contents. You may not reproduce
more than ten percent (10%) of this book in any medium without the express
written permission from the copyright holders.
Reference any excerpts in the following way: “Excerpted from “Srimad
Bhagavatam First Canto” by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, courtesy of
the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, www.krishna.com.”
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1972-2004 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust
International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, California 90034, USA. All
rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or to evaluate
dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website of the publishers,
www.krishna.com.

Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 2
About the Author
His Divine Grace AC Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, the world’s
most distinguished teacher of Vedic religion and thought, is the author
of Bhagavad-gita As It Is, Srimad-Bhagavatam, The Nector of Devotion
and many other English versions of Vedic literature. He is the founderacarya
of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness, which
has hundreds of centers throughtout the world.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
First Canto
Preface
We must know the present need of human society. And what is that need?
Human society is no longer bounded by geographical limits to particular
countries or communities. Human society is broader than in the Middle Ages,
and the world tendency is toward one state or one human society. The ideals
of spiritual communism, according to Çrémad-Bhägavatam, are based more or
less on the oneness of the entire human society, nay, of the entire energy of
living beings. The need is felt by great thinkers to make this a successful
ideology. Çrémad-Bhägavatam will fill this need in human society. It begins,
therefore, with the aphorism of Vedänta philosophy janmädy asya yataù [SB
1.1.1] to establish the ideal of a common cause.
Human society, at the present moment, is not in the darkness of oblivion. It
has made rapid progress in the field of material comforts, education and
economic development throughout the entire world. But there is a pinprick
somewhere in the social body at large, and therefore there are large-scale
quarrels, even over less important issues. There is need of a clue as to how
humanity can become one in peace, friendship and prosperity with a common
cause. Çrémad-Bhägavatam will fill this need, for it is a cultural presentation for
the respiritualization of the entire human society.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam should be introduced also in the schools and colleges,
for it is recommended by the great student-devotee Prahläda Mahäräja in
order to change the demoniac face of society.
kaumära äcaret präjïodharmän bhägavatän ihadurlabhaà mänuñaà
janmatad apy adhruvam arthadam (Bhäg. 7.6.1)
Disparity in human society is due to lack of principles in a godless
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
civilization. There is God, or the Almighty One, from whom everything
emanates, by whom everything is maintained and in whom everything is
merged to rest. Material science has tried to find the ultimate source of
creation very insufficiently, but it is a fact that there is one ultimate source of
everything that be. This ultimate source is explained rationally and
authoritatively in the beautiful Bhägavatam, or Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the transcendental science not only for knowing the
ultimate source of everything but also for knowing our relation with Him and
our duty toward perfection of the human society on the basis of this perfect
knowledge. It is powerful reading matter in the Sanskrit language, and it is
now rendered into English elaborately so that simply by a careful reading one
will know God perfectly well, so much so that the reader will be sufficiently
educated to defend himself from the onslaught of atheists. Over and above
this, the reader will be able to convert others to accepting God as a concrete
principle.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam begins with the definition of the ultimate source. It is a
bona fide commentary on the Vedänta-sütra by the same author, Çréla
Vyäsadeva, and gradually it develops into nine cantos up to the highest state of
God realization. The only qualification one needs to study this great book of
transcendental knowledge is to proceed step by step cautiously and not jump
forward haphazardly like with an ordinary book. It should be gone through
chapter by chapter, one after another. The reading matter is so arranged with
its original Sanskrit text, its English transliteration, synonyms, translation and
purports so that one is sure to become a God-realized soul at the end of
finishing the first nine cantos.
The Tenth Canto is distinct from the first nine cantos because it deals
directly with the transcendental activities of the Personality of Godhead Çré
Kåñëa. One will be unable to capture the effects of the Tenth Canto without
going through the first nine cantos. The book is complete in twelve cantos,
each independent, but it is good for all to read them in small installments one
after another.
I must admit my frailties in presenting Çrémad-Bhägavatam, but still I am
hopeful of its good reception by the thinkers and leaders of society on the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
strength of the following statement of Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.5.11):
tad-väg-visargo janatägha-viplavo
yasmin prati-çlokam abaddhavaty api
nämäny anantasya yaço ’ìkitäni yac
chåëvanti gäyanti gåëanti sädhavaù
“On the other hand, that literature which is full with descriptions of the
transcendental glories of the name, fame, form and pastimes of the unlimited
Supreme Lord is a transcendental creation meant to bring about a revolution
in the impious life of a misdirected civilization. Such transcendental
literatures, even though irregularly composed, are heard, sung and accepted by
purified men who are thoroughly honest.”
Oà tat sat
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Dated at Delhi
December 15, 1962
Introduction
The conception of God and the conception of Absolute Truth are not on
the same level. The Çrémad-Bhägavatam hits on the target of the Absolute
Truth. The conception of God indicates the controller, whereas the
conception of the Absolute Truth indicates the summum bonum or the
ultimate source of all energies. There is no difference of opinion about the
personal feature of God as the controller because a controller cannot be
impersonal. Of course modern government, especially democratic government,
is impersonal to some extent, but ultimately the chief executive head is a
person, and the impersonal feature of government is subordinate to the
personal feature. So without a doubt whenever we refer to control over others
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
we must admit the existence of a personal feature. Because there are different
controllers for different managerial positions, there may be many small gods.
According to the Bhagavad-gétä any controller who has some specific
extraordinary power is called a vibhütimat sattva, or controller empowered by
the Lord. There are many vibhütimat sattvas, controllers or gods with various
specific powers, but the Absolute Truth is one without a second. This
Çrémad-Bhägavatam designates the Absolute Truth or the summum bonum as
the paraà satyam.
The author of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Çréla Vyäsadeva, first offers his
respectful obeisances unto the paraà satyam (Absolute Truth), and because
the paraà satyam is the ultimate source of all energies, the paraà satyam is the
Supreme Person. The gods or the controllers are undoubtedly persons, but the
paraà satyam from whom the gods derive powers of control is the Supreme
Person. The Sanskrit word éçvara (controller) conveys the import of God, but
the Supreme Person is called the parameçvara, or the supreme éçvara. The
Supreme Person, or parameçvara, is the supreme conscious personality, and
because He does not derive any power from any other source, He is supremely
independent. In the Vedic literatures Brahmä is described as the supreme god
or the head of all other gods like Indra, Candra and Varuëa, but the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam confirms that even Brahmä is not independent as far as
his power and knowledge are concerned. He received knowledge in the form of
the Vedas from the Supreme Person who resides within the heart of every
living being. That Supreme Personality knows everything directly and
indirectly. Individual infinitesimal persons, who are parts and parcels of the
Supreme Personality, may know directly and indirectly everything about their
bodies or external features, but the Supreme Personality knows everything
about both His external and internal features.
The words janmädy asya [SB 1.1.1] suggest that the source of all production,
maintenance or destruction is the same supreme conscious person. Even in our
present experience we can know that nothing is generated from inert matter,
but inert matter can be generated from the living entity. For instance, by
contact with the living entity, the material body develops into a working
machine. Men with a poor fund of knowledge mistake the bodily machinery to
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
be the living being, but the fact is that the living being is the basis of the
bodily machine. The bodily machine is useless as soon as the living spark is
away from it. Similarly, the original source of all material energy is the
Supreme Person. This fact is expressed in all the Vedic literatures, and all the
exponents of spiritual science have accepted this truth. The living force is
called Brahman, and one of the greatest äcäryas (teachers), namely Çrépäda
Çaìkaräcärya, has preached that Brahman is substance whereas the cosmic
world is category. The original source of all energies is the living force, and He
is logically accepted as the Supreme Person. He is therefore conscious of
everything past, present and future, and also of each and every corner of His
manifestations, both material and spiritual. An imperfect living being does not
even know what is happening within his own personal body. He eats his food
but does not know how this food is transformed into energy or how it sustains
his body. When a living being is perfect, he is aware of everything that
happens, and since the Supreme Person is all-perfect, it is quite natural that
He knows everything in all detail. Consequently the perfect personality is
addressed in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam as Väsudeva, or one who lives everywhere
in full consciousness and in full possession of His complete energy. All of this
is clearly explained in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, and the reader has ample
opportunity to study this critically.
In the modern age Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu preached the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam by practical demonstration. It is easier to penetrate into
the topics of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam through the medium of Çré Caitanya’s
causeless mercy. Therefore a short sketch of His life and precepts is inserted
herein to help the reader understand the real merit of Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
It is imperative that one learn the Çrémad-Bhägavatam from the person
Bhägavatam. The person Bhägavatam is one whose very life is
Çrémad-Bhägavatam in practice. Since Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu is the
Absolute Personality of Godhead, He is both Bhagavän and Bhägavatam in
person and in sound. Therefore His process of approaching the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is practical for all people of the world. It was His wish that
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam be preached in every nook and corner of the world by
those who happened to take their birth in India.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the science of Kåñëa, the Absolute Personality of
Godhead of whom we have preliminary information from the text of the
Bhagavad-gétä. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu has said that anyone, regardless of
what he is, who is well versed in the science of Kåñëa (Çrémad-Bhägavatam and
Bhagavad-gétä) can become an authorized preacher or preceptor in the science
of Kåñëa.
There is a need for the science of Kåñëa in human society for the good of all
suffering humanity of the world, and we simply request the leaders of all
nations to pick up this science of Kåñëa for their own good, for the good of
society and for the good of all the world’s people.
A short sketch of the life and teachings of Lord Caitanya,
The Preacher of Çrémad-Bhägavatam
Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, the great apostle of love of God and the
father of the congregational chanting of the holy name of the Lord, advented
Himself at Çrédhäma Mäyäpura, a quarter in the city of Navadvépa in Bengal,
on the Phälguné Pürëimä evening in the year 1407 Çakäbda (corresponding to
February 1486 by the Christian calendar).
His father, Çré Jagannätha Miçra, a learned brähmaëa from the district of
Sylhet, came to Navadvépa as a student because at that time Navadvépa was
considered to be the center of education and culture. He domiciled on the
banks of the Ganges after marrying Çrématé Çacédevé, a daughter of Çréla
Nélämbara Cakravarté, the great learned scholar of Navadvépa.
Jagannätha Miçra had a number of daughters by his wife, Çrématé Çacédevé,
and most of them expired at an early age. Two surviving sons, Çré Viçvarüpa
and Viçvambhara, became at last the object of their paternal affection. The
tenth and youngest son, who was named Viçvambhara, later became known as
Nimäi Paëòita and then, after accepting the renounced order of life, Lord Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu.
Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu exhibited His transcendental activities for
forty-eight years and then disappeared in the year 1455 Çakäbda at Puré.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
For His first twenty-four years He remained at Navadvépa as a student and
householder. His first wife was Çrématé Lakñmépriyä, who died at an early age
when the Lord was away from home. When He returned from East Bengal He
was requested by His mother to accept a second wife, and He agreed. His
second wife was Çrématé Viñëupriyä Devé, who bore the separation of the Lord
throughout her life because the Lord took the order of sannyäsa at the age of
twenty-four, when Çrématé Viñëupriyä was barely sixteen years old.
After taking sannyäsa, the Lord made His headquarters at Jagannätha Puré
due to the request of His mother, Çrématé Çacédevé. The Lord remained for
twenty-four years at Puré. For six years of this time He traveled continuously
all over India (and especially throughout southern India) preaching the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
Lord Caitanya not only preached the Çrémad-Bhägavatam but propagated
the teachings of the Bhagavad-gétä as well in the most practical way. In the
Bhagavad-gétä Lord Çré Kåñëa is depicted as the Absolute Personality of
Godhead, and His last teachings in that great book of transcendental
knowledge instruct that one should give up all the modes of religious activities
and accept Him (Lord Çré Kåñëa) as the only worshipable Lord. The Lord then
assured that all His devotees would be protected from all sorts of sinful acts
and that for them there would be no cause for anxiety.
Unfortunately, despite Lord Çré Kåñëa’s direct order and the teachings of
the Bhagavad-gétä, less intelligent people misunderstand Him to be nothing but
a great historical personality, and thus they cannot accept Him as the original
Personality of Godhead. Such men with a poor fund of knowledge are misled
by many nondevotees. Thus the teachings of the Bhagavad-gétä were
misinterpreted even by great scholars. After the disappearance of Lord Çré
Kåñëa there were hundreds of commentaries on the Bhagavad-gétä by many
erudite scholars, and almost every one of them was motivated by self-interest.
Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu is the selfsame Lord Çré Kåñëa. This time,
however, He appeared as a great devotee of the Lord in order to preach to the
people in general, as well as to religionists and philosophers, about the
transcendental position of Çré Kåñëa, the primeval Lord and the cause of all
causes. The essence of His preaching is that Lord Çré Kåñëa, who appeared at
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Vrajabhümi (Våndävana) as the son of the King of Vraja (Nanda Mahäräja), is
the Supreme Personality of Godhead and is therefore worshipable by all.
Våndävana-dhäma is nondifferent from the Lord because the name, fame,
form and place where the Lord manifests Himself are all identical with the
Lord as absolute knowledge. Therefore Våndävana-dhäma is as worshipable as
the Lord. The highest form of transcendental worship of the Lord was
exhibited by the damsels of Vrajabhümi in the form of pure affection for the
Lord, and Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu recommends this process as the most
excellent mode of worship. He accepts the Çrémad-Bhägavata Puräëa as the
spotless literature for understanding the Lord, and He preaches that the
ultimate goal of life for all human beings is to attain the stage of premä, or love
of God.
Many devotees of Lord Caitanya like Çréla Våndävana däsa Öhäkura, Çré
Locana däsa Öhäkura, Çréla Kåñëadäsa Kaviräja Gosvämé, Çré Kavikarëapüra,
Çré Prabodhänanda Sarasvaté, Çré Rüpa Gosvämé, Çré Sanätana Gosvämé, Çré
Raghunätha Bhaööa Gosvämé, Çré Jéva Gosvämé, Çré Gopäla Bhaööa Gosvämé,
Çré Raghunätha däsa Gosvämé and in this latter age within two hundred years,
Çré Viçvanätha Cakravarté, Çré Baladeva Vidyäbhüñana, Çré Çyämänanda
Gosvämé, Çré Narottama däsa Öhäkura, Çré Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura and at last
Çré Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura (our spiritual master) and many other
great and renowned scholars and devotees of the Lord have prepared
voluminous books and literatures on the life and precepts of the Lord. Such
literatures are all based on the çästras like the Vedas, Puräëas, Upaniñads,
Rämäyaëa, Mahäbhärata and other histories and authentic literatures
approved by the recognized äcäryas. They are unique in composition and
unrivaled in presentation, and they are full of transcendental knowledge.
Unfortunately the people of the world are still ignorant of them, but when
these literatures, which are mostly in Sanskrit and Bengali, come to light the
world and when they are presented before thinking people, then India’s glory
and the message of love will overflood this morbid world, which is vainly
searching after peace and prosperity by various illusory methods not approved
by the äcäryas in the chain of disciplic succession.
The readers of this small description of the life and precepts of Lord
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Caitanya will profit much to go through the books of Çréla Våndävana däsa
Öhäkura (Çré Caitanya-bhägavata) and Çréla Kåñëadäsa Kaviräja Gosvämé (Çré
Caitanya-caritämåta). The early life of the Lord is most fascinatingly expressed
by the author of Caitanya-bhägavata, and as far as the teachings are
concerned, they are more vividly explained in the Caitanya-caritämåta. Now
they are available to the English-speaking public in our Teachings of Lord
Caitanya.
The Lord’s early life was recorded by one of His chief devotees and
contemporaries, namely Çréla Muräri Gupta, a medical practitioner of that
time, and the latter part of the life of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu was recorded
by His private secretary Çré Dämodara Gosvämé, or Çréla Svarüpa Dämodara,
who was practically a constant companion of the Lord at Puré. These two
devotees recorded practically all the incidents of the Lord’s activities, and later
on all the books dealing with the Lord, which are above mentioned, were
composed on the basis of kaòacäs (notebooks) by Çréla Dämodara Gosvämé and
Muräri Gupta.
So the Lord advented Himself on the Phälguné Pürëimä evening of 1407
Çakäbda, and it was by the will of the Lord that there was a lunar eclipse on
that evening. During the hours of eclipse it was the custom of the Hindu
public to take bath in the Ganges or any other sacred river and chant the
Vedic mantras for purification. When Lord Caitanya was born during the
lunar eclipse, all India was roaring with the holy sound of Hare Kåñëa, Hare
Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare
Hare. These sixteen names of the Lord are mentioned in many Puräëas and
Upaniñads, and they are described as the Täraka-brahma näma of this age. It is
recommended in the çästras that offenseless chanting of these holy names of
the Lord can deliver a fallen soul from material bondage. There are
innumerable names of the Lord both in India and outside, and all of them are
equally good because all of them indicate the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
But because these sixteen are especially recommended for this age, people
should take advantage of them and follow the path of the great äcäryas who
attained success by practicing the rules of the çästras (revealed scriptures).
The simultaneous occurrence of the Lord’s appearance and the lunar
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
eclipse indicated the distinctive mission of the Lord. This mission was to
preach the importance of chanting the holy names of the Lord in this age of
Kali (quarrel). In this present age quarrels take place even over trifles, and
therefore the çästras have recommended for this age a common platform for
realization, namely chanting the holy names of the Lord. People can hold
meetings to glorify the Lord in their respective languages and with melodious
songs, and if such performances are executed in an offenseless manner, it is
certain that the participants will gradually attain spiritual perfection without
having to undergo more rigorous methods. At such meetings everyone, the
learned and the foolish, the rich and the poor, the Hindus and the Muslims,
the Englishmen and the Indians, and the caëòälas and the brähmaëas, can all
hear the transcendental sounds and thus cleanse the dust of material
association from the mirror of the heart. To confirm the Lord’s mission, all the
people of the world will accept the holy name of the Lord as the common
platform for the universal religion of mankind. In other words, the advent of
the holy name took place along with the advent of Lord Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu.
When the Lord was on the lap of His mother, He would at once stop crying
as soon as the ladies surrounding Him chanted the holy names and clapped
their hands. This peculiar incident was observed by the neighbors with awe
and veneration. Sometimes the young girls took pleasure in making the Lord
cry and then stopping Him by chanting the holy name. So from His very
childhood the Lord began to preach the importance of the holy name. In His
early age Lord Çré Caitanya was known as Nimäi. This name was given by His
beloved mother because the Lord took His birth beneath a nimba tree in the
courtyard of His paternal house.
When the Lord was offered solid food at the age of six months in the
anna-präçana ceremony, the Lord indicated His future activities. At this time
it was customary to offer the child both coins and books in order to get some
indication of the future tendencies of the child. The Lord was offered on one
side coins and on the other the Çrémad-Bhägavatam. The Lord accepted the
Bhägavatam instead of the coins.
When He was a mere baby crawling in the yard, one day a snake appeared
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
before Him, and the Lord began to play with it. All the members of the house
were struck with fear and awe, but after a little while the snake went away,
and the baby was taken away by His mother. Once He was stolen by a thief
who intended to steal His ornaments, but the Lord took a pleasure trip on the
shoulder of the bewildered thief, who was searching for a solitary place in
order to rob the baby. It so happened that the thief, wandering hither and
thither, finally arrived just before the house of Jagannätha Miçra and, being
afraid of being caught, dropped the baby at once. Of course the anxious
parents and relatives were glad to see the lost child.
Once a pilgrim brähmaëa was received at the house of Jagannätha Miçra,
and when he was offering food to the Godhead, the Lord appeared before him
and partook of the prepared food. The eatables had to be rejected because the
child touched them, and so the brähmaëa had to make another preparation.
The next time the same thing happened, and when this happened repeatedly
for the third time, the baby was finally put to bed. At about twelve at night
when all the members of the house were fast asleep within their closed rooms,
the pilgrim brähmaëa offered his specially prepared foods to the Deity, and, in
the same way, the baby Lord appeared before the pilgrim and spoiled his
offerings. The brähmaëa then began to cry, but since everyone was fast asleep,
no one could hear him. At that time the baby Lord appeared before the
fortunate brähmaëa and disclosed His identity as Kåñëa Himself. The
brähmaëa was forbidden to disclose this incident, and the baby returned to the
lap of His mother.
There are many similar incidents in His childhood. As a naughty boy He
sometimes used to tease the orthodox brähmaëas who used to bathe in the
Ganges. When the brähmaëas complained to His father that He was splashing
them with water instead of attending school, the Lord suddenly appeared
before His father as though just coming from school with all His school clothes
and books. At the bathing ghäöa He also used to play jokes on the neighboring
girls who engaged in worshiping Çiva in hopes of getting good husbands. This
is a common practice amongst unmarried girls in Hindu families. While they
were engaged in such worship, the Lord naughtily appeared before them and
said, “My dear sisters, please give Me all the offerings you have just brought for
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Lord Çiva. Lord Çiva is My devotee, and Pärvaté is My maidservant. If you
worship Me, then Lord Çiva and all the other demigods will be more satisfied.”
Some of them refused to obey the naughty Lord, and He would curse them that
due to their refusal they would be married to old men who had seven children
by their previous wives. Out of fear and sometimes out of love the girls would
also offer Him various goods, and then the Lord would bless them and assure
them that they would have very good young husbands and that they would be
mothers of dozens of children. The blessings would enliven the girls, but they
used often to complain of these incidents to their mothers.
In this way the Lord passed His early childhood. When He was just sixteen
years old He started His own catuñpäöhé (village school conducted by a learned
brähmaëa). In this school He would simply explain Kåñëa, even in readings of
grammar. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, in order to please the Lord, later composed a
grammar in Sanskrit, in which all the rules of grammar were explained with
examples that used the holy names of the Lord. This grammar is still current. It
is known as Hari-nämämåta-vyäkaraëa and is prescribed in the syllabus of
schools in Bengal.
During this time a great Kashmir scholar named Keçava Käçméré came to
Navadvépa to hold discussions on the çästras. The Kashmir paëòita was a
champion scholar, and he had traveled to all places of learning in India.
Finally he came to Navadvépa to contest the learned paëòitas there. The
paëòitas of Navadvépa decided to match Nimäi Paëòita (Lord Caitanya) with
the Kashmir paëòita, thinking that if Nimäi Paëòita were defeated, they would
have another chance to debate with the scholar, for Nimäi Paëòita was only a
boy. And if the Kashmir paëòita were defeated, then they would even be more
glorified because people would proclaim that a mere boy of Navadvépa had
defeated a champion scholar who was famous throughout India. It so happened
that Nimäi Paëòita met Keçava Käçméré while strolling on the banks of the
Ganges. The Lord requested him to compose a Sanskrit verse in praise of the
Ganges, and the paëòita within a short time composed a hundred çlokas,
reciting the verses like a storm and showing the strength of his vast learning.
Nimäi Paëòita at once memorized all the çlokas without an error. He quoted
the sixty-fourth çloka and pointed out certain rhetorical and literary
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
irregularities. He particularly questioned the paëòita’s use of the word
bhaväné-bhartuù. He pointed out that the use of this word was redundant.
Bhaväné means the wife of Çiva, and who else can be her bhartä, or husband?
He also pointed out several other discrepancies, and the Kashmir paëòita was
struck with wonder. He was astonished that a mere student of grammar could
point out the literary mistakes of an erudite scholar. Although this matter was
ended prior to any public meeting, the news spread like wildfire all over
Navadvépa. But finally Keçava Käçméré was ordered in a dream by Sarasvaté,
the goddess of learning, to submit to the Lord, and thus the Kashmir paëòita
became a follower of the Lord.
The Lord was then married with great pomp and gaiety, and at this time He
began to preach the congregational chanting of the holy name of, the Lord at
Navadvépa. Some of the brähmaëas became envious of His popularity, and they
put many hindrances on His path. They were so jealous that they finally took
the matter before the Muslim magistrate at Navadvépa. Bengal was then
governed by Pathans, and the governor of the province was Nawab Hussain
Shah. The Muslim magistrate of Navadvépa took up the complaints of the
brähmaëas seriously, and at first he warned the followers of Nimäi Paëòita not
to chant loudly the name of Hari. But Lord Caitanya asked His followers to
disobey the orders of the Kazi, and they went on with their saìkértana
(chanting) party as usual. The magistrate then sent constables who interrupted
a saìkértana and broke some of the mådaìgas (drums). When Nimäi Paëòita
heard of this incident He organized a party for civil disobedience. He is the
pioneer of the civil disobedience movement in India for the right cause. He
organized a procession of one hundred thousand men with thousands of
mådaìgas and karatälas (hand cymbals), and this procession passed over the
roads of Navadvépa in defiance of the Kazi who had issued the order. Finally
the procession reached the house of the Kazi, who went upstairs out of fear of
the masses. The great crowds assembled at the Kazi’s house displayed a violent
temper, but the Lord asked them to be peaceful. At this time the Kazi came
down and tried to pacify the Lord by addressing Him as his nephew. He
pointed out that Nélämbara Cakravarté referred to him as an uncle, and
consequently, Çrématé Çacédevé, the mother of Nimäi Paëòita, was his sister.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
He asked the Lord whether his sister’s son could be angry at His maternal
uncle, and the Lord replied that since the Kazi was His maternal uncle he
should receive his nephew well at his home. In this way the issue was
mitigated, and the two learned scholars began a long discussion on the Koran
and Hindu çästras. The Lord raised the question of cow-killing, and the Kazi
properly answered Him by referring to the Koran. In turn the Kazi also
questioned the Lord about cow sacrifice in the Vedas, and the Lord replied
that such sacrifice as mentioned in the Vedas is not actually cow-killing. In
that sacrifice an old bull or cow was sacrificed for the sake of receiving a fresh
younger life by the power of Vedic mantras. But in the Kali-yuga such cow
sacrifices are forbidden because there are no qualified brähmaëas capable of
conducting such a sacrifice. In fact, in Kali-yuga all yajïas (sacrifices) are
forbidden because they are useless attempts by foolish men. In Kali-yuga only
the saìkértana yajïa is recommended for all practical purposes. Speaking in
this way, the Lord finally convinced the Kazi, who became the Lord’s follower.
The Kazi thenceforth declared that no one should hinder the saìkértana
movement which was started by the Lord, and the Kazi left this order in his
will for the sake of progeny. The Kazi’s tomb still exists in the area of
Navadvépa, and Hindu pilgrims go there to show their respects. The Kazi’s
descendants are residents, and they never objected to saìkértana, even during
the Hindu-Muslim riot days.
This incident shows clearly that the Lord was not a so-called timid
Vaiñëava. A Vaiñëava is a fearless devotee of the Lord, and for the right cause
he can take any step suitable for the purpose. Arjuna was also a Vaiñëava
devotee of Lord Kåñëa, and he fought valiantly for the satisfaction of the Lord.
Similarly, Vajräìgajé, or Hanumän, was also a devotee of Lord Räma, and he
gave lessons to the nondevotee party of Rävaëa. The principles of Vaiñëavism
are to satisfy the Lord by all means. A Vaiñëava is by nature a nonviolent,
peaceful living being, and he has all the good qualities of God, but when the
nondevotee blasphemes the Lord or His devotee, the Vaiñëava never tolerates
such impudency.
After this incident the Lord began to preach and propagate His
Bhägavata-dharma, or saìkértana movement, more vigorously, and whoever
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
stood against this propagation of the yuga-dharma, or duty of the age, was
properly punished by various types of chastisement. Two brähmaëa gentlemen
named Cäpala and Gopäla, who also happened to be maternal uncles of the
Lord, were inflicted with leprosy by way of chastisement, and later, when they
were repentant, they were accepted by the Lord. In the course of His
preaching work, He used to send daily all His followers, including Çréla
Nityänanda Prabhu and Öhäkura Haridäsa, two chief whips of His party, from
door to door to preach the Çrémad-Bhägavatam All of Navadvépa was
surcharged with His saìkértana movement, and His headquarters were situated
at the house of Çréväsa Öhäkura and Çré Advaita Prabhu, two of His chief
householder disciples. These two learned heads of the brähmaëa community
were the most ardent supporters of Lord Caitanya’s movement. Çré Advaita
Prabhu was the chief cause for the advent of the Lord. When Advaita Prabhu
saw that the total human society was full of materialistic activities and devoid
of devotional service, which alone could save mankind from the threefold
miseries of material existence, He, out of His causeless compassion for the
age-worn human society, prayed fervently for the incarnation of the Lord and
continually worshiped the Lord with water of the Ganges and leaves of the
holy tulasé tree. As far as preaching work in the saìkértana movement was
concerned, everyone was expected to do his daily share according to the order
of the Lord.
Once Nityänanda Prabhu and Çréla Haridäsa Öhäkura were walking down a
main road, and on the way they saw a roaring crowd assembled. Upon
inquiring from passers-by, they understood that two brothers, named Jagäi and
Mädhäi, were creating a public disturbance in a drunken state. They also heard
that these two brothers were born in a respectable brähmaëa family, but
because of low association they had turned into debauchees of the worst type.
They were not only drunkards but also meat-eaters, woman-hunters, dacoits
and sinners of all description. Çréla Nityänanda Prabhu heard all of these
stories and decided that these two fallen souls must be the first to be delivered.
If they were delivered from their sinful life, then the good name of Lord
Caitanya would be even still more glorified. Thinking in this way, Nityänanda
Prabhu and Haridäsa pushed their way through the crowd and asked the two
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
brothers to chant the holy name of Lord Hari. The drunken brothers became
enraged upon this request and attacked Nityänanda Prabhu with filthy
language. Both brothers chased them a considerable distance. In the evening
the report of the preaching work was submitted to the Lord, and He was glad
to learn that Nityänanda and Haridäsa had attempted to deliver such a stupid
pair of fellows.
The next day Nityänanda Prabhu went to see the brothers, and as soon as
He approached them one of them threw a piece of earthen pot at Him. This
struck Him on the forehead, and immediately blood began to flow. But
Nityänanda Prabhu was so kind that instead of protesting this heinous act, He
said, “It does not matter that you have thrown this stone at Me. I still request
you to chant the holy name of Lord Hari.”
One of the brothers, Jagäi, was astonished to see this behavior of
Nityänanda Prabhu, and he at once fell down at His feet and asked Him to
pardon his sinful brother. When Mädhäi again attempted to hurt Nityänanda
Prabhu, Jagäi stopped him and implored him to fall down at His feet. In the
meantime the news of Nityänanda’s injury reached the Lord, who at once
hurried to the spot in a fiery and angry mood. The Lord immediately invoked
His Sudarçana cakra (the Lord’s ultimate weapon, shaped like a wheel) to kill
the sinners, but Nityänanda Prabhu reminded Him of His mission. The
mission of the Lord was to deliver the hopelessly fallen souls of Kali-yuga, and
the brothers Jagäi and Mädhäi were typical examples of these fallen souls.
Ninety percent of the population of this age resembles these brothers, despite
high birth and mundane respectability. According to the verdict of the
revealed scriptures, the total population of the world in this age will be of the
lowest çüdra quality, or even lower. It should be noted that Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu never acknowledged the stereotyped caste system by birthright;
rather, He strictly followed the verdict of the çästras in the matter of one’s
svarüpa, or real identity.
When the Lord was invoking His Sudarçana cakra and Çréla Nityänanda
Prabhu was imploring Him to forgive the two brothers, both the brothers fell
down at the lotus feet of the Lord and begged His pardon for their gross
behavior. The Lord was also asked by Nityänanda Prabhu to accept these
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
repenting souls, and the Lord agreed to accept them on one condition, that
they henceforward completely give up all their sinful activities and habits of
debauchery. both the brothers agreed and promised to give up all their sinful
habits, and the kind Lord accepted them and did not again refer to their past
misdeeds.
This is the specific kindness of Lord Caitanya. In this age no one can say
that he is free from sin. It is impossible for anyone to say this. But Lord
Caitanya accepts all kinds of sinful persons on the one condition that they
promise not to indulge in sinful habits after being spiritually initiated by the
bona fide spiritual master.
There are a number of instructive points to he observed in this incident of
the two brothers. In this Kali-yuga practically all people are of the quality of
Jagäi and Mädhäi. If they want to be relieved from the reactions of their
misdeeds, they must take shelter of Lord Caitanya Mahäprabhu and after
spiritual initiation thus refrain from those things which are prohibited in the
çästras. The prohibitory rules are dealt with in the Lord’s teachings to Çréla
Rüpa Gosvämé.
During His householder life, the Lord did not display many of the miracles
which are generally expected from such personalities, but He did once perform
a wonderful miracle in the house of Çréniväsa Öhäkura while saìkértana was in
full swing. He asked the devotees what they wanted to eat, and when He was
informed that they wanted to eat mangoes, He asked for a seed of a mango,
although this fruit was out of season. When the seed was brought to Him He
sowed it in the yard of Çréniväsa, and at once a creeper began to grow out of
the seed. Within no time this creeper became a full-grown mango tree heavy
with more ripened fruits than the devotees could eat. The tree remained in
Çréniväsa’s yard, and from then on the devotees used to take as many mangoes
from the tree as they wanted.
The Lord had a very high estimation of the affections of the damsels of
Vrajabhümi (Våndävana) for Kåñëa, and in appreciation of their unalloyed
service to the Lord, once Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu chanted the holy names of
the gopés (cowherd girls) instead of the names of the Lord. At this time some of
His students, who were also disciples, came to see Him, and when they saw that
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the Lord was chanting the names of the gopés, they were astonished. Out of
sheer foolishness they asked the Lord why He was chanting the names of the
gopés and advised Him to chant the name of Kåñëa. The Lord, who was in
ecstasy, was thus disturbed by these foolish students. He chastised them and
chased them away. The students were almost the same age as the Lord, and
thus they wrongly thought of the Lord as one of their peers. They held a
meeting and resolved that they would attack the Lord if He dared to punish
them again in such a manner. This incident provoked some malicious talks
about the Lord on the part of the general public.
When the Lord became aware of this, He began to consider the various
types of men found in society. He noted that especially the students,
professors, fruitive workers, yogés, nondevotees, and different types of atheists
were all opposed to the devotional service of the Lord. “My mission is to
deliver all the fallen souls of this age,” He thought, “but if they commit
offenses against Me, thinking Me to be an ordinary man, they will not benefit.
If they are to begin their life of spiritual realization, they must some way or
another offer obeisances unto Me.” Thus the Lord decided to accept the
renounced order of life (sannyäsa) because people in general were inclined to
offer respects to a sannyäsé.
Five hundred years ago the condition of society was not as degraded as it is
today. At that time people would show respects to a sannyäsé, and the sannyäsé
was rigid in following the rules and regulations of the renounced order of life.
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu was not very much in favor of the renounced order
of life in this age of Kali, but that was only for the reason that very few
sannyäsés in this age are able to observe the rules and regulations of sannyäsa
life. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu decided to accept the order and become an
ideal sannyäsé so that the general populace would show Him respect. One is
duty-bound to show respect to a sannyäsé, for a sannyäsé is considered to be the
master of all varëas and äçramas.
While He was contemplating accepting the sannyäsa order, it so happened
that Keçava Bhäraté, a sannyäsé of the Mäyävädé school and resident of Katwa
(in Bengal), visited Navadvépa and was invited to dine with the Lord. When
Keçava Bhäraté came to His house, the Lord asked him to award Him the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
sannyäsa order of life. This was a matter of formality. The sannyäsa order is to
be accepted from another sannyäsé. Although the Lord was independent in all
respects, still, to keep up the formalities of the çästras, He accepted the
sannyäsa order from Keçava Bhäraté, although Keçava Bhäraté was not in the
Vaiñëava-sampradäya (school).
After consulting with Keçava Bhäraté, the Lord left Navadvépa for Katwa to
formally accept the sannyäsa order of life. He was accompanied by Çréla
Nityänanda Prabhu, Candraçekhara Äcärya, and Mukunda Datta. Those three
assisted Him in the details of the ceremony. The incident of the Lord’s
accepting the sannyäsa order is very elaborately described in the
Caitanya-bhägavata by Çréla Våndävana däsa Öhäkura.
Thus at the end of His twenty-fourth year the Lord accepted the sannyäsa
order of life in the month of Mägha. After accepting this order He became a
full-fledged preacher of the Bhägavata-dharma. Although He was doing the
same preaching work in His householder life, when He experienced some
obstacles to His preaching He sacrificed even the comfort of His home life for
the sake of the fallen souls. In His householder life His chief assistants were
Çréla Advaita Prabhu and Çréla Çréväsa Öhäkura, but after He accepted the
sannyäsa order His chief assistants became Çréla Nityänanda Prabhu, who was
deputed to preach specifically in Bengal, and the six Gosvämés (Rüpa Gosvämé,
Sanätana Gosvämé, Jéva Gosvämé, Gopäla Bhaööa Gosvämé, Raghunätha däsa
Gosvämé and Raghunätha Bhaööa Gosvämé), headed by Çréla Rüpa and
Sanätana, who were deputed to go to Våndävana to excavate the present
places of pilgrimage. The present city of Våndävana and the importance of
Vrajabhümi were thus disclosed by the will of Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu.
The Lord, after accepting the sannyäsa order, at once wanted to start for
Våndävana. For three continuous days He traveled in the Räòha-deça (places
where the Ganges does not flow). He was in full ecstasy over the idea of going
to Våndävana. However, Çréla Nityänanda diverted His path and brought Him
instead to the house of Advaita Prabhu in Çäntipura. The Lord stayed at Çré
Advaita Prabhu’s house for a few days, and knowing well that the Lord was
leaving His hearth and home for good, Çré Advaita Prabhu sent His men to
Navadvépa to bring mother Çacé to have a last meeting with her son. Some
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
unscrupulous people say that Lord Caitanya met His wife also after taking
sannyäsa and offered her His wooden slipper for worship, but the authentic
sources give no information about such a meeting. His mother met Him at the
house of Advaita Prabhu, and when she saw her son in sannyäsa, she
lamented. By way of compromise, she requested her son to make His
headquarters in Puré so that she would easily be able to get information about
Him. The Lord granted this last desire of His beloved mother. After this
incident the Lord started for Puré, leaving all the residents of Navadvépa in an
ocean of lamentation over His separation.
The Lord visited many important places on the way to Puré. He visited the
temple of Gopénäthajé, who had stolen condensed milk for His devotee Çréla
Mädhavendra Puré. Since then Deity Gopénäthajé is well known as
Kñéra-corä-gopénätha. The Lord relished this story with great pleasure. The
propensity of stealing is there even in the absolute consciousness, but because
this propensity is exhibited by the Absolute, it loses its perverted nature and
thus becomes worshipable even by Lord Caitanya on the basis of the absolute
consideration that the Lord and His stealing propensity are one and identical.
This interesting story of Gopénäthajé is vividly explained in the
Caitanya-caritämåta by Kåñëadäsa Kaviräja Gosvämé.
After visiting the temple of Kñéra-corä-gopénätha of Remuëä at Balasore in
Orissa, the Lord proceeded towards Puré and on the way visited the temple of
Säkñi-gopäla, who appeared as a witness in the matter of two brähmaëa
devotees’ family quarrel. The Lord heard the story of Säkñi-gopäla with great
pleasure because He wanted to impress upon the atheists that the worshipable
Deities in the temples approved by the great äcäryas are not idols, as alleged by
men with a poor fund of knowledge. The Deity in the temple is the arcä
incarnation of the Personality of Godhead, and thus the Deity is identical with
the Lord in all respects. He responds to the proportion of the devotee’s
affection for Him. In the story of Säkñi-gopäla, in which there was a family
misunderstanding by two devotees of the Lord, the Lord, in order to mitigate
the turmoil as well as to show specific favor to His servitors, traveled from
Våndävana to Vidyänagara, a village in Orissa, in the form of His arcä
incarnation. From there the Deity was brought to Cuttack, and thus the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
temple of Säkñi-gopäla is even today visited by thousands of pilgrims on the
way to Jagannätha Puré. The Lord stayed overnight there and began to proceed
toward Puré. On the way, His sannyäsa rod was broken by Nityänanda Prabhu.
The Lord became apparently angry with Him about this and went alone to
Puré, leaving His companions behind.
At Puré, when He entered the temple of Jagannätha, He became at once
saturated with transcendental ecstasy and fell down on the floor of the temple
unconscious. The custodians of the temple could not understand the
transcendental feats of the Lord, but there was a great learned paëòita named
Särvabhauma Bhaööäcärya, who was present, and he could understand that the
Lord’s losing His consciousness upon entering the Jagannätha temple was not
an ordinary thing. Särvabhauma Bhaööäcärya, who was the chief appointed
paëòita in the court of the King of Orissa, Mahäräja Pratäparudra, was
attracted by the youthful luster of Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu and could
understand that such a transcendental trance was only rarely exhibited and
only then by the topmost devotees who are already on the transcendental
plane in complete forgetfulness of material existence. Only a liberated soul
could show such a transcendental feat, and the Bhaööäcärya, who was vastly
learned, could understand this in the light of the transcendental literature
with which he was familiar. He therefore asked the custodians of the temple
not to disturb the unknown sannyäsé. He asked them to take the Lord to his
home so He could be further observed in His unconscious state. The Lord was
at once carried to the home of Särvabhauma Bhaööäcärya, who at that time
had sufficient power of authority due to his being the sabhä-paëòita, or the
state dean of faculty in Sanskrit literatures. The learned paëòita wanted to
scrutinizingly test the transcendental feats of Lord Caitanya because often
unscrupulous devotees imitate physical feats in order to flaunt transcendental
achievements just to attract innocent people and take advantage of them. A
learned scholar like the Bhaööäcärya can detect such imposters, and when he
finds them out he at once rejects them.
In the case of Lord Caitanya Mahäprabhu, the Bhaööäcärya tested all the
symptoms in the light of the çästras. He tested as a scientist, not as a foolish
sentimentalist. He observed the movement of the stomach, the beating of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
heart and the breathing of the nostrils. He also felt the pulse of the Lord and
saw that all His bodily activities were in complete suspension. When he put a
small cotton swab before the nostrils, he found that there was a slight
breathing as the fine fibers of cotton moved slightly. Thus he came to know
that the Lord’s unconscious trance was genuine, and he began to treat Him in
the prescribed fashion. But Lord Caitanya Mahäprabhu could only be treated
in a special way. He would respond only to the resounding of the holy names of
the Lord by His devotees. This special treatment was unknown to
Särvabhauma Bhaööäcärya because the Lord was still unknown to him. When
the Bhaööäcärya saw Him for the first time in the temple, he simply took Him
to be one of many pilgrims.
In the meantime the companions of the Lord, who reached the temple a
little after Him, heard of the Lord’s transcendental feats and of His being
carried away by the Bhaööäcärya. The pilgrims at the temple were still gossiping
about the incident. But by chance, one of these pilgrims had met Gopénätha
Äcärya, who was known to Gadädhara Paëòita, and from him it was learned
that the Lord was lying in an unconscious state at the residence of
Särvabhauma Bhaööäcärya, who happened to be the brother-in-law of
Gopénätha Äcärya. All the members of the party were introduced by
Gadädhara Paëòita to Gopénätha Äcärya, who took them all to the house of
Bhaööäcärya where the Lord was lying unconscious in a spiritual trance. All
the members then chanted loudly the holy name of the Lord Hari as usual, and
the Lord regained His consciousness. After this, Bhaööäcärya received all the
members of the party, including Lord Nityänanda Prabhu, and asked them to
become his guests of honor. The party, including the Lord, went for a bath in
the sea, and the Bhaööäcärya arranged for their residence and meals at the
house of Käçé Miçra. Gopénätha Äcärya, his brother-in-law, also assisted. There
were some friendly talks about the Lord’s divinity between the two
brothers-in-law, and in this argument Gopénätha Äcärya, who knew the Lord
before, now tried to establish the Lord as the Personality of Godhead, and the
Bhaööäcärya tried to establish Him as one of the great devotees. Both of them
argued from the angle of vision of authentic çästras and not on the strength of
sentimental vox populi. The incarnations of God are determined by authentic
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
çästras and not by popular votes of foolish fanatics. Because Lord Caitanya was
an incarnation of God in fact, foolish fanatics have proclaimed so many
so-called incarnations of God in this age without referring to authentic
scriptures. But Särvabhauma Bhaööäcärya or Gopénätha Äcärya did not
indulge in such foolish sentimentalism; on the contrary, both of them tried to
establish or reject His divinity on the strength of authentic çästras.
Later it was disclosed that Bhaööäcärya also came from the Navadvépa area,
and it was understood from him that Nélämbara Cakravarté, the maternal
grandfather of Lord Caitanya, happened to be a class fellow of the father of
Särvabhauma Bhaööäcärya. In that sense, the young sannyäsé Lord Caitanya
evoked paternal affection from Bhaööäcärya. Bhaööäcärya was the professor of
many sannyäsés in the order of the Çaìkaräcärya-sampradäya, and he himself
also belonged to that cult. As such, the Bhaööäcärya desired that the young
sannyäsé Lord Caitanya also hear from him about the teachings of Vedänta.
Those who are followers of the Çaìkara cult are generally known as
Vedäntists. This does not, however, mean that Vedänta is a monopoly study of
the Çaìkara-sampradäya. Vedänta is studied by all the bona fide sampradäyas,
but they have their own interpretations. But those in the Çaìkara-sampradäya
are generally known to be ignorant of the knowledge of the Vedäntist
Vaiñëavas. For this reason the Bhaktivedanta title was first offered to the
author by the Vaiñëavas.
The Lord agreed to take lessons from Bhaööäcärya on the Vedänta, and they
sat together in the temple of Lord Jagannätha. The Bhaööäcärya went on
speaking continually for seven days, and the Lord heard him with all attention
and did not interrupt. The Lord’s silence raised some doubts in Bhaööäcärya’s
heart, and he asked the Lord how it was that He did not ask anything or
comment on his explanations of Vedänta.
The Lord posed Himself before the Bhaööäcärya as a foolish student and
pretended that He heard the Vedänta from him because the Bhaööäcärya felt
that this was the duty of a sannyäsé. But the Lord did not agree with his
lectures. By this the Lord indicated that the so-called Vedäntists amongst the
Çaìkara-sampradäya, or any other sampradäya who do not follow the
instructions of Çréla Vyäsadeva, are mechanical students of the Vedänta. They
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
are not fully aware of that great knowledge. The explanation of the
Vedänta-sütra is given by the author himself in the text of Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
One who has no knowledge of the Bhägavatam will hardly be able to know
what the Vedänta says.
The Bhaööäcärya, being a vastly learned man, could follow the Lord’s
sarcastic remarks on the popular Vedäntist. He therefore asked Him why He
did not ask about any point which He could not follow. The Bhaööäcärya could
understand the purpose of His dead silence for the days He heard him. This
showed clearly that the Lord had something else in mind; thus the Bhaööäcärya
requested Him to disclose His mind.
Upon this, the Lord spoke as follows: “My dear sir, I can understand the
meaning of the sütras like janmädy asya yataù [SB 1.1.1], çästra-yonitvät, and
athäto brahma jijïäsä of the Vedänta-sütra, but when you explain them in your
own way it becomes difficult for Me to follow them. The purpose of the sütras
is already explained in them, but your explanations are covering them with
something else. You do not purposely take the direct meaning of the sütras but
indirectly give your own interpretations.”
The Lord thus attacked all Vedäntists who interpret the Vedänta-sütra
fashionably, according to their limited power of thinking, to serve their own
purpose. Such indirect interpretations of the authentic literatures like the
Vedänta-sütra are hereby condemned by the Lord.
The Lord continued: “Çréla Vyäsadeva has summarized the direct meanings
of the mantras in the Upaniñads in the Vedänta-sütra. Unfortunately you do
not take their direct meaning. You indirectly interpret them in a different
way.
“The authority of the Vedas is unchallengeable and stands without any
question of doubt. And whatever is stated in the Vedas must be accepted
completely, otherwise one challenges the authority of the Vedas.
“The conchshell and cow dung are bone and stool of two living beings. But
because they have been recommended by the Vedas as pure, people accept
them as such because of the authority of the Vedas.”
The idea is that one cannot set his imperfect reason above the authority of
the Vedas. The orders of the Vedas must be obeyed as they stand, without any
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
mundane reasoning. The so-called followers of the Vedic injunctions make
their own interpretations of the Vedic injunctions, and thus they establish
different parties and sects of the Vedic religion. Lord Buddha directly denied
the authority of the Vedas, and he established his own religion. Only for this
reason, the Buddhist religion was not accepted by the strict followers of the
Vedas. But those who are so-called followers of the Vedas are more harmful
than the Buddhists. The Buddhists have the courage to deny the Vedas
directly, but the so-called followers of the Vedas have no courage to deny the
Vedas, although indirectly they disobey all the injunctions of the Vedas. Lord
Caitanya condemned this.
The examples given by the Lord of the conchshell and the cow dung are
very much appropriate in this connection. If one argues that since cow dung is
pure, the stool of a learned brähmaëa is still more pure, his argument will not
be accepted. Cow dung is accepted, and the stool of a highly posted brähmaëa
is rejected. The Lord continued:
“The Vedic injunctions are self-authorized, and if some mundane creature
adjusts the interpretations of the Vedas, he defies their authority. It is foolish
to think of oneself as more intelligent than Çréla Vyäsadeva. He has already
expressed himself in his sütras, and there is no need of help from personalities
of lesser importance. His work, the Vedänta-sütra, is as dazzling as the midday
sun, and when someone tries to give his own interpretations on the
self-effulgent sunlike Vedänta-sütra, he attempts to cover this sun with the
cloud of his imagination.
“The Vedas and Puräëas are one and the same in purpose. They ascertain
the Absolute Truth, which is greater than everything else. The Absolute Truth
is ultimately realized as the Absolute Personality of Godhead with absolute
controlling power. As such, the Absolute Personality of Godhead must be
completely full of opulence, strength, fame, beauty, knowledge and
renunciation. Yet the transcendental Personality of Godhead is astonishingly
ascertained as impersonal.
“The impersonal description of the Absolute Truth in the Vedas is given to
nullify the mundane conception of the absolute whole. Personal features of the
Lord are completely different from all kinds of mundane features. The living
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
entities are all individual persons, and they are all parts and parcels of the
supreme whole. If the parts and parcels are individual persons, the source of
their emanation must not be impersonal. He is the Supreme Person amongst
all the relative persons.
“The Vedas inform us that from Him [Brahman] everything emanates, and
on Him everything rests. And after annihilation, everything merges in Him
only. Therefore, He is the ultimate dative, causative and accommodating cause
of all causes. And these causes cannot be attributed to an impersonal object.
“The Vedas inform us that He alone became many, and when He so desires
He glances over material nature. Before He glanced over material nature there
was no material cosmic creation. Therefore, His glance is not material.
Material mind or senses were unborn when the Lord glanced over material
nature. Thus evidence in the Vedas proves that beyond a doubt the Lord has
transcendental eyes and a transcendental mind. They are not material. His
impersonality therefore is a negation of His materiality, but not a denial of His
transcendental personality.
“Brahman ultimately refers to the Personality of Godhead. Impersonal
Brahman realization is just the negative conception of the mundane creations.
Paramätmä is the localized aspect of Brahman within all kinds of material
bodies. Ultimately the Supreme Brahman realization is the realization of the
Personality of Godhead according to all evidence of the revealed scriptures.
He is the ultimate source of viñëu-tattvas.
“The Puräëas are also supplementary to the Vedas. The Vedic mantras are
too difficult for an ordinary man. Women, çüdras and the so-called twice-born
higher castes are unable to penetrate into the sense of the Vedas. And thus the
Mahäbhärata as well as the Puräëas are made easy to explain the truths of the
Vedas. In his prayers before the boy Çré Kåñëa, Brahmä said that there is no
limit to the fortune of the residents of Vrajabhümi headed by Çré Nanda
Mahäräja and Yaçodämayé because the eternal Absolute Truth has become
their intimate relative.
“The Vedic mantra maintains that the Absolute Truth has no legs and no
hands and yet goes faster than all and accepts everything that is offered to
Him in devotion. The latter statements definitely suggest the personal features
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
of the Lord, although His hands and legs are distinguished from mundane
hands and legs or other senses.
“Brahman, therefore, is never impersonal, but when such mantras are
indirectly interpreted, it is wrongly thought that the Absolute Truth is
impersonal. The Absolute Truth Personality of Godhead is full of all
opulences, and therefore He has a transcendental form of full existence,
knowledge and bliss. How then can one establish that the Absolute Truth is
impersonal?
“Brahman, being full of opulences, is understood to have manifold energies,
and all these energies are classified under three headings under the authority
of Viñëu Puräëa [6.7.60], which says that the transcendental energies of Lord
Viñëu are primarily three. His spiritual energy and the energy of the living
entities are classified as superior energy, whereas the material energy is an
inferior one which is sprouted out of ignorance.
“The energy of the living entities is technically called kñetrajïa energy. This
kñetrajïa-çakti, although equal in quality with the Lord, becomes overpowered
by material energy out of ignorance and thus suffers all sorts of material
miseries. In other words, the living entities are located in the marginal energy
between the superior (spiritual) and inferior (material) energies, and in
proportion to the living being’s contact with either the material or spiritual
energies, the living entity is situated in proportionately higher and lower levels
of existence.
“The Lord is beyond the inferior and marginal energies as above
mentioned, and His spiritual energy is manifested in three different phases: as
eternal existence, eternal bliss and eternal knowledge. As far as eternal
existence is concerned, it is conducted by the sandhiné potency; similarly, bliss
and knowledge are conducted by the hlädhiné and saàvit potencies
respectively. As the supreme energetic Lord, He is the supreme controller of
the spiritual, marginal and material energies. And all these different types of
energies are connected with the Lord in eternal devotional service.
“The Supreme Personality of Godhead is thus enjoying in His
transcendental eternal form. Is it not astounding that one dares to call the
Supreme Lord nonenergetic? The Lord is the controller of all energies, and the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
living entities are parts and parcels of one of the energies. Therefore there is a
gulf of difference between the Lord and the living entities. How then can one
say that the Lord and the living entities are one and the same? In the
Bhagavad-gétä also the living entities are described as belonging to the superior
energy of the Lord. According to the principles of intimate correlation
between the energy and the energetic, both of them are nondifferent also.
Therefore, the Lord and the living entities are nondifferent as the energy and
the energetic.
“Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and ego are all inferior
energies of the Lord, but the living entities are different from all as superior
energy. This is the version of Bhagavad-gétä [7.4].
“The transcendental form of the Lord is eternally existent and full of
transcendental bliss. How then can such a form be a product of the material
mode of goodness? Anyone, therefore, who does not believe in the form of the
Lord is certainly a faithless demon and as such is untouchable, a not to be seen
persona non grata fit to be punished by the Plutonic king.
“The Buddhists are called atheists because they have no respect for the
Vedas, but those who defy the Vedic conclusions, as above mentioned, under
the pretense of being followers of the Vedas, are verily more dangerous than
the Buddhists.
“Çré Vyäsadeva very kindly compiled the Vedic knowledge in his
Vedänta-sütra, but if one hears the commentation of the Mäyäväda school (as
represented by the Çaìkara-sampradäya) certainly he will be misled on the
path of spiritual realization.
“The theory of emanations is the beginning subject of the Vedänta-sütra.
All the cosmic manifestations are emanations from the Absolute Personality of
Godhead by His inconceivable different energies. The example of the
touchstone is applicable to the theory of emanation. The touchstone can
convert an unlimited quantity of iron into gold, and still the touchstone
remains as it is. Similarly, the Supreme Lord can produce all manifested worlds
by His inconceivable energies, and yet He is full and unchanged. He is pürëa
[complete], and although an unlimited number of pürëas emanate from Him,
He is still pürëa.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
“The theory of illusion of the Mäyäväda school is advocated on the ground
that the theory of emanation will cause a transformation of the Absolute
Truth. If that is the case, Vyäsadeva is wrong. To avoid this, they have
skillfully brought in the theory of illusion. But the world or the cosmic
creation is not false, as maintained by the Mäyäväda school. It simply has no
permanent existence. A nonpermanent thing cannot be called false altogether.
But the conception that the material body is the self is certainly wrong.
“Praëava [oà], or the oàkära in the Vedas, is the primeval hymn. This
transcendental sound is identical with the form of the Lord. All the Vedic
hymns are based on this praëava oàkära. Tat tvam asi is but a side word in the
Vedic literatures, and therefore this word cannot be the primeval hymn of the
Vedas. Çrépäda Çaìkaräcärya has given more stress on the side word tat tvam
asi than on the primeval principle oàkära.”
The Lord thus spoke on the Vedänta-sütra and defied all the propaganda of
the Mäyäväda school.*(1) The Bhaööäcärya tried to defend himself and his
Mäyäväda school by jugglery of logic and grammar, but the Lord defeated him
by His forceful arguments. He affirmed that we are all related with the
Personality of Godhead eternally and that devotional service is our eternal
function in exchanging the dealings of our relations. The result of such
exchanges is to attain premä, or love of Godhead. When love of Godhead is
attained, love for all other beings automatically follows because the Lord is the
sum total of all living beings.
The Lord said that but for these three items—namely, eternal relation with
God, exchange of dealings with Him and the attainment of love for Him—all
that is instructed in the Vedas is superfluous and concocted.
The Lord further added that the Mäyäväda philosophy taught by Çrépäda
Çaìkaräcärya is an imaginary explanation of the Vedas, but it had to be taught
by him (Çaìkaräcärya) because he was ordered to teach it by the Personality of
Godhead. In the Padma Puräëa it is stated that the Personality of Godhead
ordered His Lordship Çiva to deviate the human race from Him (the
Personality of Godhead). The Personality of Godhead was to be so covered so
that people would be encouraged to generate more and more population. His
Lordship Çiva said to Devé: “In the Kali-yuga, I shall preach the Mäyäväda
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
philosophy, which is nothing but clouded Buddhism, in the garb of a
brähmaëa.”
After hearing all these speeches of the Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, the
Bhaööäcärya was struck with wonder and awe and regarded Him in dead
silence. The Lord then encouraged him with assurance that there was no cause
to wonder. “I say that devotional service unto the Personality of Godhead is the
highest goal of human life.” He then quoted a çloka from the Bhägavatam and
assured him that even the liberated souls who are absorbed in the spirit and
spiritual realization also take to the devotional service of the Lord Hari
because the Personality of Godhead has such transcendental qualities that He
attracts the heart of the liberated soul too.
Then the Bhaööäcärya desired to listen to the explanation of the
“ätmäräma” çloka from the Bhägavatam (1.7.10). The Lord first of all asked
Bhaööäcärya to explain it, and after that He would explain it. The Bhaööäcärya
then explained the çloka in a scholarly way with special reference to logic. He
explained the çloka in nine different ways chiefly based on logic because he
was the most renowned scholar of logic of the time.
The Lord, after hearing the Bhaööäcärya, thanked him for the scholarly
presentation of the çloka, and then, at the request of the Bhaööäcärya, the Lord
explained the çloka in sixty-four different ways without touching the nine
explanations given by the Bhaööäcärya.
Thus after hearing the explanation of the ätmäräma çloka from the Lord,
the Bhaööäcärya was convinced that such a scholarly presentation is impossible
for an earthly creature.*(2) Before this, Çré Gopénätha Äcärya had tried to
convince him of the divinity of the Lord, but at the time he could not so
accept Him. But the Bhaööäcärya was astounded by the Lord’s exposition of the
Vedänta-sütra and explanations of the ätmäräma çloka, and thus he began to
think that he had committed a great offense at the lotus feet of the Lord by
not recognizing Him to be Kåñëa Himself. He then surrendered unto Him,
repenting for his past dealings with Him, and the Lord was kind enough to
accept the Bhaööäcärya. Out of His causeless mercy, the Lord manifested
before him first as four-handed Näräyaëa and then again as two-handed Lord
Kåñëa with a flute in His hand.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The Bhaööäcärya at once fell down at the lotus feet of the Lord and
composed many suitable çlokas in praise of the Lord by His grace. He composed
almost one hundred çlokas in praise of the Lord. The Lord then embraced him,
and out of transcendental ecstasy the Bhaööäcärya lost consciousness of the
physical state of life. Tears, trembling, throbbing of the heart, perspiration,
emotional waves, dancing, singing, crying and all the eight symptoms of trance
were manifested in the body of the Bhaööäcärya. Çré Gopénätha Äcärya became
very glad and astonished by this marvelous conversion of his brother-in-law by
the grace of the Lord.
Out of the hundred celebrated çlokas composed by the Bhaööäcärya in
praise of the Lord, the following two are most important, and these two çlokas
explain the mission of the Lord in gist.
1. Let me surrender unto the Personality of Godhead who has appeared now
as Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. He is the ocean of all mercy and has now
come down to teach us material detachment, learning and devotional service
to Himself.
2. Since pure devotional service of the Lord has been lost in the oblivion of
time, the Lord has appeared to renovate the principles, and therefore I offer
my obeisances unto His lotus feet.
The Lord explained the word mukti to be equivalent to the word Viñëu, or
the Personality of Godhead. To attain mukti, or liberation from the bondage of
material existence, is to attain to the service of the Lord.
The Lord then proceeded towards South India for some time and converted
all He met on the way to become devotees of Lord Çré Kåñëa. Such devotees
also converted many others to the cult of devotional service, or to the
Bhägavata-dharma of the Lord, and thus He reached the bank of the Godävaré,
where He met Çréla Rämänanda Räya, the governor of Madras on behalf of
Mahäräja Pratäparudra, the King of Orissa. His talks with Rämänanda Räya
are very important for higher realization of transcendental knowledge, and the
conversation itself forms a small booklet. We shall, however, give herewith a
summary of the conversation.
Çré Rämänanda Räya was a self-realized soul, although outwardly he
belonged to a caste lower than the brähmaëa in social status. He was not in the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
renounced order of life, and besides that he was a high government servant in
the state. Still, Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu accepted him as a liberated soul on
the strength of the high order of his realization of transcendental knowledge.
Similarly, the Lord accepted Çréla Haridäsa Öhäkura, a veteran devotee of the
Lord coming from a Mohammedan family. And there are many other great
devotees of the Lord who came from different communities, sects and castes.
The Lord’s only criterion was the standard of devotional service of the
particular person. He was not concerned with the outward dress of a man; He
was concerned only with the inner soul and its activities. Therefore all the
missionary activities of the Lord are to be understood to be on the spiritual
plane, and as such the cult of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, or the cult of
Bhägavata-dharma, has nothing to do with mundane affairs, sociology, politics,
economic development or any such sphere of life. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the
purely transcendental urge of the soul.
When He met Çré Rämänanda Räya on the bank of the Godävaré, the
varëäçrama-dharma followed by the Hindus was mentioned by the Lord. Çréla
Rämänanda Räya said that by following the principles of varëäçrama-dharma,
the system of four castes and four orders of human life, everyone could realize
Transcendence. In the opinion of the Lord, the system of varëäçrama-dharma
is superficial only, and it has very little to do with the highest realization of
spiritual values. The highest perfection of life is to get detached from the
material attachment and proportionately realize the transcendental loving
service of the Lord. The Personality of Godhead recognizes a living being who
is progressing in that line. Devotional service, therefore, is the culmination of
the culture of all knowledge. When Çré Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, appeared for the deliverance of all fallen souls, He advised the
deliverance of all living entities as follows. The Supreme Absolute Personality
of Godhead, from whom all living entities have emanated, must be worshiped
by all their respective engagements, because everything that we see is also the
expansion of His energy. That is the way of real perfection, and it is approved
by all bona fide äcäryas past and present. The system of varëäçrama is more or
less based on moral and ethical principles. There is very little realization of the
Transcendence as such, and Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu rejected it as
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
superficial and asked Rämänanda Räya to go further into the matter.
Çré Rämänanda Räya then suggested renunciation of fruitive actions unto
the Lord. The Bhagavad-gétä (9.27) advises in this connection: “Whatever you
do, whatever you eat and whatever you give, as well as whatever you perform
in penance, offer to Me alone.” This dedication on the part of the worker
suggests that the Personality of Godhead is a step higher than the impersonal
conception of the varëäçrama system, but still the relation of the living being
and the Lord is not distinct in that way. The Lord therefore rejected this
proposition and asked Rämänanda Räya to go further.
Räya then suggested renunciation of the varëäçrama-dharma and
acceptance of devotional service. The Lord did not approve of this suggestion
also for the reason that all of a sudden one should not renounce his position,
for that may not bring in the desired result.
It was further suggested by Räya that attainment of spiritual realization
freed from the material conception of life is the topmost achievement for a
living being. The Lord rejected this suggestion also because on the plea of such
spiritual realization much havoc has been wrought by unscrupulous persons;
therefore all of a sudden this is not possible. The Räya then suggested sincere
association of self-realized souls and hearing submissively the transcendental
message of the pastimes of the Personality of Godhead. This suggestion was
welcomed by the Lord. This suggestion was made following in the footsteps of
Brahmäjé, who said that the Personality of Godhead is known as ajita, or the
one who cannot be conquered or approached by anyone. But such ajita also
becomes jita (conquered) by one method, which is very simple and easy. The
simple method is that one has to give up the arrogant attitude of declaring
oneself to be God Himself. One must be very meek and submissive and try to
live peacefully by lending the ear to the speeches of the transcendentally
self-realized soul who speaks on the message of Bhägavata-dharma, or the
religion of glorifying the Supreme Lord and His devotees. To glorify a great
man is a natural instinct for living beings, but they have not learned to glorify
the Lord. Perfection of life is attained simply by glorifying the Lord in
association with a self-realized devotee of the Lord.*(3) The self-realized
devotee is he who surrenders unto the Lord fully and who does not have
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
attachment for material prosperity. Material prosperity and sense enjoyment
and their advancement are all activities of ignorance in human society. Peace
and friendship are impossible for a society detached from the association of
God and His devotees. It is imperative, therefore, that one sincerely seek the
association of pure devotees and hear them patiently and submissively from
any position of life. The position of a person in the higher or lower status of
life does not hamper one in the path of self-realization. The only thing one has
to do is to hear from a self-realized soul with a routine program. The teacher
may also deliver lectures from the Vedic literatures, following in the footsteps
of the bygone äcäryas who realized the Absolute Truth. Lord Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu recommended this simple method of self-realization generally
known as Bhägavata-dharma. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the perfect guide for this
purpose.
Above these topics discussed by the Lord and Çré Rämänanda Räya, there
were still more elevated spiritual talks between the two great personalities, and
we purposely withhold those topics for the present because one has to come to
the spiritual plane before further talks with Rämänanda Räya can be heard.
We have presented further talks of Çréla Rämänanda Räya with the Lord in
another book (Teachings of Lord Caitanya).
At the conclusion of this meeting, Çré Rämänanda Räya was advised by the
Lord to retire from service and come to Puré so that they could live together
and relish a transcendental relationship. Some time later, Çré Rämänanda
Räya retired from the government service and took a pension from the King.
He returned to his residence in Puré, where he was one of the most
confidential devotees of the Lord. There was another gentleman at Puré of the
name Çikhi Mähiti, who was also a confidant like Rämänanda Räya. The Lord
used to hold confidential talks on spiritual values with three or four
companions at Puré, and He passed eighteen years in that way in spiritual
trance. His talks were recorded by His private secretary Çré Dämodara
Gosvämé, one of the four most intimate devotees.
The Lord extensively traveled all over the southern part of India. The great
saint of Mahäräñöra known as Saint Tukäräma was also initiated by the Lord.
Saint Tukäräma, after initiation by the Lord, overflooded the whole of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Mahäräñöra Province with the saìkértana movement, and the transcendental
flow is still rolling on in the southwestern part of the great Indian peninsula.
The Lord excavated from South India two very important old literatures,
namely the Brahmä-saàhitä(4) and Kåñëa-karëämåta, and these two valuable
books are authorized studies for the person in the devotional line. The Lord
then returned to Puré after His South Indian tour.
On His return to Puré, all the anxious devotees of the Lord got back their
life, and the Lord remained there with continued pastimes of His
transcendental realizations. The most important incident during that time was
His granting audience to King Pratäparudra. King Pratäparudra was a great
devotee of the Lord, and he considered himself to be one of the servants of the
Lord entrusted with sweeping the temple. This submissive attitude of the King
was very much appreciated by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. The King requested
both Bhaööäcärya and Räya to arrange his meeting with the Lord. When,
however, the Lord was petitioned by His two stalwart devotees, He flatly
refused to grant the request, even though it was put forward by personal
associates like Rämänanda Räya and Särvabhauma Bhaööäcärya. The Lord
maintained that it is dangerous for a sannyäsé to be in intimate touch with
worldly money-conscious men and with women. The Lord was an ideal
sannyäsé. No woman could approach the Lord even to offer respects. Women’s
seats were accommodated far away from the Lord. As an ideal teacher and
äcärya, He was very strict in the routine work of a sannyäsé. Apart from being
a divine incarnation, the Lord was an ideal character as a human being. His
behavior with other persons was also above suspicion. In His dealing as äcärya,
He was harder than the thunderbolt and softer than the rose. One of His
associates, Junior Haridäsa, committed a great mistake by lustfully glancing at a
young woman. The Lord as Supersoul could detect this lust in the mind of
Junior Haridäsa, who was at once banished from the Lord’s association and was
never accepted again, even though the Lord was implored to excuse Haridäsa
for the mistake. Junior Haridäsa afterwards committed suicide due to being
disassociated from the company of the Lord, and the news of suicide was duly
related to the Lord. Even at that time the Lord was not forgetful of the offense,
and He said that Haridäsa had rightly met with the proper punishment.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
On the principles of the renounced order of life and discipline, the Lord
knew no compromise, and therefore even though He knew that the King was a
great devotee, He refused to see the King, only because the King was a
dollar-and-cent man. By this example the Lord wanted to emphasize the
proper behavior for a transcendentalist. A transcendentalist has nothing to do
with women and money. He must always refrain from such intimate relations.
The King was, however, favored by the Lord by the expert arrangement of the
devotees. This means that the beloved devotee of the Lord can favor a
neophyte more liberally than the Lord. Pure devotees, therefore, never commit
an offense at the feet of another pure devotee. An offense at the lotus feet of
the Lord is sometimes excused by the merciful Lord, but an offense at the feet
of a devotee is very dangerous for one who actually wants to make progress in
devotional service.
As long as the Lord remained at Puré, thousands of His devotees used to
come to see Him during the Ratha-yäträ car festival of Lord Jagannätha. And
during the car festival, the washing of the Guëòicä temple under the direct
supervision of the Lord was an important function. The Lord’s congregational
saìkértana movement at Puré was a unique exhibition for the mass of people.
That is the way to turn the mass mind towards spiritual realization. The Lord
inaugurated this system of mass saìkértana, and leaders of all countries can
take advantage of this spiritual movement in order to keep the mass of people
in a pure state of peace and friendship with one another. This is now the
demand of the present human society all over the world.
After some time the Lord again started on His tour towards northern India,
and He decided to visit Våndävana and its neighboring places. He passed
through the jungles of Jharikhaëòa (Madhya Bhärata), and all the wild
animals also joined His saìkértana movement. The wild tigers, elephants, bears
and deer all together accompanied the Lord, and the Lord accompanied them
in saìkértana. By this He proved that by the propagation of the saìkértana
movement (congregational chanting and glorifying of the name of the Lord)
even the wild animals can live in peace and friendship, and what to speak of
men who are supposed to be civilized. No man in the world will refuse to join
the saìkértana movement. Nor is the Lord’s saìkértana movement restricted to
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
any caste, creed, color or species. Here is direct evidence of His great mission:
He allowed even the wild animals to partake in His great movement.
On His way back from Våndävana He first came to Prayäga, where He met
Rüpa Gosvämé along with his younger brother, Anupama. Then He came
down to Benares. For two months, He instructed Çré Sanätana Gosvämé in the
transcendental science. The instruction to Sanätana Gosvämé is in itself a long
narration, and full presentation of the instruction will not be possible here.
The main ideas are given as follows.
Sanätana Gosvämé (formerly known as Säkara Mallika) was in the cabinet
service of the Bengal government under the regime of Nawab Hussain Shah.
He decided to join with the Lord and thus retired from the service. On His
way back from Våndävana, when He reached Väräëasé, the Lord became the
guest of Çré Tapana Miçra and Candraçekhara, assisted by a Mahäräñöra
brähmaëa. At that time Väräëasé was headed by a great sannyäsé of the
Mäyäväda school named Çrépäda Prakäçänanda Sarasvaté. When the Lord was
at Väräëasé, the people in general became more attracted to Lord Caitanya
Mahäprabhu on account of His mass saìkértana movement. Wherever He
visited, especially the Viçvanätha temple, thousands of pilgrims would follow
Him. Some were attracted by His bodily features, and others were attracted by
His melodious songs glorifying the Lord.
The Mäyävädé sannyäsés designate themselves as Näräyaëa. Väräëasé is still
overflooded with many Mäyävädé sannyäsés. Some people who saw the Lord in
His saìkértana party considered Him to be actually Näräyaëa, and this report
reached the camp of the great sannyäsé Prakäçänanda.
In India there is always a kind of spiritual rivalry between the Mäyäväda
and Bhägavata schools, and thus when the news of the Lord reached
Prakäçänanda he knew that the Lord was a Vaiñëava sannyäsé, and therefore
he minimized the value of the Lord before those who brought him the news.
He deprecated the activities of the Lord because of His preaching the
saìkértana movement, which was in his opinion nothing but religious
sentiment. Prakäçänanda was a profound student of the Vedänta, and he
advised his followers to give attention to the Vedänta and not to indulge in
saìkértana.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
One devotee brähmaëa, who became a devotee of the Lord, did not like the
criticism of Prakäçänanda, and he went to the Lord to express his regrets. He
told the Lord that when he uttered the Lord’s name before the sannyäsé
Prakäçänanda, the latter strongly criticized the Lord, although the brähmaëa
heard Prakäçänanda uttering several times the name Caitanya. The brähmaëa
was astonished to see that the sannyäsé Prakäçänanda could not vibrate the
sound Kåñëa even once, although he uttered the name Caitanya several times.
The Lord smilingly explained to the devotee brähmaëa why the Mäyävädé
cannot utter the holy name of Kåñëa. “The Mäyävädés are offenders at the
lotus feet of Kåñëa, although they utter always brahma, ätmä, or caitanya, etc.
And because they are offenders at the lotus feet of Kåñëa, they are actually
unable to utter the holy name of Kåñëa. The name Kåñëa and the Personality
of Godhead Kåñëa are identical. There is no difference in the absolute realm
between the name, form or person of the Absolute Truth because in the
absolute realm everything is transcendental bliss. There is no difference
between the body and the soul for the Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa. Thus He
is different from the living entity who is always different from his outward
body. Because of Kåñëa’s transcendental position, it is very difficult for a
layman to actually know the Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, His holy name
and fame, etc. His name, fame, form and pastimes all are one and the same
transcendental identity, and they are not knowable by the exercise of the
material senses.
“The transcendental relationship of the pastimes of the Lord is the source
of still more bliss than one can experience by realization of Brahman or by
becoming one with the Supreme. Had it not been so, then those who are
already situated in the transcendental bliss of Brahman would not have been
attracted by the transcendental bliss of the pastimes of the Lord.”
After this, a great meeting was arranged by the devotees of the Lord in
which all the sannyäsés were invited, including the Lord and Prakäçänanda
Sarasvaté. In this meeting both the scholars (the Lord and Prakäçänanda) had
a long discourse on the spiritual values of the saìkértana movement, and a
summary is given below.
The great Mäyävädé sannyäsé Prakäçänanda inquired from the Lord as to
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the reason for His preferring the saìkértana movement to the study of the
Vedänta-sütra. Prakäçänanda said that it is the duty of a sannyäsé to read the
Vedänta-sütra. What caused the Lord to indulge in saìkértana?
After this inquiry, the Lord submissively replied: “I have taken to the
saìkértana movement instead of the study of Vedänta because I am a great
fool.” The Lord thus represented Himself as one of the numberless fools of this
age who are absolutely incapable of studying the Vedänta philosophy. The
fools’ indulgence in the study of Vedänta has caused so much havoc in society.
The Lord thus continued: “And because I am a great fool, My spiritual master
forbade Me to play with Vedänta philosophy. He said that it is better that I
chant the holy name of the Lord, for that would deliver Me from material
bondage.
“In this age of Kali there is no other religion but the glorification of the
Lord by utterance of His holy name, and that is the injunction of all the
revealed scriptures. And My spiritual master has taught Me one çloka [from the
Båhan-näradéya Puräëa]:
harer näma harer näma harer nämaiva kevalam kalau nästy eva nästy eva
nästy eva gatir anyathä. [Adi 17.21]
“So on the order of My spiritual master, I chant the holy name of Hari, and
I am now mad after this holy name. Whenever I utter the holy name I forget
Myself completely, and sometimes I laugh, cry and dance like a madman. I
thought that I had actually gone mad by this process of chanting, and therefore
I asked My spiritual master about it. He informed Me that this was the real
effect of chanting the holy name, which produces a transcendental emotion
that is a rare manifestation. It is the sign of love of God, which is the ultimate
end of life. Love of God is transcendental to liberation [mukti], and thus it is
called the fifth stage of spiritual realization, above the stage of liberation. By
chanting the holy name of Kåñëa one attains the stage of love of God, and it
was good that fortunately I was favored with the blessing.”
On hearing this statement from the Lord, the Mäyävädé sannyäsé asked the
Lord what was the harm in studying the Vedänta along with chanting the holy
name. Prakäçänanda Sarasvaté knew well that the Lord was formerly known as
Nimäi Paëòita, a very learned scholar of Navadvépa, and His posing as a great
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
fool was certainly to some purpose. Hearing this inquiry by the sannyäsé, the
Lord smiled and said, “My dear sir, if you do not mind, I will answer your
inquiry.”
All the sannyäsés there were very much pleased with the Lord for His
honest dealings, and they unanimously replied that they would not be
offended by whatever He replied. The Lord then spoke as follows:
“Vedänta-sütra consists of transcendental words or sounds uttered by the
transcendental Personality of Godhead. As such, in the Vedänta there cannot
be any human deficiencies like mistake, illusion, cheating or inefficiency. The
message of the Upaniñads is expressed in the Vedänta-sütra, and what is said
there directly is certainly glorified. Whatever interpretations have been given
by Çaìkaräcärya have no direct bearing on the sütra, and therefore such
commentation spoils everything.
“The word Brahman indicates the greatest of all, which is full with
transcendental opulences, superior to all. Brahman is ultimately the
Personality of Godhead, and He is covered by indirect interpretations and
established as impersonal. Everything that is in the spiritual world is full of
transcendental bliss, including the form, body, place and paraphernalia of the
Lord. All are eternally cognizant and blissful. It is not the fault of the Äcärya
Çaìkara that he has so interpreted Vedänta, but if someone accepts it, then
certainly he is doomed. Anyone who accepts the transcendental body of the
Personality of Godhead as something mundane certainly commits the greatest
blasphemy.”
The Lord thus spoke to the sannyäsé almost in the same way that He spoke
to the Bhaööäcärya of Puré, and by forceful arguments He nullified the
Mäyäväda interpretations of the Vedänta-sütra. All the sannyäsés there
claimed that the Lord was the personified Vedas and the Personality of
Godhead. All the sannyäsés were converted to the cult of bhakti, all of them
accepted the holy name of the Lord Çré Kåñëa, and they dined together with
the Lord in the midst of them. After this conversion of the sannyäsés, the
popularity of the Lord increased at Väräëasé, and thousands of people
assembled to see the Lord in person. The Lord thus established the primary
importance of Çrémad-Bhägavata-dharma, and He defeated all other systems of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
spiritual realization. After that everyone at Väräëasé was overwhelmed with
the transcendental saìkértana movement.
While the Lord was camping at Väräëasé, Sanätana Gosvämé also arrived
after retiring from office. He was formerly one of the state ministers in the
government of Bengal, then under the regime of Nawab Hussain Shah. He had
some difficulty in getting relief from the state service, for the Nawab was
reluctant to let him leave. Nonetheless he came to Väräëasé, and the Lord
taught him the principles of devotional service. He taught him about the
constitutional position of the living being, the cause of his bondage under
material conditions, his eternal relation with the Personality of Godhead, the
transcendental position of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, His
expansions in different plenary portions of incarnations, His control of
different parts of the universe, the nature of His transcendental abode,
devotional activities, their different stages of development, the rules and
regulations for achieving the gradual stages of spiritual perfection, the
symptoms of different incarnations in different ages, and how to detect them
with reference to the context of revealed scriptures.
The Lord’s teachings to Sanätana Gosvämé form a big chapter in the text of
Çré Caitanya-caritämåta, and to explain the whole teachings in minute details
will require a volume in itself. These are treated in detail in our book
Teachings of Lord Caitanya.
At Mathurä, the Lord visited all the important places; then He reached
Våndävana. Lord Caitanya appeared in the family of a high-caste brähmaëa,
and over and above that as sannyäsé He was the preceptor for all the varëas
and äçramas. But He used to accept meals from all classes of Vaiñëavas. At
Mathurä the Sanoòiyä brähmaëas are considered to be in the lower status of
society, but the Lord accepted meals in the family of such a brähmaëa also
because His host happened to be a disciple of the Mädhavendra Puré family.
At Våndävana the Lord took bath in twenty-four important bathing places
and ghäöas. He traveled to all the twelve important vanas (forests). In these
forests all the cows and birds welcomed Him, as if He were their very old
friend. The Lord also began to embrace all the trees of those forests, and by
doing so He felt the symptoms of transcendental ecstasy. Sometimes He fell
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
unconscious, but He was made to regain consciousness by the chanting of the
holy name of Kåñëa. The transcendental symptoms that were visible on the
body of the Lord during His travel within the forest of Våndävana were all
unique and inexplicable, and we have just given a synopsis only.
Some of the important places that were visited by the Lord in Våndävana
were Kämyavana, Ädéçvara, Pävana-sarovara, Khadiravana, Çeñaçäyé,
Khela-tértha, Bhäëòéravana, Bhadravana, Çrévana, Lauhavana, Mahävana,
Gokula, Käliya-hrada, Dvädaçäditya, Keçé-tértha, etc. When He saw the place
where the räsa dance took place, He at once fell down in trance. As long as He
remained at Våndävana, He made His headquarters at Akrüra-ghäöa.
From Våndävana His personal servitor Kåñëadäsa Vipra induced Him to go
back to Prayäga to take bath during the Mägha-melä. The Lord acceded to this
proposal, and they started for Prayäga. On the way they met with some
Pathans, amongst whom there was a learned Moulana. The Lord had some
talks with the Moulana and his companions, and the Lord convinced the
Moulana that in the Koran also there are descriptions of Bhägavata-dharma
and Kåñëa. All the Pathans were converted to His cult of devotional service.
When He returned to Prayäga, Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé and his youngest
brother met Him near Bindu-mädhava temple. This time the Lord was
welcomed by the people of Prayäga more respectfully. Vallabha Bhaööa, who
resided on the other bank of Prayäga in the village of Äòäila, was to receive
Him at his place. but while going there the Lord jumped in the River Yamunä.
With great difficulty He was picked up in an unconscious state. Finally He
visited the headquarters of Vallabha Bhaööa. This Vallabha Bhaööa was one of
His chief admirers, but later on he inaugurated his own party, the
Vallabha-sampradäya.
On the bank of the Daçäçvamedha-ghäöa at Prayäga for ten days
continually the Lord instructed Rüpa Gosvämé in the science of devotional
service to the Lord. He taught the Gosvämé the divisions of the living
creatures in the 8,400,000 species of life. Then He taught him about the
human species. Out of them He discussed the followers of the Vedic principles,
out of them the fruitive workers, out of them the empiric philosophers, and out
of them the liberated souls. He said that there are only a few who are actually
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
pure devotees of Lord Çré Kåñëa.
Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé was the younger brother of Sanätana Gosvämé, and
when he retired from service he brought with him two boat fulls of gold coins.
This means that he brought with him some hundreds of thousands of rupees
accumulated by the labor of his service. And before leaving home for Lord
Caitanya Mahäprabhu, he divided the wealth as follows: fifty percent for the
service of the Lord and His devotees, twenty-five percent for relatives and
twenty-five percent for his personal needs in case of emergency. In that way
he set an example for all householders.
The Lord taught the Gosvämé about devotional service, comparing it to a
creeper, and advised him to protect the bhakti creeper most carefully against
the mad elephant offense against the pure devotees. In addition, the creeper
has to be protected from the desires of sense enjoyment, monistic liberation
and perfection of the haöha-yoga system. They are all detrimental on the path
of devotional service. Similarly, violence against living beings, and desire for
worldly gain, worldly reception and worldly fame are all detrimental to the
progress of bhakti, or Bhägavata-dharma.
Pure devotional service must be freed from all desires for sense
gratification, fruitive aspirations and culture of monistic knowledge. One must
be freed from all kinds of designations, and when one is thus converted to
transcendental purity, one can then serve the Lord by purified senses.
As long as there is the desire to enjoy sensually or to become one with the
Supreme or to possess the mystic powers, there is no question of attaining the
stage of pure devotional service.
Devotional service is conducted under two categories, namely primary
practice and spontaneous emotion. When one can rise to the platform of
spontaneous emotion, he can make further progress by spiritual attachment,
feeling, love, and many higher stages of devotional life for which there are no
English words. We have tried to explain the science of devotional service in
our book The Nectar of Devotion, based on the authority of
Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu by Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé.
Transcendental devotional service has five stages of reciprocation:
1. The self-realization stage just after liberation from material bondage is
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
called the çänta, or neutral stage.
2. After that, when there is development of transcendental knowledge of
the Lord’s internal opulences, the devotee engages himself in the däsya stage.
3. By further development of the däsya stage, a respectful fraternity with
the Lord develops, and above that a feeling of friendship on equal terms
becomes manifest. Both these stages are called säkhya stage, or devotional
service in friendship.
4. Above this is the stage of paternal affection toward the Lord, and this is
called the vätsalya stage.
5. And above this is the stage of conjugal love, and this stage is called the
highest stage of love of God, although there is no difference in quality in any
of the above stages. The last stage of conjugal love of God is called the
mädhurya stage.
Thus He instructed Rüpa Gosvämé in devotional science and deputed him
to Våndävana to excavate the lost sites of the transcendental pastimes of the
Lord. After this, the Lord returned to Väräëasé and delivered the sannyäsés
and instructed the elder brother of Rüpa Gosvämé. We have already discussed
this.
The Lord left only eight çlokas of His instructions in writing, and they are
known as the Çikñäñöaka. All other literatures of His divine cult were
extensively written by the Lord’s principal followers, the six Gosvämés of
Våndävana, and their followers. The cult of Caitanya philosophy is richer than
any other, and it is admitted to be the living religion of the day with the
potency for spreading as viçva-dharma, or universal religion. We are glad that
the matter has been taken up by some enthusiastic sages like Bhaktisiddhänta
Sarasvaté Gosvämé Mahäräja and his disciples. We shall eagerly wait for the
happy days of Bhägavata-dharma, or prema-dharma, inaugurated by the Lord
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu.
The eight çlokas completed by the Lord are:
1
Glory to the Çré Kåñëa saìkértana, which cleanses the heart of all the dust
accumulated for years and extinguishes the fire of conditional life, of repeated
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
birth and death. This saìkértana movement is the prime benediction for humanity
at large because it spreads the rays of the benediction moon. It is the life of all
transcendental knowledge. It increases the ocean of transcendental bliss, and it
enables us to fully taste the nectar for which we are always anxious.
2
O my Lord, Your holy name alone can render all benediction to living beings,
and thus You have hundreds and millions of names like Kåñëa and Govinda. In
these transcendental names You have invested all Your transcendental energies.
There are not even hard and fast rules for chanting these names. O my Lord, out
of kindness You enable us to easily approach You by chanting Your holy names,
but I am so unfortunate that I have no attraction for them.
3
One should chant the holy name of the Lord in a humble state of mind,
thinking oneself lower than the straw in the street; one should be more tolerant
than a tree, devoid of all sense of false prestige, and ready to offer all respect to
others. In such a state of mind one can chant the holy name of the Lord constantly.
4
O almighty Lord, I have no desire to accumulate wealth, nor do I desire
beautiful women, nor do I want any number of followers. I only want Your
causeless devotional service birth after birth.
5
O son of Mahäräja Nanda [Kåñëa], I am Your eternal servitor, yet somehow or
other I have fallen into the ocean of birth and death. please pick me up from this
ocean of death and place me as one of the atoms of Your lotus feet.
6
O my Lord, when will my eyes be decorated with tears of love flowing
constantly when I chant Your holy name? When will my voice choke up, and when
will the hairs of my body stand on end at the recitation of Your name?
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
7
O Govinda! Feeling Your separation, I am considering a moment to be like
twelve years or more. Tears are flowing from my eyes like torrents of rain, and I
am feeling all vacant in the world in Your absence.
8
I know no one but Kåñëa as my Lord, and He shall remain so even if He
handles me roughly in His embrace or makes me brokenhearted by not being
present before me. He is completely free to do anything and everything, for He is
always my worshipful Lord unconditionally.
Chapter One
Questions by the Sages
TEXT 1
p NaMaae >aGavTae vaSaudevaYa
JaNMaaÛSYa YaTaae_NvYaaidTarTaêaQaeRZvi>aj" Svra$(
TaeNae b]ø ôda Ya Aaidk-vYae MauùiNTa YaTSaUrYa" )
TaeJaaevairMa*da& YaQaa iviNaMaYaae Ya}a i}aSaGaaeR_Ma*za
DaaMana SveNa Sada iNarSTaku-hk&- SaTYa& Par& DaqMaih )) 1 ))
oà namo bhagavate väsudeväya
janmädy asya yato ’nvayäd itarataç cärtheñv abhijïaù svaräö
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
tene brahma hådä ya ädi-kavaye muhyanti yat sürayaù
tejo-väri-mådäà yathä vinimayo yatra tri-sargo ’måñä
dhämnä svena sadä nirasta-kuhakaà satyaà paraà dhémahi
SYNONYMS
om—O my Lord; namaù—offering my obeisances; bhagavate—unto the
Personality of Godhead; väsudeväya—unto Väsudeva (the son of Vasudeva), or
Lord Çré Kåñëa, the primeval Lord; janma-ädi—creation, sustenance and
destruction; asya—of the manifested universes; yataù—from whom;
anvayät—directly; itarataù—indirectly; ca—and; artheñu—purposes;
abhijïaù—fully cognizant; sva-räö—fully independent; tene—imparted;
brahma—the Vedic knowledge; hådä—consciousness of the heart; yaù—one
who; ädi-kavaye—unto the original created being; muhyanti—are illusioned;
yat—about whom; sürayaù—great sages and demigods; tejaù—fire;
väri—water; mådäm—earth; yathä—as much as; vinimayaù—action and
reaction; yatra—whereupon; tri-sargaù—three modes of creation, creative
faculties; amåñä—almost factual; dhämnä—along with all transcendental
paraphernalia; svena—self-sufficiently; sadä—always; nirasta—negation by
absence; kuhakam—illusion; satyam—truth; param—absolute; dhémahi—I do
meditate upon.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, Çré Kåñëa, son of Vasudeva, O all-pervading Personality of
Godhead, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You. I meditate upon Lord Çré
Kåñëa because He is the Absolute Truth and the primeval cause of all causes of
the creation, sustenance and destruction of the manifested universes. He is
directly and indirectly conscious of all manifestations, and He is independent
because there is no other cause beyond Him. It is He only who first imparted
the Vedic knowledge unto the heart of Brahmäjé, the original living being. By
Him even the great sages and demigods are placed into illusion, as one is
bewildered by the illusory representations of water seen in fire, or land seen on
water. Only because of Him do the material universes, temporarily manifested
by the reactions of the three modes of nature, appear factual, although they are
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
unreal. I therefore meditate upon Him, Lord Çré Kåñëa, who is eternally
existent in the transcendental abode, which is forever free from the illusory
representations of the material world. I meditate upon Him, for He is the
Absolute Truth.
PURPORT
Obeisances unto the Personality of Godhead, Väsudeva, directly indicate
Lord Çré Kåñëa, who is the divine son of Vasudeva and Devaké. This fact will
be more explicitly explained in the text of this work. Çré Vyäsadeva asserts
herein that Çré Kåñëa is the original Personality of Godhead, and all others are
His direct or indirect plenary portions or portions of the portion. Çréla Jéva
Gosvämé has even more explicitly explained the subject matter in his
Kåñëa-sandarbha. And Brahmä, the original living being, has explained the
subject of Çré Kåñëa substantially in his treatise named Brahma-saàhitä. In the
Säma-veda Upaniñad, it is also stated that Lord Çré Kåñëa is the divine son of
Devaké. Therefore, in this prayer, the first proposition holds that Lord Çré
Kåñëa is the primeval Lord, and if any transcendental nomenclature is to be
understood as belonging to the Absolute Personality of Godhead, it must be
the name indicated by the word Kåñëa, which means the all-attractive. In
Bhagavad-gétä, in many places, the Lord asserts Himself to be the original
Personality of Godhead, and this is confirmed by Arjuna, and also by great
sages like Närada, Vyäsa, and many others. In the Padma Puräëa, it is also
stated that out of the innumerable names of the Lord, the name of Kåñëa is the
principal one. Väsudeva indicates the plenary portion of the Personality of
Godhead, and all the different forms of the Lord, being identical with
Väsudeva, are indicated in this text. The name Väsudeva particularly indicates
the divine son of Vasudeva and Devaké. Çré Kåñëa is always meditated upon by
the paramahaàsas, who are the perfected ones among those in the renounced
order of life.
Väsudeva, or Lord Çré Kåñëa, is the cause of all causes. Everything that
exists emanates from the Lord. How this is so is explained in later chapters of
this work. This work is described by Mahäprabhu Çré Caitanya as the spotless
Puräëa because it contains the transcendental narration of the Personality of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Godhead Çré Kåñëa. The history of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam is also very
glorious. It was compiled by Çré Vyäsadeva after he had attained maturity in
transcendental knowledge. He wrote this under the instructions of Çré
Näradajé, his spiritual master. Vyäsadeva compiled all Vedic literatures,
containing the four divisions of the Vedas, the Vedänta-sütras (or the
Brahma-sütras), the Puräëas, the Mahäbhärata, and so on. But nevertheless he
was not satisfied. His dissatisfaction was observed by his spiritual master, and
thus Närada advised him to write on the transcendental activities of Lord Çré
Kåñëa. These transcendental activities are described specifically in the Tenth
Canto of this work. But, in order to reach to the very substance, one must
proceed gradually by developing knowledge of the categories.
It is natural that a philosophical mind wants to know about the origin of
the creation. At night he sees the stars in the sky, and he naturally speculates
about their inhabitants. Such inquiries are natural for man because man has a
developed consciousness which is higher than that of the animals. The author
of Çrémad-Bhägavatam gives a direct answer to such inquiries. He says that the
Lord Çré Kåñëa is the origin of all creations. He is not only the creator of the
universe, but the destroyer as well. The manifested cosmic nature is created at
a certain period by the will of the Lord. It is maintained for some time, and
then it is annihilated by His will. Therefore, the supreme will is behind all
cosmic activities. Of course, there are atheists of various categories who do not
believe in a creator, but that is due to a poor fund of knowledge. The modern
scientist, for example, has created space satellites, and by some arrangement or
other, these satellites are thrown into outer space to fly for some time at the
control of the scientist who is far away. Similarly, all the universes with
innumerable stars and planets are controlled by the intelligence of the
Personality of Godhead.
In Vedic literatures, it is said that the Absolute Truth, Personality of
Godhead, is the chief amongst all living personalities. All living beings,
beginning from the first created being, Brahmä, down to the smallest ant, are
individual living beings. And above Brahmä, there are even other living beings
with individual capacities, and the Personality of Godhead is also a similar
living being. And He is an individual as are the other living beings. But the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Supreme Lord, or the supreme living being, has the greatest intelligence, and
He possesses supermost inconceivable energies of all different varieties. If a
man’s brain can produce a space satellite, one can very easily imagine how
brains higher than man can produce similarly wonderful things which are far
superior. The reasonable person will easily accept this argument, but there are
stubborn atheists who would never agree. Çréla Vyäsadeva, however, at once
accepts the supreme intelligence as the parameçvara. He offers his respectful
obeisances unto the supreme intelligence addressed as the para or the
parameçvara or the Supreme Personality of Godhead. And that parameçvara is
Çré Kåñëa, as admitted in Bhagavad-gétä and other scriptures delivered by Çré
Vyäsadeva and specifically in this Çrémad-Bhägavatam. In Bhagavad-gétä, the
Lord says that there is no other para-tattva (summum bonum) than Himself.
Therefore, Çré Vyäsadeva at once worships the para-tattva, Çré Kåñëa, whose
transcendental activities are described in the Tenth Canto.
Unscrupulous persons go immediately to the Tenth Canto and especially to
the five chapters which describe the Lord’s räsa dance. This portion of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the most confidential part of this great literature.
Unless one is thoroughly accomplished in the transcendental knowledge of the
Lord, one is sure to misunderstand the Lord’s worshipable transcendental
pastimes called räsa dance and His love affairs with the gopés. This subject
matter is highly spiritual, and only the liberated persons who have gradually
attained to the stage of paramahaàsa can transcendentally relish this räsa
dance. Çréla Vyäsadeva therefore gives the reader the chance to gradually
develop spiritual realization before actually relishing the essence of the
pastimes of the Lord. Therefore, he purposely invokes a Gäyatré mantra,
dhémahi. This Gäyatré mantra is meant for spiritually advanced people. When
one is successful in chanting the Gäyatré mantra, he can enter into the
transcendental position of the Lord. One must therefore acquire brahminical
qualities or be perfectly situated in the quality of goodness in order to chant
the Gäyatré mantra successfully and then attain to the stage of
transcendentally realizing the Lord, His name, His fame, His qualities and so
on.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the narration of the svarüpa of the Lord manifested
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
by His internal potency, and this potency is distinguished from the external
potency which has manifested the cosmic world, which is within our
experience. Çréla Vyäsadeva makes a clear distinction between the two in this
çloka. Çré Vyäsadeva says herein that the manifested internal potency is real,
whereas the external manifested energy in the form of material existence is
only temporary and illusory like the mirage in the desert. In the desert mirage
there is no actual water. There is only the appearance of water. Real water is
somewhere else. The manifested cosmic creation appears as reality. But reality,
of which this is but a shadow, is in the spiritual world. Absolute Truth is in the
spiritual sky, not the material sky. In the material sky everything is relative
truth. That is to say, one truth depends on something else. This cosmic
creation results from interaction of the three modes of nature, and the
temporary manifestations are so created as to present an illusion of reality to
the bewildered mind of the conditioned soul, who appears in so many species
of life, including the higher demigods, like Brahmä, Indra, Candra, and so on.
In actuality, there is no reality in the manifested world. There appears to be
reality, however, because of the true reality which exists in the spiritual world,
where the Personality of Godhead eternally exists with His transcendental
paraphernalia.
The chief engineer of a complicated construction does not personally take
part in the construction, but he knows every nook and corner because
everything is done under his direction. He knows everything about the
construction, both directly and indirectly. Similarly, the Personality of
Godhead, who is the supreme engineer of this cosmic creation, knows every
nook and corner, although affairs are being carried out by demigods.
Beginning from Brahmä down to the insignificant ant, no one is independent
in the material creation. The hand of the Lord is seen everywhere. All
material elements as well as all spiritual sparks emanate from Him only. And
whatever is created in this material world is but the interaction of two
energies, the material and the spiritual, which emanate from the Absolute
Truth, the Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa. A chemist can manufacture
water in the chemical laboratory by mixing hydrogen and oxygen. But, in
reality, the living entity works in the laboratory under the direction of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Supreme Lord. And the materials with which he works are also supplied by the
Lord. The Lord knows everything directly and indirectly, and He is cognizant
of all minute details, and He is fully independent. He is compared to a mine of
gold, and the cosmic creations in so many different forms are compared to
objects made from the gold, such as gold rings, necklaces and so on. The gold
ring and the gold necklace are qualitatively one with the gold in the mine, but
quantitatively the gold in the mine is different. Therefore, the Absolute Truth
is simultaneously one and different. Nothing is absolutely equal with the
Absolute Truth, but at the same time, nothing is independent of the Absolute
Truth.
Conditioned souls, beginning from Brahmä, who engineers the entire
universe, down to the insignificant ant, are all creating, but none of them are
independent of the Supreme Lord. The materialist wrongly thinks that there is
no creator other than his own self. This is called mäyä, or illusion. Because of
his poor fund of knowledge, the materialist cannot see beyond the purview of
his imperfect senses, and thus he thinks that matter automatically takes its
own shape without the aid of a superior intelligence. This is refuted in this
çloka by Çréla Vyäsadeva: “Since the complete whole or the Absolute Truth is
the source of everything, nothing can be independent of the body of the
Absolute Truth.” Whatever happens to the body quickly becomes known to
the embodied. Similarly, the creation is the body of the absolute whole.
Therefore, the Absolute knows everything directly and indirectly that
happens in the creation.
In the çruti-mantra, it is also stated that the absolute whole or Brahman is
the ultimate source of everything. Everything emanates from Him, and
everything is maintained by Him. And at the end, everything enters into Him.
That is the law of nature. In the småti-mantra, the same is confirmed. It is said
that the source from which everything emanates at the beginning of Brahmä’s
millennium and the reservoir to which everything ultimately enters, is the
Absolute Truth or Brahman. Material scientists take it for granted that the
ultimate source of the planetary system is the sun, but they are unable to
explain the source of the sun. Herein, the ultimate source is explained.
According to the Vedic literatures, Brahmä, who may be compared to the sun,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
is not the ultimate creator. It is stated in this çloka that Brahmä was taught
Vedic knowledge by the Personality of Godhead. One may argue that Brahmä,
being the original living being, could not be inspired because there was no
other being living at that time. Herein it is stated that the Supreme Lord
inspired the secondary creator, Brahmä, in order that Brahmä could carry out
his creative functions. So, the supreme intelligence behind all creations is the
Absolute Godhead, Çré Kåñëa. In Bhagavad-gétä, Lord Çré Kåñëa states that it is
He only who superintends the creative energy, prakåti, which constitutes the
totality of matter. Therefore, Çré Vyäsadeva does not worship Brahmä, but the
Supreme Lord, who guides Brahmä in his creative activities. In this çloka, the
particular words abhijïaù and svaräö are significant. These two words
distinguish the Supreme Lord from all the other living entities. No other living
entity is either abhijïaù or svaräö. That is, no one is either fully cognizant or
fully independent. Even Brahmä has to meditate upon the Supreme Lord in
order to create. Then what to speak of great scientists like Einstein! The brains
of such a scientist are certainly not the products of any human being.
Scientists cannot manufacture such a brain, and what to speak of foolish
atheists who defy the authority of the Lord? Even Mäyävädé impersonalists
who flatter themselves that they can become one with the Lord are neither
abhijïaù or svaräö. Such impersonalists undergo severe austerities to acquire
knowledge to become one with the Lord. But ultimately they become
dependent on some rich disciple who supplies them with money to build
monasteries and temples. Atheists like Rävaëa or Hiraëyakaçipu had to
undergo severe penances before they could flout the authority of the Lord. But
ultimately, they were rendered helpless and could not save themselves when
the Lord appeared before them as cruel death. This is also the case with the
modern atheists who also dare to flout the authority of the Lord. Such atheists
will be dealt with similarly, for history repeats itself. Whenever men neglect
the authority of the Lord, nature and her laws are there to penalize them. This
is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä in the well-known verse yadä yadä hi dharmasya
gläniù. “Whenever there is a decline of dharma and a rise of adharma, O
Arjuna, then I incarnate Myself.” (Bg. 4.7)
That the Supreme Lord is all-perfect is confirmed in all çruti-mantras. It is
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
said in the çruti-mantras that the all-perfect Lord threw a glance over matter
and thus created all living beings. The living beings are parts and parcels of the
Lord, and He impregnates the vast material creation with seeds of spiritual
sparks, and thus the creative energies are set in motion to enact so many
wonderful creations. An atheist may argue that God is no more expert than a
watchmaker, but of course God is greater because He can create machines in
duplicate male and female forms. The male and female forms of different types
of machineries go on producing innumerable similar machines without God’s
further attention. If a man could manufacture such a set of machines that
could produce other machines without his attention, then he could approach
the intelligence of God. But that is not possible, for each machine has to be
handled individually. Therefore, no one can create as well as God. Another
name for God is asamaurdhva, which means that no one is equal to or greater
than Him. Paraà satyam, or the Supreme Truth, is He who has no equal or
superior. This is confirmed in the çruti-mantras. It is said that before the
creation of the material universe there existed the Lord only, who is master of
everyone. That Lord instructed Brahmä in Vedic knowledge. That Lord has to
be obeyed in all respects. Anyone who wants to get rid of the material
entanglement must surrender unto Him. This is also confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä.
Unless one surrenders unto the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord, it is certain
that he will be bewildered. When an intelligent man surrenders unto the lotus
feet of Kåñëa and knows completely that Kåñëa is the cause of all causes, as
confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä, then only can such an intelligent man become a
mahätmä, or great soul. But such a great soul is rarely seen. Only the mahätmäs
can understand that the Supreme Lord is the primeval cause of all creations.
He is parama or ultimate truth because all other truths are relative to Him. He
is omniscient. For Him, there is no illusion.
Some Mäyävädé scholars argue that Çrémad-Bhägavatam was not compiled
by Çré Vyäsadeva. And some of them suggest that this book is a modern
creation written by someone named Vopadeva. In order to refute such
meaningless arguments, Çré Çrédhara Svämé points out that there is reference
to the Bhägavatam in many of the oldest Puräëas. This first çloka of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Bhägavatam begins with the Gäyatré mantra. There is reference to this in the
Matsya Puräëa, which is the oldest Puräëa. In that Puräëa, it is said with
reference to the Gäyatré mantra in the Bhägavatam that there are many
narrations of spiritual instructions beginning with the Gäyatré mantra. And
there is the history of Våträsura. Anyone who makes a gift of this great work
on a full moon day attains to the highest perfection of life by returning to
Godhead. There is reference to the Bhägavatam in other Puräëas also, where it
is clearly stated that this work was finished in twelve cantos, which include
eighteen thousand çlokas. In the Padma Puräëa also there is reference to the
Bhägavatam in a conversation between Gautama and Mahäräja Ambaréña. The
king was advised therein to read regularly Çrémad-Bhägavatam if he desired
liberation from material bondage. Under the circumstances, there is no doubt
about the authority of the Bhägavatam. Within the past five hundred years,
many erudite scholars and äcäryas like Jéva Gosvämé, Sanätana Gosvämé,
Viçvanätha Cakravarté, Vallabhäcärya, and many other distinguished scholars
even after the time of Lord Caitanya made elaborate commentaries on the
Bhägavatam. And the serious student would do well to attempt to go through
them to better relish the transcendental messages.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura specifically deals with the original
and pure sex psychology (ädi-rasa), devoid of all mundane inebriety. The whole
material creation is moving under the principle of sex life. In modern civilization,
sex life is the focal point for all activities. Wherever one turns his face, he sees
sex life predominant. Therefore, sex life is not unreal. Its reality is experienced
in the spiritual world. The material sex life is but a perverted reflection of the
original fact. The original fact is in the Absolute Truth, and thus the Absolute
Truth cannot be impersonal. It is not possible to be impersonal and contain
pure sex life. Consequently, the impersonalist philosophers have given indirect
impetus to the abominable mundane sex life because they have overstressed
the impersonality of the ultimate truth. Consequently, man without
information of the actual spiritual form of sex has accepted perverted material
sex life as the all in all. There is a distinction between sex life in the diseased
material condition and spiritual sex life.
This Çrémad-Bhägavatam will gradually elevate the unbiased reader to the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
highest perfectional stage of transcendence. It will enable him to transcend
the three modes of material activities: fruitive actions, speculative philosophy,
and worship of functional deities as inculcated in Vedic verses.
TEXT 2
DaMaR" Pa[aeiJ‡TakE-Tavae_}a ParMaae iNaMaRTSara<aa& SaTaa&
veÛ& vaSTavMa}a vSTau iXavd& TaaPa}aYaaeNMaUl/NaMa( )
é[qMaÙaGavTae MahaMauiNak*-Tae ik&- va ParErqìr"
SaÛae ôÛvåDYaTae_}a k*-iTai>a" éué[Uzui>aSTaT+a<aaTa( )) 2 ))
dharmaù projjhita-kaitavo ’tra paramo nirmatsaräëäà satäà
vedyaà västavam atra vastu çivadaà täpa-trayonmülanam
çrémad-bhägavate mahä-muni-kåte kià vä parair éçvaraù
sadyo hådy avarudhyate ’tra kåtibhiù çuçrüñubhis tat-kñaëät
SYNONYMS
dharmaù—religiosity; projjhita—completely rejected; kaitavaù—covered by
fruitive intention; atra—herein; paramaù—the highest; nirmatsaräëäm—of
the one-hundred-percent pure in heart; satäm—devotees;
vedyam—understandable; västavam—factual; atra—herein; vastu—substance;
çivadam—well-being; täpa-traya—threefold miseries; unmülanam—causing
uprooting of; çrémat—beautiful; bhägavate—the Bhägavata Puräëa;
mahä-muni—the great sage (Vyäsadeva); kåte—having compiled; kim—what
is; vä—the need; paraiù—others; éçvaraù—the Supreme Lord; sadyaù—at
once; hådi—within the heart; avarudhyate—become compact; atra—herein;
kåtibhiù—by the pious men; çuçrüñubhiù—by culture; tat-kñaëät—without
delay.
TRANSLATION
Completely rejecting all religious activities which are materially motivated,
this Bhägavata Puräëa propounds the highest truth, which is understandable by
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
those devotees who are fully pure in heart. The highest truth is reality
distinguished from illusion for the welfare of all. Such truth uproots the
threefold miseries. This beautiful Bhägavatam, compiled by the great sage
Vyäsadeva [in his maturity], is sufficient in itself for God realization. What is
the need of any other scripture? As soon as one attentively and submissively
hears the message of Bhägavatam, by this culture of knowledge the Supreme
Lord is established within his heart.
PURPORT
Religion includes four primary subjects, namely pious activities, economic
development, satisfaction of the senses, and finally liberation from material
bondage. Irreligious life is a barbarous condition. Indeed, human life begins
when religion begins. Eating, sleeping, fearing, and mating are the four
principles of animal life. These are common both to animals and to human
beings. But religion is the extra function of the human being. Without
religion, human life is no better than animal life. Therefore, in human
societies there is some form of religion which aims at self-realization and which
makes reference to man’s eternal relationship with God.
In the lower stages of human civilization, there is always competition to
lord it over the material nature or, in other words, there is a continuous rivalry
to satisfy the senses. Driven by such consciousness, man turns to religion. He
thus performs pious activities or religious functions in order to gain something
material. But if such material gains are obtainable in other ways, then so-called
religion is neglected. This is the situation in modern civilization. Man is
thriving economically, so at present he is not very interested in religion.
Churches, mosques or temples are now practically vacant. Men are more
interested in factories, shops, and cinemas than in religious places which were
erected by their forefathers. This practically proves that religion is performed
for some economic gains. Economic gains are needed for sense gratification.
Often when one is baffled in the pursuit of sense gratification, he takes to
salvation and tries to become one with the Supreme Lord. Consequently, all
these states are simply different types of sense gratification.
In the Vedas, the above-mentioned four activities are prescribed in the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
regulative way so that there will not be any undue competition for sense
gratification. But Çrémad-Bhägavatam is transcendental to all these sense
gratificatory activities. It is purely transcendental literature which can be
understood only by the pure devotees of the Lord who are transcendental to
competitive sense gratification. In the material world there is keen
competition between animal and animal, man and man, community and
community, nation and nation. But the devotees of the Lord rise above such
competitions. They do not compete with the materialist because they are on
the path back to Godhead where life is eternal and blissful. Such
transcendentalists are nonenvious and pure in heart. In the material world,
everyone is envious of everyone else, and therefore there is competition. But
the transcendental devotees of the Lord are not only free from material envy,
but are well-wishers to everyone, and they strive to establish a competitionless
society with God in the center. The contemporary socialist’s conception of a
competitionless society is artificial because in the socialist state there is
competition for the post of dictator. From the point of view of the Vedas or
from the point of view of common human activities, sense gratification is the
basis of material life. There are three paths mentioned in the Vedas. One
involves fruitive activities to gain promotion to better planets. Another
involves worshiping different demigods for promotion to the planets of the
demigods, and another involves realizing the Absolute Truth and His
impersonal feature and becoming one with Him.
The impersonal aspect of the Absolute Truth is not the highest. Above the
impersonal feature is the Paramätmä feature, and above this is the personal
feature of the Absolute Truth, or Bhagavän. Çrémad-Bhägavatam gives
information about the Absolute Truth in His personal feature. It is higher
than impersonalist literatures and higher than the jïäna-käëòa division of the
Vedas. It is even higher than the karma-käëòa division, and even higher than
the upäsanä-käëòa division, because it recommends the worship of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Çré Kåñëa. In the karma-käëòa, there is
competition to reach heavenly planets for better sense gratification, and there
is similar competition in the jïäna-käëòa and the upäsanä-käëòa. The
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is superior to all of these because it aims at the Supreme
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Truth which is the substance or the root of all categories. From
Çrémad-Bhägavatam one can come to know the substance as well as the
categories. The substance is the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Lord, and all
emanations are relative forms of energy.
Nothing is apart from the substance, but at the same time the energies are
different from the substance. This conception is not contradictory.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam explicitly promulgates this
simultaneously-one-and-different philosophy of the Vedänta-sütra, which
begins with the “janmädy asya” [SB 1.1.1] sütra.
This knowledge that the energy of the Lord is simultaneously one with and
different from the Lord is an answer to the mental speculators’ attempt to
establish the energy as the Absolute. When this knowledge is factually
understood, one sees the conceptions of monism and dualism to be imperfect.
Development of this transcendental consciousness grounded in the conception
of simultaneously-one-and-different leads one immediately to the stage of
freedom from the threefold miseries. The threefold miseries are (1) those
miseries which arise from the mind and body, (2) those miseries inflicted by
other living beings, and (3) those miseries arising from natural catastrophes
over which one has no control. Çrémad-Bhägavatam begins with the surrender
of the devotee unto the Absolute Person. The devotee is fully aware that he is
one with the Absolute and at the same time in the eternal position of servant
to the Absolute. In the material conception, one falsely thinks himself the lord
of all he surveys, and therefore he is always troubled by the threefold miseries
of life. But as soon as one comes to know his real position as transcendental
servant, he at once becomes free from all miseries. As long as the living entity
is trying to master material nature, there is no possibility of his becoming
servant of the Supreme. Service to the Lord is rendered in pure consciousness
of one’s spiritual identity; by service one is immediately freed from material
encumbrances.
Over and above this, Çrémad-Bhägavatam is a personal commentation on
the Vedänta-sütra by Çré Vyäsadeva. It was written in the maturity of his
spiritual life through the mercy of Närada. Çré Vyäsadeva is the authorized
incarnation of Näräyaëa, the Personality of Godhead. Therefore, there is no
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
question as to his authority. He is the author of all other Vedic literatures, yet
he recommends the study of Çrémad-Bhägavatam above all others. In other
Puräëas there are different methods set forth by which one can worship the
demigods. But in the Bhägavatam only the Supreme Lord is mentioned. The
Supreme Lord is the total body, and the demigods are the different parts of
that body. Consequently, by worshiping the Supreme Lord, one does not need
to worship the demigods. The Supreme Lord becomes fixed in the heart of the
devotee immediately. Lord Caitanya Mahäprabhu has recommended the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam as the spotless Puräëa and distinguishes it from all other
Puräëas.
The proper method for receiving this transcendental message is to hear it
submissively. A challenging attitude cannot help one realize this
transcendental message. One particular word is used herein for proper
guidance. This word is çuçrüñu. One must be anxious to hear this
transcendental message. The desire to sincerely hear is the first qualification.
Less fortunate persons are not at all interested in hearing this
Çrémad-Bhägavatam. The process is simple, but the application is difficult.
Unfortunate people find enough time to hear idle social and political
conversations, but when invited to attend a meeting of devotees to hear
Çrémad-Bhägavatam they suddenly become reluctant. Sometimes professional
readers of the Bhägavatam immediately plunge into the confidential topics of
the pastimes of the Supreme Lord, which they seemingly interpret as sex
literature. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is meant to be heard from the beginning. Those
who are fit to assimilate this work are mentioned in this çloka: “One becomes
qualified to hear Çrémad-Bhägavatam after many pious deeds.” The intelligent
person, with thoughtful discretion, can be assured by the great sage Vyäsadeva
that he can realize the Supreme Personality directly by hearing
Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Without undergoing the different stages of realization set
forth in the Vedas, one can be lifted immediately to the position of
paramahaàsa simply by agreeing to receive this message.
TEXT 3
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
iNaGaMak-LPaTaraeGaRil/Ta& f-l&/
éuk-Mau%adMa*Tad]vSa&YauTaMa( )
iPabTa >aaGavTa& rSaMaal/Ya&
Mauhurhae riSak-a >auiv >aavuk-a" )) 3 ))
nigama-kalpa-taror galitaà phalaà
çuka-mukhäd amåta-drava-saàyutam
pibata bhägavataà rasam älayaà
muhur aho rasikä bhuvi bhävukäù
SYNONYMS
nigama—the Vedic literatures; kalpa-taroù—the desire tree; galitam—fully
matured; phalam—fruit; çuka—Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé, the original speaker
of Çrémad-Bhägavatam; mukhät—from the lips of; amåta—nectar;
drava—semisolid and soft and therefore easily swallowable;
saàyutam—perfect in all respects; pibata—do relish it; bhägavatam—the book
dealing in the science of the eternal relation with the Lord; rasam—juice (that
which is relishable); älayam—until liberation, or even in a liberated condition;
muhuù—always; aho—O; rasikäù—those who are full in the knowledge of
mellows; bhuvi—on the earth; bhävukäù—expert and thoughtful.
TRANSLATION
O expert and thoughtful men, relish Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the mature fruit of
the desire tree of Vedic literatures. It emanated from the lips of Çré Çukadeva
Gosvämé. Therefore this fruit has become even more tasteful, although its
nectarean juice was already relishable for all, including liberated souls.
PURPORT
In the two previous çlokas it has been definitely proved that the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the sublime literature which surpasses all other Vedic
scriptures due to its transcendental qualities. It is transcendental to all
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
mundane activities and mundane knowledge. In this çloka it is stated that
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is not only a superior literature but is the ripened fruit of
all Vedic literatures. In other words, it is the cream of all Vedic knowledge.
Considering all this, patient and submissive hearing is definitely essential.
With great respect and attention, one should receive the message and lessons
imparted by the Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
The Vedas are compared to the desire tree because they contain all things
knowable by man. They deal with mundane necessities as well as spiritual
realization. The Vedas contain regulated principles of knowledge covering
social, political, religious, economic, military, medicinal, chemical, physical
and metaphysical subject matter and all that may be necessary to keep the
body and soul together. Above and beyond all this are specific directions for
spiritual realization. Regulated knowledge involves a gradual raising of the
living entity to the spiritual platform, and the highest spiritual realization is
knowledge that the Personality of Godhead is the reservoir of all spiritual
tastes, or rasas.
Every living entity, beginning from Brahmä, the first-born living being
within the material world, down to the insignificant ant, desires to relish some
sort of taste derived from sense perceptions. These sensual pleasures are
technically called rasas. Such rasas are of different varieties. In the revealed
scriptures the following twelve varieties of rasas are enumerated: (1) raudra
(anger), (2) adbhuta (wonder), (3) çåìgära (conjugal love), (4) häsya (comedy),
(5) véra (chivalry), (6) dayä (mercy), (7) däsya (servitorship), (8) sakhya
(fraternity), (9) bhayänaka (horror), (10) bébhatsa (shock), (11) çänta
(neutrality), (12) vätsalya (parenthood).
The sum total of all these rasas is called affection or love. Primarily, such
signs of love are manifested in adoration, service, friendship, paternal
affection, and conjugal love. And when these five are absent, love is present
indirectly in anger, wonder, comedy, chivalry, fear, shock and so on. For
example, when a man is in love with a woman, the rasa is called conjugal love.
But when such love affairs are disturbed there may be wonder, anger, shock, or
even horror. Sometimes love affairs between two persons culminate in ghastly
murder scenes. Such rasas are displayed between man and man and between
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
animal and animal. There is no possibility of an exchange or rasa between a
man and an animal or between a man and any other species of living beings
within the material world. The rasas are exchanged between members of the
same species. But as far as the spirit souls are concerned, they are one
qualitatively with the Supreme Lord. Therefore, the rasas were originally
exchanged between the spiritual living being and the spiritual whole, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The spiritual exchange or rasa is fully
exhibited in spiritual existence between living beings and the Supreme Lord.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is therefore described in the
çruti-mantras, Vedic hymns, as “the fountainhead of all rasas.” When one
associates with the Supreme Lord and exchanges one’s constitutional rasa with
the Lord, then the living being is actually happy.
These çruti-mantras indicate that every living being has its constitutional
position, which is endowed with a particular type of rasa to be exchanged with
the Personality of Godhead. In the liberated condition only, this primary rasa
is experienced in full. In the material existence, the rasa is experienced in the
perverted form, which is temporary. And thus the rasas of the material world
are exhibited in the material form of raudra (anger) and so on.
Therefore, one who attains full knowledge of these different rasas, which
are the basic principles of activities, can understand the false representations
of the original rasas which are reflected in the material world. The learned
scholar seeks to relish the real rasa in the spiritual form. In the beginning he
desires to become one with the Supreme. Thus, less intelligent
transcendentalists cannot go beyond this conception of becoming one with the
spirit whole, without knowing of the different rasas.
In this çloka, it is definitely stated that spiritual rasa, which is relished even
in the liberated stage, can be experienced in the literature of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam due to its being the ripened fruit of all Vedic knowledge.
By submissively hearing this transcendental literature, one can attain the full
pleasure of his heart’s desire. But one must be very careful to hear the message
from the right source. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is exactly received from the right
source. It was brought by Närada Muni from the spiritual world and given to
his disciple Çré Vyäsadeva. The latter in turn delivered the message to his son
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé, and Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé delivered the message to
Mahäräja Parékñit just seven days before the King’s death. Çréla Çukadeva
Gosvämé was a liberated soul from his very birth. He was liberated even in the
womb of his mother, and he did not undergo any sort of spiritual training after
his birth. At birth no one is qualified, neither in the mundane nor in the
spiritual sense. But Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé, due to his being a perfectly
liberated soul, did not have to undergo an evolutionary process for spiritual
realization. Yet despite his being a completely liberated person situated in the
transcendental position above the three material modes, he was attracted to
this transcendental rasa of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is adored
by liberated souls who sing Vedic hymns. The Supreme Lord’s pastimes are
more attractive to liberated souls than to mundane people. He is of necessity
not impersonal because it is only possible to carry on transcendental rasa with
a person.
In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam the transcendental pastimes of the Lord are
narrated, and the narration is systematically depicted by Çréla Çukadeva
Gosvämé. Thus the subject matter is appealing to all classes of persons,
including those who seek liberation and those who seek to become one with
the supreme whole.
In Sanskrit the parrot is also known as çuka. When a ripened fruit is cut by
the red beaks of such birds, its sweet flavor is enhanced. The Vedic fruit which
is mature and ripe in knowledge is spoken through the lips of Çréla Çukadeva
Gosvämé, who is compared to the parrot not for his ability to recite the
Bhägavatam exactly as he heard it from his learned father, but for his ability to
present the work in a manner that would appeal to all classes of men.
The subject matter is so presented through the lips of Çréla Çukadeva
Gosvämé that any sincere listener that hears submissively can at once relish
transcendental tastes which are distinct from the perverted tastes of the
material world. The ripened fruit is not dropped all of a sudden from the
highest planet of Kåñëaloka. Rather, it has come down carefully through the
chain of disciplic succession without change or disturbance. Foolish people
who are not in the transcendental disciplic succession commit great blunders
by trying to understand the highest transcendental rasa known as the räsa
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
dance without following in the footsteps of Çukadeva Gosvämé, who presents
this fruit very carefully by stages of transcendental realization. One should be
intelligent enough to know the position of Çrémad-Bhägavatam by considering
personalities like Çukadeva Gosvämé, who deals with the subject so carefully.
This process of disciplic succession of the Bhägavata school suggests that in the
future also Çrémad-Bhägavatam has to be understood from a person who is
factually a representative of Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé. A professional man who
makes a business out of reciting the Bhägavatam illegally is certainly not a
representative of Çukadeva Gosvämé. Such a man’s business is only to earn his
livelihood. Therefore one should refrain from hearing the lectures of such
professional men. Such men usually go to the most confidential part of the
literature without undergoing the gradual process of understanding this grave
subject. They usually plunge into the subject matter of the räsa dance, which is
misunderstood by the foolish class of men. Some of them take this to be
immoral, while others try to cover it up by their own stupid interpretations.
They have no desire to follow in the footsteps of Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé.
One should conclude, therefore, that the serious student of the rasa should
receive the message of Bhägavatam in the chain of disciplic succession from
Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé, who describes the Bhägavatam from its very
beginning and not whimsically to satisfy the mundaner who has very little
knowledge in transcendental science. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is so carefully
presented that a sincere and serious person can at once enjoy the ripened fruit
of Vedic knowledge simply by drinking the nectarean juice through the mouth
of Çukadeva Gosvämé or his bona fide representative.
TEXT 4
NaEiMaze_iNaiMaz+ae}ae ‰zYa" XaaENak-adYa" )
Sa}a& SvGaaRYal/aek-aYa SahóSaMaMaaSaTa )) 4 ))
naimiñe ’nimiña-kñetre
åñayaù çaunakädayaù
satraà svargäya lokäya
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
sahasra-samam äsata
SYNONYMS
naimiñe—in the forest known as Naimiñäraëya; animiña-kñetre—the spot
which is especially a favorite of Viñëu (who does not close His eyelids);
åñayaù—sages; çaunaka-ädayaù—headed by the sage Çaunaka;
satram—sacrifice; svargäya—the Lord who is glorified in heaven; lokäya—and
for the devotees who are always in touch with the Lord; sahasra—one
thousand; samam—years; äsata—performed.
TRANSLATION
Once, in a holy place in the forest of Naimiñäraëya, great sages headed by
the sage Çaunaka assembled to perform a great thousand-year sacrifice for the
satisfaction of the Lord and His devotees.
PURPORT
The prelude of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam was spoken in the previous three
çlokas. Now the main topic of this great literature is being presented.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, after its first recitation by Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé, was
repeated for the second time at Naimiñäraëya.
In the Väyavéya Tantra, it is said that Brahmä, the engineer of this
particular universe, contemplated a great wheel which could enclose the
universe. The hub of this great circle was fixed at a particular place known as
Naimiñäraëya. Similarly, there is another reference to the forest of
Naimiñäraëya in the Varäha Puräëa, where it is stated that by performance of
sacrifice at this place, the strength of demoniac people is curtailed. Thus
brähmaëas prefer Naimiñäraëya for such sacrificial performances.
The devotees of Lord Viñëu offer all kinds of sacrifices for His pleasure.
The devotees are always attached to the service of the Lord, whereas fallen
souls are attached to the pleasures of material existence. In Bhagavad-gétä, it is
said that anything performed in the material world for any reason other than
for the pleasure of Lord Viñëu causes further bondage for the performer. It is
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
enjoined therefore that all acts must be performed sacrificially for the
satisfaction of Viñëu and His devotees. This will bring everyone peace and
prosperity.
The great sages are always anxious to do good to the people in general, and
as such the sages headed by Çaunaka and others assembled at this holy place of
Naimiñäraëya with a program of performing a great and continuous chain of
sacrificial ceremonies. Forgetful men do not know the right path for peace and
prosperity. However, the sages know it well, and therefore for the good of all
men they are always anxious to perform acts which may bring about peace in
the world. They are sincere friends to all living entities, and at the risk of great
personal inconvenience they are always engaged in the service of the Lord for
the good of all people. Lord Viñëu is just like a great tree, and all others,
including the demigods, men, Siddhas, Cäraëas, Vidyädharas and other living
entities, are like branches, twigs and leaves of that tree. By pouring water on
the root of the tree, all the parts of the tree are automatically nourished. Only
those branches and leaves which are detached cannot be so satisfied. Detached
branches and leaves dry up gradually despite all watering attempts. Similarly,
human society, when it is detached from the Personality of Godhead like
detached branches and leaves, is not capable of being watered, and one
attempting to do so is simply wasting his energy and resources.
The modern materialistic society is detached from its relation to the
Supreme Lord. And all its plans which are being made by atheistic leaders are
sure to be baffled at every step. Yet they do not wake up to this.
In this age, the congregational chanting of the holy names of the Lord is
the prescribed method for waking up. The ways and means are most
scientifically presented by Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, and intelligent
persons may take advantage of His teachings in order to bring about real peace
and prosperity. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is also presented for the same purpose, and
this will be explained more specifically later in the text.
TEXT 5
Ta Wk-da Tau MauNaYa" Pa[aTahuRTahuTaaGanYa" )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SaTk*-Ta& SaUTaMaaSaqNa& PaPa[C^uirdMaadraTa( )) 5 ))
ta ekadä tu munayaù
prätar huta-hutägnayaù
sat-kåtaà sütam äsénaà
papracchur idam ädarät
SYNONYMS
te—the sages; ekadä—one day; tu—but; munayaù—sages; prätaù—morning;
huta—burning; huta-agnayaù—the sacrificial fire; sat-kåtam—due respects;
sütam—Çré Süta Gosvämé; äsénam—seated on; papracchuù—made inquiries;
idam—on this (as follows); ädarät—with due regards.
TRANSLATION
One day, after finishing their morning duties by burning a sacrificial fire and
offering a seat of esteem to Çréla Süta Gosvämé, the great sages made inquiries,
with great respect, about the following matters.
PURPORT
Morning is the best time to hold spiritual services. The great sages offered
the speaker of the Bhägavatam an elevated seat of respect called the vyäsäsana,
or the seat of Çré Vyäsadeva. Çré Vyäsadeva is the original spiritual preceptor
for all men. And all other preceptors are considered to be his representatives.
A representative is one who can exactly present the viewpoint of Çré
Vyäsadeva. Çré Vyäsadeva impregnated the message of Bhägavatam unto Çréla
Çukadeva Gosvämé, and Çré Süta Gosvämé heard it from him (Çré Çukadeva
Gosvämé). All bona fide representatives of Çré Vyäsadeva in the chain of
disciplic succession are to be understood to be gosvämés. These gosvämés
restrain all their senses, and they stick to the path made by the previous
äcäryas. The gosvämés do not deliver lectures on the Bhägavatam capriciously.
Rather, they execute their services most carefully, following their predecessors
who delivered the spiritual message unbroken to them.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Those who listen to the Bhägavatam may put questions to the speaker in
order to elicit the clear meaning, but this should not be done in a challenging
spirit. One must submit questions with a great regard for the speaker and the
subject matter. This is also the way recommended in Bhagavad-gétä. One must
learn the transcendental subject by submissive aural reception from the right
sources. Therefore these sages addressed the speaker Süta Gosvämé with great
respect.
TEXT 6
‰zYa Ocu"
TvYaa %lu/ Paura<aaiNa SaeiTahaSaaiNa caNaga )
Aa:YaaTaaNYaPYaDaqTaaiNa DaMaRXaañai<a YaaNYauTa )) 6 ))
åñaya ücuù
tvayä khalu puräëäni
setihäsäni cänagha
äkhyätäny apy adhétäni
dharma-çästräëi yäny uta
SYNONYMS
åñayaù—the sages; ücuù—said; tvayä—by you; khalu—undoubtedly;
puräëäni—the supplements to the Vedas with illustrative narrations;
sa-itihäsäni—along with the histories; ca—and; anagha—freed from all vices;
äkhyätäni—explained; api—although; adhétäni—well read;
dharma-çästräëi—scriptures giving right directions to progressive life;
yäni—all these; uta—said.
TRANSLATION
The sages said: Respected Süta Gosvämé, you are completely free from all
vice. You are well versed in all the scriptures famous for religious life, and in
the Puräëas and the histories as well, for you have gone through them under
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
proper guidance and have also explained them.
PURPORT
A gosvämé, or the bona fide representative of Çré Vyäsadeva, must be free
from all kinds of vices. The four major vices of Kali-yuga are (1) illicit
connection with women, (2) animal slaughter, (3) intoxication, (4) speculative
gambling of all sorts. A gosvämé must be free from all these vices before he can
dare sit on the vyäsäsana. No one should be allowed to sit on the vyäsäsana
who is not spotless in character and who is not freed from the
above-mentioned vices. He not only should be freed from all such vices, but
must also be well versed in all revealed scriptures or in the Vedas. The Puräëas
are also parts of the Vedas. And histories like the Mahäbhärata or Rämäyaëa
are also parts of the Vedas. The äcärya or the gosvämé must be well acquainted
with all these literatures. To hear and explain them is more important than
reading them. One can assimilate the knowledge of the revealed scriptures
only by hearing and explaining. Hearing is called çravaëa, and explaining is
called kértana. The two processes of çravaëa and kértana are of primary
importance to progressive spiritual life. Only one who has properly grasped the
transcendental knowledge from the right source by submissive hearing can
properly explain the subject.
TEXT 7
YaaiNa vedivda& é[eïae >aGavaNa( badraYa<a" )
ANYae c MauNaYa" SaUTa Paravrivdae ivdu" )) 7 ))
yäni veda-vidäà çreñöho
bhagavän bädaräyaëaù
anye ca munayaù süta
parävara-vido viduù
SYNONYMS
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
yäni—all that; veda-vidäm—scholars of the Vedas; çreñöhaù—seniormost;
bhagavän—incarnation of Godhead; bädaräyaëaù—Vyäsadeva; anye—others;
ca—and; munayaù—the sages; süta—O Süta Gosvämé;
parävara-vidaù—amongst the learned scholars, one who is conversant with
physical and metaphysical knowledge; viduù—one who knows.
TRANSLATION
Being the eldest learned Vedäntist, O Süta Gosvämé, you are acquainted
with the knowledge of Vyäsadeva, who is the incarnation of Godhead, and you
also know other sages who are fully versed in all kinds of physical and
metaphysical knowledge.
PURPORT
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is a natural commentation on the Brahma-sütra, or the
Bädaräyaëi Vedänta-sütras. It is called natural because Vyäsadeva is author of
both the Vedänta-sütras and Çrémad-Bhägavatam, or the essence of all Vedic
literatures. Besides Vyäsadeva, there are other sages who are the authors of six
different philosophical systems, namely Gautama, Kaëäda, Kapila, Pataïjali,
Jaimini and Añöävakra. Theism is explained completely in the Vedänta-sütra,
whereas in other systems of philosophical speculations, practically no mention
is given to the ultimate cause of all causes. One can sit on the vyäsäsana only
after being conversant in all systems of philosophy so that one can present
fully the theistic views of the Bhägavatam in defiance of all other systems. Çréla
Süta Gosvämé was the proper teacher, and therefore the sages at Naimiñäraëya
elevated him to the vyäsäsana. Çréla Vyäsadeva is designated herein as the
Personality of Godhead because he is the authorized empowered incarnation.
TEXT 8
veTQa Tv& SaaEMYa TaTSav| TatvTaSTadNauGa]haTa( )
b]UYau" iòGDaSYa iXaZYaSYa Gaurvae GauùMaPYauTa )) 8 ))
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
vettha tvaà saumya tat sarvaà
tattvatas tad-anugrahät
brüyuù snigdhasya çiñyasya
guravo guhyam apy uta
SYNONYMS
vettha—you are well conversant; tvam—Your Honor; saumya—one who is
pure and simple; tat—those; sarvam—all; tattvataù—in fact; tat—their;
anugrahät—by the favor of; brüyuù—will tell; snigdhasya—of the one who is
submissive; çiñyasya—of the disciple; guravaù—the spiritual masters;
guhyam—secret; api uta—endowed with.
TRANSLATION
And because you are submissive, your spiritual masters have endowed you
with all the favors bestowed upon a gentle disciple. Therefore you can tell us all
that you have scientifically learned from them.
PURPORT
The secret of success in spiritual life is in satisfying the spiritual master and
thereby getting his sincere blessings. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has
sung in his famous eight stanzas on the spiritual master as follows: “I offer my
respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of my spiritual master. Only by his
satisfaction can one please the Personality of Godhead, and when he is
dissatisfied there is only havoc on the path of spiritual realization.” It is
essential, therefore, that a disciple be very much obedient and submissive to
the bona fide spiritual master. Çréla Süta Gosvämé fulfilled all these
qualifications as a disciple, and therefore he was endowed with all favors by his
learned and self-realized spiritual masters such as Çréla Vyäsadeva and others.
The sages of Naimiñäraëya were confident that Çréla Süta Gosvämé was bona
fide. Therefore they were anxious to hear from him.
TEXT 9
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Ta}a Ta}aaÅSaaYauZMaNa( >avTaa YaiÜiNaiêTaMa( )
Pau&SaaMaek-aNTaTa" é[eYaSTaà" Xa&iSaTauMahRiSa )) 9 ))
tatra taträïjasäyuñman
bhavatä yad viniçcitam
puàsäm ekäntataù çreyas
tan naù çaàsitum arhasi
SYNONYMS
tatra—thereof; tatra—thereof; aïjasä—made easy; äyuñman—blessed with a
long duration of life; bhavatä—by your good self; yat—whatever;
viniçcitam—ascertained; puàsäm—for the people in general;
ekäntataù—absolutely; çreyaù—ultimate good; tat—that; naù—to us;
çaàsitum—to explain; arhasi—deserve.
TRANSLATION
Please, therefore, being blessed with many years, explain to us, in an easily
understandable way, what you have ascertained to be the absolute and ultimate
good for the people in general.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä, worship of the äcärya is recommended. The äcäryas and
gosvämés are always absorbed in thought of the well-being of the general
public, especially their spiritual well-being. Spiritual wellbeing is automatically
followed by material well-being. The äcäryas therefore give directions in
spiritual well-being for people in general. Foreseeing the incompetencies of the
people in this age of Kali, or the iron age of quarrel, the sages requested that
Süta Gosvämé give a summary of all revealed scriptures because the people of
this age are condemned in every respect. The sages, therefore, inquired of the
absolute good, which is the ultimate good for the people. The condemned state
of affairs of the people of this age is described as follows.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 10
Pa[aYae<aaLPaaYauz" Sa>Ya k-l/aviSMaNa( YauGae JaNaa" )
MaNda" SauMaNdMaTaYaae MaNd>aaGYaa ùuPad]uTaa" )) 10 ))
präyeëälpäyuñaù sabhya
kaläv asmin yuge janäù
mandäù sumanda-matayo
manda-bhägyä hy upadrutäù
SYNONYMS
präyeëa—almost always; alpa—meager; äyuñaù—duration of life;
sabhya—member of a learned society; kalau—in this age of Kali (quarrel);
asmin—herein; yuge—age; janäù—the public; mandäù—lazy;
sumanda-matayaù—misguided; manda-bhägyäù—unlucky; hi—and above all;
upadrutäù—disturbed.
TRANSLATION
O learned one, in this iron age of Kali men have but short lives. They are
quarrelsome, lazy, misguided, unlucky and, above all, always disturbed.
PURPORT
The devotees of the Lord are always anxious for the spiritual improvement
of the general public. When the sages of Naimiñäraëya analyzed the state of
affairs of the people in this age of Kali, they foresaw that men would live short
lives. In Kali-yuga, the duration of life is shortened not so much because of
insufficient food but because of irregular habits. By keeping regular habits and
eating simple food, any man can maintain his health. Overeating, over-sense
gratification, overdependence on another’s mercy, and artificial standards of
living sap the very vitality of human energy. Therefore the duration of life is
shortened.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The people of this age are also very lazy, not only materially but in the
matter of self-realization. The human life is especially meant for
self-realization. That is to say, man should come to know what he is, what the
world is, and what the supreme truth is. Human life is a means by which the
living entity can end all the miseries of the hard struggle for life in material
existence and by which he can return to Godhead, his eternal home. But, due
to a bad system of education, men have no desire for self-realization. Even if
they come to know about it, they unfortunately become victims of misguided
teachers.
In this age, men are victims not only of different political creeds and
parties, but also of many different types of sense-gratificatory diversions, such
as cinemas, sports, gambling, clubs, mundane libraries, bad association,
smoking, drinking, cheating, pilfering, bickerings, and so on. Their minds are
always disturbed and full of anxieties due to so many different engagements. In
this age, many unscrupulous men manufacture their own religious faiths which
are not based on any revealed scriptures, and very often people who are
addicted to sense gratification are attracted by such institutions.
Consequently, in the name of religion so many sinful acts are being carried on
that the people in general have neither peace of mind nor health of body. The
student (brahmacäré) communities are no longer being maintained, and
householders do not observe the rules and regulations of the gåhastha-äçrama.
Consequently, the so-called vänaprasthas and sannyäsés who come out of such
gåhastha-äçramas are easily deviated from the rigid path. In the Kali-yuga the
whole atmosphere is surcharged with faithlessness. Men are no longer
interested in spiritual values. Material sense gratification is now the standard
of civilization. For the maintenance of such material civilizations, man has
formed complex nations and communities, and there is a constant strain of hot
and cold wars between these different groups. It has become very difficult,
therefore, to raise the spiritual standard due to the present distorted values of
human society. The sages of Naimiñäraëya are anxious to disentangle all fallen
souls, and here they are seeking the remedy from Çréla Süta Gosvämé.
TEXT 11
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
>aUrqi<a >aUirk-MaaRi<a é[aeTaVYaaiNa iv>aaGaXa" )
ATa" SaaDaae_}a YaTSaar& SaMaud(Da*TYa MaNaqzYaa )
b]Uih >ad]aYa>aUTaaNaa& YaeNaaTMaa SauPa[SaqdiTa )) 11 ))
bhüréëi bhüri-karmäëi
çrotavyäni vibhägaçaù
ataù sädho ’tra yat säraà
samuddhåtya manéñayä
brühi bhadräya bhütänäà
yenätmä suprasédati
SYNONYMS
bhüréëi—multifarious; bhüri—many; karmäëi—duties; çrotavyäni—to be
learned; vibhägaçaù—by divisions of subject matter; ataù—therefore;
sädho—O sage; atra—herein; yat—whatever; säram—essence;
samuddhåtya—by selection; manéñayä—best to your knowledge; brühi—please
tell us; bhadräya—for the good of; bhütänäm—the living beings; yena—by
which; ätmä—the self; suprasédati—becomes fully satisfied.
TRANSLATION
There are many varieties of scriptures, and in all of them there are many
prescribed duties, which can be learned only after many years of study in their
various divisions. Therefore, O sage, please select the essence of all these
scriptures and explain it for the good of all living beings, that by such
instruction their hearts may be fully satisfied.
PURPORT
Ätmä, or self, is distinguished from matter and material elements. It is
spiritual in constitution, and thus it is never satisfied by any amount of
material planning. All scriptures and spiritual instructions are meant for the
satisfaction of this self, or ätmä. There are many varieties of approaches which
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
are recommended for different types of living beings in different times and at
different places. Consequently, the numbers of revealed scriptures are
innumerable. There are different methods and prescribed duties recommended
in these various scriptures. Taking into consideration the fallen condition of
the people in general in this age of Kali, the sages of Naimiñäraëya suggested
that Çré Süta Gosvämé relate the essence of all such scriptures because in this
age it is not possible for the fallen souls to understand and undergo all the
lessons of all these various scriptures in a varëa and äçrama system.
The varëa and äçrama society was considered to be the best institution for
lifting the human being to the spiritual platform, but due to Kali-yuga it is not
possible to execute the rules and regulations of these institutions. Nor is it
possible for the people in general to completely sever relations with their
families as the varëäçrama institution prescribes. The whole atmosphere is
surcharged with opposition. And considering this, one can see that spiritual
emancipation for the common man in this age is very difficult. The reason the
sages presented this matter to Çré Süta Gosvämé is explained in the following
verses.
TEXT 12
SaUTa JaaNaaiSa >ad]& Tae >aGavaNa( SaaTvTaa& PaiTa" )
devKYaa& vSaudevSYa JaaTaae YaSYa ick-IzRYaa )) 12 ))
süta jänäsi bhadraà te
bhagavän sätvatäà patiù
devakyäà vasudevasya
jäto yasya cikérñayä
SYNONYMS
süta—O Süta Gosvämé; jänäsi—you know; bhadram te—all blessings upon you;
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; sätvatäm—of the pure devotees;
patiù—the protector; devakyäm—in the womb of Devaké; vasudevasya—by
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Vasudeva; jätaù—born of; yasya—for the purpose of; cikérñayä—executing.
TRANSLATION
All blessings upon you, O Süta Gosvämé. You know for what purpose the
Personality of Godhead appeared in the womb of Devaké as the son of
Vasudeva.
PURPORT
Bhagavän means the Almighty God who is the controller of all opulences,
power, fame, beauty, knowledge and renunciation. He is the protector of His
pure devotees. Although God is equally disposed to everyone, He is especially
inclined to His devotees. Sat means the Absolute Truth. And persons who are
servitors of the Absolute Truth are called sätvatas. And the Personality of
Godhead who protects such pure devotees is known as the protector of the
sätvatas. Bhadraà te, or “blessings upon you,” indicates the sages’ anxiety to
know the Absolute Truth from the speaker. Lord Çré Kåñëa, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, appeared to Devaké, the wife of Vasudeva. Vasudeva is
the symbol of the transcendental position wherein the appearance of the
Supreme Lord takes place.
TEXT 13
Taà" éué[UzMaa<aaNaaMahRSYa®aNauvi<aRTauMa( )
YaSYaavTaarae >aUTaaNaa& +aeMaaYa c >avaYa c )) 13 ))
tan naù çuçrüñamäëänäm
arhasy aìgänuvarëitum
yasyävatäro bhütänäà
kñemäya ca bhaväya ca
SYNONYMS
tat—those; naù—unto us; çuçrüñamäëänäm—those who are endeavoring for;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
arhasi—ought to do it; aìga—O Süta Gosvämé; anuvarëitum—to explain by
following in the footsteps of previous äcäryas; yasya—whose;
avatäraù—incarnation; bhütänäm—of the living beings; kñemäya—for good;
ca—and; bhaväya—upliftment; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
O Süta Gosvämé, we are eager to learn about the Personality of Godhead and
His incarnations. Please explain to us those teachings imparted by previous
masters [äcäryas], for one is uplifted both by speaking them and by hearing
them.
PURPORT
The conditions for hearing the transcendental message of the Absolute
Truth are set forth herein. The first condition is that the audience must be
very sincere and eager to hear. And the speaker must be in the line of disciplic
succession from the recognized äcärya. The transcendental message of the
Absolute is not understandable by those who are materially absorbed. Under
the direction of a bona fide spiritual master, one becomes gradually purified.
Therefore, one must be in the chain of disciplic succession and learn the
spiritual art of submissive hearing. In the case of Süta Gosvämé and the sages
of Naimiñäraëya, all these conditions are fulfilled because Çréla Süta Gosvämé
is in the line of Çréla Vyäsadeva, and the sages of Naimiñäraëya are all sincere
souls who are anxious to learn the truth. Thus the transcendental topics of
Lord Çré Kåñëa’s superhuman activities, His incarnation, His birth, appearance
or disappearance, His forms, His names and so on are all easily understandable
because all requirements are fulfilled. Such discourses help all men on the path
of spiritual realization.
TEXT 14
AaPaà" Sa&Sa*iTa& gaaera& YaàaMa ivvXaae Ga*<aNa( )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TaTa" SaÛae ivMauCYaeTa YaiØ>aeiTa SvYa& >aYaMa( )) 14 ))
äpannaù saàsåtià ghoräà
yan-näma vivaço gåëan
tataù sadyo vimucyeta
yad bibheti svayaà bhayam
SYNONYMS
äpannaù—being entangled; saàsåtim—in the hurdle of birth and death;
ghoräm—too complicated; yat—what; näma—the absolute name;
vivaçaù—unconsciously; gåëan—chanting; tataù—from that; sadyaù—at once;
vimucyeta—gets freedom; yat—that which; bibheti—fears;
svayam—personally; bhayam—fear itself.
TRANSLATION
Living beings who are entangled in the complicated meshes of birth and
death can be freed immediately by even unconsciously chanting the holy name
of Kåñëa, which is feared by fear personified.
PURPORT
Väsudeva, or Lord Kåñëa, the Absolute Personality of Godhead, is the
supreme controller of everything. There is no one in creation who is not afraid
of the rage of the Almighty. Great asuras like Rävaëa, Hiraëyakaçipu, Kaàsa,
and others who were very powerful living entities were all killed by the
Personality of Godhead. And the almighty Väsudeva has empowered His name
with the powers of His personal Self. Everything is related to Him, and
everything has its identity in Him. It is stated herein that the name of Kåñëa is
feared even by fear personified. This indicates that the name of Kåñëa is
nondifferent from Kåñëa. Therefore, the name of Kåñëa is as powerful as Lord
Kåñëa Himself. There is no difference at all. Anyone, therefore, can take
advantage of the holy names of Lord Çré Kåñëa even in the midst of greatest
dangers. The transcendental name of Kåñëa, even though uttered
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
unconsciously or by force of circumstances, can help one obtain freedom from
the hurdle of birth and death.
TEXT 15
YaTPaadSa&é[Yaa" SaUTa MauNaYa" Pa[XaMaaYaNaa" )
SaÛ" PauNaNTYauPaSPa*ía" SvDauRNYaaPaae_NauSaevYaa )) 15 ))
yat-päda-saàçrayäù süta
munayaù praçamäyanäù
sadyaù punanty upaspåñöäù
svardhuny-äpo ’nusevayä
SYNONYMS
yat—whose; päda—lotus feet; saàçrayäù—those who have taken shelter of;
süta—O Süta Gosvämé; munayaù—great sages; praçamäyanäù—absorbed in
devotion to the Supreme; sadyaù—at once; punanti—sanctify;
upaspåñöäù—simply by association; svardhuné—of the sacred Ganges;
äpaù—water; anusevayä—bringing into use.
TRANSLATION
O Süta, those great sages who have completely taken shelter of the lotus feet
of the Lord can at once sanctify those who come in touch with them, whereas
the waters of the Ganges can sanctify only after prolonged use.
PURPORT
Pure devotees of the Lord are more powerful than the waters of the sacred
river Ganges. One can derive spiritual benefit out of prolonged use of the
Ganges waters. But one can be sanctified at once by the mercy of a pure
devotee of the Lord. In Bhagavad-gétä it is said that any person, regardless of
birth as çüdra, woman, or merchant, can take shelter of the lotus feet of the
Lord and by so doing can return to Godhead. To take shelter of the lotus feet
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
of the Lord means to take shelter of the pure devotees. The pure devotees
whose only business is serving are honored by the names Prabhupäda and
Viñëupäda, which indicate such devotees to be representatives of the lotus feet
of the Lord. Anyone, therefore, who takes shelter of the lotus feet of a pure
devotee by accepting the pure devotee as his spiritual master can be at once
purified. Such devotees of the Lord are honored equally with the Lord because
they are engaged in the most confidential service of the Lord, for they deliver
out of the material world the fallen souls whom the Lord wants to return
home, back to Godhead. Such pure devotees are better known as vicelords
according to revealed scriptures. The sincere disciple of the pure devotee
considers the spiritual master equal to the Lord, but always considers himself
to be a humble servant of the servant of the Lord. This is the pure devotional
path.
TEXT 16
k-ae va >aGavTaSTaSYa Pau<Yaëaeke-@yk-MaR<a" )
éuiÖk-aMaae Na é*<auYaaÛXa" k-il/Mal/aPahMa( )) 16 ))
ko vä bhagavatas tasya
puëya-çlokeòya-karmaëaù
çuddhi-kämo na çåëuyäd
yaçaù kali-maläpaham
SYNONYMS
kaù—who; vä—rather; bhagavataù—of the Lord; tasya—His; puëya—virtuous;
çloka-éòya—worshipable by prayers; karmaëaù—deeds;
çuddhi-kämaù—desiring deliverance from all sins; na—not; çåëuyät—does
hear; yaçaù—glories; kali—of the age of quarrel; mala-apaham—the agent for
sanctification.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Who is there, desiring deliverance from the vices of the age of quarrel, who
is not willing to hear the virtuous glories of the Lord?
PURPORT
The age of Kali is the most condemned age due to its quarrelsome features.
Kali-yuga is so saturated with vicious habits that there is a great fight at the
slightest misunderstanding. Those who are engaged in the pure devotional
service of the Lord, who are without any desire for self-aggrandizement and
who are freed from the effects of fruitive actions and dry philosophical
speculations are capable of getting out of the estrangements of this
complicated age. The leaders of the people are very much anxious to live in
peace and friendship, but they have no information of the simple method of
hearing the glories of the Lord. On the contrary, such leaders are opposed to
the propagation of the glories of the Lord. In other words, the foolish leaders
want to completely deny the existence of the Lord. In the name of secular
state, such leaders are enacting various plans every year. But by the
insurmountable intricacies of the material nature of the Lord, all these plans
for progress are being constantly frustrated. They have no eyes to see that
their attempts at peace and friendship are failing. But here is the hint to get
over the hurdle. If we want actual peace, we must open the road to
understanding of the Supreme Lord Kåñëa and glorify Him for His virtuous
activities as they are depicted in the pages of Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 17
TaSYa k-MaaR<Yaudarai<a PairGaqTaaiNa SaUiri>a" )
b]Uih Na" é[ÕDaaNaaNaa& l/Il/Yaa dDaTa" k-l/a" )) 17 ))
tasya karmäëy udäräëi
parigétäni süribhiù
brühi naù çraddadhänänäà
lélayä dadhataù kaläù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
tasya—His; karmäëi—transcendental acts; udäräëi—magnanimous;
parigétäni—broadcast; süribhiù—by the great souls; brühi—please speak;
naù—unto us; çraddadhänänäm—ready to receive with respect;
lélayä—pastimes; dadhataù—advented; kaläù—incarnations.
TRANSLATION
His transcendental acts are magnificent and gracious, and great learned sages
like Närada sing of them. Please, therefore, speak to us, who are eager to hear
about the adventures He performs in His various incarnations.
PURPORT
The Personality of Godhead is never inactive as some less intelligent
persons suggest. His works are magnificent and magnanimous. His creations
both material and spiritual are all wonderful and contain all variegatedness.
They are described nicely by such liberated souls as Çréla Närada, Vyäsa,
Välméki, Devala, Asita, Madhva, Çré Caitanya, Rämänuja, Viñëusvämé,
Nimbärka, Çrédhara, Viçvanätha, Baladeva, Bhaktivinoda, Siddhänta Sarasvaté
and many other learned and self-realized souls. These creations, both material
and spiritual, are full of opulence, beauty and knowledge, but the spiritual
realm is more magnificent due to its being full of knowledge, bliss and eternity.
The material creations are manifested for some time as perverted shadows of
the spiritual kingdom and can be likened to cinemas. They attract people of
less intelligent caliber who are attracted by false things. Such foolish men have
no information of the reality, and they take it for granted that the false
material manifestation is the all in all. But more intelligent men guided by
sages like Vyäsa and Närada know that the eternal kingdom of God is more
delightful, larger, and eternally full of bliss and knowledge. Those who are not
conversant with the activities of the Lord and His transcendental realm are
sometimes favored by the Lord in His adventures as incarnations wherein He
displays the eternal bliss of His association in the transcendental realm. By
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
such activities He attracts the conditioned souls of the material world. Some of
these conditioned souls are engaged in the false enjoyment of material senses
and others in simply negating their real life in the spiritual world. These less
intelligent persons are known as karmés, or fruitive workers, and jïänés, or dry
mental speculators. But above these two classes of men is the transcendentalist
known as sätvata, or the devotee, who is busy neither with rampant material
activity nor with material speculation. He is engaged in the positive service of
the Lord, and thereby he derives the highest spiritual benefit unknown to the
karmés and jïänés.
As the supreme controller of both the material and spiritual worlds, the
Lord has different incarnations of unlimited categories. Incarnations like
Brahmä, Rudra, Manu, Påthu and Vyäsa are His material qualitative
incarnations, but His incarnations like Räma, Narasiàha, Varäha and Vämana
are His transcendental incarnations. Lord Çré Kåñëa is the fountainhead of all
incarnations, and He is therefore the cause of all causes.
TEXT 18
AQaa:Yaaih hreDasMaàvTaark-Qaa" éu>aa" )
l/Il/a ivdDaTa" SvErMaqìrSYaaTMaMaaYaYaa )) 18 ))
athäkhyähi harer dhémann
avatära-kathäù çubhäù
lélä vidadhataù svairam
éçvarasyätma-mäyayä
SYNONYMS
atha—therefore; äkhyähi—describe; hareù—of the Lord; dhéman—O sagacious
one; avatära—incarnations; kathäù—narratives; çubhäù—auspicious;
lélä—adventures; vidadhataù—performed; svairam—pastimes; éçvarasya—of
the supreme controller; ätma—personal; mäyayä—energies.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
O wise Süta, please narrate to us the transcendental pastimes of the Supreme
Godhead’s multi-incarnations. Such auspicious adventures and pastimes of the
Lord, the supreme controller, are performed by His internal powers.
PURPORT
For the creation, maintenance and destruction of the material worlds, the
Supreme Lord Personality of Godhead Himself appears in many thousands of
forms of incarnations, and the specific adventures found in those
transcendental forms are all auspicious. Both those who are present during
such activities and those who hear the transcendental narrations of such
activities are benefited.
TEXT 19
vYa& Tau Na ivTa*PYaaMa otaMaëaek-iv§-Mae )
YaC^*<vTaa& rSajaNaa& Svadu Svadu Pade Pade )) 19 ))
vayaà tu na vitåpyäma
uttama-çloka-vikrame
yac-chåëvatäà rasa-jïänäà
svädu svädu pade pade
SYNONYMS
vayam—we; tu—but; na—not; vitåpyämaù—shall be at rest; uttama-çloka—the
Personality of Godhead, who is glorified by transcendental prayers;
vikrame—adventures; yat—which; çåëvatäm—by continuous hearing;
rasa—humor; jïänäm—those who are conversant with; svädu—relishing;
svädu—palatable; pade pade—at every step.
TRANSLATION
We never tire of hearing the transcendental pastimes of the Personality of
Godhead, who is glorified by hymns and prayers. Those who have developed a
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
taste for transcendental relationships with Him relish hearing of His pastimes at
every moment.
PURPORT
There is a great difference between mundane stories, fiction, or history and
the transcendental pastimes of the Lord. The histories of the whole universe
contain references to the pastimes of the incarnations of the Lord. The
Rämäyaëa, the Mahäbhärata, and the Puräëas are histories of bygone ages
recorded in connection with the pastimes of the incarnations of the Lord and
therefore remain fresh even after repeated readings. For example, anyone may
read Bhagavad-gétä or the Çrémad-Bhägavatam repeatedly throughout his whole
life and yet find in them new light of information. Mundane news is static
whereas transcendental news is dynamic, inasmuch as the spirit is dynamic
and matter is static. Those who have developed a taste for understanding the
transcendental subject matter are never tired of hearing such narrations. One
is quickly satiated by mundane activities, but no one is satiated by
transcendental or devotional activities. Uttama-çloka indicates that literature
which is not meant for nescience. Mundane literature is in the mode of
darkness or ignorance, whereas transcendental literature is quite different.
Transcendental literature is above the mode of darkness, and its light becomes
more luminous with progressive reading and realization of the transcendental
subject matter. The so-called liberated persons are never satisfied by the
repetition of the words ahaà brahmäsmi. Such artificial realization of Brahman
becomes hackneyed, and so to relish real pleasure they turn to the narrations
of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Those who are not so fortunate turn to altruism
and worldly philanthropy. This means the Mäyäväda philosophy is mundane,
whereas the philosophy of Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam is
transcendental.
TEXT 20
k*-TavaNa( ik-l/ k-MaaRi<a Sah raMae<a ke-Xav" )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
AiTaMaTYaaRiNa >aGavaNa( GaU!" k-Pa$=MaaNauz" )) 20 ))
kåtavän kila karmäëi
saha rämeëa keçavaù
atimartyäni bhagavän
güòhaù kapaöa-mänuñaù
SYNONYMS
kåtavän—done by; kila—what; karmäëi—acts; saha—along with;
rämeëa—Balaräma; keçavaù—Çré Kåñëa; atimartyäni—superhuman;
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; güòhaù—masked as;
kapaöa—apparently; mänuñaù—human being.
TRANSLATION
Lord Çré Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead, along with Balaräma, played
like a human being, and so masked He performed many superhuman acts.
PURPORT
The doctrines of anthropomorphism and zoomorphism are never applicable
to Çré Kåñëa, or the Personality of Godhead. The theory that a man becomes
God by dint of penance and austerities is very much rampant nowadays,
especially in India. Since Lord Räma, Lord Kåñëa and Lord Caitanya
Mahäprabhu were detected by the sages and saints to be the Personality of
Godhead as indicated in revealed scriptures, many unscrupulous men have
created their own incarnations. This process of concocting an incarnation of
God has become an ordinary business, especially in Bengal. Any popular
personality with a few traits of mystic powers will display some feat of jugglery
and easily become an incarnation of Godhead by popular vote. Lord Çré Kåñëa
was not that type of incarnation. He was actually the Personality of Godhead
from the very beginning of His appearance. He appeared before His so-called
mother as four-armed Viñëu. Then, at the request of the mother, He became
like a human child and at once left her for another devotee at Gokula, where
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
He was accepted as the son of Nanda Mahäräja and Yaçodä Mätä. Similarly,
Çré Baladeva, the counterpart of Lord Çré Kåñëa, was also considered a human
child born of another wife of Çré Vasudeva. In Bhagavad-gétä, the Lord says
that His birth and deeds are transcendental and that anyone who is so
fortunate as to know the transcendental nature of His birth and deeds will at
once become liberated and eligible to return to the kingdom of God. So
knowledge of the transcendental nature of the birth and deeds of Lord Çré
Kåñëa is sufficient for liberation. In the Bhägavatam, the transcendental
nature of the Lord is described in nine cantos, and in the Tenth Canto His
specific pastimes are taken up. All this becomes known as one’s reading of this
literature progresses. It is important to note here, however, that the Lord
exhibited His divinity even from the lap of His mother, that His deeds are all
superhuman (He lifted Govardhana Hill at the age of seven), and that all these
acts definitely prove Him to be actually the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Yet, due to His mystic covering, He was always accepted as an ordinary human
child by His so-called father and mother and other relatives. Whenever some
herculean task was performed by Him, the father and mother took it
otherwise. And they remained satisfied with unflinching filial love for their
son. As such, the sages of Naimiñäraëya describe Him as apparently resembling
a human being, but actually He is the supreme almighty Personality of
Godhead.
TEXT 21
k-il/MaaGaTaMaajaYa +ae}ae_iSMaNa( vEZ<ave vYaMa( )
AaSaqNaa dqgaRSa}ae<a k-QaaYaa& Sa+a<aa hre" )) 21 ))
kalim ägatam äjïäya
kñetre ’smin vaiñëave vayam
äsénä dérgha-satreëa
kathäyäà sakñaëä hareù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
kalim—the age of Kali (iron age of quarrel); ägatam—having arrived;
äjïäya—knowing this; kñetre—in this tract of land; asmin—in this;
vaiñëave—specially meant for the devotee of the Lord; vayam—we;
äsénäù—seated; dérgha—prolonged; satreëa—for performance of sacrifices;
kathäyäm—in the words of; sa-kñaëäù—with time at our disposal; hareù—of
the Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Knowing well that the age of Kali has already begun, we are assembled here
in this holy place to hear at great length the transcendental message of Godhead
and in this way perform sacrifice.
PURPORT
This age of Kali is not at all suitable for self-realization as was Satya-yuga,
the golden age, or Tretä- or Dväpara-yugas, the silver and copper ages. For
self-realization, the people in Satya-yuga, living a lifetime of a hundred
thousand years, were able to perform prolonged meditation. And in
Tretä-yuga, when the duration of life was ten thousand years, self-realization
was attained by performance of great sacrifice. And in the Dväpara-yuga,
when the duration of life was one thousand years, self-realization was attained
by worship of the Lord. But in the Kali-yuga, the maximum duration of life
being one hundred years only and that combined with various difficulties, the
recommended process of self-realization is that of hearing and chanting of the
holy name, fame, and pastimes of the Lord. The sages of Naimiñäraëya began
this process in a place meant specifically for the devotees of the Lord. They
prepared themselves to hear the pastimes of the Lord over a period of one
thousand years. By the example of these sages one should learn that regular
hearing and recitation of the Bhägavatam is the only way for self-realization.
Other attempts are simply a waste of time, for they do not give any tangible
results. Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu preached this system of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Bhägavata-dharma, and He recommended that all those who were born in
India should take the responsibility of broadcasting the messages of Lord Çré
Kåñëa, primarily the message of Bhagavad-gétä. And when one is well
established in the teachings of Bhagavad-gétä, he can take up the study of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam for further enlightenment in self-realization.
TEXT 22
Tv& Na" SaNdiXaRTaae Daa}aa duSTar& iNaiSTaTaqzRTaaMa( )
k-il&/ Satvhr& Pau&Saa& k-<aRDaar wva<aRvMa( )) 22 ))
tvaà naù sandarçito dhäträ
dustaraà nistitérñatäm
kalià sattva-haraà puàsäà
karëa-dhära ivärëavam
SYNONYMS
tvam—Your Goodness; naù—unto us; sandarçitaù—meeting; dhäträ—by
providence; dustaram—insurmountable; nistitérñatäm—for those desiring to
cross over; kalim—the age of Kali; sattva-haram—that which deteriorates the
good qualities; puàsäm—of a man; karëa-dhäraù—captain; iva—as;
arëavam—the ocean.
TRANSLATION
We think that we have met Your Goodness by the will of providence, just so
that we may accept you as captain of the ship for those who desire to cross the
difficult ocean of Kali, which deteriorates all the good qualities of a human
being.
PURPORT
The age of Kali is very dangerous for the human being. Human life is simply
meant for self-realization, but due to this dangerous age, men have completely
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
forgotten the aim of life. In this age, the life span will gradually decrease.
People will gradually lose their memory, finer sentiments, strength, and better
qualities. A list of the anomalies for this age is given in the Twelfth Canto of
this work. And so this age is very difficult for those who want to utilize this life
for self-realization. The people are so busy with sense gratification that they
completely forget about self-realization. Out of madness they frankly say that
there is no need for self-realization because they do not realize that this brief
life is but a moment on our great journey towards self-realization. The whole
system of education is geared to sense gratification, and if a learned man
thinks it over, he sees that the children of this age are being intentionally sent
to the slaughterhouses of so-called education. Learned men, therefore, must be
cautious of this age, and if they at all want to cross over the dangerous ocean of
Kali, they must follow the footsteps of the sages of Naimiñäraëya and accept
Çré Süta Gosvämé or his bona fide representative as the captain of the ship.
The ship is the message of Lord Çré Kåñëa in the shape of Bhagavad-gétä or the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 23
b]Uih YaaeGaeìre k*-Z<ae b]ø<Yae DaMaRvMaRi<a )
Sva& k-aïaMaDauNaaePaeTae DaMaR" k&- Xar<a& GaTa" )) 23 ))
brühi yogeçvare kåñëe
brahmaëye dharma-varmaëi
sväà käñöhäm adhunopete
dharmaù kaà çaraëaà gataù
SYNONYMS
brühi—please tell; yoga-éçvare—the Lord of all mystic powers; kåñëe—Lord
Kåñëa; brahmaëye—the Absolute Truth; dharma—religion;
varmaëi—protector; sväm—own; käñöhäm—abode; adhunä—nowadays;
upete—having gone away; dharmaù—religion; kam—unto whom;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
çaraëam—shelter; gataù—gone.
TRANSLATION
Since Çré Kåñëa, the Absolute Truth, the master of all mystic powers, has
departed for His own abode, please tell us to whom the religious principles have
now gone for shelter.
PURPORT
Essentially religion is the prescribed codes enunciated by the Personality of
Godhead Himself. Whenever there is gross misuse or neglect of the principles
of religion, the Supreme Lord appears Himself to restore religious principles.
This is stated in Bhagavad-gétä. Here the sages of Naimiñäraëya are inquiring
about these principles. The reply to this question is given later. The
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the transcendental sound representation of the
Personality of Godhead, and thus it is the full representation of transcendental
knowledge and religious principles.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the First Canto, First Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled “Questions by the Sages.”
Chapter Two
Divinity and Divine Service
TEXT 1
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
VYaaSa ovac
wiTa SaMPa[énSa&ôíae ivPa[a<aa& raEMahzRi<a" )
Pa[iTaPaUJYa vcSTaeza& Pa[v¢u-MauPac§-Mae )) 1 ))
vyäsa uväca
iti sampraçna-saàhåñöo
vipräëäà raumaharñaëiù
pratipüjya vacas teñäà
pravaktum upacakrame
SYNONYMS
vyäsaù uväca—Vyäsa said; iti—thus; sampraçna—perfect inquiries;
saàhåñöaù—perfectly satisfied; vipräëäm—of the sages there;
raumaharñaëiù—the son of Romaharñaëa, namely Ugraçravä;
pratipüjya—after thanking them; vacaù—words; teñäm—their; pravaktum—to
reply to them; upacakrame—attempted.
TRANSLATION
Ugraçravä [Süta Gosvämé], the son of Romaharñaëa, being fully satisfied by
the perfect questions of the brähmaëas, thanked them and thus attempted to
reply.
PURPORT
The sages of Naimiñäraëya asked Süta Gosvämé six questions, and so he is
answering them one by one.
TEXT 2
SaUTa ovac
Ya& Pa[v]JaNTaMaNauPaeTaMaPaeTak*-TYa&
ÜEPaaYaNaae ivrhk-aTar AaJauhav )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Pau}aeiTa TaNMaYaTaYaa Tarvae_i>aNaedu‚
STa& SavR>aUTaôdYa& MauiNaMaaNaTaae_iSMa )) 2 ))
süta uväca
yaà pravrajantam anupetam apeta-kåtyaà
dvaipäyano viraha-kätara äjuhäva
putreti tan-mayatayä taravo ’bhinedus
taà sarva-bhüta-hådayaà munim änato ’smi
SYNONYMS
sütaù—Süta Gosvämé; uväca—said; yam—whom; pravrajantam—while going
away for the renounced order of life; anupetam—without being reformed by
the sacred thread; apeta—not undergoing ceremonies; kåtyam—prescribed
duties; dvaipäyanaù—Vyäsadeva; viraha—separation; kätaraù—being afraid
of; äjuhäva—exclaimed; putra iti—O my son; tat-mayatayä—being absorbed in
that way; taravaù—all the trees; abhineduù—responded; tam—unto him;
sarva—all; bhüta—living entities; hådayam—heart; munim—sage; änataù
asmi—offer obeisances.
TRANSLATION
Çréla Süta Gosvämé said: Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto that
great sage [Çukadeva Gosvämé] who can enter the hearts of all. When he went
away to take up the renounced order of life [sannyäsa], leaving home without
undergoing reformation by the sacred thread or the ceremonies observed by the
higher castes, his father, Vyäsadeva, fearing separation from him, cried out, “O
my son!” Indeed, only the trees, which were absorbed in the same feelings of
separation, echoed in response to the begrieved father.
PURPORT
The institution of varëa and äçrama prescribes many regulative duties to be
observed by its followers. Such duties enjoin that a candidate willing to study
the Vedas must approach a bona fide spiritual master and request acceptance
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
as his disciple. The sacred thread is the sign of those who are competent to
study the Vedas from the äcärya, or the bona fide spiritual master. Çré
Çukadeva Gosvämé did not undergo such purificatory ceremonies because he
was a liberated soul from his very birth.
Generally, a man is born as an ordinary being, and by the purificatory
processes he is born for the second time. When he sees a new light and seeks
direction for spiritual progress, he approaches a spiritual master for instruction
in the Vedas. The spiritual master accepts only the sincere inquirer as his
disciple and gives him the sacred thread. In this way a man becomes
twice-born, or a dvija. After qualifying as a dvija one may study the Vedas, and
after becoming well versed in the Vedas one becomes a vipra. A vipra, or a
qualified brähmaëa, thus realizes the Absolute and makes further progress in
spiritual life until he reaches the Vaiñëava stage. The Vaiñëava stage is the
postgraduate status of a brähmaëa. A progressive brähmaëa must necessarily
become a Vaiñëava, for a Vaiñëava is a self-realized, learned brähmaëa.
Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé was a Vaiñëava from the beginning; therefore,
there was no need for him to undergo all the processes of the varëäçrama
institution. Ultimately the aim of varëäçrama-dharma is to turn a crude man
into a pure devotee of the Lord, or a Vaiñëava. Anyone, therefore, who
becomes a Vaiñëava accepted by the first-class Vaiñëava, or uttama-adhikäré
Vaiñëava, is already considered a brähmaëa, regardless of his birth or past
deeds. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu accepted this principle and recognized Çréla
Haridäsa Öhäkura as the äcärya of the holy name, although Öhäkura Haridäsa
appeared in a Mohammedan family. In conclusion, Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé
was born a Vaiñëava, and, therefore, brahminism was included in him. He did
not have to undergo any ceremonies. Any lowborn person—be he a Kiräta,
Hüëa, Ändhra, Pulinda, Pulkaça, Äbhéra, Çumbha, Yavana, Khasa or even
lower—can be delivered to the highest transcendental position by the mercy
of Vaiñëavas. Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé was the spiritual master of Çré Süta
Gosvämé, who therefore offers his respectful obeisances unto Çréla Çukadeva
Gosvämé before he begins his answers to the questions of the sages at
Naimiñäraëya.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 3
Ya" SvaNau>aavMai%l/é[uiTaSaarMaek-‚
MaDYaaTMadqPaMaiTaiTaTaqzRTaa& TaMaae_NDaMa( )
Sa&Saair<aa& k-å<aYaah Paura<aGauù&
Ta& VYaaSaSaUNauMauPaYaaiMa Gauå& MauNaqNaaMa( )) 3 ))
yaù svänubhävam akhila-çruti-säram ekam
adhyätma-dépam atititérñatäà tamo ’ndham
saàsäriëäà karuëayäha puräëa-guhyaà
taà vyäsa-sünum upayämi guruà munénäm
SYNONYMS
yaù—he who; sva-anubhävam—self-assimilated (experienced); akhila—all
around; çruti—the Vedas; säram—cream; ekam—the only one;
adhyätma—transcendental; dépam—torchlight; atititérñatäm—desiring to
overcome; tamaù andham—deeply dark material existence; saàsäriëäm—of
the materialistic men; karuëayä—out of causeless mercy; äha—said;
puräëa—supplement to the Vedas; guhyam—very confidential; tam—unto
him; vyäsa-sünum—the son of Vyäsadeva; upayämi—let me offer my
obeisances; gurum—the spiritual master; munénäm—of the great sages.
TRANSLATION
Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto him [Çuka], the spiritual master
of all sages, the son of Vyäsadeva, who, out of his great compassion for those
gross materialists who struggle to cross over the darkest regions of material
existence, spoke this most confidential supplement to the cream of Vedic
knowledge, after having personally assimilated it by experience.
PURPORT
In this prayer, Çréla Süta Gosvämé practically summarizes the complete
introduction of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the natural
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
supplementary commentary on the Vedänta-sütras. The Vedänta-sütras, or the
Brahma-sütras, were compiled by Vyäsadeva with a view to presenting just the
cream of Vedic knowledge. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the natural commentary on
this cream. Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé was a thoroughly realized master on the
Vedänta-sütra, and consequently he also personally realized the commentary,
Çrémad-Bhägavatam. And just to show his boundless mercy upon bewildered
materialistic men who want to cross completely over nescience, he recited for
the first time this confidential knowledge.
There is no point in arguing that a materialistic man can be happy. No
materialistic creature—be he the great Brahmä or an insignificant ant—can
be happy. Everyone tries to make a permanent plan for happiness, but
everyone is baffled by the laws of material nature. Therefore the materialistic
world is called the darkest region of God’s creation. Yet the unhappy
materialists can get out of it simply by desiring to get out. Unfortunately they
are so foolish that they do not want to escape. Therefore they are compared to
the camel who relishes thorny twigs because he likes the taste of the twigs
mixed with blood. He does not realize that it is his own blood and that his
tongue is being cut by the thorns. Similarly, to the materialist his own blood is
as sweet as honey, and although he is always harassed by his own material
creations, he does not wish to escape. Such materialists are called karmés. Out
of hundreds of thousands of karmés, only a few may feel tired of material
engagement and desire to get out of the labyrinth. Such intelligent persons are
called jïänés. The Vedänta-sütra is directed to such jïänés. But Çréla Vyäsadeva,
being the incarnation of the Supreme Lord, could foresee the misuse of the
Vedänta-sütra by unscrupulous men, and, therefore, he personally
supplemented the Vedänta-sütra with the Bhägavata Puräëa. It is clearly said
that this Bhägavatam is the original commentary on the Brahma-sütras. Çréla
Vyäsadeva also instructed the Bhägavatam to his own son, Çréla Çukadeva
Gosvämé, who was already at the liberated stage of transcendence. Çréla
Çukadeva realized it personally and then explained it. By the mercy of Çréla
Çukadeva, the Bhägavata-vedänta-sütra is available for all those sincere souls
who want to get out of material existence.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the one unrivaled commentary on Vedänta-sütra.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Çrépäda Çaìkaräcärya intentionally did not touch it because he knew that the
natural commentary would be difficult for him to surpass. He wrote his
Çäréraka-bhäñya, and his so-called followers deprecated the Bhägavatam as
some “new” presentation. One should not be misled by such propaganda
directed against the Bhägavatam by the Mäyäväda school. From this
introductory çloka, the beginning student should know that
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the only transcendental literature meant for those who
are paramahaàsas and completely freed from the material disease called
malice. The Mäyävädés are envious of the Personality of Godhead despite
Çrépäda Çaìkaräcärya’s admission that Näräyaëa, the Personality of Godhead,
is above the material creation. The envious Mäyävädé cannot have access to
the Bhägavatam, but those who are really anxious to get out of this material
existence may take shelter of this Bhägavatam because it is uttered by the
liberated Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé. It is the transcendental torchlight by which
one can see perfectly the transcendental Absolute Truth realized as Brahman,
Paramätmä and Bhagavän.
TEXT 4
NaaraYa<a& NaMaSk*-TYa Nar& cEv NaraetaMaMa( )
devq& SarSvTaq& VYaaSa& TaTaae JaYaMaudqrYaeTa( )) 4 ))
näräyaëaà namaskåtya
naraà caiva narottamam
devéà sarasvatéà vyäsaà
tato jayam udérayet
SYNONYMS
näräyaëam—the Personality of Godhead; namaù-kåtya—after offering
respectful obeisances; naram ca eva—and Näräyaëa Åñi; nara-uttamam—the
supermost human being; devém—the goddess; sarasvatém—the mistress of
learning; vyäsam—Vyäsadeva; tataù—thereafter; jayam—all that is meant for
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
conquering; udérayet—be announced.
TRANSLATION
Before reciting this Çrémad-Bhägavatam, which is the very means of
conquest, one should offer respectful obeisances unto the Personality of
Godhead, Näräyaëa, unto Nara-näräyaëa Åñi, the supermost human being, unto
mother Sarasvaté, the goddess of learning, and unto Çréla Vyäsadeva, the author.
PURPORT
All the Vedic literatures and the Puräëas are meant for conquering the
darkest region of material existence. The living being is in the state of
forgetfulness of his relation with God due to his being overly attracted to
material sense gratification from time immemorial. His struggle for existence
in the material world is perpetual, and it is not possible for him to get out of it
by making plans. If he at all wants to conquer this perpetual struggle for
existence, he must reestablish his eternal relation with God. And one who
wants to adopt such remedial measures must take shelter of literatures such as
the Vedas and the Puräëas. Foolish people say that the Puräëas have no
connection with the Vedas. However, the Puräëas are supplementary
explanations of the Vedas intended for different types of men. All men are not
equal. There are men who are conducted by the mode of goodness, others who
are under the mode of passion and others who are under the mode of
ignorance. The Puräëas are so divided that any class of men can take
advantage of them and gradually regain their lost position and get out of the
hard struggle for existence. Çréla Süta Gosvämé shows the way of chanting the
Puräëas. This may be followed by persons who aspire to be preachers of the
Vedic literatures and the Puräëas. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the spotless Puräëa,
and it is especially meant for those who desire to get out of the material
entanglement permanently.
TEXT 5
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
MauNaYa" SaaDau Pa*íae_h& >aviÙl/aeRk-Ma®l/Ma( )
YaTk*-Ta" k*-Z<aSaMPa[énae YaeNaaTMaa SauPa[SaqdiTa )) 5 ))
munayaù sädhu påñöo ’haà
bhavadbhir loka-maìgalam
yat kåtaù kåñëa-sampraçno
yenätmä suprasédati
SYNONYMS
munayaù—O sages; sädhu—this is relevant; påñöaù—questioned;
aham—myself; bhavadbhiù—by all of you; loka—the world;
maìgalam—welfare; yat—because; kåtaù—made; kåñëa—the Personality of
Godhead; sampraçnaù—relevant question; yena—by which; ätmä—self;
suprasédati—completely pleased.
TRANSLATION
O sages, I have been justly questioned by you. Your questions are worthy
because they relate to Lord Kåñëa and so are of relevance to the world’s welfare.
Only questions of this sort are capable of completely satisfying the self.
PURPORT
Since it has been stated hereinbefore that in the Bhägavatam the Absolute
Truth is to be known, the questions of the sages of Naimiñäraëya are proper
and just, because they pertain to Kåñëa, who is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the Absolute Truth. In Bhagavad-gétä (15.15) the Personality of
Godhead says that in all the Vedas there is nothing but the urge for searching
after Him, Lord Kåñëa. Thus the questions that pertain to Kåñëa are the sum
and substance of all the Vedic inquiries.
The whole world is full of questions and answers. The birds, beasts and men
are all busy in the matter of perpetual questions and answers. In the morning
the birds in the nest become busy with questions and answers, and in the
evening also the same birds come back and again become busy with questions
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
and answers. The human being, unless he is fast asleep at night, is busy with
questions and answers. The businessmen in the market are busy with questions
and answers, and so also the lawyers in the court and the students in the
schools and colleges. The legislators in the parliament are also busy with
questions and answers, and the politicians and the press representatives are all
busy with questions and answers. Although they go on making such questions
and answers for their whole lives, they are not at all satisfied. Satisfaction of
the soul can only be obtained by questions and answers on the subject of
Kåñëa.
Kåñëa is our most intimate master, friend, father or son and object of
conjugal love. Forgetting Kåñëa, we have created so many objects of questions
and answers, but none of them are able to give us complete satisfaction. All
things—but Kåñëa—give temporary satisfaction only, so if we are to have
complete satisfaction we must take to the questions and answers about Kåñëa.
We cannot live for a moment without being questioned or without giving
answers. Because the Çrémad-Bhägavatam deals with questions and answers
that are related to Kåñëa, we can derive the highest satisfaction only by
reading and hearing this transcendental literature. One should learn the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam and make an all-around solution to all problems
pertaining to social, political or religious matters. Çrémad-Bhägavatam and
Kåñëa are the sum total of all things.
TEXT 6
Sa vE Pau&Saa& Parae DaMaaeR YaTaae >ai¢-rDaae+aJae )
AhETauKYaPa[iTahTaa YaYaaTMaa SauPa[SaqdiTa )) 6 ))
sa vai puàsäà paro dharmo
yato bhaktir adhokñaje
ahaituky apratihatä
yayätmä suprasédati
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
saù—that; vai—certainly; puàsäm—for mankind; paraù—sublime;
dharmaù—occupation; yataù—by which; bhaktiù—devotional service;
adhokñaje—unto the Transcendence; ahaituké—causeless;
apratihatä—unbroken; yayä—by which; ätmä—the self;
suprasédati—completely satisfied.
TRANSLATION
The supreme occupation [dharma] for all humanity is that by which men can
attain to loving devotional service unto the transcendent Lord. Such devotional
service must be unmotivated and uninterrupted to completely satisfy the self.
PURPORT
In this statement, Çré Süta Gosvämé answers the first question of the sages
of Naimiñäraëya. The sages asked him to summarize the whole range of
revealed scriptures and present the most essential part so that fallen people or
the people in general might easily take it up. The Vedas prescribe two different
types of occupation for the human being. One is called the pravåtti-märga, or
the path of sense enjoyment, and the other is called the nivåtti-märga, or the
path of renunciation. The path of enjoyment is inferior, and the path of
sacrifice for the supreme cause is superior. The material existence of the living
being is a diseased condition of actual life. Actual life is spiritual existence, or
brahma-bhüta existence, where life is eternal, blissful and full of knowledge.
Material existence is temporary, illusory and full of miseries. There is no
happiness at all. There is just the futile attempt to get rid of the miseries, and
temporary cessation of misery is falsely called happiness. Therefore, the path of
progressive material enjoyment, which is temporary, miserable and illusory, is
inferior. But devotional service to the Supreme Lord, which leads one to
eternal, blissful and all-cognizant life, is called the superior quality of
occupation. This is sometimes polluted when mixed with the inferior quality.
For example, adoption of devotional service for material gain is certainly an
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
obstruction to the progressive path of renunciation. Renunciation or
abnegation for ultimate good is certainly a better occupation than enjoyment
in the diseased condition of life. Such enjoyment only aggravates the
symptoms of disease and increases its duration. Therefore devotional service to
the Lord must be pure in quality, i.e., without the least desire for material
enjoyment. One should, therefore, accept the superior quality of occupation in
the form of the devotional service of the Lord without any tinge of
unnecessary desire, fruitive action and philosophical speculation. This alone
can lead one to perpetual solace in His service.
We have purposely denoted dharma as occupation because the root
meaning of the word dharma is “that which sustains one’s existence.” A living
being’s sustenance of existence is to coordinate his activities with his eternal
relation with the Supreme Lord Kåñëa. Kåñëa is the central pivot of living
beings, and He is the all-attractive living entity or eternal form amongst all
other living beings or eternal forms. Each and every living being has his
eternal form in the spiritual existence, and Kåñëa is the eternal attraction for
all of them. Kåñëa is the complete whole, and everything else is His part and
parcel. The relation is one of the servant and the served. It is transcendental
and is completely distinct from our experience in material existence. This
relation of servant and the served is the most congenial form of intimacy. One
can realize it as devotional service progresses. Everyone should engage himself
in that transcendental loving service of the Lord, even in the present
conditional state of material existence. That will gradually give one the clue to
actual life and please him to complete satisfaction.
TEXT 7
vaSaudeve >aGaviTa >ai¢-YaaeGa" Pa[YaaeiJaTa" )
JaNaYaTYaaéu vEraGYa& jaNa& c YadhETauk-Ma( )) 7 ))
väsudeve bhagavati
bhakti-yogaù prayojitaù
janayaty äçu vairägyaà
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
jïänaà ca yad ahaitukam
SYNONYMS
väsudeve—unto Kåñëa; bhagavati—unto the Personality of Godhead;
bhakti-yogaù—contact of devotional service; prayojitaù—being applied;
janayati—does produce; äçu—very soon; vairägyam—detachment;
jïänam—knowledge; ca—and; yat—that which; ahaitukam—causeless.
TRANSLATION
By rendering devotional service unto the Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa,
one immediately acquires causeless knowledge and detachment from the world.
PURPORT
Those who consider devotional service to the Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa to be
something like material emotional affairs may argue that in the revealed
scriptures, sacrifice, charity, austerity, knowledge, mystic powers and similar
other processes of transcendental realization are recommended. According to
them, bhakti, or the devotional service of the Lord, is meant for those who
cannot perform the high-grade activities. Generally it is said that the bhakti
cult is meant for the çüdras, vaiçyas and the less intelligent woman class. But
that is not the actual fact. The bhakti cult is the topmost of all transcendental
activities, and therefore it is simultaneously sublime and easy. It is sublime for
the pure devotees who are serious about getting in contact with the Supreme
Lord, and it is easy for the neophytes who are just on the threshold of the
house of bhakti. To achieve the contact of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead Çré Kåñëa is a great science, and it is open for all living beings,
including the çüdras, vaiçyas, women and even those lower than the lowborn
çüdras, so what to speak of the high-class men like the qualified brähmaëas and
the great self-realized kings. The other high-grade activities designated as
sacrifice, charity, austerity, etc., are all corollary factors following the pure and
scientific bhakti cult.
The principles of knowledge and detachment are two important factors on
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the path of transcendental realization. The whole spiritual process leads to
perfect knowledge of everything material and spiritual, and the results of such
perfect knowledge are that one becomes detached from material affection and
becomes attached to spiritual activities. Becoming detached from material
things does not mean becoming inert altogether, as men with a poor fund of
knowledge think. Naiñkarma means not undertaking activities that will
produce good or bad effects. Negation does not mean negation of the positive.
Negation of the nonessentials does not meant negation of the essential.
Similarly, detachment from material forms does not mean nullifying the
positive form. The bhakti cult is meant for realization of the positive form.
When the positive form is realized, the negative forms are automatically
eliminated. Therefore, with the development of the bhakti cult, with the
application of positive service to the positive form, one naturally becomes
detached from inferior things, and he becomes attached to superior things.
Similarly, the bhakti cult, being the supermost occupation of the living being,
leads him out of material sense enjoyment. That is the sign of a pure devotee.
He is not a fool, nor is he engaged in the inferior energies, nor does he have
material values. This is not possible by dry reasoning. It actually happens by
the grace of the Almighty. In conclusion, one who is a pure devotee has all
other good qualities, namely knowledge, detachment, etc., but one who has
only knowledge or detachment is not necessarily well acquainted with the
principles of the bhakti cult. Bhakti is the supermost occupation of the human
being.
TEXT 8
DaMaR" SvNauiïTa" Pau&Saa& ivZvKSaeNak-QaaSau Ya" )
NaaeTPaadYaeÛid riTa& é[Ma Wv ih ke-vl/Ma( )) 8 ))
dharmaù svanuñöhitaù puàsäà
viñvaksena-kathäsu yaù
notpädayed yadi ratià
çrama eva hi kevalam
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
dharmaù—occupation; svanuñöhitaù—executed in terms of one’s own position;
puàsäm—of humankind; viñvaksena—the Personality of Godhead (plenary
portion); kathäsu—in the message of; yaù—what is; na—not; utpädayet—does
produce; yadi—if; ratim—attraction; çramaù—useless labor; eva—only;
hi—certainly; kevalam—entirely.
TRANSLATION
The occupational activities a man performs according to his own position are
only so much useless labor if they do not provoke attraction for the message of
the Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
There are different occupational activities in terms of man’s different
conceptions of life. To the gross materialist who cannot see anything beyond
the gross material body, there is nothing beyond the senses. Therefore his
occupational activities are limited to concentrated and extended selfishness.
Concentrated selfishness centers around the personal body—this is generally
seen amongst the lower animals. Extended selfishness is manifested in human
society and centers around the family, society, community, nation and world
with a view to gross bodily comfort. Above these gross materialists are the
mental speculators who hover aloft in the mental spheres, and their
occupational duties involve making poetry and philosophy or propagating
some ism with the same aim of selfishness limited to the body and the mind.
But above the body and mind is the dormant spirit soul whose absence from
the body makes the whole range of bodily and mental selfishness completely
null and void. But less intelligent people have no information of the needs of
the spirit soul.
Because foolish people have no information of the soul and how it is beyond
the purview of the body and mind, they are not satisfied in the performance of
their occupational duties. The question of the satisfaction of the self is raised
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
herein. The self is beyond the gross body and subtle mind. He is the potent
active principle of the body and mind. Without knowing the need of the
dormant soul, one cannot be happy simply with emolument of the body and
mind. The body and the mind are but superfluous outer coverings of the spirit
soul. The spirit soul’s needs must be fulfilled. Simply by cleansing the cage of
the bird, one does not satisfy the bird. One must actually know the needs of
the bird himself.
The need of the spirit soul is that he wants to get out of the limited sphere
of material bondage and fulfill his desire for complete freedom. He wants to get
out of the covered walls of the greater universe. He wants to see the free light
and the spirit. That complete freedom is achieved when he meets the complete
spirit, the Personality of Godhead. There is a dormant affection for God
within everyone; spiritual existence is manifested through the gross body and
mind in the form of perverted affection for gross and subtle matter. Therefore
we have to engage ourselves in occupational engagements that will evoke our
divine consciousness. This is possible only by hearing and chanting the divine
activities of the Supreme Lord, and any occupational activity which does not
help one to achieve attachment for hearing and chanting the transcendental
message of Godhead is said herein to be simply a waste of time. This is because
other occupational duties (whatever ism they may belong to) cannot give
liberation to the soul. Even the activities of the salvationists are considered to
be useless because of their failure to pick up the fountainhead of all liberties.
The gross materialist can practically see that his material gain is limited only
to time and space, either in this world or in the other. Even if he goes up to the
Svargaloka, he will find no permanent abode for his hankering soul. The
hankering soul must be satisfied by the perfect scientific process of perfect
devotional service.
TEXT 9
DaMaRSYa ùaPavGYaRSYa NaaQaaeR_QaaRYaaePak-LPaTae )
NaaQaRSYa DaMaOEk-aNTaSYa k-aMaae l/a>aaYa ih SMa*Ta" )) 9 ))
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
dharmasya hy äpavargyasya
närtho ’rthäyopakalpate
närthasya dharmaikäntasya
kämo läbhäya hi småtaù
SYNONYMS
dharmasya—occupational engagement; hi—certainly; äpavargyasya—ultimate
liberation; na—not; arthaù—end; arthäya—for material gain; upakalpate—is
meant for; na—neither; arthasya—of material gain; dharma-eka-antasya—for
one who is engaged in the ultimate occupational service; kämaù—sense
gratification; läbhäya—attainment of; hi—exactly; småtaù—is described by the
great sages.
TRANSLATION
All occupational engagements are certainly meant for ultimate liberation.
They should never be performed for material gain. Furthermore, according to
sages, one who is engaged in the ultimate occupational service should never use
material gain to cultivate sense gratification.
PURPORT
We have already discussed that pure devotional service to the Lord is
automatically followed by perfect knowledge and detachment from material
existence. But there are others who consider that all kinds of different
occupational engagements, including those of religion, are meant for material
gain. The general tendency of any ordinary man in any part of the world is to
gain some material profit in exchange for religious or any other occupational
service. Even in the Vedic literatures, for all sorts of religious performances an
allurement of material gain is offered, and most people are attracted by such
allurements or blessings of religiosity. Why are such so-called men of religion
allured by material gain? Because material gain can enable one to fulfill desires,
which in turn satisfy sense gratification. This cycle of occupational
engagements includes so-called religiosity followed by material gain and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
material gain followed by fulfillment of desires. Sense gratification is the
general way for all sorts of fully occupied men. But in the statement of Süta
Gosvämé, as per the verdict of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, this is nullified by the
present çloka.
One should not engage himself in any sort of occupational service for
material gain only. Nor should material gain be utilized for sense gratification.
How material gain should be utilized is described as follows.
TEXT 10
k-aMaSYa NaeiNd]YaPa[qiTal/aR>aae JaqveTa YaavTaa )
JaqvSYa TatviJajaSaa NaaQaaeR Yaêeh k-MaRi>a" )) 10 ))
kämasya nendriya-prétir
läbho jéveta yävatä
jévasya tattva-jijïäsä
närtho yaç ceha karmabhiù
SYNONYMS
kämasya—of desires; na—not; indriya—senses; prétiù—satisfaction;
läbhaù—gain; jéveta—self-preservation; yävatä—so much so; jévasya—of the
living being; tattva—the Absolute Truth; jijïäsä—inquiries; na—not;
arthaù—end; yaù ca iha—whatsoever else; karmabhiù—by occupational
activities.
TRANSLATION
Life’s desires should never be directed toward sense gratification. One should
desire only a healthy life, or self-preservation, since a human being is meant for
inquiry about the Absolute Truth. Nothing else should be the goal of one’s
works.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The completely bewildered material civilization is wrongly directed towards
the fulfillment of desires in sense gratification. In such civilization, in all
spheres of life, the ultimate end is sense gratification. In politics, social service,
altruism, philanthropy and ultimately in religion or even in salvation, the very
same tint of sense gratification is ever-increasingly predominant. In the
political field the leaders of men fight with one another to fulfill their personal
sense gratification. The voters adore the so-called leaders only when they
promise sense gratification. As soon as the voters are dissatisfied in their own
sense satisfaction, they dethrone the leaders, The leaders must always
disappoint the voters by not satisfying their senses. The same is applicable in
all other fields; no one is serious about the problems of life. Even those who are
on the path of salvation desire to become one with the Absolute Truth and
desire to commit spiritual suicide for sense gratification. But the Bhägavatam
says that one should not live for sense gratification. One should satisfy the
senses only insomuch as required for self-preservation, and not for sense
gratification. Because the body is made of senses, which also require a certain
amount of satisfaction, there are regulative directions for satisfaction of such
senses. But the senses are not meant for unrestricted enjoyment. For example,
marriage or the combination of a man with a woman is necessary for progeny,
but it is not meant for sense enjoyment. In the absence of voluntary restraint,
there is propaganda for family planning, but foolish men do not know that
family planning is automatically executed as soon as there is search after the
Absolute Truth. Seekers of the Absolute Truth are never allured by
unnecessary engagements in sense gratification because the serious students
seeking the Absolute Truth are always overwhelmed with the work of
researching the Truth. In every sphere of life, therefore, the ultimate end must
be seeking after the Absolute Truth, and that sort of engagement will make
one happy because he will be less engaged in varieties of sense gratification.
And what that Absolute Truth is is explained as follows.
TEXT 11
vdiNTa TatatvivdSTatv& YaJjaNaMaÜYaMa( )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
b]øeiTa ParMaaTMaeiTa >aGavaiNaiTa XaBÛTae )) 11 ))
vadanti tat tattva-vidas
tattvaà yaj jïänam advayam
brahmeti paramätmeti
bhagavän iti çabdyate
SYNONYMS
vadanti—they say; tat—that; tattva-vidaù—the learned souls; tattvam—the
Absolute Truth; yat—which; jïänam—knowledge; advayam—nondual;
brahma iti—known as Brahman; paramätmä iti—known as Paramätmä;
bhagavän iti—known as Bhagavän; çabdyate—it so sounded.
TRANSLATION
Learned transcendentalists who know the Absolute Truth call this nondual
substance Brahman, Paramätmä or Bhagavän.
PURPORT
The Absolute Truth is both subject and object, and there is no qualitative
difference there. Therefore, Brahman, Paramätmä and Bhagavän are
qualitatively one and the same. The same substance is realized as impersonal
Brahman by the students of the Upaniñads, as localized Paramätmä by the
Hiraëyagarbhas or the yogés, and as Bhagavän by the devotees. In other words,
Bhagavän, or the Personality of Godhead, is the last word of the Absolute
Truth. Paramätmä is the partial representation of the Personality of Godhead,
and impersonal Brahman is the glowing effulgence of the Personality of
Godhead, as the sun rays are to the sun-god. Less intelligent students of either
of the above schools sometimes argue in favor of their own respective
realization, but those who are perfect seers of the Absolute Truth know well
that the above three features of the one Absolute Truth are different
perspective views seen from different angles of vision.
As it is explained in the first çloka of the First Chapter of the Bhägavatam,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the Supreme Truth is self-sufficient, cognizant and free from the illusion of
relativity. In the relative world the knower is different from the known, but in
the Absolute Truth both the knower and the known are one and the same
thing. In the relative world the knower is the living spirit or superior energy,
whereas the known is inert matter or inferior energy. Therefore, there is a
duality of inferior and superior energy, whereas in the absolute realm both the
knower and the known are of the same superior energy. There are three kinds
of energies of the supreme energetic. There is no difference between the
energy and energetic, but there is a difference of quality of energies. The
absolute realm and the living entities are of the same superior energy, but the
material world is inferior energy. The living being in contact with the inferior
energy is illusioned, thinking he belongs to the inferior energy. Therefore
there is the sense of relativity in the material world. In the Absolute there is
no such sense of difference between the knower and the known, and therefore
everything there is absolute.
TEXT 12
TaC^\ÕDaaNaa MauNaYaae jaNavEraGYaYau¢-Yaa )
PaXYaNTYaaTMaiNa caTMaaNa& >a¢-ya é[uTaGa*hqTaYaa )) 12 ))
tac chraddadhänä munayo
jïäna-vairägya-yuktayä
paçyanty ätmani cätmänaà
bhaktyä çruta-gåhétayä
SYNONYMS
tat—that; çraddadhänäù—seriously inquisitive; munayaù—sages;
jïäna—knowledge; vairägya—detachment; yuktayä—well equipped with;
paçyanti—see; ätmani—within himself; ca—and; ätmänam—the Paramätmä;
bhaktyä—in devotional service; çruta—the Vedas; gåhétayä—well received.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The seriously inquisitive student or sage, well equipped with knowledge and
detachment, realizes that Absolute Truth by rendering devotional service in
terms of what he has heard from the Vedänta-çruti.
PURPORT
The Absolute Truth is realized in full by the process of devotional service to
the Lord, Väsudeva, or the Personality of Godhead, who is the full-fledged
Absolute Truth. Brahman is His transcendental bodily effulgence, and
Paramätmä is His partial representation. As such, Brahman or Paramätmä
realization of the Absolute Truth is but a partial realization. There are four
different types of human beings—the karmés, the jïänés, the yogés and the
devotees. The karmés are materialistic, whereas the other three are
transcendental. The first-class transcendentalists are the devotees who have
realized the Supreme Person. The second-class transcendentalists are those
who have partially realized the plenary portion of the absolute person. And the
third-class transcendentalists are those who have barely realized the spiritual
focus of the absolute person. As stated in the Bhagavad-gétä and other Vedic
literatures, the Supreme Person is realized by devotional service, which is
backed by full knowledge and detachment from material association. We have
already discussed the point that devotional service is followed by knowledge
and detachment from material association. As Brahman and Paramätmä
realization are imperfect realizations of the Absolute Truth, so the means of
realizing Brahman and Paramätmä, i.e., the paths of jïäna and yoga, are also
imperfect means of realizing the Absolute Truth. Devotional service, which is
based on the foreground of full knowledge combined with detachment from
material association and which is fixed by the aural reception of the
Vedänta-çruti, is the only perfect method by which the seriously inquisitive
student can realize the Absolute Truth. Devotional service is not, therefore,
meant for the less intelligent class of transcendentalist. There are three classes
of devotees, namely first, second, and third class. The third-class devotees, or
the neophytes, who have no knowledge and are not detached from material
association, but who are simply attracted by the preliminary process of
worshiping the Deity in the temple, are called material devotees. Material
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
devotees are more attached to material benefit than transcendental profit.
Therefore, one has to make definite progress from the position of material
devotional service to the second-class devotional position. In the second-class
position, the devotee can see four principles in the devotional line, namely the
Personality of Godhead, His devotees, the ignorant and the envious. One has
to raise himself at least to the stage of a second-class devotee and thus become
eligible to know the Absolute Truth.
A third-class devotee, therefore, has to receive the instructions of
devotional service from the authoritative sources of Bhägavata. The number
one Bhägavata is the established personality of devotee, and the other
Bhägavatam is the message of Godhead. The third-class devotee therefore has
to go to the personality of devotee in order to learn the instructions of
devotional service. Such a personality of devotee is not a professional man who
earns his livelihood by the business of Bhägavatam. Such a devotee must be a
representative of Çukadeva Gosvämé, like Süta Gosvämé, and must preach the
cult of devotional service for the all-around benefit of all people. A neophyte
devotee has very little taste for hearing from the authorities. Such a neophyte
devotee makes a show of hearing from the professional man to satisfy his
senses. This sort of hearing and chanting has spoiled the whole thing, so one
should be very careful about the faulty process. The holy messages of Godhead,
as inculcated in the Bhagavad-gétä or in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, are
undoubtedly transcendental subjects, but even though they are so, such
transcendental matters are not to be received from the professional man, who
spoils them as the serpent spoils milk simply by the touch of his tongue.
A sincere devotee must, therefore, be prepared to hear the Vedic literature
like the Upaniñads, Vedänta and other literatures left by the previous
authorities or Gosvämés, for the benefit of his progress. Without hearing such
literatures, one cannot make actual progress. And without hearing and
following the instructions, the show of devotional service becomes worthless
and therefore a sort of disturbance in the path of devotional service. Unless,
therefore, devotional service is established on the principles of çruti, småti,
puräëa or païcarätra authorities, the make-show of devotional service should
at once be rejected. An unauthorized devotee should never be recognized as a
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
pure devotee. By assimilation of such messages from the Vedic literatures, one
can see the all-pervading localized aspect of the Personality of Godhead within
his own self constantly. This is called samädhi.
TEXT 13
ATa" PauiM>aiÜRJaé[eïa v<aaRé[Maiv>aaGaXa" )
SvNauiïTaSYa DaMaRSYa Sa&iSaiÖhRirTaaez<aMa( )) 13 ))
ataù pumbhir dvija-çreñöhä
varëäçrama-vibhägaçaù
svanuñöhitasya dharmasya
saàsiddhir hari-toñaëam
SYNONYMS
ataù—so; pumbhiù—by the human being; dvija-çreñöhäù—O best among the
twice-born; varëa-äçrama—the institution of four castes and four orders of
life; vibhägaçaù—by the division of; svanuñöhitasya—of one’s own prescribed
duties; dharmasya—occupational; saàsiddhiù—the highest perfection;
hari—the Personality of Godhead; toñaëam—pleasing.
TRANSLATION
O best among the twice-born, it is therefore concluded that the highest
perfection one can achieve by discharging the duties prescribed for one’s own
occupation according to caste divisions and orders of life is to please the
Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
Human society all over the world is divided into four castes and four orders
of life. The four castes are the intelligent caste, the martial caste, the
productive caste and the laborer caste. These castes are classified in terms of
one’s work and qualification and not by birth. Then again there are four orders
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
of life, namely the student life, the householder’s life, the retired and the
devotional life. In the best interest of human society there must be such
divisions of life, otherwise no social institution can grow in a healthy state.
And in each and every one of the abovementioned divisions of life, the aim
must be to please the supreme authority of the Personality of Godhead. This
institutional function of human society is known as the system of
varëäçrama-dharma, which is quite natural for the civilized life. The
varëäçrama institution is constructed to enable one to realize the Absolute
Truth. It is not for artificial domination of one division over another. When
the aim of life, i.e., realization of the Absolute Truth, is missed by too much
attachment for indriya-préti, or sense gratification, as already discussed
hereinbefore, the institution of the varëäçrama is utilized by selfish men to
pose an artificial predominance over the weaker section. In the Kali-yuga, or
in the age of quarrel, this artificial predominance is already current, but the
saner section of the people know it well that the divisions of castes and orders
of life are meant for smooth social intercourse and high-thinking
self-realization and not for any other purpose.
Herein the statement of Bhägavatam is that the highest aim of life or the
highest perfection of the institution of the varëäçrama-dharma is to cooperate
jointly for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord. This is also confirmed in the
Bhagavad-gétä (4.13).
TEXT 14
TaSMaadeke-Na MaNaSaa >aGavaNa( SaaTvTaa& PaiTa" )
é[aeTaVYa" k-IiTaRTaVYaê DYaeYa" PaUJYaê iNaTYada )) 14 ))
tasmäd ekena manasä
bhagavän sätvatäà patiù
çrotavyaù kértitavyaç ca
dhyeyaù püjyaç ca nityadä
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; ekena—by one; manasä—attention of the mind;
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; sätvatäm—of the devotees;
patiù—protector; çrotavyaù—is to be heard; kértitavyaù—to be glorified;
ca—and; dhyeyaù—to be remembered; püjyaù—to be worshiped; ca—and;
nityadä—constantly.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, with one-pointed attention, one should constantly hear about,
glorify, remember and worship the Personality of Godhead, who is the protector
of the devotees.
PURPORT
If realization of the Absolute Truth is the ultimate aim of life, it must be
carried out by all means. In any one of the above-mentioned castes and orders
of life, the four processes, namely glorifying, hearing, remembering and
worshiping, are general occupations. Without these principles of life, no one
can exist. Activities of the living being involve engagements in these four
different principles of life. Especially in modern society, all activities are more
or less dependent on hearing and glorifying. Any man from any social status
becomes a well-known man in human society within a very short time if he is
simply glorified truly or falsely in the daily newspapers. Sometimes political
leaders of a particular party are also advertised by newspaper propaganda, and
by such a method of glorification an insignificant man becomes an important
man—within no time. But such propaganda by false glorification of an
unqualified person cannot bring about any good, either for the particular man
or for the society. There may be some temporary reactions to such propaganda,
but there are no permanent effects. Therefore such activities are a waste of
time. The actual object of glorification is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who has created everything manifested before us. We have broadly discussed
this fact from the beginning of the “janmädy asya” [SB 1.1.1] çloka of this
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Bhägavatam. The tendency to glorify others or hear others must be turned to
the real object of glorification—the Supreme Being. And that will bring
happiness.
TEXT 15
YadNauDYaaiSaNaa Yau¢-a" k-MaRGa]iNQaiNabNDaNaMa( )
i^NdiNTa k-aeivdaSTaSYa k-ae Na ku-YaaRTk-QaariTaMa( )) 15 ))
yad-anudhyäsinä yuktäù
karma-granthi-nibandhanam
chindanti kovidäs tasya
ko na kuryät kathä-ratim
SYNONYMS
yat—which; anudhyä—remembrance; asinä—sword; yuktäù—being equipped
with; karma—reactionary work; granthi—knot; nibandhanam—interknit;
chindanti—cut; kovidäù—intelligent; tasya—His; kaù—who; na—not;
kuryät—shall do; kathä—messages; ratim—attention.
TRANSLATION
With sword in hand, intelligent men cut through the binding knots of
reactionary work [karma] by remembering the Personality of Godhead.
Therefore, who will not pay attention to His message?
PURPORT
The contact of the spiritual spark with material elements creates a knot
which must be cut if one wants to be liberated from the actions and reactions
of fruitive work. Liberation means freedom from the cycle of reactionary work.
This liberation automatically follows for one who constantly remembers the
transcendental pastimes of the Personality of Godhead. This is because all the
activities of the Supreme Lord (His lélä) are transcendental to the modes of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
material energy. They are all-attractive spiritual activities, and therefore
constant association with the spiritual activities of the Supreme Lord gradually
spiritualizes the conditioned soul and ultimately severs the knot of material
bondage.
Liberation from material bondage is, therefore, a by-product of devotional
service. Attainment of spiritual knowledge is not sufficient to insure
liberation. Such knowledge must be overcoated with devotional service so that
ultimately the devotional service alone predominates. Then liberation is made
possible. Even the reactionary work of the fruitive workers can lead one to
liberation when it is overcoated with devotional service. Karma overcoated
with devotional service is called karma-yoga. Similarly, empirical knowledge
overcoated with devotional service is called jïäna-yoga. But pure bhakti-yoga is
independent of such karma and jïäna because it alone can not only endow one
with liberation from conditional life but also award one the transcendental
loving service of the Lord.
Therefore, any sensible man who is above the average man with a poor fund
of knowledge must constantly remember the Personality of Godhead by
hearing about Him, by glorifying Him, by remembering Him and by worshiping
Him always, without cessation. That is the perfect way of devotional service.
The Gosvämés of Våndävana, who were authorized by Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu to preach the bhakti cult, rigidly followed this rule and made
immense literatures of transcendental science for our benefit. They have
chalked out ways for all classes of men in terms of the different castes and
orders of life in pursuance of the teachings of Çrémad-Bhägavatam and similar
other authoritative scriptures.
TEXT 16
éué[Uzae" é[ÕDaaNaSYa vaSaudevk-Qaaåic" )
SYaaNMahTSaevYaa ivPa[a" Pau<YaTaqQaRiNazev<aaTa( )) 16 ))
çuçrüñoù çraddadhänasya
väsudeva-kathä-ruciù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
syän mahat-sevayä vipräù
puëya-tértha-niñevaëät
SYNONYMS
çuçrüñoù—one who is engaged in hearing; çraddadhänasya—with care and
attention; väsudeva—in respect to Väsudeva; kathä—the message;
ruciù—affinity; syät—is made possible; mahat-sevayä—by service rendered to
pure devotees; vipräù—O twice-born; puëya-tértha—those who are cleansed of
all vice; niñevaëät—by service.
TRANSLATION
O twice-born sages, by serving those devotees who are completely freed from
all vice, great service is done. By such service, one gains affinity for hearing the
messages of Väsudeva.
PURPORT
The conditioned life of a living being is caused by his revolting against the
Lord. There are men called deva, or godly living beings, and there are men
called asuras, or demons, who are against the authority of the Supreme Lord.
In the Bhagavad-gétä (Sixteenth Chapter) a vivid description of the asuras is
given in which it is said that the asuras are put into lower and lower states of
ignorance life after life and so sink to the lower animal forms and have no
information of the Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead. These asuras
are gradually rectified to God consciousness by the mercy of the Lord’s
liberated servitors in different countries according to the supreme will. Such
devotees of God are very confidential associates of the Lord, and when they
come to save human society from the dangers of godlessness, they are known as
the powerful incarnations of the Lord, as sons of the Lord, as servants of the
Lord or as associates of the Lord. But none of them falsely claim to be God
themselves. This is a blasphemy declared by the asuras, and the demoniac
followers of such asuras also accept pretenders as God or His incarnation. In
the revealed scriptures there is definite information of the incarnation of God.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
No one should be accepted as God or an incarnation of God unless he is
confirmed by the revealed scriptures.
The servants of God are to be respected as God by the devotees who
actually want to go back to Godhead. Such servants of God are called
mahätmäs, or térthas, and they preach according to particular time and place.
The servants of God urge people to become devotees of the Lord. They never
tolerate being called God. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu was God Himself
according to the indication of the revealed scriptures, but He played the part
of a devotee. People who knew Him to be God addressed Him as God, but He
used to block His ears with His hands and chant the name of Lord Viñëu. He
strongly protested against being called God, although undoubtedly He was God
Himself. The Lord behaves so to warn us against unscrupulous men who take
pleasure in being addressed as God.
The servants of God come to propagate God consciousness, and intelligent
people should cooperate with them in every respect. By serving the servant of
God, one can please God more than by directly serving the Lord. The Lord is
more pleased when He sees that His servants are properly respected because
such servants risk everything for the service of the Lord and so are very dear to
the Lord. The Lord declares in the Bhagavad-gétä (18.69) that no one is dearer
to Him than one who risks everything to preach His glory. By serving the
servants of the Lord, one gradually gets the quality of such servants, and thus
one becomes qualified to hear the glories of God. The eagerness to hear about
God is the first qualification of a devotee eligible for entering the kingdom of
God.
TEXT 17
é*<vTaa& Svk-Qaa" k*-Z<a" Pau<Yaé[v<ak-ITaRNa" )
ôÛNTa" SQaae ù>ad]ai<a ivDauNaaeiTa SauôTSaTaaMa( )) 17 ))
çåëvatäà sva-kathäù kåñëaù
puëya-çravaëa-kértanaù
hådy antaù stho hy abhadräëi
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
vidhunoti suhåt satäm
SYNONYMS
çåëvatäm—those who have developed the urge to hear the message of;
sva-kathäù—His own words; kåñëaù—the Personality of Godhead;
puëya—virtues; çravaëa—hearing; kértanaù—chanting; hådi antaù
sthaù—within one’s heart; hi—certainly; abhadräëi—desire to enjoy matter;
vidhunoti—cleanses; suhåt—benefactor; satäm—of the truthful.
TRANSLATION
Çré Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead, who is the Paramätmä [Supersoul] in
everyone’s heart and the benefactor of the truthful devotee, cleanses desire for
material enjoyment from the heart of the devotee who has developed the urge to
hear His messages, which are in themselves virtuous when properly heard and
chanted.
PURPORT
Messages of the Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa are nondifferent from
Him. Whenever, therefore, offenseless hearing and glorification of God are
undertaken, it is to be understood that Lord Kåñëa is present there in the form
of transcendental sound, which is as powerful as the Lord personally. Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu, in His Çikñäñöaka, declares clearly that the holy name
of the Lord has all the potencies of the Lord and that He has endowed His
innumerable names with the same potency. There is no rigid fixture of time,
and anyone can chant the holy name with attention and reverence at his
convenience. The Lord is so kind to us that He can be present before us
personally in the form of transcendental sound, but unfortunately we have no
taste for hearing and glorifying the Lord’s name and activities. We have
already discussed developing a taste for hearing and chanting the holy sound.
It is done through the medium of service to the pure devotee of the Lord.
The Lord is reciprocally respondent to His devotees. When He sees that a
devotee is completely sincere in getting admittance to the transcendental
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
service of the Lord and has thus become eager to hear about Him, the Lord
acts from within the devotee in such a way that the devotee may easily go back
to Him. The Lord is more anxious to take us back into His kingdom than we
can desire. Most of us do not desire at all to go back to Godhead. Only a very
few men want to go back to Godhead. But anyone who desires to go back to
Godhead, Çré Kåñëa helps in all respects.
One cannot enter into the kingdom of God unless one is perfectly cleared
of all sins. The material sins are products of our desires to lord it over material
nature. It is very difficult to get rid of such desires. Women and wealth are
very difficult problems for the devotee making progress on the path back to
Godhead. Many stalwarts in the devotional line fell victim to these
allurements and thus retreated from the path of liberation. But when one is
helped by the Lord Himself, the whole process becomes as easy as anything by
the divine grace of the Lord.
To become restless in the contact of women and wealth is not an
astonishment, because every living being is associated with such things from
remote time, practically immemorial, and it takes time to recover from this
foreign nature. But if one is engaged in hearing the glories of the Lord,
gradually he realizes his real position. By the grace of God such a devotee gets
sufficient strength to defend himself from the state of disturbances, and
gradually all disturbing elements are eliminated from his mind.
TEXT 18
NaíPa[aYaeZv>ad]ezu iNaTYa& >aaGavTaSaevYaa )
>aGavTYautaMaëaeke- >ai¢->aRviTa NaEiïk-I )) 18 ))
nañöa-präyeñv abhadreñu
nityaà bhägavata-sevayä
bhagavaty uttama-çloke
bhaktir bhavati naiñöhiké
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
nañöa—destroyed; präyeñu—almost to nil; abhadreñu—all that is inauspicious;
nityam—regularly; bhägavata—Çrémad-Bhägavatam, or the pure devotee;
sevayä—by serving; bhagavati—unto the Personality of Godhead;
uttama—transcendental; çloke—prayers; bhaktiù—loving service;
bhavati—comes into being; naiñöhiké—irrevocable.
TRANSLATION
By regular attendance in classes on the Bhägavatam and by rendering of
service to the pure devotee, all that is troublesome to the heart is almost
completely destroyed, and loving service unto the Personality of Godhead, who
is praised with transcendental songs, is established as an irrevocable fact.
PURPORT
Here is the remedy for eliminating all inauspicious things within the heart
which are considered to be obstacles in the path of self-realization. The remedy
is the association of the Bhägavatas. There are two types of Bhägavatas, namely
the book Bhägavata and the devotee Bhägavata. Both the Bhägavatas are
competent remedies, and both of them or either of them can be good enough
to eliminate the obstacles. A devotee Bhägavata is as good as the book
Bhägavata because the devotee Bhägavata leads his life in terms of the book
Bhägavata and the book Bhägavata is full of information about the Personality
of Godhead and His pure devotees, who are also Bhägavatas. Bhägavata book
and person are identical.
The devotee Bhägavata is a direct representative of Bhagavän, the
Personality of Godhead. So by pleasing the devotee Bhägavata one can receive
the benefit of the book Bhägavata. Human reason fails to understand how by
serving the devotee Bhägavata or the book Bhägavata one gets gradual
promotion on the path of devotion. But actually these are facts explained by
Çréla Näradadeva, who happened to be a maidservant’s son in his previous life.
The maidservant was engaged in the menial service of the sages, and thus he
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
also came into contact with them. And simply by associating with them and
accepting the remnants of foodstuff left by the sages, the son of the
maidservant got the chance to become the great devotee and personality Çréla
Näradadeva. These are the miraculous effects of the association of Bhägavatas.
And to understand these effects practically, it should be noted that by such
sincere association of the Bhägavatas one is sure to receive transcendental
knowledge very easily, with the result that he becomes fixed in the devotional
service of the Lord. The more progress is made in devotional service under the
guidance of the Bhägavatas, the more one becomes fixed in the transcendental
loving service of the Lord. The messages of the book Bhägavata, therefore,
have to be received from the devotee Bhägavata, and the combination of these
two Bhägavatas will help the neophyte devotee to make progress on and on.
TEXT 19
Tada rJaSTaMaae>aava" k-aMal/ae>aadYaê Yae )
ceTa WTaErNaaivÖ& iSQaTa& Satve Pa[SaqdiTa )) 19 ))
tadä rajas-tamo-bhäväù
käma-lobhädayaç ca ye
ceta etair anäviddhaà
sthitaà sattve prasédati
SYNONYMS
tadä—at that time; rajaù—in the mode of passion; tamaù—the mode of
ignorance; bhäväù—the situation; käma—lust and desire; lobha—hankering;
ädayaù—others; ca—and; ye—whatever they are; cetaù—the mind; etaiù—by
these; anäviddham—without being affected; sthitam—being fixed; sattve—in
the mode of goodness; prasédati—thus becomes fully satisfied.
TRANSLATION
As soon as irrevocable loving service is established in the heart, the effects of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
nature’s modes of passion and ignorance, such as lust, desire and hankering,
disappear from the heart. Then the devotee is established in goodness, and he
becomes completely happy.
PURPORT
A living being in his normal constitutional position is fully satisfied in
spiritual bliss. This state of existence is called brahma-bhüta or ätmä-nandé, or
the state of self-satisfaction. This self-satisfaction is not like the satisfaction of
the inactive fool. The inactive fool is in the state of foolish ignorance, whereas
the self-satisfied ätmänandé is transcendental to the material state of existence.
This stage of perfection is attained as soon as one is fixed in irrevocable
devotional service. Devotional service is not inactivity, but the unalloyed
activity of the soul.
The soul’s activity becomes adulterated in contact with matter, and as such
the diseased activities are expressed in the form of lust, desire, hankering,
inactivity, foolishness and sleep. The effect of devotional service becomes
manifest by complete elimination of these effects of passion and ignorance.
The devotee is fixed at once in the mode of goodness, and he makes further
progress to rise to the position of Väsudeva, or the state of unmixed sattva, or
çuddha-sattva. Only in this çuddha-sattva state can one always see Kåñëa eye to
eye by dint of pure affection for the Lord.
A devotee is always in the mode of unalloyed goodness; therefore he harms
no one. But the nondevotee, however educated he may be, is always harmful.
A devotee is neither foolish nor passionate. The harmful, foolish and
passionate cannot be devotees of the Lord, however they may advertise
themselves as devotees by outward dress. A devotee is always qualified with all
the good qualities of God. Quantitatively such qualifications may be different,
but qualitatively both the Lord and His devotee are one and the same.
TEXT 20
Wv& Pa[SaàMaNaSaae >aGavÙi¢-YaaeGaTa" )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
>aGavtatvivjaNa& Mau¢-Sa®SYa JaaYaTae )) 20 ))
evaà prasanna-manaso
bhagavad-bhakti-yogataù
bhagavat-tattva-vijïänaà
mukta-saìgasya jäyate
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; prasanna—enlivened; manasaù—of the mind;
bhagavat-bhakti—the devotional service of the Lord; yogataù—by contact of;
bhagavat—regarding the Personality of Godhead; tattva—knowledge;
vijïänam—scientific; mukta—liberated; saìgasya—of the association;
jäyate—becomes effective.
TRANSLATION
Thus established in the mode of unalloyed goodness, the man whose mind
has been enlivened by contact with devotional service to the Lord gains positive
scientific knowledge of the Personality of Godhead in the stage of liberation
from all material association.
PURPORT
In the Bhagavad-gétä (7.3) it is said that out of many thousands of ordinary
men, one fortunate man endeavors for perfection in life. Mostly men are
conducted by the modes of passion and ignorance, and thus they are engaged
always in lust, desire, hankerings, ignorance and sleep. Out of many such
manlike animals, there is actually a man who knows the responsibility of
human life and thus tries to make life perfect by following the prescribed
duties. And out of many thousands of such persons who have thus attained
success in human life, one may know scientifically about the Personality of
Godhead Çré Kåñëa. In the same Bhagavad-gétä (18.55) it is also said that
scientific knowledge of Çré Kåñëa is understood only by the process of
devotional service (bhakti-yoga).
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The very same thing is confirmed herein in the above words. No ordinary
man, or even one who has attained success in human life, can know
scientifically or perfectly the Personality of Godhead. Perfection of human life
is attained when one can understand that he is not the product of matter but is
in fact spirit. And as soon as one understands that he has nothing to do with
matter, he at once ceases his material hankerings and becomes enlivened as a
spiritual being. This attainment of success is possible when one is above the
modes of passion and ignorance, or, in other words, when one is actually a
brähmaëa by qualification. A brähmaëa is the symbol of sattva-guëa, or the
mode of goodness. And others, who are not in the mode of goodness, are either
kñatriyas, vaiçyas, çüdras or less than the çüdras. The brahminical stage is the
highest stage of human life because of its good qualities. So one cannot be a
devotee unless one at least qualifies as a brähmaëa. The devotee is already a
brähmaëa by action. But that is not the end of it. As referred to above, such a
brähmaëa has to become a Vaiñëava in fact to be actually in the
transcendental stage. A pure Vaiñëava is a liberated soul and is transcendental
even to the position of a brähmaëa. In the material stage even a brähmaëa is
also a conditioned soul because although in the brahminical stage the
conception of Brahman or transcendence is realized, scientific knowledge of
the Supreme Lord is lacking. One has to surpass the brahminical stage and
reach the vasudeva stage to understand the Personality of Godhead Kåñëa. The
science of the Personality of Godhead is the subject matter for study by the
postgraduate students in the spiritual line. Foolish men, or men with a poor
fund of knowledge, do not understand the Supreme Lord, and they interpret
Kåñëa according to their respective whims. The fact is, however, that one
cannot understand the science of the Personality of Godhead unless one is
freed from the contamination of the material modes, even up to the stage of a
brähmaëa. When a qualified brähmaëa factually becomes a Vaiñëava, in the
enlivened state of liberation he can know what is actually the Personality of
Godhead.
TEXT 21
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
i>aÛTae ôdYaGa]iNQaiX^ÛNTae SavRSa&XaYaa" )
+aqYaNTae caSYa k-MaaRi<a d*í WvaTMaNaqìre )) 21 ))
bhidyate hådaya-granthiç
chidyante sarva-saàçayäù
kñéyante cäsya karmäëi
dåñöa evätmanéçvare
SYNONYMS
bhidyate—pierced; hådaya—heart; granthiù—knots; chidyante—cut to pieces;
sarva—all; saàçayäù—misgivings; kñéyante—terminated; ca—and; asya—his;
karmäëi—chain of fruitive actions; dåñöe—having seen; eva—certainly;
ätmani—unto the self; éçvare—dominating.
TRANSLATION
Thus the knot in the heart is pierced, and all misgivings are cut to pieces.
The chain of fruitive actions is terminated when one sees the self as master.
PURPORT
Attaining scientific knowledge of the Personality of Godhead means seeing
one’s own self simultaneously. As far as the identity of the living being as spirit
self is concerned, there are a number of speculations and misgivings. The
materialist does not believe in the existence of the spirit self, and empiric
philosophers believe in the impersonal feature of the whole spirit without
individuality of the living beings. But the transcendentalists affirm that the
soul and the Supersoul are two different identities, qualitatively one but
quantitatively different. There are many other theories, but all these different
speculations are at once cleared off as soon as Çré Kåñëa is realized in truth by
the process of bhakti-yoga. Çré Kåñëa is like the sun, and the materialistic
speculations about the Absolute Truth are like the darkest midnight. As soon
as the Kåñëa sun is arisen within one’s heart, the darkness of materialistic
speculations about the Absolute Truth and the living beings is at once cleared
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
off. In the presence of the sun, the darkness cannot stand, and the relative
truths that were hidden within the dense darkness of ignorance become clearly
manifested by the mercy of Kåñëa, who is residing in everyone’s heart as the
Supersoul.
In the Bhagavad-gétä (10.11) the Lord says that in order to show special
favor to His pure devotees, He personally eradicates the dense darkness of all
misgivings by switching on the light of pure knowledge within the heart of a
devotee. Therefore, because of the Personality of Godhead’s taking charge of
illuminating the heart of His devotee, certainly a devotee, engaged in His
service in transcendental love, cannot remain in darkness. He comes to know
everything of the absolute and the relative truths. The devotee cannot remain
in darkness, and because a devotee is enlightened by the Personality of
Godhead, his knowledge is certainly perfect. This is not the case for those who
speculate on the Absolute Truth by dint of their own limited power of
approach. Perfect knowledge is called paramparä, or deductive knowledge
coming down from the authority to the submissive aural receiver who is bona
fide by service and surrender. One cannot challenge the authority of the
Supreme and know Him also at the same time. He reserves the right of not
being exposed to such a challenging spirit of an insignificant spark of the
whole, a spark subjected to the control of illusory energy. The devotees are
submissive, and therefore the transcendental knowledge descends from the
Personality of Godhead to Brahmä and from Brahmä to his sons and disciples
in succession. This process is helped by the Supersoul within such devotees.
That is the perfect way of learning transcendental knowledge.
This enlightenment perfectly enables the devotee to distinguish spirit from
matter because the knot of spirit and matter is untied by the Lord. This knot is
called ahaìkära, and it falsely obliges a living being to become identified with
matter. As soon as this knot is loosened, therefore, all the clouds of doubt are
at once cleared off. One sees his master and fully engages himself in the
transcendental loving service of the Lord, making a full termination of the
chain of fruitive action. In material existence, a living being creates his own
chain of fruitive work and enjoys the good and bad effects of those actions life
after life. But as soon as he engages himself in the loving service of the Lord,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
he at once becomes free from the chain of karma. His actions no longer create
any reaction.
TEXT 22
ATaae vE k-vYaae iNaTYa& >ai¢&- ParMaYaa Mauda )
vaSaudeve >aGaviTa ku-vRNTYaaTMaPa[SaadNaqMa( )) 22 ))
ato vai kavayo nityaà
bhaktià paramayä mudä
väsudeve bhagavati
kurvanty ätma-prasädaném
SYNONYMS
ataù—therefore; vai—certainly; kavayaù—all transcendentalists;
nityam—from time immemorial; bhaktim—service unto the Lord;
paramayä—supreme; mudä—with great delight; väsudeve—Çré Kåñëa;
bhagavati—the Personality of Godhead; kurvanti—do render; ätma—self;
prasädaném—that which enlivens.
TRANSLATION
Certainly, therefore, since time immemorial, all transcendentalists have been
rendering devotional service to Lord Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead, with
great delight, because such devotional service is enlivening to the self.
PURPORT
The speciality of devotional service unto the Personality of Godhead Lord
Çré Kåñëa is specifically mentioned herein. Lord Çré Kåñëa is the svayaà-rüpa
Personality of Godhead, and all other forms of Godhead, beginning from Çré
Baladeva, Saìkarñaëa, Väsudeva, Aniruddha, Pradyumna and Näräyaëa and
extending to the puruña-avatäras, guëa-avatäras, lélä-avatäras, yuga-avatäras
and many other thousands of manifestations of the Personality of Godhead,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
are Lord Çré Kåñëa’s plenary portions and integrated parts. The living entities
are separated parts and parcels of the Personality of Godhead. Therefore Lord
Sri Kåñëa is the original form of Godhead, and He is the last word in the
Transcendence. Thus He is more attractive to the higher transcendentalists
who participate in the eternal pastimes of the Lord. In forms of the Personality
of Godhead other than Çré Kåñëa and Baladeva, there is no facility for
intimate personal contact as in the transcendental pastimes of the Lord at
Vrajabhümi. The transcendental pastimes of Lord Çré Kåñëa are not newly
accepted, as argued by some less intelligent persons; His pastimes are eternal
and are manifested in due course once in a day of Brahmäjé, as the sun rises on
the eastern horizon at the end of every twenty-four hours.
TEXT 23
Satv& rJaSTaMa wiTa Pa[k*-TaeGauR<aaSTaE‚
YauR¢-" Par" Pauåz Wk- whaSYa Datae )
iSQaTYaadYae hiriviriÄhreiTa Sa&ja"
é[eYaa&iSa Ta}a %lu/ SatvTaNaaeNa*R<aa& SYau" )) 23 ))
sattvaà rajas tama iti prakåter guëäs tair
yuktaù paraù puruña eka ihäsya dhatte
sthity-ädaye hari-viriïci-hareti saàjïäù
çreyäàsi tatra khalu sattva-tanor nåëäà syuù
SYNONYMS
sattvam—goodness; rajaù—passion; tamaù—the darkness of ignorance;
iti—thus; prakåteù—of the material nature; guëäù—qualities; taiù—by them;
yuktaù—associated with; paraù—transcendental; puruñaù—the personality;
ekaù—one; iha asya—of this material world; dhatte—accepts; sthiti-ädaye—for
the matter of creation, maintenance and destruction, etc.; hari—Viñëu, the
Personality of Godhead; viriïci—Brahmä; hara—Lord Çiva; iti—thus;
saàjïäù—different features; çreyäàsi—ultimate benefit; tatra—therein;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
khalu—of course; sattva—goodness; tanoù—form; nåëäm—of the human
being; syuù—derived.
TRANSLATION
The transcendental Personality of Godhead is indirectly associated with the
three modes of material nature, namely passion, goodness and ignorance, and
just for the material world’s creation, maintenance and destruction He accepts
the three qualitative forms of Brahmä, Viñëu and Çiva. Of these three, all
human beings can derive ultimate benefit from Viñëu, the form of the quality of
goodness.
PURPORT
That Lord Çré Kåñëa, by His plenary parts, should be rendered devotional
service, as explained above, is confirmed by this statement. Lord Çré Kåñëa and
all His plenary parts are viñëu-tattva, or the Lordship of Godhead. From Çré
Kåñëa, the next manifestation is Baladeva. From Baladeva is Saìkarñaëa, from
Saìkarñaëa is Näräyaëa, from Näräyaëa there is the second Saìkarñaëa, and
from this Saìkarñaëa the Viñëu puruña-avatäras. The Viñëu or the Deity of the
quality of goodness in the material world is the puruña-avatära known as
Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu or Paramätmä. Brahmä is the deity of rajas (passion), and
Çiva of ignorance. They are the three departmental heads of the three qualities
of this material world. Creation is made possible by the goodness of Viñëu, and
when it requires to be destroyed, Lord Çiva does it by the täëòavanåtya. The
materialists and the foolish human beings worship Brahmä and Çiva
respectively. But the pure transcendentalists worship the form of goodness,
Viñëu, in His various forms. Viñëu is manifested by His millions and billions of
integrated forms and separated forms. The integrated forms are called
Godhead, and the separated forms are called the living entities or the jévas.
Both the jévas and Godhead have their original spiritual forms. Jévas are
sometimes subjected to the control of material energy, but the Viñëu forms are
always controllers of this energy. When Viñëu, the Personality of Godhead,
appears in the material world, He comes to deliver the conditioned living
beings who are under the material energy. Such living beings appear in the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
material world with intentions of being lords, and thus they become entrapped
by the three modes of nature. As such, the living entities have to change their
material coverings for undergoing different terms of imprisonment. The prison
house of the material world is created by Brahmä under instruction of the
Personality of Godhead, and at the conclusion of a kalpa the whole thing is
destroyed by Çiva. But as far as maintenance of the prison house is concerned,
it is done by Viñëu, as much as the state prison house is maintained by the
state. Anyone, therefore, who wishes to get out of this prison house of material
existence, which is full of miseries like repetition of birth, death, disease and
old age, must please Lord Viñëu for such liberation. Lord Viñëu is worshiped by
devotional service only, and if anyone has to continue prison life in the
material world, he may ask for relative facilities for temporary relief from the
different demigods like Çiva, Brahmä, Indra and Varuëa. No demigod,
however, can release the imprisoned living being from the conditioned life of
material existence. This can be done only by Viñëu. Therefore, the ultimate
benefit may be derived from Viñëu, the Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 24
PaaiQaRvaÕaå<aae DaUMaSTaSMaadiGanñYaqMaYa" )
TaMaSaSTau rJaSTaSMaaTSatv& Yad(b]ødXaRNaMa( )) 24 ))
pärthiväd däruëo dhümas
tasmäd agnis trayémayaù
tamasas tu rajas tasmät
sattvaà yad brahma-darçanam
SYNONYMS
pärthivät—from earth; däruëaù—firewood; dhümaù—smoke; tasmät—from
that; agniù—fire; trayé—Vedic sacrifices; mayaù—made of; tamasaù—in the
mode of ignorance; tu—but; rajaù—the mode of passion; tasmät—from that;
sattvam—the mode of goodness; yat—which; brahma—the Absolute Truth;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
darçanam—realization.
TRANSLATION
Firewood is a transformation of earth, but smoke is better than the raw
wood. And fire is still better, for by fire we can derive the benefits of superior
knowledge [through Vedic sacrifices]. Similarly, passion [rajas] is better than
ignorance [tamas], but goodness [sattva] is best because by goodness one can
come to realize the Absolute Truth.
PURPORT
As explained above, one can get release from the conditioned life of
material existence by devotional service to the Personality of Godhead. It is
further comprehended herein that one has to rise to the platform of the mode
of goodness (sattva) so that one can be eligible for the devotional service of the
Lord. But if there are impediments on the progressive path, anyone, even from
the platform of tamas, can gradually rise to the sattva platform by the expert
direction of the spiritual master. Sincere candidates must, therefore, approach
an expert spiritual master for such a progressive march, and the bona fide,
expert spiritual master is competent to direct a disciple from any stage of life:
tamas, rajas or sattva.
It is a mistake, therefore, to consider that worship of any quality or any
form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is equally beneficial. Except
Viñëu, all separated forms are manifested under the conditions of material
energy, and therefore the forms of material energy cannot help anyone to rise
to the platform of sattva, which alone can liberate a person from material
bondage.
The uncivilized state of life, or the life of the lower animals, is controlled by
the mode of tamas. The civilized life of man, with a passion for various types of
material benefits, is the stage of rajas. The rajas stage of life gives a slight clue
to the realization of the Absolute Truth in the forms of fine sentiments in
philosophy, art and culture with moral and ethical principles, but the mode of
sattva is a still higher stage of material quality, which actually helps one in
realizing the Absolute Truth. In other words, there is a qualitative difference
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
between the different kinds of worshiping methods as well as the respective
results derived from the predominating deities, namely Brahmä, Viñëu and
Hara.
TEXT 25
>aeiJare MauNaYaae_QaaGa]e >aGavNTaMaDaae+aJaMa( )
Satv& ivéuÖ& +aeMaaYa k-LPaNTae Yae_Nau TaaiNah )) 25 ))
bhejire munayo ’thägre
bhagavantam adhokñajam
sattvaà viçuddhaà kñemäya
kalpante ye ’nu tän iha
SYNONYMS
bhejire—rendered service unto; munayaù—the sages; atha—thus;
agre—previously; bhagavantam—unto the Personality of Godhead;
adhokñajam—the Transcendence; sattvam—existence; viçuddham—above the
three modes of nature; kñemäya—to derive the ultimate benefit;
kalpante—deserve; ye—those; anu—follow; tän—those; iha—in this material
world.
TRANSLATION
Previously all the great sages rendered service unto the Personality of
Godhead due to His existence above the three modes of material nature. They
worshiped Him to become free from material conditions and thus derive the
ultimate benefit. Whoever follows such great authorities is also eligible for
liberation from the material world.
PURPORT
The purpose of performing religion is neither to profit by material gain nor
to get the simple knowledge of discerning matter from spirit. The ultimate aim
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
of religious performances is to release oneself from material bondage and
regain the life of freedom in the transcendental world, where the Personality
of Godhead is the Supreme Person. Laws of religion, therefore, are directly
enacted by the Personality of Godhead, and except for the mahäjanas, or the
authorized agents of the Lord, no one knows the purpose of religion. There are
twelve particular agents of the Lord who know the purpose of religion, and all
of them render transcendental service unto Him. Persons who desire their own
good may follow these mahäjanas and thus attain the supreme benefit.
TEXT 26
MauMau+avae gaaeræPaaNa( ihTva >aUTaPaTaqNaQa )
NaaraYa<ak-l/a" XaaNTaa >aJaiNTa ùNaSaUYav" )) 26 ))
mumukñavo ghora-rüpän
hitvä bhüta-patén atha
näräyaëa-kaläù çäntä
bhajanti hy anasüyavaù
SYNONYMS
mumukñavaù—persons desiring liberation; ghora—horrible, ghastly;
rüpän—forms like that; hitvä—rejecting; bhüta-patén—demigods; atha—for
this reason; näräyaëa—the Personality of Godhead; kaläù—plenary portions;
çäntäù—all-blissful; bhajanti—do worship; hi—certainly;
anasüyavaù—nonenvious.
TRANSLATION
Those who are serious about liberation are certainly nonenvious, and they
respect all. Yet they reject the horrible and ghastly forms of the demigods and
worship only the all-blissful forms of Lord Viñëu and His plenary portions.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa, who is the original person
of the Viñëu categories, expands Himself in two different categories, namely
integrated plenary portions and separated parts and parcels. The separated
parts and parcels are the servitors, and the integrated plenary portions of
viñëu-tattvas are the worshipful objects of service.
All demigods who are empowered by the Supreme Lord are also separated
parts and parcels. They do not belong to the categories of viñëu-tattva. The
viñëu-tattvas are living beings equally as powerful as the original form of the
Personality of Godhead, and They display different categories of power in
consideration of different times and circumstances. The separated parts and
parcels are powerful by limitation. They do not have unlimited power like the
viñëu-tattvas. Therefore, one should never classify the viñëu-tattvas, or the
plenary portions of Näräyaëa, the Personality of Godhead, in the same
categories with the parts and parcels. If anyone does so he becomes at once an
offender by the name päñaëòé. In the age of Kali many foolish persons commit
such unlawful offenses and equalize the two categories.
The separated parts and parcels have different positions in the estimation
of material powers, and some of them are like Käla-bhairava,
Çmaçäna-bhairava, Çani, Mahäkälé and Caëòikä. These demigods are
worshiped mostly by those who are in the lowest categories of the mode of
darkness or ignorance. Other demigods, like Brahmä, Çiva, Sürya, Gaëeça and
many similar deities, are worshiped by men in the mode of passion, urged on by
the desire for material enjoyment. But those who are actually situated in the
mode of goodness (sattva-guëa) of material nature worship only viñëu-tattvas.
Viñëu-tattvas are represented by various names and forms, such as Näräyaëa,
Dämodara, Vämana, Govinda and Adhokñaja.
The qualified brähmaëas worship the viñëu-tattvas represented by the
çälagräma-çilä, and some of the higher castes like the kñatriyas and vaiçyas also
generally worship the viñëu-tattvas.
Highly qualified brähmaëas situated in the mode of goodness have no
grudges against the mode of worship of others. They have all respect for other
demigods, even though they may look ghastly, like Käla-bhairava or Mahäkälé.
They know very well that those horrible features of the Supreme Lord are all
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
different servitors of the Lord under different conditions, yet they reject the
worship of both horrible and attractive features of the demigods, and they
concentrate only on the forms of Viñëu because they are serious about
liberation from the material conditions. The demigods, even to the stage of
Brahmä, the supreme of all the demigods, cannot offer liberation to anyone.
Hiraëyakaçipu underwent a severe type of penance to become eternal in life,
but his worshipful deity, Brahmä, could not satisfy him with such blessings.
Therefore Viñëu, and none else, is called mukti-päda, or the Personality of
Godhead who can bestow upon us mukti, liberation. The demigods, being like
other living entities in the material world, are all liquidated at the time of the
annihilation of the material structure. They are themselves unable to get
liberation, and what to speak of giving liberation to their devotees. The
demigods can award the worshipers some temporary benefit only, and not the
ultimate one.
It is for this reason only that candidates for liberation deliberately reject
the worship of the demigods, although they have no disrespect for any one of
them.
TEXT 27
rJaSTaMa"Pa[k*-TaYa" SaMaXaql/a >aJaiNTa vE )
iPaTa*>aUTaPa[JaeXaadqNa( ié[YaEìYaRPa[JaePSav" )) 27 ))
rajas-tamaù-prakåtayaù
sama-çélä bhajanti vai
pitå-bhüta-prajeçädén
çriyaiçvarya-prajepsavaù
SYNONYMS
rajaù—the mode of passion; tamaù—the mode of ignorance; prakåtayaù—of
that mentality; sama-çéläù—of the same categories; bhajanti—do worship;
vai—actually; pitå—the forefathers; bhüta—other living beings;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
prajeça-ädén—controllers of cosmic administration; çriyä—enrichment;
aiçvarya—wealth and power; prajä—progeny; épsavaù—so desiring.
TRANSLATION
Those who are in the modes of passion and ignorance worship the
forefathers, other living beings and the demigods who are in charge of cosmic
activities, for they are urged by a desire to be materially benefited with women,
wealth, power and progeny.
PURPORT
There is no need to worship demigods of whatsoever category if one is
serious about going back to Godhead. In the Bhagavad-gétä (7.20,23) it is
clearly said that those who are mad after material enjoyment approach the
different demigods for temporary benefits, which are meant for men with a
poor fund of knowledge. We should never desire to increase the depth of
material enjoyment. Material enjoyment should be accepted only up to the
point of the bare necessities of life and not more or less than that. To accept
more material enjoyment means to bind oneself more and more to the miseries
of material existence. More wealth, more women and false aristocracy are some
of the demands of the materially disposed man because he has no information
of the benefit derived from Viñëu worship. By Viñëu worship one can derive
benefit in this life as well as in life after death. Forgetting these principles,
foolish people who are after more wealth, more wives and more children
worship various demigods. The aim of life is to end the miseries of life and not
to increase them.
For material enjoyment there is no need to approach the demigods. The
demigods are but servants of the Lord. As such, they are duty-bound to supply
necessities of life in the form of water, light, air, etc. One should work hard and
worship the Supreme Lord by the fruits of one’s hard labor for existence, and that
should be the motto of life. One should be careful to execute occupational
service with faith in God in the proper way, and that will lead one gradually
on the progressive march back to Godhead.
Lord Çré Kåñëa, when He was personally present at Vrajadhäma, stopped
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the worship of the demigod Indra and advised the residents of Vraja to worship
by their business and to have faith in God. Worshiping the multidemigods for
material gain is practically a perversity of religion. This sort of religious
activity has been condemned in the very beginning of the Bhägavatam as
kaitava-dharma. There is only one religion in the world to be followed by one
and all, and that is the Bhägavata-dharma, or the religion which teaches one to
worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead and no one else.
TEXTS 28–29
vaSaudevPara veda vaSaudevPara Ma%a" )
vaSaudevPara YaaeGaa vaSaudevPara" i§-Yaa" )) 28 ))
vaSaudevPar& jaNa& vaSaudevPar& TaPa" )
vaSaudevParae DaMaaeR vaSaudevPara GaiTa" )) 29 ))
väsudeva-parä vedä
väsudeva-parä makhäù
väsudeva-parä yogä
väsudeva-paräù kriyäù
väsudeva-paraà jïänaà
väsudeva-paraà tapaù
väsudeva-paro dharmo
väsudeva-parä gatiù
SYNONYMS
väsudeva—the Personality of Godhead; paräù—the ultimate goal;
vedäù—revealed scriptures; väsudeva—the Personality of Godhead; paräù—for
worshiping; makhäù—sacrifices; väsudeva—the Personality of Godhead;
paräù—the means of attaining; yogäù—mystic paraphernalia; väsudeva—the
Personality of Godhead; paräù—under His control; kriyäù—fruitive activities;
väsudeva—the Personality of Godhead; param—the supreme;
jïänam—knowledge; väsudeva—the Personality of Godhead; param—best;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
tapaù—austerity; väsudeva—the Personality of Godhead; paraù—superior
quality; dharmaù—religion; väsudeva—the Personality of Godhead;
paräù—ultimate; gatiù—goal of life.
TRANSLATION
In the revealed scriptures, the ultimate object of knowledge is Çré Kåñëa, the
Personality of Godhead. The purpose of performing sacrifice is to please Him.
Yoga is for realizing Him. All fruitive activities are ultimately rewarded by Him
only. He is supreme knowledge, and all severe austerities are performed to
know Him. Religion [dharma] is rendering loving service unto Him. He is the
supreme goal of life.
PURPORT
That Çré Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead, is the only object of worship is
confirmed in these two çlokas. In the Vedic literature there is the same
objective: establishing one’s relationship and ultimately reviving our lost
loving service unto Him. That is the sum and substance of the Vedas. In the
Bhagavad-gétä the same theory is confirmed by the Lord in His own words: the
ultimate purpose of the Vedas is to know Him only. All the revealed scriptures
are prepared by the Lord through His incarnation in the body of Çréla
Vyäsadeva just to remind the fallen souls, conditioned by material nature, of
Çré Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead. No demigod can award freedom from
material bondage. That is the verdict of all the Vedic literatures.
Impersonalists who have no information of the Personality of Godhead
minimize the omnipotency of the Supreme Lord and put Him on equal footing
with all other living beings, and for this act such impersonalists get freedom
from material bondage only with great difficulty. They can surrender unto
Him only after many, many births in the culture of transcendental knowledge.
One may argue that the Vedic activities are based on sacrificial ceremonies.
That is true. But all such sacrifices are also meant for realizing the truth about
Väsudeva. Another name of Väsudeva is Yajïa (sacrifice), and in the
Bhagavad-gétä it is clearly stated that all sacrifices and all activities are to be
conducted for the satisfaction of Yajïa, or Viñëu, the Personality of Godhead.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
This is the case also with the yoga systems. Yoga means to get into touch with
the Supreme Lord. The process, however, includes several bodily features such
as äsana, dhyäna, präëäyäma and meditation, and all of them are meant for
concentrating upon the localized aspect of Väsudeva represented as
Paramätmä. Paramätmä realization is but partial realization of Väsudeva, and if
one is successful in that attempt, one realizes Väsudeva in full. But by ill luck
most yogés are stranded by the powers of mysticism achieved through the
bodily process. Ill-fated yogés are given a chance in the next birth by being
placed in the families of good learned brähmaëas or in the families of rich
merchants in order to execute the unfinished task of Väsudeva realization. If
such fortunate brähmaëas and sons of rich men properly utilize the chance,
they can easily realize Väsudeva by good association with saintly persons.
Unfortunately, such preferred persons are captivated again by material wealth
and honor, and thus they practically forget the aim of life.
This is also so for the culture of knowledge. According to Bhagavad-gétä
there are eighteen items in culturing knowledge. By such culture of knowledge
one becomes gradually prideless, devoid of vanity, nonviolent, forbearing,
simple, devoted to the great spiritual master, and self-controlled. By culture of
knowledge one becomes unattached to hearth and home and becomes
conscious of the miseries due to death, birth, old age and disease. And all
culture of knowledge culminates in devotional service to the Personality of
Godhead, Väsudeva. Therefore, Väsudeva is the ultimate aim in culturing all
different branches of knowledge. Culture of knowledge leading one to the
transcendental plane of meeting Väsudeva is real knowledge. physical
knowledge in its various branches is condemned in the Bhagavad-gétä as
ajïäna, or the opposite of real knowledge. The ultimate aim of physical
knowledge is to satisfy the senses, which means prolongation of the term of
material existence and thereby continuance of the threefold miseries. So
prolonging the miserable life of material existence is nescience. But the same
physical knowledge leading to the way of spiritual understanding helps one to
end the miserable life of physical existence and to begin the life of spiritual
existence on the plane of Väsudeva.
The same applies to all kinds of austerities. Tapasya means voluntary
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
acceptance of bodily pains to achieve some higher end of life. Rävaëa and
Hiraëyakaçipu underwent a severe type of bodily torture to achieve the end of
sense gratification. Sometimes modern politicians also undergo severe types of
austerities to achieve some political end. This is not actually tapasya. One
should accept voluntary bodily inconvenience for the sake of knowing
Väsudeva because that is the way of real austerities. Otherwise all forms of
austerities are classified as modes of passion and ignorance. passion and
ignorance cannot end the miseries of life. Only the mode of goodness can
mitigate the threefold miseries of life. Vasudeva and Devaké, the so-called
father and mother of Lord Kåñëa, underwent penances to get Väsudeva as
their son. Lord Çré Kåñëa is the father of all living beings (Bg. 14.4). Therefore
He is the original living being of all other living beings. He is the original
eternal enjoyer amongst all other enjoyers. Therefore no one can be His
begetting father, as the ignorant may think. Lord Çré Kåñëa agreed to become
the son of Vasudeva and Devaké upon being pleased with their severe
austerities. Therefore if any austerities have to be done, they must be done to
achieve the end of knowledge, Väsudeva.
Väsudeva is the original Personality of Godhead Lord Çré Kåñëa. As
explained before, the original Personality of Godhead expands Himself by
innumerable forms. Such expansion of forms is made possible by His various
energies. His energies are also multifarious, and His internal energies are
superior and external energies inferior in quality. They are explained in the
Bhagavad-gétä (7.4–6) as the parä and the aparä prakåtis. So His expansions of
various forms which take place via the internal energies are superior forms,
whereas the expansions which take place via the external energies are inferior
forms. The living entities are also His expansions. The living entities who are
expanded by His internal potency are eternally liberated persons, whereas
those who are expanded in terms of the material energies are eternally
conditioned souls. Therefore, all culture of knowledge, austerities, sacrifice and
activities should be aimed at changing the quality of the influence that is
acting upon us. For the present, we are all being controlled by the external
energy of the Lord, and just to change the quality of the influence, we must
endeavor to cultivate spiritual energy. In the Bhagavad-gétä it is said that those
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
who are mahätmäs, or those whose minds have been so broadened as to be
engaged in the service of Lord Kåñëa, are under the influence of the internal
potency, and the effect is that such broadminded living beings are constantly
engaged in the service of the Lord without deviation. That should be the aim
of life. And that is the verdict of all the Vedic literatures. No one should
bother himself with fruitive activities or dry speculation about transcendental
knowledge. Everyone should at once engage himself in the transcendental
loving service of the Lord. Nor should one worship different demigods who
work as different hands of the Lord for creation, maintenance or destruction
of the material world. There are innumerable powerful demigods who look
over the external management of the material world. They are all different
assisting hands of Lord Väsudeva. Even Lord Çiva and Lord Brahmä are
included in the list of demigods, but Lord Viñëu, or Väsudeva, is always
transcendentally situated. Even though He accepts the quality of goodness of
the material world, He is still transcendental to all the material modes. The
following example will clear that matter more explicitly. In the prison house
there are the prisoners and the managers of the prison house. Both the
managers and the prisoners are bound by the laws of the king. But even though
the king sometimes comes in the prison, he is not bound by the laws of the
prison house. The king is therefore always transcendental to the laws of the
prison house, as the Lord is always transcendental to the laws of the material
world.
TEXT 30
Sa Wved& SaSaJaaRGa]e >aGavaNaaTMaMaaYaYaa )
SadSad]UPaYaa caSaaE Gau<aMaYaaGau<aae iv>au" )) 30 ))
sa evedaà sasarjägre
bhagavän ätma-mäyayä
sad-asad-rüpayä cäsau
guëamayäguëo vibhuù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
saù—that; eva—certainly; idam—this; sasarja—created; agre—before;
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; ätma-mäyayä—by His personal
potency; sat—the cause; asat—the effect; rüpayä—by forms; ca—and;
asau—the same Lord; guëa-maya—in the modes of material nature;
aguëaù—transcendental; vibhuù—the Absolute.
TRANSLATION
In the beginning of the material creation, that Absolute Personality of
Godhead [Väsudeva], in His transcendental position, created the energies of
cause and effect by His own internal energy.
PURPORT
The position of the Lord is always transcendental because the causal and
effectual energies required for the creation of the material world were also
created by Him. He is unaffected, therefore, by the qualities of the material
modes. His existence, form, activities and paraphernalia all existed before the
material creation.*(6) He is all-spiritual and has nothing to do with the
qualities of the material world, which are qualitatively distinct from the
spiritual qualities of the Lord.
TEXT 31
TaYaa ivl/iSaTaeZvezu Gau<aezu Gau<avaiNav )
ANTa"Pa[iví Aa>aaiTa ivjaNaeNa ivJa*iM>aTa" )) 31 ))
tayä vilasiteñv eñu
guëeñu guëavän iva
antaù-praviñöa äbhäti
vijïänena vijåmbhitaù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
tayä—by them; vilasiteñu—although in the function; eñu—these; guëeñu—the
modes of material nature; guëavän—affected by the modes; iva—as if;
antaù—within; praviñöaù—entered into; äbhäti—appears to be; vijïänena—by
transcendental consciousness; vijåmbhitaù—fully enlightened.
TRANSLATION
After creating the material substance, the Lord [Väsudeva] expands Himself
and enters into it. And although He is within the material modes of nature and
appears to be; one of the created beings, He is always fully enlightened in His
transcendental position.
PURPORT
The living entities are separated parts and parcels of the Lord, and the
conditioned living entities, who are unfit for the spiritual kingdom, are strewn
within the material world to enjoy matter to the fullest extent. As Paramätmä
and eternal friend of the living entities, the Lord, by one of His plenary
portions, accompanies the living entities to guide them in their material
enjoyment and to become witness to all activities. While the living entities
enjoy the material conditions, the Lord maintains His transcendental position
without being affected by the material atmosphere. In the Vedic literatures
(çruti) it is said that there are two birds in one tree.*(7) One of them is eating
the fruit of the tree, while the other is witnessing the actions. The witness is
the Lord, and the fruit-eater is the living entity. The fruit-eater (living entity)
has forgotten his real identity and is overwhelmed in the fruitive activities of
the material conditions, but the Lord (Paramätmä) is always full in
transcendental knowledge. That is the difference between the Supersoul and
the conditioned soul. The conditioned soul, the living entity, is controlled by
the laws of nature, while the Paramätmä, or the Supersoul, is the controller of
the material energy.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 32
YaQaa ùvihTaae viödaRåZvek-" SvYaaeiNazu )
NaaNaev >aaiTa ivìaTMaa >aUTaezu c TaQaa PauMaaNa( )) 32 ))
yathä hy avahito vahnir
däruñv ekaù sva-yoniñu
näneva bhäti viçvätmä
bhüteñu ca tathä pumän
SYNONYMS
yathä—as much as; hi—exactly like; avahitaù—surcharged with; vahniù—fire;
däruñu—in wood; ekaù—one; sva-yoniñu—the source of manifestation; nänä
iva—like different entities; bhäti—illuminates; viçva-ätmä—the Lord as
Paramätmä; bhüteñu—in the living entities; ca—and; tathä—in the same way;
pumän—the Absolute Person.
TRANSLATION
The Lord, as Supersoul, pervades all things, just as fire permeates wood, and
so He appears to be of many varieties, though He is the absolute one without a
second.
PURPORT
Lord Väsudeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by one of His plenary
parts expands Himself all over the material world, and His existence can be
perceived even within the atomic energy. Matter, antimatter, proton, neutron,
etc., are all different effects of the Paramätmä feature of the Lord. As from
wood, fire can be manifested, or as butter can be churned out of milk, so also
the presence of the Lord as Paramätmä can be felt by the process of legitimate
hearing and chanting of the transcendental subjects which are especially
treated in the Vedic literatures like the Upaniñads and Vedänta.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the bona fide explanation of these Vedic literatures.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The Lord can be realized through the aural reception of the transcendental
message, and that is the only way to experience the transcendental subject. As
fire is kindled from wood by another fire, the divine consciousness of man can
similarly be kindled by another divine grace. His Divine Grace the spiritual
master can kindle the spiritual fire from the woodlike living entity by
imparting proper spiritual messages injected through the receptive ear.
Therefore one is required to approach the proper spiritual master with
receptive ears only, and thus divine existence is gradually realized. The
difference between animality and humanity lies in this process only. A human
being can hear properly, whereas an animal cannot.
TEXT 33
ASaaE Gau<aMaYaE>aaRvE>aURTaSaU+MaeiNd]YaaTMai>a" )
SviNaiMaRTaezu iNaivRíae >au»e >aUTaezu Tad(Gau<aaNa( )) 33 ))
asau guëamayair bhävair
bhüta-sükñmendriyätmabhiù
sva-nirmiteñu nirviñöo
bhuìkte bhüteñu tad-guëän
SYNONYMS
asau—that Paramätmä; guëa-mayaiù—influenced by the modes of nature;
bhävaiù—naturally; bhüta—created; sükñma—subtle; indriya—senses;
ätmabhiù—by the living beings; sva-nirmiteñu—in His own creation;
nirviñöaù—entering; bhuìkte—causes to enjoy; bhüteñu—in the living entities;
tat-guëän—those modes of nature.
TRANSLATION
The Supersoul enters into the bodies of the created beings who are
influenced by the modes of material nature and causes them to enjoy the effects
of these modes by the subtle mind.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
There are 8,400,000 species of living beings beginning from the highest
intellectual being, Brahmä, down to the insignificant ant, and all of them are
enjoying the material world according to the desires of the subtle mind and
gross material body. The gross material body is based on the conditions of the
subtle mind, and the senses are created according to the desire of the living
being. The Lord as Paramätmä helps the living being to get material happiness
because the living being is helpless in all respects in obtaining what he desires.
He proposes, and the Lord disposes. In another sense, the living beings are
parts and parcels of the Lord. They are therefore one with the Lord. In the
Bhagavad-gétä the living beings in all varieties of bodies have been claimed by
the Lord as His sons. The sufferings and enjoyments of the sons are indirectly
the sufferings and enjoyments of the father. Still the father is not in any way
affected directly by the suffering and enjoyment of the sons. He is so kind that
He constantly remains with the living being as Paramätmä and always tries to
convert the living being towards the real happiness.
TEXT 34
>aavYaTYaez SatveNa l/aek-aNa( vE l/aek->aavNa" )
l/Il/avTaaraNaurTaae deviTaYaRx(Naraidzu )) 34 ))
bhävayaty eña sattvena
lokän vai loka-bhävanaù
lélävatäränurato
deva-tiryaì-narädiñu
SYNONYMS
bhävayati—maintains; eñaù—all these; sattvena—in the mode of goodness;
lokän—all over the universe; vai—generally; loka-bhävanaù—the master of all
the universes; lélä—pastimes; avatära—incarnation; anurataù—assuming the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
role; deva—the demigods; tiryak—lower animals; nara-ädiñu—in the midst of
human beings.
TRANSLATION
Thus the Lord of the universes maintains all planets inhabited by demigods,
men and lower animals. Assuming the roles of incarnations, He performs
pastimes to reclaim those in the mode of pure goodness.
PURPORT
There are innumerable material universes, and in each and every universe
there are innumerable planets inhabited by different grades of living entities
in different modes of nature. The Lord (Viñëu) incarnates Himself in each and
every one of them and in each and every type of living society. He manifests
His transcendental pastimes amongst them just to create the desire to go back
to Godhead. The Lord does not change His original transcendental position,
but He appears to be differently manifested according to the particular time,
circumstances and society.
Sometimes He incarnates Himself or empowers a suitable living being to act
for Him, but in either case the purpose is the same: the Lord wants the
suffering living being to go back home, back to Godhead. The happiness which
the living beings are hankering for is not to be found within any corner of the
innumerable universes and material planets. The eternal happiness which the
living being wants is obtainable in the kingdom of God, but the forgetful living
beings under the influence of the material modes have no information of the
kingdom of God. The Lord, therefore, comes to propagate the message of the
kingdom of God, either personally as an incarnation or through His bona fide
representative as the good son of God. Such incarnations or sons of God are
not making propaganda for going back to Godhead only within the human
society. Their work is also going on in all types of societies, amongst demigods
and those other than human beings.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the First Canto, Second Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled “Divinity and Divine Service.”
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Chapter Three
Kåñëa Is the Source of All Incarnations
TEXT 1
SaUTa ovac
JaGa*he PaaEåz& æPa& >aGavaNMahdaidi>a" )
SaM>aUTa& zae@Xak-l/MaadaE l/aek-iSaSa*+aYaa )) 1 ))
süta uväca
jagåhe pauruñaà rüpaà
bhagavän mahad-ädibhiù
sambhütaà ñoòaça-kalam
ädau loka-sisåkñayä
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta said; jagåhe—accepted; pauruñam—plenary portion as the
puruña incarnation; rüpam—form; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead;
mahat-ädibhiù—with the ingredients of the material world; sambhütam—thus
there was the creation of; ñoòaça-kalam—sixteen primary principles; ädau—in
the beginning; loka—the universes; sisåkñayä—on the intention of creating.
TRANSLATION
Süta said: In the beginning of the creation, the Lord first expanded Himself
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
in the universal form of the puruña incarnation and manifested all the
ingredients for the material creation. And thus at first there was the creation of
the sixteen principles of material action. This was for the purpose of creating
the material universe.
PURPORT
The Bhagavad-gétä states that the Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa
maintains these material universes by extending His plenary expansions. So
this puruña form is the confirmation of the same principle. The original
Personality of Godhead Väsudeva, or Lord Kåñëa, who is famous as the son of
King Vasudeva or King Nanda, is full with all opulences, all potencies, all
fame, all beauty, all knowledge and all renunciation. Part of His opulences are
manifested as impersonal Brahman, and part of His opulences are manifested
as Paramätmä. This puruña feature of the same Personality of Godhead Çré
Kåñëa is the original Paramätmä manifestation of the Lord. There are three
puruña features in the material creation, and this form, who is known as the
Käraëodakaçäyé Viñëu, is the first of the three. The others are known as the
Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu and the Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu, which we shall know one
after another. The innumerable universes are generated from the skin holes of
this Käraëodakaçäyé Viñëu, and in each one of the universes the Lord enters as
Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu.
In the Bhagavad-gétä it is also mentioned that the material world is created
at certain intervals and then again destroyed. This creation and destruction is
done by the supreme will because of the conditioned souls, or the nitya-baddha
living beings. The nitya-baddha, or the eternally conditioned souls, have the
sense of individuality or ahaìkära, which dictates them sense enjoyment,
which they are unable to have constitutionally. The Lord is the only enjoyer,
and all others are enjoyed. The living beings are predominated enjoyers. But
the eternally conditioned souls, forgetful of this constitutional position, have
strong aspirations to enjoy. The chance to enjoy matter is given to the
conditioned souls in the material world, and side by side they are given the
chance to understand their real constitutional position. Those fortunate living
entities who catch the truth and surrender unto the lotus feet of Väsudeva
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
after many, many births in the material world join the eternally liberated souls
and thus are allowed to enter into the kingdom of Godhead. After this, such
fortunate living entities need not come again within the occasional material
creation. But those who cannot catch the constitutional truth are again
merged into the mahat-tattva at the time of the annihilation of the material
creation. When the creation is again set up, this mahat-tattva is again let loose.
This mahat-tattva contains all the ingredients of the material manifestations,
including the conditioned souls. Primarily this mahat-tattva is divided into
sixteen parts, namely the five gross material elements and the eleven working
instruments or senses. It is like the cloud in the clear sky. In the spiritual sky,
the effulgence of Brahman is spread all around, and the whole system is
dazzling in spiritual light. The mahat-tattva is assembled in some corner of the
vast, unlimited spiritual sky, and the part which is thus covered by the
mahat-tattva is called the material sky. This part of the spiritual sky, called the
mahat-tattva, is only an insignificant portion of the whole spiritual sky, and
within this mahat-tattva there are innumerable universes. All these universes
are collectively produced by the Käraëodakaçäyé Viñëu, called also the
Mahä-Viñëu, who simply throws His glance to impregnate the material sky.
TEXT 2
YaSYaaM>aiSa XaYaaNaSYa YaaeGaiNad]a& ivTaNvTa" )
Naai>ahdaMbuJaadaSaqd(b]øa ivìSa*Jaa& PaiTa" )) 2 ))
yasyämbhasi çayänasya
yoga-nidräà vitanvataù
näbhi-hradämbujäd äséd
brahmä viçva-såjäà patiù
SYNONYMS
yasya—whose; ambhasi—in the water; çayänasya—lying down;
yoga-nidräm—sleeping in meditation; vitanvataù—ministering; näbhi—navel;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
hrada—out of the lake; ambujät—from the lotus; äsét—was manifested;
brahmä—the grandfather of the living beings; viçva—the universe; såjäm—the
engineers; patiù—master.
TRANSLATION
A part of the puruña lies down within the water of the universe, from the
navel lake of His body sprouts a lotus stem, and from the lotus flower atop this
stem, Brahmä, the master of all engineers in the universe, becomes manifest.
PURPORT
The first puruña is the Käraëodakaçäyé Viñëu. From His skin holes
innumerable universes have sprung up. In each and every universe, the puruña
enters as the Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu. He is lying within the half of the universe
which is full with the water of His body. And from the navel of
Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu has sprung the stem of the lotus flower, the birthplace
of Brahmä, who is the father of all living beings and the master of all the
demigod engineers engaged in the perfect design and working of the universal
order. Within the stem of the lotus there are fourteen divisions of planetary
systems, and the earthly planets are situated in the middle. Upwards there are
other, better planetary systems, and the topmost system is called Brahmaloka
or Satyaloka. Downwards from the earthly planetary system there are seven
lower planetary systems inhabited by the asuras and similar other materialistic
living beings.
From Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu there is expansion of the Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu,
who is the collective Paramätmä of all living beings. He is called Hari, and
from Him all incarnations within the universe are expanded.
Therefore, the conclusion is that the puruña-avatära is manifested in three
features — first the Käraëodakaçäyé who creates aggregate material
ingredients in the mahat-tattva, second the Garbhodakaçäyé who enters in
each and every universe, and third the Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu who is the
Paramätmä of every material object, organic or inorganic. One who knows
these plenary features of the Personality of Godhead knows Godhead properly,
and thus the knower becomes freed from the material conditions of birth,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
death, old age and disease, as it is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä, In this çloka the
subject matter of Mahä-Viñëu is summarized. The Mahä-Viñëu lies down in
some part of the spiritual sky by His own free will. Thus He lies on the ocean
of käraëa, from where He glances over His material nature, and the
mahat-tattva is at once created. Thus electrified by the power of the Lord, the
material nature at once creates innumerable universes, just as in due course a
tree decorates itself with innumerable grown fruits. The seed of the tree is
sown by the cultivator, and the tree or creeper in due course becomes
manifested with so many fruits. Nothing can take place without a cause. The
Käraëa Ocean is therefore called the Causal Ocean. Käraëa means “causal.”
We should not foolishly accept the atheistic theory of creation. The
description of the atheists is given in the Bhagavad-gétä. The atheist does not
believe in the creator, but he cannot give a good theory to explain the
creation. Material nature has no power to create without the power of the
puruña, just as a prakåti, or woman, cannot produce a child without the
connection of a puruña, or man. The puruña impregnates, and the prakåti
delivers. We should not expect milk from the fleshy bags on the neck of a goat,
although they look like breastly nipples. Similarly, we should not expect any
creative power from the material ingredients; we must believe in the power of
the puruña, who impregnates prakåti, or nature. Because the Lord wished to lie
down in meditation, the material energy created innumerable universes at
once, in each of them the Lord lay down, and thus all the planets and the
different paraphernalia were created at once by the will of the Lord. The Lord
has unlimited potencies, and thus He can act as He likes by perfect planning,
although personally He has nothing to do. No one is greater than or equal to
Him. That is the verdict of the Vedas.
TEXT 3
YaSYaavYavSa&SQaaNaE" k-iLPaTaae l/aek-ivSTar" )
TaÜE >aGavTaae æPa& ivéuÖ& SatvMaUiJaRTaMa( )) 3 ))
yasyävayava-saàsthänaiù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
kalpito loka-vistaraù
tad vai bhagavato rüpaà
viçuddhaà sattvam ürjitam
SYNONYMS
yasya—whose; avayava—bodily expansion; saàsthänaiù—situated in;
kalpitaù—is imagined; loka—planets of inhabitants; vistaraù—various; tat
vai—but that is; bhagavataù—of the Personality of Godhead; rüpam—form;
viçuddham—purely; sattvam—existence; ürjitam—excellence.
TRANSLATION
It is believed that all the universal planetary systems are situated on the
extensive body of the puruña, but He has nothing to do with the created
material ingredients. His body is eternally in spiritual existence par excellence.
PURPORT
The conception of the viräö-rüpa or viçva-rüpa of the Supreme Absolute
Truth is especially meant for the neophyte who can hardly think of the
transcendental form of the Personality of Godhead. To him a form means
something of this material world, and therefore an opposite conception of the
Absolute is necessary in the beginning to concentrate the mind on the power
extension of the Lord. As stated above, the Lord extends His potency in the
form of the mahat-tattva, which includes all material ingredients. The
extension of power by the Lord and the Lord Himself personally are one in one
sense, but at the same time the mahat-tattva is different from the Lord.
Therefore the potency of the Lord and the Lord are simultaneously different
and nondifferent. The conception of the viräö-rüpa, especially for the
impersonalist, is thus nondifferent from the eternal form of the Lord. This
eternal form of the Lord exists prior to the creation of the mahat-tattva, and it
is stressed here that the eternal form of the Lord is par excellence spiritual or
transcendental to the modes of material nature. The very same transcendental
form of the Lord is manifested by His internal potency, and the formation of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
His multifarious manifestations of incarnations is always of the same
transcendental quality, without any touch of the mahat-tattva.
TEXT 4
PaXYaNTYadae æPaMad>a]c+auza
SahóPaadaeå>auJaaNaNaad(>auTaMa( )
SahóMaUDaRé[v<aai+aNaaiSak&-
SahóMaaELYaMbrku-<@l/aeçSaTa( )) 4 ))
paçyanty ado rüpam adabhra-cakñuñä
sahasra-pädoru-bhujänanädbhutam
sahasra-mürdha-çravaëäkñi-näsikaà
sahasra-mauly-ambara-kuëòalollasat
SYNONYMS
paçyanti—see; adaù—the form of the puruña; rüpam—form; adabhra—perfect;
cakñuñä—by the eyes; sahasra-päda—thousands of legs; üru—thighs;
bhuja-änana—hands and faces; adbhutam—wonderful; sahasra—thousands of;
mürdha—heads; çravaëa—ears; akñi—eyes; näsikam—noses;
sahasra—thousands; mauli—garlands; ambara—dresses; kuëòala—earrings;
ullasat—all glowing.
TRANSLATION
The devotees, with their perfect eyes, see the transcendental form of the
puruña who has thousands of legs, thighs, arms and faces—all extraordinary. In
that body there are thousands of heads, ears, eyes and noses. They are decorated
with thousands of helmets and glowing earrings and are adorned with garlands.
PURPORT
With our present materialized senses we cannot perceive anything of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
transcendental Lord. Our present senses are to be rectified by the process of
devotional service, and then the Lord Himself becomes revealed to us. In the
Bhagavad-gétä it is confirmed that the transcendental Lord can be perceived
only by pure devotional service. So it is confirmed in the Vedas that only
devotional service can lead one to the side of the Lord and that only
devotional service can reveal Him. In the Brahma-saàhitä also it is said that
the Lord is always visible to the devotees whose eyes have been anointed with
the tinge of devotional service. So we have to take information of the
transcendental form of the Lord from persons who have actually seen Him
with perfect eyes smeared with devotional service. In the material world also
we do not always see things with our own eyes; we sometimes see through the
experience of those who have actually seen or done things. If that is the
process for experiencing a mundane object, it is more perfectly applicable in
matters transcendental. So only with patience and perseverance can we realize
the transcendental subject matter regarding the Absolute Truth and His
different forms. He is formless to the neophytes, but He is in transcendental
form to the expert servitor.
TEXT 5
WTaàaNaavTaara<aa& iNaDaaNa& bqJaMaVYaYaMa( )
YaSYaa&Xaa&XaeNa Sa*JYaNTae deviTaYaRx(NaradYa" )) 5 ))
etan nänävatäräëäà
nidhänaà béjam avyayam
yasyäàçäàçena såjyante
deva-tiryaì-narädayaù
SYNONYMS
etat—this (form); nänä—multifarious; avatäräëäm—of the incarnations;
nidhänam—source; béjam—seed; avyayam—indestructible; yasya—whose;
aàça—plenary portion; aàçena—part of the plenary portion;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
såjyante—create; deva—demigods; tiryak—animals; nara-ädayaù—human
beings and others.
TRANSLATION
This form [the second manifestation of the puruña] is the source and
indestructible seed of multifarious incarnations within the universe. From the
particles and portions of this form, different living entities, like demigods, men
and others, are created.
PURPORT
The puruña, after creating innumerable universes in the mahat-tattva,
entered in each of them as the second puruña, Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu. When
He saw that within the universe there was only darkness and space, without a
resting place, He filled half of the universe with water from His own
perspiration and laid Himself down on the same water. This water is called
Garbhodaka. Then from His navel the stem of the lotus flower sprouted, and
on the flower petals the birth of Brahmä, or the master engineer of the
universal plan, took place. Brahmä became the engineer of the universe, and
the Lord Himself took charge of the maintenance of the universe as Viñëu.
Brahmä was generated from rajo-guëa of prakåti, or the mode of passion in
nature, and Viñëu became the Lord of the mode of goodness. Viñëu, being
transcendental to all the modes, is always aloof from materialistic affection.
This has already been explained. From Brahmä there is Rudra (Çiva), who is in
charge of the mode of ignorance or darkness. He destroys the whole creation
by the will of the Lord. Therefore all three, namely Brahmä, Viñëu and Çiva,
are incarnations of the Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu. From Brahmä the other
demigods like Dakña, Maréci, Manu and many others become incarnated to
generate living entities within the universe. This Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu is
glorified in the Vedas in the hymns of Garbha-stuti, which begin with the
description of the Lord as having thousands of heads, etc. The Garbhodakaçäyé
Viñëu is the Lord of the universe, and although He appears to be lying within
the universe, He is always transcendental. This also has already been
explained. The Viñëu who is the plenary portion of the Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
is the Supersoul of the universal life, and He is known as the maintainer of the
universe or Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu. So the three features of the original puruña
are thus understood. And all the incarnations within the universe are
emanations from this Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu.
In different millennia there are different incarnations, and they are
innumerable, although some of them are very prominent, such as Matsya,
Kürma, Varäha, Räma, Nåsiàha, Vämana and many others. These
incarnations are called lélä incarnations. Then there are qualitative
incarnations such as Brahmä, Viñëu, and Çiva (or Rudra) who take charge of
the different modes of material nature.
Lord Viñëu is nondifferent from the Personality of Godhead. Lord Çiva is in
the marginal position between the Personality of Godhead and the living
entities, or jévas. Brahmä is always a jéva-tattva. The highest pious living being,
or the greatest devotee of the Lord, is empowered with the potency of the Lord
for creation, and he is called Brahmä. His power is like the power of the sun
reflected in valuable stones and jewels. When there is no such living being to
take charge of the post of Brahmä, the Lord Himself becomes a Brahmä and
takes charge of the post.
Lord Çiva is not an ordinary living being. He is the plenary portion of the
Lord, but because Lord Çiva is in direct touch with material nature, he is not
exactly in the same transcendental position as Lord Viñëu. The difference is
like that between milk and curd. Curd is nothing but milk, and yet it cannot
be used in place of milk.
The next incarnations are the Manus. Within one day’s duration of the life
of Brahmä (which is calculated by our solar year as 4,300,000 x 1,000 years)
there are fourteen Manus. Therefore there are 420 Manus in one month of
Brahmä and 5,040 Manus in one year of Brahmä. Brahmä lives for one
hundred years of his age, and therefore there are 5,040 x 100 or 504,000 Manus
in the duration of Brahmä’s life. There are innumerable universes, with one
Brahmä in each of them, and all of them are created and annihilated during
the breathing time of the puruña. Therefore one can simply imagine how many
millions of Manus there are during one breath of the puruña.
The Manus who are prominent within this universe are as follows: Yajïa as
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Sväyambhuva Manu, Vibhu as Svärociña Manu, Satyasena as Uttama Manu,
Hari as Tämasa Manu, Vaikuëöha as Raivata Manu, Ajita as Cäkñuña Manu,
Vämana as Vaivasvata Manu (the present age is under the Vaivasvata Manu),
Särvabhauma as Sävarëi Manu, Åñabha as Dakñasävarëi Manu, Viñvaksena as
Brahma-sävarëi Manu, Dharmasetu as Dharma-sävarëi Manu, Sudhämä as
Rudra-sävarëi Manu, Yogeçvara as Deva-sävarëi Manu, and Båhadbhänu as
Indra-sävarëi Manu. These are the names of one set of fourteen Manus
covering 4,300,000,000 solar years as described above.
Then there are the yugävatäras, or the incarnations of the millennia. The
yugas are known as Satya-yuga, Tretä-yuga, Dväpara-yuga and Kali-yuga. The
incarnations of each yuga are of different color. The colors are white, red,
black and yellow. In the Dväpara-yuga, Lord Kåñëa in black color appeared,
and in the Kali-yuga Lord Caitanya in yellow color appeared.
So all the incarnations of the Lord are mentioned in the revealed
scriptures. There is no scope for an imposter to become an incarnation, for an
incarnation must be mentioned in the çästras. An incarnation does not declare
Himself to be an incarnation of the Lord, but great sages agree by the
symptoms mentioned in the revealed scriptures. The features of the
incarnation and the particular type of mission which He has to execute are
mentioned in the revealed scriptures.
Apart from the direct incarnations, there are innumerable empowered
incarnations. They are also mentioned in the revealed scriptures. Such
incarnations are directly as well as indirectly empowered. When they are
directly empowered they are called incarnations, but when they are indirectly
empowered they are called vibhütis. Directly empowered incarnations are the
Kumäras, Närada, Påthu, Çeña, Ananta, etc. As far as vibhütis are concerned,
they are very explicitly described in the Bhagavad-gétä in the Vibhüti-yoga
chapter. And for all these different types of incarnations, the fountainhead is
the Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu.
TEXT 6
Sa Wv Pa[QaMa& dev" k-aEMaar& SaGaRMaaié[Ta" )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ccar duêr& b]øa b]øcYaRMa%i<@TaMa( )) 6 ))
sa eva prathamaà devaù
kaumäraà sargam äçritaù
cacära duçcaraà brahmä
brahmacaryam akhaëòitam
SYNONYMS
saù—that; eva—certainly; prathamam—first; devaù—Supreme Lord;
kaumäram—named the Kumäras (unmarried); sargam—creation;
äçritaù—under; cacära—performed; duçcaram—very difficult to do;
brahmä—in the order of Brahman; brahmacaryam—under discipline to realize
the Absolute (Brahman); akhaëòitam—unbroken.
TRANSLATION
First of all, in the beginning of creation, there were the four unmarried sons
of Brahmä [the Kumäras], who, being situated in a vow of celibacy, underwent
severe austerities for realization of the Absolute Truth.
PURPORT
The creation of the material world is effected, maintained and then again
annihilated at certain intervals. So there are different names of the creations
in terms of the particular types of Brahmä, the father of the living beings in
the creation. The Kumäras, as above mentioned, appeared in the Kaumära
creation of the material world, and to teach us the process of Brahman
realization, they underwent a severe type of disciplinary action as bachelors.
These Kumäras are empowered incarnations. And before executing the severe
type of disciplinary actions, all of them became qualified brähmaëas. This
example suggests that one must first acquire the qualifications of a brähmaëa,
not simply by birth but also by quality, and then one can undergo the process
of Brahman realization.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 7
iÜTaqYa& Tau >avaYaaSYa rSaaTal/GaTaa& MahqMa( )
oÖirZYaàuPaadta YajeXa" SaaEk-r& vPau" )) 7 ))
dvitéyaà tu bhaväyäsya
rasätala-gatäà mahém
uddhariñyann upädatta
yajïeçaù saukaraà vapuù
SYNONYMS
dvitéyam—the second; tu—but; bhaväya—for the welfare; asya—of this earth;
rasätala—of the lowest region; gatäm—having gone; mahém—the earth;
uddhariñyan—lifting; upädatta—established; yajïeçaù—the proprietor or the
supreme enjoyer; saukaram—hoggish; vapuù—incarnation.
TRANSLATION
The supreme enjoyer of all sacrifices accepted the incarnation of a boar [the
second incarnation], and for the welfare of the earth He lifted the earth from
the nether regions of the universe.
PURPORT
The indication is that for each and every incarnation of the Personality of
Godhead, the particular function executed is also mentioned. There cannot be
any incarnation without a particular function, and such functions are always
extraordinary. They are impossible for any living being to perform. The
incarnation of the boar was to take the earth out of Pluto’s region of filthy
matter. Picking up something from a filthy place is done by a boar, and the
all-powerful Personality of Godhead displayed this wonder to the asuras, who
had hidden the earth in such a filthy place. There is nothing impossible for the
Personality of Godhead, and although He played the part of a boar, by the
devotees He is worshiped, staying always in transcendence.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 8
Ta*TaqYaMa*izSaGa| vE devizRTvMauPaeTYa Sa" )
TaN}a& SaaTvTaMaací NaEZk-MYa| k-MaR<aa& YaTa" )) 8 ))
tåtéyam åñi-sargaà vai
devarñitvam upetya saù
tantraà sätvatam äcañöa
naiñkarmyaà karmaëäà yataù
SYNONYMS
tåtéyam—the third one; åñi-sargam—the millennium of the åñis; vai—certainly;
devarñitvam—incarnation of the åñi amongst the demigods; upetya—having
accepted; saù—he; tantram—exposition of the Vedas; sätvatam—which is
especially meant for devotional service; äcañöa—collected;
naiñkarmyam—nonfruitive; karmaëäm—of work; yataù—from which.
TRANSLATION
In the millennium of the åñis, the Personality of Godhead accepted the third
empowered incarnation in the form of Devarñi Närada, who is a great sage
among the demigods. He collected expositions of the Vedas which deal with
devotional service and which inspire nonfruitive action.
PURPORT
The great Åñi Närada, who is an empowered incarnation of the Personality
of Godhead, propagates devotional service all over the universe. All great
devotees of the Lord all over the universe and in different planets and species
of life are his disciples. Çréla Vyäsadeva, the compiler of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, is also one of his disciples. Närada is the author of
Närada-païcarätra, which is the exposition of the Vedas particularly for the
devotional service of the Lord. This Närada-païcarätra trains the karmés, or
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the fruitive workers, to achieve liberation from the bondage of fruitive work.
The conditioned souls are mostly attracted by fruitive work because they want
to enjoy life by the sweat of their own brows. The whole universe is full of
fruitive workers in all species of life. The fruitive works include all kinds of
economic development plans. But the law of nature provides that every action
has its resultant reaction, and the performer of the work is bound up by such
reactions, good or bad. The reaction of good work is comparative material
prosperity, whereas the reaction of bad work is comparative material distress.
But material conditions, either in so-called happiness or in so-called distress,
are all meant ultimately for distress only. Foolish materialists have no
information of how to obtain eternal happiness in the unconditional state. Çré
Närada informs these foolish fruitive workers how to realize the reality of
happiness. He gives direction to the diseased men of the world how one’s
present engagement can lead one to the path of spiritual emancipation. The
physician directs the patient to take treated milk in the form of curd for his
sufferings from indigestion due to his taking another milk preparation. So the
cause of the disease and the remedy of the disease may be the same, but it must
be treated by an expert physician like Närada. The Bhagavad-gétä also gives the
same solution of serving the Lord by the fruits of one’s labor. That will lead
one to the path of naiñkarmya, or liberation.
TEXT 9
TauYaeR DaMaRk-l/aSaGaeR NarNaaraYa<aav*zq )
>aUTvaTMaaePaXaMaaePaeTaMak-raed( duêr& TaPa" )) 9 ))
turye dharma-kalä-sarge
nara-näräyaëäv åñé
bhütvätmopaçamopetam
akarod duçcaraà tapaù
SYNONYMS
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
turye—in the fourth of the line; dharma-kalä—wife of Dharmaräja;
sarge—being born of; nara-näräyaëau—named Nara and Näräyaëa;
åñé—sages; bhütvä—becoming; ätma-upaçama—controlling the senses;
upetam—for achievement of; akarot—undertook; duçcaram—very strenuous;
tapaù—penance.
TRANSLATION
In the fourth incarnation, the Lord became Nara and Näräyaëa, the twin
sons of the wife of King Dharma. Thus He undertook severe and exemplary
penances to control the senses.
PURPORT
As King Åñabha advised His sons, tapasya, or voluntary acceptance of
penance for realization of the Transcendence, is the only duty of the human
being; it was so done by the Lord Himself in an exemplary manner to teach us.
The Lord is very kind to the forgetful souls. He therefore comes Himself and
leaves behind necessary instructions and also sends His good sons as
representatives to call all the conditioned souls back to Godhead. Recently,
within the memory of everyone, Lord Caitanya also appeared for the same
purpose: to show special favor to fallen souls of this age of iron industry. The
incarnation of Näräyaëa is worshiped still at Badaré-näräyaëa, on the range of
the Himalayas.
TEXT 10
PaÄMa" k-iPal/ae NaaMa iSaÖeXa" k-al/ivPlu/TaMa( )
Pa[aevacaSaurYae Saa&:Ya& TatvGa]aMaiviNa<aRYaMa( )) 10 ))
païcamaù kapilo näma
siddheçaù käla-viplutam
proväcäsuraye säìkhyaà
tattva-gräma-vinirëayam
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
païcamaù—the fifth one; kapilaù—Kapila; näma—of the name;
siddheçaù—the foremost amongst the perfect; käla—time; viplutam—lost;
proväca—said; äsuraye—unto the brähmaëa named Äsuri;
säìkhyam—metaphysics; tattva-gräma—the sum total of the creative elements;
vinirëayam—exposition.
TRANSLATION
The fifth incarnation, named Lord Kapila, is foremost among perfected
beings. He gave an exposition of the creative elements and metaphysics to Äsuri
Brähmaëa, for in course of time this knowledge had been lost.
PURPORT
The sum total of the creative elements is twenty-four in all. Each and every
one of them is explicitly explained in the system of Säìkhya philosophy.
Säìkhya philosophy is generally called metaphysics by the European scholars.
The etymological meaning of säìkhya is “that which explains very lucidly by
analysis of the material elements.” This was done for the first time by Lord
Kapila, who is said herein to be the fifth in the line of incarnations.
TEXT 11
zïMa( A}aerPaTYaTv& v*Ta" Pa[aáae_NaSaUYaYaa )
AaNvqi+ak-IMal/k-aRYa Pa[úadaid>Ya OicvaNa( )) 11 ))
ñañöham atrer apatyatvaà
våtaù präpto ’nasüyayä
änvékñikém alarkäya
prahlädädibhya ücivän
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
ñañöham—the sixth one; atreù—of Atri; apatyatvam—sonship; våtaù—being
prayed for; präptaù—obtained; anasüyayä—by Anasüyä; änvékñikém—on the
subject of transcendence; alarkäya—unto Alarka; prahläda-ädibhyaù—unto
Prahläda and others; ücivän—spoke.
TRANSLATION
The sixth incarnation of the puruña was the son of the sage Atri. He was
born from the womb of Anasüyä, who prayed for an incarnation. He spoke on
the subject of transcendence to Alarka, Prahläda and others [Yadu, Haihaya,
etc.].
PURPORT
The Lord incarnated Himself as Dattätreya, the son of Åñi Atri and
Anasüyä. The history of the birth of Dattätreya as an incarnation of the Lord
is mentioned in the Brahmäëòa Puräëa in connection with the story of the
devoted wife. It is said there that Anasüyä, the wife of Åñi Atri, prayed before
the Lords Brahmä, Viñëu and Çiva as follows: “My lords, if you are pleased with
me, and if you desire me to ask from you some sort of blessings, then I pray that
you combine together to become my son.” This was accepted by the lords, and
as Dattätreya the Lord expounded the philosophy of the spirit soul and
especially instructed Alarka, Prahläda, Yadu, Haihaya, etc.
TEXT 12
TaTa" SaáMa AakU-TYaa& åceYaRjae_>YaJaaYaTa )
Sa YaaMaaÛE" SaurGa<aErPaaTSvaYaM>auvaNTarMa( )) 12 ))
tataù saptama äkütyäà
rucer yajïo ’bhyajäyata
sa yämädyaiù sura-gaëair
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
apät sväyambhuväntaram
SYNONYMS
tataù—after that; saptame—the seventh in the line; äkütyäm—in the womb of
Äküti; ruceù—by Prajäpati Ruci; yajïaù—the Lord’s incarnation as Yajïa;
abhyajäyata—advented; saù—He; yäma-ädyaiù—with Yäma and others;
sura-gaëaiù—with demigods; apät—ruled; sväyambhuva-antaram—the change
of the period of Sväyambhuva Manu.
TRANSLATION
The seventh incarnation was Yajïa, the son of Prajäpati Ruci and his wife
Äküti. He controlled the period during the change of the Sväyambhuva Manu
and was assisted by demigods such as His son Yama.
PURPORT
The administrative posts occupied by the demigods for maintaining the
regulations of the material world are offered to the highly elevated pious living
beings. When there is a scarcity of such pious living beings, the Lord
incarnates Himself as Brahmä, Prajäpati, Indra, etc., and takes up the charge.
During the period of Sväyambhuva Manu (the present period is of Vaivasvata
Manu) there was no suitable living being who could occupy the post of Indra,
the King of the Indraloka (heaven) planet. The Lord Himself at that time
became Indra. Assisted by His own sons like Yama and other demigods, Lord
Yajïa ruled the administration of the universal affairs.
TEXT 13
AíMae MaeådeVYaa& Tau Naa>aeJaaRTa oå§-Ma" )
dXaRYaNa( vTMaR Daqra<aa& SavaRé[MaNaMaSk*-TaMa( )) 13 ))
añöame merudevyäà tu
näbher jäta urukramaù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
darçayan vartma dhéräëäà
sarväçrama-namaskåtam
SYNONYMS
añöame—the eighth of the incarnations; merudevyäm tu—in the womb of
Merudevé, the wife of; näbheù—King Näbhi; jätaù—took birth;
urukramaù—the all-powerful Lord; darçayan—by showing; vartma—the way;
dhéräëäm—of the perfect beings; sarva—all; äçrama—orders of life;
namaskåtam—honored by.
TRANSLATION
The eighth incarnation was King Åñabha, son of King Näbhi and his wife
Merudevé. In this incarnation the Lord showed the path of perfection, which is
followed by those who have fully controlled their senses and who are honored
by all orders of life.
PURPORT
The society of human being is naturally divided into eight by orders and
statuses of life—the four divisions of occupation and four divisions of cultural
advancement. The intelligent class, the administrative class, the productive
class and the laborer class are the four divisions of occupation. And the
student life, the householder’s life, retired life and renounced life are the four
statuses of cultural advancement towards the path of spiritual realization. Out
of these, the renounced order of life, or the order of sannyäsa, is considered
the highest of all, and a sannyäsé is constitutionally the spiritual master for all
the orders and divisions. In the sannyäsa order also there are four stages of
upliftment toward perfection. These stages are called kuöécaka, bahüdaka,
parivräjakäcärya, and paramahaàsa. The paramahaàsa stage of life is the
highest stage of perfection. This order of life is respected by all others.
Mahäräja Åñabha, the son of King Näbhi and Merudevé, was an incarnation of
the Lord, and He instructed His sons to follow the path of perfection by
tapasya, which sanctifies one’s existence and enables one to attain the stage of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
spiritual happiness which is eternal and ever increasing. Every living being is
searching after happiness, but no one knows where eternal and unlimited
happiness is obtainable. Foolish men seek after material sense pleasure as a
substitute for real happiness, but such foolish men forget that temporary
so-called happiness derived from sense pleasures is also enjoyed by the dogs
and hogs. No animal, bird or beast is bereft of this sense pleasure. In every
species of life, including the human form of life, such happiness is immensely
obtainable. The human form of life, however, is not meant for such cheap
happiness. The human life is meant for attaining eternal and unlimited
happiness by spiritual realization. This spiritual realization is obtained by
tapasya, or undergoing voluntarily the path of penance and abstinence from
material pleasure. Those who have been trained for abstinence in material
pleasures are called dhéra, or men undisturbed by the senses. Only these dhéras
can accept the orders of sannyäsa, and they can gradually rise to the status of
the paramahaàsa, which is adored by all members of society. King Åñabha
propagated this mission, and at the last stage He became completely aloof from
the material bodily needs, which is a rare stage not to be imitated by foolish
men, but to be worshiped by all.
TEXT 14
‰izi>aYaaRicTaae >aeJae NavMa& PaaiQaRv& vPau" )
duGDaeMaaMaaezDaqivRPa[aSTaeNaaYa& Sa oXataMa" )) 14 ))
åñibhir yäcito bheje
navamaà pärthivaà vapuù
dugdhemäm oñadhér vipräs
tenäyaà sa uçattamaù
SYNONYMS
åñibhiù—by the sages; yäcitaù—being prayed for; bheje—accepted;
navamam—the ninth one; pärthivam—the ruler of the earth; vapuù—body;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
dugdha—milking; imäm—all these; oñadhéù—products of the earth; vipräù—O
brähmaëas; tena—by; ayam—this; saù—he; uçattamaù—beautifully attractive.
TRANSLATION
O brähmaëas, in the ninth incarnation, the Lord, prayed for by sages,
accepted the body of a king [Påthu] who cultivated the land to yield various
produces, and for that reason the earth was beautiful and attractive.
PURPORT
Before the advent of King Påthu, there was great havoc of
maladministration due to the vicious life of the previous king, the father of
Mahäräja Påthu. The intelligent class of men (namely the sages and the
brähmaëas) not only prayed for the Lord to come down, but also dethroned the
previous king. It is the duty of the king to be pious and thus look after the
all-around welfare of the citizens. Whenever there is some negligence on the
part of the king in discharging his duty, the intelligent class of men must
dethrone him. The intelligent class of men, however, do not occupy the royal
throne, because they have much more important duties for the welfare of the
public. Instead of occupying the royal throne, they prayed for the incarnation
of the Lord, and the Lord came as Mahäräja Påthu. Real intelligent men, or
qualified brähmaëas, never aspire for political posts. Mahäräja Påthu excavated
many produces from the earth, and thus not only did the citizens become
happy to have such a good king, but the complete sight of the earth also
became beautiful and attractive.
TEXT 15
æPa& Sa JaGa*he MaaTSYa& ca+auzaediDaSaMâve )
NaaVYaaraePYa MahqMaYYaaMaPaaÜEvSvTa& MaNauMa( )) 15 ))
rüpaà sa jagåhe mätsyaà
cäkñuñodadhi-samplave
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
nävy äropya mahé-mayyäm
apäd vaivasvataà manum
SYNONYMS
rüpam—form; saù—He; jagåhe—accepted; mätsyam—of a fish;
cäkñuña—Cäkñuña; udadhi—water; samplave—inundation; nävi—on the boat;
äropya—keeping on; mahé—the earth; mayyäm—drowned in;
apät—protected; vaivasvatam—Vaivasvata; manum—Manu, the father of
man.
TRANSLATION
When there was a complete inundation after the period of the Cäkñuña
Manu and the whole world was deep within water, the Lord accepted the form
of a fish and protected Vaivasvata Manu, keeping him up on a boat.
PURPORT
According to Çrépäda Çrédhara Svämé, the original commentator on the
Bhägavatam, there is not always a devastation after the change of every Manu.
And yet this inundation after the period of Cäkñuña Manu took place in order
to show some wonders to Satyavrata. But Çré Jéva Gosvämé has given definite
proofs from authoritative scriptures (like Viñëu-dharmottara, Märkaëòeya
Puräëa, Harivaàça, etc.) that there is always a devastation after the end of
each and every Manu. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté has also supported Çréla
Jéva Gosvämé, and he (Çré Cakravarté) has also quoted from Bhägavatämåta
about this inundation after each Manu. Apart from this, the Lord, in order to
show special favor to Satyavrata, a devotee of the Lord, in this particular
period, incarnated Himself.
TEXT 16
SauraSaura<aaMaudiDa& MaQNaTaa& MaNdracl/Ma( )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
dDa]e k-Ma#=æPae<a Pa*ï Wk-adXae iv>au" )) 16 ))
suräsuräëäm udadhià
mathnatäà mandaräcalam
dadhre kamaöha-rüpeëa
påñöha ekädaçe vibhuù
SYNONYMS
sura—the theists; asuräëäm—of the atheists; udadhim—in the ocean;
mathnatäm—churning; mandaräcalam—the Mandaräcala Hill;
dadhre—sustained; kamaöha—tortoise; rüpeëa—in the form of; påñöhe—shell;
ekädaçe—the eleventh in the line; vibhuù—the great.
TRANSLATION
The eleventh incarnation of the Lord took the form of a tortoise whose shell
served as a pivot for the Mandaräcala Hill, which was being used as a churning
rod by the theists and atheists of the universe.
PURPORT
Once both the atheists and the theists were engaged in producing nectar
from the sea so that all of them could become deathless by drinking it. At that
time the Mandaräcala Hill was used as the churning rod, and the shell of Lord
Tortoise, the incarnation of Godhead, became the resting place (pivot) of the
hill in the seawater.
TEXT 17
DaaNvNTar& ÜadXaMa& }aYaaedXaMaMaev c )
APaaYaYaTSauraNaNYaaNMaaeihNYaa MaaehYaNa( iñYaa )) 17 ))
dhänvantaraà dvädaçamaà
trayodaçamam eva ca
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
apäyayat surän anyän
mohinyä mohayan striyä
SYNONYMS
dhänvantaram—the incarnation of Godhead named Dhanvantari;
dvädaçamam—the twelfth in the line; trayodaçamam—the thirteenth in the
line; eva—certainly; ca—and; apäyayat—gave to drink; surän—the demigods;
anyän—others; mohinyä—by charming beauty; mohayan—alluring; striyä—in
the form of a woman.
TRANSLATION
In the twelfth incarnation, the Lord appeared as Dhanvantari, and in the
thirteenth He allured the atheists by the charming beauty of a woman and gave
nectar to the demigods to drink.
TEXT 18
cTaudRXa& NaariSa&h& ib>a]ÕETYaeNd]MaUiJaRTaMa( )
ddar k-rJaEæraverk-a& k-$=k*-ÛQaa )) 18 ))
caturdaçaà närasiàhaà
bibhrad daityendram ürjitam
dadära karajair üräv
erakäà kaöa-kåd yathä
SYNONYMS
caturdaçam—the fourteenth in the line; nära-siàham—the incarnation of the
Lord as half-man and half-lion; bibhrat—advented; daitya-indram—the king of
the atheists; ürjitam—strongly built; dadära—bifurcated; karajaiù—by the
nails; ürau—on the lap; erakäm—canes; kaöa-kåt—carpenter; yathä—just like.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
In the fourteenth incarnation, the Lord appeared as Nåsiàha and bifurcated
the strong body of the atheist Hiraëyakaçipu with His nails, just as a carpenter
pierces cane.
TEXT 19
PaÄdXa& vaMaNak&- k*-TvaGaadßr& ble/" )
Pad}aYa& YaacMaaNa" Pa[TYaaidTSauiñiPaíPaMa( )) 19 ))
païcadaçaà vämanakaà
kåtvägäd adhvaraà baleù
pada-trayaà yäcamänaù
pratyäditsus tri-piñöapam
SYNONYMS
païcadaçam—the fifteenth in the line; vämanakam—the dwarf brähmaëa;
kåtvä—by assumption of; agät—went; adhvaram—arena of sacrifice; baleù—of
King Bali; pada-trayam—three steps only; yäcamänaù—begging;
pratyäditsuù—willing at heart to return; tri-piñöapam—the kingdom of the
three planetary systems.
TRANSLATION
In the fifteenth incarnation, the Lord assumed the form of a
dwarf-brähmaëa [Vämana] and visited the arena of sacrifice arranged by
Mahäräja Bali. Although at heart He was willing to regain the kingdom of the
three planetary systems, He simply asked for a donation of three steps of land.
PURPORT
The Almighty God can bestow upon anyone the kingdom of the universe
from a very small beginning, and similarly, He can take away the kingdom of
the universe on the plea of begging a small piece of land.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 20
AvTaare zae@XaMae PaXYaNa( b]ød]uhae Na*PaaNa( )
i}a"Saák*-Tv" ku-iPaTaae iNa"+a}aaMak-raeNMahqMa( )) 20 ))
avatäre ñoòaçame
paçyan brahma-druho nåpän
triù-sapta-kåtvaù kupito
niù-kñaträm akaron mahém
SYNONYMS
avatäre—in the incarnation of the Lord; ñoòaçame—the sixteenth;
paçyan—seeing; brahma-druhaù—disobedient to the orders of the brähmaëas;
nåpän—the kingly order; triù-sapta—thrice seven times; kåtvaù—had done;
kupitaù—being engaged; niù—negation; kñaträm—the administrative class;
akarot—did perform; mahém—the earth.
TRANSLATION
In the sixteenth incarnation of the Godhead, the Lord [as Bhågupati]
annihilated the administrative class [kñatriyas] twenty-one times, being angry
with them because of their rebellion against the brähmaëas [the intelligent
class].
PURPORT
The kñatriyas, or the administrative class of men, are expected to rule the
planet by the direction of the intelligent class of men, who give direction to
the rulers in terms of the standard çästras, or the books of revealed knowledge.
The rulers carry on the administration according to that direction. Whenever
there is disobedience on the part of the kñatriyas, or the administrative class,
against the orders of the learned and intelligent brähmaëas, the administrators
are removed by force from the posts, and arrangement is made for better
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
administration.
TEXT 21
TaTa" SaádXae JaaTa" SaTYavTYaa& ParaXaraTa( )
c§e- vedTarae" Xaa%a d*îa Pau&Saae_LPaMaeDaSa" )) 21 ))
tataù saptadaçe jätaù
satyavatyäà paräçarät
cakre veda-taroù çäkhä
dåñövä puàso ’lpa-medhasaù
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; saptadaçe—in the seventeenth incarnation;
jätaù—advented; satyavatyäm—in the womb of Satyavaté; paräçarät—by
Paräçara Muni; cakre—prepared; veda-taroù—of the desire tree of the Vedas;
çäkhäù—branches; dåñövä—be seeing; puàsaù—the people in general;
alpa-medhasaù—less intelligent.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, in the seventeenth incarnation of Godhead, Çré Vyäsadeva
appeared in the womb of Satyavaté through Paräçara Muni, and he divided the
one Veda into several branches and subbranches, seeing that the people in
general were less intelligent.
PURPORT
Originally the Veda is one. But Çréla Vyäsadeva divided the original Veda
into four, namely Säma, Yajur, Åg, Atharva, and then again they were
explained in different branches like the Puräëas and the Mahäbhärata. Vedic
language and the subject matter are very difficult for ordinary men. They are
understood by the highly intelligent and self-realized brähmaëas. But the
present age of Kali is full of ignorant men. Even those who are born by a
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
brähmaëa father are, in the present age, no better than the çüdras or the
women. The twice-born men, namely the brähmaëas, kñatriyas and vaiçyas, are
expected to undergo a cultural purificatory process known as saàskäras, but
because of the bad influence of the present age the so-called members of the
brähmaëa and other high-order families are no longer highly cultured. They
are called the dvija-bandhus, or the friends and family members of the
twice-born. But these dvija-bandhus are classified amongst the çüdras and the
women. Çréla Vyäsadeva divided the Vedas into various branches and
subbranches for the sake of the less intelligent classes like the dvija-bandhus,
çüdras and women.
TEXT 22
NardevTvMaaPaà" Saurk-aYaRick-IzRYaa )
SaMaud]iNaGa]hadqiNa c§e- vqYaaR<YaTa" ParMa( )) 22 ))
nara-devatvam äpannaù
sura-kärya-cikérñayä
samudra-nigrahädéni
cakre véryäëy ataù param
SYNONYMS
nara—human being; devatvam—divinity; äpannaù—having assumed the form
of; sura—the demigods; kärya—activities; cikérñayä—for the purpose of
performing; samudra—the Indian Ocean; nigraha-ädéni—controlling, etc.;
cakre—did perform; véryäëi—superhuman prowess; ataù param—thereafter.
TRANSLATION
In the eighteenth incarnation, the Lord appeared as King Räma. In order to
perform some pleasing work for the demigods, He exhibited superhuman powers
by controlling the Indian Ocean and then killing the atheist King Rävaëa, who
was on the other side of the sea.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
The Personality of Godhead Çré Räma assumed the form of a human being
and appeared on the earth for the purpose of doing some pleasing work for the
demigods or the administrative personalities to maintain the order of the
universe. Sometimes great demons and atheists like Rävaëa and Hiraëyakaçipu
and many others become very famous due to advancing material civilization by
the help of material science and other activities with a spirit of challenging the
established order of the Lord. For example, the attempt to fly to other planets
by material means is a challenge to the established order. The conditions of
each and every planet are different, and different classes of human beings are
accommodated there for particular purposes mentioned in the codes of the
Lord. But, puffed up by tiny success in material advancement, sometimes the
godless materialists challenge the existence of God. Rävaëa was one of them,
and he wanted to deport ordinary men to the planet of Indra (heaven) by
material means without consideration of the necessary qualifications. He
wanted a staircase to be built up directly reaching the heavenly planet so that
people might not be required to undergo the routine of pious work necessary to
enter that planet. He also wanted to perform other acts against the established
rule of the Lord. He even challenged the authority of Çré Räma, the
Personality of Godhead, and kidnapped His wife, Sétä. Of course Lord Räma
came to chastise this atheist, answering the prayer and desire of the demigods.
He therefore took up the challenge of Rävaëa, and the complete activity is the
subject matter of the Rämäyaëa. Because Lord Rämacandra was the
Personality of Godhead, He exhibited superhuman activities which no human
being, including the materially advanced Rävaëa, could perform. Lord
Rämacandra prepared a royal road on the Indian Ocean with stones that
floated on the water. The modern scientists have done research in the area of
weightlessness, but it is not possible to bring in weightlessness anywhere and
everywhere. But because weightlessness is the creation of the Lord by which
He can make the gigantic planets fly and float in the air, He made the stones
even within this earth to be weightless and prepared a stone bridge on the sea
without any supporting pillar. That is the display of the power of God.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 23
Wk-aeNaiv&Xae iv&XaiTaMae v*iZ<azu Pa[aPYa JaNMaNaq )
raMak*-Z<aaiviTa >auvae >aGavaNahrÙrMa( )) 23 ))
ekonaviàçe viàçatime
våñëiñu präpya janmané
räma-kåñëäv iti bhuvo
bhagavän aharad bharam
SYNONYMS
ekonaviàçe—in the nineteenth; viàçatime—in the twentieth also; våñëiñu—in
the Våñëi dynasty; präpya—having obtained; janmané—births;
räma—Balaräma; kåñëau—Çré Kåñëa; iti—thus; bhuvaù—of the world;
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; aharat—removed; bharam—burden.
TRANSLATION
In the nineteenth and twentieth incarnations, the Lord advented Himself as
Lord Balaräma and Lord Kåñëa in the family of Våñëi [the Yadu dynasty], and
by so doing He removed the burden of the world.
PURPORT
The specific mention of the word bhagavän in this text indicates that
Balaräma and Kåñëa are original forms of the Lord. This will be further
explained later. Lord Kåñëa is not an incarnation of the puruña, as we learned
from the beginning of this chapter. He is directly the original Personality of
Godhead, and Balaräma is the first plenary manifestation of the Lord. From
Baladeva the first phalanx of plenary expansions, Väsudeva, Saìkarñaëa,
Aniruddha and Pradyumna, expands. Lord Çré Kåñëa is Väsudeva, and
Baladeva is Saìkarñaëa.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 24
TaTa" k-l/aE SaMPa[v*tae SaMMaaehaYa SauriÜzaMa( )
buÖae NaaManaÅNaSauTa" k-Ik-$e=zu >aivZYaiTa )) 24 ))
tataù kalau sampravåtte
sammohäya sura-dviñäm
buddho nämnäïjana-sutaù
kékaöeñu bhaviñyati
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; kalau—the age of Kali; sampravåtte—having ensued;
sammohäya—for the purpose of deluding; sura—the theists; dviñäm—those
who are envious; buddhaù—Lord Buddha; nämnä—of the name;
aïjana-sutaù—whose mother was Aïjanä; kékaöeñu—in the province of Gayä
(Bihar); bhaviñyati—will take place.
TRANSLATION
Then, in the beginning of Kali-yuga, the Lord will appear as Lord Buddha,
the son of Aïjanä, in the province of Gayä, just for the purpose of deluding
those who are envious of the faithful theist.
PURPORT
Lord Buddha, a powerful incarnation of the Personality of Godhead,
appeared in the province of Gayä (Bihar) as the son of Aïjanä, and he
preached his own conception of nonviolence and deprecated even the animal
sacrifices sanctioned in the Vedas. At the time when Lord Buddha appeared,
the people in general were atheistic and preferred animal flesh to anything
else. On the plea of Vedic sacrifice, every place was practically turned into a
slaughterhouse, and animal-killing was indulged in unrestrictedly. Lord
Buddha preached nonviolence, taking pity on the poor animals. He preached
that he did not believe in the tenets of the Vedas and stressed the adverse
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
psychological effects incurred by animal-killing. Less intelligent men of the age
of Kali, who had no faith in God, followed his principle, and for the time being
they were trained in moral discipline and nonviolence, the preliminary steps
for proceeding further on the path of God realization. He deluded the atheists
because such atheists who followed his principles did not believe in God, but
they kept their absolute faith in Lord Buddha, who himself was the
incarnation of God. Thus the faithless people were made to believe in God in
the form of Lord Buddha. That was the mercy of Lord Buddha: he made the
faithless faithful to him.
Killing of animals before the advent of Lord Buddha was the most
prominent feature of the society. People claimed that these were Vedic
sacrifices. When the Vedas are not accepted through the authoritative
disciplic succession, the casual readers of the Vedas are misled by the flowery
language of that system of knowledge. In the Bhagavad-gétä a comment has
been made on such foolish scholars (avipaçcitaù). The foolish scholars of Vedic
literature who do not care to receive the transcendental message through the
transcendental realized sources of disciplic succession are sure to be
bewildered. To them, the ritualistic ceremonies are considered to be all in all.
They have no depth of knowledge. According to the Bhagavad-gétä (15.15),
vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva vedyaù: the whole system of the Vedas is to lead one
gradually to the path of the Supreme Lord. The whole theme of Vedic
literature is to know the Supreme Lord, the individual soul, the cosmic
situation and the relation between all these items. When the relation is
known, the relative function begins, and as a result of such a function the
ultimate goal of life or going back to Godhead takes place in the easiest
manner. Unfortunately, unauthorized scholars of the Vedas become captivated
by the purificatory ceremonies only, and natural progress is thereby checked.
To such bewildered persons of atheistic propensity, Lord Buddha is the
emblem of theism. He therefore first of all wanted to check the habit of
animal-killing. The animal-killers are dangerous elements on the path going
back to Godhead. There are two types of animal-killers. The soul is also
sometimes called the “animal” or the living being. Therefore, both the
slaughterer of animals and those who have lost their identity of soul are
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
animal-killers.
Mahäräja Parékñit said that only the animal-killer cannot relish the
transcendental message of the Supreme Lord. Therefore if people are to be
educated to the path of Godhead, they must be taught first and foremost to
stop the process of animal-killing as above mentioned. It is nonsensical to say
that animal-killing has nothing to do with spiritual realization. By this dangerous
theory many so-called sannyäsés have sprung up by the grace of Kali-yuga who
preach animal-killing under the garb of the Vedas. The subject matter has
already been discussed in the conversation between Lord Caitanya and
Maulana Chand Kazi Shaheb. The animal sacrifice as stated in the Vedas is
different from the unrestricted animal-killing in the slaughterhouse. Because
the asuras or the so-called scholars of Vedic literatures put forward the
evidence of animal-killing in the Vedas, Lord Buddha superficially denied the
authority of the Vedas. This rejection of the Vedas by Lord Buddha was
adopted in order to save people from the vice of animal-killing as well as to
save the poor animals from the slaughtering process of their big brothers who
clamor for universal brotherhood, peace, justice and equity. There is no justice
when there is animal-killing. Lord Buddha wanted to stop it completely, and
therefore his cult of ahiàsä was propagated not only in India but also outside
the country.
Technically Lord Buddha’s philosophy is called atheistic because there is no
acceptance of the Supreme Lord and because that system of philosophy denied
the authority of the Vedas. But that is an act of camouflage by the Lord. Lord
Buddha is the incarnation of Godhead. As such, he is the original propounder
of Vedic knowledge. He therefore cannot reject Vedic philosophy. But he
rejected it outwardly because the sura-dviña, or the demons who are always
envious of the devotees of Godhead, try to support cow-killing or
animal-killing from the pages of the Vedas, and this is now being done by the
modernized sannyäsés. Lord Buddha had to reject the authority of the Vedas
altogether. This is simply technical, and had it not been so he would not have
been so accepted as the incarnation of Godhead. Nor would he have been
worshiped in the transcendental songs of the poet Jayadeva, who is a Vaiñëava
äcärya. Lord Buddha preached the preliminary principles of the Vedas in a
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
manner suitable for the time being (and so also did Çaìkaräcärya) to establish
the authority of the Vedas. Therefore both Lord Buddha and Äcärya Çaìkara
paved the path of theism, and Vaiñëava äcäryas, specifically Lord Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu, led the people on the path towards a realization of going back to
Godhead.
We are glad that people are taking interest in the nonviolent movement of
Lord Buddha. But will they take the matter very seriously and close the animal
slaughterhouses altogether? If not, there is no meaning to the ahiàsä cult.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam was composed just prior to the beginning of the age of
Kali (about five thousand years ago), and Lord Buddha appeared about
twenty-six hundred years ago. Therefore in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam Lord
Buddha is foretold. Such is the authority of this clear scripture. There are
many such prophecies, and they are being fulfilled one after another. They will
indicate the positive standing of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, which is without trace of
mistake, illusion, cheating and imperfection, which are the four flaws of all
conditioned souls. The liberated souls are above these flaws; therefore they can
see and foretell things which are to take place on distant future dates.
TEXT 25
AQaaSaaE YauGaSaNDYaaYaa& dSYauPa[aYaezu raJaSau )
JaiNaTaa ivZ<auYaXaSaae NaaMana k-iLk-JaRGaTPaiTa" )) 25 ))
athäsau yuga-sandhyäyäà
dasyu-präyeñu räjasu
janitä viñëu-yaçaso
nämnä kalkir jagat-patiù
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; asau—the same Lord; yuga-sandhyäyäm—at the conjunction
of the yugas; dasyu—plunderers; präyeñu—almost all; räjasu—the governing
personalities; janitä—will take His birth; viñëu—named Viñëu;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
yaçasaù—surnamed Yaçä; nämnä—in the name of; kalkiù—the incarnation of
the Lord; jagat-patiù—the Lord of the creation.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, at the conjunction of two yugas, the Lord of the creation will
take His birth as the Kalki incarnation and become the son of Viñëu Yaçä. At
this time the rulers of the earth will have degenerated into plunderers.
PURPORT
Here is another foretelling of the advent of Lord Kalki, the incarnation of
Godhead. He is to appear at the conjunction of the two yugas, namely at the
end of Kali-yuga and the beginning of Satya-yuga. The cycle of the four yugas,
namely Satya, Tretä, Dväpara and Kali, rotates like the calendar months. The
present Kali-yuga lasts 432,000 years, out of which we have passed only 5,000
years after the Battle of Kurukñetra and the end of the regime of King Parékñit.
So there are 427,000 years balance yet to be finished. Therefore at the end of
this period, the incarnation of Kalki will take place, as foretold in the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam. The name of His father, Viñëu Yaçä, a learned brähmaëa,
and the village Çambhala are also mentioned. As above mentioned, all these
foretellings will prove to be factual in chronological order. That is the
authority of Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 26
AvTaara ùSa&:YaeYaa hre" SatviNaDaeiÜRJaa" )
YaQaaivdaiSaNa" ku-LYaa" SarSa" SYau" SahóXa" )) 26 ))
avatärä hy asaìkhyeyä
hareù sattva-nidher dvijäù
yathävidäsinaù kulyäù
sarasaù syuù sahasraçaù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
avatäräù—incarnations; hi—certainly; asaìkhyeyäù—innumerable; hareù—of
Hari, the Lord; sattva-nidheù—of the ocean of goodness; dvijäù—the
brähmaëas; yathä—as it is; avidäsinaù—inexhaustible; kulyäù—rivulets;
sarasaù—of vast lakes; syuù—are; sahasraçaù—thousands of.
TRANSLATION
O brähmaëas, the incarnations of the Lord are innumerable, like rivulets
flowing from inexhaustible sources of water.
PURPORT
The list of incarnations of the Personality of Godhead given herein is not
complete. It is only a partial view of all the incarnations. There are many
others, such as Çré Hayagréva, Hari, Haàsa, Påçnigarbha, Vibhu, Satyasena,
Vaikuëöha, Särvabhauma, Viñvaksena, Dharmasetu, Sudhämä, Yogeçvara,
Båhadbhänu and others of the bygone ages. Çré Prahläda Mahäräja said in his
prayer, “My Lord, You manifest as many incarnations as there are species of
life, namely the aquatics, the vegetables, the reptiles, the birds, the beasts, the
men, the demigods, etc., just for the maintenance of the faithful and the
annihilation of the unfaithful. You advent Yourself in this way in accordance
with the necessity of the different yugas. In the Kali-yuga You have incarnated
garbed as a devotee.” This incarnation of the Lord in the Kali-yuga is Lord
Caitanya Mahäprabhu. There are many other places, both in the Bhägavatam
and in other scriptures, in which the incarnation of the Lord as Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu is explicitly mentioned. In the Brahma-saàhitä also it is said
indirectly that although there are many incarnations of the Lord, such as
Räma, Nåsiàha, Varäha, Matsya, Kürma and many others, the Lord Himself
sometimes incarnates in person. Lord Kåñëa and Lord Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu are not, therefore, incarnations, but the original source of all
other incarnations. This will be clearly explained in the next çloka. So the
Lord is the inexhaustible source for innumerable incarnations which are not
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
always mentioned. But such incarnations are distinguished by specific
extraordinary feats which are impossible to be performed by any living being.
That is the general test to identify an incarnation of the Lord, directly and
indirectly empowered. Some incarnations mentioned above are almost plenary
portions. For instance, the Kumäras are empowered with transcendental
knowledge. Çré Närada is empowered with devotional service. Mahäräja Påthu
is an empowered incarnation with executive function. The Matsya incarnation
is directly a plenary portion. So the innumerable incarnations of the Lord are
manifested all over the universes constantly, without cessation, as water flows
constantly from waterfalls.
TEXT 27
‰zYaae MaNavae deva MaNauPau}aa MahaEJaSa" )
k-l/a" SaveR hrerev SaPa[JaaPaTaYa" SMa*Taa" )) 27 ))
åñayo manavo devä
manu-puträ mahaujasaù
kaläù sarve harer eva
saprajäpatayaù småtäù
SYNONYMS
åñayaù—all the sages; manavaù—all the Manus; deväù—all the demigods;
manu-puträù—all the descendants of Manu; mahä-ojasaù—very powerful;
kaläù—portion of the plenary portion; sarve—all collectively; hareù—of the
Lord; eva—certainly; sa-prajäpatayaù—along with the Prajäpatis; småtäù—are
known.
TRANSLATION
All the åñis, Manus, demigods and descendants of Manu, who are especially
powerful, are plenary portions or portions of the plenary portions of the Lord.
This also includes the Prajäpatis.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
Those who are comparatively less powerful are called vibhüti, and those who
are comparatively more powerful are called äveça incarnations.
TEXT 28
WTae ca&Xak-l/a" Pau&Sa" k*-Z<aSTau >aGavaNa( SvYaMa( )
wNd]airVYaaku-l&/ l/aek&- Ma*@YaiNTa YauGae YauGae )) 28 ))
ete cäàça-kaläù puàsaù
kåñëas tu bhagavän svayam
indräri-vyäkulaà lokaà
måòayanti yuge yuge
SYNONYMS
ete—all these; ca—and; aàça—plenary portions; kaläù—portions of the
plenary portions; puàsaù—of the Supreme; kåñëaù—Lord Kåñëa; tu—but;
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; svayam—in person; indra-ari—the
enemies of Indra; vyäkulam—disturbed; lokam—all the planets;
måòayanti—gives protection; yuge yuge—in different ages.
TRANSLATION
All of the above-mentioned incarnations are either plenary portions or
portions of the plenary portions of the Lord, but Lord Çré Kåñëa is the original
Personality of Godhead. All of them appear on planets whenever there is a
disturbance created by the atheists. The Lord incarnates to protect the theists.
PURPORT
In this particular stanza Lord Çré Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead, is
distinguished from other incarnations. He is counted amongst the avatäras
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
(incarnations) because out of His causeless mercy the Lord descends from His
transcendental abode. Avatära means “one who descends.” All the
incarnations of the Lord, including the Lord Himself, descend on the different
planets of the material world as also in different species of life to fulfill
particular missions. Sometimes He comes Himself, and sometimes His different
plenary portions or parts of the plenary portions, or His differentiated portions
directly or indirectly empowered by Him, descend on this material world to
execute certain specific functions. Originally the Lord is full of all opulences,
all prowess, all fame, all beauty, all knowledge and all renunciation. When they
are partly manifested through the plenary portions or parts of the plenary
portions, it should be noted that certain manifestations of His different powers
are required for those particular functions. When in the room small electric
bulbs are displayed, it does not mean that the electric powerhouse is limited by
the small bulbs. The same powerhouse can supply power to operate large-scale
industrial dynamos with greater volts. Similarly, the incarnations of the Lord
display limited powers because so much power is needed at that particular
time.
For example, Lord Paraçuräma and Lord Nåsiàha displayed unusual
opulence by killing the disobedient kñatriyas twenty-one times and killing the
greatly powerful atheist Hiraëyakaçipu. Hiraëyakaçipu was so powerful that
even the demigods in other planets would tremble simply by the unfavorable
raising of his eyebrow. The demigods in the higher level of material existence
many, many times excel the most well-to-do human beings, in duration of life,
beauty, wealth, paraphernalia, and in all other respects. Still they were afraid
of Hiraëyakaçipu. Thus we can simply imagine how powerful Hiraëyakaçipu
was in this material world. But even Hiraëyakaçipu was cut into small pieces by
the nails of Lord Nåsiàha. This means that anyone materially powerful cannot
stand the strength of the Lord’s nails. Similarly, Jämadagnya displayed the
Lord’s power to kill all the disobedient kings powerfully situated in their
respective states. The Lord’s empowered incarnation Närada and plenary
incarnation Varäha, as well as indirectly empowered Lord Buddha, created
faith in the mass of people. The incarnations of Räma and Dhanvantari
displayed His fame, and Balaräma, Mohiné and Vämana exhibited His beauty.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Dattätreya, Matsya, Kumära and Kapila exhibited His transcendental
knowledge. Nara and Näräyaëa Åñis exhibited His renunciation. So all the
different incarnations of the Lord indirectly or directly manifested different
features, but Lord Kåñëa, the primeval Lord, exhibited the complete features of
Godhead, and thus it is confirmed that He is the source of all other
incarnations. And the most extraordinary feature exhibited by Lord Çré Kåñëa
was His internal energetic manifestation of His pastimes with the cowherd
girls. His pastimes with the gopés are all displays of transcendental existence,
bliss and knowledge, although these are manifested apparently as sex love. The
specific attraction of His pastimes with the gopés should never be
misunderstood. The Bhägavatam relates these transcendental pastimes in the
Tenth Canto. And in order to reach the position to understand the
transcendental nature of Lord Kåñëa’s pastimes with the gopés, the Bhägavatam
promotes the student gradually in nine other cantos.
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé’s statement, in accordance with
authoritative sources, Lord Kåñëa is the source of all other incarnations. It is
not that Lord Kåñëa has any source of incarnation. All the symptoms of the
Supreme Truth in full are present in the person of Lord Çré Kåñëa, and in the
Bhagavad-gétä the Lord emphatically declares that there is no truth greater
than or equal to Himself. In this stanza the word svayam is particularly
mentioned to confirm that Lord Kåñëa has no other source than Himself.
Although in other places the incarnations are described as bhagavän because
of their specific functions, nowhere are they declared to be the Supreme
Personality. In this stanza the word svayam signifies the supremacy as the
summum bonum.
The summum bonum Kåñëa is one without a second. He Himself has
expanded Himself in various parts, portions and particles as svayaà-rüpa,
svayam-prakäça, tad-ekätmä, präbhava, vaibhava, viläsa, avatära, äveça, and
jévas, all provided with innumerable energies just suitable to the respective
persons and personalities. Learned scholars in transcendental subjects have
carefully analyzed the summum bonum Kåñëa to have sixty-four principal
attributes. All the expansions or categories of the Lord possess only some
percentages of these attributes. But Çré Kåñëa is the possessor of the attributes
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
cent percent. And His personal expansions such as svayam-prakäça, tad-ekätmä
up to the categories of the avatäras who are all viñëu-tattva, possess up to
ninety-three percent of these transcendental attributes. Lord Çiva, who is
neither avatära nor äveça nor in between them, possesses almost eighty-four
percent of the attributes. But the jévas, or the individual living beings in
different statuses of life, possess up to the limit of seventy-eight percent of the
attributes. In the conditioned state of material existence, the living being
possesses these attributes in very minute quantity, varying in terms of the
pious life of the living being. The most perfect of living beings is Brahmä, the
supreme administrator of one universe. He possesses seventy-eight percent of
the attributes in full. All other demigods have the same attributes in less
quantity, whereas human beings possess the attributes in very minute quantity.
The standard of perfection for a human being is to develop the attributes up to
seventy-eight percent in full. The living being can never possess attributes like
Çiva, Viñëu or Lord Kåñëa. A living being can become godly by developing the
seventy-eight-percent transcendental attributes in fullness, but he can never
become a God like Çiva, Viñëu or Kåñëa. He can become a Brahmä in due
course. The godly living beings who are all residents of the planets in the
spiritual sky are eternal associates of God in different spiritual planets called
Hari-dhäma and Maheça-dhäma. The abode of Lord Kåñëa above all spiritual
planets is called Kåñëaloka or Goloka Våndävana, and the perfected living
being, by developing seventy-eight percent of the above attributes in fullness,
can enter the planet of Kåñëaloka after leaving the present material body.
TEXT 29
JaNMa Gauù& >aGavTaae Ya WTaTPa[YaTaae Nar" )
SaaYa& Pa[aTaGa*R<aNa( >a¢-ya du"%Ga]aMaaiÜMauCYaTae )) 29 ))
janma guhyaà bhagavato
ya etat prayato naraù
säyaà prätar gåëan bhaktyä
duùkha-grämäd vimucyate
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
janma—birth; guhyam—mysterious; bhagavataù—of the Lord; yaù—one;
etat—all these; prayataù—carefully; naraù—man; säyam—evening;
prätaù—morning; gåëan—recites; bhaktyä—with devotion;
duùkha-grämät—from all miseries; vimucyate—gets relief from.
TRANSLATION
Whoever carefully recites the mysterious appearances of the Lord, with
devotion in the morning and in the evening, gets relief from all miseries of life.
PURPORT
In the Bhagavad-gétä the Personality of Godhead has declared that anyone
who knows the principles of the transcendental birth and activities of the Lord
will go back to Godhead after being relieved from this material tabernacle. So
simply knowing factually the mysterious way of the Lord’s incarnation in this
material world can liberate one from material bondage. Therefore the birth
and activities of the Lord, as manifested by Him for the welfare of the people
in general, are not ordinary. They are mysterious, and only by those who
carefully try to go deep into the matter by spiritual devotion is the mystery
discovered. Thus one gets liberation from material bondage. It is advised
therefore that one who simply recites this chapter of Bhägavatam, describing
the appearance of the Lord in different incarnations, in sincerity and
devotion, can have insight into the birth and activities of the Lord. The very
word vimukti, or liberation, indicates that the Lord’s birth and activities are all
transcendental; otherwise simply by reciting them one could not attain
liberation. They are therefore mysterious, and those who do not follow the
prescribed regulations of devotional service are not entitled to enter into the
mysteries of His births and activities.
TEXT 30
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
WTad]UPa& >aGavTaae ùæPaSYa icdaTMaNa" )
MaaYaaGau<aEivRricTa& Mahdaidi>araTMaiNa )) 30 ))
etad rüpaà bhagavato
hy arüpasya cid-ätmanaù
mäyä-guëair viracitaà
mahadädibhir ätmani
SYNONYMS
etat—all these; rüpam—forms; bhagavataù—of the Lord; hi—certainly;
arüpasya—of one who has no material form; cit-ätmanaù—of the
Transcendence; mäyä—material energy; guëaiù—by the qualities;
viracitam—manufactured; mahat-ädibhiù—with the ingredients of matter;
ätmani—in the self.
TRANSLATION
The conception of the viräö universal form of the Lord, as appearing in the
material world, is imaginary. It is to enable the less intelligent [and neophytes]
to adjust to the idea of the Lord’s having form. But factually the Lord has no
material form.
PURPORT
The conception of the Lord known as the viçva-rüpa or the viräö-rüpa is
particularly not mentioned along with the various incarnations of the Lord
because all the incarnations of the Lord mentioned above are transcendental
and there is not a tinge of materialism in their bodies. There is no difference
between the body and self as there is in the conditioned soul. The viräö-rüpa is
conceived for those who are just neophyte worshipers. For them the material
viräö-rüpa is presented, and it will be explained in the Second Canto. In the
viräö-rüpa the material manifestations of different planets have been
conceived as His legs, hands, etc. Actually all such descriptions are for the
neophytes. The neophytes cannot conceive of anything beyond matter. The
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
material conception of the Lord is not counted in the list of His factual forms.
As Paramätmä, or Supersoul, the Lord is within each and every material form,
even within the atoms, but the outward material form is but an imagination,
both for the Lord and for the living being. The present forms of the
conditioned souls are also not factual. The conclusion is that the material
conception of the body of the Lord as viräö is imaginary. Both the Lord and the
living beings are living spirits and have original spiritual bodies.
TEXT 31
YaQaa Na>aiSa MaegaaEgaae re<auvaR PaaiQaRvae_iNale/ )
Wv& d]íir d*XYaTvMaaraeiPaTaMabuiÖi>a" )) 31 ))
yathä nabhasi meghaugho
reëur vä pärthivo ’nile
evaà drañöari dåçyatvam
äropitam abuddhibhiù
SYNONYMS
yathä—as it is; nabhasi—in the sky; megha-oghaù—a mass of clouds;
reëuù—dust; vä—as well as; pärthivaù—muddiness; anile—in the air;
evam—thus; drañöari—to the seer; dåçyatvam—for the purpose of seeing;
äropitam—is implied; abuddhibhiù—by the less intelligent persons.
TRANSLATION
Clouds and dust are carried by the air, but less intelligent persons say that
the sky is cloudy and the air is dirty. Similarly, they also implant material
bodily conceptions on the spirit self.
PURPORT
It is further confirmed herein that with our material eyes and senses we
cannot see the Lord, who is all spirit. We cannot even detect the spiritual
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
spark which exists within the material body of the living being. We look to the
outward covering of the body or subtle mind of the living being, but we cannot
see the spiritual spark within the body. So we have to accept the living being’s
presence by the presence of his gross body. Similarly, those who want to see
the Lord with their present material eyes or with the material senses are
advised to meditate on the gigantic external feature called the viräö-rüpa. For
instance, when a particular gentleman goes in his car, which can be seen very
easily, we identify the car with the man within the car. When the President
goes out in his particular car, we say, “There is the President.” For the time
being we identify the car with the President. Similarly, less intelligent men
who want to see God immediately without necessary qualification are shown
first the gigantic material cosmos as the form of the Lord, although the Lord is
within and without. The clouds in the sky and the blue of the sky are better
appreciated in this connection. Although the bluish tint of the sky and the sky
itself are different, we conceive of the color of the sky as blue. But that is a
general conception for the laymen only.
TEXT 32
ATa" Par& YadVYa¢-MaVYaU!Gau<ab*&ihTaMa( )
Ad*íaé[uTavSTauTvaTSa Jaqvae YaTPauNa>aRv" )) 32 ))
ataù paraà yad avyaktam
avyüòha-guëa-båàhitam
adåñöäçruta-vastutvät
sa jévo yat punar-bhavaù
SYNONYMS
ataù—this; param—beyond; yat—which; avyaktam—unmanifested;
avyüòha—without formal shape; guëa-båàhitam—affected by the qualities;
adåñöa—unseen; açruta—unheard; vastutvät—being like that; saù—that;
jévaù—living being; yat—that which; punaù-bhavaù—takes birth repeatedly.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
Beyond this gross conception of form is another, subtle conception of form
which is without formal shape and is unseen, unheard and unmanifest. The
living being has his form beyond this subtlety, otherwise he could not have
repeated births.
PURPORT
As the gross cosmic manifestation is conceived as the gigantic body of the
Lord, so also there is the conception of His subtle form, which is simply
realized without being seen, heard or manifested. But in fact all these gross or
subtle conceptions of the body are in relation with the living beings. The
living being has his spiritual form beyond this gross material or subtle psychic
existence. The gross body and psychic functions cease to act as soon as the
living being leaves the visible gross body. In fact, we say that the living being
has gone away because he is unseen and unheard. Even when the gross body is
not acting when the living being is in sound sleep, we know that he is within
the body by his breathing. So the living being’s passing away from the body
does not mean that there is no existence of the living soul. It is there,
otherwise how can he repeat his births again and again?
The conclusion is that the Lord is eternally existent in His transcendental
form, which is neither gross nor subtle like that of the living being; His body is
never to be compared to the gross and subtle bodies of the living being. All
such conceptions of God’s body are imaginary. The living being has his eternal
spiritual form, which is conditioned only by his material contamination.
TEXT 33
Ya}aeMae SadSad]UPae Pa[iTaizÖe SvSa&ivda )
AivÛYaaTMaiNa k*-Tae wiTa Tad(b]ødXaRNaMa( )) 33 ))
yatreme sad-asad-rüpe
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
pratiñiddhe sva-saàvidä
avidyayätmani kåte
iti tad brahma-darçanam
SYNONYMS
yatra—whenever; ime—in all these; sat-asat—gross and subtle; rüpe—in the
forms of; pratiñiddhe—on being nullified; sva-saàvidä—by self-realization;
avidyayä—by ignorance; ätmani—in the self; kåte—having been imposed;
iti—thus; tat—that is; brahma-darçanam—the process of seeing the Absolute.
TRANSLATION
Whenever a person experiences, by self-realization, that both the gross and
subtle bodies have nothing to do with the pure self, at that time he sees himself
as well as the Lord.
PURPORT
The difference between self-realization and material illusion is to know that
the temporary or illusory impositions of material energy in the shape of gross
and subtle bodies are superficial coverings of the self. The coverings take place
due to ignorance. Such coverings are never effective in the person of the
Personality of Godhead. Knowing this convincingly is called liberation, or
seeing the Absolute. This means that perfect self-realization is made possible
by adoption of godly or spiritual life. Self-realization means becoming
indifferent to the needs of the gross and subtle bodies and becoming serious
about the activities of the self. The impetus for activities is generated from the
self, but such activities become illusory due to ignorance of the real position of
the self. By ignorance, self-interest is calculated in terms of the gross and
subtle bodies, and therefore a whole set of activities is spoiled, life after life.
When, however, one meets the self by proper culture, the activities of the self
begin. Therefore a man who is engaged in the activities of the self is called
jévan-mukta, or a liberated person even in the conditional existence.
This perfect stage of self-realization is attained not by artificial means, but
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
under the lotus feet of the Lord, who is always transcendental. In the
Bhagavad-gétä the Lord says that He is present in everyone’s heart, and from
Him only all knowledge, remembrance or forgetfulness take place. When the
living being desires to be an enjoyer of material energy (illusory phenomena),
the Lord covers the living being in the mystery of forgetfulness, and thus the
living being misinterprets the gross body and subtle mind to be his own self.
And by culture of transcendental knowledge, when the living being prays to
the Lord for deliverance from the clutches of forgetfulness, the Lord, by His
causeless mercy, removes the living being’s illusory curtain, and thus he
realizes his own self. He then engages himself in the service of the Lord in his
eternal constitutional position, becoming liberated from the conditioned life.
All this is executed by the Lord either through His external potency or directly
by the internal potency.
TEXT 34
YaÛezaeParTaa devq MaaYaa vEXaardq MaiTa" )
SaMPaà WveiTa ivduMaRihiMan Sve MahqYaTae )) 34 ))
yady eñoparatä devé
mäyä vaiçäradé matiù
sampanna eveti vidur
mahimni sve mahéyate
SYNONYMS
yadi—if, however; eñä—they; uparatä—subsided; devé mäyä—illusory energy;
vaiçäradé—full of knowledge; matiù—enlightenment; sampannaù—enriched
with; eva—certainly; iti—thus; viduù—being cognizant of; mahimni—in the
glories; sve—of the self; mahéyate—being situated in.
TRANSLATION
If the illusory energy subsides and the living entity becomes fully enriched
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
with knowledge by the grace of the Lord, then he becomes at once enlightened
with self-realization and thus becomes situated in his own glory.
PURPORT
Because the Lord is the absolute Transcendence, all of His forms, names,
pastimes, attributes, associates and energies are identical with Him. His
transcendental energy acts according to His omnipotency. The same energy
acts as His external, internal and marginal energies, and by His omnipotency
He can perform anything and everything through the agency of any of the
above energies. He can turn the external energy into internal by His will.
Therefore by His grace the external energy, which is employed in illusioning
those living beings who want to have it, subsides by the will of the Lord in
terms of repentance and penance for the conditioned soul. And the very same
energy then acts to help the purified living being make progress on the path of
self-realization. The example of electrical energy is very appropriate in this
connection. The expert electrician can utilize the electrical energy for both
heating and cooling by adjustment only. Similarly, the external energy, which
now bewilders the living being into continuation of birth and death, is turned
into internal potency by the will of the Lord to lead the living being to eternal
life. When a living being is thus graced by the Lord, he is placed in his proper
constitutional position to enjoy eternal spiritual life.
TEXT 35
Wv& JaNMaaiNa k-MaaRi<a ùk-TauRrJaNaSYa c )
v<aRYaiNTa SMa k-vYaae vedGauùaiNa ôTPaTae" )) 35 ))
evaà janmäni karmäëi
hy akartur ajanasya ca
varëayanti sma kavayo
veda-guhyäni håt-pateù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; janmäni—birth; karmäëi—activities; hi—certainly; akartuù—of
the inactive; ajanasya—of the unborn; ca—and; varëayanti—describe;
sma—in the past; kavayaù—the learned; veda-guhyäni—undiscoverable by the
Vedas; håt-pateù—of the Lord of the heart.
TRANSLATION
Thus learned men describe the births and activities of the unborn and
inactive, which is undiscoverable even in the Vedic literatures. He is the Lord
of the heart.
PURPORT
Both the Lord and the living entities are essentially all spiritual. Therefore
both of them are eternal, and neither of them has birth and death. The
difference is that the so-called births and disappearances of the Lord are
unlike those of the living beings. The living beings who take birth and then
again accept death are bound by the laws of material nature. But the so-called
appearance and disappearance of the Lord are not actions of material nature,
but are demonstrations of the internal potency of the Lord. They are described
by the great sages for the purpose of self-realization. It is stated in the
Bhagavad-gétä by the Lord that His so-called birth in the material world and
His activities are all transcendental. And simply by meditation on such
activities one can attain realization of Brahman and thus become liberated
from material bondage. In the çrutis it is said that the birthless appears to take
birth. The Supreme has nothing to do, but because He is omnipotent,
everything is performed by Him naturally, as if done automatically. As a
matter of fact, the appearance and disappearance of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead and His different activities are all confidential, even to the Vedic
literatures. Yet they are displayed by the Lord to bestow mercy upon the
conditioned souls. We should always take advantage of the narrations of the
activities of the Lord, which are meditations on Brahman in the most
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
convenient and palatable form.
TEXT 36
Sa va wd& ivìMaMaaegal/Il/"
Sa*JaTYavTYaita Na SaÂTae_iSMaNa( )
>aUTaezu caNTaihRTa AaTMaTaN}a"
zaÍiGaRk&- iJaga]iTa z@(Gau<aeXa" )) 36 ))
sa vä idaà viçvam amogha-lélaù
såjaty avaty atti na sajjate ’smin
bhüteñu cäntarhita ätma-tantraù
ñäò-vargikaà jighrati ñaò-guëeçaù
SYNONYMS
saù—the Supreme Lord; vä—alternately; idam—this; viçvam—manifested
universes; amogha-lélaù—one whose activities are spotless; såjati—creates;
avati atti—maintains and annihilates; na—not; sajjate—is affected by;
asmin—in them; bhüteñu—in all living beings; ca—also; antarhitaù—living
within; ätma-tantraù—self-independent; ñäö-vargikam—endowed with all the
potencies of His opulences; jighrati—superficially attached, like smelling the
fragrance; ñaö-guëa-éçaù—master of the six senses.
TRANSLATION
The Lord, whose activities are always spotless, is the master of the six senses
and is fully omnipotent with six opulences. He creates the manifested universes,
maintains them and annihilates them without being in the least affected. He is
within every living being and is always independent.
PURPORT
The prime difference between the Lord and the living entities is that the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Lord is the creator and the living entities are the created. Here He is called the
amogha-lélaù, which indicates that there is nothing lamentable in His creation.
Those who create disturbance in His creation are themselves disturbed. He is
transcendental to all material afflictions because He is full with all six
opulences, namely wealth, power, fame, beauty, knowledge and renunciation,
and thus He is the master of the senses. He creates these manifested universes
in order to reclaim the living beings who are within them suffering threefold
miseries, maintains them, and in due course annihilates them without being
the least affected by such actions. He is connected with this material creation
very superficially, as one smells odor without being connected with the
odorous article. Nongodly elements, therefore, can never approach Him,
despite all endeavors.
TEXT 37
Na caSYa k-iêiàPau<aeNa DaaTau‚
rvEiTa JaNTau" ku-MaNaqz OTaq" )
NaaMaaiNa æPaai<a MaNaaevcaei>a"
SaNTaNvTaae Na$=cYaaRiMavaj" )) 37 ))
na cäsya kaçcin nipuëena dhätur
avaiti jantuù kumanéña ütéù
nämäni rüpäëi mano-vacobhiù
santanvato naöa-caryäm iväjïaù
SYNONYMS
na—not; ca—and; asya—of Him; kaçcit—anyone; nipuëena—by dexterity;
dhätuù—of the creator; avaiti—can know; jantuù—the living being;
kumanéñaù—with a poor fund of knowledge; ütéù—activities of the Lord;
nämäni—His names; rüpäëi—His forms; manaù-vacobhiù—by dint of mental
speculation or deliverance of speeches; santanvataù—displaying;
naöa-caryäm—a dramatic action; iva—like; ajïaù—the foolish.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
The foolish with a poor fund of knowledge cannot know the transcendental
nature of the forms, names and activities of the Lord, who is playing like an
actor in a drama. Nor can they express such things, neither in their speculations
nor in their words.
PURPORT
No one can properly describe the transcendental nature of the Absolute
Truth. Therefore it is said that He is beyond the expression of mind and
speech. And yet there are some men, with a poor fund of knowledge, who
desire to understand the Absolute Truth by imperfect mental speculation and
faulty description of His activities. To the layman His activities, appearance
and disappearance, His names, His forms, His paraphernalia, His personalities
and all things in relation with Him are mysterious. There are two classes of
materialists, namely the fruitive workers and the empiric philosophers. The
fruitive workers have practically no information of the Absolute Truth, and
the mental speculators, after being frustrated in fruitive activities, turn their
faces towards the Absolute Truth and try to know Him by mental speculation.
And for all these men, the Absolute Truth is a mystery, as the jugglery of the
magician is a mystery to children. Being deceived by the jugglery of the
Supreme Being, the nondevotees, who may be very dexterous in fruitive work
and mental speculation, are always in ignorance. With such limited
knowledge, they are unable to penetrate into the mysterious region of
transcendence. The mental speculators are a little more progressive than the
gross materialists or the fruitive workers, but because they are also within the
grip of illusion, they take it for granted that anything which has form, a name
and activities is but a product of material energy. For them the Supreme Spirit
is formless, nameless and inactive. And because such mental speculators
equalize the transcendental name and form of the Lord with mundane names
and form, they are in fact in ignorance. With such a poor fund of knowledge,
there is no access to the real nature of the Supreme Being. As stated in
Bhagavad-gétä, the Lord is always in a transcendental position, even when He
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
is within the material world. But ignorant men consider the Lord one of the
great personalities of the world, and thus they are misled by the illusory
energy.
TEXT 38
Sa ved DaaTau" Padvq& ParSYa
durNTavqYaRSYa rQaa®Paa<ae" )
Yaae_MaaYaYaa SaNTaTaYaaNauv*tYaa
>aJaeTa TaTPaadSaraeJaGaNDaMa( )) 38 ))
sa veda dhätuù padavéà parasya
duranta-véryasya rathäìga-päëeù
yo ’mäyayä santatayänuvåttyä
bhajeta tat-päda-saroja-gandham
SYNONYMS
saù—He alone; veda—can know; dhätuù—of the creator; padavém—glories;
parasya—of the transcendence; duranta-véryasya—of the greatly powerful;
ratha-aìga-päëeù—of Lord Kåñëa, who bears in His hand the wheel of a
chariot; yaù—one who; amäyayä—without reservation; santatayä—without
any gap; anuvåttyä—favorably; bhajeta—renders service; tat-päda—of His feet;
saroja-gandham—fragrance of the lotus.
TRANSLATION
Only those who render unreserved, uninterrupted, favorable service unto
the lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa, who carries the wheel of the chariot in His hand,
can know the creator of the universe in His full glory, power and
transcendence.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Only the pure devotees can know the transcendental name, form and
activities of Lord Kåñëa due to their being completely freed from the reactions
of fruitive work and mental speculation. The pure devotees have nothing to
derive as personal profit from their unalloyed service to the Lord. They render
incessant service to the Lord spontaneously, without any reservation.
Everyone within the creation of the Lord is rendering service to the Lord
indirectly or directly. No one is an exception to this law of the Lord. Those
who are rendering service indirectly, being forced by the illusory agent of the
Lord, are rendering service unto Him unfavorably. But those who are
rendering service unto Him directly under the direction of His beloved agent
are rendering service unto Him favorably. Such favorable servitors are
devotees of the Lord, and by the grace of the Lord they can enter into the
mysterious region of transcendence by the mercy of the Lord. But the mental
speculators remain in darkness all the time. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, the
Lord Himself guides the pure devotees toward the path of realization due to
their constant engagement in the loving service of the Lord in spontaneous
affection. That is the secret of entering into the kingdom of God. Fruitive
activities and speculation are no qualifications for entering.
TEXT 39
AQaeh DaNYaa >aGavNTa wTQa&
YaÜaSaudeve_i%l/l/aek-NaaQae )
ku-vRiNTa SavaRTMak-MaaTMa>aav&
Na Ya}a >aUYa" PairvTaR oGa]" )) 39 ))
atheha dhanyä bhagavanta itthaà
yad väsudeve ’khila-loka-näthe
kurvanti sarvätmakam ätma-bhävaà
na yatra bhüyaù parivarta ugraù
SYNONYMS
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
atha—thus; iha—in this world; dhanyäù—successful; bhagavantaù—perfectly
cognizant; ittham—such; yat—what; väsudeve—unto the Personality of
Godhead; akhila—all-embracing; loka-näthe—unto the proprietor of all the
universes; kurvanti—inspires; sarva-ätmakam—one hundred percent;
ätma—spirit; bhävam—ecstasy; na—never; yatra—wherein; bhüyaù—again;
parivartaù—repetition; ugraù—dreadful.
TRANSLATION
Only by making such inquiries in this world can one be successful and
perfectly cognizant, for such inquiries invoke transcendental ecstatic love unto
the Personality of Godhead, who is the proprietor of all the universes, and
guarantee cent-percent immunity from the dreadful repetition of birth and
death.
PURPORT
The inquiries of the sages headed by Çaunaka are herewith praised by Süta
Gosvämé on the merit of their transcendental nature. As already concluded,
only the devotees of the Lord can know Him to a considerable extent, and no
one else can know Him at all, so the devotees are perfectly cognizant of all
spiritual knowledge. The Personality of Godhead is the last word in Absolute
Truth. Impersonal Brahman and localized Paramätmä (Supersoul) are included
in the knowledge of the Personality of Godhead. So one who knows the
Personality of Godhead can automatically know all about Him, His
multipotencies and His expansions. So the devotees are congratulated as being
all-successful. A cent-percent devotee of the Lord is immune to the dreadful
material miseries of repeated birth and death.
TEXT 40
wd& >aaGavTa& NaaMa Paura<a& b]øSaiMMaTaMa( )
otaMaëaek-cirTa& ck-ar >aGavaNa*iz" )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
iNa"é[eYaSaaYa l/aek-SYa DaNYa& SvSTYaYaNa& MahTa( )) 40 ))
idaà bhägavataà näma
puräëaà brahma-sammitam
uttama-çloka-caritaà
cakära bhagavän åñiù
niùçreyasäya lokasya
dhanyaà svasty-ayanaà mahat
SYNONYMS
idam—this; bhägavatam—book containing the narration of the Personality of
Godhead and His pure devotees; näma—of the name;
puräëam—supplementary to the Vedas; brahma-sammitam—incarnation of
Lord Çré Kåñëa; uttama-çloka—of the Personality of Godhead;
caritam—activities; cakära—compiled; bhagavän—incarnation of the
Personality of Godhead; åñiù—Çré Vyäsadeva; niùçreyasäya—for the ultimate
good; lokasya—of all people; dhanyam—fully successful;
svasti-ayanam—all-blissful; mahat—all-perfect.
TRANSLATION
This Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the literary incarnation of God, and it is
compiled by Çréla Vyäsadeva, the incarnation of God. It is meant for the
ultimate good of all people, and it is all-successful, all-blissful and all-perfect.
PURPORT
Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu declared that Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the
spotless sound representation of all Vedic knowledge and history. There are
selected histories of great devotees who are in direct contact with the
Personality of Godhead. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the literary incarnation of Lord
Çré Kåñëa and is therefore nondifferent from Him. Çrémad-Bhägavatam should
be worshiped as respectfully as we worship the Lord. Thereby we can derive
the ultimate blessings of the Lord through its careful and patient study. As
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
God is all light, all bliss and all perfection, so also is Çrémad-Bhägavatam. We
can have all the transcendental light of the Supreme Brahman, Çré Kåñëa,
from the recitation of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, provided it is received through the
medium of the transparent spiritual master. Lord Caitanya’s private secretary
Çréla Svarüpa Dämodara Gosvämé advised all intending visitors who came to
see the Lord at Puré to make a study of the Bhägavatam from the person
Bhägavatam Person Bhägavatam is the self-realized bona fide spiritual master,
and through him only can one understand the lessons of Bhägavatam in order
to receive the desired result. One can derive from the study of the Bhägavatam
all benefits that are possible to be derived from the personal presence of the
Lord. It carries with it all the transcendental blessings of Lord Çré Kåñëa that
we can expect from His personal contact.
TEXT 41
Taidd& Ga]ahYaaMaaSa SauTaMaaTMavTaa& vrMa( )
SavRvedeiTahaSaaNaa& Saar& Saar& SaMaud(Da*TaMa( )) 41 ))
tad idaà grähayäm äsa
sutam ätmavatäà varam
sarva-vedetihäsänäà
säraà säraà samuddhåtam
SYNONYMS
tat—that; idam—this; grähayäm äsa—made to accept; sutam—unto his son;
ätmavatäm—of the self-realized; varam—most respectful; sarva—all;
veda—Vedic literatures (books of knowledge); itihäsänäm—of all the histories;
säram—cream; säram—cream; samuddhåtam—taken out.
TRANSLATION
Çré Vyäsadeva delivered it to his son, who is the most respected among the
self-realized, after extracting the cream of all Vedic literatures and histories of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the universe.
PURPORT
Men with a poor fund of knowledge only accept the history of the world
from the time of Buddha, or since 600 B.C., and prior to this period all
histories mentioned in the scriptures are calculated by them to be only
imaginary stories. That is not a fact. All the stories mentioned in the Puräëas
and Mahäbhärata, etc., are actual histories, not only of this planet but also of
millions of other planets within the universe. Sometimes the history of planets
beyond this world appear to such men to be unbelievable. But they do not
know that different planets are not equal in all respects and that therefore
some of the historical facts derived from other planets do not correspond with
the experience of this planet. Considering the different situation of different
planets and also time and circumstances, there is nothing wonderful in the
stories of the Puräëas, nor are they imaginary. We should always remember the
maxim that one man’s food is another man’s poison. We should not, therefore,
reject the stories and histories of the Puräëas as imaginary. The great åñis like
Vyäsa had no business putting some imaginary stories in their literatures.
In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam historical facts selected from the histories of
different planets have been depicted. It is therefore accepted by all the
spiritual authorities as the Mahä-Puräëa. The special significance of these
histories is that they are all connected with activities of the Lord in a different
time and atmosphere. Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé is the topmost personality of all
the self-realized souls, and he accepted this as the subject of studies from his
father, Vyäsadeva. Çréla Vyäsadeva is the great authority, and the subject
matter of Çrémad-Bhägavatam being so important, he delivered the message
first to his great son Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé. It is compared to the cream of
the milk. Vedic literature is like the milk ocean of knowledge. Cream or butter
is the most palatable essence of milk, and so also is Çrémad-Bhägavatam, for it
contains all palatable, instructive and authentic versions of different activities
of the Lord and His devotees. There is no gain, however, in accepting the
message of Bhägavatam from the unbelievers, atheists and professional reciters
who make a trade of Bhägavatam for the laymen. It was delivered to Çréla
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Çukadeva Gosvämé, and he had nothing to do with the Bhägavata business. He
did not have to maintain family expenses by such trade. Çrémad-Bhägavatam
should therefore be received from the representative of Çukadeva, who must
be in the renounced order of life without family encumbrance. Milk is
undoubtedly very good and nourishing, but when it is touched by the mouth of
a snake it is no longer nourishing; rather, it becomes a source of death.
Similarly, those who are not strictly in the Vaiñëava discipline should not
make a business of this Bhägavatam and become a cause of spiritual death for
so many hearers. In the Bhagavad-gétä the Lord says that the purpose of all the
Vedas is to know Him (Lord Kåñëa), and Çrémad-Bhägavatam is Lord Çré Kåñëa
Himself in the form of recorded knowledge. Therefore, it is the cream of all
the Vedas, and it contains all historical facts of all times in relation with Çré
Kåñëa. It is factually the essence of all histories.
TEXT 42
Sa Tau Sa&é[avYaaMaaSa MaharaJa& Parqi+aTaMa( )
Pa[aYaaePaiví& Ga®aYaa& ParqTa& ParMaizRi>a" )) 42 ))
sa tu saàçrävayäm äsa
mahäräjaà parékñitam
präyopaviñöaà gaìgäyäà
parétaà paramarñibhiù
SYNONYMS
saù—the son of Vyäsadeva; tu—again; saàçrävayäm äsa—make them audible;
mahä-räjam—unto the emperor; parékñitam—of the name Parékñit;
präya-upaviñöam—who sat until death without food or drink; gaìgäyäm—on
the bank of the Ganges; parétam—being surrounded; parama-åñibhiù—by great
sages.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Çukadeva Gosvämé, the son of Vyäsadeva, in his turn delivered the
Bhägavatam to the great Emperor Parékñit, who sat surrounded by sages on the
bank of the Ganges, awaiting death without taking food or drink.
PURPORT
All transcendental messages are received properly in the chain of disciplic
succession. This disciplic succession is called paramparä. Unless therefore
Bhägavatam or any other Vedic literatures are received through the paramparä
system, the reception of knowledge is not bona fide. Vyäsadeva delivered the
message to Çukadeva Gosvämé, and from Çukadeva Gosvämé, Süta Gosvämé
received the message. One should therefore receive the message of Bhägavatam
from Süta Gosvämé or from his representative and not from any irrelevant
interpreter.
Emperor Parékñit received the information of his death in time, and he at
once left his kingdom and family and sat down on the bank of the Ganges to
fast till death. All great sages, åñis, philosophers, mystics, etc., went there due
to his imperial position. They offered many suggestions about his immediate
duty, and at last it was settled that he would hear from Çukadeva Gosvämé
about Lord Kåñëa. Thus the Bhägavatam was spoken to him.
Çrépäda Çaìkaräcärya, who preached Mäyäväda philosophy and stressed the
impersonal feature of the Absolute, also recommended that one must take
shelter at the lotus feet of Lord Çré Kåñëa, for there is no hope of gain from
debating. Indirectly Çrépäda Çaìkaräcärya admitted that what he had preached
in the flowery grammatical interpretations of the Vedänta-sütra cannot help
one at the time of death. At the critical hour of death one must recite the
name of Govinda. This is the recommendation of all great transcendentalists.
Çukadeva Gosvämé had long ago stated the same truth, that at the end one
must remember Näräyaëa. That is the essence of all spiritual activities. In
pursuance of this eternal truth, Çrémad-Bhägavatam was heard by Emperor
Parékñit, and it was recited by the able Çukadeva Gosvämé. And both the
speaker and the receiver of the messages of Bhägavatam were duly delivered by
the same medium.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 43
k*-Z<ae SvDaaMaaePaGaTae DaMaRjaNaaidi>a" Sah )
k-l/aE Naíd*XaaMaez Paura<aak-aeR_DauNaaeidTa" )) 43 ))
kåñëe sva-dhämopagate
dharma-jïänädibhiù saha
kalau nañöa-dåçäm eña
puräëärko ’dhunoditaù
SYNONYMS
kåñëe—in Kåñëa’s; sva-dhäma—own abode; upagate—having returned;
dharma—religion; jïäna—knowledge; ädibhiù—combined together;
saha—along with; kalau—in the Kali-yuga; nañöa-dåçäm—of persons who have
lost their sight; eñaù—all these; puräëa-arkaù—the Puräëa which is brilliant
like the sun; adhunä—just now; uditaù—has arisen.
TRANSLATION
This Bhägavata Puräëa is as brilliant as the sun, and it has arisen just after
the departure of Lord Kåñëa to His own abode, accompanied by religion,
knowledge, etc. Persons who have lost their vision due to the dense darkness of
ignorance in the age of Kali shall get light from this Puräëa.
PURPORT
Lord Çré Kåñëa has His eternal dhäma, or abode, where He eternally enjoys
Himself with His eternal associates and paraphernalia. And His eternal abode
is a manifestation of His internal energy, whereas the material world is a
manifestation of His external energy. When He descends on the material
world, He displays Himself with all paraphernalia in His internal potency,
which is called ätma-mäyä. In the Bhagavad-gétä the Lord says that He
descends by His own potency (ätma-mäyä). His form, name, fame,
paraphernalia, abode, etc., are not, therefore, creations of matter. He descends
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
to reclaim the fallen souls and to reestablish codes of religion which are
directly enacted by Him. Except for God, no one can establish the principles of
religion. Either He or a suitable person empowered by Him can dictate the
codes of religion. Real religion means to know God, our relation with Him and
our duties in relation with Him and to know ultimately our destination after
leaving this material body. The conditioned souls, who are entrapped by the
material energy, hardly know all these principles of life. Most of them are like
animals engaged in eating, sleeping, fearing and mating. They are mostly
engaged in sense enjoyment under the pretension of religiosity, knowledge or
salvation. They are still more blind in the present age of quarrel, or Kali-yuga.
In the Kali-yuga the population is just a royal edition of the animals. They
have nothing to do with spiritual knowledge or godly religious life. They are so
blind that they cannot see anything beyond the jurisdiction of the subtle
mind, intelligence or ego, but they are very much proud of their advancement
in knowledge, science and material prosperity. They can risk their lives to
become a dog or hog just after leaving the present body, for they have
completely lost sight of the ultimate aim of life. The Personality of Godhead
Çré Kåñëa appeared before us just a little prior to the beginning of Kali-yuga,
and He returned to His eternal home practically at the commencement of
Kali-yuga. While He was present, He exhibited everything by His different
activities. He spoke the Bhagavad-gétä specifically and eradicated all
pretentious principles of religiosity. And prior to His departure from this
material world, He empowered Çré Vyäsadeva through Närada to compile the
messages of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, and thus both the Bhagavad-gétä and the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam are like torchbearers for the blind people of this age. In
other words, if men in this age of Kali want to see the real light of life, they
must take to these two books only, and their aim of life will be fulfilled.
Bhagavad-gétä is the preliminary study of the Bhägavatam. And
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the summum bonum of life, Lord Çré Kåñëa personified.
We must therefore accept Çrémad-Bhägavatam as the direct representation of
Lord Kåñëa. One who can see Çrémad-Bhägavatam can see also Lord Çré Kåñëa
in person. They are identical.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 44
Ta}a k-ITaRYaTaae ivPa[a ivPa[zeR>aURirTaeJaSa" )
Ah& caDYaGaMa& Ta}a iNaivíSTadNauGa]haTa( )
Saae_h& v" é[aviYaZYaaiMa YaQaaDaqTa& YaQaaMaiTa )) 44 ))
tatra kértayato viprä
viprarñer bhüri-tejasaù
ahaà cädhyagamaà tatra
niviñöas tad-anugrahät
so ’haà vaù çrävayiñyämi
yathädhétaà yathä-mati
SYNONYMS
tatra—there; kértayataù—while reciting; vipräù—O brähmaëas;
vipra-åñeù—from the great brähmaëa-åñi; bhüri—greatly; tejasaù—powerful;
aham—I; ca—also; adhyagamam—could understand; tatra—in that meeting;
niviñöaù—being perfectly attentive; tat-anugrahät—by his mercy; saù—that
very thing; aham—I; vaù—unto you; çrävayiñyämi—shall let you hear;
yathä-adhétam yathä-mati—as far as my realization.
TRANSLATION
O learned brähmaëas, when Çukadeva Gosvämé recited Bhägavatam there [in
the presence of Emperor Parékñit], I heard him with rapt attention, and thus, by
his mercy, I learned the Bhägavatam from that great and powerful sage. Now I
shall try to make you hear the very same thing as I learned it from him and as I
have realized it.
PURPORT
One can certainly see directly the presence of Lord Çré Kåñëa in the pages
of Bhägavatam if one has heard it from a self-realized great soul like Çukadeva
Gosvämé. One cannot, however, learn Bhägavatam from a bogus hired reciter
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
whose aim of life is to earn some money out of such recitation and employ the
earning in sex indulgence. No one can learn Çrémad-Bhägavatam who is
associated with persons engaged in sex life. That is the secret of learning
Bhägavatam Nor can one learn Bhägavatam from one who interprets the text
by his mundane scholarship. One has to learn Bhägavatam from the
representative of Çukadeva Gosvämé, and no one else, if one at all wants to see
Lord Çré Kåñëa in the pages. That is the process, and there is no alternative.
Süta Gosvämé is a bona fide representative of Çukadeva Gosvämé because he
wants to present the message which he received from the great learned
brähmaëa. Çukadeva Gosvämé presented Bhägavatam as he heard it from his
great father, and so also Süta Gosvämé is presenting Bhägavatam as he had
heard it from Çukadeva Gosvämé. Simple hearing is not all; one must realize
the text with proper attention. The word niviñöa means that Süta Gosvämé
drank the juice of Bhägavatam through his ears. That is the real process of
receiving Bhägavatam. One should hear with rapt attention from the real
person, and then he can at once realize the presence of Lord Kåñëa in every
page. The secret of knowing Bhägavatam is mentioned here. No one can give
rapt attention who is not pure in mind. No one can be pure in mind who is not
pure in action. No one can be pure in action who is not pure in eating,
sleeping, fearing and mating. But somehow or other if someone hears with rapt
attention from the right person, at the very beginning one can assuredly see
Lord Çré Kåñëa in person in the pages of Bhägavatam.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the First Canto, Third Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled “Kåñëa Is the Source of All Incarnations.”
Chapter Four
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The Appearance of Çré Närada
TEXT 1
VYaaSa ovac
wiTa b]uva<a& Sa&STaUYa MauNaqNaa& dqgaRSai}a<aaMa( )
v*Ö" ku-l/PaiTa" SaUTa& bû*c" XaaENak-ae_b]vqTa( )) 1 ))
vyäsa uväca
iti bruväëaà saàstüya
munénäà dérgha-satriëäm
våddhaù kula-patiù sütaà
bahvåcaù çaunako ’bravét
SYNONYMS
vyäsaù—Vyäsadeva; uväca—said; iti—thus; bruväëam—speaking;
saàstüya—congratulating; munénäm—of the great sages; dérgha—prolonged;
satriëäm—of those engaged in the performance of sacrifice; våddhaù—elderly;
kula-patiù—head of the assembly; sütam—unto Süta Gosvämé;
bahu-åcaù—learned; çaunakaù—of the name Çaunaka; abravét—addressed.
TRANSLATION
On hearing Süta Gosvämé speak thus, Çaunaka Muni, who was the elderly,
learned leader of all the åñis engaged in that prolonged sacrificial ceremony,
congratulated Süta Gosvämé by addressing him as follows.
PURPORT
In a meeting of learned men, when there are congratulations or addresses
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
for the speaker, the qualifications of the congratulator should be as follows. He
must be the leader of the house and an elderly man. He must be vastly learned
also. Çré Çaunaka Åñi had all these qualifications, and thus he stood up to
congratulate Çré Süta Gosvämé when he expressed his desire to present
Çrémad-Bhägavatam exactly as he heard it from Çukadeva Gosvämé and also
realized it personally. Personal realization does not mean that one should, out
of vanity, attempt to show one’s own learning by trying to surpass the previous
äcärya. He must have full confidence in the previous äcärya, and at the same
time he must realize the subject matter so nicely that he can present the
matter for the particular circumstances in a suitable manner. The original
purpose of the text must be maintained. No obscure meaning should be screwed
out of it, yet it should be presented in an interesting manner for the
understanding of the audience. This is called realization. The leader of the
assembly, Çaunaka, could estimate the value of the speaker, Çré Süta Gosvämé,
simply by his uttering yathädhétam and yathä-mati, and therefore he was very
glad to congratulate him in ecstasy. No learned man should be willing to hear a
person who does not represent the original äcärya. So the speaker and the
audience were bona fide in this meeting where Bhägavatam was being recited
for the second time. That should be the standard of recitation of Bhägavatam,
so that the real purpose can be served without difficulty. Unless this situation
is created, Bhägavatam recitation for extraneous purposes is useless labor both
for the speaker and for the audience.
TEXT 2
XaaENak- ovac
SaUTa SaUTa Maha>aaGa vd Naae vdTaa& vr )
k-Qaa& >aaGavTaq& Pau<Yaa& Yadah >aGavaH^uk-" )) 2 ))
çaunaka uväca
süta süta mahä-bhäga
vada no vadatäà vara
kathäà bhägavatéà puëyäà
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
yad äha bhagaväï chukaù
SYNONYMS
çaunakaù—Çaunaka; uväca—said; süta süta—O Süta Gosvämé;
mahä-bhäga—the most fortunate; vada—please speak; naù—unto us;
vadatäm—of those who can speak; vara—respected; kathäm—message;
bhägavatém—of the Bhägavatam; puëyäm—pious; yat—which; äha—said;
bhagavän—greatly powerful; çukaù—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé.
TRANSLATION
Çaunaka said: O Süta Gosvämé, you are the most fortunate and respected of
all those who can speak and recite. Please relate the pious message of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, which was spoken by the great and powerful sage
Çukadeva Gosvämé.
PURPORT
Süta Gosvämé is twice addressed herein by Çaunaka Gosvämé out of great
joy because he and the members of the assembly were eager to hear the text of
Bhägavatam uttered by Çukadeva Gosvämé. They were not interested in
hearing it from a bogus person who would interpret in his own way to suit his
own purpose. Generally the so-called Bhägavatam reciters are either
professional readers or so-called learned impersonalists who cannot enter into
the transcendental personal activities of the Supreme Person. Such
impersonalists twist some meanings out of Bhägavatam to suit and support
impersonalist views, and the professional readers at once go to the Tenth
Canto to misexplain the most confidential part of the Lord’s pastimes. Neither
of these reciters are bona fide persons to recite Bhägavatam. Only one who is
prepared to present Bhägavatam in the light of Çukadeva Gosvämé and only
those who are prepared to hear Çukadeva Gosvämé and his representative are
bona fide participants in the transcendental discussion of Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 3
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
k-iSMaNa( YauGae Pa[v*taeYa& SQaaNae va ke-Na heTauNaa )
ku-Ta" SaÄaeidTa" k*-Z<a" k*-TavaNa( Sa&ihTaa& MauiNa" )) 3 ))
kasmin yuge pravåtteyaà
sthäne vä kena hetunä
kutaù saïcoditaù kåñëaù
kåtavän saàhitäà muniù
SYNONYMS
kasmin—in which; yuge—period; pravåttä—was begun; iyam—this; sthäne—in
the place; vä—or; kena—on what; hetunä—ground; kutaù—wherefrom;
saïcoditaù—inspired by; kåñëaù—Kåñëa-dvaipäyana Vyäsa;
kåtavän—compiled; saàhitäm—Vedic literature; muniù—the learned.
TRANSLATION
In what period and at what place was this first begun, and why was this
taken up? From where did Kåñëa-dvaipäyana Vyäsa, the great sage, get the
inspiration to compile this literature?
PURPORT
Because Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the special contribution of Çréla Vyäsadeva,
there are so many inquiries by the learned Çaunaka Muni. It was known to
them that Çréla Vyäsadeva had already explained the text of the Vedas in
various ways up to the Mahäbhärata for the understanding of less intelligent
women, çüdras and fallen members of the family of twice-born men.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is transcendental to all of them because it has nothing to
do with anything mundane. So the inquiries are very intelligent and relevant.
TEXT 4
TaSYa Pau}aae MahaYaaeGaq SaMad*x( iNaivRk-LPak-" )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Wk-aNTaMaiTaåiàd]ae GaU!ae MaU! wveYaTae )) 4 ))
tasya putro mahä-yogé
sama-dåì nirvikalpakaù
ekänta-matir unnidro
güòho müòha iveyate
SYNONYMS
tasya—his; putraù—son; mahä-yogé—a great devotee;
sama-dåk—equibalanced; nirvikalpakaù—absolute monist;
ekänta-matiù—fixed in monism or oneness of mind; unnidraù—surpassed
nescience; güòhaù—not exposed; müòhaù—stunted; iva—like; iyate—appears
like.
TRANSLATION
His [Vyäsadeva’s] son was a great devotee, an equibalanced monist, whose
mind was always concentrated in monism. He was transcendental to mundane
activities, but being unexposed, he appeared like an ignorant person.
PURPORT
Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé was a liberated soul, and thus he remained always
alert not to be trapped by the illusory energy. In the Bhagavad-gétä this
alertness is very lucidly explained. The liberated soul and the conditioned soul
have different engagements. The liberated soul is always engaged in the
progressive path of spiritual attainment, which is something like a dream for
the conditioned soul. The conditioned soul cannot imagine the actual
engagements of the liberated soul. While the conditioned soul thus dreams
about spiritual engagements, the liberated soul is awake. Similarly, the
engagement of a conditioned soul appears to be a dream for the liberated soul.
A conditioned soul and a liberated soul may apparently be on the same
platform, but factually they are differently engaged, and their attention is
always alert, either in sense enjoyment or in self-realization. The conditioned
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
soul is absorbed in matter, whereas the liberated soul is completely indifferent
to matter. This indifference is explained as follows.
TEXT 5
d*îaNauYaaNTaMa*izMaaTMaJaMaPYaNaGan&
deVYaae ihYaa PairdDauNaR SauTaSYa ic}aMa( )
TaÜq+Ya Pa*C^iTa MauNaaE JaGaduSTavaiSTa
ñqPauiM>ada Na Tau SauTaSYa iviv¢-d*íe" )) 5 ))
dåñövänuyäntam åñim ätmajam apy anagnaà
devyo hriyä paridadhur na sutasya citram
tad vékñya påcchati munau jagadus tavästi
stré-pum-bhidä na tu sutasya vivikta-dåñöeù
SYNONYMS
dåñövä—by seeing; anuyäntam—following; åñim—the sage; ätmajam—his son;
api—in spite of; anagnam—not naked; devyaù—beautiful damsels; hriyä—out
of shyness; paridadhuù—covered the body; na—not; sutasya—of the son;
citram—astonishing; tat vékñya—by seeing that; påcchati—asking;
munau—unto the muni (Vyäsa); jagaduù—replied; tava—your; asti—there
are; stré-pum—male and female; bhidä—differences; na—not; tu—but;
sutasya—of the son; vivikta—purified; dåñöeù—of one who looks.
TRANSLATION
While Çré Vyäsadeva was following his son, beautiful young damsels who
were bathing naked covered their bodies with cloth, although Çré Vyäsadeva
himself was not naked. But they had not done so when his son had passed. The
sage inquired about this, and the young ladies replied that his son was purified
and when looking at them made no distinction between male and female. But
the sage made such distinctions.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
In the Bhagavad-gétä (5.18) it is said that a learned sage looks equally on a
learned and gentle brähmaëa, a caëòäla (dog-eater), a dog or a cow due to his
spiritual vision. Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé attained that stage. Thus he did not
see a male or female; he saw all living entities in different dress. The ladies
who were bathing could understand the mind of a man simply by studying his
demeanor, just as by looking at a child one can understand how innocent he is.
Çukadeva Gosvämé was a young boy sixteen years old, and therefore all the
parts of his body were developed. He was naked also, and so were the ladies.
But because Çukadeva Gosvämé was transcendental to sex relations, he
appeared very innocent. The ladies, by their special qualifications, could sense
this at once, and therefore they were not very concerned about him. But when
his father passed, the ladies quickly dressed. The ladies were exactly like his
children or grandchildren, yet they reacted to the presence of Vyäsadeva
according to the social custom because Çréla Vyäsadeva played the part of a
householder. A householder has to distinguish between a male and female,
otherwise he cannot be a householder. One should, therefore, attempt to know
the distinction between spirit soul without any attachment for male and
female. As long as such distinction is there, one should not try to become a
sannyäsé like Çukadeva Gosvämé. At least theoretically one must be convinced
that a living entity is neither male nor female. The outward dress is made of
matter by material nature to attract the opposite sex and thus keep one
entangled in material existence. A liberated soul is above this perverted
distinction. He does not distinguish between one living being and another. For
him they are all one and the same spirit. The perfection of this spiritual vision
is the liberated stage, and Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé attained that stage. Çréla
Vyäsadeva was also in the transcendental stage, but because he was in the
householder’s life, he did not pretend to be a liberated soul, as a matter of
custom.
TEXT 6
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
k-QaMaal/i+aTa" PaaErE" SaMPa[aá" ku-åJaa®l/aNa( )
oNMataMaUk-Ja@viÜcrNa( GaJaSaaûYae )) 6 ))
katham älakñitaù pauraiù
sampräptaù kuru-jäìgalän
unmatta-müka-jaòavad
vicaran gaja-sähvaye
SYNONYMS
katham—how; älakñitaù—recognized; pauraiù—by the citizens;
sampräptaù—reaching; kuru-jäìgalän—the Kuru-jäìgala provinces;
unmatta—mad; müka—dumb; jaòavat—stunted; vicaran—wandering;
gaja-sähvaye—Hastinäpura.
TRANSLATION
How was he [Çréla Çukadeva, the son of Vyäsa] recognized by the citizens
when he entered the city of Hastinäpura [now Delhi], after wandering in the
provinces of Kuru and Jäìgala, appearing like a madman, dumb and retarded?
PURPORT
The present city of Delhi was formerly known as Hastinäpura because it
was first established by King Hasté. Gosvämé Çukadeva, after leaving his
paternal home, was roaming like a madman, and therefore it was very difficult
for the citizens to recognize him in his exalted position. A sage is not,
therefore, recognized by sight, but by hearing. One should approach a sädhu or
great sage not to see but to hear him. If one is not prepared to hear the words
of a sädhu, there is no profit. Çukadeva Gosvämé was a sädhu who could speak
on the transcendental activities of the Lord. He did not satisfy the whims of
ordinary citizens. He was recognized when he spoke on the subject of
Bhägavatam, and he never attempted jugglery like a magician. Outwardly he
appeared to be a retarded, dumb madman, but in fact he was the most elevated
transcendental personality.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 7
k-Qa& va Paa<@veYaSYa raJazeRMauRiNaNaa Sah )
Sa&vad" SaMa>aUtaaTa Ya}aEza SaaTvTaq é[uiTa" )) 7 ))
kathaà vä päëòaveyasya
räjarñer muninä saha
saàvädaù samabhüt täta
yatraiñä sätvaté çrutiù
SYNONYMS
katham—how is it; vä—also; päëòaveyasya—of the descendant of Päëòu
(Parékñit); räjarñeù—of the king who was a sage; muninä—with the muni;
saha—with; saàvädaù—discussion; samabhüt—took place; täta—O darling;
yatra—whereupon; eñä—like this; sätvaté—transcendental; çrutiù—essence of
the Vedas.
TRANSLATION
How did it so happen that King Parékñit met this great sage, making it
possible for this great transcendental essence of the Vedas [Bhägavatam] to be
sung to him?
PURPORT
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is stated here as the essence of the Vedas. It is not an
imaginary story as it is sometimes considered by unauthorized men. It is also
called Çuka-saàhitä, or the Vedic hymn spoken by Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé, the
great liberated sage.
TEXT 8
Sa GaaedaehNaMaa}a& ih Ga*hezu Ga*hMaeiDaNaaMa( )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Ave+aTae Maha>aaGaSTaqQasku-v|STadaé[MaMa( )) 8 ))
sa go-dohana-mätraà hi
gåheñu gåha-medhinäm
avekñate mahä-bhägas
térthé-kurvaàs tad äçramam
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Çukadeva Gosvämé); go-dohana-mätram—only for the time of
milking the cow; hi—certainly; gåheñu—in the house; gåha-medhinäm—of the
householders; avekñate—waits; mahä-bhägaù—the most fortunate;
térthé—pilgrimage; kurvan—transforming; tat äçramam—the residence.
TRANSLATION
He [Çukadeva Gosvämé] was accustomed to stay at the door of a householder
only long enough for a cow to be milked. And he did this just to sanctify the
residence.
PURPORT
Çukadeva Gosvämé met Emperor Parékñit and explained the text of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam. He was not accustomed to stay at any householder’s
residence for more than half an hour (at the time of milking the cow), and he
would just take alms from the fortunate householder. That was to sanctify the
residence by his auspicious presence. Therefore Çukadeva Gosvämé is an ideal
preacher established in the transcendental position. From his activities, those
who are in the renounced order of life and dedicated to the mission of
preaching the message of Godhead should learn that they have no business
with householders save and except to enlighten them in transcendental
knowledge. Such asking for alms from the householder should be for the
purpose of sanctifying his home. One who is in the renounced order of life
should not be allured by the glamor of the householder’s worldly possessions
and thus become subservient to worldly men. For one who is in the renounced
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
order of life, this is much more dangerous than drinking poison and
committing suicide.
TEXT 9
Ai>aMaNYauSauTa& SaUTa Pa[ahu>aaRGavTaaetaMaMa( )
TaSYa JaNMa MahaêYa| k-MaaRi<a c Ga*<aqih Na" )) 9 ))
abhimanyu-sutaà süta
prähur bhägavatottamam
tasya janma mahäçcaryaà
karmäëi ca gåëéhi naù
SYNONYMS
abhimanyu-sutam—the son of Abhimanyu; süta—O Süta; prähuù—is said to
be; bhägavata-uttamam—the first-class devotee of the Lord; tasya—his;
janma—birth; mahä-äçcaryam—very wonderful; karmäëi—activities;
ca—and; gåëéhi—please speak to; naù—us.
TRANSLATION
It is said that Mahäräja Parékñit is a great first-class devotee of the Lord and
that his birth and activities are all wonderful. Please tell us about him.
PURPORT
The birth of Mahäräja Parékñit is wonderful because in the womb of his
mother he was protected by the Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa. His
activities are also wonderful because he chastised Kali, who was attempting to
kill a cow. To kill cows means to end human civilization. He wanted to protect
the cow from being killed by the great representative of sin. His death is also
wonderful because he got previous notice of his death, which is wonderful for
any mortal being, and thus he prepared himself for passing away by sitting
down on the bank of the Ganges and hearing the transcendental activities of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the Lord. During all the days he heard Bhägavatam, he did not take food or
drink, nor did he sleep a moment. So everything about him is wonderful, and
his activities are worth hearing attentively. Desire is expressed herein to hear
about him in detail.
TEXT 10
Sa SaMa]a$( k-SYa va heTaae" Paa<@UNaa& MaaNavDaRNa" )
Pa[aYaaePaivíae Ga®aYaaMaNaad*TYaaiDara$(=ié[YaMa( )) 10 ))
sa samräö kasya vä hetoù
päëòünäà mäna-vardhanaù
präyopaviñöo gaìgäyäm
anädåtyädhiräö-çriyam
SYNONYMS
saù—he; samräö—the Emperor; kasya—for what; vä—or; hetoù—reason;
päëòünäm—of the sons of Päëòu; mäna-vardhanaù—one who enriches the
family; präya-upaviñöaù—sitting and fasting; gaìgäyäm—on the bank of the
Ganges; anädåtya—neglecting; adhiräö—acquired kingdom;
çriyam—opulences.
TRANSLATION
He was a great emperor and possessed all the opulences of his acquired
kingdom. He was so exalted that he was increasing the prestige of the Päëòu
dynasty. Why did he give up everything to sit down on the bank of the Ganges
and fast until death?
PURPORT
Mahäräja Parékñit was the Emperor of the world and all the seas and oceans,
and he did not have to take the trouble to acquire such a kingdom by his own
effort. He inherited it from his grandfathers Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
brothers. Besides that, he was doing well in the administration and was worthy
of the good names of his forefathers. Consequently there was nothing
undesirable in his opulence and administration. Then why should he give up
all these favorable circumstances and sit down on the bank of the Ganges,
fasting till death? This is astonishing, and therefore all were eager to know the
cause.
TEXT 11
NaMaiNTa YaTPaadiNake-TaMaaTMaNa"
iXavaYa haNaqYa DaNaaiNa Xa}av" )
k-Qa& Sa vqr" ié[YaMa® duSTYaJaa&
YauvEzTaaeTóíuMahae SahaSaui>a" )) 11 ))
namanti yat-päda-niketam ätmanaù
çiväya hänéya dhanäni çatravaù
kathaà sa véraù çriyam aìga dustyajäà
yuvaiñatotsrañöum aho sahäsubhiù
SYNONYMS
namanti—bow down; yat-päda—whose feet; niketam—under; ätmanaù—own;
çiväya—welfare; hänéya—used to bring about; dhanäni—wealth;
çatravaù—enemies; katham—for what reason; saù—he; véraù—the chivalrous;
çriyam—opulences; aìga—O; dustyajäm—insuperable; yuvä—in full youth;
aiñata—desired; utsrañöum—to give up; aho—exclamation; saha—with;
asubhiù—life.
TRANSLATION
He was such a great emperor that all his enemies would come and bow down
at his feet and surrender all their wealth for their own benefit. He was full of
youth and strength, and he possessed insuperable kingly opulences. Why did he
want to give up everything, including his life?
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
There was nothing undesirable in his life. He was quite a young man and
could enjoy life with power and opulence. So there was no question of retiring
from active life. There was no difficulty in collecting the state taxes because he
was so powerful and chivalrous that even his enemies would come to him and
bow down at his feet and surrender all wealth for their own benefit. Mahäräja
Parékñit was a pious king. He conquered his enemies, and therefore the
kingdom was full of prosperity. There was enough milk, grains and metals, and
all the rivers and mountains were full of potency. So materially everything was
satisfactory. Therefore, there was no question of untimely giving up his
kingdom and life. The sages were eager to hear about all this.
TEXT 12
iXavaYa l/aek-SYa >avaYa >aUTaYae
Ya otaMaëaek-ParaYa<aa JaNaa" )
JaqviNTa NaaTMaaQaRMaSaaE Paraé[Ya&
MauMaaec iNaivRÛ ku-Ta" k-le/vrMa( )) 12 ))
çiväya lokasya bhaväya bhütaye
ya uttama-çloka-paräyaëä janäù
jévanti nätmärtham asau paräçrayaà
mumoca nirvidya kutaù kalevaram
SYNONYMS
çiväya—welfare; lokasya—of all living beings; bhaväya—for flourishing;
bhütaye—for economic development; ye—one who is;
uttama-çloka-paräyaëäù—devoted to the cause of the Personality of Godhead;
janäù—men; jévanti—do live; na—but not; ätma-artham—selfish interest;
asau—that; para-äçrayam—shelter for others; mumoca—gave up;
nirvidya—being freed from all attachment; kutaù—for what reason;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
kalevaram—mortal body.
TRANSLATION
Those who are devoted to the cause of the Personality of Godhead live only
for the welfare, development and happiness of others. They do not live for any
selfish interest. So even though the Emperor [Parékñit] was free from all
attachment to worldly possessions, how could he give up his mortal body, which
was shelter for others?
PURPORT
Parékñit Mahäräja was an ideal king and householder because he was a
devotee of the Personality of Godhead. A devotee of the Lord automatically
has all good qualifications. And the Emperor was a typical example of this.
Personally he had no attachment for all the worldly opulences in his
possession. But since he was king for the all-around welfare of his citizens, he
was always busy in the welfare work of the public, not only for this life, but
also for the next. He would not allow slaughterhouses or killing of cows. He
was not a foolish and partial administrator who would arrange for the
protection of one living being and allow another to be killed. Because he was a
devotee of the Lord, he knew perfectly well how to conduct his administration
for everyone’s happiness—men, animals, plants and all living creatures. He
was not selfishly interested. Selfishness is either self-centered or self-extended.
He was neither. His interest was to please the Supreme Truth, Personality of
Godhead. The king is the representative of the Supreme Lord, and therefore
the king’s interest must be identical with that of the Supreme Lord. The
Supreme Lord wants all living beings to be obedient to Him and thereby
become happy. Therefore the king’s interest is to guide all subjects back to the
kingdom of God. Hence the activities of the citizens should be so coordinated
that they can at the end go back home, back to Godhead. Under the
administration of a representative king, the kingdom is full of opulence. At
that time, human beings need not eat animals. There are ample food grains,
milk, fruit and vegetables so that the human beings as well as the animals can
eat sumptuously and to their heart’s content. If all living beings are satisfied
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
with food and shelter and obey the prescribed rules, there cannot be any
disturbance between one living being and another. Emperor Parékñit was a
worthy king, and therefore all were happy during his reign.
TEXT 13
TaTSav| Na" SaMaac+v Pa*íae Yaidh ik-ÄNa )
MaNYae Tva& ivzYae vaca& òaTaMaNYa}a ^aNdSaaTa( )) 13 ))
tat sarvaà naù samäcakñva
påñöo yad iha kiïcana
manye tväà viñaye väcäà
snätam anyatra chändasät
SYNONYMS
tat—that; sarvam—all; naù—unto us; samäcakñva—clearly explain;
påñöaù—questioned; yat iha—herein; kiïcana—all that; manye—we think;
tväm—you; viñaye—in all subjects; väcäm—meanings of words; snätam—fully
acquainted; anyatra—except; chändasät—portion of the Vedas.
TRANSLATION
We know that you are expert in the meaning of all subjects, except some
portions of the Vedas, and thus you can clearly explain the answers to all the
questions we have just put to you.
PURPORT
The difference between the Vedas and the Puräëas is like that between the
brähmaëas and the parivräjakas. The brähmaëas are meant to administer some
fruitive sacrifices mentioned in the Vedas, but the parivräjakäcäryas, or
learned preachers, are meant to disseminate transcendental knowledge to one
and all. As such, the parivräjakäcäryas are not always expert in pronouncing
the Vedic mantras, which are practiced systematically by accent and meter by
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the brähmaëas who are meant for administering Vedic rites. Yet it should not
be considered that the brähmaëas are more important than the itinerant
preachers. They are one and different simultaneously because they are meant
for the same end, in different ways.
There is no difference also between the Vedic mantras and what is
explained in the Puräëas and Itihäsa. According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, it is
mentioned in the Mädhyandina-çruti that all the Vedas, namely the Säma,
Atharva, Åg, Yajur, Puräëas, Itihäsas, Upaniñads, etc., are emanations from the
breathing of the Supreme Being. The only difference is that the Vedic mantras
are mostly begun with praëava oàkära, and it requires some training to
practice the metric pronunciation of the Vedic mantras. But that does not
mean that Çrémad-Bhägavatam is of less importance than the Vedic mantras.
On the contrary, it is the ripened fruit of all the Vedas, as stated before.
Besides that, the most perfectly liberated soul, Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé, is
absorbed in the studies of the Bhägavatam, although he is already self-realized.
Çréla Süta Gosvämé is following his footsteps, and therefore his position is not
the least less important because he was not expert in chanting Vedic mantras
with metric pronunciation, which depends more on practice than actual
realization. Realization is more important than parrotlike chanting.
TEXT 14
SaUTa ovac
ÜaPare SaMaNauPa[aáe Ta*TaqYae YauGaPaYaRYae )
JaaTa" ParaXaraÛaeGaq vaSaVYaa& k-l/Yaa hre" )) 14 ))
süta uväca
dväpare samanupräpte
tåtéye yuga-paryaye
jätaù paräçaräd yogé
väsavyäà kalayä hareù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
sütaù—Süta Gosvämé; uväca—said; dväpare—in the second millennium;
samanupräpte—on the advent of; tåtéye—third; yuga—millennium;
paryaye—in the place of; jätaù—was begotten; paräçarät—by Paräçara;
yogé—the great sage; väsavyäm—in the womb of the daughter of Vasu;
kalayä—in the plenary portion; hareù—of the Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: When the second millennium overlapped the third, the
great sage [Vyäsadeva] was born to Paräçara in the womb of Satyavaté, the
daughter of Vasu.
PURPORT
There is a chronological order of the four millenniums, namely Satya,
Dväpara, Tretä and Kali. But sometimes there is overlapping. During the
regime of Vaivasvata Manu, there was an overlapping of the twenty-eighth
round of the four millenniums, and the third millennium appeared prior to the
second. In that particular millennium, Lord Çré Kåñëa also descends, and
because of this there was some particular alteration. The mother of the great
sage was Satyavaté the daughter of the Vasu (fisherman), and the father was
the great Paräçara Muni. That is the history of Vyäsadeva’s birth. Every
millennium is divided into three periods, and each period is called a sandhyä.
Vyäsadeva appeared in the third sandhyä of that particular age.
TEXT 15
Sa k-daicTSarSvTYaa oPaSPa*XYa Jal&/ éuic" )
iviv¢- Wk- AaSaqNa oidTae rivMa<@le/ )) 15 ))
sa kadäcit sarasvatyä
upaspåçya jalaà çuciù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
vivikta eka äséna
udite ravi-maëòale
SYNONYMS
saù—he; kadäcit—once; sarasvatyäù—on the bank of the Sarasvaté;
upaspåçya—after finishing morning ablutions; jalam—water; çuciù—being
purified; vivikte—concentration; ekaù—alone; äsénaù—being thus seated;
udite—on the rise; ravi-maëòale—of the sun disc.
TRANSLATION
Once upon a time he [Vyäsadeva], as the sun rose, took his morning ablution
in the waters of the Sarasvaté and sat alone to concentrate.
PURPORT
The River Sarasvaté is flowing in the Badarikäçrama area of the Himalayas.
So the place indicated here is Çamyäpräsa in Badarikäçrama, where Çré
Vyäsadeva is residing.
TEXT 16
Paravrj" Sa ‰iz" k-ale/NaaVYa¢-r&hSaa )
YauGaDaMaRVYaiTak-r& Pa[aá& >auiv YauGae YauGae )) 16 ))
parävara-jïaù sa åñiù
kälenävyakta-raàhasä
yuga-dharma-vyatikaraà
präptaà bhuvi yuge yuge
SYNONYMS
para-avara—past and future; jïaù—one who knows; saù—he;
åñiù—Vyäsadeva; kälena—in the course of time; avyakta—unmanifested;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
raàhasä—by great force; yuga-dharma—acts in terms of the millennium;
vyatikaram—anomalies; präptam—having accrued; bhuvi—on the earth; yuge
yuge—different ages.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Vyäsadeva saw anomalies in the duties of the millennium.
This happens on the earth in different ages, due to unseen forces in the course
of time.
PURPORT
The great sages like Vyäsadeva are liberated souls, and therefore they can
see clearly past and future. Thus he could see the future anomalies in the Kali
age, and accordingly he made arrangement for the people in general so that
they can execute a progressive life in this age, which is full of darkness. The
people in general in this age of Kali are too much interested in matter, which
is temporary. Because of ignorance they are unable to evaluate the assets of life
and be enlightened in spiritual knowledge.
TEXTS 17–18
>aaEiTak-aNaa& c >aavaNaa& Xai¢-haSa& c TaTk*-TaMa( )
Aé[ÕDaaNaaià"SatvaNduMaeRDaaNa( hiSaTaaYauz" )) 17 ))
du>aRGaa&ê JaNaaNa( vq+Ya MauiNaidRVYaeNa c+auza )
SavRv<aaRé[Maa<aa& YaÕDYaaE ihTaMaMaaegad*k(- )) 18 ))
bhautikänäà ca bhävänäà
çakti-hräsaà ca tat-kåtam
açraddadhänän niùsattvän
durmedhän hrasitäyuñaù
durbhagäàç ca janän vékñya
munir divyena cakñuñä
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
sarva-varëäçramäëäà yad
dadhyau hitam amogha-dåk
SYNONYMS
bhautikänäm ca—also of everything that is made of matter;
bhävänäm—actions; çakti-hräsam ca—and deterioration of natural power;
tat-kåtam—rendered by that; açraddadhänän—of the faithless;
niùsattvän—impatient due to want of the mode of goodness;
durmedhän—dull-witted; hrasita—reduced; äyuñaù—of duration of life;
durbhagän ca—also the unlucky; janän—people in general; vékñya—by seeing;
muniù—the muni; divyena—by transcendental; cakñuñä—vision; sarva—all;
varëa-äçramäëäm—of all the statuses and orders of life; yat—what;
dadhyau—contemplated; hitam—welfare; amogha-dåk—one who is fully
equipped in knowledge.
TRANSLATION
The great sage, who was fully equipped in knowledge, could see, through his
transcendental vision, the deterioration of everything material, due to the
influence of the age. He could also see that the faithless people in general would
be reduced in duration of life and would be impatient due to lack of goodness.
Thus he contemplated for the welfare of men in all statuses and orders of life.
PURPORT
The unmanifested forces of time are so powerful that they reduce all matter
to oblivion in due course. In Kali-yuga, the last millennium of a round of four
millenniums, the power of all material objects deteriorates by the influence of
time. In this age the duration of the material body of the people in general is
much reduced, and so is the memory. The action of matter has also not so
much incentive. The land does not produce food grains in the same
proportions as it did in other ages. The cow does not give as much milk as it
used to give formerly. The production of vegetables and fruits is less than
before. As such, all living beings, both men and animals, do not have
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
sumptuous, nourishing food. Due to want of so many necessities of life,
naturally the duration of life is reduced, the memory is short, intelligence is
meager, mutual dealings are full of hypocrisy and so on.
The great sage Vyäsadeva could see this by his transcendental vision. As an
astrologer can see the future fate of a man, or an astronomer can foretell the
solar and lunar eclipses, those liberated souls who can see through the
scriptures can foretell the future of all mankind. They can see this due to their
sharp vision of spiritual attainment.
And all such transcendentalists, who are naturally devotees of the Lord, are
always eager to render welfare service to the people in general. They are the
real friends of the people in general, not the so-called public leaders who are
unable to see what is going to happen five minutes ahead. In this age the
people in general as well as their so-called leaders are all unlucky fellows,
faithless in spiritual knowledge and influenced by the age of Kali. They are
always disturbed by various diseases. For example, in the present age there are
so many TB patients and TB hospitals, but formerly this was not so because the
time was not so unfavorable. The unfortunate men of this age are always
reluctant to give a reception to the transcendentalists who are representatives
of Çréla Vyäsadeva and selfless workers always busy in planning something
which may help everyone in all statuses and orders of life. The greatest
philanthropists are those transcendentalists who represent the mission of
Vyäsa, Närada, Madhva, Caitanya, Rüpa, Sarasvaté, etc. They are all one and
the same. The personalities may be different, but the aim of the mission is one
and the same, namely, to deliver the fallen souls back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 19
caTauhaeR}a& k-MaR éuÖ& Pa[JaaNaa& vq+Ya vEidk-Ma( )
VYadDaaÛjSaNTaTYaE vedMaek&- cTauivRDaMa( )) 19 ))
cätur-hotraà karma çuddhaà
prajänäà vékñya vaidikam
vyadadhäd yajïa-santatyai
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
vedam ekaà catur-vidham
SYNONYMS
cätuù—four; hotram—sacrificial fires; karma çuddham—purification of work;
prajänäm—of the people in general; vékñya—after seeing;
vaidikam—according to Vedic rites; vyadadhät—made into; yajïa—sacrifice;
santatyai—to expand; vedam ekam—only one Veda; catuù-vidham—in four
divisions.
TRANSLATION
He saw that the sacrifices mentioned in the Vedas were means by which the
people’s occupations could be purified. And to simplify the process he divided
the one Veda into four, in order to expand them among men.
PURPORT
Formerly there was only the Veda of the name Yajur, and the four divisions
of sacrifices were there specifically mentioned. But to make them more easily
performable, the Veda was divided into four divisions of sacrifice, just to purify
the occupational service of the four orders. Above the four Vedas, namely Åg,
Yajur, Säma, and Atharva, there are the Puräëas, the Mahäbhärata, Saàhitäs,
etc., which are known as the fifth Veda. Çré Vyäsadeva and his many disciples
were all historical personalities, and they were very kind and sympathetic
toward the fallen souls of this age of Kali. As such, the Puräëas and
Mahäbhärata were made from related historical facts which explained the
teaching of the four Vedas. There is no point in doubting the authority of the
Puräëas and Mahäbhärata as parts and parcels of the Vedas. In the Chändogya
Upaniñad (7.1.4), the Puräëas and Mahäbhärata, generally known as histories,
are mentioned as the fifth Veda. According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, that is the
way of ascertaining the respective values of the revealed scriptures.
TEXT 20
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
‰GYaJau"SaaMaaQavaR:Yaa vedaêTvar od(Da*Taa" )
wiTahaSaPaura<a& c PaÄMaae ved oCYaTae )) 20 ))
åg-yajuù-sämätharväkhyä
vedäç catvära uddhåtäù
itihäsa-puräëaà ca
païcamo veda ucyate
SYNONYMS
åg-yajuù-säma-atharva-äkhyäù—the names of the four Vedas; vedäù—the
Vedas; catväraù—four; uddhåtäù—made into separate parts; itihäsa—historical
records (Mahäbhärata); puräëam ca—and the Puräëas; païcamaù—the fifth;
vedaù—the original source of knowledge; ucyate—is said to be.
TRANSLATION
The four divisions of the original sources of knowledge [the Vedas] were
made separately. But the historical facts and authentic stories mentioned in the
Puräëas are called the fifth Veda.
TEXT 21
Ta}aGveRdDar" PaEl/" SaaMaGaae JaEiMaiNa" k-iv" )
vEXaMPaaYaNa WvEk-ae iNaZ<aaTaae YaJauzaMauTa )) 21 ))
tatrarg-veda-dharaù pailaù
sämago jaiminiù kaviù
vaiçampäyana evaiko
niñëäto yajuñäm uta
SYNONYMS
tatra—thereupon; åg-veda-dharaù—the professor of the Åg Veda; pailaù—the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
åñi named Paila; säma-gaù—that of the Säma Veda; jaiminiù—the åñi named
Jaimini; kaviù—highly qualified; vaiçampäyanaù—the åñi named
Vaiçampäyana; eva—only; ekaù—alone; niñëätaù—well versed; yajuñäm—of
the Yajur Veda; uta—glorified.
TRANSLATION
After the Vedas were divided into four divisions, Paila Åñi became the
professor of the Åg Veda, Jaimini the professor of the Säma Veda, and
Vaiçampäyana alone became glorified by the Yajur Veda.
PURPORT
The different Vedas were entrusted to different learned scholars for
development in various ways.
TEXT 22
AQavaRi®rSaaMaaSaqTSauMaNTaudaRå<aae MauiNa" )
wiTahaSaPaura<aaNaa& iPaTaa Mae raeMahzR<a" )) 22 ))
atharväìgirasäm äsét
sumantur däruëo muniù
itihäsa-puräëänäà
pitä me romaharñaëaù
SYNONYMS
atharva—the Atharva Veda; aìgirasäm—unto the åñi Aìgirä; äsét—was
entrusted; sumantuù—also known as Sumantu Muni; däruëaù—seriously
devoted to the Atharva Veda; muniù—the sage; itihäsa-puräëänäm—of the
historical records and the Puräëas; pitä—father; me—mine;
romaharñaëaù—the åñi Romaharñaëa.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The Sumantu Muni Aìgirä, who was very devotedly engaged, was entrusted
with the Atharva Veda. And my father, Romaharñaëa, was entrusted with the
Puräëas and historical record
PURPORT
In the çruti-mantras also it is stated that Aìgirä Muni, who strictly followed
the rigid principles of the Atharva Vedas, was the leader of the followers of the
Atharva Vedas.
TEXT 23
Ta WTa ‰zYaae ved& Sv& Sv& VYaSYaàNaek-Daa )
iXaZYaE" Pa[iXaZYaESTaiC^ZYaEveRdaSTae Xaai%Naae_>avNa( )) 23 ))
ta eta åñayo vedaà
svaà svaà vyasyann anekadhä
çiñyaiù praçiñyais tac-chiñyair
vedäs te çäkhino ’bhavan
SYNONYMS
te—they; ete—all these; åñayaù—learned scholars; vedam—the respective
Vedas; svam svam—in their own entrusted matters; vyasyan—rendered;
anekadhä—many; çiñyaiù—disciples; praçiñyaiù—grand-disciples;
tat-çiñyaiù—great grand-disciples; vedäù te—followers of the respective Vedas;
çäkhinaù—different branches; abhavan—thus became.
TRANSLATION
All these learned scholars, in their turn, rendered their entrusted Vedas
unto their many disciples, grand-disciples and great grand-disciples, and thus
the respective branches of the followers of the Vedas came into being.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The original source of knowledge is the Vedas. There are no branches of
knowledge, either mundane or transcendental, which do not belong to the
original text of the Vedas. They have simply been developed into different
branches, They were originally rendered by great, respectable and learned
professors. In other words, the Vedic knowledge, broken into different
branches by different disciplic successions, has been distributed all over the
world. No one, therefore, can claim independent knowledge beyond the Vedas.
TEXT 24
Ta Wv veda duMaeRDaEDaaRYaRNTae PauåzEYaRQaa )
Wv& ck-ar >aGavaNa( VYaaSa" k*-Pa<avTSal/" )) 24 ))
ta eva vedä durmedhair
dhäryante puruñair yathä
evaà cakära bhagavän
vyäsaù kåpaëa-vatsalaù
SYNONYMS
te—that; eva—certainly; vedäù—the book of knowledge; durmedhaiù—by the
less intellectual; dhäryante—can assimilate; puruñaiù—by the man; yathä—as
much as; evam—thus; cakära—edited; bhagavän—the powerful; vyäsaù—the
great sage of Vyäsa; kåpaëa-vatsalaù—very kind to the ignorant mass.
TRANSLATION
Thus the great sage Vyäsadeva, who is very kind to the ignorant masses,
edited the Vedas so they might be assimilated by less intellectual men.
PURPORT
The Veda is one, and the reasons for its divisions in many parts are
explained herewith. The seed of all knowledge, or the Veda, is not a subject
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
matter which can easily be understood by any ordinary man. There is a
stricture that no one should try to learn the Vedas who is not a qualified
brähmaëa. This stricture has been wrongly interpreted in so many ways. A
class of men, who claim brahminical qualification simply by their birthright in
the family of a brähmaëa, claim that the study of the Vedas is a monopoly of
the brähmaëa caste only. Another section of the people take this as an
injustice to members of other castes, who do not happen to take birth in a
brähmaëa family. But both of them are misguided. The Vedas are subjects
which had to be explained even to Brahmäjé by the Supreme Lord. Therefore
the subject matter is understood by persons with exceptional qualities of
goodness. Persons who are in the modes of passion and ignorance are unable to
understand the subject matter of the Vedas. The ultimate goal of Vedic
knowledge is Çré Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead. This Personality is very
rarely understood by those who are in the modes of passion and ignorance. In
the Satya-yuga everyone was situated in the mode of goodness. Gradually the
mode of goodness declined during the Tretä and Dväpara-yugas, and the
general mass of people became corrupt. In the present age the mode of
goodness is almost nil, and so for the general mass of people, the kindhearted,
powerful sage Çréla Vyäsadeva divided the Vedas in various ways so that they
may be practically followed by less intelligent persons in the modes of passion
and ignorance. It is explained in the next çloka as follows.
TEXT 25
ñqéUd]iÜJabNDaUNaa& }aYaq Na é[uiTaGaaecra )
k-MaRé[eYaiSa MaU!aNaa& é[eYa Wv& >aveidh )
wiTa >aarTaMaa:YaaNa& k*-PaYaa MauiNaNaa k*-TaMa( )) 25 ))
stré-çüdra-dvijabandhünäà
trayé na çruti-gocarä
karma-çreyasi müòhänäà
çreya evaà bhaved iha
iti bhäratam äkhyänaà
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
kåpayä muninä kåtam
SYNONYMS
stré—the woman class; çüdra—the laboring class; dvija-bandhünäm—of the
friends of the twice-born; trayé—three; na—not; çruti-gocarä—for
understanding; karma—in activities; çreyasi—in welfare; müòhänäm—of the
fools; çreyaù—supreme benefit; evam—thus; bhavet—achieved; iha—by this;
iti—thus thinking; bhäratam—the great Mahäbhärata; äkhyänam—historical
facts; kåpayä—out of great mercy; muninä—by the muni; kåtam—is
completed.
TRANSLATION
Out of compassion, the great sage thought it wise that this would enable men
to achieve the ultimate goal of life. Thus he compiled the great historical
narration called the Mahäbhärata for women, laborers and friends of the
twice-born.
PURPORT
The friends of the twice-born families are those who are born in the
families of brähmaëas, kñatriyas and vaiçyas, or the spiritually cultured families,
but who themselves are not equal to their forefathers. Such descendants are
not recognized as such, for want of purificatory achievements. The purificatory
activities begin even before the birth of a child, and the seed-giving
reformatory process is called Garbhädhäna-saàskära. One who has not
undergone such Garbhädhäna-saàskära, or spiritual family planning, is not
accepted as being of an actual twice-born family. The Garbhädhäna-saàskära
is followed by other purificatory processes, out of which the sacred thread
ceremony is one. This is performed at the time of spiritual initiation. After this
particular saàskära, one is rightly called twice-born. One birth is calculated
during the seed-giving saàskära, and the second birth is calculated at the time
of spiritual initiation. One who has been able to undergo such important
saàskäras can be called a bona fide twice-born.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
If the father and the mother do not undertake the process of spiritual
family planning and simply beget children out of passion only, their children
are called dvija-bandhus. These dvija-bandhus are certainly not as intelligent as
the children of the regular twice-born families. The dvija-bandhus are classified
with the çüdras and the woman class, who are by nature less intelligent. The
çüdras and the woman class do not have to undergo any saàskära save and
except the ceremony of marriage.
The less intelligent classes of men, namely women, çüdras and unqualified
sons of the higher castes, are devoid of necessary qualifications to understand
the purpose of the transcendental Vedas. For them the Mahäbhärata was
prepared. The purpose of the Mahäbhärata is to administer the purpose of the
Vedas, and therefore within this Mahäbhärata the summary Veda of
Bhagavad-gétä is placed. The less intelligent are more interested in stories than
in philosophy, and therefore the philosophy of the Vedas in the form of the
Bhagavad-gétä is spoken by the Lord Çré Kåñëa. Vyäsadeva and Lord Kåñëa are
both on the transcendental plane, and therefore they collaborated in doing
good to the fallen souls of this age. The Bhagavad-gétä is the essence of all
Vedic knowledge. It is the first book of spiritual values, as the Upaniñads are.
The Vedänta philosophy is the subject matter for study by the spiritual
graduates. Only the post-graduate spiritual student can enter into the spiritual
or devotional service of the Lord. It is a great science, and the great professor is
the Lord Himself in the form of Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. And persons
who are empowered by Him can initiate others in the transcendental loving
service of the Lord.
TEXT 26
Wv& Pa[v*taSYa Sada >aUTaaNaa& é[eYaiSa iÜJaa" )
SavaRTMake-NaaiPa Yada NaaTauZYad(Da*dYa& TaTa" )) 26 ))
evaà pravåttasya sadä
bhütänäà çreyasi dvijäù
sarvätmakenäpi yadä
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
nätuñyad dhådayaà tataù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; pravåttasya—one who is engaged in; sadä—always; bhütänäm—of
the living beings; çreyasi—in the ultimate good; dvijäù—O twice-born;
sarvätmakena api—by all means; yadä—when; na—not; atuñyat—become
satisfied; hådayam—mind; tataù—at that.
TRANSLATION
O twice-born brähmaëas, still his mind was not satisfied, although he
engaged himself in working for the total welfare of all people.
PURPORT
Çré Vyäsadeva was not satisfied with himself, although he had prepared
literatures of Vedic value for the all-around welfare of the general mass of
people. It was expected that he would be satisfied by all such activities, but
ultimately he was not satisfied.
TEXT 27
NaaiTaPa[Saqdd(Da*dYa" SarSvTYaaSTa$e= éucaE )
ivTakR-YaNa( iviv¢-SQa wd& caevac DaMaRivTa( )) 27 ))
nätiprasédad dhådayaù
sarasvatyäs taöe çucau
vitarkayan vivikta-stha
idaà coväca dharma-vit
SYNONYMS
na—not; atiprasédat—very much satisfied; hådayaù—at heart; sarasvatyäù—of
the River Sarasvaté; taöe—on the bank of; çucau—being purified;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
vitarkayan—having considered; vivikta-sthaù—situated in a lonely place; idam
ca—also this; uväca—said; dharma-vit—one who knows what religion is.
TRANSLATION
Thus the sage, being dissatisfied at heart, at once began to reflect, because he
knew the essence of religion, and he said within himself:
PURPORT
The sage began to search out the cause of not being satisfied at heart.
Perfection is never attained until one is satisfied at heart. This satisfaction of
heart has to be searched out beyond matter.
TEXTS 28–29
Da*Tav]TaeNa ih MaYaa ^Nda&iSa Gaurvae_GanYa" )
MaaiNaTaa iNaVYaRl/Ike-Na Ga*hqTa& caNauXaaSaNaMa( )) 28 ))
>aarTaVYaPadeXaeNa ùaManaYaaQaRê Pa[diXaRTa" )
d*XYaTae Ya}a DaMaaRid ñqéUd]aidi>arPYauTa )) 29 ))
dhåta-vratena hi mayä
chandäàsi guravo ’gnayaù
mänitä nirvyalékena
gåhétaà cänuçäsanam
bhärata-vyapadeçena
hy ämnäyärthaç ca pradarçitaù
dåçyate yatra dharmädi
stré-çüdrädibhir apy uta
SYNONYMS
dhåta-vratena—under a strict disciplinary vow; hi—certainly; mayä—by me;
chandäàsi—the Vedic hymns; guravaù—the spiritual masters; agnayaù—the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
sacrificial fire; mänitäù—properly worshiped; nirvyalékena—without pretense;
gåhétam ca—also accepted; anuçäsanam—traditional discipline; bhärata—the
Mahäbhärata; vyapadeçena—by compilation of; hi—certainly;
ämnäya-arthaù—import of disciplic succession; ca—and;
pradarçitaù—properly explained; dåçyate—by what is necessary; yatra—where;
dharma-ädiù—the path of religion; stré-çüdra-ädibhiù api—even by women,
çüdras, etc.; uta—spoken.
TRANSLATION
I have, under strict disciplinary vows, unpretentiously worshiped the Vedas,
the spiritual master and the altar of sacrifice. I have also abided by the rulings
and have shown the import of disciplic succession through the explanation of
the Mahäbhärata, by which even women, çüdras and others [friends of the
twice-born] can see the path of religion.
PURPORT
No one can understand the import of the Vedas without having undergone
a strict disciplinary vow and disciplic succession. The Vedas, spiritual masters
and sacrificial fire must be worshiped by the desiring candidate. All these
intricacies of Vedic knowledge are systematically presented in the
Mahäbhärata for the understanding of the woman class, the laborer class and
the unqualified members of brähmaëa, kñatriya or vaiçya families. In this age,
the Mahäbhärata is more essential than the original Vedas.
TEXT 30
TaQaaiPa bTa Mae dEùae ùaTMaa cEvaTMaNaa iv>au" )
ASaMPaà wva>aaiTa b]øvcRSYaSataMa" )) 30 ))
tathäpi bata me daihyo
hy ätmä caivätmanä vibhuù
asampanna iväbhäti
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
brahma-varcasya sattamaù
SYNONYMS
tathäpi—although; bata—defect; me—mine; daihyaù—situated in the body;
hi—certainly; ätmä—living being; ca—and; eva—even; ätmanä—myself;
vibhuù—sufficient; asampannaù—wanting in; iva äbhäti—it appears to be;
brahma-varcasya—of the Vedäntists; sattamaù—the supreme.
TRANSLATION
I am feeling incomplete, though I myself am fully equipped with everything
required by the Vedas.
PURPORT
Undoubtedly Çréla Vyäsadeva was complete in all the details of Vedic
achievements. Purification of the living being submerged in matter is made
possible by the prescribed activities in the Vedas, but the ultimate achievement
is different. Unless it is attained, the living being, even though fully equipped,
cannot be situated in the transcendentally normal stage. Çréla Vyäsadeva
appeared to have lost the clue and therefore felt dissatisfaction.
TEXT 31
ik&- va >aaGavTaa DaMaaR Na Pa[aYae<a iNaæiPaTaa" )
iPa[Yaa" ParMah&SaaNaa& Ta Wv ùCYauTaiPa[Yaa" )) 31 ))
kià vä bhägavatä dharmä
na präyeëa nirüpitäù
priyäù paramahaàsänäà
ta eva hy acyuta-priyäù
SYNONYMS
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
kim vä—or; bhägavatäù dharmäù—devotional activities of the living beings;
na—not; präyeëa—almost; nirüpitäù—directed; priyäù—dear;
paramahaàsänäm—of the perfect beings; te eva—that also; hi—certainly;
acyuta—the infallible; priyäù—attractive.
TRANSLATION
This may be because I did not specifically point out the devotional service of
the Lord, which is dear both to perfect beings and to the infallible Lord.
PURPORT
The dissatisfaction which was being felt by Çréla Vyäsadeva is expressed
herein in his own words. This was felt for the normal condition of the living
being in the devotional service of the Lord. Unless one is fixed in the normal
condition of service, neither the Lord nor the living being can become fully
satisfied. This defect was felt by him when Närada Muni, his spiritual master,
reached him. It is described as follows.
TEXT 32
TaSYaEv& i%l/MaaTMaaNa& MaNYaMaaNaSYa i%ÛTa" )
k*-Z<aSYa Naardae_>YaaGaadaé[Ma& Pa[aGaudaôTaMa( )) 32 ))
tasyaivaà khilam ätmänaà
manyamänasya khidyataù
kåñëasya närado ’bhyägäd
äçramaà präg udähåtam
SYNONYMS
tasya—his; evam—thus; khilam—inferior; ätmänam—soul;
manyamänasya—thinking within the mind; khidyataù—regretting;
kåñëasya—of Kåñëa-dvaipäyana Vyäsa; näradaù abhyägät—Närada came there;
äçramam—the cottage; präk—before; udähåtam—said.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
As mentioned before, Närada reached the cottage of Kåñëa-dvaipäyana
Vyäsa on the banks of the Sarasvaté just as Vyäsadeva was regretting his
defects.
PURPORT
The vacuum felt by Vyäsadeva was not due to his lack of knowledge.
Bhägavata-dharma is purely devotional service of the Lord to which the monist
has no access. The monist is not counted amongst the paramahaàsas (the most
perfect of the renounced order of life). Çrémad-Bhägavatam is full of narrations
of the transcendental activities of the Personality of Godhead. Although
Vyäsadeva was an empowered divinity, he still felt dissatisfaction because in
none of his works were the transcendental activities of the Lord properly
explained. The inspiration was infused by Çré Kåñëa directly in the heart of
Vyäsadeva, and thus he felt the vacuum as explained above. It is definitely
expressed herewith that without the transcendental loving service of the Lord,
everything is void; but in the transcendental service of the Lord, everything is
tangible without any separate attempt at fruitive work or empiric philosophical
speculation.
TEXT 33
TaMai>ajaYa SahSaa Pa[TYauTQaaYaaGaTa& MauiNa" )
PaUJaYaaMaaSa iviDavàard& SaurPaUiJaTaMa( )) 33 ))
tam abhijïäya sahasä
pratyutthäyägataà muniù
püjayäm äsa vidhivan
näradaà sura-püjitam
SYNONYMS
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
tam abhijïäya—seeing the good fortune of his (Närada’s) arrival; sahasä—all
of a sudden; pratyutthäya—getting up; ägatam—arrived at;
muniù—Vyäsadeva; püjayäm äsa—worship; vidhi-vat—with the same respect
as offered to Vidhi (Brahmä); näradam—to Närada; sura-püjitam—worshiped
by the demigods.
TRANSLATION
At the auspicious arrival of Çré Närada, Çré Vyäsadeva got up respectfully
and worshiped him, giving him veneration equal to that given to Brahmäjé, the
creator.
PURPORT
Vidhi means Brahmä, the first created living being. He is the original
student as well as professor of the Vedas. He learned it from Çré Kåñëa and
taught Närada first. So Närada is the second äcärya in the line of spiritual
disciplic succession. He is the representative of Brahmä, and therefore he is
respected exactly like Brahmä, the father of all vidhis (regulations); similarly
all other successive disciples in the chain are also equally respected as
representatives of the original spiritual master.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the First Canto, Fourth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled “The Appearance of Çré Närada.”
Chapter Five
Närada’s Instructions on Çrémad-Bhägavatam for Vyäsadeva
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 1
SaUTa ovac
AQa Ta& Sau%MaaSaqNa oPaaSaqNa& b*hC^\va" )
devizR" Pa[ah ivPa[iz| vq<aaPaai<a" SMaYaiàv )) 1 ))
süta uväca
atha taà sukham äséna
upäsénaà båhac-chraväù
devarñiù präha viprarñià
véëä-päëiù smayann iva
SYNONYMS
sütaù—Süta; uväca—said; atha—therefore; tam—him; sukham
äsénaù—comfortably seated; upäsénam—unto one sitting nearby;
båhat-çraväù—greatly respected; devarñiù—the great åñi among the gods;
präha—said; viprarñim—unto the åñi among the brähmaëas; véëä-päëiù—one
who carries a véëä in his hand; smayan iva—apparently smiling.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: Thus the sage amongst the gods [Närada], comfortably
seated and apparently smiling, addressed the åñi amongst the brähmaëas
[Vedavyäsa].
PURPORT
Närada was smiling because he well knew the great sage Vedavyäsa and the
cause of his disappointment. As he will explain gradually, Vyäsadeva’s
disappointment was due to insufficiency in presenting the science of
devotional service. Närada knew the defect, and it was confirmed by the
position of Vyäsa.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 2
Naard ovac
PaaraXaYaR Maha>aaGa >avTa" k-iÀdaTMaNaa )
PairTauZYaiTa Xaarqr AaTMaa MaaNaSa Wv va )) 2 ))
närada uväca
päräçarya mahä-bhäga
bhavataù kaccid ätmanä
parituñyati çäréra
ätmä mänasa eva vä
SYNONYMS
näradaù—Närada; uväca—said; päräçarya—O son of Paräçara;
mahä-bhäga—the greatly fortunate; bhavataù—your; kaccit—if it is;
ätmanä—by the self-realization of; parituñyati—does it satisfy;
çäréraù—identifying the body; ätmä—self; mänasaù—identifying the mind;
eva—certainly; vä—and.
TRANSLATION
Addressing Vyäsadeva, the son of Paräçara, Närada inquired: Are you
satisfied by identifying with the body or the mind as objects of self-realization?
PURPORT
This was a hint by Närada to Vyäsadeva regarding the cause of his
despondency. Vyäsadeva, as the descendant of Paräçara, a greatly powerful
sage, had the privilege of having a great parentage which should not have
given Vyäsadeva cause for despondency. Being a great son of a great father, he
should not have identified the self with the body or the mind. Ordinary men
with a poor fund of knowledge can identify the body as self or the mind as self,
but Vyäsadeva should not have done so. One cannot be cheerful by nature
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
unless one is factually seated in self-realization, which is transcendental to the
material body and mind.
TEXT 3
iJajaiSaTa& SauSaMPaàMaiPa Tae Mahdd(>auTaMa( )
k*-TavaNa( >aarTa& YaSTv& SavaRQaRPairb*&ihTaMa( )) 3 ))
jijïäsitaà susampannam
api te mahad-adbhutam
kåtavän bhärataà yas tvaà
sarvärtha-paribåàhitam
SYNONYMS
jijïäsitam—fully inquired; susampannam—well versed; api—in spite of;
te—your; mahat-adbhutam—great and wonderful; kåtavän—prepared;
bhäratam—the Mahäbhärata; yaù tvam—what you have done;
sarva-artha—including all sequences; paribåàhitam—elaborately explained.
TRANSLATION
Your inquiries were full and your studies were also well fulfilled, and there
is no doubt that you have prepared a great and wonderful work, the
Mahäbhärata, which is full of all kinds of Vedic sequences elaborately
explained.
PURPORT
The despondency of Vyäsadeva was certainly not due to his lack of
sufficient knowledge because as a student he had fully inquired about the
Vedic literatures, as a result of which the Mahäbhärata is compiled with full
explanation of the Vedas.
TEXT 4
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
iJajaiSaTaMaDaqTa& c b]øYataTa( SaNaaTaNaMa( )
TaQaaiPa XaaecSYaaTMaaNaMak*-TaaQaR wv Pa[>aae )) 4 ))
jijïäsitam adhétaà ca
brahma yat tat sanätanam
tathäpi çocasy ätmänam
akåtärtha iva prabho
SYNONYMS
jijïäsitam—deliberated fully well; adhétam—the knowledge obtained; ca—and;
brahma—the Absolute; yat—what; tat—that; sanätanam—eternal;
tathäpi—in spite of that; çocasi—lamenting; ätmänam—unto the self;
akåta-arthaù—undone; iva—like; prabho—my dear sir.
TRANSLATION
You have fully delineated the subject of impersonal Brahman as well as the
knowledge derived therefrom. Why should you be despondent in spite of all
this, thinking that you are undone, my dear prabhu?
PURPORT
The Vedänta-sütra, or Brahma-sütra, compiled by Çré Vyäsadeva is the full
deliberation of the impersonal absolute feature, and it is accepted as the most
exalted philosophical exposition in the world. It covers the subject of eternity,
and the methods are scholarly. So there cannot be any doubt about the
transcendental scholarship of Vyäsadeva. So why should he lament?
TEXT 5
VYaaSa ovac
ASTYaev Mae SavRiMad& TvYaae¢&-
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TaQaaiPa NaaTMaa PairTauZYaTae Mae )
TaNMaUl/MaVYa¢-MaGaaDabaeDa&
Pa*C^aMahe TvaTMa>avaTMa>aUTaMa( )) 5 ))
vyäsa uväca
asty eva me sarvam idaà tvayoktaà
tathäpi nätmä parituñyate me
tan-mülam avyaktam agädha-bodhaà
påcchämahe tvätma-bhavätma-bhütam
SYNONYMS
vyäsaù—Vyäsa; uväca—said; asti—there is; eva—certainly; me—mine;
sarvam—all; idam—this; tvayä—by you; uktam—uttered; tathäpi—and yet;
na—not; ätmä—self; parituñyate—does pacify; me—unto me; tat—of which;
mülam—root; avyaktam—undetected; agädha-bodham—the man of unlimited
knowledge; påcchämahe—do inquire; tvä—unto you; ätma-bhava—self-born;
ätma-bhütam—offspring.
TRANSLATION
Çré Vyäsadeva said: All you have said about me is perfectly correct. Despite
all this, I am not pacified. I therefore question you about the root cause of my
dissatisfaction, for you are a man of unlimited knowledge due to your being the
offspring of one [Brahmä] who is self-born [without mundane father and
mother].
PURPORT
In the material world everyone is engrossed with the idea of identifying the
body or the mind with the self. As such, all knowledge disseminated in the
material world is related either with the body or with the mind, and that is the
root cause of all despondencies. This is not always detected, even though one
may be the greatest erudite scholar in materialistic knowledge. It is good,
therefore, to approach a personality like Närada to solve the root cause of all
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
despondencies. Why Närada should be approached is explained below.
TEXT 6
Sa vE >avaNa( ved SaMaSTaGauù‚
MauPaaiSaTaae YaTPauåz" Paura<a" )
ParavreXaae MaNaSaEv ivì&
Sa*JaTYavTYaita Gau<aErSa®" )) 6 ))
sa vai bhavän veda samasta-guhyam
upäsito yat puruñaù puräëaù
parävareço manasaiva viçvaà
såjaty avaty atti guëair asaìgaù
SYNONYMS
saù—thus; vai—certainly; bhavän—yourself; veda—know;
samasta—all-inclusive; guhyam—confidential; upäsitaù—devotee of;
yat—because; puruñaù—the Personality of Godhead; puräëaù—the oldest;
parävareçaù—the controller of the material and spiritual worlds;
manasä—mind; eva—only; viçvam—the universe; såjati—creates; avati
atti—annihilates; guëaiù—by the qualitative matter; asaìgaù—unattached.
TRANSLATION
My lord! Everything that is mysterious is known to you because you worship
the creator and destroyer of the material world and the maintainer of the
spiritual world, the original Personality of Godhead, who is transcendental to
the three modes of material nature.
PURPORT
A person who is cent-percent engaged in the service of the Lord is the
emblem of all knowledge. Such a devotee of the Lord in full perfection of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
devotional service is also perfect by the qualification of the Personality of
Godhead. As such, the eightfold perfections of mystic power (añöa-siddhi)
constitute very little of his godly opulence. A devotee like Närada can act
wonderfully by his spiritual perfection, which every individual is trying to
attain. Çréla Närada is a cent-percent perfect living being, although not equal
to the Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 7
Tv& PaYaR$=àkR- wv i}al/aek-I‚
MaNTaêrae vaYauirvaTMaSaa+aq )
Paravre b]øi<a DaMaRTaae v]TaE"
òaTaSYa Mae NYaUNaMal&/ ivc+v )) 7 ))
tvaà paryaöann arka iva tri-lokém
antaç-caro väyur ivätma-säkñé
parävare brahmaëi dharmato vrataiù
snätasya me nyünam alaà vicakñva
SYNONYMS
tvam—Your Goodness; paryaöan—traveling; arkaù—the sun; iva—like;
tri-lokém—the three worlds; antaù-caraù—can penetrate into everyone’s
heart; väyuù iva—as good as the all-pervading air; ätma—self-realized;
säkñé—witness; parävare—in the matter of cause and effect; brahmaëi—in the
Absolute; dharmataù—under disciplinary regulations; vrataiù—in vow;
snätasya—having been absorbed in; me—mine; nyünam—deficiency;
alam—clearly; vicakñva—search out.
TRANSLATION
Like the sun, Your Goodness can travel everywhere in the three worlds, and
like the air you can penetrate the internal region of everyone. As such, you are
as good as the all-pervasive Supersoul. Please, therefore, find out the deficiency
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
in me, despite my being absorbed in transcendence under disciplinary
regulations and vows.
PURPORT
Transcendental realization, pious activities, worshiping the Deities, charity,
mercifulness, nonviolence and studying the scriptures under strict disciplinary
regulations are always helpful.
TEXT 8
é[qNaard ovac
>avTaaNauidTaPa[aYa& YaXaae >aGavTaae_Mal/Ma( )
YaeNaEvaSaaE Na TauZYaeTa MaNYae TaÕXaRNa& i%l/Ma( )) 8 ))
çré-närada uväca
bhavatänudita-präyaà
yaço bhagavato ’malam
yenaiväsau na tuñyeta
manye tad darçanaà khilam
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù—Çré Närada; uväca—said; bhavatä—by you;
anudita-präyam—almost not praised; yaçaù—glories; bhagavataù—of the
Personality of Godhead; amalam—spotless; yena—by which; eva—certainly;
asau—He (the Personality of Godhead); na—does not; tuñyeta—be pleased;
manye—I think; tat—that; darçanam—philosophy; khilam—inferior.
TRANSLATION
Çré Närada said: You have not actually broadcast the sublime and spotless
glories of the Personality of Godhead. That philosophy which does not satisfy
the transcendental senses of the Lord is considered worthless.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
The eternal relation of an individual soul with the Supreme Soul
Personality of Godhead is constitutionally one of being the eternal servitor of
the eternal master. The Lord has expanded Himself as living beings in order to
accept loving service from them, and this alone can satisfy both the Lord and
the living beings. Such a scholar as Vyäsadeva has completed many expansions
of the Vedic literatures, ending with the Vedänta philosophy, but none of
them have been written directly glorifying the Personality of Godhead. Dry
philosophical speculations even on the transcendental subject of the Absolute
have very little attraction without directly dealing with the glorification of the
Lord. The Personality of Godhead is the last word in transcendental
realization. The Absolute realized as impersonal Brahman or localized
Supersoul, Paramätmä, is less productive of transcendental bliss than the
supreme personal realization of His glories.
The compiler of the Vedänta-darçana is Vyäsadeva himself. Yet he is
troubled, although he is the author. So what sort of transcendental bliss can be
derived by the readers and listeners of Vedänta which is not explained directly
by Vyäsadeva, the author? Herein arises the necessity of explaining
Vedänta-sütra in the form of Çrémad-Bhägavatam by the self-same author.
TEXT 9
YaQaa DaMaaRdYaêaQaaR MauiNavYaaRNauk-IiTaRTaa" )
Na TaQaa vaSaudevSYa MaihMaa ùNauvi<aRTa" )) 9 ))
yathä dharmädayaç cärthä
muni-varyänukértitäù
na tathä väsudevasya
mahimä hy anuvarëitaù
SYNONYMS
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
yathä—as much as; dharma-ädayaù—all four principles of religious behavior;
ca—and; arthäù—purposes; muni-varya—by yourself, the great sage;
anukértitäù—repeatedly described; na—not; tathä—in that way;
väsudevasya—of the Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa; mahimä—glories;
hi—certainly; anuvarëitaù—so constantly described.
TRANSLATION
Although, great sage, you have very broadly described the four principles
beginning with religious performances, you have not described the glories of the
Supreme Personality, Väsudeva.
PURPORT
The prompt diagnosis of Çré Närada is at once declared. The root cause of
the despondency of Vyäsadeva was his deliberate avoidance of glorifying the
Lord in his various editions of the Puräëas. He has certainly, as a matter of
course, given descriptions of the glories of the Lord (Çré Kåñëa) but not as
many as given to religiosity, economic development, sense gratification and
salvation. These four items are by far inferior to engagement in the devotional
service of the Lord. Çré Vyäsadeva, as the authorized scholar, knew very well
this difference. And still instead of giving more importance to the better type
of engagement, namely, devotional service to the Lord, he had more or less
improperly used his valuable time, and thus he was despondent. From this it is
clearly indicated that no one can be pleased substantially without being
engaged in the devotional service of the Lord. In the Bhagavad-gétä this fact is
clearly mentioned.
After liberation, which is the last item in the line of performing religiosity,
etc., one is engaged in pure devotional service. This is called the stage of
self-realization, or the brahma-bhüta stage. After attainment of this
brahma-bhüta stage, one is satisfied. But satisfaction is the beginning of
transcendental bliss. One should progress by attaining neutrality and equality
in the relative world. And passing this stage of equanimity, one is fixed in the
transcendental loving service of the Lord. This is the instruction of the
Personality of Godhead in the Bhagavad-gétä. The conclusion is that in order
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
to maintain the status quo of the brahma-bhüta stage, as also to increase the
degree of transcendental realization, Närada recommended to Vyäsadeva that
he (Vyäsadeva) should now eagerly and repeatedly describe the path of
devotional service. This would cure him from gross despondency.
TEXT 10
Na YaÜciê}aPad& hreYaRXaae
JaGaTPaiv}a& Pa[Ga*<aqTa k-ihRicTa( )
TaÜaYaSa& TaqQaRMauXaiNTa MaaNaSaa
Na Ya}a h&Saa iNarMaNTYauiXaK+aYaa" )) 10 ))
na yad vacaç citra-padaà harer yaço
jagat-pavitraà pragåëéta karhicit
tad väyasaà tértham uçanti mänasä
na yatra haàsä niramanty uçik-kñayäù
SYNONYMS
na—not; yat—that; vacaù—vocabulary; citra-padam—decorative; hareù—of
the Lord; yaçaù—glories; jagat—universe; pavitram—sanctified;
pragåëéta—described; karhicit—hardly; tat—that; väyasam—crows;
tértham—place of pilgrimage; uçanti—think; mänasäù—saintly persons;
na—not; yatra—where; haàsäù—all-perfect beings; niramanti—take pleasure;
uçik-kñayäù—those who reside in the transcendental abode.
TRANSLATION
Those words which do not describe the glories of the Lord, who alone can
sanctify the atmosphere of the whole universe, are considered by saintly persons
to be like unto a place of pilgrimage for crows. Since the all-perfect persons are
inhabitants of the transcendental abode, they do not derive any pleasure there.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Crows and swans are not birds of the same feather because of their
different mental attitudes. The fruitive workers or passionate men are
compared to the crows, whereas the all-perfect saintly persons are compared to
the swans. The crows take pleasure in a place where garbage is thrown out, just
as the passionate fruitive workers take pleasure in wine and woman and places
for gross sense pleasure. The swans do not take pleasure in the places where
crows are assembled for conferences and meetings. They are instead seen in
the atmosphere of natural scenic beauty where there are transparent reservoirs
of water nicely decorated with stems of lotus flowers in variegated colors of
natural beauty. That is the difference between the two classes of birds.
Nature has influenced different species of life with different mentalities,
and it is not possible to bring them up into the same rank and file.
Similarly, there are different kinds of literature for different types of men
of different mentality. Mostly the market literatures which attract men of the
crow’s categories are literatures containing refused remnants of sensuous
topics. They are generally known as mundane talks in relation with the gross
body and subtle mind. They are full of subject matter described in decorative
language full of mundane similes and metaphorical arrangements. Yet with all
that, they do not glorify the Lord. Such poetry and prose, on any subject
matter, is considered decoration of a dead body. Spiritually advanced men who
are compared to the swans do not take pleasure in such dead literatures, which
are sources of pleasure for men who are spiritually dead. These literatures in
the modes of passion and ignorance are distributed under different labels, but
they can hardly help the spiritual urge of the human being, and thus the
swanlike spiritually advanced men have nothing to do with them. Such
spiritually advanced men are called also mänasa because they always keep up
the standard of transcendental voluntary service to the Lord on the spiritual
plane. This completely forbids fruitive activities for gross bodily sense
satisfaction or subtle speculation of the material egoistic mind.
Social literary men, scientists, mundane poets, theoretical philosophers and
politicians who are completely absorbed in the material advancement of sense
pleasure are all dolls of the material energy. They take pleasure in a place
where rejected subject matters are thrown. According to Svämé Çrédhara, this
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
is the pleasure of the prostitute-hunters.
But literatures which describe the glories of the Lord are enjoyed by the
paramahaàsas who have grasped the essence of human activities.
TEXT 11
TaÜaiGvSaGaaeR JaNaTaagaivâvae
YaiSMaNa( Pa[iTaëaek-MabÖvTYaiPa )
NaaMaaNYaNaNTaSYa YaXaae_iªTaaiNa YaTa(
é*<viNTa GaaYaiNTa Ga*<aiNTa SaaDav" )) 11 ))
tad-väg-visargo janatägha-viplavo
yasmin prati-çlokam abaddhavaty api
nämäny anantasya yaço ’ìkitäni yat
çåëvanti gäyanti gåëanti sädhavaù
SYNONYMS
tat—that; väk—vocabulary; visargaù—creation; janatä—the people in general;
agha—sins; viplavaù—revolutionary; yasmin—in which; prati-çlokam—each
and every stanza; abaddhavati—irregularly composed; api—in spite of;
nämäni—transcendental names, etc.; anantasya—of the unlimited Lord;
yaçaù—glories; aìkitäni—depicted; yat—what; çåëvanti—do hear; gäyanti—do
sing; gåëanti—do accept; sädhavaù—the purified men who are honest.
TRANSLATION
On the other hand, that literature which is full of descriptions of the
transcendental glories of the name, fame, forms, pastimes, etc., of the unlimited
Supreme Lord is a different creation, full of transcendental words directed
toward bringing about a revolution in the impious lives of this world’s
misdirected civilization. Such transcendental literatures, even though
imperfectly composed, are heard, sung and accepted by purified men who are
thoroughly honest.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
It is a qualification of the great thinkers to pick up the best even from the
worst. It is said that the intelligent man should pick up nectar from a stock of
poison, should accept gold even from a filthy place, should accept a good and
qualified wife even from an obscure family and should accept a good lesson
even from a man or from a teacher who comes from the untouchables. These
are some of the ethical instructions for everyone in every place without
exception. But a saint is far above the level of an ordinary man. He is always
absorbed in glorifying the Supreme Lord because by broadcasting the holy
name and fame of the Supreme Lord, the polluted atmosphere of the world will
change, and as a result of propagating the transcendental literatures like
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, people will become sane in their transactions. While
preparing this commentation on this particular stanza of Çrémad-Bhägavatam
we have a crisis before us. Our neighboring friend China has attacked the
border of India with a militaristic spirit. We have practically no business in the
political field, yet we see that previously there were both China and India, and
they both lived peacefully for centuries without ill feeling. The reason is that
they lived those days in an atmosphere of God consciousness, and every
country, over the surface of the world, was God-fearing, pure-hearted and
simple, and there was no question of political diplomacy. There is no cause of
quarrel between the two countries China and India over land which is not
very suitable for habitation, and certainly there is no cause for fighting on this
issue. But due to the age of quarrel, Kali, which we have discussed, there is
always a chance of quarrel on slight provocation. This is due not to the issue in
question, but to the polluted atmosphere of this age: systematically there is
propaganda by a section of people to stop glorification of the name and fame of
the Supreme Lord. Therefore, there is a great need for disseminating the
message of Çrémad-Bhägavatam all over the world. It is the duty of every
responsible Indian to broadcast the transcendental message of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam throughout the world to do all the supermost good as well
as to bring about the desired peace in the world. Because India has failed in her
duty by neglecting this responsible work, there is so much quarrel and trouble
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
all over the world. We are confident that if the transcendental message of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is received only by the leading men of the world, certainly
there will be a change of heart, and naturally the people in general will follow
them. The mass of people in general are tools in the hands of the modern
politicians and leaders of the people. If there is a change of heart of the leaders
only, certainly there will be a radical change in the atmosphere of the world.
We know that our honest attempt to present this great literature conveying
transcendental messages for reviving the God consciousness of the people in
general and respiritualizing the world atmosphere is fraught with many
difficulties. Our presenting this matter in adequate language, especially a
foreign language, will certainly fail, and there will be so many literary
discrepancies despite our honest attempt to present it in the proper way. But
we are sure that with all our faults in this connection the seriousness of the
subject matter will be taken into consideration, and the leaders of society will
still accept this due to its being an honest attempt to glorify the Almighty God.
When there is fire in a house, the inmates of the house go out to get help from
the neighbors who may be foreigners, and yet without knowing the language
the victims of the fire express themselves, and the neighbors understand the
need, even though not expressed in the same language. The same spirit of
cooperation is needed to broadcast this transcendental message of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam throughout the polluted atmosphere of the world. After
all, it is a technical science of spiritual values, and thus we are concerned with
the techniques and not with the language. If the techniques of this great
literature are understood by the people of the world, there will be success.
When there are too many materialistic activities by the people in general
all over the world, there is no wonder that a person or a nation attacks another
person or nation on slight provocation. That is the rule of this age of Kali or
quarrel. The atmosphere is already polluted with corruption of all description,
and everyone knows it well. There are so many unwanted literatures full of
materialistic ideas of sense gratification. In many countries there are bodies
appointed by the state to detect and censor obscene literature. This means that
neither the government nor the responsible leaders of the public want such
literature, yet it is in the marketplace because the people want it for sense
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
gratification. The people in general want to read (that is a natural instinct),
but because their minds are polluted they want such literatures. Under the
circumstances, transcendental literature like Çrémad-Bhägavatam will not only
diminish the activities of the corrupt mind of the people in general, but also it
will supply food for their hankering after reading some interesting literature.
In the beginning they may not like it because one suffering from jaundice is
reluctant to take sugar candy, but we should know that sugar candy is the only
remedy for jaundice. Similarly, let there be systematic propaganda for
popularizing reading of the Bhagavad-gétä and the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, which
will act like sugar candy for the jaundicelike condition of sense gratification.
When men have a taste for this literature, the other literatures, which are
catering poison to society, will then automatically cease.
We are sure, therefore, that everyone in human society will welcome
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, even though it is now presented with so many faults, for it
is recommended by Çré Närada, who has very kindly appeared in this chapter.
TEXT 12
NaEZk-MYaRMaPYaCYauTa>aavviJaRTa&
Na Xaae>aTae jaNaMal&/ iNarÅNaMa( )
ku-Ta" PauNa" Xaìd>ad]Maqìre
Na caiPaRTa& k-MaR YadPYak-ar<aMa( )) 12 ))
naiñkarmyam apy acyuta-bhäva-varjitaà
na çobhate jïänam alaà niraïjanam
kutaù punaù çaçvad abhadram éçvare
na cärpitaà karma yad apy akäraëam
SYNONYMS
naiñkarmyam—self-realization, being freed from the reactions of fruitive work;
api—in spite of; acyuta—the infallible Lord; bhäva—conception;
varjitam—devoid of; na—does not; çobhate—look well;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
jïänam—transcendental knowledge; alam—by and by; niraïjanam—free from
designations; kutaù—where is; punaù—again; çaçvat—always;
abhadram—uncongenial; éçvare—unto the Lord; na—not; ca—and;
arpitam—offered; karma—fruitive work; yat api—what is; akäraëam—not
fruitive.
TRANSLATION
Knowledge of self-realization, even though free from all material affinity,
does not look well if devoid of a conception of the Infallible [God]. What, then,
is the use of fruitive activities, which are naturally painful from the very
beginning and transient by nature, if they are not utilized for the devotional
service of the Lord?
PURPORT
As referred to above, not only ordinary literatures devoid of the
transcendental glorification of the Lord are condemned, but also Vedic
literatures and speculation on the subject of impersonal Brahman when they
are devoid of devotional service. When speculation on the impersonal
Brahman is condemned on the above ground, then what to speak of ordinary
fruitive work, which is not meant to fulfill the aim of devotional service. Such
speculative knowledge and fruitive work cannot lead one to the goal of
perfection. Fruitive work, in which almost all people in general are engaged, is
always painful either in the beginning or at the end. It can be fruitful only
when made subservient to the devotional service of the Lord. In the
Bhagavad-gétä also it is confirmed that the result of such fruitive work may be
offered for the service of the Lord, otherwise it leads to material bondage. The
bona fide enjoyer of the fruitive work is the Personality of Godhead, and thus
when it is engaged for the sense gratification of the living beings, it becomes
an acute source of trouble.
TEXT 13
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
AQaae Maha>aaGa >avaNaMaaegad*k(-
éuicé[va" SaTYarTaae Da*Tav]Ta" )
oå§-MaSYaai%l/bNDaMau¢-Yae
SaMaaiDaNaaNauSMar TaiÜceiíTaMa( )) 13 ))
atho mahä-bhäga bhavän amogha-dåk
çuci-çraväù satya-rato dhåta-vrataù
urukramasyäkhila-bandha-muktaye
samädhinänusmara tad-viceñöitam
SYNONYMS
atho—therefore; mahä-bhäga—highly fortunate; bhavän—yourself;
amogha-dåk—the perfect seer; çuci—spotless; çraväù—famous;
satya-rataù—having taken the vow of truthfulness; dhåta-vrataù—fixed in
spiritual qualities; urukramasya—of the one who performs supernatural
activities (God); akhila—universal; bandha—bondage; muktaye—for
liberation from; samädhinä—by trance; anusmara—think repeatedly and then
describe them; tat-viceñöitam—various pastimes of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
O Vyäsadeva, your vision is completely perfect. Your good fame is spotless.
You are firm in vow and situated in truthfulness. And thus you can think of
the pastimes of the Lord in trance for the liberation of the people in general
from all material bondage.
PURPORT
People in general have a taste for literatures by instinct. They want to hear
and read from the authorities something about the unknown, but their taste is
exploited by unfortunate literatures which are full of subject matter for
satisfaction of the material senses. Such literatures contain different kinds of
mundane poems and philosophical speculations, more or less under the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
influence of mäyä, ending in sense gratification. These literatures, although
worthless in the true sense of the term, are variously decorated to attract the
attention of the less intelligent men. Thus the attracted living entities are
more and more entangled in material bondage without hope of liberation for
thousands and thousands of generations. Çré Närada Åñi, being the best
amongst the Vaiñëavas, is compassionate toward such unfortunate victims of
worthless literatures, and thus he advises Çré Vyäsadeva to compose
transcendental literature which is not only attractive but can also actually
bring liberation from all kinds of bondage. Çréla Vyäsadeva or his
representatives are qualified because they are rightly trained to see things in
true perspective. Çréla Vyäsadeva and his representatives are pure in thought
due to their spiritual enlightenment, fixed in their vows due to their
devotional service, and determined to deliver the fallen souls rotting in
material activities. The fallen souls are very eager to receive novel
informations every day, and the transcendentalists like Vyäsadeva or Närada
can supply such eager people in general with unlimited news from the spiritual
world. In the Bhagavad-gétä it is said that the material world is only a part of
the whole creation and that this earth is only a fragment of the whole material
world.
There are thousands and thousands of literary men all over the world, and
they have created many, many thousands of literary works for the information
of the people in general for thousands and thousands of years. Unfortunately
none of them have brought peace and tranquillity on the earth. This is due to
a spiritual vacuum in those literatures; therefore the Vedic literatures,
especially the Bhagavad-gétä and the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, are specifically
recommended to suffering humanity to bring about the desired effect of
liberation from the pangs of material civilization, which is eating the vital part
of human energy. The Bhagavad-gétä is the spoken message of the Lord Himself
recorded by Vyäsadeva, and the Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the transcendental
narration of the activities of the same Lord Kåñëa, which alone can satisfy the
hankering desires of the living being for eternal peace and liberation from
miseries. Çrémad-Bhägavatam, therefore, is meant for all the living beings all
over the universe for total liberation from all kinds of material bondage. Such
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
transcendental narrations of the pastimes of the Lord can be described only by
liberated souls like Vyäsadeva and his bona fide representatives who are
completely merged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. Only to
such devotees do the pastimes of the Lord and their transcendental nature
become automatically manifest by dint of devotional service. No one else can
either know or describe the acts of the Lord, even if they speculate on the
subject for many, many years. The descriptions of the Bhägavatam are so
precise and accurate that whatever has been predicted in this great literature
about five thousand years ago is now exactly happening. Therefore, the vision
of the author comprehends past, present and future. Such liberated persons as
Vyäsadeva are perfect not only by the power of vision and wisdom, but also in
aural reception, in thinking, feeling and all other sense activities. A liberated
person possesses perfect senses, and with perfect senses only can one serve the
sense proprietor, Håñékeça, Çré Kåñëa the Personality of Godhead.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, therefore, is the perfect description of the all-perfect
Personality of Godhead by the all-perfect personality Çréla Vyäsadeva, the
compiler of the Vedas.
TEXT 14
TaTaae_NYaQaa ik-ÄNa YaiÜv+aTa"
Pa*QaGd*XaSTaTk*-TaæPaNaaMai>a" )
Na k-ihRicTKvaiPa c du"iSQaTaa MaiTa‚
lR/>aeTa vaTaahTaNaaEirvaSPadMa( )) 14 ))
tato ’nyathä kiïcana yad vivakñataù
påthag dåças tat-kåta-rüpa-nämabhiù
na karhicit kväpi ca duùsthitä matir
labheta vätähata-naur iväspadam
SYNONYMS
tataù—from that; anyathä—apart; kiïcana—something; yat—whatsoever;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
vivakñataù—desiring to describe; påthak—separately; dåçaù—vision;
tat-kåta—reactionary to that; rüpa—form; nämabhiù—by names; na
karhicit—never; kväpi—any; ca—and; duùsthitä matiù—oscillating mind;
labheta—gains; väta-ähata—troubled by the wind; nauù—boat; iva—like;
äspadam—place.
TRANSLATION
Whatever you desire to describe that is separate in vision from the Lord
simply reacts, with different forms, names and results, to agitate the mind as
the wind agitates a boat which has no resting place.
PURPORT
Çré Vyäsadeva is the editor of all descriptions of the Vedic literatures, and
thus he has described transcendental realization in different ways, namely by
fruitive activities, speculative knowledge, mystic power and devotional service.
Besides that, in his various Puräëas he has recommended the worship of so
many demigods in different forms and names. The result is that people in
general are puzzled how to fix their minds in the service of the Lord; they are
always disturbed about finding the real path of self-realization. Çréla
Näradadeva is stressing this particular defect in the Vedic literatures compiled
by Vyäsadeva, and thus he is trying to emphasize describing everything in
relation with the Supreme Lord, and no one else. In fact, there is nothing
existent except the Lord. The Lord is manifested in different expansions. He is
the root of the complete tree. He is the stomach of the complete body. pouring
water on the root is the right process to water the tree, as much as feeding the
stomach supplies energy to all parts of the body. Therefore, Çréla Vyäsadeva
should not have compiled any Puräëas other than the Bhägavata Puräëa
because a slight deviation from that may create havoc for self-realization. If a
slight deviation can create such havoc, then what to speak of deliberate
expansion of the ideas separate from the Absolute Truth Personality of
Godhead. The most defective part of worshiping demigods is that it creates a
definite conception of pantheism, ending disastrously in many religious sects
detrimental to the progress of the principles of the Bhägavatam, which alone
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
can give the accurate direction for self-realization in eternal relation with the
Personality of Godhead by devotional service in transcendental love. The
example of the boat disturbed by whirling wind is suitable in this respect. The
diverted mind of the pantheist can never reach the perfection of
self-realization, due to the disturbed condition of the selection of object.
TEXT 15
JauGauiPSaTa& DaMaRk*-Tae_NauXaaSaTa"
Sv>aavr¢-SYa MahaNa( VYaiTa§-Ma" )
YaÜaKYaTaae DaMaR wTaqTar" iSQaTaae
Na MaNYaTae TaSYa iNavar<a& JaNa" )) 15 ))
jugupsitaà dharma-kåte ’nuçäsataù
svabhäva-raktasya mahän vyatikramaù
yad-väkyato dharma itétaraù sthito
na manyate tasya niväraëaà janaù
SYNONYMS
jugupsitam—verily condemned; dharma-kåte—for the matter of religion;
anuçäsataù—instruction; svabhäva-raktasya—naturally inclined;
mahän—great; vyatikramaù—unreasonable; yat-väkyataù—under whose
instruction; dharmaù—religion; iti—it is thus; itaraù—the people in general;
sthitaù—fixed; na—do not; manyate—think; tasya—of that;
niväraëam—prohibition; janaù—they.
TRANSLATION
The people in general are naturally inclined to enjoy, and you have
encouraged them in that way in the name of religion. This is verily condemned
and is quite unreasonable. Because they are guided under your instructions,
they will accept such activities in the name of religion and will hardly care for
prohibitions.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
Çréla Vyäsadeva’s compilation of different Vedic literatures on the basis of
regulated performances of fruitive activities as depicted in the Mahäbhärata
and other literature is condemned herewith by Çréla Närada. The human
beings, by long material association, life after life, have a natural inclination,
by practice, to endeavor to lord it over material energy. They have no sense of
the responsibility of human life. This human form of life is a chance to get out
of the clutches of illusory matter. The Vedas are meant for going back to
Godhead, going back home. To revolve in the cycle of transmigration in a
series of lives numbering 8,400,000 is an imprisoned life for the condemned
conditioned souls. The human form of life is a chance to get out of this
imprisoned life, and as such the only occupation of the human being is to
reestablish his lost relationship with God. Under the circumstances, one
should never be encouraged in making a plan for sense enjoyment in the name
of religious functions. Such diversion of the human energy results in a
misguided civilization. Çréla Vyäsadeva is the authority in Vedic explanations
in the Mahäbhärata, etc., and his encouragement in sense enjoyment in some
form or other is a great barrier for spiritual advancement because the people in
general will not agree to renounce material activities which held them in
material bondage. At a certain stage of human civilization when such material
activities in the name of religion (as sacrificing animals in the name of yajïa)
were too much rampant, the Lord incarnated Himself as Buddha and decried
the authority of the Vedas in order to stop animal sacrifice in the name of
religion. This was foreseen by Närada, and therefore he condemned such
literatures. The flesh-eaters still continue to perform animal sacrifice before
some demigod or goddess in the name of religion because in some of the Vedic
literatures such regulated sacrifices are recommended. They are so
recommended to discourage flesh-eating, but gradually the purpose of such
religious activities is forgotten, and the slaughterhouse becomes prominent.
This is because foolish materialistic men do not care to listen to others who are
actually in a position to explain the Vedic rites.
In the Vedas it is distinctly said that the perfection of life is never to be
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
attained either by voluminous work, or by accumulation of wealth or even by
increasing the population. But it is so attained only by renunciation. The
materialistic men do not care to listen to such injunctions. According to them,
the so-called renounced order of life is meant for those who are unable to earn
their livelihood because of some corporeal defects, or for persons who have
failed to achieve prosperity in family life.
In histories like the Mahäbhärata, of course, there are topics on
transcendental subjects along with material topics. The Bhagavad-gétä is there
in the Mahäbhärata. The whole idea of the Mahäbhärata culminates in the
ultimate instructions of the Bhagavad-gétä, that one should relinquish all other
engagements and should engage oneself solely and fully in surrendering unto
the lotus feet of Lord Çré Kåñëa. But men with materialistic tendencies are
more attracted to the politics, economics and philanthropic activities
mentioned in the Mahäbhärata than to the principal topic, namely the
Bhagavad-gétä. This compromising spirit of Vyäsadeva is directly condemned
by Närada, who advises him to directly proclaim that the prime necessity of
human life is to realize one’s eternal relation with the Lord and thus surrender
unto Him without delay.
A patient suffering from a particular type of malady is almost always
inclined to accept eatables which are forbidden for him. The expert physician
does not make any compromise with the patient by allowing him to take
partially what he should not at all take. In the Bhagavad-gétä it is also said that
a man attached to fruitive work should not be discouraged from his
occupation, for gradually he may be elevated to the position of self-realization.
This is sometimes applicable for those who are only dry empiric philosophers
without spiritual realization. But those who are in the devotional line need not
be always so advised.
TEXT 16
ivc+a<aae_SYaahRiTa veidTau& iv>aae‚
rNaNTaPaarSYa iNav*itaTa" Sau%Ma( )
Pa[vTaRMaaNaSYa Gau<aErNaaTMaNa‚
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
STaTaae >avaNdXaRYa ceiíTa& iv>aae" )) 16 ))
vicakñaëo ’syärhati vedituà vibhor
ananta-pärasya nivåttitaù sukham
pravartamänasya guëair anätmanas
tato bhavän darçaya ceñöitaà vibhoù
SYNONYMS
vicakñaëaù—very expert; asya—of him; arhati—deserves; veditum—to
understand; vibhoù—of the Lord; ananta-pärasya—of the unlimited;
nivåttitaù—retired from; sukham—material happiness;
pravartamänasya—those who are attached to; guëaiù—by the material
qualities; anätmanaù—devoid of knowledge in spiritual value;
tataù—therefore; bhavän—Your Goodness; darçaya—show the ways;
ceñöitam—activities; vibhoù—of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord is unlimited. Only a very expert personality, retired from
the activities of material happiness, deserves to understand this knowledge of
spiritual values. Therefore those who are not so well situated, due to material
attachment, should be shown the ways of transcendental realization, by Your
Goodness, through descriptions of the transcendental activities of the Supreme
Lord.
PURPORT
Theological science is a difficult subject, especially when it deals with the
transcendental nature of God. It is not a subject matter to be understood by
persons who are too much attached to material activities. Only the very
expert, who have almost retired from materialistic activities by culture of
spiritual knowledge, can be admitted to the study of this great science. In the
Bhagavad-gétä it is clearly stated that out of many hundreds and thousands of
men only one person deserves to enter into transcendental realization. And
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
out of many thousands of such transcendentally realized persons, only a few
can understand the theological science specifically dealing with God as a
person. Çré Vyäsadeva is therefore advised by Närada to describe the science of
God directly by relating His transcendental activities. Vyäsadeva is himself a
personality expert in this science, and he is unattached to material enjoyment.
Therefore he is the right person to describe it, and Çukadeva Gosvämé, the son
of Vyäsadeva, is the right person to receive it.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the topmost theological science, and therefore it can
react on the laymen as medicinal doses. Because it contains the transcendental
activities of the Lord, there is no difference between the Lord and the
literature. The literature is the factual literary incarnation of the Lord. So the
laymen can hear the narration of the activities of the Lord. Thereby they are
able to associate with the Lord and thus gradually become purified from
material diseases. The expert devotees also can discover novel ways and means
to convert the nondevotees in terms of particular time and circumstance.
Devotional service is dynamic activity, and the expert devotees can find out
competent means to inject it into the dull brains of the materialistic
population. Such transcendental activities of the devotees for the service of
the Lord can bring a new order of life to the foolish society of materialistic
men. Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu and His subsequent followers exhibited
expert dexterity in this connection. By following the same method, one can
bring the materialistic men of this age of quarrel into order for peaceful life
and transcendental realization.
TEXT 17
TYa¤-a SvDaMa| cr<aaMbuJa& hre‚
>aRJaàPaKvae_Qa PaTaetaTaae Yaid )
Ya}a Kv va>ad]Ma>aUdMauZYa ik&-
k-ae vaQaR Aaáae_>aJaTaa& SvDaMaRTa" )) 17 ))
tyaktvä sva-dharmaà caraëämbujaà harer
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
bhajann apakvo ’tha patet tato yadi
yatra kva väbhadram abhüd amuñya kià
ko värtha äpto ’bhajatäà sva-dharmataù
SYNONYMS
tyaktvä—having forsaken; sva-dharmam—one’s own occupational
engagement; caraëa-ambujam—the lotus feet; hareù—of Hari (the Lord);
bhajan—in the course of devotional service; apakvaù—immature; atha—for
the matter of; patet—falls down; tataù—from that place; yadi—if;
yatra—whereupon; kva—what sort of; vä—or (used sarcastically);
abhadram—unfavorable; abhüt—shall happen; amuñya—of him;
kim—nothing; kaù vä arthaù—what interest; äptaù—obtained; abhajatäm—of
the nondevotee; sva-dharmataù—being engaged in occupational service.
TRANSLATION
One who has forsaken his material occupations to engage in the devotional
service of the Lord may sometimes fall down while in an immature stage, yet
there is no danger of his being unsuccessful. On the other hand, a nondevotee,
though fully engaged in occupational duties, does not gain anything.
PURPORT
As far as the duties of mankind are concerned, there are innumerable
duties. Every man is duty-bound not only to his parents, family members,
society, country, humanity, other living beings, the demigods, etc., but also to
the great philosophers, poets, scientists, etc. It is enjoined in the scriptures that
one can relinquish all such duties and surrender unto the service of the Lord.
So if one does so and becomes successful in the discharge of his devotional
service unto the Lord, it is well and good. But it so happens sometimes that one
surrenders himself unto the service of the Lord by some temporary sentiment,
and in the long run, due to so many other reasons, he falls down from the path
of service by undesirable association. There are so many instances of this in
the histories. Bharata Mahäräja was obliged to take his birth as a stag due to
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
his intimate attachment to a stag. He thought of this stag when he died. As
such, in the next birth he became a stag, although he did not forget the
incident of his previous birth. Similarly, Citraketu also fell down due to his
offenses at the feet of Çiva. But in spite of all this, the stress is given here to
surrendering unto the lotus feet of the Lord, even if there is a chance of falling
down, because even though one falls down from the prescribed duties of
devotional service, he will never forget the lotus feet of the Lord. Once
engaged in the devotional service of the Lord, one will continue the service in
all circumstances. In the Bhagavad-gétä it is said that even a small quantity of
devotional service can save one from the most dangerous position. There are
many instances of such examples in history. Ajämila is one of them. Ajämila in
his early life was a devotee, but in his youth he fell down. Still he was saved by
the Lord at the end.
TEXT 18
TaSYaEv heTaae" Pa[YaTaeTa k-aeivdae
Na l/>YaTae Yad(>a]MaTaaMauPaYaRDa" )
Taç>YaTae du"%vdNYaTa" Sau%&
k-ale/Na SavR}a Ga>aqrr&hSaa )) 18 ))
tasyaiva hetoù prayateta kovido
na labhyate yad bhramatäm upary adhaù
tal labhyate duùkhavad anyataù sukhaà
kälena sarvatra gabhéra-raàhasä
SYNONYMS
tasya—for that purpose; eva—only; hetoù—reason; prayateta—should
endeavor; kovidaù—one who is philosophically inclined; na—not; labhyate—is
not obtained; yat—what; bhramatäm—wandering; upari adhaù—from top to
bottom; tat—that; labhyate—can be obtained; duùkhavat—like the miseries;
anyataù—as a result of previous work; sukham—sense enjoyment; kälena—in
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
course of time; sarvatra—everywhere; gabhéra—subtle; raàhasä—progress.
TRANSLATION
Persons who are actually intelligent and philosophically inclined should
endeavor only for that purposeful end which is not obtainable even by
wandering from the topmost planet [Brahmaloka] down to the lowest planet
[Pätäla]. As far as happiness derived from sense enjoyment is concerned, it can
be obtained automatically in course of time, just as in course of time we obtain
miseries even though we do not desire them.
PURPORT
Every man everywhere is trying to obtain the greatest amount of sense
enjoyment by various endeavors. Some men are busy engaged in trade,
industry, economic development, political supremacy, etc., and some of them
are engaged in fruitive work to become happy in the next life by attaining
higher planets. It is said that on the moon the inhabitants are fit for greater
sense enjoyment by drinking soma-rasa, and the Pitåloka is obtained by good
charitable work. So there are various programs for sense enjoyment, either
during this life or in the life after death. Some are trying to reach the moon or
other planets by some mechanical arrangement, for they are very anxious to
get into such planets without doing good work. But it is not to happen. By the
law of the Supreme, different places are meant for different grades of living
beings according to the work they have performed. By good work only, as
prescribed in the scriptures, can one obtain birth in a good family, opulence,
good education and good bodily features. We see also that even in this life one
obtains a good education or money by good work. Similarly, in our next birth
we get such desirable positions only by good work. Otherwise, it would not so
happen that two persons born in the same place at the same time are seen
differently placed according to previous work. But all such material positions
are impermanent. The positions in the topmost Brahmaloka and in the lowest
Pätäla are also changeable according to our own work. The philosophically
inclined person must not be tempted by such changeable positions. He should
try to get into the permanent life of bliss and knowledge where he will not be
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
forced to come back again to the miserable material world, either in this or
that planet. Miseries and mixed happiness are two features of material life, and
they are obtained in Brahmaloka and in other lokas also. They are obtained in
the life of the demigods and also in the life of the dogs and hogs. The miseries
and mixed happiness of all living beings are only of different degree and
quality, but no one is free from the miseries of birth, death, old age and disease.
Similarly, everyone has his destined happiness also. No one can get more or
less of these things simply by personal endeavors. Even if they are obtained,
they can be lost again. One should not, therefore, waste time with these flimsy
things; one should only endeavor to go back to Godhead. That should be the
mission of everyone’s life.
TEXT 19
Na vE JaNaae JaaTau k-QaÄNaav]Jae‚
NMauku-NdSaeVYaNYavd® Sa&Sa*iTaMa( )
SMarNMauku-Ndax(ga]yuPaGaUhNa& PauNa‚
ivRhaTauiMaC^eà rSaGa]hae JaNa" )) 19 ))
na vai jano jätu kathaïcanävrajen
mukunda-sevy anyavad aìga saàsåtim
smaran mukundäìghry-upagühanaà punar
vihätum icchen na rasa-graho janaù
SYNONYMS
na—never; vai—certainly; janaù—a person; jätu—at any time;
kathaïcana—somehow or other; ävrajet—does not undergo;
mukunda-sevé—the devotee of the Lord; anyavat—like others; aìga—O my
dear; saàsåtim—material existence; smaran—remembering;
mukunda-aìghri—the lotus feet of the Lord; upagühanam—embracing;
punaù—again; vihätum—willing to give up; icchet—desire; na—never;
rasa-grahaù—one who has relished the mellow; janaù—person.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
My dear Vyäsa, even though a devotee of Lord Kåñëa sometimes falls down
somehow or other, he certainly does not undergo material existence like others
[fruitive workers, etc.] because a person who has once relished the taste of the
lotus feet of the Lord can do nothing but remember that ecstasy again and again.
PURPORT
A devotee of the Lord automatically becomes uninterested in the
enchantment of material existence because he is rasa-graha, or one who has
tasted the sweetness of the lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa. There are certainly many
instances where devotees of the Lord have fallen down due to uncongenial
association, just like fruitive workers, who are always prone to degradation. But
even though he falls down, a devotee is never to be considered the same as a
fallen karmé. A karmé suffers the result of his own fruitive reactions, whereas a
devotee is reformed by chastisement directed by the Lord Himself. The
sufferings of an orphan and the sufferings of a beloved child of a king are not
one and the same. An orphan is really poor because he has no one to take care
of him, but a beloved son of a rich man, although he appears to be on the same
level as the orphan, is always under the vigilance of his capable father. A
devotee of the Lord, due to wrong association, sometimes imitates the fruitive
workers. The fruitive workers want to lord it over the material world.
Similarly, a neophyte devotee foolishly thinks of accumulating some material
power in exchange for devotional service. Such foolish devotees are sometimes
put into difficulty by the Lord Himself. As a special favor, He may remove all
material paraphernalia. By such action, the bewildered devotee is forsaken by
all friends and relatives, and so he comes to his senses again by the mercy of
the Lord and is set right to execute his devotional service.
In the Bhagavad-gétä it is also said that such fallen devotees are given a
chance to take birth in a family of highly qualified brähmaëas or in a rich
mercantile family. A devotee in such a position is not as fortunate as one who
is chastised by the Lord and put into a position seemingly of helplessness. The
devotee who becomes helpless by the will of the Lord is more fortunate than
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
those who are born in good families. The fallen devotees born in a good family
may forget the lotus feet of the Lord because they are less fortunate, but the
devotee who is put into a forlorn condition is more fortunate because he
swiftly returns to the lotus feet of the Lord, thinking himself helpless all
around.
Pure devotional service is so spiritually relishable that a devotee becomes
automatically uninterested in material enjoyment. That is the sign of
perfection in progressive devotional service. A pure devotee continuously
remembers the lotus feet of Lord Çré Kåñëa and does not forget Him even for a
moment, not even in exchange for all the opulence of the three worlds.
TEXT 20
wd& ih ivì& >aGavaiNaveTarae
YaTaae JaGaTSQaaNaiNaraeDaSaM>ava" )
TaiÖ SvYa& ved >ava&STaQaaiPa Tae
Pa[adeXaMaa}a& >avTa" Pa[diXaRTaMa( )) 20 ))
idaà hi viçvaà bhagavän ivetaro
yato jagat-sthäna-nirodha-sambhaväù
tad dhi svayaà veda bhaväàs tathäpi te
prädeça-mätraà bhavataù pradarçitam
SYNONYMS
idam—this; hi—all; viçvam—cosmos; bhagavän—the Supreme Lord;
iva—almost the same; itaraù—different from; yataù—from whom; jagat—the
worlds; sthäna—exist; nirodha—annihilation; sambhaväù—creation; tat
hi—all about; svayam—personally; veda—know; bhavän—your good self; tathä
api—still; te—unto you; prädeça-mätram—a synopsis only; bhavataù—unto
you; pradarçitam—explained.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The Supreme Lord Personality of Godhead is Himself this cosmos, and still
He is aloof from it. From Him only has this cosmic manifestation emanated, in
Him it rests, and unto Him it enters after annihilation. Your good self knows
all about this. I have given only a synopsis.
PURPORT
For a pure devotee, the conception of Mukunda, Lord Çré Kåñëa, is both
personal and impersonal. The impersonal cosmic situation is also Mukunda
because it is the emanation of the energy of Mukunda. For example, a tree is a
complete unit, whereas the leaves and the branches of the tree are emanated
parts and parcels of the tree. The leaves and branches of the tree are also the
tree, but the tree itself is neither the leaves nor the branches. The Vedic
version that the whole cosmic creation is nothing but Brahman means that
since everything is emanating from the Supreme Brahman, nothing is apart
from Him. Similarly, the part-and-parcel hands and legs are called the body,
but the body as the whole unit is neither the hands nor the legs. The Lord is
the transcendental form of eternity, cognition and beauty. And thus the
creation of the energy of the Lord appears to be partially eternal, full of
knowledge and beautiful also. The captivated conditioned souls under the
influence of the external energy, mäyä, are therefore entrapped in the network
of the material nature. They accept this as all in all, for they have no
information of the Lord who is the primeval cause. Nor have they information
that the parts and parcels of the body, being detached from the whole body,
are no longer the same hand or leg as when attached to the body. Similarly, a
godless civilization detached from the transcendental loving service of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is just like a detached hand or leg. Such parts
and parcels may appear like hands and legs, but they have no efficiency. The
devotee of the Lord, Çréla Vyäsadeva, knows this very well. He is further
advised by Çréla Närada to expand the idea so that the entrapped conditioned
souls may take lessons from him to understand the Supreme Lord as the
primeval cause.
According to the Vedic version, the Lord is naturally fully powerful, and
thus His supreme energies are always perfect and identical with Him. Both the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
spiritual and the material skies and their paraphernalia are emanations of the
internal and external energies of the Lord. External energy is comparatively
inferior, whereas the internal potency is superior. The superior energy is living
force, and therefore she is completely identical, but the external energy, being
inert, is partially identical. But both the energies are neither equal to nor
greater than the Lord, who is the generator of all energies; such energies are
always under His control, exactly as electrical energy, however powerful it may
be, is always under the control of the engineer.
The human being and all other living beings are products of His internal
energies. Thus the living being is also identical with the Lord. But he is never
equal or superior to the Personality of Godhead. The Lord and living beings
are all individual persons. With the help of the material energies the living
beings are also creating something, but none of their creations are equal or
superior to the creations of the Lord. The human being may create a small
playful sputnik and may throw it into outer space, but that does not mean that
he can create a planet like the earth or moon and float it in the air as the Lord
does. Men with a poor fund of knowledge claim to be equal to the Lord. They
are never equal to the Lord. This is never to be. The human being, after
attaining complete perfection, may achieve a large percentage of the qualities
of the Lord (say up to seventy-eight percent), but it is never possible to surpass
the Lord or to become equal with Him. In a diseased condition only, the
foolish being claims to be one with the Lord and thus becomes misled by the
illusory energy. The misguided living beings, therefore, must accept the
supremacy of the Lord and agree to render loving service to Him. For this they
have been created. Without this, there cannot be any peace or tranquillity in
the world. Çréla Vyäsadeva is advised by Çréla Närada to expand this idea in
the Bhägavatam. In the Bhagavad-gétä also the same idea is explained:
surrender fully unto the lotus feet of the Lord. That is the only business of the
perfect human being.
TEXT 21
TvMaaTMaNaaTMaaNaMaveùMaaegad*k(-
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ParSYa Pau&Sa" ParMaaTMaNa" k-l/aMa( )
AJa& Pa[JaaTa& JaGaTa" iXavaYa Ta‚
NMahaNau>aava>YaudYaae_iDaGa<YaTaaMa( )) 21 ))
tvam ätmanätmänam avehy amogha-dåk
parasya puàsaù paramätmanaù kaläm
ajaà prajätaà jagataù çiväya tan
mahänubhäväbhyudayo ’dhigaëyatäm
SYNONYMS
tvam—yourself; ätmanä—by your own self; ätmänam—the Supersoul;
avehi—search out; amogha-dåk—one who has perfect vision; parasya—of the
Transcendence; puàsaù—the Personality of Godhead; paramätmanaù—of the
Supreme Lord; kaläm—plenary part; ajam—birthless; prajätam—have taken
birth; jagataù—of the world; çiväya—for the well-being; tat—that;
mahä-anubhäva—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa;
abhyudayaù—pastimes; adhigaëya-täm—describe most vividly.
TRANSLATION
Your Goodness has perfect vision. You yourself can know the Supersoul
Personality of Godhead because you are present as the plenary portion of the
Lord. Although you are birthless, you have appeared on this earth for the
well-being of all people. Please, therefore, describe the transcendental pastimes
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa more vividly.
PURPORT
Çréla Vyäsadeva is the empowered plenary portion incarnation of the
Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa. He descended by his causeless mercy to
deliver the fallen souls in the material world. The fallen and forgotten souls
are detached from the transcendental loving service of the Lord. The living
entities are parts and parcels of the Lord, and they are eternally servitors of
the Lord. All the Vedic literatures, therefore, are put into systematic order for
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the benefit of the fallen souls, and it is the duty of the fallen souls to take
advantage of such literatures and be freed from the bondage of material
existence. Although formally Çréla Närada Åñi is his spiritual master, Çréla
Vyäsadeva is not at all dependent on a spiritual master because in essence he is
the spiritual master of everyone else. But because he is doing the work of an
äcärya, he has taught us by his own conduct that one must have a spiritual
master, even though he be God Himself. Lord Çré Kåñëa, Lord Çré Räma and
Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, all incarnations of Godhead, accepted formal
spiritual masters, although by Their transcendental nature They were
cognizant of all knowledge. In order to direct people in general to the lotus feet
of Lord Çré Kåñëa, He Himself in the incarnation of Vyäsadeva is delineating
the transcendental pastimes of the Lord.
TEXT 22
wd& ih Pau&SaSTaPaSa" é[uTaSYa va
iSvíSYa SaU¢-SYa c buiÖdtaYaae" )
AivCYauTaae_QaR" k-ivi>aiNaRæiPaTaae
YadutaMaëaek-Gau<aaNauv<aRNaMa( )) 22 ))
idaà hi puàsas tapasaù çrutasya vä
sviñöasya süktasya ca buddhi-dattayoù
avicyuto ’rthaù kavibhir nirüpito
yad-uttamaçloka-guëänuvarëanam
SYNONYMS
idam—this; hi—certainly; puàsaù—of everyone; tapasaù—by dint of
austerities; çrutasya—by dint of study of the Vedas; vä—or;
sviñöasya—sacrifice; süktasya—spiritual education; ca—and; buddhi—culture
of knowledge; dattayoù—charity; avicyutaù—infallible; arthaù—interest;
kavibhiù—by the recognized learned person; nirüpitaù—concluded; yat—what;
uttamaçloka—the Lord, who is described by choice poetry;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
guëa-anuvarëanam—description of the transcendental qualities of.
TRANSLATION
Learned circles have positively concluded that the infallible purpose of the
advancement of knowledge, namely austerities, study of the Vedas, sacrifice,
chanting of hymns and charity, culminates in the transcendental descriptions of
the Lord, who is defined in choice poetry.
PURPORT
Human intellect is developed for advancement of learning in art, science,
philosophy, physics, chemistry, psychology, economics, politics, etc. By culture
of such knowledge the human society can attain perfection of life. This
perfection of life culminates in the realization of the Supreme Being, Viñëu.
The çruti therefore directs that those who are actually advanced in learning
should aspire for the service of Lord Viñëu. Unfortunately persons who are
enamored by the external beauty of viñëu-mäyä do not understand that
culmination of perfection or self-realization depends on Viñëu. Viñëu-mäyä
means sense enjoyment, which is transient and miserable. Those who are
entrapped by viñëu-mäyä utilize advancement of knowledge for sense
enjoyment. Çré Närada Muni has explained that all paraphernalia of the
cosmic universe is but an emanation from the Lord out of His different
energies because the Lord has set in motion, by His inconceivable energy, the
actions and reactions of the created manifestation. They have come to be out
of His energy, they rest on His energy, and after annihilation they merge into
Him. Nothing is, therefore, different from Him, but at the same time the Lord
is always different from them.
When advancement of knowledge is applied in the service of the Lord, the
whole process becomes absolute. The Personality of Godhead and His
transcendental name, fame, glory, etc., are all nondifferent from Him.
Therefore, all the sages and devotees of the Lord have recommended that the
subject matter of art, science, philosophy, physics, chemistry, psychology and
all other branches of knowledge should be wholly and solely applied in the
service of the Lord. Art, literature, poetry, painting, etc., may be used in
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
glorifying the Lord. The fiction writers, poets and celebrated litterateurs are
generally engaged in writing of sensuous subjects, but if they turn towards the
service of the Lord they can describe the transcendental pastimes of the Lord.
Välméki was a great poet, and similarly Vyäsadeva is a great writer, and both of
them have absolutely engaged themselves in delineating the transcendental
activities of the Lord and by doing so have become immortal. Similarly, science
and philosophy also should be applied in the service of the Lord. There is no
use presenting dry speculative theories for sense gratification. philosophy and
science should be engaged to establish the glory of the Lord. Advanced people
are eager to understand the Absolute Truth through the medium of science,
and therefore a great scientist should endeavor to prove the existence of the
Lord on a scientific basis. Similarly, philosophical speculations should be
utilized to establish the Supreme Truth as sentient and all-powerful. Similarly,
all other branches of knowledge should always be engaged in the service of the
Lord. In the Bhagavad-gétä also the same is affirmed. All “knowledge” not
engaged in the service of the Lord is but nescience. Real utilization of
advanced knowledge is to establish the glories of the Lord, and that is the real
import. Scientific knowledge engaged in the service of the Lord and all similar
activities are all factually hari-kértana, or glorification of the Lord.
TEXT 23
Ah& PauraTaqTa>ave_>av& MauNae
daSYaaSTau k-SYaaêNa vedvaidNaaMa( )
iNaæiPaTaae bal/k- Wv YaaeiGaNaa&
éué[Uz<ae Pa[av*iz iNaivRiv+aTaaMa( )) 23 ))
ahaà purätéta-bhave ’bhavaà mune
däsyäs tu kasyäçcana veda-vädinäm
nirüpito bälaka eva yoginäà
çuçrüñaëe prävåñi nirvivikñatäm
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
aham—I; purä—formerly; atéta-bhave—in the previous millennium;
abhavam—became; mune—O muni; däsyäù—of the maidservant; tu—but;
kasyäçcana—certain; veda-vädinäm—of the followers of Vedänta;
nirüpitaù—engaged; bälakaù—boy servant; eva—only; yoginäm—of the
devotees; çuçrüñaëe—in the service of; prävåñi—during the four months of the
rainy season; nirvivikñatäm—living together.
TRANSLATION
O muni, in the last millennium I was born as the son of a certain
maidservant engaged in the service of brähmaëas who were following the
principles of Vedänta. When they were living together during the four months
of the rainy season, I was engaged in their personal service.
PURPORT
The wonder of an atmosphere surcharged with devotional service to the
Lord is briefly described herein by Çré Närada Muni. He was the son of the
most insignificant parentage. He was not properly educated. Still, because his
complete energy was engaged in the service of the Lord, he became an
immortal sage. Such is the powerful action of devotional service. The living
entities are the marginal energy of the Lord, and therefore they are meant for
being properly utilized in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. When
this is not done, one’s situation is called mäyä. Therefore the illusion of mäyä
is at once dissipated as soon as one’s full energy is converted in the service of
the Lord instead of in sense enjoyment. From the personal example of Çré
Närada Muni in his previous birth, it is clear that the service of the Lord
begins with the service of the Lord’s bona fide servants. The Lord says that the
service of His servants is greater than His personal service. Service of the
devotee is more valuable than the service of the Lord. One should therefore
choose a bona fide servant of the Lord constantly engaged in His service,
accept such a servant as the spiritual master and engage himself in his (the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
spiritual master’s) service. Such a spiritual master is the transparent medium
by which to visualize the Lord, who is beyond the conception of the material
senses. By service of the bona fide spiritual master, the Lord consents to reveal
Himself in proportion to the service rendered. Utilization of the human
energy in the service of the Lord is the progressive path of salvation. The
whole cosmic creation becomes at once identical with the Lord as soon as
service in relation with the Lord is rendered under the guidance of a bona fide
spiritual master. The expert spiritual master knows the art of utilizing
everything to glorify the Lord, and therefore under his guidance the whole
world can be turned into the spiritual abode by the divine grace of the Lord’s
servant.
TEXT 24
Tae MaYYaPaeTaai%l/caPale/_>aRkedaNTae_
Da*Ta§-I@Nake-_NauviTaRiNa )
c§u-" k*-Paa& YaÛiPa TauLYadXaRNaa"
éué[UzMaa<ae MauNaYaae_LPa>aaizi<a )) 24 ))
te mayy apetäkhila-cäpale ’rbhake
dänte ’dhåta-kréòanake ’nuvartini
cakruù kåpäà yadyapi tulya-darçanäù
çuçrüñamäëe munayo ’lpa-bhäñiëi
SYNONYMS
te—they; mayi—unto me; apeta—not having undergone; akhila—all kinds of;
cäpale—proclivities; arbhake—unto a boy; dänte—having controlled the
senses; adhåta-kréòanake—without being accustomed to sporting habits;
anuvartini—obedient; cakruù—did bestow; kåpäm—causeless mercy;
yadyapi—although; tulya-darçanäù—impartial by nature; çuçrüñamäëe—unto
the faithful; munayaù—the muni followers of the Vedänta; alpa-bhäñiëi—one
who does not speak more than required.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
Although they were impartial by nature, those followers of the Vedänta
blessed me with their causeless mercy. As far as I was concerned, I was
self-controlled and had no attachment for sports, even though I was a boy. In
addition, I was not naughty, and I did not speak more than required.
PURPORT
In the Bhagavad-gétä the Lord says, “All the Vedas are searching after Me.”
Lord Çré Caitanya says that in the Vedas the subject matters are only three,
namely to establish the relation of the living entities with the Personality of
Godhead, perform the relative duties in devotional service and thus achieve
the ultimate goal, back to Godhead. As such, vedänta-vädés, or the followers of
the Vedänta, indicate the pure devotees of the Personality of Godhead. Such
vedänta-vädés, or the bhakti-vedäntas, are impartial in distributing the
transcendental knowledge of devotional service. To them no one is enemy or
friend; no one is educated or uneducated. No one is especially favorable, and
no one is unfavorable. The bhakti-vedäntas see that the people in general are
wasting time in false sensuous things. Their business is to get the ignorant mass
of people to reestablish their lost relationship with the Personality of Godhead.
By such endeavor, even the most forgotten soul is roused up to the sense of
spiritual life, and thus being initiated by the bhakti-vedäntas, the people in
general gradually progress on the path of transcendental realization. So the
vedänta-vädés initiated the boy even before he became self-controlled and was
detached from childish sporting, etc. But before the initiation, he (the boy)
became more and more advanced in discipline, which is very essential for one
who wishes to make progress in the line. In the system of varëäçrama-dharma,
which is the beginning of actual human life, small boys after five years of age
are sent to become brahmacäré at the guru’s äçrama, where these things are
systematically taught to boys, be they king’s sons or sons of ordinary citizens.
The training was compulsory not only to create good citizens of the state, but
also to prepare the boy’s future life for spiritual realization. The irresponsible
life of sense enjoyment was unknown to the children of the followers of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
varëäçrama system. The boy was even injected with spiritual acumen before
being placed by the father in the womb of the mother. Both the father and the
mother were responsible for the boy’s success in being liberated from the
material bondage. That is the process of successful family planning. It is to
beget children for complete perfection. Without being self-controlled, without
being disciplined and without being fully obedient, no one can become
successful in following the instructions of the spiritual master, and without
doing so, no one is able to go back to Godhead.
TEXT 25
oiC^íle/PaaNaNauMaaeidTaae iÜJaE"
Sak*-TSMa >auÅe TadPaaSTaik-iLbz" )
Wv& Pa[v*taSYa ivéuÖceTaSa‚
STaÖMaR WvaTMaåic" Pa[JaaYaTae )) 25 ))
ucchiñöa-lepän anumodito dvijaiù
sakåt sma bhuïje tad-apästa-kilbiñaù
evaà pravåttasya viçuddha-cetasas
tad-dharma evätma-ruciù prajäyate
SYNONYMS
ucchiñöa-lepän—the remnants of foodstuff; anumoditaù—being permitted;
dvijaiù—by the Vedäntist brähmaëas; sakåt—once upon a time; sma—in the
past; bhuïje—took; tat—by that action; apästa—eliminated; kilbiñaù—all sins;
evam—thus; pravåttasya—being engaged; viçuddha-cetasaù—of one whose
mind is purified; tat—that particular; dharmaù—nature; eva—certainly;
ätma-ruciù—transcendental attraction; prajäyate—was manifested.
TRANSLATION
Once only, by their permission, I took the remnants of their food, and by so
doing all my sins were at once eradicated. Thus being engaged, I became
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
purified in heart, and at that time the very nature of the transcendentalist
became attractive to me.
PURPORT
Pure devotion is as much infectious, in a good sense, as infectious diseases.
A pure devotee is cleared from all kinds of sins. The Personality of Godhead is
the purest entity, and unless one is equally pure from the infection of material
qualities, one cannot become a pure devotee of the Lord. The bhakti-vedäntas
as above mentioned were pure devotees, and the boy became infected with
their qualities of purity by their association and by eating once the remnants
of the foodstuff taken by them. Such remnants may be taken even without
permission of the pure devotees. There are sometimes pseudodevotees, and one
should be very much cautious about them. There are many things which
hinder one from entering devotional service. But by the association of pure
devotees all these obstacles are removed. The neophyte devotee becomes
practically enriched with the transcendental qualities of the pure devotee,
which means attraction for the Personality of Godhead’s name, fame, quality,
pastimes, etc. Infection of the qualities of the pure devotee means to imbibe
the taste of pure devotion always in the transcendental activities of the
Personality of Godhead. This transcendental taste at once makes all material
things distasteful. Therefore a pure devotee is not at all attracted by material
activities. After the elimination of all sins or obstacles on the path of
devotional service, one can become attracted, one can have steadiness, one
can have perfect taste, one can have transcendental emotions, and at last one
can be situated on the plane of loving service of the Lord. All these stages
develop by the association of pure devotees, and that is the purport of this
stanza.
TEXT 26
Ta}aaNvh& k*-Z<ak-Qaa" Pa[GaaYaTaa‚
MaNauGa]he<aaé*<av& MaNaaehra" )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Taa" é[ÖYaa Mae_NauPad& ivé*<vTa"
iPa[Yaé[vSYa® MaMaa>avd]uic" )) 26 ))
tatränvahaà kåñëa-kathäù pragäyatäm
anugraheëäçåëavaà manoharäù
täù çraddhayä me ’nupadaà viçåëvataù
priyaçravasy aìga mamäbhavad ruciù
SYNONYMS
tatra—thereupon; anu—every day; aham—I; kåñëa-kathäù—narration of Lord
Kåñëa’s activities; pragäyatäm—describing; anugraheëa—by causeless mercy;
açåëavam—giving aural reception; manaù-haräù—attractive; täù—those;
çraddhayä—respectfully; me—unto me; anupadam—every step;
viçåëvataù—hearing attentively; priyaçravasi—of the Personality of Godhead;
aìga—O Vyäsadeva; mama—mine; abhavat—it so became; ruciù—taste.
TRANSLATION
O Vyäsadeva, in that association and by the mercy of those great Vedäntists,
I could hear them describe the attractive activities of Lord Kåñëa And thus
listening attentively, my taste for hearing of the Personality of Godhead
increased at every step.
PURPORT
Lord Çré Kåñëa, the Absolute Personality of Godhead, is attractive not only
in His personal features, but also in His transcendental activities. It is so
because the Absolute is absolute by His name, fame, form, pastimes, entourage,
paraphernalia, etc. The Lord descends on this material world out of His
causeless mercy and displays His various transcendental pastimes as a human
being so that human beings attracted towards Him become able to go back to
Godhead. Men are naturally apt to hear histories and narrations of various
personalities performing mundane activities, without knowing that by such
association one simply wastes valuable time and also becomes addicted to the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
three qualities of mundane nature. Instead of wasting time, one can get
spiritual success by turning his attention to the transcendental pastimes of the
Lord. By hearing the narration of the pastimes of the Lord, one contacts
directly the Personality of Godhead, and, as explained before, by hearing about
the Personality of Godhead, from within, all accumulated sins of the mundane
creature are cleared. Thus being cleared of all sins, the hearer gradually
becomes liberated from mundane association and becomes attracted to the
features of the Lord. Närada Muni has just explained this by his personal
experience. The whole idea is that simply by hearing about the Lord’s pastimes
one can become one of the associates of the Lord. Närada Muni has eternal
life, unlimited knowledge and unfathomed bliss, and he can travel all over the
material and spiritual worlds without restriction. One can attain to the highest
perfection of life simply by attentive hearing of the transcendental pastimes of
the Lord from the right sources, as Çré Närada heard them from the pure
devotees (bhakti-vedäntas) in his previous life. This process of hearing in the
association of the devotees is especially recommended in this age of quarrel
(Kali).
TEXT 27
TaiSMa&STada l/BDaåceMaRhaMaTae
iPa[Yaé[vSYaS%il/Taa MaiTaMaRMa )
YaYaahMaeTaTSadSaTSvMaaYaYaa
PaXYae MaiYa b]øi<a k-iLPaTa& Pare )) 27 ))
tasmiàs tadä labdha-rucer mahä-mate
priyaçravasy askhalitä matir mama
yayäham etat sad-asat sva-mäyayä
paçye mayi brahmaëi kalpitaà pare
SYNONYMS
tasmin—it being so; tadä—at that time; labdha—achieved; ruceù—taste;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
mahä-mate—O great sage; priyaçravasi—upon the Lord; askhalitä
matiù—uninterrupted attention; mama—mine; yayä—by which; aham—I;
etat—all these; sat-asat—gross and subtle; sva-mäyayä—one’s own ignorance;
paçye—see; mayi—in me; brahmaëi—the Supreme; kalpitam—is accepted;
pare—in the Transcendence.
TRANSLATION
O great sage, as soon as I got a taste for the Personality of Godhead, my
attention to hear of the Lord was unflinching. And as my taste developed, I
could realize that it was only in my ignorance that I had accepted gross and
subtle coverings, for both the Lord and I are transcendental.
PURPORT
Ignorance in material existence is compared to darkness, and in all Vedic
literatures the Personality of Godhead is compared to the sun. Wherever there
is light there cannot be darkness. Hearing of the Lord’s pastimes is itself
transcendental association with the Lord because there is no difference
between the Lord and His transcendental pastimes. To become associated with
the supreme light is to dissipate all ignorance. By ignorance only, the
conditioned soul wrongly thinks that both he and the Lord are products of
material nature. But in fact the Personality of Godhead and the living beings
are transcendental, and they have nothing to do with the material nature.
When ignorance is removed and it is perfectly realized that there is nothing
existing without the Personality of Godhead, then nescience is removed. Since
the gross and subtle bodies are emanations from the Personality of Godhead,
the knowledge of light permits one to engage both of them in the service of the
Lord. The gross body should be engaged in acts of rendering service to the
Lord (as in bringing water, cleansing the temple or making obeisances, etc.).
The path of arcanä, or worshiping the Lord in the temple, involves engaging
one’s gross body in the service of the Lord. Similarly, the subtle mind should be
engaged in hearing the transcendental pastimes of the Lord, thinking about
them, chanting His name, etc. All such activities are transcendental. None of
the gross or subtle senses should otherwise be engaged. Such realization of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
transcendental activities is made possible by many, many years of
apprenticeship in the devotional service, but simply attraction of love for the
Personality of Godhead, as it was developed in Närada Muni, by hearing, is
highly effective.
TEXT 28
wTQa& XarTPa[av*izk-av*TaU hre‚
ivRé*<vTaae Mae_NauSav& YaXaae_Mal/Ma( )
SaªqTYaRMaaNa& MauiNai>aMaRhaTMai>a‚
>aRi¢-" Pa[v*taaTMarJaSTaMaaePaha )) 28 ))
itthaà çarat-prävåñikäv åtü harer
viçåëvato me ’nusavaà yaço ’malam
saìkértyamänaà munibhir mahätmabhir
bhaktiù pravåttätma-rajas-tamopahä
SYNONYMS
ittham—thus; çarat—autumn; prävåñikau—rainy season; åtü—two seasons;
hareù—of the Lord; viçåëvataù—continuously hearing; me—myself;
anusavam—constantly; yaçaù amalam—unadulterated glories;
saìkértyamänam—chanted by; munibhiù—the great sages;
mahä-ätmabhiù—great souls; bhaktiù—devotional service; pravåttä—began to
flow; ätma—living being; rajaù—mode of passion; tama—mode of ignorance;
upahä—vanishing.
TRANSLATION
Thus during two seasons—the rainy season and autumn—I had the
opportunity to hear these great-souled sages constantly chant the unadulterated
glories of the Lord Hari. As the flow of my devotional service began, the
coverings of the modes of passion and ignorance vanished.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
Transcendental loving service for the Supreme Lord is the natural
inclination of every living being. The instinct is dormant in everyone, but due
to the association of material nature the modes of passion and ignorance cover
this from time immemorial. If, by the grace of the Lord and the great-souled
devotees of the Lord, a living being becomes fortunate enough to associate
with the unadulterated devotees of the Lord and gets a chance to hear the
unadulterated glories of the Lord, certainly the flow of devotional service takes
place like the flow of a river. As the river flows on till she reaches the sea,
similarly pure devotional service flows by the association of pure devotees till it
reaches the ultimate goal, namely, transcendental love of God. Such a flow of
devotional service cannot stop. On the contrary, it increases more and more
without limitation. The flow of devotional service is so potent that any
onlooker also becomes liberated from the influence of the modes of passion
and ignorance. These two qualities of nature are thus removed, and the living
being is liberated, being situated in his original position.
TEXT 29
TaSYaEv& Mae_Naur¢-SYa Pa[ié[TaSYa hTaENaSa" )
é[ÕDaaNaSYa bal/SYa daNTaSYaaNaucrSYa c )) 29 ))
tasyaivaà me ’nuraktasya
praçritasya hatainasaù
çraddadhänasya bälasya
däntasyänucarasya ca
SYNONYMS
tasya—his; evam—thus; me—mine; anuraktasya—attached to them;
praçritasya—obediently; hata—freed from; enasaù—sins; çraddadhänasya—of
the faithful; bälasya—of the boy; däntasya—subjugated; anucarasya—strictly
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
following the instructions; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
I was very much attached to those sages. I was gentle in behavior, and all my
sins were eradicated in their service. In my heart I had strong faith in them. I
had subjugated the senses, and I was strictly following them with body and
mind.
PURPORT
These are the necessary qualifications of a prospective candidate who can
expect to be elevated to the position of a pure unadulterated devotee. Such a
candidate must always seek the association of pure devotees. One should not
be misled by a pseudodevotee. He himself must be plain and gentle to receive
the instructions of such a pure devotee. A pure devotee is a completely
surrendered soul unto the Personality of Godhead. He knows the Personality
of Godhead as the supreme proprietor and all others as His servitors. And by
the association of pure devotees only, one can get rid of all sins accumulated by
mundane association. A neophyte devotee must faithfully serve the pure
devotee, and he should be very much obedient and strictly follow the
instructions. These are the signs of a devotee who is determined to achieve
success even in the existing duration of life.
TEXT 30
jaNa& GauùTaMa& YataTSaa+aaÙGavTaaeidTaMa( )
ANvvaecNa( GaiMaZYaNTa" k*-PaYaa dqNavTSal/a" )) 30 ))
jïänaà guhyatamaà yat tat
säkñäd bhagavatoditam
anvavocan gamiñyantaù
kåpayä déna-vatsaläù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
jïänam—knowledge; guhyatamam—most confidential; yat—what is;
tat—that; säkñät—directly; bhagavatä uditam—propounded by the Lord
Himself; anvavocan—gave instruction; gamiñyantaù—while departing from;
kåpayä—by causeless mercy; déna-vatsaläù—those who are very kind to the
poor and meek.
TRANSLATION
As they were leaving, those bhakti-vedäntas, who are very kind to
poor-hearted souls, instructed me in that most confidential subject which is
instructed by the Personality of Godhead Himself.
PURPORT
A pure Vedäntist, or a bhakti-vedänta, instructs followers exactly according
to the instructions of the Lord Himself. The Personality of Godhead, both in
the Bhagavad-gétä and in all other scriptures, has definitely instructed men to
follow the Lord only. The Lord is the creator, maintainer and annihilator of
everything. The whole manifested creation is existing by His will, and by His
will when the whole show is finished He will remain in His eternal abode with
all His paraphernalia. Before the creation He was there in the eternal abode,
and after the annihilation He will continue to remain. He is not, therefore,
one of the created beings. He is transcendental. In the Bhagavad-gétä the Lord
says that long, long before the instruction was imparted to Arjuna, the same
was instructed to the sun-god, and in course of time, the same instruction,
being wrongly handled and being broken, was again instructed to Arjuna
because he was His perfect devotee and friend. Therefore, the instruction of
the Lord can be understood by the devotees only and no one else. The
impersonalist, who has no idea of the transcendental form of the Lord, cannot
understand this most confidential message of the Lord. The expression “most
confidential” is significant here because knowledge of devotional service is far,
far above knowledge of impersonal Brahman. Jïänam means ordinary
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
knowledge or any branch of knowledge. This knowledge develops up to the
knowledge of impersonal Brahman. Above this, when it is partially mixed with
devotion, such knowledge develops to knowledge of Paramätmä, or the
all-pervading Godhead. This is more confidential. But when such knowledge is
turned into pure devotional service and the confidential part of
transcendental knowledge is attained, it is called the most confidential
knowledge. This most confidential knowledge was imparted by the Lord to
Brahmä, Arjuna, Uddhava, etc.
TEXT 31
YaeNaEvah& >aGavTaae vaSaudevSYa veDaSa" )
MaaYaaNau>aavMaivd& YaeNa GaC^iNTa TaTPadMa( )) 31 ))
yenaivähaà bhagavato
väsudevasya vedhasaù
mäyänubhävam avidaà
yena gacchanti tat-padam
SYNONYMS
yena—by which; eva—certainly; aham—I; bhagavataù—of the Personality of
Godhead; väsudevasya—of Lord Çré Kåñëa; vedhasaù—of the supreme creator;
mäyä—energy; anubhävam—influence; avidam—easily understood; yena—by
which; gacchanti—they go; tat-padam—at the lotus feet of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
By that confidential knowledge, I could understand clearly the influence of
the energy of Lord Çré Kåñëa, the creator, maintainer and annihilator of
everything. By knowing that, one can return to Him and personally meet Him.
PURPORT
By devotional service or by the most confidential knowledge, one can
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
understand very easily how the different energies of the Lord are working.
One part of energy is manifesting the material world; the other (superior) part
of His energy is manifesting the spiritual world. And the via medium energy is
manifesting the living entities who are serving either of the above-mentioned
energies. The living entities serving material energy are struggling hard for
existence and happiness, which is presented to them as illusion. But those in
the spiritual energy are placed under the direct service of the Lord in eternal
life, complete knowledge and perpetual bliss. The Lord desires, as He has
directly said in the Bhagavad-gétä, that all conditioned souls, rotting in the
kingdom of material energy, come back to Him by giving up all engagements in
the material world. This is the most confidential part of knowledge. But this
can be understood only by the pure devotees, and only such devotees enter the
kingdom of God to see Him personally and serve Him personally. The concrete
example is Närada Himself, who attained this stage of eternal knowledge and
eternal bliss. And the ways and means are open to all, provided one agrees to
follow in the footsteps of Çré Närada Muni. According to çruti, the Supreme
Lord has unlimited energies (without effort by Him), and these are described
under three principal headings, as above mentioned.
TEXT 32
WTaTSa&SaUicTa& b]ø&STaaPa}aYaicik-iTSaTaMa( )
Yadqìre >aGaviTa k-MaR b]øi<a >aaivTaMa( )) 32 ))
etat saàsücitaà brahmaàs
täpa-traya-cikitsitam
yad éçvare bhagavati
karma brahmaëi bhävitam
SYNONYMS
etat—this much; saàsücitam—decided by the learned; brahman—O brähmaëa
Vyäsa; täpa-traya—three kinds of miseries; cikitsitam—remedial measures;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
yat—what; éçvare—the supreme controller; bhagavati—unto the Personality of
Godhead; karma—one’s prescribed activities; brahmaëi—unto the great;
bhävitam—dedicated.
TRANSLATION
O Brähmaëa Vyäsadeva, it is decided by the learned that the best remedial
measure for removing all troubles and miseries is to dedicate one’s activities to
the service of the Supreme Lord Personality of Godhead [Çré Kåñëa].
PURPORT
Çré Närada Muni personally experienced that the most feasible and
practical way to open the path of salvation or get relief from all miseries of life
is to hear submissively the transcendental activities of the Lord from the right
and bona fide sources. This is the only remedial process. The entire material
existence is full of miseries. Foolish people have manufactured, out of their
tiny brains, many remedial measures for removing the threefold miseries
pertaining to the body and mind, pertaining to the natural disturbances and in
relation with other living beings. The whole world is struggling very hard to
exist out of these miseries, but men do not know that without the sanction of
the Lord no plan or no remedial measure can actually bring about the desired
peace and tranquillity. The remedial measure to cure a patient by medical
treatment is useless if it is not sanctioned by the Lord. To cross the river or the
ocean by a suitable boat is no remedial measure if it is not sanctioned by the
Lord. We should know for certain that the Lord is the ultimate sanctioning
officer, and we must therefore dedicate our attempts to the mercy of the Lord
for ultimate success or to get rid of the obstacles on the path of success. The
Lord is all-pervading, all-powerful, omniscient and omnipresent. He is the
ultimate sanctioning agent of all good or bad effects. We should, therefore,
learn to dedicate our activities unto the mercy of the Lord and accept Him
either as impersonal Brahman, localized Paramätmä or the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. It does not matter what one is. One must dedicate
everything in the service of the Lord. If one is a learned scholar, scientist,
philosopher, poet, etc., then he should employ his learning to establish the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
supremacy of the Lord. Try to study the energy of the Lord in every sphere of
life. Do not decry Him and try to become like Him or take His position simply
by fragmental accumulation of knowledge. If one is an administrator,
statesman, warrior, politician, etc., then one should try to establish the Lord’s
supremacy in statesmanship. Fight for the cause of the Lord as Çré Arjuna did.
In the beginning, Çré Arjuna, the great fighter, declined to fight, but when he
was convinced by the Lord that the fighting was necessary, Çré Arjuna
changed his decision and fought for His cause. Similarly, if one is a
businessman, an industrialist, an agriculturist, etc., then one should spend his
hard-earned money for the cause of the Lord. Think always that the money
which is accumulated is the wealth of the Lord. Wealth is considered to be the
goddess of fortune (Lakñmé), and the Lord is Näräyaëa, or the husband of
Lakñmé. Try to engage Lakñmé in the service of Lord Näräyaëa and be happy.
That is the way to realize the Lord in every sphere of life. The best thing is,
after all, to get relief from all material activities and engage oneself completely
in hearing the transcendental pastimes of the Lord. But in case of the absence
of such an opportunity, one should try to engage in the service of the Lord
everything for which one has specific attraction, and that is the way of peace
and prosperity. The word saàsücitam in this stanza is also significant. One
should not think for a moment that the realization of Närada was childish
imagination only. It is not like that. It is so realized by the expert and erudite
scholars, and that is the real import of the word saàsücitam.
TEXT 33
AaMaYaae Yaê >aUTaaNaa& JaaYaTae YaeNa Sauv]Ta )
Tadev ùaMaYa& d]VYa& Na PauNaaiTa icik-iTSaTaMa( )) 33 ))
ämayo yaç ca bhütänäà
jäyate yena suvrata
tad eva hy ämayaà dravyaà
na punäti cikitsitam
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
ämayaù—diseases; yaù ca—whatever; bhütänäm—of the living being;
jäyate—become possible; yena—by the agency; suvrata—O good soul;
tat—that; eva—very; hi—certainly; ämayam—disease; dravyam—thing;
na—does it not; punäti—cure; cikitsitam—treated with.
TRANSLATION
O good soul, does not a thing, applied therapeutically, cure a disease which
was caused by that very same thing?
PURPORT
An expert physician treats his patient with a therapeutic diet. For example,
milk preparations sometimes cause disorder of the bowels, but the very same
milk converted into curd and mixed with some other remedial ingredients
cures such disorders. Similarly, the threefold miseries of material existence
cannot be mitigated simply by material activities. Such activities have to be
spiritualized, just as by fire iron is made red-hot, and thereby the action of fire
begins. Similarly, the material conception of a thing is at once changed as soon
as it is put into the service of the Lord. That is the secret of spiritual success.
We should not try to lord it over the material nature, nor should we reject
material things. The best way to make the best use of a bad bargain is to use
everything in relation with the supreme spiritual being. Everything is an
emanation from the Supreme Spirit, and by His inconceivable power He can
convert spirit into matter and matter into spirit. Therefore a material thing
(so-called) is at once turned into a spiritual force by the great will of the Lord.
The necessary condition for such a change is to employ so-called matter in the
service of the spirit. That is the way to treat our material diseases and elevate
ourselves to the spiritual plane where there is no misery, no lamentation and
no fear. When everything is thus employed in the service of the Lord, we can
experience that there is nothing except the Supreme Brahman. The Vedic
mantra that “everything is Brahman” is thus realized by us.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 34
Wv& Na*<aa& i§-YaaYaaeGaa" SaveR Sa&Sa*iTaheTav" )
Ta WvaTMaivNaaXaaYa k-LPaNTae k-iLPaTaa" Pare )) 34 ))
evaà nåëäà kriyä-yogäù
sarve saàsåti-hetavaù
ta evätma-vinäçäya
kalpante kalpitäù pare
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; nåëäm—of the human being; kriyä-yogäù—all activities;
sarve—everything; saàsåti—material existence; hetavaù—causes; te—that;
eva—certainly; ätma—the tree of work; vinäçäya—killing; kalpante—become
competent; kalpitäù—dedicated; pare—unto the Transcendence.
TRANSLATION
Thus when all a man’s activities are dedicated to the service of the Lord,
those very activities which caused his perpetual bondage become the destroyer
of the tree of work.
PURPORT
Fruitive work which has perpetually engaged the living being is compared
to the banyan tree in the Bhagavad-gétä, for it is certainly very deeply rooted.
As long as the propensity for enjoying the fruit of work is there, one has to
continue the transmigration of the soul from one body or place to another,
according to one’s nature of work. The propensity for enjoyment may be
turned into the desire for serving the mission of the Lord, By doing so, one’s
activity is changed into karma-yoga, or the way by which one can attain
spiritual perfection while engaging in the work for which he has a natural
tendency. Here the word ätmä indicates the categories of all fruitive work. The
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
conclusion is that when the result of all fruitive and other work is dovetailed
with the service of the Lord, it will cease to generate further karma and will
gradually develop into transcendental devotional service, which will not only
cut off completely the root of the banyan tree of work but will also carry the
performer to the lotus feet of the Lord.
The summary is that one has to, first of all, seek the association of pure
devotees who not only are learned in the Vedänta but are self-realized souls
and unalloyed devotees of Lord Çré Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead. In that
association, the neophyte devotees must render loving service physically and
mentally without reservation. This service attitude will induce the great souls
to be more favorable in bestowing their mercy, which injects the neophyte
with all the transcendental qualities of the pure devotees. Gradually this is
developed into a strong attachment to hearing the transcendental pastimes of
the Lord, which makes him able to catch up the constitutional position of the
gross and subtle bodies and beyond them the knowledge of pure soul and his
eternal relation with the Supreme Soul, the Personality of Godhead. After the
relation is ascertained by establishment of the eternal relation, pure devotional
service to the Lord begins gradually developing into perfect knowledge of the
Personality of Godhead beyond the purview of impersonal Brahman and
localized Paramätmä. By such puruñottama-yoga, as it is stated in the
Bhagavad-gétä, one is made perfect even during the present corporeal
existence, and one exhibits all the good qualities of the Lord to the highest
percentage. Such is the gradual development by association of pure devotees.
TEXT 35
Yad}a i§-YaTae k-MaR >aGavTPairTaaez<aMa( )
jaNa& YatadDaqNa& ih >ai¢-YaaeGaSaMaiNvTaMa( )) 35 ))
yad atra kriyate karma
bhagavat-paritoñaëam
jïänaà yat tad adhénaà hi
bhakti-yoga-samanvitam
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
yat—whatever; atra—in this life or world; kriyate—does perform;
karma—work; bhagavat—unto the Personality of Godhead;
paritoñaëam—satisfaction of; jïänam—knowledge; yat tat—what is so called;
adhénam—dependent; hi—certainly; bhakti-yoga—devotional;
samanvitam—dovetailed with bhakti-yoga.
TRANSLATION
Whatever work is done here in this life for the satisfaction of the mission of
the Lord is called bhakti-yoga, or transcendental loving service to the Lord, and
what is called knowledge becomes a concomitant factor.
PURPORT
The general and popular notion is that by discharging fruitive work in
terms of the direction of the scriptures one becomes perfectly able to acquire
transcendental knowledge for spiritual realization. Bhakti-yoga is considered by
some to be another form of karma. But factually bhakti-yoga is above both
karma and jïäna. Bhakti-yoga is independent of jïäna or karma; on the other
hand, jïäna and karma are dependent on bhakti-yoga. This kriyä-yoga or
karma-yoga, as recommended by Çré Närada to Vyäsa, is specifically
recommended because the principle is to satisfy the Lord. The Lord does not
want His sons, the living beings, to suffer the threefold miseries of life. He
desires that all of them come to Him and live with Him, but going back to
Godhead means that one must purify himself from material infections. When
work is performed, therefore, to satisfy the Lord, the performer becomes
gradually purified from the material affection. This purification means
attainment of spiritual knowledge. Therefore knowledge is dependent on
karma, or work, done on behalf of the Lord. Other knowledge, being devoid of
bhakti-yoga or satisfaction of the Lord, cannot lead one back to the kingdom of
God, which means that it cannot even offer salvation, as already explained in
connection with the stanza naiñkarmyam apy acyuta-bhäva-varjitam
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
(Çrémad-Bhägavatam 1.5.12). The conclusion is that a devotee engaged in the
unalloyed service of the Lord, specifically in hearing and chanting of His
transcendental glories, becomes simultaneously spiritually enlightened by the
divine grace, as confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä.
TEXT 36
ku-vaR<aa Ya}a k-MaaRi<a >aGaviC^+aYaaSak*-Ta( )
Ga*<aiNTa Gau<aNaaMaaiNa k*-Z<aSYaaNauSMariNTa c )) 36 ))
kurväëä yatra karmäëi
bhagavac-chikñayäsakåt
gåëanti guëa-nämäni
kåñëasyänusmaranti ca
SYNONYMS
kurväëäù—while performing; yatra—thereupon; karmäëi—duties;
bhagavat—the Personality of Godhead; çikñayä—by the will of;
asakåt—constantly; gåëanti—takes on; guëa—qualities; nämäni—names;
kåñëasya—of Kåñëa; anusmaranti—constantly remembers; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
While performing duties according to the order of Çré Kåñëa, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, one constantly remembers Him, His names and His
qualities.
PURPORT
An expert devotee of the Lord can mold his life in such a way that while
performing all kinds of duties either for this or the next life, he can constantly
remember the Lord’s name, fame, qualities, etc. The order of the Lord is
distinctly there in the Bhagavad-gétä: one should work only for the Lord in all
spheres of life. In every sphere of life the Lord should be situated as the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
proprietor. According to the Vedic rites, even in the worship of some demigods
like Indra, Brahmä, Sarasvaté and Gaëeça, the system is that in all
circumstances the representation of Viñëu must be there as yajïeçvara, or the
controlling power of such sacrifices. It is recommended that a particular
demigod be worshiped for a particular purpose, but still the presence of Viñëu
is compulsory in order to make the function proper.
Apart from such Vedic duties, even in our ordinary dealings (for example,
in our household affairs or in our business or profession) we must consider that
the result of all activities must be given over to the supreme enjoyer, Lord
Kåñëa. In the Bhagavad-gétä the Lord has declared Himself to be the supreme
enjoyer of everything, the supreme proprietor of every planet and the supreme
friend of all beings. No one else but Lord Çré Kåñëa can claim to be the
proprietor of everything within His creation. A pure devotee remembers this
constantly, and in doing so he repeats the transcendental name, fame and
qualities of the Lord, which means that he is constantly in touch with the
Lord. The Lord is identical with His name, fame, etc., and therefore to be
associated with His name, fame, etc., constantly, means actually to associate
with the Lord.
The major portion of our monetary income, not less than fifty percent,
must be spent to carry out the order of Lord Kåñëa. Not only should we give
the profit of our earning to this cause, but we must also arrange to preach this
cult of devotion to others because that is also one of the orders of the Lord.
The Lord definitely says that no one is more dear to Him than one who is
always engaged in the preaching work of the Lord’s name and fame all over the
world. The scientific discoveries of the material world can also be equally
engaged in carrying out His order. He wants the message of the Bhagavad-gétä
to be preached amongst His devotees. It may not be so done amongst those
who have no credit of austerities, charity, education, etc. Therefore, the
attempt must go on to convert unwilling men to become His devotees. Lord
Caitanya has taught a very simple method in this connection. He has taught
the lesson for preaching the transcendental message through singing, dancing
and refreshment. As such, fifty percent of our income may be spent for this
purpose. In this fallen age of quarrel and dissension, if only the leading and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
wealthy persons of society agree to spend fifty percent of their income in the
service of the Lord, as it is taught by Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, there is
absolute certainty of converting this hell of pandemonium to the
transcendental abode of the Lord. No one will disagree to partake in a
function where good singing, dancing and refreshment are administered.
Everyone will attend such a function, and everyone is sure to feel individually
the transcendental presence of the Lord. This alone will help the attendant
associate with the Lord and thereby purify himself in spiritual realization. The
only condition for successfully executing such spiritual activities is that they
must be conducted under the guidance of a pure devotee who is completely
free from all mundane desires, fruitive activities and dry speculations about
the nature of the Lord. No one has to discover the nature of the Lord. It is
already spoken by the Lord Himself in the Bhagavad-gétä especially and in all
other Vedic literatures generally. We have simply to accept them in toto and
abide by the orders of the Lord. That will guide us to the path of perfection.
One can remain in his own position. No one has to change his position,
especially in this age of variegated difficulties. The only condition is that one
must give up the habit of dry speculation aimed at becoming one with the
Lord. And after giving up such lofty puffed-up vanities, one may very
submissively receive the orders of the Lord in the Bhagavad-gétä or Bhägavatam
from the lips of a bona fide devotee whose qualification is mentioned above.
That will make everything successful, without a doubt.
TEXT 37
p NaMaae >aGavTae Tau>Ya& vaSaudevaYa DaqMaih )
Pa[ÛuManaYaaiNaåÖaYa NaMa" SaªzR<aaYa c )) 37 ))
oà namo bhagavate tubhyaà
väsudeväya dhémahi
pradyumnäyäniruddhäya
namaù saìkarñaëäya ca
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
oà—the sign of chanting the transcendental glory of the Lord;
namaù—offering obeisances unto the Lord; bhagavate—unto the Personality
of Godhead; tubhyam—unto You; väsudeväya—unto the Lord, the son of
Vasudeva; dhémahi—let us chant; pradyumnäya, aniruddhäya and
saìkarñaëäya—all plenary expansions of Väsudeva; namaù—respectful
obeisances; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
Let us all chant the glories of Väsudeva along with His plenary expansions
Pradyumna, Aniruddha and Saìkarñaëa.
PURPORT
According to Païcarätra, Näräyaëa is the primeval cause of all expansions
of Godhead. These are Väsudeva, Saìkarñaëa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha.
Väsudeva and Saìkarñaëa are on the middle left and right, Pradyumna is on
the right of Saìkarñaëa, and Aniruddha is on the left of Väsudeva, and thus
the four Deities are situated. They are known as the four aides-de-camp of
Lord Çré Kåñëa.
This is a Vedic hymn or mantra beginning with oàkära praëava, and thus
the mantra is established by the transcendental chanting process, namely, oà
namo dhémahi, etc.
The purport is that any transaction, either in the field of fruitive work or in
empiric philosophy, which is not ultimately aimed at transcendental
realization of the Supreme Lord, is considered to be useless. Näradajé has
therefore explained the nature of unalloyed devotional service by his personal
experience in the development of intimacy between the Lord and the living
entity by a gradual process of progressive devotional activities. Such a
progressive march of transcendental devotion for the Lord culminates in the
attainment of loving service of the Lord, which is called premä in different
transcendental variegatedness called rasas (tastes). Such devotional service is
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
also executed in mixed forms, namely mixed with fruitive work or empiric
philosophical speculations.
Now the question which was raised by the great åñis headed by Çaunaka
regarding the confidential part of Süta’s achievement through the spiritual
master is explained herein by the chanting of this hymn consisting of
thirty-three letters. And this mantra is addressed to the four Deities, or the
Lord with His plenary expansions. The central figure is Lord Çré Kåñëa because
the plenary portions are His aides-de-camp. The most confidential part of the
instruction is that one should always chant and remember the glories of the
Lord Çré Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, along with His different
plenary portions expanded as Väsudeva, Saìkarñaëa, Pradyumna and
Aniruddha. Those expansions are the original Deities for all other truths,
namely either viñëu-tattva or çakti-tattvas.
TEXT 38
wiTa MaUTYaRi>aDaaNaeNa MaN}aMaUiTaRMaMaUiTaRk-Ma( )
YaJaTae YajPauåz& Sa SaMYaGdXaRNa" PauMaaNa( )) 38 ))
iti mürty-abhidhänena
mantra-mürtim amürtikam
yajate yajïa-puruñaà
sa samyag darçanaù pumän
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; mürti—representation; abhidhänena—in sound;
mantra-mürtim—form representation of transcendental sound;
amürtikam—the Lord, who has no material form; yajate—worship;
yajïa—Viñëu; puruñam—the Personality of Godhead; saù—he alone;
samyak—perfectly; darçanaù—one who has seen; pumän—person.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Thus he is the actual seer who worships, in the form of transcendental
sound representation, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, who has no
material form.
PURPORT
Our present senses are all made of material elements, and therefore they are
imperfect in realizing the transcendental form of Lord Viñëu. He is therefore
worshiped by sound representation via the transcendental method of chanting.
Anything which is beyond the scope of experience by our imperfect senses can
be realized fully by the sound representation. A person transmitting sound
from a far distant place can be factually experienced. If this is materially
possible, why not spiritually? This experience is not a vague impersonal
experience. It is actually an experience of the transcendental Personality of
Godhead, who possesses the pure form of eternity, bliss and knowledge.
In the Amarakoça Sanskrit dictionary the word mürti carries import in
twofold meanings, namely, form and difficulty. Therefore amürtikam is
explained by Äcärya Çré Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura as meaning “without
difficulty.” The transcendental form of eternal bliss and knowledge can be
experienced by our original spiritual senses, which can be revived by chanting
of the holy mantras, or transcendental sound representations. Such sound
should be received from the transparent agency of the bona fide spiritual
master, and the chanting may be practiced by the direction of the spiritual
master. That will gradually lead us nearer to the Lord. This method of worship
is recommended in the päïcarätrika system, which is both recognized and
authorized. The päïcarätrika system has the most authorized codes for
transcendental devotional service. Without the help of such codes, one cannot
approach the Lord, certainly not by dry philosophical speculation. The
päïcarätrika system is both practical and suitable for this age of quarrel. The
Païcarätra is more important than the Vedänta for this modern age.
TEXT 39
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
wMa& SviNaGaMa& b]øàveTYa MadNauiïTaMa( )
AdaNMae jaNaMaEìYa| SviSMaNa( >aav& c ke-Xav" )) 39 ))
imaà sva-nigamaà brahmann
avetya mad-anuñöhitam
adän me jïänam aiçvaryaà
svasmin bhävaà ca keçavaù
SYNONYMS
imam—thus; sva-nigamam—confidential knowledge of the Vedas in respect to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; brahman—O brähmaëa (Vyäsadeva);
avetya—knowing it well; mat—by me; anuñöhitam—executed; adät—bestowed
upon me; me—me; jïänam—transcendental knowledge; aiçvaryam—opulence;
svasmin—personal; bhävam—intimate affection and love; ca—and;
keçavaù—Lord Kåñëa.
TRANSLATION
O brähmaëa, thus by the Supreme Lord Kåñëa I was endowed first with the
transcendental knowledge of the Lord as inculcated in the confidential parts of
the Vedas, then with the spiritual opulences, and then with His intimate loving
service.
PURPORT
Communion with the Lord by transmission of the transcendental sound is
nondifferent from the whole spirit Lord Çré Kåñëa. It is a completely perfect
method for approaching the Lord. By such pure contact with the Lord, without
offense of material conceptions (numbering ten), the devotee can rise above
the material plane to understand the inner meaning of the Vedic literatures,
including the Lord’s existence in the transcendental realm. The Lord reveals
His identity gradually to one who has unflinching faith, both in the spiritual
master and in the Lord. After this, the devotee is endowed with mystic
opulences, which are eight in number. And above all, the devotee is accepted
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
in the confidential entourage of the Lord and is entrusted with specific service
of the Lord through the agency of the spiritual master. A pure devotee is more
interested in serving the Lord than in showing an exhibition of the mystic
powers dormant in him. Çré Närada has explained all these from his personal
experience, and one can obtain all the facilities which Çré Närada obtained by
perfecting the chanting process of the sound representation of the Lord. There
is no bar for chanting this transcendental sound by anyone, provided it is
received through Närada’s representative, coming down by the chain of
disciplic succession, or the paramparä system.
TEXT 40
TvMaPYad>a]é[uTa ivé[uTa& iv>aae"
SaMaaPYaTae YaeNa ivda& bu>auiTSaTaMa( )
Pa[a:Yaaih du"%EMauRhuridRTaaTMaNaa&
Sa&©e-XaiNavaR<aMauXaiNTa NaaNYaQaa )) 40 ))
tvam apy adabhra-çruta viçrutaà vibhoù
samäpyate yena vidäà bubhutsitam
präkhyähi duùkhair muhur arditätmanäà
saìkleça-nirväëam uçanti nänyathä
SYNONYMS
tvam—your good soul; api—also; adabhra—vast; çruta—Vedic literatures;
viçrutam—have heard also; vibhoù—of the Almighty; samäpyate—satisfied;
yena—by which; vidäm—of the learned; bubhutsitam—who always desire to
learn transcendental knowledge; präkhyähi—describe; duùkhaiù—by miseries;
muhuù—always; ardita-ätmanäm—suffering mass of people;
saìkleça—sufferings; nirväëam—mitigation; uçanti na—do not get out of;
anyathä—by other means.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Please, therefore, describe the Almighty Lord’s activities which you have
learned by your vast knowledge of the Vedas, for that will satisfy the
hankerings of great learned men and at the same time mitigate the miseries of
the masses of common people who are always suffering from material pangs.
Indeed, there is no other way to get out of such miseries.
PURPORT
Çré Närada Muni from practical experience definitely asserts that the prime
solution of all problems of material work is to broadcast very widely the
transcendental glories of the Supreme Lord. There are four classes of good
men, and there are four classes of bad men also. The four classes of good men
acknowledge the authority of the Almighty God, and therefore such good men
(1) when they are in difficulty, (2) when they are in need of money, (3) when
they are advanced in knowledge and (4) when they are inquisitive to know
more and more about God, intuitively take shelter of the Lord. As such,
Näradajé advises Vyäsadeva to broadcast the transcendental knowledge of God
in terms of the vast Vedic knowledge which he had already attained.
As far as the bad men are concerned, they are also four in number: (1) those
who are simply addicted to the mode of progressive fruitive work and thus are
subjected to the accompanying miseries, (2) those who are simply addicted to
vicious work for sense satisfaction and so suffer the consequence, (3) those
who are materially very much advanced in knowledge, but who suffer because
they do not have the sense to acknowledge the authority of the Almighty Lord,
and (4) the class of men who are known as atheists and who therefore
purposely hate the very name of God, although they are always in difficulty.
Çré Näradajé advised Vyäsadeva to describe the glories of the Lord just to do
good to all eight classes of men, both good and bad. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is
therefore not meant for any particular class of men or sect. It is for the sincere
soul who actually wants his own welfare and peace of mind.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the First Canto, Fifth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled “Närada’s Instructions on Çrémad-Bhägavatam for
Vyäsadeva.”
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Chapter Six
Conversation Between Närada and Vyäsadeva
TEXT 1
SaUTa ovac
Wv& iNaXaMYa >aGavaNdevzeRJaRNMa k-MaR c )
>aUYa" PaPa[C^ Ta& b]øNa( VYaaSa" SaTYavTaqSauTa" )) 1 ))
süta uväca
evaà niçamya bhagavän
devarñer janma karma ca
bhüyaù papraccha taà brahman
vyäsaù satyavaté-sutaù
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta said; evam—thus; niçamya—hearing; bhagavän—the
powerful incarnation of God; devarñeù—of the great sage among the gods;
janma—birth; karma—work; ca—and; bhüyaù—again; papraccha—asked;
tam—him; brahman—O brähmaëas; vyäsaù—Vyäsadeva; satyavaté-sutaù—the
son of Satyavaté.
TRANSLATION
Süta said: O brähmaëas, thus hearing all about Çré Närada’s birth and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
activities, Vyäsadeva, the incarnation of God and son of Satyavaté, inquired as
follows.
PURPORT
Vyäsadeva was further inquisitive to know about the perfection of Näradajé,
and therefore he wanted to know about him more and more. In this chapter
Näradajé will describe how he was able to have a brief audience with the Lord
while he was absorbed in the transcendental thought of separation from the
Lord and when it was very painful for him.
TEXT 2
VYaaSa ovac
i>a+aui>aivRPa[viSaTae ivjaNaadeí*i>aSTav )
vTaRMaaNaae vYaSYaaÛe TaTa" ik-Mak-raeÙvaNa( )) 2 ))
vyäsa uväca
bhikñubhir vipravasite
vijïänädeñöåbhis tava
vartamäno vayasy ädye
tataù kim akarod bhavän
SYNONYMS
vyäsaù uväca—Çré Vyäsadeva said; bhikñubhiù—by the great mendicants;
vipravasite—having departed for other places; vijïäna—scientific knowledge
in transcendence; ädeñöåbhiù—those who had instructed; tava—of your;
vartamänaù—present; vayasi—of the duration of life; ädye—before the
beginning of; tataù—after that; kim—what; akarot—did; bhavän—your good
self.
TRANSLATION
Çré Vyäsadeva said: What did you [Närada] do after the departure of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
great sages who had instructed you in scientific transcendental knowledge
before the beginning of your present birth?
PURPORT
Vyäsadeva himself was the disciple of Näradajé, and therefore it was natural
to be anxious to hear what Närada did after initiation from the spiritual
masters. He wanted to follow in Närada’s footsteps in order to attain to the
same perfect stage of life. This desire to inquire from the spiritual master is an
essential factor to the progressive path. This process is technically known as
sad-dharma-påcchä.
TEXT 3
SvaYaM>auv k-Yaa v*tYaa viTaRTa& Tae Par& vYa" )
k-Qa& cedMaudóa+aq" k-ale/ Pa[aáe k-le/vrMa( )) 3 ))
sväyambhuva kayä våttyä
vartitaà te paraà vayaù
kathaà cedam udasräkñéù
käle präpte kalevaram
SYNONYMS
sväyambhuva—O son of Brahmä; kayä—under what condition;
våttyä—occupation; vartitam—was spent; te—you; param—after the
initiation; vayaù—duration of life; katham—how; ca—and; idam—this;
udasräkñéù—did you quit; käle—in due course; präpte—having attained;
kalevaram—body.
TRANSLATION
O son of Brahmä, how did you pass your life after initiation, and how did
you attain this body, having quit your old one in due course?
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
Çré Närada Muni in his previous life was just an ordinary maidservant’s son,
so how he became so perfectly transformed into the spiritual body of eternal
life, bliss and knowledge is certainly important. Çré Vyäsadeva desired him to
disclose the facts for everyone’s satisfaction.
TEXT 4
Pa[a¡-LPaivzYaaMaeTaa& SMa*iTa& Tae MauiNaSataMa )
Na ùez VYavDaaTk-al/ Wz SavRiNarak*-iTa" )) 4 ))
präk-kalpa-viñayäm etäà
småtià te muni-sattama
na hy eña vyavadhät käla
eña sarva-niräkåtiù
SYNONYMS
präk—prior; kalpa—the duration of Brahmä’s day; viñayäm—subject matter;
etäm—all these; småtim—remembrance; te—your; muni-sattama—O great
sage; na—not; hi—certainly; eñaù—all these; vyavadhät—made any difference;
kälaù—course of time; eñaù—all these; sarva—all; niräkåtiù—annihilation.
TRANSLATION
O great sage, time annihilates everything in due course, so how is it that this
subject matter, which happened prior to this day of Brahmä, is still fresh in
your memory, undisturbed by time?
PURPORT
As spirit is not annihilated even after the annihilation of the material body,
so also spiritual consciousness is not annihilated. Çré Närada developed this
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
spiritual consciousness even when he had his material body in the previous
kalpa. Consciousness of the material body means spiritual consciousness
expressed through the medium of a material body. This consciousness is
inferior, destructible and perverted. But superconsciousness of the supramind
in the spiritual plane is as good as the spirit soul and is never annihilated.
TEXT 5
Naard ovac
i>a+aui>aivRPa[viSaTae ivjaNaadeí*i>aMaRMa )
vTaRMaaNaae vYaSYaaÛe TaTa WTadk-arzMa( )) 5 ))
närada uväca
bhikñubhir vipravasite
vijïänädeñöåbhir mama
vartamäno vayasy ädye
tata etad akärañam
SYNONYMS
näradaù uväca—Çré Närada said; bhikñubhiù—by the great sages;
vipravasite—having departed for other places; vijïäna—scientific spiritual
knowledge; ädeñöåbhiù—those who imparted unto me; mama—mine;
vartamänaù—present; vayasi ädye—before this life; tataù—thereafter;
etat—this much; akärañam—performed.
TRANSLATION
Çré Närada said: The great sages, who had imparted scientific knowledge of
transcendence to me, departed for other places, and I had to pass my life in this
way.
PURPORT
In his previous life, when Näradajé was impregnated with spiritual
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
knowledge by the grace of the great sages, there was a tangible change in his
life, although he was only a boy of five years. That is an important symptom
visible after initiation by the bona fide spiritual master. Actual association of
devotees brings about a quick change in life for spiritual realization. How it so
acted upon the previous life of Çré Närada Muni is described by and by in this
chapter.
TEXT 6
Wk-aTMaJaa Mae JaNaNaq YaaeizNMaU!a c ik-ªrq )
MaYYaaTMaJae_NaNYaGaTaaE c§e- òehaNaubNDaNaMa( )) 6 ))
ekätmajä me janané
yoñin müòhä ca kiìkaré
mayy ätmaje ’nanya-gatau
cakre snehänubandhanam
SYNONYMS
eka-ätmajä—having only one son; me—my; janané—mother; yoñit—woman by
class; müòhä—foolish; ca—and; kiìkaré—maidservant; mayi—unto me;
ätmaje—being her offspring; ananya-gatau—one who has no alternative for
protection; cakre—did it; sneha-anubandhanam—tied by affectionate bondage.
TRANSLATION
I was the only son of my mother, who was not only a simple woman but a
maidservant as well. Since I was her only offspring, she had no other alternative
for protection: she bound me with the tie of affection.
TEXT 7
SaaSvTaN}aa Na k-LPaaSaqÛaeGa+aeMa& MaMaeC^Taq )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
wRXaSYa ih vXae l/aek-ae Yaaeza daåMaYaq YaQaa )) 7 ))
säsvatanträ na kalpäséd
yoga-kñemaà mamecchaté
éçasya hi vaçe loko
yoñä därumayé yathä
SYNONYMS
sä—she; asvatanträ—was dependent; na—not; kalpä—able; äsét—was;
yoga-kñemam—maintenance; mama—my; icchaté—although desirous;
éçasya—of providence; hi—for; vaçe—under the control of; lokaù—everyone;
yoñä—doll; däru-mayé—made of wood; yathä—as much as.
TRANSLATION
She wanted to look after my maintenance properly, but because she was not
independent, she was not able to do anything for me. The world is under the
full control of the Supreme Lord; therefore everyone is like a wooden doll in
the hands of a puppet master.
TEXT 8
Ah& c Tad(b]øku-le/ Oizva&STaduPae+aYaa )
idGdeXak-al/aVYauTPaàae bal/k-" PaÄhaYaNa" )) 8 ))
ahaà ca tad-brahma-kule
üñiväàs tad-upekñayä
dig-deça-kälävyutpanno
bälakaù païca-häyanaù
SYNONYMS
aham—I; ca—also; tat—that; brahma-kule—in the school of the brähmaëas;
üñivän—lived; tat—her; upekñayä—being dependent on; dik-deça—direction
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
and country; käla—time; avyutpannaù—having no experience; bälakaù—a
mere child; païca—five; häyanaù—years old.
TRANSLATION
When I was a mere child of five years, I lived in a brähmaëa school. I was
dependent on my mother’s affection and had no experience of different lands.
TEXT 9
Wk-da iNaGaRTaa& GaehaÕuhNTaq& iNaiXa Gaa& PaiQa )
SaPaaeR_dXaTPada SPa*í" k*-Pa<aa& k-al/caeidTa" )) 9 ))
ekadä nirgatäà gehäd
duhantéà niçi gäà pathi
sarpo ’daçat padä spåñöaù
kåpaëäà käla-coditaù
SYNONYMS
ekadä—once upon a time; nirgatäm—having gone away; gehät—from home;
duhantém—for milking; niçi—at night; gäm—the cow; pathi—on the path;
sarpaù—snake; adaçat—bitten; padä—on the leg; spåñöaù—thus struck;
kåpaëäm—the poor woman; käla-coditaù—influenced by supreme time.
TRANSLATION
Once upon a time, my poor mother, when going out one night to milk a cow,
was bitten on the leg by a serpent, influenced by supreme time.
PURPORT
That is the way of dragging a sincere soul nearer to God. The poor boy was
being looked after only by his affectionate mother, and yet the mother was
taken from the world by the supreme will in order to put him completely at the
mercy of the Lord.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 10
Tada TadhMaqXaSYa >a¢-aNaa& XaMa>aqPSaTa" )
ANauGa]h& MaNYaMaaNa" Pa[aiTaï& idXaMautaraMa( )) 10 ))
tadä tad aham éçasya
bhaktänäà çam abhépsataù
anugrahaà manyamänaù
prätiñöhaà diçam uttaräm
SYNONYMS
tadä—at that time; tat—that; aham—I; éçasya—of the Lord; bhaktänäm—of
the devotees; çam—mercy; abhépsataù—desiring; anugraham—special
benediction; manyamänaù—thinking in that way; prätiñöham—departed;
diçam uttaräm—in the northern direction.
TRANSLATION
I took this as the special mercy of the Lord, who always desires benediction
for His devotees, and so thinking, I started for the north.
PURPORT
Confidential devotees of the Lord see in every step a benedictory direction
of the Lord. What is considered to be an odd or difficult moment in the
mundane sense is accepted as special mercy of the Lord. Mundane prosperity is
a kind of material fever, and by the grace of the Lord the temperature of this
material fever is gradually diminished, and spiritual health is obtained step by
step. Mundane people misunderstand it.
TEXT 11
Sf-ITaaÅNaPada&STa}a PaurGa]aMav]Jaak-raNa( )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
%e$=%vR$=va$q=ê vNaaNYauPavNaaiNa c )) 11 ))
sphétäï janapadäàs tatra
pura-gräma-vrajäkarän
kheöa-kharvaöa-väöéç ca
vanäny upavanäni ca
SYNONYMS
sphétän—very flourishing; jana-padän—metropolises; tatra—there;
pura—towns; gräma—villages; vraja—big farms; äkarän—mineral fields
(mines); kheöa—agricultural lands; kharvaöa—valleys; väöéù—flower gardens;
ca—and; vanäni—forests; upavanäni—nursery gardens; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
After my departure, I passed through many flourishing metropolises, towns,
villages, animal farms, mines, agricultural lands, valleys, flower gardens, nursery
gardens and natural forests.
PURPORT
Man’s activities in agriculture, mining, farming, industries, gardening, etc.,
were all on the same scale as they are now, even previous to the present
creation, and the same activities will remain as they are, even in the next
creation. After many hundreds of millions of years, one creation is started by
the law of nature, and the history of the universe repeats itself practically in
the same way. The mundane wranglers waste time with archaeological
excavations without searching into the vital necessities of life. After getting
an impetus in spiritual life, Çré Närada Muni, even though a mere child, did
not waste time for a single moment with economic development, although he
passed towns and villages, mines and industries. He continually went on to
progressive spiritual emancipation. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the repetition of
history which happened some hundreds of millions of years ago. As it is said
herein, only the most important factors of history are picked up to be recorded
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
in this transcendental literature.
TEXT 12
ic}aDaaTauivic}aad]qiNa>a>aGan>auJad]uMaaNa( )
Jal/aXaYaaiH^vJal/aàil/Naq" SaurSaeivTaa" )
ic}aSvNaE" Pa}arQaEivR>a]Mad(>a]Marié[Ya" )) 12 ))
citra-dhätu-viciträdrén
ibha-bhagna-bhuja-drumän
jaläçayäï chiva-jalän
nalinéù sura-sevitäù
citra-svanaiù patra-rathair
vibhramad bhramara-çriyaù
SYNONYMS
citra-dhätu—valuable minerals like gold, silver and copper; vicitra—full of
variegatedness; adrén—hills and mountains; ibha-bhagna—broken by the giant
elephants; bhuja—branches; drumän—trees; jaläçayän çiva—health-giving;
jalän—reservoirs of water; nalinéù—lotus flowers; sura-sevitäù—aspired to by
the denizens of heaven; citra-svanaiù—pleasing to the heart; patra-rathaiù—by
the birds; vibhramat—bewildering; bhramara-çriyaù—decorated by drones.
TRANSLATION
I passed through hills and mountains full of reservoirs of various minerals
like gold, silver and copper, and through tracts of land with reservoirs of water
filled with beautiful lotus flowers, fit for the denizens of heaven, decorated with
bewildered bees and singing birds.
TEXT 13
Nal/ve<auXarSTaNbku-Xak-Ick-GaûrMa( )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Wk- WvaiTaYaaTaae_hMad]a+a& iviPaNa& MahTa( )
gaaer& Pa[iTa>aYaak-ar& VYaal/aelU/k-iXavaiJarMa( )) 13 ))
nala-veëu-çaras-tanbakuça-
kécaka-gahvaram
eka evätiyäto ’ham
adräkñaà vipinaà mahat
ghoraà pratibhayäkäraà
vyälolüka-çiväjiram
SYNONYMS
nala—pipes; veëu—bamboo; çaraù—pens; tanba—full of; kuça—sharp grass;
kécaka—weeds; gahvaram—caves; ekaù—alone; eva—only; atiyätaù—difficult
to go through; aham—I; adräkñam—visited; vipinam—deep forests;
mahat—great; ghoram—fearful; pratibhaya-äkäram—dangerously;
vyäla—snakes; ulüka—owls; çiva—jackals; ajiram—playgrounds.
TRANSLATION
I then passed alone through many forests of rushes, bamboo, reeds, sharp
grass, weeds and caves, which were very difficult to go through alone. I visited
deep, dark and dangerously fearful forests, which were the play yards of snakes,
owls and jackals.
PURPORT
It is the duty of a mendicant (parivräjakäcärya) to experience all varieties of
God’s creation by traveling alone through all forests, hills, towns, villages, etc.,
to gain faith in God and strength of mind as well as to enlighten the
inhabitants with the message of God. A sannyäsé is duty-bound to take all
these risks without fear, and the most typical sannyäsé of the present age is
Lord Caitanya, who traveled in the same manner through the central Indian
jungles, enlightening even the tigers, bears, snakes, deer, elephants and many
other jungle animals. In this age of Kali, sannyäsa is forbidden for ordinary
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
men. One who changes his dress to make propaganda is a different man from
the original ideal sannyäsé. One should, however, take the vow to stop social
intercourse completely and devote life exclusively to the service of the Lord.
The change of dress is only a formality. Lord Caitanya did not accept the name
of a sannyäsé, and in this age of Kali the so-called sannyäsés should not change
their former names, following in the footsteps of Lord Caitanya. In this age,
devotional service of hearing and repeating the holy glories of the Lord is
strongly recommended, and one who takes the vow of renunciation of family
life need not imitate the parivräjakäcärya like Närada or Lord Caitanya, but
may sit down at some holy place and devote his whole time and energy to hear
and repeatedly chant the holy scriptures left by the great äcäryas like the six
Gosvämés of Våndävana.
TEXT 14
Pairé[aNTaeiNd]YaaTMaah& Ta*$(ParqTaae bu>aui+aTa" )
òaTva PaqTva hde NaÛa oPaSPa*íae GaTaé[Ma" )) 14 ))
pariçräntendriyätmähaà
tåö-paréto bubhukñitaù
snätvä pétvä hrade nadyä
upaspåñöo gata-çramaù
SYNONYMS
pariçränta—being tired; indriya—bodily; ätmä—mentally; aham—I;
tåö-parétaù—being thirsty; bubhukñitaù—and hungry; snätvä—taking a bath;
pétvä—and drinking water also; hrade—in the lake; nadyäù—of a river;
upaspåñöaù—being in contact with; gata—got relief from; çramaù—tiredness.
TRANSLATION
Thus traveling, I felt tired, both bodily and mentally, and I was both thirsty
and hungry. So I took a bath in a river lake and also drank water. By contacting
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
water, I got relief from my exhaustion.
PURPORT
A traveling mendicant can meet the needs of body, namely thirst and
hunger, by the gifts of nature without being a beggar at the doors of the
householders. The mendicant therefore does not go to the house of a
householder to beg but to enlighten him spiritually.
TEXT 15
TaiSMaiàMaRNauJae_r<Yae iPaPPal/aePaSQa Aaié[Ta" )
AaTMaNaaTMaaNaMaaTMaSQa& YaQaaé[uTaMaicNTaYaMa( )) 15 ))
tasmin nirmanuje ’raëye
pippalopastha äçritaù
ätmanätmänam ätmasthaà
yathä-çrutam acintayam
SYNONYMS
tasmin—in that; nirmanuje—without human habitation; araëye—in the
forest; pippala—banyan tree; upasthe—sitting under it; äçritaù—taking shelter
of; ätmanä—by intelligence; ätmänam—the Supersoul; ätma-stham—situated
within myself; yathä-çrutam—as I had heard it from the liberated souls;
acintayam—thought over.
TRANSLATION
After that, under the shadow of a banyan tree in an uninhabited forest I
began to meditate upon the Supersoul situated within, using my intelligence, as
I had learned from liberated souls.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
One should not meditate according to one’s personal whims. One should
know perfectly well from the authoritative sources of scriptures through the
transparent medium of a bona fide spiritual master and by proper use of one’s
trained intelligence for meditating upon the Supersoul dwelling within every
living being. This consciousness is firmly developed by a devotee who has
rendered loving service unto the Lord by carrying out the orders of the
spiritual master. Çré Näradajé contacted bona fide spiritual masters, served
them sincerely and got enlightenment rightly. Thus he began to meditate.
TEXT 16
DYaaYaTaêr<aaM>aaeJa& >aaviNaiJaRTaceTaSaa )
AaETk-<#yaé[uk-l/a+aSYa ôÛaSaqNMae XaNaEhRir" )) 16 ))
dhyäyataç caraëämbhojaà
bhäva-nirjita-cetasä
autkaëöhyäçru-kaläkñasya
hådy äsén me çanair hariù
SYNONYMS
dhyäyataù—thus meditating upon; caraëa-ambhojam—the lotus feet of the
localized Personality of Godhead; bhäva-nirjita—mind transformed in
transcendental love for the Lord; cetasä—all mental activities (thinking,
feeling and willing); autkaëöhya—eagerness; açru-kala—tears rolled down;
akñasya—of the eyes; hådi—within my heart; äsét—appeared; me—my;
çanaiù—without delay; hariù—the Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
As soon as I began to meditate upon the lotus feet of the Personality of
Godhead with my mind transformed in transcendental love, tears rolled down
my eyes, and without delay the Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa appeared on
the lotus of my heart.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
The word bhäva is significant here. This bhäva stage is attained after one
has transcendental affection for the Lord. The first initial stage is called
çraddhä, or a liking for the Supreme Lord, and in order to increase that liking
one has to associate with pure devotees of the Lord. The third stage is to
practice the prescribed rules and regulations of devotional service. This will
dissipate all sorts of misgivings and remove all personal deficiencies that
hamper progress in devotional service.
When all misgivings and personal deficiencies are removed, there is a
standard faith in transcendental matter, and the taste for it increases in
greater proportion. This stage leads to attraction, and after this there is bhäva,
or the prior stage of unalloyed love for God. All the above different stages are
but different stages of development of transcendental love. Being so
surcharged with transcendental love, there comes a strong feeling of
separation which leads to eight different kinds of ecstasies. Tears from the eyes
of a devotee is an automatic reaction, and because Çré Närada Muni in his
previous birth attained that stage very quickly after his departure from home,
it was quite possible for him to perceive the actual presence of the Lord, which
he tangibly experienced by his developed spiritual senses without material
tinge.
TEXT 17
Pa[eMaaiTa>ariNai>aRàPaul/k-a®ae_iTaiNav*RTa" )
AaNaNdSaMâve l/INaae NaaPaXYaMau>aYa& MauNae )) 17 ))
premätibhara-nirbhinnapulakäìgo
’tinirvåtaù
änanda-samplave léno
näpaçyam ubhayaà mune
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
premä—love; atibhara—excessive; nirbhinna—especially distinguished;
pulaka—feelings of happiness; aìgaù—different bodily parts;
ati-nirvåtaù—being fully overwhelmed; änanda—ecstasy; samplave—in the
ocean of; lénaù—absorbed in; na—not; apaçyam—could see; ubhayam—both;
mune—O Vyäsadeva.
TRANSLATION
O Vyäsadeva, at that time, being exceedingly overpowered by feelings of
happiness, every part of my body became separately enlivened. Being absorbed
in an ocean of ecstasy, I could not see both myself and the Lord.
PURPORT
Spiritual feelings of happiness and intense ecstasies have no mundane
comparison. Therefore it is very difficult to give expression to such feelings.
We can just have a glimpse of such ecstasy in the words of Çré Närada Muni.
Each and every part of the body or senses has its particular function. After
seeing the Lord, all the senses become fully awakened to render service unto
the Lord because in the liberated state the senses are fully efficient in serving
the Lord. As such, in that transcendental ecstasy it so happened that the
senses became separately enlivened to serve the Lord. This being so, Närada
Muni lost himself in seeing both himself and the Lord simultaneously.
TEXT 18
æPa& >aGavTaae YataNMaNa"k-aNTa& éucaPahMa( )
APaXYaNa( SahSaaetaSQae vE©-VYaad(duMaRNaa wv )) 18 ))
rüpaà bhagavato yat tan
manaù-käntaà çucäpaham
apaçyan sahasottasthe
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
vaiklavyäd durmanä iva
SYNONYMS
rüpam—form; bhagavataù—of the Personality of Godhead; yat—as it is;
tat—that; manaù—of the mind; käntam—as it desires;
çuca-apaham—vanishing all disparity; apaçyan—without seeing; sahasä—all of
a sudden; uttasthe—got up; vaiklavyät—being perturbed; durmanäù—having
lost the desirable; iva—as it were.
TRANSLATION
The transcendental form of the Lord, as it is, satisfies the mind’s desire and
at once erases all mental incongruities. Upon losing that form, I suddenly got
up, being perturbed, as is usual when one loses that which is desirable.
PURPORT
That the Lord is not formless is experienced by Närada Muni. But His form
is completely different from all forms of our material experience. For the whole
duration of our life we go see different forms in the material world, but none of
them is just apt to satisfy the mind, nor can any one of them vanish all
perturbance of the mind. These are the special features of the transcendental
form of the Lord, and one who has once seen that form is not satisfied with
anything else; no form in the material world can any longer satisfy the seer.
That the Lord is formless or impersonal means that He has nothing like a
material form and is not like any material personality.
As spiritual beings, having eternal relations with that transcendental form
of the Lord, we are, life after life, searching after that form of the Lord, and we
are not satisfied by any other form of material appeasement. Närada Muni got
a glimpse of this, but having not seen it again he became perturbed and stood
up all of a sudden to search it out. What we desire life after life was obtained
by Närada Muni, and losing sight of Him again was certainly a great shock for
him.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 19
idd*+auSTadh& >aUYa" Pa[i<aDaaYa MaNaae ôid )
vq+aMaa<aae_iPa NaaPaXYaMaivTa*á wvaTaur" )) 19 ))
didåkñus tad ahaà bhüyaù
praëidhäya mano hådi
vékñamäëo ’pi näpaçyam
avitåpta iväturaù
SYNONYMS
didåkñuù—desiring to see; tat—that; aham—I; bhüyaù—again;
praëidhäya—having concentrated the mind; manaù—mind; hådi—upon the
heart; vékñamäëaù—waiting to see; api—in spite of; na—never; apaçyam—saw
Him; avitåptaù—without being satisfied; iva—like; äturaù—aggrieved.
TRANSLATION
I desired to see again that transcendental form of the Lord, but despite my
attempts to concentrate upon the heart with eagerness to view the form again, I
could not see Him any more, and thus dissatisfied, I was very much aggrieved.
PURPORT
There is no mechanical process to see the form of the Lord. It completely
depends on the causeless mercy of the Lord. We cannot demand the Lord to be
present before our vision, just as we cannot demand the sun to rise whenever
we like. The sun rises out of his own accord; so also the Lord is pleased to be
present out of His causeless mercy. One should simply await the opportune
moment and go on discharging his prescribed duty in devotional service of the
Lord. Närada Muni thought that the Lord could be seen again by the same
mechanical process which was successful in the first attempt, but in spite of his
utmost endeavor he could not make the second attempt successful. The Lord is
completely independent of all obligations. He can simply be bound up by the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
tie of unalloyed devotion. Nor is He visible or perceivable by our material
senses. When He pleases, being satisfied with the sincere attempt of devotional
service depending completely on the mercy of the Lord, then He may be seen
out of His own accord.
TEXT 20
Wv& YaTaNTa& ivJaNae MaaMaahaGaaecrae iGaraMa( )
GaM>aqrë+<aYaa vaca éuc" Pa[XaMaYaiàv )) 20 ))
evaà yatantaà vijane
mäm ähägocaro giräm
gambhéra-çlakñëayä väcä
çucaù praçamayann iva
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; yatantam—one who is engaged in attempting; vijane—in that
lonely place; mäm—unto me; äha—said; agocaraù—beyond the range of
physical sound; giräm—utterances; gambhéra—grave; çlakñëayä—pleasing to
hear; väcä—words; çucaù—grief; praçamayan—mitigating; iva—like.
TRANSLATION
Seeing my attempts in that lonely place, the Personality of Godhead, who is
transcendental to all mundane description, spoke to me with gravity and
pleasing words, just to mitigate my grief.
PURPORT
In the Vedas it is said that God is beyond the approach of mundane words
and intelligence. And yet by His causeless mercy one can have suitable senses
to hear Him or to speak to Him. This is the Lord’s inconceivable energy. One
upon whom His mercy is bestowed can hear Him. The Lord was much pleased
with Närada Muni, and therefore the necessary strength was invested in him
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
so that he could hear the Lord. It is not, however, possible for others to
perceive directly the touch of the Lord during the probationary stage of
regulative devotional service. It was a special gift for Närada. When he heard
the pleasing words of the Lord, the feelings of separation were to some extent
mitigated. A devotee in love with God feels always the pangs of separation and
is therefore always enwrapped in transcendental ecstasy.
TEXT 21
hNTaaiSMaÅNMaiNa >avaNMaa Maa& d]íuiMahahRiTa )
AivPaKvk-zaYaa<aa& dudRXaaeR_h& ku-YaaeiGaNaaMa( )) 21 ))
hantäsmiï janmani bhavän
mä mäà drañöum ihärhati
avipakva-kañäyäëäà
durdarço ’haà kuyoginäm
SYNONYMS
hanta—O Närada; asmin—this; janmani—duration of life; bhavän—yourself;
mä—not; mäm—Me; drañöum—to see; iha—here; arhati—deserve;
avipakva—immature; kañäyäëäm—material dirt; durdarçaù—difficult to be
seen; aham—I; kuyoginäm—incomplete in service.
TRANSLATION
O Närada [the Lord spoke], I regret that during this lifetime you will not be
able to see Me anymore. Those who are incomplete in service and who are not
completely free from all material taints can hardly see Me.
PURPORT
The Personality of Godhead is described in the Bhagavad-gétä as the most
pure, the Supreme and the Absolute Truth. There is no trace of a tinge of
materiality in His person, and thus one who has the slightest tinge of material
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
affection cannot approach Him. The beginning of devotional service starts
from the point when one is freed from at least two forms of material modes,
namely the mode of passion and the mode of ignorance. The result is exhibited
by the signs of being freed from käma (lust) and lobha (covetousness). That is
to say, one must be freed from the desires for sense satisfaction and avarice for
sense gratification. The balanced mode of nature is goodness. And to be
completely freed from all material tinges is to become free from the mode of
goodness also. To search the audience of God in a lonely forest is considered to
be in the mode of goodness. One can go out into the forest to attain spiritual
perfection, but that does not mean that one can see the Lord personally there.
One must be completely freed from all material attachment and be situated on
the plane of transcendence, which alone will help the devotee get in personal
touch with the Personality of Godhead. The best method is that one should
live at a place where the transcendental form of the Lord is worshiped. The
temple of the Lord is a transcendental place, whereas the forest is a materially
good habitation. A neophyte devotee is always recommended to worship the
Deity of the Lord (arcanä) rather than go into the forest to search out the
Lord. Devotional service begins from the process of arcanä, which is better
than going out in the forest. In his present life, which is completely freed from
all material hankerings, Çré Närada Muni does not go into the forest, although
he can turn every place into Vaikuëöha by his presence only. He travels from
one planet to another to convert men, gods, Kinnaras, Gandharvas, åñis, munis
and all others to become devotees of the Lord. By his activities he has engaged
many devotees like Prahläda Mahäräja, Dhruva Mahäräja and many others in
the transcendental service of the Lord. A pure devotee of the Lord, therefore,
follows in the footsteps of the great devotees like Närada and Prahläda and
engages his whole time in glorifying the Lord by the process of kértana. Such a
preaching process is transcendental to all material qualities.
TEXT 22
Sak*-Ûd( diXaRTa& æPaMaeTaTk-aMaaYa Tae_Naga )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
MaTk-aMa" XaNakE-" SaaDau SavaRNMauÄiTa ôC^YaaNa( )) 22 ))
sakåd yad darçitaà rüpam
etat kämäya te ’nagha
mat-kämaù çanakaiù sädhu
sarvän muïcati håc-chayän
SYNONYMS
sakåt—once only; yat—that; darçitam—shown; rüpam—form; etat—this is;
kämäya—for hankerings; te—your; anagha—O virtuous one; mat—Mine;
kämaù—desire; çanakaiù—by increasing; sädhuù—devotee; sarvän—all;
muïcati—gives away; håt-çayän—material desires.
TRANSLATION
O virtuous one, you have only once seen My person, and this is just to
increase your desire for Me, because the more you hanker for Me, the more you
will be freed from all material desires.
PURPORT
A living being cannot be vacant of desires. He is not a dead stone. He must
be working, thinking, feeling and willing. But when he thinks, feels and wills
materially, he becomes entangled, and conversely when he thinks, feels and
wills for the service of the Lord, he becomes gradually freed from all
entanglement. The more a person is engaged in the transcendental loving
service of the Lord, the more he acquires a hankering for it. That is the
transcendental nature of godly service. Material service has satiation, whereas
spiritual service of the Lord has neither satiation nor end. One can go on
increasing his hankerings for the loving transcendental service of the Lord,
and yet he will not find satiation or end. By intense service of the Lord, one
can experience the presence of the Lord transcendentally. Therefore seeing
the Lord means being engaged in His service because His service and His
person are identical. The sincere devotee should go on with sincere service of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the Lord. The Lord will give proper direction as to how and where it has to be
done. There was no material desire in Närada, and yet just to increase his
intense desire for the Lord, he was so advised.
TEXT 23
SaTSaevYaadqgaRYaaiPa JaaTaa MaiYa d*!a MaiTa" )
ihTvavÛiMaMa& l/aek&- GaNTaa MaÂNaTaaMaiSa )) 23 ))
sat-sevayädérghayäpi
jätä mayi dåòhä matiù
hitvävadyam imaà lokaà
gantä maj-janatäm asi
SYNONYMS
sat-sevayä—by service of the Absolute Truth; adérghayä—for some days;
api—even; jätä—having attained; mayi—unto Me; dåòhä—firm;
matiù—intelligence; hitvä—having given up; avadyam—deplorable;
imam—this; lokam—material worlds; gantä—going to; mat-janatäm—My
associates; asi—become.
TRANSLATION
By service of the Absolute Truth, even for a few days, a devotee attains firm
and fixed intelligence in Me. Consequently he goes on to become My associate
in the transcendental world after giving up the present deplorable material
worlds.
PURPORT
Serving the Absolute Truth means rendering service unto the Absolute
Personality of Godhead under the direction of the bona fide spiritual master,
who is a transparent via medium between the Lord and the neophyte devotee.
The neophyte devotee has no ability to approach the Absolute Personality of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Godhead by the strength of his present imperfect material senses, and
therefore under the direction of the spiritual master he is trained in
transcendental service of the Lord. And by such training, even for some days,
the neophyte devotee gets intelligence in such transcendental service, which
leads him ultimately to get free from perpetual inhabitation in the material
worlds and to be promoted to the transcendental world to become one of the
liberated associates of the Lord in the kingdom of God.
TEXT 24
MaiTaMaRiYa iNabÖeYa& Na ivPaÛeTa k-ihRicTa( )
Pa[JaaSaGaRiNaraeDae_iPa SMa*iTaê MadNauGa]haTa( )) 24 ))
matir mayi nibaddheyaà
na vipadyeta karhicit
prajä-sarga-nirodhe ’pi
småtiç ca mad-anugrahät
SYNONYMS
matiù—intelligence; mayi—devoted to Me; nibaddhä—engaged; iyam—this;
na—never; vipadyeta—separate; karhicit—at any time; prajä—living beings;
sarga—at the time of creation; nirodhe—also at the time of annihilation;
api—even; småtiù—remembrance; ca—and; mat—Mine; anugrahät—by the
mercy of.
TRANSLATION
Intelligence engaged in My devotion cannot be thwarted at any time. Even at
the time of creation, as well as at the time of annihilation, your remembrance
will continue by My mercy.
PURPORT
Devotional service rendered to the Personality of Godhead never goes in
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
vain. Since the Personality of Godhead is eternal, intelligence applied in His
service or anything done in His relation is also permanent. In the
Bhagavad-gétä it is said that such transcendental service rendered unto the
Personality of Godhead accumulates birth after birth, and when the devotee is
fully matured, the total service counted together makes him eligible to enter
into the association of the Personality of Godhead. Such accumulation of
God’s service is never vanquished, but increases till fully matured.
TEXT 25
WTaavdu¤-aeParraMa TaNMahd(
>aUTa& Na>aaeil/®Mail/®MaqìrMa( )
Ah& c TaSMaE MahTaa& MahqYaSae
XaqZ<aaRvNaaMa& ivdDae_Nauk-iMPaTa" )) 25 ))
etävad uktvopararäma tan mahad
bhütaà nabho-liìgam aliìgam éçvaram
ahaà ca tasmai mahatäà mahéyase
çérñëävanämaà vidadhe ’nukampitaù
SYNONYMS
etävat—thus; uktvä—spoken; upararäma—stopped; tat—that; mahat—great;
bhütam—wonderful; nabhaù-liìgam—personified by sound; aliìgam—unseen
by the eyes; éçvaram—the supreme authority; aham—I; ca—also; tasmai—unto
Him; mahatäm—the great; mahéyase—unto the glorified; çérñëä—by the head;
avanämam—obeisances; vidadhe—executed; anukampitaù—being favored by
Him.
TRANSLATION
Then that supreme authority, personified by sound and unseen by eyes, but
most wonderful, stopped speaking. Feeling a sense of gratitude, I offered my
obeisances unto Him, bowing my head.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
That the Personality of Godhead was not seen but only heard does not
make any difference. The Personality of Godhead produced the four Vedas by
His breathing, and He is seen and realized through the transcendental sound
of the Vedas. Similarly, the Bhagavad-gétä is the sound representation of the
Lord, and there is no difference in identity. The conclusion is that the Lord
can be seen and heard by persistent chanting of the transcendental sound.
TEXT 26
NaaMaaNYaNaNTaSYa hTa}aPa" Pa#=Na(
GauùaiNa >ad]ai<a k*-TaaiNa c SMarNa( )
Gaa& PaYaR$&=STauíMaNaa GaTaSPa*h"
k-al&/ Pa[Taq+aNa( ivMadae ivMaTSar" )) 26 ))
nämäny anantasya hata-trapaù paöhan
guhyäni bhadräëi kåtäni ca smaran
gäà paryaöaàs tuñöa-manä gata-spåhaù
kälaà pratékñan vimado vimatsaraù
SYNONYMS
nämäni—the holy name, fame, etc.; anantasya—of the unlimited;
hata-trapaù—being freed from all formalities of the material world;
paöhan—by recitation, repeated reading, etc.; guhyäni—mysterious;
bhadräëi—all benedictory; kåtäni—activities; ca—and; smaran—constantly
remembering; gäm—on the earth; paryaöan—traveling all through;
tuñöa-manäù—fully satisfied; gata-spåhaù—completely freed from all material
desires; kälam—time; pratékñan—awaiting; vimadaù—without being proud;
vimatsaraù—without being envious.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Thus I began chanting the holy name and fame of the Lord by repeated
recitation, ignoring all the formalities of the material world. Such chanting and
remembering of the transcendental pastimes of the Lord are benedictory. So
doing, I traveled all over the earth, fully satisfied, humble and unenvious.
PURPORT
The life of a sincere devotee of the Lord is thus explained in a nutshell by
Närada Muni by his personal example. Such a devotee, after his initiation by
the Lord or His bona fide representative, takes very seriously chanting of the
glories of the Lord and traveling all over the world so that others may also hear
the glories of the Lord. Such devotees have no desire for material gain. They
are conducted by one single desire: to go back to Godhead. This awaits them in
due course on quitting the material body. Because they have the highest aim of
life, going back to Godhead, they are never envious of anyone, nor are they
proud of being eligible to go back to Godhead. Their only business is to chant
and remember the holy name, fame and pastimes of the Lord and, according to
personal capacity, to distribute the message for others’ welfare without motive
of material gain.
TEXT 27
Wv& k*-Z<aMaTaeb]RøàaSa¢-SYaaMal/aTMaNa" )
k-al/" Pa[adur>aUTk-ale/ Tai@TSaaEdaMaNaq YaQaa )) 27 ))
evaà kåñëa-mater brahman
näsaktasyämalätmanaù
kälaù prädurabhüt käle
taòit saudämané yathä
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; kåñëa-mateù—one who is fully absorbed in thinking of Kåñëa;
brahman—O Vyäsadeva; na—not; äsaktasya—of one who is attached;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
amala-ätmanaù—of one who is completely free from all material dirt;
kälaù—death; prädurabhüt—become visible; käle—in the course of time;
taòit—lightning; saudämané—illuminating; yathä—as it is.
TRANSLATION
And so, O Brähmaëa Vyäsadeva, in due course of time I, who was fully
absorbed in thinking of Kåñëa and who therefore had no attachments, being
completely freed from all material taints, met with death, as lightning and
illumination occur simultaneously.
PURPORT
To be fully absorbed in the thought of Kåñëa means clearance of material
dirts or hankerings. As a very rich man has no hankerings for small petty
things, so also a devotee of Lord Kåñëa, who is guaranteed to pass on to the
kingdom of God, where life is eternal, fully cognizant and blissful, naturally
has no hankerings for petty material things, which are like dolls or shadows of
the reality and are without permanent value. That is the sign of spiritually
enriched persons. And in due course of time, when a pure devotee is
completely prepared, all of a sudden the change of body occurs which is
commonly called death. And for the pure devotee such a change takes place
exactly like lightning, and illumination follows simultaneously. That is to say a
devotee simultaneously changes his material body and develops a spiritual body
by the will of the Supreme. Even before death, a pure devotee has no material
affection, due to his body’s being spiritualized like a red-hot iron in contact
with fire.
TEXT 28
Pa[YauJYaMaaNae MaiYa Taa& éuÖa& >aaGavTaq& TaNauMa( )
AarBDak-MaRiNavaR<aae NYaPaTaTa( PaaÄ>aaEiTak-" )) 28 ))
prayujyamäne mayi täà
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
çuddhäà bhägavatéà tanum
ärabdha-karma-nirväëo
nyapatat päïca-bhautikaù
SYNONYMS
prayujyamäne—having been awarded; mayi—on me; täm—that;
çuddhäm—transcendental; bhägavatém—fit for associating with the
Personality of Godhead; tanum—body; ärabdha—acquired; karma—fruitive
work; nirväëaù—prohibitive; nyapatat—quit; päïca-bhautikaù—body made of
five material elements.
TRANSLATION
Having been awarded a transcendental body befitting an associate of the
Personality of Godhead, I quit the body made of five material elements, and
thus all acquired fruitive results of work [karma] stopped.
PURPORT
Informed by the Personality of Godhead that he would be awarded a
transcendental body befitting the Lord’s association, Närada got his spiritual
body as soon as he quitted his material body. This transcendental body is free
from material affinity and invested with three primary transcendental
qualities, namely eternity, freedom from material modes, and freedom from
reactions of fruitive activities. The material body is always afflicted with the
lack of these three qualities. A devotee’s body becomes at once surcharged
with the transcendental qualities as soon as he is engaged in the devotional
service of the Lord. It acts like the magnetic influence of a touchstone upon
iron. The influence of transcendental devotional service is like that. Therefore
change of the body means stoppage of the reaction of three qualitative modes
of material nature upon the pure devotee. There are many instances of this in
the revealed scriptures. Dhruva Mahäräja and Prahläda Mahäräja and many
other devotees were able to see the Personality of Godhead face to face
apparently in the same body. This means that the quality of a devotee’s body
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
changes from material to transcendence. That is the opinion of the authorized
Gosvämés via the authentic scriptures. In the Brahma-saàhitä it is said that
beginning from the indra-gopa germ up to the great Indra, King of heaven, all
living beings are subjected to the law of karma and are bound to suffer and
enjoy the fruitive results of their own work. Only the devotee is exempt from
such reactions, by the causeless mercy of the supreme authority, the
Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 29
k-LPaaNTa wdMaadaYa XaYaaNae_M>aSYaudNvTa" )
iXaXaiYazaerNauPa[a<a& ivivXae_NTarh& iv>aae" )) 29 ))
kalpänta idam ädäya
çayäne ’mbhasy udanvataù
çiçayiñor anupräëaà
viviçe ’ntar ahaà vibhoù
SYNONYMS
kalpa-ante—at the end of Brahmä’s day; idam—this; ädäya—taking together;
çayäne—having gone to lie down; ambhasi—in the causal water;
udanvataù—devastation; çiçayiñoù—lying of the Personality of Godhead
(Näräyaëa); anupräëam—breathing; viviçe—entered into; antaù—within;
aham—I; vibhoù—of Lord Brahmä.
TRANSLATION
At the end of the millennium, when the Personality of Godhead Lord
Näräyaëa lay down within the water of devastation, Brahmä began to enter into
Him along with all creative elements, and I also entered through His breathing.
PURPORT
Närada is known as the son of Brahmä, as Lord Kåñëa is known as the son
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
of Vasudeva. The Personality of Godhead and His liberated devotees like
Närada appear in the material world by the same process. As it is said in the
Bhagavad-gétä, the birth and activities of the Lord are all transcendental.
Therefore, according to authorized opinion, the birth of Närada as the son of
Brahmä is also a transcendental pastime. His appearance and disappearance
are practically on the same level as that of the Lord. The Lord and His
devotees are therefore simultaneously one and different as spiritual entities.
They belong to the same category of transcendence.
TEXT 30
SahóYauGaPaYaRNTae oTQaaYaed& iSaSa*+aTa" )
MarqiciMaé[a ‰zYa" Pa[a<ae>Yaae_h& c Jaijre )) 30 ))
sahasra-yuga-paryante
utthäyedaà sisåkñataù
maréci-miçrä åñayaù
präëebhyo ’haà ca jajïire
SYNONYMS
sahasra—one thousand; yuga—4,300,000 years; paryante—at the end of the
duration; utthäya—having expired; idam—this; sisåkñataù—desired to create
again; maréci-miçräù—åñis like Maréci; åñayaù—all the åñis; präëebhyaù—out of
His senses; aham—I; ca—also; jajïire—appeared.
TRANSLATION
After 4,300,000,000 solar years, when Brahmä awoke to create again by the
will of the Lord, all the åñis like Maréci, Aìgirä, Atri and so on were created
from the transcendental body of the Lord, and I also appeared along with them.
PURPORT
The duration of a day in the life of Brahmä is 4,320,000,000 solar years.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
This is stated also in the Bhagavad-gétä. So for this period Brahmäjé rests in
yoga-nidrä within the body of the Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, the generator of
Brahmä. Thus after the sleeping period of Brahmä, when there is again
creation by the will of the Lord through the agency of Brahmä, all the great
åñis again appear from different parts of the transcendental body, and Närada
also appears. This means that Närada appears in the same transcendental body,
just as a man awakes from sleep in the same body. Çré Närada is eternally free
to move in all parts of the transcendental and material creations of the
Almighty. He appears and disappears in his own transcendental body, which is
without distinction of body and soul, unlike conditioned beings.
TEXT 31
ANTabRihê l/aek-a&ñqNa( PaYaeRMYaSk-iNdTav]Ta" )
ANauGa]haNMahaivZ<aaerivgaaTaGaiTa" KvicTa( )) 31 ))
antar bahiç ca lokäàs trén
paryemy askandita-vrataù
anugrahän mahä-viñëor
avighäta-gatiù kvacit
SYNONYMS
antaù—in the transcendental world; bahiù—in the material world; ca—and;
lokän—planets; trén—three (divisions); paryemi—travel;
askandita—unbroken; vrataù—vow; anugrahät—by the causeless mercy;
mahä-viñëoù—of the Mahä-Viñëu (Käraëodakaçäyé Viñëu); avighäta—without
restriction; gatiù—entrance; kvacit—at any time.
TRANSLATION
Since then, by the grace of the almighty Viñëu, I travel everywhere without
restriction both in the transcendental world and in the three divisions of the
material world. This is because I am fixed in unbroken devotional service of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Lord.
PURPORT
As stated in the Bhagavad-gétä, there are three divisions of the material
spheres, namely the ürdhva-loka (topmost planets), madhya-loka (midway
planets) and adho-loka (downward planets). Beyond the ürdhva-loka planets,
that is to say above the Brahmaloka, are the material coverings of the
universes, and above that is the spiritual sky, which is unlimited in expansion,
containing unlimited self-illuminated Vaikuëöha planets inhabited by God
Himself along with His associates, who are all eternally liberated living
entities. Çré Närada Muni could enter all these planets in both the material
and spiritual spheres without restriction, as much as the almighty Lord is free
to move personally in any part of His creation. In the material world the living
beings are influenced by the three material modes of nature, namely goodness,
passion and ignorance. But Çré Närada Muni is transcendental to all these
material modes, and thus he can travel everywhere unrestricted. He is a
liberated spaceman. The causeless mercy of Lord Viñëu is unparalleled, and
such mercy is perceived by the devotees only by the grace of the Lord.
Therefore, the devotees never fall down, but the materialists, i.e., the fruitive
workers and the speculative philosophers, do fall down, being forced by their
respective modes of nature. The åñis, as above mentioned, cannot enter into
the transcendental world like Närada. This fact is disclosed in the Narasiàha
Puräëa. Åñis like Maréci are authorities in fruitive work, and åñis like Sanaka
and Sanätana are authorities in philosophical speculations. But Çré Närada
Muni is the prime authority for transcendental devotional service of the Lord.
All the great authorities in the devotional service of the Lord follow in the
footsteps of Närada Muni in the order of the Närada-bhakti-sütra, and
therefore all the devotees of the Lord are unhesitatingly qualified to enter into
the kingdom of God, Vaikuëöha.
TEXT 32
devdtaaiMaMaa& vq<aa& Svrb]øiv>aUizTaaMa( )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
MaUC^RiYaTva hirk-Qaa& GaaYaMaaNaêraMYahMa( )) 32 ))
deva-dattäm imäà véëäà
svara-brahma-vibhüñitäm
mürcchayitvä hari-kathäà
gäyamänaç carämy aham
SYNONYMS
deva—the Supreme Personality of Godhead (Çré Kåñëa); dattäm—gifted by;
imäm—this; véëäm—a musical stringed instrument; svara—singing meter;
brahma—transcendental; vibhüñitäm—decorated with;
mürcchayitvä—vibrating; hari-kathäm—transcendental message;
gäyamänaù—singing constantly; carämi—do move; aham—I.
TRANSLATION
And thus I travel, constantly singing the transcendental message of the
glories of the Lord, vibrating this instrument called a véëä, which is charged
with transcendental sound and which was given to me by Lord Kåñëa.
PURPORT
The musical stringed instrument called the véëä, which was handed to
Närada by Lord Çré Kåñëa, is described in the Liìga Puräëa, and this is
confirmed by Çréla Jéva Gosvämé. This transcendental instrument is identical
with Lord Çré Kåñëa and Närada because all of them are of the same
transcendental category. Sound vibrated by the instrument cannot be
material, and therefore the glories and pastimes which are broadcast by the
instrument of Närada are also transcendental, without a tinge of material
inebriety. The seven singing meters, namely ña (ñaòja), å (åñabha), gä
(gändhära), ma (madhyama), pa (païcama), dha (dhaivata) and ni (niñäda), are
also transcendental and specifically meant for transcendental songs. As a pure
devotee of the Lord, Çré Näradadeva is always fulfilling his obligation to the
Lord for His gift of the instrument, and thus he is always engaged in singing
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
His transcendental glories and is therefore infallible in his exalted position.
Following in the footsteps of Çréla Närada Muni, a self-realized soul in the
material world should also properly use the sound meters, namely ña, å, gä, mä,
etc., in the service of the Lord by constantly singing the glories of the Lord, as
confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä.
TEXT 33
Pa[GaaYaTa" SvvqYaaRi<a TaqQaRPaad" iPa[Yaé[va" )
AahUTa wv Mae Xaqga]& dXaRNa& YaaiTa ceTaiSa )) 33 ))
pragäyataù sva-véryäëi
tértha-pädaù priya-çraväù
ähüta iva me çéghraà
darçanaà yäti cetasi
SYNONYMS
pragäyataù—thus singing; sva-véryäëi—own activities; tértha-pädaù—the Lord,
whose lotus feet are the source of all virtues or holiness; priya-çraväù—pleasing
to hear; ähütaù—called for; iva—just like; me—to me; çéghram—very soon;
darçanam—sight; yäti—appears; cetasi—on the seat of the heart.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa, whose glories and activities are pleasing to
hear, at once appears on the seat of my heart, as if called for, as soon as I begin
to chant His holy activities.
PURPORT
The Absolute Personality of Godhead is not different from His
transcendental name, form, pastimes and the sound vibrations thereof. As
soon as a pure devotee engages himself in the pure devotional service of
hearing, chanting and remembering the name, fame and activities of the Lord,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
at once He becomes visible to the transcendental eyes of the pure devotee by
reflecting Himself on the mirror of the heart by spiritual television. Therefore
a pure devotee who is related with the Lord in loving transcendental service
can experience the presence of the Lord at every moment. It is a natural
psychology in every individual case that a person likes to hear and enjoy his
personal glories enumerated by others. That is a natural instinct, and the Lord,
being also an individual personality like others, is not an exception to this
psychology because psychological characteristics visible in the individual souls
are but reflections of the same psychology in the Absolute Lord. The only
difference is that the Lord is the greatest personality of all and absolute in all
His affairs. If, therefore, the Lord is attracted by the pure devotee’s chanting of
His glories, there is nothing astonishing. Since He is absolute, He can appear
Himself in the picture of His glorification, the two things being identical. Çréla
Närada chants the glorification of the Lord not for his personal benefit but
because the glorifications are identical with the Lord. Närada Muni penetrates
into the presence of the Lord by the transcendental chanting.
TEXT 34
WTaÖyaTaurictaaNaa& Maa}aaSPaXaeRC^Yaa Mauhu" )
>aviSaNDauâvae d*íae hircYaaRNauv<aRNaMa( )) 34 ))
etad dhy ätura-cittänäà
mäträ-sparçecchayä muhuù
bhava-sindhu-plavo dåñöo
hari-caryänuvarëanam
SYNONYMS
etat—this; hi—certainly; ätura-cittänäm—of those whose minds are always full
of cares and anxieties; mäträ—objects of sense enjoyment; sparça—senses;
icchayä—by desires; muhuù—always; bhava-sindhu—the ocean of nescience;
plavaù—boat; dåñöaù—experienced; hari-carya—activities of Hari, the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Personality of Godhead; anuvarëanam—constant recitation.
TRANSLATION
It is personally experienced by me that those who are always full of cares and
anxieties due to desiring contact of the senses with their objects can cross the
ocean of nescience on a most suitable boat—the constant chanting of the
transcendental activities of the Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
The symptom of a living being is that he cannot remain silent even for
some time. He must be doing something, thinking of something or talking
about something. Generally the materialistic men think and discuss about
subjects which satisfy their senses. But as these things are exercised under the
influence of the external, illusory energy, such sensual activities do not
actually give them any satisfaction. On the contrary, they become full with
cares and anxieties. This is called mäyä, or what is not. That which cannot
give them satisfaction is accepted as an object for satisfaction. So Närada
Muni, by his personal experience, says that satisfaction for such frustrated
beings engaged in sense gratification is to chant always the activities of the
Lord. The point is that the subject matter only should be changed. No one can
check the thinking activities of a living being, nor the feeling, willing or
working processes. But if one wants actual happiness, one must change the
subject matter only. Instead of talking of the politics of a dying man, one might
discuss the politics administered by the Lord Himself. Instead of relishing
activities of the cinema artists, one can turn his attention to the activities of
the Lord with His eternal associates like the gopés and Lakñmés. The almighty
Personality of Godhead, by His causeless mercy, descends on the earth and
manifests activities almost on the line of the worldly men, but at the same time
extraordinarily, because He is almighty. He does so for the benefit of all
conditioned souls so that they can turn their attention to transcendence. By
doing so, the conditioned soul will gradually be promoted to the
transcendental position and easily cross the ocean of nescience, the source of
all miseries. This is stated from personal experience by such an authority as Çré
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Närada Muni. And we can have the same experience also if we begin to follow
in the footsteps of the great sage, the dearmost devotee of the Lord.
TEXT 35
YaMaaidi>aYaaeRGaPaQaE" k-aMal/ae>ahTaae Mauhu" )
Mauku-NdSaevYaa YaÜtaQaaTMaaÖa Na XaaMYaiTa )) 35 ))
yamädibhir yoga-pathaiù
käma-lobha-hato muhuù
mukunda-sevayä yadvat
tathätmäddhä na çämyati
SYNONYMS
yama-ädibhiù—by the process of practicing self-restraint; yoga-pathaiù—by the
system of yoga (mystic bodily power to attain the godly stage); käma—desires
for sense satisfaction; lobha—lust for satisfaction of the senses; hataù—curbed;
muhuù—always; mukunda—the Personality of Godhead; sevayä—by the
service of; yadvat—as it is; tathä—like that; ätmä—the soul; addhä—for all
practical purposes; na—does not; çämyati—be satisfied.
TRANSLATION
It is true that by practicing restraint of the senses by the yoga system one
can get relief from the disturbances of desire and lust, but this is not sufficient
to give satisfaction to the soul, for this [satisfaction] is derived from devotional
service to the Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
Yoga aims at controlling the senses. By practice of the mystic process of
bodily exercise in sitting, thinking, feeling, willing, concentrating, meditating
and at last being merged into transcendence, one can control the senses. The
senses are considered like venomous serpents, and the yoga system is just to
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
control them. On the other hand, Närada Muni recommends another method
for controlling the senses in the transcendental loving service of Mukunda,
the Personality of Godhead. By his experience he says that devotional service
to the Lord is more effective and practical than the system of artificially
controlling the senses. In the service of the Lord Mukunda, the senses are
transcendentally engaged. Thus there is no chance of their being engaged in
sense satisfaction. The senses want some engagement. To check them
artificially is no check at all because as soon as there is some opportunity for
enjoyment, the serpentlike senses will certainly take advantage of it. There are
many such instances in history, just like Viçvämitra Muni’s falling a victim to
the beauty of Menakä. But Öhäkura Haridäsa was allured at midnight by the
well-dressed Mäyä, and still she could not induce that great devotee into her
trap.
The whole idea is that without devotional service of the Lord, neither the
yoga system nor dry philosophical speculation can ever become successful. Pure
devotional service of the Lord, without being tinged with fruitive work, mystic
yoga or speculative philosophy, is the foremost procedure to attain
self-realization. Such pure devotional service is transcendental in nature, and
the systems of yoga and jïäna are subordinate to such a process. When the
transcendental devotional service is mixed with a subordinate process, it is no
longer transcendental but is called mixed devotional service. Çréla Vyäsadeva,
the author of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, will gradually develop all these different
systems of transcendental realization in the text.
TEXT 36
Sav| TaiddMaa:YaaTa& YaTPa*íae_h& TvYaaNaga )
JaNMak-MaRrhSYa& Mae >avTaêaTMaTaaez<aMa( )) 36 ))
sarvaà tad idam äkhyätaà
yat påñöo ’haà tvayänagha
janma-karma-rahasyaà me
bhavataç cätma-toñaëam
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
sarvam—all; tat—that; idam—this; äkhyätam—described; yat—whatever;
påñöaù—asked by; aham—me; tvayä—by you; anagha—without any sins;
janma—birth; karma—activities; rahasyam—mysteries; me—mine;
bhavataù—your; ca—and; ätma—self; toñaëam—satisfaction.
TRANSLATION
O Vyäsadeva, you are freed from all sins. Thus I have explained my birth
and activities for self-realization, as you asked. All this will be conducive for
your personal satisfaction also.
PURPORT
The process of devotional activities from the beginning to the stage of
transcendence is all duly explained to satisfy the inquiries of Vyäsadeva. He
has explained how the seeds of devotional service were sown by transcendental
association and how they gradually developed by hearing the sages. The result
of such hearing is detachment from worldliness, so much so that even a small
boy could receive the death news of his mother, who was his only caretaker, as
the blessing of God. And at once he took the opportunity to search out the
Lord. A sincere urge for having an interview with the Lord was also granted to
him, although it is not possible for anyone to see the Lord with mundane eyes.
He also explained how by execution of pure transcendental service one can get
rid of the fruitive action of accumulated work and how he transformed his
material body into a spiritual one. The spiritual body is alone able to enter into
the spiritual realm of the Lord, and no one but a pure devotee is eligible to
enter into the kingdom of God. All the mysteries of transcendental realization
are duly experienced by Närada Muni himself, and therefore by hearing such
an authority one can have some idea of the results of devotional life, which are
hardly delineated even in the original texts of the Vedas. In the Vedas and
Upaniñads there are only indirect hints to all this. Nothing is directly
explained there, and therefore Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the mature fruit of all
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the Vedic trees of literatures.
TEXT 37
SaUTa ovac
Wv& SaM>aaZYa >aGavaàardae vaSavqSauTaMa( )
AaMaN}Ya vq<aa& r<aYaNa( YaYaaE Yaad*iC^k-ae MauiNa" )) 37 ))
süta uväca
evaà sambhäñya bhagavän
närado väsavé-sutam
ämantrya véëäà raëayan
yayau yädåcchiko muniù
SYNONYMS
sütaù—Süta Gosvämé; uväca—said; evam—thus; sambhäñya—addressing;
bhagavän—transcendentally powerful; näradaù—Närada Muni;
väsavé—named Väsavé (Satyavaté); sutam—son; ämantrya—inviting;
véëäm—instrument; raëayan—vibrating; yayau—went;
yädåcchikaù—wherever willing; muniù—the sage.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: Thus addressing Vyäsadeva, Çréla Närada Muni took
leave of him, and vibrating on his véëä instrument, he left to wander at his free
will.
PURPORT
Every living being is anxious for full freedom because that is his
transcendental nature. And this freedom is obtained only through the
transcendental service of the Lord. Illusioned by the external energy, everyone
thinks that he is free, but actually he is bound up by the laws of nature. A
conditioned soul cannot freely move from one place to another even on this
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
earth, and what to speak of one planet to another. But a full-fledged free soul
like Närada, always engaged in chanting the Lord’s glory, is free to move not
only on earth but also in any part of the universe, as well as in any part of the
spiritual sky. We can just imagine the extent and unlimitedness of his freedom,
which is as good as that of the Supreme Lord. There is no reason or obligation
for his traveling, and no one can stop him from his free movement. Similarly,
the transcendental system of devotional service is also free. It may or may not
develop in a particular person even after he undergoes all the detailed
formulas. Similarly, the association of the devotee is also free. One may be
fortunate to have it, or one may not have it even after thousands of endeavors.
Therefore, in all spheres of devotional service, freedom is the main pivot.
Without freedom there is no execution of devotional service. The freedom
surrendered to the Lord does not mean that the devotee becomes dependent in
every respect. To surrender unto the Lord through the transparent medium of
the spiritual master is to attain complete freedom of life.
TEXT 38
Ahae devizRDaRNYaae_Ya& YaTk-IiTa| Xaa®RDaNvNa" )
GaaYaNMaaÛiàd& TaN}Yaa rMaYaTYaaTaur& JaGaTa( )) 38 ))
aho devarñir dhanyo ’yaà
yat-kértià çärìgadhanvanaù
gäyan mädyann idaà tantryä
ramayaty äturaà jagat
SYNONYMS
aho—all glory to; devarñiù—the sage of the gods; dhanyaù—all success; ayam
yat—one who; kértim—glories; çärìga-dhanvanaù—of the Personality of
Godhead; gäyan—singing; mädyan—taking pleasure in; idam—this;
tantryä—by means of the instrument; ramayati—enlivens; äturam—distressed;
jagat—world.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
All glory and success to Çréla Närada Muni because he glorifies the activities
of the Personality of Godhead, and so doing he himself takes pleasure and also
enlivens all the distressed souls of the universe.
PURPORT
Çré Närada Muni plays on his instrument to glorify the transcendental
activities of the Lord and to give relief to all miserable living entities of the
universe. No one is happy here within the universe, and what is felt as
happiness is mäyä’s illusion. The illusory energy of the Lord is so strong that
even the hog who lives on filthy stool feels happy. No one can be truly happy
within the material world. Çréla Närada Muni, in order to enlighten the
miserable inhabitants, wanders everywhere. His mission is to get them back
home, back to Godhead. That is the mission of all genuine devotees of the
Lord following the footsteps of that great sage.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the First Canto, Sixth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled “Conversation Between Närada and Vyäsa.”
Chapter Seven
The Son of Droëa Punished
TEXT 1
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
XaaENak- ovac
iNaGaRTae Naarde SaUTa >aGavaNa( badraYa<a" )
é[uTava&STadi>aPa[eTa& TaTa" ik-Mak-raeiÜ>au" )) 1 ))
çaunaka uväca
nirgate närade süta
bhagavän bädaräyaëaù
çrutaväàs tad-abhipretaà
tataù kim akarod vibhuù
SYNONYMS
çaunakaù—Çré Çaunaka; uväca—said; nirgate—having gone; närade—Närada
Muni; süta—O Süta; bhagavän—the transcendentally powerful;
bädaräyaëaù—Vedavyäsa; çrutavän—who heard; tat—his; abhipretam—desire
of the mind; tataù—thereafter; kim—what; akarot—did he do; vibhuù—the
great.
TRANSLATION
Åñi Çaunaka asked: O Süta, the great and transcendentally powerful
Vyäsadeva heard everything from Çré Närada Muni. So after Närada’s
departure, what did Vyäsadeva do?
PURPORT
In this chapter the clue for describing Çrémad-Bhägavatam is picked up as
Mahäräja Parékñit is miraculously saved in the womb of his mother. This was
caused by Drauëi (Açvatthämä), Äcärya Droëa’s son, who killed the five sons
of Draupadé while they were asleep, for which he was punished by Arjuna.
Before commencing the great epic Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Çré Vyäsadeva realized
the whole truth by trance in devotion.
TEXT 2
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SaUTa ovac
b]øNaÛa& SarSvTYaaMaaé[Ma" PaiêMae Ta$e= )
XaMYaaPa[aSa wiTa Pa[ae¢- ‰zq<aa& Sa}avDaRNa" )) 2 ))
süta uväca
brahma-nadyäà sarasvatyäm
äçramaù paçcime taöe
çamyäpräsa iti prokta
åñéëäà satra-vardhanaù
SYNONYMS
sütaù—Çré Süta; uväca—said; brahma-nadyäm—on the bank of the river
intimately related with Vedas, brähmaëas, saints, and the Lord;
sarasvatyäm—Sarasvaté; äçramaù—cottage for meditation; paçcime—on the
west; taöe—bank; çamyäpräsaù—the place named Çamyäpräsa; iti—thus;
proktaù—said to be; åñéëäm—of the sages; satra-vardhanaù—that which
enlivens activities.
TRANSLATION
Çré Süta said: On the western bank of the River Sarasvaté, which is
intimately related with the Vedas, there is a cottage for meditation at
Çamyäpräsa which enlivens the transcendental activities of the sages.
PURPORT
For spiritual advancement of knowledge a suitable place and atmosphere
are definitely required. The place on the western bank of the Sarasvaté is
especially suitable for this purpose. And there is the äçrama of Vyäsadeva at
Çamyäpräsa. Çréla Vyäsadeva was a householder, yet his residential place is
called an äçrama. An äçrama is a place where spiritual culture is always
foremost. It does not matter whether the place belongs to a householder or a
mendicant. The whole varëäçrama system is so designed that each and every
status of life is called an äçrama. This means that spiritual culture is the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
common factor for all. The brahmacärés, the gåhasthas, the vänaprasthas and
the sannyäsés all belong to the same mission of life, namely, realization of the
Supreme. Therefore none of them are less important as far as spiritual culture
is concerned. The difference is a matter of formality on the strength of
renunciation. The sannyäsés are held in high estimation on the strength of
practical renunciation.
TEXT 3
TaiSMaNa( Sv Aaé[Mae VYaaSaae bdrqz<@Mai<@Tae )
AaSaqNaae_Pa oPaSPa*XYa Pa[i<adDYaaE MaNa" SvYaMa( )) 3 ))
tasmin sva äçrame vyäso
badaré-ñaëòa-maëòite
äséno ’pa upaspåçya
praëidadhyau manaù svayam
SYNONYMS
tasmin—in that (äçrama); sve—own; äçrame—in the cottage;
vyäsaù—Vyäsadeva; badaré—berry; ñaëòa—trees; maëòite—surrounded by;
äsénaù—sitting; apaù upaspåçya—touching water;
praëidadhyau—concentrated; manaù—the mind; svayam—himself.
TRANSLATION
In that place, Çréla Vyäsadeva, in his own äçrama, which was surrounded by
berry trees, sat down to meditate after touching water for purification.
PURPORT
Under instructions of his spiritual master Çréla Närada Muni, Vyäsadeva
concentrated his mind in that transcendental place of meditation.
TEXT 4
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
>ai¢-YaaeGaeNa MaNaiSa SaMYak(- Pa[i<aihTae_Male/ )
APaXYaTPauåz& PaU<a| MaaYaa& c TadPaaé[YaMa( )) 4 ))
bhakti-yogena manasi
samyak praëihite ’male
apaçyat puruñaà pürëaà
mäyäà ca tad-apäçrayam
SYNONYMS
bhakti—devotional service; yogena—by the process of linking up;
manasi—upon the mind; samyak—perfectly; praëihite—engaged in and fixed
upon; amale—without any matter; apaçyat—saw; puruñam—the Personality of
Godhead; pürëam—absolute; mäyäm—energy; ca—also; tat—His;
apäçrayam—under full control.
TRANSLATION
Thus he fixed his mind, perfectly engaging it by linking it in devotional
service [bhakti-yoga] without any tinge of materialism, and thus he saw the
Absolute Personality of Godhead along with His external energy, which was
under full control.
PURPORT
Perfect vision of the Absolute Truth is possible only by the linking process
of devotional service. This is also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä. One can
perfectly realize the Absolute Truth Personality of Godhead only by the
process of devotional service, and one can enter into the kingdom of God by
such perfect knowledge. Imperfect realization of the Absolute by the partial
approach of the impersonal Brahman or localized Paramätmä does not permit
anyone to enter into the kingdom of God. Çré Närada advised Çréla Vyäsadeva
to become absorbed in transcendental meditation on the Personality of
Godhead and His activities. Çréla Vyäsadeva did not take notice of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
effulgence of Brahman because that is not absolute vision. The absolute vision
is the Personality of Godhead, as it is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä (7.19):
väsudevaù sarvam iti. In the Upaniñads also it is confirmed that Väsudeva, the
Personality of Godhead, is covered by the golden glowing hiraëmayena pätreëa
veil of impersonal Brahman, and when that curtain is removed by the mercy of
the Lord the real face of the Absolute is seen. The Absolute is mentioned here
as the puruña, or person. The Absolute Personality of Godhead is mentioned in
so many Vedic literatures, and in the Bhagavad-gétä, the puruña is confirmed as
the eternal and original person. The Absolute Personality of Godhead is the
perfect person. The Supreme Person has manifold energies, out of which the
internal, external and marginal energies are specifically important. The energy
mentioned here is the external energy, as will be clear from the statements of
her activities. The internal energy is there along with the Absolute Person as
the moonlight is there with the moon. The external energy is compared to
darkness because it keeps the living entities in the darkness of ignorance. The
word apäçrayam suggests that this energy of the Lord is under full control. The
internal potency or superior energy is also called mäyä, but it is spiritual mäyä,
or energy exhibited in the absolute realm. When one is under the shelter of
this internal potency, the darkness of material ignorance is at once dissipated.
And even those who are ätmäräma, or fixed in trance, take shelter of this
mäyä, or internal energy. Devotional service, or bhakti-yoga, is the function of
the internal energy; thus there is no place for the inferior energy, or material
energy, just as there is no place for darkness in the effulgence of spiritual light.
Such internal energy is even superior to the spiritual bliss attainable in the
conception of impersonal Brahman. It is stated in the Bhagavad-gétä that the
impersonal Brahman effulgence is also an emanation from the Absolute
Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa. The parama-puruña cannot be anyone
except Çré Kåñëa Himself, as will be explained in the later çlokas.
TEXT 5
YaYaa SaMMaaeihTaae Jaqv AaTMaaNa& i}aGau<aaTMak-Ma( )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Parae_iPa MaNauTae_NaQa| TaTk*-Ta& cai>aPaÛTae )) 5 ))
yayä sammohito jéva
ätmänaà tri-guëätmakam
paro ’pi manute ’narthaà
tat-kåtaà cäbhipadyate
SYNONYMS
yayä—by whom; sammohitaù—illusioned; jévaù—the living entities;
ätmänam—self; tri-guëa-ätmakam—conditioned by the three modes of nature,
or a product of matter; paraù—transcendental; api—in spite of;
manute—takes it for granted; anartham—things not wanted; tat—by that;
kåtam ca—reaction; abhipadyate—undergoes thereof.
TRANSLATION
Due to this external energy, the living entity, although transcendental to the
three modes of material nature, thinks of himself as a material product and thus
undergoes the reactions of material miseries.
PURPORT
The root cause of suffering by the materialistic living beings is pointed out
with remedial measures which are to be undertaken and also the ultimate
perfection to be gained. All this is mentioned in this particular verse. The
living being is by constitution transcendental to material encagement, but he
is now imprisoned by the external energy, and therefore he thinks himself one
of the material products. And due to this unholy contact, the pure spiritual
entity suffers material miseries under the modes of material nature. The living
entity misunderstands himself to be a material product. This means that the
present perverted way of thinking, feeling and willing, under material
conditions, is not natural for him. But he has his normal way of thinking,
feeling and willing. The living being in his original state is not without
thinking, willing and feeling power. It is also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
that the actual knowledge of the conditioned soul is now covered by nescience.
Thus the theory that a living being is absolute impersonal Brahman is refuted
herein. This cannot be, because the living entity has his own way of thinking
in his original unconditional state also. The present conditional state is due to
the influence of the external energy, which means that the illusory energy
takes the initiative while the Supreme Lord is aloof. The Lord does not desire
that a living being be illusioned by external energy. The external energy is
aware of this fact, but still she accepts a thankless task of keeping the forgotten
soul under illusion by her bewildering influence. The Lord does not interfere
with the task of the illusory energy because such performances of the illusory
energy are also necessary for reformation of the conditioned soul. An
affectionate father does not like his children to be chastised by another agent,
yet he puts his disobedient children under the custody of a severe man just to
bring them to order. But the all-affectionate Almighty Father at the same time
desires relief for the conditioned soul, relief from the clutches of the illusory
energy. The king puts the disobedient citizens within the walls of the jail, but
sometimes the king, desiring the prisoners’ relief, personally goes there and
pleads for reformation, and on his doing so the prisoners are set free. Similarly,
the Supreme Lord descends from His kingdom upon the kingdom of illusory
energy and personally gives relief in the form of the Bhagavad-gétä, wherein He
personally suggests that although the ways of illusory energy are very stiff to
overcome, one who surrenders unto the lotus feet of the Lord is set free by the
order of the Supreme. This surrendering process is the remedial measure for
getting relief from the bewildering ways of the illusory energy. The
surrendering process is completed by the influence of association. The Lord
has suggested, therefore, that by the influence of the speeches of saintly
persons who have actually realized the Supreme, men are engaged in His
transcendental loving service. The conditioned soul gets a taste for hearing
about the Lord, and by such hearing only he is gradually elevated to the
platform of respect, devotion and attachment for the Lord. The whole thing is
completed by the surrendering process. Herein also the same suggestion is
made by the Lord in His incarnation of Vyäsadeva. This means that the
conditioned souls are being reclaimed by the Lord both ways, namely by the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
process of punishment by the external energy of the Lord, and by Himself as
the spiritual master within and without. Within the heart of every living being
the Lord Himself as the Supersoul (Paramätmä) becomes the spiritual master,
and from without He becomes the spiritual master in the shape of scriptures,
saints and the initiator spiritual master. This is still more explicitly explained
in the next çloka.
Personal superintendence of the illusory energy is confirmed in the Vedas
(the Kena Upaniñad) in relation to the demigods’ controlling power. Herein
also it is clearly stated that the living entity is controlled by the external
energy in a personal capacity. The living being thus subject to the control of
external energy is differently situated. It is clear, however, from the present
statement of Bhägavatam that the same external energy is situated in the
inferior position before the Personality of Godhead, or the perfect being. The
perfect being, or the Lord, cannot be approached even by the illusory energy,
who can only work on the living entities. Therefore it is sheer imagination
that the Supreme Lord is illusioned by the illusory energy and thus becomes a
living being. If the living being and the Lord were in the same category, then it
would have been quite possible for Vyäsadeva to see it, and there would have
been no question of material distress on the part of the illusioned being, for
the Supreme Being is fully cognizant. So there are so many unscrupulous
imaginations on the part of the monists to endeavor to put both the Lord and
the living being in the same category. Had the Lord and the living beings been
the same, then Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé would not have taken the trouble to
describe the transcendental pastimes of the Lord, for they would all be
manifestations of illusory energy.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the summum bonum remedy for suffering humanity
in the clutches of mäyä. Çréla Vyäsadeva therefore first of all diagnosed the
actual disease of the conditioned souls, i.e., their being illusioned by the
external energy. He also saw the perfect Supreme Being, from whom illusory
energy is far removed, though He saw both the diseased conditioned souls and
also the cause of the disease. And the remedial measures are suggested in the
next verse. Both the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the living beings are
undoubtedly qualitatively one, but the Lord is the controller of the illusory
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
energy, whereas the living entity is controlled by the illusory energy. Thus the
Lord and the living beings are simultaneously one and different. Another
point is distinct herein: that eternal relation between the Lord and the living
being is transcendental, otherwise the Lord would not have taken the trouble
to reclaim the conditioned souls from the clutches of mäyä. In the same way,
the living entity is also required to revive his natural love and affection for the
Lord, and that is the highest perfection of the living entity.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam treats the conditioned soul with an aim to that goal of life.
TEXT 6
ANaQaaeRPaXaMa& Saa+aaÙi¢-YaaeGaMaDaae+aJae )
l/aek-SYaaJaaNaTaae ivÜa&ê§e- SaaTvTaSa&ihTaaMa( )) 6 ))
anarthopaçamaà säkñäd
bhakti-yogam adhokñaje
lokasyäjänato vidväàç
cakre sätvata-saàhitäm
SYNONYMS
anartha—things which are superfluous; upaçamam—mitigation;
säkñät—directly; bhakti-yogam—the linking process of devotional service;
adhokñaje—unto the Transcendence; lokasya—of the general mass of men;
ajänataù—those who are unaware of; vidvän—the supremely learned;
cakre—compiled; sätvata—in relation with the Supreme Truth;
saàhitäm—Vedic literature.
TRANSLATION
The material miseries of the living entity, which are superfluous to him, can
be directly mitigated by the linking process of devotional service. But the mass
of people do not know this, and therefore the learned Vyäsadeva compiled this
Vedic literature, which is in relation to the Supreme Truth.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
Çréla Vyäsadeva saw the all-perfect Personality of Godhead. This statement
suggests that the complete unit of the Personality of Godhead includes His
parts and parcels also. He saw, therefore, His different energies, namely the
internal energy, the marginal energy and the external energy. He also saw His
different plenary portions and parts of the plenary portions, namely His
different incarnations also, and he specifically observed the unwanted miseries
of the conditioned souls, who are bewildered by the external energy. And at
last he saw the remedial measure for the conditioned souls, namely, the process
of devotional service. It is a great transcendental science and begins with the
process of hearing and chanting the name, fame, glory, etc., of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Revival of the dormant affection or love of Godhead
does not depend on the mechanical system of hearing and chanting, but it
solely and wholly depends on the causeless mercy of the Lord. When the Lord
is fully satisfied with the sincere efforts of the devotee, He may endow him
with His loving transcendental service. But even with the prescribed forms of
hearing and chanting, there is at once mitigation of the superfluous and
unwanted miseries of material existence. Such mitigation of material affection
does not wait for development of transcendental knowledge. Rather,
knowledge is dependent on devotional service for the ultimate realization of
the Supreme Truth.
TEXT 7
YaSYaa& vE é[UYaMaa<aaYaa& k*-Z<ae ParMaPaUåze )
>ai¢-åTPaÛTae Pau&Sa" Xaaek-Maaeh>aYaaPaha )) 7 ))
yasyäà vai çrüyamäëäyäà
kåñëe parama-püruñe
bhaktir utpadyate puàsaù
çoka-moha-bhayäpahä
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
yasyäm—this Vedic literature; vai—certainly; çrüyamäëäyäm—simply by
giving aural reception; kåñëe—unto Lord Kåñëa; parama—supreme;
püruñe—unto the Personality of Godhead; bhaktiù—feelings of devotional
service; utpadyate—sprout up; puàsaù—of the living being;
çoka—lamentation; moha—illusion; bhaya—fearfulness; apahä—that which
extinguishes.
TRANSLATION
Simply by giving aural reception to this Vedic literature, the feeling for
loving devotional service to Lord Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
sprouts up at once to extinguish the fire of lamentation, illusion and fearfulness.
PURPORT
There are various senses, of which the ear is the most effective. This sense
works even when a man is deep asleep. One can protect himself from the
hands of an enemy while awake, but while asleep one is protected by the ear
only. The importance of hearing is mentioned here in connection with
attaining the highest perfection of life, namely, getting free from three
material pangs. Everyone is full of lamentation at every moment, he is after
the mirage of illusory things, and he is always afraid of his supposed enemy.
These are the primary symptoms of material disease. And it is definitely
suggested herein that simply by hearing the message of Çrémad-Bhägavatam
one gets attachment for the Supreme Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa, and as
soon as this is effected the symptoms of the material diseases disappear. Çréla
Vyäsadeva saw the all-perfect Personality of Godhead, and in this statement
the all-perfect Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa is clearly confirmed.
The ultimate result of devotional service is to develop genuine love for the
Supreme Personality. Love is a word which is often used in relation with man
and woman. And love is the only word that can be properly used to indicate
the relation between Lord Kåñëa and the living entities. The living entities are
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
mentioned as prakåti in the Bhagavad-gétä, and in Sanskrit prakåti is a feminine
object. The Lord is always described as the parama-puruña, or the supreme
male personality. Thus the affection between the Lord and the living entities
is something like that between the male and the female. Therefore the term
love of Godhead is quite appropriate.
Loving devotional service to the Lord begins with hearing about the Lord.
There is no difference between the Lord and the subject matter heard about
Him. The Lord is absolute in all respects, and thus there is no difference
between Him and the subject matter heard about Him. Therefore, hearing
about Him means immediate contact with Him by the process of vibration of
the transcendental sound. And the transcendental sound is so effective that it
acts at once by removing all material affections mentioned above. As
mentioned before, a living entity develops a sort of complexity by material
association, and the illusory encagement of the material body is accepted as an
actual fact. Under such false complexity, the living beings under different
categories of life become illusioned in different ways. Even in the most
developed stage of human life, the same illusion prevails in the form of many
isms and divides the loving relation with the Lord and thereby divides the
loving relation between man and man. By hearing the subject matter of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam this false complexity of materialism is removed, and real
peace in society begins, which politicians aspire for so eagerly in so many
political situations. The politicians want a peaceful situation between man and
man, and nation and nation, but at the same time, because of too much
attachment for material domination, there is illusion and fearfulness.
Therefore the politicians’ peace conferences cannot bring about peace in
society. It can only be done by hearing the subject matter described in the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam about the Supreme Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa. The
foolish politicians may go on holding peace and summit conferences for
hundreds of years, but they will fail to achieve success. Until we reach the
stage of reestablishing our lost relation with Kåñëa, the illusion of accepting
the body as the self will prevail, and thus fearfulness will also prevail. As for
the validity of Çré Kåñëa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, there are
hundreds and thousands of evidences from revealed scriptures, and there are
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
hundreds and thousands of evidences from personal experiences of devotees in
various places like Våndävana, Navadvépa and Puré. Even in the Kaumudé
dictionary the synonyms of Kåñëa are given as the son of Yaçodä and the
Supreme Personality of Godhead Parabrahman. The conclusion is that simply
by hearing the Vedic literature Çrémad-Bhägavatam, one can have direct
connection with the Supreme Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa, and thereby
one can attain the highest perfection of life by transcending worldly miseries,
illusion and fearfulness. These are practical tests for one who has actually
given a submissive hearing to the readings of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 8
Sa Sa&ihTaa& >aaGavTaq& k*-TvaNau§-MYa caTMaJaMa( )
éuk-MaDYaaPaYaaMaaSa iNav*itaiNarTa& MauiNa" )) 8 ))
sa saàhitäà bhägavatéà
kåtvänukramya cätma-jam
çukam adhyäpayäm äsa
nivåtti-nirataà muniù
SYNONYMS
saù—that; saàhitäm—Vedic literature; bhägavatém—in relation with the
Personality of Godhead; kåtvä—having done; anukramya—by correction and
repetition; ca—and; ätma-jam—his own son; çukam—Çukadeva Gosvämé;
adhyäpayäm äsa—taught; nivåtti—path of self realization; niratam—engaged;
muniù—the sage.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Vyäsadeva, after compiling the Çrémad-Bhägavatam and
revising it, taught it to his own son, Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé, who was already
engaged in self-realization.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the natural commentation on the Brahma-sütras
compiled by the same author. This Brahma-sütra, or Vedänta-sütra, is meant
for those who are already engaged in self-realization. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is so
made that one becomes at once engaged in the path of self-realization simply
by hearing the topics. Although it is especially meant for the paramahaàsas, or
those who are totally engaged in self-realization, it works into the depths of the
hearts of those who may be worldly men. Worldly men are all engaged in sense
gratification. But even such men will find in this Vedic literature a remedial
measure for their material diseases. Çukadeva Gosvämé was a liberated soul
from the very beginning of his birth, and his father taught him
Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Amongst mundane scholars, there is some diversity of
opinion as to the date of compilation of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. It is, however,
certain from the text of the Bhägavatam that it was compiled before the
disappearance of King Parékñit and after the departure of Lord Kåñëa. When
Mahäräja Parékñit was ruling the world as the King of Bhärata-varña, he
chastised the personality of Kali. According to revealed scriptures and
astrological calculation, the age of Kali is in its five thousandth year.
Therefore, Çrémad-Bhägavatam was compiled not less than five thousand years
ago. Mahäbhärata was compiled before Çrémad-Bhägavatam, and the Puräëas
were compiled before Mahäbhärata. That is an estimation of the date of
compilation of the different Vedic literatures. The synopsis of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam was given before the detailed description under
instruction of Närada. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the science for following the path
of nivåtti-märga. The path of pravåtti-märga was condemned by Närada. That
path is the natural inclination for all conditioned souls. The theme of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the cure of the materialistic disease of the human being,
or stopping completely the pangs of material existence.
TEXT 9
XaaENak- ovac
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Sa vE iNav*itaiNarTa" SavR}aaePae+ak-ae MauiNa" )
k-SYa va b*hTaqMaeTaaMaaTMaaraMa" SaMa>YaSaTa( )) 9 ))
çaunaka uväca
sa vai nivåtti-nirataù
sarvatropekñako muniù
kasya vä båhatém etäm
ätmärämaù samabhyasat
SYNONYMS
çaunakaù uväca—Çré Çaunaka asked; saù—he; vai—of course; nivåtti—on the
path of self-realization; nirataù—always engaged; sarvatra—in every respect;
upekñakaù—indifferent; muniù—sage; kasya—for what reason; vä—or;
båhatém—vast; etäm—this; ätma-ärämaù—one who is pleased in himself;
samabhyasat—undergo the studies.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çaunaka asked Süta Gosvämé: Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé was already on the
path of self-realization, and thus he was pleased with his own self. So why did
he take the trouble to undergo the study of such a vast literature?
PURPORT
For the people in general the highest perfection of life is to cease from
material activities and be fixed on the path of self-realization. Those who take
pleasure in sense enjoyment, or those who are fixed in material bodily welfare
work, are called karmés. Out of thousands and millions of such karmés, one may
become an ätmäräma by self-realization. Ätmä means self, and äräma means to
take pleasure. Everyone is searching after the highest pleasure, but the
standard of pleasure of one may be different from the standard of another.
Therefore, the standard of pleasure enjoyed by the karmés is different from
that of the ätmärämas. The ätmärämas are completely indifferent to material
enjoyment in every respect. Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé had already attained that
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
stage, and still he was attracted to undergo the trouble of studying the great
Bhägavatam literature. This means that Çrémad-Bhägavatam is a postgraduate
study even for the ätmärämas, who have surpassed all the studies of Vedic
knowledge.
TEXT 10
SaUTa ovac
AaTMaaraMaaê MauNaYaae iNaGa]RNQaa APYauå§-Mae )
ku-vRNTYahETauk-I& >ai¢-iMaTQaM>aUTaGau<aae hir" )) 10 ))
süta uväca
ätmärämäç ca munayo
nirgranthä apy urukrame
kurvanty ahaitukéà bhaktim
ittham-bhüta-guëo hariù
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; ätmärämäù—those who take pleasure in
ätmä (generally, spirit self); ca—also; munayaù—sages; nirgranthäù—freed
from all bondage; api—in spite of; urukrame—unto the great adventurer;
kurvanti—do; ahaitukém—unalloyed; bhaktim—devotional service;
ittham-bhüta—such wonderful; guëaù—qualities; hariù—of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
All different varieties of ätmärämas [those who take pleasure in ätmä, or
spirit self], especially those established on the path of self-realization, though
freed from all kinds of material bondage, desire to render unalloyed devotional
service unto the Personality of Godhead. This means that the Lord possesses
transcendental qualities and therefore can attract everyone, including liberated
souls.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu explained this ätmäräma çloka very vividly
before His chief devotee Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé. He points out eleven factors
in the çloka, namely (1) ätmäräma, (2) munayaù, (3) nirgrantha, (4) api, (5) ca,
(6) urukrama, (7) kurvanti, (8) ahaitukém, (9) bhaktim, (10)
ittham-bhüta-guëaù and (11) hariù. According to the Viçva-prakäça Sanskrit
dictionary, there are seven synonyms for the word ätmäräma, which are as
follows: (1) Brahman (the Absolute Truth), (2) body, (3) mind, (4) endeavor,
(5) endurance, (6) intelligence and (7) personal habits.
The word munayaù refers to (1) those who are thoughtful, (2) those who are
grave and silent, (3) ascetics, (4) the persistent, (5) mendicants, (6) sages and
(7) saints.
The word nirgrantha conveys these ideas: (1) one who is liberated from
nescience, (2) one who has no connection with scriptural injunction, i.e., who
is freed from the obligation of the rules and regulations mentioned in the
revealed scriptures like ethics, Vedas, philosophy, psychology and metaphysics
(in other words the fools, illiterate, urchins, etc., who have no connection with
regulative principles), (3) a capitalist, and also (4) one who is penniless.
According to the Çabda-koça dictionary, the affix ni is used in the sense of
(1) certainty, (2) counting, (3) building, and (4) forbiddance, and the word
grantha is used in the sense of wealth, thesis, vocabulary, etc.
The word urukrama means “the one whose activities are glorious.” Krama
means “step.” This word urukrama specifically indicates the Lord’s incarnation
as Vämana, who covered the whole universe by immeasurable steps. Lord
Viñëu is powerful, and His activities are so glorious that He has created the
spiritual world by His internal potency and the material world by His external
potency. By His all-pervading features He is everywhere present as the
Supreme Truth, and in His personal feature He is always present in His
transcendental abode of Goloka Våndävana, where He displays His
transcendental pastimes in all variegatedness. His activities cannot be
compared to anyone else’s, and therefore the word urukrama is just applicable
to Him only.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
According to Sanskrit verbal arrangement, kurvanti refers to doing things
for someone else. Therefore, it means that the ätmärämas render devotional
service unto the Lord not for personal interest but for the pleasure of the Lord,
Urukrama.
Hetu means “causal.” There are many causes for one’s sense satisfaction,
and they can be chiefly classified as material enjoyment, mystic powers and
liberation, which are generally desired by progressive persons. As far as
material enjoyments are concerned, they are innumerable, and the materialists
are eager to increase them more and more because they are under the illusory
energy. There is no end to the list of material enjoyments, nor can anyone in
the material universe have all of them. As far as the mystic powers are
concerned, they are eight in all (such as to become the minutest in form, to
become weightless, to have anything one desires, to lord it over the material
nature, to control other living beings, to throw earthly globes in outer space,
etc.). These mystic powers are mentioned in the Bhägavatam. The forms of
liberation are five in number.
Therefore, unalloyed devotion means service to the Lord without desire for
the above-mentioned personal benefits. And the powerful Personality of
Godhead Çré Kåñëa can be fully satisfied by such unalloyed devotees free from
all sorts of desires for personal benefit.
Unalloyed devotional service of the Lord progresses in different stages.
Practice of devotional service in the material field is of eighty-one different
qualities, and above such activities is the transcendental practice of devotional
service, which is one and is called sädhana-bhakti. When unalloyed practice of
sädhana-bhakti is matured into transcendental love for the Lord, the
transcendental loving service of the Lord begins gradually developing into
nine progressive stages of loving service under the headings of attachment,
love, affection, feelings, affinity, adherence, following, ecstasy, and intense
feelings of separation.
The attachment of an inactive devotee develops up to the stage of
transcendental love of God. Attachment of an active servitor develops up to
the stage of adherence, and that for a friendly devotee develops up to the stage
of following, and the same is also the case for the paternal devotees. Devotees
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
in conjugal love develop ecstasy up to the stage of intense feelings of
separation. These are some of the features of unalloyed devotional service of
the Lord.
According to Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya, the import of the word ittham-bhüta is
“complete bliss.” Transcendental bliss in the realization of impersonal
Brahman becomes comparable to the scanty water contained in the pit made
by a cow’s hoof. It is nothing compared with the ocean of bliss of the vision of
the Personality of Godhead. The personal form of Lord Çré Kåñëa is so
attractive that it comprehends all attraction, all bliss and all tastes (rasas).
These attractions are so strong that no one wants to exchange them for material
enjoyment, mystic powers and liberation. There is no need of logical arguments
in support of this statement, but out of one’s own nature one becomes
attracted by the qualities of Lord Çré Kåñëa. We must know for certain that the
qualities of the Lord have nothing to do with mundane qualities. All of them
are full of bliss, knowledge and eternity. There are innumerable qualities of the
Lord, and one is attracted by one quality while another is attracted by another.
Great sages, such as the four bachelor-devotees Sanaka, Sanätana, Sananda
and Sanat-kumära, were attracted by the fragrance of flowers and tulasé leaves
anointed with the pulp of sandalwood offered at the lotus feet of the Lord.
Similarly, Çukadeva Gosvämé was attracted by the transcendental pastimes of
the Lord. Çukadeva Gosvämé was already situated in the liberated stage, yet he
was attracted by the pastimes of the Lord. This proves that the quality of His
pastimes has nothing to do with material affinity. Similarly, the young
cowherd damsels were attracted by the bodily features of the Lord, and
Rukmiëé was attracted by hearing about the glories of the Lord. Lord Kåñëa
attracts even the mind of the goddess of fortune. He attracts, in special cases,
the minds of all young girls. He attracts the minds of the elderly ladies by
paternal affection. He attracts the mind of the male in the humors of servitude
and friendship.
The word hari conveys various meanings, but the chief import of the word
is that He (the Lord) vanquishes everything inauspicious and takes away the
mind of the devotee by awarding pure transcendental love. By remembering
the Lord in acute distress one can be free from all varieties of miseries and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
anxieties. Gradually the Lord vanquishes all obstacles on the path of
devotional service of a pure devotee, and the result of nine devotional
activities, such as hearing and chanting, becomes manifested.
By His personal features and transcendental attributes, the Lord attracts all
psychological activities of a pure devotee. Such is the attractive power of Lord
Kåñëa. The attraction is so powerful that a pure devotee never hankers for any
one of the four principles of religion. These are the attractive features of the
transcendental attributes of the Lord. And adding to this the words api and ca,
one can increase the imports unlimitedly. According to Sanskrit grammar
there are seven synonyms for the word api.
So by interpreting each and every word of this çloka, one can see unlimited
numbers of transcendental qualities of Lord Kåñëa that attract the mind of a
pure devotee.
TEXT 11
hreGauR<aai+aáMaiTa>aRGavaNa( badraYai<a" )
ADYaGaaNMahda:YaaNa& iNaTYa& ivZ<auJaNaiPa[Ya" )) 11 ))
harer guëäkñipta-matir
bhagavän bädaräyaëiù
adhyagän mahad äkhyänaà
nityaà viñëu-jana-priyaù
SYNONYMS
hareù—of Hari, the Personality of Godhead; guëa—transcendental attribute;
äkñipta—being absorbed in; matiù—mind; bhagavän—powerful;
bädaräyaëiù—the son of Vyäsadeva; adhyagät—underwent studies;
mahat—great; äkhyänam—narration; nityam—regularly; viñëu-jana—devotees
of the Lord; priyaù—beloved.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé, son of Çréla Vyäsadeva, was not only
transcendentally powerful. He was also very dear to the devotees of the Lord.
Thus he underwent the study of this great narration [Çrémad-Bhägavatam].
PURPORT
According to Brahma-vaivarta Puräëa, Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé was a
liberated soul even within the womb of his mother. Çréla Vyäsadeva knew that
the child, after his birth, would not stay at home. Therefore he (Vyäsadeva)
impressed upon him the synopsis of the Bhägavatam so that the child could be
made attached to the transcendental activities of the Lord. After his birth, the
child was still more educated in the subject of the Bhägavatam by recitation of
the actual poems.
The idea is that generally the liberated souls are attached to the feature of
impersonal Brahman with a monistic view of becoming one with the supreme
whole. But by the association of pure devotees like Vyäsadeva, even the
liberated soul becomes attracted to the transcendental qualities of the Lord. By
the mercy of Çré Närada, Çréla Vyäsadeva was able to narrate the great epic of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, and by the mercy of Vyäsadeva, Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé
was able to grasp the import. The transcendental qualities of the Lord are so
attractive that Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé became detached from being
completely absorbed in impersonal Brahman and positively took up the
personal activity of the Lord.
Practically he was thrown from the impersonal conception of the Absolute,
thinking within himself that he had simply wasted so much time in devoting
himself to the impersonal feature of the Supreme, or in other words, he
realized more transcendental bliss with the personal feature than the
impersonal. And from that time, not only did he himself become very dear to
the viñëu-janas, or the devotees of the Lord, but also the viñëu-janas became
very dear to him. The devotees of the Lord, who do not wish to kill the
individuality of the living entities and who desire to become personal servitors
of the Lord, do not very much like the impersonalists, and similarly the
impersonalists, who desire to become one with the Supreme, are unable to
evaluate the devotees of the Lord. Thus from time immemorial these two
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
transcendental pilgrims have sometimes been competitors. In other words,
each of them likes to keep separate from the other because of the ultimate
personal and impersonal realizations. Therefore it appears that Çréla Çukadeva
Gosvämé also had no liking for the devotees. But since he himself became a
saturated devotee, he desired always the transcendental association of the
viñëu-janas, and the viñëu-janas also liked his association, since he became a
personal Bhägavata. Thus both the son and the father were completely
cognizant of transcendental knowledge in Brahman, and afterwards both of
them became absorbed in the personal features of the Supreme Lord. The
question as to how Çukadeva Gosvämé was attracted by the narration of the
Bhägavatam is thus completely answered by this çloka.
TEXT 12
Parqi+aTaae_Qa raJazeRJaRNMak-MaRivl/aPaNaMa( )
Sa&SQaa& c Paa<@uPau}aa<aa& v+Yae k*-Z<ak-QaaedYaMa( )) 12 ))
parékñito ’tha räjarñer
janma-karma-viläpanam
saàsthäà ca päëòu-puträëäà
vakñye kåñëa-kathodayam
SYNONYMS
parékñitaù—of King Parékñit; atha—thus; räjarñeù—of the King who was the åñi
among the kings; janma—birth; karma—activities; viläpanam—deliverance;
saàsthäm—renunciation of the world; ca—and; päëòu-puträëäm—of the sons
of Päëòu; vakñye—I shall speak; kåñëa-kathä-udayam—that which gives rise to
the transcendental narration of Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé thus addressed the åñis headed by Çaunaka: Now I shall begin
the transcendental narration of the Lord Çré Kåñëa and topics of the birth,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
activities and deliverance of King Parékñit, the sage amongst kings, as well as
topics of the renunciation of the worldly order by the sons of Päëòu.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa is so kind to the fallen souls that He personally incarnates
Himself amongst the different kinds of living entities and takes part with them
in daily activities. Any historical fact old or new which has a connection with
the activities of the Lord is to be understood as a transcendental narration of
the Lord. Without Kåñëa, all the supplementary literatures like the Puräëas
and Mahäbhärata are simply stories or historical facts. But with Kåñëa they
become transcendental, and when we hear of them we at once become
transcendentally related with the Lord. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is also a Puräëa,
but the special significance of this Puräëa is that the activities of the Lord are
central and not just supplementary historical facts. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is thus
recommended by Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu as the spotless Puräëa. There
is a class of less intelligent devotees of the Bhägavata Puräëa who desire to
relish at once the activities of the Lord narrated in the Tenth Canto without
first understanding the primary cantos. They are under the false impression
that the other cantos are not concerned with Kåñëa, and thus more foolishly
than intelligently they take to the reading of the Tenth Canto. These readers
are specifically told herein that the other cantos of the Bhägavatam are as
important as the Tenth Canto. No one should try to go into the matters of the
Tenth Canto without having thoroughly understood the purport of the other
nine cantos. Kåñëa and His pure devotees like the Päëòavas are on the same
plane. Kåñëa is not without His devotees of all the rasas, and the pure devotees
like the Päëòavas are not without Kåñëa. The devotees and the Lord are
interlinked, and they cannot be separated. Therefore talks about them are all
kåñëa-kathä, or topics of the Lord.
TEXTS 13–14
Yada Ma*Dae k-aErvSa*ÅYaaNaa&
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
vqreZvQaae vqrGaiTa& GaTaezu )
v*k-aedraivÖGadai>aMaXaR‚
>aGanaeåd<@e Da*Taraí\Pau}ae )) 13 ))
>aTauR" iPa[Ya& d]aEi<airiTa SMa PaXYaNa(
k*-Z<aaSauTaaNaa& SvPaTaa& iXara&iSa )
oPaahriÜiPa[YaMaev TaSYa
JauGauiPSaTa& k-MaR ivGahRYaiNTa )) 14 ))
yadä mådhe kaurava-såïjayänäà
véreñv atho véra-gatià gateñu
våkodaräviddha-gadäbhimarçabhagnoru-
daëòe dhåtaräñöra-putre
bhartuù priyaà drauëir iti sma paçyan
kåñëä-sutänäà svapatäà çiräàsi
upäharad vipriyam eva tasya
jugupsitaà karma vigarhayanti
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; mådhe—in the battlefield; kaurava—the party of Dhåtaräñöra;
såïjayänäm—of the party of the Päëòavas; véreñu—of the warriors; atho—thus;
véra-gatim—the destination deserved by the warriors; gateñu—being obtained;
våkodara—Bhéma (the second Päëòava); äviddha—beaten; gadä—by the club;
abhimarça—lamenting; bhagna—broken; uru-daëòe—spinal cord;
dhåtaräñöra-putre—the son of King Dhåtaräñöra; bhartuù—of the master;
priyam—pleasing; drauëiù—the son of Droëäcärya; iti—thus; sma—shall be;
paçyan—seeing; kåñëä—Draupadé; sutänäm—of the sons; svapatäm—while
sleeping; çiräàsi—heads; upäharat—delivered as a prize; vipriyam—pleasing;
eva—like; tasya—his; jugupsitam—most heinous; karma—act;
vigarhayanti—disapproving.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
When the respective warriors of both camps, namely the Kauravas and the
Päëòavas, were killed on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra and the dead warriors
obtained their deserved destinations, and when the son of Dhåtaräñöra fell down
lamenting, his spine broken, being beaten by the club of Bhémasena, the son of
Droëäcärya [Açvatthämä] beheaded the five sleeping sons of Draupadé and
delivered them as a prize to his master, foolishly thinking that he would be
pleased. Duryodhana, however, disapproved of the heinous act, and he was not
pleased in the least.
PURPORT
Transcendental topics of the activities of Lord Çré Kåñëa in the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam begin from the end of the battle at Kurukñetra, where the
Lord Himself spoke about Himself in the Bhagavad-gétä. Therefore, both the
Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam are transcendental topics of Lord
Kåñëa. The Gétä is kåñëa-kathä, or topics of Kåñëa, because it is spoken by the
Lord, and the Bhägavatam is also kåñëa-kathä because it is spoken about the
Lord. Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu wanted everyone to be informed of both
kåñëa-kathäs by His order. Lord Kåñëa Caitanya is Kåñëa Himself in the garb of
a devotee of Kåñëa, and therefore the versions of both Lord Kåñëa and Çré
Kåñëa Caitanya Mahäprabhu are identical. Lord Caitanya desired that all who
are born in India seriously understand such kåñëa-kathäs and then after full
realization preach the transcendental message to everyone in all parts of the
world. That will bring about the desired peace and prosperity of the stricken
world.
TEXT 15
MaaTaa iXaéUNaa& iNaDaNa& SauTaaNaa&
iNaXaMYa gaaer& PairTaPYaMaaNaa )
TadaådÜaZPak-l/aku-l/a+aq
Taa& SaaNTvYaàah ik-rq$=Maal/I )) 15 ))
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
mätä çiçünäà nidhanaà sutänäà
niçamya ghoraà paritapyamänä
tadärudad väñpa-kaläkuläkñé
täà säntvayann äha kiréöamälé
SYNONYMS
mätä—the mother; çiçünäm—of the children; nidhanam—massacre;
sutänäm—of the sons; niçamya—after hearing; ghoram—ghastly;
paritapyamänä—lamenting; tadä—at that time; arudat—began to cry;
väñpa-kala-äkula-akñé—with tears in the eyes; täm—her;
säntvayan—pacifying; äha—said; kiréöamälé—Arjuna.
TRANSLATION
Draupadé, the mother of the five children of the Päëòavas, after hearing of
the massacre of her sons, began to cry in distress with eyes full of tears. Trying
to pacify her in her great loss, Arjuna spoke to her thus:
TEXT 16
Tada éucSTae Pa[Ma*JaaiMa >ad]e
Yad(b]øbNDaae" iXar AaTaTaaiYaNa" )
Gaa<@qvMau¢E-ivRiXa%EåPaahre
Tva§-MYa YaTòaSYaiSa dGDaPau}aa )) 16 ))
tadä çucas te pramåjämi bhadre
yad brahma-bandhoù çira ätatäyinaù
gäëòéva-muktair viçikhair upähare
tväkramya yat snäsyasi dagdha-puträ
SYNONYMS
tadä—at that time only; çucaù—tears in grief; te—your; pramåjämi—shall
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
wipe away; bhadre—O gentle lady; yat—when; brahma-bandhoù—of a
degraded brähmaëa; çiraù—head; ätatäyinaù—of the aggressor;
gäëòéva-muktaiù—shot by the bow named Gäëòéva; viçikhaiù—by the arrows;
upähare—shall present to you; tvä—yourself; äkramya—riding on it;
yat—which; snäsyasi—take your bath; dagdha-puträ—after burning the sons.
TRANSLATION
O gentle lady, when I present you with the head of that brähmaëa, after
beheading him with arrows from my Gäëòéva bow, I shall then wipe the tears
from your eyes and pacify you. Then, after burning your sons’ bodies, you can
take your bath standing on his head.
PURPORT
An enemy who sets fire to the house, administers poison, attacks all of a
sudden with deadly weapons, plunders wealth or usurps agricultural fields, or
entices one’s wife is called an aggressor. Such an aggressor, though he be a
brähmaëa or a so-called son of a brähmaëa, has to be punished in all
circumstances. When Arjuna promised to behead the aggressor named
Açvatthämä, he knew well that Açvatthämä was the son of a brähmaëa, but
because the so-called brähmaëa acted like a butcher, he was taken as such, and
there was no question of sin in killing such a brähmaëa’s son who proved to be
a villain.
TEXT 17
wiTa iPa[Yaa& vLGauivic}aJaLPaE"
Sa SaaNTviYaTvaCYauTaiMa}aSaUTa" )
ANvad]vÕ&iXaTa oGa]DaNva
k-iPaßJaae GauåPau}a& rQaeNa )) 17 ))
iti priyäà valgu-vicitra-jalpaiù
sa säntvayitväcyuta-mitra-sütaù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
anvädravad daàçita ugra-dhanvä
kapi-dhvajo guru-putraà rathena
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; priyäm—unto the dear; valgu—sweet; vicitra—variegated;
jalpaiù—by statements; saù—he; säntvayitvä—satisfying;
acyuta-mitra-sütaù—Arjuna, who is guided by the infallible Lord as a friend
and driver; anvädravat—followed; daàçitaù—being protected by kavaca;
ugra-dhanvä—equipped with furious weapons; kapi-dhvajaù—Arjuna;
guru-putram—the son of the martial teacher; rathena—getting on the chariot.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna, who is guided by the infallible Lord as friend and driver, thus
satisfied the dear lady by such statements. Then he dressed in armor and armed
himself with furious weapons, and getting into his chariot, he set out to follow
Açvatthämä, the son of his martial teacher.
TEXT 18
TaMaaPaTaNTa& Sa ivl/+Ya dUraTa(
ku-MaarhaeiÜGanMaNaa rQaeNa )
Parad]vTPa[a<aParqPSauåVYaa|
YaavÓMa& åd]>aYaaÛQaak-" )) 18 ))
tam äpatantaà sa vilakñya dürät
kumära-hodvigna-manä rathena
parädravat präëa-parépsur urvyäà
yävad-gamaà rudra-bhayäd yathä kaù
SYNONYMS
tam—him; äpatantam—coming over furiously; saù—he; vilakñya—seeing;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
dürät—from a distance; kumära-hä—the murderer of the princes;
udvigna-manäù—disturbed in mind; rathena—on the chariot;
parädravat—fled; präëa—life; parépsuù—for protecting; urvyäm—with great
speed; yävat-gamam—as he fled; rudra-bhayät—by fear of Çiva; yathä—as;
kaù—Brahmä (or arkaù—Sürya).
TRANSLATION
Açvatthämä, the murderer of the princes, seeing from a great distance
Arjuna coming at him with great speed, fled in his chariot, panic stricken, just
to save his life, as Brahmä fled in fear from Çiva.
PURPORT
According to the reading matter, either kaù or arkaù, there are two
references in the Puräëas. Kaù means Brahmä, who once became allured by his
daughter and began to follow her, which infuriated Çiva, who attacked Brahmä
with his trident. Brahmäjé fled in fear of his life. As far as arkaù is concerned,
there is a reference in the Vämana Puräëa. There was a demon by the name
Vidyunmälé who was gifted with a glowing golden airplane which traveled to
the back of the sun, and night disappeared because of the glowing effulgence
of this plane. Thus the sun-god became angry, and with his virulent rays he
melted the plane. This enraged Lord Çiva. Lord Çiva then attacked the
sun-god, who fled away and at last fell down at Käçé (Väräëasé), and the place
became famous as Lolärka.
TEXT 19
YadaXar<aMaaTMaaNaMaE+aTa é[aNTavaiJaNaMa( )
Añ& b]øiXarae MaeNae AaTMa}aa<a& iÜJaaTMaJa" )) 19 ))
yadäçaraëam ätmänam
aikñata çränta-väjinam
astraà brahma-çiro mene
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ätma-träëaà dvijätmajaù
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; açaraëam—without being alternatively protected;
ätmänam—his own self; aikñata—saw; çränta-väjinam—the horses being tired;
astram—weapon; brahma-çiraù—the topmost or ultimate (nuclear);
mene—applied; ätma-träëam—just to save himself; dvija-ätma-jaù—the son of
a brähmaëa.
TRANSLATION
When the son of the brähmaëa [Açvatthämä] saw that his horses were tired,
he considered that there was no alternative for protection outside of his using
the ultimate weapon, the brahmästra [nuclear weapon].
PURPORT
In the ultimate issue only, when there is no alternative, the nuclear weapon
called the brahmästra is applied. The word dvijätmajaù is significant here
because Açvatthämä, although the son of Droëäcärya, was not exactly a
qualified brähmaëa. The most intelligent man is called a brähmaëa, and it is
not a hereditary title. Açvatthämä was also formerly called the brahma-bandhu,
or the friend of a brähmaëa. Being a friend of a brähmaëa does not mean that
one is a brähmaëa by qualification. A friend or son of a brähmaëa, when fully
qualified, can be called a brähmaëa and not otherwise. Since Açvatthämä’s
decision is immature, he is purposely called herein the son of a brähmaëa.
TEXT 20
AQaaePaSPa*XYa Sail/l&/ SaNdDae TaTSaMaaihTa" )
AJaaNaàiPaSa&har& Pa[a<ak*-C^\ oPaiSQaTae )) 20 ))
athopaspåçya salilaà
sandadhe tat samähitaù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ajänann api saàhäraà
präëa-kåcchra upasthite
SYNONYMS
atha—thus; upaspåçya—touching in sanctity; salilam—water;
sandadhe—chanted the hymns; tat—that; samähitaù—being in concentration;
ajänan—without knowing; api—although; saàhäram—withdrawal;
präëa-kåcchre—life being put in danger; upasthite—being placed in such a
position.
TRANSLATION
Since his life was in danger, he touched water in sanctity and concentrated
upon the chanting of the hymns for throwing nuclear weapons, although he did
not know how to withdraw such weapons.
PURPORT
The subtle forms of material activities are finer than grosser methods of
material manipulation. Such subtle forms of material activities are effected
through purification of sound. The same method is adopted here by chanting
hymns to act as nuclear weapons.
TEXT 21
TaTa" Pa[aduZk*-Ta& TaeJa" Pa[c<@& SavRTaaeidXaMa( )
Pa[a<aaPadMai>aPa[e+Ya ivZ<au& iJaZ<auåvac h )) 21 ))
tataù präduñkåtaà tejaù
pracaëòaà sarvato diçam
präëäpadam abhiprekñya
viñëuà jiñëur uväca ha
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; präduñkåtam—disseminated; tejaù—glare;
pracaëòam—fierce; sarvataù—all around; diçam—directions;
präëa-äpadam—affecting life; abhiprekñya—having observed it; viñëum—unto
the Lord; jiñëuù—Arjuna; uväca—said; ha—in the past.
TRANSLATION
Thereupon a glaring light spread in all directions. It was so fierce that
Arjuna thought his own life in danger, and so he began to address Lord Çré
Kåñëa.
TEXT 22
AJauRNa ovac
k*-Z<a k*-Z<a Mahabahae >a¢-aNaaMa>aYaªr )
TvMaek-ae dùMaaNaaNaaMaPavGaaeR_iSa Sa&Sa*Tae" )) 22 ))
arjuna uväca
kåñëa kåñëa mahä-bäho
bhaktänäm abhayaìkara
tvam eko dahyamänänäm
apavargo ’si saàsåteù
SYNONYMS
arjunaù uväca—Arjuna said; kåñëa—O Lord Kåñëa; kåñëa—O Lord Kåñëa;
mahä-bäho—He who is the Almighty; bhaktänäm—of the devotees;
abhayaìkara—eradicating the fears of; tvam—You; ekaù—alone;
dahyamänänäm—those who are suffering from; apavargaù—the path of
liberation; asi—are; saàsåteù—in the midst of material miseries.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Arjuna said: O my Lord Çré Kåñëa, You are the almighty Personality of
Godhead. There is no limit to Your different energies. Therefore only You are
competent to instill fearlessness in the hearts of Your devotees. Everyone in the
flames of material miseries can find the path of liberation in You only.
PURPORT
Arjuna was aware of the transcendental qualities of Lord Çré Kåñëa, as he
had already experienced them during the Kurukñetra War, in which both of
them were present. Therefore, Arjuna’s version of Lord Kåñëa is authoritative.
Kåñëa is almighty and is especially the cause of fearlessness for the devotees. A
devotee of the Lord is always fearless because of the protection given by the
Lord. Material existence is something like a blazing fire in the forest, which
can be extinguished by the mercy of the Lord Çré Kåñëa. The spiritual master is
the mercy representative of the Lord. Therefore, a person burning in the
flames of material existence may receive the rains of mercy of the Lord
through the transparent medium of the self-realized spiritual master. The
spiritual master, by his words, can penetrate into the heart of the suffering
person and inject knowledge transcendental, which alone can extinguish the
fire of material existence.
TEXT 23
TvMaaÛ" Pauåz" Saa+aadqìr" Pa[k*-Tae" Par" )
MaaYaa& VYaudSYa icC^¢-ya kE-vLYae iSQaTa AaTMaiNa )) 23 ))
tvam ädyaù puruñaù säkñäd
éçvaraù prakåteù paraù
mäyäà vyudasya cic-chaktyä
kaivalye sthita ätmani
SYNONYMS
tvam ädyaù—You are the original; puruñaù—the enjoying personality;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
säkñät—directly; éçvaraù—the controller; prakåteù—of material nature;
paraù—transcendental; mäyäm—the material energy; vyudasya—one who has
thrown aside; cit-çaktyä—by dint of internal potency; kaivalye—in pure
eternal knowledge and bliss; sthitaù—placed; ätmani—own self.
TRANSLATION
You are the original Personality of Godhead who expands Himself all over
the creations and is transcendental to material energy. You have cast away the
effects of the material energy by dint of Your spiritual potency. You are always
situated in eternal bliss and transcendental knowledge.
PURPORT
The Lord states in the Bhagavad-gétä that one who surrenders unto the
lotus feet of the Lord can get release from the clutches of nescience. Kåñëa is
just like the sun, and mäyä or material existence is just like darkness.
Wherever there is the light of the sun, darkness or ignorance at once vanishes.
The best means to get out of the world of ignorance is suggested here. The
Lord is addressed herein as the original Personality of Godhead. From Him all
other Personalities of Godhead expand. The all-pervasive Lord Viñëu is Lord
Kåñëa’s plenary portion or expansion. The Lord expands Himself in
innumerable forms of Godhead and living beings, along with His different
energies. But Çré Kåñëa is the original primeval Lord from whom everything
emanates. The all-pervasive feature of the Lord experienced within the
manifested world is also a partial representation of the Lord. Paramätmä,
therefore, is included within Him. He is the Absolute Personality of Godhead.
He has nothing to do with the actions and reactions of the material
manifestation because He is far above the material creation. Darkness is a
perverse representation of the sun, and therefore the existence of darkness
depends on the existence of the sun, but in the sun proper there is no trace of
darkness. As the sun is full of light only, similarly the Absolute Personality of
Godhead, beyond the material existence, is full of bliss. He is not only full of
bliss, but also full of transcendental variegatedness. Transcendence is not at all
static, but full of dynamic variegatedness. He is distinct from the material
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
nature, which is complicated by the three modes of material nature. He is
parama, or the chief. Therefore He is absolute. He has manifold energies, and
through His diverse energies He creates, manifests, maintains and destroys the
material world. In His own abode, however, everything is eternal and absolute.
The world is not conducted by the energies or powerful agents by themselves,
but by the potent all-powerful with all energies.
TEXT 24
Sa Wv Jaqvl/aek-SYa MaaYaaMaaeihTaceTaSa" )
ivDaTSae SveNa vqYaeR<a é[eYaae DaMaaRidl/+a<aMa( )) 24 ))
sa eva jéva-lokasya
mäyä-mohita-cetasaù
vidhatse svena véryeëa
çreyo dharmädi-lakñaëam
SYNONYMS
saù—that Transcendence; eva—certainly; jéva-lokasya—of the conditioned
living beings; mäyä-mohita—captivated by the illusory energy; cetasaù—by the
heart; vidhatse—execute; svena—by Your own; véryeëa—influence;
çreyaù—ultimate good; dharma-ädi—four principles of liberation;
lakñaëam—characterized by.
TRANSLATION
And yet, though You are beyond the purview of the material energy, You
execute the four principles of liberation characterized by religion and so on for
the ultimate good of the conditioned souls.
PURPORT
The Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa, out of His causeless mercy, descends
on the manifested world without being influenced by the material modes of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
nature. He is eternally beyond the material manifestations. He descends out of
His causeless mercy only to reclaim the fallen souls who are captivated by the
illusory energy. They are attacked by the material energy, and they want to
enjoy her under false pretexts, although in essence the living entity is unable
to enjoy. One is eternally the servitor of the Lord, and when he forgets this
position he thinks of enjoying the material world, but factually he is in
illusion. The Lord descends to eradicate this false sense of enjoyment and thus
reclaim conditioned souls back to Godhead. That is the all-merciful nature of
the Lord for the fallen souls.
TEXT 25
TaQaaYa& cavTaarSTae >auvae >aariJahqzRYaa )
SvaNaa& caNaNYa>aavaNaaMaNauDYaaNaaYa caSak*-Ta( )) 25 ))
tathäyaà cävatäras te
bhuvo bhära-jihérñayä
svänäà cänanya-bhävänäm
anudhyänäya cäsakåt
SYNONYMS
tathä—thus; ayam—this; ca—and; avatäraù—incarnation; te—Your;
bhuvaù—of the material world; bhära—burden; jihérñayä—for removing;
svänäm—of the friends; ca ananya-bhävänäm—and of the exclusive devotees;
anudhyänäya—for remembering repeatedly; ca—and; asakåt—fully satisfied.
TRANSLATION
Thus You descend as an incarnation to remove the burden of the world and
to benefit Your friends, especially those who are Your exclusive devotees and
are rapt in meditation upon You.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
It appears that the Lord is partial to His devotees. Everyone is related with
the Lord. He is equal to everyone, and yet He is more inclined to His own men
and devotees. The Lord is everyone’s father. No one can be His father, and yet
no one can be His son. His devotees are His kinsmen, and His devotees are His
relations. This is His transcendental pastime. It has nothing to do with
mundane ideas of relations, fatherhood or anything like that. As mentioned
above, the Lord is above the modes of material nature, and thus there is
nothing mundane about His kinsmen and relations in devotional service.
TEXT 26
ik-iMad& iSvTku-Taae veiTa devdev Na veÚyhMa( )
SavRTaaeMau%MaaYaaiTa TaeJa" ParMadaå<aMa( )) 26 ))
kim idaà svit kuto veti
deva-deva na vedmy aham
sarvato mukham äyäti
tejaù parama-däruëam
SYNONYMS
kim—what is; idam—this; svit—does it come; kutaù—wherefrom; vä iti—be
either; deva-deva—O Lord of lords; na—not; vedmi—do I know; aham—I;
sarvataù—all around; mukham—directions; äyäti—coming from;
tejaù—effulgence; parama—very much; däruëam—dangerous.
TRANSLATION
O Lord of lords, how is it that this dangerous effulgence is spreading all
around? Where does it come from? I do not understand it.
PURPORT
Anything that is presented before the Personality of Godhead should be so
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
done after due presentation of respectful prayers. That is the standard
procedure, and Çré Arjuna, although an intimate friend of the Lord, is
observing this method for general information.
TEXT 27
é[q>aGavaNauvac
veTQaed& d]ae<aPau}aSYa b]aøMañ& Pa[diXaRTaMa( )
NaEvaSaaE ved Sa&har& Pa[a<abaDa oPaiSQaTae )) 27 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
vetthedaà droëa-putrasya
brähmam astraà pradarçitam
naiväsau veda saàhäraà
präëa-bädha upasthite
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; uväca—said; vettha—just
know from Me; idam—this; droëa-putrasya—of the son of Droëa; brähmam
astram—hymns of the brähma (nuclear) weapon; pradarçitam—exhibited;
na—not; eva—even; asau—he; veda—know it; saàhäram—retraction;
präëa-bädhe—extinction of life; upasthite—being imminent.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Know from Me that this is the
act of the son of Droëa. He has thrown the hymns of nuclear energy
[brahmästra], and he does not know how to retract the glare. He has helplessly
done this, being afraid of imminent death.
PURPORT
The brahmästra is similar to the modern nuclear weapon manipulated by
atomic energy. The atomic energy works wholly on total combustibility, and so
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the brahmästra also acts. It creates an intolerable heat similar to atomic
radiation, but the difference is that the atomic bomb is a gross type of nuclear
weapon, whereas the brahmästra is a subtle type of weapon produced by
chanting hymns. It is a different science, and in the days gone by such science
was cultivated in the land of Bhärata-varña. The subtle science of chanting
hymns is also material, but it has yet to be known by the modern material
scientists. Subtle material science is not spiritual, but it has a direct
relationship with the spiritual method, which is still subtler. A chanter of
hymns knew how to apply the weapon as well as how to retract it. That was
perfect knowledge. But the son of Droëäcärya, who made use of this subtle
science, did not know how to retract. He applied it, being afraid of his
imminent death, and thus the practice was not only improper but also
irreligious. As the son of a brähmaëa, he should not have made so many
mistakes, and for such gross negligence of duty he was to be punished by the
Lord Himself.
TEXT 28
Na ùSYaaNYaTaMa& ik-iÄdñ& Pa[TYavk-XaRNaMa( )
JaùñTaeJa oàÖMañjae ùñTaeJaSaa )) 28 ))
na hy asyänyatamaà kiïcid
astraà pratyavakarçanam
jahy astra-teja unnaddham
astra-jïo hy astra-tejasä
SYNONYMS
na—not; hi—certainly; asya—of it; anyatamam—other; kiïcit—anything;
astram—weapon; prati—counter; avakarçanam—reactionary; jahi—subdue it;
astra-tejaù—the glare of this weapon; unnaddham—very powerful;
astra-jïaù—expert in military science; hi—as a matter of fact; astra-tejasä—by
the influence of your weapon.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
O Arjuna, only another brahmästra can counteract this weapon. Since you
are expert in the military science, subdue this weapon’s glare with the power of
your own weapon.
PURPORT
For the atomic bombs there is no counterweapon to neutralize the effects.
But by subtle science the action of a brahmästra can be counteracted, and
those who were expert in the military science in those days could counteract
the brahmästra. The son of Droëäcärya did not know the art of counteracting
the weapon, and therefore Arjuna was asked to counteract it by the power of
his own weapon.
TEXT 29
SaUTa ovac
é[uTva >aGavTaa Pa[ae¢&- f-aLGauNa" Parvqrha )
SPa*îaPaSTa& Pair§-MYa b]aø& b]aøañ& SaNdDae )) 29 ))
süta uväca
çrutvä bhagavatä proktaà
phälgunaù para-véra-hä
spåñöväpas taà parikramya
brähmaà brähmästraà sandadhe
SYNONYMS
sütaù—Süta Gosvämé; uväca—said; çrutvä—after hearing; bhagavatä—by the
Personality of Godhead; proktam—what was said; phälgunaù—another name
of Çré Arjuna; para-véra-hä—the killer of the opposing warrior; spåñövä—after
touching; äpaù—water; tam—Him; parikramya—circumambulating;
brähmam—the Supreme Lord; brähma-astram—the supreme weapon;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
sandadhe—acted on.
TRANSLATION
Çré Süta Gosvämé said: Hearing this from the Personality of Godhead,
Arjuna touched water for purification, and after circumambulating Lord Çré
Kåñëa, he cast his brahmästra weapon to counteract the other one.
TEXT 30
Sa&hTYaaNYaaeNYaMau>aYaaeSTaeJaSaq XarSa&v*Tae )
Aav*TYa raedSaq %& c vv*DaaTae_kR-viövTa( )) 30 ))
saàhatyänyonyam ubhayos
tejasé çara-saàvåte
ävåtya rodasé khaà ca
vavådhäte ’rka-vahnivat
SYNONYMS
saàhatya—by combination of; anyonyam—one another; ubhayoù—of both;
tejasé—the glares; çara—weapons; saàvåte—covering; ävåtya—covering;
rodasé—the complete firmament; kham ca—outer space also;
vavådhäte—increasing; arka—the sun globe; vahni-vat—like fire.
TRANSLATION
When the rays of the two brahmästras combined, a great circle of fire, like
the disc of the sun, covered all outer space and the whole firmament of planets.
PURPORT
The heat created by the flash of a brahmästra resembles the fire exhibited
in the sun globe at the time of cosmic annihilation. The radiation of atomic
energy is very insignificant in comparison to the heat produced by a
brahmästra. The atomic bomb explosion can at utmost blow up one globe, but
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the heat produced by the brahmästra can destroy the whole cosmic situation.
The comparison is therefore made to the heat at the time of annihilation.
TEXT 31
d*îañTaeJaSTau TaYaaeñqçaek-aNa( Pa[dhNMahTa( )
dùMaaNaa" Pa[Jaa" SavaR" Saa&vTaRk-MaMa&SaTa )) 31 ))
dåñövästra-tejas tu tayos
trél lokän pradahan mahat
dahyamänäù prajäù sarväù
säàvartakam amaàsata
SYNONYMS
dåñövä—thus seeing; astra—weapon; tejaù—heat; tu—but; tayoù—of both;
trén—three; lokän—planets; pradahat—blazing; mahat—severely;
dahyamänäù—burning; prajäù—population; sarväù—all over;
säàvartakam—the name of the fire which devastates during the annihilation
of the universe; amaàsata—began to think.
TRANSLATION
All the population of the three worlds was scorched by the combined heat of
the weapons. Everyone was reminded of the säàvartaka fire which takes place
at the time of annihilation.
PURPORT
The three worlds are the upper, lower and intermediate planets of the
universe. Although the brahmästra was released on this earth, the heat
produced by the combination of both weapons covered all the universe, and all
the populations on all the different planets began to feel the heat excessively
and compared it to that of the säàvartaka fire. No planet, therefore, is without
living beings, as less intelligent materialistic men think.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 32
Pa[JaaePad]vMaal/+Ya l/aek-VYaiTak-r& c TaMa( )
MaTa& c vaSaudevSYa SaÅharaJauRNaae ÜYaMa( )) 32 ))
prajopadravam älakñya
loka-vyatikaraà ca tam
mataà ca väsudevasya
saïjahärärjuno dvayam
SYNONYMS
prajä—the people in general; upadravam—disturbance; älakñya—having seen
it; loka—the planets; vyatikaram—destruction; ca—also; tam—that; matam
ca—and the opinion; väsudevasya—of Väsudeva, Çré Kåñëa;
saïjahära—retracted; arjunaù—Arjuna; dvayam—both the weapons.
TRANSLATION
Thus seeing the disturbance of the general populace and the imminent
destruction of the planets, Arjuna at once retracted both brahmästra weapons,
as Lord Çré Kåñëa desired.
PURPORT
The theory that the modern atomic bomb explosions can annihilate the
world is childish imagination. First of all, the atomic energy is not powerful
enough to destroy the world. And secondly, ultimately it all rests on the
supreme will of the Supreme Lord because without His will or sanction
nothing can be built up or destroyed. It is foolish also to think that natural
laws are ultimately powerful. Material nature’s law works under the direction
of the Lord, as confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä. The Lord says there that
natural laws work under His supervision. The world can be destroyed only by
the will of the Lord and not by the whims of tiny politicians. Lord Çré Kåñëa
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
desired that the weapons released by both Drauëi and Arjuna be withdrawn,
and it was carried out by Arjuna at once. Similarly, there are many agents of
the all-powerful Lord, and by His will only can one execute what He desires.
TEXT 33
TaTa AaSaaÛ TarSaa daå<a& GaaETaMaqSauTaMa( )
bbNDaaMazRTaaMa]a+a" Paéu& rXaNaYaa YaQaa )) 33 ))
tata äsädya tarasä
däruëaà gautamé-sutam
babandhämarña-tämräkñaù
paçuà raçanayä yathä
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereupon; äsädya—arrested; tarasä—dexterously;
däruëam—dangerous; gautamé-sutam—the son of Gautamé; babandha—bound
up; amarña—angry; tämra-akñaù—with copper-red eyes; paçum—animal;
raçanayä—by ropes; yathä—as it were.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna, his eyes blazing in anger like two red balls of copper, dexterously
arrested the son of Gautamé and bound him with ropes like an animal.
PURPORT
Açvatthämä’s mother, Kåpé, was born in the family of Gautama. The
significant point in this çloka is that Açvatthämä was caught and bound up
with ropes like an animal. According to Çrédhara Svämé, Arjuna was obliged to
catch this son of a brähmaëa like an animal as a part of his duty (dharma). This
suggestion by Çrédhara Svämé is also confirmed in the later statement of Çré
Kåñëa. Açvatthämä was a bona fide son of Droëäcärya and Kåpé, but because
he had degraded himself to a lower status of life, it was proper to treat him as
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
an animal and not as a brähmaëa.
TEXT 34
iXaibraYa iNaNaqzNTa& rJJvabd(ßairPau& bl/aTa( )
Pa[ahaJauRNa& Pa[ku-iPaTaae >aGavaNaMbuJae+a<a" )) 34 ))
çibiräya ninéñantaà
rajjvä baddhvä ripuà balät
prähärjunaà prakupito
bhagavän ambujekñaëaù
SYNONYMS
çibiräya—on the way to the military camp; ninéñantam—while bringing him;
rajjvä—by the ropes; baddhvä—bound up; ripum—the enemy; balät—by force;
präha—said; arjunam—unto Arjuna; prakupitaù—in an angry mood;
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; ambuja-ékñaëaù—who looks with His
lotus eyes.
TRANSLATION
After binding Açvatthämä, Arjuna wanted to take him to the military camp.
The Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa, looking on with His lotus eyes, spoke to
angry Arjuna.
PURPORT
Both Arjuna and Lord Çré Kåñëa are described here in an angry mood, but
Arjuna’s eyes were like balls of red copper whereas the eyes of the Lord were
like lotuses. This means that the angry mood of Arjuna and that of the Lord
are not on the same level. The Lord is Transcendence, and thus He is absolute
in any stage. His anger is not like the anger of a conditioned living being
within the modes of qualitative material nature. Because He is absolute, both
His anger and pleasure are the same. His anger is not exhibited in the three
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
modes of material nature. It is only a sign of His bent of mind towards the
cause of His devotee because that is His transcendental nature. Therefore,
even if He is angry, the object of anger is blessed. He is unchanged in all
circumstances.
TEXT 35
MaENa& PaaQaaRhRiSa }aaTau& b]øbNDauiMaMa& Jaih )
Yaae_SaavNaaGaSa" SauáaNavDaqiàiXa bal/k-aNa( )) 35 ))
mainaà pärthärhasi trätuà
brahma-bandhum imaà jahi
yo ’säv anägasaù suptän
avadhén niçi bälakän
SYNONYMS
mä enam—never unto him; pärtha—O Arjuna; arhasi—ought to;
trätum—give release; brahma-bandhum—a relative of a brähmaëa;
imam—him; jahi—kill; yaù—he (who has); asau—those; anägasaù—faultless;
suptän—while sleeping; avadhét—killed; niçi—at night; bälakän—the boys.
TRANSLATION
Lord Çré Kåñëa said: O Arjuna, you should not show mercy by releasing this
relative of a brähmaëa [brahma-bandhu], for he has killed innocent boys in
their sleep.
PURPORT
The word brahma-bandhu is significant. A person who happens to take
birth in the family of a brähmaëa but is not qualified to be called a brähmaëa is
addressed as the relative of a brähmaëa, and not as a brähmaëa. The son of a
high court judge is not virtually a high court judge, but there is no harm in
addressing a high court judge’s son as a relative of the Honorable Justice.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Therefore, as by birth only one does not become a high court judge, so also one
does not become a brähmaëa simply by birthright but by acquiring the
necessary qualifications of a brähmaëa. As the high court judgeship is a post
for the qualified man, so also the post of a brähmaëa is attainable by
qualification only. The çästra enjoins that even if good qualifications are seen
in a person born in a family other than that of a brähmaëa, the qualified man
has to be accepted as a brähmaëa, and similarly if a person born in the family
of a brähmaëa is void of brahminical qualification, then he must be treated as a
non-brähmaëa or, in better terms, a relative of a brähmaëa. Lord Çré Kåñëa, the
supreme authority of all religious principles, the Vedas, has personally pointed
out these differences, and He is about to explain the reason for this in the
following çlokas.
TEXT 36
Mata& Pa[MataMauNMata& Sauá& bal&/ iñYa& Ja@Ma( )
Pa[Paà& ivrQa& >aqTa& Na irPau& hiNTa DaMaRivTa( )) 36 ))
mattaà pramattam unmattaà
suptaà bälaà striyaà jaòam
prapannaà virathaà bhétaà
na ripuà hanti dharma-vit
SYNONYMS
mattam—careless; pramattam—intoxicated; unmattam—insane;
suptam—asleep; bälam—boy; striyam—woman; jaòam—foolish;
prapannam—surrendered; viratham—one who has lost his chariot;
bhétam—afraid; na—not; ripum—enemy; hanti—kill; dharma-vit—one who
knows the principles of religion.
TRANSLATION
A person who knows the principles of religion does not kill an enemy who is
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
careless, intoxicated, insane, asleep, afraid or devoid of his chariot. Nor does he
kill a boy, a woman, a foolish creature or a surrendered soul.
PURPORT
An enemy who does not resist is never killed by a warrior who knows the
principles of religion. Formerly battles were fought on the principles of religion
and not for the sake of sense gratification. If the enemy happened to be
intoxicated, asleep, etc., as above mentioned, he was never to be killed. These
are some of the codes of religious war. Formerly war was never declared by the
whims of selfish political leaders; it was carried out on religious principles free
from all vices. Violence carried out on religious principles is far superior to
so-called nonviolence.
TEXT 37
SvPa[a<aaNa( Ya" ParPa[a<aE" Pa[PauZ<aaTYaga*<a" %l/" )
TaÜDaSTaSYa ih é[eYaae YaÕaezaÛaTYaDa" PauMaaNa( )) 37 ))
sva-präëän yaù para-präëaiù
prapuñëäty aghåëaù khalaù
tad-vadhas tasya hi çreyo
yad-doñäd yäty adhaù pumän
SYNONYMS
sva-präëän—one’s own life; yaù—one who; para-präëaiù—at the cost of
others’ lives; prapuñëäti—maintains properly; aghåëaù—shameless;
khalaù—wretched; tat-vadhaù—killing of him; tasya—his; hi—certainly;
çreyaù—well-being; yat—by which; doñät—by the fault; yäti—goes;
adhaù—downwards; pumän—a person.
TRANSLATION
A cruel and wretched person who maintains his existence at the cost of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
others’ lives deserves to be killed for his own well-being, otherwise he will go
down by his own actions.
PURPORT
A life for a life is just punishment for a person who cruelly and shamelessly
lives at the cost of another’s life. Political morality is to punish a person by a
death sentence in order to save a cruel person from going to hell. That a
murderer is condemned to a death sentence by the state is good for the culprit
because in his next life he will not have to suffer for his act of murder. Such a
death sentence for the murderer is the lowest possible punishment offered to
him, and it is said in the småti-çästras that men who are punished by the king
on the principle of a life for a life are purified of all their sins, so much so that
they may be eligible for being promoted to the planets of heaven. According to
Manu, the great author of civic codes and religious principles, even the killer
of an animal is to be considered a murderer because animal food is never
meant for the civilized man, whose prime duty is to prepare himself for going
back to Godhead. He says that in the act of killing an animal, there is a regular
conspiracy by the party of sinners, and all of them are liable to be punished as
murderers exactly like a party of conspirators who kill a human being
combinedly. He who gives permission, he who kills the animal, he who sells the
slaughtered animal, he who cooks the animal, he who administers distribution of
the foodstuff, and at last he who eats such cooked animal food are all murderers,
and all of them are liable to be punished by the laws of nature. No one can create
a living being despite all advancement of material science, and therefore no
one has the right to kill a living being by one’s independent whims. For the
animal-eaters, the scriptures have sanctioned restricted animal sacrifices only,
and such sanctions are there just to restrict the opening of slaughterhouses and
not to encourage animal-killing. The procedure under which animal sacrifice
is allowed in the scriptures is good both for the animal sacrificed and the
animal-eaters. It is good for the animal in the sense that the sacrificed animal
is at once promoted to the human form of life after being sacrificed at the
altar, and the animal-eater is saved from grosser types of sins (eating meats
supplied by organized slaughterhouses which are ghastly places for breeding all
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
kinds of material afflictions to society, country and the people in general). The
material world is itself a place always full of anxieties, and by encouraging
animal slaughter the whole atmosphere becomes polluted more and more by
war, pestilence, famine and many other unwanted calamities.
TEXT 38
Pa[iTaé[uTa& c >avTaa PaaÄaLYaE é*<vTaae MaMa )
AahirZYae iXarSTaSYa YaSTae MaaiNaiNa Pau}aha )) 38 ))
pratiçrutaà ca bhavatä
päïcälyai çåëvato mama
ähariñye çiras tasya
yas te mänini putra-hä
SYNONYMS
pratiçrutam—it is promised; ca—and; bhavatä—by you; päïcälyai—unto the
daughter of the King of Päïcäla (Draupadé); çåëvataù—which was heard;
mama—by Me personally; ähariñye—must I bring; çiraù—the head; tasya—of
him; yaù—whom; te—your; mänini—consider; putra-hä—the killer of your
sons.
TRANSLATION
Furthermore, I have personally heard you promise Draupadé that you would
bring forth the head of the killer of her sons.
TEXT 39
TadSaaE vDYaTaa& PaaPa AaTaTaaYYaaTMabNDauha )
>aTauRê iviPa[Ya& vqr k*-TavaNa( ku-l/Paa&SaNa" )) 39 ))
tad asau vadhyatäà päpa
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ätatäyy ätma-bandhu-hä
bhartuç ca vipriyaà véra
kåtavän kula-päàsanaù
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; asau—this man; vadhyatäm—will be killed; päpaù—the sinner;
ätatäyé—assaulter; ätma—own; bandhu-hä—killer of sons; bhartuù—of the
master; ca—also; vipriyam—having not satisfied; véra—O warrior;
kåtavän—one who has done it; kula-päàsanaù—the burnt remnants of the
family.
TRANSLATION
This man is an assassin and murderer of your own family members. Not only
that, but he has also dissatisfied his master. He is but the burnt remnants of his
family. Kill him immediately.
PURPORT
The son of Droëäcärya is condemned here as the burnt remnants of his
family. The good name of Droëäcärya was very much respected. Although he
joined the enemy camp, the Päëòavas held him always in respect, and Arjuna
saluted him before beginning the fight. There was nothing wrong in that way.
But the son of Droëäcärya degraded himself by committing acts which are
never done by the dvijas, or the twice-born higher castes. Açvatthämä, the son
of Droëäcärya, committed murder by killing the five sleeping sons of Draupadé,
by which he dissatisfied his master Duryodhana, who never approved of the
heinous act of killing the five sleeping sons of the Päëòavas. This means that
Açvatthämä became an assaulter of Arjuna’s own family members, and thus he
was liable to be punished by him. In the çästras, he who attacks without notice
or kills from behind or sets fire to another’s house or kidnaps one’s wife is
condemned to death. Kåñëa reminded Arjuna of these facts so that he might
take notice of them and do the needful.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 40
SaUTa ovac
Wv& Parq+aTaa DaMa| PaaQaR" k*-Z<aeNa caeidTa" )
NaEC^ÖNTau& GauåSauTa& YaÛPYaaTMahNa& MahaNa( )) 40 ))
süta uväca
evaà parékñatä dharmaà
pärthaù kåñëena coditaù
naicchad dhantuà guru-sutaà
yadyapy ätma-hanaà mahän
SYNONYMS
sütaù—Süta Gosvämé; uväca—said; evam—this; parékñatä—being examined;
dharmam—in the matter of duty; pärthaù—Çré Arjuna; kåñëena—by Lord
Kåñëa; coditaù—being encouraged; na aicchat—did not like; hantum—to kill;
guru-sutam—the son of his teacher; yadyapi—although;
ätma-hanam—murderer of sons; mahän—very great.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: Although Kåñëa, who was examining Arjuna in religion,
encouraged Arjuna to kill the son of Droëäcärya, Arjuna, a great soul, did not
like the idea of killing him, although Açvatthämä was a heinous murderer of
Arjuna’s family members.
PURPORT
Arjuna was a great soul undoubtedly, which is proved here also. He is
encouraged herein personally by the Lord to kill the son of Droëa, but Arjuna
considers that the son of his great teacher should be spared, for he happens to
be the son of Droëäcärya, even though he is an unworthy son, having done all
sorts of heinous acts whimsically for no one’s benefit.
Lord Çré Kåñëa encouraged Arjuna outwardly just to test Arjuna’s sense of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
duty. It is not that Arjuna was incomplete in the sense of his duty, nor was
Lord Çré Kåñëa unaware of Arjuna’s sense of duty. But Lord Çré Kåñëa put to
test many of His pure devotees just to magnify the sense of duty. The gopés
were put to such tests as well. Prahläda Mahäräja also was put to such a test.
All pure devotees come out successful in the respective tests by the Lord.
TEXT 41
AQaaePaeTYa SviXaibr& GaaeivNdiPa[YaSaariQa" )
NYavedYata& iPa[YaaYaE XaaecNTYaa AaTMaJaaNa( hTaaNa( )) 41 ))
athopetya sva-çibiraà
govinda-priya-särathiù
nyavedayat taà priyäyai
çocantyä ätma-jän hatän
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; upetya—having reached; sva—own; çibiram—camp;
govinda—one who enlivens the senses (Lord Çré Kåñëa); priya—dear;
särathiù—the charioteer; nyavedayat—entrusted to; tam—him; priyäyai—unto
the dear; çocantyai—lamenting for; ätma-jän—own sons; hatän—murdered.
TRANSLATION
After reaching his own camp, Arjuna, along with his dear friend and
charioteer [Çré Kåñëa], entrusted the murderer unto his dear wife, who was
lamenting for her murdered sons.
PURPORT
The transcendental relation of Arjuna with Kåñëa is of the dearmost
friendship. In the Bhagavad-gétä the Lord Himself has claimed Arjuna as His
dearmost friend. Every living being is thus related with the Supreme Lord by
some sort of affectionate relation, either as servant or as friend or as parent or
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
as an object of conjugal love. Everyone thus can enjoy the company of the
Lord in the spiritual realm if he at all desires and sincerely tries for it by the
process of bhakti-yoga.
TEXT 42
TaQaaôTa& PaéuvTa( PaaXabÖ‚
Mavax(Mau%& k-MaRJauGauiPSaTaeNa )
iNarq+Ya k*-Z<aaPak*-Ta& Gaurae" SauTa&
vaMaSv>aava k*-PaYaa NaNaaMa c )) 42 ))
tathähåtaà paçuvat päça-baddham
aväì-mukhaà karma-jugupsitena
nirékñya kåñëäpakåtaà guroù sutaà
väma-svabhävä kåpayä nanäma ca
SYNONYMS
tathä—thus; ähåtam—brought in; paçu-vat—like an animal;
päça-baddham—tied with ropes; aväk-mukham—without a word in his mouth;
karma—activities; jugupsitena—being heinous; nirékñya—by seeing;
kåñëä—Draupadé; apakåtam—the doer of the degrading; guroù—the teacher;
sutam—son; väma—beautiful; svabhävä—nature; kåpayä—out of compassion;
nanäma—offered obeisances; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
Çré Süta Gosvämé said: Draupadé then saw Açvatthämä, who was bound with
ropes like an animal and silent for having enacted the most inglorious murder.
Due to her female nature, and due to her being naturally good and
well-behaved, she showed him due respects as a brähmaëa.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Açvatthämä was condemned by the Lord Himself, and he was treated by
Arjuna just like a culprit, not like the son of a brähmaëa or teacher. But when
he was brought before Çrématé Draupadé, she, although begrieved for the
murder of her sons, and although the murderer was present before her, could
not withdraw the due respect generally offered to a brähmaëa or to the son of a
brähmaëa. This is due to her mild nature as a woman. Women as a class are no
better than boys, and therefore they have no discriminatory power like that of
a man. Açvatthämä proved himself to be an unworthy son of Droëäcärya or of
a brähmaëa, and for this reason he was condemned by the greatest authority,
Lord Çré Kåñëa, and yet a mild woman could not withdraw her natural courtesy
for a brähmaëa.
Even to date, in a Hindu family a woman shows proper respect to the
brähmaëa caste, however fallen and heinous a brahma-bandhu may be. But the
men have begun to protest against brahma-bandhus who are born in families of
good brähmaëas but by action are less than çüdras.
The specific words used in this çloka are väma-svabhävä, “mild and gentle by
nature.” A good man or woman accepts anything very easily, but a man of
average intelligence does not do so. But, anyway, we should not give up our
reason and discriminatory power just to be gentle. One must have good
discriminatory power to judge a thing on its merit. We should not follow the
mild nature of a woman and thereby accept that which is not genuine.
Açvatthämä may be respected by a good-natured woman, but that does not
mean that he is as good as a genuine brähmaëa.
TEXT 43
ovac caSahNTYaSYa bNDaNaaNaYaNa& SaTaq )
MauCYaTaa& MauCYaTaaMaez b]aø<aae iNaTara& Gauå" )) 43 ))
uväca cäsahanty asya
bandhanänayanaà saté
mucyatäà mucyatäm eña
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
brähmaëo nitaräà guruù
SYNONYMS
uväca—said; ca—and; asahanté—being unbearable for her; asya—his;
bandhana—being bound; änayanam—bringing him; saté—the devoted;
mucyatäm mucyatäm—just get him released; eñaù—this; brähmaëaù—a
brähmaëa; nitaräm—our; guruù—teacher.
TRANSLATION
She could not tolerate Açvatthämä’s being bound by ropes, and being a
devoted lady, she said: Release him, for he is a brähmaëa, our spiritual master.
PURPORT
As soon as Açvatthämä was brought before Draupadé, she thought it
intolerable that a brähmaëa should be arrested like a culprit and brought
before her in that condition, especially when the brähmaëa happened to be a
teacher’s son.
Arjuna arrested Açvatthämä knowing perfectly well that he was the son of
Droëäcärya. Kåñëa also knew him to be so, but both of them condemned the
murderer without consideration of his being the son of a brähmaëa. According
to revealed scriptures, a teacher or spiritual master is liable to be rejected if he
proves himself unworthy of the position of a guru or spiritual master. A guru is
called also an äcärya, or a person who has personally assimilated all the essence
of çästras and has helped his disciples to adopt the ways. Açvatthämä failed to
discharge the duties of a brähmaëa or teacher, and therefore he was liable to be
rejected from the exalted position of a brähmaëa. On this consideration, both
Lord Çré Kåñëa and Arjuna were right in condemning Açvatthämä. But to a
good lady like Draupadé, the matter was considered not from the angle of
çästric vision, but as a matter of custom. By custom, Açvatthämä was offered
the same respect as offered to his father. It was so because generally the people
accept the son of a brähmaëa as a real brähmaëa, by sentiment only. Factually
the matter is different. A brähmaëa is accepted on the merit of qualification
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
and not on the merit of simply being the son of a brähmaëa.
But in spite of all this, Draupadé desired that Açvatthämä be at once
released, and it was all the same a good sentiment for her. This means that a
devotee of the Lord can tolerate all sorts of tribulation personally, but still
such devotees are never unkind to others, even to the enemy. These are the
characteristics of one who is a pure devotee of the Lord.
TEXT 44
SarhSYaae DaNauveRd" SaivSaGaaeRPaSa&YaMa" )
AñGa]aMaê >avTaa iXai+aTaae YadNauGa]haTa( )) 44 ))
sarahasyo dhanur-vedaù
savisargopasaàyamaù
astra-grämaç ca bhavatä
çikñito yad-anugrahät
SYNONYMS
sa-rahasyaù—confidential; dhanuù-vedaù—knowledge in the art of
manipulating bows and arrows; sa-visarga—releasing;
upasaàyamaù—controlling; astra—weapons; grämaù—all kinds of; ca—and;
bhavatä—by yourself; çikñitaù—learned; yat—by whose; anugrahät—mercy of.
TRANSLATION
It was by Droëäcärya’s mercy that you learned the military art of throwing
arrows and the confidential art of controlling weapons.
PURPORT
Dhanur-veda, or military science, was taught by Droëäcärya with all its
confidential secrets of throwing and controlling by Vedic hymns. Gross
military science is dependent on material weapons, but finer than that is the
art of throwing the arrows saturated with Vedic hymns, which act more
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
effectively than gross material weapons like machine guns or atomic bombs.
The control is by Vedic mantras, or the transcendental science of sound. It is
said in the Rämäyaëa that Mahäräja Daçaratha, the father of Lord Çré Räma,
used to control arrows by sound only. He could pierce his target with his arrow
by only hearing the sound, without seeing the object. So this is a finer military
science than that of the gross material military weapons used nowadays.
Arjuna was taught all this, and therefore Draupadé wished that Arjuna feel
obliged to Äcärya Droëa for all these benefits. And in the absence of
Droëäcärya, his son was his representative. That was the opinion of the good
lady Draupadé. It may be argued why Droëäcärya, a rigid brähmaëa, should be a
teacher in military science. But the reply is that a brähmaëa should become a
teacher, regardless of what his department of knowledge is. A learned
brähmaëa should become a teacher, a priest and a recipient of charity. A bona
fide brähmaëa is authorized to accept such professions.
TEXT 45
Sa Wz >aGavaNa( d]ae<a" Pa[JaaæPae<a vTaRTae )
TaSYaaTMaNaae_Da| PaTNYaaSTae NaaNvGaaÜqrSaU" k*-Paq )) 45 ))
sa eña bhagavän droëaù
prajä-rüpeëa vartate
tasyätmano ’rdhaà patny äste
nänvagäd vérasüù kåpé
SYNONYMS
saù—he; eñaù—certainly; bhagavän—lord; droëaù—Droëäcärya;
prajä-rüpeëa—in the form of his son Açvatthämä; vartate—is existing;
tasya—his; ätmanaù—of the body; ardham—half; patné—wife; äste—living;
na—not; anvagät—undertook; vérasüù—having the son present; kåpé—the
sister of Kåpäcärya.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
He [Droëäcärya] is certainly still existing, being represented by his son. His
wife Kåpé did not undergo a saté with him because she had a son.
PURPORT
The wife of Droëäcärya, Kåpé, is the sister of Kåpäcärya. A devoted wife,
who is according to revealed scripture the better half of her husband, is
justified in embracing voluntary death along with her husband if she is
without issue. But in the case of the wife of Droëäcärya, she did not undergo
such a trial because she had her son, the representative of her husband. A
widow is a widow only in name if there is a son of her husband existing. So in
either case Açvatthämä was the representative of Droëäcärya, and therefore
killing Açvatthämä would be like killing Droëäcärya. That was the argument
of Draupadé against the killing of Açvatthämä.
TEXT 46
Tad( DaMaRj Maha>aaGa >aviÙGaaOErv& ku-l/Ma( )
v*iJaNa& NaahRiTa Pa[aáu& PaUJYa& vNÛMa>aq+<aXa" )) 46 ))
tad dharmajïa mahä-bhäga
bhavadbhir gauravaà kulam
våjinaà närhati präptuà
püjyaà vandyam abhékñëaçaù
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; dharma-jïa—one who is aware of the principles of religion;
mahä-bhäga—the most fortunate; bhavadbhiù—by your good self;
gauravam—glorified; kulam—the family; våjinam—that which is painful;
na—not; arhati—does deserve; präptum—for obtaining; püjyam—the
worshipable; vandyam—respectable; abhékñëaçaù—constantly.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
O most fortunate one who knows the principles of religion, it is not good for
you to cause grief to glorious family members who are always respectable and
worshipful.
PURPORT
A slight insult for a respectable family is sufficient to invoke grief.
Therefore, a cultured man should always be careful in dealing with worshipful
family members.
TEXT 47
Maa raedqdSYa JaNaNaq GaaETaMaq PaiTadevTaa )
YaQaah& Ma*TavTSaaTaaR raeidMYaé[uMau%q Mauhu" )) 47 ))
mä rodéd asya janané
gautamé pati-devatä
yathähaà måta-vatsärtä
rodimy açru-mukhé muhuù
SYNONYMS
mä—do not; rodét—make cry; asya—his; janané—mother; gautamé—the wife
of Droëa; pati-devatä—chaste; yathä—as has; aham—myself; måta-vatsä—one
whose child is dead; ärtä—distressed; rodimi—crying; açru-mukhé—tears in
the eyes; muhuù—constantly.
TRANSLATION
My lord, do not make the wife of Droëäcärya cry like me. I am aggrieved for
the death of my sons. She need not cry constantly like me.
PURPORT
Sympathetic good lady as she was, Çrématé Draupadé did not want to put the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
wife of Droëäcärya in the same position of childlessness, both from the point
of motherly feelings and from the respectable position held by the wife of
Droëäcärya.
TEXT 48
YaE" k-aeiPaTa& b]øku-l&/ raJaNYaEriJaTaaTMai>a" )
TaTa( ku-l&/ Pa[dhTYaaéu SaaNaubNDa& éucaiPaRTaMa( )) 48 ))
yaiù kopitaà brahma-kulaà
räjanyair ajitätmabhiù
tat kulaà pradahaty äçu
sänubandhaà çucärpitam
SYNONYMS
yaiù—by those; kopitam—enraged; brahma-kulam—the order of the
brähmaëas; räjanyaiù—by the administrative order; ajita—unrestricted;
ätmabhiù—by oneself; tat—that; kulam—family; pradahati—is burnt up;
äçu—within no time; sa-anubandham—together with family members;
çucä-arpitam—being put into grief.
TRANSLATION
If the kingly administrative order, being unrestricted in sense control,
offends the brähmaëa order and enrages them, then the fire of that rage burns
up the whole body of the royal family and brings grief upon all.
PURPORT
The brähmaëa order of society, or the spiritually advanced caste or
community, and the members of such highly elevated families, were always
held in great esteem by the other, subordinate castes, namely the
administrative kingly order, the mercantile order and the laborers.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 49
SaUTa ovac
DaMYa| NYaaYYa& Sak-å<a& iNaVYaRl/Ik&- SaMa& MahTa( )
raJaa DaMaRSauTaae raYaa" Pa[TYaNaNdÜcae iÜJaa" )) 49 ))
süta uväca
dharmyaà nyäyyaà sakaruëaà
nirvyalékaà samaà mahat
räjä dharma-suto räjïyäù
pratyanandad vaco dvijäù
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; dharmyam—in accordance with the
principles of religion; nyäyyam—justice; sa-karuëam—full of mercy;
nirvyalékam—without duplicity in dharma; samam—equity; mahat—glorious;
räjä—the King; dharma-sutaù—son; räjïyäù—by the Queen;
pratyanandat—supported; vacaù—statements; dvijäù—O brähmaëas.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: O brähmaëas, King Yudhiñöhira fully supported the
statements of the Queen, which were in accordance with the principles of
religion and were justified, glorious, full of mercy and equity, and without
duplicity.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, who was the son of Dharmaräja, or Yamaräja, fully
supported the words of Queen Draupadé in asking Arjuna to release
Açvatthämä. One should not tolerate the humiliation of a member of a great
family. Arjuna and his family were indebted to the family of Droëäcärya
because of Arjuna’s learning the military science from him. If ingratitude were
shown to such a benevolent family, it would not be at all justified from the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
moral standpoint. The wife of Droëäcärya, who was the half body of the great
soul, must be treated with compassion, and she should not be put into grief
because of her son’s death. That is compassion. Such statements by Draupadé
are without duplicity because actions should be taken with full knowledge. The
feeling of equality was there because Draupadé spoke out of her personal
experience. A barren woman cannot understand the grief of a mother.
Draupadé was herself a mother, and therefore her calculation of the depth of
Kåpé’s grief was quite to the point. And it was glorious because she wanted to
show proper respect to a great family.
TEXT 50
Naku-l/" Sahdevê YauYauDaaNaae DaNaÅYa" )
>aGavaNa( devk-IPau}aae Yae caNYae Yaaê YaaeizTa" )) 50 ))
nakulaù sahadevaç ca
yuyudhäno dhanaïjayaù
bhagavän devaké-putro
ye cänye yäç ca yoñitaù
SYNONYMS
nakulaù—Nakula; sahadevaù—Sahadeva; ca—and; yuyudhänaù—Sätyaki;
dhanaïjayaù—Arjuna; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead;
devaké-putraù—the son of Devaké, Lord Çré Kåñëa; ye—those; ca—and;
anye—others; yäù—those; ca—and; yoñitaù—ladies.
TRANSLATION
Nakula and Sahadeva [the younger brothers of the King] and also Sätyaki,
Arjuna, the Personality of Godhead Lord Sri Kåñëa, son of Devaké, and the
ladies and others all unanimously agreed with the King.
TEXT 51
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Ta}aahaMaizRTaae >aqMaSTaSYa é[eYaaNa( vDa" SMa*Ta" )
Na >aTauRNaaRTMaNaêaQaeR Yaae_hNa( SauáaNa( iXaéUNa( v*Qaa )) 51 ))
taträhämarñito bhémas
tasya çreyän vadhaù småtaù
na bhartur nätmanaç cärthe
yo ’han suptän çiçün våthä
SYNONYMS
tatra—thereupon; äha—said; amarñitaù—in an angry mood; bhémaù—Bhéma;
tasya—his; çreyän—ultimate good; vadhaù—killing; småtaù—recorded;
na—not; bhartuù—of the master; na—nor; ätmanaù—of his own self;
ca—and; arthe—for the sake of; yaù—one who; ahan—killed;
suptän—sleeping; çiçün—children; våthä—without purpose.
TRANSLATION
Bhéma, however, disagreed with them and recommended killing this culprit
who, in an angry mood, had murdered sleeping children for no purpose and for
neither his nor his master’s interest.
TEXT 52
iNaXaMYa >aqMaGaidTa& d]aEPaÛaê cTau>auRJa" )
Aal/aeKYa vdNa& Sa:YauirdMaah hSaiàv )) 52 ))
niçamya bhéma-gaditaà
draupadyäç ca catur-bhujaù
älokya vadanaà sakhyur
idam äha hasann iva
SYNONYMS
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
niçamya—just after hearing; bhéma—Bhéma; gaditam—spoken by;
draupadyäù—of Draupadé; ca—and; catuù-bhujaù—the four-handed
(Personality of Godhead); älokya—having seen; vadanam—the face;
sakhyuù—of His friend; idam—this; äha—said; hasan—smiling; iva—as it.
TRANSLATION
Caturbhuja [the four-armed one], or the Personality of Godhead, after
hearing the words of Bhéma, Draupadé and others, saw the face of His dear
friend Arjuna, and He began to speak as if smiling.
PURPORT
Lord Çré Kåñëa had two arms, and why He is designated as four-armed is
explained by Çrédhara Svämé. Both Bhéma and Draupadé held opposite views
about killing Açvatthämä. Bhéma wanted him to be immediately killed,
whereas Draupadé wanted to save him. We can imagine Bhéma ready to kill
while Draupadé is obstructing him. And in order to prevent both of them, the
Lord discovered another two arms. Originally, the primeval Lord Çré Kåñëa
displays only two arms, but in His Näräyaëa feature He exhibits four. In His
Näräyaëa feature He resides with His devotees in the Vaikuëöha planets, while
in His original Çré Kåñëa feature He resides in the Kåñëaloka planet far, far
above the Vaikuëöha planets in the spiritual sky. Therefore, if Çré Kåñëa is
called caturbhujaù, there is no contradiction. If need be He can display
hundreds of arms, as He exhibited in His viçva-rüpa shown to Arjuna.
Therefore, one who can display hundreds and thousands of arms can also
manifest four whenever needed.
When Arjuna was perplexed about what to do with Açvatthämä, Lord Çré
Kåñëa, as the very dear friend of Arjuna, voluntarily took up the matter just to
make a solution. And He was smiling also.
TEXTS 53–54
é[q>aGavaNauvac
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
b]øbNDauNaR hNTaVYa AaTaTaaYaq vDaahR<a" )
MaYaEvae>aYaMaaManaTa& PairPaaùNauXaaSaNaMa( )) 53 ))
ku-å Pa[iTaé[uTa& SaTYa& YataTSaaNTvYaTaa iPa[YaaMa( )
iPa[Ya& c >aqMaSaeNaSYa PaaÄaLYaa MaùMaev c )) 54 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
brahma-bandhur na hantavya
ätatäyé vadhärhaëaù
mayaivobhayam ämnätaà
paripähy anuçäsanam
kuru pratiçrutaà satyaà
yat tat säntvayatä priyäm
priyaà ca bhémasenasya
päïcälyä mahyam eva ca
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; uväca—said;
brahma-bandhuù—the relative of a brähmaëa; na—not; hantavyaù—to be
killed; ätatäyé—the aggressor; vadha-arhaëaù—is due to be killed; mayä—by
Me; eva—certainly; ubhayam—both; ämnätam—described according to
rulings of the authority; paripähi—carry out; anuçäsanam—rulings;
kuru—abide by; pratiçrutam—as promised by; satyam—truth; yat tat—that
which; säntvayatä—while pacifying; priyäm—dear wife; priyam—satisfaction;
ca—also; bhémasenasya—of Çré Bhémasena; päïcälyäù—of Draupadé;
mahyam—unto Me also; eva—certainly; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead Sri Kåñëa said: A friend of a brähmaëa is not to
be killed, but if he is an aggressor he must be killed. All these rulings are in the
scriptures, and you should act accordingly. You have to fulfill your promise to
your wife, and you must also act to the satisfaction of Bhémasena and Me.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
Arjuna was perplexed because Açvatthämä was to be killed as well as spared
according to different scriptures cited by different persons. As a
brahma-bandhu, or a worthless son of a brähmaëa, Açvatthämä was not to be
killed, but he was at the same time an aggressor also. And according to the
rulings of Manu, an aggressor, even though he be a brähmaëa (and what to
speak of an unworthy son of a brähmaëa), is to be killed. Droëäcärya was
certainly a brähmaëa in the true sense of the term, but because he stood in the
battlefield he was killed. But although Açvatthämä was an aggressor, he stood
without any fighting weapons. The ruling is that an aggressor, when he is
without weapon or chariot, cannot be killed. All these were certainly
perplexities. Besides that, Arjuna had to keep the promise he had made before
Draupadé just to pacify her. And he also had to satisfy both Bhéma and Kåñëa,
who advised killing him. This dilemma was present before Arjuna, and the
solution was awarded by Kåñëa.
TEXT 55
SaUTa ovac
AJauRNa" SahSaajaYa hrehaRdRMaQaaiSaNaa )
Mai<a& Jahar MaUDaRNYa& iÜJaSYa SahMaUDaRJaMa( )) 55 ))
süta uväca
arjunaù sahasäjïäya
harer härdam athäsinä
maëià jahära mürdhanyaà
dvijasya saha-mürdhajam
SYNONYMS
sütaù—Süta Gosvämé; uväca—said; arjunaù—Arjuna; sahasä—just at that
time; äjïäya—knowing it; hareù—of the Lord; härdam—motive; atha—thus;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
asinä—by the sword; maëim—the jewel; jahära—separated; mürdhanyam—on
the head; dvijasya—of the twice-born; saha—with; mürdhajam—hairs.
TRANSLATION
Just then Arjuna could understand the motive of the Lord by His equivocal
orders, and thus with his sword he severed both hair and jewel from the head of
Açvatthämä.
PURPORT
Contradictory orders of different persons are impossible to carry out.
Therefore a compromise was selected by Arjuna by his sharp intelligence, and
he separated the jewel from the head of Açvatthämä. This was as good as
cutting off his head, and yet his life was saved for all practical purposes. Here
Açvatthämä is indicated as twice-born. Certainly he was twice-born, but he
fell down from his position, and therefore he was properly punished.
TEXT 56
ivMauCYa rXaNaabÖ& bal/hTYaahTaPa[>aMa( )
TaeJaSaa Mai<aNaa hqNa& iXaibraiàrYaaPaYaTa( )) 56 ))
vimucya raçanä-baddhaà
bäla-hatyä-hata-prabham
tejasä maëinä hénaà
çibirän nirayäpayat
SYNONYMS
vimucya—after releasing him; raçanä-baddham—from the bondage of ropes;
bäla-hatyä—infanticide; hata-prabham—loss of bodily luster; tejasä—of the
strength of; maëinä—by the jewel; hénam—being deprived of; çibirät—from
the camp; nirayäpayat—drove him out.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
He [Açvatthämä] had already lost his bodily luster due to infanticide, and
now, moreover, having lost the jewel from his head, he lost even more strength.
Thus he was unbound and driven out of the camp.
PURPORT
Thus being insulted, the humiliated Açvatthämä was simultaneously killed
and not killed by the intelligence of Lord Kåñëa and Arjuna.
TEXT 57
vPaNa& d]iv<aadaNa& SQaaNaaiàYaaRPa<a& TaQaa )
Wz ih b]øbNDaUNaa& vDaae NaaNYaae_iSTa dEihk-" )) 57 ))
vapanaà draviëädänaà
sthänän niryäpaëaà tathä
eña hi brahma-bandhünäà
vadho nänyo ’sti daihikaù
SYNONYMS
vapanam—cleaving the hairs from the head; draviëa—wealth;
adänam—forfeiting; sthänät—from the residence; niryäpaëam—driving away;
tathä—also; eñaù—all these; hi—certainly; brahma-bandhünäm—of the
relatives of a brähmaëa; vadhaù—killing; na—not; anyaù—any other method;
asti—there is; daihikaù—in the matter of the body.
TRANSLATION
Cutting the hair from his head, depriving him of his wealth and driving him
from his residence are the prescribed punishments for the relative of a
brähmaëa. There is no injunction for killing the body.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 58
Pau}aXaaek-aTaura" SaveR Paa<@va" Sah k*-Z<aYaa )
SvaNaa& Ma*TaaNaa& YaTk*-TYa& c§u-iNaRhRr<aaidk-Ma( )) 58 ))
putra-çokäturäù sarve
päëòaväù saha kåñëayä
svänäà måtänäà yat kåtyaà
cakrur nirharaëädikam
SYNONYMS
putra—son; çoka—bereavement; äturäù—overwhelmed with; sarve—all of
them; päëòaväù—the sons of Päëòu; saha—along with; kåñëayä—with
Draupadé; svänäm—of the kinsmen; måtänäm—of the dead; yat—what;
kåtyam—ought to be done; cakruù—did perform;
nirharaëa-ädikam—undertakable.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, the sons of Päëòu and Draupadé, overwhelmed with grief,
performed the proper rituals for the dead bodies of their relatives.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the First Canto, Seventh Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled “The Son of Droëa Punished.”
Srimad Bhagavatam
First Canto Part One
“Creation”
e-book
This e-book and others are available for download at:
www.e-vedas.com
Hard bound books may be purchased at:
www.thekrishnastore.com
Email comments or questions to:
comments@evedas.com
This e-book was completed on November 16,2005
e-books copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved
www.krishna.com
Distributed by e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
"Srimad Bhagavatam – First Canto"
by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE:
This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of this book, and is NOT FOR
RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended for personal non-commercial use only,
under the "fair use" guidelines established by international copyright laws. You
may use this electronic file to evaluate the printed version of this book, for your
own private use, or for short excerpts used in academic works, research, student
papers, presentations, and the like. You can distribute this evaluation copy to
others over the Internet, so long as you keep this copyright information intact and
do not add or subtract anything to this file and its contents. You may not reproduce
more than ten percent (10%) of this book in any medium without the express
written permission from the copyright holders.
Reference any excerpts in the following way: “Excerpted from “Srimad
Bhagavatam First Canto” by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, courtesy of
the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, www.krishna.com.”
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1972-2004 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust
International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, California 90034, USA. All
rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or to evaluate
dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website of the publishers,
www.krishna.com.

Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 2
About the Author
His Divine Grace AC Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, the world’s
most distinguished teacher of Vedic religion and thought, is the author
of Bhagavad-gita As It Is, Srimad-Bhagavatam, The Nector of Devotion
and many other English versions of Vedic literature. He is the founderacarya
of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness, which
has hundreds of centers throughtout the world.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Chapter Eight
Prayers by Queen Kunté and Parékñit Saved
TEXT 1
SaUTa ovac
AQa Tae SaMPareTaaNaa& SvaNaaMaudk-iMaC^TaaMa( )
daTau& Sak*-Z<aa Ga®aYaa& PaurSk*-TYa YaYau" iñYa" )) 1 ))
süta uväca
atha te samparetänäà
svänäm udakam icchatäm
dätuà sakåñëä gaìgäyäà
puraskåtya yayuù striyaù
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta said; atha—thus; te—the Päëòavas; samparetänäm—of the
dead; svänäm—of the relatives; udakam—water; icchatäm—willing to have;
dätum—to deliver; sa-kåñëäù—along with Draupadé; gaìgäyäm—on the
Ganges; puraskåtya—putting in the front; yayuù—went; striyaù—the women.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: Thereafter the Päëòavas, desiring to deliver water to the
dead relatives who had desired it, went to the Ganges with Draupadé. The ladies
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
walked in front.
PURPORT
To date it is the custom in Hindu society to go to the Ganges or any other
sacred river to take bath when death occurs in the family. Each of the family
members pours out a potful of the Ganges water for the departed soul and
walks in a procession, with the ladies in the front. The Päëòavas also followed
the rules more than five thousand years ago. Lord Kåñëa, being a cousin of the
Päëòavas, was also amongst the family members.
TEXT 2
Tae iNaNaqYaaedk&- SaveR ivl/PYa c >a*Xa& PauNa" )
AaPl/uTaa hirPaadaBJarJa"PaUTaSairÂle/ )) 2 ))
te ninéyodakaà sarve
vilapya ca bhåçaà punaù
äplutä hari-pädäbjarajaù-
püta-sarij-jale
SYNONYMS
te—all of them; ninéya—having offered; udakam—water; sarve—every one of
them; vilapya—having lamented; ca—and; bhåçam—sufficiently;
punaù—again; äplutäù—took bath; hari-pädäbja—the lotus feet of the Lord;
rajaù—dust; püta—purified; sarit—of the Ganges; jale—in the water.
TRANSLATION
Having lamented over them and sufficiently offered Ganges water, they
bathed in the Ganges, whose water is sanctified due to being mixed with the
dust of the lotus feet of the Lord.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 3
Ta}aaSaqNa& ku-åPaiTa& Da*Taraí\& SahaNauJaMa( )
GaaNDaarq& Pau}aXaaek-aTaa| Pa*Qaa& k*-Z<aa& c MaaDav" )) 3 ))
taträsénaà kuru-patià
dhåtaräñöraà sahänujam
gändhäréà putra-çokärtäà
påthäà kåñëäà ca mädhavaù
SYNONYMS
tatra—there; äsénam—sitting; kuru-patim—the King of the Kurus;
dhåtaräñöram—Dhåtaräñöra; saha-anujam—with his younger brothers;
gändhärém—Gändhäré; putra—son; çoka-artäm—overtaken by bereavement;
påthäm—Kunté; kåñëäm—Draupadé; ca—also; mädhavaù—Lord Çré Kåñëa.
TRANSLATION
There sat the King of the Kurus, Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, along with his
younger brothers and Dhåtaräñöra, Gändhäré, Kunté and Draupadé, all
overwhelmed with grief. Lord Kåñëa was also there.
PURPORT
The Battle of Kurukñetra was fought between family members, and thus all
affected persons were also family members like Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira and
brothers, Kunté, Draupadé, Subhadrä, Dhåtaräñöra, Gändhäré and her
daughters-in-law, etc. All the principal dead bodies were in some way or other
related with each other, and therefore the family grief was combined. Lord
Kåñëa was also one of them as a cousin of the Päëòavas and nephew of Kunté,
as well as brother of Subhadrä, etc. The Lord, therefore, was equally
sympathetic toward all of them, and therefore he began to pacify them
befittingly.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 4
SaaNTvYaaMaaSa MauiNai>ahRTabNDaUHa( éucaiPaRTaaNa( )
>aUTaezu k-al/SYa GaiTa& dXaRYaàPa[iTai§-YaaMa( )) 4 ))
säntvayäm äsa munibhir
hata-bandhüï çucärpitän
bhüteñu kälasya gatià
darçayan na pratikriyäm
SYNONYMS
säntvayäm äsa—pacified; munibhiù—along with the munis present there;
hata-bandhün—those who lost their friends and relatives; çucärpitän—all
shocked and affected; bhüteñu—unto the living beings; kälasya—of the
supreme law of the Almighty; gatim—reactions; darçayan—demonstrated;
na—no; pratikriyäm—remedial measures.
TRANSLATION
Citing the stringent laws of the Almighty and their reactions upon living
beings, Lord Çré Kåñëa and the munis began to pacify those who were shocked
and affected.
PURPORT
The stringent laws of nature, under the order of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, cannot be altered by any living entity. The living entities are
eternally under the subjugation of the almighty Lord. The Lord makes all the
laws and orders, and these laws and orders are generally called dharma or
religion. No one can create any religious formula. Bona fide religion is to abide
by the orders of the Lord. The Lord’s orders are clearly declared in the
Bhagavad-gétä. Everyone should follow Him only or His orders, and that will
make all happy, both materially and spiritually. As long as we are in the
material world, our duty is to follow the orders of the Lord, and if by the grace
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
of the Lord we are liberated from the clutches of the material world, then in
our liberated stage also we can render transcendental loving service unto the
Lord. In our material stage we can see neither ourselves nor the Lord for want
of spiritual vision. But when we are liberated from material affection and are
situated in our original spiritual form we can see both ourselves and the Lord
face to face. Mukti means to be reinstated in one’s original spiritual status after
giving up the material conception of life. Therefore, human life is specifically
meant for qualifying ourselves for this spiritual liberty. Unfortunately, under
the influence of illusory material energy, we accept this spot-life of only a few
years as our permanent existence and thus become illusioned by possessing
so-called country, home, land, children, wife, community, wealth, etc., which
are false representations created by mäyä (illusion). And under the dictation
of mäyä, we fight with one another to protect these false possessions. By
cultivating spiritual knowledge, we can realize that we have nothing to do with
all this material paraphernalia. Then at once we become free from material
attachment. This clearance of the misgivings of material existence at once
takes place by association with the Lord’s devotees, who are able to inject the
transcendental sound into the depths of the bewildered heart and thus make
one practically liberated from all lamentation and illusion. That is a summary
of the pacifying measures for those affected by the reaction of stringent
material laws, exhibited in the forms of birth, death, old age and disease, which
are insoluble factors of material existence. The victims of war, namely, the
family members of the Kurus, were lamenting the problems of death, and the
Lord pacified them on the basis of knowledge.
TEXT 5
SaaDaiYaTvaJaaTaXa}aae" Sv& raJYa& ik-TavEôRTaMa( )
gaaTaiYaTvaSaTaae raj" k-cSPaXaR+aTaaYauz" )) 5 ))
sädhayitväjäta-çatroù
svaà räjyaà kitavair håtam
ghätayitväsato räjïaù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
kaca-sparça-kñatäyuñaù
SYNONYMS
sädhayitvä—having executed; ajäta-çatroù—of one who has no enemy; svam
räjyam—own kingdom; kitavaiù—by the clever (Duryodhana and party);
håtam—usurped; ghätayitvä—having killed; asataù—the unscrupulous;
räjïaù—of the queen’s; kaca—bunch of hair; sparça—roughly handled;
kñata—decreased; äyuñaù—by the duration of life.
TRANSLATION
The clever Duryodhana and his party cunningly usurped the kingdom of
Yudhiñöhira, who had no enemy. By the grace of the Lord, the recovery was
executed, and the unscrupulous kings who joined with Duryodhana were killed
by Him. Others also died, their duration of life having decreased for their rough
handling of the hair of Queen Draupadé.
PURPORT
In the glorious days, or before the advent of the age of Kali, the brähmaëas,
the cows, the women, the children and the old men were properly given
protection.
1. The protection of the brähmaëas maintains the institution of varëa and
äçrama, the most scientific culture for attainment of spiritual life.
2. The protection of cows maintains the most miraculous form of food, i.e.,
milk for maintaining the finer tissues of the brain for understanding higher
aims of life.
3. The protection of women maintains the chastity of society, by which we
can get a good generation for peace, tranquillity and progress of life.
4. The protection of children gives the human form of life its best chance to
prepare the way of liberty from material bondage. Such protection of children
begins from the very day of begetting a child by the purificatory process of
garbhädhäna-saàskära, the beginning of pure life.
5. The protection of the old men gives them a chance to prepare themselves
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
for better life after death.
This complete outlook is based on factors leading to successful humanity as
against the civilization of polished cats and dogs. The killing of the
above-mentioned innocent creatures is totally forbidden because even by
insulting them one loses one’s duration of life. In the age of Kali they are not
properly protected, and therefore the duration of life of the present generation
has shortened considerably. In the Bhagavad-gétä it is stated that when the
women become unchaste for want of proper protection, there are unwanted
children called varëa-saìkara. To insult a chaste woman means to bring about
disaster in the duration of life. Duùçäsana, a brother of Duryodhana, insulted
Draupadé, an ideal chaste lady, and therefore the miscreants died untimely.
These are some of the stringent laws of the Lord mentioned above.
TEXT 6
YaaJaiYaTvaìMaeDaESTa& i}ai>aåtaMak-LPakE-" )
TaÛXa" PaavNa& id+au XaTaMaNYaaeirvaTaNaaeTa( )) 6 ))
yäjayitväçvamedhais taà
tribhir uttama-kalpakaiù
tad-yaçaù pävanaà dikñu
çata-manyor ivätanot
SYNONYMS
yäjayitvä—by performing; açvamedhaiù—yajïa in which a horse is sacrificed;
tam—him (King Yudhiñöhira); tribhiù—three; uttama—best;
kalpakaiù—supplied with proper ingredients and performed by able priests;
tat—that; yaçaù—fame; pävanam—virtuous; dikñu—all directions;
çata-manyoù—Indra, who performed one hundred such sacrifices; iva—like;
atanot—spread.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Lord Çré Kåñëa caused three well-performed Açvamedha-yajïas [horse
sacrifices] to be conducted by Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira and thus caused his
virtuous fame to be glorified in all directions, like that of Indra, who had
performed one hundred such sacrifices.
PURPORT
This is something like the preface to the performances of Açvamedha-yajïa
by Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira. The comparison of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira to the
King of heaven is significant. The King of heaven is thousands and thousands
of times greater than Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira in opulence, yet the fame of
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was not less. The reason is that Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira
was a pure devotee of the Lord, and by His grace only was King Yudhiñöhira on
the level of the King of heaven, even though he performed only three yajïas
whereas the King of heaven performed hundreds. That is the prerogative of
the devotee of the Lord. The Lord is equal to everyone, but a devotee of the
Lord is more glorified because he is always in touch with the all-great. The sun
rays are equally distributed, but still there are some places which are always
dark. This is not due to the sun but to the receptive power. Similarly, those
who are cent percent devotees of the Lord get the full-fledged mercy of the
Lord, which is always equally distributed everywhere.
TEXT 7
AaMaN}Ya Paa<@uPau}aa&ê XaENaeYaaeÖvSa&YauTa" )
ÜEPaaYaNaaidi>aivRPa[E" PaUiJaTaE" Pa[iTaPaUiJaTa" )) 7 ))
ämantrya päëòu-puträàç ca
çaineyoddhava-saàyutaù
dvaipäyanädibhir vipraiù
püjitaiù pratipüjitaù
SYNONYMS
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ämantrya—inviting; päëòu-puträn—all the sons of Päëòu; ca—also;
çaineya—Sätyaki; uddhava—Uddhava; saàyutaù—accompanied;
dvaipäyana-ädibhiù—by the åñis like Vedavyäsa; vipraiù—by the brähmaëas;
püjitaiù—being worshiped; pratipüjitaù—the Lord also reciprocated equally.
TRANSLATION
Lord Çré Kåñëa then prepared for His departure. He invited the sons of
Päëòu, after having been worshiped by the brähmaëas, headed by Çréla
Vyäsadeva. The Lord also reciprocated greetings.
PURPORT
Apparently Lord Çré Kåñëa was a kñatriya and was not worshipable by the
brähmaëas. But the brähmaëas present there, headed by Çréla Vyäsadeva, all
knew Him to be the Personality of Godhead, and therefore they worshiped
Him. The Lord reciprocated the greetings just to honor the social order that a
kñatriya is obedient to the orders of the brähmaëas. Although Lord Çré Kåñëa
was always offered the respects due the Supreme Lord from all responsible
quarters, the Lord never deviated from the customary usages between the four
orders of society. The Lord purposely observed all these social customs so that
others would follow Him in the future.
TEXT 8
GaNTau& k*-TaMaiTab]RøNa( Üark-a& rQaMaaiSQaTa" )
oPale/>ae_i>aDaavNTaqMautara& >aYaivûl/aMa( )) 8 ))
gantuà kåtamatir brahman
dvärakäà ratham ästhitaù
upalebhe ’bhidhävantém
uttaräà bhaya-vihvaläm
SYNONYMS
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
gantum—just desiring to start; kåtamatiù—having decided; brahman—O
brähmaëa; dvärakäm—towards Dvärakä; ratham—on the chariot;
ästhitaù—seated; upalebhe—saw; abhidhävantém—coming hurriedly;
uttaräm—Uttarä; bhaya-vihvaläm—being afraid.
TRANSLATION
As soon as He seated Himself on the chariot to start for Dvärakä, He saw
Uttarä hurrying toward Him in fear.
PURPORT
All the members of the family of the Päëòavas were completely dependent
on the protection of the Lord, and therefore the Lord protected all of them in
all circumstances. The Lord protects everyone, but one who depends
completely upon Him is especially looked after by the Lord. The father is more
attentive to the little son who is exclusively dependent on the father.
TEXT 9
otaraevac
Paaih Paaih MahaYaaeiGaNdevdev JaGaTPaTae )
NaaNYa& Tvd>aYa& PaXYae Ya}a Ma*TYau" ParSParMa( )) 9 ))
uttaroväca
pähi pähi mahä-yogin
deva-deva jagat-pate
nänyaà tvad abhayaà paçye
yatra måtyuù parasparam
SYNONYMS
uttarä uväca—Uttarä said; pähi pähi—protect, protect; mahä-yogin—the
greatest mystic; deva-deva—the worshipable of the worshiped; jagat-pate—O
Lord of the universe; na—not; anyam—anyone else; tvat—than You;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
abhayam—fearlessness; paçye—do I see; yatra—where there is; måtyuù—death;
parasparam—in the world of duality.
TRANSLATION
Uttarä said: O Lord of lords, Lord of the universe! You are the greatest of
mystics. Please protect me, for there is no one else who can save me from the
clutches of death in this world of duality.
PURPORT
This material world is the world of duality, in contrast with the oneness of
the absolute realm. The world of duality is composed of matter and spirit,
whereas the absolute world is complete spirit without any tinge of the material
qualities. In the dual world everyone is falsely trying to become the master of
the world, whereas in the absolute world the Lord is the absolute Lord, and all
others are His absolute servitors. In the world of duality everyone is envious of
all others, and death is inevitable due to the dual existence of matter and
spirit. The Lord is the only shelter of fearlessness for the surrendered soul. One
cannot save himself from the cruel hands of death in the material world
without having surrendered himself at the lotus feet of the Lord.
TEXT 10
Ai>ad]viTa MaaMaqXa XarSTaáaYaSaae iv>aae )
k-aMa& dhTau Maa& NaaQa Maa Mae Ga>aaeR iNaPaaTYaTaaMa( )) 10 ))
abhidravati mäm éça
çaras taptäyaso vibho
kämaà dahatu mäà nätha
mä me garbho nipätyatäm
SYNONYMS
abhidravati—coming towards; mäm—me; éça—O Lord; çaraù—the arrow;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
tapta—fiery; ayasaù—iron; vibho—O great one; kämam—desire; dahatu—let
it burn; mäm—me; nätha—O protector; mä—not; me—my; garbhaù—embryo;
nipätyatäm—be aborted.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, You are all-powerful. A fiery iron arrow is coming towards me
fast. My Lord, let it burn me personally, if You so desire, but please do not let it
burn and abort my embryo. Please do me this favor, my Lord.
PURPORT
This incident took place after the death of Abhimanyu, the husband of
Uttarä. Abhimanyu’s widow, Uttarä, should have followed the path of her
husband, but because she was pregnant, and Mahäräja Parékñit, a great devotee
of the Lord, was lying in embryo, she was responsible for his protection. The
mother of a child has a great responsibility in giving all protection to the child,
and therefore Uttarä was not ashamed to express this frankly before Lord
Kåñëa. Uttarä was the daughter of a great king, the wife of a great hero, and
student of a great devotee, and later she was the mother of a good king also.
She was fortunate in every respect.
TEXT 11
SaUTa ovac
oPaDaaYaR vcSTaSYaa >aGavaNa( >a¢-vTSal/" )
APaa<@viMad& k-Tau| d]aE<aerñMabuDYaTa )) 11 ))
süta uväca
upadhärya vacas tasyä
bhagavän bhakta-vatsalaù
apäëòavam idaà kartuà
drauëer astram abudhyata
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; upadhärya—by hearing her patiently;
vacaù—words; tasyäù—her; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead;
bhakta-vatsalaù—He who is very much affectionate towards His devotees;
apäëòavam—without the existence of the Päëòavas’ descendants; idam—this;
kartum—to do it; drauëeù—of the son of Droëäcärya; astram—weapon;
abudhyata—understood.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: Having patiently heard her words, Lord Çré Kåñëa, who
is always very affectionate to His devotees, could at once understand that
Açvatthämä, the son of Droëäcärya, had thrown the brahmästra to finish the
last life in the Päëòava family.
PURPORT
The Lord is impartial in every respect, but still He is inclined towards His
devotees because there is a great necessity of this for everyone’s wellbeing. The
Päëòava family was a family of devotees, and therefore the Lord wanted them
to rule the world. That was the reason He vanquished the rule of the company
of Duryodhana and established the rule of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira. Therefore,
He also wanted to protect Mahäräja Parékñit, who was lying in embryo. He did
not like the idea that the world should be without the Päëòavas, the ideal
family of devotees.
TEXT 12
TaùeRvaQa MauiNaé[eï Paa<@va" PaÄ SaaYak-aNa( )
AaTMaNaae_i>aMau%aNdqáaNaal/+Yaaña<YauPaaddu" )) 12 ))
tarhy evätha muni-çreñöha
päëòaväù païca säyakän
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ätmano ’bhimukhän déptän
älakñyästräëy upädaduù
SYNONYMS
tarhi—then; eva—also; atha—therefore; muni-çreñöha—O chief amongst the
munis; päëòaväù—all the sons of Päëòu; païca—five; säyakän—weapons;
ätmanaù—own selves; abhimukhän—towards; déptän—glaring;
älakñya—seeing it; asträëi—weapons; upädaduù—took up.
TRANSLATION
O foremost among the great thinkers [munis] [Çaunaka], seeing the glaring
brahmästra proceeding towards them, the Päëòavas took up their five respective
weapons.
PURPORT
The brahmästras are finer than the nuclear weapons. Açvatthämä
discharged the brahmästra simply to kill the Päëòavas, namely the five
brothers headed by Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira and their only grandson, who was
lying within the womb of Uttarä. Therefore the brahmästra, more effective
and finer than the atomic weapons, was not as blind as the atomic bombs.
When the atomic bombs are discharged they do not discriminate between the
target and others. Mainly the atomic bombs do harm to the innocent because
there is no control. The brahmästra is not like that. It marks out the target and
proceeds accordingly without harming the innocent.
TEXT 13
VYaSaNa& vq+Ya TataezaMaNaNYaivzYaaTMaNaaMa( )
SaudXaRNaeNa Svañe<a SvaNaa& r+aa& VYaDaaiÜ>au" )) 13 ))
vyasanaà vékñya tat teñäm
ananya-viñayätmanäm
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
sudarçanena svästreëa
svänäà rakñäà vyadhäd vibhuù
SYNONYMS
vyasanam—great danger; vékñya—having observed; tat—that; teñäm—their;
ananya—no other; viñaya—means; ätmanäm—thus inclined; sudarçanena—by
the wheel of Çré Kåñëa; sva-astreëa—by the weapon; svänäm—of His own
devotees; rakñäm—protection; vyadhät—did it; vibhuù—the Almighty.
TRANSLATION
The almighty Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, having observed that a
great danger was befalling His unalloyed devotees, who were fully surrendered
souls, at once took up His Sudarçana disc to protect them.
PURPORT
The brahmästra, the supreme weapon released by Açvatthämä, was
something similar to the nuclear weapon but with more radiation and heat.
This brahmästra is the product of a more subtle science, being the product of a
finer sound, a mantra recorded in the Vedas. Another advantage of this
weapon is that it is not blind like the nuclear weapon because it can be
directed only to the target and nothing else. Açvatthämä released the weapon
just to finish all the male members of Päëòu’s family; therefore in one sense it
was more dangerous than the atomic bombs because it could penetrate even
the most protected place and would never miss the target. Knowing all this,
Lord Çré Kåñëa at once took up His personal weapon to protect His devotees,
who did not know anyone other than Kåñëa. In the Bhagavad-gétä the Lord has
clearly promised that His devotees are never to be vanquished. And He
behaves according to the quality or degree of the devotional service rendered
by the devotees. Here the word ananya-viñayätmanäm is significant. The
Päëòavas were cent percent dependent on the protection of the Lord,
although they were all great warriors themselves. But the Lord neglects even
the greatest warriors and also vanquishes them in no time. When the Lord saw
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
that there was no time for the Päëòavas to counteract the brahmästra of
Açvatthämä, He took up His weapon even at the risk of breaking His own vow.
Although the Battle of Kurukñetra was almost finished, still, according to His
vow, He should not have taken up His own weapon. But the emergency was
more important than the vow. He is better known as the bhakta-vatsala, or the
lover of His devotee, and thus He preferred to continue as bhakta-vatsala than
to be a worldly moralist who never breaks his solemn vow.
TEXT 14
ANTa"SQa" SavR>aUTaaNaaMaaTMaa YaaeGaeìrae hir" )
SvMaaYaYaav*<aaeÓ>a| vEra$ya" ku-åTaNTave )) 14 ))
antaùsthaù sarva-bhütänäm
ätmä yogeçvaro hariù
sva-mäyayävåëod garbhaà
vairäöyäù kuru-tantave
SYNONYMS
antaùsthaù—being within; sarva—all; bhütänäm—of the living beings;
ätmä—soul; yoga-éçvaraù—the Lord of all mysticism; hariù—the Supreme
Lord; sva-mäyayä—by the personal energy; ävåëot—covered;
garbham—embryo; vairäöyäù—of Uttarä; kuru-tantave—for the progeny of
Mahäräja Kuru.
TRANSLATION
The Lord of supreme mysticism, Çré Kåñëa, resides within everyone’s heart
as the Paramätmä. As such, just to protect the progeny of the Kuru dynasty, He
covered the embryo of Uttarä by His personal energy.
PURPORT
The Lord of supreme mysticism can simultaneously reside within everyone’s
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
heart, or even within the atoms, by His Paramätmä feature, His plenary
portion. Therefore, from within the body of Uttarä He covered the embryo to
save Mahäräja Parékñit and protect the progeny of Mahäräja Kuru, of whom
King Päëòu was also a descendant. Both the sons of Dhåtaräñöra and those of
Päëòu belonged to the same dynasty of Mahäräja Kuru; therefore both of them
were generally known as Kurus. But when there were differences between the
two families, the sons of Dhåtaräñöra were known as Kurus whereas the sons of
Päëòu were known as Päëòavas. Since the sons and grandsons of Dhåtaräñöra
were all killed in the Battle of Kurukñetra, the last son of the dynasty is
designated as the son of the Kurus.
TEXT 15
YaÛPYañ& b]øiXarSTvMaaega& caPa[iTai§-YaMa( )
vEZ<av& TaeJa AaSaaÛ SaMaXaaMYad( >a*GaUÜh )) 15 ))
yadyapy astraà brahma-çiras
tv amoghaà cäpratikriyam
vaiñëavaà teja äsädya
samaçämyad bhågüdvaha
SYNONYMS
yadyapi—although; astram—weapon; brahma-çiraù—supreme; tu—but;
amogham—without check; ca—and; apratikriyam—not to be counteracted;
vaiñëavam—in relation with Viñëu; tejaù—strength; äsädya—being
confronted with; samaçämyat—was neutralized; bhågu-udvaha—O glory of the
family of Bhågu.
TRANSLATION
O Çaunaka, although the supreme brahmästra weapon released by
Açvatthämä was irresistible and without check or counteraction, it was
neutralized and foiled when confronted by the strength of Viñëu [Lord Kåñëa].
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
In the Bhagavad-gétä it is said that the brahmajyoti, or the glowing
transcendental effulgence, is resting on Lord Çré Kåñëa. In other words, the
glowing effulgence known as brahma-tejas is nothing but the rays of the Lord,
just as the sun rays are rays of the sun disc. So this Brahma weapon also,
although materially irresistible, could not surpass the supreme strength of the
Lord. The weapon called brahmästra, released by Açvatthämä, was neutralized
and foiled by Lord Çré Kåñëa by His own energy; that is to say, He did not wait
for any other’s help because He is absolute.
TEXT 16
Maa Ma&SQaa ùeTadaêYa| SavaRêYaRMaYae_CYauTae )
Ya wd& MaaYaYaa deVYaa Sa*JaTYaviTa hNTYaJa" )) 16 ))
mä maàsthä hy etad äçcaryaà
sarväçcaryamaye ’cyute
ya idaà mäyayä devyä
såjaty avati hanty ajaù
SYNONYMS
mä—do not; maàsthäù—think; hi—certainly; etat—all these;
äçcaryam—wonderful; sarva—all; äçcarya-maye—in the all-mysterious;
acyute—the infallible; yaù—one who; idam—this (creation); mäyayä—by His
energy; devyä—transcendental; såjati—creates; avati—maintains;
hanti—annihilates; ajaù—unborn.
TRANSLATION
O brähmaëas, do not think this to be especially wonderful in the activities of
the mysterious and infallible Personality of Godhead. By His own
transcendental energy, He maintains and annihilates all material things,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
although He Himself is unborn.
PURPORT
The activities of the Lord are always inconceivable to the tiny brain of the
living entities. Nothing is impossible for the Supreme Lord, but all His actions
are wonderful for us, and thus He is always beyond the range of our
conceivable limits. The Lord is the all-powerful, all-perfect Personality of
Godhead. The Lord is cent percent perfect, whereas others, namely Näräyaëa,
Brahmä, Çiva, the demigods and all other living beings, possess only different
percentages of such perfection. No one is equal to or greater than Him. He is
unrivaled.
TEXT 17
b]øTaeJaaeiviNaMauR¢E-raTMaJaE" Sah k*-Z<aYaa )
Pa[Yaa<aai>aMau%& k*-Z<aiMadMaah Pa*Qaa SaTaq )) 17 ))
brahma-tejo-vinirmuktair
ätmajaiù saha kåñëayä
prayäëäbhimukhaà kåñëam
idam äha påthä saté
SYNONYMS
brahma-tejaù—the radiation of the brahmästra; vinirmuktaiù—being saved
from; ätma-jaiù—along with her sons; saha—with; kåñëayä—Draupadé;
prayäëa—outgoing; abhimukham—towards; kåñëam—unto Lord Kåñëa;
idam—this; äha—said; påthä—Kunté; saté—chaste, devoted to the Lord.
TRANSLATION
Thus saved from the radiation of the brahmästra, Kunté, the chaste devotee
of the Lord, and her five sons and Draupadé addressed Lord Kåñëa as He started
for home.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
Kunté is described herein as saté, or chaste, due to her unalloyed devotion to
Lord Çré Kåñëa. Her mind will now be expressed in the following prayers for
Lord Kåñëa. A chaste devotee of the Lord does not look to others, namely any
other living being or demigod, even for deliverance from danger. That was all
along the characteristic of the whole family of the Päëòavas. They knew
nothing except Kåñëa, and therefore the Lord was also always ready to help
them in all respects and in all circumstances. That is the transcendental
nature of the Lord. He reciprocates the dependence of the devotee. One
should not, therefore, look for help from imperfect living beings or demigods,
but one should look for all help from Lord Kåñëa, who is competent to save His
devotees. Such a chaste devotee also never asks the Lord for help, but the
Lord, out of His own accord, is always anxious to render it.
TEXT 18
ku-NTYauvac
NaMaSYae Pauåz& TvaÛMaqìr& Pa[k*-Tae" ParMa( )
Al/+Ya& SavR>aUTaaNaaMaNTabRihrviSQaTaMa( )) 18 ))
kunty uväca
namasye puruñaà tvädyam
éçvaraà prakåteù param
alakñyaà sarva-bhütänäm
antar bahir avasthitam
SYNONYMS
kunté uväca—Çrématé Kunté said; namasye—let me bow down; puruñam—the
Supreme Person; tvä—You; ädyam—the original; éçvaram—the controller;
prakåteù—of the material cosmos; param—beyond; alakñyam—the invisible;
sarva—all; bhütänäm—of living beings; antaù—within; bahiù—without;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
avasthitam—existing.
TRANSLATION
Çrématé Kunté said: O Kåñëa, I offer my obeisances unto You because You
are the original personality and are unaffected by the qualities of the material
world. You are existing both within and without everything, yet You are
invisible to all.
PURPORT
Çrématé Kuntédevé was quite aware that Kåñëa is the original Personality of
Godhead, although He was playing the part of her nephew. Such an
enlightened lady could not commit a mistake by offering obeisances unto her
nephew. Therefore, she addressed Him as the original puruña beyond the
material cosmos. Although all living entities are also transcendental, they are
neither original nor infallible. The living entities are apt to fall down under
the clutches of material nature, but the Lord is never like that. In the Vedas,
therefore, He is described as the chief among all living entities (nityo nityänäà
cetanaç cetanänäm). Then again He is addressed as éçvara, or the controller.
The living entities or the demigods like Candra and Sürya are also to some
extent éçvara, but none of them is the supreme éçvara, or the ultimate
controller. He is the parameçvara, or the Supersoul. He is both within and
without. Although He was present before Çrématé Kunté as her nephew, He was
also within her and everyone else. In the Bhagavad-gétä (15.15) the Lord says, “I
am situated in everyone’s heart, and only due to Me one remembers, forgets
and is cognizant, etc. Through all the Vedas I am to be known because I am the
compiler of the Vedas, and I am the teacher of the Vedänta.” Queen Kunté
affirms that the Lord, although both within and without all living beings, is
still invisible. The Lord is, so to speak, a puzzle for the common man. Queen
Kunté experienced personally that Lord Kåñëa was present before her, yet He
entered within the womb of Uttarä to save her embryo from the attack of
Açvatthämä’s brahmästra. Kunté herself was puzzled about whether Çré Kåñëa is
all-pervasive or localized. In fact, He is both, but He reserves the right of not
being exposed to persons who are not surrendered souls. This checking curtain
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
is called the mäyä energy of the Supreme Lord, and it controls the limited
vision of the rebellious soul. It is explained as follows.
TEXT 19
MaaYaaJaviNak-aC^àMajaDaae+aJaMaVYaYaMa( )
Na l/+YaSae MaU!d*Xaa Na$=ae Naa$yDarae YaQaa )) 19 ))
mäyä-javanikäcchannam
ajïädhokñajam avyayam
na lakñyase müòha-dåçä
naöo näöyadharo yathä
SYNONYMS
mäyä—deluding; javanikä—curtain; äcchannam—covered by; ajïä—ignorant;
adhokñajam—beyond the range of material conception (transcendental);
avyayam—irreproachable; na—not; lakñyase—observed; müòha-dåçä—by the
foolish observer; naöaù—artist; näöya-dharaù—dressed as a player; yathä—as.
TRANSLATION
Being beyond the range of limited sense perception, You are the eternally
irreproachable factor covered by the curtain of deluding energy. You are
invisible to the foolish observer, exactly as an actor dressed as a player is not
recognized.
PURPORT
In the Bhagavad-gétä Lord Çré Kåñëa affirms that less intelligent persons
mistake Him to be an ordinary man like us, and thus they deride Him. The
same is confirmed herein by Queen Kunté. The less intelligent persons are
those who rebel against the authority of the Lord. Such persons are known as
asuras. The asuras cannot recognize the Lord’s authority. When the Lord
Himself appears amongst us, as Räma, Nåsiàha, Varäha or in His original form
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
as Kåñëa, He performs many wonderful acts which are humanly impossible. As
we shall find in the Tenth Canto of this great literature, Lord Çré Kåñëa
exhibited His humanly impossible activities even from the days of His lying on
the lap of His mother. He killed the Pütanä witch, although she smeared her
breast with poison just to kill the Lord. The Lord sucked her breast like a
natural baby, and He sucked out her very life also. Similarly, He lifted the
Govardhana Hill, just as a boy picks up a frog’s umbrella, and stood several
days continuously just to give protection to the residents of Våndävana. These
are some of the superhuman activities of the Lord described in the
authoritative Vedic literatures like the Puräëas, Itihäsas (histories) and
Upaniñads. He has delivered wonderful instructions in the shape of the
Bhagavad-gétä. He has shown marvelous capacities as a hero, as a householder,
as a teacher and as a renouncer. He is accepted as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead by such authoritative personalities as Vyäsa, Devala, Asita, Närada,
Madhva, Çaìkara, Rämänuja, Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, Jéva Gosvämé,
Viçvanätha Cakravarté, Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté and all other authorities of
the line. He Himself has declared as much in many places of the authentic
literatures. And yet there is a class of men with demoniac mentality who are
always reluctant to accept the Lord as the Supreme Absolute Truth. This is
partially due to their poor fund of knowledge and partially due to their
stubborn obstinacy, which results from various misdeeds in the past and
present. Such persons could not recognize Lord Çré Kåñëa even when He was
present before them. Another difficulty is that those who depend more on
their imperfect senses cannot realize Him as the Supreme Lord. Such persons
are like the modern scientist. They want to know everything by their
experimental knowledge. But it is not possible to know the Supreme Person by
imperfect experimental knowledge. He is described herein as adhokñaja, or
beyond the range of experimental knowledge. All our senses are imperfect. We
claim to observe everything and anything, but we must admit that we can
observe things under certain material conditions only, which are also beyond
our control. The Lord is beyond the observation of sense perception. Queen
Kunté accepts this deficiency of the conditioned soul, especially of the woman
class, who are less intelligent. For less intelligent men there must be such
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
things as temples, mosques or churches so that they may begin to recognize the
authority of the Lord and hear about Him from authorities in such holy places.
For less intelligent men, this beginning of spiritual life is essential, and only
foolish men decry the establishment of such places of worship, which are
required to raise the standard of spiritual attributes for the mass of people. For
less intelligent persons, bowing down before the authority of the Lord, as
generally done in the temples, mosques or churches, is as beneficial as it is for
the advanced devotees to meditate upon Him by active service.
TEXT 20
TaQaa ParMah&SaaNaa& MauNaqNaaMaMal/aTMaNaaMa( )
>ai¢-YaaeGaivDaaNaaQa| k-Qa& PaXYaeMa ih iñYa" )) 20 ))
tathä paramahaàsänäà
munénäm amalätmanäm
bhakti-yoga-vidhänärthaà
kathaà paçyema hi striyaù
SYNONYMS
tathä—besides that; paramahaàsänäm—of the advanced transcendentalists;
munénäm—of the great philosophers or mental speculators;
amala-ätmanäm—those whose minds are competent to discern between spirit
and matter; bhakti-yoga—the science of devotional service;
vidhäna-artham—for executing; katham—how; paçyema—can observe;
hi—certainly; striyaù—women.
TRANSLATION
You Yourself descend to propagate the transcendental science of devotional
service unto the hearts of the advanced transcendentalists and mental
speculators, who are purified by being able to discriminate between matter and
spirit. How, then, can we women know You perfectly?
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
Even the greatest philosophical speculators cannot have access to the
region of the Lord. It is said in the Upaniñads that the Supreme Truth, the
Absolute Personality of Godhead, is beyond the range of the thinking power of
the greatest philosopher. He is unknowable by great learning or by the greatest
brain. He is knowable only by one who has His mercy. Others may go on
thinking about Him for years together, yet He is unknowable. This very fact is
corroborated by the Queen, who is playing the part of an innocent woman.
Women in general are unable to speculate like philosophers, but they are
blessed by the Lord because they believe at once in the superiority and
almightiness of the Lord, and thus they offer obeisances without reservation.
The Lord is so kind that He does not show special favor only to one who is a
great philosopher. He knows the sincerity of purpose. For this reason only,
women generally assemble in great number in any sort of religious function. In
every country and in every sect of religion it appears that the women are more
interested than the men. This simplicity of acceptance of the Lord’s authority
is more effective than showy insincere religious fervor.
TEXT 21
k*-Z<aaYa vaSaudevaYa devk-INaNdNaaYa c )
NaNdGaaePaku-MaaraYa GaaeivNdaYa NaMaae NaMa" )) 21 ))
kåñëäya väsudeväya
devaké-nandanäya ca
nanda-gopa-kumäräya
govindäya namo namaù
SYNONYMS
kåñëäya—the Supreme Lord; väsudeväya—unto the son of Vasudeva;
devaké-nandanäya—unto the son of Devaké; ca—and; nanda-gopa—Nanda
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
and the cowherd men; kumäräya—unto their son; govindäya—unto the
Personality of Godhead, who enlivens the cows and the senses;
namaù—respectful obeisances; namaù—obeisances.
TRANSLATION
Let me therefore offer my respectful obeisances unto the Lord, who has
become the son of Vasudeva, the pleasure of Devaké, the boy of Nanda and the
other cowherd men of Våndävana, and the enlivener of the cows and the senses.
PURPORT
The Lord, being thus unapproachable by any material assets, out of
unbounded and causeless mercy descends on the earth as He is in order to
show His special mercy upon His unalloyed devotees and to diminish the
upsurges of the demoniac persons. Queen Kunté specifically adores the
incarnation or descent of Lord Kåñëa above all other incarnations because in
this particular incarnation He is more approachable. In the Räma incarnation
He remained a king’s son from His very childhood, but in the incarnation of
Kåñëa, although He was the son of a king, He at once left the shelter of His
real father and mother (King Vasudeva and Queen Devaké) just after His
appearance and went to the lap of Yaçodämäyé to play the part of an ordinary
cowherd boy in the blessed Vrajabhümi, which is very sanctified because of His
childhood pastimes. Therefore Lord Kåñëa is more merciful than Lord Räma.
He was undoubtedly very kind to Kunté’s brother Vasudeva and the family.
Had He not become the son of Vasudeva and Devaké, Queen Kunté could not
claim Him to be her nephew and thus address Kåñëa in parental affection. But
Nanda and Yaçodä are more fortunate because they could relish the Lord’s
childhood pastimes, which are more attractive than all other pastimes. There is
no parallel to His childhood pastimes as exhibited at Vrajabhümi, which are
the prototypes of His eternal affairs in the original Kåñëaloka described as the
cintämaëi-dhäma in the Brahma-saàhitä. Lord Çré Kåñëa descended Himself at
Vrajabhümi with all His transcendental entourage and paraphernalia. Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu therefore confirmed that no one is as fortunate as the
residents of Vrajabhümi, and specifically the cowherd girls, who dedicated
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
their everything for the satisfaction of the Lord. His pastimes with Nanda and
Yaçodä and His pastimes with the cowherd men and especially with the
cowherd boys and the cows have caused Him to be known as Govinda. Lord
Kåñëa as Govinda is more inclined to the brähmaëas and the cows, indicating
thereby that human prosperity depends more on these two items, namely
brahminical culture and cow protection. Lord Kåñëa is never satisfied where
these are lacking.
TEXT 22
NaMa" PaªJaNaa>aaYa NaMa" PaªJaMaail/Nae )
NaMa" PaªJaNae}aaYa NaMaSTae PaªJaax(ga]Yae )) 22 ))
namaù paìkaja-näbhäya
namaù paìkaja-mäline
namaù paìkaja-neträya
namas te paìkajäìghraye
SYNONYMS
namaù—all respectful obeisances; paìkaja-näbhäya—unto the Lord who has a
specific depression resembling a lotus flower in the center of His abdomen;
namaù—obeisances; paìkaja-mäline—one who is always decorated with a
garland of lotus flowers; namaù—obeisances; paìkaja-neträya—one whose
glance is as cooling as a lotus flower; namaù te—respectful obeisances unto
You; paìkaja-aìghraye—unto You, the soles of whose feet are engraved with
lotus flowers (and who are therefore said to possess lotus feet).
TRANSLATION
My respectful obeisances are unto You, O Lord, whose abdomen is marked
with a depression like a lotus flower, who are always decorated with garlands of
lotus flowers, whose glance is as cool as the lotus and whose feet are engraved
with lotuses.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
Here are some of the specific symbolical marks on the spiritual body of the
Personality of Godhead which distinguish His body from the bodies of all
others. They are all special features of the body of the Lord. The Lord may
appear as one of us, but He is always distinct by His specific bodily features.
Çrématé Kunté claims herself unfit to see the Lord because of her being a
woman. This is claimed because women, çüdras (the laborer class) and the
dvija-bandhus, or the wretched descendants of the higher three classes, are
unfit by intelligence to understand transcendental subject matter concerning
the spiritual name, fame, attributes, forms, etc., of the Supreme Absolute
Truth. Such persons, although they are unfit to enter into the spiritual affairs
of the Lord, can see Him as the arcä-vigraha, who descends on the material
world just to distribute favors to the fallen souls, including the
above-mentioned women, çüdras and dvija-bandhus. Because such fallen souls
cannot see anything beyond matter, the Lord condescends to enter into each
and every one of the innumerable universes as the Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, who
grows a lotus stem from the lotuslike depression in the center of His
transcendental abdomen, and thus Brahmä, the first living being in the
universe, is born. Therefore, the Lord is known as the Paìkajanäbhi. The
Paìkajanäbhi Lord accepts the arcä-vigraha (His transcendental form) in
different elements, namely a form within the mind, a form made of wood, a
form made of earth, a form made of metal, a form made of jewel, a form made
of paint, a form drawn on sand, etc. All such forms of the Lord are always
decorated with garlands of lotus flowers, and there should be a soothing
atmosphere in the temple of worship to attract the burning attention of the
nondevotees always engaged in material wranglings. The meditators worship a
form within the mind. Therefore, the Lord is merciful even to the women,
çüdras and dvija-bandhus, provided they agree to visit the temple of worship in
different forms made for them. Such temple visitors are not idolaters, as
alleged by some men with a poor fund of knowledge. All the great äcäryas
established such temples of worship in all places just to favor the less
intelligent, and one should not pose himself as transcending the stage of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
temple worship while one is actually in the category of the çüdras and the
women or less. One should begin to see the Lord from His lotus feet, gradually
rising to the thighs, waist, chest and face. One should not try to look at the
face of the Lord without being accustomed to seeing the lotus feet of the Lord.
Çrématé Kunté, because of her being the aunt of the Lord, did not begin to see
the Lord from the lotus feet because the Lord might feel ashamed, and thus
Kuntédevé, just to save a painful situation for the Lord, began to see the Lord
just above His lotus feet, i.e., from the waist of the Lord, gradually rising to the
face, and then down to the lotus feet. In the round, everything there is in
order.
TEXT 23
YaQaa ôzqke-Xa %le/Na devk-I
k&-SaeNa åÖaiTaicr& éucaiPaRTaa )
ivMaaeicTaah& c SahaTMaJaa iv>aae
TvYaEv NaaQaeNa MauhuivRPaÓ<aaTa( )) 23 ))
yathä håñékeça khalena devaké
kaàsena ruddhäticiraà çucärpitä
vimocitähaà ca sahätmajä vibho
tvayaiva näthena muhur vipad-gaëät
SYNONYMS
yathä—as it were; håñékeça—the master of the senses; khalena—by the envious;
devaké—Devaké (the mother of Çré Kåñëa); kaàsena—by King Kaàsa;
ruddhä—imprisoned; ati-ciram—for a long time; çuca-arpitä—distressed;
vimocitä—released; aham ca—also myself; saha-ätma-jä—along with my
children; vibho—O great one; tvayä eva—by Your Lordship; näthena—as the
protector; muhuù—constantly; vipat-gaëät—from a series of dangers.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
O Håñékeça, master of the senses and Lord of lords, You have released Your
mother, Devaké, who was long imprisoned and distressed by the envious King
Kaàsa, and me and my children from a series of constant dangers.
PURPORT
Devaké, the mother of Kåñëa and sister of King Kaàsa, was put into prison
along with her husband, Vasudeva, because the envious King was afraid of
being killed by Devaké’s eighth son (Kåñëa). He killed all the sons of Devaké
who were born before Kåñëa, but Kåñëa escaped the danger of child-slaughter
because He was transferred to the house of Nanda Mahäräja, Lord Kåñëa’s
foster father. Kuntédevé, along with her children, was also saved from a series
of dangers. But Kuntédevé was shown far more favor because Lord Kåñëa did
not save the other children of Devaké, whereas He saved the children of
Kuntédevé. This was done because Devaké’s husband, Vasudeva, was living,
whereas Kuntédevé was a widow, and there was none to help her except Kåñëa.
The conclusion is that Kåñëa endows more favor to a devotee who is in greater
dangers. Sometimes He puts His pure devotees in such dangers because in that
condition of helplessness the devotee becomes more attached to the Lord. The
more the attachment is there for the Lord, the more success is there for the
devotee.
TEXT 24
ivzaNMahaGane" PauåzaddXaRNaa‚
dSaTSa>aaYaa vNavaSak*-C^\Ta" )
Ma*Dae Ma*Dae_Naek-MaharQaañTaae
d]aE<YañTaêaSMa hre_i>ari+aTaa" )) 24 ))
viñän mahägneù puruñäda-darçanäd
asat-sabhäyä vana-väsa-kåcchrataù
mådhe mådhe ’neka-mahärathästrato
drauëy-astrataç cäsma hare ’bhirakñitäù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
viñät—from poison; mahä-agneù—from the great fire; puruña-ada—the
man-eaters; darçanät—by combating; asat—vicious; sabhäyäù—assembly;
vana-väsa—exiled to the forest; kåcchrataù—sufferings; mådhe mådhe—again
and again in battle; aneka—many; mahä-ratha—great generals;
astrataù—weapons; drauëi—the son of Droëäcärya; astrataù—from the
weapon of; ca—and; äsma—indicating past tense; hare—O my Lord;
abhirakñitäù—protected completely.
TRANSLATION
My dear Kåñëa, Your Lordship has protected us from a poisoned cake, from a
great fire, from cannibals, from the vicious assembly, from sufferings during our
exile in the forest and from the battle where great generals fought. And now
You have saved us from the weapon of Açvatthämä.
PURPORT
The list of dangerous encounters is submitted herein. Devaké was once put
into difficulty by her envious brother, otherwise she was well. But Kuntédevé
and her sons were put into one difficulty after another for years and years
together. They were put into trouble by Duryodhana and his party due to the
kingdom, and each and every time the sons of Kunté were saved by the Lord.
Once Bhéma was administered poison in a cake, once they were put into the
house made of shellac and set afire, and once Draupadé was dragged out, and
attempts were made to insult her by stripping her naked in the vicious
assembly of the Kurus. The Lord saved Draupadé by supplying an immeasurable
length of cloth, and Duryodhana’s party failed to see her naked. Similarly,
when they were exiled in the forest, Bhéma had to fight with the man-eater
demon Hiòimbä Räkñasa, but the Lord saved him. So it was not finished there.
After all these tribulations, there was the great Battle of Kurukñetra, and
Arjuna had to meet such great generals as Droëa, Bhéñma and Karëa, all
powerful fighters. And at last, even when everything was done away with,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
there was the brahmästra released by the son of Droëäcärya to kill the child
within the womb of Uttarä, and so the Lord saved the only surviving
descendant of the Kurus, Mahäräja Parékñit.
TEXT 25
ivPad" SaNTau Taa" Xaìta}a Ta}a JaGad(Gaurae )
>avTaae dXaRNa& YaTSYaadPauNa>aRvdXaRNaMa( )) 25 ))
vipadaù santu täù çaçvat
tatra tatra jagad-guro
bhavato darçanaà yat syäd
apunar bhava-darçanam
SYNONYMS
vipadaù—calamities; santu—let there be; täù—all; çaçvat—again and again;
tatra—there; tatra—and there; jagat-guro—O Lord of the universe;
bhavataù—Your; darçanam—meeting; yat—that which; syät—is; apunaù—not
again; bhava-darçanam—seeing repetition of birth and death.
TRANSLATION
I wish that all those calamities would happen again and again so that we
could see You again and again, for seeing You means that we will no longer see
repeated births and deaths.
PURPORT
Generally the distressed, the needy, the intelligent and the inquisitive, who
have performed some pious activities, worship or begin to worship the Lord.
Others, who are thriving on misdeeds only, regardless of status, cannot
approach the Supreme due to being misled by the illusory energy. Therefore,
for a pious person, if there is some calamity there is no other alternative than
to take shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord. Constantly remembering the lotus
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
feet of the Lord means preparing for liberation from birth and death.
Therefore, even though there are so-called calamities, they are welcome
because they give us an opportunity to remember the Lord, which means
liberation.
One who has taken shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord, which are accepted
as the most suitable boat for crossing the ocean of nescience, can achieve
liberation as easily as one leaps over the holes made by the hoofs of a calf. Such
persons are meant to reside in the abode of the Lord, and they have nothing to
do with a place where there is danger in every step.
This material world is certified by the Lord in the Bhagavad-gétä as a
dangerous place full of calamities. Less intelligent persons prepare plans to
adjust to those calamities without knowing that the nature of this place is itself
full of calamities. They have no information of the abode of the Lord, which is
full of bliss and without trace of calamity. The duty of the sane person,
therefore, is to be undisturbed by worldly calamities, which are sure to happen
in all circumstances. Suffering all sorts of unavoidable misfortunes, one should
make progress in spiritual realization because that is the mission of human life.
The spirit soul is transcendental to all material calamities; therefore, the
so-called calamities are called false. A man may see a tiger swallowing him in a
dream, and he may cry for this calamity. Actually there is no tiger and there is
no suffering; it is simply a case of dreams. In the same way, all calamities of life
are said to be dreams. If someone is lucky enough to get in contact with the
Lord by devotional service, it is all gain. Contact with the Lord by any one of
the nine devotional services is always a forward step on the path going back to
Godhead.
TEXT 26
JaNMaEìYaRé[uTaé[qi>areDaMaaNaMad" PauMaaNa( )
NaEvahRTYai>aDaaTau& vE TvaMaik-ÄNaGaaecrMa( )) 26 ))
janmaiçvarya-çruta-çrébhir
edhamäna-madaù pumän
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
naivärhaty abhidhätuà vai
tväm akiïcana-gocaram
SYNONYMS
janma—birth; aiçvarya—opulence; çruta—education; çrébhiù—by the
possession of beauty; edhamäna—progressively increasing;
madaù—intoxication; pumän—the human being; na—never; eva—ever;
arhati—deserves; abhidhätum—to address in feeling; vai—certainly;
tväm—You; akiïcana-gocaram—one who is approached easily by the
materially exhausted man.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, Your Lordship can easily be approached, but only by those who are
materially exhausted. One who is on the path of [material] progress, trying to
improve himself with respectable parentage, great opulence, high education and
bodily beauty, cannot approach You with sincere feeling.
PURPORT
Being materially advanced means taking birth in an aristocratic family and
possessing great wealth, an education and attractive personal beauty. All
materialistic men are mad after possessing all these material opulences, and
this is known as the advancement of material civilization. But the result is that
by possessing all these material assets one becomes artificially puffed up,
intoxicated by such temporary possessions. Consequently, such materially
puffed up persons are incapable of uttering the holy name of the Lord by
addressing Him feelingly, “O Govinda, O Kåñëa.” It is said in the çästras that
by once uttering the holy name of the Lord, the sinner gets rid of a quantity of
sins that he is unable to commit. Such is the power of uttering the holy name
of the Lord. There is not the least exaggeration in this statement. Actually the
Lord’s holy name has such powerful potency. But there is a quality to such
utterances also. It depends on the quality of feeling. A helpless man can
feelingly utter the holy name of the Lord, whereas a man who utters the same
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
holy name in great material satisfaction cannot be so sincere. A materially
puffed up person may utter the holy name of the Lord occasionally, but he is
incapable of uttering the name in quality. Therefore, the four principles of
material advancement, namely (1) high parentage, (2) good wealth, (3) high
education and (4) attractive beauty, are, so to speak, disqualifications for
progress on the path of spiritual advancement. The material covering of the
pure spirit soul is an external feature, as much as fever is an external feature of
the unhealthy body. The general process is to decrease the degree of the fever
and not to aggravate it by maltreatment. Sometimes it is seen that spiritually
advanced persons become materially impoverished. This is no discouragement.
On the other hand, such impoverishment is a good sign as much as the falling
of temperature is a good sign. The principle of life should be to decrease the
degree of material intoxication which leads one to be more and more
illusioned about the aim of life. Grossly illusioned persons are quite unfit for
entrance into the kingdom of God.
TEXT 27
NaMaae_ik-ÄNaivtaaYa iNav*taGau<av*taYae )
AaTMaaraMaaYa XaaNTaaYa kE-vLYaPaTaYae NaMa" )) 27 ))
namo ’kiïcana-vittäya
nivåtta-guëa-våttaye
ätmärämäya çäntäya
kaivalya-pataye namaù
SYNONYMS
namaù—all obeisances unto You; akiïcana-vittäya—unto the property of the
materially impoverished; nivåtta—completely transcendental to the actions of
the material modes; guëa—material modes; våttaye—affection;
ätma-ärämäya—one who is self-satisfied; çäntäya—the most gentle;
kaivalya-pataye—unto the master of the monists; namaù—bowing down.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
My obeisances are unto You, who are the property of the materially
impoverished. You have nothing to do with the actions and reactions of the
material modes of nature. You are self-satisfied, and therefore You are the most
gentle and are master of the monists.
PURPORT
A living being is finished as soon as there is nothing to possess. Therefore a
living being cannot be, in the real sense of the term, a renouncer. A living
being renounces something for gaining something more valuable. A student
sacrifices his childish proclivities to gain better education. A servant gives up
his job for a better job. Similarly, a devotee renounces the material world not
for nothing but for something tangible in spiritual value. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé,
Sanätana Gosvämé and Çréla Raghunätha däsa Gosvämé and others gave up
their worldly pomp and prosperity for the sake of the service of the Lord. They
were big men in the worldly sense. The Gosvämés were ministers in the
government service of Bengal, and Çréla Raghunätha däsa Gosvämé was the
son of a big zamindar of his time. But they left everything to gain something
superior to what they previously possessed. The devotees are generally without
material prosperity, but they have a very secret treasure-house in the lotus feet
of the Lord. There is a nice story about Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé. He had a
touchstone with him, and this stone was left in a pile of refuse. A needy man
took it, but later on wondered why the valuable stone was kept in such a
neglected place. He therefore asked him for the most valuable thing, and then
he was given the holy name of the Lord. Akiïcana means one who has nothing
to give materially. A factual devotee, or mahätmä, does not give anything
material to anyone because he has already left all material assets. He can,
however, deliver the supreme asset, namely the Personality of Godhead,
because He is the only property of a factual devotee. The touchstone of
Sanätana Gosvämé, which was thrown in the rubbish, was not the property of
the Gosvämé, otherwise it would not have been kept in such a place. This
specific example is given for the neophyte devotees just to convince them that
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
material hankerings and spiritual advancement go ill together. Unless one is
able to see everything as spiritual in relation with the Supreme Lord, one must
always distinguish between spirit and matter. A spiritual master like Çréla
Sanätana Gosvämé, although personally able to see everything as spiritual, set
this example for us only because we have no such spiritual vision.
Advancement of material vision or material civilization is a great stumbling
block for spiritual advancement. Such material advancement entangles the
living being in the bondage of a material body followed by all sorts of material
miseries. Such material advancement is called anartha, or things not wanted.
Actually this is so. In the present context of material advancement one uses
lipstick at a cost of fifty cents, and there are so many unwanted things which
are all products of the material conception of life. By diverting attention to so
many unwanted things, human energy is spoiled without achievement of
spiritual realization, the prime necessity of human life. The attempt to reach
the moon is another example of spoiling energy because even if the moon is
reached, the problems of life will not be solved. The devotees of the Lord are
called akiïcanas because they have practically no material assets. Such
material assets are all products of the three modes of material nature. They foil
spiritual energy, and thus the less we possess such products of material nature,
the more we have a good chance for spiritual progress.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead has no direct connection with
material activities. All His acts and deeds, which are exhibited even in this
material world, are spiritual and without affection for the modes of material
nature. In the Bhagavad-gétä the Lord says that all His acts, even His
appearance and disappearance in and out of the material world, are
transcendental, and one who knows this perfectly shall not take his birth again
in this material world, but will go back to Godhead.
The material disease is due to hankering after and lording it over material
nature. This hankering is due to an interaction of the three modes of nature,
and neither the Lord nor the devotees have attachment for such false
enjoyment. Therefore, the Lord and the devotees are called nivåtta-guëa-våtti.
The perfect nivåtta-guëa-våtti is the Supreme Lord because He never becomes
attracted by the modes of material nature, whereas the living beings have such
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
a tendency. Some of them are entrapped by the illusory attraction of material
nature.
Because the Lord is the property of the devotees, and the devotees are the
property of the Lord reciprocally, the devotees are certainly transcendental to
the modes of material nature. That is a natural conclusion. Such unalloyed
devotees are distinct from the mixed devotees who approach the Lord for
mitigation of miseries and poverty or because of inquisitiveness and
speculation. The unalloyed devotees and the Lord are transcendentally
attached to one another. For others, the Lord has nothing to reciprocate, and
therefore He is called ätmäräma, self-satisfied. Self-satisfied as He is, He is the
master of all monists who seek to merge into the existence of the Lord. Such
monists merge within the personal effulgence of the Lord called the
brahmajyoti, but the devotees enter into the transcendental pastimes of the
Lord, which are never to be misunderstood as material.
TEXT 28
MaNYae Tva& k-al/MaqXaaNaMaNaaidiNaDaNa& iv>auMa( )
SaMa& crNTa& SavR}a >aUTaaNaa& YaiNMaQa" k-il/" )) 28 ))
manye tväà kälam éçänam
anädi-nidhanaà vibhum
samaà carantaà sarvatra
bhütänäà yan mithaù kaliù
SYNONYMS
manye—I consider; tväm—Your Lordship; kälam—the eternal time;
éçänam—the Supreme Lord; anädi-nidhanam—without beginning and end;
vibhum—all-pervading; samam—equally merciful; carantam—distributing;
sarvatra—everywhere; bhütänäm—of the living beings; yat mithaù—by
intercourse; kaliù—dissension.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
My Lord, I consider Your Lordship to be eternal time, the supreme
controller, without beginning and end, the all-pervasive one. In distributing
Your mercy, You are equal to everyone. The dissensions between living beings
are due to social intercourse.
PURPORT
Kuntédevé knew that Kåñëa was neither her nephew nor an ordinary family
member of her paternal house. She knew perfectly well that Kåñëa is the
primeval Lord who lives in everyone’s heart as the Supersoul, Paramätmä.
Another name of the Paramätmä feature of the Lord is käla, or eternal time.
Eternal time is the witness of all our actions, good and bad, and thus resultant
reactions are destined by Him. It is no use saying that we do not know why and
for what we are suffering. We may forget the misdeed for which we may suffer
at this present moment, but we must remember that Paramätmä is our constant
companion, and therefore He knows everything, past, present and future. And
because the Paramätmä feature of Lord Kåñëa destines all actions and
reactions, He is the supreme controller also. Without His sanction not a blade
of grass can move. The living beings are given as much freedom as they
deserve, and misuse of that freedom is the cause of suffering. The devotees of
the Lord do not misuse their freedom, and therefore they are the good sons of
the Lord. Others, who misuse freedom, are put into miseries destined by the
eternal käla. The käla offers the conditioned souls both happiness and
miseries. It is all predestined by eternal time. As we have miseries uncalled-for,
so we may have happiness also without being asked, for they are all predestined
by käla. No one is therefore either an enemy or friend of the Lord. Everyone is
suffering and enjoying the result of his own destiny. This destiny is made by
the living beings in course of social intercourse. Everyone here wants to lord it
over the material nature, and thus everyone creates his own destiny under the
supervision of the Supreme Lord. He is all-pervading and therefore He can see
everyone’s activities. And because the Lord has no beginning or end, He is
known also as the eternal time, käla.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 29
Na ved k-iêÙGav&iêk-IizRTa&
TavehMaaNaSYa Na*<aa& iv@MbNaMa( )
Na YaSYa k-iêÕiYaTaae_iSTa k-ihRicd(
ÜeZYaê YaiSMaNa( ivzMaa MaiTaNa*R<aaMa( )) 29 ))
na veda kaçcid bhagavaàç cikérñitaà
tavehamänasya nåëäà viòambanam
na yasya kaçcid dayito ’sti karhicid
dveñyaç ca yasmin viñamä matir nåëäm
SYNONYMS
na—does not; veda—know; kaçcit—anyone; bhagavan—O Lord;
cikérñitam—pastimes; tava—Your; éhamänasya—like the worldly men;
nåëäm—of the people in general; viòambanam—misleading; na—never;
yasya—His; kaçcit—anyone; dayitaù—object of specific favor; asti—there is;
karhicit—anywhere; dveñyaù—object of envy; ca—and; yasmin—unto Him;
viñamä—partiality; matiù—conception; nåëäm—of the people.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, no one can understand Your transcendental pastimes, which appear
to be human and are so misleading. You have no specific object of favor, nor do
You have any object of envy. People only imagine that You are partial.
PURPORT
The Lord’s mercy upon the fallen souls is equally distributed. He has no one
as the specific object of hostility. The very conception of the Personality of
Godhead as a human being is misleading. His pastimes appear to be exactly like
a human being’s, but actually they are transcendental and without any tinge of
material contamination. He is undoubtedly known as partial to His pure
devotees, but in fact He is never partial, as much as the sun is never partial to
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
anyone. By utilizing the sun rays, sometimes even the stones become valuable,
whereas a blind man cannot see the sun, although there are enough sun rays
before him. Darkness and light are two opposite conceptions, but this does not
mean that the sun is partial in distributing its rays. The sun rays are open to
everyone, but the capacities of the receptacles differ. Foolish people think that
devotional service is flattering the Lord to get special mercy. Factually the
pure devotees who are engaged in the transcendental loving service of the
Lord are not a mercantile community. A mercantile house renders service to
someone in exchange for values. The pure devotee does not render service
unto the Lord for such exchange, and therefore the full mercy of the Lord is
open for him. Suffering and needy men, inquisitive persons or philosophers
make temporary connections with the Lord to serve a particular purpose.
When the purpose is served, there is no more relation with the Lord. A
suffering man, if he is pious at all, prays to the Lord for his recovery. But as
soon as the recovery is over, in most cases the suffering man no longer cares to
keep any connection with the Lord. The mercy of the Lord is open for him,
but he is reluctant to receive it. That is the difference between a pure devotee
and a mixed devotee. Those who are completely against the service of the Lord
are considered to be in abject darkness, those who ask for the Lord’s favor only
at the time of necessity are partial recipients of the mercy of the Lord, and
those who are cent percent engaged in the service of the Lord are full
recipients of the mercy of the Lord. Such partiality in receiving the Lord’s
mercy is relative to the recipient, and it is not due to the partiality of the
all-merciful Lord.
When the Lord descends on this material world by His all-merciful energy,
He plays like a human being, and therefore it appears that the Lord is partial
to His devotees only, but that is not a fact. Despite such apparent
manifestation of partiality, His mercy is equally distributed. In the Battlefield
of Kurukñetra all persons who died in the fight before the presence of the Lord
got salvation without the necessary qualifications because death before the
presence of the Lord purifies the passing soul from the effects of all sins, and
therefore the dying man gets a place somewhere in the transcendental abode.
Somehow or other if someone puts himself open in the sun rays, he is sure to
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
get the requisite benefit both by heat and by ultraviolet rays. Therefore, the
conclusion is that the Lord is never partial. It is wrong for the people in
general to think of Him as partial.
TEXT 30
JaNMa k-MaR c ivìaTMaàJaSYaak-TauRraTMaNa" )
iTaYaRx(Na›izzu Yaad"Sau TadTYaNTaiv@MbNaMa( )) 30 ))
janma karma ca viçvätmann
ajasyäkartur ätmanaù
tiryaì-nèñiñu yädaùsu
tad atyanta-viòambanam
SYNONYMS
janma—birth; karma—activity; ca—and; viçva-ätman—O soul of the
universe; ajasya—of the unborn; akartuù—of the inactive; ätmanaù—of the
vital energy; tiryak—animal; nå—human being; åñiñu—in the sages;
yädaùsu—in the water; tat—that; atyanta—veritable;
viòambanam—bewildering.
TRANSLATION
Of course it is bewildering, O soul of the universe, that You work, though
You are inactive, and that You take birth, though You are the vital force and
the unborn. You Yourself descend amongst animals, men, sages and aquatics.
Verily, this is bewildering.
PURPORT
The transcendental pastimes of the Lord are not only bewildering but also
apparently contradictory. In other words, they are all inconceivable to the
limited thinking power of the human being. The Lord is the all-prevailing
Supersoul of all existence, and yet He appears in the form of a boar amongst
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the animals, in the form of a human being as Räma, Kåñëa, etc., in the form of
a åñi like Näräyaëa, and in the form of an aquatic like a fish. Yet it is said that
He is unborn, and He has nothing to do. In the çruti mantra it is said that the
Supreme Brahman has nothing to do. No one is equal to or greater than Him.
He has manifold energies, and everything is performed by Him perfectly by
automatic knowledge, strength and activity. All these statements prove
without any question that the Lord’s activities, forms and deeds are all
inconceivable to our limited thinking power, and because He is inconceivably
powerful, everything is possible in Him. Therefore no one can calculate Him
exactly; every action of the Lord is bewildering to the common man. He
cannot be understood by the Vedic knowledge, but He can be easily
understood by the pure devotees because they are intimately related with Him.
The devotees therefore know that although He appears amongst the animals,
He is not an animal, nor a man, nor a åñi, nor a fish. He is eternally the
Supreme Lord, in all circumstances.
TEXT 31
GaaePYaadde TviYa k*-TaaGaiSa daMa Taavd(
Yaa Tae dXaaé[uk-il/l/aÅNaSaM>a]Maa+aMa( )
v£&- iNaNaqYa >aYa>aavNaYaa iSQaTaSYa
Saa Maa& ivMaaehYaiTa >aqriPa YaiØ>aeiTa )) 31 ))
gopy ädade tvayi kåtägasi däma tävad
yä te daçäçru-kaliläïjana-sambhramäkñam
vaktraà ninéya bhaya-bhävanayä sthitasya
sä mäà vimohayati bhér api yad bibheti
SYNONYMS
gopé—the cowherd lady (Yaçodä); ädade—took up; tvayi—on Your;
kåtägasi—creating disturbances (by breaking the butter pot); däma—rope;
tävat—at that time; yä—that which; te—Your; daçä—situation;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
açru-kalila—overflooded with tears; aïjana—ointment;
sambhrama—perturbed; akñam—eyes; vaktram—face; ninéya—downwards;
bhaya-bhävanayä—by thoughts of fear; sthitasya—of the situation; sä—that;
mäm—me; vimohayati—bewilders; bhéù api—even fear personified;
yat—whom; bibheti—is afraid.
TRANSLATION
My dear Kåñëa, Yaçodä took up a rope to bind You when You committed an
offense, and Your perturbed eyes overflooded with tears, which washed the
mascara from Your eyes. And You were afraid, though fear personified is afraid
of You. This sight is bewildering to me.
PURPORT
Here is another explanation of the bewilderment created by the pastimes of
the Supreme Lord. The Supreme Lord is the Supreme in all circumstances, as
already explained. Here is a specific example of the Lord’s being the Supreme
and at the same time a plaything in the presence of His pure devotee. The
Lord’s pure devotee renders service unto the Lord out of unalloyed love only,
and while discharging such devotional service the pure devotee forgets the
position of the Supreme Lord. The Supreme Lord also accepts the loving
service of His devotees more relishably when the service is rendered
spontaneously out of pure affection, without anything of reverential
admiration. Generally the Lord is worshiped by the devotees in a reverential
attitude, but the Lord is meticulously pleased when the devotee, out of pure
affection and love, considers the Lord to be less important than himself. The
Lord’s pastimes in the original abode of Goloka Våndävana are exchanged in
that spirit. The friends of Kåñëa consider Him one of them. They do not
consider Him to be of reverential importance. The parents of the Lord (who
are all pure devotees) consider Him a child only. The Lord accepts the
chastisements of the parents more cheerfully than the prayers of the Vedic
hymns. Similarly, He accepts the reproaches of His fiancees more palatably
than the Vedic hymns. When Lord Kåñëa was present in this material world to
manifest His eternal pastimes of the transcendental realm of Goloka
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Våndävana as an attraction for the people in general, He displayed a unique
picture of subordination before His foster mother, Yaçodä. The Lord, in His
naturally childish playful activities, used to spoil the stocked butter of mother
Yaçodä by breaking the pots and distributing the contents to His friends and
playmates, including the celebrated monkeys of Våndävana, who took
advantage of the Lord’s munificence. Mother Yaçodä saw this, and out of her
pure love she wanted to make a show of punishment for her transcendental
child. She took a rope and threatened the Lord that she would tie Him up, as is
generally done in the ordinary household. Seeing the rope in the hands of
mother Yaçodä, the Lord bowed down His head and began to weep just like a
child, and tears rolled down His cheeks, washing off the black ointment
smeared about His beautiful eyes. This picture of the Lord is adored by
Kuntédevé because she is conscious of the Lord’s supreme position. He is feared
often by fear personified, yet He is afraid of His mother, who wanted to punish
Him just in an ordinary manner. Kunté was conscious of the exalted position of
Kåñëa, whereas Yaçodä was not. Therefore Yaçodä’s position was more exalted
than Kunté’s. Mother Yaçodä got the Lord as her child, and the Lord made her
forget altogether that her child was the Lord Himself. If mother Yaçodä had
been conscious of the exalted position of the Lord, she would certainly have
hesitated to punish the Lord. But she was made to forget this situation because
the Lord wanted to make a complete gesture of childishness before the
affectionate Yaçodä. This exchange of love between the mother and the son
was performed in a natural way, and Kunté, remembering the scene, was
bewildered, and she could do nothing but praise the transcendental filial love.
Indirectly mother Yaçodä is praised for her unique position of love, for she
could control even the all-powerful Lord as her beloved child.
TEXT 32
ke-icdahurJa& JaaTa& Pau<Yaëaek-SYa k-ITaRYae )
Yadae" iPa[YaSYaaNvvaYae Mal/YaSYaev cNdNaMa( )) 32 ))
kecid ähur ajaà jätaà
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
puëya-çlokasya kértaye
yadoù priyasyänvaväye
malayasyeva candanam
SYNONYMS
kecit—someone; ähuù—says; ajam—the unborn; jätam—being born;
puëya-çlokasya—of the great pious king; kértaye—for glorifying; yadoù—of
King Yadu; priyasya—of the dear; anvaväye—in the family of;
malayasya—Malaya hills; iva—as; candanam—sandalwood.
TRANSLATION
Some say that the Unborn is born for the glorification of pious kings, and
others say that He is born to please King Yadu, one of Your dearest devotees.
You appear in his family as sandalwood appears in the Malaya hills.
PURPORT
Because the Lord’s appearance in this material world is bewildering, there
are different opinions about the birth of the Unborn. In the Bhagavad-gétä the
Lord says that He takes His birth in the material world, although He is the
Lord of all creations and He is unborn. So there cannot be any denial of the
birth of the Unborn because He Himself establishes the truth. But still there
are different opinions as to why He takes His birth. That is also declared in the
Bhagavad-gétä. He appears by His own internal potency to reestablish the
principles of religion and to protect the pious and to annihilate the impious.
That is the mission of the appearance of the Unborn. Still, it is said that the
Lord is there to glorify the pious King Yudhiñöhira. Lord Çré Kåñëa certainly
wanted to establish the kingdom of the Päëòavas for the good of all in the
world. When there is a pious king ruling over the world, the people are happy.
When the ruler is impious, the people are unhappy. In the age of Kali in most
cases the rulers are impious, and therefore the citizens are also continuously
unhappy. But in the case of democracy, the impious citizens themselves elect
their representative to rule over them, and therefore they cannot blame
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
anyone for their unhappiness. Mahäräja Nala was also celebrated as a great
pious king, but he had no connection with Lord Kåñëa. Therefore Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira is meant here to be glorified by Lord Kåñëa. He had also glorified
King Yadu, having taken His birth in the family. He is known as Yädava,
Yaduvéra, Yadunandana, etc., although the Lord is always independent of such
obligation. He is just like the sandalwood that grows in the Malaya hills. Trees
can grow anywhere and everywhere, yet because the sandalwood trees grow
mostly in the area of the Malaya hills, the name sandalwood and the Malaya
hills are interrelated. Therefore, the conclusion is that the Lord is ever unborn
like the sun, and yet He appears as the sun rises on the eastern horizon. As the
sun is never the sun of the eastern horizon, so the Lord is no one’s son, but He
is the father of everything that be.
TEXT 33
APare vSaudevSYa devKYaa& YaaicTaae_>YaGaaTa( )
AJaSTvMaSYa +aeMaaYa vDaaYa c SauriÜzaMa( )) 33 ))
apare vasudevasya
devakyäà yäcito ’bhyagät
ajas tvam asya kñemäya
vadhäya ca sura-dviñäm
SYNONYMS
apare—others; vasudevasya—of Vasudeva; devakyäm—of Devaké;
yäcitaù—being prayed for; abhyagät—took birth; ajaù—unborn; tvam—You
are; asya—of him; kñemäya—for the good; vadhäya—for the purpose of killing;
ca—and; sura-dviñäm—of those who are envious of the demigods.
TRANSLATION
Others say that since both Vasudeva and Devaké prayed for You, You have
taken Your birth as their son. Undoubtedly You are unborn, yet You take Your
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
birth for their welfare and to kill those who are envious of the demigods.
PURPORT
It is also said that Vasudeva and Devaké, in their previous birth as Sutapä
and Påçni, underwent a severe type of penance to get the Lord as their son,
and as a result of such austerities the Lord appeared as their son. It is already
declared in the Bhagavad-gétä that the Lord appears for the welfare of all
people of the world and to vanquish the asuras, or the materialistic atheists.
TEXT 34
>aaravTaar<aaYaaNYae >auvae Naav wvaedDaaE )
SaqdNTYaa >aUir>aare<a JaaTaae ùaTMa>auvaiQaRTa" )) 34 ))
bhärävatäraëäyänye
bhuvo näva ivodadhau
sédantyä bhüri-bhäreëa
jäto hy ätma-bhuvärthitaù
SYNONYMS
bhära-avatäraëäya—just to reduce the burden to the world; anye—others;
bhuvaù—of the world; nävaù—boat; iva—like; udadhau—on the sea;
sédantyäù—aggrieved; bhüri—extremely; bhäreëa—by the burden; jätaù—You
were born; hi—certainly; ätma-bhuvä—by Brahmä; arthitaù—being prayed for.
TRANSLATION
Others say that the world, being overburdened like a boat at sea, is much
aggrieved, and that Brahmä, who is Your son, prayed for You, and so You have
appeared to diminish the trouble.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Brahmä, or the first living being born just after the creation, is the direct
son of Näräyaëa. Näräyaëa, as Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, first of all entered the
material universe. Without spiritual contact, matter cannot create. This
principle was followed from the very beginning of the creation. The Supreme
Spirit entered the universe, and the first living being, Brahmä, was born on a
lotus flower grown out of the transcendental abdomen of Viñëu. Viñëu is
therefore known as Padmanäbha. Brahmä is known as ätma-bhü because he
was begotten directly from the father without any contact of mother Lakñméjé.
Lakñméjé was present near Näräyaëa, engaged in the service of the Lord, and
still, without contact with Lakñméjé, Näräyaëa begot Brahmä. That is the
omnipotency of the Lord. One who foolishly considers Näräyaëa like other
living beings should take a lesson from this. Näräyaëa is not an ordinary living
being. He is the Personality of Godhead Himself, and He has all the potencies
of all the senses in all parts of His transcendental body. An ordinary living
being begets a child by sexual intercourse, and he has no other means to beget
a child other than the one designed for him. But Näräyaëa, being omnipotent,
is not bound to any condition of energy. He is complete and independent to do
anything and everything by His various potencies, very easily and perfectly.
Brahmä is therefore directly the son of the father and was not put into the
womb of a mother. Therefore he is known as ätma-bhü. This Brahmä is in
charge of further creations in the universe, secondarily reflected by the
potency of the Omnipotent. Within the halo of the universe there is a
transcendental planet known as Çvetadvépa, which is the abode of the
Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu, the Paramätmä feature of the Supreme Lord. Whenever
there is trouble in the universe that cannot be solved by the administrative
demigods, they approach Brahmäjé for a solution, and if it is not to be solved
even by Brahmäjé, then Brahmäjé consults and prays to the Kñérodakaçäyé
Viñëu for an incarnation and solution to the problems. Such a problem arose
when Kaàsa and others were ruling over the earth and the earth became too
much overburdened by the misdeeds of the asuras. Brahmäjé, along with other
demigods, prayed at the shore of the Kñérodaka Ocean, and they were advised
of the descent of Kåñëa as the son of Vasudeva and Devaké. So some people say
that the Lord appeared because of the prayers of Brahmäjé.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 35
>ave_iSMaNa( i©-XYaMaaNaaNaaMaivÛak-aMak-MaRi>a" )
é[v<aSMar<aahaRi<a k-irZYaiàiTa ke-cNa )) 35 ))
bhave ’smin kliçyamänänäm
avidyä-käma-karmabhiù
çravaëa-smaraëärhäëi
kariñyann iti kecana
SYNONYMS
bhave—in the material creation; asmin—this; kliçyamänänäm—of those who
are suffering from; avidyä—nescience; käma—desire; karmabhiù—by
execution of fruitive work; çravaëa—hearing; smaraëa—remembering;
arhäëi—worshiping; kariñyan—may perform; iti—thus; kecana—others.
TRANSLATION
And yet others say that You appeared to rejuvenate the devotional service of
hearing, remembering, worshiping and so on in order that the conditioned souls
suffering from material pangs might take advantage and gain liberation.
PURPORT
In the Çrémad Bhagavad-gétä the Lord asserts that He appears in every
millennium just to reestablish the way of religion. The way of religion is made
by the Supreme Lord. No one can manufacture a new path of religion, as is the
fashion for certain ambitious persons. The factual way of religion is to accept
the Lord as the supreme authority and thus render service unto Him in
spontaneous love. A living being cannot help but render service because he is
constitutionally made for that purpose. The only function of the living being is
to render service to the Lord. The Lord is great, and living beings are
subordinate to Him. Therefore, the duty of the living being is just to serve Him
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
only. Unfortunately the illusioned living beings, out of misunderstanding only,
become servants of the senses by material desire. This desire is called avidyä, or
nescience. And out of such desire the living being makes different plans for
material enjoyment centered about a perverted sex life. He therefore becomes
entangled in the chain of birth and death by transmigrating into different
bodies on different planets under the direction of the Supreme Lord. Unless,
therefore, one is beyond the boundary of this nescience, one cannot get free
from the threefold miseries of material life. That is the law of nature.
The Lord, however, out of His causeless mercy, because He is more merciful
to the suffering living beings than they can expect, appears before them and
renovates the principles of devotional service comprised of hearing, chanting,
remembering, serving, worshiping, praying, cooperating and surrendering unto
Him. Adoption of all the above-mentioned items, or any one of them, can help
a conditioned soul get out of the tangle of nescience and thus become liberated
from all material sufferings created by the living being illusioned by the
external energy. This particular type of mercy is bestowed upon the living
being by the Lord in the form of Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu.
TEXT 36
é*<viNTa GaaYaiNTa Ga*<aNTYa>aq+<aXa"
SMariNTa NaNdiNTa TaveihTa& JaNaa" )
Ta Wv PaXYaNTYaicre<a Taavk&-
>avPa[vahaeParMa& PadaMbuJaMa( )) 36 ))
çåëvanti gäyanti gåëanty abhékñëaçaù
smaranti nandanti tavehitaà janäù
ta eva paçyanty acireëa tävakaà
bhava-pravähoparamaà padämbujam
SYNONYMS
çåëvanti—hear; gäyanti—chant; gåëanti—take; abhékñëaçaù—continuously;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
smaranti—remember; nandanti—take pleasure; tava—Your;
éhitam—activities; janäù—people in general; te—they; eva—certainly;
paçyanti—can see; acireëa—very soon; tävakam—Your; bhava-praväha—the
current of rebirth; uparamam—cessation; pada-ambujam—lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
O Kåñëa, those who continuously hear, chant and repeat Your
transcendental activities, or take pleasure in others’ doing so, certainly see Your
lotus feet, which alone can stop the repetition of birth and death.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa cannot be seen by our present conditional
vision. In order to see Him, one has to change his present vision by developing
a different condition of life full of spontaneous love of Godhead. When Çré
Kåñëa was personally present on the face of the globe, not everyone could see
Him as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Materialists like Rävaëa,
Hiraëyakaçipu, Kaàsa, Jaräsandha and Çiçupäla, were highly qualified
personalities by acquisition of material assets, but they were unable to
appreciate the presence of the Lord. Therefore, even though the Lord may be
present before our eyes, it is not possible to see Him unless we have the
necessary vision. This necessary qualification is developed by the process of
devotional service only, beginning with hearing about the Lord from the right
sources. The Bhagavad-gétä is one of the popular literatures which are generally
heard, chanted, repeated, etc., by the people in general, but in spite of such
hearing, etc., sometimes it is experienced that the performer of such
devotional service does not see the Lord eye to eye. The reason is that the first
item, çravaëa, is very important. If hearing is from the right sources, it acts
very quickly. Generally people hear from unauthorized persons. Such
unauthorized persons may be very learned by academic qualifications, but
because they do not follow the principles of devotional service, hearing from
them becomes a sheer waste of time. Sometimes the texts are interpreted
fashionably to suit their own purposes. Therefore, first one should select a
competent and bona fide speaker and then hear from him. When the hearing
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
process is perfect and complete, the other processes become automatically
perfect in their own way.
There are different transcendental activities of the Lord, and each and
every one of them is competent to bestow the desired result, provided the
hearing process is perfect. In the Bhägavatam the activities of the Lord begin
from His dealings with the Päëòavas. There are many other pastimes of the
Lord in connection with His dealings with the asuras and others. And in the
Tenth Canto the sublime dealings with His conjugal associates, the gopés, as
well as with His married wives at Dvärakä are mentioned. Since the Lord is
absolute, there is no difference in the transcendental nature of each and every
dealing of the Lord. But sometimes people, in an unauthorized hearing process,
take more interest in hearing about His dealings with the gopés. Such an
inclination indicates the lusty feelings of the hearer, so a bona fide speaker of
the dealings of the Lord never indulges in such hearings. One must hear about
the Lord from the very beginning, as in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam or any other
scriptures, and that will help the hearer attain perfection by progressive
development. One should not, therefore, consider that His dealings with the
Päëòavas are less important than His dealings with the gopés. We must always
remember that the Lord is always transcendental to all mundane attachment.
In all the above-mentioned dealings of the Lord, He is the hero in all
circumstances, and hearing about Him or about His devotees or combatants is
conducive to spiritual life. It is said that the Vedas and Puräëas, etc., are all
made to revive our lost relation with Him. Hearing of all these scriptures is
essential.
TEXT 37
APYaÛ NaSTv& Svk*-TaeihTa Pa[>aae
iJahaSaiSa iSvTSauôdae_NauJaqivNa" )
Yaeza& Na caNYaÙvTa" PadaMbuJaaTa(
ParaYa<a& raJaSau YaaeiJaTaa&hSaaMa( )) 37 ))
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
apy adya nas tvaà sva-kåtehita prabho
jihäsasi svit suhådo ’nujévinaù
yeñäà na cänyad bhavataù padämbujät
paräyaëaà räjasu yojitäàhasäm
SYNONYMS
api—if; adya—today; naù—us; tvam—You; sva-kåta—self-executed; éhita—all
duties; prabho—O my Lord; jihäsasi—giving up; svit—possibly;
suhådaù—intimate friends; anujévinaù—living at the mercy of; yeñäm—of
whom; na—nor; ca—and; anyat—anyone else; bhavataù—Your;
pada-ambujät—from the lotus feet; paräyaëam—dependent; räjasu—unto the
kings; yojita—engaged in; aàhasäm—enmity.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, You have executed all duties Yourself. Are you leaving us today,
though we are completely dependent on Your mercy and have no one else to
protect us, now when all kings are at enmity with us?
PURPORT
The Päëòavas are most fortunate because with all good luck they were
entirely dependent on the mercy of the Lord. In the material world, to be
dependent on the mercy of someone else is the utmost sign of misfortune, but
in the case of our transcendental relation with the Lord, it is the most
fortunate case when we can live completely dependent on Him. The material
disease is due to thinking of becoming independent of everything. But the
cruel material nature does not allow us to become independent. The false
attempt to become independent of the stringent laws of nature is known as
material advancement of experimental knowledge. The whole material world
is moving on this false attempt of becoming independent of the laws of nature.
Beginning from Rävaëa, who wanted to prepare a direct staircase to the
planets of heaven, down to the present age, they are trying to overcome the
laws of nature. They are trying now to approach distant planetary systems by
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
electronic mechanical power. But the highest goal of human civilization is to
work hard under the guidance of the Lord and become completely dependent
on Him. The highest achievement of perfect civilization is to work with valor
but at the same time depend completely on the Lord. The Päëòavas were the
ideal executors of this standard of civilization. Undoubtedly they were
completely dependent on the good will of Lord Çré Kåñëa, but they were not
idle parasites of the Lord. They were all highly qualified both by personal
character and by physical activities. Still they always looked for the mercy of
the Lord because they knew that every living being is dependent by
constitutional position. The perfection of life is, therefore, to become
dependent on the will of the Lord, instead of becoming falsely independent in
the material world. Those who try to become falsely independent of the Lord
are called anätha, or without any guardian, whereas those who are completely
dependent on the will of the Lord are called sanätha, or those having someone
to protect them. Therefore we must try to be sanätha so that we can always be
protected from the unfavorable condition of material existence. By the
deluding power of the external material nature we forget that the material
condition of life is the most undesirable perplexity. The Bhagavad-gétä
therefore directs us (7.19) that after many, many births one fortunate person
becomes aware of the fact that Väsudeva is all in all and that the best way of
leading one’s life is to surrender unto Him completely. That is the sign of a
mahätmä. All the members of the Päëòava family were mahätmäs in household
life. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was the head of these mahätmäs, and Queen
Kuntédevé was the mother. The lessons of the Bhagavad-gétä and all the
Puräëas, specifically the Bhägavata Puräëa, are therefore inevitably connected
with the history of the Päëòava mahätmäs. For them, separation from the Lord
was just like the separation of a fish from water. Çrématé Kuntédevé, therefore,
felt such separation like a thunderbolt, and the whole prayer of the Queen is
to try to persuade the Lord to stay with them. After the Battle of Kurukñetra,
although the inimical kings were killed, their sons and grandsons were still
there to deal with the Päëòavas. It is not only the Päëòavas who were put into
the condition of enmity, but all of us are always in such a condition, and the
best way of living is to become completely dependent on the will of the Lord
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
and thereby overcome all difficulties of material existence.
TEXT 38
ke- vYa& NaaMaæPaa>Yaa& Yadui>a" Sah Paa<@va" )
>avTaae_dXaRNa& YaihR ôzqk-a<aaiMaveiXaTau" )) 38 ))
ke vayaà näma-rüpäbhyäà
yadubhiù saha päëòaväù
bhavato ’darçanaà yarhi
håñékäëäm iveçituù
SYNONYMS
ke—who are; vayam—we; näma-rüpäbhyäm—without fame and ability;
yadubhiù—with the Yadus; saha—along with; päëòaväù—and the Päëòavas;
bhavataù—Your; adarçanam—absence; yarhi—as if; håñékäëäm—of the senses;
iva—like; éçituù—of the living being.
TRANSLATION
As the name and fame of a particular body is finished with the disappearance
of the living spirit, similarly if You do not look upon us, all our fame and
activities, along with the Päëòavas and Yadus, will end at once.
PURPORT
Kuntédevé is quite aware that the existence of the Päëòavas is due to Çré
Kåñëa only. The Päëòavas are undoubtedly well established in name and fame
and are guided by the great King Yudhiñöhira, who is morality personified, and
the Yadus are undoubtedly great allies, but without the guidance of Lord Kåñëa
all of them are nonentities, as much as the senses of the body are useless
without the guidance of consciousness. No one should be proud of his prestige,
power and fame without being guided by the favor of the Supreme Lord. The
living beings are always dependent, and the ultimate dependable object is the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Lord Himself. We may, therefore, invent by our advancement of material
knowledge all sorts of counteracting material resources, but without being
guided by the Lord all such inventions end in fiasco, however strong and stout
the reactionary elements may be.
TEXT 39
NaeYa& Xaaei>aZYaTae Ta}a YaQaedaNaq& GadaDar )
TvTPadEriªTaa >aaiTa Svl/+a<aivl/i+aTaE" )) 39 ))
neyaà çobhiñyate tatra
yathedänéà gadädhara
tvat-padair aìkitä bhäti
sva-lakñaëa-vilakñitaiù
SYNONYMS
na—not; iyam—this land of our kingdom; çobhiñyate—will appear beautiful;
tatra—then; yathä—as it is now; idäném—how; gadädhara—O Kåñëa;
tvat—Your; padaiù—by the feet; aìkitä—marked; bhäti—is dazzling;
sva-lakñaëa—Your own marks; vilakñitaiù—by the impressions.
TRANSLATION
O Gadädhara [Kåñëa], our kingdom is now being marked by the impressions
of Your feet, and therefore it appears beautiful. But when You leave, it will no
longer be so.
PURPORT
There are certain particular marks on the feet of the Lord which
distinguish the Lord from others. The marks of a flag, thunderbolt, and
instrument to drive an elephant, umbrella, lotus, disc, etc., are on the bottom
of the Lord’s feet. These marks are impressed upon the soft dust of the land
where the Lord traverses. The land of Hastinäpura was thus marked while
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Lord Çré Kåñëa was there with the Päëòavas, and the kingdom of the Päëòavas
thus flourished by such auspicious signs. Kuntédevé pointed out these
distinguished features and was afraid of ill luck in the absence of the Lord.
TEXT 40
wMae JaNaPada" Sv*Öa" SauPaKvaEziDavqåDa" )
vNaaid]NaÛudNvNTaae ùeDaNTae Tav vqi+aTaE" )) 40 ))
ime jana-padäù svåddhäù
supakvauñadhi-vérudhaù
vanädri-nady-udanvanto
hy edhante tava vékñitaiù
SYNONYMS
ime—all these; jana-padäù—cities and towns; svåddhäù—flourished;
supakva—nature; auñadhi—herbs; vérudhaù—vegetables; vana—forests;
adri—hills; nadé—rivers; udanvantaù—seas; hi—certainly;
edhante—increasing; tava—by You; vékñitaiù—seen.
TRANSLATION
All these cities and villages are flourishing in all respects because the herbs
and grains are in abundance, the trees are full of fruits, the rivers are flowing,
the hills are full of minerals and the oceans full of wealth. And this is all due to
Your glancing over them.
PURPORT
Human prosperity flourishes by natural gifts and not by gigantic industrial
enterprises. The gigantic industrial enterprises are products of a godless
civilization, and they cause the destruction of the noble aims of human life.
The more we go on increasing such troublesome industries to squeeze out the
vital energy of the human being, the more there will be unrest and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
dissatisfaction of the people in general, although a few only can live lavishly by
exploitation. The natural gifts such as grains and vegetables, fruits, rivers, the
hills of jewels and minerals, and the seas full of pearls are supplied by the order
of the Supreme, and as He desires, material nature produces them in
abundance or restricts them at times. The natural law is that the human being
may take advantage of these godly gifts by nature and satisfactorily flourish on
them without being captivated by the exploitative motive of lording it over
material nature. The more we attempt to exploit material nature according to
our whims of enjoyment, the more we shall become entrapped by the reaction
of such exploitative attempts. If we have sufficient grains, fruits, vegetables
and herbs, then what is the necessity of running a slaughterhouse and killing
poor animals? A man need not kill an animal if he has sufficient grains and
vegetables to eat. The flow of river waters fertilizes the fields, and there is
more than what we need. Minerals are produced in the hills, and the jewels in
the ocean. If the human civilization has sufficient grains, minerals, jewels,
water, milk, etc., then why should it hanker after terrible industrial enterprises
at the cost of the labor of some unfortunate men? But all these natural gifts are
dependent on the mercy of the Lord. What we need, therefore, is to be
obedient to the laws of the Lord and achieve the perfection of human life by
devotional service. The indications by Kuntédevé are just to the point. She
desires that God’s mercy be bestowed upon them so that natural prosperity be
maintained by His grace.
TEXT 41
AQa ivìeXa ivìaTMaNa( ivìMaUTaeR Svke-zu Mae )
òehPaaXaiMaMa& i^iNDa d*!& Paa<@uzu v*iZ<azu )) 41 ))
atha viçveça viçvätman
viçva-mürte svakeñu me
sneha-päçam imaà chindhi
dåòhaà päëòuñu våñëiñu
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
atha—therefore; viçva-éça—O Lord of the universe; viçva-ätman—O soul of
the universe; viçva-mürte—O personality of the universal form; svakeñu—unto
my own kinsmen; me—my; sneha-päçam—tie of affection; imam—this;
chindhi—cut off; dåòham—deep; päëòuñu—for the Päëòavas; våñëiñu—for the
Våñëis also.
TRANSLATION
O Lord of the universe, soul of the universe, O personality of the form of
the universe, please, therefore, sever my tie of affection for my kinsmen, the
Päëòavas and the Våñëis.
PURPORT
A pure devotee of the Lord is ashamed to ask anything in self-interest from
the Lord. But the householders are sometimes obliged to ask favors from the
Lord, being bound by the tie of family affection. Çrématé Kuntédevé was
conscious of this fact, and therefore she prayed to the Lord to cut off the
affectionate tie from her own kinsmen, the Päëòavas and the Våñëis. The
Päëòavas are her own sons, and the Våñëis are the members of her paternal
family. Kåñëa was equally related to both the families. Both the families
required the Lord’s help because both were dependent devotees of the Lord.
Çrématé Kuntédevé wished Çré Kåñëa to remain with her sons the Päëòavas, but
by His doing so her paternal house would be bereft of the benefit. All these
partialities troubled the mind of Kunté, and therefore she desired to cut off the
affectionate tie.
A pure devotee cuts off the limited ties of affection for his family and
widens his activities of devotional service for all forgotten souls. The typical
example is the band of six Gosvämés, who followed the path of Lord Caitanya.
All of them belonged to the most enlightened and cultured rich families of the
higher castes, but for the benefit of the mass of population they left their
comfortable homes and became mendicants. To cut off all family affection
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
means to broaden the field of activities. Without doing this, no one can be
qualified as a brähmaëa, a king, a public leader or a devotee of the Lord. The
Personality of Godhead, as an ideal king, showed this by example. Çré
Rämacandra cut off the tie of affection for His beloved wife to manifest the
qualities of an ideal king.
Such personalities as a brähmaëa, a devotee, a king or a public leader must
be very broadminded in discharging their respective duties. Çrématé Kuntédevé
was conscious of this fact, and being weak she prayed to be free from such
bondage of family affection. The Lord is addressed as the Lord of the universe,
or the Lord of the universal mind, indicating His all-powerful ability to cut the
hard knot of family affection. Therefore, it is sometimes experienced that the
Lord, out of His special affinity towards a weak devotee, breaks the family
affection by force of circumstances arranged by His all-powerful energy. By
doing so He causes the devotee to become completely dependent on Him and
thus clears the path for his going back to Godhead.
TEXT 42
TviYa Mae_NaNYaivzYaa MaiTaMaRDauPaTae_Sak*-Ta( )
riTaMauÜhTaadÖa Ga®evaEgaMaudNviTa )) 42 ))
tvayi me ’nanya-viñayä
matir madhu-pate ’sakåt
ratim udvahatäd addhä
gaìgevaugham udanvati
SYNONYMS
tvayi—unto You; me—my; ananya-viñayä—unalloyed; matiù—attention;
madhu-pate—O Lord of Madhu; asakåt—continuously; ratim—attraction;
udvahatät—may overflow; addhä—directly; gaìgä—the Ganges; iva—like;
ogham—flows; udanvati—down to the sea.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
O Lord of Madhu, as the Ganges forever flows to the sea without hindrance,
let my attraction be constantly drawn unto You without being diverted to
anyone else.
PURPORT
Perfection of pure devotional service is attained when all attention is
diverted towards the transcendental loving service of the Lord. To cut off the
tie of all other affections does not mean complete negation of the finer
elements, like affection for someone else. This is not possible. A living being,
whoever he may be, must have this feeling of affection for others because this
is a symptom of life. The symptoms of life, such as desire, anger, hankerings,
feelings of attraction, etc., cannot be annihilated. Only the objective has to be
changed. Desire cannot be negated, but in devotional service the desire is
changed only for the service of the Lord in place of desire for sense
gratification. The so-called affection for family, society, country, etc., consists
of different phases of sense gratification. When this desire is changed for the
satisfaction of the Lord, it is called devotional service.
In the Bhagavad-gétä we can see that Arjuna desired not to fight with his
brothers and relations just to satisfy his own personal desires. But when he
heard the message of the Lord, Çrémad Bhagavad-gétä, he changed his decision
and served the Lord. And for his doing so, he became a famous devotee of the
Lord, for it is declared in all the scriptures that Arjuna attained spiritual
perfection by devotional service to the Lord in friendship. The fighting was
there, the friendship was there, Arjuna was there, and Kåñëa was there, but
Arjuna became a different person by devotional service. Therefore, the prayers
of Kunté also indicate the same categorical changes in activities. Çrématé Kunté
wanted to serve the Lord without diversion, and that was her prayer. This
unalloyed devotion is the ultimate goal of life. Our attention is usually
diverted to the service of something which is nongodly or not in the program
of the Lord. When the program is changed into the service of the Lord, that is
to say when the senses are purified in relation with the service of the Lord, it is
called pure unalloyed devotional service. Çrématé Kuntédevé wanted that
perfection and prayed for it from the Lord.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Her affection for the Päëòavas and the Våñëis is not out of the range of
devotional service because the service of the Lord and the service of the
devotees are identical. Sometimes service to the devotee is more valuable than
service to the Lord. But here the affection of Kuntédevé for the Päëòavas and
the Våñëis was due to family relation. This tie of affection in terms of material
relation is the relation of mäyä because the relations of the body or the mind
are due to the influence of the external energy. Relations of the soul,
established in relation with the Supreme Soul, are factual relations. When
Kuntédevé wanted to cut off the family relation, she meant to cut off the
relation of the skin. The skin relation is the cause of material bondage, but the
relation of the soul is the cause of freedom. This relation of the soul to the soul
can be established by the via medium of the relation with the Supersoul.
Seeing in the darkness is not seeing. But seeing by the light of the sun means
to see the sun and everything else which was unseen in the darkness. That is
the way of devotional service.
TEXT 43
é[qk*-Z<a k*-Z<aSa% v*Z<Ya*z>aaviNaDa]uGa(
raJaNYav&XadhNaaNaPavGaRvqYaR )
GaaeivNd GaaeiÜJaSauraiTaRhravTaar
YaaeGaeìrai%l/Gaurae >aGavàMaSTae )) 43 ))
çré-kåñëa kåñëa-sakha våñëy-åñabhävani-dhrugräjanya-
vaàça-dahanänapavarga-vérya
govinda go-dvija-surärti-harävatära
yogeçvaräkhila-guro bhagavan namas te
SYNONYMS
çré-kåñëa—O Çré Kåñëa; kåñëa-sakha—O friend of Arjuna; våñëi—of
descendants of Våñëi; åñabha—O chief; avani—the earth; dhruk—rebellious;
räjanya-vaàça—dynasties of the kings; dahana—O annihilator;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
anapavarga—without deterioration of; vérya—prowess; govinda—O proprietor
of Golokadhäma; go—of the cows; dvija—the brähmaëas; sura—the demigods;
arti-hara—to relieve distress; avatära—O Lord who descends; yoga-éçvara—O
master of all mystic powers; akhila—universal; guro—O preceptor;
bhagavan—O possessor of all opulences; namaù te—respectful obeisances unto
You.
TRANSLATION
O Kåñëa, O friend of Arjuna, O chief amongst the descendants of Våñëi,
You are the destroyer of those political parties which are disturbing elements on
this earth. Your prowess never deteriorates. You are the proprietor of the
transcendental abode, and You descend to relieve the distresses of the cows, the
brähmaëas and the devotees. You possess all mystic powers, and You are the
preceptor of the entire universe. You are the almighty God, and I offer You my
respectful obeisances.
PURPORT
A summary of the Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa is made herein by Çrématé
Kuntédevé. The almighty Lord has His eternal transcendental abode where He
is engaged in keeping surabhi cows. He is served by hundreds and thousands of
goddesses of fortune. He descends on the material world to reclaim His
devotees and to annihilate the disturbing elements in groups of political
parties and kings who are supposed to be in charge of administration work. He
creates, maintains and annihilates by His unlimited energies, and still He is
always full with prowess and does not deteriorate in potency. The cows, the
brähmaëas and the devotees of the Lord are all objects of His special attention
because they are very important factors for the general welfare of living
beings.
TEXT 44
SaUTa ovac
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Pa*QaYaeTQa& k-l/PadE" Pair<aUTaai%l/aedYa" )
MaNd& JahaSa vEku-<#=ae MaaehYaiàv MaaYaYaa )) 44 ))
süta uväca
påthayetthaà kala-padaiù
pariëütäkhilodayaù
mandaà jahäsa vaikuëöho
mohayann iva mäyayä
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta said; påthayä—by Påthä (Kunté); ittham—this;
kala-padaiù—by chosen words; pariëüta—being worshiped; akhila—universal;
udayaù—glories; mandam—mildly; jahäsa—smiled; vaikuëöhaù—the Lord;
mohayan—captivating; iva—like; mäyayä—His mystic power.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: The Lord, thus hearing the prayers of Kuntédevé,
composed in choice words for His glorification, mildly smiled. That smile was as
enchanting as His mystic power.
PURPORT
Anything that is enchanting in the world is said to be a representation of
the Lord. The conditioned souls, who are engaged in trying to lord it over the
material world, are also enchanted by His mystic powers, but His devotees are
enchanted in a different way by the glories of the Lord, and His merciful
blessings are upon them. His energy is displayed in different ways, as electrical
energy works in manifold capacities. Çrématé Kuntédevé has prayed to the Lord
just to enunciate a fragment of His glories. All His devotees worship Him in
that way, by chosen words, and therefore the Lord is known as Uttamaçloka.
No amount of chosen words is sufficient to enumerate the Lord’s glory, and yet
He is satisfied by such prayers as the father is satisfied even by the broken
linguistic attempts of the growing child. The word mäyä is used both in the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
sense of delusion and mercy. Herein the word mäyä is used in the sense of the
Lord’s mercy upon Kuntédevé.
TEXT 45
Taa& ba!iMaTYauPaaMaN}Ya Pa[ivXYa GaJaSaaûYaMa( )
iñYaê SvPaur& YaaSYaNa( Pa[eM<aa raja iNavairTa" )) 45 ))
täà bäòham ity upämantrya
praviçya gajasähvayam
striyaç ca sva-puraà yäsyan
premëä räjïä niväritaù
SYNONYMS
täm—all those; bäòham—accepted; iti—thus; upämantrya—subsequently
informed; praviçya—entering; gajasähvayam—the palace of Hastinäpura;
striyaù ca—other ladies; sva-puram—own residence; yäsyan—while starting
for; premëä—with love; räjïä—by the King; niväritaù—stopped.
TRANSLATION
Thus accepting the prayers of Çrématé Kuntédevé, the Lord subsequently
informed other ladies of His departure by entering the palace of Hastinäpura.
But upon preparing to leave, He was stopped by King Yudhiñöhira, who
implored Him lovingly.
PURPORT
No one could make Lord Kåñëa stay at Hastinäpura when He decided to
start for Dvärakä, but the simple request of King Yudhiñöhira that the Lord
remain there for a few days more was immediately effective. This signifies that
the power of King Yudhiñöhira was loving affection, which the Lord could not
deny. The almighty God is thus conquered only by loving service and nothing
else. He is fully independent in all His dealings, but He voluntarily accepts
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
obligations by the loving affection of His pure devotees.
TEXT 46
VYaaSaaÛErqìrehajE" k*-Z<aeNaad(>auTak-MaR<aa )
Pa[baeiDaTaae_PaqiTahaSaENaaRbuDYaTa éucaiPaRTa" )) 46 ))
vyäsädyair éçvarehäjïaiù
kåñëenädbhuta-karmaëä
prabodhito ’pétihäsair
näbudhyata çucärpitaù
SYNONYMS
vyäsa-ädyaiù—by great sages headed by Vyäsa; éçvara—the almighty God;
éhä—by the will of; jïaiù—by the learned; kåñëena—by Kåñëa Himself;
adbhuta-karmaëä—by one who performs all superhuman work;
prabodhitaù—being solaced; api—although; itihäsaiù—by evidences from the
histories; na—not; abudhyata—satisfied; çucä arpitaù—distressed.
TRANSLATION
King Yudhiñöhira, who was much aggrieved, could not be convinced, despite
instructions by great sages headed by Vyäsa and the Lord Kåñëa Himself, the
performer of superhuman feats, and despite all historical evidence.
PURPORT
The pious King Yudhiñöhira was mortified because of the mass massacre of
human beings in the Battle of Kurukñetra, especially on his account.
Duryodhana was there on the throne, and he was doing well in his
administration, and in one sense there was no need of fighting. But on the
principle of justice Yudhiñöhira was to replace him. The whole clique of
politics centered around this point, and all the kings and residents of the
whole world became involved in this fight between the rival brothers. Lord
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Kåñëa was also there on the side of King Yudhiñöhira. It is said in the
Mahäbhärata, Ädi-parva (20) that 640,000,000 men were killed in the eighteen
days of the Battle of Kurukñetra, and some hundreds of thousands were
missing. Practically this was the greatest battle in the world within five
thousand years.
This mass killing simply to enthrone Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was too
mortifying, so he tried to be convinced with evidences from histories by great
sages like Vyäsa and the Lord Himself that the fight was just because the cause
was just. But Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira would not be satisfied, even though he was
instructed by the greatest personalities of the time. Kåñëa is designated herein
as the performer of superhuman actions, but in this particular instance neither
He nor Vyäsa could convince King Yudhiñöhira. Does it mean that He failed to
be a superhuman actor? No, certainly not. The interpretation is that the Lord
as éçvara, or the Supersoul in the hearts of both King Yudhiñöhira and Vyäsa,
performed still more superhuman action because the Lord desired it. As
Supersoul of King Yudhiñöhira, He did not allow the King to be convinced by
the words of Vyäsa and others, including Himself, because He desired that the
King hear instructions from the dying Bhéñmadeva, who was another great
devotee of the Lord. The Lord wanted that at the last stage of his material
existence the great warrior Bhéñmadeva see Him personally and see his beloved
grandchildren, King Yudhiñöhira, etc., now situated on the throne, and thus
pass away very peacefully. Bhéñmadeva was not at all satisfied to fight against
the Päëòavas, who were his beloved fatherless grandchildren. But the kñatriyas
are also very stern people, and therefore he was obliged to take the side of
Duryodhana because he was maintained at the expense of Duryodhana.
Besides this, the Lord also desired that King Yudhiñöhira be pacified by the
words of Bhéñmadeva so that the world could see that Bhéñmadeva excelled all
in knowledge, including the Lord Himself.
TEXT 47
Aah raJaa DaMaRSauTaiêNTaYaNa( Sauôda& vDaMa( )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Pa[ak*-TaeNaaTMaNaa ivPa[a" òehMaaehvXa& GaTa" )) 47 ))
äha räjä dharma-sutaç
cintayan suhådäà vadham
präkåtenätmanä vipräù
sneha-moha-vaçaà gataù
SYNONYMS
äha—said; räjä—King Yudhiñöhira; dharma-sutaù—the son of Dharma
(Yamaräja); cintayan—thinking of; suhådäm—of the friends; vadham—killing;
präkåtena—by material conception only; ätmanä—by the self; vipräù—O
brähmaëa; sneha—affection; moha—delusion; vaçam—being carried away by;
gataù—having gone.
TRANSLATION
King Yudhiñöhira, son of Dharma, overwhelmed by the death of his friends,
was aggrieved just like a common, materialistic man. O sages, thus deluded by
affection, he began to speak.
PURPORT
King Yudhiñöhira, though he was not expected to become aggrieved like a
common man, became deluded by worldly affection by the will of the Lord
(just as Arjuna was apparently deluded). A man who sees knows well that the
living entity is neither the body nor the mind, but is transcendental to the
material conception of life. The common man thinks of violence and
nonviolence in terms of the body, but that is a kind of delusion. Everyone is
duty-bound according to one’s occupational duties. A kñatriya is bound to fight
for the right cause, regardless of the opposite party. In such discharge of duty,
one should not be disturbed by annihilation of the material body, which is only
an external dress of the living soul. All this was perfectly known to Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira, but by the will of the Lord he became just like a common man
because there was another great idea behind this delusion: the King would be
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
instructed by Bhéñma as Arjuna was instructed by the Lord Himself.
TEXT 48
Ahae Mae PaXYaTaajaNa& ôid æ!& duraTMaNa" )
PaarKYaSYaEv dehSYa bûyae Mae_+aaEih<aqhRTaa" )) 48 ))
aho me paçyatäjïänaà
hådi rüòhaà durätmanaù
pärakyasyaiva dehasya
bahvyo me ’kñauhiëér hatäù
SYNONYMS
aho—O; me—my; paçyata—just see; ajïänam—ignorance; hådi—in the heart;
rüòham—situated in; durätmanaù—of the sinful; pärakyasya—meant for
others; eva—certainly; dehasya—of the body; bahvyaù—many, many; me—by
me; akñauhiëéù—combination of military phalanxes; hatäù—killed.
TRANSLATION
King Yudhiñöhira said: O my lot! I am the most sinful man! Just see my
heart, which is full of ignorance! This body, which is ultimately meant for
others, has killed many, many phalanxes of men.
PURPORT
A solid phalanx of 21,870 chariots, 21,870 elephants, 109,650 infantry and
65,600 cavalry is called an akñauhiëé. And many akñauhiëés were killed on the
Battlefield of Kurukñetra. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, as the most pious king of the
world, takes for himself the responsibility for killing such a huge number of
living beings because the battle was fought to reinstate him on the throne.
This body is, after all, meant for others. While there is life in the body, it is
meant for the service of others, and when it is dead it is meant to be eaten by
dogs and jackals or maggots. He is sorry because for such a temporary body
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
such a huge massacre was committed.
TEXT 49
bal/iÜJaSauôiNMa}aiPaTa*>a]aTa*Gauåd]uh" )
Na Mae SYaaiàrYaaNMaae+aae ùiPa vzaRYauTaaYauTaE" )) 49 ))
bäla-dvija-suhån-mitrapitå-
bhrätå-guru-druhaù
na me syän nirayän mokño
hy api varñäyutäyutaiù
SYNONYMS
bäla—boys; dvi-ja—the twice-born; suhåt—well-wishers; mitra—friends;
pitå—parents; bhrätå—brothers; guru—preceptors; druhaù—one who has
killed; na—never; me—my; syät—there shall be; nirayät—from hell;
mokñaù—liberation; hi—certainly; api—although; varña—years;
ayuta—millions; äyutaiù—being added.
TRANSLATION
I have killed many boys, brähmaëas, well-wishers, friends, parents,
preceptors and brothers. Though I live millions of years, I will not be relieved
from the hell that awaits me for all these sins.
PURPORT
Whenever there is a war, there is certainly a massacre of many innocent
living beings, such as boys, brähmaëas and women, whose killing is considered
to be the greatest of sins. They are all innocent creatures, and in all
circumstances killing of them is forbidden in the scriptures. Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira was aware of these mass killings. Similarly, there were friends,
parents and preceptors also on both sides, and all of them were killed. It was
simply horrible for him to think of such killing, and therefore he was thinking
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
of residing in hell for millions and billions of years.
TEXT 50
NaENaae raj" Pa[Jaa>aTauRDaRMaRYauÖe vDaae iÜzaMa( )
wiTa Mae Na Tau baeDaaYa k-LPaTae XaaSaNa& vc" )) 50 ))
naino räjïaù prajä-bhartur
dharma-yuddhe vadho dviñäm
iti me na tu bodhäya
kalpate çäsanaà vacaù
SYNONYMS
na—never; enaù—sins; räjïaù—of the king; prajä-bhartuù—of one who is
engaged in the maintenance of the citizens; dharma—for the right cause;
yuddhe—in the fight; vadhaù—killing; dviñäm—of the enemies; iti—all these;
me—for me; na—never; tu—but; bodhäya—for satisfaction; kalpate—they are
meant for administration; çäsanam—injunction; vacaù—words of.
TRANSLATION
There is no sin for a king who kills for the right cause, who is engaged in
maintaining his citizens. But this injunction is not applicable to me.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira thought that although he was not actually involved
in the administration of the kingdom, which was being carried on well by
Duryodhana without harm to the citizens, he caused the killing of so many
living beings only for his personal gain of the kingdom from the hands of
Duryodhana. The killing was committed not in the course of administration
but for the sake of self-aggrandizement, and as such he thought himself
responsible for all the sins.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 51
ñq<aa& MaÖTabNDaUNaa& d]aehae Yaae_SaaivhaeiTQaTa" )
k-MaRi>aGa*RhMaeDaqYaENaaRh& k-LPaae VYaPaaeihTauMa( )) 51 ))
stréëäà mad-dhata-bandhünäà
droho yo ’säv ihotthitaù
karmabhir gåhamedhéyair
nähaà kalpo vyapohitum
SYNONYMS
stréëäm—of the women; mat—by me; hata-bandhünäm—of the friends who
are killed; drohaù—enmity; yaù—that; asau—all those; iha—herewith;
utthitaù—has accrued; karmabhiù—by dint of work; gåhamedhéyaiù—by
persons engaged in material welfare; na—never; aham—I; kalpaù—can expect;
vyapohitum—undoing the same.
TRANSLATION
I have killed many friends of women, and I have thus caused enmity to such
an extent that it is not possible to undo it by material welfare work.
PURPORT
The gåhamedhés are those whose only business is to perform welfare work
for the sake of material prosperity. Such material prosperity is sometimes
hampered by sinful activities, for the materialist is sure to commit sins, even
unintentionally, in the course of discharging material duties. To get relief from
such sinful reactions, the Vedas prescribe several kinds of sacrifices. It is said in
the Vedas that by performing the Açvamedha-yajïa (horse sacrifice) one can
get relief from even brahma-hatyä (killing of a brähmaëa).
Yudhiñöhira Mahäräja performed this Açvamedha-yajïa, but he thinks that
even by performing such yajïas it is not possible to get relief from the great
sins committed. In war either the husband or the brother or even the father or
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
sons go to fight. And when they are killed, a fresh enmity is created, and thus a
chain of actions and reactions increases which is not possible to be
counteracted even by thousands of Açvamedha-yajïas.
The way of work (karma) is like that. It creates one action and another
reaction simultaneously and thus increases the chain of material activities,
binding the performer in material bondage. In the Bhagavad-gétä (Bg. 9.27–28)
the remedy is suggested that such actions and reactions of the path of work can
be checked only when work is done on behalf of the Supreme Lord. The Battle
of Kurukñetra was actually fought by the will of the Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa, as
it is evident from His version, and only by His will was Yudhiñöhira placed on
the throne of Hastinäpura. Therefore, factually no sin whatsoever touched the
Päëòavas, who were only the order carriers of the Lord. For others, who
declare war out of personal interest, the whole responsibility lies on them.
TEXT 52
YaQaa PaªeNa PaªaM>a" SaurYaa va Saurak*-TaMa( )
>aUTahTYaa& TaQaEvEk-a& Na YajEMaaRíuRMahRiTa )) 52 ))
yathä paìkena paìkämbhaù
surayä vä suräkåtam
bhüta-hatyäà tathaivaikäà
na yajïair märñöum arhati
SYNONYMS
yathä—as much as; paìkena—by the mud; paìka-ambhaù—water mixed with
mud; surayä—by wine; vä—either; suräkåtam—impurity caused by the slight
touch of wine; bhüta-hatyäm—killing of animals; tathä—like that;
eva—certainly; ekäm—one; na—never; yajïaiù—by the prescribed sacrifices;
märñöum—to counteract; arhati—is worthwhile.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
As it is not possible to filter muddy water through mud, or purify a
wine-stained pot with wine, it is not possible to counteract the killing of men by
sacrificing animals.
PURPORT
Açvamedha-yajïas or Gomedha-yajïas, sacrifices in which a horse or a bull
is sacrificed, were not, of course, for the purpose of killing the animals. Lord
Caitanya said that such animals sacrificed on the altar of yajïa were
rejuvenated and a new life was given to them. It was just to prove the efficacy
of the hymns of the Vedas. By recitation of the hymns of the Vedas in the
proper way, certainly the performer gets relief from the reactions of sins, but
in case of such sacrifices improperly done under inexpert management, surely
one has to become responsible for animal sacrifice. In this age of quarrel and
hypocrisy there is no possibility of performing the yajïas perfectly for want of
expert brähmaëas who are able to conduct such yajïas. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira
therefore gives a hint to performing sacrifices in the age of Kali. In the
Kali-yuga the only sacrifice recommended is the performance of
hari-näma-yajïa inaugurated by Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. But one
should not indulge in animal killing and counteract it by performing the
hari-näma yajïa. Those who are devotees of the Lord never kill an animal for
self-interest, and (as the Lord ordered Arjuna) they do not refrain from
performing the duty of a kñatriya. The whole purpose, therefore, is served
when everything is done for the will of the Lord. This is possible only for the
devotees.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the First Canto, Eighth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled “Prayers by Queen Kunté and Parékñit Saved.”
Chapter Nine
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The Passing Away of Bhéñmadeva in the Presence of Lord
Kåñëa
TEXT 1
SaUTa ovac
wiTa >aqTa" Pa[Jaad]aehaTSavRDaMaRivivTSaYaa )
TaTaae ivNaXaNa& Pa[aGaad( Ya}a devv]Taae_PaTaTa( )) 1 ))
süta uväca
iti bhétaù prajä-drohät
sarva-dharma-vivitsayä
tato vinaçanaà prägäd
yatra deva-vrato ’patat
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Çré Süta Gosvämé said; iti—thus; bhétaù—being afraid of;
prajä-drohät—because of killing the subjects; sarva—all; dharma—acts of
religion; vivitsayä—for understanding; tataù—thereafter; vinaçanam—the
place where the fight was held; prägät—he went; yatra—where;
deva-vrataù—Bhéñmadeva; apatat—lay down for passing away.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: Being afraid for having killed so many subjects on the
Battlefield of Kurukñetra, Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira went to the scene of the
massacre. There, Bhéñmadeva was lying on a bed of arrows, about to pass away.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
In this Ninth Chapter, as it is willed by Lord Çré Kåñëa, Bhéñmadeva will
impart instructions to King Yudhiñöhira on the subject of occupational duties.
Bhéñmadeva will also offer his last prayer to the Lord on the verge of passing
away from this mortal world and thus become liberated from the bondage of
further material engagements. Bhéñmadeva was endowed with the power of
leaving his material body at will, and his lying down on the bed of arrows was
his own choice. This passing away of the great warrior attracted the attention
of all the contemporary elites, and all of them assembled there to show their
feelings of love, respect and affection for the great soul.
TEXT 2
Tada Tae >a]aTar" SaveR SadìE" Sv<aR>aUizTaE" )
ANvGaC^Na( rQaEivRPa[a VYaaSaDaaEMYaadYaSTaQaa )) 2 ))
tadä te bhrätaraù sarve
sadaçvaiù svarëa-bhüñitaiù
anvagacchan rathair viprä
vyäsa-dhaumyädayas tathä
SYNONYMS
tadä—at that time; te—all of them; bhrätaraù—the brothers; sarve—all
together; sat-açvaiù—drawn by first-class horses; svarëa—gold;
bhüñitaiù—being decorated with; anvagacchan—followed one after another;
rathaiù—on the chariots; vipräù—O brähmaëas; vyäsa—the sage Vyäsa;
dhaumya—Dhaumya; ädayaù—and others; tathä—also.
TRANSLATION
At that time all his brothers followed him on beautiful chariots drawn by
first-class horses decorated with gold ornaments. With them were Vyäsa and
åñis like Dhaumya [the learned priest of the Päëòavas] and others.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 3
>aGavaNaiPa ivPa[zeR rQaeNa SaDaNaÅYa" )
Sa TaEVYaRraecTa Na*Pa" ku-ver wv GauùkE-" )) 3 ))
bhagavän api viprarñe
rathena sa-dhanaïjayaù
sa tair vyarocata nåpaù
kuvera iva guhyakaiù
SYNONYMS
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead (Çré Kåñëa); api—also; vipra-åñe—O
sage among the brähmaëas; rathena—on the chariot; sa-dhanaïjayaù—with
Dhanaïjaya (Arjuna); saù—He; taiù—by them; vyarocata—appeared to be
highly aristocratic; nåpaù—the King (Yudhiñöhira); kuvera—Kuvera, the
treasurer of the demigods; iva—as; guhyakaiù—companions known as
Guhyakas.
TRANSLATION
O sage amongst the brähmaëas, Lord Çré Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead,
also followed, seated on a chariot with Arjuna. Thus King Yudhiñöhira appeared
very aristocratic, like Kuvera surrounded by his companions [the Guhyakas].
PURPORT
Lord Çré Kåñëa wanted the Päëòavas to be present before Bhéñmadeva in
the most aristocratic order so that he might be pleased to see them happy at
the time of his death. Kuvera is the richest of all the demigods, and herein
King Yudhiñöhira appeared like him (Kuvera), for the procession along with
Çré Kåñëa was quite appropriate to the royalty of King Yudhiñöhira.
TEXT 4
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
d*îa iNaPaiTaTa& >aUMaaE idvXCYauTaiMavaMarMa( )
Pa[<aeMau" Paa<@va >aqZMa& SaaNauGaa" Sah ci§-<aa )) 4 ))
dåñövä nipatitaà bhümau
divaç cyutam ivämaram
praëemuù päëòavä bhéñmaà
sänugäù saha cakriëä
SYNONYMS
dåñövä—thus seeing; nipatitam—lying down; bhümau—on the ground;
divaù—from the sky; cyutam—fallen; iva—like; amaram—demigod;
praëemuù—bowed down; päëòaväù—the sons of Päëòu; bhéñmam—unto
Bhéñma; sa-anugäù—with the younger brothers; saha—also with; cakriëä—the
Lord (carrying the disc).
TRANSLATION
Seeing him [Bhéñma] lying on the ground, like a demigod fallen from the sky,
the Päëòava King Yudhiñöhira, along with his younger brothers and Lord
Kåñëa, bowed down before him.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa was also a younger cousin of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira as well as
the intimate friend of Arjuna. But all the family members of the Päëòavas
knew Lord Kåñëa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord, although
conscious of His supreme position, always behaved in a humanly custom, and
so He also bowed down before the dying Bhéñmadeva as if He were one of the
younger brothers of King Yudhiñöhira.
TEXT 5
Ta}a b]øzRYa" SaveR devzRYaê SataMa )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
raJazRYaê Ta}aaSaNa( d]íu& >arTaPau®vMa( )) 5 ))
tatra brahmarñayaù sarve
devarñayaç ca sattama
räjarñayaç ca taträsan
drañöuà bharata-puìgavam
SYNONYMS
tatra—there; brahma-åñayaù—åñis among the brähmaëas; sarve—all;
deva-åñayaù—åñis among the demigods; ca—and; sattama—situated in the
quality of goodness; räja-åñayaù—åñis among the kings; ca—and; tatra—in that
place; äsan—were present; drañöum—just to see; bharata—the descendants of
King Bharata; puìgavam—the chief of.
TRANSLATION
Just to see the chief of the descendants of King Bharata [Bhéñma], all the
great souls in the universe, namely the åñis amongst the demigods, brähmaëas
and kings, all situated in the quality of goodness, were assembled there.
PURPORT
The åñis are those who have attained perfection by spiritual achievements.
Such spiritual achievements can be earned by all, whether one is a king or a
mendicant. Bhéñmadeva himself was also one of the brahmarñis and the chief of
the descendants of King Bharata. All åñis are situated in the quality of
goodness. All of them assembled there on hearing the news of the great
warrior’s impending death.
TEXTS 6–7
PavRTaae Naardae DaaEMYaae >aGavaNa( badraYa<a" )
b*hdìae >arÜaJa" SaiXaZYaae re<auk-aSauTa" )) 6 ))
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
viSaï wNd]Pa[MadiñTaae Ga*TSaMadae_iSaTa" )
k-+aqvaNa( GaaETaMaae_i}aê k-aEiXak-ae_Qa SaudXaRNa" )) 7 ))
parvato närado dhaumyo
bhagavän bädaräyaëaù
båhadaçvo bharadväjaù
saçiñyo reëukä-sutaù
vasiñöha indrapramadas
trito gåtsamado ’sitaù
kakñévän gautamo ’triç ca
kauçiko ’tha sudarçanaù
SYNONYMS
parvataù—Parvata Muni; näradaù—Närada Muni; dhaumyaù—Dhaumya;
bhagavän—incarnation of Godhead; bädaräyaëaù—Vyäsadeva;
båhadaçvaù—Båhadaçva; bharadväjaù—Bharadväja; sa-çiñyaù—along with
disciples; reëukä-sutaù—Paraçuräma; vasiñöhaù—Vasiñöha;
indrapramadaù—Indrapramada; tritaù—Trita; gåtsamadaù—Gåtsamada;
asitaù—Asita; kakñévän—Kakñévän; gautamaù—Gautama; atriù—Atri;
ca—and; kauçikaù—Kauçika; atha—as well as; sudarçanaù—Sudarçana.
TRANSLATION
All the sages like Parvata Muni, Närada, Dhaumya, Vyäsa the incarnation of
God, Båhadaçva, Bharadväja and Paraçuräma and disciples, Vasiñöha,
Indrapramada, Trita, Gåtsamada, Asita, Kakñévän, Gautama, Atri, Kauçika and
Sudarçana were present.
PURPORT
Parvata Muni: is considered to be one of the oldest sages. He is almost
always a constant companion of Närada Muni. They are also spacemen
competent to travel in the air without the help of any material vehicle.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Parvata Muni is also a devarñi, or a great sage amongst the demigods, like
Närada. He was present along with Närada at the sacrificial ceremony of
Mahäräja Janamejaya, son of Mahäräja Parékñit. In this sacrifice all the snakes
of the world were to be killed. Parvata Muni and Närada Muni are called
Gandharvas also because they can travel in the air singing the glories of the
Lord. Since they can travel in the air, they observed Draupadé’s svayaàvara
ceremony (selecting of her own husband) from the air. Like Närada Muni,
Parvata Muni also used to visit the royal assembly in the heaven of King Indra.
As a Gandharva, sometimes he visited the royal assembly of Kuvera, one of the
important demigods. Both Närada and Parvata were once in trouble with the
daughter of Mahäräja Såïjaya. Mahäräja Såïjaya got the benediction of a son
by Parvata Muni.
Närada Muni: is inevitably associated with the narrations of the Puräëas.
He is described in the Bhägavatam. In his previous life he was the son of a
maidservant, but by good association with pure devotees he became
enlightened in devotional service, and in the next life he became a perfect
man comparable with himself only. In the Mahäbhärata his name is mentioned
in many places. He is the principle devarñi, or the chief sage amongst the
demigods. He is the son and disciple of Brahmäjé, and from him the disciplic
succession in the line of Brahmä has been spread. He initiated Prahläda
Mahäräja, Dhruva Mahäräja and many celebrated devotees of the Lord. He
initiated even Vyäsadeva, the author of the Vedic literatures, and from
Vyäsadeva, Madhväcärya was initiated, and thus the Madhva-sampradäya, in
which the Gauòéya-sampradäya is also included, has spread all over the
universe. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu belonged to this Madhva-sampradäya;
therefore, Brahmäjé, Närada, Vyäsa, down to Madhva, Caitanya and the
Gosvämés all belonged to the same line of disciplic succession. Näradajé has
instructed many kings from time immemorial. In the Bhägavatam we can see
that he instructed Prahläda Mahäräja while he was in the womb of his mother,
and he instructed Vasudeva, father of Kåñëa, as well as Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira.
Dhaumya: A great sage who practiced severe penances at Utkocaka Tértha
and was appointed royal priest of the Päëòava kings. He acted as the priest in
many religious functions of the Päëòavas (saàskära), and also each of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Päëòavas was attended by him at the betrothal of Draupadé. He was present
even during the exile of the Päëòavas and used to advise them in
circumstances when they were perplexed. He instructed them how to live
incognito for one year, and his instructions were strictly followed by the
Päëòavas during that time. His name is mentioned also when the general
funeral ceremony was performed after the Battle of Kurukñetra. In the
Anuñäsana-parva of Mahäbhärata (127.15–16), he gave religious instructions
very elaborately to Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira. He was actually the right type of
priest of a householder, for he could guide the Päëòavas on the right path of
religion. A priest is meant for guiding the householder progressively in the
right path of äçrama-dharma, or the occupational duty of a particular caste.
There is practically no difference between the family priest and the spiritual
master. The sages, saints and brähmaëas were especially meant for such
functions.
Bädaräyaëa (Vyäsadeva): He is known as Kåñëa, Kåñëa-dvaipäyana,
Dvaipäyana, Satyavaté-suta, Päräçarya, Paräçarätmaja, Bädaräyaëa, Vedavyäsa,
etc. He was the son of Mahämuni Paräçara in the womb of Satyavaté prior to
her betrothal with Mahäräja Çantanu, the father of the great general
Grandfather Bhéñmadeva. He is a powerful incarnation of Näräyaëa, and he
broadcasts the Vedic wisdom to the world. As such, Vyäsadeva is offered
respects before one chants the Vedic literature, especially the Puräëas.
Çukadeva Gosvämé was his son, and åñis like Vaiçampäyana were his disciples
for different branches of the Vedas. He is the author of the great epic
Mahäbhärata and the great transcendental literature Bhägavatam. The
Brahma-sütras—the Vedänta-sütras, or Bädaräyaëa-sütras—were compiled by
him. Amongst sages he is the most respected author by dint of severe penances.
When he wanted to record the great epic Mahäbhärata for the welfare of all
people in the age of Kali, he was feeling the necessity of a powerful writer who
could take up his dictation. By the order of Brahmäjé, Çré Gaëeçajé took up the
charge of noting down the dictation on the condition that Vyäsadeva would
not stop dictation for a moment. The Mahäbhärata was thus compiled by the
joint endeavor of Vyäsa and Gaëeça.
By the order of his mother, Satyavaté, who was later married to Mahäräja
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Çantanu, and by the request of Bhéñmadeva, the eldest son of Mahäräja
Çantanu by his first wife, the Ganges, he begot three brilliant sons, whose
names are Dhåtaräñöra, Päëòu and Vidura. The Mahäbhärata was compiled by
Vyäsadeva after the Battle of Kurukñetra and after the death of all the heroes
of Mahäbhärata. It was first spoken in the royal assembly of Mahäräja
Janamejaya, the son of Mahäräja Parékñit.
Båhadaçva: An ancient sage who used to meet Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira now
and then. First of all he met Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira at Kämyavana. This sage
narrated the history of Mahäräja Nala. There is another Båhadaçva, who is the
son of the Ikñväku dynasty (Mahäbhärata, Vana-parva 209.4–5)
Bharadväja: He is one of the seven great åñis and was present at the time of
the birth ceremony of Arjuna. The powerful åñi sometimes undertook severe
penances on the shore of the Ganges, and his äçrama is still celebrated at
Prayägadhäma. It is learned that this åñi, while taking bath in the Ganges,
happened to meet Ghåtacé, one of the beautiful society girls of heaven, and
thus he discharged semen, which was kept and preserved in an earthen pot and
from which Droëa was born. So Droëäcärya is the son of Bharadväja Muni.
Others say that Bharadväja the father of Droëa is a different person from
Maharñi Bharadväja. He was a great devotee of Brahmä. Once he approached
Droëäcärya and requested him to stop the Battle of Kurukñetra.
Paraçuräma, or Reëukäsuta: He is the son of Maharñi Jamadagni and
Çrématé Reëukä. Thus he is also known as Reëukäsuta. He is one of the
powerful incarnations of God, and he killed the kñatriya community as a whole
twenty-one times. With the blood of the kñatriyas he pleased the souls of his
forefathers. Later on he underwent severe penances at the Mahendra Parvata.
After taking the whole earth from the kñatriyas, he gave it in charity to
Kaçyapa Muni. Paraçuräma instructed the Dhanur-veda, or the science of
fighting, to Droëäcärya because he happened to be a brähmaëa. He was
present during the coronation of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, and he celebrated the
function along with other great åñis.
Paraçuräma is so old that he met both Räma and Kåñëa at different times.
He fought with Räma, but he accepted Kåñëa as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. He also praised Arjuna when he saw him with Kåñëa. When Bhéñma
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
refused to marry Ambä, who wanted him to become her husband, Ambä met
Paraçuräma, and by her request only, he asked Bhéñmadeva to accept her as his
wife. Bhéñma refused to obey his order, although he was one of the spiritual
masters of Bhéñmadeva. Paraçuräma fought with Bhéñmadeva when Bhéñma
neglected his warning. Both of them fought very severely, and at last
Paraçuräma was pleased with Bhéñma and gave him the benediction of
becoming the greatest fighter in the world.
Vasiñöha: The great celebrated sage among the brähmaëas, well known as
the Brahmarñi Vasiñöhadeva. He is a prominent figure in both the Rämäyaëa
and Mahäbhärata periods. He celebrated the coronation ceremony of the
Personality of Godhead Çré Räma. He was present also on the Battlefield of
Kurukñetra. He could approach all the higher and lower planets, and his name
is also connected with the history of Hiraëyakaçipu. There was a great tension
between him and Viçvämitra, who wanted his kämadhenu, wish-fulfilling cow.
Vasiñöha Muni refused to spare his kämadhenu, and for this Viçvämitra killed
his one hundred sons. As a perfect brähmaëa he tolerated all the taunts of
Viçvämitra. Once he tried to commit suicide on account of Viçvämitra’s
torture, but all his attempts were unsuccessful. He jumped from a hill, but the
stones on which he fell became a stack of cotton, and thus he was saved. He
jumped into the ocean, but the waves washed him ashore. He jumped into the
river, but the river also washed him ashore. Thus all his suicide attempts were
unsuccessful. He is also one of the seven åñis and husband of Arundhaté, the
famous star.
Indrapramada: Another celebrated åñi.
Trita: One of the three sons of Prajäpati Gautama. He was the third son,
and his other two brothers were known as Ekat and Dvita. All the brothers
were great sages and strict followers of the principles of religion. By dint of
severe penances they were promoted to Brahmaloka (the planet where
Brahmäjé lives). Once Trita Muni fell into a well. He was an organizing worker
of many sacrifices, and as one of the great sages he also came to show respect to
Bhéñmajé at his deathbed. He was one of the seven sages in the Varuëaloka. He
hailed from the Western countries of the world. As such, most probably he
belonged to the European countries. At that time the whole world was under
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
one Vedic culture.
Gåtsamada: One of the sages of the heavenly kingdom. He was a close
friend of Indra, the King of heaven, and was as great as Båhaspati. He used to
visit the royal assembly of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, and he also visited the place
where Bhéñmadeva breathed his last. Sometimes he explained the glories of
Lord Çiva before Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira. He was the son of Vitahavya, and he
resembled in features the body of Indra. Sometimes the enemies of Indra
mistook him to be Indra and arrested him. He was a great scholar of the
Åg-veda, and thus he was highly respected by the brähmaëa community. He
lived a life of celibacy and was powerful in every respect.
Asita: There was a king of the same name, but herein the Asita mentioned
is the Asita Devala Åñi, a great powerful sage of the time. He explained to his
father 1,500,000 verses from the Mahäbhärata. He was one of the members in
the snake sacrifice of Mahäräja Janamejaya. He was also present during the
coronation ceremony of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira along with other great åñis. He
also gave Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira instructions while he was on the Aïjana Hill.
He was also one of the devotees of Lord Çiva.
Kakñévän: One of the sons of Gautama Muni and the father of the great
sage Candakausika. He was one of the members of Parliament of Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira.
Atri: Atri Muni was a great brähmaëa sage and was one of the mental sons
of Brahmäjé. Brahmäjé is so powerful that simply by thinking of a son he can
have it. These sons are known as mänasa-putras. Out of seven mänasa-putras
of Brahmäjé and out of the seven great brähmaëa sages, Atri was one. In his
family the great Pracetäs were also born. Atri Muni had two kñatriya sons who
became kings. King Arthama is one of them. He is counted as one of the
twenty-one prajäpatis. His wife’s name was Anasüyä, and he helped Mahäräja
Parékñit in his great sacrifices.
Kauçika: One of the permanent åñi members in the royal assembly of
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira. He sometimes met Lord Kåñëa. There are several other
sages of the same name.
Sudarçana: This wheel which is accepted by the Personality of Godhead
(Viñëu or Kåñëa) as His personal weapon is the most powerful weapon, greater
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
than the brahmästras or similar other disastrous weapons. In some of the Vedic
literatures it is said that Agnideva, the fire-god, presented this weapon to Lord
Çré Kåñëa, but factually this weapon is eternally carried by the Lord. Agnideva
presented this weapon to Kåñëa in the same way that Rukmiëé was given by
Mahäräja Rukma to the Lord. The Lord accepts such presentations from His
devotees, even though such presentations are eternally His property. There is
an elaborate description of this weapon in the Ädi-parva of the Mahäbhärata.
Lord Çré Kåñëa used this weapon to kill Çiçupäla, a rival of the Lord. He also
killed Çälva by this weapon, and sometimes He wanted His friend Arjuna to
use it to kill his enemies (Mahäbhärata, Viräöa-parva 56.3).
TEXT 8
ANYae c MauNaYaae b]øNa( b]øraTaadYaae_Mal/a" )
iXaZYaEåPaeTaa AaJaGMau" k-XYaPaai®rSaadYa" )) 8 ))
anye ca munayo brahman
brahmarätädayo ’maläù
çiñyair upetä äjagmuù
kaçyapäìgirasädayaù
SYNONYMS
anye—many others; ca—also; munayaù—sages; brahman—O brähmaëas;
brahmaräta—Çukadeva Gosvämé; ädayaù—and such others;
amaläù—completely purified; çiñyaiù—by the disciples; upetäù—accompanied;
äjagmuù—arrived; kaçyapa—Kaçyapa; äìgirasa—Äìgirasa; ädayaù—others.
TRANSLATION
And many others like Çukadeva Gosvämé and other purified souls, Kaçyapa
and Äìgirasa and others, all accompanied by their respective disciples, arrived
there.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
Çukadeva Gosvämé (Brahmaräta): The famous son and disciple of Çré
Vyäsadeva, who taught him first the Mahäbhärata and then
Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Çukadeva Gosvämé recited 1,400,000 verses of the
Mahäbhärata in the councils of the Gandharvas, Yakñas and Räkñasas, and he
recited Çrémad-Bhägavatam for the first time in the presence of Mahäräja
Parékñit. He thoroughly studied all the Vedic literatures from his great father.
Thus he was a completely purified soul by dint of his extensive knowledge in
the principles of religion. From Mahäbhärata, Sabhä-parva (4.11) it is
understood that he was also present in the royal assembly of Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira and at the fasting of Mahäräja Parékñit. As a bona fide disciple of
Çré Vyäsadeva, he inquired from his father very extensively about religious
principles and spiritual values, and his great father also satisfied him by
teaching him the yoga system by which one can attain the spiritual kingdom,
the difference between fruitive work and empiric knowledge, the ways and
means of attaining spiritual realization, the four äçramas (namely the student
life, the householder’s life, the retired life and the renounced life), the sublime
position of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the process of seeing Him eye
to eye, the bona fide candidate for receiving knowledge, the consideration of
the five elements, the unique position of intelligence, the consciousness of the
material nature and the living entity, the symptoms of the self-realized soul,
the working principles of the material body, the symptoms of the influential
modes of nature, the tree of perpetual desire, and psychic activities. Sometimes
he went to the sun planet with the permission of his father and Näradajé.
Descriptions of his travel in space are given in the Çänti-parva of the
Mahäbhärata (332). At last he attained the transcendental realm. He is known
by different names like Araëeya, Aruëisuta, Vaiyäsaki and Vyäsätmaja.
Kaçyapa: One of the prajäpatis, the son of Maréci and one of the sons-in-law
of Prajäpati Dakña. He is the father of the gigantic bird Garuòa, who was given
elephants and tortoises as eatables. He married thirteen daughters of Prajäpati
Dakña, and their names are Aditi, Diti, Danu, Käñöhä, Ariñöä, Surasä, Ilä,
Muni, Krodhavaçä, Tämrä, Surabhi, Saramä and Timi. He begot many
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
children, both demigods and demons, by those wives. From his first wife, Aditi,
all the twelve Ädityas were born; one of them is Vämana, the incarnation of
Godhead. This great sage, Kaçyapa, was also present at the time of Arjuna’s
birth. He received a presentation of the whole world from Paraçuräma, and
later on he asked Paraçuräma to go out of the world. His other name is
Ariñöanemi. He lives on the northern side of the universe.
Äìgirasa: He is the son of Maharñi Aìgirä and is known as Båhaspati, the
priest of the demigods. It is said that Droëäcärya was his partial incarnation.
Çukräcärya was the spiritual master of the demons, and Båhaspati challenged
him. His son is Kaca, and he delivered the fire weapon first to Bharadväja
Muni. He begot six sons (like the fire-god) by his wife Candramäsé, one of the
reputed stars. He could travel in space, and therefore he could present himself
even in the planets of Brahmaloka and Indraloka. He advised the King of
heaven, Indra, about conquering the demons. Once he cursed Indra, who thus
had to become a hog on the earth and was unwilling to return to heaven. Such
is the power of the attraction of the illusory energy. Even a hog does not wish
to part with its earthly possessions in exchange for a heavenly kingdom. He
was the religious preceptor of the natives of different planets.
TEXT 9
TaaNa( SaMaeTaaNa( Maha>aaGaaNauPal/>Ya vSaUtaMa" )
PaUJaYaaMaaSa DaMaRjae deXak-al/iv>aaGaivTa( )) 9 ))
tän sametän mahä-bhägän
upalabhya vasüttamaù
püjayäm äsa dharma-jïo
deça-käla-vibhägavit
SYNONYMS
tän—all of them; sametän—assembled together; mahä-bhägän—all greatly
powerful; upalabhya—having received; vasu-uttamaù—the best among the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Vasus (Bhéñmadeva); püjayäm äsa—welcomed; dharma-jïaù—one who knows
religious principles; deça—place; käla—time; vibhäga-vit—one who knows the
adjustment of place and time.
TRANSLATION
Bhéñmadeva, who was the best amongst the eight Vasus, received and
welcomed all the great and powerful åñis who were assembled there, for he knew
perfectly all the religious principles according to time and place.
PURPORT
Expert religionists know perfectly well how to adjust religious principles in
terms of time and place. All the great äcäryas or religious preachers or
reformers of the world executed their mission by adjustment of religious
principles in terms of time and place. There are different climates and
situations in different parts of the world, and if one has to discharge his duties
to preach the message of the Lord, he must be expert in adjusting things in
terms of the time and place. Bhéñmadeva was one of the twelve great
authorities in preaching this cult of devotional service, and therefore he could
receive and welcome all the powerful sages assembled there at his deathbed
from all parts of the universe. He was certainly unable at that time to welcome
and receive them physically because he was neither at his home nor in a
normal healthy condition. But he was quite fit by the activities of his sound
mind, and therefore he could utter sweet words with hearty expressions, and
all of them were well received. One can perform one’s duty by physical work,
by mind and by words. And he knew well how to utilize them in the proper
place, and therefore there was no difficulty for him to receive them, although
physically unfit.
TEXT 10
k*-Z<a& c TaTPa[>aavj AaSaqNa& JaGadqìrMa( )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ôidSQa& PaUJaYaaMaaSa MaaYaYaaePaataivGa]hMa( )) 10 ))
kåñëaà ca tat-prabhäva-jïa
äsénaà jagad-éçvaram
hådi-sthaà püjayäm äsa
mäyayopätta-vigraham
SYNONYMS
kåñëam—unto Lord Çré Kåñëa; ca—also; tat—of Him; prabhäva-jïaù—the
knower of the glories (Bhéñma); äsénam—sitting; jagat-éçvaram—the Lord of
the universe; hådi-stham—situated in the heart; püjayäm äsa—worshiped;
mäyayä—by internal potency; upätta—manifested; vigraham—a form.
TRANSLATION
Lord Çré Kåñëa is situated in everyone’s heart, yet He manifests His
transcendental form by His internal potency. This very Lord was sitting before
Bhéñmadeva, and since Bhéñmadeva knew of His glories, he worshiped Him
duly.
PURPORT
The Lord’s omnipotency is displayed by His simultaneous presence in every
place. He is present always in His eternal abode Goloka Våndävana, and still
He is present in everyone’s heart and even within every invisible atom. When
He manifests His eternal transcendental form in the material world, He does
so by His internal potency. The external potency, or the material energy, has
nothing to do with His eternal form. All these truths were known to Çré
Bhéñmadeva, who worshiped Him accordingly.
TEXT 11
Paa<@uPau}aaNauPaaSaqNaaNa( Pa[é[YaPa[eMaSa®TaaNa( )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
A>YaacíaNauraGaaé[ErNDaq>aUTaeNa c+auza )) 11 ))
päëòu-puträn upäsénän
praçraya-prema-saìgatän
abhyäcañöänurägäçrair
andhébhütena cakñuñä
SYNONYMS
päëòu—the late father of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira and his brothers; puträn—the
sons of; upäsénän—sitting silently nearby; praçraya—being overtaken;
prema—in feelings of love; saìgatän—having gathered;
abhyäcañöa—congratulated; anuräga—feelingly; açraiù—by tears of ecstasy;
andhébhütena—overwhelmed; cakñuñä—with his eyes.
TRANSLATION
The sons of Mahäräja Päëòu were sitting silently nearby, overtaken with
affection for their dying grandfather. Seeing this, Bhéñmadeva congratulated
them with feeling. There were tears of ecstasy in his eyes, for he was
overwhelmed by love and affection.
PURPORT
When Mahäräja Päëòu died, his sons were all small children, and naturally
they were brought up under the affection of elderly members of the royal
family, specifically by Bhéñmadeva. Later on, when the Päëòavas were grown
up, they were cheated by cunning Duryodhana and company, and Bhéñmadeva,
although he knew that the Päëòavas were innocent and were unnecessarily
put into trouble, could not take the side of the Päëòavas for political reasons.
At the last stage of his life, when Bhéñmadeva saw his most exalted grandsons,
headed by Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, sitting very gently at his side, the great
warrior-grandfather could not check his loving tears, which were
automatically flowing from his eyes. He remembered the great tribulations
suffered by his most pious grandsons. Certainly he was the most satisfied man
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
because of Yudhiñöhira’s being enthroned in place of Duryodhana, and thus he
began to congratulate them.
TEXT 12
Ahae k-íMahae_NYaaYYa& YaÛUYa& DaMaRNaNdNaa" )
JaqivTau& NaahRQa i©-í& ivPa[DaMaaRCYauTaaé[Yaa" )) 12 ))
aho kañöam aho ’nyäyyaà
yad yüyaà dharma-nandanäù
jévituà närhatha kliñöaà
vipra-dharmäcyutäçrayäù
SYNONYMS
aho—oh; kañöam—what terrible sufferings; aho—oh; anyäyyam—what terrible
injustice; yat—because; yüyam—all of you good souls;
dharma-nandanäù—sons of religion personified; jévitum—to remain alive;
na—never; arhatha—deserve; kliñöam—suffering; vipra—brähmaëas;
dharma—piety; acyuta—God; äçrayäù—being protected by.
TRANSLATION
Bhéñmadeva said: Oh, what terrible sufferings and what terrible injustices
you good souls suffer for being the sons of religion personified. You did not
deserve to remain alive under those tribulations, yet you were protected by the
brähmaëas, God and religion.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was disturbed due to the great massacre in the Battle
of Kurukñetra. Bhéñmadeva could understand this, and therefore he spoke first
of the terrible sufferings of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira. He was put into difficulty by
injustice only, and the Battle of Kurukñetra was fought just to counteract this
injustice. Therefore, he should not regret the great massacre. He wanted to
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
point out particularly that they were always protected by the brähmaëas, the
Lord and religious principles. As long as they were protected by these three
important items, there was no cause of disappointment. Thus Bhéñmadeva
encouraged Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira to dissipate his despondency. As long as a
person is fully in cooperation with the wishes of the Lord, guided by the bona
fide brähmaëas and Vaiñëavas and strictly following religious principles, one
has no cause for despondency, however trying the circumstances of life.
Bhéñmadeva, as one of the authorities in the line, wanted to impress this point
upon the Päëòavas.
TEXT 13
Sa&iSQaTae_iTarQae Paa<@aE Pa*Qaa bal/Pa[Jaa vDaU" )
YauZMaTk*-Tae bhUNa( ©e-XaaNa( Pa[aáa Taaek-vTaq Mauhu" )) 13 ))
saàsthite ’tirathe päëòau
påthä bäla-prajä vadhüù
yuñmat-kåte bahün kleçän
präptä tokavaté muhuù
SYNONYMS
saàsthite—after the demise; ati-rathe—of the great general; päëòau—Päëòu;
påthä—Kunté; bäla-prajä—having young children; vadhüù—my
daughter-in-law; yuñmat-kåte—on your account; bahün—multifarious;
kleçän—afflictions; präptä—underwent; toka-vaté—in spite of having
grown-up boys; muhuù—constantly.
TRANSLATION
As far as my daughter-in-law Kunté is concerned, upon the great General
Päëòu’s death, she became a widow with many children, and therefore she
suffered greatly. And when you were grown up she suffered a great deal also
because of your actions.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
The sufferings of Kuntédevé are doubly lamented. She suffered greatly
because of early widowhood and to get her minor children brought up in the
royal family. And when her children were grown up, she continued to suffer
because of her sons’ actions. So her sufferings continued. This means that she
was destined to suffer by providence, and this one has to tolerate without
being disturbed.
TEXT 14
Sav| k-al/k*-Ta& MaNYae >avTaa& c YadiPa[YaMa( )
SaPaal/ae YaÜXae l/aek-ae vaYaaeirv gaNaavil/" )) 14 ))
sarvaà käla-kåtaà manye
bhavatäà ca yad-apriyam
sapälo yad-vaçe loko
väyor iva ghanävaliù
SYNONYMS
sarvam—all this; käla-kåtam—done by inevitable time; manye—I think;
bhavatäm ca—for you also; yat—whatever; apriyam—detestable;
sa-pälaù—with the rulers; yat-vaçe—under the control of that time;
lokaù—everyone in every planet; väyoù—the wind carries; iva—as;
ghana-ävaliù—a line of clouds.
TRANSLATION
In my opinion, this is all due to inevitable time, under whose control
everyone in every planet is carried, just as the clouds are carried by the wind.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
There is control by time all over the space within the universe, as there is
control by time all over the planets. All the big gigantic planets, including the
sun, are being controlled by the force of air, as the clouds are carried by the
force of air. Similarly, the inevitable käla, or time, controls even the action of
the air and other elements. Everything, therefore, is controlled by the supreme
käla, a forceful representative of the Lord within the material world. Thus
Yudhiñöhira should not be sorry for the inconceivable action of time. Everyone
has to bear the actions and reactions of time as long as one is within the
conditions of the material world. Yudhiñöhira should not think that he had
committed sins in his previous birth and is suffering the consequence. Even
the most pious has to suffer the condition of material nature. But a pious man
is faithful to the Lord, for he is guided by the bona fide brähmaëa and
Vaiñëava following the religious principles. These three guiding principles
should be the aim of life. One should not be disturbed by the tricks of eternal
time. Even the great controller of the universe, Brahmäjé, is also under the
control of that time; therefore, one should not grudge being thus controlled by
time despite being a true follower of religious principles.
TEXT 15
Ya}a DaMaRSauTaae raJaa GadaPaai<av*Rk-aedr" )
k*-Z<aae_ñq Gaai<@v& caPa& SauôTk*-Z<aSTaTaae ivPaTa( )) 15 ))
yatra dharma-suto räjä
gadä-päëir våkodaraù
kåñëo ’stré gäëòivaà cäpaà
suhåt kåñëas tato vipat
SYNONYMS
yatra—where there is; dharma-sutaù—the son of Dharmaräja; räjä—the King;
gadä-päëiù—with his mighty club in hand; våkodaraù—Bhéma;
kåñëaù—Arjuna; astré—carrier of the weapon; gäëòivam—Gäëòéva;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
cäpam—bow; suhåt—well-wisher; kåñëaù—Lord Kåñëa, the Personality of
Godhead; tataù—thereof; vipat—reverse.
TRANSLATION
O how wonderful is the influence of inevitable time. It is
irreversible—otherwise, how can there be reverses in the presence of King
Yudhiñöhira, the son of the demigod controlling religion; Bhéma, the great
fighter with a club; the great bowman Arjuna with his mighty weapon Gäëòéva;
and above all, the Lord, the direct well-wisher of the Päëòavas?
PURPORT
As far as the material or spiritual resources were required, there was no
scarcity in the case of the Päëòavas. Materially they were well equipped
because two great warriors, namely Bhéma and Arjuna, were there. Spiritually
the King himself was the symbol of religion, and above all of them the
Personality of Godhead, Lord Çré Kåñëa, was personally concerned with their
affairs as the well-wisher. And yet there were so many reverses on the side of
the Päëòavas. Despite the power of pious acts, the power of personalities, the
power of expert management and the power of weapons under the direct
supervision of Lord Kåñëa, the Päëòavas suffered so many practical reverses,
which can only be explained as due to the influence of käla, inevitable time.
Käla is identical with the Lord Himself, and therefore the influence of käla
indicates the inexplicable wish of the Lord Himself. There is nothing to be
lamented when a matter is beyond the control of any human being.
TEXT 16
Na ùSYa k-ihRicd]aJaNa( PauMaaNa( ved iviDaiTSaTaMa( )
YaiÜiJajaSaYaa Yau¢-a MauùiNTa k-vYaae_iPa ih )) 16 ))
na hy asya karhicid räjan
pumän veda vidhitsitam
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
yad vijijïäsayä yuktä
muhyanti kavayo ’pi hi
SYNONYMS
na—never; hi—certainly; asya—His; karhicit—whatsoever; räjan—O King;
pumän—anyone; veda—knows; vidhitsitam—plan; yat—which;
vijijïäsayä—with exhaustive inquiries; yuktäù—being engaged;
muhyanti—bewildered; kavayaù—great philosophers; api—even;
hi—certainly.
TRANSLATION
O King, no one can know the plan of the Lord [Çré Kåñëa]. Even though
great philosophers inquire exhaustively, they are bewildered.
PURPORT
The bewilderment of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira over his past sinful acts and the
resultant sufferings, etc., is completely negated by the great authority Bhéñma
(one of the twelve authorized persons). Bhéñma wanted to impress upon
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira that since time immemorial no one, including such
demigods as Çiva and Brahmä, could ascertain the real plan of the Lord. So
what can we understand about it? It is useless also to inquire about it. Even the
exhaustive philosophical inquiries of sages cannot ascertain the plan of the
Lord. The best policy is simply to abide by the orders of the Lord without
argument. The sufferings of the Päëòavas were never due to their past deeds.
The Lord had to execute the plan of establishing the kingdom of virtue, and
therefore His own devotees suffered temporarily in order to establish the
conquest of virtue. Bhéñmadeva was certainly satisfied by seeing the triumph of
virtue, and he was glad to see King Yudhiñöhira on the throne, although he
himself fought against him. Even a great fighter like Bhéñma could not win the
Battle of Kurukñetra because the Lord wanted to show that vice cannot
conquer virtue, regardless of who tries to execute it. Bhéñmadeva was a great
devotee of the Lord, but he chose to fight against the Päëòavas by the will of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the Lord because the Lord wanted to show that a fighter like Bhéñma cannot
win on the wrong side.
TEXT 17
TaSMaaidd& dEvTaN}a& VYavSYa >arTazR>a )
TaSYaaNauivihTaae_NaaQaa NaaQa Paaih Pa[Jaa" Pa[>aae )) 17 ))
tasmäd idaà daiva-tantraà
vyavasya bharatarñabha
tasyänuvihito ’näthä
nätha pähi prajäù prabho
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; idam—this; daiva-tantram—enchantment of providence
only; vyavasya—ascertaining; bharata-åñabha—O best among the descendants
of Bharata; tasya—by Him; anuvihitaù—as desired; anäthäù—helpless;
nätha—O master; pähi—just take care of; prajäù—of the subjects; prabho—O
Lord.
TRANSLATION
O best among the descendants of Bharata [Yudhiñöhira], I maintain,
therefore, that all this is within the plan of the Lord. Accepting the
inconceivable plan of the Lord, you must follow it. You are now the appointed
administrative head, and, my lord, you should now take care of those subjects
who are now rendered helpless.
PURPORT
The popular saying is that a housewife teaches the daughter-in-law by
teaching the daughter. Similarly, the Lord teaches the world by teaching the
devotee. The devotee does not have to learn anything new from the Lord
because the Lord teaches the sincere devotee always from within. Whenever,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
therefore, a show is made to teach the devotee, as in the case of the teachings
of Bhagavad-gétä, it is for teaching the less intelligent men. A devotee’s duty,
therefore, is to ungrudgingly accept tribulations from the Lord as a
benediction. The Päëòavas were advised by Bhéñmadeva to accept the
responsibility of administration without hesitation. The poor subjects were
without protection due to the Battle of Kurukñetra, and they were awaiting the
assumption of power by Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira. A pure devotee of the Lord
accepts tribulations as favors from the Lord. Since the Lord is absolute, there is
no mundane difference between the two.
TEXT 18
Wz vE >aGavaNa( Saa+aadaÛae NaaraYa<a" PauMaaNa( )
MaaehYaNMaaYaYaa l/aek&- GaU!êriTa v*iZ<azu )) 18 ))
eña vai bhagavän säkñäd
ädyo näräyaëaù pumän
mohayan mäyayä lokaà
güòhaç carati våñëiñu
SYNONYMS
eñaù—this; vai—positively; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead;
säkñät—original; ädyaù—the first; näräyaëaù—the Supreme Lord (who lies
down on the water); pumän—the supreme enjoyer; mohayan—bewildering;
mäyayä—by His self-created energy; lokam—the planets; güòhaù—who is
inconceivable; carati—moves; våñëiñu—among the Våñëi family.
TRANSLATION
This Çré Kåñëa is no other than the inconceivable, original Personality of
Godhead. He is the first Näräyaëa, the supreme enjoyer. But He is moving
amongst the descendants of King Våñëi just like one of us and He is bewildering
us with His self-created energy.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
The Vedic system of acquiring knowledge is the deductive process. The
Vedic knowledge is received perfectly by disciplic succession from authorities.
Such knowledge is never dogmatic, as ill conceived by less intelligent persons.
The mother is the authority to verify the identity of the father. She is the
authority for such confidential knowledge. Therefore, authority is not
dogmatic. In the Bhagavad-gétä this truth is confirmed in the Fourth Chapter
(Bg. 4.2), and the perfect system of learning is to receive it from authority. The
very same system is accepted universally as truth, but only the false arguer
speaks against it. For example, modern spacecraft fly in the sky, and when
scientists say that they travel to the other side of the moon, men believe these
stories blindly because they have accepted the modern scientists as authorities.
The authorities speak, and the people in general believe them. But in the case
of Vedic truths, they have been taught not to believe. Even if they accept
them they give a different interpretation. Each and every man wants a direct
perception of Vedic knowledge, but foolishly they deny it. This means that the
misguided man can believe one authority, the scientist, but will reject the
authority of the Vedas. The result is that people have degenerated.
Here is an authority speaking about Çré Kåñëa as the original Personality of
Godhead and the first Näräyaëa. Even such an impersonalist as Äcärya
Çaìkara has said in the beginning of his commentation on the Bhagavad-gétä
that Näräyaëa, the Personality of Godhead, is beyond the material creation.
The universe is one of the material creations, but Näräyaëa is transcendental
to such material paraphernalia.
Bhéñmadeva is one of the twelve mahäjanas who know the principles of
transcendental knowledge. His confirmation of Lord Çré Kåñëa’s being the
original Personality of Godhead is also corroborated by the impersonalist
Çaìkara. All other äcäryas have also confirmed this statement, and thus there
is no chance of not accepting Lord Çré Kåñëa as the original Personality of
Godhead. Bhéñmadeva says that He is the first Näräyaëa. This is also
confirmed by Brahmäjé in the Bhägavatam (10.14.14). Kåñëa is the first
Näräyaëa. In the spiritual world (Vaikuëöha) there are unlimited numbers of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Näräyaëas, who are all the same Personality of Godhead and are considered to
be the plenary expansions of the original Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa.
The first form of the Lord Çré Kåñëa first expands Himself as the form of
Baladeva, and Baladeva expands in so many other forms, such as Saìkarñaëa,
Pradyumna, Aniruddha, Väsudeva, Näräyaëa, Puruña, Räma and Nåsiàha. All
these expansions are one and the same viñëu-tattva, and Çré Kåñëa is the
original source of all the plenary expansions. He is therefore the direct
Personality of Godhead. He is the creator of the material world, and He is the
predominating Deity known as Näräyaëa in all the Vaikuëöha planets.
Therefore, His movements amongst human beings is another sort of
bewilderment. The Lord therefore says in the Bhagavad-gétä that foolish
persons consider Him to be one of the human beings without knowing the
intricacies of His movements.
The bewilderment regarding Çré Kåñëa is due to the action of His twofold
internal and external energies upon the third one, called marginal energy. The
living entities are expansions of His marginal energy, and thus they are
sometimes bewildered by the internal energy and sometimes by the external
energy. By internal energetic bewilderment, Çré Kåñëa expands Himself into
unlimited numbers of Näräyaëas and exchanges or accepts transcendental
loving service from the living entities in the transcendental world. And by His
external energetic expansions, He incarnates Himself in the material world
amongst the men, animals or demigods to reestablish His forgotten relation
with the living entities in different species of life. Great authorities like
Bhéñma, however, escape His bewilderment by the mercy of the Lord.
TEXT 19
ASYaaNau>aav& >aGavaNa( ved GauùTaMa& iXav" )
devizRNaaRrd" Saa+aaÙGavaNa( k-iPal/ae Na*Pa )) 19 ))
asyänubhävaà bhagavän
veda guhyatamaà çivaù
devarñir näradaù säkñäd
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
bhagavän kapilo nåpa
SYNONYMS
asya—of Him; anubhävam—glories; bhagavän—the most powerful;
veda—knows; guhya-tamam—very confidentially; çivaù—Lord Çiva;
deva-åñiù—the great sage among the demigods; näradaù—Närada;
säkñät—directly; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; kapilaù—Kapila;
nåpa—O King.
TRANSLATION
O King, Lord Çiva, Närada the sage amongst the demigods, and Kapila, the
incarnation of Godhead, all know very confidentially about His glories through
direct contact.
PURPORT
Pure devotees of the Lord are all bhävas, or persons who know the glories of
the Lord in different transcendental loving services. As the Lord has
innumerable expansions of His plenary form, there are innumerable pure
devotees of the Lord, who are engaged in the exchange of service of different
humors. Ordinarily there are twelve great devotees of the Lord, namely
Brahmä, Närada, Çiva, Kumära, Kapila, Manu, Prahläda, Bhéñma, Janaka,
Çukadeva Gosvämé, Bali Mahäräja and Yamaräja. Bhéñmadeva, although one of
them, has mentioned only three important names of the twelve who know the
glories of the Lord. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, one of the great
äcäryas in the modern age, explains that anubhäva, or the glory of the Lord, is
first appreciated by the devotee in ecstasy manifesting the symptoms of
perspiring, trembling, weeping, bodily eruptions, etc., which are further
enhanced by steady understanding of the glories of the Lord. Such different
understandings of bhävas are exchanged between Yaçodä and the Lord
(binding the Lord by ropes) and in the chariot driving by the Lord in the
exchange of love with Arjuna. These glories of the Lord are exhibited in His
being subordinated before His devotees, and that is another feature of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
glories of the Lord. Çukadeva Gosvämé and the Kumäras, although situated in
the transcendental position, became converted by another feature of bhäva
and turned into pure devotees of the Lord. Tribulations imposed upon the
devotees by the Lord constitute another exchange of transcendental bhäva
between the Lord and the devotees. The Lord says “I put My devotee into
difficulty, and thus the devotee becomes more purified in exchanging
transcendental bhäva with Me.” Placing the devotee into material troubles
necessitates delivering him from the illusory material relations. The material
relations are based on reciprocation of material enjoyment, which depends
mainly on material resources. Therefore, when material resources are
withdrawn by the Lord, the devotee is cent percent attracted toward the
transcendental loving service of the Lord. Thus the Lord snatches the fallen
soul from the mire of material existence. Tribulations offered by the Lord to
His devotee are different from the tribulations resulting from vicious action.
All these glories of the Lord are especially known to the great mahäjanas like
Brahmä, Çiva, Närada, Kapila, Kumära and Bhéñma, as mentioned above, and
one is able to grasp it by their grace.
TEXT 20
Ya& MaNYaSae MaaTaule/Ya& iPa[Ya& iMa}a& SauôtaMaMa( )
Ak-rae" Saicv& dUTa& SaaEôdadQa SaariQaMa( )) 20 ))
yaà manyase mätuleyaà
priyaà mitraà suhåttamam
akaroù sacivaà dütaà
sauhådäd atha särathim
SYNONYMS
yam—the person; manyase—you think; mätuleyam—maternal cousin;
priyam—very dear; mitram—friend; suhåt-tamam—ardent well-wisher;
akaroù—executed; sacivam—counsel; dütam—messenger; sauhådät—by good
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
will; atha—thereupon; särathim—charioteer.
TRANSLATION
O King, that personality whom, out of ignorance only, you thought to be
your maternal cousin, your very dear friend, well-wisher, counselor, messenger,
benefactor, etc., is that very Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa.
PURPORT
Lord Çré Kåñëa, although acting as the cousin, brother, friend, well-wisher,
counselor, messenger, benefactor, etc., of the Päëòavas, was still the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Out of His causeless mercy and favor upon His
unalloyed devotees, He performs all kinds of service, but that does not mean
that He has changed His position as the Absolute Person. To think of Him as
an ordinary man is the grossest type of ignorance.
TEXT 21
SavaRTMaNa" SaMad*Xaae ùÜYaSYaaNahx(k*-Tae" )
TaTk*-Ta& MaiTavEzMYa& iNarvÛSYa Na KvicTa( )) 21 ))
sarvätmanaù sama-dåço
hy advayasyänahaìkåteù
tat-kåtaà mati-vaiñamyaà
niravadyasya na kvacit
SYNONYMS
sarva-ätmanaù—of one who is present in everyone’s heart; sama-dåçaù—of
one who is equally kind to one and all; hi—certainly; advayasya—of the
Absolute; anahaìkåteù—free from all material identity of false ego;
tat-kåtam—everything done by Him; mati—consciousness;
vaiñamyam—differentiation; niravadyasya—freed from all attachment;
na—never; kvacit—at any stage.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
Being the Absolute Personality of Godhead, He is present in everyone’s
heart. He is equally kind to everyone, and He is free from the false ego of
differentiation. Therefore whatever He does is free from material inebriety. He
is equibalanced.
PURPORT
Because He is absolute, there is nothing different from Him. He is kaivalya;
there is nothing except Himself. Everything and everyone is the manifestation
of His energy, and thus He is present everywhere by His energy, being
nondifferent from it. The sun is identified with every inch of the sun rays and
every molecular particle of the rays. Similarly, the Lord is distributed by His
different energies. He is Paramätmä, or the Supersoul, present in everyone as
the supreme guidance, and therefore He is already the chariot driver and
counsel of all living beings. When He, therefore, exhibits Himself as chariot
driver of Arjuna, there is no change in His exalted position. It is the power of
devotional service only that demonstrates Him as the chariot driver or the
messenger. Since He has nothing to do with the material conception of life
because He is absolute spiritual identity, there is for Him no superior or
inferior action. Being the Absolute Personality of Godhead, He has no false
ego, and so He does not identify Himself with anything different from Him.
The material conception of ego is equibalanced in Him. He does not feel,
therefore, inferior by becoming the chariot driver of His pure devotee. It is the
glory of the pure devotee that only he can bring about service from the
affectionate Lord.
TEXT 22
TaQaaPYaek-aNTa>a¢e-zu PaXYa >aUPaaNauk-iMPaTaMa( )
YaNMae_SaU&STYaJaTa" Saa+aaTk*-Z<aae dXaRNaMaaGaTa" )) 22 ))
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
tathäpy ekänta-bhakteñu
paçya bhüpänukampitam
yan me ’süàs tyajataù säkñät
kåñëo darçanam ägataù
SYNONYMS
tathäpi—still; ekänta—unflinching; bhakteñu—unto the devotees; paçya—see
here; bhü-pa—O King; anukampitam—how sympathetic; yat—for which;
me—my; asün—life; tyajataù—ending; säkñät—directly; kåñëaù—the
Personality of Godhead; darçanam—in my view; ägataù—has kindly come.
TRANSLATION
Yet, despite His being equally kind to everyone, He has graciously come
before me while I am ending my life, for I am His unflinching servitor.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord, the Absolute Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa,
although equal to everyone, is still more inclined to His unflinching devotee
who is completely surrendered and knows no one else as his protector and
master. Having unflinching faith in the Supreme Lord as one’s protector,
friend and master is the natural condition of eternal life. A living entity is so
made by the will of the Almighty that he is most happy when placing himself
in a condition of absolute dependence.
The opposite tendency is the cause of falldown. The living entity has this
tendency of falling down by dint of misidentifying himself as fully
independent to lord it over the material world. The root cause of all troubles is
there in false egotism. One must draw towards the Lord in all circumstances.
The appearance of Lord Kåñëa at the deathbed of Bhéñmajé is due to his
being an unflinching devotee of the Lord. Arjuna had some bodily relation
with Kåñëa because the Lord happened to be his maternal cousin. But Bhéñma
had no such bodily relation. Therefore the cause of attraction was due to the
intimate relation of the soul. Yet because the relation of the body is very
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
pleasing and natural, the Lord is more pleased when He is addressed as the son
of Mahäräja Nanda, the son of Yaçodä, the lover of Rädhäräëé. This affinity by
bodily relation with the Lord is another feature of reciprocating loving service
with the Lord. Bhéñmadeva is conscious of this sweetness of transcendental
humor, and therefore he likes to address the Lord as Vijaya-Sakhe,
Pärtha-Sakhe, etc., exactly like Nanda-nandana or Yaçodä-nandana. The best
way to establish our relation in transcendental sweetness is to approach Him
through His recognized devotees. One should not try to establish the relation
directly; there must be a via medium which is transparent and competent to
lead us to the right path.
TEXT 23
>a¢-yaveXYa MaNaae YaiSMaNa( vaca YaàaMa k-ITaRYaNa( )
TYaJaNa( k-le/vr& YaaeGaq MauCYaTae k-aMak-MaRi>a" )) 23 ))
bhaktyäveçya mano yasmin
väcä yan-näma kértayan
tyajan kalevaraà yogé
mucyate käma-karmabhiù
SYNONYMS
bhaktyä—with devout attention; äveçya—meditating; manaù—mind;
yasmin—in whose; väcä—by words; yat—Kåñëa; näma—holy name;
kértayan—by chanting; tyajan—quitting; kalevaram—this material body;
yogé—the devotee; mucyate—gets release; käma-karmabhiù—from fruitive
activities.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead, who appears in the mind of the devotee by
attentive devotion and meditation and by chanting of the holy name, releases
the devotee from the bondage of fruitive activities at the time of his quitting the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
material body.
PURPORT
Yoga means concentration of the mind detached from all other subject
matter. And actually such concentration is samädhi, or cent percent
engagement in the service of the Lord. And one who concentrates his
attention in that manner is called a yogé. Such a yogé devotee of the Lord
engages himself twenty-four hours daily in the service of the Lord so that his
whole attention is engrossed with the thoughts of the Lord in ninefold
devotional service, namely hearing, chanting, remembering, worshiping,
praying, becoming a voluntary servant, carrying out orders, establishing a
friendly relationship, or offering all that one may possess, in the service of the
Lord. By such practice of yoga, or linking up in the service of the Lord, one is
recognized by the Lord Himself, as it is explained in the Bhagavad-gétä
concerning the highest perfectional stage of samädhi. The Lord calls such a
rare devotee the best amongst all the yogés Such a perfect yogé is enabled by the
divine grace of the Lord to concentrate his mind upon the Lord with a perfect
sense of consciousness, and thus by chanting His holy name before quitting the
body the yogé is at once transferred by the internal energy of the Lord to one of
the eternal planets where there is no question of material life and its
concomitant factors. In material existence a living being has to endure the
material conditions of threefold miseries, life after life, according to his
fruitive work. Such material life is produced by material desires only.
Devotional service to the Lord does not kill the natural desires of the living
being, but they are applied in the right cause of devotional service. This
qualifies the desire to be transferred to the spiritual sky. General Bhéñmadeva
is referring to a particular type of yoga called bhakti-yoga, and he was fortunate
enough to have the Lord directly in his presence before he quitted his material
body. He therefore desired that the Lord stay before his view in the following
verses.
TEXT 24
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Sa devdevae >aGavaNa( Pa[Taq+aTaa&
k-le/vr& Yaavidd& ihNaaeMYahMa( )
Pa[SaàhaSaaå<al/aecNaaeçSa‚
NMau%aMbuJaae DYaaNaPaQaêTau>auRJa" )) 24 ))
sa deva-devo bhagavän pratékñatäà
kalevaraà yävad idaà hinomy aham
prasanna-häsäruëa-locanollasanmukhämbujo
dhyäna-pathaç catur-bhujaù
SYNONYMS
saù—He; deva-devaù—the Supreme Lord of the lords; bhagavän—the
Personality of Godhead; pratékñatäm—may kindly wait; kalevaram—body;
yävat—as long as; idam—this (material body); hinomi—may quit; aham—I;
prasanna—cheerful; häsa—smiling; aruëa-locana—eyes red like the morning
sun; ullasat—beautifully decorated; mukha-ambujaù—the lotus flower of His
face; dhyäna-pathaù—in the path of my meditation; catur-bhujaù—the
four-handed form of Näräyaëa (the worshipable Deity of Bhéñmadeva).
TRANSLATION
May my Lord, who is four-handed and whose beautifully decorated lotus
face, with eyes as red as the rising sun, is smiling, kindly await me at that
moment when I quit this material body.
PURPORT
Bhéñmadeva knew well that Lord Kåñëa is the original Näräyaëa. His
worshipable Deity was four-handed Näräyaëa, but he knew that four-handed
Näräyaëa is a plenary expansion of Lord Kåñëa. Indirectly he desired Lord Çré
Kåñëa to manifest Himself in His four-handed feature of Näräyaëa. A
Vaiñëava is always humble in his behavior. Although it was cent percent
certain that Bhéñmadeva was approaching Vaikuëöha-dhäma just after leaving
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
his material body, still as a humble Vaiñëava he desired to see the beautiful
face of the Lord, for after quitting the present body he might not be in a
position to see the Lord any more. A Vaiñëava is not puffed up, although the
Lord guarantees His pure devotee entrance into His abode. Here Bhéñmadeva
says, “as long as I do not quit this body.” This means that the great General
would quit the body by his own will; he was not being forced by the laws of
nature. He was so powerful that he could stay in his body as long as he desired.
He got this benediction from his father. He desired that the Lord stay before
him in His four-handed Näräyaëa feature so that he might concentrate upon
Him and thus be in trance in that meditation. Then his mind might be
sanctified with thinking of the Lord. Thus he did not mind wherever he might
go. A pure devotee is never very anxious to go back to the kingdom of God. He
entirely depends on the good will of the Lord. He is equally satisfied even if
the Lord desires him to go to hell. The only desire that a pure devotee
entertains is that he may always be in rapt attention with thinking of the lotus
feet of the Lord, regardless. Bhéñmadeva wanted this much only: that his mind
be absorbed in thinking of the Lord and that he pass away thus. That is the
highest ambition of a pure devotee.
TEXT 25
SaUTa ovac
YauiDaiïrSTadak-<YaR XaYaaNa& XarPaÅre )
APa*C^iÜivDaaNDaMaaRNa*zq<aa& caNaué*<vTaaMa( )) 25 ))
süta uväca
yudhiñöhiras tad äkarëya
çayänaà çara-païjare
apåcchad vividhän dharmän
åñéëäà cänuçåëvatäm
SYNONYMS
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
sütaù uväca—Çré Süta Gosvämé said; yudhiñöhiraù—King Yudhiñöhira;
tat—that; äkarëya—hearing; çayänam—lying down; çara-païjare—on the bed
of arrows; apåcchat—asked; vividhän—multifarious; dharmän—duties;
åñéëäm—of the åñis; ca—and; anuçåëvatäm—hearing after.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, after hearing Bhéñmadeva speak
in that appealing tone, asked him, in the presence of all the great åñis, about the
essential principles of various religious duties.
PURPORT
Bhéñmadeva, speaking in that appealing tone, convinced Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira that he was very soon passing away. And Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira
was inspired by Lord Çré Kåñëa to ask him of the principles of religion. Lord Çré
Kåñëa inspired Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira to ask Bhéñmadeva in the presence of
many great sages, indicating thereby that the Lord’s devotee like Bhéñmadeva,
although apparently living as a worldly man, is far superior to many great
sages, even Vyäsadeva. Another point is that Bhéñmadeva at that time was not
only lying on a deathbed of arrows, but was greatly aggrieved because of that
state. One should not have asked him any question at that time, but Lord Çré
Kåñëa wanted to prove that His pure devotees are always sound in body and
mind by dint of spiritual enlightenment, and thus in any circumstances a
devotee of the Lord is in perfect order to speak of the right way of life.
Yudhiñöhira also preferred to solve his problematic questions by asking
Bhéñmadeva rather than ask anyone else present there who was seemingly
more learned than Bhéñmadeva. This is all due to the arrangement of the great
wheel-carrier Lord Çré Kåñëa, who establishes the glories of His devotee. The
father likes to see the son become more famous than himself. The Lord
declares very emphatically that worship of His devotee is more valuable than
the worship of the Lord Himself.
TEXT 26
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PauåzSv>aavivihTaaNa( YaQaav<a| YaQaaé[MaMa( )
vEraGYaraGaaePaaiDa>YaaMaaManaTaae>aYal/+a<aaNa( )) 26 ))
puruña-sva-bhäva-vihitän
yathä-varëaà yathäçramam
vairägya-rägopädhibhyäm
ämnätobhaya-lakñaëän
SYNONYMS
puruña—the human being; sva-bhäva—by his own acquired qualities;
vihitän—prescribed; yathä—according to; varëam—classification of castes;
yathä—according to; äçramam—orders of life; vairägya—detachment;
räga—attachment; upädhibhyäm—out of such designations;
ämnäta—systematically; ubhaya—both; lakñaëän—symptoms.
TRANSLATION
At Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira’s inquiry, Bhéñmadeva first defined all the
classifications of castes and orders of life in terms of the individual’s
qualifications. Then he systematically, in twofold divisions, described
counteraction by detachment and interaction by attachment.
PURPORT
The conception of four castes and four orders of life, as planned by the Lord
Himself (Bg. 4.13), is to accelerate transcendental qualities of the individual
person so that he may gradually realize his spiritual identity and thus act
accordingly to get free from material bondage, or conditional life. In almost all
the Puräëas the subject matter is described in the same spirit, and so also in
the Mahäbhärata it is more elaborately described by Bhéñmadeva in the
Çänti-parva, beginning from the sixtieth chapter.
The varëäçrama-dharma is prescribed for the civilized human being just to
train him to successfully terminate human life. Self-realization is distinguished
from the life of the lower animals engaged in eating, sleeping, fearing and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
mating. Bhéñmadeva advised for all human beings nine qualifications: (1) not
to become angry, (2) not to lie, (3) to equally distribute wealth, (4) to forgive,
(5) to beget children only by one’s legitimate wife, (6) to be pure in mind and
hygienic in body, (7) not to be inimical toward anyone, (8) to be simple, and
(9) to support servants or subordinates. One cannot be called a civilized person
without acquiring the above-mentioned preliminary qualities. Besides these,
the brähmaëas (the intelligent men), the administrative men, the mercantile
community and the laborer class must acquire special qualities in terms of
occupational duties mentioned in all the Vedic scriptures. For the intelligent
men, controlling the senses is the most essential qualification. It is the basis of
morality. Sex indulgence even with a legitimate wife must also be controlled,
and thereby family control will automatically follow. An intelligent man
abuses his great qualifications if he does not follow the Vedic way of life. This
means he must seriously make a study of the Vedic literatures, especially of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam and the Bhagavad-gétä. For learning Vedic knowledge, one
must approach a person who is cent percent engaged in devotional service. He
must not do things which are forbidden in the çästras. A person cannot be a
teacher if he drinks or smokes. In the modern system of education the
teacher’s academic qualification is taken into consideration without
evaluation of his moral life. Therefore, the result of education is misuse of high
intelligence in so many ways.
The kñatriya, the member of the administrative class, is especially advised to
give charity and not to accept charity in any circumstances. Modern
administrators raise subscriptions for some political functions, but never give
charity to the citizens in any state function. It is just the reverse in the
injunctions of the çästras. The administrative class must be well versed in the
çästras, but must not take to the profession of teachers. The administrators
should never pretend to become nonviolent and thereby go to hell. When Arjuna
wanted to become a nonviolent coward on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra, he
was severely chastised by Lord Kåñëa. The Lord degraded Arjuna at that time
to the status of an uncivilized man for his avowed acceptance of the cult of
nonviolence. The administrative class must be personally trained in military
education. Cowards should not be elevated to the presidential throne by dint
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
of numerical votes only. The monarchs were all chivalrous personalities, and
therefore monarchy should be maintained provided the monarch is regularly
trained in the occupational duties of a king. In fighting, the king or the president
should never return home without being hurt by the enemy. The so-called king of
today never visits the warfield. He is very much expert in artificially
encouraging the fighting strength in the hope of false national prestige. As
soon as the administrative class is turned into a gang of mercantile and laborer
men, the whole machinery of government becomes polluted.
The vaiçyas, the members of the mercantile communities, are especially
advised to protect the cows. Cow protection means increasing the milk
productions, namely curd and butter. Agriculture and distribution of the
foodstuff are the primary duties of the mercantile community backed by
education in Vedic knowledge and trained to give in charity. As the kñatriyas
were given charge of the protection of the citizens, vaiçyas were given the
charge of the protection of animals. Animals are never meant to be killed.
Killing of animals is a symptom of barbarian society. For a human being,
agricultural produce, fruits and milk are sufficient and compatible foodstuffs.
The human society should give more attention to animal protection. The
productive energy of the laborer is misused when he is occupied by industrial
enterprises. Industry of various types cannot produce the essential needs of
man, namely rice, wheat, grains, milk, fruits and vegetables. The production of
machines and machine tools increases the artificial living fashion of a class of
vested interests and keeps thousands of men in starvation and unrest. This
should not be the standard of civilization.
The çüdra class is less intelligent and should have no independence. They
are meant for rendering sincere service to the three higher sections of the
society. The çüdra class can attain all comforts of life simply by rendering
service to the higher classes. It is especially enjoined that a çüdra should never
bank money. As soon as the çüdras accumulate wealth, it will be misused for
sinful activities in wine, women and gambling. Wine, women and gambling
indicate that the population is degraded to less than çüdra quality. The higher
castes should always look after the maintenance of the çüdras, and they should
provide them with old and used garments. A çüdra should not leave his master
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
when the master is old and invalid, and the master should keep the servants
satisfied in all respects. The çüdras must first of all be satisfied by sumptuous
food and clothing before any sacrifice is performed. In this age so many
functions are held by spending millions, but the poor laborer is not sumptuously
fed or given charity, clothing, etc. The laborers are thus dissatisfied, and so they
make agitation.
The varëas are, so to speak, classifications of different occupations, and
äçrama-dharma is gradual progress on the path of self-realization. Both are
interrelated, and one is dependent on the other. The main purpose of
äçrama-dharma is to awaken knowledge and detachment. The brahmacäré
äçrama is the training ground for the prospective candidates. In this äçrama it
is instructed that this material world is not actually the home of the living
being. The conditioned souls under material bondage are prisoners of matter,
and therefore self-realization is the ultimate aim of life. The whole system of
äçrama-dharma is a means to detachment. One who fails to assimilate this
spirit of detachment is allowed to enter into family life with the same spirit of
detachment. Therefore, one who attains detachment may at once adopt the
fourth order, namely, renounced, and thus live on charity only, not to
accumulate wealth, but just to keep body and soul together for ultimate
realization. Household life is for one who is attached, and the vänaprastha and
sannyäsa orders of life are for those who are detached from material life. The
brahmacäré-äçrama is especially meant for training both the attached and
detached.
TEXT 27
daNaDaMaaRNa( raJaDaMaaRNa( Maae+aDaMaaRNa( iv>aaGaXa" )
ñqDaMaaRNa( >aGavÖMaaRNa( SaMaaSaVYaaSaYaaeGaTa" )) 27 ))
däna-dharmän räja-dharmän
mokña-dharmän vibhägaçaù
stré-dharmän bhagavad-dharmän
samäsa-vyäsa-yogataù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
däna-dharmän—the acts of charity; räja-dharmän—pragmatic activities of the
kings; mokña-dharmän—the acts for salvation; vibhägaçaù—by divisions;
stré-dharmän—duties of women; bhagavat-dharmän—the acts of the devotees;
samäsa—generally; vyäsa—explicitly; yogataù—by means of.
TRANSLATION
He then explained, by divisions, acts of charity, the pragmatic activities of a
king and activities for salvation. Then he described the duties of women and
devotees, both briefly and extensively.
PURPORT
To give charity is one of the householder’s main functions, and he should
be prepared to give in charity at least fifty percent of his hard-earned money.
A brahmacäré, or student, should perform sacrifices, a householder should give
charity, and a person in the retired life or in the renounced order should
practice penances and austerities. Those are the general functions of all the
äçramas, or orders of life on the path of self-realization. In the brahmacäré life
the training is sufficiently imparted so that one may understand that the world
as property belongs to the Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead. No one,
therefore, can claim to be the proprietor of anything in the world. Therefore,
in the life of a householder, which is a sort of license for sex enjoyment, one
must give in charity for the service of the Lord. Everyone’s energy is generated
or borrowed from the reservoir of energy of the Lord; therefore, the resultant
actions of such energy must be given to the Lord in the shape of
transcendental loving service for Him. As the rivers draw water from the sea
through the clouds and again go down to the sea, similarly our energy is
borrowed from the supreme source, the Lord’s energy, and it must return to the
Lord. That is the perfection of our energy. The Lord, therefore, in the
Bhagavad-gétä (9.27) says that whatever we do, whatever we undergo as
penance, whatever we sacrifice, whatever we eat or whatever we give in
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
charity must be offered to Him (the Lord). That is the way of utilizing our
borrowed energy. When our energy is utilized in that way, our energy is
purified from the contamination of material inebrieties, and thus we become
fit for our original natural life of service to the Lord.
Räja-dharma is a great science, unlike modern diplomacy for political
supremacy. The kings were trained systematically to become munificent and
not merely be tax collectors. They were trained to perform different sacrifices
only for the prosperity of the subjects. To lead the prajäs to the attainment of
salvation was a great duty of the king. The father, the spiritual master and the
king are not to become irresponsible in the matter of leading their subjects to
the path of ultimate liberation from birth, death, diseases and old age. When
these primary duties are properly discharged, there is no need of government
of the people, by the people. In modern days the people in general occupy the
administration by the strength of manipulated votes, but they are never
trained in the primary duties of the king, and that is also not possible for
everyone. Under the circumstances the untrained administrators play havoc to
make the subjects happy in all respects. On the other hand, these untrained
administrators gradually become rogues and thieves and increase the taxation
to finance a top-heavy administration that is useless for all purposes. Actually
the qualified brähmaëas are meant to give direction to the kings for proper
administration in terms of the scriptures like the Manu-saàhitä and
Dharma-çästras of Paräçara. A typical king is the ideal of the people in general,
and if the king is pious, religious, chivalrous and munificent, the citizens
generally follow him. Such a king is not a lazy sensuous person living at the
cost of the subjects, but alert always to kill thieves and dacoits. The pious kings
were not merciful to dacoits and thieves in the name of nonsensical ahiàsä
(nonviolence). The thieves and dacoits were punished in an exemplary way so
that in the future no one would dare commit such nuisances in an organized
form. Such thieves and dacoits were never meant for administration as they
are now.
The taxation law was simple. There was no force, no encroachment. The
king had a right to take one fourth of the production made by the subject. The
king had a right to claim a fourth of one’s allotted wealth. One would never
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
grudge parting with it because due to the pious king and religious harmony
there was enough natural wealth, namely grains, fruits, flowers, silk, cotton,
milk, jewels, minerals, etc., and therefore no one was materially unhappy. The
citizens were rich in agriculture and animal husbandry, and therefore they had
enough grains, fruits and milk without any artificial needs of soaps and toilets,
cinemas and bars.
The king had to see that the reserved energy of humanity was properly
utilized. Human energy is meant not exactly for fulfilling animal propensities,
but for self-realization. The whole government was specifically designed to
fulfill this particular purpose. As such, the king had to select properly the
cabinet ministers, but not on the strength of voting background. The
ministers, the military commanders and even the ordinary soldiers were all
selected by personal qualification, and the king had to supervise them properly
before they were appointed to their respective posts. The king was especially
vigilant to see that the tapasvés, or persons who sacrificed everything for
disseminating spiritual knowledge, were never disregarded. The king knew well
that the Supreme Personality of Godhead never tolerates any insult to His
unalloyed devotees. Such tapasvés were trusted leaders even of the rogues and
thieves, who would never disobey the orders of tapasvés. The king would give
special protection to illiterates, the helpless and widows of the state. Defense
measures were arranged previous to any attack by the enemies. The taxing
process was easy, and it was not meant for squandering, but was for
strengthening the reserve fund. The soldiers were recruited from all parts of
the world, and they were trained for special duties.
As far as salvation is concerned, one has to conquer the principles of lust,
anger, unlawful desires, avarice and bewilderment. To get freedom from anger,
one should learn how to forgive. To be free from unlawful desires one should
not make plans. By spiritual culture one is able to conquer sleep. By tolerance
only can one conquer desires and avarice. Disturbances from various diseases
can be avoided by regulated diets. By self-control one can be free from false
hopes, and money can be saved by avoiding undesirable association. By
practice of yoga one can control hunger, and worldliness can be avoided by
culturing the knowledge of impermanence. Dizziness can be conquered by
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
rising up, and false arguments can be conquered by factual ascertainment.
Talkativeness can be avoided by gravity and silence, and by prowess one can
avoid fearfulness. Perfect knowledge can be obtained by self-cultivation. One
must be free from lust, avarice, anger, dreaming, etc., to actually attain the
path of salvation.
As far as the women class are concerned, they are accepted as a power of
inspiration for men. As such, women are more powerful than men. Mighty
Julius Caesar was controlled by a Cleopatra. Such powerful women are
controlled by shyness. Therefore, shyness is important for women. Once this
control valve is loosened, women can create havoc in society by adultery.
Adultery means production of unwanted children known as varëa-saìkara,
who disturb the world.
The last item taught by Bhéñmadeva was the process of pleasing the Lord.
We are all eternal servants of the Lord, and when we forget this essential part
of our nature we are put into material conditions of life. The simple process of
pleasing the Lord (for the householders especially) is to install the Deity of the
Lord at home. By concentrating on the Deity, one may progressively go on
with the daily routine work. Worshiping the Deity at home, serving the
devotee, hearing the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, residing in a holy place and chanting
the holy name of the Lord are all inexpensive items by which one can please
the Lord. Thus the subject matter was explained by the grandfather to his
grandchildren.
TEXT 28
DaMaaRQaRk-aMaMaae+aa&ê SahaePaaYaaNa( YaQaa MauNae )
NaaNaa:YaaNaeiTahaSaezu v<aRYaaMaaSa TatvivTa( )) 28 ))
dharmärtha-käma-mokñäàç ca
sahopäyän yathä mune
nänäkhyänetihäseñu
varëayäm äsa tattvavit
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
dharma—occupational duties; artha—economic development;
käma—fulfillment of desires; mokñän—ultimate salvation; ca—and;
saha—along with; upäyän—means; yathä—as it is; mune—O sage;
nänä—various; äkhyäna—by recitation of historical narrations; itihäseñu—in
the histories; varëayäm äsa—described; tattva-vit—one who knows the truth.
TRANSLATION
Then he described the occupational duties of different orders and statuses of
life, citing instances from history, for he was himself well acquainted with the
truth.
PURPORT
Incidents mentioned in the Vedic literatures, such as the Puräëas,
Mahäbhärata and Rämäyaëa are factual historical narrations that took place
sometime in the past, although not in any chronological order. Such historical
facts, being instructive for ordinary men, were assorted without chronological
reference. Besides that, they happen on different planets, nay, in different
universes, and thus the description of the narrations is sometimes measured by
three dimensions. We are simply concerned with the instructive lessons of
such incidents, even though they are not in order by our limited range of
understanding. Bhéñmadeva described such narrations before Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira in reply to his different questions.
TEXT 29
DaMa| Pa[vdTaSTaSYa Sa k-al/" Pa[TYauPaiSQaTa" )
Yaae YaaeiGaNaX^NdMa*TYaaevaRiH^TaSTaUtaraYa<a" )) 29 ))
dharmaà pravadatas tasya
sa kälaù pratyupasthitaù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
yo yoginaç chanda-måtyor
väïchitas tüttaräyaëaù
SYNONYMS
dharmam—occupational duties; pravadataù—while describing; tasya—his;
saù—that; kälaù—time; pratyupasthitaù—exactly appeared; yaù—that is;
yoginaù—for the mystics; chanda-måtyoù—of one who dies according to one’s
own selection of time; väïchitaù—is desired by; tu—but; uttaräyaëaù—the
period when the sun runs on the northern horizon.
TRANSLATION
While Bhéñmadeva was describing occupational duties, the sun’s course ran
into the northern hemisphere. This period is desired by mystics who die at their
will.
PURPORT
The perfect yogés or mystics can leave the material body at their own sweet
will at a suitable time and go to a suitable planet desired by them. In the
Bhagavad-gétä (8.24) it is said that self-realized souls who have exactly
identified themselves with the interest of the Supreme Lord can generally
leave the material body during the time of the fire-god’s effulgence and when
the sun is in the northern horizon, and thus achieve the transcendental sky. In
the Vedas these times are considered auspicious for quitting the body, and they
are taken advantage of by the expert mystics who have perfected the system.
Perfection of yoga means attainment of such supermental states as to be able to
leave the material body as desired. Yogés can also reach any planet within no
time without a material vehicle. The yogés can reach the highest planetary
system within a very short time, and this is impossible for the materialist. Even
attempting to reach the highest planet will take millions of years at a speed of
millions of miles per hour. This is a different science, and Bhéñmadeva knew
well how to utilize it. He was just waiting for the suitable moment to quit his
material body, and the golden opportunity arrived when he was instructing his
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
noble grandsons, the Päëòavas. He thus prepared himself to quit his body
before the exalted Lord Çré Kåñëa, the pious Päëòavas and the great sages
headed by Bhagavän Vyäsa, etc., all great souls.
TEXT 30
TadaePaSa&ôTYa iGar" Sahó<aq‚
ivRMau¢-Sa®& MaNa AaidPaUåze )
k*-Z<ae l/SaTPaqTaPa$e= cTau>auRJae
Paur" iSQaTae_Maqil/Tad*GVYaDaarYaTa( )) 30 ))
tadopasaàhåtya giraù sahasraëér
vimukta-saìgaà mana ädi-püruñe
kåñëe lasat-péta-paöe catur-bhuje
puraù sthite ’mélita-dåg vyadhärayat
SYNONYMS
tadä—at that time; upasaàhåtya—withdrawing; giraù—speech;
sahasraëéù—Bhéñmadeva (who was expert in thousands of sciences and arts);
vimukta-saìgam—completely freed from everything else; manaù—mind;
ädi-püruñe—unto the original Personality of Godhead; kåñëe—unto Kåñëa;
lasat-péta-paöe—decorated with yellow garments; catur-bhuje—unto the
four-handed original Näräyaëa; puraù—just before; sthite—standing;
amélita—widespread; dåk—vision; vyadhärayat—fixed.
TRANSLATION
Thereupon that man who spoke on different subjects with thousands of
meanings and who fought on thousands of battlefields and protected thousands
of men, stopped speaking and, being completely freed from all bondage,
withdrew his mind from everything else and fixed his wide-open eyes upon the
original Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, who stood before him, four-handed,
dressed in yellow garments that glittered and shined.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
In the momentous hour of leaving his material body, Bhéñmadeva set the
glorious example concerning the important function of the human form of life.
The subject matter which attracts the dying man becomes the beginning of his next
life. Therefore, if one is absorbed in thoughts of the Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa,
he is sure to go back to Godhead without any doubt. This is confirmed in the
Bhagavad-gétä (8.5–15):
5: And whoever, at the time of death, quits his body remembering Me
alone, at once attains My nature. Of this there is no doubt.
6: Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body, that
state he will attain without fail.
7: Therefore, Arjuna, you should always think of Me in the form of Kåñëa
and at the same time carry out your prescribed duty of fighting. With your
activities dedicated to Me and your mind and intelligence fixed on Me, you
will attain Me without doubt.
8: He who meditates on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, his mind
constantly engaged in remembering Me, undeviated from the path, he, O
Pärtha [Arjuna], is sure to reach Me.
9: One should meditate upon the Supreme Person as the one who knows
everything, as He who is the oldest, who is the controller, who is smaller than
the smallest, who is the maintainer of everything, who is beyond all material
conception, who is inconceivable, and who is always a person. He is luminous
like the sun and, being transcendental, is beyond this material nature.
10: One who, at the time of death, fixes his life air between the eyebrows
and in full devotion engages himself in remembering the Supreme Lord will
certainly attain to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
11: Persons learned in the Vedas, who utter oàkära and who are great sages
in the renounced order, enter into Brahman. Desiring such perfection, one
practices celibacy. I shall now explain to you this process by which one may
attain salvation.
12: The yogic situation is that of detachment from all sensual engagements.
Closing all the doors of the senses and fixing the mind on the heart and the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
life air at the top of the head, one establishes himself in yoga.
13: After being situated in this yoga practice and vibrating the sacred
syllable oà, the supreme combination of letters, if one thinks of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and quits his body, he will certainly reach the spiritual
planets.
14: For one who remembers Me without deviation, I am easy to obtain, O
son of Påthä, because of his constant engagement in devotional service.
15: After attaining Me, the great souls, who are yogés in devotion, never
return to this temporary world, which is full of miseries, because they have
attained the highest perfection.
Çré Bhéñmadeva attained the perfection of quitting his body at will and was
fortunate enough to have Lord Kåñëa, the object of his attention, personally
present at the time of death. He therefore fixed his open eyes upon Him. He
wanted to see Çré Kåñëa for a long time out of his spontaneous love for Him.
Because he was a pure devotee, he had very little to do with the detailed
performance of yogic principles. Simple bhakti-yoga is enough to bring about
perfection. Therefore, the ardent desire of Bhéñmadeva was to see the person of
Lord Kåñëa, the most lovable object, and by the grace of the Lord, Çré
Bhéñmadeva had this opportunity at the last stage of his breathing.
TEXT 31
ivéuÖYaa Daar<aYaa hTaaéu>a‚
STadq+aYaEvaéu GaTaaYauDaé[Ma" )
iNav*taSaveRiNd]Yav*itaiv>a]Ma‚
STauíav JaNYa& ivSa*JaÅNaadRNaMa( )) 31 ))
viçuddhayä dhäraëayä hatäçubhas
tad-ékñayaiväçu gatä-yudha-çramaù
nivåtta-sarvendriya-våtti-vibhramas
tuñöäva janyaà visåjaï janärdanam
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
viçuddhayä—by purified; dhäraëayä—meditation; hata-açubhaù—one who has
minimized the inauspicious qualities of material existence; tat—Him;
ékñayä—by looking on; eva—simply; äçu—immediately; gatä—having gone
away; yudha—from the arrows; çramaù—fatigue; nivåtta—being stopped;
sarva—all; indriya—senses; våtti—activities; vibhramaù—being widely
engaged; tuñöäva—he prayed; janyam—the material tabernacle; visåjan—while
quitting; janärdanam—to the controller of the living beings.
TRANSLATION
By pure meditation, looking at Lord Çré Kåñëa, he at once was freed from all
material inauspiciousness and was relieved of all bodily pains caused by the
arrow wounds. Thus all the external activities of his senses at once stopped, and
he prayed transcendentally to the controller of all living beings while quitting
his material body.
PURPORT
The material body is a gift of the material energy, technically called
illusion. Identification with the material body is due to forgetfulness of our
eternal relationship with the Lord. For a pure devotee of the Lord like
Bhéñmadeva, this illusion was at once removed as soon as the Lord arrived.
Lord Kåñëa is like the sun, and the illusory, external material energy is like
darkness. In the presence of the sun there is no possibility that darkness can
stand. Therefore, just on the arrival of Lord Kåñëa, all material contamination
was completely removed, and Bhéñmadeva was thus able to be transcendentally
situated by stopping the activities of the impure senses in collaboration with
matter. The soul is originally pure and so also the senses. By material
contamination the senses assume the role of imperfection and impurity. By
revival of contact with the Supreme Pure, Lord Kåñëa, the senses again
become freed from material contaminations. Bhéñmadeva attained all these
transcendental conditions prior to his leaving the material body because of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
presence of the Lord. The Lord is the controller and benefactor of all living
beings. That is the verdict of all Vedas. He is the supreme eternity and living
entity amongst all the eternal living beings.*(1) And He alone provides all
necessities for all kinds of living beings. Thus He provided all facilities to fulfill
the transcendental desires of His great devotee Çré Bhéñmadeva, who began to
pray as follows.
TEXT 32
é[q>aqZMa ovac
wiTa MaiTaåPak-iLPaTaa ivTa*Z<aa
>aGaviTa SaaTvTaPau®ve iv>aUiMan )
SvSau%MauPaGaTae KviciÜhTau|
Pa[k*-iTaMauPaeYauiz YaÙvPa[vah" )) 32 ))
çré-bhéñma uväca
iti matir upakalpitä vitåñëä
bhagavati sätvata-puìgave vibhümni
sva-sukham upagate kvacid vihartuà
prakåtim upeyuñi yad-bhava-pravähaù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhéñmaù uväca—Çré Bhéñmadeva said; iti—thus; matiù—thinking, feeling
and willing; upakalpitä—invested; vitåñëä—freed from all sense desires;
bhagavati—unto the Personality of Godhead; sätvata-puìgave—unto the
leader of the devotees; vibhümni—unto the great;
sva-sukham—self-satisfaction; upagate—unto He who has attained it;
kvacit—sometimes; vihartum—out of transcendental pleasure; prakåtim—in
the material world; upeyuñi—do accept it; yat-bhava—from whom the creation;
pravähaù—is made and annihilated.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Bhéñmadeva said: Let me now invest my thinking, feeling and willing, which
were so long engaged in different subjects and occupational duties, in the
all-powerful Lord Çré Kåñëa. He is always self-satisfied, but sometimes, being
the leader of the devotees, He enjoys transcendental pleasure by descending on
the material world, although from Him only the material world is created.
PURPORT
Because Bhéñmadeva was a statesman, the head of the Kuru dynasty, a great
general and a leader of kñatriyas, his mind was strewn over so many subjects,
and his thinking, feeling and willing were engaged in different matters. Now,
in order to achieve pure devotional service, he wanted to invest all powers of
thinking, feeling and willing entirely in the Supreme Being, Lord Kåñëa. He is
described herein as the leader of the devotees and all-powerful. Although Lord
Kåñëa is the original Personality of Godhead, He Himself descends on earth to
bestow upon His pure devotees the boon of devotional service. He descends
sometimes as Lord Kåñëa as He is, and sometimes as Lord Caitanya. Both are
leaders of the pure devotees. Pure devotees of the Lord have no desire other
than the service of the Lord, and therefore they are called sätvata. The Lord is
the chief amongst such sätvatas. Bhéñmadeva, therefore, had no other desires.
Unless one is purified from all sorts of material desires, the Lord does not
become one’s leader. Desires cannot be wiped out, but they have only to be
purified. It is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä by the Lord Himself that He
gives His instruction from within the heart of a pure devotee who is constantly
engaged in the service of the Lord. Such instruction is given not for any
material purpose but only for going back home, back to Godhead (Bg. 10.10).
For the ordinary man who wants to lord it over material nature, the Lord not
only sanctions and becomes a witness of activities, but He never gives the
nondevotee instructions for going back to Godhead. That is the difference in
dealings by the Lord with different living beings, both the devotee and the
nondevotee. He is leader of all the living beings, as the king of the state rules
both the prisoners and the free citizens. But His dealings are different in terms
of devotee and nondevotee. Nondevotees never care to take any instruction
from the Lord, and therefore the Lord is silent in their case, although He
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
witnesses all their activities and awards them the necessary results, good or
bad. The devotees are above this material goodness and badness. They are
progressive on the path of transcendence, and therefore they have no desire
for anything material. The devotee also knows Çré Kåñëa as the original
Näräyaëa because Lord Çré Kåñëa, by His plenary portion, appears as the
Käraëodakaçäyé Viñëu, the original source of all material creation. The Lord
also desires the association of His pure devotees, and for them only the Lord
descends on the earth and enlivens them. The Lord appears out of His own
will. He is not forced by the conditions of material nature. He is therefore
described here as the vibhu, or the almighty, for He is never conditioned by the
laws of material nature.
TEXT 33
i}a>auvNak-MaNa& TaMaal/v<a|
rivk-rGaaErvraMbr& dDaaNae )
vPaurl/k-ku-l/av*TaaNaNaaBJa&
ivJaYaSa%e riTarSTau Mae_NavÛa )) 33 ))
tri-bhuvana-kamanaà tamäla-varëaà
ravi-kara-gaura-varämbaraà dadhäne
vapur alaka-kulävåtänanäbjaà
vijaya-sakhe ratir astu me ’navadyä
SYNONYMS
tri-bhuvana—three statuses of planetary systems; kamanam—the most
desirable; tamäla-varëam—bluish like the tamäla tree; ravi-kara—sun rays;
gaura—golden color; varämbaram—glittering dress; dadhäne—one who wears;
vapuù—body; alaka-kula-ävåta—covered with paintings of sandalwood pulp;
anana-abjam—face like a lotus; vijaya-sakhe—unto the friend of Arjuna; ratiù
astu—may attraction be reposed upon Him; me—my; anavadyä—without
desire for fruitive results.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
Çré Kåñëa is the intimate friend of Arjuna. He has appeared on this earth in
His transcendental body, which resembles the bluish color of the tamäla tree.
His body attracts everyone in the three planetary systems [upper, middle and
lower]. May His glittering yellow dress and His lotus face, covered with
paintings of sandalwood pulp, be the object of my attraction, and may I not
desire fruitive results.
PURPORT
When Çré Kåñëa by His own internal pleasure appears on earth, He does so
by the agency of His internal potency. The attractive features of His
transcendental body are desired in all the three worlds, namely the upper,
middle and lower planetary systems. Nowhere in the universe are there such
beautiful bodily features as those of Lord Kåñëa. Therefore His transcendental
body has nothing to do with anything materially created. Arjuna is described
here as the conqueror, and Kåñëa is described as his intimate friend.
Bhéñmadeva, on his bed of arrows after the Battle of Kurukñetra, is
remembering the particular dress of Lord Kåñëa which He put on as the driver
of Arjuna’s chariot. While fighting was going on between Arjuna and Bhéñma,
Bhéñma’s attraction was drawn by the glittering dress of Kåñëa, and indirectly
he admired his so-called enemy Arjuna for possessing the Lord as his friend.
Arjuna was always a conqueror because the Lord was his friend. Bhéñmadeva
takes this opportunity to address the Lord as vijaya-sakhe (friend of Arjuna)
because the Lord is pleased when He is addressed conjointly with His devotees,
who are related with Him in different transcendental humors. While Kåñëa
was the charioteer of Arjuna, sun rays glittered on the dress of the Lord, and
the beautiful hue created by the reflection of such rays was never forgotten by
Bhéñmadeva. As a great fighter he was relishing the relation of Kåñëa in the
chivalrous humor. Transcendental relation with the Lord in any one of the
different rasas (humors) is relishable by the respective devotees in the highest
ecstasy. Less intelligent mundaners who want to make a show of being
transcendentally related with the Lord artificially jump at once to the relation
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
of conjugal love, imitating the damsels of Vrajadhäma. Such a cheap relation
with the Lord exhibits only the base mentality of the mundaner because one
who has relished conjugal humor with the Lord cannot be attached to worldly
conjugal rasa, which is condemned even by mundane ethics. The eternal
relation of a particular soul with the Lord is evolved. A genuine relation of the
living being with the Supreme Lord can take any form out of the five principal
rasas, and it does not make any difference in transcendental degree to the
genuine devotee. Bhéñmadeva is a concrete example of this, and it should be
carefully observed how the great general is transcendentally related with the
Lord.
TEXT 34
YauiDa TaurGarJaaeivDaUMa]ivZvk(-‚
k-clu/il/Taé[MavaYaRl/x(k*-TaaSYae )
MaMa iNaiXaTaXarEivRi>aÛMaaNa‚
Tvic ivl/SaTk-vce_STau k*-Z<a AaTMaa )) 34 ))
yudhi turaga-rajo-vidhümra-viñvakkaca-
lulita-çramaväry-alaìkåtäsye
mama niçita-çarair vibhidyamänatvaci
vilasat-kavace ’stu kåñëa ätmä
SYNONYMS
yudhi—on the battlefield; turaga—horses; rajaù—dust; vidhümra—turned an
ashen color; viñvak—waving; kaca—hair; lulita—scattered;
çramaväri—perspiration; alaìkåta—decorated with; äsye—unto the face;
mama—my; niçita—sharp; çaraiù—by the arrows; vibhidyamäna—pierced by;
tvaci—in the skin; vilasat—enjoying pleasure; kavace—protecting armor;
astu—let there be; kåñëe—unto Çré Kåñëa; ätmä—mind.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
On the battlefield [where Çré Kåñëa attended Arjuna out of friendship], the
flowing hair of Lord Kåñëa turned ashen due to the dust raised by the hoofs of
the horses. And because of His labor, beads of sweat wetted His face. All these
decorations, intensified by the wounds dealt by my sharp arrows, were enjoyed
by Him. Let my mind thus go unto Çré Kåñëa.
PURPORT
The Lord is the absolute form of eternity, bliss and knowledge. As such,
transcendental loving service to the Lord in one of the five principal relations,
namely çänta, däsya, sakhya, vätsalya and mädhurya, i.e., neutrality,
servitorship, fraternity, filial affection and conjugal love, is graciously accepted
by the Lord when offered to the Lord in genuine love and affection. Çré
Bhéñmadeva is a great devotee of the Lord in the relation of servitorship. Thus
his throwing of sharp arrows at the transcendental body of the Lord is as good
as the worship of another devotee who throws soft roses upon Him.
It appears that Bhéñmadeva is repenting the actions he committed against
the person of the Lord. But factually the Lord’s body was not at all pained, due
to His transcendental existence. His body is not matter. Both He Himself and
His body are complete spiritual identity. Spirit is never pierced, burnt, dried,
moistened, etc. This is vividly explained in the Bhagavad-gétä. So also it is
stated in the Skanda Puräëa. It is said there that spirit is always
uncontaminated and indestructible. It cannot be distressed, nor can it be dried
up. When Lord Viñëu in His incarnation appears before us, He seems to be like
one of the conditioned souls, materially encaged, just to bewilder the asuras, or
the nonbelievers, who are always alert to kill the Lord, even from the very
beginning of His appearance. Kaàsa wanted to kill Kåñëa, and Rävaëa wanted
to kill Räma, because foolishly they were unaware of the fact that the Lord is
never killed, for the spirit is never annihilated.
Therefore Bhéñmadeva’s piercing of the body of Lord Kåñëa is a sort of
bewildering problem for the nondevotee atheist, but those who are devotees, or
liberated souls, are not bewildered.
Bhéñmadeva appreciated the all-merciful attitude of the Lord because He
did not leave Arjuna alone, although He was disturbed by the sharpened
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
arrows of Bhéñmadeva, nor was He reluctant to come before Bhéñma’s deathbed,
even though He was ill-treated by him on the battlefield. Bhéñma’s repentance
and the Lord’s merciful attitude are both unique in this picture.
Çré Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, a great äcärya and devotee in the
humor of conjugal love with the Lord, remarks very saliently in this regard. He
says that the wounds created on the body of the Lord by the sharpened arrows
of Bhéñmadeva were as pleasing to the Lord as the biting of a fiancee who bites
the body of the Lord directed by a strong sense of sex desire. Such biting by the
opposite sex is never taken as a sign of enmity, even if there is a wound on the
body. Therefore, the fighting as an exchange of transcendental pleasure
between the Lord and His pure devotee, Çré Bhéñmadeva, was not at all
mundane. Besides that, since the Lord’s body and the Lord are identical, there
was no possibility of wounds in the absolute body. The apparent wounds
caused by the sharpened arrows are misleading to the common man, but one
who has a little absolute knowledge can understand the transcendental
exchange in the chivalrous relation. The Lord was perfectly happy with the
wounds caused by the sharpened arrows of Bhéñmadeva. The word
vibhidyamäna is significant because the Lord’s skin is not different from the
Lord. Because our skin is different from our soul, in our case the word
vibhidyamäna, or being bruised and cut, would have been quite suitable.
Transcendental bliss is of different varieties, and the variety of activities in
the mundane world is but a perverted reflection of transcendental bliss.
Because everything in the mundane world is qualitatively mundane, it is full of
inebrieties, whereas in the absolute realm, because everything is of the same
absolute nature, there are varieties of enjoyment without inebriety. The Lord
enjoyed the wounds created by His great devotee Bhéñmadeva, and because
Bhéñmadeva is a devotee in the chivalrous relation, he fixes up his mind on
Kåñëa in that wounded condition.
TEXT 35
SaPaid Sai%vcae iNaXaMYa MaDYae
iNaJaParYaaebRl/Yaae rQa& iNaveXYa )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
iSQaTaviTa ParSaEiNak-aYaur+<aa
ôTaviTa PaaQaRSa%e riTaMaRMaaSTau )) 35 ))
sapadi sakhi-vaco niçamya madhye
nija-parayor balayo rathaà niveçya
sthitavati para-sainikäyur akñëä
håtavati pärtha-sakhe ratir mamästu
SYNONYMS
sapadi—on the battlefield; sakhi-vacaù—command of the friend;
niçamya—after hearing; madhye—in the midst; nija—His own; parayoù—and
the opposite party; balayoù—strength; ratham—chariot; niveçya—having
entered; sthitavati—while staying there; para-sainika—of the soldiers on the
opposite side; äyuù—duration of life; akñëä—by looking over; håtavati—act of
diminishing; pärtha—of Arjuna, son of Påthä (Kunté); sakhe—unto the friend;
ratiù—intimate relation; mama—my; astu—let there be.
TRANSLATION
In obedience to the command of His friend, Lord Çré Kåñëa entered the
arena of the Battlefield of Kurukñetra between the soldiers of Arjuna and
Duryodhana, and while there He shortened the life spans of the opposite party
by His merciful glance. This was done simply by His looking at the enemy. Let
my mind be fixed upon that Kåñëa.
PURPORT
In the Bhagavad-gétä (1.21–25) Arjuna ordered the infallible Lord Çré Kåñëa
to place his chariot between the phalanxes of the soldiers. He asked Him to
stay there until he had finished observing the enemies he had to face in the
battle. When the Lord was so asked, He at once did so, just like an order
carrier. And the Lord pointed out all the important men on the opposite side,
saying, “Here is Bhéñma, here is Droëa,” and so on. The Lord, being the
supreme living being, is never the order supplier or order carrier of anyone,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
whoever he may be. But out of His causeless mercy and affection for His pure
devotees, sometimes He carries out the order of the devotee like an awaiting
servant. By executing the order of a devotee, the Lord becomes pleased, as a
father is pleased to carry out the order of his small child. This is possible only
out of pure transcendental love between the Lord and His devotees, and
Bhéñmadeva was quite aware of this fact. He therefore addressed the Lord as
the friend of Arjuna.
The Lord diminished the duration of life of the opposite party by His
merciful glance. It is said that all the fighters who assembled on the Battlefield
of Kurukñetra attained salvation by personally seeing the Lord at the time of
death. Therefore, His diminishing the duration of life of Arjuna’s enemy does
not mean that He was partial to the cause of Arjuna. Factually He was
merciful to the opposite party because they would not have attained salvation
by dying at home in the ordinary course of life. Here was a chance to see the
Lord at the time of death and thus attain salvation from material life.
Therefore, the Lord is all good, and whatever He does is for everyone’s good.
Apparently it was for the victory of Arjuna, His intimate friend, but factually
it was for the good of Arjuna’s enemies. Such are the transcendental activities
of the Lord, and whoever understands this also gets salvation after quitting
this material body. The Lord does no wrong in any circumstance because He is
absolute, all good at all times.
TEXT 36
VYavihTaPa*TaNaaMau%& iNarq+Ya
SvJaNavDaaiÜMau%SYa daezbuÖya )
ku-MaiTaMahrdaTMaivÛYaa Ya‚
Xcr<ariTa" ParMaSYa TaSYa Mae_STau )) 36 ))
vyavahita-påtanä-mukhaà nirékñya
sva-jana-vadhäd vimukhasya doña-buddhyä
kumatim aharad ätma-vidyayä yaç
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
caraëa-ratiù paramasya tasya me ’stu
SYNONYMS
vyavahita—standing at a distance; påtanä—soldiers; mukham—faces;
nirékñya—by looking upon; sva-jana—kinsmen; vadhät—from the act of
killing; vimukhasya—one who is reluctant; doña-buddhyä—by polluted
intelligence; kumatim—poor fund of knowledge; aharat—eradicated;
ätma-vidyayä—by transcendental knowledge; yaù—He who; caraëa—to the
feet; ratiù—attraction; paramasya—of the Supreme; tasya—for Him; me—my;
astu—let there be.
TRANSLATION
When Arjuna was seemingly polluted by ignorance upon observing the
soldiers and commanders before him on the battlefield, the Lord eradicated his
ignorance by delivering transcendental knowledge. May His lotus feet always
remain the object of my attraction.
PURPORT
The kings and the commanders were to stand in the front of the fighting
soldiers. That was the system of actual fighting. The kings and commanders
were not so-called presidents or ministers of defense as they are today. They
would not stay home while the poor soldiers or mercenaries were fighting face
to face. This may be the regulation of modern democracy, but when actual
monarchy was prevailing, the monarchs were not cowards elected without
consideration of qualification. As it was evident from the Battlefield of
Kurukñetra, all the executive heads of both parties, like Droëa, Bhéñma, Arjuna
and Duryodhana, were not sleeping; all of them were actual participants in the
fighting, which was selected to be executed at a place away from the civil
residential quarters. This means that the innocent citizens were immune from
all effects of fighting between the rival royal parties. The citizens had no
business in seeing what was going to happen during such fighting. They were
to pay one fourth of their income to the ruler, whether he be Arjuna or
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Duryodhana. All the commanders of the parties on the Battlefield of
Kurukñetra were standing face to face, and Arjuna saw them with great
compassion and lamented that he was to kill his kinsmen on the battlefield for
the sake of the empire. He was not at all afraid of the giant military phalanx
presented by Duryodhana, but as a merciful devotee of the Lord, renunciation
of worldly things was natural for him, and thus he decided not to fight for
worldly possessions. But this was due to a poor fund of knowledge, and
therefore it is said here that his intelligence became polluted. His intelligence
could not be polluted at any time because he was a devotee and constant
companion of the Lord, as is clear in the Fourth Chapter of the Bhagavad-gétä.
Apparently Arjuna’s intelligence became polluted because otherwise there
would not have been a chance to deliver the teachings of Bhagavad-gétä for the
good of all polluted conditioned souls engaged in material bondage by the
conception of the false material body. The Bhagavad-gétä was delivered to the
conditioned souls of the world to deliver them from the wrong conception of
identifying the body with the soul and to reestablish the soul’s eternal relation
with the Supreme Lord. Ätma-vidyä, or transcendental knowledge of Himself,
was primarily spoken by the Lord for the benefit of all concerned in all parts of
the universe.
TEXT 37
SviNaGaMaMaPahaYa MaTPa[iTaja‚
Ma*TaMaiDak-TauRMavPlu/Taae rQaSQa" )
Da*TarQacr<aae_>YaYaaÀl/d(Gau‚
hRirirv hNTauiMa>a& GaTaaetarqYa" )) 37 ))
sva-nigamam apahäya mat-pratijïäm
åtam adhikartum avapluto rathasthaù
dhåta-ratha-caraëo ’bhyayäc caladgur
harir iva hantum ibhaà gatottaréyaù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
sva-nigamam—own truthfulness; apahäya—for nullifying; mat-pratijïäm—my
own promise; åtam—factual; adhi—more; kartum—for doing it;
avaplutaù—getting down; ratha-sthaù—from the chariot; dhåta—taking up;
ratha—chariot; caraëaù—wheel; abhyayät—went hurriedly;
caladguù—trampling the earth; hariù—lion; iva—like; hantum—to kill;
ibham—elephant; gata—leaving aside; uttaréyaù—covering cloth.
TRANSLATION
Fulfilling my desire and sacrificing His own promise, He got down from the
chariot, took up its wheel, and ran towards me hurriedly, just as a lion goes to
kill an elephant. He even dropped His outer garment on the way.
PURPORT
The Battle of Kurukñetra was fought on military principles but at the same
time in a sporting spirit, like a friend’s fight with another friend. Duryodhana
criticized Bhéñmadeva, alleging that he was reluctant to kill Arjuna because of
paternal affection. A kñatriya cannot tolerate insults on the principle of
fighting. Bhéñmadeva therefore promised that the next day he would kill all
five Päëòavas with special weapons made for the purpose. Duryodhana was
satisfied, and he kept the arrows with him to be delivered the next day during
the fight. By tricks Arjuna took the arrows from Duryodhana, and Bhéñmadeva
could understand that this was the trick of Lord Kåñëa. So he took a vow that
the next day Kåñëa would have to take up weapons Himself, otherwise His
friend Arjuna would die. In the next day’s fighting Bhéñmadeva fought so
violently that both Arjuna and Kåñëa were in trouble. Arjuna was almost
defeated; the situation was so tense that he was about to be killed by
Bhéñmadeva the very next moment. At that time Lord Kåñëa wanted to please
His devotee, Bhéñma, by keeping Bhéñma’s promise, which was more important
than His own. Seemingly He broke His own promise. He promised before the
beginning of the Battle of Kurukñetra that He would remain without weapons
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
and would not use His strength for either of the parties. But to protect Arjuna
He got down from the chariot, took up the wheel of the chariot and hurriedly
rushed at Bhéñmadeva in an angry mood, as a lion goes to kill an elephant. He
dropped His covering cloth on the way, and out of great anger He did not
know that He had dropped it. Bhéñmadeva at once gave up his weapons and
stood to be killed by Kåñëa, his beloved Lord. The fighting of the day was thus
ended at that very moment, and Arjuna was saved. Of course there was no
possibility of Arjuna’s death because the Lord Himself was on the chariot, but
because Bhéñmadeva wanted to see Lord Kåñëa take up some weapon to save
His friend, the Lord created this situation, making Arjuna’s death imminent.
He stood before Bhéñmadeva to show him that his promise was fulfilled and
that He had taken up the wheel.
TEXT 38
iXaTaiviXa%hTaae ivXaq<aRd&Xa"
+aTaJaPairPlu/Ta AaTaTaaiYaNaae Mae )
Pa[Sa>aMai>aSaSaar MaÜDaaQa|
Sa >avTau Mae >aGavaNa( GaiTaMauRku-Nd" )) 38 ))
çita-viçikha-hato viçérëa-daàçaù
kñataja-paripluta ätatäyino me
prasabham abhisasära mad-vadhärthaà
sa bhavatu me bhagavän gatir mukundaù
SYNONYMS
çita—sharp; viçikha—arrows; hataù—wounded by; viçérëa-daàçaù—scattered
shield; kñataja—by wounds; pariplutaù—smeared with blood; ätatäyinaù—the
great aggressor; me—my; prasabham—in an angry mood; abhisasära—began to
move on; mat-vadha-artham—for the purpose of killing me; saù—He;
bhavatu—may become; me—my; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead;
gatiù—destination; mukundaù—who awards salvation.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
May He, Lord Çré Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead, who awards salvation,
be my ultimate destination. On the battlefield He charged me, as if angry
because of the wounds dealt by my sharp arrows. His shield was scattered, and
His body was smeared with blood due to the wounds.
PURPORT
The dealings of Lord Kåñëa and Bhéñmadeva on the Battlefield of
Kurukñetra are interesting because the activities of Lord Çré Kåñëa appeared to
be partial to Arjuna and at enmity with Bhéñmadeva; but factually all this was
especially meant to show special favor to Bhéñmadeva, a great devotee of the
Lord. The astounding feature of such dealings is that a devotee can please the Lord
by playing the part of an enemy. The Lord, being absolute, can accept service
from His pure devotee even in the garb of an enemy. The Supreme Lord
cannot have any enemy, nor can a so-called enemy harm Him because He is
ajita, or unconquerable. But still He takes pleasure when His pure devotee
beats Him like an enemy or rebukes Him from a superior position, although no
one can be superior to the Lord. These are some of the transcendental
reciprocatory dealings of the devotee with the Lord. And those who have no
information of pure devotional service cannot penetrate into the mystery of
such dealings. Bhéñmadeva played the part of a valiant warrior, and he
purposely pierced the body of the Lord so that to the common eyes it appeared
that the Lord was wounded, but factually all this was to bewilder the
nondevotees. The all-spiritual body cannot be wounded, and a devotee cannot
become the enemy of the Lord. Had it been so, Bhéñmadeva would not have
desired to have the very same Lord as the ultimate destination of his life. Had
Bhéñmadeva been an enemy of the Lord, Lord Kåñëa could have annihilated
him without even moving. There was no need to come before Bhéñmadeva with
blood and wounds. But He did so because the warrior devotee wanted to see
the transcendental beauty of the Lord decorated with wounds created by a
pure devotee. This is the way of exchanging transcendental rasa, or relations
between the Lord and the servitor. By such dealings both the Lord and the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
devotee become glorified in their respective positions. The Lord was so angry
that Arjuna checked Him when He was moving towards Bhéñmadeva, but in
spite of Arjuna’s checking, He proceeded towards Bhéñmadeva as a lover goes
to a lover, without caring for hindrances. Apparently His determination was to
kill Bhéñmadeva, but factually it was to please him as a great devotee of the
Lord. The Lord is undoubtedly the deliverer of all conditioned souls. The
impersonalists desire salvation from Him, and He always awards them
according to their aspiration, but here Bhéñmadeva aspires to see the Lord in
His personal feature. All pure devotees aspire for this.
TEXT 39
ivJaYarQaku-$u=Mb AataTaae}ae
Da*TahYariXMaiNa TaiC^\Yae+a<aqYae )
>aGaviTa riTarSTau Mae MauMaUzaeR‚
YaRiMah iNarq+Ya hTaa GaTaa" SvæPaMa( )) 39 ))
vijaya-ratha-kuöumba ätta-totre
dhåta-haya-raçmini tac-chriyekñaëéye
bhagavati ratir astu me mumürñor
yam iha nirékñya hatä gatäù sva-rüpam
SYNONYMS
vijaya—Arjuna; ratha—chariot; kuöumbe—the object of protection at all risk;
ätta-totre—with a whip in the right hand; dhåta-haya—controlling the horses;
raçmini—ropes; tat-çriyä—beautifully standing; ékñaëéye—to look at;
bhagavati—unto the Personality of Godhead; ratiù astu—let my attraction be;
me—my; mumürñoù—one who is about to die; yam—upon whom; iha—in this
world; nirékñya—by looking; hatäù—those who died; gatäù—attained;
sva-rüpam—original form.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
At the moment of death, let my ultimate attraction be to Çré Kåñëa, the
Personality of Godhead. I concentrate my mind upon the chariot driver of
Arjuna who stood with a whip in His right hand and a bridle rope in His left,
who was very careful to give protection to Arjuna’s chariot by all means. Those
who saw Him on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra attained their original forms
after death.
PURPORT
A pure devotee of the Lord constantly sees the presence of the Lord within
himself because of being transcendentally related by loving service. Such a
pure devotee cannot forget the Lord for a moment. This is called trance. The
mystic (yogé) tries to concentrate upon the Supersoul by controlling the senses
from all other engagements, and thus he ultimately attains samädhi. A devotee
more easily attains samädhi, or trance, by constantly remembering the Lord’s
personal feature along with His holy name, fame, pastimes, etc. Therefore, the
concentration of the mystic yogé and that of the devotee are not on the same
level. The concentration of the mystic is mechanical, whereas that of the pure
devotee is natural in pure love and spontaneous affection. Bhéñmadeva was a
pure devotee, and as a military marshal he constantly remembered the
battlefield feature of the Lord as Pärtha-särathi, the chariot driver of Arjuna.
Therefore, the Lord’s pastime as Pärtha-särathi is also eternal. The pastimes of
the Lord, beginning from His birth at the prison house of Kaàsa up to the
mausala-lélä at the end, all move one after another in all the universes, just as
the clock hand moves from one point to another. And in such pastimes His
associates like the Päëòavas and Bhéñma are constant eternal companions. So
Bhéñmadeva never forgot the beautiful feature of the Lord as Pärtha-särathi,
which even Arjuna could not see. Arjuna was behind the beautiful
Pärtha-särathi while Bhéñmadeva was just in front of the Lord. As far as the
military feature of the Lord is concerned, Bhéñmadeva observed this with more
relish than Arjuna.
All the soldiers and persons on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra attained their
original spiritual form like the Lord after their death because by the causeless
mercy of the Lord they were able to see Him face to face on that occasion. The
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
conditioned souls rotating in the evolutionary cycle from the aquatics up to
the form of Brahmä are all in the form of mäyä, or the form obtained by one’s
own actions and awarded by material nature. The material forms of the
conditioned souls are all foreign dresses, and when the conditioned soul
becomes liberated from the clutches of material energy, he attains his original
form. The impersonalist wants to attain the impersonal Brahman effulgence of
the Lord, but that is not at all congenial to the living sparks, parts and parcels
of the Lord. Therefore, the impersonalists again fall down and get material
forms, which are all false to the spirit soul. A spiritual form like the Lord’s,
either two-handed or four-handed, is attained by the devotees of the Lord
either in the Vaikuëöhas or in the Goloka planet, according to the original
nature of the soul. This form, which is cent percent spiritual, is the svarüpa of
the living being, and all the living beings who participated on the Battlefield
of Kurukñetra, on both sides, attained their svarüpa, as confirmed by
Bhéñmadeva. So Lord Çré Kåñëa was not merciful only to the Päëòavas; He was
also merciful to the other parties because all of them attained the same result.
Bhéñmadeva wanted the same facility also, and that was his prayer to the Lord,
although his position as an associate of the Lord is assured in all circumstances.
The conclusion is that whoever dies looking on the Personality of Godhead
within or without attains his svarüpa, which is the highest perfection of life.
TEXT 40
l/il/TaGaiTaivl/aSavLGauhaSa‚
Pa[<aYaiNarq+a<ak-iLPaTaaeåMaaNaa" )
k*-TaMaNauk*-TavTYa oNMadaNDaa"
Pa[k*-iTaMaGaNa( ik-l/ YaSYa GaaePavß" )) 40 ))
lalita-gati-viläsa-valguhäsapraëaya-
nirékñaëa-kalpitorumänäù
kåta-manu-kåta-vatya unmadändhäù
prakåtim agan kila yasya gopa-vadhvaù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
lalita—attractive; gati—movements; viläsa—fascinating acts;
valguhäsa—sweet smiling; praëaya—loving; nirékñaëa—looking upon;
kalpita—mentality; urumänäù—highly glorified; kåta-manu-kåta-vatyaù—in
the act of copying the movements; unmada-andhäù—gone mad in ecstasy;
prakåtim—characteristics; agan—underwent; kila—certainly; yasya—whose;
gopa-vadhvaù—the cowherd damsels.
TRANSLATION
Let my mind be fixed upon Lord Çré Kåñëa, whose motions and smiles of love
attracted the damsels of Vrajadhäma [the gopés]. The damsels imitated the
characteristic movements of the Lord [after His disappearance from the räsa
dance].
PURPORT
By intense ecstasy in loving service, the damsels of Vrajabhümi attained
qualitative oneness with the Lord by dancing with Him on an equal level,
embracing Him in nuptial love, smiling at Him in joke, and looking at Him
with a loving attitude. The relation of the Lord with Arjuna is undoubtedly
praiseworthy for devotees like Bhéñmadeva, but the relation of the gopés with
the Lord is still more praiseworthy because of their still more purified loving
service. By the grace of the Lord, Arjuna was fortunate enough to have the
fraternal service of the Lord as chariot driver, but the Lord did not award
Arjuna with equal strength. The gopés, however, practically became one with
the Lord by attainment of equal footing with the Lord. Bhéñma’s aspiration to
remember the gopés is a prayer to have their mercy also at the last stage of his
life. The Lord is satisfied more when His pure devotees are glorified, and
therefore Bhéñmadeva has not only glorified the acts of Arjuna, his immediate
object of attraction, but has also remembered the gopés, who were endowed
with unrivalled opportunities by rendering loving service to the Lord. The
gopés’ equality with the Lord should never be misunderstood to be like the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
säyujya liberation of the impersonalist. The equality is one of perfect ecstasy
where the differential conception is completely eradicated, for the interests of
the lover and the beloved become identical.
TEXT 41
MauiNaGa<aNa*PavYaRSa&ku-le/_NTa"‚
SadiSa YauiDaiïrraJaSaUYa WzaMa( )
AhR<aMauPaPaed wR+a<aqYaae
MaMa d*iXaGaaecr Wz AaivraTMaa )) 41 ))
muni-gaëa-nåpa-varya-saìkule ’ntaùsadasi
yudhiñöhira-räjasüya eñäm
arhaëam upapeda ékñaëéyo
mama dåçi-gocara eña ävir ätmä
SYNONYMS
muni-gaëa—the great learned sages; nåpa-varya—the great ruling kings;
saìkule—in the great assembly of; antaù-sadasi—conference; yudhiñöhira—of
Emperor Yudhiñöhira; räja-süye—a royal performance of sacrifice; eñäm—of all
the great elites; arhaëam—respectful worship; upapeda—received;
ékñaëéyaù—the object of attraction; mama—my; dåçi—sight; gocaraù—within
the view of; eñaù äviù—personally present; ätmä—the soul.
TRANSLATION
At the Räjasüya-yajïa [sacrifice] performed by Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, there
was the greatest assembly of all the elite men of the world, the royal and learned
orders, and in that great assembly Lord Çré Kåñëa was worshiped by one and all
as the most exalted Personality of Godhead. This happened during my presence,
and I remembered the incident in order to keep my mind upon the Lord.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
After gaining victory in the Battle of Kurukñetra, Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira,
the Emperor of the world, performed the Räjasüya sacrificial ceremony. The
emperor, in those days, upon his ascendance to the throne, would send a
challenge horse all over the world to declare his supremacy, and any ruling
prince or king was at liberty to accept the challenge and express his tacit
willingness either to obey or to disobey the supremacy of the particular
emperor. One who accepted the challenge had to fight with the emperor and
establish his own supremacy by victory. The defeated challenger would have to
sacrifice his life, making a place for another king or ruler. So Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira also dispatched such challenging horses all over the world, and
every ruling prince and king all over the world accepted Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira’s leadership as the Emperor of the world. After this, all rulers of
the world under the regime of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira were invited to
participate in the great sacrificial ceremony of Räjasüya. Such performances
required hundreds of millions of dollars, and it was not an easy job for a petty
king. Such a sacrificial ceremony, being too expensive and also difficult to
perform under present circumstances, is now impossible in this age of Kali.
Nor can anyone secure the required expert priesthood to take charge of the
ceremony.
So, after being invited, all the kings and great learned sages of the world
assembled in the capital of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira. The learned society,
including the great philosophers, religionists, physicians, scientists and all
great sages, was invited. That is to say, the brähmaëas and the kñatriyas were
the topmost leading men in society, and they were all invited to participate in
the assembly. The vaiçyas and çüdras were unimportant elements in society,
and they are not mentioned herein. Due to the change of social activities in
the modern age, the importance of men has also changed in terms of
occupational positions.
So in that great assembly, Lord Çré Kåñëa was the cynosure of neighboring
eyes. Everyone wanted to see Lord Kåñëa, and everyone wanted to pay his
humble respects to the Lord. Bhéñmadeva remembered all this and was glad
that his worshipful Lord, the Personality of Godhead, was present before him
in His actual formal presence. So to meditate on the Supreme Lord is to
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
meditate on the activities, form, pastimes, name and fame of the Lord. That is
easier than what is imagined as meditation on the impersonal feature of the
Supreme. In the Bhagavad-gétä (12.5) it is clearly stated that to meditate upon
the impersonal feature of the Supreme is very difficult. It is practically no
meditation or simply a waste of time because very seldom is the desired result
obtained. The devotees, however, meditate upon the Lord’s factual form and
pastimes, and therefore the Lord is easily approachable by the devotees. This is
also stated in the Bhagavad-gétä (12.9). The Lord is nondifferent from His
transcendental activities. It is indicated also in this çloka that Lord Çré Kåñëa,
while actually present before human society, especially in connection with the
Battle of Kurukñetra, was accepted as the greatest personality of the time,
although He might not have been recognized as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. The propaganda that a very great man is worshiped as God after his
death is misleading because a man after his death cannot be made into God.
Nor can the Personality of Godhead be a human being, even when He is
personally present. Both ideas are misconceptions. The idea of
anthropomorphism cannot be applicable in the case of Lord Kåñëa.
TEXT 42
TaiMaMaMahMaJa& Xarqr>aaJaa&
ôid ôid iDaiïTaMaaTMak-iLPaTaaNaaMa( )
Pa[iTad*XaiMav NaEk-DaakR-Maek&-
SaMaiDaGaTaae_iSMa ivDaUTa>aedMaaeh" )) 42 ))
tam imam aham ajaà çaréra-bhäjäà
hådi hådi dhiñöhitam ätma-kalpitänäm
pratidåçam iva naikadhärkam ekaà
samadhi-gato ’smi vidhüta-bheda-mohaù
SYNONYMS
tam—that Personality of Godhead; imam—now present before me; aham—I;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ajam—the unborn; çaréra-bhäjäm—of the conditioned soul; hådi—in the
heart; hådi—in the heart; dhiñöhitam—situated; ätma—the Supersoul;
kalpitänäm—of the speculators; pratidåçam—in every direction; iva—like; na
ekadhä—not one; arkam—the sun; ekam—one only; samadhi-gataù asmi—I
have undergone trance in meditation; vidhüta—being freed from;
bheda-mohaù—misconception of duality.
TRANSLATION
Now I can meditate with full concentration upon that one Lord, Çré Kåñëa,
now present before me because now I have transcended the misconceptions of
duality in regard to His presence in everyone’s heart, even in the hearts of the
mental speculators. He is in everyone’s heart. The sun may be perceived
differently, but the sun is one.
PURPORT
Lord Çré Kåñëa is the one Absolute Supreme Personality of Godhead, but
He has expanded Himself into His multiplenary portions by His inconceivable
energy. The conception of duality is due to ignorance of His inconceivable
energy. In the Bhagavad-gétä (9.11) the Lord says that only the foolish take Him
to be a mere human being. Such foolish men are not aware of His
inconceivable energies. By His inconceivable energy He is present in
everyone’s heart, as the sun is present before everyone all over the world. The
Paramätmä feature of the Lord is an expansion of His plenary portions. He
expands Himself as Paramätmä in everyone’s heart by His inconceivable
energy, and He also expands Himself as the glowing effulgence of brahmajyoti
by expansion of His personal glow. It is stated in the Brahma-saàhitä that the
brahmajyoti is His personal glow. Therefore, there is no difference between
Him and His personal glow, brahmajyoti, or His plenary portions as Paramätmä.
Less intelligent persons who are not aware of this fact consider brahmajyoti
and Paramätmä to be different from Çré Kåñëa. This misconception of duality
is completely removed from the mind of Bhéñmadeva, and he is now satisfied
that it is Lord Çré Kåñëa only who is all in all in everything. This
enlightenment is attained by the great mahätmäs or devotees, as it is stated in
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Bhagavad-gétä (7.19) that Väsudeva is all in all in everything and that there is
no existence of anything without Väsudeva. Väsudeva, or Lord Çré Kåñëa, is
the original Supreme Person, as now confirmed by a mahäjana, and therefore
both the neophytes and the pure devotees must try to follow in his footsteps.
That is the way of the devotional line.
The worshipable object of Bhéñmadeva is Lord Çré Kåñëa as Pärtha-särathi,
and that of the gopés is the same Kåñëa in Våndävana as the most attractive
Çyämasundara. Sometimes less intelligent scholars make a mistake and think
that the Kåñëa of Våndävana and that of the Battle of Kurukñetra are different
personalities. But for Bhéñmadeva this misconception is completely removed.
Even the impersonalist’s object of destination is Kåñëa as the impersonal jyoti,
and the yogé’s destination of Paramätmä is also Kåñëa. Kåñëa is both
brahmajyoti and localized Paramätmä, but in brahmajyoti or Paramätmä there is
no Kåñëa or sweet relations with Kåñëa. In His personal feature Kåñëa is both
Pärtha-särathi and Çyämasundara of Våndävana, but in His impersonal feature
He is neither in the brahmajyoti nor in the Paramätmä. Great mahätmäs like
Bhéñmadeva realize all these different features of Lord Çré Kåñëa, and therefore
they worship Lord Kåñëa, knowing Him as the origin of all features.
TEXT 43
SaUTa ovac
k*-Z<a Wv& >aGaviTa MaNaaevaGd*iív*itai>a" )
AaTMaNYaaTMaaNaMaaveXYa Saae_NTa"ìaSa oPaarMaTa( )) 43 ))
süta uväca
kåñëa evaà bhagavati
mano-väg-dåñöi-våttibhiù
ätmany ätmänam äveçya
so ’ntaùçväsa upäramat
SYNONYMS
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; kåñëe—Lord Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; evam—only; bhagavati—unto Him; manaù—with mind;
väk—speech; dåñöi—sight; våttibhiù—activities; ätmani—unto the Supersoul;
ätmänam—the living being; äveçya—having merged in; saù—he;
antaù-çväsaù—inhaling; upäramat—became silent.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: Thus Bhéñmadeva merged himself in the Supersoul, Lord
Çré Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, with his mind, speech, sight
and actions, and thus he became silent, and his breathing stopped.
PURPORT
The stage attained by Bhéñmadeva while quitting his material body is called
nirvikalpa-samädhi because he merged his self into thinking of the Lord and
his mind into remembering His different activities. He chanted the glories of
the Lord, and by his sight he began to see the Lord personally present before
him, and thus all his activities became concentrated upon the Lord without
deviation. This is the highest stage of perfection, and it is possible for everyone
to attain this stage by practice of devotional service. The devotional service of
the Lord consists of nine principles of service activities, and they are (1)
hearing, (2) chanting, (3) remembering, (4) serving the lotus feet, (5)
worshiping, (6) praying, (7) executing the orders, (8) fraternizing, and (9)
fully surrendering. Any one of them or all of them are equally competent to
award the desired result, but they require to be practiced persistently under the
guidance of an expert devotee of the Lord. The first item, hearing, is the most
important item of all, and therefore hearing of the Bhagavad-gétä and, later on,
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is essential for the serious candidate who wants to attain
the stage of Bhéñmadeva at the end. The unique situation at Bhéñmadeva’s time
of death can be attained, even though Lord Kåñëa may not be personally
present. His words of the Bhagavad-gétä or those of Çrémad-Bhägavatam are
identical with the Lord. They are sound incarnations of the Lord, and one can
fully utilize them to be entitled to attain the stage of Çré Bhéñmadeva, who was
one of the eight Vasus. Every man or animal must die at a certain stage of life,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
but one who dies like Bhéñmadeva attains perfection, and one who dies forced
by the laws of nature dies like an animal. That is the difference between a man
and an animal. The human form of life is especially meant for dying like
Bhéñmadeva.
TEXT 44
SaMPaÛMaaNaMaajaYa >aqZMa& b]øi<a iNaZk-le/ )
SaveR b>aUvuSTae TaUZ<aq& vYaa&Saqv idNaaTYaYae )) 44 ))
sampadyamänam äjïäya
bhéñmaà brahmaëi niñkale
sarve babhüvus te tüñëéà
vayäàséva dinätyaye
SYNONYMS
sampadyamänam—having merged into; äjïäya—after knowing this;
bhéñmam—about Çré Bhéñmadeva; brahmaëi—into the Supreme Absolute;
niñkale—unlimited; sarve—all present; babhüvuù te—all of them became;
tüñëém—silent; vayäàsi iva—like birds; dina-atyaye—at the end of the day.
TRANSLATION
Knowing that Bhéñmadeva had merged into the unlimited eternity of the
Supreme Absolute, all present there became silent like birds at the end of the
day.
PURPORT
To enter into or to become merged into the unlimited eternity of the
Supreme Absolute means to enter the original home of the living being. The
living beings are all component parts and parcels of the Absolute Personality
of Godhead, and therefore they are eternally related with Him as the servitor
and the served. The Lord is served by all His parts and parcels, as the complete
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
machine is served by its parts and parcels. Any part of the machine removed
from the whole is no longer important. Similarly, any part and parcel of the
Absolute detached from the service of the Lord is useless. The living beings
who are in the material world are all disintegrated parts and parcels of the
supreme whole, and they are no longer as important as the original parts and
parcels. There are, however, more integrated living beings who are eternally
liberated. The material energy of the Lord, called Durgä-çakti, or the
superintendent of the prison house, takes charge of the disintegrated parts and
parcels, and thus they undergo a conditioned life under the laws of material
nature. When the living being becomes conscious of this fact, he tries to go
back home, back to Godhead, and thus the spiritual urge of the living being
begins. This spiritual urge is called brahma-jijïäsä, or inquiry about Brahman.
Principally this brahma-jijïäsä is successful by knowledge, renunciation and
devotional service to the Lord. Jïäna, or knowledge, means knowledge of
everything of Brahman, the Supreme; renunciation means detachment of
material affection, and devotional service is the revival by practice of the
original position of the living being. The successful living beings who are
eligible to enter into the realm of the Absolute are called the jïänés, the yogés
and the bhaktas. The jïänés and yogés enter into the impersonal rays of the
Supreme, but the bhaktas enter into the spiritual planets known as the
Vaikuëöhas. In these spiritual planets the Supreme Lord as Näräyaëa
predominates, and the healthy, unconditioned living beings live there by
rendering loving service to the Lord in the capacity of servant, friend, parents
and fiancee. There the unconditioned living beings enjoy life in full freedom
with the Lord, whereas the impersonalist jïänés and yogés enter into the
impersonal glowing effulgence of the Vaikuëöha planets. The Vaikuëöha
planets are all self-illuminating like the sun, and the rays of the Vaikuëöha
planets are called the brahmajyoti. The brahmajyoti is spread unlimitedly, and
the material world is but a covered portion of an insignificant part of the same
brahmajyoti. This covering is temporary, and therefore it is a sort of illusion.
Bhéñmadeva, as a pure devotee of the Lord, entered the spiritual realm in
one of the Vaikuëöha planets where the Lord in His eternal form of
Pärtha-särathi predominates over the unconditioned living beings who are
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
constantly engaged in the service of the Lord. The love and affection which
bind the Lord and devotee are exhibited in the case of Bhéñmadeva.
Bhéñmadeva never forgot the Lord in His transcendental feature as the
Pärtha-särathi, and the Lord was present personally before Bhéñmadeva while
he was passing to the transcendental world. That is the highest perfection of
life.
TEXT 45
Ta}a duNdu>aYaae NaedudeRvMaaNavvaidTaa" )
XaXa&Sau" SaaDavae raja& %aTPaeTau" PauZPav*íYa" )) 45 ))
tatra dundubhayo nedur
deva-mänava-väditäù
çaçaàsuù sädhavo räjïäà
khät petuù puñpa-våñöayaù
SYNONYMS
tatra—thereafter; dundubhayaù—drums; neduù—were sounded; deva—the
demigods from other planets; mänava—men from all countries;
väditäù—beaten by; çaçaàsuù—praised; sädhavaù—honest; räjïäm—by the
royal order; khät—from the sky; petuù—began to fall; puñpa-våñöayaù—showers
of flowers.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, both men and demigods sounded drums in honor, and the honest
royal order commenced demonstrations of honor and respect. And from the sky
fell showers of flowers.
PURPORT
Bhéñmadeva was respected both by the human beings and by the demigods.
The human beings live on earth and similar other planets in the Bhür and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Bhuvar group of planets, but the demigods live in the Svar, or heavenly
planets, and all of them knew Bhéñmadeva as a great warrior and devotee of the
Lord. As a mahäjana (or authority) he was on the level of Brahmä, Närada and
Çiva, although he was a human being. Qualification on a par with the great
demigods is possible only on attainment of spiritual perfection. Thus
Bhéñmadeva was known all over the universes, and during his time
interplanetary travel was effected by finer methods than the futile endeavors
of mechanical spacecraft. When the distant planets were informed of the
passing away of Bhéñmadeva, all the inhabitants of the upper planets as well as
of the earth dropped showers of flowers to show due respect to the departed
great personality. This showering of flowers from heaven is a sign of
recognition by great demigods, and it should never be compared to the
decoration of a dead body. The body of Bhéñmadeva lost its material effects due
to being surcharged with spiritual realization, and thus the body was
spiritualized as when iron becomes red-hot when in contact with fire. The
body of a fully self-realized soul is not, therefore, accepted as material. Special
ceremonies are observed for such spiritual bodies. The respect and recognition
of Bhéñmadeva are never to be imitated by artificial means, as it has become a
fashion to observe the so-called jayanté ceremony for any and every common
man. According to authorized çästras, such a jayanté ceremony for an ordinary
man, however exalted he may be materially, is an offense to the Lord because
jayanté is reserved for the day when the Lord appears on the earth. Bhéñmadeva
was unique in his activities, and his passing away to the kingdom of God is also
unique.
TEXT 46
TaSYa iNahRr<aadqiNa SaMPareTaSYa >aaGaRv )
YauiDaiïr" k-ariYaTva MauhUTa| du"i%Taae_>avTa( )) 46 ))
tasya nirharaëädéni
samparetasya bhärgava
yudhiñöhiraù kärayitvä
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
muhürtaà duùkhito ’bhavat
SYNONYMS
tasya—his; nirharaëa-ädéni—funeral ceremony; samparetasya—of the dead
body; bhärgava—O descendant of Bhågu; yudhiñöhiraù—Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira;
kärayitvä—having performed it; muhürtam—for a moment; duùkhitaù—sorry;
abhavat—became.
TRANSLATION
O descendant of Bhågu [Çaunaka], after performing funeral rituals for the
dead body of Bhéñmadeva, Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was momentarily overtaken
with grief.
PURPORT
Bhéñmadeva was not only a great family head of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, but
also he was a great philosopher and friend to him, his brothers and his mother.
Since Mahäräja Päëòu, the father of the five brothers headed by Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira, had died, Bhéñmadeva was the most affectionate grandfather of
the Päëòavas and caretaker of the widow daughter-in-law Kuntédevé.
Although Mahäräja Dhåtaräñöra, the elder uncle of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, was
there to look after them, his affection was more on the side of his hundred
sons, headed by Duryodhana. Ultimately a colossal clique was fabricated to
deprive the five fatherless brothers of the rightful claim of the kingdom of
Hastinäpura. There was great intrigue, common in imperial palaces, and the
five brothers were exiled to the wilderness. But Bhéñmadeva was always a
sincerely sympathetic well-wisher, grandfather, friend and philosopher to
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, even up to the last moment of his life. He died very
happily by seeing Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira to the throne, otherwise he would
have long ago quitted his material body, instead of suffering agony over the
undue sufferings of the Päëòavas. He was simply waiting for the opportune
moment because he was sure and certain that the sons of Päëòu would come
out victorious in the Battlefield of Kurukñetra, as His Lordship Çré Kåñëa was
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
their protector. As a devotee of the Lord, he knew that the Lord’s devotee
cannot be vanquished at any time. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was quite aware of all
these good wishes of Bhéñmadeva, and therefore he must have been feeling the
great separation. He was sorry for the separation of a great soul, and not for
the material body which Bhéñmadeva relinquished. The funeral ceremony was
a necessary duty, although Bhéñmadeva was a liberated soul. Since Bhéñmadeva
was without issue, the eldest grandson, namely Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, was the
rightful person to perform this ceremony. It was a great boon to Bhéñmadeva
that an equally great son of the family undertook the last rites of a great man.
TEXT 47
TauíuvuMauRNaYaae ôía" k*-Z<a& Tad(GauùNaaMai>a" )
TaTaSTae k*-Z<aôdYaa" Svaé[MaaNa( Pa[YaYau" PauNa" )) 47 ))
tuñöuvur munayo håñöäù
kåñëaà tad-guhya-nämabhiù
tatas te kåñëa-hådayäù
sväçramän prayayuù punaù
SYNONYMS
tuñöuvuù—satisfied; munayaù—the great sages, headed by Vyäsadeva, etc.;
håñöäù—all in a happy mood; kåñëam—unto Lord Kåñëa, the Personality of
Godhead; tat—His; guhya—confidential; nämabhiù—by His holy name, etc.;
tataù—thereafter; te—they; kåñëa-hådayäù—persons who always bear Lord
Kåñëa in their hearts; sva-äçramän—to their respective hermitages;
prayayuù—returned; punaù—again.
TRANSLATION
All the great sages then glorified Lord Çré Kåñëa, who was present there, by
confidential Vedic hymns. Then all of them returned to their respective
hermitages, bearing always Lord Kåñëa within their hearts.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
The devotees of the Lord are always in the heart of the Lord, and the Lord
is always in the hearts of the devotees. That is the sweet relation between the
Lord and His devotees. Due to unalloyed love and devotion for the Lord, the
devotees always see Him within themselves, and the Lord also, although He
has nothing to do and nothing to aspire to, is always busy in attending to the
welfare of His devotees. For the ordinary living beings the law of nature is
there for all actions and reactions, but He is always anxious to put His devotees
on the right path. The devotees, therefore, are under the direct care of the
Lord. And the Lord also voluntarily puts Himself under the care of His
devotees only. So all the sages, headed by Vyäsadeva, were devotees of the
Lord, and therefore they chanted the Vedic hymns after the funeral ceremony
just to please the Lord, who was present there personally. All the Vedic hymns
are chanted to please Lord Kåñëa. This is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä
(15.15). All the Vedas, Upaniñads, Vedänta, etc., are seeking Him only, and all
hymns are for glorifying Him only. The sages, therefore, performed the exact
acts suitable for the purpose, and they happily departed for their respective
hermitages.
TEXT 48
TaTaae YauiDaiïrae GaTva Sahk*-Z<aae GaJaaûYaMa( )
iPaTar& SaaNTvYaaMaaSa GaaNDaarq& c TaPaiSvNaqMa( )) 48 ))
tato yudhiñöhiro gatvä
saha-kåñëo gajähvayam
pitaraà säntvayäm äsa
gändhäréà ca tapasviném
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; yudhiñöhiraù—Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira; gatvä—going there;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
saha—with; kåñëaù—the Lord; gajähvayam—in the capital named Gajähvaya
Hastinäpura; pitaram—unto his uncle (Dhåtaräñöra); säntvayäm
äsa—consoled; gändhärém—the wife of Dhåtaräñöra; ca—and; tapasviném—an
ascetic lady.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira at once went to his capital, Hastinäpura,
accompanied by Lord Çré Kåñëa, and there he consoled his uncle and aunt
Gändhäré, who was an ascetic.
PURPORT
Dhåtaräñöra and Gändhäré, the father and the mother of Duryodhana and
his brothers, were the elder uncle and aunt of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira. After the
Battle of Kurukñetra, the celebrated couple, having lost all their sons and
grandsons, were under the care of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira. They were passing
their days in great agony over such a heavy loss of life and were practically
living the life of ascetics. The death news of Bhéñmadeva, uncle of Dhåtaräñöra,
was another great shock for the King and the Queen, and therefore they
required solace from Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was
conscious of his duty, and he at once hurried to the spot with Lord Kåñëa and
satisfied the bereaved Dhåtaräñöra with kind words, from both himself and the
Lord also.
Gändhäré was a powerful ascetic, although she was living the life of a
faithful wife and a kind mother. It is said that Gändhäré also voluntarily closed
her eyes because of the blindness of her husband. A wife’s duty is to follow the
husband cent percent. And Gändhäré was so true to her husband that she
followed him even in his perpetual blindness. Therefore in her actions she was
a great ascetic. Besides that, the shock she suffered because of the wholesale
killing of her one hundred sons and her grandsons also was certainly too much
for a woman. But she suffered all this just like an ascetic. Gändhäré, although a
woman, is no less than Bhéñmadeva in character. They are both remarkable
personalities in the Mahäbhärata.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 49
iPa}aa caNauMaTaae raJaa vaSaudevaNauMaaeidTa" )
ck-ar raJYa& DaMaeR<a iPaTa*PaETaaMah& iv>au" )) 49 ))
piträ cänumato räjä
väsudevänumoditaù
cakära räjyaà dharmeëa
pitå-paitämahaà vibhuù
SYNONYMS
piträ—by his uncle, Dhåtaräñöra; ca—and; anumataù—with his approval;
räjä—King Yudhiñöhira; väsudeva-anumoditaù—confirmed by Lord Çré Kåñëa;
cakära—executed; räjyam—the kingdom; dharmeëa—in compliance with the
codes of royal principles; pitå—father; paitämaham—forefather; vibhuù—as
great as.
TRANSLATION
After this, the great religious King, Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, executed the
royal power in the kingdom strictly according to the codes and royal principles
approved by his uncle and confirmed by Lord Çré Kåñëa.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was not a mere tax collector. He was always
conscious of his duty as a king, which is no less than that of a father or
spiritual master. The king is to see to the welfare of the citizens from all angles
of social, political, economic and spiritual upliftment. The king must know
that human life is meant for liberating the encaged soul from the bondage of
material conditions, and therefore his duty is to see that the citizens are
properly looked after to attain this highest stage of perfection.
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira followed these principles strictly, as will be seen from
the next chapter. Not only did he follow the principles, but he also got
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
approval from his old uncle, who was experienced in political affairs, and that
was also confirmed by Lord Kåñëa, the speaker of the philosophy of
Bhagavad-gétä.
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira is the ideal monarch, and monarchy under a trained
king like Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira is by far the most superior form of government,
superior to modern republics or governments of the people, by the people. The
mass of people, especially in this age of Kali, are all born çüdras, basically
lowborn, ill-trained, unfortunate and badly associated. They themselves do not
know the highest perfectional aim of life. Therefore, votes cast by them
actually have no value, and thus persons elected by such irresponsible votes
cannot be responsible representatives like Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the First Canto, Ninth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled “The passing Away of Bhéñmadeva in the presence
of Lord Kåñëa.”
Chapter Ten
Departure of Lord Kåñëa for Dvärakä
TEXT 1
XaaENak- ovac
hTva SvirKQaSPa*Da AaTaTaaiYaNaae
YauiDaiïrae DaMaR>a*Taa& virï" )
SahaNauJaE" Pa[TYavåÖ>aaeJaNa"
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
k-Qa& Pa[v*ta" ik-Mak-arzqtaTa" )) 1 ))
çaunaka uväca
hatvä svariktha-spådha ätatäyino
yudhiñöhiro dharma-bhåtäà variñöhaù
sahänujaiù pratyavaruddha-bhojanaù
kathaà pravåttaù kim akärañét tataù
SYNONYMS
çaunakaù uväca—Çaunaka inquired; hatvä—after killing; svariktha—the legal
inheritance; spådhaù—desiring to usurp; ätatäyinaù—the aggressor;
yudhiñöhiraù—King Yudhiñöhira; dharma-bhåtäm—of those who strictly follow
religious principles; variñöhaù—greatest; saha-anujaiù—with his younger
brothers; pratyavaruddha—restricted; bhojanaù—acceptance of necessities;
katham—how; pravåttaù—engaged; kim—what; akärañét—executed;
tataù—thereafter.
TRANSLATION
Çaunaka Muni asked: After killing his enemies who desired to usurp his
rightful inheritance, how did the greatest of all religious men, Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira, assisted by his brothers, rule his subjects? Surely he could not
freely enjoy his kingdom with unrestricted consciousness.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was the greatest of all men of religion. Thus he was
not at all inclined to fight with his cousins for the sake of enjoying the
kingdom: he fought for the right cause because the kingdom of Hastinäpura
was his rightful inheritance and his cousins wanted to usurp it for themselves.
He fought, therefore, for the right cause under the guidance of Lord Çré Kåñëa,
but he could not enjoy the results of his victory because his cousins were all
killed in the fight. He therefore ruled over the kingdom as a matter of duty,
assisted by his younger brothers. The inquiry was important for Çaunaka Åñi,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
who wanted to know about the behavior of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira when he was
at ease to enjoy the kingdom.
TEXT 2
SaUTa ovac
v&Xa& ku-raev|XadvaiGaniNaôRTa&
Sa&raehiYaTva >av>aavNaae hir" )
iNaveXaiYaTva iNaJaraJYa wRìrae
YauiDaiïr& Pa[qTaMaNaa b>aUv h )) 2 ))
süta uväca
vaàçaà kuror vaàça-davägni-nirhåtaà
saàrohayitvä bhava-bhävano hariù
niveçayitvä nija-räjya éçvaro
yudhiñöhiraà préta-manä babhüva ha
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé replied; vaàçam—dynasty; kuroù—of King Kuru;
vaàça-dava-agni—a forest fire set by the bamboos; nirhåtam—exhausted;
saàrohayitvä—seedling of the dynasty; bhava-bhävanaù—the maintainer of
creation; hariù—the Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa; niveçayitvä—having
reestablished; nija-räjye—in his own kingdom; éçvaraù—the Supreme Lord;
yudhiñöhiram—unto Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira; préta-manäù—pleased in His mind;
babhüva ha—became.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: Lord Çré Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who is the maintainer of the world, became pleased after reestablishing
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira in his own kingdom and after restoring the Kuru
dynasty, which had been exhausted by the bamboo fire of anger.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
This world is compared to a forest fire caused by the cohesion of bamboo
bushes. Such a forest fire takes place automatically, for bamboo cohesion
occurs without external cause. Similarly, in the material world the wrath of
those who want to lord it over material nature interacts, and the fire of war
takes place, exhausting the unwanted population. Such fires or wars take place,
and the Lord has nothing to do with them. But because He wants to maintain
the creation, He desires the mass of people to follow the right path of
self-realization, which enables the living beings to enter into the kingdom of
God. The Lord wants the suffering human beings to come back home, back to
Him, and cease to suffer the threefold material pangs. The whole plan of
creation is made in that way, and one who does not come to his senses suffers
in the material world by pangs inflicted by the illusory energy of the Lord. The
Lord therefore wants His bona fide representative to rule the world. Lord Çré
Kåñëa descended to establish this sort of regime and to kill the unwanted
persons who have nothing to do with His plan. The Battle of Kurukñetra was
fought according to the plan of the Lord so that undesirable persons could get
out of the world and a peaceful kingdom under His devotee could be
established. The Lord was therefore fully satisfied when King Yudhiñöhira was
on the throne and the seedling of the dynasty of Kuru, in the person of
Mahäräja Parékñit, was saved.
TEXT 3
iNaXaMYa >aqZMaae¢-MaQaaCYauTaae¢&-
Pa[v*taivjaNaivDaUTaiv>a]Ma" )
XaXaaSa GaaiMaNd] wvaiJaTaaé[Ya"
PairDYauPaaNTaaMaNauJaaNauviTaRTa" )) 3 ))
niçamya bhéñmoktam athäcyutoktaà
pravåtta-vijïäna-vidhüta-vibhramaù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
çaçäsa gäm indra iväjitäçrayaù
paridhyupäntäm anujänuvartitaù
SYNONYMS
niçamya—after listening; bhéñma-uktam—what was spoken by Bhéñmadeva;
atha—as also; acyuta-uktam—what was spoken by the infallible Lord Kåñëa;
pravåtta—being engaged in; vijïäna—perfect knowledge; vidhüta—completely
washed; vibhramaù—all misgivings; çaçäsa—ruled over; gäm—the earth;
indra—the king of the heavenly planet; iva—like; ajita-äçrayaù—protected by
the invincible Lord; paridhi-upäntäm—including the seas; anuja—the younger
brothers; anuvartitaù—being followed by them.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, after being enlightened by what was spoken by
Bhéñmadeva and Lord Çré Kåñëa, the infallible, engaged himself in matters of
perfect knowledge because all his misgivings were eradicated. Thus he ruled
over the earth and seas and was followed by his younger brothers.
PURPORT
The modern English law of primogeniture, or the law of inheritance by the
firstborn, was also prevalent in those days when Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira ruled
the earth and seas. In those days the King of Hastinäpura (now part of New
Delhi) was the emperor of the world, including the seas, up to the time of
Mahäräja Parékñit, the grandson of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira. Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira’s younger brothers were acting as his ministers and commanders of
state, and there was full cooperation between the perfectly religious brothers
of the King. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was the ideal king or representative of Lord
Çré Kåñëa to rule over the kingdom of earth and was comparable to King Indra,
the representative ruler of the heavenly planets. The demigods like Indra,
Candra, Sürya, Varuëa and Väyu are representative kings of different planets
of the universe, and similarly Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was also one of them,
ruling over the kingdom of the earth. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was not a typically
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
unenlightened political leader of modern democracy. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira
was instructed by Bhéñmadeva and the infallible Lord also, and therefore he
had full knowledge of everything in perfection.
The modern elected executive head of a state is just like a puppet because
he has no kingly power. Even if he is enlightened like Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira,
he cannot do anything out of his own good will due to his constitutional
position. Therefore, there are so many states over the earth quarreling because
of ideological differences or other selfish motives. But a king like Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira had no ideology of his own. He had but to follow the instructions
of the infallible Lord and the Lord’s representative and the authorized agent,
Bhéñmadeva. It is instructed in the çästras that one should follow the great
authority and the infallible Lord without any personal motive and
manufactured ideology. Therefore, it was possible for Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira to
rule the whole world, including the seas, because the principles were infallible
and universally applicable to everyone. The conception of one world state can
only be fulfilled if we can follow the infallible authority. An imperfect human
being cannot create an ideology acceptable to everyone. Only the perfect and
the infallible can create a program which is applicable at every place and can
be followed by all in the world. It is the person who rules, and not the
impersonal government. If the person is perfect, the government is perfect. If
the person is a fool, the government is a fool’s paradise. That is the law of
nature. There are so many stories of imperfect kings or executive heads.
Therefore, the executive head must be a trained person like Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira, and he must have the full autocratic power to rule over the world.
The conception of a world state can take shape only under the regime of a
perfect king like Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira. The world was happy in those days
because there were kings like Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira to rule over the world.
TEXT 4
k-aMa& vvzR PaJaRNYa" SavRk-aMadugaa Mahq )
iSaizcu" SMa v]JaaNa( Gaav" PaYaSaaeDaSvTaqMauRda )) 4 ))
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
kämaà vavarña parjanyaù
sarva-käma-dughä mahé
siñicuù sma vrajän gävaù
payasodhasvatér mudä
SYNONYMS
kämam—everything needed; vavarña—was showered; parjanyaù—rains;
sarva—everything; käma—necessities; dughä—producer; mahé—the land;
siñicuù sma—moisten; vrajän—pasturing grounds; gävaù—the cow; payasä
udhasvatéù—due to swollen milk bags; mudä—because of a joyful attitude.
TRANSLATION
During the reign of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, the clouds showered all the water
that people needed, and the earth produced all the necessities of man in
profusion. Due to its fatty milk bag and cheerful attitude, the cow used to
moisten the grazing ground with milk.
PURPORT
The basic principle of economic development is centered on land and cows.
The necessities of human society are food grains, fruits, milk, minerals,
clothing, wood, etc. One requires all these items to fulfill the material needs of
the body. Certainly one does not require flesh and fish or iron tools and
machinery. During the regime of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, all over the world
there were regulated rainfalls. Rainfalls are not in the control of the human
being. The heavenly King Indradeva is the controller of rains, and he is the
servant of the Lord. When the Lord is obeyed by the king and the people
under the king’s administration, there are regulated rains from the horizon,
and these rains are the causes of all varieties of production on the land. Not
only do regulated rains help ample production of grains and fruits, but when
they combine with astronomical influences there is ample production of
valuable stones and pearls. Grains and vegetables can sumptuously feed a man
and animals, and a fatty cow delivers enough milk to supply a man
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
sumptuously with vigor and vitality. If there is enough milk, enough grains,
enough fruit, enough cotton, enough silk and enough jewels, then why do the
people need cinemas, houses of prostitution, slaughterhouses, etc.? What is the
need of an artificial luxurious life of cinema, cars, radio, flesh and hotels? Has
this civilization produced anything but quarreling individually and nationally?
Has this civilization enhanced the cause of equality and fraternity by sending
thousands of men into a hellish factory and the war fields at the whims of a
particular man?
It is said here that the cows used to moisten the pasturing land with milk
because their milk bags were fatty and the animals were joyful. Do they not
require, therefore, proper protection for a joyful life by being fed with a
sufficient quantity of grass in the field? Why should men kill cows for their
selfish purposes? Why should man not be satisfied with grains, fruits and milk,
which, combined together, can produce hundreds and thousands of palatable
dishes. Why are there slaughterhouses all over the world to kill innocent
animals? Mahäräja Parékñit, grandson of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, while touring
his vast kingdom, saw a black man attempting to kill a cow. The King at once
arrested the butcher and chastised him sufficiently. Should not a king or
executive head protect the lives of the poor animals who are unable to defend
themselves? Is this humanity? Are not the animals of a country citizens also?
Then why are they allowed to be butchered in organized slaughterhouses? Are
these the signs of equality, fraternity and nonviolence?
Therefore, in contrast with the modern, advanced, civilized form of
government, an autocracy like Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira’s is by far superior to a
so-called democracy in which animals are killed and a man less than an animal
is allowed to cast votes for another less-than-animal man.
We are all creatures of material nature. In the Bhagavad-gétä it is said that
the Lord Himself is the seed-giving father and material nature is the mother of
all living beings in all shapes. Thus mother material nature has enough foodstuff
both for animals and for men, by the grace of the Father Almighty, Çré Kåñëa.
The human being is the elder brother of all other living beings. He is endowed
with intelligence more powerful than animals for realizing the course of nature
and the indications of the Almighty Father. Human civilizations should
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
depend on the production of material nature without artificially attempting
economic development to turn the world into a chaos of artificial greed and
power only for the purpose of artificial luxuries and sense gratification. This is
but the life of dogs and hogs.
TEXT 5
NaÛ" SaMaud]a iGarYa" SavNaSPaiTavqåDa" )
f-l/NTYaaezDaYa" SavaR" k-aMaMaNv*Tau TaSYa vE )) 5 ))
nadyaù samudrä girayaù
savanaspati-vérudhaù
phalanty oñadhayaù sarväù
kämam anvåtu tasya vai
SYNONYMS
nadyaù—rivers; samudräù—oceans; girayaù—hills and mountains;
savanaspati—vegetables; vérudhaù—creepers; phalanti—active;
oñadhayaù—drugs; sarväù—all; kämam—necessities; anvåtu—seasonal;
tasya—for the King; vai—certainly.
TRANSLATION
The rivers, oceans, hills, mountains, forests, creepers and active drugs, in
every season, paid their tax quota to the King in profusion.
PURPORT
Since Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was under the protection of the ajita, the
infallible Lord, as above mentioned, the properties of the Lord, namely the
rivers, oceans, hills, forests, etc., were all pleased, and they used to supply their
respective quota of taxes to the King. The secret to success is to take refuge
under the protection of the Supreme Lord. Without His sanction, nothing can be
possible. To make economic development by our own endeavors on the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
strength of tools and machinery is not all. The sanction of the Supreme Lord
must be there, otherwise despite all instrumental arrangements everything will
be unsuccessful. The ultimate cause of success is the daiva, the Supreme. Kings
like Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira knew perfectly well that the king is the agent of the
Supreme Lord to look after the welfare of the mass of people. Actually the
state belongs to the Supreme Lord. The rivers, oceans, forests, hills, drugs, etc.,
are not creations of man. They are all creations of the Supreme Lord, and the
living being is allowed to make use of the property of the Lord for the service
of the Lord. Today’s slogan is that everything is for the people, and therefore
the government is for the people and by the people. But to produce a new
species of humanity at the present moment on the basis of God consciousness
and perfection of human life, the ideology of godly communism, the world has
to again follow in the footsteps of kings like Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira or Parékñit.
There is enough of everything by the will of the Lord, and we can make proper
use of things to live comfortably without enmity between men, or animal and
man or nature. The control of the Lord is everywhere, and if the Lord is
pleased, every part of nature will be pleased. The river will flow profusely to
fertilize the land; the oceans will supply sufficient quantities of minerals, pearls
and jewels; the forest will supply sufficient wood, drugs and vegetables, and the
seasonal changes will effectively help produce fruits and flowers in profuse
quantity. The artificial way of living depending on factories and tools can
render so-called happiness only to a limited number at the cost of millions.
Since the energy of the mass of people is engaged in factory production, the
natural products are being hampered, and for this the mass is unhappy.
Without being educated properly, the mass of people are following in the
footsteps of the vested interests by exploiting natural reserves, and therefore
there is acute competition between individual and individual and nation and
nation. There is no control by the trained agent of the Lord. We must look
into the defects of modern civilization by comparison here, and should follow
in the footsteps of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira to cleanse man and wipe out
anachronisms.
TEXT 6
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
NaaDaYaae VYaaDaYa" ©e-Xaa dEv>aUTaaTMaheTav" )
AJaaTaXa}aav>avNa( JaNTaUNaa& raij k-ihRicTa( )) 6 ))
nädhayo vyädhayaù kleçä
daiva-bhütätma-hetavaù
ajäta-çaträv abhavan
jantünäà räjïi karhicit
SYNONYMS
na—never; ädhayaù—anxieties; vyädhayaù—diseases; kleçäù—trouble due to
excessive heat and cold; daiva-bhüta-ätma—all due to the body, supernatural
power and other living beings; hetavaù—due to the cause of;
ajäta-çatrau—unto one who has no enemy; abhavan—happened;
jantünäm—of the living beings; räjïi—unto the King; karhicit—at any time.
TRANSLATION
Because of the King’s having no enemy, the living beings were not at any
time disturbed by mental agonies, diseases, or excessive heat or cold.
PURPORT
To be nonviolent to human beings and to be a killer or enemy of the poor
animals is Satan’s philosophy. In this age there is enmity toward poor animals,
and therefore the poor creatures are always anxious. The reaction of the poor
animals is being forced on human society, and therefore there is always the
strain of cold or hot war between men, individually, collectively or nationally.
At the time of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, there were no different nations,
although there were different subordinate states. The whole world was united,
and the supreme head, being a trained king like Yudhiñöhira, kept all the
inhabitants free from anxiety, diseases and excessive heat and cold. They were
not only economically well-to-do, but also physically fit and undisturbed by
supernatural power, by enmity from other living beings and by disturbance of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
bodily and mental agonies. There is a proverb in Bengali that a bad king spoils
the kingdom and a bad housewife spoils the family. This truth is applicable
here also. Because the King was pious and obedient to the Lord and sages,
because he was no one’s enemy and because he was a recognized agent of the
Lord and therefore protected by Him, all the citizens under the King’s
protection were, so to speak, directly protected by the Lord and His authorized
agents. Unless one is pious and recognized by the Lord, he cannot make others
happy who are under his care. There is full cooperation between man and God
and man and nature, and this conscious cooperation between man and God
and man and nature, as exemplified by King Yudhiñöhira, can bring about
happiness, peace and prosperity in the world. The attitude of exploiting one
another, the custom of the day, will only bring misery.
TEXT 7
oizTva haiSTaNaPaure MaaSaaNa( k-iTaPaYaaNa( hir" )
Sauôda& c ivXaaek-aYa SvSauê iPa[Yak-aMYaYaa )) 7 ))
uñitvä hästinapure
mäsän katipayän hariù
suhådäà ca viçokäya
svasuç ca priya-kämyayä
SYNONYMS
uñitvä—staying; hästinapure—in the city of Hastinäpura; mäsän—months;
katipayän—a few; hariù—Lord Çré Kåñëa; suhådäm—relatives; ca—also;
viçokäya—for pacifying them; svasuù—the sister; ca—and;
priya-kämyayä—for pleasing.
TRANSLATION
Çré Hari, Lord Çré Kåñëa, resided at Hastinäpura for a few months to pacify
His relatives and please His own sister [Subhadrä].
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
Kåñëa was to start for Dvärakä, His own kingdom, after the Battle of
Kurukñetra and Yudhiñöhira’s being enthroned, but to oblige the request of
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira and to show special mercy to Bhéñmadeva, Lord Kåñëa
stopped at Hastinäpura, the capital of the Päëòavas. The Lord decided to stay
especially to pacify the aggrieved King as well as to please Subhadrä, sister of
Lord Çré Kåñëa. Subhadrä was especially to be pacified because she lost her
only son, Abhimanyu, who was just married. The boy left his wife, Uttarä,
mother of Mahäräja Parékñit. The Lord is always pleased to satisfy His devotees
in any capacity. Only His devotees can play the parts of His relatives. The
Lord is absolute.
TEXT 8
AaMaN}Ya ca>YaNaujaTa" PairZvJYaai>avaÛ TaMa( )
Aaåraeh rQa& kE-iêTPairZv¢-ae_i>avaidTa" )) 8 ))
ämantrya cäbhyanujïätaù
pariñvajyäbhivädya tam
äruroha rathaà kaiçcit
pariñvakto ’bhiväditaù
SYNONYMS
ämantrya—taking permission; ca—and; abhyanujïätaù—being permitted;
pariñvajya—embracing; abhivädya—bowing down at the feet; tam—unto
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira; äruroha—ascended; ratham—the chariot; kaiçcit—by
someone; pariñvaktaù—being embraced; abhiväditaù—being offered
obeisances.
TRANSLATION
Afterwards, when the Lord asked permission to depart and the King gave it,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the Lord offered His respects to Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira by bowing down at his
feet, and the King embraced Him. After this the Lord, being embraced by
others and receiving their obeisances, got into His chariot.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was the elder cousin of Lord Kåñëa, and therefore
while departing from him the Lord bowed down at the King’s feet. The King
embraced Him as a younger brother, although the King knew perfectly well
that Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord takes pleasure
when some of His devotees accept Him as less important in terms of love. No
one is greater than or equal to the Lord, but He takes pleasure in being treated
as younger than His devotees. These are all transcendental pastimes of the
Lord. The impersonalist cannot enter into the supernatural roles played by the
devotee of the Lord. Thereafter Bhéma and Arjuna embraced the Lord because
they were of the same age, but Nakula and Sahadeva bowed down before the
Lord because they were younger than He.
TEXTS 9–10
Sau>ad]a d]aEPadq ku-NTaq ivra$=TaNaYaa TaQaa )
GaaNDaarq Da*Taraí\ê YauYauTSauGaaOETaMaae YaMaaE )) 9 ))
v*k-aedrê DaaEMYaê iñYaae MaTSYaSauTaadYa" )
Na Saeihre ivMauùNTaae ivrh& Xaa®RDaNvNa" )) 10 ))
subhadrä draupadé kunté
viräöa-tanayä tathä
gändhäré dhåtaräñöraç ca
yuyutsur gautamo yamau
våkodaraç ca dhaumyaç ca
striyo matsya-sutädayaù
na sehire vimuhyanto
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
virahaà çärìga-dhanvanaù
SYNONYMS
subhadrä—the sister of Kåñëa; draupadé—the wife of the Päëòavas; kunté—the
mother of the Päëòavas; viräöa-tanayä—the daughter of Viräöa (Uttarä);
tathä—also; gändhäré—the mother of Duryodhana; dhåtaräñöraù—the father of
Duryodhana; ca—and; yuyutsuù—the son of Dhåtaräñöra by his vaiçya wife;
gautamaù—Kåpäcärya; yamau—the twin brothers Nakula and Sahadeva;
våkodaraù—Bhéma; ca—and; dhaumyaù—Dhaumya; ca—and; striyaù—also
other ladies of the palace; matsya-sutä-ädayaù—the daughter of a fisherman
(Satyavaté, Bhéñma’s stepmother); na—could not; sehire—tolerate;
vimuhyantaù—almost fainting; viraham—separation; çärìga-dhanvanaù—of
Çré Kåñëa, who bears a conch in His hand.
TRANSLATION
At that time Subhadrä, Draupadé, Kunté, Uttarä, Gändhäré, Dhåtaräñöra,
Yuyutsu, Kåpäcärya, Nakula, Sahadeva, Bhémasena, Dhaumya and Satyavaté all
nearly fainted because it was impossible for them to bear separation from Lord
Kåñëa.
PURPORT
Lord Çré Kåñëa is so attractive for the living beings, especially for the
devotees, that it is impossible for them to tolerate separation. The conditioned
soul under the spell of illusory energy forgets the Lord, otherwise he cannot.
The feeling of such separation cannot be described, but it can simply be
imagined by devotees only. After His separation from Våndävana and the
innocent rural cowherd boys, girls, ladies and others, they all felt shock
throughout their lives, and the separation of Rädhäräëé, the most beloved
cowherd girl, is beyond expression. Once they met at Kurukñetra during a solar
eclipse, and the feeling which was expressed by them is heartrending. There is,
of course, a difference in the qualities of the transcendental devotees of the
Lord, but none of them who have ever contacted the Lord by direct
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
communion or otherwise can leave Him for a moment. That is the attitude of
the pure devotee.
TEXTS 11–12
SaTSa®aNMau¢-du"Sa®ae haTau& NaaeTSahTae buDa" )
k-ITYaRMaaNa& YaXaae YaSYa Sak*-dak-<YaR raecNaMa( )) 11 ))
TaiSMaNNYaSTaiDaYa" PaaQaaR" SaherNa( ivrh& k-QaMa( )
dXaRNaSPaXaRSa&l/aPaXaYaNaaSaNa>aaeJaNaE" )) 12 ))
sat-saìgän mukta-duùsaìgo
hätuà notsahate budhaù
kértyamänaà yaço yasya
sakåd äkarëya rocanam
tasmin nyasta-dhiyaù pärthäù
saheran virahaà katham
darçana-sparça-saàläpaçayanäsana-
bhojanaiù
SYNONYMS
sat-saìgät—by the association of pure devotees; mukta-duùsaìgaù—freed from
bad materialistic association; hätum—to give up; na utsahate—never attempts;
budhaù—one who has understood the Lord; kértyamänam—glorifying;
yaçaù—fame; yasya—whose; sakåt—once only; äkarëya—hearing only;
rocanam—pleasing; tasmin—unto Him; nyasta-dhiyaù—one who has given his
mind unto Him; pärthäù—the sons of Påthä; saheran—can tolerate;
viraham—separation; katham—how; darçana—seeing face to face;
sparça—touching; saàläpa—conversing; çayana—sleeping; äsana—sitting;
bhojanaiù—dining together.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The intelligent, who have understood the Supreme Lord in association with
pure devotees and have become freed from bad materialistic association, can
never avoid hearing the glories of the Lord, even though they have heard them
only once. How, then, could the Päëòavas tolerate His separation, for they had
been intimately associated with His person, seeing Him face to face, touching
Him, conversing with Him, and sleeping, sitting and dining with Him?
PURPORT
The living being’s constitutional position is one of serving a superior. He is
obliged to serve by force the dictates of illusory material energy in different
phases of sense gratification. And in serving the senses he is never tired. Even
though he may be tired, the illusory energy perpetually forces him to do so
without being satisfied. There is no end to such sense gratificatory business,
and the conditioned soul becomes entangled in such servitude without hope of
release. The release is only effected by association with pure devotees. By such
association one is gradually promoted to his transcendental consciousness.
Thus he can know that his eternal position is to render service unto the Lord
and not to the perverted senses in the capacity of lust, anger, desire to lord it
over, etc. Material society, friendship and love are all different phases of lust.
Home, country, family, society, wealth and all sorts of corollaries are all causes
of bondage in the material world, where the threefold miseries of life are
concomitant factors. By associating with pure devotees and by hearing them
submissively, attachment for material enjoyment becomes slackened, and
attraction for hearing about the transcendental activities of the Lord becomes
prominent. Once they are, they will go on progressively without stoppage, like
fire in gunpowder. It is said that Hari, the Personality of Godhead, is so
transcendentally attractive that even those who are self-satisfied by
self-realization and are factually liberated from all material bondage also
become devotees of the Lord. Under the circumstances it is easily understood
what must have been the position of the Päëòavas, who were constant
companions of the Lord. They could not even think of separation from Çré
Kåñëa, since the attraction was more intense for them because of continuous
personal contact. His remembrance by His form, quality, name, fame, pastimes,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
etc., is also attractive for the pure devotee, so much so that he forgets all forms,
quality, name, fame and activities of the mundane world, and due to his
mature association with pure devotees he is not out of contact with the Lord
for a moment.
TEXT 13
SaveR Tae_iNaiMazEr+aESTaMaNaud]uTaceTaSa" )
vq+aNTa" òehSaMbÖa ivcelu/STa}a Ta}a h )) 13 ))
sarve te ’nimiñair akñais
tam anu druta-cetasaù
vékñantaù sneha-sambaddhä
vicelus tatra tatra ha
SYNONYMS
sarve—all; te—they; animiñaiù—without twinkling of the eyes; akñaiù—by the
eye; tam anu—after Him; druta-cetasaù—melted heart; vékñantaù—looking
upon Him; sneha-sambaddhäù—bound by pure affection; viceluù—began to
move; tatra tatra—here and there; ha—so they did.
TRANSLATION
All their hearts were melting for Him on the pot of attraction. They looked
at Him without blinking their eyes, and they moved hither and thither in
perplexity.
PURPORT
Kåñëa is naturally attractive for all living beings because He is the chief
eternal amongst all eternals. He alone is the maintainer of the many eternals.
This is stated in the Kaöha Upaniñad, and thus one can obtain permanent
peace and prosperity by revival of one’s eternal relation with Him, now
forgotten under the spell of mäyä, the illusory energy of the Lord. Once this
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
relation is slightly revived, the conditioned soul at once becomes freed from
the illusion of material energy and becomes mad after the association of the
Lord. This association is made possible not only by personal contact with the
Lord, but also by association with His name, fame, form and quality.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam trains the conditioned soul to this stage of perfection by
submissive hearing from the pure devotee.
TEXT 14
NYaåNDaàuÓl/ØaZPaMaaETk-<#yaÕevk-ISauTae )
iNaYaaRTYaGaaraàae_>ad]iMaiTa SYaaØaNDaviñYa" )) 14 ))
nyarundhann udgalad bäñpam
autkaëöhyäd devaké-sute
niryäty agärän no ’bhadram
iti syäd bändhava-striyaù
SYNONYMS
nyarundhan—checking with great difficulty; udgalat—overflowing;
bäñpam—tears; autkaëöhyät—because of great anxiety; devaké-sute—unto the
son of Devaké; niryäti—having come out; agärät—from the palace; naù—not;
abhadram—inauspiciousness; iti—thus; syät—may happen;
bändhava—relative; striyaù—ladies.
TRANSLATION
The female relatives, whose eyes were flooded with tears out of anxiety for
Kåñëa, came out of the palace. They could stop their tears only with great
difficulty. They feared that tears would cause misfortune at the time of
departure.
PURPORT
There were hundreds of ladies in the palace of Hastinäpura. All of them
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
were affectionate to Kåñëa. All of them were relatives also. When they saw
that Kåñëa was going away from the palace for His native place, they were very
anxious for Him, and as usual tears began to roll down their cheeks. They
thought, at the same time, that tears at that moment might be a cause of
misfortune for Kåñëa; therefore they wanted to check them. This was very
difficult for them because the tears could not be checked. Therefore, they
smeared their tears in their eyes, and their hearts throbbed. Therefore ladies
who were the wives and daughters-in-law of those who died in the battlefield
never came in direct contact with Kåñëa. But all of them heard of Him and His
great activities, and thus they thought of Him, talked of Him, His name, fame,
etc., and became affectionate also, like those who were in direct contact.
Therefore directly or indirectly anyone who thinks of Kåñëa, talks of Kåñëa or
worships Kåñëa becomes attached to Him. Because Kåñëa is absolute, there is
no difference between His name, form, quality, etc. Our intimate relation with
Kåñëa can be confidentially revived by our talking of, hearing of, or
remembering Him. It is so done due to spiritual potency.
TEXT 15
Ma*d®Xa«>aeYaRê vq<aaPa<avGaaeMau%a" )
DauNDauYaaRNak-ga<$=aÛa NaeduduRNdu>aYaSTaQaa )) 15 ))
mådaìga-çaìkha-bheryaç ca
véëä-paëava-gomukhäù
dhundhury-änaka-ghaëöädyä
nedur dundubhayas tathä
SYNONYMS
mådaìga—sweet sounding drum; çaìkha—conchshell; bheryaù—brass band;
ca—and; véëä—string band; paëava—a kind of flute; gomukhäù—another
flute; dhundhuré—another drum; änaka—kettle; ghaëöä—bell; ädyäù—others;
neduù—sounded; dundubhayaù—other different types of drums; tathä—at that
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
time.
TRANSLATION
While the Lord was departing from the palace of Hastinäpura, different
types of drums —like the mådaìga, dhola, nagra, dhundhuré and
dundubhi—and flutes of different types, the véëä, gomukha and bheré, all
sounded together to show Him honor.
TEXT 16
Pa[aSaadiXa%raæ!a" ku-åNaaYaaeR idd*+aYaa )
vv*zu" ku-SauMaE" k*-Z<a& Pa[eMav]q@aiSMaTae+a<aa" )) 16 ))
präsäda-çikharärüòhäù
kuru-näryo didåkñayä
vavåñuù kusumaiù kåñëaà
prema-vréòä-smitekñaëäù
SYNONYMS
präsäda—palace; çikhara—the roof; ärüòhäù—ascending; kuru-näryaù—the
ladies of the Kuru royalty; didåkñayä—seeing; vavåñuù—showered;
kusumaiù—by flowers; kåñëam—upon Lord Kåñëa; prema—out of affection
and love; vréòä-smita-ékñaëäù—glancing with shy smiles.
TRANSLATION
Out of a loving desire to see the Lord, the royal ladies of the Kurus got up on
top of the palace, and smiling with affection and shyness, they showered flowers
upon the Lord.
PURPORT
Shyness is a particular extra-natural beauty of the fair sex, and it commands
respect from the opposite sex. This custom was observed even during the days
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
of the Mahäbhärata, i.e., more than five thousand years ago. It is only the less
intelligent persons not well versed in the history of the world who say that
observance of separation of female from male is an introduction of the
Mohammedan period in India. This incident from the Mahäbhärata period
proves definitely that the ladies of the palace observed strict pardä (restricted
association with men), and instead of coming down in the open air where Lord
Kåñëa and others were assembled, the ladies of the palace went up on the top
of the palace and from there paid their respects to Lord Kåñëa by showers of
flowers. It is definitely stated here that the ladies were smiling there on the top
of the palace, checked by shyness. This shyness is a gift of nature to the fair
sex, and it enhances their beauty and prestige, even if they are of a less
important family or even if they are less attractive. We have practical
experience of this fact. A sweeper woman commanded the respect of many
respectable gentlemen simply by manifesting a lady’s shyness. Half-naked
ladies in the street do not command any respect, but a shy sweeper’s wife
commands respect from all.
Human civilization, as conceived of by the sages of India, is to help one free
himself from the clutches of illusion. The material beauty of a woman is an
illusion because actually the body is made of earth, water, fire, air, etc. But
because there is the association of the living spark with matter, it appears to be
beautiful. No one is attracted by an earthen doll, even if it is most perfectly
prepared to attract the attention of others. The dead body has no beauty
because no one will accept the dead body of a so-called beautiful woman.
Therefore, the conclusion is that the spirit spark is beautiful, and because of
the soul’s beauty one is attracted by the beauty of the outward body. The Vedic
wisdom, therefore, forbids us to be attracted by false beauty. But because we
are now in the darkness of ignorance, the Vedic civilization allows very
restricted mixing of woman and man. They say that the woman is considered
to be the fire, and the man is considered to be the butter. The butter must melt
in association with fire, and therefore they may be brought together only when
it is necessary. And shyness is a check to the unrestricted mixing. It is nature’s
gift, and it must be utilized.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 17
iSaTaaTaPa}a& JaGa]ah Mau¢-adaMaiv>aUizTaMa( )
rÒd<@& Gau@ake-Xa" iPa[Ya" iPa[YaTaMaSYa h )) 17 ))
sitätapatraà jagräha
muktädäma-vibhüñitam
ratna-daëòaà guòäkeçaù
priyaù priyatamasya ha
SYNONYMS
sita-ätapatram—soothing umbrella; jagräha—took up;
muktä-däma—decorated with laces and pearls; vibhüñitam—embroidered;
ratna-daëòam—with a handle of jewels; guòäkeçaù—Arjuna, the expert
warrior, or one who has conquered sleep; priyaù—most beloved;
priyatamasya—of the most beloved; ha—so he did.
TRANSLATION
At that time Arjuna, the great warrior and conqueror of sleep, who is the
intimate friend of the most beloved Supreme Lord, took up an umbrella which
had a handle of jewels and was embroidered with lace and pearls.
PURPORT
Gold, jewels, pearls and valuable stones were used in the luxurious royal
ceremonies. They are all nature’s gifts and are produced by the hills, oceans,
etc., by the order of the Lord, when man does not waste his valuable time in
producing unwanted things in the name of necessities. By so-called
development of industrial enterprises, they are now using pots of gutta-percha
instead of metals like gold, silver, brass and copper. They are using margarine
instead of purified butter, and one fourth of the city population has no shelter.
TEXT 18
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
oÖv" SaaTYaik-êEv VYaJaNae ParMaad(>auTae )
ivk-IYaRMaa<a" ku-SauMaE reJae MaDauPaiTa" PaiQa )) 18 ))
uddhavaù sätyakiç caiva
vyajane paramädbhute
vikéryamäëaù kusumai
reje madhu-patiù pathi
SYNONYMS
uddhavaù—a cousin-brother of Kåñëa’s; sätyakiù—His driver; ca—and;
eva—certainly; vyajane—engaged in fanning; parama-adbhute—decorative;
vikéryamäëaù—seated on scattered; kusumaiù—flowers all around;
reje—commanded; madhu-patiù—the master of Madhu (Kåñëa); pathi—on the
road.
TRANSLATION
Uddhava and Sätyaki began to fan the Lord with decorated fans, and the
Lord, as the master of Madhu, seated on scattered flowers, commanded them
along the road.
TEXT 19
Aé[UYaNTaaiXaz" SaTYaaSTa}a Ta}a iÜJaeirTaa" )
NaaNauæPaaNauæPaaê iNaGauR<aSYa Gau<aaTMaNa" )) 19 ))
açrüyantäçiñaù satyäs
tatra tatra dvijeritäù
nänurüpänurüpäç ca
nirguëasya guëätmanaù
SYNONYMS
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
açrüyanta—being heard; äçiñaù—benediction; satyäù—all truths; tatra—here;
tatra—there; dvija-éritäù—sounded by learned brähmaëas; na—not;
anurüpa—befitting; anurüpäù—fitting; ca—also; nirguëasya—of the
Absolute; guëa-ätmanaù—playing the role of a human being.
TRANSLATION
It was being heard here and there that the benedictions being paid to Kåñëa
were neither befitting nor unbefitting because they were all for the Absolute,
who was now playing the part of a human being.
PURPORT
At places there were sounds of Vedic benediction aiming at the Personality
of Godhead Çré Kåñëa. The benedictions were fitting in the sense that the
Lord was playing the part of a human being, as if a cousin of Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira, but they were also unfitting because the Lord is absolute and has
nothing to do with any kind of material relativities. He is nirguëa, or there are
no material qualities in Him, but He is full of transcendental qualities. In the
transcendental world there is nothing contradictory, whereas in the relative
world everything has its opposite. In the relative world white is the opposite
conception of black, but in the transcendental world there is no distinction
between white and black. Therefore the sounds of benedictions uttered by the
learned brähmaëas here and there appear to be contradictory in relation with
the Absolute Person, but when they are applied to the Absolute Person they
lose all contradiction and become transcendental. One example may clear this
idea. Lord Çré Kåñëa is sometimes described as a thief. He is very famous
amongst His pure devotees as the Mäkhana-cora. He used to steal butter from
the houses of neighbors at Våndävana in His early age. Since then He is
famous as a thief. But in spite of His being famous as a thief, He is worshiped as
a thief, whereas in the mundane world a thief is punished and is never praised.
Since He is the Absolute Personality of Godhead, everything is applicable to
Him, and still in spite of all contradictions He is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 20
ANYaaeNYaMaaSaqTSaÅLPa otaMaëaek-ceTaSaaMa( )
k-aErveNd]Paurñq<aa& SavRé[uiTaMaNaaehr" )) 20 ))
anyonyam äsét saïjalpa
uttama-çloka-cetasäm
kauravendra-pura-stréëäà
sarva-çruti-mano-haraù
SYNONYMS
anyonyam—among each other; äsét—there was; saïjalpaù—talking;
uttama-çloka—the Supreme, who is praised by selected poetry; cetasäm—of
those whose hearts are absorbed in that way; kaurava-indra—the king of the
Kurus; pura—capital; stréëäm—all the ladies; sarva—all; çruti—the Vedas;
manaù-haraù—attractive to the mind.
TRANSLATION
Absorbed in the thought of the transcendental qualities of the Lord, who is
glorified in select poetry, the ladies on the roofs of all the houses of Hastinäpura
began to talk of Him. This talk was more attractive than the hymns of the
Vedas.
PURPORT
In the Bhagavad-gétä it is said that in all the Vedic literatures the goal is the
Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa. Factually the glories of the Lord are
depicted in such literature as the Vedas, Rämäyaëa and Mahäbhärata. And in
the Bhägavatam they are specifically mentioned in respect to the Supreme
Lord. Therefore, while the ladies on the tops of the houses in the capital of the
kings of the Kuru dynasty were talking about the Lord, their talk was more
pleasing than the Vedic hymns. Anything sung in the praise of the Lord is
Çruti-mantra. There are songs of Öhäkura Narottama däsa, one of the äcäryas
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
in the Gauòéya-sampradäya, composed in simple Bengali language. But
Öhäkura Viçvanätha Cakravarté, another very learned äcärya of the same
sampradäya, has approved the songs by Öhäkura Narottama däsa to be as good
as Vedic mantras. And this is so because of the subject matter. The language is
immaterial, but the subject matter is important. The ladies, who were all
absorbed in the thought and actions of the Lord, developed the consciousness
of Vedic wisdom by the grace of the Lord. And therefore although such ladies
might not have been very learned scholars in Sanskrit or otherwise, still
whatever they spoke was more attractive than the Vedic hymns. The Vedic
hymns in the Upaniñads are sometimes indirectly directed to the Supreme
Lord. But the talks of the ladies were directly spoken of the Lord, and thus
they were more pleasing to the heart. The ladies’ talks appeared to be more
valuable than the learned brähmaëas’ benedictions.
TEXT 21
Sa vE ik-l/aYa& Pauåz" PauraTaNaae
Ya Wk- AaSaqdivXaez AaTMaiNa )
AGa]e Gau<ae>Yaae JaGadaTMaNaqìre
iNaMaqil/TaaTMaiàiXa SauáXai¢-zu )) 21 ))
sa vai kiläyaà puruñaù purätano
ya eka äséd aviçeña ätmani
agre guëebhyo jagad-ätmanéçvare
nimélitätman niçi supta-çaktiñu
SYNONYMS
saù—He (Kåñëa); vai—as I remember; kila—definitely; ayam—this;
puruñaù—Personality of Godhead; purätanaù—the original; yaù—who;
ekaù—only one; äsét—existed; aviçeñaù—materially unmanifested;
ätmani—own self; agre—before creation; guëebhyaù—of the modes of nature;
jagat-ätmani—unto the Supersoul; éçvare—unto the Supreme Lord;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
nimélita—merged into; ätman—the living entity; niçi supta—inactive at night;
çaktiñu—of the energies.
TRANSLATION
They said: Here He is, the original Personality of Godhead as we definitely
remember Him. He alone existed before the manifested creation of the modes of
nature, and in Him only, because He is the Supreme Lord, all living beings
merge, as if sleeping at night, their energy suspended.
PURPORT
There are two types of dissolution of the manifested cosmos. At the end of
every 4,320,000,000 solar years, when Brahmä, the lord of one particular
universe, goes to sleep, there is one annihilation. And at the end of Lord
Brahmä’s life, which takes place at the end of Brahmä’s one hundred years of
age, in our calculation at the end of 8,640,000,000 x 30 x 12 x 100 solar years,
there is complete annihilation of the entire universe, and in both the periods
both the material energy called the mahat-tattva and the marginal energy
called jéva-tattva merge in the person of the Supreme Lord. The living beings
remain asleep within the body of the Lord until there is another creation of
the material world, and that is the way of the creation, maintenance and
annihilation of the material manifestation.
The material creation is effected by the interaction of the three modes of
material nature set in action by the Lord, and therefore it is said here that the
Lord existed before the modes of material nature were set in motion. In the
Çruti-mantra it is said that only Viñëu, the Supreme Lord, existed before the
creation, and there was no Brahmä, Çiva or other demigods. Viñëu means the
Mahä-Viñëu, who is lying on the Causal Ocean. By His breathing only all the
universes are generated in seeds and gradually develop into gigantic forms with
innumerable planets within each and every universe. The seeds of universes
develop into gigantic forms in the way seeds of a banyan tree develop into
numberless banyan trees.
This Mahä-Viñëu is the plenary portion of the Lord Çré Kåñëa, who is
mentioned in the Brahma-saàhitä as follows:
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
“Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the original Personality of
Godhead, Govinda, whose plenary portion is the Mahä-Viñëu. All the
Brahmäs, the heads of the universes, live only for the period of His exhaling,
after the universes are generated from the pores of His transcendental body.”
(Brahma-saàhitä 5.58)
Thus Govinda, or Lord Kåñëa, is the cause of Mahä-Viñëu also. The ladies
talking about this Vedic truth must have heard it from authoritative sources.
An authoritative source is the only means of knowing about transcendental
subject matter definitely. There is no alternative.
The merging of the living beings into the body of Mahä-Viñëu takes place
automatically at the end of Brahmä’s one hundred years. But that does not
mean that the individual living being loses his identity. The identity is there,
and as soon as there is another creation by the supreme will of the Lord, all the
sleeping, inactive living beings are again let loose to begin their activities in
the continuation of past different spheres of life. It is called suptotthita naya, or
awakening from sleep and again engaging in one’s respective continuous duty.
When a man is asleep at night, he forgets himself, what he is, what his duty is
and everything of his waking state. But as soon as he awakens from slumber, he
remembers all that he has to do and thus engages himself again in his
prescribed activities. The living beings also remain merged in the body of
Mahä-Viñëu during the period of annihilation, but as soon as there is another
creation they arise to take up their unfinished work. This is also confirmed in
the Bhagavad-gétä (8.18–20).
The Lord existed before the creative energy was set in action. The Lord is
not a product of the material energy. His body is completely spiritual, and
there is no difference between His body and Himself. Before creation the Lord
remained in His abode, which is absolute and one.
TEXT 22
Sa Wv >aUYaae iNaJavqYaRcaeidTaa&
SvJaqvMaaYaa& Pa[k*-iTa& iSaSa*+aTaqMa( )
ANaaMaæPaaTMaiNa æPaNaaMaNaq
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
iviDaTSaMaaNaae_NauSaSaar Xaañk*-Ta( )) 22 ))
sa eva bhüyo nija-vérya-coditäà
sva-jéva-mäyäà prakåtià sisåkñatém
anäma-rüpätmani rüpa-nämané
vidhitsamäno ’nusasära çästra-kåt
SYNONYMS
saù—He; eva—thus; bhüyaù—again; nija—own personal; vérya—potency;
coditäm—performance of; sva—own; jéva—living being; mäyäm—external
energy; prakåtim—unto material nature; sisåkñatém—while re-creating;
anäma—without mundane designation; rüpa-ätmani—forms of the soul;
rüpa-nämané—forms and names; vidhitsamänaù—desiring to award;
anusasära—entrusted; çästra-kåt—the compiler of revealed scripture.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead, again desiring to give names and forms to His
parts and parcels, the living entities, placed them under the guidance of material
nature. By His own potency, material nature is empowered to re-create.
PURPORT
The living entities are parts and parcels of the Lord. They are of two
varieties, namely nitya-mukta and nitya-baddha. The nitya-muktas are eternally
liberated souls, and they are eternally engaged in the reciprocation of
transcendental loving service with the Lord in His eternal abode beyond the
manifested mundane creations. But the nitya-baddha, or eternally conditioned
souls, are entrusted to His external energy, mäyä, for rectification of their
rebellious attitude toward the Supreme Father. Nitya-baddhas are eternally
forgetful of their relation with the Lord as parts and parcels. They are
bewildered by the illusory energy as products of matter, and thus they are very
busy in making plans in the material world for becoming happy. They go on
merrily with plans, but by the will of the Lord both the planmakers and the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
plans are annihilated at the end of a certain period, as above mentioned. This
is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä as follows: “O son of Kunté, at the end of the
millennium all the living entities merge into My nature, and again when the
time of creation is ripe, I begin creation by the agency of My external energy.”
(Bg. 9.7)
The word bhüyaù indicates again and again, that is to say the process of
creation, maintenance and annihilation is going on perpetually by the external
energy of the Lord. He is the cause of everything. But the living beings, who
are constitutionally the parts and parcels of the Lord and are forgetful of the
sweet relation, are given a chance again to get rid of the clutches of the
external energy. And to revive his (the living being’s) consciousness, the
revealed scriptures are also created by the Lord. Vedic literatures are the
guiding directions for the conditioned souls so they can get free from the
repetition of creation and annihilation of the material world and the material
body.
The Lord says in the Bhagavad-gétä, “This created world and material
energy are under My control. Under the influence of prakåti, automatically
they are created again and again, and this is done by Me through the agency of
My external energy.”
Actually the spiritual spark living entities have no material names or forms.
But in order to fulfill their desire to lord it over the material energy of material
forms and names, they are given a chance for such false enjoyment, and at the
same time they are given a chance to understand the real position through the
revealed scriptures. The foolish and forgetful living being is always busy with
false forms and false names. Modern nationalism is the culmination of such
false names and false forms. Men are mad after false name and form. The form
of body obtained under certain conditions is taken up as factual, and the name
also taken bewilders the conditioned soul into misusing the energy in the name
of so many “isms.” The scriptures, however, supply the clue for understanding
the real position, but men are reluctant to take lessons from the scriptures
created by the Lord for different places and times. For example, the
Bhagavad-gétä is the guiding principle for every human being, but by the spell
of material energy they do not take care to carry out the programs of life in
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
terms of the Bhagavad-gétä. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the post-graduate study of
knowledge for one who has thoroughly understood the principles of the
Bhagavad-gétä. Unfortunately people have no taste for them, and therefore
they are under the clutches of mäyä for repetition of birth and death.
TEXT 23
Sa va AYa& YaTPadMa}a SaUrYaae
iJaTaeiNd]Yaa iNaiJaRTaMaaTairìNa" )
PaXYaiNTa >a¢-yuTk-il/TaaMal/aTMaNaa
NaNvez Satv& PairMaaíuRMahRiTa )) 23 ))
sa vä ayaà yat padam atra sürayo
jitendriyä nirjita-mätariçvanaù
paçyanti bhakty-utkalitämalätmanä
nanv eña sattvaà parimärñöum arhati
SYNONYMS
saù—He; vai—by providence; ayam—this; yat—that which; padam atra—here
is the same Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa; sürayaù—great devotees;
jita-indriyäù—who have overcome the influence of the senses;
nirjita—thoroughly controlled; mätariçvanaù—life; paçyanti—can see;
bhakti—by dint of devotional service; utkalita—developed;
amala-ätmanä—those whose minds are thoroughly cleansed; nanu
eñaù—certainly by this only; sattvam—existence; parimärñöum—for purifying
the mind completely; arhati—deserve.
TRANSLATION
Here is the same Supreme Personality of Godhead whose transcendental
form is experienced by the great devotees who are completely cleansed of
material consciousness by dint of rigid devotional service and full control of life
and the senses. And that is the only way to purify existence.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
As it is stated in Bhagavad-gétä, the Lord can be known in His real nature
by dint of pure devotional service only. So it is stated here that only the great
devotees of the Lord who are able to clear the mind of all material dust by rigid
devotional service can experience the Lord as He is. Jitendriya means one who
has full control over the senses. The senses are active parts of the body, and
their activities cannot be stopped. The artificial means of the yogic processes
to make the senses inactive has proved to be abject failure, even in the case of
great yogés like Viçvämitra Muni. Viçvämitra Muni controlled the senses by
yogic trance, but when he happened to meet Menakä (a heavenly society
woman), he became a victim of sex, and the artificial way of controlling the
senses failed. But in the case of a pure devotee, the senses are not at all
artificially stopped from doing anything, but they are given different good
engagements. When the senses are engaged in more attractive activities, there
is no chance of their being attracted by any inferior engagements. In the
Bhagavad-gétä it is said that the senses can be controlled only by better
engagements. Devotional service necessitates purifying the senses or engaging
them in the activities of devotional service. Devotional service is not inaction.
Anything done in the service of the Lord becomes at once purified of its
material nature. The material conception is due to ignorance only. There is
nothing beyond Väsudeva. The Väsudeva conception gradually develops in the
heart of the learned after a prolonged acceleration of the receptive organs. But
the process ends in the knowledge of accepting Väsudeva as all in all. In the
case of devotional service, this very same method is accepted from the very
beginning, and by the grace of the Lord all factual knowledge becomes
revealed in the heart of a devotee due to dictation by the Lord from within.
Therefore controlling the senses by devotional service is the only and easiest
means.
TEXT 24
Sa va AYa& Sa:YaNauGaqTaSaTk-Qaae
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
vedezu Gauùezu c Gauùvaidi>a" )
Ya Wk- wRXaae JaGadaTMal/Il/Yaa
Sa*JaTYavTYaita Na Ta}a SaÂTae )) 24 ))
sa vä ayaà sakhy anugéta-sat-katho
vedeñu guhyeñu ca guhya-vädibhiù
ya eka éço jagad-ätma-lélayä
såjaty avaty atti na tatra sajjate
SYNONYMS
saù—He; vai—also; ayam—this; sakhi—O my friend; anugéta—described;
sat-kathaù—the excellent pastimes; vedeñu—in the Vedic literatures;
guhyeñu—confidentially; ca—as also; guhya-vädibhiù—by the confidential
devotees; yaù—one who; ekaù—one only; éçaù—the supreme controller;
jagat—of the complete creation; ätma—Supersoul; lélayä—by manifestation of
pastimes; såjati—creates; avati atti—also maintains and annihilates;
na—never; tatra—there; sajjate—becomes attached to it.
TRANSLATION
O dear friends, here is that very Personality of Godhead whose attractive
and confidential pastimes are described in the confidential parts of Vedic
literature by His great devotees. It is He only who creates, maintains and
annihilates the material world and yet remains unaffected.
PURPORT
As it is stated in the Bhagavad-gétä, all the Vedic literatures are glorifying
the greatness of Lord Çré Kåñëa. Here it is confirmed in the Bhägavatam also.
The Vedas are expanded by many branches and subbranches by great devotees
and empowered incarnations of the Lord like Vyäsa, Närada, Çukadeva
Gosvämé, the Kumäras, Kapila, Prahläda, Janaka, Bali and Yamaräja, but in the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam especially, the confidential parts of His activities are
described by the confidential devotee Çukadeva Gosvämé. In the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Vedänta-sütras or Upaniñads there is only a hint of the confidential parts of
His pastimes. In such Vedic literatures as the Upaniñads, the Lord has
expressively been distinguished from the mundane conception of His
existence. His identity being fully spiritual, His form, name, quality, and
paraphernalia, etc., have been elaborately distinguished from matter, and
therefore He is sometimes misunderstood by less intelligent persons as
impersonal. But factually He is the Supreme Person, Bhagavän, and He is
partially represented as Paramätmä or impersonal Brahman.
TEXT 25
Yada ùDaMaeR<a TaMaaeiDaYaae Na*Paa
JaqviNTa Ta}aEz ih SatvTa" ik-l/ )
Datae >aGa& SaTYaMa*Ta& dYaa& YaXaae
>avaYa æPaai<a dDaÛuGae YauGae )) 25 ))
yadä hy adharmeëa tamo-dhiyo nåpä
jévanti tatraiña hi sattvataù kila
dhatte bhagaà satyam åtaà dayäà yaço
bhaväya rüpäëi dadhad yuge yuge
SYNONYMS
yadä—whenever; hi—assuredly; adharmeëa—against the principles of God’s
will; tamaù-dhiyaù—persons in the lowest material modes; nåpäù—kings and
administrators; jévanti—live like animals; tatra—thereupon; eñaù—He;
hi—only; sattvataù—transcendental; kila—certainly; dhatte—is manifested;
bhagam—supreme power; satyam—truth; åtam—positiveness; dayäm—mercy;
yaçaù—wonderful activities; bhaväya—for the maintenance; rüpäëi—in
various forms; dadhat—manifested; yuge—different periods; yuge—and ages.
TRANSLATION
Whenever there are kings and administrators living like animals in the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
lowest modes of existence, the Lord in His transcendental form manifests His
supreme power, the Truth Positive, shows special mercy to the faithful,
performs wonderful activities and manifests various transcendental forms as is
necessary in different periods and ages.
PURPORT
As mentioned above, the cosmic creation is the property of the Supreme
Lord. This is the basic philosophy of Éçopaniñad: everything is the property of
the Supreme Being. No one should encroach upon the property of the
Supreme Lord. One should accept only what is kindly awarded by Him.
Therefore, the earth or any other planet or universe is the absolute property of
the Lord. The living beings are certainly His parts and parcels, or sons, and
thus every one of them has a right to live at the mercy of the Lord to execute
his prescribed work. No one, therefore, can encroach upon the right of
another individual man or animal without being so sanctioned by the Lord.
The king or the administrator is the representative of the Lord to look after
the management of the Lord’s will. He must therefore be a recognized person
like Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira or Parékñit. Such kings have full responsibility and
knowledge from authorities about the administration of the world. But at
times, due to the influence of the ignorance mode of material nature
(tamo-guëa), the lowest of the material modes, kings and administrators come
into power without knowledge and responsibility, and such foolish
administrators live like animals for the sake of their own personal interest.
The result is that the whole atmosphere becomes surcharged with anarchy and
vicious elements. Nepotism, bribery, cheating, aggression and, therefore,
famine, epidemic, war and similar other disturbing features become prominent
in human society. And the devotees of the Lord or the faithful are persecuted
by all means. All these symptoms indicate the time of an incarnation of the
Lord to reestablish the principles of religion and to vanquish the
maladministrators. This is also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä.
The Lord then appears in His transcendental form without any tinge of
material qualities. He descends just to keep the state of His creation in a
normal condition. The normal condition is that the Lord has provided each
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
and every planet with all the needs of the native living beings. They can
happily live and execute their predestined occupations to attain salvation at
the end, following the rules and regulations mentioned in the revealed
scriptures. The material world is created to satisfy the whims of the
nitya-baddha, or everlasting conditioned souls, just as naughty boys are
provided with playing cradles. Otherwise, there was no need of the material
world. But when they become intoxicated with the power of material science
to exploit the resources unlawfully without the sanction of the Lord, and that
also only for sense gratification, there is necessity of the Lord’s incarnation to
chastise the rebellious and to protect the faithful.
When He descends, He exhibits superhuman acts just to prove His supreme
right, and materialists like Rävaëa, Hiraëyakaçipu and Kaàsa are sufficiently
punished. He acts in a manner which no one can imitate. For example, the
Lord, when He appeared as Räma, bridged the Indian Ocean. When He
appeared as Kåñëa, from His very childhood He showed superhuman activities
by killing Pütanä, Aghäsura, Çakaöäsura, Käliya, etc., and then His maternal
uncle Kaàsa. When He was at Dvärakä He married 16,108 queens, and all of
them were blessed with a sufficient number of children. The sum total of His
personal family members amounted to about 100,000, popularly known as the
Yadu-vaàça. And again, during His lifetime, He managed to vanquish them
all. He is famous as the Govardhana-dhäré Hari because He lifted at the age of
only seven the hill known as Govardhana. The Lord killed many undesirable
kings in His time, and as a kñatriya He fought chivalrously. He is famous as the
asamaurdhva, unparalleled. No one is equal to or greater than Him.
TEXT 26
Ahae Al&/ ëagYaTaMa& Yadae" ku-l/‚
Mahae Al&/ Pau<YaTaMa& MaDaaevRNaMa( )
Yadez Pau&SaaMa*z>a" ié[Ya" PaiTa"
SvJaNMaNaa cx(k]-Ma<aeNa caÄiTa )) 26 ))
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
aho alaà çläghyatamaà yadoù kulam
aho alaà puëyatamaà madhor vanam
yad eña puàsäm åñabhaù çriyaù patiù
sva-janmanä caìkramaëena cäïcati
SYNONYMS
aho—oh; alam—verily; çläghya-tamam—supremely glorified; yadoù—of King
Yadu; kulam—dynasty; aho—oh; alam—verily; puëya-tamam—supremely
virtuous; madhoù vanam—the land of Mathurä; yat—because; eñaù—this;
puàsäm—of all the living beings; åñabhaù—supreme leader; çriyaù—of the
goddess of fortune; patiù—husband; sva-janmanä—by His appearance;
caìkramaëena—by crawling; ca aïcati—glories.
TRANSLATION
Oh, how supremely glorified is the dynasty of King Yadu, and how virtuous
is the land of Mathurä, where the supreme leader of all living beings, the
husband of the goddess of fortune, has taken His birth and wandered in His
childhood.
PURPORT
In the Bhagavad-gétä the Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa has expressively
given a description of His transcendental appearance, disappearance and
activities. The Lord appears in a particular family or place by His
inconceivable potency. He does not take His birth as a conditioned soul quits
his body and accepts another body. His birth is like the appearance and
disappearance of the sun. The sun arises on the eastern horizon, but that does
not mean that the eastern horizon is the parent of the sun. The sun is existent
in every part of the solar system, but he becomes visible at a scheduled time
and so also becomes invisible at another scheduled time. Similarly, the Lord
appears in this universe like the sun and again leaves our sight at another time.
He exists at all times and at every place, but by His causeless mercy when He
appears before us we take it for granted that He has taken His birth. Anyone
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
who can understand this truth, in terms of the statements of revealed
scriptures, certainly becomes liberated just after quitting the present body.
Liberation is obtainable after many births and after great endeavor in patience
and perseverance, in knowledge and renunciation. But simply by knowing in
truth about the Lord’s transcendental births and activities, one can get
liberation at once. That is the verdict of the Bhagavad-gétä. But those who are
in the darkness of ignorance conclude that the Lord’s birth and activities in
the material world are similar to those of the ordinary living being. Such
imperfect conclusions cannot give anyone liberation. His birth, therefore, in
the family of King Yadu as the son of King Vasudeva and His transfer into the
family of Nanda Mahäräja in the land of Mathurä are all transcendental
arrangements made by the internal potency of the Lord. The fortunes of the
Yadu dynasty and that of the inhabitants of the land of Mathurä cannot be
materially estimated. If simply by knowing the transcendental nature of the
birth and activities of the Lord one can get liberation easily, we can just
imagine what is in store for those who actually enjoyed the company of the
Lord in person as a family member or as a neighbor. All those who were
fortunate enough to associate with the Lord, the husband of the goddess of
fortune, certainly obtained something more than what is known as liberation.
Therefore, rightly, the dynasty and the land are both ever glorious by the grace
of the Lord.
TEXT 27
Ahae bTa SvYaRXaSaiSTarSk-rq
ku-XaSQal/I Pau<YaYaXaSk-rq >auv" )
PaXYaiNTa iNaTYa& YadNauGa]heizTa&
iSMaTaavl/aek&- SvPaiTa& SMa YaTPa[Jaa" )) 27 ))
aho bata svar-yaçasas tiraskaré
kuçasthalé puëya-yaçaskaré bhuvaù
paçyanti nityaà yad anugraheñitaà
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
smitävalokaà sva-patià sma yat-prajäù
SYNONYMS
aho bata—how wonderful this is; svaù-yaçasaù—the glories of the heavenly
planets; tiraskaré—that which defeats; kuçasthalé—Dvärakä; puëya—virtue;
yaçaskaré—famous; bhuvaù—the planet earth; paçyanti—see;
nityam—constantly; yat—that which; anugraha-iñitam—to bestow
benediction; smita-avalokam—glance with the favor of sweet smiling;
sva-patim—unto the soul of the living being (Kåñëa); sma—used to;
yat-prajäù—the inhabitants of the place.
TRANSLATION
Undoubtedly it is wonderful that Dvärakä has defeated the glories of the
heavenly planets and has enhanced the celebrity of the earth. The inhabitants
of Dvärakä are always seeing the soul of all living beings [Kåñëa] in His loving
feature. He glances at them and favors them with sweet smiles.
PURPORT
The heavenly planets are inhabited by demigods like Indra, Candra,
Varuëa and Väyu and the pious souls reach there after performance of many
virtuous acts on earth. Modern scientists agree that the timing arrangement in
higher planetary systems is different from that of the earth. Thus it is
understood from the revealed scriptures that the duration of life there is ten
thousand years (by our calculation). Six months on earth is equal to one day
on the heavenly planets. Facilities of enjoyment are also similarly enhanced,
and the beauty of the inhabitants is legendary. Common men on the earth are
very much fond of reaching the heavenly planets because they have heard that
comforts of life are far greater there than on the earth. They are now trying to
reach the moon by spacecraft. Considering all this, the heavenly planets are
more celebrated than the earth. But the celebrity of earth has defeated that of
the heavenly planets because of Dvärakä, where Lord Çré Kåñëa reigned as
King. Three places, namely Våndävana, Mathurä and Dvärakä, are more
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
important than the famous planets within the universe. These places are
perpetually sanctified because whenever the Lord descends on earth He
displays His transcendental activities particularly in these three places. They
are perpetually the holy lands of the Lord, and the inhabitants still take
advantage of the holy places, even though the Lord is now out of their sight.
The Lord is the soul of all living beings, and He desires always to have all the
living beings, in their svarüpa, in their constitutional position, to participate in
transcendental life in His association. His attractive features and sweet smiles
go deep into the heart of everyone, and once it is so done the living being is
admitted into the kingdom of God, from which no one returns. This is
confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä.
The heavenly planets may be very famous for offering better facilities of
material enjoyment, but as we learn from the Bhagavad-gétä (9.20–21), one has
to come back again to the earth planet as soon as the acquired virtue is
finished. Dvärakä is certainly more important than the heavenly planets
because whoever has been favored with the smiling glance of the Lord shall
never come back again to this rotten earth, which is certified by the Lord
Himself as a place of misery. Not only this earth but also all the planets of the
universes are places of misery because in none of the planets within the
universe is there eternal life, eternal bliss and eternal knowledge. Any person
engaged in the devotional service of the Lord is recommended to live in one of
the above-mentioned three places, namely Dvärakä, Mathurä or Våndävana.
Because devotional service in these three places is magnified, those who go
there to follow the principles in terms of instructions imparted in the revealed
scriptures surely achieve the same result as obtained during the presence of
Lord Çré Kåñëa. His abode and He Himself are identical, and a pure devotee
under the guidance of another experienced devotee can obtain all the results,
even at present.
TEXT 28
NaUNa& v]TaòaNahuTaaidNaeìr"
SaMaicRTaae ùSYa Ga*hqTaPaai<ai>a" )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
iPabiNTa Yaa" Sa:YaDaraMa*Ta& Mauhu‚
v]RJaiñYa" SaMMauMauhuYaRdaXaYaa" )) 28 ))
nünaà vrata-snäna-hutädineçvaraù
samarcito hy asya gåhéta-päëibhiù
pibanti yäù sakhy adharämåtaà muhur
vraja-striyaù sammumuhur yad-äçayäù
SYNONYMS
nünam—certainly in the previous birth; vrata—vow; snäna—bath;
huta—sacrifice in the fire; ädinä—by all these; éçvaraù—the Personality of
Godhead; samarcitaù—perfectly worshiped; hi—certainly; asya—His;
gåhéta-päëibhiù—by the married wives; pibanti—relishes; yäù—those who;
sakhi—O friend; adhara-amåtam—the nectar from His lips; muhuù—again
and again; vraja-striyaù—the damsels of Vrajabhümi; sammumuhuù—often
fainted; yat-äçayäù—expecting to be favored in that way.
TRANSLATION
O friends, just think of His wives, whose hands He has accepted. How they
must have undergone vows, baths, fire sacrifices and perfect worship of the
Lord of the universe to constantly relish now the nectar from His lips [by
kissing]. The damsels of Vrajabhümi would often faint just by expecting such
favors.
PURPORT
Religious rites prescribed in the scriptures are meant to purify the mundane
qualities of the conditioned souls to enable them to be gradually promoted to
the stage of rendering transcendental service unto the Supreme Lord.
Attainment of this stage of pure spiritual life is the highest perfection, and this
stage is called svarüpa, or the factual identity of the living being. Liberation
means renovation of this stage of svarüpa. In that perfect stage of svarüpa, the
living being is established in five phases of loving service, one of which is the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
stage of mädhurya-rasa, or the humor of conjugal love. The Lord is always
perfect in Himself, and thus He has no hankering for Himself. He, however,
becomes a master, a friend, a son or a husband to fulfill the intense love of the
devotee concerned. Herein two classes of devotees of the Lord are mentioned
in the stage of conjugal love. One is svakéya, and the other is parakéya. Both of
them are in conjugal love with the Personality of Godhead Kåñëa. The queens
at Dvärakä were svakéya, or duly married wives, but the damsels of Vraja were
young friends of the Lord while He was unmarried. The Lord stayed at
Våndävana till the age of sixteen, and His friendly relations with the
neighboring girls were in terms of parakéya. These girls, as well as the queens,
underwent severe penances by taking vows, bathing and offering sacrifices in
the fire, as prescribed in the scriptures. The rites, as they are, are not an end in
themselves, nor are fruitive action, culture of knowledge or perfection in
mystic powers ends in themselves. They are all means to attain to the highest
stage of svarüpa, to render constitutional transcendental service to the Lord.
Each and every living being has his individual position in one of the
above-mentioned five different kinds of reciprocating means with the Lord,
and in one’s pure spiritual form of svarüpa the relation becomes manifest
without mundane affinity. The kissing of the Lord, either by His wives or His
young girl friends who aspired to have the Lord as their fiance, is not of any
mundane perverted quality. Had such things been mundane, a liberated soul
like Çukadeva would not have taken the trouble to relish them, nor would Lord
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu have been inclined to participate in those subjects
after renouncing worldly life. The stage is earned after many lives of penance.
TEXT 29
Yaa vqYaRéuLke-Na ôTaa" SvYa&vre
Pa[MaQYa cEÛPa[Mau%aNa( ih éuiZMa<a" )
Pa[ÛuManSaaMbaMbSauTaadYaae_Para
YaaêaôTaa >aaEMavDae SahóXa" )) 29 ))
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
yä vérya-çulkena håtäù svayaàvare
pramathya caidya-pramukhän hi çuñmiëaù
pradyumna-sämbämba-sutädayo ’parä
yäç cähåtä bhauma-vadhe sahasraçaù
SYNONYMS
yä—the lady; vérya—prowess; çulkena—by payment of the price; håtäù—taken
away by force; svayaàvare—in the open selection of the bridegroom;
pramathya—harassing; caidya—King Çiçupäla; pramukhän—headed by;
hi—positively; çuñmiëaù—all very powerful; pradyumna—Pradyumna (Kåñëa’s
son); sämba—Sämba; amba—Amba; suta-ädayaù—children; aparäù—other
ladies; yäù—those; ca—also; ähåtäù—similarly brought; bhauma-vadhe—after
killing kings; sahasraçaù—by the thousands.
TRANSLATION
The children of these ladies are Pradyumna, Sämba, Amba, etc: Ladies like
Rukmiëé, Satyabhämä and Jämbavaté were forcibly taken away by Him from
their svayaàvara ceremonies after He defeated many powerful kings, headed by
Çiçupäla. And other ladies were also forcibly taken away by Him after He killed
Bhaumäsura and thousands of his assistants. All of these ladies are glorious.
PURPORT
Exceptionally qualified daughters of powerful kings were allowed to make a
choice of their own bridegrooms in open competition, and such ceremonies
were called svayaàvara, or selection of the bridegroom. Because the
svayaàvara was an open competition between the rival and valiant princes,
such princes were invited by the father of the princess, and usually there were
regular fights between the invited princely order in a sporting spirit. But it so
happened that sometimes the belligerent princes were killed in such
marriage-fighting, and the victorious prince was offered the trophy princess
for whom so many princes died. Rukmiëé, the principal queen of Lord Kåñëa,
was the daughter of the King of Vidarbha, who wished that his qualified and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
beautiful daughter be given away to Lord Kåñëa. But her eldest brother wanted
her to be given away to King Çiçupäla, who happened to be a cousin of Kåñëa.
So there was open competition, and as usual Lord Kåñëa emerged successful,
after harassing Çiçupäla and other princes by His unrivalled prowess. Rukmiëé
had ten sons, like Pradyumna. There were other queens also taken away by
Lord Kåñëa in a similar way. Full description of this beautiful booty of Lord
Kåñëa will be given in the Tenth Canto. There were 16,100 beautiful girls who
were daughters of many kings and were forcibly stolen by Bhaumäsura, who
kept them captive for his carnal desire. These girls prayed piteously to Lord
Kåñëa for their deliverance, and the merciful Lord, called by their fervent
prayer, released them all by fighting and killing Bhaumäsura. All these captive
princesses were then accepted by the Lord as His wives, although in the
estimation of society they were all fallen girls. The all-powerful Lord Kåñëa
accepted the humble prayers of these girls and married them with the
adoration of queens. So altogether Lord Kåñëa had 16,108 queens at Dvärakä,
and in each of them He begot ten children. All these children grew up, and
each had as many children as the father. The aggregate of the family numbered
10,000,000.
TEXT 30
WTaa" Par& ñqTvMaPaaSTaPaeXal&/
iNarSTaXaaEc& bTa SaaDau ku-vRTae )
YaaSaa& Ga*haTPauZk-rl/aecNa" PaiTa‚
NaR JaaTvPaETYaaôiTai>aôRid SPa*XaNa( )) 30 ))
etäù paraà strétvam apästapeçalaà
nirasta-çaucaà bata sädhu kurvate
yäsäà gåhät puñkara-locanaù patir
na jätv apaity ähåtibhir hådi spåçan
SYNONYMS
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
etäù—all these women; param—highest; strétvam—womanhood;
apästapeçalam—without individuality; nirasta—without; çaucam—purity; bata
sädhu—auspiciously glorified; kurvate—do they make; yäsäm—from whose;
gåhät—homes; puñkara-locanaù—the lotus-eyed; patiù—husband; na
jätu—never at any time; apaiti—goes away; ähåtibhiù—by presentation;
hådi—in the heart; spåçan—endeared.
TRANSLATION
All these women auspiciously glorified their lives despite their being without
individuality and without purity. Their husband, the lotus-eyed Personality of
Godhead, never left them alone at home. He always pleased their hearts by
making valuable presentations.
PURPORT
The devotees of the Lord are purified souls. As soon as the devotees
surrender unto the lotus feet of the Lord sincerely, the Lord accepts them, and
thus the devotees at once become free from all material contaminations. Such
devotees are above the three modes of material nature. There is no bodily
disqualification of a devotee, just as there is no qualitative difference between
the Ganges water and the filthy drain water when they are amalgamated.
Women, merchants and laborers are not very intelligent, and thus it is very
difficult for them to understand the science of God or to be engaged in the
devotional service of the Lord. They are more materialistic, and less than them
are the Kirätas, Hüëas, Ändhras, Pulindas, Pulkaças, Äbhéras, Kaìkas,
Yavanas, Khasas, etc., but all of them can be delivered if they are properly
engaged in the devotional service of the Lord. By engagement in the service of
the Lord, the designative disqualifications are removed, and as pure souls they
become eligible to enter into the kingdom of God.
The fallen girls under the clutches of Bhaumäsura sincerely prayed to Lord
Çré Kåñëa for their deliverance, and their sincerity of purpose made them at
once pure by virtue of devotion. The Lord therefore accepted them as His
wives, and thus their lives became glorified. Such auspicious glorification was
still more glorified when the Lord played with them as the most devoted
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
husband.
The Lord used to live with His 16,108 wives constantly. He expanded
Himself into 16,108 plenary portions, and each and every one of them was the
Lord Himself without deviation from the Original Personality. The
Çruti-mantra affirms that the Lord can expand Himself into many. As husband
of so many wives, He pleased them all with presentations, even at a costly
endeavor. He brought the pärijäta plant from heaven and implanted it at the
palace of Satyabhämä, one of the principal queens. If, therefore, anyone
desires the Lord to become one’s husband, the Lord fulfills such desires in full.
TEXT 31
Wv&ivDaa GadNTaqNaa& Sa iGar" PaurYaaeizTaaMa( )
iNarq+a<aeNaai>aNaNdNa( SaiSMaTaeNa YaYaaE hir" )) 31 ))
evaàvidhä gadanténäà
sa giraù pura-yoñitäm
nirékñaëenäbhinandan
sasmitena yayau hariù
SYNONYMS
evaàvidhäù—in this way; gadanténäm—thus praying and talking about Him;
saù—He (the Lord); giraù—of words; pura-yoñitäm—of the ladies of the
capital; nirékñaëena—by His grace of glancing over them; abhinandan—and
greeting them; sa-smitena—with a smiling face; yayau—departed; hariù—the
Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
While the ladies of the capital of Hastinäpura were greeting Him and talking
in this way, the Lord, smiling, accepted their good greetings, and casting the
grace of His glance over them, He departed from the city.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 32
AJaaTaXa}au" Pa*TaNaa& GaaePaqQaaYa MaDauiÜz" )
Pare>Ya" XaiªTa" òehaTPa[aYau» cTauri®<aqMa( )) 32 ))
ajäta-çatruù påtanäà
gopéthäya madhu-dviñaù
parebhyaù çaìkitaù snehät
präyuìkta catur-aìgiëém
SYNONYMS
ajäta-çatruù—Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, who was no one’s enemy;
påtanäm—defensive forces; gopéthäya—for giving protection;
madhu-dviñaù—of the enemy of Madhu (Çré Kåñëa); parebhyaù—from others
(enemies); çaìkitaù—being afraid of; snehät—out of affection;
präyuìkta—engaged; catuù-aìgiëém—four defensive divisions.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, although no one’s enemy, engaged four divisions of
defense [horse, elephant, chariot and army] to accompany Lord Kåñëa, the
enemy of the asuras [demons]. The Mahäräja did this because of the enemy, and
also out of affection for the Lord.
PURPORT
Natural defensive measures are horses and elephants combined with
chariots and men. Horses and elephants are trained to move to any part of the
hills or forests and plains. The charioteers could fight with many horses and
elephants by the strength of powerful arrows, even up to the standard of the
brahmästra (similar to modern atomic weapons). Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira knew
well that Kåñëa is everyone’s friend and well-wisher, and yet there were asuras
who were by nature envious of the Lord. So out of fear of attack from others
and out of affection also, he engaged all varieties of defensive forces as
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
bodyguards of Lord Kåñëa. If required, Lord Kåñëa Himself was sufficient to
defend Himself from the attack of others who counted the Lord as their
enemy, but still He accepted all the arrangements made by Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira because He could not disobey the King, who was His elder cousin.
The Lord plays the part of a subordinate in His transcendental sporting, and
thus sometimes He puts Himself in the care of Yaçodämätä for His protection
in His so-called helplessness of childhood. That is the transcendental lélä, or
pastime of the Lord. The basic principle for all transcendental exchanges
between the Lord and His devotees is exhibited to enjoy a transcendental bliss
for which there is no comparison, even up to the level of brahmänanda.
TEXT 33
AQa dUraGaTaaNa( XaaEir" k-aErvaNa( ivrhaTauraNa( )
SaiàvTYaR d*!& iòGDaaNa( Pa[aYaaTSvNaGarq& iPa[YaE" )) 33 ))
atha dürägatän çauriù
kauravän virahäturän
sannivartya dåòhaà snigdhän
präyät sva-nagaréà priyaiù
SYNONYMS
atha—thus; dürägatän—having accompanied Him for a long distance;
çauriù—Lord Kåñëa; kauravän—the Päëòavas; virahäturän—overwhelmed by
a sense of separation; sannivartya—politely persuaded; dåòham—determined;
snigdhän—full of affection; präyät—proceeded; sva-nagarém—towards His
own city (Dvärakä); priyaiù—with dear companions.
TRANSLATION
Out of profound affection for Lord Kåñëa, the Päëòavas, who were of the
Kuru dynasty, accompanied Him a considerable distance to see Him off. They
were overwhelmed with the thought of future separation. The Lord, however,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
persuaded them to return home, and He proceeded towards Dvärakä with His
dear companions.
TEXTS 34–35
ku-åJaa®l/PaaÄal/aNa( éUrSaeNaaNa( SaYaaMauNaaNa( )
b]øavTa| ku-å+ae}a& MaTSYaaNa( SaarSvTaaNaQa )) 34 ))
MaåDaNvMaiTa§-MYa SaaEvqra>aqrYaae" ParaNa( )
AaNaTaaRNa( >aaGaRvaePaaGaaC^\aNTavahae MaNaaiGv>au" )) 35 ))
kuru-jäìgala-päïcälän
çürasenän sayämunän
brahmävartaà kurukñetraà
matsyän särasvatän atha
maru-dhanvam atikramya
sauvéräbhérayoù parän
änartän bhärgavopägäc
chräntaväho manäg vibhuù
SYNONYMS
kuru-jäìgala—the province of Delhi; päïcälän—part of the province Punjab;
çürasenän—part of the province of Uttar Pradesh; sa—with; yämunän—the
districts on the bank of the Yamunä; brahmävartam—part of northern Uttar
Pradesh; kurukñetram—the place where the battle was fought; matsyän—the
province Matsyä; särasvatän—part of Punjab; atha—and so on;
maru—Rajasthan, the land of deserts; dhanvam—Madhya Pradesh, where
water is very scanty; ati-kramya—after passing; sauvéra—Saurastra;
äbhérayoù—part of Gujarat; parän—western side; änartän—the province of
Dvärakä; bhärgava—O Çaunaka; upägät—overtaken by; çränta—fatigue;
vähaù—the horses; manäk vibhuù—slightly, because of the long journey.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
O Çaunaka, the Lord then proceeded towards Kurujäìgala, Päïcälä,
Çürasenä, the land on the bank of the River Yamunä, Brahmävarta,
Kurukñetra, Matsyä, Särasvatä, the province of the desert and the land of
scanty water. After crossing these provinces He gradually reached the Sauvéra
and Äbhéra provinces, then west of these, reached Dvärakä at last.
PURPORT
The provinces passed over by the Lord in those days were differently
named, but the direction given is sufficient to indicate that He traveled
through Delhi, Punjab, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Saurastra and Gujarat
and at last reached His home province at Dvärakä. We do not gain any profit
simply by researching the analogous provinces of those days up to now, but it
appears that the desert of Rajasthan and the provinces of scanty water like
Madhya Pradesh were present even five thousand years ago. The theory of soil
experts that the desert developed in recent years is not supported by the
statements of Bhägavatam. We may leave the matter for expert geologists to
research because the changing universe has different phases of geological
development. We are satisfied that the Lord has now reached His own
province, Dvärakädhäma, from the Kuru provinces. Kurukñetra continues to
exist since the Vedic age, and it is sheer foolishness when interpreters ignore
or deny the existence of Kurukñetra.
TEXT 36
Ta}a Ta}a h Ta}aTYaEhRir" Pa[TYauÛTaahR<a" )
SaaYa& >aeJae idXa& PaêaÓivïae Gaa& GaTaSTada )) 36 ))
tatra tatra ha tatratyair
hariù pratyudyatärhaëaù
säyaà bheje diçaà paçcäd
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
gaviñöho gäà gatas tadä
SYNONYMS
tatra tatra—at different places; ha—it so happened; tatratyaiù—by local
inhabitants; hariù—the Personality of Godhead; pratyudyata-arhaëaù—being
offered presentations and worshipful regards; säyam—the evening;
bheje—having overtaken; diçam—direction; paçcät—eastern; gaviñöhaù—the
sun in the sky; gäm—to the ocean; gataù—having gone; tadä—at that time.
TRANSLATION
On His journey through these provinces He was welcomed, worshiped and
given various presentations. In the evening, in all places, the Lord suspended
His journey to perform evening rites. This was regularly observed after sunset.
PURPORT
It is said here that the Lord observed the religious principles regularly while
He was on the journey. There are certain philosophical speculations that even
the Lord is under the obligations of fruitive action. But actually this is not the
case. He does not depend on the action of any good or bad work. Since the Lord
is absolute, everything done by Him is good for everyone. But when He descends
on earth, He acts for the protection of the devotees and for the annihilation of
the impious nondevotees. Although He has no obligatory duty, still He does
everything so that others may follow. That is the way of factual teaching; one
must act properly himself and teach the same to others, otherwise no one will
accept one’s blind teaching. He is Himself the awarder of fruitive results. He is
self-sufficient, and yet He acts according to the rulings of the revealed
scripture in order to teach us the process. If He does not do so, the common
man may go wrong. But in the advanced stage, when one can understand the
transcendental nature of the Lord, one does not try to imitate Him. This is not
possible.
The Lord in human society does what is the duty of everyone, but
sometimes He does something extraordinary and not to be imitated by the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
living being. His acts of evening prayer as stated herein must be followed by
the living being, but it is not possible to follow His mountain-lifting or dancing
with the gopés. One cannot imitate the sun, which can exhaust water even
from a filthy place; the most powerful can do something which is all-good, but
our imitation of such acts will put us into endless difficulty. Therefore, in all
actions, the experienced guide, the spiritual master, who is the manifested
mercy of the Lord, should always be consulted, and the path of progress will be
assured.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the First Canto, Tenth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled “Departure of Lord Kåñëa for Dvärakä.”
Chapter Eleven
Lord Kåñëa’s Entrance into Dvärakä
TEXT 1
SaUTa ovac
AaNaTaaRNa( Sa oPav]JYa Sv*ÖaÅNaPadaNa( Svk-aNa( )
dDMaaE drvr& Taeza& ivzad& XaMaYaiàv )) 1 ))
süta uväca
änartän sa upavrajya
svåddhäï jana-padän svakän
dadhmau daravaraà teñäà
viñädaà çamayann iva
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; änartän—the country known as Änartän
(Dvärakä); saù—He; upavrajya—reaching the border of; svåddhän—most
prosperous; jana-padän—city; svakän—His own; dadhmau—sounded;
daravaram—the auspicious conchshell (Päïcajanya); teñäm—of them;
viñädam—dejection; çamayan—pacifying; iva—seemingly.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: Upon reaching the border of His most prosperous
metropolis, known as the country of the Änartas [Dvärakä], the Lord sounded
His auspicious conchshell, heralding His arrival and apparently pacifying the
dejection of the inhabitants.
PURPORT
The beloved Lord was away from His own prosperous metropolis of Dvärakä
for a considerably long period because of the Battle of Kurukñetra, and thus all
the inhabitants were overcome with melancholia due to the separation. When
the Lord descends on the earth, His eternal associates also come with Him, just
as the entourage of a king accompanies him. Such associates of the Lord are
eternally liberated souls, and they cannot bear the separation of the Lord even
for a moment because of intense affection for the Lord. Thus the inhabitants
of the city of Dvärakä were in a mood of dejection and expected the arrival of
the Lord at any moment. So the heralding sound of the auspicious conchshell
was very encouraging, and apparently the sound pacified their dejection. They
were still more aspirant to see the Lord amongst themselves, and all of them
became alert to receive Him in the befitting manner. These are the signs of
spontaneous love of Godhead.
TEXT 2
Sa oÀk-aXae Davl/aedrae drae
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
_PYauå§-MaSYaaDarXaae<aXaaei<aMaa )
daDMaaYaMaaNa" k-rk-ÅSaMPau$e=
YaQaaBJa%<@e k-l/h&Sa oTSvNa" )) 2 ))
sa uccakäçe dhavalodaro daro
’py urukramasyädharaçoëa-çoëimä
dädhmäyamänaù kara-kaïja-sampuöe
yathäbja-khaëòe kala-haàsa utsvanaù
SYNONYMS
saù—that; uccakäçe—became brilliant; dhavala-udaraù—white and
fat-boweled; daraù—conchshell; api—although it is so; urukramasya—of the
great adventurer; adharaçoëa—by the transcendental quality of His lips;
çoëimä—reddened; dädhmäyamänaù—being sounded;
kara-kaïja-sampuöe—being caught by the grip of the lotus hand; yathä—as it
is; abja-khaëòe—by the stems of lotus flowers; kala-haàsaù—ducking swan;
utsvanaù—loudly sounding.
TRANSLATION
The white and fat-boweled conchshell, being gripped by the hand of Lord
Kåñëa and sounded by Him, appeared to be reddened by the touch of His
transcendental lips. It seemed that a white swan was playing in the stems of red
lotus flowers.
PURPORT
The redness of the white conchshell due to the lip-touch of the Lord is a
symbol of spiritual significance. The Lord is all spirit, and matter is ignorance
of this spiritual existence. Factually there is nothing like matter in spiritual
enlightenment, and this spiritual enlightenment takes place at once by the
contact of the Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa. The Lord is present in every particle
of all existence, and He can manifest His presence in anyone. By ardent love
and devotional service to the Lord, or in other words by spiritual contact with
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the Lord, everything becomes spiritually reddened like the conchshell in the
grip of the Lord, and the paramahaàsa, or the supremely intelligent person,
plays the part of the ducking swan in the water of spiritual bliss, eternally
decorated by the lotus flower of the Lord’s feet.
TEXT 3
TaMauPaé[uTYa iNaNad& JaGaÙYa>aYaavhMa( )
Pa[TYauÛYau" Pa[Jaa" SavaR >aTa*RdXaRNal/al/Saa" )) 3 ))
tam upaçrutya ninadaà
jagad-bhaya-bhayävaham
pratyudyayuù prajäù sarvä
bhartå-darçana-lälasäù
SYNONYMS
tam—that; upaçrutya—having overheard; ninadam—sound; jagat-bhaya—the
fear of material existence; bhaya-ävaham—the threatening principle;
prati—towards; udyayuù—rapidly proceeded; prajäù—the citizens; sarväù—all;
bhartå—the protector; darçana—audience; lälasäù—having so desired.
TRANSLATION
The citizens of Dvärakä, having heard that sound which threatens fear
personified in the material world, began to run towards Him fast, just to have a
long desired audience with the Lord, who is the protector of all devotees.
PURPORT
As already explained, the citizens of Dvärakä who lived at the time of Lord
Kåñëa’s presence there were all liberated souls who descended there along with
the Lord as entourage. All were very anxious to have an audience with the
Lord, although because of spiritual contact they were never separated from the
Lord. Just as the gopés at Våndävana used to think of Kåñëa while He was away
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
from the village for cowherding engagements, the citizens of Dvärakä were all
immersed in thought of the Lord while He was away from Dvärakä to attend
the Battle of Kurukñetra. Some distinguished fiction writer in Bengal
concluded that the Kåñëa of Våndävana, that of Mathurä and that of Dvärakä
were different personalities. Historically there is no truth in this conclusion.
The Kåñëa of Kurukñetra and the Kåñëa of Dvärakä are one and the same
personality.
The citizens of Dvärakä were thus in a state of melancholy due to the Lord’s
absence from the transcendental city, as much as we are put in a state of
melancholy at night because of the absence of the sun. The sound heralded by
Lord Kåñëa was something like the heralding of the sunrise in the morning. So
all the citizens of Dvärakä awoke from a state of slumber because of the sunrise
of Kåñëa, and they all hastened towards Him just to have an audience. The
devotees of the Lord know no one else as protector.
This sound of the Lord is identical with the Lord, as we have tried to
explain by the nondual position of the Lord. The material existence of our
present status is full of fear. Out of the four problems of material existence,
namely the food problem, the shelter problem, the fear problem and the
mating problem, the fear problem gives us more trouble than the others. We
are always fearful due to our ignorance of the next problem. The whole
material existence is full of problems, and thus the fear problem is always
prominent. This is due to our association with the illusory energy of the Lord,
known as mäyä or external energy, yet all fear is vanished as soon as there is
the sound of the Lord, represented by His holy name, as it was sounded by
Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu in the following sixteen words:
Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare
Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare
We can take advantage of these sounds and be free from all threatening
problems of material existence.
TEXTS 4–5
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Ta}aaePaNaqTabl/Yaae rvedsPaiMavad*Taa" )
AaTMaaraMa& PaU<aRk-aMa& iNaJal/a>aeNa iNaTYada )) 4 ))
Pa[qTYauTfu-çMau%a" Pa[aecuhRzRGaÓdYaa iGara )
iPaTar& SavRSauôdMaivTaariMava>aRk-a" )) 5 ))
tatropanéta-balayo
raver dépam ivädåtäù
ätmärämaà pürëa-kämaà
nija-läbhena nityadä
préty-utphulla-mukhäù procur
harña-gadgadayä girä
pitaraà sarva-suhådam
avitäram ivärbhakäù
SYNONYMS
tatra—thereupon; upanéta—having offered; balayaù—presentations;
raveù—up to the sun; dépam—lamp; iva—like; ädåtäù—being evaluated;
ätma-ärämam—unto the self-sufficient; pürëa-kämam—fully satisfied;
nija-läbhena—by His own potencies; nitya-dä—one who supplies incessantly;
préti—affection; utphulla-mukhäù—cheerful faces; procuù—said;
harña—gladdened; gadgadayä—ecstatic; girä—speeches; pitaram—unto the
father; sarva—all; suhådam—friends; avitäram—the guardian; iva—like;
arbhakäù—wards.
TRANSLATION
The citizens arrived before the Lord with their respective presentations,
offering them to the fully satisfied and self-sufficient one, who, by His own
potency, incessantly supplies others. These presentations were like the offering
of a lamp to the sun. Yet the citizens began to speak in ecstatic language to
receive the Lord, just as wards welcome their guardian and father.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord Kåñëa is described herein as ätmäräma. He is
self-sufficient, and there is no need for Him to seek happiness from anything
beyond Himself. He is self-sufficient because His very transcendental
existence is total bliss. He is eternally existent; He is all-cognizant and
all-blissful. Therefore, any presentation, however valuable it may be, is not
needed by Him. But still, because He is the well-wisher for one and all, He
accepts from everyone everything that is offered to Him in pure devotional
service. It is not that He is in want for such things, because the things are
themselves generated from His energy. The comparison is made herein that
making offerings to the Lord is something like offering a lamp in the worship
of the sun-god. Anything fiery and illuminating is but an emanation of the
energy of the sun, and yet to worship the sun-god it is necessary to offer him a
lamp. In the worship of the sun, there is some sort of demand made by the
worshiper, but in the case of devotional service to the Lord, there is no
question of demand from either side. It is all a sign of pure love and affection
between the Lord and the devotee.
The Lord is the Supreme Father of all living beings, and therefore those
who are conscious of this vital relation with God can make filial demands from
the Father, and the Father is pleased to supply the demands of such obedient
sons without bargaining. The Lord is just like the desire tree, and from Him
everyone can have everything by the causeless mercy of the Lord. As the
Supreme Father, the Lord, however, does not supply to a pure devotee what is
considered to be a barrier to the discharge of devotional service. Those who
are engaged in the devotional service of the Lord can rise to the position of
unalloyed devotional service by His transcendental attraction.
TEXT 6
NaTaa" SMa Tae NaaQa Sadax(iga]PaªJa&
ivirÄvEirHCYaSaureNd]viNdTaMa( )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ParaYa<a& +aeMaiMaheC^Taa& Par&
Na Ya}a k-al/" Pa[>aveTa( Par" Pa[>au" )) 6 ))
natäù sma te nätha sadäìghri-paìkajaà
viriïca-vairiïcya-surendra-vanditam
paräyaëaà kñemam ihecchatäà paraà
na yatra kälaù prabhavet paraù prabhuù
SYNONYMS
natäù—bowed down; sma—we had done so; te—unto You; nätha—O Lord;
sadä—always; aìghri-paìkajam—the lotus feet; viriïca—Brahmä, the first
living being; vairiïcya—sons of Brahmä like Sanaka and Sanätana;
sura-indra—the King of heaven; vanditam—worshiped by; paräyaëam—the
supreme; kñemam—welfare; iha—in this life; icchatäm—one who so desires;
param—the highest; na—never; yatra—wherein; kälaù—inevitable time;
prabhavet—can exert its influence; paraù—transcendental; prabhuù—the
Supreme Lord.
TRANSLATION
The citizens said: O Lord, You are worshiped by all demigods like Brahmä,
the four Sanas and even the King of heaven. You are the ultimate rest for those
who are really aspiring to achieve the highest benefit of life. You are the
supreme transcendental Lord, and inevitable time cannot exert its influence
upon You.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord is Çré Kåñëa, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä,
Brahma-saàhitä and other authorized Vedic literatures. No one is equal to or
greater than Him, and that is the verdict of all scriptures. The influence of
time and space is exerted upon the dependent living entities, who are all parts
and parcels of the Supreme Lord. The living entities are predominated
Brahman, whereas the Supreme Lord is the predominating Absolute. As soon
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
as we forget this clear fact, we are at once in illusion, and thus we are put into
threefold miseries, as one is put into dense darkness. The clear consciousness
of the cognizant living being is God consciousness, in which one bows down
unto Him in all circumstances.
TEXT 7
>avaYa NaSTv& >av ivì>aavNa
TvMaev MaaTaaQa SauôTPaiTa" iPaTaa )
Tv& Sad(GauåNaR" ParMa& c dEvTa&
YaSYaaNauv*tYaa k*-iTaNaae b>aUivMa )) 7 ))
bhaväya nas tvaà bhava viçva-bhävana
tvam eva mätätha suhåt-patiù pitä
tvaà sad-gurur naù paramaà ca daivataà
yasyänuvåttyä kåtino babhüvima
SYNONYMS
bhaväya—for welfare; naù—for us; tvam—Your Lordship; bhava—just become;
viçva-bhävana—the creator of the universe; tvam—Your Lordship;
eva—certainly; mätä—mother; atha—as also; suhåt—well-wisher;
patiù—husband; pitä—father; tvam—Your Lordship; sat-guruù—spiritual
master; naù—our; paramam—the supreme; ca—and; daivatam—worshipable
Deity; yasya—whose; anuvåttyä—following in the footsteps;
kåtinaù—successful; babhüvima—we have become.
TRANSLATION
O creator of the universe, You are our mother, well-wisher, Lord, father,
spiritual master and worshipable Deity. By following in Your footsteps we have
become successful in every respect. We pray, therefore, that You continue to
bless us with Your mercy.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
The all-good Personality of Godhead, being the creator of the universe, also
plans for the good of all good living beings. The good living beings are advised
by the Lord to follow His good advice, and by doing so they become successful
in all spheres of life. There is no need to worship any deity but the Lord. The
Lord is all-powerful, and if He is satisfied by our obedience unto His lotus feet,
He is competent to bestow upon us all kinds of blessings for the successful
execution of both our material and spiritual lives. For attaining spiritual
existence, the human form is a chance for all to understand our eternal
relation with God. Our relation with Him is eternal; it can neither be broken
nor vanquished. It may be forgotten for the time being, but it can be revived
also by the grace of the Lord, if we follow His injunctions, which are revealed
in the scriptures of all times and all places.
TEXT 8
Ahae SaNaaQaa >avTaa SMa YaÜYa&
}aEivíPaaNaaMaiPa dUrdXaRNaMa( )
Pa[eMaiSMaTaiòGDaiNarq+a<aaNaNa&
PaXYaeMa æPa& Tav SavRSaaE>aGaMa( )) 8 ))
aho sanäthä bhavatä sma yad vayaà
traiviñöapänäm api düra-darçanam
prema-smita-snigdha-nirékñaëänanaà
paçyema rüpaà tava sarva-saubhagam
SYNONYMS
aho—oh, it is our good luck; sa-näthäù—to be under the protection of the
master; bhavatä—by Your good self; sma—as we have become; yat vayam—as
we are; traiviñöa-pänäm—of the demigods; api—also; düra-darçanam—very
rarely seen; prema-smita—smiling with love; snigdha—affectionate;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
nirékñaëa-änanam—face looking in that mode; paçyema—let us look;
rüpam—beauty; tava—Your; sarva—all; saubhagam—auspiciousness.
TRANSLATION
Oh, it is our good luck that we have come again today under Your protection
by Your presence, for Your Lordship rarely visits even the denizens of heaven.
Now it is possible for us to look into Your smiling face, which is full of
affectionate glances. We can now see Your transcendental form, full of all
auspiciousness.
PURPORT
The Lord in His eternal personal form can be seen only by the pure
devotees. The Lord is never impersonal, but He is the Supreme Absolute
Personality of Godhead, possible to be visited by devotional service face to
face, which is impossible to be done even by the denizens of higher planets.
When Brahmäjé and other demigods want to consult Lord Viñëu, the plenary
portion of Lord Kåñëa, they have to wait on the shore of the ocean of milk
where Lord Viñëu is lying on White Land (Çvetadvépa). This ocean of milk
and the Çvetadvépa planet are the replica of Vaikuëöhaloka within the
universe. Neither Brahmäjé nor the demigods like Indra can enter into this
island of Çvetadvépa, but they can stand on the shore of the ocean of milk and
transmit their message to Lord Viñëu, known as Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu.
Therefore, the Lord is rarely seen by them, but the inhabitants of Dvärakä,
because of their being pure devotees without any tinge of the material
contamination of fruitive activities and empiric philosophical speculation, can
see Him face to face by the grace of the Lord. This is the original state of the
living entities and can be attained by reviving our natural and constitutional
state of life, which is discovered by devotional service only.
TEXT 9
YaùRMbuJaa+aaPaSaSaar >aae >avaNa(
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ku-æNa( MaDaUNa( vaQa SauôiÕd*+aYaa )
Ta}aaBdk-aei$=Pa[iTaMa" +a<aae >aved(
riv& ivNaa+<aaeirv NaSTavaCYauTa )) 9 ))
yarhy ambujäkñäpasasära bho bhavän
kurün madhün vätha suhåd-didåkñayä
taträbda-koöi-pratimaù kñaëo bhaved
ravià vinäkñëor iva nas taväcyuta
SYNONYMS
yarhi—whenever; ambuja-akña—O lotus-eyed one; apasasära—You go away;
bho—oh; bhavän—Yourself; kurün—the descendants of King Kuru;
madhün—the inhabitants of Mathurä (Vrajabhümi); vä—either;
atha—therefore; suhåt-didåkñayä—for meeting them; tatra—at that time;
abda-koöi—millions of years; pratimaù—like; kñaëaù—moments;
bhavet—becomes; ravim—the sun; vinä—without; akñëoù—of the eyes;
iva—like that; naù—ours; tava—Your; acyuta—O infallible one.
TRANSLATION
O lotus-eyed Lord, whenever You go away to Mathurä, Våndävana or
Hastinäpura to meet Your friends and relatives, every moment of Your absence
seems like a million years. O infallible one, at that time our eyes become useless,
as if bereft of sun.
PURPORT
We are all proud of our material senses for making experiments to
determine the existence of God. But we forget that our senses are not absolute
by themselves. They can only act under certain conditions. For example, our
eyes. As long as the sunshine is there, our eyes are useful to a certain extent.
But in the absence of sunshine, the eyes are useless. Lord Çré Kåñëa, being the
primeval Lord, the Supreme Truth, is compared to the sun. Without Him all
our knowledge is either false or partial. The opposite of the sun is the darkness,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
and similarly the opposite of Kåñëa is mäyä, or illusion. The devotees of the
Lord can see everything in true perspective due to the light disseminated by
Lord Kåñëa. By the grace of the Lord the pure devotee cannot be in the
darkness of ignorance. Therefore, it is necessary that we must always be in the
sight of Lord Kåñëa so that we can see both ourselves and the Lord with His
different energies. As we cannot see anything in the absence of the sun, so also
we cannot see anything including our own self, without the factual presence of
the Lord. Without Him all our knowledge is covered by illusion.
TEXT 10
k-Qa& vYa& NaaQa icraeizTae TviYa Pa[Saàd*íyai%l/TaaPaXaaez<aMa( )
JaqveMa Tae SauNdrhaSaXaaei>aTaMaPaXYaMaaNaa vdNa& MaNaaehrMa( )
wiTa caedqirTaa vac" Pa[JaaNaa& >a¢-vTSal/" )
é*<vaNaae_NauGa]h& d*íya ivTaNvNa( Pa[aivXaTa( PaurMa( )) 10 ))
kathaà vayaà nätha ciroñite tvayi
prasanna-dåñöyäkhila-täpa-çoñaëam
jévema te sundara-häsa-çobhitam
apaçyamänä vadanaà manoharam
iti codéritä väcaù
prajänäà bhakta-vatsalaù
çåëväno ’nugrahaà dåñöyä
vitanvan präviçat puram
SYNONYMS
katham—how; vayam—we; nätha—O Lord; ciroñite—being abroad almost
always; tvayi—by You; prasanna—satisfaction; dåñöyä—by the glance;
akhila—universal; täpa—miseries; çoñaëam—vanquishing; jévema—shall be
able to live; te—Your; sundara—beautiful; häsa—smiling;
çobhitam—decorated; apaçyamänäù—without seeing; vadanam—face;
manoharam—attractive; iti—thus; ca—and; udéritäù—speaking;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
väcaù—words; prajänäm—of the citizens; bhakta-vatsalaù—kind to the
devotees; çåëvänaù—thus learning; anugraham—kindness; dåñöyä—by glances;
vitanvan—distributing; präviçat—entered; puram—Dvärakäpuré.
TRANSLATION
O master, if You live abroad all the time, then we cannot look at Your
attractive face, whose smiles vanquish all our sufferings. How can we exist
without Your presence?Upon hearing their speeches, the Lord, who is very kind
to the citizens and the devotees, entered the city of Dvärakä and acknowledged
all their greetings by casting His transcendental glance over them.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa’s attraction is so powerful that once being attracted by Him one
cannot tolerate separation from Him. Why is this so? Because we are all
eternally related with Him as the sun rays are eternally related with the sun
disc. The sun rays are molecular parts of the solar radiation. Thus the sun rays
and the sun cannot be separated. The separation by the cloud is temporary and
artificial, and as soon as the cloud is cleared, the sun rays again display their
natural effulgence in the presence of the sun. Similarly, the living entities,
who are molecular parts of the whole spirit, are separated from the Lord by the
artificial covering of mäyä, illusory energy. This illusory energy, or the curtain
of mäyä, has to be removed, and when it is so done, the living entity can see
the Lord face to face, and all his miseries are at once removed. Every one of us
wants to remove the miseries of life, but we do not know how to do it. The
solution is given here, and it rests on us to assimilate it or not.
TEXT 11
MaDau>aaeJadXaahaRhRku-ku-raNDak-v*iZ<ai>a" )
AaTMaTauLYablE/GauRáa& NaaGaE>aaeRGavTaqiMav )) 11 ))
madhu-bhoja-daçärhärhaCopyright
© 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
kukurändhaka-våñëibhiù
ätma-tulya-balair guptäà
nägair bhogavatém iva
SYNONYMS
madhu—Madhu; bhoja—Bhoja; daçärha—Daçärha; arha—Arha;
kukura—Kukura; andhaka—Andhaka; våñëibhiù—by the descendants of
Våñëi; ätma-tulya—as good as Himself; balaiù—by strength;
guptäm—protected; nägaiù—by the Nägas; bhogavatém—the capital of
Nägaloka; iva—like.
TRANSLATION
As Bhogavaté, the capital of Nägaloka, is protected by the Nägas, so was
Dvärakä protected by the descendants of Våñëi—Bhoja, Madhu, Daçärha,
Arha, Kukura, Andhaka, etc.—who were as strong as Lord Kåñëa.
PURPORT
The Nägaloka planet is situated below the earth planet, and it is understood
that the sun rays are hampered there. The darkness of the planet is, however,
removed by the flashes of the jewels set on the heads of the Nägas (celestial
serpents), and it is said that there are beautiful gardens, rivulets, etc., for the
enjoyment of the Nägas. It is understood here also that the place is well
protected by the inhabitants. So also the city of Dvärakä was well protected by
the descendants of Våñëi, who were as powerful as the Lord, insofar as He
manifested His strength upon this earth.
TEXT 12
SavRTauRSavRiv>avPau<Yav*+al/Taaé[MaE" )
oÛaNaaePavNaaraMaEv*RTaPaÚak-rié[YaMa( )) 12 ))
sarvartu-sarva-vibhavaCopyright
© 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
puëya-våkña-latäçramaiù
udyänopavanärämair
våta-padmäkara-çriyam
SYNONYMS
sarva—all; åtu—seasons; sarva—all; vibhava—opulences; puëya—pious;
våkña—trees; latä—creepers; äçramaiù—with hermitages; udyäna—orchards;
upavana—flower gardens; ärämaiù—pleasure gardens and beautiful parks;
våta—surrounded by; padma-äkara—the birthplaces of lotuses or nice
reservoirs of water; çriyam—increasing the beauty.
TRANSLATION
The city of Dvärakäpuré was filled with the opulences of all seasons. There
were hermitages, orchards, flower gardens, parks and reservoirs of water
breeding lotus flowers all over.
PURPORT
Perfection of human civilization is made possible by utilizing the gifts of
nature in their own way. As we find herewith in the description of its
opulence, Dvärakä was surrounded by flower gardens and fruit orchards along
with reservoirs of water and growing lotuses. There is no mention of mills and
factories supported by slaughterhouses, which are the necessary paraphernalia
of the modern metropolis. The propensity to utilize nature’s own gifts is still
there, even in the heart of modern civilized man. The leaders of modern
civilization select their own residential quarters in a place where there are
such naturally beautiful gardens and reservoirs of water, but they leave the
common men to reside in congested areas without parks and gardens. Herein
of course we find a different description of the city of Dvärakä. It is
understood that the whole dhäma, or residential quarter, was surrounded by
such gardens and parks with reservoirs of water where lotuses grew. It is
understood that all the people depended on nature’s gifts of fruits and flowers
without industrial enterprises promoting filthy huts and slums for residential
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
quarters. Advancement of civilization is estimated not on the growth of mills
and factories to deteriorate the finer instincts of the human being, but on
developing the potent spiritual instincts of human beings and giving them a
chance to go back to Godhead. Development of factories and mills is called
ugra-karma, or pungent activities, and such activities deteriorate the finer
sentiments of the human being and society to form a dungeon of demons.
We find herein the mention of pious trees which produce seasonal flowers
and fruits. The impious trees are useless jungles only, and they can only be
used to supply fuels. In the modern civilization such impious trees are planted
on the sides of roads. Human energy should be properly utilized in developing
the finer senses for spiritual understanding, in which lies the solution of life.
Fruits, flowers, beautiful gardens, parks and reservoirs of water with ducks and
swans playing in the midst of lotus flowers, and cows giving sufficient milk and
butter are essential for developing the finer tissues of the human body. As
against this, the dungeons of mines, factories and workshops develop demoniac
propensities in the working class. The vested interests flourish at the cost of
the working class, and consequently there are severe clashes between them in
so many ways. The description of Dvärakä-dhäma is the ideal of human
civilization.
TEXT 13
GaaePaurÜarMaaGaeRzu k*-Tak-aETauk-Taaer<aaMa( )
ic}aßJaPaTaak-aGa]ErNTa" Pa[iTahTaaTaPaaMa( )) 13 ))
gopura-dvära-märgeñu
kåta-kautuka-toraëäm
citra-dhvaja-patäkägrair
antaù pratihatätapäm
SYNONYMS
gopura—the gateway of the city; dvära—door; märgeñu—on different roads;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
kåta—undertaken; kautuka—because of the festival; toraëäm—decorated
arch; citra—painted; dhvaja—flags; patäkä-agraiù—by the foremost signs;
antaù—within; pratihata—checked; ätapäm—sunshine.
TRANSLATION
The city gateway, the household doors and festooned arches along the roads
were all nicely decorated with festive signs like plantain trees and mango leaves,
all to welcome the Lord. Flags, garlands and painted signs and slogans all
combined to shade the sunshine.
PURPORT
Signs of decoration in special festivals were also collected from the gifts of
nature, such as the plantain trees, the mango trees, fruits and flowers. Mango
trees, coconut palms and plantain trees are still accepted as auspicious signs.
The flags mentioned above were all painted with the picture of either Garuòa
or Hanumän, the two great servitors of the Lord. For devotees, such paintings
and decorations are still adored, and the servitor of the master is paid more
respects for the satisfaction of the Lord.
TEXT 14
SaMMaaiJaRTaMahaMaaGaRrQYaaPa<ak-cTvraMa( )
iSa¢-a& GaNDaJalE/åáa& f-l/PauZPaa+aTaax(ku-rE" )) 14 ))
sammärjita-mahä-märgarathyäpaëaka-
catvaräm
siktäà gandha-jalair uptäà
phala-puñpäkñatäìkuraiù
SYNONYMS
sammärjita—thoroughly cleansed; mahä-märga—highways; rathya—lanes and
subways; äpaëaka—shopping marketplaces; catvaräm—public meeting places;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
siktäm—moistened with; gandha-jalaiù—scented water; uptäm—was strewn
with; phala—fruits; puñpa—flowers; akñata—unbroken; aìkuraiù—seeds.
TRANSLATION
The highways, subways, lanes, markets and public meeting places were all
thoroughly cleansed and then moistened with scented water. And to welcome
the Lord, fruits, flowers and unbroken seeds were strewn everywhere.
PURPORT
Scented waters prepared by distilling flowers like rose and keora were
requisitioned to wet the roads, streets and lanes of Dvärakä-dhäma. Such
places, along with the marketplace and public meeting places, were thoroughly
cleansed. From the above description, it appears that the city of
Dvärakädhäma was considerably big, containing many highways, streets and
public meeting places with parks, gardens and reservoirs of water, all very
nicely decorated with flowers and fruits. And to welcome the Lord such
flowers and fruits with unbroken seeds of grain were also strewn over the
public places. Unbroken seeds of grain or fruits in the seedling stage were
considered auspicious, and they are still so used by the Hindus in general on
festival days.
TEXT 15
Üair Üair Ga*ha<aa& c dDYa+aTaf-le/+aui>a" )
Al/x(k*-Taa& PaU<aRku-M>aEbRil/i>aDaURPadqPakE-" )) 15 ))
dväri dväri gåhäëäà ca
dadhy-akñata-phalekñubhiù
alaìkåtäà pürëa-kumbhair
balibhir dhüpa-dépakaiù
SYNONYMS
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
dväri dväri—the door of each and every house; gåhäëäm—of all the residential
buildings; ca—and; dadhi—curd; akñata—unbroken; phala—fruit;
ikñubhiù—sugarcane; alaìkåtäm—decorated; pürëa-kumbhaiù—full water pots;
balibhiù—along with articles for worship; dhüpa—incense; dépakaiù—with
lamps and candles.
TRANSLATION
In each and every door of the residential houses, auspicious things like curd,
unbroken fruits, sugarcane and full waterpots with articles for worship, incense
and candles were all displayed.
PURPORT
The process of reception according to Vedic rites is not at all dry. The
reception was made not simply by decorating the roads and streets as above
mentioned, but by worshiping the Lord with requisite ingredients like incense,
lamps, flowers, sweets, fruits and other palatable eatables, according to one’s
capacity. All were offered to the Lord, and the remnants of the foodstuff were
distributed amongst the gathering citizens. So it was not like a dry reception of
these modern days. Each and every house was ready to receive the Lord in a
similar way, and thus each and every house on the roads and streets distributed
such remnants of food to the citizens, and therefore the festival was successful.
Without distribution of food, no function is complete, and that is the way of
Vedic culture.
TEXTS 16–17
iNaXaMYa Pa[eïMaaYaaNTa& vSaudevae MahaMaNaa" )
A§U-rêaeGa]SaeNaê raMaêad(>auTaiv§-Ma" )) 16 ))
Pa[ÛuManêaådeZ<aê SaaMbae JaaMbvTaqSauTa" )
Pa[hzRveGaaeC^iXaTaXaYaNaaSaNa>aaeJaNaa" )) 17 ))
niçamya preñöham äyäntaà
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
vasudevo mahä-manäù
akrüraç cograsenaç ca
rämaç cädbhuta-vikramaù
pradyumnaç cärudeñëaç ca
sämbo jämbavaté-sutaù
praharña-vegocchaçitaçayanäsana-
bhojanäù
SYNONYMS
niçamya—just hearing; preñöham—the dearmost; äyäntam—coming home;
vasudevaù—Vasudeva (the father of Kåñëa); mahä-manäù—the magnanimous;
akrüraù—Akrüra; ca—and; ugrasenaù—Ugrasena; ca—and;
rämaù—Balaräma (the elder brother of Kåñëa); ca—and;
adbhuta—superhuman; vikramaù—prowess; pradyumnaù—Pradyumna;
cärudeñëaù—Cärudeñëa; ca—and; sämbaù—Sämba; jämbavaté-sutaù—the son
of Jämbavaté; praharña—extreme happiness; vega—force; ucchaçita—being
influenced by; çayana—lying down; äsana—sitting on; bhojanäù—dining.
TRANSLATION
On hearing that the most dear Kåñëa was approaching Dvärakädhäma,
magnanimous Vasudeva, Akrüra, Ugrasena, Balaräma (the superhumanly
powerful), Pradyumna, Cärudeñëa and Sämba the son of Jämbavaté, all
extremely happy, abandoned resting, sitting and dining.
PURPORT
Vasudeva: Son of King Çürasena, husband of Devaké and father of Lord Çré
Kåñëa. He is the brother of Kunté and father of Subhadrä. Subhadrä was
married with her cousin Arjuna, and this system is still prevalent in some parts
of India. Vasudeva was appointed minister of Ugrasena, and later on he
married eight daughters of Ugrasena’s brother Devaka. Devaké is only one of
them. Kaàsa was his brother-in-law, and Vasudeva accepted voluntary
imprisonment by Kaàsa on mutual agreement to deliver the eighth son of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Devaké. This was foiled by the will of Kåñëa. As maternal uncle of the
Päëòavas, he took active parts in the purificatory process of the Päëòavas. He
sent for the priest Kaçyapa at the Çatasåìga Parvata, and he executed the
functions. When Kåñëa appeared within the bars of Kaàsa’s prison house, He
was transferred by Vasudeva to the house of Nanda Mahäräja, the foster father
of Kåñëa, at Gokula. Kåñëa disappeared along with Baladeva prior to the
disappearance of Vasudeva, and Arjuna (Vasudeva’s nephew) undertook the
charge of the funeral ceremony after Vasudeva’s disappearance.
Akrüra: The commander in chief of the Våñëi dynasty and a great devotee
of Lord Kåñëa. Akrüra attained success in devotional service to the Lord by the
one single process of offering prayers. He was the husband of Sütané, daughter
of Ahüka. He supported Arjuna when Arjuna took Subhadrä forcibly away by
the will of Kåñëa. Both Kåñëa and Akrüra went to see Arjuna after his
successful kidnapping of Subhadrä. Both of them presented dowries to Arjuna
after this incidence. Akrüra was present also when Abhimanyu, the son of
Subhadrä, was married with Uttarä, mother of Mahäräja Parékñit. Ahüka, the
father-in-law of Akrüra, was not on good terms with Akrüra. But both of them
were devotees of the Lord.
Ugrasena: One of the powerful kings of the Våñëi dynasty and cousin of
Mahäräja Kuntibhoja. His other name is Ahüka. His minister was Vasudeva,
and his son was the powerful Kaàsa. This Kaàsa imprisoned his father and
became the King of Mathurä. By the grace of Lord Kåñëa and His brother,
Lord Baladeva, Kaàsa was killed, and Ugrasena was reinstalled on the throne.
When Çälva attacked the city of Dvärakä, Ugrasena fought very valiantly and
repulsed the enemy. Ugrasena inquired from Näradajé about the divinity of
Lord Kåñëa. When the Yadu dynasty was to be vanquished, Ugrasena was
entrusted with the iron lump produced from the womb of Sämba. He cut the
iron lump into pieces and then pasted it and mixed it up with the sea water on
the coast of Dvärakä. After this, he ordered complete prohibition within the
city of Dvärakä and the kingdom. He got salvation after his death.
Baladeva: He is the divine son of Vasudeva by his wife Rohiëé. He is also
known as Rohiëé-nandana, the beloved son of Rohiëé. He was also entrusted to
Nanda Mahäräja along with His mother, Rohiëé, when Vasudeva embraced
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
imprisonment by mutual agreement with Kaàsa. So Nanda Mahäräja is also
the foster father of Baladeva along with Lord Kåñëa. Lord Kåñëa and Lord
Baladeva were constant companions from Their very childhood, although
They were stepbrothers. He is the plenary manifestation of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and therefore He is as good and powerful as Lord
Kåñëa. He belongs to the viñëu-tattva (the principle of Godhead). He attended
the svayaàvara ceremony of Draupadé along with Çré Kåñëa. When Subhadrä
was kidnapped by Arjuna by the organized plan of Çré Kåñëa, Baladeva was
very angry with Arjuna and wanted to kill him at once. Çré Kåñëa, for the sake
of His dear friend, fell at the feet of Lord Baladeva and implored Him not to be
so angry. Çré Baladeva was thus satisfied. Similarly, He was once very angry
with the Kauravas, and He wanted to throw their whole city into the depths of
the Yamunä. But the Kauravas satisfied Him by surrendering unto His divine
lotus feet. He was actually the seventh son of Devaké prior to the birth of Lord
Kåñëa, but by the will of the Lord He was transferred to the womb of Rohiëé to
escape the wrath of Kaàsa. His other name is therefore Saìkarñaëa, who is
also the plenary portion of Çré Baladeva. Because He is as powerful as Lord
Kåñëa and can bestow spiritual power to the devotees, He is therefore known
as Baladeva. In the Vedas also it is enjoined that no one can know the
Supreme Lord without being favored by Baladeva. Bala means spiritual
strength not physical. Some less intelligent persons interpret bala as the
strength of the body. But no one can have spiritual realization by physical
strength. Physical strength ends with the end of the physical body, but
spiritual strength follows the spirit soul to the next transmigration, and
therefore the strength obtained by Baladeva is never wasted. The strength is
eternal, and thus Baladeva is the original spiritual master of all devotees.
Çré Baladeva was also a class friend of Lord Çré Kåñëa as a student of
Sändépani Muni. In His childhood He killed many asuras along with Çré Kåñëa,
and specifically He killed the Dhenukäsura at Tälavana. During the
Kurukñetra battle, He remained neutral, and He tried His best not to bring
about the fight. He was in favor of Duryodhana, but still He remained neutral.
When there was a club-fight between Duryodhana and Bhémasena, He was
present on the spot. He was angry at Bhémasena when the latter struck
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Duryodhana on the thigh or below the belt, and He wanted to retaliate the
unfair action. Lord Çré Kåñëa saved Bhéma from His wrath. But He left the
place at once, being disgusted at Bhémasena, and after His departure
Duryodhana fell to the ground to meet his death. The funeral ceremony of
Abhimanyu, the son of Arjuna, was performed by Him, as He was the maternal
uncle. It was impossible to be performed by any one of the Päëòavas, who were
all overwhelmed with grief. At the last stage, He departed from this world by
producing a great white snake from His mouth, and thus He was carried by
Çeñanäga in the shape of a serpent.
Pradyumna: Incarnation of Kämadeva or, according to others, incarnation
of Sanat-kumära, born as the son of the Personality of Godhead Lord Çré
Kåñëa and Lakñmédevé Çrématé Rukmiëé, the principal queen at Dvärakä. He
was one of those who went to congratulate Arjuna upon his marrying
Subhadrä. He was one of the great generals who fought with Çälva, and while
fighting with him he became unconscious on the battlefield. His charioteer
brought him back to the camp from the battlefield, and for this action he was
very sorry and rebuked his charioteer. However, he fought again with Çälva
and was victorious. He heard all about the different demigods from Näradajé.
He is one of the four plenary expansions of Lord Çré Kåñëa. He is the third one.
He inquired from his father, Çré Kåñëa, about the glories of the brähmaëas.
During the fratricidal war amongst the descendants of Yadu, he died at the
hand of Bhoja, another king of the Våñëis. After his death, he was installed in
his original position.
Cärudeñëa: Another son of Lord Çré Kåñëa and Rukmiëédevé. He was also
present during the svayaàvara ceremony of Draupadé. He was a great warrior
like his brothers and father. He fought with Vivinidhaka and killed him in the
fight.
Sämba: One of the great heroes of the Yadu dynasty and the son of Lord Çré
Kåñëa by His wife Jämbavaté. He learned the military art of throwing arrows
from Arjuna, and he became a member of parliament during the time of
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira. He was present during the Räjasüya-yajïa of Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira. When all the Våñëis were assembled during the time of
Prabhäsa-yajïa, his glorious activities were narrated by Sätyaki before Lord
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Baladeva. He was also present along with his father, Lord Çré Kåñëa, during the
Açvamedha-yajïa performed by Yudhiñöhira. He was presented before some
åñis falsely dressed as a pregnant woman by his brothers, and in fun he asked
the åñis what he was going to deliver. The åñis replied that he would deliver a
lump of iron, which would be the cause of fratricidal war in the family of Yadu.
The next day, in the morning, Sämba delivered a large lump of iron, which was
entrusted with Ugrasena for necessary action. Actually later on there was the
foretold fratricidal war, and Sämba died in that war.
So all these sons of Lord Kåñëa left their respective palaces and leaving
aside all engagements, including lying down, sitting and dining, hastened
toward their exalted father.
TEXT 18
var<aeNd]& PaurSk*-TYa b]aø<aE" SaSauMa®lE/" )
Xa«TaUYaRiNaNaadeNa b]øgaaeze<a cad*Taa" )
Pa[TYauÂGMaU rQaEôRía" Pa[<aYaaGaTaSaaßSaa" )) 18 ))
väraëendraà puraskåtya
brähmaëaiù sasumaìgalaiù
çaìkha-türya-ninädena
brahma-ghoñeëa cädåtäù
pratyujjagmü rathair håñöäù
praëayägata-sädhvasäù
SYNONYMS
väraëa-indram—elephants on the auspicious mission; puraskåtya—putting in
the front; brähmaëaiù—by the brähmaëas; sa-sumaìgalaiù—with
all-auspicious signs; çaìkha—conchshell; türya—bugle; ninädena—by the
sound of; brahma-ghoñeëa—by chanting the hymns of the Vedas; ca—and;
ädåtäù—glorified; prati—towards; ujjagmuù—proceeded hurriedly;
rathaiù—on the chariots; håñöäù—in cheerfulness; praëayägata—saturated
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
with affection; sädhvasäù—all-respectful.
TRANSLATION
They hastened toward the Lord on chariots with brähmaëas bearing flowers.
Before them were elephants, emblems of good fortune. Conchshells and bugles
were sounded, and Vedic hymns were chanted. Thus they offered their
respects, which were saturated with affection.
PURPORT
The Vedic way of receiving a great personality creates an atmosphere of
respect, which is saturated with affection and veneration for the person
received. The auspicious atmosphere of such a reception depends on the
paraphernalia described above, including conchshells, flowers, incense,
decorated elephants, and the qualified brähmaëas reciting verses from the
Vedic literatures. Such a program of reception is full of sincerity, on the part
of both the receiver and the received.
TEXT 19
varMau:Yaaê XaTaXaae YaaNaESTaÕXaRNaaeTSauk-a" )
l/SaTku-<@l/iNa>aaRTak-Paael/vdNaié[Ya" )) 19 ))
väramukhyäç ca çataço
yänais tad-darçanotsukäù
lasat-kuëòala-nirbhätakapola-
vadana-çriyaù
SYNONYMS
väramukhyäù—well-known prostitutes; ca—and; çataçaù—hundreds of;
yänaiù—by vehicles; tat-darçana—for meeting Him (Lord Çré Kåñëa);
utsukäù—very much anxious; lasat—hanging; kuëòala—earrings;
nirbhäta—dazzling; kapola—forehead; vadana—face; çriyaù—beauty.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
At the same time, many hundreds of well-known prostitutes began to
proceed on various vehicles. They were all very eager to meet the Lord, and
their beautiful faces were decorated with dazzling earrings, which enhanced the
beauty of their foreheads.
PURPORT
We may not hate even the prostitutes if they are devotees of the Lord. Even
to date there are many prostitutes in great cities of India who are sincere
devotees of the Lord. By tricks of chance one may be obliged to adopt a
profession which is not very adorable in society, but that does not hamper one
in executing devotional service to the Lord. Devotional service to the Lord is
uncheckable in all circumstances. It is understood herewith that even in those
days, about five thousand years ago, there were prostitutes in a city like
Dvärakä, where Lord Kåñëa resided. This means that prostitutes are necessary
citizens for the proper upkeep of society. The government opens wine shops,
but this does not mean that the government encourages the drinking of wine.
The idea is that there is a class of men who will drink at any cost, and it has
been experienced that prohibition in great cities encouraged illicit smuggling
of wine. Similarly, men who are not satisfied at home require such concessions,
and if there is no prostitute, then such low men will induce others into
prostitution. It is better that prostitutes be available in the marketplace so that
the sanctity of society can be maintained. It is better to maintain a class of
prostitutes than to encourage prostitutes within society. The real reformation
is to enlighten all people to become devotees of the Lord, and that will check
all kinds of deteriorating factors of life.
Çré Bilvamaìgala Öhäkura, a great äcärya of the Viñëusvämé Vaiñëava sect,
in his householder life was overly attached to a prostitute who happened to be
a devotee of the Lord. One night when the Öhäkura came to Cintämaëi’s
house in torrents of rain and thunder, Cintämaëi was astonished to see how
the Öhäkura could come on such a dreadful night after crossing a foaming
river which was full of waves. She said to Öhäkura Bilvamaìgala that his
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
attraction for the flesh and bone of an insignificant woman like her would be
properly utilized if it could be diverted to the devotional service of the Lord to
achieve attraction for the transcendental beauty of the Lord. It was a
momentous hour for the Öhäkura, and he took a turn towards spiritual
realization by the words of a prostitute. Later on the Öhäkura accepted the
prostitute as his spiritual master, and in several places of his literary works he
has glorified the name of Cintämaëi, who showed him the right path.
In the Bhagavad-gétä (9.32) the Lord says, “O son of Påthä, even the
low-born caëòälas and those who are born in a family of unbelievers, and even
the prostitutes, shall attain perfection of life if they take shelter of unalloyed
devotional service to Me, because in the path of devotional service there are
no impediments due to degraded birth and occupation. The path is open for
everyone who agrees to follow it.”
It appears that the prostitutes of Dvärakä, who were so eager to meet the
Lord, were all His unalloyed devotees, and thus they were all on the path of
salvation according to the above version of the Bhagavad-gétä. Therefore, the
only reformation that is necessary in society is to make an organized effort to
turn the citizens into devotees of the Lord, and thus all good qualities of the
denizens of heaven will overtake them in their own way. On the other hand,
those who are nondevotees have no good qualifications whatsoever, however
they may be materially advanced. The difference is that the devotees of the
Lord are on the path of liberation, whereas the nondevotees are on the path of
further entanglement in material bondage. The criterion of advancement of
civilization is whether the people are educated and advanced on the path of
salvation.
TEXT 20
Na$=NaTaRk-GaNDavaR" SaUTaMaaGaDaviNdNa" )
GaaYaiNTa caetaMaëaek-cirTaaNYad(>auTaaiNa c )) 20 ))
naöa-nartaka-gandharväù
süta-mägadha-vandinaù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
gäyanti cottamaçlokacaritäny
adbhutäni ca
SYNONYMS
naöa—dramatists; nartaka—dancers; gandharväù—celestial singers;
süta—professional historians; mägadha—professional genealogists;
vandinaù—professional learned speakers; gäyanti—chant; ca—respectively;
uttamaçloka—the Supreme Lord; caritäni—activities; adbhutäni—all
superhuman; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
Expert dramatists, artists, dancers, singers, historians, genealogists and
learned speakers all gave their respective contributions, being inspired by the
superhuman pastimes of the Lord. Thus they proceeded on and on.
PURPORT
It appears that five thousand years ago the society also needed the services
of the dramatists, artists, dancers, singers, historians, genealogists, public
speakers, etc. Dancers, singers and dramatic artists mostly hailed from the
çüdra community, whereas the learned historians, genealogists and public
speakers hailed from the brähmaëa community. All of them belonged to a
particular caste, and they became so trained in their respective families. Such
dramatists, dancers, singers, historians, genealogists and public speakers would
dwell on the subject of the Lord’s superhuman activities in different ages and
millenniums, and not on ordinary events. Nor were they in chronological
order. All the Puräëas are historical facts described only in relation with the
Supreme Lord in different ages and times as well as on different planets also.
Therefore, we do not find any chronological order. The modern historians,
therefore, cannot catch up the link, and thus they unauthoritatively remark
that the Puräëas are all imaginary stories only.
Even one hundred years ago in India, all dramatic performances were
centered around the superhuman activities of the Supreme Lord. The common
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
people would be verily entertained by the performances of dramas, and yäträ
parties played wonderfully on the superhuman activities of the Lord, and thus
even the illiterate agriculturist would be a participant in the knowledge of
Vedic literature, despite a considerable lack of academic qualifications.
Therefore, expert players in drama, dancers, singers, speakers, etc., are
required for the spiritual enlightenment of the common man. The genealogists
would give account completely of the descendants of a particular family. Even
at the present moment the guides in the pilgrimage sites of India submit a
complete account of genealogical tables before a newcomer. This wonderful
act sometimes attracts more customers to receive such important information.
TEXT 21
>aGava&STa}a bNDaUNaa& PaaEra<aaMaNauviTaRNaaMa( )
YaQaaivDYauPaSa®MYa SaveRza& MaaNaMaadDae )) 21 ))
bhagaväàs tatra bandhünäà
pauräëäm anuvartinäm
yathä-vidhy upasaìgamya
sarveñäà mänam ädadhe
SYNONYMS
bhagavän—Çré Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead; tatra—in that place;
bandhünäm—of the friends; pauräëäm—of the citizens; anuvartinäm—those
who approached Him to receive and welcome; yathä-vidhi—as it behooves;
upasaìgamya—going nearer; sarveñäm—for each and every one;
mänam—honor and respects; ädadhe—offered.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead, approached them and offered due
honor and respect to each and every one of the friends, relatives, citizens and all
others who came to receive and welcome Him.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord Personality of Godhead is neither impersonal nor an
inert object unable to reciprocate the feelings of His devotees. Here the word
yathä-vidhi, or “just as it behooves” is significant. He reciprocates “just as it
behooves” with His different types of admirers and devotees. Of course, the
pure devotees are of one type only because they have no other object for
service but the Lord, and therefore the Lord also reciprocates with such pure
devotees just as it behooves, namely, He is always attentive to all the matters of
His pure devotees. There are others who designate Him as impersonal, and so
the Lord also does not take any personal interest. He satisfies everyone in
terms of one’s development of spiritual consciousness, and a sample of such
reciprocation is exhibited here with His different welcomers.
TEXT 22
Pa[ûai>avadNaaëezk-rSPaXaRiSMaTae+a<aE" )
AaìaSYa caìPaake->Yaae vrEêai>aMaTaEivR>au" )) 22 ))
prahväbhivädanäçleñakara-
sparça-smitekñaëaiù
äçväsya cäçvapäkebhyo
varaiç cäbhimatair vibhuù
SYNONYMS
prahvä—by bowing His head; abhivädana—by greeting with words;
äçleña—embracing; kara-sparça—shaking hands; smita-ékñaëaiù—by a
glancing smile; äçväsya—by encouragement; ca—and; äçvapäkebhyaù—down
to the lowest rank of dog-eaters; varaiù—by benedictions; ca—also;
abhimataiù—as desired by; vibhuù—the Almighty.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The Almighty Lord greeted everyone present by bowing His head,
exchanging greetings, embracing, shaking hands, looking and smiling, giving
assurances and awarding benedictions, even to the lowest in rank.
PURPORT
To receive the Lord Çré Kåñëa there were all grades of population,
beginning from Vasudeva, Ugrasena and Gargamuni—the father, grandfather
and teacher—down to the prostitutes and caëòälas, who are accustomed to eat
dogs. And every one of them was properly greeted by the Lord in terms of rank
and position. As pure living entities, all are the separated parts and parcels of
the Lord, and thus no one is alien by His eternal relation. Such pure living
entities are graded differently in terms of contamination of the modes of
material nature, but the Lord is equally affectionate to all His parts and
parcels, despite material gradation. He descends only to recall these
materialistic living beings back to His kingdom, and intelligent persons take
advantage of this facility offered by the Personality of Godhead to all living
beings. No one is rejected by the Lord from the kingdom of God, and it
remains with the living being to accept this or not.
TEXT 23
SvYa& c Gauåi>aivR„Pa[E" SadarE" SQaivrEriPa )
AaXaqi>aRYauRJYaMaaNaae_NYaEvRiNdi>aêaivXaTPaurMa( )) 23 ))
svayaà ca gurubhir vipraiù
sadäraiù sthavirair api
äçérbhir yujyamäno ’nyair
vandibhiç cäviçat puram
SYNONYMS
svayam—Himself; ca—also; gurubhiù—by elderly relatives; vipraiù—by the
brähmaëas; sadäraiù—with their wives; sthaviraiù—invalid; api—also;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
äçérbhiù—by the blessing of; yujyamänaù—being praised by; anyaiù—by
others; vandibhiù—admirers; ca—and; aviçat—entered; puram—the city.
TRANSLATION
Then the Lord personally entered the city accompanied by elderly relatives
and invalid brähmaëas with their wives, all offering benedictions and singing
the glories of the Lord. Others also praised the glories of the Lord.
PURPORT
The brähmaëas in society were never attentive to banking money for future
retired life. When they were old invalids, they used to approach the assembly
of the kings, and simply by praising the glorious deeds performed by the kings,
along with their wives, they would be provided with all necessities of life. Such
brähmaëas were not, so to speak, flatterers of the kings, but the kings were
actually glorified by their actions, and they were sincerely still more
encouraged in pious acts by such brähmaëas in a dignified way. Lord Çré Kåñëa
is worthy of all glories, and the praying brähmaëas and others were glorified
themselves by chanting the glories of the Lord.
TEXT 24
raJaMaaGa| GaTae k*-Z<ae Üark-aYaa" ku-l/iñYa" )
hMYaaR<YaaååhuivRPa[ Tadq+a<aMahaeTSava" )) 24 ))
räja-märgaà gate kåñëe
dvärakäyäù kula-striyaù
harmyäëy äruruhur vipra
tad-ékñaëa-mahotsaväù
SYNONYMS
räja-märgam—the public roads; gate—while passing over; kåñëe—by Lord
Kåñëa; dvärakäyäù—of the city of Dvärakä; kula-striyaù—ladies of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
respectable families; harmyäëi—on the palaces; äruruhuù—got up; vipra—O
brähmaëas; tat-ékñaëa—just to look upon Him (Kåñëa);
mahä-utsaväù—accepted as the greatest festival.
TRANSLATION
When Lord Kåñëa passed over the public roads, all the ladies from the
respectable families of Dvärakä went up to the roofs of their palaces just to have
a look at the Lord. They considered this to be the greatest festival.
PURPORT
To have a look at the Lord is a great festive occasion undoubtedly, as it was
considered by the metropolitan ladies of Dvärakä. This is still followed by the
devout ladies of India. Especially during the days of the Jhulana and
Janmäñöamé ceremonies, the ladies of India still throng up in the greatest
number at the temple of the Lord, where His transcendental eternal form is
worshiped. The transcendental form of the Lord installed in a temple is not
different from the Lord personally. Such a form of the Lord is called
arca-vigraha, or arcä incarnation, and is expanded by the Lord by His internal
potency just to facilitate the devotional service of His innumerable devotees
who are in the material world. The material senses cannot perceive the
spiritual nature of the Lord, and therefore the Lord accepts the arca-vigraha,
which is apparently made of material elements like earth, wood and stone but
actually there is no material contamination. The Lord being kaivalya (one
alone), there is no matter in Him. He is one without a second, and therefore
the Almighty Lord can appear in any form without being contaminated by the
material conception. Therefore, festivities in the temple of the Lord, as held
generally, are like festivals performed during the manifestive days of the Lord
of Dvärakä, about five thousand years ago. The authorized äcäryas, who know
the science perfectly, install such temples of the Lord under regulative
principles just to offer facilities to the common man, but persons who are less
intelligent, without being conversant with the science, mistake this great
attempt to be idol worship and poke their nose into that to which they have no
access. Therefore, the ladies or men who observe festivals in the temples of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Lord just to have a look at the transcendental form are a thousand times more
glorious than those who are nonbelievers in the transcendental form of the
Lord.
It appears from the verse that the inhabitants of Dvärakä were all owners of
big palaces. This indicates the prosperity of the city. The ladies got up on the
roofs just to have a look at the procession and the Lord. The ladies did not mix
with the crowd on the street, and thus their respectability was perfectly
observed. There was no artificial equality with the man. Female respectability
is preserved more elegantly by keeping the woman separate from the man. The
sexes should not mix unrestrictedly.
TEXT 25
iNaTYa& iNarq+aMaa<aaNaa& YadiPa Üark-aEk-SaaMa( )
Na ivTa*PYaiNTa ih d*Xa" ié[YaaeDaaMaa®MaCYauTaMa( )) 25 ))
nityaà nirékñamäëänäà
yad api dvärakaukasäm
na vitåpyanti hi dåçaù
çriyo dhämäìgam acyutam
SYNONYMS
nityam—regularly, always; nirékñamäëänäm—of those who look at Him;
yat—although; api—in spite of; dvärakä-okasäm—the inhabitants of Dvärakä;
na—never; vitåpyanti—satisfied; hi—exactly; dåçaù—sight; çriyaù—beauties;
dhäma-aìgam—the bodily reservoir; acyutam—the infallible.
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants of Dvärakä were regularly accustomed to look upon the
reservoir of all beauty, the infallible Lord, yet they were never satiated.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
When the ladies of the city of Dvärakä got up on the roofs of their palaces,
they never thought that they had previously many times seen the beautiful
body of the infallible Lord. This indicates that they had no satiation in
desiring to see the Lord. Anything material seen for a number of times
ultimately becomes unattractive by the law of satiation. The law of satiation
acts materially, but there is no scope for it in the spiritual realm. The word
infallible is significant here, because although the Lord has mercifully
descended on earth, He is still infallible. The living entities are fallible because
when they come in contact with the material world they lack their spiritual
identity, and thus the body materially obtained becomes subjected to birth,
growth, transformation, situation, deterioration and annihilation under the
laws of nature. The Lord’s body is not like that. He descends as He is and is
never under the laws of the material modes. His body is the source of
everything that be, the reservoir of all beauties beyond our experience. No
one, therefore, is satiated by seeing the transcendental body of the Lord
because there are always manifestations of newer and newer beauties. The
transcendental name, form, qualities, entourage, etc., are all spiritual
manifestations, and there is no satiation in chanting the holy name of the
Lord, there is no satiation in discussing the qualities of the Lord, and there is
no limitation of the entourage of the Lord. He is the source of all and is
limitless.
TEXT 26
ié[Yaae iNavaSaae YaSYaaer" PaaNaPaa}a& Mau%& d*XaaMa( )
bahvae l/aek-Paal/aNaa& Saar®a<aa& PadaMbuJaMa( )) 26 ))
çriyo niväso yasyoraù
päna-pätraà mukhaà dåçäm
bähavo loka-pälänäà
säraìgäëäà padämbujam
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
çriyaù—of the goddess of fortune; niväsaù—residential place; yasya—one
whose; uraù—chest; päna-pätram—the drinking pot; mukham—face;
dåçäm—of eyes; bähavaù—the arms; loka-pälänäm—of the administrative
demigods; säraìgäëäm—of the devotees who talk and sing of the essence or
substance; pada-ambujam—the lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
The Lord’s chest is the abode of the goddess of fortune. His moonlike face is
the drinking vessel for eyes which hanker after all that is beautiful. His arms
are the resting places for the administrative demigods. And His lotus feet are
the refuge of pure devotees who never talk or sing of any subject except His
Lordship.
PURPORT
There are different classes of human beings, all seeking different
enjoyments from different objects. There are persons who are seeking after the
favor of the goddess of fortune, and for them the Vedic literatures give
information that the Lord is always served with all reverence by thousands and
thousands of goddesses of fortune at the cintämaëi-dhäma,*(2) the
transcendental abode of the Lord where the trees are all desire trees and the
buildings are made of touchstone. The Lord Govinda is engaged there in
herding the surabhi cows as His natural occupation. These goddesses of fortune
can be seen automatically if we are attracted by the bodily features of the Lord.
The impersonalists cannot observe such goddesses of fortune because of their
dry speculative habit. And those who are artists, overtaken by the beautiful
creation, should better see to the beautiful face of the Lord for complete
satisfaction. The face of the Lord is the embodiment of beauty. What they call
beautiful nature is but His smile, and what they call the sweet songs of the
birds are but specimens of the whispering voice of the Lord. There are
administrative demigods in charge of departmental service of cosmic
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
management, and there are tiny administrative gods in the state service. They
are always afraid of other competitors, but if they take shelter of the arms of
the Lord, the Lord can protect them always from the attacks of enemies. A
faithful servant of the Lord engaged in the service of administration is the
ideal executive head and can well protect the interest of the people in general.
Other so-called administrators are symbols of anachronisms leading to the
acute distress of the people who are governed by them. The administrators can
remain safely under the protection of the arms of the Lord. The essence of
everything is the Supreme Lord: He is called the säram. And those who sing
and talk about Him are called the säraìgas, or the pure devotees. The pure
devotees are always hankering after the lotus feet of the Lord. The lotus has a
kind of honey which is transcendentally relished by the devotees. They are
like the bees who are always after the honey. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé, the great
devotee äcärya of the Gauòéya-Vaiñëava-sampradäya, has sung a song about
this lotus honey, comparing himself to the bee: “O my Lord Kåñëa, I beg to
offer my prayers unto You. My mind is like the bee, and it is after some honey.
Kindly, therefore, give my bee-mind a place at Your lotus feet, which are the
resources for all transcendental honey. I know that even big demigods like
Brahmä do not see the rays of the nails of Your lotus feet, even though they
are engaged in deep meditation for years together. Still, O infallible one, my
ambition is such, for You are very merciful to your surrendered devotees. O
Mädhava, I know also that I have no genuine devotion for the service of Your
lotus feet, but because Your Lordship is inconceivably powerful, You can do
what is impossible to be done. Your lotus feet can deride even the nectar of the
heavenly kingdom, and therefore I am very much attracted by them. O
supreme eternal, please, therefore, let my mind be fixed at Your lotus feet so
that eternally I may be able to relish the taste of Your transcendental service.”
The devotees are satisfied with being placed at the lotus feet of the Lord and
have no ambition to see His all-beautiful face or aspire for the protection of
the strong arms of the Lord. They are humble by nature, and the Lord is always
leaning towards such humble devotees.
TEXT 27
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
iSaTaaTaPa}aVYaJaNaEåPaSk*-Ta"
Pa[SaUNavzOEri>avizRTa" PaiQa )
iPaXa®vaSaa vNaMaal/Yaa b>aaE
gaNaae YaQaak-aeR@uPacaPavEÛuTaE" )) 27 ))
sitätapatra-vyajanair upaskåtaù
prasüna-varñair abhivarñitaù pathi
piçaìga-väsä vana-mälayä babhau
ghano yathärkoòupa-cäpa-vaidyutaiù
SYNONYMS
sita-ätapatra—white umbrella; vyajanaiù—with a cämara fan;
upaskåtaù—being served by; prasüna—flowers; varñaiù—by the showers;
abhivarñitaù—thus being covered; pathi—on the road; piçaìga-väsäù—by the
yellow garments; vana-mälayä—by the flower garlands; babhau—thus it
became; ghanaù—cloud; yathä—as if; arka—the sun; uòupa—the moon;
cäpa—the rainbow; vaidyutaiù—by the lightning.
TRANSLATION
As the Lord passed along the public road of Dvärakä, His head was protected
from the sunshine by a white umbrella. White feathered fans moved in
semicircles, and showers of flowers fell upon the road. His yellow garments and
garlands of flowers made it appear as if a dark cloud were surrounded
simultaneously by sun, moon, lightning and rainbows.
PURPORT
The sun, moon, rainbow and lightning do not appear in the sky
simultaneously. When there is sun, the moonlight becomes insignificant, and
if there are clouds and a rainbow, there is no manifestation of lightning. The
Lord’s bodily hue is just like a new monsoon cloud. He is compared herein to
the cloud. The white umbrella over His head is compared to the sun. The
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
movement of the bunch-hair fan of flukes is compared to the moon. The
showers of flowers are compared to the stars. His yellow garments are
compared to the rainbow. So all these activities of the firmament, being
impossible simultaneous factors, cannot be adjusted by comparison. The
adjustment is possible only when we think of the inconceivable potency of the
Lord. The Lord is all-powerful, and in His presence anything impossible can be
made possible by His inconceivable energy. But the situation created at the
time of His passing on the roads of Dvärakä was beautiful and could not be
compared to anything besides the description of natural phenomena.
TEXT 28
Pa[ivíSTau Ga*h& iPa}aae" PairZv¢-" SvMaaTa*i>a" )
vvNde iXarSaa Saá devk-IPa[Mau%a Mauda )) 28 ))
praviñöas tu gåhaà pitroù
pariñvaktaù sva-mätåbhiù
vavande çirasä sapta
devaké-pramukhä mudä
SYNONYMS
praviñöaù—after entering; tu—but; gåham—houses; pitroù—of the father;
pariñvaktaù—embraced; sva-mätåbhiù—by His own mothers; vavande—offered
obeisances; çirasä—His head; sapta—seven; devaké—Devaké;
pramukhä—headed by; mudä—gladly.
TRANSLATION
After entering the house of His father, He was embraced by the mothers
present, and the Lord offered His obeisances unto them by placing His head at
their feet. The mothers were headed by Devaké [His real mother].
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
It appears that Vasudeva, the father of Lord Kåñëa, had completely separate
residential quarters where he lived with his eighteen wives, out of whom
Çrématé Devaké is the real mother of Lord Kåñëa. But in spite of this, all other
stepmothers were equally affectionate to Him, as will be evident from the
following verse. Lord Kåñëa also did not distinguish His real mother from His
stepmothers, and He equally offered His obeisances unto all the wives of
Vasudeva present on the occasion. According to scriptures also, there are
seven mothers: (1) the real mother, (2) the wife of the spiritual master, (3) the
wife of a brähmaëa, (4) the wife of the king, (5) the cow, (6) the nurse, and (7)
the earth. All of them are mothers. Even by this injunction of the çästras, the
stepmother, who is the wife of the father, is also as good as the mother because
the father is also one of the spiritual masters. Lord Kåñëa, the Lord of the
universe, plays the part of an ideal son just to teach others how to treat their
stepmothers.
TEXT 29
Taa" Pau}aMaªMaaraePYa òehòuTaPaYaaeDara" )
hzRivûil/TaaTMaaNa" iSaizcuNaeR}aJaEJaRlE/" )) 29 ))
täù putram aìkam äropya
sneha-snuta-payodharäù
harña-vihvalitätmänaù
siñicur netrajair jalaiù
SYNONYMS
täù—all of them; putram—the son; aìkam—the lap; äropya—having placed
on; sneha-snuta—moistened by affection; payodharäù—breasts filled up;
harña—delight; vihvalita-ätmänaù—overwhelmed by; siñicuù—wet;
netrajaiù—from the eyes; jalaiù—water.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The mothers, after embracing their son, sat Him on their laps. Due to pure
affection, milk sprang from their breasts. They were overwhelmed with delight,
and the tears from their eyes wetted the Lord.
PURPORT
When Lord Kåñëa was at Våndävana even the cows would become
moistened by affection towards Him, and He would draw milk from the nipples
of every affectionate living being, so what to speak of the stepmothers who
were already as good as His own mother.
TEXT 30
AQaaivXaTa( Sv>avNa& SavRk-aMaMaNautaMaMa( )
Pa[aSaada Ya}a PaÒqNaa& Sahóai<a c zae@Xa )) 30 ))
athäviçat sva-bhavanaà
sarva-kämam anuttamam
präsädä yatra patnénäà
sahasräëi ca ñoòaça
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; aviçat—entered; sva-bhavanam—personal palaces;
sarva—all; kämam—desires; anuttamam—perfect to the fullest extent;
präsädäù—palaces; yatra—where; patnénäm—of the wives numbering;
sahasräëi—thousands; ca—over and above; ñoòaça—sixteen.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, the Lord entered His palaces, which were perfect to the fullest
extent. His wives lived in them, and they numbered over sixteen thousand.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Lord Kåñëa had 16,108 wives, and for each and every one of them there was
a fully equipped palace complete with necessary compounds and gardens. Full
description of these palaces is given in the Tenth Canto. All the palaces were
made of the best marble stone. They were illuminated by jewels and decorated
by curtains and carpets of velvet and silk, nicely bedecked and embroidered
with gold lace. The Personality of Godhead means one who is full with all
power, all energy, all opulences, all beauties, all knowledge and all
renunciation. Therefore, in the palaces of the Lord there was nothing wanting
for fulfilling all desires of the Lord. The Lord is unlimited, and therefore His
desires are also unlimited, and the supply is also unlimited. Everything being
unlimited, it is concisely described here as sama-kämam, or full with all
desirable equipment.
TEXT 31
PaTNYa" PaiTa& Pa[aeZYa Ga*haNauPaaGaTa&
ivl/aeKYa SaÅaTaMaNaaeMahaeTSava" )
otaSQauraraTa( SahSaaSaNaaXaYaaTa(
Saak&- v]TaEv]s„i@Tal/aecNaaNaNaa" )) 31 ))
patnyaù patià proñya gåhänupägataà
vilokya saïjäta-mano-mahotsaväù
uttasthur ärät sahasäsanäçayät
säkaà vratair vréòita-locanänanäù
SYNONYMS
patnyaù—the ladies (wives of Lord Çré Kåñëa); patim—husband; proñya—who
was away from home; gåha-anupägatam—now returned home; vilokya—thus
seeing; saïjäta—having developed; manaù-mahä-utsaväù—a sense of joyful
ceremony within the mind; uttasthuù—got up; ärät—from a distance;
sahasä—all of a sudden; äsanä—from the seats; äçayät—from the state of
meditation; säkam—along with; vrataiù—the vow; vréòita—looking coyly;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
locana—eyes; änanäù—with such faces.
TRANSLATION
The queens of Lord Çré Kåñëa rejoiced within their minds to see their
husband home after a long period abroad. The queens got up at once from their
seats and meditations. As was socially customary, they covered their faces shyly
and looked about coyly.
PURPORT
As mentioned above, the Lord entered His home palaces occupied by 16,108
queens. This means that the Lord at once expanded Himself in as many
plenary expansions as there were queens and palaces and entered in each and
every one of them simultaneously and separately. Here is another
manifestation of the feature of His internal potency. He can expand Himself
in as many forms of spiritual identity as He desires, even though He is one
without a second. It is confirmed by the Çruti-mantra that the Absolute is one
alone, and yet He becomes many as soon as He so desires. These manifold
expansions of the Supreme Lord are manifested as plenary and separated
portions. The separated portions are representations of His energy, and the
plenary portions are manifestations of His Personality. Thus the Personality of
Godhead manifested Himself in 16,108 plenary expansions and simultaneously
entered into each and every one of the palaces of the queens. This is called
vaibhava, or the transcendental potency of the Lord. And because He can do
so, He is also known as Yogeçvara. Ordinarily, a yogé or mystic living being is
able to expand himself at utmost to tenfold expansions of his body, but the
Lord can do so to the extent of as many thousands or infinitely, as He likes.
Unbelievers become astonished to learn that Lord Kåñëa married more than
16,000 queens because they think of Lord Kåñëa as one of them and measure
the potency of the Lord by their own limited potency. One should know,
therefore, that the Lord is never on the level of the living beings, who are but
expansions of His marginal potency, and one should never equalize the potent
and the potency, although there is very little difference of quality between the
potent and the potency. The queens were also expansions of His internal
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
potency, and thus the potent and potencies are perpetually exchanging
transcendental pleasures, known as pastimes of the Lord. One should not,
therefore, become astonished to learn that the Lord married so many wives.
On the contrary, one should affirm that even if the Lord marries sixteen
thousand million wives, He is not completely manifesting His unlimited and
inexhaustible potency. He married only 16,000 wives and entered in each and
every one of the different palaces just to impress in the history of the human
beings on the surface of the earth that the Lord is never equal to or less than
any human being, however powerful he may be. No one, therefore, is either
equal to or greater than the Lord. The Lord is always great in all respects. “God
is great” is eternal truth.
Therefore, as soon as the queens saw from a distance their husband, who
was away from home for long periods due to the Battle of Kurukñetra, they all
arose from the slumber of meditation and prepared to receive their most
beloved. According to Yäjïavalkya’s religious injunctions, a woman whose
husband is away from home should not take part in any social functions,
should not decorate her body, should not laugh and should not go to any
relative’s house in any circumstance. This is the vow of the ladies whose
husbands are away from home. At the same time, it is also enjoined that a wife
should never present herself before the husband in an unclean state. She must
decorate herself with ornaments and good dress and should always be present
before the husband in a happy and joyous mood. The queens of Lord Kåñëa
were all in meditation, thinking of the Lord’s absence, and were always
meditating upon Him. The Lord’s devotees cannot live for a moment without
meditating on the Lord, and what to speak of the queens, who were all
goddesses of fortune incarnated as queens in the pastimes of the Lord at
Dvärakä. They can never be separated from the Lord, either by presence or by
trance. The gopés at Våndävana could not forget the Lord when the Lord was
away in the forest cow herding. When the Lord boy Kåñëa was absent from the
village, the gopés at home used to worry about Him traversing the rough ground
with His soft lotus feet. By thinking thus, they were sometimes overwhelmed
in trance and mortified in the heart. Such is the condition of the pure
associates of the Lord. They are always in trance, and so the queens also were
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
in trance during the absence of the Lord. Presently, having seen the Lord from
a distance, they at once gave up all their engagements, including the vows of
women as described above. According to Çré Viçvanätha Carkavarté Öhäkura,
there was a regular psychological reaction on the occasion. First of all, rising
from their seats, although they wanted to see their husband, they were
deterred because of feminine shyness. But due to strong ecstasy, they overcame
that stage of weakness and became caught up with the idea of embracing the
Lord, and this thought factually made them unconscious of their surrounding
environment. This prime state of ecstasy annihilated all other formalities and
social conventions, and thus they escaped all stumbling blocks on the path of
meeting the Lord. And that is the perfect stage of meeting the Lord of the
soul, Çré Kåñëa.
TEXT 32
TaMaaTMaJaEd*Riíi>arNTaraTMaNaa
durNTa>aava" Pairrei>are PaiTaMa( )
iNaåÖMaPYaaóvdMbu Nae}aYaae‚
ivRl/ÂTaqNaa& >a*GauvYaR vE©-vaTa( )) 32 ))
tam ätmajair dåñöibhir antarätmanä
duranta-bhäväù parirebhire patim
niruddham apy äsravad ambu netrayor
vilajjaténäà bhågu-varya vaiklavät
SYNONYMS
tam—Him (the Lord); ätma-jaiù—by the sons; dåñöibhiù—by the sight;
antara-ätmanä—by the innermost part of the heart;
duranta-bhäväù—insuperable ecstasy; parirebhire—embraced;
patim—husband; niruddham—choked up; api—in spite of; äsravat—tears;
ambu—like drops of water; netrayoù—from the eyes; vilajjaténäm—of those
situated in shyness; bhågu-varya—O chief of the Bhågus;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
vaiklavät—inadvertently.
TRANSLATION
The insuperable ecstasy was so strong that the queens, who were shy, first
embraced the Lord in the innermost recesses of their hearts. Then they
embraced Him visually, and then they sent their sons to embrace Him [which is
equal to personal embracing]. But, O chief amongst the Bhågus, though they
tried to restrain their feelings, they inadvertently shed tears.
PURPORT
Although due to feminine shyness there were many hindrances to
embracing the dear husband, Lord Çré Kåñëa, the queens performed that act by
seeing Him, by putting Him in the cores of their hearts, and by sending their
sons to embrace Him. Still, the act remained unfinished, and tears rolled down
their cheeks despite all endeavors to check them. One indirectly embraces the
husband by sending the son to embrace him because the son is developed as
part of the mother’s body. The embrace of the son is not exactly the embrace
of husband and wife from the sexual point of view, but the embrace is
satisfaction from the affectionate point of view. The embrace of the eyes is
more effective in the conjugal relation, and thus according to Çréla Jéva
Gosvämé there is nothing wrong in such an exchange of feeling between
husband and wife.
TEXT 33
YaÛPYaSaaE PaaìRGaTaae rhaeGaTa‚
STaQaaiPa TaSYaax(iga]YauGa& Nav& NavMa( )
Pade Pade k-a ivrMaeTa TaTPada‚
Àl/aiPa YaC^\qNaR JahaiTa k-ihRicTa( )) 33 ))
yadyapy asau pärçva-gato raho-gatas
tathäpi tasyäìghri-yugaà navaà navam
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
pade pade kä virameta tat-padäc
caläpi yac chrér na jahäti karhicit
SYNONYMS
yadi—although; api—certainly; asau—He (Lord Çré Kåñëa);
pärçva-gataù—just by the side; rahaù-gataù—exclusively alone; tathäpi—still;
tasya—His; aìghri-yugam—the feet of the Lord; navam navam—newer and
newer; pade—step; pade—in every step; kä—who; virameta—can be detached
from; tat-padät—from His feet; caläpi—moving; yat—whom; çréù—the goddess
of fortune; na—never; jahäti—quits; karhicit—at any time.
TRANSLATION
Although Lord Sri Kåñëa was constantly by their sides, as well as exclusively
alone, His feet appeared to them to be newer and newer. The goddess of
fortune, although by nature always restless and moving, could not quit the
Lord’s feet. So what woman can be detached from those feet, having once taken
shelter of them?
PURPORT
Conditioned living beings are always after the favor of the goddess of
fortune, although by nature she is moving from one place to another. In the
material world no one is permanently fortunate, however clever one may be.
There have been so many big empires in different parts of the world, there
have been so many powerful kings all over the world, and there have been so
many fortunate men, but all of them have been liquidated gradually. This is
the law of material nature. But spiritually it is different. According to
Brahma-saàhitä, the Lord is served very respectfully by hundreds and
thousands of goddesses of fortune. They are always in a lonely place also with
the Lord. But still the association of the Lord is so inspiringly newer and newer
that they cannot quit the Lord for a moment, even though they are by nature
very restless and are moving about. The spiritual relation with the Lord is so
enlivening and resourceful that no one can leave the company of the Lord,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
once having taken shelter of Him.
The living beings are by constitution feminine by nature. The male or
enjoyer is the Lord, and all manifestations of His different potencies are
feminine by nature. In the Bhagavad-gétä, the living beings are designated as
parä-prakåti, or the superior potency. The material elements are aparä-prakåti,
or inferior potency. Such potencies are always employed for the satisfaction of
the employer, or the enjoyer. The supreme enjoyer is the Lord Himself, as
stated in the Bhagavad-gétä (5.29). The potencies, therefore, when engaged
directly in the service of the Lord, revive the natural color, and thus there is
no disparity in the relation of the potent and potency.
Generally people engaged in service are always seeking some post under the
government or the supreme enjoyer of the state. Since the Lord is the supreme
enjoyer of everything in or outside the universe, it is happiness to be employed
by Him. Once engaged in the supreme governmental service of the Lord, no
living being wishes to be relieved from the engagement. The highest perfection
of human life is to seek some employment under the Lord’s supreme service.
That will make one extremely happy. One need not seek the moving goddess
of fortune without the relation of the Lord.
TEXT 34
Wv& Na*Paa<aa& i+aiTa>aarJaNMaNaa‚
Ma+aaEih<aqi>a" Pairv*taTaeJaSaaMa( )
ivDaaYa vEr& ìSaNaae YaQaaNal&/
iMaQaae vDaeNaaeParTaae iNaraYauDa" )) 34 ))
evaà nåpäëäà kñiti-bhära-janmanäm
akñauhiëébhiù parivåtta-tejasäm
vidhäya vairaà çvasano yathänalaà
mitho vadhenoparato niräyudhaù
SYNONYMS
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
evam—thus; nåpäëäm—of the kings or administrators; kñiti-bhära—the
burden of the earth; janmanäm—born in that way; akñauhiëébhiù—empowered
by a military strength of horses, elephants, chariots and infantry;
parivåtta—being puffed up by such surroundings; tejasäm—prowess;
vidhäya—having created; vairam—hostility; çvasanaù—interaction of the
wind and the pipe plants; yathä—as it is; analam—fire; mithaù—with one
another; vadhena—by killing them; uparataù—relieved; niräyudhaù—by
Himself without being a party to such fighting.
TRANSLATION
The Lord was pacified after killing those kings who were burdensome to the
earth. They were puffed up with their military strength, their horses, elephants,
chariots, infantry, etc. He Himself was not a party in the fight. He simply
created hostility between the powerful administrators, and they fought amongst
themselves. He was like the wind which causes friction between bamboos and
so sparks a fire.
PURPORT
As stated above, the living beings are not factual enjoyers of things which
are manifested as God’s creation. The Lord is the genuine proprietor and
enjoyer of everything manifested in His creation. Unfortunately, influenced
by the deluding energy, the living being becomes a false enjoyer under the
dictation of the modes of nature. Puffed up by such a false sense of becoming
God, the deluded living being increases his material strength by so many
activities and thus becomes the burden of the earth, so much so that the earth
becomes completely uninhabitable by the sane. This state of affairs is called
dharmasya gläëi, or misuse of the energy of the human being. When such
misuse of human energy is prominent, the saner living beings become
perturbed by the awkward situation created by the vicious administrators, who
are simply burdens of the earth, and the Lord appears by His internal potency
just to save the saner section of humanity and to alleviate the burden due to
the earthly administrators in different parts of the world. He does not favor
either of the unwanted administrators, but by His potential power He creates
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
hostility between such unwanted administrators, as the air creates fire in the
forest by the friction of the bamboos. The fire in the forest takes place
automatically by the force of the air, and similarly the hostility between
different groups of politicians takes place by the unseen design of the Lord.
The unwanted administrators, puffed up by false power and military strength,
thus become engaged in fighting amongst themselves over ideological conflicts
and so exhaust themselves of all powers. The history of the world reflects this
factual will of the Lord, and it will continue to be enacted until the living
beings are attached to the service of the Lord. In the Bhagavad-gétä this fact is
very vividly described (Bg. 7.14). It is said, “The deluding energy is My potency,
and thus it is not possible for the dependent living beings to supersede the
strength of the material modes. But those who take shelter in Me [the
Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa] can cross over the gigantic ocean of
material energy.” This means that no one can establish peace and prosperity in
the world by fruitive activities or by speculative philosophy or ideology. The
only way is to surrender unto the Supreme Lord and thus become free from the
illusion of the deluding energy.
Unfortunately persons who are engaged in destructive work are unable to
surrender to the Personality of Godhead. They are all fools of the first order;
they are the lowest of the human species of life; they are robbed of their
knowledge, although apparently they seem to be academically educated. They
are all of the demoniac mentality, always challenging the supreme power of the
Lord. Those who are very materialistic, always hankering after material power
and strength, are undoubtedly fools of the first order because they have no
information of the living energy, and being ignorant of that supreme spiritual
science, they are absorbed in material science, which ends with the end of the
material body. They are the lowest of human beings because the human life is
especially meant for reestablishing the lost relation with the Lord, and they
miss this opportunity by being engaged in material activities. They are robbed
of their knowledge because even after prolonged speculation they cannot
reach to the stage of knowing the Personality of Godhead, the summum bonum
of everything. And all of them are men of demoniac principle, and they suffer
the consequences, as did such materialistic heroes as Rävaëa, Hiraëyakaçipu,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Kaàsa and others.
TEXT 35
Sa Wz Narl/aeke-_iSMaàvTaq<aR" SvMaaYaYaa )
reMae ñqrÒkU-$=SQaae >aGavaNa( Pa[ak*-Taae YaQaa )) 35 ))
sa eña nara-loke ’sminn
avatérëaù sva-mäyayä
reme stré-ratna-küöastho
bhagavän präkåto yathä
SYNONYMS
saù—He (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); eñaù—all these;
nara-loke—on this planet of human beings; asmin—on this;
avatérëaù—having appeared; sva—personal, internal; mäyayä—causeless
mercy; reme—enjoyed; stré-ratna—woman who is competent to become a wife
of the Lord; küöasthaù—among; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead;
präkåtaù—mundane; yathä—as if it were.
TRANSLATION
That Supreme Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa, out of His causeless
mercy, appeared on this planet by His internal potency and enjoyed Himself
amongst competent women as if He were engaging in mundane affairs.
PURPORT
The Lord married and lived like a householder. This is certainly like a
mundane affair, but when we learn that He married 16,108 wives and lived with
them separately in each and every palace, certainly it is not mundane.
Therefore, the Lord, living as a householder amongst His competent wives, is
never mundane, and His behavior with them is never to be understood as
mundane sex relation. The women who became the wives of the Lord are
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
certainly not ordinary women, because to get the Lord as one’s husband is the
result of many, many millions of births’ tapasya (austerity). When the Lord
appears on different lokas, or planets, or on this planet of human beings, He
displays His transcendental pastimes just to attract the conditioned souls to
become His eternal servitors, friends, parents and lovers respectively in the
transcendental world, where the Lord eternally reciprocates such exchanges of
service. Service is pervertedly represented in the material world and broken
untimely, resulting in sad experience. The illusioned living being conditioned
by material nature cannot understand out of ignorance that all our relations
here in the mundane world are temporary and full of inebrieties. Such
relations cannot help us be happy perpetually, but if the same relation is
established with the Lord, then we are transferred to the transcendental world
after leaving this material body and become eternally related with Him in the
relation we desire. The women amongst whom He lived as their husband are
not, therefore, women of this mundane world, but are eternally related with
Him as transcendental wives, a position which they attained by perfection of
devotional service. That is their competency. The Lord is paraà brahma, or
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Conditioned souls seek after perpetual
happiness in all places—not only on this earth but also on other planets
throughout the universe—because constitutionally a spiritual spark, as he is,
can travel to any part of God’s creation. But being conditioned by the material
modes, he tries to travel in space by spacecraft and so fails to reach his
destination. The law of gravitation is binding upon him like the shackles of a
prisoner. By other processes he can reach anywhere, but even if he reaches the
highest planet, he cannot attain that perpetual happiness for which he is
searching life after life. When he comes to his senses, however, he seeks after
Brahman happiness, knowing it for certain that unlimited happiness, which he
is seeking, is never attainable in the material world. As such, the Supreme
Being, Parabrahman, certainly does not seek His happiness anywhere in the
material world. Nor can His paraphernalia of happiness be found in the
material world. He is not impersonal. Because He is the leader and Supreme
Being amongst innumerable living beings, He cannot be impersonal. He is
exactly like us, and He has all the propensities of an individual living being in
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
fullness. He marries exactly like us, but His marriage is neither mundane nor
limited by our experience in the conditioned state. His wives, therefore, appear
like mundane women, but factually they are all transcendental liberated souls,
perfect manifestations of internal energy.
TEXT 36
oÕaMa>aaviPaéuNaaMal/vLGauhaSa‚
v]q@avl/aek-iNahTaae MadNaae_iPa YaaSaaMa( )
SaMMauù caPaMaJahaTPa[MadaetaMaaSTaa
YaSYaeiNd]Ya& ivMaiQaTau& ku-hkE-NaR Xaeku-" )) 36 ))
uddäma-bhäva-piçunämala-valgu-häsavréòävaloka-
nihato madano ’pi yäsäm
sammuhya cäpam ajahät pramadottamäs tä
yasyendriyaà vimathituà kuhakair na çekuù
SYNONYMS
uddäma—very grave; bhäva—expression; piçuna—exciting; amala—spotless;
valgu-häsa—beautiful smiling; vréòa—corner of the eye; avaloka—looking;
nihataù—conquered; madanaù—Cupid (or amadana—the greatly tolerant
Çiva); api—also; yäsäm—whose; sammuhya—being overpowered by;
cäpam—bows; ajahät—gave up; pramada—woman, who maddens;
uttamäù—of high grade; tä—all; yasya—whose; indriyam—senses;
vimathitum—to perturb; kuhakaiù—by magical feats; na—never; çekuù—was
able.
TRANSLATION
Although the queens’ beautiful smiles and furtive glances were all spotless
and exciting, and although they could conquer Cupid himself by making him
give up his bow in frustration, and although even the tolerant Çiva could fall
victim to them, still, despite all their magical feats and attractions, they could
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
not agitate the senses of the Lord.
PURPORT
The path of salvation or the path going back to Godhead always forbids the
association of women, and the complete sanätana-dharma or
varëäçrama-dharma scheme forbids or restricts association with women. How,
then, can one be accepted as the Supreme Personality of Godhead who is
addicted to more than sixteen thousand wives? This question may be
relevantly raised by inquisitive persons really anxious to know about the
transcendental nature of the Supreme Lord. And to answer such questions, the
sages at Naimiñäraëya have discussed the transcendental character of the Lord
in this and in following verses. It is clear herein that the feminine attractive
features which can conquer Cupid or even the supermost tolerant Lord Çiva
could not conquer the senses of the Lord. Cupid’s business is to invoke
mundane lust. The whole universe is moving being agitated by Cupid’s arrow.
The activities of the world are being carried on by the central attraction of
male and female. A male is searching after a mate to his liking, and the female
is looking after a suitable male. That is the way of material stimulus. And as
soon as a male is combined with a female, the material bondage of the living
being is at once tightly interlocked by sex relation, and as a result of this, both
the male’s and female’s attraction for sweet home, motherland, bodily
offspring, society and friendship and accumulation of wealth becomes the
illusory field of activities, and thus a false but indefatigable attraction for the
temporary material existence, which is full of miseries, is manifest. Those who
are, therefore, on the path of salvation for going back home back to Godhead,
are especially advised by all scriptural instruction to become free from such
paraphernalia of material attraction. And that is possible only by the
association of the devotees of the Lord, who are called the mahätmäs. Cupid
throws his arrow upon the living beings to make them mad after the opposite
sex, whether the party is actually beautiful or not. Cupid’s provocations are
going on, even among beastly societies who are all ugly-looking in the
estimation of the civilized nations. Thus Cupid’s influence is exerted even
amongst the ugliest forms, and what to speak of the most perfect beauties. Lord
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Çiva, who is considered to be most tolerant, was also struck by Cupid’s arrow
because he also became mad after the Mohiné incarnation of the Lord and
acknowledged himself to be defeated. Cupid, however, was himself captivated
by the grave and exciting dealings of the goddesses of fortune, and he
voluntarily gave up his bow and arrow in a spirit of frustration. Such was the
beauty and attraction of the queens of Lord Kåñëa. Yet they could not disturb
the transcendental senses of the Lord. This is because the Lord is all-perfect
ätmäräma, or self-sufficient. He does not require anyone’s extraneous help for
His personal satisfaction. Therefore, the queens could not satisfy the Lord by
their feminine attractiveness, but they satisfied Him by their sincere affection
and service. Only by unalloyed transcendental loving service could they satisfy
the Lord, and the Lord was pleased to treat them as wives in reciprocation.
Thus being satisfied by their unalloyed service only, the Lord reciprocated the
service just like a devout husband. Otherwise He had no business becoming
the husband of so many wives. He is the husband of everyone, but to one who
accepts Him as such, He reciprocates. This unalloyed affection for the Lord is
never to be compared to mundane lust. It is purely transcendental. And the
grave dealings, which the queens displayed in natural feminine ways, were also
transcendental because the feelings were expressed out of transcendental
ecstasy. It is already explained in the previous verse that the Lord appeared
like a mundane husband, but factually His relation with His wives was
transcendental, pure and unconditioned by the modes of material nature.
TEXT 37
TaMaYa& MaNYaTae l/aek-ae ùSa®MaiPa Sai®NaMa( )
AaTMaaEPaMYaeNa MaNauJa& VYaaPa*<vaNa& YaTaae_buDa" )) 37 ))
tam ayaà manyate loko
hy asaìgam api saìginam
ätmaupamyena manujaà
vyäpåëvänaà yato ’budhaù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
tam—unto Lord Kåñëa; ayam—all these (common men); manyate—do
speculate within the mind; lokaù—the conditioned souls; hi—certainly;
asaìgam—unattached; api—in spite of; saìginam—affected; ätma—self;
aupamyena—by comparison with the self; manujam—ordinary man;
vyäpåëvänam—being engaged in; yataù—because; abudhaù—foolish because of
ignorance.
TRANSLATION
The common materialistic conditioned souls speculate that the Lord is one of
them. Out of their ignorance they think that the Lord is affected by matter,
although He is unattached.
PURPORT
The word abudhaù is significant here. Due to ignorance only, the foolish
mundane wranglers misunderstand the Supreme Lord and spread their foolish
imaginations amongst innocent persons by propaganda. The Supreme Lord Çré
Kåñëa is the original primeval Personality of Godhead, and when He was
personally present before the eyes of everyone, He displayed full-fledged divine
potency in every field of activities. As we have already explained in the first
verse of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, He is completely independent to act however He
likes, but all His actions are full of bliss, knowledge and eternity. Only the
foolish mundaners misunderstand Him, unaware of His eternal form of
knowledge and bliss, which is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä and Upaniñads.
His different potencies work in a perfect plan of natural sequence, and doing
everything by the agency of His different potencies, He remains eternally the
supreme independent. When He descends on the material world by His
causeless mercy to different living beings, He does so by His own potency. He
is not subject to any condition of the material modes of nature, and He
descends as He is originally. The mental speculators misunderstand Him as the
Supreme Person, and they consider His impersonal features as inexplicable
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Brahman to be all. Such a conception is also the product of conditioned life
because they cannot go beyond their own personal capacity. Therefore, one
who considers the Lord on the level of one’s limited potency is only a common
man. Such a man cannot be convinced that the Personality of Godhead is
always unaffected by the modes of material nature. He cannot understand that
the sun is always unaffected by infectious matter. The mental speculators
compare everything from the standpoint of experimental knowledge of their
own selves. Thus when the Lord is found to act like an ordinary person in
matrimonial bondage, they consider Him to be like one of them, without
considering that the Lord can at once marry sixteen thousand wives or more.
Due to a poor fund of knowledge they accept one side of the picture while
disbelieving the other. This means that due to ignorance only they always
think of Lord Kåñëa as like themselves and make their own conclusions, which
are absurd and unauthentic from the version of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 38
WTadqXaNaMaqXaSYa Pa[k*-iTaSQaae_iPa Tad(Gau<aE" )
Na YauJYaTae SadaTMaSQaEYaRQaa buiÖSTadaé[Yaa )) 38 ))
etad éçanam éçasya
prakåti-stho ’pi tad-guëaiù
na yujyate sadätma-sthair
yathä buddhis tad-äçrayä
SYNONYMS
etat—this; éçanam—divinity; éçasya—of the Personality of Godhead;
prakåti-sthaù—being in contact with material nature; api—in spite of;
tat-guëaiù—by the qualities; na—never; yujyate—is affected; sadä
ätma-sthaiù—by those who are situated in eternity; yathä—as is;
buddhiù—intelligence; tat—the Lord; äçrayä—those who are under the shelter
of.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
This is the divinity of the Personality of Godhead: He is not affected by the
qualities of material nature, even though He is in contact with them. Similarly,
the devotees who have taken shelter of the Lord do not become influenced by
the material qualities.
PURPORT
In the Vedas and Vedic literatures (Çruti and Småti) it is affirmed that in
the Divinity there is nothing material. He is transcendental (nirguëa) only,
the supreme cognizant. Hari, or the Personality of Godhead, is the supreme
transcendental person situated beyond the range of material affection. These
statements are also confirmed even by Äcärya Çaìkara. One may argue that
His relation with the goddesses of fortune may be transcendental, but what
about His relation with the Yadu dynasty, being born in that family, or His
killing the nonbelievers like Jaräsandha and other asuras directly in contact
with the modes of material nature. The answer is that the divinity of the
Personality of Godhead is never in contact with the qualities of material
nature in any circumstances. Actually He is in contact with such qualities
because He is the ultimate source of everything, yet He is above the actions of
such qualities. He is known, therefore, as Yogeçvara, or the master of mystic
power, or in other words the all-powerful. Even His learned devotees are not
affected by the influence of the material modes. The great six Gosvämés of
Våndävana all came from greatly rich and aristocratic families, but when they
adopted the life of mendicants at Våndävana, superficially they appeared to be
in wretched conditions of life, but factually they were the richest of all in
spiritual values. Such mahä-bhägavatas, or first-grade devotees, although
moving amongst men, are not contaminated by honor or insult, hunger or
satisfaction, sleep or wakefulness, which are all resultant actions of the three
modes of material nature. Similarly, some of them are engaged in worldly
dealings, yet are unaffected. Unless these neutralities of life are there, one
cannot be considered situated in transcendence. The Divinity and His
associates are on the same transcendental plane, and their glories are always
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
sanctified by the action of yogamäyä, or the internal potency of the Lord. The
devotees of the Lord are always transcendental, even if they are sometimes
found to have fallen in their behavior. The Lord emphatically declares in the
Bhagavad-gétä (9.30) that even if an unalloyed devotee is found to be fallen
due to a previous material contamination, he is nevertheless to be accepted as
fully transcendental because of his being engaged cent percent in the
devotional service of the Lord. The Lord protects him always because of his
rendering service unto Him, and the fallen conditions are to be considered
accidental and temporary. They will vanish in no time.
TEXT 39
Ta& MaeiNare_bl/a MaU!a" ñE<a& caNauv]Ta& rh" )
APa[Maa<aivdae >aTauRrqìr& MaTaYaae YaQaa )) 39 ))
taà menire ’balä müòhäù
straiëaà cänuvrataà rahaù
apramäëa-vido bhartur
éçvaraà matayo yathä
SYNONYMS
tam—unto Lord Çré Kåñëa; menire—took it for granted; abaläù—delicate;
müòhäù—because of simplicity; straiëam—one who is dominated by his wife;
ca—also; anuvratam—follower; rahaù—lonely place;
apramäëa-vidaù—unaware of the extent of glories; bhartuù—of their husband;
éçvaram—the supreme controller; matayaù—thesis; yathä—as it is.
TRANSLATION
The simple and delicate women truly thought that Lord Sri Kåñëa, their
beloved husband, followed them and was dominated by them. They were
unaware of the extent of the glories of their husband, as the atheists are
unaware of Him as the supreme controller.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
Even the transcendental wives of Lord Çré Kåñëa did not know completely
the unfathomable glories of the Lord. This ignorance is not mundane because
there is some action of the internal potency of the Lord in the exchange of
feelings between Him and His eternal associates. The Lord exchanges
transcendental relations in five ways, as proprietor, master, friend, son and
lover, and in each of these pastimes He plays fully by the potency of yogamäyä,
the internal potency. He plays exactly like an equal friend with the cowherd
boys or even with friends like Arjuna. He plays exactly like a son in the
presence of Yaçodämätä, He plays exactly like a lover in the presence of the
cowherd damsels, and He plays exactly like a husband in the presence of the
queens of Dvärakä. Such devotees of the Lord never think of the Lord as the
Supreme, but think of Him exactly as a common friend, a pet son, or a lover or
husband very much dear to heart and soul. That is the relation between the
Lord and His transcendental devotees, who act as His associates in the
spiritual sky, where there are innumerable Vaikuëöha planets. When the Lord
descends, He does so along with His entourage to display a complete picture of
the transcendental world, where pure love and devotion for the Lord prevail
without any mundane tinge of lording it over the creation of the Lord. Such
devotees of the Lord are all liberated souls, perfect representations of the
marginal or internal potency in complete negation of the influence of the
external potency. The wives of Lord Kåñëa were made to forget the
immeasurable glories of the Lord by the internal potency so that there might
not be any flaw of exchange, and they took it for granted that the Lord was a
henpecked husband, always following them in lonely places. In other words,
even the personal associates of the Lord do not know Him perfectly well, so
what do the thesis writers or mental speculators know about the
transcendental glories of the Lord? The mental speculators present different
theses as to His becoming the causes of the creation, the ingredients of the
creation, or the material and efficient cause of the creation, etc., but all this is
but partial knowledge about the Lord. Factually they are as ignorant as the
common man. The Lord can be known by the mercy of the Lord only, and by
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
no other means. But since the dealings of the Lord with His wives are based on
pure transcendental love and devotion, the wives are all on the transcendental
plane without material contamination.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the First Canto, Eleventh Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled “Lord Kåñëa’s Entrance into Dvärakä.”
Chapter Twelve
Birth of Emperor Parékñit
TEXT 1
é[qXaaENak- ovac
AìTQaaManaePaSa*íeNa b]øXaqZ<aaeRåTaeJaSaa )
otaraYaa hTaae Ga>aR wRXaeNaaJaqivTa" PauNa" )) 1 ))
çaunaka uväca
açvatthämnopasåñöena
brahma-çérñëoru-tejasä
uttaräyä hato garbha
éçenäjévitaù punaù
SYNONYMS
çaunakaù uväca—the sage Çaunaka said; açvatthämna—of Açvatthämä (the
son of Droëa); upasåñöena—by release of; brahma-çérñëä—the invincible
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
weapon, brahmästra; uru-tejasä—by high temperature; uttaräyäù—of Uttarä
(mother of Parékñit); hataù—being spoiled; garbhaù—womb; éçena—by the
Supreme Lord; äjévitaù—brought to life; punaù—again.
TRANSLATION
The sage Çaunaka said: The womb of Uttarä, mother of Mahäräja Parékñit,
was spoiled by the dreadful and invincible brahmästra weapon released by
Açvatthämä. But Mahäräja Parékñit was saved by the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
The sages assembled in the forest of Naimiñäraëya inquired from Süta
Gosvämé about the birth of Mahäräja Parékñit, but in the course of the
narration other topics like the release of the brahmästra by the son of Droëa,
his punishment by Arjuna, Queen Kuntédevé’s prayers, the Päëòavas’ visit to
the place where Bhéñmadeva was lying, his prayers and thereafter the Lord’s
departure for Dvärakä were discussed. His arrival at Dvärakä and residing with
the sixteen thousand queens, etc., were narrated. The sages were absorbed in
hearing such descriptions, but now they wanted to turn to the original topic,
and thus the inquiry was made by Çaunaka Åñi. So the subject of the release of
the brahmästra weapon by Açvatthämä is renewed.
TEXT 2
TaSYa JaNMa MahabuÖe" k-MaaRi<a c MahaTMaNa" )
iNaDaNa& c YaQaEvaSaqTSa Pa[eTYa GaTavaNa( YaQaa )) 2 ))
tasya janma mahä-buddheù
karmäëi ca mahätmanaù
nidhanaà ca yathaiväsét
sa pretya gatavän yathä
SYNONYMS
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
tasya—his (of Mahäräja Parékñit); janma—birth; mahä-buddheù—of great
intelligence; karmäëi—activities; ca—also; mahä-ätmanaù—of the great
devotee; nidhanam—demise; ca—also; yathä—as it was; eva—of course;
äsét—happened; saù—he; pretya—destination after death; gatavän—achieved;
yathä—as it were.
TRANSLATION
How was the great emperor Parékñit, who was a highly intelligent and great
devotee, born in that womb? How did his death take place, and what did he
achieve after his death?
PURPORT
The king of Hastinäpura (now Delhi) used to be the emperor of the world,
at least till the time of the son of Emperor Parékñit. Mahäräja Parékñit was
saved by the Lord in the womb of his mother, so he could certainly be saved
from an untimely death due to the ill will of the son of a brähmaëa. Because
the age of Kali began to act just after the assumption of power by Mahäräja
Parékñit, the first sign of misgivings was exhibited in the cursing of such a
greatly intelligent and devoted king as Mahäräja Parékñit. The king is the
protector of the helpless citizens, and their welfare, peace and prosperity
depend on him. Unfortunately, by the instigation of the fallen age of Kali, an
unfortunate brähmaëa’s son was employed to condemn the innocent Mahäräja
Parékñit, and so the King had to prepare himself for death within seven days.
Mahäräja Parékñit is especially famous as one who is protected by Viñëu, and
when he was unduly cursed by a brähmaëa’s son, he could have invoked the
mercy of the Lord to save him, but he did not want to because he was a pure
devotee. A pure devotee never asks the Lord for any undue favor. Mahäräja
Parékñit knew that the curse of the brähmaëa’s son upon him was unjustified,
as everyone else knew, but he did not want to counteract it because he knew
also that the age of Kali had begun and that the first symptom of the age,
namely degradation of the highly talented brähmaëa community, had also
begun. He did not want to interfere with the current of the time, but he
prepared himself to meet death very cheerfully and very properly. Being
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
fortunate, he got at least seven days to prepare himself to meet death, and so
he properly utilized the time in the association of Çukadeva Gosvämé, the great
saint and devotee of the Lord.
TEXT 3
Taidd& é[aeTauiMaC^aMaae GaidTau& Yaid MaNYaSae )
b]Uih Na" é[ÕDaaNaaNaa& YaSYa jaNaMadaC^uk-" )) 3 ))
tad idaà çrotum icchämo
gadituà yadi manyase
brühi naù çraddadhänänäà
yasya jïänam adäc chukaù
SYNONYMS
tat—all; idam—this; çrotum—to hear; icchämaù—all willing; gaditum—to
narrate; yadi—if; manyase—you think; brühi—please speak; naù—we;
çraddadhänänäm—who are very much respectful; yasya—whose;
jïänam—transcendental knowledge; adät—delivered; çukaù—Çré Çukadeva
Gosvämé.
TRANSLATION
We all respectfully want to hear about him [Mahäräja Parékñit] to whom
Çukadeva Gosvämé imparted transcendental knowledge. Please speak on this
matter.
PURPORT
Çukadeva Gosvämé imparted transcendental knowledge to Mahäräja
Parékñit during the remaining seven days of his life, and Mahäräja Parékñit
heard him properly, just like an ardent student. The effect of such a bona fide
hearing and chanting of Çrémad-Bhägavatam was equally shared by both the
hearer and the chanter. Both of them were benefited. Out of the nine
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
different transcendental means of devotional service to the Lord prescribed in
the Bhägavatam, either all of them, or some of them or even one of them are
equally beneficial if properly discharged. Mahäräja Parékñit and Çukadeva
Gosvämé were serious performers of the first two important items, namely the
process of chanting and the process of hearing, and therefore both of them
were successful in their laudable attempt. Transcendental realization is
attained by such serious hearing and chanting and not otherwise. There is a
type of spiritual master and disciple much advertised in this age of Kali. It is
said that the master injects spiritual force into the disciple by an electrical
current generated by the master, and the disciple begins to feel the shock. He
becomes unconscious, and the master weeps for his exhausting his store of
so-called spiritual assets. Such bogus advertisement is going on in this age, and
the poor common man is becoming the victim of such advertisement. We do
not find such folk tales in the dealings of Çukadeva Gosvämé and his great
disciple Mahäräja Parékñit. The sage recited Çrémad-Bhägavatam in devotion,
and the great King heard him properly. The King did not feel any shock of
electrical current from the master, nor did he become unconscious while
receiving knowledge from the master. One should not, therefore, become a
victim of these unauthorized advertisements made by some bogus
representative of Vedic knowledge. The sages of Naimiñäraëya were very
respectful in hearing about Mahäräja Parékñit because of his receiving
knowledge from Çukadeva Gosvämé by means of ardent hearing. Ardent
hearing from the bona fide master is the only way to receive transcendental
knowledge, and there is no need for medical performances or occult mysticism
for miraculous effects. The process is simple, but only the sincere party can
achieve the desired result.
TEXT 4
SaUTa ovac
APaqPal/ÖMaRraJa" iPaTa*vd( rÅYaNa( Pa[Jaa" )
iNa"SPa*h" SavRk-aMae>Ya" k*-Z<aPaadaNauSaevYaa )) 4 ))
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
süta uväca
apépalad dharma-räjaù
pitåvad raïjayan prajäù
niùspåhaù sarva-kämebhyaù
kåñëa-pädänusevayä
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Çré Süta Gosvämé said; apépalat—administered prosperity;
dharma-räjaù—King Yudhiñöhira; pitå-vat—exactly like his father;
raïjayan—pleasing; prajäù—all those who took birth; niùspåhaù—without
personal ambition; sarva—all; kämebhyaù—from sense gratification;
kåñëa-päda—the lotus feet of Lord Çré Kåñëa; anusevayä—by dint of rendering
continuous service.
TRANSLATION
Çré Süta Gosvämé said: Emperor Yudhiñöhira administered generously to
everyone during his reign. He was exactly like his father. He had no personal
ambition and was freed from all sorts of sense gratification because of his
continuous service unto the lotus feet of the Lord Çré Kåñëa.
PURPORT
As mentioned in our introduction, “There is a need for the science of Kåñëa
in human society for all the suffering humanity of the world, and we simply
request the leading personalities of all nations to take to the science of Kåñëa
for their own good, for the good of society, and for the good of all the people of
the world.” So it is confirmed herein by the example of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira,
the personality of goodness. In India the people hanker after Räma-räjya
because the Personality of Godhead was the ideal king and all other kings or
emperors in India controlled the destiny of the world for the prosperity of
every living being who took birth on the earth. Herein the word prajäù is
significant. The etymological import of the word is “that which is born.” On
the earth there are many species of life, from the aquatics up to the perfect
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
human beings, and all are known as prajäs. Lord Brahmä, the creator of this
particular universe, is known as the prajäpati because he is the grandfather of
all who have taken birth. Thus prajä is used in a broader sense than it is now
used. The king represents all living beings, the aquatics, plants, trees, reptiles,
birds, animals and man. Every one of them is a part and parcel of the Supreme
Lord (Bg. 14.4), and the king, being the representative of the Supreme Lord, is
duty-bound to give proper protection to every one of them. This is not the case
with the presidents and dictators of this demoralized system of administration,
where the lower animals are given no protection while the higher animals are
given so-called protection. But this is a great science which can be learned
only by one who knows the science of Kåñëa. By knowing the science of Kåñëa,
one can become the most perfect man in the world, and unless one has
knowledge in this science, all qualifications and doctorate diplomas acquired
by academic education are spoiled and useless. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira knew this
science of Kåñëa very well, for it is stated here that by continuous cultivation
of this science, or by continuous devotional service to Lord Kåñëa, he acquired
the qualification of administering the state. The father is sometimes seemingly
cruel to the son, but that does not mean that the father has lost the
qualification to be a father. A father is always a father because he always has
the good of the son at heart. The father wants every one of his sons to become
a better man than himself. Therefore, a king like Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, who
was the personality of goodness, wanted everyone under his administration,
especially human beings who have better developed consciousness, to become
devotees of Lord Kåñëa so that everyone can become free from the trifles of
material existence. His motto of administration was all good for the citizens,
for as personified goodness he knew perfectly well what is actually good for
them. He conducted the administration on that principle, and not on the
räkñasi, demonic, principle of sense gratification. As an ideal king, he had no
personal ambition, and there was no place for sense gratification because all
his senses at all times were engaged in the loving service of the Supreme Lord,
which includes the partial service to the living beings, who form the parts and
parcels of the complete whole. Those who are busy rendering service to the
parts and parcels, leaving aside the whole, only spoil time and energy, as one
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
does when watering the leaves of a tree without watering the root. If water is
poured on the root, the leaves are enlivened perfectly and automatically, but if
water is poured on the leaves only, the whole energy is spoiled. Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira, therefore, was constantly engaged in the service of the Lord, and
thus the parts and parcels of the Lord, the living beings under his careful
administration, were perfectly attended with all comforts in this life and all
progress in the next. That is the way of perfect management of state
administration.
TEXT 5
SaMPad" §-Tavae l/aek-a Maihzq >a]aTarae Mahq )
JaMbUÜqPaaiDaPaTYa& c YaXaê i}aidv& GaTaMa( )) 5 ))
sampadaù kratavo lokä
mahiñé bhrätaro mahé
jambüdvépädhipatyaà ca
yaçaç ca tri-divaà gatam
SYNONYMS
sampadaù—opulence; kratavaù—sacrifices; lokäù—future destination;
mahiñé—the queens; bhrätaraù—the brothers; mahé—the earth;
jambü-dvépa—the globe or planet of our residence; ädhipatyam—sovereignty;
ca—also; yaçaù—fame; ca—and; tri-divam—celestial planets; gatam—spread
over.
TRANSLATION
News even reached the celestial planets about Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira’s
worldly possessions, the sacrifices by which he would attain a better
destination, his queen, his stalwart brothers, his extensive land, his sovereignty
over the planet earth, and his fame, etc.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
Only a rich and great man’s name and fame are known all over the world,
and the name and fame of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira reached the higher planets
because of his good administration, worldly possessions, glorious wife Draupadé,
the strength of his brothers Bhéma and Arjuna, and his solid sovereign power
over the world, known as Jambüdvépa. Here the word lokäù is significant.
There are different lokas or higher planets scattered all over the sky, both
material and spiritual. A person can reach them by dint of his work in the
present life, as stated in Bhagavad-gétä (9.25). No forceful entrance is allowed
there. The tiny material scientists and engineers who have discovered vehicles
to travel over a few thousand miles in outer space will not be allowed entrance.
That is not the way to reach the better planets. One must qualify himself to
enter into such happy planets by sacrifice and service. Those who are sinful in
every step of life can expect only to be degraded into animal life to suffer more
and more the pangs of material existence, and this is also stated in
Bhagavad-gétä (16.19). Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira’s good sacrifices and
qualifications were so lofty and virtuous that even the residents of the higher
celestial planets were already prepared to receive him as one of them.
TEXT 6
ik&- Tae k-aMaa" SaurSPaahaR Mauku-NdMaNaSaae iÜJaa" )
AiDaJahuMauRd& raj" +auiDaTaSYa YaQaeTare )) 6 ))
kià te kämäù sura-spärhä
mukunda-manaso dvijäù
adhijahrur mudaà räjïaù
kñudhitasya yathetare
SYNONYMS
kim—what for; te—all those; kämäù—objects of sense enjoyment; sura—of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the denizens of heaven; spärhäù—aspirations; mukunda-manasaù—of one who
is already God conscious; dvijäù—O brähmaëas; adhijahruù—could satisfy;
mudam—pleasure; räjïaù—of the king; kñudhitasya—of the hungry; yathä—as
it is; itare—in other things.
TRANSLATION
O brähmaëas, the opulence of the King was so enchanting that the denizens
of heaven aspired for it. But because he was absorbed in the service of the Lord,
nothing could satisfy him except the Lord’s service.
PURPORT
There are two things in the world which can satisfy living beings. When
one is materially engrossed, he is satisfied only by sense gratification, but when
one is liberated from the conditions of the material modes, he is satisfied only
by rendering loving service for the satisfaction of the Lord. This means that
the living being is constitutionally a servitor, and not one who is served. Being
illusioned by the conditions of the external energy, one falsely thinks himself
to be the served, but actually he is not served; he is servant of the senses like
lust, desire, anger, avarice, pride, madness and intolerance. When one is in his
proper senses by attainment of spiritual knowledge, he realizes that he is not
the master of the material world, but is only a servant of the senses. At that
time he begs for the service of the Lord and thus becomes happy without being
illusioned by so-called material happiness. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was one of
the liberated souls, and therefore for him there was no pleasure in a vast
kingdom, good wife, obedient brothers, happy subjects and prosperous world.
These blessings automatically follow for a pure devotee, even though the
devotee does not aspire for them. The example set herein is exactly suitable. It
is said that one who is hungry is never satisfied by anything other than food.
The whole material world is full of hungry living beings. The hunger is not
for good food, shelter or sense gratification. The hunger is for the spiritual
atmosphere. Due to ignorance only they think that the world is dissatisfied
because there is not sufficient food, shelter, defense and objects of sense
gratification. This is called illusion. When the living being is hungry for
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
spiritual satisfaction, he is misrepresented by material hunger. But the foolish
leaders cannot see that even the people who are most sumptuously materially
satisfied are still hungry. And what is their hunger and poverty? This hunger is
actually for spiritual food, spiritual shelter, spiritual defense and spiritual sense
gratification. These can be obtained in the association of the Supreme Spirit,
Lord Çré Kåñëa, and therefore one who has them cannot be attracted by the
so-called food, shelter, defense and sense gratification of the material world,
even if they are relished by the denizens of the heavenly planets. Therefore, in
the Bhagavad-gétä (8.16) it is said by the Lord that even in the topmost planet
of the universe, namely the Brahmaloka, where the duration of life is
multiplied by millions of years by earth calculation, one cannot satisfy his
hunger. Such hunger can be satisfied only when the living being is situated in
immortality, which is attained in the spiritual sky, far, far above the
Brahmaloka, in the association of Lord Mukunda, the Lord who awards His
devotees the transcendental pleasure of liberation.
TEXT 7
MaaTauGaR>aRGaTaae vqr" Sa Tada >a*GauNaNdNa )
ddXaR Pauåz& k-iÄÕùMaaNaae_ñTaeJaSaa )) 7 ))
mätur garbha-gato véraù
sa tadä bhågu-nandana
dadarça puruñaà kaïcid
dahyamäno ’stra-tejasä
SYNONYMS
mätuù—mother; garbha—womb; gataù—being situated there; véraù—the great
fighter; saù—child Parékñit; tadä—at that time; bhågu-nandana—O son of
Bhågu; dadarça—could see; puruñam—the Supreme Lord; kaïcit—as someone
else; dahyamänaù—suffering from being burned; astra—the brahmästra;
tejasä—temperature.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
O son of Bhågu [Çaunaka], when the child Parékñit, the great fighter, was in
the womb of his mother, Uttarä, and was suffering from the burning heat of the
brahmästra [thrown by Açvatthämä], he could observe the Supreme Lord
coming to him.
PURPORT
Death generally involves remaining in trance for seven months. A living
being, according to his own action, is allowed to enter into the womb of a
mother by the vehicle of a father’s semina, and thus he develops his desired
body. This is the law of birth in specific bodies according to one’s past actions.
When he is awake from trance, he feels the inconvenience of being confined
within the womb, and thus he wants to come out of it and sometimes
fortunately prays to the Lord for such liberation. Mahäräja Parékñit, while in
the womb of his mother, was struck by the brahmästra released by Açvatthämä,
and he was feeling the burning heat. But because he was a devotee of the Lord,
the Lord at once appeared Himself within the womb by His all-powerful
energy, and the child could see that someone else had come to save him. Even
in that helpless condition, the child Parékñit endured the unbearable
temperature due to his being a great fighter by nature. And for this reason the
word véraù has been used.
TEXT 8
Ax(GauïMaa}aMaMal&/ Sfu-rTPaur$=MaaEil/NaMa( )
APaqVYadXaRNa& XYaaMa& Tai@ÜaSaSaMaCYauTaMa( )) 8 ))
aìguñöha-mätram amalaà
sphurat-puraöa-maulinam
apévya-darçanaà çyämaà
taòid väsasam acyutam
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
aìguñöha—by the measure of a thumb; mätram—only;
amalam—transcendental; sphurat—blazing; puraöa—gold; maulinam—helmet;
apévya—very beautiful; darçanam—to look at; çyämam—blackish;
taòit—lightning; väsasam—clothing; acyutam—the Infallible (the Lord).
TRANSLATION
He [the Lord] was only thumb high, but He was all transcendental. He had a
very beautiful, blackish, infallible body, and He wore a dress of lightning yellow
and a helmet of blazing gold. Thus He was seen by the child.
TEXT 9
é[qMaÕqgaRcTaubaRhu& Taák-aÄNaku-<@l/Ma( )
+aTaJaa+a& GadaPaai<aMaaTMaNa" SavRTaaeidXaMa( )
Pair>a]MaNTaMauLk-a>aa& >a]aMaYaNTa& Gada& Mauhu" )) 9 ))
çrémad-dérgha-catur-bähuà
tapta-käïcana-kuëòalam
kñatajäkñaà gadä-päëim
ätmanaù sarvato diçam
paribhramantam ulkäbhäà
bhrämayantaà gadäà muhuù
SYNONYMS
çrémat—enriched; dérgha—prolonged; catuù-bähum—four-handed;
tapta-käïcana—molten gold; kuëòalam—earrings; kñataja-akñam—eyes with
the redness of blood; gadä-päëim—hand with a club; ätmanaù—own;
sarvataù—all; diçam—around; paribhramantam—loitering; ulkäbhäm—like
shooting stars; bhrämayantam—encircling; gadäm—the club;
muhuù—constantly.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
The Lord was enriched with four hands, earrings of molten gold and eyes
blood red with fury. As He loitered about, His club constantly encircled Him
like a shooting star.
PURPORT
It is said in the Brahma-saàhitä (Ch. 5) that the Supreme Lord Govinda, by
His one plenary portion, enters into the halo of the universe and distributes
himself as Paramätmä, or the Supersoul, not only within the heart of every
living being, but also within every atom of the material elements. Thus the
Lord is all-pervading by His inconceivable potency, and thus He entered the
womb of Uttarä to save His beloved devotee Mahäräja Parékñit. In the
Bhagavad-gétä (9.31) the Lord assured everyone that His devotees are never to
be vanquished. No one can kill a devotee of the Lord because he is protected
by the Lord, and no one can save a person whom the Lord desires to kill. The
Lord is all-powerful, and therefore He can both save and kill as He likes. He
became visible to His devotee Mahäräja Parékñit even in that awkward position
(in the womb of his mother) in a shape just suitable for his vision. The Lord
can become bigger than thousands of universes and can become smaller than
an atom at the same time. Merciful as He is, He becomes just suitable to the
vision of the limited living being. He is unlimited. He is not limited by any
measurement of our calculation. He can become bigger than what we can
think of, and He can become smaller than what we can conceive. But in all
circumstances He is the same all-powerful Lord. There is no difference
between the thumblike Viñëu in the womb of Uttarä and the full-fledged
Näräyaëa in the Vaikuëöha-dhäma, the kingdom of Godhead. He accepts the
form of arca-vigraha (worshipable Deity) just to accept service from His
different incapable devotees. By the mercy of the arca-vigraha, the form of the
Lord in material elements, the devotees who are in the material world can
easily approach the Lord, although He is not conceivable by the material
senses. The arca-vigraha is therefore an all-spiritual form of the Lord to be
perceived by the material devotees; such an arca-vigraha of the Lord is never
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
to be considered material. There is no difference between matter and spirit for
the Lord, although there is a gulf of difference between the two in the case of
the conditioned living being. For the Lord there is nothing but spiritual
existence, and similarly there is nothing except spiritual existence for the pure
devotee of the Lord in his intimate relation with the Lord.
TEXT 10
AñTaeJa" SvGadYaa NaqhariMav GaaePaiTa" )
ivDaMaNTa& Saiàk-zeR PaYaOE+aTa k- wTYaSaaE )) 10 ))
astra-tejaù sva-gadayä
néhäram iva gopatiù
vidhamantaà sannikarñe
paryaikñata ka ity asau
SYNONYMS
astra-tejaù—radiation of the brahmästra; sva-gadayä—by means of His own
club; néhäram—drops of dew; iva—like; gopatiù—the sun; vidhamantam—the
act of vanishing; sannikarñe—nearby; paryaikñata—observing; kaù—who; iti
asau—this body.
TRANSLATION
The Lord was thus engaged in vanquishing the radiation of the brahmästra,
just as the sun evaporates a drop of dew. He was observed by the child, who
thought about who He was.
TEXT 11
ivDaUYa TadMaeYaaTMaa >aGavaNDaMaRGaub( iv>au" )
iMazTaae dXaMaaSaSYa Ta}aEvaNTadRDae hir" )) 11 ))
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
vidhüya tad ameyätmä
bhagavän dharma-gub vibhuù
miñato daçamäsasya
tatraiväntardadhe hariù
SYNONYMS
vidhüya—having completely washed off; tat—that; ameyätmä—the
all-pervading Supersoul; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead;
dharma-gup—the protector of righteousness; vibhuù—the Supreme;
miñataù—while observing; daçamäsasya—of one who is dressed by all
directions; tatra eva—then and there; antaù—out of sight; dadhe—became;
hariù—the Lord.
TRANSLATION
While thus being observed by the child, the Supreme Lord Personality of
Godhead, the Supersoul of everyone and the protector of the righteous, who
stretches in all directions and who is unlimited by time and space, disappeared
at once.
PURPORT
Child Parékñit was not observing a living being who is limited by time and
space. There is a gulf of difference between the Lord and the individual living
being. The Lord is mentioned herein as the supreme living being unlimited by
time and space. Every living being is limited by time and space. Even though a
living being is qualitatively one with the Lord, quantitatively there is a great
difference between the Supreme Soul and the common individual soul. In the
Bhagavad-gétä both the living beings and the Supreme Being are said to be
all-pervading (yena sarvam idaà tatam), yet there is a difference between these
two kinds of all-pervasiveness. A common living being or soul can be
all-pervading within his own limited body, but the supreme living being is
all-pervading in all space and all time. A common living being cannot extend
its influence over another common living being by its all-pervasiveness, but
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the Supreme Supersoul, the Personality of Godhead, is unlimitedly able to
exert His influence over all places and all times and over all living beings. And
because He is all-pervasive, unlimited by time and space, He can appear even
within the womb of the mother of child Parékñit. He is mentioned herein as
the protector of the righteous. Anyone who is a surrendered soul unto the
Supreme is righteous, and he is specifically protected by the Lord in all
circumstances. The Lord is the indirect protector of the unrighteous also, for
He rectifies their sins through His external potency. The Lord is mentioned
herein as one who is dressed in the ten directions. This means dressed with
garments on ten sides, up and down. He is present everywhere and can appear
and disappear at His will from everywhere and anywhere. His disappearance
from the sight of the child Parékñit does not mean that He appeared on the
spot from any other place. He was present there, and even after His
disappearance He was there, although invisible to the eyes of the child. This
material covering of the effulgent firmament is also something like a womb of
the mother nature, and we are all put into the womb by the Lord, the father of
all living beings. He is present everywhere, even in this material womb of
mother Durgä, and those who are deserving can see the Lord.
TEXT 12
TaTa" SavRGau<aaedkeR- SaaNaukU-l/Ga]haedYae )
Jaje v&XaDar" Paa<@ae>aURYa" Paa<@uirvaEJaSaa )) 12 ))
tataù sarva-guëodarke
sänuküla-grahodaye
jajïe vaàça-dharaù päëòor
bhüyaù päëòur ivaujasä
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereupon; sarva—all; guëa—good signs; udarke—having gradually
evolved; sa-anuküla—all favorable; grahodaye—constellation of stellar
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
influence; jajïe—took birth; vaàça-dharaù—heir apparent; päëòoù—of
Päëòu; bhüyaù—being; päëòuù iva—exactly like Päëòu; ojasä—by prowess.
TRANSLATION
Thereupon, when all the good signs of the zodiac gradually evolved, the heir
apparent of Päëòu, who would be exactly like him in prowess, took birth.
PURPORT
Astronomical calculations of stellar influences upon a living being are not
suppositions, but are factual, as confirmed in Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Every living
being is controlled by the laws of nature at every minute, just as a citizen is
controlled by the influence of the state. The state laws are grossly observed,
but the laws of material nature, being subtle to our gross understanding,
cannot be experienced grossly. As stated in the Bhagavad-gétä (3.9), every
action of life produces another reaction, which is binding upon us, and only
those who are acting on behalf of Yajïa (Viñëu) are not bound by reactions.
Our actions are judged by the higher authorities, the agents of the Lord, and
thus we are awarded bodies according to our activities. The law of nature is so
subtle that every part of our body is influenced by the respective stars, and a
living being obtains his working body to fulfill his terms of imprisonment by
the manipulation of such astronomical influence. A man’s destiny is therefore
ascertained by the birthtime constellation of stars, and a factual horoscope is
made by a learned astrologer. It is a great science, and misuse of a science does
not make it useless. Mahäräja Parékñit or even the Personality of Godhead
appear in certain constellations of good stars, and thus the influence is exerted
upon the body thus born at an auspicious moment. The most auspicious
constellation of stars takes place during the appearance of the Lord in this
material world, and it is specifically called jayanté, a word not to be abused for
any other purposes. Mahäräja Parékñit was not only a great kñatriya emperor,
but also a great devotee of the Lord. Thus he cannot take his birth at any
inauspicious moment. As a proper place and time is selected to receive a
respectable personage, so also to receive such a personality as Mahäräja
Parékñit, who was especially cared for by the Supreme Lord, a suitable moment
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
is chosen when all good stars assembled together to exert their influence upon
the King. Thus he took his birth just to be known as the great hero of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam. This suitable arrangement of astral influences is never a
creation of man’s will, but is the arrangement of the superior management of
the agency of the Supreme Lord. Of course, the arrangement is made
according to the good or bad deeds of the living being. Herein lies the
importance of pious acts performed by the living being. Only by pious acts can
one be allowed to get good wealth, good education and beautiful features. The
saàskäras of the school of sanätana-dharma (man’s eternal engagement) are
highly suitable for creating an atmosphere for taking advantage of good stellar
influences, and therefore garbhädhäna-saàskära, or the first seedling
purificatory process prescribed for the higher castes, is the beginning of all
pious acts to receive a good pious and intelligent class of men in human
society. There will be peace and prosperity in the world due to good and sane
population only; there is hell and disturbance only because of the unwanted,
insane populace addicted to sex indulgence.
TEXT 13
TaSYa Pa[qTaMaNaa raJaa ivPa[EDaaOEMYak*-Paaidi>a" )
JaaTak&- k-arYaaMaaSa vaciYaTva c Ma®l/Ma( )) 13 ))
tasya préta-manä räjä
viprair dhaumya-kåpädibhiù
jätakaà kärayäm äsa
väcayitvä ca maìgalam
SYNONYMS
tasya—his; préta-manäù—satisfied; räjä—King Yudhiñöhira; vipraiù—by the
learned brähmaëas; dhaumya—Dhaumya; kåpa—Kåpa; ädibhiù—and others
also; jätakam—one of the purificatory processes performed just after the birth
of a child; kärayäm äsa—had them performed; väcayitvä—by recitation;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ca—also; maìgalam—auspicious.
TRANSLATION
King Yudhiñöhira, who was very satisfied with the birth of Mahäräja
Parékñit, had the purificatory process of birth performed. Learned brähmaëas,
headed by Dhaumya and Kåpa, recited auspicious hymns.
PURPORT
There is a need for a good and intelligent class of brähmaëas who are expert
in performing the purificatory processes prescribed in the system of
varëäçrama-dharma. Unless such purificatory processes are performed, there is
no possibility of good population, and in the age of Kali the population all over
the world is of çüdra quality or lower for want of this purificatory process. It is
not possible, however, to revive the Vedic process of purification in this age,
for want of proper facilities and good brähmaëas, but there is the Päïcarätrika
system also recommended for this age. The Päïcarätrika system acts on the
çüdra class of men, supposedly the population of the Kali-yuga, and it is the
prescribed purificatory process suitable to the age and time. Such a purificatory
process is allowed only for spiritual upliftment and not for any other purpose.
Spiritual upliftment is never conditioned by higher or lower parentage.
After the garbhädhäna purificatory process, there are certain other
saàskäras like sémantonnayana, sadhabhakñaëam, etc., during the period of
pregnancy, and when the child is born the first purificatory process is
jätakarman. This was performed duly by Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira with the help of
good and learned brähmaëas like Dhaumya, the royal priest, and Kåpäcärya,
who was not only a priest but also a great general. Both these learned and
perfect priests, assisted by other good brähmaëas, were employed by Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira to perform the ceremony. Therefore all the saàskäras,
purificatory processes, are not mere formalities or social functions only, but
they are all for practical purposes and can be successfully performed by expert
brähmaëas like Dhaumya and Kåpa. Such brähmaëas are not only rare, but also
not available in this age, and therefore, for the purpose of spiritual upliftment
in this fallen age, the Gosvämés prefer the purificatory processes under
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Päïcarätrika formulas to the Vedic rites.
Kåpäcärya is the son of the great Åñi Sardban and was born in the family of
Gautama. The birth is said to be accidental. By chance, the great Åñi Sardban
met Janapadé, a famous society girl of heaven, and the Åñi Sardban discharged
semina in two parts. By one part immediately a male child and by the other
part a female child were born as twins. The male child was later on known as
Kåpa, and the female child was known as Kåpé. Mahäräja Çantanu, while
engaged in chase in the jungle, picked up the children and brought them up to
the brahminical status by the proper purificatory process. Kåpäcärya later
became a great general like Droëäcärya, and his sister was married to
Droëäcärya. Kåpäcärya later on took part in the Battle of Kurukñetra and
joined the party of Duryodhana. Kåpäcärya helped kill Abhimanyu, the father
of Mahäräja Parékñit, but he was still held in esteem by the family of the
Päëòavas due to his being as great a brähmaëa as Droëäcärya. When the
Päëòavas were sent to the forest after being defeated in the gambling game
with Duryodhana, Dhåtaräñöra entrusted the Päëòavas to Kåpäcärya for
guidance. After the end of the battle, Kåpäcärya again became a member of the
royal assembly, and he was called during the birth of Mahäräja Parékñit for
recitation of auspicious Vedic hymns to make the ceremony successful.
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, while quitting the palace for his great departure to the
Himalayas, entrusted Kåpäcärya with Mahäräja Parékñit as his disciple, and he
left home satisfied because of Kåpäcärya’s taking charge of Mahäräja Parékñit.
The great administrators, kings and emperors were always under the guidance
of learned brähmaëas like Kåpäcärya and thus were able to act properly in the
discharge of political responsibilities.
TEXT 14
ihr<Ya& Gaa& Mahq& Ga]aMaaNa( hSTYaìaà*PaiTavRraNa( )
Pa[adaTSvà& c ivPa[e>Ya" Pa[JaaTaqQaeR Sa TaqQaRivTa( )) 14 ))
hiraëyaà gäà mahéà grämän
hasty-açvän nåpatir varän
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
prädät svannaà ca viprebhyaù
prajä-térthe sa térthavit
SYNONYMS
hiraëyam—gold; gäm—cows; mahém—land; grämän—villages;
hasti—elephants; açvän—horses; nåpatiù—the King; varän—rewards;
prädät—gave in charity; su-annam—good food grains; ca—and;
viprebhyaù—unto the brähmaëas; prajä-térthe—on the occasion of giving in
charity on the birthday of a son; saù—he; tértha-vit—one who knows how,
when and where charity is to be given.
TRANSLATION
Upon the birth of a son, the King, who knew how, where and when charity
should be given, gave gold, land, villages, elephants, horses and good food grains
to the brähmaëas.
PURPORT
Only the brähmaëas and sannyäsés are authorized to accept charity from the
householders. In all the different occasions of saàskäras, especially during the
time of birth, marriage and death, wealth is distributed to the brähmaëas
because the brähmaëas give the highest quality of service in regard to the
prime necessity of humankind. The charity was substantial in the shape of
gold, land, villages, horses, elephants and food grains, with other materials for
cooking complete foodstuff. The brähmaëas were not, therefore, poor in the
actual sense of the term. On the contrary, because they possessed gold, land,
villages, horses, elephants and sufficient grains, they had nothing to earn for
themselves. They would simply devote themselves to the well-being of the
entire society.
The word térthavit is significant because the King knew well where and
when charity has to be given. Charity is never unproductive or blind. In the
çästras charity was offered to persons who deserve to accept charity by dint of
spiritual enlightenment. The so-called daridra-näräyaëa, a misconception of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the Supreme Lord by unauthorized persons, is never to be found in the çästras
as the object of charity. Nor can a wretched poor man receive much
munificent charity in the way of horses, elephants, land and villages. The
conclusion is that the intelligent men, or the brähmaëas specifically engaged
in the service of the Lord, were properly maintained without anxiety for the
needs of the body, and the King and other householders gladly looked after all
their comforts.
It is enjoined in the çästras that as long as a child is joined with the mother
by the navel pipe, the child is considered to be of one body with the mother,
but as soon as the pipe is cut and the child is separated from the mother, the
purificatory process of jätakarman is performed. The administrative demigods
and past forefathers of the family come to see a newly born child, and such an
occasion is specifically accepted as the proper time for distributing wealth to
the right persons productively for the spiritual advancement of society.
TEXT 15
TaMaUcub]aRø<aaSTauía raJaaNa& Pa[é[YaaiNvTaMa( )
Wz ùiSMaNa( Pa[JaaTaNTaaE Pauæ<aa& PaaErvzR>a )) 15 ))
tam ücur brähmaëäs tuñöä
räjänaà praçrayänvitam
eña hy asmin prajä-tantau
purüëäà pauravarñabha
SYNONYMS
tam—unto him; ücuù—addressed; brähmaëäù—the learned brähmaëas;
tuñöäù—very much satisfied; räjänam—unto the King; praçraya-anvitam—very
much obliging; eñaù—this; hi—certainly; asmin—in the chain of;
prajä-tantau—descending line; purüëäm—of the Pürus; paurava-åñabha—the
chief among the Pürus.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The learned brähmaëas, who were very satisfied with the charities of the
King, addressed him as the chief amongst the Pürus and informed him that his
son was certainly in the line of descent from the Pürus.
TEXT 16
dEveNaaPa[iTagaaTaeNa éu©e- Sa&SQaaMauPaeYauiz )
raTaae vae_NauGa]haQaaRYa ivZ<auNaa Pa[>aivZ<auNaa )) 16 ))
daivenäpratighätena
çukle saàsthäm upeyuñi
räto vo ’nugrahärthäya
viñëunä prabhaviñëunä
SYNONYMS
daivena—by supernatural power; apratighätena—by what is irresistible;
çukle—unto the pure; saàsthäm—destruction; upeyuñi—having been
enforced; rätaù—restored; vaù—for you; anugraha-arthäya—for the sake of
obliging; viñëunä—by the all-pervasive Lord; prabhaviñëunä—by the
all-powerful.
TRANSLATION
The brähmaëas said: This spotless son has been restored by the all-powerful
and all-pervasive Lord Viñëu, the Personality of Godhead, in order to oblige
you. He was saved when he was doomed to be destroyed by an irresistible
supernatural weapon.
PURPORT
The child Parékñit was saved by the all-powerful and all-pervasive Viñëu
(Lord Kåñëa) for two reasons. The first reason is that the child in the womb of
his mother was spotless due to his being a pure devotee of the Lord. The
second reason is that the child was the only surviving male descendant of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Puru, the pious forefather of the virtuous King Yudhiñöhira. The Lord wants to
continue the line of pious kings to rule over the earth as His representatives
for the actual progress of a peaceful and prosperous life. After the Battle of
Kurukñetra, even up to the next generation of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was
annihilated, and there were none who could generate another son in the great
royal family. Mahäräja Parékñit, the son of Abhimanyu, was the only surviving
heir apparent in the family, and by the irresistible supernatural brahmästra
weapon of Açvatthämä, he was forced to be annihilated. Lord Kåñëa is
described herein as Viñëu, and this is also significant. Lord Kåñëa, the original
Personality of Godhead, does the work of protection and annihilation in His
capacity of Viñëu. Lord Viñëu is the plenary expansion of Lord Kåñëa. The
all-pervasive activities of the Lord are executed by Him in His Viñëu feature.
Child Parékñit is described here as spotlessly white because he is an unalloyed
devotee of the Lord. Such unalloyed devotees of the Lord appear on the earth
just to execute the mission of the Lord. The Lord desires the conditioned souls
hovering in the material creation to be reclaimed to go back home, back to
Godhead, and thus He helps them by preparing the transcendental literatures
like the Vedas, by sending missionaries of saints and sages and by deputing His
representative, the spiritual master. Such transcendental literatures,
missionaries and representatives of the Lord are spotlessly white because the
contamination of the material qualities cannot even touch them. They are
always protected by the Lord when they are threatened with annihilation.
Such foolish threats are made by the gross materialists. The brahmästra, which
was thrown by Açvatthämä at the child Parékñit, was certainly supernaturally
powerful, and nothing of the material world could resist its force of
penetration. But the all-powerful Lord, who is present everywhere, within and
without, could counteract it by His all-powerful potency just to save a bona
fide servant of the Lord and descendant of another devotee, Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira, who was always obliged by the Lord by His causeless mercy.
TEXT 17
TaSMaaàaMana ivZ<auraTa wiTa l/aeke- >aivZYaiTa )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Na SaNdehae Maha>aaGa Maha>aaGavTaae MahaNa( )) 17 ))
tasmän nämnä viñëu-räta
iti loke bhaviñyati
na sandeho mahä-bhäga
mahä-bhägavato mahän
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; nämnä—by the name; viñëu-rätaù—protected by Viñëu,
the Personality of Godhead; iti—thus; loke—in all the planets;
bhaviñyati—shall become well known; na—no; sandehaù—doubts;
mahä-bhäga—most fortunate; mahä-bhägavataù—the first-class devotee of the
Lord; mahän—qualified by all good qualities.
TRANSLATION
For this reason this child will be well known in the world as one who is
protected by the Personality of Godhead. O most fortunate one, there is no
doubt that this child will become a first-class devotee and will be qualified with
all good qualities.
PURPORT
The Lord gives protection to all living beings because He is their supreme
leader. The Vedic hymns confirm that the Lord is the Supreme Person
amongst all personalities. The difference between the two living beings is that
the one, the Personality of Godhead, provides for all other living beings, and
by knowing Him one can achieve eternal peace (Kaöha Upaniñad). Such
protection is given by His different potencies to different grades of living
beings. But as far as His unalloyed devotees are concerned, He gives the
protection personally. Therefore, Mahäräja Parékñit is protected from the very
beginning of his appearance in the womb of his mother. And because he is
especially given protection by the Lord, the indication must be concluded that
the child would be a first-grade devotee of the Lord with all good qualities.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
There are three grades of devotees, namely the mahä-bhägavata,
madhyam-adhikäré and the kaniñöha-adhikäré. Those who go to the temples of
the Lord and offer worshipful respect to the Deity without sufficient
knowledge in the theological science and therefore without any respect for the
devotees of the Lord are called materialistic devotees, or kaniñöha-adhikäré, the
third-grade devotees. Secondly, the devotees who have developed a mentality
of genuine service to the Lord and who thus make friendships only with
similar devotees, show favor to the neophytes and avoid the atheists are called
the second-grade devotees. But those who see everything in the Lord or
everything of the Lord and also see in everything an eternal relation of the
Lord, so that there is nothing within their purview of sight except the Lord,
are called the mahä-bhägavatas, or the first-grade devotees of the Lord. Such
first-grade devotees of the Lord are perfect in all respects. A devotee who may
be in any of these categories is automatically qualified by all good qualities, and
thus a mahä-bhägavata devotee like Mahäräja Parékñit is certainly perfect in all
respects. And because Mahäräja Parékñit took his birth in the family of
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, he is addressed herein as the mahä-bhägavata, or the
greatest of the fortunates. The family in which a mahä-bhägavata takes his
birth is fortunate because due to the birth of a first-grade devotee the members
of the family, past, present and future up to one hundred generations, become
liberated by the grace of the Lord, out of respect for His beloved devotee.
Therefore, the highest benefit is done to one’s family simply by becoming an
unalloyed devotee of the Lord.
TEXT 18
é[qraJaaevac
APYaez v&XYaaNa( raJazsNa( Pau<Yaëaek-aNa( MahaTMaNa" )
ANauviTaRTaa iSvÛXaSaa SaaDauvadeNa SataMaa" )) 18 ))
çré-räjoväca
apy eña vaàçyän räjarñén
puëya-çlokän mahätmanaù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
anuvartitä svid yaçasä
sädhu-vädena sattamäù
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä—the all-good king (Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira); uväca—said;
api—whether; eñaù—this; vaàçyän—family; räja-åñén—of saintly kings;
puëya-çlokän—pious by the very name; mahä-ätmanaù—all great souls;
anuvartitä—follower; svit—will it be; yaçasä—by achievements;
sädhu-vädena—by glorification; sat-tamäù—O great souls.
TRANSLATION
The good King [Yudhiñöhira] inquired: O great souls, will he become as
saintly a king, as pious in his very name and as famous and glorified in his
achievements, as others who appeared in this great royal family?
PURPORT
The forefathers of King Yudhiñöhira were all great saintly kings, pious and
glorified by their great achievements. They were all saints on the royal throne.
And therefore all the members of the state were happy, pious, well behaved,
prosperous and spiritually enlightened. Under strict guidance of the great souls
and spiritual injunctions, such great saintly kings were trained up, and as a
result the kingdom was full of saintly persons and was a happy land of spiritual
life. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was himself a replica of his ancestors, and he
desired that the next king after him become exactly like his great forefathers.
He was happy to learn from the learned brähmaëas that by astrological
calculations the child would be born a first-grade devotee of the Lord, and
more confidentially he wanted to know whether the child was going to follow
in the footsteps of his great forefathers. That is the way of the monarchical
state. The reigning king should be a pious, chivalrous devotee of the Lord and
fear personified for the upstarts. He must also leave an heir apparent equally
qualified to rule over the innocent citizens. In the modern setup of the
democratic states, the people themselves are fallen to the qualities of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
çüdras or less, and the government is run by their representative, who is
ignorant of the scriptural mode of administrative education. Thus the whole
atmosphere is surcharged with çüdra qualities, manifested by lust and avarice.
Such administrators quarrel every day among themselves. The cabinet of
ministers changes often due to party and group selfishness. Everyone wants to
exploit the state resources till he dies. No one retires from political life unless
forced to do so. How can such low-grade men do good to the people? The result
is corruption, intrigue and hypocrisy. They should learn from the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam how ideal the administrators must be before they can be
given charge of different posts.
TEXT 19
é[qb]aø<aa Ocu"
PaaQaR Pa[JaaivTaa Saa+aaid+vaku-irv MaaNav" )
b]ø<Ya" SaTYaSaNDaê raMaae daXariQaYaRQaa )) 19 ))
brähmaëä ücuù
pärtha prajävitä säkñäd
ikñväkur iva mänavaù
brahmaëyaù satya-sandhaç ca
rämo däçarathir yathä
SYNONYMS
brähmaëäù—the good brähmaëas; ücuù—said; pärtha—O son of Påthä
(Kunté); prajä—those who are born; avitä—maintainer; säkñät—directly;
ikñväkuù iva—exactly like King Ikñväku; mänavaù—son of Manu;
brahmaëyaù—followers and respectful to the brähmaëas;
satya-sandhaù—truthful by promise; ca—also; rämaù—the Personality of
Godhead Räma; däçarathiù—the son of Mahäräja Daçaratha; yathä—like Him.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The learned brähmaëas said: O son of Påthä, this child shall be exactly like
King Ikñväku, son of Manu, in maintaining all those who are born. And as for
following the brahminical principles, especially in being true to his promise, he
shall be exactly like Räma, the Personality of Godhead, the son of Mahäräja
Daçaratha.
PURPORT
Prajä means the living being who has taken his birth in the material world.
Actually the living being has no birth and no death, but because of his
separation from the service of the Lord and due to his desire to lord it over
material nature, he is offered a suitable body to satisfy his material desires. In
doing so, one becomes conditioned by the laws of material nature, and the
material body is changed in terms of his own work. The living entity thus
transmigrates from one body to another in 8,400,000 species of life. But due to
his being the part and parcel of the Lord, he not only is maintained with all
necessaries of life by the Lord, but also is protected by the Lord and His
representatives, the saintly kings. These saintly kings give protection to all the
prajäs, or living beings, to live and to fulfill their terms of imprisonment.
Mahäräja Parékñit was actually an ideal saintly king because while touring his
kingdom he happened to see that a poor cow was about to be killed by the
personified Kali, whom he at once took to task as a murderer. This means that
even the animals were given protection by the saintly administrators, not from
any sentimental point of view, but because those who have taken their birth in
the material world have the right to live. All the saintly kings, beginning from
the King of the sun globe down to the King of the earth, are so inclined by the
influence of the Vedic literatures. The Vedic literatures are taught in higher
planets also, as there is reference in the Bhagavad-gétä (4.1) about the
teachings to the sun-god (Vivasvän) by the Lord, and such lessons are
transferred by disciplic succession, as it was done by the sun-god to his son
Manu, and from Manu to Mahäräja Ikñväku. There are fourteen Manus in one
day of Brahmä, and the Manu referred to herein is the seventh Manu, who is
one of the prajäpatis (those who create progeny), and he is the son of the
sun-god. He is known as the Vaivasvata Manu. He had ten sons, and Mahäräja
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Ikñväku is one of them. Mahäräja Ikñväku also learned bhakti-yoga as taught in
the Bhagavad-gétä from his father, Manu, who got it from his father, the
sun-god. Later on the teaching of the Bhagavad-gétä came down by disciplic
succession from Mahäräja Ikñväku, but in course of time the chain was broken
by unscrupulous persons, and therefore it again had to be taught to Arjuna on
the Battlefield of Kurukñetra. So all the Vedic literatures are current from the
very beginning of creation of the material world, and thus the Vedic
literatures are known as apauruñeya (not made by man). The Vedic knowledge
was spoken by the Lord and first heard by Brahmä, the first created living
being within the universe.
Mahäräja Ikñväku: One of the sons of Vaivasvata Manu. He had one
hundred sons. He prohibited meat eating. His son Çaçäda became the next king
after his death.
Manu: The Manu mentioned in this verse as the father of Ikñväku is the
seventh Manu, of the name Vaivasvata Manu, the son of sun-god Vivasvän, to
whom Lord Kåñëa instructed the teachings of Bhagavad-gétä prior to His
teaching them to Arjuna. Mankind is the descendant of Manu. This
Vaivasvata Manu had ten sons, named Ikñväku, Nabhaga, Dhåñöa, Çaryäti,
Nariñyanta, Näbhäga, Diñöa, Karüña, Påñadhra and Vasumän. The Lord’s
incarnation Matsya (the gigantic fish) was advented during the beginning of
Vaivasvata Manu’s reign. He learned the principles of Bhagavad-gétä from his
father, Vivasvän, the sun-god, and he reinstructed the same to his son
Mahäräja Ikñväku. In the beginning of the Tretä-yuga the sun-god instructed
devotional service to Manu, and Manu in his turn instructed it to Ikñväku for
the welfare of the whole human society.
Lord Räma: The Supreme Personality of Godhead incarnated Himself as Çré
Räma, accepting the sonhood of His pure devotee Mahäräja Daçaratha, the
King of Ayodhyä. Lord Räma descended along with His plenary portions, and
all of them appeared as His younger brothers. In the month of Caitra on the
ninth day of the growing moon in the Tretä-yuga, the Lord appeared, as usual,
to establish the principles of religion and to annihilate the disturbing
elements. When He was just a young boy, He helped the great sage Viçvämitra
by killing Subahu and striking Märéca, the she-demon, who was disturbing the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
sages in their daily discharge of duties. The brähmaëas and kñatriyas are meant
to cooperate for the welfare of the mass of people. The brähmaëa sages
endeavor to enlighten the people by perfect knowledge, and the kñatriyas are
meant for their protection. Lord Rämacandra is the ideal king for maintaining
and protecting the highest culture of humanity, known as brahmaëya-dharma.
The Lord is specifically the protector of the cows and the brähmaëas, and
hence He enhances the prosperity of the world. He rewarded the
administrative demigods by effective weapons to conquer the demons through
the agency of Viçvämitra. He was present in the bow sacrifice of King Janaka,
and by breaking the invincible bow of Çiva, He married Sétädevé, daughter of
Mahäräja Janaka.
After His marriage He accepted exile in the forest for fourteen years by the
order of His father, Mahäräja Daçaratha. To help the administration of the
demigods, He killed fourteen thousand demons, and by the intrigues of the
demons, His wife, Sétädevé, was kidnapped by Rävaëa. He made friendship
with Sugréva, who was helped by the Lord to kill Vali, brother of Sugréva. By
the help of Lord Räma, Sugréva became the king of the Väëaras (a race of
gorillas). The Lord built a floating bridge of stones on the Indian Ocean and
reached Laìkä, the kingdom of Rävaëa, who had kidnapped Sétä. Later on
Rävaëa was killed by Him, and Rävaëa’s brother Vibhéñaëa was installed on
the throne of Laìkä. Vibhéñaëa was one of the brothers of Rävaëa, a demon,
but Lord Räma made him immortal by His blessings. On the expiry of fourteen
years, after settling the affairs at Laìkä, the Lord came back to His kingdom,
Ayodhyä, by flower plane. He instructed His brother Çatrughna to attack
Lavëäsura, who reigned at Mathurä, and the demon was killed. He performed
ten Açvamedha sacrifices, and later on He disappeared while taking a bath in
the Çarayu River. The great epic Rämäyaëa is the history of Lord Räma’s
activities in the world, and the authoritative Rämäyaëa was written by the
great poet Välméki.
TEXT 20
Wz daTaa Xar<Yaê YaQaa ùaEXaqNar" iXaib" )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
YaXaae ivTaiNaTaa SvaNaa& daEZYaiNTairv YaJvNaaMa( )) 20 ))
eña dätä çaraëyaç ca
yathä hy auçénaraù çibiù
yaço vitanitä svänäà
dauñyantir iva yajvanäm
SYNONYMS
eñaù—this child; dätä—donor in charity; çaraëyaù—protector of the
surrendered; ca—and; yathä—as; hi—certainly; auçénaraù—the country
named Uçénara; çibiù—Çibi; yaçaù—fame; vitanitä—disseminator; svänäm—of
the kinsmen; dauñyantiù iva—like Bharata, the son of Duñyanta; yajvanäm—of
those who have performed many sacrifices.
TRANSLATION
This child will be a munificent donor of charity and protector of the
surrendered, like the famous King Çibi of the Uçénara country. And he will
expand the name and fame of his family like Bharata, the son of Mahäräja
Duñyanta.
PURPORT
A king becomes famous by his acts of charity, performances of yajïas,
protection of the surrendered, etc. A kñatriya king is proud to give protection
to the surrendered souls. This attitude of a king is called éçvara-bhava, or
factual power to give protection in a righteous cause. In the Bhagavad-gétä the
Lord instructs living beings to surrender unto Him, and He promises all
protection. The Lord is all-powerful and true to His word, and therefore He
never fails to give protection to His different devotees. The king, being the
representative of the Lord, must possess this attitude of giving protection to
the surrendered souls at all risk. Mahäräja Çibi, the King of Uçénara, was an
intimate friend of Mahäräja Yayäti, who was able to reach the heavenly
planets along with Mahäräja Çibi. Mahäräja Çibi was aware of the heavenly
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
planet where he was to be transferred after his death, and the description of
this heavenly planet is given in the Mahäbhärata (Ädi-parva 96.6–9).
Mahäräja Çibi was so charitably disposed that he wanted to give over his
acquired position in the heavenly kingdom to Yayäti, but he did not accept it.
Yayäti went to the heavenly planet along with great åñis like Añöaka and
others. On inquiry from the åñis, Yayäti gave an account of Çibi’s pious acts
when all of them were on the path to heaven. He has become a member of the
assembly of Yamaräja, who has become his worshipful deity. As confirmed in
the Bhagavad-gétä, the worshiper of the demigods goes to the planets of the
demigods (yänti deva-vratä devän [Bg. 9.25]); so Mahäräja Çibi has become an
associate of the great Vaiñëava authority Yamaräja on that particular planet.
While he was on the earth he became very famous as a protector of
surrendered souls and a donor of charities. The King of heaven once took the
shape of a pigeon-hunter bird (eagle), and Agni, the fire-god, took the shape of
a pigeon. The pigeon, while being chased by the eagle, took shelter on the lap
of Mahäräja Çibi, and the hunter eagle wanted the pigeon back from the King.
The King wanted to give it some other meat to eat and requested the bird not
to kill the pigeon. The hunter bird refused to accept the King’s offer, but it was
settled later on that the eagle would accept flesh from the body of the King of
the pigeon’s equivalent weight. The King began to cut flesh from his body to
weigh in the balance equivalent to the weight of the pigeon, but the mystic
pigeon always remained heavier. The King then put himself on the balance to
equate with the pigeon, and the demigods were pleased with him. The King of
heaven and the fire-god disclosed their identity, and the King was blessed by
them. Devarñi Närada also glorified Mahäräja Çibi for his great achievements,
specifically in charity and protection. Mahäräja Çibi sacrificed his own son for
the satisfaction of human beings in his kingdom. And thus child Parékñit was
to become a second Çibi in charity and protection.
Dauñyanti Bharata: There are many Bharatas in history, of which Bharata
the brother of Lord Räma, Bharata the son of King Åñabha, and Bharata the
son of Mahäräja Duñyanta are very famous. And all these Bharatas are
historically known to the universe. This earth planet is known as Bhärata, or
Bhärata-varña, due to King Bharata the son of Åñabha, but according to some
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
this land is known as Bhärata due to the reign of the son of Duñyanta. So far as
we are convinced, this land’s name Bhärata-varña was established from the
reign of Bharata the son of King Åñabha. Before him the land was known as
Ilävati-varña, but just after the coronation of Bharata, the son of Åñabha, this
land became famous as Bhärata-varña.
But despite all this, Bharata, the son of Mahäräja Duñyanta was not less
important. He is the son of the famous beauty Çakuntalä. Mahäräja Duñyanta
fell in love with Çakuntalä in the forest, and Bharata was conceived. After
that, Mahäräja forgot his wife Çakuntalä by the curse of Kaëva Muni, and the
child Bharata was brought up in the forest by his mother. Even in his
childhood he was so powerful that he challenged the lions and elephants in the
forest and would fight with them as little children play with cats and dogs.
Because of the boy’s becoming so strong, more than the so-called modern
Tarzan, the åñis in the forest called him Sarvadaman, or one who is able to
control everyone. A full description of Mahäräja Bharata is given in the
Mahäbhärata, Ädi-parva. The Päëòavas, or the Kurus, are sometimes addressed
as Bhärata due to being born in the dynasty of the famous Mahäräja Bharata,
the son of King Duñyanta.
TEXT 21
DaiNvNaaMaGa]<aqrez TauLYaêaJauRNaYaaeÜRYaae" )
huTaaXa wv duDaRzR" SaMaud] wv duSTar" )) 21 ))
dhanvinäm agraëér eña
tulyaç cärjunayor dvayoù
hutäça iva durdharñaù
samudra iva dustaraù
SYNONYMS
dhanvinäm—of the great bowmen; agraëéù—the foreman; eñaù—this child;
tulyaù—equally good; ca—and; arjunayoù—of the Arjunas; dvayoù—of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
two; hutäçaù—fire; iva—like; durdharñaù—irresistible; samudraù—ocean;
iva—like; dustaraù—unsurpassable.
TRANSLATION
Amongst great bowmen, this child will be as good as Arjuna. He will be as
irresistible as fire and as unsurpassable as the ocean.
PURPORT
In history there are two Arjunas. One is Kärttavérya Arjuna, the King of
Haihaya, and the other is the grandfather of the child. Both the Arjunas are
famous for their bowmanship, and the child Parékñit is foretold to be equal to
both of them, particularly in fighting. A short description of the Päëòava
Arjuna is given below:
Päëòava Arjuna: The great hero of the Bhagavad-gétä. He is the kñatriya son
of Mahäräja Päëòu. Queen Kuntédevé could call for any one of the demigods,
and thus she called Indra, and Arjuna was born by him. Arjuna is therefore a
plenary part of the heavenly King Indra. He was born in the month of
Phalguna (February–March), and therefore he is also called Phalguni. When
he appeared as the son of Kunté, his future greatness was proclaimed by air
messages, and all the important personalities from different parts of the
universe, such as the demigods, the Gandharvas, the Ädityas (from the sun
globe), the Rudras, the Vasus, the Nägas, the different åñis (sages) of
importance, and the Apsaräs (the society girls of heaven), all attended the
ceremony. The Apsaräs pleased everyone by their heavenly dances and songs.
Vasudeva, the father of Lord Kåñëa and the maternal uncle of Arjuna, sent his
priest representative Kaçyapa to purify Arjuna by all the prescribed saàskäras,
or reformatory processes. His saàskära of being given a name was performed in
the presence of the åñis, residents of Çatasåìga. He married four wives,
Draupadé, Subhadrä, Citraìgada and Ulüpé, from whom he got four sons of the
names Çrutakérti, Abhimanyu, Babhruvähana and Irävän respectively.
During his student life he was entrusted to study under the great professor
Droëäcärya, along with other Päëòavas and the Kurus. But he excelled
everyone by his studious intensity, and Droëäcärya was especially attracted by
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
his disciplinary affection. Droëäcärya accepted him as a first-grade scholar and
loved heartily to bestow upon him all the blessings of military science. He was
so ardent a student that he used to practice bowmanship even at night, and for
all these reasons Professor Droëäcärya was determined to make him the
topmost bowman of the world. He passed very brilliantly the examination in
piercing the target, and Droëäcärya was very pleased. Royal families at
Maëipur and Tripura are descendants of Arjuna’s son Babhruvähana. Arjuna
saved Droëäcärya from the attack of a crocodile, and the Äcärya, being
pleased with him, rewarded him with a weapon of the name brahmaçira.
Mahäräja Drupada was inimical toward Droëäcärya, and thus when he
attacked the Äcärya, Arjuna got him arrested and brought him before
Droëäcärya. He besieged a city of the name Ahichhatra, belonging to
Mahäräja Drupada, and after taking it over he gave it to Droëäcärya. The
confidential treatment of the weapon brahmaçira was explained to Arjuna,
and Droëäcärya was promised by Arjuna that he would use the weapon if
necessary when he (Droëäcärya) personally became an enemy of Arjuna. By
this, the Äcärya forecasted the future battle of Kurukñetra, in which
Droëäcärya was on the opposite side. Mahäräja Drupada, although defeated by
Arjuna on behalf of his professor Droëäcärya, decided to hand over his
daughter Draupadé to his young combatant, but he was disappointed when he
heard the false news of Arjuna’s death in the fire of a shellac house intrigued
by Duryodhana. He therefore arranged for Draupadé’s personal selection of a
groom who could pierce the eye of a fish hanging on the ceiling. This trick was
especially made because only Arjuna could do it, and he was successful in his
desire to hand over his equally worthy daughter to Arjuna. Arjuna’s brothers
were at that time living incognito under agreement with Duryodhana, and
Arjuna and his brothers attended the meeting of Draupadé’s selection in the
dress of brähmaëas. When all the kñatriya kings assembled saw that a poor
brähmaëa had been garlanded by Draupadé for her lord, Çré Kåñëa disclosed his
identity to Balaräma.
He met Ulüpé at Haridvära (Hardwar), and he was attracted by a girl
belonging to Nägaloka, and thus Iravän was born. Similarly, he met
Citraìgada, a daughter of the King of Maëipura, and thus Babhruvähana was
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
born. Lord Çré Kåñëa made a plan to help Arjuna to kidnap Subhadrä, sister of
Çré Kåñëa, because Baladeva was inclined to hand her over to Duryodhana.
Yudhiñöhira also agreed with Çré Kåñëa, and thus Subhadrä was taken by force
by Arjuna and then married to him. Subhadrä’s son is Abhimanyu, the father
of Parékñit Mahäräja, the posthumous child. Arjuna satisfied the fire-god by
setting fire to the Khäëòava Forest, and thus the fire-god gave him one
weapon. Indra was angry when the fire was set in the Khäëòava Forest, and
thus Indra, assisted by all other demigods, began fighting with Arjuna for his
great challenge. They were defeated by Arjuna, and Indradeva returned to his
heavenly kingdom. Arjuna also promised all protection to one Mayäsura, and
the latter presented him one valuable conchshell celebrated as the Devadatta.
Similarly, he received many other valuable weapons from Indradeva when he
was satisfied to see his chivalry.
When Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was disappointed in defeating the King of
Magadha, Jaräsandha, it was Arjuna only who gave King Yudhiñöhira all kinds
of assurances, and thus Arjuna, Bhéma and Lord Kåñëa started for Magadha to
kill Jaräsandha. When he went out to bring all other kings of the world under
the subjection of the Päëòavas, as was usual after the coronation of every
emperor, he conquered the country named Kelinda and brought in subjugation
King Bhagdutt. Then he traveled through countries like Antagiri, Ulukpur
and Modapur and brought under subjugation all the rulers.
Sometimes he underwent severe types of penances, and later on he was
rewarded by Indradeva. Lord Çiva also wanted to try the strength of Arjuna,
and in the form of an aborigine, Lord Çiva met him. There was a great fight
between the two, and at last Lord Çiva was satisfied with him and disclosed his
identity. Arjuna prayed to the lord in all humbleness, and the lord, being
pleased with him, presented him the paçupata weapon. He acquired many
other important weapons from different demigods. He received daëòästra from
Yamaräja, paçästra from Varuëa, and antardhana-astra from Kuvera, the
treasurer of the heavenly kingdom. Indra wanted him to come to the heavenly
kingdom, the Indraloka planet beyond the moon planet. In that planet he was
cordially received by the local residents, and he was awarded reception in the
heavenly parliament of Indradeva. Then he met Indradeva, who not only
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
presented him with his vajra weapon, but also taught him the military and
musical science as used in the heavenly planet. In one sense, Indra is the real
father of Arjuna, and therefore indirectly he wanted to entertain Arjuna with
the famous society girl of heaven, Urvaçé, the celebrated beauty. The society
girls of heaven are lusty, and Urvaçé was very eager to contact Arjuna, the
strongest human being. She met him in his room and expressed her desires but
Arjuna sustained his unimpeachable character by closing his eyes before
Urvaçé, addressing her as mother of the Kuru dynasty and placing her in the
category of his mothers Kunté, Mädré and Çacédevé, wife of Indradeva.
Disappointed, Urvaçé cursed Arjuna and left. In the heavenly planet he also
met the great celebrated ascetic Lomasa and prayed to him for the protection
of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira.
When his inimical cousin Duryodhana was under the clutches of the
Gandharvas, he wanted to save him and requested the Gandharvas to release
Duryodhana, but the Gandharvas refused, and thus he fought with them and
got Duryodhana released. When all the Päëòavas lived incognito, he presented
himself in the court of King Viräöa as a eunuch and was employed as the
musical teacher of Uttarä, his future daughter-in-law, and was known in the
Viräöa court as the Båhannala. As Båhannala, he fought on behalf of Uttara,
the son of King Viräöa, and thus defeated the Kurus in the fight incognito. His
secret weapons were safely kept in the custody of a somi tree, and he ordered
Uttara to get them back. His identity and his brothers’ identity were later on
disclosed to Uttara. Droëäcärya was informed of Arjuna’s presence in the fight
of the Kurus and the Viräöas. Later, on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra, Arjuna
killed many great generals like Karëa and others. After the Battle of
Kurukñetra, he punished Açvatthämä, who had killed all the five sons of
Draupadé. Then all the brothers went to Bhéñmadeva.
It is due to Arjuna only that the great philosophical discourses of the
Bhagavad-gétä were again spoken by the Lord on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra.
His wonderful acts on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra are vividly described in the
Mahäbhärata. Arjuna was defeated, however, by his son Babhruvähana at
Maëipura and fell unconscious when Ulüpé saved him. After the
disappearance of Lord Kåñëa, the message was brought by Arjuna to Mahäräja
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Yudhiñöhira. Again, Arjuna visited Dvärakä, and all the widow wives of Lord
Kåñëa lamented before him. He took them all in the presence of Vasudeva and
pacified all of them. Later on, when Vasudeva passed away, he performed his
funeral ceremony in the absence of Kåñëa. While Arjuna was taking all the
wives of Kåñëa to Indraprastha, he was attacked on the way, and he could not
protect the ladies in his custody. At last, advised by Vyäsadeva, all the brothers
headed for Mahäprasthan. On the way, at the request of his brother, he gave
up all important weapons as useless, and he dropped them all in the water.
TEXT 22
Ma*GaeNd] wv iv§-aNTaae iNazeVYaae ihMavaiNav )
iTaiTa+auvRSauDaevaSaaE SaihZ<au" iPaTaraivv )) 22 ))
mågendra iva vikränto
niñevyo himavän iva
titikñur vasudheväsau
sahiñëuù pitaräv iva
SYNONYMS
mågendraù—the lion; iva—like; vikräntaù—powerful; niñevyaù—worthy of
taking shelter; himavän—the Himalaya Mountains; iva—like;
titikñuù—forbearance; vasudhä iva—like the earth; asau—the child;
sahiñëuù—tolerant; pitarau—parents; iva—like.
TRANSLATION
This child will be as strong as a lion, and as worthy a shelter as the Himalaya
Mountains. He will be forbearing like the earth, and as tolerant as his parents.
PURPORT
One is compared to the lion when one is very strong in chasing an enemy.
One should be a lamb at home and a lion in the chase. The lion never fails in
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the chase of an animal; similarly, the head of the state should never fail in
chasing an enemy. The Himalaya Mountains are famous for all richness. There
are innumerable caves to live in, numberless trees of good fruits to eat, good
springs to drink water from and profuse drugs and minerals to cure diseases.
Any man who is not materially prosperous can take shelter of these great
mountains, and he will be provided with everything required. Both the
materialist and the spiritualist can take advantage of the great shelter of the
Himalayas. On the surface of the earth there are so many disturbances caused
by the inhabitants. In the modern age the people have begun to detonate
atomic weapons on the surface of the earth, and still the earth is forbearing to
the inhabitants, like a mother who excuses a little child. Parents are always
tolerant to children for all sorts of mischievous acts. An ideal king may be
possessed of all these good qualities, and the child Parékñit is foretold to have
all these qualities in perfection.
TEXT 23
iPaTaaMahSaMa" SaaMYae Pa[Saade iGairXaaePaMa" )
Aaé[Ya" SavR>aUTaaNaa& YaQaa devae rMaaé[Ya" )) 23 ))
pitämaha-samaù sämye
prasäde giriçopamaù
äçrayaù sarva-bhütänäà
yathä devo ramäçrayaù
SYNONYMS
pitämaha—the grandfather, or Brahmä; samaù—equally good; sämye—in the
matter; prasäde—in charity or in munificence; giriça—Lord Çiva;
upamaù—comparison of equilibrium; äçrayaù—resort; sarva—all;
bhütänäm—of the living beings; yathä—as; devaù—the Supreme Lord;
ramä-äçrayaù—the Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
This child will be like his grandfather Yudhiñöhira or Brahmä in equanimity
of mind. He will be munificent like the lord of the Kailäsa Hill, Çiva. And he
will be the resort of everyone, like the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Näräyaëa, who is even the shelter of the goddess of fortune.
PURPORT
Mental equanimity refers both to Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira and to Brahmä, the
grandfather of all living beings. According to Çrédhara Svämé, the grandfather
referred to is Brahmä, but according to Viçvanätha Cakravarté, the
grandfather is Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira himself. But in both cases the comparison
is equally good because both of them are recognized representatives of the
Supreme Lord, and thus both of them have to maintain mental equanimity,
being engaged in welfare work for the living being. Any responsible executive
agent at the top of administration has to tolerate different types of onslaughts
from the very persons for whom he works. Brahmäjé was criticized even by the
gopés, the highest perfectional devotees of the Lord. The gopés were dissatisfied
with the work of Brahmäjé because Lord Brahmä, as creator of this particular
universe, created eyelids which obstructed their seeing Lord Kåñëa. They could
not tolerate a moment’s blinking of the eyes, for it kept them from seeing their
beloved Lord Kåñëa. So what to speak of others, who are naturally very critical
of every action of a responsible man? Similarly, Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira had to
cross over many difficult situations created by his enemies, and he proved to be
the most perfect maintainer of mental equanimity in all critical circumstances.
Therefore the example of both grandfathers for maintaining equanimity of
mind is quite fitting.
Lord Çiva is a celebrated demigod who awards gifts to beggars. His name is
therefore Äçutoña, or one who is pleased very easily. He is also called the
Bhütanätha, or the lord of the common folk, who are mainly attached to him
because of his munificent gifts, even without consideration of the aftereffects.
Rävaëa was very attached to Lord Çiva, and by easily pleasing him, Rävaëa
became so powerful that he wanted to challenge the authority of Lord Räma.
Of course, Rävaëa was never helped by Lord Çiva when he fought with Räma,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the Lord of Lord Çiva. To Våkäsura,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Lord Çiva awarded a benediction which was not only awkward, but also
disturbing. Våkäsura became empowered, by the grace of Lord Çiva, to vanish
anyone’s head simply by touching it. Although this was awarded by Lord Çiva,
the cunning fellow wanted to make an experiment of the power by touching
the head of Lord Çiva. Thus the lord had to take shelter of Viñëu to save
himself from trouble, and the Lord Viñëu, by His illusory potency, asked
Våkäsura to make an experiment with his own head. The fellow did it and was
finished himself, and so the world was saved from all sorts of trouble by such a
cunning beggar of the demigods. The excellent point is that Lord Çiva never
denies anyone any sort of gift. He is therefore the most generous, although
sometimes some kind of a mistake is made.
Ramä means the goddess of fortune. And her shelter is Lord Viñëu. Lord
Viñëu is the maintainer of all living beings. There are innumerable living
beings, not only on the surface of this planet but also in all other hundreds of
thousands of planets. All of them are provided with all necessities of life for
the progressive march towards the end of self-realization, but on the path of
sense gratification they are put into difficulty by the agency of mäyä, the
illusory energy, and so travel the path of a false plan of economic development.
Such economic development is never successful because it is illusory. These
men are always after the mercy of the illusory goddess of fortune, but they do
not know that the goddess of fortune can live only under the protection of
Viñëu. Without Viñëu, the goddess of fortune is an illusion. We should
therefore seek the protection of Viñëu instead of directly seeking the
protection of the goddess of fortune. Only Viñëu and the devotees of Viñëu
can give protection to all, and because Mahäräja Parékñit was himself protected
by Viñëu, it was quite possible for him to give complete protection to all who
wanted to live under his rule.
TEXT 24
SavRSad(Gau<aMaahaTMYae Wz k*-Z<aMaNauv]Ta" )
riNTadev wvaedarae YaYaaiTairv DaaiMaRk-" )) 24 ))
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
sarva-sad-guëa-mähätmye
eña kåñëam anuvrataù
rantideva ivodäro
yayätir iva dhärmikaù
SYNONYMS
sarva-sat-guëa-mähätmye—glorified by all godly attributes; eñaù—this child;
kåñëam—like Lord Kåñëa; anuvrataù—a follower in His footsteps;
rantidevaù—Rantideva; iva—like; udäraù—in the matter of magnanimity;
yayätiù—Yayäti; iva—like; dhärmikaù—concerning religion.
TRANSLATION
This child will be almost as good as Lord Çré Kåñëa by following in His
footsteps. In magnanimity he will become as great as King Rantideva. And in
religion he will be like Mahäräja Yayäti.
PURPORT
The last instruction of Lord Çré Kåñëa in the Bhagavad-gétä is that one
should give up everything and should follow in the footsteps of the Lord alone.
Less intelligent persons do not agree to this great instruction of the Lord, as ill
luck would have it, but one who is actually intelligent catches up this sublime
instruction and is immensely benefited. Foolish people do not know that
association is the cause of acquiring qualities. Association with fire makes an
object hot, even in the material sense. Therefore, association with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead makes one qualified like the Lord. As we
have discussed previously, one can achieve seventy-eight percent of the godly
qualities by the Lord’s intimate association. To follow the instructions of the
Lord is to associate with the Lord. The Lord is not a material object whose
presence one has to feel for such association. The Lord is present everywhere and
at all times. It is quite possible to have His association simply by following His
instruction because the Lord and His instruction and the Lord and His name,
fame, attributes and paraphernalia are all identical with Him, being absolute
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
knowledge. Mahäräja Parékñit associated with the Lord even from the womb of
his mother up to the last day of his valuable life, and thus he acquired all the
essential good qualities of the Lord in all perfection.
Rantideva: An ancient king prior to the Mahäbhärata period, referred to by
Närada Muni while instructing Saïjaya, as mentioned in Mahäbhärata
(Droëa-parva 67). He was a great king, liberal for hospitality and distribution
of foodstuff. Even Lord Çré Kåñëa praised his acts of charity and hospitality. He
was blessed by the great Vasiñöha Muni for supplying him cold water, and thus
he achieved the heavenly planet. He used to supply fruits, roots and leaves to
the åñis, and thus he was blessed by them with fulfillment of his desires.
Although a kñatriya by birth, he never ate flesh in his life. He was especially
hospitable to Vasiñöha Muni, and by his blessings only he attained the higher
planetary residence. He is one of those pious kings whose names are
remembered in the morning and evening.
Yayäti: The great emperor of the world and the original forefather of all
great nations of the world who belong to the Äryan and Indo-European stock.
He is the son of Mahäräja Nabuña, and he became the emperor of the world
due to his elder brother’s becoming a great and liberated saintly mystic. He
ruled over the world for several thousands of years and performed many
sacrifices and pious activities recorded in history, although his early youth was
very lustful and full of romantic stories. He fell in love with Devayäné, the
most beloved daughter of Çukräcärya. Devayäné wished to marry him, but at
first he refused to accept her because of her being a daughter of a brähmaëa.
According to çästras, a brähmaëa could marry the daughter of a kñatriya but a
kñatriya could not marry the daughter of a brähmaëa. They were very much
cautious about varëa-saìkara population in the world. Çukräcärya amended
this law of forbidden marriage and induced Emperor Yayäti to accept
Devayäné. Devayäné had a girl friend named Çarmiñöhä, who also fell in love
with the emperor and thus went with her friend Devayäné. Çukräcärya forbade
Emperor Yayäti to call Çarmiñöhä into his bedroom, but Yayäti could not
strictly follow his instruction. He secretly married Çarmiñöhä also and begot
sons by her. When this was known by Devayäné, she went to her father and
lodged a complaint. Yayäti was much attached to Devayäné, and when he went
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
to his father-in-law’s place to call her, Çukräcärya was angry with him and
cursed him to become impotent. Yayäti begged his father-in-law to withdraw
his curse, but the sage asked Yayäti to ask youthfulness from his sons and let
them become old as the condition of his becoming potent. He had five sons,
two from Devayäné and three from Çarmiñöhä. From his five sons, namely (1)
Yadu, (2) Turvasu, (3) Druhyu, (4) Anu and (5) Püru, five famous dynasties,
namely (1) the Yadu dynasty, (2) the Yavana (Turk) dynasty, (3) the Bhoja
dynasty, (4) the Mleccha dynasty (Greek) and (5) the Paurava dynasty, all
emanated to spread all over the world. He reached the heavenly planets by
dint of his pious acts, but he fell down from there because of his
self-advertisement and criticizing other great souls. After his fall, his daughter
and grandson bestowed upon him their accumulated virtues, and by the help of
his grandson and friend Çibi, he was again promoted to the heavenly kingdom,
becoming one of the assembly members of Yamaräja, with whom he is staying
as a devotee. He performed more than one thousand different sacrifices, gave
in charity very liberally and was a very influential king. His majestic power
was felt all over the world. His youngest son agreed to award him his
youthfulness when he was troubled with lustful desires, even for one thousand
years. Finally he became detached from worldly life and returned the
youthfulness again to his son Püru. He wanted to hand over the kingdom to
Püru, but his noblemen and the subjects did not agree. But when he explained
to his subjects the greatness of Püru, they agreed to accept Püru as the King,
and thus Emperor Yayäti retired from family life and left home for the forest.
TEXT 25
Da*TYaa bil/SaMa" k*-Z<ae Pa[had wv Sad(Ga]h" )
AahTaOEzae_ìMaeDaaNaa& v*ÖaNaa& PaYauRPaaSak-" )) 25 ))
dhåtyä bali-samaù kåñëe
prahräda iva sad-grahaù
ähartaiño ’çvamedhänäà
våddhänäà paryupäsakaù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
dhåtyä—by patience; bali-samaù—like Bali Mahäräja; kåñëe—unto Lord Çré
Kåñëa; prahräda—Prahläda Mahäräja; iva—like; sat-grahaù—devotee of;
ähartä—performer; eñaù—this child; açvamedhänäm—of Açvamedha
sacrifices; våddhänäm—of the old and experienced men;
paryupäsakaù—follower.
TRANSLATION
This child will be like Bali Mahäräja in patience, a staunch devotee of Lord
Kåñëa like Prahläda Mahäräja, a performer of many Açvamedha [horse]
sacrifices and a follower of the old and experienced men.
PURPORT
Bali Mahäräja: One of the twelve authorities in the devotional service of
the Lord. Bali Mahäräja is a great authority in devotional service because he
sacrificed everything to please the Lord and relinquished the connection of his
so-called spiritual master who obstructed him on the path of risking everything
for the service of the Lord. The highest perfection of religious life is to attain
to the stage of unqualified devotional service of the Lord without any cause or
without being obstructed by any kind of worldly obligation. Bali Mahäräja was
determined to give up everything for the satisfaction of the Lord, and he did
not care for any obstruction whatsoever. He is the grandson of Prahläda
Mahäräja, another authority in the devotional service of the Lord. Bali
Mahäräja and the history of his dealings with Viñëu Vämanadeva are
described in the Eighth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam (Chapter 11–24).
Prahläda Mahäräja: A perfect devotee of Lord Kåñëa (Viñëu). His father,
Hiraëyakaçipu, chastised him severely when he was only five years old for his
becoming an unalloyed devotee of the Lord. He was the first son of
Hiraëyakaçipu, and his mother’s name was Kayädhu. Prahläda Mahäräja was
an authority in the devotional service of the Lord because he had his father
killed by Lord Nåsiàhadeva, setting the example that even a father should be
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
removed from the path of devotional service if such a father happens to be an
obstacle. He had four sons, and the eldest son, Virocana, is the father of Bali
Mahäräja, mentioned above. The history of Prahläda Mahäräja’s activities is
described in the Seventh Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 26
raJazs<aa& JaNaiYaTaa XaaSTaa caeTPaQaGaaiMaNaaMa( )
iNaGa]hqTaa k-le/rez >auvae DaMaRSYa k-ar<aaTa( )) 26 ))
räjarñéëäà janayitä
çästä cotpatha-gäminäm
nigrahétä kaler eña
bhuvo dharmasya käraëät
SYNONYMS
räja-åñéëäm—of kings as good as sages; janayitä—producer; çästä—chastiser;
ca—and; utpatha-gäminäm—of the upstarts; nigrahétä—molester; kaleù—of
the quarrelsome; eñaù—this; bhuvaù—of the world; dharmasya—of religion;
käraëät—on account of.
TRANSLATION
This child will be the father of kings who will be like sages. For world peace
and for the sake of religion, he will be the chastiser of the upstarts and the
quarrelsome.
PURPORT
The wisest man in the world is a devotee of the Lord. The sages are called
wise men, and there are different types of wise men for different branches of
knowledge. Unless, therefore, the king or the head of the state is the wisest
man, he cannot control all types of wise men in the state. In the line of royal
succession in the family of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, all the kings, without
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
exception, were the wisest men of their times, and so also it is foretold about
Mahäräja Parékñit and his son Mahäräja Janamejaya, who was yet to be born.
Such wise kings can become chastisers of upstarts and uprooters of Kali, or
quarrelsome elements. As will be clear in the chapters ahead, Mahäräja
Parékñit wanted to kill the personified Kali, who was attempting to kill a cow,
the emblem of peace and religion. The symptoms of Kali are (1) wine, (2)
women, (3) gambling and (4) slaughterhouses. Wise rulers of all states should
take lessons from Mahäräja Parékñit in how to maintain peace and morality by
subduing the upstarts and quarrelsome people who indulge in wine, illicit
connection with women, gambling and meat-eating supplied by regularly
maintained slaughterhouses. In this age of Kali, regular license is issued for
maintaining all of these different departments of quarrel. So how can they
expect peace and morality in the state? The state fathers, therefore, must
follow the principles of becoming wiser by devotion to the Lord, by chastising
the breaker of discipline and by uprooting the symptoms of quarrel, as
mentioned above. If we want blazing fire, we must use dry fuel. Blazing fire and
moist fuel go ill together. Peace and morality can prosper only by the
principles of Mahäräja Parékñit and his followers.
TEXT 27
Ta+ak-adaTMaNaae Ma*TYau& iÜJaPau}aaePaSaiJaRTaaTa( )
Pa[PaTSYaTa oPaé[uTYa Mau¢-Sa®" Pad& hre" )) 27 ))
takñakäd ätmano måtyuà
dvija-putropasarjität
prapatsyata upaçrutya
mukta-saìgaù padaà hareù
SYNONYMS
takñakät—by the snake-bird; ätmanaù—of his personal self; måtyum—death;
dvija-putra—the son of a brähmaëa; upasarjität—being sent by;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
prapatsyate—having taken shelter of; upaçrutya—after hearing;
mukta-saìgaù—freed from all attachment; padam—position; hareù—of the
Lord.
TRANSLATION
After hearing about his death, which will be caused by the bite of a
snake-bird sent by a son of a brähmaëa, he will get himself freed from all
material attachment and surrender unto the Personality of Godhead, taking
shelter of Him.
PURPORT
Material attachment and taking shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord go ill
together. Material attachment means ignorance of transcendental happiness
under the shelter of the Lord. Devotional service to the Lord, while existing in
the material world, is a way to practice one’s transcendental relation with the
Lord, and when it is matured, one gets completely free from all material
attachment and becomes competent to go back home, back to Godhead.
Mahäräja Parékñit, being especially attached to the Lord from the beginning of
his body in the womb of his mother, was continuously under the shelter of the
Lord, and the so-called warning of his death within seven days from the date
of the curse by the brähmaëa’s son was a boon to him to enable him to prepare
himself to go back home, back to Godhead. Since he was always protected by
the Lord, he could have avoided the effect of such a curse by the grace of the
Lord, but he did not take such undue advantage for nothing. Rather, he made
the best use of a bad bargain. For seven days continuously he heard
Çrémad-Bhägavatam from the right source, and thus he got shelter at the lotus
feet of the Lord by that opportunity.
TEXT 28
iJajaiSaTaaTMaYaaQaaQYaaeR MauNaeVYaaRSaSauTaadSaaE )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ihTved& Na*Pa Ga®aYaa& YaaSYaTYaÖaku-Taae>aYaMa( )) 28 ))
jijïäsitätma-yäthärthyo
muner vyäsa-sutäd asau
hitvedaà nåpa gaìgäyäà
yäsyaty addhäkutobhayam
SYNONYMS
jijïäsita—having inquired of; ätma-yäthärthyaù—right knowledge of one’s
own self; muneù—from the learned philosopher; vyäsa-sutät—the son of
Vyäsa; asau—he; hitvä—quitting; idam—this material attachment; nåpa—O
King; gaìgäyäm—on the bank of the Ganges; yäsyati—will go;
addhä—directly; akutaù-bhayam—the life of fearlessness.
TRANSLATION
After inquiring about proper self-knowledge from the son of Vyäsadeva, who
will be a great philosopher, he will renounce all material attachment and achieve
a life of fearlessness.
PURPORT
Material knowledge means ignorance of the knowledge of one’s own self.
Philosophy means to seek after the right knowledge of one’s own self, or the
knowledge of self-realization. Without self-realization, philosophy is dry
speculation or a waste of time and energy. Çrémad-Bhägavatam gives the right
knowledge of one’s own self, and by hearing Çrémad-Bhägavatam one can get
free from material attachment and enter into the kingdom of fearlessness. This
material world is fearfulness. Its prisoners are always fearful as within a prison
house. In the prison house no one can violate the jail rules and regulations,
and violating the rules means another term for extension of prison life.
Similarly, we in this material existence are always fearful. This fearfulness is
called anxiety. Everyone in the material life, in all species and varieties of life,
is full of anxieties, either by breaking or without breaking the laws of nature.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Liberation, or mukti, means getting relief from these constant anxieties. This is
possible only when the anxiety is changed to the devotional service of the
Lord. Çrémad-Bhägavatam gives us the chance to change the quality of anxiety
from matter to spirit. This is done in the association of a learned philosopher
like the self-realized Çukadeva Gosvämé, the great son of Çré Vyäsadeva.
Mahäräja Parékñit, after receiving warning of his death, took advantage of this
opportunity by association with Çukadeva Gosvämé and achieved the desired
result.
There is a sort of imitation of this reciting and hearing of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam by professional men, and their foolish audience thinks
that they will get free from the clutches of material attachment and attain the
life of fearlessness. Such imitative hearing of Çrémad-Bhägavatam is a
caricature only, and one should not be misled by such a performance of
bhägavatam saptäha undertaken by ridiculous greedy fellows to maintain an
establishment of material enjoyment.
TEXT 29
wiTa raj oPaaidXYa ivPa[a JaaTak-k-aeivda" )
l/BDaaPaicTaYa" SaveR Pa[iTaJaGMau" Svk-aNa( Ga*haNa( )) 29 ))
iti räjïa upädiçya
viprä jätaka-kovidäù
labdhäpacitayaù sarve
pratijagmuù svakän gåhän
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; räjïe—unto the King; upädiçya—having advised; vipräù—persons
well versed in the Vedas; jätaka-kovidäù—persons expert in astrology and in
the performance of birth ceremonies; labdha-apacitayaù—those who had
received sumptuously as remuneration; sarve—all of them; pratijagmuù—went
back; svakän—their own; gåhän—houses.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
Thus those who were expert in astrological knowledge and in performance of
the birth ceremony instructed King Yudhiñöhira about the future history of his
child. Then, being sumptuously remunerated, they all returned to their
respective homes.
PURPORT
The Vedas are the storehouse of knowledge, both material and spiritual. But
such knowledge aims at perfection of self-realization. In other words, the Vedas
are the guides for the civilized man in every respect. Since human life is the
opportunity to get free from all material miseries, it is properly guided by the
knowledge of the Vedas, in the matters of both material needs and spiritual
salvation. The specific intelligent class of men who were devoted particularly
to the knowledge of the Vedas were called the vipras, or the graduates of the
Vedic knowledge. There are different branches of knowledge in the Vedas, of
which astrology and pathology are two important branches necessary for the
common man. So the intelligent men, generally known as the brähmaëas, took
up all the different branches of Vedic knowledge to guide society. Even the
department of military education (Dhanur-veda) was also taken up by such
intelligent men, and the vipras were also teachers of this section of knowledge,
as were Droëäcärya, Kåpäcärya, etc.
The word vipra mentioned herein is significant. There is a little difference
between the vipras and the brähmaëas. The vipras are those who are expert in
karma-käëòa, or fruitive activities, guiding the society towards fulfilling the
material necessities of life, whereas the brähmaëas are expert in spiritual
knowledge of transcendence. This department of knowledge is called
jïäna-käëòa, and above this there is the upäsanä-käëòa. The culmination of
upäsanä-käëòa is the devotional service of the Lord Viñëu, and when the
brähmaëas achieve perfection, they are called Vaiñëavas. Viñëu worship is the
highest of the modes of worship. Elevated brähmaëas are Vaiñëavas engaged in
the transcendental loving service of the Lord, and thus Çrémad-Bhägavatam,
which is the science of devotional service, is very dear to the Vaiñëavas. And
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
as explained in the beginning of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, it is the mature fruit
of Vedic knowledge and is superior subject matter, above the three käëòas,
namely karma, jïäna and upäsanä.
Amongst the karma-käëòa experts, the jätaka expert vipras were good
astrologers who could tell all the future history of a born child simply by the
astral calculations of the time (lagna). Such expert jätaka-vipras were present
during the birth of Mahäräja Parékñit, and his grandfather, Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira, awarded the vipras sufficiently with gold, land, villages, grains and
other valuable necessaries of life, which also include cows. There is a need of
such vipras in the social structure, and it is the duty of the state to maintain
them comfortably, as designed in the Vedic procedure. Such expert vipras,
being sufficiently paid by the state, could give free service to the people in
general, and thus this department of Vedic knowledge could be available for
all.
TEXT 30
Sa Wz l/aeke- iv:YaaTa" Parqi+aidiTa YaTPa[>au" )
PaUv| d*íMaNauDYaaYaNa( Parq+aeTa NareiZvh )) 30 ))
sa eña loke vikhyätaù
parékñid iti yat prabhuù
pürvaà dåñöam anudhyäyan
parékñeta nareñv iha
SYNONYMS
saù—he; eñaù—in this; loke—world; vikhyätaù—famous; parékñit—one who
examines; iti—thus; yat—what; prabhuù—O my King; pürvam—before;
dåñöam—seen; anudhyäyan—constantly contemplating; parékñeta—shall
examine; nareñu—unto every man; iha—here.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
So his son would become famous in the world as Parékñit [examiner] because
he would come to examine all human beings in his search after that personality
whom he saw before his birth. Thus he would come to constantly contemplate
Him.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Parékñit, fortunate as he was, got the impression of the Lord even
in the womb of his mother, and thus his contemplation on the Lord was
constantly with him. Once the impression of the transcendental form of the
Lord is fixed in one’s mind, one can never forget Him in any circumstance.
Child Parékñit, after coming out of the womb, was in the habit of examining
everyone to see whether he was the same personality whom he first saw in the
womb. But no one could be equal to or more attractive than the Lord, and
therefore he never accepted anyone. But the Lord was constantly with him by
such examination, and thus Mahäräja Parékñit was always engaged in the
devotional service of the Lord by remembrance.
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé remarks in this connection that every child, if given an
impression of the Lord from his very childhood, certainly becomes a great devotee
of the Lord like Mahäräja Parékñit. One may not be as fortunate as Mahäräja
Parékñit to have the opportunity to see the Lord in the womb of his mother,
but even if he is not so fortunate, he can be made so if the parents of the child
desire him to be so. There is a practical example in my personal life in this
connection. My father was a pure devotee of the Lord, and when I was only
four or five years old, my father gave me a couple of forms of Rädhä and Kåñëa.
In a playful manner, I used to worship these Deities along with my sister, and I
used to imitate the performances of a neighboring temple of Rädhä-Govinda.
By constantly visiting this neighboring temple and copying the ceremonies in
connection with my own Deities of play, I developed a natural affinity for the
Lord. My father used to observe all the ceremonies befitting my position. Later
on, these activities were suspended due to my association in the schools and
colleges, and I became completely out of practice. But in my youthful days,
when I met my spiritual master, Çré Çrémad Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté
Gosvämé Mahäräja, again I revived my old habit, and the same playful Deities
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
became my worshipful Deities in proper regulation. This was followed up until
I left the family connection, and I am pleased that my generous father gave the
first impression which was developed later into regulative devotional service
by His Divine Grace. Mahäräja Prahläda also advised that such impressions of
a godly relation must be impregnated from the beginning of childhood,
otherwise one may miss the opportunity of the human form of life, which is
very valuable although it is temporary like others.
TEXT 31
Sa raJaPau}aae vv*Dae Aaéu éu©- wvae@uPa" )
AaPaUYaRMaa<a" iPaTa*i>a" k-aïai>airv Saae_NvhMa( )) 31 ))
sa räja-putro vavådhe
äçu çukla ivoòupaù
äpüryamäëaù pitåbhiù
käñöhäbhir iva so ’nvaham
SYNONYMS
saù—that; räja-putraù—the royal prince; vavådhe—grew up; äçu—very soon;
çukle—waxing moon; iva—like; uòupaù—the moon;
äpüryamäëaù—luxuriantly; pitåbhiù—by the parental guardians;
käñöhäbhiù—plenary development; iva—like; saù—he; anvaham—day after
day.
TRANSLATION
As the moon, in its waxing fortnight, develops day after day, so the royal
prince [Parékñit] very soon developed luxuriantly under the care and full
facilities of his guardian grandfathers.
TEXT 32
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Ya+YaMaa<aae_ìMaeDaeNa jaiTad]aehiJahaSaYaa )
raJaal/BDaDaNaae dDYaaENaaNYa}a k-rd<@Yaae" )) 32 ))
yakñyamäëo ’çvamedhena
jïäti-droha-jihäsayä
räjä labdha-dhano dadhyau
nänyatra kara-daëòayoù
SYNONYMS
yakñyamäëaù—desiring to perform; açvamedhena—by the horse sacrifice
ceremony; jïäti-droha—fighting with kinsmen; jihäsayä—for getting free;
räjä—King Yudhiñöhira; labdha-dhanaù—for getting some wealth;
dadhyau—thought about it; na anyatra—not otherwise; kara-daëòayoù—taxes
and fines.
TRANSLATION
Just at this time, King Yudhiñöhira was considering performing a horse
sacrifice to get freed from sins incurred from fighting with kinsmen. But he
became anxious to get some wealth, for there were no surplus funds outside of
fines and tax collection.
PURPORT
As the brähmaëas and vipras had a right to be subsidized by the state, the
state executive head had the right to collect taxes and fines from the citizens.
After the Battle of Kurukñetra the state treasury was exhausted, and therefore
there was no surplus fund except the fund from tax collection and fines. Such
funds were sufficient only for the state budget, and having no excess fund, the
King was anxious to get more wealth in some other way in order to perform
the horse sacrifice. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira wanted to perform this sacrifice
under the instruction of Bhéñmadeva.
TEXT 33
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Tadi>aPa[eTaMaal/+Ya >a]aTarae_CYauTacaeidTaa" )
DaNa& Pa[hq<aMaaJahuådqCYaa& idiXa >aUirXa" )) 33 ))
tad abhipretam älakñya
bhrätaro ’cyuta-coditäù
dhanaà prahéëam äjahrur
udécyäà diçi bhüriçaù
SYNONYMS
tat—his; abhipretam—wishes of the mind; älakñya—observing; bhrätaraù—his
brothers; acyuta—the infallible (Lord Çré Kåñëa); coditäù—being advised by;
dhanam—riches; prahéëam—to collect; äjahruù—brought about;
udécyäm—northern; diçi—direction; bhüriçaù—sufficient.
TRANSLATION
Understanding the hearty wishes of the King, his brothers, as advised by the
infallible Lord Kåñëa, collected sufficient riches from the North [left by King
Marutta].
PURPORT
Mahäräja Marutta: one of the great emperors of the world. He reigned over
the world long before the reign of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira. He was the son of
Mahäräja Avikñit and was a great devotee of the son of the sun-god, known as
Yamaräja. His brother Samvarta was a rival priest of the great Båhaspati, the
learned priest of the demigods. He conducted one sacrifice called
Saìkära-yajïa by which the Lord was so satisfied that He was pleased to hand
over to him the charge of a mountain peak of gold. This peak of gold is
somewhere in the Himalaya Mountains, and modern adventurers may try to
find it there. He was so powerful an emperor that at the day’s end of sacrifice,
the demigods from the other planets like Indra, Candra and Båhaspati used to
visit his palace. And because he had the gold peak at his disposal, he had
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
sufficient gold in his possession. The canopy of the sacrificial altar was
completely made of gold. in his daily performances of the sacrificial
ceremonies, some of the inhabitants of the Väyuloka (airy planets) were
invited to expedite the cooking work of the ceremony. And the assembly of
the demigods in the ceremony was led by Viçvadeva.
By his constant pious work he was able to drive out all kinds of diseases
from the jurisdiction of his kingdom. All the inhabitants of higher planets like
Devaloka and Pitåloka were pleased with him for his great sacrificial
ceremonies. Every day he used to give in charity to the learned brähmaëas
such things as beddings, seats, conveyances and sufficient quantities of gold.
Because of munificent charities and performances of innumerable sacrifices,
the King of heaven, Indradeva, was fully satisfied with him and always wished
for his welfare. Due to his pious activities, he remained a young man
throughout his life and reigned over the world for one thousand years,
surrounded by his satisfied subjects, ministers, legitimate wife, sons and
brothers. Even Lord Çré Kåñëa praised his spirit of pious activities. He handed
over his only daughter to Maharñi Aìgirä, and by his good blessings, he was
elevated to the kingdom of heaven. First of all, he wanted to offer the
priesthood of his sacrifices to learned Båhaspati, but the demigod refused to
accept the post because of the King’s being a human being, a man of this earth.
He was very sorry for this, but on the advice of Närada Muni he appointed
Samvarta to the post, and he was successful in his mission.
The success of a particular type of sacrifice completely depends on the
priest in charge. In this age, all kinds of sacrifice are forbidden because there is
no learned priest amongst the so-called brähmaëas, who go by the false notion
of becoming sons of brähmaëas without brahminical qualifications. In this age
of Kali, therefore, only one kind of sacrifice is recommended, saìkértana-yajïa,
as inaugurated by Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu.
TEXT 34
TaeNa SaM>a*TaSaM>aarae DaMaRPau}aae YauiDaiïr" )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
vaiJaMaeDaEiñi>a>asTaae YajE" SaMaYaJaÖirMa( )) 34 ))
tena sambhåta-sambhäro
dharma-putro yudhiñöhiraù
väjimedhais tribhir bhéto
yajïaiù samayajad dharim
SYNONYMS
tena—with that wealth; sambhåta—collected; sambhäraù—ingredients;
dharma-putraù—the pious king; yudhiñöhiraù—Yudhiñöhira; väjimedhaiù—by
horse sacrifices; tribhiù—three times; bhétaù—being greatly afraid after the
Battle of Kurukñetra; yajïaiù—sacrifices; samayajat—perfectly worshiped;
harim—the Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
By those riches, the King could procure the ingredients for three horse
sacrifices. Thus the pious King Yudhiñöhira, who was very fearful after the
Battle of Kurukñetra, pleased Lord Hari, the Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was the ideal and celebrated pious King of the world,
and still he was greatly afraid after the execution of the Battle of Kurukñetra
because of the mass killing in the fight, all of which was done only to install
him on the throne. He therefore took all the responsibility for sins committed
in the warfare, and to get rid of all these sins, he wanted to perform three
sacrifices in which horses are offered at the altar. Such a sacrifice is very
costly. Even Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira had to collect the necessary heaps of gold
left by Mahäräja Marutta and the brähmaëas who were given gold in charity
by King Marutta. The learned brähmaëas could not take away all the loads of
gold given by Mahäräja Marutta, and therefore they left behind the major
portion of the gift. And Mahäräja Marutta also did not again collect such
heaps of gold given away in charity. Besides that, all the golden plates and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
utensils which were used in the sacrifice were also thrown in the dustbins, and
all such heaps of gold remained unclaimed property for a long time, till
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira collected them for his own purposes. Lord Çré Kåñëa
advised the brothers of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira to collect the unclaimed
property because it belonged to the King. The more astonishing thing is that
no subject of the state also collected such unclaimed gold for industrial
enterprise or anything like that. This means that the state citizens were
completely satisfied with all necessities of life and therefore not inclined to
accept unnecessary productive enterprises for sense gratification. Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira also requisitioned the heaps of gold for performing sacrifices and
for pleasing the Supreme Hari Personality of Godhead. Otherwise he had no
desire to collect them for the state treasury.
One should take lessons from the acts of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira. He was
afraid of sins committed on the battlefield, and therefore he wanted to satisfy
the supreme authority. This indicates that unintentional sins are also
committed in our daily occupational discharge of duties, and to counteract
even such unintentional crimes, one must perform sacrifices as they are
recommended in the revealed scriptures. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä
(yajïärthät karmaëo ’nyatra loko ’yaà karma-bandhanaù [Bg. 3.9]) that one
must perform sacrifices recommended in the scriptures in order to get rid of
commitments of all unauthorized work, or even unintentional crimes which we
are apt to commit. By doing so, one shall be freed from all kinds of sins. And
those who do not do so but work for self-interest or sense gratification have to
undergo all tribulations accrued from committed sins. Therefore, the main
purpose of performing sacrifices is to satisfy the Supreme Personality Hari. The
process of performing sacrifices may be different in terms of different times,
places and persons, but the aim of such sacrifices is one and the same at all
times and in all circumstances, viz. , satisfaction of the Supreme Lord Hari.
That is the way of pious life, and that is the way of peace and prosperity in the
world at large. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira did all these as the ideal pious king in the
world.
If Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira is a sinner in his daily discharge of duties, in royal
administration of state affairs, wherein killing of man and animals is a
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
recognized art, then we can just imagine the amount of sins committed
consciously or unconsciously by the untrained population of the Kali-yuga who
have no way to perform sacrifice to please the Supreme Lord. The Bhägavatam
says, therefore, that the prime duty of the human being is to satisfy the
Supreme Lord by the performance of one’s occupational duty (Bhäg. 1.2.13).
Let any man of any place or community, caste or creed be engaged in any
sort of occupational duty, but he must agree to perform sacrifices as it is
recommended in the scriptures for the particular place, time and person. In
the Vedic literatures it is recommended that in Kali-yuga people engage in
glorifying the Lord by chanting the holy name of Kåñëa (kértanäd eva kåñëasya
mukta-saìgaù paraà vrajet) without offense. By doing so one can be freed from
all sins and thus can attain the highest perfection of life by returning home,
back to Godhead. We have already discussed this more than once in this great
literature in different places, especially in the introductory portion by
sketching the life of Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, and still we are repeating
the same with a view to bring about peace and prosperity in society.
The Lord has declared openly in Bhagavad-gétä how He becomes pleased
with us, and the same process is practically demonstrated in the life and
preaching work of Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. The perfect process of
performing yajïas, or sacrifice, to please the Supreme Lord Hari (the
Personality of Godhead, who gets us free from all miseries of existence) is to
follow the ways of Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu in this dark age of quarrel
and dissension.
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira had to collect heaps of gold to secure the
paraphernalia for the horse sacrifice yajïas in days of sufficiency, so we can
hardly think of such performance of yajïas in these days of insufficiency and
complete scarcity of gold. At the present moment we have heaps of papers and
promises of their being converted into gold by economic development of
modern civilization, and still there is no possibility of spending riches like
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, either individually or collectively or by state
patronization. Just suitable, therefore, for the age, is the method recommended
by Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu in terms of the çästra. Such a method
requires no expenditure at all and yet can award more benefit than other
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
expensive methods of yajïa performances.
The horse sacrifice yajïa or cow sacrifice yajïa performed by the Vedic
regulations shouldn’t be misunderstood as a process of killing animals. On the
contrary, animals offered for the yajïa were rejuvenated to a new span of life
by the transcendental power of chanting the Vedic hymns, which, if properly
chanted, are different from what is understood by the common layman. The
Veda-mantras are all practical, and the proof is rejuvenation of the sacrificed
animal.
There is no possibility of such methodical chanting of the Vedic hymns by
the so-called brähmaëas or priests of the present age. The untrained
descendants of the twice-born families are no more like their forefathers, and
thus they are counted amongst the çüdras, or once-born men. The once-born
man is unfit to chant the Vedic hymns, and therefore there is no practical
utility of chanting the original hymns.
And to save them all, Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu propounded the
saìkértana movement or yajïa for all practical purposes, and the people of the
present age are strongly recommended to follow this sure and recognized path.
TEXT 35
AahUTaae >aGavaNa( raja YaaJaiYaTva iÜJaENa*RPaMa( )
ovaSa k-iTaicNMaaSaaNa( Sauôda& iPa[Yak-aMYaYaa )) 35 ))
ähüto bhagavän räjïä
yäjayitvä dvijair nåpam
uväsa katicin mäsän
suhådäà priya-kämyayä
SYNONYMS
ähütaù—being called by; bhagavän—Lord Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead;
räjïä—by the King; yäjayitvä—causing to be performed; dvijaiù—by the
learned brähmaëas; nåpam—on behalf of the King; uväsa—resided; katicit—a
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
few; mäsän—months; suhådäm—for the sake of the relatives;
priya-kämyayä—for the pleasure.
TRANSLATION
Lord Çré Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead, being invited to the sacrifices
by Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, saw to it that they were performed by qualified
[twice-born] brähmaëas. After that, for the pleasure of the relatives, the Lord
remained a few months.
PURPORT
Lord Çré Kåñëa was invited by Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira to look into the
supervision of the performances of yajïa, and the Lord, to abide by the orders
of His elderly cousin, caused the performance of yajïas by learned twice-born
brähmaëas. Simply taking birth in the family of a brähmaëa does not make one
qualified to perform yajïas. One must be twice-born by proper training and
initiation from the bona fide äcärya. The once-born scions of brähmaëa
families are equal with the once-born çüdras, and such brahma-bandhus, or
unqualified once-born scions, must be rejected for any purpose of religious or
Vedic function. Lord Çré Kåñëa was entrusted to look after this arrangement,
and perfect as He is, He caused the yajïas to be performed by the bona fide
twice-born brähmaëas for successful execution.
TEXT 36
TaTaae raja>YaNaujaTa" k*-Z<aYaa Sah bNDaui>a" )
YaYaaE ÜarvTaq& b]øNa( SaaJauRNaae Yadui>av*RTa" )) 36 ))
tato räjïäbhyanujïätaù
kåñëayä saha-bandhubhiù
yayau dväravatéà brahman
särjuno yadubhir våtaù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; räjïä—by the King; abhyanujïätaù—being permitted;
kåñëayä—as well as by Draupadé; saha—along with; bandhubhiù—other
relatives; yayau—went to; dväravatém—Dvärakädhäma; brahman—O
brähmaëas; sa-arjunaù—along with Arjuna; yadubhiù—by the members of the
Yadu dynasty; våtaù—surrounded.
TRANSLATION
O Çaunaka, thereafter the Lord, having bade farewell to King Yudhiñöhira,
Draupadé and other relatives, started for the city of Dvärakä, accompanied by
Arjuna and other members of the Yadu dynasty.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the First Canto, Twelfth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled “Birth of Emperor Parékñit.”
Srimad Bhagavatam
First Canto Part Two
“Creation”
e-book
This e-book and others are available for download at:
www.e-vedas.com
Hard bound books may be purchased at:
www.thekrishnastore.com
Email comments or questions to:
comments@evedas.com
This e-book was completed on November 16,2005
e-books copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved
www.krishna.com
Distributed by e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
Chapter Thirteen
Dhåtaräñöra Quits Home
TEXT 1
SaUTa ovac
ivdurSTaqQaRYaa}aaYaa& MaE}aeYaadaTMaNaae GaiTaMa( )
jaTvaGaaÖaiSTaNaPaur& TaYaavaáiviviTSaTa" )) 1 ))
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
süta uväca
viduras tértha-yäträyäà
maitreyäd ätmano gatim
jïätvägäd dhästinapuraà
tayäväpta-vivitsitaù
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Çré Süta Gosvämé said; viduraù—Vidura; tértha-yäträyäm—while
traveling to different places of pilgrimage; maitreyät—from the great sage
Maitreya; ätmanaù—of the self; gatim—destination; jïätvä—by knowing it;
ägät—went back; hästinapuram—the city of Hastinäpura; tayä—by that
knowledge; aväpta—sufficiently a gainer; vivitsitaù—being well versed in
everything knowable.
TRANSLATION
Çré Süta Gosvämé said: While traveling on a pilgrimage, Vidura received
knowledge of the destination of the self from the great sage Maitreya and then
returned to Hastinäpura. He became as well versed in the subject as he desired.
PURPORT
Vidura: One of the prominent figures in the history of the Mahäbhärata.
He was conceived by Vyäsadeva in the womb of the maidservant of Ambikä,
mother of Mahäräja Päëòu. He is the incarnation of Yamaräja. Being cursed by
Maëòüka Muni, he was to become a çüdra. The story is narrated as follows.
Once upon a time the state police caught some thieves who had concealed
themselves in the hermitage of Maëòüka Muni. The police constables, as usual,
arrested all the thieves and Maëòüka Muni along with them. The magistrate
specifically punished the muni to death by being pierced with a lance. When
he was just to be pierced, the news reached the king, and he at once stopped
the act on consideration of his being a great muni. The king personally begged
the muni’s pardon for the mistake of his men, and the saint at once went to
Yamaräja, who prescribes the destiny of the living beings. Yamaräja, being
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
questioned by the muni, replied that the muni in his childhood pierced an ant
with a sharpened straw, and for that reason he was put into difficulty. The
muni thought it unwise on the part of Yamaräja that he was punished for his
childish innocence, and thus the muni cursed Yamaräja to become a çüdra, and
this çüdra incarnation of Yamaräja was known as Vidura, the çüdra brother of
Dhåtaräñöra and Mahäräja Päëòu. But this çüdra son of the Kuru dynasty was
equally treated by Bhéñmadeva, along with his other nephews, and in due
course Vidura was married with a girl who was also born in the womb of a
çüdräëé by a brähmaëa. Although Vidura did not inherit the property of his
father (the brother of Bhéñmadeva), still he was given sufficient state property
by Dhåtaräñöra, the elder brother of Vidura. Vidura was very much attached to
his elder brother, and all along he tried to guide him on the right path. During
the fratricidal war of Kurukñetra, Vidura repeatedly implored his elder brother
to do justice to the sons of Päëòu, but Duryodhana did not like such
interference by his uncle, and thus he practically insulted Vidura. This
resulted in Vidura’s leaving home for pilgrimage and taking instructions from
Maitreya.
TEXT 2
YaavTa" k*-TavaNa( Pa[énaNa( +ataa k-aEzarvaGa]Ta" )
JaaTaEk->ai¢-GaaeRivNde Tae>YaêaeParraMa h )) 2 ))
yävataù kåtavän praçnän
kñattä kauñäravägrataù
jätaika-bhaktir govinde
tebhyaç copararäma ha
SYNONYMS
yävataù—all that; kåtavän—did he put; praçnän—questions; kñattä—a name of
Vidura; kauñärava—a name of Maitreya; agrataù—in the presence of;
jäta—having grown up; eka—one; bhaktiù—transcendental loving service;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
govinde—unto Lord Kåñëa; tebhyaù—regarding further questions; ca—and;
upararäma—retired from; ha—in the past.
TRANSLATION
After asking various questions and becoming established in the
transcendental loving service of Lord Kåñëa, Vidura retired from putting
questions to Maitreya Muni.
PURPORT
Vidura retired from putting questions before Maitreya Muni when he was
convinced by Maitreya Åñi that the summum bonum of life is to be finally
situated in the transcendental loving service of Lord Çré Kåñëa, who is
Govinda, or one who satisfies His devotees in all respects. The conditioned
soul, the living being in material existence, seeks happiness by employing his
senses in the modes of materialism, but that cannot give him satisfaction. He
then searches after the Supreme Truth by the empiric philosophic speculative
method and intellectual feats. But if he does not find the ultimate goal, he
again goes down to material activities and engages himself in various
philanthropic and altruistic works, which all fail to give him satisfaction. So
neither fruitive activities nor dry philosophical speculation can give one
satisfaction because by nature a living being is the eternal servitor of the
Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa, and all the Vedic literatures give him direction
towards that ultimate end. The Bhagavad-gétä (15.15) confirms this statement.
Like Vidura, an inquisitive conditioned soul must approach a bona fide
spiritual master like Maitreya and by intelligent inquiries must try to know
everything about karma (fruitive activities), jïäna (philosophical research for
the Supreme Truth) and yoga (the linking process of spiritual realization). One
who is not seriously inclined to put questions before a spiritual master need
not accommodate a show-bottle spiritual master, nor should a person who may
be a spiritual master for others pose to be so if he is unable to engage his
disciple ultimately in the transcendental loving service of Lord Çré Kåñëa.
Vidura was successful in approaching such a spiritual master like Maitreya, and
he got the ultimate goal of life: bhakti unto Govinda. Thus there was nothing
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
to be known further about spiritual progress.
TEXTS 3–4
Ta& bNDauMaaGaTa& d*îa DaMaRPau}a" SahaNauJa" )
Da*Taraí\ae YauYauTSauê SaUTa" XaarÜTa" Pa*Qaa )) 3 ))
GaaNDaarq d]aEPadq b]øNa( Sau>ad]a caetara k*-Paq )
ANYaaê JaaMaYa" Paa<@aejaRTaYa" SaSauTaa" iñYa" )) 4 ))
taà bandhum ägataà dåñövä
dharma-putraù sahänujaù
dhåtaräñöro yuyutsuç ca
sütaù çäradvataù påthä
gändhäré draupadé brahman
subhadrä cottarä kåpé
anyäç ca jämayaù päëòor
jïätayaù sasutäù striyaù
SYNONYMS
tam—him; bandhum—relative; ägatam—having arrived there; dåñövä—by
seeing it; dharma-putraù—Yudhiñöhira; saha-anujaù—along with his younger
brothers; dhåtaräñöraù—Dhåtaräñöra; yuyutsuù—Sätyaki; ca—and;
sütaù—Saïjaya; çäradvataù—Kåpäcärya; påthä—Kunté; gändhäré—Gändhäré;
draupadé—Draupadé; brahman—O brähmaëas; subhadrä—Subhadrä; ca—and;
uttarä—Uttarä; kåpé—Kåpé; anyäù—others; ca—and; jämayaù—wives of other
family members; päëòoù—of the Päëòavas; jïätayaù—family members;
sa-sutäù—along with their sons; striyaù—the ladies.
TRANSLATION
When they saw Vidura return to the palace, all the inhabitants—Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira, his younger brothers, Dhåtaräñöra, Sätyaki, Saïjaya, Kåpäcärya,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Kunté, Gändhäré, Draupadé, Subhadrä, Uttarä, Kåpé, many other wives of the
Kauravas, and other ladies with children—all hurried to him in great delight. It
so appeared that they had regained their consciousness after a long period.
PURPORT
Gändhäré: The ideal chaste lady in the history of the world. She was the
daughter of Mahäräja Subala, the King of Gändhära (now Kandahar in
Kabul), and in her maiden state she worshiped Lord Çiva. Lord Çiva is
generally worshiped by Hindu maidens to get a good husband. Gändhäré
satisfied Lord Çiva, and by his benediction to obtain one hundred sons, she was
betrothed to Dhåtaräñöra, despite his being blind forever. When Gändhäré
came to know that her would-be husband was a blind man, to follow her life
companion she decided to become voluntarily blind. So she wrapped up her
eyes with many silk linens, and she was married to Dhåtaräñöra under the
guidance of her elder brother Çakuni. She was the most beautiful girl of her
time, and she was equally qualified by her womanly qualities, which endeared
every member of the Kaurava court. But despite all her good qualities, she had
the natural frailties of a woman, and she was envious of Kunté when the latter
gave birth to a male child. Both the queens were pregnant, but Kunté first gave
birth to a male child. Thus Gändhäré became angry and gave a blow to her own
abdomen. As a result, she gave birth to a lump of flesh only, but since she was a
devotee of Vyäsadeva, by the instruction of Vyäsadeva the lump was divided
into one hundred parts, and each part gradually developed to become a male
child. Thus her ambition to become the mother of one hundred sons was
fulfilled, and she began to nourish all the children according to her exalted
position. When the intrigue of the Battle of Kurukñetra was going on, she was
not in favor of fighting with the Päëòavas; rather, she blamed Dhåtaräñöra, her
husband, for such a fratricidal war. She desired that the state be divided into
two parts, for the sons of Päëòu and her own. She was very affected when all
her sons died in the Battle of Kurukñetra, and she wanted to curse Bhémasena
and Yudhiñöhira, but she was checked by Vyäsadeva. Her mourning over the
death of Duryodhana and Duùçäsana before Lord Kåñëa was very pitiful, and
Lord Kåñëa pacified her by transcendental messages. She was equally aggrieved
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
on the death of Karëa, and she described to Lord Kåñëa the lamentation of
Karëa’s wife. She was pacified by Çréla Vyäsadeva when he showed her dead
sons, then promoted to the heavenly kingdoms. She died along with her
husband in the jungles of the Himalayas near the mouth of the Ganges; she
burned in a forest fire. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira performed the death ceremony of
his uncle and aunt.
Påthä: Daughter of Mahäräja Çürasena and sister of Vasudeva, Lord Kåñëa’s
father. Later she was adopted by Mahäräja Kuntibhoja, and hence she is
known as Kunté. She is the incarnation of the success potency of the
Personality of Godhead. The heavenly denizens from the upper planets used to
visit the palace of King Kuntibhoja, and Kunté was engaged for their
reception. She also served the great mystic sage Durväsä, and being satisfied by
her faithful service, Durväsä Muni gave her a mantra by which it was possible
for her to call for any demigod she pleased. As a matter of inquisitiveness, she
at once called for the sun-god, who desired couplement with her, but she
declined. But the sun-god assured her immunity from virgin adulteration, and
so she agreed to his proposal. As a result of this couplement, she became
pregnant, and Karëa was born by her. By the grace of the sun, she again
turned into a virgin girl, but being afraid of her parents, she quitted the newly
born child, Karëa. After that, when she actually selected her own husband, she
preferred Päëòu to be her husband. Mahäräja Päëòu later wanted to retire
from family life and adopt the renounced order of life. Kunté refused to allow
her husband to adopt such life, but at last Mahäräja Päëòu gave her permission
to become a mother of sons by calling some other suitable personalities. Kunté
did not accept this proposal at first, but when vivid examples were set by
Päëòu she agreed. Thus by dint of the mantra awarded by Durväsä Muni she
called for Dharmaräja, and thus Yudhiñöhira was born. She called for the
demigod Väyu (air), and thus Bhéma was born. She called for Indra, the King
of heaven, and thus Arjuna was born. The other two sons, namely Nakula and
Sahadeva, were begotten by Päëòu himself in the womb of Mädré. Later on,
Mahäräja Päëòu died at an early age, for which Kunté was so aggrieved that
she fainted. Two co-wives, namely Kunté and Mädré, decided that Kunté should
live for the maintenance of the five minor children, the Päëòavas, and Mädré
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
should accept the saté rituals by meeting voluntary death along with her
husband. This agreement was endorsed by great sages like Çatasåìga and others
present on the occasion.
Later on, when the Päëòavas were banished from the kingdom by the
intrigues of Duryodhana, Kunté followed her sons, and she equally faced all
sorts of difficulties during those days. During the forest life one demon girl,
Hiòimbä, wanted Bhéma as her husband. Bhéma refused, but when the girl
approached Kunté and Yudhiñöhira, they ordered Bhéma to accept her proposal
and give her a son. As a result of this combination, Ghaöotkaca was born, and
he fought very valiantly with his father against the Kauravas. In their forest
life they lived with a brähmaëa family that was in trouble because of one
Bakäsura demon, and Kunté ordered Bhéma to kill the Bakäsura to protect the
brähmaëa family against troubles created by the demon. She advised
Yudhiñöhira to start for the Päïcäladeça. Draupadé was gained in this
Päïcäladeça by Arjuna, but by order of Kunté all five of the Päëòava brothers
became equally the husbands of Päïcälé, or Draupadé. She was married with
five Päëòavas in the presence of Vyäsadeva. Kuntédevé never forgot her first
child, Karëa, and after Karëa’s death in the Battle of Kurukñetra she lamented
and admitted before her other sons that Karëa was her eldest son prior to her
marriage with Mahäräja Päëòu. Her prayers for the Lord after the Battle of
Kurukñetra, when Lord Kåñëa was going back home, are excellently explained.
Later she went to the forest with Gändhäré for severe penance. She used to
take meals after each thirty days. She finally sat down in profound meditation
and later burned to ashes in a forest fire.
Draupadé: The most chaste daughter of Mahäräja Drupada and partly an
incarnation of goddess Çacé, the wife of Indra. Mahäräja Drupada performed a
great sacrifice under the superintendence of the sage Yaja. By his first offering,
Dhåñöadyumna was born, and by the second offering, Draupadé was born. She
is therefore the sister of Dhåñöadyumna, and she is also named Päïcälé. The
five Päëòavas married her as a common wife, and each of them begot a son in
her. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira begot a son named Pratibhit, Bhémasena begot a son
named Sutasoma, Arjuna begot Çrutakérti, Nakula begot Çatänéka, and
Sahadeva begot Çrutakarmä. She is described as a most beautiful lady, equal to
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
her mother-in-law, Kunté. During her birth there was an aeromessage that she
should be called Kåñëä. The same message also declared that she was born to
kill many a kñatriya. By dint of her blessings from Çaìkara, she was awarded
five husbands, equally qualified. When she preferred to select her own
husband, princes and kings were invited from all the countries of the world.
She was married with the Päëòavas during their exile in the forest, but when
they went back home Mahäräja Drupada gave them immense wealth as a
dowry. She was well received by all the daughters-in-law of Dhåtaräñöra. When
she was lost in a gambling game, she was forcibly dragged into the assembly
hall, and an attempt was made by Duùçäsana to see her naked beauty, even
though there were elderly persons like Bhéñma and Droëa present. She was a
great devotee of Lord Kåñëa, and by her praying, the Lord Himself became an
unlimited garment to save her from the insult. A demon of the name Jaöäsura
kidnapped her, but her second husband, Bhémasena, killed the demon and
saved her. She saved the Päëòavas from the curse of Maharñi Durväsä by the
grace of Lord Kåñëa. When the Päëòavas lived incognito in the palace of
Viräöa, Kécaka was attracted by her exquisite beauty, and by arrangement with
Bhéma the devil was killed and she was saved. She was very much aggrieved
when her five sons were killed by Açvatthämä. At the last stage, she
accompanied her husband Yudhiñöhira and others and fell on the way. The
cause of her falling was explained by Yudhiñöhira, but when Yudhiñöhira
entered the heavenly planet he saw Draupadé gloriously present there as the
goddess of fortune in the heavenly planet.
Subhadrä: Daughter of Vasudeva and sister of Lord Çré Kåñëa. She was not
only a very dear daughter of Vasudeva, but also a very dear sister to both Kåñëa
and Baladeva. The two brothers and sister are represented in the famous
Jagannätha temple of Puré, and the temple is still visited by thousands of
pilgrims daily. This temple is in remembrance of the Lord’s visit at Kurukñetra
during an occasion of solar eclipse and His subsequent meeting with the
residents of Våndävana. The meeting of Rädhä and Kåñëa during this occasion
is a very pathetic story, and Lord Çré Caitanya, in the ecstasy of Rädhäräëé,
always pined for Lord Çré Kåñëa at Jagannätha Puré. While Arjuna was at
Dvärakä, he wanted to have Subhadrä as his queen, and he expressed his desire
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
to Lord Kåñëa. Çré Kåñëa knew that His elder brother, Lord Baladeva, was
arranging her marriage elsewhere, and since He did not dare to go against the
arrangement of Baladeva, He advised Arjuna to kidnap Subhadrä. So when all
of them were on a pleasure trip on the Raivata Hill, Arjuna managed to kidnap
Subhadrä according to the plan of Çré Kåñëa. Çré Baladeva was very angry at
Arjuna, and He wanted to kill him, but Lord Kåñëa implored His brother to
excuse Arjuna. Then Subhadrä was duly married with Arjuna, and
Abhimanyu was born of Subhadrä. At the premature death of Abhimanyu,
Subhadrä was very mortified, but on the birth of Parékñit she was happy and
solaced.
TEXT 5
Pa[TYauÂGMau" Pa[hzeR<a Pa[a<a& TaNv wvaGaTaMa( )
Ai>aSa®MYa iviDavTa( PairZv®ai>avadNaE" )) 5 ))
pratyujjagmuù praharñeëa
präëaà tanva ivägatam
abhisaìgamya vidhivat
pariñvaìgäbhivädanaiù
SYNONYMS
prati—towards; ujjagmuù—went; praharñeëa—with great delight;
präëam—life; tanvaù—of the body; iva—like; ägatam—returned;
abhisaìgamya—approaching; vidhi-vat—in due form; pariñvaìga—embracing;
abhivädanaiù—by obeisances.
TRANSLATION
With great delight they all approached him, as if life had returned to their
bodies. They exchanged obeisances and welcomed each other with embraces.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
In the absence of consciousness, the limbs of the body remain inactive. But
when consciousness returns, the limbs and senses become active, and existence
itself becomes delightful. Vidura was so dear to the members of the Kaurava
family that his long absence from the palace was comparable to inactivity. All
of them were feeling acute separation from Vidura, and therefore his return to
the palace was joyful for all.
TEXT 6
MauMaucu" Pa[eMabaZPaaEga& ivrhaETk-<#yk-aTara" )
raJaa TaMahRYaa& c§e- k*-TaaSaNaPairGa]hMa( )) 6 ))
mumucuù prema-bäñpaughaà
virahautkaëöhya-kätaräù
räjä tam arhayäà cakre
kåtäsana-parigraham
SYNONYMS
mumucuù—emanated; prema—affectionate; bäñpa-ogham—emotional tears;
viraha—separation; autkaëöhya—anxiousness; kätaräù—being aggrieved;
räjä—King Yudhiñöhira; tam—unto him (Vidura); arhayäm cakre—offered;
kåta—performance of; äsana—sitting accommodations;
parigraham—arrangement of.
TRANSLATION
Due to anxieties and long separation, they all cried out of affection. King
Yudhiñöhira then arranged to offer sitting accommodations and a reception.
TEXT 7
Ta& >au¢-vNTa& ivé[aNTaMaaSaqNa& Sau%MaaSaNae )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Pa[é[YaavNaTaae raJaa Pa[ah Taeza& c é*<vTaaMa( )) 7 ))
taà bhuktavantaà viçräntam
äsénaà sukham äsane
praçrayävanato räjä
präha teñäà ca çåëvatäm
SYNONYMS
tam—him (Vidura); bhuktavantam—after feeding him sumptuously;
viçräntam—and having taken rest; äsénam—being seated; sukham äsane—on a
comfortable seat; praçraya-avanataù—naturally very gentle and meek;
räjä—King Yudhiñöhira; präha—began to speak; teñäm ca—and by them;
çåëvatäm—being heard.
TRANSLATION
After Vidura ate sumptuously and took sufficient rest, he was comfortably
seated. Then the King began to speak to him, and all who were present there
listened.
PURPORT
King Yudhiñöhira was expert in reception also, even in the case of his family
members. Vidura was well received by all the family members by exchange of
embraces and obeisances. After that, bathing and arrangements for a
sumptuous dinner were made, and then he was given sufficient rest. After
finishing his rest, he was offered a comfortable place to sit, and then the King
began to talk about all happenings, both family and otherwise. That is the
proper way to receive a beloved friend, or even an enemy. According to Indian
moral codes, even an enemy received at home should be so well received that
he will not feel any fearful situation. An enemy is always afraid of his enemy,
but this should not be so when he is received at home by his enemy. This
means that a person, when received at home, should be treated as a relative, so
what to speak of a family member like Vidura, who was a well-wisher for all the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
members of the family. Thus Yudhiñöhira Mahäräja began to speak in the
presence of all the other members.
TEXT 8
YauiDaiïr ovac
AiPa SMarQa Naae YauZMaTPa+aC^aYaaSaMaeiDaTaaNa( )
ivPaÓ<aaiÜzaGNYaadeMaaeRicTaa YaTSaMaaTa*k-a" )) 8 ))
yudhiñöhira uväca
api smaratha no yuñmatpakña-
cchäyä-samedhitän
vipad-gaëäd viñägnyäder
mocitä yat samätåkäù
SYNONYMS
yudhiñöhiraù uväca—Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira said; api—whether; smaratha—you
remember; naù—us; yuñmat—from you; pakña—partiality towards us like the
wings of a bird; chäyä—protection; samedhitän—we who were brought up by
you; vipat-gaëät—from various types of calamities; viña—by administration of
poison; agni-ädeù—by setting on fire; mocitäù—released from; yat—what you
have done; sa—along with; mätåkäù—our mother.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira said: My uncle, do you remember how you always
protected us, along with our mother, from all sorts of calamities? Your
partiality, like the wings of a bird, saved us from poisoning and arson.
PURPORT
Due to Päëòu’s death at an early age, his minor children and widow were
the object of special care by all the elderly members of the family, especially
Bhéñmadeva and Mahätmä Vidura. Vidura was more or less partial to the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Päëòavas due to their political position. Although Dhåtaräñöra was equally
careful for the minor children of Mahäräja Päëòu, he was one of the intriguing
parties who wanted to wash away the descendants of Päëòu and replace them
by raising his own sons to become the rulers of the kingdom. Mahätmä Vidura
could follow this intrigue of Dhåtaräñöra and company, and therefore, even
though he was a faithful servitor of his eldest brother, Dhåtaräñöra, he did not
like his political ambition for the sake of his own sons. He was therefore very
careful about the protection of the Päëòavas and their widow mother. Thus he
was, so to speak, partial to the Päëòavas, preferring them to the sons of
Dhåtaräñöra, although both of them were equally affectionate in his ordinary
eyes. He was equally affectionate to both the camps of nephews in the sense
that he always chastised Duryodhana for his intriguing policy against his
cousins. He always criticized his elder brother for his policy of encouragement
to his sons, and at the same time he was always alert in giving special
protection to the Päëòavas. All these different activities of Vidura within the
palace politics made him well-known as partial to the Päëòavas. Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira has referred to the past history of Vidura before his going away
from home for a prolonged pilgrim’s journey. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira reminded
him that he was equally kind and partial to his grown-up nephews, even after
the Battle of Kurukñetra, a great family disaster.
Before the Battle of Kurukñetra, Dhåtaräñöra’s policy was peaceful
annihilation of his nephews, and therefore he ordered Purocana to build a
house at Väraëävata, and when the building was finished Dhåtaräñöra desired
that his brother’s family live there for some time. When the Päëòavas were
going there in the presence of all the members of the royal family, Vidura
tactfully gave instructions to the Päëòavas about the future plan of
Dhåtaräñöra. This is specifically described in the Mahäbhärata (Ädi-parva 114).
He indirectly hinted, “A weapon not made of steel or any other material
element can be more than sharp to kill an enemy, and he who knows this is
never killed.” That is to say, he hinted that the party of the Päëòavas was
being sent to Väraëävata to be killed, and thus he warned Yudhiñöhira to be
very careful in their new residential palace. He also gave indications of fire
and said that fire cannot extinguish the soul but can annihilate the material
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
body. But one who protects the soul can live. Kunté could not follow such
indirect conversations between Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira and Vidura, and thus
when she inquired from her son about the purport of the conversation,
Yudhiñöhira replied that from the talks of Vidura it was understood that there
was a hint of fire in the house where they were proceeding. Later on, Vidura
came in disguise to the Päëòavas and informed them that the housekeeper was
going to set fire to the house on the fourteenth night of the waning moon. It
was an intrigue of Dhåtaräñöra that the Päëòavas might die all together with
their mother. And by his warning the Päëòavas escaped through a tunnel
underneath the earth so that their escape was also unknown to Dhåtaräñöra, so
much so that after setting the fire, the Kauravas were so certain of the death of
the Päëòavas that Dhåtaräñöra performed the last rites of death with great
cheerfulness. And during the mourning period all the members of the palace
became overwhelmed with lamentation, but Vidura did not become so, because
of his knowledge that the Päëòavas were alive somewhere. There are many
such instances of calamities, and in each of them Vidura gave protection to the
Päëòavas on one hand, and on the other he tried to restrain his brother
Dhåtaräñöra from such intriguing policies. Therefore, he was always partial to
the Päëòavas, just as a bird protects its eggs by its wing.
TEXT 9
k-Yaa v*tYaa viTaRTa& vêriÙ" i+aiTaMa<@l/Ma( )
TaqQaaRiNa +ae}aMau:YaaiNa SaeivTaaNaqh >aUTale/ )) 9 ))
kayä våttyä vartitaà vaç
caradbhiù kñiti-maëòalam
térthäni kñetra-mukhyäni
sevitänéha bhütale
SYNONYMS
kayä—by which; våttyä—means; vartitam—maintained your livelihood;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
vaù—your good self; caradbhiù—while traveling; kñiti-maëòalam—on the
surface of the earth; térthäni—places of pilgrimage; kñetra-mukhyäni—the
principal holy places; sevitäni—served by you; iha—in this world; bhütale—on
this planet.
TRANSLATION
While traveling on the surface of the earth, how did you maintain your
livelihood? At which holy places and pilgrimage sites did you render service?
PURPORT
Vidura went out from the palace to detach himself from household affairs,
especially political intrigues. As referred to hereinbefore, he was practically
insulted by Duryodhana’s calling him a son of a çüdräëé, although it was not
out of place to talk loosely in the case of one’s grandmother. Vidura’s mother,
although a çüdräëé, was the grandmother of Duryodhana, and funny talks are
sometimes allowed between grandmother and grandchildren. But because the
remark was an actual fact, it was unpalatable talk to Vidura, and it was
accepted as a direct insult. He therefore decided to quit his paternal house and
prepare for the renounced order of life. This preparatory stage is called
vänaprastha-äçrama, or retired life for traveling and visiting the holy places on
the surface of the earth. In the holy places of India, like Våndävana, Hardwar,
Jagannätha Puré, and Prayäga, there are many great devotees, and there are
still free kitchen houses for persons who desire to advance spiritually.
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was inquisitive to learn whether Vidura maintained
himself by the mercy of the free kitchen houses (chatras).
TEXT 10
>aviÜDaa >aaGavTaaSTaqQaR>aUTaa" SvYa& iv>aae )
TaqQasku-vRiNTa TaqQaaRiNa SvaNTa"SQaeNa Gada>a*Taa )) 10 ))
bhavad-vidhä bhägavatäs
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
tértha-bhütäù svayaà vibho
térthé-kurvanti térthäni
sväntaù-sthena gadäbhåtä
SYNONYMS
bhavat—your good self; vidhäù—like; bhägavatäù—devotees; tértha—the holy
places of pilgrimage; bhütäù—converted into; svayam—personally; vibho—O
powerful one; térthé-kurvanti—make into a holy place of pilgrimage;
térthäni—the holy places; sva-antaù-sthena—having been situated in the heart;
gadä-bhåtä—the Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, devotees like your good self are verily holy places personified.
Because you carry the Personality of Godhead within your heart, you turn all
places into places of pilgrimage.
PURPORT
The Personality of Godhead is omnipresent by His diverse potencies
everywhere, just as the power of electricity is distributed everywhere within
space. Similarly, the Lord’s omnipresence is perceived and manifested by His
unalloyed devotees like Vidura, just as electricity is manifested in an electric
bulb. A pure devotee like Vidura always feels the presence of the Lord
everywhere. He sees everything in the potency of the Lord and the Lord in
everything. The holy places all over the earth are meant for purifying the
polluted consciousness of the human being by an atmosphere surcharged with
the presence of the Lord’s unalloyed devotees. If anyone visits a holy place, he
must search out the pure devotees residing in such holy places, take lessons
from them, try to apply such instructions in practical life and thus gradually
prepare oneself for the ultimate salvation, going back to Godhead. To go to
some holy place of pilgrimage does not mean only to take a bath in the Ganges
or Yamunä or to visit the temples situated in those places. One should also find
representatives of Vidura who have no desire in life save and except to serve
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the Personality of Godhead. The Personality of Godhead is always with such
pure devotees because of their unalloyed service, which is without any tinge of
fruitive action or utopian speculation. They are in the actual service of the
Lord, specifically by the process of hearing and chanting. The pure devotees
hear from the authorities and chant, sing and write of the glories of the Lord.
Mahämuni Vyäsadeva heard from Närada, and then he chanted in writing;
Çukadeva Gosvämé studied from his father, and he described it to Parékñit; that
is the way of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. So by their actions the pure devotees of the
Lord can render any place into a place of pilgrimage, and the holy places are
worth the name only on their account. Such pure devotees are able to rectify
the polluted atmosphere of any place, and what to speak of a holy place
rendered unholy by the questionable actions of interested persons who try to
adopt a professional life at the cost of the reputation of a holy place.
TEXT 11
AiPa Na" SauôdSTaaTa baNDava" k*-Z<adevTaa" )
d*ía" é[uTaa va Yadv" SvPauYaa| Sau%MaaSaTae )) 11 ))
api naù suhådas täta
bändhaväù kåñëa-devatäù
dåñöäù çrutä vä yadavaù
sva-puryäà sukham äsate
SYNONYMS
api—whether; naù—our; suhådaù—well-wishers; täta—O my uncle;
bändhaväù—friends; kåñëa-devatäù—those who are always rapt in the service
of Lord Çré Kåñëa; dåñöäù—by seeing them; çrutäù—or by hearing about them;
vä—either; yadavaù—the descendants of Yadu; sva-puryäm—along with their
residential place; sukham äsate—if they are all happy.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
My uncle, you must have visited Dvärakä. In that holy place are our friends
and well-wishers, the descendants of Yadu, who are always rapt in the service
of the Lord Çré Kåñëa. You might have seen them or heard about them. Are
they all living happily in their abodes?
PURPORT
The particular word kåñëa-devatäù, i.e., those who are always rapt in the
service of Lord Kåñëa, is significant. The Yädavas and the Päëòavas, who were
always rapt in the thought of the Lord Kåñëa and His different transcendental
activities, were all pure devotees of the Lord like Vidura. Vidura left home in
order to devote himself completely to the service of the Lord, but the Päëòavas
and the Yädavas were always rapt in the thought of Lord Kåñëa. Thus there is
no difference in their pure devotional qualities. Either remaining at home or
leaving home, the real qualification of a pure devotee is to become rapt in the
thought of Kåñëa favorably, i.e., knowing well that Lord Kåñëa is the Absolute
Personality of Godhead. Kaàsa, Jaräsandha, Çiçupäla and other demons like
them were also always rapt in the thought of Lord Kåñëa, but they were
absorbed in a different way, namely unfavorably, or thinking Him to be a
powerful man only. Therefore, Kaàsa and Çiçupäla are not on the same level
as pure devotees like Vidura, the Päëòavas and the Yädavas.
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was also always rapt in the thought of Lord Kåñëa
and His associates at Dvärakä. Otherwise he could not have asked all about
them from Vidura. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was therefore on the same level of
devotion as Vidura, although engaged in the state affairs of the kingdom of the
world.
TEXT 12
wTYau¢-ae DaMaRraJaeNa Sav| TaTa( SaMav<aRYaTa( )
YaQaaNau>aUTa& §-MaXaae ivNaa Yaduku-l/+aYaMa( )) 12 ))
ity ukto dharma-räjena
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
sarvaà tat samavarëayat
yathänubhütaà kramaço
vinä yadu-kula-kñayam
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; uktaù—being asked; dharma-räjena—by King Yudhiñöhira;
sarvam—all; tat—that; samavarëayat—properly described;
yathä-anubhütam—as he experienced; kramaçaù—one after another;
vinä—without; yadu-kula-kñayam—annihilation of the Yadu dynasty.
TRANSLATION
Thus being questioned by Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, Mahätmä Vidura gradually
described everything he had personally experienced, except news of the
annihilation of the Yadu dynasty.
TEXT 13
NaNviPa[Ya& duivRzh& Na*<aa& SvYaMauPaiSQaTaMa( )
NaavedYaTa( Sak-å<aae du"i%TaaNa( d]íuMa+aMa" )) 13 ))
nanv apriyaà durviñahaà
nåëäà svayam upasthitam
nävedayat sakaruëo
duùkhitän drañöum akñamaù
SYNONYMS
nanu—as a matter of fact; apriyam—unpalatable; durviñaham—unbearable;
nåëäm—of humankind; svayam—in its own way; upasthitam—appearance;
na—did not; ävedayat—expressed; sakaruëaù—compassionate;
duùkhitän—distressed; drañöum—to see; akñamaù—unable.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Compassionate Mahätmä Vidura could not stand to see the Päëòavas
distressed at any time. Therefore he did not disclose this unpalatable and
unbearable incident because calamities come of their own accord.
PURPORT
According to Néti-çästra (civic laws) one should not speak an unpalatable
truth to cause distress to others. Distress comes upon us in its own way by the
laws of nature, so one should not aggravate it by propaganda. For a
compassionate soul like Vidura, especially in his dealings with the beloved
Päëòavas, it was almost impossible to disclose an unpalatable piece of news like
the annihilation of the Yadu dynasty. Therefore he purposely refrained from
it.
TEXT 14
k-iÄTk-al/MaQaavaTSaqTSaTk*-Taae devvTSau%Ma( )
>a]aTauJYaeRïSYa é[eYaSk*-TSaveRza& Sau%MaavhNa( )) 14 ))
kaïcit kälam athävätsét
sat-kåto devavat sukham
bhrätur jyeñöhasya çreyas-kåt
sarveñäà sukham ävahan
SYNONYMS
kaïcit—for a few days; kälam—time; atha—thus; avätsét—resided;
sat-kåtaù—being well treated; deva-vat—just like a godly personality;
sukham—amenities; bhrätuù—of the brother; jyeñöhasya—of the elder;
çreyaù-kåt—for doing good to him; sarveñäm—all others; sukham—happiness;
ävahan—made it possible.
TRANSLATION
Thus Mahätmä Vidura, being treated just like a godly person by his
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
kinsmen, remained there for a certain period just to rectify the mentality of his
eldest brother and in this way bring happiness to all the others.
PURPORT
Saintly persons like Vidura must be treated as well as a denizen from
heaven. In those days denizens of heavenly planets used to visit homes like
that of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, and sometimes persons like Arjuna and others
used to visit higher planets. Närada is a spaceman who can travel
unrestrictedly, not only within the material universes but also in the spiritual
universes. Even Närada used to visit the palace of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira and
what to speak of other celestial demigods. It is only the spiritual culture of the
people concerned that makes interplanetary travel possible, even in the
present body. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira therefore received Vidura in the manner
of reception offered to the demigods.
Mahätmä Vidura had already adopted the renounced order of life, and
therefore he did not return to his paternal palace to enjoy some material
comforts. He accepted out of his own mercy what was offered to him by
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, but the purpose of living in the palace was to deliver his
elder brother, Dhåtaräñöra, who was too much materially attached. Dhåtaräñöra
lost all his state and descendants in the fight with Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, and
still, due to his sense of helplessness, he did not feel ashamed to accept the
charity and hospitality of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira. On the part of Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira, it was quite in order to maintain his uncle in a befitting manner,
but acceptance of such magnanimous hospitality by Dhåtaräñöra was not at all
desirable. He accepted it because he thought that there was no alternative.
Vidura particularly came to enlighten Dhåtaräñöra and to give him a lift to the
higher status of spiritual cognition. It is the duty of enlightened souls to deliver
the fallen ones, and Vidura came for that reason. But talks of spiritual
enlightenment are so refreshing that while instructing Dhåtaräñöra, Vidura
attracted the attention of all the members of the family, and all of them took
pleasure in hearing him patiently. This is the way of spiritual realization. The
message should be heard attentively, and if spoken by a realized soul, it will act
on the dormant heart of the conditioned soul. And by continuously hearing,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
one can attain the perfect stage of self-realization.
TEXT 15
Aib>a]dYaRMaa d<@& YaQaavdgak-airzu )
YaavÕDaar éUd]Tv& XaaPaaÜzRXaTa& YaMa" )) 15 ))
abibhrad aryamä daëòaà
yathävad agha-käriñu
yävad dadhära çüdratvaà
çäpäd varña-çataà yamaù
SYNONYMS
abibhrat—administered; aryamä—Aryamä; daëòam—punishment;
yathävat—as it was suitable; agha-käriñu—unto persons who had committed
sins; yävat—as long as; dadhära—accepted; çüdratvam—the tabernacle of a
çüdra; çäpät—as the result of a curse; varña-çatam—for one hundred years;
yamaù—Yamaräja.
TRANSLATION
As long as Vidura played the part of a çüdra, being cursed by Maëòüka
Muni, Aryamä officiated at the post of Yamaräja to punish those who
committed sinful acts.
PURPORT
Vidura, born in the womb of a çüdra woman, was forbidden even to be a
party of royal heritage along with his brothers Dhåtaräñöra and Päëòu. Then
how could he occupy the post of a preacher to instruct such learned kings and
kñatriyas as Dhåtaräñöra and Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira? The first answer is that
even though it is accepted that he was a çüdra by birth, because he renounced
the world for spiritual enlightenment by the authority of Åñi Maitreya and was
thoroughly educated by him in transcendental knowledge, he was quite
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
competent to occupy the post of an äcärya, or spiritual preceptor. According to
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, anyone who is conversant in the transcendental
knowledge, or the science of Godhead, be he a brähmaëa or a çüdra, a
householder or a sannyäsé, is eligible to become a spiritual master. Even in the
ordinary moral codes (maintained by Cäëakya Paëòita, the great politician
and moralist) there is no harm in taking lessons from a person who may be by
birth less than a çüdra. This is one part of the answer. The other is that Vidura
was not actually a çüdra. He was to play the part of a so-called çüdra for one
hundred years, being cursed by Maëòüka Muni. He was the incarnation of
Yamaräja, one of the twelve mahäjanas, on the level with such exalted
personalities as Brahmä, Närada, Çiva, Kapila, Bhéñma, Prahläda, etc. Being a
mahäjana, it is the duty of Yamaräja to preach the cult of devotion to the
people of the world, as Närada, Brahmä, and other mahäjanas do. But
Yamaräja is always busy in his plutonic kingdom punishing the doers of sinful
acts. Yamaräja is deputed by the Lord to a particular planet, some hundreds of
thousands of miles away from the planet of earth, to take away the corrupt
souls after death and convict them in accordance with their respective sinful
activities. Thus Yamaräja has very little time to take leave from his responsible
office of punishing the wrongdoers. There are more wrongdoers than righteous
men. Therefore Yamaräja has to do more work than other demigods who are
also authorized agents of the Supreme Lord. But he wanted to preach the
glories of the Lord, and therefore by the will of the Lord he was cursed by
Maëòüka Muni to come into the world in the incarnation of Vidura and work
very hard as a great devotee. Such a devotee is neither a çüdra nor a brähmaëa.
He is transcendental to such divisions of mundane society, just as the
Personality of Godhead assumes His incarnation as a hog, but He is neither a
hog nor a Brahmä. He is above all mundane creatures. The Lord and His
different authorized devotees sometimes have to play the role of many lower
creatures to claim the conditioned souls, but both the Lord and His pure
devotees are always in the transcendental position. When Yamaräja thus
incarnated himself as Vidura, his post was officiated by Aryamä, one of the
many sons of Kaçyapa and Aditi. The Ädityas are sons of Aditi, and there are
twelve Ädityas. Aryamä is one of the twelve Ädityas, and therefore it was
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
quite possible for him to take charge of the office of Yamaräja during his one
hundred years’ absence in the form of Vidura. The conclusion is that Vidura
was never a çüdra, but was greater than the purest type of brähmaëa.
TEXT 16
YauiDaiïrae l/BDaraJYaae d*îa PaaE}a& ku-l/NDarMa( )
>a]aTa*i>al/aeRk-Paal/a>aEMauRMaude ParYaa ié[Yaa )) 16 ))
yudhiñöhiro labdha-räjyo
dåñövä pautraà kulan-dharam
bhrätåbhir loka-päläbhair
mumude parayä çriyä
SYNONYMS
yudhiñöhiraù—Yudhiñöhira; labdha-räjyaù—possessing his paternal kingdom;
dåñövä—by seeing; pautram—the grandson; kulam-dharam—just suitable for
the dynasty; bhrätåbhiù—by the brothers; loka-päläbhaiù—who were all expert
administrators; mumude—enjoyed life; parayä—uncommon; çriyä—opulence.
TRANSLATION
Having won his kingdom and observed the birth of one grandson competent
to continue the noble tradition of his family, Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira reigned
peacefully and enjoyed uncommon opulence in cooperation with his younger
brothers, who were all expert administrators to the common people.
PURPORT
Both Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira and Arjuna were unhappy from the beginning
of the Battle of Kurukñetra, but even though they were unwilling to kill their
own men in the fight, it had to be done as a matter of duty, for it was planned
by the supreme will of Lord Çré Kåñëa. After the battle, Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira
was unhappy over such mass killings. Practically there was none to continue
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the Kuru dynasty after them, the Päëòavas. The only remaining hope was the
child in the womb of his daughter-in-law, Uttarä, and he was also attacked by
Açvatthämä, but by the grace of the Lord the child was saved. So after the
settlement of all disturbing conditions and reestablishment of the peaceful
order of the state, and after seeing the surviving child, Parékñit, well satisfied,
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira felt some relief as a human being, although he had very
little attraction for material happiness, which is always illusory and temporary.
TEXT 17
Wv& Ga*hezu Sa¢-aNaa& Pa[MataaNaa& TadqhYaa )
ATYa§-aMadivjaTa" k-al/" ParMaduSTar" )) 17 ))
evaà gåheñu saktänäà
pramattänäà tad-éhayä
atyakrämad avijïätaù
kälaù parama-dustaraù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; gåheñu—in the family affairs; saktänäm—of persons who are too
attached; pramattänäm—insanely attached; tat-éhayä—engrossed in such
thoughts; atyakrämat—surpassed; avijïätaù—imperceptibly; kälaù—eternal
time; parama—supremely; dustaraù—insurmountable.
TRANSLATION
Insurmountable, eternal time imperceptibly overcomes those who are too
much attached to family affairs and are always engrossed in their thought.
PURPORT
“I am now happy; I have everything in order; my bank balance is quite
enough; I can now give my children enough estate; I am now successful; the
poor beggar sannyäsés depend on God, but they come to beg from me; therefore
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
I am more than the Supreme God.” These are some of the thoughts which
engross the insanely attached householder who is blind to the passing of
eternal time. Our duration of life is measured, and no one is able to enhance it
even by a second against the scheduled time ordained by the supreme will.
Such valuable time, especially for the human being, should be cautiously spent
because even a second passed away imperceptibly cannot be replaced, even in
exchange for thousands of golden coins amassed by hard labor. Every second of
human life is meant for making an ultimate solution to the problems of life, i.e.
repetition of birth and death and revolving in the cycle of 8,400,000 different
species of life. The material body, which is subject to birth and death, diseases
and old age, is the cause of all sufferings of the living being, otherwise the
living being is eternal; he is never born, nor does he ever die. Foolish persons
forget this problem. They do not know at all how to solve the problems of life,
but become engrossed in temporary family affairs not knowing that eternal
time is passing away imperceptibly and that their measured duration of life is
diminishing every second, without any solution to the big problem, namely
repetition of birth and death, disease and old age. This is called illusion.
But such illusion cannot work on one who is awake in the devotional
service of the Lord. Yudhiñöhira Mahäräja and his brothers the Päëòavas were
all engaged in the service of the Lord Çré Kåñëa, and they had very little
attraction for the illusory happiness of this material world. As we have
discussed previously, Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was fixed in the service of the Lord
Mukunda (the Lord, who can award salvation), and therefore he had no
attraction even for such comforts of life as are available in the kingdom of
heaven, because even the happiness obtained on the planet Brahmaloka is also
temporary and illusory. Because the living being is eternal, he can be happy
only in the eternal abode of the kingdom of God (paravyoma), from which no
one returns to this region of repeated birth and death, disease and old age.
Therefore, any comfort of life or any material happiness which does not
warrant an eternal life is but illusion for the eternal living being. One who
understands this factually is learned, and such a learned person can sacrifice
any amount of material happiness to achieve the desired goal known as
brahma-sukham, or absolute happiness. Real transcendentalists are hungry for
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
this happiness, and as a hungry man cannot be made happy by all comforts of
life minus foodstuff, so the man hungry for eternal absolute happiness cannot
be satisfied by any amount of material happiness. Therefore, the instruction
described in this verse cannot be applied to Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira or his
brothers and mother. It was meant for persons like Dhåtaräñöra, for whom
Vidura came especially to impart lessons.
TEXT 18
ivdurSTadi>aPa[eTYa Da*Taraí\Ma>aazTa )
raJaiàGaRMYaTaa& Xaqga]& PaXYaed& >aYaMaaGaTaMa( )) 18 ))
viduras tad abhipretya
dhåtaräñöram abhäñata
räjan nirgamyatäà çéghraà
paçyedaà bhayam ägatam
SYNONYMS
viduraù—Mahätmä Vidura; tat—that; abhipretya—knowing it well;
dhåtaräñöram—unto Dhåtaräñöra; abhäñata—said; räjan—O King;
nirgamyatäm—please get out immediately; çéghram—without the least delay;
paçya—just see; idam—this; bhayam—fear; ägatam—already arrived.
TRANSLATION
Mahätmä Vidura knew all this, and therefore he addressed Dhåtaräñöra,
saying: My dear King, please get out of here immediately. Do not delay. Just see
how fear has overtaken you.
PURPORT
Cruel death cares for no one, be he Dhåtaräñöra or even Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira; therefore spiritual instruction, as was given to old Dhåtaräñöra,
was equally applicable to younger Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira. As a matter of fact,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
everyone in the royal palace, including the King and his brothers and mother,
was raptly attending the lectures. But it was known to Vidura that his
instructions were especially meant for Dhåtaräñöra, who was too materialistic.
The word räjan is especially addressed to Dhåtaräñöra significantly. Dhåtaräñöra
was the eldest son of his father, and therefore according to law he was to be
installed on the throne of Hastinäpura. But because he was blind from birth,
he was disqualified from his rightful claim. But he could not forget the
bereavement, and his disappointment was somewhat compensated after the
death of Päëòu, his younger brother. His younger brother left behind him
some minor children, and Dhåtaräñöra became the natural guardian of them,
but at heart he wanted to become the factual king and hand the kingdom over
to his own sons, headed by Duryodhana. With all these imperial ambitions,
Dhåtaräñöra wanted to become a king, and he contrived all sorts of intrigues in
consultation with his brother-in-law Çakuni. But everything failed by the will
of the Lord, and at the last stage, even after losing everything, men and
money, he wanted to remain as king, being the eldest uncle of Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, as a matter of duty, maintained
Dhåtaräñöra in royal honor, and Dhåtaräñöra was happily passing away his
numbered days in the illusion of being a king or the royal uncle of King
Yudhiñöhira. Vidura, as a saint and as the duty-bound affectionate youngest
brother of Dhåtaräñöra, wanted to awaken Dhåtaräñöra from his slumber of
disease and old age. Vidura therefore sarcastically addressed Dhåtaräñöra as the
“King,” which he was actually not. Everyone is the servant of eternal time, and
therefore no one can be king in this material world. King means the person
who can order. The celebrated English king wanted to order time and tide, but
the time and tide refused to obey his order. Therefore one is a false king in the
material world, and Dhåtaräñöra was particularly reminded of this false position
and of the factual fearful happenings which had already approached him at
that time. Vidura asked him to get out immediately, if he wanted to be saved
from the fearful situation which was approaching him fast. He did not ask
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira in that way because he knew that a king like Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira is aware of all the fearful situations of this flimsy world and would
take care of himself, in due course, even though Vidura might not be present
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
at that time.
TEXT 19
Pa[iTai§-Yaa Na YaSYaeh ku-TaiêTk-ihRicTPa[>aae )
Sa Wz >aGavaNa( k-al/" SaveRza& Na" SaMaaGaTa" )) 19 ))
pratikriyä na yasyeha
kutaçcit karhicit prabho
sa eña bhagavän kälaù
sarveñäà naù samägataù
SYNONYMS
pratikriyä—remedial measure; na—there is none; yasya—of which; iha—in
this material world; kutaçcit—by any means; karhicit—or by anyone;
prabho—O my lord; saù—that; eñaù—positively; bhagavän—the Personality of
Godhead; kälaù—eternal time; sarveñäm—of all; naù—of us;
samägataù—arrived.
TRANSLATION
This frightful situation cannot be remedied by any person in this material
world. My lord, it is the Supreme Personality of Godhead as eternal time [käla]
that has approached us all.
PURPORT
There is no superior power which can check the cruel hands of death. No
one wants to die, however acute the source of bodily sufferings may be. Even
in the days of so-called scientific advancement of knowledge, there is no
remedial measure either for old age or for death. Old age is the notice of the
arrival of death served by cruel time, and no one can refuse to accept either
summon calls or the supreme judgment of eternal time. This is explained
before Dhåtaräñöra because he might ask Vidura to find out some remedial
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
measure for the imminent fearful situation, as he had ordered many times
before. Before ordering, however, Vidura informed Dhåtaräñöra that there was
no remedial measure by anyone or from any source in this material world. And
because there is no such thing in the material world, death is identical with
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as it is said by the Lord Himself in the
Bhagavad-gétä (10.34).
Death cannot be checked by anyone or from any source within this
material world. Hiraëyakaçipu wanted to be immortal and underwent a severe
type of penance by which the whole universe trembled, and Brahmä himself
approached him to dissuade Hiraëyakaçipu from such a severe type of penance.
Hiraëyakaçipu asked Brahmä to award him the blessings of immortality, but
Brahmä said that he himself was subject to death, even in the topmost planet,
so how could he award him the benediction of immortality? So there is death
even in the topmost planet of this universe, and what to speak of other
planets, which are far, far inferior in quality to Brahmaloka, the residing
planet of Brahmä. Wherever there is the influence of eternal time, there is this
set of tribulations, namely birth, disease, old age and death, and all of them are
invincible.
TEXT 20
YaeNa cEvai>aPaàae_Ya& Pa[a<aE" iPa[YaTaMaEriPa )
JaNa" SaÛae ivYauJYaeTa ik-MauTaaNYaEDaRNaaidi>a" )) 20 ))
yena caiväbhipanno ’yaà
präëaiù priyatamair api
janaù sadyo viyujyeta
kim utänyair dhanädibhiù
SYNONYMS
yena—pulled by such time; ca—and; eva—certainly; abhipannaù—overtaken;
ayam—this; präëaiù—with life; priya-tamaiù—which is most dear to everyone;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
api—even though; janaù—person; sadyaù—forthwith; viyujyeta—do give up;
kim uta anyaiù—what to speak of any other thing; dhana-ädibhiù—such as
wealth, honor, children, land and house.
TRANSLATION
Whoever is under the influence of supreme käla [eternal time] must
surrender his most dear life, and what to speak of other things, such as wealth,
honor, children, land and home.
PURPORT
A great Indian scientist, busy in the planmaking business, was suddenly
called by invincible eternal time while going to attend a very important
meeting of the planning commission, and he had to surrender his life, wife,
children, house, land, wealth, etc. During the political upsurge in India and its
division into Pakistan and Hindustan, so many rich and influential Indians
had to surrender life, property and honor due to the influence of time, and
there are hundreds and thousands of examples like that all over the world, all
over the universe, which are all effects of the influence of time. Therefore, the
conclusion is that there is no powerful living being within the universe who
can overcome the influence of time. Many poets have written verses lamenting
the influence of time. Many devastations have taken place over the universes
due to the influence of time, and no one could check them by any means. Even
in our daily life, so many things come and go in which we have no hand, but
we have to suffer or tolerate them without remedial measure. That is the result
of time.
TEXT 21
iPaTa*>a]aTa*SauôTPau}aa hTaaSTae ivGaTa& vYaMa( )
AaTMaa c JarYaa Ga]STa" ParGaehMauPaaSaSae )) 21 ))
pitå-bhrätå-suhåt-puträ
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
hatäs te vigataà vayam
ätmä ca jarayä grastaù
para-geham upäsase
SYNONYMS
pitå—father; bhrätå—brother; suhåt—well-wishers; puträù—sons; hatäù—all
dead; te—yours; vigatam—expended; vayam—age; ätmä—the body; ca—also;
jarayä—by invalidity; grastaù—overcome; para-geham—another’s home;
upäsase—you do live.
TRANSLATION
Your father, brother, well-wishers and sons are all dead and passed away.
You yourself have expended the major portion of your life, your body is now
overtaken by invalidity, and you are living in the home of another.
PURPORT
The King is reminded of his precarious condition, influenced by cruel time,
and by his past experience he should have been more intelligent to see what
was going to happen to his own life. His father, Vicitravérya, died long ago,
when he and his younger brothers were all little children, and it was due to the
care and kindness of Bhéñmadeva that they were properly brought up. Then
again his brother Päëòu died also. Then in the Battlefield of Kurukñetra his
one hundred sons and his grandsons all died, along with all other well-wishers
like Bhéñmadeva, Droëäcärya, Karëa and many other kings and friends. So he
had lost all men and money, and now he was living at the mercy of his nephew,
whom he had put into troubles of various types. And despite all these reverses,
he thought that he would prolong his life more and more. Vidura wanted to
point out to Dhåtaräñöra that everyone has to protect himself by his action and
the grace of the Lord. One has to execute his duty faithfully, depending for the
result on the supreme authority. No friend, no children, no father, no brother,
no state and no one else can protect a person who is not protected by the
Supreme Lord. One should, therefore, seek the protection of the Supreme
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Lord, for the human form of life is meant for seeking that protection. He was
warned of his precarious conditions more and more by the following words.
TEXT 22
ANDa" PaurEv viDarae MaNdPa[jaê SaaMPa[TaMa( )
ivXaq<aRdNTaae MaNdaiGan" SaraGa" k-f-MauÜhNa( )) 22 ))
andhaù puraiva vadhiro
manda-prajïäç ca sämpratam
viçérëa-danto mandägniù
sarägaù kapham udvahan
SYNONYMS
andhaù—blind; purä—from the beginning; eva—certainly; vadhiraù—hard of
hearing; manda-prajïäù—memory shortened; ca—and; sämpratam—recently;
viçérëa—loosened; dantaù—teeth; manda-agniù—liver action decreased;
sa-rägaù—with sound; kapham—coughing much mucus; udvahan—coming
out.
TRANSLATION
You have been blind from your very birth, and recently you have become
hard of hearing. Your memory is shortened, and your intelligence is disturbed.
Your teeth are loose, your liver is defective, and you are coughing up mucus.
PURPORT
The symptoms of old age, which had already developed in Dhåtaräñöra, were
all one after another pointed out to him as warning that death was nearing
very quickly, and still he was foolishly carefree about his future. The signs
pointed out by Vidura in the body of Dhåtaräñöra were signs of apakñaya, or
dwindling of the material body before the last stroke of death. The body is
born, it develops, stays, creates other bodies, dwindles and then vanishes. But
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
foolish men want to make a permanent settlement of the perishable body and
think that their estate, children, society, country, etc., will give them
protection. With such foolish ideas, they become overtaken by such temporary
engagements and forget altogether that they must give up this temporary body
and take a new one, again to arrange for another term of society, friendship
and love, again to perish ultimately. They forget their permanent identity and
become foolishly active for impermanent occupations, forgetting altogether
their prime duty. Saints and sages like Vidura approach such foolish men to
awaken them to the real situation, but they take such sädhus and saints as
parasites of society, and almost all of them refuse to hear the words of such
sädhus and saints, although they welcome show-bottle sädhus and so-called
saints who can satisfy their senses. Vidura was not a sädhu to satisfy the
ill-gotten sentiment of Dhåtaräñöra. He was correctly pointing out the real
situation of life, and how one can save oneself from such catastrophies.
TEXT 23
Ahae MahqYaSaq JaNTaaeJas„ivTaaXaa YaQaa >avaNa( )
>aqMaaPaviJaRTa& iPa<@Maadtae Ga*hPaal/vTa( )) 23 ))
aho mahéyasé jantor
jévitäçä yathä bhavän
bhémäpavarjitaà piëòam
ädatte gåha-pälavat
SYNONYMS
aho—alas; mahéyasé—powerful; jantoù—of the living beings; jévita-äçä—hope
for life; yathä—as much as; bhavän—you are; bhéma—of Bhémasena (a brother
of Yudhiñöhira’s); apavarjitam—remnants; piëòam—foodstuff; ädatte—eaten
by; gåha-päla-vat—like a household dog.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Alas, how powerful are the hopes of a living being to continue his life.
Verily, you are living just like a household dog and are eating remnants of food
given by Bhéma.
PURPORT
A sädhu should never flatter kings or rich men to live comfortably at their
cost. A sädhu is to speak to the householders about the naked truth of life so
that they may come to their senses about the precarious life in material
existence. Dhåtaräñöra is a typical example of an attached old man in
household life. He had become a pauper in the true sense, yet he wanted to live
comfortably in the house of the Päëòavas, of whom Bhéma especially is
mentioned because personally he killed two prominent sons of Dhåtaräñöra,
namely Duryodhana and Duùçäsana. These two sons were very much dear to
him for their notorious and nefarious activities, and Bhéma is particularly
pointed out because he killed these two pet sons. Why was Dhåtaräñöra living
there at the house of the Päëòavas? Because he wanted to continue his life
comfortably, even at the risk of all humiliation. Vidura, therefore, was
astonished how powerful is the urge to continue life. This sense of continuing
one’s life indicates that a living being is eternally a living entity and does not
want to change his bodily habitation. The foolish man does not know that a
particular term of bodily existence is awarded to him to undergo a term of
imprisonment, and the human body is awarded, after many, many births and
deaths, as a chance for self-realization to go back home, back to Godhead. But
persons like Dhåtaräñöra try to make plans to live there in a comfortable
position with profit and interest, for they do not see things as they are.
Dhåtaräñöra is blind and continues to hope to live comfortably in the midst of
all kinds of reverses of life. A sädhu like Vidura is meant to awaken such blind
persons and thus help them go back to Godhead, where life is eternal. Once
going there, no one wants to come back to this material world of miseries. We
can just imagine how responsible a task is entrusted to a sädhu like Mahätmä
Vidura.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 24
AiGaniNaRSa*íae dtaê Garae daraê dUizTaa" )
ôTa& +ae}a& DaNa& Yaeza& TaÕtaErSaui>a" ik-YaTa( )) 24 ))
agnir nisåñöo dattaç ca
garo däräç ca düñitäù
håtaà kñetraà dhanaà yeñäà
tad-dattair asubhiù kiyat
SYNONYMS
agniù—fire; nisåñöaù—set; dattaù—given; ca—and; garaù—poison;
däräù—married wife; ca—and; düñitäù—insulted; håtam—usurped;
kñetram—kingdom; dhanam—wealth; yeñäm—of those; tat—their;
dattaiù—given by; asubhiù—subsisting; kiyat—is unnecessary.
TRANSLATION
There is no need to live a degraded life and subsist on the charity of those
whom you tried to kill by arson and poisoning. You also insulted one of their
wives and usurped their kingdom and wealth.
PURPORT
The system of varëäçrama religion sets aside a part of one’s life completely
for the purpose of self-realization and attainment of salvation in the human
form of life. That is a routine division of life, but persons like Dhåtaräñöra,
even at their weary ripened age, want to stay home, even in a degraded
condition of accepting charity from enemies. Vidura wanted to point this out
and impressed upon him that it was better to die like his sons than accept such
humiliating charity. Five thousand years ago there was one Dhåtaräñöra, but at
the present moment there are Dhåtaräñöras in every home. Politicians
especially do not retire from political activities unless they are dragged by the
cruel hand of death or killed by some opposing element. To stick to family life
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
to the end of one’s human life is the grossest type of degradation and there is
an absolute need for the Viduras to educate such Dhåtaräñöras, even at the
present moment.
TEXT 25
TaSYaaiPa Tav dehae_Ya& k*-Pa<aSYa iJaJaqivzae" )
ParETYaiNaC^Taae Jaq<aaeR JarYaa vaSaSaq wv )) 25 ))
tasyäpi tava deho ’yaà
kåpaëasya jijéviñoù
paraity anicchato jérëo
jarayä väsasé iva
SYNONYMS
tasya—of this; api—in spite of; tava—your; dehaù—body; ayam—this;
kåpaëasya—of one who is miserly; jijéviñoù—of you who desire life;
paraiti—will dwindle; anicchataù—even unwilling; jérëaù—deteriorated;
jarayä—old; väsasé—garments; iva—like.
TRANSLATION
Despite your unwillingness to die and your desire to live even at the cost of
honor and prestige, your miserly body will certainly dwindle and deteriorate
like an old garment.
PURPORT
The words kåpaëasya jijéviñoù are significant. There are two classes of men.
One is called the kåpaëa, and the other is called the brähmaëa. The kåpaëa, or
the miserly man, has no estimation of his material body, but the brähmaëa has
a true estimation of himself and the material body. The kåpaëa, having a
wrong estimation of his material body, wants to enjoy sense gratification with
his utmost strength, and even in old age he wants to become a young man by
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
medical treatment or otherwise. Dhåtaräñöra is addressed herein as a kåpaëa
because without any estimation of his material body he wants to live at any
cost. Vidura is trying to open his eyes to see that he cannot live more than his
term and that he must prepare for death. Since death is inevitable, why should
he accept such a humiliating position for living? It is better to take the right
path, even at the risk of death. Human life is meant for finishing all kinds of
miseries of material existence, and life should be so regulated that one can
achieve the desired goal. Dhåtaräñöra, due to his wrong conception of life, had
already spoiled eighty percent of his achieved energy, so it behooved him to
utilize the remaining days of his miserly life for the ultimate good. Such a life is
called miserly because one cannot properly utilize the assets of the human form
of life. Only by good luck does such a miserly man meet a self-realized soul like
Vidura and by his instruction gets rid of the nescience of material existence.
TEXT 26
GaTaSvaQaRiMaMa& deh& ivr¢-ae Mau¢-bNDaNa" )
AivjaTaGaiTaJaRùaTa( Sa vE Daqr odaôTa" )) 26 ))
gata-svärtham imaà dehaà
virakto mukta-bandhanaù
avijïäta-gatir jahyät
sa vai dhéra udähåtaù
SYNONYMS
gata-sva-artham—without being properly utilized; imam—this;
deham—material body; viraktaù—indifferently; mukta—being freed;
bandhanaù—from all obligations; avijïäta-gatiù—unknown destination;
jahyät—one should give up this body; saù—such a person; vai—certainly;
dhéraù—undisturbed; udähåtaù—is said to be so.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
He is called undisturbed who goes to an unknown, remote place and, freed
from all obligations, quits his material body when it has become useless.
PURPORT
Narottama däsa Öhäkura, a great devotee and äcärya of the Gauòéya
Vaiñëava sect, has sung: “My Lord, I have simply wasted my life. Having
obtained the human body, I have neglected to worship Your Lordship, and
therefore I have willingly drunk poison.” In other words, the human body is
especially meant for cultivating knowledge of devotional service to the Lord,
without which life becomes full of anxieties and miserable conditions.
Therefore, one who has spoiled his life without such cultural activities is
advised to leave home without knowledge of friends and relatives and, being
thus freed from all obligations of family, society, country, etc., give up the body
at some unknown destination so that others may not know where and how he
has met his death. Dhéra means one who is not disturbed, even when there is
sufficient provocation. One cannot give up a comfortable family life due to his
affectionate relation with wife and children. Self-realization is obstructed by
such undue affection for family, and if anyone is at all able to forget such a
relation, he is called undisturbed, or dhéra. This is, however, the path of
renunciation based on a frustrated life, but stabilization of such renunciation is
possible only by association with bona fide saints and self-realized souls by
which one can be engaged in the loving devotional service of the Lord. Sincere
surrender unto the lotus feet of the Lord is possible by awakening the
transcendental sense of service. This is made possible by association with pure
devotees of the Lord. Dhåtaräñöra was lucky enough to have a brother whose
very association was a source of liberation for his frustrated life.
TEXT 27
Ya" Svk-aTParTaae veh JaaTaiNaveRd AaTMavaNa( )
ôid k*-Tva hir„& GaehaTPa[v]JaeTSa NaraetaMa" )) 27 ))
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
yaù svakät parato veha
jäta-nirveda ätmavän
hådi kåtvä harià gehät
pravrajet sa narottamaù
SYNONYMS
yaù—anyone who; svakät—by his own awakening; parataù vä—or by hearing
from another; iha—here in this world; jäta—becomes; nirvedaù—indifferent
to material attachment; ätmavän—consciousness; hådi—within the heart;
kåtvä—having been taken by; harim—the Personality of Godhead;
gehät—from home; pravrajet—goes away; saù—he is; nara-uttamaù—the
first-class human being.
TRANSLATION
He is certainly a first-class man who awakens and understands, either by
himself or from others, the falsity and misery of this material world and thus
leaves home and depends fully on the Personality of Godhead residing within
his heart.
PURPORT
There are three classes of transcendentalists, namely, (1) the dhéra, or the
one who is not disturbed by being away from family association, (2) one in the
renounced order of life, a sannyäsé by frustrated sentiment, and (3) a sincere
devotee of the Lord, who awakens God consciousness by hearing and chanting
and leaves home depending completely on the Personality of Godhead, who
resides in his heart. The idea is that the renounced order of life, after a
frustrated life of sentiment in the material world, may be the stepping stone on
the path of self-realization, but real perfection of the path of liberation is attained
when one is practiced to depend fully on the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who lives in everyone’s heart as Paramätmä. One may live in the darkest
jungle alone out of home, but a steadfast devotee knows very well that he is
not alone. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is with him, and He can
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
protect His sincere devotee in any awkward circumstance. One should
therefore practice devotional service at home, hearing and chanting the holy
name, quality, form, pastimes, entourage, etc., in association with pure
devotees, and this practice will help one awaken God consciousness in
proportion to one’s sincerity of purpose. One who desires material benefit by
such devotional activities can never depend on the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, although He sits in everyone’s heart. Nor does the Lord give any
direction to persons who worship Him for material gain. Such materialistic
devotees may be blessed by the Lord with material benefits, but they cannot
reach the stage of the first-class human being, as above mentioned. There are
many examples of such sincere devotees in the history of the world, especially
in India, and they are our guides on the path of self-realization. Mahätmä
Vidura is one such great devotee of the Lord, and we should all try to follow in
his lotus footsteps for self-realization.
TEXT 28
AQaaedqcq& idXa& YaaTau SvErjaTaGaiTa>aRvaNa( )
wTaae_vaRKPa[aYaXa" k-al/" Pau&Saa& Gau<aivk-zR<a" )) 28 ))
athodécéà diçaà yätu
svair ajïäta-gatir bhavän
ito ’rväk präyaçaù kälaù
puàsäà guëa-vikarñaëaù
SYNONYMS
atha—therefore; udécém—northern side; diçam—direction; yätu—please go
away; svaiù—by your relatives; ajïäta—without knowledge;
gatiù—movements; bhavän—of yourself; itaù—after this; arväk—will usher in;
präyaçaù—generally; kälaù—time; puàsäm—of men; guëa—qualities;
vikarñaëaù—diminishing.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Please, therefore, leave for the North immediately, without letting your
relatives know, for soon that time will approach which will diminish the good
qualities of men.
PURPORT
One can compensate for a life of frustration by becoming a dhéra, or leaving
home for good without communicating with relatives, and Vidura advised his
eldest brother to adopt this way without delay because very quickly the age of
Kali was approaching. A conditioned soul is already degraded by the material
association, and still in the Kali-yuga the good qualities of a man will
deteriorate to the lowest standard. He was advised to leave home before
Kali-yuga approached because the atmosphere which was created by Vidura,
his valuable instructions on the facts of life, would fade away due to the
influence of the age which was fast approaching. To become narottama, or a
first-class human being depending completely on the Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa,
is not possible for any ordinary man. It is stated in Bhagavad-gétä (7.28) that a
person who is completely relieved of all taints of sinful acts can alone depend
on the Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead. Dhåtaräñöra was
advised by Vidura at least to become a dhéra in the beginning if it were
impossible for him to become a sannyäsé or a narottama. Persistently
endeavoring on the line of self-realization helps a person to rise to the
conditions of a narottama from the stage of a dhéra. The dhéra stage is attained
after prolonged practice of the yoga system, but by the grace of Vidura one can
attain the stage immediately simply by willing to adopt the means of the dhéra
stage, which is the preparatory stage for sannyäsa. The sannyäsa stage is the
preparatory stage of paramahaàsa, or the first-grade devotee of the Lord.
TEXT 29
Wv& raJaa ivdure<aaNauJaeNa
Pa[jac+aubaeRiDaTa AaJaMaq!" )
i^tva Svezu òehPaaXaaNd]i!Manae
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
iNaê§-aMa >a]aTa*SaNdiXaRTaaßa )) 29 ))
evaà räjä vidureëänujena
prajïä-cakñur bodhita äjaméòhaù
chittvä sveñu sneha-päçän draòhimno
niçcakräma bhrätå-sandarçitädhvä
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; räjä—King Dhåtaräñöra; vidureëa anujena—by his younger
brother Vidura; prajïä—introspective knowledge; cakñuù—eyes;
bodhitaù—being understood; äjaméòhaù—Dhåtaräñöra, scion of the family of
Ajaméòha; chittvä—by breaking; sveñu—regarding kinsmen;
sneha-päçän—strong network of affection; draòhimnaù—because of
steadfastness; niçcakräma—got out; bhrätå—by his brother;
sandarçita—direction to; adhvä—the path of liberation.
TRANSLATION
Thus Mahäräja Dhåtaräñöra, the scion of the family of Ajaméòha, firmly
convinced by introspective knowledge [prajïä], broke at once the strong
network of familial affection by his resolute determination. Thus he
immediately left home to set out on the path of liberation, as directed by his
younger brother Vidura.
PURPORT
Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, the great preacher of the principles of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, has stressed the importance of association with sädhus,
pure devotees of the Lord. He said that even by a moments association with a
pure devotee, one can achieve all perfection. We are not ashamed to admit
that this fact was experienced in our practical life. Were we not favored by His
Divine Grace Çrémad Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Gosvämé Mahäräja, by our
first meeting for a few minutes only, it would have been impossible for us to
accept this mighty task of describing Çrémad-Bhägavatam in English. Without
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
seeing him at that opportune moment, we could have become a very great
business magnate, but never would we have been able to walk the path of
liberation and be engaged in the factual service of the Lord under instructions
of His Divine Grace. And here is another practical example by the action of
Vidura’s association with Dhåtaräñöra. Mahäräja Dhåtaräñöra was tightly bound
in a network of material affinities related to politics, economy and family
attachment, and he did everything in his power to achieve so-called success in
his planned projects, but he was frustrated from the beginning to the end so
far as his material activities were concerned. And yet, despite his life of failure,
he achieved the greatest of all success in self-realization by the forceful
instructions of a pure devotee of the Lord, who is the typical emblem of a
sädhu. The scriptures enjoin, therefore, that one should associate with sädhus
only, rejecting all other kinds of association, and by doing so one will have
ample opportunity to hear the sädhus, who can cut to pieces the bonds of
illusory affection in the material world. It is a fact that the material world is a
great illusion because everything appears to be a tangible reality but at the
next moment evaporates like the dashing foam of the sea or a cloud in the sky.
A cloud in the sky undoubtedly appears to be a reality because it rains, and due
to rains so many temporary green things appear, but in the ultimate issue,
everything disappears, namely the cloud, rain and green vegetation, all in due
course. But the sky remains, and the varieties of sky or luminaries also remain
forever. Similarly, the Absolute Truth, which is compared to the sky, remains
eternally, and the temporary cloudlike illusion comes and goes away. Foolish
living beings are attracted by the temporary cloud, but intelligent men are
more concerned with the eternal sky with all its variegatedness.
TEXT 30
PaiTa& Pa[YaaNTa& Saubl/SYa Pau}aq
PaiTav]Taa caNauJaGaaMa Saaßq )
ihMaal/Ya& NYaSTad<@Pa[hz|
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
MaNaiSvNaaiMav SaTSaMPa[har" )) 30 ))
patià prayäntaà subalasya putré
pati-vratä cänujagäma sädhvé
himälayaà nyasta-daëòa-praharñaà
manasvinäm iva sat samprahäraù
SYNONYMS
patim—her husband; prayäntam—while leaving home; subalasya—of King
Subala; putré—the worthy daughter; pati-vratä—devoted to her husband;
ca—also; anujagäma—followed; sädhvé—the chaste; himälayam—towards the
Himalaya Mountains; nyasta-daëòa—one who has accepted the rod of the
renounced order; praharñam—object of delight; manasvinäm—of the great
fighters; iva—like; sat—legitimate; samprahäraù—good lashing.
TRANSLATION
The gentle and chaste Gändhäré, who was the daughter of King Subala of
Kandahar [or Gändhära], followed her husband, seeing that he was going to the
Himalaya Mountains, which are the delight of those who have accepted the
staff of the renounced order like fighters who have accepted a good lashing from
the enemy.
PURPORT
Saubaliné, or Gändhäré, daughter of King Subala and wife of King
Dhåtaräñöra, was ideal as a wife devoted to her husband. The Vedic civilization
especially prepares chaste and devoted wives, of whom Gändhäré is one
amongst many mentioned in history. Lakñméjé Sétädevé was also a daughter of a
great king, but she followed her husband, Lord Rämacandra, into the forest.
Similarly, as a woman Gändhäré could have remained at home or at her
father’s house, but as a chaste and gentle lady she followed her husband
without consideration. Instructions for the renounced order of life were
imparted to Dhåtaräñöra by Vidura, and Gändhäré was by the side of her
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
husband. But he did not ask her to follow him because he was at that time fully
determined, like a great warrior who faces all kinds of dangers in the
battlefield. He was no longer attracted to so-called wife or relatives, and he
decided to start alone, but as a chaste lady Gändhäré decided to follow her
husband till the last moment. Mahäräja Dhåtaräñöra accepted the order of
vänaprastha, and at this stage the wife is allowed to remain as a voluntary
servitor, but in the sannyäsa stage no wife can stay with her former husband.
A sannyäsé is considered to be a dead man civilly, and therefore the wife
becomes a civil widow without connection with her former husband. Mahäräja
Dhåtaräñöra did not deny his faithful wife, and she followed her husband at her
own risk.
The sannyäsés accept a rod as the sign of the renounced order of life. There
are two types of sannyäsés. Those who follow the Mäyävädé philosophy, headed
by Çrépäda Çaìkaräcärya, accept only one rod (eka-daëòa), but those who
follow the Vaiñëavite philosophy accept three combined rods (tri-daëòa). The
Mäyävädé sannyäsés are ekadaëòi-svämés, whereas the Vaiñëava sannyäsés are
known as tridaëòi-svämés, or more distinctly, tridaëòi-gosvämés, in order to be
distinguished from the Mäyävädé philosophers. The ekadaëòi-svämés are mostly
fond of the Himalayas, but the Vaiñëava sannyäsés are fond of Våndävana and
Puré. The Vaiñëava sannyäsés are narottamas, whereas the Mäyävädé sannyäsés
are dhéras. Mahäräja Dhåtaräñöra was advised to follow the dhéras because at
that stage it was difficult for him to become a narottama.
TEXT 31
AJaaTaXa}au" k*-TaMaE}aae huTaaiGan‚
ivRPa[aNa( NaTva iTal/Gaae>aUiMaåKMaE" )
Ga*h& Pa[ivíae GauåvNdNaaYa
Na caPaXYaiTPaTaraE SaaEbl/I& c )) 31 ))
ajäta-çatruù kåta-maitro hutägnir
viprän natvä tila-go-bhümi-rukmaiù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
gåhaà praviñöo guru-vandanäya
na cäpaçyat pitarau saubaléà ca
SYNONYMS
ajäta—never born; çatruù—enemy; kåta—having performed;
maitraù—worshiping the demigods; huta-agniù—and offering fuel in the fire;
viprän—the brähmaëas; natvä—offering obeisances;
tila-go-bhümi-rukmaiù—along with grains, cows, land and gold; gåham—within
the palace; praviñöaù—having entered into; guru-vandanäya—for offering
respect to the elderly members; na—did not; ca—also; apaçyat—see;
pitarau—his uncles; saubalém—Gändhäré; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, whose enemy was never born, performed his daily
morning duties by praying, offering fire sacrifice to the sun-god, and offering
obeisances, grains, cows, land and gold to the brähmaëas. He then entered the
palace to pay respects to the elderly. However, he could not find his uncles or
aunt, the daughter of King Subala.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was the most pious king because he personally
practiced daily the pious duties for the householders. The householders are
required to rise early in the morning, and after bathing they should offer
respects to the Deities at home by prayers, by offering fuel in the sacred fire, by
giving the brähmaëas in charity land, cows, grains, gold, etc., and at last
offering to the elderly members due respects and obeisances. One who is not
prepared to practice injunctions prescribed in the çästras cannot be a good
man simply by book knowledge. Modern householders are practiced to
different modes of life, namely to rise late and then take bed tea without any
sort of cleanliness and without any purificatory practices as mentioned above.
The household children are taken to practice what the parents practice, and
therefore the whole generation glides towards hell. Nothing good can be
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
expected from them unless they associate with sädhus. Like Dhåtaräñöra, the
materialistic person may take lessons from a sädhu like Vidura and thus be
cleansed of the effects of modern life.
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, however, could not find in the palace his two uncles,
namely Dhåtaräñöra and Vidura, along with Gändhäré, the daughter of King
Subala. He was anxious to see them and therefore asked Saïjaya, the private
secretary of Dhåtaräñöra.
TEXT 32
Ta}a SaÅYaMaaSaqNa& PaPa[C^aeiÜGanMaaNaSa" )
GaavLGa<ae Kv NaSTaaTaae v*Öae hqNaê Nae}aYaae" )) 32 ))
tatra saïjayam äsénaà
papracchodvigna-mänasaù
gävalgaëe kva nas täto
våddho hénaç ca netrayoù
SYNONYMS
tatra—there; saïjayam—unto Saïjaya; äsénam—seated; papraccha—he
inquired from; udvigna-mänasaù—filled with anxiety; gävalgaëe—the son of
Gavalgaëa, Saïjaya; kva—where is; naù—our; tätaù—uncle; våddhaù—old;
hénaù ca—and bereft of; netrayoù—the eyes.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, full of anxiety, turned to Saïjaya, who was sitting
there, and said: O Saïjaya, where is our uncle, who is old and blind?
TEXT 33
AMba c hTaPau}aaTaaR iPaTa*VYa" Kv GaTa" SauôTa( )
AiPa MaYYak*-TaPa[je hTabNDau" Sa >aaYaRYaa )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
AaXa&SaMaaNa" XaMal&/ Ga®aYaa& du"i%Taae_PaTaTa( )) 33 ))
ambä ca hata-puträrtä
pitåvyaù kva gataù suhåt
api mayy akåta-prajïe
hata-bandhuù sa bhäryayä
äçaàsamänaù çamalaà
gaìgäyäà duùkhito ’patat
SYNONYMS
ambä—mother aunt; ca—and; hata-puträ—who had lost all her sons; ärtä—in
a sorry plight; pitåvyaù—uncle Vidura; kva—where; gataù—gone;
suhåt—well-wisher; api—whether; mayi—unto me; akåta-prajïe—ungrateful;
hata-bandhuù—one who has lost all his sons; saù—Dhåtaräñöra;
bhäryayä—with his wife; äçaàsamänaù—in doubtful mind;
çamalam—offenses; gaìgäyäm—in the Ganges water; duùkhitaù—in distressed
mind; apatat—fell down.
TRANSLATION
Where is my well-wisher, uncle Vidura, and mother Gändhäré, who is very
afflicted due to all her sons’ demise? My uncle Dhåtaräñöra was also very
mortified due to the death of all his sons and grandsons. Undoubtedly I am very
ungrateful. Did he, therefore, take my offenses very seriously and, along with
his wife, drown himself in the Ganges?
PURPORT
The Päëòavas, especially Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira and Arjuna, anticipated the
aftereffects of the Battle of Kurukñetra, and therefore Arjuna declined to
execute the fighting. The fight was executed by the will of the Lord, but the
effects of family aggrievement, as they had thought of it before, had come to be
true. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was always conscious of the great plight of his
uncle Dhåtaräñöra and aunt Gändhäré, and therefore he took all possible care
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
of them in their old age and aggrieved conditions. When, therefore, he could
not find his uncle and aunt in the palace, naturally his doubts arose, and he
conjectured that they had gone down to the water of the Ganges. He thought
himself ungrateful because when the Päëòavas were fatherless, Mahäräja
Dhåtaräñöra had given them all royal facilities to live, and in return he had
killed all Dhåtaräñöra’s sons in the Battle of Kurukñetra. As a pious man,
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira took into account all his unavoidable misdeeds, and he
never thought of the misdeeds of his uncle and company. Dhåtaräñöra had
suffered the effects of his own misdeeds by the will of the Lord, but Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira was thinking only of his own unavoidable misdeeds. That is the
nature of a good man and devotee of the Lord. A devotee never finds fault
with others, but tries to find his own and thus rectify them as far as possible.
TEXT 34
iPaTaYauRParTae Paa<@aE SavaRà" Sauôd" iXaéUNa( )
Ar+aTaa& VYaSaNaTa" iPaTa*VYaaE Kv GaTaaivTa" )) 34 ))
pitary uparate päëòau
sarvän naù suhådaù çiçün
arakñatäà vyasanataù
pitåvyau kva gatäv itaù
SYNONYMS
pitari—upon my father; uparate—falling down; päëòau—Mahäräja Päëòu;
sarvän—all; naù—of us; suhådaù—well-wishers; çiçün—small children;
arakñatäm—protected; vyasanataù—from all kinds of dangers;
pitåvyau—uncles; kva—where; gatau—have departed; itaù—from this place.
TRANSLATION
When my father, Päëòu, fell down and we were all small children, these two
uncles gave us protection from all kinds of calamities. They were always our
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
good well-wishers. Alas, where have they gone from here?
TEXT 35
SaUTa ovac
k*-PaYaa òehvE©-VYaaTSaUTaae ivrhk-iXaRTa" )
AaTMaeìrMac+aa<aae Na Pa[TYaahaiTaPaqi@Ta" )) 35 ))
süta uväca
kåpayä sneha-vaiklavyät
süto viraha-karçitaù
ätmeçvaram acakñäëo
na pratyähätipéòitaù
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; kåpayä—out of full compassion;
sneha-vaiklavyät—mental derangement due to profound affection;
sütaù—Saïjaya; viraha-karçitaù—distressed by separation; ätma-éçvaram—his
master; acakñäëaù—having not seen; na—did not; pratyäha—replied;
ati-péòitaù—being too aggrieved.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: Because of compassion and mental agitation, Saïjaya, not
having seen his own master, Dhåtaräñöra, was aggrieved and could not properly
reply to Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira.
PURPORT
Saïjaya was the personal assistant of Mahäräja Dhåtaräñöra for a very long
time, and thus he had the opportunity to study the life of Dhåtaräñöra. And
when he saw at last that Dhåtaräñöra had left home without his knowledge, his
sorrows had no bound. He was fully compassionate toward Dhåtaräñöra because
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
in the game of the Battle of Kurukñetra, King Dhåtaräñöra had lost everything,
men and money, and at last the King and the Queen had to leave home in
utter frustration. He studied the situation in his own way because he did not
know that the inner vision of Dhåtaräñöra has been awakened by Vidura and
that therefore he had left home in enthusiastic cheerfulness for a better life
after departure from the dark well of home. Unless one is convinced of a better
life after renunciation of the present life, one cannot stick to the renounced
order of life simply by artificial dress or staying out of the home.
TEXT 36
ivMa*JYaaé[Ui<a Paai<a>Yaa& iví>YaaTMaaNaMaaTMaNaa )
AJaaTaXa}au& Pa[TYaUce Pa[>aae" PaadavNauSMarNa( )) 36 ))
vimåjyäçrüëi päëibhyäà
viñöabhyätmänam ätmanä
ajäta-çatruà pratyüce
prabhoù pädäv anusmaran
SYNONYMS
vimåjya—smearing; açrüëi—tears of the eyes; päëibhyäm—with his hands;
viñöabhya—situated; ätmänam—the mind; ätmanä—by intelligence;
ajäta-çatrum—unto Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira; pratyüce—began to reply;
prabhoù—of his master; pädau—feet; anusmaran—thinking after.
TRANSLATION
First he slowly pacified his mind by intelligence, and wiping away his tears
and thinking of the feet of his master, Dhåtaräñöra, he began to reply to
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira.
TEXT 37
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SaÅYa ovac
Naah& ved VYaviSaTa& iPa}aaevR" ku-l/NaNdNa )
GaaNDaaYaaR va Mahabahae MauizTaae_iSMa MahaTMai>a" )) 37 ))
saïjaya uväca
nähaà veda vyavasitaà
pitror vaù kula-nandana
gändhäryä vä mahä-bäho
muñito ’smi mahätmabhiù
SYNONYMS
saïjayaù uväca—Saïjaya said; na—not; aham—I; veda—know;
vyavasitam—determination; pitroù—of your uncles; vaù—your;
kula-nandana—O descendant of the Kuru dynasty; gändhäryäù—of Gändhäré;
vä—or; mahä-bäho—O great King; muñitaù—cheated; asmi—I have been;
mahä-ätmabhiù—by those great souls.
TRANSLATION
Saïjaya said: My dear descendant of the Kuru dynasty, I have no
information of the determination of your two uncles and Gändhäré. O King, I
have been cheated by those great souls.
PURPORT
That great souls cheat others may be astonishing to know, but it is a fact
that great souls cheat others for a great cause. It is said that Lord Kåñëa also
advised Yudhiñöhira to tell a lie before Droëäcärya, and it was also for a great
cause. The Lord wanted it, and therefore it was a great cause. Satisfaction of
the Lord is the criterion of one who is bona fide, and the highest perfection of
life is to satisfy the Lord by one’s occupational duty. That is the verdict of Gétä
and Bhägavatam.*(1) Dhåtaräñöra and Vidura, followed by Gändhäré, did not
disclose their determination to Saïjaya, although he was constantly with
Dhåtaräñöra as his personal assistant. Saïjaya never thought that Dhåtaräñöra
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
could perform any act without consulting him. But Dhåtaräñöra’s going away
from home was so confidential that it could not be disclosed even to Saïjaya.
Sanätana Gosvämé also cheated the keeper of the prison house while going
away to see Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, and similarly Raghunätha däsa
Gosvämé also cheated his priest and left home for good to satisfy the Lord. To
satisfy the Lord, anything is good, for it is in relation with the Absolute Truth.
We also had the same opportunity to cheat the family members and leave
home to engage in the service of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Such cheating was
necessary for a great cause, and there is no loss for any party in such
transcendental fraud.
TEXT 38
AQaaJaGaaMa >aGavaNa( Naard" SahTauMbuå" )
Pa[TYauTQaaYaai>avaÛah SaaNauJaae_>YacRYaNMauiNaMa( )) 38 ))
athäjagäma bhagavän
näradaù saha-tumburuù
pratyutthäyäbhivädyäha
sänujo ’bhyarcayan munim
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; äjagäma—arrived; bhagavän—the godly personality;
näradaù—Närada; saha-tumburuù—along with his tumburu (musical
instrument); pratyutthäya—having gotten up from their seats;
abhivädya—offering their due obeisances; äha—said; sa-anujaù—along with
younger brothers; abhyarcayan—thus while receiving in a proper mood;
munim—the sage.
TRANSLATION
While Saïjaya was thus speaking, Çré Närada, the powerful devotee of the
Lord, appeared on the scene carrying his tumburu. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
his brothers received him properly by getting up from their seats and offering
obeisances.
PURPORT
Devarñi Närada is described herein as bhagavän due to his being the most
confidential devotee of the Lord. The Lord and His very confidential devotees
are treated on the same level by those who are actually engaged in the loving
service of the Lord. Such confidential devotees of the Lord are very much dear
to the Lord because they travel everywhere to preach the glories of the Lord in
different capacities and try their utmost to convert the nondevotees of the
Lord into devotees in order to bring them to the platform of sanity. Actually a
living being cannot be a nondevotee of the Lord because of his constitutional
position, but when one becomes a nondevotee or nonbeliever, it is to be
understood that the person concerned is not in a sound condition of life. The
confidential devotees of the Lord treat such illusioned living beings, and
therefore they are most pleasing in the eyes of the Lord. The Lord says in the
Bhagavad-gétä that no one is dearer to Him than one who actually preaches the
glories of the Lord to convert the nonbelievers and nondevotees. Such
personalities as Närada must be offered all due respects, like those offered to
the Personality of Godhead Himself, and Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, along with his
noble brothers, were examples for others in receiving a pure devotee of the
Lord like Närada, who had no other business save and except singing the
glories of the Lord along with his véëä, a musical stringed instrument.
TEXT 39
YauiDaiïr ovac
Naah& ved GaiTa& iPa}aae>aRGavNa( Kv GaTaaivTa" )
AMba va hTaPau}aaTaaR Kv GaTaa c TaPaiSvNaq )) 39 ))
yudhiñöhira uväca
nähaà veda gatià pitror
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
bhagavan kva gatäv itaù
ambä vä hata-puträrtä
kva gatä ca tapasviné
SYNONYMS
yudhiñöhiraù uväca—Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira said; na—do not; aham—myself;
veda—know it; gatim—departure; pitroù—of the uncles; bhagavan—O godly
personality; kva—where; gatau—gone; itaù—from this place; ambä—mother
aunt; vä—either; hata-puträ—bereft of her sons; ärtä—aggrieved; kva—where;
gatä—gone; ca—also; tapasviné—ascetic.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira said: O godly personality, I do not know where my
two uncles have gone. Nor can I find my ascetic aunt who is grief-stricken by
the loss of all her sons.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, as a good soul and devotee of the Lord, was always
conscious of the great loss of his aunt and her sufferings as an ascetic. An
ascetic is never disturbed by all kinds of sufferings, and that makes him strong
and determined on the path of spiritual progress. Queen Gändhäré is a typical
example of an ascetic because of her marvelous character in many trying
situations. She was an ideal woman as mother, wife and ascetic, and in the
history of the world such character in a woman is rarely found.
TEXT 40
k-<aRDaar wvaPaare >aGavaNa( PaardXaRk-" )
AQaab>aaze >aGavaNa( Naardae MauiNaSataMa" )) 40 ))
karëadhära iväpäre
bhagavän pära-darçakaù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
athäbabhäñe bhagavän
närado muni-sattamaù
SYNONYMS
karëa-dhäraù—captain of the ship; iva—like; apäre—in the extensive oceans;
bhagavän—representative of the Lord; pära-darçakaù—one who can give
directions to the other side; atha—thus; äbabhäñe—began to say;
bhagavän—the godly personality; näradaù—the great sage Närada;
muni-sat-tamaù—the greatest among the devotee philosophers.
TRANSLATION
You are like a captain of a ship in a great ocean and you can direct us to our
destination. Thus addressed, the godly personality, Devarñi Närada, greatest of
the philosopher devotees, began to speak.
PURPORT
There are different types of philosophers, and the greatest of all of them are
those who have seen the Personality of Godhead and have surrendered
themselves in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. Among all such
pure devotees of the Lord, Devarñi Närada is the chief, and therefore he has
been described herein as the greatest of all philosopher devotees. Unless one
has become a sufficiently learned philosopher by hearing the Vedänta
philosophy from a bona fide spiritual master, one cannot be a learned
philosopher devotee. One must be very faithful, learned and renounced,
otherwise one cannot be a pure devotee. A pure devotee of the Lord can give
us direction towards the other end of nescience. Devarñi Närada used to visit
the palace of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira because the Päëòavas were all pure
devotees of the Lord, and the Devarñi was always ready to give them good
counsel whenever needed.
TEXT 41
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Naard ovac
Maa k-ÄNa éucae raJaNa( YadqìrvXa& JaGaTa( )
l/aek-a" SaPaal/a YaSYaeMae vhiNTa bil/MaqiXaTau" )
Sa Sa&YauNai¢- >aUTaaiNa Sa Wv ivYauNai¢- c )) 41 ))
närada uväca
mä kaïcana çuco räjan
yad éçvara-vaçaà jagat
lokäù sapälä yasyeme
vahanti balim éçituù
sa saàyunakti bhütäni
sa eva viyunakti ca
SYNONYMS
näradaù uväca—Närada said; mä—never; kaïcana—by all means; çucaù—do
you lament; räjan—O King; yat—because; éçvara-vaçam—under the control of
the Supreme Lord; jagat—world; lokäù—all living beings; sa-päläù—including
their leaders; yasya—whose; ime—all these; vahanti—do bear; balim—means
of worship; éçituù—for being protected; saù—He; saàyunakti—gets together;
bhütäni—all living beings; saù—He; eva—also; viyunakti—disperses; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
Çré Närada said: O pious King, do not lament for anyone, for everyone is
under the control of the Supreme Lord. Therefore all living beings and their
leaders carry on worship to be well protected. It is He only who brings them
together and disperses them.
PURPORT
Every living being, either in this material world or in the spiritual world, is
under the control of the Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead.
Beginning from Brahmäjé, the leader of this universe, down to the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
insignificant ant, all are abiding by the order of the Supreme Lord. Thus the
constitutional position of the living being is subordination under the control
of the Lord. The foolish living being, especially man, artificially rebels against
the law of the Supreme and thus becomes chastised as an asura, or lawbreaker.
A living being is placed in a particular position by the order of the Supreme
Lord, and he is again shifted from that place by the order of the Supreme Lord
or His authorized agents. Brahmä, Çiva, Indra, Candra, Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira
or, in modern history, Napoleon, Akbar, Alexander, Gandhi, Shubhash and
Nehru all are servants of the Lord, and they are placed in and removed from
their respective positions by the supreme will of the Lord. None of them is
independent. Even though such men or leaders rebel so as not to recognize the
supremacy of the Lord, they are put under still more rigorous laws of the
material world by different miseries. Only the foolish man, therefore, says that
there is no God. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was being convinced of this naked
truth because he was greatly overwhelmed by the sudden departure of his old
uncles and aunt. Mahäräja Dhåtaräñöra was placed in that position according
to his past deeds; he had already suffered or enjoyed the benefits accrued to
him in the past, but due to his good luck, somehow or other he had a good
younger brother, Vidura, and by his instruction he left to achieve salvation by
closing all accounts in the material world.
Ordinarily one cannot change the course of one’s due happiness and
distress by plan. Everyone has to accept them as they come under the subtle
arrangement of käla, or invincible time. There is no use trying to counteract
them. The best thing is, therefore, that one should endeavor to achieve
salvation, and this prerogative is given only to man because of his developed
condition of mental activities and intelligence. Only for man are there
different Vedic instructions for attainment of salvation during the human
form of existence. One who misuses this opportunity of advanced intelligence
is verily condemned and put into different types of miseries, either in this
present life or in the future. That is the way the Supreme controls everyone.
TEXT 42
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
YaQaa Gaavae NaiSa Pa[aeTaaSTaNTYaa& bÖaê daMai>a" )
va¢-NTYaa& NaaMai>abRÖa vhiNTa bil/MaqiXaTau" )) 42 ))
yathä gävo nasi protäs
tantyäà baddhäç ca dämabhiù
väk-tantyäà nämabhir baddhä
vahanti balim éçituù
SYNONYMS
yathä—as much as; gävaù—cow; nasi—by the nose; protäù—strung;
tantyäm—by the thread; baddhäù—bound by; ca—also; dämabhiù—by ropes;
väk-tantyäm—in the network of Vedic hymns; nämabhiù—by nomenclatures;
baddhäù—conditioned; vahanti—carry on; balim—orders; éçituù—for being
controlled by the Supreme Lord.
TRANSLATION
As a cow, bound through the nose by a long rope, is conditioned, so also
human beings are bound by different Vedic injunctions and are conditioned to
obey the orders of the Supreme.
PURPORT
Every living being, whether a man or an animal or a bird, thinks that he is
free by himself, but actually no one is free from the severe laws of the Lord.
The laws of the Lord are severe because they cannot be disobeyed in any
circumstance. The man-made laws may be evaded by cunning outlaws, but in
the codes of the supreme lawmaker there is not the slightest possibility of
neglecting the laws. A slight change in the course of God-made law can bring
about a massive danger to be faced by the lawbreaker. Such laws of the
Supreme are generally known as the codes of religion, under different
conditions, but the principle of religion everywhere is one and the same,
namely, obey the orders of the Supreme God, the codes of religion. That is the
condition of material existence. All living beings in the material world have
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
taken up the risk of conditioned life by their own selection and are thus
entrapped by the laws of material nature. The only way to get out of the
entanglement is to agree to obey the Supreme. But instead of becoming free
from the clutches of mäyä, or illusion, foolish human beings become bound up
by different nomenclatures, being designated as brähmaëas, kñatriyas, vaiçyas,
çüdras, Hindus, Mohammedans, Indians, Europeans, Americans, Chinese, and
many others, and thus they carry out the orders of the Supreme Lord under
the influence of respective scriptural or legislative injunctions. The statutory
laws of the state are imperfect imitation replicas of religious codes. The secular
state, or the godless state, allows the citizens to break the laws of God, but
restricts them from disobeying the laws of the state; the result is that the
people in general suffer more by breaking the laws of God than by obeying the
imperfect laws made by man. Every man is imperfect by constitution under
conditions of material existence, and there is not the least possibility that even
the most materially advanced man can enact perfect legislation. On the other
hand, there is no such imperfection in the laws of God. If leaders are educated
in the laws of God, there is no necessity of a makeshift legislative council of
aimless men. There is necessity of change in the makeshift laws of man, but
there is no change in the God-made laws because they are made perfect by the
all-perfect Personality of Godhead. The codes of religion, scriptural
injunctions, are made by liberated representatives of God in consideration of
different conditions of living, and by carrying out the orders of the Lord, the
conditioned living beings gradually become free from the clutches of material
existence. The factual position of the living being is, however, that he is the
eternal servitor of the Supreme Lord. In his liberated state he renders service
to the Lord in transcendental love and thus enjoys a life of full freedom, even
sometimes on an equal level with the Lord or sometimes more than the Lord.
But in the conditioned material world, every living being wants to be the Lord
of other living beings, and thus by the illusion of mäyä this mentality of
lording it over becomes a cause of further extension of conditional life. So in
the material world the living being is still more conditioned, until he
surrenders unto the Lord by reviving his original state of eternal servitorship.
That is the last instruction of the Bhagavad-gétä and all other recognized
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
scriptures of the world.
TEXT 43
YaQaa §-I@aePaSk-ra<aa& Sa&YaaeGaivGaMaaivh )
wC^Yaa §-Ii@Tau" SYaaTaa& TaQaEveXaeC^Yaa Na*<aaMa( )) 43 ))
yathä kréòopaskaräëäà
saàyoga-vigamäv iha
icchayä kréòituù syätäà
tathaiveçecchayä nåëäm
SYNONYMS
yathä—as much as; kréòa-upaskaräëäm—playthings; saàyoga—union;
vigamau—disunion; iha—in this world; icchayä—by the will of; kréòituù—just
to play a part; syätäm—takes place; tathä—so also; eva—certainly; éça—the
Supreme Lord; icchayä—by the will of; nåëäm—of the human beings.
TRANSLATION
As a player sets up and disperses his playthings according to his own sweet
will, so the supreme will of the Lord brings men together and separates them.
PURPORT
We must know for certain that the particular position in which we are now
set up is an arrangement of the supreme will in terms of our own acts in the
past. The Supreme Lord is present as the localized Paramätmä in the heart of
every living being, as it is said in the Bhagavad-gétä (13.23), and therefore he
knows everything of our activities in every stage of our lives. He rewards the
reactions of our actions by placing us in some particular place. A rich man gets
his son born with a silver spoon in his mouth, but the child who came as the
rich man’s son deserved such a place, and therefore he is placed there by the
will of the Lord. And at a particular moment when the child has to be removed
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
from that place, he is also carried by the will of the Supreme, even if the child
or the father does not wish to be separated from the happy relation. The same
thing happens in the case of a poor man also. Neither rich man nor poor man
has any control over such meetings or separations of living beings. The
example of a player and his playthings should not be misunderstood. One may
argue that since the Lord is bound to award the reactionary results of our own
actions, the example of a player cannot be applied. But it is not so. We must
always remember that the Lord is the supreme will, and He is not bound by any
law. Generally the law of karma is that one is awarded the result of one’s own
actions, but in special cases, by the will of the Lord, such resultant actions are
changed also. But this change can be affected by the will of the Lord only, and
no other. Therefore, the example of the player cited in this verse is quite
appropriate, for the Supreme Will is absolutely free to do whatever He likes,
and because He is all-perfect, there is no mistake in any of His actions or
reactions. These changes of resultant actions are especially rendered by the
Lord when a pure devotee is involved. It is assured in the Bhagavad-gétä
(9.30–31) that the Lord saves a pure devotee who has surrendered unto Him
without reservation from all sorts of reactions of sins, and there is no doubt
about this. There are hundreds of examples of reactions changed by the Lord
in the history of the world. If the Lord is able to change the reactions of one’s
past deeds, then certainly He is not Himself bound by any action or reaction of
His own deeds. He is perfect and transcendental to all laws.
TEXT 44
YaNMaNYaSae Da]uv& l/aek-MaDa]uv& va Na cae>aYaMa( )
SavRQaa Na ih XaaeCYaaSTae òehadNYa}a MaaehJaaTa( )) 44 ))
yan manyase dhruvaà lokam
adhruvaà vä na cobhayam
sarvathä na hi çocyäs te
snehäd anyatra mohajät
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
yat—even though; manyase—you think; dhruvam—Absolute Truth;
lokam—persons; adhruvam—nonreality; vä—either; na—or not; ca—also;
ubhayam—or both; sarvathä—in all circumstances; na—never; hi—certainly;
çocyäù—subject for lamentation; te—they; snehät—due to affection;
anyatra—or otherwise; moha-jät—due to bewilderment.
TRANSLATION
O King, in all circumstances, whether you consider the soul to be an eternal
principle, or the material body to be perishable, or everything to exist in the
impersonal Absolute Truth, or everything to be an inexplicable combination of
matter and spirit, feelings of separation are due only to illusory affection and
nothing more.
PURPORT
The actual fact is that every living being is an individual part and parcel of
the Supreme Being, and his constitutional position is subordinate cooperative
service. Either in his conditional material existence or in his liberated position
of full knowledge and eternity, the living entity is eternally under the control
of the Supreme Lord. But those who are not conversant with factual
knowledge put forward many speculative propositions about the real position
of the living entity. It is admitted, however, by all schools of philosophy, that
the living being is eternal and that the covering body of the five material
elements is perishable and temporary. The eternal living entity transmigrates
from one material body to another by the law of karma, and material bodies are
perishable by their fundamental structures. Therefore there is nothing to be
lamented in the case of the soul’s being transferred into another body, or the
material body’s perishing at a certain stage. There are others also who believe
in the merging of the spirit soul in the Supreme Spirit when it is uncovered by
the material encagement, and there are others also who do not believe in the
existence of spirit or soul, but believe in tangible matter. In our daily
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
experience we find so many transformations of matter from one form to
another, but we do not lament such changing features. In either of the above
cases, the force of divine energy is uncheckable; no one has any hand in it, and
thus there is no cause of grief.
TEXT 45
TaSMaaÂù® vE©-VYaMajaNak*-TaMaaTMaNa" )
k-Qa& TvNaaQaa" k*-Pa<aa vTaeRr&STae c Maa& ivNaa )) 45 ))
tasmäj jahy aìga vaiklavyam
ajïäna-kåtam ätmanaù
kathaà tv anäthäù kåpaëä
varteraàs te ca mäà vinä
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; jahi—give up; aìga—O King; vaiklavyam—mental
disparity; ajïäna—ignorance; kåtam—due to; ätmanaù—of yourself;
katham—how; tu—but; anäthäù—helpless; kåpaëäù—poor creatures;
varteran—be able to survive; te—they; ca—also; mäm—me; vinä—without.
TRANSLATION
Therefore give up your anxiety due to ignorance of the self. You are now
thinking of how they, who are helpless poor creatures, will exist without you.
PURPORT
When we think of our kith and kin as being helpless and dependent on us,
it is all due to ignorance. Every living creature is allowed all protection by the
order of the Supreme Lord in terms of each one’s acquired position in the
world. The Lord is known as bhüta-bhåt, one who gives protection to all living
beings. One should discharge his duties only, for no one but the Supreme Lord
can give protection to anyone else. This is explained more clearly in the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
following verse.
TEXT 46
k-al/k-MaRGau<aaDaqNaae dehae_Ya& PaaÄ>aaEiTak-" )
k-QaMaNYaa&STau GaaePaaYaeTSaPaRGa]STaae YaQaa ParMa( )) 46 ))
käla-karma-guëädhéno
deho ’yaà päïca-bhautikaù
katham anyäàs tu gopäyet
sarpa-grasto yathä param
SYNONYMS
käla—eternal time; karma—action; guëa—modes of nature; adhénaù—under
the control of; dehaù—material body and mind; ayam—this;
päïca-bhautikaù—made of the five elements; katham—how; anyän—others;
tu—but; gopäyet—give protection; sarpa-grastaù—one who is bitten by the
snake; yathä—as much as; param—others.
TRANSLATION
This gross material body made of five elements is already under the control
of eternal time [käla], action [karma] and the modes of material nature [guëa].
How, then, can it, being already in the jaws of the serpent, protect others?
PURPORT
The world’s movements for freedom through political, economic, social, and
cultural propaganda can do no benefit to anyone, for they are controlled by
superior power. A conditioned living being is under the full control of material
nature, represented by eternal time and activities under the dictation of
different modes of nature. There are three material modes of nature, namely
goodness, passion and ignorance. Unless one is situated in the mode of
goodness, one cannot see things as they are. The passionate and the ignorant
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
cannot even see things as they are. Therefore a person who is passionate and
ignorant cannot direct his activities on the right path. Only the man in the
quality of goodness can help to a certain extent. Most persons are passionate
and ignorant, and therefore their plans and projects can hardly do any good to
others. Above the modes of nature is eternal time, which is called käla because
it changes the shape of everything in the material world. Even if we are able to
do something temporarily beneficial, time will see that the good project is
frustrated in course of time. The only thing possible to be done is to get rid of
eternal time, käla, which is compared to käla-sarpa, or the cobra snake, whose
bite is always lethal. No one can be saved from the bite of a cobra. The best
remedy for getting out of the clutches of the cobralike käla or its integrity, the
modes of nature, is bhakti-yoga, as it is recommended in the Bhagavad-gétä
(14.26). The highest perfectional project of philanthropic activities is to
engage everyone in the act of preaching bhakti-yoga all over the world because
that alone can save the people from the control of mäyä, or the material nature
represented by käla, karma and guëa, as described above. The Bhagavad-gétä
(14.26) confirms this definitely.
TEXT 47
AhSTaaiNa SahSTaaNaaMaPadaiNa cTauZPadaMa( )
f-LGaUiNa Ta}a MahTaa& Jaqvae JaqvSYa JaqvNaMa( )) 47 ))
ahastäni sahastänäm
apadäni catuñ-padäm
phalgüni tatra mahatäà
jévo jévasya jévanam
SYNONYMS
ahastäni—those who are devoid of hands; sa-hastänäm—of those who are
endowed with hands; apadäni—those who are devoid of legs; catuù-padäm—of
those who have four legs; phalgüni—those who are weak; tatra—there;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
mahatäm—of the powerful; jévaù—the living being; jévasya—of the living
being; jévanam—subsistence.
TRANSLATION
Those who are devoid of hands are prey for those who have hands; those
devoid of legs are prey for the four-legged. The weak are the subsistence of the
strong, and the general rule holds that one living being is food for another.
PURPORT
A systematic law of subsistence in the struggle for existence is there by the
supreme will, and there is no escape for anyone by any amount of planning.
The living beings who have come to the material world against the will of the
Supreme Being are under the control of a supreme power called mäyä-çakti,
the deputed agent of the Lord, and this daivé mäyä is meant to pinch the
conditioned souls by threefold miseries, one of which is explained here in this
verse: the weak are the subsistence of the strong. No one is strong enough to
protect himself from the onslaught of a stronger, and by the will of the Lord
there are systematic categories of the weak, the stronger and the strongest.
There is nothing to be lamented if a tiger eats a weaker animal, including a
man, because that is the law of the Supreme Lord. But although the law states
that a human being must subsist on another living being, there is the law of
good sense also, for the human being is meant to obey the laws of the
scriptures. This is impossible for other animals. The human being is meant for
self-realization, and for that purpose he is not to eat anything which is not first
offered to the Lord. The Lord accepts from His devotee all kinds of food
preparations made of vegetables, fruits, leaves and grains. Fruits, leaves and
milk in different varieties can be offered to the Lord, and after the Lord
accepts the foodstuff, the devotee can partake of the prasäda, by which all
suffering in the struggle for existence will be gradually mitigated. This is
confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä (9.26). Even those who are accustomed to eat
animals can offer foodstuff, not to the Lord directly, but to an agent of the
Lord, under certain conditions of religious rites. Injunctions of the scriptures
are meant not to encourage the eaters of animals, but to restrict them by
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
regulated principles.
The living being is the source of subsistence for other, stronger living
beings. No one should be very anxious for his subsistence in any circumstances
because there are living beings everywhere, and no living being starves for
want of food at any place. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira is advised by Närada not to
worry about his uncles’ suffering for want of food, for they could live on
vegetables available in the jungles as prasäda of the Supreme Lord and thus
realize the path of salvation.
Exploitation of the weaker living being by the stronger is the natural law of
existence; there is always an attempt to devour the weak in different kingdoms
of living beings. There is no possibility of checking this tendency by any
artificial means under material conditions; it can be checked only by
awakening the spiritual sense of the human being by practice of spiritual
regulations. The spiritual regulative principles, however, do not allow a man to
slaughter weaker animals on one side and teach others peaceful coexistence. If
man does not allow the animals peaceful coexistence, how can he expect
peaceful existence in human society? The blind leaders must therefore
understand the Supreme Being and then try to implement the kingdom of
God. The kingdom of God, or Räma-räjya, is impossible without the awakening
of God consciousness in the mass mind of the people of the world.
TEXT 48
Taidd& >aGavaNa( raJaàek- AaTMaaTMaNaa& Svd*k(- )
ANTarae_NaNTarae >aaiTa PaXYa Ta& MaaYaYaaeåDaa )) 48 ))
tad idaà bhagavän räjann
eka ätmätmanäà sva-dåk
antaro ’nantaro bhäti
paçya taà mäyayorudhä
SYNONYMS
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
tat—therefore; idam—this manifestation; bhagavän—the Personality of
Godhead; räjan—O King; ekaù—one without a second; ätmä—the Supersoul;
ätmanäm—by His energies; sva-dåk—qualitatively like Him;
antaraù—without; anantaraù—within and by Himself; bhäti—so manifests;
paçya—look; tam—unto Him only; mäyayä—by manifestations of different
energies; urudhä—appears to be many.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O King, you should look to the Supreme Lord only, who is one
without a second and who manifests Himself by different energies and is both
within and without.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord Personality of Godhead is one without a second, but He
manifests Himself by different energies because He is by nature blissful. The
living beings are also manifestations of His marginal energy, qualitatively one
with the Lord, and there are innumerable living beings both within and
without the external and internal energies of the Lord. Since the spiritual
world is a manifestation of the Lord’s internal energy, the living beings within
that internal potency are qualitatively one with the Lord without
contamination from the external potency. Although qualitatively one with the
Lord, the living being, due to contamination of the material world, is
pervertedly manifested, and therefore he experiences so-called happiness and
distress in the material world. Such experiences are all ephemeral and do not
affect the spirit soul. The perception of such ephemeral happiness and distress
is due only to the forgetfulness of his qualities, which are equal to the Lord’s.
There is, however, a regular current from the Lord Himself, from within and
without, by which to rectify the fallen condition of the living being. From
within He corrects the desiring living beings as localized Paramätmä, and from
without He corrects by His manifestations, the spiritual master and the
revealed scriptures. One should look unto the Lord; one should not be
disturbed by the so-called manifestations of happiness or distress, but he should
try to cooperate with the Lord in His outward activities for correcting the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
fallen souls. By His order only, one should become a spiritual master and
cooperate with the Lord. One should not become a spiritual master for one’s
personal benefit, for some material gain or as an avenue of business or
occupation for earning livelihood. Bona fide spiritual masters who look unto
the Supreme Lord to cooperate with Him are actually qualitatively one with
the Lord, and the forgetful ones are perverted reflections only. Yudhiñöhira
Mahäräja is advised by Närada, therefore, not to be disturbed by the affairs of
so-called happiness and distress, but to look only unto the Lord to execute the
mission for which the Lord has descended. That was his prime duty.
TEXT 49
Saae_YaMaÛ MaharaJa >aGavaNa( >aUTa>aavNa" )
k-al/æPaae_vTaq<aaeR_SYaaMa>aavaYa SauriÜzaMa( )) 49 ))
so ’yam adya mahäräja
bhagavän bhüta-bhävanaù
käla-rüpo ’vatérëo ’syäm
abhäväya sura-dviñäm
SYNONYMS
saù—that Supreme Lord; ayam—the Lord Çré Kåñëa; adya—at present;
mahäräja—O King; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead;
bhüta-bhävanaù—the creator or the father of everything created;
käla-rüpaù—in the disguise of all-devouring time; avatérëaù—descended;
asyäm—upon the world; abhäväya—for eliminating; sura-dviñäm—those who
are against the will of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
That Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Çré Kåñëa, in the guise of
all-devouring time [käla-rüpa] has now descended on earth to eliminate the
envious from the world.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
There are two classes of human beings, namely the envious and the
obedient. Since the Supreme Lord is one and the father of all living beings, the
envious living beings are also His sons, but they are known as the asuras. But
the living beings who are obedient to the supreme father are called devatäs, or
demigods, because they are not contaminated by the material conception of
life. Not only are the asuras envious of the Lord in even denying the existence
of the Lord, but they are also envious of all other living beings. The
predominance of asuras in the world is occasionally rectified by the Lord when
He eliminates them from the world and establishes a rule of devatäs like the
Päëòavas. His designation as käla in disguise is significant. He is not at all
dangerous, but He is the transcendental form of eternity, knowledge and bliss.
For the devotees His factual form is disclosed, and for the nondevotees He
appears like käla-rüpa, which is causal form. This causal form of the Lord is not
at all pleasing to the asuras, and therefore they think of the Lord as formless in
order to feel secure that they will not be vanquished by the Lord.
TEXT 50
iNaZPaaidTa& devk*-TYaMavXaez& Pa[Taq+aTae )
Taavd( YaUYaMave+aß& >aved( Yaavidheìr" )) 50 ))
niñpäditaà deva-kåtyam
avaçeñaà pratékñate
tävad yüyam avekñadhvaà
bhaved yävad iheçvaraù
SYNONYMS
niñpäditam—performed; deva-kåtyam—what was to be done on behalf of the
demigods; avaçeñam—the rest; pratékñate—being awaited; tävat—up to that
time; yüyam—all of you Päëòavas; avekñadhvam—observe and wait;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
bhavet—may; yävat—as long as; iha—in this world; éçvaraù—the Supreme
Lord.
TRANSLATION
The Lord has already performed His duties to help the demigods, and He is
awaiting the rest. You Päëòavas may wait as long as the Lord is here on earth.
PURPORT
The Lord descends from His abode (Kåñëaloka), the topmost planet in the
spiritual sky, in order to help the demigod administrators of this material world
when they are greatly vexed by the asuras, who are envious not only of the
Lord but also of His devotees. As referred to above, the conditioned living
beings contact material association by their own choice, dictated by a strong
desire to lord it over the resources of the material world and become imitation
lords of all they survey. Everyone is trying to become an imitation God; there
is keen competition amongst such imitation gods, and such competitors are
generally known as asuras. When there are too many asuras in the world, then
it becomes a hell for those who are devotees of the Lord. Due to the growth of
the asuras, the mass of people who are generally devoted to the Lord by nature
and the pure devotees of the Lord, including the demigods in higher planets,
pray to the Lord for relief, and the Lord either descends personally from His
abode or deputes some of His devotees to remodel the fallen condition of
human society, or even animal society. Such disruptions take place not only in
human society but also among animals, birds or other living beings, including
the demigods in the higher planets. Lord Çré Kåñëa descended personally to
vanquish asuras like Kaàsa, Jaräsandha and Çiçupäla, and during the reign of
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira almost all these asuras were killed by the Lord. Now he
was awaiting the annihilation of His own dynasty, called the Yadu-vaàça, who
appeared by His will in this world. He wanted to take them away before His
own departure to His eternal abode. Närada, like Vidura, did not disclose the
imminent annihilation of the Yadu dynasty, but indirectly gave a hint to the
King and his brothers to wait till the incident happened and the Lord
departed.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 51
Da*Taraí\" Sah >a]a}aa GaaNDaaYaaR c Sv>aaYaRYaa )
di+a<aeNa ihMavTa ‰zq<aaMaaé[Ma& GaTa" )) 51 ))
dhåtaräñöraù saha bhräträ
gändhäryä ca sva-bhäryayä
dakñiëena himavata
åñéëäm äçramaà gataù
SYNONYMS
dhåtaräñöraù—Dhåtaräñöra; saha—along with; bhräträ—his brother Vidura;
gändhäryä—Gändhäré also; ca—and; sva-bhäryayä—his own wife;
dakñiëena—by the southern side; himavataù—of the Himalaya Mountains;
åñéëäm—of the åñis; äçramam—in shelter; gataù—he has gone.
TRANSLATION
O King, your uncle Dhåtaräñöra, his brother Vidura and his wife Gändhäré
have gone to the southern side of the Himalaya Mountains, where there are
shelters of the great sages.
PURPORT
To pacify the mourning Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, Närada first of all spoke
from the philosophical point of view, and then he began to describe the future
movements of his uncle, which he could see by his foreseeing powers, and thus
began to describe as follows.
TEXT 52
óaeTaaei>a" Saái>aYaaR vE SvDauRNaq SaáDaa VYaDaaTa( )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SaáaNaa& Pa[qTaYae NaaNaa SaáóaeTa" Pa[c+aTae )) 52 ))
srotobhiù saptabhir yä vai
svardhuné saptadhä vyadhät
saptänäà prétaye nänä
sapta-srotaù pracakñate
SYNONYMS
srotobhiù—by currents; saptabhiù—by seven (divisions); yä—the river;
vai—certainly; svardhuné—the sacred Ganges; saptadhä—seven branches;
vyadhät—created; saptänäm—of the seven; prétaye—for the satisfaction of;
nänä—various; sapta-srotaù—seven sources; pracakñate—known by name.
TRANSLATION
The place is called Saptasrota [“divided by seven”] because there the waters
of the sacred Ganges were divided into seven branches. This was done for the
satisfaction of the seven great åñis.
TEXT 53
òaTvaNauSavNa& TaiSMaNhuTva caGanqNYaQaaiviDa )
AB>a+a oPaXaaNTaaTMaa Sa AaSTae ivGaTaEz<a" )) 53 ))
snätvänusavanaà tasmin
hutvä cägnén yathä-vidhi
ab-bhakña upaçäntätmä
sa äste vigataiñaëaù
SYNONYMS
snätvä—by taking bath; anusavanam—regularly three times (morning, noon
and evening); tasmin—in that Ganges divided into seven; hutvä—by
performing the Agni-hotra sacrifice; ca—also; agnén—in the fire;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
yathä-vidhi—just according to the tenets of the scripture; ap-bhakñaù—fasting
by drinking only water; upaçänta—completely controlled; ätmä—the gross
senses and the subtle mind; saù—Dhåtaräñöra; äste—would be situated;
vigata—devoid of; eñaëaù—thoughts in relation with family welfare.
TRANSLATION
On the banks at Saptasrota, Dhåtaräñöra is now engaged in beginning
añöäìga-yoga by bathing three times daily, in the morning, noon and evening, by
performing the Agni-hotra sacrifice with fire and by drinking only water. This
helps one control the mind and the senses and frees one completely from
thoughts of familial affection.
PURPORT
The yoga system is a mechanical way to control the senses and the mind
and divert them from matter to spirit. The preliminary processes are the sitting
posture, meditation, spiritual thoughts, manipulation of air passing within the
body, and gradual situation in trance, facing the Absolute Person, Paramätmä.
Such mechanical ways of rising to the spiritual platform prescribe some
regulative principles of taking bath daily three times, fasting as far as possible,
sitting and concentrating the mind on spiritual matters and thus gradually
becoming free from viñaya, or material objectives. Material existence means to
be absorbed in the material objective, which is simply illusory. House, country,
family, society, children, property, and business are some of the material
coverings of the spirit, ätmä, and the yoga system helps one to become free
from all these illusory thoughts and gradually turn towards the Absolute
Person, Paramätmä. By material association and education, we learn simply to
concentrate on flimsy things, but yoga is the process of forgetting them
altogether. Modern so-called yogés and yoga systems manifest some magical
feats, and ignorant persons are attracted by such false things, or they accept
the yoga system as a cheap healing process for diseases of the gross body. But
factually the yoga system is the process of learning to forget what we have
acquired throughout the struggle for existence. Dhåtaräñöra was all along
engaged in improving family affairs by raising the standard of living of his sons
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
or by usurping the property of the Päëòavas for the sake of his own sons. These
are common affairs for a man grossly materialistic and without knowledge of
the spiritual force. He does not see how this can drag one from heaven to hell.
By the grace of his younger brother Vidura, Dhåtaräñöra was enlightened and
could see his grossly illusory engagements, and by such enlightenment he was
able to leave home for spiritual realization. Çré Näradadeva was just foretelling
the way of his spiritual progress in a place which was sanctified by the flow of
the celestial Ganges. Drinking water only, without solid food, is also
considered fasting. This is necessary for advancement of spiritual knowledge.
A foolish man wants to be a cheap yogé without observing the regulative
principles. A man who has no control over the tongue at first can hardly
become a yogé. Yogé and bhogé are two opposite terms. The bhogé, or the merry
man who eats and drinks, cannot be a yogé, for a yogé is never allowed to eat
and drink unrestrictedly. We may note with profit how Dhåtaräñöra began his
yoga system by drinking water only and sitting calmly in a place with a
spiritual atmosphere, deeply absorbed in the thoughts of the Lord Hari, the
Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 54
iJaTaaSaNaae iJaTaìaSa" Pa[TYaaôTazi@iNd]Ya" )
hir>aavNaYaa ßSTarJa"SatvTaMaaeMal/" )) 54 ))
jitäsano jita-çväsaù
pratyähåta-ñaò-indriyaù
hari-bhävanayä dhvastarajaù-
sattva-tamo-malaù
SYNONYMS
jita-äsanaù—one who has controlled the sitting posture; jita-çväsaù—one who
has controlled the breathing process; pratyähåta—turning back; ñaö—six;
indriyaù—senses; hari—the Absolute Personality of Godhead;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
bhävanayä—absorbed in; dhvasta—conquered; rajaù—passion;
sattva—goodness; tamaù—ignorance; malaù—contaminations.
TRANSLATION
One who has controlled the sitting postures [the yogic äsanas] and the
breathing process can turn the senses toward the Absolute Personality of
Godhead and thus become immune to the contaminations of the modes of
material nature, namely mundane goodness, passion and ignorance.
PURPORT
The preliminary activities of the way of yoga are äsana, präëäyäma,
pratyähära, dhyäna, dhäraëä, etc. Mahäräja Dhåtaräñöra was to attain success in
those preliminary actions because he was seated in a sanctified place and was
concentrating upon one objective, namely the Supreme Personality of
Godhead (Hari). Thus all his senses were being engaged in the service of the
Lord. This process directly helps the devotee to get freedom from the
contaminations of the three material modes of nature. Even the highest mode,
the material mode of goodness, is also a cause of material bondage, and what to
speak of the other qualities, namely passion and ignorance. Passion and
ignorance increase the material propensities of hankering for material
enjoyment, and a strong sense of lust provokes the accumulation of wealth and
power. One who has conquered these two base mentalities and has raised
himself to the platform of goodness, which is full of knowledge and morality,
cannot also control the senses, namely the eyes, the tongue, the nose, the ear
and touch. But one who has surrendered himself unto the lotus feet of Lord
Hari, as above mentioned, can transcend all influences of the modes of
material nature and be fixed in the service of the Lord. The bhakti-yoga
process, therefore, directly applies the senses to the loving service of the Lord.
This prohibits the performer from engaging in material activities. This process
of turning the senses from material attachment to the loving transcendental
service of the Lord is called pratyähära, and the very process is called
präëäyäma, ultimately ending in samädhi, or absorption in pleasing the
Supreme Lord Hari by all means.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 55
ivjaNaaTMaiNa Sa&YaaeJYa +ae}aje Pa[ivl/aPYa TaMa( )
b]ø<YaaTMaaNaMaaDaare ga$=aMbriMavaMbre )) 55 ))
vijïänätmani saàyojya
kñetrajïe praviläpya tam
brahmaëy ätmänam ädhäre
ghaöämbaram ivämbare
SYNONYMS
vijïäna—purified identity; ätmani—in intelligence; saàyojya—perfectly
fixing; kñetra-jïe—in the matter of the living being; praviläpya—merging;
tam—him; brahmaëi—in the Supreme; ätmänam—pure living being;
ädhäre—in the reservoir; ghaöa-ambaram—sky within the block; iva—like;
ambare—in the supreme sky.
TRANSLATION
Dhåtaräñöra will have to amalgamate his pure identity with intelligence and
then merge into the Supreme Being with knowledge of his qualitative oneness,
as a living entity, with the Supreme Brahman. Being freed from the blocked
sky, he will have to rise to the spiritual sky.
PURPORT
The living being, by his desiring to lord it over the material world and
declining to cooperate with the Supreme Lord, contacts the sum total of the
material world, namely the mahat-tattva, and from the mahat-tattva his false
identity with the material world, intelligence, mind and senses is developed.
This covers his pure spiritual identity. By the yogic process, when his pure
identity is realized in self-realization, one has to revert to the original position
by amalgamating the five gross elements and the subtle elements, mind and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
intelligence, into the mahat-tattva again. Thus getting freed from the clutches
of the mahat-tattva, he has to merge in the existence of the Supersoul. In other
words, he has to realize that qualitatively he is nondifferent from the
Supersoul, and thus he transcends the material sky by his pure identical
intelligence and thus becomes engaged in the transcendental loving service of
the Lord. This is the highest perfectional development of spiritual identity,
which was attained by Dhåtaräñöra by the grace of Vidura and the Lord. The
Lord’s mercy was bestowed upon him by his personal contact with Vidura, and
when he was actually practicing the instructions of Vidura, the Lord helped
him to attain the highest perfectional stage.
A pure devotee of the Lord does not live on any planet of the material sky,
nor does he feel any contact with material elements. His so-called material
body does not exist, being surcharged with the spiritual current of the Lord’s
identical interest, and thus he is permanently freed from all contaminations of
the sum total of the mahat-tattva. He is always in the spiritual sky, which he
attains by being transcendental to the sevenfold material covering by the
effect of his devotional service. The conditioned souls are within the
coverings, whereas the liberated soul is far beyond the cover.
TEXT 56
ßSTaMaaYaaGau<aaedk-aeR iNaåÖk-r<aaXaYa" )
iNaviTaRTaai%l/ahar AaSTae SQaa<auirvacl/" )
TaSYaaNTaraYaae MaEva>aU" Sa&NYaSTaai%l/k-MaR<a" )) 56 ))
dhvasta-mäyä-guëodarko
niruddha-karaëäçayaù
nivartitäkhilähära
äste sthäëur iväcalaù
tasyäntaräyo maiväbhüù
sannyastäkhila-karmaëaù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
dhvasta—being destroyed; mäyä-guëa—the modes of material nature;
udarkaù—after effects; niruddha—being suspended; karaëa-äçayaù—the
senses and the mind; nivartita—stopped; akhila—all; ähäraù—food for the
senses; äste—is sitting; sthäëuù—immovable; iva—like; acalaù—fixed;
tasya—his; antaräyaù—hindrances; mä eva—never like that; abhüù—be;
sannyasta—renounced; akhila—all sorts; karmaëaù—material duties.
TRANSLATION
He will have to suspend all the actions of the senses, even from the outside,
and will have to be impervious to interactions of the senses, which are
influenced by the modes of material nature. After renouncing all material
duties, he must become immovably established, beyond all sources of hindrances
on the path.
PURPORT
Dhåtaräñöra had attained, by the yogic process, the stage of negation of all
sorts of material reaction. The effects of the material modes of nature draw the
victim to indefatigable desires of enjoying matter, but one can escape such
false enjoyment by the yogic process. Every sense is always busy in searching
for its food, and thus the conditioned soul is assaulted from all sides and has no
chance to become steady in any pursuit. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was advised by
Närada not to disturb his uncle by attempting to bring him back home. He was
now beyond the attraction of anything material. The material modes of nature
(the guëas) have their different modes of activities, but above the material
modes of nature is a spiritual mode, which is absolute. Nirguëa means without
reaction. The spiritual mode and its effect are identical; therefore the spiritual
quality is distinguished from its material counterpart by the word nirguëa.
After complete suspension of the material modes of nature, one is admitted to
the spiritual sphere, and action dictated by the spiritual modes is called
devotional service, or bhakti. Bhakti is therefore nirguëa attained by direct
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
contact with the Absolute.
TEXT 57
Sa va AÛTaNaad( raJaNa( ParTa" PaÄMae_hiNa )
k-le/vr& haSYaiTa Sv& TaÀ >aSMaq>aivZYaiTa )) 57 ))
sa vä adyatanäd räjan
parataù païcame ’hani
kalevaraà häsyati svaà
tac ca bhasmé-bhaviñyati
SYNONYMS
saù—he; vä—in all probability; adya—today; tanät—from; räjan—O King;
parataù—ahead; païcame—on the fifth; ahani—day; kalevaram—body;
häsyati—shall quit; svam—his own; tat—that; ca—also; bhasmé—ashes;
bhaviñyati—will turn into.
TRANSLATION
O King, he will quit his body, most probably on the fifth day from today.
And his body will turn to ashes.
PURPORT
Närada Muni’s prophecy prohibited Yudhiñöhira Mahäräja from going to
the place where his uncle was staying because even after quitting the body by
his own mystic power, Dhåtaräñöra would not be in need of any funeral
ceremony; Närada Muni indicated that his body by itself would burn to ashes.
The perfection of the yoga system is attained by such mystic power. The yogé is
able to quit his body by his own choice of time and can attain any planet he
desires by turning the present body into ashes by self-made fire.
TEXT 58
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
dùMaaNae_iGani>adeRhe PaTYau" PaÒq Sahae$=Jae )
bih" iSQaTaa PaiTa& Saaßq TaMaiGanMaNau ve+YaiTa )) 58 ))
dahyamäne ’gnibhir dehe
patyuù patné sahoöaje
bahiù sthitä patià sädhvé
tam agnim anu vekñyati
SYNONYMS
dahyamäne—while it is burning; agnibhiù—by the fire; dehe—the body;
patyuù—of the husband; patné—the wife; saha-uöaje—along with the thatched
cottage; bahiù—outside; sthitä—situated; patim—unto the husband;
sädhvé—the chaste lady; tam—that; agnim—fire; anu vekñyati—looking with
great attention will enter the fire.
TRANSLATION
While outside observing her husband, who will burn in the fire of mystic
power along with his thatched cottage, his chaste wife will enter the fire with
rapt attention.
PURPORT
Gändhäré was an ideal chaste lady, a life companion of her husband, and
therefore when she saw her husband burning in the fire of mystic yoga along
with his cottage of leaves, she despaired. She left home after losing her one
hundred sons, and in the forest she saw that her most beloved husband was
also burning. Now she actually felt alone, and therefore she entered the fire of
her husband and followed her husband to death. This entering of a chaste lady
into the fire of her dead husband is called the saté rite, and the action is
considered to be most perfect for a woman. In a later age, this saté rite became
an obnoxious criminal affair because the ceremony was forced upon even an
unwilling woman. In this fallen age it is not possible for any lady to follow the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
saté rite as chastely as it was done by Gändhäré and others in past ages. A
chaste wife like Gändhäré would feel the separation of her husband to be more
burning than actual fire. Such a lady can observe the saté rite voluntarily, and
there is no criminal force by anyone. When the rite became a formality only
and force was applied upon a lady to follow the principle, actually it became
criminal, and therefore the ceremony was to be stopped by state law. This
prophecy of Närada Muni to Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira forbade him to go to his
widowed aunt.
TEXT 59
ivdurSTau TadaêYa| iNaXaaMYa ku-åNaNdNa )
hzRXaaek-YauTaSTaSMaad( GaNTaa TaqQaRiNazevk-" )) 59 ))
viduras tu tad äçcaryaà
niçämya kuru-nandana
harña-çoka-yutas tasmäd
gantä tértha-niñevakaù
SYNONYMS
viduraù—Vidura also; tu—but; tat—that incident; äçcaryam—wonderful;
niçämya—seeing; kuru-nandana—O son of the Kuru dynasty; harña—delight;
çoka—grief; yutaù—affected by; tasmät—from that place; gantä—will go away;
tértha—place of pilgrimage; niñevakaù—for being enlivened.
TRANSLATION
Vidura, being affected with delight and grief, will then leave that place of
sacred pilgrimage.
PURPORT
Vidura was astonished to see the marvelous departure of his brother
Dhåtaräñöra as a liberated yogé, for in his past life he was much attached to
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
materialism. Of course it was only due to Vidura that his brother attained the
desirable goal of life. Vidura was therefore glad to learn about it. But he was
sorry that he could not make his brother turn into a pure devotee. This was
not done by Vidura because of Dhåtaräñöra’s being inimical to the Päëòavas,
who were all devotees of the Lord. An offense at the feet of a Vaiñëava is more
dangerous than an offense at the lotus feet of the Lord. Vidura was certainly
very liberal to bestow mercy upon his brother Dhåtaräñöra, whose past life was
very materialistic. But ultimately the result of such mercy certainly depended
on the will of the Supreme Lord in the present life; therefore Dhåtaräñöra
attained liberation only, and after many such liberated states of life one can
attain to the stage of devotional service. Vidura was certainly very mortified by
the death of his brother and sister-in-law, and the only remedy to mitigate
such lamentation was to go out to pilgrimage. Thus Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira had
no chance to call back Vidura, his surviving uncle.
TEXT 60
wTYau¤-aQaaåhTa( SvGa| Naard" SahTauMbuå" )
YauiDaiïrae vcSTaSYa ôid k*-TvaJahaC^uc" )) 60 ))
ity uktväthäruhat svargaà
näradaù saha-tumburuù
yudhiñöhiro vacas tasya
hådi kåtväjahäc chucaù
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; uktvä—having addressed; atha—thereafter; äruhat—ascended;
svargam—into outer space; näradaù—the great sage Närada; saha—along
with; tumburuù—his stringed instrument; yudhiñöhiraù—Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira; vacaù—instructions; tasya—of his; hådi kåtvä—keeping in the
heart; ajahät—gave up; çucaù—all lamentations.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Having spoken thus, the great sage Närada, along with his véëä, ascended
into outer space. Yudhiñöhira kept his instruction in his heart and so was able to
get rid of all lamentations.
PURPORT
Çré Näradajé is an eternal spaceman, having been endowed with a spiritual
body by the grace of the Lord. He can travel in the outer spaces of both the
material and spiritual worlds without restriction and can approach any planet
in unlimited space within no time. We have already discussed his previous life
as the son of a maidservant. Because of his association with pure devotees, he
was elevated to the position of an eternal spaceman and thus had freedom of
movement. One should therefore try to follow in the footsteps of Närada Muni
and not make a futile effort to reach other planets by mechanical means.
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was a pious king, and therefore he could see Närada
Muni occasionally; anyone who desires to see Närada Muni must first be pious
and follow in the footsteps of Närada Muni.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the First Canto, Thirteenth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled “Dhåtaräñöra Quits Home.”
Chapter Fourteen
The Disappearance of Lord Kåñëa
TEXT 1
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SaUTa ovac
SaMPa[iSQaTae Üark-aYaa& iJaZ<aaE bNDauidd*+aYaa )
jaTau& c Pau<Yaëaek-SYa k*-Z<aSYa c ivceiíTaMa( )) 1 ))
süta uväca
samprasthite dvärakäyäà
jiñëau bandhu-didåkñayä
jïätuà ca puëya-çlokasya
kåñëasya ca viceñöitam
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Çré Süta Gosvämé said; samprasthite—having gone to;
dvärakäyäm—the city of Dvärakä; jiñëau—Arjuna; bandhu—friends and
relatives; didåkñayä—for meeting them; jïätum—to know; ca—also;
puëya-çlokasya—of one whose glories are sung by Vedic hymns; kåñëasya—of
Lord Kåñëa; ca—and; viceñöitam—further programs of work.
TRANSLATION
Çré Süta Gosvämé said: Arjuna went to Dvärakä to see Lord Çré Kåñëa and
other friends and also to learn from the Lord of His next activities.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä, the Lord descended on earth for the protection
of the faithful and annihilation of the impious, so after the Battle of
Kurukñetra and establishment of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, the mission of the
Lord was complete. The Päëòavas, especially Çré Arjuna, were eternal
companions of the Lord, and therefore Arjuna went to Dvärakä to hear from
the Lord of His next program of work.
TEXT 2
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
VYaTaqTaa" k-iTaicNMaaSaaSTada NaaYaataTaae_JauRNa" )
ddXaR gaaeræPaai<a iNaiMataaiNa ku-æÜh" )) 2 ))
vyatétäù katicin mäsäs
tadä näyät tato ’rjunaù
dadarça ghora-rüpäëi
nimittäni kurüdvahaù
SYNONYMS
vyatétäù—after passing; katicit—a few; mäsäù—months; tadä—at that time; na
äyät—did not return; tataù—from there; arjunaù—Arjuna;
dadarça—observed; ghora—fearful; rüpäëi—appearances; nimittäni—various
causes; kuru-udvahaù—Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira.
TRANSLATION
A few months passed, and Arjuna did not return. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira then
began to observe some inauspicious omens, which were fearful in themselves.
PURPORT
Lord Çré Kåñëa the Supreme Personality of Godhead is ad infinitum, more
powerful than the most powerful sun of our experience. Millions and billions
of suns are created by Him and annihilated by Him within His one breathing
period. In the material world the sun is considered to be the source of all
productivity and material energy, and only due to the sun can we have the
necessities of life. Therefore, during the personal presence of the Lord on the
earth, all paraphernalia for our peace and prosperity, especially religion and
knowledge, were in full display because of the Lord’s presence, just as there is a
full flood of light in the presence of the glowing sun. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira
observed some discrepancies in his kingdom, and therefore he became very
anxious about Arjuna, who was long absent, and there was also no news about
Dvärakä’s well-being. He suspected the disappearance of Lord Kåñëa, otherwise
there would have been no possibility of fearful omens.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 3
k-al/SYa c GaiTa& raEd]a& ivPaYaRSTaTauRDaiMaR<a" )
PaaPaqYaSaq& Na*<aa& vaTaa| §-aeDal/ae>aaNa*TaaTMaNaaMa( )) 3 ))
kälasya ca gatià raudräà
viparyastartu-dharmiëaù
päpéyaséà nåëäà värtäà
krodha-lobhänåtätmanäm
SYNONYMS
kälasya—of eternal time; ca—also; gatim—direction; raudräm—fearful;
viparyasta—reversed; åtu—seasonal; dharmiëaù—regularities;
päpéyasém—sinful; nåëäm—of the human being; värtäm—means of livelihood;
krodha—anger; lobha—greed; anåta—falsehood; ätmanäm—of the people.
TRANSLATION
He saw that the direction of eternal time had changed, and this was very
fearful. There were disruptions in the seasonal regularities. The people in
general had become very greedy, angry and deceitful. And he saw that they
were adopting foul means of livelihood.
PURPORT
When civilization is disconnected from the loving relation of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, symptoms like changes of seasonal regulations, foul
means of livelihood, greed, anger and fraudulence become rampant. The
change of seasonal regulations refers to one season’s atmosphere becoming
manifest in another season—for example the rainy season’s being transferred
to autumn, or the fructification of fruits and flowers from one season in
another season. A godless man is invariably greedy, angry and fraudulent.
Such a man can earn his livelihood by any means, black or white. During the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
reign of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, all the above symptoms were conspicuous by
their absence. But Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was astonished to experience even a
slight change in the godly atmosphere of his kingdom, and at once he
suspected the disappearance of the Lord. Foul means of livelihood implies
deviation from one’s occupational duty. There are prescribed duties for
everyone, such as the brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya and çüdra, but anyone who
deviates from his prescribed duty and declares another’s duty to be his own is
following a foul and improper duty. A man becomes too greedy for wealth and
power when he has no higher objective in life and when he thinks that this
earthly life of a few years is all in all. Ignorance is the cause for all these
anomalies in human society, and to remove this ignorance, especially in this
age of degradation, the powerful sun is there to distribute light in the shape of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 4
iJaøPa[aYa& VYavôTa& Xaa#yiMaé[& c SaaEôdMa( )
iPaTa*MaaTa*Sauôd(>a]aTa*dMPaTaqNaa& c k-Lk-NaMa( )) 4 ))
jihma-präyaà vyavahåtaà
çäöhya-miçraà ca sauhådam
pitå-mätå-suhåd-bhrätådam-
paténäà ca kalkanam
SYNONYMS
jihma-präyam—cheating; vyavahåtam—in all ordinary transactions;
çäöhya—duplicity; miçram—adulterated in; ca—and; sauhådam—regarding
friendly well-wishers; pitå—father; mätå—regarding the mother;
suhåt—well-wishers; bhrätå—one’s own brother; dam-paténäm—regarding
husband and wife; ca—also; kalkanam—mutual quarrel.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
All ordinary transactions and dealings became polluted with cheating, even
between friends. And in familial affairs, there was always misunderstanding
between fathers, mothers and sons, between well-wishers, and between
brothers. Even between husband and wife there was always strain and quarrel.
PURPORT
A conditioned living being is endowed with four principles of malpractice,
namely errors, insanity, inability and cheating. These are signs of
imperfection, and out of the four the propensity to cheat others is most
prominent. And this cheating practice is there in the conditioned souls
because the conditioned souls are primarily in the material world imbued with
an unnatural desire to lord it over the material world. A living being in his
pure state is not conditioned by the laws because in his pure state he is
conscious that a living being is eternally subservient to the Supreme Being,
and thus it is always good for him to remain subservient, instead of falsely
trying to lord it over the property of the Supreme Lord. In the conditioned
state the living being is not satisfied even if he actually becomes the lord of all
that he surveys, which he never becomes, and therefore he becomes the victim
of all kinds of cheating, even with his nearest and most intimate relations. In
such an unsatisfactory state of affairs, there is no harmony, even between
father and sons or between husband and wife. But all these contending
difficulties can be mitigated by one process, and that is the devotional service
of the Lord. The world of hypocrisy can be checked only by counteraction
through devotional service to the Lord and nothing else. Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira, having observed the disparities, conjectured the disappearance of
the Lord from the earth.
TEXT 5
iNaiMataaNYaTYairíaiNa k-ale/ TvNauGaTae Na*<aaMa( )
l/ae>aaÛDaMaRPa[k*-iTa& d*îaevacaNauJa& Na*Pa" )) 5 ))
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
nimittäny atyariñöäni
käle tv anugate nåëäm
lobhädy-adharma-prakåtià
dåñövoväcänujaà nåpaù
SYNONYMS
nimittäni—causes; ati—very serious; ariñöäni—bad omens; käle—in course of
time; tu—but; anugate—passing away; nåëäm—of humanity at large;
lobha-ädi—such as greed; adharma—irreligious; prakåtim—habits;
dåñövä—having observed; uväca—said; anujam—younger brother; nåpaù—the
King.
TRANSLATION
In course of time it came to pass that people in general became accustomed to
greed, anger, pride, etc. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, observing all these omens, spoke
to his younger brother.
PURPORT
Such a pious king as Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira at once became perturbed when
there were such inhuman symptoms as greed, anger, irreligiosity and hypocrisy
rampant in society. It appears from this statement that all these symptoms of
degraded society were unknown to the people of the time, and it was
astonishing for them to have experienced them with the advent of the
Kali-yuga, or the age of quarrel.
TEXT 6
YauiDaiïr ovac
SaMPa[eizTaae Üark-aYaa& iJaZ<aubRNDauidd*+aYaa )
jaTau& c Pau<Yaëaek-SYa k*-Z<aSYa c ivceiíTaMa( )) 6 ))
yudhiñöhira uväca
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
sampreñito dvärakäyäà
jiñëur bandhu-didåkñayä
jïätuà ca puëya-çlokasya
kåñëasya ca viceñöitam
SYNONYMS
yudhiñöhiraù uväca—Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira said; sampreñitaù—has gone to;
dvärakäyäm—Dvärakä; jiñëuù—Arjuna; bandhu—friends; didåkñayä—for the
sake of meeting; jïätum—to know; ca—also; puëya-çlokasya—of the
Personality of Godhead; kåñëasya—of Lord Çré Kåñëa; ca—and;
viceñöitam—program of work.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira said to his younger brother Bhémasena, I sent Arjuna
to Dvärakä to meet his friends and to learn from the Personality of Godhead
Kåñëa of His program of work.
TEXT 7
GaTaa" SaáaDauNaa MaaSaa >aqMaSaeNa TavaNauJa" )
NaaYaaiTa k-SYa va heTaaeNaaRh& vededMaÅSaa )) 7 ))
gatäù saptädhunä mäsä
bhémasena tavänujaù
näyäti kasya vä hetor
nähaà vededam aïjasä
SYNONYMS
gatäù—has gone; sapta—seven; adhunä—to date; mäsäù—months;
bhémasena—O Bhémasena; tava—your; anujaù—younger brother; na—does
not; äyäti—come back; kasya—for what; vä—or; hetoù—reason; na—not;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
aham—I; veda—know; idam—this; aïjasä—factually.
TRANSLATION
Since he departed, seven months have passed, yet he has not returned. I do
not know factually how things are going there.
TEXT 8
AiPa devizR<aaidí" Sa k-al/ae_YaMauPaiSQaTa" )
YadaTMaNaae_®Maa§-I@& >aGavaNauiTSaSa*+aiTa )) 8 ))
api devarñiëädiñöaù
sa kälo ’yam upasthitaù
yadätmano ’ìgam äkréòaà
bhagavän utsisåkñati
SYNONYMS
api—whether; deva-åñiëä—by the demigod-saint (Närada);
ädiñöaù—instructed; saù—that; kälaù—eternal time; ayam—this;
upasthitaù—arrived; yadä—when; ätmanaù—of His own self; aìgam—plenary
portion; äkréòam—manifestation; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead;
utsisåkñati—is going to quit.
TRANSLATION
Is He going to quit His earthly pastimes, as Devarñi Närada indicated? Has
that time already arrived?
PURPORT
As we have discussed many times, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Lord Çré Kåñëa has many plenary expansions, and each and every one of them,
although equally powerful, executes different functions. In Bhagavad-gétä there
are different statements by the Lord, and each of these statements is meant for
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
different plenary portions or portions of the plenary portions. For example, Çré
Kåñëa, the Lord, says in Bhagavad-gétä:
“Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O
descendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that time I
descend Myself.” (Bg. 4.7)
“To deliver the faithful, to annihilate the miscreants and also to reestablish
the principles of occupational duty, I appear in every age.” (Bg. 4.8)
“If I should cease to work, then all humanity would be misdirected. I would
also be the cause of creating unwanted population, and I would thereby destroy
the peace of all sentient beings.” (Bg. 3.24)
“Whatever action a great man performs, common men will follow. And
whatever standards he sets by exemplary acts, all the world pursues.” (Bg. 3.21)
All the above statements by the Lord apply to different plenary portions of
the Lord, namely His expansions such as Saìkarñaëa, Väsudeva, Pradyumna,
Aniruddha and Näräyaëa. These are all He Himself in different
transcendental expansions, and still the Lord as Çré Kåñëa functions in a
different sphere of transcendental exchange with different grades of devotees.
And yet Lord Kåñëa as He is appears once every twenty-four hours of Brahmä’s
time (or after a lapse of 8,640,000,000 solar years) in each and every universe,
and all His transcendental pastimes are displayed in each and every universe
in a routine spool. But in that routine spool the functions of Lord Kåñëa, Lord
Väsudeva, etc., are complex problems for the layman. There is no difference
between the Lord’s Self and the Lord’s transcendental body. The expansions
execute differential activities. When the Lord, however, appears in His person
as Lord Çré Kåñëa, His other plenary portions also join in Him by His
inconceivable potency called yogamäyä, and thus the Lord Kåñëa of
Våndävana is different from the Lord Kåñëa of Mathurä or the Lord Kåñëa of
Dvärakä. The viräö-rüpa of Lord Kåñëa is also different from Him, by His
inconceivable potency. The viräö-rüpa exhibited on the Battlefield of
Kurukñetra is the material conception of His form. Therefore it should be
understood that when Lord Kåñëa was apparently killed by the bow and arrow
of the hunter, the Lord left His so-called material body in the material world.
The Lord is kaivalya, and for Him there is no difference between matter and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
spirit because everything is created from Him. Therefore His quitting one sort
of body or accepting another body does not mean that He is like the ordinary
living being. All such activities are simultaneously one and different by His
inconceivable potency. When Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was lamenting the
possibility of His disappearance, it was just in pursuance of a custom of
lamenting the disappearance of a great friend, but factually the Lord never
quits His transcendental body, as is misconceived by less intelligent persons.
Such less intelligent persons have been condemned by the Lord Himself in
Bhagavad-gétä, and they are known as the müòhas. That the Lord left His body
means that He left again His plenary portions in the respective dhämas
(transcendental abodes), as He left His viräö-rüpa in the material world.
TEXT 9
YaSMaaà" SaMPadae raJYa& dara" Pa[a<aa" ku-l&/ Pa[Jaa" )
AaSaNa( SaPaÒivJaYaae l/aek-aê YadNauGa]haTa( )) 9 ))
yasmän naù sampado räjyaà
däräù präëäù kulaà prajäù
äsan sapatna-vijayo
lokäç ca yad-anugrahät
SYNONYMS
yasmät—from whom; naù—our; sampadaù—opulence; räjyam—kingdom;
däräù—good wives; präëäù—existence of life; kulam—dynasty;
prajäù—subjects; äsan—have become possible; sapatna—competitors;
vijayaù—conquering; lokäù—future accommodation in higher planets;
ca—and; yat—by whose; anugrahät—by the mercy of.
TRANSLATION
From Him only, all our kingly opulence, good wives, lives, progeny, control
over our subjects, victory over our enemies, and future accommodations in
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
higher planets have become possible. All this is due to His causeless mercy upon
us.
PURPORT
Material prosperity consists of a good wife, good home, sufficient land, good
children, aristocratic family relations, victory over competitors and, by pious
work, attainment of accommodations in the higher celestial planets for better
facilities of material amenities. These facilities are earned not only by one’s
hard manual labor or by unfair means, but by the mercy of the Supreme Lord.
Prosperity earned by one’s personal endeavor also depends on the mercy of the
Lord. Personal labor must be there in addition to the Lord’s benediction, but
without the Lord’s benediction no one is successful simply by personal labor.
The modernized man of Kali-yuga believes in personal endeavor and denies
the benediction of the Supreme Lord. Even a great sannyäsé of India delivered
speeches in Chicago protesting the benedictions of the Supreme Lord. But as
far as Vedic çästras are concerned, as we find in the pages of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the ultimate sanction for all success rests in the hands of
the Supreme Lord. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira admits this truth in his personal
success, and it behooves one to follow in the footsteps of a great king and
devotee of the Lord to make life a full success. If one could achieve success
without the sanction of the Lord then no medical practitioner would fail to
cure a patient. Despite the most advanced treatment of a suffering patient by
the most up-to-date medical practitioner, there is death, and even in the most
hopeless case, without medical treatment, a patient is cured astonishingly.
Therefore the conclusion is that God’s sanction is the immediate cause for all
happenings, good or bad. Any successful man should feel grateful to the Lord
for all he has achieved.
TEXT 10
PaXYaaeTPaaTaaàrVYaaga] idVYaaNa( >aaEMaaNa( SadEihk-aNa( )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
daå<aaNa( Xa&SaTaae_dUraÙYa& Naae buiÖMaaehNaMa( )) 10 ))
paçyotpätän nara-vyäghra
divyän bhaumän sadaihikän
däruëän çaàsato ’düräd
bhayaà no buddhi-mohanam
SYNONYMS
paçya—just see; utpätän—disturbances; nara-vyäghra—O man of tigerlike
strength; divyän—happenings in the sky or by planetary influence;
bhaumän—happenings on the earth; sa-daihikän—happenings of the body and
the mind; däruëän—awfully dangerous; çaàsataù—indicating; adürät—in the
near future; bhayam—danger; naù—our; buddhi—intelligence;
mohanam—deluding.
TRANSLATION
Just see, O man with a tiger’s strength, how many miseries due to celestial
influences, earthly reactions and bodily pains—all very dangerous in
themselves—are foreboding danger in the near future by deluding our
intelligence.
PURPORT
Material advancement of civilization means advancement of the reactions
of the threefold miseries due to celestial influence, earthly reactions and bodily
or mental pains. By the celestial influence of the stars there are many
calamities like excessive heat, cold, rains or no rains, and the aftereffects are
famine, disease and epidemic. The aggregate result is agony of the body and
the mind. Man-made material science cannot do anything to counteract these
threefold miseries. They are all punishments from the superior energy of mäyä
under the direction of the Supreme Lord. Therefore our constant touch with
the Lord by devotional service can give us relief without our being disturbed in
the discharge of our human duties. The asuras, however, who do not believe in
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the existence of God, make their own plans to counteract all these threefold
miseries, and so they meet with failures every time. The Bhagavad-gétä (7.14)
clearly states that the reaction of material energy is never to be conquered,
because of the binding effects of the three modes. They can simply be
overcome by one who surrenders fully in devotion under the lotus feet of the
Lord.
TEXT 11
OvRi+abahvae Maù& Sfu-rNTYa® PauNa" PauNa" )
vePaQauêaiPa ôdYae AaraÕaSYaiNTa iviPa[YaMa( )) 11 ))
ürv-akñi-bähavo mahyaà
sphuranty aìga punaù punaù
vepathuç cäpi hådaye
äräd däsyanti vipriyam
SYNONYMS
üru—thighs; akñi—eyes; bähavaù—the arms; mahyam—in my;
sphuranti—quivering; aìga—left side of the body; punaù punaù—again and
again; vepathuù—palpitations; ca—also; api—certainly; hådaye—in the heart;
ärät—due to fear; däsyanti—indicating; vipriyam—undesirables.
TRANSLATION
The left side of my body, my thighs, arms and eyes are all quivering again
and again. I am having heart palpitations due to fear. All this indicates
undesirable happenings.
PURPORT
Material existence is full of undesirables. Things we do not want are forced
upon us by some superior energy, and we do not see that these undesirables are
under the grip of the three modes of material nature. When a man’s eyes, arms
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
and thighs all quiver constantly, one must know that something is going to
happen which is undesirable. These undesirables are compared to fire in a
forest. No one goes into the forest to set fires, but fires automatically take place
in the forest, creating inconceivable calamities for the living beings of the
forest. Such a fire cannot be extinguished by any human efforts. The fire can
be extinguished only by the mercy of the Lord, who sends clouds to pour water
on the forest. Similarly, undesirable happenings in life cannot be checked by
any number of plans. Such miseries can be removed only by the mercy of the
Lord, who sends His bona fide representatives to enlighten human beings and
thus save them from all calamities.
TEXT 12
iXavEzaeÛNTaMaaidTYaMai>araETYaNal/aNaNaa )
MaaMa® SaarMaeYaae_YaMai>are>aTYa>aqåvTa( )) 12 ))
çivaiñodyantam ädityam
abhirauty analänanä
mäm aìga särameyo ’yam
abhirebhaty abhéruvat
SYNONYMS
çivä—jackal; eñä—this; udyantam—rising; ädityam—unto the sun;
abhi—towards; rauti—crying; anala—fire; änanä—face; mäm—unto me;
aìga—O Bhéma; särameyaù—dog; ayam—this; abhirebhati—barks towards;
abhéru-vat—without fear.
TRANSLATION
Just see, O Bhéma, how the she jackal cries at the rising sun and vomits fire,
and how the dog barks at me fearlessly.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
These are some bad omens indicating something undesirable in the near
future.
TEXT 13
XaSTaa" ku-vRiNTa Maa& SaVYa& di+a<a& PaXavae_Pare )
vaha&ê PauåzVYaaga] l/+aYae ådTaae MaMa )) 13 ))
çastäù kurvanti mäà savyaà
dakñiëaà paçavo ’pare
vähäàç ca puruña-vyäghra
lakñaye rudato mama
SYNONYMS
çastäù—useful animals like the cow; kurvanti—are keeping; mäm—me;
savyam—on the left; dakñiëam—circumambulating; paçavaù apare—other
lower animals like asses; vähän—the horses (carriers); ca—also;
puruña-vyäghra—O tiger among men; lakñaye—I see; rudataù—weeping;
mama—of mine.
TRANSLATION
O Bhémasena, tiger amongst men, now useful animals like cows are passing
me on my left side, and lower animals like the asses are circumambulating me.
My horses appear to weep upon seeing me.
TEXT 14
Ma*TYaudUTa" k-PaaeTaae_YaMaulU/k-" k-MPaYaNa( MaNa" )
Pa[TYaulU/k-ê ku-ûaNaEivRì& vEéUNYaiMaC^Ta" )) 14 ))
måtyu-dütaù kapoto ’yam
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ulükaù kampayan manaù
pratyulükaç ca kuhvänair
viçvaà vai çünyam icchataù
SYNONYMS
måtyu—death; dütaù—messenger of; kapotaù—pigeon; ayam—this;
ulükaù—owl; kampayan—trembling; manaù—mind; pratyulükaù—the rivals
of owls (crows); ca—and; kuhvänaiù—shrieking scream; viçvam—the cosmos;
vai—either; çünyam—void; icchataù—wishing.
TRANSLATION
Just see! This pigeon is like a messenger of death. The shrieks of the owls
and their rival crows make my heart tremble. It appears that they want to make
a void of the whole universe.
TEXT 15
DaUMa]a idXa" PairDaYa" k-MPaTae >aU" Sahaid]i>a" )
iNagaaRTaê Maha&STaaTa Saak&- c STaNaiYaÒui>a" )) 15 ))
dhümrä diçaù paridhayaù
kampate bhüù sahädribhiù
nirghätaç ca mahäàs täta
säkaà ca stanayitnubhiù
SYNONYMS
dhümräù—smoky; diçaù—all directions; paridhayaù—encirclement;
kampate—throbbing; bhüù—the earth; saha adribhiù—along with the hills and
mountains; nirghätaù—bolt from the blue; ca—also; mahän—very great;
täta—O Bhéma; säkam—with; ca—also; stanayitnubhiù—thundering sound
without any cloud.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
Just see how the smoke encircles the sky. It appears that the earth and
mountains are throbbing. Just hear the cloudless thunder and see the bolts from
the blue.
TEXT 16
vaYauvaRiTa %rSPaXaaeR rJaSaa ivSa*Ja&STaMa" )
ASa*Ga( vzRiNTa Jal/da bq>aTSaiMav SavRTa" )) 16 ))
väyur väti khara-sparço
rajasä visåjaàs tamaù
asåg varñanti jaladä
bébhatsam iva sarvataù
SYNONYMS
väyuù—wind; väti—blowing; khara-sparçaù—sharply; rajasä—by the dust;
visåjan—creating; tamaù—darkness; asåk—blood; varñanti—are raining;
jaladäù—the clouds; bébhatsam—disastrous; iva—like; sarvataù—everywhere.
TRANSLATION
The wind blows violently, blasting dust everywhere and creating darkness.
Clouds are raining everywhere with bloody disasters.
TEXT 17
SaUYa| hTaPa[>a& PaXYa Ga]hMad| iMaQaae idiv )
SaSax(ku-lE/>aURTaGa<aEJvRil/Tae wv raedSaq )) 17 ))
süryaà hata-prabhaà paçya
graha-mardaà mitho divi
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
sasaìkulair bhüta-gaëair
jvalite iva rodasé
SYNONYMS
süryam—the sun; hata-prabham—its rays declining; paçya—just see;
graha-mardam—clashes of the stars; mithaù—among one another; divi—in the
sky; sa-saìkulaiù—being mixed with; bhüta-gaëaiù—by the living entities;
jvalite—being ignited; iva—as if; rodasé—crying.
TRANSLATION
The rays of the sun are declining, and the stars appear to be fighting amongst
themselves. Confused living entities appear to be ablaze and weeping.
TEXT 18
NaÛae Nadaê +aui>aTaa" Sara&iSa c MaNaa&iSa c )
Na Jvl/TYaiGanraJYaeNa k-al/ae_Ya& ik&- ivDaaSYaiTa )) 18 ))
nadyo nadäç ca kñubhitäù
saräàsi ca manäàsi ca
na jvalaty agnir äjyena
kälo ’yaà kià vidhäsyati
SYNONYMS
nadyaù—rivers; nadäù ca—and the tributaries; kñubhitäù—all perturbed;
saräàsi—reservoirs of water; ca—and; manäàsi—the mind; ca—also;
na—does not; jvalati—ignite; agniù—fire; äjyena—with the help of butter;
kälaù—the time; ayam—extraordinary it is; kim—what; vidhäsyati—going to
happen.
TRANSLATION
Rivers, tributaries, ponds, reservoirs and the mind are all perturbed. Butter
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
no longer ignites fire. What is this extraordinary time? What is going to
happen?
TEXT 19
Na iPabiNTa STaNa& vTSaa Na duùiNTa c MaaTar" )
ådNTYaé[uMau%a Gaavae Na ôZYaNTYa*z>aa v]Jae )) 19 ))
na pibanti stanaà vatsä
na duhyanti ca mätaraù
rudanty açru-mukhä gävo
na håñyanty åñabhä vraje
SYNONYMS
na—does not; pibanti—suck; stanam—breast; vatsäù—the calves; na—do not;
duhyanti—allow milking; ca—also; mätaraù—the cows; rudanti—crying;
açru-mukhäù—with a tearful face; gävaù—the cows; na—do not;
håñyanti—take pleasure; åñabhäù—the bulls; vraje—in the pasturing ground.
TRANSLATION
The calves do not suck the teats of the cows, nor do the cows give milk.
They are standing, crying, tears in their eyes, and the bulls take no pleasure in
the pasturing grounds.
TEXT 20
dEvTaaiNa ådNTaqv iSvÛiNTa ùuÀl/iNTa c )
wMae JaNaPada Ga]aMaa" PauraeÛaNaak-raé[Maa" )
>a]íié[Yaae iNaraNaNda" ik-Maga& dXaRYaiNTa Na" )) 20 ))
daivatäni rudantéva
svidyanti hy uccalanti ca
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ime jana-padä grämäù
purodyänäkaräçramäù
bhrañöa-çriyo niränandäù
kim aghaà darçayanti naù
SYNONYMS
daivatäni—the Deities in the temples; rudanti—seem to be crying; iva—like
that; svidyanti—perspiring; hi—certainly; uccalanti—as if going out; ca—also;
ime—these; jana-padäù—cities; grämäù—villages; pura—towns;
udyäna—gardens; äkara—mines; äçramäù—hermitages, etc.; bhrañöa—devoid
of; çriyaù—beauty; niränandäù—bereft of all happiness; kim—what sort of;
agham—calamities; darçayanti—shall manifest; naù—to us.
TRANSLATION
The Deities seem to be crying in the temple, lamenting and perspiring. They
seem about to leave. All the cities, villages, towns, gardens, mines and
hermitages are now devoid of beauty and bereft of all happiness. I do not know
what sort of calamities are now awaiting us.
TEXT 21
MaNYa WTaEMaRhaeTPaaTaENaURNa& >aGavTa" PadE" )
ANaNYaPauåzé[qi>ahsNaa >aUhRTaSaaE>aGaa )) 21 ))
manya etair mahotpätair
nünaà bhagavataù padaiù
ananya-puruña-çrébhir
hénä bhür hata-saubhagä
SYNONYMS
manye—I take it for granted; etaiù—by all these; mahä—great;
utpätaiù—upsurges; nünam—for want of; bhagavataù—of the Personality of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Godhead; padaiù—the marks on the sole of the foot; ananya—extraordinary;
puruña—of the Supreme Personality; çrébhiù—by the auspicious signs;
hénä—dispossessed; bhüù—the earth; hata-saubhagä—without the fortune.
TRANSLATION
I think that all these earthly disturbances indicate some greater loss to the
good fortune of the world. The world was fortunate to have been marked with
the footprints of the lotus feet of the Lord. These signs indicate that this will no
longer be.
TEXT 22
wiTa icNTaYaTaSTaSYa d*íairíeNa ceTaSaa )
raj" Pa[TYaaGaMad( b]øNa( YaduPauYaaR" k-iPaßJa" )) 22 ))
iti cintayatas tasya
dåñöäriñöena cetasä
räjïaù pratyägamad brahman
yadu-puryäù kapi-dhvajaù
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; cintayataù—while thinking to himself; tasya—he; dåñöä—by
observing; ariñöena—bad omens; cetasä—by the mind; räjïaù—the King;
prati—back; ägamat—came; brahman—O brähmaëa; yadu-puryäù—from the
kingdom of the Yadus; kapi-dhvajaù—Arjuna.
TRANSLATION
O Brähmaëa Çaunaka, while Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, observing the
inauspicious signs on the earth at that time, was thus thinking to himself,
Arjuna came back from the city of the Yadus [Dvärakä].
TEXT 23
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Ta& PaadYaaeiNaRPaiTaTaMaYaQaaPaUvRMaaTaurMa( )
ADaaevdNaMaiBbNdUNa( Sa*JaNTa& NaYaNaaBJaYaae" )) 23 ))
taà pädayor nipatitam
ayathä-pürvam äturam
adho-vadanam ab-bindün
såjantaà nayanäbjayoù
SYNONYMS
tam—him (Arjuna); pädayoù—at the feet; nipatitam—bowing down;
ayathä-pürvam—unprecedented; äturam—dejected;
adhaù-vadanam—downward face; ap-bindün—drops of water;
såjantam—creating; nayana-abjayoù—from the lotuslike eyes.
TRANSLATION
When he bowed at his feet, the King saw that his dejection was
unprecedented. His head was down, and tears glided from his lotus eyes.
TEXT 24
ivl/aeKYaaeiÜGanôdYaae ivC^aYaMaNauJa& Na*Pa" )
Pa*C^iTa SMa SauôNMaDYae Sa&SMaràardeirTaMa( )) 24 ))
vilokyodvigna-hådayo
vicchäyam anujaà nåpaù
påcchati sma suhån madhye
saàsmaran näraderitam
SYNONYMS
vilokya—by seeing; udvigna—anxious; hådayaù—heart; vicchäyam—pale
appearance; anujam—Arjuna; nåpaù—the King; påcchati sma—asked;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
suhåt—friends; madhye—amongst; saàsmaran—remembering; närada—Sage
Närada; éritam—indicated by.
TRANSLATION
Seeing Arjuna pale due to heartfelt anxieties, the King, remembering the
indications of the sage Närada, questioned him in the midst of friends.
TEXT 25
YauiDaiïr ovac
k-iÀdaNaTaRPauYaa| Na" SvJaNaa" Sau%MaaSaTae )
MaDau>aaeJadXaahaRhRSaaTvTaaNDak-v*Z<aYa" )) 25 ))
yudhiñöhira uväca
kaccid änarta-puryäà naù
sva-janäù sukham äsate
madhu-bhoja-daçärhärhasätvatändhaka-
våñëayaù
SYNONYMS
yudhiñöhiraù uväca—Yudhiñöhira said; kaccit—whether; änarta-puryäm—of
Dvärakä; naù—our; sva-janäù—relatives; sukham—happily; äsate—are passing
their days; madhu—Madhu; bhoja—Bhoja; daçärha—Daçärha; ärha—Ärha;
sätvata—Sätvata; andhaka—Andhaka; våñëayaù—of the family of Våñëi.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira said: My dear brother, please tell me whether our
friends and relatives, such as Madhu, Bhoja, Daçärha, Ärha, Sätvata, Andhaka
and the members of the Yadu family are all passing their days in happiness.
TEXT 26
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
éUrae MaaTaaMah" k-iÀTSvSTYaaSTae vaQa Maairz" )
MaaTaul/" SaaNauJa" k-iÀTku-XaLYaaNak-duNdui>a" )) 26 ))
çüro mätämahaù kaccit
svasty äste vätha märiñaù
mätulaù sänujaù kaccit
kuçaly änakadundubhiù
SYNONYMS
çüraù—Çürasena; mätämahaù—maternal grandfather; kaccit—whether;
svasti—all good; äste—passing his days; vä—or; atha—therefore;
märiñaù—respectful; mätulaù—maternal uncle; sa-anujaù—with his younger
brothers; kaccit—whether; kuçalé—all well; änaka-dundubhiù—Vasudeva.
TRANSLATION
Is my respectable grandfather Çürasena in a happy mood? And are my
maternal uncle Vasudeva and his younger brothers all doing well?
TEXT 27
Saá SvSaarSTaTPaTNYaae MaaTaul/aNYa" SahaTMaJaa" )
AaSaTae Saòuza" +aeMa& devk-IPa[Mau%a" SvYaMa( )) 27 ))
sapta sva-säras tat-patnyo
mätulänyaù sahätmajäù
äsate sasnuñäù kñemaà
devaké-pramukhäù svayam
SYNONYMS
sapta—seven; sva-säraù—own sisters; tat-patnyaù—his wives;
mätulänyaù—maternal aunts; saha—along with; ätma-jäù—sons and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
grandsons; äsate—are all; sasnuñäù—with their daughters-in-law;
kñemam—happiness; devaké—Devaké; pramukhäù—headed by;
svayam—personally.
TRANSLATION
His seven wives, headed by Devaké, are all sisters. Are they and their sons
and daughters-in-law all happy?
TEXTS 28–29
k-iÀd]aJaahuk-ae JaqvTYaSaTPau}aae_SYa caNauJa" )
ôdqk-" SaSauTaae_§U-rae JaYaNTaGadSaar<aa" )) 28 ))
AaSaTae ku-Xal&/ k-iÀÛe c Xa}auiJadadYa" )
k-iÀdaSTae Sau%& raMaae >aGavaNa( SaaTvTaa& Pa[>au" )) 29 ))
kaccid räjähuko jévaty
asat-putro ’sya cänujaù
hådékaù sasuto ’krüro
jayanta-gada-säraëäù
äsate kuçalaà kaccid
ye ca çatrujid-ädayaù
kaccid äste sukhaà rämo
bhagavän sätvatäà prabhuù
SYNONYMS
kaccit—whether; räjä—the King; ähukaù—another name of Ugrasena;
jévati—still living; asat—mischievous; putraù—son; asya—his; ca—also;
anujaù—younger brother; hådékaù—Hådéka; sa-sutaù—along with son,
Kåtavarmä; akrüraù—Akrüra; jayanta—Jayanta; gada—Gada;
säraëäù—Säraëa; äsate—are they all; kuçalam—in happiness;
kaccit—whether; ye—they; ca—also; çatrujit—Çatrujit; ädayaù—headed by;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
kaccit—whether; äste—are they; sukham—all right; rämaù—Balaräma;
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; sätvatäm—of the devotees;
prabhuù—protector.
TRANSLATION
Are Ugrasena, whose son was the mischievous Kaàsa, and his younger
brother still living? Are Hådéka and his son Kåtavarmä happy? Are Akrüra,
Jayanta, Gada, Säraëa and Çatrujit all happy? How is Balaräma, the Personality
of Godhead and the protector of devotees?
PURPORT
Hastinäpura, the capital of the Päëòavas, was situated somewhere near
present New Delhi, and the kingdom of Ugrasena was situated in Mathurä.
While returning to Delhi from Dvärakä, Arjuna must have visited the city of
Mathurä, and therefore the inquiry about the King of Mathurä is valid.
Amongst various names of the relatives, the name of Räma or Balaräma, eldest
brother of Lord Kåñëa, is added with the words “the Personality of Godhead”
because Lord Balaräma is the immediate expansion of viñëu-tattva as
prakäça-vigraha of Lord Kåñëa. The Supreme Lord, although one without a
second, expands Himself as many other living beings. The viñëu-tattva living
beings are expansions of the Supreme Lord, and all of them are qualitatively
and quantitatively equal with the Lord. But expansions of the jéva-çakti, the
category of the ordinary living beings, are not at all equal with the Lord. One
who considers the jéva-çakti and the viñëu-tattva to be on an equal level is
considered a condemned soul of the world. Çré Räma, or Balaräma, is the
protector of the devotees of the Lord. Baladeva acts as the spiritual master of
all devotees, and by His causeless mercy the fallen souls are delivered. Çré
Baladeva appeared as Çré Nityänanda Prabhu during the advent of Lord
Caitanya, and the great Lord Nityänanda Prabhu exhibited His causeless
mercy by delivering a pair of extremely fallen souls, namely Jagäi and Mädhäi.
Therefore it is particularly mentioned herein that Balaräma is the protector of
the devotees of the Lord. By His divine grace only one can approach the
Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa, and thus Çré Balaräma is the mercy incarnation of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the Lord, manifested as the spiritual master, the savior of the pure devotees.
TEXT 30
Pa[ÛuMan" SavRv*Z<aqNaa& Sau%MaaSTae MaharQa" )
GaM>aqrrYaae_iNaåÖae vDaRTae >aGavaNauTa )) 30 ))
pradyumnaù sarva-våñëénäà
sukham äste mahä-rathaù
gambhéra-rayo ’niruddho
vardhate bhagavän uta
SYNONYMS
pradyumnaù—Pradyumna (a son of Lord Kåñëa); sarva—all; våñëénäm—of the
members of the Våñëi family; sukham—happiness; äste—are in;
mahä-rathaù—the great general; gambhéra—deeply; rayaù—dexterity;
aniruddhaù—Aniruddha (a grandson of Lord Kåñëa); vardhate—flourishing;
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; uta—must.
TRANSLATION
How is Pradyumna, the great general of the Våñëi family? Is He happy? And
is Aniruddha, the plenary expansion of the Personality of Godhead, faring well?
PURPORT
Pradyumna and Aniruddha are also expansions of the Personality of
Godhead, and thus They are also viñëu-tattva. At Dvärakä Lord Väsudeva is
engaged in His transcendental pastimes along with His plenary expansions,
namely Saìkarñaëa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha, and therefore each and every
one of Them can be addressed as the Personality of Godhead, as it is
mentioned in connection with the name Aniruddha.
TEXT 31
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Sauze<aêaådeZ<aê SaaMbae JaaMbvTaqSauTa" )
ANYae c k-aiZ<aRPa[vra" SaPau}aa ‰z>aadYa" )) 31 ))
suñeëaç cärudeñëaç ca
sämbo jämbavaté-sutaù
anye ca kärñëi-pravaräù
saputrä åñabhädayaù
SYNONYMS
suñeëaù—Suñeëa; cärudeñëaù—Cärudeñëa; ca—and; sämbaù—Sämba;
jämbavaté-sutaù—the son of Jämbavaté; anye—others; ca—also; kärñëi—the
sons of Lord Kåñëa; pravaräù—all chieftains; sa-puträù—along with their sons;
åñabha—Åñabha; ädayaù—etc.
TRANSLATION
Are all the chieftain sons of Lord Kåñëa, such as Suñeëa, Cärudeñëa, Sämba
the son of Jämbavaté, and Åñabha, along with their sons, all doing well?
PURPORT
As already mentioned, Lord Kåñëa married 16,108 wives, and each of them
had ten sons. Therefore 16,108 x 10 161,080 sons. They all grew up, and each of
them had as many sons as their father, and the whole aggregate was something
near 1,610,800 family members of the Lord. The Lord is the father of all living
beings, who are countless in number; therefore only a few of them are called to
associate with the Lord in His transcendental pastimes as the Lord of Dvärakä
on this earth. It is not astonishing that the Lord maintained a visible family
consisting of so many members. It is better to refrain from comparing the
Lord’s position to ours, and it becomes a simple truth as soon as we understand
at least a partial calculation of the Lord’s transcendental position. King
Yudhiñöhira, while inquiring about the Lord’s sons and grandsons at Dvärakä,
mentioned only the chieftains amongst them, for it was impossible for him to
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
remember all the names of the Lord’s family members.
TEXTS 32–33
TaQaEvaNaucra" XaaEre" é[uTadevaeÖvadYa" )
SauNaNdNaNdXaqzR<Yaa Yae caNYae SaaTvTazR>aa" )) 32 ))
AiPa SvSTYaaSaTae SaveR raMak*-Z<a>auJaaé[Yaa" )
AiPa SMariNTa ku-Xal/MaSMaak&- bÖSaaEôda" )) 33 ))
tathaivänucaräù çaureù
çrutadevoddhavädayaù
sunanda-nanda-çérñaëyä
ye cänye sätvatarñabhäù
api svasty äsate sarve
räma-kåñëa-bhujäçrayäù
api smaranti kuçalam
asmäkaà baddha-sauhådäù
SYNONYMS
tathä eva—similarly; anucaräù—constant companions; çaureù—of Lord Çré
Kåñëa such as; çrutadeva—Çrutadeva; uddhava-ädayaù—Uddhava and others;
sunanda—Sunanda; nanda—Nanda; çérñaëyäù—other leaders; ye—all of
them; ca—and; anye—others; sätvata—liberated souls; åñabhäù—the best men;
api—if; svasti—doing well; äsate—are; sarve—all of them; räma—Balaräma;
kåñëa—Lord Kåñëa; bhuja-äçrayäù—under the protection of; api—if also;
smaranti—do remember; kuçalam—welfare; asmäkam—about ourselves;
baddha-sauhådäù—bound by eternal friendship.
TRANSLATION
Also, Çrutadeva, Uddhava and others, Nanda, Sunanda and other leaders of
liberated souls who are constant companions of the Lord are protected by Lord
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Balaräma and Kåñëa. Are they all doing well in their respective functions? Do
they, who are all eternally bound in friendship with us, remember our welfare?
PURPORT
The constant companions of Lord Kåñëa, such as Uddhava, are all liberated
souls, and they descended along with Lord Kåñëa to this material world to
fulfill the mission of the Lord. The Päëòavas are also liberated souls who
descended along with Lord Kåñëa to serve Him in His transcendental pastimes
on this earth. As stated in the Bhagavad-gétä (4.8), the Lord and His eternal
associates, who are also liberated souls like the Lord, come down on this earth
at certain intervals. The Lord remembers them all, but His associates, although
liberated souls, forget due to their being taöasthä çakti, or marginal potency of
the Lord. That is the difference between the viñëu-tattva and jéva-tattva. The
jéva-tattvas are infinitesimal potential particles of the Lord, and therefore they
require the protection of the Lord at all times. And to the eternal servitors of
the Lord, the Lord is pleased to give all protection at all times. The liberated
souls never, therefore, think themselves as free as the Lord or as powerful as
the Lord, but they always seek the protection of the Lord in all circumstances,
both in the material world and in the spiritual world. This dependence of the
liberated soul is constitutional, for the liberated souls are like sparks of a fire
that are able to exhibit the glow of fire along with the fire and not
independently. Independently the glow of the sparks is extinguished, although
the quality of fire or the glowing is there. Thus those who give up the
protection of the Lord and become so-called lords themselves, out of spiritual
ignorance, come back again to this material world, even after prolonged
tapasya of the severest type. That is the verdict of all Vedic literature.
TEXT 34
>aGavaNaiPa GaaeivNdae b]ø<Yaae >a¢-vTSal/" )
k-iÀTPaure SauDaMaaRYaa& Sau%MaaSTae Sauôd(v*Ta" )) 34 ))
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
bhagavän api govindo
brahmaëyo bhakta-vatsalaù
kaccit pure sudharmäyäà
sukham äste suhåd-våtaù
SYNONYMS
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa; api—also; govindaù—one who
enlivens the cows and the senses; brahmaëyaù—devoted to the devotees of the
brähmaëas; bhakta-vatsalaù—affectionate to the devotees; kaccit—whether;
pure—in Dvärakä Puré; sudharmäyäm—pious assembly; sukham—happiness;
äste—does enjoy; suhåt-våtaù—surrounded by friends.
TRANSLATION
Is Lord Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who gives pleasure to
the cows, the senses and the brähmaëas, who is very affectionate towards His
devotees, enjoying the pious assembly at Dvärakä Puré surrounded by friends?
PURPORT
Here in this particular verse the Lord is described as bhagavän, govinda,
brahmaëya and bhakta-vatsala. He is bhagavän svayam, or the original Supreme
Personality of Godhead, full with all opulences, all power, all knowledge, all
beauty, all fame and all renunciation. No one is equal to or greater than Him.
He is Govinda because He is the pleasure of the cows and the senses. Those
who have purified their senses by the devotional service of the Lord can
render unto Him real service and thereby derive transcendental pleasure out
of such purified senses. Only the impure conditioned living being cannot
derive any pleasure from the senses, but being illusioned by false pleasures of
the senses, he becomes servant of the senses. Therefore, we need His
protection for our own interest. The Lord is the protector of cows and the
brahminical culture. A society devoid of cow protection and brahminical
culture is not under the direct protection of the Lord, just as the prisoners in
the jails are not under the protection of the king but under the protection of a
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
severe agent of the king. Without cow protection and cultivation of the
brahminical qualities in human society, at least for a section of the members of
society, no human civilization can prosper at any length. By brahminical
culture, the development of the dormant qualities of goodness, namely
truthfulness, equanimity, sense control, forbearance, simplicity, general
knowledge, transcendental knowledge, and firm faith in the Vedic wisdom,
one can become a brähmaëa and thus see the Lord as He is. And after
surpassing the brahminical perfection, one has to become a devotee of the
Lord so that His loving affection in the form of proprietor, master, friend, son
and lover can be transcendentally achieved. The stage of a devotee, which
attracts the transcendental affection of the Lord, does not develop unless one
has developed the qualities of a brähmaëa as above mentioned. The Lord is
inclined to a brähmaëa of quality and not of false prestige. Those who are less
than a brähmaëa by qualification cannot establish any relation with the Lord,
just as fire cannot be kindled from the raw earth unless there is wood, although
there is a relation between wood and the earth. Since the Lord is all-perfect in
Himself, there could not be any question of His welfare, and Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira refrained from asking this question. He simply inquired about His
residential place, Dvärakä Puré, where pious men assemble. The Lord stays
only where pious men assemble and takes pleasure in their glorifying the
Supreme Truth. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was anxious to know about the pious
men and their pious acts in the city of Dvärakä.
TEXTS 35–36
Ma®l/aYa c l/aek-aNaa& +aeMaaYa c >avaYa c )
AaSTae Yaduku-l/aM>aaeDaavaÛae_NaNTaSa%" PauMaaNa( )) 35 ))
YaØahud<@GauáaYaa& SvPauYaa| Yadvae_icRTaa" )
§-I@iNTa ParMaaNaNd& MahaPaaEåizk-a wv )) 36 ))
maìgaläya ca lokänäà
kñemäya ca bhaväya ca
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
äste yadu-kulämbhodhäv
ädyo ’nanta-sakhaù pumän
yad bähu-daëòa-guptäyäà
sva-puryäà yadavo ’rcitäù
kréòanti paramänandaà
mahä-pauruñikä iva
SYNONYMS
maìgaläya—for all good; ca—also; lokänäm—of all the planets; kñemäya—for
protection; ca—and; bhaväya—for elevation; ca—also; äste—is there;
yadu-kula-ambhodhau—in the ocean of the Yadu dynasty; ädyaù—the
original; ananta-sakhaù—in the company of Ananta (Balaräma); pumän—the
supreme enjoyer; yat—whose; bähu-daëòa-guptäyäm—being protected by His
arms; sva-puryäm—in His own city; yadavaù—the members of the Yadu
family; arcitäù—as they deserve; kréòanti—are relishing;
parama-änandam—transcendental pleasure; mahä-pauruñikäù—the residents
of the spiritual sky; iva—like.
TRANSLATION
The original Personality of Godhead, the enjoyer, and Balaräma, the
primeval Lord Ananta, are staying in the ocean of the Yadu dynasty for the
welfare, protection and general progress of the entire universe. And the
members of the Yadu dynasty, being protected by the arms of the Lord, are
enjoying life like the residents of the spiritual sky.
PURPORT
As we have discussed many times, the Personality of Godhead Viñëu resides
within each and every universe in two capacities, namely as the
Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu and the Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu. The Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu
has His own planet on the northern top of the universe, and there is a great
ocean of milk where the Lord resides on the bed of the Ananta incarnation of
Baladeva. Thus Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira has compared the Yadu dynasty to the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ocean of milk and Çré Balaräma to the Ananta where Lord Kåñëa resides. He
has compared the citizens of Dvärakä to the liberated inhabitants of the
Vaikuëöhalokas. Beyond the material sky, further than we can see with our
eyes and beyond the sevenfold coverings of the universe, there is the Causal
Ocean in which all the universes are floating like footballs, and beyond the
Causal Ocean there is an unlimited span of spiritual sky generally known as
the effulgence of Brahman. Within this effulgence there are innumerable
spiritual planets, and they are known as the Vaikuëöha planets. Each and
every Vaikuëöha planet is many, many times bigger than the biggest universe
within the material world, and in each of them there are innumerable
inhabitants who look exactly like Lord Viñëu. These inhabitants are known as
the Mahä-pauruñikas, or persons directly engaged in the service of the Lord.
They are happy in those planets and are without any kind of misery, and they
live perpetually in full youthfulness, enjoying life in full bliss and knowledge
without fear of birth, death, old age or disease, and without the influence of
käla, eternal time. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira has compared the inhabitants of
Dvärakä to the Mahä-pauruñikas of Vaikuëöhaloka because they are so happy
with the Lord. In the Bhagavad-gétä there are many references to the
Vaikuëöhalokas, and they are mentioned there as mad-dhäma, or the kingdom
of the Lord.
TEXT 37
YaTPaadéué[Uz<aMau:Yak-MaR<aa
SaTYaadYaae ÜyíSahóYaaeizTa" )
iNaiJaRTYa Sa&:Yae i}adXaa&STadaiXazae
hriNTa vJa]aYauDavç>aaeicTaa" )) 37 ))
yat-päda-çuçrüñaëa-mukhya-karmaëä
satyädayo dvy-añöa-sahasra-yoñitaù
nirjitya saìkhye tri-daçäàs tad-äçiño
haranti vajräyudha-vallabhocitäù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
yat—whose; päda—feet; çuçrüñaëa—administration of comforts; mukhya—the
most important; karmaëä—by the acts of; satya-ädayaù—queens headed by
Satyabhämä; dvi-añöa—twice eight; sahasra—thousand; yoñitaù—the fair sex;
nirjitya—by subduing; saìkhye—in the battle; tri-daçän—of the denizens of
heaven; tat-äçiñaù—what is enjoyed by the demigods; haranti—do take away;
vajra-äyudha-vallabhä—the wives of the personality who controls the
thunderbolt; ucitäù—deserving.
TRANSLATION
Simply by administering comforts at the lotus feet of the Lord, which is the
most important of all services, the queens at Dvärakä, headed by Satyabhämä,
induced the Lord to conquer the demigods. Thus the queens enjoy things which
are prerogatives of the wives of the controller of thunderbolts.
PURPORT
Satyabhämä: One of the principal queens of Lord Çré Kåñëa at Dvärakä.
After killing Narakäsura, Lord Kåñëa visited the palace of Narakäsura
accompanied by Satyabhämä. He went to Indraloka also with Satyabhämä, and
she was received by Çacédevé, who introduced her to the mother of the
demigods, Aditi. Aditi was very much pleased with Satyabhämä, and she
blessed her with the benediction of permanent youth as long as Lord Kåñëa
remained on the earth. Aditi also took her with her to show her the special
prerogatives of the demigods in the heavenly planets. When Satyabhämä saw
the pärijäta flower, she desired to have it in her palace at Dvärakä. After that,
she came back to Dvärakä along with her husband and expressed her
willingness to have the pärijäta flower at her palace. Satyabhämä’s palace was
especially bedecked with valuable jewels, and even in the hottest season of
summer the inside of the palace remained cool, as if air-conditioned. She
decorated her palace with various flags, heralding the news of her great
husband’s presence there. Once, along with her husband, she met Draupadé,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
and she was anxious to be instructed by Draupadé in the ways and means of
pleasing her husband. Draupadé was expert in this affair because she kept five
husbands, the Päëòavas, and all were very much pleased with her. On receipt
of Draupadé’s instructions, she was very much pleased and offered her good
wishes and returned to Dvärakä. She was the daughter of Saträjit. After the
departure of Lord Kåñëa, when Arjuna visited Dvärakä, all the queens,
including Satyabhämä and Rukmiëé, lamented for the Lord with great feeling.
At the last stage of her life, she left for the forest to undergo severe penance.
Satyabhämä instigated her husband to get the pärijäta flower from the
heavenly planets, and the Lord got it even by force from the demigods, as a
common husband secures things to please his wife. As already explained, the
Lord had very little to do with so many wives to carry out their orders like an
ordinary man. But because the queens accepted the high quality of devotional
service, namely administering the Lord all comforts, the Lord played the part
of a faithful and complete husband. No earthly creature can expect to have
things from the heavenly kingdom, especially the pärijäta flowers, which are
simply to be used by the demigods. But due to their becoming the Lord’s
faithful wives, all of them enjoyed the special prerogatives of the great wives of
the denizens of heaven. In other words, since the Lord is the proprietor of
everything within His creation, it is not very astonishing for the queens of
Dvärakä to have any rare thing from any part of the universe.
TEXT 38
YaØahud<@a>YaudYaaNauJaqivNaae
YaduPa[vqra ùku-Taae>aYaa Mauhu" )
AiDa§-MaNTYax(iga]i>araôTaa& bl/aTa(
Sa>aa& SauDaMaa| SaurSataMaaeicTaaMa( )) 38 ))
yad bähu-daëòäbhyudayänujévino
yadu-pravérä hy akutobhayä muhuù
adhikramanty aìghribhir ähåtäà balät
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
sabhäà sudharmäà sura-sattamocitäm
SYNONYMS
yat—whose; bähu-daëòa—arms; abhyudaya—influenced by;
anujévinaù—always living; yadu—the members of the Yadu dynasty;
pravéräù—great heroes; hi akutobhayäù—fearless in every respect;
muhuù—constantly; adhikramanti—traversing; aìghribhiù—by foot;
ähåtäm—brought about; balät—by force; sabhäm—assembly house;
sudharmäm—Sudharmä; sura-sat-tama—the best among the demigods;
ucitäm—deserving.
TRANSLATION
The great heroes of the Yadu dynasty, being protected by the arms of Lord
Çré Kåñëa, always remain fearless in every respect. And therefore their feet
trample over the Sudharmä assembly house, which the best demigods deserved
but which was taken away from them.
PURPORT
Those who are directly servitors of the Lord are protected by the Lord from
all fearfulness, and they also enjoy the best of things, even if they are forcibly
accumulated. The Lord is equal in behavior to all living beings, but He is
partial to His pure devotees, being very affectionate toward them. The city of
Dvärakä was flourishing, being enriched with the best of things in the material
world. The state assembly house is constructed according to the dignity of the
particular state. In the heavenly planets, the state assembly house called
Sudharmä was deserving of the dignity of the best of the demigods. Such an
assembly house is never meant for any state on the globe because the human
being on the earth is unable to construct it, however far a particular state may
be materially advanced. But during the time of Lord Kåñëa’s presence on the
earth, the members of the Yadu family forcibly brought the celestial assembly
house to earth and placed it at Dvärakä. They were able to use such force
because they were certain of the indulgence and protection of the Supreme
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Lord Kåñëa. In other words, the Lord is provided with the best things in the
universe by His pure devotees. Lord Kåñëa was provided with all kinds of
comforts and facilities available within the universe by the members of the
Yadu dynasty, and in return such servitors of the Lord were protected and
fearless.
A forgetful, conditioned soul is fearful. But a liberated soul is never fearful,
just as a small child completely dependent on the mercy of his father is never
fearful of anyone. Fearfulness is a sort of illusion for the living being when he
is in slumber and forgetting his eternal relation with the Lord. Since the living
being is never to die by his constitution, as stated in Bhagavad-gétä (2.20), then
what is the cause of fearfulness? A person may be fearful of a tiger in a dream,
but another man who is awake by his side sees no tiger there. The tiger is a
myth for both of them, namely the person dreaming and the person awake,
because actually there is no tiger; but the man forgetful of his awakened life is
fearful, whereas the man who has not forgotten his position is not at all
fearful. Thus the members of the Yadu dynasty were fully awake in their
service to the Lord, and therefore there was no tiger for them to be afraid of at
any time. Even if there were a real tiger, the Lord was there to protect them.
TEXT 39
k-iÀtae_NaaMaYa& TaaTa >a]íTaeJaa iv>aaiSa Mae )
Al/BDaMaaNaae_vjaTa" ik&- va TaaTa icraeizTa" )) 39 ))
kaccit te ’nämayaà täta
bhrañöa-tejä vibhäsi me
alabdha-mäno ’vajïätaù
kià vä täta ciroñitaù
SYNONYMS
kaccit—whether; te—your; anämayam—health is all right; täta—my dear
brother; bhrañöa—bereft; tejäù—luster; vibhäsi—appear; me—to me;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
alabdha-mänaù—without respect; avajïätaù—neglected; kim—whether;
vä—or; täta—my dear brother; ciroñitaù—because of long residence.
TRANSLATION
My brother Arjuna, please tell me whether your health is all right. You
appear to have lost your bodily luster. Is this due to others disrespecting and
neglecting you because of your long stay at Dvärakä?
PURPORT
From all angles of vision, the Mahäräja inquired from Arjuna about the
welfare of Dvärakä, but he concluded at last that as long as Lord Çré Kåñëa
Himself was there, nothing inauspicious could happen. But at the same time,
Arjuna appeared to be bereft of his bodily luster, and thus the King inquired of
his personal welfare and asked so many vital questions.
TEXT 40
k-iÀàai>ahTaae_>aavE" XaBdaidi>arMa®lE/" )
Na dtaMau¢-MaiQaR>Ya AaXaYaa YaTPa[iTaé[uTaMa( )) 40 ))
kaccin näbhihato ’bhävaiù
çabdädibhir amaìgalaiù
na dattam uktam arthibhya
äçayä yat pratiçrutam
SYNONYMS
kaccit—whether; na—could not; abhihataù—addressed by;
abhävaiù—unfriendly; çabda-ädibhiù—by sounds; amaìgalaiù—inauspicious;
na—did not; dattam—give in charity; uktam—is said; arthibhyaù—unto one
who asked; äçayä—with hope; yat—what; pratiçrutam—promised to be paid.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Has someone addressed you with unfriendly words or threatened you? Could
you not give charity to one who asked, or could you not keep your promise to
someone?
PURPORT
A kñatriya or a rich man is sometimes visited by persons who are in need of
money. When they are asked for a donation, it is the duty of the possessor of
wealth to give in charity in consideration of the person, place and time. If a
kñatriya or a rich man fails to comply with this obligation, he must be very
sorry for this discrepancy. Similarly, one should not fail to keep his promise to
give in charity. These discrepancies are sometimes causes of despondency, and
thus failing, a person becomes subjected to criticism, which might also be the
cause of Arjuna’s plight.
TEXT 41
k-iÀtv& b]aø<a& bal&/ Gaa& v*Ö& raeiGa<a& iñYaMa( )
Xar<aaePaSa*Ta& Satv& NaaTYaa+aq" Xar<aPa[d" )) 41 ))
kaccit tvaà brähmaëaà bälaà
gäà våddhaà rogiëaà striyam
çaraëopasåtaà sattvaà
nätyäkñéù çaraëa-pradaù
SYNONYMS
kaccit—whether; tvam—yourself; brähmaëam—the brähmaëas; bälam—the
child; gäm—the cow; våddham—old; rogiëam—the diseased; striyam—the
woman; çaraëa-upasåtam—having approached for protection; sattvam—any
living being; na—whether; atyäkñéù—not given shelter;
çaraëa-pradaù—deserving protection.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
You are always the protector of the deserving living beings, such as
brähmaëas, children, cows, women and the diseased. Could you not give them
protection when they approached you for shelter?
PURPORT
The brähmaëas, who are always engaged in researching knowledge for the
society’s welfare work, both materially and spiritually, deserve the protection
of the king in all respects. Similarly, the children of the state, the cow, the
diseased person, the woman and the old man specifically require the protection
of the state or a kñatriya king. If such living beings do not get protection by the
kñatriya, or the royal order, or by the state, it is certainly shameful for the
kñatriya or the state. If such things had actually happened to Arjuna, Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira was anxious to know about these discrepancies.
TEXT 42
k-iÀtv& NaaGaMaae_GaMYaa& GaMYaa& vaSaTk*-Taa& iñYaMa( )
ParaiJaTaae vaQa >avaàaetaMaENaaRSaMaE" PaiQa )) 42 ))
kaccit tvaà nägamo ’gamyäà
gamyäà väsat-kåtäà striyam
paräjito vätha bhavän
nottamair näsamaiù pathi
SYNONYMS
kaccit—whether; tvam—yourself; na—not; agamaù—did contact;
agamyäm—impeachable; gamyäm—acceptable; vä—either;
asat-kåtäm—improperly treated; striyam—a woman; paräjitaù—defeated by;
vä—either; atha—after all; bhavän—your good self; na—nor; uttamaiù—by
superior power; na—not; asamaiù—by equals; pathi—on the road.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Have you contacted a woman of impeachable character, or have you not
properly treated a deserving woman? Or have you been defeated on the way by
someone who is inferior or equal to you?
PURPORT
It appears from this verse that during the time of the Päëòavas free contact
between man and woman was allowed in certain conditions only. The
higher-caste men, namely the brähmaëas and kñatriyas, could accept a woman
of the vaiçya or the çüdra community, but a man from the lower castes could
not contact a woman of the higher caste. Even a kñatriya could not contact a
woman of the brähmaëa caste. The wife of a brähmaëa is considered one of the
seven mothers (namely one’s own mother, the wife of the spiritual master or
teacher, the wife of a brähmaëa, the wife of a king, the cow, the nurse, and the
earth). Such contact between man and woman was known as uttama and
adhama. Contact of a brähmaëa with a kñatriya woman is uttama, but the
contact of a kñatriya with a brähmaëa woman is adhama and therefore
condemned. A woman approaching a man for contact should never be refused,
but at the same time the discretion as above mentioned may also be
considered. Bhéma was approached by Hiòimbé from a community lower than
the çüdras, and Yayäti refused to marry the daughter of Çukräcärya because of
Çukräcärya’s being a brähmaëa. Vyäsadeva, a brähmaëa, was called to beget
Päëòu and Dhåtaräñöra. Satyavaté belonged to a family of fishermen, but
Paräçara, a great brähmaëa, begot in her Vyäsadeva. So there are so many
examples of contacts with woman, but in all cases the contacts were not
abominable nor were the results of such contacts bad. Contact between man
and woman is natural, but that also must be carried out under regulative
principles so that social consecration may not be disturbed or unwanted
worthless population be increased for the unrest of the world.
It is abominable for a kñatriya to be defeated by one who is inferior in
strength or equal in strength. If one is defeated at all, he should be defeated by
some superior power. Arjuna was defeated by Bhéñmadeva, and Lord Kåñëa
saved him from the danger. This was not an insult for Arjuna because
Bhéñmadeva was far superior to Arjuna in all ways, namely age, respect and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
strength. But Karëa was equal to Arjuna, and therefore Arjuna was in crisis
when fighting with Karëa. It was felt by Arjuna, and therefore Karëa was
killed even by crooked means. Such are the engagements of the kñatriyas, and
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira inquired from his brother whether anything undesirable
happened on the way home from Dvärakä.
TEXT 43
AiPa iSvTPaYaR>au&KQaaSTv& SaM>aaeJYaaNa( v*Öbal/k-aNa( )
JauGauiPSaTa& k-MaR ik-iÄTk*-Tavaà Yad+aMaMa( )) 43 ))
api svit parya-bhuìkthäs tvaà
sambhojyän våddha-bälakän
jugupsitaà karma kiïcit
kåtavän na yad akñamam
SYNONYMS
api svit—if it were so that; parya—by leaving aside; bhuìkthäù—have dined;
tvam—yourself; sambhojyän—deserving to dine together; våddha—the old
men; bälakän—boys; jugupsitam—abominable; karma—action;
kiïcit—something; kåtavän—you must have done; na—not; yat—that which;
akñamam—unpardonable.
TRANSLATION
Have you not taken care of old men and boys who deserve to dine with you?
Have you left them and taken your meals alone? Have you committed some
unpardonable mistake which is considered to be abominable?
PURPORT
It is the duty of a householder to feed first of all the children, the old
members of the family, the brähmaëas and the invalids. Besides that, an ideal
householder is required to call for any unknown hungry man to come and dine
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
before he himself goes to take his meals. He is required to call for such a
hungry man thrice on the road. The neglect of this prescribed duty of a
householder, especially in the matter of the old men and children, is
unpardonable.
TEXT 44
k-iÀTa( Pa[eïTaMaeNaaQa ôdYaeNaaTMabNDauNaa )
éUNYaae_iSMa rihTaae iNaTYa& MaNYaSae Tae_NYaQaa Na åk(- )) 44 ))
kaccit preñöhatamenätha
hådayenätma-bandhunä
çünyo ’smi rahito nityaà
manyase te ’nyathä na ruk
SYNONYMS
kaccit—whether; preñöha-tamena—unto the most dear one; atha—my brother
Arjuna; hådayena—most intimate; ätma-bandhunä—own friend Lord Kåñëa;
çünyaù—void; asmi—I am; rahitaù—having lost; nityam—for all time;
manyase—you think; te—your; anyathä—otherwise; na—never; ruk—mental
distress.
TRANSLATION
Or is it that you are feeling empty for all time because you might have lost
your most intimate friend, Lord Kåñëa? O my brother Arjuna, I can think of no
other reason for your becoming so dejected.
PURPORT
All the inquisitiveness of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira about the world situation
was already conjectured by Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira on the basis of Lord Kåñëa’s
disappearance from the vision of the world, and this was now disclosed by him
because of the acute dejection of Arjuna, which could not have been possible
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
otherwise. So even though he was doubtful about it, he was obliged to inquire
frankly from Arjuna on the basis of Çré Närada’s indication.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the First Canto, Fourteenth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled “The Disappearance of Lord Kåñëa.”
Chapter Fifteen
The Päëòavas Retire Timely
TEXT 1
SaUTa ovac
Wv& k*-Z<aSa%" k*-Z<aae >a]a}aa rajaivk-iLPaTa" )
NaaNaaXaªaSPad& æPa& k*-Z<aivëezk-iXaRTa" )) 1 ))
süta uväca
evaà kåñëa-sakhaù kåñëo
bhräträ räjïä vikalpitaù
nänä-çaìkäspadaà rüpaà
kåñëa-viçleña-karçitaù
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; evam—thus; kåñëa-sakhaù—the celebrated
friend of Kåñëa; kåñëaù—Arjuna; bhräträ—by his elder brother; räjïä—King
Yudhiñöhira; vikalpitaù—speculated; nänä—various; çaìka-äspadam—based on
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
many doubts; rüpam—forms; kåñëa—Lord Çré Kåñëa; viçleña—feelings of
separation; karçitaù—became greatly bereaved.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: Arjuna, the celebrated friend of Lord Kåñëa, was
grief-stricken because of his strong feeling of separation from Kåñëa, over and
above all Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira’s speculative inquiries.
PURPORT
Being too much aggrieved, Arjuna practically became choked up, and
therefore it was not possible for him to reply properly to the various
speculative inquiries of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira.
TEXT 2
Xaaeke-Na éuZYaÜdNaôTSaraeJaae hTaPa[>a" )
iv>au& TaMaevaNauSMaràaXa¥-aeTPa[iTa>aaizTauMa( )) 2 ))
çokena çuñyad-vadanahåt-
sarojo hata-prabhaù
vibhuà tam evänusmaran
näçaknot pratibhäñitum
SYNONYMS
çokena—due to bereavement; çuñyat-vadana—drying up of the mouth;
håt-sarojaù—lotuslike heart; hata—lost; prabhaù—bodily luster; vibhum—the
Supreme; tam—unto Lord Kåñëa; eva—certainly; anusmaran—thinking
within; na—could not; açaknot—be able; pratibhäñitum—properly replying.
TRANSLATION
Due to grief, Arjuna’s mouth and lotuslike heart had dried up. Therefore his
body lost all luster. Now, remembering the Supreme Lord, he could hardly utter
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
a word in reply.
TEXT 3
k*-C^\e<a Sa&STa>Ya éuc" Paai<aNaaMa*JYa Nae}aYaae" )
Parae+ae<a SaMauàÖPa[<aYaaETk-<#yk-aTar" )) 3 ))
kåcchreëa saàstabhya çucaù
päëinämåjya netrayoù
parokñeëa samunnaddhapraëayautkaëöhya-
kätaraù
SYNONYMS
kåcchreëa—with great difficulty; saàstabhya—by checking the force;
çucaù—of bereavement; päëinä—with his hands; ämåjya—smearing;
netrayoù—the eyes; parokñeëa—due to being out of sight;
samunnaddha—increasingly; praëaya-autkaëöhya—eagerly thinking of the
affection; kätaraù—distressed.
TRANSLATION
With great difficulty he checked the tears of grief that smeared his eyes. He
was very distressed because Lord Kåñëa was out of his sight, and he increasingly
felt affection for Him.
TEXT 4
Sa:Ya& MaE}aq& SaaEôd& c SaarQYaaidzu Sa&SMarNa( )
Na*PaMaGa]JaiMaTYaah baZPaGaÓdYaa iGara )) 4 ))
sakhyaà maitréà sauhådaà ca
särathyädiñu saàsmaran
nåpam agrajam ity äha
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
bäñpa-gadgadayä girä
SYNONYMS
sakhyam—well-wishing; maitrém—benediction; sauhådam—intimately related;
ca—also; särathya-ädiñu—in becoming the chariot driver;
saàsmaran—remembering all these; nåpam—unto the King; agrajam—the
eldest brother; iti—thus; äha—said; bäñpa—heavily breathing;
gadgadayä—overwhelmingly; girä—by speeches.
TRANSLATION
Remembering Lord Kåñëa and His well-wishes, benefactions, intimate
familial relations and His chariot driving, Arjuna, overwhelmed and breathing
very heavily, began to speak.
PURPORT
The Supreme Living Being is perfect in all relations with His pure devotee.
Çré Arjuna is one of the typical pure devotees of the Lord reciprocating in the
fraternal relationship, and the Lord’s dealings with Arjuna are displays of
friendship of the highest perfect order. He was not only a well-wisher of
Arjuna but actually a benefactor, and to make it still more perfect the Lord
tied him into a family relationship by arranging Subhadrä’s marriage with him.
And above all, the Lord agreed to become a chariot driver of Arjuna in order
to protect His friend from warfare risks, and the Lord became actually happy
when He established the Päëòavas to rule over the world. Arjuna remembered
all these one after another, and thus he became overwhelmed with such
thoughts.
TEXT 5
AJauRNa ovac
viÄTaae_h& MaharaJa hir<aa bNDauæiPa<aa )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
YaeNa Mae_PaôTa& TaeJaae devivSMaaPaNa& MahTa( )) 5 ))
arjuna uväca
vaïcito ’haà mahä-räja
hariëä bandhu-rüpiëä
yena me ’pahåtaà tejo
deva-vismäpanaà mahat
SYNONYMS
arjunaù uväca—Arjuna said; vaïcitaù—left by Him; aham—myself;
mahä-räja—O King; hariëä—by the Personality of Godhead;
bandhu-rüpiëä—as if an intimate friend; yena—by whom; me—my;
apahåtam—I have been bereft; tejaù—power; deva—the demigods;
vismäpanam—astonishing; mahat—astounding.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: O King! The Supreme Personality of Godhead Hari, who
treated me exactly like an intimate friend, has left me alone. Thus my
astounding power, which astonished even the demigods, is no longer with me.
PURPORT
In the Bhagavad-gétä (10.41) the Lord says, “Anyone specifically powerful
and opulent in wealth, strength, beauty, knowledge and all that is materially
desirable is to be considered but a product of an insignificant portion of the
complete whole of My energy.” No one, therefore, can be independently
powerful in any measure without being endowed by the Lord. When the Lord
descends on the earth along with His eternal ever-liberated associates, He not
only displays the divine energy possessed by Himself, but also empowers His
associate devotees with the required energy to execute His mission of
incarnation. It is also stated in the Bhagavad-gétä (4.5) that the Lord and His
eternal associates descend on the earth many times, but the Lord remembers
all the different roles of incarnations, whereas the associates, by His supreme
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
will, forget them. Similarly, the Lord takes away with Him all His associates
when He disappears from the earth. The power and energy which were
bestowed upon Arjuna were required for fulfillment of the mission of the Lord,
but when His mission was fulfilled, the emergency powers were withdrawn
from Arjuna because the astounding powers of Arjuna, which were
astonishing even to the denizens of heaven, were no longer required, and they
were not meant for going back home, back to Godhead. If endowment of
powers and withdrawal of powers by the Lord are possible even for a great
devotee like Arjuna, or even the demigods in heaven, then what to speak of
the ordinary living beings who are but figs compared to such great souls. The
lesson is, therefore, that no one should be puffed up for his powers borrowed
from the Lord. The sane man should rather feel obliged to the Lord for such
benefactions and must utilize such power for the service of the Lord. Such
power can be withdrawn at any time by the Lord, so the best use of such power
and opulence is to engage them in the service of the Lord.
TEXT 6
YaSYa +a<aivYaaeGaeNa l/aek-ae ùiPa[YadXaRNa" )
oKQaeNa rihTaae ùez Ma*Tak-" Pa[aeCYaTae YaQaa )) 6 ))
yasya kñaëa-viyogena
loko hy apriya-darçanaù
ukthena rahito hy eña
måtakaù procyate yathä
SYNONYMS
yasya—whose; kñaëa—a moment; viyogena—by separation; lokaù—all the
universes; hi—certainly; apriya-darçanaù—everything appears unfavorable;
ukthena—by life; rahitaù—being devoid of; hi—certainly; eñaù—all these
bodies; måtakaù—dead bodies; procyate—are designated; yathä—as it were.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
I have just lost Him whose separation for a moment would render all the
universes unfavorable and void, like bodies without life.
PURPORT
Factually for a living being there is no one dearer than the Lord. The Lord
expands Himself by innumerable parts and parcels as sväàça and vibhinnäàça.
Paramätmä is the sväàça part of the Lord, whereas the vibhinnäàça parts are
the living beings. As the living being is the important factor in the material
body, for without the living being the material body has no value, similarly
without Paramätmä the living being has no status quo. Similarly, Brahman or
Paramätmä has no locus standi without the Supreme Lord Kåñëa. This is
thoroughly explained in the Bhagavad-gétä. They are all interlinked with one
another, or interdependent factors; thus in the ultimate issue the Lord is the
summum bonum and therefore the vital principle of everything.
TEXT 7
YaTSa&é[Yaad( d]uPadGaehMauPaaGaTaaNaa&
raja& SvYa&vrMau%e SMarduMaRdaNaaMa( )
TaeJaae ôTa& %lu/ MaYaai>ahTaê MaTSYa"
SaÂqk*-TaeNa DaNauzaiDaGaTaa c k*-Z<aa )) 7 ))
yat-saàçrayäd drupada-geham upägatänäà
räjïäà svayaàvara-mukhe smara-durmadänäm
tejo håtaà khalu mayäbhihataç ca matsyaù
sajjékåtena dhanuñädhigatä ca kåñëä
SYNONYMS
yat—by whose merciful; saàçrayät—by strength; drupada-geham—in the
palace of King Drupada; upägatänäm—all those assembled; räjïäm—of the
princes; svayaàvara-mukhe—on the occasion of the selection of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
bridegroom; smara-durmadänäm—all lusty in thought; tejaù—power;
håtam—vanquished; khalu—as it were; mayä—by me; abhihataù—pierced;
ca—also; matsyaù—the fish target; sajjé-kåtena—by equipping the bow;
dhanuñä—by that bow also; adhigatä—gained; ca—also; kåñëä—Draupadé.
TRANSLATION
Only by His merciful strength was I able to vanquish all the lusty princes
assembled at the palace of King Drupada for the selection of the bridegroom.
With my bow and arrow I could pierce the fish target and thereby gain the hand
of Draupadé.
PURPORT
Draupadé was the most beautiful daughter of King Drupada, and when she
was a young girl almost all the princes desired her hand. But Drupada
Mahäräja decided to hand over his daughter to Arjuna only and therefore
contrived a peculiar way. There was a fish hanging on the inner roof of the
house under the protection of a wheel. The condition was that out of the
princely order, one must be able to pierce the fish’s eyes through the wheel of
protection, and no one would be allowed to look up at the target. On the
ground there was a waterpot in which the target and wheel were reflected, and
one had to fix his aim towards the target by looking at the trembling water in
the pot. Mahäräja Drupada well knew that only Arjuna or alternately Karëa
could successfully carry out the plan. But still he wanted to hand his daughter
to Arjuna. And in the assembly of the princely order, when Dhåñöadyumna,
the brother of Draupadé, introduced all the princes to his grown-up sister,
Karëa was also present in the game. But Draupadé tactfully avoided Karëa as
the rival of Arjuna, and she expressed her desires through her brother
Dhåñöadyumna that she was unable to accept anyone who was less than a
kñatriya. The vaiçyas and the çüdras are less important than the kñatriyas.
Karëa was known as the son of a carpenter, a çüdra. So Draupadé avoided
Karëa by this plea. When Arjuna, in the dress of a poor brähmaëa, pierced the
difficult target, everyone was astonished, and all of them, especially Karëa,
offered a stiff fight to Arjuna, but as usual by the grace of Lord Kåñëa he was
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
able to emerge very successful in the princely fight and thus gain the valuable
hand of Kåñëä, or Draupadé. Arjuna was lamentingly remembering the
incident in the absence of the Lord, by whose strength only he was so
powerful.
TEXT 8
YaTSaiàDaavhMau %a<@vMaGanYae_da‚
iMaNd]& c SaaMarGa<a& TarSaa iviJaTYa )
l/BDaa Sa>aa MaYak*-Taad(>auTaiXaLPaMaaYaa
idG>Yaae_hrà*PaTaYaae bil/Maßre Tae )) 8 ))
yat-sannidhäv aham u khäëòavam agnaye ’däm
indraà ca sämara-gaëaà tarasä vijitya
labdhä sabhä maya-kåtädbhuta-çilpa-mäyä
digbhyo ’haran nåpatayo balim adhvare te
SYNONYMS
yat—whose; sannidhau—being nearby; aham—myself; u—note of
astonishment; khäëòavam—the protected forest of Indra, King of heaven;
agnaye—unto the fire-god; adäm—delivered; indram—Indra; ca—also;
sa—along with; amara-gaëam—the demigods; tarasä—with all dexterity;
vijitya—having conquered; labdhä—having obtained; sabhä—assembly house;
maya-kåtä—built by Maya; adbhuta—very wonderful; çilpa—art and
workmanship; mäyä—potency; digbhyaù—from all directions;
aharan—collected; nåpatayaù—all princes; balim—presentations;
adhvare—brought; te—your.
TRANSLATION
Because He was near me, it was possible for me to conquer with great
dexterity the powerful King of heaven, Indradeva, along with his demigod
associates and thus enable the fire-god to devastate the Khäëòava Forest. And
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
only by His grace was the demon named Maya saved from the blazing Khäëòava
Forest, and thus we could build our assembly house of wonderful architectural
workmanship, where all the princes assembled during the performance of
Räjasüya-yajïa and paid you tributes.
PURPORT
The demon Maya Dänava was an inhabitant of the forest Khäëòava, and
when the Khäëòava Forest was set on fire, he asked protection from Arjuna.
Arjuna saved his life, and as a result of this the demon felt obliged. He
reciprocated by building a wonderful assembly house for the Päëòavas, which
attracted the extraordinary attention of all state princes. They felt the
supernatural power of the Päëòavas, and thus without grudge all of them
submitted and paid tributes to the Emperor. The demons possess wonderful
and supernatural powers to create material wonders. But they are always
disturbing elements of the society. The modern demons are the harmful
material scientists who create some material wonders for disturbance in the
society. For example, the creation of nuclear weapons has caused some panic in
human society. Maya was also a materialist like that, and he knew the art of
creating such wonderful things. And yet Lord Kåñëa wanted to kill him. When
he was chased both by the fire and by the wheel of Lord Kåñëa, he took shelter
of such a devotee as Arjuna, who saved him from the wrath of the fire of Lord
Çré Kåñëa. Devotees are therefore more merciful than the Lord, and in
devotional service the mercy of a devotee is more valuable than the mercy of
the Lord. Both the fire and the Lord ceased from chasing the demon as soon as
both of them saw that the demon was given shelter by such a devotee as
Arjuna. This demon, feeling obliged to Arjuna, wanted to do him some service
to show his gratefulness, but Arjuna declined to accept anything from him in
exchange. Lord Çré Kåñëa, however, being pleased with Maya for his taking
shelter of a devotee, asked him to render service unto King Yudhiñöhira by
building a wonderful assembly house. The process is that by the grace of the
devotee the mercy of the Lord is obtained, and by the mercy of the Lord a
chance to serve the Lord’s devotee is obtained. The club of Bhémasena was also
a gift of Maya Dänava.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 9
YataeJaSaa Na*PaiXarae_x(iga]MahNMa%aQaRMa(
AaYaaeR_NauJaSTav GaJaaYauTaSatvvqYaR" )
TaeNaaôTaa" Pa[MaQaNaaQaMa%aYa >aUPaa
YaNMaaeicTaaSTadNaYaNa( bil/Maßre Tae )) 9 ))
yat-tejasä nåpa-çiro-’ìghrim ahan makhärtham
äryo ’nujas tava gajäyuta-sattva-véryaù
tenähåtäù pramatha-nätha-makhäya bhüpä
yan-mocitäs tad-anayan balim adhvare te
SYNONYMS
yat—whose; tejasä—by influence; nåpa-çiraù-aìghrim—one whose feet are
adored by the heads of kings; ahan—killed; makha-artham—for the sacrifice;
äryaù—respectable; anujaù—younger brother; tava—your; gaja-ayuta—ten
thousand elephants; sattva-véryaù—powerful existence; tena—by him;
ähåtäù—collected; pramatha-nätha—the lord of the ghosts (Mahäbhairava);
makhäya—for sacrifice; bhüpäù—kings; yat-mocitäù—by whom they were
released; tat-anayan—all of them brought; balim—taxes; adhvare—presented;
te—your.
TRANSLATION
Your respectable younger brother, who possesses the strength of ten
thousand elephants, killed, by His grace, Jaräsandha, whose feet were
worshiped by many kings. These kings had been brought for sacrifice in
Jaräsandha’s Mahäbhairava-yajïa, but they were thus released. Later they paid
tribute to Your Majesty.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Jaräsandha was a very powerful king of Magadha, and the history of his
birth and activities is also very interesting. His father, King Båhadratha, was
also a very prosperous and powerful king of Magadha, but he had no son,
although he married two daughters of the King of Käçé. Being disappointed in
not getting a son from either of the two queens, the King, along with his wives,
left home to live in the forest for austerities, but in the forest he was blessed by
one great åñi to have a son, and he gave him one mango to be eaten by the
queens. The queens did so and were very soon pregnant. The King was very
happy to see the queens bearing children, but when the ripe time approached,
the queens delivered one child in two parts, one from each of the queens’
wombs. The two parts were thrown in the forest, where a great she-demon used
to live, and she was glad to have some delicate flesh and blood from the newly
born child. Out of curiosity she joined the two parts, and the child became
complete and regained life. The she-demon was known as Jarä, and being
compassionate on the childless King, she went to the King and presented him
with the nice child, The King was very pleased with the she-demon and
wanted to reward her according to her desire. The she-demon expressed her
desire that the child be named after her, and thus the child was surnamed
Jaräsandha, or one who was joined by Jarä, the she-demon. In fact, this
Jaräsandha was born as one of the parts and parcels of the demon Vipracitti.
The saint by whose benedictions the queens bore the child was called Candra
Kauçika, who foretold of the child before his father Båhadratha.
Since he possessed demoniac qualities from birth, naturally he became a
great devotee of Lord Çiva, who is the lord of all ghostly and demoniac men.
Rävaëa was a great devotee of Lord Çiva, and so also King Jaräsandha. He used
to sacrifice all arrested kings before Lord Mahäbhairava (Çiva) and by his
military power he defeated many small kings and arrested them to butcher
before Mahäbhairava. There are many devotees of Lord Mahäbhairava, or
Kälabhairava, in the province of Bihar, formerly called Magadha. Jaräsandha
was a relative of Kaàsa, the maternal uncle of Kåñëa, and therefore after
Kaàsa’s death King Jaräsandha became a great enemy of Kåñëa, and there
were many fights between Jaräsandha and Kåñëa. Lord Kåñëa wanted to kill
him, but He also wanted that those who served as military men for Jaräsandha
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
might not be killed. Therefore a plan was adopted to kill him. Kåñëa, Bhéma
and Arjuna together went to Jaräsandha in the dress of poor brähmaëas and
begged charity from King Jaräsandha. Jaräsandha never refused charity to any
brähmaëa, and he performed many sacrifices also, yet he was not on a par with
devotional service. Lord Kåñëa, Bhéma and Arjuna asked Jaräsandha for the
facility of fighting him, and it was settled that Jaräsandha would fight with
Bhéma only. So all of them were both guests and combatants of Jaräsandha,
and Bhéma and Jaräsandha fought every day for several days. Bhéma became
disappointed, but Kåñëa gave him hints about Jaräsandha’s being joined
together as an infant, and thus Bhéma dissected him again and so killed him.
All the kings who were detained in the concentration camp to be killed before
Mahäbhairava were thus released by Bhéma. Feeling thus obliged to the
Päëòavas, they paid tribute to King Yudhiñöhira.
TEXT 10
PaTNYaaSTavaiDaMa%oeáMahai>azek-‚
ëaigaïcaåk-br& ik-TavE" Sa>aaYaaMa( )
SPa*í& ivk-IYaR PadYaae" PaiTaTaaé[uMau:Yaa
YaSTaiTñYaae_k*-TahTaeXaivMau¢-ke-Xaa" )) 10 ))
patnyäs tavädhimakha-kÿpta-mahäbhiñekaçläghiñöha-
cäru-kabaraà kitavaiù sabhäyäm
spåñöaà vikérya padayoù patitäçru-mukhyä
yas tat-striyo ’kåta-hateça-vimukta-keçäù
SYNONYMS
patnyäù—of the wife; tava—your; adhimakha—during the great sacrificial
ceremony; kÿpta—dressed; mahä-abhiñeka—greatly sanctified; çläghiñöha—thus
glorified; cäru—beautiful; kabaram—clustered hair; kitavaiù—by the
miscreants; sabhäyäm—in the great assembly; spåñöam—being caught;
vikérya—being loosened; padayoù—on the feet; patita-açru-mukhyäù—of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
one who fell down with tears in the eyes; yaù—He; tat—their; striyaù—wives;
akåta—became; hata-éça—bereft of husbands; vimukta-keçäù—loosened hair.
TRANSLATION
It was He only who loosened the hair of all the wives of the miscreants who
dared open the cluster of your Queen’s hair, which had been nicely dressed and
sanctified for the great Räjasüya sacrificial ceremony. At that time she fell
down at the feet of Lord Kåñëa with tears in her eyes.
PURPORT
Queen Draupadé had a beautiful bunch of hair which was sanctified in the
ceremonial function of Räjasüya-yajïa. But when she was lost in a bet,
Duùçäsana touched her glorified hair to insult her. Draupadé then fell down at
the lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa, and Lord Kåñëa decided that all the wives of
Duùçäsana and company should have their hair loosened as a result of the
Battle of Kurukñetra. Thus after the Battle of Kurukñetra, after all the sons and
grandsons of Dhåtaräñöra died in battle, all the wives of the family were obliged
to loosen their hair as widows. In other words, all the wives of the Kuru family
became widows because of Duùçäsana’s insulting a great devotee of the Lord.
The Lord can tolerate insults upon Himself by any miscreant because the
father tolerates even insults from the son. But He never tolerates insults upon
His devotees. By insulting a great soul, one has to forego all the results of pious
acts and benedictions also.
TEXT 11
Yaae Naae JauGaaePa vNa WTYa durNTak*-C^\ad(
duvaRSaSaae_irricTaadYauTaaGa]>auGa( Ya" )
Xaak-aàiXaíMauPaYauJYa YaTaiñl/aek-I&
Ta*áaMaMa&STa Sail/le/ iviNaMaGanSaº" )) 11 ))
yo no jugopa vana etya duranta-kåcchräd
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
durväsaso ’ri-racitäd ayutägra-bhug yaù
çäkänna-çiñöam upayujya yatas tri-lokéà
tåptäm amaàsta salile vinimagna-saìghaù
SYNONYMS
yaù—one who; naù—us; jugopa—gave protection; vane—forest; etya—getting
in; duranta—dangerously; kåcchrät—trouble; durväsasaù—of Durväsä Muni;
ari—enemy; racität—fabricated by; ayuta—ten thousand; agra-bhuk—one
who eats before; yaù—that person; çäka-anna-çiñöam—remnants of foodstuff;
upayujya—having accepted; yataù—because; tri-lokém—all the three worlds;
tåptäm—satisfied; amaàsta—thought within the mind; salile—while in the
water; vinimagna-saìghaù—all merged into the water.
TRANSLATION
During our exile, Durväsä Muni, who eats with his ten thousand disciples,
intrigued with our enemies to put us in dangerous trouble. At that time He
[Lord Kåñëa], simply by accepting the remnants of food, saved us. By His
accepting food thus, the assembly of munis, while bathing in the river, felt
sumptuously fed. And all the three worlds were also satisfied.
PURPORT
Durväsä Muni: A powerful mystic brähmaëa determined to observe the
principles of religion with great vows and under strict austerities. His name is
associated with many historical events, and it appears that the great mystic
could be both easily satisfied and easily annoyed, like Lord Çiva. When he was
satisfied, he could do tremendous good to the servitor, but if he was dissatisfied
he could bring about the greatest calamity. Kumäré Kunté, at her father’s
house, used to minister all kinds of services to all great brähmaëas, and being
satisfied with her good reception Durväsä Muni blessed her with a power to
call any demigod she desired. It is understood that he was a plenary
incarnation of Lord Çiva, and thus he could be either easily satisfied or
annoyed. He was a great devotee of Lord Çiva, and by Lord Çiva’s order he
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
accepted the priesthood of King Çvetaketu because of the King’s performance
of sacrifice for one hundred years. Sometimes he used to visit the
parliamentary assembly of the heavenly kingdom of Indradeva. He could travel
in space by his great mystic powers, and it is understood that he traveled a
great distance through space, even up to the Vaikuëöha planets beyond
material space. He traveled all these long distances within one year, during his
quarrel with King Ambaréña, the great devotee and Emperor of the world.
He had about ten thousand disciples, and wherever he visited and became a
guest of the great kñatriya kings, he used to be accompanied by a number of
followers. Once he visited the house of Duryodhana, the enemy cousin of
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira. Duryodhana was intelligent enough to satisfy the
brähmaëa by all means, and the great åñi wanted to give some benediction to
Duryodhana. Duryodhana knew his mystic powers, and he knew also that the
mystic brähmaëa, if dissatisfied, could cause some havoc, and thus he designed
to engage the brähmaëa to show his wrath upon his enemy cousins, the
Päëòavas. When the åñi wanted to award some benediction to Duryodhana,
the latter wished that he should visit the house of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, who
was the eldest and chief among all his cousins. But by his request he would go
to him after he had finished his meals with his Queen, Draupadé. Duryodhana
knew that after Draupadé’s dinner it would be impossible for Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira to receive such a large number of brähmaëa guests, and thus the
åñi would be annoyed and would create some trouble for his cousin Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira. That was the plan of Duryodhana. Durväsä Muni agreed to this
proposal, and he approached the King in exile, according to the plan of
Duryodhana, after the King and Draupadé had finished their meals.
On his arrival at the door of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, he was at once well
received, and the King requested him to finish his noontime religious rites in
the river, for by that time the foodstuff would be prepared. Durväsä Muni,
along with his large number of disciples, went to take a bath in the river, and
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was in great anxiety about the guests. As long as
Draupadé had not taken her meals, food could be served to any number of
guests, but the åñi, by the plan of Duryodhana, reached there after Draupadé
had finished her meals.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
When the devotees are put into difficulty, they have an opportunity to
recollect the Lord with rapt attention. So Draupadé was thinking of Lord
Kåñëa in that dangerous position, and the all-pervading Lord could at once
know the dangerous position of His devotees. He therefore came there on the
scene and asked Draupadé to give whatever food she might have in her stock.
On her being so requested by the Lord, Draupadé was sorrowful because the
Supreme Lord asked her for some food and she was unable to supply it at that
time. She said to the Lord that the mysterious dish which she had received
from the sun-god could supply any amount of food if she herself had not eaten.
But on that day she had already taken her meals, and thus they were in danger.
By expressing her difficulties she began to cry before the Lord as only a woman
would do in such a position. The Lord, however, asked Draupadé to bring up
the cooking pots to see if there was any particle of foodstuff left, and on
Draupadé’s doing so, the Lord found some particle of vegetable sticking to the
pot. The Lord at once picked it up and ate it. After doing so, the Lord asked
Draupadé to call for her guests, the company of Durväsä.
Bhéma was sent to call them from the river. Bhéma said, “Why are you
delaying, sirs? Come on, the food is ready for you.” But the brähmaëas, because
of Lord Kåñëa’s accepting a little particle of food, felt sumptuously fed, even
while they were in the water. They thought that since Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira
must have prepared many valuable dishes for them and since they were not
hungry and could not eat, the King would feel very sorry, so it was better not
to go there. Thus they decided to go away.
This incident proves that the Lord is the greatest mystic, and therefore He
is known as Yogeçvara. Another instruction is that every householder must
offer food to the Lord, and the result will be that everyone, even a company of
guests numbering ten thousand, will be satisfied because of the Lord’s being
satisfied. That is the way of devotional service.
TEXT 12
YataeJaSaaQa >aGavaNa( YauiDa éUl/Paai<a‚
ivRSMaaiPaTa" SaiGairJaae_ñMadaiàJa& Mae )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ANYae_iPa cahMaMauNaEv k-le/vre<a
Pa[aáae MaheNd]>avNae MahdaSaNaaDaRMa( )) 12 ))
yat-tejasätha bhagavän yudhi çüla-päëir
vismäpitaù sagirijo ’stram adän nijaà me
anye ’pi cäham amunaiva kalevareëa
präpto mahendra-bhavane mahad-äsanärdham
SYNONYMS
yat—by whose; tejasä—by influence; atha—at one time; bhagavän—the
personality of god (Lord Çiva); yudhi—in the battle; çüla-päëiù—one who has
a trident in his hand; vismäpitaù—astonished; sa-girijaù—along with the
daughter of the Himalaya Mountains; astram—weapon; adät—awarded;
nijam—of his own; me—unto me; anye api—so also others; ca—and;
aham—myself; amunä—by this; eva—definitely; kalevareëa—by the body;
präptaù—obtained; mahä-indra-bhavane—in the house of Indradeva;
mahat—great; äsana-ardham—half-elevated seat.
TRANSLATION
It was by His influence only that in a fight I was able to astonish the
personality of god Lord Çiva and his wife, the daughter of Mount Himalaya.
Thus he [Lord Çiva] became pleased with me and awarded me his own weapon.
Other demigods also delivered their respective weapons to me, and in addition I
was able to reach the heavenly planets in this present body and was allowed a
half-elevated seat.
PURPORT
By the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa, all the
demigods, including Lord Çiva, were pleased with Arjuna. The idea is that one
who is favored by Lord Çiva or any other demigod may not necessarily be
favored by the Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa. Rävaëa was certainly a great devotee
of Lord Çiva, but he could not be saved from the wrath of the Supreme
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Personality of Godhead Lord Rämacandra. And there are many instances like
that in the histories of the Puräëas. But here is an instance where we can see
that Lord Çiva became pleased even in the fight with Arjuna. The devotees of
the Supreme Lord know how to respect the demigods, but the devotees of the
demigods sometimes foolishly think that the Supreme Personality of Godhead
is no greater than the demigods. By such a conception, one becomes an
offender and ultimately meets with the same end as Rävaëa and others. The
instances described by Arjuna during his friendly dealings with Lord Çré Kåñëa
are instructive for all who may be convinced by the lessons that one can
achieve all favors simply by pleasing the Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa, whereas the
devotees or worshipers of the demigods may achieve only partial benefits,
which are also perishable, just as the demigods themselves are.
Another significance of the present verse is that Arjuna, by the grace of
Lord Çré Kåñëa, was able to reach the heavenly planet even with the selfsame
body and was honored by the heavenly demigod Indradeva, being seated with
him half-elevated. One can reach the heavenly planets by the pious acts
recommended in the çästras in the category of fruitive activities. And as stated
in the Bhagavad-gétä (9.21), when the reactions of such pious acts are spent,
the enjoyer is again degraded to this earthly planet. The moon is also on the
level with the heavenly planets, and only persons who have performed virtues
only—performing sacrifices, giving charity and undergoing severe
austerities—can be allowed to enter into the heavenly planets after the
duration of life of the body. Arjuna was allowed to enter into the heavenly
planets in the selfsame body simply by the grace of the Lord, otherwise it is not
possible to do so. The present attempts to enter into the heavenly planets by
the modern scientists will certainly prove futile because such scientists are not
on the level of Arjuna. They are ordinary human beings, without any assets of
sacrifice, charity or austerities. The material body is influenced by the three
modes of material nature, namely goodness, passion and ignorance. The
present population is more or less influenced by the modes of passion and
ignorance, and the symptoms for such influence are exhibited in their
becoming very lusty and greedy. Such degraded fellows can hardly approach
the higher planetary systems. Above the heavenly planets there are many
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
other planets also, which only those who are influenced by goodness can reach.
In heavenly and other planets within the universe, the inhabitants are all
highly intelligent, many more times than the human beings, and they are all
pious in the higher and highest mode of goodness. They are all devotees of the
Lord, and although their goodness is not unadulterated, still they are known as
demigods possessing the maximum amount of good qualities possible within the
material world.
TEXT 13
Ta}aEv Mae ivhrTaae >auJad<@YauGMa&
Gaa<@qvl/+a<aMaraiTavDaaYa deva" )
SaeNd]a" ié[Taa YadNau>aaivTaMaaJaMaq!
TaeNaahMaÛ MauizTa" Pauåze<a >aUMana )) 13 ))
tatraiva me viharato bhuja-daëòa-yugmaà
gäëòéva-lakñaëam aräti-vadhäya deväù
sendräù çritä yad-anubhävitam äjaméòha
tenäham adya muñitaù puruñeëa bhümnä
SYNONYMS
tatra—in that heavenly planet; eva—certainly; me—myself; viharataù—while
staying as a guest; bhuja-daëòa-yugmam—both of my arms; gäëòéva—the bow
named Gäëòéva; lakñaëam—mark; aräti—a demon named Nivätakavaca;
vadhäya—for killing; deväù—all the demigods; sa—along with; indräù—the
heavenly King, Indra; çritäù—taken shelter of; yat—by whose;
anubhävitam—made it possible to be powerful; äjaméòha—O descendant of
King Ajaméòha; tena—by Him; aham—myself; adya—at the present moment;
muñitaù—bereft of; puruñeëa—the personality; bhümnä—supreme.
TRANSLATION
When I stayed for some days as a guest in the heavenly planets, all the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
heavenly demigods, including King Indradeva, took shelter of my arms, which
were marked with the Gäëòéva bow, to kill the demon named Nivätakavaca. O
King, descendant of Ajaméòha, at the present moment I am bereft of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, by whose influence I was so powerful.
PURPORT
The heavenly demigods are certainly more intelligent, powerful and
beautiful, and yet they had to take help from Arjuna because of his Gäëòéva
bow, which was empowered by the grace of Lord Çré Kåñëa. The Lord is
all-powerful, and by His grace His pure devotee can be as powerful as He may
desire, and there is no limit to it. And when the Lord withdraws His power
from anyone, he is powerless by the will of the Lord.
TEXT 14
YaØaNDav" ku-åbl/aiBDaMaNaNTaPaar‚
Maek-ae rQaeNa TaTare_hMaTaqYaRSatvMa( )
Pa[TYaaôTa& bhu DaNa& c MaYaa Pareza&
TaeJaaSPad& Mai<aMaYa& c ôTa& iXarae>Ya" )) 14 ))
yad-bändhavaù kuru-baläbdhim ananta-päram
eko rathena tatare ’ham atérya-sattvam
pratyähåtaà bahu dhanaà ca mayä pareñäà
tejäs-padaà maëimayaà ca håtaà çirobhyaù
SYNONYMS
yat-bändhavaù—by whose friendship only; kuru-bala-abdhim—the ocean of
the military strength of the Kurus; ananta-päram—which was insurmountable;
ekaù—alone; rathena—being seated on the chariot; tatare—was able to cross
over; aham—myself; atérya—invincible; sattvam—existence;
pratyähåtam—drew back; bahu—very large quantity; dhanam—wealth;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ca—also; mayä—by my; pareñäm—of the enemy; tejäù-padam—source of
brilliance; maëi-mayam—bedecked with jewels; ca—also; håtam—taken by
force; çirobhyaù—from their heads.
TRANSLATION
The military strength of the Kauravas was like an ocean in which there
dwelled many invincible existences, and thus it was insurmountable. But
because of His friendship, I, seated on the chariot, was able to cross over it.
And only by His grace was I able to regain the cows and also collect by force
many helmets of the kings which were bedecked with jewels that were sources
of all brilliance.
PURPORT
On the Kaurava side there were many stalwart commanders like Bhéñma,
Droëa, Kåpa and Karëa, and their military strength was as insurmountable as
the great ocean. And yet it was due to Lord Kåñëa’s grace that Arjuna alone,
sitting on the chariot, could manage to vanquish them one after another
without difficulty. There were many changes of commanders on the other side,
but on the Päëòavas’ side Arjuna alone on the chariot driven by Lord Kåñëa
could manage the whole responsibility of the great war. Similarly, when the
Päëòavas were living at the palace of Viräöa incognito, the Kauravas picked a
quarrel with King Viräöa and decided to take away his large number of cows.
While they were taking away the cows, Arjuna fought with them incognito
and was able to regain the cows along with some booty taken by force—the
jewels set on the turbans of the royal order. Arjuna remembered that all this
was possible by the grace of the Lord.
TEXT 15
Yaae >aqZMak-<aRGauåXaLYacMaUZvd>a]‚
raJaNYavYaRrQaMa<@l/Mai<@TaaSau )
AGa]ecrae MaMa iv>aae rQaYaUQaPaaNaa‚
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
MaaYauMaRNaa&iSa c d*Xaa Sah AaeJa AaC^RTa( )) 15 ))
yo bhéñma-karëa-guru-çalya-camüñv adabhraräjanya-
varya-ratha-maëòala-maëòitäsu
agrecaro mama vibho ratha-yüthapänäm
äyur manäàsi ca dåçä saha oja ärcchat
SYNONYMS
yaù—it is He only; bhéñma—Bhéñma; karëa—Karëa; guru—Droëäcärya;
çalya—Çalya; camüñu—in the midst of the military phalanx;
adabhra—immense; räjanya-varya—great royal princes;
ratha-maëòala—chain of chariots; maëòitäsu—being decorated with;
agrecaraù—going forward; mama—of mine; vibho—O great King;
ratha-yütha-pänäm—all the charioteers; äyuù—duration of life or fruitive
activities; manäàsi—mental upsurges; ca—also; dåçä—by glance;
sahaù—power; ojaù—strength; ärcchat—withdrew.
TRANSLATION
It was He only who withdrew the duration of life from everyone and who, in
the battlefield, withdrew the speculative power and strength of enthusiasm from
the great military phalanx made by the Kauravas, headed by Bhéñma, Karëa,
Droëa, Çalya, etc. Their arrangement was expert and more than adequate, but
He [Lord Çré Kåñëa], while going forward, did all this.
PURPORT
The Absolute Personality of Godhead, Lord Çré Kåñëa, expands Himself by
His plenary Paramätmä portion in everyone s heart, and thus He directs
everyone in the matter of recollection, forgetfulness, knowledge, the absence
of intelligence and all psychological activities (Bg. 15.15). As the Supreme
Lord, He can increase or decrease the duration of life of a living being. Thus
the Lord conducted the Battle of Kurukñetra according to His own plan. He
wanted that battle to establish Yudhiñöhira as the Emperor of this planet, and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
to facilitate this transcendental business He killed all who were on the
opposite party by His omnipotent will. The other party was equipped with all
military strength supported by big generals like Bhéñma, Droëa and Çalya and
it would have been physically impossible for Arjuna to win the battle had the
Lord not helped him by every kind of tactic. Such tactics are generally
followed by every statesman, even in modern warfare, but they are all done
materially by powerful espionages, military tactics and diplomatic maneuvers.
But because Arjuna was the Lord’s affectionate devotee, the Lord did all this
Himself without personal anxiety by Arjuna. That is the way of the devotional
service to the Lord.
TEXT 16
YaÕae"zu Maa Pa[i<aihTa& Gauå>aqZMak-<aR‚
Naá*i}aGaTaRXaLYaSaENDavbaiúk-aÛE" )
Aña<YaMaaegaMaihMaaiNa iNaæiPaTaaiNa
NaaePaSPa*éuNa*RhirdaSaiMavaSaurai<a )) 16 ))
yad-doùñu mä praëihitaà guru-bhéñma-karëanaptå-
trigarta-çalya-saindhava-bählikädyaiù
asträëy amogha-mahimäni nirüpitäni
nopaspåçur nåhari-däsam iväsuräëi
SYNONYMS
yat—under whose; doùñu—protection of arms; mä praëihitam—myself being
situated; guru—Droëäcärya; bhéñma—Bhéñma; karëa—Karëa;
naptå—Bhüriçravä; trigarta—King Suçarmä; çalya—Çalya; saindhava—King
Jayadratha; bählika—brother of Mahäräja Çäntanu (Bhéñma’s father);
ädyaiù—etc.; asträëi—weapons; amogha—invincible; mahimäni—very
powerful; nirüpitäni—applied; na—not; upaspåçuù—touched;
nåhari-däsam—servitor of Nåsiàhadeva (Prahläda); iva—like;
asuräëi—weapons employed by the demons.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
Great generals like Bhéñma, Droëa, Karëa, Bhüriçravä, Suçarmä, Çalya,
Jayadratha, and Bählika all directed their invincible weapons against me. But by
His [Lord Kåñëa’s] grace they could not even touch a hair on my head.
Similarly, Prahläda Mahäräja, the supreme devotee of Lord Nåsiàhadeva, was
unaffected by the weapons the demons used against him.
PURPORT
The history of Prahläda Mahäräja, the great devotee of Nåsiàhadeva, is
narrated in the Seventh Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Prahläda Mahäräja, a
small child of only five years, became the object of envy for his great father,
Hiraëyakaçipu, only because of his becoming a pure devotee of the Lord. The
demon father employed all his weapons to kill the devotee son, Prahläda, but
by the grace of the Lord he was saved from all sorts of dangerous actions by his
father. He was thrown in a fire, in boiling oil, from the top of a hill,
underneath the legs of an elephant, and he was administered poison. At last
the father himself took up a chopper to kill his son, and thus Nåsiàhadeva
appeared and killed the heinous father in the presence of the son. Thus no one
can kill the devotee of the Lord. Similarly, Arjuna was also saved by the Lord,
although all dangerous weapons were employed by his great opponents like
Bhéñma.
Karëa: Born of Kunté by the sun-god prior to her marriage with Mahäräja
Päëòu, Karëa took his birth with bangles and earrings, extraordinary signs for
an undaunted hero. In the beginning his name was Vasusena, but when he
grew up he presented his natural bangles and earrings to Indradeva, and
thenceforward he became known as Vaikartana. After his birth from the
maiden Kunté, he was thrown in the Ganges. Later he was picked up by
Adhiratha, and he and his wife Rädhä brought him up as their own offspring.
Karëa was very charitable, especially toward the brähmaëas. There was
nothing he could not spare for a brähmaëa. In the same charitable spirit he
gave in charity his natural bangles and earrings to Indradeva, who, being very
much satisfied with him, gave him in return a great weapon called Çakti. He
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
was admitted as one of the students of Droëäcärya, and from the very
beginning there was some rivalry between him and Arjuna. Seeing his
constant rivalry with Arjuna, Duryodhana picked him up as his companion,
and this gradually grew into greater intimacy. He was also present in the great
assembly of Draupadé’s svayaàvara function, and when he attempted to
exhibit his talent in that meeting, Draupadé’s brother declared that Karëa
could not take part in the competition because of his being the son of a çüdra
carpenter. Although he was refused in the competition, still when Arjuna was
successful in piercing the fish target on the ceiling and Draupadé bestowed her
garland upon Arjuna, Karëa and the other disappointed princes offered an
unusual stumbling block to Arjuna while he was leaving with Draupadé.
Specifically, Karëa fought with him very valiantly, but all of them were
defeated by Arjuna. Duryodhana was very much pleased with Karëa because of
his constant rivalry with Arjuna, and when he was in power he enthroned
Karëa in the state of Aìga. Being baffled in his attempt to win Draupadé,
Karëa advised Duryodhana to attack King Drupada, for after defeating him
both Arjuna and Draupadé could be arrested. But Droëäcärya rebuked them
for this conspiracy, and they refrained from the action. Karëa was defeated
many times, not only by Arjuna but also by Bhémasena. He was the king of the
kingdom of Bengal, Orissa and Madras combined. Later on he took an active
part in the Räjasüya sacrifice of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, and when there was
gambling between the rival brothers, designed by Çakuni, Karëa took part in
the game, and he was very pleased when Draupadé was offered as a bet in the
gambling. This fed his old grudge. When Draupadé was in the game he was very
enthusiastic to declare the news, and it is he who ordered Duùçäsana to take
away the garments of both the Päëòavas and Draupadé. He asked Draupadé to
select another husband because, being lost by the Päëòavas, she was rendered a
slave of the Kurus. He was always an enemy of the Päëòavas, and whenever
there was an opportunity, he tried to curb them by all means. During the
Battle of Kurukñetra, he foresaw the conclusive result, and he expressed his
opinion that due to Lord Kåñëa’s being the chariot driver of Arjuna, the battle
should be won by Arjuna. He always differed with Bhéñma, and sometimes he
was proud enough to say that within five days he could finish up the Päëòavas,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
if Bhéñma would not interfere with his plan of action. But he was much
mortified when Bhéñma died. He killed Ghaöotkaca with the Çakti weapon
obtained from Indradeva. His son, Våñasena, was killed by Arjuna. He killed
the largest number of Päëòava soldiers. At last there was a severe fight with
Arjuna, and it was he only who was able to knock off the helmet of Arjuna.
But it so happened that the wheel of his chariot stuck in the battlefield mud,
and when he got down to set the wheel right, Arjuna took the opportunity and
killed him, although he requested Arjuna not to do so.
Naptä, or Bhüriçravä: Bhüriçravä was the son of Somadatta, a member of
the Kuru family. His other brother was Çalya. Both the brothers and the father
attended the svayaàvara ceremony of Draupadé. All of them appreciated the
wonderful strength of Arjuna due to his being the devotee friend of the Lord,
and thus Bhüriçravä advised the sons of Dhåtaräñöra not to pick any quarrel or
fight with them. All of them also attended the Räjasüya yajïa of Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira. He possessed one akñauhiëé regiment of army, cavalry, elephants
and chariots, and all these were employed in the Battle of Kurukñetra on
behalf of Duryodhana’s party. He was counted by Bhéma as one of the
yütha-patis. In the Battle of Kurukñetra he was especially engaged in a fight
with Sätyaki, and he killed ten sons of Sätyaki. Later on, Arjuna cut off his
hands, and he was ultimately killed by Sätyaki. After his death he merged into
the existence of Viçvadeva.
Trigarta, or Suçarmä: Son of Mahäräja Våddhakñetra, he was the King of
Trigartadeça, and he was also present in the svayaàvara ceremony of
Draupadé. He was one of the allies of Duryodhana, and he advised Duryodhana
to attack the Matsyadeça (Darbhaìga). During the time of cow-stealing in
Viräöa-nagara, he was able to arrest Mahäräja Viräöa, but later Mahäräja
Viräöa was released by Bhéma. In the Battle of Kurukñetra he also fought very
valiantly, but at the end he was killed by Arjuna.
Jayadratha: Another son of Mahäräja Våddhakñetra. He was the King of
Sindhudeça (modern Sind Pakistan). His wife’s name was Duùçalä. He was also
present in the svayaàvara ceremony of Draupadé, and he desired very strongly
to have her hand, but he failed in the competition. But since then he always
sought the opportunity to get in touch with Draupadé. When he was going to
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
marry in the Çalyadeça, on the way to Kämyavana he happened to see
Draupadé again and was too much attracted to her. The Päëòavas and
Draupadé were then in exile, after losing their empire in gambling, and
Jayadratha thought it wise to send news to Draupadé in an illicit manner
through Koöiçañya, one of his associates. Draupadé at once refused vehemently
the proposal of Jayadratha, but being so much attracted by the beauty of
Draupadé, he tried again and again. Every time he was refused by Draupadé. He
tried to take her away forcibly on his chariot, and at first Draupadé gave him a
good dashing, and he fell like a cut-root tree. But he was not discouraged, and
he was able to force Draupadé to sit on the chariot. This incident was seen by
Dhaumya Muni, and he strongly protested the action of Jayadratha. He also
followed the chariot, and through Dhätreyikä the matter was brought to the
notice of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira. The Päëòavas then attacked the soldiers of
Jayadratha and killed them all, and at last Bhéma caught hold of Jayadratha
and beat him very severely, almost dead. Then all but five hairs were cut off
his head and he was taken to all the kings and introduced as the slave of
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira. He was forced to admit himself to be the slave of
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira before all the princely order, and in the same condition
he was brought before Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was kind
enough to order him released, and when he admitted to being a tributary
prince under Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, Queen Draupadé also desired his release.
After this incident, he was allowed to return to his country. Being so insulted,
he went to Gaìgätri in the Himalayas and undertook a severe type of penance
to please Lord Çiva. He asked his benediction to defeat all the Päëòavas, at
least one at a time. Then the Battle of Kurukñetra began, and he took sides
with Duryodhana. In the first day’s fight he was engaged with Mahäräja
Drupada, then with Viräöa and then with Abhimanyu. While Abhimanyu was
being killed, mercilessly surrounded by seven great generals, the Päëòavas
came to his help, but Jayadratha, by the mercy of Lord Çiva, repulsed them
with great ability. At this, Arjuna took a vow to kill him, and on hearing this,
Jayadratha wanted to leave the warfield and asked permission from the
Kauravas for this cowardly action. But he was not allowed to do so. On the
contrary, he was obliged to fight with Arjuna, and while the fight was going on
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Lord Kåñëa reminded Arjuna that the benediction of Çiva upon Jayadratha
was that whoever would cause his head to fall on the ground would die at once.
He therefore advised Arjuna to throw the head of Jayadratha directly onto the
lap of his father, who was engaged in penances at the Samanta-païcaka
pilgrimage. This was actually done by Arjuna. Jayadratha’s father was surprised
to see a severed head on his lap, and he at once threw it to the ground. The
father immediately died, his forehead being cracked in seven pieces.
TEXT 17
SaaETYae v*Ta" ku-MaiTaNaaTMad wRìrae Mae
YaTPaadPaÚMa>avaYa >aJaiNTa >aVYaa" )
Maa& é[aNTavahMarYaae riQaNaae >auivï&
Na Pa[ahrNa( YadNau>aaviNarSTaictaa" )) 17 ))
sautye våtaù kumatinätmada éçvaro me
yat-päda-padmam abhaväya bhajanti bhavyäù
mäà çränta-väham arayo rathino bhuvi-ñöhaà
na präharan yad-anubhäva-nirasta-cittäù
SYNONYMS
sautye—regarding a chariot driver; våtaù—engaged; kumatinä—by bad
consciousness; ätma-daù—one who delivers; éçvaraù—the Supreme Lord;
me—my; yat—whose; päda-padmam—lotus feet; abhaväya—in the matter of
salvation; bhajanti—do render service; bhavyäù—the intelligent class of men;
mäm—unto me; çränta—thirsty; väham—my horses; arayaù—the enemies;
rathinaù—a great general; bhuvi-ñöham—while standing on the ground;
na—did not; präharan—attack; yat—whose; anubhäva—mercy;
nirasta—being absent; cittäù—mind.
TRANSLATION
It was by His mercy only that my enemies neglected to kill me when I
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
descended from my chariot to get water for my thirsty horses. And it was due to
my lack of esteem for my Lord that I dared engage Him as my chariot driver,
for He is worshiped and offered services by the best men to attain salvation.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa, is the object of
worship both by impersonalists and by the devotees of the Lord. The
impersonalists worship His glowing effulgence, emanating from His
transcendental body of eternal form, bliss and knowledge, and the devotees
worship Him as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Those who are below
even the impersonalists consider Him to be one of the great historical
personalities. The Lord, however, descends to attract all by His specific
transcendental pastimes, and thus He plays the part of the most perfect master,
friend, son and lover. His transcendental relation with Arjuna was in
friendship, and the Lord therefore played the part perfectly, as He did with His
parents, lovers and wives. While playing in such a perfect transcendental
relation, the devotee forgets, by the internal potency of the Lord, that his
friend or son is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although sometimes the
devotee is bewildered by the acts of the Lord. After the departure of the Lord,
Arjuna was conscious of his great friend, but there was no mistake on the part
of Arjuna, nor any ill estimation of the Lord. Intelligent men are attracted by
the transcendental acting of the Lord with a pure, unalloyed devotee like
Arjuna.
In the warfield, scarcity of water is a well-known fact. Water is very rare
there, and both the animals and men, working strenuously on the warfield,
constantly require water to quench their thirst. Especially wounded soldiers
and generals feel very thirsty at the time of death, and it sometimes so happens
that simply for want of water one has to die unavoidably. But such scarcity of
water was solved in the Battle of Kurukñetra by means of boring the ground. By
God’s grace, water can be easily obtained from any place if there is facility for
boring the ground. The modern system works on the same principle of boring
the ground, but modern engineers are still unable to dig immediately wherever
necessary. It appears, however, from the history as far back as the days of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Päëòavas, that big generals like Arjuna could at once supply water even to the
horses, and what to speak of men, by drawing water from underneath the hard
ground simply by penetrating the stratum with a sharp arrow, a method still
unknown to the modern scientists.
TEXT 18
NaMaaR<YaudaråicriSMaTaXaaei>aTaaiNa
he PaaQaR he_JauRNa Sa%e ku-åNaNdNaeiTa )
SaÅiLPaTaaiNa Nardev ôidSPa*XaaiNa
SMaTauRluR/#=iNTa ôdYa& MaMa MaaDavSYa )) 18 ))
narmäëy udära-rucira-smita-çobhitäni
he pärtha he ’rjuna sakhe kuru-nandaneti
saïjalpitäni nara-deva hådi-spåçäni
smartur luöhanti hådayaà mama mädhavasya
SYNONYMS
narmäëi—conversation in jokes; udära—talked very frankly; rucira—pleasing;
smita-çobhitäni—decorated with a smiling face; he—note of address;
pärtha—O son of Påthä; he—note of address; arjuna—Arjuna; sakhe—friend;
kuru-nandana—son of the Kuru dynasty; iti—and so on; saïjalpitäni—such
conversation; nara-deva—O King; hådi—heart; spåçäni—touching;
smartuù—by remembering them; luöhanti—overwhelms; hådayam—heart and
soul; mama—my; mädhavasya—of Mädhava (Kåñëa).
TRANSLATION
O King! His jokings and frank talks were pleasing and beautifully decorated
with smiles. His addresses unto me as “O son of Påthä, O friend, O son of the
Kuru dynasty,” and all such heartiness are now remembered by me, and thus I
am overwhelmed.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 19
XaYYaaSaNaa$=Naivk-TQaNa>aaeJaNaaid‚
ZvEKYaaÜYaSYa ‰TavaiNaiTa ivPa[l/BDa" )
Sa:Yau" Sa%ev iPaTa*vtaNaYaSYa Sav|
Saehe MahaNMaihTaYaa ku-MaTaerga& Mae )) 19 ))
çayyäsanäöana-vikatthana-bhojanädiñv
aikyäd vayasya åtavän iti vipralabdhaù
sakhyuù sakheva pitåvat tanayasya sarvaà
sehe mahän mahitayä kumater aghaà me
SYNONYMS
çayya—sleeping on one bed; äsana—sitting on one seat; aöana—walking
together; vikatthana—self-adoration; bhojana—dining together; ädiñu—and in
all such dealings; aikyät—because of oneness; vayasya—O my friend;
åtavän—truthful; iti—thus; vipralabdhaù—misbehaved; sakhyuù—unto a
friend; sakhä iva—just like a friend; pitåvat—just like the father;
tanayasya—of a child; sarvam—all; sehe—tolerated; mahän—great;
mahitayä—by glories; kumateù—of one who is of low mentality;
agham—offense; me—mine.
TRANSLATION
Generally both of us used to live together and sleep, sit and loiter together.
And at the time of advertising oneself for acts of chivalry, sometimes, if there
were any irregularity, I used to reproach Him by saying, “My friend, You are
very truthful.” Even in those hours when His value was minimized, He, being
the Supreme Soul, used to tolerate all those utterings of mine, excusing me
exactly as a true friend excuses his true friend, or a father excuses his son.
PURPORT
Since the Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa is all-perfect, His transcendental
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
pastimes with His pure devotees never lack anything in any respect, either as a
friend, son or lover. The Lord relishes the reproaches of friends, parents or
fiancees more than the Vedic hymns offered to Him by great learned scholars
and religionists in an official fashion.
TEXT 20
Saae_h& Na*PaeNd] rihTa" PauåzaetaMaeNa
Sa:Yaa iPa[Yae<a Sauôda ôdYaeNa éUNYa" )
AßNYauå§-MaPairGa]hMa® r+aNa(
GaaePaErSaiÙrble/v iviNaiJaRTaae_iSMa )) 20 ))
so ’haà nåpendra rahitaù puruñottamena
sakhyä priyeëa suhådä hådayena çünyaù
adhvany urukrama-parigraham aìga rakñan
gopair asadbhir abaleva vinirjito ’smi
SYNONYMS
saù—that; aham—myself; nåpa-indra—O Emperor; rahitaù—bereft of;
puruña-uttamena—by the Supreme Lord; sakhyä—by my friend; priyeëa—by
my dearmost; suhådä—by the well-wisher; hådayena—by the heart and soul;
çünyaù—vacant; adhvani—recently; urukrama-parigraham—the wives of the
all-powerful; aìga—bodies; rakñan—while protecting; gopaiù—by the
cowherds; asadbhiù—by the infidels; abalä iva—like a weak woman; vinirjitaù
asmi—I have been defeated.
TRANSLATION
O Emperor, now I am separated from my friend and dearmost well-wisher,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore my heart appears to be void
of everything. In His absence I have been defeated by a number of infidel
cowherd men while I was guarding the bodies of all the wives of Kåñëa.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
The important point in this verse is how it was possible that Arjuna could
be defeated by a gang of ignoble cowherd men and how such mundane
cowherd men could touch the bodies of the wives of Lord Kåñëa, who were
under the protection of Arjuna. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura has
justified the contradiction by research in the Viñëu Puräëa and Brahma
Puräëa. In these Puräëas it is said that once the fair denizens of heaven
pleased Añöävakra Muni by their service and were blessed by the muni to have
the Supreme Lord as their husband. Añöävakra Muni was curved in eight joints
of his body, and thus he used to move in a peculiar curved manner. The
daughters of the demigods could not check their laughter upon seeing the
movements of the muni, and the muni, being angry at them, cursed them that
they would be kidnapped by rogues, even if they would get the Lord as their
husband. Later on, the girls again satisfied the muni by their prayers, and the
muni blessed them that they would regain their husband even after being
robbed by the rogues. So, in order to keep the words of the great muni, the
Lord Himself kidnapped His wives from the protection of Arjuna, otherwise
they would have at once vanished from the scene as soon as they were touched
by the rogues. Besides that, some of the gopés who prayed to become wives of
the Lord returned to their respective positions after their desire was fulfilled.
After the departure of Lord Kåñëa, He wanted all His entourage back to
Godhead, and they were called back under different conditions only.
TEXT 21
TaÜE DaNauSTa wzv" Sa rQaae hYaaSTae
Saae_h& rQaq Na*PaTaYaae YaTa AaNaMaiNTa )
Sav| +a<aeNa Tad>aUdSadqXair¢&-
>aSMaNa( huTa& ku-hk-raÖiMavaeáMaUZYaaMa( )) 21 ))
tad vai dhanus ta iñavaù sa ratho hayäs te
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
so ’haà rathé nåpatayo yata änamanti
sarvaà kñaëena tad abhüd asad éça-riktaà
bhasman hutaà kuhaka-räddham ivoptam üñyäm
SYNONYMS
tat—the same; vai—certainly; dhanuù te—the same bow; iñavaù—arrows;
saù—the very same; rathaù—chariot; hayäù te—the very same horses; saù
aham—I am the same Arjuna; rathé—the chariot-fighter; nåpatayaù—all the
kings; yataù—whom; änamanti—offered their respects; sarvam—all;
kñaëena—at a moment’s notice; tat—all those; abhüt—became; asat—useless;
éça—because of the Lord; riktam—being void; bhasman—ashes;
hutam—offering butter; kuhaka-räddham—money created by magical feats;
iva—like that; uptam—sown; üñyäm—in barren land.
TRANSLATION
I have the very same Gäëòéva bow, the same arrows, the same chariot drawn
by the same horses, and I use them as the same Arjuna to whom all the kings
offered their due respects. But in the absence of Lord Kåñëa, all of them, at a
moment’s notice, have become null and void. It is exactly like offering clarified
butter on ashes, accumulating money with a magic wand or sowing seeds on
barren land.
PURPORT
As we have discussed more than once, one should not be puffed up by
borrowed plumes. All energies and powers are derived from the supreme
source, Lord Kåñëa, and they act as long as He desires and cease to function as
soon as He withdraws. All electrical energies are received from the
powerhouse, and as soon as the powerhouse stops supplying energy, the bulbs
are of no use. In a moment’s time such energies can be generated or withdrawn
by the supreme will of the Lord. Material civilization without the blessing of
the Lord is child’s play only. As long as the parents allow the child to play, it is
all right. As soon as the parents withdraw, the child has to stop. Human
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
civilization and all activities thereof must be dovetailed with the supreme
blessing of the Lord, and without this blessing all advancement of human
civilization is like decoration on a dead body. It is said here that a dead
civilization and its activities are something like clarified butter on ashes, the
accumulation of money by a magic wand and the sowing of seeds in a barren
land.
TEXTS 22–23
raJa&STvYaaNauPa*íaNaa& Sauôda& Na" SauôTPaure )
ivPa[XaaPaivMaU!aNaa& iNaganTaa& Mauiíi>aiMaRQa" )) 22 ))
vaå<aq& Maidra& PaqTva MadaeNMaiQaTaceTaSaaMa( )
AJaaNaTaaiMavaNYaaeNYa& cTau"PaÄavXaeizTaa" )) 23 ))
räjaàs tvayänupåñöänäà
suhådäà naù suhåt-pure
vipra-çäpa-vimüòhänäà
nighnatäà muñöibhir mithaù
väruëéà madiräà pétvä
madonmathita-cetasäm
ajänatäm ivänyonyaà
catuù-païcävaçeñitäù
SYNONYMS
räjan—O King; tvayä—by you; anupåñöänäm—as you inquired; suhådäm—of
friends and relatives; naù—our; suhåt-pure—in the city of Dvärakä; vipra—the
brähmaëas; çäpa—by the curse of; vimüòhänäm—of the befooled;
nighnatäm—of the killed; muñöibhiù—with bunches of sticks; mithaù—among
themselves; väruëém—fermented rice; madiräm—wine; pétvä—having drunk;
mada-unmathita—being intoxicated; cetasäm—of that mental situation;
ajänatäm—of the unrecognized; iva—like; anyonyam—one another;
catuù—four; païca—five; avaçeñitäù—now remaining.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
O King, since you have asked me about our friends and relatives in the city
of Dvärakä, I will inform you that all of them were cursed by the brähmaëas,
and as a result they all became intoxicated with wine made of putrefied rice and
fought among themselves with sticks, not even recognizing one another. Now
all but four or five of them are dead and gone.
TEXT 24
Pa[aYae<aETad( >aGavTa wRìrSYa ivceiíTaMa( )
iMaQaae iNaganiNTa >aUTaaiNa >aavYaiNTa c YaiNMaQa" )) 24 ))
präyeëaitad bhagavata
éçvarasya viceñöitam
mitho nighnanti bhütäni
bhävayanti ca yan mithaù
SYNONYMS
präyeëa etat—it is almost by; bhagavataù—of the Personality of Godhead;
éçvarasya—of the Lord; viceñöitam—by the will of; mithaù—one another;
nighnanti—do kill; bhütäni—the living beings; bhävayanti—as also protect;
ca—also; yat—of whom; mithaù—one another.
TRANSLATION
Factually this is all due to the supreme will of the Lord, the Personality of
Godhead. Sometimes people kill one another, and at other times they protect
one another.
PURPORT
According to the anthropologists, there is nature’s law of struggle for
existence and survival of the fittest. But they do not know that behind the law
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
of nature is the supreme direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In
the Bhagavad-gétä it is confirmed that the law of nature is executed under the
direction of the Lord. Whenever, therefore, there is peace in the world, it must
be known that it is due to the good will of the Lord. And whenever there is
upheaval in the world, it is also due to the supreme will of the Lord. Not a
blade of grass moves without the will of the Lord. Whenever, therefore, there
is disobedience of the established rules enacted by the Lord, there is war
between men and nations. The surest way to the path of peace, therefore, is
dovetailing everything to the established rule of the Lord. The established rule
is that whatever we do, whatever we eat, whatever we sacrifice or whatever we
give in charity must be done to the full satisfaction of the Lord. No one should
do anything, eat anything, sacrifice anything or give anything in charity
against the will of the Lord. Discretion is the better part of valor, and one must
learn how to discriminate between actions which may be pleasing to the Lord
and those which may not be pleasing to the Lord. An action is thus judged by
the Lord’s pleasure or displeasure. There is no room for personal whims; we
must always be guided by the pleasure of the Lord. Such action is called yogaù
karmasu kauçalam, or actions performed which are linked with the Supreme
Lord. That is the art of doing a thing perfectly.
TEXTS 25–26
Jal/aEk-Saa& Jale/ YaÜNMahaNTaae_dNTYa<aqYaSa" )
dubRl/aNbil/Naae raJaNMahaNTaae bil/Naae iMaQa" )) 25 ))
Wv& bil/ïEYaRdui>aMaRhiÙirTaraNa( iv>au" )
YadUNa( Yadui>arNYaaeNYa& >aU>aaraNa( SaÅhar h )) 26 ))
jalaukasäà jale yadvan
mahänto ’danty aëéyasaù
durbalän balino räjan
mahänto balino mithaù
evaà baliñöhair yadubhir
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
mahadbhir itarän vibhuù
yadün yadubhir anyonyaà
bhü-bhärän saïjahära ha
SYNONYMS
jalaukasäm—of the aquatics; jale—in the water; yadvat—as it is;
mahäntaù—the larger one; adanti—swallows; aëéyasaù—smaller ones;
durbalän—the weak; balinaù—the stronger; räjan—O King; mahäntaù—the
strongest; balinaù—less strong; mithaù—in a duel; evam—thus; baliñöhaiù—by
the strongest; yadubhiù—by the descendants of Yadu; mahadbhiù—one who
has greater strength; itarän—the common ones; vibhuù—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; yadün—all the Yadus; yadubhiù—by the Yadus;
anyonyam—among one another; bhü-bhärän—the burden of the world;
saïjahära—has unloaded; ha—in the past.
TRANSLATION
O King, as in the ocean the bigger and stronger aquatics swallow up the
smaller and weaker ones, so also the Supreme Personality of Godhead, to
lighten the burden of the earth, has engaged the stronger Yadu to kill the
weaker, and the bigger Yadu to kill the smaller.
PURPORT
In the material world the struggle for existence and survival of the fittest
are laws because in the material world there is disparity between conditioned
souls due to everyone’s desire to lord it over the material resources. This very
mentality of lording it over the material nature is the root cause of
conditioned life. And to give facility to such imitation lords, the illusory
energy of the Lord has created a disparity between conditioned living beings
by creating the stronger and the weaker in every species of life. The mentality
of lording it over the material nature and the creation has naturally created a
disparity and therefore the law of struggle for existence. In the spiritual world
there is no such disparity, nor is there such a struggle for existence. In the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
spiritual world there is no struggle for existence because everyone there exists
eternally. There is no disparity because everyone wants to render service to
the Supreme Lord, and no one wants to imitate the Lord in becoming the
beneficiary. The Lord, being creator of everything, including the living beings,
factually is the proprietor and enjoyer of everything that be, but in the
material world, by the spell of mäyä, or illusion, this eternal relation with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is forgotten, and so the living being is
conditioned under the law of struggle for existence and survival of the fittest.
TEXT 27
deXak-al/aQaRYau¢-aiNa ôtaaPaaePaXaMaaiNa c )
hriNTa SMarTaiêta& GaaeivNdai>aihTaaiNa Mae )) 27 ))
deça-kälärtha-yuktäni
håt-täpopaçamäni ca
haranti smarataç cittaà
govindäbhihitäni me
SYNONYMS
deça—space; käla—time; artha—importance; yuktäni—impregnated with;
håt—the heart; täpa—burning; upaçamäni—extinguishing; ca—and;
haranti—are attracting; smarataù—by remembering; cittam—mind;
govinda—the Supreme Personality of pleasure; abhihitäni—narrated by;
me—unto me.
TRANSLATION
Now I am attracted to those instructions imparted to me by the Personality
of Godhead [Govinda] because they are impregnated with instructions for
relieving the burning heart in all circumstances of time and space.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Herein Arjuna refers to the instruction of the Bhagavad-gétä, which was
imparted to him by the Lord on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra. The Lord left
behind Him the instructions of the Bhagavad-gétä not for the benefit of
Arjuna alone, but also for all time and in all lands. The Bhagavad-gétä, being
spoken by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the essence of all Vedic
wisdom. It is nicely presented by the Lord Himself for all who have very little
time to go through the vast Vedic literatures like the Upaniñads, Puräëas and
Vedänta-sütras. It is put within the study of the great historical epic
Mahäbhärata, which was especially prepared for the less intelligent class,
namely the women, the laborers and those who are worthless descendants of
the brähmaëas, kñatriyas and higher sections of the vaiçyas. The problem which
arose in the heart of Arjuna on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra was solved by the
teachings of the Bhagavad-gétä. Again, after the departure of the Lord from the
vision of earthly people, when Arjuna was face to face with being vanquished
in his acquired power and prominence, he wanted again to remember the great
teachings of the Bhagavad-gétä just to teach all concerned that the
Bhagavad-gétä can be consulted in all critical times, not only for solace from all
kinds of mental agonies, but also for the way out of great entanglements which
may embarrass one in some critical hour.
The merciful Lord left behind Him the great teachings of the Bhagavad-gétä
so that one can take the instructions of the Lord even when He is not visible
to material eyesight. Material senses cannot have any estimation of the
Supreme Lord, but by His inconceivable power the Lord can incarnate Himself
to the sense perception of the conditioned souls in a suitable manner through
the agency of matter, which is also another form of the Lord’s manifested
energy. Thus the Bhagavad-gétä, or any authentic scriptural sound
representation of the Lord, is also the incarnation of the Lord. There is no
difference between the sound representation of the Lord and the Lord
Himself. One can derive the same benefit from the Bhagavad-gétä as Arjuna
did in the personal presence of the Lord.
The faithful human being who is desirous of being liberated from the
clutches of material existence can very easily take advantage of the
Bhagavad-gétä, and with this in view, the Lord instructed Arjuna as if Arjuna
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
were in need of it. In the Bhagavad-gétä, five important factors of knowledge
have been delineated pertaining to (1) the Supreme Lord, (2) the living being,
(3) nature, (4) time and space and (5) the process of activity. Out of these, the
Supreme Lord and the living being are qualitatively one. The difference
between the two has been analyzed as the difference between the whole and
the part and parcel. Nature is inert matter displaying the interaction of three
different modes, and eternal time and unlimited space are considered to be
beyond the existence of the material nature. Activities of the living being are
different varieties of aptitudes which can entrap or liberate the living being
within and without material nature. All these subject matters are concisely
discussed in the Bhagavad-gétä, and later the subject matters are elaborated in
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam for further enlightenment. Out of the five subjects,
the Supreme Lord, the living entity, nature, and time and space are eternal,
but the living entity, nature and time are under the direction of the Supreme
Lord, who is absolute and completely independent of any other control. The
Supreme Lord is the supreme controller. The material activity of the living
being is beginningless, but it can be rectified by transferral into the spiritual
quality. Thus it can cease its material qualitative reactions. Both the Lord and
the living entity are cognizant, and both have the sense of identification, of
being conscious as a living force. But the living being under the condition of
material nature, called mahat-tattva, misidentifies himself as being different
from the Lord. The whole scheme of Vedic wisdom is targeted to the aim of
eradicating such a misconception and thus liberating the living being from the
illusion of material identification. When such an illusion is eradicated by
knowledge and renunciation, the living beings are responsible actors and
enjoyers also. The sense of enjoyment in the Lord is real, but such a sense in
the living being is a sort of wishful desire only. This difference in
consciousness is the distinction of the two identities, namely the Lord and the
living being. Otherwise there is no difference between the Lord and the living
being. The living being is therefore eternally one and different simultaneously.
The whole instruction of the Bhagavad-gétä stands on this principle.
In the Bhagavad-gétä the Lord and the living beings are both described as
sanätana, or eternal, and the Lord’s abode, far beyond the material sky, is also
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
described as sanätana. The living being is invited to live in the sanätana
existence of the Lord, and the process which can help a living being to
approach the Lord’s abode, where the liberated activity of the soul is exhibited,
is called sanätana-dharma. One cannot, however, reach the eternal abode of
the Lord without being free from the misconception of material identification,
and the Bhagavad-gétä gives us the clue how to achieve this stage of perfection.
The process of being liberated from the misconception of material
identification is called, in different stages, fruitive activity, empiric philosophy
and devotional service, up to transcendental realization. Such transcendental
realization is made possible by dovetailing all the above items in relation with
the Lord. Prescribed duties of the human being, as directed in the Vedas, can
gradually purify the sinful mind of the conditioned soul and raise him to the
stage of knowledge. The purified stage of acquiring knowledge becomes the
basis of devotional service to the Lord. As long as one is engaged in
researching the solution of the problems of life, his knowledge is called jïäna,
or purified knowledge, but on realizing the actual solution of life, one becomes
situated in the devotional service of the Lord. The Bhagavad-gétä begins with
the problems of life by discriminating the soul from the elements of matter and
proves by all reason and argument that the soul is indestructible in all
circumstances and that the outer covering of matter, the body and the mind,
change for another term of material existence which is full of miseries. The
Bhagavad-gétä is therefore meant for terminating all different types of miseries,
and Arjuna took shelter of this great knowledge, which had been imparted to
him during the Kurukñetra battle.
TEXT 28
SaUTa ovac
Wv& icNTaYaTaae iJaZ<aae" k*-Z<aPaadSaraeåhMa( )
SaaEhadeRNaaiTaGaa!eNa XaaNTaaSaqiÜMal/a MaiTa" )) 28 ))
süta uväca
evaà cintayato jiñëoù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
kåñëa-päda-saroruham
sauhärdenätigäòhena
çäntäséd vimalä matiù
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; evam—thus; cintayataù—while thinking of
the instructions; jiñëoù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
kåñëa-päda—the feet of Kåñëa; saroruham—resembling lotuses;
sauhärdena—by deep friendship; ati-gäòhena—in great intimacy;
çäntä—pacified; äsét—it so became; vimalä—without any tinge of material
contamination; matiù—mind.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: Thus being deeply absorbed in thinking of the
instructions of the Lord, which were imparted in the great intimacy of
friendship, and in thinking of His lotus feet, Arjuna’s mind became pacified and
free from all material contamination.
PURPORT
Since the Lord is absolute, deep meditation upon Him is as good as yogic
trance. The Lord is nondifferent from His name, form, quality, pastimes,
entourage and specific actions. Arjuna began to think of the Lord’s
instructions to him on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra. Only those instructions
began to eliminate the tinges of material contamination in the mind of
Arjuna. The Lord is like the sun; the sun’s appearance means immediate
dissipation of darkness, or ignorance, and the Lord’s appearance within the
mind of the devotee can at once drive away the miserable material effects.
Lord Caitanya has therefore recommended constant chanting of the name of
the Lord for protection from all contamination of the material world. The
feeling of separation from the Lord is undoubtedly painful to the devotee, but
because it is in connection with the Lord, it has a specific transcendental
effect which pacifies the heart. Feelings of separation are also sources of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
transcendental bliss, and they are never comparable to contaminated material
feelings of separation.
TEXT 29
vaSaudevax(ga[yNauDYaaNaPairb*&ihTar&hSaa )
>a¢-ya iNaMaRiQaTaaXaezk-zaYaiDaz<aae_JauRNa" )) 29 ))
väsudeväìghry-anudhyänaparibåàhita-
raàhasä
bhaktyä nirmathitäçeñakañäya-
dhiñaëo ’rjunaù
SYNONYMS
väsudeva-aìghri—the lotus feet of the Lord; anudhyäna—by constant
remembrance; paribåàhita—expanded; raàhasä—with great velocity;
bhaktyä—in devotion; nirmathita—subsided; açeña—unlimited; kañäya—dint;
dhiñaëaù—conception; arjunaù—Arjuna.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna’s constant remembrance of the lotus feet of Lord Çré Kåñëa rapidly
increased his devotion, and as a result all the trash in his thoughts subsided.
PURPORT
Material desires in the mind are the trash of material contamination. By
such contamination, the living being is faced with so many compatible and
incompatible things that discourage the very existence of spiritual identity.
Birth after birth the conditioned soul is entrapped with so many pleasing and
displeasing elements, which are all false and temporary. They accumulate due
to our reactions to material desires, but when we get in touch with the
transcendental Lord in His variegated energies by devotional service, the
naked forms of all material desires become manifest, and the intelligence of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the living being is pacified in its true color. As soon as Arjuna turned his
attention towards the instructions of the Lord, as they are inculcated in the
Bhagavad-gétä, his true color of eternal association with the Lord became
manifest, and thus he felt freed from all material contaminations.
TEXT 30
GaqTa& >aGavTaa jaNa& YaTa( TaTa( Sa°aMaMaUDaRiNa )
k-al/k-MaRTaMaaeåÖ& PauNarDYaGaMaTa( Pa[>au" )) 30 ))
gétaà bhagavatä jïänaà
yat tat saìgräma-mürdhani
käla-karma-tamo-ruddhaà
punar adhyagamat prabhuù
SYNONYMS
gétam—instructed; bhagavatä—by the Personality of Godhead;
jïänam—transcendental knowledge; yat—which; tat—that;
saìgräma-mürdhani—in the midst of battle; käla-karma—time and actions;
tamaù-ruddham—enwrapped by such darkness; punaù adhyagamat—revived
them again; prabhuù—the lord of his senses.
TRANSLATION
Because of the Lord’s pastimes and activities and because of His absence, it
appeared that Arjuna forgot the instructions left by the Personality of Godhead.
But factually this was not the case, and again he became lord of his senses.
PURPORT
A conditioned soul is enwrapped in his fruitive activities by the force of
eternal time. But the Supreme Lord, when He incarnates on the earth, is not
influenced by käla, or the material conception of past, present and future. The
activities of the Lord are eternal, and they are manifestations of His
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ätma-mäyä, or internal potency. All pastimes or activities of the Lord are
spiritual in nature, but to the laymen they appear to be on the same level with
material activities. It so appeared that Arjuna and the Lord were engaged in
the Battle of Kurukñetra as the other party was also engaged, but factually the
Lord was executing His mission of incarnation and association with His
eternal friend Arjuna. Therefore such apparently material activities of Arjuna
did not drive him away from his transcendental position, but on the contrary
revived his consciousness of the songs of the Lord, as He sang them personally.
This revival of consciousness is assured by the Lord in the Bhagavad-gétä
(18.65) as follows:
man-manä bhava mad-bhakto
mad-yäjé mäà namaskuru
mäm evaiñyasi satyaà te
pratijäne priyo ’si me
One should think of the Lord always; the mind should not forget Him. One
should become a devotee of the Lord and offer obeisances unto Him. One who
lives in that fashion becomes undoubtedly endowed with the blessing of the
Lord by achieving the shelter of His lotus feet. There is nothing to doubt about
this eternal truth. Because Arjuna was His confidential friend, the secret was
disclosed to him.
Arjuna had no desire to fight with his relatives, but he fought for the
mission of the Lord. He was always engaged in the execution of His mission
only, and therefore after the Lord’s departure he remained in the same
transcendental position, even though it appeared that he forgot all the
instructions of the Bhagavad-gétä. One should, therefore, adjust the activities
of life in pace with the mission of the Lord, and by doing this one is sure to
return back home, back to Godhead. This is the highest perfection of life.
TEXT 31
ivXaaek-ae b]øSaMPatYaa SaiH^àÜETaSa&XaYa" )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
l/INaPa[k*-iTaNaEGauR<Yaadil/®TvadSaM>av" )) 31 ))
viçoko brahma-sampattyä
saïchinna-dvaita-saàçayaù
léna-prakåti-nairguëyäd
aliìgatväd asambhavaù
SYNONYMS
viçokaù—free from bereavement; brahma-sampattyä—by possession of spiritual
assets; saïchinna—being completely cut off; dvaita-saàçayaù—from the doubts
of relativity; léna—merged in; prakåti—material nature; nairguëyät—due to
being in transcendence; aliìgatvät—because of being devoid of a material
body; asambhavaù—free from birth and death.
TRANSLATION
Because of his possessing spiritual assets, the doubts of duality were
completely cut off. Thus he was freed from the three modes of material nature
and placed in transcendence. There was no longer any chance of his becoming
entangled in birth and death, for he was freed from material form.
PURPORT
Doubts of duality begin from the misconception of the material body, which
is accepted as the self by less intelligent persons. The most foolish part of our
ignorance is our identifying this material body with the self. Everything in
relation with the body is ignorantly accepted as our own. Doubts due to
misconceptions of “myself” and “mine”—in other words, “my body,” “my
relatives,” “my property,” “my wife,” “my children,” “my wealth,” “my country,”
“my community,” and hundreds and thousands of similar illusory
contemplations—cause bewilderment for the conditioned soul. By assimilating
the instructions of the Bhagavad-gétä, one is sure to be released from such
bewilderment because real knowledge is knowledge that the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Väsudeva, Lord Kåñëa, is everything, including one’s
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
self. Everything is a manifestation of His potency as part and parcel. The
potency and the potent are nondifferent, so the conception of duality is at
once mitigated by attainment of perfect knowledge. As soon as Arjuna took up
the instructions of the Bhagavad-gétä, expert as he was, he could at once
eradicate the material conception of Lord Kåñëa, his eternal friend. He could
realize that the Lord was still present before him by His instruction, by His
form, by His pastimes, by His qualities and everything else related to Him. He
could realize that Lord Kåñëa, his friend, was still present before him by His
transcendental presence in different nondual energies, and there was no
question of attainment of the association of the Lord by another change of
body under the influence of time and space. By attainment of absolute
knowledge, one can be in association with the Lord constantly, even in this
present life, simply by hearing, chanting, thinking of and worshiping the
Supreme Lord. One can see Him, one can feel His presence even in this
present life simply by understanding the advaya-jïäna Lord, or the Absolute
Lord, through the process of devotional service, which begins with hearing
about Him. Lord Caitanya says that simply by chanting the holy name of the
Lord one can at once wash off the dust on the mirror of pure consciousness,
and as soon as the dust is removed, one is at once freed from all material
conditions. To become free from material conditions means to liberate the
soul. As soon as one is, therefore, situated in absolute knowledge, his material
conception of life is removed, or he emerges from a false conception of life.
Thus the function of the pure soul is revived in spiritual realization. This
practical realization of the living being is made possible due to his becoming
free from the reaction of the three modes of material nature, namely goodness,
passion and ignorance. By the grace of the Lord, a pure devotee is at once
raised to the place of the Absolute, and there is no chance of the devotee’s
becoming materially entangled again in conditioned life. One is not able to
feel the presence of the Lord in all circumstances until one is endowed with
the required transcendental vision made possible by devotional service
prescribed in the revealed scriptures. Arjuna had attained this stage long
before on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra, and when he apparently felt the
absence of the Lord, he at once took shelter of the instructions of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Bhagavad-gétä, and thus again he was placed in his original position. This is the
position of viçoka, or the stage of being freed from all grief and anxieties.
TEXT 32
iNaXaMYa >aGavNMaaGa| Sa&SQaa& Yaduku-l/SYa c )
Sv"PaQaaYa MaiTa& c§e- iNa>a*TaaTMaa YauiDaiïr" )) 32 ))
niçamya bhagavan-märgaà
saàsthäà yadu-kulasya ca
svaù-pathäya matià cakre
nibhåtätmä yudhiñöhiraù
SYNONYMS
niçamya—deliberating; bhagavat—regarding the Lord; märgam—the ways of
His appearance and disappearance; saàsthäm—end; yadu-kulasya—of the
dynasty of King Yadu; ca—also; svaù—the abode of the Lord; pathäya—on the
way of; matim—desire; cakre—gave attention; nibhåta-ätmä—lonely and
alone; yudhiñöhiraù—King Yudhiñöhira.
TRANSLATION
Upon hearing of Lord Kåñëa’s returning to His abode, and upon
understanding the end of the Yadu dynasty’s earthly manifestation, Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira decided to go back home, back to Godhead.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira also turned his attention to the instructions of the
Bhagavad-gétä after hearing about the Lord’s departure from the vision of
earthly people. He began to deliberate on the Lord’s way of appearance and
departure. The mission of the Lord’s appearance and disappearance in the
mortal universe is completely dependent on His supreme will. He is not forced
to appear or disappear by any superior energy, as the living beings appear and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
disappear, being forced by the laws of nature. Whenever the Lord likes, He can
appear Himself from anywhere and everywhere without disturbing His
appearance and disappearance in any other place. He is like the sun. The sun
appears and disappears on its own accord at any place without disturbing its
presence in other places. The sun appears in the morning in India without
disappearing from the Western Hemisphere. The sun is present everywhere
and anywhere all over the solar system, but it so appears that in a particular
place the sun appears in the morning and also disappears at some fixed time in
the evening. The time limitation even of the sun is of no concern, and so what
to speak of the Supreme Lord who is the creator and controller of the sun.
Therefore, in the Bhagavad-gétä it is stated that anyone who factually
understands the transcendental appearance and disappearance of the Lord by
His inconceivable energy becomes liberated from the laws of birth and death
and is placed in the eternal spiritual sky where the Vaikuëöha planets are.
There such liberated persons can eternally live without the pangs of birth,
death, old age and disease. In the spiritual sky the Lord and those who are
eternally engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord are all
eternally young because there is no old age and disease and there is no death.
Because there is no death there is no birth. It is concluded, therefore, that
simply by understanding the Lord’s appearance and disappearance in truth,
one can attain the perfectional stage of eternal life. Therefore, Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira also began to consider going back to Godhead. The Lord appears
on the earth or any other mortal planet along with His associates who live with
Him eternally, and the members of the Yadu family who were engaged in
supplementing the pastimes of the Lord are no other than His eternal
associates, and so also Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira and his brothers and mother, etc.
Since the appearance and disappearance of the Lord and His eternal associates
are transcendental, one should not be bewildered by the external features of
appearance and disappearance.
TEXT 33
Pa*QaaPYaNaué[uTYa DaNaÅYaaeidTa&
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
NaaXa& YadUNaa& >aGavÓiTa& c TaaMa( )
Wk-aNTa>a¢-ya >aGavTYaDaae+aJae
iNaveiXaTaaTMaaeParraMa Sa&Sa*Tae" )) 33 ))
påthäpy anuçrutya dhanaïjayoditaà
näçaà yadünäà bhagavad-gatià ca täm
ekänta-bhaktyä bhagavaty adhokñaje
niveçitätmopararäma saàsåteù
SYNONYMS
påthä—Kunté; api—also; anuçrutya—overhearing; dhanaïjaya—Arjuna;
uditam—uttered by; näçam—end; yadünäm—of the Yadu dynasty;
bhagavat—of the Personality of Godhead; gatim—disappearance; ca—also;
täm—all those; eka-anta—unalloyed; bhaktyä—devotion; bhagavati—unto the
Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëa; adhokñaje—transcendence; niveçita-ätmä—with full
attention; upararäma—became released from; saàsåteù—material existence.
TRANSLATION
Kunté, after overhearing Arjuna’s telling of the end of the Yadu dynasty and
disappearance of Lord Kåñëa, engaged in the devotional service of the
transcendental Personality of Godhead with full attention and thus gained
release from the course of material existence.
PURPORT
The setting of the sun does not mean the end of the sun. It means that the
sun is out of our sight. Similarly, the end of the mission of the Lord on a
particular planet or universe only means that He is out of our sight. The end of
the Yadu dynasty also does not mean that it is annihilated. It disappears, along
with the Lord, out of our sight. As Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira decided to prepare to
go back to Godhead, so also Kunté decided, and thus she fully engaged herself
in the transcendental devotional service of the Lord which guarantees one a
passport for going back to Godhead after quitting this present material body.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The beginning of devotional service to the Lord is the beginning of
spiritualizing the present body, and thus an unalloyed devotee of the Lord loses
all material contact in the present body. The abode of the Lord is not a myth,
as is thought by the unbelievers or ignorant people, but one cannot reach there
by any material means like a sputnik or space capsule. But one can certainly
reach there after leaving this present body, and one must prepare himself to go
back to Godhead by practicing devotional service. That guarantees a passport
for going back to Godhead, and Kunté adopted it.
TEXT 34
YaYaahrd( >auvae >aar& Taa& TaNau& ivJahavJa" )
k-<$=k&- k-<$=ke-Naev ÜYa& caPaqiXaTau" SaMaMa( )) 34 ))
yayäharad bhuvo bhäraà
täà tanuà vijahäv ajaù
kaëöakaà kaëöakeneva
dvayaà cäpéçituù samam
SYNONYMS
yayä—that by which; aharat—took away; bhuvaù—of the world;
bhäram—burden; täm—that; tanum—body; vijahau—relinquished; ajaù—the
unborn; kaëöakam—thorn; kaëöakena—by the thorn; iva—like that;
dvayam—both; ca—also; api—although; éçituù—controlling; samam—equal.
TRANSLATION
The supreme unborn, Lord Çré Kåñëa, caused the members of the Yadu
dynasty to relinquish their bodies, and thus He relieved the burden of the
world. This action was like picking out a thorn with a thorn, though both are
the same to the controller.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura suggests that the åñis like Çaunaka
and others who were hearing Çrémad-Bhägavatam from Süta Gosvämé at
Naimiñäraëya were not happy to hear about the Yadu’s dying in the madness
of intoxication. To give them relief from this mental agony, Süta Gosvämé
assured them that the Lord caused the members of the Yadu dynasty to
relinquish their bodies by which they had to take away the burden of the
world. The Lord and His eternal associates appeared on earth to help the
administrative demigods in eradicating the burden of the world. He therefore
called for some of the confidential demigods to appear in the Yadu family and
serve Him in His great mission. After the mission was fulfilled, the demigods,
by the will of the Lord, relinquished their corporeal bodies by fighting amongst
themselves in the madness of intoxication. The demigods are accustomed to
drinking the soma-rasa beverage, and therefore the drinking of wine and
intoxication are not unknown to them. Sometimes they were put into trouble
for indulging in intoxication. Once the sons of Kuvera fell in the wrath of
Närada for being intoxicated, but afterwards they regained their original forms
by the grace of the Lord Çré Kåñëa. We shall find this story in the Tenth
Canto. For the Supreme Lord, both the asuras and the demigods are equal, but
the demigods are obedient to the Lord, whereas the asuras are not. Therefore,
the example of picking out a thorn by another thorn is quite befitting. One
thorn, which causes pinpricks on the leg of the Lord, is certainly disturbing to
the Lord, and the other thorn, which takes out the disturbing elements,
certainly gives service to the Lord. So although every living being is a part and
parcel of the Lord, still one who is a pinprick to the Lord is called an asura,
and one who is a voluntary servitor of the Lord is called a devatä, or demigod.
In the material world the devatäs and asuras are always contending, and the
devatäs are always saved from the hands of the asuras by the Lord. Both of
them are under the control of the Lord. The world is full of two kinds of living
beings, and the Lord’s mission is always to protect the devatäs and destroy the
asuras, whenever there is such a need in the world, and to do good to both of
them.
TEXT 35
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
YaQaa MaTSYaaidæPaai<a Datae Jaùad( YaQaa Na$=" )
>aU>aar" +aiPaTaae YaeNa JahaE TaÀ k-le/vrMa( )) 35 ))
yathä matsyädi-rüpäëi
dhatte jahyäd yathä naöaù
bhü-bhäraù kñapito yena
jahau tac ca kalevaram
SYNONYMS
yathä—as much as; matsya-ädi—incarnation as a fish, etc.; rüpäëi—forms;
dhatte—eternally accepts; jahyät—apparently relinquishes; yathä—exactly
like; naöaù—magician; bhü-bhäraù—burden of the world; kñapitaù—relieved;
yena—by which; jahau—let go; tat—that; ca—also; kalevaram—body.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord relinquished the body which He manifested to diminish
the burden of the earth. Just like a magician, He relinquishes one body to
accept different ones, like the fish incarnation and others.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord Personality of Godhead is neither impersonal nor
formless, but His body is nondifferent from Him, and therefore He is known as
the embodiment of eternity, knowledge and bliss. In the Båhad-vaiñëava
Tantra it is clearly mentioned that anyone who considers the form of Lord
Kåñëa to be made of material energy must be ostracized by all means. And if by
chance the face of such an infidel is seen, one must clean himself by jumping
in the river with his clothing. The Lord is described as amåta, or deathless,
because He has no material body. Under the circumstances, the Lord’s dying or
quitting His body is like the jugglery of a magician. The magician shows by his
tricks that he is cut to pieces, burnt to ashes or made unconscious by hypnotic
influences, but all are false shows only. Factually the magician himself is
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
neither burnt to ashes nor cut to pieces, nor is he dead or unconscious at any
stage of his magical demonstration. Similarly, the Lord has His eternal forms of
unlimited variety, of which the fish incarnation, as was exhibited within this
universe, is also one. Because there are innumerable universes, somewhere or
other the fish incarnation must be manifesting His pastimes without cessation.
In this verse, the particular word dhatte (“eternally accepted,” and not the
word dhitvä, “accepted for the occasion”) is used. The idea is that the Lord does
not create the fish incarnation; He eternally has such a form, and the
appearance and disappearance of such an incarnation serves particular
purposes. In the Bhagavad-gétä (7.24–25) the Lord says, “The impersonalists
think that I have no form, that I am formless, but that at present I have
accepted a form to serve a purpose, and now I am manifested. But such
speculators are factually without sharp intelligence. Though they may be good
scholars in the Vedic literatures, they are practically ignorant of My
inconceivable energies and My eternal forms of personality. The reason is that
I reserve the power of not being exposed to the nondevotees by My mystic
curtain. The less intelligent fools are therefore unaware of My eternal form,
which is never to be vanquished and is unborn.” In the Padma Puräëa it is said
that those who are envious and always angry at the Lord are unfit to know the
actual and eternal form of the Lord. In the Bhägavatam also it is said that the
Lord appeared like a thunderbolt to those who were wrestlers. Çiçupäla, at the
time of being killed by the Lord, could not see Him as Kåñëa, being dazzled by
the glare of the brahmajyoti. Therefore, the temporary manifestation of the
Lord as a thunderbolt to the wrestlers appointed by Kaàsa, or the glaring
appearance of the Lord before Çiçupäla, was relinquished by the Lord, but the
Lord as a magician is eternally existent and is never vanquished in any
circumstance. Such forms are temporarily shown to the asuras only, and when
such exhibitions are withdrawn, the asuras think that the Lord is no more
existent, just as the foolish audience thinks the magician to be burnt to ashes
or cut to pieces. The conclusion is that the Lord has no material body, and
therefore He is never to be killed or changed by His transcendental body.
TEXT 36
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Yada Mauku-Ndae >aGavaiNaMaa& Mahq&
JahaE SvTaNva é[v<aqYaSaTk-Qa" )
TadahrevaPa[iTabuÖceTaSaa‚
Ma>ad]heTau" k-il/rNvvTaRTa )) 36 ))
yadä mukundo bhagavän imäà mahéà
jahau sva-tanvä çravaëéya-sat-kathaù
tadähar eväpratibuddha-cetasäm
abhadra-hetuù kalir anvavartata
SYNONYMS
yadä—when; mukundaù—Lord Kåñëa; bhagavän—the Personality of
Godhead; imäm—this; mahém—earth; jahau—left; sva-tanvä—with His
selfsame body; çravaëéya-sat-kathaù—hearing about Him is worthwhile;
tadä—at that time; ahaù eva—from the very day; aprati-buddha-cetasäm—of
those whose minds are not sufficiently developed; abhadra-hetuù—cause of all
ill fortune; kaliù anvavartata—Kali fully manifested.
TRANSLATION
When the Personality of Godhead, Lord Kåñëa, left this earthly planet in
His selfsame form, from that very day Kali, who had already partially appeared,
became fully manifest to create inauspicious conditions for those who are
endowed with a poor fund of knowledge.
PURPORT
The influence of Kali can be enforced only upon those who are not fully
developed in God consciousness. One can neutralize the effects of Kali by
keeping oneself fully under the supreme care of the Personality of Godhead.
The age of Kali ensued just after the Battle of Kurukñetra, but it could not
exert its influence because of the presence of the Lord. The Lord, however, left
this earthly planet in His own transcendental body, and as soon as He left, the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
symptoms of the Kali-yuga, as were envisioned by Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira prior
to Arjuna’s arrival from Dvärakä, began to manifest, and Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira rightly conjectured on the departure of the Lord from the earth.
As we have already explained, the Lord left our sight just as when the sun sets
it is out of our sight.
TEXT 37
YauiDaiïrSTaTPairSaPaR<a& buDa"
Paure c raí\e c Ga*he TaQaaTMaiNa )
iv>aaVYa l/ae>aaNa*TaiJaøih&SaNaa‚
ÛDaMaRc§&- GaMaNaaYa PaYaRDaaTa( )) 37 ))
yudhiñöhiras tat parisarpaëaà budhaù
pure ca räñöre ca gåhe tathätmani
vibhävya lobhänåta-jihma-hiàsanädyadharma-
cakraà gamanäya paryadhät
SYNONYMS
yudhiñöhiraù—Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira; tat—that; parisarpaëam—expansion;
budhaù—thoroughly experienced; pure—in the capital; ca—as also; räñöre—in
the state; ca—and; gåhe—at home; tathä—as also; ätmani—in person;
vibhävya—observing; lobha—avarice; anåta—untruth; jihma—diplomacy;
hiàsana-ädi—violence, envy; adharma—irreligion; cakram—a vicious circle;
gamanäya—for departure; paryadhät—dressed himself accordingly.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was intelligent enough to understand the influence of
the age of Kali, characterized by increasing avarice, falsehood, cheating and
violence throughout the capital, state, home and among individuals. So he
wisely prepared himself to leave home, and he dressed accordingly.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
The present age is influenced by the specific qualities of Kali. Since the
days of the Battle of Kurukñetra, about five thousand years ago, the influence
of the age of Kali began manifesting, and from authentic scriptures it is
learned that the age of Kali is still to run on for 427,000 years. The symptoms
of the Kali-yuga, as mentioned above, namely avarice, falsehood, diplomacy,
cheating, nepotism, violence and all such things, are already in vogue, and no
one can imagine what is going to happen gradually with further increase of the
influence of Kali till the day of annihilation. We have already come to know
that the influence of the age of Kali is meant for godless so-called civilized
man; those who are under the protection of the Lord have nothing to fear
from this horrible age. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira was a great devotee of the Lord,
and there was no necessity of his being afraid of the age of Kali, but he
preferred to retire from active household life and prepare himself to go back
home, back to Godhead. The Päëòavas are eternal companions of the Lord,
and therefore they are more interested in the company of the Lord than
anything else. Besides that, being an ideal king, Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira wanted
to retire just to set an example for others. As soon as there is some young
fellow to look after the household affairs, one should at once retire from family
life to uplift oneself to spiritual realization. One should not rot in the dark well
of household life till one is dragged out by the will of Yamaräja. Modern
politicians should take lessons from Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira about voluntary
retirement from active life and should make room for the younger generation.
Also retired old gentlemen should take lessons from him and leave home for
spiritual realization before forcefully dragged away to meet death.
TEXT 38
Svra$( PaaE}a& ivNaiYaNaMaaTMaNa" SauSaMa& Gau<aE" )
TaaeYaNaqVYaa" PaiTa& >aUMaer>YaizÄÓJaaûYae )) 38 ))
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
sva-räö pautraà vinayinam
ätmanaù susamaà guëaiù
toya-névyäù patià bhümer
abhyañiïcad gajähvaye
SYNONYMS
sva-räö—the emperor; pautram—unto the grandson; vinayinam—properly
trained; ätmanaù—his own self; su-samam—equal in all respects; guëaiù—by
the qualities; toya-névyäù—bordered by the seas; patim—master; bhümeù—of
the land; abhyañiïcat—enthroned; gajähvaye—in the capital of Hastinäpura.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, in the capital of Hastinäpura, he enthroned his grandson, who
was trained and equally qualified, as the emperor and master of all land
bordered by the seas.
PURPORT
The total land on the earth bordered by the seas was under the subjugation
of the King of Hastinäpura. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira trained his grandson,
Mahäräja Parékñit, who was equally qualified, in state administration in terms
of the king’s obligation to the citizens. Thus Parékñit was enthroned on the seat
of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira prior to his departure back to Godhead. Concerning
Mahäräja Parékñit, the specific word used, vinayinam, is significant. Why was
the King of Hastinäpura, at least till the time of Mahäräja Parékñit, accepted as
the Emperor of the world? The only reason is that the people of the world were
happy because of the good administration of the emperor. The happiness of
the citizens was due to the ample production of natural produce such as grains,
fruits, milk, herbs, valuable stones, minerals and everything that the people
needed. They were even free from all bodily miseries, anxieties of mind, and
disturbances caused by natural phenomena and other living beings. Because
everyone was happy in all respects, there was no resentment, although there
were sometimes battles between the state kings for political reasons and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
supremacy. Everyone was trained to attain the highest goal of life, and
therefore the people were also enlightened enough not to quarrel over
trivialities. The influence of the age of Kali gradually infiltrated the good
qualities of both the kings and the citizens, and therefore a tense situation
developed between the ruler and the ruled, but still even in this age of
disparity between the ruler and the ruled, there can be spiritual emolument
and God consciousness. That is a special prerogative.
TEXT 39
MaQauraYaa& TaQaa vJa]& éUrSaeNaPaiTa& TaTa" )
Pa[aJaaPaTYaa& iNaæPYaeiíMaGanqNaiPabdqìr" )) 39 ))
mathuräyäà tathä vajraà
çürasena-patià tataù
präjäpatyäà nirüpyeñöim
agnén apibad éçvaraù
SYNONYMS
mathuräyäm—at Mathurä; tathä—also; vajram—Vajra; çürasena-patim—King
of the Çürasenas; tataù—thereafter; präjäpatyäm—Präjäpatya sacrifice;
nirüpya—having performed; iñöim—goal; agnén—fire; apibat—placed in
himself; éçvaraù—capable.
TRANSLATION
Then he posted Vajra, the son of Aniruddha [grandson of Lord Kåñëa], at
Mathurä as the King of Çürasena. Afterwards Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira performed
a Präjäpatya sacrifice and placed in himself the fire for quitting household life.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, after placing Mahäräja Parékñit on the imperial
throne of Hastinäpura, and after posting Vajra, the great-grandson of Lord
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Kåñëa, as the King of Mathurä, accepted the renounced order of life. The
system of four orders of life and four castes in terms of quality and work,
known as varëäçrama-dharma, is the beginning of real human life, and
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, as the protector of this system of human activities,
timely retired from active life as a sannyäsé, handing over the charge of the
administration to a trained prince, Mahäräja Parékñit. The scientific system of
varëäçrama-dharma divides the human life into four divisions of occupation
and four orders of life. The four orders of life as brahmacäré, gåhastha,
vänaprastha and sannyäsé are to be followed by all, irrespective of the
occupational division. Modern politicians do not wish to retire from active life,
even if they are old enough, but Yudhiñöhira Mahäräja, as an ideal king,
voluntarily retired from active administrative life to prepare himself for the
next life. Everyone’s life must be so arranged that the last stage of life, say at
least the last fifteen to twenty years prior to death, can be absolutely devoted
to the devotional service of the Lord to attain the highest perfection of life. It
is really foolishness to engage oneself all the days of one’s life in material
enjoyment and fruitive activities, because as long as the mind remains
absorbed in fruitive work for material enjoyment, there is no chance of getting
out from conditioned life, or material bondage. No one should follow the
suicidal policy of neglecting one’s supreme task of attaining the highest
perfection of life, namely going back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 40
ivSa*JYa Ta}a TaTa( Sav| dukU-l/vl/Yaaidk-Ma( )
iNaMaRMaae iNarhªar" SaiH^àaXaezbNDaNa" )) 40 ))
visåjya tatra tat sarvaà
duküla-valayädikam
nirmamo nirahaìkäraù
saïchinnäçeña-bandhanaù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
visåjya—relinquishing; tatra—all those; tat—that; sarvam—everything;
duküla—belt; valaya-ädikam—and bangles; nirmamaù—uninterested;
nirahaìkäraù—unattached; saïchinna—perfectly cut off;
açeña-bandhanaù—unlimited attachment.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira at once relinquished all his garments, belt and
ornaments of the royal order and became completely disinterested and
unattached to everything.
PURPORT
To become purified of material contamination is the necessary qualification
for becoming one of the associates of the Lord. No one can become an
associate of the Lord or can go back to Godhead without such purification.
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, therefore, to become spiritually pure, at once gave up
his royal opulence, relinquishing his royal dress and garments. The kañäya, or
saffron loincloth of a sannyäsé, indicates freedom from all attractive material
garments, and thus he changed his dress accordingly. He became disinterested
in his kingdom and family and thus became free from all material
contamination, or material designation. People are generally attached to
various kinds of designations—the designations of family, society, country,
occupation, wealth, position and many others. As long as one is attached to
such designations, he is considered materially impure. The so-called leaders of
men in the modern age are attached by national consciousness, but they do not
know that such false consciousness is also another designation of the
materially conditioned soul; one has to relinquish such designations before one
can become eligible to go back to Godhead. Foolish people adore such men
who die in national consciousness, but here is an example of Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira, a royal king who prepared himself to leave this world without
such national consciousness. And yet he is remembered even today because he
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
was a great pious king, almost on the same level with the Personality of
Godhead Çré Räma. And because people of the world were dominated by such
pious kings, they were happy in all respects, and it was quite possible for such
great emperors to rule the world.
TEXT 41
vac& Jauhav MaNaiSa TaTPa[a<a wTare c TaMa( )
Ma*TYaavPaaNa& SaaeTSaGa| Ta& PaÄTve ùJaaehvqTa( )) 41 ))
väcaà juhäva manasi
tat präëa itare ca tam
måtyäv apänaà sotsargaà
taà païcatve hy ajohavét
SYNONYMS
väcam—speeches; juhäva—relinquished; manasi—into the mind; tat
präëe—mind into breathing; itare ca—other senses also; tam—into that;
måtyau—into death; apänam—breathing; sa-utsargam—with all dedication;
tam—that; païcatve—into the body made of five elements; hi—certainly;
ajohavét—amalgamated it.
TRANSLATION
Then he amalgamated all the sense organs into the mind, then the mind into
life, life into breathing, his total existence into the embodiment of the five
elements, and his body into death. Then, as pure self, he became free from the
material conception of life.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, like his brother Arjuna, began to concentrate and
gradually became freed from all material bondage. First he concentrated all the
actions of the senses and amalgamated them into the mind, or in other words
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
he turned his mind toward the transcendental service of the Lord. He prayed
that since all material activities are performed by the mind in terms of actions
and reactions of the material senses, and since he was going back to Godhead,
the mind would wind up its material activities and be turned towards the
transcendental service to the Lord. There was no longer a need for material
activities. Actually the activities of the mind cannot be stopped, for they are
the reflection of the eternal soul, but the quality of the activities can be
changed from matter to the transcendental service of the Lord. The material
color of the mind is changed when one washes it from contaminations of
life-breathing and thereby frees it from the contamination of repeated births
and deaths and situates it in pure spiritual life. All is manifested by the
temporary embodiment of the material body, which is a production of the
mind at the time of death, and if the mind is purified by practice of
transcendental loving service to the Lord and is constantly engaged in the
service of the lotus feet of the Lord, there is no more chance of the mind’s
producing another material body after death. It will be freed from absorption
in material contamination. The pure soul will be able to return home, back to
Godhead.
TEXT 42
i}aTve huTva c PaÄTv& TaÀEk-Tve_JauhaeNMauiNa" )
SavRMaaTMaNYaJauhvqd(b]ø<YaaTMaaNaMaVYaYae )) 42 ))
tritve hutvä ca païcatvaà
tac caikatve ’juhon muniù
sarvam ätmany ajuhavéd
brahmaëy ätmänam avyaye
SYNONYMS
tritve—into the three qualities; hutvä—having offered; ca—also;
païcatvam—five elements; tat—that; ca—also; ekatve—in one nescience;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ajuhot—amalgamated; muniù—the thoughtful; sarvam—the sum total;
ätmani—in the soul; ajuhavét—fixed; brahmaëi—unto the spirit;
ätmänam—the soul; avyaye—unto the inexhaustible.
TRANSLATION
Thus annihilating the gross body of five elements into the three qualitative
modes of material nature, he merged them in one nescience and then absorbed
that nescience in the self, Brahman, which is inexhaustible in all circumstances.
PURPORT
All that is manifested in the material world is the product of the
mahat-tattva-avyakta, and things that are visible in our material vision are
nothing but combinations and permutations of such variegated material
products. But the living entity is different from such material products. It is
due to the living entity’s forgetfulness of his eternal nature as eternal servitor
of the Lord, and his false conception of being a so-called lord of the material
nature, that he is obliged to enter into the existence of false sense enjoyment.
Thus a concomitant generation of material energies is the principal cause of
the mind’s being materially affected. Thus the gross body of five elements is
produced. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira reversed the action and merged the five
elements of the body in the three modes of material nature. The qualitative
distinction of the body as being good, bad or mediocre is extinguished, and
again the qualitative manifestations become merged in the material energy,
which is produced from a false sense of the pure living being. When one is thus
inclined to become an associate of the Supreme Lord, the Personality of
Godhead, in one of the innumerable planets of the spiritual sky, especially in
Goloka Våndävana, one has to think always that he is different from the
material energy; he has nothing to do with it, and he has to realize himself as
pure spirit, Brahman, qualitatively equal with the Supreme Brahman
(Parameçvara). Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, after distributing his kingdom to
Parékñit and Vajra, did not think himself Emperor of the world or head of the
Kuru dynasty. This sense of freedom from material relations, as well as freedom
from the material encagement of the gross and subtle encirclement, makes one
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
free to act as the servitor of the Lord, even though one is in the material world.
This stage is called the jévan-mukta stage, or the liberated stage, even in the
material world. That is the process of ending material existence. One must not
only think that he is Brahman, but must act like Brahman. One who only
thinks himself Brahman is an impersonalist. And one who acts like Brahman is
the pure devotee.
TEXT 43
cqrvaSaa iNaraharae bÖvax( Mau¢-MaUDaRJa" )
dXaRYaàaTMaNaae æPa& Ja@aeNMataiPaXaacvTa( )
ANave+aMaa<aae iNarGaadé*<vNa( biDarae YaQaa )) 43 ))
céra-väsä nirähäro
baddha-väì mukta-mürdhajaù
darçayann ätmano rüpaà
jaòonmatta-piçäcavat
anavekñamäëo niragäd
açåëvan badhiro yathä
SYNONYMS
céra-väsäù—accepted torn clothing; nirähäraù—gave up all solid foodstuff;
baddha-väk—stopped talking; mukta-mürdhajaù—untied his hair;
darçayan—began to show; ätmanaù—of himself; rüpam—bodily features;
jaòa—inert; unmatta—mad; piçäca-vat—just like an urchin;
anavekñamäëaù—without waiting for; niragät—was situated;
açåëvan—without hearing; badhiraù—just like a deaf man; yathä—as if.
TRANSLATION
After that, Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira dressed himself in torn clothing, gave up
eating all solid foods, voluntarily became dumb and let his hair hang loose. All
this combined to make him look like an urchin or madman with no occupation.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
He did not depend on his brothers for anything. And, just like a deaf man, he
heard nothing.
PURPORT
Thus being freed from all external affairs, he had nothing to do with
imperial life or family prestige, and for all practical purposes he posed himself
exactly like an inert mad urchin and did not speak of material affairs. He had
no dependence on his brothers, who had all along been helping him. This stage
of complete independence from everything is also called the purified stage of
fearlessness.
TEXT 44
odqcq& Pa[ivveXaaXaa& GaTaPaUva| MahaTMai>a" )
ôid b]ø Par& DYaaYaàavTaeRTa YaTaae GaTa" )) 44 ))
udécéà praviveçäçäà
gata-pürväà mahätmabhiù
hådi brahma paraà dhyäyan
nävarteta yato gataù
SYNONYMS
udécém—the northern side; praviveça-äçäm—those who wanted to enter there;
gata-pürväm—the path accepted by his forefathers; mahä-ätmabhiù—by the
broad-minded; hådi—within the heart; brahma—the Supreme;
param—Godhead; dhyäyan—constantly thinking of; na ävarteta—passed his
days; yataù—wherever; gataù—went.
TRANSLATION
He then started towards the north, treading the path accepted by his
forefathers and great men, to devote himself completely to the thought of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. And he lived in that way wherever he went.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
It is understood from this verse that Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira followed in the
footsteps of his forefathers and the great devotees of the Lord. We have
discussed many times before that the system of varëäçrama-dharma, as it was
strictly followed by the inhabitants of the world, specifically by those who
inhabited the Äryävarta province of the world, emphasizes the importance of
leaving all household connections at a certain stage of life. The training and
education was so imparted, and thus a respectable person like Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira had to leave all family connection for self-realization and going
back to Godhead. No king or respectable gentleman would continue family life
till the end, because that was considered suicidal and against the interest of
the perfection of human life. In order to be free from all family encumbrances
and devote oneself cent percent in the devotional service of Lord Kåñëa, this
system is always recommended for everyone because it is the path of authority.
The Lord instructs in the Bhagavad-gétä (18.62) that one must become a
devotee of the Lord at least at the last stage of one’s life. A sincere soul of the
Lord like Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira must abide by this instruction of the Lord for
his own interest.
The specific words brahma param indicate Lord Çré Kåñëa. This is
corroborated in the Bhagavad-gétä (10.13) by Arjuna with reference to great
authorities like Asita, Devala, Närada and Vyäsa. Thus Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira,
while leaving home for the north, constantly remembered Lord Çré Kåñëa
within himself, following in the footsteps of his forefathers as well as the great
devotees of all times.
TEXT 45
SaveR TaMaNauiNaJaRGMau>a]aRTar" k*-TaiNaêYaa" )
k-il/NaaDaMaRiMa}ae<a d*îa SPa*ía" Pa[Jaa >auiv )) 45 ))
sarve tam anunirjagmur
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
bhrätaraù kåta-niçcayäù
kalinädharma-mitreëa
dåñövä spåñöäù prajä bhuvi
SYNONYMS
sarve—all his younger brothers; tam—him; anunirjagmuù—left home by
following the elder; bhrätaraù—brothers; kåta-niçcayäù—decidedly;
kalinä—by the age of Kali; adharma—principle of irreligion; mitreëa—by the
friend; dåñövä—observing; spåñöäù—having overtaken; prajäù—all citizens;
bhuvi—on the earth.
TRANSLATION
The younger brothers of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira observed that the age of Kali
had already arrived throughout the world and that the citizens of the kingdom
were already affected by irreligious practice. Therefore they decided to follow in
the footsteps of their elder brother.
PURPORT
The younger brothers of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira were already obedient
followers of the great Emperor, and they had sufficiently been trained to know
the ultimate goal of life. They therefore decidedly followed their eldest brother
in rendering devotional service to Lord Çré Kåñëa. According to the principles
of sanätana-dharma, one must retire from family life after half the duration of
life is finished and must engage himself in self-realization. But the question of
engaging oneself is not always decided. Sometimes retired men are bewildered
about how to engage themselves for the last days of life. Here is a decision by
authorities like the Päëòavas. All of them engaged themselves in favorably
culturing the devotional service of the Lord Çré Kåñëa, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. According to Svämé Çrédhara, dharma, artha, käma
and mokña, or fruitive activities, philosophical speculations and salvation, as
conceived by several persons, are not the ultimate goal of life. They are more
or less practiced by persons who have no information of the ultimate goal of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
life. The ultimate goal of life is already indicated by the Lord Himself in the
Bhagavad-gétä (18.64), and the Päëòavas were intelligent enough to follow it
without hesitation.
TEXT 46
Tae SaaDauk*-TaSavaRQaaR jaTvaTYaiNTak-MaaTMaNa" )
MaNaSaa DaarYaaMaaSauvOEku-<#=cr<aaMbuJaMa( )) 46 ))
te sädhu-kåta-sarvärthä
jïätvätyantikam ätmanaù
manasä dhärayäm äsur
vaikuëöha-caraëämbujam
SYNONYMS
te—all of them; sädhu-kåta—having performed everything worthy of a saint;
sarva-arthäù—that which includes everything worthy; jïätvä—knowing it
well; ätyantikam—the ultimate; ätmanaù—of the living being;
manasä—within the mind; dhärayäm äsuù—sustained; vaikuëöha—the Lord of
the spiritual sky; caraëa-ambujam—the lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
They all had performed all the principles of religion and as a result rightly
decided that the lotus feet of the Lord Çré Kåñëa are the supreme goal of all.
Therefore they meditated upon His feet without interruption.
PURPORT
In the Bhagavad-gétä (7.28) the Lord says that only those who have done
pious deeds in previous lives and have become freed from the results of all
impious acts can concentrate upon the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord Çré
Kåñëa. The Päëòavas, not only in this life but also in their previous lives, had
always performed the supreme pious work, and thus they are ever free from all
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the reactions of impious work. It is quite reasonable, therefore, that they
concentrated their minds upon the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa.
According to Çré Viçvanätha Cakravarté, dharma, artha, käma and mokña
principles are accepted by persons who are not free from the results of impious
action. Such persons affected with the contaminations of the above four
principles cannot at once accept the lotus feet of the Lord in the spiritual sky.
The Vaikuëöha world is situated far beyond the material sky. The material sky
is under the management of Durgä Devé, or the material energy of the Lord,
but the Vaikuëöha world is managed by the personal energy of the Lord.
TEXTS 47–48
TaÖyaNaaeid]¢-Yaa >a¢-ya ivéuÖiDaz<aa" Pare )
TaiSMaNa( NaaraYa<aPade Wk-aNTaMaTaYaae GaiTaMa( )) 47 ))
AvaPauduRrvaPaa& Tae ASaiÙivRzYaaTMai>a" )
ivDaUTak-LMaza SQaaNa& ivrJaeNaaTMaNaEv ih )) 48 ))
tad-dhyänodriktayä bhaktyä
viçuddha-dhiñaëäù pare
tasmin näräyaëa-pade
ekänta-matayo gatim
aväpur duraväpäà te
asadbhir viñayätmabhiù
vidhüta-kalmañä sthänaà
virajenätmanaiva hi
SYNONYMS
tat—that; dhyäna—positive meditation; utriktayä—being freed from;
bhaktyä—by a devotional attitude; viçuddha—purified; dhiñaëäù—by
intelligence; pare—unto the Transcendence; tasmin—in that; näräyaëa—the
Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa; pade—unto the lotus feet;
ekänta-matayaù—of those who are fixed in the Supreme, who is one;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
gatim—destination; aväpuù—attained; duraväpäm—very difficult to obtain;
te—by them; asadbhiù—by the materialists; viñaya-ätmabhiù—absorbed in
material needs; vidhüta—washed off; kalmañäù—material contaminations;
sthänam—abode; virajena—without material passion; ätmanä eva—by the
selfsame body; hi—certainly.
TRANSLATION
Thus by pure consciousness due to constant devotional remembrance, they
attained the spiritual sky, which is ruled over by the Supreme Näräyaëa, Lord
Kåñëa. This is attained only by those who meditate upon the one Supreme Lord
without deviation. This abode of the Lord Çré Kåñëa, known as Goloka
Våndävana, cannot be attained by persons who are absorbed in the material
conception of life. But the Päëòavas, being completely washed of all material
contamination, attained that abode in their very same bodies.
PURPORT
According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, a person freed from the three modes of
material qualities, namely goodness, passion and ignorance, and situated in
transcendence can reach the highest perfection of life without change of body.
Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé in his Hari-bhakti-viläsa says that a person, whatever
he may be, can attain the perfection of a twice-born brähmaëa by undergoing
the spiritual disciplinary actions under the guidance of a bona fide spiritual
master, exactly as a chemist can turn gun metal into gold by chemical
manipulation. It is therefore the actual guidance that matters in the process of
becoming a brähmaëa, even without change of body, or in going back to
Godhead without change of body. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé remarks that the word hi
used in this connection positively affirms this truth, and there is no doubt
about this factual position. The Bhagavad-gétä (14.26) also affirms this
statement of Çréla Jéva Gosvämé when the Lord says that anyone who executes
devotional service systematically without deviation can attain the perfection
of Brahman by surpassing the contamination of the three modes of material
nature, and when the Brahman perfection is still more advanced by the
selfsame execution of devotional service, there is no doubt at all that one can
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
attain the supreme spiritual planet, Goloka Våndävana, without change of
body, as we have already discussed in connection with the Lord’s returning to
His abode without a change of body.
TEXT 49
ivdurae_iPa PairTYaJYa Pa[>aaSae dehMaaTMaNa" )
k*-Z<aaveXaeNa TaiÀta" iPaTa*i>a" Sv+aYa& YaYaaE )) 49 ))
viduro ’pi parityajya
prabhäse deham ätmanaù
kåñëäveçena tac-cittaù
pitåbhiù sva-kñayaà yayau
SYNONYMS
viduraù—Vidura (the uncle of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira); api—also;
parityajya—after quitting the body; prabhäse—in the place of pilgrimage at
Prabhäsa; deham ätmanaù—his body; kåñëa—the Personality of Godhead;
äveçena—being absorbed in that thought; tat—his; cittaù—thoughts and
actions; pitåbhiù—along with the residents of Pitåloka; sva-kñayam—his own
abode; yayau—departed.
TRANSLATION
Vidura, while on pilgrimage, left his body at Prabhäsa. Because he was
absorbed in thought of Lord Kåñëa, he was received by the denizens of Pitåloka
planet, where he returned to his original post.
PURPORT
The difference between the Päëòavas and Vidura is that the Päëòavas are
eternal associates of the Lord, the Personality of Godhead, whereas Vidura is
one of the administrative demigods in charge of the Pitåloka planet and is
known as Yamaräja. Men are afraid of Yamaräja because it is he only who
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
awards punishment to the miscreants of the material world, but those who are
devotees of the Lord have nothing to fear from him. To the devotees he is a
cordial friend, but to the nondevotees he is fear personified. As we have
already discussed, it is understood that Yamaräja was cursed by Maëòüka Muni
to be degraded as a çüdra, and therefore Vidura was an incarnation of
Yamaräja. As an eternal servitor of the Lord, he displayed his devotional
activities very ardently and lived a life of a pious man, so much so that a
materialistic man like Dhåtaräñöra also got salvation by his instruction. So by
his pious activities in the devotional service of the Lord he was able to always
remember the lotus feet of the Lord, and thus he became washed of all
contamination of a çüdra-born life. At the end he was again received by the
denizens of Pitåloka and posted in his original position. The demigods are also
associates of the Lord without personal touch, whereas the direct associates of
the Lord are in constant personal touch with Him. The Lord and His personal
associates incarnate in many universes without cessation. The Lord remembers
them all, whereas the associates forget due to their being very minute parts and
parcels of the Lord; they are apt to forget such incidents due to being
infinitesimal. This is corroborated in the Bhagavad-gétä (4.5).
TEXT 50
d]aEPadq c TadajaYa PaTaqNaaMaNaPae+aTaaMa( )
vaSaudeve >aGaviTa ùek-aNTaMaiTaraPa TaMa( )) 50 ))
draupadé ca tadäjïäya
paténäm anapekñatäm
väsudeve bhagavati
hy ekänta-matir äpa tam
SYNONYMS
draupadé—Draupadé (the wife of the Päëòavas); ca—and; tadä—at that time;
äjïäya—knowing Lord Kåñëa fully well; paténäm—of the husbands;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
anapekñatäm—who did not care for her; väsudeve—unto Lord Väsudeva
(Kåñëa); bhagavati—the personality of Godhead; hi—exactly;
eka-anta—absolutely; matiù—concentration; äpa—got; tam—Him (the Lord).
TRANSLATION
Draupadé also saw that her husbands, without caring for her, were leaving
home. She knew well about Lord Väsudeva, Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead.
Both she and Subhadrä became absorbed in thoughts of Kåñëa and attained the
same results as their husbands.
PURPORT
When flying an airplane, one cannot take care of other planes. Everyone
has to take care of his own plane, and if there is any danger, no other plane
can help another in that condition. Similarly, at the end of life, when one has
to go back home, back to Godhead, everyone has to take care of himself
without help rendered by another. The help is, however, offered on the ground
before flying in space. Similarly, the spiritual master, the father, the mother,
the relatives, the husband and others can all render help during one’s lifetime,
but while crossing the sea one has to take care of himself and utilize the
instructions formerly received. Draupadé had five husbands, and no one asked
Draupadé to come; Draupadé had to take care of herself without waiting for her
great husbands. And because she was already trained, she at once took to
concentration upon the lotus feet of Lord Väsudeva, Kåñëa, the Personality of
Godhead. The wives also got the same result as their husbands, in the same
manner; that is to say, without changing their bodies they reached the
destination of Godhead. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura suggests that
both Draupadé and Subhadrä, although her name is not mentioned herein, got
the same result. None of them had to quit the body.
TEXT 51
Ya" é[ÖYaETad( >aGaviTPa[Yaa<aa&
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Paa<@ae" SauTaaNaaiMaiTa SaMPa[Yaa<aMa( )
é*<aaeTYal&/ SvSTYaYaNa& Paiv}a&
l/Bßa hraE >ai¢-MauPaEiTa iSaiÖMa( )) 51 ))
yaù çraddhayaitad bhagavat-priyäëäà
päëòoù sutänäm iti samprayäëam
çåëoty alaà svastyayanaà pavitraà
labdhvä harau bhaktim upaiti siddhim
SYNONYMS
yaù—anyone who; çraddhayä—with devotion; etat—this;
bhagavat-priyäëäm—of those who are very dear to the Personality of Godhead;
päëòoù—of Päëòu; sutänäm—of the sons; iti—thus; samprayäëam—departure
for the ultimate goal; çåëoti—hears; alam—only; svastyayanam—good fortune;
pavitram—perfectly pure; labdhvä—by obtaining; harau—unto the Supreme
Lord; bhaktim—devotional service; upaiti—gains; siddhim—perfection.
TRANSLATION
The subject of the departure of the sons of Päëòu for the ultimate goal of
life, back to Godhead, is fully auspicious and is perfectly pure. Therefore
anyone who hears this narration with devotional faith certainly gains the
devotional service of the Lord, the highest perfection of life.
PURPORT
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is a narration about the Personality of Godhead and
the devotees of the Lord like the Päëòavas. The narration of the Personality of
Godhead and His devotees is absolute in itself, and thus to hear it with a
devotional attitude is to associate with the Lord and constant companions of
the Lord. By the process of hearing Çrémad-Bhägavatam one can attain the
highest perfection of life, namely going back home, back to Godhead, without
failure.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the First Canto, Fifteenth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled “The Päëòavas Retire Timely.”
Chapter Sixteen
How Parékñit Received the Age of Kali
TEXT 1
SaUTa ovac
TaTa" Parqi+ad( iÜJavYaRiXa+aYaa
Mahq& Maha>aaGavTa" XaXaaSa h )
YaQaa ih SaUTYaaMai>aJaaTak-aeivda"
SaMaaidXaNa( ivPa[ Mahd(Gau<aSTaQaa )) 1 ))
süta uväca
tataù parékñid dvija-varya-çikñayä
mahéà mahä-bhägavataù çaçäsa ha
yathä hi sütyäm abhijäta-kovidäù
samädiçan vipra mahad-guëas tathä
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; tataù—thereafter; parékñit—Mahäräja
Parékñit; dvija-varya—the great twice-born brähmaëas; çikñayä—by their
instructions; mahém—the earth; mahä-bhägavataù—the great devotee;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
çaçäsa—ruled; ha—in the past; yathä—as they told it; hi—certainly;
sütyäm—at the time of his birth; abhijäta-kovidäù—expert astrologers at the
time of birth; samädiçan—gave their opinions; vipra—O brähmaëas;
mahat-guëaù—great qualities; tathä—true to that.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: O learned brähmaëas, Mahäräja Parékñit then began to
rule over the world as a great devotee of the Lord under the instructions of the
best of the twice-born brähmaëas. He ruled by those great qualities which were
foretold by expert astrologers at the time of his birth.
PURPORT
At the time of Mahäräja Parékñit’s birth, the expert astrologer-brähmaëas
foretold some of his qualities. Mahäräja Parékñit developed all those qualities,
being a great devotee of the Lord. The real qualification is to become a devotee
of the Lord, and gradually all the good qualities worthy of possession develop.
Mahäräja Parékñit was a mahä-bhägavata, or a first-class devotee, who was not
only well versed in the science of devotion but also able to convert others to
become devotees by his transcendental instructions. Mahäräja Parékñit was,
therefore, a devotee of the first order, and thus he used to consult great sages
and learned brähmaëas, who could advise him by the çästras how to execute
the state administration. Such great kings were more responsible than modern
elected executive heads because they obliged the great authorities by following
their instructions left in Vedic literatures. There was no need for impractical
fools to enact daily a new legislative bill and to conveniently alter it again and
again to serve some purpose. The rules and regulations were already set forth
by great sages like Manu, Yäjïavalkya, Paräçara and other liberated sages, and
the enactments were all suitable for all ages in all places. Therefore the rules
and regulations were standard and without flaw or defect. Kings like Mahäräja
Parékñit had their council of advisers, and all the members of that council were
either great sages or brähmaëas of the first order. They did not accept any
salary, nor had they any necessity for such salaries. The state would get the best
advice without expenditure. They were themselves sama-darçé, equal to
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
everyone, both man and animal. They would not advise the king to give
protection to man and instruct him to kill the poor animals. Such council
members were not fools or representatives to compose a fool’s paradise. They
were all self-realized souls, and they knew perfectly well how all living beings
in the state would be happy, both in this life and in the next. They were not
concerned with the hedonistic philosophy of eat, drink, be merry and enjoy.
They were philosophers in the real sense, and they knew well what is the
mission of human life. Under all these obligations, the advisory council of the
king would give correct directions, and the king or executive head, being
himself a qualified devotee of the Lord, would scrutinizingly follow them for
the welfare of the state. The state in the days of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira or
Mahäräja Parékñit was a welfare state in the real sense of the term because no
one was unhappy in that state, be he man or animal. Mahäräja Parékñit was an
ideal king for a welfare state of the world.
TEXT 2
Sa otarSYa TaNaYaaMauPaYaeMa wravTaqMa( )
JaNaMaeJaYaadq&êTaurSTaSYaaMauTPaadYaTa( SauTaaNa( )) 2 ))
sa uttarasya tanayäm
upayema irävatém
janamejayädéàç caturas
tasyäm utpädayat sutän
SYNONYMS
saù—he; uttarasya—of King Uttara; tanayäm—daughter; upayeme—married;
irävatém—Irävaté; janamejaya-ädén—headed by Mahäräja Janamejaya;
caturaù—four; tasyäm—in her; utpädayat—begot; sutän—sons.
TRANSLATION
King Parékñit married the daughter of King Uttara and begot four sons,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
headed by Mahäräja Janamejaya.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Uttara was the son of Viräöa and maternal uncle of Mahäräja
Parékñit. Irävaté, being the daughter of Mahäräja Uttara, was the cousin-sister
of Mahäräja Parékñit, but cousin-brothers and -sisters were allowed to get
married if they did not belong to the same gotra, or family. In the Vedic system
of marriage, the importance of the gotra, or family, was stressed. Arjuna also
married Subhadrä, although she was his maternal cousin-sister.
Janamejaya: One of the räjarñi kings and the famous son of Mahäräja
Parékñit. His mother’s name was Irävaté, or according to some, Mädravaté.
Mahäräja Janamejaya begot two sons of the names Jïätänéka and Çaìkukarëa.
He celebrated several sacrifices in the Kurukñetra pilgrimage site, and he had
three younger brothers named Çrutasena, Ugrasena and Bhémasena II. He
invaded Takñalä (Ajanta), and he decided to avenge the unlawful curse upon
his great father, Mahäräja Parékñit. He performed a great sacrifice called
Sarpa-yajïa, to kill the race of serpents, including the takñaka, which had
bitten his father to death. On request from many influential demigods and
sages, he had to change his decision to kill the race of snakes, but despite
stopping the sacrifice, he satisfied everyone concerned in the sacrifice by
rewarding them properly. In the ceremony, Mahämuni Vyäsadeva also was
present, and he personally narrated the history of the Battle of Kurukñetra
before the King. Later on by the order of Vyäsadeva, his disciple
Vaiçampäyana narrated before the King the subject matter of Mahäbhärata.
He was much affected by his great father’s untimely death and was very
anxious to see him again, and he expressed his desire before the great sage
Vyäsadeva. Vyäsadeva also fulfilled his desire. His father was present before
him, and he worshiped both his father and Vyäsadeva with great respect and
pomp. Being fully satisfied, he most munificently gave charities to the
brähmaëas present at the sacrifice.
TEXT 3
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
AaJaharaìMaeDaa&ñqNa( Ga®aYaa& >aUirdi+a<aaNa( )
XaarÜTa& Gauå& k*-Tva deva Ya}aai+aGaaecra" )) 3 ))
äjahäräçva-medhäàs trén
gaìgäyäà bhüri-dakñiëän
çäradvataà guruà kåtvä
devä yaträkñi-gocaräù
SYNONYMS
äjahära—performed; açva-medhän—horse sacrifices; trén—three;
gaìgäyäm—the bank of the Ganges; bhüri—sufficiently; dakñiëän—rewards;
çäradvatam—unto Kåpäcärya; gurum—spiritual master; kåtvä—having
selected; deväù—the demigods; yatra—wherein; akñi—eyes; gocaräù—within
the purview.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Parékñit, after having selected Kåpäcärya for guidance as his
spiritual master, performed three horse sacrifices on the banks of the Ganges.
These were executed with sufficient rewards for the attendants. And at these
sacrifices, even the common man could see demigods.
PURPORT
It appears from this verse that interplanetary travel by the denizens of
higher planets is easy. In many statements in Bhägavatam, we have observed
that the demigods from heaven used to visit this earth to attend sacrifices
performed by influential kings and emperors. Herein also we find that during
the time of the horse sacrifice ceremony of Mahäräja Parékñit, the demigods
from other planets were visible even to the common man, due to the sacrificial
ceremony. The demigods are not generally visible to common men, as the Lord
is not visible. But as the Lord, by His causeless mercy, descends to be visible to
the common man, similarly the demigods also become visible to the common
man by their own grace. Although celestial beings are not visible to the naked
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
eyes of the inhabitants of this earth, it was due to the influence of Mahäräja
Parékñit that the demigods also agreed to be visible. The kings used to spend
lavishly during such sacrifices, as a cloud distributes rains. A cloud is nothing
but another form of water, or, in other words, the waters of the earth
transform into clouds. Similarly, the charity made by the kings in such
sacrifices are but another form of the taxes collected from the citizens. But, as
the rains fall down very lavishly and appear to be more than necessary, the
charity made by such kings also seems to be more than what the citizen needs.
Satisfied citizens will never organize agitation against the king, and thus there
was no need in changing the monarchial state.
Even for a king like Mahäräja Parékñit there was need of a spiritual master
for guidance. Without such guidance one cannot make progress in spiritual
life. The spiritual master must be bona fide, and one who wants to have
self-realization must approach and take shelter of a bona fide spiritual master
to achieve real success.
TEXT 4
iNaJaGa]ahaEJaSaa vqr" k-il&/ idiGvJaYae KvicTa( )
Na*Pail/®Dar& éUd]& ganNTa& GaaeiMaQauNa& Pada )) 4 ))
nijagrähaujasä véraù
kalià digvijaye kvacit
nåpa-liìga-dharaà çüdraà
ghnantaà go-mithunaà padä
SYNONYMS
nijagräha—sufficiently punished; ojasä—by prowess; véraù—valiant hero;
kalim—unto Kali, the master of the age; digvijaye—on his way to conquer the
world; kvacit—once upon a time; nåpa-liìga-dharam—one who passes in the
dress of a king; çüdram—the lower class; ghnantam—hurting; go-mithunam—a
cow and bull; padä—on the leg.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
Once, when Mahäräja Parékñit was on his way to conquer the world, he saw
the master of Kali-yuga, who was lower than a çüdra, disguised as a king and
hurting the legs of a cow and bull. The King at once caught hold of him to deal
sufficient punishment.
PURPORT
The purpose of a king’s going out to conquer the world is not for
self-aggrandizement. Mahäräja Parékñit went out to conquer the world after his
ascendance to the throne, but this was not for the purpose of aggression on
other states. He was the Emperor of the world, and all small states were already
under his regime. His purpose in going out was to see how things were going on
in terms of the godly state. The king, being the representative of the Lord, has
to execute the will of the Lord duly. There is no question of
self-aggrandizement. Thus as soon as Mahäräja Parékñit saw that a lower-class
man in the dress of a king was hurting the legs of a cow and a bull, at once he
arrested and punished him. The king cannot tolerate insults to the most
important animal, the cow, nor can he tolerate disrespect for the most
important man, the brähmaëa. Human civilization means to advance the cause
of brahminical culture, and to maintain it, cow protection is essential. There is
a miracle in milk, for it contains all the necessary vitamins to sustain human
physiological conditions for higher achievements. Brahminical culture can
advance only when man is educated to develop the quality of goodness, and for
this there is a prime necessity of food prepared with milk, fruits and grains.
Mahäräja Parékñit was astonished to see that a black çüdra, dressed like a ruler,
was mistreating a cow, the most important animal in human society.
The age of Kali means mismanagement and quarrel. And the root cause of
all mismanagement and quarrel is that worthless men with the modes of
lower-class men, who have no higher ambition in life, come to the helm of the
state management. Such men at the post of a king are sure to first hurt the cow
and the brahminical culture, thereby pushing all society towards hell.
Mahäräja Parékñit, trained as he was, got the scent of this root cause of all
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
quarrel in the world. Thus he wanted to stop it in the very beginning.
TEXT 5
XaaENak- ovac
k-SYa heTaaeiNaRJaGa]ah k-il&/ idiGvJaYae Na*Pa" )
Na*devicöDa*k(- éUd]k-ae_SaaE Gaa& Ya" PadahNaTa( )
TaTk-QYaTaa& Maha>aaGa Yaid k*-Z<ak-Qaaé[YaMa( )) 5 ))
çaunaka uväca
kasya hetor nijagräha
kalià digvijaye nåpaù
nådeva-cihna-dhåk çüdrako
’sau gäà yaù padähanat
tat kathyatäà mahä-bhäga
yadi kåñëa-kathäçrayam
SYNONYMS
çaunakaù uväca—Çaunaka Åñi said; kasya—for what; hetoù—reason;
nijagräha—sufficiently punished; kalim—the master of the age of Kali;
digvijaye—during the time of his world tour; nåpaù—the King; nå-deva—royal
person; cihna-dhåk—decorated like; çüdrakaù—lowest of the çüdras; asau—he;
gäm—cow; yaù—one who; padä ahanat—struck on the leg; tat—all that;
kathyatäm—please describe; mahä-bhäga—O greatly fortunate one; yadi—if,
however; kåñëa—about Kåñëa; kathä-äçrayam—related with His topics.
TRANSLATION
Çaunaka Åñi inquired: Why did Mahäräja Parékñit simply punish him, since
he was the lowest of the çüdras, having dressed as a king and having struck a
cow on the leg? Please describe all these incidents if they relate to the topics of
Lord Kåñëa.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
Çaunaka and the åñis were astonished to hear that the pious Mahäräja
Parékñit simply punished the culprit and did not kill him. This suggests that a
pious king like Mahäräja Parékñit should have at once killed an offender who
wanted to cheat the public by dressing like a king and at the same time daring
to insult the purest of the animals, a cow. The åñis in those days, however,
could not even imagine that in the advanced days of the age of Kali the lowest
of the çüdras will be elected as administrators and will open organized
slaughterhouses for killing cows. Anyway, although hearing about a çüdraka
who was a cheat and insulter of a cow was not very interesting to the great åñis,
they nevertheless wanted to hear about it to see if the event had any
connection with Lord Kåñëa. They were simply interested in the topics of Lord
Kåñëa, for anything that is dovetailed with the narration of Kåñëa is worth
hearing. There are many topics in the Bhägavatam about sociology, politics,
economics, cultural affairs, etc., but all of them are in relation with Kåñëa, and
therefore all of them are worth hearing. Kåñëa is the purifying ingredient in all
matters, regardless of what they are. In the mundane world, everything is
impure due to its being a product of the three mundane qualities. The
purifying agent, however, is Kåñëa.
TEXT 6
AQavaSYa PadaM>aaeJaMak-rNdil/ha& SaTaaMa( )
ik-MaNYaErSadal/aPaEraYauzae YadSaÜyYa" )) 6 ))
athaväsya padämbhojamakaranda-
lihäà satäm
kim anyair asad-äläpair
äyuño yad asad-vyayaù
SYNONYMS
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
athavä—otherwise; asya—of His (Lord Kåñëa’s); pada-ambhoja—lotus feet;
makaranda-lihäm—of those who lick the honey from such a lotus flower;
satäm—of those who are to exist eternally; kim anyaiù—what is the use of
anything else; asat—illusory; äläpaiù—topics; äyuñaù—of the duration of life;
yat—that which is; asat-vyayaù—unnecessary waste of life.
TRANSLATION
The devotees of the Lord are accustomed to licking up the honey available
from the lotus feet of the Lord. What is the use of topics which simply waste
one’s valuable life?
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa and His devotees are both on the transcendental plane;
therefore the topics of Lord Kåñëa and of His pure devotees are equally good.
The Battle of Kurukñetra is full of politics and diplomacy, but because the
topics are related with Lord Kåñëa, the Bhagavad-gétä is therefore adored all
over the world. There is no need to eradicate politics, economics, sociology,
etc., which are mundane to the mundaners. To a pure devotee, who is actually
related with the Lord, such mundane things are transcendental if dovetailed
with the Lord or with His pure devotees. We have heard and talked about the
activities of the Päëòavas, and we now are dealing with the topics of Mahäräja
Parékñit, but because all these topics are related to the Lord Çré Kåñëa, they are
all transcendental, and pure devotees have great interest in hearing them. We
have already discussed this matter in connection with the prayers of
Bhéñmadeva.
Our duration of life is not very long, and there is no certainty of when we
shall be ordered to leave everything for the next stage. Thus it is our duty to
see that not a moment of our life is wasted in topics which are not related with
Lord Kåñëa. Any topic, however pleasant, is not worth hearing if it is devoid of
its relation to Kåñëa.
The spiritual planet, Goloka Våndävana, the eternal abode of Lord Kåñëa, is
shaped like the whorl of a lotus flower. Even when the Lord descends to any
one of the mundane planets, He does so by manifesting His own abode as it is.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Thus His feet remain always on the same big whorl of the lotus flower. His feet
are also as beautiful as the lotus flower. Therefore it is said that Lord Kåñëa has
lotus feet.
A living being is eternal by constitution. He is, so to speak, in the whirlpool
of birth and death due to his contact with material energy. Freed from such
material energy, a living entity is liberated and is eligible to return home, back
to Godhead. Those who want to live forever without changing their material
bodies should not waste valuable time with topics other than those relating to
Lord Kåñëa and His devotees.
TEXT 7
+aud]aYauza& Na*<aaMa® MaTYaaRNaaMa*TaiMaC^TaaMa( )
whaePahUTaae >aGavaNa( Ma*TYau" XaaiMa}ak-MaRi<a )) 7 ))
kñudräyuñäà nåëäm aìga
martyänäm åtam icchatäm
ihopahüto bhagavän
måtyuù çämitra-karmaëi
SYNONYMS
kñudra—very small; äyuñäm—of the duration of life; nåëäm—of the human
beings; aìga—O Süta Gosvämé; martyänäm—of those who are sure to meet
death; åtam—eternal life; icchatäm—of those who desire it; iha—herein;
upahütaù—called for being present; bhagavän—representing the Lord;
måtyuù—the controller of death, Yamaräja; çämitra—suppressing;
karmaëi—performances.
TRANSLATION
O Süta Gosvämé, there are those amongst men who desire freedom from
death and get eternal life. They escape the slaughtering process by calling the
controller of death, Yamaräja.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
The living entity, as he develops from lower animal life to a higher human
being and gradually to higher intelligence, becomes anxious to get free from
the clutches of death. Modern scientists try to avoid death by physiochemical
advancement of knowledge, but alas, the controller of death, Yamaräja, is so
cruel that he does not spare even the very life of the scientist himself. The
scientist, who puts forward the theory of stopping death by advancement of
scientific knowledge, becomes himself a victim of death when he is called by
Yamaräja. What to speak of stopping death, no one can enhance the short
period of life even by a fraction of a moment. The only hope of suspending the
cruel slaughtering process of Yamaräja is to call him to hear and chant the holy
name of the Lord. Yamaräja is a great devotee of the Lord, and he likes to be
invited to kértanas and sacrifices by the pure devotees, who are constantly
engaged in the devotional service of the Lord. Thus the great sages, headed by
Çaunaka and others, invited Yamaräja to attend the sacrifice performed at
Naimiñäraëya. This was good for those who did not want to die.
TEXT 8
Na k-iêiNMa]YaTae Taavd( YaavdaSTa whaNTak-" )
WTadQa| ih >aGavaNaahUTa" ParMaizRi>a" )
Ahae Na*l/aeke- PaqYaeTa hirl/Il/aMa*Ta& vc" )) 8 ))
na kaçcin mriyate tävad
yävad ästa ihäntakaù
etad-arthaà hi bhagavän
ähütaù paramarñibhiù
aho nå-loke péyeta
hari-lélämåtaà vacaù
SYNONYMS
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
na—not; kaçcit—anyone; mriyate—will die; tävat—so long; yävat—as long as;
äste—is present; iha—herein; antakaù—one who causes the end of life;
etat—this; artham—reason; hi—certainly; bhagavän—the representative of
the Lord; ähütaù—invited; parama-åñibhiù—by the great sages; aho—alas;
nå-loke—in human society; péyeta—let them drink; hari-lélä—transcendental
pastimes of the Lord; amåtam—nectar for eternal life; vacaù—narrations.
TRANSLATION
As long as Yamaräja, who causes everyone’s death, is present here, no one
shall meet with death. The great sages have invited the controller of death,
Yamaräja, who is the representative of the Lord. Living beings who are under
his grip should take advantage by hearing the deathless nectar in the form of
this narration of the transcendental pastimes of the Lord.
PURPORT
Every human being dislikes meeting death, but he does not know how to get
rid of death. The surest remedy for avoiding death is to accustom oneself to
hearing the nectarean pastimes of the Lord as they are systematically narrated
in the text of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. It is advised herein, therefore, that any
human being who desires freedom from death should take to this course of life
as recommended by the åñis headed by Çaunaka.
TEXT 9
MaNdSYa MaNdPa[jSYa vYaae MaNdaYauzê vE )
iNad]Yaa ihYaTae Na¢&- idva c VYaQaRk-MaRi>a" )) 9 ))
mandasya manda-prajïasya
vayo mandäyuñaç ca vai
nidrayä hriyate naktaà
divä ca vyartha-karmabhiù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
mandasya—of the lazy; manda—paltry; prajïasya—of intelligence;
vayaù—age; manda—short; äyuñaù—of duration of life; ca—and;
vai—exactly; nidrayä—by sleeping; hriyate—passes away; naktam—night;
divä—daytime; ca—also; vyartha—for nothing; karmabhiù—by activities.
TRANSLATION
Lazy human beings with paltry intelligence and a short duration of life pass
the night sleeping and the day performing activities that are for naught.
PURPORT
The less intelligent do not know the real value of the human form of life.
The human form is a special gift of material nature in the course of her
enforcing stringent laws of miseries upon the living being. It is a chance to
achieve the highest boon of life, namely to get out of the entanglement of
repeated birth and death. The intelligent take care of this important gift by
strenuously endeavoring to get out of the entanglement. But the less
intelligent are lazy and unable to evaluate the gift of the human body to
achieve liberation from the material bondage; they become more interested in
so-called economic development and work very hard throughout life simply for
the sense enjoyment of the temporary body. Sense enjoyment is also allowed to
the lower animals by the law of nature, and thus a human being is also destined
to a certain amount of sense enjoyment according to his past or present life.
But one should definitely try to understand that sense enjoyment is not the
ultimate goal of human life. Herein it is said that during the daytime one
works “for nothing” because the aim is nothing but sense enjoyment. We can
particularly observe how the human being is engaged for nothing in the great
cities and industrial towns. There are so many things manufactured by human
energy, but they are all meant for sense enjoyment, and not for getting out of
material bondage. And after working hard during the daytime, a tired man
either sleeps or engages in sex habits at night. That is the program of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
materialistic civilized life for the less intelligent. Therefore they are designated
herein as lazy, unfortunate and short-lived.
TEXT 10
SaUTa ovac
Yada Parqi+aTa( ku-åJaa®le/_vSaTa(
k-il&/ Pa[iví& iNaJac§-viTaRTae )
iNaXaMYa vaTaaRMaNaiTaiPa[Yaa& TaTa"
XaraSaNa& Sa&YauGaXaaEi<@radde )) 10 ))
süta uväca
yadä parékñit kuru-jäìgale ’vasat
kalià praviñöaà nija-cakravartite
niçamya värtäm anatipriyäà tataù
çaräsanaà saàyuga-çauëòir ädade
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; yadä—when; parékñit—Mahäräja Parékñit;
kuru-jäìgale—in the capital of Kuru’s empire; avasat—was residing;
kalim—the symptoms of the age of Kali; praviñöam—entered;
nija-cakravartite—within his jurisdiction; niçamya—thus hearing;
värtäm—news; anati-priyäm—not very palatable; tataù—thereafter;
çaräsanam—arrows and bow; saàyuga—having gotten a chance for;
çauëòiù—martial activities; ädade—took up.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: While Mahäräja Parékñit was residing in the capital of
the Kuru empire, the symptoms of the age of Kali began to infiltrate within the
jurisdiction of his state. When he learned about this, he did not think the
matter very palatable. This did, however, give him a chance to fight. He took up
his bow and arrows and prepared himself for military activities.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
The state administration of Mahäräja Parékñit was so perfect that he was
sitting in his capital peacefully. But he got the news that the symptoms of the
age of Kali had already infiltrated into the jurisdiction of his state, and he did
not like this news. What are the symptoms of the age of Kali? They are (1)
illicit connection with women, (2) indulgence in meat-eating, (3) intoxication
and (4) taking pleasure in gambling. The age of Kali literally means the age of
quarrel, and the abovementioned four symptoms in human society are the root
causes for all kinds of quarrel. Mahäräja Parékñit heard that some of the people
of the state had already taken to those symptoms, and he wanted to take
immediate steps against such causes of unrest. This means that at least up to
the regime of Mahäräja Parékñit, such symptoms of public life were practically
unknown, and as soon as they were slightly detected, he wanted to root them
out. The news was not palatable for him, but in a way it was, because Mahäräja
Parékñit got a chance to fight. There was no need to fight with small states
because everyone was peacefully under his subordination, but the Kali-yuga
miscreants gave his fighting spirit a chance for exhibition. A perfect kñatriya
king is always jubilant as soon as he gets a chance to fight, just as a sportsman
is eager when there is a chance for a sporting match. It is no argument that in
the age of Kali such symptoms are predestined. If so, then why was there
preparation for fighting out such symptoms? Such arguments are offered by
lazy and unfortunate men. In the rainy season, rain is predestined, and yet
people take precautions to protect themselves. Similarly, in the age of Kali the
symptoms as above mentioned are sure to infiltrate into social life, but it is the
duty of the state to save the citizens from the association of the agents of the
age of Kali. Mahäräja Parékñit wanted to punish the miscreants indulging in
the symptoms of Kali, and thus save the innocent citizens who were pure in
habit by culture of religion. It is the duty of the king to give such protection,
and Mahäräja Parékñit was perfectly right when he prepared himself to fight.
TEXT 11
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Svl/x(k*-Ta& XYaaMaTaur®YaaeiJaTa&
rQa& Ma*GaeNd]ßJaMaaié[Ta" PauraTa( )
v*Taae rQaaìiÜPaPaitaYau¢-Yaa
SvSaeNaYaa idiGvJaYaaYa iNaGaRTa" )) 11 ))
svalaìkåtaà çyäma-turaìga-yojitaà
rathaà mågendra-dhvajam äçritaù purät
våto rathäçva-dvipapatti-yuktayä
sva-senayä digvijayäya nirgataù
SYNONYMS
su-alaìkåtam—very well decorated; çyäma—black; turaìga—horses;
yojitam—tackled; ratham—chariot; måga-indra—lion; dhvajam—flagged;
äçritaù—under the protection; purät—from the capital; våtaù—surrounded by;
ratha—charioteers; açva—cavalry; dvipapatti—elephants; yuktayä—thus being
equipped; sva-senayä—along with infantry; digvijayäya—for the purpose of
conquering; nirgataù—went out.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Parékñit sat on a chariot drawn by black horses. His flag was
marked with the sign of a lion. Being so decorated and surrounded by
charioteers, cavalry, elephants and infantry soldiers, he left the capital to
conquer in all directions.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Parékñit is distinguished from his grandfather Arjuna, for black
horses pulled his chariot instead of white horses. He marked his flag with the
mark of a lion, and his grandfather marked his with the mark of Hanumänjé. A
royal procession like that of Mahäräja Parékñit surrounded by well-decorated
chariots, cavalry, elephants, infantry and band not only is pleasing to the eyes,
but also is a sign of a civilization that is aesthetic even on the fighting front.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 12
>ad]aì& ke-TauMaal&/ c >aarTa& caetaraNa( ku-æNa( )
ik-MPauåzadqiNa vzaRi<a iviJaTYa JaGa*he bil/Ma( )) 12 ))
bhadräçvaà ketumälaà ca
bhärataà cottarän kurün
kimpuruñädéni varñäëi
vijitya jagåhe balim
SYNONYMS
bhadräçvam—Bhadräçva; ketumälam—Ketumäla; ca—also;
bhäratam—Bhärata; ca—and; uttarän—the northern countries; kurün—the
kingdom of the Kuru dynasty; kimpuruña-ädéni—a country beyond the
northern side of the Himalayas; varñäëi—parts of the earth planet;
vijitya—conquering; jagåhe—exacted; balim—strength.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Parékñit then conquered all parts of the earthly
planet—Bhadräçva, Ketumäla, Bhärata, the northern Kuru, Kimpuruña,
etc.—and exacted tributes from their respective rulers.
PURPORT
Bhadräçva: It is a tract of land near Meru Parvata, and it extends from
Gandha-mädana Parvata to the saltwater ocean. There is a description of this
varña in the Mahäbhärata (Bhéñma-parva 7.14–18). The description was
narrated by Saïjaya to Dhåtaräñöra.
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira also conquered this varña, and thus the province was
included within the jurisdiction of his empire. Mahäräja Parékñit was formerly
declared to be the emperor of all lands ruled by his grandfather, but still he had
to establish his supremacy while he was out of his capital to exact tribute from
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
such states.
Ketumäla: This earth planet is divided into seven dvépas by seven oceans,
and the central dvépa, called Jambüdvépa, is divided into nine varñas, or parts,
by eight huge mountains. Bhärata-varña is one of the above-mentioned nine
varñas, and Ketumäla is also described as one of the above varñas. It is said that
in Ketumäla varña, women are the most beautiful. This varña was conquered by
Arjuna also. A description of this part of the world is available in the
Mahäbhärata (Sabhä 28.6).
It is said that this part of the world is situated on the western side of the
Meru Parvata, and inhabitants of this province used to live up to ten thousand
years (Bhéñma-parva 6.31). Human beings living in this part of the globe are of
golden color, and the women resemble the angels of heaven. The inhabitants
are free from all kinds of diseases and grief.
Bhärata-varña: This part of the world is also one of the nine varñas of the
Jambüdvépa. A description of Bhärata-varña is given in the Mahäbhärata
(Bhéñma-parva, Chapters 9 and 10).
In the center of Jambüdvépa is Ilävåta-varña, and south of Ilävåta-varña is
Hari-varña. The description of these varñas is given in the Mahäbhärata
(Sabhä-parva 28.7–8) as follows:
nagaräàç ca vanäàç caiva
nadéç ca vimalodakäù
puruñän deva-kalpäàç ca
näréç ca priya-darçanäù
adåñöa-pürvän subhagän
sa dadarça dhanaïjayaù
sadanäni ca çubhräëi
näréç cäpsarasäà nibhäù
It is mentioned here that the women in both these varñas are beautiful, and
some of them are equal to the Apsaräs, or heavenly women.
Uttarakuru: According to Vedic geography the northernmost portion of
Jambüdvépa is called Uttarakuru-varña. It is surrounded by the saltwater ocean
from three sides and divided by Çåìgavän Mountain from the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Hiraëmaya-varña.
Kimpuruña-varña: It is stated to be situated north of the great Himalaya
Mountain, which is eighty thousand miles in length and height and which
covers sixteen thousand miles in width. These parts of the world were also
conquered by Arjuna (Sabhä 28.1–2). The Kimpuruñas are descendants of a
daughter of Dakña. When Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira performed a horse sacrifice
yajïa, the inhabitants of these countries were also present to take part in the
festival, and they paid tributes to the Emperor. This part of the world is called
Kimpuruña-varña, or sometimes the Himalayan provinces (Himavaté). It is said
that Çukadeva Gosvämé was born in these Himalayan provinces and that he
came to Bhärata-varña after crossing the Himalayan countries.
In other words, Mahäräja Parékñit conquered all the world. He conquered
all the continents adjoining all the seas and oceans in all directions, namely
the eastern, western, northern and southern parts of the world.
TEXTS 13–15
Ta}a Ta}aaePaé*<vaNa" SvPaUveRza& MahaTMaNaaMa( )
Pa[GaqYaMaa<a& c YaXa" k*-Z<aMaahaTMYaSaUck-Ma( )) 13 ))
AaTMaaNa& c Pair}aaTaMaìTQaaManae_ñTaeJaSa" )
òeh& c v*iZ<aPaaQaaRNaa& Taeza& >ai¢&- c ke-Xave )) 14 ))
Tae>Ya" ParMaSaNTauí" Pa[qTYauÂ*iM>aTal/aecNa" )
MahaDaNaaiNa vaSaa&iSa ddaE haraNa( MahaMaNaa" )) 15 ))
tatra tatropaçåëvänaù
sva-pürveñäà mahätmanäm
pragéyamäëaà ca yaçaù
kåñëa-mähätmya-sücakam
ätmänaà ca pariträtam
açvatthämno ’stra-tejasaù
snehaà ca våñëi-pärthänäà
teñäà bhaktià ca keçave
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
tebhyaù parama-santuñöaù
préty-ujjåmbhita-locanaù
mahä-dhanäni väsäàsi
dadau härän mahä-manäù
SYNONYMS
tatra tatra—everywhere the King visited; upaçåëvänaù—continuously he
heard; sva-pürveñäm—about his own forefathers; mahä-ätmanäm—who were
all great devotees of the Lord; pragéyamäëam—unto those who were thus
addressing; ca—also; yaçaù—glories; kåñëa—Lord Kåñëa; mähätmya—glorious
acts; sücakam—indicating; ätmänam—his personal self; ca—also;
pariträtam—delivered; açvatthämnaù—of Açvatthämä; astra—weapon;
tejasaù—powerful rays; sneham—affection; ca—also;
våñëi-pärthänäm—between descendants of Våñëi and those of Påthä;
teñäm—of all of them; bhaktim—devotion; ca—also; keçave—unto Lord Kåñëa;
tebhyaù—unto them; parama—extremely; santuñöaù—pleased;
préti—attraction; ujjåmbhita—pleasingly open; locanaù—one who has such
eyes; mahä-dhanäni—valuable riches; väsäàsi—clothing; dadau—gave in
charity; härän—necklace; mahä-manäù—one who has a broader outlook.
TRANSLATION
Wherever the King visited, he continuously heard the glories of his great
forefathers, who were all devotees of the Lord, and also of the glorious acts of
Lord Kåñëa. He also heard how he himself had been protected by the Lord from
the powerful heat of the weapon of Açvatthämä. People also mentioned the
great affection between the descendants of Våñëi and Påthä due to the latter’s
great devotion to Lord Keçava. The King, being very pleased with the singers of
such glories, opened his eyes in great satisfaction. Out of magnanimity he was
pleased to award them very valuable necklaces and clothing.
PURPORT
Kings and great personalities of the state are presented with welcome
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
addresses. This is a system from time immemorial, and Mahäräja Parékñit, since
he was one of the well-known emperors of the world, was also presented with
addresses of welcome in all parts of the world as he visited those places. The
subject matter of those welcome addresses was Kåñëa. Kåñëa means Kåñëa and
His eternal devotees, as the king means the king and his confidential
associates.
Kåñëa and His unalloyed devotees cannot be separated, and therefore
glorifying the devotee means glorifying the Lord and vice versa. Mahäräja
Parékñit would not have been glad to hear about the glories of his forefathers
like Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira and Arjuna had they not been connected with the
acts of Lord Kåñëa. The Lord descends specifically to deliver His devotees
(pariträëäya sädhünäm). The devotees are glorified by the presence of the Lord
because they cannot live for a moment without the presence of the Lord and
His different energies. The Lord is present for the devotee by His acts and
glories, and therefore Mahäräja Parékñit felt the presence of the Lord when He
was glorified by His acts, especially when he was saved by the Lord in the
womb of his mother. The devotees of the Lord are never in danger, but in the
material world which is full of dangers at every step, the devotees are
apparently placed into dangerous positions, and when they are saved by the
Lord, the Lord is glorified. Lord Kåñëa would not have been glorified as the
speaker of the Bhagavad-gétä had His devotees like the Päëòavas not been
entangled in the Battlefield of Kurukñetra. All such acts of the Lord were
mentioned in the addresses of welcome, and Mahäräja Parékñit, in full
satisfaction, rewarded those who presented such addresses. The difference
between the presentation of welcome addresses today and in those days is that
formerly the welcome addresses were presented to a person like Mahäräja
Parékñit. The welcome addresses were full of facts and figures, and those who
presented such addresses were sufficiently rewarded, whereas in the present
days the welcome addresses are presented not always with factual statements
but to please the postholder, and often they are full of flattering lies. And
rarely are those who present such welcome addresses rewarded by the poor
receiver.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 16
SaarQYaPaarzdSaevNaSa:YadaETYa‚
vqraSaNaaNauGaMaNaSTavNaPa[<aaMaaNa( )
iòGDaezu Paa<@uzu JaGaTPa[<aiTa& civZ<aae‚
>aRi¢&- k-raeiTa Na*PaiTaêr<aarivNde )) 16 ))
särathya-pärañada-sevana-sakhya-dautyavéräsanänugamana-
stavana-praëämän
snigdheñu päëòuñu jagat-praëatià ca viñëor
bhaktià karoti nå-patiç caraëäravinde
SYNONYMS
särathya—acceptance of the post of a chariot driver; pärañada—acceptance of
the presidency in the assembly of the Räjasüya sacrifice; sevana—engaging the
mind constantly in the service of the Lord; sakhya—to think of the Lord as a
friend; dautya—acceptance of the post of a messenger;
véra-äsana—acceptance of the post of a watchman with a drawn sword at
night; anugamana—following in the footsteps; stavana—offering of prayers;
praëämän—offering obeisances; snigdheñu—unto them who are malleable to
the will of the Lord; päëòuñu—unto the sons of Päëòu; jagat—the universal;
praëatim—one who is obeyed; ca—and; viñëoù—of Viñëu; bhaktim—devotion;
karoti—does; nå-patiù—the King; caraëa-aravinde—unto His lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Parékñit heard that out of His causeless mercy Lord Kåñëa [Viñëu],
who is universally obeyed, rendered all kinds of service to the malleable sons of
Päëòu by accepting posts ranging from chariot driver to president to messenger,
friend, night watchman, etc., according to the will of the Päëòavas, obeying
them like a servant and offering obeisances like one younger in years. When he
heard this, Mahäräja Parékñit became overwhelmed with devotion to the lotus
feet of the Lord.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
Lord Kåñëa is everything to the unalloyed devotees like the Päëòavas. The
Lord was for them the Supreme Lord, the spiritual master, the worshipable
Deity, the guide, the chariot driver, the friend, the servant, the messenger and
everything they could conceive of. And thus the Lord also reciprocated the
feelings of the Päëòavas. Mahäräja Parékñit, as a pure devotee of the Lord,
could appreciate the Lord’s transcendental reciprocation of the feelings of His
devotees, and thus he himself also was overwhelmed with the dealings of the
Lord. Simply by appreciating the dealings of the Lord with His pure devotees,
one can attain salvation. The Lord’s dealings with His devotees appear to be
ordinary human dealings, but one who knows them in truth becomes at once
eligible to go back home, back to Godhead. The Päëòavas were so malleable to
the will of the Lord that they could sacrifice any amount of energy for the
service of the Lord, and by such unalloyed determination they could secure the
Lord’s mercy in any shape they desired.
TEXT 17
TaSYaEv& vTaRMaaNaSYa PaUveRza& v*itaMaNvhMa( )
NaaiTadUre ik-l/aêYa| YadaSaqTa( TaiàbaeDa Mae )) 17 ))
tasyaivaà vartamänasya
pürveñäà våttim anvaham
nätidüre kiläçcaryaà
yad äsét tan nibodha me
SYNONYMS
tasya—of Mahäräja Parékñit; evam—thus; vartamänasya—remaining absorbed
in such thought; pürveñäm—of his forefathers; våttim—good engagement;
anvaham—day after day; na—not; ati-düre—far off; kila—verily;
äçcaryam—astonishing; yat—that; äsét—was; tat—which; nibodha—know it;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
me—from me.
TRANSLATION
Now you may hear from me of what happened while Mahäräja Parékñit was
passing his days hearing of the good occupations of his forefathers and being
absorbed in thought of them.
TEXT 18
DaMaR" PadEke-Na crNa( ivC^aYaaMauPal/>Ya GaaMa( )
Pa*C^iTa SMaaé[uvdNaa& ivvTSaaiMav MaaTarMa( )) 18 ))
dharmaù padaikena caran
vicchäyäm upalabhya gäm
påcchati smäçru-vadanäà
vivatsäm iva mätaram
SYNONYMS
dharmaù—the personality of religious principles; padä—leg; ekena—on one
only; caran—wandering; vicchäyäm—overtaken by the shadow of grief;
upalabhya—having met; gäm—the cow; påcchati—asking; sma—with;
açru-vadanäm—with tears on the face; vivatsäm—one who has lost her
offspring; iva—like; mätaram—the mother.
TRANSLATION
The personality of religious principles, Dharma, was wandering about in the
form of a bull. And he met the personality of earth in the form of a cow who
appeared to grieve like a mother who had lost her child. She had tears in her
eyes, and the beauty of her body was lost. Thus Dharma questioned the earth as
follows.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The bull is the emblem of the moral principle, and the cow is the
representative of the earth. When the bull and the cow are in a joyful mood, it
is to be understood that the people of the world are also in a joyful mood. The
reason is that the bull helps production of grains in the agricultural field, and
the cow delivers milk, the miracle of aggregate food values. The human society,
therefore, maintains these two important animals very carefully so that they
can wander everywhere in cheerfulness. But at the present moment in this age
of Kali both the bull and the cow are now being slaughtered and eaten up as
foodstuff by a class of men who do not know the brahminical culture. The bull
and the cow can be protected for the good of all human society simply by the
spreading of brahminical culture as the topmost perfection of all cultural
affairs. By advancement of such culture, the morale of society is properly
maintained, and so peace and prosperity are also attained without extraneous
effort. When brahminical culture deteriorates, the cow and bull are
mistreated, and the resultant actions are prominent by the following
symptoms.
TEXT 19
DaMaR ovac
k-iÀÙd]e_NaaMaYaMaaTMaNaSTae
ivC^aYaaiSa ãaYaTaezNMau%eNa )
Aal/+aYae >avTaqMaNTaraiDa&
dUre bNDau& XaaeciSa k-ÄNaaMb )) 19 ))
dharma uväca
kaccid bhadre ’nämayam ätmanas te
vicchäyäsi mläyateñan mukhena
älakñaye bhavatém antarädhià
düre bandhuà çocasi kaïcanämba
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
dharmaù uväca—Dharma inquired; kaccit—whether; bhadre—madam;
anämayam—quite hale and hearty; ätmanaù—self; te—unto you; vicchäyä
asi—appear to be covered with the shadow of grief; mläyatä—which darkens;
éñat—slightly; mukhena—by the face; älakñaye—you look; bhavatém—unto
yourself; antarädhim—some disease within; düre—long distant;
bandhum—friend; çocasi—thinking of; kaïcana—someone; amba—O mother.
TRANSLATION
Dharma [in the form of a bull] asked: Madam, are you not hale and hearty?
Why are you covered with the shadow of grief? It appears by your face that you
have become black. Are you suffering from some internal disease, or are you
thinking of some relative who is away in a distant place?
PURPORT
The people of the world in this age of Kali are always full of anxieties.
Everyone is diseased with some kind of ailment. From the very faces of the
people of this age, one can find out the index of the mind. Everyone feels the
absence of his relative who is away from home. The particular symptom of the
age of Kali is that no family is now blessed to live together. To earn a
livelihood, the father lives at a place far away from the son, or the wife lives far
away from the husband and so on. There are sufferings from internal diseases,
separation from those near and dear, and anxieties for maintaining the status
quo. These are but some important factors which make the people of this age
always unhappy.
TEXT 20
PaadENYaURNa& XaaeciSa MaEk-Paad‚
MaaTMaaNa& va v*zlE/>aaeR+YaMaa<aMa( )
Aahae SauradqNa( ôTaYaj>aaGaaNa(
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Pa[Jaa oTa iSvNMagavTYavzRiTa )) 20 ))
pädair nyünaà çocasi maika-pädam
ätmänaà vä våñalair bhokñyamäëam
äho surädén håta-yajïa-bhägän
prajä uta svin maghavaty avarñati
SYNONYMS
pädaiù—by three legs; nyünam—diminished; çocasi—if you are lamenting for
that; mä—my; eka-pädam—only one leg; ätmänam—own body; vä—or;
våñalaiù—by the unlawful meat-eaters; bhokñyamäëam—to be exploited;
ähoù—in sacrifice; sura-ädén—the authorized demigods; håta-yajïa—devoid of
sacrificial; bhägän—share; prajäù—the living beings; uta—increasing;
svit—whether; maghavati—in famine and scarcity; avarñati—because of
rainlessness.
TRANSLATION
I have lost my three legs and am now standing on one only. Are you
lamenting for my state of existence? Or are you in great anxiety because
henceforward the unlawful meat-eaters will exploit you? Or are you in a sorry
plight because the demigods are now bereft of their share of sacrificial offerings
because no sacrifices are being performed at present? Or are you grieving for
living beings because of their sufferings due to famine and drought?
PURPORT
With the progress of the age of Kali, four things particularly, namely the
duration of life, mercy, the power of recollection, and moral or religious
principles will gradually diminish. Since Dharma, or the principles of religion,
would be lost in the proportion of three out of four, the symbolic bull was
standing on one leg only. When three fourths of the population of the whole
world become irreligious, the situation is converted into hell for the animals.
In the age of Kali, godless civilizations will create so many so-called religious
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
societies in which the Personality of Godhead will be directly or indirectly
defied. And thus faithless societies of men will make the world uninhabitable
for the saner section of people. There are gradations of human beings in terms
of proportionate faith in the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The first-class
faithful men are the Vaiñëavas and the brähmaëas, then the kñatriyas, then the
vaiçyas, then the çüdras, then the mlecchas, the yavanas and at last the
caëòälas. The degradation of the human instinct begins from the mlecchas, and
the caëòäla state of life is the last word in human degradation. All the above
terms mentioned in the Vedic literatures are never meant for any particular
community or birth. They are different qualifications of human beings in
general. There is no question of birthright or community. One can acquire the
respective qualifications by one’s own efforts, and thus the son of a Vaiñëava
can become a mleccha, or the son of a caëòäla can become more than a
brähmaëa, all in terms of their association and intimate relation with the
Supreme Lord.
The meat-eaters are generally called mlecchas. But all meat-eaters are not
mlecchas. Those who accept meat in terms of scriptural injunctions are not
mlecchas, but those who accept meat without restriction are called mlecchas.
Beef is forbidden in the scriptures, and the bulls and cows are offered special
protection by followers of the Vedas. But in this age of Kali, people will exploit
the body of the bull and the cow as they like, and thus they will invite
sufferings of various types.
The people of this age will not perform any sacrifice. The mleccha
population will care very little for performances of sacrifices, although
performance of sacrifice is essential for persons who are materially engaged in
sense enjoyment. In the Bhagavad-gétä performance of sacrifices is strongly
recommended (Bg. 3.14–16).
The living beings are created by the creator Brahmä, and just to maintain
the created living being progressively towards the path back to Godhead, the
system of performing sacrifice is also created by him. The system is that living
beings live on the produce of grains and vegetables, and by eating such
foodstuff they get vital power of the body in the shape of blood and semen, and
from blood and semen one living being is able to create other living beings. But
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the production of grains, grass, etc. becomes possible by rain, and this rain is
made to shower properly by performance of recommended sacrifices. Such
sacrifices are directed by the rites of the Vedas, namely Säma, Yajur, Åg and
Atharva. In the Manu-småti it is recommended that by offerings of sacrifice on
the altar of the fire, the sun-god is pleased. When the sun-god is pleased, he
properly collects water from the sea, and thus sufficient clouds collect on the
horizon and rains fall. After sufficient rains fall, there is sufficient production
of grains for men and all animals, and thus there is energy in the living being
for progressive activity. The mlecchas, however, make plans to install
slaughterhouses for killing bulls and cows along with other animals, thinking
that they will prosper by increasing the number of factories and live on animal
food without caring for performance of sacrifices and production of grains. But
they must know that even for the animals they must produce grass and
vegetables, otherwise the animals cannot live. And to produce grass for the
animals, they require sufficient rains. Therefore they have to depend
ultimately on the mercy of the demigods like the sun-god, Indra and Candra,
and such demigods must be satisfied by performances of sacrifice.
This material world is a sort of prison house, as we have several times
mentioned. The demigods are the servants of the Lord who see to the proper
upkeep of the prison house. These demigods want to see that the rebel living
beings, who want to survive faithlessly, are gradually turned towards the
supreme power of the Lord. Therefore, the system of offering sacrifice is
recommended in the scriptures.
The materialistic men want to work hard and enjoy fruitive results for
sense enjoyment. Thus they are committing many types of sins at every step of
life. Those, however, who are consciously engaged in the devotional service of
the Lord are transcendental to all varieties of sin and virtue. Their activities
are free from the contamination of the three modes of material nature. For the
devotees there is no need for performance of prescribed sacrifices because the
very life of the devotee is a symbol of sacrifice. But persons who are engaged in
fruitive activities for sense enjoyment must perform the prescribed sacrifices
because that is the only means to get free from the reaction of all sins
committed by fruitive workers. Sacrifice is the means for counteracting such
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
accumulated sins. The demigods are pleased when such sacrifices are
performed, just as prison officers are satisfied when the prisoners are turned
into obedient subjects. Lord Caitanya, however, has recommended only one
yajïa, or sacrifice, called the saìkértana-yajïa, the chanting of Hare Kåñëa, in
which everyone can take part. Thus both devotees and fruitive workers can
derive equal benefit from the performances of saìkértana-yajïa.
TEXT 21
Ar+YaMaa<aa" iñYa oivR bal/aNa(
XaaecSYaQaae PauåzadEirvaTaaRNa( )
vac& devq& b]øku-le/ ku-k-MaR‚
<Yab]ø<Yae raJaku-le/ ku-l/aGY[aaNa( )) 21 ))
arakñyamäëäù striya urvi bälän
çocasy atho puruñädair ivärtän
väcaà devéà brahma-kule kukarmaëy
abrahmaëye räja-kule kulägryän
SYNONYMS
arakñyamäëäù—unprotected; striyaù—women; urvi—on the earth;
bälän—children; çocasi—you are feeling compassion; atho—as such;
puruña-ädaiù—by men; iva—like that; ärtän—those who are unhappy;
väcam—vocabulary; devém—the goddess; brahma-kule—in the family of the
brähmaëa; kukarmaëi—acts against the principles of religion;
abrahmaëye—persons against the brahminical culture; räja-kule—in the
administrative family; kula-agryän—most of all the families (the brähmaëas).
TRANSLATION
Are you feeling compunction for the unhappy women and children who are
left forlorn by unscrupulous persons? Or are you unhappy because the goddess
of learning is being handled by brähmaëas addicted to acts against the principles
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
of religion? Or are you sorry to see that the brähmaëas have taken shelter of
administrative families that do not respect brahminical culture?
PURPORT
In the age of Kali, the women and the children, along with brähmaëas and
cows, will be grossly neglected and left unprotected. In this age illicit
connection with women will render many women and children uncared for.
Circumstantially, the women will try to become independent of the protection
of men, and marriage will be performed as a matter of formal agreement
between man and woman. In most cases, the children will not be taken care of
properly. The brähmaëas are traditionally intelligent men, and thus they will
be able to pick up modern education to the topmost rank, but as far as moral
and religious principles are concerned, they shall be the most fallen. Education
and bad character go ill together, but such things will run parallel. The
administrative heads as a class will condemn the tenets of Vedic wisdom and
will prefer to conduct a so-called secular state, and the so-called educated
brähmaëas will be purchased by such unscrupulous administrators. Even a
philosopher and writer of many books on religious principles may also accept
an exalted post in a government which denies all the moral codes of the
çästras. The brähmaëas are specifically restricted from accepting such service.
But in this age they will not only accept service, but they will do so even if it is
of the meanest quality. These are some of the symptoms of the Kali age which
are harmful to the general welfare of human society.
TEXT 22
ik&- +a}abNDaUNa( k-il/NaaePaSa*íaNa(
raí\ai<a va TaErvraeiPaTaaiNa )
wTaSTaTaae vaXaNaPaaNavaSa"‚
òaNaVYavaYaaeNMau%Jaqvl/aek-Ma( )) 22 ))
kià kñatra-bandhün kalinopasåñöän
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
räñöräëi vä tair avaropitäni
itas tato väçana-päna-väsaùsnäna-
vyaväyonmukha-jéva-lokam
SYNONYMS
kim—whether; kñatra-bandhün—the unworthy administrators; kalinä—by the
influence of the age of Kali; upasåñöän—bewildered; räñöräëi—state affairs;
vä—or; taiù—by them; avaropitäni—put into disorder; itaù—here;
tataù—there; vä—or; açana—accepting foodstuff; päna—drink;
väsaù—residence; snäna—bath; vyaväya—sexual intercourse;
unmukha—inclined; jéva-lokam—human society.
TRANSLATION
The so-called administrators are now bewildered by the influence of this age
of Kali, and thus they have put all state affairs into disorder. Are you now
lamenting this disorder? Now the general populace does not follow the rules and
regulations for eating, sleeping, drinking, mating, etc., and they are inclined to
perform such anywhere and everywhere. Are you unhappy because of this?
PURPORT
There are some necessities of life on a par with those of the lower animals,
and they are eating, sleeping, fearing and mating. These bodily demands are
for both the human beings and the animals. But the human being has to fulfill
such desires not like animals, but like a human being. A dog can mate with a
bitch before the public eyes without hesitation, but if a human being does so
the act will be considered a public nuisance, and the person will be criminally
prosecuted. Therefore for the human being there are some rules and
regulations, even for fulfilling common demands. The human society avoids
such rules and regulations when it is bewildered by the influence of the age of
Kali. In this age, people are indulging in such necessities of life without
following the rules and regulations, and this deterioration of social and moral
rules is certainly lamentable because of the harmful effects of such beastly
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
behavior. In this age, the fathers and the guardians are not happy with the
behavior of their wards. They should know that so many innocent children are
victims of bad association awarded by the influence of this age of Kali. We
know from Çrémad-Bhägavatam that Ajämila, an innocent son of a brähmaëa,
was walking down a road and saw a çüdra pair sexually embracing. This
attracted the boy, and later on the boy became a victim of all debaucheries.
From a pure brähmaëa, he fell down to the position of a wretched urchin, and
it was all due to bad association. There was but one victim like Ajämila in
those days, but in this age of Kali the poor innocent students are daily victims
of cinemas which attract men only for sex indulgence. The so-called
administrators are all untrained in the affairs of a kñatriya. The kñatriyas are
meant for administration, as the brähmaëas are meant for knowledge and
guidance. The word kñatra-bandhu refers to the so-called administrators or
persons promoted to the post of the administrator without proper training by
culture and tradition. Nowadays they are promoted to such exalted posts by
the votes of the people who are themselves fallen in the rules and regulations
of life. How can such people select a proper man when they are themselves
fallen in the standard of life? Therefore, by the influence of the age of Kali,
everywhere, politically, socially or religiously, everything is topsy-turvy, and
therefore for the sane man it is all regrettable.
TEXT 23
YaÜaMb Tae >aUir>aravTaar‚
k*-TaavTaarSYa hreDaRiri}a )
ANTaihRTaSYa SMarTaq ivSa*ía
k-MaaRi<a iNavaR<aivl/iMbTaaiNa )) 23 ))
yadvämba te bhüri-bharävatärakåtävatärasya
harer dharitri
antarhitasya smaraté visåñöä
karmäëi nirväëa-vilambitäni
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
yadvä—that may be; amba—O mother; te—your; bhüri—heavy; bhara—load;
avatära—decreasing the load; kåta—done; avatärasya—one who incarnated;
hareù—of Lord Çré Kåñëa; dharitri—O earth; antarhitasya—of Him who is now
out of sight; smaraté—while thinking of; visåñöä—all that were performed;
karmäëi—activities; nirväëa—salvation; vilambitäni—that which entails.
TRANSLATION
O mother earth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, incarnated
Himself as Lord Çré Kåñëa just to unload your heavy burden. All His activities
here are transcendental, and they cement the path of liberation. You are now
bereft of His presence. You are probably now thinking of those activities and
feeling sorry in their absence.
PURPORT
The activities of the Lord include liberation, but they are more relishable
than the pleasure derived from nirväëa, or liberation. According to Çréla Jéva
Gosvämé and Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, the word used here is
nirväëa-vilambitäni, that which minimizes the value of liberation. To attain
nirväëa, liberation, one has to undergo a severe type of tapasya, austerity, but
the Lord is so merciful that He incarnates to diminish the burden of the earth.
Simply by remembering such activities, one can defy the pleasure derived from
nirväëa and reach the transcendental abode of the Lord to associate with Him,
eternally engaged in His blissful loving service.
TEXT 24
wd& MaMaac+v TavaiDaMaUl&/
vSauNDare YaeNa ivk-iXaRTaaiSa )
k-ale/Na va Tae bil/Naa& bl/IYaSaa
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SauraicRTa& ik&- ôTaMaMb SaaE>aGaMa( )) 24 ))
idaà mamäcakñva tavädhi-mülaà
vasundhare yena vikarçitäsi
kälena vä te balinäà baléyasä
surärcitaà kià håtam amba saubhagam
SYNONYMS
idam—this; mama—unto me; äcakñva—kindly inform; tava—your;
ädhimülam—the root cause of your tribulations; vasundhare—O reservoir of
all riches; yena—by which; vikarçitä asi—reduced to much weakness;
kälena—by the influence of time; vä—or; te—your; balinäm—very powerful;
baléyasä—more powerful; sura-arcitam—adored by the demigods;
kim—whether; håtam—taken away; amba—mother; saubhagam—fortune.
TRANSLATION
Mother, you are the reservoir of all riches. Please inform me of the root
cause of your tribulations by which you have been reduced to such a weak state.
I think that the powerful influence of time, which conquers the most powerful,
might have forcibly taken away all your fortune, which was adored even by the
demigods.
PURPORT
By the grace of the Lord, each and every planet is created fully equipped. So
not only is this earth fully equipped with all the riches for the maintenance of
its inhabitants, but also when the Lord descends on the earth the whole earth
becomes so enriched with all kinds of opulences that even the denizens of
heaven worship it with all affection. But by the will of the Lord, the whole
earth can at once be changed. He can do and undo a thing by His sweet will.
Therefore no one should consider himself to be self-sufficient or independent
of the Lord.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 25
Dar<Yauvac
>avaNa( ih ved TaTSav| YaNMaa& DaMaaRNauPa*C^iSa )
cTaui>aRvRTaRSae YaeNa PaadEl/aeRk-Sau%avhE" )) 25 ))
dharaëy uväca
bhavän hi veda tat sarvaà
yan mäà dharmänupåcchasi
caturbhir vartase yena
pädair loka-sukhävahaiù
SYNONYMS
dharaëé uväca—mother earth replied; bhavän—your good self; hi—certainly;
veda—know; tat sarvam—all that you have inquired from me; yat—that;
mäm—from me; dharma—O personality of religious principles;
anupåcchasi—you have inquired one after another; caturbhiù—by four;
vartase—you exist; yena—by which; pädaiù—by the legs; loka—in each and
every planet; sukha-ävahaiù—increasing the happiness.
TRANSLATION
The earthly deity [in the form of a cow] thus replied to the personality of
religious principles [in the form of a bull]: O Dharma, whatever you have
inquired from me shall be known to you. I shall try to reply to all those
questions. Once you too were maintained by your four legs, and you increased
happiness all over the universe by the mercy of the Lord.
PURPORT
The principles of religion are laid down by the Lord Himself, and the
executor of such laws is Dharmaräja, or Yamaräja. Such principles work fully
in the age of Satya-yuga; in the Tretä-yuga they are reduced by a fraction of
one fourth; in the Dväpara-yuga they are reduced to one half, and in the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Kali-yuga they are reduced to one fourth, gradually diminishing to the zero
point, and then devastation takes place. Happiness in the world depends
proportionately on the maintenance of the religious principles, individually or
collectively. The best part of valor is to maintain the principles despite all
kinds of odds. Thus one can be happy during the span of life and ultimately
return to Godhead.
TEXTS 26–30
SaTYa& XaaEc& dYaa +aaiNTaSTYaaGa" SaNTaaez AaJaRvMa( )
XaMaae dMaSTaPa" SaaMYa& iTaiTa+aaePariTa" é[uTaMa( )) 26 ))
jaNa& ivri¢-rEìYa| XaaEYa| TaeJaae bl&/ SMa*iTa" )
SvaTaN}Ya& k-aEXal&/ k-aiNTaDaOEYa| MaadRvMaev c )) 27 ))
Pa[aGaL>Ya& Pa[é[Ya" Xaql&/ Sah AaeJaae bl&/ >aGa" )
GaaM>aqYa| SQaEYaRMaaiSTaKYa& k-IiTaRMaaRNaae_Nahx(k*-iTa" )) 28 ))
WTae caNYae c >aGaviàTYaa Ya}a MahaGau<aa" )
Pa[aQYaaR MahtviMaC^iÙNaR ivYaiNTa SMa k-ihRicTa( )) 29 ))
TaeNaah& Gau<aPaa}ae<a é[qiNavaSaeNa SaaMPa[TaMa( )
XaaecaiMa rihTa& l/aek&- PaaPMaNaa k-il/Naei+aTaMa( )) 30 ))
satyaà çaucaà dayä kñäntis
tyägaù santoña ärjavam
çamo damas tapaù sämyaà
titikñoparatiù çrutam
jïänaà viraktir aiçvaryaà
çauryaà tejo balaà småtiù
svätantryaà kauçalaà käntir
dhairyaà märdavam eva ca
prägalbhyaà praçrayaù çélaà
saha ojo balaà bhagaù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
gämbhéryaà sthairyam ästikyaà
kértir mäno ’nahaìkåtiù
ete cänye ca bhagavan
nityä yatra mahä-guëäù
prärthyä mahattvam icchadbhir
na viyanti sma karhicit
tenähaà guëa-pätreëa
çré-niväsena sämpratam
çocämi rahitaà lokaà
päpmanä kalinekñitam
SYNONYMS
satyam—truthfulness; çaucam—cleanliness; dayä—intolerance of others’
unhappiness; kñäntiù—self-control even if there is cause of anger;
tyägaù—magnanimity; santoñaù—self-satisfaction;
ärjavam—straightforwardness; çamaù—fixing of the mind; damaù—control of
the sense organs; tapaù—trueness to one’s responsibility;
sämyam—indiscrimination between friend and foe; titikñä—tolerance of the
offenses of others; uparatiù—indifference to loss and gain; çrutam—following
scriptural injunctions; jïänam—knowledge (self-realization);
viraktiù—detachment from sense enjoyment; aiçvaryam—leadership;
çauryam—chivalry; tejaù—influence; balam—to render possible that which is
impossible; småtiù—to find one’s proper duty; svätantryam—not to depend on
others; kauçalam—dexterity in all activities; käntiù—beauty;
dhairyam—freedom from disturbance; märdavam—kindheartedness;
eva—thus; ca—also; prägalbhyam—ingenuity; praçrayaù—gentility;
çélam—mannerliness; sahaù—determination; ojaù—perfect knowledge;
balam—proper execution; bhagaù—object of enjoyment;
gämbhéryam—joyfulness; sthairyam—immovability; ästikyam—faithfulness;
kértiù—fame; mänaù—worthy of being worshiped; anahaìkåtiù—pridelessness;
ete—all these; ca anye—also many others; ca—and; bhagavan—the Personality
of Godhead; nityäù—everlasting; yatra—where; mahä-guëäù—great qualities;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
prärthyäù—worthy to possess; mahattvam—greatness; icchadbhiù—those who
desire so; na—never; viyanti—deteriorates; sma—ever; karhicit—at any time;
tena—by Him; aham—myself; guëa-pätreëa—the reservoir of all qualities;
çré—the goddess of fortune; niväsena—by the resting place; sämpratam—very
recently; çocämi—I am thinking of; rahitam—bereft of; lokam—planets;
päpmanä—by the store of all sins; kalinä—by Kali; ékñitam—is seen.
TRANSLATION
In Him reside (1) truthfulness, (2) cleanliness, (3) intolerance of another’s
unhappiness, (4) the power to control anger, (5) self-satisfaction, (6)
straightforwardness, (7) steadiness of mind, (8) control of the sense organs, (9)
responsibility, (10) equality, (11) tolerance, (12) equanimity, (13) faithfulness,
(14) knowledge, (15) absence of sense enjoyment, (16) leadership, (17) chivalry,
(18) influence, (19) the power to make everything possible, (20) the discharge
of proper duty, (21) complete independence, (22) dexterity, (23) fullness of all
beauty, (24) serenity, (25) kindheartedness, (26) ingenuity, (27) gentility, (28)
magnanimity, (29) determination, (30) perfection in all knowledge, (31) proper
execution, (32) possession of all objects of enjoyment, (33) joyfulness, (34)
immovability, (35) fidelity, (36) fame, (37) worship, (38) pridelessness, (39)
being (as the Personality of Godhead), (40) eternity, and many other
transcendental qualities which are eternally present and never to be separated
from Him. That Personality of Godhead, the reservoir of all goodness and
beauty, Lord Çré Kåñëa, has now closed His transcendental pastimes on the face
of the earth. In His absence the age of Kali has spread its influence everywhere,
so I am sorry to see this condition of existence.
PURPORT
Even if it were possible to count the atoms after smashing the earth into
powder, still it would not be possible to estimate the unfathomable
transcendental qualities of the Lord. It is said that Lord Anantadeva has tried
to expound the transcendental qualities of the Supreme Lord with His
numberless tongues, and that for numberless years together it has been
impossible to estimate the qualities of the Lord. The above statement of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
qualities of the Lord is just to estimate His qualities as far as a human being is
able to see Him. But even if it is so, the above qualities can be divided into
many subheadings. According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, the third quality,
intolerance of another’s unhappiness, can be subdivided into (1) protection of
the surrendered souls and (2) well wishes for the devotees. In the
Bhagavad-gétä the Lord states that He wants every soul to surrender unto Him
only, and He assures everyone that if one does so He will give protection from
the reactions of all sins. Unsurrendered souls are not devotees of the Lord, and
thus there is no particular protection for everyone in general. For the devotees
He has all good wishes, and for those who are actually engaged in loving
transcendental service of the Lord, He gives particular attention. He gives
direction to such pure devotees to help them discharge their responsibilities on
the path back to Godhead. By equality (10), the Lord is equally kind to
everyone, as the sun is equal in distributing its rays over everyone. Yet there
are many who are unable to take advantage of the sun’s rays. Similarly, the
Lord says that surrendering unto Him is the guarantee for all protection from
Him, but unfortunate persons are unable to accept this proposition, and
therefore they suffer from all material miseries. So even though the Lord is
equally well-wishing to everyone, the unfortunate living being, due to bad
association only, is unable to accept His instructions in toto, and for this the
Lord is never to be blamed. He is called the well-wisher for the devotees only.
He appears to be partial to His devotees, but factually the matter rests on the
living being to accept or reject equal treatment by the Lord.
The Lord never deviates from His word of honor. When He gives assurance
for protection, the promise is executed in all circumstances. It is the duty of
the pure devotee to be fixed in the discharge of the duty entrusted to him by
the Lord or the Lord’s bona fide representative, the spiritual master. The rest is
carried on by the Lord without a break.
The responsibility of the Lord is also unique. The Lord has no responsibility
because all His work is done by His different appointed energies. But still He
accepts voluntary responsibilities in displaying different roles in His
transcendental pastimes. As a boy, He was playing the part of a cowboy. As the
son of Nanda Mahäräja, He discharged responsibility perfectly. Similarly,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
when He was playing the part of a kñatriya as the son of Mahäräja Vasudeva,
He displayed all the skill of a martially spirited kñatriya. In almost all cases, the
kñatriya king has to secure a wife by fighting or kidnapping. This sort of
behavior for a kñatriya is praiseworthy in the sense that a kñatriya must show
his power of chivalry to his would-be wife so that the daughter of a kñatriya can
see the valor of her would-be husband. Even the Personality of Godhead Çré
Räma displayed such a spirit of chivalry during His marriage. He broke the
strongest bow, called Haradhanur, and achieved the hand of Sétädevé, the
mother of all opulence. The kñatriya spirit is displayed during marriage
festivals, and there is nothing wrong in such fighting. Lord Çré Kåñëa
discharged such responsibility fully because although He had more than
sixteen thousand wives, in each and every case He fought like a chivalrous
kñatriya and thus secured a wife. To fight sixteen thousand times to secure
sixteen thousand wives is certainly possible only for the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Similarly, He displayed full responsibility in every action of His
different transcendental pastimes.
The fourteenth quality, knowledge, can be further extended into five
subheadings, namely (1) intelligence, (2) gratefulness, (3) power of
understanding the circumstantial environments of place, object and time, (4)
perfect knowledge of everything, and (5) knowledge of the self. Only fools are
ungrateful to their benefactors. The Lord, however, does not require benefit
from anyone besides Himself because He is full in Himself; still He feels
benefited by the unalloyed services of His devotees. The Lord feels grateful to
His devotees for such unsophisticated, unconditional service and tries to
reciprocate it by rendering service, although the devotee also has no such
desire in his heart. The transcendental service of the Lord is itself a
transcendental benefit for the devotee, and therefore the devotee has nothing
to expect from the Lord. On the assertion of the Vedic aphorism sarvaà khalv
idaà brahma, we can understand that the Lord, by the omnipresent rays of His
effulgence, called brahmajyoti, is all-pervading inside or outside of everything,
like the omnipresent material sky, and thus He is also omniscient.
As far as the beauty of the Lord is concerned, He has some special features
that distinguish Him from all other living beings, and over and above that He
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
has some special attractive beautiful features by which He attracts the mind of
even Rädhäräëé, the supermost beautiful creation of the Lord. He is known,
therefore, as Madana-mohana, or one who attracts the mind of even Cupid.
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé Prabhu has scrutinizingly analyzed other transcendental
qualities of the Lord and affirms that Lord Çré Kåñëa is the Absolute Supreme
Personality of Godhead (Parabrahman). He is omnipotent by His
inconceivable energies, and therefore He is the Yogeçvara, or the supreme
master of all mystic powers. Being the Yogeçvara, His eternal form is spiritual,
a combination of eternity, bliss and knowledge. The nondevotee class cannot
understand the dynamic nature of His knowledge because they are satisfied to
reach up to His eternal form of knowledge. All great souls aspire to be equal in
knowledge with Him. This means that all other knowledge is ever insufficient,
flexible and measurable, whereas the knowledge of the Lord is ever fixed and
unfathomable. Çréla Süta Gosvämé affirms in the Bhägavatam that although He
was observed by the citizens of Dvärakä every day, they were ever increasingly
anxious to see Him again and again. The living beings can appreciate the
qualities of the Lord as the ultimate goal, but they cannot attain the status quo
of such equality. This material world is a product of the mahat-tattva, which is
a state of the Lord’s dreaming condition in His yoga-nidrä mystic slumber in
the Causal Ocean, and yet the whole creation appears to be a factual
presentation of His creation. This means that the Lord’s dreaming conditions
are also factual manifestations. He can therefore bring everything under His
transcendental control, and thus whenever and wherever He does appear, He
does so in His fullness.
The Lord, being all that is described above, maintains the affairs of the
creation, and by His so doing He gives salvation even to His enemies who are
killed by Him. He is attractive even to the topmost liberated soul, and thus He
is worshipable even by Brahmä and Çiva, the greatest of all demigods. Even in
His incarnation of puruña-avatära He is the Lord of the creative energy. The
creative material energy is working under His direction, as confirmed in the
Bhagavad-gétä (9.10). He is the control switch of the material energy, and to
control the material energy in the innumerable universes, He is the root cause
of innumerable incarnations in all the universes. There are more than five
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
hundred thousand incarnations of Manu in only one universe, besides other
incarnations in different universes. In the spiritual world, however, beyond
the mahat-tattva, there is no question of incarnations, but there are plenary
expansions of the Lord in different Vaikuëöhas. The planets in the spiritual
sky are at least three times the number of those within the innumerable
universes in the mahat-tattva. And all the Näräyaëa forms of the Lord are but
expansions of His Väsudeva feature, and thus He is Väsudeva, Näräyaëa and
Kåñëa simultaneously. He is çré-kåñëa govinda hare muräre, he nätha näräyaëa
väsudeva, all in one. His qualities, therefore, cannot be counted by anyone,
however great one may be.
TEXT 31
AaTMaaNa& caNauXaaecaiMa >avNTa& caMaraetaMaMa( )
devaNa( iPaTa›Na*zqNa( SaaDaUNa( SavaRNa( v<aa|STaQaaé[MaaNa( )) 31 ))
ätmänaà cänuçocämi
bhavantaà cämarottamam
devän pitèn åñén sädhün
sarvän varëäàs tathäçramän
SYNONYMS
ätmänam—myself; ca—also; anuçocämi—lamenting; bhavantam—yourself;
ca—as well as; amara-uttamam—the best amongst the demigods; devän—about
the demigods; pitèn—about the denizens of the Pitåloka planet; åñén—about
the sages; sädhün—about the devotees; sarvän—all of them; varëän—sections;
tathä—as also; äçramän—orders of human society.
TRANSLATION
I am thinking about myself and also, O best amongst the demigods, about
you, as well as about all the demigods, sages, denizens of Pitåloka, devotees of
the Lord and all men obedient to the system of varëa and äçrama in human
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
society.
PURPORT
To effect the perfection of human life there is cooperation between men
and demigods, sages, denizens of the Pitåloka, devotees of the Lord and the
scientific system of varëa and äçrama orders of life. The distinction between
human life and animal life therefore begins with the scientific system of varëa
and äçrama, guided by the experience of the sages in relation with the
demigods, gradually rising to the summit of reestablishing our eternal relation
with the Supreme Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead, Lord Çré
Kåñëa. When God-made varëäçrama-dharma, which is strictly meant for
developing animal consciousness into human consciousness and human
consciousness into godly consciousness, is broken by advancement of
foolishness, the whole system of peaceful and progressive life is at once
disturbed. In the age of Kali, the first attack of the venomous snake strikes
against the God-made varëäçrama-dharma, and thus a person properly
qualified as a brähmaëa is called a çüdra, and a çüdra by qualification is passing
as a brähmaëa, all on a false birthright claim. To become a brähmaëa by a
birthright claim is not at all bona fide, although it may be a fulfillment of one
of the conditions. But the real qualification of a brähmaëa is to control the
mind and the senses, and to cultivate tolerance, simplicity, cleanliness,
knowledge, truthfulness, devotion and faith in the Vedic wisdom. In the
present age, consideration of the necessary qualification is being neglected,
and the false birthright claim is being supported even by a popular,
sophisticated poet, the author of Räma-carita-mänasa.
This is all due to the influence of the age of Kali. Thus mother earth,
represented as a cow, was lamenting the regrettable condition.
TEXTS 32–33
b]øadYaae bhuiTaQa& YadPaa®Maae+a‚
k-aMaaSTaPa" SaMacrNa( >aGavTPa[Paàa" )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Saa é[q" SvvaSaMarivNdvNa& ivhaYa
YaTPaadSaaE>aGaMal&/ >aJaTae_Naur¢-a )) 32 ))
TaSYaahMaBJaku-il/Xaax(ku-Xake-Tauke-TaE"
é[qMaTPadE>aRGavTa" SaMal/x(k*-Taa®q )
}aqNaTYaraec oPal/>Ya TaTaae iv>aUiTa&
l/aek-aNa( Sa Maa& VYaSa*JaduTSMaYaTaq& TadNTae )) 33 ))
brahmädayo bahu-tithaà yad-apäìga-mokñakämäs
tapaù samacaran bhagavat-prapannäù
sä çréù sva-väsam aravinda-vanaà vihäya
yat-päda-saubhagam alaà bhajate ’nuraktä
tasyäham abja-kuliçäìkuça-ketu-ketaiù
çrémat-padair bhagavataù samalaìkåtäìgé
trén atyaroca upalabhya tato vibhütià
lokän sa mäà vyasåjad utsmayatéà tad-ante
SYNONYMS
brahma-ädayaù—demigods such as Brahmä; bahu-titham—for many days;
yat—of Lakñmé, the goddess of fortune; apäìga-mokña—glance of grace;
kämäù—being desirous of; tapaù—penances; samacaran—executing;
bhagavat—unto the Personality of Godhead; prapannäù—surrendered;
sä—she (the goddess of fortune); çréù—Lakñméjé; sva-väsam—her own abode;
aravinda-vanam—the forest of lotus flowers; vihäya—leaving aside;
yat—whose; päda—feet; saubhagam—all-blissful; alam—without hesitation;
bhajate—worships; anuraktä—being attached; tasya—His; aham—myself;
abja—lotus flower; kuliça—thunderbolt; aìkuça—rod for driving elephants;
ketu—flag; ketaiù—impressions; çrémat—the owner of all opulence;
padaiù—by the soles of the feet; bhagavataù—of the Personality of Godhead;
samalaìkåta-aìgé—one whose body is so decorated; trén—three;
ati—superseding; aroce—beautifully decorated; upalabhya—having obtained;
tataù—thereafter; vibhütim—specific powers; lokän—planetary systems;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
saù—He; mäm—me; vyasåjat—gave up; utsmayatém—while feeling proud;
tat-ante—at the end.
TRANSLATION
Lakñméjé, the goddess of fortune, whose glance of grace was sought by
demigods like Brahmä and for whom they surrendered many a day unto the
Personality of Godhead, gave up her own abode in the forest of lotus flowers
and engaged herself in the service of the lotus feet of the Lord. I was endowed
with specific powers to supersede the fortune of all the three planetary systems
by being decorated with the impressions of the flag, thunderbolt,
elephant-driving rod and lotus flower, which are signs of the lotus feet of the
Lord. But at the end, when I felt I was so fortunate, the Lord left me.
PURPORT
The beauty and opulence of the world can be enhanced by the grace of the
Lord and not by any man-made planning. When the Lord Çré Kåñëa was
present on this earth, the impressions of the special signs of His lotus feet were
stamped on the dust, and as a result of this specific grace, the whole earth was
made as perfect as possible. In other words, the rivers, the seas, the forests, the
hills and the mines, which are the supplying agents for the necessities of men
and animals, were fully discharging their respective duties. Therefore the
riches of the world surpassed all the riches of all other planets in the three
planetary systems of the universe. One should, therefore, ask that the grace of
the Lord always be present on earth so that we may be favored with His
causeless mercy and be happy, having all necessities of life. One may ask how
we can detain the Supreme Lord on this earth after His mission is fulfilled and
He has left this earth for His own abode. The answer is that there is no need to
detain the Lord. The Lord, being omnipresent, can be present with us if we
want Him at all. By His omnipresence, He can always be with us if we are
attached to His devotional service by hearing, chanting, remembering, etc.
There is nothing in the world with which the Lord is disconnected. The
only thing we must learn is to excavate the source of connection and thus be
linked with Him by offenseless service. We can be connected with Him by the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
transcendental sound representation of the Lord. The holy name of the Lord
and the Lord Himself are identical, and one who chants the holy name of the
Lord in an offenseless manner can at once realize that the Lord is present
before him. Even by the vibration of radio sound, we can partially realize
sound relativity, and by resounding the sound of transcendence we can verily
feel the presence of the Lord. In this age, when everything is polluted by the
contamination of Kali, it is instructed in the scriptures and preached by Lord
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu that by chanting the holy name of the Lord, we can
at once be free from contamination and gradually rise to the status of
transcendence and go back to Godhead. The offenseless chanter of the holy
name of the Lord is as auspicious as the Lord Himself, and the movement of
pure devotees of the Lord all over the world can at once change the
troublesome face of the world. Only by the propagation of the chanting of the
holy name of the Lord can we be immune from all effects of the age of Kali.
TEXT 34
Yaae vE MaMaaiTa>arMaaSaurv&Xaraja‚
Ma+aaEih<aqXaTaMaPaaNauddaTMaTaN}a" )
Tva& du"SQaMaUNaPadMaaTMaiNa PaaEåze<a
SaMPaadYaNa( Yaduzu rMYaMaib>a]d®Ma( )) 34 ))
yo vai mamätibharam äsura-vaàça-räjïäm
akñauhiëé-çatam apänudad ätma-tantraù
tväà duùstham üna-padam ätmani pauruñeëa
sampädayan yaduñu ramyam abibhrad aìgam
SYNONYMS
yaù—He who; vai—certainly; mama—mine; ati-bharam—too burdensome;
äsura-vaàça—unbelievers; räjïäm—of the kings; akñauhiëé(2)—one military
division; çatam—hundreds of such divisions; apänudat—extirpated;
ätma-tantraù—self-sufficient; tväm—unto you; duùstham—put into difficulty;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
üna-padam—devoid of strength to stand; ätmani—internal; pauruñeëa—by
dint of energy; sampädayan—for executing; yaduñu—in the Yadu dynasty;
ramyam—transcendentally beautiful; abibhrat—accepted; aìgam—body.
TRANSLATION
O personality of religion, I was greatly overburdened by the undue military
phalanxes arranged by atheistic kings, and I was relieved by the grace of the
Personality of Godhead. Similarly you were also in a distressed condition,
weakened in your standing strength, and thus He also incarnated by His
internal energy in the family of the Yadus to relieve you.
PURPORT
The asuras want to enjoy a life of sense gratification, even at the cost of
others’ happiness. In order to fulfill this ambition, the asuras, especially
atheistic kings or state executive heads, try to equip themselves with all kinds
of deadly weapons to bring about a war in a peaceful society. They have no
ambition other than personal aggrandizement, and thus mother earth feels
overburdened by such undue increases of military strength. By increase of the
asuric population, those who follow the principles of religion become unhappy,
especially the devotees, or devas.
In such a situation, the Personality of Godhead incarnates to vanquish the
unwanted asuras and to reestablish the true principles of religion. This was the
mission of Lord Çré Kåñëa, and He fulfilled it.
TEXT 35
k-a va SaheTa ivrh& PauåzaetaMaSYa
Pa[eMaavl/aek-åicriSMaTavLGauJaLPaE" )
SQaEYa| SaMaaNaMahrNMaDauMaaiNaNaqNaa&
raeMaaeTSavae MaMa Yadx(iga]iv$=iªTaaYaa" )) 35 ))
kä vä saheta virahaà puruñottamasya
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
premävaloka-rucira-smita-valgu-jalpaiù
sthairyaà samänam aharan madhu-mäninénäà
romotsavo mama yad-aìghri-viöaìkitäyäù
SYNONYMS
kä—who; vä—either; saheta—can tolerate; viraham—separation;
puruña-uttamasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; prema—loving;
avaloka—glancing; rucira-smita—pleasing smile; valgu-jalpaiù—hearty
appeals; sthairyam—gravity; sa-mänam—along with passionate wrath;
aharat—conquered; madhu—sweethearts; mäninénäm—women such as
Satyabhämä; roma-utsavaù—hair standing on end out of pleasure;
mama—mine; yat—whose; aìghri—feet; viöaìkitäyäù—imprinted with.
TRANSLATION
Who, therefore, can tolerate the pangs of separation from that Supreme
Personality of Godhead? He could conquer the gravity and passionate wrath of
His sweethearts like Satyabhämä by His sweet smile of love, pleasing glance and
hearty appeals. When He traversed my [earth’s] surface, I would be immersed
in the dust of His lotus feet and thus would be sumptuously covered with grass
which appeared like hairs standing on me out of pleasure.
PURPORT
There were chances of separation between the Lord and His thousands of
queens because of the Lord’s being absent from home, but as far as His
connection with earth was concerned, the Lord would traverse the earth with
His lotus feet, and therefore there was no chance of separation. When the
Lord left the surface of the earth to return to His spiritual abode, the earth’s
feelings of separation were therefore more acute.
TEXT 36
TaYaaerev& k-QaYaTaae" Pa*iQavqDaMaRYaaeSTada )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Parqi+aàaMa raJaizR" Pa[aá" Pa[acq& SarSvTaqMa( )) 36 ))
tayor evaà kathayatoù
påthivé-dharmayos tadä
parékñin näma räjarñiù
präptaù präcéà sarasvatém
SYNONYMS
tayoù—between them; evam—thus; kathayatoù—engaged in conversation;
påthivé—earth; dharmayoù—and the personality of religion; tadä—at that
time; parékñit—King Parékñit; näma—of the name; räja-åñiù—a saint amongst
kings; präptaù—arrived; präcém—flowing towards the east; sarasvatém—River
Sarasvaté.
TRANSLATION
While the earth and the personality of religion were thus engaged in
conversation, the saintly King Parékñit reached the shore of the Sarasvaté River,
which flowed towards the east.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the First Canto, Sixteenth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled “How Parékñit Received the Age of Kali.”
Chapter Seventeen
Punishment and Reward of Kali
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 1
SaUTa ovac
Ta}a GaaeiMaQauNa& raJaa hNYaMaaNaMaNaaQavTa( )
d<@hSTa& c v*zl&/ dd*Xae Na*Pal/aH^NaMa( )) 1 ))
süta uväca
tatra go-mithunaà räjä
hanyamänam anäthavat
daëòa-hastaà ca våñalaà
dadåçe nåpa-läïchanam
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Çré Süta Gosvämé said; tatra—thereupon; go-mithunam—a cow
and a bull; räjä—the King; hanyamänam—being beaten;
anätha-vat—appearing to be bereft of their owner; daëòa-hastam—with a club
in hand; ca—also; våñalam—lower-caste çüdra; dadåçe—observed; nåpa—a
king; läïchanam—dressed like.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: After reaching that place, Mahäräja Parékñit observed
that a lower-caste çüdra, dressed like a king, was beating a cow and a bull with a
club, as if they had no owner.
PURPORT
The principal sign of the age of Kali is that lower-caste çüdras, i.e., men
without brahminical culture and spiritual initiation, will be dressed like
administrators or kings, and the principal business of such non-kñatriya rulers
will be to kill the innocent animals, especially the cows and the bulls, who shall
be unprotected by their masters, the bona fide vaiçyas, the mercantile
community. In the Bhagavad-gétä (18.44), it is said that the vaiçyas are meant to
deal in agriculture, cow protection and trade. In the age of Kali, the degraded
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
vaiçyas, the mercantile men, are engaged in supplying cows to slaughterhouses.
The kñatriyas are meant to protect the citizens of the state, whereas the vaiçyas
are meant to protect the cows and bulls and utilize them to produce grains and
milk. The cow is meant to deliver milk, and the bull is meant to produce
grains. But in the age of Kali, the çüdra class of men are in the posts of
administrators, and the cows and bulls, or the mothers and the fathers,
unprotected by the vaiçyas, are subjected to the slaughterhouses organized by
the çüdra administrators.
TEXT 2
v*z& Ma*<aal/Davl&/ MaehNTaiMav ib>YaTaMa( )
vePaMaaNa& PadEke-Na SaqdNTa& éUd]Taai@TaMa( )) 2 ))
våñaà måëäla-dhavalaà
mehantam iva bibhyatam
vepamänaà padaikena
sédantaà çüdra-täòitam
SYNONYMS
våñam—the bull; måëäla-dhavalam—as white as a white lotus;
mehantam—urinating; iva—as if; bibhyatam—being too afraid;
vepamänam—trembling; padä ekena—standing on only one leg;
sédantam—terrified; çüdra-täòitam—being beaten by a çüdra.
TRANSLATION
The bull was as white as a white lotus flower. He was terrified of the çüdra
who was beating him, and he was so afraid that he was standing on one leg,
trembling and urinating.
PURPORT
The next symptom of the age of Kali is that principles of religion, which are
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
all spotlessly white, like the white lotus flower, will be attacked by the
uncultured çüdra population of the age. They may be descendants of brähmaëa
or kñatriya forefathers, but in the age of Kali, for want of sufficient education
and culture of Vedic wisdom, such a çüdra-like population will defy the
principles of religion, and persons who are religiously endowed will be terrified
by such men. They will declare themselves as adherents of no religious
principles, and many “isms” and cults will spring up in Kali-yuga only to kill
the spotless bull of religion. The state will be declared to be secular, or without
any particular principle of religion, and as a result there will be total
indifference to the principles of religion. The citizens will be free to act as they
like, without respect for sädhu, çästra and guru. The bull standing on one leg
indicates that the principles of religion are gradually diminishing. Even the
fragmental existence of religious principles will be embarrassed by so many
obstacles as if in the trembling condition of falling down at any time.
TEXT 3
Gaa& c DaMaRdugaa& dqNaa& >a*Xa& éUd]PadahTaaMa( )
ivvTSaaMaaé[uvdNaa& +aaMaa& YavSaiMaC^TaqMa( )) 3 ))
gäà ca dharma-dughäà dénäà
bhåçaà çüdra-padähatäm
vivatsäm äçru-vadanäà
kñämäà yavasam icchatém
SYNONYMS
gäm—the cow; ca—also; dharma-dughäm—beneficial because one can draw
religion from her; dénäm—now rendered poor; bhåçam—distressed; çüdra—the
lower caste; pada-ähatäm—beaten on the legs; vivatsäm—without any calf;
äçru-vadanäm—with tears in her eyes; kñämäm—very weak; yavasam—grass;
icchatém—as if desiring to have some grass to eat.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Although the cow is beneficial because one can draw religious principles
from her, she was now rendered poor and calfless. Her legs were being beaten
by a çüdra. There were tears in her eyes, and she was distressed and weak. She
was hankering after some grass in the field.
PURPORT
The next symptom of the age of Kali is the distressed condition of the cow.
Milking the cow means drawing the principles of religion in a liquid form. The
great åñis and munis would live only on milk. Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé would go
to a householder while he was milking a cow, and he would simply take a little
quantity of it for subsistence. Even fifty years ago, no one would deprive a
sädhu of a quart or two of milk, and every householder would give milk like
water. For a Sanätanist (a follower of Vedic principles) it is the duty of every
householder to have cows and bulls as household paraphernalia, not only for
drinking milk, but also for deriving religious principles. The Sanätanist
worships cows on religious principles and respects brähmaëas. The cow’s milk
is required for the sacrificial fire, and by performing sacrifices the householder
can be happy. The cow’s calf not only is beautiful to look at, but also gives
satisfaction to the cow, and so she delivers as much milk as possible. But in the
Kali-yuga, the calves are separated from the cows as early as possible for
purposes which may not be mentioned in these pages of Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
The cow stands with tears in her eyes, the çüdra milkman draws milk from the
cow artificially, and when there is no milk the cow is sent to be slaughtered.
These greatly sinful acts are responsible for all the troubles in present society.
People do not know what they are doing in the name of economic
development. The influence of Kali will keep them in the darkness of
ignorance. Despite all endeavors for peace and prosperity, they must try to see
the cows and the bulls happy in all respects. Foolish people do not know how
one earns happiness by making the cows and bulls happy, but it is a fact by the
law of nature. Let us take it from the authority of Çrémad-Bhägavatam and
adopt the principles for the total happiness of humanity.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 4
PaPa[C^ rQaMaaæ!" k-aTaRSvrPairC^dMa( )
MaegaGaM>aqrYaa vaca SaMaaraeiPaTak-aMauRk-" )) 4 ))
papraccha ratham ärüòhaù
kärtasvara-paricchadam
megha-gambhérayä väcä
samäropita-kärmukaù
SYNONYMS
papraccha—inquired; ratham—chariot; ärüòhaù—seated on; kärtasvara—gold;
paricchadam—embossed with; megha—cloud; gambhérayä—exonerating;
väcä—sound; samäropita—well equipped; kärmukaù—arrows and bow.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Parékñit, well equipped with arrows and bow and seated on a
gold-embossed chariot, spoke to him [the çüdra] with a deep voice sounding like
thunder.
PURPORT
An administrative head or king like Mahäräja Parékñit, with full majestic
authority, well equipped with weapons to chastise miscreants, can challenge
the agents of the age of Kali. Then only will it be possible to counteract the
degraded age. And in the absence of such strong executive heads, there is
always disruption of tranquillity. The elected show-bottle executive head, as
representative of a degraded public, cannot be equal with a strong king like
Mahäräja Parékñit. The dress or style of royal order does not count. It is one’s
actions which are counted.
TEXT 5
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
k-STv& MaC^r<ae l/aeke- bl/aÖ&SYabl/aNa( bl/I )
Nardevae_iSa veze<a Na$=vTk-MaR<aaiÜJa" )) 5 ))
kas tvaà mac-charaëe loke
baläd dhaàsy abalän balé
nara-devo ’si veñeëa
naöavat karmaëädvijaù
SYNONYMS
kaù—who are; tvam—you; mat—my; çaraëe—under protection; loke—in this
world; balät—by force; haàsi—killing; abalän—those who are helpless;
balé—although full of strength; nara-devaù—man-god; asi—appear to be;
veñeëa—by your dress; naöa-vat—like a theatrical player; karmaëä—by deeds;
advi-jaù—a man not twice-born by culture.
TRANSLATION
Oh, who are you? You appear to be strong and yet you dare kill, within my
protection, those who are helpless! By your dress you pose yourself to be a godly
man [king], but by your deeds you are opposing the principles of the twice-born
kñatriyas.
PURPORT
The brähmaëas, kñatriyas and vaiçyas are called twice-born because for
these higher classes of men there is one birth by parental conjugation and
there is another birth of cultural rejuvenation by spiritual initiation from the
bona fide äcärya, or spiritual master. So a kñatriya is also twice-born like a
brähmaëa, and his duty is to give protection to the helpless. The kñatriya king
is considered to be the representative of God to give protection to the helpless
and chastise the miscreants. Whenever there are anomalies in this routine
work by the administrators, there is an incarnation of the Lord to reestablish
the principles of a godly kingdom. In the age of Kali, the poor helpless animals,
especially the cows, which are meant to receive all sorts of protection from the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
administrative heads, are killed without restriction. Thus the administrative
heads under whose noses such things happen are representatives of God in
name only. Such powerful administrators are rulers of the poor citizens by
dress or office, but factually they are worthless, lower-class men without the
cultural assets of the twice-born. No one can expect justice or equality of
treatment from once-born (spiritually uncultured) lower-class men. Therefore
in the age of Kali everyone is unhappy due to the maladministration of the
state. The modern human society is not twice-born by spiritual culture.
Therefore the people’s government, by the people who are not twice-born,
must be a government of Kali in which everyone is unhappy.
TEXT 6
YaSTv& k*-Z<ae GaTae dUr& SahGaa<@qvDaNvNaa )
XaaeCYaae_SYaXaaeCYaaNa( rhiSa Pa[hrNa( vDaMahRiSa )) 6 ))
yas tvaà kåñëe gate düraà
saha-gäëòéva-dhanvanä
çocyo ’sy açocyän rahasi
praharan vadham arhasi
SYNONYMS
yaù—on account of; tvam—you rogue; kåñëe—Lord Kåñëa; gate—having gone
away; düram—out of sight; saha—along with; gäëòéva—the bow named
Gäëòéva; dhanvanä—the carrier, Arjuna; çocyaù—culprit; asi—you are
considered; açocyän—innocent; rahasi—in a secluded place;
praharan—beating; vadham—to be killed; arhasi—deserve.
TRANSLATION
You rogue, do you dare beat an innocent cow because Lord Kåñëa and
Arjuna, the carrier of the Gäëòéva bow, are out of sight? Since you are beating
the innocent in a secluded place, you are considered a culprit and therefore
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
deserve to be killed.
PURPORT
In a civilization where God is conspicuously banished, and there is no
devotee warrior like Arjuna, the associates of the age of Kali take advantage of
this lawless kingdom and arrange to kill innocent animals like the cow in
secluded slaughterhouses. Such murderers of animals stand to be condemned
to death by the order of a pious king like Mahäräja Parékñit. For a pious king,
the culprit who kills an animal in a secluded place is punishable by the death
penalty, exactly like a murderer who kills an innocent child in a secluded
place.
TEXT 7
Tv& va Ma*<aal/Davl/" PaadENYaURNa" Pada crNa( )
v*zæPae<a ik&- k-iêd( devae Na" Pair%edYaNa( )) 7 ))
tvaà vä måëäla-dhavalaù
pädair nyünaù padä caran
våña-rüpeëa kià kaçcid
devo naù parikhedayan
SYNONYMS
tvam—you; vä—either; måëäla-dhavalaù—as white as a lotus; pädaiù—of
three legs; nyünaù—being deprived; padä—on one leg; caran—moving;
våña—bull; rüpeëa—in the form of; kim—whether; kaçcit—someone;
devaù—demigod; naù—us; parikhedayan—causing grief.
TRANSLATION
Then he [Mahäräja Parékñit] asked the bull: Oh, who are you? Are you a
bull as white as a white lotus, or are you a demigod? You have lost three of your
legs and are moving on only one. Are you some demigod causing us grief in the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
form of a bull?
PURPORT
At least up to the time of Mahäräja Parékñit, no one could imagine the
wretched conditions of the cow and the bull. Mahäräja Parékñit, therefore, was
astonished to see such a horrible scene. He inquired whether the bull was not a
demigod assuming such a wretched condition to indicate the future of the cow
and the bull.
TEXT 8
Na JaaTau k-aErveNd]a<aa& daedR<@PairriM>aTae )
>aUTale/_NauPaTaNTYaiSMaNa( ivNaa Tae Pa[ai<aNaa& éuc" )) 8 ))
na jätu kauravendräëäà
dordaëòa-parirambhite
bhü-tale ’nupatanty asmin
vinä te präëinäà çucaù
SYNONYMS
na—not; jätu—at any time; kaurava-indräëäm—of the kings in the Kuru
dynasty; dordaëòa—strength of arms; parirambhite—protected by;
bhü-tale—on the surface of the earth; anupatanti—grieving; asmin—up till
now; vinä—save and except; te—you; präëinäm—of the living being;
çucaù—tears in the eyes.
TRANSLATION
Now for the first time in a kingdom well protected by the arms of the kings
of the Kuru dynasty, I see you grieving with tears in your eyes. Up till now no
one on earth has ever shed tears because of royal negligence.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The protection of the lives of both the human beings and the animals is the
first and foremost duty of a government. A government must not discriminate
in such principles. It is simply horrible for a pure-hearted soul to see organized
animal-killing by the state in this age of Kali. Mahäräja Parékñit was lamenting
for the tears in the eyes of the bull, and he was astonished to see such an
unprecedented thing in his good kingdom. Men and animals were equally
protected as far as life was concerned. That is the way in God’s kingdom.
TEXT 9
Maa SaaEr>aeYaa}a éucae VYaeTau Tae v*zl/ad( >aYaMa( )
Maa raedqrMb >ad]& Tae %l/aNaa& MaiYa XaaSTair )) 9 ))
mä saurabheyätra çuco
vyetu te våñaläd bhayam
mä rodér amba bhadraà te
khalänäà mayi çästari
SYNONYMS
mä—do not; saurabheya—O son of Surabhi; atra—in my kingdom;
çucaù—lamentation; vyetu—let there be; te—your; våñalät—by the çüdra;
bhayam—cause of fear; mä—do not; rodéù—cry; amba—mother cow;
bhadram—all good; te—unto you; khalänäm—of the envious; mayi—while I
am living; çästari—the ruler or subduer.
TRANSLATION
O son of Surabhi, you need lament no longer now. There is no need to fear
this low-class çüdra. And, O mother cow, as long as I am living as the ruler and
subduer of all envious men, there is no cause for you to cry. Everything will be
good for you.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Protection of bulls and cows and all other animals can be possible only
when there is a state ruled by an executive head like Mahäräja Parékñit.
Mahäräja Parékñit addresses the cow as mother, for he is a cultured, twice-born,
kñatriya king. Surabhi is the name of the cows which exist in the spiritual
planets and are especially reared by Lord Çré Kåñëa Himself. As men are made
after the form and features of the Supreme Lord, so also the cows are made
after the form and features of the surabhi cows in the spiritual kingdom. In the
material world the human society gives all protection to the human being, but
there is no law to protect the descendants of Surabhi, who can give all
protection to men by supplying the miracle food, milk. But Mahäräja Parékñit
and the Päëòavas were fully conscious of the importance of the cow and bull,
and they were prepared to punish the cow-killer with all chastisement,
including death. There has sometimes been agitation for the protection of the
cow, but for want of pious executive heads and suitable laws, the cow and the
bull are not given protection. The human society should recognize the
importance of the cow and the bull and thus give all protection to these
important animals, following in the footsteps of Mahäräja Parékñit. For
protecting the cows and brahminical culture, the Lord, who is very kind to the
cow and the brähmaëas (go-brähmaëa-hitäya), will be pleased with us and will
bestow upon us real peace.
TEXTS 10–11
YaSYa raí\e Pa[Jaa" SavaRñSYaNTae SaaDVYaSaaDaui>a" )
TaSYa MataSYa NaXYaiNTa k-IiTaRraYau>aRGaae GaiTa" )) 10 ))
Wz raja& Parae DaMaaeR ùaTaaRNaaMaaiTaRiNaGa]h" )
ATa WNa& viDaZYaaiMa >aUTad]uhMaSataMaMa( )) 11 ))
yasya räñöre prajäù sarväs
trasyante sädhvy asädhubhiù
tasya mattasya naçyanti
kértir äyur bhago gatiù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
eña räjïäà paro dharmo
hy ärtänäm ärti-nigrahaù
ata enaà vadhiñyämi
bhüta-druham asattamam
SYNONYMS
yasya—one whose; räñöre—in the state; prajäù—living beings; sarväù—one
and all; trasyante—are terrified; sädhvi—O chaste one; asädhubhiù—by the
miscreants; tasya—his; mattasya—of the illusioned; naçyanti—vanishes;
kértiù—fame; äyuù—duration of life; bhagaù—fortune; gatiù—good rebirth;
eñaù—these are; räjïäm—of the kings; paraù—superior;
dharmaù—occupation; hi—certainly; ärtänäm—of the sufferers;
ärti—sufferings; nigrahaù—subduing; ataù—therefore; enam—this man;
vadhiñyämi—I shall kill; bhüta-druham—revolter against other living beings;
asat-tamam—the most wretched.
TRANSLATION
O chaste one, the king’s good name, duration of life and good rebirth vanish
when all kinds of living beings are terrified by miscreants in his kingdom. It is
certainly the prime duty of the king to subdue first the sufferings of those who
suffer. Therefore I must kill this most wretched man because he is violent
against other living beings.
PURPORT
When there is some disturbance caused by wild animals in a village or town,
the police or others take action to kill them. Similarly, it is the duty of the
government to kill at once all bad social elements such as thieves, dacoits and
murderers. The same punishment is also due to animal-killers because the
animals of the state are also the prajä. Prajä means one who has taken birth in
the state, and this includes both men and animals. Any living being who takes
birth in a state has the primary right to live under the protection of the king.
The jungle animals are also subject to the king, and they also have a right to
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
live. So what to speak of domestic animals like the cows and bulls.
Any living being, if he terrifies other living beings, is a most wretched
subject, and the king should at once kill such a disturbing element. As the wild
animal is killed when it creates disturbances, similarly any man who
unnecessarily kills or terrifies the jungle animals or other animals must be
punished at once. By the law of the Supreme Lord, all living beings, in
whatever shape they may be, are the sons of the Lord, and no one has any right
to kill another animal, unless it is so ordered by the codes of natural law. The
tiger can kill a lower animal for his subsistence, but a man cannot kill an
animal for his subsistence. That is the law of God, who has created the law
that a living being subsists by eating another living being. Thus the vegetarians
are also living by eating other living beings. Therefore, the law is that one
should live only by eating specific living beings, as ordained by the law of God.
The Éçopaniñad directs that one should live by the direction of the Lord and
not at one’s sweet will. A man can subsist on varieties of grains, fruits and milk
ordained by God, and there is no need of animal food, save and except in
particular cases.
The illusioned king or executive head, even though sometimes advertised as
a great philosopher and learned scholar, will allow slaughterhouses in the state
without knowing that torturing poor animals clears the way to hell for such
foolish kings or executive heads. The executive head must always be alert to
the safety of the prajäs, both man and animal, and inquire whether a particular
living being is harassed at any place by another living being. The harassing
living being must at once be caught and put to death, as shown by Mahäräja
Parékñit.
The people’s government, or government by the people, should not allow
killing of innocent animals by the sweet will of foolish government men. They
must know the codes of God, as mentioned in the revealed scriptures.
Mahäräja Parékñit quotes here that according to the codes of God the
irresponsible king or state executive jeopardizes his good name, duration of
life, power and strength and ultimately his progressive march towards a better
life and salvation after death. Such foolish men do not even believe in the
existence of a next life.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
While commenting on this particular verse, we have in our presence the
statement of a great modern politician who has recently died and left his will,
which discloses his poor fund of knowledge of the codes of God mentioned by
Mahäräja Parékñit. The politician was so ignorant of the codes of God that he
writes: “I do not believe in any such ceremonies, and to submit to them, even
as a matter of form, would be hypocrisy and an attempt to delude ourselves and
others... I have no religious sentiment in the matter.”
Contrasting these statements of a great politician in the modern age with
those of Mahäräja Parékñit, we find a vast difference. Mahäräja Parékñit was
pious according to the scriptural codes, whereas the modern politician goes by
his personal belief and sentiments. Any great man of the material world is,
after all, a conditioned soul. He is bound by his hands and feet by the ropes of
material nature, and still the foolish conditioned soul thinks of himself as free
to act by his whimsical sentiments. The conclusion is that people in the time of
Mahäräja Parékñit were happy, and the animals were given proper protection
because the executive head was not whimsical or ignorant of God’s law.
Foolish, faithless creatures try to avoid the existence of the Lord and proclaim
themselves secular at the cost of valuable human life. The human life is
especially meant for knowing the science of God, but foolish creatures,
especially in this age of Kali, instead of knowing God scientifically, make
propaganda against religious belief as well as the existence of God, even
though they are always bound by the laws of God by the symptoms of birth,
death, old age and disease.
TEXT 12
k-ae_v*êTa( Tav Paada&ñqNa( SaaEr>aeYa cTauZPad )
Maa >aUv&STvad*Xaa raí\e raja& k*-Z<aaNauviTaRNaaMa( )) 12 ))
ko ’våçcat tava pädäàs trén
saurabheya catuñ-pada
mä bhüvaàs tvädåçä räñöre
räjïäà kåñëänuvartinäm
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
kaù—who is he; avåçcat—cut off; tava—your; pädän—legs; trén—three;
saurabheya—O son of Surabhi; catuù-pada—you are four-legged; mä—never
to be; bhüvan—it so happened; tvädåçäù—as yourself; räñöre—in the state;
räjïäm—of the kings; kåñëa-anuvartinäm—those who follow the codes of
Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
He [Mahäräja Parékñit] repeatedly addressed and questioned the bull thus: O
son of Surabhi, who has cut off your three legs? In the state of the kings who
are obedient to the laws of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, there is
no one as unhappy as you.
PURPORT
The kings or the executive heads of all states must know the codes of Lord
Kåñëa (generally Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam) and must act
accordingly in order to fulfill the mission of human life, which is to make an
end to all miseries of material conditions. One who knows the codes of Lord
Kåñëa can achieve this end without any difficulty. In the Bhagavad-gétä, in a
synopsis, we can understand the codes of Godhead, and in the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam the same codes are explained further.
In a state where the codes of Kåñëa are followed, no one is unhappy. Where
such codes are not followed, the first sign is that three legs of the
representative of religion are cut off, and thereby all miseries follow. When
Kåñëa was personally present, the codes of Kåñëa were being followed without
question, but in His absence such codes are presented in the pages of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam for the guidance of the blind persons who happen to be at
the helm of all affairs.
TEXT 13
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Aa:Yaaih v*z >ad]& v" SaaDaUNaaMak*-TaaGaSaaMa( )
AaTMavEæPYak-TaaRr& PaaQaaRNaa& k-IiTaRdUz<aMa( )) 13 ))
äkhyähi våña bhadraà vaù
sädhünäm akåtägasäm
ätma-vairüpya-kartäraà
pärthänäà kérti-düñaëam
SYNONYMS
äkhyähi—just let me know; våña—O bull; bhadram—good; vaù—for you;
sädhünäm—of the honest; akåta-ägasäm—of those who are offenseless;
ätma-vairüpya—deformation of the self; kartäram—the doer; pärthänäm—of
the sons of Påthä; kérti-düñaëam—blackmailing the reputation.
TRANSLATION
O bull, you are offenseless and thoroughly honest; therefore I wish all good
to you. Please tell me of the perpetrator of these mutilations, which blackmail
the reputation of the sons of Påthä.
PURPORT
The reputation of the reign of Mahäräja Rämacandra and that of the kings
who followed in the footsteps of Mahäräja Rämacandra, like the Päëòavas and
their descendants, are never to be forgotten because in their kingdom
offenseless and honest living beings were never in trouble. The bull and the
cow are the symbols of the most offenseless living beings because even the
stool and urine of these animals are utilized to benefit human society. The
descendants of the sons of Påthä, like Mahäräja Parékñit, were afraid of losing
their reputations, but in the modern days the leaders are not even afraid of
killing such offenseless animals. Herein lies the difference between the reign
of those pious kings and the modern states ruled by irresponsible executive
heads without knowledge of the codes of God.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 14
JaNae_NaaGaSYaga& YauÅNa( SavRTaae_SYa c MaÙYaMa( )
SaaDaUNaa& >ad]Maev SYaadSaaDaudMaNae k*-Tae )) 14 ))
jane ’nägasy aghaà yuïjan
sarvato ’sya ca mad-bhayam
sädhünäà bhadram eva syäd
asädhu-damane kåte
SYNONYMS
jane—to the living beings; anägasi—those who are offenseless;
agham—sufferings; yuïjan—by applying; sarvataù—anywhere and
everywhere; asya—of such offenders; ca—and; mat-bhayam—fear me;
sädhünäm—of the honest persons; bhadram—good fortune; eva—certainly;
syät—will take place; asädhu—dishonest miscreants; damane—curbed;
kåte—being so done.
TRANSLATION
Whoever causes offenseless living beings to suffer must fear me anywhere
and everywhere in the world. By curbing dishonest miscreants, one
automatically benefits the offenseless.
PURPORT
Dishonest miscreants flourish because of cowardly and impotent executive
heads of state. But when the executive heads are strong enough to curb all
sorts of dishonest miscreants, in any part of the state, certainly they cannot
flourish. When the miscreants are punished in an exemplary manner,
automatically all good fortune follows. As said before, it is the prime duty of
the king or the executive head to give protection in all respects to the
peaceful, offenseless citizens of the state. The devotees of the Lord are by
nature peaceful and offenseless, and therefore it is the prime duty of the state
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
to arrange to convert everyone to become a devotee of the Lord. Thus
automatically there will be peaceful, offenseless citizens. Then the only duty of
the king will be to curb the dishonest miscreants. That will bring about peace
and harmony all over human society.
TEXT 15
ANaaGa"iSvh >aUTaezu Ya AaGaSk*-iàrx(ku-Xa" )
AahTaaRiSMa >auJa& Saa+aadMaTYaRSYaaiPa Saa®dMa( )) 15 ))
anägaùsv iha bhüteñu
ya ägas-kån niraìkuçaù
ähartäsmi bhujaà säkñäd
amartyasyäpi säìgadam
SYNONYMS
anägaùsu iha—to the offenseless; bhüteñu—living beings; yaù—the person;
ägaù-kåt—commits offense; niraìkuçaù—upstart; ähartä asmi—I shall bring
forth; bhujam—arms; säkñät—directly; amartyasya api—even one who is a
demigod; sa-aìgadam—with decorations and armor.
TRANSLATION
An upstart living being who commits offenses by torturing those who are
offenseless shall be directly uprooted by me, even though he be a denizen of
heaven with armor and decorations.
PURPORT
The denizens of the heavenly kingdom are called amara, or deathless, due
to their possessing a long span of life, far greater than that of the human
beings. For a human being, who has only a maximum one-hundred-year
duration of life, a span of life spreading over millions of years is certainly
considered to be deathless. For example, from the Bhagavad-gétä we learn that
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
on the Brahmaloka planet the duration of one day is calculated to be 4,300,000
x 1,000 solar years. Similarly, in other heavenly planets one day is calculated to
be six months of this planet, and the inhabitants get a life of ten million of
their years. Therefore, in all higher planets, since the span of life is far greater
than that of the human being, the denizens are called deathless by
imagination, although actually no one within the material universe is
deathless.
Mahäräja Parékñit challenges even such denizens of heaven if they torture
the offenseless. This means that the state executive head must be as strong as
Mahäräja Parékñit so that he may be determined to punish the strongest
offenders. It should be the principle of a state executive head that the offender
of the codes of God is always punished.
TEXT 16
rajae ih ParMaae DaMaR" SvDaMaRSQaaNauPaal/NaMa( )
XaaSaTaae_NYaaNa( YaQaaXaañMaNaaPaÛuTPaQaaiNah )) 16 ))
räjïo hi paramo dharmaù
sva-dharma-sthänupälanam
çäsato ’nyän yathä-çästram
anäpady utpathän iha
SYNONYMS
räjïaù—of the king or the executive head; hi—certainly; paramaù—supreme;
dharmaù—occupational duty; sva-dharma-stha—one who is faithful to his
prescribed duty; anupälanam—giving protection always; çäsataù—while
ruling; anyän—others; yathä—according to; çästram—rulings of scriptures;
anäpadi—without danger; utpathän—persons going astray; iha—as a matter of
fact.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The supreme duty of the ruling king is to give all protection to law-abiding
persons and to chastise those who stray from the ordinances of the scriptures in
ordinary times, when there is no emergency.
PURPORT
In the scriptures there is mention of äpad-dharma, or occupational duty at
times of extraordinary happenings. It is said that sometimes the great sage
Viçvämitra had to live on the flesh of dogs in some extraordinary dangerous
position. In cases of emergency, one may be allowed to live on the flesh of
animals of all description, but that does not mean that there should be regular
slaughterhouses to feed the animal-eaters and that this system should he
encouraged by the state. No one should try to live on flesh in ordinary times
simply for the sake of the palate. If anyone does so, the king or the executive
head should punish him for gross enjoyment.
There are regular scriptural injunctions for different persons engaged in
different occupational duties, and one who follows them is called
svadharma-stha, or faithful in one’s prescribed duties. In the Bhagavad-gétä
(18.48) it is advised that one should not give up his occupational prescribed
duties, even if they are not always flawless. Such sva-dharma might be violated
in cases of emergency, if one is forced by circumstances, but they cannot be
violated in ordinary times. The state executive head is to see that such
sva-dharma is not changed by the follower, whatever it may be, and he should
give all protection to the follower of sva-dharma. The violator is subject to
punishment in terms of the çästra, and the duty of the king is to see that
everyone strictly follows his occupational duty, as prescribed in the scripture.
TEXT 17
DaMaR ovac
WTad( v" Paa<@veYaaNaa& Yau¢-MaaTaaR>aYa& vc" )
Yaeza& Gau<aGa<aE" k*-Z<aae daETYaadaE >aGavaNa( k*-Ta" )) 17 ))
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
dharma uväca
etad vaù päëòaveyänäà
yuktam ärtäbhayaà vacaù
yeñäà guëa-gaëaiù kåñëo
dautyädau bhagavän kåtaù
SYNONYMS
dharmaù uväca—the personality of religion said; etat—all these; vaù—by you;
päëòaveyänäm—of those who are in the Päëòava dynasty; yuktam—just
befitting; ärta—the sufferer; abhayam—freedom from all fears;
vacaù—speeches; yeñäm—those; guëa-gaëaiù—by the qualifications;
kåñëaù—even Lord Kåñëa; dautya-ädau—the duty of a messenger, etc.;
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; kåtaù—performed.
TRANSLATION
The personality of religion said: These words just spoken by you befit a
person of the Päëòava dynasty. Captivated by the devotional qualities of the
Päëòavas, even Lord Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead, performed duties as a
messenger.
PURPORT
The assurances and challenges made by Mahäräja Parékñit are never
exaggerations of his real power. The Mahäräja said that even the denizens of
heaven could not escape his stringent government if they were violators of
religious principles. He was not falsely proud, for a devotee of the Lord is
equally as powerful as the Lord or sometimes more powerful by His grace, and
any promise made by a devotee, though it may be ordinarily very difficult to
fulfill, is properly executed by the grace of the Lord. The Päëòavas, by their
unalloyed devotional service and full surrender unto the Lord, made it possible
for the Lord to become a chariot driver or sometimes their letter messenger.
Such duties executed by the Lord for His devotee are always very pleasing to
the Lord because the Lord wants to render service to His unalloyed devotee,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
whose life has no other engagement than to serve the Lord with full love and
devotion. Mahäräja Parékñit, grandson of Arjuna, the celebrated friendly
servitor of the Lord, was a pure devotee of the Lord like his grandfather, and
therefore the Lord was always with him, even from the time when he was
helplessly lying in the womb of his mother and was attacked by the blazing
brahmästra weapon of Açvatthämä. A devotee is always under the protection
of the Lord, and therefore the assurance of protection by Mahäräja Parékñit
could never be without meaning. The personality of religion accepted this fact
and thus thanked the King for his being true to his exalted position.
TEXT 18
Na vYa& ©e-XabqJaaiNa YaTa" SYau" PauåzzR>a )
Pauåz& Ta& ivJaaNaqMaae vaKYa>aedivMaaeihTaa" )) 18 ))
na vayaà kleça-béjäni
yataù syuù puruñarñabha
puruñaà taà vijänémo
väkya-bheda-vimohitäù
SYNONYMS
na—not; vayam—we; kleça-béjäni—the root cause of sufferings;
yataù—wherefrom; syuù—it so happens; puruña-åñabha—O greatest of all
human beings; puruñam—the person; tam—that; vijänémaù—know;
väkya-bheda—difference of opinion; vimohitäù—bewildered by.
TRANSLATION
O greatest among human beings, it is very difficult to ascertain the particular
miscreant who has caused our sufferings, because we are bewildered by all the
different opinions of theoretical philosophers.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
There are many theoretical philosophers in the world who put forward
their own theories of cause and effect especially about the cause of suffering
and its effect on different living beings. Generally there are six great
philosophers: Kaëäda, the author of Vaiçeñika philosophy; Gautama, the
author of logic; Pataïjali, the author of mystic yoga; Kapila, the author of
Säìkhya philosophy; Jaimini, the author of Karma-mémäàsä; and Vyäsadeva,
the author of Vedänta-darçana.
Although the bull, or the personality of religion, and the cow, the
personality of the earth, knew perfectly well that the personality of Kali was
the direct cause of their sufferings, still, as devotees of the Lord, they knew
well also that without the sanction of the Lord no one could inflict trouble
upon them. According to the Padma Puräëa, our present trouble is due to the
fructifying of seedling sins, but even those seedling sins also gradually fade
away by execution of pure devotional service. Thus even if the devotees see
the mischief-mongers, they do not accuse them for the sufferings inflicted.
They take it for granted that the mischief-monger is made to act by some
indirect cause, and therefore they tolerate the sufferings, thinking them to be
God-given in small doses, for otherwise the sufferings should have been
greater.
Mahäräja Parékñit wanted to get a statement of accusation against the direct
mischief-monger, but they declined to give it on the abovementioned grounds.
Speculative philosophers, however, do not recognize the sanction of the Lord;
they try to find out the cause of sufferings in their own way, as will be
described in the following verses. According to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, such
speculators are themselves bewildered, and thus they cannot know that the
ultimate cause of all causes is the Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 19
ke-icd( ivk-LPavSaNaa AahuraTMaaNaMaaTMaNa" )
dEvMaNYae_Pare k-MaR Sv>aavMaPare Pa[>auMa( )) 19 ))
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
kecid vikalpa-vasanä
ähur ätmänam ätmanaù
daivam anye ’pare karma
svabhävam apare prabhum
SYNONYMS
kecit—some of them; vikalpa-vasanäù—those who deny all kinds of duality;
ähuù—declare; ätmänam—own self; ätmanaù—of the self;
daivam—superhuman; anye—others; apare—someone else; karma—activity;
svabhävam—material nature; apare—many other; prabhum—authorities.
TRANSLATION
Some of the philosophers, who deny all sorts of duality, declare that one’s
own self is responsible for his personal happiness and distress. Others say that
superhuman powers are responsible, while yet others say that activity is
responsible, and the gross materialists maintain that nature is the ultimate
cause.
PURPORT
As referred to above, philosophers like Jaimini and his followers establish
that fruitive activity is the root cause of all distress and happiness, and that
even if there is a superior authority, some superhuman powerful God or gods,
He or they are also under the influence of fruitive activity because they reward
result according to one’s action. They say that action is not independent
because action is performed by some performer; therefore, the performer
himself is the cause of his own happiness or distress. In the Bhagavad-gétä (6.5)
also it is confirmed that by one’s mind, freed from material affection, one can
deliver himself from the sufferings of material pangs. So one should not
entangle oneself in matter by the mind’s material affections. Thus one’s own
mind is one’s friend or enemy in one’s material happiness and distress.
Atheistic, materialistic Säìkhyaites conclude that material nature is the
cause of all causes. According to them, combinations of material elements are
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the causes of material happiness and distress, and disintegration of matter is
the cause of freedom from all material pangs. Gautama and Kaëäda find that
atomic combination is the cause of everything, and impersonalists like
Añöävakra discover that the spiritual effulgence of Brahman is the cause of all
causes. But in the Bhagavad-gétä the Lord Himself declares that He is the
source of impersonal Brahman, and therefore He, the Personality of Godhead,
is the ultimate cause of all causes. It is also confirmed in the Brahma-saàhitä
that Lord Kåñëa is the ultimate cause of all causes.
TEXT 20
APa[TaKYaaRdiNadeRXYaaidiTa ke-ZviPa iNaêYa" )
A}aaNauæPa& raJazeR ivMa*Xa SvMaNaqzYaa )) 20 ))
apratarkyäd anirdeçyäd
iti keñv api niçcayaù
atränurüpaà räjarñe
vimåça sva-manéñayä
SYNONYMS
apratarkyät—beyond the power of reasoning; anirdeçyät—beyond the power of
thinking; iti—thus; keñu—someone; api—also; niçcayaù—definitely
concluded; atra—herein; anurüpam—which of them is right; räja-åñe—O sage
amongst the kings; vimåça—judge yourself; sva—by your own;
manéñayä—power of intelligence.
TRANSLATION
There are also some thinkers who believe that no one can ascertain the cause
of distress by argumentation, nor know it by imagination, nor express it by
words. O sage amongst kings, judge for yourself by thinking over all this with
your own intelligence.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
The Vaiñëavites, the devotees of the Lord, do believe, as above explained,
that nothing can take place without the sanction of the Supreme Lord. He is
the supreme director, for He confirms in the Bhagavad-gétä (15.15) that He, as
all-pervading Paramätmä, stays in everyone’s heart and keeps vigilance over all
actions and witnesses all activities. The argument of the atheist that one
cannot be punished for one’s misdeeds unless proved before a qualified justice
is refuted herein, for we accept the perpetual witness and constant companion
of the living being. A living being may forget all that he might have done in
his past or present life, but one must know that in the same tree of the material
body, the individual soul and the Supreme Soul as Paramätmä are sitting like
two birds. One of them, the living being, is enjoying the fruits of the tree,
whereas the Supreme Being is there to witness the activities. Therefore the
Paramätmä feature, the Supreme Soul, is actually the witness of all activities of
the living being, and only by His direction can the living being remember or
forget what he might have done in the past. He is, therefore, both the
all-pervading impersonal Brahman and the localized Paramätmä in everyone’s
heart. He is the knower of all past, present and future, and nothing can be
concealed from Him. The devotees know this truth, and therefore they
discharge their duties sincerely, without being overly anxious for rewards.
Besides that, one cannot estimate the Lord’s reactions, either by speculation or
by scholarship. Why does He put some into difficulty and not others? He is the
supreme knower of the Vedic knowledge, and thus He is the factual Vedäntist.
At the same time He is the compiler of the Vedänta. No one is independent of
Him, and everyone is engaged in His service in different ways. In the
conditioned state, such services are rendered by the living being under force of
the material nature, whereas in the liberated state the living being is helped by
the spiritual nature in the voluntary loving service of the Lord. There is no
incongruity or inebriety in His actions. All are on the path of Absolute Truth.
Bhéñmadeva correctly estimated the inconceivable actions of the Lord. The
conclusion is, therefore, that the sufferings of the representative of religion
and the representative of the earth, as present before Mahäräja Parékñit, were
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
planned to prove that Mahäräja Parékñit was the ideal executive head because
he knew well how to give protection to the cows (the earth) and the
brähmaëas (religious principles), the two pillars of spiritual advancement.
Everyone is under the full control of the Lord. He is quite correct in His action
when He desires something to be done by someone, irrespective of the
consideration of the particular case. Mahäräja Parékñit was thus put to test for
his greatness. Now let us see how he solves it by his sagacious mind.
TEXT 21
SaUTa ovac
Wv& DaMaeR Pa[vdiTa Sa SaMa]a@( iÜJaSataMaa" )
SaMaaihTaeNa MaNaSaa iv%ed" PaYaRcí TaMa( )) 21 ))
süta uväca
evaà dharme pravadati
sa samräò dvija-sattamäù
samähitena manasä
vikhedaù paryacañöa tam
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; evam—so; dharme—the personality of
religion; pravadati—thus having spoken; saù—he; samräö—the Emperor;
dvija-sattamäù—O best among the brähmaëas; samähitena—with proper
attention; manasä—by the mind; vikhedaù—without any mistake;
paryacañöa—counterreplied; tam—unto him.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: O best among the brähmaëas, the Emperor Parékñit, thus
hearing the personality of religion speak, was fully satisfied, and without
mistake or regret he gave his reply.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
The statement of the bull, the personality of religion, was full of philosophy
and knowledge, and the King was satisfied, since he could understand that the
suffering bull was not an ordinary one. Unless one is perfectly conversant with
the law of the Supreme Lord, one cannot speak such things touching
philosophical truths. The Emperor, being also on an equal level of sagacity,
replied to the point, without doubts or mistakes.
TEXT 22
raJaaevac
DaMa| b]vqiz DaMaRj DaMaaeR_iSa v*zæPaDa*k(- )
YadDaMaRk*-Ta" SQaaNa& SaUck-SYaaiPa TaÙveTa( )) 22 ))
räjoväca
dharmaà bravéñi dharma-jïa
dharmo ’si våña-rüpa-dhåk
yad adharma-kåtaù sthänaà
sücakasyäpi tad bhavet
SYNONYMS
räjä uväca—the King said; dharmam—religion; bravéñi—as you speak;
dharma-jïa—O one who knows the codes of religion; dharmaù—the
personality of religion; asi—you are; våña-rüpa-dhåk—in the disguise of a bull;
yat—whatever; adharma-kåtaù—one who acts irreligiously; sthänam—place;
sücakasya—of the identifier; api—also; tat—that; bhavet—becomes.
TRANSLATION
The King said: O you, who are in the form of a bull! You know the truth of
religion, and you are speaking according to the principle that the destination
intended for the perpetrator of irreligious acts is also intended for one who
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
identifies the perpetrator. You are no other than the personality of religion.
PURPORT
A devotee’s conclusion is that no one is directly responsible for being a
benefactor or mischief-monger without the sanction of the Lord; therefore he
does not consider anyone to be directly responsible for such action. But in
both the cases he takes it for granted that either benefit or loss is God-sent,
and thus it is His grace. In case of benefit, no one will deny that it is God-sent,
but in case of loss or reverses one becomes doubtful about how the Lord could
be so unkind to His devotee as to put him in great difficulty. Jesus Christ was
seemingly put into such great difficulty, being crucified by the ignorant, but he
was never angry at the mischief-mongers. That is the way of accepting a thing,
either favorable or unfavorable. Thus for a devotee the identifier is equally a
sinner, like the mischief-monger. By God’s grace, the devotee tolerates all
reverses. Mahäräja Parékñit observed this, and therefore he could understand
that the bull was no other than the personality of religion himself. In other
words, a devotee has no suffering at all because so-called suffering is also God’s
grace for a devotee who sees God in everything. The cow and bull never placed
any complaint before the King for being tortured by the personality of Kali,
although everyone lodges such complaints before the state authorities. The
extraordinary behavior of the bull made the King conclude that the bull was
certainly the personality of religion, for no one else could understand the finer
intricacies of the codes of religion.
TEXT 23
AQava devMaaYaaYaa NaUNa& GaiTarGaaecra )
ceTaSaae vcSaêaiPa >aUTaaNaaiMaiTa iNaêYa" )) 23 ))
athavä deva-mäyäyä
nünaà gatir agocarä
cetaso vacasaç cäpi
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
bhütänäm iti niçcayaù
SYNONYMS
athavä—alternatively; deva—the Lord; mäyäyäù—energies; nünam—very
little; gatiù—movement; agocarä—inconceivable; cetasaù—either by the
mind; vacasaù—by words; ca—or; api—also; bhütänäm—of all living beings;
iti—thus; niçcayaù—concluded.
TRANSLATION
Thus it is concluded that the Lord’s energies are inconceivable. No one can
estimate them by mental speculation or by word jugglery.
PURPORT
A question may be raised as to why a devotee should refrain from
identifying an actor, although he knows definitely that the Lord is the
ultimate doer of everything. Knowing the ultimate doer, one should not pose
himself as ignorant of the actual performer. To answer this doubt, the reply is
that the Lord is also not directly responsible, for everything is done by His
deputed mäyä-çakti, or material energy. The material energy is always
provoking doubts about the supreme authority of the Lord. The personality of
religion knew perfectly well that nothing can take place without the sanction
of the Supreme Lord, and still he was put into doubts by the deluding energy,
and thus he refrained from mentioning the supreme cause. This doubtfulness
was due to the contamination of both Kali and the material energy. The whole
atmosphere of the age of Kali is magnified by the deluding energy, and the
proportion of measurement is inexplicable.
TEXT 24
TaPa" XaaEc& dYaa SaTYaiMaiTa Paada" k*-Tae k*-Taa" )
ADaMaa|XaEñYaae >aGana" SMaYaSa®MadESTav )) 24 ))
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
tapaù çaucaà dayä satyam
iti pädäù kåte kåtäù
adharmäàçais trayo bhagnäù
smaya-saìga-madais tava
SYNONYMS
tapaù—austerity; çaucam—cleanliness; dayä—mercy; satyam—truthfulness;
iti—thus; pädäù—legs; kåte—in the age of Satya; kåtäù—established;
adharma—irreligiosity; aàçaiù—by the parts; trayaù—three combined;
bhagnäù—broken; smaya—pride; saìga—too much association with women;
madaiù—intoxication; tava—your.
TRANSLATION
In the age of Satya [truthfulness] your four legs were established by the four
principles of austerity, cleanliness, mercy and truthfulness. But it appears that
three of your legs are broken due to rampant irreligion in the form of pride, lust
for women, and intoxication.
PURPORT
The deluding energy, or material nature, can act upon the living beings
proportionately in terms of the living beings’ falling prey to the deluding
attraction of mäyä. Moths are captivated by the glaring brightness of light, and
thus they become prey to the fire. Similarly, the deluding energy is always
captivating the conditioned souls to become prey to the fire of delusion, and
the Vedic scriptures warn the conditioned souls not to become prey to
delusion but to get rid of it. The Vedas warn us to go not to the darkness of
ignorance but to the progressive path of light. The Lord Himself also warns
that the deluding power of material energy is too powerful to overcome, but
one who completely surrenders unto the Lord can easily do so. But to
surrender unto the lotus feet of the Lord is also not very easy. Such surrender
is possible by persons of austerity, cleanliness, mercy and truthfulness. These
four principles of advanced civilization were remarkable features in the age of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Satya. In that age, every human being was practically a qualified brähmaëa of
the highest order, and in the social orders of life they were all paramahaàsas,
or the topmost in the renounced order. By cultural standing, the human beings
were not at all subjected to the deluding energy. Such strong men of character
were competent enough to get away from the clutches of mäyä. But gradually,
as the basic principles of brahminical culture, namely austerity, cleanliness,
mercy and truthfulness, became curtailed by proportionate development of
pride, attachment for women and intoxication, the path of salvation or the
path of transcendental bliss retreated far, far away from human society. With
the progression of the age of Kali, people are becoming very proud, and
attached to women and intoxication. By the influence of the age of Kali, even
a pauper is proud of his penny, the women are always dressed in an overly
attractive fashion to victimize the minds of men, and the man is addicted to
drinking wine, smoking, drinking tea and chewing tobacco, etc. All these
habits, or so-called advancement of civilization, are the root causes of all
irreligiosities, and therefore it is not possible to check corruption, bribery and
nepotism. Man cannot check all these evils simply by statutory acts and police
vigilance, but he can cure the disease of the mind by the proper medicine,
namely advocating the principles of brahminical culture or the principles of
austerity, cleanliness, mercy and truthfulness. Modern civilization and
economic development are creating a new situation of poverty and scarcity
with the result of blackmailing the consumer’s commodities. If the leaders and
the rich men of the society spend fifty percent of their accumulated wealth
mercifully for the misled mass of people and educate them in God
consciousness, the knowledge of Bhägavatam, certainly the age of Kali will be
defeated in its attempt to entrap the conditioned souls. We must always
remember that false pride, or too high an estimation of one’s own values of life,
undue attachment to women or association with them, and intoxication will
divert human civilization from the path of peace, however much the people
clamor for peace in the world. The preaching of the Bhägavatam principles will
automatically render all men austere, clean both inside and outside, merciful
to the suffering, and truthful in daily behavior. That is the way of correcting
the flaws of human society, which are very prominently exhibited at the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
present moment.
TEXT 25
wdaNaq& DaMaR PaadSTae SaTYa& iNavRTaRYaeÛTa" )
Ta& iJaga*+aTYaDaMaaeR_YaMaNa*TaeNaEiDaTa" k-il/" )) 25 ))
idänéà dharma pädas te
satyaà nirvartayed yataù
taà jighåkñaty adharmo ’yam
anåtenaidhitaù kaliù
SYNONYMS
idäném—at the present moment; dharma—O personality of religion;
pädaù—leg; te—of you; satyam—truthfulness; nirvartayet—hobbling along
somehow or other; yataù—whereby; tam—that; jighåkñati—trying to destroy;
adharmaù—the personality of irreligion; ayam—this; anåtena—by deceit;
edhitaù—flourishing; kaliù—quarrel personified.
TRANSLATION
You are now standing on one leg only, which is your truthfulness, and you
are somehow or other hobbling along. But quarrel personified [Kali], flourishing
by deceit, is also trying to destroy that leg.
PURPORT
The principles of religion do not stand on some dogmas or man-made
formulas, but they stand on four primary regulative observances, namely
austerity, cleanliness, mercy and truthfulness. The mass of people must be
taught to practice these principles from childhood. Austerity means to accept
voluntarily things which may not be very comfortable for the body but are
conducive for spiritual realization, for example, fasting. Fasting twice or four
times a month is a sort of austerity which may be voluntarily accepted for
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
spiritual realization only, and not for any other purposes, political or
otherwise. Fastings which are meant not for self-realization but for some other
purposes are condemned in the Bhagavad-gétä (17.5–6). Similarly, cleanliness is
necessary both for the mind and for the body. Simply bodily cleanliness may
help to some extent, but cleanliness of the mind is necessary, and it is effected
by glorifying the Supreme Lord. No one can cleanse the accumulated mental
dust without glorifying the Supreme Lord. A godless civilization cannot
cleanse the mind because it has no idea of God, and for this simple reason
people under such a civilization cannot have good qualifications, however they
may be materially equipped. We have to see things by their resultant action.
The resultant action of human civilization in the age of Kali is dissatisfaction,
so everyone is anxious to get peace of mind. This peace of mind was complete
in the Satya age because of the existence of the above-mentioned attributes of
the human beings. Gradually these attributes have diminished in the
Tretä-yuga to three fourths, in the Dväpara to half, and in this age of Kali to
one fourth, which is also gradually diminishing on account of prevailing
untruthfulness. By pride, either artificial or real, the resultant action of
austerity is spoiled; by too much affection for female association, cleanliness is
spoiled; by too much addiction to intoxication, mercy is spoiled; and by too
much lying propaganda, truthfulness is spoiled. The revival of
bhägavata-dharma can save human civilization from falling prey to evils of all
description.
TEXT 26
wYa& c >aUiMa>aRGavTaa NYaaiSaTaaeå>ara SaTaq )
é[qMaiÙSTaTPadNYaaSaE" SavRTa" k*-Tak-aETauk-a )) 26 ))
iyaà ca bhümir bhagavatä
nyäsitoru-bharä saté
çrémadbhis tat-pada-nyäsaiù
sarvataù kåta-kautukä
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
iyam—this; ca—and; bhümiù—surface of the earth; bhagavatä—by the
Personality of Godhead; nyäsita—being performed personally as well as by
others; uru—great; bharä—burden; saté—being so done; çrémadbhiù—by the
all-auspicious; tat—that; pada-nyäsaiù—footprints; sarvataù—all around;
kåta—done; kautukä—good fortune.
TRANSLATION
The burden of the earth was certainly diminished by the Personality of
Godhead and by others as well. When He was present as an incarnation, all
good was performed because of His auspicious footprints.
TEXT 27
XaaecTYaé[uk-l/a Saaßq du>aRGaevaeiJ‡TaaSaTaq )
Ab]ø<Yaa Na*PaVYaaJaa" éUd]a >aae+YaiNTa MaaiMaiTa )) 27 ))
çocaty açru-kalä sädhvé
durbhagevojjhitä saté
abrahmaëyä nåpa-vyäjäù
çüdrä bhokñyanti mäm iti
SYNONYMS
çocati—lamenting; açru-kalä—with tears in the eyes; sädhvé—the chaste;
durbhagä—as if the most unfortunate; iva—like; ujjhitä—forlorn; saté—being
so done; abrahmaëyäù—devoid of brahminical culture; nåpa-vyäjäù—posed as
the ruler; çüdräù—lower class; bhokñyanti—would enjoy; mäm—me; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
Now she, the chaste one, being unfortunately forsaken by the Personality of
Godhead, laments her future with tears in her eyes, for now she is being ruled
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
and enjoyed by lower-class men who pose as rulers.
PURPORT
The kñatriya, or the man who is qualified to protect the sufferers, is meant
to rule the state. Untrained lower-class men, or men without ambition to
protect the sufferers, cannot be placed on the seat of an administrator.
Unfortunately, in the age of Kali the lower-class men, without training,
occupy the post of a ruler by strength of popular votes, and instead of
protecting the sufferers, such men create a situation quite intolerable for
everyone. Such rulers illegally gratify themselves at the cost of all comforts of
the citizens, and thus the chaste mother earth cries to see the pitiable
condition of her sons, both men and animals. That is the future of the world in
the age of Kali, when irreligiosity prevails most prominently. And in the
absence of a suitable king to curb irreligious tendencies, educating the people
systematically in the teaching of Çrémad-Bhägavatam will clear up the hazy
atmosphere of corruption, bribery, blackmail, etc.
TEXT 28
wiTa DaMa| Mahq& cEv SaaNTviYaTva MaharQa" )
iNaXaaTaMaadde %É& k-l/Yae_DaMaRheTave )) 28 ))
iti dharmaà mahéà caiva
säntvayitvä mahä-rathaù
niçätam ädade khaògaà
kalaye ’dharma-hetave
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; dharmam—the personality of religion; mahém—the earth; ca—also;
eva—as; säntvayitvä—after pacifying; mahä-rathaù—the general who could
fight alone with thousands of enemies; niçätam—sharp; ädade—took up;
khaògam—sword; kalaye—to kill the personified Kali; adharma—irreligion;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
hetave—the root cause.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Parékñit, who could fight one thousand enemies single-handedly,
thus pacified the personality of religion and the earth. Then he took up his
sharp sword to kill the personality of Kali, who is the cause of all irreligion.
PURPORT
As described above, the personality of Kali is he who deliberately commits
all kinds of sinful acts which are forbidden in the revealed scriptures. This age
of Kali will certainly be full of all activities of Kali, but this does not mean that
the leaders of society, the executive heads, the learned and intelligent men, or
above all the devotees of the Lord should sit down tightly and become callous
to the reactions of the age of Kali. In the rainy season certainly there will be
profuse rainfalls, but that does not mean that men should not take means to
protect themselves from the rains. It is the duty of the executive heads of state
and others to take all necessary actions against the activities of Kali or the
persons influenced by the age of Kali; and Mahäräja Parékñit is the ideal
executive head of the state, for at once he was ready to kill the personality of
Kali with his sharp sword. The administrators should not simply pass
resolutions for anticorruptional steps, but they must be ready with sharp
swords to kill the persons creating corruptions from the angle of vision of the
recognized çästras. The administrators cannot prevent corrupt activities by
allowing wine shops. They must at once close all shops of intoxicating drugs
and wine and force punishment even by death for those who indulge in habits
of intoxication of all description. That is the way of stopping the activities of
Kali, as exhibited herein by Mahäräja Parékñit, the mahä-ratha.
TEXT 29
Ta& iJagaa&SauMai>aPa[eTYa ivhaYa Na*Pal/aH^NaMa( )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TaTPaadMaUl&/ iXarSaa SaMaGaad( >aYaivûl/" )) 29 ))
taà jighäàsum abhipretya
vihäya nåpa-läïchanam
tat-päda-mülaà çirasä
samagäd bhaya-vihvalaù
SYNONYMS
tam—him; jighäàsum—willing to kill; abhipretya—knowing it well;
vihäya—leaving aside; nåpa-läïchanam—the dress of a king;
tat-päda-mülam—at his feet; çirasä—by the head; samagät—fully surrendered;
bhaya-vihvalaù—under pressure of fearfulness.
TRANSLATION
When the personality of Kali understood that the King was willing to kill
him, he at once abandoned the dress of a king and, under pressure of fear,
completely surrendered to him, bowing his head.
PURPORT
The royal dress of the personality of Kali is artificial. The royal dress is
suitable for a king or kñatriya, but when a lower-class man artificially dresses
himself as a king, his real identity is disclosed by the challenge of a bona fide
kñatriya like Mahäräja Parékñit. A real kñatriya never surrenders. He accepts
the challenge of his rival kñatriya, and he fights either to die or to win.
Surrender is unknown to a real kñatriya. In the age of Kali there are so many
pretenders dressed and posed like administrators or executive heads, but their
real identity is disclosed when they are challenged by a real kñatriya. Therefore
when the artificially dressed personality of Kali saw that to fight Mahäräja
Parékñit was beyond his ability, he bowed down his head like a subordinate and
gave up his royal dress.
TEXT 30
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PaiTaTa& PaadYaaevsr" k*-PaYaa dqNavTSal/" )
Xar<Yaae NaavDaqC^(l/aeKYa Aah ced& hSaiàv )) 30 ))
patitaà pädayor véraù
kåpayä déna-vatsalaù
çaraëyo nävadhéc chlokya
äha cedaà hasann iva
SYNONYMS
patitam—fallen; pädayoù—at the feet; véraù—the hero; kåpayä—out of
compassion; déna-vatsalaù—kind to the poor; çaraëyaù—one who is qualified
to accept surrender; na—not; avadhét—did kill; çlokyaù—one who is worthy of
being sung; äha—said; ca—also; idam—this; hasan—smiling; iva—like.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Parékñit, who was qualified to accept surrender and worthy of
being sung in history, did not kill the poor surrendered and fallen Kali, but
smiled compassionately, for he was kind to the poor.
PURPORT
Even an ordinary kñatriya does not kill a surrendered person, and what to
speak of Mahäräja Parékñit, who was by nature compassionate and kind to the
poor. He was smiling because the artificially dressed Kali had disclosed his
identity as a lower-class man, and he was thinking how ironic it was that
although no one was saved from his sharp sword when he desired to kill, the
poor lower-class Kali was spared by his timely surrender. Mahäräja Parékñit’s
glory and kindness are therefore sung in history. He was a kind and
compassionate emperor, fully worthy of accepting surrender even from his
enemy. Thus the personality of Kali was saved by the will of Providence.
TEXT 31
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
raJaaevac
Na Tae Gau@ake-XaYaXaaeDara<aa&
bÖaÅle/vOE >aYaMaiSTa ik-iÄTa( )
Na viTaRTaVYa& >avTaa k-QaÄNa
+ae}ae MadqYae TvMaDaMaRbNDau" )) 31 ))
räjoväca
na te guòäkeça-yaço-dharäëäà
baddhäïjaler vai bhayam asti kiïcit
na vartitavyaà bhavatä kathaïcana
kñetre madéye tvam adharma-bandhuù
SYNONYMS
räjä uväca—the King said; na—not; te—your; guòäkeça—Arjuna;
yaçaù-dharäëäm—of us who inherited the fame; baddha-aïjaleù—one with
folded hands; vai—certainly; bhayam—fear; asti—there is; kiïcit—even a
slight; na—neither; vartitavyam—can be allowed to live; bhavatä—by you;
kathaïcana—by all means; kñetre—in the land; madéye—in my kingdom;
tvam—you; adharma-bandhuù—the friend of irreligion.
TRANSLATION
The King thus said: We have inherited the fame of Arjuna; therefore since
you have surrendered yourself with folded hands you need not fear for your life.
But you cannot remain in my kingdom, for you are the friend of irreligion.
PURPORT
The personality of Kali, who is the friend of all kinds of irreligiosities, may
be excused if he surrenders, but in all circumstances he cannot be allowed to
live as a citizen in any part of a welfare state. The Päëòavas were entrusted
representatives of the Personality of Godhead, Lord Kåñëa, who practically
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
brought into being the Battle of Kurukñetra, but not for any personal interest.
He wanted an ideal king like Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira and his descendants like
Mahäräja Parékñit to rule the world, and therefore a responsible king like
Mahäräja Parékñit could not allow the friend of irreligiosity to flourish in his
kingdom at the cost of the good fame of the Päëòavas. That is the way of
wiping out corruption in the state, and not otherwise. The friends of
irreligiosity should be banished from the state, and that will save the state from
corruption.
TEXT 32
Tva& vTaRMaaNa& Nardevdehe‚
ZvNauPa[v*taae_YaMaDaMaRPaUGa" )
l/ae>aae_Na*Ta& caEYaRMaNaaYaRMa&hae
JYaeïa c MaaYaa k-l/hê dM>a" )) 32 ))
tväà vartamänaà nara-deva-deheñv
anupravåtto ’yam adharma-pügaù
lobho ’nåtaà cauryam anäryam aàho
jyeñöhä ca mäyä kalahaç ca dambhaù
SYNONYMS
tväm—you; vartamänam—while present; nara-deva—a man-god, or a king;
deheñu—in the body; anupravåttaù—taking place everywhere; ayam—all these;
adharma—irreligious principles; pügaù—in the masses; lobhaù—greed;
anåtam—falsity; cauryam—robbery; anäryam—incivility; aàhaù—treachery;
jyeñöhä—misfortune; ca—and; mäyä—cheating; kalahaù—quarrel; ca—and;
dambhaù—vanity.
TRANSLATION
If the personality of Kali, irreligion, is allowed to act as a man-god or an
executive head, certainly irreligious principles like greed, falsehood, robbery,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
incivility, treachery, misfortune, cheating, quarrel and vanity will abound.
PURPORT
The principles of religion, namely austerity, cleanliness, mercy and
truthfulness, as we have already discussed, may be followed by the follower of
any faith. There is no need to turn from Hindu to Mohammedan to Christian
or some other faith and thus become a renegade and not follow the principles
of religion. The Bhägavatam religion urges following the principles of religion.
The principles of religion are not the dogmas or regulative principles of a
certain faith. Such regulative principles may be different in terms of the time
and place concerned. One has to see whether the aims of religion have been
achieved. Sticking to the dogmas and formulas without attaining the real
principles is not good. A secular state may be impartial to any particular type
of faith, but the state cannot be indifferent to the principles of religion as
above-mentioned. But in the age of Kali, the executive heads of state will be
indifferent to such religious principles, and therefore under their patronage
the opponents of religious principles, such as greed, falsehood, cheating and
pilfery, will naturally follow, and so there will be no meaning to propaganda
crying to stop corruption in the state.
TEXT 33
Na viTaRTaVYa& TadDaMaRbNDaae
DaMaeR<a SaTYaeNa c viTaRTaVYae )
b]øavTaeR Ya}a YaJaiNTa YajE‚
YaRjeìr& YajivTaaNaivja" )) 33 ))
na vartitavyaà tad adharma-bandho
dharmeëa satyena ca vartitavye
brahmävarte yatra yajanti yajïair
yajïeçvaraà yajïa-vitäna-vijïäù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
na—not; vartitavyam—deserve to remain; tat—therefore;
adharma—irreligiosity; bandho—friend; dharmeëa—with religion;
satyena—with truth; ca—also; vartitavye—being situated in;
brahma-ävarte—place where sacrifice is performed; yatra—where;
yajanti—duly perform; yajïaiù—by sacrifices or devotional services;
yajïa-éçvaram—unto the Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead;
yajïa—sacrifice; vitäna—spreading; vijïäù—experts.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O friend of irreligion, you do not deserve to remain in a place
where experts perform sacrifices according to truth and religious principles for
the satisfaction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
Yajïeçvara, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the beneficiary of all
kinds of sacrificial ceremonies. Such sacrificial ceremonies are prescribed
differently in the scriptures for different ages. In other words, sacrifice means
to accept the supremacy of the Lord and thereby perform acts by which the
Lord may be satisfied in all respects. The atheists do not believe in the
existence of God, and they do not perform any sacrifice for the satisfaction of
the Lord. Any place or country where the supremacy of the Lord is accepted
and thus sacrifice is performed is called brahmävarta. There are different
countries in different parts of the world, and each and every country may have
different types of sacrifice to please the Supreme Lord, but the central point in
pleasing Him is ascertained in the Bhägavatam, and it is truthfulness. The
basic principle of religion is truthfulness, and the ultimate goal of all religions
is to satisfy the Lord. In this age of Kali, the greatest common formula of
sacrifice is the saìkértana-yajïa. That is the opinion of the experts who know
how to propagate the process of yajïa. Lord Caitanya preached this method of
yajïa, and it is understood from this verse that the sacrificial method of
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
saìkértana-yajïa may be performed anywhere and everywhere in order to drive
away the personality of Kali and save human society from falling prey to the
influence of the age.
TEXT 34
YaiSMaNa( hir>aRGavaiNaJYaMaaNa
wJYaaTMaMaUiTaRYaRJaTaa& Xa& TaNaaeiTa )
k-aMaaNaMaaegaaNa( iSQarJa®MaaNaa‚
MaNTabRihvaRYauirvEz AaTMaa )) 34 ))
yasmin harir bhagavän ijyamäna
ijyätma-mürtir yajatäà çaà tanoti
kämän amoghän sthira-jaìgamänäm
antar bahir väyur ivaiña ätmä
SYNONYMS
yasmin—in such sacrificial ceremonies; hariù—the Supreme Lord;
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; ijyamänaù—being worshiped;
ijya-ätma—the soul of all worshipable deities; mürtiù—in the forms;
yajatäm—those who worship; çam—welfare; tanoti—spreads; kämän—desires;
amoghän—inviolable; sthira-jaìgamänäm—of all the moving and nonmoving;
antaù—within; bahiù—outside; väyuù—air; iva—like; eñaù—of all of them;
ätmä—spirit soul.
TRANSLATION
In all sacrificial ceremonies, although sometimes a demigod is worshiped, the
Supreme Lord Personality of Godhead is worshiped because He is the Supersoul
of everyone, and exists both inside and outside like the air. Thus it is He only
who awards all welfare to the worshiper.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
It is even sometimes seen that demigods like Indra and Candra are
worshiped and offered sacrificial awards, yet the rewards of all such sacrifices
are awarded to the worshiper by the Supreme Lord, and it is the Lord only who
can offer all welfare to the worshiper. The demigods, although worshiped,
cannot do anything without the sanction of the Lord because the Lord is the
Supersoul of everyone, both moving and nonmoving.
In Bhagavad-gétä (9.23) the Lord Himself confirms this in the following
çloka:
ye ’py anya-devatä-bhaktä
yajante çraddhayänvitäù
te ’pi mäm eva kaunteya
yajanty avidhi-pürvakam
“Whatever a man may sacrifice to other gods, O son of Kunté, is really
meant for Me alone, but it is offered without true understanding.”
The fact is that the Supreme Lord is one without a second. There is no God
other than the Lord Himself. Thus the Supreme Lord is eternally
transcendental to the material creation. But there are many who worship the
demigods like the sun, the moon and Indra, who are only material
representatives of the Supreme Lord. These demigods are indirect, qualitative
representations of the Supreme Lord. A learned scholar or devotee, however,
knows who is who. Therefore he directly worships the Supreme Lord and is not
diverted by the material, qualitative representations. Those who are not so
learned worship such qualitative, material representations, but their worship is
unceremonious because it is irregular.
TEXT 35
SaUTa ovac
Parqi+aTaEvMaaidí" Sa k-il/JaaRTavePaQau" )
TaMauÛTaaiSaMaahed& d<@Paai<aiMavaeÛTaMa( )) 35 ))
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
süta uväca
parékñitaivam ädiñöaù
sa kalir jäta-vepathuù
tam udyatäsim ähedaà
daëòa-päëim ivodyatam
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Çré Süta Gosvämé said; parékñitä—by Mahäräja Parékñit;
evam—thus; ädiñöaù—being ordered; saù—he; kaliù—the personality of Kali;
jäta—there was; vepathuù—trembling; tam—him; udyata—raised;
asim—sword; äha—said; idam—thus; daëòa-päëim—Yamaräja, the
personality of death; iva—like; udyatam—almost ready.
TRANSLATION
Çré Süta Gosvämé said: The personality of Kali, thus being ordered by
Mahäräja Parékñit, began to tremble in fear. Seeing the King before him like
Yamaräja, ready to Kill him, Kali spoke to the King as follows.
PURPORT
The King was ready to kill the personality of Kali at once, as soon as he
disobeyed his order. Otherwise the King had no objection to allowing him to
prolong his life. The personality of Kali also, after attempting to get rid of the
punishment in various ways, decided that he must surrender unto him, and
thus he began to tremble in fear of his life. The king, or the executive head,
must be so strong as to stand before the personality of Kali like the personality
of death, Yamaräja. The King’s order must be obeyed, otherwise the culprit’s
life is in risk. That is the way to rule the personalities of Kali who create
disturbance in the normal life of the state citizens.
TEXT 36
k-il/åvac
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Ya}a KvvaQa vTSYaaiMa SaavR>aaEMa TavajYaa )
l/+aYae Ta}a Ta}aaiPa TvaMaataezuXaraSaNaMa( )) 36 ))
kalir uväca
yatra kva vätha vatsyämi
särva-bhauma taväjïayä
lakñaye tatra taträpi
tväm ätteñu-çaräsanam
SYNONYMS
kaliù uväca—the personality of Kali said; yatra—anywhere; kva—and
everywhere; vä—either; atha—thereof; vatsyämi—I shall reside;
särva-bhauma—O lord (or emperor) of the earth; tava—your; äjïayä—by the
order; lakñaye—I see; tatra tatra—anywhere and everywhere; api—also;
tväm—Your Majesty; ätta—taken over; iñu—arrows; çaräsanam—bows.
TRANSLATION
O Your Majesty, though I may live anywhere and everywhere under your
order, I shall but see you with bow and arrows wherever I look.
PURPORT
The personality of Kali could see that Mahäräja Parékñit was the emperor of
all lands all over the world, and thus anywhere he might live he would have to
meet with the same mood of the King. The personality of Kali was meant for
mischief, and Mahäräja Parékñit was meant for subduing all kinds of
mischief-mongers, especially the personality of Kali. It was better, therefore,
for the personality of Kali to have been killed by the King then and there
instead of being killed elsewhere. He was, after all, a surrendered soul before
the King, and it was for the King to do what was required.
TEXT 37
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TaNMae DaMaR>a*Taa& é[eï SQaaNa& iNadeRíuMahRiSa )
Ya}aEv iNaYaTaae vTSYa AaiTaï&STae_NauXaaSaNaMa( )) 37 ))
tan me dharma-bhåtäà çreñöha
sthänaà nirdeñöum arhasi
yatraiva niyato vatsya
ätiñöhaàs te ’nuçäsanam
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; me—me; dharma-bhåtäm—of all the protectors of religion;
çreñöha—O chief; sthänam—place; nirdeñöum—fix; arhasi—may you do so;
yatra—where; eva—certainly; niyataù—always; vatsye—can reside;
ätiñöhan—permanently situated; te—your; anuçäsanam—under your rule.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O chief amongst the protectors of religion, please fix some place
for me where I can live permanently under the protection of your government.
PURPORT
The personality of Kali addressed Mahäräja Parékñit as the chief amongst
the protectors of religiosity because the King refrained from killing a person
who surrendered unto him. A surrendered soul should be given all protection,
even though he may be an enemy. That is the principle of religion. And we
can just imagine what sort of protection is given by the Personality of
Godhead to the person who surrenders unto Him, not as an enemy but as a
devoted servitor. The Lord protects the surrendered soul from all sins and all
resultant reactions of sinful acts (Bg. 18.66).
TEXT 38
SaUTa ovac
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
A>YaiQaRTaSTada TaSMaE SQaaNaaiNa k-l/Yae ddaE )
ÛUTa& PaaNa& iñYa" SaUNaa Ya}aaDaMaRêTauivRDa" )) 38 ))
süta uväca
abhyarthitas tadä tasmai
sthänäni kalaye dadau
dyütaà pänaà striyaù sünä
yaträdharmaç catur-vidhaù
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; abhyarthitaù—thus being petitioned;
tadä—at that time; tasmai—unto him; sthänäni—places; kalaye—to the
personality of Kali; dadau—gave him permission; dyütam—gambling;
pänam—drinking; striyaù—illicit association with women; sünä—animal
slaughter; yatra—wherever; adharmaù—sinful activities; catuù-vidhaù—four
kinds of.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: Mahäräja Parékñit, thus being petitioned by the
personality of Kali, gave him permission to reside in places where gambling,
drinking, prostitution and animal slaughter were performed.
PURPORT
The basic principles of irreligiosity, such as pride, prostitution, intoxication
and falsehood, counteract the four principles of religion, namely austerity,
cleanliness, mercy and truthfulness. The personality of Kali was given
permission to live in four places particularly mentioned by the King, namely
the place of gambling, the place of prostitution, the place of drinking and the
place of animal slaughter.
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé directs that drinking against the principles of scriptures,
such as the sauträmaëé-yajïa, association with women outside marriage, and
killing animals against the injunctions of scriptures are irreligious. In the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Vedas two different types of injunctions are there for the pravåttas, or those
who are engaged in material enjoyment, and for the nivåttas, or those who are
liberated from material bondage. The Vedic injunction for the pravåttas is to
gradually regulate their activities towards the path of liberation. Therefore, for
those who are in the lowest stage of ignorance and who indulge in wine,
women and flesh, drinking by performing sauträmaëé-yajïa, association of
women by marriage and flesh-eating by sacrifices are sometimes recommended.
Such recommendations in the Vedic literature are meant for a particular class
of men, and not for all. But because they are injunctions of the Vedas for
particular types of persons, such activities by the pravåttas are not considered
adharma. One man’s food may be poison for others; similarly, what is
recommended for those in the mode of ignorance may be poison for those in
the mode of goodness. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé Prabhu, therefore, affirms that
recommendations in the scriptures for a certain class of men are never to be
considered adharma, or irreligious. But such activities are factually adharma,
and they are never to be encouraged. The recommendations in the scriptures
are not meant for the encouragement of such adharma, but for regulating the
necessary adharma gradually toward the path of dharma.
Following in the footsteps of Mahäräja Parékñit, it is the duty of all
executive heads of states to see that the principles of religion, namely
austerity, cleanliness, mercy and truthfulness, are established in the state, and
that the principles of irreligion, namely pride, illicit female association or
prostitution, intoxication and falsity, are checked by all means. And to make
the best use of a bad bargain, the personality of Kali may be transferred to
places of gambling, drinking, prostitution and slaughterhouses, if there are any
places like that. Those who are addicted to these irreligious habits may be
regulated by the injunctions of the scripture. In no circumstances should they
be encouraged by any state. In other words, the state should categorically stop
all sorts of gambling, drinking, prostitution and falsity. The state which wants
to eradicate corruption by majority may introduce the principles of religion in
the following manner:
1. Two compulsory fasting days in a month, if not more (austerity). Even
from the economic point of view, such two fasting days in a month in the state
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
will save tons of food, and the system will also act very favorably on the
general health of the citizens.
2. There must be compulsory marriage of young boys and girls attaining
twenty-four years of age and sixteen years of age respectively. There is no
harm in coeducation in the schools and colleges, provided the boys and girls
are duly married, and in case there is any intimate connection between a male
and female student, they should be married properly without illicit relation.
The divorce act is encouraging prostitution, and this should be abolished.
3. The citizens of the state must give in charity up to fifty percent of their
income for the purpose of creating a spiritual atmosphere in the state or in
human society, both individually and collectively. They should preach the
principles of Bhägavatam by (a) karma-yoga, or doing everything for the
satisfaction of the Lord, (b) regular hearing of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam from
authorized persons or realized souls, (c) chanting of the glories of the Lord
congregationally at home or at places of worship, (d) rendering all kinds of
service to bhägavatas engaged in preaching Çrémad-Bhägavatam and (e)
residing in a place where the atmosphere is saturated with God consciousness.
If the state is regulated by the above process, naturally there will be God
consciousness everywhere.
Gambling of all description, even speculative business enterprise, is
considered to be degrading, and when gambling is encouraged in the state,
there is a complete disappearance of truthfulness. Allowing young boys and
girls to remain unmarried more than the above-mentioned ages and licensing
animal slaughterhouses of all description should be at once prohibited. The
flesh-eaters may be allowed to take flesh as mentioned in the scriptures, and
not otherwise. Intoxication of all description—even smoking cigarettes,
chewing tobacco or the drinking of tea—must be prohibited.
TEXT 39
PauNaê YaacMaaNaaYa JaaTaæPaMadaTPa[>au" )
TaTaae_Na*Ta& Mad& k-aMa& rJaae vEr& c PaÄMaMa( )) 39 ))
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
punaç ca yäcamänäya
jäta-rüpam adät prabhuù
tato ’nåtaà madaà kämaà
rajo vairaà ca païcamam
SYNONYMS
punaù—again; ca—also; yäcamänäya—to the beggar; jäta-rüpam—gold;
adät—gave away; prabhuù—the King; tataù—whereby; anåtam—falsehood;
madam—intoxication; kämam—lust; rajaù—on account of a passionate mood;
vairam—enmity; ca—also; païcamam—the fifth one.
TRANSLATION
The personality of Kali asked for something more, and because of his
begging, the King gave him permission to live where there is gold because
wherever there is gold there is also falsity, intoxication, lust, envy and enmity.
PURPORT
Although Mahäräja Parékñit gave Kali permission to live in four places, it
was very difficult for him to find the places because during the reign of
Mahäräja Parékñit there were no such places. Therefore Kali asked the King to
give him something practical which could be utilized for his nefarious
purposes. Mahäräja Parékñit thus gave him permission to live in a place where
there is gold, because wherever there is gold there are all the above-mentioned
four things, and over and above them there is enmity also. So the personality
of Kali became gold-standardized. According to Çrémad-Bhägavatam, gold
encourages falsity, intoxication, prostitution, envy and enmity. Even a
gold-standard exchange and currency is bad. Gold-standard currency is based
on falsehood because the currency is not on a par with the reserved gold. The
basic principle is falsity because currency notes are issued in value beyond that
of the actual reserved gold. This artificial inflation of currency by the
authorities encourages prostitution of the state economy. The price of
commodities becomes artificially inflated because of bad money, or artificial
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
currency notes. Bad money drives away good money. Instead of paper
currency, actual gold coins should be used for exchange, and this will stop
prostitution of gold. Gold ornaments for women may be allowed by control,
not by quality, but by quantity. This will discourage lust, envy and enmity.
When there is actual gold currency in the form of coins, the influence of gold
in producing falsity, prostitution, etc., will automatically cease. There will be
no need of an anticorruption ministry for another term of prostitution and
falsity of purpose.
TEXT 40
AMaUiNa PaÄ SQaaNaaiNa ùDaMaRPa[>av" k-il/" )
AaEtareYae<a dtaaiNa NYavSaTa( TaiàdeXak*-Ta( )) 40 ))
amüni païca sthänäni
hy adharma-prabhavaù kaliù
auttareyeëa dattäni
nyavasat tan-nideça-kåt
SYNONYMS
amüni—all those; païca—five; sthänäni—places; hi—certainly;
adharma—irreligious principles; prabhavaù—encouraging; kaliù—the age of
Kali; auttareyeëa—by the son of Uttarä; dattäni—delivered; nyavasat—dwelt;
tat—by him; nideça-kåt—directed.
TRANSLATION
Thus the personality of Kali, by the directions of Mahäräja Parékñit, the son
of Uttarä, was allowed to live in those five places.
PURPORT
Thus the age of Kali began with gold standardization, and therefore falsity,
intoxication, animal slaughter and prostitution are rampant all over the world,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
and the saner section is eager to drive out corruption. The counteracting
process is suggested above, and everyone can take advantage of this suggestion.
TEXT 41
AQaETaaiNa Na SaeveTa bu>aUzu" Pauåz" KvicTa( )
ivXaezTaae DaMaRXaql/ae raJaa l/aek-PaiTaGauRå" )) 41 ))
athaitäni na seveta
bubhüñuù puruñaù kvacit
viçeñato dharma-çélo
räjä loka-patir guruù
SYNONYMS
atha—therefore; etäni—all these; na—never; seveta—come in contact;
bubhüñuù—those who desire well-being; puruñaù—person; kvacit—in any
circumstances; viçeñataù—specifically; dharma-çélaù—those who are on the
progressive path of liberation; räjä—the king; loka-patiù—public leader;
guruù—the brähmaëas and the sannyäsés.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, whoever desires progressive well-being, especially kings,
religionists, public leaders, brähmaëas and sannyäsés, should never come in
contact with the four above-mentioned irreligious principles.
PURPORT
The brähmaëas are the religious preceptors for all other castes, and the
sannyäsés are the spiritual masters for all the castes and orders of society. So
also are the king and the public leaders who are responsible for the material
welfare of all people. The progressive religionists and those who are
responsible human beings or those who do not want to spoil their valuable
human lives should refrain from all the principles of irreligiosity, especially
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
illicit connection with women. If a brähmaëa is not truthful, all his claims as a
brähmaëa at once become null and void. If a sannyäsé is illicitly connected
with women, all his claims as a sannyäsé at once become false. Similarly, if the
king and the public leader are unnecessarily proud or habituated to drinking
and smoking, certainly they become disqualified to discharge public welfare
activities. Truthfulness is the basic principle for all religions. The four leaders
of the human society, namely the sannyäsés, the brähmaëa, the king and the
public leader, must be tested crucially by their character and qualification.
Before one can be accepted as a spiritual or material master of society, he must
be tested by the above-mentioned criteria of character. Such public leaders
may be less qualified in academic qualifications, but it is necessary primarily
that they be free from the contamination of the four disqualifications, namely
gambling, drinking, prostitution and animal slaughter.
TEXT 42
v*zSYa Naía&ñqNa( PaadaNa( TaPa" XaaEc& dYaaiMaiTa )
Pa[iTaSaNdDa AaìaSYa Mahq& c SaMavDaRYaTa( )) 42 ))
våñasya nañöäàs trén pädän
tapaù çaucaà dayäm iti
pratisandadha äçväsya
mahéà ca samavardhayat
SYNONYMS
våñasya—of the bull (the personality of religion); nañöän—lost; trén—three;
pädän—legs; tapaù—austerity; çaucam—cleanliness; dayäm—mercy; iti—thus;
pratisandadhe—reestablished; äçväsya—by encouraging activities; mahém—the
earth; ca—and; samavardhayat—perfectly improved.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter the King reestablished the lost legs of the personality of religion
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
[the bull], and by encouraging activities he sufficiently improved the condition
of the earth.
PURPORT
By designating particular places for the personality of Kali, Mahäräja
Parékñit practically cheated Kali. In the presence of Kali, Dharma (in the shape
of a bull), and the earth (in the shape of a cow), he could actually estimate the
general condition of his kingdom, and therefore he at once took proper steps
to reestablish the legs of the bull, namely austerity, cleanliness and mercy. And
for the general benefit of the people of the world, he saw that the gold stock
might be employed for stabilization. Gold is certainly a generator of falsity,
intoxication, prostitution, enmity and violence, but under the guidance of a
proper king or public leader, or a brähmaëa or sannyäsé, the same gold can be
properly utilized to reestablish the lost legs of the bull, the personality of
religion.
Mahäräja Parékñit, therefore, like his grandfather Arjuna, collected all illicit
gold kept for the propensities of Kali and employed it in the saìkértana-yajïa,
as per instruction of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam. As we have suggested before,
one’s accumulated wealth may be divided into three parts for distribution,
namely fifty percent for the service of the Lord, twenty-five percent for the
family members and twenty-five percent for personal necessities. Spending
fifty percent for the service of the Lord or for propagation of spiritual
knowledge in society by way of the saìkértana-yajïa is the maximum display of
human mercy. people of the world are generally in darkness regarding spiritual
knowledge, especially in regard to the devotional service of the Lord, and
therefore to propagate the systematic transcendental knowledge of devotional
service is the greatest mercy that one can show in this world. When everyone
is taught to sacrifice fifty percent of his accumulated gold for the Lord’s
service, certainly austerity, cleanliness and mercy automatically ensue, and
thus the lost three legs of the personality of religion are automatically
established. When there is sufficient austerity, cleanliness, mercy and
truthfulness, naturally mother earth is completely satisfied, and there is very
little chance for Kali to infiltrate the structure of human society.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXTS 43–44
Sa Wz WTaùRDYaaSTa AaSaNa& PaaiQaRvaeicTaMa( )
iPaTaaMaheNaaePaNYaSTa& rajar<Ya& iviv+aTaa )) 43 ))
AaSTae_DauNaa Sa raJaizR" k-aErveNd]ié[YaaeçSaNa( )
GaJaaûYae Maha>aaGaê§-vTas b*hC^\va" )) 44 ))
sa eña etarhy adhyästa
äsanaà pärthivocitam
pitämahenopanyastaà
räjïäraëyaà vivikñatä
äste ’dhunä sa räjarñiù
kauravendra-çriyollasan
gajähvaye mahä-bhägaç
cakravarté båhac-chraväù
SYNONYMS
saù—he; eñaù—this; etarhi—at the present; adhyäste—is ruling over;
äsanam—the throne; pärthiva-ucitam—just befitting a king; pitämahena—by
the grandfather; upanyastam—being handed over; räjïä—by the King;
araëyam—forest; vivikñatä—desiring; äste—is there; adhunä—at present;
saù—that; räja-åñiù—the sage amongst the kings; kaurava-indra—the chief
amongst the Kuru kings; çriyä—glories; ullasan—spreading; gajähvaye—in
Hastinäpura; mahä-bhägaù—the most fortunate; cakravarté—the Emperor;
båhat-çraväù—highly famous.
TRANSLATION
The most fortunate Emperor Mahäräja Parékñit, who was entrusted with the
kingdom of Hastinäpura by Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira when he desired to retire to
the forest, is now ruling the world with great success due to his being glorified
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
by the deeds of the kings of the Kuru dynasty.
PURPORT
The prolonged sacrificial ceremonies undertaken by the sages of
Naimiñäraëya were begun shortly after the demise of Mahäräja Parékñit. The
sacrifice was to continue for one thousand years, and it is understood that in
the beginning some of the contemporaries of Baladeva, the elder brother of
Lord Kåñëa, also visited the sacrificial place. According to some authorities,
the present tense is also used to indicate the nearest margin of time from the
past. In that sense, the present tense is applied to the reign of Mahäräja
Parékñit here. For a continuous fact, also, present tense can be used. The
principles of Mahäräja Parékñit can be still continued, and human society can
still be improved if there is determination by the authorities. We can still
purge out from the state all the activities of immorality introduced by the
personality of Kali if we are determined to take action like Mahäräja Parékñit.
He allotted some place for Kali, but in fact Kali could not find such places in
the world at all because Mahäräja Parékñit was strictly vigilant to see that there
were no places for gambling, drinking, prostitution and animal slaughter.
Modern administrators want to banish corruption from the state, but fools as
they are, they do not know how to do it. They want to issue licenses for
gambling houses, wine and other intoxicating drug houses, brothels, hotel
prostitution and cinema houses, and falsity in every dealing, even in their own,
and they want at the same time to drive out corruption from the state. They
want the kingdom of God without God consciousness. How can it be possible
to adjust two contradictory matters? If we want to drive out corruption from
the state, we must first of all organize society to accept the principles of
religion, namely austerity, cleanliness, mercy and truthfulness, and to make
the condition favorable we must close all places of gambling, drinking,
prostitution and falsity. These are some of the practical lessons from the pages
of Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 45
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
wTQaM>aUTaaNau>aavae_YaMai>aMaNYauSauTaae Na*Pa" )
YaSYa Paal/YaTa" +aaE<aq& YaUYa& Sa}aaYa dqi+aTaa" )) 45 ))
ittham-bhütänubhävo ’yam
abhimanyu-suto nåpaù
yasya pälayataù kñauëéà
yüyaà saträya dékñitäù
SYNONYMS
ittham-bhüta—being thus; anubhävaù—experience; ayam—of this;
abhimanyu-sutaù—son of Abhimanyu; nåpaù—the king; yasya—whose;
pälayataù—on account of his ruling; kñauëém—on the earth; yüyam—you all;
saträya—in performing sacrifices; dékñitäù—initiated.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Parékñit, the son of Abhimanyu, is so experienced that by dint of
his expert administration and patronage, it has been possible for you to perform
a sacrifice such as this.
PURPORT
The brähmaëas and the sannyäsés are expert in the spiritual advancement
of society, whereas the kñatriyas or the administrators are expert in the
material peace and prosperity of human society. Both of them are the pillars of
all happiness, and therefore they are meant for full cooperation for common
welfare. Mahäräja Parékñit was experienced enough to drive away Kali from his
field of activities and thereby make the state receptive to spiritual
enlightenment. If the common people are not receptive, it is very difficult to
impress upon them the necessity of spiritual enlightenment. Austerity,
cleanliness, mercy and truthfulness, the basic principles of religion, prepare
the ground for the reception of advancement in spiritual knowledge, and
Mahäräja Parékñit made this favorable condition possible. Thus the åñis of
Naimiñäraëya were able to perform the sacrifices for a thousand years. In other
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
words, without state support, no doctrines of philosophy or religious principles
can progressively advance. There should be complete cooperation between the
brähmaëas and the kñatriyas for this common good. Even up to Mahäräja
Açoka, the same spirit was prevailing. Lord Buddha was sufficiently supported
by King Açoka, and thus his particular cult of knowledge was spread all over
the world.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the First Canto, Seventeenth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled “Punishment and Reward of Kali.”
Chapter Eighteen
Mahäräja Parékñit Cursed by a Brähmaëa Boy
TEXT 1
SaUTa ovac
Yaae vE d]aE<YañivPlu/íae Na MaaTauådre Ma*Ta" )
ANauGa]had( >aGavTa" k*-Z<aSYaad(>auTak-MaR<a" )) 1 ))
süta uväca
yo vai drauëy-astra-vipluñöo
na mätur udare måtaù
anugrahäd bhagavataù
kåñëasyädbhuta-karmaëaù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Çré Süta Gosvämé said; yaù—one who; vai—certainly;
drauëi-astra—by the weapon of the son of Droëa; vipluñöaù—burned by;
na—never; mätuù—of the mother; udare—in the womb; måtaù—met his
death; anugrahät—by the mercy; bhagavataù—of the Personality of Godhead;
kåñëasya—Kåñëa; adbhuta-karmaëaù—who acts wonderfully.
TRANSLATION
Çré Süta Gosvämé said: Due to the mercy of the Personality of Godhead, Çré
Kåñëa, who acts wonderfully, Mahäräja Parékñit, though struck by the weapon
of the son of Droëa in his mother’s womb, could not be burned.
PURPORT
The sages of Naimiñäraëya became struck with wonder after hearing about
the wonderful administration of Mahäräja Parékñit, especially in reference to
his punishing the personality of Kali and making him completely unable to do
any harm within the kingdom. Süta Gosvämé was equally anxious to describe
Mahäräja Parékñit’s wonderful birth and death, and this verse is stated by Süta
Gosvämé to increase the interest of the sages of Naimiñäraëya.
TEXT 2
b]øk-aePaaeiTQaTaad( YaSTau Ta+ak-aTPa[a<aivâvaTa( )
Na SaMMauMaaehaeå>aYaad( >aGavTYaiPaRTaaXaYa" )) 2 ))
brahma-kopotthitäd yas tu
takñakät präëa-viplavät
na sammumohorubhayäd
bhagavaty arpitäçayaù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
brahma-kopa—fury of a brähmaëa; utthität—caused by; yaù—what was;
tu—but; takñakät—by the snake-bird; präëa-viplavät—from dissolution of life;
na—never; sammumoha—was overwhelmed; uru-bhayät—great fear;
bhagavati—unto the Personality of Godhead; arpita—surrendered;
äçayaù—consciousness.
TRANSLATION
Furthermore, Mahäräja Parékñit was always consciously surrendered to the
Personality of Godhead, and therefore he was neither afraid nor overwhelmed
by fear due to a snake-bird which was to bite him because of the fury of a
brähmaëa boy.
PURPORT
A self-surrendered devotee of the Lord is called näräyaëa-paräyaëa. Such a
person is never afraid of any place or person, not even of death. For him
nothing is as important as the Supreme Lord, and thus he gives equal
importance to heaven and hell. He knows well that both heaven and hell are
creations of the Lord, and similarly life and death are different conditions of
existence created by the Lord. But in all conditions and in all circumstances,
remembrance of Näräyaëa is essential. The näräyaëa-paräyaëa practices this
constantly. Mahäräja Parékñit was such a pure devotee. He was wrongfully
cursed by an inexperienced son of a brähmaëa, who was under the influence of
Kali, and Mahäräja Parékñit took this to be sent by Näräyaëa. He knew that
Näräyaëa (Lord Kåñëa) had saved him when he was burned in the womb of his
mother, and if he were to be killed by a snake bite, it would also take place by
the will of the Lord. The devotee never goes against the will of the Lord;
anything sent by God is a blessing for the devotee. Therefore Mahäräja
Parékñit was neither afraid of nor bewildered by such things. That is the sign of
a pure devotee of the Lord.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 3
oTSa*JYa SavRTa" Sa®& ivjaTaaiJaTaSa&iSQaiTa" )
vEYaaSake-JaRhaE iXaZYaae Ga®aYaa& Sv& k-le/vrMa( )) 3 ))
utsåjya sarvataù saìgaà
vijïätäjita-saàsthitiù
vaiyäsaker jahau çiñyo
gaìgäyäà svaà kalevaram
SYNONYMS
utsåjya—after leaving aside; sarvataù—all around; saìgam—association;
vijïäta—being understood; ajita—one who is never conquered (the
Personality of Godhead); saàsthitiù—actual position; vaiyäsakeù—unto the
son of Vyäsa; jahau—gave up; çiñyaù—as a disciple; gaìgäyäm—on the bank of
the Ganges; svam—his own; kalevaram—material body.
TRANSLATION
Furthermore, after leaving all his associates, the King surrendered himself as
a disciple to the son of Vyäsa [Çukadeva Gosvämé], and thus he was able to
understand the actual position of the Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
The word ajita is significant here. The Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, is
known as Ajita, or unconquerable, and He is so in every respect. No one can
know His actual position. He is unconquerable by knowledge also. We have
heard about His dhäma, or place, eternal Goloka Våndävana, but there are
many scholars who interpret this abode in different ways. But by the grace of a
spiritual master like Çukadeva Gosvämé, unto whom the King gave himself up
as a most humble disciple, one is able to understand the actual position of the
Lord, His eternal abode, and His transcendental paraphernalia in that dhäma,
or abode. Knowing the transcendental position of the Lord and the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
transcendental method by which one can approach that transcendental
dhäma, the King was confident about his ultimate destination, and by knowing
this he could leave aside everything material, even his own body, without any
difficulty of attachment. In the Bhagavad-gétä, it is stated, paraà dåñövä
nivartate: one can give up all connection with material attachment when one
is able to see the param, or the superior quality of things. From Bhagavad-gétä
we understand the quality of the Lord’s energy that is superior to the material
quality of energy, and by the grace of a bona fide spiritual master like
Çukadeva Gosvämé, it is quite possible to know everything of the superior
energy of the Lord by which the Lord manifests His eternal name, quality,
pastimes, paraphernalia and variegatedness. Unless one thoroughly
understands this superior or eternal energy of the Lord, it is not possible to
leave the material energy, however one may theoretically speculate on the true
nature of the Absolute Truth. By the grace of Lord Kåñëa, Mahäräja Parékñit
was able to receive the mercy of such a personality as Çukadeva Gosvämé, and
thus he was able to know the actual position of the unconquerable Lord. It is
very difficult to find the Lord from the Vedic literatures, but it is very easy to
know Him by the mercy of a liberated devotee like Çukadeva Gosvämé.
TEXT 4
NaaetaMaëaek-vaTaaRNaa& JauzTaa& TaTk-QaaMa*TaMa( )
SYaaTSaM>a]Maae_NTak-ale/_iPa SMarTaa& TaTPadaMbuJaMa( )) 4 ))
nottamaçloka-värtänäà
juñatäà tat-kathämåtam
syät sambhramo ’nta-käle ’pi
smaratäà tat-padämbujam
SYNONYMS
na—never; uttama-çloka—the Personality of Godhead, of whom the Vedic
hymns sing; värtänäm—of those who live on them; juñatäm—of those who are
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
engaged in; tat—His; kathä-amåtam—transcendental topics about Him;
syät—it so happens; sambhramaù—misconception; anta—at the end; käle—in
time; api—also; smaratäm—remembering; tat—His; pada-ambujam—lotus
feet.
TRANSLATION
This was so because those who have dedicated their lives to the
transcendental topics of the Personality of Godhead, of whom the Vedic hymns
sing, and who are constantly engaged in remembering the lotus feet of the Lord,
do not run the risk of having misconceptions even at the last moment of their
lives.
PURPORT
The highest perfection of life is attained by remembering the
transcendental nature of the Lord at the last moment of one’s life. This
perfection of life is made possible by one who has learned the actual
transcendental nature of the Lord from the Vedic hymns sung by a liberated
soul like Çukadeva Gosvämé or someone in that line of disciplic succession.
There is no gain in hearing the Vedic hymns from some mental speculator.
When the same is heard from an actual self-realized soul and is properly
understood by service and submission, everything becomes transparently clear.
Thus a submissive disciple is able to live transcendentally and continue to the
end of life. By scientific adaptation, one is able to remember the Lord even at
the end of life, when the power of remembrance is slackened due to
derangement of bodily membranes. For a common man, it is very difficult to
remember things as they are at the time of death, but by the grace of the Lord
and His bona fide devotees, the spiritual masters, one can get this opportunity
without difficulty. And it was done in the case of Mahäräja Parékñit.
TEXT 5
TaavTk-il/NaR Pa[>aveTa( Pa[ivíae_Paqh SavRTa" )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
YaavdqXaae MahaNauVYaaRMaai>aMaNYav Wk-ra$( )) 5 ))
tävat kalir na prabhavet
praviñöo ’péha sarvataù
yävad éço mahän urvyäm
äbhimanyava eka-räö
SYNONYMS
tävat—so long; kaliù—the personality of Kali; na—cannot;
prabhavet—flourish; praviñöaù—entered in; api—even though; iha—here;
sarvataù—everywhere; yävat—as long as; éçaù—the lord; mahän—great;
urvyäm—powerful; äbhimanyavaù—the son of Abhimanyu; eka-räö—the one
emperor.
TRANSLATION
As long as the great, powerful son of Abhimanyu remains the Emperor of
the world, there is no chance that the personality of Kali will flourish.
PURPORT
As we have already explained, the personality of Kali had entered the
jurisdiction of this earth long ago, and he was looking for an opportunity to
spread his influence all over the world. But he could not do so satisfactorily
due to the presence of Mahäräja Parékñit. That is the way of good government.
The disturbing elements like the personality of Kali will always try to extend
their nefarious activities, but it is the duty of the able state to check them by
all means. Although Mahäräja Parékñit allotted places for the personality of
Kali, at the same time he gave no chance for the citizens to be swayed by the
personality of Kali.
TEXT 6
YaiSMaàhiNa YaùeRv >aGavaNauTSaSaJaR GaaMa( )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TadEvehaNauv*taae_SaavDaMaRPa[>av" k-il/" )) 6 ))
yasminn ahani yarhy eva
bhagavän utsasarja gäm
tadaivehänuvåtto ’säv
adharma-prabhavaù kaliù
SYNONYMS
yasmin—on that; ahani—very day; yarhi eva—in the very moment;
bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead; utsasarja—left aside; gäm—the earth;
tadä—at that time; eva—certainly; iha—in this world; anuvåttaù—followed;
asau—he; adharma—irreligion; prabhavaù—accelerating; kaliù—the
personality of quarrel.
TRANSLATION
The very day and moment the Personality of Godhead, Lord Çré Kåñëa, left
this earth, the personality of Kali, who promotes all kinds of irreligious
activities, came into this world.
PURPORT
The Personality of Godhead and His holy name, qualities, etc., are all
identical. The personality of Kali was not able to enter the jurisdiction of the
earth due to the presence of the Personality of Godhead. And similarly, if
there is an arrangement for the constant chanting of the holy names, qualities,
etc., of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, there is no chance at all for the
personality of Kali to enter. That is the technique of driving away the
personality of Kali from the world. In modernized human society there are
great advancements of material science, and they have invented the radio to
distribute sound in the air. So instead of vibrating some nuisance sound for
sense enjoyment, if the state arranges to distribute transcendental sound by
resounding the holy name, fame and activities of the Lord, as they are
authorized in the Bhagavad-gétä or Çrémad-Bhägavatam, then a favorable
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
condition will be created, the principles of religion in the world will be
reestablished, and thus the executive heads, who are so anxious to drive away
corruption from the world, will be successful. Nothing is bad if properly used
for the service of the Lord.
TEXT 7
NaaNauÜeií k-il&/ SaMa]a$( Saar® wv Saar>auk(- )
ku-Xal/aNYaaéu iSaÖyiNTa NaeTarai<a k*-TaaiNa YaTa( )) 7 ))
nänudveñöi kalià samräö
säraìga iva sära-bhuk
kuçaläny äçu siddhyanti
netaräëi kåtäni yat
SYNONYMS
na—never; anudveñöi—envious; kalim—unto the personality of Kali;
samräö—the Emperor; säram-ga—realist, like the bees; iva—like;
sära-bhuk—one who accepts the substance; kuçaläni—auspicious objects;
äçu—immediately; siddhyanti—become successful; na—never; itaräëi—which
are inauspicious; kåtäni—being performed; yat—as much as.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Parékñit was a realist, like the bees who only accept the essence [of
a flower]. He knew perfectly well that in this age of Kali, auspicious things
produce good effects immediately, whereas inauspicious acts must be actually
performed [to render effects]. So he was never envious of the personality of
Kali.
PURPORT
The age of Kali is called the fallen age. In this fallen age, because the living
beings are in an awkward position, the Supreme Lord has given some special
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
facilities to them. So by the will of the Lord, a living being does not become a
victim of a sinful act until the act is actually performed. In other ages, simply
by thinking of performing a sinful act, one used to become a victim of the act.
On the contrary, a living being in this age is awarded with the results of pious
acts simply by thinking of them. Mahäräja Parékñit, being the most learned and
experienced king by the grace of the Lord, was not unnecessarily envious of
the personality of Kali because he did not intend to give him any chance to
perform any sinful act. He protected his subjects from falling prey to the sinful
acts of the age of Kali, and at the same time he gave full facility to the age of
Kali by allotting him some particular places. At the end of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam it is said that even though all nefarious activities of the
personality of Kali are present, there is a great advantage in the age of Kali.
One can attain salvation simply by chanting the holy name of the Lord. Thus
Mahäräja Parékñit made an organized effort to propagate the chanting of the
Lord’s holy name, and thus he saved the citizens from the clutches of Kali. It is
for this advantage only that great sages sometimes wish all good for the age of
Kali. In the Vedas also it is said that by discourse on Lord Kåñëa’s activities,
one can get rid of all the disadvantages of the age of Kali. In the beginning of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam it is also said that by the recitation of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the Supreme Lord becomes at once arrested within one’s
heart. These are some of the great advantages of the age of Kali, and Mahäräja
Parékñit took all the advantages and did not think any ill of the age of Kali,
true to his Vaiñëavite cult.
TEXT 8
ik&- Nau bale/zu éUre<a k-il/Naa Daqr>aqå<aa )
APa[Mata" Pa[Mataezu Yaae v*k-ae Na*zu vTaRTae )) 8 ))
kià nu bäleñu çüreëa
kalinä dhéra-bhéruëä
apramattaù pramatteñu
yo våko nåñu vartate
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
kim—what; nu—may be; bäleñu—among the less intelligent persons;
çüreëa—by the powerful; kalinä—by the personality of Kali;
dhéra—self-controlled; bhéruëä—by one who is afraid of; apramattaù—one
who is careful; pramatteñu—among the careless; yaù—one who; våkaù—tiger;
nåñu—among men; vartate—exists.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Parékñit considered that less intelligent men might find the
personality of Kali to be very powerful, but that those who are self-controlled
would have nothing to fear. The King was powerful like a tiger and took care
for the foolish, careless persons.
PURPORT
Those who are not devotees of the Lord are careless and unintelligent.
Unless one is thoroughly intelligent, one cannot be a devotee of the Lord.
Those who are not devotees of the Lord fall prey to the actions of Kali. It will
not be possible to bring about a saner condition in society unless we are
prepared to accept the modes of action adopted by Mahäräja Parékñit, i.e.,
propagation of the devotional service of the Lord to the common man.
TEXT 9
oPavi<aRTaMaeTaÜ" Pau<Ya& Paarqi+aTa& MaYaa )
vaSaudevk-QaaePaeTaMaa:YaaNa& YadPa*C^Ta )) 9 ))
upavarëitam etad vaù
puëyaà pärékñitaà mayä
väsudeva-kathopetam
äkhyänaà yad apåcchata
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
upavarëitam—almost everything described; etat—all these; vaù—unto you;
puëyam—pious; pärékñitam—about Mahäräja Parékñit; mayä—by me;
väsudeva—of Lord Kåñëa; kathä—narrations; upetam—in connection with;
äkhyänam—statements; yat—what; apåcchata—you asked from me.
TRANSLATION
O sages, as you did ask me, now I have described almost everything
regarding the narrations about Lord Kåñëa in connection with the history of the
pious Mahäräja Parékñit.
PURPORT
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the history of the activities of the Lord. And the
activities of the Lord are performed in relation with the devotees of the Lord.
Therefore, the history of the devotees is not different from the history of Lord
Kåñëa’s activities. A devotee of the Lord regards both the activities of the Lord
and those of His pure devotees on an equal level, for they are all
transcendental.
TEXT 10
Yaa Yaa" k-Qaa >aGavTa" k-QaNaqYaaeåk-MaR<a" )
Gau<ak-MaaRé[Yaa" PauiM>a" Sa&SaeVYaaSTaa bu>aUzui>a" )) 10 ))
yä yäù kathä bhagavataù
kathanéyoru-karmaëaù
guëa-karmäçrayäù pumbhiù
saàsevyäs tä bubhüñubhiù
SYNONYMS
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
yäù—whatever; yäù—and whatsoever; kathäù—topics; bhagavataù—about the
Personality of Godhead; kathanéya—were to be spoken by me;
uru-karmaëaù—of Him who acts wonderfully; guëa—transcendental qualities;
karma—uncommon deeds; äçrayäù—involving; pumbhiù—by persons;
saàsevyäù—ought to be heard; täù—all of them; bubhüñubhiù—by those who
want their own welfare.
TRANSLATION
Those who are desirous of achieving complete perfection in life must
submissively hear all topics that are connected with the transcendental activities
and qualities of the Personality of Godhead, who acts wonderfully.
PURPORT
The systematic hearing of the transcendental activities, qualities and names
of Lord Çré Kåñëa pushes one towards eternal life. Systematic hearing means
knowing Him gradually in truth and fact, and this knowing Him in truth and
fact means attaining eternal life, as stated in the Bhagavad-gétä. Such
transcendental, glorified activities of Lord Çré Kåñëa are the prescribed remedy
for counteracting the process of birth, death, old age and disease, which are
considered to be material awards for the conditioned living being. The
culmination of such a perfectional stage of life is the goal of human life and
the attainment of transcendental bliss.
TEXT 11
‰zYa Ocu"
SaUTa Jaqv SaMaa" SaaEMYa XaaìTaqivRXad& YaXa" )
YaSTv& Xa&SaiSa k*-Z<aSYa MaTYaaRNaaMaMa*Ta& ih Na" )) 11 ))
åñaya ücuù
süta jéva samäù saumya
çäçvatér viçadaà yaçaù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
yas tvaà çaàsasi kåñëasya
martyänäm amåtaà hi naù
SYNONYMS
åñayaù ücuù—the good sages said; süta—O Süta Gosvämé; jéva—we wish you
life for; samäù—many years; saumya—grave; çäçvatéù—eternal;
viçadam—particularly; yaçaù—in fame; yaù tvam—because you;
çaàsasi—speaking nicely; kåñëasya—of Lord Çré Kåñëa; martyänäm—of those
who die; amåtam—eternity of life; hi—certainly; naù—our.
TRANSLATION
The good sages said: O grave Süta Gosvämé! May you live many years and
have eternal fame, for you are speaking very nicely about the activities of Lord
Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead. This is just like nectar for mortal beings
like us.
PURPORT
When we hear about the transcendental qualities and activities of the
Personality of Godhead, we may always remember what has been spoken by
the Lord Himself in the Bhagavad-gétä (4.9). His acts, even when He acts in
human society, are all transcendental, for they are all accentuated by the
spiritual energy of the Lord, which is distinguished from His material energy.
As stated in the Bhagavad-gétä, such acts are called divyam. This means that He
does not act or take His birth like an ordinary living being under the custody
of material energy. Nor is His body material or changeable like that of ordinary
living beings. And one who understands this fact, either from the Lord or from
authorized sources, is not reborn after leaving the present material body. Such
an enlightened soul is admitted into the spiritual realm of the Lord and
engages in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. Therefore, the more
we hear about the transcendental activities of the Lord, as they are stated in
the Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the more we can know about His
transcendental nature and thus make definite progress on the path back to
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Godhead.
TEXT 12
k-MaR<YaiSMaàNaaìaSae DaUMaDaUMa]aTMaNaa& >avaNa( )
AaPaaYaYaiTa GaaeivNdPaadPaÚaSav& MaDau )) 12 ))
karmaëy asminn anäçväse
dhüma-dhümrätmanäà bhavän
äpäyayati govindapäda-
padmäsavaà madhu
SYNONYMS
karmaëi—performance of; asmin—in this; anäçväse—without certainty;
dhüma—smoke; dhümra-ätmanäm—tinged body and mind; bhavän—your
good self; äpäyayati—very much pleasing; govinda—the Personality of
Godhead; päda—feet; padma-äsavam—nectar of the lotus flower;
madhu—honey.
TRANSLATION
We have just begun the performance of this fruitive activity, a sacrificial
fire, without certainty of its result due to the many imperfections in our action.
Our bodies have become black from the smoke, but we are factually pleased by
the nectar of the lotus feet of the Personality of Godhead, Govinda, which you
are distributing.
PURPORT
The sacrificial fire kindled by the sages of Naimiñäraëya was certainly full
of smoke and doubts because of so many flaws. The first flaw is that there is an
acute scarcity of expert brähmaëas able to carry out such performances
successfully in this age of Kali. Any discrepancy in such sacrifices spoils the
whole show, and the result is uncertain, like agricultural enterprises. The good
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
result of tilling the paddy field depends on providential rain, and therefore the
result is uncertain. Similarly, performance of any kind of sacrifice in this age
of Kali is also uncertain. Unscrupulous greedy brähmaëas of the age of Kali
induce the innocent public to such uncertain sacrificial shows without
disclosing the scriptural injunction that in the age of Kali there is no fruitful
sacrificial performance but the sacrifice of the congregational chanting of the
holy name of the Lord. Süta Gosvämé was narrating the transcendental
activities of the Lord before the congregation of sages, and they were factually
perceiving the result of hearing these transcendental activities. One can feel
this practically, as one can feel the result of eating food. Spiritual realization
acts in that way.
The sages of Naimiñäraëya were practically sufferers from the smoke of a
sacrificial fire and were doubtful about the result, but by hearing from a
realized person like Süta Gosvämé, they were fully satisfied. In the
Brahma-vaivarta Puräëa, Viñëu tells Çiva that in the age of Kali, men full of
anxieties of various kinds can vainly labor in fruitive activity and
philosophical speculations, but when they are engaged in devotional service,
the result is sure and certain, and there is no loss of energy. In other words,
nothing performed for spiritual realization or for material benefit can be
successful without the devotional service to the Lord.
TEXT 13
Taul/YaaMa l/veNaaiPa Na SvGa| NaaPauNa>aRvMa( )
>aGavTSai®Sa®SYa MaTYaaRNaa& ik-MauTaaiXaz" )) 13 ))
tulayäma lavenäpi
na svargaà näpunar-bhavam
bhagavat-saìgi-saìgasya
martyänäà kim utäçiñaù
SYNONYMS
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
tulayäma—to be balanced with; lavena—by a moment; api—even; na—never;
svargam—heavenly planets; na—nor; apunaù-bhavam—liberation from
matter; bhagavat-saìgi—devotee of the Lord; saìgasya—of the association;
martyänäm—those who are meant for death; kim—what is there; uta—to
speak of; äçiñaù—worldly benediction.
TRANSLATION
The value of a moment’s association with the devotee of the Lord cannot
even be compared to the attainment of heavenly planets or liberation from
matter, and what to speak of worldly benedictions in the form of material
prosperity, which are for those who are meant for death.
PURPORT
When there are some similar points, it is possible to compare one thing to
another. One cannot compare the association of a pure devotee to anything
material. Men who are addicted to material happiness aspire to reach the
heavenly planets like the moon, Venus and Indraloka, and those who are
advanced in material philosophical speculations aspire after liberation from all
material bondage. When one becomes frustrated with all kinds of material
advancement, one desires the opposite type of liberation, which is called
apunar-bhava, or no rebirth. But the pure devotees of the Lord do not aspire
after the happiness obtained in the heavenly kingdom, nor do they aspire after
liberation from material bondage. In other words, for the pure devotees of the
Lord the material pleasures obtainable in the heavenly planets are like
phantasmagoria, and because they are already liberated from all material
conceptions of pleasure and distress, they are factually liberated even in the
material world. This means that the pure devotees of the Lord are engaged in a
transcendental existence, namely in the loving service of the Lord, both in the
material world and in the spiritual world. As a government servant is always
the same, either in the office or at home or at any place, so a devotee has
nothing to do with anything material, for he is exclusively engaged in the
transcendental service of the Lord. Since he has nothing to do with anything
material, what pleasure can he derive from material benedictions like kingship
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
or other overlordships, which are finished quickly with the end of the body?
Devotional service is eternal; it has no end, because it is spiritual. Therefore,
since the assets of a pure devotee are completely different from material assets,
there is no comparison between the two. Süta Gosvämé was a pure devotee of
the Lord, and therefore his association with the åñis in Naimiñäraëya is unique.
In the material world, association with gross materialists is veritably
condemned. The materialist is called yoñit-saìgé, or one who is much attached
to material entanglement (women and other paraphernalia). Such attachment
is conditioned because it drives away the benedictions of life and prosperity.
And just the opposite is bhägavata-saìgé, or one who is always in the
association with the Lord’s name, form, qualities, etc. Such association is
always desirable; it is worshipable, it is praiseworthy, and one may accept it as
the highest goal of life.
TEXT 14
k-ae NaaMa Ta*PYaed( rSaivTk-QaaYaa&
MahtaMaEk-aNTaParaYa<aSYa )
NaaNTa& Gau<aaNaaMaGau<aSYa JaGMau‚
YaaeRGaeìra Yae >avPaaÚMau:Yaa" )) 14 ))
ko näma tåpyed rasavit kathäyäà
mahattamaikänta-paräyaëasya
näntaà guëänäm aguëasya jagmur
yogeçvarä ye bhava-pädma-mukhyäù
SYNONYMS
kaù—who is he; näma—specifically; tåpyet—get full satisfaction;
rasa-vit—expert in relishing mellow nectar; kathäyäm—in the topics of;
mahat-tama—the greatest amongst the living beings; ekänta—exclusively;
paräyaëasya—of one who is the shelter of; na—never; antam—end;
guëänäm—of attributes; aguëasya—of the Transcendence; jagmuù—could
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ascertain; yoga-éçvaräù—the lords of mystic power; ye—all they; bhava—Lord
Çiva; pädma—Lord Brahmä; mukhyäù—heads.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead, Lord Kåñëa [Govinda], is the exclusive shelter
for all great living beings, and His transcendental attributes cannot even be
measured by such masters of mystic powers as Lord Çiva and Lord Brahmä. Can
anyone who is expert in relishing nectar [rasa] ever be fully satiated by hearing
topics about Him?
PURPORT
Lord Çiva and Lord Brahmä are two chiefs of the demigods. They are full of
mystic powers. For example, Lord Çiva drank an ocean of poison of which one
drop was sufficient to kill an ordinary living being. Similarly, Brahmä could
create many powerful demigods, including Lord Çiva. So they are éçvaras, or
lords of the universe. But they are not the supreme powerful. The supreme
powerful is Govinda, Lord Kåñëa. He is the Transcendence, and His
transcendental attributes cannot be measured even by such powerful éçvaras as
Çiva and Brahmä. Therefore Lord Kåñëa is the exclusive shelter of the greatest
of all living beings. Brahmä is counted amongst the living beings, but he is the
greatest of all of us. And why is the greatest of all the living beings so much
attached to the transcendental topics of Lord Kåñëa? Because He is the
reservoir of all enjoyment. Everyone wants to relish some kind of taste in
everything, but one who is engaged in the transcendental loving service of the
Lord can derive unlimited pleasure from such engagement. The Lord is
unlimited, and His name, attributes, pastimes, entourage, variegatedness, etc.
are unlimited, and those who relish them can do so unlimitedly and still not
feel satiated. This fact is confirmed in the Padma Puräëa:
ramante yogino ’nante
satyänanda-cid-ätmani
iti räma-padenäsau
paraà brahmäbhidhéyate
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
“The mystics derive unlimited transcendental pleasures from the Absolute
Truth, and therefore the Supreme Absolute Truth, the Personality of
Godhead, is also known as Räma.”
There is no end to such transcendental discourses. In mundane affairs there
is the law of satiation, but in transcendence there is no such satiation. Süta
Gosvämé desired to continue the topics of Lord Kåñëa before the sages of
Naimiñäraëya, and the sages also expressed their readiness to hear from him
continuously. Since the Lord is transcendence and His attributes are
transcendental, such discourses increase the receptive mood of the purified
audience.
TEXT 15
Taàae >avaNa( vE >aGavTPa[DaaNaae
MahtaMaEk-aNTaParaYa<aSYa )
hreådar& cirTa& ivéuÖ&
éué[UzTaa& Naae ivTaNaaeTau ivÜNa( )) 15 ))
tan no bhavän vai bhagavat-pradhäno
mahattamaikänta-paräyaëasya
harer udäraà caritaà viçuddhaà
çuçrüñatäà no vitanotu vidvan
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; naù—of us; bhavän—your good self; vai—certainly;
bhagavat—in relation with the Personality of Godhead; pradhänaù—chiefly;
mahat-tama—the greatest of all greats; ekänta—exclusively; paräyaëasya—of
the shelter; hareù—of the Lord; udäram—impartial; caritam—activities;
viçuddham—transcendental; çuçrüñatäm—those who are receptive;
naù—ourselves; vitanotu—kindly describe; vidvan—O learned one.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
O Süta Gosvämé, you are a learned and pure devotee of the Lord because the
Personality of Godhead is your chief object of service. Therefore please describe
to us the pastimes of the Lord, which are above all material conception, for we
are anxious to receive such messages.
PURPORT
The speaker on the transcendental activities of the Lord should have only
one object of worship and service, Lord Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. And the audience for such topics should be anxious to hear about
Him. When such a combination is possible, namely a qualified speaker and a
qualified audience, it is then and there very much congenial to continue
discourses on the Transcendence. Professional speakers and a materially
absorbed audience cannot derive real benefit from such discourses.
Professional speakers make a show of Bhägavata-saptäha for the sake of family
maintenance, and the materially disposed audience hears such discourses of
Bhägavata-saptäha for some material benefit, namely religiosity, wealth,
gratification of the senses, or liberation. Such Bhägavatam discourses are not
purified from the contamination of the material qualities. But the discourses
between the saints of Naimiñäraëya and Çré Süta Gosvämé are on the
transcendental level. There is no motive for material gain. In such discourses,
unlimited transcendental pleasure is relished both by the audience and by the
speaker, and therefore they can continue the topics for many thousands of
years. Now Bhägavata-saptähas are held for seven days only, and after finishing
the show, both the audience and the speaker become engaged in material
activities as usual. They can do so because the speaker is not
bhagavat-pradhäna and the audience is not çuçrüñatäm, as explained above.
TEXT 16
Sa vE Maha>aaGavTa" Parqi+ad(
YaeNaaPavGaaR:YaMad>a]buiÖ" )
jaNaeNa vEYaaSaik-XaiBdTaeNa
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
>aeJae %GaeNd]ßJaPaadMaUl/Ma( )) 16 ))
sa vai mahä-bhägavataù parékñid
yenäpavargäkhyam adabhra-buddhiù
jïänena vaiyäsaki-çabditena
bheje khagendra-dhvaja-päda-mülam
SYNONYMS
saù—he; vai—certainly; mahä-bhägavataù—first-class devotee; parékñit—the
King; yena—by which; apavarga-äkhyam—by the name of liberation;
adabhra—fixed; buddhiù—intelligence; jïänena—by knowledge;
vaiyäsaki—the son of Vyäsa; çabditena—vibrated by; bheje—taken to;
khaga-indra—Garuòa, the king of the birds; dhvaja—flag; päda-mülam—soles
of the feet.
TRANSLATION
O Süta Gosvämé, please describe those topics of the Lord by which Mahäräja
Parékñit, whose intelligence was fixed on liberation, attained the lotus feet of
the Lord, who is the shelter of Garuòa, the king of birds. Those topics were
vibrated by the son of Vyäsa [Çréla Çukadeva].
PURPORT
There is some controversy amongst the students on the path of liberation.
Such transcendental students are known as impersonalists and devotees of the
Lord. The devotee of the Lord worships the transcendental form of the Lord,
whereas the impersonalist meditates upon the glaring effulgence, or the bodily
rays of the Lord, known as the brahmajyoti. Here in this verse it is said that
Mahäräja Parékñit attained the lotus feet of the Lord by instructions in
knowledge delivered by the son of Vyäsadeva, Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé.
Çukadeva Gosvämé was also an impersonalist in the beginning, as he himself
has admitted in the Bhägavatam (2.1.9), but later on he was attracted by the
transcendental pastimes of the Lord and thus became a devotee. Such devotees
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
with perfect knowledge are called mahä-bhägavatas, or first-class devotees.
There are three classes of devotees, namely the präkåta, madhyama, and
mahä-bhägavata. The präkåta, or third-class devotees, are temple worshipers
without specific knowledge of the Lord and the Lord’s devotees. The
madhyama, or the second-class devotee, knows well the Lord, the Lord’s
devotees, the neophytes, and the nondevotees also. But the mahä-bhägavata, or
the first-class devotee, sees everything in relation with the Lord and the Lord
present in everyone’s relation. The mahä-bhägavata, therefore, does not make
any distinction, particularly between a devotee and nondevotee. Mahäräja
Parékñit was such a mahä-bhägavata devotee because he was initiated by a
mahä-bhägavata devotee, Çukadeva Gosvämé. He was equally kind, even to the
personality of Kali, and what to speak of others.
So there are many instances in the transcendental histories of the world of
an impersonalist who has later become a devotee. But a devotee has never
become an impersonalist. This very fact proves that on the transcendental
steps, the step occupied by a devotee is higher than the step occupied by an
impersonalist. It is also stated in the Bhagavad-gétä (12.5) that persons stuck on
the impersonal step undergo more sufferings than achievement of reality.
Therefore knowledge imparted by Çukadeva Gosvämé unto Mahäräja Parékñit
helped him attain the service of the Lord. And this stage of perfection is called
apavarga, or the perfect stage of liberation. Simple knowledge of liberation is
material knowledge. Actual freedom from material bondage is called
liberation, but attainment of the transcendental service of the Lord is called
the perfect stage of liberation. Such a stage is attained by knowledge and
renunciation, as we have already explained (Bhäg. 1.2.12), and perfect
knowledge, as delivered by Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé, results in the attainment
of the transcendental service of the Lord.
TEXT 17
Taà" Par& Pau<YaMaSa&v*TaaQaR‚
Maa:YaaNaMaTYad(>auTaYaaeGaiNaïMa( )
Aa:YaaùNaNTaacirTaaePaPaà&
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Paarqi+aTa& >aaGavTaai>araMaMa( )) 17 ))
tan naù paraà puëyam asaàvåtärtham
äkhyänam atyadbhuta-yoga-niñöham
äkhyähy anantäcaritopapannaà
pärékñitaà bhägavatäbhirämam
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; naù—unto us; param—supreme; puëyam—purifying;
asaàvåta-artham—as it is; äkhyänam—narration; ati—very;
adbhuta—wonderful; yoga-niñöham—compact in bhakti-yoga;
äkhyähi—describe; ananta—the Unlimited; äcarita—activities;
upapannam—full of; pärékñitam—spoken to Mahäräja Parékñit; bhägavata—of
the pure devotees; abhirämam—particularly very dear.
TRANSLATION
Thus please narrate to us the narrations of the Unlimited, for they are
purifying and supreme. They were spoken to Mahäräja Parékñit, and they are
very dear to the pure devotees, being full of bhakti-yoga.
PURPORT
What was spoken to Mahäräja Parékñit and what is very dear to the pure
devotees is Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is mainly full of the
narrations of the activities of the Supreme Unlimited, and therefore it is the
science of bhakti-yoga, or the devotional service of the Lord. Thus it is para, or
supreme, because although it is enriched with all knowledge and religion, it is
specifically enriched with the devotional service of the Lord.
TEXT 18
SaUTa ovac
Ahae vYa& JaNMa>a*Taae_Û haSMa
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
v*ÖaNauv*tYaaiPa ivl/aeMaJaaTaa" )
daEZku-LYaMaaiDa& ivDauNaaeiTa Xaqga]&
MahtaMaaNaaMai>aDaaNaYaaeGa" )) 18 ))
süta uväca
aho vayaà janma-bhåto ’dya häsma
våddhänuvåttyäpi viloma-jätäù
dauñkulyam ädhià vidhunoti çéghraà
mahattamänäm abhidhäna-yogaù
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; aho—how; vayam—we;
janma-bhåtaù—promoted in birth; adya—today; ha—clearly; äsma—have
become; våddha-anuvåttyä—by serving those who are advanced in knowledge;
api—although; viloma-jätäù—born in a mixed caste;
dauñkulyam—disqualification of birth; ädhim—sufferings; vidhunoti—purifies;
çéghram—very soon; mahat-tamänäm—of those who are great;
abhidhäna—conversation; yogaù—connection.
TRANSLATION
Çré Süta Gosvämé said: O God, although we are born in a mixed caste, we are
still promoted in birthright simply by serving and following the great who are
advanced in knowledge. Even by conversing with such great souls, one can
without delay cleanse oneself of all disqualifications resulting from lower births.
PURPORT
Süta Gosvämé did not take his birth in a brähmaëa family. He was born in a
family of mixed caste, or an uncultured low family. But because of higher
association, like Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé and the great åñis of Naimiñäraëya,
certainly the disqualification of inferior birth was washed off. Lord Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu followed this principle in pursuance of the Vedic
usages, and by His transcendental association He elevated many lowborn, or
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
those disqualified by birth or action, to the status of devotional service and
established them in the position of äcäryas, or authorities. He clearly stated
that any man, whatever he may be, whether a brähmaëa or çüdra by birth, or a
householder or mendicant in the order of society, if he is conversant with the
science of Kåñëa, he can be accepted as an äcärya or guru, a spiritual master.
Süta Gosvämé learned the science of Kåñëa from great åñis and authorities
like Çukadeva and Vyäsadeva and he was so qualified that even the sages of
Naimiñäraëya eagerly wanted to hear from him the science of Kåñëa in the
form of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. So he had the double association of great souls by
hearing and preaching. Transcendental science, or the science of Kåñëa, has to
be learned from the authorities, and when one preaches the science, he
becomes still more qualified. So Süta Gosvämé had both the advantages, and
thus undoubtedly he was completely freed from all disqualifications of low
birth and mental agonies. This verse definitely proves that Çréla Çukadeva
Gosvämé did not refuse to teach Süta Gosvämé about the transcendental
science nor did the sages of Naimiñäraëya refuse to hear lessons from him
because of his inferior birth. This means that thousands of years ago there was
no bar to learning or preaching the transcendental science because of inferior
birth. The rigidity of the so-called caste system in Hindu society became
prominent within only one hundred years or so when the number of
dvija-bandhus, or disqualified men in the families of higher castes, increased.
Lord Çré Caitanya revived the original Vedic system, and He elevated Öhäkura
Haridäsa to the position of nämäcärya, or the authority in preaching the
glories of the holy name of the Lord, although His Holiness Çréla Haridäsa
Öhäkura was pleased to appear in a family of Mohammedans.
Such is the power of pure devotees of the Lord. The Ganges water is
accepted as pure, and one can become purified after taking a bath in the
waters of the Ganges. But as far as the great devotees of the Lord are
concerned, they can purify a degraded soul even by being seen by the lowborn,
and what to speak of association. Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu wanted to
purify the whole atmosphere of the polluted world by sending qualified
preachers all over the world, and it remains with the Indians to take up this
task scientifically and thus do the best kind of humanitarian work. The mental
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
diseases of the present generation are more acute than bodily diseases; it is
quite fit and proper to take up the preaching of Çrémad-Bhägavatam all over
the world without delay. Mahattamänäm abhidhäna also means dictionary of
great devotees, or a book full of the words of great devotees. Such a dictionary
of the words of great devotees and those of the Lord are in the Vedas and allied
literatures, specifically the Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 19
ku-Ta" PauNaGa*R<aTaae NaaMa TaSYa
MahtaMaEk-aNTaParaYa<aSYa )
Yaae_NaNTaXai¢->aRGavaNaNaNTaae
Mahd(Gau<aTvad( YaMaNaNTaMaahu" )) 19 ))
kutaù punar gåëato näma tasya
mahattamaikänta-paräyaëasya
yo ’nanta-çaktir bhagavän ananto
mahad-guëatväd yam anantam ähuù
SYNONYMS
kutaù—what to say; punaù—again; gåëataù—one who chants; näma—holy
name; tasya—His; mahat-tama—great devotees; ekänta—exclusive;
paräyaëasya—of one who takes shelter of; yaù—He who; ananta—is the
Unlimited; çaktiù—potency; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead;
anantaù—immeasurable; mahat—great; guëatvät—on account of such
attributes; yam—whom; anantam—by the name ananta; ähuù—is called.
TRANSLATION
And what to speak of those who are under the direction of the great
devotees, chanting the holy name of the Unlimited, who has unlimited potency?
The Personality of Godhead, unlimited in potency and transcendental by
attributes, is called the ananta [Unlimited].
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
The dvija-bandhu, or the less intelligent, uncultured men born of higher
castes, put forward many arguments against the lower-caste men becoming
brähmaëas in this life. They argue that birth in a family of çüdras or less than
çüdras is made possible by one’s previous sinful acts and that one therefore has
to complete the terms of disadvantages due to lower birth. And to answer these
false logicians, Çrémad-Bhägavatam asserts that one who chants the holy name
of the Lord under the direction of a pure devotee can at once get free from the
disadvantages due to a lower-caste birth. A pure devotee of the Lord does not
commit any offense while chanting the holy name of the Lord. There are ten
different offenses in the chanting of the holy name of the Lord. To chant the
holy name under the direction of a pure devotee is offenseless chanting.
Offenseless chanting of the holy name of the Lord is transcendental, and,
therefore, such chanting can at once purify one from the effects of all kinds of
previous sins. This offenseless chanting indicates that one has fully understood
the transcendental nature of the holy name and has thus surrendered unto the
Lord. Transcendentally the holy name of the Lord and the Lord Himself are
identical, being absolute. The holy name of the Lord is as powerful as the Lord.
The Lord is the all-powerful Personality of Godhead, and He has innumerable
names, which are all nondifferent from Him and are equally powerful also. In
the last word of the Bhagavad-gétä the Lord asserts that one who surrenders
fully unto Him is protected from all sins by the grace of the Lord. Since His
name and He Himself are identical, the holy name of the Lord can protect the
devotee from all effects of sins. The chanting of the holy name of the Lord can
undoubtedly deliver one from the disadvantages of a lower-caste birth. The
Lord’s unlimited power is extended on and on by the unlimited expansion of
the devotees and incarnations, and thus every devotee of the Lord and
incarnations also can be equally surcharged with the potency of the Lord.
Since the devotee is surcharged with the potency of the Lord, even
fractionally, the disqualification due to lower birth cannot stand in the way.
TEXT 20
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
WTaavTaal&/ NaNau SaUicTaeNa
Gau<aErSaaMYaaNaiTaXaaYaNaSYa )
ihTveTaraNa( Pa[aQaRYaTaae iv>aUiTa‚
YaRSYaax(iga]re<au& JauzTae_Na>aqPSaae" )) 20 ))
etävatälaà nanu sücitena
guëair asämyänatiçäyanasya
hitvetarän prärthayato vibhütir
yasyäìghri-reëuà juñate ’nabhépsoù
SYNONYMS
etävatä—so far; alam—unnecessary; nanu—if at all; sücitena—by description;
guëaiù—by attributes; asämya—immeasurable; anati-çäyanasya—of one who
is unexcelled; hitvä—leaving aside; itarän—others; prärthayataù—of those
who ask for; vibhütiù—favor of the goddess of fortune; yasya—one whose;
aìghri—feet; reëum—dust; juñate—serves; anabhépsoù—of one who is
unwilling.
TRANSLATION
It is now ascertained that He [the Personality of Godhead] is unlimited and
there is none equal to Him. Consequently no one can speak of Him adequately.
Great demigods cannot obtain the favor of the goddess of fortune even by
prayers, but this very goddess renders service unto the Lord, although He is
unwilling to have such service.
PURPORT
The Personality of Godhead, or the Parameçvara Parabrahman, according
to the çrutis, has nothing to do. He has no equal. Nor does anyone excel Him.
He has unlimited potencies, and His every action is carried out systematically
in His natural and perfect ways. Thus the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
full in Himself, and He has nothing to accept from anyone else, including the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
great demigods like Brahmä. Others ask for the favor of the goddess of fortune,
and despite such prayers she declines to award such favors. But still she renders
service unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although He has nothing to
accept from her. The Personality of Godhead in His Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu
feature begets Brahmä, the first created person in the material world, from His
navel lotus stem and not in the womb of the goddess of fortune, who is
eternally engaged in His service. These are some of the instances of His
complete independence and perfection. That He has nothing to do does not
mean that He is impersonal. He is transcendentally so full of inconceivable
potencies that simply by His willing, everything is done without physical or
personal endeavor. He is called, therefore, Yogeçvara, or the Lord of all mystic
powers.
TEXT 21
AQaaiPa YaTPaadNa%avSa*í&
JaGaiÜirÄaePaôTaahR<aaM>a" )
SaeXa& PauNaaTYaNYaTaMaae Mauku-NdaTa(
k-ae NaaMa l/aeke- >aGavTPadaQaR" )) 21 ))
athäpi yat-päda-nakhävasåñöaà
jagad viriïcopahåtärhaëämbhaù
seçaà punäty anyatamo mukundät
ko näma loke bhagavat-padärthaù
SYNONYMS
atha—therefore; api—certainly; yat—whose; päda-nakha—nails of the feet;
avasåñöam—emanating; jagat—the whole universe; viriïca—Brahmäjé;
upahåta—collected; arhaëa—worship; ambhaù—water; sa—along with;
éçam—Lord Çiva; punäti—purifies; anyatamaù—who else; mukundät—besides
the Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa; kaù—who; näma—name; loke—within
the world; bhagavat—Supreme Lord; pada—position; arthaù—worth.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
Who can be worthy of the name of the Supreme Lord but the Personality of
Godhead Çré Kåñëa? Brahmäjé collected the water emanating from the nails of
His feet in order to award it to Lord Çiva as a worshipful welcome. This very
water [the Ganges] is purifying the whole universe, including Lord Çiva.
PURPORT
The conception of many gods in the Vedic literatures by the ignorant is
completely wrong. The Lord is one without a second, but He expands Himself
in many ways, and this is confirmed in the Vedas. Such expansions of the Lord
are limitless, but some of them are the living entities. The living entities are
not as powerful as the Lord’s plenary expansions, and therefore there are two
different types of expansions. Lord Brahmä is generally one of the living
entities, and Lord Çiva is the via medium between the Lord and the living
entities. In other words, even demigods like Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva, who
are the chief amongst all demigods, are never equal to or greater than Lord
Viñëu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The goddess of fortune, Lakñmé,
and all-powerful demigods like Brahmä and Çiva are engaged in the worship of
Viñëu or Lord Kåñëa; therefore who can be more powerful than Mukunda
(Lord Kåñëa) to be factually called the Supreme Personality of Godhead? The
goddess of fortune, Lakñméjé, Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva are not
independently powerful; they are powerful as expansions of the Supreme Lord,
and all of them are engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord,
and so also are the living entities. There are four sects of worshipful devotees
of the Lord, and the chief amongst them are the Brahma-sampradäya,
Rudra-sampradäya and Çré-sampradäya, descending directly from Lord
Brahmä, Lord Çiva and the goddess of fortune, Lakñmé, respectively. Besides
the above-mentioned three sampradäyas, there is the Kumära-sampradäya,
descending from Sanat-kumära. All of the four original sampradäyas are still
scrupulously engaged in the transcendental service of the Lord up to date, and
they all declare that Lord Kåñëa, Mukunda, is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and no other personality is equal to Him or greater than Him.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 22
Ya}aaNaur¢-a" SahSaEv Daqra
VYaPaaeù dehaidzu Sa®MaU!Ma( )
v]JaiNTa TaTPaarMah&SYaMaNTYa&
YaiSMaàih&SaaePaXaMa" SvDaMaR" )) 22 ))
yatränuraktäù sahasaiva dhérä
vyapohya dehädiñu saìgam üòham
vrajanti tat pärama-haàsyam antyaà
yasminn ahiàsopaçamaù sva-dharmaù
SYNONYMS
yatra—unto whom; anuraktäù—firmly attached; sahasä—all of a sudden;
eva—certainly; dhéräù—self-controlled; vyapohya—leaving aside; deha—the
gross body and subtle mind; ädiñu—relating to; saìgam—attachment;
üòham—taken to; vrajanti—go away; tat—that; pärama-haàsyam—the
highest stage of perfection; antyam—and beyond that; yasmin—in which;
ahiàsä—nonviolence; upaçamaù—and renunciation;
sva-dharmaù—consequential occupation.
TRANSLATION
Self-controlled persons who are attached to the Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa can
all of a sudden give up the world of material attachment, including the gross
body and subtle mind, and go away to attain the highest perfection of the
renounced order of life, by which nonviolence and renunciation are
consequential.
PURPORT
Only the self-controlled can gradually be attached to the Supreme
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Personality of Godhead. Self-controlled means not indulging in sense
enjoyment more than is necessary. And those who are not self-controlled are
given over to sense enjoyment. Dry philosophical speculation is a subtle sense
enjoyment of the mind. Sense enjoyment leads one to the path of darkness.
Those who are self-controlled can make progress on the path of liberation
from the conditional life of material existence. The Vedas, therefore, enjoin
that one should not go on the path of darkness but should make a progressive
march towards the path of light or liberation. Self-control is actually achieved
not by artificially stopping the senses from material enjoyment, but by
becoming factually attached to the Supreme Lord by engaging one’s unalloyed
senses in the transcendental service of the Lord. The senses cannot be forcibly
curbed, but they can be given proper engagement. Purified senses, therefore,
are always engaged in the transcendental service of the Lord. This perfectional
stage of sense engagement is called bhakti-yoga. So those who are attached to
the means of bhakti-yoga are factually self-controlled and can all of a sudden
give up their homely or bodily attachment for the service of the Lord. This is
called the paramahaàsa stage. Haàsas, or swans, accept only milk out of a
mixture of milk and water. Similarly, those who accept the service of the Lord
instead of mäyä’s service are called the paramahaàsas. They are naturally
qualified with all the good attributes, such as pridelessness, freedom from
vanity, nonviolence, tolerance, simplicity, respectability, worship, devotion
and sincerity. All these godly qualities exist in the devotee of the Lord
spontaneously. Such paramahaàsas, who are completely given up to the
service of the Lord, are very rare. They are very rare even amongst the
liberated souls. Real nonviolence means freedom from envy. In this world
everyone is envious of his fellow being. But a perfect paramahaàsa, being
completely given up to the service of the Lord, is perfectly nonenvious. He
loves every living being in relation with the Supreme Lord. Real renunciation
means perfect dependence on God. Every living being is dependent on
someone else because he is so made. Actually everyone is dependent on the
mercy of the Supreme Lord, but when one forgets his relation with the Lord,
he becomes dependent on the conditions of material nature. Renunciation
means renouncing ones dependence on the conditions of material nature and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
thus becoming completely dependent on the mercy of the Lord. Real
independence means complete faith in the mercy of the Lord without
dependence on the conditions of matter. This paramahaàsa stage is the
highest perfectional stage in bhakti-yoga, the process of devotional service to
the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 23
Ah& ih Pa*íae_YaRMa<aae >aviÙ‚
rac+a AaTMaavGaMaae_}a YaavaNa( )
Na>a" PaTaNTYaaTMaSaMa& PaTaiT}a<a‚
STaQaa SaMa& ivZ<auGaiTa& ivPaiêTa" )) 23 ))
ahaà hi påñöo ’ryamaëo bhavadbhir
äcakña ätmävagamo ’tra yävän
nabhaù patanty ätma-samaà patattriëas
tathä samaà viñëu-gatià vipaçcitaù
SYNONYMS
aham—my humble self; hi—certainly; påñöaù—asked by you; aryamaëaù—as
powerful as the sun; bhavadbhiù—by you; äcakñe—may describe;
ätma-avagamaù—as far as my knowledge is concerned; atra—herein;
yävän—so far; nabhaù—sky; patanti—fly; ätma-samam—as far as it can;
patattriëaù—the birds; tathä—thus; samam—similarly;
viñëu-gatim—knowledge of Viñëu; vipaçcitaù—even though learned.
TRANSLATION
O åñis, who are as powerfully pure as the sun, I shall try to describe to you
the transcendental pastimes of Viñëu as far as my knowledge is concerned. As
the birds fly in the sky as far as their capacity allows, so do the learned devotees
describe the Lord as far as their realization allows.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
The Supreme Absolute Truth is unlimited. No living being can know about
the unlimited by his limited capacity. The Lord is impersonal, personal and
localized. By His impersonal feature He is all-pervading Brahman, by His
localized feature He is present in everyone’s heart as the Supreme Soul, and by
His ultimate personal feature He is the object of transcendental loving service
by His fortunate associates the pure devotees. The pastimes of the Lord in
different features can only be estimated partly by the great learned devotees.
So Çréla Süta Gosvämé has rightly taken this position in describing the
pastimes of the Lord as far as he has realized. Factually only the Lord Himself
can describe Himself, and His learned devotee also can describe Him as far as
the Lord gives him the power of description.
TEXTS 24–25
Wk-da DaNauåÛMYa ivcrNa( Ma*GaYaa& vNae )
Ma*GaaNaNauGaTa" é[aNTa" +auiDaTaSTa*izTaae >a*XaMa( )) 24 ))
Jal/aXaYaMac+aa<a" Pa[ivveXa TaMaaé[MaMa( )
ddXaR MauiNaMaaSaqNa& XaaNTa& Maqil/Tal/aecNaMa( )) 25 ))
ekadä dhanur udyamya
vicaran mågayäà vane
mågän anugataù çräntaù
kñudhitas tåñito bhåçam
jaläçayam acakñäëaù
praviveça tam äçramam
dadarça munim äsénaà
çäntaà mélita-locanam
SYNONYMS
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
ekadä—once upon a time; dhanuù—arrows and bow; udyamya—taking firmly;
vicaran—following; mågayäm—hunting excursion; vane—in the forest;
mågän—stags; anugataù—while following; çräntaù—fatigued;
kñudhitaù—hungry; tåñitaù—being thirsty; bhåçam—extremely;
jala-äçayam—reservoir of water; acakñäëaù—while searching for;
praviveça—entered into; tam—that famous; äçramam—hermitage of Çaméka
Åñi; dadarça—saw; munim—the sage; äsénam—seated; çäntam—all silent;
mélita—closed; locanam—eyes.
TRANSLATION
Once upon a time Mahäräja Parékñit, while engaged in hunting in the forest
with bow and arrows, became extremely fatigued, hungry and thirsty while
following the stags. While searching for a reservoir of water, he entered the
hermitage of the well-known Çaméka Åñi and saw the sage sitting silently with
closed eyes.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord is so kind to His pure devotees that in proper time He
calls such devotees up to Him and thus creates an auspicious circumstance for
the devotee. Mahäräja Parékñit was a pure devotee of the Lord, and there was
no reason for him to become extremely fatigued, hungry and thirsty because a
devotee of the Lord never becomes perturbed by such bodily demands. But by
the desire of the Lord, even such a devotee can become apparently fatigued
and thirsty just to create a situation favorable for his renunciation of worldly
activities. One has to give up all attachment for worldly relations before one is
able to go back to Godhead, and thus when a devotee is too much absorbed in
worldly affairs, the Lord creates a situation to cause indifference. The Supreme
Lord never forgets His pure devotee, even though he may be engaged in
so-called worldly affairs. Sometimes He creates an awkward situation, and the
devotee becomes obliged to renounce all worldly affairs. The devotee can
understand by the signal of the Lord, but others take it to be unfavorable and
frustrating. Mahäräja Parékñit was to become the medium for the revelation of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam by Lord Çré Kåñëa, as his grandfather Arjuna was the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
medium for the Bhagavad-gétä. Had Arjuna not been taken up with an illusion
of family affection by the will of the Lord, the Bhagavad-gétä would not have
been spoken by the Lord Himself for the good of all concerned. Similarly, had
Mahäräja Parékñit not been fatigued, hungry and thirsty at this time,
Çrémad-Bhägavatam would not have been spoken by Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé,
the prime authority of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. So this is a prelude to the
circumstances under which Çrémad-Bhägavatam was spoken for the benefit of
all concerned. The prelude, therefore, begins with the words “once upon a
time.”
TEXT 26
Pa[iTaåÖeiNd]YaPa[a<aMaNaaebuiÖMauPaarTaMa( )
SQaaNa}aYaaTPar& Pa[aá& b]ø>aUTaMaivi§-YaMa( )) 26 ))
pratiruddhendriya-präëamano-
buddhim upäratam
sthäna-trayät paraà präptaà
brahma-bhütam avikriyam
SYNONYMS
pratiruddha—restrained; indriya—the sense organs; präëa—air of respiration;
manaù—the mind; buddhim—intelligence; upäratam—inactive;
sthäna—places; trayät—from the three; param—transcendental;
präptam—achieved; brahma-bhütam—qualitatively equal with the Supreme
Absolute; avikriyam—unaffected.
TRANSLATION
The muni’s sense organs, breath, mind and intelligence were all restrained
from material activities, and he was situated in a trance apart from the three
[wakefulness, dream and unconsciousness], having achieved a transcendental
position qualitatively equal with the Supreme Absolute.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
It appears that the muni, in whose hermitage the King entered, was in yogic
trance. The transcendental position is attained by three processes, namely the
process of jïäna, or theoretical knowledge of transcendence, the process of
yoga, or factual realization of trance by manipulation of the physiological and
psychological functions of the body, and the most approved process of
bhakti-yoga, or the engagement of senses in the devotional service of the Lord.
In the Bhagavad-gétä also we have the information of the gradual development
of perception from matter to a living entity. Our material mind and body
develop from the living entity, the soul, and being influenced by the three
qualities of matter, we forget our real identity. The jïäna process theoretically
speculates about the reality of the soul. But bhakti-yoga factually engages the
spirit soul in activities. The perception of matter is transcended to still subtler
states of the senses. The senses are transcended to the subtler mind, and then
to breathing activities and gradually to intelligence. Beyond the intelligence,
the living soul is realized by the mechanical activities of the yoga system, or
practice of meditation restraining the senses, regulating the breathing system
and applying intelligence to rise to the transcendental position. This trance
stops all material activities of the body. The King saw the muni in that
position. He also saw the muni as follows.
TEXT 27
ivPa[k-I<aRJa$=aC^à& raErve<aaiJaNaeNa c )
ivéuZYataalu/ådk&- TaQaa>aUTaMaYaacTa )) 27 ))
viprakérëa-jaöäcchannaà
rauraveëäjinena ca
viçuñyat-tälur udakaà
tathä-bhütam ayäcata
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
viprakérëa—all scattered; jaöa-äcchannam—covered with compressed, long
hair; rauraveëa—by the skin of a stag; ajinena—by the skin; ca—also;
viçuñyat—dried up; täluù—palate; udakam—water; tathä-bhütam—in that
state; ayäcata—asked for.
TRANSLATION
The sage, in meditation, was covered by the skin of a stag, and long,
compressed hair was scattered all over him. The King, whose palate was dry
from thirst, asked him for water.
PURPORT
The King, being thirsty, asked the sage for water. That such a great devotee
and king asked for water from a sage absorbed in trance was certainly
providential. Otherwise there was no chance of such a unique happening.
Mahäräja Parékñit was thus placed in an awkward position so that gradually
Çrémad-Bhägavatam could be revealed.
TEXT 28
Al/BDaTa*<a>aUMYaaidrSaMPa[aáagYaRSaUNa*Ta" )
AvjaTaiMavaTMaaNa& MaNYaMaaNaêuk-aePa h )) 28 ))
alabdha-tåëa-bhümy-ädir
asampräptärghya-sünåtaù
avajïätam ivätmänaà
manyamänaç cukopa ha
SYNONYMS
alabdha—having not received; tåëa—seat of straw; bhümi—place; ädiù—and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
so on; asampräpta—not properly received; arghya—water for reception;
sünåtaù—sweet words; avajïätam—thus being neglected; iva—like that;
ätmänam—personally; manyamänaù—thinking like that; cukopa—became
angry; ha—in that way.
TRANSLATION
The King, not received by any formal welcome by means of being offered a
seat, place, water and sweet addresses, considered himself neglected, and so
thinking he became angry.
PURPORT
The law of reception in the codes of the Vedic principles states that even if
an enemy is received at home, he must be received with all respects. He should
not be given a chance to understand that he has come into the house of an
enemy. When Lord Kåñëa, accompanied by Arjuna and Bhéma, approached
Jaräsandha in Magadha, the respectable enemies were given a royal reception
by King Jaräsandha. The guest enemy, namely Bhéma, was to fight with
Jaräsandha, and yet they were given a grand reception. At night they used to
sit down together as friends and guests, and in the day they used to fight,
risking life and death. That was the law of reception. The reception law
enjoins that a poor man, who has nothing to offer his guest, should be good
enough to offer a straw mat for sitting, a glass of water for drinking and some
sweet words. Therefore, to receive a guest, either friend or foe, there is no
expense. It is only a question of good manners.
When Mahäräja Parékñit entered the door of Çaméka Åñi, he did not expect
a royal reception by the åñi because he knew that saints and åñis are not
materially rich men. But he never expected that a seat of straw, a glass of water
and some sweet words would be denied to him. He was not an ordinary guest,
nor was he an enemy of the åñi, and therefore the cold reception by the åñi
astonished the King greatly. As a matter of fact, the King was right to get
angry with the åñi when he needed a glass of water very badly. To become
angry in such a grave situation was not unnatural for the King, but because the
King himself was not less than a great saint, his becoming angry and taking
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
action were astonishing. So it must be accepted that it was so ordained by the
supreme will of the Lord. The King was a great devotee of the Lord, and the
saint was also as good as the King. But by the will of the Lord, the
circumstances were so created that they became ways to the King’s becoming
unattached to family connection and governmental activities and thus
becoming a completely surrendered soul unto the lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa. The
merciful Lord sometimes creates such awkward positions for his pure devotees
in order to drag them towards Himself from the mire of material existence. But
outwardly the situations appear to be frustrating to the devotees. The devotees
of the Lord are always under the protection of the Lord, and in any condition,
frustration or success, the Lord is the supreme guide for the devotees. The pure
devotees, therefore, accept all conditions of frustration as blessings from the
Lord.
TEXT 29
A>aUTaPaUvR" SahSaa +auta*@(>YaaMaidRTaaTMaNa" )
b]aø<a& Pa[TYa>aUd(b]øNa( MaTSarae MaNYaurev c )) 29 ))
abhüta-pürvaù sahasä
kñut-tåòbhyäm arditätmanaù
brähmaëaà praty abhüd brahman
matsaro manyur eva ca
SYNONYMS
abhüta-pürvaù—unprecedented; sahasä—circumstantially; kñut—hunger;
tåòbhyäm—as well as by thirst; ardita—being distressed; ätmanaù—of his self;
brähmaëam—unto a brähmaëa; prati—against; abhüt—became; brahman—O
brähmaëas; matsaraù—envious; manyuù—angry; eva—thus; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
O brähmaëas, the King’s anger and envy, directed toward the brähmaëa
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
sage, were unprecedented, being that circumstances had made him hungry and
thirsty.
PURPORT
For a king like Mahäräja Parékñit to become angry and envious, especially at
a sage and brähmaëa, was undoubtedly unprecedented. The King knew well
that brähmaëas, sages, children, women and old men are always beyond the
jurisdiction of punishment. Similarly, the king, even though he commits a
great mistake, is never to be considered a wrongdoer. But in this case,
Mahäräja Parékñit became angry and envious at the sage due to his thirst and
hunger, by the will of the Lord. The King was right to punish his subject for
coldly receiving him or neglecting him, but because the culprit was a sage and
a brähmaëa, it was unprecedented. As the Lord is never envious of anyone, so
also the Lord’s devotee is never envious of anyone. The only justification for
Mahäräja Parékñit’s behavior is that it was ordained by the Lord.
TEXT 30
Sa Tau b]ø‰zer&Sae GaTaaSauMaurGa& åza )
iviNaGaRC^NDaNauZk-ae$ya iNaDaaYa PaurMaaGaTa" )) 30 ))
sa tu brahma-åñer aàse
gatäsum uragaà ruñä
vinirgacchan dhanuñ-koöyä
nidhäya puram ägataù
SYNONYMS
saù—the King; tu—however; brahma-åñeù—of the brähmaëa sage; aàse—on
the shoulder; gata-asum—lifeless; uragam—snake; ruñä—in anger;
vinirgacchan—while leaving; dhanuù-koöyä—with the front of the bow;
nidhäya—by placing it; puram—palace; ägataù—returned.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
While leaving, the King, being so insulted, picked up a lifeless snake with his
bow and angrily placed it on the shoulder of the sage. Then he returned to his
palace.
PURPORT
The King thus treated the sage tit for tat, although he was never
accustomed to such silly actions. By the will of the Lord, the King, while going
away, found a dead snake in front of him, and he thought that the sage, who
had coldly received him, thus might be coldly rewarded by being offered a
garland of a dead snake. In the ordinary course of dealing, this was not very
unnatural, but in the case of Mahäräja Parékñit’s dealing with a brähmaëa sage,
this was certainly unprecedented. It so happened by the will of the Lord.
TEXT 31
Wz ik&- iNa>a*TaaXaezk-r<aae Maqil/Tae+a<a" )
Ma*zaSaMaaiDarahaeiSviTk&- Nau SYaaT+a}abNDaui>a" )) 31 ))
eña kià nibhåtäçeñakaraëo
mélitekñaëaù
måñä-samädhir ähosvit
kià nu syät kñatra-bandhubhiù
SYNONYMS
eñaù—this; kim—whether; nibhåta-açeña—meditative mood; karaëaù—senses;
mélita—closed; ékñaëaù—eyes; måñä—false; samädhiù—trance; äho—remains;
svit—if it is so; kim—either; nu—but; syät—may be; kñatra-bandhubhiù—by
the lower kñatriya.
TRANSLATION
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Upon returning, he began to contemplate and argue within himself whether
the sage had actually been in meditation, with senses concentrated and eyes
closed, or whether he had just been feigning trance just to avoid receiving a
lower kñatriya.
PURPORT
The King, being a devotee of the Lord, did not approve of his own action,
and thus he began to wonder whether the sage was really in a trance or was
just pretending in order to avoid receiving the King, who was a kñatriya and
therefore lower in rank. Repentance comes in the mind of a good soul as soon
as he commits something wrong. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura and
Çréla Jéva Gosvämé do not believe that the King’s action was due to his past
misdeeds. The arrangement was so made by the Lord just to call the King back
home, back to Godhead.
According to Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté, the plan was made by the will of
the Lord, and by the will of the Lord the situation of frustration was created.
The plan was that for his so-called misdeed the King could be cursed by an
inexperienced brähmaëa boy infected by the influence of Kali, and thus the
King would leave his hearth and home for good. His connections with Çréla
Çukadeva Gosvämé would enable the presentation of the great
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, which is considered to be the book incarnation of the
Lord. This book incarnation of the Lord gives much fascinating information of
the transcendental pastimes of the Lord, like His räsa-léla with the spiritual
cowherd damsels of Vrajabhümi. This specific pastime of the Lord has a special
significance because anyone who properly learns about this particular pastime
of the Lord will certainly be dissuaded from mundane sex desire and be placed
on the path of sublime devotional service to the Lord. The pure devotee’s
mundane frustration is meant to elevate the devotee to a higher
transcendental position. By placing Arjuna and the Päëòavas in frustration
due to the intrigue of their cousin-brothers, the prelude of the Battle of
Kurukñetra was created by the Lord. This was to incarnate the sound
representative of the Lord, Bhagavad-gétä. So by placing King Parékñit in an
awkward position, the incarnation of Çrémad-Bhägavatam was created by the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
will of the Lord. Being distressed by hunger and thirst was only a show, because
the King endured much, even in the womb of his mother. He was never
disturbed by the glaring heat of the brahmästra released by Açvatthämä. The
King’s distressed condition was certainly unprecedented. The devotees like
Mahäräja Parékñit are powerful enough to forbear such distresses, by the will of
the Lord, and they are never disturbed. The situation, in this case, was
therefore all planned by the Lord.
TEXT 32
TaSYa Pau}aae_iTaTaeJaSvq ivhrNa( bal/k-ae_>aRkE-" )
rajaga& Pa[aiPaTa& TaaTa& é[uTva Ta}aedMab]vqTa( )) 32 ))
tasya putro ’titejasvé
viharan bälako ’rbhakaiù
räjïäghaà präpitaà tätaà
çrutvä tatredam abravét
SYNONYMS
tasya—his (the sage’s); putraù—son; ati—extremely; tejasvé—powerful;
viharan—while playing; bälakaù—with boys; arbhakaiù—who were all
childish; räjïä—by the King; agham—distress; präpitam—made to have;
tätam—the father; çrutvä—by hearing; tatra—then and there; idam—this;
abravét—spoke.
TRANSLATION
The sage had a son who was very powerful, being a brähmaëa’s son. While
he was playing with inexperienced boys, he heard of his father’s distress, which
was occasioned by the King. Then and there the boy spoke as follows.
PURPORT
Due to Mahäräja Parékñit’s good government, even a boy of tender age, who
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
was playing with other inexperienced boys, could become as powerful as a
qualified brähmaëa. This boy was known as Çåìgi, and he achieved good
training in brahmacarya by his father so that he could be as powerful as a
brähmaëa, even at that age. But because the age of Kali was seeking an
opportunity to spoil the cultural heritage of the four orders of life, the
inexperienced boy gave a chance for the age of Kali to enter into the field of
Vedic culture. Hatred of the lower orders of life began from this brähmaëa boy,
under the influence of Kali, and thus cultural life began to dwindle day after
day. The first victim of brahminical injustice was Mahäräja Parékñit, and thus
the protection given by the King against the onslaught of Kali was slackened.
TEXT 33
Ahae ADaMaR" Paal/aNaa& Paqvna& bil/>auJaaiMav )
SvaiMaNYaga& Yad( daSaaNaa& ÜarPaaNaa& éuNaaiMav )) 33 ))
aho adharmaù pälänäà
pévnäà bali-bhujäm iva
sväminy aghaà yad däsänäà
dvära-pänäà çunäm iva
SYNONYMS
aho—just look at; adharmaù—irreligion; pälänäm—of the rulers; pévnäm—of
one who is brought up; bali-bhujäm—like the crows; iva—like; svämini—unto
the master; agham—sin; yat—what is; däsänäm—of the servants;
dvära-pänäm—keeping watch at the door; çunäm—of the dogs; iva—like.
TRANSLATION
[The brähmaëa’s son, Çåìgi, said:] O just look at the sins of the rulers who,
like crows and watchdogs at the door, perpetrate sins against their masters,
contrary to the principles governing servants.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
The brähmaëas are considered to be the head and brains of the social body,
and the kñatriyas are considered to be the arms of the social body. The arms are
required to protect the body from all harm, but the arms must act according to
the directions of the head and brain. That is a natural arrangement made by
the supreme order, for it is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä that four social
orders or castes, namely the brähmaëas, the kñatriyas, the vaiçyas and the
çüdras, are set up according to quality and work done by them. Naturally the
son of a brähmaëa has a good chance to become a brähmaëa by the direction of
his qualified father, as a son of a medical practitioner has a very good chance
to become a qualified medical practitioner. So the caste system is quite
scientific. The son must take advantage of the father’s qualification and thus
become a brähmaëa or medical practitioner, and not otherwise. Without being
qualified, one cannot become a brähmaëa or medical practitioner, and that is
the verdict of all scriptures and social orders. Herein Çåìgi, a qualified son of a
great brähmaëa, attained the required brahminical power both by birth and by
training, but he was lacking in culture because he was an inexperienced boy.
By the influence of Kali, the son of a brähmaëa became puffed up with
brahminical power and thus wrongly compared Mahäräja Parékñit to crows and
watchdogs. The King is certainly the watchdog of the state in the sense that he
keeps vigilant eyes over the border of the state for its protection and defense,
but to address him as a watchdog is the sign of a less-cultured boy. Thus the
downfall of the brahminical powers began as they gave importance to
birthright without culture. The downfall of the brähmaëa caste began in the
age of Kali. And since brähmaëas are the heads of the social order, all other
orders of society also began to deteriorate. This beginning of brahminical
deterioration was highly deplored by the father of Çåìgi, as we will find.
TEXT 34
b]aø<aE" +a}abNDauihR Ga*hPaal/ae iNaæiPaTa" )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Sa k-Qa& Tad(Ga*he Üa"SQa" Sa>aa<@& >aae¢u-MahRiTa )) 34 ))
brähmaëaiù kñatra-bandhur hi
gåha-pälo nirüpitaù
sa kathaà tad-gåhe dväù-sthaù
sabhäëòaà bhoktum arhati
SYNONYMS
brähmaëaiù—by the brahminical order; kñatra-bandhuù—the sons of the
kñatriyas; hi—certainly; gåha-pälaù—the watchdog; nirüpitaù—designated;
saù—he; katham—on what grounds; tat-gåhe—in the home of him (the
master); dväù-sthaù—keeping at the door; sa-bhäëòam—in the same pot;
bhoktum—to eat; arhati—deserves.
TRANSLATION
The descendants of the kingly orders are definitely designated as watchdogs,
and they must keep themselves at the door. On what grounds can dogs enter the
house and claim to dine with the master on the same plate?
PURPORT
The inexperienced brähmaëa boy certainly knew that the King asked for
water from his father and the father did not respond. He tried to explain away
his father’s inhospitality in an impertinent manner befitting an uncultured
boy. He was not at all sorry for the King’s not being well received. On the
contrary, he justified the wrong act in a way characteristic of the brähmaëas of
Kali-yuga. He compared the King to a watchdog, and so it was wrong for the
King to enter the home of a brähmaëa and ask for water from the same pot.
The dog is certainly reared by its master, but that does not mean that the dog
shall claim to dine and drink from the same pot. This mentality of false
prestige is the cause of downfall of the perfect social order, and we can see that
in the beginning it was started by the inexperienced son of a brähmaëa. As the
dog is never allowed to enter within the room and hearth, although it is reared
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
by the master, similarly, according to Çåìgi, the King had no right to enter the
house of Çaméka Åñi. According to the boy’s opinion, the King was on the
wrong side and not his father, and thus he justified his silent father.
TEXT 35
k*-Z<ae GaTae >aGaviTa XaaSTaYauRTPaQaGaaiMaNaaMa( )
TaiÙàSaeTaUNaÛah& XaaiSMa PaXYaTa Mae bl/Ma( )) 35 ))
kåñëe gate bhagavati
çästary utpatha-gäminäm
tad bhinna-setün adyähaà
çäsmi paçyata me balam
SYNONYMS
kåñëe—Lord Kåñëa; gate—having departed from this world; bhagavati—the
Personality of Godhead; çästari—the supreme ruler; utpatha-gäminäm—of
those who are upstarts; tat bhinna—being separated; setün—the protector;
adya—today; aham—myself; çäsmi—shall punish; paçyata—just see; me—my;
balam—prowess.
TRANSLATION
After the departure of Lord Çré Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead and
supreme ruler of everyone, these upstarts have flourished, our protector being
gone. Therefore I myself shall take up this matter and punish them. Just
witness my power.
PURPORT
The inexperienced brähmaëa, puffed up by a little brahma-tejas, became
influenced by the spell of Kali-yuga. Mahäräja Parékñit gave license to Kali to
live in four places as mentioned hereinbefore, but by his very expert
government the personality of Kali could hardly find the places allotted him.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
The personality of Kali-yuga, therefore, was seeking the opportunity to
establish authority, and by the grace of the Lord he found a hole in the
puffed-up, inexperienced son of a brähmaëa. The little brähmaëa wanted to
show his prowess in destruction, and he had the audacity to punish such a
great king as Mahäräja Parékñit. He wanted to take the place of Lord Kåñëa
after His departure. These are the principal signs of upstarts who want to take
the place of Çré Kåñëa under the influence of the age of Kali. An upstart with a
little power wants to become an incarnation of the Lord. There are many false
incarnations after the departure of Lord Kåñëa from the face of the globe, and
they are misleading the innocent public by accepting the spiritual obedience of
the general mass of people to maintain false prestige. In other words, the
personality of Kali got the opportunity to reign through this son of a
brähmaëa, Çåìgi.
TEXT 36
wTYau¤-a raezTaaMa]a+aae vYaSYaaNa*izbal/k-" )
k-aEiXaKYaaPa oPaSPa*XYa vaGvJa]& ivSaSaJaR h )) 36 ))
ity uktvä roña-tämräkño
vayasyän åñi-bälakaù
kauçiky-äpa upaspåçya
väg-vajraà visasarja ha
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; uktvä—saying; roña-tämra-akñaù—with red-hot eyes due to being
angry; vayasyän—unto the playmates; åñi-bälakaù—the son of a åñi;
kauçiké—the River Kauçika; äpaù—water; upaspåçya—by touching;
väk—words; vajram—thunderbolt; visasarja—threw; ha—in the past.
TRANSLATION
The son of the åñi, his eyes red-hot with anger, touched the water of the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
River Kauçika while speaking to his playmates and discharged the following
thunderbolt of words.
PURPORT
The circumstances under which Mahäräja Parékñit was cursed were simply
childish, as it appears from this verse. Çåìgi was showing his impudency
amongst his playmates, who were innocent. Any sane man would have
prevented him from doing such great harm to all human society. By killing a
king like Mahäräja Parékñit, just to make a show of acquired brahminical
power, the inexperienced son of a brähmaëa committed a great mistake.
TEXT 37
wiTa l/iºTaMaYaaRd& Ta+ak-" SaáMae_hiNa )
d&+YaiTa SMa ku-l/a®ar& caeidTaae Mae TaTad]uhMa( )) 37 ))
iti laìghita-maryädaà
takñakaù saptame ’hani
daìkñyati sma kuläìgäraà
codito me tata-druham
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; laìghita—surpassing; maryädam—etiquette; takñakaù—snake-bird;
saptame—on the seventh; ahani—day; daìkñyati—will bite; sma—certainly;
kula-aìgäram—the wretched of the dynasty; coditaù—having done; me—my;
tata-druham—enmity towards the father.
TRANSLATION
The brähmaëa’s son cursed the King thus: On the seventh day from today a
snake-bird will bite the most wretched one of that dynasty [Mahäräja Parékñit]
because of his having broken the laws of etiquette by insulting my father.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
Thus the beginning of the misuse of brahminical power began, and
gradually the brähmaëas in the age of Kali became devoid of both brahminical
powers and culture. The brähmaëa boy considered Mahäräja Parékñit to be
kuläìgära, or the wretched of the dynasty, but factually the brähmaëa boy
himself was so because only from him did the brähmaëa caste become
powerless, like the snake whose poisoned teeth are broken. The snake is fearful
as long as his poison teeth are there, otherwise he is fearful only to children.
The personality of Kali conquered the brähmaëa boy first, and gradually the
other castes. Thus the whole scientific system of the orders of society in this
age has assumed the form of a vitiated caste system, which is now being
uprooted by another class of men similarly influenced by the age of Kali. One
should see to the root cause of vitiation and not try to condemn the system as
it is, without knowledge of its scientific value.
TEXT 38
TaTaae_>YaeTYaaé[Ma& bal/ae Gale/ SaPaRk-le/vrMa( )
iPaTar& vq+Ya du"%aTaaeR Mau¢-k-<#=ae åraed h )) 38 ))
tato ’bhyetyäçramaà bälo
gale sarpa-kalevaram
pitaraà vékñya duùkhärto
mukta-kaëöho ruroda ha
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; abhyetya—after entering into; äçramam—the hermitage;
bälaù—boy; gale sarpa—the snake on the shoulder; kalevaram—body;
pitaram—unto the father; vékñya—having seen; duùkha-ärtaù—in a sorry
plight; mukta-kaëöhaù—loudly; ruroda—cried; ha—in the past.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, when the boy returned to the hermitage, he saw a snake on his
father’s shoulder, and out of his grief he cried very loudly.
PURPORT
The boy was not happy because he committed a great mistake, and he
wanted to be relieved of the burden on his heart by crying. So after entering
the hermitage and seeing his father in that condition, he cried loudly so that
he might be relieved. But it was too late. The father regretted the whole
incident.
TEXT 39
Sa va Aai®rSaae b]øNa( é[uTva SauTaivl/aPaNaMa( )
oNMaqLYa XaNakE-NaeR}ae d*îa ca&Sae Ma*TaaerGaMa( )) 39 ))
sa vä äìgiraso brahman
çrutvä suta-viläpanam
unmélya çanakair netre
dåñövä cäàse måtoragam
SYNONYMS
saù—he; vai—also; äìgirasaù—the åñi born in the family of Aìgirä;
brahman—O Çaunaka; çrutvä—on hearing; suta—his son; viläpanam—crying
in distress; unmélya—opening; çanakaiù—gradually; netre—by the eyes;
dåñövä—by seeing; ca—also; aàse—on the shoulder; måta—dead;
uragam—snake.
TRANSLATION
O brähmaëas, the åñi, who was born in the family of Aìgirä Muni, hearing
his son crying, gradually opened his eyes and saw the dead snake around his
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
neck.
TEXT 40
ivSa*JYa Ta& c PaPa[C^ vTSa k-SMaaiÖ raeidiz )
ke-Na va Tae_Pak*-TaiMaTYau¢-" Sa NYavedYaTa( )) 40 ))
visåjya taà ca papraccha
vatsa kasmäd dhi rodiñi
kena vä te ’pakåtam
ity uktaù sa nyavedayat
SYNONYMS
visåjya—throwing aside; tam—that; ca—also; papraccha—asked; vatsa—my
dear son; kasmät—what for; hi—certainly; rodiñi—crying; kena—by whom;
vä—otherwise; te—they; apakåtam—misbehaved; iti—thus; uktaù—being
asked; saù—the boy; nyavedayat—informed of everything.
TRANSLATION
He threw the dead snake aside and asked his son why he was crying,
whether anyone had done him harm. On hearing this, the son explained to him
what had happened.
PURPORT
The father did not take the dead snake on his neck very seriously. He
simply threw it away. Actually there was nothing seriously wrong in Mahäräja
Parékñit’s act, but the foolish son took it very seriously, and being influenced by
Kali he cursed the King and thus ended a chapter of happy history.
TEXT 41
iNaXaMYa XaáMaTadh| NareNd]&
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Sa b]aø<aae NaaTMaJaMa>YaNaNdTa( )
Ahae bTaa&hae MahdÛ Tae k*-Ta‚
MaLPaqYaiSa d]aeh oådRMaae Da*Ta" )) 41 ))
niçamya çaptam atad-arhaà narendraà
sa brähmaëo nätmajam abhyanandat
aho batäàho mahad adya te kåtam
alpéyasi droha urur damo dhåtaù
SYNONYMS
niçamya—after hearing; çaptam—cursed; atat-arham—never to be
condemned; nara-indram—unto the King, best of humankind; saù—that;
brähmaëaù—brähmaëa-åñi; na—not; ätma-jam—his own son;
abhyanandat—congratulated; aho—alas; bata—distressing; aàhaù—sins;
mahat—great; adya—today; te—yourself; kåtam—performed;
alpéyasi—insignificant; drohe—offense; uruù—very great;
damaù—punishment; dhåtaù—awarded.
TRANSLATION
The father heard from his son that the King had been cursed, although he
should never have been condemned, for he was the best amongst all human
beings. The åñi did not congratulate his son, but, on the contrary, began to
repent, saying: Alas! What a great sinful act was performed by my son. He has
awarded heavy punishment for an insignificant offense.
PURPORT
The king is the best of all human beings. He is the representative of God,
and he is never to be condemned for any of his actions. In other words, the
king can do no wrong. The king may order hanging of a culprit son of a
brähmaëa, but he does not become sinful for killing a brähmaëa. Even if there
is something wrong with the king, he is never to be condemned. A medical
practitioner may kill a patient by mistaken treatment, but such a killer is never
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
condemned to death. So what to speak of a good and pious king like Mahäräja
Parékñit? In the Vedic way of life, the king is trained to become a räjarñi, or a
great saint, although he is ruling as king. It is the king only by whose good
government the citizens can live peacefully and without any fear. The räjarñis
would manage their kingdoms so nicely and piously that their subjects would
respect them as if they were the Lord. That is the instruction of the Vedas. The
king is called narendra, or the best amongst the human beings. How then could
a king like Mahäräja Parékñit be condemned by an inexperienced, puffed-up
son of a brahmaëa, even though he had attained the powers of a qualified
brähmaëa?
Since Çaméka Åñi was an experienced, good brähmaëa, he did not approve
of the actions of his condemned son. He began to lament for all that his son
had done. The king was beyond the jurisdiction of curses as a general rule, and
what to speak of a good king like Mahäräja Parékñit. The offense of the King
was most insignificant, and his being condemned to death was certainly a very
great sin for Çåìgi. Therefore Åñi Çaméka regretted the whole incident.
TEXT 42
Na vE Na*i>aNaRrdev& Para:Ya&
SaMMaaTauMahRSYaivPaKvbuÖe )
YataeJaSaa duivRzhe<a Gauáa
ivNdiNTa >ad]a<Yaku-Taae>aYaa" Pa[Jaa" )) 42 ))
na vai nåbhir nara-devaà paräkhyaà
sammätum arhasy avipakva-buddhe
yat-tejasä durviñaheëa guptä
vindanti bhadräëy akutobhayäù prajäù
SYNONYMS
na—never; vai—as a matter of fact; nåbhiù—by any man; nara-devam—unto a
man-god; para-äkhyam—who is transcendental; sammätum—place on equal
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
footing; arhasi—by the prowess; avipakva—unripe or immature;
buddhe—intelligence; yat—of whom; tejasä—by the prowess;
durviñaheëa—unsurpassable; guptäù—protected; vindanti—enjoys;
bhadräëi—all prosperity; akutaù-bhayäù—completely defended; prajäù—the
subjects.
TRANSLATION
O my boy, your intelligence is immature, and therefore you have no
knowledge that the king, who is the best amongst human beings, is as good as
the Personality of Godhead. He is never to be placed on an equal footing with
common men. The citizens of the state live in prosperity, being protected by his
unsurpassable prowess.
TEXT 43
Al/+YaMaa<ae NardevNaaiMan
rQaa®Paa<aavYaMa® l/aek-" )
Tada ih caErPa[curae ivNa&+Ya‚
TYar+YaMaa<aae_ivvæQavTa( +a<aaTa( )) 43 ))
alakñyamäëe nara-deva-nämni
rathäìga-päëäv ayam aìga lokaù
tadä hi caura-pracuro vinaìkñyaty
arakñyamäëo ’vivarüthavat kñaëät
SYNONYMS
alakñyamäëe—being abolished; nara-deva—monarchical; nämni—of the
name; ratha-aìga-päëau—the representative of the Lord; ayam—this;
aìga—O my boy; lokaù—this world; tadä hi—at once; caura—thieves;
pracuraù—too much; vinaìkñyati—vanquishes; arakñyamäëaù—being not
protected; avivarütha-vat—like lambs; kñaëät—at once.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
My dear boy, the Lord, who carries the wheel of a chariot, is represented by
the monarchical regime, and when this regime is abolished the whole world
becomes filled with thieves, who then at once vanquish the unprotected subjects
like scattered lambs.
PURPORT
According to Çrémad-Bhägavatam the monarchical regime represents the
Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead. The king is said to be the
representative of the Absolute Personality of Godhead because he is trained to
acquire the qualities of God to protect the living beings. The Battle of
Kurukñetra was planned by the Lord to establish the real representative of the
Lord, Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira. An ideal king thoroughly trained by culture and
devotional service with the martial spirit makes a perfect king. Such a personal
monarchy is far better than the so-called democracy of no training and
responsibility. The thieves and rogues of modern democracy seek election by
misrepresentation of votes, and the successful rogues and thieves devour the
mass of population. One trained monarch is far better than hundreds of useless
ministerial rogues, and it is hinted herein that by abolition of a monarchical
regime like that of Mahäräja Parékñit, the mass of people become open to many
attacks of the age of Kali. They are never happy in an overly advertised form
of democracy. The result of such a kingless administration is described in the
following verses.
TEXT 44
TadÛ Na" PaaPaMauPaETYaNaNvYa&
YaàíNaaQaSYa vSaaeivRlu/MPak-aTa( )
ParSPar& ganiNTa XaPaiNTa v*ÅTae
PaéUNa( iñYaae_QaaRNa( PauådSYavae JaNaa" )) 44 ))
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
tad adya naù päpam upaity ananvayaà
yan nañöa-näthasya vasor vilumpakät
parasparaà ghnanti çapanti våïjate
paçün striyo ’rthän puru-dasyavo janäù
SYNONYMS
tat—for this reason; adya—from this day; naù—upon us; päpam—reaction of
sin; upaiti—will overtake; ananvayam—disruption; yat—because;
nañöa—abolished; näthasya—of the monarch; vasoù—of wealth;
vilumpakät—being plundered; parasparam—between one another;
ghnanti—will kill; çapanti—will do harm; våïjate—will steal; paçün—animals;
striyaù—women; arthän—riches; puru—greatly; dasyavaù—thieves;
janäù—the mass of people.
TRANSLATION
Due to the termination of the monarchical regimes and the plundering of the
people’s wealth by rogues and thieves, there will be great social disruptions.
People will be killed and injured, and animals and women will be stolen. And
for all these sins we shall be responsible.
PURPORT
The word naù (we) is very significant in this verse. The sage rightly takes
the responsibility of the brähmaëas as a community for killing monarchical
government and thus giving an opportunity to the so-called democrats, who
are generally plunderers of the wealth of the state subjects. The so-called
democrats capture the administrative machine without assuming responsibility
for the prosperous condition of the citizens. Everyone captures the post for
personal gratification, and thus instead of one king, a number of irresponsible
kings grow up to tax the citizens. It is foretold herein that in the absence of
good monarchical government, everyone will be the cause of disturbance for
others by plundering riches, animals, women, etc.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 45
TadaYaRDaMaR" Pa[ivl/IYaTae Na*<aa&
v<aaRé[MaacarYauTañYaqMaYa" )
TaTaae_QaRk-aMaai>aiNaveiXaTaaTMaNaa&
éuNaa& k-PaqNaaiMav v<aRSaªr" )) 45 ))
tadärya-dharmaù praviléyate nåëäà
varëäçramäcära-yutas trayémayaù
tato ’rtha-kämäbhiniveçitätmanäà
çunäà kapénäm iva varëa-saìkaraù
SYNONYMS
tadä—at that time; ärya—progressive civilization; dharmaù—engagement;
praviléyate—is systematically vanquished; nåëäm—of humankind;
varëa—caste; äçrama—orders of society; äcära-yutaù—composed in a good
manner; trayé-mayaù—in terms of the Vedic injunction; tataù—thereafter;
artha—economic development; käma-abhiniveçita—fully absorbed in sense
gratification; ätmanäm—of men; çunäm—like dogs; kapénäm—like monkeys;
iva—thus; varëa-saìkaraù—unwanted population.
TRANSLATION
At that time the people in general will fall systematically from the path of a
progressive civilization in respect to the qualitative engagements of the castes
and the orders of society and the Vedic injunctions. Thus they will be more
attracted to economic development for sense gratification, and as a result there
will be an unwanted population on the level of dogs and monkeys.
PURPORT
It is foretold herein that in the absence of a monarchical regime, the
general mass of people will be an unwanted population like dogs and monkeys.
As the monkeys are too sexually inclined and dogs are shameless in sexual
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
intercourse, the general mass of population born of illegitimate connection
will systematically go astray from the Vedic way of good manners and
qualitative engagements in the castes and orders of life.
The Vedic way of life is the progressive march of the civilization of the
Äryans. The Äryans are progressive in Vedic civilization. The Vedic
civilization’s destination is to go back to Godhead, back home, where there is
no birth, no death, no old age and no disease. The Vedas direct everyone not
to remain in the darkness of the material world but to go towards the light of
the spiritual kingdom far beyond the material sky. The qualitative caste system
and the orders of life are scientifically planned by the Lord and His
representatives, the great åñis. The perfect way of life gives all sorts of
instruction in things both material and spiritual. The Vedic way of life does
not allow any man to be like the monkeys and dogs. A degraded civilization of
sense gratification and economic development is the by-product of a godless or
kingless government of the people, by the people, and for the people. The
people should not, therefore, begrudge the poor administrations they
themselves elect.
TEXT 46
DaMaRPaal/ae NarPaiTa" Sa Tau SaMa]a@( b*hC^\va" )
Saa+aaNMaha>aaGavTaae raJaizRhRYaMaeDaYaa$( )
+auta*$(é[MaYauTaae dqNaae NaEvaSMaC^aPaMahRiTa )) 46 ))
dharma-pälo nara-patiù
sa tu samräò båhac-chraväù
säkñän mahä-bhägavato
räjarñir haya-medhayäö
kñut-tåö-çrama-yuto déno
naiväsmac chäpam arhati
SYNONYMS
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
dharma-pälaù—the protector of religion; nara-patiù—the King; saù—he;
tu—but; samräö—Emperor; båhat—highly; çraväù—celebrated;
säkñät—directly; mahä-bhägavataù—the first-class devotee of the Lord;
räja-åñiù—saint amongst the royal order; haya-medhayäö—great performer of
horse sacrifices; kñut—hunger; tåö—thirst; çrama-yutaù—tired and fatigued;
dénaù—stricken; na—never; eva—thus; asmat—by us; çäpam—curse;
arhati—deserves.
TRANSLATION
The Emperor Parékñit is a pious king. He is highly celebrated and is a
first-class devotee of the Personality of Godhead. He is a saint amongst royalty,
and he has performed many horse sacrifices. When such a king is tired and
fatigued, being stricken with hunger and thirst, he does not at all deserve to be
cursed.
PURPORT
After explaining the general codes relating to the royal position and
asserting that the king can do no wrong and therefore is never to be
condemned, the sage Çaméka wanted to say something about Emperor Parékñit
specifically. The specific qualification of Mahäräja Parékñit is summarized
herein. The King, even calculated as a king only, was most celebrated as a ruler
who administered the religious principles of the royal order. In the çästras the
duties of all castes and orders of society are prescribed. All the qualities of a
kñatriya mentioned in the Bhagavad-gétä (18.43) were present in the person of
the Emperor. He was also a great devotee of the Lord and a self-realized soul.
Cursing such a king, when he was tired and fatigued with hunger and thirst,
was not at all proper. Çaméka Åñi thus admitted from all sides that Mahäräja
Parékñit was cursed most unjustly. Although all the brähmaëas were aloof from
the incident, still for the childish action of a brähmaëa boy the whole world
situation was changed. Thus Åñi Çaméka, a brähmaëa, took responsibility for all
deterioration of the good orders of the world.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXT 47
APaaPaezu Sv>a*TYaezu bale/NaaPaKvbuiÖNaa )
PaaPa& k*-Ta& TaÙGavaNa( SavaRTMaa +aNTauMahRiTa )) 47 ))
apäpeñu sva-bhåtyeñu
bälenäpakva-buddhinä
päpaà kåtaà tad bhagavän
sarvätmä kñantum arhati
SYNONYMS
apäpeñu—unto one who is completely free from all sins; sva-bhåtyeñu—unto
one who is subordinate and deserves to be protected; bälena—by a child;
apakva—who is immature; buddhinä—by intelligence; päpam—sinful act;
kåtam—has been done; tat bhagavän—therefore the Personality of Godhead;
sarva-ätmä—who is all-pervading; kñantum—just to pardon; arhati—deserve.
TRANSLATION
Then the åñi prayed to the all-pervading Personality of Godhead to pardon
his immature boy, who had no intelligence and who committed the great sin of
cursing a person who was completely free from all sins, who was subordinate
and who deserved to be protected.
PURPORT
Everyone is responsible for his own action, either pious or sinful. Åñi
Çaméka could foresee that his son had committed a great sin by cursing
Mahäräja Parékñit, who deserved to be protected by the brähmaëas, for he was
a pious ruler and completely free from all sins because of his being a first-class
devotee of the Lord. When an offense is done unto the devotee of the Lord, it
is very difficult to overcome the reaction. The brähmaëas, being at the head of
the social orders, are meant to give protection to their subordinates and not to
curse them. There are occasions when a brähmaëa may furiously curse a
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
subordinate kñatriya or vaiçya, etc., but in the case of Mahäräja Parékñit there
were no grounds, as already explained. The foolish boy had done it out of sheer
vanity in being a brähmaëa’s son, and thus he became liable to be punished by
the law of God. The Lord never forgives a person who condemns His pure
devotee. Therefore, by cursing a king the foolish Çåìgi had committed not only
a sin but also the greatest offense. Therefore the åñi could foresee that only the
Supreme Personality of Godhead could save his boy from his sinful act. He
therefore directly prayed for pardon from the Supreme Lord, who alone can
undo a thing which is impossible to change. The appeal was made in the name
of a foolish boy who had developed no intelligence at all.
A question may be raised herein that since it was the desire of the Lord that
Parékñit Mahäräja be put into that awkward position so that he might be
delivered from material existence, then why was a brähmaëa’s son made
responsible for this offensive act? The answer is that the offensive act was
performed by a child only so that he could be excused very easily, and thus the
prayer of the father was accepted. But if the question is raised why the
brähmaëa community as a whole was made responsible for allowing Kali into
the world affairs, the answer is given in the Varäha Puräëa that the demons
who acted inimically toward the Personality of Godhead but were not killed by
the Lord were allowed to take birth in the families of brähmaëas to take
advantage of the age of Kali. The all-merciful Lord gave them a chance to have
their births in the families of pious brähmaëas so that they could progress
toward salvation. But the demons, instead of utilizing the good opportunity,
misused the brahminical culture due to being puffed up by vanity in becoming
brähmaëas. The typical example is the son of Çaméka Åñi, and all the foolish
sons of brähmaëas are warned hereby not to become as foolish as Çåìgi and be
always on guard against the demoniac qualities which they had in their
previous births. The foolish boy was, of course, excused by the Lord, but others,
who may not have a father like Çaméka Åñi, will be put into great difficulty if
they misuse the advantages obtained by birth in a brähmaëa family.
TEXT 48
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
iTarSk*-Taa ivPa[l/BDaa" Xaáa" i+aáa hTaa AiPa )
NaaSYa TaTa( Pa[iTaku-vRiNTa TaÙ¢-a" Pa[>avae_iPa ih )) 48 ))
tiraskåtä vipralabdhäù
çaptäù kñiptä hatä api
näsya tat pratikurvanti
tad-bhaktäù prabhavo ’pi hi
SYNONYMS
tiraù-kåtäù—being defamed; vipralabdhäù—being cheated; çaptäù—being
cursed; kñiptäù—disturbed by negligence; hatäù—or even being killed;
api—also; na—never; asya—for all these acts; tat—them;
pratikurvanti—counteract; tat—the Lord’s; bhaktäù—devotees;
prabhavaù—powerful; api—although; hi—certainly.
TRANSLATION
The devotees of the Lord are so forbearing that even though they are
defamed, cheated, cursed, disturbed, neglected or even killed, they are never
inclined to avenge themselves.
PURPORT
Åñi Çaméka also knew that the Lord does not forgive a person who has
committed an offense at the feet of a devotee. The Lord can only give
direction to take shelter of the devotee. He thought within himself that if
Mahäräja Parékñit would countercurse the boy, he might be saved. But he knew
also that a pure devotee is callous about worldly advantages or reverses. As
such, the devotees are never inclined to counteract personal defamation,
curses, negligence, etc. As far as such things are concerned, in personal affairs
the devotees do not care for them. But in the case of their being performed
against the Lord and His devotees, then the devotees take very strong action.
It was a personal affair, and therefore Çaméka Åñi knew that the King would
not take counteraction. Thus there was no alternative than to place an appeal
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
to the Lord for the immature boy.
It is not that only the brähmaëas are powerful enough to award curses or
blessings upon the subordinates; the devotee of the Lord, even though he may
not be a brähmaëa, is more powerful than a brähmaëa. But a powerful devotee
never misuses the power for personal benefit. Whatever power the devotee
may have is always utilized in service towards the Lord and His devotees only.
TEXT 49
wiTa Pau}ak*-TaagaeNa Saae_NauTaáae MahaMauiNa" )
SvYa& ivPa[k*-Taae raja NaEvaga& TadicNTaYaTa( )) 49 ))
iti putra-kåtäghena
so ’nutapto mahä-muniù
svayaà viprakåto räjïä
naiväghaà tad acintayat
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; putra—son; kåta—done by; aghena—by the sin; saù—he (the muni);
anutaptaù—regretting; mahä-muniù—the sage; svayam—personally;
viprakåtaù—being so insulted; räjïä—by the King; na—not; eva—certainly;
agham—the sin; tat—that; acintayat—thought of it.
TRANSLATION
The sage thus regretted the sin committed by his own son. He did not take
the insult paid by the King very seriously.
PURPORT
The whole incident is now cleared up. Mahäräja Parékñit’s garlanding the
sage with a dead snake was not at all a very serious offense, but Çåìgi’s cursing
the King was a serious offense. The serious offense was committed by a foolish
child only; therefore he deserved to be pardoned by the Supreme Lord,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
although it was not possible to get free from the sinful reaction. Mahäräja
Parékñit also did not mind the curse offered to him by a foolish brähmaëa. On
the contrary, he took full advantage of the awkward situation, and by the great
will of the Lord, Mahäräja Parékñit achieved the highest perfection of life
through the grace of Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé. Actually it was the desire of the
Lord, and Mahäräja Parékñit, Åñi Çaméka and his son Çåìgi were all
instrumental in fulfilling the desire of the Lord. So none of them were put into
difficulty because everything was done in relation with the Supreme Person.
TEXT 50
Pa[aYaXa" SaaDavae l/aeke- ParEÜRNÜezu YaaeiJaTaa" )
Na VYaQaiNTa Na ôZYaiNTa YaTa AaTMaa_Gau<aaé[Ya" )) 50 ))
präyaçaù sädhavo loke
parair dvandveñu yojitäù
na vyathanti na håñyanti
yata ätmäguëäçrayaù
SYNONYMS
präyaçaù—generally; sädhavaù—saints; loke—in this world; paraiù—by others;
dvandveñu—in duality; yojitäù—being engaged; na—never;
vyathanti—distressed; na—nor; håñyanti—takes pleasure; yataù—because;
ätmä—self; aguëa-äçrayaù—transcendental.
TRANSLATION
Generally the transcendentalists, even though engaged by others in the
dualities of the material world, are not distressed. Nor do they take pleasure [in
worldly things], for they are transcendentally engaged.
PURPORT
The transcendentalists are the empiric philosophers, the mystics and the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
devotees of the Lord. Empiric philosophers aim at the perfection of merging
into the being of the Absolute, mystics aim at perceiving the all-pervading
Supersoul, and the devotees of the Lord are engaged in the transcendental
loving service of the Personality of Godhead. Since Brahman, Paramätmä and
Bhagavän are different phases of the same Transcendence, all these
transcendentalists are beyond the three modes of material nature. Material
distresses and happinesses are products of the three modes, and therefore the
causes of such material distress and happiness have nothing to do with the
transcendentalists. The King was a devotee, and the åñi was a mystic.
Therefore both of them were unattached to the accidental incident created by
the supreme will. The playful child was an instrument in fulfilling the Lord’s
will.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the First Canto, Eighteenth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled “Mahäräja Parékñit Cursed by a Brähmaëa
Boy.”
Chapter Nineteen
The Appearance of Çukadeva Gosvämé
TEXT 1
SaUTa ovac
MahqPaiTaSTvQa TaTk-MaR Gaù|
ivicNTaYaàaTMak*-Ta& SauduMaRNaa" )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Ahae MaYaa NaqcMaNaaYaRvTk*-Ta&
iNaraGaiSa b]øi<a GaU!TaeJaiSa )) 1 ))
süta uväca
mahé-patis tv atha tat-karma garhyaà
vicintayann ätma-kåtaà sudurmanäù
aho mayä nécam anärya-vat kåtaà
nirägasi brahmaëi güòha-tejasi
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; mahé-patiù—the King; tu—but; atha—thus
(while coming back home); tat—that; karma—act; garhyam—abominable;
vicintayan—thus thinking; ätma-kåtam—done by himself; su-durmanäù—very
much depressed; aho—alas; mayä—by me; nécam—heinous;
anärya—uncivilized; vat—like; kåtam—done; nirägasi—unto one who is
faultless; brahmaëi—unto a brähmaëa; güòha—grave; tejasi—unto the
powerful.
TRANSLATION
Çré Süta Gosvämé said: While returning home, the King [Mahäräja Parékñit]
felt that the act he had committed against the faultless and powerful brähmaëa
was heinous and uncivilized. Consequently he was distressed.
PURPORT
The pious King regretted his accidental improper treatment of the powerful
brähmaëa, who was faultless. Such repentance is natural for a good man like
the King, and such repentance delivers a devotee from all kinds of sins
accidentally committed. The devotees are naturally faultless. Accidental sins
committed by a devotee are sincerely regretted, and by the grace of the Lord
all sins unwillingly committed by a devotee are burnt in the fire of repentance.
TEXT 2
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Da]uv& TaTaae Mae k*-Tadevhel/Naad(
durTYaYa& VYaSaNa& NaaiTadqgaaRTa( )
TadSTau k-aMa& ùgaiNaZk*-TaaYa Mae
YaQaa Na ku-Yaa| PauNarevMaÖa )) 2 ))
dhruvaà tato me kåta-deva-helanäd
duratyayaà vyasanaà näti-dérghät
tad astu kämaà hy agha-niñkåtäya me
yathä na kuryäà punar evam addhä
SYNONYMS
dhruvam—sure and certain; tataù—therefore; me—my;
kåta-deva-helanät—because of disobeying the orders of the Lord;
duratyayam—very difficult; vyasanam—calamity; na—not; ati—greatly;
dérghät—far off; tat—that; astu—let it be; kämam—desire without
reservations; hi—certainly; agha—sins; niñkåtäya—for getting free; me—my;
yathä—so that; na—never; kuryäm—shall I do it; punaù—again; evam—as I
have done; addhä—directly.
TRANSLATION
[King Parékñit thought:] Due to my neglecting the injunctions of the
Supreme Lord I must certainly expect some difficulty to overcome me in the
near future. I now desire without reservation that the calamity come now, for
in this way I may be freed of the sinful action and not commit such an offense
again.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord enjoins that brähmaëas and cows must be given all
protection. The Lord is Himself very much inclined to do good to brähmaëas
and cows (go-brähmaëa-hitäya ca). Mahäräja Parékñit knew all this, and thus
he concluded that his insulting a powerful brähmaëa was certainly to be
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
punished by the laws of the Lord, and he was expecting something very
difficult in the very near future. He therefore desired the imminent calamity
to fall on him and not on his family members. A man’s personal misconduct
affects all his family members. Therefore Mahäräja Parékñit desired the
calamity to fall on him alone. By suffering personally he would be restrained
from future sins, and at the same time the sin which he had committed would
be counteracted so that his descendants would not suffer. That is the way a
responsible devotee thinks. The family members of a devotee also share the
effects of a devotee’s service unto the Lord. Mahäräja Prahläda saved his
demon father by his personal devotional service. A devotee son in the family is
the greatest boon or blessing of the Lord.
TEXT 3
AÛEv raJYa& bl/Ma*Ök-aeXa&
Pa[k-aeiPaTab]øku-l/aNal/ae Mae )
dhTv>ad]SYa PauNaNaR Mae_>aUTa(
PaaPaqYaSaq DaqiÜRJadevGaae>Ya" )) 3 ))
adyaiva räjyaà balam åddha-koçaà
prakopita-brahma-kulänalo me
dahatv abhadrasya punar na me ’bhüt
päpéyasé dhér dvija-deva-gobhyaù
SYNONYMS
adya—this day; eva—on the very; räjyam—kingdom; balam åddha—strength
and riches; koçam—treasury; prakopita—ignited by; brahma-kula—by the
brähmaëa community; analaù—fire; me dahatu—let it burn me;
abhadrasya—inauspiciousness; punaù—again; na—not; me—unto me;
abhüt—may occur; päpéyasé—sinful; dhéù—intelligence; dvija—brähmaëas;
deva—the Supreme Lord; gobhyaù—and the cows.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
I am uncivilized and sinful due to my neglect of brahminical culture, God
consciousness and cow protection. Therefore I wish that my kingdom, strength
and riches burn up immediately by the fire of the brähmaëa’s wrath so that in
the future I may not be guided by such inauspicious attitudes.
PURPORT
Progressive human civilization is based on brahminical culture, God
consciousness and protection of cows. All economic development of the state
by trade, commerce, agriculture and industries must be fully utilized in relation
to the above principles, otherwise all so-called economic development becomes
a source of degradation. Cow protection means feeding the brahminical
culture, which leads towards God consciousness, and thus perfection of human
civilization is achieved. The age of Kali aims at killing the higher principles of
life, and although Mahäräja Parékñit strongly resisted the domination of the
personality of Kali within the world, the influence of the age of Kali came at
an opportune moment, and even a strong king like Mahäräja Parékñit was
induced to disregard the brahminical culture due to a slight provocation of
hunger and thirst. Mahäräja Parékñit lamented the accidental incident, and he
desired that all his kingdom, strength and accumulation of wealth would be
burned up for not being engaged in brahminical culture, etc.
Where wealth and strength are not engaged in the advancement of
brahminical culture, God consciousness and cow protection, the state and
home are surely doomed by Providence. If we want peace and prosperity in the
world, we should take lessons from this verse; every state and every home must
endeavor to advance the cause of brahminical culture for self-purification,
God consciousness for self-realization and cow protection for getting sufficient
milk and the best food to continue a perfect civilization.
TEXT 4
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Sa icNTaYaiàTQaMaQaaé*<aaed( YaQaa
MauNae" SauTaae¢-ae iNa‰RiTaSTa+ak-a:Ya" )
Sa SaaDau MaeNae Naicre<a Ta+ak-a‚
Nal&/ Pa[Sa¢-SYa ivri¢-k-ar<aMa( )) 4 ))
sa cintayann ittham athäçåëod yathä
muneù sutokto niråtis takñakäkhyaù
sa sädhu mene na cireëa takñakänalaà
prasaktasya virakti-käraëam
SYNONYMS
saù—he, the King; cintayan—thinking; ittham—like this; atha—now;
açåëot—heard; yathä—as; muneù—of the sage; suta-uktaù—uttered by the
son; niråtiù—death; takñaka-äkhyaù—in relation with the snake-bird; saù—he
(the King); sädhu—well and good; mene—accepted; na—not; cireëa—very
long time; takñaka—snake-bird; analam—fire; prasaktasya—for one who is too
attached; virakti—indifference; käraëam—cause.
TRANSLATION
While the King was thus repenting, he received news of his imminent death,
which would be due to the bite of a snake-bird, occasioned by the curse spoken
by the sage’s son. The King accepted this as good news, for it would be the
cause of his indifference toward worldly things.
PURPORT
Real happiness is achieved by spiritual existence or by cessation of the
repetition of birth and death. One can stop the repetition of birth and death
only by going back to Godhead. In the material world, even by attaining the
topmost planet (Brahmaloka), one cannot get rid of the conditions of repeated
birth and death, but still we do not accept the path of attaining perfection.
The path of perfection frees one from all material attachments, and thus one
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
becomes fit to enter into the spiritual kingdom. Therefore, those who are
materially poverty-stricken are better candidates than those who are
materially prosperous. Mahäräja Parékñit was a great devotee of the Lord and a
bona fide candidate for entering into the kingdom of God, but even though he
was so, his material assets as the Emperor of the world were setbacks to perfect
attainment of his rightful status as one of the associates of the Lord in the
spiritual sky. As a devotee of the Lord, he could understand that the cursing of
the brähmaëa boy, although unwise, was a blessing upon him, being the cause
of detachment from worldly affairs, both political and social. Çaméka Muni
also, after regretting the incident, conveyed the news to the King as a matter
of duty so that the King would be able to prepare himself to go back to
Godhead. Çaméka Muni sent news to the King that foolish Çåìgi, his son,
although a powerful brähmaëa boy, unfortunately had misused his spiritual
power by cursing the King unwarrantedly. The incident of the King’s
garlanding the muni was not sufficient cause for being cursed to death, but
since there was no way to retract the curse, the King was informed to prepare
for death within a week. Both Çaméka Muni and the King were self-realized
souls. Çaméka Muni was a mystic, and Mahäräja Parékñit was a devotee.
Therefore there was no difference between them in self-realization. Neither of
them was afraid of meeting death. Mahäräja Parékñit could have gone to the
muni to beg his pardon, but the news of imminent death was conveyed to the
King with so much regret by the muni that the King did not want to shame the
muni further by his presence there. He decided to prepare himself for his
imminent death and find out the way to go back to Godhead.
The life of a human being is a chance to prepare oneself to go back to
Godhead, or to get rid of the material existence, the repetition of birth and
death. Thus in the system of varëäçrama-dharma every man and woman is
trained for this purpose. In other words, the system of varëäçrama-dharma is
known also as sanätana-dharma, or the eternal occupation. The system of
varëäçrama-dharma prepares a man for going back to Godhead, and thus a
householder is ordered to go to the forest as vänaprastha to acquire complete
knowledge and then to take sannyäsa prior to his inevitable death. Parékñit
Mahäräja was fortunate to get a seven-day notice to meet his inevitable death.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
But for the common man there is no definite notice, although death is
inevitable for all. Foolish men forget this sure fact of death and neglect the
duty of preparing themselves for going back to Godhead. They spoil their lives
in animal propensities to eat, drink, be merry and enjoy. Such an irresponsible
life is adopted by the people in the age of Kali because of a sinful desire to
condemn brahminical culture, God consciousness and cow protection, for
which the state is responsible. The state must employ revenue to advance these
three items and thus educate the populace to prepare for death. The state
which does so is the real welfare state. The state of India should better follow
the examples of Mahäräja Parékñit, the ideal executive head, than to imitate
other materialistic states which have no idea of the kingdom of Godhead, the
ultimate goal of human life. Deterioration of the ideals of Indian civilization
has brought about the deterioration of civic life, not only in India but also
abroad.
TEXT 5
AQaae ivhaYaeMaMaMau& c l/aek&-
ivMaiXaRTaaE heYaTaYaa PaurSTaaTa( )
k*-Z<aax(iga]SaevaMaiDaMaNYaMaaNa
oPaaivXaTa( Pa[aYaMaMaTYaRNaÛaMa( )) 5 ))
atho vihäyemam amuà ca lokaà
vimarçitau heyatayä purastät
kåñëäìghri-seväm adhimanyamäna
upäviçat präyam amartya-nadyäm
SYNONYMS
atho—thus; vihäya—giving up; imam—this; amum—and the next; ca—also;
lokam—planets; vimarçitau—all of them being judged; heyatayä—because of
inferiority; purastät—hereinbefore; kåñëa-aìghri—the lotus feet of the Lord,
Çré Kåñëa; seväm—transcendental loving service; adhimanyamänaù—one who
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
thinks of the greatest of all achievements; upäviçat—sat down firmly;
präyam—for fasting; amartya-nadyäm—on the bank of the transcendental
river (the Ganges or the Yamunä).
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Parékñit sat down firmly on the banks of the Ganges to concentrate
his mind in Kåñëa consciousness, rejecting all other practices of self-realization,
because transcendental loving service to Kåñëa is the greatest achievement,
superseding all other methods.
PURPORT
For a devotee like Mahäräja Parékñit, none of the material planets, even the
topmost Brahmaloka, is as desirable as Goloka Våndävana, the abode of Lord
Çré Kåñëa, the primeval Lord and original Personality of Godhead. This earth
is one of the innumerable material planets within the universe, and there are
innumerable universes also within the compass of the mahat-tattva. The
devotees are told by the Lord and His representatives, the spiritual masters or
äcäryas, that not one of the planets within all the innumerable universes is
suitable for the residential purposes of a devotee. The devotee always desires to
go back home, back to Godhead, just to become one of the associates of the
Lord in the capacity of servitor, friend, parent or conjugal lover of the Lord,
either in one of the innumerable Vaikuëöha planets or in Goloka Våndävana,
the planet of Lord Çré Kåñëa. All these planets are eternally situated in the
spiritual sky, the paravyoma, which is on the other side of the Causal Ocean
within the mahat-tattva. Mahäräja Parékñit was already aware of all this
information due to his accumulated piety and birth in a high family of
devotees, Vaiñëavas, and thus he was not at all interested in the material
planets. Modern scientists are very eager to reach the moon by material
arrangements, but they cannot conceive of the highest planet of this universe.
But a devotee like Mahäräja Parékñit does not care a fig for the moon or, for
that matter, any of the material planets. So when he was assured of his death
on a fixed date, he became more determined in the transcendental loving
service of Lord Kåñëa by complete fasting on the bank of the transcendental
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
River Yamunä, which flows down by the capital of Hastinäpura (in the Delhi
state). Both the Ganges and the Yamunä are amartyä (transcendental) rivers,
and Yamunä is still more sanctified for the following reasons.
TEXT 6
Yaa vE l/SaC^\qTaul/SaqiviMaé[‚
k*-Z<aax(iga]re<v>YaiDak-aMbuNae}aq )
PauNaaiTa l/aek-aNau>aYa}a SaeXaaNa(
k-STaa& Na SaeveTa MairZYaMaa<a" )) 6 ))
yä vai lasac-chré-tulasé-vimiçrakåñëäìghri-
reëv-abhyadhikämbu-netré
punäti lokän ubhayatra seçän
kas täà na seveta mariñyamäëaù
SYNONYMS
yä—the river which; vai—always; lasat—floating with; çré-tulasé—tulasé
leaves; vimiçra—mixed; kåñëa-aìghri—the lotus feet of the Lord, Çré Kåñëa;
reëu—dust; abhyadhika—auspicious; ambu—water; netré—that which is
carrying; punäti—sanctifies; lokän—planets; ubhayatra—both the upper and
lower or inside and outside; sa-éçän—along with Lord Çiva; kaù—who else;
täm—that river; na—does not; seveta—worship; mariñyamäëaù—one who is
to die at any moment.
TRANSLATION
The river [Ganges, by which the King sat to fast] carries the most auspicious
water, which is mixed with the dust of the lotus feet of the Lord and tulasé
leaves. Therefore that water sanctifies the three worlds inside and outside and
even sanctifies Lord Çiva and other demigods. Consequently everyone who is
destined to die must take shelter of this river.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Parékñit, just after receiving the news of his death within seven
days, at once retired from family life and shifted himself to the sacred bank of
the Yamunä River. Generally it is said that the King took shelter on the bank
of the Ganges, but according to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, the King took shelter on
the bank of the Yamunä. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé’s statement appears to be more
accurate because of the geographical situation. Mahäräja Parékñit resided in his
capital Hastinäpura, situated near present Delhi, and the River Yamunä flows
down past the city. Naturally the King would take shelter of the River Yamunä
because she was flowing past his palace door. And as far as sanctity is
concerned, the River Yamunä is more directly connected with Lord Kåñëa
than the Ganges. The Lord sanctified the River Yamunä from the beginning of
His transcendental pastimes in the world. While His father Vasudeva was
crossing the Yamunä with the baby Lord Kåñëa for a safe place at Gokula on
the other bank of the river from Mathurä, the Lord fell down in the river, and
by the dust of His lotus feet the river at once became sanctified. It is especially
mentioned herein that Mahäräja Parékñit took shelter of that particular river
which is beautifully flowing, carrying the dust of the lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa,
mixed with tulasé leaves. Lord Kåñëa’s lotus feet are always besmeared with the
tulasé leaves, and thus as soon as His lotus feet contact the water of the Ganges
and the Yamunä, the rivers become at once sanctified. The Lord, however,
contacted the River Yamunä more than the Ganges. According to the Varäha
Puräëa, as quoted by Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, there is no difference between the
water of the Ganges and the Yamunä, but when the water of the Ganges is
sanctified one hundred times, it is called the Yamunä. Similarly, it is said in the
scriptures that one thousand names of Viñëu are equal to one name of Räma,
and three names of Lord Räma are equal to one name of Kåñëa.
TEXT 7
wiTa VYaviC^Û Sa Paa<@veYa"
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Pa[aYaaePaveXa& Pa[iTa ivZ<auPaÛaMa( )
dDaaE Mauku-Ndax(iga]MaNaNYa>aavae
MauiNav]Taae Mau¢-SaMaSTaSa®" )) 7 ))
iti vyavacchidya sa päëòaveyaù
präyopaveçaà prati viñëu-padyäm
dadhau mukundäìghrim ananya-bhävo
muni-vrato mukta-samasta-saìgaù
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; vyavacchidya—having decided; saù—the King; päëòaveyaù—worthy
descendant of the Päëòavas; präya-upaveçam—for fasting until death;
prati—toward; viñëu-padyäm—on the bank of the Ganges (emanating from
the lotus feet of Lord Viñëu); dadhau—gave himself up;
mukunda-aìghrim—unto the lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa; ananya—without
deviation; bhävaù—spirit; muni-vrataù—with the vows of a sage;
mukta—liberated from; samasta—all kinds of; saìgaù—association.
TRANSLATION
Thus the King, the worthy descendant of the Päëòavas, decided once and for
all and sat on the Ganges’ bank to fast until death and give himself up to the
lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa, who alone is able to award liberation. So, freeing
himself from all kinds of associations and attachments, he accepted the vows of
a sage.
PURPORT
The water of the Ganges sanctifies all the three worlds, including the gods
and the demigods, because it emanates from the lotus feet of the Personality of
Godhead Viñëu. Lord Kåñëa is the fountainhead of the principle of
viñëu-tattva, and therefore shelter of His lotus feet can deliver one from all
sins, including an offense committed by a king unto a brähmaëa. Mahäräja
Parékñit, therefore, decided to meditate upon the lotus feet of Lord Çré Kåñëa,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
who is Mukunda, or the giver of liberations of all description. The banks of the
Ganges or the Yamunä give one a chance to remember the Lord continuously.
Mahäräja Parékñit freed himself from all sorts of material association and
meditated upon the lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa, and that is the way of liberation.
To be free from all material association means to cease completely from
committing any further sins. To meditate upon the lotus feet of the Lord
means to become free from the effects of all previous sins. The conditions of
the material world are so made that one has to commit sins willingly or
unwillingly, and the best example is Mahäräja Parékñit himself, who was a
recognized sinless, pious king. But he also became a victim of an offense, even
though he was ever unwilling to commit such a mistake. He was cursed also,
but because he was a great devotee of the Lord, even such reverses of life
became favorable. The principle is that one should not willingly commit any
sin in his life and should constantly remember the lotus feet of the Lord
without deviation. Only in such a mood will the Lord help the devotee make
regular progress toward the path of liberation and thus attain the lotus feet of
the Lord. Even if there are accidental sins committed by the devotee, the Lord
saves the surrendered soul from all sins, as confirmed in all scriptures.
sva-päda-mülaà bhajataù priyasya
tyaktäny abhävasya hariù pareçaù
vikarma yac cotpatitaà kathaïcid
dhunoti sarvaà hådi sanniviñöaù
(Bhäg. 11.5.42)
TEXT 8
Ta}aaePaJaGMau>auRvNa& PauNaaNaa
MahaNau>aava MauNaYa" SaiXaZYaa" )
Pa[aYae<a TaqQaaRi>aGaMaaPadeXaE"
SvYa& ih TaqQaaRiNa PauNaiNTa SaNTa" )) 8 ))
tatropajagmur bhuvanaà punänä
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
mahänubhävä munayaù sa-çiñyäù
präyeëa térthäbhigamäpadeçaiù
svayaà hi térthäni punanti santaù
SYNONYMS
tatra—there; upajagmuù—arrived; bhuvanam—the universe; punänäù—those
who can sanctify; mahä-anubhäväù—great minds; munayaù—thinkers;
sa-çiñyäù—along with their disciples; präyeëa—almost; tértha—place of
pilgrimage; abhigama—journey; apadeçaiù—on the plea of;
svayam—personally; hi—certainly; térthäni—all the places of pilgrimage;
punanti—sanctify; santaù—sages.
TRANSLATION
At that time all the great minds and thinkers, accompanied by their disciples,
and sages who could verily sanctify a place of pilgrimage just by their presence,
arrived there on the plea of making a pilgrim’s journey.
PURPORT
When Mahäräja Parékñit sat down on the bank of the Ganges, the news
spread in all directions of the universe, and the great-minded sages, who could
follow the importance of the occasion, all arrived there on the plea of
pilgrimage. Actually they came to meet Mahäräja Parékñit and not to take a
bath of pilgrimage because all of them were competent enough to sanctify the
places of pilgrimage. Common men go to pilgrimage sites to get themselves
purified of all sins. Thus the places of pilgrimage become overburdened with
the sins of others. But when such sages visit overburdened places of pilgrimage,
they sanctify the places by their presence. Therefore the sages who came to
meet Mahäräja Parékñit were not very much interested in getting themselves
purified like common men, but on the plea of taking a bath in that place they
came to meet Mahäräja Parékñit because they could foresee that
Çrémad-Bhägavatam would be spoken by Çukadeva Gosvämé. All of them
wanted to take advantage of the great occasion.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TEXTS 9–10
Ai}avRiSaïXCYavNa" XarÜa‚
NairíNaeiMa>a*RGauri®raê )
ParaXarae GaaiDaSauTaae_Qa raMa
oTaQYa wNd]Pa[MadeDMavahaE )) 9 ))
MaeDaaiTaiQadeRvl/ AaiíRze<aae
>aarÜaJaae GaaETaMa" iPaPPal/ad" )
MaE}aeYa AaEvR" k-vz" ku-M>aYaaeiNa‚
ÜOEPaaYaNaae >aGavaàardê )) 10 ))
atrir vasiñöhaç cyavanaù çaradvän
ariñöanemir bhågur aìgiräç ca
paräçaro gädhi-suto ’tha räma
utathya indrapramadedhmavähau
medhätithir devala ärñöiñeëo
bhäradväjo gautamaù pippalädaù
maitreya aurvaù kavañaù kumbhayonir
dvaipäyano bhagavän näradaç ca
SYNONYMS
atri to närada—all names of the different saintly personalities who arrived
there from different parts of the universe.
TRANSLATION
From different parts of the universe there arrived great sages like Atri,
Cyavana, Çaradvän, Ariñöanemi, Bhågu, Vasiñöha, Paräçara, Viçvämitra,
Aìgirä, Paraçuräma, Utathya, Indrapramada, Idhmavähu, Medhätithi, Devala,
Ärñöiñeëa, Bhäradväja, Gautama, Pippaläda, Maitreya, Aurva, Kavaña,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Kumbhayoni, Dvaipäyana and the great personality Närada.
PURPORT
Cyavana: A great sage and one of the sons of Bhågu Muni. He was born
prematurely when his pregnant mother was kidnapped. Cyavana is one of the
six sons of his father.
Bhågu: When Brahmäjé was performing a great sacrifice on behalf of
Varuëa, Maharñi Bhågu was born from the sacrificial fire. He was a great sage,
and his very dear wife was Pulomä. He could travel in space like Durväsä,
Närada and others, and he used to visit all the planets of the universe. Before
the Battle of Kurukñetra, he tried to stop the battle. Sometimes he instructed
Bhäradväja Muni about astronomical evolution, and he is the author of the
great Bhågu-saàhitä, the great astrological calculation. He explained how air,
fire, water and earth are generated from ether. He explained how the air in the
stomach works and regulates the intestines. As a great philosopher, he logically
established the eternity of the living entity (Mahäbhärata). He was also a great
anthropologist, and the theory of evolution was long ago explained by him. He
was a scientific propounder of the four divisions and orders of human society
known as the varëäçrama institution. He converted the kñatriya king
Vétahavya into a brähmaëa.
Vasiñöha: See Çrémad-Bhägavatam 1.9.6.
Paräçara: He is the grandson of Vasiñöha Muni and father of Vyäsadeva. He
is the son of Maharñi Çakti, and his mother’s name was Adåçyaté. He was in the
womb of his mother when she was only twelve years old. And from within the
womb of his mother he learned the Vedas. His father was killed by a demon,
Kalmäñapäda, and to avenge this he wanted to annihilate the whole world. He
was restrained, however, by his grandfather Vasiñöha. He then performed a
Räkñasa-killing yajïa, but Maharñi Pulastya restrained him. He begot
Vyäsadeva, being attracted by Satyavaté, who was to become the wife of
Mahäräja Çäntanu. By the blessings of Paräçara, Satyavaté became fragrant for
miles. He was present also during the time of Bhéñma’s death. He was spiritual
master of Mahäräja Janaka and a great devotee of Lord Çiva. He is the author
of many Vedic scriptures and sociological directions.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Gädhi-suta, or Viçvämitra: A great sage of austerity and mystic power. He is
famous as Gädhi-suta because his father was Gädhi, a powerful king of the
province of Kanyäkubja (part of Uttara Pradesh). Although he was a kñatriya
by birth, he became a brähmaëa in the very same body by the power of his
spiritual achievements. He picked a quarrel with Vasiñöha Muni when he was a
kñatriya king and performed a great sacrifice in cooperation with Magaìga
Muni and thus was able to vanquish the sons of Vasiñöha. He became a great
yogé, and yet he failed to check his senses and thus was obliged to become the
father of Çakuntalä, the beauty queen of world history. Once, when he was a
kñatriya king, he visited the hermitage of Vasiñöha Muni, and he was given a
royal reception. Viçvämitra wanted from Vasiñöha a cow named Nandiné, and
the Muni refused to deliver it. Viçvämitra stole the cow, and thus there was a
quarrel between the sage and the King. Viçvämitra was defeated by the
spiritual strength of Vasiñöha, and thus the King decided to become a
brähmaëa. Before becoming a brähmaëa he underwent severe austerity on the
bank of the Kauçika. He was also one who tried to stop the Kurukñetra war.
Aìgirä: He is one of the six mental sons of Brahmä and the father of
Båhaspati, the great learned priest of the demigods in the heavenly planets. He
was born of the semen of Brahmäjé given to a cinder of fire. Utathya and
Saàvarta are his sons. It is said that he is still performing austerity and
chanting the holy name of the Lord at a place known as Alokänanda on the
banks of the Ganges.
Paraçuräma: See Çrémad-Bhägavatam 1.9.6.
Utathya: One of the three sons of Maharñi Aìgirä. He was the spiritual
master of Mahäräja Mandhätä. He married Bhadrä, the daughter of Soma
(moon). Varuëa kidnapped his wife Bhadrä, and to retaliate the offense of the
god of water, he drank all the water of the world.
Medhätithi: An old sage of yore. An assembly member of the heavenly King
Indradeva. His son was Kaëva Muni, who brought up Çakuntalä in the forest.
He was promoted to the heavenly planet by strictly following the principles of
retired life (vänaprastha).
Devala: A great authority like Närada Muni and Vyäsadeva. His good name
is on the list of authorities mentioned in the Bhagavad-gétä when Arjuna
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
acknowledged Lord Kåñëa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He met
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira after the Battle of Kurukñetra, and he was the elder
brother of Dhaumya, the priest of the Päëòava family. Like the kñatriyas, he
also allowed his daughter to select her own husband in a svayaàvara meeting,
and at that ceremony all the bachelor sons of the åñis were invited. According
to some, he is not Asita Devala.
Bhäradväja: See Çrémad-Bhägavatam 1.9.6.
Gautama: One of the seven great sages of the universe. Çaradvän Gautama
was one of his sons. Persons in the Gautama-gotra (dynasty) today are either
his family descendants or in his disciplic succession. The brähmaëas who
profess Gautama-gotra are generally family descendants, and the kñatriyas and
vaiçyas who profess Gautama-gotra are all in the line of his disciplic succession.
He was the husband of the famous Ahalyä who turned into stone when
Indradeva, the King of the heaven, molested her. Ahalyä was delivered by
Lord Rämacandra. Gautama was the grandfather of Kåpäcärya, one of the
heroes of the Battle of Kurukñetra.
Maitreya: A great åñi of yore. He was spiritual master of Vidura and a great
religious authority. He advised Dhåtaräñöra to keep good relations with the
Päëòavas. Duryodhana disagreed and thus was cursed by him. He met
Vyäsadeva and had religious discourses with him.
TEXT 11
ANYae c devizRb]øizRvYaaR
raJaizRvYaaR Aå<aadYaê )
NaaNaazeRYaPa[vraNa( SaMaeTaa‚
Na>YaCYaR raJaa iXarSaa vvNde )) 11 ))
anye ca devarñi-brahmarñi-varyä
räjarñi-varyä aruëädayaç ca
nänärñeya-pravarän sametän
abhyarcya räjä çirasä vavande
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
anye—many others; ca—also; devarñi—saintly demigods; brahmarñi—saintly
brähmaëas; varyäù—topmost; räjarñi-varyäù—topmost saintly kings;
aruëa-ädayaù—a special rank of räjarñis; ca—and; nänä—many others;
ärñeya-pravarän—chief amongst the dynasties of the sages;
sametän—assembled together; abhyarcya—by worshiping; räjä—the Emperor;
çirasä—bowed his head to the ground; vavande—welcomed.
TRANSLATION
There were also many other saintly demigods, kings and special royal orders
called aruëädayas [a special rank of räjarñis] from different dynasties of sages.
When they all assembled together to meet the Emperor [Parékñit], he received
them properly and bowed his head to the ground.
PURPORT
The system of bowing the head to the ground to show respect to superiors is
an excellent etiquette which obliges the honored guest deep into the heart.
Even the first-grade offender is excused simply by this process, and Mahäräja
Parékñit, although honored by all the åñis and kings, welcomed all the big men
in that humble etiquette in order to be excused from any offenses. Generally at
the last stage of one’s life this humble method is adopted by every sensible man
in order to be excused before departure. In this way Mahäräja Parékñit
implored everyone’s good will for going back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 12
Sau%aePaivíeZvQa Taezu >aUYa"
k*-TaPa[<aaMa" Svick-IizRTa& YaTa( )
ivjaPaYaaMaaSa iviv¢-ceTaa
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
oPaiSQaTaae_Ga]e_i>aGa*hqTaPaai<a" )) 12 ))
sukhopaviñöeñv atha teñu bhüyaù
kåta-praëämaù sva-cikérñitaà yat
vijïäpayäm äsa vivikta-cetä
upasthito ’gre ’bhigåhéta-päëiù
SYNONYMS
sukha—happily; upaviñöeñu—all sitting down; atha—thereupon; teñu—unto
them (the visitors); bhüyaù—again; kåta-praëämaù—having offered
obeisances; sva—his own; cikérñitam—decision of fasting; yat—who;
vijïäpayäm äsa—submitted; vivikta-cetäù—one whose mind is detached from
worldly affairs; upasthitaù—being present; agre—before them;
abhigåhéta-päëiù—humbly with folded hands.
TRANSLATION
After all the åñis and others had seated themselves comfortably, the King,
humbly standing before them with folded hands, told them of his decision to
fast until death.
PURPORT
Although the King had already decided to fast until death on the bank of
the Ganges, he humbly expressed his decision to elicit the opinions of the great
authorities present there. Any decision, however important, should be
confirmed by some authority. That makes the matter perfect. This means that
the monarchs who ruled the earth in those days were not irresponsible
dictators. They scrupulously followed the authoritative decisions of the saints
and sages in terms of Vedic injunction. Mahäräja Parékñit, as a perfect king,
followed the principles by consulting the authorities, even up to the last days
of his life.
TEXT 13
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
raJaaevac
Ahae vYa& DaNYaTaMaa Na*Paa<aa&
MahtaMaaNauGa]h<aqYaXaql/a" )
raja& ku-l&/ b]aø<aPaadXaaEcad(
dUrad( ivSa*í& bTa GaùRk-MaR )) 13 ))
räjoväca
aho vayaà dhanyatamä nåpäëäà
mahattamänugrahaëéya-çéläù
räjïäà kulaà brähmaëa-päda-çaucäd
düräd visåñöaà bata garhya-karma
SYNONYMS
räjä uväca—the fortunate King said; aho—ah; vayam—we;
dhanya-tamäù—most thankful; nåpäëäm—of all the kings; mahat-tama—of
the great souls; anugrahaëéya-çéläù—trained to get favors; räjïäm—of the
royal; kulam—orders; brähmaëa-päda—feet of the brähmaëas; çaucät—refuse
after cleaning; dürät—at a distance; visåñöam—always left out; bata—on
account of; garhya—condemnable; karma—activities.
TRANSLATION
The fortunate King said: Indeed, we are the most grateful of all the kings
who are trained to get favors from the great souls. Generally you [sages]
consider royalty as refuse to be rejected and left in a distant place.
PURPORT
According to religious principles, stool, urine, wash water, etc., must be left
at a long distance. Attached bathrooms, urinals, etc. may be very convenient
amenities of modern civilization, but they are ordered to be situated at a
distance from residential quarters. That very example is cited herein in
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
relation to the kingly order for those who are progressively marching back to
Godhead. Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu said that to be in intimate touch
with dollars-and-cents men, or the kingly order, is worse than suicide for one
who desires to go back to Godhead. In other words, the transcendentalists do
not generally associate with men who are too enamored by the external beauty
of God’s creation. By advanced knowledge in spiritual realization, the
transcendentalist knows that this beautiful material world is nothing but a
shadowy reflection of the reality, the kingdom of God. They are not, therefore,
very much captivated by royal opulence or anything like that. But in the case
of Mahäräja Parékñit, the situation was different. Apparently the King was
condemned to death by an inexperienced brähmaëa boy, but factually he was
called by the Lord to return to Him. Other transcendentalists, the great sages
and mystics who assembled together because of Mahäräja Parékñit’s fasting
unto death, were quite anxious to see him, for he was going back to Godhead.
Mahäräja Parékñit also could understand that the great sages who assembled
there were all kind to his forefathers, the Päëòavas, because of their
devotional service to the Lord. He therefore felt grateful to the sages for being
present there at the last stage of his life, and he felt that it was all due to the
greatness of his late forefathers or grandfathers. He felt proud, therefore, that
he happened to be the descendant of such great devotees. Such pride for the
devotees of the Lord is certainly not equal to the puffed-up sense of vanity for
material prosperity. The first is reality, whereas the other is false and vain.
TEXT 14
TaSYaEv Mae_gaSYa ParavreXaae
VYaaSa¢-ictaSYa Ga*heZv>aq+<aMa( )
iNaveRdMaUl/ae iÜJaXaaPaæPaae
Ya}a Pa[Sa¢-ae >aYaMaaéu Datae )) 14 ))
tasyaiva me ’ghasya parävareço
vyäsakta-cittasya gåheñv abhékñëam
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
nirveda-mülo dvija-çäpa-rüpo
yatra prasakto bhayam äçu dhatte
SYNONYMS
tasya—his; eva—certainly; me—mine; aghasya—of the sinful;
parä—transcendental; avara—mundane; éçaù—controller, the Supreme Lord;
vyäsakta—overly attached; cittasya—of the mind; gåheñu—to family affairs;
abhékñëam—always; nirveda-mülaù—the source of detachment;
dvija-çäpa—cursing by the brähmaëa; rüpaù—form of; yatra—whereupon;
prasaktaù—one who is affected; bhayam—fearfulness; äçu—very soon;
dhatte—take place.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, the controller of both the
transcendental and mundane worlds, has graciously overtaken me in the form of
a brähmaëa’s curse. Due to my being too much attached to family life, the Lord,
in order to save me, has appeared before me in such a way that only out of fear
I will detach myself from the world.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Parékñit, although born in a family of great devotees, the
Päëòavas, and although securely trained in transcendental attachment for the
association of the Lord, still found the allurement of mundane family life so
strong that he had to be detached by a plan of the Lord. Such direct action is
taken by the Lord in the case of a special devotee. Mahäräja Parékñit could
understand this by the presence of the topmost transcendentalists in the
universe. The Lord resides with His devotees, and therefore the presence of
the great saints indicated the presence of the Lord. The King therefore
welcomed the presence of the great åñis as a mark of favor of the Supreme
Lord.
TEXT 15
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Ta& MaaePaYaaTa& Pa[iTaYaNTau ivPa[a
Ga®a c devq Da*TaictaMaqXae )
iÜJaaePaSa*í" ku-hk-STa+ak-ae va
dXaTvl&/ GaaYaTa ivZ<auGaaQaa" )) 15 ))
taà mopayätaà pratiyantu viprä
gaìgä ca devé dhåta-cittam éçe
dvijopasåñöaù kuhakas takñako vä
daçatv alaà gäyata viñëu-gäthäù
SYNONYMS
tam—for that reason; mä—me; upayätam—taken shelter of; pratiyantu—just
accept me; vipräù—O brähmaëas; gaìgä—mother Ganges; ca—also;
devé—direct representative of the Lord; dhåta—taken into; cittam—heart;
éçe—unto the Lord; dvija-upasåñöaù—created by the brähmaëa;
kuhakaù—something magical; takñakaù—the snakebird; vä—either;
daçatu—let it bite; alam—without further delay; gäyata—please go on singing;
viñëu-gäthäù—narration of the deeds of Viñëu.
TRANSLATION
O brähmaëas, just accept me as a completely surrendered soul, and let
mother Ganges, the representative of the Lord, also accept me in that way, for I
have already taken the lotus feet of the Lord into my heart. Let the
snake-bird—or whatever magical thing the brähmaëa created—bite me at once.
I only desire that you all continue singing the deeds of Lord Viñëu.
PURPORT
As soon as one is given up completely unto the lotus feet of the Supreme
Lord, he is not at all afraid of death. The atmosphere created by the presence
of great devotees of the Lord on the bank of the Ganges and Mahäräja
Parékñit’s complete acceptance of the Lord’s lotus feet were sufficient
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
guarantee to the King for going back to Godhead. He thus became absolutely
free from all fear of death.
TEXT 16
PauNaê >aUYaaÙGavTYaNaNTae
riTa" Pa[Sa®ê Tadaé[Yaezu )
MahTSau Yaa& YaaMauPaYaaiMa Sa*ií&
MaE}YaSTau SavR}a NaMaae iÜJae>Ya" )) 16 ))
punaç ca bhüyäd bhagavaty anante
ratiù prasaìgaç ca tad-äçrayeñu
mahatsu yäà yäm upayämi såñöià
maitry astu sarvatra namo dvijebhyaù
SYNONYMS
punaù—again; ca—and; bhüyät—let it be; bhagavati—unto Lord Çré Kåñëa;
anante—who has unlimited potency; ratiù—attracting;
prasaìgaù—association; ca—also; tat—His; äçrayeñu—with those who are His
devotees; mahatsu—within the material creation; yäm yäm—wherever;
upayämi—I may take; såñöim—my birth; maitré—friendly relation; astu—let it
be; sarvatra—everywhere; namaù—my obeisances; dvijebhyaù—unto the
brähmaëas.
TRANSLATION
Again, offering obeisances unto all you brähmaëas, I pray that if I should
again take my birth in the material world I will have complete attachment to
the unlimited Lord Kåñëa, association with His devotees and friendly relations
with all living beings.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
That a devotee of the Lord is the only perfect living being is explained
herein by Mahäräja Parékñit. A devotee of the Lord is no one’s enemy,
although there may be many enemies of a devotee. A devotee of the Lord does
not like to associate with nondevotees, although he has no enmity with them.
He desires association with the devotees of the Lord. This is perfectly natural
because birds of the same feather mix together. And the most important
function of a devotee is to have complete attachment for Lord Çré Kåñëa, the
father of all living beings. As a good son of the father behaves in a friendly way
with all his other brothers, so also the devotee of the Lord, being a good son of
the supreme father, Lord Kåñëa, sees all other living beings in relation with the
supreme father. He tries to bring back the upstart sons of the father to a saner
stage and to get them to accept the supreme fatherhood of God. Mahäräja
Parékñit was certainly going back to Godhead, but even if he were not to go
back, he prayed for a pattern of life which is the most perfect way in the
material world. A pure devotee does not desire the company of a personality as
great as Brahmä, but he prefers the association of a petty living being, provided
he is a devotee of the Lord.
TEXT 17
wiTa SMa raJaaDYavSaaYaYau¢-"
Pa[acqNaMaUle/zu ku-Xaezu Daqr" )
odx(Mau%ae di+a<akU-l/ AaSTae
SaMaud]PaTNYaa" SvSauTaNYaSTa>aar" )) 17 ))
iti sma räjädhyavasäya-yuktaù
präcéna-müleñu kuçeñu dhéraù
udaì-mukho dakñiëa-küla äste
samudra-patnyäù sva-suta-nyasta-bhäraù
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; sma—as in the past; räjä—the King; adhyavasäya—perseverance;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
yuktaù—being engaged; präcéna—eastern; müleñu—with the root; kuçeñu—on
a seat made of kuça straw; dhéraù—self-controlled; udaì-mukhaù—facing the
northern side; dakñiëa—on the southern; küle—bank; äste—situated;
samudra—the sea; patnyäù—wife of (the Ganges); sva—own; suta—son;
nyasta—given over; bhäraù—the charge of administration.
TRANSLATION
In perfect self-control, Mahäräja Parékñit sat down on a seat of straw, with
straw-roots facing the east, placed on the southern bank of the Ganges, and he
himself faced the north. Just previously he had given charge of his kingdom
over to his son.
PURPORT
The River Ganges is celebrated as the wife of the sea. The seat of kuça straw
is considered to be sanctified if the straw is taken out of the earth complete
with root, and if the root is pointed toward the east it is considered to be
auspicious. Facing the north is still more favorable for attaining spiritual
success. Mahäräja Parékñit handed over the charge of administration to his son
before leaving home. He was thus fully equipped for all favorable conditions.
TEXT 18
Wv& c TaiSMaàrdevdeve
Pa[aYaaePaivíe idiv devSaºa" )
Pa[XaSYa >aUMaaE VYaik-rNa( Pa[SaUNaE‚
MauRda MauhuduRNdu>aYaê Naedu" )) 18 ))
evaà ca tasmin nara-deva-deve
präyopaviñöe divi deva-saìghäù
praçasya bhümau vyakiran prasünair
mudä muhur dundubhayaç ca neduù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; ca—and; tasmin—in that; nara-deva-deve—upon the King’s;
präya-upaviñöe—being engaged in fasting to death; divi—in the sky;
deva—demigods; saìghäù—all of them; praçasya—having praised the action;
bhümau—on the earth; vyakiran—scattered; prasünaiù—with flowers;
mudä—in pleasure; muhuù—continually; dundubhayaù—celestial drums;
ca—also; neduù—beaten.
TRANSLATION
Thus the King, Mahäräja Parékñit, sat to fast until death. All the demigods of
the higher planets praised the King’s actions and in pleasure continually
scattered flowers over the earth and beat celestial drums.
PURPORT
Even up to the time of Mahäräja Parékñit there were interplanetary
communications, and the news of Mahäräja Parékñit’s fasting unto death to
attain salvation reached the higher planets in the sky where the intelligent
demigods live. The demigods are more luxurious than human beings, but all of
them are obedient to the orders of the Supreme Lord. There is no one in the
heavenly planets who is an atheist or nonbeliever. Thus any devotee of the
Lord on the surface of the earth is always praised by them, and in the case of
Mahäräja Parékñit they were greatly delighted and thus gave tokens of honor
by scattering flowers over the earth and by beating celestial drums. A demigod
takes pleasure in seeing someone go back to Godhead. He is always pleased
with a devotee of the Lord, so much so that by his adhidaivic powers he may
help the devotees in all respects. And by their actions, the Lord is pleased with
them. There is an invisible chain of complete cooperation between the Lord,
the demigods and the devotee of the Lord on earth.
TEXT 19
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
MahzRYaae vE SaMauPaaGaTaa Yae
Pa[XaSYa SaaißTYaNauMaaedMaaNaa" )
Ocu" Pa[JaaNauGa]hXaql/Saara
YadutaMaëaek-Gau<aai>aæPaMa( )) 19 ))
maharñayo vai samupägatä ye
praçasya sädhv ity anumodamänäù
ücuù prajänugraha-çéla-särä
yad uttama-çloka-guëäbhirüpam
SYNONYMS
maharñayaù—the great sages; vai—as a matter of course;
samupägatäù—assembled there; ye—those who; praçasya—by praising;
sädhu—quite all right; iti—thus; anumodamänäù—all approving; ücuù—said;
prajä-anugraha—doing good to the living being; çéla-säräù—qualitatively
powerful; yat—because; uttama-çloka—one who is praised by selected poems;
guëa-abhirüpam—as beautiful as godly qualities.
TRANSLATION
All the great sages who were assembled there also praised the decision of
Mahäräja Parékñit and they expressed their approval by saying, “Very good.”
Naturally the sages are inclined to do good to common men, for they have all
the qualitative powers of the Supreme Lord. Therefore they were very much
pleased to see Mahäräja Parékñit, a devotee of the Lord, and they spoke as
follows.
PURPORT
The natural beauty of a living being is enhanced by rising up to the
platform of devotional service. Mahäräja Parékñit was absorbed in attachment
for Lord Kåñëa. Seeing this, the great sages assembled were very pleased, and
they expressed their approval by saying, “Very good.” Such sages are naturally
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
inclined to do good to the common man, and when they see a personality like
Mahäräja Parékñit advance in devotional service, their pleasure knows no
bounds, and they offer all blessings in their power. The devotional service of
the Lord is so auspicious that all demigods and sages, up to the Lord Himself,
became pleased with the devotee, and therefore the devotee finds everything
auspicious. All inauspicious matters are removed from the path of a progressive
devotee. Meeting all the great sages at the time of death was certainly
auspicious for Mahäräja Parékñit, and thus he was blessed by the so-called curse
of a brähmaëa’s boy.
TEXT 20
Na va wd& raJaizRvYaR ic}a&
>avTSau k*-Z<a& SaMaNauv]Taezu )
Yae_DYaaSaNa& raJaik-rq$=Jauí&
SaÛae Jahu>aRGavTPaaìRk-aMaa" )) 20 ))
na vä idaà räjarñi-varya citraà
bhavatsu kåñëaà samanuvrateñu
ye ’dhyäsanaà räja-kiréöa-juñöaà
sadyo jahur bhagavat-pärçva-kämäù
SYNONYMS
na—neither; vä—like this; idam—this; räjarñi—saintly king; varya—the chief;
citram—astonishing; bhavatsu—unto all of you; kåñëam—Lord Kåñëa;
samanuvrateñu—unto those who are strictly in the line of; ye—who;
adhyäsanam—seated on the throne; räja-kiréöa—helmets of kings;
juñöam—decorated; sadyaù—immediately; jahuù—gave up; bhagavat—the
Personality of Godhead; pärçva-kämäù—desiring to achieve association.
TRANSLATION
[The sages said:] O chief of all the saintly kings of the Päëòu dynasty who
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
are strictly in the line of Lord Çré Kåñëa! It is not at all astonishing that you
give up your throne, which is decorated with the helmets of many kings, to
achieve eternal association with the Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
Foolish politicians who hold political administrative posts think that the
temporary posts they occupy are the highest material gain of life, and therefore
they stick to those posts even up to the last moment of life, without knowing
that achievement of liberation as one of the associates of the Lord in His
eternal abode is the highest gain of life. The human life is meant for achieving
this end. The Lord has assured us in the Bhagavad-gétä many times that going
back to Godhead, His eternal abode, is the highest achievement. Prahläda
Mahäräja, while praying to Lord Nåsiàha, said, “O my Lord, I am very much
afraid of the materialistic way of life, and I am not the least afraid of Your
present ghastly ferocious feature as Nåsiàhadeva. This materialistic way of life
is something like a grinding stone, and we are being crushed by it. We have
fallen into this horrible whirlpool of the tossing waves of life, and thus, my
Lord, I pray at Your lotus feet to call me back to Your eternal abode as one of
Your servitors. This is the summit liberation of this materialistic way of life. I
have very bitter experience of the materialistic way of life. In whichever
species of life I have taken birth, compelled by the force of my own activities, I
have very painfully experienced two things, namely separation from my
beloved and meeting with what is not wanted. And to counteract them, the
remedies which I undertook were more dangerous than the disease itself. So I
drift from one point to another birth after birth, and I pray to You therefore to
give me a shelter at Your lotus feet.”
The Päëòava kings, who are more than many saints of the world, knew the
bitter results of the materialistic way of life. They were never captivated by the
glare of the imperial throne they occupied, and they sought always the
opportunity of being called by the Lord to associate with Him eternally.
Mahäräja Parékñit was the worthy grandson of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira.
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira gave up the imperial throne to his grandson, and
similarly Mahäräja Parékñit, the grandson of Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, gave up the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
imperial throne to his son Janamejaya. That is the way of all the kings in the
dynasty because they are all strictly in the line of Lord Kåñëa. Thus the
devotees of the Lord are never enchanted by the glare of materialistic life, and
they live impartially, unattached to the objects of the false, illusory
materialistic way of life.
TEXT 21
SaveR vYa& TaavidhaSMahe_Qa
k-le/vr& YaavdSaaE ivhaYa )
l/aek&- Par& ivrJaSk&- ivXaaek&-
YaaSYaTYaYa& >aaGavTaPa[DaaNa" )) 21 ))
sarve vayaà tävad ihäsmahe ’tha
kalevaraà yävad asau vihäya
lokaà paraà virajaskaà viçokaà
yäsyaty ayaà bhägavata-pradhänaù
SYNONYMS
sarve—all; vayam—of us; tävat—as long as; iha—at this place; äsmahe—shall
stay; atha—hereafter; kalevaram—the body; yävat—so long; asau—the King;
vihäya—giving up; lokam—the planet; param—the supreme;
virajaskam—completely free from mundane contamination;
viçokam—completely freed from all kinds of lamentation; yäsyati—returns;
ayam—this; bhägavata—devotee; pradhänaù—the foremost.
TRANSLATION
We shall all wait here until the foremost devotee of the Lord, Mahäräja
Parékñit, returns to the supreme planet, which is completely free from all
mundane contamination and all kinds of lamentation.
PURPORT
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Beyond the limitation of the material creation, which is compared to the
cloud in the sky, there is the paravyoma, or the spiritual sky, full of planets
called Vaikuëöhas. Such Vaikuëöha planets are also differently known as the
Puruñottamaloka, Acyutaloka, Trivikramaloka, Håñékeçaloka, Keçavaloka,
Aniruddhaloka, Mädhavaloka, Pradyumnaloka, Saìkarñaëaloka, Çrédharaloka,
Väsudevaloka, Ayodhyäloka, Dvärakäloka and many other millions of spiritual
lokas wherein the Personality of Godhead predominates; all the living entities
there are liberated souls with spiritual bodies as good as that of the Lord. There
is no material contamination; everything there is spiritual, and therefore there
is nothing objectively lamentable. They are full of transcendental bliss, and are
without birth, death, old age and disease. And amongst all the
above-mentioned Vaikuëöhalokas, there is one supreme loka called Goloka
Våndävana, which is the abode of the Lord Çré Kåñëa and His specific
associates. Mahäräja Parékñit was destined to achieve this particular loka, and
the great åñis assembled there could foresee this. All of them consulted among
themselves about the great departure of the great King, and they wanted to see
him up to the last moment because they would no more be able to see such a
great devotee of the Lord. When a great devotee of the Lord passes away, there
is nothing to be lamented because the devotee is destined to enter into the
kingdom of God. But the sorry plight is that such great devotees leave our
sight, and therefore there is every reason to be sorry. As the Lord is rarely to
be seen by our present eyes, so also are the great devotees. The great åñis,
therefore, correctly decided to remain on the spot till the last moment.
TEXT 22
Aaé[uTYa Tad*izGa<avc" Parqi+aTa(
SaMa& MaDauCYaud( Gauå caVYal/Ik-Ma( )
Aa>aazTaENaaNai>aNaNÛ Yau¢-aNa(
éué[UzMaa<aêirTaaiNa ivZ<aae" )) 22 ))
äçrutya tad åñi-gaëa-vacaù parékñit
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
samaà madhu-cyud guru cävyalékam
äbhäñatainän abhinandya yuktän
çuçrüñamäëaç caritäni viñëoù
SYNONYMS
äçrutya—just after hearing; tat—that; åñi-gaëa—the sages assembled;
vacaù—speaking; parékñit—Mahäräja Parékñit; samam—impartial;
madhu-cyut—sweet to hear; guru—grave; ca—also; avyalékam—perfectly true;
äbhäñata—said; enän—all of them; abhinandya—congratulated;
yuktän—appropriately presented; çuçrüñamäëaù—being desirous to hear;
caritäni—activities of; viñëoù—the Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
All that was spoken by the great sages was very sweet to hear, full of
meaning and appropriately presented as perfectly true. So after hearing them,
Mahäräja Parékñit, desiring to hear of the activities of Lord Çré Kåñëa, the
Personality of Godhead, congratulated the great sages.
TEXT 23
SaMaaGaTaa" SavRTa Wv SaveR
veda YaQaa MaUiTaRDaraiñPa*ïe )
NaehaQaNaaMau}a c k-êNaaQaR
‰Tae ParaNauGa]hMaaTMaXaql/Ma( )) 23 ))
samägatäù sarvata eva sarve
vedä yathä mürti-dharäs tri-påñöhe
nehätha nämutra ca kaçcanärtha
åte paränugraham ätma-çélam
SYNONYMS
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
samägatäù—assembled; sarvataù—from all directions; eva—certainly;
sarve—all of you; vedäù—supreme knowledge; yathä—as;
mürti-dharäù—personified; tri-påñöhe—on the planet of Brahmä (which is
situated above the three planetary systems, namely the upper, intermediate
and lower worlds); na—not; iha—in this world; atha—thereafter; na—nor;
amutra—in the other world; ca—also; kaçcana—any other; arthaù—interest;
åte—save and except; para—others; anugraham—doing good to;
ätma-çélam—own nature.
TRANSLATION
The King said: O great sages, you have all very kindly assembled here,
having come from all parts of the universe. You are all as good as supreme
knowledge personified, who resides in the planet above the three worlds
[Satyaloka]. Consequently you are naturally inclined to do good to others, and
but for this you have no interest, either in this life or in the next.
PURPORT
Six kinds of opulences, namely wealth, strength, fame, beauty, knowledge
and renunciation, are all originally the different attributes pertaining to the
Absolute Personality of Godhead. The living beings, who are part-and-parcel
entities of the Supreme Being, have all these attributes partially, up to the full
strength of seventy-eight percent. In the material world these attributes (up to
seventy-eight percent of the Lord’s attributes) are covered by the material
energy, as the sun is covered by a cloud. The covered strength of the sun is
very dim, compared to the original glare, and similarly the original color of the
living beings with such attributes becomes almost extinct. There are three
planetary systems, namely the lower worlds, the intermediate worlds and the
upper worlds. The human beings on earth are situated at the beginning of the
intermediate worlds, but living beings like Brahmä and his contemporaries live
in the upper worlds, of which the topmost is Satyaloka. In Satyaloka the
inhabitants are fully cognizant of Vedic wisdom, and thus the mystic cloud of
material energy is cleared. Therefore they are known as the Vedas personified.
Such persons, being fully aware of knowledge both mundane and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
transcendental, have no interest in either the mundane or transcendental
worlds. They are practically desireless devotees. In the mundane world they
have nothing to achieve, and in the transcendental world they are full in
themselves. Then why do they come to the mundane world? They descend on
different planets as messiahs by the order of the Lord to deliver the fallen
souls. On the earth they come down and do good to the people of the world in
different circumstances under different climatic influences. They have
nothing to do in this world save and except reclaim the fallen souls rotting in
material existence, deluded by material energy.
TEXT 24
TaTaê v" Pa*C^yiMaMa& ivPa*C^e
ivé[>Ya ivPa[a wiTak*-TYaTaaYaaMa( )
SavaRTMaNaa iMa]YaMaa<aEê k*-TYa&
éuÖ& c Ta}aaMa*XaTaai>aYau¢-a" )) 24 ))
tataç ca vaù påcchyam imaà vipåcche
viçrabhya viprä iti kåtyatäyäm
sarvätmanä mriyamäëaiç ca kåtyaà
çuddhaà ca taträmåçatäbhiyuktäù
SYNONYMS
tataù—as such; ca—and; vaù—unto you; påcchyam—that which is to be asked;
imam—this; vipåcche—beg to ask you; viçrabhya—trustworthy;
vipräù—brähmaëas; iti—thus; kåtyatäyäm—out of all different duties;
sarva-ätmanä—by everyone; mriyamäëaiù—especially those who are just
about to die; ca—and; kåtyam—dutiful; çuddham—perfectly correct; ca—and;
tatra—therein; ämåçata—by complete deliberation; abhiyuktäù—just befitting.
TRANSLATION
O trustworthy brähmaëas, I now ask you about my immediate duty. Please,
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
after proper deliberation, tell me of the unalloyed duty of everyone in all
circumstances, and specifically of those who are just about to die.
PURPORT
In this verse the King has placed two questions before the learned sages.
The first question is what is the duty of everyone in all circumstances, and the
second question is what is the specific duty of one who is to die very shortly.
Out of the two, the question relating to the dying man is most important
because everyone is a dying man, either very shortly or after one hundred
years. The duration of life is immaterial, but the duty of a dying man is very
important. Mahäräja Parékñit placed these two questions before Çukadeva
Gosvämé also on his arrival, and practically the whole of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, beginning from the Second Canto up to the last Twelfth
Canto, deals with these two questions. The conclusion arrived at thereof is
that devotional service of the Lord Çré Kåñëa, as it is confirmed by the Lord
Himself in the last phases of the Bhagavad-gétä, is the last word in relation to
everyone’s permanent duty in life. Mahäräja Parékñit was already aware of this
fact, but he wanted the great sages assembled there to unanimously give their
verdict on his conviction so that he might be able to go on with his confirmed
duty without controversy. He has especially mentioned the word çuddha, or
perfectly correct. For transcendental realization or self-realization, many
processes are recommended by various classes of philosophers. Some of them
are first-class methods, and some of them are second- or third-class methods.
The first-class method demands that one give up all other methods and
surrender unto the lotus feet of the Lord and thus be saved from all sins and
their reactions.
TEXT 25
Ta}aa>avÙGavaNa( VYaaSaPau}aae
Yad*C^Yaa GaaMa$=MaaNaae_NaPae+a" )
Al/+Yail/®ae iNaJal/a>aTauíae
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
v*Taê balE/rvDaUTavez" )) 25 ))
taträbhavad bhagavän vyäsa-putro
yadåcchayä gäm aöamäno ’napekñaù
alakñya-liìgo nija-läbha-tuñöo
våtaç ca bälair avadhüta-veñaù
SYNONYMS
tatra—there; abhavat—appeared; bhagavän—powerful; vyäsa-putraù—son of
Vyäsadeva; yadåcchayä—as one desires; gäm—the earth; aöamänaù—while
traveling; anapekñaù—disinterested; alakñya—unmanifested;
liìgaù—symptoms; nija-läbha—self-realized; tuñöaù—satisfied;
våtaù—surrounded; ca—and; bälaiù—by children; avadhüta—neglected by
others; veñaù—dressed.
TRANSLATION
At that moment there appeared the powerful son of Vyäsadeva, who traveled
over the earth disinterested and satisfied with himself. He did not manifest any
symptoms of belonging to any social order or status of life. He was surrounded
with women and children, and he dressed as if others had neglected him.
PURPORT
The word bhagavän is sometimes used in relation with some of the great
devotees of the Lord, like Çukadeva Gosvämé. Such liberated souls are
disinterested in the affairs of this material world because they are self-satisfied
by the great achievements of devotional service. As explained before,
Çukadeva Gosvämé never accepted any formal spiritual master, nor did he
undergo any formal reformatory performances. His father, Vyäsadeva, was his
natural spiritual master because Çukadeva Gosvämé heard Çrémad-Bhägavatam
from him. After this, he became completely self-satisfied. Thus he was not
dependent on any formal process. The formal processes are necessary for those
who are expected to reach the stage of complete liberation, but Çré Çukadeva
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
Gosvämé was already in that status by the grace of his father. As a young boy
he was expected to be properly dressed, but he went about naked and was
uninterested in social customs. He was neglected by the general populace, and
inquisitive boys and women surrounded him as if he were a madman. He thus
appears on the scene while traveling on the earth of his own accord. It appears
that upon the inquiry of Mahäräja Parékñit, the great sages were not
unanimous in their decision as to what was to be done. For spiritual salvation
there were many prescriptions according to the different modes of different
persons. But the ultimate aim of life is to attain the highest perfectional stage
of devotional service to the Lord. As doctors differ, so also sages differ in their
different prescriptions. While such things were going on, the great and
powerful son of Vyäsadeva appeared on the scene.
TEXT 26
Ta& Üyívz| Sauku-MaarPaad‚
k-raeåbaû&Sak-Paael/Gaa}aMa( )
cavaRYaTaa+aaeàSaTauLYak-<aR‚
Sau>vaNaNa& k-MbuSauJaaTak-<#=Ma( )) 26 ))
taà dvyañöa-varñaà su-kumära-pädakaroru-
bähv-aàsa-kapola-gätram
cärv-äyatäkñonnasa-tulya-karëasubhrv-
änanaà kambu-sujäta-kaëöham
SYNONYMS
tam—him; dvi-añöa—sixteen; varñam—years; su-kumära—delicate;
päda—legs; kara—hands; üru—thighs; bähu—arms; aàsa—shoulders;
kapola—forehead; gätram—body; cäru—beautiful; äyata—broad; akña—eyes;
unnasa—high nose; tulya—similar; karëa—ears; subhru—nice brows;
änanam—face; kambu—conchshell; sujäta—nicely built; kaëöham—neck.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
This son of Vyäsadeva was only sixteen years old. His legs, hands, thighs,
arms, shoulders, forehead and the other parts of his body were all delicately
formed. His eyes were beautifully wide, and his nose and ears were highly
raised. He had a very attractive face, and his neck was well formed and
beautiful like a conchshell.
PURPORT
A respectable personality is described beginning with the legs, and this
honored system is observed here with Çukadeva Gosvämé. He was only sixteen
years of age. A person is honored for his achievements and not for advanced
age. A person can be older by experience and not by age. Çré Çukadeva
Gosvämé, who is described herein as the son of Vyäsadeva, was by his
knowledge more experienced than all the sages present there, although he was
only sixteen years old.
TEXT 27
iNaGaU!Ja}au& Pa*QauTau®v+aSa‚
MaavTaRNaai>a& vil/vLGaUdr& c )
idGaMbr& v£-ivk-I<aRke-Xa&
Pa[l/Mbbahu& SvMaraetaMaa>aMa( )) 27 ))
nigüòha-jatruà påthu-tuìga-vakñasam
ävarta-näbhià vali-valgüdaraà ca
dig-ambaraà vaktra-vikérëa-keçaà
pralamba-bähuà svamarottamäbham
SYNONYMS
nigüòha—covered; jatrum—collarbone; påthu—broad; tuìga—swollen;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
vakñasam—chest; ävarta—whirled; näbhim—navel; vali-valgu—striped;
udaram—abdomen; ca—also; dik-ambaram—dressed by all directions (naked);
vaktra—curled; vikérëa—scattered; keçam—hair; pralamba—elongated;
bähum—hands; su-amara-uttama—the best among the gods (Kåñëa);
äbham—hue.
TRANSLATION
His collarbone was fleshy, his chest broad and thick, his navel deep and his
abdomen beautifully striped. His arms were long, and curly hair was strewn
over his beautiful face. He was naked, and the hue of his body reflected that of
Lord Kåñëa.
PURPORT
His bodily features indicate him to be different from common men. All the
signs described in connection with the bodily features of Çukadeva Gosvämé
are uncommon symptoms, typical of great personalities, according to
physiognomical calculations. His bodily hue resembled that of Lord Kåñëa, who
is the supreme among the gods, demigods and all living beings.
TEXT 28
XYaaMa& SadaPaqVYavYaae_®l/+MYaa
ñq<aa& MaNaaej& åicriSMaTaeNa )
Pa[TYauiTQaTaaSTae MauNaYa" SvaSaNae>Ya‚
STaç+a<aja AiPa GaU!vcRSaMa( )) 28 ))
çyämaà sadäpévya-vayo-’ìga-lakñmyä
stréëäà mano-jïaà rucira-smitena
pratyutthitäs te munayaù sväsanebhyas
tal-lakñaëa-jïä api güòha-varcasam
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
çyämam—blackish; sadä—always; apévya—excessively; vayaù—age;
aìga—symptoms; lakñmyä—by the opulence of; stréëäm—of the fair sex;
manaù-jïam—attractive; rucira—beautiful; smitena—smiling;
pratyutthitäù—stood up; te—all of them; munayaù—the great sages; sva—own;
äsanebhyaù—from the seats; tat—those; lakñaëa-jïäù—expert in the art of
physiognomy; api—even; güòha-varcasam—covered glories.
TRANSLATION
He was blackish and very beautiful due to his youth. Because of the glamor
of his body and his attractive smiles, he was pleasing to women. Though he
tried to cover his natural glories, the great sages present there were all expert in
the art of physiognomy, and so they honored him by rising from their seats.
TEXT 29
Sa ivZ<auraTaae_iTaQaYa AaGaTaaYa
TaSMaE SaPaYaa| iXarSaaJahar )
TaTaae iNav*taa ùbuDaa" iñYaae_>aRk-a
MahaSaNae SaaePaivveXa PaUiJaTa" )) 29 ))
sa viñëu-räto ’tithaya ägatäya
tasmai saparyäà çirasäjahära
tato nivåttä hy abudhäù striyo ’rbhakä
mahäsane sopaviveça püjitaù
SYNONYMS
saù—he; viñëu-rätaù—Mahäräja Parékñit (who is always protected by Lord
Viñëu); atithaye—to become a guest; ägatäya—one who arrived there;
tasmai—unto him; saparyäm—with the whole body; çirasä—with bowed head;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
äjahära—offered obeisances; tataù—thereafter; nivåttäù—ceased;
hi—certainly; abudhäù—less intelligent; striyaù—women; arbhakäù—boys;
mahä-äsane—exalted seat; sa—he; upaviveça—sat down; püjitaù—being
respected.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Parékñit, who is also known as Viñëuräta [one who is always
protected by Viñëu], bowed his head to receive the chief guest, Çukadeva
Gosvämé. At that time all the ignorant women and boys ceased following Çréla
Çukadeva. Receiving respect from all, Çukadeva Gosvämé took his exalted seat.
PURPORT
On Çukadeva Gosvämé’s arrival at the meeting, everyone, except Çréla
Vyäsadeva, Närada and a few others, stood up, and Mahäräja Parékñit, who was
glad to receive a great devotee of the Lord, bowed down before him with all
the limbs of his body. Çukadeva Gosvämé also exchanged the greetings and
reception by embrace, shaking of hands, nodding and bowing down, especially
before his father and Närada Muni. Thus he was offered the presidential seat
at the meeting. When he was so received by the king and sages, the street boys
and less intelligent women who followed him were struck with wonder and
fear. So they retired from their frivolous activities, and everything was full of
gravity and calm.
TEXT 30
Sa Sa&v*TaSTa}a MahaNa( MahqYaSaa&
b]øizRraJaizRdevizRSaºE" )
VYaraecTaal&/ >aGavaNa( YaQaeNdu‚
Ga]Rh+aRTaaraiNak-rE" ParqTa" )) 30 ))
sa saàvåtas tatra mahän mahéyasäà
brahmarñi-räjarñi-devarñi-saìghaiù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
vyarocatälaà bhagavän yathendur
graharkña-tärä-nikaraiù parétaù
SYNONYMS
saù—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé; saàvåtaù—surrounded by; tatra—there;
mahän—great; mahéyasäm—of the greatest; brahmarñi—saint among the
brähmaëas; räjarñi—saint among the kings; devarñi—saint among the
demigods; saìghaiù—by the assembly of; vyarocata—well deserved;
alam—able; bhagavän—powerful; yathä—as; induù—the moon;
graha—planets; åkña—heavenly bodies; tärä—stars; nikaraiù—by the assembly
of; parétaù—surrounded by.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé was then surrounded by saintly sages and demigods just
as the moon is surrounded by stars, planets and other heavenly bodies. His
presence was gorgeous, and he was respected by all.
PURPORT
In the great assembly of saintly personalities, there was Vyäsadeva the
brahmarñi, Närada the devarñi, Paraçuräma the great ruler of the kñatriya kings,
etc. Some of them were powerful incarnations of the Lord. Çukadeva Gosvämé
was not known as brahmarñi, räjarñi or devarñi, nor was he an incarnation like
Närada, Vyäsa or Paraçuräma. And yet he excelled them in respects paid. This
means that the devotee of the Lord is more honored in the world than the
Lord Himself. One should therefore never minimize the importance of a
devotee like Çukadeva Gosvämé.
TEXT 31
Pa[XaaNTaMaaSaqNaMaku-<#=MaeDaSa&
MauiNa& Na*Paae >aaGavTaae_>YauPaeTYa )
Pa[<aMYa MaUDNaaRvihTa" k*-TaaÅil/‚
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
NaRTva iGara SaUNa*TaYaaNvPa*C^Ta( )) 31 ))
praçäntam äsénam akuëöha-medhasaà
munià nåpo bhägavato ’bhyupetya
praëamya mürdhnävahitaù kåtäïjalir
natvä girä sünåtayänvapåcchat
SYNONYMS
praçäntam—perfectly pacified; äsénam—sitting; akuëöha—without hesitation;
medhasam—one who has sufficient intelligence; munim—unto the great sage;
nåpaù—the King (Mahäräja Parékñit); bhägavataù—the great devotee;
abhyupetya—approaching him; praëamya—bowing down; mürdhnä—his head;
avahitaù—properly; kåta-aïjaliù—with folded hands; natvä—politely; girä—by
words; sünåtayä—in sweet voices; anvapåcchat—inquired.
TRANSLATION
The sage Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé sat perfectly pacified, intelligent and ready
to answer any question without hesitation. The great devotee, Mahäräja
Parékñit, approached him, offered his respects by bowing before him, and
politely inquired with sweet words and folded hands.
PURPORT
The gesture now adopted by Mahäräja Parékñit of questioning a master is
quite befitting in terms of scriptural injunctions. The scriptural injunction is
that one should humbly approach a spiritual master to understand the
transcendental science. Mahäräja Parékñit was now prepared for meeting his
death, and within the very short time of seven days he was to know the process
of entering the kingdom of God. In such important cases, one is required to
approach a spiritual master. There is no necessity of approaching a spiritual
master unless one is in need of solving the problems of life. One who does not
know how to put questions before the spiritual master has no business seeing
him. And the qualification of the spiritual master is perfectly manifested in
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the person of Çukadeva Gosvämé. Both the spiritual master and the disciple,
namely Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé and Mahäräja Parékñit, attained perfection
through the medium of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Çukadeva Gosvämé learned
Çrémad-Bhägavatam from his father, Vyäsadeva, but he had no chance to recite
it. Before Mahäräja Parékñit he recited Çrémad-Bhägavatam and answered the
questions of Mahäräja Parékñit unhesitatingly, and thus both the master and
the disciple got salvation.
TEXT 32
Parqi+aduvac
Ahae AÛ vYa& b]øNa( SaTSaeVYaa" +a}abNDav" )
k*-PaYaaiTaiQaæPae<a >aviÙSTaqQaRk-a" k*-Taa" )) 32 ))
parékñid uväca
aho adya vayaà brahman
sat-sevyäù kñatra-bandhavaù
kåpayätithi-rüpeëa
bhavadbhis térthakäù kåtäù
SYNONYMS
parékñit uväca—the fortunate Mahäräja Parékñit said; aho—ah; adya—today;
vayam—we; brahman—O brähmaëa; sat-sevyäù—eligible to serve the devotee;
kñatra—the ruling class; bandhavaù—friends; kåpayä—by your mercy;
atithi-rüpeëa—in the manner of a guest; bhavadbhiù—by your good self;
térthakäù—qualified for being places of pilgrimage; kåtäù—done by you.
TRANSLATION
The fortunate King Parékñit said: O brähmaëa, by your mercy only, you
have sanctified us, making us like unto places of pilgrimage, all by your
presence here as my guest. By your mercy, we, who are but unworthy royalty,
become eligible to serve the devotee.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PURPORT
Saintly devotees like Çukadeva Gosvämé generally do not approach worldly
enjoyers, especially those in royal orders. Mahäräja Pratäparudra was a
follower of Lord Caitanya, but when he wanted to see the Lord, the Lord
refused to see him because he was a king. For a devotee who desires to go back
to Godhead, two things are strictly prohibited: worldly enjoyers and women.
Therefore, devotees of the standard of Çukadeva Gosvämé are never interested
in seeing kings. Mahäräja Parékñit was, of course, a different case. He was a
great devotee, although a king, and therefore Çukadeva Gosvämé came to see
him in his last stage of life. Mahäräja Parékñit, out of his devotional humility,
felt himself an unworthy descendant of his great kñatriya forefathers, although
he was as great as his predecessors. The unworthy sons of the royal orders are
called kñatra-bandhavas, as the unworthy sons of the brähmaëas are called
dvija-bandhus or brahma-bandhus. Mahäräja Parékñit was greatly encouraged by
the presence of Çukadeva Gosvämé. He felt himself sanctified by the presence
of the great saint whose presence turns any place into a place of pilgrimage.
TEXT 33
Yaeza& Sa&SMar<aaTa( Pau&Saa& SaÛ" éuÖyiNTa vE Ga*ha" )
ik&- PauNadRXaRNaSPaXaRPaadXaaEcaSaNaaidi>a" )) 33 ))
yeñäà saàsmaraëät puàsäà
sadyaù çuddhyanti vai gåhäù
kià punar darçana-sparçapäda-
çaucäsanädibhiù
SYNONYMS
yeñäm—of whom; saàsmaraëät—by remembrance; puàsäm—of a person;
sadyaù—instantly; çuddhyanti—cleanses; vai—certainly; gåhäù—all houses;
kim—what; punaù—then; darçana—meeting; sparça—touching; päda—the
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
feet; çauca—washing; äsana-ädibhiù—by offering a seat, etc.
TRANSLATION
Simply by our remembering you, our houses become instantly sanctified.
And what to speak of seeing you, touching you, washing your holy feet and
offering you a seat in our home?
PURPORT
The importance of holy places of pilgrimage is due to the presence of great
sages and saints. It is said that sinful persons go to the holy places and leave
their sins there to accumulate. But the presence of the great saints disinfects
the accumulated sins, and thus the holy places continue to remain sanctified
by the grace of the devotees and saints present there. If such saints appear in
the homes of worldly people, certainly the accumulated sins of such worldly
enjoyers become neutralized. Therefore, the holy saints actually have no
self-interest with the householders. The only aim of such saints is to sanctify
the houses of the householders, and the householders therefore should feel
grateful when such saints and sages appear at their doors. A householder who
dishonors such holy orders is a great offender. It is enjoined, therefore, that a
householder who does not bow down before a saint at once must undergo
fasting for the day in order to neutralize the great offense.
TEXT 34
SaaiàDYaatae MahaYaaeiGaNPaaTak-aiNa MahaNTYaiPa )
SaÛae NaXYaiNTa vE Pau&Saa& ivZ<aaeirv SaureTara" )) 34 ))
sännidhyät te mahä-yogin
pätakäni mahänty api
sadyo naçyanti vai puàsäà
viñëor iva suretaräù
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
SYNONYMS
sännidhyät—on account of the presence; te—your; mahä-yogin—O great
mystic; pätakäni—sins; mahänti—invulnerable; api—in spite of;
sadyaù—immediately; naçyanti—vanquished; vai—certainly; puàsäm—of a
person; viñëoù—like the presence of the Personality of Godhead; iva—like;
sura-itaräù—other than the demigods.
TRANSLATION
Just as the atheist cannot remain in the presence of the Personality of
Godhead, so also the invulnerable sins of a man are immediately vanquished in
your presence, O saint! O great mystic!
PURPORT
There are two classes of human beings, namely the atheist and the devotee
of the Lord. The devotee of the Lord, because of manifesting godly qualities, is
called a demigod, whereas the atheist is called a demon. The demon cannot
stand the presence of Viñëu, the Personality of Godhead. The demons are
always busy in trying to vanquish the Personality of Godhead, but factually as
soon as the Personality of Godhead appears, by either His transcendental
name, form, attributes, pastimes, paraphernalia or variegatedness, the demon is
at once vanquished. It is said that a ghost cannot remain as soon as the holy
name of the Lord is chanted. The great saints and devotees of the Lord are in
the list of His paraphernalia, and thus as soon as a saintly devotee is present,
the ghostly sins are at once vanquished. That is the verdict of all Vedic
literatures. One is recommended, therefore, to associate only with saintly
devotees so that worldly demons and ghosts cannot exert their sinister
influence.
TEXT 35
AiPa Mae >aGavaNa( Pa[qTa" k*-Z<a" Paa<@uSauTaiPa[Ya" )
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
PaETa*ZvSaeYaPa[qTYaQa| TaÓae}aSYaatabaNDav" )) 35 ))
api me bhagavän prétaù
kåñëaù päëòu-suta-priyaù
paitå-ñvaseya-préty-arthaà
tad-gotrasyätta-bändhavaù
SYNONYMS
api—definitely; me—unto me; bhagavän—the Personality of Godhead;
prétaù—pleased; kåñëaù—the Lord; päëòu-suta—the sons of King Päëòu;
priyaù—dear; paitå—in relation with the father; svaseya—the sons of the
sister; préti—satisfaction; artham—in the matter of; tat—their; gotrasya—of
the descendant; ätta—accepted; bändhavaù—as a friend.
TRANSLATION
Lord Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead, who is very dear to the sons of
King Päëòu, has accepted me as one of those relatives just to please His great
cousins and brothers.
PURPORT
A pure and exclusive devotee of the Lord serves his family interest more
dexterously than others, who are attached to illusory family affairs. Generally
people are attached to family matters, and the whole economic impetus of
human society is moving under the influence of family affection. Such deluded
persons have no information that one can render better service to the family
by becoming a devotee of the Lord. The Lord gives special protection to the
family members and descendants of a devotee, even though such members are
themselves nondevotees! Mahäräja Prahläda was a great devotee of the Lord,
but his father, Hiraëyakaçipu, was a great atheist and declared enemy of the
Lord. But despite all this, Hiraëyakaçipu was awarded salvation due to his
being the father of Mahäräja Prahläda. The Lord is so kind that he gives all
protection to the family members of His devotee, and thus the devotee has no
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
need to bother about his family members, even if one leaves such family
members aside to discharge devotional service. Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira and his
brothers were the sons of Kunté, the paternal aunt of Lord Kåñëa, and
Mahäräja Parékñit admits the patronage of Lord Kåñëa because of his being the
only grandson of the great Päëòavas.
TEXT 36
ANYaQaa Tae_VYa¢-GaTaedRXaRNa& Na" k-Qa& Na*<aaMa( )
iNaTara& iMa]YaMaa<aaNaa& Sa&iSaÖSYa vNaqYaSa" )) 36 ))
anyathä te ’vyakta-gater
darçanaà naù kathaà nåëäm
nitaräà mriyamäëänäà
saàsiddhasya vanéyasaù
SYNONYMS
anyathä—otherwise; te—your; avyakta-gateù—of one whose movements are
invisible; darçanam—meeting; naù—for us; katham—how; nåëäm—of the
people; nitaräm—specifically; mriyamäëänäm—of those who are about to die;
saàsiddhasya—of one who is all-perfect; vanéyasaù—voluntary appearance.
TRANSLATION
Otherwise [without being inspired by Lord Kåñëa] how is it that you have
voluntarily appeared here, though you are moving incognito to the common man
and are not visible to us who are on the verge of death?
PURPORT
The great sage Çukadeva Gosvämé was certainly inspired by Lord Kåñëa to
appear voluntarily before Mahäräja Parékñit, the great devotee of the Lord, just
to give him the teachings of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. One can achieve the nucleus
of the devotional service of the Lord by the mercy of the spiritual master and
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
the Personality of Godhead. The spiritual master is the manifested
representative of the Lord to help one achieve ultimate success. One who is
not authorized by the Lord cannot become a spiritual master. Çréla Çukadeva
Gosvämé is an authorized spiritual master, and thus he was inspired by the
Lord to appear before Mahäräja Parékñit and instruct him in the teachings of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam. One can achieve the ultimate success of going back to
Godhead if he is favored by the Lord’s sending His true representative. As
soon as a true representative of the Lord is met by a devotee of the Lord, the
devotee is assured a guarantee for going back to Godhead just after leaving the
present body. This, however, depends on the sincerity of the devotee himself.
The Lord is seated in the heart of all living beings, and thus he knows very
well the movements of all individual persons. As soon as the Lord finds that a
particular soul is very eager to go back to Godhead, the Lord at once sends His
bona fide representative. The sincere devotee is thus assured by the Lord of
going back to Godhead. The conclusion is that to get the assistance and help of
a bona fide spiritual master means to receive the direct help of the Lord Himself.
TEXT 37
ATa" Pa*C^aiMa Sa&iSaiÖ& YaaeiGaNaa& ParMa& GauåMa( )
PauåzSYaeh YaTk-aYa| iMa]YaMaa<aSYa SavRQaa )) 37 ))
ataù påcchämi saàsiddhià
yoginäà paramaà gurum
puruñasyeha yat käryaà
mriyamäëasya sarvathä
SYNONYMS
ataù—therefore; påcchämi—beg to inquire; saàsiddhim—the way of
perfection; yoginäm—of the saints; paramam—the supreme; gurum—the
spiritual master; puruñasya—of a person; iha—in this life; yat—whatever;
käryam—duty; mriyamäëasya—of one who is going to die; sarvathä—in every
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
way.
TRANSLATION
You are the spiritual master of great saints and devotees. I am therefore
begging you to show the way of perfection for all persons, and especially for one
who is about to die.
PURPORT
Unless one is perfectly anxious to inquire about the way of perfection,
there is no necessity of approaching a spiritual master. A spiritual master is not
a kind of decoration for a householder. Generally a fashionable materialist
engages a so-called spiritual master without any profit. The pseudo spiritual
master flatters the so-called disciple, and thereby both the master and his ward
go to hell without a doubt. Mahäräja Parékñit is the right type of disciple
because he puts forward questions vital to the interest of all men, particularly
for the dying men. The question put forward by Mahäräja Parékñit is the basic
principle of the complete thesis of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Now let us see how
intelligently the great master replies.
TEXT 38
YaC^\aeTaVYaMaQaae JaPYa& YaTk-TaRVYa& Na*i>a" Pa[>aae )
SMaTaRVYa& >aJaNaqYa& va b]Uih YaÜa ivPaYaRYaMa( )) 38 ))
yac chrotavyam atho japyaà
yat kartavyaà nåbhiù prabho
smartavyaà bhajanéyaà vä
brühi yad vä viparyayam
SYNONYMS
yat—whatever; çrotavyam—worth hearing; atho—thereof; japyam—chanted;
yat—what also; kartavyam—executed; nåbhiù—by the people in general;
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
prabho—O master; smartavyam—that which is remembered;
bhajanéyam—worshipable; vä—either; brühi—please explain; yad vä—what it
may be; viparyayam—against the principle.
TRANSLATION
Please let me know what a man should hear, chant, remember and worship,
and also what he should not do. Please explain all this to me.
TEXT 39
NaUNa& >aGavTaae b]øNa( Ga*hezu Ga*hMaeiDaNaaMa( )
Na l/+YaTae ùvSQaaNaMaiPa GaaedaehNa& KvicTa( )) 39 ))
nünaà bhagavato brahman
gåheñu gåha-medhinäm
na lakñyate hy avasthänam
api go-dohanaà kvacit
SYNONYMS
nünam—because; bhagavataù—of you, who are powerful; brahman—O
brähmaëa; gåheñu—in the houses; gåha-medhinäm—of the householders;
na—not; lakñyate—are seen; hi—exactly; avasthänam—staying in; api—even;
go-dohanam—milking the cow; kvacit—rarely.
TRANSLATION
O powerful brähmaëa, it is said that you hardly stay in the houses of men
long enough to milk a cow.
PURPORT
Saints and sages in the renounced order of life go to the houses of the
householders at the time they milk the cows, early in the morning, and ask
some quantity of milk for subsistence. A pound of milk fresh from the milk bag
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
of a cow is sufficient to feed an adult with all vitamin values, and therefore
saints and sages live only on milk. Even the poorest of the householders keep
at least ten cows, each delivering twelve to twenty quarts of milk, and
therefore no one hesitates to spare a few pounds of milk for the mendicants. It
is the duty of householders to maintain the saints and sages, like the children.
So a saint like Çukadeva Gosvämé would hardly stay at the house of a
householder for more than five minutes in the morning. In other words, such
saints are very rarely seen in the houses of householders, and Mahäräja
Parékñit therefore prayed to him to instruct him as soon as possible. The
householders also should be intelligent enough to get some transcendental
information from visiting sages. The householder should not foolishly ask a
saint to deliver what is available in the market. That should be the reciprocal
relation between the saints and the householders.
TEXT 40
SaUTa ovac
WvMaa>aaizTa" Pa*í" Sa raja ë+<aYaa iGara )
Pa[TYa>aazTa DaMaRjae >aGavaNa( badraYai<a" )) 40 ))
süta uväca
evam äbhäñitaù påñöaù
sa räjïä çlakñëayä girä
pratyabhäñata dharma-jïo
bhagavän bädaräyaëiù
SYNONYMS
sütaù uväca—Çré Süta Gosvämé said; evam—thus; äbhäñitaù—being spoken;
påñöaù—and asked for; saù—he; räjïä—by the King; çlakñëayä—by sweet;
girä—language; pratyabhäñata—began to reply; dharma-jïaù—one who knows
the principles of religion; bhagavän—the powerful personality;
bädaräyaëiù—son of Vyäsadeva.
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved.
TRANSLATION
Çré Süta Gosvämé said: The King thus spoke and questioned the sage, using
sweet language. Then the great and powerful personality, the son of Vyäsadeva,
who knew the principles of religion, began his reply.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the First Canto, Nineteenth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled “The Appearance of Çukadeva Gosvämé.”
END OF THE FIRST CANTO
Srimad Bhagavatam
First Canto Part Three
“Creation”
e-book
This e-book and others are available for download at:
www.e-vedas.com
Hard bound books may be purchased at:
www.thekrishnastore.com
Email comments or questions to:
comments@evedas.com
This e-book was completed on November 16,2005
e-books copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved
www.krishna.com
Distributed by e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers