"Srimad Bhagavatam – Sixth Canto"
by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE:
This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of this book, and is NOT FOR
RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended for personal non-commercial use only,
under the "fair use" guidelines established by international copyright laws. You
may use this electronic file to evaluate the printed version of this book, for your
own private use, or for short excerpts used in academic works, research, student
papers, presentations, and the like. You can distribute this evaluation copy to
others over the Internet, so long as you keep this copyright information intact and
do not add or subtract anything to this file and its contents. You may not reproduce
more than ten percent (10%) of this book in any medium without the express
written permission from the copyright holders.
Reference any excerpts in the following way: “Excerpted from “Srimad
Bhagavatam Sixth Canto” by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, courtesy of
the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, www.krishna.com.”
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1972-2004 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust
International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, California 90034, USA. All
rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or to evaluate
dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website of the publishers,
www.krishna.com.

About the Author
His Divine Grace AC Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, the world’s most
distinguished teacher of Vedic religion and thought, is the author of
Bhagavad-gita As It Is, Srimad-Bhagavatam, The Sri Isopanisad and many
other English versions of Vedic literature. He is the Founder-Arcarya of the
International Society for Krishna Consciousness, which has hundreds of
centers throughout the world.
For more information about His Divine Grace visit:
http://www.krishna.com/newsite/main.php?id=7
1
1. The History of the Life of Ajämila
Throughout Çrémad-Bhägavatam there are descriptions of ten subject
matters, including creation, subsequent creation and the planetary systems.
Çukadeva Gosvämé, the speaker of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, has already described
creation, subsequent creation and the planetary systems in the Third, Fourth
and Fifth Cantos. Now, in this Sixth Canto, which consists of nineteen
chapters, he will describe poñaëa, or protection by the Lord.
The first chapter relates the history of Ajämila, who was considered a
greatly sinful man, but was liberated when four order carriers of Viñëu came to
rescue him from the hands of the order carriers of Yamaräja. A full description
of how he was liberated, having been relieved of the reactions of his sinful life,
is given in this chapter. Sinful activities are painful both in this life and in the
next. We should know for certain that the cause of all painful life is sinful
action. On the path of fruitive work one certainly commits sinful activities,
and therefore according to the considerations of karma-käëòa, different types
of atonement are recommended. Such methods of atonement, however, do not
free one from ignorance, which is the root of sinful life. Consequently one is
prone to commit sinful activities even after atonement, which is therefore very
inadequate for purification. On the path of speculative knowledge one
becomes free from sinful life by understanding things as they are. Therefore
the acquirement of speculative knowledge is also considered a method of
atonement. While performing fruitive activities one can become free from the
actions of sinful life through austerity, penance, celibacy, control of the mind
and senses, truthfulness and the practice of mystic yoga. By awakening
knowledge one may also neutralize sinful reactions. Neither of these methods,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
2
however, can free one from the tendency to commit sinful activities.
By bhakti-yoga one can completely avoid the tendency for sinful life; other
methods are not very feasible. Therefore the Vedic literature concludes that
devotional service is more important than the methods of karma-käëòa and
jïäna-käëòa. Only the path of devotional service is auspicious for everyone.
Fruitive activities and speculative knowledge cannot independently liberate
anyone, but devotional service, independent of karma and jïäna, is so potent
that one who has fixed his mind at the lotus feet of Kåñëa is guaranteed not to
meet the Yamadütas, the order carriers of Yamaräja, even in dreams.
To prove the strength of devotional service, Çukadeva Gosvämé described
the history of Ajämila. Ajämila was a resident of Känyakubja (the modern
Kanauj). He was trained by his parents to become a perfect brähmaëa by
studying the Vedas and following the regulative principles, but because of his
past, this youthful brähmaëa was somehow attracted by a prostitute, and
because of her association he became most fallen and abandoned all regulative
principles. Ajämila begot in the womb of the prostitute ten sons, the last of
whom was called Näräyaëa. At the time of Ajämila's death, when the order
carriers of Yamaräja came to take him, he loudly called the name Näräyaëa in
fear because he was attached to his youngest son. Thus he remembered the
original Näräyaëa, Lord Viñëu. Although he did not chant the holy name of
Näräyaëa completely offenselessly, it acted nevertheless. As soon as he
chanted the holy name of Näräyaëa, the order carriers of Lord Viñëu
immediately appeared on the scene. A discussion ensued between the order
carriers of Lord Viñëu and those of Yamaräja, and by hearing that discussion
Ajämila was liberated. He could then understand the bad effect of fruitive
activities and could also understand how exalted is the process of devotional
service.
TEXT 1
é[qParqi+aduvac
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
3
iNav*itaMaaGaR" k-iQaTa AadaE >aGavTaa YaQaa )
§-MaYaaeGaaePal/BDaeNa b]ø<aa YadSa&Sa*iTa" )) 1 ))
çré-parékñid uväca
nivåtti-märgaù kathita
ädau bhagavatä yathä
krama-yogopalabdhena
brahmaëä yad asaàsåtiù
SYNONYMS
çré-parékñit uväca—Mahäräja Parékñit said; nivåtti-märgaù—the path of
liberation; kathitaù—described; ädau—in the beginning; bhagavatä—by Your
Holiness; yathä—duly; krama—gradually; yoga-upalabdhena—obtained by the
yoga process; brahmaëä—along with Lord Brahmä (after reaching
Brahmaloka); yat—by which way; asaàsåtiù—cessation of the repetition of
birth and death.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Parékñit said: O my lord, O Çukadeva Gosvämé, you have already
described [in the Second Canto] the path of liberation [nivåtti-märga]. By
following that path, one is certainly elevated gradually to the highest planetary
system, Brahmaloka, from which one is promoted to the spiritual world along
with Lord Brahmä. Thus one's repetition of birth and death in the material
world ceases.
PURPORT
Since Mahäräja Parékñit was a Vaiñëava, when he heard the description, at
the end of the Fifth Canto, of the different hellish conditions of life, he was
very much concerned with how to liberate the conditioned souls from the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
4
clutches of mäyä and take them back home, back to Godhead. Therefore he
reminded his spiritual master, Çukadeva Gosvämé, about the nivåtti-märga, or
path of liberation, which he had described in the Second Canto. Mahäräja
Parékñit, who at the time of death was fortunate to have met Çukadeva
Gosvämé, inquired from Çukadeva Gosvämé about the path of liberation at that
crucial time. Çukadeva Gosvämé very much appreciated his question and
congratulated him by saying:
varéyän eña te praçnaù
kåto loka-hitaà nåpa
ätmavit-sammataù puàsäà
çrotavyädiñu yaù paraù
"My dear King, your question is glorious because it is very beneficial for all
kinds of people. The answer to this question is the prime subject matter for
hearing, and it is approved by all transcendentalists." (SB 2.1.1)
Parékñit Mahäräja was astonished that the living entities in the conditional
stage do not accept the path of liberation, devotional service, instead of
suffering in so many hellish conditions. This is the symptom of a Vaiñëava.
Väïchä-kalpa-tarubhyaç ca kåpä-sindhubhya eva ca: a Vaiñëava is an ocean of
mercy. Para-duùkha-duùkhé: he is unhappy because of the unhappiness of
others. Therefore Parékñit Mahäräja, being compassionate toward the
conditioned souls suffering in hellish life, suggested that Çukadeva Gosvämé
continue describing the path of liberation, which he had explained in the
beginning of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. The word asaàsåti is very important in this
connection. Saàsåti refers to continuing on the path of birth and death.
Asaàsåti, on the contrary, refers to nivåtti-märga, or the path of liberation, by
which one's birth and death cease and one gradually progresses to Brahmaloka,
unless one is a pure devotee who does not care about going to the higher
planetary systems, in which case one immediately returns home, back to
Godhead, by executing devotional service (tyaktvä dehaà punar janma naiti
[Bg. 4.9]). Parékñit Mahäräja, therefore, was very eager to hear from Çukadeva
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
5
Gosvämé about the path of liberation for the conditioned soul.
According to the opinion of the äcäryas, the word krama-yogopalabdhena
indicates that by first performing karma-yoga and then jïäna-yoga and finally
coming to the platform of bhakti-yoga, one can be liberated. Bhakti-yoga,
however, is so powerful that it does not depend on karma-yoga or jïäna-yoga.
Bhakti-yoga itself is so powerful that even an impious man with no assets in
karma-yoga or an illiterate with no assets in jïäna-yoga can undoubtedly be
elevated to the spiritual world if he simply adheres to bhakti-yoga. Mäm
evaiñyasy asaàçayaù. Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (8.7) that by the process of
bhakti-yoga one undoubtedly goes back to Godhead, back home to the spiritual
world. Yogés, however, instead of going directly to the spiritual world,
sometimes want to see other planetary systems, and therefore they ascend to
the planetary system where Lord Brahmä lives, as indicated here by the word
brahmaëä. At the time of dissolution, Lord Brahmä, along with all the
inhabitants of Brahmaloka, goes directly to the spiritual world. This is
confirmed in the Vedas as follows:
brahmaëä saha te sarve
sampräpte pratisaïcare
parasyänte kåtätmänaù
praviçanti paraà padam
"Because of their exalted position, those who are on Brahmaloka at the time of
dissolution go directly back home, back to Godhead, along with Lord Brahmä."
TEXT 2
Pa[v*ital/+a<aêEv }aEGau<YaivzYaae MauNae )
Yaae_Saavl/INaPa[k*-TaeGauR<aSaGaR" PauNa" PauNa" )) 2 ))
pravåtti-lakñaëaç caiva
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
6
traiguëya-viñayo mune
yo 'säv aléna-prakåter
guëa-sargaù punaù punaù
SYNONYMS
pravåtti—by inclination; lakñaëaù—symptomized; ca—also; eva—indeed;
trai-guëya—the three modes of nature; viñayaù—possessing as objectives;
mune—O great sage; yaù—which; asau—that; aléna-prakåteù—of one who is
not freed from the clutches of mäyä; guëa-sargaù—in which there is a creation
of material bodies; punaù punaù—again and again.
TRANSLATION
O great sage Çukadeva Gosvämé, unless the living entity is freed from the
infection of the material modes of nature, he receives different types of bodies
in which to enjoy or suffer, and according to the body, he is understood to have
various inclinations. By following these inclinations he traverses the path called
pravåtti-märga, by which one may be elevated to the heavenly planets, as you
have already described [in the Third Canto].
PURPORT
As Lord Kåñëa explains in Bhagavad-gétä (9.25):
yänti deva-vratä devän
pitèn yänti pitå-vratäù
bhütäni yänti bhütejyä
yänti mad-yäjino 'pi mäm
"Those who worship the demigods will take birth among the demigods; those
who worship ghosts and spirits will take birth among such beings; those who
worship ancestors go to the ancestors; and those who worship Me will live with
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
7
Me." Because of the influence of the various modes of nature, the living
entities have various tendencies or propensities, and therefore they are
qualified to achieve various destinations. As long as one is materially attached,
he wants to be elevated to the heavenly planets because of his attraction to the
material world. The Supreme Personality of Godhead declares, however,
"Those who worship Me come to Me." If one has no information about the
Supreme Lord and His abode, one tries to be elevated only to a higher material
position, but when one concludes that in this material world there is nothing
but repeated birth and death, he tries to return home, back to Godhead. If one
attains that destination, he need never return to this material world (yad gatvä
na nivartante tad dhäma paramaà mama [Bg. 15.6]). As Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu says in Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 19.151):
brahmäëòa bhramite kona bhägyavän jéva
guru-kåñëa-prasäde päya bhakti-latä-béja
"According to their karma, all living entities are wandering throughout the
entire universe. Some of them are being elevated to the upper planetary
systems, and some are going down into the lower planetary systems. Out of
many millions of wandering living entities, one who is very fortunate gets an
opportunity to associate with a bona fide spiritual master by the grace of
Kåñëa. By the mercy of both Kåñëa and the spiritual master, such a person
receives the seed of the creeper of devotional service." All living entities are
rotating throughout the universe, going sometimes up to the higher planetary
systems and sometimes down to the lower planets. This is the material disease,
which is known as pravåtti-märga. When one becomes intelligent he takes to
nivåtti-märga, the path of liberation, and thus instead of rotating within this
material world, he returns home, back to Godhead. This is necessary.
TEXT 3
ADaMaRl/+a<aa NaaNaa Nark-aêaNauvi<aRTaa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
8
MaNvNTarê VYaa:YaaTa AaÛ" SvaYaM>auvae YaTa" )) 3 ))
adharma-lakñaëä nänä
narakäç cänuvarëitäù
manvantaraç ca vyäkhyäta
ädyaù sväyambhuvo yataù
SYNONYMS
adharma-lakñaëäù—symptomized by impious activities; nänä—various;
narakäù—hells; ca—also; anuvarëitäù—have been described;
manu-antaraù—the change of Manus [in one day of Brahmä there are
fourteen Manus]; ca—also; vyäkhyätaù—has been described; ädyaù—the
original; sväyambhuvaù—directly the son of Lord Brahmä; yataù—wherein.
TRANSLATION
You have also described [at the end of the Fifth Canto] the varieties of
hellish life that result from impious activities, and you have described [in the
Fourth Canto] the first manvantara, which was presided over by Sväyambhuva
Manu, the son of Lord Brahmä.
TEXTS 4-5
iPa[Yav]TaaetaaNaPadaev|XaSTaÀirTaaiNa c )
ÜqPavzRSaMaud]aid]NaÛuÛaNavNaSPaTaqNa( )) 4 ))
DaraMa<@l/Sa&SQaaNa& >aaGal/+a<aMaaNaTa" )
JYaaeiTaza& ivvra<aa& c YaQaedMaSa*JaiÜ>au" )) 5 ))
priyavratottänapador
vaàças tac-caritäni ca
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
9
dvépa-varña-samudrädrinady-
udyäna-vanaspatén
dharä-maëòala-saàsthänaà
bhäga-lakñaëa-mänataù
jyotiñäà vivaräëäà ca
yathedam asåjad vibhuù
SYNONYMS
priyavrata—of Priyavrata; uttänapadoù—and of Uttänapäda; vaàçaù—the
dynasty; tat-caritäni—their characteristics; ca—also; dvépa—different planets;
varña—lands; samudra—oceans and seas; adri—mountains; nadé—rivers;
udyäna—gardens; vanaspatén—and trees; dharä-maëòala—of the planet earth;
saàsthänam—situation; bhäga—according to divisions; lakñaëa—different
symptoms; mänataù—and measurements; jyotiñäm—of the sun and other
luminaries; vivaräëäm—of the lower planetary systems; ca—and; yathä—as;
idam—this; asåjat—created; vibhuù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
My dear lord, you have described the dynasties and characteristics of King
Priyavrata and King Uttänapäda. The Supreme Personality of Godhead created
this material world with various universes, planetary systems, planets and stars,
with varied lands, seas, oceans, mountains, rivers, gardens and trees, all with
different characteristics. These are divided among this planet earth, the
luminaries in the sky and the lower planetary systems. You have very clearly
described these planets and the living entities who live on them.
PURPORT
Here the words yathedam asåjad vibhuù clearly indicate that the Supreme,
the great, almighty Personality of Godhead, created this entire material world
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
10
with its different varieties of planets, stars and so forth. Atheists try to conceal
the hand of God, which is present in every creation, but they cannot explain
how all these creations could come into existence without a competent
intelligence and almighty power behind them. Simply to imagine or speculate
is a waste of time. In Bhagavad-gétä (10.8), the Lord says, ahaà sarvasya
prabhavo: "I am the origin of everything." Mattaù sarvaà pravartate: "whatever
exists in the creation emanates from Me." Iti matvä bhajante mäà budhä
bhäva-samanvitäù: "When one fully understands that I create everything by
My omnipotence, one becomes firmly situated in devotional service and fully
surrenders at My lotus feet." Unfortunately, the unintelligent cannot
immediately understand Kåñëa's supremacy. Nonetheless, if they associate with
devotees and read authorized books, they may gradually come to the proper
understanding, although this may take many, many births. As Kåñëa says in
Bhagavad-gétä (7.19):
bahünäà janmanäm ante
jïänavän mäà prapadyate
väsudevaù sarvam iti
sa mahätmä sudurlabhaù
"After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge surrenders
unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and all that is. Such a great
soul is very rare." Väsudeva, Kåñëa, is the creator of everything, and His energy
is displayed in various ways. As explained in Bhagavad-gétä (7.4-5), a
combination of the material energy (bhümir äpo 'nalo väyuù) and the spiritual
energy, the living entity, exists in every creation. Therefore the same
principle, the combination of the supreme spirit and the material elements, is
the cause of the cosmic manifestation.
TEXT 6
ADauNaeh Maha>aaGa YaQaEv Nark-aàr" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
11
NaaNaaeGa]YaaTaNaaàeYaataNMae VYaa:YaaTauMahRiSa )) 6 ))
adhuneha mahä-bhäga
yathaiva narakän naraù
nänogra-yätanän neyät
tan me vyäkhyätum arhasi
SYNONYMS
adhunä—right now; iha—in this material world; mahä-bhäga—O greatly
opulent and fortunate Çukadeva Gosvämé; yathä—so that; eva—indeed;
narakän—all the hellish conditions into which the impious are put;
naraù—human beings; nänä—varieties of; ugra—terrible;
yätanän—conditions of suffering; na éyät—may not undergo; tat—that;
me—to me; vyäkhyätum arhasi—please describe.
TRANSLATION
O greatly fortunate and opulent Çukadeva Gosvämé, now kindly tell me how
human beings may be saved from having to enter hellish conditions in which
they suffer terrible pains.
PURPORT
In the Twenty-sixth Chapter of the Fifth Canto, Çukadeva Gosvämé has
explained that people who commit sinful acts are forced to enter hellish
planets and suffer. Now Mahäräja Parékñit, being a devotee, is concerned with
how this can be stopped. A Vaiñëava is para-duùkha-duùkhé; in other words, he
has no personal troubles, but he is very unhappy to see others in trouble.
Prahläda Mahäräja said, "My Lord, I have no personal problems, for I have
learned how to glorify Your transcendental qualities and thus enter a trance of
ecstasy. I do have a problem, however, for I am simply thinking of these rascals
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
12
and fools who are busy with mäyä-sukha, temporary happiness, without
knowledge of devotional service unto You." This is the problem faced by a
Vaiñëava. Because a Vaiñëava fully takes shelter of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, he personally has no problems, but because he is compassionate
toward the fallen, conditioned souls, he is always thinking of plans to save
them from their hellish life in this body and the next. Parékñit Mahäräja,
therefore, anxiously wanted to know from Çukadeva Gosvämé how humanity
can be saved from gliding down to hell. Çukadeva Gosvämé had already
explained how people enter hellish life, and he could also explain how they
could be saved from it. Intelligent men must take advantage of these
instructions. Unfortunately, however, the entire world is lacking Kåñëa
consciousness, and therefore people are suffering from the grossest ignorance
and do not even believe in a life after this one. To convince them of their next
life is very difficult because they have become almost mad in their pursuit of
material enjoyment. Nevertheless, our duty, the duty of all sane men, is to save
them. Mahäräja Parékñit is the representative of one who can save them.
TEXT 7
é[qXauk- ovac
Na ceidhEvaPaiciTa& YaQaa&hSa"
k*-TaSYa ku-YaaRNMaNao¢-Paai<ai>a" )
Da]uv& Sa vE Pa[eTYa Nark-aNauPaEiTa
Yae k-IiTaRTaa Mae >avTaiSTaGMaYaaTaNaa" )) 7 ))
çré-çuka uväca
na ced ihaiväpacitià yathäàhasaù
kåtasya kuryän mana-ukta-päëibhiù
dhruvaà sa vai pretya narakän upaiti
ye kértitä me bhavatas tigma-yätanäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
13
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé said; na—not; cet—if; iha—within
this life; eva—certainly; apacitim—counteraction, atonement; yathä—duly;
aàhasaù kåtasya—when one has performed sinful activities; kuryät—performs;
manaù—with the mind; ukta—words; päëibhiù—and with the senses;
dhruvam—undoubtedly; saù—that person; vai—indeed; pretya—after death;
narakän—different varieties of hellish conditions; upaiti—attains; ye—which;
kértitäù—were already described; me—by me; bhavataù—unto you;
tigma-yätanäù—in which there is very terrible suffering.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé replied: My dear King, if before one's next death
whatever impious acts one has performed in this life with his mind, words and
body are not counteracted through proper atonement according to the
description of the Manu-saàhitä and other dharma-çästras, one will certainly
enter the hellish planets after death and undergo terrible suffering, as I have
previously described to you.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura mentions that although Mahäräja
Parékñit was a pure devotee, Çukadeva Gosvämé did not immediately speak to
him about the strength of devotional service. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä
(14.26):
mäà ca yo 'vyabhicäreëa
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa guëän samatétyaitän
brahma-bhüyäya kalpate
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
14
Devotional service is so strong that if one fully surrenders to Kåñëa and takes
fully to His devotional service, the reactions of his sinful life immediately stop.
Elsewhere in the Gétä (18.66), Lord Kåñëa urges that one give up all other
duties and surrender to Him, and He promises, ahaà tväà sarva-päpebhyo
mokñayiñyämi: "I shall free you from all sinful reactions and give you
liberation." Therefore in response to the inquiries of Parékñit Mahäräja,
Çukadeva Gosvämé, his guru, could have immediately explained the principle
of bhakti, but to test Parékñit Mahäräja's intelligence, he first prescribed
atonement according to karma-käëòa, the path of fruitive activities. For
karma-käëòa there are eighty authorized scriptures, such as Manu-saàhitä,
which are known as dharma-çästras. In these scriptures one is advised to
counteract his sinful acts by performing other types of fruitive action. This was
the path first recommended by Çukadeva Gosvämé to Mahäräja Parékñit, and
actually it is a fact that one who does not take to devotional service must
follow the decision of these scriptures by performing pious acts to counteract
his impious acts. This is known as atonement.
TEXT 8
TaSMaaTPaurEvaiìh PaaPaiNaZk*-TaaE
YaTaeTa Ma*TYaaerivPaÛTaaTMaNaa )
daezSYa d*îa Gauål/agav& YaQaa
i>azk( icik-TSaeTa åJaa& iNadaNaivTa( )) 8 ))
tasmät puraiväçv iha päpa-niñkåtau
yateta måtyor avipadyatätmanä
doñasya dåñövä guru-läghavaà yathä
bhiñak cikitseta rujäà nidänavit
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
15
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; purä—before; eva—indeed; äçu—very quickly; iha—in this
life; päpa-niñkåtau—to become free from the reaction of sinful activities;
yateta—one should endeavor; måtyoù—death; avipadyata—not troubled by
disease and old age; ätmanä—with a body; doñasya—of the sinful activities;
dåñövä—estimating; guru-läghavam—the heaviness or lightness; yathä—just
like; bhiñak—a physician; cikitseta—would treat; rujäm—of disease;
nidäna-vit—one who is expert in diagnosis.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, before one's next death comes, as long as one's body is strong
enough, one should quickly adopt the process of atonement according to çästra;
otherwise one's time will be lost, and the reactions of his sins will increase. As
an expert physician diagnoses and treats a disease according to its gravity, one
should undergo atonement according to the severity of one's sins.
PURPORT
The dharma-çästras like the Manu-saàhitä prescribe that a man who has
committed murder should be hanged and his own life sacrificed in atonement.
Previously this system was followed all over the world, but since people are
becoming atheists, they are stopping capital punishment. This is not wise.
Herein it is said that a physician who knows how to diagnose a disease
prescribes medicine accordingly. If the disease is very serious, the medicine
must be strong. The weight of a murderer's sin is very great, and therefore
according to Manu-saàhitä a murderer must be killed. By killing a murderer
the government shows mercy to him because if a murderer is not killed in this
life, he will be killed and forced to suffer many times in future lives. Since
people do not know about the next life and the intricate workings of nature,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
16
they manufacture their own laws, but they should properly consult the
established injunctions of the çästras and act accordingly. In India even today
the Hindu community often takes advice from expert scholars regarding how
to counteract sinful activities. In Christianity also there is a process of
confession and atonement. Therefore atonement is required, and atonement
must be undergone according to the gravity of one's sinful acts.
TEXT 9
é[qraJaaevac
d*íé[uTaa>Yaa& YaTPaaPa& JaaNaàPYaaTMaNaae_ihTaMa( )
k-raeiTa >aUYaae ivvXa" Pa[aYaiêtaMaQaae k-QaMa( )) 9 ))
çré-räjoväca
dåñöa-çrutäbhyäà yat päpaà
jänann apy ätmano 'hitam
karoti bhüyo vivaçaù
präyaçcittam atho katham
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—Parékñit Mahäräja replied; dåñöa—by seeing; çrutäbhyäm—also
by hearing (from the scriptures or lawbooks); yat—since; päpam—sinful,
criminal action; jänan—knowing; api—although; ätmanaù—of his self;
ahitam—injurious; karoti—he acts; bhüyaù—again and again; vivaçaù—unable
to control himself; präyaçcittam—atonement; atho—therefore; katham—what
is the value of.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Parékñit said: One may know that sinful activity is injurious for
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
17
him because he actually sees that a criminal is punished by the government and
rebuked by people in general and because he hears from scriptures and learned
scholars that one is thrown into hellish conditions in the next life for
committing sinful acts. Nevertheless, in spite of such knowledge, one is forced
to commit sins again and again, even after performing acts of atonement.
Therefore, what is the value of such atonement?
PURPORT
In some religious sects a sinful man goes to a priest to confess his sinful acts
and pay a fine, but then he again commits the same sins and returns to confess
them again. This is the practice of a professional sinner. Parékñit Mahäräja's
observations indicate that even five thousand years ago it was the practice of
criminals to atone for their crimes but then commit the same crimes again, as
if forced to do so. Therefore, owing to his practical experience, Parékñit
Mahäräja saw that the process of repeatedly sinning and atoning is pointless.
Regardless of how many times he is punished, one who is attached to sense
enjoyment will commit sinful acts again and again until he is trained to refrain
from enjoying his senses. The word vivaça is used herein, indicating that even
one who does not want to commit sinful acts will be forced to do so by habit.
Parékñit Mahäräja therefore considered the process of atonement to have little
value for saving one from sinful acts. In the following verse he further explains
his rejection of this process.
TEXT 10
KviciàvTaRTae_>ad]aTKvicÀriTa TaTPauNa" )
Pa[aYaiêtaMaQaae_PaaQa| MaNYae ku-ÅrXaaEcvTa( )) 10 ))
kvacin nivartate 'bhadrät
kvacic carati tat punaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
18
präyaçcittam atho 'pärthaà
manye kuïjara-çaucavat
SYNONYMS
kvacit—sometimes; nivartate—ceases; abhadrät—from sinful activity;
kvacit—sometimes; carati—commits; tat—that (sinful activity); punaù—again;
präyaçcittam—the process of atonement; atho—therefore; apärtham—useless;
manye—I consider; kuïjara-çaucavat—exactly like the bathing of an elephant.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes one who is very alert so as not to commit sinful acts is victimized
by sinful life again. I therefore consider this process of repeated sinning and
atoning to be useless. It is like the bathing of an elephant, for an elephant
cleanses itself by taking a full bath, but then throws dust over its head and body
as soon as it returns to the land.
PURPORT
When Parékñit Mahäräja inquired how a human being could free himself
from sinful activities so as not to be forced to go to hellish planetary systems
after death, Çukadeva Gosvämé answered that the process of counteracting
sinful life is atonement. In this way Çukadeva Gosvämé tested the intelligence
of Mahäräja Parékñit, who passed the examination by refusing to accept this
process as genuine. Now Parékñit Mahäräja is expecting another answer from
his spiritual master, Çukadeva Gosvämé.
TEXT 11
é[qbadraYai<aåvac
k-MaR<aa k-MaRiNahaRrae Na ùaTYaiNTak- wZYaTae )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
19
AivÜdiDak-airTvaTPa[aYaiêta& ivMaXaRNaMa( )) 11 ))
çré-bädaräyaëir uväca
karmaëä karma-nirhäro
na hy ätyantika iñyate
avidvad-adhikäritvät
präyaçcittaà vimarçanam
SYNONYMS
çré-bädaräyaëiù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé, the son of Vyäsadeva, replied;
karmaëä—by fruitive activities; karma-nirhäraù—counteraction of fruitive
activities; na—not; hi—indeed; ätyantikaù—final; iñyate—becomes possible;
avidvat-adhikäritvät—from being without knowledge; präyaçcittam—real
atonement; vimarçanam—full knowledge of Vedänta.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé, the son of Vedavyäsa, answered: My dear King, since
acts meant to neutralize impious actions are also fruitive, they will not release
one from the tendency to act fruitively. Persons who subject themselves to the
rules and regulations of atonement are not at all intelligent. Indeed, they are in
the mode of darkness. Unless one is freed from the mode of ignorance, trying to
counteract one action through another is useless because this will not uproot
one's desires. Thus even though one may superficially seem pious, he will
undoubtedly be prone to act impiously. Therefore real atonement is
enlightenment in perfect knowledge, Vedänta, by which one understands the
Supreme Absolute Truth.
PURPORT
The guru, Çukadeva Gosvämé, has examined Parékñit Mahäräja, and it
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
20
appears that the King has passed one phase of the examination by rejecting the
process of atonement because it involves fruitive activities. Now Çukadeva
Gosvämé is suggesting the platform of speculative knowledge. Progressing from
karma-käëòa to jïäna-käëòa, he is proposing, präyaçcittaà vimarçanam: "Real
atonement is full knowledge." Vimarçana refers to the cultivation of
speculative knowledge. In Bhagavad-gétä, karmés, who are lacking in
knowledge, are compared to asses. Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (7.15):
na mäà duñkåtino müòhäù
prapadyante narädhamäù
mäyayäpahåta-jïänä
äsuraà bhävam äçritäù
"Those miscreants who are grossly foolish, lowest among mankind, whose
knowledge is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the atheistic nature of
demons, do not surrender unto Me." Thus karmés who engage in sinful acts and
who do not know the true objective of life are called müòhas, asses. Vimarçana,
however, is also explained in Bhagavad-gétä (15.15), where Kåñëa says, vedaiç ca
sarvair aham eva vedyaù: the purpose of Vedic study is to understand the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. If one studies Vedänta but merely advances
somewhat in speculative knowledge and does not understand the Supreme
Lord, one remains the same müòha. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (7.19), one
attains real knowledge when he understands Kåñëa and surrenders unto Him
(bahünäà janmanäm ante jïänavän mäà prapadyate). To become learned and
free from material contamination, therefore, one should try to understand
Kåñëa, for thus one is immediately liberated from all pious and impious
activities and their reactions.
TEXT 12
NaaénTa" PaQYaMaevaà& VYaaDaYaae_i>a>aviNTa ih )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
21
Wv& iNaYaMak*-d]aJaNa( XaNaE" +aeMaaYa k-LPaTae )) 12 ))
näçnataù pathyam evännaà
vyädhayo 'bhibhavanti hi
evaà niyamakåd räjan
çanaiù kñemäya kalpate
SYNONYMS
na—not; açnataù—those who eat; pathyam—suitable; eva—indeed;
annam—food; vyädhayaù—different types of disease; abhibhavanti—overcome;
hi—indeed; evam—similarly; niyama-kåt—one following regulative principles;
räjan—O King; çanaiù—gradually; kñemäya—for well-being;
kalpate—becomes fit.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, if a diseased person eats the pure, uncontaminated food
prescribed by a physician, he is gradually cured, and the infection of disease can
no longer touch him. Similarly, if one follows the regulative principles of
knowledge, he gradually progresses toward liberation from material
contamination.
PURPORT
One is gradually purified if one cultivates knowledge, even through mental
speculation, and strictly follows the regulative principles enjoined in the
çästras and explained in the next verse. Therefore the platform of jïäna,
speculative knowledge, is better than the platform of karma, fruitive action.
There is every chance of falling from the platform of karma to hellish
conditions, but on the platform of jïäna one is saved from hellish life,
although one is still not completely free from infection. The difficulty is that
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
22
on the platform of jïäna one thinks that he has been liberated and has become
Näräyaëa, or Bhagavän. This is another phase of ignorance.
ye 'nye 'ravindäkña vimukta-mäninas
tvayy asta-bhäväd aviçuddha-buddhayaù
äruhya kåcchreëa paraà padaà tataù
patanty adho 'nädåta-yuñmad-aìghrayaù
(SB 10.2.32)
Because of ignorance, one speculatively thinks himself liberated from material
contamination although actually he is not. Therefore even if one rises to
brahma jïäna, understanding of Brahman, one nevertheless falls down because
of not taking shelter of the lotus feet of Kåñëa. Nonetheless, jïänés at least
know what is sinful and what is pious, and they very cautiously act according
to the injunctions of the çästras.
TEXTS 13-14
TaPaSaa b]øcYaeR<a XaMaeNa c dMaeNa c )
TYaaGaeNa SaTYaXaaEca>Yaa& YaMaeNa iNaYaMaeNa va )) 13 ))
dehvaGbuiÖJa& Daqra DaMaRja" é[ÖYaaiNvTaa" )
i+aPaNTYaga& MahdiPa ve<auGauLMaiMavaNal/" )) 14 ))
tapasä brahmacaryeëa
çamena ca damena ca
tyägena satya-çaucäbhyäà
yamena niyamena vä
deha-väg-buddhijaà dhérä
dharmajïäù çraddhayänvitäù
kñipanty aghaà mahad api
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
23
veëu-gulmam ivänalaù
SYNONYMS
tapasä—by austerity or voluntary rejection of material enjoyment;
brahmacaryeëa—by celibacy (the first austerity); çamena—by controlling the
mind; ca—and; damena—by fully controlling the senses; ca—also;
tyägena—by voluntarily giving charity to good causes; satya—by truthfulness;
çaucäbhyäm—and by following regulative principles to keep oneself internally
and externally clean; yamena—by avoiding cursing and violence;
niyamena—by regularly chanting the holy name of the Lord; vä—and;
deha-väk-buddhi-jam—performed by the body, words and intelligence;
dhéräù—those who are sober; dharma-jïäù—fully imbued with knowledge of
religious principles; çraddhayä anvitäù—endowed with faith; kñipanti—destroy;
agham—all kinds of sinful activities; mahat api—although very great and
abominable; veëu-gulmam—the dried creepers beneath a bamboo tree;
iva—like; analaù—fire.
TRANSLATION
To concentrate the mind, one must observe a life of celibacy and not fall
down. One must undergo the austerity of voluntarily giving up sense
enjoyment. One must then control the mind and senses, give charity, be
truthful, clean and nonviolent, follow the regulative principles and regularly
chant the holy name of the Lord. Thus a sober and faithful person who knows
the religious principles is temporarily purified of all sins performed with his
body, words and mind. These sins are like the dried leaves of creepers beneath a
bamboo tree, which may be burned by fire although their roots remain to grow
again at the first opportunity.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
24
Tapaù is explained in the småti-çästra as follows: manasaç cendriyäëäà ca
aikägryaà paramaà tapaù. "Complete control of the mind and senses and their
complete concentration on one kind of activity is called tapaù." Our Kåñëa
consciousness movement is teaching people how to concentrate the mind on
devotional service. This is first-class tapaù. Brahmacarya, the life of celibacy,
has eight aspects: one should not think of women, speak about sex life, dally
with women, look lustfully at women, talk intimately with women or decide to
engage in sexual intercourse, nor should one endeavor for sex life or engage in
sex life. One should not even think of women or look at them, to say nothing
of talking with them. This is called first-class brahmacarya. If a brahmacäré or
sannyäsé talks with a woman in a secluded place, naturally there will be a
possibility of sex life without anyone's knowledge. Therefore a complete
brahmacäré practices just the opposite. If one is a perfect brahmacäré, he can
very easily control the mind and senses, give charity, speak truthfully and so
forth. To begin, however, one must control the tongue and the process of
eating.
In the bhakti-märga, the path of devotional service, one must strictly follow
the regulative principles by first controlling the tongue (sevonmukhe hi
jihvädau svayam eva sphuraty adaù [Brs. 1.2.234(1)]). The tongue (jihvä) can be
controlled if one chants the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra, does not speak of any
subjects other than those concerning Kåñëa and does not taste anything not
offered to Kåñëa. If one can control the tongue in this way, brahmacarya and
other purifying processes will automatically follow. It will be explained in the
next verse that the path of devotional service is completely perfect and is
therefore superior to the path of fruitive activities and the path of knowledge.
Quoting from the Vedas, Çréla Véraräghava Äcärya explains that austerity
involves observing fasts as fully as possible (tapasänäçakena). Çréla Rüpa
Gosvämé has also advised that atyähära, too much eating, is an impediment to
advancement in spiritual life. Also, in Bhagavad-gétä (6.17) Kåñëa says:
yuktähära-vihärasya
yukta-ceñöasya karmasu
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
25
yukta-svapnävabodhasya
yogo bhavati duùkha-hä
"He who is temperate in his habits of eating, sleeping, working and recreation
can mitigate all material pains by practicing the yoga system."
In text 14 the word dhéräù, meaning "those who are undisturbed under all
circumstances," is very significant. Kåñëa tells Arjuna in Bhagavad-gétä (2.14):
mäträ-sparçäs tu kaunteya
çétoñëa-sukha-duùkha-däù
ägamäpäyino 'nityäs
täàs titikñasva bhärata
"O son of Kunté, the nonpermanent appearance of happiness and distress, and
their disappearance in due course, are like the appearance and disappearance
of winter and summer seasons. They arise from sense perception, O scion of
Bharata, and one must learn to tolerate them without being disturbed." In
material life there are many disturbances (adhyätmika, adhidaivika and
adhibhautika). One who has learned to tolerate these disturbances under all
circumstances is called dhéra.
TEXT 15
ke-icTke-vl/Yaa >a¢-ya vaSaudevParaYa<aa" )
Aga& DauNviNTa k-aTSNYaeRNa NaqhariMav >aaSk-r" )) 15 ))
kecit kevalayä bhaktyä
väsudeva-paräyaëäù
aghaà dhunvanti kärtsnyena
néhäram iva bhäskaraù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
26
SYNONYMS
kecit—some people; kevalayä bhaktyä—by executing unalloyed devotional
service; väsudeva—to Lord Kåñëa, the all-pervading Supreme Personality of
Godhead; paräyaëäù—completely attached (only to such service, without
dependence on austerity, penance, cultivation of knowledge or pious
activities); agham—all kinds of sinful reactions; dhunvanti—destroy;
kärtsnyena—completely (with no possibility that sinful desires will revive);
néhäram—fog; iva—like; bhäskaraù—the sun.
TRANSLATION
Only a rare person who has adopted complete, unalloyed devotional service
to Kåñëa can uproot the weeds of sinful actions with no possibility that they
will revive. He can do this simply by discharging devotional service, just as the
sun can immediately dissipate fog by its rays.
PURPORT
In the previous verse Çukadeva Gosvämé gave the example that the dried
leaves of creepers beneath a bamboo tree may be completely burnt to ashes by
a fire, although the creepers may sprout again because the root is still in the
ground. Similarly, because the root of sinful desire is not destroyed in the heart
of a person who is cultivating knowledge but who has no taste for devotional
service, there is a possibility that his sinful desires will reappear. As stated in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.14.4):
çreyaù-såtià bhaktim udasya te vibho
kliçyanti ye kevala-bodha-labdhaye
Speculators who undergo great labor to gain a meticulous understanding of the
material world by distinguishing between sinful and pious activities, but who
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
27
are not situated in devotional service, are prone to material activities. They
may fall down and become implicated in fruitive activities. If one becomes
attached to devotional service, however, his desires for material enjoyment are
automatically vanquished without separate endeavor. Bhaktiù pareçänubhavo
viraktir anyatra ca: [SB 11.2.42] if one is advanced in Kåñëa consciousness,
material activities, both sinful and pious, automatically become distasteful to
him. That is the test of Kåñëa consciousness. Both pious and impious activities
are actually due to ignorance because a living entity, as an eternal servant of
Kåñëa, has no need to act for his personal sense gratification. Therefore as
soon as one is reclaimed to the platform of devotional service, he relinquishes
his attachment for pious and impious activities and is interested only in what
will satisfy Kåñëa. This process of bhakti, devotional service to Kåñëa
(väsudeva-paräyaëa), relieves one from the reactions of all activities.
Since Mahäräja Parékñit was a great devotee. the answers of his guru,
Çukadeva Gosvämé, concerning karma-käëòa and jïäna-käëòa could not
satisfy him. Therefore Çukadeva Gosvämé, knowing very well the heart of his
disciple, explained the transcendental bliss of devotional service. The word
kecit, which is used in this verse, means. "a few people but not all." Not
everyone can become Kåñëa conscious. As Kåñëa explains in Bhagavad-gétä
(7.3):
manuñyäëäà sahasreñu
kaçcid yatati siddhaye
yatatäm api siddhänäà
kaçcin mäà vetti tattvataù
"Out of many thousands among men, one may endeavor for perfection, and of
those who have achieved perfection, hardly one knows Me in truth."
Practically no one understands Kåñëa as He is, for Kåñëa cannot be understood
through pious activities or attainment of the most elevated speculative
knowledge. Actually the highest knowledge consists of understanding Kåñëa.
Unintelligent men who do not understand Kåñëa are grossly puffed up,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
28
thinking that they are liberated or have themselves become Kåñëa or
Näräyaëa. This is ignorance.
To indicate the purity of bhakti, devotional service, Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé
says in Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu (1.1.11):
anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà
jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam
änukülyena kåñëänuçélanaà
bhaktir uttamä
[Cc. Madhya 19.167]
"One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord Kåñëa
favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through fruitive
activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure devotional service."
Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé further explains that bhakti is kleçaghné çubhadä, which
means if one takes to devotional service, all kinds of unnecessary labor and
material distress cease entirely and one achieves all good fortune. Bhakti is so
powerful that it is also said to be mokña-laghutäkåt; in other words, it minimizes
the importance of liberation.
Nondevotees must undergo material hardships because they are prone to
commit sinful fruitive activities. The desire to commit sinful actions continues
in their hearts due to ignorance. These sinful actions are divided into three
categories—pätaka, mahä-pätaka and atipätaka—and also into two divisions;
prärabdha and aprärabdha. Prärabdha refers to sinful reactions from which one
is suffering at the present, and aprärabdha refers to sources of potential
suffering. When the seeds (béja) of sinful reactions have not yet fructified, the
reactions are called aprärabdha. These seeds of sinful action are unseen, but
they are unlimited, and no one can trace when they were first planted.
Because of prärabdha, sinful reactions that have already fructified, one is seen
to have taken birth in a low family or to be suffering from other miseries.
When one takes to devotional service, however, all phases of sinful life,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
29
including prärabdha, aprärabdha and béja, are vanquished. In
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.14.19) Lord Kåñëa tells Uddhava:
yathägniù susamåddhärciù
karoty edhäàsi bhasmasät
tathä mad-viñayä bhaktir
uddhavainäàsi kåtsnaçaù
"My dear Uddhava, devotional service in relationship with Me is like a blazing
fire that can burn to ashes all the fuel of sinful activities supplied to it." How
devotional service vanquishes the reactions of sinful life is explained in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (3.33.6) in a verse spoken during Lord Kapiladeva's
instructions to His mother, Devahüti. Devahüti said:
yan-nämadheya-çravaëänukértanäd
yat-prahvaëäd yat-smaraëäd api kvacit
çvädo 'pi sadyaù savanäya kalpate
kutaù punas te bhagavan nu darçanät
"My dear Lord, if even a person born in a family of dog-eaters hears and
repeats the chanting of Your glories, offers respects to You and remembers
You, he is immediately greater than a brähmaëa and is therefore eligible to
perform sacrifices. Therefore, what is to be said of one who has seen You
directly?"
In the Padma Puräëa there is a statement that persons whose hearts are
always attached to the devotional service of Lord Viñëu are immediately
released from all the reactions of sinful life. These reactions generally exist in
four phases. Some of them are ready to produce results immediately, some are
in the form of seeds, some are unmanifested, and some are current. All such
reactions are immediately nullified by devotional service. When devotional
service is present in one's heart, desires to perform sinful activities have no
place there. Sinful life is due to ignorance, which means forgetfulness of one's
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
30
constitutional position as an eternal servant of God, but when one is fully
Kåñëa conscious he realizes that he is God's eternal servant.
In this regard, Çréla Jéva Gosvämé comments that bhakti may be divided into
two divisions: (1) santatä, devotional service that continues incessantly with
faith and love, and (2) kädäcitké, devotional service that does not continue
incessantly but is sometimes awakened. Incessantly flowing devotional service
(santatä) may also be divided into two categories: (1) service performed with
slight attachment and (2) spontaneous devotional service. Intermittent
devotional service (kädäcitké) may be divided into three categories: (1)
rägäbhäsamayé, devotional service in which one is almost attached, (2)
rägäbhäsa-çünya-svarüpa-bhütä, devotional service in which there is no
spontaneous love but one likes the constitutional position of serving, and (3)
äbhäsa-rüpä, a slight glimpse of devotional service. As for atonement, if one
has caught even a slight glimpse of devotional service, all needs to undergo
präyaçcitta, atonement, are superseded. Therefore atonement is certainly
unnecessary when one has achieved spontaneous love and, above that,
attachment with love, which are signs of increasing advancement in kädäcitké.
Even in the stage of äbhäsa-rüpä bhakti, all the reactions of sinful life are
uprooted and vanquished. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé expresses the opinion that the
word kärtsnyena means that even if one has a desire to commit sinful actions,
the roots of that desire are vanquished merely by äbhäsa-rüpä bhakti. The
example of bhäskara, the sun, is most appropriate. The äbhäsa feature of bhakti
is compared to twilight, and the accumulation of one's sinful activities is
compared to fog. Since fog does not spread throughout the sky, the sun need
do no more than merely manifest its first rays, and the fog immediately
disappears. Similarly, if one has even a slight relationship with devotional
service, all the fog of his sinful life is immediately vanquished.
TEXT 16
Na TaQaa ùgavaNa( raJaNa( PaUYaeTa TaPaAaidi>a" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
31
YaQaa k*-Z<aaiPaRTaPa[a<aSTaTPauåziNazevYaa )) 16 ))
na tathä hy aghavän räjan
püyeta tapa-ädibhiù
yathä kåñëärpita-präëas
tat-puruña-niñevayä
SYNONYMS
na—not; tathä—so much; hi—certainly; agha-vän—a man full of sinful
activities; räjan—O King; püyeta—can become purified; tapaù-ädibhiù—by
executing the principles of austerity, penance, brahmacarya and other
purifying processes; yathä—as much as; kåñëa-arpita-präëaù—the devotee
whose life is fully Kåñëa conscious; tat-puruña-niñevayä—by engaging his life in
the service of Kåñëa's representative.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, if a sinful person engages in the service of a bona fide devotee
of the Lord and thus learns how to dedicate his life unto the lotus feet of Kåñëa,
he can be completely purified. One cannot be purified merely by undergoing
austerity, penance, brahmacarya and the other methods of atonement I have
previously described.
PURPORT
Tat-puruña refers to a preacher of Kåñëa consciousness, such as the spiritual
master. Çréla Narottama däsa Öhäkura has said, chäòiyä vaiñëava-sevä nistära
päyeche kebä: "Without serving a bona fide spiritual master, an ideal Vaiñëava,
who can be delivered from the clutches of mäyä?" This idea is also expressed in
many other places. Çrémad-Bhägavatam (5.5.2) says, mahat-seväà dväram ähur
vimukteù: if one desires liberation from the clutches of mäyä, one must
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
32
associate with a pure devotee mahätmä. A mahätmä is one who engages
twenty-four hours daily in the loving service of the Lord. As Kåñëa says in
Bhagavad-gétä (9.13):
mahätmänas tu mäà pärtha
daivéà prakåtim äçritäù
bhajanty ananya-manaso
jïätvä bhütädim avyayam
"O son of Påthä, those who are not deluded, the great souls, are under the
protection of the divine nature. They are fully engaged in devotional service
because they know Me as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, original and
inexhaustible." Thus the symptom of a mahätmä is that he has no engagement
other than service to Kåñëa. One must render service to a Vaiñëava in order to
get freed from sinful reactions, revive one's original Kåñëa consciousness and
be trained in how to love Kåñëa. This is the result of mahätma-sevä. Of course,
if one engages in the service of a pure devotee, the reactions of one's sinful life
are vanquished automatically. Devotional service is necessary not to drive
away an insignificant stock of sins, but to awaken our dormant love for Kåñëa.
As fog is vanquished at the first glimpse of sunlight, one's sinful reactions are
automatically vanquished as soon as one begins serving a pure devotee; no
separate endeavor is required.
The word kåñëa-rpita-präëaù refers to a devotee who dedicates his life to
serving Kåñëa, not to being saved from the path to hellish life. A devotee is
näräyaëa-paräyaëa, or väsudeva-paräyaëa, which means that the path of
Väsudeva, or the devotional path, is his life and soul. Näräyaëa-paräù sarve na
kutaçcana bibhyati (SB 6.17.28): such a devotee is not afraid of going anywhere.
There is a path toward liberation in the higher planetary systems and a path
toward the hellish planets, but a näräyaëa-para devotee is unafraid wherever
he is sent; he simply wants to remember Kåñëa, wherever he may be. Such a
devotee is unconcerned with hell and heaven; he is simply attached to
rendering service to Kåñëa. When a devotee is put into hellish conditions, he
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
33
accepts them as Kåñëa's mercy: tat te 'nukampäà susamékñamäëaù (SB 10.14.8).
He does not protest, "Oh, I am such a great devotee of Kåñëa. Why have I been
put into this misery?" Instead he thinks, "This is Kåñëa's mercy." Such an
attitude is possible for a devotee who engages in the service of Kåñëa's
representative. This is the secret of success.
TEXT 17
SaDa]qcqNaae ùYa& l/aeke- PaNQaa" +aeMaae_ku-Taae>aYa" )
SauXaql/a" SaaDavae Ya}a NaaraYa<aParaYa<aa" )) 17 ))
sadhrécéno hy ayaà loke
panthäù kñemo 'kuto-bhayaù
suçéläù sädhavo yatra
näräyaëa-paräyaëäù
SYNONYMS
sadhrécénaù—just appropriate; hi—certainly; ayam—this; loke—in the world;
panthäù—path; kñemaù—auspicious; akutaù-bhayaù—without fear;
su-çéläù—well-behaved; sädhavaù—saintly persons; yatra—wherein;
näräyaëa-paräyaëäù—those who have taken the path of Näräyaëa, devotional
service, as their life and soul.
TRANSLATION
The path followed by pure devotees, who are well behaved and fully
endowed with the best qualifications, is certainly the most auspicious path in
this material world. It is free from fear, and it is authorized by the çästras.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
34
One should not think that the person who takes to bhakti is one who
cannot perform the ritualistic ceremonies recommended in the karma-käëòa
section of the Vedas or is not sufficiently educated to speculate on spiritual
subjects. Mäyävädés generally allege that the bhakti path is for women and
illiterates. This is a groundless accusation. The bhakti path is followed by the
most learned scholars, such as the Gosvämés, Lord Caitanya Mahäprabhu and
Rämänujäcärya. These are the actual followers of the bhakti path. Regardless of
whether or not one is educated or aristocratic, one must follow in their
footsteps. Mahäjano yena gataù sa panthäù: [Cc. Madhya 17.186] one must
follow the path of the mahäjanas. The mahäjanas are those who have taken to
the path of devotional service (suçéläù sädhavo yatra näräyaëa-paräyaëäù), for
these great personalities are the perfect persons. As stated in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (5.18.12):
yasyästi bhaktir bhagavaty akiïcanä
sarvair guëais tatra samäsate suräù
"One who has unflinching devotion to the Personality of Godhead has all the
good qualities of the demigods." The less intelligent, however, misunderstand
the bhakti path and therefore allege that it is for one who cannot execute
ritualistic ceremonies or speculate. As confirmed here by the word sadhrécénaù,
bhakti is the path that is appropriate, not the paths of karma-käëòa and
jïäna-käëòa. Mäyävädés may be suçéläù sädhavaù (well-behaved saintly
persons), but there is nevertheless some doubt about whether they are actually
making progress, for they have not accepted the path of bhakti. On the other
hand, those who follow the path of the äcäryas are suçéläù and sädhavaù, but
furthermore their path is akuto-bhaya, which means free from fear. One should
fearlessly follow the twelve mahäjanas and their line of disciplic succession and
thus be liberated from the clutches of mäyä.
TEXT 18
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
35
Pa[aYaiêtaaiNa cq<aaRiNa NaaraYa<aParax(Mau%Ma( )
Na iNaZPauNaiNTa raJaeNd] Sauraku-M>aiMavaPaGaa" )) 18 ))
präyaçcittäni cérëäni
näräyaëa-paräìmukham
na niñpunanti räjendra
surä-kumbham iväpagäù
SYNONYMS
präyaçcittäni—processes of atonement; cérëäni—very nicely performed;
näräyaëa-paräìmukham—a nondevotee; na niñpunanti—cannot purify;
räjendra—O King; surä-kumbham—a pot containing liquor; iva—like;
äpa-gäù—the waters of the rivers.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, as a pot containing liquor cannot be purified even if washed
in the waters of many rivers, nondevotees cannot be purified by processes of
atonement even if they perform them very well.
PURPORT
To take advantage of the methods of atonement, one must be at least
somewhat devoted; otherwise there is no chance of one's being purified. It is
clear from this verse that even those who take advantage of karma-käëòa and
jïäna-käëòa, but are not at least slightly devoted cannot be purified simply by
following these other paths. The word präyaçcittäni is plural in number to
indicate both karma-käëòa and jïäna-käëòa. Narottama däsa Öhäkura
therefore says, karma-käëòa, jïäna-käëòa, kevala viñera bhäëòa. Thus
Narottama däsa Öhäkura compares the paths of karma-käëòa and jïäna-käëòa
to pots of poison. Liquor and poison are in the same category. According to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
36
this verse from Çrémad-Bhägavatam, a person who has heard a good deal about
the path of devotional service, but who is not attached to it, who is not Kåñëa
conscious, is like a pot of liquor. Such a person cannot be purified without at
least a slight touch of devotional service.
TEXT 19
Sak*-NMaNa" k*-Z<aPadarivNdYaae‚
iNaRveiXaTa& Tad(Gau<araiGa YaEirh )
Na Tae YaMa& PaaXa>a*Taê TaÙ$=aNa(
SvPane_iPa PaXYaiNTa ih cq<aRiNaZk*-Taa" )) 19 ))
sakån manaù kåñëa-padäravindayor
niveçitaà tad-guëa-rägi yair iha
na te yamaà päça-bhåtaç ca tad-bhaöän
svapne 'pi paçyanti hi cérëa-niñkåtäù
SYNONYMS
sakåt—once only; manaù—the mind; kåñëa-pada-aravindayoù—unto the two
lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa; niveçitam—completely surrendered; tat—of Kåñëa;
guëa-rägi—which is somewhat attached to the qualities, name, fame and
paraphernalia; yaiù—by whom; iha—in this world; na—not; te—such persons;
yamam—Yamaräja, the superintendent of death; päça-bhåtaù—those who
carry ropes (to catch sinful persons); ca—and; tat—his; bhaöän—order
carriers; svapne api—even in dreams; paçyanti—see; hi—indeed;
cérëa-niñkåtäù—who have performed the right type of atonement.
TRANSLATION
Although not having fully realized Kåñëa, persons who have even once
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
37
surrendered completely unto His lotus feet and who have become attracted to
His name, form, qualities and pastimes are completely freed of all sinful
reactions, for they have thus accepted the true method of atonement. Even in
dreams, such surrendered souls do not see Yamaräja or his order carriers, who
are equipped with ropes to bind the sinful.
PURPORT
Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (18.66):
sarva-dharmän parityajya
mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja
ahaà tväà sarva-päpebhyo
mokñayiñyämi mä çucaù
"Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall deliver
you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear." This same principle is described here
(sakån manaù kåñëa-padäravindayoù). If by studying Bhagavad-gétä one decides
to surrender to Kåñëa, he is immediately freed from all sinful reactions. It is
also significant that Çukadeva Gosvämé, having several times repeated the
words väsudeva-paräyaëa and näräyaëa-paräyaëa, finally says
kåñëa-padäravindayoù. Thus he indicates that Kåñëa is the origin of both
Näräyaëa and Väsudeva. Even though Näräyaëa and Väsudeva are not
different from Kåñëa, simply by surrendering to Kåñëa one fully surrenders to
all His expansions, such as Näräyaëa, Väsudeva and Govinda. As Kåñëa says in
Bhagavad-gétä (7.7), mattaù parataraà nänyat: "There is no truth superior to
Me." There are many names and forms of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, but Kåñëa is the supreme form (kåñëas tu bhagavän svayam [SB
1.3.28]). Therefore Kåñëa recommends to neophyte devotees that one should
surrender unto Him only (mäm ekam). Because neophyte devotees cannot
understand what the forms of Näräyaëa, Väsudeva and Govinda are, Kåñëa
directly says, mäm ekam. Herein, this is also supported by the word
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
38
kåñëa-padäravindayoù. Näräyaëa does not speak personally, but Kåñëa, or
Väsudeva, does, as in Bhagavad-gétä for example. Therefore, to follow the
direction of Bhagavad-gétä means to surrender unto Kåñëa, and to surrender in
this way is the highest perfection of bhakti-yoga.
Parékñit Mahäräja had inquired from Çukadeva Gosvämé how one can be
saved from falling into the various conditions of hellish life. In this verse
Çukadeva Gosvämé answers that a soul who has surrendered to Kåñëa certainly
cannot go to naraka, hellish existence. To say nothing of going there, even in
his dreams he does not see Yamaräja or his order carriers, who are able to take
one there. In other words, if one wants to save himself from falling into
naraka, hellish life, he should fully surrender to Kåñëa. The word sakåt is
significant because it indicates that if one sincerely surrenders to Kåñëa once,
he is saved even if by chance he falls down by committing sinful activities.
Therefore Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (9.30):
api cet su-duräcäro
bhajate mäm ananya-bhäk
sädhur eva sa mantavyaù
samyag vyavasito hi saù
"Even if one commits the most abominable actions, if he is engaged in
devotional service he is to be considered saintly because he is properly
situated." If one never for a moment forgets Kåñëa, he is safe even if by chance
he falls down by committing sinful acts.
In the Second Chapter of Bhagavad-gétä (2.40) the Lord also says:
nehäbhikrama-näço 'sti
pratyaväyo na vidyate
svalpam apy asya dharmasya
träyate mahato bhayät
"In this endeavor there is no loss or diminution, and a little advancement on
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
39
this path can protect one from the most dangerous type of fear."
Elsewhere in the Gétä (6.40) the Lord says, na hi kalyäëa-kåt kaçcid durgatià
täta gacchati: "one who performs auspicious activity is never overcome by evil."
The highest kalyäëa (auspicious) activity is to surrender to Kåñëa. That is the
only path by which to save oneself from falling down into hellish life. Çréla
Prabodhänanda Sarasvaté has confirmed this as follows:
kaivalyaà narakäyate tri-daça-pür äkäça-puñpäyate
durdäntendriya-käla-sarpa-paöalé protkhäta-daàñöräyate
viçvaà pürëa-sukhäyate vidhi-mahendrädiç ca kéöäyate
yat-käruëya-kaöäkña-vaibhavavatäà taà gauram eva stumaù
(Caitanya-candrämåta 5)
The sinful actions of one who has surrendered unto Kåñëa are compared to a
snake with its poison fangs removed (protkhäta-daàñöräyate). Such a snake is
no longer to be feared. Of course, one should not commit sinful activities on
the strength of having surrendered to Kåñëa. However, even if one who has
surrendered to Kåñëa happens to do something sinful because of his former
habits, such sinful actions no longer have a destructive effect. Therefore one
should adhere to the lotus feet of Kåñëa very tightly and serve Him under the
direction of the spiritual master. Thus in all conditions one will be
akuto-bhaya, free from fear.
TEXT 20
A}a caedahrNTaqMaiMaiTahaSa& PauraTaNaMa( )
dUTaaNaa& ivZ<auYaMaYaae" Sa&vadSTa& iNabaeDa Mae )) 20 ))
atra codäharantémam
itihäsaà purätanam
dütänäà viñëu-yamayoù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
40
saàvädas taà nibodha me
SYNONYMS
atra—in this connection; ca—also; udäharanti—they give as an example;
imam—this; itihäsam—the history (of Ajämila); purätanam—which is very
old; dütänäm—of the order carriers; viñëu—of Lord Viñëu; yamayoù—and of
Yamaräja; saàvädaù—the discussion; tam—that; nibodha—try to understand;
me—from me.
TRANSLATION
In this regard, learned scholars and saintly persons describe a very old
historical incident involving a discussion between the order carriers of Lord
Viñëu and those of Yamaräja. Please hear of this from me.
PURPORT
The Puräëas, or old histories, are sometimes neglected by unintelligent men
who consider their descriptions mythological. Actually, the descriptions of the
Puräëas, or the old histories of the universe, are factual, although not
chronological. The puräëas record the chief incidents that have occurred over
many millions of years, not only on this planet but also on other planets within
the universe. Therefore all learned and realized Vedic scholars speak with
references to the incidents in the Puräëas. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé accepts the
Puräëas to be as important as the Vedas themselves. Therefore in
Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu he quotes the following verse from the
Brahma-yämala:
çruti-småti-puräëädipaïcarätra-
vidhià vinä
aikäntiké harer bhaktir
utpätäyaiva kalpate
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
41
[Brs. 1.2.101(2)]
"Devotional service of the Lord that ignores the authorized Vedic literatures
like the Upaniñads, puräëas and Närada-païcarätra is simply an unnecessary
disturbance in society." A devotee of Kåñëa must refer not only to the Vedas,
but also to the puräëas. One should not foolishly consider the Puräëas
mythological. If they were mythological, Çukadeva Gosvämé would not have
taken the trouble to recite the old historical incidents concerning the life of
Ajämila. Now the history begins as follows.
TEXT 21
k-aNYaku-BJae iÜJa" k-iêÕaSaqPaiTarJaaiMal/" )
NaaMNaa NaíSadacarae daSYaa" Sa&SaGaRdUizTa" )) 21 ))
känyakubje dvijaù kaçcid
däsé-patir ajämilaù
nämnä nañöa-sadäcäro
däsyäù saàsarga-düñitaù
SYNONYMS
känya-kubje—in the city of Känyakubja (Kanauj, a town near Kanpur);
dvijaù—brähmaëa; kaçcit—some; däsé-patiù—the husband of a low-class
woman or prostitute; ajämilaù—Ajämila; nämnä—by name;
nañöa-sat-äcäraù—who lost all brahminical qualities; däsyäù—of the prostitute
or maidservant; saàsarga-düñitaù—contaminated by the association.
TRANSLATION
In the city known as Känyakubja there was a brähmaëa named Ajämila who
married a prostitute maidservant and lost all his brahminical qualities because of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
42
the association of that low-class woman.
PURPORT
The fault of illicit connection with women is that it makes one lose all
brahminical qualities. In India there is still a class of servants, called çüdras,
whose maidservant wives are called çüdräëés. Sometimes people who are very
lusty establish relationships with such maidservants and sweeping women,
since in the higher statuses of society they cannot indulge in the habit of
woman hunting, which is strictly prohibited by social convention. Ajämila, a
qualified brähmaëa youth, lost all his brahminical qualities because of his
association with a prostitute, but he was ultimately saved because he had begun
the process of bhakti-yoga. Therefore in the previous verse, Çukadeva Gosvämé
spoke of the person who has only once surrendered himself at the lotus feet of
the Lord (manaù kåñëa-padäravindayoù) or has just begun the bhakti-yoga
process. Bhakti-yoga begins with çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù [SB 7.5.23], hearing
and chanting of Lord Viñëu's names, as in the mahä-mantra—Hare Kåñëa,
Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma,
Hare Hare. Chanting is the beginning of bhakti-yoga. Therefore Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu declares:
harer näma harer näma
harer nämaiva kevalam
kalau nästy eva nästy eva
nästy eva gatir anyathä
[Cc. Ädi 17.21]
"In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance is chanting
the holy name of the Lord. There is no other way. There is no other way.
There is no other way." The process of chanting the holy name of the Lord is
always superbly effective, but it is especially effective in this age of Kali. Its
practical effectiveness will now be explained by Çukadeva Gosvämé through
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
43
the history of Ajämila, who was freed from the hands of the Yamadütas simply
because of chanting the holy name of Näräyaëa. Parékñit Mahäräja's original
question was how to be freed from falling down into hell or into the hands of
the Yamadütas. In reply, Çukadeva Gosvämé is citing this old historical
example to convince Parékñit Mahäräja of the potency of bhakti-yoga, which
begins simply with the chanting of the Lord's name. All the great authorities of
bhakti-yoga recommend the devotional process beginning with the chanting of
the holy name of Kåñëa (tan-näma-grahaëädibhiù).
TEXT 22
bNÛ+aE" kE-TavEêaEYaOEGaRihRTaa& v*itaMaaiSQaTa" )
ib>a]Tku-$u=MbMaXauicYaaRTaYaaMaaSa deihNa" )) 22 ))
bandy-akñaiù kaitavaiç cauryair
garhitäà våttim ästhitaù
bibhrat kuöumbam açucir
yätayäm äsa dehinaù
SYNONYMS
bandé-akñaiù—by unnecessarily arresting someone; kaitavaiù—by cheating in
gambling or throwing dice; cauryaiù—by committing theft;
garhitäm—condemned; våttim—professions; ästhitaù—who has undertaken
(because of association with a prostitute); bibhrat—maintaining;
kuöumbam—his dependent wife and children; açuciù—being most sinful;
yätayäm äsa—he gave trouble; dehinaù—to other living entities.
TRANSLATION
This fallen brähmaëa, Ajämila, gave trouble to others by arresting them, by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
44
cheating them in gambling or by directly plundering them. This was the way he
earned his livelihood and maintained his wife and children.
PURPORT
This verse indicates how degraded one becomes simply by indulging in
illicit sex with a prostitute. Illicit sex is not possible with a chaste or
aristocratic woman, but only with unchaste çüdras. The more society allows
prostitution and illicit sex, the more impetus it gives to cheaters, thieves,
plunderers, drunkards and gamblers. Therefore we first advise all the disciples
in our Kåñëa consciousness movement to avoid illicit sex, which is the
beginning of all abominable life and which is followed by meat-eating,
gambling and intoxication, one after another. Of course, restraint is very
difficult, but it is quite possible if one fully surrenders to Kåñëa, since all these
abominable habits gradually become distasteful for a Kåñëa conscious person. If
illicit sex is allowed to increase in a society, however, the entire society will be
condemned, for it will be full of rogues, thieves, cheaters and so forth.
TEXT 23
Wv& iNavSaTaSTaSYa l/al/YaaNaSYa TaTSauTaaNa( )
k-al/ae_TYaGaaNMahaNa( raJaàíaXaqTYaaYauz" SaMaa" )) 23 ))
evaà nivasatas tasya
lälayänasya tat-sutän
kälo 'tyagän mahän räjann
añöäçétyäyuñaù samäù
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; nivasataù—living; tasya—of him (Ajämila);
lälayänasya—maintaining; tat—of her (the çüdräëé); sutän—sons;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
45
kälaù—time; atyagät—passed away; mahän—a great amount; räjan—O King;
añöäçétyä—eighty-eight; äyuñaù—of the duration of life; samäù—years.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, while he thus spent his time in abominable, sinful activities
to maintain his family of many sons, eighty-eight years of his life passed by.
TEXT 24
TaSYa Pa[vYaSa" Pau}aa dXa Taeza& Tau Yaae_vMa" )
bal/ae NaaraYa<aae NaaMNaa iPa}aaeê diYaTaae >a*XaMa( )) 24 ))
tasya pravayasaù puträ
daça teñäà tu yo 'vamaù
bälo näräyaëo nämnä
pitroç ca dayito bhåçam
SYNONYMS
tasya—of him (Ajämila); pravayasaù—who was very old; puträù—sons;
daça—ten; teñäm—of all of them; tu—but; yaù—the one who; avamaù—the
youngest; bälaù—child; näräyaëaù—Näräyaëa; nämnä—by name; pitroù—of
the father and mother; ca—and; dayitaù—dear; bhåçam—very.
TRANSLATION
That old man Ajämila had ten sons, of whom the youngest was a baby named
Näräyaëa. Since Näräyaëa was the youngest of all the sons, he was naturally
very dear to both his father and his mother.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
46
PURPORT
The word pravayasaù indicates Ajämila's sinfulness because although he was
eighty-eight years old, he had a very young child. According to Vedic culture,
one should leave home as soon as he has reached fifty years of age; one should
not live at home and go on producing children. Sex life is allowed for
twenty-five years, between the ages of twenty-five and forty-five or, at the
most, fifty. After that one should give up the habit of sex life and leave home
as a vänaprastha and then properly take sannyäsa. Ajämila, however, because
of his association with a prostitute, lost all brahminical culture and became
most sinful, even in his so-called household life.
TEXT 25
Sa bÖôdYaSTaiSMaà>aRke- k-l/>aaizi<a )
iNarq+aMaa<aSTaçIl/a& MauMaude Jar#=ae >a*XaMa( )) 25 ))
sa baddha-hådayas tasminn
arbhake kala-bhäñiëi
nirékñamäëas tal-léläà
mumude jaraöho bhåçam
SYNONYMS
saù—he; baddha-hådayaù—being very attached; tasmin—to that;
arbhake—small child; kala-bhäñiëi—who could not talk clearly but talked in
broken language; nirékñamäëaù—seeing; tat—his; léläm—pastimes (such as
walking and talking to his father); mumude—enjoyed; jaraöhaù—the old man;
bhåçam—very much.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
47
TRANSLATION
Because of the child's broken language and awkward movements, old
Ajämila was very much attached to him. He always took care of the child and
enjoyed the child's activities.
PURPORT
Here it is clearly mentioned that the child Näräyaëa was so young that he
could not even speak or walk properly. Since the old man was very attached to
the child, he enjoyed the child's activities, and because the child's name was
Näräyaëa, the old man always chanted the holy name of Näräyaëa. Although
he was referring to the small child and not to the original Näräyaëa, the name
of Näräyaëa is so powerful that even by chanting his son's name he was
becoming purified (harer näma harer näma harer nämaiva kevalam [Cc. Ädi
17.21]). Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé has therefore declared that if one's mind is
somehow or other attracted by the holy name of Kåñëa (tasmät kenäpy upäyena
manaù kåñëe niveçayet [SB 7.1.32]), one is on the path of liberation. It is
customary in Hindu society for parents to give their children names like
Kåñëadäsa, Govinda däsa, Näräyaëa däsa and Våndävana däsa. Thus they
chant the names Kåñëa, Govinda, Näräyaëa and Våndävana and get the
chance to be purified.
TEXT 26
>auÅaNa" Pa[iPabNa( %adNa( bal/k&-òehYaiN}aTa" )
>aaeJaYaNa( PaaYaYaNMaU!ae Na vedaGaTaMaNTak-Ma( )) 26 ))
bhuïjänaù prapiban khädan
bälakaà sneha-yantritaù
bhojayan päyayan müòho
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
48
na vedägatam antakam
SYNONYMS
bhuïjänaù—while eating; prapiban—while drinking; khädan—while chewing;
bälakam—unto the child; sneha-yantritaù—being attached by affection;
bhojayan—feeding; päyayan—giving something to drink; müòhaù—the foolish
man; na—not; veda—understood; ägatam—had arrived; antakam—death.
TRANSLATION
When Ajämila chewed food and ate it, he called the child to chew and eat,
and when he drank he called the child to drink also. Always engaged in taking
care of the child and calling his name, Näräyaëa, Ajämila could not understand
that his own time was now exhausted and that death was upon him.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is kind to the conditioned soul.
Although this man completely forgot Näräyaëa, he was calling his child,
saying, "Näräyaëa, please come eat this food. Näräyaëa, please come drink this
milk." Somehow or other, therefore, he was attached to the name Näräyaëa.
This is called ajïäta-sukåti. Although calling for his son, he was unknowingly
chanting the name of Näräyaëa, and the holy name of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is so transcendentally powerful that his chanting was
being counted and recorded.
TEXT 27
Sa Wv& vTaRMaaNaae_jae Ma*TYauk-al/ oPaiSQaTae )
MaiTa& ck-ar TaNaYae bale/ NaaraYa<aaûYae )) 27 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
49
sa evaà vartamäno 'jïo
måtyu-käla upasthite
matià cakära tanaye
bäle näräyaëähvaye
SYNONYMS
saù—that Ajämila; evam—thus; vartamänaù—living; ajïaù—foolish;
måtyu-käle—when the time of death; upasthite—arrived; matim
cakära—concentrated his mind; tanaye—on his son; bäle—the child;
näräyaëa-ähvaye—whose name was Näräyaëa.
TRANSLATION
When the time of death arrived for the foolish Ajämila, he began thinking
exclusively of his son Näräyaëa.
PURPORT
In the Second Canto of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam (2.1.6) Çukadeva Gosvämé
says:
etävän säìkhya-yogäbhyäà
svadharma-pariniñöhayä
janma-läbhaù paraù puàsäm
ante näräyaëa-småtiù
"The highest perfection of human life, achieved either by complete knowledge
of matter and spirit, by acquirement of mystic powers, or by perfect discharge
of one's occupational duty, is to remember the Personality of Godhead at the
end of life." Somehow or other, Ajämila consciously or unconsciously chanted
the name of Näräyaëa at the time of death (ante näräyaëa-småtiù), and
therefore he became all-perfect simply by concentrating his mind on the name
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
50
of Näräyaëa.
It may also be concluded that Ajämila, who was the son of a brähmaëa, was
accustomed to worshiping Näräyaëa in his youth because in every brähmaëa's
house there is worship of the näräyaëa-çilä. This system is still present in
India; in a rigid brähmaëa's house, there is näräyaëa-sevä, worship of
Näräyaëa. Therefore, although the contaminated Ajämila was calling for his
son, by concentrating his mind on the holy name of Näräyaëa he remembered
the Näräyaëa he had very faithfully worshiped in his youth.
In this regard Çréla Çrédhara Svämé expressed his verdict as follows: etac ca
tad-upalälanädi-çré-näräyaëa-namoccäraëa-mähätmyena tad-bhaktir eväbhüd iti
siddhäntopayogitvenäpi drañöavyam. "According to the bhaktisiddhänta, it is to
be analyzed that because Ajämila constantly chanted his son's name,
Näräyaëa, he was elevated to the platform of bhakti, although he did not know
it." Similarly, Çréla Véraräghava Äcärya gives this opinion: evaà vartamänaù sa
dvijaù måtyu-käle upasthite satyajïo näräyaëäkhye putra eva matià cakära
matim äsaktäm akarod ity arthaù. "Although at the time of death he was
chanting the name of his son, he nevertheless concentrated his mind upon the
holy name of Näräyaëa." Çréla Vijayadhvaja Tértha gives a similar opinion:
måtyu-käle deha-viyoga-lakñaëa-käle måtyoù sarva-doña-päpa-harasya harer
anugrahät käle datta-jïäna-lakñaëe upasthite hådi prakäçite tanaye pürëa-jïäne
bäle païca-varña-kalpe prädeça-mätre näräyaëähvaye mürti-viçeñe matià
smaraëa-samarthaà cittaà cakära bhaktyäsmarad ity arthaù.
Directly or indirectly, Ajämila factually remembered Näräyaëa at the time of
death (ante näräyaëa-småtiù [SB 2.1.6]).
TEXTS 28-29
Sa PaaXahSTaa&ñqNd*îa PauåzaNaiTadaå<aaNa( )
v§-Tau<@aNaUßRraeM<a AaTMaaNa& NaeTauMaaGaTaaNa( )) 28 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
51
dUre §-I@Nak-aSa¢&- Pau}a& NaaraYa<aaûYaMa( )
âaivTaeNa Svre<aaeÀEraJauhavaku-le/iNd]Ya" )) 29 ))
sa päça-hastäàs trén dåñövä
puruñän ati-däruëän
vakra-tuëòän ürdhva-romëa
ätmänaà netum ägatän
düre kréòanakäsaktaà
putraà näräyaëähvayam
plävitena svareëoccair
äjuhäväkulendriyaù
SYNONYMS
saù—that person (Ajämila); päça-hastän—having ropes in their hands;
trén—three; dåñövä—seeing; puruñän—persons; ati-däruëän—very fearful in
their features; vakra-tuëòän—with twisted faces; ürdhva-romëaù—with hair
standing on the body; ätmänam—the self; netum—to take away;
ägatän—arrived; düre—a short distance away; kréòanaka-äsaktam—engaged in
his play; putram—his child; näräyaëa-ähvayam—named Näräyaëa;
plävitena—with tearful eyes; svareëa—with his voice; uccaiù—very loudly;
äjuhäva—called; äkula-indriyaù—being full of anxiety.
TRANSLATION
Ajämila then saw three awkward persons with deformed bodily features,
fierce, twisted faces, and hair standing erect on their bodies. With ropes in their
hands, they had come to take him away to the abode of Yamaräja. When he saw
them he was extremely bewildered, and because of attachment to his child, who
was playing a short distance away, Ajämila began to call him loudly by his
name. Thus with tears in his eyes he somehow or other chanted the holy name
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
52
of Näräyaëa.
PURPORT
A person who performs sinful activities performs them with his body, mind
and words. Therefore three order carriers from Yamaräja came to take Ajämila
to Yamaräja's abode. Fortunately, even though he was referring to his son,
Ajämila chanted the four syllables of the hari-näma Näräyaëa, and therefore
the order carriers of Näräyaëa, the Viñëudütas, also immediately arrived there.
Because Ajämila was extremely afraid of the ropes of Yamaräja, he chanted the
Lord's name with tearful eyes. Actually, however, he never meant to chant the
holy name of Näräyaëa; he meant to call his son.
TEXT 30
iNaXaMYa iMa]YaMaa<aSYa Mau%Taae hirk-ITaRNaMa( )
>aTauRNaaRMa MaharaJa PaazRda" SahSaaPaTaNa( )) 30 ))
niçamya mriyamäëasya
mukhato hari-kértanam
bhartur näma mahäräja
pärñadäù sahasäpatan
SYNONYMS
niçamya—hearing; mriyamäëasya—of the dying man; mukhataù—from the
mouth; hari-kértanam—chanting of the holy name of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; bhartuù näma—the holy name of their master; mahä-räja—O
King; pärñadäù—the order carriers of Viñëu; sahasä—immediately;
äpatan—arrived.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
53
TRANSLATION
My dear King, the order carriers of Viñëu, the Viñëudütas, immediately
arrived when they heard the holy name of their master from the mouth of the
dying Ajämila, who had certainly chanted without offense because he had
chanted in complete anxiety.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura remarks, hari-kértanaà niçamyäpatan,
katham-bhütasya bhartur näma bruvataù: the order carriers of Lord Viñëu came
because Ajämila had chanted the holy name of Näräyaëa. They did not
consider why he was chanting. While chanting the name of Näräyaëa, Ajämila
was actually thinking of his son, but simply because they heard Ajämila
chanting the Lord's name, the order carriers of Lord Viñëu, the Viñëudütas,
immediately came for Ajämila's protection. Hari-kértana is actually meant to
glorify the holy name, form, pastimes and qualities of the Lord. Ajämila,
however, did not glorify the form, qualities or paraphernalia of the Lord; he
simply chanted the holy name. Nevertheless, that chanting was sufficient to
cleanse him of all sinful activities. As soon as the Viñëudütas heard their
master's name being chanted, they immediately came. In this regard Çréla
Vijayadhvaja Tértha remarks: anena putra-sneham antareëa präcénädåñöa-baläd
udbhütayä bhaktyä bhagavan-näma-saìkértanaà kåtam iti jïäyate. "Ajämila
chanted the name of Näräyaëa because of his excessive attachment to his son.
Nevertheless, because of his past good fortune in having rendered devotional
service to Näräyaëa, he apparently chanted the holy name in full devotional
service and without offenses."
TEXT 31
ivk-zRTaae_NTaôRdYaaÕaSaqPaiTaMaJaaiMal/Ma( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
54
YaMaPa[eZYaaNa( ivZ<audUTaa varYaaMaaSauraeJaSaa )) 31 ))
vikarñato 'ntar hådayäd
däsé-patim ajämilam
yama-preñyän viñëudütä
värayäm äsur ojasä
SYNONYMS
vikarñataù—snatching; antaù hådayät—from within the heart; däsé-patim—the
husband of the prostitute; ajämilam—Ajämila; yama-preñyän—the messengers
of Yamaräja; viñëu-dütäù—the order carriers of Lord Viñëu; värayäm
äsuù—forbade; ojasä—with resounding voices.
TRANSLATION
The order carriers of Yamaräja were snatching the soul from the core of the
heart of Ajämila, the husband of the prostitute, but with resounding voices the
messengers of Lord Viñëu, the Viñëudütas, forbade them to do so.
PURPORT
A Vaiñëava, one who has surrendered to the lotus feet of Lord Viñëu, is
always protected by Lord Viñëu's order carriers. Because Ajämila had chanted
the holy name of Näräyaëa, the Viñëudütas not only immediately arrived on
the spot but also at once ordered the Yamadütas not to touch him. By speaking
with resounding voices, the Viñëudütas threatened to punish the Yamadütas if
they continued trying to snatch Ajämila's soul from his heart. The order
carriers of Yamaräja have jurisdiction over all sinful living entities, but the
messengers of Lord Viñëu, the Viñëudütas, are capable of punishing anyone,
including Yamaräja, if he wrongs a Vaiñëava.
Materialistic scientists do not know where to find the soul within the body
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
55
with their material instruments, but this verse clearly explains that the soul is
within the core of the heart (hådaya); it is from the heart that the Yamadütas
were extracting the soul of Ajämila. Similarly, we learn that the Supersoul,
Lord Viñëu, is also situated within the heart (éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà håd-deçe
'rjuna tiñöhati [Bg. 18.61]). In the Upaniñads it is said that the Supersoul and the
individual soul are living in the same tree of the body as two friendly birds.
The Supersoul is said to be friendly because the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is so kind to the original soul that when the original soul
transmigrates from one body to another, the Lord goes with him. Furthermore,
according to the desire and karma of the individual soul, the Lord, through the
agency of mäyä, creates another body for him.
The heart of the body is a mechanical arrangement. As the Lord says in
Bhagavad-gétä (18.61):
éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà
håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati
bhrämayan sarva-bhütäni
yanträrüòhäni mäyayä
"The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna, and is directing
the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a machine, made of
the material energy." Yantra means a machine, such as an automobile. The
driver of the machine of the body is the individual soul, who is also its director
or proprietor, but the supreme proprietor is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. One's body is created through the agency of mäyä (karmaëä
daiva-netreëa [SB 3.31.1]), and according to one's activities in this life, another
vehicle is created, again under the supervision of daivé mäyä (daivé hy eñä
guëa-mayé mama mäyä duratyayä [Bg. 7.14]). At the appropriate time, one's
next body is immediately chosen, and both the individual soul and the
Supersoul transfer to that particular bodily machine. This is the process of
transmigration. During transmigration from one body to the next, the soul is
taken away by the order carriers of Yamaräja and put into a particular type of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
56
hellish life (naraka) in order to become accustomed to the condition in which
he will live in his next body.
TEXT 32
OcuiNaRzeiDaTaaSTaa&STae vEvSvTaPaur"Sara" )
ke- YaUYa& Pa[iTazeÖarae DaMaRraJaSYa XaaSaNaMa( )) 32 ))
ücur niñedhitäs täàs te
vaivasvata-puraùsaräù
ke yüyaà pratiñeddhäro
dharma-räjasya çäsanam
SYNONYMS
ücuù—replied; niñedhitäù—being forbidden; tän—to the order carriers of Lord
Viñëu; te—they; vaivasvata—of Yamaräja; puraù-saräù—the assistants or
messengers; ke—who; yüyam—all of you; pratiñed-dhäraù—who are opposing;
dharma-räjasya—of the king of religious principles, Yamaräja; çäsanam—the
ruling jurisdiction.
TRANSLATION
When the order carriers of Yamaräja, the son of the sun-god, were thus
forbidden, they replied: Who are you, sirs, that have the audacity to challenge
the jurisdiction of Yamaräja?
PURPORT
According to the sinful activities of Ajämila, he was within the jurisdiction
of Yamaräja, the supreme judge appointed to consider the sins of the living
entities. When forbidden to touch Ajämila, the order carriers of Yamaräja
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
57
were surprised because they had never been hindered in the execution of their
duty by anyone within the three worlds.
TEXT 33
k-SYa va ku-Ta AaYaaTaa" k-SMaadSYa iNazeDaQa )
ik&- deva oPadeva Yaa YaUYa& ik&- iSaÖSataMaa" )) 33 ))
kasya vä kuta äyätäù
kasmäd asya niñedhatha
kià devä upadevä yä
yüyaà kià siddha-sattamäù
SYNONYMS
kasya—whose servants; vä—or; kutaù—from where; äyätäù—have you come;
kasmät—what is the reason; asya—(the taking away) of this Ajämila;
niñedhatha—are you forbidding; kim—whether; deväù—demigods;
upadeväù—sub-demigods; yäù—who; yüyam—all of you; kim—whether;
siddha-sat-tamäù—the best of the perfect beings, the pure devotees.
TRANSLATION
Dear sirs, whose servants are you, where have you come from, and why are
you forbidding us to touch the body of Ajämila? Are you demigods from the
heavenly planets, are you sub-demigods, or are you the best of devotees?
PURPORT
The most significant word used in this verse is siddha-sattamäù, which
means "the best of the perfect." In Bhagavad-gétä (7.3) it is said, manuñyäëäà
sahasreñu kaçcid yatati siddhaye: out of millions of persons, one may try to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
58
become siddha, perfect—or, in other words, self-realized. A self-realized person
knows that he is not the body but a spiritual soul (ahaà brahmäsmi(3)). At the
present moment practically everyone is unaware of this fact, but one who
understands this has attained perfection and is therefore called siddha. When
one understands that the soul is part and parcel of the supreme soul and one
thus engages in the devotional service of the supreme soul, one becomes
siddha-sat-tama. One is then eligible to live in the Vaikuëöha planets or
Kåñëaloka. The word siddha-sattama, therefore, refers to a liberated, pure
devotee.
Since the Yamadütas are servants of Yamaräja, who is also one of the
siddha-sattamas, they knew that a siddha-sattama is above the demigods and
sub-demigods and, indeed, above all the living entities within this material
world. The Yamadütas therefore inquired why the Viñëudütas were present
where a sinful man was going to die.
It should also be noted that Ajämila was not yet dead, for the Yamadütas
were trying to snatch the soul from his heart. They could not take the soul,
however, and therefore Ajämila was not yet dead. This will be revealed in later
verses. Ajämila was simply in an unconscious state when the argument was in
progress between the Yamadütas and the Viñëudütas. The conclusion of the
argument was to be a decision regarding who would claim the soul of Ajämila.
TEXTS 34-36
SaveR PaÚPal/aXaa+aa" PaqTak-aEXaeYavaSaSa" )
ik-rqi$=Na" ku-<@il/Naae l/SaTPauZk-rMaail/Na" )) 34 ))
SaveR c NaUÒvYaSa" SaveR caåcTau>auRJaa" )
DaNauiNaRz(r)aiSaGadaXa«c§-aMbuJaié[Ya" )) 35 ))
idXaae iviTaiMaral/aek-a" ku-vRNTa" SveNa TaeJaSaa )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
59
ik-MaQa| DaMaRPaal/SYa ik-ªraàae iNazeDaQa )) 36 ))
sarve padma-paläçäkñäù
péta-kauçeya-väsasaù
kiréöinaù kuëòalino
lasat-puñkara-mälinaù
sarve ca nütna-vayasaù
sarve cäru-caturbhujäù
dhanur-niñaìgäsi-gadäçaìkha-
cakrämbuja-çriyaù
diço vitimirälokäù
kurvantaù svena tejasä
kim arthaà dharma-pälasya
kiìkarän no niñedhatha
SYNONYMS
sarve—all of you; padma-paläça-akñäù—with eyes like the petals of a lotus
flower; péta—yellow; kauçeya—silk; väsasaù—wearing garments;
kiréöinaù—with helmets; kuëòalinaù—with earrings; lasat—glittering;
puñkara-mälinaù—with a garland of lotus flowers; sarve—all of you; ca—also;
nütna-vayasaù—very youthful; sarve—all of you; cäru—very beautiful;
catuù-bhujäù—with four arms; dhanuù—bow; niñaìga—quiver of arrows;
asi—sword; gadä—club; çaìkha—conchshell; cakra—disc; ambuja—lotus
flower; çriyaù—decorated with; diçaù—all directions; vitimira—without
darkness; älokäù—extraordinary illumination; kurvantaù—exhibiting;
svena—by your own; tejasä—effulgence; kim artham—what is the purpose;
dharma-pälasya—of Yamaräja, the maintainer of religious principles;
kiìkarän—servants; naù—us; niñedhatha—you are forbidding.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
60
TRANSLATION
The order carriers of Yamaräja said: Your eyes are just like the petals of
lotus flowers. Dressed in yellow silken garments, decorated with garlands of
lotuses, and wearing very attractive helmets on your heads and earrings on your
ears, you all appear fresh and youthful. Your four long arms are decorated with
bows and quivers of arrows and with swords, clubs, conchshells, discs and lotus
flowers. Your effulgence has dissipated the darkness of this place with
extraordinary illumination. Now, sirs, why are you obstructing us?
PURPORT
Before even being introduced to a foreigner, one becomes acquainted with
him through his dress, bodily features and behavior and can thus understand
his position. Therefore when the Yamadütas saw the Viñëudütas for the first
time, they were surprised. They said, "By your bodily features you appear to be
very exalted gentlemen, and you have such celestial power that you have
dissipated the darkness of this material world with your own effulgences. Why
then should you endeavor to stop us from executing our duty?" It will be
explained that the Yamadütas, the order carriers of Yamaräja, mistakenly
considered Ajämila sinful. They did not know that although he was sinful
throughout his entire life, he was purified by constantly chanting the holy
name of Näräyaëa. In other words, unless one is a Vaiñëava, one cannot
understand the activities of a Vaiñëava.
The dress and bodily features of the residents of Vaikuëöhaloka are
properly described in these verses. The residents of Vaikuëöha, who are
decorated with garlands and yellow silken garments, have four arms holding
various weapons. Thus they conspicuously resemble Lord Viñëu. They have the
same bodily features as Näräyaëa because they have attained the liberation of
särüpya, but they nevertheless act as servants. All the residents of
Vaikuëöhaloka know perfectly well that their master is Näräyaëa, or Kåñëa,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
61
and that they are all His servants. They are all self-realized souls who are
nitya-mukta, everlastingly liberated. Although they could conceivably declare
themselves Näräyaëa or Viñëu, they never do so; they always remain Kåñëa
conscious and serve the Lord faithfully. Such is the atmosphere of
Vaikuëöhaloka. Similarly, one who learns the faithful service of Lord Kåñëa
through the Kåñëa consciousness movement will always remain in
Vaikuëöhaloka and have nothing to do with the material world.
TEXT 37
é[qXauk- ovac
wTYau¢e- YaMadUTaESTaevaSaudevae¢-k-air<a" )
TaaNa( Pa[TYaUcu" Pa[hSYaed& MaegaiNahaRdYaa iGara )) 37 ))
çré-çuka uväca
ity ukte yamadütais te
väsudevokta-käriëaù
tän pratyücuù prahasyedaà
megha-nirhrädayä girä
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; ukte—being addressed;
yamadütaiù—by the messengers of Yamaräja; te—they;
väsudeva-ukta-käriëaù—who are always ready to execute the orders of Lord
Väsudeva (being personal associates of Lord Viñëu who have obtained the
liberation of sälokya); tän—unto them; pratyücuù—replied;
prahasya—smiling; idam—this; megha-nirhrädayä—resounding like a rumbling
cloud; girä—with voices.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
62
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: Being thus addressed by the messengers of
Yamaräja, the servants of Väsudeva smiled and spoke the following words in
voices as deep as the sound of rumbling clouds.
PURPORT
The Yamadütas were surprised to see that the Viñëudütas, although polite,
were hindering the rule of Yamaräja. Similarly, the Viñëudütas were also
surprised that the Yamadütas, although claiming to be servants of Yamaräja,
the supreme judge of religious principles, were unaware of the principles of
religious action. Thus the Viñëudütas smiled, thinking, "What is this nonsense
they are speaking? If they are actually servants of Yamaräja they should know
that Ajämila is not a suitable candidate for them to carry off."
TEXT 38
é[qivZ<audUTaa Ocu"
YaUYa& vE DaMaRraJaSYa Yaid iNadeRXak-air<a" )
b]UTa DaMaRSYa NaSTatv& YaÀaDaMaRSYa l/+a<aMa( )) 38 ))
çré-viñëudütä ücuù
yüyaà vai dharma-räjasya
yadi nirdeça-käriëaù
brüta dharmasya nas tattvaà
yac cädharmasya lakñaëam
SYNONYMS
çré-viñëudütäù ücuù—the blessed messengers of Lord Viñëu spoke; yüyam—all
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
63
of you; vai—indeed; dharma-räjasya—of King Yamaräja, who knows the
religious principles; yadi—if; nirdeça-käriëaù—order carriers; brüta—just
speak; dharmasya—of religious principles; naù—unto us; tattvam—the truth;
yat—that which; ca—also; adharmasya—of impious activities;
lakñaëam—symptoms.
TRANSLATION
The blessed messengers of Lord Viñëu, the Viñëudütas, said: If you are
actually servants of Yamaräja, you must explain to us the meaning of religious
principles and the symptoms of irreligion.
PURPORT
This inquiry by the Viñëudütas to the Yamadütas is most important. A
servant must know the instructions of his master. The servants of Yamaräja
claimed to be carrying out his orders, and therefore the Viñëudütas very
intelligently asked them to explain the symptoms of religious and irreligious
principles. A Vaiñëava knows these principles perfectly well because he is well
acquainted with the instructions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The
Supreme Lord says, sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja: [Bg.
18.66] "Give up all other varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me."
Therefore surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the actual
principle of religion. Those who have surrendered to the principles of material
nature instead of to Kåñëa are all impious, regardless of their material position.
Unaware of the principles of religion, they do not surrender to Kåñëa, and
therefore they are considered sinful rascals, the lowest of men, and fools bereft
of all knowledge. As Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (7.15):
na mäà duñkåtino müòhäù
prapadyante narädhamäù
mäyayäpahåta-jïänä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
64
äsuraà bhävam äçritäù
"Those miscreants who are grossly foolish, lowest among mankind, whose
knowledge is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the atheistic nature of
demons, do not surrender unto Me." One who has not surrendered to Kåñëa
does not know the true principle of religion; otherwise he would have
surrendered.
The question posed by the Viñëudütas was very suitable. One who
represents someone else must fully know that person's mission. The devotees in
the Kåñëa consciousness movement must therefore be fully aware of the
mission of Kåñëa and Lord Caitanya; otherwise they will be considered foolish.
All devotees, especially preachers, must know the philosophy of Kåñëa
consciousness so as not to be embarrassed and insulted when they preach.
TEXT 39
k-Qa&iSvd( iDa]YaTae d<@" ik&- vaSYa SQaaNaMaqiPSaTaMa( )
d<@ya" ik&- k-air<a" SaveR AahaeiSvTk-iTaicà*<aaMa( )) 39 ))
kathaà svid dhriyate daëòaù
kià väsya sthänam épsitam
daëòyäù kià käriëaù sarve
äho svit katicin nåëäm
SYNONYMS
katham svit—by which means; dhriyate—is imposed; daëòaù—punishment;
kim—what; vä—or; asya—of this; sthänam—the place; épsitam—desirable;
daëòyäù—punishable; kim—whether; käriëaù—fruitive actors; sarve—all; äho
svit—or whether; katicit—some; nåëäm—of the human beings.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
65
TRANSLATION
What is the process of punishing others? Who are the actual candidates for
punishment? Are all karmés engaged in fruitive activities punishable, or only
some of them?
PURPORT
One who has the power to punish others should not punish everyone.
There are innumerable living entities, the majority of whom are in the
spiritual world and are nitya-mukta, everlastingly liberated. There is no
question of judging these liberated living beings. Only a small fraction of the
living entities, perhaps one fourth, are in the material world. And the major
portion of the living entities in the material world—8,000,000 of the 8,400,000
forms of life—are lower than human beings. They are not punishable, for
under the laws of material nature they are automatically evolving. Human
beings, who are advanced in consciousness, are responsible, but not all of them
are punishable. Those engaged in advanced pious activities are beyond
punishment. Only those who engage in sinful activities are punishable.
Therefore the Viñëudütas particularly inquired about who is punishable and
why Yamaräja has been designated to discriminate between who is punishable
and who is not. How is one to be judged? What is the basic principle of
authority? These are the questions raised by the Viñëudütas.
TEXT 40
YaMadUTaa Ocu"
vedPa[i<aihTaae DaMaaeR ùDaMaRSTaiÜPaYaRYa" )
vedae NaaraYa<a" Saa+aaTSvYaM>aUiriTa Xaué[uMa )) 40 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
66
yamadütä ücuù
veda-praëihito dharmo
hy adharmas tad-viparyayaù
vedo näräyaëaù säkñät
svayambhür iti çuçruma
SYNONYMS
yamadütäù ücuù—the order carriers of Yamaräja said; veda—by the four Vedas
(Säma, Yajur, Åg and Atharva); praëihitaù—prescribed; dharmaù—religious
principles; hi—indeed; adharmaù—irreligious principles; tat-viparyayaù—the
opposite of that (that which is not supported by Vedic injunctions);
vedaù—the Vedas, books of knowledge; näräyaëaù säkñät—directly the
Supreme Personality of Godhead (being the words of Näräyaëa);
svayam-bhüù—self-born, self-sufficient (appearing only from the breath of
Näräyaëa and not being learned from anyone else); iti—thus; çuçruma—we
have heard.
TRANSLATION
The Yamadütas replied: That which is prescribed in the Vedas constitutes
dharma, the religious principles, and the opposite of that is irreligion. The
Vedas are directly the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa, and are
self-born. This we have heard from Yamaräja.
PURPORT
The servants of Yamaräja replied quite properly. They did not manufacture
principles of religion or irreligion. Instead, they explained what they had heard
from the authority Yamaräja. Mahäjano yena gataù sa panthäù: [Cc. Madhya
17.186] one should follow the mahäjana, the authorized person. Yamaräja is one
of twelve authorities. Therefore the servants of Yamaräja, the Yamadütas,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
67
replied with perfect clarity when they said çuçruma ("we have heard"). The
members of modern civilization manufacture defective religious principles
through speculative concoction. This is not dharma. They do not know what is
dharma and what is adharma. Therefore, as stated in the beginning of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, dharmaù projjhita-kaitavo 'tra: [SB 1.1.2] dharma not
supported by the Vedas is rejected from çrémad-bhägavata-dharma.
Bhägavata-dharma comprises only that which is given by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Bhägavata-dharma is sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm
ekaà çaraëaà vraja: [Bg. 18.66] one must accept the authority of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and surrender to Him and whatever He says. That is
dharma. Arjuna, for example, thinking that violence was adharma, was
declining to fight, but Kåñëa urged him to fight. Arjuna abided by the orders of
Kåñëa, and therefore he is actually a dharmé because the order of Kåñëa is
dharma. Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (15.15), vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva vedyaù:
"The real purpose of veda, knowledge, is to know Me." One who knows Kåñëa
perfectly is liberated. As Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (4.9):
janma karma ca me divyam
evaà yo vetti tattvataù
tyaktvä dehaà punar janma
naiti mäm eti so 'rjuna
"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities
does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but
attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna." One who understands Kåñëa and abides
by His order is a candidate for returning home, back to Godhead. It may be
concluded that dharma, religion, refers to that which is ordered in the Vedas,
and adharma, irreligion, refers to that which is not supported in the Vedas.
Dharma is not actually manufactured by Näräyaëa. As stated in the Vedas,
asya mahato bhütasya niçvasitam etad yad åg-vedaù iti: the injunctions of
dharma emanate from the breathing of Näräyaëa, the supreme living entity.
Näräyaëa exists eternally and breathes eternally, and therefore dharma, the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
68
injunctions of Näräyaëa, also exist eternally. Çréla Madhväcärya, the original
äcärya for those who belong to the Mädhva-Gauòéya-sampradäya, says:
vedänäà prathamo vaktä
harir eva yato vibhuù
ato viñëv-ätmakä vedä
ity ähur veda-vädinaù
The transcendental words of the Vedas emanated from the mouth of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the Vedic principles should be
understood to be Vaiñëava principles because Viñëu is the origin of the Vedas.
The Vedas contain nothing besides the instructions of Viñëu, and one who
follows the Vedic principles is a Vaiñëava. The Vaiñëava is not a member of a
manufactured community of this material world. A Vaiñëava is a real knower
of the Vedas, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva vedyaù
[Bg. 15.15]).
TEXT 41
YaeNa SvDaaMNYaMaq >aava rJa"SatvTaMaaeMaYaa" )
Gau<aNaaMai§-YaaæPaEivR>aaVYaNTae YaQaaTaQaMa( )) 41 ))
yena sva-dhämny amé bhävä
rajaù-sattva-tamomayäù
guëa-näma-kriyä-rüpair
vibhävyante yathä-tatham
SYNONYMS
yena—by whom (Näräyaëa); sva-dhämni—although in His own place, the
spiritual world; amé—all these; bhäväù—manifestations;
rajaù-sattva-tamaù-mayäù—created by the three modes of material nature
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
69
(passion, goodness and ignorance); guëa—qualities; näma—names;
kriyä—activities; rüpaiù—and with forms; vibhävyante—are variously
manifested; yathä-tatham—exactly to the right point.
TRANSLATION
The supreme cause of all causes, Näräyaëa, is situated in His own abode in
the spiritual world, but nevertheless He controls the entire cosmic
manifestation according to the three modes of material nature-sattva-guëa,
rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa. In this way all living entities are awarded different
qualities, different names [such as brähmaëa, kñatriya and vaiçya], different
duties according to the varëäçrama institution, and different forms. Thus
Näräyaëa is the cause of the entire cosmic manifestation.
PURPORT
The Vedas inform us:
na tasya käryaà karaëaà ca vidyate
na tat-samaç cäbhyadhikaç ca dåçyate
paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate
sväbhäviké jïäna-bala-kriyä ca
(Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad 6.8)
[Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]
Näräyaëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is almighty, omnipotent. He
has multifarious energies, and therefore He is able to remain in His own abode
and without endeavor supervise and manipulate the entire cosmic
manifestation through the interaction of the three modes of material
nature—sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa. These interactions create
different forms, bodies, activities and changes, which all occur perfectly.
Because the Lord is perfect, everything works as if He were directly supervising
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
70
and taking part in it. Atheistic men, however, being covered by the three
modes of material nature, cannot see Näräyaëa to be the supreme cause behind
all activities. As Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (7.13):
tribhir guëamayair bhävair
ebhiù sarvam idaà jagat
mohitaà näbhijänäti
mäm ebhyaù param avyayam
"Deluded by the three modes, the whole world does not know Me, who am
above the modes and inexhaustible." Because unintelligent agnostics are
mohita, illusioned by the three modes of material nature, they cannot
understand that Näräyaëa, Kåñëa, is the supreme cause of all activities. As
stated in Brahma-saàhitä (5.1):
éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù
sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù
anädir ädir govindaù
sarva-käraëa-käraëam
"Kåñëa, who is known as Govinda, is the supreme controller. He has an eternal,
blissful, spiritual body. He is the origin of all. He has no other origin, for He is
the prime cause of all causes."
TEXT 42
SaUYaaeR_iGan" %& MaåÕev" SaaeMa" SaNDYaahNaq idXa" )
k&- ku-" SvYa& DaMaR wiTa ùeTae dEùSYa Saai+a<a" )) 42 ))
süryo 'gniù khaà marud devaù
somaù sandhyähané diçaù
kaà kuù svayaà dharma iti
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
71
hy ete daihyasya säkñiëaù
SYNONYMS
süryaù—the sun-god; agniù—the fire; kham—the sky; marut—the air;
devaù—the demigods; somaù—the moon; sandhyä—evening; ahané—the day
and night; diçaù—the directions; kam—the water; kuù—the land;
svayam—personally; dharmaù—Yamaräja or the Supersoul; iti—thus;
hi—indeed; ete—all of these; daihyasya—of a living entity embodied in the
material elements; säkñiëaù—witnesses.
TRANSLATION
The sun, fire, sky, air, demigods, moon, evening, day, night, directions,
water, land and Supersoul Himself all witness the activities of the living entity.
PURPORT
The members of some religious sects, especially Christians, do not believe in
the reactions of karma. We once had a discussion with a learned Christian
professor who argued that although people are generally punished after the
witnesses of their misdeeds are examined, where are the witnesses responsible
for one's suffering the reactions of past karma? To such a person the answer by
the Yamadütas is given here. A conditioned soul thinks that he is working
stealthily and that no one can see his sinful activities, but we can understand
from the çästras that there are many witnesses, including the sun, fire, sky, air,
moon, demigods, evening, day, night, directions, water, land and the Supersoul
Himself, who sits with the individual soul within his heart. Where is the
dearth of witnesses? The witnesses and the Supreme Lord both exist, and
therefore so many living entities are elevated to higher planetary systems or
degraded to lower planetary systems, including the hellish planets. There are
no discrepancies, for everything is arranged perfectly by the management of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
72
the Supreme God (sväbhäviké jïäna-bala-kriyä ca). The witnesses mentioned in
this verse are also mentioned in other Vedic literatures:
äditya-candräv anilo 'nalaç ca
dyaur bhümir äpo hådayaà yamaç ca
ahaç ca rätriç ca ubhe ca sandhye
dharmo 'pi jänäti narasya våttam
TEXT 43
WTaErDaMaaeR ivjaTa" SQaaNa& d<@SYa YauJYaTae )
SaveR k-MaaRNauraeDaeNa d<@MahRiNTa k-air<a" )) 43 ))
etair adharmo vijïätaù
sthänaà daëòasya yujyate
sarve karmänurodhena
daëòam arhanti käriëaù
SYNONYMS
etaiù—by all these (witnesses, beginning from the sun-god);
adharmaù—deviation from the regulative principles; vijïätaù—is known;
sthänam—the proper place; daëòasya—of punishment; yujyate—is accepted
as; sarve—all; karma-anurodhena—with consideration of the activities
performed; daëòam—punishment; arhanti—deserve; käriëaù—the performers
of sinful activities.
TRANSLATION
The candidates for punishment are those who are confirmed by these many
witnesses to have deviated from their prescribed regulative duties. Everyone
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
73
engaged in fruitive activities is suitable to be subjected to punishment according
to his sinful acts.
TEXT 44
SaM>aviNTa ih >ad]ai<a ivParqTaaiNa caNagaa" )
k-air<aa& Gau<aSa(r)ae_iSTa dehvaNa( Na ùk-MaRk*-Ta( )) 44 ))
sambhavanti hi bhadräëi
viparétäni cänaghäù
käriëäà guëa-saìgo 'sti
dehavän na hy akarma-kåt
SYNONYMS
sambhavanti—there are; hi—indeed; bhadräëi—auspicious, pious activities;
viparétäni—just the opposite (inauspicious, sinful activities); ca—also;
anaghäù—O sinless inhabitants of Vaikuëöha; käriëäm—of the fruitive
workers; guëa-saìgaù—contamination of the three modes of nature;
asti—there is; deha-vän—anyone who has accepted this material body;
na—not; hi—indeed; akarma-kåt—without performing action.
TRANSLATION
O inhabitants of Vaikuëöha, you are sinless, but those within this material
world are all karmés, whether acting piously or impiously. Both kinds of action
are possible for them because they are contaminated by the three modes of
nature and must act accordingly. One who has accepted a material body cannot
be inactive, and sinful action is inevitable for one acting under the modes of
material nature. Therefore all the living entities within this material world are
punishable.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
74
PURPORT
The difference between human beings and nonhuman beings is that a
human is supposed to act according to the direction of the Vedas.
Unfortunately, men manufacture their own ways of acting, without reference
to the Vedas. Therefore all of them commit sinful actions and are punishable.
TEXT 45
YaeNa YaavaNa( YaQaaDaMaaeR DaMaaeR veh SaMaqihTa" )
Sa Wv TaTf-l&/ >au»e TaQaa TaavdMau}a vE )) 45 ))
yena yävän yathädharmo
dharmo veha saméhitaù
sa eva tat-phalaà bhuìkte
tathä tävad amutra vai
SYNONYMS
yena—by which person; yävän—to which extent; yathä—in which manner;
adharmaù—irreligious activities; dharmaù—religious activities; vä—or;
iha—in this life; saméhitaù—performed; saù—that person; eva—indeed;
tat-phalam—the particular result of that; bhuìkte—enjoys or suffers; tathä—in
that way; tävat—to that extent; amutra—in the next life; vai—indeed.
TRANSLATION
In proportion to the extent of one's religious or irreligious actions in this
life, one must enjoy or suffer the corresponding reactions of his karma in the
next.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
75
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (14.18):
ürdhvaà gacchanti sattva-sthä
madhye tiñöhanti räjasäù
jaghanya-guëa-våtti-sthä
adho gacchanti tämasäù
Those who act in the mode of goodness are promoted to higher planetary
systems to become demigods, those who act in an ordinary way and do not
commit excessively sinful acts remain within this middle planetary system, and
those who perform abominable sinful actions must go down to hellish life.
TEXT 46
YaQaeh devPa[vrañEivDYaMauPal/>YaTae )
>aUTaezu Gau<avEic}YaataQaaNYa}aaNauMaqYaTae )) 46 ))
yatheha deva-pravaräs
trai-vidhyam upalabhyate
bhüteñu guëa-vaicitryät
tathänyatränuméyate
SYNONYMS
yathä—just as; iha—in this life; deva-pravaräù—O best of the demigods;
trai-vidhyam—three kinds of attributes; upalabhyate—are achieved;
bhüteñu—among all living entities; guëa-vaicitryät—because of the diversity of
the contamination by the three modes of nature; tathä—similarly; anyatra—in
other places; anuméyate—it is inferred.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
76
TRANSLATION
O best of the demigods, we can see three different varieties of life, which are
due to the contamination of the three modes of nature. The living entities are
thus known as peaceful, restless and foolish; as happy, unhappy or in-between;
or as religious, irreligious and semireligious. We can deduce that in the next life
these three kinds of material nature will similarly act.
PURPORT
The actions and reactions of the three modes of material nature are visible
in this life. For example, some people are very happy, some are very distressed,
and some are in mixed happiness and distress. This is the result of past
association with the modes of material nature—goodness, passion and
ignorance. Since these varieties are visible in this life, we may assume that the
living entities, according to their association with the different modes of
material nature, will be happy, distressed or between the two in their next lives
also. Therefore the best policy is to disassociate oneself from the three modes
of material nature and be always transcendental to their contamination. This
is possible only when one fully engages in the devotional service of the Lord.
As Kåñëa confirms in Bhagavad-gétä (14.26):
mäà ca yo 'vyabhicäreëa
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa guëän samatétyaitän
brahma-bhüyäya kalpate
"One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down under any
circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes
to the spiritual platform." Unless one is fully absorbed in the service of the
Lord, one is subject to the contamination of the three modes of material
nature and must therefore suffer from distress or mixed happiness and distress.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
77
TEXT 47
vTaRMaaNaae_NYaYaae" k-al/ae Gau<aai>ajaPak-ae YaQaa )
Wv& JaNMaaNYaYaaereTaÖMaaRDaMaRiNadXaRNaMa( )) 47 ))
vartamäno 'nyayoù kälo
guëäbhijïäpako yathä
evaà janmänyayor etad
dharmädharma-nidarçanam
SYNONYMS
vartamänaù—the present; anyayoù—of the past and future; kälaù—time;
guëa-abhijïäpakaù—making known the qualities; yathä—just as; evam—thus;
janma—birth; anyayoù—of the past and future births; etat—this;
dharma—religious principles; adharma—irreligious principles;
nidarçanam—indicating.
TRANSLATION
Just as springtime in the present indicates the nature of springtimes in the
past and future, so this life of happiness, distress or a mixture of both gives
evidence concerning the religious and irreligious activities of one's past and
future lives.
PURPORT
Our past and future are not very difficult to understand, for time is under
the contamination of the three modes of material nature. As soon as spring
arrives, the usual exhibition of various types of fruits and flowers automatically
becomes manifest, and therefore we may conclude that spring in the past was
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
78
adorned with similar fruits and flowers and will be so adorned in the future
also. Our repetition of birth and death is taking place within time, and
according to the influence of the modes of nature, we are receiving various
types of bodies and being subjected to various conditions.
TEXT 48
MaNaSaEv Paure dev" PaUvRæPa& ivPaXYaiTa )
ANauMaqMaa&SaTae_PaUv| MaNaSaa >aGavaNaJa" )) 48 ))
manasaiva pure devaù
pürva-rüpaà vipaçyati
anumémäàsate 'pürvaà
manasä bhagavän ajaù
SYNONYMS
manasä—by the mind; eva—indeed; pure—in his abode, or within everyone's
heart like the Supersoul; devaù—the demigod Yamaräja (dévyatéti devaù, one
who is always brilliant and illuminated is called deva); pürva-rüpam—the past
religious or irreligious condition; vipaçyati—completely observes;
anumémäàsate—he considers; apürvam—the future condition; manasä—with
his mind; bhagavän—who is omnipotent; ajaù—as good as Lord Brahmä.
TRANSLATION
The omnipotent Yamaräja is as good as Lord Brahmä, for while situated in
his own abode or in everyone's heart like the Paramätmä, he mentally observes
the past activities of a living entity and thus understands how the living entity
will act in future lives.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
79
PURPORT
One should not consider Yamaräja an ordinary living being. He is as good
as Lord Brahmä. He has the complete cooperation of the Supreme Lord, who is
situated in everyone's heart, and therefore, by the grace of the Supersoul, he
can see the past, present and future of a living being from within. The word
anumémäàsate means that he can decide in consultation with the Supersoul.
Anu means "following." The actual decisions concerning the next lives of the
living entities are made by the Supersoul, and they are carried out by
Yamaräja.
TEXT 49
YaQaajSTaMaSaa Yau¢- oPaaSTae VYa¢-Maev ih )
Na ved PaUvRMaPar& NaíJaNMaSMa*iTaSTaQaa )) 49 ))
yathäjïas tamasä yukta
upäste vyaktam eva hi
na veda pürvam aparaà
nañöa-janma-småtis tathä
SYNONYMS
yathä—just as; ajïaù—an ignorant living being; tamasä—in sleep;
yuktaù—engaged; upäste—acts according to; vyaktam—a body manifested in a
dream; eva—certainly; hi—indeed; na veda—does not know; pürvam—the past
body; aparam—the next body; nañöa—lost; janma-småtiù—the remembrance
of birth; tathä—similarly.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
80
As a sleeping person acts according to the body manifested in his dreams and
accepts it to be himself, so one identifies with his present body, which he
acquired because of his past religious or irreligious actions, and is unable to
know his past or future lives.
PURPORT
A man engages in sinful activities because he does not know what he did in
his past life to get his present materially conditioned body, which is subjected
to the threefold miseries. As stated by Åñabhadeva in Çrémad-Bhägavatam
(5.5.4), nünaà pramattaù kurute vikarma: a human being who is mad after
sense gratification does not hesitate to act sinfully. Yad indriya-prétaya äpåëoti:
he performs sinful actions simply for sense gratification. Na sädhu manye: this
is not good. Yata ätmano 'yam asann api kleçada äsa dehaù: because of such
sinful actions, one receives another body in which to suffer as he is suffering in
his present body because of his past sinful activities.
It should be understood that a person who does not have Vedic knowledge
always acts in ignorance of what he has done in the past, what he is doing at
the present and how he will suffer in the future. He is completely in darkness.
Therefore the Vedic injunction is, tamasi mä: "Don't remain in darkness."
Jyotir gama: "Try to go to the light." The light or illumination is Vedic
knowledge, which one can understand when he is elevated to the mode of
goodness or when he transcends the mode of goodness by engaging in
devotional service to the spiritual master and the Supreme Lord. This is
described in the Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad (6.23):
yasya deve parä bhaktir
yathä deve tathä gurau
tasyaite kathitä hy arthäù
prakäçante mahätmanaù
[ÇU 6.23(4)]
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
81
"Unto those great souls who have implicit faith in both the Lord and the
spiritual master, all the imports of Vedic knowledge are automatically
revealed." The Vedas enjoin, tad-vijïänärthaà sa gurum eväbhigacchet: [MU
1.2.12(5)] one must approach a spiritual master who has full knowledge of the
Vedas and be faithfully directed by him in order to become a devotee of the
Lord. Then the knowledge of the Vedas will be revealed. When the Vedic
knowledge is revealed, one need no longer remain in the darkness of material
nature.
According to his association with the material modes of nature—goodness,
passion and ignorance—a living entity gets a particular type of body. The
example of one who associates with the mode of goodness is a qualified
brähmaëa. Such a brähmaëa knows past, present and future because he
consults the Vedic literature and sees through the eyes of çästra
(çästra-cakñuù). He can understand what his past life was, why be is in the
present body, and how he can obtain liberation from the clutches of mäyä and
not accept another material body. This is all possible when one is situated in
the mode of goodness. Generally, however, the living entities are engrossed in
the modes of passion and ignorance.
In any case, one receives an inferior or superior body at the discretion of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Paramätmä. As stated in the previous
verse:
manasaiva pure devaù
pürva-rüpaà vipaçyati
anumémäàsate 'pürvaà
manasä bhagavän ajaù
Everything depends on bhagavän, or ajaù, the unborn. Why doesn't one please
Bhagavän to receive a better body? The answer is ajïas tamasä: because of
gross ignorance. One who is in complete darkness cannot know what his past
life was or what his next life will be; he is simply interested in his present body.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
82
Even though he has a human body, a person in the mode of ignorance and
interested only in his present body is like an animal, for an animal, being
covered by ignorance, thinks that the ultimate goal of life and happiness is to
eat as much as possible. A human being must be educated to understand his
past life and how he can endeavor for a better life in the future. There is even
a book, called Bhågu-saàhitä, which reveals information about one's past,
present and future lives according to astrological calculations. Somehow or
other one must be enlightened about his past, present and future. One who is
interested only in his present body and who tries to enjoy his senses to the
fullest extent is understood to be engrossed in the mode of ignorance. His
future is very, very dark. Indeed, the future is always dark for one who is
grossly covered by ignorance. Especially in this age, human society is covered
by the mode of ignorance, and therefore everyone thinks his present body to
be everything, without consideration of the past or future.
TEXT 50
PaÄi>a" ku-åTae SvaQaaRNa( PaÄ vedaQa PaÄi>a" )
Wk-STau zae@XaeNa }aqNa( SvYa& SaádXaae_énuTae )) 50 ))
païcabhiù kurute svärthän
païca vedätha païcabhiù
ekas tu ñoòaçena trén
svayaà saptadaço 'çnute
SYNONYMS
païcabhiù—with the five working senses (voice, arms, legs, anus and genitals);
kurute—performs; sva-arthän—his desired interests; païca—the five objects of
the senses (sound, form, touch, aroma and taste); veda—knows; atha—thus;
païcabhiù—by the five senses of perception (hearing, seeing, smelling, tasting
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
83
and feeling); ekaù—the one; tu—but; ñoòaçena—by these fifteen items and the
mind; trén—the three categories of experience (happiness, distress and a
mixture of both); svayam—he, the living entity himself; saptadaçaù—the
seventeenth item; açnute—enjoys.
TRANSLATION
Above the five senses of perception, the five working senses and the five
objects of the senses is the mind, which is the sixteenth element. Above the
mind is the seventeenth element, the soul, the living being himself, who, in
cooperation with the other sixteen, enjoys the material world alone. The living
being enjoys three kinds of situations, namely happy, distressful and mixed.
PURPORT
Everyone engages in work with his hands, legs and other senses just to
achieve a certain goal according to his concocted ideas. One tries to enjoy the
five sense objects, namely form, sound, taste, aroma and touch, not knowing
the actual goal of life, which is to satisfy the Supreme Lord. Because of
disobeying the Supreme Lord, one is put into material conditions, and he then
tries to improve his situation in a concocted way, not desiring to follow the
instructions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Nevertheless, the
Supreme Lord is so kind that He comes Himself to instruct the bewildered
living entity how to act obediently and then gradually return home, back to
Godhead, where he can attain an eternal, peaceful life of bliss and knowledge.
The living entity has a body, which is a very complicated combination of the
material elements, and with this body he struggles alone, as indicated in this
verse by the words ekas tu. For example, if one is struggling in the ocean, he
must swim through it alone. Although many other men and aquatics are
swimming in the ocean, he must take care of himself because no one else will
help him. Therefore this verse indicates that the seventeenth item, the soul,
must work alone. Although he tries to create society, friendship and love, no
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
84
one will be able to help him but Kåñëa, the Supreme Lord. Therefore his only
concern should be how to satisfy Kåñëa. That is also what Kåñëa wants
(sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja [Bg. 18.66]). People
bewildered by material conditions try to be united, but although they strive for
unity among men and nations, all their attempts are futile. Everyone must
struggle alone for existence with the many elements of nature. Therefore one's
only hope, as Kåñëa advises, is to surrender to Him, for He can help one
become free from the ocean of nescience. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu therefore
prayed:
ayi nanda-tanuja kiìkaraà
patitaà mäà viñame bhavämbudhau
kåpayä tava päda-paìkajasthita-
dhülé-sadåçaà vicintaya
[Cc. Antya 20.32, Çikñäñöaka 5]
"O Kåñëa, beloved son of Nanda Mahäräja, I am Your eternal servant, but
somehow or other I have fallen into this ocean of nescience, and although I am
struggling very hard, there is no way I can save myself. If You kindly pick me
up and fix me as one of the particles of dust at Your lotus feet, that will save
me."
In a similar way, Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura sang:
anädi karama-phale, paòi' bhavärëava-jale,
taribäre nä dekhi upäya
"My dear Lord, I cannot remember when I somehow or other fell into this
ocean of nescience, and now I can find no way to rescue myself." We should
remember that everyone is responsible for his own life. If an individual
becomes a pure devotee of Kåñëa, he is then delivered from the ocean of
nescience.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
85
TEXT 51
TadeTaTa( zae@Xak-l&/ il/(r)& Xai¢-}aYa& MahTa( )
Datae_NauSa&Sa*iTa& Pau&iSa hzRXaaek->aYaaiTaRdaMa( )) 51 ))
tad etat ñoòaça-kalaà
liìgaà çakti-trayaà mahat
dhatte 'nusaàsåtià puàsi
harña-çoka-bhayärtidäm
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; etat—this; ñoòaça-kalam—made of sixteen parts (namely the
ten senses, the mind and the five sense objects); liìgam—the subtle body;
çakti-trayam—the effect of the three modes of material nature;
mahat—insurmountable; dhatte—gives; anusaàsåtim—almost perpetual
rotation and transmigration in different types of bodies; puàsi—unto the
living entity; harña—jubilation; çoka—lamentation; bhaya—fear;
ärti—misery; däm—which gives.
TRANSLATION
The subtle body is endowed with sixteen parts—the five
knowledge-acquiring senses, the five working senses, the five objects of sense
gratification, and the mind. This subtle body is an effect of the three modes of
material nature. It is composed of insurmountably strong desires, and therefore
it causes the living entity to transmigrate from one body to another in human
life, animal life and life as a demigod. When the living entity gets the body of a
demigod, he is certainly very jubilant, when he gets a human body he is always
in lamentation, and when he gets the body of an animal, he is always afraid. In
all conditions, however, he is actually miserable. His miserable condition is
called saàsåti, or transmigration in material life.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
86
PURPORT
The sum and substance of material conditional life is explained in this
verse. The living entity, the seventeenth element, is struggling alone, life after
life. This struggle is called saàsåti, or material conditional life. In
Bhagavad-gétä it is said that the force of material nature is insurmountably
strong (daivé hy eñä guëa-mayé mama mäyä duratyayä [Bg. 7.14]). Material
nature harasses the living entity in different bodies, but if the living entity
surrenders to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he becomes free from this
entanglement, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (mäm eva ye prapadyante mäyäm
etäà taranti te). Thus his life becomes successful.
TEXT 52
deùjae_iJaTazÍGaaeR NaeC^Na( k-MaaRi<a k-aYaRTae )
k-aeXak-ar wvaTMaaNa& k-MaR<aaC^aÛ MauùiTa )) 52 ))
dehy ajïo 'jita-ñaò-vargo
necchan karmäëi käryate
koçakära ivätmänaà
karmaëäcchädya muhyati
SYNONYMS
dehé—the embodied soul; ajïaù—without perfect knowledge;
ajita-ñaö-vargaù—who has not controlled the senses of perception and the
mind; na icchan—without desiring; karmäëi—activities for material benefit;
käryate—is caused to perform; koçakäraù—the silkworm; iva—like;
ätmänam—himself; karmaëä—by fruitive activities; äcchädya—covering;
muhyati—becomes bewildered.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
87
TRANSLATION
The foolish embodied living entity, inept at controlling his senses and mind,
is forced to act according to the influence of the modes of material nature,
against his desires. He is like a silkworm that uses its own saliva to create a
cocoon and then becomes trapped in it, with no possibility of getting out. The
living entity traps himself in a network of his own fruitive activities and then
can find no way to release himself. Thus he is always bewildered, and
repeatedly he dies.
PURPORT
As already explained, the influence of the modes of nature is very strong.
The living entity entangled in different types of fruitive activity is like a
silkworm trapped in a cocoon. Getting free is very difficult unless he is helped
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 53
Na ih k-iêT+a<aMaiPa JaaTau iTaïTYak-MaRk*-Ta( )
k-aYaRTae ùvXa" k-MaR Gau<aE" Sva>aaivkE-bRl/aTa( )) 53 ))
na hi kaçcit kñaëam api
jätu tiñöhaty akarma-kåt
käryate hy avaçaù karma
guëaiù sväbhävikair balät
SYNONYMS
na—not; hi—indeed; kaçcit—anyone; kñaëam api—even for a moment;
jätu—at any time; tiñöhati—remains; akarma-kåt—without doing anything;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
88
käryate—he is caused to perform; hi—indeed; avaçaù—automatically;
karma—fruitive activities; guëaiù—by the three modes of nature;
sväbhävikaiù—which are produced by his own tendencies in previous lives;
balät—by force.
TRANSLATION
Not a single living entity can remain unengaged even for a moment. One
must act by his natural tendency according to the three modes of material
nature because this natural tendency forcibly makes him work in a particular
way.
PURPORT
The sväbhävika, or one's natural tendency, is the most important factor in
action. One's natural tendency is to serve because a living entity is an eternal
servant of God. The living entity wants to serve, but because of his
forgetfulness of his relationship with the Supreme Lord, he serves under the
modes of material nature and manufactures various modes of service, such as
socialism, humanitarianism and altruism. However, one should be enlightened
in the tenets of Bhagavad-gétä and accept the instruction of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead that one give up all natural tendencies for material
service under different names and take to the service of the Lord. One's
original natural tendency is to act in Kåñëa consciousness because one's real
nature is spiritual. The duty of a human being is to understand that since he is
essentially spirit, he must abide by the spiritual tendency and not be carried
away by material tendencies. Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura has therefore sung:
(miche) mäyära vaçe, yäccha bhese',
khäccha häbuòubu, bhäi
"My dear brothers, you are being carried away by the waves of material energy
and are suffering in many miserable conditions. Sometimes you are drowning
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
89
in the waves of material nature, and sometimes you are tossed like a swimmer
struggling in the ocean." As confirmed by Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura, this
tendency to be battered by the waves of mäyä can be changed to one's original,
natural tendency, which is spiritual, when the living entity comes to
understand that he is eternally kåñëa-däsa, a servant of God, Kåñëa.
(jéva) kåñëa-däsa, ei viçväsa,
karle ta' ära duùkha näi
If instead of serving mäyä under different names, one turns his service attitude
toward the Supreme Lord, he is then safe, and there is no more difficulty. If
one returns to his original, natural tendency in the human form of life by
understanding the perfect knowledge given by Kåñëa Himself in the Vedic
literature, one's life is successful.
TEXT 54
l/Bßa iNaiMataMaVYa¢&- VYa¢-aVYa¢&- >avTYauTa )
YaQaaYaaeiNa YaQaabqJa& Sv>aaveNa bl/IYaSaa )) 54 ))
labdhvä nimittam avyaktaà
vyaktävyaktaà bhavaty uta
yathä-yoni yathä-béjaà
svabhävena baléyasä
SYNONYMS
labdhvä—having gotten; nimittam—the cause; avyaktam—unseen or unknown
to the person; vyakta-avyaktam—manifested and unmanifested, or the gross
body and the subtle body; bhavati—come into being; uta—certainly;
yathä-yoni—exactly like the mother; yathä-béjam—exactly like the father;
sva-bhävena—by the natural tendency; baléyasä—which is very powerful.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
90
TRANSLATION
The fruitive activities a living being performs, whether pious or impious, are
the unseen cause for the fulfillment of his desires. This unseen cause is the root
for the living entity's different bodies. Because of his intense desire, the living
entity takes birth in a particular family and receives a body which is either like
that of his mother or like that of his father. The gross and subtle bodies are
created according to his desire.
PURPORT
The gross body is a product of the subtle body. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä
(8.6):
yaà yaà väpi smaran bhävaà
tyajaty ante kalevaram
taà tam evaiti kaunteya
sadä tad-bhäva-bhävitaù
"Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body, that state he
will attain without fail." The atmosphere of the subtle body at the time of
death is created by the activities of the gross body. Thus the gross body acts
during one's lifetime, and the subtle body acts at the time of death. The subtle
body, which is called liìga, the body of desire, is the background for the
development of a particular type of gross body, which is either like that of
one's mother or like that of one's father. According to the Åg Veda, if at the
time of sex the secretions of the mother are more profuse than those of the
father, the child will receive a female body, and if the secretions of the father
are more profuse than those of the mother, the child will receive a male body.
These are the subtle laws of nature, which act according to the desire of the
living entity. If a human being is taught to change his subtle body by
developing a consciousness of Kåñëa, at the time of death the subtle body will
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
91
create a gross body in which he will be a devotee of Kåñëa, or if he is still more
perfect, he will not take another material body but will immediately get a
spiritual body and thus return home, back to Godhead. This is the process of
the transmigration of the soul. Therefore instead of trying to unite human
society through pacts for sense gratification that can never be achieved, it is
clearly desirable to teach people how to become Kåñëa conscious and return
home, back to Godhead. This is true now and, indeed, at any time.
TEXT 55
Wz Pa[k*-iTaSa(r)eNa PauåzSYa ivPaYaRYa" )
AaSaqTa( Sa Wv NaicradqXaSa(r)aiÜl/IYaTae )) 55 ))
eña prakåti-saìgena
puruñasya viparyayaù
äsét sa eva na ciräd
éça-saìgäd viléyate
SYNONYMS
eñaù—this; prakåti-saìgena—because of association with the material nature;
puruñasya—of the living entity; viparyayaù—a situation of forgetfulness or an
awkward position; äsét—came to be; saù—that position; eva—indeed;
na—not; cirät—taking a long time; éça-saìgät—from the association of the
Supreme Lord; viléyate—is vanquished.
TRANSLATION
Since the living entity is associated with material nature, he is in an
awkward position, but if in the human form of life he is taught how to associate
with the Supreme Personality of Godhead or His devotee, this position can be
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
92
overcome.
PURPORT
The word prakåti means material nature, and puruña may also refer to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. If one wants to continue his association with
prakåti, the female energy of Kåñëa, and be separated from Kåñëa by the
illusion that he is able to enjoy prakåti, he must continue in his conditional
life. If he changes his consciousness, however, and associates with the supreme,
original person (puruñaà çäçvatam), or with His associates, he can get out of
the entanglement of material nature. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (4.9),
janma karma ca me divyam evaà yo vetti tattvataù: one must simply understand
the Supreme Person, Kåñëa, in terms of His form, name, activities and
pastimes. This will keep one always in the association of Kåñëa. Tyaktvä dehaà
punar janma naiti mäm eti so'rjuna: thus after giving up his gross material body,
one accepts not another gross body but a spiritual body in which to return
home, back to Godhead. Thus one ends the tribulation caused by his
association with the material energy. In summary, the living entity is an
eternal servant of God, but he comes to the material world and is bound by
material conditions because of his desire to lord it over matter. Liberation
means giving up this false consciousness and reviving one's original service to
the Lord. This return to one's original life is called mukti, as confirmed in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (muktir hitvänyathä rüpaà svarüpeëa vyavasthitiù [SB
2.10.6]).
TEXTS 56-57
AYa& ih é[uTaSaMPaà" Xaql/v*taGau<aal/Ya" )
Da*Tav]Taae Ma*dudaRNTa" SaTYavax(MaN}aivC^uic" )) 56 ))
GauvRGNYaiTaiQav*ÖaNaa& Xaué[UzurNahx(k*„„„Ta" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
93
SavR>aUTaSauôTSaaDauiMaRTavaGaNaSaUYak-" )) 57 ))
ayaà hi çruta-sampannaù
çéla-våtta-guëälayaù
dhåta-vrato mådur däntaù
satya-väì mantra-vic chuciù
gurv-agny-atithi-våddhänäà
çuçrüñur anahaìkåtaù
sarva-bhüta-suhåt sädhur
mita-väg anasüyakaù
SYNONYMS
ayam—this person (known as Ajämila); hi—indeed; çruta-sampannaù—well
educated in Vedic knowledge; çéla—of good character; våtta—good conduct;
guëa—and good qualities; älayaù—the reservoir; dhåta-vrataù—fixed in the
execution of the Vedic injunctions; måduù—very mild; däntaù—completely
controlling the mind and senses; satya-väk—always truthful;
mantra-vit—knowing how to chant the Vedic hymns; çuciù—always very neat
and clean; guru—the spiritual master; agni—the fire-god; atithi—guests;
våddhänäm—and of the old household members; çuçrüñuù—very respectfully
engaged in the service; anahaìkåtaù—without pride or false prestige;
sarva-bhüta-suhåt—friendly to all living entities; sädhuù—well behaved (no
one could find any fault in his character); mita-väk—talking with great care
not to speak nonsense; anasüyakaù—not envious.
TRANSLATION
In the beginning this brähmaëa named Ajämila studied all the Vedic
literatures. He was a reservoir of good character, good conduct and good
qualities. Firmly established in executing all the Vedic injunctions, he was very
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
94
mild and gentle, and he kept his mind and senses under control. Furthermore,
he was always truthful, he knew how to chant the Vedic mantras, and he was
also very pure. Ajämila was very respectful to his spiritual master, the fire-god,
guests, and the elderly members of his household. Indeed, he was free from false
prestige. He was upright, benevolent to all living entities, and well behaved. He
would never speak nonsense or envy anyone.
PURPORT
The order carriers of Yamaräja, the Yamadütas, are explaining the factual
position of piety and impiety and how a living entity is entangled in this
material world. Describing the history of Ajämila's life, the Yamadütas relate
that in the beginning he was a learned scholar of the Vedic literature. He was
well behaved, neat and clean, and very kind to everyone. In fact, he had all
good qualities. In other words, he was like a perfect brähmaëa. A brähmaëa is
expected to be perfectly pious, to follow all the regulative principles and to
have all good qualities. The symptoms of piety are explained in these verses.
Çréla Véraräghava Äcärya comments that dhåta-vrata means dhåtaà vrataà
stré-saìga-rähityätmaka-brahmacarya-rüpam. In other words, Ajämila followed
the rules and regulations of celibacy as a perfect brahmacäré and was very
softhearted, truthful, clean and pure. How he fell down in spite of all these
qualities and thus came to be threatened with punishment by Yamaräja will be
described in the following verses.
TEXTS 58-60
Wk-daSaaE vNa& YaaTa" iPaTa*SaNdeXak*-d( iÜJa" )
AadaYa TaTa Aav*ta" f-l/PauZPaSaiMaTku-XaaNa( )) 58 ))
ddXaR k-aiMaNa& k-iÄC^Ud]& Sah >auiJaZYaYaa )
PaqTva c MaDau MaEreYa& MadagaUi<aRTaNae}aYaa )) 59 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
95
MataYaa ivëQaàqVYaa VYaPaeTa& iNarPa}aPaMa( )
§-I@NTaMaNauGaaYaNTa& hSaNTaMaNaYaaiNTake- )) 60 ))
ekadäsau vanaà yätaù
pitå-sandeça-kåd dvijaù
ädäya tata ävåttaù
phala-puñpa-samit-kuçän
dadarça käminaà kaïcic
chüdraà saha bhujiñyayä
pétvä ca madhu maireyaà
madäghürëita-netrayä
mattayä viçlathan-névyä
vyapetaà nirapatrapam
kréòantam anugäyantaà
hasantam anayäntike
SYNONYMS
ekadä—once upon a time; asau—this Ajämila; vanam yätaù—went to the
forest; pitå—of his father; sandeça—the order; kåt—carrying out; dvijaù—the
brähmaëa; ädäya—collecting; tataù—from the forest; ävåttaù—returning;
phala-puñpa—fruits and flowers; samit-kuçän—two kinds of grass, known as
samit and kuça; dadarça—saw; käminam—very lusty; kaïcit—someone;
çüdram—a fourth-class man, a çüdra; saha—along with; bhujiñyayä—an
ordinary maidservant or prostitute; pétvä—after drinking; ca—also;
madhu—nectar; maireyam—made of the soma flower; mada—by intoxication;
äghürëita—moving; netrayä—her eyes; mattayä—intoxicated;
viçlathat-névyä—whose dress was slackened; vyapetam—fallen from proper
behavior; nirapatrapam—without fear of public opinion; kréòantam—engaged
in enjoyment; anugäyantam—singing; hasantam—smiling; anayä—with her;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
96
antike—close by.
TRANSLATION
Once this brähmaëa Ajämila, following the order of his father, went to the
forest to collect fruit, flowers and two kinds of grass, called samit and kuça. On
the way home, he came upon a çüdra, a very lusty, fourth-class man, who was
shamelessly embracing and kissing a prostitute. The çüdra was smiling, singing
and enjoying as if this were proper behavior. Both the çüdra and the prostitute
were drunk. The prostitute's eyes were rolling in intoxication, and her dress
had become loose. Such was the condition in which Ajämila saw them.
PURPORT
While traveling along the public way, Ajämila came upon a fourth-class
man and a prostitute, who are vividly described here. Drunkenness was
sometimes manifest even in bygone ages, although not very frequently. In this
age of Kali, however, such sin is to be seen everywhere, for people all over the
world have become shameless. Long ago, when he saw the scene of the
drunken çüdra and the prostitute, Ajämila, who was a perfect brahmacäré, was
affected. Nowadays such sin is visible in so many places, and we must consider
the position of a brahmacäré student who sees such behavior. For such a
brahmacäré to remain steady is very difficult unless he is extremely strong in
following the regulative principles. Nevertheless, if one takes to Kåñëa
consciousness very seriously, he can withstand the provocation created by sin.
In our Kåñëa consciousness movement we prohibit illicit sex, intoxication,
meat-eating and gambling. In Kali-yuga, a drunk, half-naked woman
embracing a drunk man is a very common sight, especially in the Western
countries, and restraining oneself after seeing such things is very difficult.
Nevertheless, if by the grace of Kåñëa one adheres to the regulative principles
and chants the Hare Kåñëa mantra, Kåñëa will certainly protect him. Indeed,
Kåñëa says that His devotee is never vanquished (kaunteya pratijänéhi na me
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
97
bhaktaù praëaçyati [Bg. 9.31]). Therefore all the disciples practicing Kåñëa
consciousness should obediently follow the regulative principles and remain
fixed in chanting the holy name of the Lord. Then there need be no fear.
Otherwise one's position is very dangerous, especially in this Kali-yuga.
TEXT 61
d*îa Taa& k-aMail/áeNa bahuNaa PairriM>aTaaMa( )
JaGaaMa ôC^YavXa& SahSaEv ivMaaeihTa" )) 61 ))
dåñövä täà käma-liptena
bähunä parirambhitäm
jagäma håc-chaya-vaçaà
sahasaiva vimohitaù
SYNONYMS
dåñövä—by seeing; täm—her (the prostitute); käma-liptena—decorated with
turmeric to incite lusty desires; bähunä—with the arm;
parirambhitäm—embraced; jagäma—went; håt-çaya—of lusty desires within
the heart; vaçam—under the control; sahasä—suddenly; eva—indeed;
vimohitaù—being illusioned.
TRANSLATION
The çüdra, his arm decorated with turmeric powder, was embracing the
prostitute. When Ajämila saw her, the dormant lusty desires in his heart
awakened, and in illusion he fell under their control.
PURPORT
It is said that if one's body is smeared with turmeric, it attracts the lusty
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
98
desires of the opposite sex. The word käma-liptena indicates that the çüdra was
decorated with turmeric smeared on his body.
TEXT 62
STaM>aYaàaTMaNaaTMaaNa& YaavTSatv& YaQaaé[uTaMa( )
Na XaXaak- SaMaaDaaTau& MaNaae MadNaveiPaTaMa( )) 62 ))
stambhayann ätmanätmänaà
yävat sattvaà yathä-çrutam
na çaçäka samädhätuà
mano madana-vepitam
SYNONYMS
stambhayan—trying to control; ätmanä—by the intelligence; ätmänam—the
mind; yävat sattvam—as far as possible for him; yathä-çrutam—by
remembering the instruction (of celibacy, brahmacarya, not even to see a
woman); na—not; çaçäka—was able; samädhätum—to restrain; manaù—the
mind; madana-vepitam—agitated by Cupid or lusty desire.
TRANSLATION
As far as possible he patiently tried to remember the instructions of the
çästras not even to see a woman. With the help of this knowledge and his
intellect, he tried to control his lusty desires, but because of the force of Cupid
within his heart, he failed to control his mind.
PURPORT
Unless one is very strong in knowledge, patience and proper bodily, mental
and intellectual behavior, controlling one's lusty desires is extremely difficult.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
99
Thus after seeing a man embracing a young woman and practically doing
everything required for sex life, even a fully qualified brähmaëa, as described
above, could not control his lusty desires and restrain himself from pursuing
them. Because of the force of materialistic life, to maintain self-control is
extremely difficult unless one is specifically under the protection of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead through devotional service.
TEXT 63
TaiàiMataSMarVYaaJaGa]hGa]STaae ivceTaNa" )
TaaMaev MaNaSaa DYaaYaNa( SvDaMaaRiÜrraMa h )) 63 ))
tan-nimitta-smara-vyäjagraha-
grasto vicetanaù
täm eva manasä dhyäyan
sva-dharmäd viraräma ha
SYNONYMS
tat-nimitta—caused by the sight of her; smara-vyäja—taking advantage of his
thinking of her always; graha-grastaù—being caught by an eclipse;
vicetanaù—having completely forgotten his real position; täm—her;
eva—certainly; manasä—by the mind; dhyäyan—meditating upon;
sva-dharmät—from the regulative principles executed by a brähmaëa;
viraräma ha—he completely ceased.
TRANSLATION
In the same way that the sun and moon are eclipsed by a low planet, the
brähmaëa lost all his good sense. Taking advantage of this situation, he always
thought of the prostitute, and within a short time he took her as a servant in his
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
100
house and abandoned all the regulative principles of a brähmaëa.
PURPORT
By speaking this verse, Çukadeva Gosvämé wants to impress upon the mind
of the reader that Ajämila's exalted position as a brähmaëa was vanquished by
his association with the prostitute, so much so that he forgot all his
brahminical activities. Nevertheless, at the end of his life, by chanting the four
syllables of the name Näräyaëa, he was saved from the gravest danger of falling
down. Svalpam apy asya dharmasya träyate mahato bhayät: even a little
devotional service can save one from the greatest danger. Devotional service,
which begins with chanting of the holy name of the Lord, is so powerful that
even if one falls down from the exalted position of a brähmaëa through sexual
indulgence, he can be saved from all calamities if he somehow or other chants
the holy name of the Lord. This is the extraordinary power of the Lord's holy
name. Therefore in Bhagavad-gétä it is advised that one not forget the
chanting of the holy name even for a moment (satataà kértayanto mäà
yatantaç ca dåòha-vratäù [Bg. 9.14]). There are so many dangers in this material
world that one may fall down from an exalted position at any time. Yet if one
keeps himself always pure and steady by chanting the Hare Kåñëa
mahä-mantra, he will be safe without a doubt.
TEXT 64
TaaMaev TaaezYaaMaaSa iPa}Yae<aaQaeRNa YaavTaa )
Ga]aMYaEMaRNaaerMaE" k-aMaE" Pa[SaqdeTa YaQaa TaQaa )) 64 ))
täm eva toñayäm äsa
pitryeëärthena yävatä
grämyair manoramaiù kämaiù
prasédeta yathä tathä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
101
SYNONYMS
täm—her (the prostitute); eva—indeed; toñayäm äsa—he tried to please;
pitryeëa—he got from his father's hard labor; arthena—by the money;
yävatä—as long as possible; grämyaiù—material; manaù-ramaiù—pleasing to
her mind; kämaiù—by presentations for sense enjoyment; prasédeta—she
would be satisfied; yathä—so that; tathä—in that way.
TRANSLATION
Thus Ajämila began spending whatever money he had inherited from his
father to satisfy the prostitute with various material presentations so that she
would remain pleased with him. He gave up all his brahminical activities to
satisfy the prostitute.
PURPORT
There are many instances throughout the world in which even a purified
person, being attracted by a prostitute, spends all the money he has inherited.
Prostitute hunting is so abominable that the desire for sex with a prostitute
can ruin one's character, destroy one's exalted position and plunder all one's
money. Therefore illicit sex is strictly prohibited. One should be satisfied with
his married wife, for even a slight deviation will create havoc. A Kåñëa
conscious gåhastha should always remember this. He should always be satisfied
with one wife and be peaceful simply by chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra.
Otherwise at any moment he may fall down from his good position, as
exemplified in the case of Ajämila.
TEXT 65
ivPa[a& Sv>aaYaaRMaPa[aE!a& ku-le/ MahiTa l/iM>aTaaMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
102
ivSaSaJaaRicraTPaaPa" SvEir<YaaPaa(r)ivÖDaq" )) 65 ))
vipräà sva-bhäryäm aprauòhäà
kule mahati lambhitäm
visasarjäcirät päpaù
svairiëyäpäìga-viddha-dhéù
SYNONYMS
vipräm—the daughter of a brähmaëa; sva-bhäryäm—his wife; aprauòhäm—not
very old (youthful); kule—from a family; mahati—very respectable;
lambhitäm—married; visasarja—he gave up; acirät—very soon; päpaù—being
sinful; svairiëyä—of the prostitute; apäìga-viddha-dhéù—his intelligence
pierced by the lustful glance.
TRANSLATION
Because his intelligence was pierced by the lustful glance of the prostitute,
the victimized brähmaëa Ajämila engaged in sinful acts in her association. He
even gave up the company of his very beautiful young wife, who came from a
very respectable brähmaëa family.
PURPORT
Customarily everyone is eligible to inherit his father's property, and
Ajämila also inherited the money of his father. But what did he do with the
money? Instead of engaging the money in the service of Kåñëa, he engaged it
in the service of a prostitute. Therefore he was condemned and was punishable
by Yamaräja. How did this happen? He was victimized by the dangerous lustful
glance of a prostitute.
TEXT 66
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
103
YaTaSTaTaêaePaiNaNYae NYaaYaTaae_NYaaYaTaae DaNaMa( )
b>aaraSYaa" ku-$u=iMbNYaa" ku-$u=Mb& MaNdDaqrYaMa( )) 66 ))
yatas tataç copaninye
nyäyato 'nyäyato dhanam
babhäräsyäù kuöumbinyäù
kuöumbaà manda-dhér ayam
SYNONYMS
yataù tataù—wherever possible, however possible; ca—and; upaninye—he got;
nyäyataù—properly; anyäyataù—improperly; dhanam—money; babhära—he
maintained; asyäù—of her; kuöum-binyäù—possessing many sons and
daughters; kuöumbam—the family; manda-dhéù—bereft of all intelligence;
ayam—this person (Ajämila).
TRANSLATION
Although born of a brähmaëa family, this rascal, bereft of intelligence
because of the prostitute's association, earned money somehow or other,
regardless of whether properly or improperly, and used it to maintain the
prostitute's sons and daughters.
TEXT 67
YadSaaE XaañMauçx(gYa SvErcaYaRiTaGaihRTa" )
AvTaRTa icr& k-al/MagaaYaurXauicMaRl/aTa( )) 67 ))
yad asau çästram ullaìghya
svaira-cäry ati-garhitaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
104
avartata ciraà kälam
aghäyur açucir malät
SYNONYMS
yat—because; asau—this brähmaëa; çästram ullaìghya—transgressing the laws
of çästra; svaira-cäré—acting irresponsibly; ati-garhitaù—very much
condemned; avartata—passed; ciram kälam—a long time; agha-äyuù—whose
life was full of sinful activities; açuciù—unclean; malät—because of impurity.
TRANSLATION
This brähmaëa irresponsibly spent his long lifetime transgressing all the
rules and regulations of the holy scripture, living extravagantly and eating food
prepared by a prostitute. Therefore he is full of sins. He is unclean and is
addicted to forbidden activities.
PURPORT
Food prepared by an unclean, sinful man or woman, especially a prostitute,
is extremely infectious. Ajämila ate such food, and therefore he was subject to
be punished by Yamaräja.
TEXT 68
TaTa WNa& d<@Paa<ae" Sak-aXa& k*-Taik-iLbzMa( )
NaeZYaaMaae_k*-TaiNaveRXa& Ya}a d<@eNa XauÖyiTa )) 68 ))
tata enaà daëòa-päëeù
sakäçaà kåta-kilbiñam
neñyämo 'kåta-nirveçaà
yatra daëòena çuddhyati
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
105
SYNONYMS
tataù—therefore; enam—him; daëòa-päëeù—of Yamaräja, who is authorized
to punish; sakäçam—in the presence; kåta-kilbiñam—who has regularly
committed all sinful activities; neñyämaù—we shall take; akåta-nirveçam—who
has not undergone atonement; yatra—where; daëòena—by punishment;
çuddhyati—he will be purified.
TRANSLATION
This man Ajämila did not undergo atonement. Therefore because of his
sinful life, we must take him into the presence of Yamaräja for punishment.
There, according to the extent of his sinful acts, he will be punished and thus
purified.
PURPORT
The Viñëudütas had forbidden the Yamadütas to take Ajämila to Yamaräja,
and therefore the Yamadütas explained that taking such a man to Yamaräja
was appropriate. Since Ajämila had not undergone atonement for his sinful
acts, he was to be taken to Yamaräja to be purified. When a man commits
murder he becomes sinful, and therefore he also must be killed; otherwise after
death he must suffer many sinful reactions. Similarly, punishment by Yamaräja
is a process of purification for the most abominable sinful persons. Therefore
the Yamadütas requested the Viñëudütas not to obstruct their taking Ajämila
to Yamaräja.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, First Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The History of the Life of Ajämila."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
106
2. Ajämila Delivered by the Viñëudütas
In this chapter the messengers from Vaikuëöha explain to the Yamadütas
the glories of chanting the holy name of the Lord. The Viñëudütas said, "Now
impious acts are being performed even in an assembly of devotees, for a person
who is not punishable is going to be punished in the assembly of Yamaräja. The
mass of people are helpless and must depend upon the government for their
safety and security, but if the government takes advantage of this to harm the
citizens, where will they go? We see perfectly that Ajämila should not be
punished, although you are attempting to take him to Yamaräja for
punishment."
It was due to Ajämila's glorifying the holy name of the Supreme Lord that
he was not punishable. The Viñëudütas explained this as follows: "Simply by
once chanting the holy name of Näräyaëa, this brähmaëa has become free
from the reactions of sinful life. Indeed, he has been freed not only from the
sins of this life, but from the sins of many, many thousands of other lives. He
has already undergone true atonement for all his sinful actions. If one atones
according to the directions of the çästras, one does not actually become free
from sinful reactions, but if one chants the holy name of the Lord, even a
glimpse of such chanting can immediately free one from all sins. Chanting the
glories of the Lord's holy name awakens all good fortune. Therefore there is no
doubt that Ajämila, being completely free from all sinful reactions, should not
be punished by Yamaräja."
As they were saying this, the Viñëudütas released Ajämila from the ropes of
the Yamadütas and left for their own abode. The brähmaëa Ajämila, however,
offered his respectful obeisances to the Viñëudütas. He could understand how
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
107
fortunate he was to have chanted the holy name of Näräyaëa at the end of his
life. Indeed, he could realize the full significance of this good fortune. Having
thoroughly understood the discussion between the Yamadütas and the
Viñëudütas, he became a pure devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
He lamented very much for how very sinful he had been, and he condemned
himself again and again.
Finally, because of his association with the Viñëudütas, Ajämila, his original
consciousness aroused, gave up everything and went to Hardwar, where he
engaged in devotional service without deviation, always thinking of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus the Viñëudütas went there, seated him
on a golden throne and took him away to Vaikuëöhaloka.
In summary, although the sinful Ajämila meant to call his son, the holy
name of Lord Näräyaëa, even though chanted in the preliminary stage,
nämäbhäsa, was able to give him liberation. Therefore one who chants the holy
name of the Lord with faith and devotion is certainly exalted. He is protected
even in his material, conditional life.
TEXT 1
é[qbadraYai<aåvac
Wv& Tae >aGavÕUTaa YaMadUTaai>a>aaizTaMa( )
oPaDaaYaaRQa TaaNa( raJaNa( Pa[TYaahuNaRYak-aeivda" )) 1 ))
çré-bädaräyaëir uväca
evaà te bhagavad-dütä
yamadütäbhibhäñitam
upadhäryätha tän räjan
pratyähur naya-kovidäù
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
108
çré-bädaräyaëiù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé, the son of Vyäsadeva, said;
evam—thus; te—they; bhagavat-dütäù—the servants of Lord Viñëu;
yamadüta—by the servants of Yamaräja; abhibhäñitam—what was spoken;
upadhärya—hearing; atha—then; tän—unto them; räjan—O King;
pratyähuù—replied properly; naya-kovidäù—being conversant in good
arguments or good logic.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: My dear King, the servants of Lord Viñëu are
always very expert in logic and arguments. After hearing the statements of the
Yamadütas, they replied as follows.
TEXT 2
é[qivZ<audUTaa Ocu"
Ahae k-í& DaMaRd*XaaMaDaMaR" SPa*XaTae Sa>aaMa( )
Ya}aad<@yeZvPaaPaezu d<@ae YaEiDa]RYaTae v*Qaa )) 2 ))
çré-viñëudütä ücuù
aho kañöaà dharma-dåçäm
adharmaù spåçate sabhäm
yaträdaëòyeñv apäpeñu
daëòo yair dhriyate våthä
SYNONYMS
çré-viñëudütäù ücuù—the Viñëudütas said; aho—alas; kañöam—how painful it
is; dharma-dåçäm—of persons interested in maintaining religion;
adharmaù—irreligion; spåçate—is affecting; sabhäm—the assembly;
yatra—wherein; adaëòyeñu—upon persons not to be punished; apäpeñu—who
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
109
are sinless; daëòaù—punishment; yaiù—by whom; dhriyate—is being allotted;
våthä—unnecessarily.
TRANSLATION
The Viñëudütas said: Alas, how painful it is that irreligion is being
introduced into an assembly where religion should be maintained. Indeed, those
in charge of maintaining the religious principles are needlessly punishing a
sinless, unpunishable person.
PURPORT
The Viñëudütas accused the Yamadütas of violating the religious principles
by attempting to drag Ajämila to Yamaräja for punishment. Yamaräja is the
officer appointed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead to judge religious
and irreligious principles and to punish people who are irreligious. However, if
completely sinless people are punished, the entire assembly of Yamaräja is
contaminated. This principle applies not only in the assembly of Yamaräja, but
throughout human society also.
In human society, properly maintaining religious principles is the duty of
the king's court or the government. Unfortunately, in this yuga, Kali-yuga, the
religious principles are tampered with, and the government cannot properly
judge who is to be punished and who is not. It is said that in the Kali-yuga if
one cannot spend money in court, one cannot get justice. Indeed, in courts of
justice it is often found that magistrates are bribed for favorable judgments.
Sometimes religious men who preach the Kåñëa consciousness movement for
the benefit of the entire populace are arrested and harassed by the police and
courts. The Viñëudütas, who are Vaiñëavas, lamented for these very
regrettable facts. Because of their spiritual compassion for all the fallen souls,
Vaiñëavas go out to preach according to the standard method of all religious
principles, but unfortunately, because of the influence of Kali-yuga, Vaiñëavas
who have dedicated their lives to preaching the glories of the Lord are
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
110
sometimes harassed and punished by courts on false charges of disturbing the
peace.
TEXT 3
Pa[JaaNaa& iPaTarae Yae c XaaSTaar" SaaDav" SaMaa" )
Yaid SYaataezu vEzMYa& k&- YaaiNTa Xar<a& Pa[Jaa" )) 3 ))
prajänäà pitaro ye ca
çästäraù sädhavaù samäù
yadi syät teñu vaiñamyaà
kaà yänti çaraëaà prajäù
SYNONYMS
prajänäm—of the citizens; pitaraù—protectors, guardians (kings or
government servants); ye—they who; ca—and; çästäraù—give instructions
concerning law and order; sädhavaù—endowed with all good qualities;
samäù—equal to everyone; yadi—if; syät—there is; teñu—among them;
vaiñamyam—partiality; kam—what; yänti—will go to; çaraëam—shelter;
prajäù—the citizens.
TRANSLATION
A king or governmental official should be so well qualified that he acts as a
father, maintainer and protector of the citizens because of affection and love.
He should give the citizens good advice and instructions according to the
standard scriptures and should be equal to everyone. Yamaräja does this, for he
is the supreme master of justice, and so do those who follow in his footsteps.
However, if such persons become polluted and exhibit partiality by punishing
an innocent, blameless person, where will the citizens go to take shelter for
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
111
their maintenance and security?
PURPORT
The king, or in modern times the government, should act as the guardian of
the citizens by teaching them the proper goal of life. The human form of life is
especially meant for realization of one's self and one's relationship with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead because this cannot be realized in animal life.
The duty of the government, therefore, is to take charge of training all the
citizens in such a way that by a gradual process they will be elevated to the
spiritual platform and will realize the self and his relationship with God. This
principle was followed by kings like Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, Mahäräja Parékñit,
Lord Rämacandra, Mahäräja Ambaréña and Prahläda Mahäräja. The leaders of
the government must be very honest and religious because otherwise all the
affairs of the state will suffer. Unfortunately, in the name of democracy, rogues
and thieves are electing other rogues and thieves to the most important posts
in the government. Recently this has been proven in America, where the
president had to be condemned and dragged down from his post by the
citizens. This is only one case, but there are many others. Because of the
importance of the Kåñëa consciousness movement, people should be Kåñëa
conscious and should not vote for anyone who is not Kåñëa conscious. Then
there will be actual peace and prosperity in the state. When a Vaiñëava sees
mismanagement in the government, he feels great compassion in his heart and
tries his best to purify the situation by spreading the Hare Kåñëa movement.
TEXT 4
YaÛdacriTa é[eYaaiNaTarSTatadqhTae )
Sa YaTPa[Maa<a& ku-åTae l/aek-STadNauvTaRTae )) 4 ))
yad yad äcarati çreyän
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
112
itaras tat tad éhate
sa yat pramäëaà kurute
lokas tad anuvartate
SYNONYMS
yat yat—whatever; äcarati—executes; çreyän—a first-class man with full
knowledge of religious principles; itaraù—the subordinate man; tat tat—that;
éhate—performs; saù—he (the great man); yat—whatever; pramäëam—as
evidence or as the right thing; kurute—accepts; lokaù—the general public;
tat—that; anuvartate—follows.
TRANSLATION
The mass of people follow the example of a leader in society and imitate his
behavior. They accept as evidence whatever the leader accepts.
PURPORT
Although Ajämila was not punishable, the Yamadütas were insisting on
taking him away to Yamaräja for punishment. This was adharma, contrary to
religious principles. The Viñëudütas feared that if such irreligious acts were
allowed, the management of human society would be spoiled. In modern times,
the Kåñëa consciousness movement is trying to introduce the right principles
of management for human society, but unfortunately the governments of
Kali-yuga do not properly support the Hare Kåñëa movement because they do
not appreciate its valuable service. The Hare Kåñëa movement is the right
movement for ameliorating the fallen condition of human society, and
therefore governments and public leaders in every part of the world should
support this movement to completely rectify humanity's sinful condition.
TEXTS 5-6
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
113
YaSYaaªe iXar AaDaaYa l/aek-" SviPaiTa iNav*RTa" )
SvYa& DaMaRMaDaMa| va Na ih ved YaQaa PaXau" )) 5 ))
Sa k-Qa& NYaiPaRTaaTMaaNa& k*-TaMaE}aMaceTaNaMa( )
ivóM>a<aqYaae >aUTaaNaa& Saga*<aae daeGDauMahRiTa )) 6 ))
yasyäìke çira ädhäya
lokaù svapiti nirvåtaù
svayaà dharmam adharmaà vä
na hi veda yathä paçuù
sa kathaà nyarpitätmänaà
kåta-maitram acetanam
visrambhaëéyo bhütänäà
saghåëo dogdhum arhati
SYNONYMS
yasya—of whom; aìke—on the lap; çiraù—the head; ädhäya—placing;
lokaù—the general mass of people; svapiti—sleep; nirvåtaù—in peace;
svayam—personally; dharmam—religious principles or the goal of life;
adharmam—irreligious principles; vä—or; na—not; hi—indeed; veda—know;
yathä—exactly like; paçuù—an animal; saù—such a person; katham—how;
nyarpita-ätmänam—unto the living entity who has fully surrendered;
kåta-maitram—endowed with good faith and friendship; acetanam—with
undeveloped consciousness, foolish; visrambhaëéyaù—deserving to be the
object of faith; bhütänäm—of the living entities; sa-ghåëaù—who has a soft
heart for the good of all people; dogdhum—to give pain; arhati—is able.
TRANSLATION
People in general are not very advanced in knowledge by which to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
114
discriminate between religion and irreligion. The innocent, unenlightened
citizen is like an ignorant animal sleeping in peace with its head on the lap of its
master, faithfully believing in the master's protection. If a leader is actually
kindhearted and deserves to be the object of a living entity's faith, how can he
punish or kill a foolish person who has fully surrendered in good faith and
friendship?
PURPORT
The Sanskrit word viçvasta-ghäta refers to one who breaks faith or causes a
breach of trust. The mass of people should always feel security because of the
government's protection. Therefore, how regrettable it is for the government
itself to cause a breach of trust and put the citizens in difficulty for political
reasons. We actually saw during the partition days in India that although
Hindus and Muslims were living together peacefully, manipulation by
politicians suddenly aroused feelings of hatred between them, and thus the
Hindus and Muslims killed one another over politics. This is a sign of
Kali-yuga. In this age, animals are kept nicely sheltered, completely confident
that their masters will protect them, but unfortunately as soon as the animals
are fat, they are immediately sent for slaughter. Such cruelty is condemned by
Vaiñëavas like the Viñëudütas. Indeed, the hellish conditions already described
await the sinful men responsible for such suffering. One who betrays the
confidence of a living entity who takes shelter of him in good faith, whether
that living entity be a human being or an animal, is extremely sinful. Because
such betrayals now go unpunished by the government, all of human society is
terribly contaminated. The people of this age are therefore described as
mandäù sumanda-matayo manda-bhägyä hy upadrutäù [SB 1.1.10]. As a
consequence of such sinfulness, men are condemned (mandäù), their
intelligence is unclear (sumanda-matayaù), they are unfortunate
(manda-bhägyäù), and therefore they are always disturbed by many problems
(upadrutäù). This is their situation in this life, and after death they are
punished in hellish conditions.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
115
TEXT 7
AYa& ih k*-TaiNaveRXaae JaNMak-ae$y&hSaaMaiPa )
Yad( VYaaJahar ivvXaae NaaMa SvSTYaYaNa& hre" )) 7 ))
ayaà hi kåta-nirveço
janma-koöy-aàhasäm api
yad vyäjahära vivaço
näma svasty-ayanaà hareù
SYNONYMS
ayam—this person (Ajämila); hi—indeed; kåta-nirveçaù—has undergone all
kinds of atonement; janma—of births; koöi—of millions; aàhasäm—for the
sinful activities; api—even; yat—because; vyäjahära—he has chanted;
vivaçaù—in a helpless condition; näma—the holy name; svasti-ayanam—the
means of liberation; hareù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Ajämila has already atoned for all his sinful actions. Indeed, he has atoned
not only for sins performed in one life but for those performed in millions of
lives, for in a helpless condition he chanted the holy name of Näräyaëa. Even
though he did not chant purely, he chanted without offense, and therefore he is
now pure and eligible for liberation.
PURPORT
The Yamadütas had considered only the external situation of Ajämila.
Since he was extremely sinful throughout his life, they thought he should be
taken to Yamaräja and did not know that he had become free from the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
116
reactions of all his sins. The Viñëudütas therefore instructed that because he
had chanted the four syllables of the name Näräyaëa at the time of his death,
he was freed from all sinful reactions. In this regard Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura quotes the following verses from the småti-çästra:
nämno hi yävaté çaktiù
päpa-nirharaëe hareù
tävat kartuà na çaknoti
pätakaà pätaké naraù
"Simply by chanting one holy name of Hari, a sinful man can counteract the
reactions to more sins than he is able to commit." (Båhad-viñëu Puräëa)
avaçenäpi yan-nämni
kértite sarva-pätakaiù
pumän vimucyate sadyaù
siàha-trastair mågair iva
"If one chants the holy name of the Lord, even in a helpless condition or
without desiring to do so, all the reactions of his sinful life depart, just as when
a lion roars, all the small animals flee in fear." (Garuòa Puräëa)
sakåd uccäritaà yena
harir ity akñara-dvayam
baddha-parikaras tena
mokñäya gamanaà prati
"By once chanting the holy name of the Lord, which consists of the two
syllables ha-ri, one guarantees his path to liberation." (Skanda Puräëa)
These are some of the reasons why the Viñëudütas objected to the
Yamadütas' taking Ajämila to the court of Yamaräja.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
117
TEXT 8
WTaeNaEv ùgaaeNaae_SYa k*-Ta& SYaadgaiNaZk*-TaMa( )
Yada NaaraYa<aaYaeiTa JaGaad cTaur+arMa( )) 8 ))
etenaiva hy aghono 'sya
kåtaà syäd agha-niñkåtam
yadä näräyaëäyeti
jagäda catur-akñaram
SYNONYMS
etena—by this (chanting); eva—indeed; hi—certainly; aghonaù—who
possesses sinful reactions; asya—of this (Ajämila); kåtam—performed;
syät—is; agha—of sins; niñkåtam—complete atonement; yadä—when;
näräyaëa—O Näräyaëa (the name of his son); äya—please come; iti—thus;
jagäda—he chanted; catuù-akñaram—the four syllables (nä-rä-ya-ëa).
TRANSLATION
The Viñëudütas continued: Even previously, while eating and at other
times, this Ajämila would call his son, saying, "My dear Näräyaëa, please come
here." Although calling the name of his son, he nevertheless uttered the four
syllables nä-rä-ya-ëa. Simply by chanting the name of Näräyaëa in this way, he
sufficiently atoned for the sinful reactions of millions of lives.
PURPORT
Previously, when engaged in sinful activities to maintain his family,
Ajämila chanted the name of Näräyaëa without offenses. To chant the holy
name of the Lord just to counteract one's sinful activities, or to commit sinful
activities on the strength of chanting the holy name, is offensive (nämno baläd
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
118
yasya hi päpa-buddhiù). But although Ajämila engaged in sinful activities, he
never chanted the holy name of Näräyaëa to counteract them; he simply
chanted the name Näräyaëa to call his son. Therefore his chanting was
effective. Because of chanting the holy name of Näräyaëa in this way, he had
already vanquished the accumulated sinful reactions of many, many lives. In
the beginning he was pure, but although he later committed many sinful acts,
he was offenseless because he did not chant the holy name of Näräyaëa to
counteract them. One who always chants the holy name of the Lord without
offenses is always pure. As confirmed in this verse Ajämila was already sinless,
and because he chanted the name of Näräyaëa he remained sinless. It did not
matter that he was calling his son; the name itself was effective.
TEXTS 9-10
STaeNa" SauraPaae iMa}aDa]uGa( b]øha GauåTaLPaGa" )
ñqraJaiPaTa*GaaehNTaa Yae c PaaTaik-Naae_Pare )) 9 ))
SaveRzaMaPYagavTaaiMadMaev SauiNaZk*-TaMa( )
NaaMaVYaahr<a& ivZ<aaeYaRTaSTaiÜzYaa MaiTa" )) 10 ))
stenaù surä-po mitra-dhrug
brahma-hä guru-talpa-gaù
stré-räja-pitå-go-hantä
ye ca pätakino 'pare
sarveñäm apy aghavatäm
idam eva suniñkåtam
näma-vyäharaëaà viñëor
yatas tad-viñayä matiù
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
119
stenaù—one who steals; surä-paù—a drunkard; mitra-dhruk—one who turns
against a friend or relative; brahma-hä—one who kills a brähmaëa;
guru-talpa-gaù—one who indulges in sex with the wife of his teacher or guru;
stré—women; räja—king; pitå—father; go—of cows; hantä—the killer;
ye—those who; ca—also; pätakinaù—committed sinful activities;
apare—many others; sarveñäm—of all of them; api—although;
agha-vatäm—persons who have committed many sins; idam—this;
eva—certainly; su-niñkåtam—perfect atonement;
näma-vyäharaëam—chanting of the holy name; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu;
yataù—because of which; tat-viñayä—on the person who chants the holy
name; matiù—His attention.
TRANSLATION
The chanting of the holy name of Lord Viñëu is the best process of
atonement for a thief of gold or other valuables, for a drunkard, for one who
betrays a friend or relative, for one who kills a brähmaëa, or for one who
indulges in sex with the wife of his guru or another superior. It is also the best
method of atonement for one who murders women, the king or his father, for
one who slaughters cows, and for all other sinful men. Simply by chanting the
holy name of Lord Viñëu, such sinful persons may attract the attention of the
Supreme Lord, who therefore considers, "Because this man has chanted My
holy name, My duty is to give him protection."
TEXT 11
Na iNaZk*-TaEåidTaEb]Røvaidi>a‚
STaQaa ivXauÖyTYagavaNa( v]Taaidi>a" )
YaQaa hreNaaRMaPadEådaôTaE‚
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
120
STadutaMaëaek-Gau<aaePal/M>ak-Ma( )) 11 ))
na niñkåtair uditair brahma-vädibhis
tathä viçuddhyaty aghavän vratädibhiù
yathä harer näma-padair udähåtais
tad uttamaçloka-guëopalambhakam
SYNONYMS
na—not; niñkåtaiù—by the processes of atonement; uditaiù—prescribed;
brahma-vädibhiù—by learned scholars such as Manu; tathä—to that extent;
viçuddhyati—becomes purified; agha-vän—a sinful man; vrata-ädibhiù—by
observing the vows and regulative principles; yathä—as; hareù—of Lord Hari;
näma-padaiù—by the syllables of the holy name; udähåtaiù—chanted;
tat—that; uttamaçloka—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; guëa—of the
transcendental qualities; upalambhakam—reminding one.
TRANSLATION
By following the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies or undergoing atonement,
sinful men do not become as purified as by chanting once the holy name of Lord
Hari. Although ritualistic atonement may free one from sinful reactions, it does
not awaken devotional service, unlike the chanting of the Lord's names, which
reminds one of the Lord's fame, qualities, attributes, pastimes and
paraphernalia.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura comments that the chanting of the
holy name of the Lord has special significance that distinguishes it from the
Vedic ritualistic ceremonies of atonement for severe, more severe or most
severe sinful actions. There are twenty types of religious scriptures called
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
121
dharma-çästras, beginning with the Manu-saàhitä and paräçara-saàhitä, but
herein it is stressed that although one may become free from the reactions of
the most sinful activities by following the religious principles of these
scriptures, this cannot promote a sinful man to the stage of loving service to
the Lord. On the other hand, chanting the holy name of the Lord even once
not only frees one immediately from the reactions of the greatest sins, but also
raises one to the platform of rendering loving service to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is described as uttamaçloka because He is famous
for His glorious activities. Thus one serves the Lord by remembering His form,
His attributes and pastimes. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains
that this is all possible simply by chanting the Lord's holy name because of the
Lord's omnipotence. What cannot be achieved through the performance of
Vedic rituals can be easily achieved through the chanting of the Lord's holy
name. To chant the holy name and dance in ecstasy is so easy and sublime that
one can achieve all the benefits of spiritual life simply by following this
process. Therefore Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu declares, paraà vijayate
çré-kåñëa-saìkértanam: "All glories to Çré Kåñëa saìkértana!" The saìkértana
movement we have started offers the best process for becoming purified of all
sinful reactions and coming immediately to the platform of spiritual life.
TEXT 12
NaEk-aiNTak&- TaiÖ k*-Tae_iPa iNaZk*-Tae
MaNa" PauNaDaaRviTa cedSaTPaQae )
TaTk-MaRiNahaRrMa>aqPSaTaa& hre‚
GaRu<aaNauvad" %lu/ Satv>aavNa" )) 12 ))
naikäntikaà tad dhi kåte 'pi niñkåte
manaù punar dhävati ced asat-pathe
tat karma-nirhäram abhépsatäà harer
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
122
guëänuvädaù khalu sattva-bhävanaù
SYNONYMS
na—not; aikäntikam—absolutely cleansed; tat—the heart; hi—because;
kåte—very nicely performed; api—although; niñkåte—atonement; manaù—the
mind; punaù—again; dhävati—runs; cet—if; asat-pathe—on the path of
material activities; tat—therefore; karma-nirhäram—cessation of the fruitive
reactions of material activities; abhépsatäm—for those who seriously want;
hareù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; guëa-anuvädaù—constant
chanting of the glories; khalu—indeed; sattva-bhävanaù—actually purifying
one's existence.
TRANSLATION
The ritualistic ceremonies of atonement recommended in the religious
scriptures are insufficient to cleanse the heart absolutely because after
atonement one's mind again runs toward material activities. Consequently, for
one who wants liberation from the fruitive reactions of material activities, the
chanting of the Hare Kåñëa mantra, or glorification of the name, fame and
pastimes of the Lord, is recommended as the most perfect process of atonement
because such chanting eradicates the dirt from one's heart completely.
PURPORT
The statements in this verse have been confirmed previously in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.17):
çåëvatäà sva-kathäù kåñëaù
puëya-çravaëa-kértanaù
hådy antaù-stho hy abhadräëi
vidhunoti suhåt satäm
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
123
"Çré Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead, who is the Paramätmä [Supersoul] in
everyone's heart and the benefactor of the truthful devotee, cleanses desire for
material enjoyment from the heart of the devotee who relishes His messages,
which are in themselves virtuous when properly heard and chanted." It is the
special mercy of the Supreme Lord that as soon as He knows that one is
glorifying His name, fame and attributes, He personally helps cleanse the dirt
from one's heart. Therefore simply by such glorification one not only becomes
purified, but also achieves the results of pious activities
(puëya-çravaëa-kértana). Puëya-çravaëa-kértana refers to the process of
devotional service. Even if one does not understand the meaning of the Lord's
name, pastimes or attributes, one is purified simply by hearing or chanting of
them. Such purification is called sattva-bhävana.
One's main purpose in human life should be to purify his existence and
achieve liberation. As long as one has a material body, one is understood to be
impure. In such an impure, material condition, one cannot enjoy a truly
blissful life, although everyone seeks it. Therefore Çrémad-Bhägavatam (5.5.1)
says, tapo divyaà putrakä yena sattvaà çuddhyet: one must perform tapasya,
austerity, to purify his existence in order to come to the spiritual platform. The
tapasya of chanting and glorifying the name, fame and attributes of the Lord is
a very easy purifying process by which everyone can be happy. Therefore
everyone who desires the ultimate cleansing of his heart must adopt this
process. Other processes, such as karma, jïäna and yoga, cannot cleanse the
heart absolutely.
TEXT 13
AQaENa& MaaPaNaYaTa k*-TaaXaezagaiNaZk*-TaMa( )
YadSaaE >aGavàaMa iMa]YaMaa<a" SaMaGa]hqTa( )) 13 ))
athainaà mäpanayata
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
124
kåtäçeñägha-niñkåtam
yad asau bhagavan-näma
mriyamäëaù samagrahét
SYNONYMS
atha—therefore; enam—him (Ajämila); mä—do not; apanayata—try to take;
kåta—already done; açeña—unlimited; agha-niñkåtam—atonement for his
sinful actions; yat—because; asau—he; bhagavat-näma—the holy name of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; mriyamäëaù—while dying;
samagrahét—perfectly chanted.
TRANSLATION
At the time of death, this Ajämila helplessly and very loudly chanted the
holy name of the Lord, Näräyaëa. That chanting alone has already freed him
from the reactions of all sinful life. Therefore, O servants of Yamaräja, do not
try to take him to your master for punishment in hellish conditions.
PURPORT
The Viñëudütas, who are superior authorities, gave orders to the
Yamadütas, who did not know that Ajämila was no longer subject to
tribulation in hellish life for his past sins. Although he had chanted the holy
name Näräyaëa to indicate his son, the holy name is so transcendentally
powerful that he was automatically freed because he had chanted the holy
name while dying (ante näräyaëa-småtiù [SB 2.1.6]). As Kåñëa confirms in
Bhagavad-gétä (7.28):
yeñäà tv anta-gataà päpaà
janänäà puëya-karmaëäm
te dvandva-moha-nirmuktä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
125
bhajante mäà dåòha-vratäù
"Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life, whose sinful
actions are completely eradicated and who are freed from the duality of
delusion, engage themselves in My service with determination." Unless one is
freed from all sinful reactions, one cannot be promoted to the platform of
devotional service. Elsewhere in Bhagavad-gétä (8.5) it is stated:
anta-käle ca mäm eva
smaran muktvä kalevaram
yaù prayäti sa mad-bhävaà
yäti nästy atra saàçayaù
If one remembers Kåñëa, Näräyaëa, at the time of death, one is certainly
eligible to return immediately home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 14
SaaªeTYa& PaairhaSYa& va STaae>a& hel/NaMaev va )
vEku-<#=NaaMaGa]h<aMaXaezagahr& ivdu" )) 14 ))
säìketyaà pärihäsyaà vä
stobhaà helanam eva vä
vaikuëöha-näma-grahaëam
açeñägha-haraà viduù
SYNONYMS
säìketyam—as an assignation; pärihäsyam—jokingly; vä—or; stobham—as
musical entertainment; helanam—neglectfully; eva—certainly; vä—or;
vaikuëöha—of the Lord; näma-grahaëam—chanting the holy name;
açeña—unlimited; agha-haram—neutralizing the effect of sinful life;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
126
viduù—advanced transcendentalists know.
TRANSLATION
One who chants the holy name of the Lord is immediately freed from the
reactions of unlimited sins, even if he chants indirectly [to indicate something
else], jokingly, for musical entertainment, or even neglectfully. This is accepted
by all the learned scholars of the scriptures.
TEXT 15
PaiTaTa" S%il/Taae >aGan" SaNdíSTaá AahTa" )
hirirTYavXaeNaah PauMaaàahRiTa YaaTaNaa" )) 15 ))
patitaù skhalito bhagnaù
sandañöas tapta ähataù
harir ity avaçenäha
pumän närhati yätanäù
SYNONYMS
patitaù—fallen down; skhalitaù—slipped; bhagnaù—having broken his bones;
sandañöaù—bitten; taptaù—severely attacked by fever or similar painful
conditions; ähataù—injured; hariù—Lord Kåñëa; iti—thus;
avaçena—accidentally; äha—chants; pumän—a person; na—not;
arhati—deserves; yätanäù—hellish conditions.
TRANSLATION
If one chants the holy name of Hari and then dies because of an accidental
misfortune, such as falling from the top of a house, slipping and suffering
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
127
broken bones while traveling on the road, being bitten by a serpent, being
afflicted with pain and high fever, or being injured by a weapon, one is
immediately absolved from having to enter hellish life, even though he is sinful.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (8.6):
yaà yaà väpi smaran bhävaà
tyajaty ante kalevaram
taà tam evaiti kaunteya
sadä tad-bhäva-bhävitaù
"Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body, that state he
will attain without fail." If one practices chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra, he is
naturally expected to chant Hare Kåñëa when he meets with some accident.
Even without such practice, however, if one somehow or other chants the holy
name of the Lord (Hare Kåñëa) when he meets with an accident and dies, he
will be saved from hellish life after death.
TEXT 16
Gauæ<aa& c l/gaUNaa& c Gauæi<a c l/gaUiNa c )
Pa[aYaiêtaaiNa PaaPaaNaa& jaTvae¢-aiNa MahizRi>a" )) 16 ))
gurüëäà ca laghünäà ca
gurüëi ca laghüni ca
präyaçcittäni päpänäà
jïätvoktäni maharñibhiù
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
128
gurüëäm—heavy; ca—and; laghünäm—light; ca—also; gurüëi—heavy;
ca—and; laghüni—light; ca—also; präyaçcittäni—the processes of atonement;
päpänäm—of sinful activities; jïätvä—knowing perfectly well; uktäni—have
been prescribed; mahä-åñibhiù—by great sages.
TRANSLATION
Authorities who are learned scholars and sages have carefully ascertained
that one should atone for the heaviest sins by undergoing a heavy process of
atonement and one should atone for lighter sins by undergoing lighter
atonement. Chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra, however, vanquishes all the
effects of sinful activities, regardless of whether heavy or light.
PURPORT
In this regard, Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura describes an incident
that took place when Sämba was rescued from the punishment of the
Kauravas. Sämba fell in love with the daughter of Duryodhana, and since
according to kñatriya custom one is not offered a kñatriya's daughter unless he
displays his chivalrous valor, Sämba abducted her. Consequently Sämba was
arrested by the Kauravas. Later, when Lord Balaräma came to rescue him,
there was an argument about Sämba's release. Since the argument was not
settled, Balaräma showed His power in such a way that all of Hastinäpura
trembled and would have been vanquished as if by a great earthquake. Then
the matter was settled, and Sämba married Duryodhana's daughter. The
purport is that one should take shelter of Kåñëa-Balaräma, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, whose protective power is so great that it cannot be
equaled in the material world. However powerful the reactions of one's sins,
they will immediately be vanquished if one chants the name of Hari, Kåñëa,
Balaräma or Näräyaëa.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
129
TEXT 17
TaESTaaNYagaaiNa PaUYaNTae TaPaaedaNav]Taaidi>a" )
NaaDaMaRJa& Tad(Da*dYa& TadPaqXaax(iga]SaevYaa )) 17 ))
tais täny aghäni püyante
tapo-däna-vratädibhiù
nädharmajaà tad-dhådayaà
tad apéçäìghri-sevayä
SYNONYMS
taiù—by those; täni—all those; aghäni—sinful activities and their results;
püyante—become vanquished; tapaù—austerity; däna—charity;
vrata-ädibhiù—by vows and other such activities; na—not;
adharma-jam—produced from irreligious actions; tat—of that; hådayam—the
heart; tat—that; api—also; éça-aìghri—of the lotus feet of the Lord;
sevayä—by service.
TRANSLATION
Although one may neutralize the reactions of sinful life through austerity,
charity, vows and other such methods, these pious activities cannot uproot the
material desires in one's heart. However, if one serves the lotus feet of the
Personality of Godhead, he is immediately freed from all such contaminations.
PURPORT
As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.2.42), bhaktiù pareçänubhavo viraktir
anyatra ca: devotional service is so powerful that one who performs devotional
service is immediately freed from all sinful desires. All desires within this
material world are sinful because material desire means sense gratification,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
130
which always involves action that is more or less sinful. Pure bhakti, however,
is anyäbhiläñitä-çünya; in other words, it is free from material desires, which
result from karma and jïäna. One who is situated in devotional service no
longer has material desires, and therefore he is beyond sinful life. Material
desires should be completely stopped. Otherwise, although one's austerities,
penances and charity may free one from sin for the time being, one's desires
will reappear because his heart is impure. Thus he will act sinfully and suffer.
TEXT 18
AjaNaadQava jaNaadutaMaëaek-NaaMa YaTa( )
SaªqiTaRTaMaga& Pau&Saae dhedeDaae YaQaaNal/" )) 18 ))
ajïänäd athavä jïänäd
uttamaçloka-näma yat
saìkértitam aghaà puàso
dahed edho yathänalaù
SYNONYMS
ajïänät—out of ignorance; athavä—or; jïänät—with knowledge;
uttamaçloka—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; näma—the holy name;
yat—that which; saìkértitam—chanted; agham—sin; puàsaù—of a person;
dahet—burns to ashes; edhaù—dry grass; yathä—just as; analaù—fire.
TRANSLATION
As a fire burns dry grass to ashes, so the holy name of the Lord, whether
chanted knowingly or unknowingly, burns to ashes, without fail, all the
reactions of one's sinful activities.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
131
PURPORT
Fire will act, regardless of whether handled by an innocent child or by
someone well aware of its power. For example, if a field of straw or dry grass is
set afire, either by an elderly man who knows the power of fire or by a child
who does not, the grass will be burned to ashes. Similarly, one may or may not
know the power of chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra, but if one chants the holy
name he will become free from all sinful reactions.
TEXT 19
YaQaaGad& vqYaRTaMaMauPaYau¢&- Yad*C^Yaa )
AJaaNaTaae_PYaaTMaGau<a& ku-YaaRNMaN}aae_PYaudaôTa" )) 19 ))
yathägadaà véryatamam
upayuktaà yadåcchayä
ajänato 'py ätma-guëaà
kuryän mantro 'py udähåtaù
SYNONYMS
yathä—just like; agadam—medicine; vérya-tamam—very powerful;
upayuktam—properly taken; yadåcchayä—somehow or other; ajänataù—by a
person without knowledge; api—even; ätma-guëam—its own potency;
kuryät—manifests; mantraù—the Hare Kåñëa mantra; api—also;
udähåtaù—chanted.
TRANSLATION
If a person unaware of the effective potency of a certain medicine takes that
medicine or is forced to take it, it will act even without his knowledge because
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
132
its potency does not depend on the patient's understanding. Similarly, even
though one does not know the value of chanting the holy name of the Lord, if
one chants knowingly or unknowingly, the chanting will be very effective.
PURPORT
In the Western countries, where the Hare Kåñëa movement is spreading,
learned scholars and other thoughtful men are realizing its effectiveness. For
example, Dr. J. Stillson Judah, a learned scholar, has been very much attracted
to this movement because he has actually seen that it is turning hippies
addicted to drugs into pure Vaiñëavas who voluntarily become servants of
Kåñëa and humanity. Even a few years ago, such hippies did not know the
Hare Kåñëa mantra, but now they are chanting it and becoming pure
Vaiñëavas. Thus they are becoming free from all sinful activities, such as illicit
sex, intoxication, meat-eating and gambling. This is practical proof of the
effectiveness of the Hare Kåñëa movement, which is supported in this verse.
One may or may not know the value of chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra, but if
one somehow or other chants it, he will immediately be purified, just as one
who takes a potent medicine will feel its effects, regardless of whether he takes
it knowingly or unknowingly.
TEXT 20
é[qXauk- ovac
Ta Wv& SauiviNa<asYa DaMa| >aaGavTa& Na*Pa )
Ta& YaaMYaPaaXaaiàMauRCYa ivPa[& Ma*TYaaerMaUMaucNa( )) 20 ))
çré-çuka uväca
ta evaà suvinirëéya
dharmaà bhägavataà nåpa
taà yämya-päçän nirmucya
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
133
vipraà måtyor amümucan
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; te—they (the order carriers of
Lord Viñëu); evam—thus; su-vinirëéya—perfectly ascertaining;
dharmam—real religion; bhägavatam—in terms of devotional service;
nåpa—O King; tam—him (Ajämila); yämya-päçät—from the bondage of the
order carriers of Yamaräja; nirmucya—releasing; vipram—the brähmaëa;
måtyoù—from death; amümucan—rescued.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: My dear King, having thus perfectly
judged the principles of devotional service with reasoning and arguments, the
order carriers of Lord Viñëu released the brähmaëa Ajämila from the bondage
of the Yamadütas and saved him from imminent death.
TEXT 21
wiTa Pa[TYauidTaa YaaMYaa dUTaa YaaTva YaMaaiNTak-Ma( )
YaMaraje YaQaa SavRMaacc+aurirNdMa )) 21 ))
iti pratyuditä yämyä
dütä yätvä yamäntikam
yama-räjïe yathä sarvam
äcacakñur arindama
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; pratyuditäù—having been replied to (by the order carriers of Viñëu);
yämyäù—the servants of Yamaräja; dütäù—the messengers; yätvä—going;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
134
yama-antikam—to the abode of Lord Yamaräja; yama-räjïe—unto King
Yamaräja; yathä—duly; sarvam—everything; äcacakñuù—informed in full
detail; arindama—O subduer of the enemies.
TRANSLATION
My dear Mahäräja Parékñit, O subduer of all enemies, after the servants of
Yamaräja had been answered by the order carriers of Lord Viñëu, they went to
Yamaräja and explained to him everything that had happened.
PURPORT
In this verse the word pratyuditäù is very significant. The servants of
Yamaräja are so powerful that they can never be hindered anywhere, but this
time they were baffled and disappointed in their attempt to take away a man
they considered sinful. Therefore they immediately returned to Yamaräja and
described to him everything that had happened.
TEXT 22
iÜJa" PaaXaaiÜiNaMauR¢-ae GaTa>aq" Pa[k*-iTa& GaTa" )
vvNde iXarSaa ivZ<aae" ik-ªraNa( dXaRNaaeTSav" )) 22 ))
dvijaù päçäd vinirmukto
gata-bhéù prakåtià gataù
vavande çirasä viñëoù
kiìkarän darçanotsavaù
SYNONYMS
dvijaù—the brähmaëa (Ajämila); päçät—from the noose; vinirmuktaù—being
released; gata-bhéù—freed from fear; prakåtim gataù—came to his senses;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
135
vavande—offered his respectful obeisances; çirasä—by bowing his head;
viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu; kiìkarän—unto the servants; darçana-utsavaù—very
pleased by seeing them.
TRANSLATION
Having been released from the nooses of Yamaräja's servants, the brähmaëa
Ajämila, now free from fear, came to his senses and immediately offered
obeisances to the Viñëudütas by bowing his head at their lotus feet. He was
extremely pleased by their presence, for he had seen them save his life from the
hands of the servants of Yamaräja.
PURPORT
Vaiñëavas are also Viñëudütas because they carry out the orders of Kåñëa.
Lord Kåñëa is very eager for all the conditioned souls rotting in this material
world to surrender to Him and be saved from material pangs in this life and
punishment in hellish conditions after death. A Vaiñëava therefore tries to
bring conditioned souls to their senses. Those who are fortunate like Ajämila
are saved by the Viñëudütas, or Vaiñëavas, and thus they return back home,
back to Godhead.
TEXT 23
Ta& ivv+auMai>aPa[eTYa MahaPauåzik-ªra" )
SahSaa PaXYaTaSTaSYa Ta}aaNTadRiDare_Naga )) 23 ))
taà vivakñum abhipretya
mahäpuruña-kiìkaräù
sahasä paçyatas tasya
taträntardadhire 'nagha
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
136
SYNONYMS
tam—him (Ajämila); vivakñum—desiring to speak;
abhipretya—understanding; mahäpuruña-kiìkaräù—the order carriers of Lord
Viñëu; sahasä—suddenly; paçyataù tasya—while he looked on; tatra—there;
antardadhire—disappeared; anagha—O sinless Mahäräja Parékñit.
TRANSLATION
O sinless Mahäräja Parékñit, the order carriers of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the Viñëudütas, saw that Ajämila was attempting to say something,
and thus they suddenly disappeared from his presence.
PURPORT
The çästras say:
päpiñöhä ye duräcärä
deva-brähmaëa-nindakäù
apathya-bhojanäs teñäm
akäle maraëaà dhruvam
"For persons who are päpiñöha, very sinful, and duräcära, misbehaved or very
unclean in their habits, who are against the existence of God, who disrespect
Vaiñëavas and brähmaëas, and who eat anything and everything, untimely
death is sure." It is said that in Kali-yuga one has a maximum lifetime of one
hundred years, but as people become degraded, the duration of their lives
decreases (präyeëälpäyuñaù). Because Ajämila was now free from all sinful
reactions, his lifetime was extended, even though he was to have died
immediately. When the Viñëudütas saw Ajämila trying to say something to
them, they disappeared to give him a chance to glorify the Supreme Lord.
Since all his sinful reactions had been vanquished, he was now prepared to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
137
glorify the Lord. Indeed, one cannot glorify the Lord unless one is completely
free from all sinful activities. This is confirmed by Kåñëa Himself in
Bhagavad-gétä (7.28):
yeñäà tv anta-gataà päpaà
janänäà puëya-karmaëäm
te dvandva-moha-nirmuktä
bhajante mäà dåòha-vratäù
"Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life, whose sinful
actions are completely eradicated and who are freed from the duality of
delusion, engage themselves in My service with determination." The
Viñëudütas made Ajämila aware of devotional service so that He might
immediately become fit to return home, back to Godhead. To increase his
eagerness to glorify the Lord, they disappeared so that he would feel separation
in their absence. In the mode of separation, glorification of the Lord is very
intense.
TEXTS 24-25
AJaaiMal/ae_PYaQaak-<YaR dUTaaNaa& YaMak*-Z<aYaae" )
DaMa| >aaGavTa& XauÖ& }aEveÛ& c Gau<aaé[YaMa( )) 24 ))
>ai¢-MaaNa( >aGavTYaaXau MaahaTMYaé[v<aaÖre" )
ANauTaaPaae MahaNaaSaqTSMarTaae_Xau>aMaaTMaNa" )) 25 ))
ajämilo 'py athäkarëya
dütänäà yama-kåñëayoù
dharmaà bhägavataà çuddhaà
trai-vedyaà ca guëäçrayam
bhaktimän bhagavaty äçu
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
138
mähätmya-çravaëäd dhareù
anutäpo mahän äsét
smarato 'çubham ätmanaù
SYNONYMS
ajämilaù—Ajämila; api—also; atha—thereafter; äkarëya—hearing;
dütänäm—of the order carriers; yama-kåñëayoù—of Yamaräja and Lord Kåñëa;
dharmam—actual religious principles; bhägavatam—as described in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, or concerning the relationship between the living being
and the Supreme Personality of Godhead; çuddham—pure;
trai-vedyam—mentioned in three Vedas; ca—also; guëa-açrayam—material
religion, under the modes of material nature; bhakti-män—a pure devotee
(cleansed of the modes of material nature); bhagavati—unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; äçu—immediately; mähätmya—glorification of the
name, fame, etc.; çravaëät—because of hearing; hareù—of Lord Hari;
anutäpaù—regret; mahän—very great; äsét—there was;
smarataù—remembering; açubham—all the inglorious activities;
ätmanaù—done by himself.
TRANSLATION
After hearing the discourses between the Yamadütas and the Viñëudütas,
Ajämila could understand the religious principles that act under the three
modes of material nature. These principles are mentioned in the three Vedas.
He could also understand the transcendental religious principles, which are
above the modes of material nature and which concern the relationship between
the living being and the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Furthermore,
Ajämila heard glorification of the name, fame, qualities and pastimes of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. He thus became a perfectly pure devotee. He
could then remember his past sinful activities, which he greatly regretted
having performed.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
139
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (2.45) Lord Kåñëa told Arjuna:
traiguëya-viñayä vedä
nistraiguëyo bhavärjuna
nirdvandvo nitya-sattva-stho
niryoga-kñema ätmavän
"The Vedas mainly deal with the subject of the three modes of material nature.
Rise above these modes, O Arjuna. Be transcendental to all of them. Be free
from all dualities and from all anxieties for gain and safety, and be established
in the Self." The Vedic principles certainly prescribe a gradual process for
rising to the spiritual platform, but if one remains attached to the Vedic
principles, there is no chance of his being elevated to spiritual life. Kåñëa
therefore advised Arjuna to perform devotional service, which is the process of
transcendental religion. The transcendental position of devotional service is
also confirmed in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.6). Sa vai puàsäà paro dharmo yato
bhaktir adhokñaje. Bhakti, devotional service, is paro dharmaù, transcendental
dharma; it is not material dharma. People generally think that religion should
be pursued for material profit. This may be suitable for persons interested in
material life, but one who is interested in spiritual life should be attached to
paro dharmaù, the religious principles by which one becomes a devotee of the
Supreme Lord (yato bhaktir adhokñaje). The bhägavata religion teaches that the
Lord and the living entity are eternally related and that the duty of the living
entity is to surrender to the Lord. When one is situated on the platform of
devotional service, one is freed from impediments and completely satisfied
(ahaituky apratihatä yayätmä suprasédati). Having been elevated to that
platform, Ajämila began to lament for his past materialistic activities and
glorify the name, fame, form and pastimes of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
140
TEXT 26
Ahae Mae ParMa& k-íMa>aUdiviJaTaaTMaNa" )
YaeNa ivâaivTa& b]ø v*zLYaa& JaaYaTaaTMaNaa )) 26 ))
aho me paramaà kañöam
abhüd avijitätmanaù
yena viplävitaà brahma
våñalyäà jäyatätmanä
SYNONYMS
aho—alas; me—my; paramam—extreme; kañöam—miserable condition;
abhüt—became; avijita-ätmanaù—because my senses were uncontrolled;
yena—by which; viplävitam—destroyed; brahma—all my brahminical
qualifications; våñalyäm—through a çüdräëé, a maidservant; jäyatä—being
born; ätmanä—by me.
TRANSLATION
Ajämila said: Alas, being a servant of my senses, how degraded I became! I
fell down from my position as a duly qualified brähmaëa and begot children in
the womb of a prostitute.
PURPORT
The men of the higher classes—the brähmaëas, kñatriyas and vaiçyas—do
not beget children in the wombs of lower-class women. Therefore the custom
in Vedic society is to examine the horoscopes of a girl and boy being
considered for marriage to see whether their combination is suitable. Vedic
astrology reveals whether one has been born in the vipra-varëa, kñatriya-varëa,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
141
vaiçya-varëa or çüdra-varëa, according to the three qualities of material
nature. This must be examined because a marriage between a boy of the
vipra-varëa and a girl of the çüdra-varëa is incompatible; married life would be
miserable for both husband and wife. Consequently a boy should marry a girl
of the same category. Of course, this is trai-guëya, a material calculation
according to the Vedas, but if the boy and girl are devotees there need be no
such considerations. A devotee is transcendental, and therefore in a marriage
between devotees, the boy and girl form a very happy combination.
TEXT 27
iDax(Maa& ivGaihRTa& SaiÙduRZk*-Ta& ku-l/k-Âl/Ma( )
ihTva bal/a& SaTaq& Yaae_h& SauraPaqMaSaTaqMaGaaMa( )) 27 ))
dhiì mäà vigarhitaà sadbhir
duñkåtaà kula-kajjalam
hitvä bäläà satéà yo 'haà
surä-pém asatém agäm
SYNONYMS
dhik mäm—all condemnation upon me; vigarhitam—condemned; sadbhiù—by
honest men; duñkåtam—who has committed sinful acts; kula-kajjalam—who
has defamed the family tradition; hitvä—giving up; bäläm—a young wife;
satém—chaste; yaù—who; aham—I; suräpém—with a woman accustomed to
drinking wine; asatém—unchaste; agäm—I had sexual intercourse.
TRANSLATION
Alas, all condemnation upon me! I acted so sinfully that I degraded my
family tradition. Indeed, I gave up my chaste and beautiful young wife to have
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
142
sexual intercourse with a fallen prostitute accustomed to drinking wine. All
condemnation upon me!
PURPORT
This is the mentality of one who is becoming a pure devotee. When one is
elevated to the platform of devotional service by the grace of the Lord and the
spiritual master, one first regrets his past sinful activities. This helps one
advance in spiritual life. The Viñëudütas had given Ajämila the chance to
become a pure devotee, and the duty of a pure devotee is to regret his past
sinful activities in illicit sex, intoxication, meat-eating and gambling. Not only
should one give up his past bad habits, but he must always regret his past sinful
acts. This is the standard of pure devotion.
TEXT 28
v*ÖavNaaQaaE iPaTaraE NaaNYabNDaU TaPaiSvNaaE )
Ahae MaYaaDauNaa TYa¢-avk*-TajeNa NaqcvTa( )) 28 ))
våddhäv anäthau pitarau
nänya-bandhü tapasvinau
aho mayädhunä tyaktäv
akåtajïena nécavat
SYNONYMS
våddhau—old; anäthau—who had no other person to look after their comforts;
pitarau—my father and mother; na anya-bandhü—who had no other friend;
tapasvinau—who underwent great difficulties; aho—alas; mayä—by me;
adhunä—at that moment; tyaktau—were given up; akåta-jïena—ungrateful;
néca-vat—like the most abominable low-class person.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
143
TRANSLATION
My father and mother were old and had no other son or friend to look after
them. Because I did not take care of them, they lived with great difficulty. Alas,
like an abominable lower-class man, I ungratefully left them in that condition.
PURPORT
According to Vedic civilization, everyone has the responsibility for taking
care of brähmaëas, old men, women, children and cows. This is the duty of
everyone, especially an upper-class person. Because of his association with a
prostitute, Ajämila abandoned all his duties. Regretting this, Ajämila now
considered himself quite fallen.
TEXT 29
Saae_h& VYa¢&- PaiTaZYaaiMa Narke- >a*Xadaå<ae )
DaMaRgana" k-aiMaNaae Ya}a ivNdiNTa YaMaYaaTaNaa" )) 29 ))
so 'haà vyaktaà patiñyämi
narake bhåça-däruëe
dharma-ghnäù kämino yatra
vindanti yama-yätanäù
SYNONYMS
saù—such a person; aham—I; vyaktam—it is now clear; patiñyämi—will fall
down; narake—in hell; bhåça-däruëe—most miserable; dharma-ghnäù—they
who break the principles of religion; käminaù—who are too lusty;
yatra—where; vindanti—undergo; yama-yätanäù—the miserable conditions
imposed by Yamaräja.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
144
TRANSLATION
It is now clear that as a consequence of such activities, a sinful person like
me must be thrown into hellish conditions meant for those who have broken
religious principles and must there suffer extreme miseries.
TEXT 30
ik-iMad& SvPan AahaeiSvTa( Saa+aad( d*íiMahad(>auTaMa( )
Kv YaaTaa AÛ Tae Yae Maa& VYak-zRNa( PaaXaPaa<aYa" )) 30 ))
kim idaà svapna äho svit
säkñäd dåñöam ihädbhutam
kva yätä adya te ye mäà
vyakarñan päça-päëayaù
SYNONYMS
kim—whether; idam—this; svapne—in a dream; äho svit—or; säkñät—directly;
dåñöam—seen; iha—here; adbhutam—wonderful; kva—where; yätäù—have
gone; adya—now; te—all of them; ye—who; mäm—me; vyakarñan—were
dragging; päça-päëayaù—with ropes in their hands.
TRANSLATION
Was this a dream I saw, or was it reality? I saw fearsome men with ropes in
their hands coming to arrest me and drag me away. Where have they gone?
TEXT 31
AQa Tae Kv GaTaa" iSaÖaêTvarêaådXaRNaa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
145
VYaaMaaecYaàqYaMaaNa& bd(ßa PaaXaErDaae >auv" )) 31 ))
atha te kva gatäù siddhäç
catväraç cäru-darçanäù
vyämocayan néyamänaà
baddhvä päçair adho bhuvaù
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; te—those persons; kva—where; gatäù—went;
siddhäù—liberated; catväraù—four personalities; cäru-darçanäù—extremely
beautiful to see; vyämocayan—they released; néyamänam—me, who was being
carried away; baddhvä—being arrested; päçaiù—by ropes; adhaù
bhuvaù—downward to the hellish region.
TRANSLATION
And where have those four liberated and very beautiful persons gone who
released me from arrest and saved me from being dragged down to the hellish
regions?
PURPORT
As we have learned from the descriptions in the Fifth Canto, the hellish
planets are situated in the lower portions of this universe. Therefore they are
called adho bhuvaù. Ajämila could understand that the Yamadütas had come
from that region.
TEXT 32
AQaaiPa Mae du>aRGaSYa ivbuDaaetaMadXaRNae )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
146
>aivTaVYa& Ma(r)le/Na YaeNaaTMaa Mae Pa[SaqdiTa )) 32 ))
athäpi me durbhagasya
vibudhottama-darçane
bhavitavyaà maìgalena
yenätmä me prasédati
SYNONYMS
atha—therefore; api—although; me—of me; durbhagasya—so unfortunate;
vibudha-uttama—exalted devotees; darçane—because of seeing;
bhavitavyam—there must be; maìgalena—auspicious activities; yena—by
which; ätmä—self; me—my; prasédati—actually becomes happy.
TRANSLATION
I am certainly most abominable and unfortunate to have merged in an ocean
of sinful activities, but nevertheless, because of my previous spiritual activities,
I could see those four exalted personalities who came to rescue me. Now I feel
exceedingly happy because of their visit.
PURPORT
As stated in Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 22.54):
'sädhu-saìga', 'sädhu-saìga'—sarva-çästre kaya
lava-mätra sädhu-saìge sarva-siddhi haya
"Association with devotees is recommended by all the çästras because by even a
moment of such association one can receive the seed for all perfection." In the
beginning of his life Ajämila was certainly very pure, and he associated with
devotees and brähmaëas; because of that pious activity, even though he was
fallen, he was inspired to name his son Näräyaëa. Certainly this was due to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
147
good counsel given from within by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As
the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (15.15), sarvasya cähaà hådi sanniviñöo mattaù
småtir jïänam apohanaà ca: "I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me
come remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness." The Lord, who is situated
in everyone's heart, is so kind that if one has ever rendered service to Him, the
Lord never forgets him. Thus the Lord, from within, gave Ajämila the
opportunity to name his youngest son Näräyaëa so that in affection he would
constantly call "Näräyaëa! Näräyaëa!" and thus be saved from the most fearful
and dangerous condition at the time of his death. Such is the mercy of Kåñëa.
Guru-kåñëa-prasäde päya bhakti-latä-béja: [Cc. Madhya 19.151] by the mercy of
the guru and Kåñëa, one receives the seed of bhakti. This association saves a
devotee from the greatest fear. In our Kåñëa consciousness movement we
therefore change a devotee's name to a form that reminds him of Viñëu. If at
the time of death the devotee can remember his own name, such as Kåñëadäsa
or Govinda däsa, he can be saved from the greatest danger. Therefore the
change of names at the time of initiation is essential. The Kåñëa consciousness
movement is so meticulous that it gives one a good opportunity to remember
Kåñëa somehow or other.
TEXT 33
ANYaQaa iMa]YaMaa<aSYa NaaXaucev*Rzl/IPaTae" )
vEku-<#=NaaMaGa]h<a& iJaûa v¢u-iMahahRiTa )) 33 ))
anyathä mriyamäëasya
näçucer våñalé-pateù
vaikuëöha-näma-grahaëaà
jihvä vaktum ihärhati
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
148
anyathä—otherwise; mriyamäëasya—of a person who is just ready for death;
na—not; açuceù—most unclean; våñalé-pateù—the keeper of a prostitute;
vaikuëöha—of the Lord of Vaikuëöha; näma-grahaëam—the chanting of the
holy name; jihvä—the tongue; vaktum—to speak; iha—in this situation;
arhati—is able.
TRANSLATION
Were it not for my past devotional service, how could I, a most unclean
keeper of a prostitute, have gotten an opportunity to chant the holy name of
Vaikuëöhapati when I was just ready to die? Certainly it could not have been
possible.
PURPORT
The name Vaikuëöhapati, which means "the master of the spiritual world,"
is not different from the name Vaikuëöha. Ajämila, who was now a realized
soul, could understand that because of his past spiritual activities in devotional
service, he had gotten this opportunity to chant the holy name of
Vaikuëöhapati in his horrible condition at the time of death.
TEXT 34
Kv cah& ik-Tav" PaaPaae b]øganae iNarPa}aPa" )
Kv c NaaraYa<aeTYaeTaÙGavàaMa Ma(r)l/Ma( )) 34 ))
kva cähaà kitavaù päpo
brahma-ghno nirapatrapaù
kva ca näräyaëety etad
bhagavan-näma maìgalam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
149
SYNONYMS
kva—where; ca—also; aham—I; kitavaù—a cheater; päpaù—all sins
personified; brahma-ghnaù—the killer of my brahminical culture;
nirapatrapaù—shameless; kva—where; ca—also; näräyaëa—Näräyaëa;
iti—thus; etat—this; bhagavat-näma—the holy name of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; maìgalam—all-auspicious.
TRANSLATION
Ajämila continued: I am a shameless cheater who has killed his brahminical
culture. Indeed, I am sin personified. Where am I in comparison to the
all-auspicious chanting of the holy name of Lord Näräyaëa?
PURPORT
Those engaged in broadcasting the holy name of Näräyaëa, Kåñëa, through
the Kåñëa consciousness movement should always consider what our position
was before we came and what it is now. We had fallen into abominable lives as
meat-eaters, drunkards and woman hunters who performed all kinds of sinful
activities, but now we have been given the opportunity to chant the Hare
Kåñëa mantra. Therefore we should always appreciate this opportunity. By the
grace of the Lord we are opening many branches, and we should use this good
fortune to chant the holy name of the Lord and serve the Supreme Personality
of Godhead directly. We must be conscious of the difference between our
present and past conditions and should always be very careful not to fall from
the most exalted life.
TEXT 35
Saae_h& TaQaa YaiTaZYaaiMa YaTaictaeiNd]YaaiNal/" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
150
YaQaa Na >aUYa AaTMaaNaMaNDae TaMaiSa MaÂYae )) 35 ))
so 'haà tathä yatiñyämi
yata-cittendriyänilaù
yathä na bhüya ätmänam
andhe tamasi majjaye
SYNONYMS
saù—such a person; aham—I; tathä—in that way; yatiñyämi—I shall endeavor;
yata-citta-indriya—controlling the mind and senses; anilaù—and the internal
airs; yathä—so that; na—not; bhüyaù—again; ätmänam—my soul; andhe—in
darkness; tamasi—in ignorance; majjaye—I drown.
TRANSLATION
I am such a sinful person, but since I have now gotten this opportunity, I
must completely control my mind, life and senses and always engage in
devotional service so that I may not fall again into the deep darkness and
ignorance of material life.
PURPORT
Every one of us should have this determination. We have been elevated to
an exalted position by the mercy of Kåñëa and the spiritual master, and if we
remember that this is a great opportunity and pray to Kåñëa that we will not
fall again, our lives will be successful.
TEXTS 36-37
ivMauCYa TaiMaMa& bNDaMaivÛak-aMak-MaRJaMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
151
SavR>aUTaSauôC^aNTaae MaE}a" k-å<a AaTMavaNa( )) 36 ))
MaaecYae Ga]STaMaaTMaaNa& YaaeizNMaYYaaTMaMaaYaYaa )
iv§-Ii@Taae YaYaEvah& §-I@aMa*Ga wvaDaMa" )) 37 ))
vimucya tam imaà bandham
avidyä-käma-karmajam
sarva-bhüta-suhåc chänto
maitraù karuëa ätmavän
mocaye grastam ätmänaà
yoñin-mayyätma-mäyayä
vikréòito yayaivähaà
kréòä-måga ivädhamaù
SYNONYMS
vimucya—having become free from; tam—that; imam—this;
bandham—bondage; avidyä—due to ignorance; käma—due to lusty desire;
karma-jam—caused by activities; sarva-bhüta—of all living entities;
suhåt—friend; çäntaù—very peaceful; maitraù—friendly; karuëaù—merciful;
ätma-vän—self-realized; mocaye—I shall disentangle; grastam—encaged;
ätmänam—my soul; yoñit-mayyä—in the form of woman; ätma-mäyayä—by
the illusory energy of the Lord; vikréòitaù—played with; yayä—by which;
eva—certainly; aham—I; kréòä-mågaù—a controlled animal; iva—like;
adhamaù—so fallen.
TRANSLATION
Because of identifying oneself with the body, one is subjected to desires for
sense gratification, and thus one engages in many different types of pious and
impious action. This is what constitutes material bondage. Now I shall
disentangle myself from my material bondage, which has been caused by the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
152
Supreme Personality of Godhead's illusory energy in the form of a woman.
Being a most fallen soul, I was victimized by the illusory energy and have
become like a dancing dog led around by a woman's hand. Now I shall give up
all lusty desires and free myself from this illusion. I shall become a merciful,
well-wishing friend to all living entities and always absorb myself in Kåñëa
consciousness.
PURPORT
This should be the standard of determination for all Kåñëa conscious
persons. A Kåñëa conscious person should free himself from the clutches of
mäyä, and he should also be compassionate to all others suffering in those
clutches. The activities of the Kåñëa consciousness movement are meant not
only for oneself but for others also. This is the perfection of Kåñëa
consciousness. One who is interested in his own salvation is not as advanced
in Kåñëa consciousness as one who feels compassion for others and who
therefore propagates the Kåñëa consciousness movement. Such an advanced
devotee will never fall down, for Kåñëa will give him special protection. That is
the sum and substance of the Kåñëa consciousness movement. Everyone is like
a play toy in the hands of the illusory energy and is acting as she moves him.
One should come to Kåñëa consciousness to release oneself and also to release
others.
TEXT 38
MaMaahiMaiTa dehadaE ihTvaiMaQYaaQaRDaqMaRiTaMa( )
DaaSYae MaNaae >aGaviTa XauÖ& TaTk-ITaRNaaidi>a" )) 38 ))
mamäham iti dehädau
hitvämithyärtha-dhér matim
dhäsye mano bhagavati
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
153
çuddhaà tat-kértanädibhiù
SYNONYMS
mama—my; aham—I; iti—thus; deha-ädau—in the body and things related to
the body; hitvä—giving up; amithyä—not false; artha—on values; dhéù—with
my consciousness; matim—the attitude; dhäsye—I shall engage; manaù—my
mind; bhagavati—on the Supreme Personality of Godhead; çuddham—pure;
tat—His name; kértana-ädibhiù—by chanting, hearing and so on.
TRANSLATION
Simply because I chanted the holy name of the Lord in the association of
devotees, my heart is now becoming purified. Therefore I shall not fall victim
again to the false lures of material sense gratification. Now that I have become
fixed in the Absolute Truth, henceforward I shall not identify myself with the
body. I shall give up false conceptions of "I" and "mine" and fix my mind on
the lotus feet of Kåñëa.
PURPORT
How a living entity becomes a victim of the material condition is lucidly
explained in this verse. The beginning is to misidentify the body as one's self.
Therefore Bhagavad-gétä begins with the spiritual instruction that one is not
the body, but is within the body. This consciousness can be possible only if one
chants the holy name of Kåñëa, the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra, and always
keeps oneself in the association of devotees. This is the secret of success.
Therefore we stress that one should chant the holy name of the Lord and keep
oneself free from the contaminations of this material world, especially the
contaminations of lusty desires for illicit sex, meat-eating, intoxication and
gambling. With determination, one should vow to follow these principles and
thus be saved from the miserable condition of material existence. The first
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
154
necessity is to become freed from the bodily concept of life.
TEXT 39
wiTa JaaTaSauiNaveRd" +a<aSa(r)eNa SaaDauzu )
Ga(r)aÜarMauPaeYaaYa Mau¢-SavaRNaubNDaNa" )) 39 ))
iti jäta-sunirvedaù
kñaëa-saìgena sädhuñu
gaìgä-dväram upeyäya
mukta-sarvänubandhanaù
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; jäta-sunirvedaù—(Ajämila) who had become detached from the
material conception of life; kñaëa-saìgena—by a moment's association;
sädhuñu—with devotees; gaìgä-dväram—to Hardwar (hari-dvära), the
doorway to Hari (because the Ganges begins there, Hardwar is also called
gaìgä-dvära); upeyäya—went; mukta—being freed from;
sarva-anubandhanaù—all kinds of material bondage.
TRANSLATION
Because of a moment's association with devotees [the Viñëudütas], Ajämila
detached himself from the material conception of life with determination. Thus
freed from all material attraction, he immediately started for Hardwar.
PURPORT
The word mukta-sarvänubandhanaù indicates that after this incident,
Ajämila, not caring for his wife and children, went straight to Hardwar for
further advancement in his spiritual life. Our Kåñëa consciousness movement
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
155
now has centers in Våndävana and Navadvépa so that those who want to live a
retired life, whether they be devotees or not, can go there and with
determination give up the bodily concept of life. One is welcome to live in
those holy places for the rest of his life in order to achieve the highest success
by the very simple method of chanting the holy name of the Lord and taking
prasäda. Thus one may return home, back to Godhead. We do not have a
center in Hardwar, but Våndävana and Çrédhäma Mäyäpur are better for
devotees than any other places. The Caitanya Candrodaya temple offers one a
good opportunity to associate with devotees. Let us all take advantage of this
opportunity.
TEXT 40
Sa TaiSMaNa( devSadNa AaSaqNaae YaaeGaMaaiSQaTa" )
Pa[TYaaôTaeiNd]YaGa]aMaae YauYaaeJa MaNa AaTMaiNa )) 40 ))
sa tasmin deva-sadana
äséno yogam ästhitaù
pratyähåtendriya-grämo
yuyoja mana ätmani
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Ajämila); tasmin—at that place (Hardwar); deva-sadane—in one
Viñëu temple; äsénaù—being situated; yogam ästhitaù—performed bhakti-yoga;
pratyähåta—withdrawn from all activities of sense gratification;
indriya-grämaù—his senses; yuyoja—he fixed; manaù—the mind; ätmani—on
the self or the Supersoul, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
156
In Hardwar, Ajämila took shelter at a Viñëu temple, where he executed the
process of bhakti-yoga. He controlled his senses and fully applied his mind in
the service of the Lord.
PURPORT
The devotees who have joined the Kåñëa consciousness movement may live
comfortably in our many temples and engage in the devotional service of the
Lord. Thus they can control the mind and senses and achieve the highest
success in life. This is the process descending from time immemorial. Learning
from the life of Ajämila, we should vow with determination to do what is
necessary to follow this path.
TEXT 41
TaTaae Gau<ae>Ya AaTMaaNa& ivYauJYaaTMaSaMaaiDaNaa )
YauYauJae >aGavÖaiMNa b]ø<YaNau>avaTMaiNa )) 41 ))
tato guëebhya ätmänaà
viyujyätma-samädhinä
yuyuje bhagavad-dhämni
brahmaëy anubhavätmani
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; guëebhyaù—from the modes of material nature;
ätmänam—the mind; viyujya—detaching; ätma-samädhinä—by being fully
engaged in devotional service; yuyuje—engaged; bhagavat-dhämni—in the
form of the Lord; brahmaëi—which is Parabrahman (not idol worship);
anubhava-ätmani—which is always thought of (beginning from the lotus feet
and gradually progressing upward).
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
157
TRANSLATION
Ajämila fully engaged in devotional service. Thus he detached his mind from
the process of sense gratification and became fully absorbed in thinking of the
form of the Lord.
PURPORT
If one worships the Deity in the temple, one's mind will naturally be
absorbed in thought of the Lord and His form. There is no distinction between
the form of the Lord and the Lord Himself. Therefore bhakti-yoga is the most
easy system of yoga. Yogés try to concentrate their minds upon the form of the
Supersoul, Viñëu, within the heart, but this same objective is easily achieved
when one's mind is absorbed in the Deity worshiped in the temple. In every
temple there is a transcendental form of the Lord, and one may easily think of
this form. By seeing the Lord during ärati, by offering bhoga and by constantly
thinking of the form of the Deity, one becomes a first-class yogé. This is the
best process of yoga, as confirmed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead in
Bhagavad-gétä (6.47):
yoginäm api sarveñäà
mad-gatenäntarätmanä
çraddhävän bhajate yo mäà
sa me yuktatamo mataù
"Of all yogés, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping Me in
transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in yoga and is
the highest of all." The first-class yogé is he who controls his senses and
detaches himself from material activities by always thinking of the form of the
Lord.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
158
TEXT 42
YaùuRPaarTaDaqSTaiSMaàd]a+aqTPauåzaNa( Paur" )
oPal/>YaaePal/BDaaNa( Pa[aGa( vvNde iXarSaa iÜJa" )) 42 ))
yarhy upärata-dhés tasminn
adräkñét puruñän puraù
upalabhyopalabdhän präg
vavande çirasä dvijaù
SYNONYMS
yarhi—when; upärata-dhéù—his mind and intelligence were fixed; tasmin—at
that time; adräkñét—had seen; puruñän—the persons (the order carriers of
Lord Viñëu); puraù—before him; upalabhya—getting; upalabdhän—who were
gotten; präk—previously; vavande—offered obeisances; çirasä—by the head;
dvijaù—the brähmaëa.
TRANSLATION
When his intelligence and mind were fixed upon the form of the Lord, the
brähmaëa Ajämila once again saw before him four celestial persons. He could
understand that they were those he had seen previously, and thus he offered
them his obeisances by bowing down before them.
PURPORT
The Viñëudütas who had rescued Ajämila came before him again when his
mind was firmly fixed upon the form of the Lord. The Viñëudütas had gone
away for some time to give Ajämila a chance to become firmly fixed in
meditation upon the Lord. Now that his devotion had matured, they returned
to take him. Understanding that the same Viñëudütas had returned, Ajämila
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
159
offered them his obeisances by bowing down before them.
TEXT 43
ihTva k-le/vr& TaqQaeR Ga(r)aYaa& dXaRNaadNau )
SaÛ" SvæPa& JaGa*he >aGavTPaaìRviTaRNaaMa( )) 43 ))
hitvä kalevaraà térthe
gaìgäyäà darçanäd anu
sadyaù svarüpaà jagåhe
bhagavat-pärçva-vartinäm
SYNONYMS
hitvä—giving up; kalevaram—the material body; térthe—in the holy place;
gaìgäyäm—on the bank of the Ganges; darçanät anu—after seeing;
sadyaù—immediately; sva-rüpam—his original spiritual form; jagåhe—he
assumed; bhagavat-pärçva-vartinäm—which is fit for an associate of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
Upon seeing the Viñëudütas, Ajämila gave up his material body at Hardwar
on the bank of the Ganges. He regained his original spiritual body, which was a
body appropriate for an associate of the Lord.
PURPORT
The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (4.9):
janma karma ca me divyam
evaà yo vetti tattvataù
tyaktvä dehaà punar janma
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
160
naiti mäm eti so 'rjuna
"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities
does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but
attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna."
The result of perfection in Kåñëa consciousness is that after giving up one's
material body, one is immediately transferred to the spiritual world in one's
original spiritual body to become an associate of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Some devotees go to Vaikuëöhaloka, and others go to Goloka
Våndävana to become associates of Kåñëa.
TEXT 44
Saak&- ivhaYaSaa ivPa[ae MahaPauåzik-ªrE" )
hEMa& ivMaaNaMaaåù YaYaaE Ya}a ié[Ya" PaiTa" )) 44 ))
säkaà vihäyasä vipro
mahäpuruña-kiìkaraiù
haimaà vimänam äruhya
yayau yatra çriyaù patiù
SYNONYMS
säkam—along; vihäyasä—by the path in the sky, or the airways; vipraù—the
brähmaëa (Ajämila); mahäpuruña-kiìkaraiù—with the order carriers of Lord
Viñëu; haimam—made of gold; vimänam—an airplane; äruhya—boarding;
yayau—went; yatra—where; çriyaù patiù—Lord Viñëu, the husband of the
goddess of fortune.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
161
Accompanied by the order carriers of Lord Viñëu, Ajämila boarded an
airplane made of gold. Passing through the airways, he went directly to the
abode of Lord Viñëu, the husband of the goddess of fortune.
PURPORT
For many years, material scientists have tried to go to the moon, but they
are still unable to go there. However, the spiritual airplanes from the spiritual
planets can take one back home, back to Godhead, in a second. The speed of
such a spiritual plane can only be imagined. Spirit is finer than the mind, and
everyone has experience of how swiftly the mind travels from one place to
another. Therefore one can imagine the swiftness of the spiritual form by
comparing it to the speed of the mind. In less than even a moment, a perfect
devotee can return home, back to Godhead, immediately after giving up his
material body.
TEXT 45
Wv& Sa ivâaivTaSavRDaMaaR
daSYaa" PaiTa" PaiTaTaae GaùRk-MaR<aa )
iNaPaaTYaMaaNaae iNarYae hTav]Ta"
SaÛae ivMau¢-ae >aGavàaMa Ga*õNa( )) 45 ))
evaà sa viplävita-sarva-dharmä
däsyäù patiù patito garhya-karmaëä
nipätyamäno niraye hata-vrataù
sadyo vimukto bhagavan-näma gåhëan
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; saù—he (Ajämila); viplävita-sarva-dharmäù—who gave up
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
162
all religious principles; däsyäù patiù—the husband of a prostitute;
patitaù—fallen; garhya-karmaëä—by being engaged in abominable activities;
nipätyamänaù—falling; niraye—in hellish life; hata-vrataù—who broke all his
vows; sadyaù—immediately; vimuktaù—liberated; bhagavat-näma—the holy
name of the Lord; gåhëan—chanting.
TRANSLATION
Ajämila was a brähmaëa who because of bad association had given up all
brahminical culture and religious principles. Becoming most fallen, he stole,
drank and performed other abominable acts. He even kept a prostitute. Thus he
was destined to be carried away to hell by the order carriers of Yamaräja, but he
was immediately rescued simply by a glimpse of the chanting of the holy name
Näräyaëa.
TEXT 46
NaaTa" Par& k-MaRiNabNDak*-NTaNa&
MauMau+aTaa& TaqQaRPadaNauk-ITaRNaaTa( )
Na YaTPauNa" k-MaRSau SaÂTae MaNaae
rJaSTaMaae>Yaa& k-il/l&/ TaTaae_NYaQaa )) 46 ))
nätaù paraà karma-nibandha-kåntanaà
mumukñatäà tértha-padänukértanät
na yat punaù karmasu sajjate mano
rajas-tamobhyäà kalilaà tato 'nyathä
SYNONYMS
na—not; ataù—therefore; param—better means; karma-nibandha—the
obligation to suffer or undergo tribulations as a result of fruitive activities;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
163
kåntanam—that which can completely cut off; mumukñatäm—of persons
desiring to get out of the clutches of material bondage; tértha-pada—about the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, at whose feet all the holy places stand;
anukértanät—than constantly chanting under the direction of the bona fide
spiritual master; na—not; yat—because; punaù—again; karmasu—in fruitive
activities; sajjate—becomes attached; manaù—the mind;
rajaù-tamobhyäm—by the modes of passion and ignorance;
kalilam—contaminated; tataù—thereafter; anyathä—by any other means.
TRANSLATION
Therefore one who desires freedom from material bondage should adopt the
process of chanting and glorifying the name, fame, form and pastimes of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, at whose feet all the holy places stand. One
cannot derive the proper benefit from other methods, such as pious atonement,
speculative knowledge and meditation in mystic yoga, because even after
following such methods one takes to fruitive activities again, unable to control
his mind, which is contaminated by the base qualities of nature, namely passion
and ignorance.
PURPORT
It has actually been seen that even after achieving so-called perfection,
many karmés, jïänés and yogés become attached to material activities again.
Many so-called svämés and yogés give up material activities as false (jagan
mithyä), but after some time they nevertheless resume material activities by
opening hospitals and schools or performing other activities for the benefit of
the public. Sometimes they participate in politics, although still falsely
declaring themselves sannyäsés, members of the renounced order. The perfect
conclusion, however, is that if one actually desires to get out of the material
world, he must take to devotional service, which begins with çravaëaà
kértanaà viñëoù: [SB 7.5.23] chanting and hearing the glories of the Lord. The
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
164
Kåñëa consciousness movement has actually proved this. In the Western
countries, many young boys who were addicted to drugs and who had many
other bad habits, which they could not give up, abandoned all those
propensities and very seriously engaged in chanting the glories of the Lord as
soon as they joined the Kåñëa consciousness movement. In other words, this
process is the perfect method of atonement for actions performed in rajaù and
tamaù (passion and ignorance). As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.19):
tadä rajas-tamo-bhäväù
käma-lobhädayaç ca ye
ceta etair anäviddhaà
sthitaà sattve prasédati
As a result of rajaù and tamaù, one becomes increasingly lusty and greedy, but
when one takes to the process of chanting and hearing, one comes to the
platform of goodness and becomes happy. As he advances in devotional
service, all his doubts are completely eradicated (bhidyate hådaya-granthiç
chidyante sarva-saàçayäù). Thus the knot of his desire for fruitive activities is
cut to pieces.
TEXTS 47-48
Ya WTa& ParMa& GauùiMaiTahaSaMagaaPahMa( )
é*<auYaaC^\ÖYaa Yau¢-ae Yaê >a¢-yaNauk-ITaRYaeTa( )) 47 ))
Na vE Sa Nark&- YaaiTa Naei+aTaae YaMaik-ªrE" )
YaÛPYaMa(r)l/ae MaTYaaeR ivZ<aul/aeke- MahqYaTae )) 48 ))
ya etaà paramaà guhyam
itihäsam aghäpaham
çåëuyäc chraddhayä yukto
yaç ca bhaktyänukértayet
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
165
na vai sa narakaà yäti
nekñito yama-kiìkaraiù
yady apy amaìgalo martyo
viñëu-loke mahéyate
SYNONYMS
yaù—anyone who; etam—this; paramam—very; guhyam—confidential;
itihäsam—historical narration; agha-apaham—which frees one from all
reactions to sins; çåëuyät—hears; çraddhayä—with faith; yuktaù—endowed;
yaù—one who; ca—also; bhaktyä—with great devotion; anukértayet—repeats;
na—not; vai—indeed; saù—such a person; narakam—to hell; yäti—goes;
na—not; ékñitaù—is observed; yama-kiìkaraiù—by the order carriers of
Yamaräja; yadi api—although; amaìgalaù—inauspicious; martyaù—a living
entity with a material body; viñëu-loke—in the spiritual world; mahéyate—is
welcomed and respectfully received.
TRANSLATION
Because this very confidential historical narration has the potency to
vanquish all sinful reactions, one who hears or describes it with faith and
devotion is no longer doomed to hellish life, regardless of his having a material
body and regardless of how sinful he may have been. Indeed, the Yamadütas,
who carry out the orders of Yamaräja, do not approach him even to see him.
After giving up his body, he returns home, back to Godhead, where he is very
respectfully received and worshiped.
TEXT 49
iMa]YaMaa<aae hreNaaRMa Ga*<aNa( Pau}aaePacairTaMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
166
AJaaiMal/ae_PYaGaaÖaMa ik-MauTa é[ÖYaa Ga*<aNa( )) 49 ))
mriyamäëo harer näma
gåëan putropacäritam
ajämilo 'py agäd dhäma
kim uta çraddhayä gåëan
SYNONYMS
mriyamäëaù—at the time of death; hareù näma—the holy name of Hari;
gåëan—chanting; putra-upacäritam—indicating his son; ajämilaù—Ajämila;
api—even; agät—went; dhäma—to the spiritual world; kim uta—what to
speak of; çraddhayä—with faith and love; gåëan—chanting.
TRANSLATION
While suffering at the time of death, Ajämila chanted the holy name of the
Lord, and although the chanting was directed toward his son, he nevertheless
returned home, back to Godhead. Therefore if one faithfully and inoffensively
chants the holy name of the Lord, where is the doubt that he will return to
Godhead?
PURPORT
At the time of death one is certainly bewildered because his bodily
functions are in disorder. At that time, even one who throughout his life has
practiced chanting the holy name of the Lord may not be able to chant the
Hare Kåñëa mantra very distinctly. Nevertheless, such a person receives all the
benefits of chanting the holy name. While the body is fit therefore, why
should we not chant the holy name of the Lord loudly and distinctly? If one
does so, it is quite possible that even at the time of death he will be properly
able to chant the holy name of the Lord with love and faith. In conclusion,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
167
one who chants the holy name of the Lord constantly is guaranteed to return
home, back to Godhead, without a doubt.
Supplementary note to this chapter.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura's commentary to texts nine and ten of
this chapter form a dialogue concerning how one can become free from all
sinful reactions simply by chanting the holy name of the Lord.
Someone may say, "It may be accepted that by chanting the holy name of
the Lord one becomes freed from all the reactions of sinful life. However, if
one commits sinful acts in full consciousness, not only once but many, many
times, he is unable to free himself from the reactions of such sins even after
atoning for them for twelve years or more. How is it possible, then, that simply
by once chanting the holy name of the Lord one immediately becomes freed
from the reactions of such sins?"
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura replies by quoting verses nine and ten
of this chapter: "The chanting of the holy name of Lord Viñëu is the best
process of atonement for a thief of gold or other valuables, for a drunkard, for
one who betrays a friend or relative, for one who kills a brähmaëa, or for one
who indulges in sex with the wife of his guru or another superior. It is also the
best method of atonement for one who murders women, the king or his father,
for one who slaughters cows, and for all other sinful men. Simply by chanting
the holy name of Lord Viñëu, such sinful persons may attract the attention of
the Supreme Lord, who therefore considers "Because this man has chanted My
holy name, My duty is to give him protection.' "
One may atone for sinful life and vanquish all sinful reactions by chanting
the holy name, although this is not called atonement. Ordinary atonement
may temporarily protect a sinful person, but it does not completely cleanse his
heart of the deep-rooted desire to commit sinful acts. Therefore atonement is
not as powerful as the chanting of the holy name of the Lord. In the çästras it
is said that if a person only once chants the holy name and completely
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
168
surrenders unto the lotus feet of the Lord, the Lord immediately considers him
His ward and is always inclined to give him protection. This is confirmed by
Çrédhara Svämé. Thus when Ajämila was in great danger of being carried off by
the order carriers of Yamaräja, the Lord immediately sent His personal order
carriers to protect him, and because Ajämila was freed from all sinful
reactions, the Viñëudütas spoke on his behalf.
Ajämila had named his son Näräyaëa, and because he loved the boy very
much, he would call him again and again. Although he was calling for his son,
the name itself was powerful because the name Näräyaëa is not different from
the Supreme Lord Näräyaëa. When Ajämila named his son Näräyaëa, all the
reactions of his sinful life were neutralized, and as he continued calling his son
and thus chanting the holy name of Näräyaëa thousands of times, he was
actually unconsciously advancing in Kåñëa consciousness.
One may argue, "Since he was constantly chanting the name of Näräyaëa,
how was it possible for him to be associating with a prostitute and thinking of
wine?" By his sinful actions he was bringing suffering upon himself again and
again, and therefore one may say that his ultimate chanting of Näräyaëa was
the cause of his being freed. However, his chanting would then have been a
näma-aparädha. Nämno baläd yasya hi päpa-buddhiù: one who continues to act
sinfully and tries to neutralize his sins by chanting the holy name of the Lord
is a näma-aparädhé, an offender to the holy name. In response it may be said
that Ajämila's chanting was inoffensive because he did not chant the name of
Näräyaëa with the purpose of counteracting his sins. He did not know that he
was addicted to sinful actions, nor did he know that his chanting of the name
of Näräyaëa was neutralizing them. Thus he did not commit a näma-aparädha,
and his repeated chanting of the holy name of Näräyaëa while calling his son
may be called pure chanting. Because of this pure chanting, Ajämila
unconsciously accumulated the results of bhakti. Indeed, even his first
utterance of the holy name was sufficient to nullify all the sinful reactions of
his life. To cite a logical example, a fig tree does not immediately yield fruits,
but in time the fruits are available. Similarly, Ajämila's devotional service grew
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
169
little by little, and therefore although he committed very sinful acts, the
reactions did not affect him. In the çästras it is said that if one chants the holy
name of the Lord even once, the reactions of past, present or future sinful life
do not affect him. To give another example, if one extracts the poison fangs of
a serpent, this saves the serpent's future victims from poisonous effects, even if
the serpent bites repeatedly. Similarly, if a devotee chants the holy name even
once inoffensively, this protects him eternally. He need only wait for the
results of the chanting to mature in due course of time.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, Second Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Ajämila Delivered by the Viñëudütas."
3. Yamaräja Instructs His Messengers
As related in this chapter, the Yamadütas approached Yamaräja, who very
exhaustively explained bhägavata-dharma, the religious principle of devotional
service. Yamaräja thus satisfied the Yamadütas, who had been very
disappointed. Yamaräja said, "Although Ajämila was calling for his son, he
chanted the holy name of the Lord, Näräyaëa, and simply by a glimpse of the
chanting of the holy name, he immediately achieved the association of Lord
Viñëu's order carriers, who saved him from your attempt to arrest him. This is
quite all right. It is a fact that even a chronically sinful person who chants the
holy name of the Lord, although not completely without offenses, does not
take another material birth."
By chanting the holy name of the Lord, Ajämila had met four order carriers
of Lord Viñëu. They were very beautiful and had quickly come to rescue him.
Yamaräja now described them. "The Viñëudütas are all pure devotees of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
170
Lord, the Supreme Person in regard to the creation, maintenance and
annihilation of this cosmic manifestation. Neither King Indra, Varuëa, Çiva,
Brahmä, the seven åñis nor I myself can understand the transcendental
activities of the Supreme Lord, who is self-sufficient and beyond the reach of
the material senses. With material senses, no one can attain enlightenment
about Him. The Lord, the master of the illusory energy, possesses
transcendental qualities for the good fortune of everyone, and His devotees are
also qualified in that way. The devotees, concerned only with rescuing the
fallen souls from this material world, apparently take birth in different places
in the material world just to save the conditioned souls. If one is somewhat
interested in spiritual life, the devotees of the Lord protect him in many ways."
Yamaräja continued, "The essence of sanätana-dharma, or eternal religion,
is extremely confidential. No one but the Lord Himself can deliver that
confidential religious system to human society. It is by the mercy of the Lord
that the transcendental system of religion can be understood by His pure
devotees, and specifically by the twelve mahäjanas-Lord Brahmä, Närada
Muni, Lord Çiva, the Kumäras, Kapila, Manu, Prahläda, Janaka, Bhéñma, Bali,
Çukadeva Gosvämé and me. Other learned scholars, headed by Jaimini, are
almost always covered by the illusory energy, and therefore they are more or
less attracted by the flowery language of the three Vedas, namely Åg, Yajur and
Säma, which are called trayé. Instead of becoming pure devotees, people
captivated by the flowery words of these three Vedas are interested in the
Vedic ritualistic ceremonies. They cannot understand the glories of chanting
the holy name of the Lord. Intelligent persons, however, take to the devotional
service of the Lord. When they chant the holy name of the Lord without
offenses, they are no longer subject to my rulings. If by chance they commit
some sinful act, they are protected by the holy name of the Lord because that
is where their interest lies. The four weapons of the Lord, especially the club
and the Sudarçana cakra, always protect the devotees. One who chants, hears
or remembers the holy name of the Lord without duplicity, or who prays or
offers obeisances to the Lord, becomes perfect, whereas even a learned person
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
171
may be called to hell if he is bereft of devotional service."
After Yamaräja thus described the glories of the Lord and His devotees,
Çukadeva Gosvämé further explained the potency of chanting the holy name
and the futility of performing Vedic ritualistic ceremonies and pious activities
for atonement.
TEXT 1
é[qraJaaevac
iNaXaMYa dev" Sv>a$=aePavi<aRTa&
Pa[TYaah ik&- TaaNaiPa DaMaRraJa" )
Wv& hTaajae ivhTaaNMaurare‚
NaOE„deiXakE-YaRSYa vXae JaNaae_YaMa( )) 1 ))
çré-räjoväca
niçamya devaù sva-bhaöopavarëitaà
pratyäha kià tän api dharmaräjaù
evaà hatäjïo vihatän murärer
naideçikair yasya vaçe jano 'yam
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—the King said; niçamya—after hearing; devaù—Lord Yamaräja;
sva-bhaöa—of his own servants; upavarëitam—the statements;
pratyäha—replied; kim—what; tän—unto them; api—also;
dharma-räjaù—Yamaräja, the superintendent of death and the judge of
religious and irreligious activities; evam—thus; hata-äjïaù—whose order was
foiled; vihatän—who were defeated; muräreù naideçikaiù—by the order
carriers of Muräri, Kåñëa; yasya—of whom; vaçe—under the subjugation; janaù
ayam—all the people of the world.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
172
TRANSLATION
King Parékñit said: O my lord, O Çukadeva Gosvämé, Yamaräja is the
controller of all living entities in terms of their religious and irreligious
activities, but his order had been foiled. When his servants, the Yamadütas,
informed him of their defeat by the Viñëudütas, who had stopped them from
arresting Ajämila, what did he reply?
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura says that although the statements of
the Yamadütas were fully upheld by Vedic principles, the statements of the
Viñëudütas were triumphant. This was confirmed by Yamaräja himself.
TEXT 2
YaMaSYa devSYa Na d<@>a(r)"
ku-TaêNazeR é[uTaPaUvR AaSaqTa( )
WTaNMauNae v*êiTa l/aek-Sa&XaYa&
Na ih TvdNYa wiTa Mae iviNaiêTaMa( )) 2 ))
yamasya devasya na daëòa-bhaìgaù
kutaçcanarñe çruta-pürva äsét
etan mune våçcati loka-saàçayaà
na hi tvad-anya iti me viniçcitam
SYNONYMS
yamasya—of Yamaräja; devasya—the demigod in charge of judgment;
na—not; daëòa-bhaìgaù—the breaking of the order; kutaçcana—from
anywhere; åñe—O great sage; çruta-pürvaù—heard before; äsét—was;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
173
etat—this; mune—O great sage; våçcati—can eradicate; loka-saàçayam—the
doubt of people; na—not; hi—indeed; tvat-anyaù—anyone other than you;
iti—thus; me—by me; viniçcitam—concluded.
TRANSLATION
O great sage, never before has it been heard anywhere that an order from
Yamaräja has been baffled. Therefore I think that people will have doubts about
this that no one but you can eradicate. Since that is my firm conviction, kindly
explain the reasons for these events.
TEXT 3
é[qXauk- ovac
>aGavTPauåzE raJaNa( YaaMYaa" Pa[iTahTaaeÛMaa" )
PaiTa& ivjaPaYaaMaaSauYaRMa& Sa&YaMaNaqPaiTaMa( )) 3 ))
çré-çuka uväca
bhagavat-puruñai räjan
yämyäù pratihatodyamäù
patià vijïäpayäm äsur
yamaà saàyamané-patim
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; bhagavat-puruñaiù—by the order
carriers of the Lord, the Viñëudütas; räjan—O King; yämyäù—the order
carriers of Yamaräja; pratihata-udyamäù—whose efforts were defeated;
patim—their master; vijïäpayäm äsuù—informed; yamam—Yamaräja;
saàyamané-patim—the master of the city Saàyamané.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
174
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé replied: My dear King, when the order carriers of
Yamaräja were baffled and defeated by the order carriers of Viñëu, they
approached their master, the controller of Saàyamané-puré and master of sinful
persons, to tell him of this incident.
TEXT 4
YaMadUTaa Ocu"
k-iTa SaNTaqh XaaSTaarae Jaqvl/aek-SYa vE Pa[>aae )
}aEivDYa& ku-vRTa" k-MaR f-l/ai>aVYai¢-heTav" )) 4 ))
yamadütä ücuù
kati santéha çästäro
jéva-lokasya vai prabho
trai-vidhyaà kurvataù karma
phaläbhivyakti-hetavaù
SYNONYMS
yamadütäù ücuù—the order carriers of Yamaräja said; kati—how many;
santi—are there; iha—in this world; çästäraù—controllers or rulers;
jéva-lokasya—of this material world; vai—indeed; prabho—O master;
trai-vidhyam—under the three modes of material nature;
kurvataù—performing; karma—activity; phala—of the results; abhivyakti—of
the manifestation; hetavaù—causes.
TRANSLATION
The Yamadütas said: Our dear lord, how many controllers or rulers are there
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
175
in this material world? How many causes are responsible for manifesting the
various results of activities performed under the three modes of material nature
[sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa]?
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura says that the Yamadütas, the order
carriers of Yamaräja, were so disappointed that they asked their master, almost
in great anger, whether there were many masters other than him.
Furthermore, because the Yamadütas had been defeated and their master could
not protect them, they were inclined to say that there was no need to serve
such a master. If a servant cannot carry out the orders of his master without
being defeated, what is the use of serving such a powerless master?
TEXT 5
Yaid SYaubRhvae l/aeke- XaaSTaarae d<@Daair<a" )
k-SYa SYaaTaa& Na va k-SYa Ma*TYauêaMa*TaMaev va )) 5 ))
yadi syur bahavo loke
çästäro daëòa-dhäriëaù
kasya syätäà na vä kasya
måtyuç cämåtam eva vä
SYNONYMS
yadi—if; syuù—there are; bahavaù—many; loke—in this world;
çästäraù—rulers or controllers; daëòa-dhäriëaù—who punish the sinful men;
kasya—of whom; syätäm—there may be; na—not; vä—or; kasya—of whom;
måtyuù—distress or unhappiness; ca—and; amåtam—happiness;
eva—certainly; vä—or.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
176
TRANSLATION
If in this universe there are many rulers and justices who disagree about
punishment and reward, their contradictory actions will neutralize each other,
and no one will be punished or rewarded. Otherwise, if their contradictory acts
fail to neutralize each other, everyone will have to be both punished and
rewarded.
PURPORT
Because the Yamadütas had been unsuccessful in carrying out the order of
Yamaräja, they doubted whether Yamaräja actually had the power to punish
the sinful. Although they had gone to arrest Ajämila, following Yamaräja's
order, they found themselves unsuccessful because of the order of some higher
authority. Therefore they were unsure of whether there were many authorities
or only one. If there were many authorities who gave different judgments,
which could be contradictory, a person might be wrongly punished or wrongly
rewarded, or he might be neither punished nor rewarded. According to our
experience in the material world, a person punished in one court may appeal
to another. Thus the same man may be either punished or rewarded according
to different judgments. However, in the law of nature or the court of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead there cannot be such contradictory
judgments. The judges and their judgments must be perfect and free from
contradictions. Actually the position of Yamaräja was very awkward in the
case of Ajämila because the Yamadütas were right in attempting to arrest
Ajämila, but the Viñëudütas had baffled them. Although Yamaräja, under
these circumstances, was accused by both the Viñëudütas and the Yamadütas,
he is perfect in administering justice because he is empowered by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Therefore he will explain what his real position is and
how everyone is controlled by the supreme controller, the Personality of
Godhead.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
177
TEXT 6
ik-NTau XaaSTa*bhuTve SYaaØhUNaaiMah k-iMaR<aaMa( )
XaaSTa*TvMauPacarae ih YaQaa Ma<@l/viTaRNaaMa( )) 6 ))
kintu çästå-bahutve syäd
bahünäm iha karmiëäm
çäståtvam upacäro hi
yathä maëòala-vartinäm
SYNONYMS
kintu—but; çästå—of governors or judges; bahutve—in the plurality;
syät—there may be; bahünäm—of many; iha—in this world;
karmiëäm—persons performing actions; çäståtvam—departmental
management; upacäraù—administration; hi—indeed; yathä—just like;
maëòala-vartinäm—of the departmental heads.
TRANSLATION
The Yamadütas continued: Since there are many different karmés, or
workers, there may be different judges or rulers to give them justice, but just as
one central emperor controls different departmental rulers, there must be one
supreme controller to guide all the judges.
PURPORT
In governmental management there may be departmental officials to give
justice to different persons, but the law must be one, and that central law must
control everyone. The Yamadütas could not imagine that two judges would
give two different verdicts in the same case, and therefore they wanted to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
178
know who the central judge is. The Yamadütas were certain that Ajämila was a
most sinful man, but although Yamaräja wanted to punish him, the Viñëudütas
excused him. This was a puzzling situation that the Yamadütas wanted
Yamaräja to clarify.
TEXT 7
ATaSTvMaek-ae >aUTaaNaa& Saeìra<aaMaDaqìr" )
XaaSTaa d<@Darae Na›<aa& Xau>aaXau>aivvecNa" )) 7 ))
atas tvam eko bhütänäà
seçvaräëäm adhéçvaraù
çästä daëòa-dharo nèëäà
çubhäçubha-vivecanaù
SYNONYMS
ataù—as such; tvam—you; ekaù—one; bhütänäm—of all living beings;
sa-éçvaräëäm—including all the demigods; adhéçvaraù—the supreme master;
çästä—the supreme ruler; daëòa-dharaù—the supreme administrator of
punishment; nèëäm—of human society; çubha-açubha-vivecanaù—who
discriminates between what is auspicious and inauspicious.
TRANSLATION
The supreme judge must be one, not many. It was our understanding that
you are that supreme judge and that you have jurisdiction even over the
demigods. Our impression was that you are the master of all living entities, the
supreme authority who discriminates between the pious and impious activities
of all human beings.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
179
TEXT 8
TaSYa Tae ivihTaae d<@ae Na l/aeke- vTaRTae_DauNaa )
cTaui>aRrd(>auTaE" iSaÖEraja Tae ivPa[l/iM>aTaa )) 8 ))
tasya te vihito daëòo
na loke vartate 'dhunä
caturbhir adbhutaiù siddhair
äjïä te vipralambhitä
SYNONYMS
tasya—of the influence; te—of you; vihitaù—ordained; daëòaù—punishment;
na—not; loke—within this world; vartate—exists; adhunä—now;
caturbhiù—by four; adbhutaiù—very wonderful; siddhaiù—perfected persons;
äjïä—the order; te—your; vipralambhitä—surpassed.
TRANSLATION
But now we see that the punishment ordained under your authority is no
longer effective, since your order has been transgressed by four wonderful and
perfect persons.
PURPORT
The Yamadütas had been under the impression that Yamaräja was the only
person in charge of administering justice. They were fully confident that no
one could counteract his judgments, but now, to their surprise, his order had
been violated by the four wonderful persons from Siddhaloka.
TEXT 9
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
180
NaqYaMaaNa& TavadeXaadSMaai>aYaaRTaNaaGa*haNa( )
VYaaMaaecYaNa( PaaTaik-Na& i^tva PaaXaaNa( Pa[Saù Tae )) 9 ))
néyamänaà tavädeçäd
asmäbhir yätanä-gåhän
vyämocayan pätakinaà
chittvä päçän prasahya te
SYNONYMS
néyamänam—being brought; tava ädeçät—by your order; asmäbhiù—by us;
yätanä-gåhän—to the torture chambers, the hellish planets;
vyämocayan—released; pätakinam—the sinful Ajämila; chittvä—cutting;
päçän—the ropes; prasahya—by force; te—they.
TRANSLATION
We were bringing the most sinful Ajämila toward the hellish planets,
following your order, when those beautiful persons from Siddhaloka forcibly cut
the knots of the ropes with which we were arresting him.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura remarks that the Yamadütas wanted
to bring the Viñëudütas before Yamaräja. If Yamaräja could then have
punished the Viñëudütas, the Yamadütas would have been satisfied.
TEXT 10
Taa&STae veidTauiMaC^aMaae Yaid Naae MaNYaSae +aMaMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
181
NaaraYa<aeTYai>aihTae Maa >aEirTYaaYaYaud]uRTaMa( )) 10 ))
täàs te veditum icchämo
yadi no manyase kñamam
näräyaëety abhihite
mä bhair ity äyayur drutam
SYNONYMS
tän—about them; te—from you; veditum—to know; icchämaù—we wish;
yadi—if; naù—for us; manyase—you think; kñamam—suitable;
näräyaëa—Näräyaëa; iti—thus; abhihite—being uttered; mä—do not;
bhaiù—fear; iti—thus; äyayuù—they arrived; drutam—very soon.
TRANSLATION
As soon as the sinful Ajämila uttered the name Näräyaëa, these four
beautiful men immediately arrived and reassured him, saying, "Do not fear. Do
not fear." We wish to know about them from Your Lordship. If you think we
are able to understand them, kindly describe who they are.
PURPORT
The order carriers of Yamaräja, being very much aggrieved because of their
defeat by the four Viñëudütas, wanted to bring them before Yamaräja and, if
possible, punish them. Otherwise they desired to commit suicide. Before
pursuing either course, however, they wanted to know about the Viñëudütas
from Yamaräja, who is also omniscient.
TEXT 11
é[qbadraYai<aåvac
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
182
wiTa dev" Sa AaPa*í" Pa[JaaSa&YaMaNaae YaMa" )
Pa[qTa" SvdUTaaNa( Pa[TYaah SMarNa( PaadaMbuJa& hre" )) 11 ))
çré-bädaräyaëir uväca
iti devaù sa äpåñöaù
prajä-saàyamano yamaù
prétaù sva-dütän pratyäha
smaran pädämbujaà hareù
SYNONYMS
çré-bädaräyaëiù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; devaù—the
demigod; saù—he; äpåñöaù—being questioned; prajä-saàyamanaù
yamaù—Lord Yamaräja, who controls the living entities; prétaù—being
pleased; sva-dütän—to his own servants; pratyäha—replied;
smaran—remembering; päda-ambujam—the lotus feet; hareù—of Hari, the
Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Thus having been questioned, Lord Yamaräja,
the supreme controller of the living entities, was very pleased with his order
carriers because of hearing from them the holy name of Näräyaëa. He
remembered the lotus feet of the Lord and began to reply.
PURPORT
Çréla Yamaräja, the supreme controller of the living entities in terms of
their pious and impious activities, was very pleased with his servants because
they had chanted the holy name of Näräyaëa in his dominion. Yamaräja has to
deal with men who are all sinful and who can hardly understand Näräyaëa.
Consequently when his order carriers uttered the name of Näräyaëa, he was
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
183
extremely pleased, for he also is a Vaiñëava.
TEXT 12
YaMa ovac
Parae MadNYaae JaGaTaSTaSQauzê
AaeTa& Pa[aeTa& Pa$=vÛ}a ivìMa( )
Yad&XaTaae_SYa iSQaiTaJaNMaNaaXaa
NaSYaaeTavd( YaSYa vXae c l/aek-" )) 12 ))
yama uväca
paro mad-anyo jagatas tasthuñaç ca
otaà protaà paöavad yatra viçvam
yad-aàçato 'sya sthiti-janma-näçä
nasy otavad yasya vaçe ca lokaù
SYNONYMS
yamaù uväca—Yamaräja replied; paraù—superior; mat—than me;
anyaù—another; jagataù—of all moving things; tasthuñaù—of nonmoving
things; ca—and; otam—crosswise; protam—lengthwise; paöavat—like a woven
cloth; yatra—in whom; viçvam—the cosmic manifestation; yat—of whom;
aàçataù—from the partial expansions; asya—of this universe; sthiti—the
maintenance; janma—the creation; näçäù—the annihilation; nasi—in the
nose; ota-vat—like the rope; yasya—of whom; vaçe—under the control;
ca—and; lokaù—the whole creation.
TRANSLATION
Yamaräja said: My dear servants, you have accepted me as the Supreme, but
factually I am not. Above me, and above all the other demigods, including Indra
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
184
and Candra, is the one supreme master and controller. The partial
manifestations of His personality are Brahmä, Viñëu and Çiva, who are in
charge of the creation, maintenance and annihilation of this universe. He is like
the two threads that form the length and breadth of a woven cloth. The entire
world is controlled by Him just as a bull is controlled by a rope in its nose.
PURPORT
The order carriers of Yamaräja suspected that there was a ruler even above
Yamaräja. To eradicate their doubts, Yamaräja immediately replied, "Yes, there
is one supreme controller above everything." Yamaräja is in charge of some of
the moving living entities, namely the human beings, but the animals, who also
move, are not under his control. Only human beings have consciousness of
right and wrong, and among them only those who perform sinful activities
come under the control of Yamaräja. Therefore although Yamaräja is a
controller, he is only a departmental controller of a few living entities. There
are other demigods who control many other departments, but above them all is
one supreme controller, Kåñëa. Éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù
sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù [Bs. 5.1]: the supreme controller is Kåñëa. Others, who
control their own departments in the affairs of the universe, are insignificant
in comparison to Kåñëa, the supreme controller. Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä
(7.7), mattaù parataraà nänyat kiïcid asti dhanaïjaya: "My dear Dhanaïjaya
[Arjuna], no one is superior to Me." Therefore Yamaräja immediately cleared
away the doubts of his assistants, the Yamadütas, by confirming that there is a
supreme controller above all others.
Çréla Madhväcärya explains that the words otaà protam refer to the cause
of all causes. The Supreme Lord is both vertical and horizontal to the cosmic
manifestation. This is confirmed by the following verse from the Skanda
Puräëa:
yathä kanthä-paöäù sütra
otäù protäç ca sa sthitäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
185
evaà viñëäv idaà viçvam
otaà protaà ca saàsthitam
Like the two threads, horizontal and vertical, of which a quilt is manufactured,
Lord Viñëu is situated as the vertical and horizontal cause of the cosmic
manifestation.
TEXT 13
Yaae NaaMai>avaRic JaNa& iNaJaaYaa&
bDNaaiTa TaN}YaaiMav daMai>aGaaR" )
YaSMaE bil&/ Ta wMae NaaMak-MaR‚
iNabNDabÖaêik-Taa vhiNTa )) 13 ))
yo nämabhir väci janaà nijäyäà
badhnäti tantryäm iva dämabhir gäù
yasmai balià ta ime näma-karmanibandha-
baddhäç cakitä vahanti
SYNONYMS
yaù—He who; nämabhiù—by different names; väci—to the Vedic language;
janam—all people; nijäyäm—which has emanated from Himself;
badhnäti—binds; tantryäm—to a rope; iva—like; dämabhiù—by cords;
gäù—bulls; yasmai—unto whom; balim—a small presentation of taxes; te—all
of them; ime—these; näma-karma—of names and different activities;
nibandha—by the obligations; baddhäù—bound; cakitäù—being fearful;
vahanti—carry.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
186
Just as the driver of a bullock cart ties ropes through the nostrils of his bulls
to control them, the Supreme Personality of Godhead binds all men through the
ropes of His words in the Vedas, which set forth the names and activities of the
distinct orders of human society [brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya and çüdra]. In fear,
the members of these orders all worship the Supreme Lord by offering Him
presentations according to their respective activities.
PURPORT
In this material world, everyone is conditioned, regardless of who he is. One
may be a human being, a demigod or an animal, tree or plant, but everything is
controlled by the laws of nature, and behind this natural control is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is confirmed by Bhagavad-gétä (9.10),
wherein Kåñëa says, mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù süyate sa-caräcaram: "The
material nature is working under My direction and producing all moving and
nonmoving beings." Thus Kåñëa is behind the natural machine, which works
under His control.
Apart from other living entities, the living being in the human form of
body is systematically controlled by the Vedic injunctions in terms of the
divisions of varëa and äçrama. A human being is expected to follow the rules
and regulations of varëa and äçrama; otherwise he cannot escape punishment
by Yamaräja. The point is that every human being is expected to elevate
himself to the position of a brähmaëa, the most intelligent man, and then one
must transcend that position to become a Vaiñëava. This is the perfection of
life. The brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya and çüdra can elevate themselves by
worshiping the Lord according to their activities (sve sve karmaëy abhirataù
saàsiddhià labhate naraù). The divisions of varëa and äçrama are necessary to
insure the proper execution of duties and peaceful existence for everyone, but
everyone is directed to worship the Supreme Lord, who is all-pervading (yena
sarvam idaà tatam). The Supreme Lord exists vertically and horizontally (otaà
protam), and therefore if one follows the Vedic injunctions by worshiping the
Supreme Lord according to one's ability, his life will be perfect. As stated in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
187
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.13):
ataù pumbhir dvija-çreñöhä
varëäçrama-vibhägaçaù
svanuñöhitasya dharmasya
saàsiddhir hari-toñaëam
"O best among the twice-born, it is therefore concluded that the highest
perfection one can achieve, by discharging his prescribed duties [dharma]
according to caste divisions and orders of life, is to please the Lord Hari." The
varëäçrama institution offers the perfect process for making one eligible to
return home, back to Godhead, because the aim of every varëa and äçrama is
to please the Supreme Lord. One can please the Lord under the direction of a
bona fide spiritual master. and if one does so his life is perfect. The Supreme
Lord is worshipable. and everyone worships Him directly or indirectly. Those
who worship Him directly get the results of liberation quickly, whereas the
liberation of those who serve Him indirectly is delayed.
The words nämabhir väci are very important. In the varëäçrama institution,
there are different names—brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya, çüdra, brahmacäré,
gåhastha, vänaprastha and sannyäsé. The väk, or Vedic injunctions, give
directions for all these divisions. Everyone is expected to offer obeisances to
the Supreme Lord and perform duties as indicated in the Vedas.
TEXTS 14-15
Ah& MaheNd]ae iNa‰RiTa" Pa[ceTaa"
SaaeMaae_iGanrqXa" PavNaae iviriÄ" )
AaidTYaivìe vSavae_Qa SaaDYaa
MaåÓ<aa åd]Ga<aa" SaiSaÖa" )) 14 ))
ANYae c Yae ivìSa*Jaae_MareXaa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
188
>a*GvadYaae_SPa*írJaSTaMaSk-a" )
YaSYaeihTa& Na ivdu" SPa*íMaaYaa"
SatvPa[DaaNaa AiPa ik&- TaTaae_NYae )) 15 ))
ahaà mahendro niråtiù pracetäù
somo 'gnir éçaù pavano viriïciù
äditya-viçve vasavo 'tha sädhyä
marud-gaëä rudra-gaëäù sasiddhäù
anye ca ye viçva-såjo 'mareçä
bhågv-ädayo 'spåñöa-rajas-tamaskäù
yasyehitaà na viduù spåñöa-mäyäù
sattva-pradhänä api kià tato 'nye
SYNONYMS
aham—I, Yamaräja; mahendraù—Indra, the King of heaven; niråtiù—Niråti;
pracetäù—Varuëa, the controller of water; somaù—the moon; agniù—fire;
éçaù—Lord Çiva; pavanaù—the demigod of the air; viriïciù—Lord Brahmä;
äditya—the sun; viçve—Viçväsu; vasavaù—the eight Vasus; atha—also;
sädhyäù—the demigods; marut-gaëäù—masters of the wind; rudra-gaëäù—the
expansions of Lord Çiva; sa-siddhäù—with the inhabitants of Siddhaloka;
anye—others; ca—and; ye—who; viçva-såjaù—Maréci and the other creators of
the universal affairs; amara-éçäù—the demigods like Båhaspati;
bhågu-ädayaù—the great sages headed by Bhågu; aspåñöa—who have not been
contaminated; rajaù-tamaskäù—by the lower modes of material nature
(rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa); yasya—of whom; éhitam—the activity; na
viduù—do not know; spåñöa-mäyäù—who are illusioned by the illusory energy;
sattva-pradhänäù—chiefly in the mode of goodness; api—although; kim—what
to speak of; tataù—than them; anye—others.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
189
TRANSLATION
I, Yamaräja; Indra, the King of heaven; Niråti; Varuëa; Candra, the
moon-god; Agni; Lord Çiva; Pavana; Lord Brahmä; Sürya, the sun-god;
Viçväsu; the eight Vasus; the Sädhyas; the Maruts; the Rudras; the Siddhas;
and Maréci and the other great åñis engaged in maintaining the departmental
affairs of the universe, as well as the best of the demigods headed by Båhaspati,
and the great sages headed by Bhågu are all certainly freed from the influence of
the two base material modes of nature, namely passion and ignorance.
Nevertheless, although we are in the mode of goodness, we cannot understand
the activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. What, then, is to be said
of others, who, under illusion, merely speculate to know God?
PURPORT
The men and other living entities within this cosmic manifestation are
controlled by the three modes of nature. For the living entities controlled by
the base qualities of nature, passion and ignorance, there is no possibility of
understanding God. Even those in the mode of goodness, like the many
demigods and great åñis described in these verses, cannot understand the
activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä,
one who is situated in the devotional service of the Lord is transcendental to
all the material qualities. Therefore the Lord personally says that no one can
understand Him but the bhaktas, who are transcendental to all material
qualities (bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti [Bg. 18.55]). As stated by Bhéñmadeva to
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.9.16):
na hy asya karhicid räjan
pumän veda vidhitsitam
yad-vijijïäsayä yuktä
muhyanti kavayo 'pi hi
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
190
"O King, no one can know the plan of the Lord [Çré Kåñëa]. Even though great
philosophers inquire exhaustively, they are bewildered." No one, therefore, can
understand God by speculative knowledge. Indeed, by speculation one will be
bewildered (muhyanti). This is also confirmed by the Lord Himself in
Bhagavad-gétä (7.3):
manuñyäëäà sahasreñu
kaçcid yatati siddhaye
yatatäm api siddhänäà
kaçcin mäà vetti tattvataù
Among many thousands of men, one may endeavor for perfection, and even
among the siddhas, those who have already become perfect, only one who
adopts the process of bhakti, devotional service, can understand Kåñëa.
TEXT 16
Ya& vE Na Gaaei>aMaRNaSaaSaui>avaR
ôda iGara vaSau>a*Taae ivc+aTae )
AaTMaaNaMaNTaôRid SaNTaMaaTMaNaa&
c+auYaRQaEvak*-TaYaSTaTa" ParMa( )) 16 ))
yaà vai na gobhir manasäsubhir vä
hådä girä väsu-bhåto vicakñate
ätmänam antar-hådi santam ätmanäà
cakñur yathaiväkåtayas tataù param
SYNONYMS
yam—whom; vai—indeed; na—not; gobhiù—by the senses; manasä—by the
mind; asubhiù—by the life breath; vä—or; hådä—by thoughts; girä—by words;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
191
vä—or; asu-bhåtaù—the living entities; vicakñate—see or know;
ätmänam—the Supersoul; antaù-hådi—within the core of the heart;
santam—existing; ätmanäm—of the living entities; cakñuù—the eyes;
yathä—just like; eva—indeed; äkåtayaù—the different parts or limbs of the
body; tataù—than them; param—higher.
TRANSLATION
As the different limbs of the body cannot see the eyes, the living entities
cannot see the Supreme Lord, who is situated as the Supersoul in everyone's
heart. Not by the senses, by the mind, by the life air, by thoughts within the
heart, or by the vibration of words can the living entities ascertain the real
situation of the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
Although the different parts of the body do not have the power to see the
eyes, the eyes direct the movements of the body's different parts. The legs
move forward because the eyes see what is in front of them, and the hand
touches because the eyes see touchable entities. Similarly, every living being
acts according to the direction of the Supersoul, who is situated within the
heart. As the Lord Himself confirms in Bhagavad-gétä (15.15), sarvasya cähaà
hådi sanniviñöo mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca: "I am sitting in everyone's
heart and giving directions for remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness."
Elsewhere in Bhagavad-gétä it is stated, éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà håd-deçe 'rjuna
tiñöhati: [Bg. 18.61] "The Supreme Lord, as the Supersoul, is situated within the
heart." The living entity cannot do anything without the sanction of the
Supersoul. The Supersoul is acting at every moment, but the living entity
cannot understand the form and activities of the Supersoul by manipulating
his senses. The example of the eyes and the bodily limbs is very appropriate. If
the limbs could see, they could walk forward without the help of the eyes, but
that is impossible. Although one cannot see the Supersoul in one's heart
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
192
through sensual activities, His direction is necessary.
TEXT 17
TaSYaaTMaTaN}aSYa hrerDaqiXaTau"
ParSYa MaaYaaiDaPaTaeMaRhaTMaNa" )
Pa[aYae<a dUTaa wh vE MaNaaehra‚
êriNTa Tad]UPaGau<aSv>aava" )) 17 ))
tasyätma-tantrasya harer adhéçituù
parasya mäyädhipater mahätmanaù
präyeëa dütä iha vai manoharäç
caranti tad-rüpa-guëa-svabhäväù
SYNONYMS
tasya—of Him; ätma-tantrasya—being self-sufficient, not dependent on any
other person; hareù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; adhéçituù—who is
the master of everything; parasya—the Transcendence; mäyä-adhipateù—the
master of the illusory energy; mahä-ätmanaù—of the Supreme Soul;
präyeëa—almost; dütäù—the order carriers; iha—in this world; vai—indeed;
manoharäù—pleasing in their dealings and bodily features; caranti—they
move; tat—of Him; rüpa—possessing the bodily features; guëa—the
transcendental qualities; svabhäväù—and nature.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is self-sufficient and fully
independent. He is the master of everyone and everything, including the
illusory energy. He has His form, qualities and features; and similarly His order
carriers, the Vaiñëavas, who are very beautiful, possess bodily features,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
193
transcendental qualities and a transcendental nature almost like His. They
always wander within this world with full independence.
PURPORT
Yamaräja was describing the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the supreme
controller, but the order carriers of Yamaräja were very eager to know about
the Viñëudütas, who had defeated them in their encounter with Ajämila.
Yamaräja therefore stated that the Viñëudütas resemble the Supreme
Personality of Godhead in their bodily features, transcendental qualities and
nature. In other words, the Viñëudütas, or Vaiñëavas, are almost as qualified as
the Supreme Lord. Yamaräja informed the Yamadütas that the Viñëudütas are
no less powerful than Lord Viñëu. Since Viñëu is above Yamaräja, the
Viñëudütas are above the Yamadütas. Persons protected by the Viñëudütas,
therefore, cannot be touched by the Yamadütas.
TEXT 18
>aUTaaiNa ivZ<aae" SaurPaUiJaTaaiNa
dudRXaRil/(r)aiNa Mahad(>auTaaiNa )
r+aiNTa TaÙi¢-MaTa" Pare>Yaae
Mataê MaTYaaRNaQa SavRTaê )) 18 ))
bhütäni viñëoù sura-püjitäni
durdarça-liìgäni mahädbhutäni
rakñanti tad-bhaktimataù parebhyo
mattaç ca martyän atha sarvataç ca
SYNONYMS
bhütäni—living entities or servants; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
194
sura-püjitäni—who are worshiped by the demigods;
durdarça-liìgäni—possessing forms not easily seen; mahä-adbhutäni—greatly
wonderful; rakñanti—they protect; tat-bhakti-mataù—the devotees of the
Lord; parebhyaù—from others who are inimical; mattaù—from me (Yamaräja)
and my order carriers; ca—and; martyän—the human beings; atha—thus;
sarvataù—from everything; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
The order carriers of Lord Viñëu, who are worshiped even by the demigods,
possess wonderful bodily features exactly like those of Viñëu and are very rarely
seen. The Viñëudütas protect the devotees of the Lord from the hands of
enemies, from envious persons and even from my jurisdiction, as well as from
natural disturbances.
PURPORT
Yamaräja has specifically described the qualities of the Viñëudütas to
convince his own servants not to be envious of them. Yamaräja warned the
Yamadütas that the Viñëudütas are worshiped with respectful obeisances by
the demigods and are always very alert to protect the devotees of the Lord
from the hands of enemies, from natural disturbances and from all dangerous
conditions in this material world. Sometimes the members of the Kåñëa
Consciousness Society are afraid of the impending danger of world war and
ask what would happen to them if a war should occur. In all kinds of danger,
they should be confident of their protection by the Viñëudütas or the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (kaunteya pratijänéhi na
me bhaktaù praëaçyati [Bg. 9.31]). Material danger is not meant for devotees.
This is also confirmed in Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Padaà padaà yad vipadäà na
teñäm: [SB 10.14.58] in this material world there are dangers at every step, but
they are not meant for devotees who have fully surrendered unto the lotus feet
of the Lord. The pure devotees of Lord Viñëu may rest assured of the Lord's
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
195
protection, and as long as they are in this material world they should fully
engage in devotional service by preaching the cult of Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu and Lord Kåñëa, namely the Hare Kåñëa movement of Kåñëa
consciousness.
TEXT 19
DaMa| Tau Saa+aaÙGavTPa[<aqTa&
Na vE ivdu‰RzYaae NaaiPa deva"
Na iSaÖMau:Yaa ASaura MaNauZYaa"
ku-Taae Nau ivÛaDarcar<aadYa" )) 19 ))
dharmaà tu säkñäd bhagavat-praëétaà
na vai vidur åñayo näpi deväù
na siddha-mukhyä asurä manuñyäù
kuto nu vidyädhara-cäraëädayaù
SYNONYMS
dharmam—real religious principles, or bona fide laws of religion; tu—but;
säkñät—directly; bhagavat—by the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
praëétam—enacted; na—not; vai—indeed; viduù—they know; åñayaù—the
great åñis such as Bhågu; na—not; api—also; deväù—the demigods; na—nor;
siddha-mukhyäù—the chief leaders of Siddhaloka; asuräù—the demons;
manuñyäù—the inhabitants of Bhürloka, the human beings; kutaù—where;
nu—indeed; vidyädhara—the lesser demigods known as Vidyädharas;
cäraëa—the residents of the planets where people are by nature great
musicians and singers; ädayaù—and so on.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
196
Real religious principles are enacted by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Although fully situated in the mode of goodness, even the great åñis who occupy
the topmost planets cannot ascertain the real religious principles, nor can the
demigods or the leaders of Siddhaloka, to say nothing of the asuras, ordinary
human beings, Vidyädharas and Cäraëas.
PURPORT
When challenged by the Viñëudütas to describe the principles of religion,
the Yamadütas said, veda-praëihito dharmaù: the religious principles are the
principles enacted in the Vedic literature. They did not know, however, that
the Vedic literature contains ritualistic ceremonies that are not
transcendental, but are meant to keep peace and order among materialistic
persons in the material world. Real religious principles are nistraiguëya, above
the three modes of material nature, or transcendental. The Yamadütas did not
know these transcendental religious principles, and therefore when prevented
from arresting Ajämila they were surprised. Materialistic persons who attach
all their faith to the Vedic rituals are described in Bhagavad-gétä (2.42),
wherein Kåñëa says, veda-väda-ratäù pärtha nänyad astéti vädinaù: the supposed
followers of the Vedas say that there is nothing beyond the Vedic ceremonies.
Indeed, there is a group of men in India who are very fond of the Vedic rituals,
not understanding the meaning of these rituals, which are intended to elevate
one gradually to the transcendental platform of knowing Kåñëa (vedaiç ca
sarvair aham eva vedyaù [Bg. 15.15]). Those who do not know this principle but
who simply attach their faith to the Vedic rituals are called veda-väda-ratäù.
Herein it is stated that the real religious principle is that which is given by
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That principle is stated in Bhagavad-gétä.
Sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja: [Bg. 18.66] one should give
up all other duties and surrender unto the lotus feet of Kåñëa. That is the real
religious principle everyone should follow. Even though one follows Vedic
scriptures, one may not know this transcendental principle, for it is not known
to everyone. To say nothing of human beings, even the demigods in the upper
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
197
planetary systems are unaware of it. This transcendental religious principle
must be understood from the Supreme Personality of Godhead directly or from
His special representative, as stated in the next verses.
TEXTS 20-21
SvYaM>aUNaaRrd" XaM>au" ku-Maar" k-iPal/ae MaNau" )
Pa[úadae JaNak-ae >aqZMaae bil/vOEYaaSaik-vRYaMa( )) 20 ))
ÜadXaETae ivJaaNaqMaae DaMa| >aaGavTa& >a$=a" )
Gauù& ivXauÖ& dubaeRDa& Ya& jaTvaMa*TaMaénuTae )) 21 ))
svayambhür näradaù çambhuù
kumäraù kapilo manuù
prahlädo janako bhéñmo
balir vaiyäsakir vayam
dvädaçaite vijänémo
dharmaà bhägavataà bhaöäù
guhyaà viçuddhaà durbodhaà
yaà jïätvämåtam açnute
SYNONYMS
svayambhüù—Lord Brahmä; näradaù—the great saint Närada; çambhuù—Lord
Çiva; kumäraù—the four Kumäras; kapilaù—Lord Kapila;
manuù—Sväyambhuva Manu; prahlädaù—Prahläda Mahäräja;
janakaù—Janaka Mahäräja; bhéñmaù—Grandfather Bhéñma; baliù—Bali
Mahäräja; vaiyäsakiù—Çukadeva, the son of Vyäsadeva; vayam—we;
dvädaça—twelve; ete—these; vijänémaù—know; dharmam—real religious
principles; bhägavatam—which teach a person how to love the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; bhaöäù—O my dear servants; guhyam—very
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
198
confidential; viçuddham—transcendental, not contaminated by the material
modes of nature; durbodham—not easily understood; yam—which;
jïätvä—understanding; amåtam—eternal life; açnute—he enjoys.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä, Bhagavän Närada, Lord Çiva, the four Kumäras, Lord Kapila
[the son of Devahüti], Sväyambhuva Manu, Prahläda Mahäräja, Janaka
Mahäräja, Grandfather Bhéñma, Bali Mahäräja, Çukadeva Gosvämé and I myself
know the real religious principle. My dear servants, this transcendental religious
principle, which is known as bhägavata-dharma, or surrender unto the Supreme
Lord and love for Him, is uncontaminated by the material modes of nature. It is
very confidential and difficult for ordinary human beings to understand, but if
by chance one fortunately understands it, he is immediately liberated, and thus
he returns home, back to Godhead.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä Lord Kåñëa refers to bhägavata-dharma as the most
confidential religious principle (sarva-guhyatamam, guhyäd guhyataram). Kåñëa
says to Arjuna, "Because you are My very dear friend, I am explaining to you
the most confidential religion." Sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà
vraja: [Bg. 18.66] "Give up all other duties and surrender unto Me." One may
ask, "If this principle is very rarely understood, what is the use of it?" In answer,
Yamaräja states herein that this religious principle is understandable if one
follows the paramparä system of Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva, the four Kumäras
and the other standard authorities. There are four lines of disciplic succession:
one from Lord Brahmä, one from Lord Çiva, one from Lakñmé, the goddess of
fortune, and one from the Kumäras. The disciplic succession from Lord
Brahmä is called the Brahma-sampradäya, the succession from Lord Çiva
(Çambhu) is called the Rudra-sampradäya, the one from the goddess of
fortune, Lakñméjé, is called the Çré-sampradäya, and the one from the Kumäras
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
199
is called the Kumära-sampradäya. One must take shelter of one of these four
sampradäyas in order to understand the most confidential religious system. In
the Padma Puräëa it is said, sampradäya-vihénä ye manträs te niñphalä matäù: if
one does not follow the four recognized disciplic successions, his mantra or
initiation is useless. In the present day there are many apasampradäyas, or
sampradäyas which are not bona fide, which have no link to authorities like
Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva, the Kumäras or Lakñmé. People are misguided by such
sampradäyas. The çästras say that being initiated in such a sampradäya is a
useless waste of time, for it will never enable one to understand the real
religious principles.
TEXT 22
WTaavaNaev l/aeke-_iSMaNa( Pau&Saa& DaMaR" Par" SMa*Ta" )
>ai¢-YaaeGaae >aGaviTa TaàaMaGa]h<aaidi>a" )) 22 ))
etävän eva loke 'smin
puàsäà dharmaù paraù småtaù
bhakti-yogo bhagavati
tan-näma-grahaëädibhiù
SYNONYMS
etävän—this much; eva—indeed; loke asmin—in this material world;
puàsäm—of the living entities; dharmaù—the religious principles;
paraù—transcendental; småtaù—recognized; bhakti-yogaù—bhakti-yoga, or
devotional service; bhagavati—to the Supreme Personality of Godhead (not to
the demigods); tat—His; näma—of the holy name;
grahaëa-ädibhiù—beginning with chanting.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
200
TRANSLATION
Devotional service, beginning with the chanting of the holy name of the
Lord, is the ultimate religious principle for the living entity in human society.
PURPORT
As stated in the previous verse, dharmaà bhägavatam, real religious
principles, are bhägavata-dharma, the principles described in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam itself or in Bhagavad-gétä, the preliminary study of the
Bhägavatam. What are these principles? The Bhägavatam says, dharmaù
projjhita-kaitavo 'tra: [SB 1.1.2] in Çrémad-Bhägavatam there are no cheating
religious systems. Everything in the Bhägavatam is directly connected with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Bhägavatam further says, sa vai puàsäà
paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokñaje: [SB 1.2.6] the supreme religion is that
which teaches its followers how to love the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who is beyond the reach of experimental knowledge. Such a religious system
begins with tan-näma-grahaëa, chanting of the holy name of the Lord
(çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù smaraëaà päda-sevanam [SB 7.5.23]). After
chanting the holy name of the Lord and dancing in ecstasy, one gradually sees
the form of the Lord, the pastimes of the Lord and the transcendental qualities
of the Lord. This way one fully understands the situation of the Personality of
Godhead. One can come to this understanding of the Lord, how He descends
into the material world, how He takes His births and what activities He
performs, but one can know this only by executing devotional service. As
stated in Bhagavad-gétä, bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti: [Bg. 18.55] simply by
devotional service one can understand everything about the Supreme Lord. If
one fortunately understands the Supreme Lord in this way, the result is tyaktvä
dehaà punar janma naiti: [Bg. 4.9] after giving up his material body, he no
longer has to take birth in this material world. Instead, he returns home, back
to Godhead. That is the ultimate perfection. Therefore Kåñëa says in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
201
Bhagavad-gétä (8.15):
mäm upetya punar janma
duùkhälayam açäçvatam
näpnuvanti mahätmänaù
saàsiddhià paramäà gatäù
"After attaining Me, the great souls, who are yogés in devotion, never return to
this temporary world, which is full of miseries, because they have attained the
highest perfection."
TEXT 23
NaaMaaeÀar<aMaahaTMYa& hre" PaXYaTa Pau}ak-a" )
AJaaiMal/ae_iPa YaeNaEv Ma*TYauPaaXaadMauCYaTa )) 23 ))
nämoccäraëa-mähätmyaà
hareù paçyata putrakäù
ajämilo 'pi yenaiva
måtyu-päçäd amucyata
SYNONYMS
näma—of the holy name; uccäraëa—of the pronouncing; mähätmyam—the
exalted position; hareù—of the Supreme Lord; paçyata—just see; putrakäù—O
my dear servants, who are like my sons; ajämilaù api—even Ajämila (who was
considered greatly sinful); yena—by the chanting of which; eva—certainly;
måtyu-päçät—from the ropes of death; amucyata—was delivered.
TRANSLATION
My dear servants, who are as good as my sons, just see how glorious is the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
202
chanting of the holy name of the Lord. The greatly sinful Ajämila chanted only
to call his son, not knowing that he was chanting the Lord's holy name.
Nevertheless, by chanting the holy name of the Lord, he remembered
Näräyaëa, and thus he was immediately saved from the ropes of death.
PURPORT
There is no need to conduct research into the significance of the chanting
of the Hare Kåñëa mantra. The history of Ajämila is sufficient proof of the
power of the Lord's holy name and the exalted position of a person who chants
the holy name incessantly. Therefore Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu advised:
harer näma harer näma
harer nämaiva kevalam
kalau nästy eva nästy eva
nästy eva gatir anyathä
[Cc. Ädi 17.21]
In this age of Kali, no one can perform all the ritualistic ceremonies for
becoming liberated; that is extremely difficult. Therefore all the çästras and all
the äcäryas have recommended that in this age one chant the holy name.
TEXT 24
WTaavTaal/MagaiNahRr<aaYa Pau&Saa&
SaªqTaRNa& >aGavTaae Gau<ak-MaRNaaMNaaMa( )
iv§u-XYa Pau}aMagavaNa( YadJaaiMal/ae_iPa
NaaraYa<aeiTa iMa]YaMaa<a wYaaYa Maui¢-Ma( )) 24 ))
etävatälam agha-nirharaëäya puàsäà
saìkértanaà bhagavato guëa-karma-nämnäm
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
203
vikruçya putram aghavän yad ajämilo 'pi
näräyaëeti mriyamäëa iyäya muktim
SYNONYMS
etävatä—with this much; alam—sufficient; agha-nirharaëäya—for taking
away the reactions of sinful activities; puàsäm—of human beings;
saìkértanam—the congregational chanting; bhagavataù—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; guëa—of the transcendental qualities;
karma-nämnäm—and of His names according to His activities and pastimes;
vikruçya—crying to without offense; putram—his son; aghavän—the sinful;
yat—since; ajämilaù api—even Ajämila; näräyaëa—the Lord's name,
Näräyaëa; iti—thus; mriyamäëaù—dying; iyäya—achieved;
muktim—liberation.
TRANSLATION
Therefore it should be understood that one is easily relieved from all sinful
reactions by chanting the holy name of the Lord and chanting of His qualities
and activities. This is the only process recommended for relief from sinful
reactions. Even if one chants the holy name of the Lord with improper
pronunciation, he will achieve relief from material bondage if he chants without
offenses. Ajämila, for example, was extremely sinful, but while dying he merely
chanted the holy name, and although calling his son, he achieved complete
liberation because he remembered the name of Näräyaëa.
PURPORT
In the assembly of Raghunätha däsa Gosvämé's father, Haridäsa Öhäkura
confirmed that simply by chanting the holy name of the Lord one is liberated,
even if he does not chant completely inoffensively. Smärta-brähmaëas and
Mäyävädés do not believe that one can achieve liberation in this way, but the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
204
truth of Haridäsa Öhäkura's statement is supported by many quotations from
Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
In his commentary on this verse, for example, Çrédhara Svämé gives the
following quotation:
säyaà prätar gåëan bhaktyä
duùkha-grämäd vimucyate
"If one always chants the holy name of the Lord with great devotion in the
evening and in the morning, one can become free from all material miseries."
Another quotation confirms that one can achieve liberation if one hears the
holy name of the Lord constantly, every day with great respect (anudinam
idam ädareëa çåëvan). Another quotation says:
çravaëaà kértanaà dhyänaà
harer adbhuta-karmaëaù
janma-karma-guëänäà ca
tad-arthe 'khila-ceñöitam
"One should always chant and hear about the extraordinarily wonderful
activities of the Lord, one should meditate upon these activities, and one
should endeavor to please the Lord." (SB 11.3.27)
Çrédhara Svämé also quotes from the Puräëas, päpa-kñayaç ca bhavati
smaratäà tam ahar-niçam: "One can become free from all sinful reactions
simply by remembering the lotus feet of the Lord day and night [ahar-niçam]."
Furthermore, he quotes from Bhägavatam (6.3.31):
tasmät saìkértanaà viñëor
jagan-maìgalam aàhasäm
mahatäm api kauravya
viddhy aikäntika-niñkåtam
All these quotations prove that one who constantly engages in chanting and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
205
hearing of the holy activities, name, fame and form of the Lord is liberated. As
stated wonderfully in this verse, etävatälam agha-nirharaëäya puàsäm: simply
by uttering the name of the Lord, one is freed from all sinful reactions.
The word alam, which is used in this verse, indicates that simply uttering
the holy name of the Lord is sufficient. This word is used with different
imports. As stated in the Amara-koça, the most authorized dictionary in the
Sanskrit language, alaà bhüñaëa-paryäpti-çakti-väraëa-väcakam: the word
alam is used to mean "ornament," "sufficiency," "power" and "restraint." Here
the word alam is used to indicate that there is no need of any other process, for
the chanting of the holy name of the Lord is sufficient. Even if one chants
imperfectly, one becomes free from all sinful reactions by chanting.
This power of chanting the holy name was proved by the liberation of
Ajämila. When Ajämila chanted the holy name of Näräyaëa, he did not
precisely remember the Supreme Lord; instead, he remembered his own son.
At the time of death, Ajämila certainly was not very clean; indeed, he was
famous as a great sinner. Furthermore, one's physiological condition is
completely disturbed at the time of death, and in such an awkward condition it
would certainly have been very difficult for Ajämila to have chanted clearly.
Nevertheless, Ajämila achieved liberation simply by chanting the holy name
of the Lord. Therefore, what is to be said of those who are not sinful like
Ajämila? It is to be concluded that with a strong vow one should chant the
holy name of the Lord—Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/
Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare—for thus one will certainly
be delivered from the clutches of mäyä by the grace of Kåñëa.
The chanting of the Hare Kåñëa mantra is recommended even for persons
who commit offenses, because if they continue chanting they will gradually
chant offenselessly. By chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra without offenses, one
increases his love for Kåñëa. As stated by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, premä
pum-artho mahän: one's main concern should be to increase one's attachment
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and to increase one's love for Him.
In this regard Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura quotes the following
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
206
verse from Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.19.24):
evaà dharmair manuñyäëäm
uddhavätmani vedinäm
mayi saïjäyate bhaktiù
ko 'nyo 'rtho 'syävaçiñyate
"My dear Uddhava, the supreme religious system for human society is that by
which one can awaken his dormant love for Me." Commenting on this verse,
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura describes the word bhakti by saying
premaivoktaù. Kaù anyaù arthaù asya: in the presence of bhakti, what is the
necessity of liberation?
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura also quotes this verse from the Padma
Puräëa:
nämäparädha-yuktänäà
nämäny eva haranty agham
aviçränti-prayuktäni
täny evärtha-karäëi ca
Even if in the beginning one chants the Hare Kåñëa mantra with offenses, one
will become free from such offenses by chanting again and again. Päpa-kñayaç
ca bhavati smaratäà tam ahar-niçam: one becomes free from all sinful reactions
if one chants day and night, following the recommendation of Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu. It was Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu who quoted the following verse:
harer näma harer näma
harer nämaiva kevalam
kalau nästy eva nästy eva
nästy eva gatir anyathä
[Cc. Ädi 17.21]
"In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance is chanting
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
207
the holy name of the Lord. There is no other way. There is no other way.
There is no other way." If the members of the Kåñëa consciousness movement
strictly follow this recommendation of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, their
position will always be secure.
TEXT 25
Pa[aYae<a ved Taidd& Na MahaJaNaae_Ya&
deVYaa ivMaaeihTaMaiTabRTa MaaYaYaal/Ma( )
}aYYaa& Ja@qk*-TaMaiTaMaRDauPauiZPaTaaYaa&
vETaaiNake- MahiTa k-MaRi<a YauJYaMaaNa" )) 25 ))
präyeëa veda tad idaà na mahäjano 'yaà
devyä vimohita-matir bata mäyayälam
trayyäà jaòé-kåta-matir madhu-puñpitäyäà
vaitänike mahati karmaëi yujyamänaù
SYNONYMS
präyeëa—almost always; veda—know; tat—that; idam—this; na—not;
mahäjanaù—great personalities besides Svayambhü, Çambhu and the other
ten; ayam—this; devyä—by the energy of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; vimohita-matiù—whose intelligence is bewildered; bata—indeed;
mäyayä—by the illusory energy; alam—greatly; trayyäm—in the three Vedas;
jaòé-kåta-matiù—whose intelligence has been dulled; madhu-puñpitäyäm—in
the flowery Vedic language describing the results of ritualistic performances;
vaitänike—in the performances mentioned in the Vedas; mahati—very great;
karmaëi—fruitive activities; yujyamänaù—being engaged.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
208
Because they are bewildered by the illusory energy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Yäjïavalkya and Jaimini and other compilers of the
religious scriptures cannot know the secret, confidential religious system of the
twelve mahäjanas. They cannot understand the transcendental value of
performing devotional service or chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra. Because
their minds are attracted to the ritualistic ceremonies mentioned in the
Vedas—especially the Yajur Veda, Säma Veda and Åg Veda—their intelligence
has become dull. Thus they are busy collecting the ingredients for ritualistic
ceremonies that yield only temporary benefits, such as elevation to Svargaloka
for material happiness. They are not attracted to the saìkértana movement;
instead, they are interested in dharma, artha, käma and mokña.
PURPORT
Since one may easily achieve the highest success by chanting the holy name
of the Lord, one may ask why there are so many Vedic ritualistic ceremonies
and why people are attracted to them. This verse answers that question. As
stated in Bhagavad-gétä (15.15), vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva vedyaù: the real
purpose of studying the Vedas is to approach the lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa.
Unfortunately, unintelligent people bewildered by the grandeur of Vedic
yajïas want to see gorgeous sacrifices performed. They want Vedic mantras
chanted and huge amounts of money spent for such ceremonies. Sometimes we
have to observe the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies to please such unintelligent
men. Recently, when we established a large Kåñëa-Balaräma temple in
Våndävana, we were obliged to have Vedic ceremonies enacted by brähmaëas
because the inhabitants of Våndävana, especially the smärta-brähmaëas, would
not accept Europeans and Americans as bona fide brähmaëas. Thus we had to
engage brähmaëas to perform costly yajïas. In spite of these yajïas, the
members of our Society performed saìkértana loudly with mådaìgas, and I
considered the saìkértana more important than the Vedic ritualistic
ceremonies. Both the ceremonies and the saìkértana were going on
simultaneously. The ceremonies were meant for persons interested in Vedic
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
209
rituals for elevation to heavenly planets (jaòé-kåta-matir madhu-puñpitäyäm),
whereas the saìkértana was meant for pure devotees interested in pleasing the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. We would simply have performed
saìkértana, but then the inhabitants of Våndävana would not have taken the
installation ceremony seriously. As explained here, the Vedic performances
are meant for those whose intelligence has been dulled by the flowery language
of the Vedas, which describe fruitive activities intended to elevate one to the
higher planets.
Especially in this age of Kali, saìkértana alone is sufficient. If the members
of our temples in the different parts of the world simply continue saìkértana
before the Deity, especially before Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, they will remain
perfect. There is no need of any other performances. Nevertheless, to keep
oneself clean in habits and mind, Deity worship and other regulative
principles are required. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé says that although saìkértana is
sufficient for the perfection of life, the arcanä, or worship of the Deity in the
temple, must continue in order that the devotees may stay clean and pure.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura therefore recommended that one
follow both processes simultaneously. We strictly follow his principle of
performing Deity worship and saìkértana along parallel lines. This we should
continue.
TEXT 26
Wv& ivMa*XYa SauiDaYaae >aGavTYaNaNTae
SavaRTMaNaa ivdDaTae %lu/ >aavYaaeGaMa( )
Tae Mae Na d<@MahRNTYaQa YaÛMaqza&
SYaaTa( PaaTak&- TadiPa hNTYauåGaaYavad" )) 26 ))
evaà vimåçya sudhiyo bhagavaty anante
sarvätmanä vidadhate khalu bhäva-yogam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
210
te me na daëòam arhanty atha yady améñäà
syät pätakaà tad api hanty urugäya-vädaù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; vimåçya—considering; su-dhiyaù—those whose intelligence is
sharp; bhagavati—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; anante—the
unlimited; sarva-ätmanä—with all their heart and soul; vidadhate—take to;
khalu—indeed; bhäva-yogam—the process of devotional service; te—such
persons; me—my; na—not; daëòam—punishment; arhanti—deserve;
atha—therefore; yadi—if; améñäm—of them; syät—there is; pätakam—some
sinful activity; tat—that; api—also; hanti—destroys; urugäya-vädaù—the
chanting of the holy name of the Supreme Lord.
TRANSLATION
Considering all these points, therefore, intelligent men decide to solve all
problems by adopting the devotional service of chanting the holy name of the
Lord, who is situated in everyone's heart and who is a mine of all auspicious
qualities. Such persons are not within my jurisdiction for punishment.
Generally they never commit sinful activities, but even if by mistake or because
of bewilderment or illusion they sometimes commit sinful acts, they are
protected from sinful reactions because they always chant the Hare Kåñëa
mantra.
PURPORT
In this regard Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura quotes the following
verse from the prayers of Lord Brahmä (SB 10.14.29):
athäpi te deva padämbuja-dvayaprasäda-
leçänugåhéta eva hi
jänäti tattvaà bhagavan-mahimno
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
211
na cänya eko 'pi ciraà vicinvan
The purport is that even though one is a very learned scholar of the Vedic
çästras, he may be completely unaware of the existence of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and His name, fame, qualities and so forth, whereas
one who is not a great scholar can understand the position of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead if he somehow or other becomes a pure devotee of the
Lord by engaging in devotional service. Therefore this verse spoken by
Yamaräja says, evaà vimåçya sudhiyo bhagavati: those who engage in the loving
service of the Lord become sudhiyaù, intelligent, but this is not so of a Vedic
scholar who does not understand Kåñëa's name, fame and qualities. A pure
devotee is one whose intelligence is clear; he is truly thoughtful because he
engages in the service of the Lord—not as a matter of show, but with love,
with his mind, words and body. Nondevotees may make a show of religion, but
it is not very effective because although they ostentatiously attend a temple or
church, they are thinking of something else. Such persons are neglecting their
religious duty and are punishable by Yamaräja. But a devotee who commits
sinful acts, which he may do unwillingly or accidentally because of his former
habits, is excused. That is the value of the saìkértana movement.
TEXT 27
Tae deviSaÖPairGaqTaPaiv}aGaaQaa
Yae SaaDav" SaMad*Xaae >aGavTPa[Paàa" )
TaaNa( NaaePaSaqdTa hreGaRdYaai>aGauáaNa(
NaEza& vYa& Na c vYa" Pa[>avaMa d<@e )) 27 ))
te deva-siddha-parigéta-pavitra-gäthä
ye sädhavaù samadåço bhagavat-prapannäù
tän nopasédata harer gadayäbhiguptän
naiñäà vayaà na ca vayaù prabhaväma daëòe
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
212
SYNONYMS
te—they; deva—by the demigods; siddha—and the inhabitants of Siddhaloka;
parigéta—sung; pavitra-gäthäù—whose pure narrations; ye—who;
sädhavaù—devotees; samadåçaù—who see everyone equally;
bhagavat-prapannäù—being surrendered to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; tän—them; na—not; upasédata—should go near; hareù—of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; gadayä—by the club; abhiguptän—being
fully protected; na—not; eñäm—of these; vayam—we; na ca—and also not;
vayaù—unlimited time; prabhaväma—are competent; daëòe—in punishing.
TRANSLATION
My dear servants, please do not approach such devotees, for they have fully
surrendered to the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. They are
equal to everyone, and their narrations are sung by the demigods and the
inhabitants of Siddhaloka. Please do not even go near them. They are always
protected by the club of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore
Lord Brahmä and I and even the time factor are not competent to chastise
them.
PURPORT
In effect, Yamaräja warned his servants, "My dear servants, despite what
you may have done previously to disturb the devotees, henceforward you
should stop. The actions of devotees who have surrendered unto the lotus feet
of the Lord and who constantly chant the holy name of the Lord are praised by
the demigods and the residents of Siddhaloka. Those devotees are so
respectable and exalted that Lord Viñëu personally protects them with the
club in His hand. Therefore, regardless of what you have done this time,
henceforward you should not approach such devotees; otherwise you will be
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
213
killed by the club of Lord Viñëu. This is my warning. Lord Viñëu has a club
and cakra to punish nondevotees. Do not risk punishment by attempting to
disturb the devotees. Not to speak of you, if even Lord Brahmä or I were to
punish them, Lord Viñëu would punish us. Therefore do not disturb the
devotees any further."
TEXT 28
TaaNaaNaYaßMaSaTaae ivMau%aNa( Mauku-Nd‚
PaadarivNdMak-rNdrSaadJaóMa( )
iNaiZk-ÄNaE" ParMah&Saku-lE/rSa(r)E‚
JauRíad( Ga*he iNarYavTMaRiNa bÖTa*Z<aaNa( )) 28 ))
tän änayadhvam asato vimukhän mukundapädäravinda-
makaranda-rasäd ajasram
niñkiïcanaiù paramahaàsa-kulair asaìgair
juñöäd gåhe niraya-vartmani baddha-tåñëän
SYNONYMS
tän—them; änayadhvam—bring before me; asataù—nondevotees (those who
have not taken to Kåñëa consciousness); vimukhän—who have turned against;
mukunda—of Mukunda, the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
päda-aravinda—of the lotus feet; makaranda—of the honey; rasät—the taste;
ajasram—continuously; niñkiïcanaiù—by persons completely free from
material attachment; paramahaàsa-kulaiù—by the paramahaàsas, the most
exalted personalities; asaìgaiù—who have no material attachment;
juñöät—which is enjoyed; gåhe—to household life; niraya-vartmani—the path
leading to hell; baddha-tåñëän—whose desires are bound.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
214
TRANSLATION
Paramahaàsas are exalted persons who have no taste for material enjoyment
and who drink the honey of the Lord's lotus feet. My dear servants, bring to me
for punishment only persons who are averse to the taste of that honey, who do
not associate with paramahaàsas and who are attached to family life and
worldly enjoyment, which form the path to hell.
PURPORT
After warning the Yamadütas not to approach the devotees, Yamaräja now
indicates who is to be brought before him. He specifically advises the
Yamadütas to bring him the materialistic persons who are attached to
household life merely for sex. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam, yan
maithunädi-gåhamedhi-sukhaà hi tuccham: [SB 7.9.45] people are attached to
household life for sex only. They are always harassed in many ways by their
material engagements, and their only happiness is that after working very hard
all day, at night they sleep and indulge in sex. Nidrayä hriyate naktaà
vyaväyena ca vä vayaù: [SB 2.1.3] at night, materialistic householders sleep or
indulge in sex life. Divä cärthehayä rajan kuöumba-bharaëena vä: during the
day they are busy trying to find out where money is, and if they get money
they spend it to maintain their families. Yamaräja specifically advises his
servants to bring these persons to him for punishment and not to bring the
devotees, who always lick the honey at the lotus feet of the Lord, who are equal
to everyone, and who try to preach Kåñëa consciousness because of sympathy
for all living entities. Devotees are not liable to punishment by Yamaräja, but
persons who have no information of Kåñëa consciousness cannot be protected
by their material life of so-called family enjoyment. Çrémad-Bhägavatam says
(2.1.4):
dehäpatya-kalaträdiñv
ätma-sainyeñv asatsv api
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
215
teñäà pramatto nidhanaà
paçyann api na paçyati
Such persons complacently believe that their nations, communities or families
can protect them, unaware that all such fallible soldiers will be destroyed in
due course of time. In conclusion, one should try to associate with persons who
engage in devotional service twenty-four hours a day.
TEXT 29
iJaûa Na vi¢- >aGavd(Gau<aNaaMaDaeYa&
ceTaê Na SMariTa TaÀr<aarivNdMa( )
k*-Z<aaYa Naae NaMaiTa YaiC^r Wk-daiPa
TaaNaaNaYaßMaSaTaae_k*-TaivZ<auk*-TYaaNa( )) 29 ))
jihvä na vakti bhagavad-guëa-nämadheyaà
cetaç ca na smarati tac-caraëäravindam
kåñëäya no namati yac-chira ekadäpi
tän änayadhvam asato 'kåta-viñëu-kåtyän
SYNONYMS
jihvä—the tongue; na—not; vakti—chants; bhagavat—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; guëa—transcendental qualities; näma—and the holy
name; dheyam—imparting; cetaù—the heart; ca—also; na—not;
smarati—remembers; tat—His; caraëa-aravindam—lotus feet; kåñëäya—unto
Lord Kåñëa through His Deity in the temple; no—not; namati—bows;
yat—whose; çiraù—head; ekadä api—even once; tän—them;
änayadhvam—bring before me; asataù—the nondevotees; akåta—not
performing; viñëu-kåtyän—duties toward Lord Viñëu.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
216
TRANSLATION
My dear servants, please bring to me only those sinful persons who do not
use their tongues to chant the holy name and qualities of Kåñëa, whose hearts
do not remember the lotus feet of Kåñëa even once, and whose heads do not
bow down even once before Lord Kåñëa. Send me those who do not perform
their duties toward Viñëu, which are the only duties in human life. Please bring
me all such fools and rascals.
PURPORT
The word viñëu-kåtyän is very important in this verse because the purpose
of human life is to please Lord Viñëu. Varëäçrama-dharma is also meant for
that purpose. As stated in the Viñëu Puräëa (3.8.9):
varëäçramäcäravatä
puruñeëa paraù pumän
viñëur ärädhyate panthä
nänyat tat-toña-käraëam
[Cc. Madhya 8.58]
Human society is meant to follow strictly the varëäçrama-dharma, which
divides society into four social divisions (brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya and çüdra)
and four spiritual divisions (brahmacarya, gåhastha, vänaprastha and sannyäsa).
Varëäçrama-dharma easily brings one nearer to Lord Viñëu, who is the only
true objective in human society. Na te viduù svärtha-gatià hi viñëum: [SB
7.5.31] unfortunately, however, people do not know that their self-interest is to
return home, back to Godhead, or to approach Lord Viñëu. Duräçayä ye
bahir-artha-mäninaù: instead, they are simply bewildered. Every human being
is expected to perform duties meant for approaching Lord Viñëu. Therefore
Yamaräja advises the Yamadütas to bring him those persons who have
forgotten their duties toward Viñëu (akåta-viñëu-kåtyän). One who does not
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
217
chant the holy name of Viñëu (Kåñëa), who does not bow down to the Deity of
Viñëu, and who does not remember the lotus feet of Viñëu is punishable by
Yamaräja. In summary, all avaiñëavas, persons unconcerned with Lord Viñëu,
are punishable by Yamaräja.
TEXT 30
TaTa( +aMYaTaa& Sa >aGavaNa( Pauåz" Paura<aae
NaaraYa<a" SvPauåzEYaRdSaTk*-Ta& Na" )
SvaNaaMahae Na ivduza& ricTaaÅl/INaa&
+aaiNTaGaRrqYaiSa NaMa" PauåzaYa >aUMNae )) 30 ))
tat kñamyatäà sa bhagavän puruñaù puräëo
näräyaëaù sva-puruñair yad asat kåtaà naù
svänäm aho na viduñäà racitäïjalénäà
kñäntir garéyasi namaù puruñäya bhümne
SYNONYMS
tat—that; kñamyatäm—let it be excused; saù—He; bhagavän—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; puruñaù—the Supreme Person; puräëaù—the oldest;
näräyaëaù—Lord Näräyaëa; sva-puruñaiù—by my own servants; yat—which;
asat—impudence; kåtam—performed; naù—of us; svänäm—of my own men;
aho—alas; na viduñäm—not knowing; racita-aïjalénäm—folding our hands
together to beg Your pardon; kñäntiù—forgiveness; garéyasi—in the glorious;
namaù—respectful obeisances; puruñäya—unto the person; bhümne—supreme
and all-pervading.
TRANSLATION
[Then Yamaräja, considering himself and his servants to be offenders, spoke
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
218
as follows, begging pardon from the Lord.] O my Lord, my servants have surely
committed a great offense by arresting a Vaiñëava such as Ajämila. O Näräyaëa,
O supreme and oldest person, please forgive us. Because of our ignorance, we
failed to recognize Ajämila as a servant of Your Lordship, and thus we have
certainly committed a great offense. Therefore with folded hands we beg Your
pardon. My Lord, since You are supremely merciful and are always full of good
qualities, please pardon us. We offer our respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
Lord Yamaräja took upon himself the responsibility for the offense
committed by his servants. If the servant of an establishment makes a mistake,
the establishment takes responsibility for it. Although Yamaräja is above
offenses, his servants, practically with his permission, went to arrest Ajämila,
which was a great offense. The nyäya-çästra confirms, bhåtyäparädhe svämino
daëòaù: if a servant makes a mistake, the master is punishable because he is
responsible for the offense. Taking this seriously, Yamaräja, along with his
servants, prayed with folded hands to be excused by the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Näräyaëa.
TEXT 31
TaSMaaTa( SaªqTaRNa& ivZ<aaeJaRGaNMa(r)l/Ma&hSaaMa( )
MahTaaMaiPa k-aErVYa ivÖyEk-aiNTak-iNaZk*-TaMa( )) 31 ))
tasmät saìkértanaà viñëor
jagan-maìgalam aàhasäm
mahatäm api kauravya
viddhy aikäntika-niñkåtam
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
219
tasmät—therefore; saìkértanam—the congregational chanting of the holy
name; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu; jagat-maìgalam—the most auspicious
performance within this material world; aàhasäm—for sinful activities;
mahatäm api—even though very great; kauravya—O descendant of the Kuru
family; viddhi—understand; aikäntika—the ultimate; niñkåtam—atonement.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: My dear King, the chanting of the holy name
of the Lord is able to uproot even the reactions of the greatest sins. Therefore
the chanting of the saìkértana movement is the most auspicious activity in the
entire universe. Please try to understand this so that others will take it
seriously.
PURPORT
We should note that although Ajämila chanted the name of Näräyaëa
imperfectly, he was delivered from all sinful reactions. The chanting of the
holy name is so auspicious that it can free everyone from the reactions of
sinful activities. One should not conclude that one may continue to sin with
the intention of chanting Hare Kåñëa to neutralize the reactions. Rather, one
should be very careful to be free from all sins and never think of counteracting
sinful activities by chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra, for this is another offense.
If by chance a devotee accidentally performs some sinful activity, the Lord will
excuse him, but one should not intentionally perform sinful acts.
TEXT 32
é*<vTaa& Ga*<aTaa& vqYaaR<YauÕaMaaiNa hreMauRhu" )
YaQaa SauJaaTaYaa >a¢-ya XauÖyeàaTMaa v]Taaidi>a" )) 32 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
220
çåëvatäà gåëatäà véryäëy
uddämäni harer muhuù
yathä sujätayä bhaktyä
çuddhyen nätmä vratädibhiù
SYNONYMS
çåëvatäm—of those hearing; gåëatäm—and chanting; véryäëi—the wonderful
activities; uddämäni—able to counteract sin; hareù—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; muhuù—always; yathä—as; su-jätayä—easily brought
forth; bhaktyä—by devotional service; çuddhyet—may be purified; na—not;
ätmä—the heart and soul; vrata-ädibhiù—by performing ritualistic
ceremonies.
TRANSLATION
One who constantly hears and chants the holy name of the Lord and hears
and chants about His activities can very easily attain the platform of pure
devotional service, which can cleanse the dirt from one's heart. One cannot
achieve such purification merely by observing vows and performing Vedic
ritualistic ceremonies.
PURPORT
One may very easily practice chanting and hearing the holy name of the
Lord and thus become ecstatic in spiritual life. Padma Puräëa states:
nämäparädha-yuktänäà
nämäny eva haranty agham
aviçränti-prayuktäni
täny evärtha-karäëi ca
Even if one chants the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra offensively, one can avoid
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
221
offenses by continuously chanting without deviation. One who becomes
accustomed to this practice will always remain in a pure transcendental
position, untouchable by sinful reactions. Çukadeva Gosvämé especially
requested King Parékñit to note this fact very carefully. There is no profit,
however, in executing the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies. By performing such
activities one may go to the higher planetary systems, but as stated in
Bhagavad-gétä (9.21), kñéëe puëye martya-lokaà viçanti: when the period of
one's enjoyment in the heavenly planets is terminated because of the limited
extent of the results of one's pious activities, one must return to earth. Thus
there is no use in endeavoring to travel up and down in the universe. It is
better to chant the holy name of the Lord so that one may become fully
purified and eligible to return home, back to Godhead. That is the aim of life,
and that is the perfection of life.
TEXT 33
k*-Z<aax(iga]PaÚMaDauil/<a( Na PauNaivRSa*í‚
MaaYaaGau<aezu rMaTae v*iJaNaavhezu )
ANYaSTau k-aMahTa AaTMarJa" Pa[MaaíuR‚
MaqheTa k-MaR YaTa Wv rJa" PauNa" SYaaTa( )) 33 ))
kåñëäìghri-padma-madhu-lië na punar visåñöamäyä-
guëeñu ramate våjinävaheñu
anyas tu käma-hata ätma-rajaù pramärñöum
éheta karma yata eva rajaù punaù syät
SYNONYMS
kåñëa-aìghri-padma—of the lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa; madhu—the honey;
liö—one who licks; na—not; punaù—again; visåñöa—already renounced;
mäyä-guëeñu—in the material modes of nature; ramate—desires to enjoy;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
222
våjina-avaheñu—which brings distress; anyaù—another; tu—however;
käma-hataù—being enchanted by lust; ätma-rajaù—the sinful infection of the
heart; pramärñöum—to cleanse; éheta—may perform; karma—activities;
yataù—after which; eva—indeed; rajaù—the sinful activity; punaù—again;
syät—appears.
TRANSLATION
Devotees who always lick the honey from the lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa do not
care at all for material activities, which are performed under the three modes of
material nature and which bring only misery. Indeed, devotees never give up
the lotus feet of Kåñëa to return to material activities. Others, however, who
are addicted to Vedic rituals because they have neglected the service of the
Lord's lotus feet and are enchanted by lusty desires, sometimes perform acts of
atonement. Nevertheless, being incompletely purified, they return to sinful
activities again and again.
PURPORT
A devotee's duty is to chant the Hare Kåñëa mantra. One may sometimes
chant with offenses and sometimes without offenses, but if one seriously
adopts this process, he will achieve perfection, which cannot be achieved
through Vedic ritualistic ceremonies of atonement. Persons who are attached
to the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies, but do not believe in devotional service,
who advise atonement, but do not appreciate the chanting of the Lord's holy
name, fail to achieve the highest perfection. Devotees, therefore, being
completely detached from material enjoyment, never give up Kåñëa
consciousness for Vedic ritualistic ceremonies. Those who are attached to
Vedic ritualistic ceremonies because of lusty desires are subjected to the
tribulations of material existence again and again. Mahäräja Parékñit has
compared their activities to kuïjara-çauca, the bathing of an elephant.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
223
TEXT 34
wTQa& Sv>aTa*RGaidTa& >aGavNMaihTv&
Sa&SMa*TYa iviSMaTaiDaYaae YaMaik-ªraSTae )
NaEvaCYauTaaé[YaJaNa& Pa[iTaXaªMaaNaa
d]íu& c ib>YaiTa TaTa" Pa[>a*iTa SMa raJaNa( )) 34 ))
itthaà svabhartå-gaditaà bhagavan-mahitvaà
saàsmåtya vismita-dhiyo yama-kiìkaräs te
naiväcyutäçraya-janaà pratiçaìkamänä
drañöuà ca bibhyati tataù prabhåti sma räjan
SYNONYMS
ittham—of such power; sva-bhartå-gaditam—explained by their master
(Yamaräja); bhagavat-mahitvam—the extraordinary glory of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and His name, fame, form and attributes;
saàsmåtya—remembering; vismita-dhiyaù—whose minds were struck with
wonder; yama-kiìkaräù—all the servants of Yamaräja; te—they; na—not;
eva—indeed; acyuta-äçraya-janam—a person sheltered by the lotus feet of
Acyuta, Lord Kåñëa; pratiçaìkamänäù—always fearing; drañöum—to see;
ca—and; bibhyati—they are afraid; tataù prabhåti—beginning from then;
sma—indeed; räjan—O King.
TRANSLATION
After hearing from the mouth of their master about the extraordinary glories
of the Lord and His name, fame and attributes, the Yamadütas were struck with
wonder. Since then, as soon as they see a devotee, they fear him and dare not
look at him again.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
224
PURPORT
Since this incident, the Yamadütas have given up the dangerous behavior
of approaching devotees. For the Yamadütas, a devotee is dangerous.
TEXT 35
wiTahaSaiMaMa& Gauù& >aGavaNa( ku-M>aSaM>av" )
k-QaYaaMaaSa Mal/Ya AaSaqNaae hirMacRYaNa( )) 35 ))
itihäsam imaà guhyaà
bhagavän kumbha-sambhavaù
kathayäm äsa malaya
äséno harim arcayan
SYNONYMS
itihäsam—history; imam—this; guhyam—very confidential; bhagavän—the
most powerful; kumbha-sambhavaù—Agastya Muni, the son of Kumbha;
kathayäm äsa—explained; malaye—in the Malaya Hills; äsénaù—residing;
harim arcayan—worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
When the great sage Agastya, the son of Kumbha, was residing in the
Malaya Hills and worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead, I approached
him, and he explained to me this confidential history.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, Third Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Yamaräja Instructs His Messengers."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
225
4. The Haàsa-guhya Prayers
After Mahäräja Parékñit appealed to Çukadeva Gosvämé to describe in
further detail the creation of the living entities within this universe, Çukadeva
Gosvämé informed him that when the Pracetäs, the ten sons of Präcénabarhi,
entered the sea to execute austerities, the planet earth was neglected because
of the absence of a king. Naturally many weeds and unnecessary trees grew,
and no food grains were produced. Indeed, all the land became like a forest.
When the ten Pracetäs came out of the sea and saw the entire world full of
trees, they were very angry with the trees and decided to destroy them all to
rectify the situation. Thus the Pracetäs created wind and fire to burn the trees
to ashes. Soma, however, the king of the moon and the king of all vegetation,
forbade the Pracetäs to destroy the trees, since the trees are the source of fruit
and flowers for all living beings. Just to satisfy the Pracetäs, Soma gave them a
beautiful girl born of Pramlocä Apsarä. By the semen of all the Pracetäs, Dakña
was born of that girl.
In the beginning, Dakña created all the demigods, demons and human
beings, but when he found the population not increasing properly, he took
sannyäsa and went to Vindhya Mountain, where be underwent severe
austerities and offered Lord Viñëu a particular prayer known as Haàsa-guhya,
by which Lord Viñëu became very pleased with him. The contents of the
prayer were as follows.
"The Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Supersoul, Lord Hari, is the
controller of both the living entities and the material nature. He is
self-sufficient and self-effulgent. As the subject matter of perception is not the
cause of our perceiving senses, so the living entity, although within his body,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
226
does not cause his eternal friend the Supersoul, who is the cause of creation of
all the senses. Because of the living entity's ignorance, his senses are engaged
with material objects. Since the living entity is alive, he can understand the
creation of this material world to some extent, but he cannot understand the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is beyond the conception of the body,
mind and intelligence. Nevertheless, great sages who are always in meditation
can see the personal form of the Lord within their hearts.
"Since an ordinary living being is materially contaminated, his words and
intelligence are also material. Therefore he cannot ascertain the Supreme
Personality of Godhead by manipulating his material senses. The conception
of God derived through the material senses is inaccurate because the Supreme
Lord is beyond the material senses, but when one engages his senses in
devotional service, the eternal Supreme Personality of Godhead is revealed on
the platform of the soul. When that Supreme Godhead becomes the aim of
one's life, one is said to have attained spiritual knowledge.
"The Supreme Brahman is the cause of all causes because He originally
existed before the creation. He is the original cause of everything, both
material and spiritual, and His existence is independent. However, the Lord
has a potency called avidyä, the illusory energy, which induces the false arguer
to think himself perfect and which induces the illusory energy to bewilder the
conditioned soul. That Supreme Brahman, the Supersoul, is very affectionate
to His devotees. To bestow mercy upon them, He discloses His form, name,
attributes and qualities to be worshiped within this material world.
"Unfortunately, however, those who are materially absorbed worship
various demigods. As the air passes over a lotus flower and carries the scent of
the flower with it, or as the air sometimes carries dust and therefore assumes
colors, the Supreme Personality of Godhead appears as the various demigods
according to the desires of His various foolish worshipers, but actually He is
the supreme truth, Lord Viñëu. To fulfill the desires of His devotees, He
appears in various incarnations, and therefore there is no need to worship the
demigods."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
227
Being very satisfied by the prayers of Dakña, Lord Viñëu appeared before
Dakña with eight arms. The Lord was dressed in yellow garments and had a
blackish complexion. Understanding that Dakña was very eager to follow the
path of enjoyment, the Lord awarded him the potency to enjoy the illusory
energy. The Lord offered him the daughter of Païcajana named Asikné, who
was suitable for Mahäräja Dakña to enjoy in sex. Indeed, Dakña received his
name because he was very expert in sex life. After awarding this benediction,
Lord Viñëu disappeared.
TEXTS 1-2
é[qraJaaevac
devaSaurNa*<aa& SaGaaeR NaaGaaNaa& Ma*GaPai+a<aaMa( )
SaaMaaiSak-STvYaa Pa[ae¢-ae YaSTau SvaYaM>auve_NTare )) 1 ))
TaSYaEv VYaaSaiMaC^aiMa jaTau& Tae >aGavNa( YaQaa )
ANauSaGa| YaYaa Xa¢-ya SaSaJaR >aGavaNa( Par" )) 2 ))
çré-räjoväca
deväsura-nåëäà sargo
nägänäà måga-pakñiëäm
sämäsikas tvayä prokto
yas tu sväyambhuve 'ntare
tasyaiva vyäsam icchämi
jïätuà te bhagavan yathä
anusargaà yayä çaktyä
sasarja bhagavän paraù
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—the King said; deva-asura-nåëäm—of the demigods, the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
228
demons and the human beings; sargaù—the creation; nägänäm—of the Nägas
(serpentine living entities); måga-pakñiëäm—of the beasts and birds;
sämäsikaù—briefly; tvayä—by you; proktaù—described; yaù—which;
tu—however; sväyambhuve—of Sväyambhuva Manu; antare—within the
period; tasya—of this; eva—indeed; vyäsam—the detailed account; icchämi—I
wish; jïätum—to know; te—from you; bhagavan—O my lord; yathä—as well
as; anusargam—the subsequent creation; yayä—by which; çaktyä—potency;
sasarja—created; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
paraù—transcendental.
TRANSLATION
The blessed King said to Çukadeva Gosvämé: My dear lord, the demigods,
demons, human beings, Nägas, beasts and birds were created during the reign of
Sväyambhuva Manu. You have spoken about this creation briefly [in the Third
Canto]. Now I wish to know about it elaborately. I also wish to know about the
potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead by which He brought about the
secondary creation.
TEXT 3
é[qSaUTa ovac
wiTa SaMPa[énMaak-<YaR raJazeRbaRdraYai<a" )
Pa[iTaNaNÛ MahaYaaeGaq JaGaad MauiNaSataMaa" )) 3 ))
çré-süta uväca
iti sampraçnam äkarëya
räjarñer bädaräyaëiù
pratinandya mahä-yogé
jagäda muni-sattamäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
229
SYNONYMS
çré-sütaù uväca—Süta Gosvämé said; iti—thus; sampraçnam—the inquiry;
äkarëya—hearing; räjarñeù—of King Parékñit; bädaräyaëiù—Çukadeva
Gosvämé; pratinandya—praising; mahä-yogé—the great yogé; jagäda—replied;
muni-sattamäù—O best of the sages.
TRANSLATION
Süta Gosvämé said: O great sages [assembled at Naimiñäraëya], after the
great yogi Çukadeva Gosvämé heard King Parékñit's inquiry, he praised it and
thus replied.
TEXT 4
é[qXauk- ovac
Yada Pa[ceTaSa" Pau}aa dXa Pa[acqNabihRz" )
ANTa"SaMaud]aduNMaGana dd*XauGaa| d]uMaEv*RTaaMa( )) 4 ))
çré-çuka uväca
yadä pracetasaù puträ
daça präcénabarhiñaù
antaù-samudräd unmagnä
dadåçur gäà drumair våtäm
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; yadä—when; pracetasaù—the
Pracetäs; puträù—the sons; daça—ten; präcénabarhiñaù—of King Präcénabarhi;
antaù-samudrät—from within the ocean; unmagnäù—emerged; dadåçuù—they
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
230
saw; gäm—the entire planet; drumaiù våtäm—covered with trees.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: When the ten sons of Präcénabarhi emerged from
the waters, in which they were performing austerities, they saw that the entire
surface of the world was covered by trees.
PURPORT
When King Präcénabarhi was performing Vedic rituals in which the killing
of animals was recommended, Närada Muni, out of compassion, advised him to
stop. Präcénabarhi understood Närada properly and then left the kingdom to
perform austerities in the forest. His ten sons, however, were performing
austerities within the water, and therefore there was no king to see to the
management of the world. When the ten sons, the Pracetäs, came out of the
water, they saw that the earth was overrun with trees.
When the government neglects agriculture, which is necessary for the
production of food, the land becomes covered with unnecessary trees. Of
course, many trees are useful because they produce fruits and flowers, but
many other trees are unnecessary. They could be used as fuel and the land
cleared and used for agriculture. When the government is negligent, less grain
is produced. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (18.44), kåñi-go-rakñya-väëijyaà
vaiçya-karma svabhäva jam: the proper engagements for vaiçyas, according to
their nature, are to farm and to protect cows. The duty of the government and
the kñatriyas is to see that the members of the third class, the vaiçyas, who are
neither brähmaëas nor kñatriyas, are thus properly engaged. Kñatriyas are
meant to protect human beings, whereas vaiçyas are meant to protect useful
animals, especially cows.
TEXT 5
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
231
d]uMae>Ya" §u-DYaMaaNaaSTae TaPaaedqiPaTaMaNYav" )
Mau%Taae vaYauMaiGan& c SaSa*JauSTaiÕDa+aYaa )) 5 ))
drumebhyaù krudhyamänäs te
tapo-dépita-manyavaù
mukhato väyum agnià ca
sasåjus tad-didhakñayä
SYNONYMS
drumebhyaù—unto the trees; krudhyamänäù—being very angry; te—they (the
ten sons of Präcénabarhi); tapaù-dépita-manyavaù—whose anger was inflamed
because of long austerities; mukhataù—from the mouth; väyum—wind;
agnim—fire; ca—and; sasåjuù—they created; tat—those forests;
didhakñayä—with the desire to burn.
TRANSLATION
Because of having undergone long austerities in the water, the Pracetäs were
very angry at the trees. Desiring to burn them to ashes, they generated wind
and fire from their mouths.
PURPORT
Here the word tapo-dépita-manyavaù indicates that persons who have
undergone severe austerity (tapasya) are endowed with great mystic power, as
evinced by the Pracetäs, who created fire and wind from their mouths.
Although devotees undergo severe tapasya, however, they are vimanyavaù,
sädhavaù, which means that they are never angry. They are always decorated
with good qualities. Bhägavatam (3.25.21) states:
titikñavaù käruëikäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
232
suhådaù sarva-dehinäm
ajäta-çatravaù çäntäù
sädhavaù sädhu-bhüñaëäù
A sädhu, a devotee, is never angry. Actually the real feature of devotees who
undergo tapasya, austerity, is forgiveness. Although a Vaiñëava has sufficient
power in tapasya, he does not become angry when put into difficulty. If one
undergoes tapasya but does not become a Vaiñëava, however, one does not
develop good qualities. For example, Hiraëyakaçipu and Rävaëa also
performed great austerities, but they did so to demonstrate their demoniac
tendencies. Vaiñëavas must meet many opponents while preaching the glories
of the Lord, but Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu recommends that they not become
angry while preaching. Lord Caitanya Mahäprabhu has given this formula:
tåëäd api sunécena taror api sahiñëunä/ amäninä mänadena kértanéyaù sadä hariù
[Cc. Ädi 17.31]. "One should chant the holy name of the Lord in a humble state
of mind, thinking oneself lower than the straw in the street; one should be
more tolerant than a tree, devoid of all sense of false prestige and should be
ready to offer all respect to others. In such a state of mind one can chant the
holy name of the Lord constantly." Those engaged in preaching the glories of
the Lord should be humbler than grass and more tolerant than a tree; then
they can preach the glories of the Lord without difficulty.
TEXT 6
Taa>Yaa& iNadRùMaaNaa&STaaNauPal/>Ya ku-æÜh )
raJaaevac MahaNa( SaaeMaae MaNYau& Pa[XaMaYaiàv )) 6 ))
täbhyäà nirdahyamänäàs tän
upalabhya kurüdvaha
räjoväca mahän somo
manyuà praçamayann iva
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
233
SYNONYMS
täbhyäm—by the wind and fire; nirdahyamänän—being burned; tän—them
(the trees); upalabhya—seeing; kurüdvaha—O Mahäräja Parékñit; räjä—the
king of the forest; uväca—said; mahän—the great; somaù—predominating
deity of the moon, Somadeva; manyum—the anger; praçamayan—pacifying;
iva—like.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Parékñit, when Soma, the king of the trees and predominating
deity of the moon, saw the fire and wind burning all the trees to ashes, he felt
great sympathy because he is the maintainer of all herbs and trees. To appease
the anger of the Pracetäs, Soma spoke as follows.
PURPORT
It is understood from this verse that the predominating deity of the moon is
the maintainer of all the trees and plants throughout the universe. It is due to
the moonshine that trees and plants grow very luxuriantly. Therefore how can
we accept the so-called scientists whose moon expeditions have informed us
that there are no trees or vegetation on the moon? Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura says, somo våkñädhiñöhätä sa eva våkñäëäà räjä: Soma, the
predominating deity of the moon, is the king of all vegetation. How can we
believe that the maintainer of vegetation has no vegetation on his own planet?
TEXT 7
Na d]uMae>Yaae Maha>aaGaa dqNae>Yaae d]aeGDauMahRQa )
ivvDaRiYazvae YaUYa& Pa[JaaNaa& PaTaYa" SMa*Taa" )) 7 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
234
na drumebhyo mahä-bhägä
dénebhyo drogdhum arhatha
vivardhayiñavo yüyaà
prajänäà patayaù småtäù
SYNONYMS
na—not; drumebhyaù—the trees; mahä-bhägäù—O greatly fortunate ones;
dénebhyaù—who are very poor; drogdhum—to burn to ashes; arhatha—you
deserve; vivardhayiñavaù—desiring to bring about an increase; yüyam—you;
prajänäm—of all living entities who have taken shelter of you; patayaù—the
masters or protectors; småtäù—known as.
TRANSLATION
O greatly fortunate ones, you should not kill these poor trees by burning
them to ashes. Your duty is to wish the citizens [prajäs] all prosperity and to act
as their protectors.
PURPORT
It is indicated herein that the government or king has the duty of
protecting not only the human beings, but all other living entities, including
animals, trees and plants. No living entity should be killed unnecessarily.
TEXT 8
Ahae Pa[JaaPaiTaPaiTa>aRGavaNa( hirrVYaYa" )
vNaSPaTaqNaaezDaqê SaSaJaaeRJaRiMaz& iv>au" )) 8 ))
aho prajäpati-patir
bhagavän harir avyayaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
235
vanaspatén oñadhéç ca
sasarjorjam iñaà vibhuù
SYNONYMS
aho—alas; prajäpati-patiù—the Lord of all the lords of created beings;
bhagavän hariù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari;
avyayaù—indestructible; vanaspatén—the trees and plants; oñadhéù—the
herbs; ca—and; sasarja—created; ürjam—invigorating; iñam—food;
vibhuù—the Supreme Being.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Hari, is the master of all living
entities, including all the prajäpatis, such as Lord Brahmä. Because He is the
all-pervading and indestructible master, He has created all these trees and
vegetables as eatables for other living entities.
PURPORT
Soma, the predominating deity of the moon, reminded the Pracetäs that
this vegetation had been created by the Lord of lords to provide food for
everyone. If the Pracetäs tried to kill them off, their own subjects would also
suffer, for trees are also required for food.
TEXT 9
Aà& cra<aaMacra ùPad" Paadcair<aaMa( )
AhSTaa hSTaYau¢-aNaa& iÜPada& c cTauZPad" )) 9 ))
annaà caräëäm acarä
hy apadaù päda-cäriëäm
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
236
ahastä hasta-yuktänäà
dvi-padäà ca catuñ-padaù
SYNONYMS
annam—food; caräëäm—of those that move on wings; acaräù—the
nonmoving (fruits and flowers); hi—indeed; apadaù—the living entities
without legs, like the grass; päda-cäriëäm—of the animals who move on legs,
like the cows and buffalo; ahastäù—animals without hands;
hasta-yuktänäm—of the animals with hands, like the tigers; dvi-padäm—of
human beings, who have two legs; ca—and; catuù-padaù—the four-legged
animals like the deer.
TRANSLATION
By nature's arrangement, fruits and flowers are considered the food of
insects and birds; grass and other legless living entities are meant to be the food
of four-legged animals like cows and buffalo; animals that cannot use their front
legs as hands are meant to be the food of animals like tigers, which have claws;
and four-legged animals like deer and goats, as well as food grains, are meant to
be the food of human beings.
PURPORT
By nature's law, or the arrangement of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, one kind of living entity is eatable by other living entities. As
mentioned herein, dvi-padäà ca catuñ-padaù: the four-legged animals
(catuñ-padaù), as well as food grains, are eatables for human beings
(dvi-padäm). These four-legged animals are those such as deer and goats, not
cows, which are meant to be protected. Generally the men of the higher classes
of society—the brähmaëas, kñatriyas and vaiçyas—do not eat meat. Sometimes
kñatriyas go to the forest to kill animals like deer because they have to learn
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
237
the art of killing, and sometimes they eat the animals also. Çüdras, too, eat
animals such as goats. Cows, however, are never meant to be killed or eaten by
human beings. In every çästra, cow killing is vehemently condemned. Indeed,
one who kills a cow must suffer for as many years as there are hairs on the body
of a cow. Manu-saàhitä says, pravåttir eñä bhütänäà nivåttis tu mahä-phalä: we
have many tendencies in this material world, but in human life one is meant to
learn how to curb those tendencies. Those who desire to eat meat may satisfy
the demands of their tongues by eating lower animals, but they should never
kill cows, who are actually accepted as the mothers of human society because
they supply milk. The çästra especially recommends, kåñi-go-rakñya: the vaiçya
section of humanity should arrange for the food of the entire society through
agricultural activities and should give full protection to the cows, which are
the most useful animals because they supply milk to human society.
TEXT 10
YaUYa& c iPa}aaNvaidía devdeveNa caNagaa" )
Pa[JaaSaGaaRYa ih k-Qa& v*+aaNa( iNadRGDauMahRQa )) 10 ))
yüyaà ca pitränvädiñöä
deva-devena cänaghäù
prajä-sargäya hi kathaà
våkñän nirdagdhum arhatha
SYNONYMS
yüyam—you; ca—also; piträ—by your father; anvädiñöäù—ordered;
deva-devena—by the Personality of Godhead, the master of the masters;
ca—also; anaghäù—O sinless ones; prajä-sargäya—for generating the
population; hi—indeed; katham—how; våkñän—the trees; nirdagdhum—to
burn to ashes; arhatha—are able.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
238
TRANSLATION
O pure-hearted ones, your father, Präcénabarhi, and the Supreme
Personality of Godhead have ordered you to generate population. Therefore
how can you burn to ashes these trees and herbs, which are needed for the
maintenance of your subjects and descendants?
TEXT 11
AaiTaïTa SaTaa& MaaGa| k-aePa& YaC^Ta dqiPaTaMa( )
iPa}aa iPaTaaMaheNaaiPa Jauí& v" Pa[iPaTaaMahE" )) 11 ))
ätiñöhata satäà märgaà
kopaà yacchata dépitam
piträ pitämahenäpi
juñöaà vaù prapitämahaiù
SYNONYMS
ätiñöhata—just follow; satäm märgam—the path of the great saintly
personalities; kopam—the anger; yacchata—subdue; dépitam—which is now
awakened; piträ—by the father; pitämahena api—and by the grandfather;
juñöam—executed; vaù—your; prapitämahaiù—by the great-grandfathers.
TRANSLATION
The path of goodness traversed by your father, grandfather and
great-grandfathers is that of maintaining the subjects [prajäs], including the
men, animals and trees. That is the path you should follow. Unnecessary anger
is contrary to your duty. Therefore I request you to control your anger.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
239
PURPORT
Here the words piträ pitämahenäpi juñöaà vaù prapitämahaiù depict an
honest royal family, consisting of the kings, their father, their grandfather and
their great-grandfathers. Such a royal family has a prestigious position because
it maintains the citizens, or prajäs. The word prajä refers to one who has taken
birth within the jurisdiction of the government. The exalted royal families
were conscious that all living beings, whether human, animal or lower than
animal, should be given protection. The modern democratic system cannot be
exalted in this way because the leaders elected strive only for power and have
no sense of responsibility. In a monarchy, a king with a prestigious position
follows the great deeds of his forefathers. Thus Soma, the king of the moon,
here reminds the Pracetäs about the glories of their father, grandfather and
great-grandfathers.
TEXT 12
Taaek-aNaa& iPaTaraE bNDaU d*Xa" Pa+Ma iñYaa" PaiTa" )
PaiTa" Pa[JaaNaa& i>a+aU<aa& Ga*ùjaNaa& buDa" SauôTa( )) 12 ))
tokänäà pitarau bandhü
dåçaù pakñma striyäù patiù
patiù prajänäà bhikñüëäà
gåhy ajïänäà budhaù suhåt
SYNONYMS
tokänäm—of children; pitarau—the two parents; bandhü—the friends;
dåçaù—of the eye; pakñma—the eyelid; striyäù—of the woman; patiù—the
husband; patiù—the protector; prajänäm—of the subjects; bhikñüëäm—of the
beggars; gåhé—the householder; ajïänäm—of the ignorant; budhaù—the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
240
learned; su-håt—the friend.
TRANSLATION
As the father and mother are the friends and maintainers of their children,
as the eyelid is the protector of the eye, as the husband is the maintainer and
protector of a woman, as the householder is the maintainer and protector of
beggars, and as the learned is the friend of the ignorant, so the king is the
protector and giver of life to all his subjects. The trees are also subjects of the
king. Therefore they should be given protection.
PURPORT
By the supreme will of the Personality of Godhead, there are various
protectors and maintainers for helpless living entities. The trees are also
considered prajäs, subjects of the king, and therefore the duty of the monarch
is to protect even the trees, not to speak of others. The king is duty-bound to
protect the living entities in his kingdom. Thus although the parents are
directly responsible for the protection and maintenance of their children, the
duty of the king is to see that all parents do their duty properly. Similarly, the
king is also responsible for overseeing the other protectors mentioned in this
verse. It may also be noted that the beggars who should be maintained by the
householders are not professional beggars, but sannyäsés and brähmaëas, to
whom the householders should supply food and clothing.
TEXT 13
ANTadeRhezu >aUTaaNaaMaaTMaaSTae hirrqìr" )
Sav| TaiÖZ<YaMaq+aßMaev& vSTaaeizTaae ùSaaE )) 13 ))
antar deheñu bhütänäm
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
241
ätmäste harir éçvaraù
sarvaà tad-dhiñëyam ékñadhvam
evaà vas toñito hy asau
SYNONYMS
antaù deheñu—within the bodies (in the cores of the hearts); bhütänäm—of all
living entities; ätmä—the Supersoul; äste—resides; hariù—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; éçvaraù—the Lord or director; sarvam—all;
tat-dhiñëyam—His place of residence; ékñadhvam—try to see; evam—in this
way; vaù—with you; toñitaù—satisfied; hi—indeed; asau—that Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is situated as the Supersoul within the
cores of the hearts of all living entities, whether moving or nonmoving,
including men, birds, animals, trees and, indeed, all living entities. Therefore
you should consider every body a residence or temple of the Lord. By such
vision you will satisfy the Lord. You should not angrily kill these living entities
in the forms of trees.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä and confirmed by all the Vedic scriptures,
éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati: [Bg. 18.61] the Supersoul is
situated within everyone's heart. Therefore, since everyone's body is the
residence of the Supreme Lord, one should not destroy the body because of
unnecessary envy. That will dissatisfy the Supersoul. Soma told the Pracetäs
that because they had tried to satisfy the Supersoul, now they should not
displease Him.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
242
TEXT 14
Ya" SaMauTPaiTaTa& deh Aak-aXaaNMaNYauMauLb<aMa( )
AaTMaiJajaSaYaa YaC^eTa( Sa Gau<aaNaiTavTaRTae )) 14 ))
yaù samutpatitaà deha
äkäçän manyum ulbaëam
ätma-jijïäsayä yacchet
sa guëän ativartate
SYNONYMS
yaù—anyone who; samutpatitam—suddenly awakened; dehe—in the body;
äkäçät—from the sky; manyum—anger; ulbaëam—powerful;
ätma-jijïäsayä—by inquiry into spiritual realization or self-realization;
yacchet—subdues; saù—that person; guëän—the modes of material nature;
ativartate—transcends.
TRANSLATION
One who inquires into self-realization and thus subdues his powerful
anger—which awakens suddenly in the body as if falling from the
sky—transcends the influence of the modes of material nature.
PURPORT
When one becomes angry, he forgets himself and his situation, but if one is
able to consider his situation by knowledge, one transcends the influence of
the modes of material nature. One is always a servant of lusty desires, anger,
greed, illusion, envy and so forth, but if one obtains sufficient strength in
spiritual advancement, one can control them. One who obtains such control
will always be transcendentally situated, untouched by the modes of material
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
243
nature. This is only possible when one fully engages in the service of the Lord.
As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (14.26):
mäà ca yo 'vyabhicäreëa
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa guëän samatétyaitän
brahma-bhüyäù
"One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in any
circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes
to the spiritual platform." By engaging one in devotional service, the Kåñëa
consciousness movement keeps one always transcendental to anger, greed, lust,
envy and so forth. One must perform devotional service because otherwise one
will become victimized by the modes of material nature.
TEXT 15
Al&/ dGDaEd]uRMaEdsNaE" i%l/aNaa& iXavMaSTau v" )
va+as ùeza vra k-NYaa PaÒqTve Pa[iTaGa*ùTaaMa( )) 15 ))
alaà dagdhair drumair dénaiù
khilänäà çivam astu vaù
värkñé hy eñä varä kanyä
patnétve pratigåhyatäm
SYNONYMS
alam—enough; dagdhaiù—with burning; drumaiù—the trees; dénaiù—poor;
khilänäm—of the remainder of the trees; çivam—all good fortune; astu—let
there be; vaù—of you; värkñé—raised by the trees; hi—indeed; eñä—this;
varä—choice; kanyä—daughter; patnétve—into wifehood; pratigåhyatäm—let
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
244
her be accepted.
TRANSLATION
There is no need to burn these poor trees any longer. Let whatever trees still
remain be happy. Indeed, you should also be happy. Now, here is a beautiful,
well-qualified girl named Märiñä, who was raised by the trees as their daughter.
You may accept this beautiful girl as your wife.
TEXT 16
wTYaaMaN}Ya vraraeha& k-NYaaMaaPSarSaq& Na*Pa )
SaaeMaae raJaa YaYaaE dtva Tae DaMaeR<aaePaYaeiMare )) 16 ))
ity ämantrya varärohäà
kanyäm äpsaraséà nåpa
somo räjä yayau dattvä
te dharmeëopayemire
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; ämantrya—addressing; vara-ärohäm—possessing high, beautiful
hips; kanyäm—the girl; äpsarasém—born of an Apsarä; nåpa—O King;
somaù—Soma, the predominating deity of the moon; räjä—the king;
yayau—returned; dattvä—delivering; te—they; dharmeëa—according to
religious principles; upayemire—married.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: My dear King, after thus pacifying the
Pracetäs, Soma, the king of the moon, gave them the beautiful girl born of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
245
Pramlocä Apsarä. The Pracetäs all received Pramlocä's daughter, who had high,
very beautiful hips, and married her according to the religious system.
TEXT 17
Tae>YaSTaSYaa& SaMa>avd( d+a" Pa[aceTaSa" ik-l/ )
YaSYa Pa[JaaivSaGaeR<a l/aek-a AaPaUirTaañYa" )) 17 ))
tebhyas tasyäà samabhavad
dakñaù präcetasaù kila
yasya prajä-visargeëa
lokä äpüritäs trayaù
SYNONYMS
tebhyaù—from all the Pracetäs; tasyäm—in her; samabhavat—was generated;
dakñaù—Dakña, the expert in begetting children; präcetasaù—the son of the
Pracetäs; kila—indeed; yasya—of whom; prajä-visargeëa—by the generation
of living entities; lokäù—the worlds; äpüritäù—filled; trayaù—three.
TRANSLATION
In the womb of that girl the Pracetäs all begot a son named Dakña, who filled
the three worlds with living entities.
PURPORT
Dakña was first born during the reign of Sväyambhuva Manu, but because
of offending Lord Çiva he was punished by having the head of a goat
substituted for his own head. Thus insulted, he had to give up that body, and
in the sixth manvantara, called the Cäkñuña manvantara, he was born of the
womb of Märiñä as Dakña. In this connection Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
246
Öhäkura quotes this verse:
cäkñuñe tv antare präpte
präk-sarge käla-vidrute
yaù sasarja prajä iñöäù
sa dakño daiva-coditaù
"His previous body had been destroyed, but he, the same Dakña, inspired by the
supreme will, created all the desired living entities in the Cäkñuña
manvantara." (SB 4.30.49) Thus Dakña regained his previous opulence and
again begot thousands and millions of children to fill the three worlds.
TEXT 18
YaQaa SaSaJaR >aUTaaiNa d+aae duihTa*vTSal/" )
reTaSaa MaNaSaa cEv TaNMaMaavihTa" é*<au )) 18 ))
yathä sasarja bhütäni
dakño duhitå-vatsalaù
retasä manasä caiva
tan mamävahitaù çåëu
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; sasarja—created; bhütäni—the living entities; dakñaù—Dakña;
duhitå-vatsalaù—who is very affectionate to his daughters; retasä—by semen;
manasä—by the mind; ca—also; eva—indeed; tat—that; mama—from me;
avahitaù—being attentive; çåëu—please hear.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: Please hear from me with great attention how
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
247
Prajäpati Dakña, who was very affectionate to his daughters, created different
types of living entities through his semen and through his mind.
PURPORT
The word duhitå-vatsalaù indicates that all the prajäs were born from
Dakña's daughters. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura says that apparently
Dakña had no son.
TEXT 19
MaNaSaEvaSa*JaTPaUv| Pa[JaaPaiTairMaa" Pa[Jaa" )
devaSaurMaNauZYaadqà>a"SQal/Jal/aEk-Sa" )) 19 ))
manasaiväsåjat pürvaà
prajäpatir imäù prajäù
deväsura-manuñyädén
nabhaù-sthala-jalaukasaù
SYNONYMS
manasä—by the mind; eva—indeed; asåjat—created; pürvam—in the
beginning; prajäpatiù—the prajäpati (Dakña); imäù—these; prajäù—living
entities; deva—the demigods; asura—the demons; manuñya-ädén—and other
living entities, headed by the human beings; nabhaù—in the skies; sthala—on
the land; jala—or within the water; okasaù—who have their abodes.
TRANSLATION
With his mind, Prajäpati Dakña first created all kinds of demigods, demons,
human beings, birds, beasts, aquatics and so on.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
248
TEXT 20
TaMab*&ihTaMaal/aeKYa Pa[JaaSaGa| Pa[JaaPaiTa" )
ivNDYaPaadaNauPav]JYa Saae_crd( duZk-r& TaPa" )) 20 ))
tam abåàhitam älokya
prajä-sargaà prajäpatiù
vindhya-pädän upavrajya
so 'carad duñkaraà tapaù
SYNONYMS
tam—that; abåàhitam—not increasing; älokya—seeing; prajä-sargam—the
creation of the living entities; prajäpatiù—Dakña, the generator of living
entities; vindhya-pädän—the mountains near the Vindhya mountain range;
upavrajya—going to; saù—he; acarat—executed; duñkaram—very difficult;
tapaù—austerities.
TRANSLATION
But when Prajäpati Dakña saw that he was not properly generating all kinds
of living entities, he approached a mountain near the Vindhya mountain range,
and there he executed very difficult austerities.
TEXT 21
Ta}aagaMazR<a& NaaMa TaqQa| PaaPahr& ParMa( )
oPaSPa*XYaaNauSavNa& TaPaSaaTaaezYaÖirMa( )) 21 ))
taträghamarñaëaà näma
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
249
térthaà päpa-haraà param
upaspåçyänusavanaà
tapasätoñayad dharim
SYNONYMS
tatra—there; aghamarñaëam—Aghamarñaëa; näma—named; tértham—the
holy place; päpa-haram—suitable for destroying all sinful reactions;
param—best; upaspåçya—performing äcamana and bathing;
anusavanam—regularly; tapasä—by austerity; atoñayat—caused pleasure;
harim—to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Near that mountain was a very holy place named Aghamarñaëa. There
Prajäpati Dakña executed ritualistic ceremonies and satisfied the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Hari, by engaging in great austerities to please Him.
TEXT 22
ASTaaEzqÖ&SaGauùeNa >aGavNTaMaDaae+aJaMa( )
Tau>Ya& Tadi>aDaaSYaaiMa k-SYaaTauZYad( YaQaa hir" )) 22 ))
astauñéd dhaàsa-guhyena
bhagavantam adhokñajam
tubhyaà tad abhidhäsyämi
kasyätuñyad yathä hariù
SYNONYMS
astauñét—satisfied; haàsa-guhyena—by the celebrated prayers known as
Haàsa-guhya; bhagavantam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
250
adhokñajam—who is beyond the reach of the senses; tubhyam—unto you;
tat—that; abhidhäsyämi—I shall explain; kasya—with Dakña, the prajäpati;
atuñyat—was satisfied; yathä—how; hariù—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, I shall fully explain to you the Haàsa-guhya prayers, which
were offered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead by Dakña, and I shall
explain how the Lord was pleased with him for those prayers.
PURPORT
It is to be understood that the Haàsa-guhya prayers were not composed by
Dakña, but were existing in the Vedic literature.
TEXT 23
é[qPa[JaaPaiTaåvac
NaMa" ParaYaaivTaQaaNau>aUTaYae
Gau<a}aYaa>aaSaiNaiMatabNDave )
Ad*íDaaMNae Gau<aTatvbuiÖi>a‚
iNaRv*taMaaNaaYa dDae SvYaM>auve )) 23 ))
çré-prajäpatir uväca
namaù paräyävitathänubhütaye
guëa-trayäbhäsa-nimitta-bandhave
adåñöa-dhämne guëa-tattva-buddhibhir
nivåtta-mänäya dadhe svayambhuve
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
251
SYNONYMS
çré-prajäpatiù uväca—the prajäpati Dakña said; namaù—all respectful
obeisances; paräya—unto the Transcendence; avitatha—correct;
anubhütaye—unto Him whose spiritual potency brings about realization of
Him; guëa-traya—of the three material modes of nature; äbhäsa—of the living
entities who have the appearance; nimitta—and of the material energy;
bandhave—unto the controller; adåñöa-dhämne—who is not perceived in His
abode; guëa-tattva-buddhibhiù—by the conditioned souls whose poor
intelligence dictates that real truth is found in the manifestations of the three
modes of material nature; nivåtta-mänäya—who has surpassed all material
measurements and calculations; dadhe—I offer; svayambhuve—unto the
Supreme Lord, who is manifest with no cause.
TRANSLATION
Prajäpati Dakña said: The Supreme Personality of Godhead is transcendental
to the illusory energy and the physical categories it produces. He possesses the
potency for unfailing knowledge and supreme willpower, and He is the
controller of the living entities and the illusory energy. The conditioned souls
who have accepted this material manifestation as everything cannot see Him,
for He is above the evidence of experimental knowledge. Self-evident and
self-sufficient, He is not caused by any superior cause. Let me offer my
respectful obeisances unto Him.
PURPORT
The transcendental position of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
explained herewith. He is not perceivable by the conditioned souls, who are
accustomed to material vision and cannot understand that the Supreme
Personality of Godhead exists in His abode, which is beyond that vision. Even
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
252
if a materialistic person could count all the atoms in the universe, he would
still be unable to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As
confirmed in Brahma-saàhitä (5.34):
panthäs tu koöi-çata-vatsara-saàpragamyo
väyor athäpi manaso muni-puìgavänäm
so 'py asti yat-prapada-sémny avicintya-tattve
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
The conditioned souls may try to understand the Supreme Personality of
Godhead for many billions of years through their mental speculative processes,
traveling at the speed of the mind or the wind, but still the Absolute Truth
will remain inconceivable to them because a materialistic person cannot
measure the length and breadth of the Supreme Personality of Godhead's
unlimited existence. If the Absolute Truth is beyond measurement, one may
ask, how can one realize Him? The answer is given here by the word
svayambhuve: one may understand Him or not, but nevertheless He is existing
in His own spiritual potency.
TEXT 24
Na YaSYa Sa:Ya& Pauåzae_vEiTa Sa:Yau"
Sa%a vSaNa( Sa&vSaTa" Paure_iSMaNa( )
Gau<aae YaQaa Gaui<aNaae VYa¢-d*íe‚
STaSMaE MaheXaaYa NaMaSk-raeiMa )) 24 ))
na yasya sakhyaà puruño 'vaiti sakhyuù
sakhä vasan saàvasataù pure 'smin
guëo yathä guëino vyakta-dåñöes
tasmai maheçäya namaskaromi
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
253
SYNONYMS
na—not; yasya—whose; sakhyam—fraternity; puruñaù—the living entity;
avaiti—knows; sakhyuù—of the supreme friend; sakhä—the friend;
vasan—living; saàvasataù—of the one living with; pure—in the body;
asmin—this; guëaù—the object of sense perception; yathä—just like;
guëinaù—of its respective sense organ; vyakta-dåñöeù—who oversees the
material manifestation; tasmai—unto Him; mahä-éçäya—unto the supreme
controller; namaskaromi—I offer my obeisances.
TRANSLATION
As the sense objects [form, taste, touch, smell and sound] cannot understand
how the senses perceive them, so the conditioned soul, although residing in his
body along with the Supersoul, cannot understand how the supreme spiritual
person, the master of the material creation, directs his senses. Let me offer my
respectful obeisances unto that Supreme Person, who is the supreme controller.
PURPORT
The individual soul and the Supreme Soul live together within the body.
This is confirmed in the Upaniñads by the analogy that two friendly birds live
in one tree—one bird eating the fruit of the tree and the other simply
witnessing and directing. Although the individual living being, who is
compared to the bird that is eating, is sitting with his friend the Supreme Soul,
the individual living being cannot see Him. Actually the Supersoul is directing
the workings of his senses in the enjoyment of sense objects, but as these sense
objects cannot see the senses, the conditioned soul cannot see the directing
soul. The conditioned soul has desires, and the Supreme Soul fulfills them, but
the conditioned soul is unable to see the Supreme Soul. Thus Prajäpati Dakña
offers his obeisances to the Supreme Soul, the Supersoul, even though unable
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
254
to see Him. Another example given is that although ordinary citizens work
under the direction of the government, they cannot understand how they are
being governed or what the government is. In this regard, Madhväcärya quotes
the following verse from the Skanda Puräëa:
yathä räjïaù priyatvaà tu
bhåtyä vedena cätmanaù
tathä jévo na yat-sakhyaà
vetti tasmai namo 'stu te
"As the various servants in the different departments of big establishments
cannot see the supreme managing director under whom they are working, the
conditioned souls cannot see the supreme friend sitting within their bodies.
Let us therefore offer our respectful obeisances unto the Supreme, who is
invisible to our material eyes."
TEXT 25
dehae_Savae_+aa MaNavae >aUTaMaa}aa‚
MaaTMaaNaMaNYa& c ivdu" Par& YaTa( )
Sav| PauMaaNa( ved Gau<aa&ê TaJjae
Na ved SavRjMaNaNTaMaq@e )) 25 ))
deho 'savo 'kñä manavo bhüta-mäträm
ätmänam anyaà ca viduù paraà yat
sarvaà pumän veda guëäàç ca taj-jïo
na veda sarva-jïam anantam éòe
SYNONYMS
dehaù—this body; asavaù—the life airs; akñäù—the different senses;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
255
manavaù—the mind, understanding, intellect and ego; bhüta-mäträm—the
five gross material elements and the sense objects (form, taste, sound and so
on); ätmänam—themselves; anyam—any other; ca—and; viduù—know;
param—beyond; yat—that which; sarvam—everything; pumän—the living
being; veda—knows; guëän—the qualities of the material nature; ca—and;
tat-jïaù—knowing those things; na—not; veda—knows; sarva-jïam—unto the
omniscient; anantam—the unlimited; éòe—I offer my respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
Because they are only matter, the body, the life airs, the external and
internal senses, the five gross elements and the subtle sense objects [form, taste,
smell, sound and touch] cannot know their own nature, the nature of the other
senses or the nature of their controllers. But the living being, because of his
spiritual nature, can know his body, the life airs, the senses, the elements and
the sense objects, and he can also know the three qualities that form their roots.
Nevertheless, although the living being is completely aware of them, he is
unable to see the Supreme Being, who is omniscient and unlimited. I therefore
offer my respectful obeisances unto Him.
PURPORT
Material scientists can make an analytical study of the physical elements,
the body, the senses, the sense objects and even the air that controls the vital
force, but still they cannot understand that above all these is the real spirit
soul. In other words, the living entity, because of his being a spirit soul, can
understand all the material objects, or, when self-realized, he can understand
the Paramätmä, upon whom yogés meditate. Nevertheless, the living being,
even if advanced, cannot understand the Supreme Being, the Personality of
Godhead, for He is ananta, unlimited, in all six opulences.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
256
TEXT 26
YadaeParaMaae MaNaSaae NaaMaæPa‚
æPaSYa d*íSMa*iTaSaMPa[MaaezaTa( )
Ya wRYaTae ke-vl/Yaa SvSa&SQaYaa
h&SaaYa TaSMaE XauicSaÚNae NaMa" )) 26 ))
yadoparämo manaso näma-rüparüpasya
dåñöa-småti-sampramoñät
ya éyate kevalayä sva-saàsthayä
haàsäya tasmai çuci-sadmane namaù
SYNONYMS
yadä—when in trance; uparämaù—complete cessation; manasaù—of the
mind; näma-rüpa—material names and forms; rüpasya—of that by which they
appear; dåñöa—of material vision; småti—and of remembrance;
sampramoñät—due to the destruction; yaù—who (the Supreme Personality of
Godhead); éyate—is perceived; kevalayä—with spiritual; sva-saàsthayä—His
own original form; haàsäya—unto the supreme pure; tasmai—unto Him;
çuci-sadmane—who is realized only in the pure state of spiritual existence;
namaù—I offer my respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
When one's consciousness is completely purified of the contamination of
material existence, gross and subtle, without being agitated as in the working
and dreaming states, and when the mind is not dissolved as in suñupti, deep
sleep, one comes to the platform of trance. Then one's material vision and the
memories of the mind, which manifests names and forms, are vanquished. Only
in such a trance is the Supreme Personality of Godhead revealed. Thus let us
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
257
offer our respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who
is seen in that uncontaminated, transcendental state.
PURPORT
There are two stages of God realization. One is called sujïeyam, or very
easily understood (generally by mental speculation), and the other is called
durjïeyam, understood only with difficulty. Paramätmä realization and
Brahman realization are considered sujïeyam, but realization of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is durjïeyam. As described here, one attains the
ultimate realization of the Personality of Godhead when one gives up the
activities of the mind—thinking, feeling and willing—or, in other words,
when mental speculation stops. This transcendental realization is above
susupti, deep sleep. In our gross conditional stage we perceive things through
material experience and remembrance, and in the subtle stage we perceive the
world in dreams. The process of vision also involves remembrance and also
exists in a subtle form. Above gross experience and dreams is susupti, deep
sleep, and when one comes to the completely spiritual platform, transcending
deep sleep, he attains trance, viçuddha-sattva, or vasudeva-sattva, in which the
Personality of Godhead is revealed.
Ataù çré-kåñëa-nämädi na bhaved grähyam indriyaiù: [Cc. Madhya 17.136] as
long as one is situated in duality, on the sensual platform, gross or subtle,
realization of the original Personality of Godhead is impossible. Sevonmukhe hi
jihvädau svayam eva sphuraty adaù: but when one engages his senses in the
service of the Lord—specifically, when one engages the tongue in chanting
the Hare Kåñëa mantra and tasting only Kåñëa prasäda with a spirit of
service—the Supreme Personality of Godhead is revealed. This is indicated in
this verse by the word çuci-sadmane. Çuci means purified. By the spirit of
rendering service with one's senses, one's entire existence becomes çuci-sadma,
the platform of uncontaminated purity. Dakña therefore offers his respectful
obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is revealed on the
platform of çuci-sadma. In this regard Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
258
quotes the following prayer by Lord Brahmä from the Çrémad-Bhägavatam
(10.14.6): tathäpi bhüman mahimäguëasya te viboddhum arhaty
amaläntar-ätmabhiù. "One whose heart has become completely purified, my
Lord, can understand the transcendental qualities of Your Lordship and can
understand the greatness of Your activities."
TEXTS 27-28
MaNaqiz<aae_NTaôRid Sa&iNaveiXaTa&
SvXai¢-i>aNaRvi>aê i}av*iÙ" )
viö& YaQaa daåi<a PaaÄdXYa&
MaNaqzYaa iNaZk-zRiNTa GaU!Ma( )) 27 ))
Sa vE MaMaaXaezivXaezMaaYaa‚
iNazeDaiNavaR<aSau%aNau>aUiTa" )
Sa SavRNaaMaa Sa c ivìæPa"
Pa[SaqdTaaMaiNaå¢-aTMaXai¢-" )) 28 ))
manéñiëo 'ntar-hådi sanniveçitaà
sva-çaktibhir navabhiç ca trivådbhiù
vahnià yathä däruëi päïcadaçyaà
manéñayä niñkarñanti güòham
sa vai mamäçeña-viçeña-mäyäniñedha-
nirväëa-sukhänubhütiù
sa sarva-nämä sa ca viçva-rüpaù
prasédatäm aniruktätma-çaktiù
SYNONYMS
manéñiëaù—great learned brähmaëas performing ritualistic ceremonies and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
259
sacrifices; antaù-hådi—within the core of the heart; sanniveçitam—being
situated; sva-çaktibhiù—with His own spiritual potencies; navabhiù—also with
the nine different material potencies (the material nature, the total material
energy, the ego, the mind and the five objects of the senses); ca—and (the five
gross material elements and the ten acting and knowledge-gathering senses);
trivådbhiù—by the three material modes of nature; vahnim—fire; yathä—just
like; däruëi—within wood; päïcadaçyam—produced by chanting the fifteen
hymns known as Sämidhené mantras; manéñayä—by purified intelligence;
niñkarñanti—extract; güòham—although not manifesting; saù—that Supreme
Personality of Godhead; vai—indeed; mama—toward me; açeña—all;
viçeña—varieties; mäyä—of the illusory energy; niñedha—by the process of
negation; nirväëa—of liberation; sukha-anubhütiù—who is realized by
transcendental bliss; saù—that Supreme Personality of Godhead;
sarva-nämä—who is the source of all names; saù—that Supreme Personality of
Godhead; ca—also; viçva-rüpaù—the gigantic form of the universe;
prasédatäm—may He be merciful; anirukta—inconceivable; ätma-çaktiù—the
reservoir of all spiritual potencies.
TRANSLATION
Just as great learned brähmaëas who are expert in performing ritualistic
ceremonies and sacrifices can extract the fire dormant within wooden fuel by
chanting the fifteen Sämidhené mantras, thus proving the efficacy of the Vedic
mantras, so those who are actually advanced in consciousness—in other words,
those who are Kåñëa conscious—can find the Supersoul, who by His own
spiritual potency is situated within the heart. The heart is covered by the three
modes of material nature and the nine material elements [material nature, the
total material energy, the ego, the mind and the five objects of sense
gratification], and also by the five material elements and the ten senses. These
twenty-seven elements constitute the external energy of the Lord. Great yogés
meditate upon the Lord, who is situated as the Supersoul, Paramätmä, within
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
260
the core of the heart. May that Supersoul be pleased with me. The Supersoul is
realized when one is eager for liberation from the unlimited varieties of material
life. One actually attains such liberation when he engages in the transcendental
loving service of the Lord and realizes the Lord because of his attitude of
service. The Lord may be addressed by various spiritual names, which are
inconceivable to the material senses. When will that Supreme Personality of
Godhead be pleased with me?
PURPORT
In his commentary to this verse, Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura uses
the word durvijïeyam, which means "very difficult to realize." The pure stage of
existence is described in Bhagavad-gétä (7.28), wherein Kåñëa says:
yeñäà tv anta-gataà päpaà
janänäà puëya-karmaëäm
te dvandva-moha-nirmuktä
bhajante mäà dåòha-vratäù
"Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life, whose sinful
actions are completely eradicated and who are freed from the duality of
delusion, engage themselves in My service with determination."
Elsewhere in Bhagavad-gétä (9.14) the Lord says:
satataà kértayanto mäà
yatantaç ca dåòha-vratäù
namasyantaç ca mäà bhaktyä
nitya-yuktä upäsate
"Always chanting My glories, endeavoring with great determination, bowing
down before Me, these great souls perpetually worship Me with devotion."
One can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead after
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
261
transcending all material impediments. Therefore Lord Kåñëa also says in the
Gétä (7.3):
manuñyäëäà sahasreñu
kaçcid yatati siddhaye
yatatäm api siddhänäà
kaçcin mäà vetti tattvataù
"Out of many thousands among men, one may endeavor for perfection, and of
those who have achieved perfection, hardly one knows Me in truth."
To understand Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one must
undergo severe penances and austerities, but since the path of devotional
service is perfect, by following this process one can very easily come to the
spiritual platform and understand the Lord. This, too, is confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä (18.55), wherein Kåñëa says:
bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti
yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù
tato mäà tattvato jïätvä
viçate tad-anantaram
"One can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead as He is only by
devotional service. And when one is in full consciousness of the Supreme Lord
by such devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God."
Thus although the subject matter is durvijïeyam, extremely difficult to
understand, it becomes easy if one follows the prescribed method. Coming in
touch with the Supreme Personality of Godhead is possible through pure
devotional service, which begins with çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù [SB 7.5.23]. In
this regard, Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura quotes a verse from
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (2.8.5): praviñöaù karëa-randhreëa svänäà
bhäva-saroruham. The process of hearing and chanting enters the core of the
heart, and in this way one becomes a pure devotee. By continuing this process,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
262
one comes to the stage of transcendental love, and then he appreciates the
transcendental name, form, qualities and pastimes of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. In other words, a pure devotee, by devotional service, is able to
see the Supreme Personality of Godhead despite many material impediments,
which are all various energies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Easily
making his way through these impediments, a devotee comes directly in
contact with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. After all, the material
impediments described in these verses are but various energies of the Lord.
When a devotee is eager to see the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he prays
to the Lord:
ayi nanda-tanuja kiìkaraà
patitaà mäà viñame bhavämbudhau
kåpayä tava päda-paìkajasthita-
dhülé-sadåçaà vicintaya
[Cc. Antya 20.32, Çikñäñöaka 5]
"O son of Mahäräja Nanda [Kåñëa], I am Your eternal servitor, yet somehow or
other I have fallen into the ocean of birth and death. Please pick me up from
this ocean of death and place me as one of the atoms at Your lotus feet." Being
pleased with the devotee, the Lord turns all his material impediments into
spiritual service. In this connection Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura
quotes a verse from the Viñëu Puräëa:
hlädiné sandhiné samvit
tvayy ekä sarva-saàsthitau
hläda-täpa-karé miçrä
tvayi no guëa-varjite
In the material world, the spiritual energy of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is manifested as täpa-karé, which means "causing miseries." Everyone
hankers for happiness, but although happiness originally comes from the
pleasure potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, in the material
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
263
world, because of material activities, the pleasure potency of the Lord becomes
a source of miseries (hläda-täpa-karé). False happiness in the material world is
the source of distress, but when one's endeavors for happiness are redirected
toward the satisfaction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, this täpa-karé
element of misery is vanquished. An example given in this connection is that
extracting fire from wood is certainly difficult, but when the fire comes out it
burns the wood to ashes. In other words, experiencing the Supreme Personality
of Godhead is extremely difficult for those devoid of devotional service, but
everything becomes easier for a devotee, and thus he can very easily meet the
Supreme Lord.
Here the prayers say that the form of the Lord is beyond the jurisdiction of
material form and is therefore inconceivable. A devotee prays, however, "My
dear Lord, be pleased with me so that I may very easily see Your transcendental
form and potency." Nondevotees try to understand the Supreme Brahman by
discussions of neti neti. Niñedha-nirväëa-sukhänubhütiù: a devotee, however,
simply by chanting the holy name of the Lord, avoids such laborious
speculations and realizes the existence of the Lord very easily.
TEXT 29
YaÛiàå¢&- vcSaa iNaæiPaTa&
iDaYaa+ai>avaR MaNaSaaeTa YaSYa )
Maa >aUTa( SvæPa& Gau<aæPa& ih TataTa(
Sa vE Gau<aaPaaYaivSaGaRl/+a<a" )) 29 ))
yad yan niruktaà vacasä nirüpitaà
dhiyäkñabhir vä manasota yasya
mä bhüt svarüpaà guëa-rüpaà hi tat tat
sa vai guëäpäya-visarga-lakñaëaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
264
SYNONYMS
yat yat—whatever; niruktam—expressed; vacasä—by words;
nirüpitam—ascertained; dhiyä—by so-called meditation or intelligence;
akñabhiù—by the senses; vä—or; manasä—by the mind; uta—certainly;
yasya—of whom; mä bhüt—may not be; sva-rüpam—the actual form of the
Lord; guëa-rüpam—consisting of the three qualities; hi—indeed; tat tat—that;
saù—that Supreme Personality of Godhead; vai—indeed; guëa-apäya—the
cause of the annihilation of everything made of the material modes of nature;
visarga—and the creation; lakñaëaù—appearing as.
TRANSLATION
Anything expressed by material vibrations, anything ascertained by material
intelligence and anything experienced by the material senses or concocted
within the material mind is but an effect of the modes of material nature and
therefore has nothing to do with the real nature of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. The Supreme Lord is beyond the creation of this material world, for
He is the source of the material qualities and creation. As the cause of all
causes, He exists before the creation and after the creation. I wish to offer my
respectful obeisances unto Him.
PURPORT
One who manufactures names, forms, qualities or paraphernalia pertaining
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead cannot understand Him, since He is
beyond creation. The Supreme Lord is the creator of everything, and this
means that He existed when there was no creation. In other words, His name,
form and qualities are not materially created entities; they are transcendental
always. Therefore by our material concoctions, vibrations and thoughts we
cannot ascertain the Supreme Lord. This is explained in the verse ataù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
265
çré-kåñëa-nämädi na bhaved grähyam indriyaiù [Cc. Madhya 17.136].
Präcetasa, Dakña, herein offers prayers unto the Transcendence, not to
anyone within the material creation. Only fools and rascals think God a
material creation. This is confirmed by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gétä
(9.11):
avajänanti mäà müòhä
mänuñéà tanum äçritam
paraà bhävam ajänanto
mama bhüta-maheçvaram
"Fools deride Me when I descend in the human form. They do not know My
transcendental nature and My supreme dominion over all that be." Therefore,
one must receive knowledge from a person to whom the Lord has revealed
Himself; there is no value in creating an imaginary name or form for the Lord.
Çrépäda Çaìkaräcärya was an impersonalist, but nevertheless he said,
näräyaëaù paro 'vyaktät: Näräyaëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is
not a person of the material world. We cannot assign Näräyaëa a material
designation, as the foolish attempt to do when they speak of daridra-näräyaëa
(poor Näräyaëa). Näräyaëa is always transcendental, beyond this material
creation. How can He become daridra-näräyaëa? Poverty is found within this
material world, but in the spiritual world, there is no such thing as poverty.
Therefore the idea of daridra-näräyaëa is merely a concoction.
Dakña very carefully points out that material designations cannot be names
of the worshipable Lord: yad yan niruktaà vacasä nirüpitam. Nirukta refers to
the Vedic dictionary. One cannot properly understand the Supreme
Personality of Godhead merely by picking up expressions from a dictionary. In
praying to the Lord, Dakña does not wish material names and forms to be the
objects of his worship; rather, he wants to worship the Lord, who existed
before the creation of material dictionaries and names. As confirmed in the
Vedas, yato väco nivartante/ apräpya manasä saha: the name, form, attributes
and paraphernalia of the Lord cannot be ascertained through a material
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
266
dictionary. However, if one reaches the transcendental platform of
understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he becomes well
acquainted with everything, material and spiritual. This is confirmed in
another Vedic mantra: tam eva viditväti måtyum eti. If one can somehow or
other, by the grace of the Lord, understand the transcendental position of the
Lord, one becomes eternal. This is further confirmed by the Lord Himself in
Bhagavad-gétä (4.9):
janma karma ca me divyam
evaà yo vetti tattvataù
tyaktvä dehaà punar janma
naiti mäm eti so 'rjuna
"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities
does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but
attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna." Simply by understanding the Supreme
Lord, one goes beyond birth, death, old age and disease. Çréla Çukadeva
Gosvämé therefore advised Mahäräja Parékñit in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (2.1.5):
tasmäd bhärata sarvätmä
bhagavän éçvaro hariù
çrotavyaù kértitavyaç ca
smartavyaç cecchatäbhayam
"O descendant of King Bharata, one who desires to be free from all miseries
must hear, glorify and also remember the Personality of Godhead. who is the
Supersoul, the controller and the savior from all miseries."
TEXT 30
YaiSMaNa( YaTaae YaeNa c YaSYa YaSMaE
Yad( Yaae YaQaa ku-åTae k-aYaRTae c )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
267
Paravreza& ParMa& Pa[ak( Pa[iSaÖ&
Tad( b]ø TaÖeTaurNaNYadek-Ma( )) 30 ))
yasmin yato yena ca yasya yasmai
yad yo yathä kurute käryate ca
parävareñäà paramaà präk prasiddhaà
tad brahma tad dhetur ananyad ekam
SYNONYMS
yasmin—in whom (the Supreme Personality of Godhead or the supreme place
of repose); yataù—from whom (everything emanates); yena—by whom
(everything is enacted); ca—also; yasya—to whom everything belongs;
yasmai—to whom (everything is offered); yat—which; yaù—who; yathä—as;
kurute—executes; käryate—is performed; ca—also; para-avareñäm—of both, in
the material and spiritual existence; paramam—the supreme; präk—the origin;
prasiddham—well known to everyone; tat—that; brahma—the Supreme
Brahman; tat hetuù—the cause of all causes; ananyat—having no other cause;
ekam—one without a second.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Brahman, Kåñëa, is the ultimate resting place and source of
everything. Everything is done by Him, everything belongs to Him, and
everything is offered to Him. He is the ultimate objective, and whether acting
or causing others to act, He is the ultimate doer. There are many causes, high
and low, but since He is the cause of all causes, He is well known as the
Supreme Brahman who existed before all activities. He is one without a second
and has no other cause. I therefore offer my respects unto Him.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
268
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, is the original cause, as
confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (ahaà sarvasya prabhavaù [Bg. 10.8]). Even this
material world, which is conducted under the modes of material nature, is
caused by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who therefore also has an
intimate relationship with the material world. If the material world were not a
part of His body, the Supreme Lord, the supreme cause, would be incomplete.
Therefore we hear, väsudevaù sarvam iti sa mahätmä sudurlabhaù: [Bg. 7.19] if
one knows that Väsudeva is the original cause of all causes, he becomes a
perfect mahätmä.
The Brahma-saàhitä (5.1) declares:
éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù
sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù
anädir ädir govindaù
sarva-käraëa-käraëam
"Kåñëa, who is known as Govinda, is the supreme controller. He has an eternal,
blissful, spiritual body. He is the origin of all. He has no other origin, for He is
the prime cause of all causes." The Supreme Brahman (tad brahma) is the cause
of all causes, but He has no cause. Anädir ädir govindaù sarva-käraëa-käraëam:
[Bs. 5.1] Govinda, Kåñëa, is the original cause of all causes, but He has no cause
for His appearance as Govinda. Govinda expands in multifarious forms, but
nevertheless they are one. As confirmed by Madhväcärya, ananyaù
sadåçäbhäväd eko rüpädy-abhedataù: Kåñëa has no cause nor any equal, and He
is one because His various forms, as sväàça and vibhinnäàça, are nondifferent
from Himself.
TEXT 31
YaC^¢-Yaae vdTaa& vaidNaa& vE
ivvadSa&vad>auvae >aviNTa )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
269
ku-vRiNTa cEza& MauhuraTMaMaaeh&
TaSMaE NaMaae_NaNTaGau<aaYa >aUMNae )) 31 ))
yac-chaktayo vadatäà vädinäà vai
viväda-saàväda-bhuvo bhavanti
kurvanti caiñäà muhur ätma-mohaà
tasmai namo 'nanta-guëäya bhümne
SYNONYMS
yat-çaktayaù—whose multifarious potencies; vadatäm—speaking different
philosophies; vädinäm—of the speakers; vai—indeed; viväda—of argument;
saàväda—and agreement; bhuvaù—the causes; bhavanti—are;
kurvanti—create; ca—and; eñäm—of them (the theorists);
muhuù—continuously; ätma-moham—bewilderment regarding the existence
of the soul; tasmai—unto Him; namaù—my respectful obeisances;
ananta—unlimited; guëäya—possessing transcendental attributes;
bhümne—the all-pervading Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the all-pervading Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who possesses unlimited transcendental qualities.
Acting from within the cores of the hearts of all philosophers, who propagate
various views, He causes them to forget their own souls while sometimes
agreeing and sometimes disagreeing among themselves. Thus He creates within
this material world a situation in which they are unable to come to a conclusion.
I offer my obeisances unto Him.
PURPORT
Since time immemorial or since the creation of the cosmic manifestation,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
270
the conditioned souls have formed various parties of philosophical speculation,
but this is not true of the devotees. Nondevotees have different ideas of
creation, maintenance and annihilation, and therefore they are called vädés
and prativädés—proponents and counterproponents. It is understood from the
statement of Mahäbhärata that there are many munis, or speculators:
tarko 'pratiñöhaù çrutayo vibhinnä
näsäv åñir yasya mataà na bhinnam
All speculators must disagree with other speculators; otherwise, why should
there be so many opposing parties concerned with ascertaining the supreme
cause?
Philosophy means finding the ultimate cause. As Vedänta-sütra very
reasonably says, athäto brahma jijïäsä: human life is meant for understanding
the ultimate cause. Devotees accept that the ultimate cause is Kåñëa because
this conclusion is supported by all Vedic literature and also by Kåñëa Himself,
who says, ahaà sarvasya prabhavaù: [Bg. 10.8] "I am the source of everything."
Devotees have no problem understanding the ultimate cause of everything, but
nondevotees must face many opposing elements because everyone who wants
to be a prominent philosopher invents his own way. In India there are many
parties of philosophers, such as the dvaita-vädés, advaita-vädés, vaiçeñikas,
mémäàsakas, Mäyävädés and svabhäva-vädés, and each of them opposes the
others. Similarly, in the Western countries there are also many philosophers
with different views of creation, life, maintenance and annihilation. Thus it is
undoubtedly a fact that there are countless philosophers throughout the world,
each of them contradicting the others.
Now, one might ask why there are so many philosophers if the ultimate goal
of philosophy is one. Undoubtedly the ultimate cause is one—the Supreme
Brahman. As Arjuna told Kåñëa in Bhagavad-gétä (10.12):
paraà brahma paraà dhäma
pavitraà paramaà bhavän
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
271
puruñaà çäçvataà divyam
ädi-devam ajaà vibhum
"You are the Supreme Brahman, the ultimate, the supreme abode and purifier,
the Absolute Truth and the eternal divine person. You are the primal God,
transcendental and original, and You are the unborn and all-pervading
beauty." Nondevotee speculators, however, do not accept an ultimate cause
(sarva-käraëa-käraëam [Bs. 5.1]). Because they are ignorant and bewildered
concerning the soul and its activities, even though some of them have a vague
idea of the soul, many controversies arise, and the philosophical speculators
can never reach a conclusion. All of these speculators are envious of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and as Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä
(16.19-20):
tän ahaà dviñataù krürän
saàsäreñu narädhamän
kñipämy ajasram açubhän
äsuréñv eva yoniñu
äsuréà yonim äpannä
müòhä janmani janmani
mäm apräpyaiva kaunteya
tato yänty adhamäà gatim
"Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among men, are
cast by Me into the ocean of material existence, into various demoniac species
of life. Attaining repeated birth among the species of demoniac life, such
persons can never approach Me. Gradually they sink down to the most
abominable type of existence." Because of their envy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, nondevotees are born in demoniac families life after
life. They are great offenders, and because of their offenses the Supreme Lord
keeps them always bewildered. Kurvanti caiñäà muhur ätma-moham: the Lord,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
272
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, purposely keeps them in darkness
(ätma-moham).
The great authority Paräçara, the father of Vyäsadeva, explains the
Supreme Personality of Godhead thus:
jïäna-çakti-balaiçvaryavérya-
tejäàsy açeñataù
bhagavac-chabda-väcyäni
vinä heyair guëädibhiù
The demoniac speculators cannot understand the transcendental qualities,
form, pastimes, strength, knowledge and opulence of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, which are all free from material contamination (vinä heyair
guëädibhiù). These speculators are envious of the existence of the Lord. Jagad
ähur anéçvaram: their conclusion is that the entire cosmic manifestation has
no controller, but is just working naturally. Thus they are kept in constant
darkness, birth after birth, and cannot understand the real cause of all causes.
This is the reason why there are so many schools of philosophical speculation.
TEXT 32
ASTaqiTa NaaSTaqiTa c vSTauiNaïYaae‚
rek-SQaYaaei>aRàivåÖDaMaR<aae" )
Avei+aTa& ik-ÄNa YaaeGaSaa&:YaYaae"
SaMa& Par& ùNaukU-l&/ b*htaTa( )) 32 ))
astéti nästéti ca vastu-niñöhayor
eka-sthayor bhinna-viruddha-dharmaëoù
avekñitaà kiïcana yoga-säìkhyayoù
samaà paraà hy anukülaà båhat tat
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
273
SYNONYMS
asti—there is; iti—thus; na—not; asti—there is; iti—thus; ca—and;
vastu-niñöhayoù—professing knowledge of the ultimate cause;
eka-sthayoù—with one and the same subject matter, establishing Brahman;
bhinna—demonstrating different; viruddha-dharmaëoù—and opposing
characteristics; avekñitam—perceived; kiïcana—that something which;
yoga-säìkhyayoù—of mystic yoga and the Säìkhya philosophy (analysis of the
ways of nature); samam—the same; param—transcendental; hi—indeed;
anukülam—dwelling place; båhat tat—that ultimate cause.
TRANSLATION
There are two parties—namely, the theists and the atheists. The theist, who
accepts the Supersoul, finds the spiritual cause through mystic yoga. The
Säìkhyite, however, who merely analyzes the material elements, comes to a
conclusion of impersonalism and does not accept a supreme cause—whether
Bhagavän, Paramätmä or even Brahman. Instead, he is preoccupied with the
superfluous, external activities of material nature. Ultimately, however, both
parties demonstrate the Absolute Truth because although they offer opposing
statements, their object is the same ultimate cause. They are both approaching
the same Supreme Brahman, to whom I offer my respectful obeisances.
PURPORT
Actually there are two sides to this argument. Some say that the Absolute
has no form (niräkära), and others say that the Absolute has a form (säkära).
Therefore the word form is the common factor, although some accept it (asti or
astika) whereas others try to negate it (nästi or nästika). Since the devotee
considers the word "form" (äkära) the common factor for both, he offers his
respectful obeisances to the form, although others may go on arguing about
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
274
whether the Absolute has a form or not.
In this verse the word yoga-säìkhyayoù is very important. Yoga means
bhakti-yoga because yogés also accept the existence of the all-pervading
Supreme Soul and try to see that Supreme Soul within their hearts. As stated
in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (12.13.1), dhyänävasthita-tad-gatena manasä paçyanti
yaà yoginaù. The devotee tries to come directly in touch with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, whereas the yogé tries to find the Supersoul within the
heart by meditation. Thus, both directly and indirectly, yoga means
bhakti-yoga. Säìkhya, however, means physical study of the cosmic situation
through speculative knowledge. This is generally known as jïäna-çästra. The
Säìkhyites are attached to the impersonal Brahman, but the Absolute Truth is
known in three ways. Brahmeti paramätmeti bhagavän iti çabdyate: [SB 1.2.11]
the Absolute Truth is one, but some accept Him as impersonal Brahman, some
as the Supersoul existing everywhere, and some as Bhagavän, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The central point is the Absolute Truth.
Although the impersonalists and personalists fight with one another, they
focus upon the same Parabrahman, the same Absolute Truth. In the
yoga-çästras, Kåñëa is described as follows: kåñëaà piçaìgämbaram
ambujekñaëaà catur-bhujaà çaìkha-gadädy-udäyudham. Thus the pleasing
appearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead's bodily features, His limbs
and His dress are described. The säìkhya-çästra, however, denies the existence
of the Lord's transcendental form. The säìkhya-çästra says that the Supreme
Absolute Truth has no hands, no legs and no name: hy
anäma-rüpa-guëa-päëi-pädam acakñur açrotram ekam advitéyam api
näma-rüpädikaà nästi. The Vedic mantras say, apäëi-pädo javano grahétä: the
Supreme Lord has no legs and hands, but He can accept whatever is offered to
Him. Actually such statements accept that the Supreme has hands and legs,
but deny that He has material hands and legs. This is why the Absolute is
called apräkåta. Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, has a
sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], a form of eternity, knowledge and bliss, not a
material form. The Säìkhyites, or jïänés, deny the material form, and the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
275
devotees also know very well that the Absolute Truth, Bhagavän, has no
material form.
éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù
sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù
anädir ädir govindaù
sarva-käraëa-käraëam
[Bs. 5.1]
"Kåñëa, who is known as Govinda, is the supreme controller. He has an eternal,
blissful, spiritual body. He is the origin of all. He has no other origin, for He is
the prime cause of all causes." The conception of the Absolute without hands
and legs and the conception of the Absolute with hands and legs are
apparently contradictory, but they both coincide with the same truth about
the Supreme Absolute Person. Therefore the word vastu-niñöhayoù, which is
used herein, indicates that both the yogés and Säìkhyites have faith in the
reality, but are arguing about it from the different viewpoints of material and
spiritual identities. Parabrahman, or båhat, is the common point. The
Säìkhyites and yogés are both situated in that same Brahman, but they differ
because of different angles of vision.
The directions given by the bhakti-çästra point one in the perfect direction
because the Supreme Personality of Godhead says in Bhagavad-gétä, bhaktyä
mäm abhijänäti: [Bg. 18.55] "Only by devotional service am I to be known." The
bhaktas know that the Supreme Person has no material form, whereas the
jïänés simply deny the material form. One should therefore take shelter of the
bhakti-märga, the path of devotion; then everything will be clear. Jïänés
concentrate on the viräö-rüpa, the gigantic universal form of the Lord. This is a
good system in the beginning for those who are extremely materialistic, but
there is no need to think continuously of the viräö-rüpa. When Arjuna was
shown the viräö-rüpa of Kåñëa, he saw it, but he did not want to see it
perpetually. He therefore requested the Lord to return to His original form as
two-armed Kåñëa. In conclusion, learned scholars find no contradictions in the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
276
devotees' concentration upon the spiritual form of the Lord (éçvaraù paramaù
kåñëaù sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù [Bs. 5.1]). In this regard, Çréla Madhväcärya
says that less intelligent nondevotees think that their conclusion is the
ultimate, but because devotees are completely learned, they can understand
that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the ultimate goal.
TEXT 33
Yaae_NauGa]haQa| >aJaTaa& PaadMaUl/‚
MaNaaMaæPaae >aGavaNaNaNTa" )
NaaMaaiNa æPaai<a c JaNMak-MaRi>a‚
>aeRJae Sa Maù& ParMa" Pa[SaqdTau )) 33 ))
yo 'nugrahärthaà bhajatäà päda-mülam
anäma-rüpo bhagavän anantaù
nämäni rüpäëi ca janma-karmabhir
bheje sa mahyaà paramaù prasédatu
SYNONYMS
yaù—who (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); anugraha-artham—to show
His causeless mercy; bhajatäm—to the devotees who always render devotional
service; päda-mülam—to His transcendental lotus feet; anäma—with no
material name; rüpaù—or material form; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; anantaù—unlimited, all-pervading and eternally existing;
nämäni—transcendental holy names; rüpäëi—His transcendental forms;
ca—also; janma-karmabhiù—with His transcendental birth and activities;
bheje—manifests; saù—He; mahyam—unto me; paramaù—the Supreme;
prasédatu—may He be merciful.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
277
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is inconceivably opulent, who is
devoid of all material names, forms and pastimes, and who is all-pervading, is
especially merciful to the devotees who worship His lotus feet. Thus He
exhibits transcendental forms and names with His different pastimes. May that
Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose form is eternal and full of knowledge
and bliss, be merciful to me.
PURPORT
In regard to the significant word anäma-rüpaù, Çré Çrédhara Svämé says,
präkåta-näma-rüpa-rahito 'pi. The word anäma, which means "having no
name," indicates that the Supreme Personality of Godhead has no material
name. Simply by chanting the name of Näräyaëa to call his son, Ajämila
attained salvation. This means that Näräyaëa is not an ordinary mundane
name; it is nonmaterial. The word anäma, therefore, indicates that the names
of the Supreme Lord do not belong to this material world. The vibration of the
Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra is not a material sound, and similarly the form of the
Lord and His appearance and activities are all nonmaterial. To show His
causeless mercy to the devotees, as well as to the nondevotees, Kåñëa, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, appears in this material world with names,
forms and pastimes, all of which are transcendental. Unintelligent men who
cannot understand this think that these names, forms and pastimes are
material, and therefore they deny that He has a name or a form.
Considered with scrutiny, the conclusion of nondevotees, who say that God
has no name, and that of devotees, who know that His name is not material,
are practically the same. The Supreme Personality of Godhead has no material
name, form, birth, appearance or disappearance, but nevertheless, He takes His
birth (janma). As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (4.6):
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
278
ajo 'pi sann avyayätmä
bhütänäm éçvaro 'pi san
prakåtià sväm adhiñöhäya
sambhavämy ätma-mäyayä
Although the Lord is unborn (aja) and His body never undergoes material
changes, He nevertheless appears as an incarnation, maintaining Himself
always in the transcendental stage (çuddha-sattva). Thus He exhibits His
transcendental forms, names and activities. That is His special mercy toward
His devotees. Others may continue merely arguing about whether the
Absolute Truth has form or not, but when a devotee, by the grace of the Lord,
sees the Lord personally, he becomes spiritually ecstatic.
Unintelligent persons say that the Lord does nothing. Actually He has
nothing to do, but nevertheless He has to do everything, because without His
sanction no one can do anything. The unintelligent, however, cannot see how
He is working and how the entire material nature is working under His
direction. His different potencies work perfectly.
na tasya käryaà karaëaà ca vidyate
na tat-samaç cäbhyadhikaç ca dåçyate
paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate
sväbhäviké jïäna-bala-kriyä ca
(Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad 6.8)
[Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]
He has nothing to do personally, for since His potencies are perfect,
everything is immediately done by His will. Persons to whom the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is not revealed cannot see how He is working, and
therefore they think that even if there is God, He has nothing to do or has no
particular name.
Actually the Lord's name already exists because of His transcendental
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
279
activities. The Lord is sometimes called guëa-karma-näma because He is
named according to His transcendental activities. For example, Kåñëa means
"all-attractive." This is the Lord's name because His transcendental qualities
make Him very attractive. As a small boy He lifted Govardhana Hill, and in
His childhood He killed many demons. Such activities are very attractive, and
therefore He is sometimes called Giridhäré, Madhusüdana, Agha-niñüdana and
so on. Because He acted as the son of Nanda Mahäräja, He is called
Nanda-tanuja. These names already exist, but since nondevotees cannot
understand the names of the Lord, He is sometimes called anäma, or nameless.
This means that He has no material names. All His activities are spiritual, and
therefore He has spiritual names.
Generally, less intelligent men are under the impression that the Lord has
no form. Therefore He appears in His original form as Kåñëa,
sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], to carry out His mission of participating in the
Battle of Kurukñetra and pastimes to protect the devotees and vanquish the
demons (pariträëäya sädhünäà vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm [Bg. 4.8]). This is His
mercy. For those who think that He has no form and no work to do, Kåñëa
comes to show that indeed He works. He works so gloriously that no one else
can perform such uncommon acts. Although He appeared as a human being,
He married 16,108 wives, which is impossible for a human being to do. The
Lord performs such activities to show people how great He is, how affectionate
He is and how merciful He is. Although His original name is Kåñëa (kåñëas tu
bhagavän svayam [SB 1.3.28]), He acts in unlimited ways, and therefore
according to His work He has many, many thousands of names.
TEXT 34
Ya" Pa[ak*-TaEjaRNaPaQaEJaRNaaNaa&
YaQaaXaYa& dehGaTaae iv>aaiTa )
YaQaaiNal/" PaaiQaRvMaaié[Taae Gau<a&
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
280
Sa wRìrae Mae ku-åTaa& MaNaaerQaMa( )) 34 ))
yaù präkåtair jïäna-pathair janänäà
yathäçayaà deha-gato vibhäti
yathänilaù pärthivam äçrito guëaà
sa éçvaro me kurutäà manoratham
SYNONYMS
yaù—who; präkåtaiù—lower grade; jïäna-pathaiù—by the paths of worship;
janänäm—of all living entities; yathä-äçayam—according to the desire;
deha-gataù—situated within the core of the heart; vibhäti—manifests;
yathä—just as; anilaù—the air; pärthivam—earthly; äçritaù—receiving;
guëam—the quality (like flavor and color); saù—He; éçvaraù—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; me—my; kurutäm—may He fulfill;
manoratham—desire (for devotional service).
TRANSLATION
As the air carries various characteristics of the physical elements, like the
aroma of a flower or colors resulting from a mixture of dust in the air, the Lord
appears through lower systems of worship according to one's desires, although
He appears as the demigods and not in His original form. What is the use of
these other forms? May the original Supreme Personality of Godhead please
fulfill my desires.
PURPORT
The impersonalists imagine the various demigods to be forms of the Lord.
For example, the Mäyävädés worship five demigods (païcopäsanä). They do not
actually believe in the form of the Lord, but for the sake of worship they
imagine some form to be God. Generally they imagine a form of Viñëu, a form
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
281
of Çiva, and forms of Gaëeça, the sun-god and Durgä. This is called
païcopäsanä. Dakña, however, wanted to worship not an imaginary form, but
the supreme form of Lord Kåñëa.
In this regard, Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura describes the
difference between the Supreme Personality of Godhead and an ordinary
living being. As pointed out in a previous verse, sarvaà pumän veda guëäàç ca
taj-jïo na veda sarva jïam anantam éòe: the omnipotent Supreme Lord knows
everything, but the living being does not actually know the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. As Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä, "I know everything,
but no one knows Me." This is the difference between the Supreme Lord and
an ordinary living being. In a prayer in Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Queen Kunté says,
"My dear Lord, You exist inside and outside, yet no one can see You."
The conditioned soul cannot understand the Supreme Personality of
Godhead by speculative knowledge or by imagination. One must therefore
know the Supreme Personality of Godhead by the grace of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. He reveals Himself, but He cannot be understood by
speculation. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.14.29):
athäpi te deva padämbuja-dvayaprasäda-
leçänugåhéta eva hi
jänäti tattvaà bhagavan-mahimno
na cänya eko 'pi ciraà vicinvan
"My Lord, if one is favored by even a slight trace of the mercy of Your lotus
feet, he can understand the greatness of Your personality. But those who
speculate to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead are unable to
know You, even though they continue to study the Vedas for many years."
This is the verdict of the çästra. An ordinary man may be a great
philosopher and may speculate upon what the Absolute Truth is, what His
form is and where He is existing, but be cannot understand these truths.
Sevonmukhe hi jihvädau svayam eva sphuraty adaù: [Brs. 1.2.234(6)] one can
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
282
understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead only through devotional
service. This is also explained by the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself
in Bhagavad-gétä (18.55). Bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù:
"One can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead as He is only by
devotional service." Unintelligent persons want to imagine or concoct a form
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but devotees want to worship the
actual Personality of Godhead. Therefore Dakña prays, "One may think of You
as personal, impersonal or imaginary, but I wish to pray to Your Lordship that
You fulfill my desires to see You as You actually are."
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura comments that this verse is especially
meant for the impersonalist, who thinks that he himself is the Supreme
because there is no difference between the living being and God. The
Mäyävädé philosopher thinks that there is only one Supreme Truth and that
he is also that Supreme Truth. Actually this is not knowledge but foolishness,
and this verse is especially meant for such fools, whose knowledge has been
stolen by illusion (mäyayäpahåta jïänäù [Bg. 7.15]). Viçvanätha Cakravarté
Öhäkura says that such persons, jïäni-mäninaù, think themselves very
advanced, but actually they are unintelligent.
In regard to this verse, Çréla Madhväcärya says:
svadeha-sthaà harià prähur
adhamä jévam eva tu
madhyamäç cäpy anirëétaà
jéväd bhinnaà janärdanam
There are three classes of men—the lowest (adhama), those in the middle
(madhyama), and the best (uttama). The lowest (adhama) think that there is
no difference between God and the living entity except that the living entity
is under designations whereas the Absolute Truth has no designations. In their
opinion, as soon as the designations of the material body are dissolved, the jéva,
the living entity, will mix with the Supreme. They give the argument of
ghaöäkäça-paöäkäça, in which the body is compared to a pot with the sky within
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
283
and the sky without. When the pot breaks, the sky inside becomes one with
the sky outside, and so the impersonalists say that the living being becomes
one with the Supreme. This is their argument, but Çréla Madhväcärya says that
such an argument is put forward by the lowest class of men. Another class of
men cannot ascertain what the actual form of the Supreme is, but they agree
that there is a Supreme who controls the activities of the ordinary living being.
Such philosophers are accepted as mediocre. The best, however. are those who
understand the Supreme Lord (sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]).
Pürëänandädi-guëakaà sarva jéva-vilakñaëam: His form is completely spiritual,
full of bliss, and completely distinct from that of the conditioned soul or any
other living entity. Uttamäs tu harià prähus täratamyena teñu ca: such
philosophers are the best because they know that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead reveals Himself differently to worshipers in various modes of
material nature. They know that there are thirty-three million demigods just
to convince the conditioned soul that there is a supreme power and to induce
him to agree to worship one of these demigods so that by the association of
devotees he may be able to understand that Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. As Lord Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä, mattaù parataraà nänyat
kiïcid asti dhanaïjaya: [Bg. 7.7] "There is no truth superior to Me." Aham ädir
hi devänäm: [Bg 10.2] "I am the origin of all the demigods." Ahaà sarvasya
prabhavaù: [Bg. 10.8] "I am superior to everyone, even Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva
and the other demigods." These are the conclusions of the çästra, and one who
accepts these conclusions should be considered a first-class philosopher. Such a
philosopher knows that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the Lord of the
demigods (deva-deveçvaraà sütram änandaà präëa-vedinaù).
TEXTS 35-39
é[qXauk- ovac
wiTa STauTa" Sa&STauvTa" Sa TaiSMaàgaMazR<ae )
Pa[aduraSaqTa( ku-åé[eï >aGavaNa( >a¢-vTSal/" )) 35 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
284
k*-TaPaad" SauPa<aa|Sae Pa[l/MbaíMaha>auJa" )
c§-Xa«aiSacMaeRzuDaNau"PaaXaGadaDar" )) 36 ))
PaqTavaSaa gaNaXYaaMa" Pa[SaàvdNae+a<a" )
vNaMaal/aiNavqTaa(r)ae l/SaC^\qvTSak-aESTau>a" )) 37 ))
Mahaik-rq$=k-$=k-" Sfu-rNMak-rku-<@l/" )
k-aHCYax(Gaul/IYavl/YaNaUPaura(r)d>aUizTa" )) 38 ))
}aEl/aeKYaMaaehNa& æPa& ib>a]Ta( i}a>auvNaeìr" )
v*Taae NaardNaNdaÛE" PaazRdE" SaurYaUQaPaE" )
STaUYaMaaNaae_NauGaaYaiÙ" iSaÖGaNDavRcar<aE" )) 39 ))
çré-çuka uväca
iti stutaù saàstuvataù
sa tasminn aghamarñaëe
präduräsét kuru-çreñöha
bhagavän bhakta-vatsalaù
kåta-pädaù suparëäàse
pralambäñöa-mahä-bhujaù
cakra-çaìkhäsi-carmeñudhanuù-
päça-gadä-dharaù
péta-väsä ghana-çyämaù
prasanna-vadanekñaëaù
vana-mälä-nivétäìgo
lasac-chrévatsa-kaustubhaù
mahä-kiréöa-kaöakaù
sphuran-makara-kuëòalaù
käïcy-aìguléya-valayanüpuräìgada-
bhüñitaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
285
trailokya-mohanaà rüpaà
bibhrat tribhuvaneçvaraù
våto närada-nandädyaiù
pärñadaiù sura-yüthapaiù
stüyamäno 'nugäyadbhiù
siddha-gandharva-cäraëaiù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; stutaù—being praised;
saàstuvataù—of Dakña, who was offering prayers; saù—that Supreme
Personality of Godhead; tasmin—in that; aghamarñaëe—holy place celebrated
as Aghamarñaëa; präduräsét—appeared; kuru-çreñöha—O best of the Kuru
dynasty; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
bhakta-vatsalaù—who is very kind to His devotees; kåta-pädaù—whose lotus
feet were placed; suparëa-aàse—on the shoulders of His carrier, Garuòa;
pralamba—very long; añöa-mahä-bhujaù—possessing eight mighty arms;
cakra—disc; çaìkha—conchshell; asi—sword; carma—shield; iñu—arrow;
dhanuù—bow; päça—rope; gadä—club; dharaù—holding; péta-väsäù—with
yellow garments; ghana-çyämaù—whose bodily hue was intense blue-black;
prasanna—very cheerful; vadana—whose face; ékñaëaù—and glance;
vana-mälä—by a garland of forest flowers; nivéta-aìgaù—whose body was
adorned from the neck down to the feet; lasat—shining;
çrévatsa-kaustubhaù—the jewel known as Kaustubha and the mark of Çrévatsa;
mahä-kiréöa—of a very large and gorgeous helmet; kaöakaù—a circle;
sphurat—glittering; makara-kuëòalaù—earrings resembling sharks;
käïcé—with a belt; aìguléya—finger rings; valaya—bracelets; nüpura—ankle
bells; aìgada—upper-arm bracelets; bhüñitaù—decorated;
trai-lokya-mohanam—captivating the three worlds; rüpam—His bodily
features; bibhrat—shining; tri-bhuvana—of the three worlds; éçvaraù—the
Supreme Lord; våtaù—surrounded; närada—by exalted devotees, headed by
Närada; nanda-ädyaiù—and others, like Nanda; pärñadaiù—who are all
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
286
eternal associates; sura-yüthapaiù—as well as by the heads of the demigods;
stüyamänaù—being glorified; anugäyadbhiù—singing after Him;
siddha-gandharva-cäraëaiù—by the Siddhas, Gandharvas and Cäraëas.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari,
who is extremely affectionate to His devotees, was very pleased by the prayers
offered by Dakña, and thus He appeared at that holy place known as
Aghamarñaëa. O Mahäräja Parékñit, best of the Kuru dynasty, the Lord's lotus
feet rested on the shoulders of His carrier, Garuòa, and He appeared with eight
long, mighty, very beautiful arms. In His hands He held a disc, conchshell,
sword, shield, arrow, bow, rope and club—in each hand a different weapon, all
brilliantly shining. His garments were yellow and His bodily hue deep bluish.
His eyes and face were very cheerful, and from His neck to His feet hung a
long garland of flowers. His chest was decorated with the Kaustubha jewel and
the mark of Çrévatsa. On His head was a gorgeous round helmet, and His ears
were decorated with earrings resembling sharks. All these ornaments were
uncommonly beautiful. The Lord wore a golden belt on His waist, bracelets on
His arms, rings on His fingers, and ankle bells on His feet. Thus decorated by
various ornaments, Lord Hari, who is attractive to all the living entities of the
three worlds, is known as Puruñottama, the best personality. He was
accompanied by great devotees like Närada, Nanda and all the principal
demigods, led by the heavenly king, Indra, and the residents of various upper
planetary systems such as Siddhaloka, Gandharvaloka and Cäraëaloka. Situated
on both sides of the Lord and behind Him as well, these devotees offered Him
prayers continuously.
TEXT 40
æPa& TaNMahdaêYa| ivc+YaaGaTaSaaßSa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
287
NaNaaMa d<@vd( >aUMaaE Pa[ôíaTMaa Pa[JaaPaiTa" )) 40 ))
rüpaà tan mahad-äçcaryaà
vicakñyägata-sädhvasaù
nanäma daëòavad bhümau
prahåñöätmä prajäpatiù
SYNONYMS
rüpam—transcendental form; tat—that; mahat-äçcaryam—greatly wonderful;
vicakñya—seeing; ägata-sädhvasaù—in the beginning becoming afraid;
nanäma—offered obeisances; daëòa-vat—like a stick; bhümau—on the
ground; prahåñöa-ätmä—being pleased in his body, mind and soul;
prajäpatiù—the prajäpati known as Dakña.
TRANSLATION
Seeing that wonderful and effulgent form of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Prajäpati Dakña was first somewhat afraid, but then he was very
pleased to see the Lord, and he fell to the ground like a stick [daëòavat] to offer
his respects to the Lord.
TEXT 41
Na ik-ÄNaaedqriYaTauMaXak-Ta( Taqv]Yaa Mauda )
AaPaUirTaMaNaaeÜarEhRidNYa wv iNa‡R„rE" )) 41 ))
na kiïcanodérayitum
açakat tévrayä mudä
äpürita-manodvärair
hradinya iva nirjharaiù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
288
SYNONYMS
na—not; kiïcana—anything; udérayitum—to speak; açakat—he was able;
tévrayä—by very great; mudä—happiness; äpürita—filled; manaù-dväraiù—by
the senses; hradinyaù—the rivers; iva—like; nirjharaiù—by torrents from the
mountain.
TRANSLATION
As rivers are filled by water flowing from a mountain, all of Dakña's senses
were filled with pleasure. Because of his highly elevated happiness, Dakña could
not say anything, but simply remained flat on the ground.
PURPORT
When one actually realizes or sees the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he
is filled with complete happiness. For example, when Dhruva Mahäräja saw the
Lord in his presence, he said, svämin kåtärtho'smi varaà na yäce: [Cc. Madhya
22.42] "My dear Lord, I have nothing to ask from You. Now I am completely
satisfied." Similarly, when Prajäpati Dakña saw the Supreme Lord in his
presence, he simply fell flat, unable to speak or ask Him for anything.
TEXT 42
Ta& TaQaavNaTa& >a¢&- Pa[Jaak-aMa& Pa[JaaPaiTaMa( )
ictaj" SavR>aUTaaNaaiMadMaah JaNaadRNa" )) 42 ))
taà tathävanataà bhaktaà
prajä-kämaà prajäpatim
citta-jïaù sarva-bhütänäm
idam äha janärdanaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
289
SYNONYMS
tam—him (Prajäpati Dakña); tathä—in that way; avanatam—prostrated before
Him; bhaktam—a great devotee; prajä-kämam—desiring to increase the
population; prajäpatim—unto the prajäpati (Dakña); citta-jïaù—who can
understand the hearts; sarva-bhütänäm—of all living entities; idam—this;
äha—said; janärdanaù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who can
appease everyone's desires.
TRANSLATION
Although Prajäpati Dakña could not say anything, when the Lord, who
knows everyone's heart, saw His devotee prostrate in that manner and desiring
to increase the population, He addressed him as follows.
TEXT 43
é[q>aGavaNauvac
Pa[aceTaSa Maha>aaGa Sa&iSaÖSTaPaSaa >avaNa( )
YaC^\ÖYaa MaTParYaa MaiYa >aav& Par& GaTa" )) 43 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
präcetasa mahä-bhäga
saàsiddhas tapasä bhavän
yac chraddhayä mat-parayä
mayi bhävaà paraà gataù
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; präcetasa—O
My dear Präcetasa; mahä-bhäga—O you who are so fortunate;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
290
saàsiddhaù—perfected; tapasä—by your austerities; bhavän—your good self;
yat—because; çraddhayä—by great faith; mat-parayä—whose object is Me;
mayi—in Me; bhävam—ecstasy; param—supreme; gataù—attained.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O most fortunate Präcetasa,
because of your great faith in Me, you have attained the supreme devotional
ecstasy. Indeed, because of your austerities, combined with exalted devotion,
your life is now successful. You have achieved complete perfection.
PURPORT
As the Lord Himself confirms in Bhagavad-gétä (8.15), one reaches the
highest perfection when he attains the fortune of realizing the Supreme
Personality of Godhead:
mäm upetya punar janma
duùkhälayam açäçvatam
näpnuvanti mahätmänaù
saàsiddhià paramäà gatäù
"After attaining Me, the great souls, who are yogés in devotion, never return to
this temporary world, which is full of miseries, because they have attained the
highest perfection." Therefore the Kåñëa consciousness movement teaches one
to follow the path toward the topmost perfection simply by performing
devotional service.
TEXT 44
Pa[qTaae_h& Tae Pa[JaaNaaQa Yatae_SYaaed(b*&h<a& TaPa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
291
MaMaEz k-aMaae >aUTaaNaa& Yad( >aUYaaSauivR>aUTaYa" )) 44 ))
préto 'haà te prajä-nätha
yat te 'syodbåàhaëaà tapaù
mamaiña kämo bhütänäà
yad bhüyäsur vibhütayaù
SYNONYMS
prétaù—very much pleased; aham—I; te—with you; prajä-nätha—O king of
population; yat—because; te—your; asya—of this material world;
udbåàhaëam—causing increase; tapaù—austerity; mama—My; eñaù—this;
kämaù—desire; bhütänäm—of the living entities; yat—which; bhüyäsuù—may
there be; vibhütayaù—advancement in all respects.
TRANSLATION
My dear Prajäpati Dakña, you have performed extreme austerities for the
welfare and growth of the world. My desire also is that everyone within this
world be happy. I am therefore very pleased with you because you are
endeavoring to fulfill My desire for the welfare of the entire world.
PURPORT
After every dissolution of the material cosmos, all the living entities take
shelter in the body of Käraëodakaçäyé Viñëu, and when creation takes place
again, they come forth from His body in their various species to resume their
activities. Why does the creation take place in such a way that the living
entities are put into conditioned life to suffer the threefold miseries imposed
upon them by the material nature? Here the Lord says to Dakña, "You desire to
benefit all living entities, and that is also My desire." The living entities who
come in contact with the material world are meant to be corrected. All the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
292
living entities within this material world have revolted against the service of
the Lord, and therefore they remain within this material world as ever
conditioned, nitya-baddha, taking birth again and again. There is a chance, of
course, of their being liberated, but nevertheless the conditioned souls, not
taking advantage of this opportunity, continue in a life of sense enjoyment,
and thus they are punished by birth and death again and again. This is the law
of nature. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (7.14):
daivé hy eñä guëa-mayé
mama mäyä duratyayä
mäm eva ye prapadyante
mäyäm etäà taranti te
"This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material nature,
is difficult to overcome. But those who have surrendered unto Me can easily
cross beyond it." Elsewhere in Bhagavad-gétä (15.7) the Lord says:
mamaiväàço jéva-loke
jéva-bhütaù sanätanaù
manaù ñañöhänéndriyäëi
prakåti-sthäni karñati
"The living entities in this conditioned world are My eternal, fragmental parts.
Due to conditioned life, they are struggling very hard with the six senses,
which include the mind." The living entity's struggle for existence within the
material world is due to his rebellious nature. Unless a living entity surrenders
to Kåñëa, he must continue this life of struggle.
The Kåñëa consciousness movement is not a fad. It is a bona fide movement
intended to promote the welfare of all conditioned souls by trying to elevate
everyone to the platform of Kåñëa consciousness. If one does not come to this
platform, he must continue in material existence perpetually, sometimes in the
upper planets and sometimes in the lower planets. As confirmed in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
293
Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 20.118), kabhu svarge uöhäya, kabhu narake
òubäya: the conditioned soul sometimes descends into nescience and
sometimes gets some relief by being relatively freed from it. This is the life of
the conditioned soul.
Prajäpati Dakña is trying to benefit the conditioned souls by begetting them
to give them a life with a chance for liberation. Liberation means surrender to
Kåñëa. If one begets children with the purpose of training them to surrender to
Kåñëa, fatherhood is very good. Similarly, when the spiritual master trains the
conditioned souls to become Kåñëa conscious, his position is successful. If one
gives the conditioned souls a chance to become Kåñëa conscious, all his
activities are approved by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is
extremely pleased, as stated here (préto 'ham). Following the examples of the
previous äcäryas, all the members of the Kåñëa consciousness movement
should try to benefit the conditioned souls by inducing them to become Kåñëa
conscious and giving them all facilities to do so. Such activities constitute real
welfare work. By such activities, a preacher or anyone who endeavors to spread
Kåñëa consciousness is recognized by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As
the Lord Himself confirms in Bhagavad-gétä (18.68-69):
ya idaà paramaà guhyaà
mad-bhakteñv abhidhäsyati
bhaktià mayi paräà kåtvä
mäm evaiñyaty asaàçayaù
na ca tasmän manuñyeñu
kaçcin me priya-kåttamaù
bhavitä na ca me tasmäd
anyaù priyataro bhuvi
"For one who explains the supreme secret to the devotees, devotional service is
guaranteed, and at the end he will come back to Me. There is no servant in
this world more dear to Me than he, nor will there ever be one more dear."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
294
TEXT 45
b]øa >avae >avNTaê MaNavae ivbuDaeìra" )
iv>aUTaYaae MaMa ùeTaa >aUTaaNaa& >aUiTaheTav" )) 45 ))
brahmä bhavo bhavantaç ca
manavo vibudheçvaräù
vibhütayo mama hy etä
bhütänäà bhüti-hetavaù
SYNONYMS
brahmä—Lord Brahmä; bhavaù—Lord Çiva; bhavantaù—all of you prajäpatis;
ca—and; manavaù—the Manus; vibudha-éçvaräù—all the different demigods
(such as the sun, the moon, Venus, Mars and Jupiter, who are all in charge of
various activities for the welfare of the world); vibhütayaù—expansions of
energy; mama—My; hi—indeed; etäù—all these; bhütänäm—of all the living
entities; bhüti—of welfare; hetavaù—causes.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva, the Manus, all the other demigods in the higher
planetary systems, and you prajäpatis, who are increasing the population, are
working for the benefit of all living entities. Thus you expansions of My
marginal energy are incarnations of My various qualities.
PURPORT
There are various types of incarnations or expansions of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The expansions of His personal self, or viñëu-tattva,
are called sväàça expansions, whereas the living entities, who are not
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
295
viñëu-tattva but jéva-tattva, are called vibhinnäàça, separated expansions.
Although Prajäpati Dakña is not on the same level as Lord Brahmä and Lord
Çiva, he is compared to them because he engages in the service of the Lord. In
the service of the Personality of Godhead, it is not that Lord Brahmä is
considered very great while an ordinary human being trying to preach the
glories of the Lord is considered very low. There are no such distinctions.
Regardless of whether materially high or materially low, anyone engaged in the
service of the Lord is spiritually very dear to Him. In this regard, Çréla
Madhväcärya gives this quotation from the Tantra-nirëaya:
viçeña-vyakti-pätratväd
brahmädyäs tu vibhütayaù
tad-antaryämiëaç caiva
matsyädyä vibhaväù småtäù
From Lord Brahmä down, all the living entities engaged in the service of the
Lord are extraordinary and are called vibhüti. As the Lord says in
Bhagavad-gétä (10.41):
yad yad vibhütimat sattvaà
çrémad ürjitam eva vä
tat tad evävagaccha tvaà
mama tejo-'àça-sambhavam
"Know that all beautiful, glorious and mighty creations spring from but a spark
of My splendor." A living entity especially empowered to act on behalf of the
Lord is called vibhüti, whereas the viñëu-tattva incarnations of the Lord, such
as the Matsya avatära (keçava dhåta-ména-çaréra jaya jagad-éça hare), are called
vibhava.
TEXT 46
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
296
TaPaae Mae ôdYa& b]ø&STaNauivRÛa i§-Yaak*-iTa" )
A(r)aiNa §-Tavae JaaTaa DaMaR AaTMaaSav" Saura" )) 46 ))
tapo me hådayaà brahmaàs
tanur vidyä kriyäkåtiù
aìgäni kratavo jätä
dharma ätmäsavaù suräù
SYNONYMS
tapaù—austerities like mental control, mystic yoga and meditation; me—My;
hådayam—heart; brahman—O brähmaëa; tanuù—the body; vidyä—the
knowledge derived from Vedic scripture; kriyä—spiritual activities;
äkåtiù—form; aìgäni—the limbs of the body; kratavaù—the ritualistic
ceremonies and sacrifices mentioned in the Vedic literature;
jätäù—completed; dharmaù—the religious principles for executing the
ritualistic ceremonies; ätmä—My soul; asavaù—life airs; suräù—the demigods
who execute My orders in different departments of the material world.
TRANSLATION
My dear brähmaëa, austerity in the form of meditation is My heart, Vedic
knowledge in the form of hymns and mantras constitutes My body, and spiritual
activities and ecstatic emotions are My actual form. The ritualistic ceremonies
and sacrifices, when properly conducted, are the various limbs of My body, the
unseen good fortune proceeding from pious or spiritual activities constitutes My
mind, and the demigods who execute My orders in various departments are My
life and soul.
PURPORT
Sometimes atheists argue that since God is invisible to their eyes, they do
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
297
not believe in God. For them the Supreme Lord is describing a method by
which one can see God in His impersonal form. Intelligent persons can see
God in His personal form, as stated in the çästras, but if one is very eager to see
the Supreme Personality of Godhead immediately, face to face, he can see the
Supreme Lord through this description, which portrays the various internal
and external parts of His body.
To engage in tapasya, or denial of material activities, is the first principle of
spiritual life. Then there are spiritual activities, such as the performance of
Vedic ritualistic sacrifices, study of the Vedic knowledge, meditation upon the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and chanting of the Hare Kåñëa
mahä-mantra. One should also respect the demigods and understand how they
are situated, how they act and how they manage the activities of the various
departments of this material world. In this way one can see how God is
existing and how everything is managed perfectly because of the presence of
the Supreme Lord. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (9.10):
mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù
süyate sa-caräcaram
hetunänena kaunteya
jagad viparivartate
"This material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kunté, and it is
producing all moving and nonmoving beings. By its rule this manifestation is
created and annihilated again and again." If one is unable to see the Supreme
Lord although He is present as Kåñëa in His various incarnations, one may see
the Supreme Lord's impersonal feature, according to the direction of the
Vedas, by seeing the activities of material nature.
Anything done under the direction of the Vedic injunctions is called
dharma, as described by the order carriers of Yamaräja (SB 6.1.40):
veda-praëihito dharmo
hy adharmas tad-viparyayaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
298
vedo näräyaëaù säkñät
svayambhür iti çuçruma
"That which is prescribed in the Vedas constitutes dharma, the religious
principles, and the opposite of that is irreligion. The Vedas are directly the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa, and are self-born. This we have
heard from Yamaräja."
In this connection, Çréla Madhväcärya comments:
tapo 'bhimäné rudras tu
viñëor hådayam äçritaù
vidyä rüpä tathaivomä
viñëos tanum upäçritä
çåìgärädy-äkåti-gataù
kriyätmä päka-çäsanaù
aìgeñu kratavaù sarve
madhya-dehe ca dharma-räö
präëo väyuç citta-gato
brahmädyäù sveñu devatäù
The various demigods are all acting under the protection of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and according to their various actions the demigods
are differently named.
TEXT 47
AhMaevaSaMaevaGa]e NaaNYaTa( ik-ÄaNTar& bih" )
Sa&jaNaMaa}aMaVYa¢&- Pa[SauáiMav ivìTa" )) 47 ))
aham eväsam evägre
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
299
nänyat kiïcäntaraà bahiù
saàjïäna-mätram avyaktaà
prasuptam iva viçvataù
SYNONYMS
aham—I, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; eva—only; äsam—was;
eva—certainly; agre—in the beginning, before the creation; na—not;
anyat—other; kiïca—anything; antaram—besides Me; bahiù—external (since
the cosmic manifestation is external to the spiritual world, the spiritual world
existed when there was no material world); saàjïäna-mätram—only the
consciousness of the living entities; avyaktam—unmanifested;
prasuptam—sleeping; iva—like; viçvataù—all over.
TRANSLATION
Before the creation of this cosmic manifestation, I alone existed with My
specific spiritual potencies. Consciousness was then unmanifested, just as one's
consciousness is unmanifested during the time of sleep.
PURPORT
The word aham indicates a person. As explained in the Vedas, nityo
nityänäà cetanaç cetanänäm (Kaöha Upaniñad 2.2.13): the Lord is the supreme
eternal among innumerable eternals and the supreme living being among the
innumerable living beings. The Lord is a person who also has impersonal
features. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.11):
vadanti tat tattva-vidas
tattvaà yaj jïänam advayam
brahmeti paramätmeti
bhagavän iti çabdyate
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
300
"Learned transcendentalists who know the Absolute Truth call this nondual
substance Brahman, Paramätmä or Bhagavän." Consideration of the
Paramätmä and impersonal Brahman arose after the creation; before the
creation, only the Supreme Personality of Godhead existed. As firmly declared
in Bhagavad-gétä (18.55), the Lord can be understood only by bhakti-yoga. The
ultimate cause, the supreme cause of creation, is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who can be understood only by bhakti-yoga. He cannot be
understood by speculative philosophical research or by meditation, since all
such processes came into existence after the material creation. The impersonal
and localized conceptions of the Supreme Lord are more or less materially
contaminated. The real spiritual process, therefore, is bhakti-yoga. As the Lord
says, bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti: [Bg. 18.55] "Only by devotional service can I be
understood." Before the creation, the Lord existed as a person, as indicated
here by the word aham. When Prajäpati Dakña saw Him as a person, who was
beautifully dressed and ornamented, he actually experienced the meaning of
this word aham through devotional service.
Each person is eternal. Because the Lord says that He existed as a person
before the creation (agre) and will also exist after the annihilation, the Lord is
a person eternally. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura therefore quotes
these verses from Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.9.13-14):
na cäntar na bahir yasya
na pürvaà näpi cäparam
pürväparaà bahiç cäntar
jagato yo jagac ca yaù
taà matvätmajam avyaktaà
martya-liìgam adhokñajam
gopikolükhale dämnä
babandha präkåtaà yathä
The Personality of Godhead appeared in Våndävana as the son of mother
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
301
Yaçodä, who bound the Lord with rope just as an ordinary mother binds a
material child. There are actually no divisions of external and internal for the
form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead (sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]),
but when He appears in His own form the unintelligent think Him an
ordinary person. Avajänanti mäà müòhä mänuñéà tanum äçritam: [Bg. 9.11]
although He comes in His own body, which never changes. müòhas, the
unintelligent, think that the impersonal Brahman has assumed a material body
to come in the form of a person. Ordinary living beings assume material bodies,
but the Supreme Personality of Godhead does not. Since the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is the supreme consciousness, it is stated herein that
saàjïäna-mätram, the original consciousness, Kåñëa consciousness, was
unmanifested before the creation, although the consciousness of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is the origin of everything. The Lord says in
Bhagavad-gétä (2.12), "Never was there a time when I did not exist, nor you,
nor all these kings; nor in the future shall any of us cease to be." Thus the
Lord's person is the Absolute Truth in the past, present and future.
In this regard, Madhväcärya quotes two verses from the Matsya Puräëa:
nänä-varëo haris tv eko
bahu-çérña-bhujo rüpät
äsél laye tad-anyat tu
sükñma-rüpaà çriyaà vinä
asuptaù supta iva ca
mélitäkño 'bhavad dhariù
anyatränädaräd viñëau
çréç ca léneva kathyate
sükñmatvena harau sthänäl
lénam anyad apéñyate
After the annihilation of everything, the Supreme Lord, because of His
sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], remains in His original form, but since the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
302
other living entities have material bodies, the matter merges into matter, and
the subtle form of the spirit soul remains within the body of the Lord. The
Lord does not sleep, but the ordinary living entities remain asleep until the
next creation. An unintelligent person thinks that the opulence of the
Supreme Lord is nonexistent after the annihilation, but that is not a fact. The
opulence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead remains as it is in the
spiritual world; only in the material world is everything dissolved. Brahma-léna,
merging into the Supreme Brahman, is not actual léna, or annihilation, for the
subtle form remaining in the Brahman effulgence will return to the material
world after the material creation and again assume a material form. This is
described as bhütvä bhütvä praléyate [Bg. 8.19]. When the material body is
annihilated, the spirit soul remains in a subtle form, which later assumes
another material body. This is true for the conditioned souls, but the Supreme
Personality of Godhead remains eternally in His original consciousness and
spiritual body.
TEXT 48
MaYYaNaNTaGau<ae_NaNTae Gau<aTaae Gau<aivGa]h" )
YadaSaqTa( TaTa WvaÛ" SvYaM>aU" SaMa>aUdJa" )) 48 ))
mayy ananta-guëe 'nante
guëato guëa-vigrahaù
yadäsét tata evädyaù
svayambhüù samabhüd ajaù
SYNONYMS
mayi—in Me; ananta-guëe—possessing unlimited potency; anante—unlimited;
guëataù—from My potency known as mäyä; guëa-vigrahaù—the universe,
which is a result of the modes of nature; yadä—when; äsét—it came into
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
303
existence; tataù—therein; eva—indeed; ädyaù—the first living being;
svayambhüù—Lord Brahmä; samabhüt—was born; ajaù—although not from a
material mother.
TRANSLATION
I am the reservoir of unlimited potency, and therefore I am known as
unlimited or all-pervading. From My material energy the cosmic manifestation
appeared within Me, and in this universal manifestation appeared the chief
being, Lord Brahmä, who is your source and is not born of a material mother.
PURPORT
This is a description of the history of the universal creation. The first cause
is the Lord Himself, the Supreme Person. From Him, Brahmä is created, and
Brahmä takes charge of the affairs of the universe. The universal affairs of the
material creation depend upon the material energy of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, who is therefore the cause of the material creation. The entire
cosmic manifestation is described herein as guëa-vigrahaù, the form of the
Lord's qualities. From the cosmic universal form, the first creation is Lord
Brahmä, who is the cause of all living entities. In this regard, Çréla
Madhväcärya describes the unlimited attributes of the Lord:
praty-ekaço guëänäà tu
niùsématvam udéryate
tadänantyaà tu guëatas
te cänantä hi saìkhyayä
ato 'nanta-guëo viñëur
guëato 'nanta eva ca
Paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate: [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport] the Lord has
innumerable potencies, all of which are unlimited. Therefore the Lord Himself
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
304
and all His qualities, forms, pastimes and paraphernalia are also unlimited.
Because Lord Viñëu has unlimited attributes, He is known as Ananta.
TEXTS 49-50
Sa vE Yada Mahadevae MaMa vqYaaeRPab*&ihTa" )
MaeNae i%l/iMavaTMaaNaMauÛTa" SvGaRk-MaRi<a )) 49 ))
AQa Mae_i>aihTaae devSTaPaae_TaPYaTa daå<aMa( )
Nav ivìSa*Jaae YauZMaaNa( YaeNaadavSa*Jad( iv>au" )) 50 ))
sa vai yadä mahädevo
mama véryopabåàhitaù
mene khilam ivätmänam
udyataù svarga-karmaëi
atha me 'bhihito devas
tapo 'tapyata däruëam
nava viçva-såjo yuñmän
yenädäv asåjad vibhuù
SYNONYMS
saù—that Lord Brahmä; vai—indeed; yadä—when; mahä-devaù—the chief of
all the demigods; mama—My; vérya-upabåàhitaù—being increased by the
potency; mene—thought; khilam—incapable; iva—as if; ätmänam—himself;
udyataù—attempting; svarga-karmaëi—in the creation of the universal affairs;
atha—at that time; me—by Me; abhihitaù—advised; devaù—that Lord
Brahmä; tapaù—austerity; atapyata—performed; däruëam—extremely
difficult; nava—nine; viçva-såjaù—important personalities to create the
universe; yuñmän—all of you; yena—by whom; ädau—in the beginning;
asåjat—created; vibhuù—the great.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
305
TRANSLATION
When the chief lord of the universe, Lord Brahmä [Svayambhü], having
been inspired by My energy, was attempting to create, he thought himself
incapable. Therefore I gave him advice, and in accordance with My instructions
he underwent extremely difficult austerities. Because of these austerities, the
great Lord Brahmä was able to create nine personalities, including you, to help
him in the functions of creation.
PURPORT
Nothing is possible without tapasya. Lord Brahmä, however, was empowered
to create this entire universe because of his austerities. The more we engage in
austerities, the more we become powerful by the grace of the Lord. Therefore
Åñabhadeva advised His sons, tapo divyaà putrakä yena sattvaà çuddhyed:
"One should engage in penance and austerity to attain the divine position of
devotional service. By such activity, one's heart is purified." (SB 5.5.1) In our
material existence we are impure, and therefore we cannot do anything
wonderful, but if we purify our existence by tapasya, we can do wonderful
things by the grace of the Lord. Therefore tapasya is very important, as stressed
in this verse.
TEXT 51
Wza PaÄJaNaSYaa(r) duihTaa vE Pa[JaaPaTae" )
AiSa¥-I NaaMa PaÒqTve Pa[JaeXa Pa[iTaGa*ùTaaMa( )) 51 ))
eñä païcajanasyäìga
duhitä vai prajäpateù
asikné näma patnétve
prajeça pratigåhyatäm
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
306
SYNONYMS
eñä—this; païcajanasya—of Païcajana; aìga—O My dear son; duhitä—the
daughter; vai—indeed; prajäpateù—another prajäpati; asikné näma—of the
name Asikné; patnétve—as your wife; prajeça—O prajäpati; pratigåhyatäm—let
her be accepted.
TRANSLATION
O My dear son Dakña, Prajäpati Païcajana has a daughter named Asikné,
whom I offer to you so that you may accept her as your wife.
TEXT 52
iMaQauNaVYavaYaDaMaRSTv& Pa[JaaSaGaRiMaMa& PauNa" )
iMaQauNaVYavaYaDaiMaR<Yaa& >aUirXaae >aaviYaZYaiSa )) 52 ))
mithuna-vyaväya-dharmas tvaà
prajä-sargam imaà punaù
mithuna-vyaväya-dharmiëyäà
bhüriço bhävayiñyasi
SYNONYMS
mithuna—of man and woman; vyaväya—sexual activities; dharmaù—who
accepts by religious performance; tvam—you; prajä-sargam—creation of living
entities; imam—this; punaù—again; mithuna—of man and woman united;
vyaväya-dharmiëyäm—in her according to the religious performance of sexual
intercourse; bhüriçaù—manifold; bhävayiñyasi—you will cause to be.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
307
TRANSLATION
Now unite in sexual life as man and woman, and in this way, by sexual
intercourse, you will be able to beget hundreds of children in the womb of this
girl to increase the population.
PURPORT
The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (7.11), dharmäviruddho bhüteñu kämo 'smi: "I
am sex that is not contrary to religious principles." Sexual intercourse ordained
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead is dharma, a religious principle, but it
is not intended for sense enjoyment. Indulgence in sense enjoyment through
sexual intercourse is not allowed by the Vedic principles. One may follow the
natural tendency for sex life only to beget children. Therefore the Lord told
Dakña in this verse, "This girl is offered to you only for sex life to beget
children, not for any other purpose. She is very fertile, and therefore you will
be able to have as many children as you can beget."
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura remarks in this connection that
Dakña was given the facility for unlimited sexual intercourse. In Dakña's
previous life he was also known as Dakña, but in the course of performing
sacrifices he offended Lord Çiva, and thus his head was replaced with that of a
goat. Then Dakña gave up his life because of his degraded condition, but
because he maintained the same unlimited sexual desires, he underwent
austerities by which he satisfied the Supreme Lord, who then gave him
unlimited potency for sexual intercourse.
It should be noted that although such a facility for sexual intercourse is
achieved by the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, this facility is
not offered to advanced devotees, who are free from material desires
(anyäbhiläñitä-çünyam [Cc. Madhya 19.167]). In this connection it may be noted
that if the American boys and girls engaged in the Kåñëa consciousness
movement want to advance in Kåñëa consciousness to achieve the supreme
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
308
benefit of loving service to the Lord, they should refrain from indulging in this
facility for sex life. Therefore we advise that one should at least refrain from
illicit sex. Even if there are opportunities for sex life, one should voluntarily
accept the limitation of having sex only for progeny, not for any other
purpose. Kardama Muni was also given the facility for sex life, but he had only
a slight desire for it. Therefore after begetting children in the womb of
Devahüti, Kardama Muni became completely renounced. The purport is that if
one wants to return home, back to Godhead, one should voluntarily refrain
from sex life. Sex should be accepted only as much as needed, not unlimitedly.
One should not think that Dakña received the favor of the Lord by
receiving the facilities for unlimited sex. Later verses will reveal that Dakña
again committed an offense, this time at the lotus feet of Närada. Therefore
although sex life is the topmost enjoyment in the material world and although
one may have an opportunity for sexual enjoyment by the grace of God, this
entails a risk of committing offenses. Dakña was open to such offenses, and
therefore, strictly speaking, he was not actually favored by the Supreme Lord.
One should not seek the favor of the Lord for unlimited potency in sex life.
TEXT 53
Tvtaae_DaSTaaTa( Pa[Jaa" SavaR iMaQauNaq>aUYa MaaYaYaa )
MadqYaYaa >aivZYaiNTa hirZYaiNTa c Mae bil/Ma( )) 53 ))
tvatto 'dhastät prajäù sarvä
mithuné-bhüya mäyayä
madéyayä bhaviñyanti
hariñyanti ca me balim
SYNONYMS
tvattaù—you; adhastät—after; prajäù—the living entities; sarväù—all;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
309
mithuné-bhüya—having sex life; mäyayä—because of the influence or facilities
given by the illusory energy; madéyayä—My; bhaviñyanti—they will become;
hariñyanti—they will offer; ca—also; me—unto Me; balim—presentations.
TRANSLATION
After you give birth to many hundreds and thousands of children, they will
also be captivated by My illusory energy and will engage, like You, in sexual
intercourse. But because of My mercy to you and them, they will also be able to
give Me presentations in devotion.
TEXT 54
é[qXauk- ovac
wTYau¤-a iMazTaSTaSYa >aGavaNa( ivì>aavNa" )
SvPanaePal/BDaaQaR wv Ta}aEvaNTadRDae hir" )) 54 ))
çré-çuka uväca
ity uktvä miñatas tasya
bhagavän viçva-bhävanaù
svapnopalabdhärtha iva
tatraiväntardadhe hariù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé continued to speak; iti—thus;
uktvä—saying; miñataù tasya—while he (Dakña) was personally looking on;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; viçva-bhävanaù—who
creates the universal affairs; svapna-upalabdha-arthaù—an object obtained in
dreaming; iva—like; tatra—there; eva—certainly; antardadhe—disappeared;
hariù—the Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
310
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: After the creator of the entire universe, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, had spoken in this way in the presence
of Prajäpati Dakña, He immediately disappeared as if He were an object
experienced in a dream.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, Fourth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Haàsa-guhya Prayers Offered to the Lord by
Prajäpati Dakña."
5. Närada Muni Cursed by Prajäpati Dakña
This chapter relates how all the sons of Dakña were delivered from the
clutches of the material energy by following the advice of Närada, who was
therefore cursed by Dakña.
Influenced by the external energy of Lord Viñëu, Prajäpati Dakña begot ten
thousand sons in the womb of his wife, Päïcajané. These sons, who were all of
the same character and mentality, were known as the Haryaçvas. Ordered by
their father to create more and more population, the Haryaçvas went west to
the place where the River Sindhu (now the Indus) meets the Arabian Sea. In
those days this was the site of a holy lake named Näräyaëa-saras, where there
were many saintly persons. The Haryaçvas began practicing austerities,
penances and meditation, which are the engagements of the highly exalted
renounced order of life. However, when Çréla Närada Muni saw these boys
engaged in such commendable austerities simply for material creation, he
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
311
thought it better to release them from this tendency. Närada Muni described
to the boys their ultimate goal of life and advised them not to become ordinary
karmés to beget children. Thus all the sons of Dakña became enlightened and
left, never to return.
Prajäpati Dakña, who was very sad at the loss of his sons, begot one
thousand more sons in the womb of his wife, Päïcajané, and ordered them to
increase progeny. These sons, who were named the Savaläçvas, also engaged in
worshiping Lord Viñëu to beget children, but Närada Muni convinced them to
become mendicants and not beget children. Foiled twice in his attempts to
increase population, Prajäpati Dakña became most angry at Närada Muni and
cursed him, saying that in the future he would not be able to stay anywhere.
Since Närada Muni, being fully qualified, was fixed in tolerance, he accepted
Dakña's curse.
TEXT 1
é[qXauk- ovac
TaSYaa& Sa PaaÄJaNYaa& vE ivZ<auMaaYaaePab*&ihTa" )
hYaRìSa&jaNaYauTa& Pau}aaNaJaNaYad( iv>au" )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
tasyäà sa päïcajanyäà vai
viñëu-mäyopabåàhitaù
haryaçva-saàjïän ayutaà
puträn ajanayad vibhuù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; tasyäm—in her; saù—Prajäpati
Dakña; päïcajanyäm—his wife named Päïcajané; vai—indeed;
viñëu-mäyä-upabåàhitaù—being made capable by the illusory energy of Lord
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
312
Viñëu; haryaçva-saàjïän—named the Haryaçvas; ayutam—ten thousand;
puträn—sons; ajanayat—begot; vibhuù—being powerful.
TRANSLATION
Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: Impelled by the illusory energy of Lord
Viñëu, Prajäpati Dakña begot ten thousand sons in the womb of Päïcajané
[Asikné]. My dear King, these sons were called the Haryaçvas.
TEXT 2
APa*QaGDaMaRXaql/aSTae SaveR da+aaYa<aa Na*Pa )
iPa}aa Pa[ae¢-a" Pa[JaaSaGaeR Pa[Taqcq& Pa[YaYauidRXaMa( )) 2 ))
apåthag-dharma-çéläs te
sarve däkñäyaëä nåpa
piträ proktäù prajä-sarge
pratécéà prayayur diçam
SYNONYMS
apåthak—alike in; dharma-çéläù—good character and behavior; te—they;
sarve—all; däkñäyaëäù—the sons of Dakña; nåpa—O King; piträ—by their
father; proktäù—ordered; prajä-sarge—to increase the population;
pratécém—we stern; prayayuù—they went to; diçam—the direction.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, all the sons of Prajäpati Dakña were alike in being very gentle
and obedient to the orders of their father. When their father ordered them to
beget children, they all went in the western direction.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
313
TEXT 3
Ta}a NaaraYa<aSarSTaqQa| iSaNDauSaMaud]Yaae" )
Sa(r)Maae Ya}a SauMahNMauiNaiSaÖiNazeivTaMa( )) 3 ))
tatra näräyaëa-saras
térthaà sindhu-samudrayoù
saìgamo yatra sumahan
muni-siddha-niñevitam
SYNONYMS
tatra—in that direction; näräyaëa-saraù—the lake named Näräyaëa-saras;
tértham—very holy place; sindhu-samudrayoù—of the River Sindhu and the
sea; saìgamaù—confluence; yatra—where; su-mahat—very great; muni—by
sages; siddha—and perfected human beings; niñevitam—frequented.
TRANSLATION
In the west, where the River Sindhu meets the sea, there is a great place of
pilgrimage known as Näräyaëa-saras. Many sages and others advanced in
spiritual consciousness live there.
TEXTS 4-5
TaduPaSPaXaRNaadev iviNaDaURTaMal/aXaYaa" )
DaMaeR PaarMah&SYae c Pa[aeTPaàMaTaYaae_PYauTa )) 4 ))
TaeiPare TaPa WvaeGa]& iPa}aadeXaeNa YaiN}aTaa" )
Pa[Jaaivv*ÖYae YataaNa( devizRSTaaNa( ddXaR h )) 5 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
314
tad-upasparçanäd eva
vinirdhüta-maläçayäù
dharme päramahaàsye ca
protpanna-matayo 'py uta
tepire tapa evograà
piträdeçena yantritäù
prajä-vivåddhaye yattän
devarñis tän dadarça ha
SYNONYMS
tat—of that holy place; upasparçanät—from bathing in that water or touching
it; eva—only; vinirdhüta—completely washed away; mala-äçayäù—whose
impure desires; dharme—to the practices; päramahaàsye—executed by the
topmost class of sannyäsés; ca—also; protpanna—highly inclined;
matayaù—whose minds; api uta—although; tepire—they executed;
tapaù—penances; eva—certainly; ugram—severe; pitå-ädeçena—by the order
of their father; yantritäù—engaged; prajä-vivåddhaye—for the purpose of
increasing the population; yattän—ready; devarñiù—the great sage Närada;
tän—them; dadarça—visited; ha—indeed.
TRANSLATION
In that holy place, the Haryaçvas began regularly touching the lake's waters
and bathing in them. Gradually becoming very much purified, they became
inclined toward the activities of paramahaàsas. Nevertheless, because their
father had ordered them to increase the population, they performed severe
austerities to fulfill his desires. One day, when the great sage Närada saw those
boys performing such fine austerities to increase the population, Närada
approached them.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
315
TEXTS 6-8
ovac caQa hYaRìa" k-Qa& ó+YaQa vE Pa[Jaa" )
Ad*îaNTa& >auvae YaUYa& bail/Xaa bTa Paal/k-a" )) 6 ))
TaQaEk-Pauåz& raí\& ibl&/ cad*íiNaGaRMaMa( )
bhuæPaa& iñYa& caiPa PauMaa&Sa& Pau&êl/IPaiTaMa( )) 7 ))
NadqMau>aYaTaaevaha& PaÄPaÄad(>auTa& Ga*hMa( )
KvicÖ&Sa& ic}ak-Qa& +aaErPaVYa& SvYa& >a]iMa )) 8 ))
uväca cätha haryaçväù
kathaà srakñyatha vai prajäù
adåñöväntaà bhuvo yüyaà
bäliçä bata pälakäù
tathaika-puruñaà räñöraà
bilaà cädåñöa-nirgamam
bahu-rüpäà striyaà cäpi
pumäàsaà puàçcalé-patim
nadém ubhayato vähäà
païca-païcädbhutaà gåham
kvacid dhaàsaà citra-kathaà
kñaura-pavyaà svayaà bhrami
SYNONYMS
uväca—he said; ca—also; atha—thus; haryaçväù—O Haryaçvas, sons of
Prajäpati Dakña; katham—why; srakñyatha—you will beget; vai—indeed;
prajäù—progeny; adåñövä—having not seen; antam—the end; bhuvaù—of this
earth; yüyam—all of you; bäliçäù—inexperienced; bata—alas;
pälakäù—although ruling princes; tathä—so also; eka—one; puruñam—man;
räñöram—kingdom; bilam—the hole; ca—also; adåñöa-nirgamam—from which
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
316
there is no coming out; bahu-rüpäm—taking many forms; striyam—the
woman; ca—and; api—even; pumäàsam—the man; puàçcalé-patim—the
husband of a prostitute; nadém—a river; ubhayataù—in both ways;
vähäm—which flows; païca-païca—of five multiplied by five (twenty-five);
adbhutam—a wonder; gåham—the house; kvacit—somewhere; haàsam—a
swan; citra-katham—whose story is wonderful; kñaura-pavyam—made of sharp
razors and thunderbolts; svayam—itself; bhrami—revolving.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Närada said: My dear Haryaçvas, you have not seen the
extremities of the earth. There is a kingdom where only one man lives and
where there is a hole from which, having entered, no one emerges. A woman
there who is extremely unchaste adorns herself with various attractive dresses,
and the man who lives there is her husband. In that kingdom, there is a river
flowing in both directions, a wonderful home made of twenty-five materials, a
swan that vibrates various sounds, and an automatically revolving object made
of sharp razors and thunderbolts. You have not seen all this, and therefore you
are inexperienced boys without advanced knowledge. How, then, will you
create progeny?
PURPORT
Närada Muni saw that the boys known as the Haryaçvas were already
purified because of living in that holy place and were practically ready for
liberation. Why then should they be encouraged to become entangled in
family life, which is so dark that once having entered it one cannot leave it?
Through this analogy, Närada Muni asked them to consider why they should
follow their father's order to be entangled in family life. Indirectly, he asked
them to find within the cores of their hearts the situation of the Supersoul,
Lord Viñëu, for then they would truly be experienced. In other words, one who
is too involved in his material environment and does not look within the core
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
317
of his heart is increasingly entangled in the illusory energy. Närada Muni's
purpose was to get the sons of Prajäpati Dakña to divert their attention toward
spiritual realization instead of involving themselves in the ordinary but
complicated affairs of propagation. The same advice was given by Prahläda
Mahäräja to his father (SB 7.5.5):
tat sädhu manye 'sura-varya dehinäà
sadä samudvigna-dhiyäm asad-grahät
hitvätma-pätaà gåham andha-küpaà
vanaà gato yad dharim äçrayeta
In the dark well of family life, one is always full of anxiety because of having
accepted a temporary body. If one wants to free himself from this anxiety, one
should immediately leave family life and take shelter of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead in Våndävana. Närada Muni advised the Haryaçvas
not to enter household life. Since they were already advanced in spiritual
knowledge, why should they be entangled in that way?
TEXT 9
k-Qa& SviPaTauradeXaMaivÜa&Saae ivPaiêTa" )
ANauæPaMaivjaYa Ahae SaGa| k-irZYaQa )) 9 ))
kathaà sva-pitur ädeçam
avidväàso vipaçcitaù
anurüpam avijïäya
aho sargaà kariñyatha
SYNONYMS
katham—how; sva-pituù—of your own father; ädeçam—the order;
avidväàsaù—ignorant; vipaçcitaù—who knows everything;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
318
anurüpam—suitable for you; avijïäya—without knowing; aho—alas;
sargam—the creation; kariñyatha—you will perform.
TRANSLATION
Alas, your father is omniscient, but you do not know his actual order.
Without knowing the actual purpose of your father, how will you create
progeny?
TEXT 10
é[qXauk- ovac
TaiàXaMYaaQa hYaRìa AaETPaitak-MaNaqzYaa )
vac"kU-$&= Tau devzeR" SvYa& ivMaMa*XauiDaRYaa )) 10 ))
çré-çuka uväca
tan niçamyätha haryaçvä
autpattika-manéñayä
väcaù küöaà tu devarñeù
svayaà vimamåçur dhiyä
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; tat—that; niçamya—hearing;
atha—thereafter; haryaçväù—all the sons of Prajäpati Dakña;
autpattika—naturally awakened; manéñayä—by possessing the power to
consider; väcaù—of the speech; küöam—the enigma; tu—but; devarñeù—of
Närada Muni; svayam—themselves; vimamåçuù—reflected upon; dhiyä—with
full intelligence.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
319
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Hearing these enigmatic words of Närada Muni,
the Haryaçvas considered them with their natural intelligence, without help
from others.
TEXT 11
>aU" +ae}a& JaqvSa&j& YadNaaid iNaJabNDaNaMa( )
Ad*îa TaSYa iNavaR<a& ik-MaSaTk-MaRi>a>aRveTa( )) 11 ))
bhüù kñetraà jéva-saàjïaà yad
anädi nija-bandhanam
adåñövä tasya nirväëaà
kim asat-karmabhir bhavet
SYNONYMS
bhüù—the earth; kñetram—the field of activities; jéva-saàjïam—the
designation of the spiritual living being who is bound by different results of
activity; yat—which; anädi—existing since time immemorial;
nija-bandhanam—causing his own bondage; adåñövä—without seeing;
tasya—of this; nirväëam—the cessation; kim—what benefit;
asat-karmabhiù—with temporary fruitive activities; bhavet—there can be.
TRANSLATION
[The Haryaçvas understood the meaning of Närada's words as follows.] The
word "bhüù" ["the earth"] refers to the field of activities. The material body,
which is a result of the living being's actions, is his field of activities, and it
gives him false designations. Since time immemorial, he has received various
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
320
types of material bodies, which are the roots of bondage to the material world. If
one foolishly engages in temporary fruitive activities and does not look toward
the cessation of this bondage, what will be the benefit of his actions?
PURPORT
Närada Muni spoke to the Haryaçvas, the sons of Prajäpati Dakña, about ten
allegorical subjects—the king, the kingdom, the river, the house, the physical
elements and so forth. After considering these by themselves, the Haryaçvas
could understand that the living entity encaged in his body seeks happiness,
but takes no interest in how to become free from his encagement. This is a
very important verse, since all the living entities in the material world are very
active, having obtained their particular types of bodies. A man works all day
and night for sense gratification, and animals like hogs and dogs also work for
sense gratification all day and night. Birds, beasts and all other conditioned
living entities engage in various activities without knowledge of the soul
encaged within the body. Especially in the human form of body, one's duty is
to act in such a way that he can release himself from his encagement, but
without the instructions of Närada or his representative in the disciplic
succession, people blindly engage in bodily activities to enjoy
mäyä-sukha—flickering, temporary happiness. They do not know how to
become free from their material encagement. Åñabhadeva therefore said that
such activity is not at all good, since it encages the soul again and again in a
body subjected to the threefold miseries of the material condition.
The Haryaçvas, the sons of Prajäpati Dakña, could immediately understand
the purport of Närada's instructions. Our Kåñëa consciousness movement is
especially meant for such enlightenment. We are trying to enlighten humanity
so that people may come to the understanding that they should work hard in
tapasya for self-realization and freedom from the continuous bondage of birth,
death, old age and disease in one body after another. Mäyä, however, is very
strong; she is expert in putting impediments in the way of this understanding.
Therefore sometimes one comes to the Kåñëa consciousness movement but
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
321
again falls into the clutches of mäyä, not understanding the importance of this
movement.
TEXT 12
Wk- WveìrSTauYaaeR >aGavaNa( Svaé[Ya" Par" )
TaMad*îa>av& Pau&Sa" ik-MaSaTk-MaRi>a>aRveTa( )) 12 ))
eka eveçvaras turyo
bhagavän sväçrayaù paraù
tam adåñöväbhavaà puàsaù
kim asat-karmabhir bhavet
SYNONYMS
ekaù—one; eva—indeed; éçvaraù—supreme controller; turyaù—the fourth
transcendental category; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
sva-äçrayaù—independent, being His own shelter; paraù—beyond this
material creation; tam—Him; adåñövä—not seeing; abhavam—who is not born
or created; puàsaù—of a man; kim—what benefit; asat-karmabhiù—with
temporary fruitive activities; bhavet—there can be.
TRANSLATION
[Närada Muni had said that there is a kingdom where there is only one male.
The Haryaçvas realized the purport of this statement.] The only enjoyer is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who observes everything, everywhere. He is
full of six opulences and fully independent of everyone else. He is never subject
to the three modes of material nature, for He is always transcendental to this
material creation. If the members of human society do not understand Him, the
Supreme, through their advancement in knowledge and activities, but simply
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
322
work very hard like cats and dogs all day and night for temporary happiness,
what will be the benefit of their activities?
PURPORT
Närada Muni had mentioned a kingdom where there is only one king with
no competitor. The complete spiritual world, and specifically the cosmic
manifestation, has only one proprietor or enjoyer—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is beyond this material manifestation. The Lord has therefore
been described as turya, existing on the fourth platform. He has also been
described as abhava. The word bhava, which means "takes birth," comes from
the word bhü, "to be." As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (8.19), bhütvä bhütvä praléyate:
the living entities in the material world must be repeatedly born and
destroyed. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, however, is neither bhütvä
nor praléyate; He is eternal. In other words, He is not obliged to take birth like
human beings or animals, which repeatedly take birth and die because of
ignorance of the soul. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, is not
subjected to such changes of body, and one who thinks otherwise is considered
a fool (avajänanti mäà müòhä mänuñéà tanum äçritam [Bg. 9.11]). Närada Muni
advises that human beings not waste their time simply jumping like cats and
monkeys, without real benefit. The duty of the human being is to understand
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 13
PauMaaNa( NaEvEiTa Yad( GaTva ibl/SvGa| GaTaae YaQaa )
Pa[TYaGDaaMaaivd wh ik-MaSaTk-MaRi>a>aRveTa( )) 13 ))
pumän naivaiti yad gatvä
bila-svargaà gato yathä
pratyag-dhämävida iha
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
323
kim asat-karmabhir bhavet
SYNONYMS
pumän—a human being; na—not; eva—indeed; eti—comes back; yat—to
which; gatvä—having gone; bila-svargam—to the region of the lower planetary
system known as Pätäla; gataù—gone; yathä—like; pratyak-dhäma—the
effulgent spiritual world; avidaù—of the unintelligent man; iha—in this
material world; kim—what benefit; asat-karmabhiù—with temporary fruitive
activities; bhavet—there can be.
TRANSLATION
[Närada Muni had described that there is a bila, or hole, from which, having
entered, one does not return. The Haryaçvas understood the meaning of this
allegory.] Hardly once has a person who has entered the lower planetary system
called Pätäla been seen to return. Similarly, if one enters the Vaikuëöha-dhäma
[pratyag-dhäma], he does not return to this material world. If there is such a
place, from which, having gone, one does not return to the miserable material
condition of life, what is the use of jumping like monkeys in the temporary
material world and not seeing or understanding that place? What will be the
profit?
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (15.6), yad gatvä na nivartante tad dhäma
paramaà mama: there is a region from which, having gone, one does not
return to the material world. This region has been repeatedly described.
Elsewhere in Bhagavad-gétä (4.9), Kåñëa says:
janma karma ca me divyam
evaà yo vetti tattvataù
tyaktvä dehaà punar janma
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
324
naiti mäm eti so 'rjuna
"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities
does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but
attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna."
If one can properly understand Kåñëa, who has already been described as
the Supreme King, he does not return here after giving up his material body.
This fact has been described in this verse of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Pumän
naivaiti yad gatvä: he does not return to this material world, but returns home,
back to Godhead, to live an eternally blissful life of knowledge. Why do people
not care about this? What will be the benefit of taking birth again in this
material world, sometimes as a human being, sometimes a demigod and
sometimes a cat or dog? What is the benefit of wasting time in this way? Kåñëa
has very definitely asserted in Bhagavad-gétä (8.15):
mäm upetya punar janma
duùkhälayam açäçvatam
näpnuvanti mahätmänaù
saàsiddhià paramäà gatäù
"After attaining Me, the great souls, who are yogés in devotion, never return to
this temporary world, which is full of miseries, because they have attained the
highest perfection." One's real concern should be to free himself from the
repetition of birth and death and attain the topmost perfection of life by living
with the Supreme King in the spiritual world. In these verses the sons of Dakña
repeatedly say, kim asat-karmabhir bhavet: "What is the use of impermanent
fruitive activities?"
TEXT 14
NaaNaaæPaaTMaNaae buiÖ" SvEir<aqv Gau<aaiNvTaa )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
325
TaiàïaMaGaTaSYaeh ik-MaSaTk-MaRi>a>aRveTa( )) 14 ))
nänä-rüpätmano buddhiù
svairiëéva guëänvitä
tan-niñöhäm agatasyeha
kim asat-karmabhir bhavet
SYNONYMS
nänä—various; rüpä—who has forms or dresses; ätmanaù—of the living
entity; buddhiù—the intelligence; svairiëé—a prostitute who freely decorates
herself with different types of cloths and ornaments; iva—like;
guëa-anvitä—endowed with the mode of passion, and so on; tat-niñöhäm—the
cessation of that; agatasya—of one who has not obtained; iha—in this material
world; kim asat-karmabhiù bhavet—what is the use of performing temporary
fruitive activities.
TRANSLATION
[Närada Muni had described a woman who is a professional prostitute. The
Haryaçvas understood the identity of this woman.] Mixed with the mode of
passion, the unsteady intelligence of every living entity is like a prostitute who
changes dresses just to attract one's attention. If one fully engages in temporary
fruitive activities, not understanding how this is taking place, what does he
actually gain?
PURPORT
A woman who has no husband declares herself independent, which means
that she becomes a prostitute. A prostitute generally dresses herself in various
fashions intended to attract a man's attention to the lower part of her body.
Today it has become a much advertised fashion for a woman to go almost
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
326
naked, covering the lower part of her body only slightly, in order to draw the
attention of a man to her private parts for sexual enjoyment. The intelligence
engaged to attract a man to the lower part of the body is the intelligence of a
professional prostitute. Similarly, the intelligence of a living entity who does
not turn his attention toward Kåñëa or the Kåñëa consciousness movement
simply changes dresses like a prostitute. What is the benefit of such foolish
intelligence? One should be intelligently conscious in such a way that he need
no longer change from one body to another.
Karmés change their professions at any moment, but a Kåñëa conscious
person does not change his profession, for his only profession is to attract the
attention of Kåñëa by chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra and living a very
simple life, without following daily changes of fashion. In our Kåñëa
consciousness movement, fashionable persons are taught to adopt one
fashion—the dress of a Vaiñëava with a shaved head and tilaka. They are
taught to be always clean in mind, dress and eating in order to be fixed in
Kåñëa consciousness. What is the use of changing one's dress, sometimes
wearing long hair and a long beard and sometimes dressing otherwise? This is
not good. One should not waste his time in such frivolous activities. One
should always be fixed in Kåñëa consciousness and take the cure of devotional
service with firm determination.
TEXT 15
TaTSa(r)>a]&iXaTaEìYa| Sa&SarNTa& ku->aaYaRvTa( )
TaÓTaqrbuDaSYaeh ik-MaSaTk-MaRi>a>aRveTa( )) 15 ))
tat-saìga-bhraàçitaiçvaryaà
saàsarantaà kubhäryavat
tad-gatér abudhasyeha
kim asat-karmabhir bhavet
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
327
SYNONYMS
tat-saìga—by association with the prostitute of intelligence; bhraàçita—taken
away; aiçvaryam—the opulence of independence; saàsarantam—undergoing
the material way of life; ku-bhärya-vat—exactly like a person who has a
polluted wife; tat-gatéù—the movements of the polluted intelligence;
abudhasya—of one who does not know; iha—in this world; kim asat-karmabhiù
bhavet—what can be the benefit of performing temporary fruitive activities.
TRANSLATION
[Närada Muni had also spoken of a man who is the husband of the
prostitute. The Haryaçvas understood this as follows.] If one becomes the
husband of a prostitute, he loses all independence. Similarly, if a living entity
has polluted intelligence, he prolongs his materialistic life. Frustrated by
material nature, he must follow the movements of the intelligence, which brings
various conditions of happiness and distress. If one performs fruitive activities
under such conditions, what will be the benefit?
PURPORT
Polluted intelligence has been compared to a prostitute. One who has not
purified his intelligence is said to be controlled by that prostitute. As stated in
Bhagavad-gétä (2.41), vyavasäyätmikä buddhir ekeha kuru-nandana: those who
are actually serious are conducted by one kind of intelligence, namely,
intelligence in Kåñëa consciousness. Bahu-çäkhä hy anantäç ca buddhayo
'vyavasäyinäm: one who is not fixed in proper intelligence discovers many
modes of life. Thus involved in material activities, he is exposed to the
different modes of material nature and subjected to varieties of so-called
happiness and distress. If a man becomes the husband of a prostitute, he
cannot be happy, and similarly one who follows the dictations of material
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
328
intelligence and material consciousness will never be happy.
One must judiciously understand the activities of material nature. As stated
in Bhagavad-gétä (3.27):
prakåteù kriyamäëäni
guëaiù karmäëi sarvaçaù
ahaìkära-vimüòhätmä
kartäham iti manyate
"The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of material
nature, thinks himself to be the doer of activities, which are in actuality
carried out by nature." Although one follows the dictations of material nature,
he happily thinks himself the master or husband of material nature. Scientists,
for example, try to be the masters of material nature, life after life, not caring
to understand the Supreme Person, under whose direction everything within
this material world is moving. Trying to be the masters of material nature, they
are imitation gods who declare to the public that scientific advancement will
one day be able to avoid the so-called control of God. In fact, however, the
living being, unable to control the rulings of God, is forced to associate with
the prostitute of polluted intelligence and accept various material bodies. As
stated in Bhagavad-gétä (13.22):
puruñaù prakåti-stho hi
bhuìkte prakåti-jän guëän
käraëaà guëa-saìgo 'sya
sad-asad-yoni-janmasu
"The living entity in material nature thus follows the ways of life, enjoying the
three modes of nature. This is due to his association with that material nature.
Thus he meets with good and evil amongst various species." If one fully engages
in temporary fruitive activities and does not solve this real problem, what
profit will he gain?
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
329
TEXT 16
Sa*íyPYaYak-rq& MaaYaa& vel/akU-l/aNTaveiGaTaaMa( )
MataSYa TaaMaivjSYa ik-MaSaTk-MaRi>a>aRveTa( )) 16 ))
såñöy-apyaya-karéà mäyäà
velä-külänta-vegitäm
mattasya täm avijïasya
kim asat-karmabhir bhavet
SYNONYMS
såñöi—creation; apyaya—dissolution; karém—one who causes; mäyäm—the
illusory energy; velä-küla-anta—near the banks; vegitäm—being very rapid;
mattasya—of one who is mad; täm—that material nature; avijïasya—who does
not know; kim asat-karmabhiù bhavet—what benefit can there be by
performing temporary fruitive activities.
TRANSLATION
[Närada Muni had said that there is a river flowing in both directions. The
Haryaçvas understood the purport of this statement.] Material nature functions
in two ways—by creation and dissolution. Thus the river of material nature
flows both ways. A living entity who unknowingly falls in this river is
submerged in its waves, and since the current is swifter near the banks of the
river, he is unable to get out. What will be the benefit of performing fruitive
activities in that river of mäyä?
PURPORT
One may be submerged in the waves of the river of mäyä, but one may also
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
330
get free from the waves by coming to the banks of knowledge and austerity.
Near these banks, however, the waves are very strong. If one does not
understand how he is being tossed by the waves, but simply engages in
temporary fruitive activities, what benefit will he derive?
In the Brahma-saàhitä (5.44) there is this statement:
såñöi-sthiti-pralaya-sädhana-çaktir ekä
chäyeva yasya bhuvanäni bibharti durgä
The mäyä-çakti, Durgä, is in charge of såñöi-sthiti-pralaya, creation and
dissolution, and she acts under the direction of the Supreme Lord
(mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù süyate sa-caräcaram [Bg. 9.10]). When one falls in the
river of nescience, he is always tossed here and there by the waves, but the
same mäyä can also save him when be surrenders to Kåñëa, or becomes Kåñëa
conscious. Kåñëa consciousness is knowledge and austerity. A Kåñëa conscious
person takes knowledge from the Vedic literature, and at the same time he
must practice austerities.
To attain freedom from material life, one must take to Kåñëa consciousness.
Otherwise, if one very busily engages in the so-called advancement of science,
what benefit will he derive? If one is carried away by the waves of nature, what
is the meaning of being a great scientist or philosopher? Mundane science and
philosophy are also material creations. One must understand how mäyä works
and how one can be released from the tossing waves of the river of nescience.
That is one's first duty.
TEXT 17
PaÄiv&XaiTaTatvaNaa& Pauåzae_d(>auTadPaR<a" )
ADYaaTMaMabuDaSYaeh ik-MaSaTk-MaRi>a>aRveTa( )) 17 ))
païca-viàçati-tattvänäà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
331
puruño 'dbhuta-darpaëaù
adhyätmam abudhasyeha
kim asat-karmabhir bhavet
SYNONYMS
païca-viàçati—twenty-five; tattvänäm—of the elements; puruñaù—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; adbhuta-darpaëaù—the wonderful
manifester; adhyätmam—the overseer of all causes and effects; abudhasya—of
one who does not know; iha—in this world; kim asat-karmabhiù bhavet—what
can be the benefit of engaging in temporary fruitive activities.
TRANSLATION
[Närada Muni had said that there is a house made of twenty-five elements.
The Haryaçvas understood this analogy.] The Supreme Lord is the reservoir of
the twenty-five elements, and as the Supreme Being, the conductor of cause
and effect, He causes their manifestation. If one engages in temporary fruitive
activities, not knowing that Supreme Person, what benefit will he derive?
PURPORT
Philosophers and scientists conduct scholarly research to find the original
cause, but they should do so scientifically, not whimsically or through fantastic
theories. The science of the original cause is explained in various Vedic
literatures. Athäto brahma jijïäsä/janmädy asya yataù [SB 1.1.1]. The
Vedänta-sütra explains that one should inquire about the Supreme Soul. Such
inquiry about the Supreme is called brahma jijïäsä. The Absolute Truth, tattva,
is explained in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.11):
vadanti tat tattva-vidas
tattvaà yaj jïänam advayam
brahmeti paramätmeti
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
332
bhagavän iti çabdyate
"Learned transcendentalists who know the Absolute Truth call this nondual
substance Brahman, Paramätmä or Bhagavän." The Absolute Truth appears to
neophytes as impersonal Brahman and to advanced mystic yogés as Paramätmä,
the Supersoul, but devotees, who are further advanced, understand the
Absolute Truth as the Supreme Lord, Viñëu.
This material cosmic manifestation is an expansion of the energy of Lord
Kåñëa, or Lord Viñëu.
eka-deça-sthitasyägner
jyotsnä vistäriëé yathä
parasya brahmaëaù çaktis
tathedam akhilaà jagat
"Whatever we see in this world is but an expansion of various energies of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is like a fire that spreads illumination
for a long distance although it is situated in one place." (Viñëu Puräëa) The
entire cosmic manifestation is an expansion of the Supreme Lord. Therefore if
one does not conduct research to find the supreme cause, but instead falsely
engages in frivolous, temporary activities, what is the use of demanding
recognition as an important scientist or philosopher? If one does not know the
ultimate cause, what is the use of his scientific and philosophical research?
The puruña, the original person—Bhagavän, Viñëu—can be understood
only by devotional service. Bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù:
[Bg. 18.55] only by devotional service can one understand the Supreme Person,
who is behind everything. One must try to understand that the material
elements are the separated, inferior energy of the Lord and that the living
entity is the Lord's spiritual energy. Whatever we experience, including matter
and the spirit soul, the living force, is but a combination of two energies of
Lord Viñëu—the inferior energy and the superior energy. One should seriously
study the facts concerning creation, maintenance and devastation, as well as
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
333
the permanent place from which one never need return (yad gatvä na
nivartante [Bg. 15.6]). Human society should study this, but instead of culturing
such knowledge, people are attracted to temporary happiness and sense
gratification, culminating in bottomless, topless passion. There is no profit in
such activities; one must engage himself in the Kåñëa consciousness
movement.
TEXT 18
Weìr& XaañMauTSa*JYa bNDaMaae+aaNaudXaRNaMa( )
iviv¢-PadMajaYa ik-MaSaTk-MaRi>a>aRveTa( )) 18 ))
aiçvaraà çästram utsåjya
bandha-mokñänudarçanam
vivikta-padam ajïäya
kim asat-karmabhir bhavet
SYNONYMS
aiçvaram—bringing understanding of God, or Kåñëa consciousness;
çästram—the Vedic literature; utsåjya—giving up; bandha—of bondage;
mokña—and of liberation; anudarçanam—informing about the ways;
vivikta-padam—distinguishing spirit from matter; ajïäya—not knowing; kim
asat-karmabhiù bhavet—what can be the use of temporary fruitive activities.
TRANSLATION
[Närada Muni had spoken of a swan. That swan is explained in this verse.]
The Vedic literatures [çästras] vividly describe how to understand the Supreme
Lord, the source of all material and spiritual energy. Indeed, they elaborately
explain these two energies. The swan [haàsa] is one who discriminates between
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
334
matter and spirit, who accepts the essence of everything, and who explains the
means of bondage and the means of liberation. The words of scriptures consist
of variegated vibrations. If a foolish rascal leaves aside the study of these çästras
to engage in temporary activities, what will be the result?
PURPORT
The Kåñëa consciousness movement is very eager to present Vedic
literature in modern languages, especially Western languages such as English,
French and German. The leaders of the Western world, the Americans and
Europeans, have become the idols of modern civilization because the Western
people are very sophisticated in temporary activities for the advancement of
material civilization. A sane man, however, can see that all such grand
activities, although perhaps very important for temporary life, have nothing to
do with eternal life. The entire world is imitating the materialistic civilization
of the West, and therefore the Kåñëa consciousness movement is very much
interested in giving the Western people knowledge by translating the original
Sanskrit Vedic literatures into Western languages.
The word vivikta-padam refers to the path of logical discourses concerning
the aim of life. If one does not discuss that which is important in life, one is
put into darkness and must struggle for existence. What, then, is the benefit of
his advancement in knowledge? The people of the West are seeing their
students becoming hippies, despite gorgeous arrangements for university
education. The Kåñëa consciousness movement, however, is trying to convert
misguided, drug-addicted students to the service of Kåñëa and engage them in
the best welfare activities for human society.
TEXT 19
k-al/c§&- >a]iMa Taq+<a& Sav| iNaZk-zRYaÂGaTa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
335
SvTaN}aMabuDaSYaeh ik-MaSaTk-MaRi>a>aRveTa( )) 19 ))
käla-cakraà bhrami tékñëaà
sarvaà niñkarñayaj jagat
svatantram abudhasyeha
kim asat-karmabhir bhavet
SYNONYMS
käla-cakram—the wheel of eternal time; bhrami—revolving automatically;
tékñëam—very sharp; sarvam—all; niñkarñayat—driving; jagat—the world;
sva-tantram—independent, not caring for the so-called scientists and
philosophers; abudhasya—of one who does not know (this principle of time);
iha—in this material world; kim asat-karmabhiù bhavet—what is the use of
engaging in temporary fruitive activities.
TRANSLATION
[Närada Muni had spoken of a physical object made of sharp blades and
thunderbolts. The Haryaçvas understood this allegory as follows.] Eternal time
moves very sharply, as if made of razors and thunderbolts. Uninterrupted and
fully independent, it drives the activities of the entire world. If one does not try
to study the eternal element of time, what benefit can he derive from
performing temporary material activities?
PURPORT
This verse explains the words kñaura-pavyaà svayaà bhrami, which
especially refer to the orbit of eternal time. It is said that time and tide wait for
no man. According to the moral instructions of the great politician Cäëakya
Paëòita:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
336
äyuñaù kñaëa eko 'pi
na labhyaù svarëa-koöibhiù
na cen nirarthakaà nétiù
kä ca hänis tato 'dhikä
Even a moment of one's lifetime could not be returned in exchange for
millions of dollars. Therefore one should consider how much loss one suffers if
he wastes even a moment of his life for nothing. Living like an animal, not
understanding the goal of life, one foolishly thinks that there is no eternity
and that his life span of fifty, sixty, or, at the most, one hundred years, is
everything. This is the greatest foolishness. Time is eternal, and in the
material world one passes through different phases of his eternal life. Time is
compared herein to a sharp razor. A razor is meant to shave the hair from one's
face, but if not carefully handled, the razor will cause disaster. One is advised
not to create a disaster by misusing his lifetime. One should be extremely
careful to utilize the span of his life for spiritual realization, or Kåñëa
consciousness.
TEXT 20
XaañSYa iPaTauradeXa& Yaae Na ved iNavTaRk-Ma( )
k-Qa& TadNauæPaaYa Gau<aivóM>YauPa§-MaeTa( )) 20 ))
çästrasya pitur ädeçaà
yo na veda nivartakam
kathaà tad-anurüpäya
guëa-visrambhy upakramet
SYNONYMS
çästrasya—of the scriptures; pituù—of the father; ädeçam—the instruction;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
337
yaù—one who; na—not; veda—understands; nivartakam—which brings about
the cessation of the material way of life; katham—how; tat-anurüpäya—to
follow the instruction of the çästras; guëa-visrambhé—a person entangled in
the three modes of material nature; upakramet—can engage in the creation of
progeny.
TRANSLATION
[Närada Muni had asked how one could ignorantly defy one's own father.
The Haryaçvas understood the meaning of this question.] One must accept the
original instructions of the çästra. According to Vedic civilization, one is offered
a sacred thread as a sign of second birth. One takes his second birth by dint of
having received instructions in the çästra from a bona fide spiritual master.
Therefore, çästra, scripture, is the real father. All the çästras instruct that one
should end his material way of life. If one does not know the purpose of the
father's orders, the çästras, he is ignorant. The words of a material father who
endeavors to engage his son in material activities are not the real instructions of
the father.
PURPORT
Bhagavad-gétä (16.7) says, pravåttià ca nivåttià ca janä na vidur äsuräù:
demons, who are less than human beings but are not called animals, do not
know the meaning of pravåtti and nivåtti, work to be done and work not to be
done. In the material world, every living entity has a desire to lord it over the
material world as much as possible. This is called pravåtti-märga. All the
çästras, however, advise nivåtti-märga, or release from the materialistic way of
life. Apart from the çästras of the Vedic civilization, which is the oldest of the
world, other çästras agree on this point. For example, in the Buddhist çästras
Lord Buddha advises that one achieve nirväëa by giving up the materialistic
way of life. In the Bible, which is also çästra, one will find the same advice: one
should cease materialistic life and return to the kingdom of God. In any çästra
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
338
one may examine, especially the Vedic çästra, the same advice is given: one
should give up his materialistic life and return to his original, spiritual life.
Çaìkaräcärya also propounds the same conclusion. Brahma satyaà jagan
mithyä: this material world or materialistic life is simply illusion, and therefore
one should stop his illusory activities and come to the platform of Brahman.
The word çästra refers to the scriptures, particularly the Vedic books of
knowledge. The Vedas-Säma, Yajur, Åg and Atharva—and any other books
deriving knowledge from these Vedas are considered Vedic literatures.
Bhagavad-gétä is the essence of all Vedic knowledge, and therefore it is the
scripture whose instructions should be especially accepted. In this essence of
all çästras, Kåñëa personally advises that one give up all other duties and
surrender unto Him (sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja [Bg.
18.66]).
One should be initiated into following the principles of çästra. In offering
initiation, our Kåñëa consciousness movement asks one to come to the
conclusion of çästra by taking the advice of the supreme speaker of the çästra,
Kåñëa, forgetting the principles of the materialistic way of life. Therefore the
principles we advise are no illicit sex, no intoxication, no gambling and no
meat-eating. These four types of engagement will enable an intelligent person
to get free from the materialistic life and return home, back to Godhead.
In regard to the instructions of the father and mother, it may be said that
every living entity, including even the insignificant cats, dogs and serpents,
takes birth of a father and mother. Therefore, getting a material father and
mother is not a problem. In every form of life, birth after birth, the living
entity gets a father and mother. In human society, however, if one is satisfied
with his material father and mother and their instructions and does not make
further progress by accepting a spiritual master and being educated in the
çästras, he certainly remains in darkness. The material father and mother are
important only if they are interested in educating their son to become free
from the clutches of death. As instructed by Åñabhadeva (SB 5.5.18): pitä na sa
syäj janané na sä syät/ na mocayed yaù samupeta-måtyum. One should not strive
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
339
to become a mother or father if one cannot save one's dependent son from the
impending danger of death. A parent who does not know how to save his son
has no value because such fathers and mothers may be had in any form of life,
even among the cats, dogs and so on. Only a father and mother who can
elevate their son to the spiritual platform are bona fide parents. Therefore
according to the Vedic system it is said, janmanä jäyate çüdraù: one is born of a
material father and mother as a çüdra. The purpose of life, however, is to
become a brähmaëa, a first-class man.
A first-class intelligent man is called a brähmaëa because he knows the
Supreme Brahman, the Absolute Truth. According to the Vedic instructions,
tad-vijïänärthaà sa gurum eväbhigacchet: [MU 1.2.12(7)] to know this science,
one must approach a bona fide guru, a spiritual master who will initiate the
disciple with the sacred thread so that he may understand the Vedic
knowledge. Janmanä jäyate çüdraù saàskäräd dhi bhaved dvijaù. Becoming a
brähmaëa through the endeavor of a bona fide spiritual master is called
saàskära. After initiation, one is engaged in study of the çästra, which teaches
the student how to gain release from materialistic life and return home, back
to Godhead.
The Kåñëa consciousness movement is teaching this higher knowledge of
retiring from materialistic life to return to Godhead, but unfortunately many
parents are not very satisfied with this movement. Aside from the parents of
our students, many businessmen are also dissatisfied because we teach our
students to abandon intoxication, meat-eating, illicit sex and gambling. If the
Kåñëa consciousness movement spreads, the so-called businessmen will have to
close their slaughterhouses, breweries and cigarette factories. Therefore they
are also very much afraid. However, we have no alternative than to teach our
disciples to free themselves from materialistic life. We must instruct them in
the opposite of material life to save them from the repetition of birth and
death.
Närada Muni, therefore, advised the Haryaçvas, the sons of Prajäpati Dakña,
that instead of begetting progeny, it would be better to leave and achieve the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
340
perfection of spiritual understanding according to the instructions of the
çästras. The importance of the çästras is mentioned in Bhagavad-gétä (16.23):
yaù çästra-vidhim utsåjya
vartate käma-kärataù
na sa siddhim aväpnoti
na sukhaà na paräà gatim
"One who disregards the injunctions of the çästras and acts whimsically, as he
likes, never achieves the perfection of life, not to speak of happiness. Nor does
he return home to the spiritual world."
TEXT 21
wiTa VYaviSaTaa raJaNa( hYaRìa Wk-ceTaSa" )
Pa[YaYauSTa& Pair§-MYa PaNQaaNaMaiNavTaRNaMa( )) 21 ))
iti vyavasitä räjan
haryaçvä eka-cetasaù
prayayus taà parikramya
panthänam anivartanam
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; vyavasitäù—being fully convinced by the instructions of Närada
Muni; räjan—O King; haryaçväù—the sons of Prajäpati Dakña;
eka-cetasaù—all being of the same opinion; prayayuù—left; tam—Närada
Muni; parikramya—circumambulating; panthänam—on the path;
anivartanam—which does not bring one back again to this material world.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
341
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: My dear King, after hearing the instructions
of Närada, the Haryaçvas, the sons of Prajäpati Dakña, were firmly convinced.
They all believed in his instructions and reached the same conclusion. Having
accepted him as their spiritual master, they circumambulated that great sage and
followed the path by which one never returns to this world.
PURPORT
From this verse we can understand the meaning of initiation and the duties
of a disciple and spiritual master. The spiritual master never instructs his
disciple, "Take a mantra from me, pay me some money, and by practicing this
yoga system you will become very expert in materialistic life." This is not the
duty of a spiritual master. Rather, the spiritual master teaches the disciple how
to give up materialistic life, and the disciple's duty is to assimilate his
instructions and ultimately follow the path back home, back to Godhead, from
whence no one returns to this material world.
After hearing the instructions of Närada Muni, the Haryaçvas, the sons of
Prajäpati Dakña, decided not to be entangled in materialistic life by begetting
hundreds of children and having to take care of them. This would have been
unnecessarily entangling. The Haryaçvas did not consider pious and impious
activities. Their materialistic father had instructed them to increase the
population, but because of the words of Närada Muni, they could not heed that
instruction. Närada Muni, as their spiritual master, gave them the çästric
instructions that they should give up this material world, and as bona fide
disciples they followed his instructions. One should not endeavor to wander to
different planetary systems within this universe, for even if one goes to the
topmost planetary system, Brahmaloka, one must return again (kñéëe puëye
martya-lokaà viçanti [Bg. 9.21]). The endeavors of karmés are a useless waste of
time. One should endeavor to return home, back to Godhead. This is the
perfection of life. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (8.16):
äbrahma-bhuvanäl lokäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
342
punar ävartino 'rjuna
mäm upetya tu kaunteya
punar janma na vidyate
"From the highest planet in the material world down to the lowest, all are
places of misery wherein repeated birth and death take place. But one who
attains to My abode, O son of Kunté, never takes birth again."
TEXT 22
Svrb]øi<a iNa>aaRTaôzqke-XaPadaMbuJae )
A%<@& ictaMaaveXYa l/aek-aNaNaucrNMauiNa" )) 22 ))
svara-brahmaëi nirbhätahåñékeça-
padämbuje
akhaëòaà cittam äveçya
lokän anucaran muniù
SYNONYMS
svara-brahmaëi—in spiritual sound; nirbhäta—placing clearly before the mind;
håñékeça—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, the master of the
senses; padämbuje—the lotus feet; akhaëòam—unbroken;
cittam—consciousness; äveçya—engaging; lokän—all the planetary systems;
anucarat—traveled around; muniù—the great sage Närada Muni.
TRANSLATION
The seven musical notes-ña, å, gä, ma, pa, dha and ni-are used in musical
instruments, but originally they come from the Säma Veda. The great sage
Närada vibrates sounds describing the pastimes of the Supreme Lord. By such
transcendental vibrations, such as Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
343
Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare, he fixes his mind at
the lotus feet of the Lord. Thus he directly perceives Håñékeça, the master of
the senses. After delivering the Haryaçvas, Närada Muni continued traveling
throughout the planetary systems, his mind always fixed at the lotus feet of the
Lord.
PURPORT
The goodness of the great sage Närada Muni is described herewith. He
always chants about the pastimes of the Lord and delivers the fallen souls back
to Godhead. In this regard, Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura has sung:
närada-muni, bäjäya véëä,
'rädhikä-ramaëa'-näme
näma amani, udita haya,
bhakata-géta-säme
amiya-dhärä, variñe ghana,
çravaëa-yugale giyä
bhakata-jana, saghane näce,
bhariyä äpana hiyä
mädhuré-püra, äsaba paçi',
mätäya jagata-jane
keha vä käìde, keha vä näce,
keha mäte mane mane
païca-vadana, närade dhari',
premera saghana rola
kamaläsana, näciyä bale,
'bola bola hari bola'
sahasränana, parama-sukhe,
'hari hari' bali' gäya
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
344
näma-prabhäve, mätila viçva,
näma-rasa sabe päya
çré-kåñëa-näma, rasane sphuri',
purä'la ämära äça
çré-rüpa-pade, yäcaye ihä,
bhakativinoda däsa
The purport of this song is that Närada Muni, the great soul, plays a stringed
instrument called a véëä, vibrating the sound rädhikä-ramaëa, which is
another name for Kåñëa. As soon as he strokes the strings, all the devotees
begin responding, making a very beautiful vibration. Accompanied by the
stringed instrument, the singing seems like a shower of nectar, and all the
devotees dance in ecstasy to the fullest extent of their satisfaction. While
dancing, they appear madly intoxicated with ecstasy, as if drinking the
beverage called mädhuré-püra. Some of them cry, some of them dance, and
some of them, although unable to dance publicly, dance within their hearts.
Lord Çiva embraces Närada Muni and begins talking in an ecstatic voice, and
seeing Lord Çiva dancing with Närada, Lord Brahmä also joins, saying, "All of
you kindly chant 'Hari bol! Hari bol!' " The King of heaven, Indra, also
gradually joins with great satisfaction and begins dancing and chanting "Hari
bol! Hari bol!" In this way, by the influence of the transcendental vibration of
the holy name of God, the whole universe becomes ecstatic. Bhaktivinoda
Öhäkura says, "When the universe becomes ecstatic, my desire is satisfied. I
therefore pray unto the lotus feet of Rüpa Gosvämé that this chanting of harer
näma [Cc. Ädi 17.21] may go on nicely like this."
Lord Brahmä is the guru of Närada Muni, who is the guru of Vyäsadeva, and
Vyäsadeva is the guru of Madhväcärya. Thus the Gauòéya-Mädhva-sampradäya
is in the disciplic succession from Närada Muni. The members of this disciplic
succession—in other words, the members of the Kåñëa consciousness
movement—should follow in the footsteps of Närada Muni by chanting the
transcendental vibration Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/
Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare. They should go everywhere
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
345
to deliver the fallen souls by vibrating the Hare Kåñëa mantra and the
instructions of Bhagavad-gétä, Çrémad-Bhägavatam and Caitanya-caritämåta.
That will please the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One can spiritually
advance if one actually follows the instructions of Närada Muni. If one pleases
Närada Muni, then the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Håñékeça, is also
pleased (yasya prasädäd bhagavat-prasädaù **(8)). The immediate spiritual
master is the representative of Närada Muni; there is no difference between
the instructions of Närada Muni and those of the present spiritual master.
Both Närada Muni and the present spiritual master speak the same teachings
of Kåñëa, who says in Bhagavad-gétä (18.65-66):
man-manä bhava mad-bhakto
mad-yäjé mäà namaskuru
mäm evaiñyasi satyaà te
pratijäne priyo 'si me
sarva-dharmän parityajya
mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja
ahaà tväà sarva-päpebhyo
mokñayiñyämi mä çucaù
"Always think of Me and become My devotee. Worship Me and offer your
homage unto Me. Thus you will come to Me without fail. I promise you this
because you are My very dear friend. Abandon all varieties of religion and just
surrender unto Me. I shall deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear."
TEXT 23
NaaXa& iNaXaMYa Pau}aa<aa& NaardaC^ql/Xaail/NaaMa( )
ANvTaPYaTa k-" XaaecNa( SauPa[JaSTv& Xauca& PadMa( )) 23 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
346
näçaà niçamya puträëäà
näradäc chéla-çälinäm
anvatapyata kaù çocan
suprajastvaà çucäà padam
SYNONYMS
näçam—the loss; niçamya—hearing of; puträëäm—of his sons; näradät—from
Närada; çéla-çälinäm—who were the best of well-behaved persons;
anvatapyata—suffered; kaù—Prajäpati Dakña; çocan—lamenting;
su-prajastvam—having ten thousand well-behaved sons; çucäm—of
lamentation; padam—position.
TRANSLATION
The Haryaçvas, the sons of Prajäpati Dakña, were very well behaved,
cultured sons, but unfortunately, because of the instructions of Närada Muni,
they deviated from the order of their father. When Dakña heard this news,
which was brought to him by Närada Muni, he began to lament. Although he
was the father of such good sons, he had lost them all. Certainly this was
lamentable.
PURPORT
The Haryaçvas, the sons of Prajäpati Dakña, were certainly well behaved,
learned and advanced, and in accordance with the order of their father they
went to perform austerities to beget good sons for their family. But Närada
Muni took advantage of their good behavior and culture to properly direct
them not to be involved with this material world, but to use their culture and
knowledge to end their material affairs. The Haryaçvas abided by the order of
Närada Muni, but when news of this was brought to Prajäpati Dakña, the
prajäpati, instead of being happy with the actions of Närada Muni, was
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
347
extremely sorrowful. Similarly, we are trying to bring as many young men as
possible to the Kåñëa consciousness movement for their ultimate benefit, but
the parents of the young men joining this movement, being very sorry, are
lamenting and making counterpropaganda. Of course, Prajäpati Dakña did not
make propaganda against Närada Muni, but later, as we shall see, Dakña cursed
Närada Muni for his benevolent activities. This is the way of materialistic life.
A materialistic father and mother want to engage their sons in begetting
children, striving for improved economic conditions and rotting in
materialistic life. They are not unhappy when their children become spoiled,
useless citizens, but they lament when they join the Kåñëa consciousness
movement to achieve the ultimate goal of life. This animosity between parents
and the Kåñëa consciousness movement has existed since time immemorial.
Even Närada Muni was condemned, not to speak of others. Nevertheless,
Närada Muni never gives up his mission. To deliver as many fallen souls as
possible, he continues playing his musical instrument and vibrating the
transcendental sound Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare
Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare.
TEXT 24
Sa >aUYa" PaaÄJaNYaaYaaMaJaeNa PairSaaiNTvTa" )
Pau}aaNaJaNaYad( d+a" Savl/aìaNa( Sahió<a" )) 24 ))
sa bhüyaù päïcajanyäyäm
ajena parisäntvitaù
puträn ajanayad dakñaù
savaläçvän sahasriëaù
SYNONYMS
saù—Prajäpati Dakña; bhüyaù—again; päïcajanyäyäm—in the womb of his
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
348
wife Asikné, or Päïcajané; ajena—by Lord Brahmä; parisäntvitaù—being
pacified; puträn—sons; ajanayat—begot; dakñaù—Prajäpati Dakña;
savaläçvän—named the Savaläçvas; sahasriëaù—numbering one thousand.
TRANSLATION
When Prajäpati Dakña was lamenting for his lost children, Lord Brahmä
pacified him with instructions, and thereafter Dakña begot one thousand more
children in the womb of his wife, Päïcajané. This time his sons were known as
the Savaläçvas.
PURPORT
Prajäpati Dakña was so named because he was very expert in begetting
children. (The word dakña means "expert.") First he begot ten thousand
children in the womb of his wife, and when the children were lost—when they
returned home, back to Godhead—he begot another set of children, known as
the Savaläçvas. Prajäpati Dakña is very expert in begetting children, and
Närada Muni is very expert in delivering all the conditioned souls back home,
back to Godhead. Therefore the materialistic experts do not agree with the
spiritual expert Närada Muni. but this does not mean that Närada Muni will
give up his engagement of chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra.
TEXT 25
Tae c iPa}aa SaMaaidía" Pa[JaaSaGaeR Da*Tav]Taa" )
NaaraYa<aSarae JaGMauYaR}a iSaÖa" SvPaUvRJaa" )) 25 ))
te ca piträ samädiñöäù
prajä-sarge dhåta-vratäù
näräyaëa-saro jagmur
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
349
yatra siddhäù sva-pürvajäù
SYNONYMS
te—these sons (the Savaläçvas); ca—and; piträ—by their father;
samädiñöäù—being ordered; prajä-sarge—in increasing progeny or population;
dhåta-vratäù—accepted vows; näräyaëa-saraù—the holy lake named
Näräyaëa-saras; jagmuù—went to; yatra—where; siddhäù—perfected;
sva-pürva-jäù—their older brothers, who had previously gone there.
TRANSLATION
In accordance with their father's order to beget children, the second group of
sons also went to Näräyaëa-saras, the same place where their brothers had
previously attained perfection by following the instructions of Närada.
Undertaking great vows of austerity, the Savaläçvas remained at that holy place.
PURPORT
Prajäpati Dakña sent his second group of sons to the same place where his
previous sons had attained perfection. He did not hesitate to send his second
group of sons to the same place, although they too might become victims of
Närada's instructions. According to the Vedic culture, one should be trained
in spiritual understanding as a brahmacäré before entering household life to
beget children. This is the Vedic system. Thus Prajäpati Dakña sent his second
group of sons for cultural improvement, despite the risk that because of the
instructions of Närada they might become as intelligent as their older brothers.
As a dutiful father, he did not hesitate to allow his sons to receive cultural
instructions concerning the perfection of life; he depended upon them to
choose whether to return home, back to Godhead, or to rot in this material
world in various species of life. In all circumstances, the duty of the father is to
give cultural education to his sons, who must later decide which way to go.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
350
Responsible fathers should not hinder their sons who are making cultural
advancement in association with the Kåñëa consciousness movement. This is
not a father's duty. The duty of a father is to give his son complete freedom to
make his choice after becoming spiritually advanced by following the
instructions of the spiritual master.
TEXT 26
TaduPaSPaXaRNaadev iviNaDaURTaMal/aXaYaa" )
JaPaNTaae b]ø ParMa& TaePauSTa}a MahTa( TaPa" )) 26 ))
tad-upasparçanäd eva
vinirdhüta-maläçayäù
japanto brahma paramaà
tepus tatra mahat tapaù
SYNONYMS
tat—of that holy place; upasparçanät—by bathing regularly in the water;
eva—indeed; vinirdhüta—completely purified; mala-äçayäù—of all the dirt
within the heart; japantaù—chanting or murmuring; brahma—mantras
beginning with oà (such as oà tad viñëoù paramaà padaà sadä paçyanti
sürayaù); paramam—the ultimate goal; tepuù—performed; tatra—there;
mahat—great; tapaù—penances.
TRANSLATION
At Näräyaëa-saras, the second group of sons performed penances in the same
way as the first. They bathed in the holy water, and by its touch all the dirty
material desires in their hearts were cleansed away. They murmured mantras
beginning with oàkära and underwent a severe course of austerities.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
351
PURPORT
Every Vedic mantra is called brahma because each mantra is preceded by
the brahmäkñara (aum or oàkära). For example, oà namo bhagavate
väsudeväya. Lord Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (7.8), praëavaù sarva-vedeñu: "In
all the Vedic mantras, I am represented by praëava, or oàkära." Thus chanting
of the Vedic mantras beginning with oàkära is directly chanting of Kåñëa's
name. There is no difference. Whether one chants oàkära or addresses the
Lord as "Kåñëa," the meaning is the same, but Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu has
recommended that in this age one chant the Hare Kåñëa mantra (harer näma
eva kevalam [Cc. Ädi 17.21]). Although there is no difference between Hare
Kåñëa and the Vedic mantras beginning with oàkära, Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu, the leader of the spiritual movement for this age, has
recommended that one chant Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare
Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare.
TEXTS 27-28
AB>a+aa" k-iTaicNMaaSaaNa( k-iTaicd( vaYau>aaeJaNaa" )
AaraDaYaNa( MaN}aiMaMaMa>YaSYaNTa w@SPaiTaMa( )) 27 ))
p NaMaae NaaraYa<aaYa PauåzaYa MahaTMaNae )
ivXauÖSatviDaZ<YaaYa Mahah&SaaYa DaqMaih )) 28 ))
ab-bhakñäù katicin mäsän
katicid väyu-bhojanäù
ärädhayan mantram imam
abhyasyanta iòaspatim
oà namo näräyaëäya
puruñäya mahätmane
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
352
viçuddha-sattva-dhiñëyäya
mahä-haàsäya dhémahi
SYNONYMS
ap-bhakñäù—drinking only water; katicit mäsän—for some months;
katicit—for some; väyu-bhojanäù—merely breathing, or eating air;
ärädhayan—worshiped; mantram imam—this mantra, which is nondifferent
from Näräyaëa; abhyasyantaù—practicing; iòaù-patim—the master of all
mantras, Lord Viñëu; oà—O Lord; namaù—respectful obeisances;
näräyaëäya—unto Lord Näräyaëa; puruñäya—the Supreme Person;
mahä-ätmane—the exalted Supersoul; viçuddha-sattva-dhiñëyäya—who is
always situated in the transcendental abode; mahä-haàsäya—the great
swanlike Personality of Godhead; dhémahi—we always offer.
TRANSLATION
For a few months the sons of Prajäpati Dakña drank only water and ate only
air. Thus undergoing great austerities, they recited this mantra: "Let us offer
our respectful obeisances unto Näräyaëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who is always situated in His transcendental abode. Since He is the Supreme
Person [paramahaàsa], let us offer our respectful obeisances unto Him."
PURPORT
From these verses it is apparent that the chanting of the mahä-mantra or
the Vedic mantras must be accompanied by severe austerities. In Kali-yuga,
people cannot undergo severe austerities like those mentioned
herein—drinking only water and eating only air for many months. One
cannot imitate such a process. But at least one must undergo some austerity by
giving up four unwanted principles, namely illicit sex, meat-eating,
intoxication and gambling. Anyone can easily practice this tapasya, and then
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
353
the chanting of the Hare Kåñëa mantra will be effective without delay. One
should not give up the process of austerity. If possible, one should bathe in the
waters of the Ganges or Yamunä, or in the absence of the Ganges and Yamunä
one may bathe in the water of the sea. This is an item of austerity. Our Kåñëa
consciousness movement has therefore established two very large centers, one
in Våndävana and another in Mäyäpur, Navadvépa. There one may bathe in
the Ganges or Yamunä, chant the Hare Kåñëa mantra and thus become perfect
and return home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 29
wiTa TaaNaiPa raJaeNd] Pa[JaaSaGaRiDaYaae MauiNa" )
oPaeTYa Naard" Pa[ah vac" kU-$=aiNa PaUvRvTa( )) 29 ))
iti tän api räjendra
prajä-sarga-dhiyo muniù
upetya näradaù präha
väcaù küöäni pürvavat
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; tän—them (the sons of Prajäpati Dakña known as the Savaläçvas);
api—also; räjendra—O King Parékñit; prajä-sarga-dhiyaù—who were under the
impression that begetting children was the most important duty; muniù—the
great sage; upetya—approaching; näradaù—Närada; präha—said;
väcaù—words; küöäni—enigmatic; pürva-vat—as he had done previously.
TRANSLATION
O King Parékñit, Närada Muni approached these sons of Prajäpati Dakña,
who were engaged in tapasya to beget children, and spoke enigmatic words to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
354
them just as he had spoken to their elder brothers.
TEXT 30
da+aaYa<aa" Sa&é*<auTa GadTaae iNaGaMa& MaMa )
AiNvC^TaaNauPadvq& >a]aTa›<aa& >a]aTa*vTSal/a" )) 30 ))
däkñäyaëäù saàçåëuta
gadato nigamaà mama
anvicchatänupadavéà
bhrätèëäà bhrätå-vatsaläù
SYNONYMS
däkñäyaëäù—O sons of Prajäpati Dakña; saàçåëuta—please hear with
attention; gadataù—who am speaking; nigamam—instruction; mama—my;
anvicchata—follow; anupadavém—the path; bhrätèëäm—of your brothers;
bhrätå-vatsaläù—O you who are very much affectionate to your brothers.
TRANSLATION
O sons of Dakña, please hear my words of instruction attentively. You are all
very affectionate to your elder brothers, the Haryaçvas. Therefore you should
follow their path.
PURPORT
Närada Muni encouraged Prajäpati Dakña's second group of sons by
awakening their natural affinity for their brothers. He urged them to follow
their older brothers if they were at all affectionate toward them. Family
affection is very strong, and therefore Närada Muni followed this tactic of
reminding them of their family relationship with the Haryaçvas. Generally the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
355
word nigama refers to the Vedas, but here nigama refers to the instructions
contained in the Vedas. Çrémad-Bhägavatam says, nigama-kalpa-taror galitaà
phalam: [SB 1.1.3] the Vedic instructions are like a tree, of which
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the ripened fruit. Närada Muni is engaged in
distributing this fruit, and therefore he instructed Vyäsadeva to write this
Mahä-Puräëa, Çrémad-Bhägavatam, for the benefit of ignorant human society.
anarthopaçamaà säkñäd
bhakti-yogam adhokñaje
lokasyäjänato vidväàç
cakre sätvata-saàhitäm
"The material miseries of the living entity, which are superfluous to him, can
be directly mitigated by the linking process of devotional service. But the mass
of people do not know this, and therefore the learned Vyäsadeva compiled this
Vedic literature, which is in relation to the Supreme Truth." (SB 1.7.6) People
are suffering because of ignorance and are following a wrong path for
happiness. This is called anartha. These material activities will never make
them happy, and therefore Närada instructed Vyäsadeva to record the
instructions of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Vyäsadeva actually followed Närada and
did this. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the supreme instruction of the Vedas. Galitaà
phalam: the ripened fruit of the Vedas is Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
TEXT 31
>a]aTa›<aa& Pa[aYa<a& >a]aTaa Yaae_NauiTaïiTa DaMaRivTa( )
Sa Pau<YabNDau" Pauåzae MaåiÙ" Sah MaaedTae )) 31 ))
bhrätèëäà präyaëaà bhrätä
yo 'nutiñöhati dharmavit
sa puëya-bandhuù puruño
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
356
marudbhiù saha modate
SYNONYMS
bhrätèëäm—of elder brothers; präyaëam—the path; bhrätä—a faithful
brother; yaù—one who; anutiñöhati—follows; dharma-vit—knowing the
religious principles; saù—that; puëya-bandhuù—highly pious;
puruñaù—person; marudbhiù—the demigods of the winds; saha—with;
modate—enjoys life.
TRANSLATION
A brother aware of the principles of religion follows in the footsteps of his
elder brothers. Because of being highly elevated, such a pious brother gets the
opportunity to associate and enjoy with demigods like the Maruts, who are all
affectionate to their brothers.
PURPORT
According to their belief in various material relationships, people are
promoted to various planets. Here it is said that one who is very faithful to his
brothers should follow a path similar to theirs and get the opportunity for
promotion to Marudloka. Närada Muni advised Prajäpati Dakña's second group
of sons to follow their elder brothers and be promoted to the spiritual world.
TEXT 32
WTaavdu¤-a Pa[YaYaaE Naardae_MaaegadXaRNa" )
Tae_iPa caNvGaMaNa( MaaGa| >a]aTa›<aaMaev Maairz )) 32 ))
etävad uktvä prayayau
närado 'mogha-darçanaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
357
te 'pi cänvagaman märgaà
bhrätèëäm eva märiña
SYNONYMS
etävat—this much; uktvä—speaking; prayayau—departed from that place;
näradaù—the great sage Närada; amogha-darçanaù—whose glance is
all-auspicious; te—they; api—also; ca—and; anvagaman—followed;
märgam—the path; bhrätèëäm—of their previous brothers; eva—indeed;
märiña—O great Äryan king.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: O best of the advanced Äryans, after saying
this much to the sons of Prajäpati Dakña, Närada Muni, whose merciful glance
never goes in vain, left as he had planned. The sons of Dakña followed their
elder brothers. Not attempting to produce children, they engaged themselves in
Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 33
SaDa]qcqNa& Pa[TaqcqNa& ParSYaaNauPaQa& GaTaa" )
NaaÛaiPa Tae iNavTaRNTae PaiêMaa YaaiMaNaqirv )) 33 ))
sadhrécénaà pratécénaà
parasyänupathaà gatäù
nädyäpi te nivartante
paçcimä yäminér iva
SYNONYMS
sadhrécénam—completely correct; pratécénam—obtainable by adopting a mode
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
358
of life aimed at the highest goal, devotional service; parasya—of the Supreme
Lord; anupatham—the pathway; gatäù—taking to; na—not; adya api—even
until today; te—they (the sons of Prajäpati Dakña); nivartante—have come
back; paçcimäù—western (those that have past); yäminéù—nights; iva—like.
TRANSLATION
The Savaläçvas took to the correct path, which is obtainable by a mode of
life meant to achieve devotional service, or the mercy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Like nights that have gone to the west, they have not
returned even until now.
TEXT 34
WTaiSMaNa( k-al/ oTPaaTaaNa( bhUNa( PaXYaNa( Pa[JaaPaiTa" )
PaUvRvàardk*-Ta& Pau}aNaaXaMauPaaé*<aaeTa( )) 34 ))
etasmin käla utpätän
bahün paçyan prajäpatiù
pürvavan närada-kåtaà
putra-näçam upäçåëot
SYNONYMS
etasmin—at this; käle—time; utpätän—disturbances; bahün—many;
paçyan—seeing; prajäpatiù—Prajäpati Dakña; pürva-vat—like before;
närada—by the great sage Närada Muni; kåtam—done; putra-näçam—the loss
of his children; upäçåëot—he heard of.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
359
At this time, Prajäpati Dakña observed many inauspicious signs, and he
heard from various sources that his second group of sons, the Savaläçvas, had
followed the path of their elder brothers in accordance with the instructions of
Närada.
TEXT 35
cu§-aeDa NaardaYaaSaaE Pau}aXaaek-ivMaUiC^RTa" )
devizRMauPal/>Yaah raezaiÜSfu-irTaaDar" )) 35 ))
cukrodha näradäyäsau
putra-çoka-vimürcchitaù
devarñim upalabhyäha
roñäd visphuritädharaù
SYNONYMS
cukrodha—became very angry; näradäya—at the great sage Närada Muni;
asau—that one (Dakña); putra-çoka—due to lamentation for the loss of his
children; vimürcchitaù—almost fainting; devarñim—the great sage Devarñi
Närada; upalabhya—seeing; äha—he said; roñät—out of great anger;
visphurita—trembling; adharaù—whose lips.
TRANSLATION
When he heard that the Savaläçvas had also left this world to engage in
devotional service, Dakña was angry at Närada, and he almost fainted due to
lamentation. When Dakña met Närada, Dakña's lips began trembling in anger,
and he spoke as follows.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
360
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura comments that Närada Muni had
delivered the entire family of Sväyambhuva Manu, beginning with Priyavrata
and Uttänapäda. He had delivered Uttänapäda's son Dhruva and had even
delivered Präcénabarhi, who was engaged in fruitive activities. Nevertheless,
he could not deliver Prajäpati Dakña. Prajäpati Dakña saw Närada before him
because Närada had personally come to deliver him. Närada Muni took the
opportunity to approach Prajäpati Dakña in his bereavement because the time
of bereavement is a suitable time for appreciating bhakti-yoga. As stated in
Bhagavad-gétä (7.16), four kinds of men—ärta (one who is distressed), arthärthé
(one in need of money), jijïäsu (one who is inquisitive) and jïäné (a person in
knowledge)—try to understand devotional service. Prajäpati Dakña was in
great distress because of the loss of his sons, and therefore Närada took the
opportunity to instruct him regarding liberation from material bondage.
TEXT 36
é[qd+a ovac
Ahae ASaaDaae SaaDaUNaa& SaaDauil/(r)eNa NaSTvYaa )
ASaaßk-aYaR>aRk-a<aa& i>a+aaeMaaRGaR" Pa[diXaRTa" )) 36 ))
çré-dakña uväca
aho asädho sädhünäà
sädhu-liìgena nas tvayä
asädhv akäry arbhakäëäà
bhikñor märgaù pradarçitaù
SYNONYMS
çré-dakñaù uväca—Prajäpati Dakña said; aho asädho—O greatly dishonest
nondevotee; sädhünäm—of the society of devotees and great sages;
sädhu-liìgena—wearing the dress of a saintly person; naù—unto us; tvayä—by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
361
you; asädhu—a dishonesty; akäri—has been done; arbhakäëäm—of poor boys
who were very inexperienced; bhikñoù märgaù—the path of a beggar or
mendicant sannyäsé; pradarçitaù—shown.
TRANSLATION
Prajäpati Dakña said: Alas, Närada Muni, you wear the dress of a saintly
person, but you are not actually a saint. Indeed, although I am now in gåhastha
life, I am a saintly person. By showing my sons the path of renunciation, you
have done me an abominable injustice.
PURPORT
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu said, sannyäséra alpa chidra sarva-loke gäya (Cc.
Madhya 12.51). In society one will find many sannyäsés, vänaprasthas, gåhasthas
and brahmacärés, but if all of them properly live in accordance with their
duties, they are understood to be sädhus. Prajäpati Dakña was certainly a sädhu
because he had executed such great austerities that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Lord Viñëu, had appeared before him. Nevertheless, he had a
fault-finding mentality. He improperly thought Närada Muni to be asädhu, or
nonsaintly, because Närada had foiled his intentions. Desiring to train his sons
to become gåhasthas fully equipped with knowledge, Dakña had sent them to
execute austerities by Näräyaëa-saras. Närada Muni, however, taking
advantage of their highly elevated position in austerity, instructed them to
become Vaiñëavas in the renounced order. This is the duty of Närada Muni
and his followers. They must show everyone the path of renouncing this
material world and returning home, back to Godhead. Prajäpati Dakña,
however, could not see the exaltedness of the duties Närada Muni performed
in relation to his sons. Unable to appreciate Närada Muni's behavior, Dakña
accused Närada of being asädhu.
The words bhikñor märga, "the path of the renounced order," are very
significant in this regard. A sannyäsé is called tridaëòi-bhikñu because his duty
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
362
is to beg alms from the homes of gåhasthas and to give the gåhasthas spiritual
instructions. A sannyäsé is allowed to beg from door to door, but a gåhastha
cannot do so. Gåhasthas may earn their living according to the four divisions
of spiritual life. A brähmaëa gåhastha may earn his livelihood by becoming a
learned scholar and teaching people in general how to worship the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. He may also assume the duty of worship himself.
Therefore it is said that only brähmaëas may engage in Deity worship, and
they may accept as prasäda whatever people offer the Deity. Although a
brähmaëa may sometimes accept charity, it is not for his personal maintenance
but for the worship of the Deity. Thus a brähmaëa does not stock anything for
his future use. Similarly, kñatriyas may collect taxes from the citizens, and they
must also protect the citizens, enforce rules and regulations, and maintain law
and order. Vaiçyas should earn their livelihood through agriculture and cow
protection, and çüdras should maintain their livelihood by serving the three
higher classes. Unless one becomes a brähmaëa, one cannot take sannyäsa.
Sannyäsés and brahmacärés may beg alms door to door, but a gåhastha cannot.
Prajäpati Dakña condemned Närada Muni because Närada, a brahmacäré
who could beg from door to door, had made sannyäsés of Dakña's sons, who
were being trained to be gåhasthas. Dakña was extremely angry at Närada
because he thought that Närada had done him a great injustice. According to
Dakña's opinion, Närada Muni had misled Dakña's inexperienced sons (asädhv
akäry arbhakäëäm). Dakña regarded his sons as innocent boys who had been
misled when Närada showed them the renounced order of life. Because of all
these considerations, Prajäpati Dakña charged that Närada Muni was asädhu
and should not have adopted the dress of a sädhu.
Sometimes a saintly person is misunderstood by gåhasthas, especially when
he instructs their young sons to accept Kåñëa consciousness. Generally a
gåhastha thinks that unless one enters gåhastha life he cannot properly enter
the renounced order. If a young man immediately adopts the path of the
renounced order in accordance with the instructions of Närada or a member of
his disciplic succession, his parents become very angry. This same
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
363
phenomenon is occurring in our Kåñëa consciousness movement because we
are instructing all the young boys in the Western countries to follow the path
of renunciation. We allow gåhastha life, but a gåhastha also follows the path of
renunciation. Even a gåhastha has to give up so many bad habits that his
parents think his life has been practically destroyed. We allow no meat-eating,
no illicit sex, no gambling and no intoxication, and consequently the parents
wonder how, if there are so many no's, one's life can be positive. In the
Western countries especially, these four prohibited activities practically
constitute the life and soul of the modern population. Therefore parents
sometimes dislike our movement, just as Prajäpati Dakña disliked the activities
of Närada and accused Närada of dishonesty. Nevertheless, although parents
may be angry at us, we must perform our duty without hesitation because we
are in the disciplic succession from Närada Muni.
People addicted to householder life wonder how one can give up the
enjoyment of gåhastha life, which is a concession for sex enjoyment, simply to
become a mendicant in Kåñëa consciousness. They do not know that the
householder's concession for sex life cannot be regulated unless one accepts
the life of a mendicant. The Vedic civilization therefore enjoins that at the
end of one's fiftieth year one must give up household life. This is compulsory.
However, because modern civilization is misled, householders want to remain
in family life until death, and therefore they are suffering. In such cases, the
disciples of Närada Muni advise all the members of the younger generation to
join the Kåñëa consciousness movement immediately. There is nothing wrong
in this.
TEXT 37
‰<aEiñi>arMau¢-aNaaMaMaqMaa&iSaTak-MaR<aaMa( )
ivgaaTa" é[eYaSa" PaaPa l/aek-Yaaeå>aYaae" k*-Ta" )) 37 ))
åëais tribhir amuktänäm
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
364
amémäàsita-karmaëäm
vighätaù çreyasaù päpa
lokayor ubhayoù kåtaù
SYNONYMS
åëaiù—from the debts; tribhiù—three; amuktänäm—of persons not freed;
amémäàsita—not considering; karmaëäm—the path of duty; vighätaù—ruin;
çreyasaù—of the path of good fortune; päpa—O most sinful (Närada Muni);
lokayoù—of the worlds; ubhayoù—both; kåtaù—done.
TRANSLATION
Prajäpati Dakña said: My sons were not at all freed from their three debts.
Indeed, they did not properly consider their obligations. O Närada Muni, O
personality of sinful action, you have obstructed their progress toward good
fortune in this world and the next because they are still indebted to the saintly
persons, the demigods and their father.
PURPORT
As soon as a brähmaëa takes birth, he assumes three kinds of debts—debts
to great saints, debts to the demigods and debts to his father. The son of a
brähmaëa must undergo celibacy (brahmacarya) to clear his debts to the saintly
persons, he must perform ritualistic ceremonies to clear his debts to the
demigods, and he must beget children to become free from his debts to his
father. Prajäpati Dakña argued that although the renounced order is
recommended for liberation, one cannot attain liberation unless one fulfills his
obligations to the demigods, the saints and his father. Since Dakña's sons had
not liberated themselves from these three debts, how could Närada Muni have
led them to the renounced order of life? Apparently, Prajäpati Dakña did not
know the final decision of the çästras. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
365
(11.5.41):
devarñi-bhütäpta-nåëäà pitèëäà
na kiìkaro näyam åëé ca räjan
sarvätmanä yaù çaraëaà çaraëyaà
gato mukundaà parihåtya kartam
Everyone is indebted to the demigods, to living entities in general, to his
family, to the pitäs and so on, but if one fully surrenders to Kåñëa, Mukunda,
who can give one liberation, even if one performs no yajïas, one is freed from
all debts. Even if one does not repay his debts, he is freed from all debts if he
renounces the material world for the sake of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, whose lotus feet are the shelter of everyone. This is the verdict of
the çästra. Therefore Närada Muni was completely right in instructing the sons
of Prajäpati Dakña to renounce this material world immediately and take
shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Unfortunately, Prajäpati
Dakña, the father of the Haryaçvas and Savaläçvas, did not understand the
great service rendered by Närada Muni. Dakña therefore addressed him as päpa
(the personality of sinful activities) and asädhu (a nonsaintly person). Since
Närada Muni was a great saint and Vaiñëava, he tolerated all such accusations
from Prajäpati Dakña. He merely performed his duty as a Vaiñëava by
delivering all the sons of Prajäpati Dakña, enabling them to return home, back
to Godhead.
TEXT 38
Wv& Tv& iNarNau§-aeXaae bal/aNaa& MaiTai>aÖre" )
PaazRdMaDYae criSa YaXaaeha iNarPa}aPa" )) 38 ))
evaà tvaà niranukroço
bälänäà mati-bhid dhareù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
366
pärñada-madhye carasi
yaço-hä nirapatrapaù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; tvam—you (Närada); niranukroçaù—without compassion;
bälänäm—of innocent, inexperienced boys; mati-bhit—contaminating the
consciousness; hareù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
pärñada-madhye—among the personal associates; carasi—travel;
yaçaù-hä—defaming the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
nirapatrapaù—(although you do not know what you are doing, you are
executing sinful activities) without shame.
TRANSLATION
Prajäpati Dakña continued: Thus committing violence against other living
entities and yet claiming to be an associate of Lord Viñëu, you are defaming the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. You needlessly created a mentality of
renunciation in innocent boys, and therefore you are shameless and devoid of
compassion. How could you travel with the personal associates of the Supreme
Lord?
PURPORT
This mentality of Prajäpati Dakña still continues even today. When young
boys join the Kåñëa consciousness movement, their fathers and so-called
guardians are very angry at the propounder of the Kåñëa consciousness
movement because they think that their sons have been unnecessarily induced
to deprive themselves of the material enjoyments of eating, drinking and
merrymaking. Karmés, fruitive workers, think that one should fully enjoy his
present life in this material world and also perform some pious activities to be
promoted to higher planetary systems for further enjoyment in the next life. A
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
367
yogé, however, especially a bhakti-yogé, is callous to the opinions of this material
world. He is not interested in traveling to the higher planetary systems of the
demigods to enjoy a long life in an advanced materialistic civilization. As
stated by Prabodhänanda Sarasvaté, kaivalyaà narakäyate tridaça-pür
äkäça-puñpäyate: for a devotee, merging into the Brahman existence is hellish,
and life in the higher planetary systems of the demigods is a will-o'-the-wisp, a
phantasmagoria with no real existence at all. A pure devotee is not interested
in yogic perfection, travel to higher planetary systems, or oneness with
Brahman. He is interested only in rendering service to the Personality of
Godhead. Since Prajäpati Dakña was a karmé, he could not appreciate the great
service Närada Muni had rendered his eleven thousand sons. Instead, he
accused Närada Muni of being sinful and charged that because Närada Muni
was associated with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Lord would also
be defamed. Thus Dakña criticized that Närada Muni was an offender to the
Lord although he was known as an associate of the Lord.
TEXT 39
NaNau >aaGavTaa iNaTYa& >aUTaaNauGa]hk-aTara" )
‰Tae Tva& SaaEôdgan& vE vErªrMavEir<aaMa( )) 39 ))
nanu bhägavatä nityaà
bhütänugraha-kätaräù
åte tväà sauhåda-ghnaà vai
vairaì-karam avairiëäm
SYNONYMS
nanu—now; bhägavatäù—devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
nityam—eternally; bhüta-anugraha-kätaräù—very much anxious to bestow
benedictions upon the fallen conditioned souls; åte—except; tväm—yourself;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
368
sauhåda-ghnam—a breaker of friendship (therefore not countable among the
bhägavatas, or devotees of the Lord); vai—indeed; vairam-karam—you create
enmity; avairiëäm—toward persons who are not enemies.
TRANSLATION
All the devotees of the Lord but you are very kind to the conditioned souls
and are eager to benefit others. Although you wear the dress of a devotee, you
create enmity with people who are not your enemies, or you break friendship
and create enmity between friends. Are you not ashamed of posing as a devotee
while performing these abominable actions?
PURPORT
Such are the criticisms that must be borne by the servants of Närada Muni
in the disciplic succession. Through the Kåñëa consciousness movement, we
are trying to train young people to become devotees and return home, back to
Godhead, by following rigid regulative principles, but our service is
appreciated neither in India nor abroad in the Western countries where we are
endeavoring to spread this Kåñëa consciousness movement. In India the caste
brähmaëas have become enemies of the Kåñëa consciousness movement
because we elevate foreigners, who are supposed to be mlecchas and yavanas, to
the position of brähmaëas. We train them in austerities and penances and
recognize them as brähmaëas by awarding them sacred threads. Thus the caste
brähmaëas of India are very displeased by our activities in the Western world.
In the West also, the parents of the young people who join this movement
have also become enemies. We have no business creating enemies, but the
process is such that nondevotees will always be inimical toward us.
Nevertheless, as stated in the çästras, a devotee should be both tolerant and
merciful. Devotees engaged in preaching should be prepared to be accused by
ignorant persons, and yet they must be very merciful to the fallen conditioned
souls. If one can execute his duty in the disciplic succession of Närada Muni,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
369
his service will surely be recognized. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä
(18.68-69):
ya idaà paramaà guhyaà
mad-bhakteñv abhidhäsyati
bhaktià mayi paräà kåtvä
mäm evaiñyaty asaàçayaù
na ca tasmän manuñyeñu
kaçcin me priya-kåttamaù
bhavitä na ca me tasmäd
anyaù priyataro bhuvi
"For one who explains the supreme secret to the devotees, devotional service is
guaranteed, and at the end he will come back to Me. There is no servant in
this world more dear to Me than he, nor will there ever be one more dear." Let
us continue preaching the message of Lord Kåñëa and not be afraid of enemies.
Our only duty is to satisfy the Lord by this preaching, which will be accepted
as service by Lord Caitanya and Lord Kåñëa. We must sincerely serve the Lord
and not be deterred by so-called enemies.
In this verse the word sauhåda-ghnam ("a breaker of friendship") is used.
Because Närada Muni and the members of his disciplic succession disrupt
friendships and family life, they are sometimes accused of being
sauhåda-ghnam, creators of enmity between relatives. Actually such devotees
are friends of every living entity (suhådaà sarva-bhütänäm [Bg. 5.29]), but they
are misunderstood to be enemies. Preaching can be a difficult, thankless task,
but a preacher must follow the orders of the Supreme Lord and be unafraid of
materialistic persons.
TEXT 40
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
370
NaeTQa& Pau&Saa& ivraGa" SYaaTa( TvYaa ke-vil/Naa Ma*za )
MaNYaSae YaÛuPaXaMa& òehPaaXaiNak*-NTaNaMa( )) 40 ))
netthaà puàsäà virägaù syät
tvayä kevalinä måñä
manyase yady upaçamaà
sneha-päça-nikåntanam
SYNONYMS
na—not; ittham—in this way; puàsäm—of persons; virägaù—renunciation;
syät—is possible; tvayä—by you; kevalinä måñä—possessing knowledge falsely;
manyase—you think; yadi—if; upaçamam—renunciation of material
enjoyment; sneha-päça—the bonds of affection; nikåntanam—cutting.
TRANSLATION
Prajäpati Dakña continued: If you think that simply awakening the sense of
renunciation will detach one from the material world, I must say that unless full
knowledge is awakened, simply changing dresses as you have done cannot
possibly bring detachment.
PURPORT
Prajäpati Dakña was correct in stating that changing one's dress cannot
detach one from this material world. The sannyäsés of Kali-yuga who change
their robes from white to saffron and then think they can do whatever they
like are more abominable than materialistic gåhasthas. This is not
recommended anywhere. Prajäpati Dakña was right in pointing out this defect,
but he did not know that Närada Muni had aroused the spirit of renunciation
in the Haryaçvas and Savaläçvas through full knowledge. Such enlightened
renunciation is desirable. One should enter the renounced order with full
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
371
knowledge (jïäna-vairägya), for the perfection of life is possible for one who
renounces this material world in that way. This elevated stage can be reached
very easily, as supported by the statements of Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.7):
väsudeve bhagavati
bhakti-yogaù prayojitaù
janayaty äçu vairägyaà
jïänaà ca yad ahaitukam
"By rendering devotional service unto the Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa,
one immediately acquires causeless knowledge and detachment from the
world." If one seriously engages in devotional service to Lord Väsudeva, jïäna
and vairägya are automatically manifest in one's person. There is no doubt of
this. Prajäpati Dakña's accusation that Närada had not actually elevated his
sons to the platform of knowledge was not factual. All the sons of Prajäpati
Dakña had first been raised to the platform of jïäna and had then
automatically renounced this world. In summary, unless one's knowledge is
awakened, renunciation cannot take place, for without elevated knowledge
one cannot give up attachment for material enjoyment.
TEXT 41
NaaNau>aUYa Na JaaNaaiTa PauMaaNa( ivzYaTaq+<aTaaMa( )
iNaivRÛTae SvYa& TaSMaaà TaQaa i>aàDaq" ParE" )) 41 ))
nänubhüya na jänäti
pumän viñaya-tékñëatäm
nirvidyate svayaà tasmän
na tathä bhinna-dhéù paraiù
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
372
na—not; anubhüya—experiencing; na—not; jänäti—knows; pumän—a
person; viñaya-tékñëatäm—the sharpness of material enjoyment;
nirvidyate—becomes aloof; svayam—himself; tasmät—from that; na
tathä—not like that; bhinna-dhéù—whose intelligence is changed; paraiù—by
others.
TRANSLATION
Material enjoyment is indeed the cause of all unhappiness, but one cannot
give it up unless one has personally experienced how much suffering it is.
Therefore one should be allowed to remain in so-called material enjoyment
while simultaneously advancing in knowledge to experience the misery of this
false material happiness. Then, without help from others, one will find material
enjoyment detestful. Those whose minds are changed by others do not become
as renounced as those who have personal experience.
PURPORT
It is said that unless a woman becomes pregnant, she cannot understand the
trouble of giving birth to a child. Bandhyä ki bujhibe prasava-vedanä. The word
bandhyä means a sterile woman. Such a woman cannot give birth to a child.
How, then, can she perceive the pain of delivery? According to the philosophy
of Prajäpati Dakña, a woman should first become pregnant and then
experience the pain of childbirth. Then, if she is intelligent, she will not want
to be pregnant again. Actually. however. this is not a fact. Sex enjoyment is so
strong that a woman becomes pregnant and suffers at the time of childbirth.
but she becomes pregnant again, despite her experience. According to Dakña's
philosophy. one should become implicated in material enjoyment so that after
experiencing the distress of such enjoyment. one will automatically renounce.
Material nature, however. is so strong that although a man suffers at every
step, he will not cease his attempts to enjoy (tåpyanti neha
kåpaëa-bahu-duùkha-bhäjaù [SB 7.9.45]). Under the circumstances, unless one
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
373
gets the association of a devotee like Närada Muni or his servant in the
disciplic succession, one's dormant spirit of renunciation cannot be awakened.
It is not a fact that because material enjoyment involves so many painful
conditions one will automatically become detached. One needs the blessings of
a devotee like Närada Muni. Then one can renounce his attachment for the
material world. The young boys and girls of the Kåñëa consciousness
movement have given up the spirit of material enjoyment not because of
practice but by the mercy of Lord Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu and His servants.
TEXT 42
YaàSTv& k-MaRSaNDaaNaa& SaaDaUNaa& Ga*hMaeiDaNaaMa( )
k*-TavaNaiSa duMaRz| iviPa[Ya& Tav MaizRTaMa( )) 42 ))
yan nas tvaà karma-sandhänäà
sädhünäà gåhamedhinäm
kåtavän asi durmarñaà
vipriyaà tava marñitam
SYNONYMS
yat—which; naù—unto us; tvam—you; karma-sandhänäm—who strictly
follow the fruitive ritualistic ceremonies according to Vedic injunctions;
sädhünäm—who are honest (because we honestly seek elevated social
standards and bodily comfort); gåha-medhinäm—although situated with a wife
and children; kåtavän asi—have created; durmarñam—unbearable;
vipriyam—wrong; tava—your; marñitam—forgiven.
TRANSLATION
Although I live in household life with my wife and children, I honestly
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
374
follow the Vedic injunctions by engaging in fruitive activities to enjoy life
without sinful reactions. I have performed all kinds of yajïas, including the
deva-yajïa, åñi-yajïa, pitå-yajïa and nå-yajïa. Because these yajïas are called
vratas [vows], I am known as a gåhavrata. Unfortunately, you have given me
great displeasure by misguiding my sons, for no reason, to the path of
renunciation. This can be tolerated once.
PURPORT
Prajäpati Dakña wanted to prove that he had been most tolerant in not
having said anything when Närada Muni, for no reason, induced his ten
thousand innocent sons to adopt the path of renunciation. Sometimes
householders are accused of being gåhamedhés, for gåhamedhés are satisfied with
family life without spiritual advancement. Gåhasthas, however, are different
because although gåhasthas live in householder life with their wives and
children, they are eager for spiritual advancement. Wanting to prove that he
had been magnanimous to Närada Muni, Prajäpati Dakña stressed that when
Närada had misled his first sons, Dakña had taken no action; he had been kind
and tolerant. He was aggrieved, however, because Närada Muni had misled his
sons for a second time. Therefore he wanted to prove that Närada Muni,
although dressed like a sädhu, was not actually a sädhu; he himself, although a
householder, was a greater sädhu than Närada Muni.
TEXT 43
TaNTauk*-NTaNa YaàSTvMa>ad]Macr" PauNa" )
TaSMaaçaeke-zu Tae MaU! Na >aved(>a]MaTa" PadMa( )) 43 ))
tantu-kåntana yan nas tvam
abhadram acaraù punaù
tasmäl lokeñu te müòha
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
375
na bhaved bhramataù padam
SYNONYMS
tantu-kåntana—O mischief-monger who have mercilessly separated my sons
from me; yat—which; naù—unto us; tvam—you; abhadram—an inauspicious
thing; acaraù—have done; punaù—again; tasmät—therefore; lokeñu—in all
the planetary systems within the universe; te—of you; müòha—O rascal not
knowing how to act; na—not; bhavet—there may be; bhramataù—who are
wandering; padam—an abode.
TRANSLATION
You have made me lose my sons once, and now you have again done the
same inauspicious thing. Therefore you are a rascal who does not know how to
behave toward others. You may travel all over the universe, but I curse you to
have no residence anywhere.
PURPORT
Because Prajäpati Dakña was a gåhamedhé who wanted to remain in
household life, he thought that if Närada Muni could not remain in one place,
but had to travel all over the world, that would be a great punishment for him.
Actually, however, such a punishment is a boon for a preacher. A preacher is
known as parivräjakäcärya—an äcärya, or teacher, who always travels for the
benefit of human society. Prajäpati Dakña cursed Närada Muni by saying that
although he had the facility to travel all over the universe, he would never be
able to stay in one place. In the paramparä system from Närada Muni, I have
also been cursed. Although I have many centers that would be suitable places
of residence, I cannot stay anywhere, for I have been cursed by the parents of
my young disciples. Since the Kåñëa consciousness movement was started, I
have traveled all over the world two or three times a year, and although I am
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
376
provided comfortable places to stay wherever I go, I cannot stay anywhere for
more than three days or a week. I do not mind this curse by the parents of my
disciples, but now it is necessary that I stay in one place to finish another
task—this translation of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. If my young disciples, especially
those who have taken sannyäsa, take charge of traveling all over the world, it
may be possible for me to transfer the curse of the parents to these young
preachers. Then I may sit down conveniently in one place for the work of
translation.
TEXT 44
é[qXauk- ovac
Pa[iTaJaGa]ah Tad( ba!& Naard" SaaDauSaMMaTa" )
WTaavaNa( SaaDauvadae ih iTaiTa+aeTaeìr" SvYaMa( )) 44 ))
çré-çuka uväca
pratijagräha tad bäòhaà
näradaù sädhu-sammataù
etävän sädhu-vädo hi
titikñeteçvaraù svayam
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; pratijagräha—accepted;
tat—that; bäòham—so be it; näradaù—Närada Muni; sädhu-sammataù—who
is an approved sädhu; etävän—this much; sädhu-vädaù—appropriate for a
saintly person; hi—indeed; titikñeta—he may tolerate; éçvaraù—although able
to curse Prajäpati Dakña; svayam—himself.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
377
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: My dear King, since Närada Muni is an
approved saintly person, when cursed by Prajäpati Dakña he replied, "tad
bäòham: Yes, what you have said is good. I accept this curse." He could have
cursed Prajäpati Dakña in return, but because he is a tolerant and merciful
sädhu, he took no action.
PURPORT
As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (3.25.21):
titikñavaù käruëikäù
suhådaù sarva-dehinäm
ajäta-çatravaù çäntäù
sädhavaù sädhu-bhüñaëäù
"The symptoms of a sädhu are that he is tolerant, merciful and friendly to all
living entities. He has no enemies, he is peaceful, he abides by the scriptures,
and all his characteristics are sublime." Because Närada Muni is the most
elevated of sädhus, devotees, to deliver Prajäpati Dakña he silently tolerated
the curse. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu has taught this principle to all His
devotees:
tåëäd api sunécena
taror api sahiñëunä
amäninä mänadena
kértanéyaù sadä hariù
[Cc. Ädi 17.31]
"One should chant the holy name of the Lord in a humble state of mind,
thinking oneself lower than the straw in the street; one should be more
tolerant than a tree, devoid of all sense of false prestige and should be ready to
offer all respects to others. In such a state of mind one can chant the holy
name of the Lord constantly." Following the orders of Çré Caitanya
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
378
Mahäprabhu, one who preaches the glories of the Lord all over the world or all
over the universe should be humbler than grass and more tolerant than a tree
because a preacher cannot live an easygoing life. Indeed, a preacher must face
many impediments. Not only is he sometimes cursed, but sometimes he must
also suffer personal injury. For example, when Nityänanda Prabhu went to
preach Kåñëa consciousness to the two roguish brothers Jagäi and Mädhäi, they
injured Him and made His head bleed, but nevertheless, He tolerantly
delivered the two rogues, who became perfect Vaiñëavas. This is the duty of a
preacher. Lord Jesus Christ even tolerated crucifixion. Therefore the curse
against Närada was not very astonishing, and he tolerated it.
Now, it may be asked why Närada Muni stayed in the presence of Prajäpati
Dakña and tolerated all his accusations and curses. Was that for Dakña's
deliverance? The answer is yes. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura says that
after being insulted by Prajäpati Dakña, Närada Muni should have left
immediately, but he purposely stayed to hear all Dakña's strong words so that
Dakña might be relieved of his anger. Prajäpati Dakña was not an ordinary
man; he had accumulated the results of many pious activities. Therefore
Närada Muni expected that after delivering his curse, Dakña, satisfied and
freed from anger, would repent his misbehavior and thus get a chance to
become a Vaiñëava and be delivered. When Jagäi and Mädhäi offended Lord
Nityänanda, Lord Nityänanda stood tolerantly, and therefore both brothers
fell at His lotus feet and repented. Consequently they later became perfect
Vaiñëavas.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, Fifth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam. entitled "Närada Muni Cursed by Prajäpati Dakña."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
379
6. The Progeny of the Daughters of Dakña
As described in this chapter, Prajäpati Dakña begot sixty daughters in the
womb of his wife Asikné. These daughters were given in charity to various
persons to increase the population. Since these offspring of Dakña were
women, Närada Muni did not try to lead them toward the renounced order of
life. Thus the daughters were saved from Närada Muni. Ten of the daughters
were given in marriage to Dharmaräja, thirteen to Kaçyapa Muni, and
twenty-seven to the moon-god, Candra. In this way fifty daughters were
distributed, and of the other ten daughters, four were given to Kaçyapa and
two each to Bhüta, Aìgirä and Kåçäçva. One should know that it is because of
the union of these sixty daughters with various exalted personalities that the
entire universe was filled with various kinds of living entities, such as human
beings, demigods, demons, beasts, birds and serpents.
TEXT 1
é[qXauk- ovac
TaTa" Pa[aceTaSaae_iSa¥-yaMaNauNaqTa" SvYaM>auva )
zií& SaÅNaYaaMaaSa duihTa›" iPaTa*vTSal/a" )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
tataù präcetaso 'siknyäm
anunétaù svayambhuvä
ñañöià saïjanayäm äsa
duhitèù pitå-vatsaläù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
380
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; tataù—after that incident;
präcetasaù—Dakña; asiknyäm—in his wife named Asikné; anunétaù—pacified;
svayambhuvä—by Lord Brahmä; ñañöim—sixty; saïjanayäm äsa—begot;
duhitèù—daughters; pitå-vatsaläù—all very affectionate to their father.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: My dear King, thereafter, at the request of Lord
Brahmä, Prajäpati Dakña, who is known as Präcetasa, begot sixty daughters in
the womb of his wife Asikné. All the daughters were very affectionate toward
their father.
PURPORT
After the incidents concerning the loss of his many sons, Dakña repented
his misunderstanding with Närada Muni. Lord Brahmä then saw Dakña and
instructed him to beget children again. This time Dakña was very cautious to
beget female children instead of male children so that Närada Muni would not
disturb them by urging them to accept the renounced order. Females are not
meant for the renounced order of life; they should be faithful to their good
husbands, for if a husband is competent for liberation, his wife will also
achieve liberation with him. As stated in the çästra, the results of a husband's
pious activities are shared by his wife. Therefore a woman's duty is to be very
chaste and faithful to her husband. Then without separate endeavor she will
share in all the profit the husband earns.
TEXT 2
dXa DaMaaRYa k-aYaadad(iÜz$( i}a<av ceNdve )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
381
>aUTaai(r)r"k*-Xaaìe>Yaae Üe Üe Taa+YaaRYa caPara" )) 2 ))
daça dharmäya käyädäd
dvi-ñaö tri-ëava cendave
bhütäìgiraù-kåçäçvebhyo
dve dve tärkñyäya cäparäù
SYNONYMS
daça—ten; dharmäya—unto King Dharma, Yamaräja; käya—unto Kaçyapa;
adät—gave; dvi-ñaö—twice six and one (thirteen); tri-nava—thrice nine
(twenty-seven); ca—also; indave—unto the moon-god;
bhüta-aìgiraù-kåçäçvebhyaù—unto Bhüta, Aìgirä and Kåçäçva; dve dve—two
each; tärkñyäya—again unto Kaçyapa; ca—and; aparäù—the balance.
TRANSLATION
He gave ten daughters in charity to Dharmaräja [Yamaräja], thirteen to
Kaçyapa [first twelve and then one more], twenty-seven to the moon-god, and
two each to Aìgirä, Kåçäçva and Bhüta. The other four daughters were given to
Kaçyapa. [Thus Kaçyapa received seventeen daughters in all.]
TEXT 3
NaaMaDaeYaaNYaMaUza& Tv& SaaPaTYaaNaa& c Mae é*<au )
YaaSaa& Pa[SaUiTaPa[SavEl/aeRk-a AaPaUirTaañYa" )) 3 ))
nämadheyäny amüñäà tvaà
säpatyänäà ca me çåëu
yäsäà prasüti-prasavair
lokä äpüritäs trayaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
382
SYNONYMS
nämadheyäni—the different names; amüñäm—of them; tvam—you;
sa-apatyänäm—with their offspring; ca—and; me—from me; çåëu—please
hear; yäsäm—of all of whom; prasüti-prasavaiù—by so many children and
descendants; lokäù—the worlds; äpüritäù—populated; trayaù—three (the
upper, middle and lower worlds).
TRANSLATION
Now please hear from me the names of all these daughters and their
descendants, who filled all the three worlds.
TEXT 4
>aaNaul/RMba k-ku-ÛaiMaivRìa SaaDYaa MaåTvTaq )
vSauMauRhUTaaR SaªLPaa DaMaRPaTNYa" SauTaaHa( é*<au )) 4 ))
bhänur lambä kakud yämir
viçvä sädhyä marutvaté
vasur muhürtä saìkalpä
dharma-patnyaù sutäï çåëu
SYNONYMS
bhänuù—Bhänu; lambä—Lambä; kakut—Kakud; yämiù—Yämi; viçvä—Viçvä;
sädhyä—Sädhyä; marutvaté—Marutvaté; vasuù—Vasu; muhürtä—Muhürtä;
saìkalpä—Saìkalpä; dharma-patnyaù—the wives of Yamaräja; sutän—their
sons; çåëu—now hear of.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
383
TRANSLATION
The ten daughters given to Yamaräja were named Bhänu, Lambä, Kakud,
Yämi, Viçvä, Sädhyä, Marutvaté, Vasu, Muhürtä and Saìkalpä. Now hear the
names of their sons.
TEXT 5
>aaNaaeSTau dev‰z>a wNd]SaeNaSTaTaae Na*Pa )
ivÛaeTa AaSaqçMbaYaaSTaTaê STaNaiYaÒv" )) 5 ))
bhänos tu deva-åñabha
indrasenas tato nåpa
vidyota äsél lambäyäs
tataç ca stanayitnavaù
SYNONYMS
bhänoù—from the womb of Bhänu; tu—of course; deva-åñabhaù—Deva-åñabha;
indrasenaù—Indrasena; tataù—from him (Deva-åñabha); nåpa—O King;
vidyotaù—Vidyota; äsét—appeared; lambäyäù—from the womb of Lambä;
tataù—from him; ca—and; stanayitnavaù—all the clouds.
TRANSLATION
O King, a son named Deva-åñabha was born from the womb of Bhänu, and
from him came a son named Indrasena. From the womb of Lambä came a son
named Vidyota, who generated all the clouds.
TEXT 6
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
384
k-ku-d" Saª$=STaSYa k-Ik-$=STaNaYaae YaTa" )
>auvae duGaaRi<a YaaMaeYa" SvGaaeR NaiNdSTaTaae_>avTa( )) 6 ))
kakudaù saìkaöas tasya
kékaöas tanayo yataù
bhuvo durgäëi yämeyaù
svargo nandis tato 'bhavat
SYNONYMS
kakudaù—from the womb of Kakud; saìkaöaù—Saìkaöa; tasya—from him;
kékaöaù—Kékaöa; tanayaù—son; yataù—from whom; bhuvaù—of the earth;
durgäëi—many demigods, protectors of this universe (which is called Durgä);
yämeyaù—of Yämi; svargaù—Svarga; nandiù—Nandi; tataù—from him
(Svarga); abhavat—was born.
TRANSLATION
From the womb of Kakud came the son named Saìkaöa, whose son was
named Kékaöa. From Kékaöa came the demigods named Durgä. From Yämi came
the son named Svarga, whose son was named Nandi.
TEXT 7
ivìedevaSTau ivìaYaa APa[Jaa&STaaNa( Pa[c+aTae )
SaaDYaaeGa<aê SaaDYaaYaa AQaRiSaiÖSTau TaTSauTa" )) 7 ))
viçve-deväs tu viçväyä
aprajäàs tän pracakñate
sädhyo-gaëaç ca sädhyäyä
arthasiddhis tu tat-sutaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
385
SYNONYMS
viçve-deväù—the demigods named the Viçvadevas; tu—but; viçväyäù—from
Viçvä; aprajän—without sons; tän—them; pracakñate—it is said;
sädhyaù-gaëaù—the demigods named the Sädhyas; ca—and; sädhyäyäù—from
the womb of Sädhya-; arthasiddhiù—Arthasiddhi; tu—but; tat-sutaù—the son
of the Sädhyas.
TRANSLATION
The sons of Viçvä were the Viçvadevas, who had no progeny. From the
womb of Sädhyä came the Sädhyas, who had a son named Arthasiddhi.
TEXT 8
MaåTva&ê JaYaNTaê MaåTvTYaa b>aUvTau" )
JaYaNTaae vaSaudeva&Xa oPaeNd] wiTa Ya& ivdu" )) 8 ))
marutväàç ca jayantaç ca
marutvatyä babhüvatuù
jayanto väsudeväàça
upendra iti yaà viduù
SYNONYMS
marutvän—Marutvän; ca—also; jayantaù—Jayanta; ca—and;
marutvatyäù—from Marutvaté; babhüvatuù—took birth; jayantaù—Jayanta;
väsudeva-aàçaù—an expansion of Väsudeva; upendraù—Upendra; iti—thus;
yam—whom; viduù—they know.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
386
TRANSLATION
The two sons who took birth from the womb of Marutvaté were Marutvän
and Jayanta. Jayanta, who is an expansion of Lord Väsudeva, is known as
Upendra.
TEXT 9
MaaEhUiTaRk-a devGa<aa MauhUTaaRYaaê Jaijre )
Yae vE f-l&/ Pa[YaC^iNTa >aUTaaNaa& SvSvk-al/JaMa( )) 9 ))
mauhürtikä deva-gaëä
muhürtäyäç ca jajïire
ye vai phalaà prayacchanti
bhütänäà sva-sva-kälajam
SYNONYMS
mauhürtikäù—Mauhürtikas; deva-gaëäù—the demigods; muhürtäyäù—from
the womb of Muhürtä; ca—and; jajïire—took birth; ye—all of whom;
vai—indeed; phalam—result; prayacchanti—deliver; bhütänäm—of the living
entities; sva-sva—their own; käla-jam—born of time.
TRANSLATION
The demigods named the Mauhürtikas took birth from the womb of
Muhürtä. These demigods deliver the results of actions to the living entities of
their respective times.
TEXTS 10-11
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
387
SaªLPaaYaaSTau SaªLPa" k-aMa" SaªLPaJa" SMa*Ta" )
vSavae_íaE vSaae" Pau}aaSTaeza& NaaMaaiNa Mae é*<au )) 10 ))
d]ae<a" Pa[a<aae Da]uvae_k-aeR_iGandaeRzae vaSTauivR>aavSau" )
d]ae<aSYaai>aMaTae" PaTNYaa hzRXaaek->aYaadYa" )) 11 ))
saìkalpäyäs tu saìkalpaù
kämaù saìkalpajaù småtaù
vasavo 'ñöau vasoù puträs
teñäà nämäni me çåëu
droëaù präëo dhruvo 'rko 'gnir
doño västur vibhävasuù
droëasyäbhimateù patnyä
harña-çoka-bhayädayaù
SYNONYMS
saìkalpäyäù—from the womb of Saìkalpä; tu—but; saìkalpaù—Saìkalpa;
kämaù—Käma; saìkalpa-jaù—the son of Saìkalpä; småtaù—known; vasavaù
añöau—the eight Vasus; vasoù—of Vasu; puträù—the sons; teñäm—of them;
nämäni—the names; me—from me; çåëu—just hear; droëaù—Droëa;
präëaù—Präëa; dhruvaù—Dhruva; arkaù—Arka; agniù—Agni; doñaù—Doña;
västuù—Västu; vibhävasuù—Vibhävasu; droëasya—of Droëa;
abhimateù—from Abhimati; patnyäù—the wife;
harña-çoka-bhaya-ädayaù—the sons named Harña, Çoka, Bhaya and so on.
TRANSLATION
The son of Saìkalpä was known as Saìkalpa, and from him lust was born.
The sons of Vasu were known as the eight Vasus. Just hear their names from
me: Droëa, Präëa, Dhruva, Arka, Agni, Doña, Västu and Vibhävasu. From
Abhimati, the wife of the Vasu named Droëa, were generated the sons named
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
388
Harña, Çoka, Bhaya and so on.
TEXT 12
Pa[a<aSYaaeJaRSvTaq >aaYaaR Sah AaYau" PauraeJav" )
Da]uvSYa >aaYaaR Dari<arSaUTa ivivDaa" Paur" )) 12 ))
präëasyorjasvaté bhäryä
saha äyuù purojavaù
dhruvasya bhäryä dharaëir
asüta vividhäù puraù
SYNONYMS
präëasya—of Präna; ürjasvaté—Ürjasvaté; bhäryä—the wife; sahaù—Saha;
äyuù—Äyus; purojavaù—Purojava; dhruvasya—of Dhruva; bhäryä—the wife;
dharaëiù—Dharaëi; asüta—gave birth to; vividhäù—the various; puraù—cities
and towns.
TRANSLATION
Ürjasvaté, the wife of Präëa, gave birth to three sons, named Saha, Äyus and
Purojava. The wife of Dhruva was known as Dharaëi, and from her womb
various cities took birth.
TEXT 13
Ak-RSYa vaSaNaa >aaYaaR Pau}aaSTazaRdYa" SMa*Taa" )
AGane>aaRYaaR vSaaeDaaRra Pau}aa d]iv<ak-adYa" )) 13 ))
arkasya väsanä bhäryä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
389
puträs tarñädayaù småtäù
agner bhäryä vasor dhärä
puträ draviëakädayaù
SYNONYMS
arkasya—of Arka; väsanä—Väsanä; bhäryä—the wife; puträù—the sons;
tarña-ädayaù—named Tarña and so on; småtäù—celebrated; agneù—of Agni;
bhäryä—wife; vasoù—the Vasu; dhärä—Dhärä; puträù—the sons;
draviëaka-ädayaù—known as Draviëaka and so on.
TRANSLATION
From the womb of Väsanä, the wife of Arka, came many sons, headed by
Tarña. Dhärä, the wife of the Vasu named Agni, gave birth to many sons,
headed by Draviëaka.
TEXT 14
Sk-Ndê k*-itak-aPau}aae Yae ivXaa%adYaSTaTa" )
daezSYa XavRrqPau}a" iXaXauMaarae hre" k-l/a )) 14 ))
skandaç ca kåttikä-putro
ye viçäkhädayas tataù
doñasya çarvaré-putraù
çiçumäro hareù kalä
SYNONYMS
skandaù—Skanda; ca—also; kåttikä-putraù—the son of Kåttikä; ye—all of
whom; viçäkha-ädayaù—headed by Viçäkha; tataù—from him (Skanda);
doñasya—of Doña; çarvaré-putraù—the son of his wife Çarvaré;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
390
çiçumäraù—Çiçumära; hareù kalä—an expansion of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
From Kåttikä, another wife of Agni, came the son named Skanda,
Kärttikeya, whose sons were headed by Viçäkha. From the womb of Çarvaré, the
wife of the Vasu named Doña, came the son named Çiçumära, who was an
expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 15
vaSTaaerai(r)rSaqPau}aae ivìk-MaaRk*-TaqPaiTa" )
TaTaae MaNauêa+auzae_>aUd( ivìe SaaDYaa MaNaae" SauTaa" )) 15 ))
västor äìgirasé-putro
viçvakarmäkåté-patiù
tato manuç cäkñuño 'bhüd
viçve sädhyä manoù sutäù
SYNONYMS
västoù—of Västu; äìgirasé—of his wife named Äìgirasé; putraù—the son;
viçvakarmä—Viçvakarmä; äkåté-patiù—the husband of Äkåté; tataù—from
them; manuù cäkñuñaù—the Manu named Cäkñuña; abhüt—was born;
viçve—the Viçvadevas; sädhyäù—the Sädhyas; manoù—of Manu; sutäù—the
sons.
TRANSLATION
From Äìgirasé, the wife of the Vasu named Västu, was born the great
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
391
architect Viçvakarmä. Viçvakarmä became the husband of Äkåté, from whom
the Manu named Cäkñuña was born. The sons of Manu were known as the
Viçvadevas and Sädhyas.
TEXT 16
iv>aavSaaerSaUTaaeza VYauí& raeiczMaaTaPaMa( )
PaÄYaaMaae_Qa >aUTaaiNa YaeNa JaaGa]iTa k-MaRSau )) 16 ))
vibhävasor asütoñä
vyuñöaà rociñam ätapam
païcayämo 'tha bhütäni
yena jägrati karmasu
SYNONYMS
vibhävasoù—of Vibhävasu; asüta—gave birth to; üñä—named Üñä;
vyuñöam—Vyuñöa; rociñam—Rociña; ätapam—Ätapa;
païcayämaù—Païcayäma; atha—thereafter; bhütäni—the living entities;
yena—by whom; jägrati—are awakened; karmasu—in material activities.
TRANSLATION
Üñä, the wife of Vibhävasu, gave birth to three sons—Vyuñöa, Rociña and
Ätapa. From Ätapa came Païcayäma, the span of day, who awakens all living
entities to material activities.
TEXTS 17-18
SaæPaaSaUTa >aUTaSYa >aaYaaR åd]a&ê k-aei$=Xa" )
rEvTaae_Jaae >avae >aqMaae vaMa oGa]ae v*zak-iPa" )) 17 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
392
AJaEk-Paadihb]RDNaae bhuæPaae MahaiNaiTa )
åd]SYa PaazRdaêaNYae gaaera" Pa[eTaivNaaYak-a" )) 18 ))
sarüpäsüta bhütasya
bhäryä rudräàç ca koöiçaù
raivato 'jo bhavo bhémo
väma ugro våñäkapiù
ajaikapäd ahirbradhno
bahurüpo mahän iti
rudrasya pärñadäç cänye
ghoräù preta-vinäyakäù
SYNONYMS
sarüpä—Sarüpä; asüta—gave birth; bhütasya—of Bhüta; bhäryä—the wife;
rudrän—Rudras; ca—and; koöiçaù—ten million; raivataù—Raivata;
ajaù—Aja; bhavaù—Bhava; bhémaù—Bhéma; vämaù—Väma; ugraù—Ugra;
våñäkapiù—Våñäkapi; ajaikapät—Ajaikapät; ahirbradhnaù—Ahirbradhna;
bahurüpaù—Bahurüpa; mahän—Mahän; iti—thus; rudrasya—of these Rudras;
pärñadäù—their associates; ca—and; anye—other; ghoräù—very fearful;
preta—ghosts; vinäyakäù—and hobgoblins.
TRANSLATION
Sarüpä, the wife of Bhüta, gave birth to the ten million Rudras, of whom the
eleven principle Rudras were Raivata, Aja, Bhava, Bhéma, Väma, Ugra,
Våñäkapi, Ajaikapät, Ahirbradhna, Bahurüpa and Mahän. Their associates, the
ghosts and goblins, who are very fearful, were born of the other wife of Bhüta.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
393
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura comments that Bhüta had two wives.
One of them, Sarüpä, gave birth to the eleven Rudras, and the other wife gave
birth to the associates of the Rudras known as the ghosts and hobgoblins.
TEXT 19
Pa[JaaPaTaeri(r)rSa" SvDaa PaÒq iPaTa›NaQa )
AQavaRi(r)rSa& ved& Pau}aTve cak-raeTa( SaTaq )) 19 ))
prajäpater aìgirasaù
svadhä patné pitèn atha
atharväìgirasaà vedaà
putratve cäkarot saté
SYNONYMS
prajäpateù aìgirasaù—of another prajäpati, known as Aìgirä; svadhä—Svadhä;
patné—his wife; pitèn—the Pitäs; atha—thereafter;
atharva-äìgirasam—Atharväìgirasa; vedam—the personified Veda;
putratve—as the son; ca—and; akarot—accepted; saté—Saté.
TRANSLATION
The prajäpati Aìgirä had two wives, named Svadhä and Saté. The wife
named Svadhä accepted all the Pitäs as her sons, and Saté accepted the
Atharväìgirasa Veda as her son.
TEXT 20
k*-Xaaìae_icRiz >aaYaaRYaa& DaUMake-TauMaJaqJaNaTa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
394
iDaz<aaYaa& vediXarae devl&/ vYauNa& MaNauMa( )) 20 ))
kåçäçvo 'rciñi bhäryäyäà
dhümaketum ajéjanat
dhiñaëäyäà vedaçiro
devalaà vayunaà manum
SYNONYMS
kåçäçvaù—Kåçäçva; arciñi—Arcis; bhäryäyäm—in his wife; dhümaketum—to
Dhümaketu; ajéjanat—gave birth; dhiñaëäyäm—in the wife known as Dhiñaëä;
vedaçiraù—Vedaçirä; devalam—Devala; vayunam—Vayuna; manum—Manu.
TRANSLATION
Kåçäçva had two wives, named Arcis and Dhiñaëä. In the wife named Arcis
he begot Dhümaketu and in Dhiñaëä he begot four sons, named Vedaçirä,
Devala, Vayuna and Manu.
TEXTS 21-22
Taa+YaRSYa ivNaTaa k-d]U" PaTa(r)q YaaiMaNaqiTa c )
PaTa(r)ySaUTa PaTaGaaNa( YaaiMaNaq Xal/>aaNaQa )) 21 ))
SauPa<aaRSaUTa Gaå@& Saa+aad( YajeXavahNaMa( )
SaUYaRSaUTaMaNaUå& c k-d]UNaaRGaaNaNaek-Xa" )) 22 ))
tärkñyasya vinatä kadrüù
pataìgé yäminéti ca
pataìgy asüta patagän
yäminé çalabhän atha
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
395
suparëäsüta garuòaà
säkñäd yajïeça-vähanam
sürya-sütam anüruà ca
kadrür nägän anekaçaù
SYNONYMS
tärkñyasya—of Kaçyapa, whose other name is Tärkñya; vinatä—Vinatä;
kadrüù—Kadrü; pataìgé—Pataìgé; yäminé—Yäminé; iti—thus; ca—and;
pataìgé—Pataìgé; asüta—gave birth; patagän—to birds of different varieties;
yäminé—Yäminé; çalabhän—(gave birth to) locusts; atha—thereafter;
suparëä—the wife named Vinatä; asüta—gave birth; garuòam—to the
celebrated bird known as Garuòa; säkñät—directly; yajïeça-vähanam—the
carrier of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu; sürya-sütam—the
chariot driver of the sun-god; anürum—Anüru; ca—and; kadrüù—Kadrü;
nägän—serpents; anekaçaù—in varieties.
TRANSLATION
Kaçyapa, who is also named Tärkñya, had four wives—Vinatä [Suparëä],
Kadrü, Pataìgé and Yäminé. Pataìgé gave birth to many kinds of birds, and
Yäminé gave birth to locusts. Vinatä [Suparëä] gave birth to Garuòa, the carrier
of Lord Viñëu, and to Anüru, or Aruëa, the chariot driver of the sun-god.
Kadrü gave birth to different varieties of serpents.
TEXT 23
k*-itak-adqiNa Na+a}aa<aqNdae" PaTNYaSTau >aarTa )
d+aXaaPaaTa( Saae_NaPaTYaSTaaSau Ya+MaGa]haidRTa" )) 23 ))
kåttikädéni nakñaträëcopyright
©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
396
éndoù patnyas tu bhärata
dakña-çäpät so 'napatyas
täsu yakñma-grahärditaù
SYNONYMS
kåttikä-ädéni—headed by Kåttikä; nakñaträëi—the constellations; indoù—of
the moon-god; patnyaù—the wives; tu—but; bhärata—O Mahäräja Parékñit,
descendant of the dynasty of Bharata; dakña-çäpät—because of being cursed by
Dakña; saù—the moon-god; anapatyaù—without children; täsu—in so many
wives; yakñma-graha-arditaù—being oppressed by a disease that brings about
gradual destruction.
TRANSLATION
O Mahäräja Parékñit, best of the Bhäratas, the constellations named Kåttikä
were all wives of the moon-god. However, because Prajäpati Dakña had cursed
him to suffer from a disease causing gradual destruction, the moon-god could
not beget children in any of his wives.
TEXTS 24-26
PauNa" Pa[SaaÛ Ta& SaaeMa" k-l/a le/>ae +aYae idTaa" )
é*<au NaaMaaiNa l/aek-aNaa& MaaTa›<aa& Xaªrai<a c )) 24 ))
AQa k-XYaPaPaÒqNaa& YaTPa[SaUTaiMad& JaGaTa( )
AidiTaidRiTadRNau" k-aïa Airía SaurSaa wl/a )) 25 ))
MauiNa" §-aeDavXaa TaaMa]a Sauri>a" SarMaa iTaiMa" )
iTaMaeYaaRdaeGa<aa AaSaNa( ìaPada" SarMaaSauTaa" )) 26 ))
punaù prasädya taà somaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
397
kalä lebhe kñaye ditäù
çåëu nämäni lokänäà
mätèëäà çaìkaräëi ca
atha kaçyapa-patnénäà
yat-prasütam idaà jagat
aditir ditir danuù käñöhä
ariñöä surasä ilä
muniù krodhavaçä tämrä
surabhiù saramä timiù
timer yädo-gaëä äsan
çväpadäù saramä-sutäù
SYNONYMS
punaù—again; prasädya—pacifying; tam—him (Prajäpati Dakña); somaù—the
moon-god; kaläù—portions of light; lebhe—achieved; kñaye—in gradual
destruction (the dark fortnight); ditäù—removed; çåëu—please hear;
nämäni—all the names; lokänäm—of the planets; mätèëäm—of the mothers;
çaìkaräëi—pleasing; ca—also; atha—now; kaçyapa-patnénäm—of the wives of
Kaçyapa; yat-prasütam—from whom was born; idam—this; jagat—whole
universe; aditiù—Aditi; ditiù—Diti; danuù—Danu; käñöhä—Käñöhä;
ariñöä—Ariñöä; surasä—Surasä; ilä—Ilä; muniù—Muni;
krodhavaçä—Krodhavaçä; tämrä—Tämrä; surabhiù—Surabhi;
saramä—Saramä; timiù—Timi; timeù—from Timi; yädaù-gaëäù—the aquatics;
äsan—appeared; çväpadäù—the ferocious animals like the lions and tigers;
saramä-sutäù—the children of Saramä.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter the King of the moon pacified Prajäpati Dakña with courteous
words and thus regained the portions of light he had lost during his disease.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
398
Nevertheless he could not beget children. The moon loses his shining power
during the dark fortnight, and in the bright fortnight it is manifest again. O
King Parékñit, now please hear from me the names of Kaçyapa's wives, from
whose wombs the population of the entire universe has come. They are the
mothers of almost all the population of the entire universe, and their names are
very auspicious to hear. They are Aditi, Diti, Danu, Käñöhä, Ariñöä, Surasä, Ilä,
Muni, Krodhavaçä, Tämrä, Surabhi, Saramä and Timi. From the womb of Timi
all the aquatics took birth, and from the womb of Saramä the ferocious animals
like the tigers and lions took birth.
TEXT 27
Saur>aeMaRihzaGaavae Yae caNYae iÜXaf-a Na*Pa )
TaaMa]aYaa" XYaeNaGa*Da]aÛa MauNaerPSarSaa& Ga<aa" )) 27 ))
surabher mahiñä gävo
ye cänye dviçaphä nåpa
tämräyäù çyena-gådhrädyä
muner apsarasäà gaëäù
SYNONYMS
surabheù—from the womb of Surabhi; mahiñäù—buffalo; gävaù—cows;
ye—who; ca—also; anye—others; dvi-çaphäù—having cloven hooves; nåpa—O
King; tämräyäù—from Tämrä; çyena—eagles; gådhra-ädyäù—vultures and so
on; muneù—from Muni; apsarasäm—of angels; gaëäù—the groups.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Parékñit, from the womb of Surabhi the buffalo, cow and other
animals with cloven hooves took birth, from the womb of Tämrä the eagles,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
399
vultures and other large birds of prey took birth, and from the womb of Muni
the angels took birth.
TEXT 28
dNdXaUk-adYa" SaPaaR raJaNa( §-aeDavXaaTMaJaa" )
wl/aYaa >aUåha" SaveR YaaTauDaaNaaê SaaErSaa" )) 28 ))
dandaçükädayaù sarpä
räjan krodhavaçätmajäù
iläyä bhüruhäù sarve
yätudhänäç ca saurasäù
SYNONYMS
dandaçüka-ädayaù—headed by the dandaçüka snakes; sarpäù—reptiles;
räjan—O King; krodhavaçä-ätma-jäù—born from Krodhavaçä; iläyäù—from
the womb of Ilä; bhüruhäù—the creepers and trees; sarve—all;
yätudhänäù—the cannibals (Räkñasas); ca—also; saurasäù—from the womb of
Surasä.
TRANSLATION
The sons born of Krodhavaçä were the serpents known as dandaçüka, as well
as other serpents and the mosquitoes. All the various creepers and trees were
born from the womb of Ilä. The Räkñasas, bad spirits, were born from the womb
of Surasä.
TEXTS 29-31
AiríaYaaSTau GaNDavaR" k-aïaYaa iÜXafe-Tara" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
400
SauTaa dNaaerek-ziíSTaeza& Pa[aDaaiNak-aHa( é*<au )) 29 ))
iÜMaUDaaR XaMbrae_iríae hYaGa]qvae iv>aavSau" )
AYaaeMau%" Xax(ku-iXara" Sv>aaRNau" k-iPal/ae_å<a" )) 30 ))
Paul/aeMaa v*zPavaR c Wk-c§-ae_NauTaaPaNa" )
DaUMa]ke-Xaae ivæPaa+aae ivPa[icitaê duJaRYa" )) 31 ))
ariñöäyäs tu gandharväù
käñöhäyä dviçaphetaräù
sutä danor eka-ñañöis
teñäà prädhänikäï çåëu
dvimürdhä çambaro 'riñöo
hayagrévo vibhävasuù
ayomukhaù çaìkuçiräù
svarbhänuù kapilo 'ruëaù
pulomä våñaparvä ca
ekacakro 'nutäpanaù
dhümrakeço virüpäkño
vipracittiç ca durjayaù
SYNONYMS
ariñöäyäù—from the womb of Ariñöä; tu—but; gandharväù—the Gandharvas;
käñöhäyäù—from the womb of Käñöhä; dvi-çapha-itaräù—animals such as
horses, which do not have cloven hooves; sutäù—sons; danoù—from the womb
of Danu; eka-ñañöiù—sixty-one; teñäm—of them; prädhänikän—the important
ones; çåëu—hear; dvimürdhä—Dvimürdhä; çambaraù—Çambara;
ariñöaù—Ariñöa; hayagrévaù—Hayagréva; vibhävasuù—Vibhävasu;
ayomukhaù—Ayomukha; çaìkuçiräù—Çaìkuçirä; svarbhänuù—Svarbhänu;
kapilaù—Kapila; aruëaù—Aruëa; pulomä—Pulomä; våñaparvä—Våñaparvä;
ca—also; ekacakraù—Ekacakra; anutäpanaù—Anutäpana;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
401
dhümrakeçaù—Dhümrakeça; virüpäkñaù—Virüpäkña; vipracittiù—Vipracitti;
ca—and; durjayaù—Durjaya.
TRANSLATION
The Gandharvas were born from the womb of Ariñöä, and animals whose
hooves are not split, such as the horse, were born from the womb of Käñöhä. O
King, from the womb of Danu came sixty-one sons, of whom these eighteen
were very important: Dvimürdhä, Çambara, Ariñöa, Hayagréva, Vibhävasu,
Ayomukha, Çaìkuçirä, Svarbhänu, Kapila, Aruëa, Pulomä, Våñaparvä,
Ekacakra, Anutäpana, Dhümrakeça, Virüpäkña, Vipracitti and Durjaya.
TEXT 32
Sv>aaRNaae" SauPa[>aa& k-NYaaMauvah NaMauic" ik-l/ )
v*zPavR<aSTau XaiMaRïa& YaYaaiTaNaaRhuzae bl/I )) 32 ))
svarbhänoù suprabhäà kanyäm
uväha namuciù kila
våñaparvaëas tu çarmiñöhäà
yayätir nähuño balé
SYNONYMS
svarbhänoù—of Svarbhänu; suprabhäm—Suprabhä; kanyäm—the daughter;
uväha—married; namuciù—Namuci; kila—indeed; våñaparvaëaù—of
Våñaparvä; tu—but; çarmiñöhäm—Çarmiñöhä; yayätiù—King Yayäti;
nähuñaù—the son of Nahuña; balé—very powerful.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
402
The daughter of Svarbhänu named Suprabhä was married by Namuci. The
daughter of Våñaparvä named Çarmiñöhä was given to the powerful King Yayäti,
the son of Nahuña.
TEXTS 33-36
vEìaNarSauTaa Yaaê cTaóêaådXaRNaa" )
oPadaNavq hYaiXara Paul/aeMaa k-al/k-a TaQaa )) 33 ))
oPadaNavq& ihr<Yaa+a" §-TauhRYaiXara& Na*Pa )
Paul/aeMaa& k-al/k-a& c Üe vEìaNarSauTae Tau k-" )) 34 ))
oPaYaeMae_Qa >aGavaNa( k-XYaPaae b]øcaeidTa" )
PaaEl/aeMaa" k-al/ke-Yaaê daNava YauÖXaail/Na" )) 35 ))
TaYaae" ziíSahóai<a Yajgana&STae iPaTau" iPaTaa )
JagaaNa SvGaRTaae raJaàek- wNd]iPa[Yaªr" )) 36 ))
vaiçvänara-sutä yäç ca
catasraç cäru-darçanäù
upadänavé hayaçirä
pulomä kälakä tathä
upadänavéà hiraëyäkñaù
kratur hayaçiräà nåpa
pulomäà kälakäà ca dve
vaiçvänara-sute tu kaù
upayeme 'tha bhagavän
kaçyapo brahma-coditaù
paulomäù kälakeyäç ca
dänavä yuddha-çälinaù
tayoù ñañöi-sahasräëi
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
403
yajïa-ghnäàs te pituù pitä
jaghäna svar-gato räjann
eka indra-priyaìkaraù
SYNONYMS
vaiçvänara-sutäù—the daughters of Vaiçvänara; yäù—who; ca—and;
catasraù—four; cäru-darçanäù—very, very beautiful; upadänavé—Upadänavé;
hayaçirä—Hayaçirä; pulomä—Pulomä; kälakä—Kälakä; tathä—as well;
upadänavém—Upadänavé; hiraëyäkñaù—the demon Hiraëyäkña;
kratuù—Kratu; hayaçiräm—Hayaçirä; nåpa—O King; pulomäm kälakäm
ca—Pulomä and Kälakä; dve—the two; vaiçvänara-sute—daughters of
Vaiçvänara; tu—but; kaù—the prajäpati; upayeme—married; atha—then;
bhagavän—the most powerful; kaçyapaù—Kaçyapa Muni;
brahma-coditaù—requested by Lord Brahmä; paulomäù kälakeyäù ca—the
Paulomas and Kälakeyas; dänaväù—demons; yuddha-çälinaù—very fond of
fighting; tayoù—of them; ñañöi-sahasräëi—sixty thousand; yajïa-ghnän—who
were disturbing sacrifices; te—your; pituù—of the father; pitä—the father;
jaghäna—killed; svaù-gataù—in the heavenly planets; räjan—O King;
ekaù—alone; indra-priyam-karaù—to please King Indra.
TRANSLATION
Vaiçvänara, the son of Danu, had four beautiful daughters, named
Upadänavé, Hayaçirä, Pulomä and Kälakä. Hiraëyäkña married Upadänavé, and
Kratu married Hayaçirä. Thereafter, at the request of Lord Brahmä, Prajäpati
Kaçyapa married Pulomä and Kälakä, the other two daughters of Vaiçvänara.
From the wombs of these two wives of Kaçyapa came sixty thousand sons,
headed by Nivätakavaca, who are known as the Paulomas and the Kälakeyas.
They were physically very strong and expert in fighting, and their aim was to
disturb the sacrifices performed by the great sages. My dear King, when your
grandfather Arjuna went to the heavenly planets, he alone killed all these
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
404
demons, and thus King Indra became extremely affectionate toward him.
TEXT 37
ivPa[icita" iSa&ihk-aYaa& XaTa& cEk-MaJaqJaNaTa( )
rahuJYaeï& ke-TauXaTa& Ga]hTv& Ya oPaaGaTaa" )) 37 ))
vipracittiù siàhikäyäà
çataà caikam ajéjanat
rähu-jyeñöhaà ketu-çataà
grahatvaà ya upägatäù
SYNONYMS
vipracittiù—Vipracitti; siàhikäyäm—in the womb of his wife Siàhikä;
çatam—to one hundred; ca—and; ekam—one; ajéjanat—gave birth;
rähu-jyeñöham—among whom Rähu is the oldest; ketu-çatam—one hundred
Ketus; grahatvam—planethood; ye—all of whom; upägatäù—obtained.
TRANSLATION
In his wife Siàhikä, Vipracitti begot one hundred and one sons, of whom
the eldest is Rähu and the others are the one hundred Ketus. All of them
attained positions in the influential planets.
TEXTS 38-39
AQaaTa" é[UYaTaa& v&Xaae Yaae_idTaerNauPaUvRXa" )
Ya}a NaaraYa<aae dev" Sva&XaeNaavaTard(iv>au" )) 38 ))
ivvSvaNaYaRMaa PaUza TvíaQa SaivTaa >aGa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
405
DaaTaa ivDaaTaa vå<aae iMa}a" Xa}au oå§-Ma" )) 39 ))
athätaù çrüyatäà vaàço
yo 'diter anupürvaçaù
yatra näräyaëo devaù
sväàçenävätarad vibhuù
vivasvän aryamä püñä
tvañöätha savitä bhagaù
dhätä vidhätä varuëo
mitraù çatru urukramaù
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; ataù—now; çrüyatäm—let it be heard; vaàçaù—the dynasty;
yaù—which; aditeù—from Aditi; anupürvaçaù—in chronological order;
yatra—wherein; näräyaëaù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
devaù—the Lord; sva-aàçena—by His own plenary expansion;
avätarat—descended; vibhuù—the Supreme; vivasvän—Vivasvän;
aryamä—Aryamä; püñä—Püñä; tvañöä—Tvañöä; atha—thereafter;
savitä—Savitä; bhagaù—Bhaga; dhätä—Dhätä; vidhätä—Vidhätä;
varuëaù—Varuëa; mitraù—Mitra; çatruù—Çatru; urukramaù—Urukrama.
TRANSLATION
Now please hear me as I describe the descendants of Aditi in chronological
order. In this dynasty the Supreme Personality of Godhead Näräyaëa descended
by His plenary expansion. The names of the sons of Aditi are as follows:
Vivasvän, Aryamä, Püñä, Tvañöä, Savitä, Bhaga, Dhätä, Vidhätä, Varuëa,
Mitra, Çatru and Urukrama.
TEXT 40
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
406
ivvSvTa" é[aÖdev& Sa&jaSaUYaTa vE MaNauMa( )
iMaQauNa& c Maha>aaGaa YaMa& dev& YaMaq& TaQaa )
SaEv >aUTvaQa v@va NaaSaTYaaE Sauzuve >auiv )) 40 ))
vivasvataù çräddhadevaà
saàjïäsüyata vai manum
mithunaà ca mahä-bhägä
yamaà devaà yaméà tathä
saiva bhütvätha vaòavä
näsatyau suñuve bhuvi
SYNONYMS
vivasvataù—of the sun-god; çräddhadevam—named Çräddhadeva;
saàjïä—Saàjïä; asüyata—gave birth; vai—indeed; manum—to Manu;
mithunam—twins; ca—and; mahä-bhägä—the fortunate Saàjïä; yamam—to
Yamaräja; devam—the demigod; yamém—to his sister named Yamé; tathä—as
well as; sä—she; eva—also; bhütvä—becoming; atha—then; vaòavä—a mare;
näsatyau—to the Açviné-kumäras; suñuve—gave birth; bhuvi—on this earth.
TRANSLATION
Saàjïä, the wife of Vivasvän, the sun-god, gave birth to the Manu named
Çräddhadeva, and the same fortunate wife also gave birth to the twins Yamaräja
and the River Yamunä. Then Yamé, while wandering on the earth in the form
of a mare, gave birth to the Açviné-kumäras.
TEXT 41
^aYaa XaNaEêr& le/>ae Saavi<a| c MaNau& TaTa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
407
k-NYaa& c TaPaTaq& Yaa vE vv]e Sa&vr<a& PaiTaMa( )) 41 ))
chäyä çanaiçcaraà lebhe
sävarëià ca manuà tataù
kanyäà ca tapatéà yä vai
vavre saàvaraëaà patim
SYNONYMS
chäyä—Chäyä, another wife of the sun-god; çanaiçcaram—Saturn;
lebhe—begot; sävarëim—Sävarëi; ca—and; manum—the Manu; tataù—from
him (Vivasvän); kanyäm—one daughter; ca—as well as; tapatém—named
Tapaté; yä—who; vai—indeed; vavre—married; saàvaraëam—Saàvaraëa;
patim—husband.
TRANSLATION
Chäyä, another wife of the sun-god, begot two sons named Çanaiçcara and
Sävarëi Manu, and one daughter, Tapaté, who married Saàvaraëa.
TEXT 42
AYaRM<aae MaaTa*k-a PaÒq TaYaaeêzR<aYa" SauTaa" )
Ya}a vE MaaNauzq JaaiTab]Rø<aa caePak-iLPaTaa )) 42 ))
aryamëo mätåkä patné
tayoç carñaëayaù sutäù
yatra vai mänuñé jätir
brahmaëä copakalpitä
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
408
aryamëaù—of Aryamä; mätåkä—Mätåkä; patné—the wife; tayoù—by their
union; carñaëayaù sutäù—many sons who were learned scholars;
yatra—wherein; vai—indeed; mänuñé—human; jätiù—species; brahmaëä—by
Lord Brahmä; ca—and; upakalpitä—was created.
TRANSLATION
From the womb of Mätåkä, the wife of Aryamä, were born many learned
scholars. Among them Lord Brahmä created the human species, which are
endowed with an aptitude for self-examination.
TEXT 43
PaUzaNaPaTYa" iPaíadae >aGandNTaae_>avTa( Paura )
Yaae_SaaE d+aaYa ku-iPaTa& JahaSa ivv*TaiÜJa" )) 43 ))
püñänapatyaù piñöädo
bhagna-danto 'bhavat purä
yo 'sau dakñäya kupitaà
jahäsa vivåta-dvijaù
SYNONYMS
püñä—Püñä; anapatyaù—without children; piñöa-adaù—who lives by eating
flour; bhagna-dantaù—with broken teeth; abhavat—became; purä—formerly;
yaù—who; asau—that; dakñäya—at Dakña; kupitam—very angry;
jahäsa—laughed; vivåta-dvijaù—uncovering his teeth.
TRANSLATION
Püñä had no sons. When Lord Çiva was angry at Dakña, Püñä had laughed at
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
409
Lord Çiva and shown his teeth. Therefore he lost his teeth and had to live by
eating only ground flour.
TEXT 44
TvíudOETYaaTMaJaa >aaYaaR rcNaa NaaMa k-NYak-a )
Sa&iNaveXaSTaYaaeJaRje ivìæPaê vqYaRvaNa( )) 44 ))
tvañöur daityätmajä bhäryä
racanä näma kanyakä
sanniveças tayor jajïe
viçvarüpaç ca véryavän
SYNONYMS
tvañöuù—of Tvañöä; daitya-ätma-jä—the daughter of a demon; bhäryä—wife;
racanä—Racanä; näma—named; kanyakä—a maiden; sanniveçaù—Sanniveça;
tayoù—of those two; jajïe—was born; viçvarüpaù—Viçvarüpa; ca—and;
véryavän—very powerful in bodily strength.
TRANSLATION
Racanä, the daughter of the Daityas, became the wife of Prajäpati Tvañöä. By
his semina he begot in her womb two very powerful sons named Sanniveça and
Viçvarüpa.
TEXT 45
Ta& viv]re SaurGa<aa SvóqYa& iÜzTaaMaiPa )
ivMaTaeNa PairTYa¢-a Gauå<aai(r)rSaeNa YaTa( )) 45 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
410
taà vavrire sura-gaëä
svasréyaà dviñatäm api
vimatena parityaktä
guruëäìgirasena yat
SYNONYMS
tam—him (Viçvarüpa); vavrire—accepted as a priest; sura-gaëäù—the
demigods; svasréyam—the son of a daughter; dviñatäm—of the inimical
demons; api—although; vimatena—being disrespected; parityaktäù—who were
given up; guruëä—by their spiritual master; äìgirasena—Båhaspati;
yat—since.
TRANSLATION
Although Viçvarüpa was the son of the daughter of their eternal enemies the
demons, the demigods accepted him as their priest in accordance with the order
of Brahmä when they were abandoned by their spiritual master, Båhaspati,
whom they had disrespected.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sixth Canto, Sixth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Progeny of the Daughters of Dakña."
7. Indra Offends His Spiritual Master, Båhaspati.
As related in this chapter, Indra, the King of heaven, committed an offense
at the feet of his spiritual master, Båhaspati. Båhaspati therefore left the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
411
demigods, who then had no priest. However, at the request of the demigods,
Viçvarüpa, the son of the brähmaëa Tvañöä, became their priest.
Once upon a time, Indra, the King of the demigods, was sitting with his
wife Çacédevé and being praised by various demigods like the Siddhas, Cäraëas
and Gandharvas when Båhaspati, the spiritual master of the demigods, entered
the assembly. Indra, being too absorbed in material opulence, forgot himself
and did not respect Båhaspati, who thus became aware of Indra's pride in his
material opulence and immediately disappeared from the assembly to teach
him a lesson. Indra became most repentant, understanding that because of his
opulence he had forgotten to respect his spiritual master. He left the palace to
beg pardon from his spiritual master, but could not find Båhaspati anywhere.
Because of his disrespectful behavior toward his spiritual master. Indra lost
all his opulence and was conquered by the demons, who defeated the demigods
in a great fight and occupied Indra's throne. King Indra, along with the other
demigods, later took shelter of Lord Brahmä. Understanding the situation,
Lord Brahmä chastised the demigods for their offense to their spiritual master.
Following Lord Brahmä's orders, the demigods accepted Viçvarüpa, who was a
brähmaëa and the son of Tvañöä, as their priest. Then they performed yajïas
under the priesthood of Viçvarüpa and were able to conquer the demons.
TEXT 1
é[qraJaaevac
k-SYa heTaae" PairTYa¢-a AacaYaeR<aaTMaNa" Saura" )
WTadac+v >aGaviH^ZYaa<aaMa§-Ma& GauraE )) 1 ))
çré-räjoväca
kasya hetoù parityaktä
äcäryeëätmanaù suräù
etad äcakñva bhagavaï
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
412
chiñyäëäm akramaà gurau
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—the King inquired; kasya hetoù—for what reason;
parityaktäù—rejected; äcäryeëa—by the spiritual master, Båhaspati;
ätmanaù—of himself; suräù—all the demigods; etat—this; äcakñva—kindly
describe; bhagavan—O great sage (Çukadeva Gosvämé); çiñyäëäm—of the
disciples; akramam—the offense; gurau—unto the spiritual master.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Parékñit inquired from Çukadeva Gosvämé: O great sage, why did
the spiritual master of the demigods, Båhaspati, reject the demigods, who were
his own disciples? What offense did the demigods commit against their spiritual
master? Please describe to me this incident.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura comments:
saptame guruëä tyaktair
devair daitya-paräjitaiù
viçvarüpo gurutvena
våto brahmopadeçataù
"This Seventh Chapter describes how Båhaspati was offended by the demigods,
how he left them and the demigods were defeated, and how the demigods,
following the instructions of Lord Brahmä, accepted Viçvarüpa as the priest to
perform their sacrifice."
TEXTS 2-8
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
413
é[qbadraYai<aåvac
wNd]iñ>auvNaEìYaRMadaeçiºTaSaTPaQa" )
MaåiÙvRSau>aq åd]EraidTYaE‰R>aui>aNa*RPa )) 2 ))
ivìedevEê SaaDYaEê NaaSaTYaa>Yaa& Pairié[Ta" )
iSaÖcar<aGaNDavOEMauRiNai>ab]Røvaidi>a" )) 3 ))
ivÛaDaraPSaraei>aê ik-àrE" PaTaGaaerGaE" )
iNazeVYaMaa<aae MagavaNa( STaUYaMaaNaê >aarTa )) 4 ))
oPaGaqYaMaaNaae l/il/TaMaaSQaaNaaDYaaSaNaaié[Ta" )
Paa<@ure<aaTaPa}ae<a cNd]Ma<@l/caå<aa )) 5 ))
Yau¢-êaNYaE" PaarMaeïyEêaMarVYaJaNaaidi>a" )
ivraJaMaaNa" PaaEl/MYaa SahaDaaRSaNaYaa >a*XaMa( )) 6 ))
Sa Yada ParMaacaYa| devaNaaMaaTMaNaê h )
Naa>YaNaNdTa S&aPa[aá& Pa[TYauTQaaNaaSaNaaidi>a" )) 7 ))
vacSPaiTa& MauiNavr& SauraSaurNaMaSk*-TaMa( )
NaaeÀcal/aSaNaaidNd]" PaXYaàiPa Sa>aaGaTaMa( )) 8 ))
çré-bädaräyaëir uväca
indras tribhuvanaiçvaryamadollaìghita-
satpathaù
marudbhir vasubhé rudrair
ädityair åbhubhir nåpa
viçvedevaiç ca sädhyaiç ca
näsatyäbhyäà pariçritaù
siddha-cäraëa-gandharvair
munibhir brahmavädibhiù
vidyädharäpsarobhiç ca
kinnaraiù patagoragaiù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
414
niñevyamäëo maghavän
stüyamänaç ca bhärata
upagéyamäno lalitam
ästhänädhyäsanäçritaù
päëòureëätapatreëa
candra-maëòala-cäruëä
yuktaç cänyaiù pärameñöhyaiç
cämara-vyajanädibhiù
viräjamänaù paulamyä
sahärdhäsanayä bhåçam
sa yadä paramäcäryaà
devänäm ätmanaç ca ha
näbhyanandata sampräptaà
pratyutthänäsanädibhiù
väcaspatià muni-varaà
suräsura-namaskåtam
noccacäläsanäd indraù
paçyann api sabhägatam
SYNONYMS
çré-bädaräyaëiù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé replied; indraù—King Indra;
tri-bhuvana-aiçvarya—because of possessing all the material opulences of the
three worlds; mada—due to pride; ullaìghita—who has transgressed;
sat-pathaù—the path of Vedic civilization; marudbhiù—by the wind demigods,
known as the Maruts; vasubhiù—by the eight Vasus; rudraiù—by the eleven
Rudras; ädityaiù—by the Ädityas; åbhubhiù—by the Åbhus; nåpa—O King;
viçvedevaiù ca—and by the Viçvadevas; sädhyaiù—by the Sädhyas; ca—also;
näsatyäbhyäm—by the two Açviné-kumäras; pariçritaù—surrounded;
siddha—by the inhabitants of Siddhaloka; cäraëa—the Cäraëas;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
415
gandharvaiù—and the Gandharvas; munibhiù—by the great sages;
brahmavädibhiù—by greatly learned impersonalist scholars;
vidyädhara-apsarobhiù ca—and by the Vidyädharas and Apsaräs;
kinnaraiù—by the Kinnaras; pataga-uragaiù—by the Patagas (birds) and
Uragas (snakes); niñevyamäëaù—being served; maghavän—King Indra;
stüyamänaù ca—and being offered prayers; bhärata—O Mahäräja Parékñit;
upagéyamänaù—being sung before; lalitam—very sweetly; ästhäna—in his
assembly; adhyäsana-äçritaù—situated on the throne; päëòureëa—white;
ätapatreëa—with an umbrella over the head; candra-maëòala-cäruëä—as
beautiful as the circle of the moon; yuktaù—endowed; ca anyaiù—and by
other; pärameñöhyaiù—symptoms of an exalted king; cämara—by yak-tail;
vyajana-ädibhiù—fans and other paraphernalia; viräjamänaù—shining;
paulamyä—his wife, Çacé; saha—with; ardha-äsanayä—who occupied half the
throne; bhåçam—greatly; saù—he (Indra); yadä—when;
parama-äcäryam—the most exalted äcärya, spiritual master; devänäm—of all
the demigods; ätmanaù—of himself; ca—and; ha—indeed; na—not;
abhyanandata—welcomed; sampräptam—having appeared in the assembly;
pratyutthäna—by getting up from the throne; äsana-ädibhiù—and by a seat
and other greetings; väcaspatim—the priest of the demigods, Båhaspati;
muni-varam—the best of all the sages; sura-asura-namaskåtam—who is
respected by both the demigods and the asuras; na—not; uccacäla—did get up;
äsanät—from the throne; indraù—Indra; paçyan api—although seeing;
sabhä-ägatam—entering the assembly.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O King, once upon a time, the King of heaven,
Indra, being extremely proud because of his great opulence of the three worlds,
transgressed the law of Vedic etiquette. Seated on his throne, he was
surrounded by the Maruts, Vasus, Rudras, Ädityas, Åbhus, Viçvadevas,
Sädhyas, Açviné-kumäras, Siddhas, Cäraëas and Gandharvas and by great
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
416
saintly persons. Also surrounding him were the Vidyädharas, Apsaräs,
Kinnaras, Patagas [birds] and Uragas [snakes]. All of them were offering Indra
their respects and services, and the Apsaräs and Gandharvas were dancing and
singing with very sweet musical instruments. Over Indra's head was a white
umbrella as effulgent as the full moon. Fanned by yak-tail whisks and served
with all the paraphernalia of a great king, Indra was sitting with his wife,
Çacédevé, who occupied half the throne, when the great sage Båhaspati appeared
in that assembly. Båhaspati, the best of the sages, was the spiritual master of
Indra and the demigods and was respected by the demigods and demons alike.
Nevertheless, although Indra saw his spiritual master before him, he did not
rise from his own seat or offer a seat to his spiritual master, nor did Indra offer
him a respectful welcome. Indra did nothing to show him respect.
TEXT 9
TaTaae iNaGaRTYa SahSaa k-ivrai(r)rSa" Pa[>au" )
AaYaYaaE SvGa*h& TaUZ<aq& ivÜaNa( é[qMadivi§-YaaMa( )) 9 ))
tato nirgatya sahasä
kavir äìgirasaù prabhuù
äyayau sva-gåhaà tüñëéà
vidvän çré-mada-vikriyäm
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; nirgatya—going out; sahasä—suddenly; kaviù—the great
learned sage; äìgirasaù—Båhaspati; prabhuù—the master of the demigods;
äyayau—returned; sva-gåham—to his home; tüñëém—being silent;
vidvän—having known; çré-mada-vikriyäm—deterioration because of madness
due to opulence.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
417
TRANSLATION
Båhaspati knew everything that would happen in the future. Seeing Indra's
transgression of etiquette, he completely understood that Indra was puffed up
by his material opulence. Although able to curse Indra, he did not do so.
Instead, he left the assembly and in silence returned to his home.
TEXT 10
TaùeRv Pa[iTabuDYaeNd]ae Gauåhel/NaMaaTMaNa" )
GahRYaaMaaSa SadiSa SvYaMaaTMaaNaMaaTMaNaa )) 10 ))
tarhy eva pratibudhyendro
guru-helanam ätmanaù
garhayäm äsa sadasi
svayam ätmänam ätmanä
SYNONYMS
tarhi—then, immediately; eva—indeed; pratibudhya—realizing; indraù—King
Indra; guru-helanam—disrespect to the spiritual master; ätmanaù—his own;
garhayäm äsa—reproached; sadasi—in that assembly; svayam—personally;
ätmänam—himself; ätmanä—by himself.
TRANSLATION
Indra, the King of heaven, could immediately understand his mistake.
Realizing he had disrespected his spiritual master, he condemned himself in the
presence of all the members of the assembly.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
418
TEXT 11
Ahae bTa MaYaaSaaDau k*-Ta& vE d>a]buiÖNaa )
YaNMaYaEìYaRMataeNa Gauå" SadiSa k-aTk*-Ta" )) 11 ))
aho bata mayäsädhu
kåtaà vai dabhra-buddhinä
yan mayaiçvarya-mattena
guruù sadasi kätkåtaù
SYNONYMS
aho—alas; bata—indeed; mayä—by me; asädhu—disrespectful; kåtam—the
action done; vai—certainly; dabhra-buddhinä—being of less intelligence;
yat—because; mayä—by me; aiçvarya-mattena—being very proud of material
opulence; guruù—the spiritual master; sadasi—in this assembly;
kät-kåtaù—mistreated.
TRANSLATION
Alas, what a regrettable deed I have committed because of my lack of
intelligence and my pride in my material opulences. I failed to show respect to
my spiritual master when he entered this assembly, and thus I have insulted
him.
TEXT 12
k-ae Ga*DYaeTa( Pai<@Taae l/+Maq& i}aiPaíPaPaTaeriPa )
YaYaahMaaSaur& >aav& NaqTaae_Û ivbuDaeìr" )) 12 ))
ko gådhyet paëòito lakñméà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
419
tripiñöapa-pater api
yayäham äsuraà bhävaà
néto 'dya vibudheçvaraù
SYNONYMS
kaù—who; gådhyet—would accept; paëòitaù—a learned man;
lakñmém—opulences; tri-piñöa-pa-pateù api—although I am the King of the
demigods; yayä—by which; aham—I; äsuram—demoniac; bhävam—mentality;
nétaù—carried to; adya—now; vibudha—of the demigods, who are in the mode
of goodness; éçvaraù—the King.
TRANSLATION
Although I am King of the demigods, who are situated in the mode of
goodness, I was proud of a little opulence and polluted by false ego. Under the
circumstances, who in this world would accept such riches at the risk of falling
down ? Alas! I condemn my wealth and opulence.
PURPORT
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu prayed to the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
na dhanaà na janaà na sundaréà kavitäà vä jagad-éça kämaye: [Cc. Antya
20.29, Çikñäñöaka 4] "O my Lord, I do not aspire for material opulence or
wealth, nor do I want a great number of followers to accept me as their leader,
nor do I want a very beautiful wife to please me." Mama janmani janmanéçvare
bhavatäd bhaktir ahaituké tvayi: "I do not even want liberation. All I want, life
after life, is to be a faithful servant of Your Lordship." According to the laws of
nature, when one is extremely opulent one becomes degraded, and this is true
both individually and collectively. The demigods are situated in the mode of
goodness, but sometimes even one who is situated in such an exalted position
as King Indra, the king of all the demigods, falls down because of material
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
420
opulence. We are now actually seeing this in America. The entire American
nation has tried to advance in material opulence without striving to produce
ideal human beings. The result is that Americans are now regretting the
wholesale criminality of American society and are wondering how America
has become so lawless and unmanageable. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam
(7.5.31), na te viduù svärtha-gatià hi viñëum: persons who are unenlightened do
not know the aim of life, which is to return home, back to Godhead.
Therefore, both individually and collectively, they try to enjoy so-called
material comforts, and they become addicted to wine and women. The men
produced in such a society are less than fourth class. They are the unwanted
population known as varëa-saìkara, and as stated in Bhagavad-gétä, an
increase of varëa-saìkara population creates a hellish society. This is the
society in which Americans now find themselves.
Fortunately, however, the Hare Kåñëa movement has come to America, and
many fortunate young men are giving serious attention to this movement,
which is creating ideal men of first-class character, men who completely
refrain from meat-eating, illicit sex, intoxication and gambling. If the
American people are serious about curbing the degraded criminal life of their
nation, they must take to the Kåñëa consciousness movement and try to create
the kind of human society advised in Bhagavad-gétä (cätur-varëyaà mayä
såñöaà guëa-karma-vibhägaçaù [Bg. 4.13]). They must divide their society into
first-class men, second-class men, third-class men and fourth-class men. Since
they are now creating only men who are less than fourth class, how can they
avoid the dangers of a criminal society? Long, long ago, Lord Indra regretted
his disrespect to his spiritual master, Båhaspati. Similarly, it is advised that the
American people regret their mistaken advancement in civilization. They
should take advice from the spiritual master, the representative of Kåñëa. If
they do so, they will be happy, and theirs will be an ideal nation to lead the
entire world.
TEXT 13
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
421
Ya" PaarMaeïy& iDaz<aMaiDaiTaïNa( Na k-ÄNa )
Pa[TYauitaïeidiTa b]UYauDaRMa| Tae Na Par& ivdu" )) 13 ))
yaù pärameñöhyaà dhiñaëam
adhitiñöhan na kaïcana
pratyuttiñöhed iti brüyur
dharmaà te na paraà viduù
SYNONYMS
yaù—anyone who; pärameñöhyam—royal; dhiñaëam—throne;
adhitiñöhan—sitting on; na—not; kaïcana—anyone; pratyuttiñöhet—should
rise before; iti—thus; brüyuù—those who say; dharmam—the codes of religion;
te—they; na—not; param—higher; viduù—know.
TRANSLATION
If a person says, "One who is situated on the exalted throne of a king should
not stand up to show respect to another king or a brähmaëa," it is to be
understood that he does not know the superior religious principles.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura says in this regard that when a
president or king is sitting on his throne, he does not need to show respect to
everyone who comes within his assembly, but he must show respect to
superiors like his spiritual master, brähmaëas and Vaiñëavas. There are many
examples of how he should act. When Lord Kåñëa was sitting on His throne
and Närada fortunately entered His assembly, even Lord Kåñëa immediately
stood up with His officers and ministers to offer respectful obeisances to
Närada. Närada knew that Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
422
Kåñëa knew that Närada was His devotee, but although Kåñëa is the Supreme
Lord and Närada is the Lord's devotee, the Lord observed the religious
etiquette. Since Närada was a brahmacäré, a brähmaëa and an exalted devotee,
even Kåñëa, while acting as a king, offered His respectful obeisances unto
Närada. Such is the conduct visible in the Vedic civilization. A civilization in
which the people do not know how the representative of Närada and Kåñëa
should be respected, how society should be formed and how one should
advance in Kåñëa consciousness—a society concerned only with
manufacturing new cars and new skyscrapers every year and then breaking
them to pieces and making new ones—may be technologically advanced, but it
is not a human civilization. A human civilization is advanced when its people
follow the cätur-varëya system, the system of four orders of life. There must be
ideal, first-class men to act as advisors, second-class men to act as
administrators, third-class men to produce food and protect cows, and
fourth-class men who obey the three higher classes of society. One who does
not follow the standard system of society should be considered a fifth-class
man. A society without Vedic laws and regulations will not be very helpful to
humanity. As stated in this verse, dharmaà te na paraà viduù: such a society
does not know the aim of life and the highest principle of religion.
TEXT 14
Taeza& ku-PaQadeí›<aa& PaTaTaa& TaMaiSa ùDa" )
Yae é[ÕDYauvRcSTae vE MaÂNTYaXMaâva wv )) 14 ))
teñäà kupatha-deñöèëäà
patatäà tamasi hy adhaù
ye çraddadhyur vacas te vai
majjanty açma-plavä iva
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
423
SYNONYMS
teñäm—of them (the misleaders); ku-patha-deñöèëäm—who show the path of
danger; patatäm—themselves falling; tamasi—in darkness; hi—indeed;
adhaù—down; ye—anyone who; çraddadhyuù—place faith in; vacaù—the
words; te—they; vai—indeed; majjanti—sink; açma-plaväù—boats made of
stone; iva—like.
TRANSLATION
Leaders who have fallen into ignorance and who mislead people by directing
them to the path of destruction [as described in the previous verse] are, in
effect, boarding a stone boat, and so too are those who blindly follow them. A
stone boat would be unable to float and would sink in the water with its
passengers. Similarly, those who mislead people go to hell, and their followers go
with them.
PURPORT
As stated in the Vedic literature (SB 11.20.17):
nå-deham ädyaà sulabhaà sudurlabhaà
plavaà sukalpaà guru-karëa-dhäram
We, the conditioned souls, have fallen in the ocean of nescience, but the
human body fortunately provides us a good opportunity to cross the ocean
because the human body is like a very good boat. When directed by a spiritual
master acting as the captain, the boat can very easily cross the ocean.
Furthermore, the boat is helped across by favorable winds, which are the
instructions of Vedic knowledge. If one does not take advantage of all these
facilities to cross the ocean of nescience, he is certainly committing suicide.
One who boards a boat made of stone is doomed. To be elevated to the stage
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
424
of perfection, humanity must first give up false leaders who present boats of
stone. All of human society is in such a dangerous position that to be rescued it
must abide by the standard instructions of the Vedas. The cream of these
instructions appears in the form of Bhagavad-gétä. One should not take shelter
of any other instructions, for Bhagavad-gétä gives direct instructions on how to
fulfill the aim of human life. Lord Çré Kåñëa therefore says, sarva-dharmän
parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja: [Bg. 18.66] "Give up all other processes of
religion and simply surrender to Me." Even if one does not accept Lord Kåñëa
as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, His instructions are so exalted and
beneficial for humanity that if one follows His instructions one will be saved.
Otherwise one will be cheated by unauthorized meditation and gymnastic
methods of yoga. Thus one will board a boat of stone. which will sink and
drown all its passengers. Unfortunately. although the American people are
extremely eager to get out of materialistic chaos, they are sometimes found to
patronize the makers of stone boats. That will not help them. They must take
the proper boat offered by Kåñëa in the form of the Kåñëa consciousness
movement. Then they will be easily saved. In this regard Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura comments: açmamayaù plavo yeñäà te yathä majjantaà
plavam anumajjanti tatheti räja-néty-upadeñöåñu sva-sabhyeñu kopo vyaïjitaù. If
society is guided by political diplomacy, with one nation maneuvering against
another, it will certainly sink like a stone boat. political maneuvering and
diplomacy will not save human society. People must take to Kåñëa
consciousness to understand the aim of life, to understand God. and to fulfill
the human mission.
TEXT 15
AQaahMaMaracaYaRMaGaaDaiDaz<a& iÜJaMa( )
Pa[SaadiYaZYae iNaXa#=" XaqZ<aaR TaÀr<a& SPa*XaNa( )) 15 ))
athäham amaräcäryam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
425
agädha-dhiñaëaà dvijam
prasädayiñye niçaöhaù
çérñëä tac-caraëaà spåçan
SYNONYMS
atha—therefore; aham—I; amara-äcäryam—the spiritual master of the
demigods; agädha-dhiñaëam—whose spiritual knowledge is deep; dvijam—the
perfect brähmaëa; prasädayiñye—I shall please; niçaöhaù—without duplicity;
çérñëä—with my head; tat-caraëam—his lotus feet; spåçan—touching.
TRANSLATION
King Indra said: Therefore with great frankness and without duplicity I
shall now bow my head at the lotus feet of Båhaspati, the spiritual master of the
demigods. Because he is in the mode of goodness, he is fully aware of all
knowledge and is the best of the brähmaëas. Now I shall touch his lotus feet
and offer my obeisances unto him to try to satisfy him.
PURPORT
Coming to his senses, King Indra realized that he was not a very sincere
disciple of his spiritual master, Båhaspati. Therefore he decided that
henceforward he would be niçaöha, nonduplicitous. Niçaöhaù
çérñëa-tac-caraëaà spåçan: he decided to touch his head to the feet of his
spiritual master. From this example, we should learn this principle enunciated
by Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura:
yasya prasädäd bhagavat-prasädo
yasyäprasädän na gatiù kuto 'pi **(9)
"By the mercy of the spiritual master one is benedicted by the mercy of Kåñëa.
Without the grace of the spiritual master, one cannot make any advancement."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
426
A disciple should never be a hypocrite or be unfaithful to his spiritual master.
In Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.17.27), the spiritual master is also called äcärya.
Äcäryaà mäà vijänéyän: the Supreme Personality of Godhead says that one
should respect the spiritual master, accepting him as the Lord Himself.
Nävamanyeta karhicit: one should not disrespect the äcärya at any time. Na
martya-buddhyäsüyeta: one should never think the äcärya an ordinary person.
Familiarity sometimes breeds contempt, but one should be very careful in one's
dealings with the äcärya. Agädha-dhiñaëaà dvijam: the äcärya is a perfect
brähmaëa and has unlimited intelligence in guiding the activities of his
disciple. Therefore Kåñëa advises in Bhagavad-gétä (4.34):
tad viddhi praëipätena
paripraçnena sevayä
upadekñyanti te jïänaà
jïäninas tattva-darçinaù
"Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire from him
submissively and render service unto him. The self-realized soul can impart
knowledge unto you because he has seen the truth." One should fully surrender
unto the spiritual master. and with service (sevayä) one should approach him
for further spiritual enlightenment.
TEXT 16
Wv& icNTaYaTaSTaSYa MagaaeNaae >aGavaNa( Ga*haTa( )
b*hSPaiTaGaRTaae_d*ía& GaiTaMaDYaaTMaMaaYaYaa )) 16 ))
evaà cintayatas tasya
maghono bhagavän gåhät
båhaspatir gato 'dåñöäà
gatim adhyätma-mäyayä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
427
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; cintayataù—while thinking very seriously; tasya—he;
maghonaù—Indra; bhagavän—the most powerful; gåhät—from his home;
båhaspatiù—Båhaspati; gataù—went; adåñöäm—invisible; gatim—to a state;
adhyätma—due to being highly elevated in spiritual consciousness;
mäyayä—by his potency.
TRANSLATION
While Indra, the King of the demigods, thought in this way and repented in
his own assembly, Båhaspati, the most powerful spiritual master, understood his
mind. Thus he became invisible to Indra and left home, for Båhaspati was
spiritually more powerful than King Indra.
TEXT 17
GauraeNaaRiDaGaTa" Sa&ja& Parq+aNa( >aGavaNa( Svra$( )
DYaaYaNa( iDaYaa SaurEYauR¢-" XaMaR Naal/>aTaaTMaNa" )) 17 ))
guror nädhigataù saàjïäà
parékñan bhagavän svaräö
dhyäyan dhiyä surair yuktaù
çarma nälabhatätmanaù
SYNONYMS
guroù—of his spiritual master; na—not; adhigataù—finding; saàjïäm—trace;
parékñan—searching vigorously all around; bhagavän—the most powerful
Indra; svaräö—independent; dhyäyan—meditating; dhiyä—by wisdom;
suraiù—by the demigods; yuktaù—surrounded; çarma—peace; na—not;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
428
alabhata—obtained; ätmanaù—of the mind.
TRANSLATION
Although Indra searched vigorously with the assistance of the other
demigods, he could not find Båhaspati. Then Indra thought, "Alas, my spiritual
master has become dissatisfied with me, and now I have no means of achieving
good fortune." Although Indra was surrounded by demigods, he could not find
peace of mind.
TEXT 18
TaC^]uTvEvaSaura" SavR Aaié[TYaaEXaNaSa& MaTaMa( )
devaNa( Pa[TYauÛMa& c§u-duRMaRda AaTaTaaiYaNa" )) 18 ))
tac chrutvaiväsuräù sarva
äçrityauçanasaà matam
devän pratyudyamaà cakrur
durmadä ätatäyinaù
SYNONYMS
tat çrutvä—hearing that news; eva—indeed; asuräù—the demons; sarve—all;
äçritya—taking shelter of; auçanasam—of Çukräcärya; matam—the
instruction; devän—the demigods; pratyudyamam—action against;
cakruù—performed; durmadäù—not very intelligent; ätatäyinaù—equipped
with arms for fighting.
TRANSLATION
Hearing of the pitiable condition of King Indra, the demons, following the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
429
instructions of their guru, Çukräcärya, equipped themselves with weapons and
declared war against the demigods.
TEXT 19
TaEivRSa*íezui>aSTaq+<aEiNaRi>aRàa(r)aeåbahv" )
b]øa<a& Xar<a& JaGMau" SaheNd]a NaTak-NDara" )) 19 ))
tair visåñöeñubhis tékñëair
nirbhinnäìgoru-bähavaù
brahmäëaà çaraëaà jagmuù
sahendrä nata-kandharäù
SYNONYMS
taiù—by them (the demons); visåñöa—thrown; iñubhiù—by the arrows;
tékñëaiù—very sharp; nirbhinna—pierced all over; aìga—bodies; uru—thighs;
bähavaù—and arms; brahmäëam—of Lord Brahmä; çaraëam—the shelter;
jagmuù—approached; saha-indräù—with King Indra; nata-kandharäù—their
heads bent downward.
TRANSLATION
The demigods' heads, thighs and arms and the other parts of their bodies
were injured by the sharp arrows of the demons. The demigods, headed by
Indra, saw no other course than to immediately approach Lord Brahmä with
bowed heads for shelter and proper instruction.
TEXT 20
Taa&STaQaa>YaidRTaaNa( vq+Ya >aGavaNaaTMa>aUrJa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
430
k*-PaYaa ParYaa dev ovac PairSaaNTvYaNa( )) 20 ))
täàs tathäbhyarditän vékñya
bhagavän ätmabhür ajaù
kåpayä parayä deva
uväca parisäntvayan
SYNONYMS
tän—them (the demigods); tathä—in that way; abhyarditän—afflicted by the
weapons of the demons; vékñya—seeing; bhagavän—the most powerful;
ätma-bhüù—Lord Brahmä; ajaù—who was not born like an ordinary human
being; kåpayä—out of causeless mercy; parayä—great; devaù—Lord Brahmä;
uväca—said; parisäntvayan—pacifying them.
TRANSLATION
When the most powerful Lord Brahmä saw the demigods coming toward
him, their bodies gravely injured by the arrows of the demons, he pacified them
by his great causeless mercy and spoke as follows.
TEXT 21
é[qb]øaevac
Ahae bTa Sauré[eïa ù>ad]& v" k*-Ta& MahTa( )
b]iøï& b]aø<a& daNTaMaEìYaaRàa>YaNaNdTa )) 21 ))
çré-brahmoväca
aho bata sura-çreñöhä
hy abhadraà vaù kåtaà mahat
brahmiñöhaà brähmaëaà däntam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
431
aiçvaryän näbhyanandata
SYNONYMS
çré-brahmä uväca—Lord Brahmä said; aho—alas; bata—it is very astonishing;
sura-çreñöhäù—O best of the demigods; hi—indeed; abhadram—injustice;
vaù—by you; kåtam—done; mahat—great; brahmiñöham—a person fully
obedient to the Supreme Brahman; brähmaëam—a brähmaëa; däntam—who
has fully controlled the mind and senses; aiçvaryät—because of your material
opulence; na—not; abhyanandata—welcomed properly.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahmä said: O best of the demigods, unfortunately, because of
madness resulting from your material opulence, you failed to receive Båhaspati
properly when he came to your assembly. Because he is aware of the Supreme
Brahman and fully in control of his senses, he is the best of the brähmaëas.
Therefore it is very astonishing that you have acted impudently toward him.
PURPORT
Lord Brahmä recognized the brahminical qualifications of Båhaspati, who
was the spiritual master of the demigods because of his awareness of the
Supreme Brahman. Båhaspati was very much in control of his senses and mind,
and therefore he was a most qualified brähmaëa. Lord Brahmä chastised the
demigods for not properly respecting this brähmaëa, who was their guru. Lord
Brahmä wanted to impress upon the demigods that one's guru should not be
disrespected under any circumstances. When Båhaspati entered the assembly
of the demigods, they and their king, Indra, took him for granted. Since he
came every day, they thought, they did not need to show him special respect.
As it is said, familiarity breeds contempt. Being very much displeased,
Båhaspati immediately left Indra's palace. Thus all the demigods, headed by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
432
Indra, became offenders at the lotus feet of Båhaspati, and Lord Brahmä, being
aware of this, condemned their neglect. In a song we sing every day,
Narottama däsa Öhäkura says, cakñu-däna dila yei, janme janme prabhu sei: the
guru gives spiritual insight to the disciple, and therefore the guru should be
considered his master, life after life. Under no circumstances should the guru
be disrespected, but the demigods, being puffed up by their material
possessions, were disrespectful to their guru. Therefore Çrémad-Bhägavatam
(11.17.27) advises, äcäryaà mäà vijänéyän nävamanyeta karhicit/ na
martya-buddhyäsüyeta: the äcärya should always be offered respectful
obeisances; one should never envy the äcärya, considering him an ordinary
human being.
TEXT 22
TaSYaaYaMaNaYaSYaaSaqTa( Pare>Yaae v" Para>av" )
Pa[+aq<ae>Ya" SvvEir>Ya" SaMa*ÖaNaa& c YaTa( Saura" )) 22 ))
tasyäyam anayasyäsét
parebhyo vaù paräbhavaù
prakñéëebhyaù sva-vairibhyaù
samåddhänäà ca yat suräù
SYNONYMS
tasya—that; ayam—this; anayasya—of your ungrateful activity; äsét—was;
parebhyaù—by others; vaù—of all of you; paräbhavaù—the defeat;
prakñéëebhyaù—although they were weak; sva-vairibhyaù—by your own
enemies, who were previously defeated by you; samåddhänäm—being
yourselves very opulent; ca—and; yat—which; suräù—O demigods.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
433
TRANSLATION
Because of your misbehavior toward Båhaspati, you have been defeated by
the demons. My dear demigods, since the demons were weak, having been
defeated by you several times, how else could you, who were so advanced in
opulence, be defeated by them?
PURPORT
The devas are celebrated for fighting with the asuras perpetually. In such
fights the asuras were always defeated, but this time the demigods were
defeated. Why? The reason, as stated here, was that they had offended their
spiritual master. Their impudent disrespect of their spiritual master was the
cause of their defeat by the demons. As stated in the çästras, when one
disrespects a respectable superior, one loses his longevity and the results of his
pious activities, and in this way one is degraded.
TEXT 23
MagavNa( iÜzTa" PaXYa Pa[+aq<aaNa( GauvRiTa§-MaaTa( )
SaMPa[TYauPaicTaaNa( >aUYa" k-aVYaMaaraDYa >ai¢-Ta" )
AaddqrNa( iNal/YaNa& MaMaaiPa >a*GaudevTaa" )) 23 ))
maghavan dviñataù paçya
prakñéëän gurv-atikramät
sampraty upacitän bhüyaù
kävyam ärädhya bhaktitaù
ädadéran nilayanaà
mamäpi bhågu-devatäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
434
SYNONYMS
maghavan—O Indra; dviñataù—your enemies; paçya—just see;
prakñéëän—being very weak (formerly); guru-atikramät—because of
disrespecting their guru, Çukräcärya; samprati—at the present moment;
upacitän—powerful; bhüyaù—again; kävyam—their spiritual master,
Çukräcärya; ärädhya—worshiping; bhaktitaù—with great devotion;
ädadéran—may take away; nilayanam—the abode, Satyaloka; mama—my;
api—even; bhågu-devatäù—who are now strong devotees of Çukräcärya, the
disciple of Bhågu.
TRANSLATION
O Indra, your enemies, the demons, were extremely weak because of their
disrespect toward Çukräcärya, but since they have now worshiped Çukräcärya
with great devotion, they have again become powerful. By their devotion to
Çukräcärya, they have increased their strength so much that now they are even
able to easily seize my abode from me.
PURPORT
Lord Brahmä wanted to point out to the demigods that by the strength of
the guru one can become most powerful within this world, and by the
displeasure of the guru one can lose everything. This is confirmed by the song
of Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura:
yasya prasädäd bhagavat-prasädo
yasyäprasädän na gatiù kuto 'pi **(10)
"By the mercy of the spiritual master one is benedicted by the mercy of Kåñëa.
Without the grace of the spiritual master, one cannot make any advancement."
Although the demons are insignificant in comparison to Lord Brahmä, because
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
435
of the strength of their guru they were so powerful that they could even seize
Brahmaloka from Lord Brahmä. We therefore pray to the spiritual master:
mükaà karoti väcälaà
paìguà laìghayate girim
yat-kåpä tam ahaà vande
çré-guruà déna-täraëam
(Madhya 17.80)
By the mercy of the guru, even a dumb man can become the greatest orator,
and even a lame man can cross mountains. As advised by Lord Brahmä, one
should remember this çästric injunction if one desires success in his life.
TEXT 24
i}aiPaíPa& ik&- Ga<aYaNTYa>aeÛ‚
MaN}aa >a*GaU<aaMaNauiXai+aTaaQaaR" )
Na ivPa[GaaeivNdGavqìra<aa&
>avNTYa>ad]ai<a Nareìra<aaMa( )) 24 ))
tripiñöapaà kià gaëayanty abhedyamanträ
bhågüëäm anuçikñitärthäù
na vipra-govinda-gav-éçvaräëäà
bhavanty abhadräëi nareçvaräëäm
SYNONYMS
tri-piñöa-pam—all the demigods, including Lord Brahmä; kim—what;
gaëayanti—they care for; abhedya-manträù—whose determination to carry out
the orders of the spiritual master is unbreakable; bhågüëäm—of the disciples of
Bhågu Muni like Çukräcärya; anuçikñita-arthäù—deciding to follow the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
436
instructions; na—not; vipra—the brähmaëas; govinda—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa; go—the cows; éçvaräëäm—of persons favoring
or considering worshipable; bhavanti—are; abhadräëi—any misfortunes;
nara-éçvaräëäm—or of kings who follow this principle.
TRANSLATION
Because of their firm determination to follow the instructions of Çukräcärya,
his disciples, the demons, are now unconcerned about the demigods. In fact,
kings or others who have determined faith in the mercy of brähmaëas, cows and
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, and who always worship these
three are always strong in their position.
PURPORT
From the instructions of Lord Brahmä it is understood that everyone should
very faithfully worship the brähmaëas, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and the cows. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is go-brähmaëa-hitäya ca:
He is always very kind to cows and brähmaëas. Therefore one who worships
Govinda must satisfy Him by worshiping the brähmaëas and cows. If a
government worships the brähmaëas, the cows and Kåñëa, Govinda, it is never
defeated anywhere; otherwise it must always be defeated and condemned
everywhere. At the present moment, all over the world, governments have no
respect for brähmaëas, cows and Govinda, and consequently there are chaotic
conditions all over the world. In summary, although the demigods were very
powerful in material opulence, the demons defeated them in battle because the
demigods had behaved disrespectfully toward a brähmaëa, Båhaspati, who was
their spiritual master.
TEXT 25
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
437
Tad( ivìæPa& >aJaTaaXau ivPa[&
TaPaiSvNa& Tvaí\MaQaaTMavNTaMa( )
Sa>aaiJaTaae_QaaRNa( Sa ivDaaSYaTae vae
Yaid +aiMaZYaßMauTaaSYa k-MaR )) 25 ))
tad viçvarüpaà bhajatäçu vipraà
tapasvinaà tväñöram athätmavantam
sabhäjito 'rthän sa vidhäsyate vo
yadi kñamiñyadhvam utäsya karma
SYNONYMS
tat—therefore; viçvarüpam—Viçvarüpa; bhajata—just worship as guru;
äçu—immediately; vipram—who is a perfect brähmaëa;
tapasvinam—undergoing great austerities and penances; tväñöram—the son of
Tvañöä; atha—as well as; ätma-vantam—very independent; sabhäjitaù—being
worshiped; arthän—the interests; saù—he; vidhäsyate—will execute; vaù—of
all of you; yadi—if; kñamiñyadhvam—you tolerate; uta—indeed; asya—his;
karma—activities (to support the Daityas).
TRANSLATION
O demigods, I instruct you to approach Viçvarüpa, the son of Tvañöä, and
accept him as your guru. He is a pure and very powerful brähmaëa undergoing
austerity and penances. Pleased by your worship, he will fulfill your desires,
provided that you tolerate his being inclined to side with the demons.
PURPORT
Lord Brahmä advised the demigods to accept the son of Tvañöä as their
spiritual master although he was always inclined toward the benefit of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
438
asuras.
TEXT 26
é[qXauk- ovac
Ta WvMauidTaa raJaNa( b]ø<aa ivGaTaJvra" )
‰iz& Tvaí\MauPav]JYa PairZvJYaedMab]uvNa( )) 26 ))
çré-çuka uväca
ta evam uditä räjan
brahmaëä vigata-jvaräù
åñià tväñöram upavrajya
pariñvajyedam abruvan
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé said; te—all the demigods; evam—thus;
uditäù—being advised; räjan—O King Parékñit; brahmaëä—by Lord Brahmä;
vigata-jvaräù—being relieved from the aggrievement caused by the demons;
åñim—the great sage; tväñöram—to the son of Tvañöä; upavrajya—going;
pariñvajya—embracing; idam—this; abruvan—spoke.
TRANSLATION
Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: Thus advised by Lord Brahmä and
relieved of their anxiety, all the demigods went to the sage Viçvarüpa, the son
of Tvañöä. My dear King, they embraced him and spoke as follows.
TEXT 27
é[qdeva Ocu"
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
439
vYa& Tae_iTaQaYa" Pa[aáa Aaé[Ma& >ad]MaSTau Tae )
k-aMa" SaMPaaÛTaa& TaaTa iPaTa›<aa& SaMaYaaeicTa" )) 27 ))
çré-devä ücuù
vayaà te 'tithayaù präptä
äçramaà bhadram astu te
kämaù sampädyatäà täta
pitèëäà samayocitaù
SYNONYMS
çré-deväù ücuù—the demigods said; vayam—we; te—your; atithayaù—guests;
präptäù—arrived at; äçramam—your abode; bhadram—good fortune; astu—let
there be; te—unto you; kämaù—the desire; sampädyatäm—let it be executed;
täta—O darling; pitèëäm—of us, who are just like your fathers;
samayocitaù—suitable to the present time.
TRANSLATION
The demigods said: Beloved Viçvarüpa, may there be all good fortune for
you. We, the demigods, have come to your äçrama as your guests. Please try to
fulfill our desires according to the time, since we are on the level of your
parents.
TEXT 28
Pau}aa<aa& ih Parae DaMaR" iPaTa*Xaué[Uz<a& SaTaaMa( )
AiPa Pau}avTaa& b]øNa( ik-MauTa b]øcair<aaMa( )) 28 ))
puträëäà hi paro dharmaù
pitå-çuçrüñaëaà satäm
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
440
api putravatäà brahman
kim uta brahmacäriëäm
SYNONYMS
puträëäm—of sons; hi—indeed; paraù—superior; dharmaù—religious
principle; pitå-çuçrüñaëam—the service of the parents; satäm—good;
api—even; putra-vatäm—of those who have sons; brahman—O dear
brähmaëa; kim uta—what to speak; brahmacäriëäm—of brahmacärés.
TRANSLATION
O brähmaëa, the highest duty of a son, even though he has sons of his own,
is to serve his parents, and what to speak of a son who is a brahmacäré?
TEXTS 29-30
AacaYaaeR b]ø<aae MaUiTaR" iPaTaa MaUiTaR" Pa[JaaPaTae" )
>a]aTaa MaåTPaTaeMaURiTaRMaaRTaa Saa+aaTa( i+aTaeSTaNau" )) 29 ))
dYaaYaa >aiGaNaq MaUiTaRDaRMaRSYaaTMaaiTaiQa" SvYaMa( )
AGaner>YaaGaTaae MaUiTaR" SavR>aUTaaiNa caTMaNa" )) 30 ))
äcäryo brahmaëo mürtiù
pitä mürtiù prajäpateù
bhrätä marutpater mürtir
mätä säkñät kñites tanuù
dayäyä bhaginé mürtir
dharmasyätmätithiù svayam
agner abhyägato mürtiù
sarva-bhütäni cätmanaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
441
SYNONYMS
äcäryaù—the teacher or spiritual master who instructs Vedic knowledge by his
personal behavior; brahmaëaù—of all the Vedas; mürtiù—the personification;
pitä—the father; mürtiù—the personification; prajäpateù—of Lord Brahmä;
bhrätä—the brother; marut-pateù mürtiù—the personification of Indra;
mätä—the mother; säkñät—directly; kñiteù—of the earth; tanuù—the body;
dayäyäù—of mercy; bhaginé—the sister; mürtiù—the personification;
dharmasya—of religious principles; ätma—the self; atithiù—the guest;
svayam—personally; agneù—of the fire-god; abhyägataù—the invited guest;
mürtiù—the personification; sarva-bhütäni—all living entities; ca—and;
ätmanaù—of the Supreme Lord Viñëu.
TRANSLATION
The äcärya, the spiritual master who teaches all the Vedic knowledge and
gives initiation by offering the sacred thread, is the personification of all the
Vedas. Similarly, a father personifies Lord Brahmä; a brother, King Indra; a
mother, the planet earth; and a sister, mercy. A guest personifies religious
principles, an invited guest personifies the demigod Agni, and all living entities
personify Lord Viñëu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
According to the moral instructions of Cäëakya Paëòita, ätmavat
sarva-bhüteñu: one should observe all living entities to be on the same level as
oneself. This means that no one should be neglected as inferior; because
Paramätmä is seated in everyone's body, everyone should be respected as a
temple of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This verse describes the
different ways in which one should respect a guru, a father, a brother, a sister,
a guest and so on.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
442
TEXT 31
TaSMaaTa( iPaTa›<aaMaaTaaRNaaMaaiTa| ParPara>avMa( )
TaPaSaaPaNaYa&STaaTa SaNdeXa& k-TauRMahRiSa )) 31 ))
tasmät pitèëäm ärtänäm
ärtià para-paräbhavam
tapasäpanayaàs täta
sandeçaà kartum arhasi
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; pitèëäm—of the parents; ärtänäm—who are in distress;
ärtim—the grief; para-paräbhavam—being defeated by the enemies;
tapasä—by the strength of your austerities; apanayan—taking away; täta—O
dear son; sandeçam—our desire; kartum arhasi—you deserve to execute.
TRANSLATION
Dear son, we have been defeated by our enemies, and therefore we are very
much aggrieved. Please mercifully fulfill our desires by relieving our distress
through the strength of your austerities. Please fulfill our prayers.
TEXT 32
v*<aqMahe TvaePaaDYaaYa& b]iøï& b]aø<a& GauåMa( )
YaQaaÅSaa ivJaeZYaaMa" SaPaÒa&STav TaeJaSaa )) 32 ))
våëémahe tvopädhyäyaà
brahmiñöhaà brähmaëaà gurum
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
443
yathäïjasä vijeñyämaù
sapatnäàs tava tejasä
SYNONYMS
våëémahe—we choose; tvä—you; upädhyäyam—as teacher and spiritual master;
brahmiñöham—being perfectly aware of the Supreme Brahman; brähmaëam—a
qualified brähmaëa; gurum—the perfect spiritual master; yathä—so that;
aïjasä—very easily; vijeñyämaù—we shall defeat; sapatnän—our rivals;
tava—your; tejasä—by the power of austerity.
TRANSLATION
Since you are completely aware of the Supreme Brahman, you are a perfect
brähmaëa, and therefore you are the spiritual master of all orders of life. We
accept you as our spiritual master and director so that by the power of your
austerity we may easily defeat the enemies who have conquered us.
PURPORT
One must approach a particular type of guru to execute a particular type of
duty. Therefore although Viçvarüpa was inferior to the demigods, the
demigods accepted him as their guru to conquer the demons.
TEXT 33
Na GahRYaiNTa ùQaeRzu Yaivïax(„g[Yai>avadNaMa( )
^Ndae>Yaae_NYa}a Na b]øNa( vYaae JYaEïySYa k-ar<aMa( )) 33 ))
na garhayanti hy artheñu
yaviñöhäìghry-abhivädanam
chandobhyo 'nyatra na brahman
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
444
vayo jyaiñöhyasya käraëam
SYNONYMS
na—not; garhayanti—forbid; hi—indeed; artheñu—in acquiring interests;
yaviñöha-aìghri—at the lotus feet of a junior; abhivädanam—offering
obeisances; chandobhyaù—the Vedic mantras; anyatra—apart from; na—not;
brahman—O brähmaëa; vayaù—age; jyaiñöhyasya—of seniority; käraëam—the
cause.
TRANSLATION
The demigods continued: Do not fear criticism for being younger than us.
Such etiquette does not apply in regard to Vedic mantras. Except in relationship
to Vedic mantras, seniority is determined by age, but one may offer respectful
obeisances even to a younger person who is advanced in chanting Vedic
mantras. Therefore although you are junior in relationship to us, you may
become our priest without hesitation.
PURPORT
It is said, våddhatvaà vayasä vinä: one may be senior without being
advanced in age. Even if one is not old, one gains seniority if he is senior in
knowledge. Viçvarüpa was junior in relationship to the demigods because he
was their nephew, but the demigods wanted to accept him as their priest, and
therefore he would have to accept obeisances from them. The demigods
explained that this should not be a cause for hesitation; he could become their
priest because he was advanced in Vedic knowledge. Similarly. Cäëakya
Paëòita advises, nécäd apy uttamaà jïänam: one may accept education from a
member of a lower social order. The brähmaëas, the members of the most
elevated varëa, are teachers, but a person in a lower family, such as a family of
kñatriyas, vaiçyas or even çüdras, may be accepted as a teacher if he has
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
445
knowledge. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu approved of this when He expressed this
opinion before Rämänanda Räya (Cc. Madhya 8.128):
kibä vipra, kibä nyäsé, çüdra kene naya
yei kåñëa-tattva-vettä, sei 'guru' haya
It does not matter whether one is a brähmaëa, çüdra, gåhastha or sannyäsé.
These are all material designations. A spiritually advanced person has nothing
to do with such designations. Therefore, if one is advanced in the science of
Kåñëa consciousness, regardless of his position in human society, he may
become a spiritual master.
TEXT 34
é[q‰izåvac
A>YaiQaRTa" SaurGa<aE" PaaErihTYae MahaTaPaa" )
Sa ivìæPaSTaaNaah Pa[Saà" ë+<aYaa iGara )) 34 ))
çré-åñir uväca
abhyarthitaù sura-gaëaiù
paurahitye mahä-tapäù
sa viçvarüpas tän äha
prasannaù çlakñëayä girä
SYNONYMS
çré-åñiù uväca—Çukadeva Gosvämé continued to speak; abhyarthitaù—being
requested; sura-gaëaiù—by the demigods; paurahitye—in accepting the
priesthood; mahä-tapäù—highly advanced in austerity and penances; saù—he;
viçvarüpaù—Viçvarüpa; tän—to the demigods; äha—spoke; prasannaù—being
satisfied; çlakñëayä—sweet; girä—with words.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
446
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: When all the demigods requested the great
Viçvarüpa to be their priest, Viçvarüpa, who was advanced in austerities, was
very pleased. He replied to them as follows.
TEXT 35
é[qivìæPa ovac
ivGaihRTa& DaMaRXaqlE/b]RøvcRoPaVYaYaMa( )
k-Qa& Nau MaiÜDaae NaaQaa l/aeke-XaEri>aYaaicTaMa( )
Pa[TYaa:YaaSYaiTa TaiC^ZYa" Sa Wv SvaQaR oCYaTae )) 35 ))
çré-viçvarüpa uväca
vigarhitaà dharma-çélair
brahmavarca-upavyayam
kathaà nu mad-vidho näthä
lokeçair abhiyäcitam
pratyäkhyäsyati tac-chiñyaù
sa eva svärtha ucyate
SYNONYMS
çré-viçvarüpaù uväca—Çré Viçvarüpa said; vigarhitam—condemned;
dharma-çélaiù—by persons respectful to the religious principles;
brahma-varcaù—of brahminical strength or power; upavyayam—causes loss;
katham—how; nu—indeed; mat-vidhaù—a person like me; näthäù—O lords;
loka-éçaiù—by the ruling powers of different planets; abhiyäcitam—request;
pratyäkhyäsyati—will refuse; tat-çiñyaù—who is on the level of their disciple;
saù—that; eva—indeed; sva-arthaù—real interest; ucyate—is described as.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
447
TRANSLATION
Çré Viçvarüpa said: O demigods, although the acceptance of priesthood is
decried as causing the loss of previously acquired brahminical power, how can
someone like me refuse to accept your personal request? You are all exalted
commanders of the entire universe. I am your disciple and must take many
lessons from you. Therefore I cannot refuse you. I must agree for my own
benefit.
PURPORT
The professions of a qualified brähmaëa are paöhana, päöhana, yajana,
yäjana, däna and pratigraha. The words yajana and yäjana mean that a
brähmaëa becomes the priest of the populace for the sake of their elevation.
One who accepts the post of spiritual master neutralizes the sinful reactions of
the yajamäna, the one on whose behalf he performs yajïa. Thus the results of
the pious acts previously performed by the priest or spiritual master are
diminished. Therefore priesthood is not accepted by learned brähmaëas.
Nevertheless, the greatly learned brähmaëa Viçvarüpa became the priest of the
demigods because of his profound respect for them.
TEXT 36
Aik-ÄNaaNaa& ih DaNa& iXal/aeH^Na&
TaeNaeh iNavRiTaRTaSaaDauSaiT§-Ya" )
k-Qa& ivGaù| Nau k-raeMYaDaqìra"
PaaEraeDaSa& ôZYaiTa YaeNa duMaRiTa" )) 36 ))
akiïcanänäà hi dhanaà çiloïchanaà
teneha nirvartita-sädhu-satkriyaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
448
kathaà vigarhyaà nu karomy adhéçvaräù
paurodhasaà håñyati yena durmatiù
SYNONYMS
akiïcanänäm—of persons who have taken to austerities and penances to
become detached from worldly possessions; hi—certainly; dhanam—the
wealth; çila—the collecting of grains left in the field; uïchanam—and the
collecting of grains left in the wholesale marketplace; tena—by that means;
iha—here; nirvartita—accomplishing; sädhu—of the exalted devotees;
sat-kriyaù—all the pious activities; katham—how; vigarhyam—reproachable;
nu—indeed; karomi—I shall execute; adhéçvaräù—O great governors of the
planetary systems; paurodhasam—the duty of priesthood; håñyati—is pleased;
yena—by which; durmatiù—one who is less intelligent.
TRANSLATION
O exalted governors of various planets, the true brähmaëa, who has no
material possessions, maintains himself by the profession of accepting
çiloïchana. In other words, he picks up grains left in the field and on the
ground in the wholesale marketplace. By this means, householder brähmaëas
who actually abide by the principles of austerity and penance maintain
themselves and their families and perform all necessary pious activities. A
brähmaëa who desires to achieve happiness by gaining wealth through
professional priesthood must certainly have a very low mind. How shall I accept
such priesthood?
PURPORT
A first-class brähmaëa does not accept any rewards from his disciples or
yajamänas. Practicing austerities and penances, he instead goes to the
agricultural field and collects food grains left by the agriculturalists to be
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
449
collected by brähmaëas. Similarly, such brähmaëas go to marketplaces where
grains are purchased and sold wholesale, and there they collect grains left by
the merchants. In this way, such exalted brähmaëas maintain their bodies and
families. Such priests never demand anything from their disciples to live in
opulence, imitating kñatriyas or vaiçyas. In other words, a pure brähmaëa
voluntarily accepts a life of poverty and lives in complete dependence on the
mercy of the Lord. Not very many years ago, a brähmaëa in Kåñëanagara, near
Navadvépa, was offered some help from the local Zamindar, Räjä Kåñëacandra.
The brähmaëa refused to accept the help. He said that since he was very happy
in his householder life, taking rice given by his disciples and cooking
vegetables of tamarind leaves, there was no question of taking help from the
Zamindar. The conclusion is that although a brähmaëa may receive much
opulence from his disciples, he should not utilize the rewards of his priesthood
for his personal benefit; he must use them for the service of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 37
TaQaaiPa Na Pa[iTab]UYaa& Gauåi>a" Pa[aiQaRTa& ik-YaTa( )
>avTaa& Pa[aiQaRTa& Sav| Pa[a<aErQaOEê SaaDaYae )) 37 ))
tathäpi na pratibrüyäà
gurubhiù prärthitaà kiyat
bhavatäà prärthitaà sarvaà
präëair arthaiç ca sädhaye
SYNONYMS
tathä api—still; na—not; pratibrüyäm—I may refuse; gurubhiù—by persons on
the level of my spiritual master; prärthitam—request; kiyat—of small value;
bhavatäm—of all of you; prärthitam—the desire; sarvam—whole; präëaiù—by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
450
my life; arthaiù—by my possessions; ca—also; sädhaye—I shall execute.
TRANSLATION
All of you are my superiors. Therefore although accepting priesthood is
sometimes reproachable, I cannot refuse even a small request from you. I agree
to be your priest. I shall fulfill your request by dedicating my life and
possessions.
TEXT 38
é[qbadraYai<aåvac
Tae>Ya Wv& Pa[iTaé[uTYa ivìæPaae MahaTaPaa" )
PaaErihTYa& v*Taê§e- ParMae<a SaMaaiDaNaa )) 38 ))
çré-bädaräyaëir uväca
tebhya evaà pratiçrutya
viçvarüpo mahä-tapäù
paurahityaà våtaç cakre
parameëa samädhinä
SYNONYMS
çré-bädaräyaëiù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; tebhyaù—unto them (the
demigods); evam—thus; pratiçrutya—promising; viçvarüpaù—Viçvarüpa;
mahä-tapäù—the most exalted personality; paurahityam—the priesthood;
våtaù—surrounded by them; cakre—executed; parameëa—supreme;
samädhinä—with attention.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
451
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: O King, after making this promise to the
demigods, the exalted Viçvarüpa, surrounded by the demigods, performed the
necessary priestly activities with great enthusiasm and attention.
PURPORT
The word samädhinä is very important. Samädhi means complete absorption
with an undiverted mind. Viçvarüpa, who was a most learned brähmaëa, not
only accepted the request of the demigods, but took their request seriously and
performed the activities of priesthood with an undiverted mind. In other
words, he accepted the priesthood not for material gain, but to profit the
demigods. Such is the duty of a priest. The word puraù means "family," and hita
means "benefit." Thus the word purohita indicates that the priest is the
well-wisher of the family. Another meaning of the word puraù is "first." A
priest's first duty is to see that his disciples benefit spiritually and materially by
all means. Then he is satisfied. A priest should never be interested in
performing Vedic rituals for his personal benefit.
TEXT 39
SauriÜza& ié[Ya& GauáaMaaEXaNaSYaaiPa ivÛYaa )
AaiC^ÛadaNMaheNd]aYa vEZ<aVYaa ivÛYaa iv>au" )) 39 ))
sura-dviñäà çriyaà guptäm
auçanasyäpi vidyayä
äcchidyädän mahendräya
vaiñëavyä vidyayä vibhuù
SYNONYMS
sura-dviñäm—of the enemies of the demigods; çriyam—the opulence;
guptäm—protected; auçanasya—of Çukräcärya; api—although; vidyayä—by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
452
the talents; äcchidya—collecting; adät—delivered; mahä-indräya—unto King
Indra; vaiñëavyä—of Lord Viñëu; vidyayä—by a prayer; vibhuù—the most
powerful Viçvarüpa.
TRANSLATION
The opulence of the demons, who are generally known as the enemies of the
demigods, was protected by the talents and tactics of Çukräcärya, but
Viçvarüpa, who was most powerful, composed a protective prayer known as the
Näräyaëa-kavaca. By this intelligent mantra, he took away the opulence of the
demons and gave it to Mahendra, the King of heaven.
PURPORT
The distinction between the demigods (devas) and demons (asuras) is that
the demigods are all devotees of Lord Viñëu whereas the demons are devotees
of demigods like Lord Çiva, Goddess Kälé and Goddess Durgä. Sometimes the
demons are also devotees of Lord Brahmä. For example, Hiraëyakaçipu was a
devotee of Lord Brahmä, Rävaëa was a devotee of Lord Çiva, and Mahiñäsura
was a devotee of Goddess Durgä. The demigods are devotees of Lord Viñëu
(viñëu-bhaktaù småto daiva), whereas the demons (äsuras tad-viparyayaù) are
always against the viñëu-bhaktas, or Vaiñëavas. To oppose the Vaiñëavas, the
demons become devotees of Lord Çiva, Lord Brahmä, Kälé, Durgä, and so on. In
the days of yore, many long years ago, there was animosity between the devas
and the asuras, and the same spirit still continues, for the devotees of Lord
Çiva and Goddess Durgä are always envious of Vaiñëavas, who are devotees of
Lord Viñëu. This strain between the devotees of Lord Çiva and Lord Viñëu has
always existed. In the higher planetary systems, fights between the demons and
the demigods continue for a long, long time.
Herein we see that Viçvarüpa made for the demigods a protective covering,
saturated with a Viñëu mantra. Sometimes the Viñëu mantra is called
Viñëu-jvara, and the Çiva mantra is called Çiva-jvara. We find in the çästras
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
453
that sometimes the Çiva-jvara and Viñëu-jvara are employed in the fights
between the demons and the demigods.
The word sura-dviñäm, which in this verse means "of the enemies of the
demigods," also refers to the atheists. Çrémad-Bhägavatam elsewhere says that
Lord Buddha appeared for the purpose of bewildering the demons or atheists.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead always awards His benediction to
devotees. The Lord Himself confirms this in Bhagavad-gétä (9.31):
kaunteya pratijänéhi
na me bhaktaù praëaçyati
"O son of Kunté, declare it boldly that My devotee never perishes."
TEXT 40
YaYaa Gauá" Sahóa+aae iJaGYae_SaurcMaUivR>au" )
Taa& Pa[ah Sa MaheNd]aYa ivìæPa odarDaq" )) 40 ))
yayä guptaù sahasräkño
jigye 'sura-camür vibhuù
täà präha sa mahendräya
viçvarüpa udära-dhéù
SYNONYMS
yayä—by which; guptaù—protected; sahasra-akñaù—the thousand-eyed
demigod, Indra; jigye—conquered; asura—of the demons; camüù—military
power; vibhuù—becoming very powerful; täm—that; präha—spoke; saù—he;
mahendräya—unto the King of heaven, Mahendra; viçvarüpaù—Viçvarüpa;
udära-dhéù—very broad-minded.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
454
TRANSLATION
Viçvarüpa, who was most liberal, spoke to King Indra [Sahasräkña] the secret
hymn that protected Indra and conquered the military power of the demons.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sixth Canto, Seventh Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Indra Offends His Spiritual Master, Båhaspati."
8. The Näräyaëa-kavaca Shield
This chapter describes how Indra, the King of heaven, was victorious over
the soldiers of the demons, and it also describes the shield of the Viñëu mantra.
To take protection from this shield, one must first touch kuça grass and
wash one's mouth with äcamana-mantras. One should observe silence and then
place the eight-syllable Viñëu mantra on the parts of his body and place the
twelve-syllable mantra on his hands. The eight-syllable mantra is oà namo
näräyaëäya. This mantra should be distributed all over the front and back of
the body. The twelve-syllable mantra, which begins with the praëava, oàkära,
is oà namo bhagavate väsudeväya. One syllable should be placed on each of the
fingers and should be preceded by the praëava, oàkära. Thereafter, one must
chant oà viñëave namaù, which is a six-syllable mantra. One must progressively
place the syllables of the mantra on the heart, the head, between the two
eyebrows, on the çikhä and between the eyes, and then one should chant maù
asträya phaö and with this mantra protect himself from all directions. Nädevo
devam arcayet: one who has not risen to the level of a deva cannot chant this
mantra. According to this direction of the çästra, one must think himself
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
455
qualitatively nondifferent from the Supreme.
After finishing this dedication, one must offer a prayer to the eight-armed
Lord Viñëu, who sits on the shoulders of Garuòadeva. One also has to think of
the fish incarnation, Vämana, Kürma, Nåsiàha, Varäha, Paraçuräma,
Rämacandra (the elder brother of Lakñmaëa). Nara-Näräyaëa, Dattätreya (an
empowered incarnation), Kapila, Sanat-kumära, Hayagréva, Näradadeva (the
incarnation of a devotee). Dhanvantari, Åñabhadeva, Yajïa, Balaräma,
Vyäsadeva, Buddhadeva and Keçava. One should also think of Govinda, the
master of Våndävana, and one should think of Näräyaëa, the master of the
spiritual sky. One should think of Madhusüdana, Tridhämä, Mädhava,
Håñékeça, Padmanäbha, Janärdana, Dämodara and Viçveçvara, as well as the
Supreme Personality of Godhead Kåñëa Himself. After offering prayers to the
Lord's personal expansions known as the sväàça and çaktyäveça-avatäras, one
should pray to the weapons of Lord Näräyaëa, such as the Sudarçana, gadä,
çaìkha, khaòga and bow.
After explaining this process, Çukadeva Gosvämé told Mahäräja Parékñit
how Viçvarüpa, the brother of Våträsura, described the glories of the
Näräyaëa-kavaca to Indra.
TEXTS 1-2
é[qraJaaevac
YaYaa Gauá" Sahóa+a" SavahaNa( irPauSaEiNak-aNa( )
§-I@iàv iviNaiJaRTYa i}al/aeKYaa bu>auJae ié[YaMa( )) 1 ))
>aGav&STaNMaMaa:Yaaih vMaR NaaraYa<aaTMak-Ma( )
YaQaaTaTaaiYaNa" Xa}aUNa( YaeNa Gauáae_JaYaNMa*Dae )) 2 ))
çré-räjoväca
yayä guptaù sahasräkñaù
savähän ripu-sainikän
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
456
kréòann iva vinirjitya
tri-lokyä bubhuje çriyam
bhagavaàs tan mamäkhyähi
varma näräyaëätmakam
yathätatäyinaù çatrün
yena gupto 'jayan mådhe
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—King Parékñit said; yayä—by which (the spiritual armor);
guptaù—protected; sahasra-akñaù—the thousand-eyed King Indra;
sa-vähän—with their carriers; ripu-sainikän—the soldiers and commanders of
the enemies; kréòan iva—just like playing; vinirjitya—conquering;
tri-lokyäù—of the three worlds (the higher, middle and lower planetary
systems); bubhuje—enjoyed; çriyam—the opulence; bhagavan—O great sage;
tat—that; mama—unto me; äkhyähi—please explain; varma—defensive armor
made of a mantra; näräyaëa-ätmakam—consisting of the mercy of Näräyaëa;
yathä—in which way; ätatäyinaù—who were endeavoring to kill him;
çatrün—enemies; yena—by which; guptaù—being protected;
ajayat—conquered; mådhe—in the fight.
TRANSLATION
King Parékñit inquired from Çukadeva Gosvämé: My lord, kindly explain the
Viñëu mantra armor that protected King Indra and enabled him to conquer his
enemies, along with their carriers, and enjoy the opulence of the three worlds.
Please explain to me that Näräyaëa armor, by which King Indra achieved
success in battle, conquering the enemies who were endeavoring to kill him.
TEXT 3
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
457
é[qbadraYai<aåvac
v*Ta" PauraeihTaSTvaí\ae MaheNd]aYaaNauPa*C^Tae )
NaaraYa<aa:Ya& vMaaRh TaidhEk-MaNaa" é*<au )) 3 ))
çré-bädaräyaëir uväca
våtaù purohitas tväñöro
mahendräyänupåcchate
näräyaëäkhyaà varmäha
tad ihaika-manäù çåëu
SYNONYMS
çré-bädaräyaëiù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; våtaù—the chosen;
purohitaù—priest; tväñöraù—the son of Tvañöä; mahendräya—unto King Indra;
anupåcchate—after he (Indra) inquired; näräyaëa-äkhyam—named
Näräyaëa-kavaca; varma—defensive armor made of a mantra; äha—he said;
tat—that; iha—this; eka-manäù—with great attention; çåëu—hear from me.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: King Indra, the leader of the demigods, inquired
about the armor known as Näräyaëa-kavaca from Viçvarüpa, who was engaged
by the demigods as their priest. Please hear Viçvarüpa's reply with great
attention.
TEXTS 4-6
é[qivìæPa ovac
DaaETaax(iga]Paai<aracMYa SaPaiv}a odx(Mau%" )
k*-TaSva(r)k-rNYaaSaae MaN}aa>Yaa& vaGYaTa" Xauic" )) 4 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
458
NaaraYa<aPar& vMaR Saàùed( >aYa AaGaTae )
PaadYaaeJaaRNauNaaeævaeRådre ôÛQaaeriSa )) 5 ))
Mau%e iXarSYaaNauPaUVYaaRdaeªaradqiNa ivNYaSaeTa( )
p NaMaae NaaraYa<aaYaeiTa ivPaYaRYaMaQaaiPa va )) 6 ))
çré-viçvarüpa uväca
dhautäìghri-päëir äcamya
sapavitra udaì-mukhaù
kåta-sväìga-kara-nyäso
manträbhyäà väg-yataù çuciù
näräyaëa-paraà varma
sannahyed bhaya ägate
pädayor jänunor ürvor
udare hådy athorasi
mukhe çirasy änupürvyäd
oàkärädéni vinyaset
oà namo näräyaëäyeti
viparyayam athäpi vä
SYNONYMS
çré-viçvarüpaù uväca—Çré Viçvarüpa said; dhauta—having completely washed;
aìghri—feet; päëiù—hands; äcamya—performing äcamana (sipping a little
water three times after chanting the prescribed mantra); sa-pavitraù—wearing
rings made of kuça grass (on the ring finger of each hand);
udak-mukhaù—sitting facing the north; kåta—making;
sva-aìga-kara-nyäsaù—mental assignment of the eight parts of the body and
twelve parts of the hands; manträbhyäm—with the two mantras (oà namo
bhagavate väsudeväya and oà namo näräyaëäya); väk-yataù—keeping oneself
silent; çuciù—being purified; näräyaëa-param—fully intent on Lord
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
459
Näräyaëa; varma—armor; sannahyet—put on oneself; bhaye—when fear;
ägate—has come; pädayoù—on the two legs; jänunoù—on the two knees;
ürvoù—on the two thighs; udare—on the abdomen; hådi—on the heart;
atha—thus; urasi—on the chest; mukhe—on the mouth; çirasi—on the head;
änupürvyät—one after another; oàkära-ädéni—beginning with oàkära;
vinyaset—one should place; oà—the praëava; namaù—obeisances;
näräyaëäya—unto Näräyaëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; iti—thus;
viparyayam—the reverse; atha api—moreover; vä—or.
TRANSLATION
Viçvarüpa said: If some form of fear arrives, one should first wash his hands
and legs clean and then perform äcamana by chanting this mantra: oà apavitraù
pavitro vä sarvävasthäà gato 'pi vä/ yaù smaret puëòarékäkñaà sa
bahyäbhyantaraù çuciù/ çré-viñëu çré-viñëu çré-viñëu. Then one should touch
kuça grass and sit gravely and silently, facing north. When completely purified,
one should touch the mantra composed of eight syllables to the eight parts of his
body and touch the mantra composed of twelve syllables to his hands. Thus, in
the following manner, he should bind himself with the Näräyaëa coat of armor.
First, while chanting the mantra composed of eight syllables [oà namo
näräyaëäya], beginning with the praëava, the syllable oà, one should touch his
hands to eight parts of his body, starting with the two feet and progressing
systematically to the knees, thighs, abdomen, heart, chest, mouth and head.
Then one should chant the mantra in reverse, beginning from the last syllable
[ya], while touching the parts of his body in the reverse order. These two
processes are known as utpatti-nyäsa and saàhära-nyäsa respectively.
TEXT 7
k-rNYaaSa& TaTa" ku-YaaRd( ÜadXaa+arivÛYaa )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
460
Pa[<avaidYak-araNTaMax(GauLYax(GauïPavRSau )) 7 ))
kara-nyäsaà tataù kuryäd
dvädaçäkñara-vidyayä
praëavädi-ya-käräntam
aìguly-aìguñöha-parvasu
SYNONYMS
kara-nyäsam—the ritual known as kara-nyäsa, which assigns the syllables of
the mantra to the fingers; tataù—thereafter; kuryät—should execute;
dvädaça-akñara—composed of twelve syllables; vidyayä—with the mantra;
praëava-ädi—beginning with the oàkära; ya-kära-antam—ending with the
syllable ya; aìguli—on the fingers, beginning with the index finger;
aìguñöha-parvasu—to the joints of the thumbs.
TRANSLATION
Then one should chant the mantra composed of twelve syllables [oà namo
bhagavate väsudeväya]. Preceding each syllable by the oàkära, one should place
the syllables of the mantra on the tips of his fingers, beginning with the index
finger of the right hand and concluding with the index finger of the left. The
four remaining syllables should be placed on the joints of the thumbs.
TEXTS 8-10
NYaSaed(Da*dYa pk-ar& ivk-arMaNau MaUDaRiNa )
zk-ar& Tau >a]uvaeMaRDYae <ak-ar& iXa%Yaa NYaSaeTa( )) 8 ))
vek-ar& Nae}aYaaeYauRHJYaaàk-ar& SavRSaiNDazu )
Mak-arMañMauiÕXYa MaN}aMaUiTaR>aRved( buDa" )) 9 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
461
SaivSaGa| f-@NTa& TaTa( SavRid+au iviNaidRXaeTa( )
p ivZ<ave NaMa wiTa )) 10 ))
nyased dhådaya oàkäraà
vi-käram anu mürdhani
ña-käraà tu bhruvor madhye
ëa-käraà çikhayä nyaset
ve-käraà netrayor yuïjyän
na-käraà sarva-sandhiñu
ma-käram astram uddiçya
mantra-mürtir bhaved budhaù
savisargaà phaò-antaà tat
sarva-dikñu vinirdiçet
oà viñëave nama iti
SYNONYMS
nyaset—should place; hådaye—on the heart; oàkäram—the praëava, oàkära;
vi-käram—the syllable vi of viñëave; anu—thereafter; mürdhani—on the top of
the head; ña-käram—the syllable sa; tu—and; bhruvoù madhye—between the
two eyebrows; ëa-käram—the syllable ëa; çikhayä—on the çikhä on the head;
nyaset—should place; vekäram—the syllable ve; netrayoù—between the two
eyes; yuïjyät—should be placed; na-käram—the syllable na of the word
namaù; sarva-sandhiñu—on all the joints; ma-käram—the syllable ma of the
word namaù; astram—a weapon; uddiçya—thinking; mantra-mürtiù—the form
of the mantra; bhavet—should become; budhaù—an intelligent person;
sa-visargam—with the visarga (ù); phaö-antam—ending with the sound phaö;
tat—that; sarva-dikñu—in all directions; vinirdiçet—should fix; oà—praëava;
viñëave—unto Lord Viñëu; namaù—obeisances; iti—thus.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
462
TRANSLATION
One must then chant the mantra of six syllables [oà viñëave namaù]. One
should place the syllable "oà" on his heart, the syllable "vi" on the top of his
head, the syllable "ña" between his eyebrows, the syllable "ëa" on his tuft of
hair [çikhä], and the syllable "ve" between his eyes. The chanter of the mantra
should then place the syllable "na" on all the joints of his body and meditate on
the syllable "ma" as being a weapon. He should thus become the perfect
personification of the mantra. Thereafter, adding visarga to the final syllable
"ma," he should chant the mantra "maù asträya phaö" in all directions,
beginning from the east. In this way, all directions will be bound by the
protective armor of the mantra.
TEXT 11
AaTMaaNa& ParMa& DYaaYaed( DYaeYa& z$(=Xai¢-i>aYauRTaMa( )
ivÛaTaeJaSTaPaaeMaUiTaRiMaMa& MaN}aMaudahreTa( )) 11 ))
ätmänaà paramaà dhyäyed
dhyeyaà ñaö-çaktibhir yutam
vidyä-tejas-tapo-mürtim
imaà mantram udäharet
SYNONYMS
ätmänam—the self; paramam—the supreme; dhyäyet—one should meditate
on; dhyeyam—worthy to be meditated on; ñaö-çaktibhiù—the six opulences;
yutam—possessed of; vidyä—learning; tejaù—influence; tapaù—austerity;
mürtim—personified; imam—this; mantram—mantra; udäharet—should
chant.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
463
TRANSLATION
After finishing this chanting, one should think himself qualitatively one
with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is full in six opulences and is
worthy to be meditated upon. Then one should chant the following protective
prayer to Lord Näräyaëa, the Näräyaëa-kavaca.
TEXT 12
p hirivRdDYaaNMaMa SavRr+aa&
NYaSTaax(iga]PaÚ" PaTaGaeNd]Pa*ïe )
draircMaaRiSaGadezucaPa‚
PaaXaaNa( dDaaNaae_íGau<aae_íbahu" )) 12 ))
oà harir vidadhyän mama sarva-rakñäà
nyastäìghri-padmaù patagendra-påñöhe
daräri-carmäsi-gadeñu-cäpapäçän
dadhäno 'ñöa-guëo 'ñöa-bähuù
SYNONYMS
oà—O Lord; hariù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vidadhyät—may
He bestow; mama—my; sarva-rakñäm—protection from all sides;
nyasta—placed; aìghri-padmaù—whose lotus feet; patagendra-påñöhe—on the
back of Garuòa, the king of all birds; dara—conchshell; ari—disc;
carma—shield; asi—sword; gadä—club; iñu—arrows; cäpa—bow;
päçän—ropes; dadhänaù—holding; añöa—possessing eight;
guëaù—perfections; añöa—eight; bähuù—arms.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
464
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord, who sits on the back of the bird Garuòa, touching him
with His lotus feet, holds eight weapons—the conchshell, disc, shield, sword,
club, arrows, bow and ropes. May that Supreme Personality of Godhead protect
me at all times with His eight arms. He is all-powerful because He fully
possesses the eight mystic powers [aëimä, laghimä, etc.].
PURPORT
Thinking oneself one with the Supreme is called ahaìgrahopäsanä.
Through ahaìgrahopäsanä one does not become God, but he thinks of himself
as qualitatively one with the Supreme. Understanding that as a spirit soul he is
equal in quality to the supreme soul the way the water of a river is of the same
nature as the water of the sea, one should meditate upon the Supreme Lord, as
described in this verse, and seek His protection. The living entities are always
subordinate to the Supreme. Consequently their duty is to always seek the
mercy of the Lord in order to be protected by Him in all circumstances.
TEXT 13
Jale/zu Maa& r+aTau MaTSYaMaUiTaR‚
YaaRdaeGa<ae>Yaae vå<aSYa PaaXaaTa( )
SQale/zu MaaYaav$u=vaMaNaae_VYaaTa(
i}aiv§-Ma" %e_vTau ivìæPa" )) 13 ))
jaleñu mäà rakñatu matsya-mürtir
yädo-gaëebhyo varuëasya päçät
sthaleñu mäyävaöu-vämano 'vyät
trivikramaù khe 'vatu viçvarüpaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
465
SYNONYMS
jaleñu—in the water; mäm—me; rakñatu—protect; matsya-mürtiù—the
Supreme Lord in the form of a great fish; yädaù-gaëebhyaù—from fierce
aquatic animals; varuëasya—of the demigod known as Varuëa; päçät—from
the arresting rope; sthaleñu—on the land; mäyä-vaöu—the merciful form of the
Lord as a dwarf; vämanaù—named Vämanadeva; avyät—may He protect;
trivikramaù—Trivikrama, whose three gigantic steps took the three worlds
from Bali; khe—in the sky; avatu—may the Lord protect; viçvarüpaù—the
gigantic universal form.
TRANSLATION
May the Lord, who assumes the body of a great fish, protect me in the water
from the fierce animals that are associates of the demigod Varuëa. By expanding
His illusory energy, the Lord assumed the form of the dwarf Vämana. May
Vämana protect me on the land. Since the gigantic form of the Lord, Viçvarüpa,
conquers the three worlds, may He protect me in the sky.
PURPORT
This mantra seeks the protection of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in
the water, land and sky in His incarnations as the fish, Vämanadeva and the
Viçvarüpa.
TEXT 14
duGaeRZv$=VYaaiJaMau%aidzu Pa[>au"
PaaYaaà*iSa&hae_SaurYaUQaPaair" )
ivMauÄTaae YaSYa MahaÆhaSa&
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
466
idXaae ivNaeduNYaRPaTa&ê Ga>aaR" )) 14 ))
durgeñv aöavy-äji-mukhädiñu prabhuù
päyän nåsiàho 'sura-yüthapäriù
vimuïcato yasya mahäööa-häsaà
diço vinedur nyapataàç ca garbhäù
SYNONYMS
durgeñu—in places where travel is very difficult; aöavi—in the dense forest;
äji-mukha-ädiñu—on the war front and so on; prabhuù—the Supreme Lord;
päyät—may He protect; nåsiàhaù—Lord Nåsiàhadeva; asura-yüthapa—of
Hiraëyakaçipu, the leader of the demons; ariù—the enemy;
vimuïcataù—releasing; yasya—of whom; mahä-aööa-häsam—great and fearful
laughing; diçaù—all the directions; vineduù—resounded through;
nyapatan—fell down; ca—and; garbhäù—the embryos of the wives of the
demons.
TRANSLATION
May Lord Nåsiàhadeva, who appeared as the enemy of Hiraëyakaçipu,
protect me in all directions. His loud laughing vibrated in all directions and
caused the pregnant wives of the asuras to have miscarriages. May that Lord be
kind enough to protect me in difficult places like the forest and battlefront.
TEXT 15
r+aTvSaaE MaaßiNa Yajk-LPa"
Svd&í\YaaeàqTaDarae vrah" )
raMaae_id]kU-$e=ZvQa ivPa[vaSae
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
467
Sal/+Ma<aae_VYaad( >arTaaGa]Jaae_SMaaNa( )) 15 ))
rakñatv asau mädhvani yajïa-kalpaù
sva-daàñörayonnéta-dharo varähaù
rämo 'dri-küöeñv atha vipraväse
salakñmaëo 'vyäd bharatägrajo 'smän
SYNONYMS
rakñatu—may the Lord protect; asau—that; mä—me; adhvani—on the street;
yajïa-kalpaù—who is ascertained by performance of ritualistic ceremonies;
sva-daàñörayä—by His own tusk; unnéta—raising; dharaù—the planet earth;
varähaù—Lord Boar; rämaù—Lord Räma; adri-küöeñu—on the summits of the
mountains; atha—then; vipraväse—in foreign countries; sa-lakñmaëaù—with
His brother Lakñmaëa; avyät—may He protect; bharata-agrajaù—the elder
brother of Mahäräja Bharata; asmän—us.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme indestructible Lord is ascertained through the performance of
ritualistic sacrifices and is therefore known as Yajïeçvara. In His incarnation as
Lord Boar, He raised the planet earth from the water at the bottom of the
universe and kept it on His pointed tusks. May that Lord protect me from
rogues on the street. May Paraçuräma protect me on the tops of mountains, and
may the elder brother of Bharata, Lord Rämacandra, along with His brother
Lakñmaëa, protect me in foreign countries.
PURPORT
There are three Rämas. One Räma is Paraçuräma (Jämadägnya), another
Räma is Lord Rämacandra, and a third Räma is Lord Balaräma. In this verse
the words rämo'dri-küöeñv atha indicate Lord Paraçuräma. The brother of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
468
Bharata Mahäräja and Lakñmaëa is Lord Rämacandra.
TEXT 16
MaaMauGa]DaMaaRdi%l/aTa( Pa[Maada‚
àaraYa<a" PaaTau Narê haSaaTa( )
dtaSTvYaaeGaadQa YaaeGaNaaQa"
PaaYaad( Gau<aeXa" k-iPal/" k-MaRbNDaaTa( )) 16 ))
mäm ugra-dharmäd akhilät pramädän
näräyaëaù pätu naraç ca häsät
dattas tv ayogäd atha yoga-näthaù
päyäd guëeçaù kapilaù karma-bandhät
SYNONYMS
mäm—me; ugra-dharmät—from unnecessary religious principles;
akhilät—from all kinds of activities; pramädät—which are enacted in madness;
näräyaëaù—Lord Näräyaëa; pätu—may He protect; naraù ca—and Nara;
häsät—from unnecessary pride; dattaù—Dattätreya; tu—of course;
ayogät—from the path of false yoga; atha—indeed; yoga-näthaù—the master
of all mystic powers; päyät—may He protect; guëa-éçaù—the master of all
spiritual qualities; kapilaù—Lord Kapila; karma-bandhät—from the bondage of
fruitive activities.
TRANSLATION
May Lord Näräyaëa protect me from unnecessarily following false religious
systems and falling from my duties due to madness. May the Lord in His
appearance as Nara protect me from unnecessary pride. May Lord Dattätreya,
the master of all mystic power, protect me from falling while performing
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
469
bhakti-yoga, and may Lord Kapila, the master of all good qualities, protect me
from the material bondage of fruitive activities.
TEXT 17
SaNaTku-Maarae_vTau k-aMadeva‚
ÖYaXaqzaR Maa& PaiQa devhel/NaaTa( )
devizRvYaR" PauåzacRNaaNTaraTa(
kU-MaaeR hirMaa| iNarYaadXaezaTa( )) 17 ))
sanat-kumäro 'vatu kämadeväd
dhayaçérñä mäà pathi deva-helanät
devarñi-varyaù puruñärcanäntarät
kürmo harir mäà nirayäd açeñät
SYNONYMS
sanat-kumäraù—the great brahmacäré named Sanat-kumära; avatu—may he
protect; käma-devät—from the hands of Cupid or lusty desire;
haya-çérñä—Lord Hayagréva, the incarnation of the Lord whose head is like
that of a horse; mäm—me; pathi—on the path; deva-helanät—from neglecting
to offer respectful obeisances to brähmaëas, Vaiñëavas and the Supreme Lord;
devarñi-varyaù—the best of the saintly sages, Närada;
puruña-arcana-antarät—from the offenses in worshiping the Deity;
kürmaù—Lord Kürma, the tortoise; hariù—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; mäm—me; nirayät—from hell; açeñät—unlimited.
TRANSLATION
May Sanat-kumära protect me from lusty desires. As I begin some auspicious
activity, may Lord Hayagréva protect me from being an offender by neglecting
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
470
to offer respectful obeisances to the Supreme Lord. May Devarñi Närada protect
me from committing offenses in worshiping the Deity, and may Lord Kürma,
the tortoise, protect me from falling to the unlimited hellish planets.
PURPORT
Lusty desires are very strong in everyone, and they are the greatest
impediment to the discharge of devotional service. Therefore those who are
very much influenced by lusty desires are advised to take shelter of
Sanat-kumära, the great brahmacäré devotee. Närada Muni, who is the guide
for arcana, is the author of the Närada-païcarätra, which prescribes the
regulative principles for worshiping the Deity. Everyone engaged in Deity
worship, whether at home or in the temple, should always seek the mercy of
Devarñi Närada in order to avoid the thirty-two offenses while worshiping the
Deity. These offenses in Deity worship are mentioned in The Nectar of
Devotion.
TEXT 18
DaNvNTair>aRGavaNa( PaaTvPaQYaad(
ÜNÜad( >aYaad*z>aae iNaiJaRTaaTMaa )
Yajê l/aek-advTaaÂNaaNTaad(
bl/ae Ga<aaTa( §-aeDavXaadhqNd]" )) 18 ))
dhanvantarir bhagavän pätv apathyäd
dvandväd bhayäd åñabho nirjitätmä
yajïaç ca lokäd avatäj janäntäd
balo gaëät krodha-vaçäd ahéndraù
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
471
dhanvantariù—the incarnation Dhanvantari, the physician; bhagavän—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; pätu—may He protect me; apathyät—from
things injurious to the health, such as meat and intoxicants; dvandvät—from
duality; bhayät—from fear; åñabhaù—Lord Åñabhadeva; nirjita-ätmä—who
fully controlled his mind and self; yajïaù—Yajïa; ca—and; lokät—from the
defamation of the populace; avatät—may He protect; jana-antät—from
dangerous positions created by other people; balaù—Lord Balaräma;
gaëät—from the hordes of; krodha-vaçät—the angry serpents; ahéndraù—Lord
Balaräma in the form of the serpent Çeña Näga.
TRANSLATION
May the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His incarnation as Dhanvantari
relieve me from undesirable eatables and protect me from physical illness. May
Lord Åñabhadeva, who conquered His inner and outer senses, protect me from
fear produced by the duality of heat and cold. May Yajïa protect me from
defamation and harm from the populace, and may Lord Balaräma as Çeña protect
me from envious serpents.
PURPORT
To live within this material world, one must face many dangers, as
described herein. For example, undesirable food poses a danger to health, and
therefore one must give up such food. The Dhanvantari incarnation can
protect us in this regard. Since Lord Viñëu is the Supersoul of all living
entities, if He likes He can save us from adhibhautika disturbances,
disturbances from other living entities. Lord Balaräma is the Çeña incarnation,
and therefore He can save us from angry serpents or envious persons, who are
always ready to attack.
TEXT 19
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
472
ÜEPaaYaNaae >aGavaNaPa[baeDaad(
buÖSTau Paaz<@Ga<aPa[MaadaTa( )
k-iLk-" k-le/" k-al/Mal/aTa( Pa[PaaTau
DaMaaRvNaaYaaeåk*-TaavTaar" )) 19 ))
dvaipäyano bhagavän aprabodhäd
buddhas tu päñaëòa-gaëa-pramädät
kalkiù kaleù käla-malät prapätu
dharmävanäyoru-kåtävatäraù
SYNONYMS
dvaipäyanaù—Çréla Vyäsadeva, the giver of all Vedic knowledge;
bhagavän—the most powerful incarnation of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; aprabodhät—from ignorance of the çästra; buddhaù tu—also Lord
Buddha; päñaëòa-gaëa—of atheists creating disillusionment for innocent
persons; pramädät—from the madness; kalkiù—Lord Kalki, the incarnation of
Keçava; kaleù—of this Kali-yuga; käla-malät—from the darkness of the age;
prapätu—may He protect; dharma-avanäya—for the protection of religious
principles; uru—very great; kåta-avatäraù—who took an incarnation.
TRANSLATION
May the Personality of Godhead in His incarnation as Vyäsadeva protect me
from all kinds of ignorance resulting from the absence of Vedic knowledge. May
Lord Buddhadeva protect me from activities opposed to Vedic principles and
from laziness that causes one to madly forget the Vedic principles of knowledge
and ritualistic action. May Kalkideva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who appeared as an incarnation to protect religious principles, protect me from
the dirt of the age of Kali.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
473
PURPORT
This verse mentions various incarnations of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead who appear for various purposes. Çréla Vyäsadeva, Mahämuni,
compiled the Vedic literature for the benefit of all human society. If one wants
to be protected from the reactions of ignorance even in this age of Kali, one
may consult the books left by Çréla Vyäsadeva, Upaniñads, Vedänta-sütra
(Brahma-sütra), Mahäbhärata, Çrémad-Bhägavatam Mahä-Puräëa (Vyäsadeva's
commentary on the Brahma-sütra) and the other seventeen Puräëas. Only by
the mercy of Çréla Vyäsadeva do we have so many volumes of transcendental
knowledge to save us from the clutches of ignorance.
As described by Çréla Jayadeva Gosvämé in his Daçävatära-stotra, Lord
Buddha apparently decried the Vedic knowledge:
nindasi yajïa-vidher ahaha çruti-jätaà
sadaya-hådaya-darçita-paçu-ghätam
keçava dhåta-buddha-çaréra jaya jagad-éça hare
The mission of Lord Buddha was to save people from the abominable activity
of animal killing and to save the poor animals from being unnecessarily killed.
When päñaëòés were cheating by killing animals on the plea of sacrificing
them in Vedic yajïas, the Lord said, "If the Vedic injunctions allow animal
killing, I do not accept the Vedic principles." Thus he actually saved people
who acted according to Vedic principles. One should therefore surrender to
Lord Buddha so that he can help one avoid misusing the injunctions of the
Vedas.
The Kalki avatära is the fierce incarnation who vanquishes the class of the
atheists born in this age of Kali. Now, in the beginning of Kali-yuga, many
irreligious principles are in effect, and as Kali-yuga advances, many pseudo
religious principles will certainly be introduced, and people will forget the real
religious principles enunciated by Lord Kåñëa before the beginning of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
474
Kali-yuga, namely principles of surrender unto the lotus feet of the Lord.
Unfortunately, because of Kali-yuga, foolish people do not surrender to the
lotus feet of Kåñëa. Even most people who claim to belong to the Vedic system
of religion are actually opposed to the Vedic principles. Every day they
manufacture a new type of dharma on the plea that whatever one
manufactures is also a path of liberation. Atheistic men generally say, yata
mata tata patha. According to this view, there are hundreds and thousands of
different opinions in human society, and each opinion is a valid religious
principle. This philosophy of rascals has killed the religious principles
mentioned in the Vedas, and such philosophies will become increasingly
influential as Kali-yuga progresses. In the last stage of Kali-yuga, Kalkideva,
the fierce incarnation of Keçava, will descend to kill all the atheists and will
save only the devotees of the Lord.
TEXT 20
Maa& ke-Xavae GadYaa Pa[aTarVYaad(
GaaeivNd AaSa(r)vMaatave<au" )
NaaraYa<a" Pa[aõ odataXai¢-‚
MaRDYaiNdNae ivZ<aurrqNd]Paai<a" )) 20 ))
mäà keçavo gadayä prätar avyäd
govinda äsaìgavam ätta-veëuù
näräyaëaù prähëa udätta-çaktir
madhyan-dine viñëur aréndra-päëiù
SYNONYMS
mäm—me; keçavaù—Lord Keçava; gadayä—by His club; prätaù—in the
morning hours; avyät—may He protect; govindaù—Lord Govinda;
äsaìgavam—during the second part of the day; ätta-veëuù—holding His flute;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
475
näräyaëaù—Lord Näräyaëa with four hands; prähëaù—during the third part
of the day; udätta-çaktiù—controlling different types of potencies;
madhyam-dine—during the fourth part of the day; viñëuù—Lord Viñëu;
aréndra-päëiù—bearing the disc in His hand to kill the enemies.
TRANSLATION
May Lord Keçava protect me with His club in the first portion of the day,
and may Govinda, who is always engaged in playing His flute, protect me in the
second portion of the day. May Lord Näräyaëa, who is equipped with all
potencies, protect me in the third part of the day, and may Lord Viñëu, who
carries a disc to kill His enemies, protect me in the fourth part of the day.
PURPORT
According to Vedic astronomical calculations, day and night are each
divided into thirty ghaöikäs (twenty-four minutes), instead of twelve hours.
Generally, each day and each night is divided into six parts consisting of five
ghaöikäs. In each of these six portions of the day and night, the Lord may be
addressed for protection according to different names. Lord Keçava, the
proprietor of the holy place of Mathurä, is the Lord of the first portion of the
day, and Govinda, the Lord of Våndävana. is the master of the second portion.
TEXT 21
devae_Paraõe MaDauhaeGa]DaNva
SaaYa& i}aDaaMaavTau MaaDavae MaaMa( )
daeze ôzqke-Xa oTaaDaRra}ae
iNaXaqQa Wk-ae_vTau PaÚNaa>a" )) 21 ))
devo 'parähëe madhu-hogradhanvä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
476
säyaà tri-dhämävatu mädhavo mäm
doñe håñékeça utärdha-rätre
niçétha eko 'vatu padmanäbhaù
SYNONYMS
devaù—the Lord; aparähëe—in the fifth part of the day; madhu-hä—named
Madhusüdana; ugra-dhanvä—bearing the very fearful bow known as Çärìga;
säyam—the sixth part of the day; tri-dhämä—manifesting as the three deities
Brahmä, Viñëu and Maheçvara; avatu—may He protect; mädhavaù—named
Mädhava; mäm—me; doñe—during the first portion of the night;
håñékeçaù—Lord Håñékeça; uta—also; ardha-rätre—during the second part of
the night; niçéthe—during the third part of the night; ekaù—alone;
avatu—may He protect; padmanäbhaù—Lord Padmanäbha.
TRANSLATION
May Lord Madhusüdana, who carries a bow very fearful for the demons,
protect me during the fifth part of the day. In the evening, may Lord Mädhava,
appearing as Brahmä, Viñëu and Maheçvara, protect me, and in the beginning of
night may Lord Håñékeça protect me. At the dead of night [in the second and
third parts of night] may Lord Padmanäbha alone protect me.
TEXT 22
é[qvTSaDaaMaaParra}a wRXa"
Pa[TYaUz wRXaae_iSaDarae JaNaadRNa" )
daMaaedrae_VYaadNauSaNDYa& Pa[>aaTae
ivìeìrae >aGavaNa( k-al/MaUiTaR" )) 22 ))
çrévatsa-dhämäpara-rätra éçaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
477
pratyüña éço 'si-dharo janärdanaù
dämodaro 'vyäd anusandhyaà prabhäte
viçveçvaro bhagavän käla-mürtiù
SYNONYMS
çrévatsa-dhämä—the Lord, on whose chest the mark of Çrévatsa is resting;
apara-rätre—in the fourth part of the night; éçaù—the Supreme Lord;
pratyüñe—in the end of the night; éçaù—the Supreme Lord;
asi-dharaù—carrying a sword in the hand; janärdanaù—Lord Janärdana;
dämodaraù—Lord Dämodara; avyät—may He protect; anusandhyam—during
each junction or twilight; prabhäte—in the early morning (the sixth part of
the night); viçva-éçvaraù—the Lord of the whole universe; bhagavän—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; käla-mürtiù—the personification of time.
TRANSLATION
May the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who bears the Çrévatsa on His
chest, protect me after midnight until the sky becomes pinkish. May Lord
Janärdana, who carries a sword in His hand, protect me at the end of night
[during the last four ghaöikäs of night]. May Lord Dämodara protect me in the
early morning, and may Lord Viçveçvara protect me during the junctions of day
and night.
TEXT 23
c§&- YauGaaNTaaNal/iTaGMaNaeiMa
>a]MaTa( SaMaNTaad( >aGavTPa[Yau¢-Ma( )
dNdiGDa dNdGDYairSaENYaMaaXau
k-+a& YaQaa vaTaSa%ae huTaaXa" )) 23 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
478
cakraà yugäntänala-tigma-nemi
bhramat samantäd bhagavat-prayuktam
dandagdhi dandagdhy ari-sainyam äçu
kakñaà yathä väta-sakho hutäçaù
SYNONYMS
cakram—the disc of the Lord; yuga-anta—at the end of the millennium;
anala—like the fire of devastation; tigma-nemi—with a sharp rim;
bhramat—wandering; samantät—on all sides; bhagavat-prayuktam—being
engaged by the Lord; dandagdhi dandagdhi—please burn completely, please
burn completely; ari-sainyam—the army of our enemies; äçu—immediately;
kakñam—dry grass; yathä—like; väta-sakhaù—the friend of the wind;
hutäçaù—blazing fire.
TRANSLATION
Set into motion by the Supreme Personality of Godhead and wandering in all
the four directions, the disc of the Supreme Lord has sharp edges as destructive
as the fire of devastation at the end of the millennium. As a blazing fire burns
dry grass to ashes with the assistance of the breeze, may that Sudarçana cakra
burn our enemies to ashes.
TEXT 24
Gade_XaiNaSPaXaRNaivSfu-il/(r)e
iNaiZPai<! iNaiZPa<!yiJaTaiPa[YaaiSa )
ku-ZMaa<@vENaaYak-Ya+ar+aae‚
>aUTaGa]ha&êU<aRYa cU<aRYaarqNa( )) 24 ))
gade 'çani-sparçana-visphuliìge
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
479
niñpiëòhi niñpiëòhy ajita-priyäsi
kuñmäëòa-vainäyaka-yakña-rakñobhüta-
grahäàç cürëaya cürëayärén
SYNONYMS
gade—O club in the hands of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
açani—like thunderbolts; sparçana—whose touch; visphuliìge—giving off
sparks of fire; niñpiëòhi niñpiëòhi—pound to pieces, pound to pieces;
ajita-priyä—very dear to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; asi—you are;
kuñmäëòa—imps named Kuñmäëòas; vainäyaka—ghosts named Vainäyakas;
yakña—ghosts named Yakñas; rakñaù—ghosts named Räkñasas; bhüta—ghosts
named Bhütas; grahän—and evil demons named Grahas; cürëaya—pulverize;
cürëaya—pulverize; arén—my enemies.
TRANSLATION
O club in the hand of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, you produce
sparks of fire as powerful as thunderbolts, and you are extremely dear to the
Lord. I am also His servant. Therefore kindly help me pound to pieces the evil
living beings known as Kuñmäëòas, Vainäyakas, Yakñas, Räkñasas, Bhütas and
Grahas. Please pulverize them.
TEXT 25
Tv& YaaTauDaaNaPa[MaQaPa[eTaMaaTa*‚
iPaXaacivPa[Ga]hgaaerd*íqNa( )
dreNd] ivd]avYa k*-Z<aPaUirTaae
>aqMaSvNaae_reôRdYaaiNa k-MPaYaNa( )) 25 ))
tvaà yätudhäna-pramatha-preta-mätåcopyright
©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
480
piçäca-vipragraha-ghora-dåñöén
darendra vidrävaya kåñëa-pürito
bhéma-svano 'rer hådayäni kampayan
SYNONYMS
tvam—you; yätudhäna—Räkñasas; pramatha—Pramathas; preta—Pretas;
mätå—Mätäs; piçäca—Piçäcas; vipra-graha—brähmaëa ghosts;
ghora-dåñöén—who have very fearful eyes; darendra—O Päïcajanya, the
conchshell in the hands of the Lord; vidrävaya—drive away;
kåñëa-püritaù—being filled with air from the mouth of Kåñëa;
bhéma-svanaù—sounding extremely fearful; areù—of the enemy;
hådayäni—the cores of the hearts; kampayan—causing to tremble.
TRANSLATION
O best of conchshells, O Päïcajanya in the hands of the Lord, you are always
filled with the breath of Lord Kåñëa. Therefore you create a fearful sound
vibration that causes trembling in the hearts of enemies like the Räkñasas,
pramatha ghosts, Pretas, Mätäs, Piçäcas and brähmaëa ghosts with fearful eyes.
TEXT 26
Tv& iTaGMaDaaraiSavrairSaENYa‚
MaqXaPa[Yau¢-ae MaMa i^iNDa i^iNDa )
c+aU&iz cMaRH^TacNd] ^adYa
iÜzaMagaaeNaa& hr PaaPac+auzaMa( )) 26 ))
tvaà tigma-dhäräsi-varäri-sainyam
éça-prayukto mama chindhi chindhi
cakñüàñi carmaï chata-candra chädaya
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
481
dviñäm aghonäà hara päpa-cakñuñäm
SYNONYMS
tvam—you; tigma-dhära-asi-vara—O best of swords possessing very sharp
blades; ari-sainyam—the soldiers of the enemy; éça-prayuktaù—being engaged
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mama—my; chindhi chindhi—chop to
pieces, chop to pieces; cakñüàñi—the eyes; carman—O shield;
çata-candra—possessing brilliant circles like a hundred moons;
chädaya—please cover; dviñäm—of those who are envious of me;
aghonäm—who are completely sinful; hara—please take away;
päpa-cakñuñäm—of those whose eyes are very sinful.
TRANSLATION
O king of sharp-edged swords, you are engaged by the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Please cut the soldiers of my enemies to pieces. Please cut them to
pieces! O shield marked with a hundred brilliant moonlike circles, please cover
the eyes of the sinful enemies. Pluck out their sinful eyes.
TEXTS 27-28
Yaàae >aYa& Ga]he>Yaae_>aUTa( ke-Tau>Yaae Na*>Ya Wv c )
SarqSa*Pae>Yaae d&ií\>Yaae >aUTae>Yaae_&hae>Ya Wv c )) 27 ))
SavaR<YaeTaaiNa >aGavàaMaæPaaNauk-ITaRNaaTa( )
Pa[YaaNTau Sa&+aYa& SaÛae Yae Na" é[eYa"Pa[TaqPak-a" )) 28 ))
yan no bhayaà grahebhyo 'bhüt
ketubhyo nåbhya eva ca
sarésåpebhyo daàñöribhyo
bhütebhyo 'àhobhya eva ca
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
482
sarväëy etäni bhagavannäma-
rüpänukértanät
prayäntu saìkñayaà sadyo
ye naù çreyaù-pratépakäù
SYNONYMS
yat—which; naù—our; bhayam—fear; grahebhyaù—from the Graha demons;
abhüt—was; ketubhyaù—from meteors, or falling stars; nåbhyaù—from envious
human beings; eva ca—also; sarésåpebhyaù—from snakes or scorpions;
daàñöribhyaù—from animals with fierce teeth like tigers, wolves and boars;
bhütebhyaù—from ghosts or the material elements (earth, water, fire, etc.);
aàhobhyaù—from sinful activities; eva ca—as well as; sarväëi etäni—all these;
bhagavat-näma-rüpa-anukértanät—by glorifying the transcendental form,
name, attributes and paraphernalia of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
prayäntu—let them go; saìkñayam—to complete destruction;
sadyaù—immediately; ye—which; naù—our; çreyaù-pratépakäù—hindrances to
well-being.
TRANSLATION
May the glorification of the transcendental name, form, qualities and
paraphernalia of the Supreme Personality of Godhead protect us from the
influence of bad planets, meteors, envious human beings, serpents, scorpions,
and animals like tigers and wolves. May it protect us from ghosts and the
material elements like earth, water, fire and air, and may it also protect us from
lightning and our past sins. We are always afraid of these hindrances to our
auspicious life. Therefore, may they all be completely destroyed by the chanting
of the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra.
TEXT 29
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
483
Gaå@ae >aGavaNa( STaae}aSTaae>aX^NdaeMaYa" Pa[>au" )
r+aTvXaezk*-C^\e>Yaae ivZvKSaeNa" SvNaaMai>a" )) 29 ))
garuòo bhagavän stotrastobhaç
chandomayaù prabhuù
rakñatv açeña-kåcchrebhyo
viñvaksenaù sva-nämabhiù
SYNONYMS
garuòaù—His Holiness Garuòa, the carrier of Lord Viñëu; bhagavän—as
powerful as the Supreme Personality of Godhead; stotra-stobhaù—who is
glorified by selected verses and songs; chandaù-mayaù—the personified Vedas;
prabhuù—the lord; rakñatu—may He protect; açeña-kåcchrebhyaù—from
unlimited miseries; viñvaksenaù—Lord Viñvaksena; sva-nämabhiù—by His holy
names.
TRANSLATION
Lord Garuòa, the carrier of Lord Viñëu, is the most worshipable lord, for he
is as powerful as the Supreme Lord Himself. He is the personified Vedas and is
worshiped by selected verses. May he protect us from all dangerous conditions,
and may Lord Viñvaksena, the Personality of Godhead, also protect us from all
dangers by His holy names.
TEXT 30
SavaRPad(>Yaae hreNaaRMaæPaYaaNaaYauDaaiNa Na" )
buÖqiNd]YaMaNa"Pa[a<aaNa( PaaNTau PaazRd>aUz<aa" )) 30 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
484
sarväpadbhyo harer nämarüpa-
yänäyudhäni naù
buddhéndriya-manaù-präëän
päntu pärñada-bhüñaëäù
SYNONYMS
sarva-äpadbhyaù—from all kinds of danger; hareù—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; näma—the holy name; rüpa—the transcendental
form; yäna—the carriers; äyudhäni—and all the weapons; naù—our;
buddhi—intelligence; indriya—senses; manaù—mind; präëän—life air;
päntu—may they protect and maintain; pärñada-bhüñaëäù—the decorations
who are personal associates.
TRANSLATION
May the Supreme Personality of Godhead's holy names, His transcendental
forms, His carriers and all the weapons decorating Him as personal associates
protect our intelligence, senses, mind and life air from all dangers.
PURPORT
There are various associates of the transcendental Personality of Godhead,
and His weapons and carrier are among them. In the spiritual world, nothing is
material. The sword, bow, club, disc and everything decorating the personal
body of the Lord are spiritual living force. Therefore the Lord is called advaya
jïäna, indicating that there is no difference between Him and His names,
forms, qualities, weapons and so on. Anything pertaining to Him is in the same
category of spiritual existence. They are all engaged in the service of the Lord
in varieties of spiritual forms.
TEXT 31
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
485
YaQaa ih >aGavaNaev vSTauTa" SadSaÀ YaTa( )
SaTYaeNaaNaeNa Na" SaveR YaaNTau NaaXaMauPad]va" )) 31 ))
yathä hi bhagavän eva
vastutaù sad asac ca yat
satyenänena naù sarve
yäntu näçam upadraväù
SYNONYMS
yathä—just as; hi—indeed; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
eva—undoubtedly; vastutaù—at the ultimate issue; sat—manifested;
asat—unmanifested; ca—and; yat—whatever; satyena—by the truth;
anena—this; naù—our; sarve—all; yäntu—let them go; näçam—to
annihilation; upadraväù—disturbances.
TRANSLATION
The subtle and gross cosmic manifestation is material, but nevertheless it is
nondifferent from the Supreme Personality of Godhead because He is
ultimately the cause of all causes. Cause and effect are factually one because the
cause is present in the effect. Therefore the Absolute Truth, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, can destroy all our dangers by any of His potent parts.
TEXTS 32-33
YaQaEk-aTMYaaNau>aavaNaa& ivk-LParihTa" SvYaMa( )
>aUz<aaYauDail/(r)a:Yaa Datae Xa¢-I" SvMaaYaYaa )) 32 ))
TaeNaEv SaTYaMaaNaeNa SavRjae >aGavaNa( hir" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
486
PaaTau SavOE" SvæPaENaR" Sada SavR}a SavRGa" )) 33 ))
yathaikätmyänubhävänäà
vikalpa-rahitaù svayam
bhüñaëäyudha-liìgäkhyä
dhatte çaktéù sva-mäyayä
tenaiva satya-mänena
sarva-jïo bhagavän hariù
pätu sarvaiù svarüpair naù
sadä sarvatra sarva-gaù
SYNONYMS
yathä—just as; aikätmya—in terms of oneness manifested in varieties;
anubhävänäm—of those thinking; vikalpa-rahitaù—the absence of difference;
svayam—Himself; bhüñaëa—decorations; äyudha—weapons;
liìga-äkhyäù—characteristics and different names; dhatte—possesses;
çaktéù—potencies like wealth, influence, power, knowledge, beauty and
renunciation; sva-mäyayä—by expanding His spiritual energy; tena eva—by
that; satya-mänena—true understanding; sarva-jïaù—omniscient;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hariù—who can take away
all the illusion of the living entities; pätu—may He protect; sarvaiù—with all;
sva-rüpaiù—His forms; naù—us; sadä—always; sarvatra—everywhere;
sarva-gaù—who is all-pervasive.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, the living entities, the material
energy, the spiritual energy and the entire creation are all individual substances.
In the ultimate analysis, however, together they constitute the supreme one,
the Personality of Godhead. Therefore those who are advanced in spiritual
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
487
knowledge see unity in diversity. For such advanced persons, the Lord's bodily
decorations, His name, His fame, His attributes and forms and the weapons in
His hand are manifestations of the strength of His potency. According to their
elevated spiritual understanding, the omniscient Lord, who manifests various
forms, is present everywhere. May He always protect us everywhere from all
calamities.
PURPORT
A person highly elevated in spiritual knowledge knows that nothing exists
but the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is also confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä (9.4) where Lord Kåñëa says, mayä tatam idaà sarvam,
indicating that everything we see is an expansion of His energy. This is
confirmed in the Viñëu Puräëa (1.22.52):
eka-deça-sthitasyägner
jyotsnä vistäriëé yathä
parasya brahmaëaù çaktis
tathedam akhilaà jagat
As a fire, although existing in one place, can expand its light and heat
everywhere, so the omnipotent Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
although situated in His spiritual abode, expands Himself everywhere, in both
the material and spiritual worlds, by His various energies. Since both cause and
effect are the Supreme Lord, there is no difference between cause and effect.
Consequently the ornaments and weapons of the Lord, being expansions of
His spiritual energy, are not different from Him. There is no difference
between the Lord and His variously presented energies. This is also confirmed
in the Padma Puräëa:
näma cintämaëiù kåñëaç
caitanya-rasa-vigrahaù
pürëaù çuddho nitya-mukto
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
488
'bhinnatvän näma-näminoù
[Cc. Madhya 17.133]
The holy name of the Lord is fully identical with the Lord, not partially. The
word pürëa means "complete." The Lord is omnipotent and omniscient, and
similarly, His name, form, qualities, paraphernalia and everything pertaining
to Him are complete, pure, eternal and free from material contamination. The
prayer to the ornaments and carriers of the Lord is not false, for they are as
good as the Lord. Since the Lord is all-pervasive, He exists in everything, and
everything exists in Him. Therefore even worship of the Lord's weapons or
ornaments has the same potency as worship of the Lord. Mäyävädés refuse to
accept the form of the Lord, or they say that the form of the Lord is mäyä, or
false, but one should note very carefully that this is not acceptable. Although
the Lord's original form and His impersonal expansion are one, the Lord
maintains His form, qualities and abode eternally. Therefore this prayer says,
pätu sarvaiù svarüpair naù sadä sarvatra sama-gaù: "May the Lord, who is
all-pervasive in His various forms, protect us everywhere." The Lord is always
present everywhere by His name, form, qualities, attributes and paraphernalia,
and they all have equal power to protect the devotees. Çréla Madhväcärya
explains this as follows:
eka eva paro viñëur
bhüñäheti dhvajeñv ajaù
tat-tac-chakti-pradatvena
svayam eva vyavasthitaù
satyenänena mäà devaù
pätu sarveçvaro hariù
TEXT 34
ivid+au id+aUßRMaDa" SaMaNTaa‚
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
489
dNTabRih>aRGavaNa( NaariSa&h" )
Pa[haPaYmaçaek->aYa& SvNaeNa
SvTaeJaSaa Ga]STaSaMaSTaTaeJaa" )) 34 ))
vidikñu dikñürdhvam adhaù samantäd
antar bahir bhagavän närasiàhaù
prahäpayaû loka-bhayaà svanena
sva-tejasä grasta-samasta-tejäù
SYNONYMS
vidikñu—in all corners; dikñu—in all directions (east, west, north and south);
ürdhvam—above; adhaù—below; samantät—on all sides; antaù—internally;
bahiù—externally; bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
närasiàhaù—in the form of Nåsiàhadeva (half-lion and half-man);
prahäpayan—completely destroying; loka-bhayam—fear created by animals,
poison, weapons, water, air, fire and so on; svanena—by His roar or the
vibration of His name by His devotee Prahläda Mahäräja; sva-tejasä—by His
personal effulgence; grasta—covered; samasta—all other; tejäù—influences.
TRANSLATION
Prahläda Mahäräja loudly chanted the holy name of Lord Nåsiàhadeva. May
Lord Nåsiàhadeva, roaring for His devotee Prahläda Mahäräja, protect us from
all fear of dangers created by stalwart leaders in all directions through poison,
weapons, water, fire, air and so on. May the Lord cover their influence by His
own transcendental influence. May Nåsiàhadeva protect us in all directions and
in all corners, above, below, within and without.
TEXT 35
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
490
MagaviàdMaa:YaaTa& vMaR NaaraYa<aaTMak-Ma( )
ivJaeZYaSae_ÅSaa YaeNa d&iXaTaae_SaurYaUQaPaaNa( )) 35 ))
maghavann idam äkhyätaà
varma näräyaëätmakam
vijeñyase 'ïjasä yena
daàçito 'sura-yüthapän
SYNONYMS
maghavan—O King Indra; idam—this; äkhyätam—described; varma—mystic
armor; näräyaëa-ätmakam—related to Näräyaëa; vijeñyase—you will conquer;
aïjasä—very easily; yena—by which; daàçitaù—being protected;
asura-yüthapän—the chief leaders of the demons.
TRANSLATION
Viçvarüpa continued: O Indra, this mystic armor related to Lord Näräyaëa
has been described by me to you. By putting on this protective covering, you
will certainly be able to conquer the leaders of the demons.
TEXT 36
WTad( DaarYaMaa<aSTau Ya& Ya& PaXYaiTa c+auza )
Pada va Sa&SPa*XaeTa( SaÛ" SaaßSaaTa( Sa ivMauCYaTae )) 36 ))
etad dhärayamäëas tu
yaà yaà paçyati cakñuñä
padä vä saàspåçet sadyaù
sädhvasät sa vimucyate
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
491
SYNONYMS
etat—this; dhärayamäëaù—a person employing; tu—but; yam
yam—whomever; paçyati—he sees; cakñuñä—by his eyes; padä—by his feet;
vä—or; saàspåçet—may touch; sadyaù—immediately; sädhvasät—from all fear;
saù—he; vimucyate—is freed.
TRANSLATION
If one employs this armor, whomever he sees with his eyes or touches with
his feet is immediately freed from all the above-mentioned dangers.
TEXT 37
Na ku-Taiêd( >aYa& TaSYa ivÛa& DaarYaTaae >aveTa( )
raJadSYauGa]haid>Yaae VYaaDYaaid>Yaê k-ihRicTa( )) 37 ))
na kutaçcid bhayaà tasya
vidyäà dhärayato bhavet
räja-dasyu-grahädibhyo
vyädhy-ädibhyaç ca karhicit
SYNONYMS
na—not; kutaçcit—from anywhere; bhayam—fear; tasya—of him;
vidyäm—this mystical prayer; dhärayataù—employing; bhavet—may appear;
räja—from the government; dasyu—from rogues and thieves;
graha-ädibhyaù—from demons and so on; vyädhi-ädibhyaù—from diseases and
so on; ca—also; karhicit—at any time.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
492
TRANSLATION
This prayer, Näräyaëa-kavaca, constitutes subtle knowledge
transcendentally connected with Näräyaëa. One who employs this prayer is
never disturbed or put in danger by the government, by plunderers, by evil
demons or by any type of disease.
TEXT 38
wMaa& ivÛa& Paura k-iêTa( k-aEiXak-ae DaarYaNa( iÜJa" )
YaaeGaDaar<aYaa Sva(r)& JahaE Sa MaåDaNviNa )) 38 ))
imäà vidyäà purä kaçcit
kauçiko dhärayan dvijaù
yoga-dhäraëayä sväìgaà
jahau sa maru-dhanvani
SYNONYMS
imäm—this; vidyäm—prayer; purä—formerly; kaçcit—someone;
kauçikaù—Kauçika; dhärayan—using; dvijaù—a brähmaëa;
yoga-dhäraëayä—by mystic power; sva-aìgam—his own body; jahau—gave up;
saù—he; maru-dhanvani—in the desert.
TRANSLATION
O King of heaven, a brähmaëa named Kauçika formerly used this armor
when he purposely gave up his body in the desert by mystic power.
TEXT 39
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
493
TaSYaaePair ivMaaNaeNa GaNDavRPaiTarek-da )
YaYaaE ic}arQa" ñqi>av*RTaae Ya}a iÜJa+aYa" )) 39 ))
tasyopari vimänena
gandharva-patir ekadä
yayau citrarathaù strébhir
våto yatra dvija-kñayaù
SYNONYMS
tasya—his dead body; upari—above; vimänena—by airplane;
gandharva-patiù—the King of Gandharvaloka, Citraratha; ekadä—once upon
a time; yayau—went; citrarathaù—Citraratha; strébhiù—by many beautiful
women; våtaù—surrounded; yatra—where; dvija-kñayaù—the brähmaëa
Kauçika had died.
TRANSLATION
Surrounded by many beautiful women, Citraratha, the King of
Gandharvaloka, was once passing in his airplane over the brähmaëa's body at
the spot where the brähmaëa had died.
TEXT 40
GaGaNaaNNYaPaTaTa( SaÛ" SaivMaaNaae ùvak(„„„iXara" )
Sa val/i%LYavcNaadSQaqNYaadaYa iviSMaTa" )
Pa[aSYa Pa[acqSarSvTYaa& òaTva DaaMa SvMaNvGaaTa( )) 40 ))
gaganän nyapatat sadyaù
savimäno hy aväk-çiräù
sa välikhilya-vacanäd
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
494
asthény ädäya vismitaù
präsya präcé-sarasvatyäà
snätvä dhäma svam anvagät
SYNONYMS
gaganät—from the sky; nyapatat—fell; sadyaù—suddenly; sa-vimänaù—with
his airplane; hi—certainly; aväk-çiräù—with his head downward; saù—he;
välikhilya—of the great sages named the Välikhilyas; vacanät—by the
instructions; asthéni—all the bones; ädäya—taking; vismitaù—struck with
wonder; präsya—throwing; präcé-sarasvatyäm—in the River Sarasvaté, which
flows to the east; snätvä—bathing in that river; dhäma—to the abode;
svam—his own; anvagät—returned.
TRANSLATION
Suddenly Citraratha was forced to fall from the sky headfirst with his
airplane. Struck with wonder, he was ordered by the great sages named the
Välikhilyas to throw the brähmaëa's bones in the nearby River Sarasvaté. He
had to do this and bathe in the river before returning to his own abode.
TEXT 41
é[qXauk- ovac
Ya wd& é*<auYaaTa( k-ale/ Yaae DaarYaiTa cad*Ta" )
Ta& NaMaSYaiNTa >aUTaaiNa MauCYaTae SavRTaae >aYaaTa( )) 41 ))
çré-çuka uväca
ya idaà çåëuyät käle
yo dhärayati cädåtaù
taà namasyanti bhütäni
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
495
mucyate sarvato bhayät
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; yaù—anyone who; idam—this;
çåëuyät—may hear; käle—at a time of fear; yaù—anyone who;
dhärayati—employs this prayer; ca—also; ädåtaù—with faith and adoration;
tam—unto him; namasyanti—offer respectful obeisances; bhütäni—all living
beings; mucyate—is released; sarvataù—from all; bhayät—fearful conditions.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: My dear Mahäräja Parékñit, one who employs
this armor or hears about it with faith and veneration when afraid because of
any conditions in the material world is immediately freed from all dangers and is
worshiped by all living entities.
TEXT 42
WTaa& ivÛaMaiDaGaTaae ivìæPaaC^Ta§-Tau" )
}aEl/aeKYal/+Maq& bu>auJae iviNaiJaRTYa Ma*Dae_SauraNa( )) 42 ))
etäà vidyäm adhigato
viçvarüpäc chatakratuù
trailokya-lakñméà bubhuje
vinirjitya mådhe 'surän
SYNONYMS
etäm—this; vidyäm—prayer; adhigataù—received; viçvarüpät—from the
brähmaëa Viçvarüpa; çata-kratuù—Indra, the King of heaven;
trailokya-lakñmém—all the opulence of the three worlds; bubhuje—enjoyed;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
496
vinirjitya—conquering; mådhe—in battle; asurän—all the demons.
TRANSLATION
King Indra, who performed one hundred sacrifices, received this prayer of
protection from Viçvarüpa. After conquering the demons, he enjoyed all the
opulences of the three worlds.
PURPORT
This mystical mantric armor given by Viçvarüpa to Indra, the King of
heaven, acted powerfully, with the effect that Indra was able to conquer the
asuras and enjoy the opulence of the three worlds without impediments. In
this regard, Madhväcärya points out:
vidyäù karmäëi ca sadä
guroù präptäù phala-pradäù
anyathä naiva phaladäù
prasannoktäù phala-pradäù
One must receive all kinds of mantras from a bona fide spiritual master;
otherwise the mantras will not be fruitful. This is also indicated in
Bhagavad-gétä (4.34):
tad viddhi praëipätena
paripraçnena sevayä
upadekñyanti te jïänaà
jïäninas tattva-darçinaù
"Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire from him
submissively and render service unto him. The self-realized soul can impart
knowledge unto you because he has seen the truth." All mantras should be
received through the authorized guru, and the disciple must satisfy the guru in
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
497
all respects, after surrendering at his lotus feet. In the Padma Puräëa it is also
said, sampradäya-vihénä ye manträs te niñphalä matäù. There are four
sampradäyas, or disciplic successions, namely the Brahma-sampradäya, the
Rudra-sampradäya, the Çré sampradäya and the Kumära-sampradäya. If one
wants to advance in spiritual power, one must receive his mantras from one of
these bona fide sampradäyas; otherwise he will never successfully advance in
spiritual life.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, Eighth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Näräyaëa-kavaca Shield."
9. Appearance of the Demon Våträsura
As described in this chapter, Indra, the King of heaven, killed Viçvarüpa,
and therefore Viçvarüpa's father performed a yajïa to kill Indra. When
Våträsura appeared from that yajïa, the demigods, in fear, sought shelter of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and glorified Him.
Because of affection for the demons, Viçvarüpa secretly supplied them the
remnants of yajïa. When Indra learned about this, he beheaded Viçvarüpa, but
he later regretted killing Viçvarüpa because Viçvarüpa was a brähmaëa.
Although competent to neutralize the sinful reactions for killing a brähmaëa,
Indra did not do so. Instead he accepted the reactions. Later, he distributed
these reactions among the land, water, trees and women in general. Since the
land accepted one fourth of the sinful reactions, a portion of the land turned
into desert. The trees were also given one fourth of the sinful reactions, and
therefore they drip sap, which is prohibited for drinking. Because women
accepted one fourth of the sinful reactions, they are untouchable during their
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
498
menstrual period. Since water was also infested with sinful reactions, when
bubbles appear in water it cannot be used for any purpose.
After Viçvarüpa was killed, his father, Tvañöä, performed a sacrifice to kill
King Indra. Unfortunately, if mantras are chanted irregularly, they yield an
opposite result. This happened when Tvañöä performed this yajïa. While
performing the sacrifice to kill Indra. Tvañöä chanted a mantra to increase
Indra's enemies, but because he chanted the mantra wrong, the sacrifice
produced an asura named Våträsura, of whom Indra was the enemy. When
Våträsura was generated from the sacrifice, his fierce features made the whole
world afraid, and his personal effulgence diminished even the power of the
demigods. Finding no other means of protection, the demigods began to
worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the enjoyer of all the results of
sacrifice, who is supreme throughout the entire universe. The demigods all
worshiped Him because ultimately no one but Him can protect a living entity
from fear and danger. Seeking shelter of a demigod instead of worshiping the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is compared to trying to cross the ocean by
grasping the tail of a dog. A dog can swim, but that does not mean that one can
cross the ocean by grasping a dog's tail.
Being pleased with the demigods, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
advised them to approach Dadhéci to beg him for the bones of his own body.
Dadhéci would comply with the request of the demigods, and with the help of
his bones Våträsura could be killed.
TEXT 1
é[qXauk- ovac
TaSYaaSaNa( ivìæPaSYa iXara&iSa }aqi<a >aarTa )
SaaeMaPaqQa& SauraPaqQaMaàadiMaiTa Xaué[uMa )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
499
tasyäsan viçvarüpasya
çiräàsi tréëi bhärata
soma-péthaà surä-pétham
annädam iti çuçruma
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; tasya—of him; äsan—there
were; viçvarüpasya—of Viçvarüpa, the priest of the demigods; çiräàsi—heads;
tréëi—three; bhärata—O Mahäräja Parékñit; soma-pétham—used for drinking
the beverage soma; surä-pétham—used for drinking wine; anna-adam—used
for eating; iti—thus; çuçruma—I have heard by the paramparä system.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: Viçvarüpa, who was engaged as the priest
of the demigods, had three heads. He used one to drink the beverage soma-rasa,
another to drink wine and the third to eat food. O King Parékñit, thus I have
heard from authorities.
PURPORT
One cannot directly perceive the kingdom of heaven, its king and other
inhabitants, or how they perform their various engagements, for no one can go
to the heavenly planets. Although modern scientists have invented many
powerful space vehicles, they cannot even go to the moon, not to speak of
other planets. By direct experience one cannot learn anything beyond the
range of human perception. One must hear from authorities. Therefore
Çukadeva Gosvämé, a great personality, says, "What I am describing to you, O
King, is what I have heard from authoritative sources." This is the Vedic
system. The Vedic knowledge is called çruti because it must be received by
being heard from authorities. It is beyond the realm of our false experimental
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
500
knowledge.
TEXT 2
Sa vE bihRiz deve>Yaae >aaGa& Pa[TYa+aMauÀkE-" )
Addd( YaSYa iPaTarae deva" SaPa[é[Ya& Na*Pa )) 2 ))
sa vai barhiñi devebhyo
bhägaà pratyakñam uccakaiù
adadad yasya pitaro
deväù sapraçrayaà nåpa
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Viçvarüpa); vai—indeed; barhiñi—in the sacrificial fire;
devebhyaù—unto the particular demigods; bhägam—the proper share;
pratyakñam—visibly; uccakaiù—by loud chanting of the mantras;
adadat—offered; yasya—of whom; pitaraù—the fathers; deväù—demigods;
sa-praçrayam—very humbly in a gentle voice; nåpa—O King Parékñit.
TRANSLATION
O Mahäräja Parékñit, the demigods were related to Viçvarüpa from his
father's side, and therefore he visibly offered clarified butter in the fire while
chanting mantras such as indräya idaà svähä ["this is meant for King Indra"]
and idam agnaye ["this is for the demigod of fire"]. He loudly chanted these
mantras and offered each of the demigods his proper share.
TEXT 3
Sa Wv ih ddaE >aaGa& Parae+aMaSauraNa( Pa[iTa )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
501
YaJaMaaNaae_vhd( >aaGa& MaaTa*òehvXaaNauGa" )) 3 ))
sa eva hi dadau bhägaà
parokñam asurän prati
yajamäno 'vahad bhägaà
mätå-sneha-vaçänugaù
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Viçvarüpa); eva—indeed; hi—certainly; dadau—offered;
bhägam—share; parokñam—without the knowledge of the demigods;
asurän—the demons; prati—unto; yajamänaù—performing sacrifice;
avahat—offered; bhägam—share; mätå-sneha—by affection for his mother;
vaça-anugaù—being compelled.
TRANSLATION
Although offering clarified butter in the sacrificial fire in the name of the
demigods, without the knowledge of the demigods he also offered oblations to
the demons because they were his relatives through his mother.
PURPORT
Because of Viçvarüpa's affection for the families of both the demigods and
the demons, he appeased the Supreme Lord on behalf of both dynasties. When
he offered oblations in the fire on behalf of the asuras, he did so secretly.
without the knowledge of the demigods.
TEXT 4
Tad( devhel/Na& TaSYa DaMaaRl/Ik&- Saureìr" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
502
Aal/+Ya TarSaa >aqTaSTaC^qzaR<YaiC^Nad( åza )) 4 ))
tad deva-helanaà tasya
dharmälékaà sureçvaraù
älakñya tarasä bhétas
tac-chérñäëy acchinad ruñä
SYNONYMS
tat—that; deva-helanam—offense to the demigods; tasya—of him (Viçvarüpa);
dharma-alékam—cheating in religious principles (pretending to be the priest of
the demigods, but secretly acting as the priest of the demons also);
sura-éçvaraù—the king of the demigods; älakñya—observing; tarasä—quickly;
bhétaù—being afraid (that the demons would gain strength by being blessed by
Viçvarüpa); tat—his (Viçvarüpa's); çérñäëi—heads; acchinat—cut off;
ruñä—with great anger.
TRANSLATION
Once upon a time, however, the King of heaven, Indra, understood that
Viçvarüpa was secretly cheating the demigods by offering oblations on behalf of
the demons. He became extremely afraid of being defeated by the demons, and
in great anger at Viçvarüpa he cut Viçvarüpa's three heads from his shoulders.
TEXT 5
SaaeMaPaqQa& Tau YaTa( TaSYa iXar AaSaqTa( k-iPaÅl/" )
k-l/ivª" SauraPaqQaMaàad& YaTa( Sa iTaitair" )) 5 ))
soma-péthaà tu yat tasya
çira äsét kapiïjalaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
503
kalaviìkaù surä-pétham
annädaà yat sa tittiriù
SYNONYMS
soma-pétham—used for drinking soma-rasa; tu—however; yat—which;
tasya—of him (Viçvarüpa); çiraù—the head; äsét—became; kapiïjalaù—a
francolin partridge; kalaviìkaù—a sparrow; surä-pétham—meant for drinking
wine; anna-adam—used for eating food; yat—which; saù—that; tittiriù—a
common partridge.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, the head meant for drinking soma-rasa was transformed into a
kapiïjala [francolin partridge]. Similarly, the head meant for drinking wine was
transformed into a kalaviìka [sparrow], and the head meant for eating food
became a tittiri [common partridge].
TEXT 6
b]øhTYaaMaÅil/Naa JaGa]ah YadPaqìr" )
Sa&vTSaraNTae Tadga& >aUTaaNaa& Sa ivXauÖYae )
>aUMYaMbud]uMaYaaeizd(>YaêTauDaaR VYa>aJaÖir" )) 6 ))
brahma-hatyäm aïjalinä
jagräha yad apéçvaraù
saàvatsaränte tad aghaà
bhütänäà sa viçuddhaye
bhümy-ambu-druma-yoñidbhyaç
caturdhä vyabhajad dhariù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
504
SYNONYMS
brahma-hatyäm—the sinful reaction for killing a brähmaëa; aïjalinä—with
folded hands; jagräha—assumed the responsibility for; yat api—although;
éçvaraù—very powerful; saàvatsara-ante—after one year; tat agham—that
sinful reaction; bhütänäm—of the material elements; saù—he; viçuddhaye—for
purification; bhümi—unto the earth; ambu—water; druma—trees;
yoñidbhyaù—and unto women; caturdhä—in four divisions;
vyabhajat—divided; hariù—King Indra.
TRANSLATION
Although Indra was so powerful that he could neutralize the sinful reactions
for killing a brähmaëa, he repentantly accepted the burden of these reactions
with folded hands. He suffered for one year, and then to purify himself he
distributed the reactions for this sinful killing among the earth, water, trees and
women.
TEXT 7
>aUiMaSTaurqYa& JaGa]ah %aTaPaUrvre<a vE )
wRir<a& b]øhTYaaYaa æPa& >aUMaaE Pa[d*XYaTae )) 7 ))
bhümis turéyaà jagräha
khäta-püra-vareëa vai
ériëaà brahma-hatyäyä
rüpaà bhümau pradåçyate
SYNONYMS
bhümiù—the earth; turéyam—one fourth; jagräha—accepted; khäta-püra—of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
505
the filling of holes; vareëa—because of the benediction; vai—indeed;
ériëam—the deserts; brahma-hatyäyäù—of the reaction for killing a brähmaëa;
rüpam—form; bhümau—on the earth; pradåçyate—is visible.
TRANSLATION
In return for King Indra's benediction that ditches in the earth would be
filled automatically, the land accepted one fourth of the sinful reactions for
killing a brähmaëa. Because of those sinful reactions, we find many deserts on
the surface of the earth.
PURPORT
Because deserts are manifestations of the earth's diseased condition, no
auspicious ritualistic ceremony can be performed in a desert. Persons destined
to live in deserts are understood to be sharing the reactions for the sin of
brahma-hatyä, the killing of a brähmaëa.
TEXT 8
TauYa| ^edivraehe<a vre<a JaGa*hud]uRMaa" )
Taeza& iNaYaaRSaæPae<a b]øhTYaa Pa[d*XYaTae )) 8 ))
turyaà cheda-viroheëa
vareëa jagåhur drumäù
teñäà niryäsa-rüpeëa
brahma-hatyä pradåçyate
SYNONYMS
turyam—one fourth; cheda—although being cut; viroheëa—of growing again;
vareëa—because of the benediction; jagåhuù—accepted; drumäù—the trees;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
506
teñäm—of them; niryäsa-rüpeëa—by the liquid oozing from the trees;
brahma-hatyä—the reaction for killing a brähmaëa; pradåçyate—is visible.
TRANSLATION
In return for Indra's benediction that their branches and twigs would grow
back when trimmed, the trees accepted one fourth of the reactions for killing a
brähmaëa. These reactions are visible in the flowing of sap from trees.
[Therefore one is forbidden to drink this sap.]
TEXT 9
XaìTk-aMavre<aa&hSTaurqYa& JaGa*hu" iñYa" )
rJaaeæPae<a TaaSv&hae MaaiSa MaaiSa Pa[d*XYaTae )) 9 ))
çaçvat-käma-vareëäàhas
turéyaà jagåhuù striyaù
rajo-rüpeëa täsv aàho
mäsi mäsi pradåçyate
SYNONYMS
çaçvat—perpetual; käma—of sexual desire; vareëa—because of the
benediction; aàhaù—the sinful reaction for killing a brähmaëa; turéyam—one
fourth; jagåhuù—accepted; striyaù—women; rajaù-rüpeëa—in the form of the
menstrual period; täsu—in them; aàhaù—the sinful reaction; mäsi
mäsi—every month; pradåçyate—is visible.
TRANSLATION
In return for Lord Indra's benediction that they would be able to enjoy lusty
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
507
desires continuously, even during pregnancy for as long as sex is not injurious
to the embryo, women accepted one fourth of the sinful reactions. As a result of
those reactions, women manifest the signs of menstruation every month.
PURPORT
Women as a class are very lusty, and apparently their continuous lusty
desires are never satisfied. In return for Lord Indra's benediction that there
would be no cessation to their lusty desires, women accepted one fourth of the
sinful reactions for killing a brähmaëa.
TEXT 10
d]VYa>aUYaaevre<aaPaSTaurqYa& JaGa*huMaRl/Ma( )
TaaSau bud(budfe-Naa>Yaa& d*í& TaÖriTa i+aPaNa( )) 10 ))
dravya-bhüyo-vareëäpas
turéyaà jagåhur malam
täsu budbuda-phenäbhyäà
dåñöaà tad dharati kñipan
SYNONYMS
dravya—other things; bhüyaù—of increasing; vareëa—by the benediction;
äpaù—water; turéyam—one fourth; jagåhuù—accepted; malam—the sinful
reaction; täsu—in the water; budbuda-phenäbhyäm—by bubbles and foam;
dåñöam—visible; tat—that; harati—one collects; kñipan—throwing away.
TRANSLATION
And in return for King Indra's benediction that water would increase the
volume of other substances with which it was mixed, water accepted one fourth
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
508
of the sinful reactions. Therefore there are bubbles and foam in water. When
one collects water, these should be avoided.
PURPORT
If water is mixed with milk, fruit juice or other similar substances, it
increases their volume, and no one can understand which has increased. In
return for this benediction, water accepted one fourth of Indra's sinful
reactions. These sinful reactions are visible in foam and bubbles. Therefore
one should avoid foam and bubbles while collecting drinking water.
TEXT 11
hTaPau}aSTaTaSTvía JauhaveNd]aYa Xa}ave )
wNd]Xa}aae ivvDaRSv Maaicr& Jaih iviÜzMa( )) 11 ))
hata-putras tatas tvañöä
juhävendräya çatrave
indra-çatro vivardhasva
mä ciraà jahi vidviñam
SYNONYMS
hata-putraù—who lost his son; tataù—thereafter; tvañöä—Tvañöä;
juhäva—performed a sacrifice; indräya—of Indra; çatrave—for creating an
enemy; indra-çatro—O enemy of Indra; vivardhasva—increase; mä—not;
ciram—after a long time; jahi—kill; vidviñam—your enemy.
TRANSLATION
After Viçvarüpa was killed, his father, Tvañöä, performed ritualistic
ceremonies to kill Indra. He offered oblations in the sacrificial fire, saying, "O
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
509
enemy of Indra, flourish to kill your enemy without delay."
PURPORT
There was some defect in Tvañöä's chanting of the mantra because he
chanted it long instead of short, and therefore the meaning changed. Tvañöä
intended to chant the word indra-çatro, meaning, "O enemy of Indra." In this
mantra, the word indra is in the possessive case (ñañöhé), and the word
indra-çatro is called a tat-puruña compound (tatpuruña-samäsa). Unfortunately,
instead of chanting the mantra short, Tvañöä chanted it long, and its meaning
changed from "the enemy of Indra" to "Indra, who is an enemy." Consequently
instead of an enemy of Indra's, there emerged the body of Våträsura, of whom
Indra was the enemy.
TEXT 12
AQaaNvahaYaRPacNaaduiTQaTaae gaaerdXaRNa" )
k*-TaaNTa wv l/aek-aNaa& YauGaaNTaSaMaYae YaQaa )) 12 ))
athänvähärya-pacanäd
utthito ghora-darçanaù
kåtänta iva lokänäà
yugänta-samaye yathä
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; anvähärya-pacanät—from the fire known as Anvähärya;
utthitaù—arisen; ghora-darçanaù—appearing very fearful;
kåtäntaù—personified annihilation; iva—like; lokänäm—of all the planets;
yuga-anta—of the end of the millennium; samaye—at the time; yathä—just as.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
510
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, from the southern side of the sacrificial fire known as
Anvähärya came a fearful personality who looked like the destroyer of the
entire creation at the end of the millennium.
TEXTS 13-17
ivZviGvvDaRMaaNa& TaiMazuMaa}a& idNae idNae )
dGDaXaEl/Pa[Taqk-aXa& SaNDYaa>a]aNaqk-vcRSaMa( )) 13 ))
TaáTaaMa]iXa%aXMaé[u& MaDYaaöak-aeRGa]l/aecNaMa( )) 14 ))
dedqPYaMaaNae i}aiXa%e XaUl/ AaraePYa raedSaq )
Na*TYaNTaMauàdNTa& c cal/YaNTa& Pada MahqMa( )) 15 ))
drqGaM>aqrv£e-<a iPabTaa c Na>aSTal/Ma( )
il/hTaa iJaûYa+aaRi<a Ga]SaTaa >auvNa}aYaMa( )) 16 ))
MahTaa raEd]d&í\e<a Ja*M>aMaa<a& MauhuMauRhu" )
iv}aSTaa dud]uvul/aeRk-a vq+Ya SaveR idXaae dXa )) 17 ))
viñvag vivardhamänaà tam
iñu-mätraà dine dine
dagdha-çaila-pratékäçaà
sandhyäbhränéka-varcasam
tapta-tämra-çikhä-çmaçruà
madhyähnärkogra-locanam
dedépyamäne tri-çikhe
çüla äropya rodasé
nåtyantam unnadantaà ca
cälayantaà padä mahém
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
511
daré-gambhéra-vaktreëa
pibatä ca nabhastalam
lihatä jihvayarkñäëi
grasatä bhuvana-trayam
mahatä raudra-daàñöreëa
jåmbhamäëaà muhur muhuù
vitrastä dudruvur lokä
vékñya sarve diço daça
SYNONYMS
viñvak—all around; vivardhamänam—increasing; tam—him; iñu-mätram—an
arrow's flight; dine dine—day after day; dagdha—burnt; çaila—mountain;
pratékäçam—resembling; sandhyä—in the evening; abhra-anéka—like an array
of clouds; varcasam—having an effulgence; tapta—melted; tämra—like
copper; çikhä—hair; çmaçrum—moustache and beard; madhyähna—at midday;
arka—like the sun; ugra-locanam—having powerful eyes;
dedépyamäne—blazing; tri-çikhe—three-pointed; çüle—on his spear;
äropya—keeping; rodasé—heaven and earth; nåtyantam—dancing;
unnadantam—shouting loudly; ca—and; cälayantam—moving; padä—by his
foot; mahém—the earth; daré-gambhéra—as deep as a cave; vaktreëa—by the
mouth; pibatä—drinking; ca—also; nabhastalam—the sky; lihatä—licking up;
jihvayä—by the tongue; åkñäëi—the stars; grasatä—swallowing;
bhuvana-trayam—the three worlds; mahatä—very great;
raudra-daàñöreëa—with fearful teeth; jåmbhamäëam—yawning; muhuù
muhuù—again and again; vitrastäù—fearful; dudruvuù—ran; lokäù—people;
vékñya—seeing; sarve—all; diçaù daça—ten directions.
TRANSLATION
Like arrows released in the four directions, the demon's body grew, day after
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
512
day. Tall and blackish, he appeared like a burnt hill and was as lustrous as a
bright array of clouds in the evening. The hair on the demon's body and his
beard and moustache were the color of melted copper, and his eyes were
piercing like the midday sun. He appeared unconquerable, as if holding the
three worlds on the points of his blazing trident. Dancing and shouting with a
loud voice, he made the entire surface of the earth tremble as if from an
earthquake. As he yawned again and again, he seemed to be trying to swallow
the whole sky with his mouth, which was as deep as a cave. He seemed to be
licking up all the stars in the sky with his tongue and eating the entire universe
with his long, sharp teeth. Seeing this gigantic demon, everyone, in great fear,
ran here and there in all directions.
TEXT 18
YaeNaav*Taa wMae l/aek-aSTaPaSaa Tvaí\MaUiTaRNaa )
Sa vE v*}a wiTa Pa[ae¢-" PaaPa" ParMadaå<a" )) 18 ))
yenävåtä ime lokäs
tapasä tväñöra-mürtinä
sa vai våtra iti proktaù
päpaù parama-däruëaù
SYNONYMS
yena—by whom; ävåtäù—covered; ime—all these; lokäù—planets; tapasä—by
the austerity; tväñöra-mürtinä—in the form of the son of Tvañöä; saù—he;
vai—indeed; våtraù—Våtra; iti—thus; proktaù—called; päpaù—personified
sin; parama-däruëaù—very fearful.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
513
That very fearful demon, who was actually the son of Tvañöä, covered all the
planetary systems by dint of austerity. Therefore he was named Våtra, or one
who covers everything.
PURPORT
In the Vedas it is said, sa imäû lokän ävåëot tad våtrasya våtratvam: because
the demon covered all the planetary systems, his name was Våträsura.
TEXT 19
Ta& iNaJaganuri>ad]uTYa SaGa<aa ivbuDazR>aa" )
SvE" SvEidRVYaañXañaEgaE" Saae_Ga]SaTa( TaaiNa k*-TòXa" )) 19 ))
taà nijaghnur abhidrutya
sagaëä vibudharñabhäù
svaiù svair divyästra-çastraughaiù
so 'grasat täni kåtsnaçaù
SYNONYMS
tam—him; nijaghnuù—struck; abhidrutya—running to; sa-gaëäù—with
soldiers; vibudha-åñabhäù—all the great demigods; svaiù svaiù—with their own
respective; divya—transcendental; astra—bows and arrows;
çastra-oghaiù—different weapons; saù—he (Våtra); agrasat—swallowed;
täni—them (the weapons); kåtsnaçaù—all together.
TRANSLATION
The demigods, headed by Indra, charged the demon with their soldiers,
striking him with their own transcendental bows and arrows and other weapons
but Våträsura swallowed all their weapons.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
514
TEXT 20
TaTaSTae iviSMaTaa" SaveR ivz<<aa Ga]STaTaeJaSa" )
Pa[TYaÄMaaidPauåzMauPaTaSQau" SaMaaihTaa" )) 20 ))
tatas te vismitäù sarve
viñaëëä grasta-tejasaù
pratyaïcam ädi-puruñam
upatasthuù samähitäù
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; te—they (the demigods); vismitäù—being struck with
wonder; sarve—all; viñaëëäù—being very morose; grasta-tejasaù—having lost
all their personal strength; pratyaïcam—to the Supersoul; ädi-puruñam—the
original person; upatasthuù—prayed; samähitäù—all gathered together.
TRANSLATION
Struck with wonder and disappointment upon seeing the strength of the
demon, the demigods lost their own strength. Therefore they all met together to
try to please the Supersoul, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa, by
worshiping Him.
TEXT 21
é[qdeva Ocu"
vaYvMbraGNYaiP+aTaYaiñl/aek-a
b]øadYaae Yae vYaMauiÜJaNTa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
515
hraMa YaSMaE bil/MaNTak-ae_SaaE
ib>aeiTa YaSMaadr<a& TaTaae Na" )) 21 ))
çré-devä ücuù
väyv-ambarägny-ap-kñitayas tri-lokä
brahmädayo ye vayam udvijantaù
haräma yasmai balim antako 'sau
bibheti yasmäd araëaà tato naù
SYNONYMS
çré-deväù ücuù—the demigods said; väyu—composed of air; ambara—sky;
agni—fire; ap—water; kñitayaù—and land; tri-lokäù—the three worlds;
brahma-ädayaù—beginning from Lord Brahmä; ye—who; vayam—we;
udvijantaù—being very much afraid; haräma—offer; yasmai—unto whom;
balim—presentation; antakaù—the destroyer, death; asau—that;
bibheti—fears; yasmät—from whom; araëam—shelter; tataù—therefore;
naù—our.
TRANSLATION
The demigods said: The three worlds are created by the five
elements—namely ether, air, fire, water and earth—which are controlled by
various demigods, beginning from Lord Brahmä. Being very much afraid that
the time factor will end our existence, we offer presentations unto time by
performing our work as time dictates. The time factor himself, however, is
afraid of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore let us now worship
that Supreme Lord, who alone can give us full protection.
PURPORT
When one is afraid of being killed, one must take shelter of the Supreme
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
516
Personality of Godhead. He is worshiped by all the demigods, beginning from
Brahmä, although they are in charge of the various elements of this material
world. The words bibheti yasmät indicate that all the demons, regardless of how
great and powerful, fear the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The demigods,
being afraid of death, took shelter of the Lord and offered Him these prayers.
Although the time factor is fearful to everyone, fear personified is afraid of the
Supreme Lord, who is therefore known as abhaya, fearless. Taking shelter of
the Supreme Lord brings actual fearlessness, and therefore the demigods
decided to take shelter of the Lord.
TEXT 22
AiviSMaTa& Ta& PairPaU<aRk-aMa&
SveNaEv l/a>aeNa SaMa& Pa[XaaNTaMa( )
ivNaaePaSaPaRTYaPar& ih bail/Xa"
ìl/ax(Gaule/NaaiTaiTaTaiTaR iSaNDauMa( )) 22 ))
avismitaà taà paripürëa-kämaà
svenaiva läbhena samaà praçäntam
vinopasarpaty aparaà hi bäliçaù
çva-läìgulenätititarti sindhum
SYNONYMS
avismitam—who is never struck with wonder; tam—Him;
paripürëa-kämam—who is fully satisfied; svena—by His own; eva—indeed;
läbhena—achievements; samam—equipoised; praçäntam—very steady;
vinä—without; upasarpati—approaches; aparam—another; hi—indeed;
bäliçaù—a fool; çva—of a dog; läìgulena—by the tail; atititarti—wants to
cross; sindhum—the sea.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
517
TRANSLATION
Free from all material conceptions of existence and never wonder-struck by
anything, the Lord is always jubilant and fully satisfied by His own spiritual
perfection. He has no material designations, and therefore He is steady and
unattached. That Supreme Personality of Godhead is the only shelter of
everyone. Anyone desiring to be protected by others is certainly a great fool
who desires to cross the sea by holding the tail of a dog.
PURPORT
A dog can swim in the water, but if a dog dives in the ocean and someone
wants to cross the ocean by holding the dog's tail, he is certainly fool number
one. A dog cannot cross the ocean, nor can a person cross the ocean by
catching a dog's tail. Similarly, one who desires to cross the ocean of nescience
should not seek the shelter of any demigod or anyone else but the fearless
shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.14.58)
therefore says:
samäçritä ye pada-pallava-plavaà
mahat-padaà puëya-yaço-muräreù
bhavämbudhir vatsa-padaà paraà padaà
padaà padaà yad vipadäà na teñäm
The Lord's lotus feet are an indestructible boat, and if one takes shelter of that
boat he can easily cross the ocean of nescience. Consequently there are no
dangers for a devotee although he lives within this material world, which is full
of dangers at every step. One should seek the shelter of the all-powerful
instead of trying to be protected by one's own concocted ideas.
TEXT 23
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
518
YaSYaaeåé*(r)e JaGaTaq& SvNaav&
MaNauYaRQaabDYa TaTaar duGaRMa( )
Sa Wv NaSTvaí\>aYaad( durNTaaTa(
}aaTaaié[TaaNa( vaircrae_iPa NaUNaMa( )) 23 ))
yasyoru-çåìge jagatéà sva-nävaà
manur yathäbadhya tatära durgam
sa eva nas tväñöra-bhayäd durantät
trätäçritän väricaro 'pi nünam
SYNONYMS
yasya—of whom; uru—very strong and high; çåìge—on the horn; jagatém—in
the form of the world; sva-nävam—his own boat; manuù—Manu, King
Satyavrata; yathä—just as; äbadhya—binding; tatära—crossed; durgam—the
very difficult to cross (inundation); saù—He (the Supreme Personality of
Godhead); eva—certainly; naù—us; tväñöra-bhayät—from fear of the son of
Tvañöä; durantät—endless; trätä—deliverer; äçritän—dependents (like us);
väri-caraù api—although taking the form of a fish; nünam—indeed.
TRANSLATION
The Manu named King Satyavrata formerly saved himself by tying the small
boat of the entire world to the horn of the Matsya avatära, the fish incarnation.
By the grace of the Matsya avatära, Manu saved himself from the great danger
of the flood. May that same fish incarnation save us from the great and fearful
danger caused by the son of Tvañöä.
TEXT 24
Paura SvYaM>aUriPa Sa&YaMaaM>a‚
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
519
SYaudq<aRvaTaaeiMaRrvE" k-rale/ )
Wk-ae_rivNdaTa( PaiTaTaSTaTaar
TaSMaad( >aYaad( YaeNa Sa Naae_STau Paar" )) 24 ))
purä svayambhür api saàyamämbhasy
udérëa-vätormi-ravaiù karäle
eko 'ravindät patitas tatära
tasmäd bhayäd yena sa no 'stu päraù
SYNONYMS
purä—formerly (during the time of creation); svayambhüù—Lord Brahmä;
api—also; saàyama-ambhasi—in the water of inundation; udérëa—very high;
väta—of wind; ürmi—and of waves; ravaiù—by the sounds; karäle—very
fearful; ekaù—alone; aravindät—from the lotus seat; patitaù—almost fallen;
tatära—escaped; tasmät—from that; bhayät—fearful situation; yena—by
whom (the Lord); saù—He; naù—of us; astu—let there be;
päraù—deliverance.
TRANSLATION
In the beginning of creation, a tremendous wind caused fierce waves of
inundating water. The great waves made such a horrible sound that Lord
Brahmä almost fell from his seat on the lotus into the water of devastation, but
he was saved with the help of the Lord. Thus we also expect the Lord to protect
us from this dangerous condition.
TEXT 25
Ya Wk- wRXaae iNaJaMaaYaYaa Na"
SaSaJaR YaeNaaNauSa*JaaMa ivìMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
520
vYa& Na YaSYaaiPa Paur" SaMaqhTa"
PaXYaaMa il/(r)& Pa*QaGaqXaMaaiNaNa" )) 25 ))
ya eka éço nija-mäyayä naù
sasarja yenänusåjäma viçvam
vayaà na yasyäpi puraù saméhataù
paçyäma liìgaà påthag éça-mäninaù
SYNONYMS
yaù—He who; ekaù—one; éçaù—controller; nija-mäyayä—by His
transcendental potency; naù—us; sasarja—created; yena—by whom (through
whose mercy); anusåjäma—we also create; viçvam—the universe; vayam—we;
na—not; yasya—of whom; api—although; puraù—in front of us;
saméhataù—of Him who is acting; paçyäma—see; liìgam—the form;
påthak—separate; éça—as controllers; mäninaù—thinking of ourselves.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who created us by His external
potency and by whose mercy we expand the creation of the universe, is always
situated before us as the Supersoul, but we cannot see His form. We are unable
to see Him because all of us think that we are separate and independent gods.
PURPORT
Here is an explanation of why the conditioned soul cannot see the Supreme
Personality of Godhead face to face. Even though the Lord appears before us as
Lord Kåñëa or Lord Rämacandra and lives in human society as a leader or king,
the conditioned soul cannot understand Him. Avajänanti mäà müòhä
mänuñéà tanum äçritam: [Bg. 9.11] rascals (müòhas) deride the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, thinking Him an ordinary human being. However
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
521
insignificant we are, we think that we are also God, that we can create a
universe or that we can create another God. This is why we cannot see or
understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In this regard, Çréla
Madhväcärya says:
liìgam eva paçyämaù
kadäcid abhimänas tu
devänäm api sann iva
präyaù käleñu nästy eva
täratamyena so 'pi tu
We are all conditioned to various degrees, but we think that we are God. This
is why we cannot understand who God is or see Him face to face.
TEXTS 26-27
Yaae Na" SaPaÒE>a*RXaMaÛRMaaNaaNa(
devizRiTaYaRx(Na*zu iNaTYa Wv )
k*-TaavTaarSTaNaui>a" SvMaaYaYaa
k*-TvaTMaSaaTa( PaaiTa YauGae YauGae c )) 26 ))
TaMaev dev& vYaMaaTMadEvTa&
Par& Pa[DaaNa& Pauåz& ivìMaNYaMa( )
v]JaaMa SaveR Xar<a& Xar<Ya&
SvaNaa& Sa Naae DaaSYaiTa Xa& MahaTMaa )) 27 ))
yo naù sapatnair bhåçam ardyamänän
devarñi-tiryaì-nåñu nitya eva
kåtävatäras tanubhiù sva-mäyayä
kåtvätmasät päti yuge yuge ca
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
522
tam eva devaà vayam ätma-daivataà
paraà pradhänaà puruñaà viçvam anyam
vrajäma sarve çaraëaà çaraëyaà
svänäà sa no dhäsyati çaà mahätmä
SYNONYMS
yaù—He who; naù—us; sapatnaiù—by our enemies, the demons;
bhåçam—almost always; ardyamänän—being persecuted; deva—among the
demigods; åñi—the saintly persons; tiryak—the animals; nåñu—and men;
nityaù—always; eva—certainly; kåta-avatäraù—appearing as an incarnation;
tanubhiù—with different forms; sva-mäyayä—by His internal potency; kåtvä
ätmasät—considering very near and dear to Him; päti—protects; yuge
yuge—in every millennium; ca—and; tam—Him; eva—indeed; devam—the
Supreme Lord; vayam—all of us; ätma-daivatam—the Lord of all living
entities; param—transcendental; pradhänam—the original cause of the total
material energy; puruñam—the supreme enjoyer; viçvam—whose energy
constitutes this universe; anyam—separately situated; vrajäma—we approach;
sarve—all; çaraëam—shelter; çaraëyam—suitable as shelter; svänäm—unto
His own devotees; saù—He; naù—unto us; dhäsyati—shall give; çam—good
fortune; mahätmä—the Supersoul.
TRANSLATION
By His inconceivable internal potency, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
expands into various transcendental bodies as Vämanadeva, the incarnation of
strength among the demigods; Paraçuräma, the incarnation among saints;
Nåsiàhadeva and Varäha, incarnations among animals; and Matsya and Kürma,
incarnations among aquatics. He accepts various transcendental bodies among
all types of living entities, and among human beings He especially appears as
Lord Kåñëa and Lord Räma. By His causeless mercy, He protects the demigods,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
523
who are always harassed by the demons. He is the supreme worshipable Deity
of all living entities. He is the supreme cause, represented as the male and
female creative energies. Although different from this universe, He exists in
His universal form [viräö-rüpa]. In our fearful condition, let us take shelter of
Him, for we are sure that the Supreme Lord, the Supreme Soul, will give us His
protection.
PURPORT
In this verse, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, is ascertained to
be the original cause of creation. Çrédhara Svämé, in his commentary
Bhävärtha-dépikä, replies to the idea that prakåti and puruña are the causes of
the cosmic manifestation. As stated herein, paraà pradhänaà puruñaà viçvam
anyam: "He is the supreme cause, represented as the male and female creative
energies. Although different from this universe, He exists in His universal
form [viräö rüpa]." The word prakåti, which is used to indicate the source of
generation, refers to the material energy of the Supreme Lord, and the word
puruña refers to the living entities, who are the superior energy of the Lord.
Both the prakåti and puruña ultimately enter the Supreme Lord, as stated in
Bhagavad-gétä (prakåtià yänti mämikäm).
Although prakåti and puruña superficially appear to be the causes of the
material manifestation, both are emanations of different energies of the
Supreme Lord. Therefore the Supreme Lord is the cause of prakåti and puruña.
He is the original cause (sarva-käraëa-käraëam [Bs. 5.1]). The Näradéya
Puräëa says:
avikäro 'pi paramaù
prakåtis tu vikäriëé
anupraviçya govindaù
prakåtiç cäbhidhéyate
Both the prakåti and puruña, which are inferior and superior energies, are
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
524
emanations from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As explained in
Bhagavad-gétä (gäm äviçya [Bg. 15.13]), the Lord enters the prakåti, and then the
prakåti creates different manifestations. The prakåti is not independent or
beyond His energies. Väsudeva, Lord Çré Kåñëa, is the original cause of
everything. Therefore the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (10.8):
ahaà sarvasya prabhavo
mattaù sarvaà pravartate
iti matvä bhajante mäà
budhä bhäva-samanvitäù
"I am the source of all spiritual and material worlds. Everything emanates from
Me. The wise who perfectly know this engage in My devotional service and
worship Me with all their hearts." In Çrémad-Bhägavatam (2.9.33) the Lord also
says, aham eväsam evägre: "Only I existed before the creation." This is
confirmed in the Brahmäëòa Puräëa as follows:
småtir avyavadhänena
prakåtitvam iti sthitiù
ubhayätmaka-sütitväd
väsudevaù paraù pumän
prakåtiù puruñaç ceti
çabdair eko 'bhidhéyate
To generate the universe, the Lord acts indirectly as the puruña and directly as
the prakåti. Because both energies emanate from Lord Väsudeva, the
all-pervasive Supreme Personality of Godhead, He is known as both prakåti
and puruña. Therefore Väsudeva is the cause of everything
(sarva-käraëa-käraëam [Bs. 5.1]).
TEXT 28
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
525
é[qXauk- ovac
wiTa Taeza& MaharaJa Saura<aaMauPaiTaïTaaMa( )
Pa[TaqCYaa& idXYa>aUdaiv" Xa«c§-GadaDar" )) 28 ))
çré-çuka uväca
iti teñäà mahäräja
suräëäm upatiñöhatäm
pratécyäà diçy abhüd äviù
çaìkha-cakra-gadä-dharaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; teñäm—of them;
mahäräja—O King; suräëäm—of the demigods; upatiñöhatäm—praying;
pratécyäm—inside; diçi—in the direction; abhüt—became; äviù—visible;
çaìkha-cakra-gadä-dharaù—bearing the transcendental weapons: the
conchshell, disc and club.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: My dear King, when all the demigods offered
Him their prayers, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Hari, carrying
His weapons, the conchshell, disc and club, appeared first within their hearts
and then before them.
TEXTS 29-30
AaTMaTauLYaE" zae@Xai>aivRNaa é[qvTSak-aESTau>aaE )
PaYauRPaaiSaTaMauiàd]XardMbuåhe+a<aMa( )) 29 ))
d*îa TaMavNaaE SavR wR+a<aaúadiv(c)-va" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
526
d<@vTa( PaiTaTaa raJaH^NaEåTQaaYa Tauíuvu" )) 30 ))
ätma-tulyaiù ñoòaçabhir
vinä çrévatsa-kaustubhau
paryupäsitam unnidraçarad-
amburuhekñaëam
dåñövä tam avanau sarva
ékñaëähläda-viklaväù
daëòavat patitä räjaï
chanair utthäya tuñöuvuù
SYNONYMS
ätma-tulyaiù—almost equal to Himself; ñoòaçabhiù—by sixteen (servants);
vinä—without; çrévatsa-kaustubhau—the Çrévatsa mark and Kaustubha jewel;
paryupäsitam—being attended on all sides; unnidra—blooming; çarat—of the
autumn; amburuha—like lotus flowers; ékñaëam—having eyes; dåñövä—seeing;
tam—Him (the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa); avanau—on the
ground; sarve—all of them; ékñaëa—from directly seeing; ähläda—with
happiness; viklaväù—being overwhelmed; daëòa-vat—like a stick;
patitäù—fell; räjan—O King; çanaiù—slowly; utthäya—standing up;
tuñöuvuù—offered prayers.
TRANSLATION
Surrounding and serving the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa,
were sixteen personal attendants, decorated with ornaments and appearing
exactly like Him but without the mark of Çrévatsa and the Kaustubha jewel. O
King, when all the demigods saw the Supreme Lord in that posture, smiling
with eyes like the petals of lotuses grown in autumn, they were overwhelmed
with happiness and immediately fell down like rods, offering daëòavats. Then
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
527
they slowly rose and pleased the Lord by offering Him prayers.
PURPORT
In Vaikuëöhaloka the Supreme Personality of Godhead has four hands and
decorations like the Çrévatsa mark on His chest and the gem known as
Kaustubha. These are special indications of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. The Lord's personal attendants and other devotees in Vaikuëöha
have the same features, except for the Çrévatsa mark and the Kaustubha gem.
TEXT 31
é[qdeva Ocu"
NaMaSTae YajvqYaaRYa vYaSae oTa Tae NaMa" )
NaMaSTae ùSTac§-aYa NaMa" SauPauåhUTaYae )) 31 ))
çré-devä ücuù
namas te yajïa-véryäya
vayase uta te namaù
namas te hy asta-cakräya
namaù supuru-hütaye
SYNONYMS
çré-deväù ücuù—the demigods said; namaù—obeisances; te—unto You;
yajïa-véryäya—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is able to give
the results of sacrifice; vayase—who is the time factor, which ends the results
of yajïa; uta—although; te—unto You; namaù—obeisances;
namaù—obeisances; te—unto You; hi—indeed; asta-cakräya—who throws the
disc; namaù—respectful obeisances; supuru-hütaye—having varieties of
transcendental names.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
528
TRANSLATION
The demigods said: O Supreme Personality of Godhead, You are competent
to give the results of sacrifice, and You are also the time factor that destroys all
such results in due course. You are the one who releases the cakra to kill the
demons. O Lord, who possess many varieties of names, we offer our respectful
obeisances unto You.
TEXT 32
YaTa( Tae GaTaqNaa& iTaSa*<aaMaqiXaTau" ParMa& PadMa( )
NaavaRcqNaae ivSaGaRSYa DaaTaveRidTauMahRiTa )) 32 ))
yat te gaténäà tisåëäm
éçituù paramaà padam
närväcéno visargasya
dhätar veditum arhati
SYNONYMS
yat—which; te—of You; gaténäm tisåëäm—of the three destinations (the
heavenly planets, the earthly planets and hell); éçituù—who are the controller;
paramam padam—the supreme abode, Vaikuëöhaloka; na—not; arväcénaù—a
person appearing after; visargasya—the creation; dhätaù—O supreme
controller; veditum—to understand; arhati—is able.
TRANSLATION
O supreme controller, You control the three destinations [promotion to the
heavenly planets, birth as a human being, and condemnation in hell], yet Your
supreme abode is Vaikuëöha-dhäma. Since we appeared after You created this
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
529
cosmic manifestation, Your activities are impossible for us to understand. We
therefore have nothing to offer You but our humble obeisances.
PURPORT
An inexperienced man generally does not know what to beg from the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Everyone is under the jurisdiction of the
created material world, and no one knows what benediction to ask when
praying to the Supreme Lord. People generally pray to be promoted to the
heavenly planets because they have no information of Vaikuëöhaloka. Çréla
Madhväcärya quotes the following verse:
deva-lokät pitå-lokät
nirayäc cäpi yat param
tisåbhyaù paramaà sthänaà
vaiñëavaà viduñäà gatiù
There are different planetary systems, known as Devaloka (the planets of the
demigods), Pitåloka (the planet of the Pitäs) and Niraya (the hellish planets).
When one transcends these various planetary systems and enters
Vaikuëöhaloka, he achieves the ultimate resort of the Vaiñëavas. Vaiñëavas
have nothing to do with the other planetary systems.
TEXT 33
p NaMaSTae_STau >aGavNa( NaaraYa<a vaSaudevaidPauåz MahaPauåz MahaNau>aav
ParMaMa(r)l/ ParMak-LYaa<a ParMak-aåi<ak- ke-vl/ JaGadaDaar l/aekE-k-NaaQa
SaveRìr l/+MaqNaaQa ParMah&SaPairv]aJakE-" ParMae<aaTMaYaaeGaSaMaaiDaNaa Pair>aaiv‚
TaPairSfu-$=PaarMah&SYaDaMaeR<aaed(gaai$=TaTaMa"k-Paa$=Üare ictae_Paav*Ta AaTMal/aeke-
SvYaMauPal/BDaiNaJaSau%aNau>avae >avaNa( )) 33 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
530
oà namas te 'stu bhagavan näräyaëa väsudevädi-puruña mahä-puruña
mahänubhäva parama-maìgala parama-kalyäëa parama-käruëika kevala
jagad-ädhära lokaika-nätha sarveçvara lakñmé-nätha
paramahaàsa-parivräjakaiù parameëätma-yoga-samädhinä
paribhävita-parisphuöa-päramahaàsya-dharmeëodghäöita-tamaù-kapäöa-dväre
citte 'pävåta ätma-loke svayam upalabdha-nija-sukhänubhavo bhavän.
SYNONYMS
oà—O Lord; namaù—respectful obeisances; te—unto You; astu—let there be;
bhagavan—O Supreme Personality of Godhead; näräyaëa—the resort of all
living entities, Näräyaëa; väsudeva—Lord Väsudeva, Çré Kåñëa;
ädi-puruña—the original person; mahä-puruña—the most exalted personality;
mahä-anubhäva—the supremely opulent; parama-maìgala—the most
auspicious; parama-kalyäëa—the supreme benediction; parama-käruëika—the
supremely merciful; kevala—changeless; jagat-ädhära—the support of the
cosmic manifestation; loka-eka-nätha—the only proprietor of all the planetary
systems; sarva-éçvara—the supreme controller; lakñmé-nätha—the husband of
the goddess of fortune; paramahaàsa-parivräjakaiù—by the topmost sannyäsés
wandering all over the world; parameëa—by supreme;
ätma-yoga-samädhinä—absorption in bhakti-yoga; paribhävita—fully purified;
parisphuöa—and fully manifested; päramahaàsya-dharmeëa—by executing the
transcendental process of devotional service; udghäöita—pushed open;
tamaù—of illusory existence; kapäöa—in which the door; dväre—existing as
the entrance; citte—in the mind; apävåte—without contamination;
ätma-loke—in the spiritual world; svayam—personally;
upalabdha—experiencing; nija—personal; sukha-anubhavaù—perception of
happiness; bhavän—Your Lordship.
TRANSLATION
O Supreme Personality of Godhead, O Näräyaëa, O Väsudeva, original
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
531
person! O most exalted person, supreme experience, welfare personified! O
supreme benediction, supremely merciful and changeless! O support of the
cosmic manifestation, sole proprietor of all planetary systems, master of
everything and husband of the goddess of fortune! Your Lordship is realized by
the topmost sannyäsés, who wander about the world to preach Kåñëa
consciousness, fully absorbed in samädhi through bhakti-yoga. Because their
minds are concentrated upon You, they can receive the conception of Your
personality in their fully purified hearts. When the darkness in their hearts is
completely eradicated and You are revealed to them, the transcendental bliss
they enjoy is the transcendental form of Your Lordship. No one but such
persons can realize You. Therefore we simply offer You our respectful
obeisances.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead has numerous transcendental names
pertaining to different grades of revelation to various grades of devotees and
transcendentalists. When He is realized in His impersonal form He is called
the Supreme Brahman, when realized as the Paramätmä He is called antaryämé,
and when He expands Himself in different forms for material creation He is
called Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu, Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu and Käraëodakaçäyé Viñëu.
When He is realized as Väsudeva, Saìkarñaëa, Pradyumna and
Aniruddha—the Caturvyüha, who are beyond the three forms of Viñëu—He
is the Vaikuëöha Näräyaëa. Above realization of Näräyaëa is realization of
Baladeva, and above that is realization of Kåñëa. All these realizations are
possible when one engages fully in devotional service. The covered core of
one's heart is then completely open to receiving an understanding of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in His various forms.
TEXT 34
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
532
durvbaeDa wv TavaYa& ivharYaaeGaae YadXar<aae_Xarqr wdMaNavei+aTaaSMaTSa‚
MavaYa AaTMaNaEvaivi§-YaMaa<aeNa SaGau<aMaGau<a" Sa*JaiSa PaaiSa hriSa )) 34 ))
duravabodha iva taväyaà vihära-yogo yad açaraëo 'çaréra idam
anavekñitäsmat-samaväya ätmanaivävikriyamäëena saguëam aguëaù såjasi
päsi harasi.
SYNONYMS
duravabodhaù—difficult to understand; iva—quite; tava—Your; ayam—this;
vihära-yogaù—engagement in the pastimes of material creation, maintenance
and annihilation; yat—which; açaraëaù—not dependent on any other
support; açaréraù—without having a material body; idam—this;
anavekñita—without waiting for; asmat—of us; samaväyaù—the cooperation;
ätmanä—by Your own self; eva—indeed; avikriyamäëena—without being
transformed; sa-guëam—the material modes of nature; aguëaù—although
transcendental to such material qualities; såjasi—You create; päsi—maintain;
harasi—annihilate.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, You need no support, and although You have no material body, You
do not need cooperation from us. Since You are the cause of the cosmic
manifestation and You supply its material ingredients without being
transformed, You create, maintain and annihilate this cosmic manifestation by
Yourself. Nevertheless, although You appear engaged in material activity, You
are transcendental to all material qualities. Consequently these transcendental
activities of Yours are extremely difficult to understand.
PURPORT
The Brahma-saàhitä (5.37) says, goloka eva nivasaty akhilätma-bhütaù: the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
533
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, is always situated in Goloka
Våndävana. It is also said, våndävanaà parityajya padam ekaà na gacchati:
Kåñëa never goes even a step from Våndävana. Nevertheless, although Kåñëa is
situated in His own abode, Goloka Våndävana, He is simultaneously
all-pervading and is therefore present everywhere. This is very difficult for a
conditioned soul to understand, but devotees can understand how Kåñëa,
without undergoing any changes, can simultaneously be in His abode and be
all-pervasive. The demigods are understood to be various limbs of the Supreme
Lord's body, although the Supreme Lord has no material body and does not
need anyone's help. He is spread everywhere (mayä tatam idaà sarvaà jagad
avyakta-mürtinä [Bg. 9.4]). Nevertheless, He is not present everywhere in His
spiritual form. According to the Mäyäväda philosophy, the Supreme Truth,
being all-pervasive, does not need a transcendental form. The Mäyävädés
suppose that since His form is distributed everywhere, He has no form. This is
untrue. The Lord keeps His transcendental form, and at the same time He
extends everywhere, in every nook and corner of the material creation.
TEXT 35
AQa Ta}a >avaNa( ik&- devdtavidh Gau<aivSaGaRPaiTaTa" PaarTaN}Yae<a Svk*-Ta‚
ku-Xal/aku-Xal&/ f-l/MauPaaddaTYaahaeiSvdaTMaaraMa oPaXaMaXaql/" SaMaÅSadXaRNa
odaSTa wiTa h vav Na ivdaMa" )) 35 ))
atha tatra bhavän kià devadattavad iha guëa-visarga-patitaù päratantryeëa
sva-kåta-kuçaläkuçalaà phalam upädadäty ähosvid ätmäräma upaçama-çélaù
samaïjasa-darçana udästa iti ha väva na vidämaù.
SYNONYMS
atha—therefore; tatra—in that; bhavän—Your Lordship; kim—whether;
deva-datta-vat—like an ordinary human being, forced by the fruits of his
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
534
activities; iha—in this material world; guëa-visarga-patitaù—fallen in a
material body impelled by the modes of material nature; päratantryeëa—by
dependence on the conditions of time, space, activity and nature;
sva-kåta—executed by oneself; kuçala—auspicious; akuçalam—inauspicious;
phalam—results of action; upädadäti—accepts; ähosvit—or;
ätmärämaù—completely self-satisfied; upaçama-çélaù—self-controlled in
nature; samaïjasa-darçanaù—not deprived of full spiritual potencies;
udäste—remains neutral as the witness; iti—thus; ha väva—certainly; na
vidämaù—we do not understand.
TRANSLATION
These are our inquiries. The ordinary conditioned soul is subject to the
material laws, and he thus receives the fruits of his actions. Does Your
Lordship, like an ordinary human being, exist within this material world in a
body produced by the material modes? Do You enjoy or suffer the good or bad
results of actions under the influence of time, past work and so forth? Or, on
the contrary, are You present here only as a neutral witness who is
self-sufficient, free from all material desires, and always full of spiritual
potency? We certainly cannot understand Your actual position.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä Kåñëa says that He descends to this material world for two
purposes, namely pariträëäya sädhünäà vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm [Bg. 4.8]—to
relieve the devotees and kill demons or nondevotees. These two kinds of
action are the same for the Absolute Truth. When the Lord comes to punish
the demons, He bestows His favor upon them, and similarly when He delivers
His devotees and gives them relief, He also bestows His favor. Thus the Lord
bestows His favor equally upon the conditioned souls. When a conditioned
soul gives relief to others he acts piously, and when he gives trouble to others
he acts impiously, but the Lord is neither pious nor impious; He is always full
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
535
in His spiritual potency, by which He shows equal mercy to the punishable and
the protectable. The Lord is apäpa-viddham; He is never contaminated by the
reactions of so-called sinful activities. When Kåñëa was present on this earth,
He killed many inimical nondevotees, but they all received särüpya; in other
words, they returned to their original spiritual bodies. One who does not know
the Lord's position says that God is unkind to him but merciful to others.
Actually the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (9.29), samo 'haà sarva-bhüteñu na me
dveñyo 'sti na priyaù: "I am equal to everyone. No one is My enemy, and no one
is My friend." But He also says, ye bhajanti tu mäà bhaktyä mayi te teñu cäpy
aham: "If one becomes My devotee and fully surrenders unto Me, I give him
special attention."
TEXT 36
Na ih ivraeDa o>aYa& >aGavTYaPairiMaTaGau<aGa<a wRìre_NavGaaùMaahaTMYae
_vaRcqNaivk-LPaivTak-RivcarPa[Maa<aa>aaSaku-Tak-RXaañk-il/l/aNTa"k-r<aaé[YadurvGa]‚
hvaidNaa& ivvadaNavSar oParTaSaMaSTaMaaYaaMaYae ke-vl/ WvaTMaMaaYaaMaNTaDaaRYa
k-ae NvQaaeR dugaR$= wv >aviTa SvæPaÜYaa>aavaTa( )) 36 ))
na hi virodha ubhayaà bhagavaty aparimita-guëa-gaëa éçvare
'navagähya-mähätmye
'rväcéna-vikalpa-vitarka-vicära-pramäëäbhäsa-kutarka-çästra-kaliläntaùkaraë
äçraya-duravagraha-vädinäà vivädänavasara uparata-samasta-mäyämaye
kevala evätma-mäyäm antardhäya ko nv artho durghaöa iva bhavati
svarüpa-dvayäbhävät.
SYNONYMS
na—not; hi—certainly; virodhaù—contradiction; ubhayam—both;
bhagavati—in the Supreme Personality of Godhead; aparimita—unlimited;
guëa-gaëe—whose transcendental attributes; éçvare—in the supreme
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
536
controller; anavagähya—possessing; mähätmye—unfathomable ability and
glories; arväcéna—recent; vikalpa—full of equivocal calculations;
vitarka—opposing arguments; vicära—judgments; pramäëa-äbhäsa—imperfect
evidence; kutarka—useless arguments; çästra—by unauthorized scriptures;
kalila—agitated; antaùkaraëa—minds; äçraya—whose shelter;
duravagraha—with wicked obstinacies; vädinäm—of theorists; viväda—of the
controversies; anavasare—not within the range; uparata—withdrawn;
samasta—from whom all; mäyä-maye—illusory energy; kevale—without a
second; eva—indeed; ätma-mäyäm—the illusory energy, which can do and
undo the inconceivable; antardhäya—placing between; kaù—what;
nu—indeed; arthaù—meaning; durghaöaù—impossible; iva—as it were;
bhavati—is; sva-rüpa—natures; dvaya—of two; abhävät—due to the absence.
TRANSLATION
O Supreme Personality of Godhead, all contradictions can be reconciled in
You. O Lord, since You are the Supreme Person, the reservoir of unlimited
spiritual qualities, the supreme controller, Your unlimited glories are
inconceivable to the conditioned souls. Many modern theologians argue about
right and wrong without knowing what is actually right. Their arguments are
always false and their judgments inconclusive because they have no authorized
evidence with which to gain knowledge of You. Because their minds are
agitated by scriptures containing false conclusions, they are unable to
understand the truth concerning You. Furthermore, because of polluted
eagerness to arrive at the right conclusion, their theories are incapable of
revealing You, who are transcendental to their material conceptions. You are
one without a second, and therefore in You contradictions like doing and not
doing, happiness and distress, are not contradictory. Your potency is so great
that it can do and undo anything as You like. With the help of that potency,
what is impossible for You? Since there is no duality in Your constitutional
position, You can do everything by the influence of Your energy.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
537
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, being self-sufficient, is full of
transcendental bliss (ätmäräma). He enjoys bliss in two ways—when He
appears happy and when He appears distressed. Distinctions and
contradictions are impossible in Him because only from Him have they
emanated. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the reservoir of all
knowledge, all potency, all strength, opulence and influence. There is no limit
to His powers. Since He is full in all transcendental attributes, nothing
abominable from the material world can exist in Him. He is transcendental
and spiritual, and therefore conceptions of material happiness and distress do
not apply to Him.
We should not be astonished to find contradictions in the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Actually there are no contradictions. That is the
meaning of His being supreme. Because He is all-powerful, He is not subject to
the conditioned soul's arguments regarding His existence or nonexistence. He
is pleased to protect His devotees by killing their enemies. He enjoys both the
killing and the protecting.
Such freedom from duality applies not only to the Lord but also to His
devotees. In Våndävana, the damsels of Vrajabhümi enjoy transcendental bliss
in the company of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, and they feel
the same transcendental bliss in separation when Kåñëa and Balaräma leave
Våndävana for Mathurä. There is no question of material pains or pleasures for
either the Supreme Personality of Godhead or His pure devotees, although
they are sometimes superficially said to be distressed or happy. One who is
ätmäräma is blissful in both ways.
Nondevotees cannot understand the contradictions present in the Supreme
Lord or His devotees. Therefore in Bhagavad-gétä the Lord says, bhaktyä mäm
abhijänäti: [Bg. 18.55] the transcendental pastimes can be understood through
devotional service; to nondevotees they are inconceivable. Acintyäù khalu ye
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
538
bhävä na täàs tarkeëa yojayet: the Supreme Lord and His form, name, pastimes
and paraphernalia are inconceivable to nondevotees, and one should not try to
understand such realities simply by logical arguments. They will not bring one
to the right conclusion about the Absolute Truth.
TEXT 37
SaMaivzMaMaTaqNaa& MaTaMaNauSariSa YaQaa rÂu%<@" SaPaaRidiDaYaaMa( )) 37 ))
sama-viñama-maténäà matam anusarasi yathä rajju-khaëòaù sarpädi-dhiyäm.
SYNONYMS
sama—equal or proper; viñama—and unequal or mistaken; maténäm—of those
having intelligence; matam—conclusion; anusarasi—You follow; yathä—just
as; rajju-khaëòaù—a piece of rope; sarpa-ädi—a snake, etc.; dhiyäm—of those
who perceive.
TRANSLATION
A rope causes fear for a bewildered person who considers it a snake, but not
for a person with proper intelligence who knows it to be only a rope. Similarly,
You, as the Supersoul in everyone's heart, inspire fear or fearlessness according
to one's intelligence, but in You there is no duality.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (4.11) the Lord says, ye yathä mäà prapadyante täàs
tathaiva bhajämy aham: "As one surrenders unto Me, I reward him
accordingly." The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the reservoir of
everything, including all knowledge, all truth and all contradictions. The
example cited herein is very appropriate. A rope is one truth, but some mistake
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
539
it for a snake, whereas others know it to be a rope. Similarly, devotees who
know the Supreme Personality of Godhead do not see contradictions in Him,
but nondevotees regard Him as the snakelike source of all fear. For example,
when Nåsiàhadeva appeared, Prahläda Mahäräja saw the Lord as the supreme
solace, whereas his father, a demon, saw Him as the ultimate death. As stated
in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.2.37), bhayaà dvitéyäbhiniveçataù syät: fear results
from being absorbed in duality. When one is in knowledge of duality, one
knows both fear and bliss. The same Supreme Lord is a source of bliss to
devotees and fear to nondevotees who have a poor fund of knowledge. God is
one, but people understand the Absolute Truth from different angles of vision.
The unintelligent see contradictions in Him, but sober devotees find no
contradictions.
TEXT 38
Sa Wv ih PauNa" SavRvSTauiNa vSTauSvæPa" SaveRìr" Sak-l/JaGaTk-ar<ak-ar<a>aUTa"
SavRPa[TYaGaaTMaTvaTa( SavRGau<aa>aaSaaePal/i+aTa Wk- Wv PaYaRvXaeizTa" )) 38 ))
sa eva hi punaù sarva-vastuni vastu-svarüpaù sarveçvaraù
sakala-jagat-käraëa-käraëa-bhütaù sarva-pratyag-ätmatvät
sarva-guëäbhäsopalakñita eka eva paryavaçeñitaù.
SYNONYMS
saù—He (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); eva—indeed; hi—certainly;
punaù—again; sarva-vastuni—in everything, material and spiritual;
vastu-svarüpaù—the substance; sarva-éçvaraù—the controller of everything;
sakala-jagat—of the whole universe; käraëa—of the causes;
käraëa-bhütaù—existing as the cause; sarva-pratyak-ätmatvät—because of
being the Supersoul of every living being, or being present in everything, even
the atom; sarva-guëa—of all the effects of the material modes of nature (such
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
540
as intelligence and the senses); äbhäsa—by the manifestations;
upalakñitaù—perceived; ekaù—alone; eva—indeed; paryavaçeñitaù—left
remaining.
TRANSLATION
With deliberation, one will see that the Supreme Soul, although manifested
in different ways, is actually the basic principle of everything. The total
material energy is the cause of the material manifestation, but the material
energy is caused by Him. Therefore He is the cause of all causes, the manifester
of intelligence and the senses. He is perceived as the Supersoul of everything.
Without Him, everything would be dead. You, as that Supersoul, the supreme
controller, are the only one remaining.
PURPORT
The words sarva-vastuni vastu-svarüpaù indicate that the Supreme Lord is
the active principle of everything. As described in the Brahma-saàhitä (5.35):
eko 'py asau racayituà jagad-aëòa-koöià
yac-chaktir asti jagad-aëòa-cayä yad-antaù
aëòäntara-stha-paramäëu-cayäntara-sthaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship the Personality of Godhead, Govinda, who enters the existence of
every universe and every atom by one of His plenary portions and thus
manifests His infinite energy throughout the material creation." By His one
plenary portion as Paramätmä, antaryämé, the Lord is all-pervading throughout
the unlimited universes. He is the pratyak, or antaryämé, of all living entities.
The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (13.3), kñetra-jïaà cäpi mäà viddhi
sarva-kñetreñu bhärata: "O scion of Bharata, you should understand that I am
also the knower in all bodies." Because the Lord is the Supersoul, He is the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
541
active principle of every living entity and even the atom
(aëòäntara-stha-paramäëu-cayäntara-stham). He is the actual reality.
According to various stages of intelligence, one realizes the presence of the
Supreme in everything through the manifestations of His energy. The entire
world is permeated by the three guëas, and one can understand His presence
according to one's modes of material nature.
TEXT 39
AQa h vav Tav MaihMaaMa*TarSaSaMaud]ivPa[uza Sak*-dvl/I!Yaa SvMaNaiSa
iNaZYaNdMaaNaaNavrTaSau%eNa ivSMaairTad*íé[uTaivzYaSau%le/Xaa>aaSaa" ParMa>aaGavTaa
Wk-aiNTaNaae >aGaviTa SavR>aUTaiPa[YaSauôid SavaRTMaiNa iNaTara& iNarNTar& iNav*RTa‚
MaNaSa" k-QaMau h va WTae MaDauMaQaNa PauNa" SvaQaRku-Xal/a ùaTMaiPa[YaSauôd"
SaaDavSTvÀr<aaMbuJaaNauSaeva& ivSa*JaiNTa Na Ya}a PauNarYa& Sa&SaarPaYaaRvTaR"
)) 39 ))
atha ha väva tava mahimämåta-rasa-samudra-vipruñä sakåd avaléòhayä
sva-manasi niñyandamänänavarata-sukhena
vismärita-dåñöa-çruta-viñaya-sukha-leçäbhäsäù parama-bhägavatä ekäntino
bhagavati sarva-bhüta-priya-suhådi sarvätmani nitaräà nirantaraà
nirvåta-manasaù katham u ha vä ete madhumathana punaù svärtha-kuçalä hy
ätma-priya-suhådaù sädhavas tvac-caraëämbujänuseväà visåjanti na yatra
punar ayaà saàsära-paryävartaù.
SYNONYMS
atha ha—therefore; väva—indeed; tava—Your; mahima—of glories; amåta—of
the nectar; rasa—of the mellow; samudra—of the ocean; vipruñä—by a drop;
sakåt—only once; avaléòhayä—tasted; sva-manasi—in his mind;
niñyandamäna—flowing; anavarata—continuously; sukhena—by the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
542
transcendental bliss; vismärita—forgotten; dåñöa—from material sight;
çruta—and sound; viñaya-sukha—of the material happiness; leça-äbhäsäù—the
dim reflection of a tiny portion; parama-bhägavatäù—great, exalted devotees;
ekäntinaù—who have faith only in the Supreme Lord and nothing else;
bhagavati—in the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarva-bhüta—to all living
entities; priya—who is dearmost; suhådi—the friend; sarva-ätmani—the
Supersoul of all; nitaräm—completely; nirantaram—continuously;
nirvåta—with happiness; manasaù—those whose minds; katham—how; u
ha—then; vä—or; ete—these; madhu-mathana—O killer of the Madhu demon;
punaù—again; sva-artha-kuçaläù—who are expert in the interest of life;
hi—indeed; ätma-priya-suhådaù—who have accepted You as the Supersoul,
dearmost lover and friend; sädhavaù—the devotees;
tvat-caraëa-ambuja-anuseväm—service to the lotus feet of Your Lordship;
visåjanti—can give up; na—not; yatra—wherein; punaù—again; ayam—this;
saàsära-paryävartaù—repetition of birth and death within the material world.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O killer of the Madhu demon, incessant transcendental bliss
flows in the minds of those who have even once tasted but a drop of the nectar
from the ocean of Your glories. Such exalted devotees forget the tiny reflection
of so-called material happiness produced from the material senses of sight and
sound. Free from all desires, such devotees are the real friends of all living
entities. Offering their minds unto You and enjoying transcendental bliss, they
are expert in achieving the real goal of life. O Lord, You are the soul and dear
friend of such devotees, who never need return to this material world. How
could they give up engagement in Your devotional service?
PURPORT
Although nondevotees, because of their meager knowledge and speculative
habits, cannot understand the real nature of the Lord, a devotee who has once
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
543
tasted the nectar from the Lord's lotus feet can realize what transcendental
pleasure there is in the Lord's devotional service. A devotee knows that simply
by rendering service to the Lord, he serves everyone. Therefore devotees are
real friends to all living entities. Only a pure devotee can preach the glories of
the Lord for the benefit of all conditioned souls.
TEXT 40
i}a>auvNaaTMa>avNa i}aiv§-Ma i}aNaYaNa i}al/aek-MaNaaehraNau>aav TavEv iv>aUTaYaae
idiTaJadNauJaadYaêaiPa TaezaMauPa§-MaSaMaYaae_YaiMaiTa SvaTMaMaaYaYaa SaurNarMa*GaiMa‚
ié[TaJal/crak*-iTai>aYaRQaaParaDa& d<@& d<@Dar dDaQaR WvMaeNaMaiPa >aGavÅih
Tvaí\MauTa Yaid MaNYaSae )) 40 ))
tri-bhuvanätma-bhavana trivikrama tri-nayana tri-loka-manoharänubhäva
tavaiva vibhütayo ditija-danujädayaç cäpi teñäm upakrama-samayo 'yam iti
svätma-mäyayä sura-nara-måga-miçrita-jalacaräkåtibhir yathäparädhaà
daëòaà daëòa-dhara dadhartha evam enam api bhagavaï jahi tväñöram uta
yadi manyase.
SYNONYMS
tri-bhuvana-ätma-bhavana—O Lord, You are the shelter of the three worlds
because You are the Supersoul of the three worlds; tri-vikrama—O Lord, who
assumes the form of Vämana, Your power and opulence are distributed
throughout the three worlds; tri-nayana—O maintainer and seer of the three
worlds; tri-loka-manohara-anubhäva—O You who are perceived as the most
beautiful within the three worlds; tava—of You; eva—certainly;
vibhütayaù—the expansions of energy; diti-ja-danu-ja-ädayaù—the demoniac
sons of Diti, and the Dänavas, another type of demon; ca—and; api—also (the
human beings); teñäm—of all of them; upakrama-samayaù—the time of
enterprise; ayam—this; iti—thus; sva-ätma-mäyayä—by Your own energy;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
544
sura-nara-måga-miçrita-jalacara-äkåtibhiù—with different forms like those of
the demigods, human beings, animals, mixtures and aquatics (the incarnations
Vämana, Lord Rämacandra, Kåñëa, Varäha, Hayagréva, Nåsiàha, Matsya and
Kürma); yathä-aparädham—according to their offenses;
daëòam—punishment; daëòa-dhara—O supreme chastiser; dadhartha—You
awarded; evam—thus; enam—this one (Våträsura); api—also; bhagavan—O
Supreme Personality of Godhead; jahi—kill; tväñöram—the son of Tvañöä;
uta—indeed; yadi manyase—if You think it proper.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, O personified three worlds, father of the three worlds! O strength of
the three worlds, in the form of the Vämana incarnation! O three-eyed form of
Nåsiàhadeva! O most beautiful person within the three worlds! Everything and
everyone, including human beings and even the Daitya demons and the
Dänavas, is but an expansion of Your energy. O supremely powerful one, You
have always appeared in Your forms as the various incarnations to punish the
demons as soon as they become very powerful. You appear as Lord
Vämanadeva, Lord Räma and Lord Kåñëa. You appear sometimes as an animal
like Lord Boar, sometimes a mixed incarnation like Lord Nåsiàhadeva and Lord
Hayagréva, and sometimes an aquatic like Lord Fish and Lord Tortoise.
Assuming such various forms, You have always punished the demons and
Dänavas. We therefore pray that Your Lordship appear today as another
incarnation, if You so desire, to kill the great demon Våträsura.
PURPORT
There are two kinds of devotees, known as sakäma and akäma. Pure
devotees are akäma, whereas devotees in the upper planetary systems, such as
the demigods, are called sakäma because they still want to enjoy material
opulence. Because of their pious activities, the sakäma devotees are promoted
to the higher planetary systems, but at heart they still desire to lord it over the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
545
material resources. The sakäma devotees are sometimes disturbed by the
demons and Räkñasas, but the Lord is so kind that He always saves them by
appearing as an incarnation. The Lord's incarnations are so powerful that Lord
Vämanadeva covered the entire universe with two steps and therefore had no
place for His third step. The Lord is called Trivikrama because He showed His
strength by delivering the entire universe with merely three steps.
The difference between sakäma and akäma devotees is that when sakäma
devotees, like the demigods, fall into difficulty, they approach the Supreme
Personality of Godhead for relief, whereas akäma devotees, even in the
greatest danger, never disturb the Lord for material benefits. Even if an akäma
devotee is suffering, he thinks this is due to his past impious activities and
agrees to suffer the consequences. He never disturbs the Lord. Sakäma
devotees immediately pray to the Lord as soon as they are in difficulty, but
they are regarded as pious because they consider themselves fully dependent
on the mercy of the Lord. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.14.8):
tat te 'nukampäà susamékñamäëo
bhuïjäna evätma-kåtaà vipäkam
håd-väg-vapurbhir vidadhan namas te
jéveta yo mukti-pade sa däya-bhäk
Even while suffering in the midst of difficulties, devotees simply offer their
prayers and service more enthusiastically. In this way they become firmly fixed
in devotional service and eligible to return home, back to Godhead, without a
doubt. Sakäma devotees, of course, achieve from the Lord the results they
desire from their prayers, but they do not immediately become fit to return to
Godhead. It is to be noted herein that Lord Viñëu, in His various incarnations,
is always the protector of His devotees. Çréla Madhväcärya says: vividhaà
bhäva-pätratvät sarve viñëor vibhütayaù. Kåñëa is the original Personality of
Godhead (kåñëas tu bhagavän svayam [SB 1.3.28]). All the other incarnations
proceed from Lord Viñëu.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
546
TEXT 41
ASMaak&- Taavk-aNaa& TaTaTaTa NaTaaNaa& hre Tav cr<aNail/NaYauGal/DYaaNaaNau‚
bÖôdYaiNaGa@aNaa& Svil/(r)ivvr<aeNaaTMaSaaTk*-TaaNaaMaNauk-MPaaNauriÅTaivXadåicr‚
iXaiXariSMaTaavl/aeke-Na ivGail/TaMaDaurMau%rSaaMa*Tak-l/Yaa caNTaSTaaPaMaNagaahRiSa
XaMaiYaTauMa( )) 41 ))
asmäkaà tävakänäà tatatata natänäà hare tava
caraëa-nalina-yugala-dhyänänubaddha-hådaya-nigaòänäà
sva-liìga-vivaraëenätmasät-kåtänäm
anukampänuraïjita-viçada-rucira-çiçira-smitävalokena
vigalita-madhura-mukha-rasämåta-kalayä cäntas täpam anaghärhasi
çamayitum.
SYNONYMS
asmäkam—of us; tävakänäm—who are wholly and solely dependent upon You;
tata-tata—O grandfather, father of the father; natänäm—who are fully
surrendered unto You; hare—O Lord Hari; tava—Your; caraëa—on the feet;
nalina-yugala—like two blue lotus flowers; dhyäna—by meditation;
anubaddha—bound; hådaya—in the heart; nigaòänäm—whose chains;
sva-liìga-vivaraëena—by manifesting Your own form; ätmasät-kåtänäm—of
those You have accepted as Your own; anukampä—by compassion;
anuraïjita—being colored; viçada—bright; rucira—very pleasing; çiçira—cool;
smita—with a smile; avalokena—by Your glance; vigalita—melted with
compassion; madhura-mukha-rasa—of the very sweet words from Your mouth;
amåta-kalayä—by the drops of nectar; ca—and; antaù—within the cores of
our hearts; täpam—the great pain; anagha—O supreme pure; arhasi—You
deserve; çamayitum—to curb.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
547
TRANSLATION
O supreme protector, O grandfather, O supreme pure, O Lord! We are all
surrendered souls at Your lotus feet. Indeed, our minds are bound to Your lotus
feet in meditation by chains of love. Now please manifest Your incarnation.
Accepting us as Your own eternal servants and devotees, be pleased with us and
sympathetic toward us. By Your love-filled glance, with its cool and pleasing
smile of sympathy, and by the sweet, nectarean words emanating from Your
beautiful face, free us from the anxiety caused by this Våträsura, who always
pains the cores of our hearts.
PURPORT
Lord Brahmä is considered the father of the demigods, but Kåñëa, or Lord
Viñëu, is the father of Brahmä because Brahmä took birth from the lotus
flower growing from the Lord's abdomen.
TEXT 42
AQa >aGav&STavaSMaai>ari%l/JaGaduTPaitaiSQaiTal/YaiNaiMataaYaMaaNaidVYaMaaYaaiv‚
NaaedSYaSak-l/JaqviNak-aYaaNaaMaNTaôRdYaezu bihriPa c b]øPa[TYaGaaTMaSvæPae<a
Pa[DaaNaæPae<a c YaQaadeXak-al/dehavSQaaNaivXaez& TaduPaadaNaaePal/M>ak-TaYaaNau>avTa"
SavRPa[TYaYaSaai+a<a Aak-aXaXarqrSYa Saa+aaTParb]ø<a" ParMaaTMaNa" ik-YaaiNah
vaQaRivXaezae ivjaPaNaqYa" SYaad( ivSfu-il/(r)aidi>airv ihr<YareTaSa" )) 42 ))
atha bhagavaàs taväsmäbhir
akhila-jagad-utpatti-sthiti-laya-nimittäyamäna-divya-mäyä-vinodasya
sakala-jéva-nikäyänäm antar-hådayeñu bahir api ca
brahma-pratyag-ätma-svarüpeëa pradhäna-rüpeëa ca
yathä-deça-käla-dehävasthäna-viçeñaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
548
tad-upädänopalambhakatayänubhavataù sarva-pratyaya-säkñiëa
äkäça-çarérasya säkñät para-brahmaëaù paramätmanaù kiyän iha värtha-viçeño
vijïäpanéyaù syäd visphuliìgädibhir iva hiraëya-retasaù.
SYNONYMS
atha—therefore; bhagavan—O Lord; tava—of You; asmäbhiù—by us;
akhila—all; jagat—of the material world; utpatti—of the creation;
sthiti—maintenance; laya—and annihilation; nimittäyamäna—being the
cause; divya-mäyä—with the spiritual energy; vinodasya—of You, who amuse
Yourself; sakala—all; jéva-nikäyänäm—of the hordes of living entities;
antaù-hådayeñu—in the cores of the hearts; bahiù api—externally also;
ca—and; brahma—of impersonal Brahman, or the Absolute Truth;
pratyak-ätma—of the Supersoul; sva-rüpeëa—by Your forms;
pradhäna-rüpeëa—by Your form as the external ingredients; ca—also;
yathä—according to; deça-käla-deha-avasthäna—of country, time, body and
position; viçeñam—the particulars; tat—of them; upädäna—of the material
causes; upalambhakatayä—by being the exhibitor; anubhavataù—witnessing;
sarva-pratyaya-säkñiëaù—the witness of all different activities;
äkäça-çarérasya—the Supersoul of the whole universe; säkñät—directly;
para-brahmaëaù—the Supreme Absolute Truth; paramätmanaù—the
Supersoul; kiyän—of what extent; iha—herein; vä—or; artha-viçeñaù—special
necessity; vijïäpanéyaù—to be informed; syät—may be;
visphuliìga-ädibhiù—by the sparks of the fire; iva—like; hiraëya-retasaù—to
the original fire.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, as the small sparks of a fire cannot possibly perform the actions of
the whole fire, we sparks of Your Lordship cannot inform You of the necessities
of our lives. You are the complete whole. Therefore, of what do we need to
inform You? You know everything because You are the original cause of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
549
cosmic manifestation, the maintainer and the annihilator of the entire universal
creation. You always engage in Your pastimes with Your spiritual and material
energies, for You are the controller of all these varied energies. You exist within
all living entities, within the cosmic manifestation, and also beyond them. You
exist internally as Parabrahman and externally as the ingredients of the material
creation. Therefore, although manifested in various stages, at different times
and places, and in various bodies, You, the Personality of Godhead, are the
original cause of all causes. Indeed, You are the original element. You are the
witness of all activities, but because You are as great as the sky, You are never
touched by any of them. You are the witness of everything as Parabrahman and
Paramätmä. O Supreme Personality of Godhead, nothing is unknown to You.
PURPORT
The Absolute Truth exists in three phases of spiritual
understanding—Brahman, Paramätmä and Bhagavän (brahmeti paramätmeti
bhagavän iti çabdyate [SB 1.2.11]). Bhagavän, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, is the cause of Brahman and Paramätmä. Brahman, the impersonal
Absolute Truth, is all-pervading, and Paramätmä is locally situated in
everyone's heart, but Bhagavän, who is worshipable by the devotees, is the
original cause of all causes. A pure devotee is aware that since nothing is
unknown to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He need not be informed of
a devotee's conveniences and inconveniences. A pure devotee knows that
there is no need to ask the Absolute Truth for any material necessities.
Therefore, while informing the Supreme Lord about their distress in being
attacked by Våträsura, the demigods apologized for offering prayers for their
safety. A neophyte devotee, of course, approaches the Supreme Lord for relief
from distress or poverty, or for speculative knowledge of the Lord.
Bhagavad-gétä (7.16) mentions four kinds of pious men who begin devotional
service to the Lord—one who is distressed (ärta), one in need of money
(arthärthé), one who is inquisitive (jijïäsu) and one who is searching for the
Absolute Truth (jïäné). A pure devotee, however, knows that since the Lord is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
550
omnipresent and omniscient, there is no need to offer prayers or worship Him
for one's personal benefit. A pure devotee always engages in the service of the
Lord without demanding anything. The Lord is present everywhere and knows
the necessities of His devotees; consequently there is no need to disturb Him
by asking Him for material benefits.
TEXT 43
ATa Wv SvYa& TaduPak-LPaYaaSMaak&- >aGavTa" ParMaGauraeSTav cr<aXaTa‚
Pal/aXaC^aYaa& ivivDav*iJaNaSa&SaarPairé[MaaePaXaMaNaqMauPaSa*TaaNaa& vYa& YaTk-aMaeNaae‚
PaSaaidTaa" )) 43 ))
ata eva svayaà tad upakalpayäsmäkaà bhagavataù parama-guros tava
caraëa-çata-paläçac-chäyäà vividha-våjina-saàsära-pariçramopaçamaném
upasåtänäà vayaà yat-kämenopasäditäù.
SYNONYMS
ata eva—therefore; svayam—Yourself; tat—that; upakalpaya—please arrange;
asmäkam—of us; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
parama-guroù—the supreme spiritual master; tava—of You; caraëa—of the
feet; çata-paläçat—like lotus flowers with hundreds of petals; chäyäm—the
shade; vividha—various; våjina—with dangerous positions; saàsära—of this
conditioned life; pariçrama—the pain; upaçamaném—relieving;
upasåtänäm—the devotees who have taken shelter at Your lotus feet;
vayam—we; yat—for which; kämena—by the desires; upasäditäù—caused to
come near (the shelter of Your lotus feet).
TRANSLATION
Dear Lord, You are omniscient, and therefore You know very well why we
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
551
have taken shelter at Your lotus feet, which provide shade that gives relief from
all material disturbances. Since You are the supreme spiritual master and You
know everything, we have sought shelter of Your lotus feet for instruction.
Please give us relief by counteracting our present distress. Your lotus feet are
the only shelter for a fully surrendered devotee and are the only means for
subduing all the tribulations of this material world.
PURPORT
One need only seek shelter of the shade of the Lord's lotus feet. Then all
the material tribulations that disturb him will be subdued, just as when one
comes under the shadow of a big tree, the disturbances caused by the heat of
the scorching sun are immediately mitigated, without one's asking for relief.
Therefore the whole concern of the conditioned soul should be the lotus feet
of the Lord. The conditioned soul suffering from various tribulations because
of existing in this material world can be relieved only when he seeks shelter at
the Lord's lotus feet.
TEXT 44
AQaae wRXa Jaih Tvaí\& Ga]SaNTa& >auvNa}aYaMa( )
Ga]STaaiNa YaeNa Na" k*-Z<a TaeJaa&SYañaYauDaaiNa c )) 44 ))
atho éça jahi tväñöraà
grasantaà bhuvana-trayam
grastäni yena naù kåñëa
tejäàsy asträyudhäni ca
SYNONYMS
atho—therefore; éça—O supreme controller; jahi—kill; tväñöram—the demon
Våträsura, son of Tvañöä; grasantam—who is devouring; bhuvana-trayam—the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
552
three worlds; grastäni—devoured; yena—by whom; naù—our; kåñëa—O Lord
Kåñëa; tejäàsi—all strength and prowess; astra—arrows; äyudhäni—and other
weapons; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O Lord, O supreme controller, O Lord Kåñëa, please annihilate
this dangerous demon Våträsura, Tvañöä's son, who has already swallowed all
our weapons, our paraphernalia for fighting, and our strength and influence.
PURPORT
The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (7.15-16):
na mäà duñkåtino müòhäù
prapadyante narädhamäù
mäyayäpahåta-jïänä
äsuraà bhävam äçritäù
catur-vidhä bhajante mäà
janäù sukåtino 'rjuna
ärto jijïäsur arthärthé
jïäné ca bharatarñabha
"Those miscreants who are grossly foolish, lowest among mankind, whose
knowledge is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the atheistic nature of
demons, do not surrender unto Me. O best among the Bhäratas [Arjuna], four
kinds of pious men render devotional service unto Me—the distressed, the
desirer of wealth, the inquisitive, and he who is searching for knowledge of the
Absolute."
The four classes of neophyte devotees who approach the Supreme
Personality of Godhead to offer devotional service because of material motives
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
553
are not pure devotees, but the advantage for such materialistic devotees is that
they sometimes give up their material desires and become pure. When the
demigods are utterly helpless, they approach the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in grief and with tears in their eyes, praying to the Lord, and thus
they become almost pure devotees, free from material desires. Admitting that
they have forgotten pure devotional service because of extensive material
opportunities, they fully surrender to the Lord, leaving to His consideration
whether to maintain them or annihilate them. Such surrender is necessary.
Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura sings, märabi räkhabi-yo icchä tohärä: "O Lord, I fully
surrender unto Your lotus feet. Now, as You desire, You may protect me or
annihilate me. You have the full right to do either."
TEXT 45
h&SaaYa dhiNal/YaaYa iNarq+ak-aYa
k*-Z<aaYa Ma*íYaXaSae iNaåPa§-MaaYa )
SaTSa&Ga]haYa >avPaaNQaiNaJaaé[Maaáa‚
vNTae ParqíGaTaYae hrYae NaMaSTae )) 45 ))
haàsäya dahra-nilayäya nirékñakäya
kåñëäya måñöa-yaçase nirupakramäya
sat-saìgrahäya bhava-päntha-nijäçramäptäv
ante paréñöa-gataye haraye namas te
SYNONYMS
haàsäya—unto the most exalted and pure (pavitraà paramam, the supreme
pure); dahra—in the core of the heart; nilayäya—whose abode;
nirékñakäya—supervising the activities of the individual soul; kåñëäya—unto
the Supersoul, who is a partial manifestation of Kåñëa; måñöa-yaçase—whose
reputation is very bright; nirupakramäya—who has no beginning;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
554
sat-saìgrahäya—understood only by pure devotees;
bhava-päntha-nija-äçrama-äptau—being obtainment of the shelter of Kåñëa for
persons within this material world; ante—at the ultimate end;
paréñöa-gataye—unto Him who is the ultimate goal, the highest success of life;
haraye—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; namaù—respectful
obeisances; te—unto You.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, O supreme pure, You live within the core of everyone's heart and
observe all the desires and activities of the conditioned souls. O Supreme
Personality of Godhead known as Lord Kåñëa, Your reputation is bright and
illuminating. You have no beginning, for You are the beginning of everything.
This is understood by pure devotees because You are easily accessible to the
pure and truthful. When the conditioned souls are liberated and sheltered at
Your lotus feet after roving throughout the material world for many millions of
years, they attain the highest success of life. Therefore, O Lord, O Supreme
Personality of Godhead, we offer our respectful obeisances at Your lotus feet.
PURPORT
The demigods certainly wanted Lord Viñëu to relieve their anxiety, but
now they directly approach Lord Kåñëa, for although there is no difference
between Lord Kåñëa and Lord Viñëu, Kåñëa descends to this planet in His
Väsudeva feature for the purpose of pariträëäya sädhünäà vinäçäya ca
duñkåtäm [Bg. 4.8]—protecting His devotees and annihilating the miscreants.
Demons, or atheists, always disturb the demigods, or devotees, and therefore
Kåñëa descends to punish the atheists and demons and fulfill the desire of His
devotees. Kåñëa, being the original cause of everything, is the Supreme Person,
above even Viñëu and Näräyaëa, although there is no difference between
these different forms of the Lord. As explained in Brahma-saàhitä (5.46):
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
555
dépärcir eva hi daçäntaram abhyupetya
dépäyate vivåta-hetu-samäna-dharmä
yas tädåg eva hi ca viñëutayä vibhäti
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
Kåñëa expands Himself as Viñëu the way a bright candle kindles another.
Although there is no difference between the power of one candle and another,
Kåñëa is compared to the original candle.
The word måñöa-yaçase is significant herein because Kåñëa is always famous
for relieving His devotee from danger. A devotee who has sacrificed
everything for the service of Kåñëa and whose only source of relief is the Lord
is known as akiïcana.
As expressed in the prayers offered by Queen Kunté, the Lord is
akiïcana-vitta, the property of such a devotee. Those who are liberated from
the bondage of conditioned life are elevated to the spiritual world, where they
achieve five kinds of liberation—säyujya, sälokya, särüpya, särñöi and sämépya
[Cc. Madhya 6.266]. They personally associate with the Lord in five
mellows—çänta, däsya, sakhya, vätsalya and mädhurya. These rasas are all
emanations from Kåñëa. As described by Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, the
original mellow, ädi-rasa, is conjugal love. Kåñëa is the origin of pure and
spiritual conjugal love.
TEXT 46
é[qXauk- ovac
AQaEvMaqi@Taae raJaNa( Saadr& i}adXaEhRir" )
SvMauPaSQaaNaMaak-<YaR Pa[ah TaaNai>aNaiNdTa" )) 46 ))
çré-çuka uväca
athaivam éòito räjan
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
556
sädaraà tri-daçair hariù
svam upasthänam äkarëya
präha tän abhinanditaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; atha—thereafter; evam—in this
way; éòitaù—being worshiped and offered obeisances; räjan—O King;
sa-ädaram—with proper respect; tri-daçaiù—by all the demigods from the
higher planetary systems; hariù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; svam
upasthänam—their prayer glorifying Him; äkarëya—hearing; präha—replied;
tän—unto them (the demigods); abhinanditaù—being pleased.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: O King Parékñit, when the demigods
offered the Lord their sincere prayers in this way, the Lord listened by His
causeless mercy. Being pleased, He then replied to the demigods.
TEXT 47
é[q>aGavaNauvac
Pa[qTaae_h& v" Sauré[eïa MaduPaSQaaNaivÛYaa )
AaTMaEìYaRSMa*iTa" Pau&Saa& >ai¢-êEv YaYaa MaiYa )) 47 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
préto 'haà vaù sura-çreñöhä
mad-upasthäna-vidyayä
ätmaiçvarya-småtiù puàsäà
bhaktiç caiva yayä mayi
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
557
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
prétaù—pleased; aham—I; vaù—of you; sura-çreñöhäù—O best of the demigods;
mat-upasthäna-vidyayä—by the highly advanced knowledge and prayers
offered unto Me; ätma-aiçvarya-småtiù—remembrance of the exalted
transcendental position of Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
puàsäm—of men; bhaktiù—devotional service; ca—and; eva—certainly;
yayä—by which; mayi—unto Me.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O beloved demigods, you have
offered your prayers to Me with great knowledge, and I am certainly most
pleased with you. A person is liberated by such knowledge, and thus he
remembers My exalted position, which is above the conditions of material life.
Such a devotee is fully purified by offering prayers in full knowledge. This is
the source of devotional service to Me.
PURPORT
Another name of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is Uttamaçloka,
which means that He is offered prayers with selected verses. Bhakti means
çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù [SB 7.5.23], chanting and hearing about Lord Viñëu.
Impersonalists cannot be purified, for they do not offer personal prayers to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Even though they sometimes offer prayers,
the prayers are not directed toward the Supreme Person. Impersonalists
sometimes show their incomplete knowledge by addressing the Lord as being
nameless. They always offer prayers indirectly, saying, "You are this, You are
that," but they do not know to whom they are praying. A devotee, however,
always offers personal prayers. A devotee says, govindam ädi-puruñaà tam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
558
ahaà bhajämi **: "I offer my respectful obeisances unto Govinda, unto Kåñëa."
That is the way to offer prayers. If one continues to offer such personal prayers
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he is eligible to become a pure devotee
and return home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 48
ik&- duraPa& MaiYa Pa[qTae TaQaaiPa ivbuDazR>aa" )
MaYYaek-aNTaMaiTaNaaRNYaNMataae vaH^iTa TatvivTa( )) 48 ))
kià duräpaà mayi préte
tathäpi vibudharñabhäù
mayy ekänta-matir nänyan
matto väïchati tattva-vit
SYNONYMS
kim—what; duräpam—difficult to obtain; mayi—when I; préte—satisfied;
tathäpi—still; vibudha-åñabhäù—O best of the intelligent demigods; mayi—in
Me; ekänta—exclusively fixed; matiù—whose attention; na anyat—not
anything other; mattaù—than Me; väïchati—desires; tattva-vit—one who
knows the truth.
TRANSLATION
O best of the intelligent demigods, although it is true that nothing is difficult
for one to obtain when I am pleased with him, a pure devotee, whose mind is
exclusively fixed upon Me, does not ask Me for anything but the opportunity to
engage in devotional service.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
559
When the demigods finished offering their prayers, they anxiously waited
for their enemy Våträsura to be killed. This means that the demigods are not
pure devotees. Although without difficulty one can get anything he desires if
the Lord is pleased, the demigods aspire for material profit by pleasing the
Lord. The Lord wanted the demigods to pray for unalloyed devotional service,
but instead they prayed for an opportunity to kill their enemy. This is the
difference between a pure devotee and a devotee on the material platform.
Indirectly, the Lord regretted that the demigods did not ask for pure
devotional service.
TEXT 49
Na ved k*-Pa<a" é[eYa AaTMaNaae Gau<avSTaud*k( )
TaSYa TaaiNaC^Taae YaC^ed( Yid Saae_iPa TaQaaivDa" )) 49 ))
na veda kåpaëaù çreya
ätmano guëa-vastu-dåk
tasya tän icchato yacched
yadi so 'pi tathä-vidhaù
SYNONYMS
na—not; veda—knows; kåpaëaù—a miserly living entity; çreyaù—the ultimate
necessity; ätmanaù—of the soul; guëa-vastu-dåk—who is attracted by the
creation of the modes of material nature; tasya—of him; tän—things created
by the material energy; icchataù—desiring; yacchet—one bestows; yadi—if; saù
api—he also; tathä-vidhaù—of the kind (a foolish kåpaëa who does not know
his real self-interest).
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
560
Those who think material assets to be everything or to be the ultimate goal
of life are called misers [kåpaëas]. They do not know the ultimate necessity of
the soul. Moreover, if one awards that which is desired by such fools, he must
also be considered foolish.
PURPORT
There are two classes of men—namely the kåpaëa and the brähmaëa. A
brähmaëa is one who knows Brahman, the Absolute Truth, and who thus
knows his real interest. A kåpaëa, however, is one who has a material, bodily
concept of life. Not knowing how to utilize his human or demigod life, a
kåpaëa is attracted by things created by the material modes of nature. The
kåpaëas, who always desire material benefits, are foolish, whereas brähmaëas,
who always desire spiritual benefits, are intelligent. If a kåpaëa, not knowing
his self-interest, foolishly asks for something material, one who awards it to
him is also foolish. Kåñëa, however, is not a foolish person; He is supremely
intelligent. If someone comes to Kåñëa asking for material benefits, Kåñëa does
not award him the material things he desires. Instead, the Lord gives him
intelligence so that he will forget his material desires and become attached to
the Lord's lotus feet. In such cases, although the kåpaëa offers prayers to Lord
Kåñëa for material things, the Lord takes away whatever material possessions
the kåpaëa has and gives him the sense to become a devotee. As stated by the
Lord in the Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 22.39):
ämi-vijïa, ei mürkhe 'viñaya' kene diba?
sva-caraëämåta diyä 'viñaya' bhuläiba
"Since I am very intelligent, why should I give this fool material prosperity?
Instead I shall induce him to take the nectar of the shelter of My lotus feet and
make him forget illusory material enjoyment." If one sincerely prays to God for
material possessions in exchange for devotional service, the Lord, who is not
foolish like such an unintelligent devotee, shows him special favor by taking
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
561
away whatever material possessions he has and gradually giving him the
intelligence to be satisfied only by rendering service to His lotus feet. Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura comments in this regard that if a foolish child
requests his mother to give him poison, the mother, being intelligent, will
certainly not give him poison, even though he requests it. A materialist does
not know that to accept material possessions means to accept poison, or the
repetition of birth and death. An intelligent person, a brähmaëa, aspires for
liberation from material bondage. That is the real self-interest of a human
being.
TEXT 50
SvYa& iNa"é[eYaSa& ivÜaNa( Na v¢-yjaYa k-MaR ih )
Na raiTa raeiGa<aae_PaQYa& vaH^Taae_iPa i>az¢-Ma" )) 50 ))
svayaà niùçreyasaà vidvän
na vakty ajïäya karma hi
na räti rogiëo 'pathyaà
väïchato 'pi bhiñaktamaù
SYNONYMS
svayam—personally; niùçreyasam—the supreme goal of life, namely the means
of obtaining ecstatic love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
vit-vän—one who is accomplished in devotional service; na—not;
vakti—teaches; ajïäya—unto a foolish person not conversant with the
ultimate goal of life; karma—fruitive activities; hi—indeed; na—not;
räti—administers; rogiëaù—unto the patient; apathyam—something
unconsumable; väïchataù—desiring; api—although; bhiñak-tamaù—an
experienced physician.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
562
TRANSLATION
A pure devotee who is fully accomplished in the science of devotional service
will never instruct a foolish person to engage in fruitive activities for material
enjoyment, not to speak of helping him in such activities. Such a devotee is like
an experienced physician, who never encourages a patient to eat food injurious
to his health, even if the patient desires it.
PURPORT
Here is the difference between the benedictions awarded by the demigods
and those awarded by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viñëu. Devotees
of the demigods ask for benedictions simply for sense gratification, and
therefore they have been described in Bhagavad-gétä (7.20) as bereft of
intelligence.
kämais tais tair håta-jïänäù
prapadyante 'nya-devatäù
taà taà niyamam ästhäya
prakåtyä niyatäù svayä
"Those whose minds are distorted by material desires surrender unto demigods
and follow the particular rules and regulations of worship according to their
own natures."
Conditioned souls are generally bereft of intelligence because of profound
desires for sense gratification. They do not know what benedictions to ask.
Therefore nondevotees are advised in the çästras to worship various demigods
to achieve material benefits. For example, if one wants a beautiful wife, he is
advised to worship Umä, or goddess Durgä. If one wants to be cured of a
disease, he is advised to worship the sun-god. All requests for benedictions
from the demigods, however, are due to material lust. The benedictions will be
finished at the end of the cosmic manifestation, along with those who bestow
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
563
them. If one approaches Lord Viñëu for benedictions, the Lord will give him a
benediction that will help him return home, back to Godhead. This is also
confirmed by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gétä (10.10):
teñäà satata-yuktänäà
bhajatäà préti-pürvakam
dadämi buddhi-yogaà taà
yena mäm upayänti te
Lord Viñëu, or Lord Kåñëa, instructs a devotee who constantly engages in His
service how to approach Him at the end of his material body. The Lord says in
Bhagavad-gétä (4.9):
janma karma ca me divyam
evaà yo vetti tattvataù
tyaktvä dehaà punar janma
naiti mäm eti so 'rjuna
"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities,
does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but
attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna." This is the benediction of Lord Viñëu,
Kåñëa. After giving up his body, a devotee returns home, back to Godhead.
A devotee may foolishly ask for material benedictions, but Lord Kåñëa does
not give him such benedictions, despite the devotee's prayers. Therefore
people who are very attached to material life do not generally become devotees
of Kåñëa or Viñëu. Instead they become devotees of the demigods (kämais tais
tair håta jïänäù prapadyante 'nya-devatäù [Bg. 7.20]). The benedictions of the
demigods, however, are condemned in Bhagavad-gétä. Antavat tu phalaà teñäà
tad bhavaty alpa-medhasäm: [Bg. 7.23] "Men of small intelligence worship the
demigods, and their fruits are limited and temporary." A non-Vaiñëava, one
who is not engaged in the service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is
considered a fool with a small quantity of brain substance.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
564
TEXT 51
MagavNa( YaaTa >ad]& vae dDYaÄMa*izSataMaMa( )
ivÛav]TaTaPa"Saar& Gaa}a& YaacTa Maa icrMa( )) 51 ))
maghavan yäta bhadraà vo
dadhyaïcam åñi-sattamam
vidyä-vrata-tapaù-säraà
gätraà yäcata mä ciram
SYNONYMS
maghavan—O Indra; yäta—go; bhadram—good fortune; vaù—to all of you;
dadhyaïcam—to Dadhyaïca; åñi-sat-tamam—the most exalted saintly person;
vidyä—of education; vrata—vow; tapaù—and austerities; säram—the essence;
gätram—his body; yäcata—ask for; mä ciram—without delay.
TRANSLATION
O Maghavan [Indra], all good fortune unto you. I advise you to approach the
exalted saint Dadhyaïca [Dadhéci]. He has become very accomplished in
knowledge, vows and austerities, and his body is very strong. Go ask him for his
body without delay.
PURPORT
Everyone in this material world, from Lord Brahmä down to the ant, is
eager to keep his body comfortable. A pure devotee may also be comfortable,
but he is not eager for such a benediction. Since Maghavan, the King of
heaven, still aspired for a comfortable bodily situation, Lord Viñëu advised him
to ask Dadhyaïca for his body, which was very strong due to his knowledge,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
565
vows and austerity.
TEXT 52
Sa va AiDaGaTaae dDYax(xiì>Yaa& b]ø iNaZk-l/Ma( )
Yad( va AìiXarae NaaMa TaYaaerMarTaa& VYaDaaTa( )) 52 ))
sa vä adhigato dadhyaìì
açvibhyäà brahma niñkalam
yad vä açvaçiro näma
tayor amaratäà vyadhät
SYNONYMS
saù—he; vä—certainly; adhigataù—having obtained; dadhyaì—Dadhyaïca;
açvibhyäm—to the two Açviné-kumäras; brahma—spiritual knowledge;
niñkalam—pure; yat vä—by which; açvaçiraù—Açvaçira; näma—named;
tayoù—of the two; amaratäm—liberation in one's life; vyadhät—awarded.
TRANSLATION
That saintly Dadhyaïca, who is also known as Dadhéci, personally
assimilated the spiritual science and then delivered it to the Açviné-kumäras. It
is said that Dadhyaïca gave them mantras through the head of a horse.
Therefore the mantras are called Açvaçira. After obtaining the mantras of
spiritual science from Dadhéci, the Açviné-kumäras became jévan-mukta,
liberated even in this life.
PURPORT
The following story is narrated by many äcäryas in their commentaries:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
566
niçamyätharvaëaà dakñaà pravargya-brahmavidyayoù; dadhyaïcaà
samupägamya tam ücatur athäçvinau; bhagavan dehi nau vidyäm iti çrutvä sa
cäbravét; karmaëy avasthito 'dyähaà paçcäd vakñyämi gacchatam; tayor
nirgatayor eva çakra ägatya taà munim; uväca bhiñajor vidyäà mä vädér açvinor
mune; yadi mad-väkyam ullaìghya bravéñi sahasaiva te; çiraç-chindyäà na
sandeha ity uktvä sa yayau hariù; indre gate tathäbhyetya näsatyäv ücatur
dvijam; tan-mukhäd indra-gaditaà çrutvä täv ücatuù punaù; äväà tava çiraç
chittvä pürvam açvasya mastakam; sandhäsyävas tato brühi tena vidyäà ca nau
dvija; tasminn indreëa saïchinne punaù sandhäya mastakam; nijaà te dakñiëäà
dattvä gamiñyävo yathägatam; etac chrutvä tadoväca dadhyaìì ätharvaëas tayoù
pravargyaà brahma-vidyäà ca sat-kåto 'satya-çaìkitaù.
The great saint Dadhéci had perfect knowledge of how to perform fruitive
activities, and he had advanced spiritual knowledge as well. Knowing this, the
Açviné-kumäras once approached him and begged him to instruct them in
spiritual science (brahma-vidyä). Dadhéci Muni replied, "I am now engaged in
arranging sacrifices for fruitive activities. Come back some time later." When
the Açviné-kumäras left, Indra, the King of heaven, approached Dadhéci and
said, "My dear Muni, the Açviné-kumäras are only physicians. Please do not
instruct them in spiritual science. If you impart the spiritual science to them
despite my warning, I shall punish you by cutting off your head." After
warning Dadhéci in this way, Indra returned to heaven. The Açviné-kumäras,
who understood Indra's desires, returned and begged Dadhéci for brahma-vidyä.
When the great saint Dadhéci informed them of Indra's threat, the
Açviné-kumäras replied, "Let us first cut off your head and replace it with the
head of a horse. You can instruct brahma-vidyä through the horse's head, and
when Indra returns and cuts off that head, we shall reward you and restore
your original head." Since Dadhéci had promised to impart brahma-vidyä to the
Açviné-kumäras, he agreed to their proposal. Therefore, because Dadhéci
imparted brahma-vidyä through the mouth of a horse, this brahma-vidyä is also
known as Açvaçira.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
567
TEXT 53
dDYax(xaQavR<aSTví\e vMaaR>aeÛ& MadaTMak-Ma( )
ivìæPaaYa YaTa( Pa[adaTa( Tvía YaTa( TvMaDaaSTaTa" )) 53 ))
dadhyaìì ätharvaëas tvañöre
varmäbhedyaà mad-ätmakam
viçvarüpäya yat prädät
tvañöä yat tvam adhäs tataù
SYNONYMS
dadhyaì—Dadhyaïca; ätharvaëaù—the son of Atharvä; tvañöre—unto Tvañöä;
varma—the protective covering known as Näräyaëa-kavaca;
abhedyam—invincible; mat-ätmakam—consisting of Myself;
viçvarüpäya—unto Viçvarüpa; yat—which; prädät—delivered; tvañöä—Tvañöä;
yat—which; tvam—you; adhäù—received; tataù—from him.
TRANSLATION
Dadhyaïca's invincible protective covering known as the Näräyaëa-kavaca
was given to Tvañöä, who delivered it to his son Viçvarüpa, from whom you
have received it. Because of this Näräyaëa-kavaca, Dadhéci's body is now very
strong. You should therefore beg him for his body.
TEXT 54
YauZMa>Ya& YaaicTaae_iì>Yaa& DaMaRjae_(r)aiNa daSYaiTa )
TaTaSTaEraYauDaé[eïae ivìk-MaRiviNaiMaRTa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
568
YaeNa v*}aiXarae hTaaR MataeJaoPab*&ihTa" )) 54 ))
yuñmabhyaà yäcito 'çvibhyäà
dharma-jïo 'ìgäni däsyati
tatas tair äyudha-çreñöho
viçvakarma-vinirmitaù
yena våtra-çiro hartä
mat-teja-upabåàhitaù
SYNONYMS
yuñmabhyam—for all of you; yäcitaù—being asked; açvibhyäm—by the
Açviné-kumäras; dharma-jïaù—Dadhéci, who knows the principles of religion;
aìgäni—his limbs; däsyati—will give; tataù—after that; taiù—by those bones;
äyudha—of weapons; çreñöhaù—the most powerful (the thunderbolt);
viçvakarma-vinirmitaù—manufactured by Viçvakarmä; yena—by which;
våtra-çiraù—the head of Våträsura; hartä—will be taken away; mat-tejaù—by
My strength; upabåàhitaù—increased.
TRANSLATION
When the Açviné-kumäras beg for Dadhyaïca's body on your behalf, he will
surely give it because of affection. Do not doubt this, for Dadhyaïca is very
experienced in religious understanding. When Dadhyaïca awards you his body,
Viçvakarmä will prepare a thunderbolt from his bones. This thunderbolt will
certainly kill Våträsura because it will be invested with My power.
TEXT 55
TaiSMaNa( iviNahTae YaUYa& TaeJaae_ñaYauDaSaMPad" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
569
>aUYa" Pa[aPSYaQa >ad]& vae Na ih&SaiNTa c MaTParaNa( )) 55 ))
tasmin vinihate yüyaà
tejo-'sträyudha-sampadaù
bhüyaù präpsyatha bhadraà vo
na hiàsanti ca mat-parän
SYNONYMS
tasmin—when he (Våträsura); vinihate—is killed; yüyam—all of you;
tejaù—power; astra—arrows; äyudha—other weapons; sampadaù—and
opulence; bhüyaù—again; präpsyatha—will obtain; bhadram—all good fortune;
vaù—unto you; na—not; hiàsanti—hurt; ca—also; mat-parän—My devotees.
TRANSLATION
When Våträsura is killed because of My spiritual strength, you will regain
your strength, weapons and wealth. Thus there will be all good fortune for all of
you. Although Våträsura can destroy all the three worlds, do not fear that he
will harm you. He is also a devotee and will never be envious of you.
PURPORT
A devotee of the Lord is never envious of anyone, what to speak of other
devotees. As revealed later, Våträsura was also a devotee. Therefore be was not
expected to be envious of the demigods. Indeed, of his own accord, he would
try to benefit the demigods. A devotee does not hesitate to give up his own
body for a better cause. Cäëakya Paëòita said, san-nimitte varaà tyägo vinäçe
niyate sati. After all, all one's material possessions, including his body, will be
destroyed in due course of time. Therefore if the body and other possessions
can be utilized for a better cause, a devotee never hesitates to give up even his
own body. Because Lord Viñëu wanted to save the demigods, Våträsura, even
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
570
though able to swallow the three worlds, would agree to be killed by the
demigods. For a devotee there is no difference between living and dying
because in this life a devotee engages in devotional service, and after giving up
his body, he engages in the same service in the spiritual world. His devotional
service is never hindered.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Ninth Chapter, Sixth Canto, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Appearance of the Demon Våträsura."
10. The Battle Between the Demigods and Våträsura
As described in this chapter, after Indra obtained the body of Dadhéci, a
thunderbolt was prepared from Dadhéci's bones, and a fight took place between
Våträsura and the demigods.
Following the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the demigods
approached Dadhéci Muni and begged for his body. Dadhéci Muni, just to hear
from the demigods about the principles of religion, jokingly refused to
relinquish his body, but for higher purposes he thereafter agreed to give it up,
for after death the body is usually eaten by low animals like dogs and jackals.
Dadhéci Muni first merged his gross body made of five elements into the
original stock of five elements and then engaged his soul at the lotus feet of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus he gave up his gross body. With the
help of Viçvakarmä, the demigods then prepared a thunderbolt from Dadhéci's
bones. Armed with the thunderbolt weapon, they prepared themselves to fight
and got up on the backs of elephants.
At the end of Satya-yuga and the beginning of Tretä-yuga, a great fight
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
571
took place between the demigods and the asuras. Unable to tolerate the
effulgence of the demigods, the asuras fled the battle. leaving Våträsura, their
commander in chief, to fight for himself. Våträsura, however, seeing the
demons fleeing, instructed them in the importance of fighting and dying in the
battlefield. One who is victorious in battle gains material possessions, and one
who dies in the battlefield attains a residence at once in the celestial heavens.
In either way, the fighter benefits.
TEXT 1
é[qbadraYai<aåvac
wNd]Maev& SaMaaidXYa >aGavaNa( ivì>aavNa" )
PaXYaTaaMaiNaMaeza<aa& Ta}aEvaNTadRDae hir" )) 1 ))
çré-bädaräyaëir uväca
indram evaà samädiçya
bhagavän viçva-bhävanaù
paçyatäm animeñäëäà
tatraiväntardadhe hariù
SYNONYMS
çré-bädaräyaëiù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; indram—Indra, the
heavenly King; evam—thus; samädiçya—after instructing; bhagavän—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; viçva-bhävanaù—the original cause of all
cosmic manifestations; paçyatäm animeñäëäm—while the demigods were
looking on; tatra—then and there; eva—indeed; antardadhe—disappeared;
hariù—the Lord.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
572
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: After instructing Indra in this way, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, the cause of the cosmic manifestation,
then and there disappeared from the presence of the onlooking demigods.
TEXT 2
TaQaai>aYaaicTaae devE‰RizraQavR<aae MahaNa( )
MaaedMaaNa ovaced& Pa[hSaiàv >aarTa )) 2 ))
tathäbhiyäcito devair
åñir ätharvaëo mahän
modamäna uväcedaà
prahasann iva bhärata
SYNONYMS
tathä—in that manner; abhiyäcitaù—being begged; devaiù—by the demigods;
åñiù—the great saintly person; ätharvaëaù—Dadhéci, the son of Atharvä;
mahän—the great personality; modamänaù—being merry; uväca—said;
idam—this; prahasan—smiling; iva—somewhat; bhärata—O Mahäräja
Parékñit.
TRANSLATION
O King Parékñit, following the Lord's instructions, the demigods approached
Dadhéci, the son of Atharvä. He was very liberal, and when they begged him to
give them his body, he at once partially agreed. However, just to hear religious
instructions from them, he smiled and jokingly spoke as follows.
TEXT 3
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
573
AiPa v*Ndark-a YaUYa& Na JaaNaqQa Xarqir<aaMa( )
Sa&SQaaYaa& YaSTvi>ad]aehae du"SahêeTaNaaPah" )) 3 ))
api våndärakä yüyaà
na jänétha çarériëäm
saàsthäyäà yas tv abhidroho
duùsahaç cetanäpahaù
SYNONYMS
api—although; våndärakäù—O demigods; yüyam—all of you; na jänétha—do
not know; çarériëäm—of those who have material bodies; saàsthäyäm—at the
time of death, or while quitting this body; yaù—which; tu—then;
abhidrohaù—severe pain; duùsahaù—unbearable; cetana—the consciousness;
apahaù—which takes away.
TRANSLATION
O elevated demigods, at the time of death, severe, unbearable pain takes
away the consciousness of all living entities who have accepted material bodies.
Don't you know about this pain?
TEXT 4
iJaJaqivzU<aa& JaqvaNaaMaaTMaa Pa[eï wheiPSaTa" )
k- oTSaheTa Ta& daTau& i>a+aMaa<aaYa ivZ<ave )) 4 ))
jijéviñüëäà jévänäm
ätmä preñöha ihepsitaù
ka utsaheta taà dätuà
bhikñamäëäya viñëave
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
574
SYNONYMS
jijéviñüëäm—aspiring to remain alive; jévänäm—of all living entities;
ätmä—the body; preñöhaù—very dear; iha—here; épsitaù—desired; kaù—who;
utsaheta—can bear; tam—that body; dätum—to deliver;
bhikñamäëäya—begging; viñëave—even to Lord Viñëu.
TRANSLATION
In this material world, every living entity is very much addicted to his
material body. Struggling to keep his body forever, everyone tries to protect it
by all means, even at the sacrifice of all his possessions. Therefore, who would
be prepared to deliver his body to anyone, even if it were demanded by Lord
Viñëu?
PURPORT
It is said, ätmänaà sarvato rakñet tato dharmaà tato dhanam: one must
protect his body by all means; then he may protect his religious principles and
thereafter his possessions. This is the natural desire of all living entities. No
one wants to give up his body unless it is forcibly given away. Even though the
demigods said that they were demanding Dadhéci's body for their benefit in
accordance with the order of Lord Viñëu, Dadhéci superficially refused to give
them his body.
TEXT 5
é[qdeva Ocu"
ik&- Nau Tad( duSTYaJa& b]øNa( Pau&Saa& >aUTaaNauk-iMPaNaaMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
575
>aviÜDaaNaa& MahTaa& Pau<Yaëaeke-@yk-MaR<aaMa( )) 5 ))
çré-devä ücuù
kià nu tad dustyajaà brahman
puàsäà bhütänukampinäm
bhavad-vidhänäà mahatäà
puëya-çlokeòya-karmaëäm
SYNONYMS
çré-deväù ücuù—the demigods said; kim—what; nu—indeed; tat—that;
dustyajam—difficult to give up; brahman—O exalted brähmaëa; puàsäm—of
persons; bhüta-anukampinäm—who are very sympathetic toward the suffering
living entities; bhavat-vidhänäm—like Your Lordship; mahatäm—who are very
great; puëya-çloka-éòya-karmaëäm—whose pious activities are praised by all
great souls.
TRANSLATION
The demigods replied: O exalted brähmaëa, pious persons like you, whose
activities are praiseworthy, are very kind and affectionate to people in general.
What can't such pious souls give for the benefit of others? They can give
everything, including their bodies.
TEXT 6
NaUNa& SvaQaRParae l/aek-ae Na ved ParSa&k-$=Ma( )
Yaid ved Na YaaceTa NaeiTa Naah Yadqìr" )) 6 ))
nünaà svärtha-paro loko
na veda para-saìkaöam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
576
yadi veda na yäceta
neti näha yad éçvaraù
SYNONYMS
nünam—certainly; sva-artha-paraù—interested only in sense gratification in
this life or the next; lokaù—materialistic people in general; na—not;
veda—know; para-saìkaöam—the pain of others; yadi—if; veda—know;
na—not; yäceta—would ask; na—no; iti—thus; na äha—does not say;
yat—since; éçvaraù—able to give charity.
TRANSLATION
Those who are too self-interested beg something from others, not knowing of
others' pain. But if the beggar knew the difficulty of the giver, he would not ask
for anything. Similarly, he who is able to give charity does not know the
beggar's difficulty, for otherwise he would not refuse to give the beggar
anything he might want as charity.
PURPORT
This verse describes two people—one who gives charity and one who begs
for it. A beggar should not ask charity from a person who is in difficulty.
Similarly, one who is able to give charity should not deny a beggar. These are
the moral instructions of the çästra. Cäëakya Paëòita says, san-nimitte varaà
tyägo vinäçe niyate sati: everything within this material world will be destroyed,
and therefore one should use everything for good purposes. If one is advanced
in knowledge, he must always be prepared to sacrifice anything for a better
cause. At the present moment the entire world is in a dangerous position
under the spell of a godless civilization. The Kåñëa consciousness movement
needs many exalted, learned persons who will sacrifice their lives to revive
God consciousness throughout the world. We therefore invite all men and
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
577
women advanced in knowledge to join the Kåñëa consciousness movement and
sacrifice their lives for the great cause of reviving the God consciousness of
human society.
TEXT 7
é[q‰izåvac
DaMa| v" é[aeTauk-aMaeNa YaUYa& Mae Pa[TYaudaôTaa" )
Wz v" iPa[YaMaaTMaaNa& TYaJaNTa& Sa&TYaJaaMYahMa( )) 7 ))
çré-åñir uväca
dharmaà vaù çrotu-kämena
yüyaà me pratyudähåtäù
eña vaù priyam ätmänaà
tyajantaà santyajämy aham
SYNONYMS
çré-åñiù uväca—the great saint Dadhéci said; dharmam—the principles of
religion; vaù—from you; çrotu-kämena—by the desire to hear; yüyam—you;
me—by me; pratyudähåtäù—replied to the contrary; eñaù—this; vaù—for you;
priyam—dear; ätmänam—body; tyajantam—leaving me anyway, today or
tomorrow; santyajämi—give up; aham—I.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Dadhéci said: Just to hear from you about religious principles,
I refused to offer my body at your request. Now, although my body is extremely
dear to me, I must give it up for your better purposes since I know that it will
leave me today or tomorrow.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
578
TEXT 8
Yaae_Da]uve<aaTMaNaa NaaQaa Na DaMa| Na YaXa" PauMaaNa( )
wRheTa >aUTadYaYaa Sa XaaeCYa" SQaavrEriPa )) 8 ))
yo 'dhruveëätmanä näthä
na dharmaà na yaçaù pumän
éheta bhüta-dayayä
sa çocyaù sthävarair api
SYNONYMS
yaù—anyone who; adhruveëa—impermanent; ätmanä—by the body;
näthäù—O lords; na—not; dharmam—religious principles; na—not;
yaçaù—fame; pumän—a person; éheta—endeavors for; bhüta-dayayä—by
mercy for the living beings; saù—that person; çocyaù—pitiable; sthävaraiù—by
the immobile creatures; api—even.
TRANSLATION
O demigods, one who has no compassion for humanity in its suffering and
does not sacrifice his impermanent body for the higher causes of religious
principles or eternal glory is certainly pitied even by the immovable beings.
PURPORT
In this regard, a very exalted example was set by Lord Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu and the six Gosvämés of Våndävana. Concerning Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu it is said in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.5.34):
tyaktvä sudustyaja-surepsita-räjya-lakñméà
dharmiñöha ärya-vacasä yad agäd araëyam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
579
mäyä-mågaà dayitayepsitam anvadhävad
vande mahä-puruña te caraëäravindam
"We offer our respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of the Lord, upon whom
one should always meditate. He left His householder life, leaving aside His
eternal consort, whom even the denizens of heaven adore. He went into the
forest to deliver the fallen souls, who are put into illusion by material energy."
To accept sannyäsa means to commit civil suicide, but sannyäsa is compulsory,
at least for every brähmaëa, every first-class human being. Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu had a very young and beautiful wife and a very affectionate
mother. Indeed, the affectionate dealings of His family members were so
pleasing that even the demigods could not expect such happiness at home.
Nevertheless, for the deliverance of all the fallen souls of the world, Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu took sannyäsa and left home when He was only
twenty-four years old. He lived a very strict life as a sannyäsé, refusing all
bodily comforts. Similarly, His disciples the six Gosvämés were ministers who
held exalted positions in society, but they also left everything to join the
movement of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. Çréniväsa Äcärya says:
tyaktvä türëam açeña-maëòala-pati-çreëéà sadä tucchavat
bhütvä déna-gaëeçakau karuëayä kaupéna-kanthäçritau
These Gosvämés left their very comfortable lives as ministers. Zamindars and
learned scholars and joined Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu's movement, just to
show mercy to the fallen souls of the world (déna-gaëeçakau karuëayä).
Accepting very humble lives as mendicants, wearing no more than loincloths
and torn quilts (kaupéna-kantha). they lived in Våndävana and followed Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu's order to excavate Våndävana's lost glories.
Similarly. everyone else with a materially comfortable condition in this
world should join the Kåñëa consciousness movement to elevate the fallen
souls. The words bhüta-dayayä, mäyä-mågaà dayitayepsitam and
déna-gaëeçakau karuëayä all convey the same sense. These are very significant
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
580
words for those interested in elevating human society to a proper
understanding of life. One should join the Kåñëa consciousness movement,
following the examples of such great personalities as Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu, the six Gosvämés and, before them, the great sage Dadhéci.
Instead of wasting one's life for temporary bodily comforts. one should always
be prepared to give up one's life for better causes. After all, the body will be
destroyed. Therefore one should sacrifice it for the glory of distributing
religious principles throughout the world.
TEXT 9
WTaavaNaVYaYaae DaMaR" Pau<YaëaekE-åPaaiSaTa" )
Yaae >aUTaXaaek-hzaR>YaaMaaTMaa XaaeciTa ôZYaiTa )) 9 ))
etävän avyayo dharmaù
puëya-çlokair upäsitaù
yo bhüta-çoka-harñäbhyäm
ätmä çocati håñyati
SYNONYMS
etävän—this much; avyayaù—imperishable; dharmaù—religious principle;
puëya-çlokaiù—by famous persons who are celebrated as pious;
upäsitaù—recognized; yaù—which; bhüta—of the living beings; çoka—by the
distress; harñäbhyäm—and by the happiness; ätmä—the mind;
çocati—laments; håñyati—feels happiness.
TRANSLATION
If one is unhappy to see the distress of other living beings and happy to see
their happiness, his religious principles are appreciated as imperishable by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
581
exalted persons who are considered pious and benevolent.
PURPORT
One generally follows different types of religious principles or performs
various occupational duties according to the body given to him by the modes of
material nature. In this verse, however, real religious principles are explained.
Everyone should be unhappy to see others in distress and happy to see others
happy. Ätmavat sarva-bhüteñu: one should feel the happiness and distress of
others as his own. It is on this basis that the Buddhist religious principle of
nonviolence—ahiàsaù parama-dharmaù—is established. We feel pain when
someone disturbs us, and therefore we should not inflict pain upon other living
beings. Lord Buddha's mission was to stop unnecessary animal killing, and
therefore he preached that the greatest religious principle is nonviolence.
One cannot continue killing animals and at the same time be a religious
man. That is the greatest hypocrisy. Jesus Christ said, "Do not kill," but
hypocrites nevertheless maintain thousands of slaughterhouses while posing as
Christians. Such hypocrisy is condemned in this verse. One should be happy to
see others happy, and one should be unhappy to see others unhappy. This is
the principle to be followed. Unfortunately, at the present moment so-called
philanthropists and humanitarians advocate the happiness of humanity at the
cost of the lives of poor animals. That is not recommended herein. This verse
clearly says that one should be compassionate to all living entities. Regardless
of whether human, animal, tree or plant, all living entities are sons of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Lord Kåñëa says in Bhagavad-gétä (14.4):
sarva-yoniñu kaunteya
mürtayaù sambhavanti yäù
täsäà brahma mahad yonir
ahaà béja-pradaù pitä
"It should be understood that all species of life, O son of Kunté, are made
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
582
possible by birth in this material nature, and that I am the seed-giving father."
The different forms of these living entities are only their external dresses.
Every living being is actually a spirit soul, a part and parcel of God. Therefore
one should not favor only one kind of living being. A Vaiñëava sees all living
entities as part and parcel of God. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (5.18 and
18.54):
vidyä-vinaya-sampanne
brähmaëe gavi hastini
çuni caiva çvapäke ca
paëòitäù sama-darçinaù
"The humble sage, by virtue of true knowledge, sees with equal vision a learned
and gentle brähmaëa, a cow, an elephant, a dog and a dog-eater [outcaste]."
brahma-bhütaù prasannätmä
na çocati na käìkñati
samaù sarveñu bhüteñu
mad-bhaktià labhate paräm
[Bg. 18.54]
"One who is transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme Brahman
and becomes fully joyful. He never laments nor desires to have anything; he is
equally disposed to every living entity. In that state he attains pure devotional
service unto Me." A Vaiñëava, therefore, is truly a perfect person because he
laments to see others unhappy and feels joy at seeing others happy. A Vaiñëava
is para-duùkha-duùkhé; he is always unhappy to see the conditioned souls in an
unhappy state of materialism. Therefore a Vaiñëava is always busy preaching
Kåñëa consciousness throughout the world.
TEXT 10
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
583
Ahae dENYaMahae k-í& PaarKYaE" +a<a>ax(GaurE" )
YaàaePaku-YaaRdSvaQaOEMaRTYaR" SvjaiTaivGa]hE" )) 10 ))
aho dainyam aho kañöaà
pärakyaiù kñaëa-bhaìguraiù
yan nopakuryäd asvärthair
martyaù sva-jïäti-vigrahaiù
SYNONYMS
aho—alas; dainyam—a miserable condition; aho—alas; kañöam—simply
tribulation; pärakyaiù—which after death are eatable by dogs and jackals;
kñaëa-bhaìguraiù—perishable at any moment; yat—because; na—not;
upakuryät—would help; a-sva-arthaiù—not meant for self-interest;
martyaù—a living entity destined to die; sva—with his wealth; jïäti—relatives
and friends; vigrahaiù—and his body.
TRANSLATION
This body, which is eatable by jackals and dogs after death, does not actually
do any good for me, the spirit soul. It is usable only for a short time and may
perish at any moment. The body and its possessions, its riches and relatives,
must all be engaged for the benefit of others, or else they will be sources of
tribulation and misery.
PURPORT
Similar advice is also given in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.22.35):
etävaj janma-säphalyaà
dehinäm iha dehiñu
präëair arthair dhiyä väcä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
584
çreya-äcaraëaà sadä
"It is the duty of every living being to perform welfare activities for the benefit
of others with his life, wealth, intelligence and words." This is the mission of
life. One's own body and the bodies of his friends and relatives, as well as one's
own riches and everything else one has, should be engaged for the benefit of
others. This is the mission of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. As stated in
Caitanya-caritämåta (Ädi 9.41):
bhärata-bhümite haila manuñya-janma yära
janma särthaka kari' kara para-upakära
"One who has taken birth as a human being in the land of India
[Bhärata-varña] should make his life successful and work for the benefit of all
other people.
The word upakuryät means para-upakära, helping others. Of course, in
human society there are many institutions to help others, but because
philanthropists do not know how to help others, their propensity for
philanthropy is ineffectual. They do not know the ultimate goal of life (çreya
äcaraëam), which is to please the Supreme Lord. If all philanthropic and
humanitarian activities were directed toward achieving the ultimate goal of
life—to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead—they would all be
perfect. Humanitarian work without Kåñëa is nothing. Kåñëa must be brought
to the center of all our activities; otherwise no activity will have value.
TEXT 11
é[qbadraYai<aåvac
Wv& k*-TaVYaviSaTaae dDYax(xaQavR<aSTaNauMa( )
Pare >aGaviTa b]ø<YaaTMaaNa& SaàYaÅhaE )) 11 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
585
çré-bädaräyaëir uväca
evaà kåta-vyavasito
dadhyaìì ätharvaëas tanum
pare bhagavati brahmaëy
ätmänaà sannayaï jahau
SYNONYMS
çré-bädaräyaëiù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—thus;
kåta-vyavasitaù—making certain of what to do (in giving his body to the
demigods); dadhyaì—Dadhéci Muni; ätharvaëaù—the son of Atharvä;
tanum—his body; pare—to the Supreme; bhagavati—Personality of Godhead;
brahmaëi—the Supreme Brahman; ätmänam—himself. the spirit soul;
sannayan—offering; jahau—gave up.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Dadhéci Muni, the son of Atharvä, thus
resolved to give his body to the service of the demigods. He placed himself, the
spirit soul, at the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and in this
way gave up his gross material body made of five elements.
PURPORT
As indicated by the words pare bhagavati brahmaëy ätmänaà sannayan,
Dadhéci placed himself, as spirit soul, at the lotus feet of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. In this regard, one may refer to the incident of
Dhåtaräñöra's leaving his body, as described in the First Canto of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.13.55). Dhåtaräñöra analytically divided his gross
material body into the five different elements of which it was made—earth,
water, fire, air and ether—and distributed them to the different reservoirs of
these elements; in other words, he merged these five elements into the original
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
586
mahat-tattva. By identifying his material conception of life, he gradually
separated his spirit soul from material connections and placed himself at the
lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The example given in this
connection is that when an earthen pot is broken, the small portion of the sky
within the pot is united with the large sky outside the pot. Mäyävädé
philosophers misunderstand this description of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Therefore
Çré Rämänuja Svämé, in his book Vedänta-tattva-sära, has described that this
merging of the soul means that after separating himself from the material body
made of eight elements—earth, water, fire, air, ether, false ego, mind and
intelligence—the individual soul engages himself in devotional service to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in His eternal form (éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù
sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù/ anädir ädir govindaù sarva-käraëa-käraëam [Bs. 5.1]).
The material cause of the material elements absorbs the material body, and the
spiritual soul assumes its original position. As described by Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu, jévera 'svarüpa' haya-kåñëera 'nitya-däsa': [Cc. Madhya 20.108]
the constitutional position of the living entity is that he is the eternal servant
of Kåñëa. When one overcomes the material body through cultivation of
spiritual knowledge and devotional service, one can revive his own position
and thus engage in the service of the Lord.
TEXT 12
YaTaa+aaSauMaNaaebuiÖSTatvd*Ga( ßSTabNDaNa" )
AaiSQaTa" ParMa& YaaeGa& Na deh& bubuDae GaTaMa( )) 12 ))
yatäkñäsu-mano-buddhis
tattva-dåg dhvasta-bandhanaù
ästhitaù paramaà yogaà
na dehaà bubudhe gatam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
587
SYNONYMS
yata—controlled; akña—senses; asu—the life air; manaù—the mind;
buddhiù—intelligence; tattva-dåk—one who knows the tattvas, the material
and spiritual energies; dhvasta-bandhanaù—liberated from bondage;
ästhitaù—being situated in; paramam—the supreme; yogam—absorption,
trance; na—not; deham—the material body; bubudhe—perceived; gatam—left.
TRANSLATION
Dadhéci Muni controlled his senses, life force, mind and intelligence and
became absorbed in trance. Thus he cut all his material bonds. He could not
perceive how his material body became separated from his self.
PURPORT
The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (8.5):
anta-käle ca mäm eva
smaran muktvä kalevaram
yaù prayäti sa mad-bhävaà
yäti nästy atra saàçayaù
"Whoever, at the time of death, quits his body remembering Me alone, at once
attains My nature. Of this there is no doubt." Of course, one must practice
before one is overcome by death, but the perfect yogé, namely the devotee, dies
in trance, thinking of Kåñëa. He does not feel his material body being
separated from his soul; the soul is immediately transferred to the spiritual
world. Tyaktvä dehaà punar janma naiti mäm eti: [Bg. 4.9] the soul does not
enter the womb of a material mother again, but is transferred back home, back
to Godhead. This yoga, bhakti-yoga, is the highest yoga system, as explained by
the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gétä (6.47):
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
588
yoginäm api sarveñäà
mad-gatenäntarätmanä
çraddhävän bhajate yo mäà
sa me yuktatamo mataù
"Of all yogés, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping Me in
transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in yoga and is
the highest of all." The bhakti-yogé always thinks of Kåñëa, and therefore at the
time of death he can very easily transfer himself to Kåñëaloka, without even
perceiving the pains of death.
TEXTS 13-14
AQaeNd]ae vJa]MauÛMYa iNaiMaRTa& ivìk-MaR<aa )
MauNae" Xai¢-i>aåiTSa¢-ae >aGavtaeJaSaaiNvTa" )) 13 ))
v*Taae devGa<aE" SavOEGaRJaeNd]aePaYaRXaae>aTa )
STaUYaMaaNaae MauiNaGa<aEñEl/aeKYa& hzRYaiàv )) 14 ))
athendro vajram udyamya
nirmitaà viçvakarmaëä
muneù çaktibhir utsikto
bhagavat-tejasänvitaù
våto deva-gaëaiù sarvair
gajendropary açobhata
stüyamäno muni-gaëais
trailokyaà harñayann iva
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; indraù—the King of heaven; vajram—the thunderbolt;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
589
udyamya—firmly taking up; nirmitam—manufactured; viçvakarmaëä—by
Viçvakarmä; muneù—of the great sage, Dadhéci; çaktibhiù—by the power;
utsiktaù—saturated; bhagavat—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
tejasä—with spiritual power; anvitaù—endowed; våtaù—encircled;
deva-gaëaiù—by the other demigods; sarvaiù—all; gajendra—of his elephant
carrier; upari—upon the back; açobhata—shone; stüyamänaù—being offered
prayers; muni-gaëaiù—by the saintly persons; trai-lokyam—to the three
worlds; harñayan—causing pleasure; iva—as it were.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, King Indra very firmly took up the thunderbolt manufactured by
Viçvakarmä from the bones of Dadhéci. Charged with the exalted power of
Dadhéci Muni and enlightened by the power of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Indra rode on the back of his carrier, Airävata, surrounded by all the
demigods, while all the great sages offered him praise. Thus he shone very
beautifully, pleasing the three worlds as he rode off to kill Våträsura.
TEXT 15
v*}aMa>Yad]vC^}auMaSauraNaqk-YaUQaPaE" )
PaYaRSTaMaaeJaSaa raJaNa( §u-Öae åd] wvaNTak-Ma( )) 15 ))
våtram abhyadravac chatrum
asuränéka-yüthapaiù
paryastam ojasä räjan
kruddho rudra iväntakam
SYNONYMS
våtram—Våträsura; abhyadravat—attacked; çatrum—the enemy;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
590
asura-anéka-yüthapaiù—by the commanders or captains of the soldiers of the
asuras; paryastam—surrounded; ojasä—with great force; räjan—O King;
kruddhaù—being angry; rudraù—an incarnation of Lord Çiva; iva—like;
antakam—Antaka, or Yamaräja.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Parékñit, as Rudra, being very angry at Antaka [Yamaräja] had
formerly run toward Antaka to kill him, Indra angrily and with great force
attacked Våträsura, who was surrounded by the leaders of the demoniac armies.
TEXT 16
TaTa" Saura<aaMaSaurE r<a" ParMadaå<a" )
}aeTaaMau%e NaMaRdaYaaMa>avTa( Pa[QaMae YauGae )) 16 ))
tataù suräëäm asurai
raëaù parama-däruëaù
tretä-mukhe narmadäyäm
abhavat prathame yuge
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; suräëäm—of the demigods; asuraiù—with the demons;
raëaù—a great battle; parama-däruëaù—very fearful; tretä-mukhe—in the
beginning of Tretä-yuga; narmadäyäm—on the bank of the River Narmadä;
abhavat—took place; prathame—in the first; yuge—millennium.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, at the end of Satya-yuga and the beginning of Tretä-yuga, a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
591
fierce battle took place between the demigods and the demons on the bank of
the Narmadä.
PURPORT
Herein the Narmadä does not mean the Narmadä River in India. The five
sacred rivers in India—Gaìgä, Yamunä, Narmadä, Käveré and Kåñëä—are all
celestial. Like the Ganges River, the Narmadä River also flows in the higher
planetary systems. The battle between the demigods and the demons took
place in the higher planets.
The words prathame yuge mean "in the beginning of the first millennium,"
that is to say, in the beginning of the Vaivasvata manvantara. In one day of
Brahmä there are fourteen Manus, who each live for seventy-one millenniums.
The four yugas-Satya, Tretä, Dväpara and Kali—constitute one millennium.
We are presently in the manvantara of Vaivasvata Manu, who is mentioned in
Bhagavad-gétä (imaà vivasvate yogaà proktavän aham avyayam/ vivasvän
manave präha [Bg. 4.1]). We are now in the twenty-eighth millennium of
Vaivasvata Manu, but this fight took place in the beginning of Vaivasvata
Manu's first millennium. One can historically calculate how long ago the battle
took place. Since each millennium consists of 4,300,000 years and we are now
in the twenty-eighth millennium, some 120,400,000 years have passed since
the battle took place on the bank of the River Narmadä.
TEXTS 17-18
åd]EvRSaui>araidTYaEriì>Yaa& iPaTa*viöi>a" )
MaåiÙ‰R>aui>a" SaaDYaEivRìedevEMaRåTPaiTaMa( )) 17 ))
d*îa vJa]Dar& Xa§&- raecMaaNa& SvYaa ié[Yaa )
NaaMa*ZYaàSaura raJaNa( Ma*Dae v*}aPaur"Sara" )) 18 ))
rudrair vasubhir ädityair
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
592
açvibhyäà pitå-vahnibhiù
marudbhir åbhubhiù sädhyair
viçvedevair marut-patim
dåñövä vajra-dharaà çakraà
rocamänaà svayä çriyä
nämåñyann asurä räjan
mådhe våtra-puraùsaräù
SYNONYMS
rudraiù—by the Rudras; vasubhiù—by the Vasus; ädityaiù—by the Ädityas;
açvibhyäm—by the Açviné-kumäras; pitå—by the Pitäs; vahnibhiù—and the
Vahnis; marudbhiù—by the Maruts; åbhubhiù—by the Åbhus; sädhyaiù—by
the Sädhyas; viçve-devaiù—by the Viçvadevas; marut-patim—Indra, the
heavenly King; dåñövä—seeing; vajra-dharam—bearing the thunderbolt;
çakram—another name of Indra; rocamänam—shining; svayä—by his own;
çriyä—opulence; na—not; amåñyan—tolerated; asuräù—all the demons;
räjan—O King; mådhe—in the fight; våtra-puraùsaräù—headed by Våträsura.
TRANSLATION
O King, when all the asuras came onto the battlefield, headed by Våträsura,
they saw King Indra carrying the thunderbolt and surrounded by the Rudras,
Vasus, Ädityas, Açviné-kumäras, Pitäs, Vahnis, Maruts, Åbhus, Sädhyas and
Viçvadevas. Surrounded by his company, Indra shone so brightly that his
effulgence was intolerable to the demons.
TEXTS 19-22
NaMauic" XaMbrae_NavaR iÜMaUDaaR ‰z>aae_Saur" )
hYaGa]qv" Xax(ku-iXara ivPa[icitarYaaeMau%" )) 19 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
593
Paul/aeMaa v*zPavaR c Pa[heiTaheRiTaåTk-l/" )
dETaeYaa daNava Ya+aa r+aa&iSa c SahóXa" )) 20 ))
SauMaail/Maail/Pa[Mau%a" k-aTaRSvrPairC^da" )
Pa[iTaizDYaeNd]SaeNaaGa]& Ma*TYaaeriPa duraSadMa( )) 21 ))
A>YadRYaàSa&>a]aNTaa" iSa&hNaadeNa duMaRda" )
Gadai>a" PairgaEbaR<aE" Pa[aSaMauÓrTaaeMarE" )) 22 ))
namuciù çambaro 'narvä
dvimürdhä åñabho 'suraù
hayagrévaù çaìkuçirä
vipracittir ayomukhaù
pulomä våñaparvä ca
prahetir hetir utkalaù
daiteyä dänavä yakñä
rakñäàsi ca sahasraçaù
sumäli-mäli-pramukhäù
kärtasvara-paricchadäù
pratiñidhyendra-senägraà
måtyor api duräsadam
abhyardayann asambhräntäù
siàha-nädena durmadäù
gadäbhiù parighair bäëaiù
präsa-mudgara-tomaraiù
SYNONYMS
namuciù—Namuci; çambaraù—Çambara; anarvä—Anarvä;
dvimürdhä—Dvimürdhä; åñabhaù—Åñabha; asuraù—Asura;
hayagrévaù—Hayagréva; çaìkuçiräù—Çaìkuçirä; vipracittiù—Vipracitti;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
594
ayomukhaù—Ayomukha; pulomä—Pulomä; våñaparvä—Våñaparvä; ca—also;
prahetiù—Praheti; hetiù—Heti; utkalaù—Utkala; daiteyäù—the Daityas;
dänaväù—the Dänavas; yakñäù—the Yakñas; rakñäàsi—the Räkñasas;
ca—and; sahasraçaù—by the thousands; sumäli-mäli-pramukhäù—others,
headed by Sumäli and Mäli; kärtasvara—of gold; paricchadäù—dressed in
ornaments; pratiñidhya—keeping back; indra-senä-agram—the front of Indra's
army; måtyoù—for death; api—even; duräsadam—difficult to approach;
abhyardayan—harassed; asambhräntäù—without fear; siàha-nädena—with a
sound like a lion; durmadäù—furious; gadäbhiù—with clubs; parighaiù—with
iron-studded bludgeons; bäëaiù—with arrows; präsa-mudgara-tomaraiù—with
barbed missiles, mallets and lances.
TRANSLATION
Many hundreds and thousands of demons, demi-demons, Yakñas, Räkñasas
[man-eaters] and others, headed by Sumäli and Mäli, resisted the armies of King
Indra, which even death personified cannot easily overcome. Among the
demons were Namuci, Çambara, Anarvä, Dvimürdhä, Åñabha, Asura,
Hayagréva, Çaìkuçirä, Vipracitti, Ayomukha, Pulomä, Våñaparvä, Praheti, Heti
and Utkala. Roaring tumultuously and fearlessly like lions, these invincible
demons, all dressed in golden ornaments, gave pain to the demigods with
weapons like clubs, bludgeons, arrows, barbed darts, mallets and lances.
TEXT 23
XaUlE/" ParìDaE" %ÉE" XaTaganqi>a>auRXaui<@i>a" )
SavRTaae_vaik-rNa( XañErñEê ivbuDazR>aaNa( )) 23 ))
çülaiù paraçvadhaiù khaògaiù
çataghnébhir bhuçuëòibhiù
sarvato 'väkiran çastrair
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
595
astraiç ca vibudharñabhän
SYNONYMS
çülaiù—by spears; paraçvadhaiù—by axes; khaògaiù—by swords;
çataghnébhiù—by çataghnés; bhuçuëòibhiù—by bhuçuëòis; sarvataù—all
around; aväkiran—scattered; çastraiù—with weapons; astraiù—with arrows;
ca—and; vibudha-åñabhän—the chiefs of the demigods.
TRANSLATION
Armed with lances, tridents, axes, swords and other weapons like çataghnés
and bhuçuëòis, the demons attacked from different directions and scattered all
the chiefs of the demigod armies.
TEXT 24
Na Tae_d*XYaNTa Sa&^àa" XarJaalE/" SaMaNTaTa" )
Pau«aNauPau«PaiTaTaEJYaaeRTaq„&zqv Na>aaegaNaE" )) 24 ))
na te 'dåçyanta saïchannäù
çara-jälaiù samantataù
puìkhänupuìkha-patitair
jyotéàñéva nabho-ghanaiù
SYNONYMS
na—not; te—they (the demigods); adåçyanta—were seen; saïchannäù—being
completely covered; çara-jälaiù—by networks of arrows; samantataù—all
around; puìkha-anupuìkha—one arrow after another; patitaiù—falling;
jyotéàñi iva—like the stars in the sky; nabhaù-ghanaiù—by the dense clouds.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
596
TRANSLATION
As the stars in the sky cannot be seen when covered by dense clouds, the
demigods, being completely covered by networks of arrows falling upon them
one after another, could not be seen.
TEXT 25
Na Tae XañañvzaOEgaa ùaSaedu" SaurSaEiNak-aNa( )
i^àa" iSaÖPaQae devEl/RgauhSTaE" SahóDaa )) 25 ))
na te çasträstra-varñaughä
hy äseduù sura-sainikän
chinnäù siddha-pathe devair
laghu-hastaiù sahasradhä
SYNONYMS
na—not; te—those; çastra-astra-varña-oghäù—showers of arrows and other
weapons; hi—indeed; äseduù—reached; sura-sainikän—the armies of the
demigods; chinnäù—cut; siddha-pathe—in the sky; devaiù—by the demigods;
laghu-hastaiù—quick-handed; sahasradhä—into thousands of pieces.
TRANSLATION
The showers of various weapons and arrows released to kill the soldiers of
the demigods did not reach them because the demigods, acting quickly, cut the
weapons into thousands of pieces in the sky.
TEXT 26
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
597
AQa +aq<aañXañaEgaa iGairé*(r)d]uMaaePalE/" )
A>YavzRNa( Saurbl&/ iciC^duSTaa&ê PaUvRvTa( )) 26 ))
atha kñéëästra-çastraughä
giri-çåìga-drumopalaiù
abhyavarñan sura-balaà
cicchidus täàç ca pürvavat
SYNONYMS
atha—thereupon; kñéëa—being reduced; astra—of the arrows released by
mantras; çastra—and weapons; oghäù—the multitudes; giri—of mountains;
çåìga—with the peaks; druma—with trees; upalaiù—and with stones;
abhyavarñan—showered; sura-balam—the soldiers of the demigods;
cicchiduù—broke to pieces; tän—them; ca—and; pürva-vat—as before.
TRANSLATION
As their weapons and mantras decreased, the demons began showering
mountain peaks, trees and stones upon the demigod soldiers, but the demigods
were so powerful and expert that they nullified all these weapons by breaking
them to pieces in the sky as before.
TEXT 27
TaaNa+aTaaNa( SviSTaMaTaae iNaXaaMYa
XañañPaUGaErQa v*}aNaaQaa" )
d]uMaEd*RziÙivRivDaaid]é*(r)E‚
riv+aTaa&STa}aSauirNd]SaEiNak-aNa( )) 27 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
598
tän akñatän svastimato niçämya
çasträstra-pügair atha våtra-näthäù
drumair dåñadbhir vividhädri-çåìgair
avikñatäàs tatrasur indra-sainikän
SYNONYMS
tän—them (the soldiers of the demigods); akñatän—not injured;
svasti-mataù—being very healthy; niçämya—seeing; çastra-astra-pügaiù—by
the bunches of weapons and mantras; atha—thereupon; våtra-näthäù—the
soldiers led by Våträsura; drumaiù—by the trees; dåñadbhiù—by the stones;
vividha—various; adri—of mountain s; çåìgaiù—by the peaks; avikñatän—not
injured; tatrasuù—became afraid; indra-sainikän—the soldiers of King Indra.
TRANSLATION
When the soldiers of the demons, commanded by Våträsura, saw that the
soldiers of King Indra were quite well, having not been injured at all by their
volleys of weapons, not even by the trees, stones and mountain peaks, the
demons were very much afraid.
TEXT 28
SaveR Pa[YaaSaa A>avNa( ivMaaegaa"
k*-Taa" k*-Taa devGa<aezu dETYaE" )
k*-Z<aaNaukU-le/zu YaQaa MahTSau
+aud]E" Pa[Yau¢-a OzTaq æ+avac" )) 28 ))
sarve prayäsä abhavan vimoghäù
kåtäù kåtä deva-gaëeñu daityaiù
kåñëänuküleñu yathä mahatsu
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
599
kñudraiù prayuktä üñaté rükña-väcaù
SYNONYMS
sarve—all; prayäsäù—endeavors; abhavan—were; vimoghäù—futile;
kåtäù—performed; kåtäù—again performed; deva-gaëeñu—unto the demigods;
daityaiù—by the demons; kåñëa-anuküleñu—who were always protected by
Kåñëa; yathä—just as; mahatsu—unto the Vaiñëavas; kñudraiù—by
insignificant persons; prayuktäù—used; üñatéù—unfavorable; rükña—rough;
väcaù—words.
TRANSLATION
When insignificant persons use rough words to cast false, angry accusations
against saintly persons, their fruitless words do not disturb the great
personalities. Similarly, all the efforts of the demons against the demigods, who
were favorably situated under the protection of Kåñëa, were futile.
PURPORT
There is a Bengali saying that if a vulture curses a cow to die, the curse will
not be effective. Similarly, accusations made by demoniac persons against
devotees of Kåñëa cannot have any effect. The demigods are devotees of Lord
Kåñëa, and therefore the curses of the demons were futile.
TEXT 29
Tae SvPa[YaaSa& ivTaQa& iNarq+Ya
hrav>a¢-a hTaYauÖdPaaR" )
Pal/aYaNaaYaaiJaMau%e ivSa*JYa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
600
PaiTa& MaNaSTae dDaurataSaara" )) 29 ))
te sva-prayäsaà vitathaà nirékñya
haräv abhaktä hata-yuddha-darpäù
paläyanäyäji-mukhe visåjya
patià manas te dadhur ätta-säräù
SYNONYMS
te—they (the demons); sva-prayäsam—their own endeavors;
vitatham—fruitless; nirékñya—seeing; harau abhaktäù—the asuras, those who
are not devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hata—defeated;
yuddha-darpäù—their pride in fighting; paläyanäya—for leaving the
battlefield; äji-mukhe—in the very beginning of the battle; visåjya—leaving
aside; patim—their commander, Våträsura; manaù—their minds; te—all of
them; dadhuù—gave; ätta-säräù—whose prowess was taken away.
TRANSLATION
The asuras, who are never devotees of Lord Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, lost their pride in fighting when they found all their endeavors
futile. Leaving aside their leader even in the very beginning of the fight, they
decided to flee because all their prowess had been taken away by the enemy.
TEXT 30
v*}aae_Saura&STaaNaNauGaaNa( MaNaSvq
Pa[DaavTa" Pa[e+Ya b>aaz WTaTa( )
Pal/aiYaTa& Pa[e+Ya bl&/ c >aGan&
>aYaeNa Taqv]e<a ivhSYa vqr" )) 30 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
601
våtro 'suräàs tän anugän manasvé
pradhävataù prekñya babhäña etat
paläyitaà prekñya balaà ca bhagnaà
bhayena tévreëa vihasya véraù
SYNONYMS
våtraù—Våträsura, the commander of the demons; asurän—all the demons;
tän—them; anugän—his followers; manasvé—the great-minded;
pradhävataù—fleeing; prekñya—observing; babhäña—spoke; etat—this;
paläyitam—fleeing; prekñya—seeing; balam—army; ca—and;
bhagnam—broken; bhayena—out of fear; tévreëa—intense; vihasya—smiling;
véraù—the great hero.
TRANSLATION
Seeing his army broken and all the asuras, even those known as great heroes,
fleeing the battlefield out of intense fear, Våträsura, who was truly a
great-minded hero, smiled and spoke the following words.
TEXT 31
k-al/aePaPaàa& åicra& MaNaiSvNaa&
JaGaad vac& PauåzPa[vqr" )
he ivPa[ictae NaMauce Paul/aeMaNa(
MaYaaNavRH^Mbr Mae é*<außMa( )) 31 ))
kälopapannäà ruciräà manasvinäà
jagäda väcaà puruña-pravéraù
he vipracitte namuce puloman
mayänarvaï chambara me çåëudhvam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
602
SYNONYMS
käla-upapannäm—suitable to the time and circumstances; ruciräm—very
beautiful; manasvinäm—to the great, deep-minded personalities;
jagäda—spoke; väcam—words; puruña-pravéraù—the hero among heroes,
Våträsura; he—O; vipracitte—Vipracitti; namuce—O Namuci; puloman—O
Pulomä; maya—O Maya; anarvan—O Anarvä; çambara—O Çambara;
me—from me; çåëudhvam—please hear.
TRANSLATION
According to his position and the time and circumstances, Våträsura, the
hero among heroes, spoke words that were much to be appreciated by
thoughtful men. He called to the heroes of the demons, "O Vipracitti! O
Namuci! O Pulomä! O Maya, Anarvä and Çambara! Please hear me and do not
flee."
TEXT 32
JaaTaSYa Ma*TYauDa]uRv Wv SavRTa"
Pa[iTai§-Yaa YaSYa Na ceh oeáa )
l/aek-ae YaXaêaQa TaTaae Yaid ùMau&
k-ae NaaMa Ma*TYau& Na v*<aqTa Yau¢-Ma( )) 32 ))
jätasya måtyur dhruva eva sarvataù
pratikriyä yasya na ceha kÿptä
loko yaçaç cätha tato yadi hy amuà
ko näma måtyuà na våëéta yuktam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
603
SYNONYMS
jätasya—of one who has taken birth (all living beings); måtyuù—death;
dhruvaù—inevitable; eva—indeed; sarvataù—everywhere in the universe;
pratikriyä—counteraction; yasya—of which; na—not; ca—also; iha—in this
material world; kÿptä—devised; lokaù—promotion to higher planets;
yaçaù—reputation and glory; ca—and; atha—then; tataù—from that; yadi—if;
hi—indeed; amum—that; kaù—who; näma—indeed; måtyum—death;
na—not; våëéta—would accept; yuktam—suitable.
TRANSLATION
Våträsura said: All living entities who have taken birth in this material
world must die. Surely, no one in this world has found any means to be saved
from death. Even providence has not provided a means to escape it. Under the
circumstances, death being inevitable, if one can gain promotion to the higher
planetary systems and be always celebrated here by dying a suitable death, what
man will not accept such a glorious death?
PURPORT
If by dying one can be elevated to the higher planetary systems and be
ever-famous after his death, who is so foolish that he will refuse such a glorious
death? Similar advice was also given by Kåñëa to Arjuna. "My dear Arjuna,"
the Lord said, "do not desist from fighting. If you gain victory in the fight, you
will enjoy a kingdom, and even if you die you will be elevated to the heavenly
planets." Everyone should be ready to die while performing glorious deeds. A
glorious person is not meant to meet death like cats and dogs.
TEXT 33
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
604
ÜaE Sa&MaTaaivh Ma*TYaU duraPaaE
Yad( b]øSa&Daar<aYaa iJaTaaSau" )
k-le/vr& YaaeGarTaae ivJaùad(
YadGa]<aqvsrXaYae_iNav*ta" )) 33 ))
dvau sammatäv iha måtyü duräpau
yad brahma-sandhäraëayä jitäsuù
kalevaraà yoga-rato vijahyäd
yad agraëér véra-çaye 'nivåttaù
SYNONYMS
dvau—two; sammatau—approved (by çästra and great personalities); iha—in
this world; måtyü—deaths; duräpau—extremely rare; yat—which;
brahma-sandhäraëayä—with concentration on Brahman, Paramätmä or
Parabrahma, Kåñëa; jita-asuù—controlling the mind and senses;
kalevaram—the body; yoga-rataù—being engaged in the performance of yoga;
vijahyät—one may leave; yat—which; agraëéù—taking the lead; véra-çaye—on
the battlefield; anivåttaù—not turning back.
TRANSLATION
There are two ways to meet a glorious death, and both are very rare. One is
to die after performing mystic yoga, especially bhakti-yoga, by which one can
control the mind and living force and die absorbed in thought of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The second is to die on the battlefield, leading the
army and never showing one's back. These two kinds of death are recommended
in the çästra as glorious.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, Tenth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Battle Between the Demigods and Våträsura."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
605
11. The Transcendental Qualities of Våträsura
This chapter describes Våträsura's great qualities. When the prominent
commanders of the demons fled, not hearing Våträsura's advice. Våträsura
condemned them all as cowards. Speaking very bravely, he stood alone to face
the demigods. When the demigods saw Våträsura's attitude, they were so afraid
that they practically fainted, and Våträsura began trampling them down.
Unable to tolerate this, Indra, the King of the demigods, threw his club at
Våträsura, but Våträsura was such a great hero that he easily caught the club
with his left hand and used it to beat Indra's elephant. Struck by the blow of
Våträsura, the elephant was pushed back fourteen yards and fell, with Indra on
its back.
King Indra had first accepted Viçvarüpa as his priest and thereafter killed
him. Reminding Indra of his heinous activities, Våträsura said, "If one is a
devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viñëu, and depends on
Lord Viñëu in every respect, then victory, opulence and peace of mind are all
inevitably available. Such a person has nothing for which to aspire in the three
worlds. The Supreme Lord is so kind that He especially favors such a devotee
by not giving him opulence that will hamper his devotional service. Therefore
I wish to give up everything for the service of the Lord. I wish always to chant
the glories of the Lord and engage in His service. Let me become unattached to
my worldly family and make friendships with the devotees of the Lord. I do not
desire to be promoted to the higher planetary systems, even to Dhruvaloka or
Brahmaloka, nor do I desire an unconquerable position within this material
world. I have no need for such things."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
606
TEXT 1
é[qXauk- ovac
Ta Wv& Xa&SaTaae DaMa| vc" PaTYaurceTaSa" )
NaEvaGa*õNTa SaM>a]aNTaa" Pal/aYaNaPara Na*Pa )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
ta evaà çaàsato dharmaà
vacaù patyur acetasaù
naivägåhëanta sambhräntäù
paläyana-parä nåpa
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; te—they; evam—thus;
çaàsataù—praising; dharmam—the principles of religion; vacaù—the words;
patyuù—of their master; acetasaù—their minds being very disturbed; na—not;
eva—indeed; agåhëanta—accepted; sambhräntäù—fearful;
paläyana-paräù—intent upon fleeing; nåpa—O King.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O King, Våträsura, the commander in chief of
the demons, advised his lieutenants in the principles of religion, but the
cowardly demoniac commanders, intent upon fleeing the battlefield, were so
disturbed by fear that they could not accept his words.
TEXTS 2-3
ivXaqYaRMaa<aa& Pa*TaNaaMaaSaurqMaSaurzR>a" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
607
k-al/aNaukU-lE/iñdXaE" k-aLYaMaaNaaMaNaaQavTa( )) 2 ))
d*îaTaPYaTa Sa&k]u„„„Ö wNd]Xa}aurMaizRTa" )
TaaNa( iNavaYaaOEJaSaa raJaNa( iNa>aRTSYaeRdMauvac h )) 3 ))
viçéryamäëäà påtanäm
äsurém asurarñabhaù
kälänukülais tridaçaiù
kälyamänäm anäthavat
dåñövätapyata saìkruddha
indra-çatrur amarñitaù
tän niväryaujasä räjan
nirbhartsyedam uväca ha
SYNONYMS
viçéryamäëäm—being shattered; påtanäm—the army; äsurém—of the demons;
asura-åñabhaù—the best of the asuras, Våträsura; käla-anukülaiù—following
the circumstances presented by time; tridaçaiù—by the demigods;
kälyamänäm—being chased; anätha-vat—as if no one were there to protect
them; dåñövä—seeing; atapyata—felt pain; saìkruddhaù—being very angry;
indra-çatruù—Våträsura, the enemy of Indra; amarñitaù—unable to tolerate;
tän—them (the demigods); nivärya—blocking; ojasä—with great force;
räjan—O King Parékñit; nirbhartsya—rebuking; idam—this; uväca—said;
ha—indeed.
TRANSLATION
O King Parékñit, the demigods, taking advantage of a favorable opportunity
presented by time, attacked the army of the demons from the rear and began
driving away the demoniac soldiers, scattering them here and there as if their
army had no leader. Seeing the pitiable condition of his soldiers, Våträsura, the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
608
best of the asuras, who was called Indraçatru, the enemy of Indra, was very
much aggrieved. Unable to tolerate such reverses, he stopped and forcefully
rebuked the demigods, speaking the following words in an angry mood.
TEXT 4
ik&- v oÀirTaEMaaRTauDaaRviÙ" Pa*ïTaae hTaE" )
Na ih >aqTavDa" ëagYaae Na SvGYaR" XaUrMaaiNaNaaMa( )) 4 ))
kià va uccaritair mätur
dhävadbhiù påñöhato hataiù
na hi bhéta-vadhaù çläghyo
na svargyaù çüra-mäninäm
SYNONYMS
kim—what is the benefit; vaù—for you; uccaritaiù—with those like the stool;
mätuù—of the mother; dhävadbhiù—running away; påñöhataù—from the back;
hataiù—killed; na—not; hi—certainly; bhéta-vadhaù—the killing of a person
who is afraid; çläghyaù—glorious; na—nor; svargyaù—leading to the heavenly
planets; çüra-mäninäm—of persons who consider themselves heroes.
TRANSLATION
O demigods, these demoniac soldiers have taken birth uselessly. Indeed, they
have come from the bodies of their mothers exactly like stool. What is the
benefit of killing such enemies from behind while they are running in fear? One
who considers himself a hero should not kill an enemy who is afraid of losing
his life. Such killing is never glorious, nor can it promote one to the heavenly
planets.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
609
PURPORT
Våträsura rebuked both the demigods and the demoniac soldiers because
the demons were running in fear of their lives and the demigods were killing
them from behind. The actions of both were abominable. When a fight takes
place, the opposing parties must be prepared to fight like heroes. A hero never
runs from the field of battle. He always fights face to face, determined to gain
victory or lay down his life in the fight. That is heroic. Killing an enemy from
behind is also inglorious. When an enemy turns his back and runs in fear of his
life, he should not be killed. This is the etiquette of military science.
Våträsura insulted the demoniac soldiers by comparing them to the stool of
their mothers. Both stool and a cowardly son come from the abdomen of the
mother, and Våträsura said that there is no difference between them. A similar
comparison was given by Tulasé däsa, who commented that a son and urine
both come from the same channel. In other words, semen and urine both come
from the genitals, but semen produces a child whereas urine produces nothing.
Therefore if a child is neither a hero nor a devotee, he is not a son but urine.
Similarly, Cäëakya Paëòita also says:
ko 'rthaù putreëa jätena
yo na vidvän na dhärmikaù
käëena cakñuñä kià vä
cakñuù péòaiva kevalam
"What is the use of a son who is neither glorious nor devoted to the Lord? Such
a son is like a blind eye, which simply gives pain but cannot help one see."
TEXT 5
Yaid v" Pa[DaNae é[Öa Saar& va +auçk-a ôid )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
610
AGa]e iTaïTa Maa}a& Mae Na ced( Ga]aMYaSau%e SPa*ha )) 5 ))
yadi vaù pradhane çraddhä
säraà vä kñullakä hådi
agre tiñöhata mätraà me
na ced grämya-sukhe spåhä
SYNONYMS
yadi—if; vaù—of you; pradhane—in battle; çraddhä—faith; säram—patience;
vä—or; kñullakäù—O insignificant ones; hådi—in the core of the heart;
agre—in front; tiñöhata—just stand; mätram—for a moment; me—of me;
na—not; cet—if; grämya-sukhe—in sense gratification; spåhä—desire.
TRANSLATION
O insignificant demigods, if you truly have faith in your heroism, if you have
patience in the cores of your hearts and if you are not ambitious for sense
gratification, please stand before me for a moment.
PURPORT
Rebuking the demigods, Våträsura challenged, "O demigods, if you are
actually heroes, stand before me now and try to show your prowess. If you do
not wish to fight, if you are afraid of losing your lives, I shall not kill you, for
unlike you, I am not so evil minded as to kill persons who are neither heroic
nor willing to fight. If you have faith in your heroism, please stand before me."
TEXT 6
Wv& SaurGa<aaNa( §u-Öae >aqzYaNa( vPauza irPaUNa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
611
VYaNadTa( SauMahaPa[a<aae YaeNa l/aek-a ivceTaSa" )) 6 ))
evaà sura-gaëän kruddho
bhéñayan vapuñä ripün
vyanadat sumahä-präëo
yena lokä vicetasaù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; sura-gaëän—the demigods; kruddhaù—being very angry;
bhéñayan—terrifying; vapuñä—by his body; ripün—his enemies;
vyanadat—roared; su-mahä-präëaù—the most powerful Våträsura; yena—by
which; lokäù—all people; vicetasaù—unconscious.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Våträsura, the angry and most powerful hero,
terrified the demigods with his stout and strongly built body. When he roared
with a resounding voice, nearly all living entities fainted.
TEXT 7
TaeNa devGa<aa" SaveR v*}aivSf-ae$=NaeNa vE )
iNaPaeTauMaURiC^RTaa >aUMaaE YaQaEvaXaiNaNaa hTaa" )) 7 ))
tena deva-gaëäù sarve
våtra-visphoöanena vai
nipetur mürcchitä bhümau
yathaiväçaninä hatäù
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
612
tena—by that; deva-gaëäù—the demigods; sarve—all; våtra-visphoöanena—the
tumultuous sound of Våträsura; vai—indeed; nipetuù—fell;
mürcchitäù—fainted; bhümau—on the ground; yathä—just as if; eva—indeed;
açaninä—by a thunderbolt; hatäù—struck.
TRANSLATION
When all the demigods heard Våträsura's tumultuous roar, which resembled
that of a lion, they fainted and fell to the ground as if struck by thunderbolts.
TEXT 8
MaMadR PaÙya& SaurSaENYaMaaTaur&
iNaMaqil/Taa+a& r<ar(r)duMaRd" )
Gaa& k-MPaYaàuÛTaXaUl/ AaeJaSaa
Naal&/ vNa& YaUQaPaiTaYaRQaaeNMad" )) 8 ))
mamarda padbhyäà sura-sainyam äturaà
nimélitäkñaà raëa-raìga-durmadaù
gäà kampayann udyata-çüla ojasä
nälaà vanaà yütha-patir yathonmadaù
SYNONYMS
mamarda—trampled; padbhyäm—by his feet; sura-sainyam—the army of the
demigods; äturam—who were very afraid; nimélita-akñam—closing their eyes;
raëa-raìga-durmadaù—arrogant on the battlefield; gäm—the surface of the
globe; kampayan—causing to tremble; udyata-çülaù—taking up his trident;
ojasä—with his strength; nälam—of hollow bamboo sticks; vanam—a forest;
yütha-patiù—an elephant; yathä—just as; unmadaù—maddened.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
613
TRANSLATION
As the demigods closed their eyes in fear, Våträsura, taking up his trident
and making the earth tremble with his great strength, trampled the demigods
beneath his feet on the battlefield the way a mad elephant tramples hollow
bamboos in the forest.
TEXT 9
ivl/aeKYa Ta& vJa]Darae_TYaMaizRTa"
SvXa}ave_i>ad]vTae MahaGadaMa( )
ic+aePa TaaMaaPaTaTaq& Saudu"Saha&
JaGa]ah vaMaeNa k-re<a l/Il/Yaa )) 9 ))
vilokya taà vajra-dharo 'tyamarñitaù
sva-çatrave 'bhidravate mahä-gadäm
cikñepa täm äpatatéà suduùsahäà
jagräha vämena kareëa lélayä
SYNONYMS
vilokya—seeing; tam—him (Våträsura); vajra-dharaù—the carrier of the
thunderbolt (King Indra); ati—very much; amarñitaù—intolerant; sva—his
own; çatrave—toward the enemy; abhidravate—running; mahä-gadäm—a very
powerful club; cikñepa—threw; täm—that (club); äpatatém—flying toward
him; su-duùsahäm—very difficult to counteract; jagräha—caught;
vämena—with his left; kareëa—hand; lélayä—very easily.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
614
Seeing Våträsura's disposition, Indra, the King of heaven, became intolerant
and threw at him one of his great clubs, which are extremely difficult to
counteract. However, as the club flew toward him, Våträsura easily caught it
with his left hand.
TEXT 10
Sa wNd]Xa}au" ku-iPaTaae >a*Xa& TaYaa
MaheNd]vah& GadYaaeåiv§-Ma" )
JagaaNa ku-M>aSQal/ oàdNa( Ma*Dae
TaTk-MaR SaveR SaMaPaUJaYaà*Pa )) 10 ))
sa indra-çatruù kupito bhåçaà tayä
mahendra-vähaà gadayoru-vikramaù
jaghäna kumbha-sthala unnadan mådhe
tat karma sarve samapüjayan nåpa
SYNONYMS
saù—that; indra-çatruù—Våträsura; kupitaù—being angry; bhåçam—very
much; tayä—with that; mahendra-väham—the elephant who is the carrier of
Indra; gadayä—by the club; uru-vikramaù—who is famous for his great
strength; jaghäna—struck; kumbha-sthale—on the head; unnadan—roaring
loudly; mådhe—in that fight; tat karma—that action (striking the head of
Indra's elephant with the club in his left hand); sarve—all the soldiers (on
both sides); samapüjayan—glorified; nåpa—O King Parékñit.
TRANSLATION
O King Parékñit, the powerful Våträsura, the enemy of King Indra, angrily
struck the head of Indra's elephant with that club, making a tumultuous sound
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
615
on the battlefield. For this heroic deed, the soldiers on both sides glorified him.
TEXT 11
WeravTaae v*}aGadai>aMa*íae
ivgaUi<aRTaae_id]" ku-il/XaahTaae YaQaa )
APaaSard( i>aàMau%" SaheNd]ae
MauÄàSa*k( SaáDaNau>a*RXaaTaR" )) 11 ))
airävato våtra-gadäbhimåñöo
vighürëito 'driù kuliçähato yathä
apäsarad bhinna-mukhaù sahendro
muïcann asåk sapta-dhanur bhåçärtaù
SYNONYMS
airävataù—Airävata, the elephant of King Indra;
våtra-gadä-abhimåñöaù—struck by the club in Våträsura's hand;
vighürëitaù—shaken; adriù—a mountain; kuliça—by a thunderbolt;
ähataù—struck; yathä—just like; apäsarat—was pushed back;
bhinna-mukhaù—having a broken mouth; saha-indraù—with King Indra;
muïcan—spitting; asåk—blood; sapta-dhanuù—a distance measured by seven
bows (approximately fourteen yards); bhåça—very severely; ärtaù—aggrieved.
TRANSLATION
Struck with the club by Våträsura like a mountain struck by a thunderbolt,
the elephant Airävata, feeling great pain and spitting blood from its broken
mouth, was pushed back fourteen yards. In great distress, the elephant fell, with
Indra on its back.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
616
TEXT 12
Na SaàvahaYa ivz<<aceTaSae
Pa[aYau» >aUYa" Sa Gada& MahaTMaa )
wNd]ae_Ma*TaSYaiNdk-rai>aMaXaR‚
vqTaVYaQa+aTavahae_vTaSQae )) 12 ))
na sanna-vähäya viñaëëa-cetase
präyuìkta bhüyaù sa gadäà mahätmä
indro 'måta-syandi-karäbhimarçavéta-
vyatha-kñata-väho 'vatasthe
SYNONYMS
na—not; sanna—fatigued; vähäya—upon him whose carrier;
viñaëëa-cetase—morose in the core of his heart; präyuìkta—used;
bhüyaù—again; saù—he (Våträsura); gadäm—the club; mahä-ätmä—the great
soul (who refrained from striking Indra with the club when he saw Indra
morose and aggrieved); indraù—Indra; amåta-syandi-kara—of his hand, which
produces nectar; abhimarça—by the touch; véta—was relieved; vyatha—from
pains; kñata—and cuts; vähaù—whose carrier elephant; avatasthe—stood
there.
TRANSLATION
When he saw Indra's carrier elephant thus fatigued and injured and when he
saw Indra morose because his carrier had been harmed in that way, the great
soul Våträsura, following religious principles, refrained from again striking
Indra with the club. Taking this opportunity, Indra touched the elephant with
his nectar-producing hand, thus relieving the animal's pain and curing its
injuries. Then the elephant and Indra both stood silently.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
617
TEXT 13
Sa Ta& Na*PaeNd]ahvk-aMYaYaa irPau&
vJa]aYauDa& >a]aTa*h<a& ivl/aeKYa )
SMar&ê TaTk-MaR Na*Xa&SaMa&h"
Xaaeke-Na MaaeheNa hSaÅGaad )) 13 ))
sa taà nåpendrähava-kämyayä ripuà
vajräyudhaà bhrätå-haëaà vilokya
smaraàç ca tat-karma nå-çaàsam aàhaù
çokena mohena hasaï jagäda
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Våträsura); tam—him (the King of heaven, Indra); nåpa-indra—O
King Parékñit; ähava-kämyayä—with a desire to fight; ripum—his enemy;
vajra-äyudham—whose weapon was the thunderbolt (made from the bones of
Dadhéci); bhrätå-haëam—who was the killer of his brother; vilokya—seeing;
smaran—remembering; ca—and; tat-karma—his activities; nå-çaàsam—cruel;
aàhaù—a great sin; çokena—with lamentation; mohena—by bewilderment;
hasan—laughing; jagäda—said.
TRANSLATION
O King, when the great hero Våträsura saw Indra, his enemy, the killer of
his brother, standing before him with a thunderbolt in his hand, desiring to
fight, Våträsura remembered how Indra had cruelly killed his brother. Thinking
of Indra's sinful activities, he became mad with lamentation and forgetfulness.
Laughing sarcastically, he spoke as follows.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
618
TEXT 14
é[qv*}a ovac
idíya >avaNa( Mae SaMaviSQaTaae irPau‚
YaaeR b]øha Gauåha >a]aTa*ha c )
idíyaNa*<aae_ÛahMaSataMa TvYaa
MaC^Ul/iNai>aRàd*zd(Da*daicraTa( )) 14 ))
çré-våtra uväca
diñöyä bhavän me samavasthito ripur
yo brahma-hä guru-hä bhrätå-hä ca
diñöyänåëo 'dyäham asattama tvayä
mac-chüla-nirbhinna-dåñad-dhådäcirät
SYNONYMS
çré-våtraù uväca—the great hero Våträsura said; diñöyä—by good fortune;
bhavän—Your Lordship; me—of me; samavasthitaù—situated (in front);
ripuù—my enemy; yaù—who; brahma-hä—the killer of a brähmaëa;
guru-hä—the killer of your guru; bhrätå-hä—the killer of my brother; ca—also;
diñöyä—by good fortune; anåëaù—free from debt (to my brother);
adya—today; aham—I; asat-tama—O most abominable one; tvayä—through
you; mat-çüla—by my trident; nirbhinna—being pierced; dåñat—like stone;
hådä—whose heart; acirät—very soon.
TRANSLATION
Çré Våträsura said: He who has killed a brähmaëa, he who has killed his
spiritual master—indeed, he who has killed my brother—is now, by good
fortune, standing before me face to face as my enemy. O most abominable one,
when I pierce your stonelike heart with my trident, I shall be freed from my
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
619
debt to my brother.
TEXT 15
Yaae Naae_Ga]JaSYaaTMaivdae iÜJaaTae‚
GauRraerPaaPaSYa c dqi+aTaSYa )
ivé[>Ya %ÉeNa iXara&SYav*êTa(
PaXaaeirvak-å<a" SvGaRk-aMa" )) 15 ))
yo no 'grajasyätma-vido dvijäter
guror apäpasya ca dékñitasya
viçrabhya khaògena çiräàsy avåçcat
paçor iväkaruëaù svarga-kämaù
SYNONYMS
yaù—he who; naù—our; agra-jasya—of the elder brother; ätma-vidaù—who
was fully self-realized; dvi-jäteù—a qualified brähmaëa; guroù—your spiritual
master; apäpasya—free from all sinful activities; ca—also;
dékñitasya—appointed as the initiator of your yajïa; viçrabhya—trustfully;
khaògena—by your sword; çiräàsi—the heads; avåçcat—cut off; paçoù—of an
animal; iva—like; akaruëaù—merciless; svarga-kämaù—desiring the heavenly
planets.
TRANSLATION
Only for the sake of living in the heavenly planets, you killed my elder
brother—a self-realized, sinless, qualified brähmaëa who had been appointed
your chief priest. He was your spiritual master, but although you entrusted him
with the performance of your sacrifice, you later mercilessly severed his heads
from his body the way one butchers an animal.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
620
TEXT 16
é[qhqdYaak-IiTaRi>aåiJ‡Ta& Tva&
Svk-MaR<aa PauåzadEê GaùRMa( )
k*-C^\e<a MaC^Ul/ivi>aàdeh‚
MaSPa*íviö& SaMadiNTa Ga*Da]a" )) 16 ))
çré-hré-dayä-kértibhir ujjhitaà tväà
sva-karmaëä puruñädaiç ca garhyam
kåcchreëa mac-chüla-vibhinna-deham
aspåñöa-vahnià samadanti gådhräù
SYNONYMS
çré—opulence or beauty; hré—shame; dayä—mercy; kértibhiù—and glory;
ujjhitam—bereft of; tväm—you; sva-karmaëä—by your own activities;
puruña-adaiù—by the Räkñasas (man-eaters); ca—and;
garhyam—condemnable; kåcchreëa—with great difficulty; mat-çüla—by my
trident; vibhinna—pierced; deham—your body; aspåñöa-vahnim—not even
touched by fire; samadanti—will eat; gådhräù—the vultures.
TRANSLATION
Indra, you are bereft of all shame, mercy, glory and good fortune. Deprived
of these good qualities by the reactions of your fruitive activities, you are to be
condemned even by the man-eaters [Räkñasas]. Now I shall pierce your body
with my trident, and after you die with great pain, even fire will not touch you;
only the vultures will eat your body.
TEXT 17
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
621
ANYae_Nau Yae Tveh Na*Xa&SaMaja
YaduÛTaaña" Pa[hriNTa MaùMa( )
TaE>aURTaNaaQaaNa( SaGa<aaNa( iNaXaaTa‚
i}aXaUl/iNai>aRàGalE/YaRJaaiMa )) 17 ))
anye 'nu ye tveha nå-çaàsam ajïä
yad udyatästräù praharanti mahyam
tair bhüta-näthän sagaëän niçätatriçüla-
nirbhinna-galair yajämi
SYNONYMS
anye—others; anu—follow; ye—who; tvä—you; iha—in this connection;
nå-çaàsam—very cruel; ajïäù—persons unaware of my prowess; yat—if;
udyata-asträù—with their swords raised; praharanti—attack; mahyam—me;
taiù—with those; bhüta-näthän—to such leaders of the ghosts as Bhairava;
sa-gaëän—with their hordes; niçäta—sharpened; tri-çüla—by the trident;
nirbhinna—separated or pierced; galaiù—having their necks; yajämi—I shall
offer sacrifices.
TRANSLATION
You are naturally cruel. If the other demigods, unaware of my prowess,
follow you by attacking me with raised weapons, I shall sever their heads with
this sharp trident. With those heads I shall perform a sacrifice to Bhairava and
the other leaders of the ghosts, along with their hordes.
TEXT 18
AQaae hre Mae ku-il/XaeNa vqr
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
622
hTaaR Pa[MaQYaEv iXarae Yadqh )
Ta}aaNa*<aae >aUTabil&/ ivDaaYa
MaNaiSvNaa& PaadrJa" Pa[PaTSYae )) 18 ))
atho hare me kuliçena véra
hartä pramathyaiva çiro yadéha
tatränåëo bhüta-balià vidhäya
manasvinäà päda-rajaù prapatsye
SYNONYMS
atho—otherwise; hare—O King Indra; me—of me; kuliçena—by your
thunderbolt; véra—O great hero; hartä—you cut off; pramathya—destroying
my army; eva—certainly; çiraù—head; yadi—if; iha—in this battle; tatra—in
that case; anåëaù—relieved of all debts in this material world; bhüta-balim—a
presentation for all living entities; vidhäya—arranging; manasvinäm—of great
sages like Närada Muni; päda-rajaù—the dust of the lotus feet; prapatsye—I
shall achieve.
TRANSLATION
But if in this battle you cut off my head with your thunderbolt and kill my
soldiers, O Indra, O great hero, I shall take great pleasure in offering my body
to other living entities [such as jackals and vultures]. I shall thus be relieved of
my obligations to the reactions of my karma, and my fortune will be to receive
the dust from the lotus feet of great devotees like Närada Muni.
PURPORT
Çré Narottama däsa Öhäkura sings:
ei chaya gosäïi yära, mui tära däsa
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
623
täì' sabära pada-reëu mora païca-gräsa
"I am the servant of the six Gosvämés, and the dust of their lotus feet provides
my five kinds of food." A Vaiñëava always desires the dust of the lotus feet of
previous äcäryas and Vaiñëavas. Våträsura was certain that he would be killed
in the battle with Indra, because this was the desire of Lord Viñëu. He was
prepared for death because he knew that after his death he was destined to
return home, back to Godhead. This is a great destination, and it is achieved
by the grace of a Vaiñëava. Chäòiyä vaiñëava-sevä nistära päyeche kebä: no one
has ever gone back to Godhead without being favored by a Vaiñëava. In this
verse, therefore, we find the words manasvinäà päda-rajaù prapatsye: "I shall
receive the dust of the lotus feet of great devotees." The word manasvinäm
refers to great devotees who always think of Kåñëa. They are always peaceful,
thinking of Kåñëa, and therefore they are called dhéra. The best example of
such a devotee is Närada Muni. If one receives the dust of the lotus feet of a
manasvé, a great devotee, he certainly returns home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 19
SaureXa k-SMaaà ihNaaeiz vJa]&
Paur" iSQaTae vEiri<a MaYYaMaaegaMa( )
Maa Sa&XaiYaïa Na Gadev vJa]"
SYaaiàZf-l/" k*-Pa<aaQaeRv YaaÁa )) 19 ))
sureça kasmän na hinoñi vajraà
puraù sthite vairiëi mayy amogham
mä saàçayiñöhä na gadeva vajraù
syän niñphalaù kåpaëärtheva yäcïä
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
624
sura-éça—O King of the demigods; kasmät—why; na—not; hinoñi—you hurl;
vajram—the thunderbolt; puraù sthite—standing in front; vairiëi—your
enemy; mayi—at me; amogham—which is infallible (your thunderbolt);
mä—do not; saàçayiñöhäù—doubt; na—not; gadä iva—like the club;
vajraù—the thunderbolt; syät—may be; niñphalaù—with no result;
kåpaëa—from a miserly person; arthä—for money; iva—like; yäcïä—a
request.
TRANSLATION
O King of the demigods, since I, your enemy, am standing before you, why
don't you hurl your thunderbolt at me? Although your attack upon me with
your club was certainly useless, like a request of money from a miser, the
thunderbolt you carry will not be useless. You need have no doubts about this.
PURPORT
When King Indra threw his club at Våträsura, Våträsura caught it in his left
hand and retaliated by using it to strike the head of Indra's elephant. Thus
Indra's attack was a disastrous failure. Indeed, Indra's elephant was injured and
thrown back fourteen yards. Therefore even though Indra stood with the
thunderbolt to hurl against Våträsura, he was doubtful, thinking that the
thunderbolt might also fail. Våträsura, however, being a Vaiñëava, assured
Indra that the thunderbolt would not fail, for Våträsura knew that it had been
prepared in accordance with the instructions of Lord Viñëu. Although Indra
had doubts because he could not understand that Lord Viñëu's order never
fails, Våträsura understood Lord Viñëu's purpose. Våträsura was eager to be
killed by the thunderbolt manufactured according to Lord Viñëu's instructions
because he was sure that he would thus return home, back to Godhead. He was
simply waiting for the opportunity of the thunderbolt's being released. In
effect, therefore, Våträsura told Indra, "If you want to kill me, since I am your
enemy, take this opportunity. Kill me. You will gain victory, and I shall go back
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
625
to Godhead. Your deed will be equally beneficial for both of us. Do it
immediately."
TEXT 20
NaNvez vJa]STav Xa§- TaeJaSaa
hredRDaqceSTaPaSaa c TaeiJaTa" )
TaeNaEv Xa}au& Jaih ivZ<auYaiN}aTaae
YaTaae hirivRJaYa" é[qGauR<aaSTaTa" )) 20 ))
nanv eña vajras tava çakra tejasä
harer dadhéces tapasä ca tejitaù
tenaiva çatruà jahi viñëu-yantrito
yato harir vijayaù çrér guëäs tataù
SYNONYMS
nanu—certainly; eñaù—this; vajraù—thunderbolt; tava—of yours; çakra—O
Indra; tejasä—by the prowess; hareù—of Lord Viñëu, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; dadhéceù—of Dadhéci; tapasä—by the austerities; ca—as well as;
tejitaù—empowered; tena—with that; eva—certainly; çatrum—your enemy;
jahi—kill; viñëu-yantritaù—ordered by Lord Viñëu; yataù—wherever;
hariù—Lord Viñëu; vijayaù—victory; çréù—opulences; guëäù—and other good
qualities; tataù—there.
TRANSLATION
O Indra, King of heaven, the thunderbolt you carry to kill me has been
empowered by the prowess of Lord Viñëu and the strength of Dadhéci's
austerities. Since you have come here to kill me in accordance with Lord
Viñëu's order, there is no doubt that I shall be killed by the release of your
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
626
thunderbolt. Lord Viñëu has sided with you. Therefore your victory, opulence
and all good qualities are assured.
PURPORT
Våträsura not only assured King Indra that the thunderbolt was invincible,
but also encouraged Indra to use it against him as soon as possible. Våträsura
was eager to die with the stroke of the thunderbolt sent by Lord Viñëu so that
he could immediately return home, back to Godhead. By hurling the
thunderbolt, Indra would gain victory and enjoy the heavenly planets,
remaining in the material world for repeated birth and death. Indra wanted to
gain victory over Våträsura and thereby become happy, but that would not at
all be happiness. The heavenly planets are just below Brahmaloka, but as stated
by the Supreme Lord, Kåñëa, äbrahma-bhuvanäl lokäù punar ävartino 'rjuna:
[Bg. 8.16] even if one achieves Brahmaloka, he must still fall to the lower
planetary systems again and again. However, if one goes back to Godhead, he
never returns to this material world. By killing Våträsura, Indra would not
actually gain; he would remain in the material world. Våträsura, however,
would go to the spiritual world. Therefore victory was destined for Våträsura,
not for Indra.
TEXT 21
Ah& SaMaaDaaYa MaNaae YaQaah Na"
SaªzR<aSTaÀr<aarivNde )
TvÜJa]r&haelu/il/TaGa]aMYaPaaXaae
GaiTa& MauNaeYaaRMYaPaivÖl/aek-" )) 21 ))
ahaà samädhäya mano yathäha naù
saìkarñaëas tac-caraëäravinde
tvad-vajra-raàho-lulita-grämya-päço
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
627
gatià muner yämy apaviddha-lokaù
SYNONYMS
aham—I; samädhäya—fixing firmly; manaù—the mind; yathä—just as;
äha—said; naù—our; saìkarñaëaù—Lord Saìkarñaëa; tat-caraëa-aravinde—at
His lotus feet; tvat-vajra—of your thunderbolt; raàhaù—by the force;
lulita—torn; grämya—of material attachment; päçaù—the rope; gatim—the
destination; muneù—of Närada Muni and other devotees; yämi—I shall
achieve; apaviddha—giving up; lokaù—this material world (where one desires
all kinds of impermanent things).
TRANSLATION
By the force of your thunderbolt, I shall be freed of material bondage and
shall give up this body and this world of material desires. Fixing my mind upon
the lotus feet of Lord Saìkarñaëa, I shall attain the destination of such great
sages as Närada Muni, just as Lord Saìkarñaëa has said.
PURPORT
The words ahaà samädhäya manaù indicate that the most important duty
at the time of death is to concentrate one's mind. If one can fix his mind on
the lotus feet of Kåñëa, Viñëu, Saìkarñaëa or any Viñëu mürti, his life will be
successful. To be killed while fixing his mind at the lotus feet of Saìkarñaëa,
Våträsura asked Indra to release his vajra, or thunderbolt. He was destined to
be killed by the thunderbolt given by Lord Viñëu; there was no question of its
being baffled. Therefore Våträsura requested Indra to release the thunderbolt
immediately, and he prepared himself by fixing his mind at the lotus feet of
Kåñëa. A devotee is always ready to give up his material body, which is
described herein as grämya-päça, the rope of material attachment. The body is
not at all good; it is simply a cause of bondage to the material world.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
628
Unfortunately, even though the body is destined for destruction, fools and
rascals invest all their faith in the body and are never eager to return home,
back to Godhead.
TEXT 22
Pau&Saa& ik-lE/k-aNTaiDaYaa& Svk-aNaa&
Yaa" SaMPadae idiv >aUMaaE rSaaYaaMa( )
Na raiTa Yad( Üez oÜeGa AaiDa‚
MaRd" k-il/VYaRSaNa& Sa&Pa[YaaSa" )) 22 ))
puàsäà kilaikänta-dhiyäà svakänäà
yäù sampado divi bhümau rasäyäm
na räti yad dveña udvega ädhir
madaù kalir vyasanaà samprayäsaù
SYNONYMS
puàsäm—unto persons; kila—certainly; ekänta-dhiyäm—who are advanced in
spiritual consciousness; svakänäm—who are recognized by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead as His own; yäù—which; sampadaù—opulences;
divi—in the upper planetary systems; bhümau—in the middle planetary
systems; rasäyäm—and in the lower planetary systems; na—not; räti—bestows;
yat—from which; dveñaù—envy; udvegaù—anxiety; ädhiù—mental agitation;
madaù—pride; kaliù—quarrel; vyasanam—distress due to loss;
samprayäsaù—great endeavor.
TRANSLATION
Persons who fully surrender at the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and always think of His lotus feet are accepted and recognized by the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
629
Lord as His own personal assistants or servants. The Lord never bestows upon
such servants the brilliant opulences of the upper, lower and middle planetary
systems of this material world. When one possesses material opulence in any of
these three divisions of the universe, his possessions naturally increase his
enmity, anxiety, mental agitation, pride and belligerence. Thus one goes
through much endeavor to increase and maintain his possessions, and he suffers
great unhappiness when he loses them.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä (4.11) the Lord says:
ye yathä mäà prapadyante
täàs tathaiva bhajämy aham
mama vartmänuvartante
manuñyäù pärtha sarvaçaù
"As devotees surrender unto Me, I reward them accordingly. Everyone follows
My path in all respects, O son of Påthä." Both Indra and Våträsura were
certainly devotees of the Lord, although Indra took instructions from Viñëu to
kill Våträsura. The Lord was actually more favorable to Våträsura because after
being killed by Indra's thunderbolt, Våträsura would go back to Godhead,
whereas the victorious Indra would rot in this material world. Because both of
them were devotees, the Lord awarded them the respective benedictions they
wanted. Våträsura never wanted material possessions, for he knew very well
the nature of such possessions. To accumulate material possessions, one must
labor very hard, and when he gets them he creates many enemies because this
material world is always full of rivalry. If one becomes rich, his friends or
relatives are envious. For ekänta-bhaktas, unalloyed devotees, Kåñëa therefore
never provides material possessions. A devotee sometimes needs some material
possessions for preaching, but the possessions of a preacher are not like those
of a karmé. A karmé's possessions are achieved as a result of karma, but those of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
630
a devotee are arranged by the Supreme Personality of Godhead just to
facilitate his devotional activities. Because a devotee never uses material
possessions for any purpose other than the service of the Lord, the possessions
of a devotee are not to be compared to those of a karmé.
TEXT 23
}aEviGaRk-aYaaSaivgaaTaMaSMaTa(‚
PaiTaivRDatae PauåzSYa Xa§- )
TaTaae_NauMaeYaae >aGavTPa[Saadae
Yaae dul/R>aae_ik-ÄNaGaaecrae_NYaE" )) 23 ))
trai-vargikäyäsa-vighätam asmatpatir
vidhatte puruñasya çakra
tato 'numeyo bhagavat-prasädo
yo durlabho 'kiïcana-gocaro 'nyaiù
SYNONYMS
trai-vargika—for the three objectives, namely religiosity, economic
development, and satisfaction of the senses; äyäsa—of endeavor;
vighätam—the ruin; asmat—our; patiù—Lord; vidhatte—performs;
puruñasya—of a devotee; çakra—O Indra; tataù—whereby; anumeyaù—to be
inferred; bhagavat-prasädaù—the special mercy of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; yaù—which; durlabhaù—very difficult to obtain;
akiïcana-gocaraù—within the reach of the unalloyed devotees; anyaiù—by
others, who aspire for material happiness.
TRANSLATION
Our Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, forbids His devotees to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
631
endeavor uselessly for religion, economic development and sense gratification. O
Indra, one can thus infer how kind the Lord is. Such mercy is obtainable only
by unalloyed devotees, not by persons who aspire for material gains.
PURPORT
There are four objectives in human life-namely, religiosity (dharma),
economic development (artha), sense gratification (käma), and liberation
(mokña) from the bondage of material existence. People generally aspire for
religiosity, economic development and sense gratification, but a devotee has no
other desire than to serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead both in this
life and in the next. The special mercy for the unalloyed devotee is that the
Lord saves him from hard labor to achieve the results of religion, economic
development and sense gratification. Of course, if one wants such benefits, the
Lord certainly awards them. Indra, for example, although a devotee, was not
much interested in release from material bondage; instead, he desired sense
gratification and a high standard of material happiness in the heavenly
planets. Våträsura, however, being an unalloyed devotee, aspired only to serve
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the Lord arranged for him to
go back to Godhead after his bodily bondage was destroyed by Indra. Våträsura
requested Indra to release his thunderbolt against him as soon as possible so
that both he and Indra would benefit according to their proportionate
advancement in devotional service.
TEXT 24
Ah& hre Tav PaadEk-MaUl/‚
daSaaNaudaSaae >aivTaaiSMa >aUYa" )
MaNa" SMareTaaSauPaTaeGauR<aa&STae
Ga*<aqTa vak( k-MaR k-raeTau k-aYa" )) 24 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
632
ahaà hare tava pädaika-müladäsänudäso
bhavitäsmi bhüyaù
manaù smaretäsu-pater guëäàs te
gåëéta väk karma karotu käyaù
SYNONYMS
aham—I; hare—O my Lord; tava—of Your Lordship; päda-eka-müla—whose
only shelter is the lotus feet; däsa-anudäsaù—the servant of Your servant;
bhavitäsmi—shall I become; bhüyaù—again; manaù—my mind; smareta—may
remember; asu-pateù—of the Lord of my life; guëän—the attributes; te—of
Your Lordship; gåëéta—may chant; väk—my words; karma—activities of
service to You; karotu—may perform; käyaù—my body.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, will I again be able to be a
servant of Your eternal servants who find shelter only at Your lotus feet? O
Lord of my life, may I again become their servant so that my mind may always
think of Your transcendental attributes, my words always glorify those
attributes, and my body always engage in the loving service of Your Lordship?
PURPORT
This verse gives the sum and substance of devotional life. One must first
become a servant of the servant of the servant of the Lord (däsänudäsa). Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu advised, and He also showed by His own example, that
a living entity should always desire to be a servant of the servant of the servant
of Kåñëa, the maintainer of the gopés (gopé-bhartuù pada-kamalayor
däsa-däsänudäsaù [Cc. Madhya 13.80]). This means that one must accept a
spiritual master who comes in the disciplic succession and is a servant of the
servant of the Lord. Under his direction, one must then engage one's three
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
633
properties, namely his body, mind and words. The body should be engaged in
physical activity under the order of the master, the mind should think of
Kåñëa incessantly, and one's words should be engaged in preaching the glories
of the Lord. If one is thus engaged in the loving service of the Lord, one's life is
successful.
TEXT 25
Na Naak-Pa*ï& Na c PaarMaeïy&
Na SaavR>aaEMa& Na rSaaiDaPaTYaMa( )
Na YaaeGaiSaÖqrPauNa>aRv& va
SaMaÅSa Tva ivrhYYa k-a¿e )) 25 ))
na näka-påñöhaà na ca pärameñöhyaà
na särva-bhaumaà na rasädhipatyam
na yoga-siddhér apunar-bhavaà vä
samaïjasa tvä virahayya käìkñe
SYNONYMS
na—not; näka-påñöham—the heavenly planets or Dhruvaloka; na—nor;
ca—also; pärameñöhyam—the planet on which Lord Brahmä resides; na—nor;
särva-bhaumam—sovereignty of the whole earthly planetary system; na—nor;
rasä-ädhipatyam—sovereignty of the lower planetary systems; na—nor;
yoga-siddhéù—eight kinds of mystic yogic power (aëimä, laghimä, mahimä,
etc.); apunaù-bhavam—liberation from rebirth in a material body; vä—or;
samaïjasa—O source of all opportunities; tvä—You; virahayya—being
separated from; käìkñe—I desire.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
634
O my Lord, source of all opportunities, I do not desire to enjoy in
Dhruvaloka, the heavenly planets or the planet where Lord Brahmä resides, nor
do I want to be the supreme ruler of all the earthly planets or the lower
planetary systems. I do not desire to be master of the powers of mystic yoga, nor
do I want liberation if I have to give up Your lotus feet.
PURPORT
A pure devotee never desires to gain material opportunities by rendering
transcendental loving service to the Lord. A pure devotee desires only to
engage in loving service to the Lord in the constant association of the Lord
and His eternal associates, as stated in the previous verse (däsänudäso
bhavitäsmi). As confirmed by Narottama däsa Öhäkura:
täìdera caraëa sevi bhakta-sane väsa
janame janame haya, ei abhiläña
To serve the Lord and the servants of His servants, in the association of
devotees, is the only objective of a pure, unalloyed devotee.
TEXT 26
AJaaTaPa+aa wv MaaTar& %Gaa"
STaNYa& YaQaa vTSaTara" +auDaaTaaR" )
iPa[Ya& iPa[Yaev VYauizTa& ivz<<aa
MaNaae_rivNda+a idd*+aTae TvaMa( )) 26 ))
ajäta-pakñä iva mätaraà khagäù
stanyaà yathä vatsataräù kñudh-ärtäù
priyaà priyeva vyuñitaà viñaëëä
mano 'ravindäkña didåkñate tväm
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
635
SYNONYMS
ajäta-pakñäù—who have not yet grown wings; iva—like; mätaram—the
mother; khagäù—small birds; stanyam—the milk from the udder; yathä—just
as; vatsataräù—the young calves; kñudh-ärtäù—distressed by hunger;
priyam—the beloved or husband; priyä—the wife or lover; iva—like;
vyuñitam—who is away from home; viñaëëä—morose; manaù—my mind;
aravinda-akña—O lotus-eyed one; didåkñate—wants to see; tväm—You.
TRANSLATION
O lotus-eyed Lord, as baby birds that have not yet developed their wings
always look for their mother to return and feed them, as small calves tied with
ropes await anxiously the time of milking, when they will be allowed to drink
the milk of their mothers, or as a morose wife whose husband is away from
home always longs for him to return and satisfy her in all respects, I always
yearn for the opportunity to render direct service unto You.
PURPORT
A pure devotee always yearns to associate personally with the Lord and
render service unto Him. The examples given in this regard are most
appropriate. A small baby bird is practically never satisfied except when the
mother bird comes to feed it, a small calf is not satisfied unless allowed to suck
the milk from the mother's udder, and a chaste, devoted wife whose husband is
away from home is never satisfied until she has the association of her beloved
husband.
TEXT 27
MaMaaetaMaëaek-JaNaezu Sa:Ya&
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
636
Sa&Saarc§e- >a]MaTa" Svk-MaRi>a" )
TvNMaaYaYaaTMaaTMaJadarGaehe‚
ZvaSa¢-ictaSYa Na NaaQa >aUYaaTa( )) 27 ))
mamottamaçloka-janeñu sakhyaà
saàsära-cakre bhramataù sva-karmabhiù
tvan-mäyayätmätmaja-dära-geheñv
äsakta-cittasya na nätha bhüyät
SYNONYMS
mama—my; uttama-çloka-janeñu—among devotees who are simply attached to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sakhyam—friendship;
saàsära-cakre—in the cycle of birth and death; bhramataù—who am
wandering; sva-karmabhiù—by the results of my own fruitive activities;
tvat-mäyayä—by Your external energy; ätma—to the body; ätma-ja—children;
dära—wife; geheñu—and home; äsakta—attached; cittasya—whose mind;
na—not; nätha—O my Lord; bhüyät—may there be.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, my master, I am wandering throughout this material world as a
result of my fruitive activities. Therefore I simply seek friendship in the
association of Your pious and enlightened devotees. My attachment to my body,
wife, children and home is continuing by the spell of Your external energy, but
I wish to be attached to them no longer. Let my mind, my consciousness and
everything I have be attached only to You.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sixth Canto, Eleventh Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Transcendental Qualities of Våträsura."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
637
12. Våträsura's Glorious Death
This chapter describes how Indra, the King of heaven, killed Våträsura
despite great reluctance.
After Våträsura finished speaking, he released his trident against King
Indra with great anger, but Indra, using his thunderbolt, which was many times
more powerful than the trident, broke the trident to pieces and cut off one of
Våträsura's arms. Nevertheless, Våträsura used his remaining arm to strike
Indra with an iron mace, making the thunderbolt fall from Indra's hand. Indra,
being very ashamed of this, did not pick up the thunderbolt from the ground,
but Våträsura encouraged King Indra to pick it up and fight. Våträsura then
spoke to King Indra as follows, instructing him very well.
"The Supreme Personality of Godhead," he said, "is the cause of victory and
defeat. Not knowing that the Supreme Lord is the cause of all causes, fools and
rascals try to take credit for victory or defeat themselves, but everything is
actually under the control of the Lord. No one but Him has any independence.
The puruña (the enjoyer) and prakåti (the enjoyed) are under the control of
the Lord, for it is by His supervision that everything works systematically. Not
seeing the hand of the Supreme in every action, a fool considers himself the
ruler and controller of everything. When one understands, however, that the
real controller is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he is freed from the
relativities of the world, such as distress, happiness, fear and impurity." Thus
Indra and Våträsura not only fought, but also engaged in philosophical
discourses. Then they began to fight again.
This time Indra was more powerful, and he severed Våträsura's remaining
arm. Våträsura then assumed a gigantic form and swallowed King Indra, but
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
638
Indra, being protected by the talisman known as Näräyaëa-kavaca, was able to
protect himself even within Våträsura's body. Thus he emerged from
Våträsura's abdomen and severed the demon's head from his body with his
powerful thunderbolt. Severing the demon's head took one complete year to
accomplish.
TEXT 1
é[q‰izåvac
Wv& iJahaSauNa*RPa dehMaaJaaE
Ma*TYau& vr& ivJaYaaNMaNYaMaaNa" )
XaUl&/ Pa[Ga*ùa>YaPaTaTa( SaureNd]&
YaQaa MahaPauåz& kE-$=>aae_PSau )) 1 ))
çré-åñir uväca
evaà jihäsur nåpa deham äjau
måtyuà varaà vijayän manyamänaù
çülaà pragåhyäbhyapatat surendraà
yathä mahä-puruñaà kaiöabho 'psu
SYNONYMS
çré-åñiù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—thus; jihäsuù—very eager
to give up; nåpa—O King Parékñit; deham—the body; äjau—in battle;
måtyum—death; varam—better; vijayät—than victory;
manyamänaù—thinking; çülam—trident; pragåhya—taking up;
abhyapatat—attacked; sura-indram—the King of heaven, Indra; yathä—just
as; mahä-puruñam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kaiöabhaù—the
demon Kaiöabha; apsu—when the whole universe was inundated.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
639
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Desiring to give up his body, Våträsura considered
death in the battle preferable to victory. O King Parékñit, he vigorously took up
his trident and with great force attacked Lord Indra, the King of heaven, just as
Kaiöabha had forcefully attacked the Supreme Personality of Godhead when the
universe was inundated.
PURPORT
Although Våträsura repeatedly encouraged Indra to kill him with the
thunderbolt, King Indra was morose at having to kill such a great devotee and
was hesitant to throw it. Våträsura, disappointed that King Indra was reluctant
despite his encouragement, took the initiative very forcefully by throwing his
trident at Indra. Våträsura was not at all interested in victory; he was
interested in being killed so that he could immediately return home, back to
Godhead. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (4.9), tyaktvä dehaà punar janma
naiti: after giving up his body, a devotee immediately returns to Lord Kåñëa
and never returns to accept another body. This was Våträsura's interest.
TEXT 2
TaTaae YauGaaNTaaiGank-#=aeriJaû‚
MaaivDYa XaUl&/ TarSaaSaureNd]" )
i+aPTva MaheNd]aYa ivNaÛ vqrae
hTaae_iSa PaaPaeiTa åza JaGaad )) 2 ))
tato yugäntägni-kaöhora-jihvam
ävidhya çülaà tarasäsurendraù
kñiptvä mahendräya vinadya véro
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
640
hato 'si päpeti ruñä jagäda
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; yuga-anta-agni—like the fire at the end of every
millennium; kaöhora—sharp; jihvam—possessing points; ävidhya—twirling;
çülam—the trident; tarasä—with great force; asura-indraù—the great hero of
the demons, Våträsura; kñiptvä—throwing; mahä-indräya—unto King Indra;
vinadya—roaring; véraù—the great hero (Våträsura); hataù—killed; asi—you
are; päpa—O sinful one; iti—thus; ruñä—with great anger; jagäda—be cried
out.
TRANSLATION
Then Våträsura, the great hero of the demons, whirled his trident, which
had points like the flames of the blazing fire at the end of the millennium. With
great force and anger he threw it at Indra, roaring and exclaiming loudly, "O
sinful one, thus shall I kill you!"
TEXT 3
% AaPaTaTa( Tad( ivcl/d( Ga]haeLk-v‚
iàrq+Ya duZPa[e+YaMaJaaTaiv(c)-v" )
vJa]e<a vJa]q XaTaPavR<aaiC^Nad(
>auJa& c TaSYaaerGaraJa>aaeGaMa( )) 3 ))
kha äpatat tad vicalad graholkavan
nirékñya duñprekñyam ajäta-viklavaù
vajreëa vajré çata-parvaëäcchinad
bhujaà ca tasyoraga-räja-bhogam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
641
SYNONYMS
khe—in the sky; äpatat—flying toward him; tat—that trident;
vicalat—rotating; graha-ulka-vat—like a falling star; nirékñya—observing;
duñprekñyam—unbearable to see; ajäta-viklavaù—not afraid; vajreëa—with the
thunderbolt; vajré—Indra, the holder of the thunderbolt;
çata-parvaëä—possessing one hundred joints; äcchinat—cut; bhujam—the
arm; ca—and; tasya—of him (Våträsura); uraga-räja—of the great serpent
Väsuki; bhogam—like the body.
TRANSLATION
Flying in the sky, Våträsura's trident resembled a brilliant meteor. Although
the blazing weapon was difficult to look upon, King Indra, unafraid, cut it to
pieces with his thunderbolt. Simultaneously, he cut off one of Våträsura's arms,
which was as thick as the body of Väsuki, the King of the serpents.
TEXT 4
i^àEk-bahu" Pairgae<a v*}a"
Sa&rBDa AaSaaÛ Ga*hqTavJa]Ma( )
hNaaE TaTaa@eNd]MaQaaMare>a&
vJa]& c hSTaaNNYaPaTaNMagaaeNa" )) 4 ))
chinnaika-bähuù parigheëa våtraù
saàrabdha äsädya gåhéta-vajram
hanau tatäòendram athämarebhaà
vajraà ca hastän nyapatan maghonaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
642
SYNONYMS
chinna—cut off; eka—one; bähuù—whose arm; parigheëa—with a mace of
iron; våtraù—Våträsura; saàrabdhaù—being very angry; äsädya—reaching;
gåhéta—taking up; vajram—the thunderbolt; hanau—on the jaw;
tatäòa—struck; indram—Lord Indra; atha—also; amara-ibham—his elephant;
vajram—the thunderbolt; ca—and; hastät—from the hand; nyapatat—fell;
maghonaù—of King Indra.
TRANSLATION
Although one of his arms was severed from his body, Våträsura angrily
approached King Indra and struck him on the jaw with an iron mace. He also
struck the elephant that carried Indra. Thus Indra dropped the thunderbolt
from his hand.
TEXT 5
v*}aSYa k-MaaRiTaMahad(>auTa& TaTa(
SauraSauraêar<aiSaÖSaºa" )
APaUJaYa&STaTa( PauåhUTaSa&k„„„$&=
iNarq+Ya ha heiTa ivcu§u-Xau>a*RXaMa( )) 5 ))
våtrasya karmäti-mahädbhutaà tat
suräsuräç cäraëa-siddha-saìghäù
apüjayaàs tat puruhüta-saìkaöaà
nirékñya hä heti vicukruçur bhåçam
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
643
våtrasya—of Våträsura; karma—the accomplishment; ati—very;
mahä—greatly; adbhutam—wonderful; tat—that; sura—the demigods;
asuräù—and the demons; cäraëa—the Cäraëas; siddha-saìghäù—and the
society of Siddhas; apüjayan—glorified; tat—that; puruhüta-saìkaöam—the
dangerous position of Indra; nirékñya—seeing; hä hä—alas, alas; iti—thus;
vicukruçuù—lamented; bhåçam—very much.
TRANSLATION
The denizens of various planets, like the demigods, demons, Cäraëas and
Siddhas, praised Våträsura's deed, but when they observed that Indra was in
great danger, they lamented, "Alas! Alas!"
TEXT 6
wNd]ae Na vJa]& JaGa*he ivl/iÂTa‚
XCYauTa& SvhSTaadirSaiàDaaE PauNa" )
TaMaah v*}aae hr AatavJa]ae
Jaih SvXa}au& Na ivzadk-al/" )) 6 ))
indro na vajraà jagåhe vilajjitaç
cyutaà sva-hastäd ari-sannidhau punaù
tam äha våtro hara ätta-vajro
jahi sva-çatruà na viñäda-kälaù
SYNONYMS
indraù—King Indra; na—not; vajram—the thunderbolt; jagåhe—took up;
vilajjitaù—being ashamed; cyutam—fallen; sva-hastät—from his own hand;
ari-sannidhau—in front of his enemy; punaù—again; tam—unto him;
äha—said; våtraù—Våträsura; hare—O Indra; ätta-vajraù—taking up your
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
644
thunderbolt; jahi—kill; sva-çatrum—your enemy; na—not; viñäda-kälaù—the
time for lamentation.
TRANSLATION
Having dropped the thunderbolt from his hand in the presence of his enemy,
Indra was practically defeated and was very much ashamed. He dared not pick
up his weapon again. Våträsura, however, encouraged him, saying, "Take up
your thunderbolt and kill your enemy. This is not the time to lament your
fate."
TEXT 7
YauYauTSaTaa& ku-}aicdaTaTaaiYaNaa&
JaYa" SadEk-}a Na vE ParaTMaNaaMa( )
ivNaEk-MauTPaital/YaiSQaTaqìr&
SavRjMaaÛ& Pauåz& SaNaaTaNaMa( )) 7 ))
yuyutsatäà kutracid ätatäyinäà
jayaù sadaikatra na vai parätmanäm
vinaikam utpatti-laya-sthitéçvaraà
sarvajïam ädyaà puruñaà sanätanam
SYNONYMS
yuyutsatäm—of those who are belligerent; kutracit—sometimes;
ätatäyinäm—armed with weapons; jayaù—victory; sadä—always; ekatra—in
one place; na—not; vai—indeed; para-ätmanäm—of the subordinate living
entities, who work only under the direction of the Supersoul; vinä—except;
ekam—one; utpatti—of the creation; laya—annihilation; sthiti—and
maintenance; éçvaram—the controller; sarva-jïam—who knows everything
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
645
(past, present and future); ädyam—the original; puruñam—enjoyer;
sanätanam—eternal.
TRANSLATION
Våträsura continued: O Indra, no one is guaranteed of being always
victorious but the original enjoyer, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Bhagavän. He is the cause of creation, maintenance and annihilation, and He
knows everything. Being dependent and being obliged to accept material bodies,
belligerent subordinates are sometimes victorious and sometimes defeated.
PURPORT
The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (15.15):
sarvasya cähaà hådi sanniviñöo
mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca
"I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowledge
and forgetfulness." When two parties fight, the fighting actually goes on under
the direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is Paramätmä, the
Supersoul. Elsewhere in the Gétä (3.27) the Lord says:
prakåteù kriyamäëäni
guëaiù karmäëi sarvaçaù
ahaìkära-vimüòhätmä
kartäham iti manyate
"The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of material
nature, thinks himself the doer of activities that are in actuality carried out by
nature." The living entities work only under the direction of the Supreme
Lord. The Lord gives orders to material nature, and she arranges facilities for
the living entities. The living entities are not independent, although they
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
646
foolishly think themselves the doers (kartä).
Victory is always with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As for the
subordinate living entities, they fight under the arrangement of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Victory or defeat is not actually theirs; it is an
arrangement by the Lord through the agency of material nature. Pride in
victory, or moroseness in defeat, is useless. One should fully depend on the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is responsible for the victory and defeat
of all living entities. The Lord advises, niyataà kuru karma tvaà karma jyäyo
hy akarmaëaù: "Perform your prescribed duty, for action is better than
inaction." The living entity is ordered to act according to his position. Victory
or defeat depends on the Supreme Lord. Karmaëy evädhikäras te mä phaleñu
kadäcana: "You have a right to perform your prescribed duty, but you are not
entitled to the fruits of actions." One must act sincerely, according to his
position. Victory or defeat depends on the Lord.
Våträsura encouraged Indra, saying, "Don't be morose because of my victory.
There is no need to stop fighting. Instead, you should go on with your duty.
When Kåñëa desires, you will certainly be victorious." This verse is very
instructive for sincere workers in the Kåñëa consciousness movement. We
should not be jubilant in victory or morose in defeat. We should make a
sincere effort to implement the will of Kåñëa, or Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu,
and we should not be concerned with victory and defeat. Our only duty is to
work sincerely, so that our activities may be recognized by Kåñëa.
TEXT 8
l/aek-a" SaPaal/a YaSYaeMae ìSaiNTa ivvXaa vXae )
iÜJaa wv iXaca bÖa" Sa k-al/ wh k-ar<aMa( )) 8 ))
lokäù sapälä yasyeme
çvasanti vivaçä vaçe
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
647
dvijä iva çicä baddhäù
sa käla iha käraëam
SYNONYMS
lokäù—the worlds; sa-päläù—with their chief deities or controllers; yasya—of
whom; ime—all these; çvasanti—live; vivaçäù—fully dependent; vaçe—under
the control; dvijäù—birds; iva—like; çicä—by a net; baddhäù—bound;
saù—that; kälaù—time factor; iha—in this; käraëam—the cause.
TRANSLATION
All living beings in all the planets of this universe, including the presiding
deities of all the planets, are fully under the control of the Lord. They work like
birds caught in a net, who cannot move independently.
PURPORT
The difference between the suras and the asuras is that the suras know that
nothing can happen without the desire of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, whereas the asuras cannot understand the supreme will of the Lord.
In this fight, Våträsura is actually the sura, whereas Indra is the asura. No one
can act independently; rather, everyone acts under the direction of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore victory and defeat come
according to the results of one's karma, and the judgment is given by the
Supreme Lord (karmaëä-daiva-netreëa [SB 3.31.1]). Since we act under the
control of the Supreme according to our karma, no one is independent, from
Brahmä down to the insignificant ant. Whether we are defeated or victorious,
the Supreme Lord is always victorious because everyone acts under His
directions.
TEXT 9
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
648
AaeJa" Sahae bl&/ Pa[a<aMaMa*Ta& Ma*TYauMaev c )
TaMajaYa JaNaae heTauMaaTMaaNa& MaNYaTae Ja@Ma( )) 9 ))
ojaù saho balaà präëam
amåtaà måtyum eva ca
tam ajïäya jano hetum
ätmänaà manyate jaòam
SYNONYMS
ojaù—the strength of the senses; sahaù—the strength of the mind; balam—the
strength of the body; präëam—the living condition; amåtam—immortality;
måtyum—death; eva—indeed; ca—also; tam—Him (the Supreme Lord);
ajïäya—without knowing; janaù—a foolish person; hetum—the cause;
ätmänam—the body; manyate—considers; jaòam—although as good as stone.
TRANSLATION
Our sensory prowess, mental power, bodily strength, living force,
immortality and mortality are all subject to the superintendence of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Not knowing this, foolish people think the dull
material body to be the cause of their activities.
TEXT 10
YaQaa daåMaYaq Naarq YaQaa Pa}aMaYaae Ma*Ga" )
Wv& >aUTaaiNa MagavàqXaTaN}aai<a iviÖ >aae" )) 10 ))
yathä därumayé näré
yathä patramayo mågaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
649
evaà bhütäni maghavann
éça-tanträëi viddhi bhoù
SYNONYMS
yathä—just as; däru-mayé—made of wood; näré—a woman; yathä—just as;
patra-mayaù—made of leaves; mågaù—an animal; evam—thus; bhütäni—all
things; maghavan—O King Indra; éça—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
tanträëi—depending upon; viddhi—please know; bhoù—O sir.
TRANSLATION
O King Indra, as a wooden doll that looks like a woman or as an animal made
of grass and leaves cannot move or dance independently, but depends fully on
the person who handles it, all of us dance according to the desire of the supreme
controller, the Personality of Godhead. No one is independent.
PURPORT
This is confirmed in Caitanya-caritämåta (Ädi 5.142):
ekale éçvara kåñëa, ära saba bhåtya
yäre yaiche näcäya, se taiche kare nåtya
"Lord Kåñëa alone is the supreme controller, and all others are His servants.
They dance as He makes them do so." We are all servants of Kåñëa; we have no
independence. We are dancing according to the desire of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, but out of ignorance and illusion we think we are
independent of the supreme will. Therefore it is said:
éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù
sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù
anädir ädir govindaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
650
sarva-käraëa-käraëam
"Kåñëa, who is known as Govinda, is the supreme controller. He has an eternal,
blissful, spiritual body. He is the origin of all. He has no other origin, for He is
the prime cause of all causes." (Bs. 5.1)
TEXT 11
Pauåz" Pa[k*-iTaVYaR¢-MaaTMaa >aUTaeiNd]YaaXaYaa" )
Xa¥u-vNTYaSYa SaGaaRdaE Na ivNaa YadNauGa]haTa( )) 11 ))
puruñaù prakåtir vyaktam
ätmä bhütendriyäçayäù
çaknuvanty asya sargädau
na vinä yad-anugrahät
SYNONYMS
puruñaù—the generator of the total material energy; prakåtiù—the material
energy or material nature; vyaktam—the principles of manifestation
(mahat-tattva); ätmä—the false ego; bhüta—the five material elements;
indriya—the ten senses; äçayäù—the mind, intelligence and consciousness;
çaknuvanti—are able; asya—of this universe; sarga-ädau—in the creation,
etc.; na—not; vinä—without; yat—of whom; anugrahät—the mercy.
TRANSLATION
The three puruñas—Käraëodakaçäyé Viñëu, Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu and
Kñérodakaçäyé-Viñëu—the material nature, the total material energy, the false
ego, the five material elements, the material senses, the mind, the intelligence
and consciousness cannot create the material manifestation without the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
651
direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
As confirmed in the Viñëu Puräëa, parasya brahmaëaù çaktis tathedam
akhilaà jagat: whatever manifestations we experience are nothing but various
energies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. These energies cannot create
anything independently. This is also confirmed by the Lord Himself in
Bhagavad-gétä (9.10): mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù süyate sa-caräcaram. "This
material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kunté, and it is
producing all moving and unmoving living beings." Only under the direction
of the Lord, the Supreme Person, can prakåti, which is manifested in
twenty-four elements, create different situations for the living entity. In the
Vedas the Lord says:
madéyaà mahimänaà ca
parabrahmeti çabditam
vetsyasy anugåhétaà me
sampraçnair vivåtaà hådi
"Since everything is a manifestation of My energy, I am known as
Parabrahman. Therefore everyone should hear from Me about My glorious
activities." The Lord also says in Bhagavad-gétä (10.2), aham ädir hi devänäm: "I
am the origin of all the demigods." Therefore the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is the origin of everything, and no one is independent of Him. Çréla
Madhväcärya also says, anéça jéva-rüpeëa: the living entity is anéça, never the
controller, but is always controlled. Therefore when a living entity becomes
proud of being an independent éçvara, or god, that is his foolishness. Such
foolishness is described in the following verse.
TEXT 12
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
652
AivÜaNaevMaaTMaaNa& MaNYaTae_NaqXaMaqìrMa( )
>aUTaE" Sa*JaiTa >aUTaaiNa Ga]SaTae TaaiNa TaE" SvYaMa( )) 12 ))
avidvän evam ätmänaà
manyate 'néçam éçvaram
bhütaiù såjati bhütäni
grasate täni taiù svayam
SYNONYMS
avidvän—one who is foolish, without knowledge; evam—thus;
ätmänam—himself; manyate—considers; anéçam—although totally dependent
on others; éçvaram—as the supreme controller, independent; bhütaiù—by the
living entities; såjati—He (the Lord) creates; bhütäni—other living entities;
grasate—He devours; täni—them; taiù—by other living beings;
svayam—Himself.
TRANSLATION
A foolish, senseless person cannot understand the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Although always dependent, he falsely thinks himself the Supreme. If
one thinks, "According to one's previous fruitive actions, one's material body is
created by the father and mother, and the same body is annihilated by another
agent, as another animal is devoured by a tiger," this is not proper
understanding. The Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself creates and
devours the living beings through other living beings.
PURPORT
According to the conclusion of the philosophy known as karma-mémäàsä,
one's karma, or previous fruitive activity, is the cause of everything, and
therefore there is no need to work. Those who arrive at this conclusion are
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
653
foolish. When a father creates a child, he does not do so independently; he is
induced to do so by the Supreme Lord. As the Lord Himself says in
Bhagavad-gétä (15.15), sarvasya cähaà hådi sanniviñöo mattaù småtir jïänam
apohanaà ca: "I am in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance,
knowledge and forgetfulness." Unless one receives dictation from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who sits within everyone's heart, one cannot be
induced to create anything. Therefore the father and mother are not the
creators of the living entity. According to the living entity's karma, fruitive
activities, he is put into the semen of the father, who injects the living entity
into the womb of the mother. Then according to the body of the mother and
father (yathä-yoni yathä-béjam), the living entity accepts a body and takes birth
to suffer or enjoy. Therefore the Supreme Lord is the original cause of one's
birth. Similarly, the Supreme Lord is the cause of one's being killed. No one is
independent; everyone is dependent. The true conclusion is that the only
independent person is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 13
AaYau" é[q" k-IiTaR„rEìYaRMaaiXaz" PauåzSYa Yaa" )
>avNTYaev ih TaTk-ale/ YaQaaiNaC^aeivRPaYaRYaa" )) 13 ))
äyuù çréù kértir aiçvaryam
äçiñaù puruñasya yäù
bhavanty eva hi tat-käle
yathänicchor viparyayäù
SYNONYMS
äyuù—longevity; çréù—opulence; kértiù—fame; aiçvaryam—power;
äçiñaù—benedictions; puruñasya—of the living entity; yäù—which;
bhavanti—arise; eva—indeed; hi—certainly; tat-käle—at that proper time;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
654
yathä—just as; anicchoù—of one not desiring; viparyayäù—reverse conditions.
TRANSLATION
Just as a person not inclined to die must nonetheless give up his longevity,
opulence, fame and everything else at the time of death, so, at the appointed
time of victory, one can gain all these when the Supreme Lord awards them by
His mercy.
PURPORT
It is not good to be falsely puffed up, saying that by one's own effort one has
become opulent, learned, beautiful and so on. All such good fortune is
achieved through the mercy of the Lord. From another point of view, no one
wants to die, and no one wants to be poor or ugly. Therefore, why does the
living entity, against his will, receive such unwanted troubles? It is due to the
mercy or chastisement of the Supreme Personality of Godhead that one gains
or loses everything material. No one is independent; everyone is dependent on
the mercy or chastisement of the Supreme Lord. There is a common saying in
Bengal that the Lord has ten hands. This means that He has control
everywhere—in the eight directions and up and down. If He wants to take
everything away from us with His ten hands, we cannot protect anything with
our two hands. Similarly, if He wants to bestow benedictions upon us with His
ten hands, we cannot factually receive them all with our two hands; in other
words, the benedictions exceed our ambitions. The conclusion is that even
though we do not wish to be separated from our possessions, sometimes the
Lord forcibly takes them from us; and sometimes He showers such benedictions
upon us that we are unable to receive them all. Therefore either in opulence or
in distress we are not independent; everything is dependent on the sweet will
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
655
TEXT 14
TaSMaadk-IiTaRYaXaSaaeJaRYaaPaJaYaYaaeriPa )
SaMa" SYaaTa( Sau%du"%a>Yaa& Ma*TYauJaqivTaYaaeSTaQaa )) 14 ))
tasmäd akérti-yaçasor
jayäpajayayor api
samaù syät sukha-duùkhäbhyäà
måtyu-jévitayos tathä
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore (because of being fully dependent on the pleasure of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead); akérti—of defamation; yaçasoù—and fame;
jaya—of victory; apajayayoù—and defeat; api—even; samaù—equal;
syät—one should be; sukha-duùkhäbhyäm—with the distress and happiness;
måtyu—of death; jévitayoù—or of living; tathä—as well as.
TRANSLATION
Since everything is dependent on the supreme will of the Personality of
Godhead, one should be equipoised in fame and defamation, victory and defeat,
life and death. In their effects, represented as happiness and distress, one should
maintain oneself in equilibrium, without anxiety.
TEXT 15
Satv& rJaSTaMa wiTa Pa[k*-TaeNaaRTMaNaae Gau<aa" )
Ta}a Saai+a<aMaaTMaaNa& Yaae ved Sa Na bDYaTae )) 15 ))
sattvaà rajas tama iti
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
656
prakåter nätmano guëäù
tatra säkñiëam ätmänaà
yo veda sa na badhyate
SYNONYMS
sattvam—the mode of goodness; rajaù—the mode of passion; tamaù—the
mode of ignorance; iti—thus; prakåteù—of the material nature; na—not;
ätmanaù—of the spirit soul; guëäù—the qualities; tatra—in such a position;
säkñiëam—an observer; ätmänam—the self; yaù—anyone who; veda—knows;
saù—he; na—not; badhyate—is bound.
TRANSLATION
One who knows that the three qualities—goodness, passion and
ignorance—are not qualities of the soul but qualities of material nature, and
who knows that the pure soul is simply an observer of the actions and reactions
of these qualities, should be understood to be a liberated person. He is not
bound by these qualities.
PURPORT
As the Lord explains in Bhagavad-gétä (18.54):
brahma-bhütaù prasannätmä
na çocati na käìkñati
samaù sarveñu bhüteñu
mad-bhaktià labhate paräm
"One who is transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme Brahman
and becomes fully joyful. He never laments or desires to have anything; he is
equally disposed to every living entity. In that state he attains pure devotional
service unto Me." When one attains self-realization, the brahma-bhüta [SB
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
657
4.30.20] stage, one knows that whatever happens during his life is due to the
contamination of the modes of material nature. The living being, the pure
soul, has nothing to do with these modes. In the midst of the hurricane of the
material world, everything changes very quickly, but if one remains silent and
simply observes the actions and reactions of the hurricane, he is understood to
be liberated. The real qualification of the liberated soul is that he remains
Kåñëa conscious, undisturbed by the actions and reactions of the material
energy. Such a liberated person is always jubilant. He never laments or aspires
for anything. Since everything is supplied by the Supreme Lord, the living
entity, being fully dependent on Him, should not protest or accept anything in
terms of his personal sense gratification; rather, he should receive everything
as the mercy of the Lord and remain steady in all circumstances.
TEXT 16
PaXYa Maa& iNaiJaRTa& Xa}au v*K<aaYauDa>auJa& Ma*Dae )
ga$=MaaNa& YaQaaXai¢- Tav Pa[a<aiJahqzRYaa )) 16 ))
paçya mäà nirjitaà çatru
våkëäyudha-bhujaà mådhe
ghaöamänaà yathä-çakti
tava präëa-jihérñayä
SYNONYMS
paçya—look; mäm—at me; nirjitam—already defeated; çatru—O enemy;
våkëa—cut off; äyudha—my weapon; bhujam—and my arm; mådhe—in this
fight; ghaöamänam—still trying; yathä-çakti—according to my ability; tava—of
you; präëa—the life; jihérñayä—with the desire to take away.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
658
TRANSLATION
O my enemy, just look at me. I have already been defeated, for my weapon
and arm have been cut to pieces. You have already overwhelmed me, but
nonetheless, with a desire to kill you, I am trying my best to fight. I am not at
all morose, even under such adverse conditions. Therefore you should give up
your moroseness and continue fighting.
PURPORT
Våträsura was so great and powerful that in effect he was acting as the
spiritual master of Indra. Although Våträsura was on the verge of defeat, he
was not at all affected. He knew that he was going to be defeated by Indra, and
he voluntarily accepted that, but since he was supposed to be Indra's enemy, he
tried his best to kill Indra. Thus he performed his duty. One should perform his
duty under all circumstances, even though one may know what the result will
be.
TEXT 17
Pa[a<aGl/hae_Ya& SaMar wZv+aae vahNaaSaNa" )
A}a Na jaYaTae_MauZYa JaYaae_MauZYa ParaJaYa" )) 17 ))
präëa-glaho 'yaà samara
iñv-akño vähanäsanaù
atra na jïäyate 'muñya
jayo 'muñya paräjayaù
SYNONYMS
präëa-glahaù—life is the stake; ayam—this; samaraù—battle; iñu-akñaù—the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
659
arrows are the dice; vähana-äsanaù—the carriers such as the horses and
elephants are the game board; atra—here (in this gambling match); na—not;
jïäyate—is known; amuñya—of that one; jayaù—victory; amuñya—of that
one; paräjayaù—defeat.
TRANSLATION
O my enemy, consider this battle a gambling match in which our lives are
the stakes, the arrows are the dice, and the animals acting as carriers are the
game board. No one can understand who will be defeated and who will be
victorious. It all depends on providence.
TEXT 18
é[qXauk- ovac
wNd]ae v*}avc" é[uTva GaTaal/Ik-MaPaUJaYaTa( )
Ga*hqTavJa]" Pa[hSa&STaMaah GaTaivSMaYa" )) 18 ))
çré-çuka uväca
indro våtra-vacaù çrutvä
gatälékam apüjayat
gåhéta-vajraù prahasaàs
tam äha gata-vismayaù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; indraù—King Indra;
våtra-vacaù—the words of Våträsura; çrutvä—hearing; gata-alékam—without
duplicity; apüjayat—worshiped; gåhéta-vajraù—taking up the thunderbolt;
prahasan—smiling; tam—unto Våträsura; äha—said; gata-vismayaù—giving
up his wonder.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
660
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Hearing the straightforward, instructive words of
Våträsura, King Indra praised him and again took the thunderbolt in his hand.
Without bewilderment or duplicity, he then smiled and spoke to Våträsura as
follows.
PURPORT
King Indra, the greatest of the demigods, was astonished to hear the
instructions of Våträsura, who was supposed to be a demon. He was struck with
wonder that a demon could speak so intelligently. Then he remembered great
devotees like Prahläda Mahäräja and Bali Mahäräja, who had been born in the
families of demons, and thus he came to his senses. Even so-called demons
sometimes have exalted devotion for the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Therefore Indra smiled reassuringly at Våträsura.
TEXT 19
wNd] ovac
Ahae daNav iSaÖae_iSa YaSYa Tae MaiTarqd*Xaq )
>a¢-" SavaRTMaNaaTMaaNa& Sauôd& JaGadqìrMa( )) 19 ))
indra uväca
aho dänava siddho 'si
yasya te matir édåçé
bhaktaù sarvätmanätmänaà
suhådaà jagad-éçvaram
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
661
indraù uväca—Indra said; aho—hello; dänava—O demon; siddhaù asi—you
are now perfect; yasya—whose; te—your; matiù—consciousness; édåçé—such as
this; bhaktaù—a great devotee; sarva-ätmanä—without diversion;
ätmänam—to the Supersoul; suhådam—the greatest friend; jagat-éçvaram—to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Indra said: O great demon, I see by your discrimination and endurance in
devotional service, despite your dangerous position, that you are a perfect
devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Supersoul and friend of
everyone.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (6.22):
yaà labdhvä cäparaà läbhaà
manyate nädhikaà tataù
yasmin sthito na duùkhena
guruëäpi vicälyate
"Established in Kåñëa consciousness, one never departs from the truth, and
upon gaining this he thinks there is no greater gain. Being situated in such a
position, one is never shaken, even in the midst of the greatest difficulty." An
unalloyed devotee is never disturbed by any kind of trying circumstance. Indra
was surprised to see that Våträsura, undisturbed, was fixed in devotional
service to the Lord, for such a mentality is impossible for a demon. However,
by the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, anyone can become an
exalted devotee (striyo vaiçyäs tathä çüdräs te 'pi yänti paräà gatim). An
unalloyed devotee is sure to return home, back to Godhead.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
662
TEXT 20
>avaNaTaazsNMaaYaa& vE vEZ<avq& JaNaMaaeihNaqMa( )
Yad( ivhaYaaSaur& >aav& MahaPauåzTaa& GaTa" )) 20 ))
bhavän atärñén mäyäà vai
vaiñëavéà jana-mohiném
yad vihäyäsuraà bhävaà
mahä-puruñatäà gataù
SYNONYMS
bhavän—your good self; atärñét—has surmounted; mäyäm—the illusory
energy; vai—indeed; vaiñëavém—of Lord Viñëu; jana-mohiném—which deludes
the mass of people; yat—since; vihäya—giving up; äsuram—of the demons;
bhävam—the mentality; mahä-puruñatäm—the position of an exalted devotee;
gataù—obtained.
TRANSLATION
You have surmounted the illusory energy of Lord Viñëu, and because of this
liberation, you have given up the demoniac mentality and have attained the
position of an exalted devotee.
PURPORT
Lord Viñëu is the mahä-puruña. Therefore one who becomes a Vaiñëava
attains the position of a mahä-pauruñya. This position was attained by
Mahäräja Parékñit. It is said in the Padma Puräëa that the distinction between
a demigod and a demon is that a demigod is a devotee of Lord Viñëu whereas a
demon is just the opposite: viñëu-bhaktaù småto daiva äsuras tad-viparyayaù.
Våträsura was considered a demon, but actually he was more than qualified as a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
663
devotee, or mahä-pauruñya. If one somehow becomes a devotee of the Supreme
Lord, whatever his position, he can be brought to the position of a perfect
person. This is possible if an unalloyed devotee tries to serve the Lord by
delivering him in this way. Therefore Çukadeva Gosvämé says in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (2.4.18):
kiräta-hüëändhra-pulinda-pulkaçä
äbhéra-çumbhä yavanäù khasädayaù
ye 'nye ca päpä yad-apäçrayäçrayäù
çudhyanti tasmai prabhaviñëave namaù
"Kirätas, Hüëas, Ändhras, Pulindas, Pulkaças, Äbhéras, Çumbhas, Yavanas and
members of the Khasa races, and even others addicted to sinful acts can be
purified by taking shelter of the devotees of the Lord, for He is the supreme
power. I beg to offer my respectful obeisances unto Him." Anyone can be
purified if he takes shelter of a pure devotee and molds his character according
to the pure devotee's direction. Then, even if one is a Kiräta, Ändhra, Pulinda
or whatever, he can be purified and elevated to the position of a
mahä-pauruñya.
TEXT 21
%iLvd& MahdaêYa| Yad( rJa"Pa[k*-TaeSTav )
vaSaudeve >aGaviTa SatvaTMaiNa d*!a MaiTa" )) 21 ))
khalv idaà mahad äçcaryaà
yad rajaù-prakåtes tava
väsudeve bhagavati
sattvätmani dåòhä matiù
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
664
khalu—indeed; idam—this; mahat äçcaryam—great wonder; yat—which;
rajaù—influenced by the mode of passion; prakåteù—whose nature; tava—of
you; väsudeve—in Lord Kåñëa; bhagavati—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; sattva-ätmani—who is situated in pure goodness; dåòhä—firm;
matiù—consciousness.
TRANSLATION
O Våträsura, demons are generally conducted by the mode of passion.
Therefore, what a great wonder it is that although you are a demon, you have
adopted the mentality of a devotee and have fixed your mind on the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Väsudeva, who is always situated in pure goodness.
PURPORT
King Indra wondered how Våträsura could have been elevated to the
position of an exalted devotee. As for Prahläda Mahäräja, he was initiated by
Närada Muni, and therefore it was possible for him to become a great devotee,
although he was born in a family of demons. For Våträsura, however, Indra
could not detect such causes. Therefore he was struck with wonder that
Våträsura was such an exalted devotee that he could fix his mind without
deviation upon the lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa, Väsudeva.
TEXT 22
YaSYa >ai¢->aRGaviTa hraE iNa"é[eYaSaeìre )
iv§-I@Taae_Ma*TaaM>aaeDaaE ik&- +aud]E" %aTak-aedkE-" )) 22 ))
yasya bhaktir bhagavati
harau niùçreyaseçvare
vikréòato 'måtämbhodhau
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
665
kià kñudraiù khätakodakaiù
SYNONYMS
yasya—of whom; bhaktiù—devotional service; bhagavati—to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; harau—Lord Hari; niùçreyasa-éçvare—the controller
of the supreme perfection of life, or supreme liberation; vikréòataù—swimming
or playing; amåta-ambhodhau—in the ocean of nectar; kim—what is the use;
kñudraiù—with small; khätaka-udakaiù—ditches of water.
TRANSLATION
A person fixed in the devotional service of the Supreme Lord, Hari, the Lord
of the highest auspiciousness, swims in the ocean of nectar. For him what is the
use of the water in small ditches?
PURPORT
Våträsura has formerly prayed (SB 6.11.25), na näka-påñöhaà na ca
pärameñöhyaà na säma-bhaumaà na rasädhipatyam. "I do not want the
facilities for happiness on Brahmaloka, Svargaloka or even Dhruvaloka, not to
speak of this earth or the lower planets. I simply want to return home, back to
Godhead." This is the determination of a pure devotee. A pure devotee is
never attracted to any exalted position within this material world. He simply
wants to associate with the Supreme Personality of Godhead like the
inhabitants of Våndävana-Çrématé Rädhäräëé, the gopés, Kåñëa's father and
mother (Nanda Mahäräja and Yaçodä), Kåñëa's friends and Kåñëa's servants.
He wants to associate with Kåñëa's atmosphere of Våndävana's beauty. These
are the highest ambitions of a devotee of Kåñëa. Devotees of Lord Viñëu may
aspire for a position in Vaikuëöhaloka, but a devotee of Kåñëa never aspires
even for the facilities of Vaikuëöha; he wants to return to Goloka Våndävana
and associate with Lord Kåñëa in His eternal pastimes. Any material happiness
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
666
is like water in a ditch, whereas the spiritual happiness eternally enjoyed in the
spiritual world is like an ocean of nectar in which a devotee wants to swim.
TEXT 23
é[qXauk- ovac
wiTa b]uva<aavNYaaeNYa& DaMaRiJajaSaYaa Na*Pa )
YauYauDaaTae MahavqYaaRivNd]v*}aaE YauDaaMPaTaq )) 23 ))
çré-çuka uväca
iti bruväëäv anyonyaà
dharma-jijïäsayä nåpa
yuyudhäte mahä-véryäv
indra-våtrau yudhäm paté
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; bruväëau—speaking;
anyonyam—to one another; dharma-jijïäsayä—with a desire to know the
supreme, ultimate religious principle (devotional service); nåpa—O King;
yuyudhäte—fought; mahä-véryau—both very powerful; indra—King Indra;
våtrau—and Våträsura; yudhäm paté—both great military commanders.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Våträsura and King Indra spoke about
devotional service even on the battlefield, and then as a matter of duty they
again began fighting. My dear King, both of them were great fighters and were
equally powerful.
TEXT 24
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
667
AaivDYa Pairga& v*}a" k-aZ<aaRYaSaMairNdMa" )
wNd]aYa Pa[aih<aaed( gaaer& vaMahSTaeNa Maairz )) 24 ))
ävidhya parighaà våtraù
kärñëäyasam arindamaù
indräya prähiëod ghoraà
väma-hastena märiña
SYNONYMS
ävidhya—whirling; parigham—the club; våtraù—Våträsura;
kärñëa-ayasam—made of iron; arim-damaù—who was competent to subdue his
enemy; indräya—at Indra; prähiëot—threw; ghoram—very fearful;
väma-hastena—with his left hand; märiña—O best of kings, Mahäräja Parékñit.
TRANSLATION
O Mahäräja Parékñit, Våträsura, who was completely able to subdue his
enemy, took his iron club, whirled it around, aimed it at Indra and then threw
it at him with his left hand.
TEXT 25
Sa Tau v*}aSYa Pairga& k-r& c k-r>aaePaMaMa( )
icC^ed YauGaPad( devae vJa]e<a XaTaPavR<aa )) 25 ))
sa tu våtrasya parighaà
karaà ca karabhopamam
ciccheda yugapad devo
vajreëa çata-parvaëä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
668
SYNONYMS
saù—he (King Indra); tu—however; våtrasya—of Våträsura; parigham—the
iron club; karam—his hand; ca—and; karabha-upamam—as strong as the
trunk of an elephant; ciccheda—cut to pieces; yugapat—simultaneously;
devaù—Lord Indra; vajreëa—with the thunderbolt; çata-parvaëä—having one
hundred joints.
TRANSLATION
With his thunderbolt named Çataparvan, Indra simultaneously cut to pieces
Våträsura's club and his remaining hand.
TEXT 26
dae>YaaRMauTk*-taMaUl/a>Yaa& b>aaE r¢-óvae_Saur" )
i^àPa+aae YaQaa Gaae}a" %ad( >a]íae viJa]<aa hTa" )) 26 ))
dorbhyäm utkåtta-müläbhyäà
babhau rakta-sravo 'suraù
chinna-pakño yathä gotraù
khäd bhrañöo vajriëä hataù
SYNONYMS
dorbhyäm—from the two arms; utkåtta-müläbhyäm—cut from the very root;
babhau—was; rakta-sravaù—profusely discharging blood; asuraù—Våträsura;
chinna-pakñaù—whose wings are cut; yathä—just as; gotraù—a mountain;
khät—from the sky; bhrañöaù—falling; vajriëä—by Indra, the carrier of the
thunderbolt; hataù—struck.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
669
TRANSLATION
Våträsura, bleeding profusely, his two arms cut off at their roots, looked
very beautiful, like a flying mountain whose wings have been cut to pieces by
Indra.
PURPORT
It appears from the statement of this verse that sometimes there are flying
mountains and that their wings are cut by the thunderbolt of Indra.
Våträsura's huge body resembled such a mountain.
TEXTS 27-29
MahaPa[a<aae MahavqYaaeR MahaSaPaR wv iÜPaMa( )
k*-TvaDara& hNau& >aUMaaE dETYaae idVYautara& hNauMa( )
Na>aaeGaM>aqrv£e-<a le/il/haeLb<aiJaûYaa )) 27 ))
d&í\ai>a" k-al/k-LPaai>aGa]RSaiàv JaGaT}aYaMa( )
AiTaMaa}aMahak-aYa Aai+aPa&STarSaa iGarqNa( )) 28 ))
iGairra$( Paadcarqv PaÙya& iNaJaRrYaNa( MahqMa( )
JaGa]aSa Sa SaMaaSaaÛ viJa]<a& SahvahNaMa( )) 29 ))
mahä-präëo mahä-véryo
mahä-sarpa iva dvipam
kåtvädharäà hanuà bhümau
daityo divy uttaräà hanum
nabho-gambhéra-vaktreëa
leliholbaëa-jihvayä
daàñöräbhiù käla-kalpäbhir
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
670
grasann iva jagat-trayam
atimätra-mahä-käya
äkñipaàs tarasä girén
giri-räö päda-cäréva
padbhyäà nirjarayan mahém
jagräsa sa samäsädya
vajriëaà saha-vähanam
SYNONYMS
mahä-präëaù—very great in bodily strength; mahä-véryaù—showing
uncommon prowess; mahä-sarpaù—the biggest snake; iva—like; dvipam—an
elephant; kåtvä—placing; adharäm—the lower; hanum—jaw; bhümau—on the
ground; daityaù—the demon; divi—in the sky; uttaräm hanum—the upper jaw;
nabhaù—like the sky; gambhéra—deep; vaktreëa—with his mouth; leliha—like
a snake; ulbaëa—fearful; jihvayä—with a tongue; daàñöräbhiù—with teeth;
käla-kalpäbhiù—exactly like the time factor, or death; grasan—devouring;
iva—as if; jagat-trayam—the three worlds; ati-mätra—very high;
mahä-käyaù—whose great body; äkñipan—shaking; tarasä—with great force;
girén—the mountains; giri-räö—the Himalaya Mountains; päda-cäré—moving
on foot; iva—as if; padbhyäm—by his feet; nirjarayan—crushing; mahém—the
surface of the world; jagräsa—swallowed; saù—he; samäsädya—reaching;
vajriëam—Indra, who carries the thunderbolt; saha-vähanam—with his
carrier, the elephant.
TRANSLATION
Våträsura was very powerful in physical strength and influence. He placed
his lower jaw on the ground and his upper jaw in the sky. His mouth became
very deep, like the sky itself, and his tongue resembled a large serpent. With his
fearful, deathlike teeth, he seemed to be trying to devour the entire universe.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
671
Thus assuming a gigantic body, the great demon Våträsura shook even the
mountains and began crushing the surface of the earth with his legs, as if he
were the Himalayas walking about. He came before Indra and swallowed him
and Airävata, his carrier, just as a big python might swallow an elephant.
TEXT 30
v*}aGa]STa& TaMaal/aeKYa SaPa[JaaPaTaYa" Saura" )
ha k-íiMaiTa iNaivR<<aaêu§u-Xau" SaMahzRYa" )) 30 ))
våtra-grastaà tam älokya
saprajäpatayaù suräù
hä kañöam iti nirviëëäç
cukruçuù samaharñayaù
SYNONYMS
våtra-grastam—swallowed by Våträsura; tam—him (Indra); älokya—seeing;
sa-prajäpatayaù—with Lord Brahmä and other prajäpatis; suräù—all the
demigods; hä—alas; kañöam—what a tribulation; iti—thus; nirviëëäù—being
very morose; cukruçuù—lamented; sa-mahä-åñayaù—with the great sages.
TRANSLATION
When the demigods, along with Brahmä, other prajäpatis and other great
saintly persons, saw that Indra had been swallowed by the demon, they became
very morose. "Alas," they lamented. "What a calamity ! What a calamity !"
TEXT 31
iNaGaq<aaeR_PYaSaureNd]e<a Na MaMaaraedr& GaTa" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
672
MahaPauåzSaàÖae YaaeGaMaaYaable/Na c )) 31 ))
nigérëo 'py asurendreëa
na mamärodaraà gataù
mahäpuruña-sannaddho
yogamäyä-balena ca
SYNONYMS
nigérëaù—swallowed; api—although; asura-indreëa—by the best of the
demons, Våträsura; na—not; mamära—died; udaram—the abdomen;
gataù—reaching; mahä-puruña—by the armor of the Supreme Lord, Näräyaëa;
sannaddhaù—being protected; yoga-mäyä-balena—by the mystic power that
Indra himself possessed; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
The protective armor of Näräyaëa, which Indra possessed, was identical
with Näräyaëa Himself, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Protected by that
armor and by his own mystic power, King Indra, although swallowed by
Våträsura, did not die within the demon's belly.
TEXT 32
i>atva vJa]e<a TaTku-i+a& iNaZ§-MYa bl/i>ad( iv>au" )
oÀk-TaR iXar" Xa}aaeiGaRiré*(r)iMavaEJaSaa )) 32 ))
bhittvä vajreëa tat-kukñià
niñkramya bala-bhid vibhuù
uccakarta çiraù çatror
giri-çåìgam ivaujasä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
673
SYNONYMS
bhittvä—piercing; vajreëa—by the thunderbolt; tat-kukñim—the abdomen of
Våträsura; niñkramya—getting out; bala-bhit—the slayer of the demon Bala;
vibhuù—the powerful Lord Indra; uccakarta—cut off; çiraù—the head;
çatroù—of the enemy; giri-çåìgam—the peak of a mountain; iva—like;
ojasä—with great force.
TRANSLATION
With his thunderbolt, King Indra, who was also extremely powerful, pierced
through Våträsura's abdomen and came out. Indra, the killer of the demon Bala,
then immediately cut off Våträsura's head, which was as high as the peak of a
mountain.
TEXT 33
vJa]STau TaTk-NDarMaaXauveGa"
k*-NTaNa( SaMaNTaaTa( PairvTaRMaaNa" )
NYaPaaTaYaTa( TaavdhGaR<aeNa
Yaae JYaaeiTazaMaYaNae va}aRhTYae )) 33 ))
vajras tu tat-kandharam äçu-vegaù
kåntan samantät parivartamänaù
nyapätayat tävad ahar-gaëena
yo jyotiñäm ayane värtra-hatye
SYNONYMS
vajraù—the thunderbolt; tu—but; tat-kandharam—his neck;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
674
äçu-vegaù—although very fast; kåntan—cutting; samantät—all around;
parivartamänaù—revolving; nyapätayat—caused to fall; tävat—so many;
ahaù-gaëena—by days; yaù—which; jyotiñäm—of the luminaries like the sun
and moon; ayane—in moving to both sides of the equator; värtra-hatye—at the
time suitable for killing Våträsura.
TRANSLATION
Although the thunderbolt revolved around Våträsura's neck with great
speed, separating his head from his body took one complete year—360 days, the
time in which the sun, moon and other luminaries complete a northern and
southern journey. Then, at the suitable time for Våträsura to be killed, his head
fell to the ground.
TEXT 34
Tada c %e duNdu>aYaae ivNaedu‚
GaRNDavRiSaÖa" SaMahizRSaºa" )
va}aRganil/(r)ESTaMai>aíuvaNaa
MaN}aEMauRda ku-SauMaEr>YavzRNa( )) 34 ))
tadä ca khe dundubhayo vinedur
gandharva-siddhäù samaharñi-saìghäù
värtra-ghna-liìgais tam abhiñöuvänä
mantrair mudä kusumair abhyavarñan
SYNONYMS
tadä—at that time; ca—also; khe—in the higher planetary systems in the sky;
dundubhayaù—the kettledrums; vineduù—sounded; gandharva—the
Gandharvas; siddhäù—and the Siddhas; sa-maharñi-saìghäù—with the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
675
assembly of saintly persons; värtra-ghna-liìgaiù—celebrating the prowess of
the killer of Våträsura; tam—him (Indra); abhiñöuvänäù—praising;
mantraiù—by various mantras; mudä—with great pleasure; kusumaiù—with
flowers; abhyavarñan—showered.
TRANSLATION
When Våträsura was killed, the Gandharvas and Siddhas in the heavenly
planets beat kettledrums in jubilation. With Vedic hymns they celebrated the
prowess of Indra, the killer of Våträsura, praising Indra and showering flowers
upon him with great pleasure.
TEXT 35
v*}aSYa dehaiàZ§-aNTaMaaTMaJYaaeiTarirNdMa )
PaXYaTaa& SavRdevaNaaMal/aek&- SaMaPaÛTa )) 35 ))
våtrasya dehän niñkräntam
ätma-jyotir arindama
paçyatäà sarva-devänäm
alokaà samapadyata
SYNONYMS
våtrasya—of Våträsura; dehät—from the body; niñkräntam—coming out;
ätma-jyotiù—the spirit soul, which was as brilliant as the effulgence of
Brahman; arim-dama—O King Parékñit, subduer of enemies; paçyatäm—were
watching; sarva-devänäm—while all the demigods; alokam—the supreme
abode, filled with the Brahman effulgence; samapadyata—achieved.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
676
TRANSLATION
O King Parékñit, subduer of enemies, the living spark then came forth from
Våträsura's body and returned home, back to Godhead. While all the demigods
looked on, he entered the transcendental world to become an associate of Lord
Saìkarñaëa.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura explains that Indra, not Våträsura,
was actually killed. He says that when Våträsura swallowed King Indra and his
carrier, the elephant, he thought, "Now I have killed Indra, and therefore
there is no more need of fighting. Now let me return home, back to Godhead."
Thus he stopped all his bodily activities and became situated in trance. Taking
advantage of the silence of Våträsura's body, Indra pierced the demon's
abdomen, and because of Våträsura's trance, Indra was able to come out. Now,
Våträsura was in yoga-samadhi, and therefore although King Indra wanted to
cut his throat, the demon's neck was so stiff that Indra's thunderbolt took 360
days to cut it to pieces. Actually it was the body left by Våträsura that was cut
to pieces by Indra; Våträsura himself was not killed. In his original
consciousness, Våträsura returned home, back to Godhead, to become an
associate of Lord Saìkarñaëa. Here the word alokam means the transcendental
world, Vaikuëöhaloka, where Saìkarñaëa eternally resides.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, Twelfth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Våträsura's Glorious Death."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
677
13. King Indra Afflicted by Sinful Reaction
This chapter describes Indra's fear at having killed a brähmaëa (Våträsura),
and it also describes how he fled and was saved by the grace of Lord Viñëu.
When all the demigods requested Indra to kill Våträsura, he refused because
Våträsura was a brähmaëa. The demigods, however, encouraged Indra not to
fear killing him because Indra was protected by the Näräyaëa-kavaca, or the
Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself, Lord Näräyaëa. Even by a glimpse
of the chanting of Näräyaëa's name, one becomes free from all the sinful
reactions of killing a woman, a cow or a brähmaëa. The demigods advised Indra
to perform an açvamedha sacrifice, by which Näräyaëa would be pleased, for
the performer of such a sacrifice is not implicated in sinful reactions even if he
kills the entire universe.
Following this instruction from the demigods, King Indra fought Våträsura,
but when Våträsura was killed, everyone was satisfied but King Indra, who
knew Våträsura's position. This is the nature of a great personality. Even if a
great personality acquires some opulence, he is always ashamed and regretful if
he acquires it illegally. Indra could understand that he was certainly entangled
by sinful reactions for killing a brähmaëa. Indeed, he could see sinful reaction
personified following him, and thus he fled here and there in fear, thinking of
how to rid himself of his sins. He went to Mänasa-sarovara, and there, under
the protection of the goddess of fortune, he meditated for one thousand years.
During this time, Nahuña reigned over the heavenly planets as the
representative of Indra. Unfortunately, however, he was attracted by the
beauty of Indra's wife, Çacédevé, and because of his sinful desire he had to
accept the body of a serpent in his next life. Indra later performed a great
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
678
sacrifice with the help of exalted brähmaëas and saints. In this way he was
released from the reactions of his sinful killing of a brähmaëa.
TEXT 1
é[qXauk- ovac
v*}ae hTae }aYaae l/aek-a ivNaa Xa§e-<a >aUird )
SaPaal/a ù>avNa( SaÛae ivJvra iNav*RTaeiNd]Yaa" )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
våtre hate trayo lokä
vinä çakreëa bhürida
sapälä hy abhavan sadyo
vijvarä nirvåtendriyäù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; våtre hate—when Våträsura was
killed; trayaù lokäù—the three planetary systems (upper, middle and lower);
vinä—except; çakreëa—Indra, who is also called Çakra; bhüri-da—O Mahäräja
Parékñit, giver of great charity; sa-päläù—with the rulers of the various planets;
hi—indeed; abhavan—became; sadyaù—immediately; vijvaräù—without fear
of death; nirvåta—very much pleased; indriyäù—whose senses.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O King Parékñit, who are so charitably disposed,
when Våträsura was killed, all the presiding deities and everyone else in the
three planetary systems was immediately pleased and free from
trouble—everyone, that is, except Indra.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
679
TEXT 2
devizRiPaTa*>aUTaaiNa dETYaa devaNauGaa" SvYaMa( )
Pa[iTaJaGMau" SviDaZ<YaaiNa b]øeXaeNd]adYaSTaTa" )) 2 ))
devarñi-pitå-bhütäni
daityä devänugäù svayam
pratijagmuù sva-dhiñëyäni
brahmeçendrädayas tataù
SYNONYMS
deva—demigods; åñi—great saintly persons; pitå—the inhabitants of Pitåloka;
bhütäni—and the other living entities; daityäù—demons; deva-anugäù—the
inhabitants of other planets following the principles of the demigods;
svayam—independently (without asking permission from Indra);
pratijagmuù—returned; sva-dhiñëyäni—to their respective planets and homes;
brahma—Lord Brahmä; éça—Lord Çiva; indra-ädayaù—and the demigods
headed by Indra; tataù—thereafter.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, the demigods, the great saintly persons, the inhabitants of
Pitåloka and Bhütaloka, the demons, the followers of the demigods, and also
Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva and the demigods subordinate to Indra all returned to
their respective homes. While departing, however, no one spoke to Indra.
PURPORT
In this connection Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura comments:
brahmeçendrädaya iti; indrasya sva-dhiñëya-gamanaà nopapadyate
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
680
våtra-vadha-kñaëa eva brahma-hatyopadrava-präpteù; tasmät tata ity anena
mänasa-sarovaräd ägatya pravartitäd açvamedhät parata iti vyäkhyeyam.
Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva and the other demigods returned to their respective
abodes, but Indra did not, for he was disturbed at having killed Våträsura, who
was actually a brähmaëa. After killing Våträsura, Indra went to the
Mänasa-sarovara Lake to become free from sinful reactions. When he left the
lake, he performed an açvamedha-yajïa and then returned to his own abode.
TEXT 3
é[qraJaaevac
wNd]SYaaiNav*RTaeheRTau& é[aeTauiMaC^aiMa >aae MauNae )
YaeNaaSaNa( Saui%Naae deva hreduR"%& ku-Taae_>avTa( )) 3 ))
çré-räjoväca
indrasyänirvåter hetuà
çrotum icchämi bho mune
yenäsan sukhino devä
harer duùkhaà kuto 'bhavat
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—King Parékñit inquired; indrasya—of King Indra; anirvåteù—of
the moroseness; hetum—the reason; çrotum—to hear; icchämi—I wish;
bhoù—O my lord; mune—O great sage, Çukadeva Gosvämé; yena—by which;
äsan—were; sukhinaù—very happy; deväù—all the demigods; hareù—of Indra;
duùkham—moroseness; kutaù—from where; abhavat—was.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Parékñit inquired from Çukadeva Gosvämé: O great sage, what was
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
681
the reason for Indra's unhappiness? I wish to hear about this. When he killed
Våträsura, all the demigods were extremely happy. Why, then, was Indra
himself unhappy?
PURPORT
This, of course, is a very intelligent question. When a demon is killed,
certainly all the demigods are happy. In this case, however, when all the
demigods were happy because of Våträsura's having been killed, Indra was
unhappy. Why? It may be suggested that Indra was unhappy because he knew
that he had killed a great devotee and brähmaëa. Våträsura outwardly
appeared to be a demon, but inwardly he was a great devotee and therefore a
great brähmaëa.
Herein it is clearly indicated that a person who is not at all demoniac, such
as Prahläda Mahäräja and Bali Mahäräja, may outwardly be a demon or be
born in a family of demons. Therefore in terms of real culture one should not
be considered a demigod or demon simply according to birth. In his dealings
while fighting with Indra, Våträsura proved himself a great devotee of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Furthermore, as soon as he finished fighting
with Indra and was apparently killed, Våträsura was transferred to
Vaikuëöhaloka to become an associate of Saìkarñaëa. Indra knew this, and
therefore he was morose at having killed such a demon, who was actually a
Vaiñëava or brähmaëa.
A Vaiñëava is already a brähmaëa, although a brähmaëa may not be a
Vaiñëava. The Padma Puräëa says:
ñaö-karma-nipuëo vipro
mantra-tantra-viçäradaù
avaiñëavo gurur na syäd
vaiñëavaù çva-paco guruù
One may be a brähmaëa in terms of his culture and family and may be expert
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
682
in Vedic knowledge (mantra-tantra-viçäradaù), but if he is not a Vaiñëava, he
cannot be a guru. This means that an expert brähmaëa may not be a Vaiñëava,
but a Vaiñëava is already a brähmaëa. A millionaire may very easily possess
hundreds and thousands of dollars, but a person with hundreds and thousands
of dollars is not necessarily a millionaire. Våträsura was a perfect Vaiñëava,
and therefore he was also a brähmaëa.
TEXT 4
é[qXauk- ovac
v*}aiv§-MaSa&ivGana" SaveR deva" SahizRi>a" )
TaÜDaaYaaQaRYaiàNd]& NaEC^d( >aqTaae b*hÜDaaTa( )) 4 ))
çré-çuka uväca
våtra-vikrama-saàvignäù
sarve deväù saharñibhiù
tad-vadhäyärthayann indraà
naicchad bhéto båhad-vadhät
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; våtra—of Våträsura;
vikrama—by the powerful activities; saàvignäù—being full of anxieties;
sarve—all; deväù—the demigods; saha åñibhiù—with the great sages;
tat-vadhäya—for the killing of him; ärthayan—requested; indram—Indra; na
aicchat—declined; bhétaù—being afraid; båhat-vadhät—due to killing a
brähmaëa.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé answered: When all the great sages and demigods
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
683
were disturbed by the extraordinary power of Våträsura, they had assembled to
ask Indra to kill him. Indra, however, being afraid of killing a brähmaëa,
declined their request.
TEXT 5
wNd] ovac
ñq>aUd]uMaJalE/reNaae ivìæPavDaaeÙvMa( )
iv>a¢-MaNauGa*õiÙv*R}ahTYaa& Kv MaaJMYaRhMa( )) 5 ))
indra uväca
stré-bhü-druma-jalair eno
viçvarüpa-vadhodbhavam
vibhaktam anugåhëadbhir
våtra-hatyäà kva märjmy aham
SYNONYMS
indraù uväca—King Indra replied; stré—by women; bhü—the earth;
druma—the trees; jalaiù—and water; enaù—this (sin); viçvarüpa—of
Viçvarüpa; vadha—from the killing; udbhavam—produced;
vibhaktam—divided; anugåhëadbhiù—showing their favor (to me);
våtra-hatyäm—the killing of Våtra; kva—how; märjmi—shall become free
from; aham—I.
TRANSLATION
King Indra replied: When I killed Viçvarüpa, I received extensive sinful
reactions, but I was favored by the women, land, trees and water, and therefore
I was able to divide the sin among them. But now if I kill Våträsura, another
brähmaëa, how shall I free myself from the sinful reactions?
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
684
TEXT 6
é[qXauk- ovac
‰zYaSTaduPaak-<YaR MaheNd]iMadMab]uvNa( )
YaaJaiYaZYaaMa >ad]& Tae hYaMaeDaeNa Maa SMa >aE" )) 6 ))
çré-çuka uväca
åñayas tad upäkarëya
mahendram idam abruvan
yäjayiñyäma bhadraà te
hayamedhena mä sma bhaiù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; åñayaù—the great sages;
tat—that; upäkarëya—hearing; mahä-indram—unto King Indra; idam—this;
abruvan—spoke; yäjayiñyämaù—we shall perform a great sacrifice;
bhadram—good fortune; te—unto you; hayamedhena—by the horse sacrifice;
mä sma bhaiù—do not be afraid.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Hearing this, the great sages replied to King
Indra, "O King of heaven, all good fortune unto you. Do not fear. We shall
perform an açvamedha sacrifice to release you from any sin you may accrue by
killing the brähmaëa."
TEXT 7
hYaMaeDaeNa Pauåz& ParMaaTMaaNaMaqìrMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
685
wîa NaaraYa<a& dev& Maae+YaSae_iPa JaGaÜDaaTa( )) 7 ))
hayamedhena puruñaà
paramätmänam éçvaram
iñövä näräyaëaà devaà
mokñyase 'pi jagad-vadhät
SYNONYMS
hayamedhena—by the sacrifice known as açvamedha; puruñam—the Supreme
Person; paramätmänam—the Supersoul; éçvaram—the supreme controller;
iñövä—worshiping; näräyaëam—Lord Näräyaëa; devam—the Supreme Lord;
mokñyase—you will be liberated; api—even; jagat-vadhät—from the sin for
killing the whole world.
TRANSLATION
The åñis continued: O King Indra, by performing an açvamedha sacrifice and
thereby pleasing the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the Supersoul,
Lord Näräyaëa, the supreme controller, one can be relieved even of the sinful
reactions for killing the entire world, not to speak of killing a demon like
Våträsura.
TEXTS 8-9
b]øha iPaTa*ha Gaaeganae MaaTa*hacaYaRhagavaNa( )
ìad" PauLk-Sak-ae vaiPa XauÖyerNa( YaSYa k-ITaRNaaTa( )) 8 ))TaMaìMaeDaeNa MahaMa%eNa
é[ÖaiNvTaae_SMaai>arNauiïTaeNa )
hTvaiPa Sab]øcracr& Tv&
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
686
Na il/PYaSae ik&- %l/iNaGa]he<a )) 9 ))
brahma-hä pitå-hä go-ghno
mätå-häcärya-häghavän
çvädaù pulkasako väpi
çuddhyeran yasya kértanät
tam açvamedhena mahä-makhena
çraddhänvito 'smäbhir anuñöhitena
hatväpi sabrahma-caräcaraà tvaà
na lipyase kià khala-nigraheëa
SYNONYMS
brahma-hä—a person who has killed a brähmaëa; pitå-hä—a person who has
killed his father; go-ghnaù—a person who has killed a cow; mätå-hä—a person
who has killed his mother; äcärya-hä—a person who has killed his spiritual
master; agha-vän—such a sinful person; çva-adaù—a dog-eater; pulkasakaù—a
caëòäla, one who is less than a çüdra; vä—or; api—even; çuddhyeran—may be
purified; yasya—of whom (Lord Näräyaëa); kértanät—from chanting the holy
name; tam—Him; açvamedhena—by the açvamedha sacrifice;
mahä-makhena—the topmost of all sacrifices; çraddhä-anvitaù—endowed with
faith; asmäbhiù—by us; anuñöhitena—conducted or managed; hatvä—killing;
api—even; sa-brahma-cara-acaram—all the living entities, including the
brähmaëas; tvam—you; na—not; lipyase—are contaminated; kim—what then;
khala-nigraheëa—by killing one disturbing demon.
TRANSLATION
One who has killed a brähmaëa, one who has killed a cow or one who has
killed his father, mother or spiritual master can be immediately freed from all
sinful reactions simply by chanting the holy name of Lord Näräyaëa. Other
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
687
sinful persons, such as dog-eaters and caëòälas, who are less than çüdras, can
also be freed in this way. But you are a devotee, and we shall help you by
performing the great horse sacrifice. If you please Lord Näräyaëa in that way,
why should you be afraid? You will be freed even if you kill the entire universe,
including the brähmaëas, not to speak of killing a disturbing demon like
Våträsura.
PURPORT
It is said in the Båhad-viñëu Puräëa:
nämno hi yävaté çaktiù
päpa-nirharaëe hareù
tävat kartuà na çaknoti
pätakaà pätaké naraù
Also, in the Prema-vivarta by Jagadänanda Paëòita it is said:
eka kåñëa-näme päpéra yata päpa-kñaya
bahu janme sei päpé karite näraya
This means that by once chanting the holy name of the Lord, one can be freed
from the reactions of more sins that he can even imagine performing. The holy
name is so spiritually potent that simply by chanting the holy name one can be
freed from the reactions to all sinful activities. What, then, is to be said of
those who chant the holy name regularly or worship the Deity regularly? For
such purified devotees, freedom from sinful reaction is certainly assured. This
does not mean, however, that one should intentionally commit sinful acts and
think himself free from the reactions because he is chanting the holy name.
Such a mentality is a most abominable offense at the lotus feet of the holy
name. Nämno baläd yasya hi päpa-buddhiù: the Lord's holy name certainly has
the potency to neutralize all sinful activities, but if one repeatedly and
intentionally commits sins while chanting the holy name, he is most
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
688
condemned.
These verses name the performers of various sinful deeds. In the
Manu-saàhitä the following names are given. A son begotten by a brähmaëa
and born from the womb of a çüdra mother is called a päraçava or niñäda, a
hunter accustomed to stealing. A son begotten by a niñäda in the womb of a
çüdra woman is called a pukkasa. A child begotten by a kñatriya in the womb of
the daughter of a çüdra is called an ugra. A child begotten by a çüdra in the
womb of the daughter of a kñatriya is called a kñattä. A child begotten by a
kñatriya in the womb of a lower-class woman is called a çväda, or dog-eater. All
such offspring are considered extremely sinful, but the holy name of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is so strong that all of them can be purified
simply by chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra.
The Hare Kåñëa movement offers everyone a chance to be purified,
regardless of birth or family. As confirmed in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (2.4.18):
kiräta-hüëändhra-pulinda-pulkaçä
äbhéra-çumbhä yavanäù khasädayaù
ye 'nye ca päpä yad-apäçrayäçrayäù
çudhyanti tasmai prabhaviñëave namaù
"Kirätas, Hüëas, Ändhras, Pulindas, Pulkaças, Äbhéras, Çumbhas, Yavanas,
members of the Khasa races, and even others addicted to sinful acts can be
purified by taking shelter of devotees of the Lord, for He is the supreme power.
I beg to offer my respectful obeisances unto Him." Even such sinful persons can
certainly all be purified if they chant the holy name of the Lord under the
direction of a pure devotee.
Herein the sages encourage King Indra to kill Våträsura even at the risk of
brahma-hatyä, the killing of a brähmaëa, and they guarantee to release him
from sinful reactions by performing an açvamedha-yajïa. Such purposefully
devised atonement, however, cannot relieve the performer of sinful acts. This
will be seen from the following verse.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
689
TEXT 10
é[qXauk- ovac
Wv& SaÄaeidTaae ivPa[EMaRåTvaNahNaid]PauMa( )
b]øhTYaa hTae TaiSMaàaSaSaad v*zak-iPaMa( )) 10 ))
çré-çuka uväca
evaà saïcodito viprair
marutvän ahanad ripum
brahma-hatyä hate tasminn
äsasäda våñäkapim
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—thus; saïcoditaù—being
encouraged; vipraiù—by the brähmaëas; marutvän—Indra; ahanat—killed;
ripum—his enemy, Våträsura; brahma-hatyä—the sinful reaction for killing a
brähmaëa; hate—was killed; tasmin—when he (Våträsura);
äsasäda—approached; våñäkapim—Indra, who is also named Våñäkapi.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Encouraged by the words of the sages, Indra
killed Våträsura, and when he was killed the sinful reaction for killing a
brähmaëa [brahma-hatyä] certainly took shelter of Indra.
PURPORT
After killing Våträsura, Indra could not surpass the brahma-hatyä, the sinful
reactions for killing a brähmaëa. Formerly he had killed one brähmaëa,
Viçvarüpa, out of circumstantial anger, but this time, following the advice of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
690
the sages, he killed another brähmaëa purposely. Therefore the sinful reaction
was greater than before. Indra could not be relieved from the reaction simply
by performing sacrifices for atonement. He had to undergo a severe series of
sinful reactions, and when he was freed by such suffering, the brähmaëas
allowed him to perform the horse sacrifice. The planned execution of sinful
deeds on the strength of chanting the holy name of the Lord or undergoing
präyaçcitta, atonement, cannot give relief to anyone, even to Indra or Nahuña.
Nahuña was officiating for Indra while Indra, absent from heaven, was going
here and there to gain release from his sinful reactions.
TEXT 11
TaYaeNd]" SMaaSahTa( TaaPa& iNav*RiTaNaaRMauMaaivXaTa( )
hqMaNTa& vaCYaTaa& Pa[aá& Sau%YaNTYaiPa Naae Gau<aa" )) 11 ))
tayendraù smäsahat täpaà
nirvåtir nämum äviçat
hrémantaà väcyatäà präptaà
sukhayanty api no guëäù
SYNONYMS
tayä—by that action; indraù—King Indra; sma—indeed; asahat—suffered;
täpam—misery; nirvåtiù—happiness; na—not; amum—him; äviçat—entered;
hrémantam—one who is shameful; väcyatäm—ill fame; präptam—obtaining;
sukhayanti—give pleasure; api—although; no—not; guëäù—good
qualifications like possessing opulence.
TRANSLATION
Following the advice of the demigods, Indra killed Våträsura, and he suffered
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
691
because of this sinful killing. Although the other demigods were happy, he
could not derive happiness from the killing of Våträsura. Indra's other good
qualities, such as tolerance and opulence, could not help him in his grief.
PURPORT
One cannot be happy by committing sinful acts, even if one is endowed
with material opulence. Indra found this to be true. People began to blaspheme
him, saying, "This person has killed a brähmaëa for the sake of enjoying
heavenly material happiness." Therefore in spite of being King of heaven and
enjoying material opulence, Indra was always unhappy because of the
accusations of the populace.
TEXTS 12-13
Taa& ddXaaRNauDaavNTaq& ca<@al/IiMav æiPa<aqMa( )
JarYaa vePaMaaNaa(r)q& Ya+MaGa]STaaMaSa*KPa$=aMa( )) 12 ))
ivk-IYaR Pail/TaaNa( ke-Xaa&iSTaï iTaïeiTa >aaiz<aqMa( )
MaqNaGaNDYaSauGaNDaeNa ku-vRTaq& MaaGaRdUz<aMa( )) 13 ))
täà dadarçänudhävantéà
cäëòälém iva rüpiëém
jarayä vepamänäìgéà
yakñma-grastäm asåk-paöäm
vikérya palitän keçäàs
tiñöha tiñöheti bhäñiëém
ména-gandhy-asu-gandhena
kurvatéà märga-düñaëam
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
692
täm—the sinful reaction; dadarça—he saw; anudhävantém—chasing;
cäëòälém—a woman of the lowest class; iva—like; rüpiëém—taking a form;
jarayä—because of old age; vepamäna-aìgém—whose bodily limbs were
trembling; yakñma-grastäm—infected with tuberculosis; asåk-paöäm—whose
clothes were covered with blood; vikérya—scattering; palitän—grayed;
keçän—hair; tiñöha tiñöha—wait, wait; iti—thus; bhäñiëém—calling;
ména-gandhi—the smell of fish; asu—whose breath; gandhena—by the odor;
kurvatém—bringing about; märga-düñaëam—the pollution of the whole street.
TRANSLATION
Indra saw personified sinful reaction chasing him, appearing like a caëòäla
woman, a woman of the lowest class. She seemed very old, and all the limbs of
her body trembled. Because she was afflicted with tuberculosis, her body and
garments were covered with blood. Breathing an unbearable fishy odor that
polluted the entire street, she called to Indra, "Wait! Wait!"
PURPORT
When a person is afflicted with tuberculosis, he often vomits blood, which
makes his garments bloody.
TEXT 14
Na>aae GaTaae idXa" SavaR" Sahóa+aae ivXaaMPaTae )
Pa[aGaudqcq& idXa& TaU<a| Pa[ivíae Na*Pa MaaNaSaMa( )) 14 ))
nabho gato diçaù sarväù
sahasräkño viçämpate
präg-udécéà diçaà türëaà
praviñöo nåpa mänasam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
693
SYNONYMS
nabhaù—to the sky; gataù—going; diçaù—to the directions; sarväù—all;
sahasra-akñaù—Indra, who is endowed with one thousand eyes; viçämpate—O
King; präk-udécém—to the northeast; diçam—direction; türëam—very
speedily; praviñöaù—entered; nåpa—O King; mänasam—the lake known as
Mänasa-sarovara.
TRANSLATION
O King, Indra first fled to the sky, but there also he saw the woman of
personified sin chasing him. This witch followed him wherever he went. At last
he very quickly went to the northeast and entered the Mänasa-sarovara Lake.
TEXT 15
Sa AavSaTPauZk-rNaal/TaNTaU‚
Nal/BDa>aaeGaae YaidhaiGandUTa" )
vzaRi<a SaahóMal/i+aTaae_NTa"
SaiÄNTaYaNa( b]øvDaad( ivMaae+aMa( )) 15 ))
sa ävasat puñkara-näla-tantün
alabdha-bhogo yad ihägni-dütaù
varñäëi sähasram alakñito 'ntaù
saïcintayan brahma-vadhäd vimokñam
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Indra); ävasat—lived; puñkara-näla-tantün—in the network of the
fibers of a lotus stem; alabdha-bhogaù—not getting any material comfort
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
694
(practically starving for all material needs); yat—which; iha—here;
agni-dütaù—the fire-god messenger; varñäëi—celestial years; sähasram—one
thousand; alakñitaù—invisible; antaù—within his heart; saïcintayan—always
thinking of; brahma-vadhät—from the killing of a brähmaëa;
vimokñam—liberation.
TRANSLATION
Always thinking of how he could be relieved from the sinful reaction for
killing a brähmaëa, King Indra, invisible to everyone, lived in the lake for one
thousand years in the subtle fibers of the stem of a lotus. The fire-god used to
bring him his share of all yajïas, but because the fire-god was afraid to enter the
water, Indra was practically starving.
TEXT 16
TaaviT}a<aak&- Nahuz" XaXaaSa
ivÛaTaPaaeYaaeGabl/aNau>aav" )
Sa SaMPadEìYaRMadaNDabuiÖ‚
NasTaiSTarêa& GaiTaiMaNd]PaTNYaa )) 16 ))
tävat triëäkaà nahuñaù çaçäsa
vidyä-tapo-yoga-balänubhävaù
sa sampad-aiçvarya-madändha-buddhir
nétas tiraçcäà gatim indra-patnyä
SYNONYMS
tävat—for so long; triëäkam—the heavenly planet; nahuñaù—Nahuña;
çaçäsa—ruled; vidyä—by education; tapaù—austerities; yoga—mystic power;
bala—and strength; anubhävaù—being equipped; saù—he (Nahuña);
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
695
sampat—of so much wealth; aiçvarya—and opulence; mada—by the madness;
andha—blinded; buddhiù—his intelligence; nétaù—was brought; tiraçcäm—of
a snake; gatim—to the destination; indra-patnyä—by Indra's wife Çacédevé.
TRANSLATION
As long as King Indra lived in the water, wrapped in the stem of the lotus,
Nahuña was equipped with the ability to rule the heavenly kingdom, due to his
knowledge, austerity and mystic power. Nahuña, however, blinded and
maddened by power and opulence, made undesirable proposals to Indra's wife
with a desire to enjoy her. Thus Nahuña was cursed by a brähmaëa and later
became a snake.
TEXT 17
TaTaae GaTaae b]øiGaraePahUTa
‰TaM>arDYaaNaiNavairTaaga" )
PaaPaSTau idGdevTaYaa hTaaEJaa‚
STa& Naa>Ya>aUdivTa& ivZ<auPaTNYaa )) 17 ))
tato gato brahma-giropahüta
åtambhara-dhyäna-niväritäghaù
päpas tu digdevatayä hataujäs
taà näbhyabhüd avitaà viñëu-patnyä
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; gataù—gone; brahma—of the brähmaëas; girä—by the
words; upahütaù—being invited; åtambhara—on the Supreme Lord, who
maintains truth; dhyäna—by meditation; nivärita—impeded; aghaù—whose
sin; päpaù—the sinful activity; tu—then; dik-devatayä—by the demigod
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
696
Rudra; hata-ojäù—with all prowess diminished; tam—him (Indra); na
abhyabhüt—could not overcome; avitam—being protected; viñëu-patnyä—by
Lord Viñëu's wife, the goddess of fortune.
TRANSLATION
Indra's sins were diminished by the influence of Rudra, the demigod of all
directions. Because Indra was protected by the goddess of fortune, Lord Viñëu's
wife, who resides in the lotus clusters of Mänasa-sarovara Lake, Indra's sins
could not affect him. Indra was ultimately relieved of all the reactions of his
sinful deeds by strictly worshiping Lord Viñëu. Then he was called back to the
heavenly planets by the brähmaëas and reinstated in his position.
TEXT 18
Ta& c b]øzRYaae_>YaeTYa hYaMaeDaeNa >aarTa )
YaQaavÕq+aYaaÄ„§u-" PauåzaraDaNaeNa h )) 18 ))
taà ca brahmarñayo 'bhyetya
hayamedhena bhärata
yathävad dékñayäà cakruù
puruñärädhanena ha
SYNONYMS
tam—him (Lord Indra); ca—and; brahma-åñayaù—the great saints and
brähmaëas; abhyetya—approaching; hayamedhena—with an açvamedha
sacrifice; bhärata—O King Parékñit; yathävat—according to the rules and
regulations; dékñayäm cakruù—initiated; puruña-ärädhanena—which consists
of worship of the Supreme Person, Hari; ha—indeed.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
697
TRANSLATION
O King, when Lord Indra reached the heavenly planets, the saintly
brähmaëas approached him and properly initiated him into a horse sacrifice
[açvamedha-yajïa] meant to please the Supreme Lord.
TEXTS 19-20
AQaeJYaMaaNae Pauåze SavRdevMaYaaTMaiNa )
AìMaeDae MaheNd]e<a ivTaTae b]øvaidi>a" )) 19 ))
Sa vE Tvaí\vDaae >aUYaaNaiPa PaaPacYaae Na*Pa )
NaqTaSTaeNaEv XaUNYaaYa Naqhar wv >aaNauNaa )) 20 ))
athejyamäne puruñe
sarva-devamayätmani
açvamedhe mahendreëa
vitate brahma-vädibhiù
sa vai tväñöra-vadho bhüyän
api päpa-cayo nåpa
nétas tenaiva çünyäya
néhära iva bhänunä
SYNONYMS
atha—therefore; ijyamäne—when worshiped; puruñe—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; sarva—all; deva-maya-ätmani—the Supersoul and
maintainer of the demigods; açvamedhe—through the açvamedha-yajïa;
mahä-indreëa—by King Indra; vitate—being administered;
brahma-vädibhiù—by the saints and brähmaëas expert in Vedic knowledge;
saù—that; vai—indeed; tväñöra-vadhaù—the killing of Våträsura, the son of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
698
Tvañöä; bhüyät—may be; api—although; päpacayaù—mass of sin; nåpa—O
King; nétaù—was brought; tena—by that (the horse sacrifice); eva—certainly;
çünyäya—to nothing; néhäraù—fog; iva—like; bhänunä—by the brilliant sun.
TRANSLATION
The horse sacrifice performed by the saintly brähmaëas relieved Indra of the
reactions to all his sins because he worshiped the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in that sacrifice. O King, although he had committed a gravely sinful
act, it was nullified at once by that sacrifice, just as fog is vanquished by the
brilliant sunrise.
TEXT 21
Sa vaiJaMaeDaeNa YaQaaeidTaeNa
ivTaaYaMaaNaeNa MarqiciMaé[E" )
wîaiDaYaj& Pauåz& Paura<a‚
iMaNd]ae MahaNaaSa ivDaUTaPaaPa" )) 21 ))
sa väjimedhena yathoditena
vitäyamänena maréci-miçraiù
iñövädhiyajïaà puruñaà puräëam
indro mahän äsa vidhüta-päpaù
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Indra); väjimedhena—by the açvamedha sacrifice; yathä—just as;
uditena—described; vitäyamänena—being performed; maréci-miçraiù—by the
priests, headed by Maréci; iñövä—worshiping; adhiyajïam—the Supreme
Supersoul; puruñam puräëam—the original Personality of Godhead;
indraù—King Indra; mahän—worshipable; äsa—became;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
699
vidhüta-päpaù—being cleansed of all sinful reactions.
TRANSLATION
King Indra was favored by Maréci and the other great sages. They performed
the sacrifice just according to the rules and regulations, worshiping the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the Supersoul, the original person. Thus Indra regained
his exalted position and was again honored by everyone.
TEXTS 22-23
wd& Maha:YaaNaMaXaezPaaPMaNaa&
Pa[+aal/Na& TaqQaRPadaNauk-ITaRNaMa( )
>a¢-yuC^\Ya& >a¢-JaNaaNauv<aRNa&
MaheNd]Maae+a& ivJaYa& MaåTvTa" )) 22 ))
Pa#e=Yaura:YaaNaiMad& Sada buDaa"
é*<vNTYaQaae PavRi<a PavR<aqiNd]YaMa( )
DaNYa& YaXaSYa& iNai%l/agaMaaecNa&
irPauÅYa& SvSTYaYaNa& TaQaaYauzMa( )) 23 ))
idaà mahäkhyänam açeña-päpmanäà
prakñälanaà térthapadänukértanam
bhakty-ucchrayaà bhakta-janänuvarëanaà
mahendra-mokñaà vijayaà marutvataù
paöheyur äkhyänam idaà sadä budhäù
çåëvanty atho parvaëi parvaëéndriyam
dhanyaà yaçasyaà nikhilägha-mocanaà
ripuïjayaà svasty-ayanaà tathäyuñam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
700
SYNONYMS
idam—this; mahä-äkhyänam—great historical incident; açeña-päpmanäm—of
unlimited numbers of sinful acts; prakñälanam—cleansing;
térthapada-anukértanam—glorifying the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who
is known as Térthapada; bhakti—of devotional service; ucchrayam—in which
there is an increase; bhakta-jana—the devotees; anuvarëanam—describing;
mahä-indra-mokñam—the liberation of the King of heaven; vijayam—the
victory; marutvataù—of King Indra; paöheyuù—should read;
äkhyänam—narration; idam—this; sadä—always; budhäù—learned scholars;
çåëvanti—continue to hear; atho—as well; parvaëi parvaëi—on the occasion
of great festivals; indriyam—which makes the senses sharp; dhanyam—brings
wealth; yaçasyam—brings fame; nikhila—all; agha-mocanam—releasing from
sins; ripum-jayam—makes one victorious over his enemies;
svasti-ayanam—brings good fortune for all; tathä—so also; äyuñam—longevity.
TRANSLATION
In this very great narrative there is glorification of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Näräyaëa, there are statements about the exaltedness of devotional
service, there are descriptions of devotees like Indra and Våträsura, and there
are statements about King Indra's release from sinful life and about his victory
in fighting the demons. By understanding this incident, one is relieved of all
sinful reactions. Therefore the learned are always advised to read this narration.
If one does so, one will become expert in the activities of the senses, his
opulence will increase, and his reputation will become widespread. One will also
be relieved of all sinful reactions, he will conquer all his enemies, and the
duration of his life will increase. Because this narration is auspicious in all
respects, learned scholars regularly hear and repeat it on every festival day.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, Thirteenth Chapter, of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
701
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "King Indra Afflicted by Sinful Reaction."
14. King Citraketu's Lamentation
In this Fourteenth Chapter, Parékñit Mahäräja asks his spiritual master,
Çukadeva Gosvämé, how such a demon as Våträsura could become an exalted
devotee. In this connection the previous life of Våträsura is discussed. This
involves the story of Citraketu and how he was victimized by lamentation
because of the death of his son.
Among many millions of living entities, the number of human beings is
extremely small, and among human beings who are actually religious, only
some are eager to be liberated from material existence. Among many
thousands of people who desire relief from material existence, one is freed
from the association of unwanted persons or is relieved of material
contamination. And among many millions of such liberated persons, one may
become a devotee of Lord Näräyaëa. Therefore such devotees are extremely
rare. Since bhakti, devotional service, is not ordinary, Parékñit Mahäräja was
astonished that an asura could rise to the exalted position of a devotee. Being
doubtful, Parékñit Mahäräja inquired from Çukadeva Gosvämé, who then
described Våträsura with reference to his previous birth as Citraketu, the King
of Çürasena.
Citraketu, who had no sons, got an opportunity to meet the great sage
Aìgirä. When Aìgirä inquired from the King about his welfare, the King
expressed his moroseness, and therefore by the grace of the great sage, the
King's first wife, Kåtadyuti, gave birth to a son, who was the cause of both
happiness and lamentation. Upon the birth of this son, the King and all the
residents of the palace were very happy. The co-wives of Kåtadyuti, however,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
702
were envious, and later they administered poison to the child. Citraketu was
overwhelmed by shock at his son's death. Then Närada Muni and Aìgirä went
to see him.
TEXT 1
é[qParqi+aduvac
rJaSTaMa"Sv>aavSYa b]øNa( v*}aSYa PaaPMaNa" )
NaaraYa<ae >aGaviTa k-QaMaaSaqd( d*!a MaiTa" )) 1 ))
çré-parékñid uväca
rajas-tamaù-svabhävasya
brahman våtrasya päpmanaù
näräyaëe bhagavati
katham äséd dåòhä matiù
SYNONYMS
çré-parékñit uväca—King Parékñit inquired; rajaù—of the mode of passion;
tamaù—and of the mode of ignorance; sva-bhävasya—having a nature;
brahman—O learned brähmaëa; våtrasya—of Våträsura; päpmanaù—who was
supposedly sinful; näräyaëe—in Lord Näräyaëa; bhagavati—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; katham—how; äsét—was there; dåòhä—very strong;
matiù—consciousness.
TRANSLATION
King Parékñit inquired from Çukadeva Gosvämé: O learned brähmaëa,
demons are generally sinful, being obsessed with the modes of passion and
ignorance. How, then, could Våträsura have attained such exalted love for the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Näräyaëa?
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
703
PURPORT
In this material world, everyone is obsessed with the modes of passion and
ignorance. However, unless one conquers these modes and comes to the
platform of goodness, there is no chance of one's becoming a pure devotee.
This is confirmed by Lord Kåñëa Himself in Bhagavad-gétä (7.28):
yeñäà tv anta-gataà päpaà
janänäà puëya-karmaëäm
te dvandva-moha-nirmuktä
bhajante mäà dåòha-vratäù
"Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life, whose sinful
actions are completely eradicated and who are freed from the duality of
delusion, engage themselves in My service with determination." Since
Våträsura was among the demons, Mahäräja Parékñit wondered how it was
possible for him to have become such an exalted devotee.
TEXT 2
devaNaa& XauÖSatvaNaaMa*zq<aa& caMal/aTMaNaaMa( )
>ai¢-MauRku-Ndcr<ae Na Pa[aYae<aaePaJaaYaTae )) 2 ))
devänäà çuddha-sattvänäm
åñéëäà cämalätmanäm
bhaktir mukunda-caraëe
na präyeëopajäyate
SYNONYMS
devänäm—of the demigods; çuddha-sattvänäm—whose minds are purified;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
704
åñéëäm—of great saintly persons; ca—and; amala-ätmanäm—who have
purified their existence; bhaktiù—devotional service; mukunda-caraëe—to the
lotus feet of Mukunda, the Lord, who can give liberation; na—not;
präyeëa—almost always; upajäyate—develops.
TRANSLATION
Demigods situated in the mode of goodness and great saints cleansed of the
dirt of material enjoyment hardly ever render pure devotional service at the
lotus feet of Mukunda. [Therefore how could Våträsura have become such a
great devotee?]
TEXT 3
rJaaei>a" SaMaSa&:YaaTaa" PaaiQaRvEirh JaNTav" )
Taeza& Yae ke-cNaehNTae é[eYaae vE MaNauJaadYa" )) 3 ))
rajobhiù sama-saìkhyätäù
pärthivair iha jantavaù
teñäà ye kecanehante
çreyo vai manujädayaù
SYNONYMS
rajobhiù—with the atoms; sama-saìkhyätäù—having the same numerical
strength; pärthivaiù—of the earth; iha—in this world; jantavaù—the living
entities; teñäm—of them; ye—those who; kecana—some; éhante—act;
çreyaù—for religious principles; vai—indeed; manuja-ädayaù—the human
beings and so on.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
705
TRANSLATION
In this material world there are as many living entities as atoms. Among
these living entities, a very few are human beings, and among them, few are
interested in following religious principles.
TEXT 4
Pa[aYaae MauMau+avSTaeza& ke-cNaEv iÜJaaetaMa )
MauMau+aU<aa& Sahóezu k-iêNMauCYaeTa iSaDYaiTa )) 4 ))
präyo mumukñavas teñäà
kecanaiva dvijottama
mumukñüëäà sahasreñu
kaçcin mucyeta sidhyati
SYNONYMS
präyaù—almost always; mumukñavaù—persons interested in liberation;
teñäm—of them; kecana—some; eva—indeed; dvija-uttama—O best of the
brähmaëas; mumukñüëäm—of those who desire to be liberated; sahasreñu—in
many thousands; kaçcit—someone; mucyeta—may be actually liberated;
sidhyati—someone is perfect.
TRANSLATION
O best of the brähmaëas, Çukadeva Gosvämé, out of many persons who
follow religious principles, only a few desire liberation from the material world.
Among many thousands who desire liberation, one may actually achieve
liberation, giving up material attachment to society, friendship, love, country,
home, wife and children. And among many thousands of such liberated persons,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
706
one who can understand the true meaning of liberation is very rare.
PURPORT
There are four classes of men, namely karmés, jïänés, yogés and bhaktas. This
statement pertains especially to karmés and jïänés. A karmé tries to he happy
within this material world by changing from one body to another. His
objective is bodily comfort, either in this planet or in another. When such a
person becomes a jïäné, however, be aspires for liberation from material
bondage. Among many such persons who aspire for liberation, one may
actually be liberated during his life. Such a person gives up his attachment for
society, friendship, love, country, family, wife and children. Among many such
persons, who are in the vänaprastha stage, one may understand the value of
becoming a sannyäsé, completely accepting the renounced order of life.
TEXT 5
Mau¢-aNaaMaiPa iSaÖaNaa& NaaraYa<aParaYa<a" )
Saudul/R>a" Pa[XaaNTaaTMaa k-aei$=ZviPa MahaMauNae )) 5 ))
muktänäm api siddhänäà
näräyaëa-paräyaëaù
su-durlabhaù praçäntätmä
koöiñv api mahä-mune
SYNONYMS
muktänäm—of those who are liberated during this life (who are unattached to
the bodily comforts of society, friendship and love); api—even;
siddhänäm—who are perfect (because they understand the insignificance of
bodily comforts); näräyaëa-paräyaëaù—a person who has concluded that
Näräyaëa is the Supreme; su-durlabhaù—very rarely found; praçänta—fully
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
707
pacified; ätmä—whose mind; koöiñu(11)-out of millions and trillions;
api—even; mahä-mune—O great sage.
TRANSLATION
O great sage, among many millions who are liberated and perfect in
knowledge of liberation, one may be a devotee of Lord Näräyaëa, or Kåñëa.
Such devotees, who are fully peaceful, are extremely rare.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura gives the following purport to this
verse. Simply desiring mukti, or liberation, is insufficient; one must become
factually liberated. When one understands the futility of the materialistic way
of life, one becomes advanced in knowledge, and therefore he situates himself
in the vänaprastha order, unattached to family, wife and children. One should
then further progress to the platform of sannyäsa, the actual renounced order,
never to fall again and be afflicted by materialistic life. Even though one
desires to be liberated, this does not mean he is liberated. Only rarely is
someone liberated. Indeed, although many men take sannyäsa to become
liberated, because of their imperfections they again become attached to
women, material activities, social welfare work and so on.
Jïänés, yogés and karmés devoid of devotional service are called offenders.
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu says, mäyävädé kåñëe aparädhé: one who thinks that
everything is mäyä instead of thinking that everything is Kåñëa is called an
aparädhé, or offender. Although the Mäyävädés, impersonalists, are offenders at
the lotus feet of Kåñëa, they may nonetheless be counted among the siddhas,
those who have realized the self. They may be considered nearer to spiritual
perfection because at least they have realized what spiritual life is. If such a
person becomes näräyaëa-paräyaëa, a devotee of Lord Näräyaëa, he is better
than a jévan-mukta, one who is liberated or perfect. This requires higher
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
708
intelligence.
There are two kinds of jïänés. One is inclined to devotional service and the
other to impersonal realization. Impersonalists generally undergo great
endeavor for no tangible benefit, and therefore it is said that they are husking
paddy that has no grain (sthüla-tuñävaghätinaù). The other class of jïänés,
whose jïäna is mixed with bhakti, are also of two kinds—those who are
devoted to the so-called false form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and
those who understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead as
sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], the actual spiritual form. The Mäyävädé
devotees worship Näräyaëa or Viñëu with the idea that Viñëu has accepted a
form of mäyä and that the ultimate truth is actually impersonal. The pure
devotee, however, never thinks that Viñëu has accepted a body of mäyä;
instead, he knows perfectly well that the original Absolute Truth is the
Supreme Person. Such a devotee is actually situated in knowledge. He never
merges in the Brahman effulgence. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.2.32):
ye 'nye 'ravindäkña vimukta-mäninas
tvayy asta-bhäväd aviçuddha-buddhayaù
äruhya kåcchreëa paraà padaà tataù
patanty adho 'nädåta-yuñmad-aìghrayaù
"O Lord, the intelligence of those who think themselves liberated but who
have no devotion is impure. Even though they rise to the highest point of
liberation by dint of severe penances and austerities, they are sure to fall down
again into material existence, for they do not take shelter at Your lotus feet."
Evidence of this same point is also given in Bhagavad-gétä (9.11), wherein the
Lord says:
avajänanti mäà müòhä
mänuñéà tanum äçritam
paraà bhävam ajänanto
mama bhüta-maheçvaram
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
709
[Bg. 9.11]
"Fools deride Me when I descend in the human form. They do not know My
transcendental nature and My supreme dominion over all that be." When
rascals (müòhas) see that Kåñëa acts exactly like a human being, they deride
the transcendental form of the Lord because they do not know the paraà
bhävam, His transcendental form and activities. Such persons are further
described in Bhagavad-gétä (9.12) as follows:
moghäçä mogha-karmäëo
mogha-jïänä vicetasaù
räkñasém äsuréà caiva
prakåtià mohinéà çritäù
"Those who are thus bewildered are attracted by demoniac and atheistic views.
In that deluded condition, their hopes for liberation, their fruitive activities
and their culture of knowledge are all defeated." Such persons do not know
that Kåñëa's body is not material. There is no distinction between Kåñëa's body
and His soul, but because less intelligent men see Kåñëa as a human being, they
deride Him. They cannot imagine how a person like Kåñëa could be the origin
of everything (govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi **). Such persons are
described as moghäçäù, baffled in their hopes. Whatever they desire for the
future will be baffled. Even if they apparently engage in devotional service,
they are described as moghäçäù because they ultimately desire to merge into
the Brahman effulgence.
Those who aspire to be elevated to the heavenly planets by devotional
service will also be frustrated, because this is not the result of devotional
service. However, they are also given a chance to engage in devotional service
and be purified. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.17):
çåëvatäà sva-kathäù kåñëaù
puëya-çravaëa-kértanaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
710
hådy antaù-stho hy abhadräëi
vidhunoti suhåt satäm
"Çré Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead, who is the Paramätmä [Supersoul] in
everyone's heart and the benefactor of the truthful devotee, cleanses desire for
material enjoyment from the heart of the devotee who relishes His messages,
which are in themselves virtuous when properly heard and chanted."
Unless the dirt within the core of one's heart is cleansed away, one cannot
become a pure devotee. Therefore the word su-durlabhaù ("very rarely found")
is used in this verse. Not only among hundreds and thousands, but among
millions of perfectly liberated souls, a pure devotee is hardly ever found.
Therefore the words koöiñv api are used herein. Çréla Madhväcärya gives the
following quotations from the Tantra Bhägavata:
nava-koöyas tu devänäm
åñayaù sapta-koöayaù
näräyaëäyanäù sarve
ye kecit tat-paräyaëäù
"There are ninety million demigods and seventy million sages, who are all
called näräyaëäyana, devotees of Lord Näräyaëa. Among them, only a few are
called näräyaëa-paräyaëa."
näräyaëäyanä devä
åñy-ädyäs tat-paräyaëäù
brahmädyäù kecanaiva syuù
siddho yogya-sukhaà labhan
The difference between the siddhas and näräyaëa-paräyaëas is that direct
devotees are called näräyaëa-paräyaëas whereas those who perform various
types of mystic yoga are called siddhas.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
711
TEXT 6
v*}aSTau Sa k-Qa& PaaPa" SavRl/aek-aePaTaaPaNa" )
wTQa& d*!MaiTa" k*-Z<a AaSaqTa( Sa&Ga]aMa oLb<ae )) 6 ))
våtras tu sa kathaà päpaù
sarva-lokopatäpanaù
itthaà dåòha-matiù kåñëa
äsét saìgräma ulbaëe
SYNONYMS
våtraù—Våträsura; tu—but; saù—he; katham—how; päpaù—although sinful
(getting the body of a demon); sarva-loka—of all the three worlds;
upatäpanaù—the cause of suffering; ittham—such; dåòha-matiù—firmly fixed
intelligence; kåñëe—in Kåñëa; äsét—there was; saìgräme ulbaëe—in the great
blazing fire of battle.
TRANSLATION
Våträsura was situated in the blazing fire of battle and was an infamous,
sinful demon, always engaged in giving troubles and anxieties to others. How
could such a demon become so greatly Kåñëa conscious?
PURPORT
It has been described that a näräyaëa-paräyaëa, a pure devotee, is rarely
found even among millions and millions of persons. Therefore Parékñit
Mahäräja was surprised that Våträsura, whose purpose was to give trouble and
anxiety to others, was one of these devotees, even on a battlefield. What was
the reason for Våträsura's advancement?
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
712
TEXT 7
A}a Na" Sa&XaYaae >aUYaaH^\aeTau& k-aETaUhl&/ Pa[>aae )
Ya" PaaEåze<a SaMare Sahóa+aMaTaaezYaTa( )) 7 ))
atra naù saàçayo bhüyäï
chrotuà kautühalaà prabho
yaù pauruñeëa samare
sahasräkñam atoñayat
SYNONYMS
atra—in this connection; naù—our; saàçayaù—doubt; bhüyän—great;
çrotum—to hear; kautühalam—eagerness; prabho—O my lord; yaù—he who;
pauruñeëa—by bravery and strength; samare—in battle; sahasra-akñam—Lord
Indra, who has one thousand eyes; atoñayat—pleased.
TRANSLATION
My dear lord, Çukadeva Gosvämé, although Våträsura was a sinful demon, he
showed the prowess of a most exalted kñatriya and satisfied Lord Indra in battle.
How could such a demon be a great devotee of Lord Kåñëa? These
contradictions have caused me great doubt, and they have made me eager to
hear of this from you.
TEXT 8
é[qSaUTa ovac
Parqi+aTaae_Qa Sa&Pa[én& >aGavaNa( badraYai<a" )
iNaXaMYa é[ÕDaaNaSYa Pa[iTaNaNÛ vcae_b]vqTa( )) 8 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
713
çré-süta uväca
parékñito 'tha sampraçnaà
bhagavän bädaräyaëiù
niçamya çraddadhänasya
pratinandya vaco 'bravét
SYNONYMS
çré-sütaù uväca—Çré Süta Gosvämé said; parékñitaù—of Mahäräja Parékñit;
atha—thus; sampraçnam—the perfect question; bhagavän—the most powerful;
bädaräyaëiù—Çukadeva Gosvämé, the son of Vyäsadeva; niçamya—hearing;
çraddadhänasya—of his disciple, who was so faithful in understanding the
truth; pratinandya—congratulating; vacaù—words; abravét—spoke.
TRANSLATION
Çré Süta Gosvämé said: After hearing Mahäräja Parékñit's very intelligent
question, Çukadeva Gosvämé, the most powerful sage, began answering his
disciple with great affection.
TEXT 9
é[qXauk- ovac
é*<auZvavihTaae raJaiàiTahaSaiMaMa& YaQaa )
é[uTa& ÜEPaaYaNaMau%aàardaÕevl/adiPa )) 9 ))
çré-çuka uväca
çåëuñvävahito räjann
itihäsam imaà yathä
çrutaà dvaipäyana-mukhän
näradäd devaläd api
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
714
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; çåëuñva—please hear;
avahitaù—with great attention; räjan—O King; itihäsam—history;
imam—this; yathä—just as; çrutam—heard; dvaipäyana—of Vyäsadeva;
mukhät—from the mouth; näradät—from Närada; devalät—from Devala Åñi;
api—also.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O King, I shall speak to you the same history I
have heard from the mouths of Vyäsadeva, Närada and Devala. Please listen
with attention.
TEXT 10
AaSaqd]aJaa SaavR>aaEMa" XaUrSaeNaezu vE Na*Pa )
ic}ake-TauiriTa :YaaTaae YaSYaaSaqTa( k-aMaDaux(Mahq )) 10 ))
äséd räjä särvabhaumaù
çüraseneñu vai nåpa
citraketur iti khyäto
yasyäsét kämadhuì mahé
SYNONYMS
äsét—there was; räjä—one king; särva-bhaumaù—an emperor of the entire
surface of the globe; çüraseneñu—in the country known as Çürasena;
vai—indeed; nåpa—O King; citraketuù—Citraketu; iti—thus;
khyätaù—celebrated; yasya—of whom; äsét—was; käma-dhuk—supplying all
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
715
the necessities; mahé—the earth.
TRANSLATION
O King Parékñit, in the province of Çürasena there was a king named
Citraketu, who ruled the entire earth. During his reign, the earth produced all
the necessities for life.
PURPORT
Here the most significant statement is that the earth completely produced
all the necessities of life during the time of King Citraketu. As stated in the
Éçopaniñad [Éço mantra 1]:
éçäväsyam idaà sarvaà
yat kiïca jagatyäà jagat
tena tyaktena bhuïjéthä
mä gådhaù kasya svid dhanam
"Everything animate or inanimate that is within the universe is controlled and
owned by the Lord. One should therefore accept only those things necessary
for himself, which are set aside as his quota, and one should not accept other
things, knowing well to whom they belong." Kåñëa, the supreme controller, has
created the material world, which is completely perfect and free from scarcity.
The Lord supplies the necessities of all living entities. These necessities come
from the earth, and thus the earth is the source of supply. When there is a
good ruler, that source produces the necessities of life abundantly. However,
when there is not such a good ruler, there will be scarcity. This is the
significance of the word kämadhuk. Elsewhere in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.10.4) it
is said, kämaà vavarña parjanyaù sarva-käma-dughä mahé: "During the reign of
Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira, the clouds showered all the water that people needed,
and the earth produced all the necessities of men in profusion." We have
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
716
experience that in some seasons the rains produce abundance and in other
seasons there is scarcity. We have no control over the earth's productiveness,
for it is naturally under the full control of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. By His order, the Lord can make the earth produce sufficiently or
insufficiently. If a pious king rules the earth according to the çästric
injunctions, there will naturally be regular rainfall and sufficient produce to
provide for all men. There will be no question of exploitation, for everyone
will have enough. Black-marketeering and other corrupt dealings will then
automatically stop. Simply ruling the land cannot solve man's problems unless
the leader has spiritual capabilities. He must be like Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira,
Parékñit Mahäräja or Rämacandra. Then all the inhabitants of the land will be
extremely happy.
TEXT 11
TaSYa >aaYaaRSahóa<aa& Sahóai<a dXaa>avNa( )
SaaNTaaiNak-êaiPa Na*Paae Na le/>ae TaaSau SaNTaiTaMa( )) 11 ))
tasya bhäryä-sahasräëäà
sahasräëi daçäbhavan
säntänikaç cäpi nåpo
na lebhe täsu santatim
SYNONYMS
tasya—of him (King Citraketu); bhäryä—of wives; sahasräëäm—of thousands;
sahasräëi—thousands; daça—ten; abhavan—there were; säntänikaù—quite
capable of begetting sons; ca—and; api—although; nåpaù—the King; na—not;
lebhe—obtained; täsu—in them; santatim—a son.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
717
TRANSLATION
This Citraketu had ten million wives, but although he was capable of
producing children, he did not receive a child from any of them. By chance, all
the wives were barren.
TEXT 12
æPaaEdaYaRvYaaeJaNMaivÛEìYaRié[Yaaidi>a" )
SaMPaàSYa Gau<aE" SavOE„iêNTaa bNDYaaPaTaer>aUTa( )) 12 ))
rüpaudärya-vayo-janmavidyaiçvarya-
çriyädibhiù
sampannasya guëaiù sarvaiç
cintä bandhyä-pater abhüt
SYNONYMS
rüpa—with beauty; audärya—magnanimity; vayaù—youth;
janma—aristocratic birth; vidyä—education; aiçvarya—opulence;
çriya-ädibhiù—wealth and so on; sampannasya—endowed; guëaiù—with good
qualities; sarvaiù—all; cintä—anxiety; bandhyä-pateù—of Citraketu, the
husband of so many sterile wives; abhüt—there was.
TRANSLATION
Citraketu, the husband of these millions of wives, was endowed with a
beautiful form, magnanimity and youth. He was born in a high family, he had a
complete education, and he was wealthy and opulent. Nevertheless, in spite of
being endowed with all these assets, he was full of anxiety because he did not
have a son.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
718
PURPORT
It appears that the King first married one wife, but she could not bear a
child. Then he married a second, a third, a fourth and so on, but none of the
wives could bear children. In spite of the material assets of
janmaiçvarya-çruta-çré [SB 1.8.26] birth in an aristocratic family with full
opulence, wealth, education and beauty—he was very much aggrieved because
in spite of having so many wives, he had no son. Certainly his grief was
natural. Gåhastha life does not mean having a wife and no children. Cäëakya
Paëòita says, putra-hénaà gåhaà çünyam: if a family man has no son, his home
is no better than a desert. The King was certainly most unhappy that he could
not get a son, and this is why he had married so many times. Kñatriyas
especially are allowed to marry more than one wife, and this King did so.
Nonetheless, he had no issue.
TEXT 13
Na TaSYa Sa&Pad" SavaR MaihZYaae vaMal/aecNaa" )
SaavR>aaEMaSYa >aUêeYaMa>avNa( Pa[qiTaheTav" )) 13 ))
na tasya sampadaù sarvä
mahiñyo väma-locanäù
särvabhaumasya bhüç ceyam
abhavan préti-hetavaù
SYNONYMS
na—not; tasya—of him (Citraketu); sampadaù—the great opulences;
sarväù—all; mahiñyaù—the queens; väma-locanäù—having very attractive
eyes; särva-bhaumasya—of the emperor; bhüù—land; ca—also; iyam—this;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
719
abhavan—were; préti-hetavaù—sources of pleasure.
TRANSLATION
His queens all had beautiful faces and attractive eyes, yet neither his
opulences, his hundreds and thousands of queens, nor the lands of which he
was the supreme proprietor were sources of happiness for him.
TEXT 14
TaSYaEk-da Tau >avNaMai(r)ra >aGavaNa*iz" )
l/aek-aNaNaucràeTaaNauPaaGaC^Ûd*C^Yaa )) 14 ))
tasyaikadä tu bhavanam
aìgirä bhagavän åñiù
lokän anucarann etän
upägacchad yadåcchayä
SYNONYMS
tasya—of him; ekadä—once upon a time; tu—but; bhavanam—to the palace;
aìgiräù—Aìgirä; bhagavän—very powerful; åñiù—sage; lokän—planets;
anucaran—traveling around; etän—these; upägacchat—came;
yadåcchayä—suddenly.
TRANSLATION
Once upon a time, when the powerful sage named Aìgirä was traveling all
over the universe without engagement, by his sweet will he came to the palace
of King Citraketu.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
720
TEXT 15
Ta& PaUJaiYaTva iviDavTPa[TYauTQaaNaahR<aaidi>a" )
k*-TaaiTaQYaMauPaaSaqdTSau%aSaqNa& SaMaaihTa" )) 15 ))
taà püjayitvä vidhivat
pratyutthänärhaëädibhiù
kåtätithyam upäsédat
sukhäsénaà samähitaù
SYNONYMS
tam—him; püjayitvä—after worshiping; vidhi-vat—according to the rules and
regulations for receiving exalted guests; pratyutthäna—by standing from the
throne; arhaëa-ädibhiù—offering worship and so on; kåta-atithyam—who was
given hospitality; upäsédat—sat down near; sukha-äsénam—who was seated
very comfortably; samähitaù—controlling his mind and senses.
TRANSLATION
Citraketu immediately stood up from his throne and offered him worship.
He offered drinking water and eatables and in this way performed his duty as a
host to a great guest. When the åñi was seated very comfortably, the King,
restraining his mind and senses, sat on the ground at the side of the åñi's feet.
TEXT 16
MahizRSTaMauPaaSaqNa& Pa[é[YaavNaTa& i+aTaaE )
Pa[iTaPaUJYa MaharaJa SaMaa>aaZYaedMab]vqTa( )) 16 ))
maharñis tam upäsénaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
721
praçrayävanataà kñitau
pratipüjya mahäräja
samäbhäñyedam abravét
SYNONYMS
mahä-åñiù—the great sage; tam—unto him (the King); upäsénam—sitting near;
praçraya-avanatam—bowing in humility; kñitau—on the ground;
pratipüjya—congratulating; mahäräja—O King Parékñit;
samäbhäñya—addressing; idam—this; abravét—said.
TRANSLATION
O King Parékñit, when Citraketu, bent low in humility, was seated at the
lotus feet of the great sage, the sage congratulated him for his humility and
hospitality. The sage addressed him in the following words.
TEXT 17
Ai(r)ra ovac
AiPa Tae_NaaMaYa& SviSTa Pa[k*-TaqNaa& TaQaaTMaNa" )
YaQaa Pa[k*-iTai>aGauRá" PauMaaNa( raJaa c Saái>a" )) 17 ))
aìgirä uväca
api te 'nämayaà svasti
prakåténäà tathätmanaù
yathä prakåtibhir guptaù
pumän räjä ca saptabhiù
SYNONYMS
aìgiräù uväca—the great sage Aìgirä said; api—whether; te—of you;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
722
anämayam—health; svasti—auspiciousness; prakåténäm—of your royal
elements (associates and paraphernalia); tathä—as well as; ätmanaù—of your
own body, mind and soul; yathä—like; prakåtibhiù—by the elements of
material nature; guptaù—protected; pumän—the living being; räjä—the king;
ca—also; saptabhiù—by seven.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Aìgirä said: My dear King, I hope that your body and mind
and your royal associates and paraphernalia are well. When the seven properties
of material nature [the total material energy, the ego and the five objects of
sense gratification] are in proper order, the living entity within the material
elements is happy. Without these seven elements one cannot exist. Similarly, a
king is always protected by seven elements—his instructor (svämé or guru), his
ministers, his kingdom, his fort, his treasury, his royal order and his friends.
PURPORT
As it is quoted by Çrédhara Svämé in his Bhägavatam commentary:
svämy-amätyau janapadä
durga-draviëa-saïcayäù
daëòo mitraà ca tasyaitäù
sapta-prakåtayo matäù
A king is not alone. He first has his spiritual master, the supreme guide. Then
come his ministers, his kingdom, his fortifications, his treasury, his system of
law and order, and his friends or allies. If these seven are properly maintained,
the king is happy. Similarly, as explained in Bhagavad-gétä (dehino 'smin yathä
dehe [Bg. 2.13]), the living entity, the soul, is within the material covering of
the mahat-tattva, ego and païca-tanmäträ, the five objects of sense
gratification. When these seven are in proper order, the living entity is in a
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
723
mood of pleasure. Generally when the associates of the king are quiet and
obedient, the king can be happy. Therefore the great sage Aìgirä Åñi inquired
about the King's personal health and the good fortune of his seven associates.
When we inquire from a friend whether everything is well, we are concerned
not only with his personal self but also with his family, his source of income,
and his assistants or servants. All of them must be well, and then a person can
be happy.
TEXT 18
AaTMaaNa& Pa[k*-iTaZvÖa iNaDaaYa é[eYa AaPanuYaaTa( )
raja TaQaa Pa[k*-TaYaae NardevaihTaaDaYa" )) 18 ))
ätmänaà prakåtiñv addhä
nidhäya çreya äpnuyät
räjïä tathä prakåtayo
naradevähitädhayaù
SYNONYMS
ätmänam—himself; prakåtiñu—under these seven royal elements;
addhä—directly; nidhäya—placing; çreyaù—ultimate happiness;
äpnuyät—may obtain; räjïä—by the king; tathä—so also; prakåtayaù—the
dependent royal elements; nara-deva—O King; ähita-adhayaù—offering
wealth and other items.
TRANSLATION
O King, O lord of humanity, when a king directly depends upon his
associates and follows their instructions, he is happy. Similarly, when his
associates offer their gifts and activities to the king and follow his orders, they
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
724
are also happy.
PURPORT
The actual happiness of a king and his dependents is described in this verse.
A king should not simply give orders to his dependents because he is supreme;
sometimes he must follow their instructions. Similarly, the dependents should
depend on the king. This mutual dependence will make everyone happy.
TEXT 19
AiPa dara" Pa[JaaMaaTYaa >a*TYaa" é[e<Yaae_Qa MaiN}a<a" )
PaaEra JaaNaPada >aUPaa AaTMaJaa vXaviTaRNa" )) 19 ))
api däräù prajämätyä
bhåtyäù çreëyo 'tha mantriëaù
paurä jänapadä bhüpä
ätmajä vaça-vartinaù
SYNONYMS
api—whether; däräù—wives; prajä—citizens; amätyäù—and secretaries;
bhåtyäù—servants; çreëyaù—merchants; atha—as well as;
mantriëaù—ministers; pauräù—inmates of the palace; jänapadäù—the
provincial governors; bhüpäù—landholders; ätma-jäù—sons;
vaça-vartinaù—under your full control.
TRANSLATION
O King, are your wives, citizens, secretaries and servants and the merchants
who sell spices and oil under your control? Are you also in full control of
ministers, the inhabitants of your palace, your provincial governors, your sons
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
725
and your other dependents?
PURPORT
The master or king and his subordinates should be interdependent.
Through cooperation, both of them can be happy.
TEXT 20
YaSYaaTMaaNauvXaêeTSYaaTSaveR TaÜXaGaa wMae )
l/aek-a" SaPaal/a YaC^iNTa SaveR bil/MaTaiNd]Taa" )) 20 ))
yasyätmänuvaçaç cet syät
sarve tad-vaçagä ime
lokäù sapälä yacchanti
sarve balim atandritäù
SYNONYMS
yasya—of whom; ätmä—mind; anuvaçaù—under control; cet—if; syät—may
be; sarve—all; tat-vaça-gäù—under the control of him; ime—these; lokäù—the
worlds; sa-päläù—with their governors; yacchanti—offer; sarve—all;
balim—contribution; atandritäù—becoming free from laziness.
TRANSLATION
If the king's mind is fully controlled, all his family members and
governmental officers are subordinate to him. His provincial governors present
taxes on time, without resistance, and what to speak of lesser servants?
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
726
Aìgirä Åñi asked the King whether his mind was also under control. This is
most essential for happiness.
TEXT 21
AaTMaNa" Pa[qYaTae NaaTMaa ParTa" SvTa Wv va )
l/+aYae_l/BDak-aMa& Tva& icNTaYaa Xabl&/ Mau%Ma( )) 21 ))
ätmanaù préyate nätmä
parataù svata eva vä
lakñaye 'labdha-kämaà tväà
cintayä çabalaà mukham
SYNONYMS
ätmanaù—of you; préyate—is pleased; na—not; ätmä—the mind;
parataù—due to other causes; svataù—due to yourself; eva—indeed; vä—or;
lakñaye—I can see; alabdha-kämam—not achieving your desired goals;
tväm—you; cintayä—by anxiety; çabalam—pale; mukham—face.
TRANSLATION
O King Citraketu, I can observe that your mind is not pleased. You seem not
to have achieved your desired goal. Is this because of you yourself, or has it
been caused by others? Your pale face reflects your deep anxiety.
TEXT 22
Wv& ivk-iLPaTaae raJaNa( ivduza MauiNaNaaiPa Sa" )
Pa[é[YaavNaTaae_>Yaah Pa[Jaak-aMaSTaTaae MauiNaMa( )) 22 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
727
evaà vikalpito räjan
viduñä muninäpi saù
praçrayävanato 'bhyäha
prajä-kämas tato munim
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; vikalpitaù—questioned; räjan—O King Parékñit; viduñä—greatly
learned; muninä—by the philosopher; api—although; saù—he (King
Citraketu); praçraya-avanataù—being bent low due to humility;
abhyäha—replied; prajä-kämaù—desiring offspring; tataù—thereafter;
munim—to the great sage.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O King Parékñit, although the great sage Aìgirä
knew everything, he inquired from the King in this way. Thus King Citraketu,
desiring a son, bent low in great humility and spoke to the great sage as follows.
PURPORT
Since the face is the index to the mind, a saintly person can study the
condition of one's mind by seeing his face. When Aìgirä Åñi remarked about
the King's discolored face, King Citraketu explained the cause of his anxiety as
follows.
TEXT 23
ic}ake-Tauåvac
>aGavNa( ik&- Na ividTa& TaPaaejaNaSaMaaiDai>a" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
728
YaaeiGaNaa& ßSTaPaaPaaNaa& bihrNTa" Xarqirzu )) 23 ))
citraketur uväca
bhagavan kià na viditaà
tapo-jïäna-samädhibhiù
yoginäà dhvasta-päpänäà
bahir antaù çarériñu
SYNONYMS
citraketuù uväca—King Citraketu replied; bhagavan—O most powerful sage;
kim—what; na—not; viditam—is understood; tapaù—by austerity;
jïäna—knowledge; samädhibhiù—and by samädhi (trance, transcendental
meditation); yoginäm—by the great yogés or devotees; dhvasta-päpänäm—who
are fully freed from all sinful reactions; bahiù—externally; antaù—internally;
çarériñu—in conditioned souls, who have material bodies.
TRANSLATION
King Citraketu said: O great lord Aìgirä, because of austerity, knowledge
and transcendental samädhi, you are freed from all the reactions of sinful life.
Therefore, as a perfect yogé, you can understand everything external and
internal regarding embodied, conditioned souls like us.
TEXT 24
TaQaaiPa Pa*C^Taae b]UYaa& b]øàaTMaiNa iciNTaTaMa( )
>avTaae ivduzêaiPa caeidTaSTvdNaujYaa )) 24 ))
tathäpi påcchato brüyäà
brahmann ätmani cintitam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
729
bhavato viduñaç cäpi
coditas tvad-anujïayä
SYNONYMS
tathäpi—still; påcchataù—asking; brüyäm—let me speak; brahman—O great
brähmaëa; ätmani—in the mind; cintitam—anxiety; bhavataù—to you;
viduñaù—who know everything; ca—and; api—although; coditaù—being
inspired; tvat—your; anujïayä—by the order.
TRANSLATION
O great soul, you are aware of everything, yet you are asking me why I am
full of anxiety. Therefore, in response to your order, let me disclose the cause.
TEXT 25
l/aek-PaalE/riPa Pa[aQYaaR" SaaMa]aJYaEìYaRSaMPad" )
Na NaNdYaNTYaPa[Ja& Maa& +auta*$(k-aMaiMavaPare )) 25 ))
loka-pälair api prärthyäù
sämräjyaiçvarya-sampadaù
na nandayanty aprajaà mäà
kñut-tåö-kämam iväpare
SYNONYMS
loka-pälaiù—by great demigods; api—even; prärthyäù—desirable; sämräjya—a
great empire; aiçvarya—material opulence; sampadaù—possessions; na
nandayanti—do not give pleasure; aprajam—because of having no son;
mäm—unto me; kñut—hunger; tåö—thirst; kämam—desiring to satisfy;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
730
iva—like; apare—other enjoyable sense objects.
TRANSLATION
As a person aggrieved by hunger and thirst is not pleased by the external
gratification of flower garlands or sandalwood pulp, I am not pleased with my
empire, opulence or possessions, which are desirable even for great demigods,
because I have no son.
TEXT 26
TaTa" Paaih Maha>aaGa PaUvOE" Sah GaTa& TaMa" )
YaQaa TareMa duZPaar& Pa[JaYaa Tad( ivDaeih Na" )) 26 ))
tataù pähi mahä-bhäga
pürvaiù saha gataà tamaù
yathä tarema duñpäraà
prajayä tad vidhehi naù
SYNONYMS
tataù—therefore, because of this; pähi—kindly save; mahä-bhäga—O great
sage; pürvaiù saha—along with my forefathers; gatam—gone; tamaù—to
darkness; yathä—so that; tarema—we can cross; duñpäram—very difficult to
cross; prajayä—by getting a son; tat—that; vidhehi—kindly do; naù—for us.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O great sage, please save me and my forefathers, who are
descending to the darkness of hell because I have no progeny. Kindly do
something so that I may have a son to deliver us from hellish conditions.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
731
PURPORT
According to Vedic civilization, one gets married simply to have a son, who
is needed to offer oblations to his forefathers. King Citraketu responsibly
desired to beget a child so that he and his forefathers might be delivered from
the darkest regions. He was concerned with how to get piëòa, oblations, in the
next life, not only for himself but also for his forefathers. Therefore he
requested Aìgirä Åñi to favor him by doing something that could help him get
a son.
TEXT 27
é[qXauk- ovac
wTYaiQaRTa" Sa >aGavaNa( k*-Paalu/b]Rø<a" SauTa" )
é[PaiYaTva cå& Tvaí\& TvíarMaYaJad( iv>au" )) 27 ))
çré-çuka uväca
ity arthitaù sa bhagavän
kåpälur brahmaëaù sutaù
çrapayitvä caruà tväñöraà
tvañöäram ayajad vibhuù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; arthitaù—being
requested; saù—he (Aìgirä Åñi); bhagavän—the most powerful;
kåpäluù—being very merciful; brahmaëaù—of Lord Brahmä; sutaù—a son
(born of Lord Brahmä's mind); çrapayitvä—after causing to cook; carum—a
specific oblation of sweetrice; tväñöram—meant for the demigod known as
Tvañöä; tvañöäram—Tvañöä; ayajat—he worshiped; vibhuù—the great sage.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
732
TRANSLATION
In response to the request of Mahäräja Citraketu, Aìgirä Åñi, who was born
of Lord Brahmä's mind, was very merciful toward him. Because the sage was a
greatly powerful personality, he performed a sacrifice by offering oblations of
sweetrice to Tvañöä.
TEXT 28
JYaeïa é[eïa c Yaa rajae Maihzq<aa& c >aarTa )
NaaMNaa k*-TaÛuiTaSTaSYaE YajaeiC^íMadad( iÜJa" )) 28 ))
jyeñöhä çreñöhä ca yä räjïo
mahiñéëäà ca bhärata
nämnä kåtadyutis tasyai
yajïocchiñöam adäd dvijaù
SYNONYMS
jyeñöhä—the senior; çreñöhä—the most perfect; ca—and; yä—she who;
räjïaù—of the King; mahiñéëäm—among all the queens; ca—also; bhärata—O
Mahäräja Parékñit, the best of the Bhäratas; nämnä—by name;
kåtadyutiù—Kåtadyuti; tasyai—unto her; yajïa—of the sacrifice;
ucchiñöam—the remnants of food; adät—delivered; dvijaù—the great sage
(Aìgirä).
TRANSLATION
O Parékñit Mahäräja, best of the Bhäratas, the remnants of the food offered
in the yajïa were given by the great sage Aìgirä to the first and most perfect
among Citraketu's millions of queens, whose name was Kåtadyuti.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
733
TEXT 29
AQaah Na*PaiTa& raJaNa( >aivTaEk-STavaTMaJa" )
hzRXaaek-Pa[dSTau>YaiMaiTa b]øSauTaae YaYaaE )) 29 ))
athäha nåpatià räjan
bhavitaikas tavätmajaù
harña-çoka-pradas tubhyam
iti brahma-suto yayau
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; äha—said; nåpatim—unto the King; räjan—O King
Citraketu; bhavitä—there will be; ekaù—one; tava—your; ätmajaù—son;
harña-çoka—jubilation and lamentation; pradaù—who will give;
tubhyam—unto you; iti—thus; brahma-sutaù—Aìgirä Åñi, the son of Lord
Brahmä; yayau—left.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, the great sage told the King, "O great King, now you will have a
son who will be the cause of both jubilation and lamentation." The sage then
left, without waiting for Citraketu's response.
PURPORT
The word harña means "jubilation," and çoka means "lamentation." The King
was overwhelmed with joy when he understood that he would have a son.
Because of his great jubilation, he could not actually understand the statement
of the sage Aìgirä. He accepted it to mean that there would certainly be
jubilation because of the birth of his future son, but that he would be the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
734
King's only son and, being very proud of his great wealth and empire, would
not be very obedient to his father. Thus the King was satisfied, thinking, "Let
there be a son. It does not matter if he is not very obedient." In Bengal there is
a proverb that instead of having no maternal uncle, it is better to have a
maternal uncle who is blind. The King accepted this philosophy, thinking that
a disobedient son would be better than no son at all. The great sage Cäëakya
Paëòita says:
ko 'rthaù putreëa jätena
yo na vidvän na dhärmikaù
käëena cakñuñä kià vä
cakñuù péòaiva kevalam
"What is the use of a son who is neither a learned scholar nor a devotee? Such
a son is like a blind, diseased eye, which always causes suffering." Nevertheless,
the material world is so polluted that one wants to have a son even though he
is useless. This attitude was represented in the history of King Citraketu.
TEXT 30
SaaiPa TaTPa[aXaNaadev ic}ake-TaaerDaarYaTa( )
Ga>a| k*-TaÛuiTadeRvq k*-itak-aGaneirvaTMaJaMa( )) 30 ))
säpi tat-präçanäd eva
citraketor adhärayat
garbhaà kåtadyutir devé
kåttikägner ivätmajam
SYNONYMS
sä—she; api—even; tat-präçanät—by eating the remnants of food from the
great sacrifice; eva—indeed; citraketoù—from King Citraketu;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
735
adhärayat—bore; garbham—pregnancy; kåtadyutiù—Queen Kåtadyuti;
devé—the goddess; kåttikä—Kåttikä; agneù—from Agni; iva—as; ätma-jam—a
son.
TRANSLATION
As Kåttikädevé, after receiving the semen of Lord Çiva from Agni, conceived
a child named Skanda [Kärttikeya], Kåtadyuti, having received semen from
Citraketu, became pregnant after eating remnants of food from the yajïa
performed by Aìgirä.
TEXT 31
TaSYaa ANauidNa& Ga>aR" Xau(c)-Pa+a wvae@uPa" )
vv*Dae XaUrSaeNaeXaTaeJaSaa XaNakE-Na*RPa )) 31 ))
tasyä anudinaà garbhaù
çukla-pakña ivoòupaù
vavådhe çüraseneçatejasä
çanakair nåpa
SYNONYMS
tasyäù—her; anudinam—day after day; garbhaù—embryo;
çukla-pakñe—during the fortnight of the waxing moon; iva—like; uòupaù—the
moon; vavådhe—gradually developed; çürasena-éça—of the King of Çürasena;
tejasä—by the semen; çanakaiù—little by little; nåpa—O King Parékñit.
TRANSLATION
After receiving semen from Mahäräja Citraketu, the King of Çürasena,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
736
Queen Kåtadyuti gradually developed in her pregnancy, O King Parékñit, just as
the moon develops during the bright fortnight.
TEXT 32
AQa k-al/ oPaav*tae ku-Maar" SaMaJaaYaTa )
JaNaYaNa( XaUrSaeNaaNaa& é*<vTaa& ParMaa& MaudMa( )) 32 ))
atha käla upävåtte
kumäraù samajäyata
janayan çürasenänäà
çåëvatäà paramäà mudam
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; käle upävåtte—in due course of time; kumäraù—the son;
samajäyata—took birth; janayan—creating; çürasenänäm—of the inhabitants
of Çürasena; çåëvatäm—hearing; paramäm—the highest; mudam—delight.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, in due course of time, a son was born to the King. Hearing news
of this, all the inhabitants of the state of Çürasena were extremely pleased.
TEXT 33
ôíae raJaa ku-MaarSYa òaTa" Xauicrl&/k*„„„Ta" )
vaciYaTvaiXazae ivPa[E" k-arYaaMaaSa JaaTak-Ma( )) 33 ))
håñöo räjä kumärasya
snätaù çucir alaìkåtaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
737
väcayitväçiño vipraiù
kärayäm äsa jätakam
SYNONYMS
håñöaù—very happy; räjä—the King; kumärasya—of his newly born son;
snätaù—having bathed; çuciù—being purified; alaìkåtaù—being decorated
with ornaments; väcayitvä—having caused to be spoken; äçiñaù—words of
benediction; vipraiù—by learned brähmaëas; kärayäm äsa—caused to be
performed; jätakam—the birth ceremony.
TRANSLATION
King Citraketu was especially pleased. After purifying himself by bathing
and by decorating himself with ornaments, he engaged learned brähmaëas in
offering benedictions to the child and performing the birth ceremony.
TEXT 34
Tae>Yaae ihr<Ya& rJaTa& vaSaa&SYaa>ar<aaiNa c )
Ga]aMaaNa( hYaaNa( GaJaaNa( Pa[adad( DaeNaUNaaMabuRdaiNa z$( )) 34 ))
tebhyo hiraëyaà rajataà
väsäàsy äbharaëäni ca
grämän hayän gajän prädäd
dhenünäm arbudäni ñaö
SYNONYMS
tebhyaù—unto them (the learned brähmaëas); hiraëyam—gold;
rajatam—silver; väsäàsi—garments; äbharaëäni—ornaments; ca—also;
grämän—villages; hayän—horses; gajän—elephants; prädät—gave in charity;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
738
dhenünäm—of cows; arbudäni—groups of one hundred million; ñaö—six.
TRANSLATION
Unto the brähmaëas who took part in the ritualistic ceremony the King gave
charity of gold, silver, garments, ornaments, villages, horses and elephants, as
well as sixty crores of cows [six hundred million cows].
TEXT 35
vvzR k-aMaaNaNYaeza& PaJaRNYa wv deihNaaMa( )
DaNYa& YaXaSYaMaaYauZYa& ku-MaarSYa MahaMaNaa" )) 35 ))
vavarña kämän anyeñäà
parjanya iva dehinäm
dhanyaà yaçasyam äyuñyaà
kumärasya mahä-manäù
SYNONYMS
vavarña—showered, gave in charity; kämän—all desirable things; anyeñäm—of
others; parjanyaù—a cloud; iva—like; dehinäm—of all living entities;
dhanyam—with the desire for an increase of opulence; yaçasyam—an increase
of reputation; äyuñyam—and an increase of the duration of life;
kumärasya—of the newly born child; mahä-manäù—the beneficent King
Citraketu.
TRANSLATION
As a cloud indiscriminately pours water on the earth, the beneficent King
Citraketu, to increase the reputation, opulence and longevity of his son,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
739
distributed like rainfall all desirable things to everyone.
TEXT 36
k*-C^\l/BDae_Qa raJazeRSTaNaYae_NauidNa& iPaTau" )
YaQaa iNa"SvSYa k*-C^\aáe DaNae òehae_NvvDaRTa )) 36 ))
kåcchra-labdhe 'tha räjarñes
tanaye 'nudinaà pituù
yathä niùsvasya kåcchräpte
dhane sneho 'nvavardhata
SYNONYMS
kåcchra—with great difficulty; labdhe—gained; atha—thereafter; räja-åñeù—of
the pious King Citraketu; tanaye—for the son; anudinam—day after day;
pituù—of the father; yathä—exactly as; niùsvasya—of a poor man;
kåcchra-äpte—gained after great difficulty; dhane—for riches;
snehaù—affection; anvavardhata—increased.
TRANSLATION
When a poor man gets some money after great difficulty, his affection for
the money increases daily. Similarly, when King Citraketu, after great
difficulty, received a son, his affection for the son increased day after day.
TEXT 37
MaaTauSTviTaTara& Pau}ae òehae MaaehSaMauÙv" )
k*-TaÛuTae" SaPaÒqNaa& Pa[Jaak-aMaJvrae_>avTa( )) 37 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
740
mätus tv atitaräà putre
sneho moha-samudbhavaù
kåtadyuteù sapatnénäà
prajä-käma-jvaro 'bhavat
SYNONYMS
mätuù—of the mother; tu—also; atitaräm—excessively; putre—for the son;
snehaù—affection; moha—out of ignorance; samudbhavaù—produced;
kåtadyuteù—of Kåtadyuti; sapatnénäm—of the co-wives; prajä-käma—of a
desire to have sons; jvaraù—a fever; abhavat—there was.
TRANSLATION
The mother's attraction and attention to the son, like that of the child's
father, excessively increased. The other wives, seeing Kåtadyuti's son, were
very much agitated, as if by high fevers, with a desire to have sons.
TEXT 38
ic}ake-TaaeriTaPa[qiTaYaRQaa dare Pa[JaaviTa )
Na TaQaaNYaezu SaÅje bal&/ l/al/YaTaae_NvhMa( )) 38 ))
citraketor atiprétir
yathä däre prajävati
na tathänyeñu saïjajïe
bälaà lälayato 'nvaham
SYNONYMS
citraketoù—of King Citraketu; atiprétiù—excessive attraction; yathä—just as;
däre—unto the wife; prajä-vati—who begot a son; na—not; tathä—like that;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
741
anyeñu—unto the others; saïjajïe—arose; bälam—the son; lälayataù—taking
care of; anvaham—constantly.
TRANSLATION
As King Citraketu fostered his son very carefully, his affection for Queen
Kåtadyuti increased, but gradually he lost affection for the other wives, who
had no sons.
TEXT 39
Taa" PaYaRTaPYaàaTMaaNa& GahRYaNTYaae_>YaSaUYaYaa )
AaNaPaTYaeNa du"%eNa rajêaNaadre<a c )) 39 ))
täù paryatapyann ätmänaà
garhayantyo 'bhyasüyayä
änapatyena duùkhena
räjïaç cänädareëa ca
SYNONYMS
täù—they (the queens who did not have sons); paryatapyan—lamented;
ätmänam—themselves; garhayantyaù—condemning; abhyasüyayä—out of
envy; änapatyena—due to being without sons; duùkhena—by unhappiness;
räjïaù—of the King; ca—also; anädareëa—due to negligence; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
The other queens were extremely unhappy due to their being sonless.
Because of the King's negligence toward them, they condemned themselves in
envy and lamented.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
742
TEXT 40
iDaGaPa[Jaa& iñYa& PaaPaa& PaTYauêaGa*hSaMMaTaaMa( )
SauPa[Jaai>a" SaPaÒqi>adaRSaqiMav iTarSk*-TaaMa( )) 40 ))
dhig aprajäà striyaà päpäà
patyuç cägåha-sammatäm
suprajäbhiù sapatnébhir
däsém iva tiraskåtäm
SYNONYMS
dhik—all condemnation; aprajäm—without a son; striyam—upon a woman;
päpäm—full of sinful activities; patyuù—by the husband; ca—also;
a-gåha-sammatäm—who is not honored at home; su-prajäbhiù—who have
sons; sapatnébhiù—by co-wives; däsém—a maidservant; iva—exactly like;
tiraskåtäm—dishonored.
TRANSLATION
A wife who has no sons is neglected at home by her husband and dishonored
by her co-wives exactly like a maidservant. Certainly such a woman is
condemned in every respect because of her sinful life.
PURPORT
As stated by Cäëakya Paëòita:
mätä yasya gåhe nästi
bhäryä cäpriya-vädiné
araëyaà tena gantavyaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
743
yathäraëyaà tathä gåham
"A person who has no mother at home and whose wife does not speak sweetly
should go to the forest. For such a person, living at home and living in the
forest are equal." Similarly, for a woman who has no son, who is not cared for
by her husband and whose co-wives neglect her, treating her like a
maidservant, to go to the forest is better than to remain at home.
TEXT 41
daSaqNaa& k-ae Nau SaNTaaPa" SvaiMaNa" PaircYaRYaa )
A>aq+<a& l/BDaMaaNaaNaa& daSYaa daSaqv du>aRGaa" )) 41 ))
däsénäà ko nu santäpaù
sväminaù paricaryayä
abhékñëaà labdha-mänänäà
däsyä däséva durbhagäù
SYNONYMS
däsénäm—of the maidservants; kaù—what; nu—indeed;
santäpaù—lamentation; sväminaù—unto the husband; paricaryayä—by
rendering service; abhékñëam—constantly; labdha-mänänäm—honored;
däsyäù—of the maidservant; däsé iva—like a maidservant; durbhagäù—most
unfortunate.
TRANSLATION
Even maidservants who are constantly engaged in rendering service to the
husband are honored by the husband, and thus they have nothing for which to
lament. Our position, however, is that we are maidservants of the maidservant.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
744
Therefore we are most unfortunate.
TEXT 42
Wv& SaNdùMaaNaaNaa& SaPaTNYaa" Pau}aSaMPada )
rajae_SaMMaTav*taqNaa& ivÜezae bl/vaNa>aUTa( )) 42 ))
evaà sandahyamänänäà
sapatnyäù putra-sampadä
räjïo 'sammata-våtténäà
vidveño balavän abhüt
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; sandahyamänänäm—of the queens, who were constantly burning
in lamentation; sapatnyäù—of the co-wife Kåtadyuti; putra-sampadä—due to
the opulence of a son; räjïaù—by the King; asammata-våtténäm—not being
very much favored; vidveñaù—envy; balavän—very strong; abhüt—became.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: Being neglected by their husband and
seeing Kåtadyuti's opulence in possessing a son, Kåtadyuti's co-wives always
burned in envy, which became extremely strong.
TEXT 43
ivÜezNaíMaTaYa" iñYaae daå<aceTaSa" )
Gar& ddu" ku-MaaraYa duMaRzaR Na*PaiTa& Pa[iTa )) 43 ))
vidveña-nañöa-matayaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
745
striyo däruëa-cetasaù
garaà daduù kumäräya
durmarñä nåpatià prati
SYNONYMS
vidveña-nañöa-matayaù—whose intelligence was lost in envy; striyaù—the
women; däruëa-cetasaù—being very hardhearted; garam—poison;
daduù—administered; kumäräya—unto the boy; durmarñäù—being intolerant;
nåpatim—the King; prati—upon.
TRANSLATION
As their envy increased, they lost their intelligence. Being extremely
hardhearted and unable to tolerate the King's neglect, they finally administered
poison to the son.
TEXT 44
k*-TaÛuiTarJaaNaNTaq SaPaÒqNaaMaga& MahTa( )
Sauá WveiTa SaiÄNTYa iNarq+Ya VYacrd( Ga*he )) 44 ))
kåtadyutir ajänanté
sapatnénäm aghaà mahat
supta eveti saïcintya
nirékñya vyacarad gåhe
SYNONYMS
kåtadyutiù—Queen Kåtadyuti; ajänanté—being unaware of; sapatnénäm—of
her co-wives; agham—sinful act; mahat—very great; suptaù—sleeping;
eva—indeed; iti—thus; saïcintya—thinking; nirékñya—looking at;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
746
vyacarat—was walking; gåhe—at home.
TRANSLATION
Unaware of the poison administered by her co-wives, Queen Kåtadyuti
walked within the house, thinking that her son was sleeping deeply. She did not
understand that he was dead.
TEXT 45
XaYaaNa& Sauicr& bal/MauPaDaaYaR MaNaqiz<aq )
Pau}aMaaNaYa Mae >ad]e wiTa Daa}aqMacaedYaTa( )) 45 ))
çayänaà suciraà bälam
upadhärya manéñiëé
putram änaya me bhadre
iti dhätrém acodayat
SYNONYMS
çayänam—lying down; su-ciram—for a long time; bälam—the son;
upadhärya—thinking; manéñiëé—very intelligent; putram—the son;
änaya—bring; me—unto me; bhadre—O gentle friend; iti—thus;
dhätrém—unto the nurse; acodayat—gave the order.
TRANSLATION
Thinking that her child had been sleeping for a long time, Queen Kåtadyuti,
who was certainly very intelligent, ordered the nurse, "My dear friend, please
bring my son here."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
747
TEXT 46
Saa XaYaaNaMauPav]JYa d*îa caetaarl/aecNaMa( )
Pa[a<aeiNd]YaaTMai>aSTYa¢&- hTaaSMaqTYaPaTad(>auiv )) 46 ))
sä çayänam upavrajya
dåñövä cottära-locanam
präëendriyätmabhis tyaktaà
hatäsméty apatad bhuvi
SYNONYMS
sä—she (the maidservant); çayänam—lying down; upavrajya—going to;
dåñövä—seeing; ca—also; uttära-locanam—his eyes turned upward (as are
those of a dead body); präëa-indriya-ätmabhiù—by the life force, senses and
mind; tyaktam—abandoned; hatä asmi—now I am doomed; iti—thus;
apatat—fell down; bhuvi—on the ground.
TRANSLATION
When the maidservant approached the child, who was lying down, she saw
that his eyes were turned upward. There were no signs of life, all his senses
having stopped, and she could understand that the child was dead. Seeing this,
she immediately cried, "Now I am doomed," and fell to the ground.
TEXT 47
TaSYaaSTadak-<YaR >a*XaaTaur& Svr&
ganNTYaa" k-ra>YaaMaur oÀkE-riPa )
Pa[ivXYa rajq TvrYaaTMaJaaiNTak&-
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
748
ddXaR bal&/ SahSaa Ma*Ta& SauTaMa( )) 47 ))
tasyäs tadäkarëya bhåçäturaà svaraà
ghnantyäù karäbhyäm ura uccakair api
praviçya räjïé tvarayätmajäntikaà
dadarça bälaà sahasä måtaà sutam
SYNONYMS
tasyäù—of her (the maidservant); tadä—at that time; äkarëya—hearing;
bhåça-äturam—highly regretful and agitated; svaram—voice;
ghnantyäù—striking; karäbhyäm—with the hands; uraù—the chest;
uccakaiù—loudly; api—also; praviçya—entering; räjïé—the Queen;
tvarayä—hastily; ätmaja-antikam—near her son; dadarça—she saw;
bälam—the child; sahasä—suddenly; måtam—dead; sutam—son.
TRANSLATION
In great agitation, the maidservant struck her breast with both hands and
cried loudly in regretful words. Hearing her loud voice, the Queen immediately
came, and when she approached her son, she saw that he was suddenly dead.
TEXT 48
PaPaaTa >aUMaaE Pairv*ÖYaa Xauca
MauMaaeh iv>a]íiXaraeåhaMbra )) 48 ))
papäta bhümau parivåddhayä çucä
mumoha vibhrañöa-çiroruhämbarä
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
749
papäta—fell down; bhümau—on the ground; parivåddhayä—highly increased;
çucä—out of lamentation; mumoha—she became unconscious;
vibhrañöa—scattered; çiroruha—hair; ambarä—and dress.
TRANSLATION
In great lamentation, her hair and dress in disarray, the Queen fell to the
ground unconscious.
TEXT 49
TaTaae Na*PaaNTa"PaurviTaRNaae JaNaa
Naraê NaaYaRê iNaXaMYa raedNaMa( )
AaGaTYa TauLYaVYaSaNaa" Saudu"i%Taa‚
STaaê VYal/Ik&- åådu" k*-TaaGaSa" )) 49 ))
tato nåpäntaùpura-vartino janä
naräç ca näryaç ca niçamya rodanam
ägatya tulya-vyasanäù suduùkhitäs
täç ca vyalékaà ruruduù kåtägasaù
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; nåpa—O King; antaùpura-vartinaù—the inhabitants of the
palace; janäù—all the people; naräù—the men; ca—and; näryaù—the women;
ca—also; niçamya—hearing; rodanam—loud crying; ägatya—coming;
tulya-vyasanäù—being equally aggrieved; su-duùkhitäù—very greatly
lamenting; täù—they; ca—and; vyalékam—pretentiously; ruruduù—cried;
kåta-ägasaù—who had committed the offense (by giving the poison).
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
750
TRANSLATION
O King Parékñit, hearing the loud crying, all the inhabitants of the palace
came, both men and women. Being equally aggrieved, they also began to cry.
The queens who had administered the poison also cried pretentiously, knowing
full well their offense.
TEXTS 50-51
é[uTva Ma*Ta& Pau}aMal/i+aTaaNTak&-
ivNaíd*ií" Pa[PaTaNa( S%l/Na( PaiQa )
òehaNaubNDaEiDaTaYaa Xauca >a*Xa&
ivMaUiC^RTaae_NauPa[k*-iTaiÜRJaEv*RTa" )) 50 ))
PaPaaTa bal/SYa Sa PaadMaUle/
Ma*TaSYa ivóSTaiXaraeåhaMbr" )
dqga| ìSaNa( baZPak-l/aeParaeDaTaae
iNaåÖk-<#=ae Na XaXaak- >aaizTauMa( )) 51 ))
çrutvä måtaà putram alakñitäntakaà
vinañöa-dåñöiù prapatan skhalan pathi
snehänubandhaidhitayä çucä bhåçaà
vimürcchito 'nuprakåtir dvijair våtaù
papäta bälasya sa päda-müle
måtasya visrasta-çiroruhämbaraù
dérghaà çvasan bäñpa-kaloparodhato
niruddha-kaëöho na çaçäka bhäñitum
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
751
çrutvä—hearing; måtam—dead; putram—the son; alakñita-antakam—the
cause of death being unknown; vinañöa-dåñöiù—unable to see properly;
prapatan—constantly falling down; skhalan—slipping; pathi—on the road;
sneha-anubandha—because of affection; edhitayä—increasing; çucä—by
lamentation; bhåçam—greatly; vimürcchitaù—becoming unconscious;
anuprakåtiù—followed by ministers and other officers; dvijaiù—by learned
brähmaëas; våtaù—surrounded; papäta—fell down; bälasya—of the boy;
saù—he (the King); päda-müle—at the feet; måtasya—of the dead body;
visrasta—scattered; çiroruha—hair; ambaraù—and dress; dérgham—long;
çvasan—breathing; bäñpa-kalä-uparodhataù—due to crying with tearful eyes;
niruddha-kaëöhaù—having a choked voice; na—not; çaçäka—was able;
bhäñitum—to speak.
TRANSLATION
When King Citraketu heard of his son's death from unknown causes, he
became almost blind. Because of his great affection for his son, his lamentation
grew like a blazing fire, and as he went to see the dead child, he kept slipping
and falling on the ground. Surrounded by his ministers and other officers and
the learned brähmaëas present, the King approached and fell unconscious at the
child's feet, his hair and dress scattered. When the King, breathing heavily,
regained consciousness, his eyes were tearful, and he could not speak.
TEXT 52
PaiTa& iNarq+YaaeåXaucaiPaRTa& Tada
Ma*Ta& c bal&/ SauTaMaek-SaNTaiTaMa( )
JaNaSYa rajq Pa[k*-Taeê ôd]uJa&
SaTaq dDaaNaa ivl/l/aPa ic}aDaa )) 52 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
752
patià nirékñyoru-çucärpitaà tadä
måtaà ca bälaà sutam eka-santatim
janasya räjïé prakåteç ca håd-rujaà
saté dadhänä vilaläpa citradhä
SYNONYMS
patim—the husband; nirékñya—by seeing; uru—greatly; çuca—with
lamentation; arpitam—pained; tadä—at that time; måtam—dead; ca—and;
bälam—the child; sutam—the son; eka-santatim—the only son in the family;
janasya—of all the other people gathered there; räjïé—the Queen; prakåteù
ca—as well as of the officers and ministers; håt-rujam—the pains within the
core of the heart; saté dadhänä—increasing; vilaläpa—lamented; citradhä—in
varieties of ways.
TRANSLATION
When the Queen saw her husband, King Citraketu, merged in great
lamentation and saw the dead child, who was the only son in the family, she
lamented in various ways. This increased the pain in the cores of the hearts of
all the inhabitants of the palace, the ministers and all the brähmaëas.
TEXT 53
STaNaÜYa& ku-x(„ku„„„MaPaªMai<@Ta&
iNaizÄTaq SaaÅNabaZPaibNdui>a" )
ivk-IYaR ke-XaaNa( ivGal/TóJa" SauTa&
XauXaaec ic}a& ku-rrqv SauSvrMa( )) 53 ))
stana-dvayaà kuìkuma-paìka-maëòitaà
niñiïcaté säïjana-bäñpa-bindubhiù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
753
vikérya keçän vigalat-srajaù sutaà
çuçoca citraà kuraréva susvaram
SYNONYMS
stana-dvayam—her two breasts; kuìkuma—with kuìkuma powder (which is
generally sprayed on the breasts of women); paìka—ointment;
maëòitam—decorated; niñiïcaté—moistening; sa-aïjana—mixed with the eye
ointment; bäñpa—of tears; bindubhiù—by drops; vikérya—scattering;
keçän—hair; vigalat—was falling down; srajaù—on which the flower garland;
sutam—for her son; çuçoca—lamented; citram—variegated; kuraré iva—like a
kuraré bird; su-svaram—in a very sweet voice.
TRANSLATION
The garland of flowers decorating the Queen's head fell, and her hair
scattered. Falling tears melted the collyrium on her eyes and moistened her
breasts, which were covered with kuìkuma powder. As she lamented the loss of
her son, her loud crying resembled the sweet sound of a kuraré bird.
TEXT 54
Ahae ivDaaTaSTvMaTaqv bail/Xaae
YaSTvaTMaSa*íyPa[iTaæPaMaqhSae )
Pare Nau JaqvTYaParSYa Yaa Ma*iTa‚
ivRPaYaRYaêetvMaiSa Da]uv" Par" )) 54 ))
aho vidhätas tvam atéva bäliço
yas tv ätma-såñöy-apratirüpam éhase
pare nu jévaty aparasya yä måtir
viparyayaç cet tvam asi dhruvaù paraù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
754
SYNONYMS
aho—alas (in great lamentation); vidhätaù—O Providence; tvam—You;
atéva—very much; bäliçaù—inexperienced; yaù—who; tu—indeed;
ätma-såñöi—of Your own creation; apratirüpam—just the opposite; éhase—You
are performing and desiring; pare—while the father or the elder; nu—indeed;
jévati—is living; aparasya—of one who was born later; yä—which;
måtiù—death; viparyayaù—contradictory; cet—if; tvam—You; asi—are;
dhruvaù—indeed; paraù—an enemy.
TRANSLATION
Alas, O Providence, O Creator, You are certainly inexperienced in creation,
for during the lifetime of a father You have caused the death of his son, thus
acting in opposition to Your creative laws. If You are determined to contradict
these laws, You are certainly the enemy of living entities and are never
merciful.
PURPORT
This is the way a conditioned soul condemns the supreme creator when he
meets reverses. Sometimes he accuses the Supreme Personality of Godhead of
being crooked because some people are happy and some are not. Here the
Queen blames supreme providence for her son's death. Following the creative
laws, a father should die first and then his son. If the creative laws are changed
according to the whims of providence, then providence certainly should not be
considered merciful, but must be considered inimical to the created being.
Actually it is not the creator, but the conditioned soul who is inexperienced.
He does not know how the subtle laws of fruitive activity work, and without
knowledge of these laws of nature, he ignorantly criticizes the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
755
TEXT 55
Na ih §-Maêeidh Ma*TYauJaNMaNaae"
Xarqir<aaMaSTau TadaTMak-MaRi>a" )
Ya" òehPaaXaae iNaJaSaGaRv*ÖYae
SvYa& k*-TaSTae TaiMaMa& ivv*êiSa )) 55 ))
na hi kramaç ced iha måtyu-janmanoù
çarériëäm astu tad ätma-karmabhiù
yaù sneha-päço nija-sarga-våddhaye
svayaà kåtas te tam imaà vivåçcasi
SYNONYMS
na—not; hi—indeed; kramaù—chronological order; cet—if; iha—in this
material world; måtyu—of death; janmanoù—and of birth; çarériëäm—of the
conditioned souls, who have accepted material bodies; astu—let it be;
tat—that; ätma-karmabhiù—by the results of one's karma (fruitive activities);
yaù—that which; sneha-päçaù—bondage of affection; nija-sarga—Your own
creation; våddhaye—to increase; svayam—personally; kåtaù—made; te—by
You; tam—that; imam—this; vivåçcasi—you are cutting.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, You may say that there is no law that a father must die in the
lifetime of his son and that a son must be born in the lifetime of his father,
since everyone lives and dies according to his own fruitive activity. However, if
fruitive activity is so strong that birth and death depend upon it, there is no
need of a controller, or God. Again, if You say that a controller is needed
because the material energy does not have the power to act, one may answer
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
756
that if the bonds of affection You have created are disturbed by fruitive action,
no one will raise children with affection; instead, everyone will cruelly neglect
his children. Since You have cut the bonds of affection that compel a parent to
raise his child, You appear inexperienced and unintelligent.
PURPORT
As stated in the Brahma-saàhitä, karmäëi nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhäjäm:
[Bs. 5.54] one who has taken to Kåñëa consciousness, devotional service, is not
affected by the results of karma. In this verse, karma has been stressed on the
basis of karma-mémäàsä philosophy, which says that one must act according to
his karma and that a supreme controller must give the results of karma. The
subtle laws of karma, which are controlled by the Supreme, cannot be
understood by ordinary conditioned souls. Therefore Kåñëa says that one who
can understand Him and how He is acting, controlling everything by subtle
laws, immediately becomes freed by His grace. That is the statement of
Brahma-saàhitä (karmäëi nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhäjäm [Bs. 5.54]). One
should take to devotional service without reservations and surrender
everything to the supreme will of the Lord. That will make one happy in this
life and the next.
TEXT 56
Tv& TaaTa NaahRiSa c Maa& k*-Pa<aaMaNaaQaa&
TYa¢u-& ivc+v iPaTar& Tav Xaaek-TaáMa( )
AÅSTareMa >avTaaPa[JaduSTar& Yad(
ßaNTa& Na Yaaùk-å<aeNa YaMaeNa dUrMa( )) 56 ))
tvaà täta närhasi ca mäà kåpaëäm anäthäà
tyaktuà vicakñva pitaraà tava çoka-taptam
aïjas tarema bhavatäpraja-dustaraà yad
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
757
dhväntaà na yähy akaruëena yamena düram
SYNONYMS
tvam—you; täta—my dear son; na—not; arhasi—ought; ca—and; mäm—me;
kåpaëäm—very poor; anäthäm—without a protector; tyaktum—to give up;
vicakñva—look; pitaram—at the father; tava—your; çoka-taptam—affected by
so much lamentation; aïjaù—easily; tarema—we can cross; bhavatä—by you;
apraja-dustaram—very difficult to cross for one without a son; yat—which;
dhväntam—the kingdom of darkness; na yähi—do not go away;
akaruëena—merciless; yamena—with Yamaräja; düram—any further.
TRANSLATION
My dear son, I am helpless and very much aggrieved. You should not give up
my company. Just look at your lamenting father. We are helpless because
without a son we shall have to suffer the distress of going to the darkest hellish
regions. You are the only hope by which we can get out of these dark regions.
Therefore I request you not to go any further with the merciless Yama.
PURPORT
According to the Vedic injunctions, one must accept a wife just to beget a
son who can deliver one from the clutches of Yamaräja. Unless one has a son
to offer oblations to the pitäs, or forefathers, one must suffer in Yamaräja's
kingdom. King Citraketu was very much aggrieved. thinking that because his
son was going away with Yamaräja he himself would again suffer. The subtle
laws exist for the karmés; if one becomes a devotee, he has no more obligations
to the laws of karma.
TEXT 57
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
758
oitaï TaaTa Ta wMae iXaXavae vYaSYaa‚
STvaMaaûYaiNTa Na*PaNaNdNa Sa&ivhTauRMa( )
Sauáiêr& ùXaNaYaa c >avaNa( ParqTaae
>aux(+v STaNa& iPab Xaucae hr Na" Svk-aNaaMa( )) 57 ))
uttiñöha täta ta ime çiçavo vayasyäs
tväm ähvayanti nåpa-nandana saàvihartum
suptaç ciraà hy açanayä ca bhavän paréto
bhuìkñva stanaà piba çuco hara naù svakänäm
SYNONYMS
uttiñöha—kindly get up; täta—my dear son; te—they; ime—all these;
çiçavaù—children; vayasyäù—playmates; tväm—you; ähvayanti—are calling;
nåpa-nandana—O son of the King; saàvihartum—to play with; suptaù—you
have slept; ciram—for a long time; hi—indeed; açanayä—by hunger; ca—also;
bhavän—you; parétaù—overcome; bhuìkñva—please eat; stanam—at the
breast (of your mother); piba—drink; çucaù—lamentation; hara—just
dissipate; naù—of us; svakänäm—your relatives.
TRANSLATION
My dear son, you have slept a long time. Now please get up. Your playmates
are calling you to play. Since you must be very hungry, please get up and suck
my breast and dissipate our lamentation.
TEXT 58
Naah& TaNaUJa dd*Xae hTaMa(r)l/a Tae
MauGDaiSMaTa& MauidTavq+a<aMaaNaNaaBJaMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
759
ik&- va GaTaae_SYaPauNarNvYaMaNYal/aek&-
NaqTaae_ga*<aeNa Na é*<aaeiMa k-l/a iGarSTae )) 58 ))
nähaà tanüja dadåçe hata-maìgalä te
mugdha-smitaà mudita-vékñaëam änanäbjam
kià vä gato 'sy apunar-anvayam anya-lokaà
néto 'ghåëena na çåëomi kalä giras te
SYNONYMS
na—not; aham—I; tanü-ja—my dear son (born of my body); dadåçe—saw;
hata-maìgalä—because of my being the most unfortunate; te—your;
mugdha-smitam—with charming smiling; mudita-vékñaëam—with closed eyes;
änana-abjam—lotus face; kià vä—whether; gataù—gone away; asi—you are;
a-punaù-anvayam—from which one does not return; anya-lokam—to another
planet, or the planet of Yamaräja; nétaù—having been taken away;
aghåëena—by the cruel Yamaräja; na—not; çåëomi—I can hear; kaläù—very
pleasing; giraù—utterances; te—your.
TRANSLATION
My dear son, I am certainly most unfortunate, for I can no longer see your
mild smiling. You have closed your eyes forever. I therefore conclude that you
have been taken from this planet to another, from which you will not return.
My dear son, I can no longer hear your pleasing voice.
TEXT 59
é[qXauk- ovac
ivl/PaNTYaa Ma*Ta& Pau}aiMaiTa ic}aivl/aPaNaE" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
760
ic}ake-Tau>a*RXa& Taáae Mau¢-k-<#=ae åraed h )) 59 ))
çré-çuka uväca
vilapantyä måtaà putram
iti citra-viläpanaiù
citraketur bhåçaà tapto
mukta-kaëöho ruroda ha
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; vilapantyä—with the woman
who was lamenting; måtam—dead; putram—for the son; iti—thus;
citra-viläpanaiù—with various lamentations; citraketuù—King Citraketu;
bhåçam—very much; taptaù—aggrieved; mukta-kaëöhaù—loudly;
ruroda—cried; ha—indeed.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: Accompanied by his wife, who was thus
lamenting for her dead son, King Citraketu began crying loudly with an open
mouth, being greatly aggrieved.
TEXT 60
TaYaaeivRl/PaTaae" SaveR dMPaTYaaeSTadNauv]Taa" )
åådu" SMa Nara NaaYaR" SavRMaaSaqdceTaNaMa( )) 60 ))
tayor vilapatoù sarve
dampatyos tad-anuvratäù
ruruduù sma narä näryaù
sarvam äséd acetanam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
761
SYNONYMS
tayoù—while the two of them; vilapatoù—were lamenting; sarve—all;
dam-patyoù—the King, along with his wife; tat-anuvratäù—their followers;
ruruduù—cried loudly; sma—indeed; naräù—the male members; näryaù—the
female members; sarvam—the whole kingdom; äsét—became;
acetanam—almost unconscious.
TRANSLATION
As the King and Queen lamented, all their male and female followers joined
them in crying. Because of the sudden accident, all the citizens of the kingdom
were almost unconscious.
TEXT 61
Wv& k-XMal/MaaPaà& NaíSa&jMaNaaYak-Ma( )
jaTvai(r)ra NaaMa ‰izraJaGaaMa SaNaard" )) 61 ))
evaà kaçmalam äpannaà
nañöa-saàjïam anäyakam
jïätväìgirä näma åñir
äjagäma sanäradaù
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; kaçmalam—misery; äpannam—having gotten; nañöa—lost;
saàjïam—consciousness; anäyakam—without help; jïätvä—knowing;
aìgiräù—Aìgirä; näma—named; åñiù—the saintly person; äjagäma—came;
sa-näradaù—with Närada Muni.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
762
TRANSLATION
When the great sage Aìgirä understood that the King was almost dead in an
ocean of lamentation, he went there with Närada Åñi.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, Fourteenth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "King Citraketu's Lamentation."
15. The Saints Närada and Aìgirä Instruct King Citraketu
In this chapter, Aìgirä Åñi, along with Närada, consoles Citraketu as far as
possible. Aìgirä and Närada Åñi came to relieve the King from excessive
lamentation by instructing him about the spiritual significance of life.
The great saints Aìgirä and Närada explained that the relationship
between father and son is not factual; it is simply a representation of the
illusory energy. The relationship did not exist before, nor will it stay in the
future. By the arrangement of time, the relationship exists only in the present.
One should not lament for temporary relationships. The entire cosmic
manifestation is temporary; although not unreal, it is not factual. By the
direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, everything created in the
material world is transient. By a temporary arrangement, a father begets a
child, or a living entity becomes the child of a so-called father. This temporary
arrangement is made by the Supreme Lord. Neither the father nor the son
exists independently.
As the King listened to the great sages, he was relieved from his false
lamentation, and then he inquired about their identity. The great sages
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
763
presented who they were and instructed that all sufferings are due to the
bodily conception of life. When one understands his spiritual identity and
surrenders to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the supreme spiritual
person, one becomes actually happy. When one searches for happiness in
matter, one must certainly lament for bodily relationships. Self-realization
means spiritual realization of one's relationship with Kåñëa. Such realization
ends one's miserable material life.
TEXT 1
é[qXauk- ovac
OcTauMa*RTak-aePaaNTae PaiTaTa& Ma*Tak-aePaMaMa( )
Xaaek-ai>a>aUTa& raJaaNa& baeDaYaNTaaE Sadui¢-i>a" )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
ücatur måtakopänte
patitaà måtakopamam
çokäbhibhütaà räjänaà
bodhayantau sad-uktibhiù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; ücatuù—they spoke;
måtaka—the dead body; upänte—near; patitam—fallen;
måtaka-upamam—exactly like another dead body; çoka-abhibhütam—very
much aggrieved by lamentation; räjänam—to the King; bodhayantau—giving
instruction; sat-uktibhiù—by instructions that are factual, not temporary.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: While King Citraketu, overcome by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
764
lamentation, lay like a dead body at the side of the dead body of his son, the two
great sages Närada and Aìgirä instructed him about spiritual consciousness as
follows.
TEXT 2
k-ae_Ya& SYaaTa( Tav raJaeNd] >avaNa( YaMaNauXaaeciTa )
Tv& caSYa k-TaMa" Sa*íaE PauredaNaqMaTa" ParMa( )) 2 ))
ko 'yaà syät tava räjendra
bhavän yam anuçocati
tvaà cäsya katamaù såñöau
puredäném ataù param
SYNONYMS
kaù—who; ayam—this; syät—is; tava—to you; räja-indra—O best of kings;
bhavän—Your Lordship; yam—whom; anuçocati—laments over; tvam—you;
ca—and; asya—to him (the dead boy); katamaù—who; såñöau—in the birth;
purä—previously; idäném—at this time, at the present; ataù param—and
hereafter, in the future.
TRANSLATION
O King, what relationship does the dead body for which you lament have
with you, and what relationship do you have with him? You may say that you
are now related as father and son, but do you think this relationship existed
before? Does it truly exist now? Will it continue in the future?
PURPORT
The instructions given by Närada and Aìgirä Muni are the true spiritual
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
765
instructions for the illusioned conditioned soul. This world is temporary, but
because of our previous karma we come here and accept bodies, creating
temporary relationships in terms of society, friendship, love, nationality and
community, which are all finished at death. These temporary relationships did
not exist in the past, nor will they exist in the future. Therefore at the present
moment the so-called relationships are illusions.
TEXT 3
YaQaa Pa[YaaiNTa Sa&YaaiNTa óaeTaaeveGaeNa balu/k-a" )
Sa&YauJYaNTae ivYauJYaNTae TaQaa k-ale/Na deihNa" )) 3 ))
yathä prayänti saàyänti
sroto-vegena bälukäù
saàyujyante viyujyante
tathä kälena dehinaù
SYNONYMS
yathä—just as; prayänti—move apart; saàyänti—come together;
srotaù-vegena—by the force of waves; bälukäù—the small particles of sand;
saàyujyante—they are united; viyujyante—they are separated;
tathä—similarly; kälena—by time; dehinaù—the living entities who have
accepted material bodies.
TRANSLATION
O King, as small particles of sand sometimes come together and are
sometimes separated due to the force of the waves, the living entities who have
accepted material bodies sometimes come together and are sometimes separated
by the force of time.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
766
PURPORT
The misunderstanding of the conditioned soul is the bodily conception of
life. The body is material, but within the body is the soul. This is spiritual
understanding. Unfortunately, one who is in ignorance, under the spell of
material illusion, accepts the body to be the self. He cannot understand that
the body is matter. Like small particles of sand, bodies come together and are
separated by the force of time, and people falsely lament for unification and
separation. Unless one knows this, there is no question of happiness.
Therefore in Bhagavad-gétä (2.13) this is the first instruction given by the Lord:
dehino 'smin yathä dehe
kaumäraà yauvanaà jarä
tathä dehäntara-präptir
dhéras tatra na muhyati
"As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to youth
to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death. The
self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change." We are not the body; we
are spiritual beings trapped in the body. Our real interest lies in understanding
this simple fact. Then we can make further spiritual progress. Otherwise, if we
remain in the bodily conception of life, our miserable material existence will
continue forever. Political adjustments, social welfare work, medical assistance
and the other programs we have manufactured for peace and happiness will
never endure. We shall have to undergo the sufferings of material life one
after another. Therefore material life is said to be duùkhälayam açäçvatam [Bg.
8.15]; it is a reservoir of miserable conditions.
TEXT 4
YaQaa DaaNaaSau vE DaaNaa >aviNTa Na >aviNTa c )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
767
Wv& >aUTaaiNa >aUTaezu caeidTaaNaqXaMaaYaYaa )) 4 ))
yathä dhänäsu vai dhänä
bhavanti na bhavanti ca
evaà bhütäni bhüteñu
coditänéça-mäyayä
SYNONYMS
yathä—just as; dhänäsu—through seeds of paddy; vai—indeed;
dhänäù—grains; bhavanti—are generated; na—not; bhavanti—are generated;
ca—also; evam—in this way; bhütäni—the living entities; bhüteñu—in other
living entities; coditäni—impelled; éça-mäyayä—by the potency or power of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
When seeds are sown in the ground, they sometimes grow into plants and
sometimes do not. Sometimes the ground is not fertile, and the sowing of seeds
is unproductive. Similarly, sometimes a prospective father, being impelled by
the potency of the Supreme Lord, can beget a child, but sometimes conception
does not take place. Therefore one should not lament over the artificial
relationship of parenthood, which is ultimately controlled by the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Citraketu was actually not destined to get a son. Therefore
although he married hundreds and thousands of wives, all of them proved
barren, and he could not beget even one child. When Aìgirä Åñi came to see
the King, the King requested the great sage to enable him to have at least one
son. Because of the blessing of Aìgirä Åñi, a child was sent by the grace of
mäyä, but the child was not to live for long. Therefore in the beginning Aìgirä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
768
Åñi told the King that he would beget a child who would cause jubilation and
lamentation.
King Citraketu was not destined to get a child by providence, or the will of
the Supreme. Just as sterile grain cannot produce more grain, a sterile person,
by the will of the Supreme Lord, cannot beget a child. Sometimes a child is
born even to an impotent father and sterile mother, and sometimes a potent
father and fertile mother are childless. Indeed, sometimes a child is born
despite contraceptive methods, and therefore the parents kill the child in the
womb. In the present age, killing children in the womb has become a common
practice. Why? When contraceptive methods are taken, why don't they act?
Why is a child sometimes produced so that the father and mother have to kill
it in the womb? We must conclude that our arrangement of so-called scientific
knowledge cannot determine what will take place; what is enacted actually
depends on the supreme will. It is by the supreme will that we are situated in
certain conditions in terms of family, community and personality. These are
all arrangements of the Supreme Lord according to our desires under the spell
of mäyä, illusion. In devotional life, therefore, one should not desire anything,
since everything depends on the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As stated
in Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu (1.1.11):
anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà
jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam
änukülyena kåñëänuçélanaà
bhaktir uttamä
[Cc. Madhya 19.167]
"One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord Kåñëa
favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through fruitive
activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure devotional service."
One should act only to develop Kåñëa consciousness. For everything else, one
should fully depend upon the Supreme Person. We should not create plans
that will ultimately make us frustrated.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
769
TEXT 5
vYa& c Tv& c Yae ceMae TauLYak-al/aêracra" )
JaNMaMa*TYaaeYaRQaa PaêaTa( Pa[ax(NaEvMaDauNaaiPa >aae" )) 5 ))
vayaà ca tvaà ca ye ceme
tulya-käläç caräcaräù
janma-måtyor yathä paçcät
präì naivam adhunäpi bhoù
SYNONYMS
vayam—we (the great sages and the ministers and adherents of the King);
ca—and; tvam—you; ca—also; ye—who; ca—also; ime—these;
tulya-käläù—assembled at the same time; cara-acaräù—moving and not
moving; janma—birth; måtyoù—and death; yathä—just as; paçcät—after;
präk—before; na—not; evam—thus; adhunä—at present; api—although;
bhoù—O King.
TRANSLATION
O King, both you and we—your advisers, wives and ministers—as well as
everything moving and not moving throughout the entire cosmos at this time,
are in a temporary situation. Before our birth this situation did not exist, and
after our death it will exist no longer. Therefore our situation now is
temporary, although it is not false.
PURPORT
The Mäyävädé philosophers say, brahma satyaà jagan mithyä: Brahman, the
living being, is factual, but his present bodily situation is false. According to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
770
the Vaiñëava philosophy, however, the present situation is not false but
temporary. It is like a dream. A dream does not exist before one falls asleep,
nor does it continue after one awakens. The period for dreaming exists only
between these two, and therefore it is false in the sense that it is impermanent.
Similarly, the entire material creation, including our own creation and those
of others, is impermanent. We do not lament for the situation in a dream
before the dream takes place or after it is over, and so during the dream, or
during a dreamlike situation, one should not accept it as factual and lament
about it. This is real knowledge.
TEXT 6
>aUTaE>aURTaaiNa >aUTaeXa" Sa*JaTYaviTa hiNTa c )
AaTMaSa*íErSvTaN}aErNaPae+aae_iPa bal/vTa( )) 6 ))
bhütair bhütäni bhüteçaù
såjaty avati hanti ca
ätma-såñöair asvatantrair
anapekño 'pi bälavat
SYNONYMS
bhütaiù—by some living beings; bhütäni—other living entities;
bhüta-éçaù—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master of everything;
såjati—creates; avati—maintains; hanti—kills; ca—also; ätma-såñöaiù—who
are created by Him; asvatantraiù—not independent; anapekñaù—not
interested (in creation); api—although; bäla-vat—like a boy.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master and proprietor of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
771
everything, is certainly not interested in the temporary cosmic manifestation.
Nonetheless, just as a boy at the beach creates something in which he is not
interested, the Lord, keeping everything under His control, causes creation,
maintenance and annihilation. He creates by engaging a father to beget a son,
He maintains by engaging a government or king to see to the public's welfare,
and He annihilates through agents for killing, such as snakes. The agents for
creation, maintenance and annihilation have no independent potency, but
because of the spell of the illusory energy, one thinks himself the creator,
maintainer and annihilator.
PURPORT
No one can independently create, maintain or annihilate. Bhagavad-gétä
(3.27) therefore says:
prakåteù kriyamäëäni
guëaiù karmäëi sarvaçaù
ahaìkära-vimüòhätmä
kartäham iti manyate
"The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of material
nature, thinks himself the doer of activities that are in actuality carried out by
nature." Prakåti, material nature, as directed by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, induces all living entities to create, maintain or annihilate
according to the modes of nature. But the living entity, without knowledge of
the Supreme Person and His agent the material energy, thinks that he is the
doer. In fact, he is not at all the doer. As an agent of the supreme doer, the
Supreme Lord, one should abide by the Lord's orders. The present chaotic
conditions of the world are due to the ignorance of leaders who forget that
they have been appointed to act by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Because they have been appointed by the Lord, their duty is to consult the
Lord and act accordingly. The book for consultation is Bhagavad-gétä, in which
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
772
the Supreme Lord gives directions. Therefore those who are engaged in
creation, maintenance and annihilation should consult the Supreme Person,
who has appointed them, and should act accordingly. Then everyone will be
satisfied, and there will be no disturbances.
TEXT 7
deheNa deihNaae raJaNa( dehaÕehae_i>aJaaYaTae )
bqJaadev YaQaa bqJa& deùQaR wv XaaìTa" )) 7 ))
dehena dehino räjan
dehäd deho 'bhijäyate
béjäd eva yathä béjaà
dehy artha iva çäçvataù
SYNONYMS
dehena—by the body; dehinaù—of the father possessing a material body;
räjan—O King; dehät—from the body (of the mother); dehaù—another body;
abhijäyate—takes birth; béjät—from one seed; eva—indeed; yathä—just as;
béjam—another seed; dehé—a person who has accepted a material body;
arthaù—the material elements; iva—like; çäçvataù—eternal.
TRANSLATION
As from one seed another seed is generated, O King, so from one body [the
body of the father], through another body [the body of the mother], a third
body is generated [the body of a son]. As the elements of the material body are
eternal, the living entity who appears through these material elements is also
eternal.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
773
PURPORT
From Bhagavad-gétä we understand that there are two energies, namely the
superior energy and inferior energy. Inferior energy consists of the five gross
and three subtle material elements. The living entity, who represents the
superior energy, appears in different types of bodies through these elements by
the manipulation or supervision of the material energy. Actually both the
material and spiritual energies—matter and spirit—exist eternally as potencies
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The potent entity is the Supreme
Person. Since the spiritual energy, the living being, who is part and parcel of
the Supreme Lord, desires to enjoy this material world, the Lord gives him a
chance to accept different types of material bodies and enjoy or suffer in
different material conditions. Factually, the spiritual energy, the living entity
who desires to enjoy material things, is manipulated by the Supreme Lord. The
so-called father and mother have nothing to do with the living entity. As a
result of his own choice and karma, the living being takes different bodies
through the agency of so-called fathers and mothers.
TEXT 8
dehdeihiv>aaGaae_YaMaivvek-k*-Ta" Paura )
JaaiTaVYai¢-iv>aaGaae_Ya& YaQaa vSTauiNa k-iLPaTa" )) 8 ))
deha-dehi-vibhägo 'yam
aviveka-kåtaù purä
jäti-vyakti-vibhägo 'yaà
yathä vastuni kalpitaù
SYNONYMS
deha—of this body; dehi—and the proprietor of the body; vibhägaù—the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
774
division; ayam—this; aviveka—from ignorance; kåtaù—made; purä—from
time immemorial; jäti—of the class or caste; vyakti—and the individual;
vibhägaù—division; ayam—this; yathä—just as; vastuni—in the original
object; kalpitaù—imagined.
TRANSLATION
Divisions of generalization and specification, such as nationality and
individuality, are the imaginations of persons who are not advanced in
knowledge.
PURPORT
Actually there are two energies—material and spiritual. Both of them are
ever-existing because they are emanations from the eternal truth, the Supreme
Lord. Because the individual soul, the individual living entity, has desired to
act in forgetfulness of his original identity since time immemorial, he is
accepting different positions in material bodies and being designated
according to many divisions of nationality, community, society, species and so
on.
TEXT 9
é[qXauk- ovac
WvMaaìaiSaTaae raJaa ic}ake-TauiÜRJaaei¢-i>a" )
ivMa*JYa Paai<aNaa v£-MaaiDaãaNaMa>aazTa )) 9 ))
çré-çuka uväca
evam äçväsito räjä
citraketur dvijoktibhiù
vimåjya päëinä vaktram
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
775
ädhi-mlänam abhäñata
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—thus; äçväsitaù—being
enlightened or given hope; räjä—the King; citraketuù—Citraketu;
dvija-uktibhiù—by the instructions of the great brähmaëas (Närada and
Aìgirä Åñi); vimåjya—wiping off; päëinä—by the hand; vaktram—his face;
ädhi-mlänam—shriveled due to lamentation; abhäñata—spoke intelligently.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: Thus enlightened by the instructions of
Närada and Aìgirä, King Citraketu became hopeful with knowledge. Wiping
his shriveled face with his hand, the King began to speak.
TEXT 10
é[qraJaaevac
k-aE Yauva& jaNaSaMPaàaE MaihïaE c MahqYaSaaMa( )
AvDaUTaeNa veze<a GaU!aivh SaMaaGaTaaE )) 10 ))
çré-räjoväca
kau yuväà jïäna-sampannau
mahiñöhau ca mahéyasäm
avadhütena veñeëa
güòhäv iha samägatau
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—King Citraketu said; kau—who; yuväm—you two;
jïäna-sampannau—fully developed in knowledge; mahiñöhau—the greatest;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
776
ca—also; mahéyasäm—among other great personalities; avadhütena—of the
liberated wandering mendicants; veñeëa—by the dress; güòhau—disguised;
iha—in this place; samägatau—arrived.
TRANSLATION
King Citraketu said: You have both come here dressed like avadhütas,
liberated persons, just to cover your identities, but I see that of all men, you are
the most elevated in awareness. You know everything as it is. Therefore you are
the greatest of all great personalities.
TEXT 11
criNTa ùvNaaE k-aMa& b]aø<aa >aGaviTPa[Yaa" )
Maad*Xaa& Ga]aMYabuÖqNaa& baeDaaYaaeNMatail/i(r)Na" )) 11 ))
caranti hy avanau kämaà
brähmaëä bhagavat-priyäù
mädåçäà grämya-buddhénäà
bodhäyonmatta-liìginaù
SYNONYMS
caranti—wander; hi—indeed; avanau—on the surface of the world;
kämam—according to desire; brähmaëäù—the brähmaëas;
bhagavat-priyäù—who are also Vaiñëavas, very dear to the Personality of
Godhead; mä-dåçäm—of those like me; grämya-buddhénäm—who are obsessed
with temporary material consciousness; bodhäya—for the awakening;
unmatta-liìginaù—who dress as if madmen.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
777
TRANSLATION
Brähmaëas who are exalted to the position of Vaiñëavas, the most dear
servants of Kåñëa, sometimes dress like madmen. Just to benefit materialists like
us, who are always attached to sense gratification, and just to dissipate our
ignorance, these Vaiñëavas wander on the surface of the globe according to their
desire.
TEXTS 12-15
ku-Maarae Naard ‰>auri(r)ra devl/ae_iSaTa" )
APaaNTarTaMaa VYaaSaae Maak-R<@eYaae_Qa GaaETaMa" )) 12 ))
viSaïae >aGavaNa( raMa" k-iPal/ae badraYai<a" )
duvaRSaa YaajvLKYaê JaaTauk-<aRSTaQaaåi<a" )) 13 ))
raeMaXaXCYavNaae dta AaSauir" SaPaTaÅil/" )
‰izveRdiXara DaaEMYaae MauiNa" PaÄiXa%STaQaa )) 14 ))
ihr<YaNaa>a" k-aEXaLYa" é[uTadev ‰TaßJa" )
WTae Pare c iSaÖeXaaêriNTa jaNaheTav" )) 15 ))
kumäro närada åbhur
aìgirä devalo 'sitaù
apäntaratamä vyäso
märkaëòeyo 'tha gautamaù
vasiñöho bhagavän rämaù
kapilo bädaräyaëiù
durväsä yäjïavalkyaç ca
jätukarëas tathäruëiù
romaçaç cyavano datta
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
778
äsuriù sapataïjaliù
åñir veda-çirä dhaumyo
muniù païcaçikhas tathä
hiraëyanäbhaù kauçalyaù
çrutadeva åtadhvajaù
ete pare ca siddheçäç
caranti jïäna-hetavaù
SYNONYMS
kumäraù—Sanat-kumära; näradaù—Närada Muni; åbhuù—Åbhu;
aìgiräù—Aìgirä; devalaù—Devala; asitaù—Asita; apäntaratamäù—Vyäsa's
previous name, Apäntaratamä; vyäsaù—Vyäsa; märkaëòeyaù—Märkaëòeya;
atha—and; gautamaù—Gautama; vasiñöhaù—Vasiñöha; bhagavän rämaù—Lord
Paraçuräma; kapilaù—Kapila; bädaräyaëiù—Çukadeva Gosvämé;
durväsäù—Durväsä; yäjïavalkyaù—Yäjïavalkya; ca—also;
jätukarëaù—Jätukarëa; tathä—as well as; aruëiù—Aruëi; romaçaù—Romaça;
cyavanaù—Cyavana; dattaù—Dattätreya; äsuriù—Äsuri; sa-pataïjaliù—with
Pataïjali Åñi; åñiù—the sage; veda-çiräù—the head of the Vedas;
dhaumyaù—Dhaumya; muniù—the sage; païcaçikhaù—Païcaçikha; tathä—so
also; hiraëyanäbhaù—Hiraëyanäbha; kauçalyaù—Kauçalya;
çrutadevaù—Çrutadeva; åtadhvajaù—Åtadhvaja; ete—all of these;
pare—others; ca—and; siddha-éçäù—the masters of mystic power;
caranti—wander; jïäna-hetavaù—very learned persons who preach all over
the world.
TRANSLATION
O great souls, I have heard that among the great and perfect persons
wandering the surface of the earth to instruct knowledge to people covered by
ignorance are Sanat-kumära, Närada, Åbhu, Aìgirä, Devala, Asita,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
779
Apäntaratamä [Vyäsadeva], Märkaëòeya, Gautama, Vasiñöha, Bhagavän
Paraçuräma, Kapila, Çukadeva, Durväsä, Yäjïavalkya, Jätukarëa and Aruëi.
Others are Romaça, Cyavana, Dattätreya, Äsuri, Pataïjali, the great sage
Dhaumya who is like the head of the Vedas, the sage Païcaçikha,
Hiraëyanäbha, Kauçalya, Çrutadeva and Åtadhvaja. You must certainly be
among them.
PURPORT
The word jïäna-hetavaù is very significant because great personalities like
those listed in these verses wander on the surface of the globe not to mislead
the populace, but to distribute real knowledge. Without this knowledge,
human life is wasted. The human form of life is meant for realization of one's
relationship with Kåñëa, or God. One who lacks this knowledge is categorized
among the animals. The Lord Himself says in Bhagavad-gétä (7.15):
na mäà duñkåtino müòhäù
prapadyante narädhamäù
mäyayäpahåta-jïänä
äsuraà bhävam äçritäù
"Those miscreants who are grossly foolish, lowest among mankind, whose
knowledge is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the atheistic nature of
demons, do not surrender unto Me."
Ignorance is the bodily conception of life (yasyätma-buddhiù kuëape
tri-dhätuke. ...sa eva go-kharaù [SB 10.84.13]). Practically everyone throughout
the universe, especially on this planet, Bhürloka, thinks that there is no
separate existence of the body and soul and therefore no need of
self-realization. But that is not a fact. Therefore all the brähmaëas listed here,
being devotees, travel all over the world to awaken Kåñëa consciousness in the
hearts of such foolish materialists.
The äcäryas mentioned in these verses are described in the Mahäbhärata.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
780
The word païcaçikha is also important. One who is liberated from the
conceptions of annamaya, präëamaya, manomaya, vijïänamaya and
änandamaya and who is perfectly aware of the subtle coverings of the soul is
called païcaçikha. According to the statements of the Mahäbhärata
(Sänti-parva, Chapters 218-219), an äcärya named Païcaçikha took birth in the
family of Mahäräja Janaka, the ruler of Mithila. The Säìkhya philosophers
accept Païcaçikhäcärya as one of them. Real knowledge pertains to the living
entity dwelling within the body. Unfortunately, because of ignorance, the
living entity identifies himself with the body and therefore feels pleasure and
pain.
TEXT 16
TaSMaaÛuva& Ga]aMYaPaXaaeMaRMa MaU!iDaYa" Pa[>aU )
ANDae TaMaiSa MaGanSYa jaNadqPa odqYaRTaaMa( )) 16 ))
tasmäd yuväà grämya-paçor
mama müòha-dhiyaù prabhü
andhe tamasi magnasya
jïäna-dépa udéryatäm
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; yuväm—both of you; grämya-paçoù—of an animal like a
hog, pig or dog; mama—me; müòha-dhiyaù—who am very foolish (due to
having no spiritual knowledge); prabhü—O my two lords; andhe—in blind;
tamasi—darkness; magnasya—of one who is absorbed; jïäna-dépaù—the
torchlight of knowledge; udéryatäm—let it be ignited.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
781
Because you are great personalities, you can give me real knowledge. I am as
foolish as a village animal like a pig or dog because I am merged in the darkness
of ignorance. Therefore, please ignite the torch of knowledge to save me.
PURPORT
This is the way to receive knowledge. One must submit oneself at the lotus
feet of great personalities who can actually deliver transcendental knowledge.
It is therefore said, tasmäd guruà prapadyeta jijïäsuù çreya uttamam: [SB
11.3.21] "One who is inquisitive to understand the highest goal and benefit of
life must approach a bona fide spiritual master and surrender unto him." Only
one who is actually eager to receive knowledge to eradicate the darkness of
ignorance is eligible to approach a guru, or spiritual master. The guru should
not be approached for material benefits. One should not approach a guru just
to cure some disease or receive some miraculous benefit. This is not the way to
approach the guru. Tad-vijïänärtham: one should approach the guru to
understand the transcendental science of spiritual life. Unfortunately, in this
age of Kali there are many bogus gurus who display magic to their disciples,
and many foolish disciples want to see such magic for material benefits. These
disciples are not interested in pursuing spiritual life to save themselves from
the darkness of ignorance. It is said:
oà ajïäna-timirändhasya
jïänäïjana-çaläkayä
cakñur unmélitaà yena
tasmai çré-gurave namaù
"I was born in the darkest ignorance, and my spiritual master opened my eyes
with the torch of knowledge. I offer my respectful obeisances unto him." This
gives the definition of the guru. Everyone is in the darkness of ignorance.
Therefore everyone needs to be enlightened with transcendental knowledge.
One who enlightens his disciple and saves him from rotting in the darkness of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
782
ignorance in this material world is a true guru.
TEXT 17
é[qAi(r)ra ovac
Ah& Tae Pau}ak-aMaSYa Pau}adae_SMYai(r)ra Na*Pa )
Wz b]øSauTa" Saa+aaàardae >aGavaNa*iz" )) 17 ))
çré-aìgirä uväca
ahaà te putra-kämasya
putrado 'smy aìgirä nåpa
eña brahma-sutaù säkñän
närado bhagavän åñiù
SYNONYMS
çré-aìgiräù uväca—the great sage Aìgirä said; aham—I; te—of you;
putra-kämasya—desiring to have a son; putra-daù—the giver of the son;
asmi—am; aìgiräù—Aìgirä Åñi; nåpa—O King; eñaù—this;
brahma-sutaù—the son of Lord Brahmä; säkñät—directly; näradaù—Närada
Muni; bhagavän—the most powerful; åñiù—sage.
TRANSLATION
Aìgirä said: My dear King, when you desired to have a son, I approached
you. Indeed, I am the same Aìgirä Åñi who gave you this son. As for this åñi, he
is the great sage Närada, the direct son of Lord Brahmä
TEXTS 18-19
wTQa& Tva& Pau}aXaaeke-Na MaGan& TaMaiSa duSTare )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
783
ATadhRMaNauSMa*TYa MahaPauåzGaaecrMa( )) 18 ))
ANauGa]haYa >avTa" Pa[aáavavaiMah Pa[>aae )
b]ø<Yaae >aGavÙ¢-ae NaavaSaaidTauMahRiSa )) 19 ))
itthaà tväà putra-çokena
magnaà tamasi dustare
atad-arham anusmåtya
mahäpuruña-gocaram
anugrahäya bhavataù
präptäv äväm iha prabho
brahmaëyo bhagavad-bhakto
näväsäditum arhasi
SYNONYMS
ittham—in this way; tväm—you; putra-çokena—because of grief at the death of
your son; magnam—merged; tamasi—in darkness; dustare—insurmountable;
a-tat-arham—unsuitable for a person like you; anusmåtya—remembering;
mahä-puruña—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; gocaram—who are
advanced in understanding; anugrahäya—just to show favor;
bhavataù—toward you; präptau—arrived; äväm—we two; iha—in this place;
prabho—O King; brahmaëyaù—one who is situated in the Supreme Absolute
Truth; bhagavat-bhaktaù—an advanced devotee of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; na—not; aväsäditum—to lament; arhasi—you deserve.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, you are an advanced devotee of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. To be absorbed in lamentation for the loss of something material is
unsuitable for a person like you. Therefore we have both come to relieve you
from this false lamentation, which is due to your being merged in the darkness
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
784
of ignorance. For those who are advanced in spiritual knowledge to be affected
by material loss and gain is not at all desirable.
PURPORT
Several words in this verse are very important. The word mahä-puruña
refers to advanced devotees and also to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Mahä means "the supreme," and puruña means "person." One who always
engages in the service of the Supreme Lord is called mahä-pauruñika. Çukadeva
Gosvämé and Mahäräja Parékñit are sometimes addressed as mahä-pauruñika. A
devotee should always aspire to engage in the service of advanced devotees. As
Çréla Narottama däsa Öhäkura has sung:
täìdera caraëa sevi bhakta-sane väsa
janame janame haya, ei abhiläña
A devotee should always aspire to live in the association of advanced devotees
and engage in the service of the Lord through the paramparä system. One
should serve the mission of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu through the instructions
of the great Gosvämés of Våndävana. This is called täìdera caraëa sevi. While
serving the lotus feet of the Gosvämés, one should live in the association of
devotees (bhakta-sane väsa). This is the business of a devotee. A devotee
should not aspire for material profit or lament for material loss. When Aìgirä
Åñi and Närada saw that Mahäräja Citraketu, an advanced devotee, had fallen
in the darkness of ignorance and was lamenting for the material body of his
son, by their causeless mercy they came to advise him so that he could be saved
from this ignorance.
Another significant word is brahmaëya. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead is sometimes addressed by the prayer namo brahmaëya-deväya, which
offers obeisances unto the Lord because He is served by the devotees.
Therefore this verse states, brahmaëyo bhagavad-bhakto näväsäditum arhasi.
This is the symptom of an advanced devotee. Brahma-bhütaù prasannätmä [Bg.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
785
18.54]. For a devotee—an advanced, self-realized soul—there is no cause for
material jubilation or lamentation. He is always transcendental to conditional
life.
TEXT 20
TadEv Tae Par& jaNa& ddaiMa Ga*hMaaGaTa" )
jaTvaNYaai>aiNaveXa& Tae Pau}aMaev ddaMYahMa( )) 20 ))
tadaiva te paraà jïänaà
dadämi gåham ägataù
jïätvänyäbhiniveçaà te
putram eva dadämy aham
SYNONYMS
tadä—then; eva—indeed; te—unto you; param—transcendental;
jïänam—knowledge; dadämi—I would have delivered; gåham—to your home;
ägataù—came; jïätvä—knowing; anya-abhiniveçam—absorption in something
else (in material things); te—your; putram—a son; eva—only; dadämi—gave;
aham—I.
TRANSLATION
When I first came to your home, I could have given you the supreme
transcendental knowledge, but when I saw that your mind was absorbed in
material things, I gave you only a son, who caused you jubilation and
lamentation.
TEXTS 21-23
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
786
ADauNaa Paui}a<aa& TaaPaae >avTaEvaNau>aUYaTae )
Wv& dara Ga*ha raYaae ivivDaEìYaRSaMPad" )) 21 ))
XaBdadYaê ivzYaaêl/a raJYaiv>aUTaYa" )
Mahq raJYa& bl&/ k-aezae >a*TYaaMaaTYaSauôÂNaa" )) 22 ))
SaveR_iPa XaUrSaeNaeMae Xaaek-Maaeh>aYaaiTaRda" )
GaNDavRNaGarPa[:Yaa" SvPanMaaYaaMaNaaerQaa" )) 23 ))
adhunä putriëäà täpo
bhavataivänubhüyate
evaà därä gåhä räyo
vividhaiçvarya-sampadaù
çabdädayaç ca viñayäç
calä räjya-vibhütayaù
mahé räjyaà balaà koño
bhåtyämätya-suhåj-janäù
sarve 'pi çüraseneme
çoka-moha-bhayärtidäù
gandharva-nagara-prakhyäù
svapna-mäyä-manorathäù
SYNONYMS
adhunä—at the present moment; putriëäm—of persons who have children;
täpaù—the tribulation; bhavatä—by you; eva—indeed; anubhüyate—is
experienced; evam—in this way; däräù—good wife; gåhäù—residence;
räyaù—riches; vividha—various; aiçvarya—opulences;
sampadaù—prosperities; çabda-ädayaù—sound and so on; ca—and;
viñayäù—the objects of sense gratification; caläù—temporary; räjya—of the
kingdom; vibhütayaù—opulences; mahé—land; räjyam—kingdom;
balam—strength; koñaù—treasury; bhåtya—servants; amätya—ministers;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
787
suhåt-janäù—allies; sarve—all; api—indeed; çürasena—O King of Çürasena;
ime—these; çoka—of lamentation; moha—of illusion; bhaya—of fear;
arti—and distress; däù—givers; gandharva-nagara-prakhyäù—headed by the
illusory sight of a gandharva-nagara, a big palace within the forest;
svapna—dreams; mäyä—illusions; manorathäù—and concoctions of the mind.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, now you are actually experiencing the misery of a person who
has sons and daughters. O King, owner of the state of Çürasena, one's wife, his
house, the opulence of his kingdom, and his various other opulences and objects
of sense perception are all the same in that they are temporary. One's kingdom,
military power, treasury, servants, ministers, friends and relatives are all causes
of fear, illusion, lamentation and distress. They are like a gandharva-nagara, a
nonexistent palace that one imagines to exist in the forest. Because they are
impermanent, they are no better than illusions, dreams and mental concoctions.
PURPORT
This verse describes the entanglement of material existence. In material
existence, the living entity possesses many things—the material body,
children, wife and so on (dehäpatya-kalaträdiñu [SB 2.1.4]). One may think that
these will give him protection, but that is impossible. In spite of all these
possessions, the spirit soul has to give up his present situation and accept
another. The next situation may be unfavorable, but even if it is favorable, one
must give it up and again accept another body. In this way, one's tribulation in
material existence continues. A sane man should be perfectly aware that these
things will never be able to give him happiness. One must be situated in his
spiritual identity and eternally serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead as a
devotee. Aìgirä Åñi and Närada Muni gave this instruction to Mahäräja
Citraketu.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
788
TEXT 24
d*XYaMaaNaa ivNaaQaeRNa Na d*XYaNTae MaNaae>ava" )
k-MaRi>aDYaaRYaTaae NaaNaak-MaaRi<a MaNaSaae_>avNa( )) 24 ))
dåçyamänä vinärthena
na dåçyante manobhaväù
karmabhir dhyäyato nänäkarmäëi
manaso 'bhavan
SYNONYMS
dåçyamänäù—being perceived; vinä—without; arthena—substance or reality;
na—not; dåçyante—are seen; manobhaväù—creations of mental concoction;
karmabhiù—by fruitive activities; dhyäyataù—meditating upon;
nänä—various; karmäëi—fruitive activities; manasaù—from the mind;
abhavan—appear.
TRANSLATION
These visible objects like wife, children and property are like dreams and
mental concoctions. Actually what we see has no permanent existence. It is
sometimes seen and sometimes not. Only because of our past actions do we
create such mental concoctions, and because of these concoctions, we perform
further activities.
PURPORT
Everything material is a mental concoction because it is sometimes visible
and sometimes not. At night when we dream of tigers and snakes, they are not
actually present, but we are afraid because we are affected by what we envision
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
789
in our dreams. Everything material is like a dream because it actually has no
permanent existence.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura writes as follows in his commentary:
arthena vyäghra-sarpädinä vinaiva dåçyamänäù svapnädi-bhaìge sati na dåçyante
tad evaà därädayo 'västava-vastu-bhütäù svapnädayo 'vastu-bhütäç ca sarve
manobhaväù mano-väsanä janyatvän manobhaväù. At night one dreams of
tigers and snakes, and while dreaming he actually sees them, but as soon as the
dream is broken they no longer exist. Similarly, the material world is a creation
of our mental concoctions. We have come to this material world to enjoy
material resources, and by mental concoction we discover many, many objects
of enjoyment because our minds are absorbed in material things. This is why
we receive various bodies. According to our mental concoctions we work in
various ways, desiring various achievements, and by nature and the order of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead (karmaëä-daiva-netreëa [SB 3.31.1]) we
get the advantages we desire. Thus we become more and more involved with
material concoctions. This is the reason for our suffering in the material world.
By one kind of activity we create another, and they are all products of our
mental concoctions.
TEXT 25
AYa& ih deihNaae dehae d]VYajaNai§-YaaTMak-" )
deihNaae ivivDa(c)e-XaSaNTaaPak*-dudaôTa" )) 25 ))
ayaà hi dehino deho
dravya-jïäna-kriyätmakaù
dehino vividha-kleçasantäpa-
kåd udähåtaù
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
790
ayam—this; hi—certainly; dehinaù—of the living entity; dehaù—body;
dravya-jïäna-kriyä-ätmakaù—consisting of the material elements, the senses
for acquiring knowledge, and the acting senses; dehinaù—of the living entity;
vividha—various; kleça—sufferings; santäpa—and of pains; kåt—the cause;
udähåtaù—is declared.
TRANSLATION
The living entity in the bodily conception of life is absorbed in the body,
which is a combination of the physical elements, the five senses for gathering
knowledge, and the five senses of action, along with the mind. Through the
mind the living entity suffers three kinds of tribulations—adhibhautika,
adhidaivika and adhyätmika. Therefore this body is a source of all miseries.
PURPORT
In the Fifth Canto (5.5.4), while instructing his sons, Åñabhadeva said,
asann api kleçada äsa dehaù: the body, although temporary, is the cause of all
the miseries of material existence. As already discussed in the previous verse,
the entire material creation is based on mental concoction. The mind
sometimes induces us to think that if we purchase an automobile we can enjoy
the physical elements, such as earth, water, air and fire, combined in forms of
iron, plastic, petrol and so on. Working with the five material elements
(païca-bhütas), as well as with our five knowledge-gathering senses like the
eyes, ears and tongue and our five active senses like the hands and legs, we
become involved in the material condition. Thus we are subjected to the
tribulations known as adhyätmika, adhidaivika and adhibhautika. The mind is
the center because the mind creates all these things. As soon as the material
object is struck, however, the mind is affected, and we suffer. For example,
with the material elements, the working senses and the knowledge-gathering
senses we create a very nice car, and when the car is accidentally smashed in a
collision, the mind suffers, and through the mind the living entity suffers.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
791
The fact is that the living entity, while concocting with the mind, creates
the material condition. Because matter is destructible, through the material
condition the living entity suffers. Otherwise, the living entity is detached
from all material conditions. When one comes to the Brahman platform, the
platform of spiritual life, fully understanding that he is a spiritual soul (ahaà
brahmäsmi(12)), he is no longer affected by lamentation or hankering. As the
Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (18.54):
brahma-bhütaù prasannätmä
na çocati na käìkñati
"One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme
Brahman and becomes fully joyful. He never laments nor desires to have
anything." Elsewhere in Bhagavad-gétä (15.7) the Lord says:
mamaiväàço jéva-loke
jéva-bhütaù sanätanaù
manaù-ñañöhänéndriyäëi
prakåti-sthäni karñati
"The living entities in this conditioned world are My eternal fragmental parts.
Due to conditioned life, they are struggling very hard with the six senses,
which include the mind." The living entity is actually part and parcel of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and is unaffected by material conditions, but
because the mind (manaù) is affected, the senses are affected, and the living
entity struggles for existence within this material world.
TEXT 26
TaSMaaTa( SvSQaeNa MaNaSaa ivMa*XYa GaiTaMaaTMaNa" )
ÜETae Da]uvaQaRivé[M>a& TYaJaaePaXaMaMaaivXa )) 26 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
792
tasmät svasthena manasä
vimåçya gatim ätmanaù
dvaite dhruvärtha-viçrambhaà
tyajopaçamam äviça
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; svasthena—with a careful; manasä—mind;
vimåçya—considering; gatim—real position; ätmanaù—of yourself; dvaite—in
the duality; dhruva—as permanent; artha—object; viçrambham—belief;
tyaja—give up; upaçamam—a peaceful condition; äviça—take to.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O King Citraketu, carefully consider the position of the ätmä. In
other words, try to understand who you are—whether body, mind or soul.
Consider where you have come from, where you are going after giving up this
body, and why you are under the control of material lamentation. Try to
understand your real position in this way, and then you will be able to give up
your unnecessary attachment. You will also be able to give up the belief that
this material world, or anything not directly in touch with service to Kåñëa, is
eternal. Thus you will obtain peace.
PURPORT
The Kåñëa consciousness movement is factually endeavoring to bring
human society to a sober condition. Because of a misdirected civilization,
people are jumping in materialistic life like cats and dogs, performing all sorts
of abominable, sinful actions and becoming increasingly entangled. The Kåñëa
consciousness movement includes self-realization because one is first directed
by Lord Kåñëa to understand that one is not the body but the owner of the
body. When one understands this simple fact, he can direct himself toward the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
793
goal of life. Because people are not educated in terms of the goal of life, they
are working like madmen and becoming more and more attached to the
material atmosphere. The misguided man accepts the material condition as
everlasting. One must give up his faith in material things and give up
attachment for them. Then one will be sober and peaceful.
TEXT 27
é[qNaard ovac
WTaa& MaN}aaePaiNazd& Pa[TaqC^ Pa[YaTaae MaMa )
Yaa& DaarYaNa( Saára}aad( d]ía SaªzR<a& iv>auMa( )) 27 ))
çré-närada uväca
etäà mantropaniñadaà
pratéccha prayato mama
yäà dhärayan sapta-räträd
drañöä saìkarñaëaà vibhum
SYNONYMS
çré-näradaù uväca—Çré Närada Muni said; etäm—this;
mantra-upaniñadam—Upaniñad in the form of a mantra by which one can
achieve the highest goal of life; pratéccha—accept; prayataù—with great
attention (after finishing the funeral ceremony of your dead son);
mama—from me; yäm—which; dhärayan—accepting; sapta-räträt—after
seven nights; drañöä—you will see; saìkarñaëam—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Saìkarñaëa; vibhum—the Lord.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Närada continued: My dear King, attentively receive from me
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
794
a mantra, which is most auspicious. After accepting it from me, in seven nights
you will be able to see the Lord face to face.
TEXT 28
YaTPaadMaUl/MauPaSa*TYa NareNd] PaUveR
XavaRdYaae >a]MaiMaMa& iÜTaYa& ivSa*JYa )
SaÛSTadqYaMaTaul/aNaiDak&- MaihTv&
Pa[aPau>aRvaNaiPa Par& NaicraduPaEiTa )) 28 ))
yat-päda-mülam upasåtya narendra pürve
çarvädayo bhramam imaà dvitayaà visåjya
sadyas tadéyam atulänadhikaà mahitvaà
präpur bhavän api paraà na ciräd upaiti
SYNONYMS
yat-päda-mülam—the lotus feet of whom (Lord Saìkarñaëa);
upasåtya—obtaining shelter at; nara-indra—O King; pürve—formerly;
çarva-ädayaù—great demigods like Lord Mahädeva; bhramam—illusion;
imam—this; dvitayam—consisting of duality; visåjya—giving up;
sadyaù—immediately; tadéyam—His; atula—unequaled;
anadhikam—unsurpassed; mahitvam—glories; präpuù—achieved;
bhavän—yourself; api—also; param—the supreme abode; na—not;
cirät—after a long time; upaiti—will obtain.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, in former days Lord Çiva and other demigods took shelter of
the lotus feet of Saìkarñaëa. Thus they immediately got free from the illusion
of duality and achieved unequaled and unsurpassed glories in spiritual life. You
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
795
will very soon attain that very same position.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, Fifteenth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "The Saints Närada and Aìgirä Instruct King
Citraketu."
16. King Citraketu Meets the Supreme Lord
As related in this chapter, Citraketu was able to talk with his dead son and
hear from him the truth of life. When Citraketu was appeased, the great sage
Närada gave him a mantra, and by chanting this mantra Citraketu found
shelter at the lotus feet of Saìkarñaëa.
The living entity is eternal. Thus he has neither birth nor death (na
hanyate hanyamäne çarére [Bg. 2.20]). According to the reactions of one's
fruitive activities, one takes birth in various species of life among the birds,
beasts, trees, human beings, demigods and so on, thus rotating through various
bodies. For a certain period of time, one receives a particular type of body as a
son or father in a false relationship. All our relationships in this material world
with friends, relatives or enemies consist of duality, in which one feels happy
and distressed on the basis of illusion. The living entity is actually a spiritual
soul who is part and parcel of God and has nothing to do with relationships in
the world of duality. Therefore Närada Muni advised Citraketu not to lament
for his so-called dead son.
After hearing instructions from their dead child, Citraketu and his wife
could understand that all relationships in this material world are causes of
misery. The queens who had administered poison to the son of Kåtadyuti were
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
796
very much ashamed. They atoned for the sinful act of killing a child and gave
up their aspiration to have sons. Thereafter. Närada Muni chanted prayers to
Näräyaëa, who exists as catur-vyüha, and instructed Citraketu about the
Supreme Lord, who creates, maintains and annihilates everything and who is
the master of the material nature. After instructing King Citraketu in this
way, he returned to Brahmaloka. These instructions about the Absolute Truth
are called the mahä-vidyä. After being initiated by Närada Muni, King
Citraketu chanted the mahä-vidyä, and after one week he attained the
presence of Lord Saìkarñaëa, who was surrounded by the four Kumäras. The
Lord was nicely dressed in bluish garments, with a helmet and ornaments of
gold. His face appeared very happy. In the presence of Lord Saìkarñaëa,
Citraketu offered his obeisances and began to offer prayers.
In his prayers, Citraketu said that millions of universes rest in the pores of
Saìkarñaëa, who is limitless, having no beginning and end. The Lord is well
known to the devotees for His eternity. The difference between worshiping
the Lord and worshiping the demigods is that the worshiper of the Lord also
becomes eternal, whereas whatever benedictions one can get from the
demigods are impermanent. Unless one becomes a devotee, one cannot
understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
After Citraketu finished his prayers, the unlimited Supreme Lord explained
knowledge of Himself to Citraketu.
TEXT 1
é[qbadraYai<aåvac
AQa dev‰zq raJaNa( SaMPareTa& Na*PaaTMaJaMa( )
dXaRiYaTveiTa haevac jaTaqNaaMaNauXaaecTaaMa( )) 1 ))
çré-bädaräyaëir uväca
atha deva-åñé räjan
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
797
samparetaà nåpätmajam
darçayitveti hoväca
jïäténäm anuçocatäm
SYNONYMS
çré-bädaräyaëiù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; atha—thus;
deva-åñiù—the great sage Närada; räjan—O King; samparetam—dead;
nåpa-ätmajam—the son of the King; darçayitvä—making visible; iti—thus;
ha—indeed; uväca—explained; jïäténäm—to all the relatives;
anuçocatäm—who were lamenting.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: My dear King Parékñit, by his mystic power the
great sage Närada brought the dead son into the vision of all the lamenting
relatives and then spoke as follows.
TEXT 2
é[qNaard ovac
JaqvaTMaNa( PaXYa >ad]& Tae MaaTar& iPaTar& c Tae )
Sauôdae baNDavaSTaáa" Xauca TvTk*-TaYaa >a*XaMa( )) 2 ))
çré-närada uväca
jévätman paçya bhadraà te
mätaraà pitaraà ca te
suhådo bändhaväs taptäù
çucä tvat-kåtayä bhåçam
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
798
çré-näradaù uväca—Çré Närada Muni said; jéva-ätman—O living entity;
paçya—just see; bhadram—good fortune; te—unto you; mätaram—the mother;
pitaram—the father; ca—and; te—of you; suhådaù—friends;
bändhaväù—relatives; taptäù—aggrieved; çucä—by lamentation;
tvat-kåtayä—because of you; bhåçam—very greatly.
TRANSLATION
Çré Närada Muni said: O living entity, all good fortune unto you. Just see
your father and mother. All your friends and relatives are overwhelmed with
grief because of your passing away.
TEXT 3
k-le/vr& SvMaaivXYa XaezMaaYau" Sauôd(v*Ta" )
>aux(+v >aaeGaaNa( iPaTa*Pa[taaNaiDaiTaï Na*PaaSaNaMa( )) 3 ))
kalevaraà svam äviçya
çeñam äyuù suhåd-våtaù
bhuìkñva bhogän pitå-prattän
adhitiñöha nåpäsanam
SYNONYMS
kalevaram—body; svam—your own; äviçya—entering; çeñam—the balance;
äyuù—duration of life; suhåt-våtaù—surrounded by your friends and relatives;
bhuìkñva—just enjoy; bhogän—all enjoyable opulences; pitå—by your father;
prattän—awarded; adhitiñöha—accept; nåpa-äsanam—the throne of the king.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
799
Because you died untimely, the balance of your lifetime still remains.
Therefore you may reenter your body and enjoy the remainder of your life,
surrounded by your friends and relatives. Accept the royal throne and all the
opulences given by your father.
TEXT 4
Jaqv ovac
k-iSMaÅNMaNYaMaq Maù& iPaTarae MaaTarae_>avNa( )
k-MaRi>a>a]aRMYaMaa<aSYa deviTaYaRx(Na*YaaeiNazu )) 4 ))
jéva uväca
kasmiï janmany amé mahyaà
pitaro mätaro 'bhavan
karmabhir bhrämyamäëasya
deva-tiryaì-nå-yoniñu
SYNONYMS
jévaù uväca—the living entity said; kasmin—in which; janmani—birth;
amé—all those; mahyam—to me; pitaraù—fathers; mätaraù—mothers;
abhavan—were; karmabhiù—by the results of fruitive action;
bhrämyamäëasya—who am wandering; deva-tiryak—of the demigods and the
lower animals; nå—and of the human species; yoniñu—in the wombs.
TRANSLATION
By the mystic power of Närada Muni, the living entity reentered his dead
body for a short time and spoke in reply to Närada Muni's request. He said:
According to the results of my fruitive activities, I, the living being,
transmigrate from one body to another, sometimes going to the species of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
800
demigods, sometimes to the species of lower animals, sometimes among the
vegetables, and sometimes to the human species. Therefore, in which birth were
these my mother and father? No one is actually my mother and father. How can
I accept these two people as my parents?
PURPORT
Here it is made clear that the living being enters a material body that is like
a machine created by the five gross elements of material nature (earth, water,
fire, air and sky) and the three subtle elements (mind, intelligence and ego).
As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä, there are two separate identities, called the
inferior and superior natures, which both belong to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. According to the results of a living entity's fruitive actions, he is
forced to enter the material elements in different types of bodies.
This time the living entity was supposed to have been the son of Mahäräja
Citraketu and Queen Kåtadyuti because according to the laws of nature he had
entered a body made by the King and Queen. Actually, however, he was not
their son. The living entity is the son of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and because he wants to enjoy this material world, the Supreme Lord gives him
a chance to enter various bodies. The living entity has no true relationship
with the material body he gets from his material father and mother. He is part
and parcel of the Supreme Lord, but he is allowed to go through different
bodies. The body created by the so-called father and mother actually has
nothing to do with its so-called creators. Therefore the living entity flatly
denied that Mahäräja Citraketu and his wife were his father and mother.
TEXT 5
bNDaujaTYairMaDYaSQaiMa}aaedaSaqNaiviÜz" )
SavR Wv ih SaveRza& >aviNTa §-MaXaae iMaQa" )) 5 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
801
bandhu-jïäty-ari-madhyasthamitrodäséna-
vidviñaù
sarva eva hi sarveñäà
bhavanti kramaço mithaù
SYNONYMS
bandhu—friends; jïäti—family members; ari—enemies;
madhyastha—neutrals; mitra—well-wishers; udäséna—indifferent;
vidviñaù—or envious persons; sarve—all; eva—indeed; hi—certainly;
sarveñäm—of all; bhavanti—become; kramaçaù—gradually; mithaù—of one
another.
TRANSLATION
In this material world, which advances like a river that carries away the
living entity, all people become friends, relatives and enemies in due course of
time. They also act neutrally, they mediate, they despise one another, and they
act in many other relationships. Nonetheless, despite these various transactions,
no one is permanently related.
PURPORT
It is our practical experience in this material world that the same person
who is one's friend today becomes one's enemy tomorrow. Our relationships as
friends or enemies, family men or outsiders, are actually the results of our
different dealings. Citraketu Mahäräja was lamenting for his son, who was now
dead, but he could have considered the situation otherwise. "This living
entity," he could have thought, "was my enemy in my last life, and now, having
appeared as my son, he is prematurely leaving just to give me pain and agony."
Why should he not consider his dead son his former enemy and instead of
lamenting be jubilant because of an enemy's death? As stated in Bhagavad-gétä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
802
(3.27), prakåteù kriyamäëäni guëaiù karmäëi sarvaçaù: factually everything is
happening because of our association with the modes of material nature.
Therefore one who is my friend today in association with the mode of
goodness may be my enemy tomorrow in association with the modes of passion
and ignorance. As the modes of material nature work, in illusion we accept
others as friends, enemies, sons or fathers in terms of the reactions of different
dealings under different conditions.
TEXT 6
YaQaa vSTaUiNa Pa<YaaiNa heMaadqiNa TaTaSTaTa" )
PaYaR$=iNTa NareZvev& Jaqvae YaaeiNazu k-Ta*Rzu )) 6 ))
yathä vastüni paëyäni
hemädéni tatas tataù
paryaöanti nareñv evaà
jévo yoniñu kartåñu
SYNONYMS
yathä—just as; vastüni—commodities; paëyäni—meant for trading;
hema-ädéni—such as gold; tataù tataù—from here to there; paryaöanti—move
about; nareñu—among men; evam—in this way; jévaù—the living entity;
yoniñu—in different species of life; kartåñu—in different material fathers.
TRANSLATION
Just as gold and other commodities are continually transferred from one
place to another in due course of purchase and sale, so the living entity, as a
result of his fruitive activities, wanders throughout the entire universe, being
injected into various bodies in different species of life by one kind of father
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
803
after another.
PURPORT
It has already been explained that Citraketu's son was his enemy in a past
life and had now appeared as his son just to give him more severe pain. Indeed,
the untimely death of the son caused severe lamentation for the father. One
may put forward the argument, "If the King's son was his enemy, how could the
King have so much affection for him?" In answer, the example is given that
when someone's wealth falls into the hands of his enemy, the money becomes
the enemy's friend. Then the enemy can use it for his own purposes. Indeed, he
can even use it to harm its previous owner. Therefore the money belongs
neither to the one party nor to the other. The money is always money, but in
different situations it can be used as an enemy or a friend.
As explained in Bhagavad-gétä, it is not by any father or mother that the
living entity is given his birth. The living entity is a completely separate
identity from the so-called father and mother. By the laws of nature, the living
entity is forced to enter the semen of a father and be injected into the womb
of the mother. He is not in control of selecting what kind of father he will
accept. prakåteù kriyamäëäni: [Bg. 3.27] the laws of nature force him to go to
different fathers and mothers, just like a consumer commodity that is
purchased and sold. Therefore the so-called relationship of father and son is an
arrangement of prakåti, or nature. It has no meaning, and therefore it is called
illusion.
The same living entity sometimes takes shelter of an animal father and
mother and sometimes a human father and mother. Sometimes he accepts a
father and mother among the birds, and sometimes he accepts a demigod
father and mother. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu therefore says:
brahmäëòa bhramite kona bhägyavän jéva
guru-kåñëa-prasäde päya bhakti-latä-béja
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
804
[Cc. Madhya 19.151]
Harassed life after life by the laws of nature, the living entity wanders
throughout the entire universe in different planets and different species of
life. Somehow or other, if he is fortunate enough, he comes in touch with a
devotee who reforms his entire life. Then the living entity goes back home,
back to Godhead. Therefore it is said:
janame janame sabe pitä mätä päya
kåñëa guru nahi mile baja hari ei
In the transmigration of the soul through different bodies, everyone, in every
form of life—be it human, animal, tree or demigod—gets a father and mother.
This is not very difficult. The difficulty is to obtain a bona fide spiritual master
and Kåñëa. Therefore the duty of a human being is to capture the opportunity
to come in touch with Kåñëa's representative, the bona fide spiritual master.
Under the guidance of the spiritual master, the spiritual father, one can return
home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 7
iNaTYaSYaaQaRSYa SaMbNDaae ùiNaTYaae d*XYaTae Na*zu )
YaavÛSYa ih SaMbNDaae MaMaTv& Taavdev ih )) 7 ))
nityasyärthasya sambandho
hy anityo dåçyate nåñu
yävad yasya hi sambandho
mamatvaà tävad eva hi
SYNONYMS
nityasya—of the eternal; arthasya—thing; sambandhaù—relationship;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
805
hi—indeed; anityaù—temporary; dåçyate—is seen; nåñu—in human society;
yävat—as long as; yasya—of whom; hi—indeed; sambandhaù—relationship;
mamatvam—ownership; tävat—that long; eva—indeed; hi—certainly.
TRANSLATION
A few living entities are born in the human species, and others are born as
animals. Although both are living entities, their relationships are impermanent.
An animal may remain in the custody of a human being for some time, and then
the same animal may be transferred to the possession of other human beings. As
soon as the animal goes away, the former proprietor no longer has a sense of
ownership. As long as the animal is in his possession he certainly has an affinity
for it, but as soon as the animal is sold, the affinity is lost.
PURPORT
Aside from the fact that the soul transmigrates from one body to another,
even in this life the relationships between living entities are impermanent, as
exemplified in this verse. The son of Citraketu was named Harñaçoka, or
"jubilation and lamentation." The living entity is certainly eternal, but because
he is covered by a temporary dress, the body, his eternity is not observed.
Dehino 'smin yathä dehe kaumäraà yauvanaà jarä: [Bg. 2.13] "The embodied
soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to youth to old age." Thus
the bodily dress is impermanent. The living entity, however, is permanent. As
an animal is transferred from one owner to another, the living entity who was
the son of Citraketu lived as his son for some time, but as soon as he was
transferred to another body, the affectionate relationship was broken. As
stated in the example given in the previous verse, when one has a commodity
in his hands he considers it his, but as soon as it is transferred it becomes
someone else's commodity. Then one no longer has a relationship with it; he
has no affection for it, nor does he lament for it.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
806
TEXT 8
Wv& YaaeiNaGaTaae Jaqv" Sa iNaTYaae iNarhx(k*„„„Ta" )
YaavÛ}aaePal/>YaeTa TaavTSvTv& ih TaSYa TaTa( )) 8 ))
evaà yoni-gato jévaù
sa nityo nirahaìkåtaù
yävad yatropalabhyeta
tävat svatvaà hi tasya tat
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; yoni-gataù—being within a specific species of life; jévaù—the
living entity; saù—he; nityaù—eternal; nirahaìkåtaù—without identification
with the body; yävat—as long as; yatra—where; upalabhyeta—he may be
found; tävat—that long; svatvam—the concept of self; hi—indeed; tasya—of
him; tat—that.
TRANSLATION
Even though one living entity becomes connected with another because of a
relationship based on bodies that are perishable, the living entity is eternal.
Actually it is the body that is born or lost, not the living entity. One should not
accept that the living entity takes birth or dies. The living being actually has no
relationship with so-called fathers and mothers. As long as he appears as the son
of a certain father and mother as a result of his past fruitive activities, he has a
connection with the body given by that father and mother. Thus he falsely
accepts himself as their son and acts affectionately. After he dies, however, the
relationship is finished. Under these circumstances, one should not be falsely
involved with jubilation and lamentation.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
807
PURPORT
When the living entity lives within the material body, he falsely thinks that
he is the body, although actually he is not. His relationship with his body and
his so-called father and mother are false, illusory conceptions. These illusions
continue as long as one is not enlightened about the situation of the living
entity.
TEXT 9
Wz iNaTYaae_VYaYa" SaU+Ma Wz SavaRé[Ya" Svd*k( )
AaTMaMaaYaaGau<aEivRìMaaTMaaNa& Sa*JaTae Pa[>au" )) 9 ))
eña nityo 'vyayaù sükñma
eña sarväçrayaù svadåk
ätmamäyä-guëair viçvam
ätmänaà såjate prabhuù
SYNONYMS
eñaù—this living entity; nityaù—eternal; avyayaù—imperishable;
sükñmaù—very, very fine (not seen by the material eyes); eñaù—this living
entity; sarva-äçrayaù—the cause of different types of bodies;
sva-dåk—self-effulgent; ätma-mäyä-guëaiù—by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead's modes of material nature; viçvam—this material world;
ätmänam—himself; såjate—appears; prabhuù—the master.
TRANSLATION
The living entity is eternal and imperishable because he actually has no
beginning and no end. He never takes birth or dies. He is the basic principle of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
808
all types of bodies, yet he does not belong to the bodily category. The living
being is so sublime that he is equal in quality to the Supreme Lord.
Nonetheless, because he is extremely small, he is prone to be illusioned by the
external energy, and thus he creates various bodies for himself according to his
different desires.
PURPORT
In this verse the philosophy of acintya-bhedäbheda—simultaneous oneness
and difference—is described. The living entity is eternal (nitya) like the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, but the difference is that the Supreme Lord
is the greatest, no one being equal to or greater than Him, whereas the living
entity is sükñma, or extremely small. The çästra describes that the magnitude of
the living entity is one ten-thousandth the size of the tip of a hair. The
Supreme Lord is all-pervading (aëòäntara-stha-paramäëu-cayäntara-stham [Bs.
5.35]). Relatively, if the living entity is accepted as the smallest, there should
naturally be inquiry about the greatest. The greatest is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and the smallest is the living entity.
Another peculiar characteristic of the jéva is that he becomes covered by
mäyä. Ätmamäyä-guëaiù: he is prone to being covered by the Supreme Lord's
illusory energy. The living entity is responsible for his conditional life in the
material world, and therefore he is described as prabhu ("the master"). If he
likes he can come to this material world, and if he likes he can return home,
back to Godhead. Because he wanted to enjoy this material world, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead gave him a material body through the agency
of the material energy. As the Lord Himself says in Bhagavad-gétä (18.61):
éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà
håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati
bhrämayan sarva-bhütäni
yanträrüòhäni mäyayä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
809
"The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna, and is directing
the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a machine, made of
the material energy." The Supreme Lord gives the living entity a chance to
enjoy in this material world as he desires, but He openly expresses His own
desire that the living entity give up all material aspirations, fully surrender
unto Him and return home, back to Godhead.
The living entity is the smallest (sükñma). Jéva Gosvämé says in this
connection that the living entity within the body is extremely difficult for
materialistic scientists to find, although we understand from authorities that
the living entity is within the body. The body is different from the living
entity.
TEXT 10
Na ùSYaaiSTaiPa[Ya" k-iêàaiPa[Ya" Sv" Parae_iPa va )
Wk-" SavRiDaYaa& d]ía k-Ta›R<aa& Gau<adaezYaae" )) 10 ))
na hy asyästi priyaù kaçcin
näpriyaù svaù paro 'pi vä
ekaù sarva-dhiyäà drañöä
kartèëäà guëa-doñayoù
SYNONYMS
na—not; hi—indeed; asya—to the living entity; asti—there is; priyaù—dear;
kaçcit—someone; na—not; apriyaù—not dear; svaù—own; paraù—other;
api—also; vä—or; ekaù—the one; sarva-dhiyäm—of the varieties of
intelligence; drañöä—the seer; kartèëäm—of the performers; guëa-doñayoù—of
right and wrong activities.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
810
TRANSLATION
For this living entity, no one is dear, nor is anyone unfavorable. He makes
no distinction between that which is his own and that which belongs to anyone
else. He is one without a second; in other words, he is not affected by friends
and enemies, well-wishers or mischief-mongers. He is only an observer, a
witness, of the different qualities of men.
PURPORT
As explained in the previous verse, the living entity has the same qualities
as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but he has them in minute quantities
because he is a small particle (sükñma) whereas the Supreme Lord is
all-pervading and great. For the Supreme Lord there are no friends, enemies or
relatives, for He is completely free from all the disqualifications of ignorance
that characterize the conditioned souls. On the other hand, He is extremely
kind and favorable to His devotees, and He is not at all satisfied with persons
who are envious of His devotees. As the Lord Himself confirms in
Bhagavad-gétä (9.29):
samo 'haà sarva-bhüteñu
na me dveñyo 'sti na priyaù
ye bhajanti tu mäà bhaktyä
mayi te teñu cäpy aham
"I envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But whoever
renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend, is in Me, and I am also a friend
to him." The Supreme Lord has no enemy or friend, but He is inclined toward
a devotee who always engages in His devotional service. Similarly, elsewhere in
the Gétä (16.19) the Lord says:
tän ahaà dviñataù krürän
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
811
saàsäreñu narädhamän
kñipämy ajasram açubhän
äsuréñv eva yoniñu
"Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among men, are
cast by Me into the ocean of material existence, into various demoniac species
of life." The Lord is extremely antagonistic toward those who are envious of
His devotees. To protect His devotees, the Lord sometimes has to kill their
enemies. For example, to protect Prahläda Mahäräja, the Lord had to kill his
enemy Hiraëyakaçipu, although Hiraëyakaçipu attained salvation because of
being killed by the Lord. Since the Lord is the witness of everyone's activities,
He witnesses the actions of the enemies of His devotees, and He is inclined to
punish them. In other cases, however, He simply witnesses what the living
entities do and gives the results of one's sinful or pious actions.
TEXT 11
Naadta AaTMaa ih Gau<a& Na daez& Na i§-Yaaf-l/Ma( )
odaSaqNavdaSaqNa" Paravrd*Gaqìr" )) 11 ))
nädatta ätmä hi guëaà
na doñaà na kriyä-phalam
udäsénavad äsénaù
parävara-dåg éçvaraù
SYNONYMS
na—not; ädatte—accepts; ätmä—the Supreme Lord; hi—indeed;
guëam—happiness; na—not; doñam—unhappiness; na—nor;
kriyä-phalam—the result of any fruitive activity; udäséna-vat—exactly like a
neutral man; äsénaù—sitting (in the core of the heart);
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
812
para-avara-dåk—seeing the cause and effect; éçvaraù—the Supreme Lord.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord [ätmä], the creator of cause and effect, does not accept
the happiness and distress that result from fruitive actions. He is completely
independent of having to accept a material body, and because He has no
material body, He is always neutral. The living entities, being part and parcel of
the Lord, possess His qualities in a minute quantity. Therefore one should not
be affected by lamentation.
PURPORT
The conditioned soul has friends and enemies. He is affected by the good
qualities and the faults of his position. The Supreme Lord, however, is always
transcendental. Because He is the éçvara, the supreme controller, He is not
affected by duality. It may therefore be said that He sits in the core of
everyone's heart as the neutral witness of the causes and effects of one's
activities, good and bad. We should also understand that udäséna, neutral, does
not mean that He takes no action. Rather, it means that He is not personally
affected. For example, a court judge is neutral when two opposing parties
appear before him, but he still takes action as the case warrants. To become
completely neutral, indifferent, to material activities, we should simply seek
shelter at the lotus feet of the supreme neutral person.
Mahäräja Citraketu was advised that remaining neutral in such trying
circumstances as the death of one's son is impossible. Nevertheless, since the
Lord knows how to adjust everything, the best course is to depend upon Him
and do one's duty in devotional service to the Lord. In all circumstances, one
should be undisturbed by duality. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (2.47):
karmaëy evädhikäras te
mä phaleñu kadäcana
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
813
mä karma-phala-hetur bhür
mä te saìgo 'stv akarmaëi
"You have a right to perform your prescribed duty, but you are not entitled to
the fruits of action. Never consider yourself to be the cause of the results of
your activities, and never be attached to not doing your duty." One should
execute one's devotional duty, and for the results of one's actions one should
depend upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 12
é[qbadraYai<aåvac
wTYaudqYaR GaTaae Jaqvae jaTaYaSTaSYa Tae Tada )
iviSMaTaa MauMaucu" Xaaek&- i^tvaTMaòehé*«l/aMa( )) 12 ))
çré-bädaräyaëir uväca
ity udérya gato jévo
jïätayas tasya te tadä
vismitä mumucuù çokaà
chittvätma-sneha-çåìkhaläm
SYNONYMS
çré-bädaräyaëiù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—in this way;
udérya—speaking; gataù—went; jévaù—the living entity (who had appeared as
the son of Mahäräja Citraketu); jïätayaù—the relatives and family members;
tasya—of him; te—they; tadä—at that time; vismitäù—being astonished;
mumucuù—gave up; çokam—lamentation; chittvä—cutting off;
ätma-sneha—of affection due to a relationship; çåìkhaläm—the iron shackles.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
814
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: When the conditioned soul [jéva] in the
form of Mahäräja Citraketu's son had spoken in this way and then left,
Citraketu and the other relatives of the dead son were all astonished. Thus they
cut off the shackles of their affection, which was due to their relationship with
him, and gave up their lamentation.
TEXT 13
iNaôRTYa jaTaYaae jaTaedeRh& k*-TvaeicTaa" i§-Yaa" )
TaTYaJauduRSTYaJa& òeh& Xaaek-Maaeh>aYaaiTaRdMa( )) 13 ))
nirhåtya jïätayo jïäter
dehaà kåtvocitäù kriyäù
tatyajur dustyajaà snehaà
çoka-moha-bhayärtidam
SYNONYMS
nirhåtya—removing; jïätayaù—King Citraketu and all the other relatives;
jïäteù—of the son; deham—the body; kåtvä—performing; ucitäù—suitable;
kriyäù—activities; tatyajuù—gave up; dustyajam—very difficult to give up;
sneham—affection; çoka—lamentation; moha—illusion; bhaya—fear;
arti—and distress; dam—giving.
TRANSLATION
After the relatives had discharged their duties by performing the proper
funeral ceremonies and burning the dead child's body, they gave up the
affection that leads to illusion, lamentation, fear and pain. Such affection is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
815
undoubtedly difficult to give up, but they gave it up very easily.
TEXT 14
bal/gNYaae v]qi@TaaSTa}a bal/hTYaahTaPa[>aa" )
bal/hTYaav]Ta& ceåb]aRø<aEYaRiàæiPaTaMa( )
YaMauNaaYaa& MaharaJa SMarNTYaae iÜJa>aaizTaMa( )) 14 ))
bäla-ghnyo vréòitäs tatra
bäla-hatyä-hata-prabhäù
bäla-hatyä-vrataà cerur
brähmaëair yan nirüpitam
yamunäyäà mahäräja
smarantyo dvija-bhäñitam
SYNONYMS
bäla-ghnyaù—the killers of the child; vréòitäù—being very much ashamed;
tatra—there; bäla-hatyä—because of killing the child; hata—having lost;
prabhäù—all bodily luster; bäla-hatyä-vratam—the atonement for killing the
child; ceruù—executed; brähmaëaiù—by the priests; yat—which;
nirüpitam—described; yamunäyäm—at the River Yamunä; mahä-räja—O
King Parékñit; smarantyaù—remembering; dvija-bhäñitam—the statement
given by the brähmaëa.
TRANSLATION
Queen Kåtyadyuti's co-wives, who had poisoned the child, were very much
ashamed, and they lost all their bodily luster. While lamenting, O King, they
remembered the instructions of Aìgirä and gave up their ambition to bear
children. Following the directions of the brähmaëas, they went to the bank of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
816
the Yamunä, where they bathed and atoned for their sinful activities.
PURPORT
In this verse the word bäla-hatyä-hata-prabhäù is to be particularly noted.
The practice of killing children has existed in human society for a long
time—since time immemorial—but in the days of yore it was very rarely
performed. At the present moment, however, in this age of Kali,
abortion—killing of the child within the womb—has become very common,
and sometimes a child is even killed after birth. If a woman performs such an
abominable act, she gradually loses all her bodily luster
(bäla-hatyä-hata-prabhäù). It is also to be noted that the ladies who had
committed the sinful act of administering poison to the child were very much
ashamed, and according to the directions of the brähmaëas, they had to
undergo atonement for killing the child. Any woman who has ever performed
such an infamously sinful act must atone for it, but no one now is doing that.
Under the circumstances, the women responsible must suffer in this life and
the next. Those who are sincere souls, after hearing this incident, should
refrain from such child-killing and should atone for their sinful activities by
taking to Kåñëa consciousness very seriously. If one chants the Hare Kåñëa
mahä-mantra without offenses, all of one's sinful actions are surely atoned for
immediately, but one should not commit such deeds again, for that is an
offense.
TEXT 15
Sa wTQa& Pa[iTabuÖaTMaa ic}ake-TauiÜRJaaei¢-i>a" )
Ga*haNDakU-PaaiàZ§-aNTa" Sar"Paªaidv iÜPa" )) 15 ))
sa itthaà pratibuddhätmä
citraketur dvijoktibhiù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
817
gåhändha-küpän niñkräntaù
saraù-paìkäd iva dvipaù
SYNONYMS
saù—he; ittham—in this way; pratibuddha-ätmä—being fully aware of spiritual
knowledge; citraketuù—King Citraketu; dvija-uktibhiù—by the instructions of
the perfect brähmaëas (Aìgirä and Närada Muni); gåha-andha-küpät—from
the dark well of family life; niñkräntaù—came out; saraù—of a lake or
reservoir of water; paìkät—from the mud; iva—like; dvipaù—an elephant.
TRANSLATION
Thus enlightened by the instructions of the brähmaëas Aìgirä and Närada,
King Citraketu became fully aware of spiritual knowledge. As an elephant
becomes free from a muddy reservoir of water, King Citraketu came out of the
dark well of family life.
TEXT 16
k-ail/NÛa& iviDavTa( òaTva k*-TaPau<YaJal/i§-Ya" )
MaaENaeNa Sa&YaTaPa[a<aae b]øPau}aavvNdTa )) 16 ))
kälindyäà vidhivat snätvä
kåta-puëya-jala-kriyaù
maunena saàyata-präëo
brahma-puträv avandata
SYNONYMS
kälindyäm—in the River Yamunä; vidhi-vat—according to prescribed
regulations; snätvä—bathing; kåta—performing; puëya—pious;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
818
jala-kriyaù—oblations by offering water; maunena—with gravity;
saàyata-präëaù—controlling the mind and senses; brahma-putrau—unto the
two sons of Lord Brahmä (Aìgirä and Närada); avandata—offered his prayers
and obeisances.
TRANSLATION
The King bathed in the water of the Yamunä, and according to prescribed
duties, he offered oblations of water to the forefathers and demigods. Very
gravely controlling his senses and mind, he then offered his respects and
obeisances to the sons of Lord Brahmä [Aìgirä and Närada].
TEXT 17
AQa TaSMaE Pa[PaàaYa >a¢-aYa Pa[YaTaaTMaNae )
>aGavaàard" Pa[qTaae ivÛaMaeTaaMauvac h )) 17 ))
atha tasmai prapannäya
bhaktäya prayatätmane
bhagavän näradaù préto
vidyäm etäm uväca ha
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; tasmai—unto him; prapannäya—who was surrendered;
bhaktäya—being a devotee; prayata-ätmane—who was self-controlled;
bhagavän—the most powerful; näradaù—Närada; prétaù—being very pleased;
vidyäm—transcendental knowledge; etäm—this; uväca—spoke; ha—indeed.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
819
Thereafter, being very much pleased with Citraketu, who was a
self-controlled devotee and surrendered soul, Närada, the most powerful sage,
spoke to him the following transcendental instructions.
TEXTS 18-19
p NaMaSTau>Ya& >aGavTae vaSaudevaYa DaqMaih )
Pa[ÛuMNaaYaaiNaåÖaYa NaMa" SaªzR<aaYa c )) 18 ))
NaMaae ivjaNaMaa}aaYa ParMaaNaNdMaUTaRYae )
AaTMaaraMaaYa XaaNTaaYa iNav*taÜETad*íYae )) 19 ))
oà namas tubhyaà bhagavate
väsudeväya dhémahi
pradyumnäyäniruddhäya
namaù saìkarñaëäya ca
namo vijïäna-mäträya
paramänanda-mürtaye
ätmärämäya çäntäya
nivåtta-dvaita-dåñöaye
SYNONYMS
oà—O my Lord; namaù—obeisances; tubhyam—unto You; bhagavate—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; väsudeväya—Kåñëa, the son of Vasudeva;
dhémahi—let me meditate upon; pradyumnäya—unto Pradyumna;
aniruddhäya—unto Aniruddha; namaù—respectful obeisances;
saìkarñaëäya—unto Lord Saìkarñaëa; ca—also; namaù—all obeisances;
vijïäna-mäträya—unto the form full of knowledge;
parama-änanda-mürtaye—full of transcendental bliss; ätma-ärämäya—unto
the Lord, who is self-sufficient; çäntäya—and free from disturbances;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
820
nivåtta-dvaita-dåñöaye—whose vision turns away from duality, or who is one
without a second.
TRANSLATION
[Närada gave Citraketu the following mantra.] O Lord, O Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who are addressed by the oàkära [praëava], I offer my
respectful obeisances unto You. O Lord Väsudeva, I meditate upon You. O Lord
Pradyumna, Lord Aniruddha and Lord Saìkarñaëa, I offer You my respectful
obeisances. O reservoir of spiritual potency, O supreme bliss, I offer my
respectful obeisances unto You, who are self-sufficient and most peaceful. O
ultimate truth, one without a second, You are realized as Brahman, Paramätmä
and Bhagavän and are therefore the reservoir of all knowledge. I offer my
respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä Kåñëa says that He is praëavaù sarva-vedeñu, the syllable
oà in the Vedic mantras. In transcendental knowledge, the Lord is addressed
as praëava, oàkära, which is a symbolic representation of the Lord in sound.
Oà namo bhagavate väsudeväya. Väsudeva, who is an expansion of Näräyaëa,
expands Himself as Pradyumna, Aniruddha and Saìkarñaëa. From Saìkarñaëa
comes a second Näräyaëa expansion, and from this Näräyaëa come further
expansions of Väsudeva, Pradyumna, Saìkarñaëa and Aniruddha. The
Saìkarñaëa in this group is the original cause of the three puruñas, namely
Käraëodakaçäyé Viñëu, Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu and Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu.
Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu is situated in every universe in a special planet called
Çvetadvépa. This is confirmed in the Brahma-saàhitä: aëòäntara-stha. The
word aëòa means this universe. Within this universe is a planet called
Çvetadvépa, where Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu is situated. From Him come all the
incarnations within this universe.
As confirmed in the Brahma-saàhitä, all these forms of the Supreme
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
821
Personality of Godhead are advaita, nondifferent, and they are also acyuta,
infallible; they do not fall down like the conditioned souls. The ordinary living
entity is prone to falling into the clutches of mäyä, but the Supreme Lord in
His different incarnations and forms is acyuta, infallible. Therefore His body is
different from the material body possessed by the conditioned soul.
The word mäträ is explained in the Mediné dictionary as follows: mäträ
karëa-vibhüñäyäà vitte mäne paricchade. The word mäträ, in its different
imports, is used to indicate the decoration of the ear, possession, respect, and
the possession of a covering. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (2.14):
mäträ-sparçäs tu kaunteya
çétoñëa-sukha-duùkha-däù
ägamäpäyino 'nityäs
täàs titikñasva bhärata
"O son of Kunté, the nonpermanent appearance of happiness and distress, and
their disappearance in due course, are like the appearance and disappearance
of winter and summer seasons. They arise from sense perception, O scion of
Bharata, and one must learn to tolerate them without being disturbed." In the
conditioned state of life, the body is used as our dress, and as one needs
different dresses during the summer and winter, we conditioned souls are
changing bodies according to our desires. However, because the body of the
Supreme Lord is full of knowledge, it needs no covering. The idea that Kåñëa's
body is like ours—in other words, that His body and soul are different—is a
misunderstanding. There are no such differences for Kåñëa, because His body
is full of knowledge. Here we receive material bodies because of a lack of
knowledge, but because Kåñëa, Väsudeva, is full of knowledge, there is no
difference between His body and His soul. Kåñëa remembers what He said
forty million years ago to the sun-god, but an ordinary being cannot remember
what he said the day before yesterday. This is the difference between Kåñëa's
body and our body. Therefore the Lord is addressed as vijïäna-mäträya
paramänanda-mürtaye.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
822
Because the Lord's body is full of knowledge, He always enjoys
transcendental bliss. Indeed, His very form is paramänanda. This is confirmed
in the Vedänta-sütra: änandamayo'bhyäsät. By nature the Lord is änandamaya.
Whenever we see Kåñëa, He is always full of änanda in all circumstances. No
one can make Him morose. Ätmärämäya: He does not need to search for
external enjoyment, because He is self-sufficient. Çäntäya: He has no anxiety.
One who has to seek pleasure from other sources is always full of anxiety.
Karmés, jïänés and yogés are full of anxiety because they want something, but a
devotee does not want anything; he is simply satisfied in the service of the
Lord, who is fully blissful.
Nivåtta-dvaita-dåñöaye: in our conditioned life our bodies have different
parts, but although Kåñëa apparently has different bodily parts, no part of His
body is different from any other part. Kåñëa can see with His eyes, and Kåñëa
can see without His eyes. Therefore in the Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad it is said,
paçyaty acakñuù. He can see with His hands and legs. He does not need a
particular bodily part to perform a particular action. Aìgäni yasya
sakalendriya-våttimanti: He can do anything He desires with any part of His
body, and therefore He is called almighty.
TEXT 20
AaTMaaNaNdaNau>aUTYaEv NYaSTaXa¢-yUMaRYae NaMa" )
ôzqke-XaaYa MahTae NaMaSTae_NaNTaMaUTaRYae )) 20 ))
ätmänandänubhütyaiva
nyasta-çakty-ürmaye namaù
håñékeçäya mahate
namas te 'nanta-mürtaye
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
823
ätma-änanda—of Your personal bliss; anubhütyä—by perception;
eva—certainly; nyasta—given up; çakti-ürmaye—the waves of material nature;
namaù—respectful obeisances; håñékeçäya—unto the supreme controller of the
senses; mahate—unto the Supreme; namaù—respectful obeisances; te—unto
You; ananta—unlimited; mürtaye—whose expansions.
TRANSLATION
Perceiving Your personal bliss, You are always transcendental to the waves
of material nature. Therefore, my Lord, I offer my respectful obeisances unto
You. You are the supreme controller of the senses, and Your expansions of form
are unlimited. You are the greatest, and therefore I offer my respectful
obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
This verse analytically differentiates the living entity from the Supreme
Lord. The form of the Lord and the form of the conditioned soul are different
because the Lord is always blissful whereas the conditioned soul is always
under the threefold miseries of the material world. The Supreme Lord is
sac-cid-änanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]. He derives änanda, bliss, from His own self.
The Lord's body is transcendental, spiritual, but because the conditioned soul
has a material body, he has many bodily and mental troubles. The conditioned
soul is always perturbed by attachment and detachment, whereas the Supreme
Lord is always free from such dualities. The Lord is the supreme master of all
the senses, whereas the conditioned soul is controlled by the senses. The Lord
is the greatest, whereas the living entity is the smallest. The living entity is
conditioned by the waves of material nature, but the Supreme Lord is
transcendental to all actions and reactions. The expansions of the Supreme
Lord's body are innumerable (advaitam acyutam anädim ananta-rüpam [Bs.
5.33]), but the conditioned soul is limited to only one form. From history we
learn that a conditioned soul, by mystic power, can sometimes expand into
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
824
eight forms, but the Lord's bodily expansions are unlimited. This means that
the bodies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead have no beginning and no
end, unlike the bodies of the living entities.
TEXT 21
vcSYauParTae_Pa[aPYa Ya Wk-ae MaNaSaa Sah )
ANaaMaæPaiêNMaa}a" Saae_VYaaà" SadSaTPar" )) 21 ))
vacasy uparate 'präpya
ya eko manasä saha
anäma-rüpaç cin-mätraù
so 'vyän naù sad-asat-paraù
SYNONYMS
vacasi—when the words; uparate—cease; apräpya—not achieving the goal;
yaù—He who; ekaù—one without a second; manasä—the mind; saha—with;
anäma—with no material name; rüpaù—or material form; cit-mätraù—totally
spiritual; saù—He; avyät—may kindly protect; naù—us; sat-asat-paraù—who
is the cause of all causes (the supreme cause).
TRANSLATION
The words and mind of the conditioned soul cannot approach the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, for material names and forms are not applicable to the
Lord, who is entirely spiritual, beyond the conception of gross and subtle forms.
The impersonal Brahman is another of His forms. May He, by His pleasure,
protect us.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
825
The impersonal Brahman, which is the effulgence of the Lord, is described
in this verse.
TEXT 22
YaiSMaiàd& YaTaêed& iTaïTYaPYaeiTa JaaYaTae )
Ma*<MaYaeiZvv Ma*ÂaiTaSTaSMaE Tae b]ø<ae NaMa" )) 22 ))
yasminn idaà yataç cedaà
tiñöhaty apyeti jäyate
måëmayeñv iva måj-jätis
tasmai te brahmaëe namaù
SYNONYMS
yasmin—in whom; idam—this (cosmic manifestation); yataù—from whom;
ca—also; idam—this (cosmic manifestation); tiñöhati—stands;
apyeti—dissolves; jäyate—is born; måt-mayeñu—in things made of earth;
iva—like; måt-jätiù—birth from earth; tasmai—unto Him; te—You;
brahmaëe—the supreme cause; namaù—respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
As pots made completely of earth are situated on earth after being created
and are transformed into earth again when broken, this cosmic manifestation is
caused by the Supreme Brahman, situated in the Supreme Brahman, and
annihilated in the same Supreme Brahman. Therefore, since the Supreme Lord
is the cause of Brahman, let us offer Him our respectful obeisances.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord is the cause of the cosmic manifestation, He maintains it
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
826
after creation, and after annihilation the Lord is the reservoir of everything.
TEXT 23
Yaà SPa*XaiNTa Na ivduMaRNaaebuÖqiNd]YaaSav" )
ANTabRihê ivTaTa& VYaaeMavtaàTaae_SMYahMa( )) 23 ))
yan na spåçanti na vidur
mano-buddhéndriyäsavaù
antar bahiç ca vitataà
vyomavat tan nato 'smy aham
SYNONYMS
yat—whom; na—not; spåçanti—can touch; na—nor; viduù—can know;
manaù—the mind; buddhi—the intelligence; indriya—the senses; asavaù—the
life airs; antaù—within; bahiù—outside; ca—also; vitatam—expanded;
vyoma-vat—like the sky; tat—unto Him; nataù—bowed; asmi—am; aham—I.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Brahman emanates from the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and expands like the sky. Although untouched by anything material, it exists
within and without. Nonetheless, the mind, intelligence, senses and living force
can neither touch Him nor know Him. I offer unto Him my respectful
obeisances.
TEXT 24
deheiNd]YaPa[a<aMaNaaeiDaYaae_Maq
Yad&XaivÖa" Pa[criNTa k-MaRSau )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
827
NaEvaNYada l/aEhiMavaPa[Taá&
SQaaNaezu Tad( d]í\PadeXaMaeiTa )) 24 ))
dehendriya-präëa-mano-dhiyo 'mé
yad-aàça-viddhäù pracaranti karmasu
naivänyadä lauham iväprataptaà
sthäneñu tad drañörapadeçam eti
SYNONYMS
deha—the body; indriya—senses; präëa—life airs; manaù—mind; dhiyaù—and
intelligence; amé—all those; yat-aàça-viddhäù—being influenced by rays of
Brahman, or the Supreme Lord; pracaranti—they move; karmasu—in various
activities; na—not; eva—indeed; anyadä—at other times; lauham—iron;
iva—like; aprataptam—not heated (by fire); sthäneñu—in those circumstances;
tat—that; drañöå-apadeçam—the name of a subject matter; eti—achieves.
TRANSLATION
As iron has the power to burn when made red-hot in the association of fire,
so the body, senses, living force, mind and intelligence, although merely lumps
of matter, can function in their activities when infused with a particle of
consciousness by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As iron cannot burn
unless heated by fire, the bodily senses cannot act unless favored by the
Supreme Brahman.
PURPORT
Red-hot iron can burn, but it cannot burn the original fire. Therefore the
consciousness of the small particle of Brahman is fully dependent on the power
of the Supreme Brahman. In Bhagavad-gétä the Lord says, mattaù småtir
jïänam apohanaà ca: [Bg. 15.15] "From Me the conditioned soul receives
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
828
memory, knowledge and forgetfulness." The power for activities comes from
the Supreme Lord, and when the Lord withdraws this power, the conditioned
soul no longer has energy with which to act through his various senses. The
body includes five knowledge-acquiring senses, five active senses and the
mind, but actually these are merely lumps of matter. For example, the brain is
nothing but matter, but when electrified by the energy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the brain can act, just as iron can burn when made
red-hot by the influence of fire. The brain can act while we are awake or even
while we are dreaming, but when we are fast asleep or unconscious the brain is
inactive. Since the brain is a lump of matter, it does not have independent
power with which to act. It can act only when favored by the influence of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is Brahman or Parabrahman. This is the
way to understand how the Supreme Brahman, Kåñëa, is present everywhere,
just as the sunshine is present because of the sun-god in the sun globe. The
Supreme Lord is called Håñékeça; He is the only conductor of the senses. Unless
empowered by His energy, our senses cannot act. In other words, He is the only
seer, the only worker, the only listener, and the only active principle or
supreme controller.
TEXT 25
p NaMaae >aGavTae MahaPauåzaYa MahaNau>aavaYa Mahaiv>aUiTaPaTaYae Sak-l/Saa‚
TvTaPairv*!iNak-rk-rk-Mal/ku-@(Mal/aePal/ail/Tacr<aarivNdYauGal/ ParMaParMaeiï‚
àMaSTae )) 25 ))
oà namo bhagavate mahä-puruñäya mahänubhäväya mahä-vibhüti-pataye
sakala-sätvata-parivåòha-nikara-kara-kamala-kuòmalopalälita-caraëäravinda
-yugala parama-parameñöhin namas te.
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
829
oà—O Supreme Personality of Godhead; namaù—respectful obeisances;
bhagavate—unto You, the Lord, who are full in six opulences;
mahä-puruñäya—the supreme enjoyer; mahä-anubhäväya—the most perfect
realized soul, or the Supersoul; mahä-vibhüti-pataye—the master of all mystic
power; sakala-sätvata-parivåòha—of all the best devotees; nikara—of the
multitude; kara-kamala—of the lotus hands; kuòmala—by the buds;
upalälita—served; caraëa-aravinda-yugala—whose two lotus feet;
parama—topmost; parame-ñöhin—who are situated in the spiritual planet;
namaù te—respectful obeisances unto You.
TRANSLATION
O transcendental Lord, who are situated in the topmost planet of the
spiritual world, Your two lotus feet are always massaged by a multitude of the
best devotees with their lotus-bud hands. You are the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, complete in six opulences. You are the supreme person mentioned in
the Puruña-sükta prayers. You are the most perfect, self-realized master of all
mystic power. Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
It is said that the Absolute Truth is one, but is manifested in different
features as Brahman, Paramätmä and Bhagavän. The previous verses described
the Brahman and Paramätmä features of the Absolute Truth. Now this prayer
is offered in bhakti-yoga to the Absolute Supreme Person. The words used in
this regard are sakala-sätvata-parivåòha. The word sätvata means "devotees,"
and sakala means "all together." The devotees, who also have lotus feet, serve
the lotus feet of the Lord with their lotus hands. The devotees may sometimes
not be competent to serve the lotus feet of the Lord, and therefore the Lord is
addressed as parama-parameñöhin. He is the Supreme Person, yet He is very
kind to the devotees. No one is competent to serve the Lord, but even if a
devotee is not competent, the merciful Lord accepts the humble attempt of the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
830
devotee.
TEXT 26
é[qXauk- ovac
>a¢-aYaETaa& Pa[PaàaYa ivÛaMaaidXYa Naard" )
YaYaavi(r)rSaa Saak&- DaaMa SvaYaM>auv& Pa[>aae )) 26 ))
çré-çuka uväca
bhaktäyaitäà prapannäya
vidyäm ädiçya näradaù
yayäv aìgirasä säkaà
dhäma sväyambhuvaà prabho
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; bhaktäya—unto the devotee;
etäm—this; prapannäya—unto one who fully surrendered;
vidyäm—transcendental knowledge; ädiçya—instructing; näradaù—the great
sage Närada; yayau—left; aìgirasä—the great saint Aìgirä; säkam—with;
dhäma—for the topmost planet; sväyambhuvam—belonging to Lord Brahmä;
prabho—O King.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: Närada, having become the spiritual
master of Citraketu, instructed him fully in this prayer because Citraketu was
fully surrendered. O King Parékñit, Närada then left with the great sage Aìgirä
for the topmost planet, known as Brahmaloka.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
831
PURPORT
When Aìgirä had first come to visit King Citraketu, he did not bring
Närada with him. However, after the death of Citraketu's son, Aìgirä brought
Närada to instruct King Citraketu about bhakti-yoga. The difference was that
in the beginning Citraketu was not in a temperament of renunciation, but
after the death of his son, when he was overwhelmed by his great plight, he
was awakened to the platform of renunciation by instructions regarding the
falsity of this material world and material possessions. It is only at this stage
that bhakti-yoga can be instructed. As long as one is attached to material
enjoyment, bhakti-yoga cannot be understood. This is confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä (2.44):
bhogaiçvarya-prasaktänäà
tayäpahåta-cetasäm
vyavasäyätmikä buddhiù
samädhau na vidhéyate
"In the minds of those who are too attached to sense enjoyment and material
opulence, and who are bewildered by such things, the resolute determination
of devotional service to the Supreme Lord does not take place." As long as one
is very much attached to material enjoyment, one cannot concentrate his
mind on the subject matter of devotional service.
The Kåñëa consciousness movement is progressing successfully in the
Western countries at the present moment because the youth in the West have
reached the stage of vairägya, or renunciation. They are practically disgusted
with material pleasure from material sources, and this has resulted in a
population of hippies throughout the Western countries. Now if these young
people are instructed about bhakti-yoga, Kåñëa consciousness, the instructions
will certainly be effective.
As soon as Citraketu understood the philosophy of vairägya-vidyä, the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
832
knowledge of renunciation, he could understand the process of bhakti-yoga. In
this regard Çréla Särvabhauma Bhaööäcärya has said,
vairägya-vidyä-nija-bhakti-yoga [Cc. Madhya 6.254]. Vairägya-vidyä and
bhakti-yoga are parallel lines. One is essential for understanding the other. It is
also said, bhaktiù pareçänubhavo viraktir anyatra ca (SB 11.2.42). Advancement
in devotional service, or Kåñëa consciousness, is characterized by increasing
renunciation of material enjoyment. Närada Muni is the father of devotional
service, and therefore, just to bestow causeless mercy upon King Citraketu,
Aìgirä brought Närada Muni to instruct the King. These instructions were
extremely effective. Anyone who follows in the footsteps of Närada Muni is
certainly a pure devotee.
TEXT 27
ic}ake-TauSTau Taa& ivÛa& YaQaa Naard>aaizTaaMa( )
DaarYaaMaaSa SaáahMaB>a+a" SauSaMaaihTa" )) 27 ))
citraketus tu täà vidyäà
yathä närada-bhäñitäm
dhärayäm äsa saptäham
ab-bhakñaù susamähitaù
SYNONYMS
citraketuù—King Citraketu; tu—indeed; täm—that; vidyäm—transcendental
knowledge; yathä—just as; närada-bhäñitäm—instructed by the great sage
Närada; dhärayäm äsa—chanted; sapta-aham—continuously for one week;
ap-bhakñaù—only drinking water; su-samähitaù—with great attention and
care.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
833
TRANSLATION
Fasting and drinking only water, Citraketu for one week continuously
chanted with great care and attention the mantra given by Närada Muni.
TEXT 28
TaTa" Sa Saára}aaNTae ivÛYaa DaaYaRMaa<aYaa )
ivÛaDaraiDaPaTYa& c le/>ae_Pa[iTahTa& Na*Pa )) 28 ))
tataù sa sapta-rätränte
vidyayä dhäryamäëayä
vidyädharädhipatyaà ca
lebhe 'pratihataà nåpa
SYNONYMS
tataù—from this; saù—he; sapta-rätra-ante—at the end of seven nights;
vidyayä—by the prayers; dhäryamäëayä—being carefully practiced;
vidyädhara-adhipatyam—mastership of the Vidyädharas (as an intermediate
result); ca—also; lebhe—achieved; apratihatam—undeviated from the
instructions of the spiritual master; nåpa—O King Parékñit.
TRANSLATION
O King Parékñit, after only one week of repeatedly practicing the mantra
received from the spiritual master, Citraketu achieved the rule of the planet of
the Vidyädharas as an intermediate product of his spiritual advancement in
knowledge.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
834
PURPORT
If a devotee, after being initiated, adheres rigidly to the instructions of the
spiritual master, he is naturally endowed with the material opulences of
vidyädhara-adhipatyam and similar posts as by-products. A devotee need not
practice yoga, karma or jïäna to achieve a successful result. Devotional service
alone is competent to award a devotee all material power. A pure devotee,
however, is never attached to material power, although he gets it very easily
without personal endeavor. Citraketu received this side benefit of his
devotional service, which he rigidly performed in accordance with the
instructions of Närada.
TEXT 29
TaTa" k-iTaPaYaahaei>aivRÛYaeÖMaNaaeGaiTa" )
JaGaaMa devdevSYa XaezSYa cr<aaiNTak-Ma( )) 29 ))
tataù katipayähobhir
vidyayeddha-mano-gatiù
jagäma deva-devasya
çeñasya caraëäntikam
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; katipaya-ahobhiù—within a few days; vidyayä—by the
spiritual mantra; iddha-manaù-gatiù—the course of his mind being
enlightened; jagäma—went; deva-devasya—of the master of all other lords or
demigods; çeñasya—Lord Çeña; caraëa-antikam—to the shelter of the lotus
feet.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
835
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, within a very few days, by the influence of the mantra that
Citraketu had practiced, his mind became increasingly enlightened in spiritual
progress, and he attained shelter at the lotus feet of Anantadeva.
PURPORT
A devotee's ultimate achievement is to take shelter of the lotus feet of the
Lord in any one of the planets in the spiritual sky. As a result of rigid
execution of devotional service, a devotee receives all material opulences if
these are required; otherwise, the devotee is not interested in material
opulences, nor does the Supreme Lord award them. When a devotee is actually
engaged in the devotional service of the Lord, his apparently material
opulences are not material; they are all spiritual. For example, if a devotee
spends money to construct a beautiful and costly temple, the construction is
not material but spiritual (nirbandhaù kåñëa-sambandhe yuktaà vairägyam
ucyate). A devotee's mind is never diverted to the material side of the temple.
The bricks, stone and wood used in the construction of the temple are
spiritual, just as the Deity, although made of stone, is not stone but the
Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself. The more one advances in spiritual
consciousness, the more he can understand the elements of devotional service.
Nothing in devotional service is material; everything is spiritual. Consequently
a devotee is awarded so-called material opulence for spiritual advancement.
This opulence is an aid to help the devotee advance toward the spiritual
kingdom. Thus Mahäräja Citraketu remained in material opulence as a
vidyädhara-pati, master of the Vidyädharas, and by executing devotional
service he became perfect within a very few days and returned home, back to
Godhead, taking shelter of the lotus feet of Lord Çeña, Ananta.
A karmé's material opulence and a devotee's material opulence are not on
the same level. Çréla Madhväcärya comments in this way:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
836
anyäntaryämiëaà viñëum
upäsyänya-samépagaù
bhaved yogyatayä tasya
padaà vä präpnuyän naraù
By worshiping Lord Viñëu one can get whatever he desires, but a pure devotee
never asks Lord Viñëu for any material profit. Instead he serves Lord Viñëu
without material desires and is therefore ultimately transferred to the spiritual
kingdom. In this regard, Çréla Véraräghava Äcärya comments, yatheñöa-gatir ity
arthaù: by worshiping Viñëu, a devotee can get whatever he likes. Mahäräja
Citraketu wanted only to return home, back to Godhead, and therefore he
achieved success in that way.
TEXT 30
Ma*<aal/GaaEr& iXaiTavaSaSa& Sfu-rTa(‚
ik-rq$=ke-YaUrk-i$=}ak-ª<aMa( )
Pa[Saàv£-aå<al/aecNa& v*Ta&
ddXaR iSaÖeìrMa<@lE/" Pa[>auMa( )) 30 ))
måëäla-gauraà çiti-väsasaà sphuratkiréöa-
keyüra-kaöitra-kaìkaëam
prasanna-vakträruëa-locanaà våtaà
dadarça siddheçvara-maëòalaiù prabhum
SYNONYMS
måëäla-gauram—white like the fibers of a lotus; çiti-väsasam—wearing
garments of blue silk; sphurat—glittering; kiréöa—helmet; keyüra—armlets;
kaöitra—belt; kaìkaëam—whose bangles; prasanna-vaktra—smiling face;
aruëa-locanam—having reddish eyes; våtam—surrounded; dadarça—he saw;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
837
siddha-éçvara-maëòalaiù—by the most perfect devotees; prabhum—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Upon reaching the shelter of Lord Çeña, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Citraketu saw that He was as white as the white fibers of a lotus
flower. He was dressed in bluish garments and adorned with a brilliantly
glittering helmet, armlets, belt and bangles. His face was smiling, and His eyes
were reddish. He was surrounded by such exalted liberated persons as
Sanat-kumära.
TEXT 31
TaÕXaRNaßSTaSaMaSTaik-iLbz"
SvSQaaMal/aNTa"k-r<aae_>YaYaaNMauiNa" )
Pa[v*Ö>a¢-ya Pa[<aYaaé[ul/aecNa"
Pa[ôíraeMaaNaMadaidPauåzMa( )) 31 ))
tad-darçana-dhvasta-samasta-kilbiñaù
svasthämaläntaùkaraëo 'bhyayän muniù
pravåddha-bhaktyä praëayäçru-locanaù
prahåñöa-romänamad ädi-puruñam
SYNONYMS
tat-darçana—by the sight of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
dhvasta—destroyed; samasta-kilbiñaù—having all sins; svastha—healthy;
amala—and pure; antaùkaraëaù—the core of whose heart;
abhyayät—approached face to face; muniù—the King, who was silent due to
full mental satisfaction; pravåddha-bhaktyä—with an attitude of increased
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
838
devotional service; praëaya-açru-locanaù—with tears in his eyes because of
love; prahåñöa-roma—his hairs standing on end due to jubilation;
anamat—offered respectful obeisances; ädi-puruñam—unto the expansion of
the original personality.
TRANSLATION
As soon as Mahäräja Citraketu saw the Supreme Lord, he was cleansed of all
material contamination and situated in his original Kåñëa consciousness, being
completely purified. He became silent and grave, and because of love for the
Lord, tears fell from his eyes, and his hairs stood on end. With great devotion
and love, he offered his respectful obeisances unto the original Personality of
Godhead.
PURPORT
The word tad-darçana-dhvasta-samasta-kilbiñaù is very important in this
verse. If one regularly sees the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the temple,
one will gradually be disinfected of all material desires simply by visiting the
temple and seeing the Deity. When one is freed from all the results of sinful
activities, one will be purified, and with a healthy mind, completely cleansed,
he will increasingly make progress in Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 32
Sa otaMaëaek-PadaBJaivír&
Pa[eMaaé[ule/XaEåPaMaehYaNMauhu" )
Pa[eMaaePaåÖai%l/v<aRiNaGaRMaae
NaEvaXak-ta& Pa[SaMaqi@Tau& icrMa( )) 32 ))
sa uttamaçloka-padäbja-viñöaraà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
839
premäçru-leçair upamehayan muhuù
premoparuddhäkhila-varëa-nirgamo
naiväçakat taà prasaméòituà ciram
SYNONYMS
saù—he; uttamaçloka—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pada-abja—of
the lotus feet; viñöaram—the resting place; prema-açru—of tears of pure love;
leçaiù—by drops; upamehayan—moistening; muhuù—again and again;
prema-uparuddha—choked with love; akhila—all; varëa—of the letters;
nirgamaù—the coming out; na—not; eva—indeed; açakat—was able;
tam—unto Him; prasaméòitum—to offer prayers; ciram—for a long time.
TRANSLATION
With tears of love and affection, Citraketu repeatedly moistened the resting
place of the Supreme Lord's lotus feet. Because his voice was choked in ecstasy,
for a considerable time he was unable to utter any of the letters of the alphabet
to offer the Lord suitable prayers.
PURPORT
All the letters of the alphabet and the words constructed by those letters
are meant for offering prayers to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Mahäräja Citraketu had the opportunity to offer prayers to the Lord by
composing nice verses from the letters of the alphabet, but because of his
ecstasy, for a considerable time he could not join those letters to offer prayers
to the Lord. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.5.22):
idaà hi puàsas tapasaù çrutasya vä
sviñöasya süktasya ca buddhi-dattayoù
avicyuto 'rthaù kavibhir nirüpito
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
840
yad uttamaçloka-guëänuvarëanam
If one has scientific, philosophical, political, economic or any other abilities
and wants perfection in his knowledge, he should offer prayers to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead by composing first-class poetry or engaging his talents
in the service of the Lord. Citraketu wanted to do this, but he was unable
because of loving ecstasy. Therefore he had to wait for a considerable time
before be could offer prayers.
TEXT 33
TaTa" SaMaaDaaYa MaNaae MaNaqzYaa
b>aaz WTaTPa[iTal/BDavaGaSaaE )
iNaYaMYa SaveRiNd]YabaùvTaRNa&
JaGad(Gauå& SaaTvTaXaañivGa]hMa( )) 33 ))
tataù samädhäya mano manéñayä
babhäña etat pratilabdha-väg asau
niyamya sarvendriya-bähya-vartanaà
jagad-guruà sätvata-çästra-vigraham
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; samädhäya—controlling; manaù—the mind; manéñayä—by
his intelligence; babhäña—spoke; etat—this; pratilabdha—recovering;
väk—speech; asau—that one (King Citraketu); niyamya—controlling;
sarva-indriya—of all the senses; bähya—external; vartanam—the wandering;
jagat-gurum—who is the spiritual master of everyone; sätvata—of devotional
service; çästra—of the holy scriptures; vigraham—the personified form.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
841
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, by controlling his mind with his intelligence and thus restricting
his senses from external engagements, he recovered suitable words with which
to express his feelings. Thus he began offering prayers to the Lord, who is the
personification of the holy scriptures [the sätvata-saàhitäs like the
Brahma-saàhitä and the Närada-païcarätra] and who is the spiritual master of
all. He offered his prayers as follows.
PURPORT
One cannot offer prayers to the Lord with mundane words. One must
become spiritually advanced by controlling the mind and senses. Then he can
find suitable words to offer in prayers to the Lord. Quoting the following verse
from the Padma Puräëa, Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé forbids us to sing any song
not sung by authorized devotees.
avaiñëava-mukhodgérëaà
pütaà hari-kathämåtam
çravaëaà naiva kartavyaà
sarpocchiñöaà yathä payaù
The words or songs of a person not fixed in Vaiñëava behavior, not strictly
following the rules and regulations and chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra
should not be accepted by pure devotees. The words sätvata-çästra-vigraham
indicate that the sac-cid-änanda [Bs. 5.1] body of the Lord can never be
accepted to be made of mäyä. Devotees do not offer prayers to the Lord in an
imaginary form. The existence of the Lord's form is supported by all Vedic
literature.
TEXT 34
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
842
ic}ake-Tauåvac
AiJaTa iJaTa" SaMaMaiTai>a"
SaaDaui>a>aRvaNa( iJaTaaTMai>a>aRvTaa )
iviJaTaaSTae_iPa c >aJaTaa‚
Mak-aMaaTMaNaa& Ya AaTMadae_iTak-å<a" )) 34 ))
citraketur uväca
ajita jitaù sama-matibhiù
sädhubhir bhavän jitätmabhir bhavatä
vijitäs te 'pi ca bhajatäm
akämätmanäà ya ätmado 'ti-karuëaù
SYNONYMS
citraketuù uväca—King Citraketu said; ajita—O my unconquerable Lord;
jitaù—conquered; sama-matibhiù—by persons who have conquered the mind;
sädhubhiù—the devotees; bhavän—Your Lordship; jita-ätmabhiù—who have
completely controlled the senses; bhavatä—by You; vijitäù—conquered;
te—they; api—also; ca—and; bhajatäm—to those who always engage in Your
service; akäma-ätmanäm—with no motives for material profit; yaù—who;
ätma-daù—giving Yourself; ati-karuëaù—extremely merciful.
TRANSLATION
Citraketu said: O unconquerable Lord, although You cannot be conquered
by anyone, You are certainly conquered by devotees who have control of the
mind and senses. They can keep You under their control because You are
causelessly merciful to devotees who desire no material profit from You. Indeed,
You give Yourself to them, and because of this You also have full control over
Your devotees.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
843
PURPORT
The Lord and the devotees both conquer. The Lord is conquered by the
devotees, and the devotees are conquered by the Lord. Because of being
conquered by one another, they both derive transcendental bliss from their
relationship. The highest perfection of this mutual conquering is exhibited by
Kåñëa and the gopés. The gopés conquered Kåñëa, and Kåñëa conquered the
gopés. Thus whenever Kåñëa played His flute, He conquered the minds of the
gopés, and without seeing the gopés Kåñëa could not be happy. Other
transcendentalists, such as jïänés and yogés, cannot conquer the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; only pure devotees can conquer Him.
Pure devotees are described as sama-mati, which means that they never
deviate from devotional service under any circumstances. It is not that
devotees worship the Supreme Lord only when happy; they worship Him even
when in distress. Happiness and distress do not hamper the process of
devotional service. Therefore Çrémad-Bhägavatam says that devotional service
is ahaituky apratihatä, unmotivated and uninterrupted. When a devotee offers
devotional service to the Lord without any motive (anyäbhiläñitä-çünyam
[Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.1.11(13)], his service cannot be hampered by any
material condition (apratihatä). Thus a devotee who offers service in all
conditions of life can conquer the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
A special distinction between devotees and the other transcendentalists,
namely the jïänés and yogés, is that jïänés and yogés artificially try to become
one with the Supreme, whereas devotees never aspire for such an impossible
accomplishment. Devotees know that their position is to be eternally servants
of the Supreme Lord and never to be one with Him. Therefore they are called
sama-mati or jitätmä. They detest oneness with the Supreme. They have no
lusty desires for oneness; instead, their desire is to be freed from all material
hankering. Therefore they are called niñkäma, desireless. A living entity
cannot exist without desires, but desires that can never be fulfilled are called
käma, lusty desires. Kämais tais tair håta jïänäù: [Bg. 7.20] because of lusty
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
844
desires, nondevotees are deprived of their intelligence. Thus they are unable to
conquer the Supreme Lord, whereas devotees, being freed from such
unreasonable desires, can conquer the Lord. Such devotees are also conquered
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Because they are pure, being free
from all material desires, they fully surrender to the Supreme Lord, and
therefore the Lord conquers them. Such devotees never aspire for liberation.
They simply desire to serve the lotus feet of the Lord. Because they serve the
Lord without desires for remuneration, they can conquer the mercy of the
Lord. The Lord is by nature very merciful, and when He sees that His servant
is working without desires for material profit, naturally He is conquered.
Devotees are always engaged in service.
sa vai manaù kåñëa-padäravindayor
vacäàsi vaikuëöha-guëänuvarëane
[SB 9.4.18]
All the activities of their senses are engaged in the service of the Lord. Because
of such devotion, the Lord gives Himself to His devotees as if they could use
Him for any purpose they might desire. Of course, devotees have no purpose
other than to serve. When a devotee fully surrenders and has no aspiration for
material profit, the Lord certainly gives him all opportunities for service. This
is the position of the Lord when conquered by His devotees.
TEXT 35
Tav iv>av" %lu/ >aGavNa(
JaGadudYaiSQaiTal/YaadqiNa )
ivìSa*JaSTae_&Xaa&Xaa‚
STa}a Ma*za SPaDaRiNTa Pa*QaGai>aMaTYaa )) 35 ))
tava vibhavaù khalu bhagavan
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
845
jagad-udaya-sthiti-layädéni
viçva-såjas te 'àçäàçäs
tatra måñä spardhanti påthag abhimatyä
SYNONYMS
tava—Your; vibhavaù—opulences; khalu—indeed; bhagavan—O Supreme
Personality of Godhead; jagat—of the cosmic manifestation; udaya—the
creation; sthiti—maintenance; laya-ädéni—dissolution and so on;
viçva-såjaù—the creators of the manifested world; te—they;
aàça-aàçäù—parts of Your plenary portion; tatra—in that; måñä—in vain;
spardhanti—rival one another; påthak—of separateness; abhimatyä—by a false
conception.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, this cosmic manifestation and its creation, maintenance and
annihilation are all but Your opulences. Since Lord Brahmä and the other
creators are nothing but small portions of a portion of You, their partial power
to create does not make them God [éçvara]. Their consciousness of themselves
as separate Lords is therefore merely false prestige. It is not valid.
PURPORT
A devotee who has fully surrendered to the lotus feet of the Lord knows
very well that the creative energy of the living entities, from Lord Brahmä
down to the small ant, exists because the living entities are part and parcel of
the Lord. In Bhagavad-gétä (15.7) the Lord says, mamaiväàço jéva-loke
jéva-bhütaù sanätanaù: "The living entities in this conditioned world are My
eternal, fragmental parts." The living entities are nothing but very small
portions of the supreme spirit, like sparks of a fire. Because they are part of the
Supreme, they have a creative quality in a very minute quantity.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
846
The so-called scientists of the modern materialistic world are proud because
they have created modern facilities like great airplanes, but the credit for
creating the airplanes should go to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, not
to the scientists who have invented or created the so-called wonderful
products. The first consideration is the intelligence of the scientist; one must
be elevated by the dictation of the Supreme Lord, who says in Bhagavad-gétä
(15.15), mattaù småtir jïänam apohanaà ca: "From Me come remembrance,
knowledge and forgetfulness." Because the Supreme Lord, as Supersoul, sits
within the core of every living entity's heart, the dictation by which one
advances in scientific knowledge or creative faculties comes from Him.
Furthermore, the ingredients to manufacture wonderful machines like
airplanes are also supplied by the Lord, not by the scientists. Before the
airplane was created, its ingredients already existed, having been caused by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, but when the manifested creation of the
airplane is ruined, the remaining debris is a problem for the so-called creators.
Another example is that the West is creating many automobiles. The
ingredients for these cars are supplied, of course, by the Supreme Lord, and the
intelligence for the so-called creation is also supplied by the Lord. Ultimately,
when the cars are demolished, the so-called creators are faced with the
problem of what to do with their ingredients. The actual creator, the original
creator, is the Personality of Godhead. Only in the interim does someone
create something with intelligence supplied by the Lord, and later the creation
again becomes a problem. Therefore the so-called creator is not to be credited
with the act of creation; the only credit goes to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. It is rightly stated herein that the credit for all the opulences of
creation, maintenance and annihilation belongs to the Supreme Lord, not to
the living entities.
TEXT 36
ParMaa<auParMaMahTaae‚
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
847
STvMaaÛNTaaNTarvTas }aYaivDaur" )
AadavNTae_iPa c SatvaNaa&
Yad( Da]uv& TadevaNTarale/_iPa )) 36 ))
paramäëu-parama-mahatos
tvam ädy-antäntara-varté traya-vidhuraù
ädäv ante 'pi ca sattvänäà
yad dhruvaà tad eväntaräle 'pi
SYNONYMS
parama-aëu—of the atomic particle; parama-mahatoù—and of the biggest (the
result of the combination of atoms); tvam—You; ädi-anta—in both the
beginning and the end; antara—and in the middle; varté—existing;
traya-vidhuraù—although without beginning, end or middle; ädau—in the
beginning; ante—at the end; api—also; ca—and; sattvänäm—of all existences;
yat—which; dhruvam—permanent; tat—that; eva—certainly; antaräle—in
the middle; api—also.
TRANSLATION
You exist in the beginning, middle and end of everything, from the most
minute particle of the cosmic manifestation—the atom—to the gigantic
universes and total material energy. Nonetheless, You are eternal, having no
beginning, end or middle. You are perceived to exist in these three phases, and
thus You are permanent. When the cosmic manifestation does not exist, You
exist as the original potency.
PURPORT
The Brahma-saàhitä (5.33) says:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
848
advaitam acyutam anädim ananta-rüpam
ädyaà puräëa-puruñaà nava-yauvanaà ca
vedeñu durlabham adurlabham ätma-bhaktau
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda [Kåñëa], who is the
original person—absolute, infallible, without beginning, although expanded
into unlimited forms, still the same original, the oldest, and the person always
appearing as a fresh youth. Such eternal, blissful, all-knowing forms of the
Lord cannot be understood even by the best Vedic scholars, but they are
always manifest to pure, unalloyed devotees." The Supreme Personality of
Godhead has no cause, for He is the cause of everything. The Lord is beyond
the workings of cause and effect. He is eternally existing. In another verse the
Brahma-saàhitä says, aëòäntara-stha-paramäëu-cayäntara-stham: [Bs. 5.35] the
Lord exists within the gigantic universe and within the atom. The descent of
the Lord into the atom and the universe indicates that without His presence,
nothing could factually exist. Scientists say that water is a combination of
hydrogen and oxygen, but when they see a vast ocean they are puzzled about
where such a quantity of hydrogen and oxygen could have come from. They
think that everything evolved from chemicals, but where did the chemicals
come from? That they do not know. Since the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is the cause of all causes, He can produce immense quantities of
chemicals to create a situation for chemical evolution. We actually see that
chemicals are produced from living entities. For example, a lemon tree
produces many tons of citric acid. The citric acid is not the cause of the tree;
rather, the tree is the cause of the acid. Similarly, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is the cause of everything. He is the cause of the tree that produces
the citric acid (béjaà mäà sarva-bhütänäm [Bg. 7.10]). Devotees can see that
the original potencies causing the cosmic manifestation are not in chemicals
but in the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for He is the cause of the
chemicals.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
849
Everything is caused or manifested by the energy of the Supreme Lord, and
when everything is annihilated or dissolved, the original potency enters the
body of the Supreme Lord. Therefore this verse says, ädäv ante 'pi ca sattvänäà
yad dhruvaà tad eväntaräle 'pi. The word dhruvam means "permanent." The
permanent reality is Kåñëa, not this cosmic manifestation. As stated in
Bhagavad-gétä, aham ädir hi devänäm [Bg. 10.2] and mattaù sarvaà pravartate:
Kåñëa is the original cause of everything. Arjuna recognized Lord Çré Kåñëa as
the original person (puruñaà çäçvataà divyam ädi-devam ajaà vibhum), and
the Brahma-saàhitä describes Him as the original person (govindam
ädi-puruñam). He is the cause of all causes, whether at the beginning, at the
end or in the middle.
TEXT 37
i+aTYaaidi>arez ik-l/av*Ta"
Saái>adRXaGau<aaetarEr<@k-aeXa" )
Ya}a PaTaTYa<auk-LPa"
Saha<@k-aei$=k-aei$=i>aSTadNaNTa" )) 37 ))
kñity-ädibhir eña kilävåtaù
saptabhir daça-guëottarair aëòa-koçaù
yatra pataty aëu-kalpaù
sahäëòa-koöi-koöibhis tad anantaù
SYNONYMS
kñiti-ädibhiù—by the ingredients of the material world, headed by earth;
eñaù—this; kila—indeed; ävåtaù—covered; saptabhiù—seven;
daça-guëa-uttaraiù—each ten times more than the previous one;
aëòa-koçaù—egg-shaped universe; yatra—in whom; patati—falls;
aëu-kalpaù—like a minute atom; saha—with; aëòa-koöi-koöibhiù—millions of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
850
such universes; tat—therefore; anantaù—(You are called) unlimited.
TRANSLATION
Every universe is covered by seven layers—earth, water, fire, air, sky, the
total energy and false ego—each ten times greater than the previous one. There
are innumerable universes besides this one, and although they are unlimitedly
large, they move about like atoms in You. Therefore You are called unlimited
[ananta].
PURPORT
The Brahma-saàhitä (5.48) says:
yasyaika-niçvasita-kälam athävalambya
jévanti loma-vilajä jagad-aëòa-näthäù
viñëur mahän sa iha yasya kalä-viçeño
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
The origin of the material creation is Mahä-Viñëu, who lies in the Causal
Ocean. While He sleeps in that ocean, millions of universes are generated as
He exhales, and they are all annihilated when He inhales. This Mahä-Viñëu is
a plenary portion of a portion of Viñëu, Govinda (yasya kalä-viçeñaù). The
word kalä refers to a plenary portion of a plenary portion. From Kåñëa, or
Govinda, comes Balaräma; from Balaräma comes Saìkarñaëa; from
Saìkarñaëa, Näräyaëa; from Näräyaëa, the second Saìkarñaëa; from the
second Saìkarñaëa, Mahä-Viñëu; from Mahä-Viñëu, Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu;
and from Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu. Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu
controls every universe. This gives an idea of the meaning of ananta,
unlimited. What is to be said of the unlimited potency and existence of the
Lord? This verse describes the coverings of the universe (saptabhir
daça-guëottarair aëòa-koçaù). The first covering is earth, the second is water,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
851
the third is fire, the fourth is air, the fifth is sky, the sixth is the total material
energy, and the seventh is the false ego. Beginning with the covering of earth,
each covering is ten times greater than the previous one. Thus we can only
imagine how great each universe is, and there are many millions of universes.
As confirmed by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gétä (10.42):
athavä bahunaitena
kià jïätena tavärjuna
viñöabhyäham idaà kåtsnam
ekäàçena sthito jagat
"But what need is there, Arjuna, for all this detailed knowledge? With a single
fragment of Myself I pervade and support this entire universe." The entire
material world manifests only one fourth of the Supreme Lord's energy.
Therefore He is called ananta.
TEXT 38
ivzYaTa*zae NarPaXavae
Ya oPaaSaTae iv>aUTaqNaR Par& TvaMa( )
TaezaMaaiXaz wRXa
TadNau ivNaXYaiNTa YaQaa raJaku-l/Ma( )) 38 ))
viñaya-tåño nara-paçavo
ya upäsate vibhütér na paraà tväm
teñäm äçiña éça
tad anu vinaçyanti yathä räja-kulam
SYNONYMS
viñaya-tåñaù—eager to enjoy sense gratification; nara-paçavaù—manlike
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
852
animals; ye—who; upäsate—worship very gorgeously; vibhütéù—small particles
of the Supreme Lord (the demigods); na—not; param—the Supreme;
tväm—You; teñäm—of them; äçiñaù—the benedictions; éça—O supreme
controller; tat—them (the demigods); anu—after; vinaçyanti—will be
vanquished; yathä—just as; räja-kulam—those who are supported by the
government (when the government is finished).
TRANSLATION
O Lord, O Supreme, unintelligent persons who thirst for sense enjoyment
and who worship various demigods are no better than animals in the human
form of life. Because of their animalistic propensities, they fail to worship Your
Lordship, and instead they worship the insignificant demigods, who are but
small sparks of Your glory. With the destruction of the entire universe,
including the demigods, the benedictions received from the demigods also
vanish, just like the nobility when a king is no longer in power.
PURPORT
Bhagavad-gétä (7.20) says, kämais tais tair håta jïänäù prapadyante
'nya-devatäù: "Those whose minds are distorted by material desires surrender
unto the demigods." Similarly, this verse condemns worship of the demigods.
We may show our respect to the demigods, but the demigods are not
worshipable. The intelligence of those who worship the demigods is lost (håta
jïänäù) because these worshipers do not know that when the entire material
cosmic manifestation is annihilated, the demigods, who are the departmental
heads of that manifestation, will be vanquished. When the demigods are
vanquished, the benedictions given by the demigods to unintelligent men will
also be vanquished. Therefore a devotee should not hanker to obtain material
opulence by worshiping the demigods, but should engage in the service of the
Lord, who will satisfy all his desires.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
853
akämaù sarva-kämo vä
mokña-käma udära-dhéù
tévreëa bhakti-yogena
yajeta puruñaà param
"Whether full of all material desires, free from material desires or desiring
liberation, a person who has broader intelligence must by all means worship
the supreme whole, the Personality of Godhead." (SB 2.3.10) This is the duty of
a perfect human being. One who has the shape of a human being but whose
actions are nothing but those of an animal is called nara-paçu or dvipada-paçu,
a two-legged animal. A human being who is not interested in Kåñëa
consciousness is condemned herewith as a nara-paçu.
TEXT 39
k-aMaiDaYaSTviYa ricTaa
Na ParMa raehiNTa YaQaa k-rM>abqJaaiNa )
jaNaaTMaNYaGau<aMaYae
Gau<aGa<aTaae_SYa ÜNÜJaal/aiNa )) 39 ))
käma-dhiyas tvayi racitä
na parama rohanti yathä karambha-béjäni
jïänätmany aguëamaye
guëa-gaëato 'sya dvandva-jäläni
SYNONYMS
käma-dhiyaù—desires for sense gratification; tvayi—in You;
racitäù—performed; na—not; parama—O Supreme Personality of Godhead;
rohanti—do grow (produce other bodies); yathä—just as;
karambha-béjäni—sterilized or fried seeds; jïäna-ätmani—in You, whose
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
854
existence is in full knowledge; aguëa-maye—who is not affected by the
material qualities; guëa-gaëataù—from the material qualities; asya—of a
person; dvandva-jäläni—the networks of duality.
TRANSLATION
O Supreme Lord, if persons obsessed with material desires for sense
gratification through material opulence worship You, who are the source of all
knowledge and are transcendental to material qualities, they are not subject to
material rebirth, just as sterilized or fried seeds do not produce plants. Living
entities are subjected to the repetition of birth and death because they are
conditioned by material nature, but since You are transcendental, one who is
inclined to associate with You in transcendence escapes the conditions of
material nature.
PURPORT
This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (4.9), wherein the Lord says:
janma karma ca me divyam
evaà yo vetti tattvataù
tyaktvä dehaà punar janma
naiti mäm eti so 'rjuna
"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities
does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but
attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna." If one simply engages in Kåñëa
consciousness to understand Kåñëa, he surely becomes immune to the process
of repeated birth and death. As clearly stated in Bhagavad-gétä, tyaktvä dehaà
punar janma naiti: [Bg. 4.9] such a person, simply by engaging in Kåñëa
consciousness or understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa,
becomes quite fit to return home, back to Godhead. Even those who are
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
855
obsessed with material desires may also come to worship the Supreme
Personality of Godhead so steadily that they go back to Godhead. The fact is
that if one comes to Kåñëa consciousness, although he may have many material
desires, he becomes increasingly attracted to the lotus feet of Kåñëa through
associating with the Supreme Lord by chanting His holy name. The Supreme
Lord and His holy name are identical. Thus he becomes uninterested in
attachment to material enjoyment. The perfection of life is to be uninterested
in material enjoyment and interested in Kåñëa. If one comes to Kåñëa
consciousness somehow or other, even for material gain, the result is that he
will be liberated. Kämäd dveñäd bhayät snehät. Whether for the satisfaction of
material desires, because of the influence of envy, because of fear, because of
affection or because of any other reason, if one comes to Kåñëa, his life is
successful.
TEXT 40
iJaTaMaiJaTa Tada >avTaa
Yadah >aaGavTa& DaMaRMaNavÛMa( )
iNaiZk-ÄNaa Yae MauNaYa
AaTMaaraMaa YaMauPaaSaTae_PavGaaRYa )) 40 ))
jitam ajita tadä bhavatä
yadäha bhägavataà dharmam anavadyam
niñkiïcanä ye munaya
ätmärämä yam upäsate 'pavargäya
SYNONYMS
jitam—conquered; ajita—O unconquerable one; tadä—then; bhavatä—by
Your Lordship; yadä—when; äha—spoke; bhägavatam—which helps the
devotee approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead; dharmam—the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
856
religious process; anavadyam—faultless (free from contamination);
niñkiïcanäù—who have no desire to be happy with material opulences;
ye—those who; munayaù—great philosophers and exalted sages;
ätma-ärämäù—who are self-satisfied (being completely aware of their
constitutional position as eternal servants of the Lord); yam—whom;
upäsate—worship; apavargäya—for achieving liberation from material
bondage.
TRANSLATION
O unconquerable one, when You spoke about bhägavata-dharma, which is
the uncontaminated religious system for achieving the shelter of Your lotus
feet, that was Your victory. Persons who have no material desires, like the
Kumäras, who are self-satisfied sages, worship You to be liberated from material
contamination. In other words, they accept the process of bhägavata-dharma to
achieve shelter at Your lotus feet.
PURPORT
As stated by Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé in Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu:
anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà
jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam
änukülyena kåñëänuçélanaà
bhaktir uttamä
[Cc. Madhya 19.167]
"One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord Kåñëa
favorably and without desires for material profit or gain through fruitive
activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure devotional service."
The Närada-païcarätra also says:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
857
sarvopädhi-vinirmuktaà
tat-paratvena nirmalam
håñékeëa håñékeçasevanaà
bhaktir ucyate
[Cc. Madhya 19.170]
"One should be free from all material designations and cleansed of all material
contamination. He should be restored to his pure identity, in which he engages
his senses in the service of the proprietor of the senses. That is called
devotional service." This is also called bhägavata-dharma. Without material
aspirations, one should simply serve Kåñëa, as advised in Bhagavad-gétä,
Närada-païcarätra and Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Bhägavata-dharma is the process
of religion enunciated by pure devotees, direct representatives of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead like Närada, Çukadeva Gosvämé and their humble
servants in the disciplic succession. By understanding bhägavata-dharma, one
immediately becomes free from material contamination. Living entities, who
are part and parcel of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, are loitering in
this material world suffering. When they are instructed by the Lord Himself
about bhägavata-dharma and they adopt it, that is victory for the Lord, for He
then reclaims these fallen souls. A devotee following the principles of
bhägavata-dharma feels very much obligated to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. He can understand the difference between life without
bhägavata-dharma and life with bhägavata-dharma and thus he ever remains
obliged to the Lord. Taking to Kåñëa consciousness and bringing fallen souls to
Kåñëa consciousness is victory for Lord Kåñëa.
sa vai puàsäà paro dharmo
yato bhaktir adhokñaje
ahaituky apratihatä
yayätmä suprasédati
"The supreme occupation [dharma] for all humanity is that by which men can
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
858
attain to loving devotional service unto the transcendent Lord. Such
devotional service must be unmotivated and uninterrupted in order to
completely satisfy the self." (SB 1.2.6) Therefore Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the
pure transcendental process of religion.
TEXT 41
ivzMaMaiTaNaR Ya}a Na*<aa&
TvMahiMaiTa MaMa TaveiTa c YadNYa}a )
ivzMaiDaYaa ricTaae Ya"
Sa ùivXauÖ" +aiYaZ<aurDaMaRbhul/" )) 41 ))
viñama-matir na yatra nåëäà
tvam aham iti mama taveti ca yad anyatra
viñama-dhiyä racito yaù
sa hy aviçuddhaù kñayiñëur adharma-bahulaù
SYNONYMS
viñama—unequal (your religion, my religion; your belief, my belief);
matiù—consciousness; na—not; yatra—in which; nåëäm—of human society;
tvam—you; aham—I; iti—thus; mama—my; tava—your; iti—thus; ca—also;
yat—which; anyatra—elsewhere (in religious systems other than
bhägavata-dharma); viñama-dhiyä—by this unequal intelligence;
racitaù—made; yaù—that which; saù—that system of religion; hi—indeed;
aviçuddhaù—not pure; kñayiñëuù—temporary; adharma-bahulaù—full of
irreligion.
TRANSLATION
Being full of contradictions, all forms of religion but bhägavata-dharma work
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
859
under conceptions of fruitive results and distinctions of "you and I" and "yours
and mine." The followers of Çrémad-Bhägavatam have no such consciousness.
They are all Kåñëa conscious, thinking that they are Kåñëa's and Kåñëa is
theirs. There are other, low-class religious systems, which are contemplated for
the killing of enemies or the gain of mystic power, but such religious systems,
being full of passion and envy, are impure and temporary. Because they are full
of envy, they are full of irreligion.
PURPORT
Bhägavata-dharma has no contradictions. Conceptions of "your religion"
and "my religion" are completely absent from bhägavata-dharma.
Bhägavata-dharma means following the orders given by the Supreme Lord,
Bhagavän, as stated in Bhagavad-gétä: sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà
çaraëaà vraja [Bg. 18.66]. God is one, and God is for everyone. Therefore
everyone must surrender to God. That is the pure conception of religion.
Whatever God orders constitutes religion (dharmaà tu säkñäd
bhagavat-praëétam [SB 6.3.19]). In bhägavata-dharma there is no question of
"what you believe" and "what I believe." Everyone must believe in the Supreme
Lord and carry out His orders. Änukülyena kåñëänuçélanam: [Cc. Madhya
19.167] whatever Kåñëa says—whatever God says—should be directly carried
out. That is dharma, religion.
If one is actually Kåñëa conscious, he cannot have any enemies. Since his
only engagement is to induce others to surrender to Kåñëa, or God, how can he
have enemies? If one advocates the Hindu religion, the Muslim religion, the
Christian religion, this religion or that religion, there will be conflicts. History
shows that the followers of religious systems without a clear conception of God
have fought with one another. There are many instances of this in human
history, but systems of religion that do not concentrate upon service to the
Supreme are temporary and cannot last for long because they are full of envy.
There are many activities directed against such religious systems, and therefore
one must give up the idea of "my belief" and "your belief." Everyone should
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
860
believe in God and surrender unto Him. That is bhägavata-dharma.
Bhägavata-dharma is not a concocted sectarian belief, for it entails research
to find how everything is connected with Kåñëa (éçäväsyam idaà sarvam [Éço
mantra 1]). According to the Vedic injunctions, sarvaà khalv idaà brahma:
Brahman, the Supreme, is present in everything. Bhägavata-dharma captures
this presence of the Supreme. Bhägavata-dharma does not consider everything
in the world to be false. Because everything emanates from the Supreme,
nothing can be false; everything has some use in the service of the Supreme.
For example, we are now dictating into a microphone and recording on a
dictating machine, and thus we are finding how the machine can be connected
to the Supreme Brahman. Since we are using this machine in the service of the
Lord, it is Brahman. This is the meaning of sarvaà khalv idaà brahma.
Everything is Brahman because everything can be used for the service of the
Supreme Lord. Nothing is mithyä, false; everything is factual.
Bhägavata-dharma is called sarvotkåñöa, the best of all religious systems,
because those who follow bhägavata-dharma are not envious of anyone. Pure
bhägavatas, pure devotees, invite everyone, without envy, to join the Kåñëa
consciousness movement. A devotee is therefore exactly like the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Suhådaà sarva-bhütänäm: [Bg. 5.29] he is the friend of
all living entities. Therefore this is the best of all religious systems. Whereas
so-called religions are meant for a particular type of person who believes in a
particular way, such discrimination has no place in Kåñëa consciousness, or
bhägavata-dharma. If we scrutinize the religious systems meant for worship of
demigods or anyone else but the Supreme Personality of Godhead, we will find
that they are full of envy and therefore impure.
TEXT 42
k-" +aeMaae iNaJaParYaae"
ik-YaaNa( vaQaR" SvPard]uha DaMaeR<a )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
861
Svd]aehatav k-aePa"
ParSaMPaq@Yaa c TaQaaDaMaR" )) 42 ))
kaù kñemo nija-parayoù
kiyän värthaù sva-para-druhä dharmeëa
sva-drohät tava kopaù
para-sampéòayä ca tathädharmaù
SYNONYMS
kaù—what; kñemaù—benefit; nija—to oneself; parayoù—and to others;
kiyän—how much; vä—or; arthaù—purpose; sva-para-druhä—which is
envious of the performer and of others; dharmeëa—with the religious system;
sva-drohät—from being envious of one's own self; tava—of You; kopaù—anger;
para-sampéòayä—by giving pain to others; ca—also; tathä—as well as;
adharmaù—irreligion.
TRANSLATION
How can a religious system that produces envy of one's self and of others be
beneficial for oneself and for them? What is auspicious about following such a
system? What is actually to be gained? By causing pain to one's own self due to
self-envy and by causing pain to others, one arouses Your anger and practices
irreligion.
PURPORT
Any religious system but the process of bhägavata-dharma-service as an
eternal servant of the Supreme Personality of Godhead—is a system of envy of
one's own self and of others. For example, there are many systems of religion in
which animal sacrifices are recommended. Such animal sacrifices are
inauspicious both for the performer and for the animal. Although one is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
862
sometimes permitted to sacrifice an animal before the goddess Kälé and eat it
instead of purchasing meat from a slaughterhouse, permission to eat meat after
a sacrifice in the presence of the goddess Kälé is not the order of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. It is simply a concession for the miserable person who
will not give up eating meat. It is meant to restrict his desire for unrestricted
meat-eating. Such a religious system is condemned. Therefore Kåñëa says,
sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja: [Bg. 18.66] "Give up all
other duties and surrender unto Me." That is the last word in religion.
One may argue that the sacrifice of animals is recommended in the Vedas.
This recommendation, however, is a restriction. Without Vedic restrictions on
the purchase of meat, people will purchase meat from the market, which will
be overflooded with meat shops, and slaughterhouses will increase. To restrict
this, sometimes the Vedas say that one may eat meat after sacrificing an
insignificant animal like a goat before the goddess Kälé. In any case, a system of
religion in which animal sacrifices are recommended is inauspicious for those
who perform the sacrifices and for the animals. Envious persons who perform
ostentatious animal sacrifices are condemned in Bhagavad-gétä (16.17) as
follows:
ätma-sambhävitäù stabdhä
dhana-mäna-madänvitäù
yajante näma-yajïais te
dambhenävidhi-pürvakam
"Self-complacent and always impudent, deluded by wealth and false prestige,
they sometimes perform sacrifices in name only without following any rules or
regulations." Sometimes animal sacrifices are performed very gorgeously with
grand arrangements for worshiping the goddess Kälé, but such festivals,
although performed in the name of yajïa, are not actually yajïa, for yajïa
means to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore it is
recommended that in this age specifically, yajïaiù saìkértana-präyair yajanti hi
sumedhasaù: [SB 11.5.32] those who have good intelligence satisfy the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
863
yajïa-puruña, Viñëu, by chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra. Envious persons,
however, are condemned by the Supreme Personality of Godhead as follows:
ahaìkäraà balaà darpaà
kämaà krodhaà ca saàçritäù
mäm ätma-para-deheñu
pradviñanto 'bhyasüyakäù
tän ahaà dviñataù krürän
saàsäreñu narädhamän
kñipämy ajasram açubhän
äsuréñv eva yoniñu
"Bewildered by false ego, strength, pride, lust and anger, the demon becomes
envious of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is situated in his own
body and in the bodies of others, and blasphemes against the real religion.
Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among men, are
cast by Me into the ocean of material existence, into various demoniac species
of life." (Bg. 16.18-19) These persons are condemned by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, as indicated by the words tava kopaù. A person who
commits murder is envious of himself and also the person he has killed, for the
result of committing murder is that he will be arrested and hanged. If one
transgresses the laws of a man-made government, he may escape being killed
by the state, but one cannot escape the laws of God. A killer of any animal
must be killed in his next life by the same animal. This is the law of nature.
One must follow the instructions of the Supreme Lord: sarva-dharmän
parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja [Bg. 18.66]. If one follows any other system
of religion, he is subject to punishment by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in many different ways. Therefore if one follows a concocted system
of religion, he is envious not only of others but also of himself. Consequently
his system of religion is useless.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.8) says:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
864
dharmaù svanuñöhitaù puàsäà
viñvaksena-kathäsu yaù
notpädayed yadi ratià
çrama eva hi kevalam
"Duties (dharma) executed by men, regardless of occupation, are only so much
useless labor if they do not provoke attraction for the message of the Supreme
Lord." Following a system of religion that does not awaken one's Kåñëa
consciousness, or God consciousness, is merely a waste of time and labor.
TEXT 43
Na VYai>acriTa Tave+aa
YaYaa ùi>aihTaae >aaGavTaae DaMaR" )
iSQarcrSatvk-dMbe‚
ZvPa*QaiGDaYaae YaMauPaaSaTae TvaYaaR" )) 43 ))
na vyabhicarati tavekñä
yayä hy abhihito bhägavato dharmaù
sthira-cara-sattva-kadambeñv
apåthag-dhiyo yam upäsate tv äryäù
SYNONYMS
na—not; vyabhicarati—fails; tava—Your; ékñä—outlook; yayä—by which;
hi—indeed; abhihitaù—declared; bhägavataù—in relationship with Your
instructions and activities; dharmaù—religious principle; sthira—nonmoving;
cara—moving; sattva-kadambeñu—among the living entities;
apåthak-dhiyaù—who do not consider distinctions; yam—which;
upäsate—follow; tu—certainly; äryäù—those who are advanced in civilization.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
865
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, one's occupational duty is instructed in Çrémad-Bhägavatam
and Bhagavad-gétä according to Your point of view, which never deviates from
the highest goal of life. Those who follow their occupational duties under Your
supervision, being equal to all living entities, moving and nonmoving, and not
considering high and low, are called Äryans. Such Äryans worship You, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
Bhägavata-dharma and kåñëa-kathä are identical. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu
wanted everyone to become a guru and preach the instructions of Kåñëa
everywhere from Bhagavad-gétä, Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the Puräëas,
Vedänta-sütra and similar Vedic literatures. Äryans, who are advanced in
civilization, follow bhägavata-dharma. Prahläda Mahäräja, although merely a
child of five years, recommended:
kaumära äcaret präjïo
dharmän bhägavatän iha
durlabhaà mänuñaà janma
tad apy adhruvam arthadam
(SB 7.6.1)
Prahläda Mahäräja preached bhägavata-dharma among his classmates as soon
as an opportunity was afforded by the absence of his teachers from the
classroom. He said that from the very beginning of life, from the age of five,
children should be instructed about bhägavata-dharma because the human
form of life, which is very rarely obtained, is meant for understanding this
subject.
Bhägavata-dharma means living according to the instructions of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. In Bhagavad-gétä we find that the Supreme
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
866
Lord has arranged human society in four social divisions, namely brähmaëa,
kñatriya, vaiçya and çüdra. Again, the Puräëas and other Vedic literatures set
forth four äçramas, which are the divisions of spiritual life. Therefore
bhägavata-dharma means the varëäçrama-dharma of the four social and four
spiritual divisions.
The members of human society who strictly follow the principles of
bhägavata-dharma and live according to the instructions of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead are called Äryans or ärya. A civilization of Äryans
who strictly follow the instructions of the Lord and never deviate from those
instructions is perfect. Such civilized men do not discriminate between trees,
animals, human beings and other living entities. paëòitäù sama-darçinaù: [Bg.
5.18] because they are completely educated in Kåñëa consciousness, they see all
living beings equally. Äryans do not kill even a small plant unnecessarily, not
to speak of cutting trees for sense gratification. At the present moment,
throughout the world, killing is prominent. Men are killing trees, they are
killing animals, and they are killing other human beings also, all for sense
gratification. This is not an Äryan civilization. As stated here,
sthira-cara-sattva-kadambeñv apåthag-dhiyaù. The word apåthag-dhiyaù
indicates that Äryans do not distinguish between lower and higher grades of
life. All life should be protected. All living beings have a right to live, even the
trees and plants. This is the basic principle of an Äryan civilization. Apart
from the lower living entities, those who have come to the platform of human
civilization should be divided into a society of brähmaëas, kñatriyas, vaiçyas and
çüdras. The brähmaëas should follow the instructions of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead as stated in Bhagavad-gétä and other Vedic literatures.
The criterion must be guëa and karma. In other words, one should acquire the
qualities of a brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya or çüdra and act accordingly. This is
the civilization accepted by the Äryans. Why do they accept it? They accept it
because they are very much eager to satisfy Kåñëa. This is perfect civilization.
Äryans do not deviate from the instructions of Kåñëa, nor do they have
doubts about Kåñëa, but non-Äryans and other demoniac people fail to follow
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
867
the instructions of Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam. This is because they
have been trained in sense gratification at the cost of all other living entities.
Nünaà pramattaù kurute vikarma: [SB 5.5.4] their only business is to indulge in
all kinds of forbidden activities for sense gratification. Yad indriya-prétaya
äpåëoti: they deviate in this way because they want to gratify their senses.
They have no other occupation or ambition. Their method of civilization is
condemned in the previous verse. Kaù kñemo nija-parayoù kiyän värthaù
sva-para-druhä dharmeëa: "What is the meaning of a civilization that kills
oneself and others?"
This verse, therefore, advises that everyone become a member of the Äryan
civilization and accept the instructions of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. One should conduct his social, political and religious affairs
according to His instructions. We are spreading the Kåñëa consciousness
movement to try to establish a society the way that Kåñëa wants it. This is the
meaning of Kåñëa consciousness. We are therefore presenting Bhagavad-gétä as
it is and kicking out all kinds of mental concoction. Fools and rascals interpret
Bhagavad-gétä in their own way. When Kåñëa says, man-manä bhava
mad-bhakto mad-yäjé mäà namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]—"Always think of Me,
become My devotee, worship Me and offer your homage unto Me"—they
comment that it is not Kåñëa to whom we must surrender. Thus they derive
imaginary meanings from Bhagavad-gétä. The Kåñëa consciousness movement,
however, strictly follows bhägavata-dharma, the instructions of Bhagavad-gétä
and Çrémad-Bhägavatam for the complete welfare of human society. One who
misinterprets Bhagavad-gétä, twisting out some meaning for his sense
gratification, is a non-Äryan. Therefore commentaries on Bhagavad-gétä by
such persons should be immediately rejected. One should try to follow
Bhagavad-gétä as it is. In Bhagavad-gétä (12.6-7) Lord Çré Kåñëa says:
ye tu sarväëi karmäëi
mayi sannyasya mat-paräù
ananyenaiva yogena
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
868
mäà dhyäyanta upäsate
teñäm ahaà samuddhartä
måtyu-saàsära-sägarät
bhavämi na cirät pärtha
mayy äveçita-cetasäm
"For one who worships Me, giving up all his activities unto Me and being
devoted to Me without deviation, engaged in devotional service and always
meditating upon Me, who has fixed his mind upon Me, O son of Påthä, for him
I am the swift deliverer from the ocean of birth and death."
TEXT 44
Na ih >aGavàgai$=TaiMad&
TvÕXaRNaaà*<aaMai%l/PaaPa+aYa" )
YaàaMaSak*-C^\v<aaTa(
Pau¡-Xaae_iPa ivMauCYaTae Sa&SaaraTa( )) 44 ))
na hi bhagavann aghaöitam idaà
tvad-darçanän nåëäm akhila-päpa-kñayaù
yan-näma sakåc chravaëät
pukkaço 'pi vimucyate saàsärät
SYNONYMS
na—not; hi—indeed; bhagavan—O my Lord; aghaöitam—not occurred;
idam—this; tvat—of You; darçanät—by seeing; nåëäm—of all human beings;
akhila—all; päpa—of sins; kñayaù—annihilation; yat-näma—whose name;
sakåt—only once; çravaëät—by hearing; pukkaçaù—the lowest class, the
caëòäla; api—also; vimucyate—is delivered; saàsärät—from the entanglement
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
869
of material existence.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, it is not impossible for one to be immediately freed from all
material contamination by seeing You. Not to speak of seeing You personally,
merely by hearing the holy name of Your Lordship only once, even caëòälas,
men of the lowest class, are freed from all material contamination. Under the
circumstances, who will not be freed from material contamination simply by
seeing You?
PURPORT
As stated in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam (9.5.16), yan-näma-çruti-mätreëa
pumän bhavati nirmalaù: simply by hearing the holy name of the Lord, one is
immediately purified. Therefore, in this age of Kali, when all people are very
contaminated, the chanting of the holy name of the Lord is recommended as
the only means of improvement.
harer näma harer näma
harer nämaiva kevalam
kalau nästy eva nästy eva
nästy eva gatir anyathä
[Cc. Ädi 17.21]
"In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance is the
chanting of the holy name of the Lord. There is no other way. There is no
other way. There is no other way." (Båhan-näradéya Puräëa) Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu introduced this chanting of the holy name five hundred years
ago, and now through the Kåñëa consciousness movement, the Hare Kåñëa
movement, we are actually seeing that men who are considered to belong to
the lowest class are being delivered from all sinful activities simply by hearing
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
870
the holy name of the Lord. Saàsära, material existence, is a result of sinful
actions. Everyone in this material world is condemned, yet as there are
different grades of prisoners, there are different grades of men. All of them, in
all statuses of life, are suffering. To stop the suffering of material existence,
one must take to the Hare Kåñëa movement of saìkértana or Kåñëa conscious
life.
Herein it is said, yan-näma sakåc chravaëät: the holy name of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is so powerful that if once heard without offenses, it
can purify the lowest of men (kiräta-hüëändhra-pulinda-pulkaçäù). Such men,
who are called caëòälas, are less than çüdras, but they also can be purified
simply by hearing the holy name of the Lord, not to speak of personally seeing
the Lord. From our present position, the Supreme Personality of Godhead can
be personally seen as the Deity in the temple. The Deity of the Lord is not
different from the Supreme Lord. Because we cannot see the Supreme Lord
with our present blunt eyes, the Lord has kindly consented to come before us
in a form we can see. Therefore the Deity in the temple should not be
considered material. By offering food to the Deity and by decorating and
serving the Deity, one gets the same result that one derives from serving the
Lord personally in Vaikuëöha.
TEXT 45
AQa >aGavNa( vYaMaDauNaa
Tvdvl/aek-PairMa*íaXaYaMal/a" )
Saur‰iz<aa YaTa( k-iQaTa&
Taavke-Na k-QaMaNYaQaa >aviTa )) 45 ))
atha bhagavan vayam adhunä
tvad-avaloka-parimåñöäçaya-maläù
sura-åñiëä yat kathitaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
871
tävakena katham anyathä bhavati
SYNONYMS
atha—therefore; bhagavan—O Supreme Personality of Godhead; vayam—we;
adhunä—at the present moment; tvat-avaloka—by seeing You;
parimåñöa—wiped away; äçaya-maläù—contaminated desires in the heart;
sura-åñiëä—by the great sage of the demigods (Närada); yat—which;
kathitam—spoken; tävakena—who is Your devotee; katham—how;
anyathä—otherwise; bhavati—can it be.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, my dear Lord, simply seeing You has now wiped away all the
contamination of sinful activities and their results of material attachment and
lusty desires, which always filled my mind and the core of my heart. Whatever
is predicted by the great sage Närada Muni cannot be otherwise. In other
words, I have obtained Your audience as a result of being trained by Närada
Muni.
PURPORT
This is the process of the perfect way. One must take lessons from
authorities like Närada, Vyäsa and Asita, and follow their principles. Then one
will be able to see the Supreme Personality of Godhead even with one's own
eyes. One only needs training. Ataù çré-kåñëa-nämädi na bhaved grähyam
indriyaiù [Cc. Madhya 17.136]. With our blunt eyes and other senses we cannot
perceive the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but if we engage our senses in
the service of the Lord according to the instructions of the authorities, it will
be possible to see Him. As soon as one sees the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, all the sinful reactions in the core of one's heart are certainly
vanquished.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
872
TEXT 46
ividTaMaNaNTa SaMaSTa&
Tav JaGadaTMaNaae JaNaEirhacirTaMa( )
ivjaPYa& ParMaGaurae"
ik-Yaidv SaivTauirv %ÛaeTaE" )) 46 ))
viditam ananta samastaà
tava jagad-ätmano janair ihäcaritam
vijïäpyaà parama-guroù
kiyad iva savitur iva khadyotaiù
SYNONYMS
viditam—well known; ananta—O unlimited; samastam—everything; tava—to
You; jagat-ätmanaù—who are the Supersoul of all living entities; janaiù—by
the mass of people, or all living entities; iha—within this material world;
äcaritam—performed; vijïäpyam—to be informed; parama-guroù—to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the supreme master; kiyat—how much;
iva—certainly; savituù—to the sun; iva—like; khadyotaiù—by the fireflies.
TRANSLATION
O unlimited Supreme Personality of Godhead, whatever a living entity does
in this material world is well known to You because You are the Supersoul. In
the presence of the sun there is nothing to be revealed by the light of a
glowworm. Similarly, because You know everything, in Your presence there is
nothing for me to make known.
TEXT 47
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
873
NaMaSTau>Ya& >aGavTae
Sak-l/JaGaiTSQaiTal/YaaedYaeXaaYa )
durviSaTaaTMaGaTaYae
ku-YaaeiGaNaa& i>ada ParMah&SaaYa )) 47 ))
namas tubhyaà bhagavate
sakala-jagat-sthiti-layodayeçäya
duravasitätma-gataye
kuyoginäà bhidä paramahaàsäya
SYNONYMS
namaù—all obeisances; tubhyam—unto You; bhagavate—Your Lordship;
sakala—all; jagat—of the cosmic manifestation; sthiti—of the maintenance;
laya—dissolution; udaya—and creation; éçäya—unto the Supreme Lord;
duravasita—impossible to understand; ätma-gataye—whose own position;
ku-yoginäm—of those who are attached to the objects of the senses; bhidä—by
the false understanding of separateness; parama-haàsäya—unto the supreme
pure.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, You are the creator, maintainer and annihilator of this cosmic
manifestation, but persons who are too materialistic and who always see
separateness do not have eyes with which to see You. They cannot understand
Your real position, and therefore they conclude that the cosmic manifestation is
independent of Your opulence. My Lord, You are the supreme pure, and You
are full in all six opulences. Therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto
You.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
874
PURPORT
Atheistic men think that the cosmic manifestation has come about by
chance, by a combination of matter, without reference to God. Materialistic
so-called chemists and atheistic philosophers always try to avoid even the
name of God in relation to the cosmic manifestation. For them God's creation
is impossible to understand because they are too materialistic. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead is paramahaàsa, or the supreme pure, whereas those
who are sinful, being very much attached to material sense enjoyment and
therefore engaging in material activities like asses, are the lowest of men. All
their so-called scientific knowledge is null and void because of their atheistic
temperament. Thus they cannot understand the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
TEXT 48
Ya& vE ìSaNTaMaNau ivìSa*Ja" ìSaiNTa
Ya& ceik-TaaNaMaNau ictaYa oÀk-iNTa )
>aUMa<@l&/ SazRPaaYaiTa YaSYa MaUiDnaR
TaSMaE NaMaae >aGavTae_STau SahóMaUDnaeR )) 48 ))
yaà vai çvasantam anu viçva-såjaù çvasanti
yaà cekitänam anu cittaya uccakanti
bhü-maëòalaà sarñapäyati yasya mürdhni
tasmai namo bhagavate 'stu sahasra-mürdhne
SYNONYMS
yam—whom; vai—indeed; çvasantam—endeavoring; anu—after;
viçva-såjaù—the directors of the cosmic creation; çvasanti—also endeavor;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
875
yam—whom; cekitänam—perceiving; anu—after; cittayaù—all the
knowledge-gathering senses; uccakanti—perceive; bhü-maëòalam—the huge
universe; sarñapäyati—become like seeds of mustard; yasya—of whom;
mürdhni—on the head; tasmai—unto Him; namaù—obeisances;
bhagavate—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, full with six opulences;
astu—may there be; sahasra-mürdhne—who has thousands of hoods.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, it is after You endeavor that Lord Brahmä, Indra and the
other directors of the cosmic manifestation become occupied with their
activities. It is after You perceive the material energy, My Lord, that the senses
begin to perceive. The Supreme Personality of Godhead holds all the universes
on His heads like seeds of mustard. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You,
that Supreme Personality, who has thousands of hoods.
TEXT 49
é[qXauk- ovac
Sa&STauTaae >aGavaNaevMaNaNTaSTaMa>aazTa )
ivÛaDarPaiTa& Pa[qTaiê}ake-Tau& ku-æÜh )) 49 ))
çré-çuka uväca
saàstuto bhagavän evam
anantas tam abhäñata
vidyädhara-patià prétaç
citraketuà kurüdvaha
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; saàstutaù—being worshiped;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
876
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; evam—in this way;
anantaù—Lord Ananta; tam—unto him; abhäñata—replied;
vidyädhara-patim—the King of the Vidyädharas; prétaù—being very pleased;
citraketum—King Citraketu; kuru-udvaha—O best of the Kuru dynasty,
Mahäräja Parékñit.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: The Lord, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Anantadeva, being very much pleased with the prayers offered by
Citraketu, the King of the Vidyädharas, replied to him as follows, O best of the
Kuru dynasty, Mahäräja Parékñit.
TEXT 50
é[q>aGavaNauvac
Yaàardai(r)rae>Yaa& Tae VYaaôTa& Mae_NauXaaSaNaMa( )
Sa&iSaÖae_iSa TaYaa raJaNa( ivÛYaa dXaRNaaÀ Mae )) 50 ))
çré-bhagavän uväca
yan näradäìgirobhyäà te
vyähåtaà me 'nuçäsanam
saàsiddho 'si tayä räjan
vidyayä darçanäc ca me
SYNONYMS
çré-bhagavän uväca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Saìkarñaëa,
replied; yat—which; närada-aìgirobhyäm—by the great sages Närada and
Aìgirä; te—unto you; vyähåtam—spoken; me—of Me; anuçäsanam—the
worship; saàsiddhaù—completely perfected; asi—you are; tayä—by that;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
877
räjan—O King; vidyayä—mantra; darçanät—from the direct sight; ca—as well
as; me—of Me.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Anantadeva, replied as follows: O
King, as a result of your having accepted the instructions spoken about Me by
the great sages Närada and Aìgirä, you have become completely aware of
transcendental knowledge. Because you are now educated in the spiritual
science, you have seen Me face to face. Therefore you are now completely
perfect.
PURPORT
The perfection of life is to be spiritually educated and to understand the
existence of the Lord and how He creates, maintains and annihilates the
cosmic manifestation. When one is perfect in knowledge, he can develop his
love of Godhead through the association of such perfect persons as Närada and
Aìgirä and the members of their disciplic succession. Then one is able to see
the unlimited Supreme Personality of Godhead face to face. Although the
Lord is unlimited, by His causeless mercy He becomes visible to the devotee,
who is then able to see Him. In our present position of conditioned life we
cannot see or understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
ataù çré-kåñëa-nämädi
na bhaved grähyam indriyaiù
sevonmukhe hi jihvädau
svayam eva sphuraty adaù
[Cc. Madhya 17.136]
"No one can understand the transcendental nature of the name, form, quality
and pastimes of Çré Kåñëa through his materially contaminated senses. Only
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
878
when one becomes spiritually saturated by transcendental service to the Lord
are the transcendental name, form, quality and pastimes of the Lord revealed
to him." (Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.2.234) If one takes to spiritual life under the
direction of Närada Muni or his representative and thus engages himself in the
service of the Lord, he qualifies himself to see the Lord face to face. The
Brahma-saàhitä (5.38) states:
premäïjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santaù sadaiva hådayeñu vilokayanti
yaà çyämasundaram acintya-guëa-svarüpaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship the primeval Lord, Govinda, who is always seen by the devotee
whose eyes are anointed with the pulp of love. He is seen in His eternal form
of Çyämasundara situated within the heart of the devotee." One must follow
the instructions of the spiritual master. Thus one becomes qualified and later
sees the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as evinced by Mahäräja Citraketu.
TEXT 51
Ah& vE SavR>aUTaaiNa >aUTaaTMaa >aUTa>aavNa" )
XaBdb]ø Par& b]ø MaMaae>ae XaaìTaq TaNaU )) 51 ))
ahaà vai sarva-bhütäni
bhütätmä bhüta-bhävanaù
çabda-brahma paraà brahma
mamobhe çäçvaté tanü
SYNONYMS
aham—I; vai—indeed; sarva-bhütäni—expanded in different forms of living
entities; bhüta-ätmä—the Supersoul of all living entities (the supreme director
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
879
and enjoyer of them); bhüta-bhävanaù—the cause for the manifestation of all
living entities; çabda-brahma—the transcendental sound vibration (the Hare
Kåñëa mantra); param brahma—the Supreme Absolute Truth; mama—My;
ubhe—both (namely, the form of sound and the form of spiritual identity);
çäçvaté—eternal; tanü—two bodies.
TRANSLATION
All living entities, moving and nonmoving, are My expansions and are
separate from Me. I am the Supersoul of all living beings, who exist because I
manifest them. I am the form of the transcendental vibrations like oàkära and
Hare Kåñëa Hare Räma, and I am the Supreme Absolute Truth. These two
forms of Mine—namely, the transcendental sound and the eternally blissful
spiritual form of the Deity, are My eternal forms; they are not material.
PURPORT
The science of devotional service has been instructed by Närada and
Aìgirä to Citraketu. Now, because of Citraketu's devotional service, he has
seen the Supreme Personality of Godhead. By performing devotional service,
one advances step by step, and when one is on the platform of love of Godhead
(premä pumartho mahän) he sees the Supreme Lord at every moment. As stated
in Bhagavad-gétä, when one engages in devotional service twenty-four hours a
day (teñäà satata-yuktänäà bhajatäà préti-pürvakam [Bg. 10.10]) in accordance
with the instructions of the spiritual master, his devotional service becomes
more and more pleasing. Then the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is
within the core of everyone's heart, speaks to the devotee (dadämi
buddhi-yogaà taà yena mäm upayänti te). Citraketu Mahäräja was first
instructed by his gurus, Aìgirä and Närada, and now, having followed their
instructions, he has come to the stage of seeing the Supreme Lord face to face.
Therefore the Lord is now instructing him in the essence of knowledge.
The essence of knowledge is that there are two kinds of vastu, or substances,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
880
One is real, and the other, being illusory or temporary, is sometimes called
nonfactual. One must consider these two kinds of existence. The real tattva, or
truth, consists of Brahman, Paramätmä, and Bhagavän. As stated in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.11):
vadanti tat tattva-vidas
tattvaà yaj jïänam advayam
brahmeti paramätmeti
bhagavän iti çabdyate
"Learned transcendentalists who know the Absolute Truth call this nondual
substance Brahman, Paramätmä or Bhagavän." The Absolute Truth exists
eternally in three features. Therefore, Brahman, Paramätmä and Bhagavän
combined are the substance.
The categories of emanations from the nonsubstance are two—activities
and forbidden activities (karma and vikarma). Karma refers to the pious life or
material activities performed during the day and the mental activities of
dreams at night. These are more or less desired activities. Vikarma, however,
refers to illusory activities, which are something like the will-o'-the-wisp.
These are activities that have no meaning. For example, modern scientists
imagine that life can be produced from chemical combinations, and they are
very busy trying to prove this in laboratories throughout the world, although
no one in history has been able to produce the substance of life from material
combinations. Such activities are called vikarma.
All material activities are actually illusory, and progress in illusion is simply
a waste of time. These illusory activities are called akärya, and one must learn
of them from the instructions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As
stated in Bhagavad-gétä (4.17):
karmaëo hy api boddhavyaà
boddhavyaà ca vikarmaëaù
akarmaëaç ca boddhavyaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
881
gahanä karmaëo gatiù
"The intricacies of action are very hard to understand. Therefore one should
know properly what action is, what forbidden action is, and what inaction is."
One must learn of these directly from the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who, as Anantadeva, is instructing King Citraketu because of the advanced
stage of devotional service he achieved by following the instructions of Närada
and Aìgirä.
Herein it is said, ahaà vai sarva-bhütäni: the Lord is everything
(sarva-bhütäni), including the living entities and the material or physical
elements. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (7.4-5):
bhümir äpo 'nalo väyuù
khaà mano buddhir eva ca
ahaìkära itéyaà me
bhinnä prakåtir añöadhä
apareyam itas tv anyäà
prakåtià viddhi me paräm
jéva-bhütäà mahä-bäho
yayedaà dhäryate jagat
"Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego—all together
these eight comprise My separated material energies. Besides this inferior
nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is a superior energy of Mine, which
consists of the living entities, who are struggling with material nature and are
sustaining the universe." The living entity tries to lord it over the material or
physical elements, but both the physical elements and the spiritual spark are
energies emanating from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the
Lord says, ahaà vai sarva-bhütäni: "I am everything." Just as heat and light
emanate from fire, these two energies—the physical elements and the living
entities—emanate from the Supreme Lord. Therefore the Lord says, ahaà vai
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
882
sarva-bhütäni: "I expand the physical and spiritual categories."
Again, the Lord, as the Supersoul, guides the living entities who are
conditioned by the physical atmosphere. Therefore he is called bhütätmä
bhüta-bhävanaù. He gives the living entity the intelligence with which to
improve his position so that he may return home, back to Godhead, or if he
does not want to go back to Godhead, the Lord gives him the intelligence with
which to improve his material position. This is confirmed by the Lord Himself
in Bhagavad-gétä (15.15). Sarvasya cähaà hådi sanniviñöo mattaù småtir jïänam
apohanaà ca: "I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come
remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness." From within, the Lord gives the
living being the intelligence with which to work. Therefore the previous verse
said that after the Supreme Personality of Godhead endeavors, our endeavors
begin. We cannot independently endeavor or act upon anything. Therefore
the Lord is bhüta-bhävanaù.
Another specific feature of the knowledge given in this verse is that
çabda-brahma is also a form of the Supreme Lord. In His eternal, blissful form,
Lord Kåñëa is accepted by Arjuna as paraà brahma. A living entity in the
conditioned stage accepts something illusory as substantial. This is called mäyä
or avidyä—ignorance. Therefore according to the Vedic knowledge, one must
become a devotee, and one must then distinguish between avidyä and vidyä,
which are elaborately explained in the Éçopaniñad. When one is actually on the
platform of vidyä, he can personally understand the Personality of Godhead in
His forms like those of Lord Räma, Lord Kåñëa and Saìkarñaëa. The Vedic
knowledge is described as the breathing of the Supreme Lord, and activities
begin on the basis of Vedic knowledge. Therefore the Lord says that when He
endeavors or breathes, the material universes come into existence, and various
activities gradually develop. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä, praëavaù
sarva-vedeñu: "I am the syllable oà in all the Vedic mantras." Vedic knowledge
begins with the vibration of the transcendental sound praëava, oàkära. The
same transcendental sound is Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare
Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare. Abhinnatvän
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
883
näma-näminoù: [Cc. Madhya 17.133] there is no difference between the holy
name of the Lord and the Lord Himself.
TEXT 52
l/aeke- ivTaTaMaaTMaaNa& l/aek&- caTMaiNa SaNTaTaMa( )
o>aYa& c MaYaa VYaaá& MaiYa cEvae>aYa& k*-TaMa( )) 52 ))
loke vitatam ätmänaà
lokaà cätmani santatam
ubhayaà ca mayä vyäptaà
mayi caivobhayaà kåtam
SYNONYMS
loke—in this material world; vitatam—expanded (in the spirit of material
enjoyment); ätmänam—the living entity; lokam—the material world;
ca—also; ätmani—in the living entity; santatam—spread; ubhayam—both
(the material world of material elements and the living entity); ca—and;
mayä—by Me; vyäptam—pervaded; mayi—in Me; ca—also; eva—indeed;
ubhayam—both of them; kåtam—created.
TRANSLATION
In this world of matter, which the conditioned soul accepts as consisting of
enjoyable resources, the conditioned soul expands, thinking that he is the
enjoyer of the material world. Similarly, the material world expands in the
living entity as a source of enjoyment. In this way they both expand, but
because they are My energies, they are both pervaded by Me. As the Supreme
Lord, I am the cause of these effects, and one should know that both of them
rest in Me.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
884
PURPORT
The Mäyäväda philosophy sees everything as being equal in quality with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, or the Supreme Brahman, and therefore sees
everything as worshipable. This dangerous theory of the Mäyäväda school has
turned people in general toward atheism. On the strength of this theory, one
thinks that he is God, but this is not a fact. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (mayä
tatam idaà sarvaà jagad avyakta-mürtinä [Bg. 9.4]), the fact is that the entire
cosmic manifestation is an expansion of the Supreme Lord's energies, which
are manifested in the physical elements and the living entities. The living
entities wrongly consider the physical elements to be resources meant for their
enjoyment, and they think themselves to be the enjoyers. However, neither of
them is independent; they are both energies of the Lord. The original cause for
the material energy and spiritual energy is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. However, although the expansion of the Lord's energies is the
original cause, one should not think that the Lord Himself has expanded in
different ways. To condemn the theories of the Mäyävädés, the Lord clearly
says in Bhagavad-gétä, mat-sthäni sarva-bhütäni na cähaà teñv avasthitaù: [Bg.
9.4] "All beings are in Me, but I am not in them." Everything rests upon Him,
and everything is but an expansion of His energies, but this does not mean
that everything is as worshipable as the Lord Himself. The material expansion
is temporary, but the Lord is not temporary. The living entities are parts of the
Lord, but they are not the Lord Himself. The living entities in this material
world are not inconceivable, but the Lord is. The theory that the Lord's
energies, being expansions of the Lord, are as good as the Lord is mistaken.
TEXTS 53-54
YaQaa Sauzuá" Pauåzae ivì& PaXYaiTa caTMaiNa )
AaTMaaNaMaek-deXaSQa& MaNYaTae SvPan oiTQaTa" )) 53 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
885
Wv& JaaGar<aadqiNa JaqvSQaaNaaiNa caTMaNa" )
MaaYaaMaa}aai<a ivjaYa Tad(d]íar& Par& SMareTa( )) 54 ))
yathä suñuptaù puruño
viçvaà paçyati cätmani
ätmänam eka-deça-sthaà
manyate svapna utthitaù
evaà jägaraëädéni
jéva-sthänäni cätmanaù
mäyä-mäträëi vijïäya
tad-drañöäraà paraà smaret
SYNONYMS
yathä—just as; suñuptaù—sleeping; puruñaù—a person; viçvam—the whole
universe; paçyati—perceives; ca—also; ätmani—in himself;
ätmänam—himself; eka-deça-stham—lying down in one place; manyate—he
considers; svapne—in the dreaming condition; utthitaù—waking up; evam—in
this way; jägaraëa-ädéni—the states of wakefulness and so on;
jéva-sthänäni—the living entity's different conditions of existence; ca—also;
ätmanaù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mäyä-mäträëi—the
exhibitions of the illusory potency; vijïäya—knowing; tat—of them;
drañöäram—the creator or seer of all such conditions; param—the Supreme;
smaret—one should always remember.
TRANSLATION
When a person is in deep sleep, he dreams and sees in himself many other
objects, such as great mountains and rivers or perhaps even the entire universe,
although they are far away. Sometimes when one awakens from a dream he sees
that he is in a human form, lying in his bed in one place. Then he sees himself,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
886
in terms of various conditions, as belonging to a particular nationality, family
and so on. All the conditions of deep sleep, dreaming and wakefulness are but
energies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One should always remember
the original creator of these conditions, the Supreme Lord, who is unaffected by
them.
PURPORT
None of these conditions of the living entities—namely, deep sleep,
dreaming and wakefulness—is substantial. They are simply displays of various
phases of conditional life. There may be many mountains, rivers, trees, bees,
tigers and snakes that are situated far away, but in a dream one may imagine
them to be nearby. Similarly, as one has subtle dreams at night, when the
living entity is awake he lives in gross dreams of nation, community, society,
possessions, skyscrapers, bank balance, position and honor. Under the
circumstances, one should know that his position is due to his contact with the
material world. One is situated in different positions in various forms of life
that are all but creations of the illusory energy, which works under the
direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the Supreme
Lord is the ultimate actor, and the conditioned living entity should simply
remember this original actor, Çré Kåñëa. As living entities, we are being carried
away by the waves of prakåti, or nature, which works under the Lord's direction
(mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù süyate sa-caräcaram [Bg. 9.10]). Bhaktivinoda
Öhäkura sings, (miche) mäyära vaçe, yäccha bhese', khäccha häbuòubu, bhäi:
"Why are you being carried away by the waves of the illusory energy in various
phases of dreaming and wakefulness? These are all creations of mäyä." Our
only duty is to remember the supreme director of this illusory energy—Kåñëa.
For us to do this, the çästra advises us, harer näma harer näma harer nämaiva
kevalam [Cc. Ädi 17.21]: one should constantly chant the holy name of the
Lord—Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare
Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare. The Supreme Lord is realized in three
different phases, as Brahman, Paramätmä and Bhagavän, but Bhagavän is the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
887
ultimate realization. One who realizes Bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Kåñëa—is the most perfect mahätmä (väsudevaù sarvam iti sa
mahätmä sudurlabhaù [Bg. 7.19]). In the human form of life, one should
understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for then one will understand
everything else. Yasmin vijïäte sarvam evaà vijïätaà bhavati (Muëòaka
Upaniñad 1.3). According to this Vedic injunction, simply by understanding
Kåñëa one understands Brahman, Paramätmä, prakåti, the illusory energy, the
spiritual energy and everything else. Everything will be revealed. prakåti, the
material nature, is. working under the direction of the Supreme Lord, and we
living entities are being carried away by various phases of prakåti. For
self-realization, one should always remember Kåñëa. As stated in Padma
Puräëa, smartavyaù satataà viñëuù: we should always remember Lord Viñëu.
Vismartavyo na jätucit: we should never forget the Lord. This is the perfection
of life.
TEXT 55
YaeNa Pa[Sauá" Pauåz" SvaPa& vedaTMaNaSTada )
Sau%& c iNaGauR<a& b]ø TaMaaTMaaNaMaveih MaaMa( )) 55 ))
yena prasuptaù puruñaù
sväpaà vedätmanas tadä
sukhaà ca nirguëaà brahma
tam ätmänam avehi mäm
SYNONYMS
yena—by whom (the Supreme Brahman); prasuptaù—sleeping; puruñaù—a
man; sväpam—the subject of a dream; veda—knows; ätmanaù—of himself;
tadä—at that time; sukham—happiness; ca—also; nirguëam—without contact
with the material environment; brahma—the supreme spirit; tam—Him;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
888
ätmänam—the pervader; avehi—just know; mäm—Me.
TRANSLATION
Know Me to be the Supreme Brahman, the all-pervading Supersoul through
whom the sleeping living entity can understand his dreaming condition and his
happiness beyond the activities of the material senses. That is to say, I am the
cause of the activities of the sleeping living being.
PURPORT
When the living entity becomes free from false ego, he understands his
superior position as a spirit soul, part and parcel of the pleasure potency of the
Lord. Thus, due to Brahman, even while sleeping the living entity can enjoy.
The Lord says, "That Brahman, that Paramätmä and that Bhagavän are I
Myself." This is noted by Çréla Jéva Gosvämé in his Krama-sandarbha.
TEXT 56
o>aYa& SMarTa" Pau&Sa" Pa[SvaPaPa[iTabaeDaYaae" )
ANveiTa VYaiTairCYaeTa TaJjaNa& b]ø TaTa( ParMa( )) 56 ))
ubhayaà smarataù puàsaù
prasväpa-pratibodhayoù
anveti vyatiricyeta
taj jïänaà brahma tat param
SYNONYMS
ubhayam—both types of consciousness (sleep and wakefulness);
smarataù—remembering; puàsaù—of the person; prasväpa—of consciousness
during sleep; pratibodhayoù—and of consciousness while awake;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
889
anveti—extends through; vyatiricyeta—may reach beyond; tat—that;
jïänam—knowledge; brahma—the Supreme Brahman; tat—that;
param—transcendental.
TRANSLATION
If one's dreams during sleep are merely subject matters witnessed by the
Supersoul, how can the living entity, who is different from the Supersoul,
remember the activities of dreams? The experiences of one person cannot be
understood by another. Therefore the knower of the facts, the living entity who
inquires into the incidents manifested in dreams and wakefulness, is different
from the circumstantial activities. That knowing factor is Brahman. In other
words, the quality of knowing belongs to the living entities and to the Supreme
Soul. Thus the living entity can also experience the activities of dreams and
wakefulness. In both stages the knower is unchanged, but is qualitatively one
with the Supreme Brahman.
PURPORT
In knowledge the living entity is qualitatively one with the Supreme
Brahman, but the quantity of the Supreme Brahman is not the same as that of
the living entity, who is part of Brahman. Because the living entity is Brahman
in quality, he can remember the past activities of dreams and also know the
present activities of wakefulness.
TEXT 57
YadeTaiÜSMa*Ta& Pau&Saae MaÙav& i>aàMaaTMaNa" )
TaTa" Sa&Saar WTaSYa dehaÕehae Ma*TaeMa*RiTa" )) 57 ))
yad etad vismåtaà puàso
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
890
mad-bhävaà bhinnam ätmanaù
tataù saàsära etasya
dehäd deho måter måtiù
SYNONYMS
yat—which; etat—this; vismåtam—forgotten; puàsaù—of the living entity;
mat-bhävam—My spiritual position; bhinnam—separation; ätmanaù—from
the Supreme Soul; tataù—from that; saàsäraù—material, conditional life;
etasya—of the living entity; dehät—from one body; dehaù—another body;
måteù—from one death; måtiù—another death.
TRANSLATION
When a living entity, thinking himself different from Me, forgets his
spiritual identity of qualitative oneness with Me in eternity, knowledge and
bliss, his material, conditional life begins. In other words, instead of identifying
his interest with Mine, he becomes interested in his bodily expansions like his
wife, children and material possessions. In this way, by the influence of his
actions, one body comes from another, and after one death, another death takes
place.
PURPORT
Generally the Mäyävädé philosophers or persons influenced by Mäyävädé
philosophers think themselves as good as the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
This is the cause of their conditional life. As stated by the Vaiñëava poet
Jagadänanda Paëòita in his Prema-vivarta:
kåñëa-bahirmukha haïä bhoga väïchä kare
nikaöa-stha mäyä täre jäpaöiyä dhare
As soon as a living entity forgets his constitutional position and endeavors to
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
891
become one with the Supreme, his conditional life begins. The conception that
the Supreme Brahman and the living entity are equal not only in quality but
also in quantity is the cause of conditional life. If one forgets the difference
between the Supreme Lord and the living entity, his conditional life begins.
Conditional life means giving up one body to accept another and undergoing
death to accept death again. The Mäyävädé philosopher teaches the philosophy
of tat tvam asi, saying, "You are the same as God." He forgets that tat tvam asi
applies in terms of the marginal position of the living entity, who is like
sunshine. There is heat and light in the sun, and there is heat and light in the
sunshine, and thus they are qualitatively one. But one should not forget that
the sunshine rests on the sun. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä, brahmaëo hi
pratiñöhäham [Bg. 14.27]: "I am the original source of Brahman." The sunshine is
important because of the presence of the sun globe. It is not that the sun globe
is important because of the all-pervasiveness of the sunshine. Forgetfulness
and misunderstanding of this fact is called mäyä. Because of forgetfulness of
one's constitutional position and that of the Supreme Lord, one comes into
mäyä, or saàsära—conditional life. In this regard, Madhväcärya says:
sarva-bhinnaà parätmänaà
vismaran saàsared iha
abhinnaà saàsmaran yäti
tamo nästy atra saàçayaù
When one thinks that the living entity is nondifferent in all respects from the
Supreme Lord, there is no doubt that he is in ignorance (tamaù).
TEXT 58
l/Bßeh MaaNauzq& YaaeiNa& jaNaivjaNaSaM>avaMa( )
AaTMaaNa& Yaae Na buÖyeTa Na KvicTa( +aeMaMaaPanuYaaTa( )) 58 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
892
labdhveha mänuñéà yonià
jïäna-vijïäna-sambhaväm
ätmänaà yo na buddhyeta
na kvacit kñemam äpnuyät
SYNONYMS
labdhvä—achieving; iha—in this material world (especially in this pious land
of Bhärata-varña, India); mänuñém—the human; yonim—species; jïäna—of
knowledge through Vedic scriptures; vijïäna—and practical application of
that knowledge in life; sambhaväm—wherein there is a possibility;
ätmänam—one's real identity; yaù—anyone who; na—not;
buddhyeta—understands; na—never; kvacit—at any time; kñemam—success in
life; äpnuyät—can obtain.
TRANSLATION
A human being can attain perfection in life by self-realization through the
Vedic literature and its practical application. This is possible especially for a
human being born in India, the land of piety. A man who obtains birth in such
a convenient position but does not understand his self is unable to achieve the
highest perfection, even if he is exalted to life in the higher planetary systems.
PURPORT
This statement is confirmed in Caitanya-caritämåta (Ädi 9.41). Lord
Caitanya said:
bhärata-bhümite haila manuñya-janma yära
janma särthaka kari' kara para-upakära
Everyone born in India, especially as a human being, can achieve the supreme
success through the Vedic literature and its practical application in life. When
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
893
one is perfect, he can render a service for the self-realization of the entire
human society. This is the best way to perform humanitarian work.
TEXT 59
SMa*TvehaYaa& Pair(c)e-Xa& TaTa" f-l/ivPaYaRYaMa( )
A>aYa& caPYaNaqhaYaa& SaªLPaaiÜrMaeTk-iv" )) 59 ))
småtvehäyäà parikleçaà
tataù phala-viparyayam
abhayaà cäpy anéhäyäà
saìkalpäd viramet kaviù
SYNONYMS
småtvä—remembering; éhäyäm—in the field of activities with fruitive results;
parikleçam—the waste of energy and the miserable conditions; tataù—from
that; phala-viparyayam—the opposite of the desired result;
abhayam—fearlessness; ca—also; api—indeed; anéhäyäm—when there is no
desire for fruitive results; saìkalpät—from material desire; viramet—should
cease; kaviù—one who is advanced in knowledge.
TRANSLATION
Remembering the great trouble found in the field of activities performed for
fruitive results, and remembering how one receives the reverse of the results
one desires—whether from material actions or from the fruitive activities
recommended in the Vedic literatures—an intelligent man should cease from
the desire for fruitive actions, for by such endeavors one cannot achieve the
ultimate goal of life. On the other hand, if one acts without desires for fruitive
results—in other words, if one engages in devotional activities—he can achieve
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
894
the highest goal of life with freedom from miserable conditions. Considering
this, one should cease from material desires.
TEXT 60
Sau%aYa du"%Maae+aaYa ku-vaRTae dMPaTaq i§-Yaa" )
TaTaae_iNav*itarPa[aiáduR"%SYa c Sau%SYa c )) 60 ))
sukhäya duùkha-mokñäya
kurväte dampaté kriyäù
tato 'nivåttir apräptir
duùkhasya ca sukhasya ca
SYNONYMS
sukhäya—for happiness; duùkha-mokñäya—for release from the unhappy state;
kurväte—perform; dam-paté—the wife and husband; kriyäù—activities;
tataù—from that; anivåttiù—no cessation; apräptiù—no achievement;
duùkhasya—of distress; ca—also; sukhasya—of happiness; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
As husband and wife, a man and woman plan together to attain happiness
and decrease unhappiness, working jointly in many ways, but because their
activities are full of desires, these activities are never a source of happiness, and
they never diminish distress. On the contrary, they are a cause of great
unhappiness.
TEXTS 61-62
Wv& ivPaYaRYa& bud(ßa Na*<aa& ivjai>aMaaiNaNaaMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
895
AaTMaNaê GaiTa& SaU+Maa& SQaaNa}aYaivl/+a<aaMa( )) 61 ))
d*íé[uTaai>aMaaR}aai>aiNaRMauR¢-" SveNa TaeJaSaa )
jaNaivjaNaSaNTa*áae MaÙ¢-" Pauåzae >aveTa( )) 62 ))
evaà viparyayaà buddhvä
nåëäà vijïäbhimäninäm
ätmanaç ca gatià sükñmäà
sthäna-traya-vilakñaëäm
dåñöa-çrutäbhir mäträbhir
nirmuktaù svena tejasä
jïäna-vijïäna-santåpto
mad-bhaktaù puruño bhavet
SYNONYMS
evam—in this way; viparyayam—reversal; buddhvä—realizing; nåëäm—of
men; vijïa-abhimäninäm—who think of themselves as full of scientific
knowledge; ätmanaù—of the self; ca—also; gatim—the progress;
sükñmäm—extremely difficult to understand; sthäna-traya—the three
conditions of life (deep sleep, dreaming and wakefulness); vilakñaëäm—apart
from; dåñöa—directly perceived; çrutäbhiù—or understood by information from
authorities; mäträbhiù—from objects; nirmuktaù—being freed; svena—by one's
own; tejasä—strength of consideration; jïäna-vijïäna—with knowledge and
practical application of the knowledge; santåptaù—being fully satisfied;
mat-bhaktaù—My devotee; puruñaù—a person; bhavet—should become.
TRANSLATION
One should understand that the activities of persons who are proud of their
material experience bring only results contradictory to those such persons
conceive while awake, sleeping and deeply sleeping. One should further
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
896
understand that the spirit soul, although very difficult for the materialist to
perceive, is above all these conditions, and by the strength of one's
discrimination, one should give up the desire for fruitive results in the present
life and in the next. Thus becoming experienced in transcendental knowledge,
one should become My devotee.
TEXT 63
WTaavaNaev MaNauJaEYaaeRGaNaEPau<YabuiÖi>a" )
SvaQaR" SavaRTMaNaa jeYaae YaTParaTMaEk-dXaRNaMa( )) 63 ))
etävän eva manujair
yoga-naipuëya-buddhibhiù
svärthaù sarvätmanä jïeyo
yat parätmaika-darçanam
SYNONYMS
etävän—this much; eva—indeed; manujaiù—by human beings; yoga—by the
process of linking with the Supreme by bhakti-yoga; naipuëya—endowed with
expertise; buddhibhiù—who have intelligence; sva-arthaù—the ultimate goal of
life; sarva-ätmanä—by all means; jïeyaù—to be known; yat—which; para—of
the transcendental Lord; ätma—and of the soul; eka—of the oneness;
darçanam—understanding.
TRANSLATION
Persons who try to reach the ultimate goal of life must expertly observe the
Supreme Absolute Person and the living entity, who are one in quality in their
relationship as part and whole. This is the ultimate understanding of life. There
is no better truth than this.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
897
TEXT 64
TvMaeTaC^\ÖYaa raJaàPa[Mataae vcae MaMa )
jaNaivjaNaSaMPaàae DaarYaàaXau iSaDYaiSa )) 64 ))
tvam etac chraddhayä räjann
apramatto vaco mama
jïäna-vijïäna-sampanno
dhärayann äçu sidhyasi
SYNONYMS
tvam—you; etat—this; çraddhayä—with great faith and allegiance; räjan—O
King; apramattaù—without being mad or deviated to any other conclusion;
vacaù—instruction; mama—of Me; jïäna-vijïäna-sampannaù—being fully
aware of knowledge and its practical application in life; dhärayan—accepting;
äçu—very soon; sidhyasi—you will become the most perfect.
TRANSLATION
O King, if you accept this conclusion of Mine, being unattached to material
enjoyment, adhering to Me with great faith and thus becoming proficient and
fully aware of knowledge and its practical application in life, you will achieve
the highest perfection by attaining Me.
TEXT 65
é[qXauk- ovac
AaìaSYa >aGavaiNaTQa& ic}ake-Tau& JaGad(Gauå" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
898
PaXYaTaSTaSYa ivìaTMaa TaTaêaNTadRDae hir" )) 65 ))
çré-çuka uväca
äçväsya bhagavän itthaà
citraketuà jagad-guruù
paçyatas tasya viçvätmä
tataç cäntardadhe hariù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; äçväsya—assuring;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ittham—thus;
citraketum—King Citraketu; jagat-guruù—the supreme spiritual master;
paçyataù—while looking on; tasya—he; viçva-ätmä—the Supersoul of the
whole universe; tataù—from there; ca—also; antardadhe—disappeared;
hariù—Lord Hari.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: After thus instructing Citraketu and
assuring him of perfection in this way, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who is the supreme spiritual master, the supreme soul, Saìkarñaëa, disappeared
from that place as Citraketu looked on.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, Sixteenth Chapter, of the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "King Citraketu Meets the Supreme Lord."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
899
17. Mother Pärvaté Curses Citraketu
The Seventeenth Chapter is summarized as follows. This chapter describes
Citraketu's receiving the body of an asura, or demon, because of joking with
Lord Çiva.
After personally talking with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, King
Citraketu enjoyed life in his airplane with the women of the Vidyädhara
planet. Engaging in the congregational chanting of the glories of the Lord, he
began flying his plane and traveling in outer space. One day while traveling
like this, he wandered into the bowers of Sumeru Mountain, where he came
upon Lord Çiva embracing Pärvaté, surrounded by an assembly of Siddhas,
Cäraëas and great sages. Seeing Lord Çiva in that situation, Citraketu laughed
very loudly, but Pärvaté became very angry at him and cursed him. Because of
this curse, Citraketu later appeared as the demon Våträsura.
Citraketu, however, was not at all afraid of Pärvaté's curse, and thus he
spoke as follows: "Everyone in human society enjoys happiness and distress
according to his past deeds and in this way travels in the material world.
Therefore no one is responsible for his happiness and distress. One is
controlled by the influence of material nature in the material world, yet one
thinks himself the doer of everything. In this material world, which is made of
the external energy of the Supreme Lord, one is sometimes cursed and
sometimes favored, and thus he sometimes enjoys in the upper planetary
systems and sometimes suffers in the lower planets, but all these situations are
the same because they are within this material world. None of these positions
has any factual existence, for all of them are temporary. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead is the ultimate controller because the material world is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
900
created, maintained and annihilated under His control while He nonetheless
remains neutral to these different transformations of the material world in
time and space. The material, external energy of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is in charge of this material world. The Lord helps the world by
creating situations for the living entities within it."
When Citraketu spoke in this way, all the members in the great assembly in
which Lord Çiva and Pärvaté were present were astonished. Then Lord Çiva
began speaking about the devotees of the Lord. A devotee is neutral in all
conditions of life, whether in the heavenly planets or hellish planets, whether
liberated from the material world or conditioned by it, and whether blessed
with happiness or subjected to distress. These are all merely dualities created
by the external energy. Being influenced by the external energy, the living
entity accepts a gross and subtle material body, and in this illusory position he
apparently suffers miseries, although everyone is part and parcel of the
Supreme Lord. The so-called demigods consider themselves independent lords,
and in this way they are misled from understanding that all living entities are
part of the Supreme. This chapter concludes by glorifying the devotee and the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 1
é[qXauk- ovac
YaTaêaNTaihRTaae_NaNTaSTaSYaE k*-Tva idXae NaMa" )
ivÛaDariê}ake-Tauêcar GaGaNaecr" )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
yataç cäntarhito 'nantas
tasyai kåtvä diçe namaù
vidyädharaç citraketuç
cacära gagane caraù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
901
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; yataù—in which (direction);
ca—and; antarhitaù—disappeared; anantaù—the unlimited Supreme
Personality of Godhead; tasyai—unto that; kåtvä—after offering;
diçe—direction; namaù—obeisances; vidyädharaù—the King of the
Vidyädhara planet; citraketuù—Citraketu; cacära—traveled; gagane—in outer
space; caraù—moving.
TRANSLATION
Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé said: After offering obeisances to the direction from
which Ananta, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, had disappeared,
Citraketu began traveling in outer space as the head of the Vidyädharas.
TEXTS 2-3
Sa l/+a& vzRl/+aa<aaMaVYaahTable/iNd]Ya" )
STaUYaMaaNaae MahaYaaeGaq MauiNai>a" iSaÖcar<aE" )) 2 ))
ku-l/acle/Nd]d]ae<aqzu NaaNaaSaªLPaiSaiÖzu )
reMae ivÛaDarñqi>aGaaRPaYaNa( hirMaqìrMa( )) 3 ))
sa lakñaà varña-lakñäëäm
avyähata-balendriyaù
stüyamäno mahä-yogé
munibhiù siddha-cäraëaiù
kuläcalendra-droëéñu
nänä-saìkalpa-siddhiñu
reme vidyädhara-strébhir
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
902
gäpayan harim éçvaram
SYNONYMS
saù—he (Citraketu); lakñam—one hundred thousand; varña—of years;
lakñäëäm—one hundred thousand; avyähata—without hindrance;
bala-indriyaù—whose strength and power of the senses; stüyamänaù—being
praised; mahä-yogé—the great mystic yogé; munibhiù—by saintly persons;
siddha-cäraëaiù—by the Siddhas and Cäraëas; kuläcalendra-droëéñu—within
the valleys of the great mountain known as Kuläcalendra, or Sumeru;
nänä-saìkalpa-siddhiñu—where one becomes perfect in all kinds of mystic
power; reme—enjoyed; vidyädhara-strébhiù—with the women of the
Vidyädhara planet; gäpayan—causing to praise; harim—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Hari; éçvaram—the controller.
TRANSLATION
Being praised by great sages and saints and by the inhabitants of Siddhaloka
and Cäraëaloka, Citraketu, the most powerful mystic yogé, wandered about
enjoying life for millions of years. With bodily strength and senses free from
deterioration, he traveled within the valleys of Sumeru Mountain, which is the
place of perfection for various kinds of mystic power. In those valleys he
enjoyed life with the women of Vidyädhara-loka by chanting the glories of the
Supreme Lord, Hari.
PURPORT
It is to be understood that Mahäräja Citraketu, although surrounded by
beautiful women from Vidyädhara-loka, did not forget to glorify the Lord by
chanting the holy name of the Lord. It has been proved in many places that
one who is not contaminated by any material condition, who is a pure devotee
engaged in chanting the glories of the Lord, should be understood to be
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
903
perfect.
TEXTS 4-5
Wk-da Sa ivMaaNaeNa ivZ<audtaeNa >aaSvTaa )
iGairXa& dd*Xae GaC^Na( ParqTa& iSaÖcar<aE" )) 4 ))
Aail/x(GYaaªqk*-Taa& devq& bahuNaa MauiNaSa&Said )
ovac deVYaa" é*<vNTYaa JahaSaaeÀESTadiNTake- )) 5 ))
ekadä sa vimänena
viñëu-dattena bhäsvatä
giriçaà dadåçe gacchan
parétaà siddha-cäraëaiù
äliìgyäìkékåtäà devéà
bähunä muni-saàsadi
uväca devyäù çåëvantyä
jahäsoccais tad-antike
SYNONYMS
ekadä—one time; saù—he (King Citraketu); vimänena—with his airplane;
viñëu-dattena—given to him by Lord Viñëu; bhäsvatä—shining brilliantly;
giriçam—Lord Çiva; dadåçe—he saw; gacchan—going; parétam—surrounded;
siddha—by the inhabitants of Siddhaloka; cäraëaiù—and the inhabitants of
Cäraëaloka; äliìgya—embracing; aìkékåtäm—sitting on his lap; devém—his
wife, Pärvaté; bähunä—with his arm; muni-saàsadi—in the presence of great
saintly persons; uväca—he said; devyäù—while the goddess Pärvaté;
çåëvantyäù—was hearing; jahäsa—he laughed; uccaiù—very loudly;
tad-antike—in the vicinity.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
904
TRANSLATION
One time while King Citraketu was traveling in outer space on a brilliantly
effulgent airplane given to him by Lord Viñëu, he saw Lord Çiva, surrounded by
Siddhas and Cäraëas. Lord Çiva was sitting in an assembly of great saintly
persons and embracing Pärvaté on his lap with his arm. Citraketu laughed
loudly and spoke, within the hearing of Pärvaté.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura says in this connection,
bhaktià bhütià harir dattvä
sva-vicchedänubhütaye
devyäù çäpena våtratvaà
nétvä taà sväntike 'nayat
The purport is that the Supreme Personality of Godhead wanted to bring
Citraketu to Vaikuëöhaloka as soon as possible. The Lord's plan was that
Citraketu be cursed by Pärvaté to become Våträsura so that in his next life he
could quickly return home, back to Godhead. There have been many instances
in which a devotee acting as a demon has been brought to the kingdom of God
by the mercy of the Lord. For Pärvaté to be embraced by Lord Çiva was natural
in a relationship between husband and wife; this was nothing extraordinary
for Citraketu to see. Nonetheless, Citraketu laughed loudly to see Lord Çiva in
that situation, even though he should not have done so. Thus he was
eventually cursed, and this curse was the cause of his returning home, back to
Godhead.
TEXT 6
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
905
ic}ake-Tauåvac
Wz l/aek-Gauå" Saa+aaÖMa| v¢-a Xarqir<aaMa( )
AaSTae Mau:Ya" Sa>aaYaa& vE iMaQauNaq>aUYa >aaYaRYaa )) 6 ))
citraketur uväca
eña loka-guruù säkñäd
dharmaà vaktä çarériëäm
äste mukhyaù sabhäyäà vai
mithuné-bhüya bhäryayä
SYNONYMS
citraketuù uväca—King Citraketu said; eñaù—this; loka-guruù—the spiritual
master of the people who follow Vedic instructions; säkñät—directly;
dharmam—of religion; vaktä—the speaker; çarériëäm—for all living entities
who have accepted material bodies; äste—sits; mukhyaù—the chief;
sabhäyäm—in an assembly; vai—indeed; mithuné-bhüya—embracing;
bhäryayä—with his wife.
TRANSLATION
Citraketu said: Lord Çiva, the spiritual master of the general populace, is the
best of all living entities who have accepted material bodies. He enunciates the
system of religion. Yet how wonderful it is that he is embracing his wife,
Pärvaté, in the midst of an assembly of great saintly persons.
TEXT 7
Ja$=aDarSTaqv]TaPaa b]øvaidSa>aaPaiTa" )
Aªqk*-TYa iñYa& caSTae GaTahq" Pa[ak*-Taae YaQaa )) 7 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
906
jaöä-dharas tévra-tapä
brahmavädi-sabhä-patiù
aìkékåtya striyaà cäste
gata-hréù präkåto yathä
SYNONYMS
jaöä-dharaù—keeping matted locks of hair; tévra-tapäù—highly elevated due to
undergoing fierce austerities and penances; brahma-vädi—of strict followers of
the Vedic principles; sabhä-patiù—the president of an assembly;
aìkékåtya—embracing; striyam—a woman; ca—and; äste—sits;
gata-hréù—without shame; präkåtaù—a person conditioned by material nature;
yathä—just as.
TRANSLATION
Lord Çiva, whose hair is matted on his head, has certainly undergone great
austerities and penances. Indeed, he is the president in the assembly of strict
followers of Vedic principles. Nonetheless, he is seated with his wife on his lap
in the midst of saintly persons and is embracing her as if he were a shameless,
ordinary human being.
PURPORT
Citraketu appreciated the exalted position of Lord Çiva, and therefore he
remarked at how wonderful it was that Lord Çiva was acting like an ordinary
human being. He appreciated Lord Çiva's position, but when he saw Lord Çiva
sitting in the midst of saintly persons and acting like a shameless, ordinary
man, he was astonished. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura remarks that
although Citraketu criticized Lord Çiva, he did not offend Lord Çiva like
Dakña. Dakña considered Lord Çiva insignificant, but Citraketu expressed his
wonder at Lord Çiva's being situated in that way.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
907
TEXT 8
Pa[aYaXa" Pa[ak*-TaaêaiPa iñYa& rhiSa ib>a]iTa )
AYa& Mahav]TaDarae ib>aiTaR SadiSa iñYaMa( )) 8 ))
präyaçaù präkåtäç cäpi
striyaà rahasi bibhrati
ayaà mahä-vrata-dharo
bibharti sadasi striyam
SYNONYMS
präyaçaù—generally; präkåtäù—conditioned souls; ca—also; api—although;
striyam—a woman; rahasi—in a solitary place; bibhrati—embrace; ayam—this
(Lord Çiva); mahä-vrata-dharaù—the master of great vows and austerities;
bibharti—enjoys; sadasi—in an assembly of great saintly persons; striyam—his
wife.
TRANSLATION
Ordinary conditioned persons generally embrace their wives and enjoy their
company in solitary places. How wonderful it is that Lord Mahädeva, although a
great master of austerity, is embracing his wife openly in the midst of an
assembly of great saints.
PURPORT
The word mahä-vrata-dharaù indicates a brahmacäré who has never fallen
down. Lord Çiva is counted among the best of yogés, yet he embraced his wife
in the midst of great saintly persons. Citraketu appreciated how great Lord
Çiva was to be unaffected even in that situation. Therefore Citraketu was not
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
908
an offender; he merely expressed his wonder.
TEXT 9
é[qXauk- ovac
>aGavaNaiPa TaC^]uTva Pa[hSYaaGaaDaDaqNa*RPa )
TaUZ<aq& b>aUv SadiSa Sa>Yaaê TadNauv]Taa" )) 9 ))
çré-çuka uväca
bhagavän api tac chrutvä
prahasyägädha-dhér nåpa
tüñëéà babhüva sadasi
sabhyäç ca tad-anuvratäù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; bhagavän—Lord Çiva; api—also;
tat—that; çrutvä—hearing; prahasya—smiling; agädhadhéù—whose
intelligence is unfathomed; nåpa—O King; tüñëém—silent;
babhüva—remained; sadasi—in the assembly; sabhyäù—everyone assembled
there; ca—and; tat-anuvratäù—followed Lord Çiva (remained silent).
TRANSLATION
Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: My dear King, after hearing Citraketu's
statement, Lord Çiva, the most powerful personality, whose knowledge is
fathomless, simply smiled and remained silent, and all the members of the
assembly followed the lord by not saying anything.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
909
Citraketu's purpose in criticizing Lord Çiva is somewhat mysterious and
cannot be understood by a common man. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté
Öhäkura, however, has made the following observations. Lord Çiva, being the
most exalted Vaiñëava and one of the most powerful demigods, is able to do
anything he desires. Although he was externally exhibiting the behavior of a
common man and not following etiquette, such actions cannot diminish his
exalted position. The difficulty is that a common man, seeing Lord Çiva's
behavior, might follow his example. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (3.21):
yad yad äcarati çreñöhas
tat tad evetaro janaù
sa yat pramäëaà kurute
lokas tad anuvartate
"Whatever action a great man performs, common men follow. And whatever
standards he sets by exemplary acts, all the world pursues." A common man
might also criticize Lord Çiva, like Dakña, who suffered the consequences for
his criticism. King Citraketu desired that Lord Çiva cease this external
behavior so that others might be saved from criticizing him and thus becoming
offenders. If one thinks that Viñëu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is
the only perfect personality whereas the demigods, even such demigods as Lord
Çiva, are inclined to improper social affairs, he is an offender. Considering all
this, King Citraketu was somewhat harsh in his behavior with Lord Çiva.
Lord Çiva, who is always deep in knowledge, could understand Citraketu's
purpose, and therefore he was not at all angry; rather, he simply smiled and
remained silent. The members of the assembly surrounding Lord Çiva could
also understand Citraketu's purpose. Consequently, following the behavior of
Lord Çiva, they did not protest; instead, following their master, they remained
silent. If the members of the assembly thought that Citraketu had blasphemed
Lord Çiva, they would certainly have left at once, blocking their ears with
their hands.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
910
TEXT 10
wTYaTaÜqYaRivduiz b]uva<ae bûXaae>aNaMa( )
åzah devq Da*íaYa iNaiJaRTaaTMaai>aMaaiNaNae )) 10 ))
ity atad-vérya-viduñi
bruväëe bahv-açobhanam
ruñäha devé dhåñöäya
nirjitätmäbhimänine
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; a-tat-vérya-viduñi—when Citraketu, who did not know the prowess
of Lord Çiva; bruväëe—spoke; bahu-açobhanam—that which is not up to the
standard of etiquette (the criticism of the exalted Lord Çiva); ruñä—with
anger; äha—said; devé—the goddess Pärvaté; dhåñöäya—unto Citraketu, who
was quite shameless; nirjita-ätma—as one who has controlled his senses;
abhimänine—thinking of himself.
TRANSLATION
Not knowing the prowess of Lord Çiva and Pärvaté, Citraketu strongly
criticized them. His statements were not at all pleasing, and therefore the
goddess Pärvaté, being very angry, spoke as follows to Citraketu, who thought
himself better than Lord Çiva in controlling the senses.
PURPORT
Although Citraketu never meant to insult Lord Çiva, he should not have
criticized the lord, even though the lord was transgressing social customs. It is
said, tejéyasäà na doñäya: one who is very powerful should be understood to be
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
911
faultless. For example, one should not find faults with the sun, although it
evaporates urine from the street. The most powerful cannot be criticized by an
ordinary man, or even by a great personality. Citraketu should have known
that Lord Çiva, although sitting in that way, was not to be criticized. The
difficulty was that Citraketu, having become a great devotee of Lord Viñëu,
Saìkarñaëa, was somewhat proud at having achieved Lord Saìkarñaëa's favor
and therefore thought that he could now criticize anyone, even Lord Çiva.
This kind of pride in a devotee is never tolerated. A Vaiñëava should always
remain very humble and meek and offer respect to others.
tåëäd api sunécena
taror api sahiñëunä
amäninä mänadena
kértanéyaù sadä hariù
[Cc. Ädi 17.31]
"One should chant the holy name of the Lord in a humble state of mind,
thinking oneself lower than the straw in the street; one should be more
tolerant than a tree, devoid of all sense of false prestige and ready to offer all
respect to others. In such a state of mind one can chant the holy name of the
Lord constantly." A Vaiñëava should not try to minimize anyone else's
position. It is better to remain humble and meek and chant the Hare Kåñëa
mantra. The word nirjitätmäbhimänine indicates that Citraketu thought
himself a better controller of the senses than Lord Çiva, although actually he
was not. Because of all these considerations, mother Pärvaté was somewhat
angry at Citraketu.
TEXT 11
é[qPaavRTYauvac
AYa& ik-MaDauNaa l/aeke- XaaSTaa d<@Dar" Pa[>au" )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
912
ASMaiÜDaaNaa& duíaNaa& iNal/RÂaNaa& c ivPa[k*-Ta( )) 11 ))
çré-pärvaty uväca
ayaà kim adhunä loke
çästä daëòa-dharaù prabhuù
asmad-vidhänäà duñöänäà
nirlajjänäà ca viprakåt
SYNONYMS
çré-pärvaté uväca—the goddess Pärvaté said; ayam—this; kim—whether;
adhunä—now; loke—in the world; çästä—the supreme controller;
daëòa-dharaù—the carrier of the rod of punishment; prabhuù—the master;
asmat-vidhänäm—of persons like us; duñöänäm—criminals; nirlajjänäm—who
have no shame; ca—and; viprakåt—the restrainer.
TRANSLATION
The goddess Pärvaté said: Alas, has this upstart now received a post from
which to punish shameless persons like us? Has he been appointed ruler, carrier
of the rod of punishment? Is he now the only master of everything?
TEXT 12
Na ved DaMa| ik-l/ PaÚYaaeiNa‚
NaR b]øPau}aa >a*GauNaardaÛa" )
Na vE ku-Maar" k-iPal/ae MaNauê
Yae Naae iNazeDaNTYaiTaviTaRNa& hrMa( )) 12 ))
na veda dharmaà kila padmayonir
na brahma-puträ bhågu-näradädyäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
913
na vai kumäraù kapilo manuç ca
ye no niñedhanty ati-vartinaà haram
SYNONYMS
na—not; veda—knows; dharmam—the religious principles; kila—indeed;
padma-yoniù—Lord Brahmä; na—nor; brahma-puträù—the sons of Lord
Brahmä; bhågu—Bhågu; närada—Närada; ädyäù—and so on; na—nor;
vai—indeed; kumäraù—the four Kumäras (Sanaka, Sanat-kumära, Sananda
and Sanätana); kapilaù—Lord Kapila; manuù—Manu himself; ca—and;
ye—who; no—not; niñedhanti—order to stop; ati-vartinam—who is beyond
laws and orders; haram—Lord Çiva.
TRANSLATION
Alas, Lord Brahmä, who has taken his birth from the lotus flower, does not
know the principles of religion, nor do the great saints like Bhågu and Närada,
nor the four Kumäras, headed by Sanat-kumära. Manu and Kapila have also
forgotten the religious principles. I suppose it to be because of this that they
have not tried to stop Lord Çiva from behaving improperly.
TEXT 13
WzaMaNauDYaeYaPadaBJaYauGMa&
JaGad(Gauå& Ma(r)l/Ma(r)l&/ SvYaMa( )
Ya" +a}abNDau" Pair>aUYa SaUrqNa(
Pa[XaaiSTa Da*íSTadYa& ih d<@y" )) 13 ))
eñäm anudhyeya-padäbja-yugmaà
jagad-guruà maìgala-maìgalaà svayam
yaù kñatra-bandhuù paribhüya sürén
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
914
praçästi dhåñöas tad ayaà hi daëòyaù
SYNONYMS
eñäm—of all these (exalted personalities); anudhyeya—to be constantly
meditated upon; pada-abja-yugmam—whose two lotus feet; jagat-gurum—the
spiritual master of the whole world; maìgala-maìgalam—personification of
the topmost religious principle; svayam—himself; yaù—he who;
kñatra-bandhuù—the lowest of the kñatriyas; paribhüya—overriding;
sürén—the demigods (like Brahmä and the others); praçästi—chastises;
dhåñöaù—impudent; tat—therefore; ayam—this person; hi—indeed;
daëòyaù—to be punished.
TRANSLATION
This Citraketu is the lowest of kñatriyas, for he has impudently overridden
Brahmä and the other demigods by insulting Lord Çiva, upon whose lotus feet
they always meditate. Lord Çiva is personified religion and the spiritual master
of the entire world, and therefore Citraketu must be punished.
PURPORT
All the members of the assembly were exalted brähmaëas and self-realized
souls, but they did not say anything about the conduct of Lord Çiva, who was
embracing the goddess Pärvaté on his lap. Citraketu nonetheless criticized
Lord Çiva, and therefore the opinion of Pärvaté was that he should be
punished.
TEXT 14
NaaYaMahRiTa vEku-<#=PaadMaUl/aePaSaPaR<aMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
915
SaM>aaivTaMaiTa" STaBDa" SaaDaui>a" PaYauRPaaiSaTaMa( )) 14 ))
näyam arhati vaikuëöhapäda-
mülopasarpaëam
sambhävita-matiù stabdhaù
sädhubhiù paryupäsitam
SYNONYMS
na—not; ayam—this person; arhati—deserves;
vaikuëöha-päda-müla-upasarpaëam—the approaching of the shelter of Lord
Viñëu's lotus feet; sambhävita-matiù—considering himself highly esteemed;
stabdhaù—impudent; sädhubhiù—by great saintly persons;
paryupäsitam—worshiped.
TRANSLATION
This person is puffed up because of his achievements, thinking, "I am the
best." He does not deserve to approach the shelter of Lord Viñëu's lotus feet,
which are worshiped by all saintly persons, for he is impudent, thinking himself
greatly important.
PURPORT
If a devotee thinks that he is very much advanced in devotional service, he
is considered puffed up and unfit to sit beneath the shelter of the Lord's lotus
feet. Again, this instruction by Lord Caitanya is applicable:
tåëäd api sunécena
taror api sahiñëunä
amäninä mänadena
kértanéyaù sadä hariù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
916
[Cc. Ädi 17.31]
"One should chant the holy name of the Lord in a humble state of mind,
thinking oneself lower than the straw in the street; one should be more
tolerant than a tree, devoid of all sense of false prestige and ready to offer all
respect to others. In such a state of mind one can chant the holy name of the
Lord constantly." Unless one is humble and meek, one cannot qualify to sit at
the lotus feet of the Lord.
TEXT 15
ATa" PaaPaqYaSaq& YaaeiNaMaaSaurq& Yaaih duMaRTae )
YaQaeh >aUYaae MahTaa& Na k-TaaR Pau}a ik-iLbzMa( )) 15 ))
ataù päpéyaséà yonim
äsuréà yähi durmate
yatheha bhüyo mahatäà
na kartä putra kilbiñam
SYNONYMS
ataù—therefore; päpéyasém—most sinful; yonim—to the species of life;
äsurém—demoniac; yähi—go; durmate—O impudent one; yathä—so that;
iha—in this world; bhüyaù—again; mahatäm—to great personalities; na—not;
kartä—will commit; putra—my dear son; kilbiñam—any offense.
TRANSLATION
O impudent one, my dear son, now take birth in a low, sinful family of
demons so that you will not commit such an offense again toward exalted,
saintly persons in this world.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
917
PURPORT
One should be very careful not to commit offenses at the lotus feet of
Vaiñëavas, of whom Lord Çiva is the best. While instructing Çréla Rüpa
Gosvämé, Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu described an offense at the lotus feet of a
Vaiñëava as häté mätä, a mad elephant. When a mad elephant enters a nice
garden, it spoils the entire garden. Similarly, if one becomes like a mad
elephant and commits offenses at the lotus feet of a Vaiñëava, his entire
spiritual career is halted. One should therefore be very careful not to commit
offenses at the lotus feet of a Vaiñëava.
Mother Pärvaté was justified in punishing Citraketu, for Citraketu
impudently criticized the supreme father, Mahädeva, who is the father of the
living entities conditioned within this material world. The goddess Durgä is
called mother, and Lord Çiva is called father. A pure Vaiñëava should be very
careful to engage in his specific duty without criticizing others. This is the
safest position. Otherwise, if one tends to criticize others, he may commit the
great offense of criticizing a Vaiñëava.
Because Citraketu was undoubtedly a Vaiñëava, he might have been
surprised that Pärvaté had cursed him. Therefore the goddess Pärvaté addressed
him as putra, or son. Everyone is the son of mother Durgä, but she is not an
ordinary mother. As soon as there is a small discrepancy in a demon's behavior,
mother Durgä immediately punishes the demon so that he may come to his
senses. This is explained by Lord Kåñëa in Bhagavad-gétä (7.14):
daivé hy eñä guëa-mayé
mama mäyä duratyayä
mäm eva ye prapadyante
mäyäm etäà taranti te
"This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material nature,
is difficult to overcome. But those who have surrendered unto Me can easily
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
918
cross beyond it." To surrender to Kåñëa means to surrender to His devotees
also, for no one can be a proper servant of Kåñëa unless he is a proper servant
of a devotee. Chäòiyä vaiñëava-sevä nistära päyeche kebä: without serving a
servant of Kåñëa, one cannot be elevated to being a servant of Kåñëa Himself.
Therefore mother Pärvaté spoke to Citraketu exactly like a mother who says to
her naughty child, "My dear child, I am punishing you so that you won't do
anything like this again." This tendency of a mother to punish her child is
found even in mother Yaçodä, who became the mother of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Mother Yaçodä punished Kåñëa by binding Him and
showing Him a stick. Thus it is the duty of a mother to chastise her beloved
son, even in the case of the Supreme Lord. It is to be understood that mother
Durgä was justified in punishing Citraketu. This punishment was a boon to
Citraketu because after taking birth as the demon Våträsura, he was promoted
directly to Vaikuëöha.
TEXT 16
é[qXauk- ovac
Wv& Xaáiê}ake-TauivRMaaNaadvåù Sa" )
Pa[SaadYaaMaaSa SaTaq& MaUDNaaR NaMa]e<a >aarTa )) 16 ))
çré-çuka uväca
evaà çaptaç citraketur
vimänäd avaruhya saù
prasädayäm äsa satéà
mürdhnä namreëa bhärata
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; evam—thus; çaptaù—cursed;
citraketuù—King Citraketu; vimänät—from his airplane; avaruhya—coming
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
919
down; saù—he; prasädayäm äsa—completely pleased; satém—Pärvaté;
mürdhnä—by his head; namreëa—bent low; bhärata—O King Parékñit.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: My dear King Parékñit, when Citraketu
was cursed by Pärvaté, he descended from his airplane, bowed before her with
great humility and pleased her completely.
TEXT 17
ic}ake-Tauåvac
Pa[iTaGa*õaiMa Tae XaaPaMaaTMaNaae_Åil/NaaiMbke- )
devEMaRTYaaRYa YaTPa[ae¢&- PaUvRidí& ih TaSYa TaTa( )) 17 ))
citraketur uväca
pratigåhëämi te çäpam
ätmano 'ïjalinämbike
devair martyäya yat proktaà
pürva-diñöaà hi tasya tat
SYNONYMS
citraketuù uväca—King Citraketu said; pratigåhëämi—I accept; te—your;
çäpam—curse; ätmanaù—my own; aïjalinä—with folded bands; ambike—O
mother; devaiù—by the demigods; martyäya—unto a mortal; yat—which;
proktam—prescribed; pürva-diñöam—fixed previously according to one's past
deeds; hi—indeed; tasya—of him; tat—that.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
920
Citraketu said: My dear mother, with my own hands folded together I accept
the curse upon me. I do not mind the curse, for happiness and distress are given
by the demigods as a result of one's past deeds.
PURPORT
Since Citraketu was a devotee of the Lord, he was not at all disturbed by
the curse of mother Pärvaté. He knew very well that one suffers or enjoys the
results of one's past deeds as ordained by daiva-netra-superior authority, or the
agents of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He knew that he had not
committed any offense at the lotus feet of Lord Çiva or the goddess Pärvaté, yet
he had been punished, and this means that the punishment had been
ordained. Thus the King did not mind it. A devotee is naturally so humble and
meek that he accepts any condition of life as a blessing from the Lord. Tat te
'nukampäà susamékñamäëaù (SB 10.14.8). A devotee always accepts
punishment from anyone as the mercy of the Lord. If one lives in this
conception of life, he sees whatever reverses occur to be due to his past
misdeeds, and therefore he never accuses anyone. On the contrary, he
becomes increasingly attached to the Supreme Personality of Godhead because
of his being purified by his suffering. Suffering, therefore, is also a process of
purification.
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura says in this connection that one who
has developed Kåñëa consciousness and who exists in love with Kåñëa is no
longer subject to suffering and happiness under the laws of karma. Indeed, he
is beyond karma. The Brahma-saàhitä says, karmäëi nirdahati kintu ca
bhakti-bhäjäm: [Bs. 5.54] a devotee is free from the reactions of his karma
because he has taken to devotional service. This same principle is confirmed in
Bhagavad-gétä (14.26). Sa guëän samatétyaitän brahma-bhüyäya kalpate: one
who is engaged in devotional service has already been freed from the reactions
of his material karma, and thus he immediately becomes brahma-bhüta [SB
4.30.20], or transcendental. This is also expressed in Çrémad-Bhägavatam
(1.2.21). Kñéyante cäsya karmäëi: before attaining the stage of love, one
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
921
becomes free from all the results of karma.
The Lord is very kind and affectionate toward His devotees, and therefore a
devotee, in any condition, is not subjected to the results of karma. A devotee
never aspires for the heavenly planets. The heavenly planets, liberation and
hell are nondifferent for a devotee, for he does not discriminate between
different positions in the material world. A devotee is always eager to return
home, back to Godhead, and remain there as the Lord's associate. This
ambition becomes increasingly fervent in his heart, and therefore he does not
care about material changes in his life. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura
comments that Mahäräja Citraketu's being cursed by Pärvaté should be
considered the mercy of the Lord. The Lord wanted Citraketu to return to
Godhead as soon as possible, and therefore he terminated all the reactions of
his past deeds. Acting through the heart of Pärvaté, the Lord, who is situated
in everyone's heart, cursed Citraketu in order to end all his material reactions.
Thus Citraketu became Våträsura in his next life and returned home, back to
Godhead.
TEXT 18
Sa&Saarc§- WTaiSMaÅNTaurjaNaMaaeihTa" )
>a]aMYaNa( Sau%& c du"%& c >au»e SavR}a SavRda )) 18 ))
saàsära-cakra etasmiï
jantur ajïäna-mohitaù
bhrämyan sukhaà ca duùkhaà ca
bhuìkte sarvatra sarvadä
SYNONYMS
saàsära-cakre—in the wheel of material existence; etasmin—this; jantuù—the
living entity; ajïäna-mohitaù—being bewildered by ignorance;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
922
bhrämyan—wandering; sukham—happiness; ca—and; duùkham—distress;
ca—also; bhuìkte—he undergoes; sarvatra—everywhere; sarvadä—always.
TRANSLATION
Deluded by ignorance, the living entity wanders in the forest of this material
world, enjoying the happiness and distress resulting from his past deeds,
everywhere and at all times. [Therefore, my dear mother, neither you nor I am
to be blamed for this incident.]
PURPORT
As confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä (3.27):
prakåteù kriyamäëäni
guëaiù karmäëi sarvaçaù
ahaìkära-vimüòhätmä
kartäham iti manyate
"The bewildered soul, under the influence of the three modes of material
nature, thinks himself the doer of activities that are in actuality carried out by
nature." Actually a conditioned soul is completely under the control of
material nature. Wandering here and there—always and everywhere—he is
subjected to the results of his past deeds. This is carried out by the laws of
nature, but one foolishly thinks himself the doer, which in fact he is not. To
get free from the karma-cakra, the wheel of the results of one's karma, one
should take to bhakti-märga—devotional service, or Kåñëa consciousness. That
is the only remedy. Sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja [Bg.
18.66].
TEXT 19
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
923
NaEvaTMaa Na ParêaiPa k-TaaR SYaaTa( Sau%du"%Yaae" )
k-TaaRr& MaNYaTae_}aaj AaTMaaNa& ParMaev c )) 19 ))
naivätmä na paraç cäpi
kartä syät sukha-duùkhayoù
kartäraà manyate 'träjïa
ätmänaà param eva ca
SYNONYMS
na—not; eva—indeed; ätmä—the spirit soul; na—nor; paraù—another
(friend or enemy); ca—also; api—indeed; kartä—the doer; syät—can be;
sukha-duùkhayoù—of happiness and distress; kartäram—the doer;
manyate—considers; atra—in this connection; ajïaù—a person not aware of
the real fact; ätmänam—himself; param—another; eva—indeed; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
In this material world, neither the living entity himself nor others [friends
and enemies] are the cause of material happiness and distress. But because of
gross ignorance, the living entity thinks that he and others are the cause.
PURPORT
In this verse the word ajïa is very significant. In the material world, all
living entities are ajïa, ignorant, in different degrees. This ignorance
continues very strongly in the mode of ignorance presented by material
nature. One must therefore promote himself to the stage of goodness through
his character and behavior and then gradually come to the transcendental
platform, or adhokñaja platform, in which he realizes both his position and the
position of others. Everything is done under the superintendence of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The process by which the results of action
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
924
are ordained is called niyatam, always working.
TEXT 20
Gau<aPa[vah WTaiSMaNa( k-" XaaPa" k-ae NvNauGa]h" )
k-" SvGaaeR Nark-" k-ae va ik&- Sau%& du"%Maev va )) 20 ))
guëa-praväha etasmin
kaù çäpaù ko nv anugrahaù
kaù svargo narakaù ko vä
kià sukhaà duùkham eva vä
SYNONYMS
guëa-pravähe—in the current of the modes of material nature; etasmin—this;
kaù—what; çäpaù—a curse; kaù—what; nu—indeed; anugrahaù—a favor;
kaù—what; svargaù—elevation to heavenly planets; narakaù—hell;
kaù—what; vä—or; kim—what; sukham—happiness; duùkham—distress;
eva—indeed; vä—or.
TRANSLATION
This material world resembles the waves of a constantly flowing river.
Therefore, what is a curse and what is a favor? What are the heavenly planets,
and what are the hellish planets? What is actually happiness, and what is
actually distress? Because the waves flow constantly, none of them has an
eternal effect.
PURPORT
Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura sings, (miche) mäyära vaçe, yäccha bhese',
khäccha häbuòubu, bhäi: "My dear living entities within this material world,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
925
why are you being carried away by the waves of the modes of material nature?"
(Jéva) kåñëa-däsa, ei viçväsa, karle ta' ära duùkha näi: "If the living entity tries
to understand that he is an eternal servant of Kåñëa, there will no longer be
misery for him." Kåñëa wants us to give up all other engagements and surrender
unto Him. If we do so, where will the cause and effect of this material world
be? There is nothing like cause and effect for the surrendered soul. Çréla
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura says in this regard that being put into this
material world is like being thrown into a mine of salt. If one falls into a mine
of salt, he tastes only salt wherever he goes. Similarly, this material world is full
of miseries. The so-called temporary happiness of the world is also misery, but
in ignorance we cannot understand this. That is the actual position. When
one comes to his senses—when he becomes Kåñëa conscious—he is no longer
concerned with the various conditions of this material world. He is not
concerned with happiness or distress, curses or favors, or heavenly or hellish
planets. He sees no distinction between them.
TEXT 21
Wk-" Sa*JaiTa >aUTaaiNa >aGavaNaaTMaMaaYaYaa )
Wza& bNDa& c Maae+a& c Sau%& du"%& c iNaZk-l/" )) 21 ))
ekaù såjati bhütäni
bhagavän ätma-mäyayä
eñäà bandhaà ca mokñaà ca
sukhaà duùkhaà ca niñkalaù
SYNONYMS
ekaù—one; såjati—creates; bhütäni—different varieties of living entities;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ätma-mäyayä—by His
personal potencies; eñäm—of all the conditioned souls; bandham—the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
926
conditional life; ca—and; mokñam—the liberated life; ca—also;
sukham—happiness; duùkham—distresses; ca—and; niñkalaù—not affected by
the material qualities.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is one. Unaffected by the conditions of
the material world, He creates all the conditioned souls by His own personal
potency. Because of being contaminated by the material energy, the living
entity is put into ignorance and thus into different conditions of bondage.
Sometimes, by knowledge, the living entity is given liberation. In sattva-guëa
and rajo-guëa, he is subjected to happiness and distress.
PURPORT
The question may be raised why the living entities are situated in different
conditions and who has arranged this. The answer is that it has been done by
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, without anyone's help. The Lord has His
own energies (paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]),
and one of them, namely the external energy, creates the material world and
the varieties of happiness and distress for the conditioned souls under the
supervision of the Lord. The material world consists of three modes of material
nature—sattva-guëa, rajo-guëa and tamo-guëa. By sattva-guëa the Lord
maintains the material world, by rajo-guëa He creates it, and by tamo-guëa He
annihilates it. After the varieties of living entities are created, they are subject
to happiness and distress according to their association. When they are in
sattva-guëa, the mode of goodness, they feel happiness, when in rajo-guëa they
are distressed, and when in tamo-guëa they have no sense of what to do or
what is right and wrong.
TEXT 22
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
927
Na TaSYa k-iêÕiYaTa" Pa[TaqPaae
Na jaiTabNDauNaR Parae Na c Sv" )
SaMaSYa SavR}a iNarÅNaSYa
Sau%e Na raGa" ku-Ta Wv raez" )) 22 ))
na tasya kaçcid dayitaù pratépo
na jïäti-bandhur na paro na ca svaù
samasya sarvatra niraïjanasya
sukhe na rägaù kuta eva roñaù
SYNONYMS
na—not; tasya—of Him (the Supreme Lord); kaçcit—anyone; dayitaù—dear;
pratépaù—not dear; na—nor; jïäti—kinsman; bandhuù—friend; na—nor;
paraù—other; na—nor; ca—also; svaù—own; samasya—who is equal;
sarvatra—everywhere; niraïjanasya—without being affected by material
nature; sukhe—in happiness; na—not; rägaù—attachment; kutaù—from
where; eva—indeed; roñaù—anger.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is equally disposed toward all living
entities. Therefore no one is very dear to Him, and no one is a great enemy for
Him; no one is His friend, and no one is His relative. Being unattached to the
material world, He has no affection for so-called happiness or hatred for
so-called distress. The two terms happiness and distress are relative. Since the
Lord is always happy, for Him there is no question of distress.
TEXT 23
TaQaaiPa TaC^i¢-ivSaGaR Wza&
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
928
Sau%aYa du"%aYa ihTaaihTaaYa )
bNDaaYa Maae+aaYa c Ma*TYauJaNMaNaae"
Xarqir<aa& Sa&Sa*TaYae_vk-LPaTae )) 23 ))
tathäpi tac-chakti-visarga eñäà
sukhäya duùkhäya hitähitäya
bandhäya mokñäya ca måtyu-janmanoù
çarériëäà saàsåtaye 'vakalpate
SYNONYMS
tathäpi—still; tat-çakti—of the Lord's energy; visargaù—the creation;
eñäm—of these (conditioned souls); sukhäya—for the happiness;
duùkhäya—for the distress; hita-ahitäya—for the profit and loss;
bandhäya—for the bondage; mokñäya—for the liberation; ca—also; måtyu—of
death; janmanoù—and birth; çarériëäm—of all those who accept material
bodies; saàsåtaye—for the repetition; avakalpate—acts.
TRANSLATION
Although the Supreme Lord is unattached to our happiness and distress
according to karma, and although no one is His enemy or favorite, He creates
pious and impious activities through the agency of His material potency. Thus
for the continuation of the materialistic way of life He creates happiness and
distress, good fortune and bad, bondage and liberation, birth and death.
PURPORT
Although the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the ultimate doer of
everything, in His original transcendental existence He is not responsible for
the happiness and distress, or bondage and liberation, of the conditioned souls.
These are due to the results of the fruitive activities of the living entities
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
929
within this material world. By the order of a judge, one person is released from
jail, and another is imprisoned, but the judge is not responsible, for the distress
and happiness of these different people is due to their own activities. Although
the government is ultimately the supreme authority, the justice is administered
by the departments of the government, and the government is not responsible
for the individual judgments. Therefore the government is equal to all the
citizens. Similarly, the Supreme Lord is neutral to everyone, but for the
maintenance of law and order His supreme government has various
departments, which control the activities of the living entities. Another
example given in this regard is that lilies open or close because of the sunshine,
and thus the bumblebees enjoy or suffer, but the sunshine and the sun globe
are not responsible for the happiness and distress of the bumblebees.
TEXT 24
AQa Pa[SaadYae Na Tva& XaaPaMaae+aaYa >aaiMaiNa )
YaNMaNYaSae ùSaaDaU¢&- MaMa TaT+aMYaTaa& SaiTa )) 24 ))
atha prasädaye na tväà
çäpa-mokñäya bhämini
yan manyase hy asädhüktaà
mama tat kñamyatäà sati
SYNONYMS
atha—therefore; prasädaye—I am trying to please; na—not; tväm—you;
çäpa-mokñäya—for being released from your curse; bhämini—O most angry
one; yat—which; manyase—you consider; hi—indeed;
asädhu-uktam—improper speech; mama—my; tat—that; kñamyatäm—let it be
excused; sati—O most chaste one.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
930
TRANSLATION
O mother, you are now unnecessarily angry, but since all my happiness and
distress are destined by my past activities, I do not plead to be excused or
relieved from your curse. Although what I have said is not wrong, please let
whatever you think is wrong be pardoned.
PURPORT
Being fully aware of how the results of one's karma accrue by the laws of
nature, Citraketu did not want to be released from Pärvaté's curse.
Nonetheless, he wanted to satisfy her because although his verdict was natural,
she was displeased with him. As a matter of course, Mahäräja Citraketu begged
pardon from Pärvaté.
TEXT 25
é[qXauk- ovac
wiTa Pa[SaaÛ iGairXaaE ic}ake-TaurirNdMa )
JaGaaMa SvivMaaNaeNa PaXYaTaae" SMaYaTaaeSTaYaae" )) 25 ))
çré-çuka uväca
iti prasädya giriçau
citraketur arindama
jagäma sva-vimänena
paçyatoù smayatos tayoù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; prasädya—after
satisfying; giriçau—Lord Çiva and his wife, Pärvaté; citraketuù—King
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
931
Citraketu; arim-dama—O King Parékñit, who are always able to subdue the
enemy; jagäma—went away; sva-vimänena—by his own airplane;
paçyatoù—were watching; smayatoù—were smiling; tayoù—while Lord Çiva
and Pärvaté.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: O King Parékñit, subduer of the enemy,
after Citraketu satisfied Lord Çiva and his wife, Pärvaté, he boarded his airplane
and left as they looked on. When Lord Çiva and Pärvaté saw that Citraketu,
although informed of the curse, was unafraid, they smiled, being fully
astonished by his behavior.
TEXT 26
TaTaSTau >aGavaNa( åd]ae åd]a<aqiMadMab]vqTa( )
devizRdETYaiSaÖaNaa& PaazRdaNaa& c é*<vTaaMa( )) 26 ))
tatas tu bhagavän rudro
rudräëém idam abravét
devarñi-daitya-siddhänäà
pärñadänäà ca çåëvatäm
SYNONYMS
tataù—thereafter; tu—then; bhagavän—the most powerful; rudraù—Lord
Çiva; rudräëém—unto his wife, Pärvaté; idam—this; abravét—said;
devarñi—while the great sage Närada; daitya—the demons; siddhänäm—and
the inhabitants of Siddhaloka, who are expert in yogic power;
pärñadänäm—his personal associates; ca—also; çåëvatäm—were listening.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
932
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, in the presence of the great sage Närada, the demons, the
inhabitants of Siddhaloka, and his personal associates, Lord Çiva, who is most
powerful, spoke to his wife, Pärvaté, while they all listened.
TEXT 27
é[qåd] ovac
d*ívTYaiSa Saué[aei<a hrerd(>auTak-MaR<a" )
MaahaTMYa& >a*TYa>a*TYaaNaa& iNa"SPa*ha<aa& MahaTMaNaaMa( )) 27 ))
çré-rudra uväca
dåñöavaty asi suçroëi
harer adbhuta-karmaëaù
mähätmyaà bhåtya-bhåtyänäà
niùspåhäëäà mahätmanäm
SYNONYMS
çré-rudraù uväca—Lord Çiva said; dåñöavaté asi—have you seen; su-çroëi—O
beautiful Pärvaté; hareù—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
adbhuta-karmaëaù—whose acts are wonderful; mähätmyam—the greatness;
bhåtya-bhåtyänäm—of the servants of the servants; niùspåhäëäm—who are
without ambitions for sense gratification; mahätmanäm—great souls.
TRANSLATION
Lord Çiva said: My dear beautiful Pärvaté, have you seen the greatness of the
Vaiñëavas? Being servants of the servants of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Hari, they are great souls and are not interested in any kind of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
933
material happiness.
PURPORT
Lord Çiva, the husband of Pärvaté, told his wife, "My dear Pärvaté, you are
very beautiful in your bodily features. Certainly you are glorious. But I do not
think that you can compete with the beauty and glory of devotees who have
become servants of the servants of the Supreme Personality of Godhead." Of
course, Lord Çiva smiled when he joked with his wife in that way, for others
cannot speak like that. "The Supreme Lord," Çiva continued, "is always exalted
in His activities, and here is another example of His wonderful influence upon
King Citraketu, His devotee. Just see, although you cursed the King, he was
not at all afraid or sorry. Rather, he offered respect to you, called you mother
and accepted your curse, thinking himself faulty. He did not say anything in
retaliation. This is the excellence of a devotee. By mildly tolerating your curse,
he has certainly excelled the glory of your beauty and your power to curse him.
I can impartially judge that this devotee, Citraketu, has defeated you and your
excellence simply by becoming a pure devotee of the Lord." As stated by Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu, taror api sahiñëunä. Just like a tree, a devotee can
tolerate all kinds of curses and reversals in life. This is the excellence of a
devotee. Indirectly, Lord Çiva forbade Pärvaté to commit the mistake of cursing
a devotee like Citraketu. He indicated that although she was powerful, the
King, without showing any power, had excelled her power by his tolerance.
TEXT 28
NaaraYa<aPara" SaveR Na ku-TaêNa ib>YaiTa )
SvGaaRPavGaRNarke-ZviPa TauLYaaQaRdiXaRNa" )) 28 ))
näräyaëa-paräù sarve
na kutaçcana bibhyati
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
934
svargäpavarga-narakeñv
api tulyärtha-darçinaù
SYNONYMS
näräyaëa-paräù—pure devotees, who are interested only in the service of
Näräyaëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarve—all; na—not;
kutaçcana—anywhere; bibhyati—are afraid; svarga—in the higher planetary
systems; apavarga—in liberation; narakeñu—and in hell; api—even;
tulya—equal; artha—value; darçinaù—who see.
TRANSLATION
Devotees solely engaged in the devotional service of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Näräyaëa, never fear any condition of life. For them the heavenly
planets, liberation and the hellish planets are all the same, for such devotees are
interested only in the service of the Lord.
PURPORT
Pärvaté might naturally have inquired how devotees become so exalted.
Therefore this verse explains that they are näräyaëa-para, simply dependent
on Näräyaëa. They do not mind reverses in life because in the service of
Näräyaëa they have learned to tolerate whatever hardships there may be.
They do not care whether they are in heaven or in hell: they simply engage in
the service of the Lord. This is their excellence. Änukülyena kåñëänuçélanam:
[Cc. Madhya 19.167] they are liberally engaged in the service of the Lord, and
therefore they are excellent. By using the word bhåtya-bhåtyänäm, Lord Çiva
pointed out that although Citraketu provided one example of tolerance and
excellence, all the devotees who have taken shelter of the Lord as eternal
servants are glorious. They have no eagerness to be happy by being placed in
the heavenly planets, becoming liberated or becoming one with Brahman, the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
935
supreme effulgence. These benefits do not appeal to their minds. They are
simply interested in giving direct service to the Lord.
TEXT 29
deihNaa& dehSa&YaaeGaad( ÜNÜaNaqìrl/Il/Yaa )
Sau%& du"%& Ma*iTaJaRNMa XaaPaae_NauGa]h Wv c )) 29 ))
dehinäà deha-saàyogäd
dvandvänéçvara-lélayä
sukhaà duùkhaà måtir janma
çäpo 'nugraha eva ca
SYNONYMS
dehinäm—of all those who have accepted material bodies;
deha-saàyogät—because of contact with the material body;
dvandväni—dualities; éçvara-lélayä—by the supreme will of the Lord;
sukham—happiness; duùkham—distress; måtiù—death; janma—birth;
çäpaù—curse; anugrahaù—favor; eva—certainly; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
Because of the actions of the Supreme Lord's external energy, the living
entities are conditioned in contact with material bodies. The dualities of
happiness and distress, birth and death, curses and favors, are natural
by-products of this contact in the material world.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gétä we find, mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù süyate sa-caräcaram: [Bg.
9.10] the material world works under the direction of the goddess Durgä, the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
936
material energy of the Lord, but she acts under the direction of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. This is also confirmed in the Brahma-saàhitä (5.44):
såñöi-sthiti-pralaya-sädhana-çaktir ekä
chäyeva yasya bhuvanäni bibharti durgä
Durgä—the goddess Pärvaté, the wife of Lord Çiva—is extremely powerful.
She can create, maintain and annihilate any number of universes by her sweet
will, but she acts under the direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Kåñëa, not independently. Kåñëa is impartial, but because this is the material
world of duality, such relative terms as happiness and distress, curses and
favors, are created by the will of the Supreme. Those who are not
näräyaëa-para, pure devotees, must be disturbed by this duality of the material
world, whereas devotees who are simply attached to the service of the Lord are
not at all disturbed by it. For example, Haridäsa Öhäkura was beaten with cane
in twenty-two bazaars, but he was never disturbed; instead, he smilingly
tolerated the beating. Despite the disturbing dualities of the material world,
devotees are not disturbed at all. Because they fix their minds on the lotus feet
of the Lord and concentrate on the holy name of the Lord, they do not feel the
so-called pains and pleasures caused by the dualities of this material world.
TEXT 30
Aivvek-k*-Ta" Pau&Saae ùQaR>aed wvaTMaiNa )
Gau<adaezivk-LPaê i>adev óiJavTk*-Ta" )) 30 ))
aviveka-kåtaù puàso
hy artha-bheda ivätmani
guëa-doña-vikalpaç ca
bhid eva srajivat kåtaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
937
SYNONYMS
aviveka-kåtaù—done in ignorance, without mature consideration; puàsaù—of
the living entity; hi—indeed; artha-bhedaù—differentiation of value;
iva—like; ätmani—in himself; guëa-doña—of quality and fault;
vikalpaù—imagination; ca—and; bhit—difference; eva—certainly; sraji—in a
garland; vat—like; kåtaù—male.
TRANSLATION
As one mistakenly considers a flower garland to be a snake or experiences
happiness and distress in a dream, so, in the material world, by a lack of careful
consideration, we differentiate between happiness and distress, considering one
good and the other bad.
PURPORT
The happiness and distress of the material world of duality are both
mistaken ideas. In the Caitanya-caritämåta (Antya 4.176) it is said:
"dvaite" bhadräbhadra-jïäna, saba—"manodharma"
"ei bhäla, ei manda",—ei saba "bhrama"
The distinctions between happiness and distress in the material world of
duality are simply mental concoctions, for the so-called happiness and distress
are actually one and the same. They are like the happiness and distress in
dreams. A sleeping man creates his happiness and distress by dreaming,
although actually they have no existence.
The other example given in this verse is that a flower garland is originally
very nice, but by mistake, for want of mature knowledge, one may consider it a
snake. In this connection there is a statement by Prabodhänanda Sarasvaté:
viçvaà pürëa-sukhäyate. Everyone in this material world is distressed by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
938
miserable conditions, but Çréla Prabodhänanda Sarasvaté says that this world is
full of happiness. How is this possible? He answers,
yat-käruëya-katäkña-vaibhavavatäà taà gauram eva stumaù. A devotee accepts
the distress of this material world as happiness only due to the causeless mercy
of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. By His personal behavior, Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu showed that He was never distressed but always happy in
chanting the Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra. One should follow in the footsteps of
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu and engage constantly in chanting the
mahä-mantra—Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma,
Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare. Then he will never feel the distresses of
the world of duality. In any condition of life one will be happy if he chants the
holy name of the Lord.
In dreams we sometimes enjoy eating sweet rice and sometimes suffer as if
one of our beloved family members had died. Because the same mind and body
exist in the same material world of duality when we are awake, the so-called
happiness and distress of this world are no better than the false, superficial
happiness of dreams. The mind is the via medium in both dreams and
wakefulness, and everything created by the mind in terms of saìkalpa and
vikalpa, acceptance and rejection, is called manodharma, or mental concoction.
TEXT 31
vaSaudeve >aGaviTa >ai¢-MauÜhTaa& Na*<aaMa( )
jaNavEraGYavqYaaR<aa& Na ih k-iêd( VYaPaaé[Ya" )) 31 ))
väsudeve bhagavati
bhaktim udvahatäà nåëäm
jïäna-vairägya-véryäëäà
na hi kaçcid vyapäçrayaù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
939
SYNONYMS
väsudeve—to Lord Väsudeva, Kåñëa; bhagavati—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; bhaktim—love and faith in devotional service; udvahatäm—for
those who are carrying; nåëäm—men; jïäna-vairägya—of real knowledge and
detachment; véryäëäm—possessing the powerful strength; na—not;
hi—indeed; kaçcit—anything; vyapäçrayaù—as interest or shelter.
TRANSLATION
Persons engaged in devotional service to Lord Väsudeva, Kåñëa, have
naturally perfect knowledge and detachment from this material world.
Therefore such devotees are not interested in the so-called happiness or
so-called distress of this world.
PURPORT
Here is the distinction between a devotee and a philosopher who speculates
on the subject matter of transcendence. A devotee does not need to cultivate
knowledge to understand the falsity or temporary existence of this material
world. Because of his unalloyed devotion to Väsudeva, this knowledge and
detachment are automatically manifested in his person. As confirmed
elsewhere in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.7):
väsudeve bhagavati
bhakti-yogaù prayojitaù
janayaty äçu vairägyaà
jïänaà ca yad ahaitukam
One who engages in unalloyed devotional service to Väsudeva, Kåñëa,
automatically becomes aware of this material world, and therefore he is
naturally detached. This detachment is possible because of his high standard of
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
940
knowledge. The speculative philosopher tries to understand that this material
world is false by cultivating knowledge, but this understanding is automatically
manifested in the person of a devotee, without separate endeavor. The
Mäyävädé philosophers may be very proud of their so-called knowledge, but
because they do not understand Väsudeva (väsudevaù sarvam iti [Bg. 7.19]),
they do not understand the world of duality, which is a manifestation of
Väsudeva's external energy. Therefore, unless the so-called jïänés take shelter
of Väsudeva, their speculative knowledge is imperfect. Ye 'nye 'ravindäkña
vimukta-mäninaù. They simply think of becoming free from the contamination
of the material world, but because they do not take shelter at the lotus feet of
Väsudeva, their knowledge is impure. When they actually become pure, they
surrender to the lotus feet of Väsudeva. Therefore, the Absolute Truth is
easier to understand for a devotee than for jïänés who simply speculate to
understand Väsudeva. Lord Çiva confirms this statement in the following
verse.
TEXT 32
Naah& ivirÄae Na ku-MaarNaardaE
Na b]øPau}aa MauNaYa" SaureXaa" )
ivdaMa YaSYaeihTaMa&Xak-a&Xak-a
Na TaTSvæPa& Pa*QaGaqXaMaaiNaNa" )) 32 ))
nähaà viriïco na kumära-näradau
na brahma-puträ munayaù sureçäù
vidäma yasyehitam aàçakäàçakä
na tat-svarüpaà påthag-éça-mäninaù
SYNONYMS
na—not; aham—I (Lord Çiva); viriïcaù—Lord Brahmä; na—nor;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
941
kumära—the Açviné-kumäras; näradau—the great saint Närada; na—nor;
brahma-puträù—the sons of Lord Brahmä; munayaù—great saintly persons;
sura-éçäù—all the great demigods; vidäma—know; yasya—of whom;
éhitam—activity; aàçaka-aàçakäù—those who are parts of the parts; na—not;
tat—His; sva-rüpam—real personality; påthak—separate; éça—rulers;
mäninaù—who consider ourselves to be.
TRANSLATION
Neither I [Lord Çiva], nor Brahmä, nor the Açviné-kumäras, nor Närada or
the other great sages who are Brahmä's sons, nor even the demigods can
understand the pastimes and personality of the Supreme Lord. Although we are
part of the Supreme Lord, we consider ourselves independent, separate
controllers, and thus we cannot understand His identity.
PURPORT
Brahma-saàhitä (5.33) states:
advaitam acyutam anädim ananta-rüpam
ädyaà puräëa-puruñaà nava-yauvanaà ca
vedeñu durlabham adurlabham ätma-bhaktau
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
"I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda, who is the original
person. He is absolute, infallible and beginningless, and although expanded
into unlimited forms, He is still the same original person, the oldest person,
who always appears as a fresh youth. The eternal, blissful, all-knowing forms of
the Lord can not be understood even by the best Vedic scholars, but they are
always manifest to pure, unalloyed devotees." Lord Çiva places himself as one
of the nondevotees, who cannot understand the identity of the Supreme Lord.
The Lord, being ananta, has an unlimited number of forms. Therefore, how is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
942
it possible for an ordinary, common man to understand Him? Lord Çiva, of
course, is above the ordinary human beings, yet be is unable to understand the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Lord Çiva is not among the ordinary living
entities, nor is he in the category of Lord Viñëu. He is between Lord Viñëu and
the common living entity.
TEXT 33
Na ùSYaaiSTa iPa[Ya" k-iêàaiPa[Ya" Sv" Parae_iPa va )
AaTMaTvaTSavR>aUTaaNaa& SavR>aUTaiPa[Yaae hir" )) 33 ))
na hy asyästi priyaù kaçcin
näpriyaù svaù paro 'pi vä
ätmatvät sarva-bhütänäà
sarva-bhüta-priyo hariù
SYNONYMS
na—not; hi—indeed; asya—of the Lord; asti—there is; priyaù—very dear;
kaçcit—anyone; na—nor; apriyaù—not dear; svaù—own; paraù—other;
api—even; vä—or; ätmatvät—due to being the soul of the soul;
sarva-bhütänäm—of all living entities; sarva-bhüta—to all living entities;
priyaù—very, very dear; hariù—Lord Hari.
TRANSLATION
He holds no one as very dear and no one as inimical. He has no one for His
own relative, and no one is alien to Him. He is actually the soul of the soul of
all living entities. Thus He is the auspicious friend of all living beings and is
very near and dear to all of them.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
943
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, in His second feature, is the
Supersoul of all living entities. As one's self is extremely dear, the Superself of
the self is still more dear. No one can be the enemy of the friendly Superself,
who is equal to everyone. Relationships of dearness or enmity between the
Supreme Lord and the living beings are due to the intervention of the illusory
energy. Because the three modes of material nature intervene between the
Lord and the living beings, these different relationships appear. Actually, the
living entity in his pure condition is always very near and dear to the Lord,
and the Lord is dear to him. There is no question of partiality or enmity.
TEXTS 34-35
TaSYa caYa& Maha>aaGaiê}ake-Tau" iPa[Yaae_NauGa" )
SavR}a SaMad*k( XaaNTaae ùh& cEvaCYauTaiPa[Ya" )) 34 ))
TaSMaaà ivSMaYa" k-aYaR" Pauåzezu MahaTMaSau )
MahaPauåz>a¢e-zu XaaNTaezu SaMadiXaRzu )) 35 ))
tasya cäyaà mahä-bhägaç
citraketuù priyo 'nugaù
sarvatra sama-dåk çänto
hy ahaà caiväcyuta-priyaù
tasmän na vismayaù käryaù
puruñeñu mahätmasu
mahäpuruña-bhakteñu
çänteñu sama-darçiñu
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
944
tasya—of Him (the Lord); ca—and; ayam—this; mahä-bhägaù—the most
fortunate; citraketuù—King Citraketu; priyaù—beloved; anugaù—most
obedient servant; sarvatra—everywhere; sama-dåk—sees equally; çäntaù—very
peaceful; hi—indeed; aham—I; ca—also; eva—certainly; acyuta-priyaù—very
dear to Lord Kåñëa, who never fails; tasmät—therefore; na—no;
vismayaù—wonder; käryaù—to be done; puruñeñu—among persons;
mahä-ätmasu—who are exalted souls; mahä-puruña-bhakteñu—devotees of
Lord Viñëu; çänteñu—peaceful; sama-darçiñu—equal to everyone.
TRANSLATION
This magnanimous Citraketu is a dear devotee of the Lord. He is equal to all
living entities and is free from attachment and hatred. Similarly, I am also very
dear to Lord Näräyaëa. Therefore, no one should be astonished to see the
activities of the most exalted devotees of Näräyaëa, for they are free from
attachment and envy. They are always peaceful, and they are equal to everyone.
PURPORT
It is said, vaiñëavera kriyä, mudrä vijïeha nä bujhaya: [Cc. Madhya 23.39] one
should not be astonished to see the activities of exalted, liberated Vaiñëavas.
As one should not be misled by the activities of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, one should also not be misled by the activities of His devotees. Both
the Lord and His devotees are liberated. They are on the same platform, the
only difference being that the Lord is the master and the devotees are
servants. Qualitatively, they are one and the same. In Bhagavad-gétä (9.29) the
Lord says:
samo 'haà sarva-bhüteñu
na me dveñyo 'sti na priyaù
ye bhajanti tu mäà bhaktyä
mayi te teñu cäpy aham
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
945
"I envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But whoever
renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend, is in Me, and I am also a friend
to him." From this statement by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, it is
clear that the devotees of the Lord are always extremely dear to Him. In effect,
Lord Çiva told Pärvaté, "Both Citraketu and I are always very dear to the
Supreme Lord. In other words, both he and I are on the same level as servants
of the Lord. We are always friends, and sometimes we enjoy joking words
between us. When Citraketu loudly laughed at my behavior, he did so on
friendly terms, and therefore there was no reason to curse him." Thus Lord
Çiva tried to convince his wife, Pärvaté, that her cursing of Citraketu was not
very sensible.
Here is a difference between male and female that exists even in the higher
statuses of life-in fact, even between Lord Çiva and his wife. Lord Çiva could
understand Citraketu very nicely, but Pärvaté could not. Thus even in the
higher statuses of life there is a difference between the understanding of a
male and that of a female. It may be clearly said that the understanding of a
woman is always inferior to the understanding of a man. In the Western
countries there is now agitation to the effect that man and woman should be
considered equal, but from this verse it appears that woman is always less
intelligent than man.
It is clear that Citraketu wanted to criticize the behavior of his friend Lord
Çiva because Lord Çiva was sitting with his wife on his lap. Then, too, Lord
Çiva wanted to criticize Citraketu for externally posing as a great devotee but
being interested in enjoying with the Vidyädharé women. These were all
friendly jokes; there was nothing serious for which Citraketu should have been
cursed by Pärvaté. Upon hearing the instructions of Lord Çiva, Pärvaté must
have been very much ashamed for cursing Citraketu to become a demon.
Mother Pärvaté could not appreciate Citraketu's position, and therefore she
cursed him, but when she understood the instructions of Lord Çiva she was
ashamed.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
946
TEXT 36
é[qXauk- ovac
wiTa é[uTva >aGavTa" iXavSYaaeMaai>a>aaizTaMa( )
b>aUv XaaNTaDaq raJaNa( devq ivGaTaivSMaYaa )) 36 ))
çré-çuka uväca
iti çrutvä bhagavataù
çivasyomäbhibhäñitam
babhüva çänta-dhé räjan
devé vigata-vismayä
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; iti—thus; çrutvä—hearing;
bhagavataù—of the most powerful demigod; çivasya—of Lord Çiva;
umä—Pärvaté; abhibhäñitam—instruction; babhüva—became;
çänta-dhéù—very peaceful; räjan—O King Parékñit; devé—the goddess;
vigata-vismayä—released from astonishment.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O King, after hearing this speech by her
husband, the demigoddess [Umä, the wife of Lord Çiva] gave up her
astonishment at the behavior of King Citraketu and became steady in
intelligence.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura remarks that the word çänta-dhéù
means svéya-pürva-svabhäva-småtyä. When Pärvaté remembered her former
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
947
behavior in cursing Citraketu, she became very much ashamed and covered
her face with the skirt of her sari, admitting that she was wrong in cursing
Citraketu.
TEXT 37
wiTa >aaGavTaae deVYaa" Pa[iTaXaáuMal/NTaMa" )
MaUDNaaR Sa JaGa*he XaaPaMaeTaavTSaaDaul/+a<aMa( )) 37 ))
iti bhägavato devyäù
pratiçaptum alantamaù
mürdhnä sa jagåhe çäpam
etävat sädhu-lakñaëam
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; bhägavataù—the most exalted devotee; devyäù—of Pärvaté;
pratiçaptum—to make a counter-curse; alantamaù—able in all respects;
mürdhnä—with his head; saù—he (Citraketu); jagåhe—accepted; çäpam—the
curse; etävat—this much; sädhu-lakñaëam—the symptom of a devotee.
TRANSLATION
The great devotee Citraketu was so powerful that he was quite competent to
curse mother Pärvaté in retaliation, but instead of doing so he very humbly
accepted the curse and bowed his head before Lord Çiva and his wife. This is
very much to be appreciated as the standard behavior of a Vaiñëava.
PURPORT
Upon being informed by Lord Çiva, mother Pärvaté could understand that
she was wrong in cursing Citraketu. King Citraketu was so exalted in his
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
948
character that in spite of being wrongly cursed by Pärvaté, he immediately
descended from his airplane and bowed his head before the mother, accepting
her curse. This has already been explained: näräyaëa-paräù sarve na kutaçcana
bibhyati [SB 6.17.28]. Citraketu very sportingly felt that since the mother
wanted to curse him, he could accept this curse just to please her. This is called
sädhu-lakñaëam, the characteristic of a sädhu, or a devotee. As explained by Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu, tåëäd api sunécena taror api sahiñëunä. A devotee
should always be very humble and meek and should offer all respect to others,
especially to superiors. Being protected by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, a devotee is always powerful, but a devotee does not wish to show his
power unnecessarily. However, when a less intelligent person has some power,
he wants to use it for sense gratification. This is not the behavior of a devotee.
TEXT 38
Jaje TvíudRi+a<aaGanaE daNavq& YaaeiNaMaaié[Ta" )
v*}a wTYai>aiv:YaaTaae jaNaivjaNaSa&YauTa" )) 38 ))
jajïe tvañöur dakñiëägnau
dänavéà yonim äçritaù
våtra ity abhivikhyäto
jïäna-vijïäna-saàyutaù
SYNONYMS
jajïe—was born; tvañöuù—of the brähmaëa known as Tvañöä;
dakñiëa-agnau—in the fire sacrifice known as dakñiëägni;
dänavém—demoniac; yonim—species of life; äçritaù—taking shelter of;
våtraù—Våtra; iti—thus; abhivikhyätaù—celebrated;
jïäna-vijïäna-saàyutaù—fully equipped with transcendental knowledge and
practical application of that knowledge in life.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
949
TRANSLATION
Being cursed by mother Durgä [Bhaväné, the wife of Lord Çiva], that same
Citraketu accepted birth in a demoniac species of life. Although still fully
equipped with transcendental knowledge and practical application of that
knowledge in life, he appeared as a demon at the fire sacrifice performed by
Tvañöä, and thus he became famous as Våträsura.
PURPORT
The word yoni is generally understood to mean jäti-family, group or species.
Although Våträsura appeared in a family of demons, it is clearly said that his
knowledge of spiritual life still existed. Jïäna-vijïäna-saàyutaù: his spiritual
knowledge and the practical application of that knowledge in life were not
lost. Therefore it is said that even if a devotee falls down for some reason, he is
still not lost.
yatra kva väbhadram abhüd amuñya kià
ko värtha äpto 'bhajatäà sva-dharmataù
(SB 1.5.17)
Once one is advanced in devotional service, his spiritual assets are never lost
under any circumstances. Whatever spiritual advancement he has achieved
continues. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä. Even if a bhakti-yogé falls, he
takes birth in a rich family or family of brähmaëas, in which he again starts
devotional activities from the point where he left off. Although Våträsura was
known as an asura, or demon, he did not lose his consciousness of Kåñëa or
devotional service.
TEXT 39
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
950
WTatae SavRMaa:YaaTa& YaNMaa& Tv& PairPa*C^iSa )
v*}aSYaaSaurJaaTaeê k-ar<a& >aGavNMaTae" )) 39 ))
etat te sarvam äkhyätaà
yan mäà tvaà paripåcchasi
våtrasyäsura-jäteç ca
käraëaà bhagavan-mateù
SYNONYMS
etat—this; te—unto you; sarvam—all; äkhyätam—explained; yat—which;
mäm—me; tvam—you; paripåcchasi—asked; våtrasya—of Våträsura;
asura-jäteù—whose birth was in a species of asuras; ca—and; käraëam—the
cause; bhagavat-mateù—of exalted intelligence in Kåñëa consciousness.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Parékñit, you inquired from me how Våträsura, a great
devotee, took birth in a demoniac family. Thus I have tried to explain to you
everything about this.
TEXT 40
wiTahaSaiMaMa& Pau<Ya& ic}ake-TaaeMaRhaTMaNa" )
MaahaTMYa& ivZ<au>a¢-aNaa& é[uTva bNDaaiÜMauCYaTae )) 40 ))
itihäsam imaà puëyaà
citraketor mahätmanaù
mähätmyaà viñëu-bhaktänäà
çrutvä bandhäd vimucyate
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
951
SYNONYMS
itihäsam—history; imam—this; puëyam—very pious; citraketoù—of Citraketu;
mahä-ätmanaù—the exalted devotee; mähätmyam—containing glory;
viñëu-bhaktänäm—from the devotees of Viñëu; çrutvä—hearing;
bandhät—from bondage or conditional, material life; vimucyate—is freed.
TRANSLATION
Citraketu was a great devotee [mahätmä]. If one hears this history of
Citraketu from a pure devotee, the listener also is freed from the conditional
life of material existence.
PURPORT
The historical incidents in the puräëas, such as the history of Citraketu
explained in the Bhägavata Puräëa, are sometimes misunderstood by outsiders,
or nondevotees. Therefore Çukadeva Gosvämé advised that the history of
Citraketu be heard from a devotee. Anything about devotional service or the
characteristics of the Lord and His devotees must be heard from a devotee, not
from a professional reciter. This is advised herein. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu's
secretary also advised that one learn the history of Çrémad-Bhägavatam from a
devotee: yäha, bhägavata pada vaiñëavera sthäne. One should not hear the
statements of Çrémad-Bhägavatam from professional reciters, or else they will
not be effective. Quoting from Padma Puräëa, Çré Sanätana Gosvämé has
strictly forbidden us to hear about the activities of the Lord and His devotees
from the mouths of nondevotees:
avaiñëava-mukhodgérëaà
pütaà hari-kathämåtam
çravaëaà naiva kartavyaà
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
952
sarpocchiñöaà yathä payaù
"One should not hear anything about Kåñëa from a non-Vaiñëava. Milk
touched by the lips of a serpent has poisonous effects; similarly, talks about
Kåñëa given by a non-Vaiñëava are also poisonous." One must be a bona fide
devotee, and then he can preach and impress devotional service upon his
listeners.
TEXT 41
Ya WTaTPa[aTaåTQaaYa é[ÖYaa vaGYaTa" Pa#e=Ta( )
wiTahaSa& hir„& SMa*Tva Sa YaaiTa ParMaa& GaiTaMa( )) 41 ))
ya etat prätar utthäya
çraddhayä väg-yataù paöhet
itihäsaà harià småtvä
sa yäti paramäà gatim
SYNONYMS
yaù—any person who; etat—this; prätaù—early in the morning;
utthäya—rising; çraddhayä—with faith; väk-yataù—controlling the mind and
words; paöhet—may read; itihäsam—history; harim—the Supreme Lord;
småtvä—remembering; saù—that person; yäti—goes; paramäm gatim—back
home, back to Godhead.
TRANSLATION
One who rises from bed early in the morning and recites this history of
Citraketu, controlling his words and mind and remembering the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, will return home, back to Godhead, without difficulty.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
953
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, Seventeenth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam entitled, "Mother Pärvaté Curses Citraketu."
18. Diti Vows to Kill King Indra
This chapter gives the history of Diti, the wife of Kaçyapa, and how she
followed a vow to have a son who would kill Indra. It also describes how Indra
attempted to foil her plan by cutting to pieces the son within her womb.
In relation to Tvañöä and his descendants, there is a description of the
dynasty of the Ädityas (sons of Aditi) and other demigods. Påçni, the wife of
Aditi's fifth son named Savitä, had three daughters-Sävitré, Vyähåti and
Trayé-and very exalted sons named Agnihotra, Paçu, Soma, Cäturmäsya and
the five Mahäyajïas. Siddhi, the wife of Bhaga, had three sons, named
Mahimä, Vibhu and Prabhu, and she also had one daughter, whose name was
Äçé. Dhätä had four wives-Kuhü, Sinévälé, Räkä and Anumati-who had four
sons, named Säyam, Darça, Prätaù and Pürëamäsa respectively. Kriyä, the wife
of Vidhätä, gave birth to the five Puréñyas, who are representatives of five
kinds of fire-gods. Bhågu, the mind-born son of Brahmä, took his birth again
from Carñaëé, the wife of Varuëa, and the great sage Välméki appeared from
Varuëa's semen. Agastya and Vasiñöha were two sons of Varuëa and Mitra.
Upon seeing the beauty of Urvaçé, Mitra and Varuëa discharged semen, which
they kept in an earthen pot. From that pot, Agastya and Vasiñöha appeared.
Mitra had a wife named Revaté, who gave birth to three sons-Utsarga, Ariñöa
and Pippala. Aditi had twelve sons, of whom Indra was the eleventh. Indra's
wife was named Paulomé (Çacédevé). She gave birth to three sons-Jayanta,
Åñabha and Méòhuña. By His own powers, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
954
appeared as Vämanadeva. From His wife, whose name was Kérti, appeared a
son named Båhatçloka. Båhatçloka's first son was known as Saubhaga. This is a
description of the sons of Aditi. A description of Äditya Urukrama, who is an
incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, will be offered in the
Eighth Canto.
The demons born of Diti are also described in this chapter. In the dynasty
of Diti appeared the great saintly devotee Prahläda and also Bali, Prahläda's
grandson. Hiraëyakaçipu and Hiraëyäkña were the first sons of Diti.
Hiraëyakaçipu and his wife, whose name was Kayädhu, had four
sons-Saàhläda, Anuhläda, Hläda and Prahläda. They also had one daughter,
whose name was Siàhikä. In association with the demon Vipracit, Siàhikä
bore a son named Rähu, whose head was severed by the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Kåti, the wife of Saàhläda, bore a son named Païcajana. Hläda's
wife, whose name was Dhamani, gave birth to two sons-Vätäpi and Ilvala.
Ilvala put Vätäpi into the form of a ram and gave him to Agastya to eat.
Anuhläda, in the womb of his wife, Süryä, begot two sons, named Bäñkala and
Mahiña. Prahläda's son was known as Virocana, and his grandson was known as
Bali Mahäräja. Bali Mahäräja had one hundred sons, of whom Bäëa was the
eldest.
After describing the dynasty of the Ädityas and the other demigods,
Çukadeva Gosvämé describes Diti's sons known as the Maruts and how they
were elevated to the position of demigods. Just to help Indra, Lord Viñëu had
killed Hiraëyäkña and Hiraëyakaçipu. Because of this, Diti was very envious,
and she was eager to have a son who could kill Indra. By her service, she
enchanted Kaçyapa Muni in order to beg from him a greater son to do this. In
corroboration of the Vedic injunction vidväàsam api karñati, Kaçyapa Muni
was attracted to his beautiful wife and promised to grant her any request.
When, however, she requested a son who would kill Indra, he condemned
himself, and he advised his wife Diti to follow the Vaiñëava ritualistic
ceremonies to purify herself. When Diti, following the instructions of Kaçyapa,
engaged in devotional service, Indra could understand her purpose, and he
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
955
began observing all her activities. One day, Indra had the opportunity to see
her deviating from devotional service. Thus he entered her womb and cut her
son into forty-nine parts. In this way the forty-nine kinds of air known as the
Maruts appeared, but because Diti had performed the Vaiñëava ritualistic
ceremonies, all the sons became Vaiñëavas.
TEXT 1
é[qXauk- ovac
Pa*iénSTau PaÒq SaivTau" Saaiv}aq& VYaaôiTa& }aYaqMa( )
AiGanhae}a& PaXau& SaaeMa& caTauMaaRSYa& MahaMa%aNa( )) 1 ))
çré-çuka uväca
påçnis tu patné savituù
sävitréà vyähåtià trayém
agnihotraà paçuà somaà
cäturmäsyaà mahä-makhän
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; påçniù—Påçni; tu—then;
patné—wife; savituù—of Savitä; sävitrém—Sävitré; vyähåtim—Vyähåti;
trayém—Trayé; agnihotram—Agnihotra; paçum—Paçu; somam—Soma;
cäturmäsyam—Cäturmäsya; mahä-makhän—the five Mahäyajïas.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Påçni, who was the wife of Savitä, the fifth of
the twelve sons of Aditi, gave birth to three daughters—Sävitré, Vyähåti and
Trayé—and the sons named Agnihotra, Paçu, Soma, Cäturmäsya and the five
Mahäyajïas.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
956
TEXT 2
iSaiÖ>aRGaSYa >aaYaaR(r) MaihMaaNa& iv>au& Pa[>auMa( )
AaiXaz& c vraraeha& k-NYaa& Pa[aSaUTa Sauv]TaaMa( )) 2 ))
siddhir bhagasya bhäryäìga
mahimänaà vibhuà prabhum
äçiñaà ca varärohäà
kanyäà präsüta suvratäm
SYNONYMS
siddhiù—Siddhi; bhagasya—of Bhaga; bhäryä—the wife; aìga—my dear King;
mahimänam—Mahimä; vibhum—Vibhu; prabhum—Prabhu; äçiñam—Äçé;
ca—and; varärohäm—very beautiful; kanyäm—daughter; präsüta—bore;
su-vratäm—virtuous.
TRANSLATION
O King, Siddhi, who was the wife of Bhaga, the sixth son of Aditi, bore
three sons, named Mahimä, Vibhu and Prabhu, and one extremely beautiful
daughter, whose name was Äçé.
TEXTS 3-4
DaaTau" ku-hU" iSaNaqval/I rak-a caNauMaiTaSTaQaa )
SaaYa& dXaRMaQa Pa[aTa" PaU<aRMaaSaMaNau§-MaaTa( )) 3 ))
AGanqNa( PaurqZYaaNaaData i§-YaaYaa& SaMaNaNTar" )
czR<aq vå<aSYaaSaqÛSYaa& JaaTaae >a*Gau" PauNa" )) 4 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
957
dhätuù kuhüù sinévälé
räkä cänumatis tathä
säyaà darçam atha prätaù
pürëamäsam anukramät
agnén puréñyän ädhatta
kriyäyäà samanantaraù
carñaëé varuëasyäséd
yasyäà jäto bhåguù punaù
SYNONYMS
dhätuù—of Dhätä; kuhüù—Kuhü; sinévälé—Sinévälé; räkä—Räkä; ca—and;
anumatiù—Anumati; tathä—also; säyam—Säyam; darçam—Darça; atha—also;
prätaù—Prätaù; pürëamäsam—Pürëamäsa; anukramät—respectively;
agnén—fire-gods; puréñyän—called the Puréñyas; ädhatta—begot; kriyäyäm—in
Kriyä; samanantaraù—the next son, Vidhätä; carñaëé—Carñaëé;
varuëasya—of Varuëa; äsét—was; yasyäm—in whom; jätaù—took birth;
bhåguù—Bhågu; punaù—again.
TRANSLATION
Dhätä, the seventh son of Aditi, had four wives, named Kuhü, Sinévälé,
Räkä and Anumati. These wives begot four sons, named Säyam, Darça, Prätaù
and Pürëamäsa respectively. The wife of Vidhätä, the eighth son of Aditi, was
named Kriyä. In her Vidhätä begot the five fire-gods named the Puréñyas. The
wife of Varuëa, the ninth son of Aditi, was named Carñaëé. Bhågu, the son of
Brahmä, took birth again in her womb.
TEXT 5
vaLMaqik-ê MahaYaaeGaq vLMaqk-ad>aviTk-l/ )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
958
AGaSTYaê viSaïê iMa}aavå<aYaae‰Rzq )) 5 ))
välmékiç ca mahä-yogé
valmékäd abhavat kila
agastyaç ca vasiñöhaç ca
miträ-varuëayor åñé
SYNONYMS
välmékiù—Välméki; ca—and; mahä-yogé—the great mystic; valmékät—from an
anthill; abhavat—took birth; kila—indeed; agastyaù—Agastya; ca—and;
vasiñöhaù—Vasiñöha; ca—also; miträ-varuëayoù—of Mitra and Varuëa;
åñé—the two sages.
TRANSLATION
By the semen of Varuëa, the great mystic Välméki took birth from an
anthill. Bhågu and Välméki were specific sons of Varuëa, whereas Agastya and
Vasiñöha Åñis were the common sons of Varuëa and Mitra, the tenth son of
Aditi.
TEXT 6
reTa" iSaizcTau" ku-M>ae ovRXYaa" SaiàDaaE d]uTaMa( )
revTYaa& iMa}a oTSaGaRMairí& iPaPPal&/ VYaDaaTa( )) 6 ))
retaù siñicatuù kumbhe
urvaçyäù sannidhau drutam
revatyäà mitra utsargam
ariñöaà pippalaà vyadhät
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
959
SYNONYMS
retaù—semen; siñicatuù—discharged; kumbhe—in an earthen pot;
urvaçyäù—of Urvaçé; sannidhau—in the presence; drutam—flown;
revatyäm—in Revaté; mitraù—Mitra; utsargam—Utsarga; ariñöam—Ariñöa;
pippalam—Pippala; vyadhät—begot.
TRANSLATION
Upon seeing Urvaçé, the celestial society girl, both Mitra and Varuëa
discharged semen, which they preserved in an earthen pot. The two sons
Agastya and Vasiñöha later appeared from that pot, and they are therefore the
common sons of Mitra and Varuëa. Mitra begot three sons in the womb of his
wife, whose name was Revaté. Their names were Utsarga, Ariñöa and Pippala.
PURPORT
Modern science is trying to generate living entities in test tubes by
processing semen, but even long, long ago it was possible for semen kept in a
pot to develop into a child.
TEXT 7
PaaEl/aeMYaaiMaNd] AaData }aqNa( Pau}aaiNaiTa Na" é[uTaMa( )
JaYaNTaMa*z>a& TaaTa Ta*TaqYa& Maq!uz& Pa[>au" )) 7 ))
paulomyäm indra ädhatta
trén puträn iti naù çrutam
jayantam åñabhaà täta
tåtéyaà méòhuñaà prabhuù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
960
SYNONYMS
paulomyäm—in Paulomé (Çacédevé); indraù—Indra; ädhatta—begot;
trén—three; puträn—sons; iti—thus; naù—by us; çrutam—heard;
jayantam—Jayanta; åñabham—Åñabha; täta—my dear King; tåtéyam—third;
méòhuñam—Méòhuña; prabhuù—the lord.
TRANSLATION
O King Parékñit, Indra, the King of the heavenly planets and eleventh son of
Aditi, begot three sons, named Jayanta, Åñabha and Méòhuña, in the womb of
his wife, Paulomé. Thus we have heard.
TEXT 8
oå§-MaSYa devSYa MaaYaavaMaNaæiPa<a" )
k-ITaaOE PaTNYaa& b*hC^(l/aek-STaSYaaSaNa( SaaE>aGaadYa" )) 8 ))
urukramasya devasya
mäyä-vämana-rüpiëaù
kértau patnyäà båhacchlokas
tasyäsan saubhagädayaù
SYNONYMS
urukramasya—of Urukrama; devasya—the Lord; mäyä—by His internal
potency; vämana-rüpiëaù—having the form of a dwarf; kértau—in Kérti;
patnyäm—His wife; båhacchlokaù—Båhatçloka; tasya—of him; äsan—were;
saubhaga-ädayaù—sons beginning with Saubhaga.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
961
TRANSLATION
By His own potency, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who has
multifarious potencies, appeared in the form of a dwarf as Urukrama, the
twelfth son of Aditi. In the womb of His wife, whose name was Kérti, He begot
one son, named Båhatçloka, who had many sons, headed by Saubhaga.
PURPORT
As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (4.6):
ajo 'pi sann avyayätmä
bhütänäm éçvaro 'pi san
prakåtià sväm adhiñöhäya
sambhavämy ätma-mäyayä
"Although I am unborn and My transcendental body never deteriorates, and
although I am the Lord of all sentient beings, I still appear in every millennium
in My original transcendental form." When the Supreme Personality of
Godhead incarnates, He does not need any help from the external energy, for
He appears as He is by His own potency. The spiritual potency is also called
mäyä. It is said, ato mäyämayaà viñëuà pravadanti manéñiëaù: the body
accepted by the Supreme Personality of Godhead is called mäyämaya. This
does not mean that He is formed of the external energy; this mäyä refers to His
internal potency.
TEXT 9
TaTk-MaRGau<avqYaaRi<a k-aXYaPaSYa MahaTMaNa" )
PaêaÜ+YaaMahe_idTYaa& YaQaEvavTaTaar h )) 9 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
962
tat-karma-guëa-véryäëi
käçyapasya mahätmanaù
paçcäd vakñyämahe 'dityäà
yathaivävatatära ha
SYNONYMS
tat—His; karma—activities; guëa—qualities; véryäëi—and power;
käçyapasya—of the son of Kaçyapa; mahä-ätmanaù—the great soul;
paçcät—later; vakñyämahe—I shall describe; adityäm—in Aditi; yathä—how;
eva—certainly; avatatära—descended; ha—indeed.
TRANSLATION
Later [in the Eighth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam] I shall describe how
Urukrama, Lord Vämanadeva, appeared as the son of the great sage Kaçyapa
and how He covered the three worlds with three steps. I shall describe the
uncommon activities He performed, His qualities, His power and how He took
birth from the womb of Aditi.
TEXT 10
AQa k-XYaPadaYaadaNa( dETaeYaaNa( k-ITaRYaaiMa Tae )
Ya}a >aaGavTa" é[qMaaNa( Pa[hadae bil/rev c )) 10 ))
atha kaçyapa-däyädän
daiteyän kértayämi te
yatra bhägavataù çrémän
prahrädo balir eva ca
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
963
atha—now; kaçyapa-däyädän—the sons of Kaçyapa; daiteyän—born of Diti;
kértayämi—I shall describe; te—to you; yatra—where; bhägavataù—the great
devotee; çré-män—glorious; prahrädaù—Prahläda; baliù—Bali; eva—certainly;
ca—also.
TRANSLATION
Now let me describe the sons of Diti, who were begotten by Kaçyapa but
who became demons. In this demoniac family the great devotee Prahläda
Mahäräja appeared, and Bali Mahäräja also appeared in that family. The demons
are technically known as Daityas because they proceeded from the womb of
Diti.
TEXT 11
idTaeÜaRvev daYaadaE dETYadaNavviNdTaaE )
ihr<Yak-iXaPauNaaRMa ihr<Yaa+aê k-IiTaRTaaE )) 11 ))
diter dväv eva däyädau
daitya-dänava-vanditau
hiraëyakaçipur näma
hiraëyäkñaç ca kértitau
SYNONYMS
diteù—of Diti; dvau—two; eva—certainly; däyädau—sons; daitya-dänava—by
the Daityas and Dänavas; vanditau—worshiped;
hiraëyakaçipuù—Hiraëyakaçipu; näma—named; hiraëyäkñaù—Hiraëyäkña;
ca—also; kértitau—known.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
964
TRANSLATION
First the two sons named Hiraëyakaçipu and Hiraëyäkña took birth from
Diti's womb. Both of them were very powerful and were worshiped by the
Daityas and Dänavas.
TEXTS 12-13
ihr<Yak-iXaPaae>aaRYaaR k-YaaDauNaaRMa daNavq )
JaM>aSYa TaNaYaa Saa Tau Sauzuve cTaur" SauTaaNa( )) 12 ))
Sa&had& Pa[aGaNauhad& had& Pa[hadMaev c )
TaTSvSaa iSa&ihk-a NaaMa rahu& ivPa[icTaae_Ga]hqTa( )) 13 ))
hiraëyakaçipor bhäryä
kayädhur näma dänavé
jambhasya tanayä sä tu
suñuve caturaù sutän
saàhrädaà präg anuhrädaà
hrädaà prahrädam eva ca
tat-svasä siàhikä näma
rähuà vipracito 'grahét
SYNONYMS
hiraëyakaçipoù—of Hiraëyakaçipu; bhäryä—the wife; kayädhuù—Kayädhu;
näma—named; dänavé—descendant of Danu; jambhasya—of Jambha;
tanayä—daughter; sä—she; tu—indeed; suñuve—gave birth to; caturaù—four;
sutän—sons; saàhrädam—Saàhläda; präk—first; anuhrädam—Anuhläda;
hrädam—Hläda; prahrädam—Prahläda; eva—also; ca—and; tat-svasä—his
sister; siàhikä—Siàhikä; näma—named; rähum—Rähu; vipracitaù—from
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
965
Vipracit; agrahét—received.
TRANSLATION
The wife of Hiraëyakaçipu was known as Kayädhu. She was the daughter of
Jambha and a descendant of Danu. She gave birth to four consecutive sons,
known as Saàhläda, Anuhläda, Hläda and Prahläda. The sister of these four
sons was known as Siàhikä. She married the demon named Vipracit and gave
birth to another demon, named Rähu.
TEXT 14
iXarae_hrÛSYa hirê§e-<a iPabTaae_Ma*TaMa( )
Sa&hadSYa k*-iTa>aaRYaaRSaUTa PaÄJaNa& TaTa" )) 14 ))
çiro 'harad yasya hariç
cakreëa pibato 'måtam
saàhrädasya kåtir bhäryäsüta
païcajanaà tataù
SYNONYMS
çiraù—the head; aharat—cut off; yasya—of whom; hariù—Hari;
cakreëa—with the disc; pibataù—drinking; amåtam—nectar; saàhrädasya—of
Saàhläda; kåtiù—Kåti; bhäryä—the wife; asüta—gave birth to;
païcajanam—Païcajana; tataù—from him.
TRANSLATION
While Rähu, in disguise, was drinking nectar among the demigods, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead severed his head. The wife of Saàhläda was
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
966
named Kåti. By union with Saàhläda, Kåti gave birth to a son named
Païcajana.
TEXT 15
hadSYa DaMaiNa>aaRYaaRSaUTa vaTaaiPaiMaLvl/Ma( )
Yaae_GaSTYaaYa TviTaQaYae Paece vaTaaiPaiMaLvl/" )) 15 ))
hrädasya dhamanir bhäryäsüta
vätäpim ilvalam
yo 'gastyäya tv atithaye
pece vätäpim ilvalaù
SYNONYMS
hrädasya—of Hläda; dhamaniù—Dhamani; bhäryä—the wife; asüta—gave
birth to; vätäpim—Vätäpi; ilvalam—Ilvala; yaù—he who; agastyäya—to
Agastya; tu—but; atithaye—his guest; pece—cooked; vätäpim—Vätäpi;
ilvalaù—Ilvala.
TRANSLATION
The wife of Hläda was named Dhamani. She gave birth to two sons, named
Vätäpi and Ilvala. When Agastya Muni became Ilvala's guest, Ilvala served him
a feast by cooking Vätäpi, who was in the shape of a ram.
TEXT 16
ANauhadSYa SaUYaaRYaa& baZk-l/ae MaihzSTaQaa )
ivraecNaSTau Pa[ahaiddeRVYaa& TaSYaa>avØil/" )) 16 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
967
anuhrädasya süryäyäà
bäñkalo mahiñas tathä
virocanas tu prährädir
devyäà tasyäbhavad baliù
SYNONYMS
anuhrädasya—of Anuhläda; süryäyäm—through Süryä; bäñkalaù—Bäñkala;
mahiñaù—Mahiña; tathä—also; virocanaù—Virocana; tu—indeed;
prährädiù—the son of Prahläda; devyäm—through his wife; tasya—of him;
abhavat—was; baliù—Bali.
TRANSLATION
The wife of Anuhläda was named Süryä. She gave birth to two sons, named
Bäñkala and Mahiña. Prahläda had one son, Virocana, whose wife gave birth to
Bali Mahäräja.
TEXT 17
ba<aJYaeï& Pau}aXaTaMaXaNaaYaa& TaTaae_>avTa( )
TaSYaaNau>aav& SauëaeKYa& Paêadevai>aDaaSYaTae )) 17 ))
bäëa-jyeñöhaà putra-çatam
açanäyäà tato 'bhavat
tasyänubhävaà suçlokyaà
paçcäd eväbhidhäsyate
SYNONYMS
bäëa-jyeñöham—having Bäëa as the eldest; putra-çatam—one hundred sons;
açanäyäm—through Açanä; tataù—from him; abhavat—there were;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
968
tasya—his; anubhävam—character; su-çlokyam—laudable; paçcät—later;
eva—certainly; abhidhäsyate—will be described.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, Bali Mahäräja begot one hundred sons in the womb of Açanä. Of
these one hundred sons, King Bäëa was the eldest. The activities of Bali
Mahäräja, which are very laudable, will be described later [in the Eighth
Canto].
TEXT 18
ba<a AaraDYa iGairXa& le/>ae TaÓ<aMau:YaTaaMa( )
YaTPaaìeR >aGavaNaaSTae ùÛaiPa PaurPaal/k-" )) 18 ))
bäëa ärädhya giriçaà
lebhe tad-gaëa-mukhyatäm
yat-pärçve bhagavän äste
hy adyäpi pura-pälakaù
SYNONYMS
bäëaù—Bäëa; ärädhya—having worshiped; giriçam—Lord Çiva;
lebhe—obtained; tat—of him (Lord Çiva); gaëa-mukhyatäm—the platform of
being one of the chief associates; yat-pärçve—beside whom; bhagavän—Lord
Çiva; äste—remains; hi—because of which; adya—now; api—even;
pura-pälakaù—the protector of the capital.
TRANSLATION
Since King Bäëa was a great worshiper of Lord Çiva, he became one of Lord
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
969
Çiva's most celebrated associates. Even now, Lord Çiva protects King Bäëa's
capital and always stands beside him.
TEXT 19
MaåTaê idTae" Pau}aaêTvair„&XaàvaiDak-a" )
Ta AaSaàPa[Jaa" SaveR NaqTaa wNd]e<a SaaTMaTaaMa( )) 19 ))
marutaç ca diteù puträç
catväriàçan navädhikäù
ta äsann aprajäù sarve
nétä indreëa sätmatäm
SYNONYMS
marutaù—the Maruts; ca—and; diteù—of Diti; puträù—sons;
catväriàçat—forty; nava-adhikäù—plus nine; te—they; äsan—were;
aprajäù—without sons; sarve—all; nétäù—were brought; indreëa—by Indra;
sa-ätmatäm—to the position of demigods.
TRANSLATION
The forty-nine Marut demigods were also born from the womb of Diti. None
of them had sons. Although they were born of Diti, King Indra gave them a
position as demigods.
PURPORT
Apparently even demons can be elevated to positions as demigods when
their atheistic character is reformed. There are two kinds of men throughout
the universe. Those who are devotees of Lord Viñëu are called demigods, and
those who are just the opposite are called demons. Even the demons can be
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
970
transformed into demigods, as the statement of this verse proves.
TEXT 20
é[qraJaaevac
k-Qa& Ta AaSaur& >aavMaPaaeùaETPaitak&- Gaurae )
wNd]e<a Pa[aiPaTaa" SaaTMYa& ik&- TaTSaaDau k*-Ta& ih TaE" )) 20 ))
çré-räjoväca
kathaà ta äsuraà bhävam
apohyautpattikaà guro
indreëa präpitäù sätmyaà
kià tat sädhu kåtaà hi taiù
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—King Parékñit said; katham—why; te—they;
äsuram—demoniac; bhävam—mentality; apohya—giving up;
autpattikam—due to birth; guro—my dear lord; indreëa—by Indra;
präpitäù—were converted; sa-ätmyam—to demigods; kim—whether;
tat—therefore; sädhu—pious activities; kåtam—performed; hi—indeed;
taiù—by them.
TRANSLATION
King Parékñit inquired: My dear lord, due to their birth, the forty-nine
Maruts must have been obsessed with a demoniac mentality. Why did Indra, the
King of heaven, convert them into demigods? Did they perform any rituals or
pious activities?
TEXT 21
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
971
wMae é[ÕDaTae b]øà*zYaae ih MaYaa Sah )
PairjaNaaYa >aGav&STaàae VYaa:YaaTauMahRiSa )) 21 ))
ime çraddadhate brahmann
åñayo hi mayä saha
parijïänäya bhagavaàs
tan no vyäkhyätum arhasi
SYNONYMS
ime—these; çraddadhate—are eager; brahman—O brähmaëa; åñayaù—sages;
hi—indeed; mayä saha—with me; parijïänäya—to know; bhagavan—O great
soul; tat—therefore; naù—to us; vyäkhyätum arhasi—please explain.
TRANSLATION
My dear brähmaëa, I and all the sages present with me are eager to know
about this. Therefore, O great soul, kindly explain to us the reason.
TEXT 22
é[qSaUTa ovac
TaiÜZ<auraTaSYa Sa badraYai<a‚
vRcae iNaXaMYaad*TaMaLPaMaQaRvTa( )
Sa>aaJaYaNa( Sa&iNa>a*TaeNa ceTaSaa
JaGaad Sa}aaYa<a SavRdXaRNa" )) 22 ))
çré-süta uväca
tad viñëurätasya sa bädaräyaëir
vaco niçamyädåtam alpam arthavat
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
972
sabhäjayan san nibhåtena cetasä
jagäda saträyaëa sarva-darçanaù
SYNONYMS
çré-sütaù uväca—Çré Süta Gosvämé said; tat—those; viñëurätasya—of Mahäräja
Parékñit; saù—he; bädaräyaëiù—Çukadeva Gosvämé; vacaù—words;
niçamya—hearing; ädåtam—respectful; alpam—brief; artha-vat—meaningful;
sabhäjayan san—praising; nibhåtena cetasä—with great pleasure;
jagäda—replied; saträyaëa—O Çaunaka; sarva-darçanaù—who is aware of
everything.
TRANSLATION
Çré Süta Gosvämé said: O great sage Çaunaka, after hearing Mahäräja
Parékñit speak respectfully and briefly on topics essential to hear, Çukadeva
Gosvämé, who was well aware of everything, praised his endeavor with great
pleasure and replied.
PURPORT
Mahäräja Parékñit's question was very much appreciated by Çukadeva
Gosvämé because although it was composed of a small number of words, it
contained meaningful inquiries about how the sons of Diti, although born as
demons, became demigods. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura stresses that
even though Diti was very envious, her heart was purified because of a
devotional attitude. Another significant topic is that although Kaçyapa Muni
was a learned scholar and was advanced in spiritual consciousness, he
nonetheless fell a victim to the inducement of his beautiful wife. All these
questions were posed in a small number of words, and therefore Çukadeva
Gosvämé very much appreciated Mahäräja Parékñit's inquiry.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
973
TEXT 23
é[qXauk- ovac
hTaPau}aa idiTa" Xa§-PaaiZ<aRGa]ahe<a ivZ<auNaa )
MaNYauNaa Xaaek-dqáeNa Jvl/NTaq PaYaRicNTaYaTa( )) 23 ))
çré-çuka uväca
hata-puträ ditiù çakrapärñëi-
gräheëa viñëunä
manyunä çoka-déptena
jvalanté paryacintayat
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; hata-puträ—whose sons were
killed; ditiù—Diti; çakra-pärñëi-gräheëa—who was helping Lord Indra;
viñëunä—by Lord Viñëu; manyunä—with anger; çoka-déptena—kindled by
lamentation; jvalanté—burning; paryacintayat—thought.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Just to help Indra, Lord Viñëu killed the two
brothers Hiraëyäkña and Hiraëyakaçipu. Because of their being killed, their
mother, Diti, overwhelmed with lamentation and anger, contemplated as
follows.
TEXT 24
k-da Nau >a]aTa*hNTaariMaiNd]YaaraMaMauLb<aMa( )
Ai(c)-àôdYa& PaaPa& gaaTaiYaTva XaYae Sau%Ma( )) 24 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
974
kadä nu bhrätå-hantäram
indriyärämam ulbaëam
aklinna-hådayaà päpaà
ghätayitvä çaye sukham
SYNONYMS
kadä—when; nu—indeed; bhrätå-hantäram—the killer of the brothers;
indriya-ärämam—very fond of sense gratification; ulbaëam—cruel;
aklinna-hådayam—hard hearted; päpam—sinful; ghätayitvä—having caused to
be killed; çaye—shall I rest; sukham—happily.
TRANSLATION
Lord Indra, who is very much fond of sense gratification, has killed the two
brothers Hiraëyäkña and Hiraëyakaçipu by means of Lord Viñëu. Therefore
Indra is cruel, hardhearted and sinful. When will I, having killed him, rest with
a pacified mind?
TEXT 25
k*-iMaivÌSMaSa&jaSaqÛSYaeXaai>aihTaSYa c )
>aUTaDa]uk( TaTk*-Tae SvaQa| ik&- ved iNarYaae YaTa" )) 25 ))
kåmi-viò-bhasma-saàjïäséd
yasyeçäbhihitasya ca
bhüta-dhruk tat-kåte svärthaà
kià veda nirayo yataù
SYNONYMS
kåmi—worms; viö—stool; bhasma—ashes; saàjïä—name; äsét—becomes;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
975
yasya—of which (body); éça-abhihitasya—although designated as king;
ca—also; bhüta-dhruk—he who harms others; tat-kåte—for the sake of that;
sva-artham—his self-interest; kim veda—does he know; nirayaù—punishment
in hell; yataù—from which.
TRANSLATION
When dead, the bodies of all the rulers known as kings and great leaders will
be transformed into worms, stool or ashes. If one enviously kills others for the
protection of such a body, does he actually know the true interest of life?
Certainly he does not, for if one is envious of other entities, he surely goes to
hell.
PURPORT
The material body, even if possessed by a great king, is ultimately
transformed into stool, worms or ashes. When one is too attached to the bodily
conception of life, he is certainly not very intelligent.
TEXT 26
AaXaaSaaNaSYa TaSYaed& Da]uvMauàÖceTaSa" )
MadXaaezk- wNd]SYa >aUYaaÛeNa SauTaae ih Mae )) 26 ))
äçäsänasya tasyedaà
dhruvam unnaddha-cetasaù
mada-çoñaka indrasya
bhüyäd yena suto hi me
SYNONYMS
äçäsänasya—thinking; tasya—of him; idam—this (body); dhruvam—eternal;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
976
unnaddha-cetasaù—whose mind is unrestrained; mada-çoñakaù—who can
remove the madness; indrasya—of Indra; bhüyät—may there be; yena—by
which; sutaù—a son; hi—certainly; me—of me.
TRANSLATION
Diti thought: Indra considers his body eternal, and thus he has become
unrestrained. I therefore wish to have a son who can remove Indra's madness.
Let me adopt some means to help me in this.
PURPORT
One who is in the bodily conception of life is compared in the çästras to
animals like cows and asses. Diti wanted to punish Indra, who had become like
a lower animal.
TEXTS 27-28
wiTa >aaveNa Saa >aTauRraccaraSak*-iTPa[YaMa( )
Xaué[UzYaaNauraGae<a Pa[é[Yae<a dMaeNa c )) 27 ))
>a¢-ya ParMaYaa raJaNa( MaNaaejEvRLGau>aaizTaE" )
MaNaae JaGa]ah >aavja SaiSMaTaaPaa(r)vq+a<aE" )) 28 ))
iti bhävena sä bhartur
äcacäräsakåt priyam
çuçrüñayänurägeëa
praçrayeëa damena ca
bhaktyä paramayä räjan
manojïair valgu-bhäñitaiù
mano jagräha bhäva-jïä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
977
sasmitäpäìga-vékñaëaiù
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; bhävena—with the intention; sä—she; bhartuù—of the husband;
äcacära—performed; asakåt—constantly; priyam—pleasing activities;
çuçrüñayä—with service; anurägeëa—with love; praçrayeëa—with humility;
damena—with self-control; ca—also; bhaktyä—with devotion;
paramayä—great; räjan—O King; manojïaiù—charming;
valgu-bhäñitaiù—with sweet words; manaù—his mind; jagräha—brought under
her control; bhäva-jïä—knowing his nature; sa-smita—with smiling;
apäìga-vékñaëaiù—by glancing.
TRANSLATION
Thinking in this way [with a desire for a son to kill Indra], Diti began
constantly acting to satisfy Kaçyapa by her pleasing behavior. O King, Diti
always carried out Kaçyapa's orders very faithfully, as he desired. With service,
love, humility and control, with words spoken very sweetly to satisfy her
husband, and with smiles and glances at him, Diti attracted his mind and
brought it under her control.
PURPORT
When a woman wants to endear herself to her husband and make him very
faithful, she must try to please him in all respects. When the husband is
pleased with his wife, the wife can receive all necessities, ornaments and full
satisfaction for her senses. Herein this is indicated by the behavior of Diti.
TEXT 29
Wv& iñYaa Ja@q>aUTaae ivÜaNaiPa MaNaaejYaa )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
978
ba!iMaTYaah ivvXaae Na TaiÀ}a& ih YaaeiziTa )) 29 ))
evaà striyä jaòébhüto
vidvän api manojïayä
bäòham ity äha vivaço
na tac citraà hi yoñiti
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; striyä—by the woman; jaòébhütaù—enchanted; vidvän—very
learned; api—although; manojïayä—very expert; bäòham—yes; iti—thus;
äha—said; vivaçaù—under her control; na—not; tat—that;
citram—astonishing; hi—indeed; yoñiti—in the matter of women.
TRANSLATION
Although Kaçyapa Muni was a learned scholar, he was captivated by Diti's
artificial behavior, which brought him under her control. Therefore he assured
his wife that he would fulfill her desires. Such a promise by a husband is not at
all astonishing.
TEXT 30
ivl/aeKYaEk-aNTa>aUTaaiNa >aUTaaNYaadaE Pa[JaaPaiTa" )
iñYa& c§e- SvdehaDa| YaYaa Pau&Saa& MaiTaôRTaa )) 30 ))
vilokyaikänta-bhütäni
bhütäny ädau prajäpatiù
striyaà cakre sva-dehärdhaà
yayä puàsäà matir håtä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
979
SYNONYMS
vilokya—seeing; ekänta-bhütäni—detached; bhütäni—the living entities;
ädau—in the beginning; prajäpatiù—Lord Brahmä; striyam—the woman;
cakre—created; sva-deha—of his body; ardham—half; yayä—by whom;
puàsäm—of men; matiù—the mind; håtä—carried away.
TRANSLATION
In the beginning of creation, Lord Brahmä, the father of the living entities of
the universe, saw that all the living entities were unattached. To increase
population, he then created woman from the better half of man's body, for
woman's behavior carries away a man's mind.
PURPORT
This entire universe is going on under the spell of sexual attachment, which
was created by Lord Brahmä to increase the population of the entire universe,
not only in human society but also in other species. As stated by Åñabhadeva
in the Fifth Canto, puàsaù striyä mithuné-bhävam etam: [SB 5.5.8] the entire
world is going on under the spell of sexual attraction and desire between man
and woman. When man and woman unite, the hard knot of this attraction
becomes increasingly tight, and thus a man is implicated in the materialistic
way of life. This is the illusion of the material world. This illusion acted upon
Kaçyapa Muni, although he was very learned and advanced in spiritual
knowledge. As stated in the Manu-saàhitä (2.215) and Çrémad-Bhägavatam
(9.19.17) :
mäträ svasrä duhiträ vä
näviviktäsano bhavet
balavän indriya-grämo
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
980
vidväàsam api karñati
"A man should not associate with a woman in a solitary place, not even with
his mother, sister or daughter, for the senses are so strong that they lead astray
even a person advanced in knowledge." When a man remains in a solitary
place with a woman, his sexual desires undoubtedly increase. Therefore the
words ekänta-bhütäni, which are used here, indicate that to avoid sexual
desires one should avoid the company of women as far as possible. Sexual
desire is so powerful that one is saturated with it if he stays in a solitary place
with any woman, even his mother, sister or daughter.
TEXT 31
Wv& Xaué[UizTaSTaaTa >aGavaNa( k-XYaPa" iñYaa )
Pa[hSYa ParMaPa[qTaae idiTaMaahai>aNaNÛ c )) 31 ))
evaà çuçrüñitas täta
bhagavän kaçyapaù striyä
prahasya parama-préto
ditim ähäbhinandya ca
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; çuçrüñitaù—being served; täta—O dear one; bhagavän—the
powerful; kaçyapaù—Kaçyapa; striyä—by the woman; prahasya—smiling;
parama-prétaù—being very pleased; ditim—to Diti; äha—said;
abhinandya—approving; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
O my dear one, the most powerful sage Kaçyapa, being extremely pleased by
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
981
the mild behavior of his wife Diti, smiled and spoke to her as follows.
TEXT 32
é[qk-XYaPa ovac
vr& vrYa vaMaaeå Pa[qTaSTae_hMaiNaiNdTae )
iñYaa >aTaRir SauPa[qTae k-" k-aMa wh caGaMa" )) 32 ))
çré-kaçyapa uväca
varaà varaya vämoru
prétas te 'ham anindite
striyä bhartari supréte
kaù käma iha cägamaù
SYNONYMS
çré-kaçyapaù uväca—Kaçyapa Muni said; varam—benediction; varaya—ask;
vämoru—O beautiful woman; prétaù—pleased; te—with you; aham—I;
anindite—O irreproachable lady; striyäù—for the woman; bhartari—when the
husband; su-préte—pleased; kaù—what; kämaù—desire; iha—here; ca—and;
agamaù—difficult to obtain.
TRANSLATION
Kaçyapa Muni said: O beautiful woman, O irreproachable lady, since I am
very much pleased by your behavior, you may ask me for any benediction you
want. If a husband is pleased, what desires are difficult for his wife to obtain,
either in this world or in the next?
TEXTS 33-34
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
982
PaiTarev ih Naarq<aa& dEvTa& ParMa& SMa*TaMa( )
MaaNaSa" SavR>aUTaaNaa& vaSaudev" ié[Ya" PaiTa" )) 33 ))
Sa Wv devTaail/(r)ENaaRMaæPaivk-iLPaTaE" )
wJYaTae >aGavaNa( PauiM>a" ñqi>aê PaiTaæPaDa*k( )) 34 ))
patir eva hi näréëäà
daivataà paramaà småtam
mänasaù sarva-bhütänäà
väsudevaù çriyaù patiù
sa eva devatä-liìgair
näma-rüpa-vikalpitaiù
ijyate bhagavän pumbhiù
strébhiç ca pati-rüpa-dhåk
SYNONYMS
patiù—the husband; eva—indeed; hi—certainly; näréëäm—of women;
daivatam—demigod; paramam—supreme; småtam—is considered;
mänasaù—situated in the heart; sarva-bhütänäm—of all living entities;
väsudevaù—Väsudeva; çriyaù—of the goddess of fortune; patiù—the husband;
saù—He; eva—certainly; devatä-liìgaiù—by the forms of the demigods;
näma—names; rüpa—forms; vikalpitaiù—conceived; ijyate—is worshiped;
bhagavän—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pumbhiù—by men;
strébhiù—by women; ca—also; pati-rüpa-dhåk—in the form of the husband.
TRANSLATION
A husband is the supreme demigod for a woman. The Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Lord Väsudeva, the husband of the goddess of fortune, is situated
in everyone's heart and is worshiped through the various names and forms of
the demigods by fruitive workers. Similarly, a husband represents the Lord as
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
983
the object of worship for a woman.
PURPORT
The Lord says in Bhagavad-gétä (9.23):
ye 'py anya-devatä-bhaktä
yajante çraddhayänvitäù
te 'pi mäm eva kaunteya
yajanty avidhi-pürvakam
"Whatever a man may sacrifice to other gods, O son of Kunté, is really meant
for Me alone, but it is offered without true understanding." The demigods are
various assistants who act like the hands and legs of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. One who is not in direct touch with the Supreme Lord and
cannot conceive of the exalted position of the Lord is sometimes advised to
worship the demigods as various parts of the Lord. If women, who are usually
very much attached to their husbands, worship their husbands as
representatives of Väsudeva, the women benefit, just as Ajämila benefited by
calling for Näräyaëa, his son. Ajämila was concerned with his son, but because
of his attachment to the name of Näräyaëa, he attained salvation simply by
chanting that name. In India a husband is still called pati-guru, the husband
spiritual master. If husband and wife are attached to one another for
advancement in Kåñëa consciousness, their relationship of cooperation is very
effective for such advancement. Although the names of Indra and Agni are
sometimes uttered in the Vedic mantras (indräya svähä, agnaye svähä), the
Vedic sacrifices are actually performed for the satisfaction of Lord Viñëu. As
long as one is very much attached to material sense gratification, the worship
of the demigods or the worship of one's husband is recommended.
TEXT 35
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
984
TaSMaaTPaiTav]Taa NaaYaR" é[eYaSk-aMaa" SauMaDYaMae )
YaJaNTae_NaNYa>aaveNa PaiTaMaaTMaaNaMaqìrMa( )) 35 ))
tasmät pati-vratä näryaù
çreyas-kämäù sumadhyame
yajante 'nanya-bhävena
patim ätmänam éçvaram
SYNONYMS
tasmät—therefore; pati-vratäù—devoted to the husband; näryaù—women;
çreyaù-kämäù—conscientious; su-madhyame—O thin-waisted woman;
yajante—worship; ananya-bhävena—with devotion; patim—the husband;
ätmänam—the Supersoul; éçvaram—representative of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
My dear wife, whose body is so beautiful, your waist being thin, a
conscientious wife should be chaste and should abide by the orders of her
husband. She should very devoutly worship her husband as a representative of
Väsudeva.
TEXT 36
Saae_h& TvYaaicRTaae >ad]e wRd*G>aaveNa >ai¢-Ta" )
Ta& Tae SaMPaadYae k-aMaMaSaTaqNaa& Saudul/R>aMa( )) 36 ))
so 'haà tvayärcito bhadre
édåg-bhävena bhaktitaù
taà te sampädaye kämam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
985
asaténäà sudurlabham
SYNONYMS
saù—such a person; aham—I; tvayä—by you; arcitaù—worshiped; bhadre—O
gentle woman; édåk-bhävena—in such a way; bhaktitaù—with devotion;
tam—that; te—your; sampädaye—shall fulfill; kämam—desire; asaténäm—for
unchaste women; su-durlabham—not obtainable.
TRANSLATION
My dear gentle wife, because you have worshiped me with great devotion,
considering me a representative of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, I shall
reward you by fulfilling your desires, which are unobtainable for an unchaste
wife.
TEXT 37
idiTaåvac
vrdae Yaid Mae b]øNa( Pau}aiMaNd]h<a& v*<ae )
AMa*TYau& Ma*TaPau}aah& YaeNa Mae gaaiTaTaaE SauTaaE )) 37 ))
ditir uväca
varado yadi me brahman
putram indra-haëaà våëe
amåtyuà måta-puträhaà
yena me ghätitau sutau
SYNONYMS
ditiù uväca—Diti said; vara-daù—the giver of benedictions; yadi—if; me—to
me; brahman—O great soul; putram—a son; indra-haëam—who can kill Indra;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
986
våëe—I am asking for; amåtyum—immortal; måta-puträ—whose sons are dead;
aham—I; yena—by whom; me—my; ghätitau—were caused to be killed;
sutau—two sons.
TRANSLATION
Diti replied: O my husband, O great soul, I have now lost my sons. If you
want to give me a benediction, I ask you for an immortal son who can kill
Indra. I pray for this because Indra, with the help of Viñëu, has killed my two
sons Hiraëyäkña and Hiraëyakaçipu.
PURPORT
The word indra-haëam means "one who can kill Indra," but it also means
"one who follows Indra." The word amåtyum refers to the demigods, who do not
die like ordinary human beings because they have extremely long durations of
life. For example, the duration of Lord Brahmä's life is stated in Bhagavad-gétä:
sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad brahmaëo viduù [Bg. 8.17]. Even the duration
of one day, or twelve hours, of Brahmä is 4,300,000 years multiplied by one
thousand. Thus the duration of his life is inconceivable for an ordinary human
being. The demigods are therefore sometimes called amara, which means "one
who has no death." In this material world, however, everyone has to die.
Therefore the word amåtyum indicates that Diti wanted a son who would be
equal in status to the demigods.
TEXT 38
iNaXaMYa TaÜcae ivPa[ae ivMaNaa" PaYaRTaPYaTa )
Ahae ADaMaR" SauMahaNaÛ Mae SaMauPaiSQaTa" )) 38 ))
niçamya tad-vaco vipro
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
987
vimanäù paryatapyata
aho adharmaù sumahän
adya me samupasthitaù
SYNONYMS
niçamya—hearing; tat-vacaù—her words; vipraù—the brähmaëa;
vimanäù—aggrieved; paryatapyata—lamented; aho—alas; adharmaù—impiety;
su-mahän—very great; adya—today; me—upon me; samupasthitaù—has come.
TRANSLATION
Upon hearing Diti's request, Kaçyapa Muni was very much aggrieved.
"Alas," he lamented, "now I face the danger of the impious act of killing
Indra."
PURPORT
Although Kaçyapa Muni was eager to fulfill the desire of his wife Diti, when
he heard that she wanted a son to kill Indra his jubilation was immediately
reduced to nothing because he was averse to the idea.
TEXT 39
Ahae AQaeRiNd]YaaraMaae YaaeizNMaYYaeh MaaYaYaa )
Ga*hqTaceTaa" k*-Pa<a" PaiTaZYae Narke- Da]uvMa( )) 39 ))
aho arthendriyärämo
yoñin-mayyeha mäyayä
gåhéta-cetäù kåpaëaù
patiñye narake dhruvam
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
988
SYNONYMS
aho—alas; artha-indriya-ärämaù—too attached to material enjoyment;
yoñit-mayyä—in the form of a woman; iha—here; mäyayä—by the illusory
energy; gåhéta-cetäù—my mind being captivated; kåpaëaù—wretched;
patiñye—I shall fall; narake—to hell; dhruvam—surely.
TRANSLATION
Kaçyapa Muni thought: Alas, I have now become too attached to material
enjoyment. Taking advantage of this, my mind has been attracted by the
illusory energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the form of a woman
[my wife]. Therefore I am surely a wretched person who will glide down toward
hell.
TEXT 40
k-ae_iTa§-Maae_NauvTaRNTYaa" Sv>aaviMah YaaeizTa" )
iDax( Maa& bTaabuDa& SvaQaeR Yadh& TviJaTaeiNd]Ya" )) 40 ))
ko 'tikramo 'nuvartantyäù
svabhävam iha yoñitaù
dhiì mäà batäbudhaà svärthe
yad ahaà tv ajitendriyaù
SYNONYMS
kaù—what; atikramaù—offense; anuvartantyäù—following; sva-bhävam—her
nature; iha—here; yoñitaù—of the woman; dhik—condemnation; mäm—unto
me; bata—alas; abudham—not conversant; sva-arthe—in what is good for me;
yat—because; aham—I; tu—indeed; ajita-indriyaù—unable to control my
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
989
senses.
TRANSLATION
This woman, my wife, has adopted a means that follows her nature, and
therefore she is not to be blamed. But I am a man. Therefore, all condemnation
upon me! I am not at all conversant with what is good for me, since I could not
control my senses.
PURPORT
The natural instinct of a woman is to enjoy the material world. She induces
her husband to enjoy this world by satisfying his tongue, belly and genitals,
which are called jihvä, udara and upastha. A woman is expert in cooking
palatable dishes so that she can easily satisfy her husband in eating. When one
eats nicely, his belly is satisfied, and as soon as the belly is satisfied the genitals
become strong. Especially when a man is accustomed to eating meat and
drinking wine and similar passionate things, he certainly becomes sexually
inclined. It should be understood that sexual inclinations are meant not for
spiritual progress but for gliding down to hell. Thus Kaçyapa Muni considered
his situation and lamented. In other words, to be a householder is very risky
unless one is trained and the wife is a follower of her husband. A husband
should be trained at the very beginning of his life. Kaumära äcaret präjïo
dharmän bhägavatän iha (SB 7.6.1). During the time of brahmacarya, or student
life, a brahmacäré should be taught to be expert in bhägavata-dharma,
devotional service. Then when he marries, if his wife is faithful to her husband
and follows him in such life, the relationship between husband and wife is very
desirable. However, a relationship between husband and wife without spiritual
consciousness but strictly for sense gratification is not at all good. It is said in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (12.2.3) that especially in this age, Kali-yuga, däm-patye
'bhirucir hetuù: the relationship between husband and wife will be based on
sexual power. Therefore householder life in this Kali-yuga is extremely
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
990
dangerous unless both the wife and husband take to Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 41
XarTPaÚaeTSav& v£&- vcê é[v<aaMa*TaMa( )
ôdYa& +aurDaara>a& ñq<aa& k-ae ved ceiíTaMa( )) 41 ))
çarat-padmotsavaà vaktraà
vacaç ca çravaëämåtam
hådayaà kñura-dhäräbhaà
stréëäà ko veda ceñöitam
SYNONYMS
çarat—in the autumn; padma—a lotus flower; utsavam—blossoming;
vaktram—face; vacaù—words; ca—and; çravaëa—to the ear; amåtam—giving
pleasure; hådayam—heart; kñura-dhärä—the blade of a razor; äbham—like;
stréëäm—of women; kaù—who; veda—knows; ceñöitam—the dealings.
TRANSLATION
A woman's face is as attractive and beautiful as a blossoming lotus flower
during autumn. Her words are very sweet, and they give pleasure to the ear, but
if we study a woman's heart, we can understand it to be extremely sharp, like
the blade of a razor. In these circumstances, who could understand the dealings
of a woman?
PURPORT
Woman is now depicted very well from the materialistic point of view by
Kaçyapa Muni. Women are generally known as the fair sex, and especially in
youth, at the age of sixteen or seventeen, women are very attractive to men.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
991
Therefore a woman's face is compared to a blooming lotus flower in autumn.
Just as a lotus is extremely beautiful in autumn, a woman at the threshold of
youthful beauty is extremely attractive. In Sanskrit a woman's voice is called
näré-svara because women generally sing and their singing is very attractive.
At the present moment, cinema artists, especially female singers, are especially
welcome. Some of them earn fabulous amounts of money simply by singing.
Therefore, as taught by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, a woman's singing is
dangerous because it can make a sannyäsé fall a victim to the woman. Sannyäsa
means giving up the company of women, but if a sannyäsé hears the voice of a
woman and sees her beautiful face, he certainly becomes attracted and is sure
to fall down. There have been many examples. Even the great sage Viçvämitra
fell a victim to Menakä. Therefore a person desiring to advance in spiritual
consciousness must be especially careful not to see a woman's face or hear a
woman's voice. To see a woman's face and appreciate its beauty or to hear a
woman's voice and appreciate her singing as very nice is a subtle falldown for a
brahmacäré or sannyäsé. Thus the description of a woman's features by Kaçyapa
Muni is very instructive.
When a woman's bodily features are attractive, when her face is beautiful
and when her voice is sweet, she is naturally a trap for a man. The çästras
advise that when such a woman comes to serve a man, she should be
considered to be like a dark well covered by grass. In the fields there are many
such wells, and a man who does not know about them drops through the grass
and falls down. Thus there are many such instructions. Since the attraction of
the material world is based on attraction for women, Kaçyapa Muni thought,
"Under the circumstances, who can understand the heart of a woman?"
Cäëakya Paëòita has also advised, viçväso naiva kartavyaù stréñu räja-kuleñu ca:
"There are two persons one should not trust—a politician and a woman."
These, of course, are authoritative çästric injunctions, and we should therefore
be very careful in our dealings with women.
Sometimes our Kåñëa consciousness movement is criticized for mingling
men and women, but Kåñëa consciousness is meant for anyone. Whether one is
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
992
a man or woman does not matter. Lord Kåñëa personally says, striyo vaiçyäs
tathä çüdräs te 'pi yänti paräà gatim: whether one is a woman, çüdra or vaiçya,
not to speak of being a brähmaëa or kñatriya, everyone is fit to return home,
back to Godhead, if he strictly follows the instructions of the spiritual master
and çästra. We therefore request all the members of the Kåñëa consciousness
movement—both men and women—not to be attracted by bodily features but
only to be attracted by Kåñëa. Then everything will be all right. Otherwise
there will be danger.
TEXT 42
Na ih k-iêiTPa[Ya" ñq<aaMaÅSaa SvaiXazaTMaNaaMa( )
PaiTa& Pau}a& >a]aTar& va ganNTYaQaeR gaaTaYaiNTa c )) 42 ))
na hi kaçcit priyaù stréëäm
aïjasä sväçiñätmanäm
patià putraà bhrätaraà vä
ghnanty arthe ghätayanti ca
SYNONYMS
na—not; hi—certainly; kaçcit—anyone; priyaù—dear; stréëäm—to women;
aïjasä—actually; sva-äçiñä—for their own interests; ätmanäm—most dear;
patim—husband; putram—son; bhrätaram—brother; vä—or; ghnanti—they
kill; arthe—for their own interests; ghätayanti—cause to be killed; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
To satisfy their own interests, women deal with men as if the men were
most dear to them, but no one is actually dear to them. Women are supposed to
be very saintly, but for their own interests they can kill even their husbands,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
993
sons or brothers, or cause them to be killed by others.
PURPORT
A woman's nature has been particularly well studied by Kaçyapa Muni.
Women are self-interested by nature, and therefore they should be protected
by all means so that their natural inclination to be too self-interested will not
be manifested. Women need to be protected by men. A woman should be cared
for by her father in her childhood, by her husband in her youth and by her
grown sons in her old age. This is the injunction of Manu, who says that a
woman should not be given independence at any stage. Women must be cared
for so that they will not be free to manifest their natural tendency for gross
selfishness. There have been many cases, even in the present day, in which
women have killed their husbands to take advantage of their insurance
policies. This is not a criticism of women but a practical study of their nature.
Such natural instincts of a woman or a man are manifested only in the bodily
conception of life. When either a man or a woman is advanced in spiritual
consciousness, the bodily conception of life practically vanishes. We should see
all women as spiritual units (ahaà brahmäsmi(14)), whose only duty is to satisfy
Kåñëa. Then the influences of the different modes of material nature, which
result from one's possessing a material body, will not act.
The Kåñëa consciousness movement is so beneficial that it can very easily
counteract the contamination of material nature, which results from one's
possessing a material body. Bhagavad-gétä therefore teaches, in the very
beginning, that whether one is a man or a woman, one must know that he or
she is not the body but a spiritual soul. Everyone should be interested in the
activities of the spirit soul, not the body. As long as one is activated by the
bodily conception of life, there is always the danger of being misled, whether
one is a man or a woman. The soul is sometimes described as puruña because
whether one is dressed as a man or a woman, one is inclined to enjoy this
material world. One who has this spirit of enjoyment is described as puruña.
Whether one is a man or a woman, he is not interested in serving others;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
994
everyone is interested in satisfying his or her own senses. Kåñëa consciousness,
however, provides first-class training for a man or a woman. A man should be
trained to be a first-class devotee of Lord Kåñëa, and a woman should be
trained to be a very chaste follower of her husband. That will make the lives of
both of them happy.
TEXT 43
Pa[iTaé[uTa& ddaMaqiTa vcSTaà Ma*za >aveTa( )
vDa& NaahRiTa ceNd]ae_iPa Ta}aedMauPak-LPaTae )) 43 ))
pratiçrutaà dadäméti
vacas tan na måñä bhavet
vadhaà närhati cendro 'pi
tatredam upakalpate
SYNONYMS
pratiçrutam—promised; dadämi—I shall give; iti—thus; vacaù—statement;
tat—that; na—not; måñä—false; bhavet—can be; vadham—killing; na—not;
arhati—is suitable; ca—and; indraù—Indra; api—also; tatra—in that
connection; idam—this; upakalpate—is suitable.
TRANSLATION
I promised to give her a benediction, and this promise cannot be violated, but
Indra does not deserve to be killed. In these circumstances, the solution I have
is quite suitable.
PURPORT
Kaçyapa Muni concluded, "Diti is eager to have a son who can kill Indra,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
995
since she is a woman, after all, and is not very intelligent. I shall train her in
such a way that instead of always thinking of how to kill Indra, she will become
a Vaiñëava, a devotee of Kåñëa. If she agrees to follow the rules and regulations
of the Vaiñëava principles, the unclean core of her heart will certainly be
cleansed." Ceto-darpaëa-märjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. This is the process of
devotional service. Anyone can be purified by following the principles of
devotional service in Kåñëa consciousness, for Kåñëa consciousness is so
powerful that it can purify even the dirtiest class of men and transform them
into the topmost Vaiñëavas. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu's movement aims at this
purpose. Narottama däsa Öhäkura says:
vrajendra-nandana yei, çacé-suta haila sei,
balaräma ha-ila nitäi
déna-héna yata chila, hari-näme uddhärila,
ta'ra säkñé jagäi-mädhäi
The appearance of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu in this Kali-yuga is especially
meant to deliver the fallen souls, who are always planning something for
material enjoyment. He gave the people of this age the advantage of being able
to chant the Hare Kåñëa mantra and thus become fully pure, free from all
material contamination. Once one becomes a pure Vaiñëava, he transcends all
material conceptions of life. Thus Kaçyapa Muni tried to transform his wife
into a Vaiñëavé so that she might give up the idea of killing Indra. He wanted
both her and her sons to be purified so that they would be fit to become pure
Vaiñëavas. Of course, sometimes a practitioner deviates from the Vaiñëava
principles, and there is a chance that he may fall down, but Kaçyapa Muni
thought that even if one falls while practicing the Vaiñëava principles, he is
still not a loser. Even a fallen Vaiñëava is eligible for better results, as
confirmed in Bhagavad-gétä. Svalpam apy asya dharmasya träyate mahato
bhayät: even practicing the Vaiñëava principles to a small extent can save one
from the greatest danger of material existence. Thus Kaçyapa Muni planned to
instruct his wife Diti to become a Vaiñëava because he wanted to save the life
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
996
of Indra.
TEXT 44
wiTa Sa&icNTYa >aGavaNMaarqc" ku-åNaNdNa )
ovac ik-iÄTa( ku-iPaTa AaTMaaNa& c ivGahRYaNa( )) 44 ))
iti saïcintya bhagavän
märécaù kurunandana
uväca kiïcit kupita
ätmänaà ca vigarhayan
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; saïcintya—thinking; bhagavän—the powerful; märécaù—Kaçyapa
Muni; kuru-nandana—O descendant of Kuru; uväca—spoke;
kiïcit—somewhat; kupitaù—angry; ätmänam—himself; ca—and;
vigarhayan—condemning.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Kaçyapa Muni, thinking in this way, became
somewhat angry. Condemning himself, O Mahäräja Parékñit, descendant of
Kuru, he spoke to Diti as follows.
TEXT 45
é[qk-XYaPa ovac
Pau}aSTae >aivTaa >ad]e wNd]hadevbaNDav" )
Sa&vTSar& v]TaiMad& YaÛÅae DaariYaZYaiSa )) 45 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
997
çré-kaçyapa uväca
putras te bhavitä bhadre
indra-hädeva-bändhavaù
saàvatsaraà vratam idaà
yady aïjo dhärayiñyasi
SYNONYMS
çré-kaçyapaù uväca—Kaçyapa Muni said; putraù—son; te—your; bhavitä—will
be; bhadre—O gentle woman; indra-hä—killer of Indra, or follower of Indra;
adeva-bändhavaù—friend of the demons (or deva-bändhavaù—friend of the
demigods); saàvatsaram—for a year; vratam—vow; idam—this; yadi—if;
aïjaù—properly; dhärayiñyasi—you will execute.
TRANSLATION
Kaçyapa Muni said: My dear gentle wife, if you follow my instructions
regarding this vow for at least one year, you will surely get a son who will be
able to kill Indra. However, if you deviate from this vow of following the
Vaiñëava principles, you will get a son who will be favorable to Indra.
PURPORT
The word indra-hä refers to an asura who is always eager to kill Indra. An
enemy of Indra is naturally a friend to the asuras, but the word indra-hä also
refers to one who follows Indra or who is obedient to him. When one becomes
a devotee of Indra, he is certainly a friend to the demigods. Thus the words
indra-hädeva-bändhavaù are equivocal, for they say, "Your son will kill Indra,
but he will be very friendly to the demigods." If a person actually became a
friend of the demigods, he certainly would not be able to kill Indra.
TEXT 46
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
998
idiTaåvac
DaariYaZYae v]Ta& b]øNb]Uih k-aYaaRi<a YaaiNa Mae )
YaaiNa ceh iNaizÖaiNa Na v]Ta& ganiNTa YaaNYauTa )) 46 ))
ditir uväca
dhärayiñye vrataà brahman
brühi käryäëi yäni me
yäni ceha niñiddhäni
na vrataà ghnanti yäny uta
SYNONYMS
ditiù uväca—Diti said; dhärayiñye—I shall accept; vratam—vow; brahman—my
dear brähmaëa; brühi—please state; käryäëi—must be done; yäni—what;
me—to me; yäni—what; ca—and; iha—here; niñiddhäni—is forbidden;
na—not; vratam—the vow; ghnanti—break; yäni—what; uta—also.
TRANSLATION
Diti replied: My dear brähmaëa, I must accept your advice and follow the
vow. Now let me understand what I have to do, what is forbidden and what will
not break the vow. Please clearly state all this to me.
PURPORT
As stated above, a woman is generally inclined to serve her own purposes.
Kaçyapa Muni proposed to train Diti to fulfill her desires within one year, and
since she was eager to kill Indra, she immediately agreed, saying, "Please let me
know what the vow is and how I have to follow it. I promise that I shall do the
needful and not break the vow." This is another side of a woman's psychology.
Even though a woman is very fond of fulfilling her own plans, when someone
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
999
instructs her, especially her husband, she innocently follows, and thus she can
be trained for better purposes. By nature a woman wants to be a follower of a
man; therefore if the man is good the woman can be trained for a good
purpose.
TEXT 47
é[qk-XYaPa ovac
Na ih&SYaad(>aUTaJaaTaaiNa Na XaPaeàaNa*Ta& vdeTa( )
Nai^NÛaà%raeMaai<a Na SPa*XaeÛdMa(r)l/Ma( )) 47 ))
çré-kaçyapa uväca
na hiàsyäd bhüta-jätäni
na çapen nänåtaà vadet
na chindyän nakha-romäëi
na spåçed yad amaìgalam
SYNONYMS
çré-kaçyapaù uväca—Kaçyapa Muni said; na hiàsyät—must not harm;
bhüta-jätäni—the living entities; na çapet—must not curse; na—not;
anåtam—a lie; vadet—must speak; na chindyät—must not cut;
nakha-romäëi—the nails and hair; na spåçet—must not touch; yat—that
which; amaìgalam—impure.
TRANSLATION
Kaçyapa Muni said: My dear wife, to follow this vow, do not be violent or
cause harm to anyone. Do not curse anyone, and do not speak lies. Do not cut
your nails and hair, and do not touch impure things like skulls and bones.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1000
PURPORT
Kaçyapa Muni's first instruction to his wife was not to be envious. The
general tendency of anyone within this material world is to be envious, and
therefore, to become a Kåñëa conscious person, one must curb this tendency, as
stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (paramo nirmatsaräëäm [SB 1.1.2]). A Kåñëa
conscious person is always nonenvious, whereas others are always envious.
Thus Kaçyapa Muni's instruction that his wife not be envious indicates that
this is the first stage of advancement in Kåñëa consciousness. Kaçyapa Muni
desired to train his wife to be a Kåñëa conscious person, for this would suffice
to protect both her and Indra.
TEXT 48
NaaPSau òaYaaà ku-PYaeTa Na SaM>aazeTa duJaRNaE" )
Na vSaqTaaDaaETavaSa" óJa& c ivDa*Taa& KvicTa( )) 48 ))
näpsu snäyän na kupyeta
na sambhäñeta durjanaiù
na vasétädhauta-väsaù
srajaà ca vidhåtäà kvacit
SYNONYMS
na—not; apsu—in water; snäyät—must bathe; na kupyeta—must not become
angry; na sambhäñeta—must not speak; durjanaiù—with wicked persons; na
vaséta—must not wear; adhauta-väsaù—unwashed clothes; srajam—flower
garland; ca—and; vidhåtäm—which was already worn; kvacit—ever.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1001
Kaçyapa Muni continued: My dear gentle wife, never enter the water while
bathing, never be angry, and do not even speak or associate with wicked people.
Never wear clothes that have not been properly washed, and do not put on a
garland that has already been worn.
TEXT 49
NaaeiC^í& ci<@k-aà& c SaaiMaz& v*zl/aôTaMa( )
>auÅqTaaedKYaYaa d*í& iPabeàaÅil/Naa TvPa" )) 49 ))
nocchiñöaà caëòikännaà ca
sämiñaà våñalähåtam
bhuïjétodakyayä dåñöaà
piben näïjalinä tv apaù
SYNONYMS
na—not; ucchiñöam—leftover food; caëòikä-annam—food offered to the
goddess Kälé; ca—and; sa-ämiñam—mixed with flesh; våñala-ähåtam—brought
by a çüdra; bhuïjéta—must eat; udakyayä—by a woman in her menstrual
period; dåñöam—seen; pibet na—must not drink; aïjalinä—by joining and
cupping the two palms; tu—also; apaù—water.
TRANSLATION
Never eat leftover food, never eat prasäda offered to the goddess Kälé
[Durgä], and do not eat anything contaminated by flesh or fish. Do not eat
anything brought or touched by a çüdra nor anything seen by a woman in her
menstrual period. Do not drink water by joining your palms.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1002
Generally the goddess Kälé is offered food containing meat and fish, and
therefore Kaçyapa Muni strictly forbade his wife to take the remnants of such
food. Actually a Vaiñëava is not allowed to take any food offered to the
demigods. A Vaiñëava is always fixed in accepting prasäda offered to Lord
Viñëu. Through all these instructions, Kaçyapa Muni, in a negative way,
instructed his wife Diti how to become a Vaiñëavé.
TEXT 50
NaaeiC^íaSPa*íSail/l/a SaNDYaaYaa& Mau¢-MaUDaRJaa )
ANaicRTaaSa&YaTavak( NaaSa&vqTaa bihêreTa( )) 50 ))
nocchiñöäspåñöa-salilä
sandhyäyäà mukta-mürdhajä
anarcitäsaàyata-väk
näsaàvétä bahiç caret
SYNONYMS
na—not; ucchiñöä—after eating; aspåñöa-salilä—without washing;
sandhyäyäm—in the evening; mukta-mürdhajä—with the hair loose;
anarcitä—without ornaments; asaàyata-väk—without being grave; na—not;
asaàvétä—without being covered; bahiù—outside; caret—should go.
TRANSLATION
After eating, you should not go out to the street without having washed your
mouth, hands and feet. You should not go out in the evening or with your hair
loose, nor should you go out unless you are properly decorated with ornaments.
You should not leave the house unless you are very grave and are sufficiently
covered.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1003
PURPORT
Kaçyapa Muni advised his wife not to go out onto the street unless she was
well decorated and well dressed. He did not encourage the miniskirts that have
now become fashionable. In Oriental civilization, when a woman goes out onto
the street, she must be fully covered so that no man will recognize who she is.
All these methods are to be accepted for purification. If one takes to Kåñëa
consciousness, one is fully purified, and thus one remains always
transcendental to the contamination of the material world.
TEXT 51
NaaDaaETaPaadaPa[YaTaa Naad]RPaada odiKXara" )
XaYaqTa NaaParax(NaaNYaENaR NaGana Na c SaNDYaYaae" )) 51 ))
nädhauta-pädäprayatä
närdra-pädä udak-çiräù
çayéta näparäì nänyair
na nagnä na ca sandhyayoù
SYNONYMS
na—not; adhauta-pädä—without washing the feet; aprayatä—without being
purified; na—not; ardra-pädä—with wet feet; udak-çiräù—with the head
toward the north; çayéta—should lie down; na—not; aparäk—with the head
pointed west; na—not; anyaiù—with other women; na—not; nagnä—naked;
na—not; ca—and; sandhyayoù—at sunrise and sunset.
TRANSLATION
You should not lie down without having washed both of your feet or without
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1004
being purified, nor with wet feet or with your head pointed west or north. You
should not lie naked, or with other women, or during the sunrise or sunset.
TEXT 52
DaaETavaSaa XauiciNaRTYa& SavRMa(r)l/Sa&YauTaa )
PaUJaYaeTPa[aTaraXaaTPa[aGGaaeivPa[aHa( ié[YaMaCYauTaMa( )) 52 ))
dhauta-väsä çucir nityaà
sarva-maìgala-saàyutä
püjayet prätaräçät präg
go-vipräï çriyam acyutam
SYNONYMS
dhauta-väsä—wearing washed cloth; çuciù—being purified; nityam—always;
sarva-maìgala—with all auspicious items; saàyutä—adorned; püjayet—one
should worship; prätaù-äçät präk—before breakfast; go-viprän—the cows and
brähmaëas; çriyam—the goddess of fortune; acyutam—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Putting on washed clothing, being always pure and being adorned with
turmeric, sandalwood pulp and other auspicious items, before breakfast one
should worship the cows, the brähmaëas, the goddess of fortune and the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
If one is trained to honor and worship the cows and brähmaëas, he is
actually civilized. The worship of the Supreme Lord is recommended, and the
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1005
Lord is very fond of the cows and brähmaëas (namo brahmaëya-deväya
go-brähmaëa-hitäya ca). In other words, a civilization in which there is no
respect for the cows and brähmaëas is condemned. One cannot become
spiritually advanced without acquiring the brahminical qualifications and
giving protection to cows. Cow protection insures sufficient food prepared
with milk, which is needed for an advanced civilization. One should not
pollute civilization by eating the flesh of cows. A civilization must do
something progressive, and then it is an Äryan civilization. Instead of killing
the cow to eat flesh, civilized men must prepare various milk products that will
enhance the condition of society. If one follows the brahminical culture, he
will become competent in Kåñëa consciousness.
TEXT 53
iñYaae vqrvTaqêaceRTóGGaNDabil/Ma<@NaE" )
PaiTa& caCYaaeRPaiTaïeTa DYaaYaeTk-aeïGaTa& c TaMa( )) 53 ))
striyo véravatéç cärcet
srag-gandha-bali-maëòanaiù
patià cärcyopatiñöheta
dhyäyet koñöha-gataà ca tam
SYNONYMS
striyaù—women; véra-vatéù—possessing husbands and sons; ca—and;
arcet—she should worship; srak—with garlands; gandha—sandalwood;
bali—presentations; maëòanaiù—and with ornaments; patim—the husband;
ca—and; ärcya—worshiping; upatiñöheta—should offer prayers;
dhyäyet—should meditate; koñöha-gatam—situated in the womb; ca—also;
tam—upon him.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1006
TRANSLATION
With flower garlands, sandalwood pulp, ornaments and other paraphernalia,
a woman following this vow should worship women who have sons and whose
husbands are living. The pregnant wife should worship her husband and offer
him prayers. She should meditate upon him, thinking that he is situated in her
womb.
PURPORT
The child in the womb is a part of the husband's body. Therefore the
husband, through his representative, indirectly remains within the womb of
his pregnant wife.
TEXT 54
Saa&vTSar& Pau&SavNa& v]TaMaeTadivPlu„„TaMa( )
DaariYaZYaiSa cetau>Ya& Xa§-ha >aivTaa SauTa" )) 54 ))
säàvatsaraà puàsavanaà
vratam etad aviplutam
dhärayiñyasi cet tubhyaà
çakra-hä bhavitä sutaù
SYNONYMS
säàvatsaram—for one year; puàsavanam—called puàsavana; vratam—vow;
etat—this; aviplutam—without violation; dhärayiñyasi—you will perform;
cet—if; tubhyam—for you; çakra-hä—the killer of Indra; bhavitä—will be;
sutaù—a son.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1007
TRANSLATION
Kaçyapa Muni continued: If you perform this ceremony called puàsavana,
adhering to the vow with faith for at least one year, you will give birth to a son
destined to kill Indra. But if there is any discrepancy in the discharge of this
vow, the son will be a friend to Indra.
TEXT 55
ba!iMaTYa>YauPaeTYaaQa idTaq raJaNa( MahaMaNaa" )
k-XYaPaad( Ga>aRMaaData v]Ta& caÅae dDaar Saa )) 55 ))
bäòham ity abhyupetyätha
dité räjan mahä-manäù
kaçyapäd garbham ädhatta
vrataà cäïjo dadhära sä
SYNONYMS
bäòham—yes; iti—thus; abhyupetya—accepting; atha—then; ditiù—Diti;
räjan—O King; mahä-manäù—jubilant; kaçyapät—from Kaçyapa;
garbham—semen; ädhatta—obtained; vratam—the vow; ca—and;
aïjaù—properly; dadhära—discharged; sä—she.
TRANSLATION
O King Parékñit, Diti, the wife of Kaçyapa, agreed to undergo the
purificatory process known as puàsavana. "Yes," she said, "I shall do
everything according to your instructions." With great jubilation she became
pregnant, having taken semen from Kaçyapa, and faithfully began discharging
the vow.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1008
TEXT 56
MaaTa*ZvSauri>aPa[aYaiMaNd] AajaYa MaaNad )
Xaué[Uz<aeNaaé[MaSQaa& idiTa& PaYaRcrTk-iv" )) 56 ))
mätå-ñvasur abhipräyam
indra äjïäya mänada
çuçrüñaëenäçrama-sthäà
ditià paryacarat kaviù
SYNONYMS
mätå-svasuù—of his mother's sister; abhipräyam—the intention;
indraù—Indra; äjïäya—understanding; mäna-da—O King Parékñit, who give
respect to everyone; çuçrüñaëena—with service; äçrama-sthäm—residing in an
äçrama; ditim—Diti; paryacarat—attended upon; kaviù—seeing his own
interest.
TRANSLATION
O King, who are respectful to everyone, Indra understood Diti's purpose,
and thus he contrived to fulfill his own interests. Following the logic that
self-preservation is the first law of nature, he wanted to break Diti's promise.
Thus he engaged himself in the service of Diti, his aunt, who was residing in an
äçrama.
TEXT 57
iNaTYa& vNaaTSauMaNaSa" f-l/MaUl/SaiMaTku-XaaNa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1009
Pa}aax(ku„„„rMa*dae_Paê k-ale/ k-al/ oPaahrTa( )) 57 ))
nityaà vanät sumanasaù
phala-müla-samit-kuçän
paträìkura-mådo 'paç ca
käle käla upäharat
SYNONYMS
nityam—daily; vanät—from the forest; sumanasaù—flowers; phala—fruits;
müla—roots; samit—wood for the sacrificial fire; kuçän—and kuça grass;
patra—leaves; aìkura—sprouts; mådaù—and earth; apaù—water; ca—also;
käle käle—at the proper time; upäharat—brought.
TRANSLATION
Indra served his aunt daily by bringing flowers, fruits, roots and wood for
yajïas from the forest. He also brought kuça grass, leaves, sprouts, earth and
water exactly at the proper time.
TEXT 58
Wv& TaSYaa v]TaSQaaYaa v]TaiC^d]& hirNa*RPa )
Pa[ePSau" PaYaRcriÂøae Ma*Gahev Ma*Gaak*-iTa" )) 58 ))
evaà tasyä vrata-sthäyä
vrata-cchidraà harir nåpa
prepsuù paryacaraj jihmo
måga-heva mågäkåtiù
SYNONYMS
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1010
evam—thus; tasyäù—of her; vrata-sthäyäù—who was faithfully discharging
her vow; vrata-chidram—a fault in the execution of the vow; hariù—Indra;
nåpa—O King; prepsuù—desiring to find; paryacarat—served;
jihmaù—deceitful; måga-hä—a hunter; iva—like; måga-äkåtiù—in the form of
a deer.
TRANSLATION
O King Parékñit, as the hunter of a deer becomes like a deer by covering his
body with deerskin and serving the deer, so Indra, although at heart the enemy
of the sons of Diti, became outwardly friendly and served Diti in a faithful way.
Indra's purpose was to cheat Diti as soon as he could find some fault in the way
she discharged the vows of the ritualistic ceremony. However, he wanted to be
undetected, and therefore he served her very carefully.
TEXT 59
NaaDYaGaC^d(v]TaiC^d]& TaTParae_Qa MahqPaTae )
icNTaa& Taqv]a& GaTa" Xa§-" ke-Na Mae SYaaiC^v& iTvh )) 59 ))
nädhyagacchad vrata-cchidraà
tat-paro 'tha mahé-pate
cintäà tévräà gataù çakraù
kena me syäc chivaà tv iha
SYNONYMS
na—not; adhyagacchat—could find; vrata-chidram—a fault in the execution of
the vow; tat-paraù—intent upon that; atha—thereupon; mahé-pate—O master
of the world; cintäm—anxiety; tévräm—intense; gataù—obtained;
çakraù—Indra; kena—how; me—my; syät—can there be; çivam—well-being;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1011
tu—then; iha—here.
TRANSLATION
O master of the entire world, when Indra could find no faults, he thought,
"How will there be good fortune for me?" Thus he was full of deep anxiety.
TEXT 60
Wk-da Saa Tau SaNDYaaYaaMauiC^ía v]Tak-iXaRTaa )
ASPa*ívaYaRDaaETaax(iga]" SauZvaPa iviDaMaaeihTaa )) 60 ))
ekadä sä tu sandhyäyäm
ucchiñöä vrata-karçitä
aspåñöa-väry-adhautäìghriù
suñväpa vidhi-mohitä
SYNONYMS
ekadä—once; sä—she; tu—but; sandhyäyäm—during the evening twilight;
ucchiñöä—just after eating; vrata—from the vow; karçitä—weak and thin;
aspåñöa—not touched; väri—water; adhauta—not washed; aìghriù—her feet;
suñväpa—went to sleep; vidhi—by fate; mohitä—bewildered.
TRANSLATION
Having grown weak and thin because of strictly following the principles of
the vow, Diti once unfortunately neglected to wash her mouth, hands and feet
after eating and went to sleep during the evening twilight.
TEXT 61
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1012
l/Bßa TadNTar& Xa§-ae iNad]aPaôTaceTaSa" )
idTae" Pa[iví odr& YaaeGaeXaae YaaeGaMaaYaYaa )) 61 ))
labdhvä tad-antaraà çakro
nidräpahåta-cetasaù
diteù praviñöa udaraà
yogeço yoga-mäyayä
SYNONYMS
labdhvä—finding; tat-antaram—after that; çakraù—Indra; nidrä—by sleep;
apahåta-cetasaù—unconscious; diteù—of Diti; praviñöaù—entered;
udaram—the womb; yoga-éçaù—the master of yoga; yoga—of yogic
perfections; mäyayä—by the power.
TRANSLATION
Finding this fault, Indra, who has all the mystic powers [the yoga-siddhis
such as aëimä and laghimä], entered Diti's womb while she was unconscious,
being fast asleep.
PURPORT
A perfectly successful yogé is expert in eight kinds of perfection. By one of
them, called aëimä-siddhi, he can become smaller than an atom, and in that
state he can enter anywhere. With this yogic power, Indra entered the womb
of Diti while she was pregnant.
TEXT 62
ck-TaR SaáDaa Ga>a| vJa]e<a k-Nak-Pa[>aMa( )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1013
ådNTa& SaáDaEkE-k&- Maa raedqiriTa TaaNa( PauNa" )) 62 ))
cakarta saptadhä garbhaà
vajreëa kanaka-prabham
rudantaà saptadhaikaikaà
mä rodér iti tän punaù
SYNONYMS
cakarta—he cut; sapta-dhä—into seven pieces; garbham—the embryo;
vajreëa—by his thunderbolt; kanaka—of gold; prabham—which had the
appearance; rudantam—crying; sapta-dhä—into seven pieces; eka-ekam—each
one; mä rodéù—do not cry; iti—thus; tän—them; punaù—again.
TRANSLATION
After entering Diti's womb, Indra, with the help of his thunderbolt, cut into
seven pieces her embryo, which appeared like glowing gold. In seven places,
seven different living beings began crying. Indra told them, "Do not cry," and
then he cut each of them into seven pieces again.
PURPORT
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura remarks that Indra, by his yogic
power, first expanded the body of the one Marut into seven, and then when he
cut each of the seven parts of the original body into pieces, there were
forty-nine. When each body was cut into seven, other living entities entered
the new bodies, and thus they were like plants, which become separate entities
when cut into various parts and planted on a hill. The first body was one, and
when it was cut into many pieces, many other living entities entered the new
bodies.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1014
TEXT 63
TaMaUcu" Paa$yMaaNaaSTae SaveR Pa[aÅl/Yaae Na*Pa )
ik&- Na wNd] iJagaa&SaiSa >a]aTarae MaåTaSTav )) 63 ))
tam ücuù päöyamänäs te
sarve präïjalayo nåpa
kià na indra jighäàsasi
bhrätaro marutas tava
SYNONYMS
tam—to him; ücuù—said; päöyamänäù—being aggrieved; te—they; sarve—all;
präïjalayaù—with folded hands; nåpa—O King; kim—why; naù—us;
indra—O Indra; jighäàsasi—do you want to kill; bhrätaraù—brothers;
marutaù—Maruts; tava—your.
TRANSLATION
O King, being very much aggrieved, they pleaded to Indra with folded hands,
saying, "Dear Indra, we are the Maruts, your brothers. Why are you trying to
kill us?"
TEXT 64
Maa >aEí >a]aTarae Maù& YaUYaiMaTYaah k-aEiXak-" )
ANaNYa>aavaNa( PaazRdaNaaTMaNaae MaåTaa& Ga<aaNa( )) 64 ))
mä bhaiñöa bhrätaro mahyaà
yüyam ity äha kauçikaù
ananya-bhävän pärñadän
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1015
ätmano marutäà gaëän
SYNONYMS
mä bhaiñöa—do not fear; bhrätaraù—brothers; mahyam—my; yüyam—you;
iti—thus; äha—said; kauçikaù—Indra; ananya-bhävän—devoted;
pärñadän—followers; ätmanaù—his; marutäm gaëän—the Maruts.
TRANSLATION
When Indra saw that actually they were his devoted followers, he said to
them: If you are all my brothers, you have nothing more to fear from me.
TEXT 65
Na MaMaar idTaeGaR>aR" é[qiNavaSaaNauk-MPaYaa )
bhuDaa ku-il/Xa+au<<aae d]aE<Yañe<a YaQaa >avaNa( )) 65 ))
na mamära diter garbhaù
çréniväsänukampayä
bahudhä kuliça-kñuëëo
drauëy-astreëa yathä bhavän
SYNONYMS
na—not; mamära—died; diteù—of Diti; garbhaù—the embryo; çréniväsa—of
Lord Viñëu, the resting place of the goddess of fortune; anukampayä—by the
mercy; bahu-dhä—into many pieces; kuliça—by the thunderbolt;
kñuëëaù—cut; drauëi—of Açvatthämä; astreëa—by the weapon; yathä—just
as; bhavän—you.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1016
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: My dear King Parékñit, you were burned by the
brahmästra of Açvatthämä, but when Lord Kåñëa entered the womb of your
mother, you were saved. Similarly, although the one embryo was cut into
forty-nine pieces by the thunderbolt of Indra, they were all saved by the mercy
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXTS 66-67
Sak*-idîaidPauåz& Pauåzae YaaiTa SaaMYaTaaMa( )
Sa&vTSar& ik-iÄdUNa& idTYaa YaÖirricRTa" )) 66 ))
SaJaUirNd]e<a PaÄaXaÕevaSTae MaåTaae_>avNa( )
VYaPaaeù MaaTa*daez& Tae hir<aa SaaeMaPaa" k*-Taa" )) 67 ))
sakåd iñövädi-puruñaà
puruño yäti sämyatäm
saàvatsaraà kiïcid ünaà
dityä yad dharir arcitaù
sajür indreëa païcäçad
deväs te maruto 'bhavan
vyapohya mätå-doñaà te
hariëä soma-päù kåtäù
SYNONYMS
sakåt—once; iñövä—worshiping; ädi-puruñam—the original person; puruñaù—a
person; yäti—goes to; sämyatäm—possessing the same bodily feature as the
Lord; saàvatsaram—a year; kiïcit ünam—a little less than; dityä—by Diti;
yat—because; hariù—Lord Hari; arcitaù—was worshiped; sajüù—with;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1017
indreëa—Indra; païcäçat—fifty; deväù—demigods; te—they; marutaù—the
Maruts; abhavan—became; vyapohya—removing; mätå-doñam—the fault of
their mother; te—they; hariëä—by Lord Hari; soma-päù—drinkers of
soma-rasa; kåtäù—were made.
TRANSLATION
If one worships the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the original person,
even once, he receives the benefit of being promoted to the spiritual world and
possessing the same bodily features as Viñëu. Diti worshiped Lord Viñëu for
almost one year, adhering to a great vow. Because of such strength in spiritual
life, the forty-nine Maruts were born. How, then, is it wonderful that the
Maruts, although born from the womb of Diti, became equal to the demigods by
the mercy of the Supreme Lord ?
TEXT 68
idiTaåTQaaYa dd*Xae ku-MaaraNaNal/Pa[>aaNa( )
wNd]e<a SaihTaaNa( devq PaYaRTauZYadiNaiNdTaa )) 68 ))
ditir utthäya dadåçe
kumärän anala-prabhän
indreëa sahitän devé
paryatuñyad aninditä
SYNONYMS
ditiù—Diti; utthäya—getting up; dadåçe—saw; kumärän—children;
anala-prabhän—as brilliant as fire; indreëa sahitän—with Indra; devé—the
goddess; paryatuñyat—was pleased; aninditä—being purified.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1018
TRANSLATION
Because of worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Diti was
completely purified. When she got up from bed, she saw her forty-nine sons
along with Indra. These forty-nine sons were all as brilliant as fire and were in
friendship with Indra, and therefore she was very pleased.
TEXT 69
AQaeNd]Maah TaaTaahMaaidTYaaNaa& >aYaavhMa( )
APaTYaiMaC^NTYacr& v]TaMaeTaTSauduZk-rMa( )) 69 ))
athendram äha tätäham
ädityänäà bhayävaham
apatyam icchanty acaraà
vratam etat suduñkaram
SYNONYMS
atha—thereafter; indram—to Indra; äha—spoke; täta—dear one; aham—I;
ädityänäm—to the Ädityas; bhaya-ävaham—fearful; apatyam—a son;
icchanté—desiring; acaram—executed; vratam—vow; etat—this;
su-duñkaram—very difficult to perform.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, Diti said to Indra: My dear son, I adhered to this difficult vow
just to get a son to kill you twelve Ädityas.
TEXT 70
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1019
Wk-" SaªiLPaTa" Pau}a" Saá Saáa>avNa( k-QaMa( )
Yaid Tae ividTa& Pau}a SaTYa& k-QaYa Maa Ma*za )) 70 ))
ekaù saìkalpitaù putraù
sapta saptäbhavan katham
yadi te viditaà putra
satyaà kathaya mä måñä
SYNONYMS
ekaù—one; saìkalpitaù—was prayed for; putraù—son; sapta sapta—forty-nine;
abhavan—came to be; katham—how; yadi—if; te—by you; viditam—known;
putra—my dear son; satyam—the truth; kathaya—speak; mä—do not (speak);
måñä—lies.
TRANSLATION
I prayed for only one son, but now I see that there are forty-nine. How has
this happened? My dear son Indra, if you know, please tell me the truth. Do not
try to speak lies.
TEXT 71
wNd] ovac
AMb Tae_h& VYaviSaTaMauPaDaaYaaRGaTaae_iNTak-Ma( )
l/BDaaNTarae_iC^d& Ga>aRMaQaRbuiÖNaR DaMaRd*k( )) 71 ))
indra uväca
amba te 'haà vyavasitam
upadhäryägato 'ntikam
labdhäntaro 'cchidaà garbham
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1020
artha-buddhir na dharma-dåk
SYNONYMS
indraù uväca—Indra said; amba—O mother; te—your; aham—I;
vyavasitam—vow; upadhärya—understanding; ägataù—came;
antikam—nearby; labdha—having found; antaraù—a fault; acchidam—I cut;
garbham—the embryo; artha-buddhiù—being self-interested; na—not;
dharma-dåk—possessing vision of religion.
TRANSLATION
Indra replied: My dear mother, because I was grossly blinded by selfish
interests, I lost sight of religion. When I understood that you were observing a
great vow in spiritual life, I wanted to find some fault in you. When I found
such a fault, I entered your womb and cut the embryo to pieces.
PURPORT
When Diti, Indra's aunt, explained to Indra without reservations what she
had wanted to do, Indra explained his intentions to her. Thus both of them,
instead of being enemies, freely spoke the truth. This is the qualification that
results from contact with Viñëu. As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (5.18.12):
yasyästi bhaktir bhagavaty akiïcanä
sarvair guëais tatra samäsate suräù
If one develops a devotional attitude and becomes purified by worshiping the
Supreme Lord, all the good qualities are certainly manifested in his body.
Because of being touched by worship of Viñëu, both Diti and Indra were
purified.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1021
TEXT 72
k*-taae Mae SaáDaa Ga>aR AaSaNa( Saá ku-Maark-a" )
Tae_iPa cEkE-k-Xaae v*K<aa" SaáDaa NaaiPa MaiMa]re )) 72 ))
kåtto me saptadhä garbha
äsan sapta kumärakäù
te 'pi caikaikaço våkëäù
saptadhä näpi mamrire
SYNONYMS
kåttaù—cut; me—by me; sapta-dhä—into seven; garbhaù—the embryo;
äsan—there came to be; sapta—seven; kumärakäù—babies; te—they;
api—although; ca—also; eka-ekaçaù—each one; våkëäù—cut; sapta-dhä—into
seven; na—not; api—still; mamrire—died.
TRANSLATION
First I cut the child in the womb into seven pieces, which became seven
children. Then I cut each of the children into seven pieces again. By the grace
of the Supreme Lord, however, none of them died.
TEXT 73
TaTaSTaTParMaaêYa| vq+Ya VYaviSaTa& MaYaa )
MahaPauåzPaUJaaYaa" iSaiÖ" k-aPYaaNauzi(r)<aq )) 73 ))
tatas tat paramäçcaryaà
vékñya vyavasitaà mayä
mahäpuruña-püjäyäù
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1022
siddhiù käpy änuñaìgiëé
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; tat—that; parama-äçcaryam—great wonder; vékñya—seeing;
vyavasitam—it was decided; mayä—by me; mahä-puruña—of Lord Viñëu;
püjäyäù—of worship; siddhiù—result; käpi—some; änuñaìgiëé—secondary.
TRANSLATION
My dear mother, when I saw that all forty-nine sons were alive, I was
certainly struck with wonder. I decided that this was a secondary result of your
having regularly executed devotional service in worship of Lord Viñëu.
PURPORT
For one who engages in worshiping Lord Viñëu, nothing is very wonderful.
This is a fact. In Bhagavad-gétä (18.78) it is said:
yatra yogeçvaraù kåñëo
yatra pärtho dhanur-dharaù
tatra çrér vijayo bhütir
dhruvä nétir matir mama
"Wherever there is Kåñëa, the master of all mystics, and wherever there is
Arjuna, the supreme archer, there will also certainly be opulence, victory,
extraordinary power, and morality. That is my opinion." Yogeçvara is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master of all mystic yoga, who can do
anything and everything He likes. This is the omnipotence of the Supreme
Lord. For one who pleases the Supreme Lord, no achievement is wonderful.
Everything is possible for him.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1023
TEXT 74
AaraDaNa& >aGavTa wRhMaaNaa iNaraiXaz" )
Yae Tau NaeC^NTYaiPa Par& Tae SvaQaRku-Xal/a" SMa*Taa" )) 74 ))
ärädhanaà bhagavata
éhamänä niräçiñaù
ye tu necchanty api paraà
te svärtha-kuçaläù småtäù
SYNONYMS
ärädhanam—the worship; bhagavataù—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; éhamänäù—being interested in; niräçiñaù—without material desires;
ye—those who; tu—indeed; na icchanti—do not desire; api—even;
param—liberation; te—they; sva-artha—in their own interest;
kuçaläù—expert; småtäù—are considered.
TRANSLATION
Although those who are interested only in worshiping the Supreme
Personality of Godhead do not desire anything material from the Lord and do
not even want liberation, Lord Kåñëa fulfills all their desires.
PURPORT
When Dhruva Mahäräja saw Lord Viñëu, he declined to take any
benedictions from Him, for he was fully satisfied by seeing the Lord.
Nonetheless, the Lord is so kind that because Dhruva Mahäräja, in the
beginning, had desired a kingdom greater than his father's, he was promoted to
Dhruvaloka, the best planet in the universe. Therefore in the çästra it is said:
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1024
akämaù sarva-kämo vä
mokña-käma udära-dhéù
tévreëa bhakti-yogena
yajeta puruñaà param
"A person who has broader intelligence, whether he is full of material desires,
free from material desires, or desiring liberation, must by all means worship the
supreme whole, the Personality of Godhead." (SB 2.3.10) One should engage in
full devotional service. Then, even though he has no desires, whatever desires
he previously had can all be fulfilled simply by his worship of the Lord. The
actual devotee does not desire even liberation (anyäbhiläñitä-çünyam
[Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.1.11(15)]). The Lord, however, fulfills the desire of
the devotee by awarding him opulence that will never be destroyed. A karmé's
opulence is destroyed, but the opulence of a devotee is never destroyed. A
devotee becomes more and more opulent as he increases his devotional service
to the Lord.
TEXT 75
AaraDYaaTMaPa[d& dev& SvaTMaaNa& JaGadqìrMa( )
k-ae v*<aqTa Gau<aSPaXa| buDa" SYaaàrke-_iPa YaTa( )) 75 ))
ärädhyätma-pradaà devaà
svätmänaà jagad-éçvaram
ko våëéta guëa-sparçaà
budhaù syän narake 'pi yat
SYNONYMS
ärädhya—after worshiping; ätma-pradam—who gives Himself; devam—the
Lord; sva-ätmänam—the most dear; jagat-éçvaram—the Lord of the universe;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1025
kaù—what; våëéta—would choose; guëa-sparçam—material happiness;
budhaù—intelligent person; syät—is; narake—in hell; api—even; yat—which.
TRANSLATION
The ultimate goal of all ambitions is to become a servant of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. If an intelligent man serves the most dear Lord, who
gives Himself to His devotees, how can he desire material happiness, which is
available even in hell?
PURPORT
An intelligent man will never aspire to become a devotee to achieve
material happiness. That is the test of a devotee. As Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu
teaches:
na dhanaà na janaà na sundaréà
kavitäà vä jagad-éça kämaye
mama janmani janmanéçvare
bhavatäd bhaktir ahaituké tvayi
[Cc. Antya 20.29, Çikñäñöaka 4]
"O almighty Lord, I have no desire to accumulate wealth, nor do I desire
beautiful women, nor do I want any number of followers. I only want Your
causeless devotional service birth after birth." A pure devotee never begs the
Lord for material happiness in the shape of riches, followers, a good wife or
even mukti. The Lord promises, however, yoga-kñemaà vahämy aham: [Bg.
9.22] "I voluntarily bring everything necessary for My service."
TEXT 76
Taidd& MaMa daEJaRNYa& bail/XaSYa MahqYaiSa )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1026
+aNTauMahRiSa MaaTaSTv& idíya Ga>aaeR Ma*TaaeiTQaTa" )) 76 ))
tad idaà mama daurjanyaà
bäliçasya mahéyasi
kñantum arhasi mätas tvaà
diñöyä garbho måtotthitaù
SYNONYMS
tat—that; idam—this; mama—of me; daurjanyam—evil deed; bäliçasya—a
fool; mahéyasi—O best of women; kñantum arhasi—please excuse; mätaù—O
mother; tvam—you; diñöyä—by fortune; garbhaù—the child within the womb;
måta—killed; utthitaù—became alive.
TRANSLATION
O my mother, O best of all women, I am a fool. Kindly excuse me for
whatever offenses I have committed. Your forty-nine sons have been born
unhurt because of your devotional service. As an enemy, I cut them to pieces,
but because of your great devotional service they did not die.
TEXT 77
é[qXauk- ovac
wNd]STaYaa>YaNaujaTa" XauÖ>aaveNa TauíYaa )
MaåiÙ" Sah Taa& NaTva JaGaaMa i}aidv& Pa[>au" )) 77 ))
çré-çuka uväca
indras tayäbhyanujïätaù
çuddha-bhävena tuñöayä
marudbhiù saha täà natvä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1027
jagäma tri-divaà prabhuù
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; indraù—Indra; tayä—by her;
abhyanujïätaù—being permitted; çuddha-bhävena—by the good behavior;
tuñöayä—satisfied; marudbhiù saha—with the Maruts; täm—to her;
natvä—having offered obeisances; jagäma—he went; tri-divam—to the
heavenly planets; prabhuù—the Lord.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: Diti was extremely satisfied by Indra's
good behavior. Then Indra offered his respects to his aunt with profuse
obeisances, and with her permission he went away to the heavenly planets with
his brothers the Maruts.
TEXT 78
Wv& Tae SavRMaa:YaaTa& YaNMaa& Tv& PairPa*C^iSa )
Ma(r)l&/ MaåTaa& JaNMa ik&- >aUYa" k-QaYaaiMa Tae )) 78 ))
evaà te sarvam äkhyätaà
yan mäà tvaà paripåcchasi
maìgalaà marutäà janma
kià bhüyaù kathayämi te
SYNONYMS
evam—thus; te—to you; sarvam—all; äkhyätam—narrated; yat—which;
mäm—me; tvam—you; paripåcchasi—asked; maìgalam—auspicious;
marutäm—of the Maruts; janma—the birth; kim—what; bhüyaù—further;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1028
kathayämi—shall I speak; te—to you.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Parékñit, I have replied as far as possible to the questions you
have asked me, especially in regard to this pure, auspicious narration about the
Maruts. Now you may inquire further, and I shall explain more.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sixth Canto, Eighteenth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "Diti Vows to Kill King Indra."
19. Performing the Puàsavana Ritualistic Ceremony
This chapter explains how Diti, Kaçyapa Muni's wife, executed Kaçyapa
Muni's instructions on devotional service. During the first day of the bright
fortnight of the moon in the month of Agrahäyaëa (November-December),
every woman, following in the footsteps of Diti and following the instructions
of her own husband, should begin this puàsavana-vrata. In the morning, after
washing her teeth, bathing and thus becoming purified, she should hear about
the birth mystery of the Maruts. Then, covering her body with a white dress
and being properly ornamented, before breakfast she should worship Lord
Viñëu and mother Lakñmé, the goddess of fortune, Lord Viñëu's wife, by
glorifying Lord Viñëu for His mercy, patience, prowess, ability, greatness and
other glories and for how He can bestow all mystic benedictions. While
offering the Lord all paraphernalia for worship, such as ornaments, a sacred
thread, scents, nice flowers, incense and water for bathing and washing His
feet, hands and mouth, one should invite the Lord with this mantra: oà namo
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1029
bhagavate mahä-puruñäya mahänubhäväya mahävibhütipataye saha
mahä-vibhütibhir balim upaharämi. Then one should offer twelve oblations in
the fire while chanting this mantra: oà namo bhagavate mahä-puruñäya
mahävibhüti-pataye svähä. One should offer obeisances while chanting this
mantra ten times. Then one should chant the Lakñmé-Näräyaëa mantra.
If either a pregnant woman or her husband regularly discharges this
devotional service, both of them will receive the result. After continuing this
process for one full year, the chaste wife should fast on the pürëimä, the
full-moon day, of Kärttika. On the following day, the husband should worship
the Lord as before and then observe a festival by cooking nice food and
distributing prasäda to the brähmaëas. Then, with the permission of the
brähmaëas, the husband and wife should take prasäda. This chapter ends by
glorifying the results of the puàsavana function.
TEXT 1
é[qraJaaevac
v]Ta& Pau&SavNa& b]øNa( >avTaa YadudqirTaMa( )
TaSYa veidTauiMaC^aiMa YaeNa ivZ<au" Pa[SaqdiTa )) 1 ))
çré-räjoväca
vrataà puàsavanaà brahman
bhavatä yad udéritam
tasya veditum icchämi
yena viñëuù prasédati
SYNONYMS
çré-räjä uväca—Mahäräja Parékñit said; vratam—the vow; puàsavanam—called
puàsavana; brahman—O brähmaëa; bhavatä—by you; yat—which;
udéritam—was spoken of; tasya—of that; veditum—to know; icchämi—I want;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1030
yena—by which; viñëuù—Lord Viñëu; prasédati—is pleased.
TRANSLATION
Mahäräja Parékñit said: My dear lord, you have already spoken about the
puàsavana vow. Now I want to hear about it in detail, for I understand that by
observing this vow one can please the Supreme Lord, Viñëu.
TEXTS 2-3
é[qXauk- ovac
Xau(c)e- MaaGaRiXare Pa+ae YaaeizÙTauRrNaujYaa )
Aar>aeTa v]TaiMad& SaavRk-aiMak-MaaidTa" )) 2 ))
iNaXaMYa MaåTaa& JaNMa b]aø<aaNaNauMaN}Ya c )
òaTva Xau(c)-dTaq Xau(c)e- vSaqTaal/x(k*„„„TaaMbre )
PaUJaYaeTPa[aTaraXaaTPa[aG>aGavNTa& ié[Yaa Sah )) 3 ))
çré-çuka uväca
çukle märgaçire pakñe
yoñid bhartur anujïayä
ärabheta vratam idaà
särva-kämikam äditaù
niçamya marutäà janma
brähmaëän anumantrya ca
snätvä çukla-daté çukle
vasétälaìkåtämbare
püjayet prätaräçät präg
bhagavantaà çriyä saha
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1031
SYNONYMS
çré-çukaù uväca—Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said; çukle—bright;
märgaçire—during the month of November-December; pakñe—during the
fortnight; yoñit—a woman; bhartuù—of the husband; anujïayä—with the
permission; ärabheta—should begin; vratam—vow; idam—this;
särva-kämikam—which fulfills all desires; äditaù—from the first day;
niçamya—hearing; marutäm—of the Maruts; janma—the birth;
brähmaëän—the brähmaëas; anumantrya—taking instruction from; ca—and;
snätvä—bathing; çukla-daté—having cleaned the teeth; çukle—white;
vaséta—should put on; alaìkåtä—wearing ornaments; ambare—garments;
püjayet—should worship; prätaù-äçät präk—before breakfast;
bhagavantam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; çriyä saha—with the
goddess of fortune.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: On the first day of the bright fortnight of the
month of Agrahäyaëa [November-December], following the instructions of her
husband, a woman should begin this regulative devotional service with a vow of
penance, for it can fulfill all one's desires. Before beginning the worship of Lord
Viñëu, the woman should hear the story of how the Maruts were born. Under
the instructions of qualified brähmaëas, in the morning she should wash her
teeth, bathe, and dress herself with white cloth and ornaments, and before
taking breakfast she should worship Lord Viñëu and Lakñmé.
TEXT 4
Al&/ Tae iNarPae+aaYa PaU<aRk-aMa NaMaae_STau Tae )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1032
Mahaiv>aUiTaPaTaYae NaMa" Sak-l/iSaÖYae )) 4 ))
alaà te nirapekñäya
pürëa-käma namo 'stu te
mahävibhüti-pataye
namaù sakala-siddhaye
SYNONYMS
alam—enough; te—to You; nirapekñäya—indifferent; pürëa-käma—O Lord,
whose desire is always fulfilled; namaù—obeisances; astu—may there be;
te—unto You; mahä-vibhüti—of Lakñmé; pataye—unto the husband;
namaù—obeisances; sakala-siddhaye—unto the master of all mystic
perfections.
TRANSLATION
[She should then pray to the Lord as follows.] My dear Lord, You are full in
all opulences, but I do not beg You for opulence. I simply offer my respectful
obeisances unto You. You are the husband and master of Lakñmédevé, the
goddess of fortune, who has all opulences. Therefore You are the master of all
mystic yoga. I simply offer my obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
A devotee knows how to appreciate the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
oà pürëam adaù pürëam idaà
pürëät pürëam udacyate
pürëasya pürëam ädäya
pürëam evävaçiñyate
[Éço Invocation]
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1033
"The Personality of Godhead is perfect and complete, and because He is
completely perfect, all emanations from Him, such as this phenomenal world,
are perfectly equipped as complete wholes. Whatever is produced of the
complete whole is also complete in itself. Because He is the complete whole,
even though so many complete units emanate from Him, He remains the
complete balance." Therefore, to take shelter of the Supreme Lord is required.
Whatever a devotee needs will be supplied by the complete Supreme
Personality of Godhead (teñäà nityäbhiyuktänäà yoga-kñemaà vahämy aham
[Bg. 9.22]). Therefore a pure devotee will not ask anything from the Lord. He
simply offers the Lord his respectful obeisances, and the Lord is prepared to
accept whatever the devotee can secure to worship Him, even patraà puñpaà
phalaà toyam [Bg. 9.26]-a leaf, flower, fruit or water. There is no need to
artificially exert oneself. It is better to be plain and simple and with respectful
obeisances offer to the Lord whatever one can secure. The Lord is completely
able to bless the devotee with all opulences.
TEXT 5
YaQaa Tv& k*-PaYaa >aUTYaa TaeJaSaa MaihMaaEJaSaa )
Jauí wRXa Gau<aE" SavOESTaTaae_iSa >aGavaNa( Pa[>au" )) 5 ))
yathä tvaà kåpayä bhütyä
tejasä mahimaujasä
juñöa éça guëaiù sarvais
tato 'si bhagavän prabhuù
SYNONYMS
yathä—as; tvam—You; kåpayä—with mercy; bhütyä—with opulences;
tejasä—with prowess; mahima-ojasä—with glory and strength;
juñöaù—endowed; éça—O my Lord; guëaiù—with transcendental qualities;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1034
sarvaiù—all; tataù—therefore; asi—You are; bhagavän—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; prabhuù—the master.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, because You are endowed with causeless mercy, all opulences, all
prowess and all glories, strength and transcendental qualities, You are the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master of everyone.
PURPORT
In this verse the words tato 'si bhagavän prabhuù mean "Therefore You are
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master of everyone." The Supreme
Personality of Godhead is endowed with all six opulences in full, and moreover
He is extremely kind to His devotee. Although He is full in Himself, He
nonetheless wants all the living entities to surrender unto Him so that they
may engage in His service. Thus He becomes satisfied. Although He is full in
Himself, He nonetheless becomes pleased when His devotee offers Him patraà
puñpaà phalaà toyam [Bg. 9.26]—a leaf, flower, fruit or water—in devotion.
Sometimes the Lord, as the child of mother Yaçodä, requests His devotee for
some food, as if He were very hungry. Sometimes He tells His devotee in a
dream that His temple and His garden are now very old and that He cannot
enjoy them very nicely. Thus He requests the devotee to repair them.
Sometimes He is buried in the earth, and as if unable to come out Himself, He
requests His devotee to rescue Him. Sometimes He requests His devotee to
preach His glories all over the world, although He alone is quite competent to
perform this task. Even though the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
endowed with all possessions and is self-sufficient, He depends on His
devotees. Therefore the relationship of the Lord with His devotees is
extremely confidential. Only the devotee can perceive how the Lord, although
full in Himself, depends on His devotee for some particular work. This is
explained in Bhagavad-gétä (11.33), where the Lord tells Arjuna,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1035
nimitta-mätraà bhava savyasäcin: "O Arjuna, merely be an instrument in the
fight." Lord Kåñëa had the competence to win the Battle of Kurukñetra, but
nonetheless He induced His devotee Arjuna to fight and become the cause of
victory. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu was quite competent enough to spread His
name and mission all over the world, but still He depended upon His devotee
to do this work. Considering all these points, the most important aspect of the
Supreme Lord's self-sufficiency is that He depends on His devotees. This is
called His causeless mercy. The devotee who has perceived this causeless mercy
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead by realization can understand the
master and the servant.
TEXT 6
ivZ<auPaiÒ MahaMaaYae MahaPauåzl/+a<ae )
Pa[qYaeQaa Mae Maha>aaGae l/aek-MaaTaNaRMaae_STau Tae )) 6 ))
viñëu-patni mahä-mäye
mahäpuruña-lakñaëe
préyethä me mahä-bhäge
loka-mätar namo 'stu te
SYNONYMS
viñëu-patni—O wife of Lord Viñëu; mahä-mäye—O energy of Lord Viñëu;
mahä-puruña-lakñaëe—possessing the qualities and opulences of Lord Viñëu;
préyethäù—kindly be pleased; me—upon me; mahä-bhäge—O goddess of
fortune; loka-mätaù—O mother of the world; namaù—obeisances; astu—may
there be; te—unto you.
TRANSLATION
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1036
[After profusely offering obeisances unto Lord Viñëu, the devotee should
offer respectful obeisances unto mother Lakñmé, the goddess of fortune, and
pray as follows.] O wife of Lord Viñëu, O internal energy of Lord Viñëu, you
are as good as Lord Viñëu Himself, for you have all of His qualities and
opulences. O goddess of fortune, please be kind to me. O mother of the entire
world, I offer my respectful obeisances unto you.
PURPORT
The Lord has multifarious potencies (paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate [Cc.
Madhya 13.65, purport]). Since mother Lakñmé, the goddess of fortune, is the
Lord's very precious potency, she is addressed here as mahä-mäye. The word
mäyä means çakti. Lord Viñëu, the Supreme, cannot exhibit His power
everywhere without His principal energy. It is said, çakti çaktimän abheda: the
power and the powerful are identical. Therefore mother Lakñmé, the goddess of
fortune, is the constant companion of Lord Viñëu; they remain together
constantly. One cannot keep Lakñmé in one's home without Lord Viñëu. To
think that one can do so is very dangerous. To keep Lakñmé, or the riches of
the Lord, without the service of the Lord is always dangerous, for then Lakñmé
becomes the illusory energy. With Lord Viñëu, however, Lakñmé is the spiritual
energy.
TEXT 7
p NaMaae >aGavTae MahaPauåzaYa MahaNau>aavaYa Mahaiv>aUiTaPaTaYae Sah
Mahaiv>aUiTai>abRil/MauPahraMaqiTa ) ANaeNaahrhMaRN}ae<a ivZ<aaeravahNaagYaRPaaÛae‚
PaSPaXaRNaòaNavaSaoPavqTaiv>aUz<aGaNDaPauZPaDaUPadqPaaePaharaÛuPacaraNa( SauSaMaaihTaae‚
PaahreTa( )) 7 ))
oà namo bhagavate mahä-puruñäya mahänubhäväya mahävibhüti-pataye saha
mahä-vibhütibhir balim upaharäméti; anenähar-ahar mantreëa viñëor
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1037
ävähanärghya-pädyopasparçana-snäna-väsa-upavéta-vibhüñaëa-gandha-puñpadhüpa-
dépopahärädy-upacärän susamä-hitopäharet.
SYNONYMS
oà—O my Lord; namaù—obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, full with six opulences; mahä-puruñäya—the best of
enjoyers; mahä-anubhäväya—the most powerful; mahä-vibhüti—of the goddess
of fortune; pataye—the husband; saha—with; mahä-vibhütibhiù—associates;
balim—presentation s; upaharämi—I am offering; iti—thus; anena—by this;
ahaù-ahaù—every day; mantreëa—mantra; viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu;
ävähana—invocations; arghya-pädya-upasparçana—water for washing the
hands, feet and mouth; snäna—water for bathing; väsa—garments; upavéta—a
sacred thread; vibhüñaëa—ornaments; gandha—scents; puñpa—flowers;
dhüpa—incense; dépa—lamps; upahära—gifts; ädi—and so on;
upacärän—presentations; su-samähitä—with great attention; upäharet—she
must offer.
TRANSLATION
"My Lord Viñëu, full in six opulences, You are the best of all enjoyers and
the most powerful. O husband of mother Lakñmé, I offer my respectful
obeisances unto You, who are accompanied by many associates, such as
Viçvaksena. I offer all the paraphernalia for worshiping You." One should chant
this mantra every day with great attention while worshiping Lord Viñëu with
all paraphernalia, such as water for washing His feet, hands and mouth and
water for His bath. One must offer Him various presentations for His worship,
such as garments, a sacred thread, ornaments, scents, flowers, incense and
lamps.
PURPORT
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1038
This mantra is very important. Anyone engaged in Deity worship should
chant this mantra, as quoted above, beginning with oà namo bhagavate
mahä-puruñäya.
TEXT 8
hiv"Xaez& c JauhuYaadNale/ ÜadXaahuTaq" )
p NaMaae >aGavTae MahaPauåzaYa Mahaiv>aUiTaPaTaYae SvaheiTa )) 8 ))
haviù-çeñaà ca juhuyäd
anale dvädaçähuté
oà namo bhagavate mahä-puruñäya mahävibhüti-pataye sväheti
SYNONYMS
haviù-çeñam—remnants of the offering; ca—and; juhuyät—one should offer;
anale—in the fire; dvädaça—twelve; ähutéù—oblations; oà—O my Lord;
namaù—obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
mahä-puruñäya—the supreme enjoyer; mahä-vibhüti—of the goddess of
fortune; pataye—the husband; svähä—hail; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: After worshiping the Lord with all the
paraphernalia mentioned above, one should chant the following mantra while
offering twelve oblations of ghee on the sacred fire: oà namo bhagavate
mahä-puruñäya mahävibhüti-pataye svähä.
TEXT 9
ié[Ya& ivZ<au& c vrdavaiXaza& Pa[>avavu>aaE )
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1039
>a¢-ya SaMPaUJaYaeiàTYa& YadqC^eTSavRSaMPad" )) 9 ))
çriyaà viñëuà ca varadäv
äçiñäà prabhaväv ubhau
bhaktyä sampüjayen nityaà
yadécchet sarva-sampadaù
SYNONYMS
çriyam—the goddess of fortune; viñëum—Lord Viñëu; ca—and; vara-dau—the
bestowers of benedictions; äçiñäm—of blessings; prabhavau—the sources;
ubhau—both; bhaktyä—with devotion; sampüjayet—should worship;
nityam—daily; yadi—if; icchet—desires; sarva—all; sampadaù—opulences.
TRANSLATION
If one desires all opulences, his duty is to daily worship Lord Viñëu with His
wife, Lakñmé. With great devotion one should worship Him according to the
above-mentioned process. Lord Viñëu and the goddess of fortune are an
immensely powerful combination. They are the bestowers of all benedictions
and the sources of all good fortune. Therefore the duty of everyone is to
worship Lakñmé-Näräyaëa.
PURPORT
Lakñmé-Näräyaëa-Lord Viñëu and mother Lakñmé—are always situated in
everyone's heart (éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà håd-deçe 'rjuna tiñöhati [Bg. 18.61]).
However, because nondevotees do not realize that Lord Viñëu stays with His
eternal consort, Lakñmé, within the hearts of all living entities, they are not
endowed with the opulence of Lord Viñëu. Unscrupulous men sometimes
address a poor man as daridra-näräyaëa, or "poor Näräyaëa." This is most
unscientific. Lord Viñëu and Lakñmé are always situated in everyone's heart,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1040
but this does not mean that everyone is Näräyaëa, especially not those in
poverty. This is a most abominable term to use in connection with Näräyaëa.
Näräyaëa never becomes poor, and therefore He can never be called
daridra-näräyaëa. Näräyaëa is certainly situated in everyone's heart, but He is
neither poor nor rich. Only unscrupulous persons who do not know the
opulence of Näräyaëa try to afflict Him with poverty.
TEXT 10
Pa[<aMaeÕ<@vd(>aUMaaE >ai¢-Pa[ûe<a ceTaSaa )
dXavar& JaPaeNMaN}a& TaTa" STaae}aMaudqrYaeTa( )) 10 ))
praëamed daëòavad bhümau
bhakti-prahveëa cetasä
daça-väraà japen mantraà
tataù stotram udérayet
SYNONYMS
praëamet—should offer obeisances; daëòa-vat—like a stick; bhümau—on the
ground; bhakti—through devotion; prahveëa—humble; cetasä—with a mind;
daça-väram—ten times; japet—should utter; mantram—the mantra;
tataù—then; stotram—prayer; udérayet—should chant.
TRANSLATION
One should offer obeisances unto the Lord with a mind humbled through
devotion. While offering daëòavats by falling on the ground like a rod, one
should chant the above mantra ten times. Then one should chant the following
prayer.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1041
TEXT 11
Yauva& Tau ivìSYa iv>aU JaGaTa" k-ar<a& ParMa( )
wYa& ih Pa[k*-iTa" SaU+Maa MaaYaaXai¢-duRrTYaYaa )) 11 ))
yuväà tu viçvasya vibhü
jagataù käraëaà param
iyaà hi prakåtiù sükñmä
mäyä-çaktir duratyayä
SYNONYMS
yuväm—both of you; tu—indeed; viçvasya—of the universe; vibhü—the
proprietors; jagataù—of the universe; käraëam—the cause; param—supreme;
iyam—this; hi—certainly; prakåtiù—energy; sükñmä—difficult to understand;
mäyä-çaktiù—the internal energy; duratyayä—difficult to overcome.
TRANSLATION
My Lord Viñëu and mother Lakñmé, goddess of fortune, you are the
proprietors of the entire creation. Indeed, you are the cause of the creation.
Mother Lakñmé is extremely difficult to understand because she is so powerful
that the jurisdiction of her power is difficult to overcome. Mother Lakñmé is
represented in the material world as the external energy, but actually she is
always the internal energy of the Lord.
TEXT 12
TaSYaa ADaqìr" Saa+aatvMaev Pauåz" Par" )
Tv& SavRYaj wJYaeYa& i§-YaeYa& f-l/>auG>avaNa( )) 12 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1042
tasyä adhéçvaraù säkñät
tvam eva puruñaù paraù
tvaà sarva-yajïa ijyeyaà
kriyeyaà phala-bhug bhavän
SYNONYMS
tasyäù—of her; adhéçvaraù—the master; säkñät—directly; tvam—You;
eva—certainly; puruñaù—the person; paraù—supreme; tvam—You;
sarva-yajïaù—personified sacrifice; ijyä—worship; iyam—this (Lakñmé);
kriyä—activities; iyam—this; phala-bhuk—the enjoyer of the fruits;
bhavän—You.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, You are the master of energy, and therefore You are the Supreme
Person. You are sacrifice [yajïa] personified. Lakñmé, the embodiment of
spiritual activities, is the original form of worship offered unto You, whereas
You are the enjoyer of all sacrifices.
TEXT 13
Gau<aVYai¢-irYa& devq VYaÅk-ae Gau<a>auG>avaNa( )
Tv& ih SavRXarqYaaRTMaa é[q" XarqreiNd]YaaXaYaa" )
NaaMaæPae >aGavTaq Pa[TYaYaSTvMaPaaé[Ya" )) 13 ))
guëa-vyaktir iyaà devé
vyaïjako guëa-bhug bhavän
tvaà hi sarva-çaréry ätmä
çréù çarérendriyäçayäù
näma-rüpe bhagavaté
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1043
pratyayas tvam apäçrayaù
SYNONYMS
guëa-vyaktiù—the reservoir of qualities; iyam—this; devé—goddess;
vyaïjakaù—manifester; guëa-bhuk—the enjoyer of the qualities;
bhavän—You; tvam—You; hi—indeed; sarva-çaréré ätmä—the Supersoul of all
living entities; çréù—the goddess of fortune; çaréra—the body; indriya—senses;
äçayäù—and the mind; näma—name; rüpe—and form; bhagavaté—Lakñmé;
pratyayaù—the cause of manifestation; tvam—You; apäçrayaù—the support.
TRANSLATION
Mother Lakñmé, who is here, is the reservoir of all spiritual qualities,
whereas You manifest and enjoy all these qualities. Indeed, You are actually the
enjoyer of everything. You live as the Supersoul of all living entities, and the
goddess of fortune is the form of their bodies, senses and minds. She also has a
holy name and form, whereas You are the support of all such names and forms
and the cause for their manifestation.
PURPORT
Madhväcärya, the äcärya of the Tattvavädés, has described this verse in the
following way: "Viñëu is described as yajïa personified, and mother Lakñmé is
described as spiritual activities and the original form of worship. In fact, they
represent spiritual activities and the Supersoul of all yajïa. Lord Viñëu is the
Supersoul even of Lakñmédevé, but no one can be the Supersoul of Lord Viñëu,
for Lord Viñëu Himself is the spiritual Supersoul of everyone."
According to Madhväcärya, there are two tattvas, or factors. One is
independent, and the other is dependent. The first tattva is the Supreme Lord,
Viñëu, and the second is the jéva-tattva. Lakñmédevé, being dependent on Lord
Viñëu, is sometimes counted among the jévas. The Gauòéya Vaiñëavas,
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1044
however, describe Lakñmédevé in accordance with the following two verses
from the Prameya-ratnävalé of Baladeva Vidyäbhüñaëa. The first verse is a
quotation from the Viñëu Puräëa.
nityaiva sä jagan-mätä
viñëoù çrér anapäyiné
yathä sarva-gato viñëus
tathaiveyaà dvijottama
viñëoù syuù çaktayas tisras
täsu yä kértitä parä
saiva çrés tad-abhinneti
präha çiñyän prabhur mahän
"O best of the brähmaëas, Lakñméjé is the constant companion of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, and therefore she is called anapäyiné. She is
the mother of all creation. As Lord Viñëu is all-pervading, His spiritual
potency, mother Lakñmé, is also all-pervading. Lord Viñëu has three principal
potencies—internal, external and marginal. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu has
accepted parä-çakti, the spiritual energy of the Lord, as being identical with
the Lord. Thus she is also included in the independent viñëu-tattva."
In the Känti-mälä commentary on the Prameya-ratnävalé there is this
statement: nanu kvacit nitya-mukta jévatvaà lakñmyäù svékåtaà, taträha-präheti.
nityaiveti padye sarva-vyäpti-kathanena kaläkäñöhety ädi-padya-dvaye, çuddho
'péty uktä ca mahäprabhunä svaçiñyän prati lakñmyä bhagavad-advaitam
upadiñöam. kvacid yat tasyäs tu dvaitam uktaà, tat tu tad-äviñöa-nitya-mukta
jévam ädäya saìgatamas tu. "Although some authoritative Vaiñëava disciplic
successions count the goddess of fortune among the ever-liberated living
entities (jévas) in Vaikuëöha, Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, in accordance with
the statement in the Viñëu Puräëa, has described Lakñmé as being identical
with the viñëu-tattva. The correct conclusion is that the descriptions of Lakñmé
as being different from Viñëu are stated when an eternally liberated living
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1045
entity is imbued with the quality of Lakñmé; they do not pertain to mother
Lakñmé, the eternal consort of Lord Viñëu."
TEXT 14
YaQaa Yauva& i}al/aek-SYa vrdaE ParMaeiïNaaE )
TaQaa Ma otaMaëaek- SaNTau SaTYaa MahaiXaz" )) 14 ))
yathä yuväà tri-lokasya
varadau parameñöhinau
tathä ma uttamaçloka
santu satyä mahäçiñaù
SYNONYMS
yathä—since; yuväm—both of you; tri-lokasya—of the three worlds;
vara-dau—givers of benedictions; parame-ñöhinau—the supreme rulers;
tathä—therefore; me—my; uttama-çloka—O Lord, who are praised with
excellent verses; santu—may become; satyäù—fulfilled; mahä-äçiñaù—great
ambitions.
TRANSLATION
You are both the supreme rulers and benedictors of the three worlds.
Therefore, my Lord, Uttamaçloka, may my ambitions be fulfilled by Your grace.
TEXT 15
wTYai>aíUYa vrd& é[qiNavaSa& ié[Yaa Sah )
Taià"SaaYaaeRPahr<a& dtvacMaNaMacRYaeTa( )) 15 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1046
ity abhiñöüya varadaà
çréniväsaà çriyä saha
tan niùsäryopaharaëaà
dattväcamanam arcayet
SYNONYMS
iti—thus; abhiñöüya—offering prayers; vara-dam—who bestows benedictions;
çré-niväsam—unto Lord Viñëu, the abode of the goddess of fortune; çriyä
saha—with Lakñmé; tat—then; niùsärya—removing; upaharaëam—the
paraphernalia for worship; dattvä—after offering; äcamanam—water for
washing the hands and mouth; arcayet—one should worship.
TRANSLATION
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé continued: Thus one should worship Lord Viñëu,
who is known as Çréniväsa, along with mother Lakñmé, the goddess of fortune,
by offering prayers according to the process mentioned above. After removing
all the paraphernalia of worship, one should offer them water to wash their
hands and mouths, and then one should worship them again.
TEXT 16
TaTa" STauvqTa STaae}ae<a >ai¢-Pa[ûe<a ceTaSaa )
YajaeiC^íMavga]aYa PauNar>YacRYaeÖirMa( )) 16 ))
tataù stuvéta stotreëa
bhakti-prahveëa cetasä
yajïocchiñöam avaghräya
punar abhyarcayed dharim
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1047
SYNONYMS
tataù—then; stuvéta—one should praise; stotreëa—with prayers; bhakti—with
devotion; prahveëa—humble; cetasä—with a mind; yajïa-ucchiñöam—the
remnants of sacrifice; avaghräya—smelling; punaù—again; abhyarcayet—one
should worship; harim—Lord Viñëu.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, with devotion and humility, one should offer prayers to the Lord
and mother Lakñmé. Then one should smell the remnants of the food offered
and then again worship the Lord and Lakñméjé.
TEXT 17
PaiTa& c ParYaa >a¢-ya MahaPauåzceTaSaa )
iPa[YaESTaESTaEåPaNaMaeTa( Pa[eMaXaql/" SvYa& PaiTa" )
ib>a*YaaTa( SavRk-MaaRi<a PaTNYaa oÀavcaiNa c )) 17 ))
patià ca parayä bhaktyä
mahäpuruña-cetasä
priyais tais tair upanamet
prema-çélaù svayaà patiù
bibhåyät sarva-karmäëi
patnyä uccävacäni ca
SYNONYMS
patim—the husband; ca—and; parayä—supreme; bhaktyä—with devotion;
mahä-puruña-cetasä—accepting as the Supreme Person; priyaiù—dear; taiù
taiù—by those (offerings); upanamet—should worship; prema-çélaù—being
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1048
affectionate; svayam—himself; patiù—the husband; bibhåyät—should execute;
sarva-karmäëi—all activities; patnyäù—of the wife; ucca-avacäni—high and
low; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
Accepting her husband as the representative of the Supreme Person, a wife
should worship him with unalloyed devotion by offering him prasäda. The
husband, being very pleased with his wife, should engage himself in the affairs
of his family.
PURPORT
The family relationship of husband and wife should be established
spiritually according to the process mentioned above.
TEXT 18
k*-TaMaek-Tare<aaiPa dMPaTYaaeå>aYaaeriPa )
PaTNYaa& ku-YaaRdNahaRYaa& PaiTareTaTa( SaMaaihTa" )) 18 ))
kåtam ekatareëäpi
dam-patyor ubhayor api
patnyäà kuryäd anarhäyäà
patir etat samähitaù
SYNONYMS
kåtam—executed; ekatareëa—by one; api—even; dam-patyoù—of the wife and
husband; ubhayoù—of both; api—still; patnyäm—when the wife; kuryät—he
should execute; anarhäyäm—is unable; patiù—the husband; etat—this;
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1049
samähitaù—with attention.
TRANSLATION
Between the husband and wife, one person is sufficient to execute this
devotional service. Because of their good relationship, both of them will enjoy
the result. Therefore if the wife is unable to execute this process, the husband
should carefully do so, and the faithful wife will share the result.
PURPORT
The relationship between husband and wife is firmly established when the
wife is faithful and the husband sincere. Then even if the wife, being weaker,
is unable to execute devotional service with her husband, if she is chaste and
sincere she shares half of her husband's activities.
TEXTS 19-20
ivZ<aaev]RTaiMad& ib>a]à ivhNYaaTa( k-QaÄNa )
ivPa[aNa( iñYaae vqrvTaq" óGGaNDabil/Ma<@NaE" )
AceRdhrh>aR¢-ya dev& iNaYaMaMaaiSQaTaa )) 19 ))
oÜaSYa dev& Sve DaaiMNa TaiàveidTaMaGa]Ta" )
AÛadaTMaivXauÖyQa| SavRk-aMaSaMa*ÖYae )) 20 ))
viñëor vratam idaà bibhran
na vihanyät kathaïcana
viprän striyo véravatéù
srag-gandha-bali-maëòanaiù
arced ahar-ahar bhaktyä
devaà niyamam ästhitä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1050
udväsya devaà sve dhämni
tan-niveditam agrataù
adyäd ätma-viçuddhy-arthaà
sarva-käma-samåddhaye
SYNONYMS
viñëoù—of Lord Viñëu; vratam—vow; idam—this; bibhrat—executing;
na—not; vihanyät—should break; kathaïcana—for any reason; viprän—the
brähmaëas; striyaù—women; véra-vatéù—who have their husband and sons;
srak—with garlands; gandha—sandalwood; bali—offerings of food;
maëòanaiù—and with ornaments; arcet—one should worship;
ahaù-ahaù—daily; bhaktyä—with devotion; devam—Lord Viñëu;
niyamam—the regulative principles; ästhitä—following; udväsya—placing;
devam—the Lord; sve—in His own; dhämni—resting place; tat—to Him;
niveditam—what was offered; agrataù—after dividing first among the others;
adyät—one should eat; ätma-viçuddhi-artham—for self-purification;
sarva-käma—all desires; samåddhaye—for fulfilling.
TRANSLATION
One should accept this viñëu-vrata, which is a vow in devotional service, and
should not deviate from its execution to engage in anything else. By offering the
remnants of prasäda, flower garlands, sandalwood pulp and ornaments, one
should daily worship the brähmaëas and worship women who peacefully live
with their husbands and children. Every day the wife must continue following
the regulative principles to worship Lord Viñëu with great devotion.
Thereafter, Lord Viñëu should be laid in His bed, and then one should take
prasäda. In this way, husband and wife will be purified and will have all their
desires fulfilled.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1051
TEXT 21
WTaeNa PaUJaaiviDaNaa MaaSaaNa( ÜadXa haYaNaMa( )
NaqTvaQaaeParMaeTSaaßq k-aiTaRke- crMae_hiNa )) 21 ))
etena püjä-vidhinä
mäsän dvädaça häyanam
nétväthoparamet sädhvé
kärtike carame 'hani
SYNONYMS
etena—with this; püjä-vidhinä—regulated worship; mäsän dvädaça—twelve
months; häyanam—a year; nétvä—after passing; atha—then;
uparamet—should fast; sädhvé—the chaste wife; kärtike—in Kärttika; carame
ahani—on the final day.
TRANSLATION
The chaste wife must perform such devotional service continuously for one
year. After one year passes, she should fast on the full-moon day in the month
of Kärttika [October-November].
TEXT 22
ìae>aUTae_Pa oPaSPa*XYa k*-Z<aMa>YaCYaR PaUvRvTa( )
PaYa"é*TaeNa JauhuYaaÀå<aa Sah SaiPaRza )
Paak-YajivDaaNaeNa ÜadXaEvahuTaq" PaiTa" )) 22 ))
çvo-bhüte 'pa upaspåçya
kåñëam abhyarcya pürvavat
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1052
payaù-çåtena juhuyäc
caruëä saha sarpiñä
päka-yajïa-vidhänena
dvädaçaivähutéù patiù
SYNONYMS
çvaù-bhüte—on the following morning; apaù—water; upaspåçya—contacting;
kåñëam—Lord Kåñëa; abhyarcya—worshiping; pürva-vat—as previously;
payaù-çåtena—with boiled milk; juhuyät—one should offer; caruëä—with an
offering of sweet rice; saha—with; sarpiñä—ghee;
päka-yajïa-vidhänena—according to the injunctions of the Gåhya-sütras;
dvädaça—twelve; eva—indeed; ähutéù—oblations; patiù—the husband.
TRANSLATION
On the morning of the next day, one should wash oneself, and after
worshiping Lord Kåñëa as before, one should cook as one cooks for festivals as
stated in the Gåhya-sütras. Sweet rice should be cooked with ghee, and with
this preparation the husband should offer oblations to the fire twelve times.
TEXT 23
AaiXaz" iXarSaadaYa iÜJaE" Pa[qTaE" SaMaqirTaa" )
Pa[<aMYa iXarSaa >a¢-ya >auÅqTa TadNaujYaa )) 23 ))
äçiñaù çirasädäya
dvijaiù prétaiù saméritäù
praëamya çirasä bhaktyä
bhuïjéta tad-anujïayä
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1053
SYNONYMS
äçiñaù—blessings; çirasä—with the head; ädäya—accepting; dvijaiù—by the
brähmaëas; prétaiù—who are pleased; saméritäù—spoken; praëamya—after
offering obeisances; çirasä—with the head; bhaktyä—with devotion;
bhuïjéta—he should eat; tat-anujïayä—with their permission.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, he should satisfy the brähmaëas. When the satisfied brähmaëas
bestow their blessings, he should devotedly offer them respectful obeisances
with his head, and with their permission he should take prasäda.
TEXT 24
AacaYaRMaGa]Ta" k*-Tva vaGYaTa" Sah bNDaui>a" )
dÛaTPaTNYaE crae" Xaez& SauPa[JaaSTv& SauSaaE>aGaMa( )) 24 ))
äcäryam agrataù kåtvä
väg-yataù saha bandhubhiù
dadyät patnyai caroù çeñaà
suprajästvaà susaubhagam
SYNONYMS
äcäryam—the äcärya; agrataù—first of all; kåtvä—receiving properly;
väk-yataù—controlling speech; saha—with; bandhubhiù—friends and
relatives; dadyät—he should give; patnyai—to the wife; caroù—of the oblation
of sweet rice; çeñam—the remnant; su-prajästvam—which insures good
progeny; su-saubhagam—which insures good fortune.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1054
TRANSLATION
Before taking his meal, the husband must first seat the äcärya comfortably,
and, along with his relatives and friends, should control his speech and offer
prasäda to the guru. Then the wife should eat the remnants of the oblation of
sweet rice cooked with ghee. Eating the remnants insures a learned, devoted son
and all good fortune.
TEXT 25
WTaÀirTva iviDavd(v]Ta& iv>aaer
>aqiPSaTaaQa| l/>aTae PauMaaiNah )
ñq cETadaSQaaYa l/>aeTa SaaE>aGa&
ié[Ya& Pa[Jaa& JaqvPaiTa& YaXaae Ga*hMa( )) 25 ))
etac caritvä vidhivad vrataà vibhor
abhépsitärthaà labhate pumän iha
stré caitad ästhäya labheta saubhagaà
çriyaà prajäà jéva-patià yaço gåham
SYNONYMS
etat—this; caritvä—performing; vidhi-vat—according to the injunctions of
çästra; vratam—vow; vibhoù—from the Lord; abhépsita—desired;
artham—object; labhate—gets; pumän—a man; iha—in this life; stré—a
woman; ca—and; etat—this; ästhäya—performing; labheta—can get;
saubhagam—good fortune; çriyam—opulence; prajäm—progeny; jéva-patim—a
husband with a long duration of life; yaçaù—good reputation; gåham—home.
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1055
TRANSLATION
If this vow or ritualistic ceremony is observed according to the description of
çästra, even in this life a man will be able to achieve all the benedictions he
desires from the Lord. A wife who performs this ritualistic ceremony will surely
receive good fortune, opulence, sons, a long-living husband, a good reputation
and a good home.
PURPORT
In Bengal even today if a woman lives for a long time with her husband, she
is considered very fortunate. A woman generally desires a good husband, good
children, a good home, prosperity, opulence and so on. As recommended in
this verse, a woman will receive all these desirable benedictions, and a man
will also be able to receive all benedictions, from the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Thus by performing this particular type of vrata, a man and a woman
in Kåñëa consciousness will be happy in this material world, and because of
being Kåñëa conscious they will be promoted to the spiritual world.
TEXTS 26-28
k-NYaa c ivNdeTa SaMaGa]l/+a<a&
PaiTa& Tvvqra hTaik-iLbza& GaiTaMa( )
Ma*TaPa[Jaa JaqvSauTaa DaNaeìrq
Saudu>aRGaa Sau>aGaa æPaMaGY]aMa( )) 26 ))
ivNded( ivæPaa ivåJaa ivMauCYaTae
Ya AaMaYaavqiNd]Yak-LYadehMa( )
WTaTPa#=à>YaudYae c k-MaR
<YaNaNTaTa*iá" iPaTa*devTaaNaaMa( )) 27 ))
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1056
Tauía" Pa[YaC^iNTa SaMaSTak-aMaaNa(
haeMaavSaaNae huTa>auk( é[qhirê )
raJaNa( MahNMaåTaa& JaNMa Pau<Ya&
idTaev]RTa& cai>aihTa& Mahtae )) 28 ))
kanyä ca vindeta samagra-lakñaëaà
patià tv avérä hata-kilbiñäà gatim
måta-prajä jéva-sutä dhaneçvaré
sudurbhagä subhagä rüpam agryam
vinded virüpä virujä vimucyate
ya ämayävéndriya-kalya-deham
etat paöhann abhyudaye ca karmaëy
ananta-tåptiù pitå-devatänäm
tuñöäù prayacchanti samasta-kämän
homävasäne huta-bhuk çré-hariç ca
räjan mahan marutäà janma puëyaà
diter vrataà cäbhihitaà mahat te
SYNONYMS
kanyä—an unmarried girl; ca—and; vindeta—can get;
samagralakñaëam—possessing all good qualities; patim—a husband; tu—and;
avérä—a woman without a husband or son; hata-kilbiñäm—free from fault;
gatim—the destination; måta-prajä—a woman whose children are dead;
jéva-sutä—a woman whose child has a long duration of life;
dhana-éçvaré—possessing wealth; su-durbhagä—unfortunate;
su-bhagä—fortunate; rüpam—beauty; agryam—excellent; vindet—can get;
virüpä—an ugly woman; virujä—from the disease; vimucyate—is freed;
yaù—he who; ämayä-vé—a diseased man; indriya-kalya-deham—an able body;
etat—this; paöhan—reciting; abhyudaye ca karmaëi—and in a sacrificial
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1057
ceremony in which oblations are offered to the forefathers and demigods;
ananta—unlimited; tåptiù—satisfaction; pitå-devatänäm—of the forefathers
and demigods; tuñöäù—being pleased; prayacchanti—they bestow;
samasta—all; kämän—desires; homa-avasäne—on the completion of the
ceremony; huta-bhuk—the enjoyer of the sacrifice; çré-hariù—Lord Viñëu;
ca—also; räjan—O King; mahat—great; marutäm—of the Maruts;
janma—birth; puëyam—pious; diteù—of Diti; vratam—the vow; ca—also;
abhihitam—explained; mahat—great; te—to you.
TRANSLATION
If an unmarried girl observes this vrata, she will be able to get a very good
husband. If a woman who is avérä—who has no husband or son—executes this
ritualistic ceremony, she can be promoted to the spiritual world. A woman
whose children have died after birth can get a child with a long duration of life
and also become very fortunate in possessing wealth. If a woman is unfortunate
she will become fortunate, and if ugly she will become beautiful. By observing
this vrata, a diseased man can gain relief from his disease and have an able body
with which to work. If one recites this narration while offering oblations to the
pitäs and demigods, especially during the çräddha ceremony, the demigods and
inhabitants of Pitåloka will be extremely pleased with him and bestow upon him
the fulfillment of all desires. After one performs this ritualistic ceremony, Lord
Viñëu and His wife, mother Lakñmé, the goddess of fortune, are very pleased
with him. O King Parékñit, now I have completely described how Diti
performed this ceremony and had good children—the Maruts—and a happy
life. I have tried to explain this to you as elaborately as possible.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, Nineteenth Chapter, of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, entitled "performing the Puàsavana Ritualistic
Ceremony."
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
1058
END OF THE SIXTH CANTO
copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved – www.krishna.com
Srimad Bhagavatam
Sixth Canto
“Prescribed Duties for Mankind”
e-book
This e-book and others are available for download at:
www.e-vedas.com
Hard bound books may be purchased at:
www.thekrishnastore.com
Email comments or questions to:
comments@evedas.com
This e-book was completed on November 16,2005
e-books copyright ©1998 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, all rights reserved
www.krishna.com
Distributed by e-vedas.com with permission of the publishers
